古文：文公诛观状以伐郑，反其陴。
现代文：晋文公因讨伐偷看他肋骨的曹共公，随后又攻打郑国，摧毁城上的矮墙。
English: Prince Jinwen, because of his crusade against Prince Cao, who had peeked at his ribs, then attacked Zheng and destroyed the low wall of the city.

古文：郑人以名宝行成，公弗许，曰： 予我詹而师还。 
现代文：郑国用名贵的宝物来乞和，晋文公不答应，说： 你们把叔詹交出来，我就退兵。 
English: Zheng Guo used precious treasures to beg for peace, but Jin Wengong did not agree, saying, "If you hand over Uncle Zhan, I will withdraw from the army."

古文：詹请往，郑伯弗许，詹固请曰： 一臣可以赦百姓而定社稷，君何爱于巨也？ 
现代文：叔詹请求前往，郑文公不答应，叔詹再三请求说： 用我一个人可以救百姓，安国家，君主何必对小臣如此爱惜呢？ 
English: Uncle Zhan asked to go, but Zheng Wen Gong did not agree. Uncle Zhan repeatedly asked, "With me alone, I can save the people and secure the country. Why should the monarch be so fond of his vassal?

古文：郑人以詹予晋，晋人将烹之。
现代文：郑国将叔詹交给了晋国，晋人将要烹煮叔詹。
English: Zheng Guo gave Uncle Zhan to Jin Guo, and the Jin people are going to cook Uncle Zhan.

古文：詹曰： 臣愿获尽辞而死，固所愿也。 
现代文：叔詹说： 我希望把话说完而死，那是我的心愿。 
English: Uncle Zhan said, "I hope I can finish my words and die, that is my wish."

古文：公听其辞。
现代文：晋文公听他陈辞。
English: Jin Wenkong listened to his speech.

古文：詹曰： 天降郑祸，使淫观状，弃礼违亲。
现代文：叔詹说： 上天把灾祸降给郑国，如同曹共公偷看肋骨的事那样，抛弃了礼仪，违背了宗亲关系。
English: Uncle Zhan said: Heaven brought the disaster to Zheng Guo, just as Cao Gongguo peeked at the ribs, abandoned the etiquette and violated the patriarchal relationship.

古文：臣曰： 不可。
现代文：我劝阻说： 不可以这样。
English: I tried to dissuade him, saying, "This is unacceptable.

古文：夫晋公子贤明，其左右皆卿才，若复其国，而得志于诸侯，祸无赦矣。 
现代文：晋公子十分贤明，他的左右随从都具有做卿的才干，如果一旦返国即位，必然得志成为诸侯的盟主，那末郑国的大祸将无法解除。 
English: Prince Jin was very wise, and his right and left followers all had the ability to be lords. If, once he returned to the country and ascended the throne, he would inevitably aspire to become the lord of the lords, then the great disaster of Zheng Guo would not be resolved.

古文：今祸及矣。
现代文：今天大祸果然到来了。
English: Today, the calamity has arrived.

古文：尊明胜患，智也。
现代文：我当初尊重公子的贤明，预先觉察到祸患而加以遏制，这是聪明。
English: At the beginning, I respected the wisdom of my son. It is wise to anticipate the evil and contain it.

古文：杀身赎国，忠也。 
现代文：现在不避个人的牺牲，挽救国家，这是忠贞。 
English: Now it is not shunning personal sacrifice to save the country, it is loyalty.

古文：乃就烹，据鼎耳而疾号曰： 自今以往，知忠以事君者，与詹同。 
现代文：说罢便去就刑，用手抓住鼎耳大声呼喊： 从今以后，忠心耿耿事奉君主的人，都要落得和我叔詹一样的下场。 
English: "From now on, all those who faithfully serve the sovereign will meet the same fate as my uncle Zhan."

古文：乃命弗杀，厚为之礼而归之。
现代文：晋文公于是下令不杀叔詹，待以厚礼，将他送还了郑国。
English: Jinwen then ordered not to kill Uncle Zhan, and sent him back to Zheng with a generous gift.

古文：郑人以詹伯为将军。
现代文：郑文公因此任命叔詹为将军。
English: Therefore, Zheng Wengong appointed Uncle Zhan as a general.

