古文：帝君曰：吾证道果，奉吾二亲，升不骄境，天上聚首，室家承顺，玉真庆宫，逍遥自在。
现代文：帝君说：我征得道果，侍奉我的双亲，升入不骄帝境，家人在天上聚首，妻妾遵奉顺从，在玉真庆宫里，逍遥自在。
English: The emperor said, "I have attained the fruition of the Tao, served my parents, and ascended to the realm of the humble emperor. My family is gathered in heaven, my wife and concubines are obedient, and I am at ease in the Jade Emperor's Palace.

古文：吾今行化，阐告大众，不孝之子，百行莫赎；至孝之家，万劫可消。
现代文：我今天施行教化，阐述告知大众：不孝的子女，百种善行都不能救赎他的罪过；达到至孝的人家，万般劫难都能够消除。
English: Today, I will carry out edification, expound and inform the public: if a child is not filial, a hundred kinds of good deeds cannot redeem his sins; if a family is filial, all kinds of calamities can be eliminated.

古文：不孝之子，天地不容，雷霆怒殁，摩煞祸侵；孝子之门，鬼神护之，福禄畀之。
现代文：不孝的子女，天地不容，雷霆怒击，魔鬼恶煞用各种灾祸侵袭他；孝子之家，鬼神保护他，福禄赐予他。
English: An unfilial child, heaven and earth will not tolerate, thunder and lightning will strike, the devil and evil spirits will attack him with all kinds of disasters; a filial child's home, ghosts and gods will protect him, and blessings will be bestowed on him.

古文：惟孝格天，惟孝配地，惟孝感人，三才化成；惟神敬孝，惟天爱孝，惟地成孝。
现代文：唯有孝能够感通天，唯有孝能够配享地，唯有孝能够感化人，天地人三才得以化生长成。唯有神敬重孝，唯有天热爱孝，唯有地成就孝。
English: Only filial piety can be transmitted to heaven, only filial piety can be shared with the earth, only filial piety can influence people, and the three worlds and people can be transformed and grown. Only God respects filial piety, only God loves filial piety, and only the earth can achieve filial piety.

古文：水难出之，火难出之，刀兵刑戮，疫疠凶灾，毒药毒虫，冤家谋害，一切厄中，处处佑之。
现代文：无论是出现水灾，出现火灾，刀兵刑戮，疾病瘟疫，毒药毒虫，冤家谋害，一切灾厄中，处处都能得到神灵的佑护。
English: Whether it is a flood, a fire, a sword, a plague, a disease, a poison, a poisonous insect, or a wrongdoer plotting to kill, in all disasters and calamities, you can receive the protection of the gods everywhere.

古文：孝之所至，地狱沉苦，重重救拔，元祖宗亲，皆得解脱，四生六道，饿鬼穷魂，皆得超升，父母沉疴，即时痊愈。
现代文：孝所到之处，沉沦于地狱的苦难，都会得到解救；始祖宗族，都会得到解脱；四生六道中的恶鬼穷魂，都能得到超升；父母的重病，即时痊愈。
English: Wherever the filial piety goes, the sufferings of sinking into hell will be relieved; the ancestors and clans will be relieved; the evil spirits and poor souls in all walks of life can be transcended; the serious illness of parents will be cured immediately.

古文：三十六天，济度快乐；七十二地，灵爽逍遥。
现代文：三十六天中，以济度为快乐；七十二福地，魂灵逍遥自在。
English: In the thirty-six days, frugality is happiness; in the seventy-two days of happiness, the soul is at ease.

古文：是以斗中，有孝弟王，下有孝子，光曜乾坤，精贯两仪，气协四维，和遍九垓，星斗万象，莫不咸熙。
现代文：所以在斗星之中，有孝悌王，在下界有孝子，光耀天地，精气贯通天地，协调四方，协和九重天之内的万物，星斗万象，无不兴盛。
English: Therefore, among the fighting stars, there are filial sons and daughters, and in the netherworld there are filial sons and daughters. They shine in heaven and earth, and their essence penetrates heaven and earth. They coordinate the four directions, and harmonize all things within the nine heavens. All the stars and constellations are flourishing.

古文：神行河岳，海波不扬；遐荒是奠，遐尔均孚，孝之为道，功德普遍。
现代文：神行遍江河山岳，海波不扬；遥远的地方进献贡物，远近的人们都信服可见。孝作为道，其功德广布，遍及一切。
English: God walks through rivers, rivers and mountains, and the sea waves do not rise. Distant places offer tributes, and people near and far are convinced. Filial piety as a way, its merit is widespread, pervading everything.

古文：偈曰：迹显心亦显，感应固神妙，若有心不孝，盗名以为孝，假以欺世人，中实难自道，迹或似不孝，身心实尽孝，世人竞黜之，心惟天可告，独此两等人，感不漏纤毫，天鉴不可期，祸福时昭报。
现代文：偈说：行迹显现，人心也就会显现，善恶感应也固然神妙。如果心里不孝，而为了窃取声名而行孝，这是假借孝之名欺骗世人，中间的道理实在难以说明。有人行为好像是不孝，而身心却实在是尽孝，世人竞相贬低攻击他，其心思只能告知上天。唯独这两种人，感应不漏一丝一毫。天的鉴察不可欺瞒，祸福报应时常昭显。
English: The guru said, "When one's deeds are revealed, one's heart will also be revealed, and one's perception of good and evil will also be wonderful. If one is not filial in heart, but practices filial piety in order to steal fame, this is deceiving the world under the guise of filial piety. The reason in between is really difficult to explain. Someone acts as if he is not filial, but his mind and body are actually filial piety. The world competes to belittle and attack him, and his thoughts can only be told to heaven. Only these two types of people do not miss a single bit of inspiration. Heaven's inspection cannot be

古文：真君曰：凛哉凛哉，今劝世人，遵吾修行，感应之机，速于众善。
现代文：畏惧啊！现在我劝化世人，遵照我所说的去修行。天人感应的征兆，快于孝之外的各种善行。
English: Fear not! I now exhort mankind to practice as I have said. The signs of divine inspiration are swifter than all good deeds except filial piety.

古文：背吾所言，天条不赦，万劫受罪。
现代文：违背我的教导，上天的法则也不会赦免他，就会万劫不复，永远受到罪罚。
English: If he disobeys My teachings, the heavenly law will not forgive him, and he will be doomed to be punished forever.

古文：夫人之生，养亲有缺，且难为子，何况世人，毁骂父母，腹诽父母，亲且毁骂，殴叔詈伯，弑君凌师，无所不为。
现代文：人生在世，不能圆满地奉养双亲，尚且难以成为合格的子女，更何况现今之人，诋毁咒骂父母，嘴里虽不说，而在心里非议父母。双亲都敢诋毁咒骂，更不用说殴打咒骂叔伯，弑害君主，凌辱老师，以至于无所不为。
English: It is difficult to become a qualified child when one is still alive and cannot fully support his or her parents. Moreover, today's people slander and curse their parents. Although they do not say it, they criticize their parents in their hearts. Both parents dare to slander and curse, not to mention beating and cursing uncles, insulting the monarch, and insulting teachers, so that they can do anything.

古文：子在怀抱，气不忍吹，及其长也，爱之者真，训之者严。
现代文：子女在父母怀抱中时，父母都不忍心气息吹到他们。等到子女长大，对他们爱得真切，教训得也很严厉。
English: When children are in their parents' arms, their parents can't bear to breathe on them. When their children grow up, they love them very much and teach them very harshly.

古文：以爱子心，用之挞楚。挞即是爱，嗔亦是爱，即有盛怒，子惟柔顺，欲再杖时，手不能下。
现代文：从爱护子女的心出发，鞭挞教训子女，这样的鞭挞是对子女的爱，嗔怒也是对子女的爱。父母就是对子女勃然大怒，子女也只有婉柔顺从。父母再想痛打时，也下不了手。
English: Starting from the heart of loving and caring for children, whipping teaches children. Such whipping is love for children, and anger is also love for children. Parents are furious with their children, and children are only gentle and obedient. When parents want to beat them, they can't.

古文：何尔世人，拒亲责己，如抗大敌，天怒地变，岂容大逆。
现代文：为什么现今之人，拒绝双亲责备自己，与父母抗衡，如面临大敌一样。此时，天地也会动怒，岂能容忍这样大逆不道的人。
English: Why is it that people today refuse to blame their parents, and fight against their parents as if they were facing a great enemy? At this time, heaven and earth will also be angry, and they will not be able to tolerate such a rebellious person.

古文：子有病厄，亲处不安；何于亲疾，绝不关心。
现代文：子女有了病痛灾难，父母坐立不安。奈何对于父母的疾苦，子女却完全不放在心上。
English: When their children are afflicted with illness or disaster, their parents are restless. However, their children are completely unconcerned about the suffering of their parents.

古文：子有劳苦，亲关痛痒；何况我体，犯法极刑。
现代文：子女有了劳苦，都事关父母的痛痒，何况我犯了王法，身体受了极刑。
English: If children have to work, it's all about the parents. What's more, I broke the royal law and suffered extreme physical punishment.

古文：子苟不育，泪不曾干，冀其重生，伤人七情。
现代文：子女如果夭折，父母眼泪就未曾干过，希望他能够获得重生，伤心痛彻心扉。
English: If a child dies prematurely, the parents have never shed a tear, hoping that he can be reborn, heartbroken and heartbroken.

古文：何尔世人，父母终天，未及三年，思慕中衰，飨祭失时，亲骨不葬，且干不孝。
现代文：为什么现今之人，在父母亡故后，还不到三年，对父母的思念敬慕就已经中断了，供奉祭祀不及时，父母的骨骸久停不葬，并且干不孝的事情。
English: Why is it that people today, less than three years after the death of their parents, have already stopped thinking about and honoring their parents, do not offer sacrifices in time, do not bury the bones of their parents for a long time, and do things that are not filial.

古文：何尔世人，贫发亲冢，卖穴暴露，嗟尔父母，念念及子；何尔世人，凡事用心，独于父母，有口无心，不肯实为。
现代文：为什么现今之人，贫穷后就发掘双亲的坟墓，出卖墓穴，使父母的尸骨暴露。可叹你们的父母，念念都想到你们。为什么现今之人，对事关自己的一切事情都非常用心地去做，唯独对事关父母的事情，有口无心，不肯实在用力去做。
English: Why is it that people nowadays, when they are poor, dig up the graves of their parents, sell the graves, and expose the bones of their parents. Alas, your parents, thoughts go out to you. Why is it that people nowadays are very careful about everything that concerns them, but when it comes to their parents, they are careless and do not want to work hard.

古文：人之一身，诸般痛楚，何处可受，何尔化外，火焚亲尸，全无隐恻，美名不葬，于心最忍。
现代文：人死之后，口不能说话，肢体不能活动，但人的心却实在还没有死，仍然能够感知痛苦。
English: After death, the mouth can't speak and the limbs can't move, but the human heart is still alive and can still feel pain.

古文：夫人之死，口不能言，肢体难动，心实不死，犹知痛苦，过七七日，心之形死，其形虽死，此心不灵，千年不死，火焚而炽，碎首裂骨，烧筋炙节，立时牵缩，心惊肉跳，若痛苦状，俄顷之间，化为灰烬。
现代文：过了七七之后，心的肉体死去。虽然心的肉体已经死去，但心的灵魂，千年不死。用火焚烧地非常炽烈，头颅碎裂，骨骼破裂，燃烧筋脉，炙焚关节，尸体立刻就收缩，心惊肉跳，就好比是痛苦的形况。转瞬之间，化成灰烬。
English: After seventy-seven years, the body of the heart dies. Although the body of the heart has died, the soul of the heart does not die for a thousand years. It is burned with fire very fiercely, the skull is cracked, the bones are cracked, the sinews are burned, the joints are burned, the body immediately contracts, the heart is startled, it is like a painful condition. In an instant, it turns into ashes.

古文：于人且惨，何况我亲。
现代文：这对于人来说都是凄惨的，更何况是我的父母？
English: It's heartbreaking for anyone, let alone my parents?

古文：仰知冥狱，首重子逆，开罪本慈，人自罪犯，多致不孝，自罹冥法。
现代文：可知道，地狱首先重责忤逆之罪。阎罗王本来是慈悲的，只是人自己主动犯罪，从而导致不孝，触犯冥界律法。
English: However, it should be known that hell first of all severely punishes the sin of rebellion. The King of Hell was originally merciful, but man himself took the initiative to sin, which led to unfilial piety and violation of the laws of the underworld.

古文：人尽能孝，多致善行，地狱自空。
现代文：如果人都能够尽孝，多做各种善行，地狱自然就空了。
English: If everyone could be filial and do more good deeds, hell would naturally be empty.

古文：一节之孝，冥必登记，在在超生，诵是经者，各宜省悟。
现代文：如果没有父母，就没有我身，报答父母的恩情没有尽头，感激父母的慈爱没有终极。
English: If there were no parents, there would be no self, there would be no end to repaying the kindness of parents, and there would be no end to being grateful for the love of parents.

古文：苟无父母，乌有此身，报恩靡尽，衔慈莫极，人果孝亲，惟以心求，生集百福，死到仙班，万事如意，子孙荣昌，世系绵延，锡自斗王，是经在处，可镇经藏，可概万行，厌诸魔恶，成大罗仙，长保亨衢，何乐不从。
现代文：人们果真孝敬父母，只有用心去求取。活着就会百福聚集，死后就能位列仙班；万事如意，子孙尊荣昌盛，祖宗的血脉绵延永存，这都是得自北斗星君的恩赐。有这部经所在的地方，可以镇守佛藏道经，可以概括各种行为，镇压一切魔鬼恶神，成为大罗神仙，长久保持通达顺利，为什么不乐于听从呢？
English: If people are truly filial to their parents, they only have to seek with their hearts. If they are alive, they will gather a hundred blessings, and after death they will be able to be ranked among the immortals; if everything goes well, their children and grandchildren will be honored and prosperous, and the blood of their ancestors will continue to exist forever, these are all gifts from the Big Dipper. If there is a place where this sutra is located, you can keep the Buddhist sutra, you can summarize all kinds of behaviors, suppress all demons and evil spirits, become a great Luo immortal, and keep the passage smooth for a long time, why are you not willing to obey it?

古文：孝感神应咒：禔啝禔啝，人子心曲，仰事俯育，一家气和，飞鸾广度，乐恺先歌，如意宝光，普照长怤。
现代文：孝感神应咒：禔啝禔啝，人子的心事是，对上能奉养父母，对下能抚育妻小，一家人和气。神人驾着鸾鸟普度众生，欢快的乐曲到处飘荡，如意的祥光，普照永远喜乐之人。
English: Filial piety inspires the gods to cast a spell: "Oh, the heart of the son of man is to be able to provide for his parents, to be able to raise his wife and children, and to have a happy family. The godman drives the ostrich to save all living beings, the joyful music wafts everywhere, and the auspicious light shines everywhere, illuminating those who are forever joyful."

古文：禔啝禔啝，尽孝靡他，解尽亲厄，消尽亲过，罪灭福生，孝思不磨，超脱九幽，永离网罗，欲报亲慈，惟心常慕。
现代文：禔啝禔啝，尽孝不是为了别的，而是要解除双亲的所有的灾厄，消除双亲所有的过错，从而罪过灭尽，福气多生。孝的心念不灭，就能超脱鬼域，永离灾难的罗网。想要报答双亲的慈恩，只有心里常常慕恋孝道。
English: After all, filial piety is not for anything else, but to remove all the disasters and misfortunes of the parents, to eliminate all the mistakes of the parents, so that the sins are eliminated and the blessings are more abundant. If the filial piety is not extinguished, it will be able to transcend the ghost realm and leave the net of disaster forever. If you want to repay the kindness of the parents, only the heart often yearns for filial piety.

古文：禔啝禔啝，至孝诚孚亲生，福禄寿增多，归去逍遥升天都，孝思不磨乐，佗娑唵娑诃。
现代文：禔啝禔啝，尽孝诚信，可以使父母的福禄滋生，寿命增长，死后能够逍遥升至天府，孝亲之思不灭，福乐永远，佗娑唵娑诃。
English: , filial piety and honesty can make the parents' happiness grow, life expectancy increase, after death they can rise to heaven, filial piety is immortal, happiness forever,.

古文：但愿人子心，常如在母腹，一呼一吸中，吮血茹膏液，一血一脉间，俱属在父怙，情虽性发，依为命府，阴阳日月从此龢，乾坤翕辟从此龢，五声六律五行龢，五伦妙道从此龢，太虚有尽处，孝愿无嗟磨。
现代文：但愿子女的心，常常像在母亲腹中一样，一呼一吸，吸食母亲的脂膏和血液；一血一脉，都倚仗父亲的扶持。情虽然是发自心性，是命的依靠，阴阳日月都是从这里得到协调，天地的运行是从这里得到调和，五声六律五行和谐，五伦妙道也是从这里得到协调。宇宙有尽头，孝的心愿不磨灭。
English: May the hearts of children, as often as in their mothers' wombs, breathe in and breathe out, absorbing the mother's fat and blood; blood and blood, all relying on the father's support. Although love is from the heart, it is dependent on life. Yin and yang, sun and moon are all coordinated from here. The movement of heaven and earth is coordinated from here. The harmony of the five syllables, the six laws and the five elements, and the way of the five elements are also coordinated from here. The universe has an end, and the wish of filial piety will not be extinguished.

古文：佗娑佗娑娑佗娑佗唵唎婆啝。
现代文：佗娑佗娑娑佗娑佗唵唎娑啝。
English: That's it.

古文：孝子文印偈曰：至文本无文，韫之孝道中，发现自成章，司之岂容泄。
现代文：孝子文印偈说：非常好的文章本自无文，蕴藏在孝道中，发现它的道理就能自然成章，实行起来是不能有一点泄露。
English: The Filial Piety Sutra says, "A very good essay is written from scratch, hidden in filial piety, and when its truth is discovered, it will naturally become a chapter, and when it is implemented, it cannot be leaked at all."

古文：天聋与地哑，非聋亦非哑。
现代文：天聋和地哑，并不是真的聋，也不是真的哑，是特别为了使天地的秘密，不尽被人所解知。
English: Deaf and dumb, not really deaf, not really dumb, especially so that the secrets of heaven and earth are not fully understood by man.

古文：特将天地秘，不使尽人解，朱衣与魁光，变幻文人心，遇彼纯孝子，塞其聪明路；遇彼纯孝子，开其智慧途。
现代文：朱衣神和魁星，变幻文人心智。遇到不孝的子女，就会阻塞其聪明的道路；遇到纯洁的孝顺子女，就会开辟其智慧的道路。
English: Zhu Yi Shen and Quixing transform the minds of writers. If they encounter unfilial children, they will block their path of wisdom; if they encounter pure filial children, they will open up their path of wisdom.

古文：凡才作仙品，仙品作凡才。
现代文：平凡才智的人可以列入仙品，具有仙品的人也会成为凡才。
English: People with ordinary talents can be included in fairy tales, and people with fairy tales will also become ordinary talents.

古文：文虽有高下，黜陟岂人操，或因前生报，或因今生报，今生或后报，必当为孝显，文章作证明，阐扬在大道。
现代文：文章的好坏虽有高下之分，贬斥和提升都不是人所能操控的。或者是因为前生今报，或者因为今生今报，今生报或后世报，都必定是通过孝而得到显扬。用文章作证明，说明和宣扬在于大道。
English: Although the quality of an article varies from one generation to the next, neither denigration nor promotion can be manipulated by man. Either because of the previous life of this newspaper, or because of the current life of this newspaper, the current life of this newspaper or the future generation of this newspaper, all must be shown through filial piety. It is in the avenue to use articles to prove, explain and promote.

古文：孝子桂苑天香心印偈曰：我有蟾宫桂，仙品真足贵，禀蕴斗星灵，包含月华精，元和钟妙蕊，枝根挺天衢，苍龙覆七曲，光辉连玉宇，栽得大灵根，吐兹百宝芬，一萼目天逗，大地万花稠，流化在人间，所到无不周，纷纷世上胄，植香岂不茂。
现代文：孝子桂苑天香心印偈说：我有蟾宫的桂枝，仙品是非常珍贵的。禀藏着斗星的灵气，包含月亮的精华。元和之气聚集在奇妙的花蕊，枝根挺向广阔天空。
English: Filial son Gui Yuan Tianxiang Xin Ying said: I have the cinnamon branch of the Palace of Heaven, and the immortals are very precious. The cinnamon contains the aura of the star, including the essence of the moon. The spirit of harmony is gathered in the wonderful flower stalks, and the roots of the branches stretch to the broad sky.

古文：易茂亦易落，暂而不能久，无如天上桂，一萼胜千数，愈散觉愈远，愈远觉愈悠，香随九天翔，浩荡风清飚，声怀万会秋，真妙永无量，名之为金粟，载之在奎斗，珍贮庆宫中，高占壁楼头。
现代文：越发散就越觉得远，时间越长，就越觉得悠香。香气在九天飞翔，随着清风飚风浩浩荡荡。馨香包藏万秋，真实奇妙永远不可限量。以金粟为名，装载在奎斗。珍藏在玉真庆宫中，高高地占据璧楼顶。
English: The more diffuse it is, the more distant it feels, and the longer it lasts, the more fragrant it feels. The fragrance flies for nine days, and swells with the wind. The fragrance is treasured for thousands of years, and there is no limit to how wonderful it can be. In the name of the golden poppy, it is stored in Kuidou. It is treasured in the Yujing Palace, occupying the top of the building.

古文：不是擎元叟，莫得主其有；若非植善手，莫得攀兹秀。
现代文：不是持受善的长者，是不能主宰它的。如果不是行善人的手，是不能攀摘这样的美丽花朵的。
English: If it were not for the benevolent elder, it would not be possible to control it. If it were not for the hands of the doer of good, it would not be possible to pick such beautiful flowers.

古文：勿与轻薄子，必以孝为首，莫下害良笔，莫使亵字手。
现代文：不能给予轻薄的人，必定给以行孝为首的人。不要下笔损害忠良，不要使用亵渎文字的手。
English: What cannot be given to the frivolous must be given to the filial. Do not write to injure the faithful, and do not use profane language.

古文：孝子之所为，我当赍赐厚，千祥凝聚处，早把天香授。
现代文：对于孝子的所作所为，我必定对其厚加奖赏。在千祥凝聚的地方，早点把芳香的桂花授给他。
English: For the deeds of a filial son, I will surely reward him generously. In the place where a thousand virtues converge, give him the fragrant osmanthus early.

古文：果是诚孝子，不求而自授。
现代文：如果真是至诚的孝子，不用祈求我自然就会授给他。
English: If he is really a sincere filial son, I will naturally bestow it on him without having to pray.

古文：不孝不弟人，求攀终莫有，变孝妄行道，有必夺其有，悔逆猛从孝，无仍赐其有。
现代文：不孝不悌的人，就是攀求也不会得到。改变孝行，倒行逆施，即使有了也必定会被剥夺。悔改违逆而大力行孝，即使原本没有这福分，上天也会赐予。
English: Those who are not filial will not get what they are seeking. Those who change their filial piety and act in a perverted manner will be deprived of it. Those who repent and act in a rebellious manner will be blessed by Heaven even if they do not have this blessing.

古文：圣人孝天地，大位帝眷佑，须知世所贵，必从天上酬，祈游桂苑者，宜认此来由，中间莫错路，自有非常遘。
现代文：圣人孝敬天地，文昌帝君就会眷顾保佑他得到显贵的官位。必须知道尘世所贵重的东西，必定来自上天的酬报。祈望遨游桂苑的人，应当认清楚这个缘由。在里面不要认错道路，自然会有非常的遭遇。
English: If a saint holds heaven and earth in high esteem, Emperor Wenchang will take care of him and bless him to obtain a prominent official position. It is necessary to know that what is valuable on earth must come from heaven. Those who wish to visit Guiyuan should clearly recognize this reason. Do not recognize the wrong path in it, there will naturally be a very bad encounter.

古文：亿色花香里，重重宝光覆，洞明万户玲，天天叠文秀，凝成篆籀章，结合五霞构，秘策列缤纷，仙韵不停流，悉在光中过，遍照大神州，盘旋观不尽，群仙晤且逅，花随步履扬，馥自冠裳透，略嗅云霄桂，洗尽尘俗垢，千孔与百窍，感香俱灵牖，心腑也充满，福缘无不偶，入圊独推元，垂芳能不朽，宝哉勿轻锡，慎重待孝友。
现代文：裹身在亿种花香里，覆盖在重重宝光中。照亮千家万户，每天都增加文才。凝结成各种文章，结成五彩云霞。奥妙文书缤纷排列，神仙的声韵不停地飘流。
English: Wrapped in a billion kinds of floral scents, covered in layers of precious light. Illuminating thousands of households, increasing literary talent every day. Condensed into various articles, formed into colorful clouds. Mysterious instruments are colorfully arranged, and the rhyme of immortals is constantly drifting.

古文：吾奉九天元皇帝律令，乃说赞曰：纯孝本性生，无不备于人，体之皆具足，践履无难循，以此瞻依志，无忝鞠育心，在地自为纪，在天即为经，生民安饮食，君子表言行，父母天亲乐，无奇本率真。
现代文：我奉九天元皇帝的律令，就此说赞：纯粹的孝来自人的本性，人人无不具备。用心体究，人人具备，实践起来也不难遵循。从这里看其心志，无愧于父母养育的用心。在地就成为法度法则，在天就成为纲纪准则。人民安然饮食，君子彰显言行，父母天伦之乐，这些都平淡无奇，而是本自率真的心性。
English: According to the imperial edict of Emperor Jiu Tianyuan, I praise him for this: Pure filial piety comes from human nature, and everyone has it. Studying with the heart, everyone has it, and it is not difficult to follow in practice. From here, we can see his heart, which is worthy of the parents' upbringing. On earth, it becomes the rule of law, and in heaven, it becomes the code of discipline. People eat and drink safely, gentlemen show their words and deeds, and parents are happy. These are all unremarkable, but it is a genuine heart.

古文：人人若共道，家国贺太平，放之充海宇，广之塞乾坤，孝行满天下，尘寰即玉京。
现代文：如果人人都遵守，家国共贺太平。放之则可以充塞宇内，广布则可以塞满天地。孝行布满天下，尘世即是仙境。
English: If everyone observes it, the whole country will celebrate the peace. If it is released, it can fill the whole world. If it is released, it can fill the whole world. If it is released, it can fill the world. If it is released, it can fill the world. If it is released, it can fill the world. If it is released, it can fill the world.

古文：说赞未毕，声周三界，惠日蔼风，一时拥护。
现代文：说赞尚未完毕，声音已传遍三界。和煦的阳光与轻风，立即围上拥护。
English: The praise has not yet finished, and the sound has spread throughout the three realms. The warm sunshine and light wind immediately surrounded and supported.

古文：尔时有朱衣真君，恭敬稽首，深会妙旨，演为慈孝钧天大罗妙乐，以广圣化，爰命金童玉女，著五色霞衣，按歌起舞，奏曰：
现代文：这时，有个朱衣真君，恭敬地跪拜作礼，深深地领会了其中的精深旨意，演绎为慈孝钧天大罗妙乐，以广泛传播圣人的教化。于是命令金童玉女穿上五色霞衣，闻歌起舞，演奏唱道：教化孝道有相传的经典，奏出动听的乐曲。
English: At this time, there was a Zhu Yi Zhenjun, respectfully kneeled and made a bow, deeply comprehended the profound intention of it, interpreted it as a benevolence and filial piety and great heavenly music, in order to widely spread the enlightenment of the saint. So he ordered the golden girl to put on the five-colored gauze dress, listen to the song and dance, and play and sing the way: the teaching of filial piety has a classic that has been passed down, and play a beautiful music.

古文：教孝有传经，奏恺成声，母慈昱昱，父爱甄甄，子色循循；妻婉婉，夫誾誾，兄秩秩，弟恂恂，姑仁媳敬承；父携子，祖携孙，恩勤室蔼蔼，家溱溱，俱是父母一般心。
现代文：母亲的慈爱放出光明，父亲慈爱飞扬涌动，子女循规蹈矩。
English: A mother's love shines, a father's love soars, a child follows the rules.

古文：乐衎衎，何地不生，至性中笃，实天情，欢腾普天下，亿兆声蒸。
现代文：妻子委婉和顺，丈夫谦和恭敬；兄长肃敬，弟弟恭顺；婆婆仁爱，媳妇恭顺。
English: The wife is tactful and obedient, the husband is modest and respectful; the elder brother is serious and respectful, the younger brother is obedient; the mother-in-law is benevolent, and the daughter-in-law is obedient.

古文：气洽谈门屏，俱如家人，父母一般心。
现代文：父亲提携子女，祖父提携孙子，恩爱勤劳。家庭和睦繁盛，都与父母一样的心。
English: The father is devoted to his children, the grandfather is devoted to his grandchildren, love is diligent, the family is harmonious and prosperous, and they all have the same heart as their parents.

古文：有身有亲，始信有君。
现代文：和和乐乐，无处不在。
English: Harmony, harmony, harmony everywhere.

古文：有臣有民，师弟良朋，咸归于贞，邦家总孝成。
现代文：内心廉正，行为淳厚的品性，是与生俱来的。
English: It is innate to be honest at heart and behave with integrity.

古文：自身克孝，当准万功，事后母孝，准万万功，亲亡事祖，如孝父母，准万万功，善哉善哉。
现代文：孝敬后母，准有万万个功德。双亲亡故后事道见病卧奉祖先，如同孝敬父母一样，准有万万个功德。好啊！好啊！
English: Filial piety to one's stepmother is said to have ten thousand merits. After the death of one's parents, it is said that one should show filial piety to one's ancestors, just as one should show filial piety to one's parents. Good! Good!

古文：谛听吾言。
现代文：注意听我说的话。
English: Pay attention to what I'm saying.

古文：于是朱衣魁星，天聋地哑及诸仙众，欢喜踊跃，命诸掌籍，载之玉册，信受奉行。
现代文：于是朱衣魁星，天聋地哑，及众多神仙，欢喜雀跃，命令各位掌籍，记载在玉册之上，相信接受，并且遵照实行。
English: Therefore, Zhu Yi Kui Xing, who was deaf and dumb, and many immortals, were overjoyed and ordered everyone to be registered, recorded in the jade book, believed, accepted, and implemented accordingly.

