古文：元次山有《文编》十卷，李商隐作序，今九江所刻是也。
现代文：元次山有《文编》十卷，李商隐作序，即现在九江所刻印的版本。
English: In the Yuan Dynasty, there were ten volumes of "Wen Ji Shan," with a preface by Li Shangyin, which is the version now engraved in Jiujiang.

古文：又有《元子》十卷，李纾作序，予家有之，凡一百五篇，其十四篇已见于《文编》余者大氐澶漫矫亢。
现代文：又有《元子》十卷，李纾作序，我家有这本书，共一百零五篇，其中十四篇已收入《文编》，其余大多是纵情任性，故作与众不同的内容。
English: There are also ten volumes of "Guan Zi" with a preface by Li Xuan. My family has this book, with a total of 105 articles, of which 14 have been included in the "Wen Bian," and the rest are mostly self-indulgent, pretentious and unique content.

古文：而弟八卷中所载方国二十国事最为谲诞，其略云：方国之惣，尽身皆方，其俗恶圆。
现代文：而第八卷中所记录方国二十国事，极为怪异荒诞，大意是说： 方国的野人，全身各处都是方形的，他们的风俗是厌恶圆形。
English: However, the eighth volume records the twenty national affairs of Fang Guo, which is extremely bizarre and absurd, to the effect of saying: The savages of Fang Guo are square all over their bodies, and their customs abhor round shapes.

古文：设有问者，曰： 汝心圆 ，则两手破胸露心，曰： 此心圆耶？ 
现代文：假如有人问道： 你的心是圆的吧？ 他们就用双手扒开胸口露出心，说： 这个心是圆的吗？ 
English: If someone asks: Is your heart round? they open their chests with their hands to show their hearts and say: Is this heart round?

古文：圆国则反之。
现代文：圆国则与此相反。
English: On the other hand, it is the opposite in the provinces.

古文：言国之惣，三口三舌。
现代文：言国的野人三个嘴，三根舌头。
English: The savages who speak for the country have three mouths and three tongues.

古文：相乳国之惣，口以下直为一窍。
现代文：相乳国的野人，嘴下边只是一个孔。
English: A wildling from the land of milk and honey, with only a hole at the bottom of his mouth.

古文：无手国足便于手。无足国肤行如风。其说颇近《山海经》，固已不韪，至云：恶国之惣，男长大则杀父，女长大则杀母。
现代文：无手国脚比手灵便，无足国用皮肤飞行，象风一样轻快， 这些说法很近似《山海经》，本已是荒谬的了，至于说： 恶国的野人，男的长大就杀父亲，女的长大就杀母亲。
English: It is more convenient to have a limbless foot than a limbless hand, and a footless country flies with its skin, as light as the wind. These sayings are very similar to the "Mountain and Sea Sutra" and are already absurd. As for saying: "Wild people in evil countries, when a man grows up, he kills his father, and when a woman grows up, she kills her mother."

古文：忍国之惣，父母见子，如臣见君。
现代文：忍国的野人，父母见到子女，如同臣子见到国君。
English: Wildlings of the ninja country, parents see their children, as courtiers see the sovereign.

古文：无鼻之国，兄弟相逢则相害。
现代文：无鼻之国，兄弟相逢就相害。
English: In a country without a nose, when brothers meet, they harm each other.

古文：触国之惣，子孙长大则杀之。
现代文：触国的野人，子孙长大就杀掉。 
English: If a savage flees the country, kill his children and grandchildren when they grow up.

古文：如此之类，皆悖理害教，于事无补，次山《中兴颂》与日月争光，若此书，不作可也，惜哉！
现代文：象这一类，都是违背情理，有害子教化，没有益处的。次山的《中兴颂》写得光华灿烂，可与日月争光，至于这部书，真是不可写的，可惜啊！
English: Like this one, they are all against reason, harmful to education, and of no benefit. The following book, "Zhongxingsong," is written brilliantly, and can compete with the sun and the moon, but as for this book, it really cannot be written, what a pity!

