古文：樊宏子儵族曾孙准阴识弟兴
现代文：◆樊宏传，樊宏字靡卿，南阳郡湖阳人，世祖的舅舅。
English: ◆宏传,宏字靡卿, a native of Hoyang, Nanyang County, and the uncle of the founder.

古文：樊宏字靡卿，南阳湖阳人也，世祖之舅。其先周仲山甫，封于樊，因而氏焉，为乡里著姓。
现代文：其先祖周仲山甫，封于樊，因以为氏，为乡里显姓。
English: His ancestor, Zhou Zhongshan Fu, was born in the county of Yunnan, and because of his family name, his family name was prominent in the township.

古文：父重，字君云，世善农稼，好货殖。
现代文：父樊重，字君云，善农稼，好货殖。
English: His father, Zou Junyun, was a good farmer and a good producer of goods.

古文：重性温厚，有法度，三世共财，子孙朝夕礼敬，常若公家。
现代文：樊重性温厚，有法度，三世共同生活，子孙朝夕礼敬，常像公家。
English: They are warm-hearted, law-abiding, live together for three generations, and their children and grandchildren bow to them in the morning and evening. They often look like court nobles.

古文：其营理产业，物无所弃，课役童隶，各得其宜，故能上下戮力，财利岁倍，至乃开广田土三百余顷。
现代文：其经营产业，物无所弃，课童役隶，各得其宜，所以能上下同心戮力，财利每年倍增，于是开广田土三百余顷。
English: Its management industry, nothing is abandoned, schoolchildren are assigned to subordinates, each according to their own needs, so it can concentrate the upper and lower forces, and the financial profit doubles every year, so it has opened more than three hundred hectares of land.

古文：其所起庐舍，皆有重堂高阁，陂渠灌注。
现代文：其所起庐舍，都有重堂高阁，塘渠灌注。
English: The residences built by them all have a high-ceilinged main hall and are fed by a pond.

古文：又池鱼牧畜，有求必给。
现代文：又池鱼牧畜，有求必给。
English: Also, pond fish and livestock, there is a need to give.

古文：尝欲作器物，先种梓漆，时人嗤之，然积以岁月，皆得其用，向之笑者咸求假焉。
现代文：曾想作器物，先种梓漆，当时人都讥笑，然而积以岁月，都得到利用，过去讥笑他的人都向他租借。
English: Once he wanted to make utensils, and first he planted a horse chestnut tree. At the time, people scoffed, but over the years, they have all been used. People who used to mock him have rented from him.

古文：资至巨万，而赈赡宗族，恩加乡闾。
现代文：资至巨万，而赈济赡养宗族，恩加乡闾。
English: He has a huge amount of money, but he supports his family and his hometown of Enga.

古文：外孙何氏兄弟争财，重耻之，以田二顷解其忿讼。
现代文：外孙何氏兄弟争夺财产，樊重感到羞耻，以田二顷解决他们的忿讼。
English: The grandsons of the He brothers fought over property, and the brothers felt ashamed and settled their grievances with two hectares of farmland.

古文：县中称美，推为三老。
现代文：县中赞美，推为三老。
English: In the middle of the county, he was praised and promoted to be the third elder.

古文：年八十余终。
现代文：年八十多岁而终。
English: He died in his eighties.

古文：其素所假贷人间数百万，遗令焚削文契。
现代文：其平时向他假贷的人债累数百万，樊重遗令焚烧文契。
English: He had accumulated millions of dollars in debts to people who had borrowed money from him under false pretenses, and he had ordered the burning of documents.

古文：责家闻者皆惭，争往偿之，诸子从敕，竟不肯受。
现代文：债家听说都很惭愧，争着向他家还债，诸子从父命，不肯接受。
English: The creditor was said to be very ashamed and fought to repay his debt to his family, but his sons refused to accept their father's order.

古文：宏少有志行。
现代文：樊宏少有志行。
English: Yan Hong rarely volunteers to go.

古文：王莽末，义兵起，刘伯升与族兄赐俱将兵攻湖阳，城守不下。
现代文：王莽末年，义兵兴起，刘伯升与族兄刘赐都率兵攻湖阳，没有攻下。
English: At the end of Wang Mang's life, there was a rise in the number of volunteer soldiers. Liu Bosheng and his brother Liu Jizhe led an army to attack Huyang, but failed to capture it.

古文：赐女弟为宏妻，湖阳由是收系宏妻子，令出譬伯升，宏因留不反。
现代文：刘赐的妹妹是樊宏的妻子，湖阳因此逮捕樊宏妻子，令她晓谕伯升，樊宏因留不返。
English: Liu Qi's younger sister was Yan Hong's wife. Therefore, Hoyang arrested Yan Hong's wife and ordered her to tell Bo Sheng that Yan Hong would not return because of this.

古文：湖阳军帅欲杀其妻子，长吏以下共相谓曰： 樊重子父，礼义恩德行于乡里，虽有罪，且当在后。 
现代文：湖阳军帅欲杀其妻子，长吏以下都说： 樊重父子，礼义恩德行于乡里，虽有罪，且待以后再说。 
English: The commander of the Hoyang army wanted to kill his wife, and the officials said the following: "He is a father and a son, he behaves with courtesy and kindness in the countryside. Although he is guilty, let's talk about it later."

古文：会汉兵日盛，湖阳惶急，未敢杀之，遂得免脱。
现代文：恰好汉兵到，阳军惶恐着急，不敢杀樊妻，于是得以脱离危险。
English: Just as the Han soldiers arrived, the Yang soldiers panicked and hurried, not daring to kill their wives, so they were able to get out of danger.

古文：更始立，欲以宏为将，宏叩头辞曰： 书生不习兵事。 
现代文：更始立，想以樊宏为将，樊宏叩头推辞说： 书生不懂兵事。 
English: From the very beginning, he wanted to use Nie Hong as a general, but Nie Hong kowtowed and said, "Students don't understand military affairs."

古文：竟得免归。与宗家亲属作营堑自守，老弱归之者千余家。
现代文：竟得免归，与宗家亲戚作营垒自守，老弱跟随者千余家。
English: In fact, he was exempted from returning, and he camped with the relatives of his father's family to protect himself. There are more than a thousand families of old and weak followers.

古文：时赤眉贼掠唐子乡，多所残杀，欲前攻宏营，宏遣人持牛酒米谷，劳遗赤眉。
现代文：当时赤眉贼掠唐子乡，残杀百姓甚多，还想前去攻打樊宏营，樊宏遣人带着牛酒米谷，送给赤眉。
English: At that time, the Red Eyebrows bandits plundered Tangzi Township and killed many people. They also wanted to attack the camp of Zou Hong. Zou Hong sent people with rice and wine to give to the Red Eyebrows.

古文：赤眉长老先闻宏仁厚，皆称曰： 樊君素善，且今见待如此，何心攻之。 
现代文：赤眉长老先听说樊宏仁厚，都说： 樊君素来和善，而且现在这样优待我们，何必攻他呢。 
English: When the red-browed elders first heard of Yao Hong's benevolence, they all said: "Yao Jun has always been kind, and now he treats us so well, why should we attack him?"

古文：引兵而去，遂免寇难。
现代文：于是引兵而去，樊宏得免于难。
English: As a result, the soldiers were led away, and Yan Hong was spared.

古文：世祖即位，拜光禄大夫，位特进，次三公。
现代文：世祖即位，拜光禄大夫，位特进，仅次三公。
English: The ancestor ascends the throne, Dr. Baiguanglu is promoted to a special promotion, and the three princes are promoted for the second time.

古文：建武五年，封长罗侯。
现代文：建武五年，封长罗侯。
English: Jianwu five years, Fuchang Luo.

古文：十三年，封弟丹为射阳侯，兄子寻玄乡侯，族兄忠更父侯。
现代文：十三年，封其弟樊丹为射阳侯，兄子寻为玄乡侯，族兄樊忠为更父侯。
English: In the thirteenth year, he made his younger brother Shidan the lord of Shayang, his elder brother Han the lord of Xuanxiang, and his elder brother Shizhong the lord of Zeng.

古文：十五年，定封宏寿张侯。
现代文：十五年，定封樊宏为寿张侯。
English: Fifteen years later, Jianhong was given the title of Shou Zhanghou.

古文：十八年，帝南祠章陵，过湖阳，祠重墓，追爵谥为寿张敬侯，立庙于湖阳，车驾每南巡，常幸其墓，赏赐大会。
现代文：十八年，帝南祠章陵祭祀，过湖阳，祭祀樊重墓，追谥樊重为寿张敬侯，立庙于湖阳。帝每次南巡，常祀其墓，举行赏赐大会。
English: In the 18th year, the Emperor's South Ancestral Shrine and Mausoleum was dedicated, passing through Hoyang, and the gravestone was dedicated, and the gravestone was chased for Shou Zhang Jing Hou, and the temple was built in Hoyang. Every time the emperor went to the south, he often worshiped his tomb and held a reward conference.

古文：宏为人谦柔畏慎，不求苟进。
现代文：樊宏为人谦柔小心谨慎，不求侥幸。
English: Yan Hong is a humble, careful and cautious person, and does not seek luck.

古文：常戒其子曰： 富贵盈溢，未有能终者。
现代文：常戒其子说： 富贵过了头，没有能得到善终的。
English: He often admonished his son: "If you are too rich, you won't have a happy ending."

古文：吾非不喜荣势也，天道恶满而好谦，前世贵戚皆明戒也。
现代文：我不是不喜荣耀和权势，但天道厌恶盈满而好谦，前世贵戚的下场都是明戒哩。
English: I am not averse to glory and power, but the heavenly way abhors fullness and is full of modesty. The fate of noble relatives in previous lives is a clear warning.

古文：保身全己，岂不乐哉！ 
现代文：保身全己，岂不快乐吗？ 
English: Wouldn't it be nice to be able to protect yourself?

古文：每当朝会，辄迎期先到，俯伏待事，时至乃起。
现代文：每当朝会，常按期先到，俯伏在宫殿静待，到了时间才起来。
English: Whenever there is a meeting of the Imperial Family, the groom often arrives ahead of schedule, prostrates himself in the palace and waits until it is time to get up.

古文：帝闻之，常敕驺骑临朝乃告，勿令豫到。
现代文：帝听到，常令主驾车马的从骑临朝才告他，不让他事先赶到。
English: When the emperor heard this, he often ordered the master of the carriage and horse to call him from the morning, not to let him arrive in advance.

古文：宏所上便宜及言得失，辄手自书写，毁削草本。
现代文：樊宏所上对国家有利应办的奏章及讨论利害得失的发言，常亲手书写，销毁草本。
English: Zou Hong often hand-wrote and destroyed the transcripts of the speeches on the state's interests and the discussion of the gains and losses.

古文：公朝访逮，不敢众对。
现代文：公朝访逮，不敢众对。
English: He dared not face the public when he visited the DPRK.

古文：宗族染其化，未尝犯法。
现代文：宗族感染其教化，未尝犯法。
English: The clan infected him with indoctrination, but he never broke the law.

古文：帝甚重之。
现代文：帝很重视他。
English: Emperor Jing was very fond of him.

古文：及病困，车驾临视，留宿，问其所欲言。
现代文：等到病困，帝亲自看视，留宿，问他有何话要说。
English: When he fell ill, the emperor himself visited him, stayed with him, and asked him what he had to say.

古文：宏顿首自陈： 无功享食大国，诚恐子孙不能保全厚恩，令臣魂神惭负黄泉，愿还寿张，食小乡亭。 
现代文：樊宏顿首自说： 我无功享食大国，诚恐子孙不能保全厚恩，使我的魂神惭愧于九泉之下，愿还寿张，食小乡亭。 
English: Zou Hongdun said to himself, "I have not been able to enjoy the food of a great country. I sincerely fear that my descendants will not be able to preserve the bounty, so that my soul will be ashamed under the nine springs. May I live long and eat the food of a small township."

古文：帝悲伤其言，而竟不许。二十七年，卒。
现代文：帝其言，而不准所请。二十七年，去世。
English: 27 years old, passed away.

古文：遗敕薄葬，一无所用，以为棺柩一臧，不宜复见，如有腐败，伤孝子之心，使与夫人同坟异臧。
现代文：遗命薄葬，一无所用，只用棺柩埋葬，不宜厚殓，如有腐败，伤孝子之心，使与夫人同坟异臧。
English: It is of no use to bury the deceased in a shallow grave, with only a coffin lid, and it is not appropriate to use a thick coffin lid. If there is corruption, it will hurt the hearts of the sons and daughters, and they will end up in the same grave as their wives.

古文：帝善其令，以书示百官，因曰： 今不顺寿张侯意，无以彰其德。
现代文：帝赞美其遗嘱，以书示百官，因而说 ：今如果不顺寿张侯意，无以表彰其德行。
English: The emperor praised his will and sent a letter to all the officials, saying, "If Zhang Hou's wishes do not come true now, there is no way to commend his virtue."

古文：且吾万岁之后，欲以为式。 
现代文：而且我死以后，也要以此为模式。 
English: And I want that to be the model after I'm gone.

古文：赙钱千万，布万匹，谥为恭侯，赠以印绶，车驾亲送葬。
现代文：赙钱千万，布万匹，谥为恭侯，赠以印绶，帝亲自为送葬。
English: Ten million pieces of money, ten thousand pieces of cloth, a horse as a tribute, a seal as a gift, and the emperor himself as a funeral procession.

古文：子鯈嗣。
现代文：子樊矹嗣位。
English: His son became the heir.

古文：帝悼宏不已，复封少子茂为平望侯。
现代文：帝悼宏不已，复封小儿子樊茂为平望侯。
English: The emperor continued to mourn his great-grandson, and the youngest son, Gongmao, was posthumously reinstated as the prince of Pingwang.

古文：樊氏侯者凡五国。
现代文：樊氏封侯者共五国。
English: A total of five countries were fiefs of the Min clan.

古文：明年，赐鯈弟鲔及从昆弟七人合钱五千万。
现代文：第二年，赐樊矹弟樊鲔及从昆弟七人合钱五千万。
English: In the second year, he gave 50 million yuan to seven people from Kunde and his younger brother.

古文：论曰：昔楚顷襄王问阳陵君曰： 君子之富何如？ 
现代文：史官评论道：以前楚顷襄王问阳陵君道： 君子的富如何呢？ 
English: The historian commented, "Previously, Chu He Xiang Wang asked Yang Ling Jun Dao: How is a gentleman's wealth?

古文：对曰： 假人不德不责，食人不使不役，亲戚爱之，众人善之。 
现代文：阳陵君回答： 假贷给人的不自以为德，不责其报偿，给别人东西吃而不役使他，所以亲戚相爱，众人称善。 
English: Yang Lingjun replied: It is not self-righteous to give a person a fake loan, and it is not responsible to reward him, and it is not helpful to give someone something to eat, so relatives love each other, and everyone is good.

古文：视事三年，以疾征，三转为尚书令，明习故事，遂见任用。
现代文：樊重的焚契止讼，也许可以说是君子的富吧！分地以用天道，实廪以崇礼节，以此理推之教化，也是可以推之于施政哩。
English: Perhaps it can be said that the arduous process of terminating a contract by incineration is a gentleman's wealth. The division of land into the use of the heavenly way and the real estate into the reverence of etiquette can be deduced from the principle of enlightenment, and can also be deduced from governance.

古文：元初三年，代周暢为光禄勋。
现代文：与那些爱而敬畏的，有什么不同呢？
English: And what difference is there between those who love and those who fear?

古文：五年，卒于官。阴识字次伯，南阳新野人也，光烈皇后之前母兄也。
现代文：◆阴识传，阴识字次伯，南阳郡新野人。光烈皇后前母的哥哥。
English: ◆ Yin Zhi Chuan, Yin Zhi Zhi Jibo, Nanyang County, Xinwu people. He was the elder brother of the former mother of Empress Guanglie.

古文：其先出自管仲，管仲七世孙修，自齐适楚，为阴大夫，因而氏焉。
现代文：其祖先出自管仲，管仲的七世孙管修，自齐国到了楚国，为阴大夫，因而改为阴姓。
English: His ancestors were from Guanzhong. Guanzhong's seventh-generation grandson Guanzhu, who came from Qi to Chu, was a Yin doctor, so he changed his surname to Yin.

古文：秦、汉之际，始家新野。
现代文：秦汉时，开始定居新野。
English: During the Qin and Han dynasties, they began to settle in Xinye.

古文：及刘伯升起义兵，识时游学长安，闻之，委业而归，率子弟、宗族、宾客千余人往诣伯升。
现代文：刘伯升起义兵，阴识这时游学在长安，听到了，弃学而归，率领子弟、宗族、宾客千余人前往会见伯升。
English: Liu Bo-sheng, a rebel soldier, who was on a study tour in Chang'an at the time, heard the news, dropped out of school and returned, leading his children, relatives and more than a thousand guests to meet Bo-sheng.

古文：伯升乃以识为校尉。
现代文：伯升就以阴识为校尉。
English: Bo Sheng was promoted to the rank of lieutenant.

古文：更始元年，迁偏将军，从攻宛，别降新野、阳、杜衍、冠军、湖阳。
现代文：更始元年，迁偏将军，跟从攻宛，分别降服新野、氵育阳、杜衍、冠军、湖阳五县。
English: At the beginning of the first year of the new year, the general moved away, followed by the attack, and surrendered to Nino, Zouyuan, Duyan, Champion, and Hoyang five counties respectively.

古文：二年，更始封识阴德侯，行大将军事。
现代文：二年，更始封阴识为阴德侯，行大将军事。
English: Two years later, he was given the title of "Yin Zheng," "Yin Dehu," and became a general in the military.

古文：建武元年，光武遣使迎阴贵人于新野，并征识。
现代文：建武元年，光武派遣使者迎阴贵人于新野，并征召阴识。
English: In the first year of the Jianwu era, Guangwu sent an envoy to welcome the Yin nobles in Nien, and conscripted Yin knowledge.

古文：识随贵人至，以为骑都尉，更封阴乡侯。
现代文：阴识随阴贵人到，拜为骑都尉，更封阴乡侯。
English: With the arrival of a high-ranking Yin person, Yin Sheng was promoted to cavalry captain, and was even given the title of Yin Xianghou.

古文：二年，以征伐军功增封，识叩头让曰： 天下初定，将帅有功者众，臣托属掖廷，仍加爵邑，不可以示天下。 
现代文：建武二年，以征伐军功增封，阴识叩头谦让说： 天下刚定，将帅中有功劳的很多，臣托属阴贵人之亲，仍加爵邑，不可以公示天下。 
English: In the second year of the Jianwu era, he was awarded an additional title for his military exploits, and Yin Zhi bowed down and humbly said: The world is just, there is a lot of merit in the general, the vassal is a close relative of Yin Guizhong, he is still a peerage, and it is not allowed to be made public to the world.

古文：帝甚美之，以为关都尉，镇函谷。
现代文：帝很赞美，以他为关都尉，镇守函谷。
English: The emperor was full of praise, and made him the lieutenant of Guan, the town guard of Hakodate.

古文：迁侍中，以母忧辞归。
现代文：后迁侍中，以母丧辞归。
English: Later, he was transferred to be a chamberlain, but he returned home after his mother's funeral.

古文：十五年，定封原鹿侯。
现代文：建武十五年，定封原鹿侯。
English: Jianwu 15 years, Dingfu former Deer Lord.

古文：及显宗立为皇太子，以识守执金吾，辅导东宫。
现代文：显宗立为皇太子后，以阴识守执金吾，辅导东宫。
English: After the enthronement of Emperor Xianzong as the crown prince, he guided the Eastern Court with the virtue of yin and yang.

古文：帝每巡郡国，识常留镇守京师，委以禁兵。
现代文：帝每巡郡国，阴识常留镇守京师，委以禁兵。
English: Whenever the emperor went on a tour of the county and the country, he often stayed in the town to guard the capital, and the troops were forbidden.

古文：入虽极言正议，及与宾客语，未尝及国事。
现代文：入宫虽极言正议，但等到与宾客讲话，未尝言及国事。
English: Although he was very forthright when he entered the palace, he did not mention the state affairs until he spoke with the guests.

古文：帝敬重之，常指识以敕戒贵戚，激厉左右焉。
现代文：帝敬重他，常指阴识以令戒贵戚，激励左右。
English: Emperors respected him, often referring to Yin consciousness as a warning to their noble relatives, and as an incentive to the left and right.

古文：识所用掾史皆简贤者，如虞廷、傅宽、薛等，多至公卿校尉。
现代文：阴识所用掾史都是简明贤达之士，如虞廷、傅宽、薛忄音等，多做到公卿校尉。
English: The stories used by Yin Zhi are all concise and wise men, such as Yu Ting, Fu Kuan, Xue Yueyin, etc., and most of them are noble lieutenants.

古文：显宗即位，拜为执金吾，位特进。
现代文：显宗即位，拜为执金吾，位特进。
English: When Emperor Xuanzong ascended to the throne, he paid homage to King Wu and was given a special promotion.

古文：永平二年，卒，赠以本官印绶，谥曰贞侯。
现代文：永平二年，去世，赠以本官印绶，谥称贞侯。
English: In the second year of Yongping, he died, and was presented with his official seal, and was given the title of Zhenhou.

