古文：○仁宗二明道元年春二月癸卯，吕夷简上《三朝宝训》。
现代文：明道元年春二月初二，吕夷简呈上《三朝宝训》。
English: On the second day of the second month of the spring of the first year of the Ming Dynasty, Lü Yijian presented the "Three Dynasties Treasure Sermon."

古文：丙午，诏仕广南者毋过两任，以防贪黩。
现代文：初五，下诏任职广南的官吏不要超过两任，以防贪赃枉法。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, it was decreed that officials serving in Guangnan should not hold more than two posts, in order to prevent corruption.

古文：庚戌，以张士逊同中书门下平章事、集贤殿大学士。
现代文：初九，任命张士逊同中书门下平章事、集贤殿大学士。
English: On the 9th day of the 9th month of the year, Zhang Shisun was appointed as a scholar of Shihai Zhangji and Jixianden University.

古文：戊午，录故宰臣孙，并试将作监主簿。
现代文：十七日，录用已故宰相执政子孙一并试将作监主簿。
English: On the 17th, the sons and grandsons of the late prime minister were hired to work as supervisors.

古文：甲子，诏员外郎以上致仕者，录其子校书郎，三丞以上斋郎。
现代文：二十三日，下诏员外郎以上退休官员，录用其子为校书郎，三承以上斋郎。
English: On the 23rd, retired officials with the rank of Zaozhan Wairo or higher were promoted, and their sons were hired as school scribes, and those with the rank of Sansho or higher were promoted to Jairo.

古文：丁卯，以真宗顺容李氏为宸妃，是日妃薨。
现代文：二十六日，以真宗顺容李氏为哀妃，这天李氏逝世。
English: On the 26th, with the Shun Rong Li Clan of the True Sect as the mourners, the Li Clan passed away that day.

古文：三月戊子，颁《天圣编敕》。
现代文：三月十七日，颁布天圣编救。
English: On March 17th, Tian Sheng Hen Zhe was promulgated.

古文：戊戌，以江、淮旱，遣使与长吏录系囚，流以下减一等，杖笞释之。
现代文：二十七日，因江淮早灾，派遣使臣与长吏讯问记录关押囚犯罪状，流刑以下减一等，杖刑和答刑释放。
English: On the 27th, due to the early disaster of the Yangtze River and Huai River, envoys and officials were dispatched to interrogate and record the criminal status of the prisoners. The sentence of banishment or less was reduced by one grade, and the punishment of caning and answering punishment were released.

古文：己亥，除婺、秀州丁身钱。
现代文：二十八日，免除姿州、秀州身丁钱。
English: On the 28th, Zizhou and Xiuzhou were exempted from paying the fine.

古文：夏四月丙午，录系囚。
现代文：夏四月初六，讯问记录关押囚犯罪状。
English: On the 6th day of the 4th month of the summer, the interrogation recorded the criminal status of the detained prisoner.

古文：戊午，知棣州王涉坐冒请官地为职田，配广南牢城。
现代文：十八日，知棣州王涉因冒请官地为职田，流配广南牢城。
English: On the 18th day of the month, Wang Zhan of Zhifang Province was sent to the Guangnan Detention Center for daring to invite officials to his workplace.

古文：五月癸酉，遣使点检河北城池器甲，密访官吏能否。
现代文：五月初三，派遣使臣点检河北城池器甲，密访官吏能否。
English: On the third day of the fifth month, the envoys were sent to inspect the Hebei Chengchi Pool A, to see if they could secretly visit the officials.

古文：壬午，废杭、秀二州盐场。
现代文：十二日，废除杭、秀二州盐场。
English: On the 12th, the Hangzhou and Xiuzhou salt fields were abolished.

古文：秋七月丙申，诏诸路转运使举国子监讲官。
现代文：秋七月二十七日，下诏各路转运使推举国子监讲官。
English: On the 27th day of the 7th month of the autumn, the transportation envoys of the following provinces were selected to be the supervisors and lecturers.

古文：丁酉，王曙罢。
现代文：二十八日，王曙被罢免。
English: On the 28th, Wang Akebono was removed from office.

古文：太白昼见，弥月乃灭。
现代文：太白星白天出现，一个月后才消失。
English: The too-white star appears during the day, only to disappear a month later.

古文：八月辛丑，以晏殊为枢密副使。
现代文：八月初二，任命晏殊为枢密副使。
English: On the second day of August, he was appointed as the Vice-Minister of the Privy Council.

古文：丙午，晏殊参知政事。
现代文：初七，晏殊参知政事。
English: On the 7th day of the first month of the new year, he was appointed to the post of governor.

古文：甲寅，以杨崇勋为枢密副使。
现代文：十五日，任命杨崇勋为枢密副使。
English: On the 15th, Yang Chongxun was appointed as the vice-minister of the privy council.

古文：辛酉，授唃厮啰为宁远大将军、爱州团练使。
现代文：二十二日，授确厮缪为宁远大将军、爱州团练使。
English: On the 22nd, he was awarded the title of Ningyuan Grand General and Aizhou Rehearsal Envoy.

古文：壬戌，大内火，延八殿。
现代文：二十三日，皇宫发生火灾，延烧八殿。
English: On the 23rd, a fire broke out in the Imperial Palace, burning eight halls.

古文：癸亥，移御延福宫。
现代文：二十四日，移御延福宫。
English: On the 24th, he moved to Enfuku Palace.

古文：甲子，以吕夷简为修内使。
现代文：二十五日，任命吕夷简为修筑皇宫使。
English: On the 25th, Lü Yizhen was appointed as the envoy to build the imperial palace.

古文：乙丑，诏群臣直言阙失。
现代文：二十六日，下诏大臣直言缺失。
English: On the 26th, the next day, the minister's direct speech was missing.

古文：丁卯，大赦。
现代文：二十八日，大赦。
English: Dingwu, amnesty to the world.

古文：九月庚寅，重作受命宝。
现代文：九月二十二日，重作受命宝。
English: On September 22nd, he was ordered to do it again.

古文：丙申，皇太后出金银器易左藏缗钱二十万，以助修内。
现代文：二十八日，皇太后拿出金银器换来左藏库络钱二十万，补助修建皇宫。
English: On the 28th, the Empress Dowager took out gold and silverware in exchange for two hundred thousand rupees from the Left Bank to subsidize the construction of the Imperial Palace.

古文：冬十月庚子，黄白气五贯紫微垣。
现代文：冬十月初二，黄白气五次横盖紫微垣。
English: In winter, on the second day of October, the yellow-white gas covered the purple wall five times.

古文：丁巳，诏汉阳军发廪粟以振饥民。
现代文：十九日，下诏汉阳军开仓发粟贩济饥民。
English: On the 19th, the Hanyang Army issued an order to open warehouses to sell poppies to feed the hungry.

古文：十一月甲戌，以修内成，恭谢天地于天安殿，谒太庙，大赦，改元，百官进秩，优赏诸军。
现代文：十一月初六，因皇宫复修成功，在天安殿恭谢天地，朝拜太庙，大赦，改元，百官升官晋爵，优赏各军。
English: On the 6th day of the 11th month, due to the success of the restoration of the Imperial Palace, Tian'anmen Hall was used to thank heaven and earth, worship the Great Temple, grant amnesty, change the era name, promote hundreds of officials to higher ranks, and reward the troops.

古文：是日还宫。
现代文：这天回宫。
English: He returned to the Imperial Palace the same day.

古文：己卯，冬至，率百官贺皇太后于文德殿，御天安殿受朝。
现代文：十一月，冬至，仁宗率百官到文德殿祝贺皇太后，然后到天安殿接受朝贺。
English: In November, at the winter solstice, Emperor Nijong led hundreds of officials to the Winter Palace to congratulate the Empress Dowager, and then to the Cheonan Palace to receive morning greetings.

古文：壬辰，延州言夏王赵德明卒。
现代文：二十四日，延州报告说赵德明去世。
English: On the 24th, Yanzhou reported that Zhao Deming passed away.

古文：癸巳，以德明子元昊为定难军节度使、西平王。
现代文：二十五日，任命赵德明儿子元昊为定难军节度使、西平王。
English: On the 25th, he appointed Zhao Deming's son, Yuan Hao, as the festival envoy of the Dingan Army, King Xiping.

古文：十二月壬寅，以杨崇勋为枢密使。
现代文：十二月初五，任命杨崇勋为枢密使。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of December, Yang Chongxun was appointed as the envoy.

古文：戊午，诏获劫盗者奏裁，毋擅杀。
现代文：二十一日，下诏俘获劫盗奏裁，不要擅自诛杀。
English: On the 21st, the following edict was issued: "If you are caught robbing or stealing, do not fight and kill without permission."

古文：壬戌，西北有苍白气亘天。
现代文：二十五日，西北方向有苍白气横贯天空。
English: On the 25th, a pale atmosphere streaked across the sky from the northwest.

古文：是岁，京东、淮南、江东饥。
现代文：这一年，京东、淮南、江东饥荒。
English: That year, famine struck Jingdong, Huainan, and Jiangdong.

古文：二年春正月己卯，诏发运使以上供米百万斛振江、淮饥民，遣使督视。
现代文：明道二年春正月十二日，下诏发运使以上供米一百万解贩济江淮饥民，派遣使臣督察。
English: On the twelfth day of the first month of the second year of the Ming Dynasty, the following edict was issued to send more than one million rice to relieve the starving people of Jianghuai, and dispatched envoy inspectors.

古文：二月戊戌，含誉星见东北方。
现代文：二月初二，含誉星出现在东北方。
English: On the second day of the second month of February, the famous star appeared in the northeast.

古文：庚子，诏江、淮民饥死者，官为之葬祭。
现代文：初四，下诏江淮饥民死亡者，官府为之掩葬祭奠。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, the government held a memorial service for the victims of the famine in Jianghuai Province.

古文：乙巳，皇太后服衮衣、仪天冠飨太庙，皇太妃亚献，皇后终献。
现代文：初九，皇太后穿礼服、戴礼帽祭祀太庙，皇太妃次献爵，皇后最后献爵。
English: On the ninth day of the new year, the empress dowager wore a ceremonial dress and a ceremonial hat to offer sacrifices to the Imperial Temple. The empress dowager was the second to offer a knighthood, and the empress finally offered a knighthood.

古文：是日，上皇太后尊号曰应元齐圣显功崇德慈仁保寿皇太后。
现代文：这天，上皇太后尊号为应元齐圣显功崇德慈仁保寿皇太后。
English: On this day, the honorific title of the former empress dowager was Yingyuan Qi Sheng Xiang Gong Chong De Ci Ren Baoshou Empress Dowager.

古文：丁未，祀先农于东郊，躬耕籍田，大赦。
现代文：十一日，在东郊祭祀先农，亲行籍田礼，大赦。
English: On the 11th day, in the eastern suburbs, there will be a sacrificial ceremony for the former farmers, the relatives will perform the registration ceremony, and there will be an amnesty.

古文：百官上尊号曰睿圣文武体天法道仁明孝德皇帝。
现代文：百官上皇帝尊号为睿圣文武体天法道仁明孝德皇帝。
English: The emperor's honorary title is the Emperor of Wisdom, Literature, Martial Arts, Heavenly Law, Benevolence, and Filial Piety.

古文：三月庚午，加恩百官。
现代文：三月初五，加恩百官。
English: On the 5th of March, Gahn became the 100th official.

古文：丁亥，祈雨于会灵观、上清宫、景德开宝寺。
现代文：二十二日，在会灵观、上清宫、景德寺、开宝寺祈祷降雨。
English: On the 22nd, they prayed for rain at Lingguan, Shangqing Palace, Jingde Temple and Kaibao Temple.

古文：庚寅，以皇太后不豫，大赦，除常赦所不原者。乾兴以来贬死者复官，谪者内徙。
现代文：二十五日，因皇太后身体不适，大赦，免除常赦所不能原谅者；乾兴以来贬死者恢复官职，贬滴者向内地迁徙。
English: On the 25th, due to the physical discomfort of the Empress Dowager, an amnesty was issued, exempting those who could not be pardoned by the pardon office; those who had been demoted since the Qing Dynasty resumed their official duties, and those who had been demoted migrated to the mainland.

古文：甲午，皇太后崩，遗诏尊皇太妃为皇太后。
现代文：二十九日，皇太后逝世，遗诏尊皇太妃为皇太后。
English: On the 29th, the Empress Dowager passed away, and the last will and testament named the Crown Princess as Empress Dowager.

古文：吕夷简为山陵使。
现代文：吕夷简为山陵使。
English: Lv Yijian was appointed as the envoy to the mausoleum.

古文：夏四月丙申朔，出大行皇太后遗留物赐近臣。
现代文：夏四月初一，拿出皇太后遗留物赐给近臣。
English: On the first day of the fourth month of the summer, he took out the leftovers of the Empress Dowager and gave them to his close vassals.

古文：壬寅，追尊宸妃李氏为皇太后，至是帝始知为宸妃所生。
现代文：初七，追尊哀妃李氏为皇太后，这时仁宗才知道自己为李氏所生。
English: On the seventh day of his junior year, he was named after the revered and mourned Empress Dowager Ri, and it was only then that Rinzong knew that he was the son of Ri.

古文：甲辰，以大行皇太后山陵五使并兼追尊皇太后园陵使。
现代文：初九，以大行皇太后山陵五使都兼追尊皇太后园陵使。
English: On the ninth day of the first month of the year, the five envoys to the Empress Dowager's Mausoleum and the five envoys to the garden of the Empress Dowager were sent.

古文：戊申，听政于崇政殿西厢。
现代文：十三日，在崇政殿西厅治国事。
English: On the 13th, he presided over state affairs in the West Hall of the Grand Palace.

古文：己酉，罢乾元节上寿。
现代文：十四日，废罢乾元节祝寿。
English: On the 14th, the strike was called off to celebrate the Lantern Festival.

古文：壬子，诏臣僚、宗戚、命妇毋得以进献祈恩泽，及缘亲戚通表章。
现代文：十七日，下诏臣僚、宗戚、命妇不得用进献钱物祈求恩赏和惠泽，及因亲戚关系而帮助进交表章。
English: On the 17th, the next edict decreed that ministers, relatives, and wives were not allowed to use donated money to pray for rewards and benefits, and to help with the purchase of watches due to family relationships.

古文：罢创修寺观。
现代文：废罢创修寺观。
English: It's time to abolish strikes and create a new view of the temple.

古文：帝始亲政，裁抑侥幸，中外大悦。
现代文：仁宗开始亲自治理国事，裁抑侥廊，中外非常高兴。
English: China and other countries are very pleased that Nanzong has begun to manage state affairs in a pro-self-governing manner, and has reduced and curbed corruption.

古文：癸丑，召还宋绶、范仲淹。
现代文：十八日，召回宋缓、范仲淹。
English: On the 18th, Song Yang and Fan Zhongran were recalled.

古文：丙辰，内侍江德明等并坐交通请谒黜。
现代文：二十一日，内侍江德明等人因为交通请私遭贬默。
English: On the twenty-first day, the maid of honor, Jiang Deming, and others were silenced because they asked me for transportation.

古文：己未，吕夷简、张耆、夏竦、陈尧佐、范雍、赵稹、晏殊皆罢。
现代文：二十四日，吕夷简、张鲁、夏辣、陈尧佐、范雍、赵棋、晏殊都被罢免。
English: On the 24th, Lv Yizhen, Zhang Lu, Xia Lai, Chen Yizao, Fan Yong, Zhao Qi, and Gong Shu were all dismissed.

古文：以张士逊为昭文馆大学士，李迪同中书门下平章事、集贤殿大学士，王随参知政事，李谘为枢密副使，王德用签书枢密院事。
现代文：任命张士逊为昭文馆大学士，李迪为同中书门下平章事、集贤殿大学士，王随为参知政事，李谱为枢密副使，王德用为签书枢密院事。
English: Zhang Shisong was appointed as a Scholar of the Zhaowen Museum, Li Di as a Scholar of the Lower Pingzhang and Scholar of the Jixian Palace, Wang Zui as a Councillor of State, Li Shu as a Vice-Envoy of the Privy Council, and Wang Deyan as a Signatory of the Privy Council.

古文：壬戌，御紫宸殿，以张士逊为山陵使兼园陵使。
现代文：二十七日，到紫哀殿，任命张士逊为山陵使兼园陵使。
English: On the 27th, he went to the Purple Shrine and appointed Zhang Shisun as the envoy to the mountains and gardens.

古文：癸亥，上大行太后谥曰庄献明肃，追尊宸妃李氏为皇太后，谥曰庄懿。
现代文：二十八日，上皇太后，溢号为庄献明肃，追尊哀妃李氏为皇太后，溢号为庄爵。
English: On the 28th, the former empress dowager was given the posthumous title of Zhuang Xian Mingshu, and the former empress dowager was given the posthumous title of Suizhong Aifei Li, and the posthumous title of Zhuang Jie was given to Zhuang Jie.

古文：五月戊辰，诏礼部贡举。
现代文：五月初四，下诏礼部贡举。
English: On the fourth day of the fifth lunar month, the tribute of the Imperial Regalia Department will begin.

古文：癸酉，诏中外勿辄言皇太后垂帘日事。
现代文：初九，下诏中外不要轻率评论皇太后垂帘听政时的事。
English: On the ninth day of the first month of the year, it was decreed that people at home and abroad should not rashly comment on the matter of the Empress Dowager hanging her curtains to listen to politics.

古文：乙亥，罢群牧制置使。
现代文：十一日，废罢群牧制置使。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the abolition of the group pastoral system was put into effect.

古文：丙子，命宰臣张士逊撰《谢太庙》及《躬耕籍田记》。
现代文：十二日，命令宰臣张士逊撰写谢太奋、咱弓耕籍田主己。
English: On the 12th, he ordered the vice-minister Zhang Shisong to write down the names of Xie Taifeng, Zhe Yucho and Zheng Tian.

古文：检讨宋祁言，皇太后谒庙非后世法，乃止撰《籍田记》。
现代文：检讨官宋祁论道，皇太后渴庙不是后世所要效法的，请只撰籍田主己。
English: Reviewing officer Song Li said that the Empress Dowager's Thirsty Temple is not something that future generations should emulate, so please only write about Tian Shushi.

古文：戊寅，录系囚。
现代文：十四日，讯问记录囚犯罪状。
English: On the 14th, the interrogation recorded the criminal status of the prisoner.

古文：六月甲午朔，日有食之。
现代文：六月初一，日食。
English: On the first day of June, a solar eclipse.

古文：壬寅，录周世宗及高季兴、李煜、孟昶、刘继元、刘鋹后。
现代文：初九，录用周世宗、高季兴、李煌、孟爬、刘继元、刘银后代。
English: In the ninth grade, the descendants of Zhou Shizong, Gao Jixing, Li Huang, Meng Lai, Liu Jiyuan and Liu Yin were recruited.

古文：癸卯，命审刑、大理详定配隶刑名。
现代文：初十，命令审刑寺、大理寺详细确定配隶刑名。
English: On the 10th day of the first month, it was ordered that the names of those to be punished were to be determined in detail by Shujie Temple and Dali Temple.

古文：戊午，减天下岁贡物。
现代文：二十五日，减少天下岁贡物
English: On the 25th, reduce the year-end tribute

古文：秋七月丁丑，诏知耀州富平县事张龟年增秩再任，以其治行风告天下。
现代文：秋七月十四日，诏令知耀州富平县事张龟年增品再任，向全国宣传他的治绩。
English: On the 14th day of the 7th month of the autumn, he was reappointed to the post of Zengcheng Zengpin in Fuping County, Zhiyaozhou, and promoted his performance to the whole country.

古文：戊子，诏以蝗旱，去尊号 睿圣文武 四字，以告天地宗庙，仍令中外直言阙政。
现代文：二十五日，诏令因蝗早灾害去掉尊号 睿圣文武 四字，告诉天地宗庙，并且命令中外人士直言缺政。
English: On the 25th, the imperial edict removed the honorific title Rui Shengwenwu due to the locust plague, told the heaven and earth to the ancestral temple, and ordered Chinese and foreign people to bluntly lack politics.

古文：八月甲午朔，契丹使来吊慰祭奠。
现代文：八月初一，契丹使臣来吊慰祭奠。
English: On the first day of August, Khitan envoys came to offer condolences and pay tribute.

古文：壬寅，作奉慈庙。
现代文：初九，修建奉慈庙。
English: In the early 9th century, the Feng Ci Temple was built.

古文：甲辰，诏中外毋避庄献明肃太后父讳。
现代文：十一日，下诏中外不避庄献明肃太后父亲名讳。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the emperor issued the following edict, inviting people from home and abroad to dedicate themselves to the memory of Empress Dowager Su's father.

古文：丁巳，置端明殿学士。
现代文：二十四日，设置端明殿学士。
English: On the 24th, the Taimei-den Academy was established.

古文：九月甲戌，幸洪福院，临庄懿太后梓宫。
现代文：九月十二日，到洪福院，哭吊庄爵太后梓宫。
English: On September 12th, he went to Hongfu Courtyard to mourn the death of Zhuangzhe Empress Dowager Zi Gong.

古文：丙子、壬午，临如之。
现代文：十四日、二十日再次哭吊。
English: On the 14th and 20th, she started crying again.

古文：冬十月癸巳朔，太白犯南斗。
现代文：冬十月初一，太白星侵犯南斗星。
English: On the first day of October in winter, the Taibai Star encroached on the Southern Dipper.

古文：甲午，禁登州民采金。
现代文：初二，禁止登州百姓采金。
English: On the second day of the new year, it is forbidden for people to go to the state to mine gold.

古文：丁酉，祔葬庄献明肃皇太后、庄懿皇太后于永定陵。
现代文：初五，附葬庄献明肃皇太后、庄爵皇太后于永定陵。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, the funeral homes dedicated to Empress Dowager Ming Su and Empress Dowager Zhuangzhe were built at Yongding Mausoleum.

古文：甲辰，诏以两川岁贡绫锦罗绮纱，以三之二易为纟由绢，供军须。
现代文：十二日，下诏用两川岁贡绩锦罗绮纱的三分之二换为绸绢，供应军需。
English: On the 12th day of the following month, two-thirds of the brocade yarn used to pay tribute to the two rivers was exchanged for silk yarn to supply the military.

古文：己酉，祔庄献明肃太后、庄懿太后神主于奉慈庙。
现代文：十七日，在奉慈庙附祭庄献明肃太后、庄爵太后神主。
English: On the 17th, the deities of Empress Dowager Myoshu and Empress Dowager Shōjō were dedicated at a temple attached to Bongji Temple.

古文：癸丑，下德音，降东、西京囚罪一等，徒以下释之。缘二太后陵应奉民户，免租赋科役有差。
现代文：二十一日，颁布德音，降东、西京囚犯罪刑一等，徒刑以下释放；因二太后陵应役民户，免除租赋科役不等。
English: On the 21st, the Deyin was promulgated, and the first-class criminal punishment for the prisoners in the east and west of Beijing was reduced, and they were released under the prison sentence; because of the tomb of the Second Empress Dowager, the private households that were subject to service were exempted from the rent-paying service.

古文：丙辰，赠周王祐为皇太子。
现代文：二十四日，贝曾周王赵为皇太子。
English: On the 24th, Baizeng Zhou Wang Zhao became crown prince.

古文：戊午，张士逊、杨崇勋罢，以吕夷简为门下侍郎、同中书门下平章事、昭文馆大学士，王曙为枢密使，王德用为枢密副使，宋绶参知政事，蔡齐为枢密副使。
现代文：二十六日，张士逊、杨崇勋被罢免。任命吕夷简为门下侍郎、同中书门下平章事、昭文馆大学士，王曙为枢密使，王德用为枢密副使，宋缓为参知政事，蔡齐为枢密副使。
English: On the 26th, Zhang Shisong and Yang Chongxun were removed from their posts, and Lu Yijan was appointed as the under-secretary of the cabinet, Lu Heijian as the under-secretary of the cabinet of the same title, and Wang Deyi as the under-secretary of the cabinet of the same title, Wang Deyi as the under-secretary of the cabinet of the same title, Wang Deyi as the under-secretary of the cabinet of the same title, Song Jian as the under-secretary of the cabinet of the same title, and Cai Qi as the under-secretary of the cabinet of the same title.

古文：十一月癸亥朔，薛奎罢。
现代文：十一月初一，薛奎被罢免。
English: On the first day of November, Xue Kui was removed from office.

古文：诏增宗室奉。
现代文：下诏增加宗室棒禄。
English: The next edict was to increase the family stipend.

古文：太白犯南斗。
现代文：太白星侵犯南斗星。
English: Too white Venus is in the heaven zone.

古文：乙丑，追册美人张氏为皇后。
现代文：初三，追册美人张氏为皇后。
English: In the third year of junior high school, Ms. Zhang, a registered beauty, became the queen.

古文：甲戌，赠寇准为中书令。
现代文：十二日，赠寇准为中书令。
English: On the 12th, the granting of the license was made into a Chinese decree.

古文：十二月丙申，复置提点刑狱。
现代文：十二月初四，重新设置提点刑狱。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of December, the detention center was re-established.

古文：丁酉，诏诸路转运使、副，岁遍历所部，仍令州军具所至月日以闻。
现代文：初五，下诏各路转运使、副使每年要视察所管辖的所有地区，并且命令州军上报转运使、副使到达月日。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, it was decreed that the envoys and deputy envoys should inspect all areas under their jurisdiction every year, and ordered the state army to report the arrival date of the envoys and deputy envoys.

古文：甲辰，以京东饥，出内藏绢二十万代其民岁输。
现代文：十二日，因京东饥荒，拿出内藏绢二十万代替其地百姓输税。
English: On the 12th, due to the famine in Jingdong, he took out 200,000 Inner Tibetan rupees to pay taxes instead of the local people.

古文：乙巳，诏修周庙。
现代文：十三日，诏修周庙。
English: On the 13th, the Zhaozhou Temple was built.

古文：丁未，诏台官非中丞、知杂保荐者勿任。
现代文：十五日，下诏台官非中承、知杂官吏保荐的人不要任命为职。
English: On the 15th, the lower-ranking officials should not be appointed if they are not middle-ranking officials, and those who are recommended by officials should not be appointed.

古文：戊申，出宫人二百。
现代文：十六日，放出宫人二百名。
English: On the 16th, 200 palace officials were released.

古文：乙卯，废皇后郭氏为净妃、玉京冲妙仙师，居长宁宫。
现代文：二十三日，废皇后郭氏为净妃、玉京冲妙仙师，居长宁宫。
English: On the 23rd, the former Empress Guo was crowned as the Pure Empress, the Jade Emperor and the Miraculous Immortal, and moved into Changning Palace.

古文：御史中丞孔道辅率谏官、御史，大呼殿门请对，诏宰相告以皇后当废状。
现代文：御史中承孔道辅率领谏官、御史，大呼殿门请对，诏令宰相告诉他们皇后应当废除的情况。
English: In the imperial history, the eunuch, the imperial historian, and Daehundo-mon, Daehundo-mon, Daehundo-mon, Daehundo-mon, Daehundo-mon, Daehundo-mon, Daehundo-mon, Daehundo-mon, Daehundo-mon, Daehundo-mon, Daehundo-mon, Daehundo-mon, Daehundo-mon, Daehundo-mon, Daehundo-mon, Daehundo-mon, Daehundo-mon, Daehundo-mon, Daehundo-mon,

古文：丙辰，出道辅及谏官范仲淹，仍诏台谏自今毋相率请对。
现代文：二十四日，罢默孔道辅和谏官范仲淹，并且下诏台谏从今以后不得相率请对。
English: On the 24th, Kong Daosuke and eunuch Fan Zhongyan were silenced, and it was decreed that from now on, the eunuch would not be allowed to preside over the throne.

古文：丁巳，诏明年改元。
现代文：二十五日，诏令明年改元。
English: On the 25th, the emperor decreed that the era name would be changed next year.

古文：禁边臣增置堡砦。
现代文：禁止边臣增置堡寨。
English: It is forbidden for border officials to build additional fortresses.

古文：是岁，畿内、京东西、河北、河东、陕西蝗，淮南、江东、两川饥，遣使安抚，除民租。
现代文：这一年，瓷内、京东西、河北、河东、陕西蝗灾，淮南、江东、两川饥荒，派遣使臣安抚，免除民租。
English: In this year, there were locust plagues in China, East and West Beijing, Hebei, Hedong and Shaanxi, and famines in Huainan, Jiangdong and Liangchuan. Envoys were sent to appease the people and exempt them from paying rent.

古文：注辇国来贡。
现代文：注举国来进贡。
English: The country was summoned to pay tribute.

古文：景祐元年春正月甲子，发江、淮漕米振京东饥民。
现代文：景元年春正月初三，发江淮槽米贩济京东饥民。
English: On the third day of the first month of the spring in the year of Jingyuan, a rice trader from Huai Trough in the Fujiang River came to feed the hungry people in East Beijing.

古文：丙寅，诏开封府界诸县作糜粥以济饥民，诸灾伤州军亦如之。
现代文：初五，下诏开封府界各县制作米粥贩济饥民，各路灾伤州军都如此。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, all counties in the prefecture were ordered to make rice porridge to help the starving people. This was the case for the state troops injured in various disasters.

古文：戊辰，诏三司铸景祐元宝钱。
现代文：初七，下诏三司铸造景元宝钱。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, the casting of Jingyuan Baoqian by the Third Division of the Imperial Edict began.

古文：甲戌，诏执政大臣议兵农可更制者以闻。
现代文：十三日，下诏执政大臣议论兵农可以更制的情况上报朝廷。
English: On the 13th, the ruling minister announced that he would report to the imperial court on the situation that the soldiers and peasants could change the system.

古文：诏募民掘蝗种，给菽米。
现代文：下诏募民掘埋蝗虫，赏给寂米。
English: He issued an edict calling for people to dig up and bury the locusts, and rewarded Jakumi.

古文：癸未，诏礼部所试举人十取其二，进士三举、诸科五举尝经殿试，进士五举年五十、诸科六举年六十，及曾经先朝御试者，皆以名闻。
现代文：二十二日，下诏：礼部所试举人十取其二；进士三举、诸科五举曾经殿试，进士五举年五十、诸科六举年六十，以及在先朝时参加御试的人，都将姓名上报朝廷。
English: On the 22nd, the following edict was issued: those who had passed the 10th examination of the Ministry of Rites and Ceremonies were to be promoted to the 2nd; those who had passed the 3rd examination of the Ministry of Education and the 5th examination of the Ministry of Science and Technology were to be promoted to the 50th examination of the Ministry of Education and the 60th examination of the Ministry of Science and Technology, and those who had passed the final examination of the Ministry of Education and the Ministry of Culture were to be promoted to the 50th examination of the Ministry of Education and the 60th examination of the Ministry of Science and Technology were to be promoted to the 50th examination of the Ministry of Education

古文：甲申，淮南饥，出内藏绢二十万代其民岁输。
现代文：二十三日，淮南饥荒，拿出内藏绢二十万代替其地百姓输税。
English: On the 23rd, Huainan suffered from famine and took out 200,000 Inner Tibetan rupees to pay taxes instead of its own people.

古文：丁亥，置崇政殿说书。
现代文：二十六日，设置崇政殿说书。
English: On the 26th, the Sui Seongden Memorial Hall was set up.

古文：庚寅，诏停淮南上供一年。
现代文：二十九日，下诏停止淮南上供一年。
English: On the 29th, the following edict stopped the Huainan supply for one year.

古文：二月乙未，罢书判拔萃科。
现代文：二月初四，废罢书判拔萃科。
English: On the fourth day of the second month of the year, it was decided to abolish the school.

古文：辛丑，诏礼部贡院：诸科举人七举者，不限年，并许特奏名。
现代文：初十，下诏礼部贡院，各科举人七次参加考试的，不限年龄，一律允许特奏名。
English: On the 10th day of the first month of the new year, when the Ministry of Rites and Ceremonies pays tribute to the institute, all subjects are invited to participate in the examination seven times, regardless of age, all special names are allowed.

古文：甲辰，权减江、淮漕米二百万石。
现代文：十三日，暂且减免江淮二百万石槽米。
English: On the 13th, Jianghuai temporarily reduced and exempted 2 million tons of stone trough rice.

古文：戊申，诏麟、府州振蕃、汉饥民。
现代文：十七日，下诏麟州、府州贩济蕃汉饥民。
English: On the 17th, Linzhou and Fuzhou hawkers came down to help the starving people of Han.

古文：三月壬午，免诸路灾伤州军今年夏税。
现代文：三月二十二日，免除各路灾伤州军今年夏税。
English: On March 22nd, the injured state troops were exempted from this summer's tax.

古文：癸未，诏解州畦户逋盐蠲其半。
现代文：二十三日，下诏解州畦户拖欠盐免一半。
English: On the 23rd, the next edict exempted half of the salt arrears of Seto, Shizuoka.

古文：是月，赐礼部奏名进士、诸科及第出身七百八十三人。
现代文：这个月，赐礼部奏名进士、各科及第出身七百八十三人。
English: This month, seven hundred and eighty-three people from all disciplines and all walks of life were awarded the title of "Ceremonial Musicians."

古文：夏四月丁酉，开封府判官庞籍言，尚美人遣内侍称教旨免工人市租。
现代文：夏四月初八，开封府判官庞籍报告说，尚美人派内侍称有圣旨免工人市租。
English: On the 8th day of the 4th month of the summer, the magistrate of Kaifeng reported that Shangmeiren sent a servant to say that there was a sacred order to exempt the workers from the market rent.

古文：帝为杖内侍，仍诏有司自今宫中传命，毋得辄受。
现代文：仁宗杖脊内侍，并且下诏有关部门，从今以后宫中传命，不得轻易接受。
English: Emperor Jinzong issued an edict to the attendants of the Imperial Household Agency, and also issued an edict to the relevant departments that from now on, the Imperial Household Agency's orders must not be easily accepted.

古文：癸丑，诏置殿中侍御史、监察御史里行。
现代文：二十四日，下诏设置殿中侍御史、监察御史里行。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, the following edict was issued to set up the palace's attendants and inspectors.

古文：五月辛酉，出布十万端，易钱籴河北军储。
现代文：五月初二，拿出布十万端易换钱来买河北军储。
English: On the second day of May, I took out 100,000 pieces of cloth to exchange for money to buy Hebei Military Reserve.

古文：丁卯，禁民间织锦刺绣为服饰。
现代文：初八，禁止民间织锦刺绣为饰物。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, folk brocade embroidery is prohibited as an ornament.

古文：西川岁织锦上供亦罢之。
现代文：西川每年织锦上供也废罢。
English: The annual brocade offering in Nishikawa should be scrapped.

古文：癸酉，诏台谏未曾历郡守者与郡。
现代文：十四日，下诏：台谏没有担任郡守的，任命担任此职。
English: On the 14th, the following edict was issued: If the governor of Taiwan did not serve as the county governor, he was appointed to this position.

古文：壬午，录系囚。
现代文：二十三日，讯问记录囚犯罪状。
English: On the 23rd, the interrogation recorded the criminal status of the prisoner.

古文：是月，契丹主宗真之母还政于子，出居庆陵。
现代文：这个月，契丹主耶律宗真母亲还政于子，出居庆陵。
English: This month, the mother of the Khitan lord, Yerutsongzhen, returned the throne to her son and moved out of Qingling.

古文：六月壬辰，交州民六百余人内附。
现代文：六月初四，六百多名交州人内附朝廷。
English: On the fourth day of the sixth month, more than six hundred people from Jiaozhou joined the imperial court.

古文：庚子，免畿内被灾民税之半。
现代文：十二日，免除瓷内遭受灾害百姓租税的一半。
English: On the 12th, half of the people who suffered from disasters in China were exempted from tax.

古文：己酉，策制举、武举人。
现代文：二十一日，策试制举、武举人。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, the strategic trial was held, and the people were selected.

古文：乙卯，诏州县官非理科决罪人至死者，并奏听裁。
现代文：二十七日，下诏州县官没有理由将罪犯判决至死的，一律上奏听候裁决。
English: On the 27th day of the following month, the Zhaozhou county official had no reason to sentence the criminal to death, and all cases were sent to the court for adjudication.

古文：闰月甲子，泗州淮、汴溢。
现代文：闰六月初七，泅州淮水、汁水溢出河道。
English: On the 7th day of the 6th month of the leap year, the Huai water and juice overflowed the river in Luzhou.

古文：己巳，常州无锡县大风发屋。
现代文：十二日，常州无锡大风将屋舍刮倒。
English: On the 12th, a gale in Wuxi, Changzhou, blew down houses.

古文：乙亥，毁天下无额寺院。
现代文：十八日，废毁天下无额寺院。
English: On the 18th, all temples without offerings were abolished and destroyed.

古文：壬午，罢造玳瑁、龟筒器。
现代文：二十五日，废除制造袱帽、龟筒器。
English: On the 25th, the manufacture of hats and gimbals was abolished.

古文：秋七月丙申，赐寿州下蔡县被溺之家钱有差。
现代文：秋七月初九，赐给寿州下蔡县被水淹没之家钱不等。
English: On the 9th day of the 7th month of the autumn, money was given to the flooded family in Shoushu's lower Cai County.

古文：己亥，枢密使王曙加同平章事。
现代文：十二日，枢密使王曙加为同平章事。
English: On the 12th, the Privy Council added Wang Shuxu as a peerage.

古文：辛丑，诏文武提刑毋得互相荐论。
现代文：十四日，下诏文武提刑不得相互推荐。
English: On the 14th, the following edict was issued, stating that martial arts practitioners should not recommend punishment to each other.

古文：壬子，诏转运使与长吏，举所部官专领常平仓粟。
现代文：二十五日，下诏转运使和长官，推举所属官吏专门提领常平仓粟。
English: On the 25th, the envoys and senior officials were transferred, and their subordinate officials were specially nominated to receive the Changping Cangmao.

古文：甲寅，河决澶州横陇埽。
现代文：二十七日，黄河在擅州横陇塌决口。
English: On the 27th, the Yellow River broke through the rift in the Hengzhou.

古文：八月庚申，薛奎卒。
现代文：八月初三，薛奎去世。
English: On August 3, Xue Kui passed away.

古文：壬戌，有星孛于张、翼。
现代文：有星出现在张宿、翼宿。
English: A star appears in Zhangjuku, Tsubasa.

古文：癸亥，王曙卒。
现代文：初六，王曙去世。
English: On the sixth day of the new year, Wang Akebono passed away.

古文：甲子，月犯南斗。
现代文：初七，月亮侵犯南斗星。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, the moon encroaches on the Southern Dipper.

古文：戊辰，帝不豫。
现代文：十一日，仁宗身体不适。
English: On the 11th day, Rinzong became unwell.

古文：庚午，以王曾为枢密使。
现代文：十三日，任命王曾为枢密使。
English: On the 13th, Wang Zeng was appointed as a Privy Councilor.

古文：辛未，以星变，大赦，避正殿，减常膳，辅臣奏事延和殿阁。
现代文：十四日，因星变大赦、避正殿、减常膳，辅臣到延和殿阁门奏事。
English: On the 14th, as a result of the amnesty, the avoidance of the main hall, and the reduction of the regular meal, the vassals went to the gate of the palace to report the matter.

古文：壬申，诏净妃郭氏出居于外，美人尚氏入道，杨氏安置别宅。
现代文：十五日，下诏净妃郭氏出居外地，美人尚氏启程，杨氏安置别宅。
English: On the 15th, Princess Guo moved out, the beautiful Ms. Shang left, and Ms. Yang moved to another house.

古文：九月壬辰，百官请只日御前殿，如先帝故事，诏可。
现代文：九月初六，百官请双日到前殿，像真宗时那样，诏令按照这样实行。
English: On the 6th day of the 9th month, the centurion asked Sojitz to come to the front hall, and the edict was carried out accordingly, just as it had been in the time of the Shinshu sect.

古文：丁酉，帝康复，御正殿，复常膳。
现代文：十一日，仁宗康复，到正殿，恢复饮食。
English: On the 11th day, Rinzong recovered and went to the main hall to resume eating.

古文：甲辰，诏立皇后曹氏。
现代文：十八日，下诏立皇后曹氏。
English: On the 18th, Empress Cao was enthroned.

古文：丙午，荧惑犯南斗。
现代文：二十日，荧惑星侵犯南斗星。
English: On the 20th, the fluorescent planet invaded the Southern Dipper.

古文：冬十月庚申，罢淮南、江、浙、荆湖制置发运使，诏淮南转运兼发运事。
现代文：冬十月初四，废罢淮南、江、浙、荆湖制置发运使，下诏淮南转运使兼发运使事。
English: On the 4th day of the 10th month of winter, the dispatching envoys of Huainan, Jiangsu, Zhejiang and Jinghu were abolished, and the dispatching envoys of Huainan transshipment and dispatching were established.

古文：乙亥，作郊庙《景安》、《兴安》、《祐安》之曲。
现代文：十九日，作郊庙景安、兴安、安之曲。
English: On the 19th, he composed the songs of Jing'an, Xing'an and An of the Suburban Temple.

古文：十一月己丑，册曹氏为皇后。
现代文：十一月初三，册曹氏为皇后。
English: On the third day of the first month of November, Cao Cao became empress.

古文：癸丑，作《大安》之曲以飨圣祖。
现代文：初七，作伏安之曲以享圣祖。
English: On the seventh day of his junior year, he composed "Boan no Kyoku" (Song of Buan) to celebrate his ancestor.

古文：十二月癸酉，赐西平王赵元昊佛经。
现代文：十二月十七日，赐给西平王元昊佛经。
English: On December 17th, the sutra was given to Xiping Wang Yuanhao.

古文：是岁，南平王李德政献驯象二，诏还之。
现代文：这一年，南平王李德政献纳二头驯象，下诏还给他。
English: In the same year, the king of Nanping, Li Dezheng, donated two tamed elephants, and the imperial edict was returned to him.

古文：开封府、淄州蝗。
现代文：开封府、淄州蝗灾。
English: Locust plagues in Kaifeng and Zhangzhou.

古文：二年春正月癸丑，置迩英、延义二阁，写《尚书·无逸》篇于屏。
现代文：景二年春正月二十八日，设置迩英阁和延义阁，将《尚书&;;无逸篇书写于屏。
English: On the 28th day of the first month of the second year of Jing's reign, he set up the Shunying Pavilion and the Yan'yi Pavilion, and wrote the "Shangshu&;; Muxiyan" on the screen.

古文：二月戊午，御延福宫观大乐。
现代文：二月初三，到延福宫观大乐。
English: On the third day of the second lunar month, they went to Yanfu Palace to watch the grand parade.

古文：癸亥，旧给事资善堂者皆推恩。
现代文：初八，原来给事资善堂者都受到恩惠。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, all those who had given donations to the Goodwill Hall received favors.

古文：戊辰，李迪罢，以王曾为门下侍郎、同中书门下平章事、集贤殿大学士，王随、李谘知枢密院事，蔡齐、盛度参知政事，王德用、韩亿同知枢密院事。
现代文：十三日，李迪被罢免，任命王曾为门下侍郎、同中书门下平章事、集贤殿大学士，王随、李谱为知枢密院事，蔡齐、盛度为参知政事，王德用、韩亿为同知枢密院事。
English: On the 13th, Li Di was ousted, and Wang Zeng was appointed as a subordinate attendant, Wang Zeng as a subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate

古文：三月戊申，出内库珠赐三司，以助经费。
现代文：三月二十四日，调出内库珠赐给三司，以助经费。
English: On March 24th, the internal treasury was transferred to the three departments to help with funding.

古文：夏四月庚午，诏天下有知乐者，所在荐闻。
现代文：夏四月十七日，下诏天下有精通乐理的人，所在各地推荐上报。
English: On the 17th day of the 4th month of the summer, the following edict was issued: There are people in the world who are proficient in music theory, and it is recommended to report to the authorities in various regions.

古文：五月甲午，獠寇雷、化州，诏桂、广会兵讨之。
现代文：五月十一日，瑶、撩人攻打雷州、化州，下诏桂州、广州联合攻讨。
English: On May 11th, the Jurchens and Jurchens attacked Leizhou and Huazhou, followed by the joint attack of Guizhou and Guangzhou.

古文：丙申，录系囚。
现代文：十三日，讯问记录囚犯罪状。
English: On the 19th, the interrogation recorded the criminal status of the prisoner.

古文：庚子，议太祖、太宗、真宗庙并万世不迁。南郊升侑上帝，以太祖定配，二宗迭配。
现代文：十七日，商议太祖、太宗、真宗庙都万世不迁；南郊酬答上天，以宋太祖配，太宗、真宗迭配。
English: On the 17th, it was discussed that the temples of Taizu, Taizong, and Shinshu would not be moved for all eternity; Nanjiao replied that they would go to heaven, with Song Taizu, Taizong, and Shinshu.

古文：丙午，降天下系囚罪一等，杖以下释之。
现代文：二十三日，降天下关押囚犯罪刑一等，杖刑以下释放。
English: On the 23rd, the first-class criminal punishment of prisoners in custody was lowered to the world, and they were released under the cane punishment.

古文：丁未，广西言镇宁州蛮入寇。
现代文：二十四日，广西报告说镇宁州蛮攻打边境。
English: On the 24th, Guangxi reported that Zhenningzhou had brutally attacked the border.

古文：六月丁巳，诏幕职官初任未成考毋荐。
现代文：六月初五，诏令幕职官初任没有考验成绩，不得荐举。
English: On the 5th day of the 6th month, the imperial edict decreed that the first-term officials of the shogunate had no test results and could not be recommended.

古文：乙亥，颁《一司一务及在京敕》。
现代文：二十三日，颁布司一务及在京初。
English: On the 23rd, the promulgation of the first business and the first day in Beijing.

古文：镇宁蛮请降。
现代文：镇宁蛮请求降附。
English: The town of Ningbaru requested to be annexed.

古文：秋七月戊申，废西京采柴务，以山林赋民，官取十之一。
现代文：秋七月二十七日，废罢西京采柴务，把山林给还百姓。官府取十分之一。
English: On the 27th day of the 7th month of autumn, the collection of firewood in West Beijing was abolished, and the mountains and forests were returned to the people. The government took a tenth of the proceeds.

古文：八月壬子朔，诏轻强盗法。
现代文：八月初一，下诏减轻强盗法。
English: On the first day of August, the government issued a decree to relax the robbery law.

古文：甲寅，宴紫宸殿，初用乐。
现代文：初三，宴饮紫哀殿，开始用乐。
English: On the third day of junior high school, after the banquet at Shieiden, they began to play music.

古文：甲戌，幸安肃门炮场阅习战。
现代文：二十三日，到安肃门炮场检阅训练作战。
English: On the 23rd, it went to the Anshu Gate Artillery Field to review the training and combat.

古文：己卯，置提点银铜坑冶铸钱官。
现代文：二十八日，设置提点银铜坑冶铸钱官。
English: On the 28th, a mint official was set up at the silver and copper mine.

古文：九月壬寅，按新乐。
现代文：九月二十二日，按新乐。
English: September 22nd, according to Xinle.

古文：己酉，作睦亲宅。
现代文：二十九日，作睦亲宅。
English: On the 29th, we left for Mutsumi's house.

古文：命中丞杜衍等汰三司胥吏。
现代文：命令中承杜衍等裁汰三司青吏。
English: In the order, Cheng Duyan and other judges of the Third Division of the Youth Affairs Bureau were removed.

古文：宋绶上《中书总例》。
现代文：宋缓呈上冲书总例。
English: Song Ye presented a general example of stamping a book.

古文：冬十月辛亥朔，复置朝集院。
现代文：冬十月初一，重新设朝集院。
English: On the first day of October in winter, the morning assembly hall was re-established.

古文：癸亥，复群牧制置使。
现代文：十三日，重新设置群牧制置使。
English: On the 13th, the herd management system was re-established.

古文：丁卯，诏诸路岁输缗钱，福建、二广易以银，江东以帛。
现代文：十七日，下诏各路每年输钱福建、二广换银，输钱江东换帛。
English: On the 17th, it was announced that each year, Fujian and Erguang would exchange money for silver, and Jiangdong would exchange money for money.

古文：庚午，荧惑犯左执法。
现代文：二十日，荧惑星侵犯左执法星。
English: On the 20th, the fluorescent planet invaded the left law enforcement star.

古文：十一月戊子，废后郭氏薨。
现代文：十一月初八，废后郭氏逝世。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of November, after the abolition, Guo died.

古文：癸巳，朝飨景灵宫。
现代文：十三日，祭祀景灵宫。
English: On the 13th, the ceremony was held at the Jingling Palace.

古文：甲午，飨太庙、奉慈庙。
现代文：十四日，祭祀太庙、奉慈庙。
English: On the 14th, there will be a ceremony at the Grand Temple and the Feng Ci Temple.

古文：乙未，祀天地于圜丘，大赦。
现代文：十五日，在圆丘祭祀天地，大赦。
English: On the fifteenth day, the heavens and the earth were sacrificed at the round mound, and a general amnesty was declared.

古文：录五代及诸国后。
现代文：录用五代及各国国王后代。
English: Five generations and descendants of kings from all over the world have been recruited.

古文：宗室任诸司使以下至殿直者，换西班官。
现代文：宗室任诸司使以下至殿直者，换西班官。
English: The head family appointed officials from the lower echelons to the Western echelons.

古文：百官上尊号曰景祐体天法道钦文聪武圣神孝德皇帝。
现代文：百官上尊号为景体天法道钦文聪武圣神孝德皇帝。
English: The highest-ranking dignitary is the Emperor of Heavenly Bodies, Dharma, Ch'ing, Manchu, Wu, Holy Spirit and Filial Piety.

古文：丁未，加恩百官。
现代文：二十七日，加恩百官。
English: On the 27th, Gahn was made a centurion.

古文：十二月壬子，加唃厮啰为保顺军留后。
现代文：十二月初二，加确厮锣为保顺军留后。
English: On the second day of the first month of December, Jia Jizhen stayed behind to lead the Baoshun army.

古文：丙子，诏长吏能导民修水利辟荒田者赏之。
现代文：二十六日，下诏长官能引导百姓兴修水利开辟荒田者予以奖赏。
English: On the 26th, the chief magistrate issued an edict to reward those who could guide the people to develop water conservancy and open up wasteland.

古文：是岁，以镇戎军荐饥，贷弓箭手粟麦六万石。
现代文：这一年，因镇戎军接连饥荒，贷给弓箭手粟麦六万石。
English: This year, due to the successive famine of the town's army, the archers were lent 60,000 koku of millet.

古文：三年春正月壬辰，追复郭氏为皇后。
现代文：景三年春正月十三日，追复郭氏为皇后。
English: On the 13th day of the first month of the third year of King Jing's reign, the Guo clan was restored as empress.

古文：丁酉，葬皇后郭氏。
现代文：十八日，葬皇后郭氏。
English: On the 18th, the funeral of Empress Guo took place.

古文：二月丙辰，命官较太常钟律。
现代文：二月初七，命令官吏校正太常钟律。
English: On the seventh day of the second month of the year, officials were ordered to correct the too-frequent clock rule.

古文：壬戌，诏两制、礼官详定京师士民服用、居室之制。
现代文：十三日，下诏两制、礼官详定京师士民服用、居室制度。
English: On the 13th, the two systems were promulgated, and the etiquette official detailed that the citizens of Beijing should use the living room system.

古文：甲子，以广南兵民苦瘴毒，为置医药。
现代文：十五日，因广南兵民苦于瘴毒，为他们置办医药。
English: On the 15th, because the soldiers and civilians in Guangnan were suffering from poisoning, they were provided with medicine.

古文：丁卯，修陕西三白渠。
现代文：十八日，修陕西三白渠。
English: On the 18th, the Sanbai Canal in Shaanxi Province was repaired.

古文：三月癸巳，复商贾以见钱算请官茶法。
现代文：三月十四日，恢复商人用现钱算请官茶法。
English: On March 14th, merchants were allowed to use cash to pay for government tea.

古文：乙未，观新定钟律。
现代文：十六日，观赏新定钟律。
English: On the 16th, watch the newly set clock rhythm.

古文：戊戌，诏两省、卿监、刺史、阁门以上致仕，给奉如分司官，长吏岁时劳赐之。
现代文：十九日，下诏两省、卿监、刺史、阎门以上退休，给棒禄如同分司官，长吏节令岁时慰劳赏赐。
English: On the 19th, the following decrees were issued for the retirement of the two provinces, the chief inspector, the chief historian, and the mayor, and they were given a bonus as if they were sub-officers, and a reward for their hard work at the time of the Chief Official's Day.

古文：改维州为威州。
现代文：改维州为威州。
English: Change Victoria to Wessex.

古文：夏五月庚辰，购求馆阁逸书。
现代文：夏五月初三，购求馆阁逸书。
English: On the third day of the fifth month of summer, purchase a book from the library.

古文：丙申，录系囚。
现代文：十九日，讯问记录囚犯罪状。
English: On the 19th, the interrogation recorded the criminal status of the prisoner.

古文：丙戌，天章阁待制范仲淹坐讥刺大臣，落职知饶州。
现代文：初九，天章阁待制范仲淹因讥刺大臣，解职为饶州知州。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, Tianzhangge was suspended for ridiculing the minister, and the dismissal was Raozhou Zhizhou.

古文：集贤校理余靖、馆阁校勘尹洙、欧阳修并落职补外。
现代文：集贤校理余靖、馆阁校勘尹沫、欧阳修都被解职补外。
English: Yu Jing, the principal of Shixian School, Kan Yin Mou, the principal of Guanqiao School, and Ouyang Xiu, the principal of Ouyang School, were all dismissed.

古文：诏戒百官越职言事。
现代文：下诏告诫百官越职言事。
English: The following edict admonished the officials for exceeding their duties.

古文：六月壬申，虔、吉州水溢，坏城郭、庐舍，赐被溺家钱有差。
现代文：六月二十五日，虔、吉州水溢出，毁坏城廓庐舍，赐给淹水家钱不等。
English: On June 25th, water overflowed in Qian and Jizhou, destroying the city walls and houses, and money was given to flooded families.

古文：秋七月丁亥，禁民间私写编敕、刑书。
现代文：秋七月十一日，禁止民间私自撰写编救、刑书。
English: On the 11th day of the 7th month of the autumn, it was forbidden for people to privately write rescue and punishment books.

古文：乙未，置大宗正司。
现代文：十九日，设置大宗正司。
English: On the 19th, Taizong Zhengji was set up.

古文：庚子，大雨震电。
现代文：二十四日，大雨闪电。
English: On the 24th, there was heavy rain and lightning.

古文：太平兴国寺灾。
现代文：太平兴国寺发生火灾。
English: A fire broke out at the Taiping Xingguo Temple.

古文：辛丑，降三京罪囚一等，徒以下释之。
现代文：二十五日，降三京囚犯罪刑一等，徒刑以下释放。
English: On the 25th, the criminal punishment of the three Beijing prisoners was reduced to the first degree, and they were released with a prison sentence or less.

古文：八月己酉，班民间冠服、居室、车马、器用犯制之禁。
现代文：八月初四，颁布民间冠服、居室、车马、器用凶制之禁令。
English: On the 4th day of the 8th month, a ban on folk costumes, living rooms, chariots and horses, and the use of weapons was promulgated.

古文：乙卯，月犯南斗。
现代文：初十，月亮侵犯南斗星。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, the moon invaded the Southern Dipper.

古文：九月庚辰，幸睦亲宅宴宗室。
现代文：九月初五，到睦亲宅宴饮宗室。
English: On the 5th day of the 9th month, they went to Mutsu's parents' house for a banquet.

古文：癸巳，荧惑犯南斗。
现代文：十八日，荧惑星侵犯南斗星。
English: On the 18th, the fluorescent planet invaded the Southern Dipper.

古文：是月，定申心丧解官法。
现代文：这个月，确定申心丧解官法。
English: This month, the Shin Shin Sorrow and Dismissal Law was finalized.

古文：冬十月丁未，命章得象等考课诸路提刑。
现代文：冬十月初三，命令章得象等考课各路提刑。
English: On the third day of the tenth month of the winter, the command was given to punish all the students of the examination course.

古文：甲寅，作朝集院。
现代文：初十，建造朝集院。
English: At the age of ten, he built a morning school.

古文：十一月戊寅，保庆皇太后杨氏崩。
现代文：十一月初四，保庆皇太后杨氏逝世。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of November, the Dowager Empress Baoqing Yang passed away.

古文：辛卯，上保庆太后谥曰庄惠。
现代文：十七日，上保庆太后溢号为庄惠。
English: On the 17th, Empress Dowager Shang Baoqing was given the name Zhuang Hui.

古文：十二月丙寅，李谘卒。
现代文：十二月二十二日，李谱去世。
English: On December 22, Li Shuang passed away.

古文：丁卯，王德用知枢密院事，章得象同知枢密院事。
现代文：二十三日，王德用为知枢密院事，章得象为同知枢密院事。
English: On the 23rd, Wang De used it to learn about the Privy Council, and Zhang Dexiang used it to learn about the Privy Council.

古文：是岁，南平王李德政、西南蕃来贡。
现代文：这一年，南平王李德政、西南蕃来进贡。
English: In this year, the king of Nanping, Li Desheng, and the king of Southwest Yunnan came to pay tribute.

古文：南丹州莫淮戟内附。
现代文：南丹州莫淮戟内附朝廷。
English: Nantan County, Mo Huai, was annexed by the imperial court.

古文：四年春正月壬午，诏均诸州解额。
现代文：景四年春正月初九，下诏平均各州解送举人名额。
English: On the ninth day of the first month of the spring of the fourth year, the average number of people sent by each state increased.

古文：二月己酉，葬庄惠皇太后于永定陵。
现代文：二月初六，葬庄惠皇太后于永定陵。
English: On the 6th day of the 2nd month, the funeral of Empress Dowager Hui was held at Yongding Mausoleum.

古文：己未，祔神主于奉慈庙。
现代文：十六日，在奉慈庙附祭庄惠皇太后神主。
English: On the 16th, the deity of the Empress Dowager Hui was enshrined at a temple attached to the Feng Ci Temple.

古文：庚申，德音：降东、西京及灵驾所过州县囚罪一等，徒以下释之。
现代文：十七日，颁降德音：降东、西京和灵驾所过州县囚犯罪刑一等，徒刑以下释放。
English: On the 17th, the following sentences were handed down: the East and West Beijing and Lingzhi driving stations passed the first-class criminal punishment for prisoners in Zhoushu County, and they were released from prison.

古文：乙丑，置赤帝像于宫中祈嗣。
现代文：二十二日，设置赤帝像于宫中祈祷生子。
English: On the 22nd, a statue of the Red Emperor was set up in the palace to pray for a child.

古文：三月甲戌，置天章阁侍讲。
现代文：三月初一，设置天章阁侍讲。
English: On the first day of March, the Tenjokaku lecture hall was set up.

古文：戊寅，诏礼部贡举。
现代文：初五，下诏礼部贡举。
English: On the 5th day of the first month of the year, the tribute of the Imperial Rescript Department will begin.

古文：夏四月乙巳，吕夷简上《景祐法宝新录》。
现代文：夏四月初三，吕夷简呈上景法宝新录。
English: On the third day of the fourth month of the summer, Lyu Yijian presented a new collection of superior magic treasures.

古文：甲子，吕夷简、王曾、宋绶、蔡齐罢，以王随为门下侍郎、同中书门下平章事、昭文馆大学士，陈尧佐同中书门下平章事、集贤殿大学士，盛度知枢密院事，韩亿、程琳、石中立参知政事，王鬷同知枢密院事。
现代文：二十二日，吕夷简、王曾、宋缓、蔡齐被罢免。任命王随为门下侍郎、同中书门下平章事、昭文馆大学士，陈尧佐为同中书门下平章事、集贤殿大学士，盛度为知枢密院事，韩亿、程琳、石中立为参知政事，王为同知枢密院事。
English: On the 22nd, Lü Yijian, Wang Zeng, Song Xuan, and Cai Qi were removed from their posts, and Wang Sui was appointed as the junior chamberlain, the junior secretary of the same middle school, and the scholar of the Shouwen Academy, Chen Yingsuo was the junior secretary of the same middle school, and the scholar of the same middle school, and the scholar of the same middle school, and the scholar of the same middle school, and the scholar of the same middle school, and the scholar of the same middle school, and the scholar of the same middle school, and the scholar of the same middle school, and the scholar of the same middle school.

古文：五月庚戌，皇子生，录系囚，降死罪一等，流以下释之。
现代文：五月初九，皇子出生，讯问记录囚犯罪状，降死罪一等，流刑以下释放。
English: On the ninth day of the fifth month, the prince was born, the interrogation recorded the criminal status of the prisoner, the death penalty was reduced to the first class, and the exile was released.

古文：是日，皇子薨。
现代文：这天皇子去世。
English: This emperor's son passed away.

古文：乙卯，以旱，遣使决三京系囚。
现代文：十四日，因早灾派遣使臣处理三京关押囚犯。
English: On the 14th, envoys were dispatched to deal with the prisoners in Sanjing due to the early disaster.

古文：丙寅，芝生化成殿楹。
现代文：二十五日，化成殿厅里生出芝草。
English: On the twenty-fifth day, there was grass growing in the hall of the Great Hall.

古文：六月乙亥，杭州江潮坏堤，遣使致祭。
现代文：六月初四，杭州江潮冲毁堤岸，遣使致祭。
English: On the 4th day of the 6th month, the tidal current of the Hangzhou River broke through the embankment, and an envoy was sent to offer a sacrifice.

古文：戊子，出《神武秘略》赐边臣。
现代文：十七日，赐给边臣件申武秘略。
English: On the seventeenth day, he gave the secret strategy to the border guards.

古文：己丑，奉安太祖御容于扬州建隆寺。秋七月丁未，诏河东、河北州郡密严边备。
现代文：十八日，恭敬安置太祖遗像于扬州建隆寺秋七月初七，下诏河东、河北州郡严密边备。
English: On the 18th, the remains of the great ancestor were respectfully placed in Yangzhou Jianlong Temple on the 7th day of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 8th month of the 9th month of the 9th month of the 9th month of the 9th month of the 9th month of the 10th month of the 10th month of the 11th month of the 11th month of the 12th month of the 12th month of the 11th month of the 12th month of the 12th month of the 12th month of the 12th month

古文：戊申，有星数百西南流至壁东，大者其光烛地，黑气长丈余，出毕宿下。
现代文：初八，数百颗星向西南流至壁东，大者光照耀地面，有一丈多长的黑气，出现在毕宿下面。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, hundreds of stars streamed to the southwest to the east of the wall, the great light shone on the ground, and a long black atmosphere appeared below the lodge.

古文：八月甲戌，越州水，赐被溺民家钱有差。
现代文：八月初五，越州发生水灾，赐给淹水家钱不等。
English: On the 5th of August, flooding occurred in Yuezhou, and the amount of money given to the flooded families varied.

古文：甲午，诏三司、转运司毋借常平钱谷。
现代文：二十五日，下诏三司、转运司不得借常平钱谷。
English: On the 25th, the 3rd Division and the Transit Division were ordered not to use the Changping Valley.

古文：冬十一月癸亥，罢登、莱卖金场。
现代文：冬十一月二十五日，废罢登州、莱州买金场。
English: In winter, on November 25th, Dengzhou and Laizhou gold fields were abolished.

古文：十二月甲申，并、代、忻州并言地震，吏民压死者三万二千三百六人，伤五千六百人，畜扰死者五万余。
现代文：十二月十七日，并州、代州、忻州都报告说发生地震，吏民压死者三万二千三百零六人，伤五千六百人，牲畜扰死者五万多头。
English: On December 17th, Anhui Province, Daizhou Province, and Zhangzhou Province all reported that an earthquake had occurred, with 32,306 people killed, 5,600 injured, and more than 50,000 heads of livestock killed.

古文：遣使抚存其民，赐死伤之家钱有差。
现代文：派遣使臣安抚慰问其地百姓，赐给死伤之家钱不等。
English: Sending envoys to appease and console the local people, and giving money to the families of the dead and injured.

古文：是岁，滑州民蚕成被，长二丈五尺。
现代文：这一年，滑州民蚕成被，长二丈五尺。
English: In this year, the silkworms of the people of Nanzhou grew into quilts with a length of two meters and five feet.

古文：唃厮啰、龟兹、沙州来贡。
现代文：角厮锣、龟兹、沙州来进贡。
English: The horned toad, the tortoise and the sandpiper came to pay tribute.

古文：宝元元年春正月甲辰，雷。
现代文：宝元元年春正月初七，打雷。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the first month of the first month of the first month of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year

古文：丙辰，以地震及雷发不时，诏转运使、提举刑狱按所部官吏。除并、代、忻州压死民家去年秋粮。
现代文：十九日，因打雷、地震发生的不是时候，下诏转运使、提点刑狱考核所属官吏，免除并州、代州、忻州压死百姓家去年秋粮。
English: On the 19th, because it was not the right time for thunder and earthquakes to occur, the following order was issued to transfer envoys and officials belonging to the assessment of prisons, exempting the people from the provinces, prefectures and counties who crushed the people's homes last autumn grain.

古文：二月壬申，诏复日御前殿。
现代文：二月初五，下诏恢复日御前殿治理国事。
English: On the 5th day of the 2nd month, the Imperial edict was issued to resume the administration of state affairs by the Imperial Household Agency.

古文：甲午，安化蛮寇宜、融州。
现代文：二十七日，安化蛮攻打宜州、融州。
English: On the 27th, Anhua brutally attacked Yizhou and Rongzhou.

古文：三月戊戌朔，王随、陈尧佐、韩亿、石中立罢，以张士逊为门下侍郎、同中书门下平章事、昭文馆大学士，章得象同中书门下平章事、集贤殿大学士，王鬷、李若谷并参知政事，王博文、陈执中同知枢密院事。
现代文：三月初一，王随、陈尧佐、韩亿、石中立被罢免，任命张士逊为门下侍郎、同中书门下平章事、昭文馆大学士，章得象为同中书门下平章事、集贤殿大学士，王、李若谷为参知政事，王博文、陈执中为同知枢密院事。
English: On the first day of March, Wang Sui, Chen Bingzao, Han Rongyi and Shi Zhongli were dismissed, and Zhang Shisong was appointed as the attendant of the disciple, the subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate

古文：己亥，发邵、澧、潭三州驻泊兵讨安化州蛮。
现代文：初二，出动邵、遭、潭三州驻泊兵讨伐安化州蛮。
English: On the second day of the first semester, the soldiers stationed in the three states of Shao, Seng and Tan were dispatched to fight the barbarians of Anhua.

古文：是月，赐礼部奏名进士、诸科及第出身七百二十四人。
现代文：这个月，赐礼部奏名进士、各科及第出身七百二十四人。
English: This month, the Ministry of Rites and Ceremonies conferred honorary doctorates on 724 people from various disciplines and backgrounds.

古文：夏四月癸酉，王博文卒。
现代文：夏四月初七，王博文去世。
English: On the seventh day of the fourth month of the summer, Wang Bowen passed away.

古文：乙亥，以张观同知枢密院事。
现代文：初九，任命张观为同知枢密院事。
English: On the first day of the ninth month, Zhang Guan was appointed as Tongzhi Privy Councillor.

古文：壬辰，除宜、融州夏税。
现代文：二十六日，免除宜州、融州夏税。
English: On the 26th, Yizhou and Rongzhou were exempted from summer tax.

古文：五月乙巳，录系囚。
现代文：五月初九，讯问记录囚犯罪状。
English: On May 9, the interrogation recorded the criminal status of the prisoner.

古文：六月戊寅，罢举童子。
现代文：六月十三日，罢举童子。
English: On June 13th, Doji went on strike.

古文：己卯，建州大水，坏民庐舍，赐死伤家钱有差，其无主者，官葬祭之。
现代文：十四日，建州涨大水，毁坏百姓庐舍，赐给死伤家钱不等，没有主的尸体官府代为埋葬祭奠。
English: On the 14th day of the month, floodwaters rose in Jianzhou, destroying people's homes, and the families of the dead and injured were given varying amounts of money.

古文：甲申，诏天下诸州月上雨雪状。
现代文：十九日，下诏天下各州每月上报雨雪情况。
English: On the 19th, it was decreed that all the states in the world should report the rain and snow situation every month.

古文：秋七月壬戌，策制举人。
现代文：秋七月二十七日，策试制举人。
English: On the 27th day of the 7th month of autumn, the selection of candidates began.

古文：癸亥，策武举人。
现代文：二十八日，策试武举人。
English: On the 28th, the strategy was put to the test.

古文：八月丁卯，复淮南、江、浙、荆湖制置发运使。
现代文：八月初三，恢复淮南、江、浙、荆湖制置发运使。
English: At the beginning of August 3, the system of dispatching and transporting envoys to Huainan, Jiangsu, Zhejiang and Jinghu was resumed.

古文：庚辰，荧惑犯南斗。
现代文：十六日，荧惑星侵犯南斗星。
English: On the 16th, the fluorescent planet invaded the Southern Dipper.

古文：九月戊申，诏应祀事，己受誓戒而失虔恭者，毋以赦原。
现代文：九月十五日，下诏祭祀已经接受誓戒而表现出不恭敬不虔诚的人，赦免时也得不到原谅。
English: On the 15th of September, at the next imperial edict ceremony, those who have taken vows and have shown disrespect and impiety will not be pardoned when pardoned.

古文：赐宜、融州讨蛮兵缗钱。
现代文：赐给宜州、融州讨蛮士兵络钱。
English: Yizhou and Rongzhou were given a large sum of money to fight against the barbarian soldiers.

古文：冬十月丙寅，诏戒百官朋党。
现代文：冬十月初三，下诏警告百官结为朋党。
English: On the 3rd day of the 10th month of winter, the emperor issued an imperial edict warning all officials not to become party cronies.

古文：十一月甲辰，诏广西钤辖进兵讨安化蛮。
现代文：十一月十二日，下诏广西铃辖进兵讨伐安化蛮。
English: On November 12th, troops from Guangxi Province were sent to fight against the Anhua barbarians.

古文：乙巳，诏宜、融州民尝从军役者，免今夏税，运粮者免其半。
现代文：十三日，下诏宜州、融州百姓曾经服军役的人，免除今年夏税，运输军粮的免除一半。
English: On the 13th, the people of Yizhou and Rongzhou who had served in the military were exempted from this year's summer tax, and half of the transportation of military grain was exempted.

古文：戊申，朝飨景灵宫。
现代文：十六日，祭祀景灵宫。
English: On the 16th, the ceremony was held at the Jingling Palace.

古文：己酉，飨太庙及奉慈庙。
现代文：十七日，祭祀太庙和奉慈庙。
English: On the 17th, there will be a ceremony at the Grand Temple and the Bongji Temple.

古文：庚戌，祀天地于圜丘，大赦，改元。
现代文：十八日，在圆丘祭祀天地，大赦，改元。
English: On the 18th, in the round mound, the heavens and the earth were sacrificed, amnesty was granted, and the era was changed.

古文：百官上尊号曰宝元体天法道钦文聪武圣神孝德皇帝。
现代文：百官上尊号为宝元体天法道钦文聪武圣神孝德皇帝。
English: His official title is Emperor Bao Yuan Ti Tian Fa Dao Qin Wen Cong Wu Sheng Sheng Xiao De.

古文：乙卯，复奏举县令法。
现代文：二十三日，恢复奏举县令法。
English: On the 23rd, the law on reciting county ordinances was reinstated.

古文：王曾薨。
现代文：王曾逝世。
English: Wang Zeng passed away.

古文：十二月癸亥朔，加恩百官。
现代文：十二月初一，加恩百官。
English: On the first day of December, Gahn became the 100th official.

古文：甲子，京师地震。
现代文：初二，京城发生地震。
English: On the 13th, an earthquake occurred in Beijing.

古文：丙寅，鄜延路言赵元昊反。
现代文：初四，延路报告说赵元昊反叛。
English: On the fourth day of the first month, Yanlu reported that Zhao Yuanhao rebelled.

古文：甲戌，禁边人与元昊互市。
现代文：十二日，禁止边人与元昊互市。
English: On the 12th, the border people and Yuan Hao were prohibited from trading with each other.

古文：己卯，奉宁军节度使、知永兴军夏竦兼泾原、秦凤路安抚使，振武军节度使、知延州范雍兼鄜延、环庆路安抚使。
现代文：十七日，奉宁军节度使、知永兴军夏辣兼径源秦凤路安抚使，振武军节度使、知延州范雍兼延环庆路安抚使。
English: On the 17th, he was the festival envoy of the Bongning Army, the pacification envoy of the Xiara and Qianyuan Qinfeng Road of the Zhiyongxing Army, the festival envoy of the Zhenwu Army, and the pacification envoy of the Fan Yong and Yanhuangqing Road of the Zhiyongxing Army.

古文：是岁，达州大水，黎州蛮来贡。
现代文：这一年，达州发生大水，黎州蛮来进贡。
English: In that year, Dazhou was hit by a flood, and Li Province was forced to pay tribute.

古文：二年春正月己酉，王随卒。
现代文：宝元二年春正月十八日，王随去世。
English: On the 18th day of the first month of the second year of the Heian era, Wang Sui passed away.

古文：辛亥，安化蛮平。
现代文：二十日，安化蛮被平定。
English: On the 20th, Anhua was completely subdued.

古文：癸丑，赵元昊表请称帝、改元。
现代文：二十二日，赵元昊上表请称帝改元。
English: On the 22nd, Zhao Yuanhao went up to the table and asked to be called Emperor Yuan.

古文：三月丁未，铸皇宋通宝钱。
现代文：三月十六日，铸造皇宋通宝钱。
English: On March 16th, the imperial Song Tong treasure money was minted.

古文：乙卯，阅试卫士。
现代文：二十四日，检阅考试武士。
English: On the 24th, the examination for samurai was held.

古文：戊午，赐陕西缘边军士缗钱。
现代文：二十七日，赐给陕西沿边军士络钱。
English: On the 27th, he gave money to soldiers along the border of Shaanxi Province.

古文：夏四月癸亥，授唃厮啰二子瞎毡、磨毡角团练使。
现代文：夏四月初三，授给确厮锣二个儿子瞎毡、磨毡角团练使职务。
English: On the 3rd day of the 4th month of the summer, the two sons of Ji Jian were awarded the positions of blind and sharpening horns.

古文：乙丑，放宫女二百七十人。
现代文：初五，放出宫女二百七十人。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, they let out 270 maids of honor.

古文：壬申，免昭州运粮死蛮寇者家徭二年、赋租一年。
现代文：十二日，昭州运粮死于蛮寇者免除其家摇役二年、赋税一年。
English: On the 12th, those who died in the grain transportation in Zhaozhou were exempted from two years of household labor and one year of tax.

古文：丁亥，募河东、陕西民入粟实边。
现代文：二十七日，招募河东、陕西百姓人粟充实边储。
English: On the 27th, the people of Hedong and Shaanxi were recruited to replenish the reserves.

古文：五月癸巳，诏近臣举方略材武之士各二人。
现代文：五月初三，下诏近臣推举有智勇的人二名。
English: On the third day of the fifth month of the year, two men of wisdom and courage were selected by the emperor's close advisers.

古文：己亥，禁皇族及诸命妇、女冠、尼等非时入内。
现代文：初九，禁止皇族和各位命妇、女道士、僧尼等随便进人宫内。
English: On the first day of the ninth month, it was forbidden for members of the imperial family and ladies-in-waiting, female Taoists, monks and nuns, etc. to enter the Imperial Palace at will.

古文：癸卯，命近臣同三司议节省浮费。
现代文：十三日，命令近臣同三司一起讨论节约开支。
English: On the 13th, he ordered his close vassals to discuss cost-saving measures with the three departments.

古文：丙午，遣使体量安抚陕西、河东。
现代文：十六日，派遣使臣视察安抚陕西和河东。
English: On the 16th, envoys were dispatched to inspect and pacify Shaanxi and Hedong.

古文：己酉，录系囚。
现代文：十九日，讯问记录囚犯罪状。
English: On the 19th, the interrogation recorded the criminal status of the prisoner.

古文：壬子，王德用罢，以夏守赟知枢密院事。
现代文：二十二日，王德用被罢免，任命夏守贾为知枢密院事。
English: On the 22nd, Wang Deyi was removed from office and appointed Xia Shoujia as the Secretary of the Privy Council.

古文：六月壬戌，诏省浮费，自乘舆服御及宫掖所须，宜从简约，若吏兵禄赐，毋概行裁减。
现代文：六月初三，下诏节省浮费，从皇帝的衣食住行到宫廷日常开支，都应该节约，像官吏士兵的棒禄赏赐，不要一律裁减。
English: On the third day of the first month of June, the emperor issued an edict to save floating expenses. From the emperor's food, clothing, housing and transportation to the daily expenses of the court, they should be saved. Like the reward of the official soldiers, they should not be reduced uniformly.

古文：戊辰，诏诸致仕官尝犯赃者，毋推恩子孙。
现代文：初九，下诏各位退休官员曾经犯贪赃罪的，子孙不得享受恩惠。
English: On the first day of the ninth month, it was decreed that the descendants of retired officials who had committed the crime of embezzlement should not enjoy any benefits.

古文：丁丑，益州火，焚庐舍三千余区。
现代文：十八日，益州火灾，焚毁庐舍二千多间。
English: On the 18th, a fire in Yizhou destroyed more than 2,000 houses.

古文：壬午，削赵元昊官爵，除属籍。
现代文：二十三日，削夺赵元昊官爵，除属籍。
English: On the 23rd, Zhao Yuanhao was stripped of his title, and his family status was removed.

古文：秋七月丁巳，诏宗室遇南郊及乾元节恩，许官一子，余五岁授官。
现代文：秋七月二十八日，下诏宗室遇到南郊祭祀和乾元节推恩给赏时，可以任一子为官，其余五岁授官。
English: On the 28th day of the 7th month of autumn, when the Southern Suburbs Festival and the Lantern Festival were held, any son could become an official, and the remaining five-year-olds could be awarded.

古文：戊午，以夏竦知泾州兼泾原、秦凤路沿边经略安抚使、泾原路马步军都总管，范雍兼鄜延、环庆路沿边经略安抚使、鄜延路马步军都总管。
现代文：二十九日，任命夏辣知径州兼径原秦凤路沿边经略安抚使、径原路马步军都总管，范雍兼延环庆路沿边经略安抚使、延路马步军都总管。
English: On the 29th, he appointed Xia Lichizhou and the former Qinfeng Road along the border to be the pacifying envoy and the former road to be the general manager of the horse-walking army, and Fan Yong and Yan Huanqing Road along the border to be the pacifying envoy and the former road to be the general manager of the horse-walking army.

古文：八月丁卯，以筚篥城唃厮波补本族军主。
现代文：八月初八，委任单菜城确厮波补本族军主。
English: On the 8th day of the 8th month of the 8th month of the 8th month of the 8th month of the 8th month of the 8th month of the 8th month of the 8th month of the 8th month of the 8th month of the 8th month of the 8th month of the 8th month of the 8th month of the 8th month of the 8th month of the 8th month of the 8th month of the 8th month of the 8th month of the 8th month of the 8th month of the 8th month of the 8th month of the 8th month of the 8th month of the 8th month of the 8th month of the 8

古文：甲戌，皇子生。
现代文：十五日，皇子生。
English: On the 15th, the prince was born.

古文：丙子，降三京囚罪一等，徒以下释之。
现代文：十七日，降三京囚犯罪刑一等，徒刑以下释放。
English: On the 17th, the criminal punishment of the three Beijing prisoners was reduced to the first degree, and they were released with a prison sentence or less.

古文：辛巳，命辅臣报祠高禖。
现代文：二十二日，命令辅臣答谢祭祀媒神。
English: On the 22nd, he ordered his vassals to offer sacrifices to the matchmaker.

古文：九月壬寅，诏河北转运使兼都大制置营田屯田事。
现代文：九月十四日，诏令河北转运使兼都大制置营田屯田事。
English: On September 14th, the Hebei Transportation Envoy and the Capital of Hebei Province issued a decree to set up campgrounds and garrisons.

古文：乙卯，出内库银四万两易粟，振益、梓、利、夔路饥民。
现代文：二十七日，调出内库银四万两，换来粮食贩济益、梓、利、夔路饥民。
English: On the 27th, 40,000 taels of silver were transferred from the treasury in exchange for grain traders to help the hungry people in Yixi, Zi, Lixi and Kushiro.

古文：十月庚午，赐麟、府州及川、陕军士缗钱。
现代文：十月十二日，赐给麟州、府州和川、陕士兵络钱。
English: On October 12th, soldiers from Linzhou, Fuzhou, Sichuan and Shaanxi were given money.

古文：甲申，诏两川饥民出剑门关者勿禁。
现代文：二十六日，下诏不要禁止两川饥民出剑门关。
English: On the 26th, it was decreed that the starving people of the two rivers should not be prohibited from leaving Jianmen Pass.

古文：十一月戊子朔，出内库珠，易缗钱三十万籴边储。
现代文：十一月初一，调出内库珠子换来络钱三十万来买边储。
English: On the first day of November, it transferred 300,000 yuan from its internal reserves to buy foreign exchange reserves.

古文：丁酉，盛度、程琳罢，出御史中丞孔道辅。
现代文：初十，盛度、程琳被罢免，罢默御史中承孔道辅。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, Shengdu and Chenglin were dismissed, and Zhongcheng Kong Dofu was dismissed.

古文：壬寅，以王鬷知枢密院事，宋庠参知政事。
现代文：十五日，任命王为知枢密院事，宋序为参知政事。
English: On the fifteenth day, Wang was appointed as a member of the Privy Council, and Song Xiu as a member of the Council of State.

古文：十二月庚申，诏审刑院、大理寺、刑部毋通宾客。
现代文：十二月初四，下诏审刑院、大理寺、刑部不要交通宾客。
English: On the 4th day of the 12th lunar month, it was announced that the Sentencing and Punishment Institute, Dali Temple, and the Criminal Investigation Department would no longer accept traffic guests.

古文：壬申，诏： 御史阙员，朕自择举。 
现代文：十六日，下诏御史缺人由皇帝自己选择推举。
English: On the 16th day of the following month, the emperor himself chose the person to be appointed.

古文：是岁，曹、濮、单州蝗。
现代文：这一年，曹、攫、单州蝗灾。
English: This year, the locust plagues in Cao, Handan, and Shan state.

古文：康定元年春正月丙辰朔，日有食之。
现代文：康定元年春正月初一，日食。
English: The solar eclipse occurred on the first day of the first month of spring in the first year of Kangding.

古文：壬戌，赐国子监学田五十顷。
现代文：初七，赐给国子监学田五十顷。
English: In the seventh year of his junior high school, he was given fifty hectares of land to supervise students.

古文：是月，元昊寇延州，执鄜延、环庆两路副都总管刘平、鄜延副都总管石元孙。
现代文：这个月，元昊攻打延州，俘获延、环庆两路副都总管刘平，延副都总管石元孙。
English: This month, Yuan Hao attacked Yanzhou, and captured Liu Ping, the vice-governor of Yan and Huanqing, and Shi Yuan Sun, the vice-governor of Yan.

古文：诏陕西运使明镐募强壮备边。
现代文：下诏陕西运使明镐招募强壮民夫准备边防使用。
English: The next edict of the Shaanxi Dispatching Envoy of the Ming Dynasty called for the recruitment of strong people to prepare for the use of border defense.

古文：二月丁亥，以夏守赟为宣徽南院使、陕西马步军都总管、经略安抚使。
现代文：二月初二，任命夏守贾为宣徽南院使、陕西马步军都总管、经略安抚使。
English: On the second day of the second month of February, Xia Shoujia was appointed as the envoy of the Southern Court of Xuanhui, the head of the Shaanxi Horse and Foot Troops, and the pacification envoy.

古文：诏潼关设备。
现代文：下诏撞关设防守备。
English: Set up a defensive position at the next junction.

古文：辛卯，月、太白俱犯昴。
现代文：初六，月亮、太白星都侵犯晶星。
English: On the sixth day of the first month, the moon and the white star both encroach on the crystal star.

古文：壬辰，夏守赟兼沿边招讨使。
现代文：初七，夏守贾兼沿边招讨使。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, the summer governor, Jia Jian, invited the envoys along the border.

古文：出内藏缗钱十万赐戍边禁兵之家。
现代文：调出内藏络钱十万赐给守边禁兵的家庭。
English: He transferred 100,000 yuan from the Inner Tibet Network to the families of the soldiers who were forbidden to guard the border.

古文：知制诰韩琦安抚陕西。
现代文：知制浩韩琦安抚陕西。
English: Intellectual control of the Han Dynasty pacified Shaanxi.

古文：白气如绳贯日。
现代文：白气如绳贯日。
English: The sky is white as a pikestaff.

古文：甲午，括畿内、京东西、淮南、陕西马。
现代文：初九，括瓷内、京东西、淮南、陕西马。
English: The first nine, including Cera, Beijing East, Huainan, Shaanxi Ma.

古文：丙申，诏诸路转运使、提刑访知边事者以闻。
现代文：十一日，下诏各路转运使、提刑，访问精通边事者上报朝廷。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the following decrees were issued to transfer envoys, impose punishments, and report to the imperial court those who were familiar with border affairs.

古文：丁酉，诏枢密院同宰臣议边事。
现代文：十二日，下诏枢密院与宰相一起商议边事。
English: On the 12th, the Privy Council and the Prime Minister came together to discuss peripheral matters.

古文：辛丑，出内藏缗钱八十万付陕西市籴军储。
现代文：十六日，调出内藏络钱八十万付给陕西来买军储。
English: On the 16th, it transferred 800,000 yuan to Shaanxi to buy military reserves.

古文：丙午，德音：释延州、保安军流以下罪，寇所攻掠地除今夏税，戍兵及战死者赐其家缗钱。
现代文：二十一日，颁布德音，延州保安军流刑以下释放，免除西夏攻掠地区今年夏税，赐给守兵和战死者家钱。
English: On the 21st, the decree was promulgated, releasing the Yangzhou Security Army from exile, exempting the Western Xia attack and looting areas from this summer's tax, and giving family money to the guards and the war dead.

古文：是日改元，去尊号 宝元 字，许中外臣庶上封章言事。
现代文：这天改元，去尊号 宝元 二字，允许中外臣僚庶民上密封奏章议论国事。
English: On this day, the era name was changed to Yuan and the honorific title Ho Yuan was abolished, allowing Chinese and foreign ministers and commoners to discuss state affairs in a sealed record.

古文：丁未，诏陕西量民力，蠲所科刍粮。
现代文：二十二日，下诏陕西审度民力，免除所科粮草。
English: On the 22nd, the Shaanxi Provincial People's Procuratorate issued the following edict, exempting Soke Grain and Grass.

古文：癸丑，降范雍为尚书吏部侍郎、知安州。
现代文：二十八日，降范雍为尚书吏部侍郎、安州知州。
English: On the 28th, Fan Yong was demoted to the position of the attendant of Shang Shuliribe, Anzhou Chizhou.

古文：甲寅，出内库珠偿民马直。
现代文：二十九日，调出内库珠子偿还百姓马匹钱。
English: On the 29th, the internal treasury beads were transferred to repay the people's horse money.

古文：三月丙辰，诏大臣条陕西攻守策。
现代文：三月初二，下诏大臣讨论陈述陕西攻守策略。
English: On the second day of March, the Minister discussed the strategy of attacking and defending Shaanxi.

古文：癸亥，命韩琦治陕西城池。
现代文：初九，命令韩琦修治陕西城治。
English: On the 9th day of the first month, Han Zheng ordered to restore the city government of Shaanxi Province.

古文：乙丑，阅虎翼军习战。
现代文：十一日，检阅虎翼军练习作战。
English: On the 11th day, the inspection of the tiger wing army practice combat.

古文：辛未，诏延州录战没军士子孙，月给粮。
现代文：十七日，下诏延州录用战死军士子孙，每月供给粮食。
English: On the 17th, the descendants of soldiers who died in the war were recruited from Yanzhou and provided with grain every month.

古文：丙子，大风，昼暝，是夜有黑气长数丈，见东南。
现代文：二十二日，大风，白天昏暗，这天晚上有黑气长数尺，出现在东南方向。
English: On the 22nd, it was windy and dark during the day. That evening, a black cloud several feet long appeared in the southeast.

古文：丁丑，罢大宴。
现代文：二十三日，废罢大宴。
English: On the 23rd, the great banquet was held.

古文：诏中外言阙政。
现代文：下诏中外陈述缺政。
English: The following Chinese and foreign statements are out of order.

古文：戊寅，王鬷、陈执中、张观罢，以晏殊、宋绶知枢密院事，王贻永同知枢密院事。
现代文：二十四日，王、陈执中、张观被罢免，任命晏殊、宋缓为知枢密院事。王贻永为同知枢密院事。
English: On the 24th, Wang, Chen Jizhong and Zhang Guan were removed from their posts, and Gongshu and Song Jian were appointed as the members of the Privy Council of the Chinese Academy of Sciences. Wang Bingyong was appointed as the member of the Privy Council of the Chinese Academy of Sciences.

古文：诏按察官举才堪将帅者。
现代文：下诏按察官推举才能可以担任将帅的人。
English: According to the following edict, only those who are recommended by the procurator can serve as generals.

古文：庚辰，诏参知政事同议边事。
现代文：二十六日，下诏参知政事参与讨论边事。
English: On the 26th, the lower echelon of political leaders participated in the discussion of side issues.

古文：辛巳，德音：降天下囚罪一等，徒以下释之。
现代文：二十七日，颁布德音：降天下囚犯罪刑一等，徒刑以下释放。
English: On the 27th, the following decrees were promulgated: the first-class criminal punishment of prisoners was reduced, and those sentenced to imprisonment or less were released.

古文：赐京师、河北、陕西、河东诸军缗钱，蠲陕西夏税十之二，减河东所科粟。
现代文：赐给京师、河北、陕西、河东各路络钱，免除陕西夏税十分之二，减免河东所科粟。
English: Beijing, Hebei, Shaanxi, and Hedong were all given a certain amount of money, Shaanxi was exempted from two-tenths of the summer tax, and the Science Research Institute of Hedong was exempted from the tax.

古文：夏四月丙戌，省陕西沿边堡砦。
现代文：夏四月初二，撤减陕西沿边堡寨。
English: On the second day of the fourth month of the summer, the border fortresses along Shaanxi were withdrawn.

古文：癸巳，诏诸戍边军月遣内侍存问其家，病致医药，死为敛葬之。
现代文：初九，下诏每个月派遣内侍慰问抚恤各戍边军士兵的家属，病了供给医药，死了代为埋葬。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, the emperor decreed that a chambermaid should be dispatched every month to offer condolences and support to the families of the soldiers of the border troops, to provide medicine for the sick, and to bury the dead.

古文：甲午，遣使籍陕西强壮军。
现代文：初十，派遣使臣登记陕西强壮军。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, envoys were dispatched to register the strong army of Shaanxi.

古文：乙未，契丹国母复遣使来贺乾元节。
现代文：十一日，契丹国母又派遣使臣来祝贺乾元节。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the Empress of Khitan sent an envoy to congratulate the Chinese New Year.

古文：乙巳，增补河北强壮军。
现代文：二十一日，增补河北强壮军。
English: On the 21st, Hebei's strong army was replenished.

古文：丙午，鄜延路兵马都监黄德和坐弃军要斩。
现代文：二十二日，延路兵马都监黄德和因弃军被诛杀。
English: On the 22nd, Yanlu's military governor, Huang Dehe, was beaten to death for deserting the army.

古文：丁未，赠刘平、石元孙官，录其子孙。
现代文：二十三日，赠给刘平、石元孙官职，录用其子孙。
English: On the 23rd, Liu Ping and Shi Yuansun were given official positions, and their children and grandchildren were hired.

古文：辛亥，筑延州金明栲栳砦。
现代文：二十七日，修筑延州金洲考佬寨。
English: On the 27th, Yanzhou Jinzhou Gaokao Village was built.

古文：五月甲寅朔，诏前殿奏事毋过五班，余对后殿。
现代文：五月初一，下诏前殿奏事不超过五班，其余到后殿奏事。
English: On the first day of May, there will be no more than five groups performing the ceremony in the front hall, and the rest will perform the ceremony in the back hall.

古文：命大官赐食。
现代文：命大官赐食。
English: It is a great honor to be given food.

古文：壬戌，张士逊致事，吕夷简为门下侍郎、同中书门下平章事、昭文馆大学士。
现代文：初九，张士逊退休，吕夷简为门下侍郎、同中书门下平章事、昭文馆大学士。
English: On the 9th day of the 9th month, Zhang Shisong retired, and Lü Yijian became the under-waiter, the under-secretary of the same middle school, and the scholar of the Shobun Museum.

古文：癸酉，诏夏守赟进屯鄜州。
现代文：二十日，下诏夏守贾进屯州。
English: On the 20th, Xia Shou Jia entered Tunzhou.

古文：戊寅，以夏竦为陕西马步军都总管兼招讨使。
现代文：二十五日，任命夏辣为陕西马步军都总管兼招讨使。
English: On the 25th, Xia Lai was appointed as the general manager and recruiting officer of the Shaanxi Horse Cavalry Corps.

古文：是月，元昊陷塞门砦，兵马监押王继元死之，又陷安远砦。
现代文：这个月，元昊攻陷塞门寨，兵马监押王继元战死，元昊又攻陷安远寨。
English: This month, Yuan Hao attacked and captured Saimen Village. Wang Jiyuan, the commander of the soldiers and horses, died in the battle. Yuan Hao also attacked and captured Anyuan Village.

古文：六月丙戌，诏假日御崇政殿视事如前殿。
现代文：六月初三，下诏假日到崇政殿治理国事如同前殿。
English: On the third day of the first month of June, the next imperial edict holiday, it is like the front hall to govern the country from the throne hall.

古文：丁亥，以夏守赟同知枢密院事。
现代文：初四，任命夏守贾为同知枢密院事。
English: On the fourth day of the new year, Xia Shoujia was appointed as Tongzhi Privy Councillor.

古文：甲午，降三京囚罪一等，徒以下释之。
现代文：十一日，降三京囚犯罪刑一等，徒刑以下释放。
English: On the 11th, the criminal punishment of the three Beijing prisoners was reduced to the first degree, and they were released with a prison sentence or less.

古文：乙未，南京鸿庆宫神御殿火。
现代文：十二日，南京鸿庆宫神御殿发生火灾。
English: On the 12th, a fire broke out in the main hall of Nanjing Hongqing Palace.

古文：壬寅，遣使体量安抚京东、西。
现代文：十九日，派遣使臣视察安抚京东、西。
English: On the 19th, envoys were dispatched to inspect and pacify the eastern and western parts of Beijing.

古文：甲辰，增置陕西、河北、河东、京东西弓手。
现代文：二十一日，增置陕西、河北、河东、京东西弓手。
English: On the 21st, archers from Shaanxi, Hebei, Hedong and Beijing were added.

古文：秋七月乙丑，遣使以讨元昊告契丹。庚午，阅诸军习战。
现代文：秋七月十二日，派遣使臣告诉契丹，宋朝出兵攻讨元昊。十七日，检阅各军练习作战。
English: On the 12th day of the 7th month of autumn, an envoy was dispatched to tell Khitan that the Song Dynasty had sent troops to attack Yuan Hao. On the 17th day, each army was inspected to practice combat.

古文：戊寅，皇子昕为忠正军节度使，封寿国公。
现代文：二十五日，皇子赵听为忠正军节度使，封为寿国公。
English: On the 25th, the prince Zhao He was appointed as the envoy to the festival of the Zhongzheng army and was given the title of Prince of Shou.

古文：八月戊戌，禁以金箔饰佛像。
现代文：八月十六日，禁止用金箔装饰佛像。
English: On August 16, it was forbidden to decorate Buddha statues with gold leaf.

古文：癸卯，遣尚书屯田员外郎刘涣使邈川。
现代文：二十一日，派遣尚书屯田员外郎刘涣出使邀川。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, Shangshu sent the foreign envoy Liu Xuan to invite Chuan.

古文：戊申，夏守赟罢，以杜衍同知枢密院事。
现代文：二十六日，夏守贾被罢免，任命杜衍为同知枢密院事。
English: On the 26th, Xia Shou Jia was dismissed and Du Yan was appointed as Tongzhi Privy Councillor.

古文：辛亥，诏范仲淹、葛怀敏领兵驱逐塞门等砦蕃骑出境，仍募弓箭手，给地居之。
现代文：二十九日，下诏范仲淹、葛怀敏率兵驱逐塞门寨等寨夏军骑兵出境，并且招募弓箭手，给地居住。
English: On the 29th, Fan Zhongran and Ge Huimin led the troops to expel the cavalry of the Zhai Xia Army such as Saimenzhai, and recruited archers to live in the area.

古文：九月甲寅，滑州河溢。
现代文：九月初二，滑州黄河水溢出河道。
English: On the second day of September, water from the Yellow River overflowed its course in the city of Luzhou.

古文：戊午，李若谷罢，以宋绶、晁宗悫参知政事，郑戬同知枢密院事。
现代文：初六，李若谷被罢免，任命宋缓、晃宗意为参知政事，郑戮为同知枢密院事。
English: On the sixth day of the first month of the year, Li Ruogu was removed from office, and Song Xuan and Jiao Zongyi were appointed as co-chairs of the State Council, and Zheng Rong as co-chairs of the Privy Council.

古文：戊辰，以晏殊为枢密使，王贻永、杜衍、郑戬并枢密副使。
现代文：十六日，任命晏殊为枢密使，王贻永、杜衍、郑戮为枢密副使。
English: On the 16th, Gongshu was appointed as the Privy Envoy, and Wang Bingyong, Du Yan, and Zheng Rini were appointed as the Deputy Privy Envoys.

古文：甲戌，诏使臣、诸班、诸军有武艺者自陈。
现代文：二十二日，下诏使臣、诸班、诸军有武艺者自己陈述上报。
English: On the 22nd, the envoys, groups, and soldiers with martial arts made their own statements and reported.

古文：辛巳，阅诸军习战。
现代文：二十九日，检阅各军练习作战。
English: On the 29th, each army was inspected to practice combat.

古文：是月，元昊寇三川砦，都巡检杨保吉死之。又围师子、定川堡，战士死者五千余人，遂陷乾沟、乾河、赵福三堡。
现代文：这个月，元昊攻打三川寨，都巡检杨保吉战死；元昊又围攻师子寨、定川寨，战士死者五千余人，于是攻陷乾沟、乾河、赵福三堡。
English: This month, Yuan Hao attacked Sanchuan Village, and Yang Baoji, the inspector, was killed in the battle; Yuan Hao also besieged Shi Zi Village and Dingchuan Village, and more than 5,000 soldiers were killed, so the three castles of Qian Gou, Qianhe and Zhao Fu were captured.

古文：环庆路兵马副都总管任福破白豹城。
现代文：环庆路兵马副都总管任福攻破白豹城。
English: Huanqing Road, Ren Fu, deputy head of the Terracotta Warriors and Horses, broke through the White Leopard City.

古文：冬十月乙未，制铜符、木契、传信牌。
现代文：冬十月十三日，制作铜符、木契和传信牌。
English: On the 13th day of October in winter, bronze charms, wooden certificates and telegrams were made.

古文：甲辰，录方略士六十一人，授官有差。
现代文：二十二日，录用方略士六十一人，授官不等。
English: On the 22nd, sixty-one party cadres were recruited, and their positions varied.

古文：十一月壬戌，有大星流西南，声如雷者三。
现代文：十一月十一日，有大星流向西南，声音如雷者出现三次。
English: On November 11th, there was a large stream of stars to the southwest, and thunderous sounds appeared three times.

古文：十二月癸未，出内藏库绢一百万助籴军储。
现代文：十二月初二，调出内藏库绢一百万匹助来军储。
English: On the second day of December, a million horses were transferred from the internal storage to the military reserve.

古文：诏南京祠大火。
现代文：下诏南京祠大火。
English: The Nanjing ancestral hall caught fire.

古文：丙戌，诏以常平缗钱助籴军储。
现代文：初五，下诏用常平络钱助来军储。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, the emperor issued an edict to use Changping network money to help the military reserve.

古文：癸卯，宋绶卒。
现代文：二十二日，宋缓去世。
English: On the 22nd, Song Xuan passed away.

古文：戊申，铸当十钱权助边费。
现代文：二十七日，铸造 当十 钱暂且补助边费。
English: On the 27th day of the month, the casting of ten coins was temporarily subsidized.

