古文：陈伯之，济阴睢陵人也。
现代文：陈伯之，是济阴睢陵人。
English: Chen Bozhi is a native of Jilin and Fuling.

古文：年十三四，好着獭皮冠，带刺刀，候邻里稻熟，辄偷刈之。
现代文：十三四岁时，喜欢戴一顶獭皮帽子，带着刺刀，等邻村稻熟时，便去偷割。
English: At the age of thirteen or fourteen, he liked to wear a mink hat and carry a bayonet. When the rice ripened in a neighboring village, he would go and cut it secretly.

古文：尝爲田主所见，呵之曰： 楚子莫动！ 
现代文：有一次被田主人发现了，呵责他说： 小子别动！ 
English: Once he was discovered by the owner of the field, who scolded him: "Kid, don't move!

古文：伯之曰： 君稻幸多，取一担何苦。 
现代文：陈伯之说： 所幸您家稻谷很多，取一担算得了什么？ 
English: Chen Bozhi said, "Fortunately, your family has a lot of rice. How much is a load of rice worth?

古文：田主将执之。
现代文：田主准备去抓他。
English: The farmer is going to catch him.

古文：因拔刀而进，曰： 楚子定何如！ 
现代文：他拔出刀来赶上前去，说： 小子，你想怎样？ 
English: He pulled out his knife to catch up and said, "Kid, what do you want?

古文：田主皆反走，徐担稻而归。
现代文：田主们吓得返身逃走，陈伯之这才慢吞吞地挑着稻谷回家去。
English: The farmers were so scared that they turned back and ran away. Chen Bozhi then slowly picked up the rice and went home.

古文：及年长，在锺离数爲劫盗，尝授面觇人船，船人斫之，获其左耳。
现代文：长大以后，他多次在钟离当强盗抢劫。他曾经当面抢人家的船只，船工抓了他，割下一只左耳。
English: When he grew up, he robbed several times in Zhongli. He once robbed someone's boat in front of him. The boatman caught him and cut off his left ear.

古文：后随乡人车骑将军王广之，广之爱其勇，每夜卧下榻，征伐常将自随。
现代文：后来他跟随了本乡人车骑将军王广之，王广之喜爱他英勇，每夜让他睡在自己的下榻，作战时经常带他跟随在身边。
English: Later, he followed the local chariot-riding general Wang Guangzhi. Wang Guangzhi loved him for his bravery and let him sleep in his bed every night. He often took him with him when he went to battle.

古文：频以战功，累迁骠骑司马，封鱼复县伯。
现代文：由于陈伯之连立战功，累迁至骠骑司马，被封为鱼复县伯。
English: As a result of Chen Bozhi's continuous war exploits, he was successively relocated to Zhangjiajie and Sima, and was awarded the title of Yuifu County Bozhi.

古文：梁武起兵，东昏假伯之节，督前驱诸军事、豫州刺史，转江州，据寻阳以拒梁武。
现代文：梁武帝起兵时，东昏侯让陈伯之假持节，都督前驱诸军事、豫州刺史，又转至江州，占据寻阳以对抗梁武帝。
English: When Emperor Liangwu raised an army, Dongwu marquis let Chen Bo's pretense hold the festival, the governor drove forward the military, Yuzhou stabbed history, and then turned to Jiangzhou to occupy Xuanyang to confront Emperor Liangwu.

古文：郢城平，武帝使说伯之，即以爲江州刺史。子武牙爲徐州刺史。
现代文：郢城被讨平后，梁武帝派人劝说陈伯之，当即让他担任江州刺史，他的儿子陈武牙任徐州刺史。
English: After Lucheng was leveled, Emperor Liangwu sent someone to persuade Chen Bozhi to immediately let him serve as the governor of Jiangzhou, and his son Chen Wuga served as the governor of Xuzhou.

古文：伯之虽受命，犹怀两端。
现代文：陈伯之虽然接受了这一任命，却仍心怀两处。
English: Although Chen Bozhi accepted this appointment, he still had two things in mind.

古文：帝及其犹豫逼之，伯之退保南湖，然后归附，与衆军俱下。
现代文：武帝见他犹豫不决，便领兵进逼，陈伯之退保南湖，然后归降，和众军一起东下。
English: Emperor Wu saw that he was indecisive, so he led an army to force Chen Bozhi to retreat to Nanhu Lake, and then he surrendered and went east with the army.

古文：建康城未平，每降人出，伯之辄唤与耳语。
现代文：当时建康城还未平定，每当有人出降时，陈伯之便和他低声耳语。
English: When the dust had not yet settled, whenever someone who had surrendered left the city, Chen Bozhi would call him over and whisper to him.

古文：帝疑其复怀翻覆，会东昏将郑伯伦降，帝使过伯之，谓曰： 城中甚忿卿，欲遣信诱卿，须卿降，当生割卿手脚。
现代文：武帝怀疑他仍存有反复之心。这时，正值东昏侯的将军郑伯伦前来投降，武帝让他去见陈伯之，并对陈伯之说： 城里正对你十分恼怒，准备派人来引诱你，等你投降以后，活活砍掉你的手脚。
English: Emperor Wu suspected that he still harbored feelings of repetition. At this time, General Zheng Bailun, who was in his twilight, came to surrender. Emperor Wu asked him to see Chen Bozhi, and said to Chen Bozhi: The city is very angry with you and is preparing to send someone to lure you, and after you surrender, cut off your hands and feet alive.

古文：卿若不降，复欲遣刺客杀卿。 
现代文：你如果不归降，就要派刺客来杀你。 
English: If you do not surrender, I will send assassins to kill you.

古文：伯之大惧，自是无异志矣。
现代文：陈伯之大为惊慌，从此以后就不再有贰心了。
English: Chen Bozhi was greatly alarmed, and from then on, he no longer felt sick.

古文：城平，封丰城县公，遣之镇。
现代文：城被讨平之后，被封为丰城县公，派他回州镇守。
English: After the city was leveled, he was made Fengcheng County official and sent back to the state as town guard.

古文：伯之不识书，及还江州，得文牒辞讼，唯作大诺而已。
现代文：陈伯之不认识字，当他到江州后，收到公文和有人诉讼时，只是点点头而已。
English: Chen Bozhi doesn't know how to read. When he received official documents and lawsuits after arriving in Jiangzhou, he just nodded his head.

古文：有事，典签传口语，与夺决于主者。
现代文：有事时，由典签传他的口信，办和不办都由主事人决定。
English: In the event of an incident, he would ask the signing officer to transmit his verbal order, and the final decision would be made by the official in charge of the matter.

古文：伯之与豫章人邓缮、永兴人戴承忠并有旧，缮经藏伯之息免祸，伯之尤德之。
现代文：陈伯之和豫章人邓缮、永兴人戴承忠都有旧交情，邓缮还替陈伯之藏过儿子，使之免祸，陈伯之特别感激他。
English: Chen Bozhi had old friendships with Deng Shuang of Yuanzhang and Dai Chengzhong of Yongxing. Deng Shuang had also hidden a son for Chen Bozhi to save him from harm. Chen Bozhi was especially grateful to him.

古文：及在州，用缮爲别驾，承忠爲记室参军。
现代文：当陈伯之到江州后，任用邓缮当别驾，戴承忠当记室参军。
English: When Chen Bozhi arrived in Jiangzhou, he appointed Deng Shuang as his deputy and Dai Chengzhong as his secretary to join the army.

古文：河南褚緭，都下之薄行者，武帝即位，频造尚书范云。
现代文：河南人褚纟胃，是京都中的轻薄儿，梁武帝即位后，他多次去求见尚书范云。
English: Henan people have small stomachs and are light-skinned in Kyoto. After the enthronement of Emperor Liangwu, he repeatedly went to see Shangshu Fanyun.

古文：云不好緭，坚拒之。
现代文：范云很不喜欢褚纟胃，坚决不肯用他。
English: Fan Yun didn't like the stomach cramps very much and resolutely refused to use him.

古文：緭益怒，私语所知曰： 建武以后，草泽底下悉成贵人，吾何罪而见弃。
现代文：褚纟胃更加恼怒，私下对自己的知心者说： 建武年后，那些草泽底下的人都成了贵人，我有什么罪而被弃置不用。
English: Gao Gang was even more angry and said to his confidant in private: After the founding of the People's Liberation Army, those people under the grass became nobles. What is my fault for being abandoned and useless?

古文：今天下草创，丧乱未可知。陈伯之拥强兵在江州，非代来臣，有自疑之意。
现代文：如今天下正是草创之初，丧乱尚未可知，陈伯之在江州拥有重兵，他不是代州来的将领，心中经常生疑。
English: For example, today is the beginning of the grassroots, the turmoil is not yet known, Chen Bozhi has heavy troops in Jiangzhou, he is not a general from Jiangzhou, he often has doubts in his heart.

古文：且复荧惑守南斗，讵非爲我出？
现代文：况且火星守于南斗处，莫非因为我而出现的？
English: Moreover, Mars stays in the Southern Cross, did it appear because of me?

古文：今者一行，事若无成，入魏，何减作河南郡。 
现代文：如今前去，如果大事无成，就到魏国，何能小于河南郡守。 
English: Go ahead now, if nothing happens, go to Wei, how can you be less than the county governor of Henan?

古文：于是投伯之书佐王思穆事之，大见亲狎。
现代文：于是他投奔到陈伯之的书佐王思穆，得以侍奉陈伯之，大受亲宠。
English: So he ran to Chen Bo's subordinate Wang Simu, and was able to serve Chen Bo, and was greatly favored by his relatives.

古文：及伯之乡人朱龙符爲长流参军，并乘伯之愚闇，恣行奸险。
现代文：当时陈伯之的同乡人朱龙符任长流参军，他们一起乘陈伯之愚昧无知，任意作奸恶之事。
English: At that time, Chen Bozhi's fellow villager, Zhu Longfu Ren Changliu, joined the army. Together, they took advantage of Chen Bozhi's ignorance to do evil things.

古文：伯之子武牙时爲直合将军，武帝手疏龙符罪亲付武牙，武牙封示伯之。
现代文：陈伯之的儿子武牙这时任直阁将军，梁武帝写了有关朱龙符罪状的手疏亲自交给武牙，武牙将手疏给陈伯之看。
English: Chen Bozhi's son, Wu Ya, was then the general of Zhougu, and Emperor Liang Wudi wrote a handwriting about Zhu Longfu's crime and personally handed it to Wu Ya. Wu Ya showed the handwriting to Chen Bozhi.

古文：帝又遣代江州别驾邓缮，伯之并不受命，曰： 龙符健儿，邓缮在事有绩。
现代文：武帝又派人来代替江州别驾邓缮。陈伯之不肯听从命令，说道： 朱龙符是个勇士，邓缮在州任事有功绩。
English: Emperor Wu also sent someone to take Deng Shu's place in Jiangzhou. Chen Bozhi refused to obey the order, saying: Zhu Longfu was a warrior, and Deng Shu had distinguished service in the state.

古文：台所遣别驾,请以爲中从事。 
现代文：朝廷所派来的别驾，请改任为中从事。 
English: The courtiers sent by the imperial court, please change your post to middle management.

古文：缮于是日夜说伯之云： 台家府库空竭，无复器仗，三仓无米。
现代文：邓缮于是日夜劝说陈伯之，他说： 朝廷府库空虚，又没有兵器甲仗，三仓中没有米。
English: Deng Shu then spent day and night persuading Chen Bozhi, saying: "The imperial treasury is empty, there are no weapons, and there is no rice in the granaries.

古文：此万世一时，机不可失。 
现代文：这真是万世一时出现的良机啊，机不可失。 
English: This is truly a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity, and it must not be lost.

古文：緭、承忠等每赞成之。
现代文：褚纟胃、戴承忠等也总是加以赞同。
English: Gao Gang, Dai Chengzhong and others always agree with them.

古文：伯之谓缮： 今段啓卿，若复不得，便与卿共下。 
现代文：陈伯之便对邓缮说： 如今前来要你，如果回复不得，便和你一起东下。 
English: Chen Bozhi then said to Deng Xuan: "I've come to ask for you now, and if I don't get a reply, I'll go east with you."

古文：使反，武帝敕部内一郡处缮。
现代文：使者回去之后，武帝让吏部选一个郡来安置邓缮。
English: After the envoy returned, Emperor Wu asked the cadre department to choose a county to resettle Deng Shuang.

古文：伯之于是集府州佐史，谓曰： 奉齐建安王教，率江北义勇十万已次六合，见使以江州见力运粮速下。
现代文：陈伯之于是召集了府州的佐史们，对他们说： 我接到齐建安王的命令，他已率领江北义勇军十万人到达六合，现在命令以江州现有兵力运粮迅速东下。
English: Chen Bozhi then called together the prefectural officials and said to them, "I have received an order from King Qi Jian'an. He has led 100,000 people of the North Jiangsu Volunteer Army to Liuhe, and now he has ordered that the grain be transported quickly to the east with the existing forces in Jiangzhou.

古文：我荷明帝厚恩，誓以死报。 
现代文：我受明帝厚恩，誓以死相报。 
English: I have been blessed by Emperor Ming, and I vow to repay him with my life.

古文：使緭诈爲萧宝寅书以示僚佐，于听事前爲坛，杀牲以盟。
现代文：他又让褚纟胃假造了萧宝寅的书信出示给僚佐们看。他们在官厅前面建坛，杀了牲口盟誓。
English: He also had Gao Ganxin forge Xiao Baoying's letter and show it to his colleagues. They built an altar in front of the government office, killed animals and swore an oath.

古文：伯之先歃，长史以下次第歃。
现代文：陈伯之首先歃血，长史以下官员依次序歃血。
English: Chen Bozhi was the first to draw blood, followed by officials from Changshi down.

古文：緭说伯之： 今举大事，宜引人望。
现代文：褚纟胃对陈伯之说： 如今已举大事，必须任用有名望的人。
English: Hao Gangtuo said to Chen Bozhong, "Nowadays, a big event has been held, and it is necessary to appoint a well-known person.

古文：程元冲不与人同心；临川内史王观，僧虔之孙，人身不恶，可召爲长史，以代元冲。 
现代文：程元冲不能和大家同心，临川内史王观，是僧虔的孙子，为人不错，可召任他为长史，以代替程元冲。 
English: Cheng Yuanchong could not be of the same mind as everyone else. Wang Gu, the grandson of a pious monk in Linchuan, was a good man. He could be appointed as Changshi to replace Cheng Yuanchong.

古文：伯之从之，仍以緭爲寻阳太守，承忠辅义将军，龙符豫州刺史。
现代文：陈伯之听从了，便任命褚纟胃当寻阳太守，戴承忠为辅义将军，朱龙符任豫州刺史。
English: Chen Bozhi obeyed, and then appointed Gao Gang to be the governor of Xuanyang, Dai Chengzhong to be the auxiliary general, and Zhu Longfu to be the governor of Yuzhou.

古文：豫章太守郑伯伦起郡兵拒守。
现代文：豫章太守郑伯伦召集郡兵抵抗。
English: Emperor Yuanzhang's father-in-law, Zheng Bailun, rallied the county soldiers to resist.

古文：程元冲既失职，于家合率数百人，使伯之典签吕孝通、戴元则爲内应。
现代文：程元冲既已失去职务，便回家纠集了几百人，让陈伯之的典签吕孝通、戴元则作为内应。
English: Since Cheng Yuanchong had lost his position, he went home and gathered several hundred people, and asked Chen Bozhi's signature, Lyu Xiaotong, and Dai Yuan to act as inside help.

古文：伯之每旦常作伎，日晡辄卧，左右仗身皆休息。
现代文：陈伯之每天早晨起来练习武艺，日晚就睡觉，身边手持武器的卫士们也都休息了。
English: Chen Bozhi often does some carpentry work in the morning, and sleeps as soon as the sun sets in the evening. His left and right guards are also resting.

古文：元冲因其解弛，从北门入，径至听事前。
现代文：程元冲乘着防守松懈的时候，从北门进入，直到厅堂之前。
English: When Cheng Yuanchong took advantage of the lax defense, he entered from the north gate until before the hall.

古文：伯之闻叫，自率出荡。元冲力不能敌，走逃庐山。
现代文：陈伯之听到喊叫声，亲自率领部下冲杀出来，程元冲难以对抗，逃往庐山。
English: Chen Bozhi heard the shouting and personally led his subordinates to rush out. Cheng Yuanchong was difficult to fight and fled to Shaoshan.

古文：伯之遣使还报武牙兄弟，武牙等走盱眙，盱眙人徐文安、庄兴绍、张显明邀击之，不能禁，反见杀。
现代文：陈伯之派使者回去报告陈武牙兄弟。武牙等从盱眙逃走，盱眙人徐文安、庄兴绍、张显明出来拦击，不能阻止住，反而被杀。
English: Chen Bo sent an emissary back to report Chen Wuya's brothers. Wuya and others fled from Xing, and Xing's men Xu Wen'an, Zhuang Xing'ao, and Zhang Xianming came out to stop them. They could not be stopped, but were killed instead.

古文：武帝遣王茂讨伯之，败走，间道亡命出江北，与子武牙及褚緭俱入魏。
现代文：梁武帝派王茂攻打陈伯之，陈伯之兵败而逃，他们走间道亡命逃往江北，和儿子武牙以及褚纟胃一起到了魏国。
English: Emperor Liangwu sent Wang Mao to attack Chen Bozhi. Chen Bozhi was defeated and fled. They escaped to the north of the Yangtze River, and went to Wei with their son Wu Ya and Gao Gan.

古文：魏以伯之爲使持节、散骑常侍、都督淮南诸军事、平南将军、光禄大夫、曲江县侯。
现代文：魏国任命陈伯之为使持节、散骑常侍、都督淮南诸军事、平南将军、光禄大夫、曲江县侯。
English: The State of Wei appointed Chen Boqin as the envoy of Ji Jie, the cavalryman, the military governor of Huainan, the general of Pingnan, the doctor of Guanglu, and the governor of Qujiang County.

古文：天监四年，诏太尉临川王巨集北侵，巨集命记室丘迟私与之书曰：
现代文：天监四年，梁武帝诏令太尉临川王萧宏北上攻魏，萧宏让记室丘迟私下写信给陈伯之说：
English: In the fourth year of Tianjun, Emperor Liangwu issued an edict ordering Linchuan King Xiaohong to attack Wei from the north. Xiaohong asked Murokawa to privately write to Chen Bozhi, saying:

古文：陈将军足下，无恙，幸甚，幸甚。
现代文： 陈将军足下，别来无恙，有幸之极。
English: Under General Chen's feet, there is nothing to worry about, and he is extremely fortunate.

古文：将军勇冠三军，才爲世出。弃燕雀之毛羽，慕鸿鹄以高翔。
现代文：将军勇冠三军，才为世所重视，鄙视燕雀之毛羽，追慕鸿鹄以高翔。
English: It is only when a general leads three armies to victory that the world takes him seriously. It despises the feathers of the sparrow and admires the soaring wings of the falcon.

古文：昔因机变化，遭遇时主，立功立事，开国称孤，朱轮华毂，拥旄万里，何其壮也！
现代文：昔日随机变化，受遇于时主，建功立事，开国称孤，乘朱轮华毂之车，拥重兵于万里，何等威武雄壮！
English: Random changes in the past, suffered by the master of the time, made great contributions, founded the country alone, took Zhu Lintong's car, held heavy soldiers for thousands of miles, what a mighty and powerful!

古文：如何一旦爲奔亡之虏，闻鸣镝而股战，对穹庐以屈膝，又何劣邪？
现代文：如何一旦成为逃亡之臣虏，听鸣镝而两股战栗，对穹庐而屈膝下跪，又何等低下！
English: How, once a fugitive subject, one shudders to hear the war-cries, and bows the knee to the vault, and how low!

古文：寻君去就之际，非有他故，直以不能内审诸己，外受流言，沈迷猖蹶，以至于此。
现代文：寻求前时你所以去梁就魏之由，并非其他缘故，只因内不能反复思考，外受流言所误，迷惑狂妄，以致于此。
English: The reason why you went to Liang and Wei in the past was not for any other reason, but because you could not think over and over again internally, and were misled by rumors and confused and arrogant externally, resulting in this.

古文：圣朝赦罪责功，弃瑕录用，推赤心于天下，安反侧于万物，此将军之所知，非假仆一二谈也。
现代文： 圣朝赦免罪责，要求立功赎罪，不遗弃有缺点的人，加以任用，推真心于天下，安反侧于万物，此是将军之所知，不需由我一一叙述。
English: The Holy Dynasty forgives sins and responsibilities, requires merit to atone for sins, does not abandon people with shortcomings, appoints them, pushes sincerity to the world, and defers to all things. This is what the general knows, and does not need to be described by me one by one.

古文：昔朱鲔涉血于友于，张绣倳刃于爱子，汉主不以爲疑，魏君待之若旧。
现代文：昔日朱鲔参与杀害刘秀长兄，张绣刺杀了曹操爱子，汉王不使之心疑，魏王待之如故友。
English: In the past, Zhu Xi participated in the killing of Liu Xiu's eldest brother, Zhang Xiu assassinated Cao Cao's beloved son, the Han king did not suspect him, and the Wei king treated him like an old friend.

古文：况将军无昔人之罪，而勋重于当代。
现代文：何况将军没有前人之重罪，而功勋见重于当代。
English: What's more, the general did not have the serious crimes of his predecessors, and his merits were more important than those of his contemporaries.

古文：夫迷涂知反，往哲是与，不远而复，先典攸高。
现代文：迷途而知返，前贤所赞许；不远而复还，先典以为高。
English: The wise men of the past praised those who found their way back after getting lost; those who returned not far away were praised by the ancients.

古文：主上屈法申恩，吞舟是漏。
现代文：主上法网宽大推恩，可漏吞舟之鱼；将军祖坟安然，亲戚安居乐业。
English: The Lord on the net of the law is generous and benevolent, but the fish of the boat can be swallowed; the general's ancestral tomb is safe, and the relatives live and work in peace.

古文：将军松柏不翦，亲戚安居；高堂未倾，爱妾尚在。
现代文：高屋未曾倾覆，爱妾依然健在，悠悠你心，有何可说！
English: The high-rise has not collapsed, your beloved is still alive, your heart is still beating, what can I say!

古文：悠悠尔心，亦何可言。当今功臣名将，雁行有序，佩紫怀黄，赞帷幄之谋；乘轺建节，奉疆埸之任。
现代文：当今朝中功臣名将，如雁飞行，井然有序，佩紫绶而怀金印，谋划于帷幄之中，乘轻车持符节之特使，驰骋于疆场之上。
English: Today's great generals and heroes, like geese flying, move in an orderly manner, wear purple and gold, plan in the curtains, and ride in a light car with a special envoy of the rune festival, galloping on the battlefield.

古文：并刑马作誓，传之子孙。
现代文：皆杀白马以盟誓，传爵位于子孙。
English: They often kill a white horse, take blood and drink it to make a vow, and pass this habit on to their children and grandchildren.

古文：将军独腼顔借命，驱驰毡裘之长，宁不哀哉！
现代文：将军独强颜而偷生，效力于外族之君长，能不可悲！
English: How sad it is for a general to be born with a strong face and work for a foreign monarch!

古文：夫以慕容超之强，身送东市，姚泓之盛，面缚西都。
现代文： 前以慕容超之强，身死于东市；姚泓之兴盛，面缚于长安。
English: Formerly known as Murong Chao, he died in Dongshi; Yao Yao thrived in Chang'an.

古文：故知霜露所均，不育异类，姬汉旧邦，无取杂种。
现代文：故知霜露所布，不育异类；华夏之邦，无取杂种。
English: According to ancient knowledge, it is a sterile heterogeneous species; in the state of China, there are no hybrids.

古文：北虏僭号中原，多历年所，恶积祸盈，理至焦烂。
现代文：北寇僭称帝号于中原，经历多年，恶贯满盈，理应粉身碎骨。
English: The Northern Cossacks called the emperor in the Central Plains, experienced for many years, evil is rampant, it should be crushed.

古文：况僞孽昏狡，自相夷戮，部落携离，酋豪猜贰。
现代文：况伪孽种类，昏庸狡猾，自相残杀，部落分离，豪酋猜疑。
English: There are also types of hypocrisy, deception, cunning, fratricide, separation of tribes, and suspicion of powerful chiefs.

古文：方当系颈蛮邸，县首藳街。
现代文：正应当系其颈项于蛮夷邸舍，悬其首级于藁街之间。
English: It is fitting that his neck should be chained to the mansion of the barbarians, and his head suspended between the streets.

古文：而将军鱼游于沸鼎之中，燕巢于飞幕之上，不亦惑乎！
现代文：而将军却如鱼游于沸腾之油鼎，如燕筑巢于帷幕之上，不也令人迷惑不解吗？
English: Isn't it puzzling that you, General, are as dangerous as a fish swimming in a pot of boiling water, or a swallow building a nest on a flying tent?

古文：暮春三月，江南草长，杂花生树，群鹦乱飞。
现代文： 正是暮春三月，江南绿草正长，杂花生树，群莺乱飞。
English: It was late spring in March, and the green grass in the south of the Yangtze River was growing, there were some peanut trees, and flocks of dragonflies were flying around.

古文：见故国之旗鼓，感生平于畴日，抚弦登陴，岂不怆恨。
现代文：见故国之旗鼓，感生平于昔日，登高以抚弓弦，能不凄然怀恨！
English: See the flag and drum of the motherland, feel the life in the past, climb high to stroke the bowstring, can not bear a grudge!

古文：所以廉公之思赵将，吴子之泣西河，人之情也，将军独无情哉？
现代文：所以廉颇仍思为赵将，吴起哭泣于西河，人之常情，将军独无情吗？
English: So Liangpo still thinks of Zhao Zheng, Wu Qi crying in the West River, human feelings, is the general alone ruthless?

古文：想早励良规，自求多福。
现代文：想应早作谋划，自求后福。
English: We should make plans early and seek happiness later.

古文：当今皇帝盛明，天下安乐，白环西献，楛矢东来，夜郎、滇池解辫请职，朝鲜、昌海蹶角受化；唯北狄野心，掘强沙塞之间，欲延岁月之命耳。
现代文：当今皇帝盛明，天下安乐。白环自西而献，木苦矢从东而来。夜郎、滇池，解发辫以求封职；朝鲜、昌海，叩其首接受教化；惟有北狄仍怀野心，崛起于沙漠边塞之间，苟延若干岁月之命而已。
English: Today's Emperor Shengming, the whole world is at ease. Baihuan from the west, Mukuya from the east. Yelang, Dianchi, to seek the title; North Korea, Changhai, beat his head to accept enlightenment; Only Bei Di still harboring ambitions, rising between the desert border fortress, just prolong the life of several years.

古文：中军临川殿下，明德茂亲，总兹戎重，方吊人洛汭，伐罪秦中，若遂不改，方思仆言。
现代文：中军将军临川王殿下，明于大德，帝室至亲，总督重兵，方救民于洛氵内，伐有罪于秦中，如仍不改悔，此后才详思我之所言。
English: Your Imperial Highness, the general of the Chinese army, King Linchuan, is known for his great virtue, the imperial family is close to him, the governor is a heavy soldier, the party rescuing the people is in Luoyang, and the war criminal is in Qin. If you still do not repent, then think about what I said in detail.

古文：聊布往怀，君其详之。
现代文：聊述情怀，请君详加思虑。 
English: When you talk about your feelings, please be thoughtful.

古文：伯之得书，乃于寿阳拥衆八千归降。
现代文：陈伯之收到信后，便在寿阳带领八千人马归降。
English: After Chen Bozhi received the letter, he led eight thousand horses to surrender in Shouyang.

古文：武牙爲魏人所杀。
现代文：武牙被北魏人杀害。
English: Wu Ya was killed by the Northern Wei.

古文：伯之既至，以爲平北将军、西豫州刺史、永新县侯。
现代文：陈伯之到梁之后，被任命为平北将军、西豫州刺史、永新县侯。
English: After Chen Bozhi arrived in Liang, he was appointed as the general of Pingbei, the governor of West Henan Province, and the governor of Yongxin County.

古文：未之任。复爲骁骑将军，又爲太中大夫。
现代文：他尚未到任，又被任命为骁骑将军，又任太中大夫。
English: He had not yet arrived at his post, but he was also appointed General of Horse and Chariot, as well as Grand Vice-Marshal.

古文：久之，卒于家。
现代文：过了许久，他死于家中。
English: Some time later, Chen Bozhi passed away at home.

古文：其子犹有在魏者。
现代文：他的儿子中还有留在北魏的人。
English: His other sons are still in Wei.

古文：褚緭在魏，魏人欲用之。
现代文：褚纟胃留在魏国，魏人准备任用他。
English: He remained in Wei, and the Wei people were ready to appoint him.

古文：魏元会，緭戏爲诗曰： 帽上着笼冠，緭上着朱衣，不知是今是，不知非昔非。 
现代文：正值魏人举行元日庆会，褚纟胃戏写了一首诗说： 帽上著笼冠，衤夸上著朱衣，不知是今是，不知非昔非。 
English: It was the time when the Wei people held the New Year's Day celebration, and Gao Gang wrote a poem saying: "With a caged crown on his cap, and a red coat on his coat, I don't know if it is now, or if it was in the past.

古文：魏人怒，出爲始平太守。
现代文：魏人看后大为愤怒，只派他出任始平太守。
English: After seeing this, the Wei people were very angry and only sent him to serve as the First Emperor of the Heian period.

古文：日日行猎，堕马而死。
现代文：褚纟胃天天外出打猎，坠马而死。
English: He went out hunting every day, fell off his horse and died.

