古文：郭祚张彝郭祚，字季祐，太原晋阳人，魏车骑郭淮弟亮后也。
现代文：郭祚，字季祐，太原晋阳人，魏车骑将军郭淮弟弟郭亮的后代。
English: Guo Qi, Ji Yu, Taiyuan Jinyang people, descendants of the Wei chariot riding general Guo Huai's brother Guo Liang.

古文：祖逸，州别驾，前后以二女妻司徒崔浩，一女妻浩弟上党太守恬。
现代文：祖郭逸，任州别驾，前后以两个女儿嫁司徒崔浩为妻，一个女儿嫁给崔浩弟弟上党太守崔恬。
English: Guo Yu's ancestor Guo Yu, who was appointed by the state, married two daughters to the priest Cui Hao, and one daughter married Cui Hao's younger brother, the former Party Secretary Cui Wei.

古文：世祖时，浩亲宠用事，拜逸徐州刺史，假榆次侯，终赠光禄大夫。
现代文：世祖时，崔浩受宠用事，拜郭逸为徐州刺史，假榆次侯，终赠光禄大夫。
English: At the time of the founding father, Cui Hao was favored, and Guo Yat was worshiped as the history of Xuzhou, and Guo Yat was the second-in-command, and eventually he was given the title of Guanglu doctor.

古文：父洪之，坐浩事诛，祚亡窜得免。
现代文：父郭洪之，因崔浩事发牵连被诛，郭祚逃亡在外，得以免死。
English: Guo Hongzhi, father of Guo Hongzhi, was arrested as a result of the Cui Hao incident. Guo Hao escaped and was able to avoid death.

古文：少而孤贫，姿貌不伟，乡人莫之识也。
现代文：郭祚少时孤贫，其貌不扬，乡人没人认识他。
English: Guo Yao was poor when he was young, his appearance was unimpressive, and no one in the village knew him.

古文：有女巫相祚，后当富贵。
现代文：有名女巫给他看相说日后当富贵。
English: A famous witch told him that he would be rich one day.

古文：祚涉历经史，习崔浩之书，尺牍文章见称于世。
现代文：郭祚博涉经史，习崔浩之书，尺牍文章见称于世。
English: Guo Gan's exposition of classic historical books, study of Cui Hao's books, letters and articles are famous in the world.

古文：弱冠，州主簿，刺史孙小委之书记。
现代文：刚成年，任州主簿，刺史孙小任他为书记。
English: He was just a year old when he was appointed as the state's chief accountant, with Shisun as his secretary.

古文：又太原王希彦，逸妻之侄，共相周恤，得以饶振。
现代文：又太原王希，是徐逸妻的侄儿，与他互相照应，二人得以出名。
English: Another Taiyuan Wang Xi was the nephew of Xu Yizhe's wife. He and Wang Xi took care of each other, and the two became famous.

古文：高祖初，举秀才，对策上第，拜中书博士，转中书侍郎，迁尚书左丞，长兼给事黄门侍郎。
现代文：高祖初年，郭祚被举为秀才，对策处上第，朝廷拜授他为中书博士，转任中书侍郎，迁任尚书左丞，长兼给事黄门侍郎。
English: In the first year of Gaozu, Guo Jie was promoted to be an outstanding talent, the countermeasures department was promoted to the first, the court awarded him the title of Doctor of Chinese Literature, he was transferred to the post of Secretary of Chinese Literature, transferred to the post of Senior Secretary of Chinese Literature, and appointed to the post of Secretary of Huangmen.

古文：祚清勤在公，夙夜匪懈，高祖甚知赏之。
现代文：郭祚对公事清正勤勉，日夜不懈，高祖很是欣赏他。
English: Guo Wei is very diligent in business affairs, and he works tirelessly day and night. Gao Zu really appreciates him.

古文：从高祖南征，及还，正黄门。
现代文：跟从高祖南征，还朝之后，转任正黄门。
English: He followed Gao Zu to the Southern Expedition, and after returning to China, he was transferred to Zhenghuangmen.

古文：车驾幸长安，行经渭桥，过郭淮庙，问祚曰： 是卿祖宗所承邪？ 
现代文：皇帝车驾幸临长安，行经渭桥，经过郭淮庙，帝问郭祚说： 这是爱卿的祖庙？ 
English: The emperor's car drove happily to Chang'an, passing the Yingqiao Bridge and passing Guo Huai Temple. The emperor asked Guo Hui, "Is this the ancestral temple of Ai Qing?

古文：祚曰： 是臣七世伯祖。 
现代文：郭祚说： 这是臣七世伯祖。 
English: He replied, "He is my seventh great-uncle."

古文：高祖曰： 先贤后哲，顿在一门。 
现代文：高祖说： 先贤后哲，尽出一门。 
English: Gao Zu said: The sages and philosophers are all from the same family.

古文：祚对曰： 昔臣先人以通儒英博，唯事魏文。微臣虚薄，遭奉明圣，自惟幸甚。 
现代文：郭祚回答说： 过去臣先人以通儒英博，只事魏文，微臣虚薄，得奉明圣，自思十分幸运。 
English: Guo Wei replied, "In the past, our predecessors were gifted with profound knowledge of Confucianism and English literature, but they were only able to write in Wei and Wei script. Weak and feeble, they were awarded the title of Fengming and Sheng, and they considered themselves very fortunate.

古文：因敕以太牢祭淮庙，令祚自撰祭文。
现代文：皇帝下诏以太牢祭祀祖庙，让郭祚自写祭文。
English: Emperor Xiaowen ordered to use the most precious offerings made of cattle, sheep and pigs to worship Guo Huai Temple, and let Guo Wei himself write the ritual.

古文：以赞迁洛之规，赐爵东光子。
现代文：帝又因郭祚辅赞迁都洛阳的功劳，赐给他东光子爵位。
English: Soon after, he was knighted as Dongguangzi for his participation in the plan to move the capital to Luoyang.

古文：高祖曾幸华林园，因观故景阳山。祚曰： 山以仁静，水以智流，愿陛下修之。 
现代文：高祖曾经幸临华林园，观看旧的景阳山，郭祚说： 山以仁静，水以智流，愿陛下好自修之。 
English: Gao Zu once had the good fortune to visit the Hualin Garden and see the old Jingyang Mountain. Guo Wei said, "The mountain is benevolent and tranquil, the water is wise and flowing. May His Majesty cultivate it well."

古文：高祖曰： 魏明以奢失于前，朕何为袭之于后？ 
现代文：高祖说： 魏明帝因奢失于前，朕我为什么步其后尘？ 
English: Gao Zu said, "Wei Mingdi is ahead because of his extravagance, why should I follow in his footsteps?

古文：祚曰： 高山仰止。 
现代文：郭祚说： 高山仰止。 
English: Guo Yu sighed, "It really is like being in the mountains."

古文：高祖曰： 得非景行之谓？ 
现代文：高祖说： 这是不是指身行影从？ 
English: Gaozu said, "Does this mean that you are a ghost?"

古文：迁散骑常侍，仍领黄门。
现代文：迁官散骑常侍，仍然领黄门职。
English: Guo Jian was promoted to the position of straggler's equerry and still held the position of Huangmen.

古文：是时高祖锐意典礼，兼铨镜九流，又迁都草创，征讨不息，内外规略，号为多事。
现代文：当时，高祖锐意典礼，兼考检群官，又加上迁都洛阳，百业草创，征战不息，内政外务，十分繁杂。
English: At that time, the ceremony of Gao Zu Rui Yi, and the examination of officials, coupled with the relocation of the capital to Luoyang, the creation of a hundred industries, the continuous war, and the internal and external affairs, were very complicated.

古文：祚与黄门宋弁参谋帏幄，随其才用，各有委寄。
现代文：郭祚与黄门宋弁参与谋划。按其才能，各有委任。
English: Guo Wei and Huangmen Song Ben participated in the planning. According to their talents, each was appointed.

古文：祚承禀注疏，特成勤剧。
现代文：郭祚负责承禀注疏之类文字工作，特别勤勉。
English: Guo Gan was in charge of annotating the scriptures, and he finally completed this arduous and complicated task.

古文：尝以立冯昭仪，百官夕饮清徽后园，高祖举觞赐祚及崔光曰： 郭祚忧劳庶事，独不欺我；崔光温良博物，朝之儒秀。
现代文：皇帝曾因立冯昭仪，百官晚上在清微后园饮宴的机会，高祖举杯酒赐给郭祚以及崔光说： 郭祚忧劳众事，忠心于朕；崔光温良博物，为朝中隽秀。
English: The emperor once granted Feng Zhaoyi and hundreds of officials the opportunity to have a banquet in the evening in the Qingwei backyard. Gao Zu raised a glass of wine and gave it to Guo Gan and Cui Guang, saying: Guo Gan is worried about all kinds of work and is loyal to me; Cui Guang is a warm-hearted naturalist and is a brilliant person in the court.

古文：不劝此两人，当劝谁也？ 
现代文：朕不劝这两个人的酒，那该劝谁的呢？ 
English: If I can't persuade these two to drink, who can I persuade?

古文：其见知若此。
现代文：二人被皇帝是如此看重。
English: He was so valued by Emperor Xiaowen.

古文：初，高祖以李彪为散骑常侍，祚因入见，高祖谓祚曰： 朕昨误授一人官。 
现代文：当初，高祖任命李彪为散骑常侍，郭祚因入见皇帝，高祖对郭祚说： 朕昨天误授一个人的官职。 
English: At the beginning, Gaozu appointed Li Biao as his equestrian aide-de-camp. Because Guo Yu had an audience with the emperor, Gaozu said to Guo Yu: I mistakenly conferred an official position on someone yesterday.

古文：祚对曰： 陛下圣镜照临，论才授职，进退可否，黜陟幽明，品物既彰，人伦有序。岂容圣诏一行而有差异？ 
现代文：郭祚回答说： 陛下您圣镜照临，论才授职，官员进退与否，黜升幽明，品物既彰，人伦有序，何至于容圣诏颁行而有差异。 
English: Guo Wei replied, "Your Majesty, your holy mirror is shining, and there are differences in the conferring of posts, the promotion and demotion of officials, the rise and fall of officials, the quality of goods, and the orderliness of personal relationships.

古文：高祖沉吟曰： 此自应有让。因让，朕欲别授一官。 
现代文：高祖沉吟说： 这应该有推让，如李彪推让，朕就打算另给他授一官职。 
English: Gao Zu paused and said, "There should be a concession. If Li Biao makes a concession, I plan to give him another official post."

古文：须臾，彪有启云： 伯石辞卿，子产所恶。臣欲之已久，不敢辞让。 
现代文：不一会，李彪出启说： 伯石辞卿，子产所恶，臣想要这个官职已经很久，不打算辞让。 
English: After a while, Li Biao came out and said: "Bo Shi Jieqing, your son-in-law is evil. The minister has wanted this post for a long time and does not intend to give it up.

古文：高祖叹谓祚曰： 卿之忠谏，李彪正辞，使朕迟回不能复决。 
现代文：高祖叹着气对郭祚说： 你的忠谏，李彪的咄咄正辞，使朕迟疑不能决定。 
English: Gao Zu sighed and said to Guo Yao: Your loyalty, Li Biao's sincere words, made me hesitate and unable to decide.

古文：遂不换彪官也。
现代文：于是不换李彪的官职。
English: Therefore, he did not change Li Biao's official position.

古文：乘舆南讨，祚以兼侍中从，拜尚书，进爵为伯。
现代文：皇帝乘舆南讨，郭祚以兼侍中职跟从皇帝，又被拜为尚书，晋爵为伯。
English: Emperor Xiaowen led the Southern Expedition, and Guo Jie followed as an attendant. He was also appointed as Shangshu, and received the title of Shangjie.

古文：高祖崩，咸阳王禧等奏祚兼吏部尚书，寻除长兼吏部尚书、并州大中正。
现代文：高祖逝世，咸阳王元禧等人启奏郭祚兼任吏部尚书，不久除任长兼吏部尚书、并州大中正。
English: After the death of Gaozu, Guo Zhen was appointed to the post of the secretary of the administrative department by King Yuanxi of Xianyang and others. He was soon removed from the post of the president and secretary of the administrative department, and became the vice-president of the state university.

古文：世宗诏以奸吏逃刑，悬配远戍，若永避不出，兄弟代之。
现代文：魏世宗下诏因奸吏逃刑，决定把他们流放到边疆，如若他们永避不出，兄弟代受刑罚。
English: Emperor Wei Shizong decreed that traitors who evaded punishment should be exiled to the frontier. If they could not escape forever, their brothers should be punished in their place.

古文：祚奏曰： 慎狱审刑，道焕先古；垂宪设禁，义纂惟今。
现代文：郭祚启奏说： 慎狱审刑，道昭先古；垂章设禁，义纂惟今。
English: Guo Rongqi said: Shun prison and trial punishment, Tao Zhaoxian is ancient; hanging is forbidden, and Yizhong is only now.

古文：是以先王沿物之情，为之轨法；故八刑备于昔典，奸律炳于来制，皆所以谋其始迹，访厥成罪，敦风厉俗，永资世范者也。
现代文：所以先王循按人情物理，为之立法，故而八种刑罚备于昔典，查奸之律彰于来制，都是按照所犯罪行，量刑定罪，这是为了敦风厉俗，永为世范。
English: Therefore, the former king legislated in accordance with the laws of human nature. Therefore, the eight kinds of punishments were prepared in the ancient classics, and the law of investigation and punishment was promoted in the modern system. All of them were in accordance with the crimes committed, the sentencing and conviction. This was to keep up with the times and be a model for the world.

古文：伏惟旨义博远，理绝近情，既怀愚异，不容不述。
现代文：臣考虑皇旨博远，理绝近情，为臣既有愚蠢的不同看法，不容不讲述出来。
English: A vassal should consider that the emperor's will is far-reaching and the truth is close at hand. Since a vassal has a foolishly different opinion, it is not permissible not to tell about it.

古文：诚以败法之原，起于奸吏，奸吏虽微，败法实甚。
现代文：的确，败坏法律的根源，是由于奸吏作怪，奸吏身份虽微，败坏法律的行为实在很厉害。
English: Indeed, the root cause of the corruption of the law is due to the mischief-making of the traitors. Although the identity of the traitors is small, the act of corrupting the law is very serious.

古文：伏寻诏旨，信亦断其逋逃之路，为治之要，实在于斯。
现代文：臣寻思皇诏之旨，的确是为了断其遁逃之路，治理要决，确实在此。
English: The intention of the imperial edict was indeed to cut off his escape route, and it was indeed here that the governance had to be decided.

古文：然法贵止奸，不在过酷，立制施禁，为可传之于后。
现代文：然而法贵止奸，不在过于严酷，制定法律，还可为后世范式。
English: However, it is not too harsh to enact laws to stop treason, and it can also be a model for future generations.

古文：若法猛而奸不息，禁过不可永传，将何以载之刑书，垂之百代？
现代文：假如法律太猛而奸诈不息，禁止罪过而法不能传，那拿什么载于刑书，垂示百代？
English: If the law is too violent and treacherous, if the prohibition of crime is too strong and the law cannot be passed on, then what is written in the book of punishments, to be handed down for a hundred generations?

古文：若以奸吏逃窜，徙其兄弟；罪人妻子，复应徙之。此则一人之罪，祸倾二室。
现代文：如果因奸吏逃窜，兄弟顶罪，罪人的妻儿又应随之定罪，这就会是一人之罪，祸殃二家。
English: If, because of a traitor's flight, a brother is condemned, and the wife and children of the sinner are also condemned, this will be the sin of one man, and the woe of two families.

古文：愚谓罪人既逃，止徙妻子，走者之身，悬名永配，于眚不免，奸途自塞。 
现代文：愚臣认为罪人既逃，就当让妻儿连罪，逃走的人，悬名永配，过失永不赦免，这样做奸之途自然塞住了。 
English: The foolish minister thought that if a sinner escaped, his wife and children should also be punished. Those who ran away would be condemned forever, and their misdeeds would never be pardoned. By doing so, the way of treachery was naturally blocked.

古文：诏从之。
现代文：帝下诏从之。
English: He complied.

古文：寻正吏部。
现代文：不久，郭祚转正吏部。
English: Soon after, Guo Jun was transferred to the General Staff Department.

古文：祚持身洁清，重惜官位，至于铨授，假令得人，必徘徊久之，然后下笔。下笔即云： 此人便以贵矣。 
现代文：郭祚立身高洁清廉，珍惜重视官位，至于授予官职，如果得到一人，必定会考虑很久，然后才行下笔，下笔就说： 此人从此就走上显贵之途了。 
English: Guo Jian stood tall, clean and incorruptible, cherishing and valuing official positions. As for the granting of official positions, if one person is awarded, he will certainly consider it for a long time before writing the next sentence, and the next sentence will say: This person has since embarked on the path to prominence.

古文：由是事颇稽滞，当时每招怨讟。
现代文：由于这，办事速度颇慢，当时很是招了些怨愤。
English: As a result, matters were often delayed, leading to complaints at the time.

古文：然所拔用者，皆量才称职，时又以此归之。
现代文：但是他所选拔录用的，都量才称职，当时人们又因此称赞他。
English: However, he was given credit for selecting the best people for the job.

古文：出为使持节、镇北将军、瀛州刺史。
现代文：出任使持节、镇北将军、瀛州刺史。
English: He was appointed as the envoy of the festival, the general of Zhenbei and the historian of Zhangzhou.

古文：及太极殿成，祚朝于京师，转镇东将军、青州刺史。
现代文：等太极殿建成，郭祚到京师朝拜，转任镇东将军、青州刺史。
English: After the completion of the Taiji Hall, Guo Gan went to Beijing to pay homage, and was appointed as the general of Zhendong and the historian of Qingzhou.

古文：祚值岁不稔，阖境饥敝，矜伤爱下，多所赈恤，虽断决淹留，号为烦缓，然士女怀其德泽，于今思之。
现代文：郭祚任地方官职时，逢上收成不好，全境饥荒，他伤惜优抚百姓，多有赈济，虽然他处理事务不快，很是烦缓，但是当地人民到今天还怀念他的恩泽。
English: When Guo Wei served as a local official, there was a bad harvest and famine in the whole territory. He took pity on the people and took care of them, and provided them with much aid. Although he was not happy to deal with affairs and was very slow, the local people still miss his grace to this day.

古文：入为侍中、金紫光禄大夫、并州大中正，迁尚书右仆射。
现代文：入朝为侍中、金紫光禄大夫、并州大中正，迁任尚书右仆射。
English: He entered the imperial court as a chamberlain, a doctor of the Golden Purple Light and Gold, and a junior high school teacher of the State University, and was transferred to the post of Shoshu right-hand man.

古文：时议定新令，诏祚与侍中、黄门参议刊正。
现代文：当时朝廷正在议定新律，帝诏让郭祚与侍中、黄门参议勘正。
English: At that time, a new decree was agreed upon, and Guo Gan was ordered to discuss and confirm it with the chamberlains and the Yellow Gate.

古文：故事，令、仆、中丞驺唱而入宫门，至于马道。
现代文：旧例，令、仆、中丞入宫时引马骑卒传呼开道而入宫门，直到马道。
English: The Imperial Court's old practice: the emperor, his servants, and junior courtiers rode on horseback, and were summoned to the palace by courtiers. They could go to the horse-drawn carriage.

古文：及祚为仆射，以为非尽敬之宜，言于世宗，帝纳之。下诏： 御在太极，驺唱至止车门；御在朝堂，至司马门。 
现代文：等到郭祚任仆射，认为这不是尽敬皇上的行为，就跟世宗提了出来，帝接受了他的意见，下诏说： 皇御在太极殿，臣上朝传呼开道止于止车门；皇御在朝堂，止于司马门。 
English: When Guo Junren's servant shot him, thinking that this was not an act of complete respect for the emperor, he brought it up with Shizong. The emperor accepted his opinion and issued the following edict: The emperor is in the Taiji Hall, and the vassal's call to the emperor to open the way stops at the carriage door; the emperor is in the court, and stops at the Sima Gate.

古文：驺唱不入宫，自此始也。
现代文：传呼开道不入宫，由此开始。
English: If you can't do it in the court, start here.

古文：诏祚本官领太子少师。
现代文：帝诏郭祚以本官领太子少卿。
English: Under the imperial edict, the imperial court ordered Guo Jun to take up his former official position as the prince's junior teacher.

古文：祚曾从世宗幸东宫，肃宗幼弱，祚怀一黄出奉肃宗。
现代文：郭祚曾跟从世宗幸临东宫，肃宗幼弱，郭祚怀揣一黄瓜出奉肃宗。
English: Guo Gan once followed Shizong Xinglin to the East Palace, Su Zong was young and weak, Guo Gan carried a cucumber to honor Su Zong.

古文：时应诏左右赵桃弓与御史中尉王显迭相脣齿，深为世宗所信，祚私事之。
现代文：当时应诏皇帝左右赵桃弓与御史中尉王显互相援引，深受世宗宠幸，郭私下里巴结他们。
English: At that time, Zhao Taoyuan and Wang Xian, the lieutenant of the imperial historian, invoked each other at the request of the emperor. They were deeply favored by Shizong, and Guo privately patronized them.

古文：时人谤祚者，号为桃弓仆射、黄少师。
现代文：当时人毁谤他的，称他为桃弓仆射、黄瓜少师。
English: At that time, people slandered him, calling him Peach Bow Shooter, Cucumber Young Master.

古文：祚奏曰： 谨案前后考格虽班天下，如臣愚短，犹有未悟。
现代文：郭祚启奏说： 臣谨案前后考查格式虽然能甄别天下之士，而臣愚短，还有不明白的地方。
English: Guo Junqi said: Although the format of examination before and after the examination can distinguish the world's people, and the minister is stupid, there are still some incomprehensible places.

古文：今须定职人迁转由状，超越阶级者即须量折。
现代文：现在必须定职的人的迁官转职由其情况而定，超越阶等的即须量情处置。
English: Now, it is necessary to determine the circumstances of the promotion of officials, and those who exceed the official rank should be reduced.

古文：景明初考格，五年者得一阶半。
现代文：景明初年的考官格式，五年可升一阶半。
English: According to the standard set in the first year of Jingming, it takes five years to rise one and a half levels.

古文：正始中，故尚书、中山王英奏考格，被旨：但可正满三周为限，不得计残年之勤。
现代文：正始年间，故尚书、中山王元英奏启考格，受旨：只依可正满三周年为限，不能计残年之勤。
English: At the beginning of the year, Shangshu and Zhongshan Wangyuan Yingzhu, who played the role of Kaige, received the order: only the third anniversary could be counted, and the remaining years could not be counted.

古文：又去年中，以前二制不同，奏请裁决。
现代文：又去年中，因以前二制不同，奏请皇上裁决。
English: In the middle of last year, due to the difference between the previous two systems, the emperor's ruling was requested.

古文：旨云： 黜陟之体，自依旧来恆断。 
现代文：帝旨说： 升降体式，只依以前格式裁断。 
English: The emperor's edict said, "For ascending and descending styles, only cut according to the previous format."

古文：今未审从旧来之旨，为从景明之断，为从正始为限？
现代文：而今不知以前格式，是随从景明年间的断决办法，还是随正始格式？
English: And now I don't know the previous format, is it a decision between following the scene next year, or following the original format?

古文：景明考法：东西省文武闲官悉为三等，考同任事；而前尚书卢昶奏上第之人三年转半阶。
现代文：景明年考检官员的办法，东西省文武闲官都分三等，考同任事，而前尚书卢昶启奏上第之人三年转升半阶。
English: According to the method of examination for officials next year, the civil and military officials of the eastern and western provinces will be divided into three grades, and the examination will be the same, and the person who was the first in the previous year will be promoted to the second grade in three years.

古文：今之考格，复分为九等，前后不同，参差无准。 
现代文：现在的考格，又分为九等，前后不同，错落无依。 
English: The current inspection standard is divided into nine levels, with different explanations and no fixed standard.

古文：诏曰： 考在上中者，得泛以前，有六年以上迁一阶，三年以上迁半阶，残年悉除。
现代文：帝下诏说： 考绩在上中的，升职办法，有六年以上的，迁升一阶，三年以上迁升半阶，残年都去除。
English: The imperial edict issued by the imperial court said: if the performance appraisal is higher than that of a junior high school, the previous situation can be taken into account; if the post has been held for more than six years, it will be promoted to the first grade, and if it has been held for more than three years, it will be promoted to the half grade, and the extra years will not be counted.

古文：考在上下者，得泛以前，六年以上迁半阶，不满者除。
现代文：政绩考核在上下的，六年以上迁升半阶，不满六年的不计。
English: For those whose performance appraisal is lower or higher, the previous situation can be taken into account, and those who have been in office for more than six years can be promoted by half a grade; those who have not been in office for less than six years can be counted in the next inspection.

古文：其得泛以后，考在上下者，三年迁一阶。
现代文：其职满期以后考绩在上下的，三年迁升一阶。
English: After the expiration of his term of office, if his performance appraisal is lower or higher, he shall be promoted to the next level within three years.

古文：散官从卢昶所奏。 
现代文：散官按卢昶所奏方法实行。 
English: Sankan is performed according to the method of Lu Xun.

古文：祚又奏言： 考察令：公清独著，德绩超伦，而无负殿者为上上，一殿为上中，二殿为上下，累计八殿，品降至九。
现代文：郭祚又启奏说： 考察令：公正清廉独著，德行治绩超常，而不负朝廷嘱托的为上上，一等的为上中，二等的为上下，共计八等，品级降幅有九等。
English: Guo Wei also said in his opening speech: Inspection order: the most just and clean, the most virtuous, the most extraordinary performance, and the one that does not bear the order of the imperial court is the upper, the first is the upper middle, and the second is the upper and lower, a total of eight grades, and the grade decline is nine grades.

古文：未审今诸曹府寺，凡考：在事公清，然才非独著；绩行称务，而德非超伦；干能粗可，而守平堪任；或人用小劣，处官济事，并全无负殿之徒为依何第？
现代文：不知现今诸曹府寺，凡考：理事公清，但才干并非十分突出；才干称职，但德行并不出众；干才大略可以，而守平堪任；或者才能稍差，处官应事，并不是全都提不上等级的人依照哪一条？
English: I don't know, but at present, all the temples in Caofu have the following tests: the director is fair and clean, but the talent is not very outstanding; the talent is competent, but the virtue is not outstanding; the talent is roughly acceptable, and the person is able to keep a level head; or the talent is slightly inferior, the official is in charge of affairs, and not all people are not up to the grade, according to which one?

古文：景明三年以来，至今十有一载，准限而判，三应升退。
现代文：景明三年以来，至今已有十一年，按原规定的期限而判，应有三次升退官员了。
English: Since the third year of Jingming, it has been eleven years so far. According to the original deadline, there should have been three promotions and retirements of officials.

古文：今既通考，未审为十年之中通其殿最，积以为第，随前后年断，各自除其善恶而为升降？
现代文：而今臣通查一过，不知为十年之中通其等级，积以为第，是否随其前后年代分别，各自区别善恶而定升降？
English: But now, once the vetting is over, I don't know if it's the middle of the decade when the vetting is at its highest level, accumulating to the first, whether it will rise and fall according to the years before and after, and according to the difference between good and evil?

古文：且负注之章，数成殿为差，此条以寡愆为最，多戾为殿。
现代文：况且过失的条章，数成落后为差，这条以少过为最，多失为后。
English: Moreover, the fault of the article, the number of backward is poor, this one with less than the most, more loss for the latter.

古文：未审取何行是寡愆？
现代文：不知取什么是少过？
English: I don't know what is less?

古文：何坐为多戾？
现代文：依什么为多先？
English: How far in advance?

古文：结累品次，复有几等？
现代文：累计品级，又有几等？
English: Cumulative grade, how many grades are there?

古文：诸文案失衷，应杖十者为一负。
现代文：官员的诸文案失踪，应杖罚十下为一负。
English: If an official's documents go missing, he or she will be punished with ten strokes of the cane.

古文：罪依律次，过随负记。
现代文：罪依律条，过失随其付记。
English: Sin is according to the law, and guilt is according to the law.

古文：十年之中，三经肆眚，赦前之罪，不问轻重，皆蒙宥免。
现代文：十年之中，三经赦失，赦前之罪，不问轻重，都蒙宽免。
English: During the ten years, the three amnesties and the sins before the amnesty, no matter how serious, were all forgiven.

古文：或为御史所弹，案验未周，遇赦复任者，未审记殿得除以不？ 
现代文：或者被御史弹劾，查验不实，遇赦复职的，不知记等还能除任与否？ 
English: Or was he impeached by history, found to be untruthful, pardoned and reinstated, and I don't know if he can be removed from office?

古文：诏曰： 独者、超伦及才备、寡咎，皆谓文武兼上上之极言耳。
现代文：帝诏说： 独著、超常以及才备、少过，都是文武兼上上之极的。
English: Emperor Xuanzang said: "Independent authorship, extraordinary ability, talent, and modesty are the best of the best in literature and martial arts.

古文：自此以降，犹有八等，随才为次，令文已具。
现代文：由此以降，还有八等，随才为序，令文已备。
English: After this, there are eight grades, in order of precedence, the order is ready.

古文：其积负累殿及守平得济，皆含在其中，何容别疑也？
现代文：其政绩较差以及政绩平平的情况，都包含在其中，何容另外产生怀疑呢。
English: His poor political performance and mediocre political performance are included in this, so how can there be any doubt?

古文：所云通考者，据总多年之言；至于黜陟之体，自依旧来年断，何足复请？
现代文：所说的通考，意指累年政绩，至于升降格式依照惯例决断，不用又请制定。
English: As for the promotion and relegation format, it is decided in accordance with the usual practice, and there is no need to formulate it.

古文：其罚赎已决之殿，固非免限，遇赦免罪，惟记其殿，除之。 
现代文：那些惩罚已定的政绩差劲的，本来就是这个范围之内的，遇大赦免罪，只记述其殿等，任官。 
English: Those who punish the poor performance of the government, which has already been decided, are originally within this scope. In the case of a great pardon, only their palace, etc. are recorded.

古文：寻加散骑常侍。
现代文：不久，加授郭祚为散骑常侍。
English: Not long after, Guo Jun was appointed as a horseback riding attendant.

古文：时诏营明堂国学。祚奏曰： 今云罗西举，开纳岷蜀；戎旗东指，镇靖淮荆；汉沔之间，复须防捍。
现代文：当时帝诏营建明堂国学，郭祚启奏说： 而今大军西举，开纳岷蜀；戎旗东指，镇靖淮、荆；汉水、沔水之间又须防守保卫。
English: At that time, Emperor Xuanzong was engaged in the construction of the Ming Hall of the Chinese Academy of Sciences, and Guo Rongqi said, "Nowadays, the great army is moving westward, and the capital is in Shoushu; the military flag is pointing eastward, and the towns are Jinghuai and Jing; and the Han River and the Bohai River must be defended and protected.

古文：征兵发众，所在殷广，边郊多垒，烽驿未息，不可于师旅之际，兴板筑之功。
现代文：征兵发众，实在是多了，郊边多垒，烽火未息，不可在战争之际，又兴土木之功。
English: There are too many conscripts, too many bases in the suburbs, and the bonfires have not yet been extinguished. It is not possible to build civil engineering projects at the time of war.

古文：且献岁云暨，东作将始，臣愚量谓宜待丰靖之年，因子来之力，可不时而就。 
现代文：而且冬去春来，春作将始，为臣愚见认为应当等丰收之后，百姓有效忠急公之心，明堂国学便可即刻成就。 
English: Moreover, as winter turned to spring and the spring harvest was about to begin, the vassals foolishly thought that they should wait until after the harvest, and the people had a strong sense of loyalty to the emperor. Ming Tang's study of Chinese classics could be accomplished immediately.

古文：从之。
现代文：帝从之。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：世宗末年，每引祚入东宫，密受赏赉，多至百余万，杂以锦绣。
现代文：世宗末年，皇帝常常引郭祚入东宫，密受赏赐，多至百余万，杂以绫纟罗绸缎。
English: In the last years of his reign, the emperor often invited Gu Guo into the East Palace, where he was lavishly rewarded with gifts of up to one million rupees, mixed with silk and silk brocade.

古文：又特赐以剑杖，恩宠甚深，迁左仆射。
现代文：又特别赐予剑与杖，恩宠很深，迁任左仆射。
English: In addition, he was specially given a sword and a staff. His grace was very deep, and he was transferred to the position of left-handed archer.

古文：先是，萧衍遣将康绚遏淮，将灌扬徐。祚表曰： 萧衍狂悖，擅断川渎，役苦民劳，危亡已兆。
现代文：这以前，萧衍派将康绚遏阻淮水，准备淹灌扬州、徐州，郭祚上表说： 萧衍狂悖，擅自截断河水，工程很苦，民众不堪，危亡征兆已经显出。
English: Prior to this, Xiao Yan's faction had blocked the Huai River and prepared to flood Yangzhou and Xuzhou. Guo Gan said on the table: Xiao Yan was crazy, cut off the river without authorization, the project was very difficult, the people were unbearable, and the signs of danger had already appeared.

古文：然古谚有之， 敌不可纵 。
现代文：但是古谚有 敌不可纵 的话。
English: But there's an old saying: "Enemies never prosper."

古文：夫以一酌之水，或为不测之渊；如不时灭，恐同原草。
现代文：夫以一瓢之水，也许会成为不测之渊，如不及时剪灭，恐怕会后果不堪设想。
English: A husband with a bucket of water may become an abyss of unpredictability. If it is not cut off in time, I am afraid that the consequences will be unimaginable.

古文：宜命一重将，率统军三十人，领羽林一万五千人，并科京东七州虎旅九万，长驱电迈，遄令扑讨。
现代文：陛下应该命一重将，率领统军三十人，领羽林一万五千人，并调京东七州虎旅九万人，长驱电迈，火速令其扑讨。
English: His Majesty should appoint a general with a heavy burden of responsibility to lead the unified army of 30 people, lead 15 thousand people to Uebayashi, and transfer 90 thousand people to the Beijing East seven-state tiger brigade, drive them away, and quickly make them fight.

古文：擒斩之勋，一如常制，贼资杂物，悉入军人。
现代文：擒斩之勋，一如常制，敌人辎重杂物，都交军人。
English: As usual, the honor of beheading, as well as the enemy's heavy debris, were all handed over to the soldiers.

古文：如此，则鲸鲵之首可不日而悬。
现代文：像这样，则贼凶之首用不了多长时间就可高高悬起。
English: Like this, it doesn't take long for the head of the thief to hang high.

古文：诚知农桑之时，非发众之日，苟事理宜然，亦不得不尔。
现代文：为臣的确清楚，农桑之时，不是发兵之日，但假如事情深有道理，那也就不得不这样了。
English: It is indeed clear to the minister that the time of Nongsang is not the day to send troops, but if the matter is deeply justified, then it will have to be so.

古文：昔韦顾跋扈，殷后起昆吾之师；玁狁孔炽，周王兴六月之伐。
现代文：过去韦、顾跋扈，殷后起昆吾之师；犭严狁乱起，周王兴六月之伐。
English: In the past, Wei, Gu Biao, and Yin later became the teachers of Kunwu; Yan Yan and Zhou Wang Xing were the leaders of the June Campaign.

古文：臣职忝枢衡，献纳是主，心之所怀，宁敢自嘿。
现代文：微臣身处机要之地，提出建议是臣的责任，为臣心中有什么想法，怎么敢默而不献。
English: A minor vassal is in an important position. It is the vassal's responsibility to make suggestions. If a vassal has any thoughts in his heart, how dare he remain silent?

古文：并宜敕扬州选一猛将，遣当州之兵令赴浮山，表里夹攻。 
现代文：陛下一并应敕扬州选择一名猛将，派当州之兵赶赴浮山，表里夹攻。 
English: His majesty should also choose a fierce general from Yangzhou and send soldiers from Yangzhou to rush to Fushan to attack.

古文：朝议从之。
现代文：朝议接受了这个建议。
English: The court agreed with him.

古文：出除使持节、散骑常侍、都督雍岐华三州诸军事、征西将军、雍州刺史。
现代文：朝廷出除郭祚的使持节、散骑常侍，都督雍、岐、华三州诸军事、征西将军、雍州刺史。
English: The imperial court expelled Guo Jun's envoys, horsemen, governors-general of Yong, Qi, and Huasanzhou, generals of the Western Expedition, and Yongzhou's chief historian.

古文：太和以前，朝法尤峻，贵臣蹉跌，便致诛夷。
现代文：太和以前，朝廷刑法尤其严酷，显贵臣僚稍有差失，便常常遭杀头之罪。
English: Two thousand years ago, the imperial court's legal discipline was very strict, and if a minister made a mistake, he would be killed.

古文：李冲之用事也，钦祚识干，荐为左丞，又兼黄门。
现代文：李冲掌握朝政，钦佩郭祚的学识才干，推荐他为左丞，又兼任黄门郎。
English: Li Chong mastered the court politics, admired Guo Qi's academic ability, recommended him as the left-hand man, and also served as Huangmen Lang.

古文：意便满足，每以孤门往经崔氏之祸，常虑危亡，苦自陈挹，辞色恳然，发于诚至。
现代文：郭祚便觉得心满意足，经常因家中以前曾经历崔氏之祸，总担心会遭危险灭亡，苦自陈诉，言词恳切，发自内心。
English: Guo Wei then felt satisfied with his heart, often because he had previously experienced the evil of Cui in his family, always worried that he would be in danger of dying, painstakingly made a complaint, and his words were sincere and from the heart.

古文：冲谓之曰： 人生有运，非可避也。但当明白当官，何所顾畏。 
现代文：李冲对他说： 人生有运数，是无法躲避的，你只管清白当官，有什么可害怕的。 
English: Li Chong said to him: Life is full of misfortune, it is unavoidable, you just need to be a clean official, there is nothing to be afraid of.

古文：自是积二十余年，位秩隆重，而进趋之心更复不息。
现代文：从此二十多年，官位俸禄都很隆重，而求进之心越发滋长。
English: Since then, for more than 20 years, the official salary has been very grand, and the desire to advance has grown more and more.

古文：又以东宫师傅之资，列辞尚书，志在封侯、仪同之位，尚书令、任城王澄为之奏闻。
现代文：又以东宫师傅的资本，看不上尚书之职，志在封侯、仪同之位，尚书令、任城王元澄替他上奏请位。
English: He also took advantage of the capital of the master of the Donggong Palace to rise to the post of Shangshu, aspiring to the position of vassal, and Shangshu, and appointed the king of the city, Yuancheng, to play the role of Shangshu.

古文：及为征西、雍州，虽喜于外抚，尚以府号不优，心望加大，执政者颇怪之。
现代文：等到为征西将军、雍州刺史，郭祚虽很高兴外任，但尚以府号不优，愿望越发大起来，执政的人颇觉奇怪。
English: By the time he became the general of the Western Conquest and the chief historian of Yongzhou, although Guo Gan was very happy to be appointed to an outside post, he still did not have a good prefectural title, and his desire grew stronger and stronger. The people in power found this rather strange.

古文：于时，领军于忠恃宠骄恣；崔光之徒，曲躬承奉。祚心恶之，乃遣子太尉从事中郎景尚说高阳王雍，令出忠为州。忠闻而大怒，矫诏杀祚，时年六十七。
现代文：这时，领军于忠恃宠骄横，崔光这些人，卑躬奉承他，郭祚很讨厌他，于是派太尉从事中郎景尚说服高阳王元雍，令于忠出任州职，于忠听说大怒，矫诏杀害郭祚，当时郭祚六十七岁。
English: At this time, the leader of the army favored the arrogant Yuzhong, the people of Cui Guang groveled and flattered him, and Guo Gan hated him very much, so he sent the captain to engage in the middle-man Jing Shang to persuade the high-ranking Wang Yuan Yong to appoint Yuzhong to the state post, and Yuzhong heard that he was very angry and killed Guo Gan. At that time, Guo Gan was 67 years old.

古文：祚达于政事。凡所经履，咸为称职；每有断决，多为故事。
现代文：郭祚通达政事，凡是他经历的职务，都很称职，每有裁断，都有旧例可依。
English: Guo Juntong reached government affairs, and all the positions he experienced were very competent. For every decision, there are old examples to follow.

古文：名器既重，时望亦深，一朝非罪见害，远近莫不惋惜。
现代文：名位既重，声望也深，一旦无辜被害，远近时人无不惋惜。
English: Fame is both important and prestigious, and once an innocent person is killed, people both near and far will regret it.

古文：灵太后临朝，遣使吊慰，追复伯爵。
现代文：灵太后临朝，派使者前去吊慰，追复伯爵之位。
English: The Dowager Empress Dowager Rinchen Dorjee Rinpoche sent an emissary to offer condolences and restore the count's position.

古文：正光中，赠使持节、车骑将军、仪同三司、雍州刺史，谥文贞公。
现代文：正光年间，朝廷赠他为使持节、车骑将军、仪同三司、雍州刺史，谥称文贞公。
English: During the reign of Zheng Guang, the imperial court gave him the titles of Zhi Ji Jie, General of Chariots and Cavalry, General of Ceremonies, General of the Three Departments, and General of Yongzhou, and he was nicknamed "Wen Zhen Gong."

