古文：钱若水苏易简郭贽李至辛仲甫王沔温仲舒王化基钱若水，字澹成，一字长卿，河南新安人。
现代文：钱若水字澹成，又字长卿，河南新安人。
English: Qian Ruoxi, also known as Changqing, was from Xin'an, Henan Province.

古文：父文敏，汉青州帅刘铢辟为录事参军，历长水禜都尉、扶风令、相州录事参军。
现代文：其父钱文敏，被后汉青州节度刘铢征召为录事参军，历任长水酆都尉、扶风令、相州录事参军。
English: His father, Qian Wenmin, was called up to join the army as a recorder by Liu Xi, the post-Han Qingzhou governor, and successive governors, such as Captain Shuiyan, Commander Fu Feng, and Recorder of Xiangzhou, also joined the army.

古文：先是，府帅多以笔牍私取官库钱，韩重赟领节制，颇仍其弊。
现代文：从前，节度常用手书私自取用官府钱，韩重斌贝任节制，沿袭这套做法。
English: In the past, it was common for officials to use their own money to pay for their travel expenses. Han Chongbin Bei followed this practice.

古文：文敏不从，重赟假他事廷责之，文敏不为屈。
现代文：文敏不遵从，重斌贝借别的事当廷责罚他，文敏没有屈服。
English: Wenmin did not comply, and Chongbin Bei used other matters to punish him in court. Wenmin did not give in.

古文：太祖嘉其有守，授右赞善大夫、知泸州，召见讲武殿，谓曰： 泸州近蛮境，尤宜绥抚。
现代文：太祖喜欢他有节操，任命他为右赞善大夫、知泸州，在讲武殿召见他，对他说： 泸州接近蛮境，尤其应当抚慰。
English: The great-grandfather liked him for his self-restraint, appointed him as the Right Zanzan Good Doctor, Zhishu, summoned him to the lecture hall, and said to him: Zhishu is close to the barbarian frontier, and should be especially comforted.

古文：闻知州郭思齐、监军郭重迁掊敛不法，恃其荒远，谓朝廷不知尔。
现代文：听说知州郭思齐、监军郭重迁苛敛不法，凭着荒远，以为朝廷不知道。
English: It is said that Guo Siqi of Chizhou and Guo Ju Qian, the inspector of the Guo Ju Qian, were harsh and lawless, and thought that the imperial court did not know because of the distance.

古文：至，为朕鞫之，苟一毫有侵于民，朕必不赦。 至郡，有政迹，夷人诣阙借留。
现代文：如果有一毫侵扰百姓，我一定不会赦免他们。 到任后，有政绩，夷人到朝廷借留他。
English: If there is anyone who disturbs the people, I will certainly not pardon them. After taking office, there are political achievements, and people go to the imperial court to borrow him.

古文：诏改殿中丞，许再任。
现代文：诏令改任殿中丞，允许再任。
English: By imperial decree, he was reappointed to the post of Imperial Junior Secretary, and he was allowed to be reappointed.

古文：三迁司封员外郎，又知洺州、建昌军。
现代文：三次升迁任司封员外郎，又任知氵名州、建昌军。
English: He was promoted three times to the position of Sifu Jian Gairo, and was also appointed to Zhishan, Mingshou and Jianchang Army.

古文：卒，年七十二。
现代文：去世，终年七十二岁。
English: He was 72 when he died.

古文：若水幼聪悟，十岁能属文。
现代文：若水年幼时聪颖，十岁能写文章。
English: If water is clever when young, it can write articles at the age of ten.

古文：华山陈抟见之，谓曰： 子神清，可以学道；不然，当富贵，但忌太速尔。 雍熙中，举进士，释褐同州观察推官，听决明允，郡治赖之。
现代文：华山陈抟见了他，对他说： 你精神清朗，可以学道；否则，应当富贵，但忌讳太快。 雍熙年间，考中进士，任同州观察推官，处理政事公允，郡里依赖他得到治理。
English: Huashan Chen Qi saw him and said to him: You have a clear spirit, you can learn the Tao; otherwise, you should be rich and noble, but the taboo is too fast. During the reign of Yong Xi, he was a candidate for the middle school entrance examination, he was appointed as an observer and adjudicator of Tongzhou, he dealt with political affairs fairly, and the county relied on him to be governed.

古文：淳化初，寇准掌选，荐若水洎王扶、程肃、陈充、钱熙五人文学高第，召试翰林，若水最优，擢秘书丞、直史馆。
现代文：淳化初年，寇准掌管选举，推荐若水及王扶、程肃、陈充、钱熙五人为文学高第，召试翰林，若水最优，提升为秘书丞、直史馆。
English: In the first year of Chunhua, Guo Jian presided over the election, recommended five people, namely, Ruoshui, Wang Fu, Cheng Su, Chen Chong and Qian Xi, to be the members of the Literature High School, summoned Han Lin, Ruoshui was the best, and promoted him to the position of secretary and the director of the History Museum.

古文：岁余。迁右正言、知制诰。
现代文：一年多后，升任右正言、知制诰。
English: A little more than a year later, he was promoted to the posts of Ujishogen and Chiseiho.

古文：会置理检院于乾元门外，命若水领之。
现代文：正好在乾元门外设置理检院，命令若水兼管。
English: Just outside the gate of Qianyuan, the physical examination institute was set up, and the order was given to control both water and sewage.

古文：俄同知贡举，加屯田员外郎。诏诣原、盐等州制置边事，还奏合旨，翌日改职方员外郎、翰林学士，与张洎并命。
现代文：不久同知贡举，加任屯田员外郎，诏令他到原、盐等州处理边事，回朝汇报符合圣意，第二天改任职方员外郎、翰林学士，与张洎一同受命。
English: Soon after, Tongzhi gave tribute and was appointed to the additional post of Tondenkangairao. He was ordered to go to Hara, Yan and other prefectures to deal with peripheral matters and report back to the emperor in accordance with the holy will. The next day, he was appointed to the post of Fangkangangangairao and Hanlin Baccalaureate, together with Zhang Xi.

古文：俄知审官院、银台通进封驳司。
现代文：不久任知审官院、银台通进封驳司。
English: Soon after, he was appointed to the Court of Chancery, and then to the Sealing Division of the Bank of Taiwan.

古文：尝草赐赵保忠诏，有云： 不斩继迁，开狡兔之三穴，潜疑光嗣，持首鼠之两端。 太宗大以为当。
现代文：曾经草拟赐给赵保忠的诏书，有句话： 不斩继迁，开狡兔之三穴；潜疑光嗣，持首鼠之两端。 太宗认为非常适当。
English: He once drafted an edict to be given to Zhao Baozhong, which included the following sentence: "Do not cut off the line of succession, open the three holes of the cunning rabbit; suspect the heir, hold the two ends of the head of the rat."

古文：至道初，以右谏议大夫同知枢密院事。
现代文：至道初年，以右谏议大夫同知枢密院事。
English: In the first year of the Tao, he was promoted to the position of Doctor of the Right Hand and Doctor of the Privy Council.

古文：真宗即位，加工部侍郎。数月，以母老上章，求解机务，诏不许。
现代文：真宗即帝位，加任工部侍郎，几月后，因母亲年老上章请求解去机务之职，诏令不同意。
English: A few months later, because of his mother's old age, he asked to be relieved of his duties as chief priest, but the imperial edict did not agree.

古文：若水请益坚，遂以本官充集贤院学士、判院事。
现代文：若水坚持请求，于是以本官充任集贤院学士、判院事。
English: If Wakamizu insisted on his request, he was appointed as a member of the Academy of Confucianism.

古文：俄诏修《太宗实录》，若水引柴成务、宗度、吴淑、杨亿同修，成八十卷。
现代文：不久奉诏修撰《太宗实录》，若水推荐引用柴成务、宗度、吴氵叔、杨亿同修，写成八十卷。
English: Soon after the edict was issued, "The True Record of Taizong" was compiled by Zhao Xiu, and it was recommended by Ruoshui and quoted by Chai Chengmu, Zongdu, Wu Shunshu, and Yang Yibai, and it was written in eighty volumes.

古文：真宗览书流涕，锡赉有差。
现代文：真宗览书流涕，分别加以赏赐。
English: The books of the True Sect were read aloud, and they were awarded separately.

古文：初，太宗有畜犬甚驯，常在乘舆左右。
现代文：当初，太宗有条畜犬非常驯良，常在身旁。
English: At first, Taizong's dog was very docile and often stayed by his side.

古文：及崩，呜号不食，因送永熙陵寝。
现代文：太宗去世后，这只犬号哭不食，于是送到永熙陵寝殿。
English: After the death of Emperor Taizong, this dog cried and refused to eat, so it was sent to the Yongxi Mausoleum.

古文：李至尝咏其事，欲若水书之以戒浮俗，若水不从。
现代文：李至曾经为这件事作诗，想求若水书写以戒浮俗，若水不办。
English: Li Zhi once wrote a poem about this matter. He wanted to ask Ruo Shu to write a book to banish vulgarity, but Ruo Shu would not do it.

古文：吕端虽为监修，以不莅局不得署名，至抉其事以为专美。
现代文：吕端虽然是监修，因为不到场不得署名，李至挑出这件事认为若水独任美名。
English: Although Lü Duan was the supervisor, because he was not allowed to sign without being present, Li Zhi singled out this matter and thought that if the water was the only beauty.

古文：若水称诏旨及唐朝故事以折之，时议不能夺。
现代文：若水引诏旨及唐朝旧例来回答他，当时舆论不能改变。
English: If Shui cited the imperial edict and the Tang Dynasty's old cases to answer him, then public opinion could not be changed.

古文：既又重修《太祖实录》，参以王禹偁、李宗谔、梁颢、赵安仁，未周岁毕。安仁时为宗正卿，上言夔王于太宗属当为兄，《实录》所纪缪误。
现代文：后来又重修《太祖实录》，参用王禹翶、李宗谔、梁颢、赵安仁，不满一年完成，安仁当时任宗正卿，上言说夔王是太宗的哥哥，《实录》所记谬误。
English: Later, he revised "The True Record of King Taizong" and used Wang Ufan, Li Zonglu, Liang Hui, and Zhao Anren. It took less than a year to complete. Anren was then serving as Zong Zhengqing, and the above statement said that King Bao was the elder brother of King Taizong, a fallacy recorded in the "True Record."

古文：若水援国初诏令，廷诤数四乃定。
现代文：若水援引国初诏令，在朝廷争论再三才定下来。
English: When Wakamizu invoked the Imperial Edict of the First Year of the Joseon Dynasty, the dispute was repeatedly settled in the Imperial Court.

古文：俄判吏部流内铨。
现代文：不久任判吏部流内铨。
English: He was soon appointed as a magistrate.

古文：从幸大名，若水陈御敌安边之策，有曰：
现代文：跟从皇上到大名，若水陈述御敌安边三策，有这样的话：
English: Following from the emperor to the daimyo, Wakamizu stated three measures to keep the enemy safe, such as:

古文：孙武著书，以伐谋为主；汉高将将，以用法为先。
现代文：孙武著兵书，以谋划为主；汉高祖统率将领，以用法为先。
English: Sun Wu, the author of the Book of Soldiers, was mainly concerned with planning; Henkel, the ancestor of the Han Dynasty, led the generals, with usage as the first step.

古文：伐谋者，以将帅能料敌制胜也；用法者，以朝廷能赏罚不私也。
现代文：谋划所以将帅能料敌制胜；用法所以朝廷能赏罚不私。
English: Strategy is why a skillful commander can defeat the enemy; usage is why the imperial court can reward and punish unselfishly.

古文：今傅潜领雄师数万，闭门不出，坐视边寇俘掠生民，上孤委注之恩，下挫锐师之气，盖潜辈不能制胜，朝廷未能用法使然也。
现代文：现在傅潜率领数万雄师，闭门不出战，坐视边寇俘掠百姓，上负委用之恩，下挫锐师之气，是因为傅潜等人不能料敌制胜，朝廷不能用法制裁导致的啊。
English: Now, Fu Qian is leading tens of thousands of soldiers, not going to war behind closed doors, watching the border robbers capture and plunder the people, and losing the grace of being appointed and the spirit of being a sharp teacher. This is because Fu Qian and others can't predict the enemy's victory, and the court can't use legal sanctions.

古文：军法，临阵不用命者斩。
现代文：军中法律，临阵不听命令者斩。
English: According to military law, those who disobey orders in the heat of battle will be beheaded.

古文：今若斩潜以徇，然后擢如杨延朗、杨嗣者五七人，增其爵秩，分授兵柄，使将万人，间以强弩，分路讨除，孰敢不用命哉？
现代文：现在如果诛杀傅潜示众，然后提升如杨延朗、杨嗣这样的人五至七个，增加他们的爵禄，分别授以兵权，使他们每人统率万人，间杂强弩射手，分路进讨，谁敢不听从命令？
English: Now, if the order to kill Fu is revealed to the public, and then five to seven people such as Yang Yanlang and Yang Zhi are promoted, their peerage is increased, and they are separately granted military power, so that each of them can lead ten thousand people, and there are strong sharpshooters, who dare not disobey the order?

古文：敌人闻我将帅不用命，退则有死，岂独思遁，抑亦来岁不敢犯边矣。
现代文：敌人听见我方将帅无不听从命令，退则就死，岂止只想逃跑，甚至来年不敢侵犯边疆。
English: When the enemy hears that our generals will obey orders and retreat or die, they will not only want to escape, but even dare not invade the border next year.

古文：如此则可以坐清边塞，然后銮辂还京，天威慑于四海矣。
现代文：如此就可以坐着扫清边塞，然后挽车回京城，天威慑服四海。
English: In this way, you can sit and clear the border, and then turn back to the capital, and the sky will cover the four seas.

古文：臣尝读前史，周世宗即位之始，刘崇结敌入寇，敌遣其将杨衮领骑兵数万，随崇至高平。当时懦将樊爱能、何徽等临敌不战，世宗大陈宴会，斩爱能等，拔偏将十余人，分兵击太原。
现代文：我曾经读过前代史书，周世宗即位之初，刘崇勾结敌人侵犯内地，敌人派其将领杨衮率领数万骑兵，跟随刘崇到高平，当时懦将樊爱能、何徽等人临敌不战，世宗大摆宴会，诛斩爱能等人，提拔偏将十几人，分兵进攻太原。
English: I once read a history book of the previous generation. At the beginning of Zhou Shizong's accession to the throne, Liu Chong colluded with the enemy to invade the inland. The enemy sent his general Yang Kun, who led tens of thousands of cavalry, to follow Liu Chong to Gaoping. At that time, the cowardly generals such as Zou Ai Neng and He Hui did not fight against the enemy, Shizong held a grand banquet, and Zou Shizong killed Ai Neng and others, promoted more than a dozen generals, and sent troops to attack Taiyuan.

古文：刘崇闻之，股慄不敢出，即日遁去。
现代文：刘崇听说后，畏惧不敢出战，当天逃走。
English: After hearing this, Liu Chong was too afraid to fight and fled the same day.

古文：自是兵威大振。
现代文：从此兵威大振。
English: Since then, the military's prestige has been greatly shaken.

古文：其后收淮甸，下秦、凤，平关南，特席卷尔。
现代文：后来收复淮甸，攻克秦、凤，平定关南，只如卷席罢了。
English: Later, the recovery of HuaiDian, the conquest of Qin and Feng, and the pacification of GuanNan were just like a roll call.

古文：以陛下之神武，岂让世宗乎？
现代文：以陛下之神武，难道不如世宗吗？
English: With His Majesty's divine power, isn't it better to follow the world's tradition?

古文：此今日御敌之奇策也。
现代文：这是当今御敌的奇策啊。
English: This is the strategy of today's enemy.

古文：若将来安边之术，请以近事言之，太祖朝制置最得其宜。
现代文：说到将来安边之术，请允许我用近来事情说明，太祖朝处理得最适宜。
English: When it comes to the future of the policy of appeasement, please allow me to use recent events to illustrate that the Taizu era handled it in the most appropriate manner.

古文：止以郭进在邢州，李汉超在关南，何继筠在镇定，贺惟忠在易州，李谦溥在隰州，姚内斌在庆州，董遵诲在通远军，王彦升在原州，但授缘边巡检之名，不加行营部署之号，率皆十余年不易其任。
现代文：只以郭进在邢州，李汉超在关南，何继筠在镇定，贺惟忠在易州，李谦溥在隰州，姚内斌在庆州，董遵海在通远军，王彦升在原州，只授以缘边巡检之名，不加行营部署之号，大抵都十余年不换任。
English: Only Guo Jin in Zhangzhou, Li Hanchao in Guannan, He Jizhe in Puding, He Weizhong in Yizhou, Li Qianyao in Zhangzhou, Yao Nebin in Gyeongju, Dong Zunhai in Tongyuan, Wang Yansheng in Wonju, only awarded the name of border patrol, without the number of battalion deployment, mostly do not change jobs for more than ten years.

古文：立边功者厚加赏赉，其位皆不至观察使。
现代文：立下边功者多加赏赐，其官都不超过观察使。
English: Those who perform meritorious deeds on the frontier are given more rewards, and their posts do not exceed that of an observer.

古文：盖位不高则朝廷易制，任不易则边事尽知。
现代文：官位不高则朝廷容易控制，任职不变则边事尽知。
English: If the official rank is not high, the imperial court is easy to control, and if the position is unchanged, the side matters are well known.

古文：然后授以圣谋，来则掩杀，去则勿追，所以十七年中，北边、西蕃不敢犯塞，以至屡使乞和，此皆陛下之所知也。
现代文：然后授给他们谋略，敌人来就掩杀之，敌人逃去就不要追击，所以十七年中，北部边疆、西部蕃族不敢侵犯边塞，以致多次派使求和，这都是陛下知道的。
English: Then he gave them a strategy: when the enemy comes, kill him; when the enemy flees, do not pursue him. Therefore, for seventeen years, the Yi people in the northern and western borderlands did not dare to invade the border fortress, so they repeatedly sent envoys to sue for peace. His Majesty knows all this.

古文：苟能遵太祖故事，慎择名臣，分理边郡；罢部署之号，使不相统辖；置巡检之名，俾递相救应。
现代文：如果能遵照太祖旧例，慎重选择名臣，分别管理边郡；罢去部署的称号，使他们互不统辖；设立巡检的职名，使他们互相救应。
English: If we can follow the ancient practice of the great-grandfathers, carefully select eminent courtiers, and separately manage the border counties; remove the titles of deployment, so that they do not control each other; establish the title of inspection, so that they can help each other.

古文：如此则出必击寇，入则守城，不数年间，可致边烽罢警矣。
现代文：如此则出战必打败敌人，入城则能固守，不要几年，可使边烽没有警报。
English: In this way, if you go out to fight, you will surely defeat the enemy, and if you enter the city, you will be able to hold fast, and it will not take several years, so that there is no alarm at the border.

古文：俄知开封府。
现代文：不久任知开封府。
English: He was soon appointed to Chikaifu-fu.

古文：时北边未宁，内出手札访若水以策。
现代文：当时北部边境不宁静，宫内传出皇帝手札访求若水的计策。
English: At that time, the northern border was not tranquil, and the palace was rumored to have a strategy of the emperor's handwritten card asking for a visit to Wakamizu.

古文：若水陈备边之要有五：
现代文：若水陈述备边的关键有五条：
English: There are five keys to preparing for a watery presentation:

古文：一曰择郡守，二曰募乡兵，三曰积刍粟，四曰革将帅，五曰明赏罚。
现代文：一是选择郡守，二是招募乡兵，三是积聚粮草，四是革新将帅，五是明确赏罚。
English: The first is the selection of county governors, the second is the recruitment of rural soldiers, the third is the accumulation of grain and grass, the fourth is the innovation of generals, and the fifth is the clear reward and punishment.

古文：何谓择郡守？
现代文：什么是选择郡守？
English: What is the County Governor's Choice?

古文：今之所患，患在战守不同心。
现代文：当今之患，患在战守不同心。
English: The trouble today is that there is no unity in the war effort.

古文：望陛下选沉厚有谋谙边事者，任为边郡刺史，令兼缘边巡检，许召勇敢之士为随身部曲。
现代文：希望陛下选择沉厚有边事谋略者，任为边郡刺史，令他兼任缘边巡检，允许他招募勇敢之士为随身部队。
English: It is hoped that His Majesty will choose a deep-rooted strategist who is familiar with border affairs, appoint him as a border county historian, make him concurrently serve as a border patrol, and allow him to recruit brave men as accompanying troops.

古文：廪赡不充则官为支给。
现代文：费用不足则官府为他支付。
English: If the fee is insufficient, the government will pay it for him.

古文：然后严亭障，明斥候，每得事宜，密相报示。
现代文：然后加固亭障，加强侦察，每得事宜，秘密地互相报告。
English: Then strengthen the pavilion barrier, strengthen the reconnaissance, and report to each other in secret on all matters.

古文：寇来则互为救应，齐出讨除；寇去则不令远追，各务安静。
现代文：敌人攻来则互相救应，齐出讨敌；敌人逃走则不要远追，各务安静。
English: When the enemy attacks, they should help each other and fight against the enemy; when the enemy escapes, they should not chase far away, and all affairs should be quiet.

古文：苟无大过，勿为替移；傥立微功，就加爵赏。
现代文：如果没有大过错，不要替换；一旦立下小功，就加以赏赐。
English: If there is no big mistake, don't replace it; if there is a small mistake, reward it.

古文：如此则战守必能同心，敌人不敢近塞矣。
现代文：如此则战守必能同心，敌人不敢接近边塞。
English: In this way, the defenders will be able to work as one, and the enemy will not dare to approach the fortress.

古文：何谓募乡兵？
现代文：什么是招募乡兵呢？
English: What is the purpose of recruiting rural soldiers?

古文：今之所患，患在不知敌情。
现代文：当今之患，患在不知敌情。
English: The trouble today is that we don't know the enemy.

古文：望诏逐州沿边民为招收军，给与粮赐，蠲其赋租。
现代文：希望诏令沿边各州招收百姓为军士，给与粮食，免去其租赋。
English: It is hoped that the edict will encourage the provinces along the border to recruit civilians as sergeants, give them grain, and exempt them from rent.

古文：彼两地之中，各有亲族，使其怀惠，来布腹心。
现代文：他们在两地各有亲戚，使他心怀感激，布下心腹。
English: They both have relatives in both countries, which makes him feel grateful and close to them.

古文：彼若举兵，此必预知，苟能预知，则百战百胜矣。
现代文：敌人如果用兵，他就能预先知道，如果能预先知道，就能百战百胜。
English: If the enemy uses soldiers, he can know in advance, and if he knows in advance, he can win every battle.

古文：何谓积刍粟？
现代文：什么是积聚粮草呢？
English: What is the accumulation of grain and grass?

古文：今之所患，患在困民力。
现代文：当今之患，患在民力受困。
English: Today's problem is that the people's power is in trouble.

古文：望陛下令缘边各广营田，以州郡长官兼其使额，每岁秋夏，较其课程，立鼓旗以齐之，行赏罚以劝之。
现代文：希望陛下缘边各自广为营田，以州郡长官兼任营田使，每年秋夏两季，检验成果，立下目标，实行赏罚加以劝勉。
English: It is hoped that His Majesty's provinces and counties will be widely used for yakitori, with the prefect of the prefecture and county concurrently serving as the yakitori envoy. Every autumn and summer, the results of the inspection will be examined, goals will be set, and rewards and punishments will be implemented to dissuade.

古文：仍纵商人入粟缘边。
现代文：并且雇商人运粟到边境。
English: They also hire traders to transport the poppies to the border.

古文：傥镇戍有三年之备，则敌人不敢动矣。
现代文：如果镇守部队有三年的粮食储备，敌人就不敢轻动了。
English: If the garrison has three years of grain reserves, the enemy will not dare to move.

古文：何谓革将帅？
现代文：什么是革新将帅呢？
English: What is innovation?

古文：今之所患，患在重兵居外，轻兵居内。
现代文：当今之患，患在重兵居外，轻兵居内。
English: Today's trouble is that the heavy soldiers are outside and the light soldiers are inside.

古文：去岁傅潜以八万骑屯中山，魏、博之间镇兵全少，非銮辂亲征，则城邑危矣。
现代文：去年傅潜把八万骑兵驻屯在中山，魏、博之间守兵极少，不是御驾亲征，则城邑危险。
English: Last year, Fu Qian stationed 80,000 cavalry in Zhongshan, and there were very few guards between Wei and Bo. If they were not recruited personally, the city would be in danger.

古文：望陛下慎选将臣任河北近镇，仍依旧事节制边兵，未能削部署之名，望且减行营之号；有警则暂巡边徼，无事则却复旧藩。
现代文：希望陛下慎重选择将领担任河北各地节度，仍依旧制节制边兵，不能削去部署之名，希望减去行营之号；有危险则暂时巡边，无事则仍回旧镇。
English: It is hoped that His Majesty will carefully select generals to serve as border guards in various parts of Hebei, and will still control the border guards. The name of the deployment cannot be removed, and it is hoped that the name of the camp will be subtracted; if there is danger, it will temporarily patrol the border, and if there is no problem, it will still return to the old town.

古文：岂惟不启戎心，况复待劳以逸。如此则不失备边之要，又无举兵之名，且使重兵不屯一处，进退动静，无施不可矣。
现代文：不仅不启戎心，又能以逸待劳，如此则不失备边之要义，又无兴师之名，并且使重兵不驻屯在一处，进退动静，无施不可。
English: Not only does it not arouse the military spirit, but it can also be used as an excuse to wait for labor. In this way, it does not lose the essence of preparation, and there is no name of the entertainer, and the heavy soldiers are not stationed in one place, the advance and retreat are static, and there is no need to do anything.

古文：何谓明赏罚？
现代文：什么是明确赏罚呢？
English: What is a clear reward and punishment?

古文：今之所患，患在戎卒骄惰。
现代文：当今之患，患在戎卒骄惰。
English: Today's affliction is pride in the military.

古文：臣自知府以来，见侍卫、殿前两司送到边上亡命军卒，人数甚多。
现代文：我自从主持府政以来，看到侍卫、殿前两司送到边疆的逃走的军卒，人数很多。
English: Since I have presided over the prefectural government, I have seen a large number of escaping soldiers who were sent to the frontier by the guards and the two divisions in front of the palace.

古文：臣试讯之，皆以思亲为言，此盖令之不严也。
现代文：我曾经审讯他们，他们都以思亲为念，这是命令不严啊。
English: I once interrogated them, and they all said they were thinking of their relatives, which is a lax order.

古文：平时尚敢如此，况临大敌乎？
现代文：平时尚敢如此，况且面临大敌呢？
English: How dare fashion do this, especially in the face of a great enemy?

古文：望陛下以此言示将帅，俾申严号令，以警其下。
现代文：希望陛下把这个情况告诉将领，使他们申严号令，以警诫部下。
English: I hope that His Majesty will inform the generals of this situation, so that they will issue strict orders to warn their subordinates.

古文：古人云： 赏不劝谓之止善，罚不惩谓之纵恶。 又曰： 法不可移，令不可违。 臣尝闻郭进出镇西山，太祖每遣戍卒，必谕之曰： 汝等谨奉法。
现代文：古人说 ：赏赐不能劝勉是阻止善行，责罚不能惩诫是放纵恶行。 又说 ：法不可移，令不可违。 我曾经听说郭进出镇西山，太祖每次遣送戍卒，一定告诉他们说 ：你们要严谨守法。
English: The ancients said: "To reward without exhortation is to discourage good deeds, and to punish without discipline is to indulge in evil deeds." They also said: "The law cannot be moved, and the order cannot be violated." I once heard that Guo entered and left the town of Xishan, and every time the great-grandfather sent his servants, he must tell them: "You must strictly abide by the law."

古文：我犹赦汝，郭进杀汝矣。 其假借如此，故郭进所至，未尝少衄。
现代文：我还可以赦免你们，郭进会杀掉你们啊。 其号令之严如此，故郭进所到，从未失手。
English: I can still pardon you, Guo Jin will kill you. His orders are so strict, so Guo Jin never misses a beat.

古文：陛下能鉴前日之事，即今日之元龟也。
现代文：陛下能借鉴前日旧事，就是今日的吉祥啊。
English: If His Majesty can learn from the previous day's events, then today will be auspicious.

古文：若水又言： 边部用兵，唯视太白与月为进退者，诚以太白者将军也，星辰者廷尉也。
现代文：若水又说：边疆用兵，只有看太白和月亮为进退，因为把太白当作将军，把星辰当作廷尉。
English: Wakamizu also said: When using soldiers on the frontier, only Taibai and the moon can be seen as advances and retreats, because Taibai is regarded as a general, and the stars are regarded as courtiers.

古文：合则有战，不合则无战；合于东则主胜，合于西则客胜。
现代文：太白与月亮相合就出战，太白与月亮不合就不战；相合在东边守者就胜，相合在西边攻者就胜。
English: If Taibai coincides with the moon, he will go to war; if Taibai does not coincide with the moon, he will not go to war; if they coincide in the east, the defenders will win, and if they coincide in the west, the attackers will win.

古文：陛下能用臣言以谨边备，则边部不召而自来矣。
现代文：陛下如能把我的话告诉边将，则边部人不召而自来。
English: If Your Majesty can convey my words to the border guards, then the border guards will come uninvited.

古文：太祖临御十七年间，未尝生事疆埸，而敌人往往遣使乞和者，以其任用得人而备御有方也。
现代文：太祖统治十七年间，从未在战场作战，而敌人往往遣使求和，是因为任用得人而防御有方。
English: During the seventeen years of his reign, the great-grandfather never fought on the battlefield, and the enemy often sent envoys to sue for peace, because he was appointed and had a good defense.

古文：陛下苟思兵者凶器，战者危事，而不倒持太阿，授人以柄，则守在四夷，而常获静胜，此备御之上策也。 
现代文：陛下如果认为战争是危险的事，兵器是凶器，而不倒拿太阿剑，把剑柄送给别人，则四面边疆防守，常获静胜，这是防御的上策啊。
English: Your Majesty, if you think that war is a dangerous thing and weapons are deadly weapons, but do not take the sword and give the hilt to others, then you will defend the borders on all sides and often win a quiet victory. This is the best defense strategy.

古文：未几，出知天雄军兼兵马部署。
现代文：不久，出任知天雄军兼兵马部署。
English: Soon, he assumed the post of commander of the Chitenai army and troop deployment.

古文：时言事者请城绥州，屯兵积谷以备党项。
现代文：当时议论政事的人建议在绥州筑城，屯兵积粮以防备党项。
English: At that time, those who discussed politics suggested building a city in Zhangzhou and storing grain for troops to guard against party plots.

古文：边城互言利害，前后遣使数辈按视，不能决。
现代文：边城互相陈述利害，朝廷先后派遣几起使者前去考察，不能决定下来。
English: The border towns presented their interests to each other, and the imperial court sent several emissaries to investigate, but could not come to a decision.

古文：时已大发丁夫，将兴其役，诏若水自大名驰往视之。若水上言： 绥州顷为内地，民赋登集，尚须旁郡转饷。
现代文：当时已经大发丁夫、将要开始工程，诏令若水从大名骑马前去巡视，若水上言： 绥州从前算内地时，百姓赋税丰厚，还需旁边州郡转运饷银。
English: At that time, there was already great excitement and the project was about to begin. The emperor ordered that if there was water, the daimyo would go on horseback to inspect it. If there was water, the emperor said: When Zhangzhou was formerly considered the inland, the people paid rich taxes, and it was necessary for the neighboring counties to transport the money.

古文：自赐地赵保忠以来，人户凋残，若复城之，即须增戍。
现代文：自从把它赐给赵保忠以来，百姓凋敝，如果重新筑城，就需要增加戍卒。
English: Since it was given to Zhao Baozhong, the people have withered away, and if the city is rebuilt, it will require more soldiers.

古文：刍粮之给，全仰河东。
现代文：粮食的供给，全部仰仗河东。
English: The supply of grain is entirely dependent on the east of the river.

古文：其地隔越黄河、铁碣二山，无定河在其城下，缓急用兵，输送艰阻。
现代文：其地被黄河、铁碣二山隔绝，无定河在其城下，如果发生战争，输送困难。
English: Its territory is cut off by the Yellow River and the Tiexuan Mountains, and the Muding River is under its city. In the event of war, transportation would be difficult.

古文：且其地险，若未葺未完，边寇奔冲，难于固守。
现代文：况且其地险要，如果没有修葺完，边寇攻来，难以固守。
English: Moreover, it is very dangerous. If it is not repaired, it will be attacked by border raiders, and it will be difficult to hold on.

古文：况城邑焚毁，片瓦不存，所过山林，材木匮乏。
现代文：况且城邑焚毁，片瓦不存，旁边山林，材木缺乏。
English: What's more, the town was burned down, there are no tiles left, there are mountains and forests nearby, and there is a lack of timber.

古文：城之甚劳，未见其利。 复诣阙面陈其事，上嘉纳之，遂罢役。
现代文：筑城非常费力，又没有好处。 又到朝廷当面陈述这件事，皇上赞赏并采纳了他的意见，于是工程停罢。
English: The construction of the city was very laborious and unprofitable, and he went to the imperial court to present the matter in person, and the emperor appreciated and accepted his opinion, so the project was stopped.

古文：初，若水率众过河，分布军伍，咸有节制，深为戍将推服。
现代文：当初，若水率领部队经过黄河，分布行军行列，都有节制，深为戍将推服。
English: At the beginning, if water led the troops through the Yellow River, the distribution of marching ranks were all restrained, and it was deeply convinced.

古文：上谓左右曰： 若水，儒臣中知兵者也。 是秋，又遣巡抚陕西缘边诸郡，令便宜制置边事。
现代文：皇上对身边大臣说： 若水是儒臣中知兵的人。 这年秋天，皇上又派他巡抚陕西缘边诸郡，令他见机处理边事。
English: The emperor said to the ministers around him, "Lakusui is a person who knows the soldiers among the Confucianism." In the autumn of that year, the emperor also sent him to be the governor of the border counties of Shaanxi, so that he could deal with the border affairs.

古文：还拜邓州观察使、并代经略使、知并州事。
现代文：回朝后授任邓州观察使、并代经略使、知并州事。
English: After returning to the imperial court, he was appointed as the Dengzhou Observation Envoy, and also as the Delegate Envoy of the Ministry of Economic Affairs.

古文：六年春，因疾灸两足，创溃出血数斗，自是体貌羸鼛，手诏慰劳之，俾归京师。
现代文：咸平六年春天，因病针灸两只脚，创口溃血流了几斗，从此体貌羸弱，皇上下手诏慰劳他，让他回到京城。
English: In the spring of the sixth year of Xianping, due to illness, acupuncture and moxibustion of both feet, the wound ruptured and bled several times, and his body was weak from then on. The emperor comforted him and let him return to Beijing.

古文：数月，始赴朝谒，因与僚友会食僧舍，假寝而卒，年四十四。
现代文：几月后，才入宫朝见，因与僚友在僧舍聚餐，假睡而去世，终年四十四岁。
English: A few months later, he went to the Imperial Palace for a morning meeting, but died at the age of forty-four after having a meal with his colleagues in the monks' quarters and taking a nap.

古文：赠户部尚书，赐其母白金五百两。
现代文：追赠户部尚书，赐给他的母亲五百两白金。
English: He gave his mother five hundred taels of silver.

古文：子延年甫七岁，录为太常奉礼郎。
现代文：他的儿子延年刚七岁，录用为太常奉礼郎。
English: His seven-year-old son, Ennen, was hired as Taicho's page boy.

古文：若水美风神，有器识，能断大事，事继母以孝闻。
现代文：若水风度精神雄美，有器识，能决断大事，奉事继母以孝顺闻名。
English: If you are young, you have a beautiful demeanor, a sense of propriety, can make important decisions, and are known for being a dutiful stepmother.

古文：雅善谈论，尤轻财好施。
现代文：善于谈论，尤其轻财好施。
English: Good at talking, especially about money.

古文：所至推诚待物，委任僚佐，总其纲领，无不称治。
现代文：所到各地推诚待物，委任僚佐，总管大政，无不称治。
English: Everywhere he went, he was cordially received, appointed assistant secretary, and general manager of the grand government, all of which were commendable.

古文：延年后以献文赐进士出身，历太常博士、集贤校理。
现代文：汲引后进，推贤重士，态度豁达。精通术数，知道自己年寿不长，所以恳请避开权位。对于他的死，士大夫君子们非常痛惜。著有文集二十卷。
English: He was a great scholar with an open-minded attitude. He was well-versed in mathematics and knew that his life would not last long, so please avoid positions of power. His death was greatly regretted by the scholar-officials. He wrote 20 volumes of literary works.

古文：苏易简，字太简，梓州铜山人。
现代文：苏易简字太简，梓州铜山人。
English: Su Yi's simplified characters are too simple, and Zizhou Tongshan's are too complex.

古文：父协举蜀进士，归宋，累任州县，以易简居翰林，任开封县兵曹参军，俄迁光禄寺丞，卒，特赠秘书丞。
现代文：其父苏协考中后蜀进士，归降宋朝，历任州县官吏，因为易简官居翰林，任开封县兵曹参军，不久升任光禄寺丞，去世，特地追赠秘书丞。
English: His father was a member of the Shu Jinji after the Soviet Union's examination, returned to the Song Dynasty, successively served as a state and county official, because Yi Jian official lived in Hanlin, served as a Kaifeng County petty officer to join the army, soon rose to the post of Guanglu Temple, died, specially posthumously awarded the secretary.

古文：易简少聪悟好学，风度奇秀，才思敏赡。
现代文：易简年幼时聪明好学，风度奇秀，才思敏捷。
English: When she was young, Yi Jian was bright and eager to learn, had a wonderful demeanor, and was quick-witted.

古文：太平兴国五年，年逾弱冠，举进士。
现代文：太平兴国五年，年纪刚过二十，考中进士。
English: Taiping Xingguo is five years old, just over twenty years old, and has passed the middle school entrance examination.

古文：太宗方留心儒术，贡士皆临轩覆试。
现代文：太宗正留心儒术，贡士都临殿复试。
English: Taizong is paying attention to Confucianism, and Gongshi is retaking the examination.

古文：易简所试三千余言立就，奏上，览之称赏，擢冠甲科。
现代文：易简所作三千多字很快写成，进奏皇上，太宗看后称善，选拔为甲科之首。
English: Yi Jian's more than three thousand words were quickly written, and after the Emperor and Taizong saw it, they praised it and selected it as the top of the A section.

古文：解褐将作监丞，通判升州，迁左赞善大夫。
现代文：授职将作监丞，通判升州，升为左赞善大夫。
English: He will be awarded the post of superintendent, promoted to the state, and promoted to Zuozanzen doctor.

古文：八年，以右拾遗知制诰。
现代文：太平兴国八年，以右拾遗知制诰。
English: Taiping Xingguo eight years, with the right to pick up the knowledge of the system.

古文：雍熙初，以郊祀恩进秩祠部员外郎。
现代文：雍熙初年，以郊祀受恩升为祠部员外郎。
English: In the first year of the Yongxi Dynasty, he was promoted to a member of the ancestral hall as a result of his benevolence.

古文：二年，与贾黄中同知贡举。
现代文：雍熙二年，与贾黄中一同主持贡举。
English: In the second year of Yongxi, he presided over the tribute together with Jia Huangzhong.

古文：有诏，凡亲属就举者，籍名别试。
现代文：诏令规定，凡主考官有亲属应试者，要登记名册另行考试。
English: The edict stipulates that if the chief examiner has a relative taking the exam, he should register the roster for a separate exam.

古文：易简妻弟崔范，匿父丧充贡，奏名在上第；又王千里者，水部员外郎孚之子，协为孚门生，千里预荐。
现代文：易简的内弟崔范，隐瞒父丧充任考生，被录取在上第；又有个王千里，是水部员外郎王孚的儿子，苏协是王孚的学生，千里也参加了考试。
English: Yi Jian's brother-in-law Cui Fan, who concealed his father's death to take the exam, was admitted to the upper class; another Wang Qili, the son of the water minister Wang Fu, was a student of Wang Fu, and also took the exam.

古文：上闻，坐范及千里罪。
现代文：太宗听说后，处理崔范及王千里的罪行。
English: After hearing this, Taizong dealt with the crimes of Cui Fan and Wang Qianli.

古文：易简缘是罢知制诰，以本官奉朝请。
现代文：易简因此被罢去知制诰，以本官奉朝请。
English: As a result, Yi Jian was removed from his post and given the title of secretary.

古文：未几，复知制诰。
现代文：不久，重新任知制诰。
English: Soon after, he was reappointed to the position of chizisei.

古文：三年，充翰林学士。
现代文：雍熙三年，充任翰林学士。
English: In the third year of Yongxi, he was appointed as a scholar of Hanlin.

古文：初，易简充贡，宋白掌贡部，至是裁七年。
现代文：当初，易简充任贡生，宋白掌管贡部，到此时才七年。
English: At the beginning, Yi Jianchong was in charge of the tribute, and Song Bai was in charge of the tribute department. It was only seven years ago.

古文：易简幼时随父河南，贾黄中来使，尝教之属辞；及是，悉为同列。
现代文：易简年幼时随父亲到河南，贾黄中任使者来河南，曾经教他作文；到此时，成为同列官吏。
English: When Yi Jian was young, he went to Henan with his father. Jia Huang Zhong was an envoy to Henan and once taught him composition. At this time, he became an official of the same rank.

古文：易简连知贡举，陈尧叟、孙何并甲廷试。
现代文：易简连续主持贡举，陈尧叟、孙何都录为廷试第一。
English: Yi Jian continuously presided over the tribute, and Chen Zhen and Sun He were listed as the first in the court trial.

古文：淳化元年，丁外艰。
现代文：淳化元年，遭父丧。
English: In the first year of the Chunhua era, his father passed away.

古文：二年，同知京朝官考课，迁中书舍人，充承旨。
现代文：二年，任同知京朝官考课，升为中书舍人，充任承旨。
English: Two years later, he was appointed to the Beijing Imperial Examination Course, and was promoted to the position of Senior Lecturer of Chinese Literature.

古文：先是，曲宴将相，翰林学士皆预坐，梁迥启太祖罢之；又皇帝御丹凤楼，翰林承旨侍从升楼西南隅，礼亦废。
现代文：从前，皇帝宴请将相，翰林学士都参加，梁迥建议太祖取消了；又皇帝到丹凤楼，翰林承旨侍从到楼上西南角，此礼也废除。
English: Once upon a time, when the emperor invited the general secretary and the scholar Hanlin to a banquet, Liang Zhen suggested that the great-grandfather cancel the banquet; when the emperor went to the Danfeng Building, Hanlin Zhengzhi's attendant went to the southwest corner of the building, and this ceremony was also abolished.

古文：至是，易简请之，皆复旧制。
现代文：到当时，易简请求，都恢复旧制。
English: At that time, Yi Jian requested that the old system be restored.

古文：易简续唐李肇《翰林志》二卷以献，帝赐诗以嘉之。
现代文：易简续撰唐朝李肇的《翰林志》二卷献给皇上，皇上赐诗嘉奖他。
English: Yi Jianlian wrote two volumes of the Tang Dynasty Li Zhao's "History of Hanlin" dedicated to the emperor, and the emperor awarded him with a poem.

古文：帝尝以轻绡飞白大书 玉堂之署 四字，令易简榜于厅额。
现代文：皇帝曾经用轻绡书写飞白体 玉堂之署 四个大字，令易简悬在厅额。
English: The emperor once wrote the four large characters "Flying White Body, Gyokudo's Office" with a light pen, and hung it in the hall.

古文：易简会韩伾、毕士安、李至等往观。
现代文：易简会同韩亻丕、毕士安、李至等前去观看。
English: Yi Jian will go to watch with Han Yu, Bi Shi An, Li Zhi and others.

古文：上闻，遣中使赐宴甚盛，至等各赋诗纪其事，宰相李昉等亦作诗颂美之。
现代文：皇上听说，派中使赐给丰盛的宴席，李至等人都赋诗记述这件事，宰相李日方等也作诗赞美。
English: The emperor heard that the envoys sent by the Central Committee gave a sumptuous banquet, and Li Zhi and others wrote poems to record the event, and Prime Minister Li Yifang and others also wrote poems to praise.

古文：他日，易简直禁中，以水试欹器。
现代文：后来，易简在宫中值班，用水试验奇器。
English: Later, Yi Jian was on duty in the palace, testing the miracle device with water.

古文：上密闻之，因晚朝，问曰： 卿所玩得非欹器耶？ 易简曰： 然，江南徐邈所作也。 命取试之。
现代文：皇上暗地听说，趁晚朝时问他： 你玩的是不是奇器？ 易简说： 是的，江南徐邈所作。 皇帝命令取来试玩。
English: The emperor secretly heard about it, and took advantage of the late morning to ask him: Are you playing with a strange instrument? Yi Jian said: Yes, it was made by Jiangnan Xu Xi. The emperor ordered to take it to try it out.

古文：易简奏曰： 臣闻日中则昃，月满则亏，器盈则覆，物盛则衰。
现代文：易简奏说 ：我听说日中则昃，月满则亏，器盈则覆，物盛则衰。
English: Yi Jianso said, "I've heard that during the day, it's bad, at the full moon, it's bad, when it's full, it's over, and when it's full, it's bad.

古文：愿陛下持盈守成，慎终如始，以固丕基，则天下幸甚。 
现代文：希望陛下持盈守成，慎终如始，以加固宏基，则天下非常幸运。 
English: It is hoped that His Majesty will keep the gains and achievements, be prudent in the end as in the beginning, and strengthen the foundation, so that the world will be very lucky.

古文：会郊祀，充礼仪使。
现代文：遇上郊祀典礼，易简充任礼仪使。
English: When it came to the suburban worship ceremony, Yi Jian was appointed as the ceremonial envoy.

古文：先是，扈蒙建议以宣祖升配。易简引唐故事，请以宣祖、太祖同配。从之。
现代文：从前，扈蒙建议把宣祖升到配祀，易简援引唐朝旧例，请以宣祖、太祖一同享祀，皇上听从了。
English: Once upon a time, Yimong suggested that Xuanzu be elevated to the status of a co-shrine. Yi Jian cited the old Tang dynasty precedent and requested that Xuanzu and Taizu be enshrined together. The emperor complied.

古文：知审官院，言初任京朝官，未尝历州县，不得拟知州、通判。
现代文：主持审官院，建议初任京中朝官，从未历任州县职的，不得任为知州、通判。
English: Presiding over the Supreme People's Procuratorate, it is recommended that the first-time appointment of the Beijing-Zhongshan imperial official, who has never served as a state and county official, shall not be appointed as a chizhou or tsuchiban.

古文：诏可。
现代文：诏令同意。
English: The royal decree was approved.

古文：改知审刑院，俄掌吏部选，迁给事中、参知政事。
现代文：改为主持审刑院，不久掌管吏部选官，升为给事中、参知政事。
English: He was put in charge of the Sentencing Court, and soon he was in charge of the selection of officials for the Criminal Investigation Department. He was promoted to the position of Deputy Minister of Justice and Assistant Minister of State.

古文：时赵昌言亦参知政事，与易简不协，至忿争上前，上皆优容之。
现代文：当时赵昌言也任参知政事，与易简不和，甚至在皇上面前忿争，皇上宽容了他们。
English: At that time, Zhao Changyan was also a member of the prefectural government, and he was at odds with Yi Jian. They even quarreled in front of the emperor, but the emperor tolerated them.

古文：未几，昌言出使剑南，中路命改知凤翔府。
现代文：不久，昌言出使剑南，中途命令改任知凤翔府。
English: Soon after, Changyan sent an envoy to Jiannan, and halfway there, he ordered him to be reassigned to Chifeng Xiangfu.

古文：明年，易简亦以礼部侍郎出知邓州，移陈州。
现代文：第二年，易简也以礼部侍郎身份出任知邓州，改任知陈州。
English: In the following year, Yi Jian also took up the post of Zhi Deng Zhou as an attendant of the Ceremonial Department and changed his post to Zhi Chen Zhou.

古文：至道二年，卒，年三十九，赠礼部尚书。
现代文：至道二年去世，终年三十九岁，追赠礼部尚书。
English: He died two years later, at the age of thirty-nine, and was posthumously presented with a copy of the Book of Etiquette.

古文：易简外虽坦率，中有城府。
现代文：易简外表虽然坦率，心中却有城府。
English: Although Yi Jian is outspoken on the outside, he has the city government in his heart.

古文：由知制诰入为学士，年未满三十。
现代文：由知制诰入翰林为学士，年纪不满三十岁。
English: He is a bachelor from Zhisheng into Hanlin and is less than 30 years old.

古文：属文初不达体要，及掌诰命，颇自刻励。
现代文：写文章开始不达要点，到掌管诰命，非常刻苦磨练。
English: When I started to write articles, I didn't get to the point, but when I took over the management, I worked very hard.

古文：在翰林八年，眷遇敻绝伦等。
现代文：在翰林任职八年，受到无比的恩宠。
English: He has been working in Hanlin for eight years and has been extremely favored.

古文：李沆后入，在易简下，先参知政事，故以易简为承旨，锡赉均焉。
现代文：李沆比他后进翰林，位在易简之下，先任参知政事，所以让易简任承旨，赏赐相均。
English: Li Qiye was later than him to enter Hanlin, and was under Yi Jian, and was the first to be appointed to the post of governor. Therefore, Yi Jian was appointed to carry out the will, and the rewards were equal.

古文：太宗遵旧制，且欲稔其名望而后正台辅，易简以亲老急于进用，因亟言时政阙失，遂参大政。
现代文：太宗遵照旧制，打算让他名望成熟后任宰相，易简因为双亲年老急于进用，于是极言时政得失，于是参预大政。
English: Taizong, in accordance with the old system, planned to let his reputation mature and then become prime minister. Yi Jian, because of his elderly parents, was eager to advance, so he spoke highly of the gains and losses of politics, and then participated in the pre-election grand politics.

古文：蜀人何光逢，易简之执友也，尝任县令，坐赂削籍，流寓京师。
现代文：蜀人何光逢是易简的挚友，曾经任过县令，因贿赂丢官，客居京城。
English: Shu man He Guangfan is a close friend of Yi Jian. He once served as a county magistrate, lost his position due to bribery, and now lives in Beijing.

古文：会易简典贡部，光逢代人充试以取赀，易简于稠人中屏出之。
现代文：正遇易简主管贡部，光逢代人考试以收费，易简在人群中把他赶出来。
English: Just as Yi Jian, the head of the tribute department, was about to charge a fee for the exam, Yi Jian chased him out of the crowd.

古文：光逢遂造谤书，斥言朝廷事，且讥易简。
现代文：光逢于是制造谤书，指斥朝廷政事，并且讥刺易简。
English: It was only a matter of time before slanderous books were produced, denouncing the political affairs of the imperial court and ridiculing I Chien.

古文：易简得其书以闻，逮捕光逢，狱具，坐弃市。
现代文：易简获得他的谤书告诉皇上，逮捕光逢，官司审结，定罪诛杀。
English: Yi Jian obtained his libelous book and told the emperor. He was arrested, tried, convicted and killed.

古文：易简以杀光逢非其意，居常怏怏。
现代文：易简因杀光逢不是本意，平时常常怏怏不乐。
English: Because killing is not her intention, Yi Jian is often unhappy in her daily life.

古文：母薛氏以杀父执切责之，易简泣曰： 不渭及此易简罪也。 及易简参知政事，召薛氏入禁中，赐冠帔，命坐，问曰： 何以教子成此令器？ 对曰： 幼则束以礼让，长则教以诗书。 上顾左右曰： 真孟母也。 
现代文：其母薛氏以杀死父亲挚友严责他，易简哭着说： 本认为不会致死，是我的罪过啊。 易简任参知政事后，皇上召薛氏入宫，赐给凤冠霞帔，赐座，问道 ：怎么样把儿子教育成大器？ 回答说： 年幼时则用礼让约束他，年长后则用诗书教育他。 皇上看着身边大臣说 ：真是孟母啊。 
English: His mother, Xue, severely reproached him for killing his father's best friend. Yi Jian cried and said, "I thought it would not lead to death, it was my fault." After Yi Jian was appointed to the post of governor, the emperor called Xue into the palace, gave him a crown and a throne, and asked, "How can I educate my son to be a great man?" He replied, "When he was young, I used courtesy to restrain him, and when he was older, I used poetry to educate him." The emperor looked at the ministers around him and said, "It's true, Mother Meng."

古文：易简性嗜酒，初入翰林，谢日饮已微醉，余日多沉湎。
现代文：易简嗜酒成性，初入翰林时，入谢那天已经微醉，其他的日子常常沉醉。
English: Yi Jian is an inveterate drinker. When he first entered Hanlin, he was already slightly intoxicated on the day of his initiation, and on other days he was often intoxicated.

古文：上尝戒约深切，且草书《劝酒》二章以赐，令对其母读之。
现代文：皇上曾经对他诫约深切，并且草书《劝酒》二章赐给他，让他面对母亲读出来。
English: The Emperor had made a solemn promise to him, and had given him the second chapter of the "Counsel on Drinking" in cursive so that he could read it in front of his mother.

古文：至刚严简重，人士罕登其门。
现代文：从此每次入宫值班，不敢饮酒。去世后，皇上说： 易简果然因酒致死，可惜啊。 
English: From then on, whenever he was on duty in the palace, he did not dare to drink alcohol. After his death, the emperor said: It is a pity that Yi Jian died from drinking.

古文：性吝啬。幼育于知审，及贵，即逐其养子以利其资。
现代文：易简平日擅长笔札，尤其善于谈笑，旁通佛经，所著《文房四谱》、《续翰林志》及《文集》二十卷，藏在秘阁。
English: On a normal day, Yi Jian is good at writing. He is especially good at talking and joking. He also reads Buddhist scriptures. His books, "The Four Phases of the Library," "Continuation of Hanlin's History" and "Collected Works," 20 volumes, are kept in a secret cupboard.

古文：知审因至亦至右金吾卫大将军。
现代文：三个儿子分别名叫宿、寿、耆，大中祥符年间，都被录用为官。
English: The three sons, respectively named Shuku, Shou, and Shun, were all recruited as officials during their junior high school years.

古文：辛仲甫，字之翰，汾州孝义人。
现代文：辛仲甫字之翰，汾州孝义人。
English: Xin Zhongfu Zi Zi Han, Zhangzhou filial piety.

古文：曾祖实，石州推官。
现代文：其曾祖辛实，曾任石州推官。
English: His great-grandfather, Xin Si, once served as the governor of Shishu.

古文：祖迪，寿阳令。
现代文：其祖父辛迪，曾任寿阳令。
English: His grandfather, Cindy, was a Shouyangling.

古文：父藩，河东节度判官。
现代文：其父辛藩，曾任河南节度判官。
English: His father, Xin Fan, was a judge of the Henan Festival.

古文：仲甫少好学，及长，能吏事，伟姿仪，器局沉厚。
现代文：仲甫年少好学，年长后，能办吏事，姿仪雄伟，气质沉厚。
English: When he was young, Zhongfu was eager to learn, and when he was older, he was able to run administrative affairs. He had a majestic posture and a strong temperament.

古文：周广顺中，郭崇掌亲军，领武定节制，置仲甫掌书记。
现代文：后周广顺年间，郭崇掌管禁军，兼任武定节制，署任仲甫为掌书记。
English: Later, during the Zhou Guangshun era, Guo Chong was in charge of the Forbidden Army, concurrently serving as the military governor of Wuding, and his deputy, Zhongfu, was the secretary in charge.

古文：显德初，出镇澶渊，仍署旧职。
现代文：显德初年，郭崇出京镇守澶渊，仍署任他原职。
English: In the first year of Emperor Xiande's reign, Guo Chong was appointed as the governor of Jingzhen, but he remained in his original post.

古文：崇所亲吏为厢虞候，部民有被劫杀者，诉阴识贼魁，即捕盗吏也，官不敢诘。
现代文：郭崇亲信的官吏任厢虞候，州民有人被劫杀，声明暗地认识贼首，就是捕盗吏，官府不敢追问。
English: Officials of Guo Chongxin's relatives are waiting in the wings, state residents have been robbed and killed, declaring that they secretly know the thief's head, that is, the theft officer, the government does not dare to inquire.

古文：仲甫请自捕逮，鞫之，吏故稽其狱，仲甫曰： 民被寇害而使自诬服，蠹政甚矣，焉用僚佐为？ 请易吏以雪冤愤。
现代文：仲甫要求自己逮捕此人，审讯他，狱吏故意拖延案件处理，仲甫说 ：百姓被寇贼伤害而让他自己诬服自己，政治太败坏了，哪里用得上僚佐呢？ 要求换个官吏为那人雪冤。
English: Zhongfu asked himself to arrest this person, interrogate him, and the prison officials deliberately delayed the handling of the case. Zhongfu said: The people were injured by the robbers and let him falsely accuse himself. Politics is too corrupt, where is the need for a superior officer? The request to change an official is a great misfortune for that person.

古文：崇悟，移鞫之，乃得实状。
现代文：郭崇醒悟，改人审讯，才得到实情。
English: Guo Chong wised up and changed his interrogator to get the truth.

古文：崇移镇真定，改深、赵、镇观察判官。
现代文：郭崇移任镇守真定，改任他为深、赵、镇观察判官。
English: Guo Chong was transferred to the town guard of Zhending, and he was appointed as the judge for the observation of Shenzhou, Zhao and the town.

古文：太祖受命，以崇为监军。陈思诲密奏崇有奸状，上怒且疑，遣中使驰往验之。
现代文：太祖受命即位，任命郭崇为监军，陈思诲密奏郭崇有阴谋，太祖又怒又疑，派中使骑马前去验看。
English: The great-grandfather received the order to ascend the throne, appointed Guo Chong as the supervisor of the army, Chen Shiyi secretly played Guo Chong with a conspiracy, the great-grandfather was angry and suspicious, and sent a middle-ranking official on horseback to inspect.

古文：未至，崇忧懑失据，谓宾佐曰： 苟主人不察，为之奈何？ 皆愕相视。
现代文：中使还未到，郭崇忧虑得不知所措，对宾佐们说： 假使朝廷使者不察真情，怎么办呢？ 宾佐们都愕然相视。
English: Before the envoy arrived, Guo Chong was so worried that he was at a loss for words. He said to the courtiers, "What if the imperial envoy doesn't know the truth? The courtiers looked at each other in dismay.

古文：仲甫曰： 皇帝膺运，公首效节，军民处置，率循常度，且何以加辞。
现代文：仲甫说： 皇帝接受天运，你最先效忠，军政民政的处理，都遵循常例，怎么能找到借口加害你呢？
English: Zhongfu said: The emperor accepts the fate of heaven, you are the first to be loyal, the handling of military, political and civil affairs follows the usual practice, how can you find an excuse to harm you?

古文：第远侦使者，率僚属尽郊迎礼，听彼伺察，久当自辨矣。 崇如其言。
现代文：只管远远侦察使者，率领僚属举行郊行礼，听任他观察，时间长了会自然辨明的。 郭崇照此办理。
English: Although he was far away from the reconnaissance emissary, he led his colleagues and subordinates to hold a suburban procession, and allowed him to observe. After a long time, he would naturally identify it. Guo Chong acted accordingly.

古文：使者至，视崇无他意，还奏，上大喜，归罪于思诲。
现代文：使者到后，看见郭崇并无他意，回朝上奏，太祖非常高兴，归罪于思诲。
English: After the messenger arrived, he saw that Guo Chong had no other intention but to return to the morning to play. The great-grandfather was very happy and blamed it on his thoughts.

古文：仲甫又随崇为平卢军节度判官。
现代文：仲甫又跟随郭崇任平卢军节度判官。
English: Zhongfu also followed Guo Chong as the judge of the festival of the Pinglu army.

古文：崇卒，改郓、齐观察判官，累雪冤枉。
现代文：郭崇死后，改任郓、齐观察判官，多次雪洗冤屈。
English: After Guo Chong's death, he was reassigned to the post of magistrate of Qi and Qi observation, and he repeatedly washed away his grievances.

古文：乾德五年，入拜右补阙，出知光州。
现代文：乾德五年，入朝任右补阙，出京任知光州。
English: In the fifth year of Emperor Qiande, he entered the imperial court as the Right Auxiliary Governor and left for Beijing as the Governor of Shiguangzhou.

古文：州有横河与城直，会霖潦暴疾，水溢溃庐舍。
现代文：州里有条横河与州城平行，正遇暴雨成灾，洪水冲毁房舍。
English: A river in the state, which runs parallel to the state capital, is experiencing torrential rain, with flooding destroying houses.

古文：仲甫集船数百艘，军资民储，皆赖以济。
现代文：仲甫征集数百艘船只，军队资产、百姓储备，都赖以救出。
English: Zhongfu conscripted hundreds of ships, military assets, and people's reserves, all of which depended on the rescue.

古文：六年，移知彭州。
现代文：乾德六年，改任知彭州。
English: Six years later, he was transferred to Pengzhou.

古文：州卒诱营兵及诸屯戍，谋以长春节宴集日为乱。
现代文：州卒引诱营兵及屯戍兵，阴谋在长春节宴集这天作乱。
English: The state pawns lured the battalion soldiers and the garrison soldiers and plotted to make a disturbance on the day of the Spring Festival banquet.

古文：属春初，仲甫出城巡视，见壕中草深，意可藏伏，命烧薙之。
现代文：当时是初春，仲甫出城巡视，见壕中草深，料想可能有藏伏，命令烧掉了。
English: At that time, it was early spring. Zhongfu went out of the city to inspect. He saw that the grass in the ditch was deep, and thought that there might be a hiding place. He ordered to burn it.

古文：凶党疑谋泄，有自首者。
现代文：凶党怀疑阴谋泄露，有人出来自首。
English: The thugs suspected that the plot had been leaked, and someone came forward to turn himself in.

古文：禽百余人，尽斩之。
现代文：捉拿一百多人，全部杀掉。
English: Capture more than a hundred people and kill them all.

古文：先是州少种树，暑无所休。
现代文：从前州中很少种树，热天没有地方歇凉休息。
English: Few trees were planted in the former prefecture, and there was no place to cool off on hot days.

古文：仲甫课民栽柳荫行路，郡人德之，名为 补阙柳 。太祖问群臣文武兼资者为谁，赵普以仲甫对。
现代文：仲甫督促百姓栽种柳树为大路遮荫，郡里百姓感激他，取名为 补阙柳 ，太祖询问大臣中文武兼备者是谁，赵普回答是仲甫。
English: Zhong Fu urged the people to plant willow trees to shade the main road. The people in the county were grateful to him and named it "Mending Willow." Grandfather asked the minister who the Chinese warrior was, and Zhao Pu replied that it was Zhong Fu.

古文：徙益州兵马都监，代还，选为三司户部判官。
现代文：改任仲甫为益州兵马都监，换任回朝，选为三司户部判官。
English: He was reappointed as Zhongfu for the Yizhou Terracotta Warriors and Horses Supervisor, reappointed back to the North, and elected as the judge of the Third Division of the Household Department.

古文：太平兴国初，迁起居舍人，奉使契丹。
现代文：太平兴国初年，升任起居舍人，奉命出使契丹。
English: In the first year of Taiping's rejuvenation of the country, he was promoted to the post of resident overseer, and was ordered to dispatch Khitan.

古文：辽主问： 党进何如人？
现代文：辽主问他： 党进是怎样的人？
English: Liao Zhen asked him: What kind of person is Dangjin?

古文：如进之比有几？ 仲甫曰： 国家名将辈出，如进鹰犬材耳，何足道哉！ 辽主欲留之，仲甫曰： 信以成命，义不可留，有死而已。 辽主竟不能屈。
现代文：像党进这样的有几个？ 仲甫说 ：国家名将辈出，像党进只是鹰犬般的材料而已，何足道哉？ 辽主想留住他，仲甫说 ：守信用以完成使命，义不可留，只有死路而已。 辽主竟不能使他屈服。
English: How many are there like Dangjin? Zhongfu said: National famous generals come and go, but like Dangjin, they are just material like hawk-dogs, what is the way? Liao Lord wanted to keep him, Zhongfu said: to keep the trust to complete the mission, righteousness can not be left, only the way of death. Liao Lord could not make him give in.

古文：使还，以刑部郎中知成都府。
现代文：出使回来，以刑部郎中身份知成都府。
English: When he returned from his mission, he went back to Chengdu as a vice-minister of the Ministry of Justice.

古文：既至，奏免岁输铜钱，罢榷酤，政尚宽简，蜀人安之。
现代文：到任后，上奏免去每年输送铜钱，罢除沽酒的专卖制度，政事崇尚宽简，蜀人得到安宁。
English: After taking office, Shangso dispensed with the annual delivery of copper money, abolished the monopoly system of liquor, advocated the simplification of government affairs, and the people of Shu gained peace.

古文：八年，加右谏议大夫。
现代文：太平兴国八年，加任右谏议大夫。
English: In the eighth year of the Taiping Xingguo, he was appointed to the post of doctor of the Right Division of the Legislative Yuan.

古文：时彭州盗贼连结为害，诏捕未获。
现代文：当时彭州盗贼连结为害，诏令捕捉没有捉到。
English: At that time, the thieves in Pengzhou were linked together to cause harm, and the order to catch them was not caught.

古文：仲甫诱令自缚诣吏者凡百余人，余因散去。
现代文：仲甫诱令自首到官府的共一百多人，其余的人散去。
English: Zhongfu ordered a total of more than a hundred people to surrender to the government, and the rest dispersed.

古文：九年，入知开封府，拜御史中丞。
现代文：太平兴国九年，入京任知开封府，授任御史中丞。
English: In the ninth year of the Taiping Restoration, he entered Beijing and was assigned to Chikaifu, and was given the title of Goshi Chujo.

古文：雍熙二年，拜给事中、参知政事。
现代文：雍熙二年，授任给事中、参知政事。
English: In the second year of the reign of Emperor Yongxi, he was appointed to be a member of the Central Committee of the CPC and a member of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China.

古文：端拱中，进户部侍郎。
现代文：端拱年间，进位户部侍郎。
English: In the year of the end of the arch, he was promoted to the position of household attendant.

古文：时吕蒙正以长厚居相位，王沔任事，仲甫从容其间而已。
现代文：当时吕蒙正因长厚任宰相，王沔主持政事，仲甫在他们之间从容行事而已。
English: At that time, Lv Meng was serving as prime minister due to his seniority, Wang Qian was presiding over government affairs, and Zhong Fu was just acting calmly between them.

古文：淳化二年，以足疾罢为工部尚书，出知陈州。
现代文：淳化二年，因足病罢相任工部尚书，出京任知陈州。
English: In the second year of Chunhua, due to a foot disease, he resigned from the post of the Ministry of Industry and Commerce, and went to Beijing to serve as Chizhenzhou.

古文：代归，会蜀有寇，以仲甫素著恩信，将令舆疾招抚，以疾未行。
现代文：换任回朝，正遇蜀地有寇情，以仲甫历来有恩信，令他坐车急去招抚，因为有病未去。
English: When he was transferred back to the imperial court, he was met with suspicion in Shu. He had always been grateful to Zhongfu, so he hurriedly went to visit him by car, because he was ill.

古文：无何，以太子少保致仕。
现代文：不久，以太子少保衔退休。
English: Soon after, Ethereal retired with a minor title.

古文：真宗即位，加太子少傅。
现代文：真宗即帝位，加太子太傅衔。
English: The True Sect is the imperial throne, plus the title of crown prince.

古文：咸平三年，卒，年七十四，赠太子太保。
现代文：咸平三年，去世，终年七十四岁，追赠太子太保。
English: Xianping died three years later, at the age of seventy-four, and was posthumously granted the title of crown prince.

古文：子若冲、若虚、若蒙、若济、若渝，皆能其官。
现代文：他的儿子若冲、若虚、若蒙、若济、若渝，都有任官的能力。
English: His sons, Jakuchu, Jakuchu, Jakuchu, Jakuchu, Jakuchu, and Jakuchu, all have the ability to be appointed officials.

古文：沔以是频为寇准所诋云。温仲舒，字秉阳，河南人。
现代文：他的孙子有孚、有邻，都考中进士。温仲舒字秉阳，河南人。
English: His grandsons, Yufu and Yucheng, both passed the junior high school entrance examination. Wen Zhongshu Zi Bingyang, from Henan Province.

古文：太平兴国二年，举进士，为大理评事，通判吉州。
现代文：太平兴国二年，考中进士，任大理评事，通判吉州。
English: In the second year of the Taiping Xingguo, he was admitted to the middle school entrance examination, appointed as a university critic, and passed the judgment of Jizhou.

古文：再迁秘书丞、知汾州，坐事除名。
现代文：后升至秘书丞、知汾州，因犯法被除名。
English: Later, he was promoted to secretary joe and chihiroshu, but was expelled for violating the law.

古文：未几，复起为右赞善大夫，通判睦州。
现代文：不久，重新起用为右赞善大夫，通判睦州。
English: Soon after, he was reappointed as Uzanzen doctor, and was awarded the title of Mutsu Province.

古文：端拱初，拜右正言、直史馆、判户部凭由司。
现代文：端拱初年，任右正言、直史馆、判户部凭由司。
English: In the first year of the end of the arch, he was appointed to the post of right chief councilor, direct history museum, and judge of the household department.

古文：三年，拜工部郎中、枢密直学士，知三班院。
现代文：端拱三年，授任工部郎中、枢密直学士，主持三院工作。
English: At the end of the third year of the arch, he was awarded the title of Vice-Minister of the Ministry of Industry and Commerce and the title of Privy Direct Bachelor, presiding over the work of the three institutions.

古文：秋，彗星见，召对别殿，仲舒以为 国家平太原以来，燕、代之交，城守年深，杀伤剽掠，彼此迭见。
现代文：这年秋天，彗星出现，皇上在别殿召见大臣，仲舒认为 国家平定太原以来，燕、代之间，长年战争，杀伤剽掠，前后不断。
English: In the autumn of that year, a comet appeared, and the emperor summoned the minister to the hall of residence. Zhongshu believed that since the country had pacified Taiyuan, there had been long-term wars, killing and plundering, back and forth between generations.

古文：大河以北，农桑废业，户口减耗。
现代文：大河以北，农桑业废弛，户口减少。
English: North of the Tahe River, the agricultural mulberry industry is in decline, and the number of household registrations has decreased.

古文：凋弊之余，极力奉边。
现代文：凋敝之余，还极力供奉边事。
English: In addition to withering away, he also tried his best to serve others.

古文：丁壮备徭，老弱供赋。
现代文：丁壮服徭役，老弱供给赋税。
English: The young and strong will serve as eunuchs, and the old and weak will supply and pay taxes.

古文：遗庐坏堵，不亡即死。
现代文：庐舍毁坏，百姓不是逃亡就是死去。
English: Homes were destroyed and people either fled or died.

古文：邪人媚上，犹云乐输。
现代文：奸臣媚惑皇上，还说百姓乐于交赋。
English: The treacherous vassal charmed the emperor, and also said that the people were willing to surrender.

古文：加以兵卒践更，行者辛苦，居者怨旷。
现代文：加之兵卒经常换防，出征的人辛苦，居家的人怨旷。
English: In addition, soldiers often change sides, those who go out to fight are hard-working, and those who stay at home are resentful.

古文：愿推恩宥，以绥民庶。 太宗嘉纳之，遂赦河北。
现代文：希望推加恩泽，抚慰百姓 。太宗赞许并采纳了他的意见，于是大赦河北。
English: In the hope of furthering his benevolence and appeasing the people, Emperor Taizong approved of and adopted his opinion, and thus granted amnesty to Hebei.

古文：淳化二年，拜右谏议大夫、枢密副使，改同知枢密院事。
现代文：淳化二年，任右谏议大夫、枢密副使，改任同知枢密院事。
English: In the second year of the Chunhua era, he was appointed Doctor of the Right Hand, Vice-Minister of the Privy Council, and was reassigned to Tongzhi Privy Council.

古文：四年，罢知秦州。
现代文：淳化四年，罢去本职任知秦州。
English: After four years in Chunhua, he was transferred to his current post in Zhiqin.

古文：先是，俗杂羌、戎，有两马家、朵藏、枭波等部，唐末以来，居于渭河之南，大洛、小洛门砦，多产良木，为其所据。
现代文：在此之前，汉人与羌人、戎人杂居，有两马家、朵藏、枭波等部落，唐朝末年以来，居住在渭河的南面，大洛、小洛门砦，出产很多良木，被他们占据。
English: Prior to this, the Han Chinese and the Yi people and the Eun people lived together, and there were tribes such as the Two Horse Family, the Tozang, and the Yanbo. Since the end of the Tang Dynasty, they lived in the south of the Wei River, in the Greater Luo and the Small Luo Men Fort. They produced a lot of good trees and were occupied by them.

古文：岁调卒采伐给京师，必以赀假道于羌户。
现代文：每年征调士卒采伐林木供给京师，必定用钱向羌族人买道通行。
English: Every year, officials are recruited to cut down trees to supply the Beijing division, and they must use money to buy roads from the Yi people.

古文：然不免攘夺，甚至杀掠，为平民患。
现代文：但仍不免被他们抢夺，甚至遭到杀掠，成为百姓的祸患。
English: However, they were still inevitably robbed and even plundered, becoming a scourge to the people.

古文：仲舒至，部兵历按诸砦，谕其酋以威信，诸部献地内属。
现代文：仲舒到任后，督率士卒巡视各个寨落，以威信宣谕寨落首领，诸部落都献地依附内地。
English: After Zhongshu took office, the inspector led the officers to inspect each village, and with authority proclaimed to the village leaders that all tribes were devoted to adhering to the inland.

古文：既而悉徙其部落于渭北，立堡砦以限之。
现代文：后来把这些部落都迁徙到渭河的北面，建立堡寨来限制他们。
English: Later, these tribes were all moved to the north of the Wei River, and a fortress was built to restrict them.

古文：民感其惠，为画像祠之。
现代文：百姓感激他的这一惠举，画他的像来祭祀他。
English: The people were grateful to him for this favour and painted his image to worship him.

古文：会有言仲舒生事者，上谓近臣曰： 仲舒尝总机密之职，在吾左右，当以绥怀为务。
现代文：正遇有人认为仲舒生事，皇上对亲近大臣说： 仲舒曾经统管枢密事务，在我的身边，应当以绥抚为原则。
English: Just when some people thought that Zhongshu was causing trouble, the emperor said to a close minister: Zhongshu used to be in charge of confidential affairs, and around me, the principle should be to caress.

古文：古伊、洛之间，尚有羌、浑杂居，况此羌部内属，素居渭南，土著已久，一旦擅意斥逐，或至骚动，又烦吾关右之民。 乃命知凤翔薛惟吉与仲舒对易其任。
现代文：古时伊、洛之间，尚且有羌族、浑族与汉人杂居，况且这些羌族内属，一向居住在渭河以南，居住已久，一旦擅意斥逐，可能导致骚动，又烦扰我的关右的百姓。 于是命令知凤翔薛惟吉与仲舒对调任地。
English: In ancient times, there were mixed populations of Yi, Hun, and Han people living in the area between Yi and Luo. Moreover, these members of the Yi family had always lived south of the Wei River and had been living there for a long time. If they were to expel them without permission, it could lead to disturbances and annoy the people of My Guan. Therefore, they ordered Zhifeng Xiang Xue Weijie and Zhongshu to change their posts.

古文：连知兴元、江陵二府，加给事中。
现代文：接连任知兴元、江陵二府，加任给事中。
English: He was successively appointed to Chixingyuan and Gangneung two prefectures, and was additionally appointed to Zhizhong.

古文：会内侍蓝继宗使秦州还，言得地甚利。
现代文：内侍蓝继宗出使秦州回朝，述说得到渭南之地的好处。
English: The imperial chamberlain Lan Jizong sent an envoy to Qinzhou to return to the imperial court and tell of the benefits of the land south of the Yunnan River.

古文：乃召仲舒，拜户部侍郎，寻参知政事。
现代文：于是召见仲舒，授任户部侍郎，不久参知政事。
English: As a result, Zhongshu was summoned, appointed as a household attendant, and soon became involved in politics.

古文：二砦后为内地，岁获巨木之利。
现代文：后来大洛、小洛二寨成为内地，每年有采伐巨木的利益。
English: Later, Dalo and Xiaolou Erzhai became the mainland, and there is a benefit of logging huge trees every year.

古文：咸平初，拜礼部尚书，罢政，出知河阳。
现代文：咸平初年，授任礼部尚书，罢去参知政事，出京任知河阳。
English: In the first year of Xianping, he was appointed to the Ministry of Rites and Ceremonies, removed from his post to participate in government affairs, and went to Beijing to serve Chihayang.

古文：逾年，知开封府。
现代文：过了一年，任知开封府。
English: A year later, Ren Zhi opened the Imperial Palace.

古文：五年，以京府务剧求罢，遂以本官兼御史中丞，寻迁刑部尚书、知天雄军，徙河南。
现代文：咸平五年，因为京府政务繁剧请求辞职，于是以本官兼任御史中丞，不久改任刑部尚书、知天雄军，又改任知河南。
English: In the fifth year of Xianping, because of the Beijing government's complicated political affairs, he was asked to resign, so he also served as the Vice-President of History, and soon he was reassigned to the Criminal Department of Shangshu, Chitiengungun, and Chihenan.

古文：景德中，并州缺守，上以北门重镇须大臣镇抚，非张齐贤、温仲舒不可，令宰相谕旨，皆不愿往。
现代文：景德年间，并州缺乏长官，皇上认为北门重镇须大臣镇抚，非张齐贤、温仲舒不可，命令宰相宣谕旨意，两人都不愿去。
English: During the reign of King Jingde, when there was a lack of governors in the province, the emperor thought that the minister should govern the important town of Beimen, and that Zhang Qixian and Wen Zhongshu were indispensable. He ordered the prime minister to announce the will, but neither of them wanted to go.

古文：未几，复知审官院。
现代文：不久，又主持审官院。
English: Soon, he presided over the Supreme People's Procuratorate.

古文：大中祥符中，进秩户部尚书。
现代文：大中祥符年间，进升为户部尚书。
English: During his junior high school years, he was promoted to the head of the household.

古文：三年，判昭文馆大学士，命下，卒，年六十七。
现代文：大中祥符三年，任他为判昭文馆大学士，任命下达时，去世，终年六十七岁。
English: In the third year of high school, he was appointed as a judge of the Shouwen Academy, and died at the age of sixty-seven.

古文：赠左仆射，谥恭肃。
现代文：追赠左仆射，赐谥号为 恭肃 。
English: He posthumously bestowed the title of Zuofei (左仆射) and the posthumous title of Gongshu (恭肃).

古文：仲舒敏于应务。少与吕蒙正契厚，又同登第。
现代文：仲舒应接事务敏捷，年轻时与吕蒙正交情很厚，又一起考中进士。
English: Zhongshu is quick to respond to matters. When he was young, he had a strong friendship with Lv Meng, and together they passed the junior high school entrance examination.

古文：仲舒黜废累年，蒙正居中书，极力援引，及被任用，反攻蒙正，士论薄之。
现代文：仲舒被斥贬多年，蒙正在中书省任职，极力援引，被任用后，却反攻蒙正，士大夫议论时都看不起他。
English: Zhongshu was scorned for many years. He vigorously quoted Meng Zheng, who was in charge of the Ministry of Education and Culture. However, after he was appointed, he attacked Meng Zheng. The scholar-bureaucrats looked down on him in their discussions.

古文：自为正言至贰枢密，皆与寇准同进，时人谓之 温寇 。
现代文：自从任正言到枢密副使，都与寇准同时进升，当时人称之为 温寇 。
English: Ever since Ren Zhengyuan was promoted to Privy Vice-Minister, he was promoted at the same time as Qiao Jun. At that time, people called him Wen Qiao.

古文：子嗣宗、嗣良、嗣先、嗣立。仲舒既卒，帝悯其孤弱，并禄以官。
现代文：他的儿子名嗣宗、嗣良、嗣先、嗣立，仲舒死后，皇帝可怜他们孤弱，都录用为官。
English: After the death of Zhongshu, the emperor took pity on his sons, named Hezong, He Liang, He Xian and He Li, and appointed them to government posts.

