古文：黄帝问曰：余闻善言天者，必有验于人；善言古者，必有合于今；善言人者，必有厌于己。
现代文：黄帝问道：我听说善于谈论天道的，必能应验于人事；善于谈论历史的，必能应合于今事；善于谈论人事的，必能结合自己的情况。
English: The Yellow Emperor asked, "I have heard that if you are good at talking about heavenly things, you will be able to apply it to human affairs; if you are good at talking about history, you will be able to apply it to current affairs; and if you are good at talking about human affairs, you will be able to apply it to your own situation.

古文：如此则道不惑而要数极，所谓明也。
现代文：这样，才能掌握事物的规律而不迷惑，了解事物的要领极其透彻，这就是所谓明达事理的人。
English: In this way, you can grasp the laws of things without being confused, and understand the essentials of things very thoroughly. This is the so-called sensible person.

古文：今余问于夫子，令言而可知，视而可见，扪而可得，令验于己而发蒙解惑，可得而闻乎？
现代文：现在我想请教先生，将问诊所知，望诊所见，切脉所得的情况告诉我，使我有所体验，启发蒙昧，解除疑惑，你能告诉我吗？
English: Now I would like to ask you, sir, please let the clinic know, see the clinic, tell me the situation of the incision, let me experience, enlighten, dispel doubts, can you tell me?

古文：岐伯再拜稽首对曰：何道之问也？
现代文：岐伯行二次大拜之礼后回答说：你要问的是哪些道理呢？
English: After the second major prayer, Qibogang replied, "What is the reason for your question?

古文：帝曰：愿闻人之五脏卒痛，何气使然？
现代文：黄帝说：我想听听人体的五脏突然作痛，是什么邪气造成的呢？
English: The Yellow Emperor said, "I want to hear about the five viscera of the human body suddenly experiencing pain. What evil spirit caused it?"

古文：岐伯对曰：经脉流行不止，环周不休。寒气入经而稽迟，泣而不行，客于脉外则血少，客于脉中则气不通，故卒然而痛。
现代文：岐伯回答说：人体经脉中的气血流行不止，如环无端，如果寒邪侵入了经脉，则经脉气血的循行迟滞，凝涩而不畅行；如果寒邪侵袭于经脉外面，则使经脉内气血虚少；如果寒邪侵袭于经脉内部，则气血留止而不通，这二个原因都会导致突然产生疼痛。
English: Qi Bo replied: The circulation of qi and blood in the human meridians is endlessly prevalent. If the cold invades the meridians, the circulation of qi and blood in the meridians will be sluggish and stiff. If the cold invades the outside of the meridians, the qi and blood in the meridians will be reduced. If the cold invades the inside of the meridians, the qi and blood will be blocked. Both of these reasons will lead to sudden pain.

古文：帝曰：其痛或卒然而止者，或痛甚不休者，或痛甚不可按者，或按之而痛止者，或按之无益者，或喘动应手者，或心与背相引而痛者，或胁肋与少腹相引而痛者，或腹痛引阴股者，或痛宿昔而成积者，或卒然痛死不知人，有少间复生者，或痛而呕者，或腹痛而后泄者，或痛而闭不通者。
现代文：黄帝说：其疼痛有突然停止的，有疼得很剧烈而不停止的，有痛得很剧烈而不能按压的，有按压而疼痛停止的，有按压也不见缓解的，有疼痛跳动应手的，有心和背部相互牵引而痛的，有胁肋和腹相互牵引而痛的，有腹痛牵引阴股的，有疼痛日久而成积聚的，有突然疼痛昏厥如死不知人事稍停片刻又清醒的，有痛而呕吐的，有腹痛而后泄泻的，有痛而大便闭结不通的。
English: Huang Di said: the pain has a sudden stop, has a very severe pain and does not stop, has a very severe pain and cannot be pressed, has a pressure and the pain stops, has a pressure and there is no relief, has a pain beating handy, has a heart and back mutual traction and pain, has a stress rib and abdomen mutual traction and pain, has an abdominal pain traction pubic, has a pain for a long time and accumulated, has a sudden pain fainting like death, I do not know if the person stops for a moment and is awake, has pain and vomiting, has abdominal pain and then diarrhea, has pain and stool does not close.

古文：凡此诸痛，各不同形，别之奈何？
现代文：以上这些疼痛的情况，其发病情形各不相同，如何加以区别呢？
English: The above-mentioned pain conditions have different incidence, how can they be distinguished?

古文：岐伯曰：寒气客于脉外则脉寒，脉寒则缩蜷，缩蜷则脉绌急，绌急则外引小络，故卒然而痛。
现代文：岐伯说：寒邪侵袭于脉外，则经脉受寒，经脉受寒则经脉收缩不伸，收缩不伸则屈曲拘急，因而牵引在外的细小脉络，内外引急，故突然发生疼痛。
English: Qi Bo said: if the cold invades outside the pulse, the meridians will be affected by the cold, if the meridians are affected by the cold, the meridians will contract and not stretch, and if the contractions do not stretch, the flexion will be urgent. As a result, the fine veins outside will be pulled, and the inside and outside will be pulled, so the pain will suddenly occur.

古文：得炅则痛立止，因重中于寒，则痛久矣。
现代文：如果得到热气，则疼痛立刻停止，假如再次感受寒邪，卫阳受损就会久痛不止。
English: If you get hot gas, the pain will stop immediately. If you feel cold again, the damage to the solar plexus will last for a long time.

古文：寒气客于经脉之中，与炅气相薄则脉满，满则痛而不可按也。
现代文：寒邪侵袭经脉之中，和人体本身的热气相互搏争，则经脉充满，脉满为实，不任压迫，故痛而不可按。
English: When the cold invades the meridians and fights with the human body's own heat, the meridians are full, the pulses are full, they are not allowed to be pressed, so they are painful and cannot be pressed.

古文：寒气稽留，炅气从上，则脉充大而血气乱，故痛甚不可按也。
现代文：寒邪停留于脉中，人体本身的热气则随之而上，与寒邪相搏，使经脉充满，气血运行紊乱，故疼痛剧烈而不可触按。
English: The cold evil stays in the pulse, and the hot air of the human body itself rises with it, fighting with the cold evil, filling the meridians, and disrupting the operation of qi and blood. Therefore, the pain is severe and cannot be touched.

古文：寒气客于肠胃之间，膜原之下，血不得散，小络急引故痛，按之则血气散，故按之痛止。
现代文：寒邪侵袭于肠胃之间，膜原之下，以致血气凝涩而不散，细小的脉络拘急牵引，所以疼痛；如果以手按揉，则血气散行，故按之疼痛停止。
English: The cold invades between the intestines and stomach, under the membrane, so that the blood congeals and does not disperse. The small veins are urgently pulled, so it is painful; if you rub it with your hand, the blood will disperse, so press it to stop the pain.

古文：寒气客于侠脊之脉，则深按之不能及，故按之无益也。
现代文：寒邪侵袭于侠脊脉，由于邪侵的部位较深，按揉难以达到病所，故按揉也无济于事。
English: The cold invades the chivalrous spinal cord. Since the site of the invasion is deep, it is difficult to reach the site of the disease by rubbing, so rubbing does not help.

古文：寒气客于冲脉，冲脉起于关元，随腹直上，寒气客则脉不通，脉不通则气因之，故喘动应手矣。
现代文：寒邪侵袭于冲脉之中，冲脉是从小腹部的关元穴开始，循腹上行，如因寒气侵入则冲脉不通，脉不通则气因之鼓脉欲通，故腹痛而跳动应手。
English: The cold invades the pulses. The pulses start from the keyhole of the small abdomen and travel up the abdomen. If the cold air invades, the pulses will not pass. If the pulses do not pass, the qi will want to pass through the drum, so the abdominal pain will be relieved.

古文：寒气客于背俞之脉则脉泣，脉泣则血虚，血虚则痛。其俞注于心，故相引而痛。按之则热气至，热气至则痛止矣。
现代文：寒邪侵于足太阳膀胱经的背俞穴，则血脉流行滞涩，脉涩则血虚，血虚则疼痛，因足太阳膀胱经的背俞穴与心相连，故心与背相引而痛，按揉能使热气来复，热气来复则寒邪消散，故疼痛即刻停止。
English: If the cold evil invades the dorsal fossa of the solar plexus of the foot, the blood circulation will be astringent, the astringency will be blood deficiency, and the blood deficiency will be pain. Because the dorsal fossa of the solar plexus of the foot is connected to the heart, the heart and the back are attracted to each other, and the pain will stop immediately. Kneading can make the hot air come back, and the hot air will dissipate the cold evil.

古文：寒气客于厥阴之脉，厥阴之脉者，络阴器，系于肝，寒气客于脉中，则血泣脉急，故胁肋与少腹相引痛矣。
现代文：寒邪侵袭于足厥阴肝经，足厥阴肝经循股阴入毛中，环阴器抵少腹，布胁肋而属于肝，寒邪侵入于脉中，则血凝涩而脉紧急，故胁肋与少腹牵引作痛。
English: Cold sores invade the foot, leg and liver meridians, the foot, leg and liver meridians follow the groin and enter the hair, the annulus reaches the lower abdomen, the cloth-covered ribs belong to the liver, the cold sores invade the pulse, the blood is coagulated and the pulse is urgent, so the coagulated ribs and the lower abdomen are painful.

古文：厥气客于阴股，寒气上及少腹，血泣在下相引，故腹痛引阴股。
现代文：寒厥之气客于阴股，寒邪上及小腹，血凝涩向下牵引，则小腹疼痛牵引阴股。
English: The cold air is attracted to the genitals, the cold is attracted to the upper and lower abdomen, the blood coagulation is attracted downward, and the pain of the lower abdomen is attracted to the genitals.

古文：寒气客于小肠膜原之间，络血之中，血泣不得注于大经，血气稽留不得行，故宿昔而成积矣。
现代文：寒邪侵入于小肠膜原之间、络血之中，使络血凝涩不能流注于大经脉，血气留止不能畅行，故日久便可结成积聚。
English: The cold invades between the small intestinal membranes and the blood vessels, so that the blood clots can not flow into the great meridians, and the blood gas retention can not go smoothly, so it can accumulate for a long time.

古文：寒气客于五脏，厥逆上泄，阴气竭，阳气未入，故卒然痛死不知人，气复反则生矣。
现代文：寒邪侵袭于五脏，迫使五脏之气逆而上行，以致脏气上越外泄，阴气竭于内，阳气不得入，阴阳暂时相离，故突然疼痛昏死，不省人事；如果阳气复返，阴阳相接，则可以苏醒。
English: The evil of cold invades the five viscera, forcing the gas of the five viscera to go up, so that the dirty gas leaks more and more, the yin gas is exhausted inside, the yang gas cannot enter, and the yin and yang are temporarily separated, so the pain suddenly faints, unconscious; if the yang gas returns, and the yin and yang are connected, you can wake up.

古文：寒气客于肠胃，厥逆上出，故痛而呕也。
现代文：寒邪侵袭于肠胃，迫使肠胃之气逆而上行，故出现疼痛而呕吐。
English: The cold invades the intestines and stomach, forcing the intestinal and gastric gas to rise in the opposite direction, causing pain and vomiting.

古文：寒气客于小肠，小肠不得成聚，故后泄腹痛矣。
现代文：寒邪侵袭于小肠，小肠为受盛之腑，因寒而阳气不化，水谷不得停留，故泄泻而腹痛。
English: The evil of cold invades the small intestine. The small intestine is the key to prosperity. Because of the cold, it does not become yang. It cannot stay in the trough, so it causes diarrhea and abdominal pain.

古文：热气留于小肠，肠中痛、瘅热、焦渴，则坚干不得出，故痛而闭不通矣。
现代文：如果是热邪留蓄于小肠，也可发生小肠中疼痛，由于内热伤津而唇焦口渴，粪便坚硬难以排出，故腹痛而大便秘结不通。
English: If the fever is stored in the small intestine, pain can also occur in the small intestine. Due to the internal heat injury, the lips are hot and thirsty, the feces are hard and difficult to discharge, so the abdomen is painful and the stool does not pass.

古文：帝曰：所谓言而可知者也，视而可见，奈何？
现代文：黄帝说：以上所说从问诊中可以了解，至于望诊可见又是怎样的呢？
English: Huang Di said: The above can be understood from the consultation, but what about the observation?

古文：岐伯曰：五脏六腑，固尽有部，视其五色，黄赤为热，白为寒，青黑为痛，此所谓视而可见者也。
现代文：岐伯说：五脏六腑在面部各有所属部位，望面部五色的变化就可以诊断疾病，如黄色赤色主热，白色主寒，青色黑色主痛，这都是通过望诊可以了解的。
English: Qi Bo said: The five viscera and six glands each have their own parts in the face. Looking at the changes in the five colors of the face can diagnose diseases, such as yellow-red fever, white-cold, and blue-black pain, which can be understood through observation.

古文：帝曰：扪而可得奈何？
现代文：黄帝说：用手切诊而知病情是怎样的呢？
English: Huang Di said: How is it to know the condition by hand incision?

古文：岐伯曰：视其主病之脉，坚而血及陷下者，皆可扪而得也。
现代文：岐伯说：首先确定主病的经脉，然后以手循按，如果脉坚实的，是有邪气结聚；如果属气血留滞的，脉必充盛而高起；如果脉陷下的，是气血不足，多属阴证。
English: Qi Bo said: First of all, determine the meridians of the main disease, and then press it by hand. If the vein is solid, there is evil gas agglomeration; if it is qi and blood retention, the vein will be full and high; if the vein is sunken, it is qi and blood deficiency, mostly negative evidence.

古文：帝曰：善。
现代文：这些都是可以用手扪切按循而可得知的。
English: Emperor Jinwu said, "Very good."

古文：余知百病生于气也，怒则气上，喜则气缓，悲则气消，恐则气下，寒则气收，炅则气泄，惊则气乱，劳则气耗，思则气结。
现代文：黄帝说：好。我已知道许多疾病的发生，都是由气机失调引起的，暴怒则气上逆，大喜则气涣散，大悲则至气消，恐惧则气下沉，遇寒则气收敛，受热则气外泄，受惊则气紊乱，过劳则气耗散，过虑则气郁结。
English: Huang Di said: "Good. I already know that the occurrence of many diseases is caused by the imbalance of qi, violent anger is the opposite of qi, great happiness is the opposite of qi, great sorrow is the opposite of qi, fear is the opposite of qi, cold is the opposite of qi, heat is the opposite of qi, fright is the opposite of qi, overwork is the opposite of qi, and worry is the opposite of qi.

古文：九气不同，何病之生？
现代文：这九种气的变化各不相同，会发生怎样的疾病呢？
English: The changes of these nine kinds of qi are all different, so what kind of disease will occur?

古文：岐伯曰：怒则气逆，甚则呕血及飧泄，故气上矣。
现代文：岐伯说：大怒会使肝气上逆，血随气逆，甚则吐血，或肝气乘脾发生飧泄，所以说是怒则气上。
English: Qi Bo said: great anger will cause the liver gas to rise, the blood will rise with the gas, and even vomit blood, or the liver gas will leak through the spleen, so it is said that anger is on the gas.

古文：喜则气和志达，荣卫通利，故气缓矣。
现代文：高兴时气和顺而志意畅达，营卫之气通利，但是大喜则会使气涣散。
English: The joy of the times and the smoothness of the will are unimpeded, and the spirit of protection is beneficial, but the great happiness will disperse the discouragement.

古文：悲则心系急，肺布叶举，而上焦不通，荣卫不散，热气在中，故气消矣。
现代文：悲哀太过会使心联系其它器官的经脉拘急，影响到肺使肺叶张大抬高，上焦随之闭塞不通，营卫之气得不到布散全身，热气郁闭于胸中，时间长了会转化为热，耗损肺气，所以说是悲则气消。
English: Too much sadness will cause the heart to contact the meridians of other organs. It will affect the lungs, causing the lungs to expand and elevate. The upper focus will be blocked, and the air of protection will not be able to spread throughout the body. The hot air will be blocked in the chest. If it takes a long time, it will be converted into heat, and the lungs will be exhausted. Therefore, it is said that sadness is eliminated.

古文：恐则精却，却则上焦闭，闭则气还，还则下焦胀，故气不行矣。
现代文：恐惧会使肾脏的精气下沉，精气下沉则升降不交，故上焦闭塞，上焦闭塞则气还归于下，气郁于下则下焦胀满，所以说是恐则气下。
English: Fear will cause the kidney's essence to sink, and if the essence sinks, it will not rise and fall, so the upper focus will be blocked, and if the upper focus is blocked, the qi will return to the lower, and if the qi is depressed in the lower, the lower qi will swell, so it is said that fear is the lower qi.

古文：寒则腠理闭，气不行，故气收矣。
现代文：寒冷之气侵袭人体，会使肌肤腠理汗孔闭密，阳气不能向外通行而收敛于内，所以说是寒则气收。
English: When cold air invades the human body, it causes the pores of the skin and the sweat glands to close, and the yang cannot pass out but converges inward, so it is said that cold is astringent.

古文：炅则腠理开，荣卫通，汗大泄，故气泄。
现代文：火热之气能使人肌肤腠理汗孔开放，营卫通畅，汗液大量外出，致使气随津泄，所以说是热则气泄。
English: The hot gas can make people's skin pores and sweat open, and the blood circulation is smooth, and a large amount of sweat goes out, causing the gas to leak, so it is said that the heat is a gas leak.

古文：惊则心无所倚，神无所归，虑无所定，故气乱矣。
现代文：受惊会使人心悸动无所依附，神志无所归宿，心中疑虑不安，所以说是惊则气乱。
English: Shock can make people's hearts throb without attachment, their spirits have nowhere to go, and their hearts are doubtful and uneasy, so it is said that shock is angry.

古文：劳则喘息汗出，外内皆越，故气耗矣。
现代文：劳役过度会使人气动喘息，汗出过多，喘则内气外越，汗出过多则外气耗散，内外之气皆泄越，所以说是劳则气耗。
English: Excessive labor will cause people to gasp for air, sweat too much, and the gasping will cause the internal air to leak out, and the excessive sweating will cause the external air to dissipate, and the internal and external air will leak out, so it is said that labor is air consumption.

古文：思则心有所存，神有所归，正气留而不行，故气结矣。
现代文：过度思虑会使人精神过度集中，心有所存，神归一处，以致正气留结而不能正常运行，所以说是思则气结。
English: Excessive thinking will make a person's spirit over-concentrate, the mind will be preoccupied, and the mind will be in one place, so that the positive qi will be tied up and cannot run normally, so it is said that thinking is a qi knot.

