古文：或献书燕王： 王而不能自恃，不恶卑名以事强，事强可以令国安长久，万世之善计。
现代文：有人向燕王送上书信说： 大王如果不能依靠自己的力量保存国家，不如不在乎名声的卑贱侍奉强国，假如侍奉强国可以使国家长久安定，也是泽被万世的上策。
English: Someone sent a letter to King Yan saying: If the great king cannot preserve the country by relying on his own strength, it is better to serve the powerful country as a lowly person who does not care about fame. If serving the powerful country can make the country stable for a long time, it is also the best strategy for the world.

古文：以事强而不可以为万世，则不如合弱。将奈何合弱不能如一，此臣之所为山东苦也。
现代文：认为侍奉强国不能奠定万世基业，那就不如联合弱国，只是无法把弱国联合起来，使它们行动如一，这是臣下为山东各国感到遗憾的。
English: He thought that serving the powerful countries could not lay the foundation of the world, so it would be better to unite the weak countries, but it was not possible to unite the weak countries and make them act as one. This was regretted by the vassals for the Shandong countries.

古文： 比目之鱼，不相得则不能行，故古之人称之，以其合两而如一也。
现代文：比目鱼，两眼不在一侧就不能游动，古人所以这样称呼它，是因为它能合二如一。
English: The flounder cannot swim without its two eyes on the same side. The ancients called it this way because it can merge into one.

古文：今山东合弱而不能如一，是山东之智不如鱼也。
现代文：如今山东弱国联合却不能步调一致，这就看出山东六国人的才智赶不上比目鱼。
English: Nowadays, Shandong weak countries can't keep pace with each other, which shows that the talents of the six countries in Shandong can't keep up with the flounder.

古文：又譬如车士之引车也，三人不能行，索二人，五人而车因行矣。
现代文：又譬如车夫驾车，三个人各行其事车就不能走，绑上聪个人，这样就是有五人乘车，车也会走的。
English: Another example is a driver driving a car. If three people each do their own thing, the car can't go. If one person is tied up, then there are five people in the car, and the car will go.

古文：今山东三国弱而不能敌秦，索二国，因能胜秦矣。
现代文：现在山东任意三个国家都不能单独对抗秦国，但随便联合两个国家，就都能战胜秦国。
English: Now, any three countries in Shandong cannot fight against Qin alone, but any two countries can defeat Qin.

古文：然而山东不知相索，智固不如车士矣。
现代文：然而山东各国却不知道互相联合，才智当然还不如车夫。
English: However, the countries of Shandong do not know how to unite with each other, and of course, their talents are not as good as the coachmen.

古文：胡与越人，言语不相知，志意不相通，同舟而凌波，至其相救助如一也。
现代文：胡人和越国人，言语不能互相明白，想法不能沟通，一同乘船航行在波涛之上，也会互相帮助像一个人一样。
English: Hu people and Viet people, words can not understand each other, ideas can not communicate, sailing together on a boat on the waves, will help each other like a person.

古文：今山东之相与也，如同舟而济，秦之兵至，不能相救助如一，智又不如胡、越之人矣。
现代文：如今山东各国互相联合，正像同舟共济一样，秦兵一旦到来，不能互相救助像一个整体，才智又赶不上胡人、越国人。
English: Nowadays, Shandong countries are united with each other, just like helping each other in the same boat. Once the Qin soldiers arrived, they could not help each other as a whole, and their intelligence could not keep up with the Hu people and the Yue people.

古文：三物者，人之所能为也，山东之主遂不悟，此臣之所为山东苦也。
现代文：以上三件事，是常人所能做到的，山东各国的国君却不能领悟，这是臣下为山东各国感到遗憾的。
English: The above three things can be done by ordinary people, but the sovereigns of Shandong countries cannot understand them, which is regretted by the vassals of Shandong countries.

古文：愿大王之熟虑之也。 山东相合，之主者不卑名，之国者可长存，之卒者出士以戍韩、梁之西边，此燕之上计也。
现代文：希望大王仔细想一想这件事。 山东各国互相联合，傲国君的就不会使名声卑贱，国家也可以长存直到永远。派兵戍守韩、魏两国的西部边境，这是燕国的上策。
English: It is hoped that the great king will think about this matter carefully. If the countries of Shandong unite with each other, those who are proud of the country will not lower their reputation, and the country can survive forever. Sending soldiers to guard the western border of South Korea and Wei is the best policy of Yan.

古文：不急为此，国必危矣，主必大忧。
现代文：不赶快这样做，国家一定很危险，国君一定有大患。
English: If we don't do this soon, the country will be in danger, and the sovereign will be in serious trouble.

古文：今韩、梁、赵三国以合矣，秦见三晋之坚也，必南伐楚。
现代文：现在韩、魏、赵三国已经联合了，秦囤看到三国如此坚定如一，必定会向南进攻楚国。
English: Now that Han, Wei, and Zhao have united, Qin Yu, seeing that the three countries are so firm as one, will certainly attack Chu to the south.

古文：赵见秦之伐楚也，必北攻燕。
现代文：赵国看到秦国进攻楚国，一定会向北进攻燕国。
English: When Zhao saw Qin attacking Chu, he would attack Yan to the north.

古文：物固有势异面患同者。
现代文：事情本来就有形势不同而祸患相同的情况。
English: There are situations where the situation is different but the scourge is the same.

古文：秦久伐韩，故中山亡；今久伐楚，燕必亡。
现代文：秦国长期进攻韩国，所以中山国被赵国灭亡了；如今秦国如果长时间进攻楚国，燕国一定要被赵国灭亡。
English: Qin attacked Korea for a long time, so Zhongshan was destroyed by Zhao; now, if Qin attacks Chu for a long time, Yan must be destroyed by Zhao.

古文：臣窃为王计，不如以兵南合三晋，约戍韩、梁之西边。
现代文：臣下私下为大王考虑，不如把军队同南面的韩、魏、赵三国军队联合，订约戍守韩、魏两国西部边境。
English: The vassal privately considered that it would be better to unite the army with the troops of South Korea, Wei and Zhao in the south and sign an agreement to guard the western border of South Korea and Wei.

古文：山东不能坚为此，此必皆亡。 
现代文：山东各国如不能坚定不移地这样做，这些国家一定会全部灭亡。 
English: If the Shandong countries cannot unswervingly do so, all these countries will surely perish.

古文：燕果以兵南合三晋也。
现代文：燕国果然把军队同南面的韩、魏、赵三国军队联合在一起。
English: Yan's state did unite its army with the armies of Han, Wei, and Zhao in the south.

