古文：起重光赤奋若，尽昭阳单阏三月，凡二年有奇。
现代文：起重光赤奋若，尽昭阳单阏三月，凡二年有奇。
English: If the lifting light is red-hot, the sun is shining brightly in March, every two years there is a miracle.

古文：太宗文武大圣大广孝皇帝中之中
现代文：太宗文武大圣大广孝皇帝中之中
English: Emperor Taizong, Emperor Wenwu, Emperor Sheng, Emperor Guangxiao

古文：贞观十五年辛丑，公元六四一年春，正月，甲戌，以吐蕃禄东赞为右卫大将军。
现代文：唐太宗贞观十五年春季，正月，甲戌，唐朝廷任命吐蕃禄东赞为右卫大将军。
English: In the spring of the 15th year of the reign of Emperor Taizong of Tang Dynasty, in the first month of the year, the Tang court appointed Tonglu Dongzan as the right guard general.

古文：上嘉禄东赞善应对，以琅邪公主外孙段氏妻之。辞曰： 臣国中自有妇，父母所聘，不可弃也。
现代文：太宗嘉许禄东赞善于应对，欲将琅邪公主的外孙女段氏嫁给他为妻，禄东赞推辞说： 臣在本国中自有妻子，是父母为我聘娶的，不能够抛弃。
English: Emperor Taizong praised Lu Dongzan for his ability to deal with the situation. Lu Dongzan wanted to marry Duan, the granddaughter of the evil princess, to him as his wife. Lu Dongzan said, "The minister has his own wife in his own country. My parents hired her for me, and I can't abandon her.

古文：且赞普未得谒公主，陪臣何敢先娶！ 
现代文：而且我们的赞普首领还未曾迎娶公主，陪臣我怎么敢先娶呢？ 
English: Moreover, our Zampu chief has not yet married a princess, so how dare I marry a vassal first?

古文：上益贤之，然欲抚以厚恩，竟不从其志。
现代文：太宗更加赞赏他，然而想要以厚礼隆恩加以抚慰，他最后还是没有从命。
English: Emperor Taizong appreciated him even more. However, he tried to console him with a generous gift, but in the end, he did not take his own life.

古文：丁丑，命礼部尚书江夏王道宗持节送文成公主于吐蕃。
现代文：丁丑，太宗令礼部尚书、江夏王李道宗持旌节护送文成公主到吐蕃。
English: Ding Yuxiu, Taizong ordered the Ministry of Ceremonies to write a formal letter, and the King of Jiangxia, Li Daozong, escorted Princess Wencheng to Tubo to celebrate the Lantern Festival.

古文：赞普大喜，见道宗，尽子婿礼，慕中国衣服、仪卫之美，为公主别筑城郭宫室而处之，自服纨绮以见公主。
现代文：吐蕃赞普非常高兴，见到李道宗，完全按婿礼行事，羡慕唐朝的服装和仪仗之美，将公主安置在特意营筑的城郭宫室之内，自己穿戴着精美的丝绸服装与公主见面。
English: Tubo Zampu was very happy to see Li Daozong, who acted completely according to the son-in-law's etiquette, envied the Tang Dynasty's clothing and the beauty of ceremonial warfare, placed the princess in a specially built castle palace room, and met the princess wearing exquisite silk clothing.

古文：其国人皆以赭涂面，公主恶之，赞普下令禁之；亦渐革其猜暴之性，遣子弟入国学，受《诗》、《书》。
现代文：吐蕃人的脸上都涂着红褐色、公主感到厌恶，赞普便下令禁止涂面；并且逐渐改变其猜忌粗暴的本性，派遣本族子弟到长安国子学，学习《诗经》、《尚书》等典籍。
English: The princess was disgusted by the reddish-brown face paint on the faces of the Tujue people, and Zampu ordered a ban on face painting; and gradually changed his suspicious and rough nature, sending his own children to study in Chang'an, learning classics such as "The Book of Songs" and "Shangshu."

古文：乙亥，突厥侯利苾可汗始帅部落济河，建牙于故定襄城，有户三万，胜兵四万，马九万匹，仍奏言： 臣非分蒙恩，为部落之长，愿子子孙孙为国家一犬，守吠北门。
现代文：乙亥，突厥俟利可汗开始率部落渡过黄河，在旧定襄城建牙帐，共有三万户，军队四万人，九万匹马，于是上奏言道： 我过分地蒙受恩宠，成为本部落的首领只希望子子孙孙为大唐效犬马之劳，守卫北面的大门。
English: At the turn of the century, the Turkic Qili Khan began to lead the tribe across the Yellow River and built a post in the old Dingxiang City, with a total of 30,000 households, 40,000 troops, and 90,000 horses. He then made a speech: I have been excessively blessed to become the leader of this tribe. I only hope that my children and grandchildren will serve the Great Tang as dogs and horses and guard the northern gate.

古文：若薛延陀侵逼，请从家属入长城。 
现代文：假如薛延陀侵犯逼近，请求允许我方家属进入长城以内。 
English: If Xue Yantu's invasion approaches, please allow our family members to enter the Great Wall.

古文：诏许之。
现代文：太宗下诏应允。
English: The emperor issued an imperial edict approving it.

古文：上将幸洛阳，命皇太子监国，留右仆射高士廉辅之。
现代文：太宗将要巡幸洛阳，命皇太子留守监国，并留下尚书右仆射高士廉辅佐太子。
English: Emperor Taizong was going to visit Luoyang, and ordered the crown prince to remain in charge of the country, leaving Prince Shangshu's right-hand man, Prince Shao Gao, and Prince Rensu.

古文：辛巳，行及温汤，卫士崔卿、刁文懿惮于行役，冀上惊而止，乃夜射行宫，矢及寝庭者五；皆以大逆论。
现代文：辛巳，太宗车辇到了温汤。卫士崔卿、刁文懿二人厌倦于行进之苦，希望太宗能因偶受惊吓而停止巡行，于是在夜里向太宗行宫射箭，有五枝箭射入寝宫庭院；事发后，二人均以十恶中的大逆罪被处死。
English: The guards Cui Xing (崔卿) and Yu Wenyuan (文) were tired of the hardships of marching and hoped that Taizong would stop marching due to occasional fright, so they shot arrows at Taizong's traveling palace at night, and five arrows were shot into the courtyard of the sleeping palace; after the incident, they were both executed for the crime of high treason among the ten evils.

古文：三月，戊辰，幸襄城宫，地既烦热，复多毒蛇；庚午，罢襄城宫，分赐百姓，免阎立德官。
现代文：三月，戊辰，太宗巡幸襄城宫，当地天气燥热，又多毒蛇出没；庚午，废除襄城宫的行宫地位，将它分赐给当地的百姓，并罢免了营建此宫的阎立德的官职。
English: In March, Wu Chen, Emperor Taizong visited the Xiangcheng Palace, where the weather was hot and there were many poisonous snakes; in the afternoon, he abolished the status of the Xiangcheng Palace and gave it to the local people, and removed Yan Lide, who built the palace, from his official position.

古文：夏，四月，辛卯朔，诏以来年二月有事于泰山。
现代文：夏季，四月，辛卯朔，太宗下诏宣布下一年二月份在泰山行封禅礼。
English: In the summer, in April, Emperor Taizong issued an edict announcing that the enthronement ceremony would be held at Mount Tai in February of the following year.

古文：上以近世阴阳杂书，讹伪尤多，命太常博士吕才与诸术士刊定可行者，凡四十七卷。
现代文：太宗认为近代以来的阴阳杂书讹误很多，命太常博士吕才与众多方术之士刊定其中可以通行的内容，共成四十卷。
English: Taizong believed that since modern times, there have been many mistakes in yin and yang miscellaneous books, and ordered Dr. Lu Cai and many masters of magic to publish the contents that can be passed, a total of forty volumes.

古文：己酉，书成，上之；才皆为之叙，质以经史。
现代文：己酉，书修成，进呈太宗；吕才每本书都写有序，质证于经史书籍。
English: He was self-taught, accomplished in calligraphy, and advanced to Taizong; he wrote each book in an orderly manner, which was confirmed by the books of history.

古文：其叙《宅经》，以为： 近世巫觋妄分五姓，如张、王为商，武、庾为羽，似取谐韵；至于以柳为宫，以赵为角，又复不类。
现代文：他为《宅经》作序，认为： 近代以来巫觋阴阳之术，妄自划分姓氏以附会音律，譬如张、王姓为商，武、庚姓为羽，似乎是取其谐韵；至于以柳姓为宫，以赵姓为角，又象是不伦不类。
English: He wrote the preface to the "House Book" and believed that: Since modern times, in the art of yin and yang, surnames have been arbitrarily divided according to the musical notation. For example, the surnames of Zhang and Wang are Shang, and the surnames of Wu and Geng are Yu, which seems to be the result of their harmonious rhyme. As for the surnames of Liu for Gong and Zhao for Angle, they seem to be indistinguishable.

古文：或同出一姓，分属宫商；或复姓数字，莫辨征羽。
现代文：或者同出于一姓，却分属宫商二调；或者属于复姓的几个字，却不能分辨徵羽二调。
English: Or the same family name, but it is divided into two tones; or a few words belonging to a compound surname, but it is not possible to distinguish between the two tones.

古文：此则事不稽古，义理乖僻者也。 
现代文：这些都是不符合古代事例，也深乖义理的。 
English: These are doctrines for which there is no basis in the ancient books, and which are based on anomalous and perverse principles.

古文：叙《禄命》，以为： 禄命之书，多言或中，人乃信之。
现代文：序《禄命》一篇认为： 福禄性命之书，说的多了总能说中，人们便相信它。
English: An article in the preface of "The Fortune of Life" says: "The book of the fortune of life, if you say it often enough, people will believe it.

古文：然长平坑卒，未闻共犯三刑；南阳贵士，何必俱当六合！
现代文：然而长平之战，秦国坑杀赵国士兵四十五万人，没有听说他们都犯了三刑；汉光武帝时南阳人士多富贵，又哪里都是遇上六合的吉日。
English: However, in the Changping War, Qin Guofeng killed 450,000 soldiers from Zhao, and it is not known that they all committed the three punishments; during the reign of Emperor Guangwu of the Han Dynasty, Nanyang people were more affluent, and the auspicious day of Liuhe was everywhere.

古文：今亦有同年同禄而贵贱悬殊，共命共胎而寿夭更异。
现代文：如今也有虽然同年同榜登第，却贵贱相差悬殊，共命运同胞兄弟却寿命长短有异。
English: Nowadays, although the same year with the first place, but the difference between the rich and the poor is very large, but the life expectancy of brothers and sisters who share the same fate is different.

古文：按鲁庄公法应贫贱，又尪弱短陋，惟得长寿；秦始皇法无官爵，纵得禄，少奴婢，为人无始有终；汉武帝、后魏孝文帝皆法无官爵；宋武帝禄与命并当空亡，唯宜长子，虽有次子，法当早夭；此皆禄命不验之著明者也。 
现代文：按命理说鲁庄公本来应该贫贱，又懦弱见识短，惟独得以长寿；秦始皇不应该有官爵，纵使得到食禄，也少有奴婢，为人没有起始而有终极；汉武帝、后魏孝文帝都是本不应有官爵；以宋武帝的禄与命来讲都是截路空亡，只对长子合宜，即使有次子，也应当早早夭折；这些都是福禄性命不征验的明显证明。 
English: According to the principle of life, Lu Zhuang Gong should have been poor, cowardly and short-sighted, but he was able to live a long life; Qin Shihuang should not have a title of nobility, even if he got food, he had few slaves and maids, and there was no beginning but an end for a person; Emperor Hanwu and Emperor Xiaowen of the later Wei Dynasty should not have had a title of nobility; as far as the Song Emperor's reward and life were concerned, they were cut off and died in vain, only suitable for the eldest son, and even if there was a second son, he should die early; these are obvious proofs that

古文：其叙《葬》，以为： 《孝经》云： 卜其宅兆而安厝之。 盖以窀穸既终，永安体魄，而朝市迁变，泉石交侵，不可前知，故谋之龟筮。
现代文：吕才为《葬》作序，认为： 《孝经》说： 卜选阴宅墓地，然后再加以安葬 ，这是因为人死后长夜漫漫，体魄永远安息，然而城邑集市不断变化，泉水与石块交互侵蚀，不可以预先知道，所以要谋求于龟筮占卜之类。
English: Lu Cai prefaced "Burial" with the following thought: "The Book of Filial Piety" says, "Choose a cemetery in the house of the dead, and then bury the dead." This is because after a person dies, the night is long and the body is forever at rest. However, city markets are constantly changing, and springs and stones are subject to erosion. It is impossible to know in advance, so one should seek divination from turtles and other creatures.

古文：近代或选年月，或相墓田，以为一事失所，祸及死生。
现代文：近几年来丧葬选年月，或相土为墓，认为一件事偶有差失，便会累及死生的大问题。
English: In recent years, funerals have been choosing the date, or the soil for the grave, believing that if one thing goes wrong, it will affect the big problem of life and death.

古文：按《礼》，天子、诸侯、大夫葬皆有月数。是古人不择年月也。
现代文：按照《周礼》的说法：天子、诸侯与士大夫的丧葬都有规定的月数，这说明古人不作年月的挑选。
English: According to the "Weekly Rituals," the funerals of emperors, princes and scholars all have a specified number of months, which shows that the ancients did not make a selection of years and months.

古文：《春秋》： 九月丁巳，葬定公，雨，不克葬，戊午，日下昃，乃克葬。 
现代文：《春秋》写道： 九月丁巳，安葬鲁定公，赶上天下大雨，没有安葬，戊午太阳西斜，才将定公安葬。 
English: "Spring and Autumn" wrote: In September, it was time to bury Lu Dinggong, but when the world was hit by heavy rain, there was no funeral, and the sun set at noon, it was time to hold a public funeral.

古文：是不择日也。
现代文：这说明也不选择日期。
English: That means not choosing a date either.

古文：郑葬简公，司墓之室当路，毁之则朝而窆，不毁则日中而窆，子产不毁，是不择时也。
现代文：郑国安葬简公，看墓的房子正好档在安葬的道上，拆毁它则可以早晨落葬，不拆它则要到中午才能落葬，子产决定不拆毁而葬，这是不选择时辰。
English: Zheng Guo buried Jian Gong peacefully. The tomb-watching house happened to be on the road of burial. If it was demolished, it could be buried in the morning. If it was not demolished, it could not be buried until noon. Zi Bao decided not to demolish but to bury. This was not a choice of time.

古文：古之葬者皆于国都之北，兆域有常处，是不择地也。
现代文：古人安葬均在京城的北面，墓地有固定的地方，这便是不另外选择墓地。
English: The ancient people were buried in the north of the capital, the cemetery has a fixed place, this is the only choice of cemetery.

古文：今葬书以为子孙富贵、贫贱、寿夭，皆因卜葬所致。
现代文：如今丧葬书上说子孙富贵与贫贱、长寿与夭折，都是由于占卜丧葬的缘故。
English: Nowadays, the funerary books say that the descendants of the rich and the poor, the long life and the premature death are all due to the divination funeral.

古文：夫子文为令尹而三已，柳下惠为士师而三黜，计其丘陇，未尝改移。
现代文：子文三次做令尹而三次被罢免，柳下惠三次做士师也三次被免职。料想他们的丘陇墓地，也没有移动吧。
English: Zi Wen was dismissed three times for insubordination, and Liu Shimo Hui was dismissed three times for being a judge. Imagine their mound cemetery, it didn't move either.

古文：而野俗无识，妖巫妄言，遂于擗踊之际，择葬地而希官爵；荼毒之秋，选葬时而规财利。
现代文：而乡野村俗没有知识，巫术妄说，于是便在捶胸顿足极度悲哀之际，选择葬地希望能得到官爵；痛苦不堪的时节，希望选择安葬时辰来获取财物好处。
English: But the people of the countryside and villages do not have knowledge and believe in witchcraft. Therefore, when they are extremely sad, they choose the burial place in the hope of getting a peerage; when they are in pain, they hope to choose the time of burial to gain financial benefits.

古文：或云辰日不可哭泣，遂莞尔而对吊客；或云同属忌于临圹，遂吉服不送其亲。
现代文：有人说逢辰日不能哭泣，于是便微笑着面对吊客；有人说家人中有忌去葬地的，于是便身着吉服不去送亲入葬。
English: Some people said that they could not cry on the day of the funeral, so they smiled and waved to the mourners; some people said that their family members were afraid to go to the cemetery, so they did not go to the funeral in their traditional clothes.

古文：伤教败礼，莫斯为甚！ 
现代文：伤风败俗破坏礼教，没有比这些更为严重的了！ 
English: There is nothing more serious than offending customs and destroying etiquette!

古文：术士皆恶其言，而识者皆以为确论。
现代文：巫术之士都憎恶吕才的这一番言论，有识之士均许为精辟之论。
English: Wiccans abhor Lyu Cai Rong's remarks, while those with insight consider them to be a brilliant theory.

古文：丁巳，果毅都尉席君买帅精骑百二十，袭击吐谷浑丞相宣王，破之，斩其兄弟三人。
现代文：丁巳，果毅都尉席君买率领精锐骑兵一百二十人袭击吐谷浑丞相宣王，重创敌军，将其兄弟三人斩首。
English: At the same time, Guo Yi's lieutenant Xi Junmei led 120 elite cavalrymen to attack Tuya Hunjo's minister, King Xuanwang, inflicting heavy losses on the enemy and beheading three of his brothers.

古文：初，丞相宣王专国政，阴谋袭弘化公主，劫其王诺曷钵奔吐蕃。
现代文：起初，丞相宣王独掌吐谷浑国政，密谋袭击下嫁吐谷浑的弘化公主，劫持吐谷浑国王诺曷钵投奔吐蕃。
English: At first, the prime minister, King Seonjo, single-handedly led the national politics of Tugu Hun, plotted to attack Princess Hongwha, who was married to Tugu Hun, and kidnapped King Tugu Hun, Norodom Thubten Thubten.

古文：诺曷钵闻之，轻骑奔鄯善城，其臣威信王以兵迎之，故君买为之讨诛宣王。
现代文：诺曷钵事先得知消息，率轻骑奔赴鄯善城，他手下的大臣威信王领兵迎接，所以席君买便替诺曷奔讨伐宣王。
English: Having learned the news in advance, Norodom rode swiftly to the city of Shanshan. His subordinate minister, King Wixin, led the troops to meet him, so the king agreed to fight for Norodom against King Xuan.

古文：国人犹惊扰，遣户部尚书唐俭等慰抚之。
现代文：吐谷浑人大受惊扰，太宗派户部尚书唐俭前往安抚。
English: The people of Tugu were greatly alarmed, and the Tai Sect sent the head of the household, Shangshu Tang Jian, to pacify them.

古文：五月，壬申，并州父老诣阙请上封泰山毕，还幸晋阳，上许之。
现代文：五月，壬申，并州百姓来到朝中请求太宗在泰山封禅后，回来巡幸晋阳，太宗应允。
English: In May, the people of Jinshin and Hanzhou came to the imperial court to request that Emperor Taizong return to Jinyang for a tour after he had been enthroned on Mount Tai. Emperor Taizong agreed.

古文：丙子，百济来告其王扶馀璋之丧，遣使册命其嗣子义慈。
现代文：丙子，百济派人来为他们的国王扶馀璋报丧，太宗派使节册封他的儿子义慈继任。
English: Bong Son, Baekje sent people to attend the funeral of their king, Buyeo, and envoys from the Taisei sect appointed his son, Yi Ci, as his successor.

古文：己酉，有星孛于太微，太史令薛颐上言 未可东封 。辛亥，起居郎褚遂良亦言之。丙辰，诏罢封禅。
现代文：己酉，有异星出现过于太微垣，太史令薛颐上书认为此时不可去泰山封禅；辛亥，起居郎褚遂良也言及此事；丙辰，太宗下诏停止封禅。
English: According to the legend, a strange star appeared too far away, and Emperor Taishi ordered Emperor Xue to write a letter stating that it was not possible to go to Mount Tai for the ceremony; Emperor Xinhai also mentioned the matter; Emperor Bixin ordered Emperor Taizong to stop the ceremony.

古文：太子詹事于志宁遭母丧，寻起复就职。
现代文：太子詹事于志宁母丧丁忧离职，不久服丧中重新复职。
English: Prince Zhan left his post after the death of Zhining's mother, Ding Zhen, and was reinstated shortly after the funeral.

古文：太子治宫室，妨农功；又好郑、卫之乐；志宁谏，不听。
现代文：当时太子修筑宫室，妨碍农事；又喜爱郑、卫等靡之音。于志宁反复劝谏，太子不听。
English: At that time, the prince was building a palace, which hindered farming; he also liked Zheng and Wei. Yu Shining repeatedly persuaded him, but the prince did not listen.

古文：又宠昵宦官，常在左右，志宁上书，以为： 自易牙以来，宦官覆亡国家者非一。
现代文：又宠幸亲近宦官，常让他们不离身边左右，志宁给太宗上书，认为： 自从易牙以后，宦官导致国家灭亡的事例很多。
English: He was also fortunate enough to be close to eunuchs, and often kept them around. Shining wrote to Emperor Taizong, saying, "Since Iga, there have been many cases of eunuchs leading to the downfall of the country.

古文：今殿下亲宠此属，使陵易衣冠，不可长也。 
现代文：如今太子殿下亲近此类人物，并让他们敢于与太子换穿衣服，此风不可长。 
English: Now that His Royal Highness the Crown Prince is getting close to such people and daring them to change clothes with him, this trend will not last long.

古文：太子役使司驭等，半岁不许分番，又私引突厥达哥友入宫，志宁上书切谏，太子大怒，遣刺客张师政、纥干承基杀之。
现代文：太子又私自役使皇厩驾驭手，半年不许他们轮流值班，又私下带引突厥人达哥友进入宫中，志宁上书直言切谏，太子勃然大怒，派刺客张思政、纥干承基二人去杀于志宁。
English: The prince also secretly made the imperial stables drivers, and did not allow them to take turns on duty for half a year. He also secretly brought the Turk Dagoyo into the palace. Shining wrote a letter bluntly, and the prince flew into a rage. He sent two assassins, Zhang Sizheng and Gan Chengji, to kill Shining.

古文：二人入其第，见志宁寝处苫塊，竟不忍杀而止。
现代文：二人进入于志宁的宅第，见志宁躺在苫席上，头枕着土地，终于不忍心杀他而罢休。
English: The two entered Shining's house, saw him lying on the dining table with his head resting on the ground, and finally could not bear to kill him.

古文：西突厥沙钵罗叶护可汗数遣使入贡。
现代文：西突厥沙钵罗叶护可汗多次派使节进献贡品。
English: The Western Turkic Shah Rukh Yegor Khan repeatedly sent envoys to bring tribute.

古文：秋，七月，甲戌，命左领军将军张大师持节即其所号立为可汗，赐以鼓纛。
现代文：秋季，七月，甲戌，太宗命令左领军将军张大师持旌节就其已得名位立沙钵罗叶护为可汗，赐给鼓和大旗。
English: In the autumn, in July, at Kuching, Taizong ordered the left-leading general, Zhang Daishi, to hold a festival on the occasion of his having been given the title of khan, and to give him a drum and a banner.

古文：上又命使者多赍金帛，历诸国市良马，魏征谏曰： 可汗位未定而先市马，彼必以为陛下志在市马，以立可汗为名耳。
现代文：太宗又命令使者多带着金银财物，在沿途经过的各国购买好马，魏徵劝谏说： 可汗的位置还未确定却先去买马，他们必然认为陛下的志趣只在买马，立可汗只是虚名。
English: Emperor Taizong also ordered the envoys to take more gold, silver and property to buy good horses in the countries they passed along the way. Wei Zheng advised them to buy horses first, saying: The position of the khan has not yet been determined. They must think that His Majesty's ambition is only to buy horses, and the establishment of the khan is just a false name.

古文：使可汗得立，荷德必浅；若不得立，为怨实深。
现代文：立了可汗，他们感戴的恩德必然浅薄；如果没有立可汗，他们的怨恨必然深。
English: If there is a khan, their feelings of gratitude are bound to be shallow; if there is no khan, their resentment is bound to be deep.

古文：诸国闻之，亦轻中国。
现代文：各国听说这件事，也会轻视我大唐。
English: When other countries hear about this, they will also despise me, Datang.

古文：市或不得，得亦非美。
现代文：买马也许买不成，即使买成也并非好事。
English: It may not be possible to buy a horse, and even if it is possible, it is not a good thing.

古文：苟能使彼安宁，则诸国之马，不求自至矣。 
现代文：如果能使西突厥安定，那么各国的好马，不用买自然会送上门来。 
English: If West Turkistan can be stabilized, then good horses from various countries will naturally be sent to the door without having to buy them.

古文：上欣然止之。
现代文：太宗信服魏徵的话，停止了买马的事。
English: Taizong was convinced by Wei Zheng's words and stopped buying horses.

古文：乙毘咄陆可汗与沙钵罗叶护互相攻，乙毘咄陆浸强大，西域诸国多附之。
现代文：乙毗咄陆可汗与沙钵罗叶护相互征战，乙毗咄陆日渐强大，西域各国多依附于他。
English: Khan and Sagara Yegor fought against each other. Khan became more and more powerful, and most of the countries in the western region depended on him.

古文：未几，乙毘咄陆使石国吐屯击沙钵罗叶护，擒之以归，杀之。
现代文：不久，乙毗咄陆让掌握石国大权的突厥吐屯袭击沙钵罗叶护，将其擒获并送到乙毗咄陆那里，将他杀死。
English: Not long after, the Turkic Tutun, who held the power of Shikoku, was attacked by the Turkic Tutun, who was captured by the Turkic Tutun, and sent to the Turkic Tutun to be killed.

古文：丙子，上指殿屋谓侍臣曰： 治天下如建此屋，营构既成，勿数改移；苟易一榱，正一瓦，践履动摇，必有所损。
现代文：丙子，太宗指着殿宇对身边大臣说： 治理天下如同建造这些房屋，营造建成之后，不要多次改变移动；假如换一根椽，或一片瓦，上房践踏摇动，必然有所损害。
English: By the way, Taizong pointed to the palace and said to the ministers around him: "Governing the world is like building these houses. After the construction is completed, do not change the movement many times. If you change a shovel or a piece of tile, and the upper house is trampled and shaken, it will inevitably cause damage.

古文：若慕奇功，变法度，不恒其德，劳扰实多。 
现代文：如果贪慕新奇，屡变法度，不恒守固有的道德，劳扰百姓之处实在太多。 
English: If you covet novelty, repeatedly change laws and regulations, and do not always adhere to inherent morality, there are too many places to bother the people.

古文：上遣职方郎中陈大德使高丽；八月，己亥，自高丽还。
现代文：太宗派职方郎中陈大德出使高丽国，八月，己亥，从高丽返回长安。
English: In August, Ji Hai returned to Chang'an from Goryeo, where he had been sent by Chen Dadong, a member of the Taejong faction.

古文：大德初入其境，欲知山川风俗，所至城邑，以绫绮遗其守者，曰： 吾雅好山水，此有胜处，吾欲观之。 
现代文：陈大德起初进入高丽境内时，很想知道当地山川名胜与风俗，经过某一城镇，将绫罗绸缎送给当地官员，说： 我一向喜爱山水，此地如有名胜，我想去看一看。 
English: When Chen Daede first entered the territory of Korea, he was very curious to know the local scenic spots and customs. He passed through a certain town and gave a silk brocade to a local official, saying, "I have always loved the landscape. This place is like a scenic spot. I want to take a look."

古文：守者喜，导之游历，无所不至，往往见中国人，自云 家在某郡，隋末从军，没于高丽，高丽妻以游女，与高丽错居，殆将半矣。 
现代文：当地官员十分高兴，引导他去游历，无处不去，处处见到有中原人，自我介绍说： 家住在某郡，隋末充军东征，留在高丽，娶离家远游的女子为妻，与高丽杂错居处，几乎占当地人的一半。 
English: Local officials were very happy and guided him to travel. He had nowhere to go and saw Central Plains people everywhere. He introduced himself by saying, "I live in a certain county. At the end of the Sui Dynasty, I went on a military expedition to the East. I stayed in Korea and married a woman who had traveled far from home. I live in a different place from Korea. I account for almost half of the local people."

古文：因问亲戚存没，大德绐之曰： 皆无恙。 
现代文：并向陈大德询问他们中原的亲属的生死状况，大德哄骗他们说： 均完好无恙。 
English: He also asked Chen Dade about the life and death status of their relatives in Central Plains, and Dade tricked them into saying, "They are all intact."

古文：咸涕泣相告。
现代文：他们听后挥泪互相转告。
English: They were in tears as they told each other.

古文：数日后，隋人望之而哭者，遍于郊野。
现代文：几天后，隋朝留在高丽的中原人来见大德，都眼含泪水，城郊野外聚集着很多人。
English: A few days later, people from the Central Plains who had stayed in Korea during the Sui Dynasty came to see him, with tears in their eyes and many people gathered outside the city.

古文：大德言于上曰： 其国闻高昌亡，大惧，馆候之勤，加于常数。 
现代文：大德回到朝中对太宗说： 高丽人听说高昌已经灭亡，大为惊恐，频频去馆舍中问候，超过以往。 
English: When Daede returned to the court, he said to Taizong: When the Goryeo people heard that Gaochang had perished, they were greatly alarmed and frequently went to the museum to offer greetings, more than before.

古文：上曰： 高丽本四郡地耳，吾发卒数万攻辽东，彼必倾国救之。别遣舟师出东莱，自海道趋平壤，水陆合势，取之不难。
现代文：太宗说： 高丽本来是汉武帝所设四郡，我大唐如果发动数万兵力攻打辽东，高丽必然要倾国相救，如果另外派水师出东莱，从海道直驱平壤，水陆合围，攻取高丽并不难。
English: Taizong said: Goryeo was originally four counties set up by Emperor Hanwu. If I, the Great Tang, launch tens of thousands of troops to attack Liaodong, Goryeo will inevitably have to rush to the rescue. If I also send sailors out of Donglai, drive straight to Pyongyang from the sea, and encircle the sea and land, it will not be difficult to capture Goryeo.

古文：但山东州县凋瘵未复，吾不欲劳之耳。 
现代文：只是关东一带州县凋疲，尚未复原，朕不想再疲劳百姓。 
English: It's just that the states and counties in the Kanto region are exhausted and have yet to recover. I don't want to tire the people any more.

古文：乙巳，上谓侍臣曰： 朕有二喜一惧。
现代文：乙巳，太宗对身边大臣说： 朕有二件喜事一件忧事。
English: Suddenly, Taizong said to the minister next to him, "I have two joys and one sorrow.

古文：比年丰稔，长安斗粟直三、四钱，一喜也；北虏久服，边鄙无虞，二喜也。
现代文：连年丰收，长安城一斗粟仅值三、四钱，这是一喜；北方部族久已服顺，边境没有祸患，这是二喜。
English: The bumper harvest year after year, with a bucket of millet in Chang'an City only worth three or four yuan, is a blessing; the northern tribes have been obedient for a long time, and there is no disaster on the border, which is the second blessing.

古文：治安则骄侈易生，骄侈则危亡立至，此一惧也。 
现代文：政治安定则容易滋生骄奢淫逸，骄奢淫逸则立刻遭致危亡，此是一件忧虑的事。 
English: It is a matter of concern that political stability is likely to breed arrogance, while arrogance is immediately endangered.

古文：冬，十月，辛卯，上校猎伊阙；壬辰，幸嵩阳；辛丑，还宫。
现代文：冬季，十月，辛卯，太宗到伊阙狩猎；壬辰，巡幸嵩阳县；辛丑，回到宫中。
English: In winter, October, Xinwu, Taizong went to Ili to hunt; Renchen, went on a tour of Songyang County; Xinwu, went back to the palace.

古文：并州大都督长史李世勣在州十六年，令行禁止，民夷怀服。
现代文：并州大都督府长史李世在并州任职十六年，令行禁止，百姓顺服安定。
English: Shi Li Shih, the governor of the Grand Duchy of Anhui Province, has served in Anhui Province for 16 years. The order is prohibited, and the people are obedient and stable.

古文：上曰： 隋炀帝劳百姓，筑长城以备突厥，卒无所益。
现代文：太宗说： 隋炀帝疲劳百姓，修筑长城以防备突厥的进攻，最后毫无用处。
English: Emperor Taizong said: Emperor Sui and Qian tired the people and built the Great Wall to prevent the Turkish attack, but in the end it was useless.

古文：朕唯置李世勣于晋阳而边尘不惊，其为长城，岂不壮哉！ 
现代文：朕只是将李世安置在晋阳，而边境安宁，将他比做长城，岂不是更为壮美吗！ 
English: I just placed Li Shih in Jinyang, and the border is peaceful. Isn't it more magnificent to compare him to the Great Wall?

古文：十一月，庚申，以世勣为兵部尚书。
现代文：十一月，庚申，任命李世为兵部尚书。
English: In November, Geng Sheng appointed Li Shih as the secretary of the military department.

古文：壬申，车驾西归长安。
现代文：壬申，太宗车驾西行回到长安。
English: Jinshin, Taizong drove westbound back to Chang'an.

古文：薛延陀真珠可汗闻上将东封，谓其下曰： 天子封泰山，士马皆从，边境必虚，我以此时取思摩，如拉朽耳。 
现代文：薛延陀真珠可汗听说太宗想要东去泰山行封禅礼，对他的下属说： 大唐天子去泰山封禅，护卫都跟随前往，边境地区必然空虚，我乘此时机攻取思摩，势如摧枯拉朽。 
English: When Xue Yanda Pearl Khan heard that Emperor Taizong wanted to go east to Mount Tai to perform the enthronement ceremony, he said to his subordinates: "Great Tang Tianzi is going to Mount Tai for the enthronement ceremony, the guards are following him, the border areas must be empty, I take this opportunity to capture Sima, the situation is devastating.

古文：乃命其子大度设发同罗、仆骨、回纥、靺鞨、等兵合二十万，度漠南，屯白道川，据善阳岭以击突厥。
现代文：于是命令他的儿子大度设征发同罗、仆骨、回纥？等族兵马，总计二十万人，渡过漠南，屯兵在白道川，据守善阳岭，袭击突厥。
English: Therefore, he ordered his son to generously recruit and dispatch soldiers and horses of the Dongluo, Hubei, Hui and other ethnic groups, a total of 200,000 people, to cross the desert south, garrison in the Baidu River, garrison Zhenyangling, and attack the Turks.

古文：俟利苾可汗不能御，帅部落入长城，保朔州，遣使告急。
现代文：俟利可汗抵挡不住，率领本部落进入长城，守住朔州，派使者向唐朝告急。
English: Unable to resist, the Qili Khan led his tribe into the Great Wall, defended Shuozhou, and sent an envoy to the Tang Dynasty.

古文：癸酉，上命营州都督张俭帅所部骑兵及奚、、契丹压其东境；以兵部尚书李世勣为朔州道行军总管，将兵六万，骑千二百，屯羽方；右卫大将军李大亮为灵州道行军总管，将兵四万，骑五千，屯灵武；右屯卫大将军张士贵将兵一万七千，为庆州道行军总管，出云中；凉州都督李袭誉为凉州道行军总管，出其西。
现代文：癸酉，太宗命令营州都督张俭率领本部骑兵以及奚？契丹族兵马进通薛延陀东部边境；任命兵部尚书李世为朔州道行军总管，领兵六万，包括一千二百名骑兵，驻扎在羽方城；任命右卫大将军李大亮为灵州道行军总管，领兵四万，骑兵五千，驻扎在灵武；任命右屯卫大将军张士贵领兵一万七千人，为庆州道行军总管，出兵云中；任命凉州都督李袭誉为凉州道行军总管，出击薛延陀西部。
English: At the same time, Emperor Taizong ordered Zhang Jian, the governor of Zhouzhou, to lead the cavalry of the headquarters and the Qidan soldiers and horses to the eastern border of Xueyantuo; appointed Shangshu Li Shih of the military department as the general manager of the march of Shuozhou Road, leading 60,000 soldiers, including 1,200 cavalry, stationed in Ufang City; appointed Li Dailiang, the general of the Right Division of the Guards, as the general manager of the march of Lingzhou Road, leading 40,000 soldiers and 5,000 cavalry, stationed in Lingwu; appointed Zhang Shigui, the general of the Right Division of the Guards, leading 17,000

古文：诸将辞行，上戒之曰： 薛延陀负其强盛，逾漠而南，行数千里，马已疲瘦。
现代文：众位将领向太宗辞行，太宗告诫他们说： 薛延陀仗着他们强盛，越过沙漠南下，行程几千里，马已疲乏瘦弱。
English: The generals led the way for Taizong to leave, and Taizong admonished them, saying, "Xue Yantuo is strong thanks to them. He crossed the desert to the south, traveling thousands of miles. His horse is tired and weak.

古文：凡用兵之道，见利速进，不利速退。
现代文：凡是用兵的道理，须是见有利迅速推进，见着不利局面迅速撤退。
English: The general principle of using troops is to advance quickly when advantageous and retreat quickly when unfavorable.

古文：薛延陀不能掩思摩不备，急击之，思摩入长城，又不速退。吾已敕思摩烧剃秋草，彼粮糗日尽，野无所获。
现代文：薛延陀不能乘思摩不防备，急速进攻，思摩进入长城以内，薛延陀兵又不立即后退；朕已敕令思摩烧掉秋草，对方粮草日益吃尽，野地中毫无所获。
English: Xue Yanta could not take advantage of Sima's unprepared, rapid attack, Sima entered the Great Wall, and Xue Yanta's soldiers did not immediately retreat; I have ordered Sima to burn the autumn grass, the other side is increasingly eating up the grain and grass, and nothing has been gained in the field.

古文：顷侦者来，云其马啮林木枝皮略尽。
现代文：刚才探马来报，说他们的马啃吃树皮枝叶已经快光了。
English: Just now, a prospector came to report that their stallions have almost run out of bark to eat.

古文：卿等当与思摩共为掎角，不须速战，俟其将退，一时奋击，破之必矣。 
现代文：你们应当与思摩互成犄角之势，不需要速战，等到敌人将要撤退时，一鼓作气，乘胜追击，定会大破敌军。 
English: You and Sima should be at each other's throats. There is no need for a quick battle. When the enemy is about to retreat, you should work hard, take advantage of the victory and pursue the enemy. You will surely defeat the enemy army.

古文：十二月，戊子，车驾至京师。
现代文：十二月，戊子，太宗车驾回到长安。
English: In December, Wu Zi and Taizong drove back to Chang'an.

古文：己亥，薛延陀遣使入见，请与突厥和亲。
现代文：己亥，薛延陀派使节入朝见太宗，请求与突厥和亲。
English: At the same time, Xue Yanta sent an envoy to the imperial court to meet Emperor Taizong and ask for peace with the Turks.

古文：甲辰，李世勣败薛延陀于诺真水。
现代文：甲辰，李世在诺真水大败薛延陀。
English: At the time of Jia Chen, Li Shih defeated Xue Yantuo in the battle of Nozhenshui.

古文：初，薛延陀击西突厥沙钵罗及阿史那社尔，皆以步战取胜；及将入寇，乃大教步战，使五人为伍，一人执马，四人前战，战胜则授以马追奔。
现代文：起初，薛延陀袭击西突厥沙钵罗以及阿史那社尔，均以步战取胜；等到将要去进攻思摩时，便教习士兵大练步战，让五个人为一队，一人牵马，四人冲前拼战，战胜后则骑上马追击。
English: At first, Xueyantuo attacked the West Turk Sagara and Ashinasar, both of which were won on foot; when he was about to attack Sima, he taught the soldiers to practice foot combat, letting five people form a team, one person leading a horse, four people rushing forward to fight, and after victory, riding on a horse to chase.

古文：于是大度设将三万骑逼长城，欲击突厥，而思摩已走，知不可得，遣人登城骂之。
现代文：当时大度设率三万骑兵进逼长城，想要袭击突厥，而思摩已经先行逃走，望尘莫及，只得派人登上城楼谩骂。
English: At that time, he boldly sent thirty thousand cavalrymen to the Great Wall to attack the Turks, but Sima had already fled ahead of them and could not be caught, so he had to send people to climb the castle tower to curse.

古文：会李世勣引唐兵至，尘埃涨天，大度设惧，将其众自赤柯泺北走。世勣选麾下及突厥精骑六千自直道邀之，逾白道川，追及于青山。
现代文：适逢李世带领唐朝兵马赶到，尘土飞扬，一眼望不到边，大度设十分害怕，率领大部队从赤柯泺向北逃去，李世挑选麾下及突厥精锐骑兵六千人抄近路拦截，跨越白道川，在青山追上敌军。
English: At the right time, Li Shih led the Tang Dynasty soldiers and horses to arrive, the dust was flying, you could not see the edge at a glance, and he was very scared. He led a large army to flee north from Chaka Khao. Li Shih selected six thousand of his subordinates and Turkic elite cavalry to take a shortcut to intercept, cross the Baidu River, and catch up with the enemy army in Aoyama.

古文：大度设走累日，至诺真水，勒兵还战，陈亘十里。
现代文：大度设狂奔数日，到了诺真水，勒住兵马准备战斗，战阵横亘十里地。
English: He ran wildly for several days, and when he reached Nozhenshui, he held back the soldiers and horses to prepare for battle. The battle line stretched for ten miles.

古文：突厥先与之战，不胜，还走。大度设乘胜追之，遇唐兵。薛延陀万矢俱发，唐马多死。
现代文：突厥兵先和他们拼战，不能取胜，退兵，大度设乘胜追击，与唐朝的部队遭遇，薛延陀兵万箭齐发，唐军马匹多被射死。
English: The Turk soldiers fought with them, could not win, retreated, and pursued the Tang Dynasty troops, encountering the troops of the Tang Dynasty. Xueyanta soldiers fired thousands of arrows, and many horses of the Tang Army were shot dead.

古文：世勣命士卒皆下马，执长槊直前冲之。
现代文：李世命令士兵们都下马，手执长槊，往前直冲。
English: Li Shih ordered the soldiers to dismount from their horses and rush straight ahead, holding long ropes in their hands.

古文：薛延陀众溃，副总管薛万彻以数千骑收其执马者。
现代文：薛延陀兵溃散，副总管薛万彻用数千骑兵收捕薛延陀部队中牵马的士兵。
English: Xue Yan Tuo's soldiers scattered, and the deputy commander Xue Wan Che used thousands of cavalry to capture the soldiers who were leading horses in Xue Yan Tuo's troops.

古文：薛延陀失马，不知所为，唐兵纵击，斩首三千馀级，捕虏五万馀人。
现代文：薛延陀兵丢失了马匹，张惶失措，唐兵纵马追击，杀死三千多人，俘虏五万多人。
English: Xue Yan Tuo's soldiers lost their horses and panicked. Tang soldiers chased them on horseback, killing more than 3,000 people and taking more than 50,000 prisoners.

古文：大度设脱身走，万彻追之不及。
现代文：大度设脱身逃走，薛万彻追赶不及。
English: He tried his best to escape, but Xue Wancher couldn't catch up.

古文：其众至漠北，值大雪，人畜冻死者什八九。
现代文：薛延陀兵到了漠北，赶上天降大雪，人和马匹冻死十分之八九。
English: When Xue Yan Tuo's soldiers arrived in the desert north, they caught up with the heavy snowfall, and people and horses froze to death in eighty-nine cases out of ten.

古文：李世勣还军定襄，突厥思结部居五台者叛走，州兵追之；会世勣军还，夹击，悉诛之。
现代文：李世勣回师定襄，突厥思结部居住在五台县的纷纷叛逃，当地州兵追捕他们，正赶上李世的部队路经此地，两军夹击，将他们全部杀掉。
English: When Li Shixuan returned to his division in Dingxiang, the Turkic tribesmen living in Wutai County defected one after another. The local National Guard chased after them and caught up with Li Shixuan's troops passing through the area. The two armies clashed and killed them all.

古文：丙子，薛延陀使者辞还，上谓之曰： 吾约汝与突厥以大漠为界，有相侵者，我则讨之。
现代文：丙子，薛延陀使者向太宗辞行，太宗对他说： 我约定你们与突厥以大沙漠为界，如有侵袭者，我大唐即予以讨伐。
English: Xue Yantou's envoy resigned to Emperor Taizong, and Emperor Taizong said to him: I have agreed that the border between you and the Turks will be the Great Desert. If there are any invaders, I, the Great Tang, will fight them.

古文：汝自恃其强，逾漠攻突厥。
现代文：你们自恃强大，越过沙漠进入突厥。
English: You thought you were strong, crossing the desert into Turkey.

古文：李世勣所将才数千骑耳，汝已狼狈如此！
现代文：李世仅仅率领几千骑兵，你们便如此狼狈。
English: Li Shiyi is only leading a few thousand cavalry, and you are in such a mess.

古文：归语可汗：凡举措利害，可善择其宜。 
现代文：你回去告诉你们的可汗：做事须权衡利弊，可要善于选择适宜的事去做。 
English: Go back and tell your khans: You have to weigh the pros and cons of doing things, but you have to be good at choosing the right things to do.

古文：上问魏征： 比来朝臣何殊不论事！ 
现代文：太宗问魏徵： 近来朝廷大臣们为什么不上书议论朝政？ 
English: Taizong asked Wei Zheng: Recently, why don't imperial ministers write letters to discuss imperial politics?

古文：对曰： 陛下虚心采纳，必有言者。
现代文：魏徵答道： 陛下虚心纳谏，就一定会有上书言事者。
English: Wei Qian replied: If His Majesty accepts the proposal with an open mind, there will definitely be someone to write a letter.

古文：凡臣徇国者寡，爱身者多，彼畏罪，故不言耳。 
现代文：大臣们愿为国徇身者少，爱惜自身的人较多，他们害怕获罪，所以不上书言事。 
English: There are fewer ministers who are willing to sacrifice themselves for the country, and more who love themselves. They are afraid of being punished, so they don't write letters.

古文：上曰： 然。
现代文：太宗说： 是这样。
English: His last position was that of Taijo-jo.

古文：人臣关说忤旨，动及刑诛，与夫蹈汤火冒白刃者亦何异哉！
现代文：大臣们议论国事而忤怒圣意，动辄处以刑罚，这与上刀山下火海又有什么区别呢？
English: What is the difference between the ministers who discuss state affairs and anger the sacred will, and are often punished with a penalty, and the sword mountain and the sea of fire?

古文：是以禹拜昌言，良为此也。 
现代文：所以大禹给提意见的人行礼，正是为此。 
English: Therefore, it is for this reason that Dayu gives a salute to those who offer opinions.

古文：房玄龄、高士廉遇少府少监窦德素于路，问： 北门近何营缮？ 
现代文：房玄龄、高士廉路上遇见少府少监窦德素，问道： 北门近来在营建什么？ 
English: Fang Xuanling and Gao Shillian met with Shoufu and Shao Jian Dou De Su on the road and asked: What has Beimen been building recently?

古文：德素奏之。
现代文：窦德素奏与太宗。
English: Dou De Suo and Taizong.

古文：上怒，让玄龄等曰： 君但知南牙政事，北门小营缮，何预君事！ 
现代文：太宗大怒，责备房玄龄等人说： 你只管执掌南衙朝中政事，北门小小的营缮事，与你有什么相干？ 
English: Taizong was furious, and scolded Fang Xuanling and the others, saying, "You are only in charge of the political affairs of the Southern Wei Dynasty, and the small affairs of the Northern Gate. What does it have to do with you?

古文：玄龄等拜谢。
现代文：房玄龄等磕头谢罪。
English: Xuanling and others bowed their heads in thanks.

古文：魏征进曰： 臣不知陛下何以责玄龄等，而玄龄等亦何所谢！
现代文：魏徵进谏说： 我不知道陛下为什么要责备玄龄等人，玄龄等人又为什么要谢罪？
English: Wei Zhengjin said, "I don't know why Your Majesty should blame Xuanling and others, and why should Xuanling and others apologize?

古文：玄龄等为陛下股肱耳目，于中外事岂有不应知者！
现代文：玄龄等人身为陛下的股肱耳目之臣，对宫内宫外事岂有不应知道的道理！
English: As a vassal of His Majesty, there is no reason why someone of his age should not know what is going on inside and outside the palace.

古文：使所营为是，当助陛下成之；为非，当请陛下罢之。
现代文：如果营造的事是对的，定会帮助陛下促成其事；如果不当营造，就应当请求陛下停止此事。
English: If the construction is correct, it will help His Majesty to promote it; if it is not correct, it should ask His Majesty to stop it.

古文：问于有司，理则宜然。
现代文：所以他们询问有关部门，也是理所当然的事。
English: So it's only natural that they ask the relevant authorities.

古文：不知何罪而责，亦何罪而谢也！ 
现代文：不知因何罪而责怪他们，又因为什么罪而谢罪呢？ 
English: I don't know for what crime they are being blamed, and for what crime they are being forgiven.

古文：上甚愧之。
现代文：太宗听后十分差愧。
English: Taizong was very ashamed after listening to it.

古文：上尝临朝谓侍臣曰： 朕为人主，常兼将相之事。 
现代文：太宗曾在上朝时对身边大臣说： 朕为万民之主，经常要兼管武将文相的事。 
English: When Emperor Taizong ascended to the throne, he said to the ministers around him, "I am the lord of all the people, and I often have to manage the affairs of generals and ministers.

古文：给事中张行成退而上书，以为： 禹不矜伐而天下莫与之争。
现代文：给事中张行成退朝后又上书给太宗，认为： 大禹本人不自大自夸而天下人都不和他争功争能。
English: In the middle of the matter, Zhang Xingcheng sent a letter to Emperor Taizong after his abdication, saying: Dayu himself does not boast and the world does not compete with him.

古文：陛下拨乱反正，群臣诚不足望清光；然不必临朝言之。
现代文：陛下拨乱反正，众位大臣实在是不足以眺望到圣明风采；然而陛下却不必在上朝时言及此事。
English: In any case, the ministers are really not enough to see the sacred style; however, His Majesty did not have to mention this when he ascended the throne.

古文：以万乘之尊，乃与群臣校功争能，臣窃为陛下不取。 
现代文：以陛下的天子尊体，却与群臣争功比能，我认为深不足取。 
English: I do not think it is worthy of your majesty's reverence for the Son of Heaven to compete with your courtiers.

古文：上甚善之。
现代文：太宗非常赞许张行成。
English: Tai Zong highly praised Zhang Xingcheng.

古文：贞观十六年壬寅，公元六四二年
现代文：贞观十六年春季，正月，乙丑，魏王李泰进呈《括地志》一书。
English: In the spring of the 16th year of Zhenguan, the first month, the second month, the Wei King Li Taijin presented the book "Bridging the Land."

古文：春，正月，乙丑，魏王泰上《括地志》。泰好学，司马苏勖说泰，以古之贤王皆招士著书，故泰奏请修之。
现代文：李泰勤勉好学，司马苏勖劝说李泰，古代的贤能王子均招徕学者著书立说，故而李泰奏请修撰《括地志》。
English: Li Tai was a diligent student, Sima Su Shi persuaded Li Tai, and the ancient virtuous princes all invited scholars to write books. Therefore, Li Tai Su requested to revise the "History of the World."

古文：于是大开馆舍，广延时俊，人物辐凑，门庭如市。
现代文：于是大开馆舍，广泛延请天下俊彦贤才，人才济济，门庭若市。
English: As a result, the library was opened to the public, widely inviting the world's young scholars, sages, and talented people.

古文：泰月给逾于太子，谏议大夫褚遂良上疏，以为： 圣人制礼，尊嫡卑庶，世子用物不会，与王者共之。
现代文：李泰每月的费用超过了太子，谏议大夫褚遂良上奏疏言道： 圣人制定礼仪，是为了尊嫡卑庶，供太子用的物品不作计算，与君王待遇相共。
English: Li Tai's monthly expenses exceeded that of the crown prince, and the chief of the council, Dr. Su Sui Liang, reluctantly said: The saint established the etiquette in order to honor the heir and the heiress, and the items used by the crown prince were not calculated, which was the same as the treatment of the monarch.

古文：庶子虽爱，不得逾嫡，所以塞嫌疑之渐，除祸乱之源也。
现代文：对庶出的儿子虽然喜欢，也不得超过嫡生子，这是为了堵塞嫌疑的发生，除去祸乱的根源。
English: Although they like the illegitimate son, they must not exceed the legitimate son. This is to block the occurrence of suspicion and remove the root cause of the disaster.

古文：若当亲者疏，当尊者卑，则佞巧之奸，乘机而动矣。
现代文：如果应当亲近的人反而疏远，应当尊贵的人反而卑贱，则那些奸佞之人，必然会乘此时机得势。
English: If those who should be close are estranged, and those who should be honored are humiliated, then those who are treacherous will inevitably take advantage of this opportunity to gain power.

古文：昔汉窦太后宠梁孝王，卒以忧死；宣帝宠淮阳宪王，亦几至于败。
现代文：从前西汉窦太后宠幸梁孝王，最后忧虑而死；汉宣帝宠幸淮阳宪王，也几乎导致败亡。
English: In the former Western Han Dynasty, the dowager empress favored King Liang Xiao, who eventually died of worry; Emperor Han Xuan favored King Huaiyang Xian, who also almost led to defeat.

古文：今魏王新出阁，宜示以礼则，训以谦俭，乃为良器，此所谓 圣人之教不肃而成 者也。 
现代文：如今魏王刚刚作藩王，应该向他显示礼仪制度，用谦虚节俭来训导，如此才能使他成为良才，正所谓 圣人的教导不待严肃而自然有成。  
English: Now that the Wei king has just become the king of the domain, it is necessary to show him the etiquette system and use modesty and frugality to teach him, so that he can become a good talent. The teachings of the so-called saints are not serious and naturally successful.

古文：上从之。
现代文：太宗听从其意见。
English: Emperor Dezong accepted his suggestion.

古文：上又令泰徙居武德殿。魏征上疏，以为： 陛下爱魏王，常欲使之安全，宜每抑其骄奢，不处嫌疑之地。
现代文：太宗又让李泰迁居到武德殿；魏徵上奏疏言道： 陛下喜欢魏王，常常想让他安全，正应当多多抑制他的骄奢习气，不让他处于嫌疑之地。
English: Emperor Taizong also allowed Li Tai to move to the Wu De Palace; Wei Zheng played a dulcet tone and said: His Majesty likes Wei Wang and often wants to keep him safe. He should restrain his arrogant habits and not let him be in a suspicious place.

古文：今移居此殿，乃在东宫之西，海陵昔尝居之，时人不以为可；虽时异事异，然亦恐魏王之心不敢安息也。 
现代文：如今移居到武德殿中，位在东宫西面，当年海陵剌王李元吉曾在此居住，时人均认为不可取；虽然时势事情都不同，然而我也担心魏王的心里惊恐不敢安闲。 
English: Now I have moved to the Wude Hall, which is located on the west side of the East Palace. Back then, Li Yuanji, the King of Hailing, once lived here, which was considered undesirable by everyone at the time. Although the current situation is different, I am worried that the heart of the Wei King is frightened and does not dare to be idle.

古文：上曰： 几致此误。 
现代文：太宗说： 差一点造成失误。 
English: Taizong said: I almost made a mistake.

古文：遽遣泰归第。
现代文：即刻让李泰回到原宅第。
English: Immediately let Li Tai return to the original house.

古文：辛未，徙死罪者实西州，其犯流徒则充戍，各以罪轻重为年限。
现代文：辛未，唐朝将死罪犯人改充西州，流放罪的改为充军，并且各以罪行轻重划定年限。
English: In Xinwei, the Tang Dynasty changed the criminals sentenced to death to Xizhou, and those sentenced to banishment to military service, and assigned the years of imprisonment according to the severity of the crimes.

古文：敕天下括浮游无籍者，限来年末附华。
现代文：敕令全国检括核查无户籍的游民，限定下一年年未附籍完毕。
English: The national inspection and verification of homeless people without household registration was ordered to be completed in the following year.

古文：以兼中书侍郎岑文本为中书侍郎，专知机密。
现代文：太宗任命兼中书侍郎的岑文本为中书侍郎，单独执掌朝廷机密事宜。
English: Emperor Taizong appointed 文本, who was also the Chushusajiro, as the Chushusajiro to be in charge of the confidential matters of the imperial court.

古文：夏，四月，壬子，上谓谏议大夫褚遂良曰； 卿犹知起居注，所书可得观乎？ 
现代文：夏季，四月，壬子，太宗对谏议大夫褚遂良说： 你还在兼管起居注的事，朕可以看看都记了些什么吗？ 
English: In the summer, in April, in Renzi, Taizong said to Dr. Yu Suiliang, "You are still in charge of the living note, can I see what you have memorized?"

古文：对曰： 史官书人君言动，备记善恶，庶几人君不敢为非，未闻自取而观之也！ 
现代文：答道： 史官记载君主言行，详细记录善恶诸事，这样君主才不敢胡作非为，我未听说君主可以亲自看记录的。 
English: Answer: Historians record the monarch's words and deeds, and keep detailed records of good and evil deeds, so that the monarch would not dare to do anything wrong. I have not heard that the monarch can personally read the records.

古文：上曰： 朕有不善，卿亦记之邪？ 
现代文：太宗说： 朕有不妥当的事，你也记下了吗？ 
English: Emperor Taizong said, "I have something improper to do, have you also noted it down?"

古文：对曰： 臣职当载笔，不敢不记。 
现代文：答道： 我的职责在于秉笔直书，不敢不记。 
English: He replied: My duty is to write honestly, and I dare not forget.

古文：黄门侍郎刘洎曰： 借使遂良不记，天下亦皆记之。 
现代文：黄门侍郎刘洎说： 假使褚遂良不记载下来，全国也都会记下来。 
English: Huangmen waiter Liu Zhe said: If Zhe Suiliang is not recorded, the whole country will be recorded.

古文：上曰： 诚然。 
现代文：太宗说： 的确是这样。 
English: Emperor Taizong said, "It is indeed so."

古文：六月，庚寅，诏息隐王可追复皇太子，海陵剌王元吉追封巢王，谥并依旧。
现代文：六月，庚寅，太宗诏令息隐王李建成可以追封恢复皇太子称号，海陵剌王李元吉追封为巢王，谥号一并依旧。
English: In June, Emperor Gao and Emperor Taizong issued an imperial edict to reinstate the title of crown prince to the late King Yin Li Jiancheng, and to reinstate the title of prince to the late King Haile Selassie Li Yuanji, both of whom retained their imperial titles.

古文：甲辰，诏自今皇太子出用库物，所司勿为限制。
现代文：甲辰，太宗诏令从即日起皇太子领出所用库府器物，各有关部门不必加以限制，于是太子挥霍无度。
English: At that time, Emperor Taizong issued an edict that from that day on, the crown prince should bring out the utensils used in the treasury, and the relevant departments did not have to impose restrictions. As a result, the prince was extravagant.

古文：于是太子发取无度，左庶子张玄素上书，以为： 周武帝平定山东，隋文帝混一江南，勤俭爱民，皆为令主；有子不肖，卒亡宗祀。
现代文：左庶子张玄素上书说： 周武帝平定关东地区，隋文帝统一江南地带，勤俭爱护百姓，均成为一代名主；但他们的儿子不肖，才使社稷灭亡。
English: Zhang Xuansu, Zhou's son-in-law, wrote: Emperor Zhou conquered the Kanto region, Emperor Sui unified the southern part of the Yangtze River, and loved and cared for the people. They all became a generation of great lords. However, their sons were not handsome, which led to the demise of Shifang.

古文：圣上以殿下亲则父子，事兼家国，所应用物不为节限，恩旨未逾六旬，用物已过七万，骄奢之极，孰云过此！
现代文：圣上因与太子殿下乃是父子，行事兼有家、国，所应用器物无所节度限制，圣旨还未过六十天，所用器物已经超过七万，骄奢淫逸之极，没有人能够超过。
English: The Most Holy Cause and His Imperial Highness the Crown Prince are father and son. They both have families and countries to serve, and there is no limit to the utensils they can use. The sacred edict has not yet passed sixty days, and the utensils they have used have already exceeded seventy thousand. This is the height of arrogance and debauchery, and no one can surpass it.

古文：况宫臣正士，未尝在侧；群邪淫巧，昵近深宫。
现代文：况且东宫臣属与正直之士，都没有在身旁；各种奇技淫巧，充斥深宫。
English: Moreover, the Eastern Court's vassals and honest people were not around; all kinds of tricks and tricks abounded in the Deep Court.

古文：在外瞻仰，已有此失；居中隐密，宁可胜计！
现代文：从外面远看，已经看到了这些失误；内中深宫隐密之事，更是无法计算。
English: Looking from afar, we have already seen these mistakes; what is hidden in the inner depths of the palace is incalculable.

古文：苦药利病，苦言利行，伏惟居安思危，日慎一日。 
现代文：良药苦口利于病，苦言辛辣利于行，应当居安思危，一日比一日谨慎行事。 
English: The bitter taste of good medicine is good for the disease, the bitter and spicy words are good for the practice, we should live in peace and mind, and be more cautious day by day.

古文：太子恶其书，令户奴伺玄素早朝，密以大马棰击之，几毙。
现代文：太子讨厌张玄素的上书，让守门的小奴乘张玄素上早朝的机会，暗中用大马棰袭击他，差一点将他打死。
English: The prince hated Zhang Xuansu's letter, so he let the gatekeeper's servant take advantage of Zhang Xuansu's early morning opportunity to secretly attack him with a sledgehammer, nearly killing him.

古文：秋，七月，戊午，以长孙无忌为司徒，房玄龄为司空。
现代文：秋季，七月，戊午，任命长孙无忌为司徒，房玄龄为司空。
English: In the autumn, in July, in the afternoon, the eldest grandson was appointed as a disciple, and Fang Xuanling was appointed as a disciple.

古文：庚申，制： 自今有自伤残者，据法加罪，仍从赋役。 
现代文：庚申，太宗下制令： 从即日起有自残身体者，依法加重罪行，并且仍要交赋服役。 
English: Goshun, Taizong issued an order: From now on, those who have self-inflicted injuries will have their crimes aggravated according to law, and they will still have to submit to military service.

古文：隋末赋役重数，人往往自折支体，谓之 福手 、 福足 ；至是遗风犹存，故禁之。
现代文：隋朝末年赋役繁重，人们往往自残身体，称之为 福手 、 福足 ；到此时这种风气仍在存留，所以加以禁止。
English: At the end of the Sui Dynasty, there was heavy forced labor, and people often self-mutilated their bodies, calling it good luck, good luck; at this time, this culture still existed, so it was banned.

古文：特进魏征有疾，上手诏问之，且言： 不见数日，朕过多矣。
现代文：特进魏徵患病，太宗手书诏令探问病情，且说： 几天不见，朕的过错又多起来。
English: When Wei, a special envoy, fell ill, Taizong wrote to him to inquire about his condition and said, "I haven't seen you for a few days, and my faults have increased."

古文：今欲自往，恐益为劳。
现代文：如今想亲去探望，又恐更添烦扰。
English: Now I want to visit in person, but I'm afraid it will be even more troublesome.

古文：若有闻见，可封状进来。 
现代文：你如果听到或看到什么，可以封上状子呈进来。 
English: If you hear or see anything, you can come forward with a complaint.

古文：征上言： 比者弟子陵师，奴婢忽主，下多轻上，皆有为而然，渐不可长。 
现代文：魏徵上书言道： 近来弟子冒犯老师，奴婢忽视主子，下属多轻视上级，都是有原因的，此风不可长。 
English: Wei Zheng wrote: Recently, the disciple offends the teacher, the slave ignores the master, and the subordinate despises the superior. There is a reason for this, and this trend will not last long.

古文：又言： 陛下临朝，常以至公为言，退而行之，未免私僻。
现代文：又说： 陛下临朝听政，常常将公正挂在嘴边，退朝后所做所为，却未免有所偏私。
English: He also said: His Majesty listened to politics when he was in the imperial court, and often spoke of justice. However, his actions after he retired from the imperial court were biased.

古文：或畏人知，横加威怒，欲盖弥彰，竟有何益！ 
现代文：有时害怕别人知道，横施神威圣怒，这样欲盖弥彰，有什么好处呢？ 
English: What good is it, sometimes, to be afraid that others will find out, and to try to cover it up by invoking God's power and wrath?

古文：征宅无堂，上命辍小殿之材以构之，五日而成，仍赐以素屏风、素褥、几、杖等以遂其所尚。
现代文：魏徵的宅院没有厅堂，太宗令将停建小殿的材料拿去建造厅堂，五天即完工，还赐给他质地平常色彩单调屏风和褥子，以及几案、手杖等，以顺应他的俭朴习惯。
English: Wei Zheng's house did not have a hall, so Emperor Taizong ordered that the materials for the construction of the small hall be used to build the hall, which was completed in five days. He also gave him a plain-colored plain-colored screen and pliers, as well as several cases, canes, etc., to comply with his frugal habits.

古文：征上表谢，上手诏称： 处卿至此，盖为黎元与国家，岂为一人，何事过谢！ 
现代文：魏徵上表谢恩，太宗手书诏文称： 朕这样对侍你，都是为了黎民百姓与国家，难道是为朕一人？何必过于客气呢。 
English: Wei Zheng wrote a letter of thanks on the table, and Emperor Taizong wrote a letter saying: I am serving you like this for the sake of the people and the country. Is it just for me? Why should I be too polite?

古文：八月，丁酉，上曰： 当今国家何事最急？ 
现代文：八月，丁酉，太宗说： 如今朝廷中什么事情最为急迫？ 
English: In August, Ding Xi, Taizong said: What is the most urgent matter in the imperial court today?

古文：谏议大夫褚遂良曰： 今四方无虞，唯太子、诸王宜有定分最急。 
现代文：谏议大夫褚遂良说： 如今四方安定，只有确定太子与诸王的名分最为紧要。 
English: "Nowadays, all four sides are stable, and the most important thing is to determine the names of the crown prince and the kings," said Zeng Suiliang, a doctor of deliberation.

古文：上曰： 此言是也。 
现代文：太宗说： 这话说得有道理。 
English: Taizong said, "That makes sense.

古文：时太子承乾失德，魏王泰有宠，群臣日有疑议，上闻而恶之，谓侍臣曰： 方今群臣，忠直无逾魏征，我遣傅太子，用绝天下之疑。 
现代文：当时太子李承乾德行欠缺，魏王李泰得到宠爱，众位大臣愈益产生疑议，太宗听说后十分厌恶，对身边大臣说： 当朝的臣属们，忠直没人能超过魏徵，我让他做太子的老师，以此杜绝天下人的疑心。 
English: At that time, the prince Li Chengxian was deficient in virtue, the Wei king Li Tai was favored, and the ministers increasingly had doubts. After hearing this, Taizong was very disgusted. He said to the ministers around him: "Subordinates of that dynasty, no one can be more loyal than Wei Zheng. I let him be the prince's teacher, in order to eliminate the suspicion of the world.

古文：九月，丁巳，以魏征为太子太师。
现代文：九月，丁巳，任命魏徵为太子太师。
English: In September, Ding Si appointed Wei Zheng as the crown prince.

古文：征疾小愈，诣朝堂表辞，上手诏谕以 周幽、晋献，废嫡立庶，危国亡家。
现代文：魏徵病刚有好转，亲到朝堂上表推辞，太宗手书诏令晓谕他： 周幽王、晋献公，废除嫡子立庶子造成国家危亡。
English: Wei Zheng's illness had just improved, and he went to the imperial court to submit his resignation. The emperor's handwritten edict told him: Zhou Yu Wang, Jin Xianguo, abolish the legitimate son and establish the illegitimate son, causing the country to perish.

古文：汉高祖几废太子，赖四皓然后安。
现代文：汉高祖差一点儿废掉太子，幸亏商山四位老人才得以保住太子位。
English: Henkel's great-great-grandfather was on the verge of losing his crown, but thanks to the four old men from Shangshan, he was able to keep it.

古文：我今赖公，即其义也。
现代文：朕如今信赖你，就是这个意思。
English: I trust you now, that's what I mean.

古文：知公疾病，可卧护之。 
现代文：朕知道你有病在身，可以躺在床上铺佐太子。 
English: Knowing that you are ill, you can also protect the prince while you are sick.

古文：征乃受诏。
现代文：魏徵于是接受诏令。
English: Wei Zheng then accepted the edict.

古文：癸亥，薛延陀真珠可汗遣其叔父沙钵罗泥孰俟斤来请昏，献马三千，貂皮三万八千，马脑镜一。
现代文：癸亥，薛延陀真珠可汗派他的叔父沙钵罗泥熟俟斤前来唐朝请求通婚，并献上三千匹马，三万八千张貂皮，一只玛瑙镜子。
English: In the year of the boar, Xue Yanda Pearl Khan sent his uncle Shaju Luo to Tang Dynasty to ask for intermarriage, and offered three thousand horses, thirty-eight thousand mink skins, and an agate mirror.

古文：癸酉，以凉州都督郭孝恪行安西都护、西州刺史，高昌旧民与镇兵及谪徙者杂居西州，孝恪推诚抚御，咸得其欢心。
现代文：癸酉，唐朝廷任命凉州都督郭孝恪为安西都护、西州刺史。高昌旧部与镇兵以及迁徙流放的犯人都居住在西州，较为混杂，郭孝恪诚心诚意抚慰治理，非常受当地人的欢迎。
English: At that time, the Tang Dynasty court appointed the governor of Liangzhou, Guo Xiaoqiu, to be the guardian of Anxi and the historian of Xizhou. The old Gaochang government, the soldiers of the town and the exiled prisoners all lived in Xizhou, and they were rather mixed. Guo Xiaoqiu sincerely comforted and governed, and was very popular with the local people.

古文：西突厥乙毘咄陆可汗既杀沙钵罗叶护，并其众，又击吐火罗，灭之。
现代文：西突厥乙毗咄陆可汗杀死沙钵罗叶护以后，吞并其兵众，又袭击吐火罗，将其灭掉。
English: After the West Turk Bifur Khan killed Shajuro Yegu, he absorbed his troops and attacked Tuhuaro, eliminating him.

古文：自恃强大，遂骄倨，拘留唐使者，侵暴西域，遣兵寇伊州；郭孝恪将轻骑二千自乌骨邀击，败之。
现代文：自恃强大，于是十分骄横，拘留了唐朝的使者，侵扰西域地区，并且派兵进犯伊州，郭孝恪率二千轻骑兵从乌骨拦击，将他们打得大败。
English: Pretending to be powerful, he was very arrogant, detained the Tang Dynasty's envoys, invaded the western region, and sent troops to invade Izhou. Guo Xiaoqi led two thousand light cavalrymen to intercept them from the Black Bone and defeated them.

古文：乙毘咄陆又遣处月、处密二部围天山；孝恪击走之，乘胜进拔处月俟斤所居城，追奔至遏索山，降处密之众而归。
现代文：乙毗咄陆又派处月、处密二个部族围困天山，孝格将其击退，乘胜追击，拔下处月首领所居住的小城，一直追到遏索山，收降处密兵众而后凯旋。
English: Bifidahu also sent two tribes, the Zhizhong and the Zhimizhong, to besiege Tianshan. Xiao Ge repulsed them, pursued them with victory, pulled down the small city where the leaders of the Zhizhong lived, pursued them all the way to the Jiezhuang Mountain, collected the troops of the Zhizhong, and then returned in triumph.

古文：初，高昌既平，岁发兵千馀人戍守其地。褚遂良上疏，以为： 圣王为治，先华夏而后夷狄。
现代文：起初，平定高昌以后，每年征发一千多名士卒驻守在当地，褚遂良上奏疏言道： 自古圣王治理天下，都是先华夏而后四方边族。
English: At first, after the pacification of Gaochang, more than a thousand soldiers were sent every year to be stationed in the local area. Sui Liang went on to say: Since ancient times, holy kings have ruled the world, first the Chinese and then the Sifang people.

古文：陛下兴兵取高昌，数郡萧然，累年不复；岁调千馀人屯戍，远去乡里，破产办装。
现代文：陛下派军队功取了高昌，当地数郡一片萧条，多年恢复不了；又每年征调一千多人驻扎戍边，远离乡土，破产以置备行装。
English: His Majesty sent troops to Gaochang, where several counties were in a state of depression and could not recover for many years. In addition, more than a thousand people were conscripted every year to be stationed in Fuzhou, far away from the countryside, and they went bankrupt in order to prepare for the move.

古文：又谪徙罪人，皆无赖子弟，适足骚扰边鄙，岂能有益行陈！
现代文：而且又将犯人流放到此地，这些人都是些无赖之徒，正好大肆骚扰边境，岂能有益于排兵布阵。
English: Moreover, the deportation of convicts to this place, these people are ruffians, just harassing the border, can not be beneficial to the formation of troops.

古文：所遣多复逃亡，徒烦追捕。
现代文：这些人又多次逃亡，徒劳追捕。
English: The men fled again and again, leading to a fruitless hunt.

古文：加以道涂所经，沙碛千里，冬风如割，夏风如焚，行人往来，遇之多死。
现代文：再加上一路上所经过的地区，千里大沙漠，冬季风吹如刀割，夏季风吹如火烧，行人来来往往，遇见这种情况往往难逃一死。
English: Add to this the regions they pass through along the way, the vast deserts, the wind that cuts like a knife in the winter and burns like a torch in the summer, and the pedestrians who come and go. If you encounter such a situation, it is often difficult to escape death.

古文：设使张掖、酒泉有烽燧之警，陛下岂得高昌一夫斗粟之用？终当发陇右诸州兵食以赴之耳。
现代文：假使张掖、酒泉有烽火报警，陛下难道还指望用高昌的一个兵一斗粮吗，最终还是要征发陇右各州兵马粮草再赴前方。
English: If Zhang Ye and Jiuquan have a bonfire alarm, does your majesty still expect to use a bucket of grain from a soldier in Gaochang? In the end, it is necessary to conscript soldiers and horses from all prefectures and then go forward.

古文：然则河西者，中国之心腹；高昌者，他人之手足；奈何糜弊本根以事无用之土乎！
现代文：然而河西地带，乃是我大唐的心腹；高昌，不过是他人的手足；为什么要荒废根本来占有无用的土地呢？
English: However, the Hexi region is the heart and soul of my Great Tang; Gaochang is only the limb of others; why should it be abandoned to occupy useless land?

古文：且陛下得突厥、吐谷浑，皆不有其地，为之立君长以抚之，高昌独不得与为比乎！
现代文：而且陛下打败突厥、吐谷浑后，都没有占有他们土地，而为他们重立君长加以安抚，惟独高昌不能与他们相比吗？
English: Moreover, after defeating the Turks and Tugu Huns, your majesty did not occupy their lands, but re-established monarchs for them to pacify them, but Gaochang cannot be compared to them?

古文：叛而执之，服而封之，刑莫威焉，德莫厚焉。
现代文：叛离者将其抓获，服顺者封他们官职，刑罚没有比此更威严的，恩德没有比这更高厚的。
English: There is no punishment more severe, no reward more generous, than the capture of the traitors and the appointment of the obedient.

古文：愿更择高昌子弟可立者，使君其国，子子孙孙，负荷大恩，永为唐室籓辅，内安外宁，不亦善乎！ 
现代文：深望陛下另外选择高昌王子中可以立为可汗的，使其为高昌一国之主，子子孙孙，感荷陛下的大恩德，永远作为大唐帝国的屏障，内部安定外围宁静，这不是很好的事吗？ 
English: I deeply hope that His Majesty will choose another prince of Gaochang who can be appointed as Khan, so that he will be the master of Gaochang as a country, his children and grandchildren will be impressed by His Majesty's great kindness, and will always serve as a barrier to the Great Tang Empire, with internal stability and external tranquility. Isn't this a good thing?

古文：上弗听。
现代文：太宗不听从其意见。
English: Emperor Wen did not listen to him.

古文：及西突厥入寇，上悔之，曰： 魏征、褚遂良劝我复立高昌，吾不用其言，今方自咎耳。 
现代文：等到西突厥进犯，太宗十分后悔，说道： 魏徵、褚遂良都劝朕再立高昌国王，朕不采纳他们的建议，如今正是咎由自取呀！ 
English: When the Western Turks invaded, Emperor Taizong was very regretful and said: Wei Zheng and Sui Liang both advised me to reinstate the King of Gaochang, but I did not accept their advice. Now I have only myself to blame!

古文：乙毘咄陆西击康居，道过米国，破之。
现代文：乙毗咄陆向西进攻康居国，途经米国，将其吞灭。
English: Bifidobacterium moved westward to invade Kangju Province, passing through the United States and devouring it.

古文：虏获甚多，不分与其下，其将泥孰啜辄夺取之，乙毘咄陆怒，斩泥孰啜以徇，众皆愤怨。
现代文：俘获较多的米国人，却不分给他的下属，其部将泥熟啜擅自抢夺俘虏，乙毗咄陆大怒，将泥熟啜斩首示众，众人均满腹怨恨。
English: When he captured a large number of Americans, but did not distribute them to his subordinates, his subordinates took prisoners without permission, and he was so angry that he beheaded them in public, and everyone was full of resentment.

古文：泥孰啜部将胡禄屋袭击之，乙毘咄陆众散，走保白水胡城。
现代文：泥熟啜部将胡禄屋袭击咄陆，乙毗咄陆的部下纷纷逃散，退守在白水胡城。
English: The mud-caked troops attacked Hulun's house, and his subordinates scattered and retreated to Baishuiwucheng.

古文：于是弩失毕诸部及乙毘咄陆所部屋利啜等遣使诣阙，请废乙毘咄陆，更立可汗。
现代文：于是弩失毕各部以及乙毗咄陆部下屋利啜等人派使节到大唐，请求废掉乙毗咄陆，重新立一个可汗。
English: As a result, the ministers of the lost provinces, as well as the subordinates of Bibi and Lu, sent envoys to Datang, requesting the abolition of Bibi and Lu and the re-establishment of a khan.

古文：上遣使赍玺书，立莫贺咄之子为乙毘射匮可汗。
现代文：太宗派使节带着玺书，立莫贺咄的儿子，是为乙毗射匮可汗。
English: The envoys of the Great Sect were carrying a letter from the son of Limoges, the Khan of Epirus.

古文：乙毘射匮既立，悉礼遣乙毘咄陆所留唐使者，帅诸部击乙毘咄陆于白水胡城。
现代文：乙毗射匮即可汗位后，礼待并放回乙毗咄陆所拘留的唐朝使者，并亲率部队进攻乙毗咄陆于白水胡城。
English: After the abdication ceremony, he treated with courtesy and released the Tang Dynasty emissaries detained in the abdication hall, and led the troops to attack the abdication hall in Baishuiwu City.

古文：乙毘咄陆出兵击之，乙毘射匮大败。
现代文：乙毗咄陆出兵迎击，将乙毗射匮打得大败。
English: Bifidobacteria sent troops to meet the attack, and defeated Bifidobacteria.

古文：乙毘咄陆遣使招其故部落，故部落皆曰： 使我千人战死，一人独存，亦不汝从！ 
现代文：乙毗咄陆派人招募他的旧部落，他的旧部落都说： 即使我们一千人战死，一人生存，也不会跟从你。 
English: But his old tribe said, "Even if a thousand of us die in battle and only one survives, we will not follow you."

古文：乙毘咄陆自知不为众所附，乃西奔吐火罗。
现代文：乙毗咄陆自知己不为众人钦服，便向西投奔吐火罗。
English: Since his confidant was not admired by everyone, he ran to the west to put out the fire.

古文：冬，十月，丙申，殿中监郢纵公宇文士及卒。
现代文：冬季，十月，丙申，殿中监、郢纵公宇文士及去世。
English: In the winter, in October, Bishin, the palace middle supervisor and the scholar of the imperial proclamation, passed away.

古文：上尝止树下，爱之，士及从而誉之不已，上正色曰： 魏征常劝我远佞人，我不知佞人为谁，意疑是汝，今果不谬！ 
现代文：太宗曾经停靠在一棵树下，很喜欢这棵树，宇文士及在身边也称赞不已，太宗正颜厉色道： 魏徵常常劝朕远离谄谀的小人，朕还不知道是指谁，也怀疑是你，今日一见，果然不错。 
English: Taizong had once docked under a tree, he liked this tree very much, Yu Wenshi and those around him also praised it, Taizong Zhengyan said: Wei Zheng often advised me to stay away from the villain, I still don't know who it is, and I doubt it's you. Today, at first glance, it's really good.

古文：士及叩头谢。
现代文：宇文士及磕头谢罪。
English: Uwenshi and Shantou Xie sinned.

古文：上谓侍臣曰： 薛延陀屈强漠北，今御之止有二策，苟非发兵殄灭之，则与之婚姻以抚之耳。二者何从？ 
现代文：太宗对身边大臣说： 薛延陀在漠北称雄，如今制御它有二个办法，如果不发兵将其消灭，就与他们通婚以安抚他们，这二个办法执行哪个？ 
English: Taizong said to the minister next to him, "Xue Yantao has become a hero in the north of the desert, and now there are two ways to control it. If you don't send troops to eliminate them, you can marry them to appease them. Which of these two methods should be implemented?

古文：房玄龄对曰： 中国新定，兵凶战危，臣以为和亲便。 
现代文：房玄龄答道： 中国刚刚安定，出兵征战凶多吉少，我认为和亲为上策。 
English: Fang Xuanling replied: China has just been stabilized, and sending troops to fight is not so bad. I think making peace with relatives is the best policy.

古文：上曰： 然。
现代文：太宗说： 很对。
English: His last position was that of Taijo-jo.

古文：朕为民父母，苟可利之，何爱一女！ 
现代文：朕既为天下百姓的父母，如果对百姓有利，何必爱惜一个女儿。 
English: Since we are the parents of the people of the world, if it is beneficial to the people, why should we spare a daughter.

古文：先是，左领军将军契苾何力母姑臧夫人及弟贺兰州都督沙门皆在凉州，上遣何力归觐，且抚其部落。
现代文：先前，左领军将军契何力母亲姑臧夫人及他的弟弟贺兰州都督沙门都居住在凉州，太宗派契何力回去省亲，并且得便安抚契部落。
English: Previously, the left-wing army's leader, General Qi He Li, his mother, Mrs. Gu Jun, and his brother, the governor of Helan, Shamen, all lived in Liangzhou. Tai sect sent Qi He Li back to visit his relatives, and he was able to pacify the Qi tribe.

古文：时薛延陀方强，契苾部落皆欲归之，何力大惊曰： 主上厚恩如是，奈何遽为叛逆！ 
现代文：当时薛延陀势力正强大，契部落都想归附薛延陀，何力十分惊奇地说： 大唐天子待我们如此厚恩，为什么还有叛离呢？ 
English: At that time, Xueyantuo's influence was strong, and all the Qi tribes wanted to join Xueyantuo. Surprised, he said, "Great Tang has been so kind to us, why do you still want to defect?"

古文：其徒曰： 夫人、都督先已诣彼，若之何不往！ 
现代文：契部落的人说： 老夫人及都督此前都已到了薛延陀那里，你何不前往？ 
English: The people of the Che tribe said, "The old lady and the governor have already gone to Xue Yantao's place, why don't you go?"

古文：何力曰： 沙门孝于亲，我忠于君，必不汝从。 
现代文：何力说： 沙门孝敬老人家，而我要对皇上忠心，坚决不跟你们去。 
English: He Li said, "Salman is a filial old man, and I want to be loyal to the emperor, so I will not go with you."

古文：其徒执之诣薛延陀，置真珠牙帐前。
现代文：契人将其捆梆起来送到薛延陀部，扔在真珠可汗牙帐前。
English: The people of Chechnya bundled him up and sent him to Xueyantab, where he was thrown in front of the Pearl Khan's casket.

古文：何力箕踞，拔佩刀东向大呼曰： 岂有唐烈士而受屈虏庭，天地日月，愿知我心！ 
现代文：何力伸直双腿，拔出佩刀向东面大声喊道： 岂有大唐忠烈之士受你们的污辱，天日昭昭，望你们知道我的真心。 
English: He stretched his legs with all his might, pulled out his sword and rode eastward, shouting in a loud voice, "Is there any great Tang loyal and brave soldier who would be insulted by you? It's clear as day. I hope you know my true heart."

古文：因割左耳以誓。
现代文：于是将左耳割掉发誓不从。
English: So he cut off his left ear and swore not to obey.

古文：真珠欲杀之，其妻谏而止。
现代文：真珠可汗想杀死他，真珠妻子力劝才作罢。
English: Pearl Khan wanted to kill him, but Pearl's wife persuaded him not to.

古文：上闻契苾叛，曰： 必非何力之意。 
现代文：太宗听说契何力叛逃，说： 肯定不是何力的本意。 
English: When Emperor Taizong heard of Chi Ho-li's defection, he said, "It was definitely not Ho-li's intention.

古文：左右曰： 戎狄气类相亲，何力入薛延陀，如鱼趋水耳。 
现代文：身边的人说： 这些戎狄之族臭味相投，何力加盟薛延陀，如鱼得水。 
English: Those around him said, "These people from the Jung Di clan are all alike. How can I join Xue Yantuo, it's like a fish in water."

古文：上曰： 不然。
现代文：太宗说： 不对。
English: The emperor said, "That is not so."

古文：何力心如铁石，必不叛我！ 
现代文：何力心如铁石般坚定，肯定不会背叛我。 
English: Ho Lixin is as firm as a rock, and will definitely not betray me.

古文：会有使者自薛延陀来，具言其状，上为之下泣，谓左右曰： 何力果如何！ 
现代文：恰巧有使者从薛延陀那里回来，详悉讲述了真情，太宗听完后落下泪来，对身边的人说： 何力究竟怎样了？ 
English: It so happened that an emissary returned from Xueyantuo and told the truth in detail. After listening, Taizong burst into tears and said to the people around him: What happened to He Li?

古文：即命兵部侍郎崔敦礼持节谕薛延陀，以新兴公主妻之，以求何力。何力由是得还，拜右骁卫大将军。
现代文：当即命令兵部侍郎崔敦礼持旌节晓谕薛延陀，将新兴公主嫁给真珠可汗为妻，以换回契何力，何力因此得以回到朝中，官拜右骁卫大将军。
English: He immediately ordered the attendant of the military department, Cui Dun, to hold a scepter festival and tell Xue Yantao to marry the emerging princess to Pearl Khan as his wife in exchange for the return of Qi He Li. As a result, He Li was able to return to the center of the court and pay homage to the right guard general.

古文：十一月，丙辰，上校猎于武功。
现代文：十一月，丙辰，太宗在武功狩猎。
English: In November, Hsin-Chen and Taizong went on a martial arts hunt.

古文：丁巳，营州都督张俭奏高丽东部大人泉盖苏文弑其王武。
现代文：丁巳，营州都督张俭上奏称高丽东部大人姓泉名叫盖苏文的杀死高丽王高武。
English: Ding Si, Yingzhou Governor Zhang Jian reported that the killing of Goryeo King Gaowu by an adult named Quan named Gai Suwen in eastern Goryeo.

古文：盖苏文凶暴，多不法，其王及大臣议诛之。
现代文：盖苏文凶残暴虐，多不守法度，高丽王和大臣们商议将其处死。
English: Gaesoo Man was a violent and lawless man, and the King of Goryeo and his ministers discussed putting him to death.

古文：盖苏文密知之，悉集部兵若校阅者，并盛陈酒馔于城南，召诸大臣共临视，勒兵尽杀之，死者百馀人。
现代文：盖苏文暗中得知消息，召集全部兵马装做校阅模样，并且在城南大摆酒宴，召集众位大臣亲往观看，勒令手下士兵将他们全部杀掉，共有一百多人。
English: Gaisuwen secretly learned the news, called together all the soldiers and horses to dress up as a school reading, and held a grand wine banquet in the south of the city, called together a number of ministers to watch, and ordered his soldiers to kill them all, a total of more than a hundred people.

古文：因驰入宫，手弑其王，断为数段，弃沟中，立王弟子藏为王；自为莫离支，其官如中国吏部兼兵部尚书也。
现代文：接着冲进王宫，亲手杀死高丽王，腰斩数段，扔在水沟中，立高丽王的侄子高藏为王；自封为莫离支，其官职便如同我大唐的吏部兼兵部尚书。
English: Then he rushed into the royal palace, killed the king of Goryeo with his own hands, cut off several parts of his waist and threw it in a ditch, and made the nephew of the king of Goryeo, Gaozang, king. He appointed himself as a member of the Morye branch, and his official position was the same as that of Shangshu, the official and military department of my Great Tang.

古文：于是号令远近，专制国事。
现代文：于是远近都听其号令，独掌高丽国政。
English: As a result, people from near and far obeyed his orders, and Koryo's national politics were left in his hands.

古文：盖苏文状貌雄伟，意气豪逸，身佩五刀，左右莫敢仰视。
现代文：盖苏文身材魁伟，气概豪爽，身上佩带五把短刀，身边的人都不敢抬头看他。
English: Gaisuwen is a big man with a strong spirit. He carries five knives on his body, and people around him do not dare to look up at him.

古文：每上下马，常令贵人、武将伏地而履之。
现代文：每次上马下马，常让贵族、武将伏在地下由他踩着。
English: Every time he got on and off his horse, he often had nobles and generals kneel down on the ground and let him step on them.

古文：出行必整队伍，前导者长呼，则人皆奔迸，不避坑谷，路绝行者，国人甚苦之。
现代文：出行定要整齐队伍，前导者拉长声呼喊，路人急忙奔逃，也不避积水浅坑，路上绝少有行人，高丽国百姓叫苦连天。
English: The procession must be neatly lined up, the leader shouts in a long voice, passers-by run away in a hurry, and do not avoid shallow pits of water. There are very few pedestrians on the road, and the people of Korea are in agony.

古文：壬戌，上校猎于岐阳，因幸庆善宫，召武功故老宴赐，极欢而罢。
现代文：壬戌，太宗在岐阳打猎，接着临幸庆善宫，召集武功县故老赐予酒宴，尽兴而罢。
English: According to legend, Emperor Taizong went hunting in Qiyang, and then went to Qingzengong Palace to convene the elders of Wugong County to hold a banquet.

古文：庚午，还京师。
现代文：庚午，返回长安。
English: In the afternoon, return to Chang'an.

古文：壬申，上曰： 朕为兆民之主，皆欲使之富贵。
现代文：壬申，太宗说： 朕为万民之主，想让百姓们都富贵。
English: Jinshin, Taizong said: I am the lord of all people, I want to make the people rich.

古文：若教以礼义，使之少敬长、妇敬夫，则皆贵矣。
现代文：如果教给他们礼义，使他们年少的孝敬年长的，妻子尊敬丈夫，那就都尊贵了。
English: If you teach them to be courteous, to respect their elders when they are young, and to respect their husbands when they are old, then they will all be respected.

古文：轻徭薄敛，使之各治生业。则皆富矣。
现代文：轻徭薄赋，使他们各治产业，那就都富足了。
English: Let them all have their own industries, and then they will all be rich.

古文：若家给人足，朕虽不听管弦，乐在其中矣。 
现代文：如果家给人足，朕即使不听音乐，也自然乐在其中了。 
English: If the home gives people enough, even if I don't listen to music, I will naturally enjoy it.

古文：亳州刺史裴庄奏请伐高丽，上曰： 高丽王武职贡不绝，为贼臣所弑，朕哀之甚深，固不忘也。
现代文：毫州刺史裴行庄上奏疏请求讨伐高丽，太宗说： 高丽国王高武每年贡赋不断，被贼臣杀死后，朕非常哀痛，一直不能忘怀。
English: When Maozhou sent a request to Bae Xingzhuang for a crusade against Goryeo, Taizong said, "Goryeo King Gaowu has been paying tribute every year. After he was killed by a vassal, I was very sad and have never been able to forget him.

古文：但因丧乘乱而取之，虽得之不贵。且山东凋弊，吾未忍言用兵也。 
现代文：但其新丧国王，乘乱而攻取，即使得胜也不足为贵，而且关东地区民生凋敝，朕实在不忍心谈用兵呀。 
English: However, its newly-deceased king took advantage of the turmoil to conquer, even if victory is not enough, and the people's livelihood in the Kanto region is withering, I really can't bear to talk about using soldiers.

古文：高祖之入关也，隋武勇郎将冯翊党仁弘将兵二千馀人，归高祖于蒲坂，从平京城，寻除陕州总管，大军东讨，仁弘转饷不绝，历南宁、戎、广州都督。
现代文：当年唐高祖李渊进入关东时，隋朝武勇郎将冯人党仁弘率部下二千多人在蒲阪归附高祖皇帝，并且跟随他平定了京城。不久官拜陕州总管，唐朝大军讨王世充时，党仁弘负责转运粮饷，没有断绝，历任南宁州、戎州、广州都督。
English: When Li Yuan, the ancestor of the Tang Dynasty Emperor Gao, entered Kanto in that year, Zhu Yuyong of the Sui Dynasty assigned more than two thousand people under the leadership of the Feng people's party, Jin Hong, to Emperor Gao Zu in Busan, and followed him to level the capital city. Soon, the officials asked for the general manager of Shaanxi Province, and when the Tang Dynasty army fought against Wang Shichong, Party Jin Hong was responsible for the transshipment of grain, which was not interrupted, and successively served as the governor of Nanning Province, Eon Province, and Guangzhou.

古文：仁弘有才略，所至著声迹，上甚器之。
现代文：仁弘有才识韬略，所到之处均留有声誉，太宗十分器重他。
English: Ninhong is a talented and clever person. He has a good reputation everywhere he goes. Taizong attaches great importance to him.

古文：然性贪，罢广州，为人所讼，赃百馀万，罪当死。
现代文：然而性情贪婪，被罢免广州都督，被人控告，贪赃一百多万，其罪应当处死刑。
English: However, he had a greedy nature, was removed as the governor of Guangzhou, and was accused of embezzling more than one million yuan. His crime was punishable by death.

古文：上谓侍臣曰： 吾昨见大理五奏诛仁弘，哀其白首就戮，方晡食，遂命撤案；然为之求生理，终不可得。
现代文：太宗对身边大臣说： 朕昨天看见大理寺五次上奏请求处死仁弘，朕可怜他白发苍苍而被处斩，正吃晚饭，便命令把食案撤掉；然而想为他求条生路，最终也难以找到理由。
English: Emperor Taizong said to the ministers around him, "Yesterday, I saw five petitions from Dali Temple asking for the execution of Nihong. I felt sorry for him because his hair was white and he was executed. While we were having dinner, I ordered that the petition be withdrawn. However, if I wanted to find a way out for him, it would be difficult to find a reason.

古文：今欲曲法就公等乞之。 
现代文：如今只想变通法令请求你们同意免他一死。 
English: All I want to do now is to ask you to change the law and agree to spare his life.

古文：十二月，壬午朔，上复召五品已上集太极殿前，谓曰： 法者，人君所受于天，不可以私而失信。
现代文：十二月，壬午朔，太宗又召见五品以上官员齐集太极殿前，对他们说： 法令，是君王受命于上天所得，不可因私情而失信。
English: In the early afternoon of December, Emperor Taizong also summoned officials of five grades and above to gather in front of the Taiji Hall and said to them: The edict is what the emperor was ordered to obtain from heaven, and he must not lose trust due to personal feelings.

古文：今朕私党仁弘而欲赦之，是乱其法，上负于天。
现代文：如今朕偏袒党仁弘想要宽赦他，这是淆乱法度，有负于上天。
English: Now, I am partial to Party member Nihiro and want to pardon him. This is a confusion of laws and regulations, and it is a sin against heaven.

古文：欲席藁于南郊，日一进蔬食，以谢罪于天三日。 
现代文：朕想要在南郊坐在席子上，每日只进一次素食，用三天时间向上天谢罪。 
English: I want to sit on a mat in the southern suburbs, eat only one vegetarian meal a day, and spend three days thanking God.

古文：房玄龄等皆曰： 生杀之柄，人主所得专也，何至自贬责如此！ 
现代文：房玄龄等人都劝道： 生杀的权柄，都掌握在皇上一人手中，何至于如此自我贬损呢？ 
English: Fang Xuanling and others all advised: The power of life and death is in the hands of the emperor alone, why such self-deprecation?

古文：上不许，群臣顿首固请于庭，自旦至日昃，上乃降手诏，自称： 朕有三罪：知人不明，一也；以私乱法，二也；善善未赏，恶恶未诛，三也。
现代文：太宗不答应，众位大臣一再磕头请求，从早晨直到傍晚，太宗才降下诏书说： 朕有三项罪过：识别人而不能明察，是一罪；因私情淆乱法令，是二罪；亲近善人而未予赏赐，讨厌恶人而未予诛罚，是三罪。
English: Emperor Taizong did not agree, and the ministers repeatedly begged him. From morning until evening, Emperor Taizong issued an edict saying, "I have committed three sins: recognizing others without being able to see them clearly is one sin; confusing and confusing laws due to personal feelings is two sins; being close to good people without rewarding them, and hating evil people without punishing them is three sins.

古文：以公等固谏，且依来请。 
现代文：因为你们执意苦谏，暂且依说情者。 
English: For ye suffer fools gladly, seeing ye yourselves are wise.

古文：于是黜仁弘为庶人，徙钦州。
现代文：于是将党仁弘废黜为平民，流放到钦州。
English: As a result, Party member Nihong was dethroned as a commoner and exiled to Qinzhou.

古文：癸卯，上幸骊山温汤；甲辰，猎于骊山。
现代文：癸卯，太宗巡幸骊山温泉；甲辰，在骊山打猎。
English: Yu Yu, Taizong toured Lushan Hot Spring; Jia Chen, went hunting in Lushan.

古文：上登山，见围有断处，顾谓左右曰： 吾见其不整而不刑，则堕军法；刑之，则是吾登高临下以求人之过也。 
现代文：太宗登上骊山，看见围墙有断垣处，回头对身边人说： 我看见没整治的地方不加治理，则是在败坏军纪；如果加以整治呢，又象是我居高临下在寻找别人的过失。 
English: When Emperor Taizong ascended Shaoshan and saw a breach in the wall, he turned around and said to those around him, "If I see a place that has not been rectified and do not rectify it, then I am corrupting military discipline; if I rectify it, then it is as if I am looking down on others and finding their faults."

古文：乃托以道险，引辔入谷以避之。
现代文：于是推托道路险恶，牵马进入山谷以回避此处。
English: So he took the dangerous road and led his horse into the valley to avoid this place.

古文：乙巳，还宫。
现代文：乙巳，返回宫中。
English: Now, let's go back to the palace.

古文：刑部以反逆缘坐律兄弟没官为轻，请改从死。
现代文：刑部认为： 反叛等大罪依连坐法令，兄弟没官为奴处罚太轻，请求改为一并处死。 
English: The Department of Corrections believes that: rebellion and other serious crimes are punishable according to the law, and the punishment is too light for a slave without a brother. The request was changed to death together.

古文：敕八座议之，议者皆以为 秦、汉、魏、晋之法，反者皆夷三族，今宜如刑部请为是。 
现代文：太宗敕令尚书省仆射以及六部尚书共同议定，议者都认为： 秦、汉、魏、晋的法律，谋反罪都要夷灭三族，如今应当改用刑部的请求为是。 
English: Emperor Taizong decreed that the Qin, Han, Wei, and Jin dynasties should all be exterminated for the crime of treason, and now the request of the criminal department should be accepted.

古文：给事中崔仁师驳曰： 古者父子兄弟罪不相及，奈何以亡秦酷法变隆周中典！
现代文：给事中崔仁师反驳说： 古时候父子兄弟犯罪互不相关，为什么要用亡秦的严刑酷法来改变使周朝兴隆的中典呢？
English: During the presentation, Cui Renshi countered: In ancient times, the crimes of father and son were not related to each other. Why should the harsh punishment of the late Qin Dynasty be used to change the Chinese classics that made the Zhou Dynasty flourish?

古文：且诛其父子，足累其心，此而不顾，何爱兄弟！ 
现代文：而且诛杀其父子，已经足以累及其心灵，这一点都不顾及，又如何谈到爱惜他们的兄弟呢？ 
English: And killing their fathers and sons is enough to wear out their souls, never mind this, what about loving their brothers?

古文：上从之。
现代文：太宗听从他的意见。
English: Emperor Dezong accepted his suggestion.

古文：上问侍臣曰： 自古或君乱而臣治，或君治而臣乱，二者孰愈？ 
现代文：太宗问身边大臣： 自古以来有时是君主昏愦而臣下清明，有时又是君主清明而臣下昏乱，二者之间哪个更厉害些？ 
English: Taizong asked the ministers around him: Since ancient times, sometimes the monarch is dizzy and his subjects are lucid, and sometimes the monarch is lucid and his subjects are dizzy. Which of the two is more powerful?

古文：魏征对曰： 君治则善恶赏罚当，臣安得而乱之！
现代文：魏徵答道： 君主清明则善恶赏罚得当，臣下如何能够作乱！
English: Wei Qian replied: If the monarch is clear, then good and evil will be rewarded and punished appropriately. How can his vassals make trouble?

古文：苟为不治，纵暴愎谏，虽有良臣，将安所施！ 
现代文：如果不清明，放纵暴虐刚愎自用，即使有良臣在身旁，又有何作为？ 
English: If it is not clear, indulging in tyranny and violence for one's own use, even if there are good ministers around, what can be done?

古文：上曰： 齐文宣得杨遵彦，非君乱而臣治乎？ 
现代文：太宗说： 齐文宣帝身边有个杨遵彦，难道不是君主昏愦而臣下清明吗？ 
English: Taizong said, "Qiwen Xuandi is surrounded by Yang Zunyan. Isn't it true that the monarch is drowsy, but the vassal is lucid?

古文：对曰： 彼才能救亡耳，乌足为治哉！ 
现代文：答道： 他也只能延缓灭亡而已，如何谈得上治理好朝政呢？ 
English: He replied: He can only postpone his demise. How can we talk about governing the country well?

古文：贞观十七年癸卯，公元六四三年
现代文：贞观十七年
English: The 17th year of Zhenguan

古文：春，正月，丙寅，上谓群臣曰： 闻外间士民以太子有足疾，魏王颖悟，多从游幸，遽生异议，徼幸之徒，已有附会者。
现代文：夏季正月，丙寅，太宗对大臣们说： 听说外面士大夫传言承乾太子有脚病行走不便，魏王李泰聪颖悟性高，由于李泰多次跟随朕游幸，便突生疑义，一些别有企图的人，已有附会其法的。
English: In the first month of summer, Emperor Taizong said to his ministers: "I have heard that there is a rumor that Prince Heungchen has a foot ailment that makes it difficult for him to walk. The Wei King Li Tai Cong Ying has a high level of understanding. Since Li Tai has accompanied me on many trips, doubts have suddenly arisen. Some people with ulterior motives have already made their plans.

古文：太子虽病足，不废步履。
现代文：太子虽然脚有病，但并不妨碍行走。
English: Although the prince has a foot ailment, it does not prevent him from walking.

古文：且《礼》：嫡子死，立嫡孙。
现代文：而且依据《礼记》：嫡长子死，应立嫡长孙。
English: Moreover, according to the "Li Ji": If the eldest son dies, the eldest grandson should be appointed.

古文：太子男已五岁，朕终不以孽代宗，启窥窬之源也。 
现代文：承乾的儿子已有五岁，朕终究不会以庶子取代嫡生子，来开启觊觎皇位的根源。 
English: Choekyong's son is already five years old. After all, I will not replace the legitimate son with an illegitimate son to open the root of the throne.

古文：郑文贞公魏征寝疾，上遣使者问讯，赐以药饵，相望于道。
现代文：郑文贞公魏徵卧病不起，太宗派人前去问讯，赐给他药饵，送药的人往来不绝。
English: When Zheng Wenzhen Gong Wei was bedridden and unable to work, Emperor Taizong sent someone to inquire about him and gave him medicine. The people who sent medicine kept coming and going.

古文：又遣中郎将李安俨宿其第，动静以闻。
现代文：又派中郎将李安俨在魏徵的宅院里留宿，一有动静便立即报告。
English: He also sent a middle-man to stay with Li Antao in Wei Zheng's house, and reported immediately if there was any movement.

古文：上复与太子同至其第，指衡山公主，欲以妻其子叔玉。
现代文：太宗又和太子一同到其住处，指着衡山公主，想要将她嫁给魏徵的儿子魏叔玉。
English: Emperor Taizong also went to her residence with the crown prince, pointing at Princess Hengshan, wanting to marry her to Wei Shuyu, the son of Wei Zheng.

古文：戊辰，征薨，命百官九品以上皆赴丧，给羽葆鼓吹，陪葬昭陵。
现代文：戊辰，魏徵去世，太宗命九品以上文武百官均去奔丧，赐给手持羽葆的仪仗队和吹鼓手，陪葬在昭陵。
English: When Wu Chen and Wei Zheng passed away, more than a hundred military and civilian officials above the ninth grade of Taizong's life went to pay their respects. They were given a ceremonial guard and a trumpeter holding a feather quill, and they were buried with them in Zhaoling.

古文：其妻裴氏曰： 征平生俭素，今葬以一品羽仪，非亡者之志。 
现代文：魏徵的妻子说： 魏徵平时生活检朴，如今用鸟羽装饰旌旗，用一品官的礼仪安葬，这并不是死者的愿望。 
English: Wei Zheng's wife said: Wei Zheng used to live a simple life, but now he decorates the banner with bird feathers and is buried with the etiquette of an official. This is not the wish of the deceased.

古文：悉辞不受，以布车载柩而葬。
现代文：全都推辞不受，仅用布罩上车子载着棺材安葬。
English: All were refused, and they were buried with only a cloth shroud and a wagon carrying a coffin.

古文：上登苑西楼，望哭尽哀。
现代文：太宗登上禁苑西楼，望着魏徵灵车痛哭，非常悲哀。
English: Taizong boarded the West Building of the Forbidden City, looking at Wei Zheng's hearse and weeping bitterly, very sad.

古文：上自制碑文，并为书石。
现代文：太宗亲自撰写碑文，并且书写墓碑。
English: Emperor Taizong personally wrote the inscription and inscribed the tombstone.

古文：上思征不已，谓侍臣曰： 人以铜为镜，可以正衣冠，以古为镜，可以见兴替，以人为镜，可以知得失；魏征没，朕亡一镜矣！ 
现代文：太宗不停地思念魏徵，对身边的大臣说： 人们用铜做成镜子，可以用来整齐衣帽，将历史做为镜子，可以观察到历朝的兴衰隆替，将人比做一面镜子，可以确知自己行为的得失。魏徵死去了，朕失去了一面绝好的镜子。 
English: Taizong kept thinking about Wei Zheng and said to the ministers around him: People use copper to make a mirror, which can be used to tidy clothes and hats, use history as a mirror, can observe the rise and fall of dynasties, compare people with a mirror, and can know the gains and losses of their actions. Wei Zheng died, and I lost an excellent mirror.

古文：鄠尉游文芝告代州都督刘兰成谋反，戊申，兰成坐腰斩。
现代文：雩尉游文芝上告代州都督刘兰成谋反，戊申，刘兰成被处以腰斩。
English: Lieutenant Yu Wenzhi reported the rebellion to Liu Lancheng, the acting provincial governor, and Liu Lancheng was sentenced to beheading.

古文：右武侯将军丘行恭探兰成心肝食之；上闻而让之曰： 兰成谋反，国有常刑，何至如是！
现代文：右武候将军丘行恭取出刘兰成的心、肝吃掉；太宗听说后责备他说： 兰成谋反，国家有规定的刑罚，何至于如此！
English: Yu Xingqiong, commander of the Right Military Region, took out Liu Lancheng's heart and liver and ate them; after hearing this, Emperor Taizong rebuked him, saying, "Lancheng plotted to rebel, the state has prescribed punishments, so what's the big deal!

古文：若以为忠孝，则太子诸王先食之矣，岂至卿邪！ 
现代文：如果以此来表示忠孝，则应该是太子和诸亲王先吃，岂能轮到你呢？ 
English: If this is a sign of loyalty and filial piety, then the prince and princes should eat first. Can it be your turn?

古文：行恭惭而拜谢。
现代文：丘行恭惭愧，磕头谢罪。
English: Qiu Xingqiong was ashamed, and Shantou Xie was remorseful.

古文：二月，壬午，上问谏议大夫褚遂良曰： 舜造漆器，谏者十馀人。
现代文：二月，壬午，太宗问谏议大夫褚遂良： 舜帝制造漆器，谏阻的有十多个人。
English: In February, at noon, Emperor Taizong asked Dr. Su Suiliang for advice: Emperor Sui was making lacquerware, and there were more than ten people who opposed him.

古文：此何足谏？ 
现代文：这有什么值得进谏的？ 
English: What's the big deal?

古文：对曰： 奢侈者，危亡之本；漆器不已，将以金玉为之。
现代文：答道： 穷奢极欲，是造成危亡的根源；漆器不能满足了，便会进一步用金玉。
English: He replied, "Excessive desire for luxury is the root cause of peril; lacquerware cannot be satisfied, so gold beads are used.

古文：忠臣爱君，必防其渐，若祸乱已成，无所复谏矣。 
现代文：忠臣敬爱君主，定要防微杜渐，如果祸乱已经形成，就用不着再去行谏了。 
English: Loyal subjects, who respect the monarch, must guard against evils. If a calamity has already taken shape, there is no need to go to battle again.

古文：上曰： 然。
现代文：太宗说： 是这样。
English: His last position was that of Taijo-jo.

古文：朕有过，卿亦当谏其渐。
现代文：朕一有过失，你也应当谏于初发时。
English: If I'm at fault, you should be at the start.

古文：朕见前世帝王拒谏者，多云 业已为之 ，或云 业已许之 ，终不为改。如此，欲无危亡，得乎？ 
现代文：朕观察前代拒谏的帝王，多说 已经那样做了 ，或说 已经应允的事 ，最终不加改悔，这样一来，想要不出现危亡，能做得到吗？ 
English: I observed that the emperors of the previous generation who refused the imperial edict mostly said that they had already done that, or that they had already promised, and ultimately did not repent. In this way, if you want to avoid peril, can you do it?

古文：时皇子为都督、刺史者多幼稚，遂良上疏，以为： 汉宣帝云： 与我共治天下者，其惟良二千石乎？ 
现代文：当时做都督、刺史的皇子们大多年纪幼小，褚遂良上书道： 汉宣帝曾说： 与我共同治理天下的，就是那些称职的郡守啊！ 
English: At that time, most of the princes who served as the city's governor and chief magistrate were young and small, so they were good at calligraphy. Emperor Han Xuan once said: "Those who jointly govern the world with me are those competent county governors!"

古文：今皇子幼稚，未知从政，不若且留京师，教以经术，俟其长而遣之。 
现代文：如今皇子们年幼，还不知道如何从政，不如暂且将他们留在长安，教他们治国方略，等到长大以后再派到各地。 
English: Now that the princes are young and do not yet know how to engage in politics, it is better to leave them in Chang'an for the time being, teach them how to govern the country, and then send them to various regions when they are older.

古文：上以为然。
现代文：太宗认为很有道理。
English: Tenshi thinks it makes sense.

古文：壬辰，以太子詹事张亮为洛州都督。
现代文：壬辰，任命太子詹事张亮为洛州都督。
English: In Imjin, Prince Zhan Zhi Zhang Liang was appointed as the governor of Luozhou.

古文：侯君集自以有功而下吏，怨望，有异志。
现代文：侯君集自以为有功而被拿到职司衙门，内心怨恨而产生反叛之心。
English: Hou Junji thought that he was meritorious and was given the post of gatekeeper, and his inner resentment gave rise to a rebellious heart.

古文：亮出为洛州，君集激之曰： 何人相排？ 
现代文：张亮出任洛州，侯君集刺激他说： 什么人排挤你？ 
English: Zhang Liang took up the post of Lozhou, and Hou Junji stimulated him by saying: "Who is crowding you out?

古文：亮曰： 非公而谁！ 
现代文：张亮说： 不是你又是谁呢？ 
English: Zhang Liang said: If not you, then who?

古文：君集曰： 我平一国来，逢嗔如屋大，安能仰排！ 
现代文：侯君集说： 我刚刚平定一国归来，即遭圣上嗔怪如铺天盖地一般，怎么还能排挤你呢？ 
English: Hou Junji said: I have just returned from the pacification of a country, and I have been attacked by the Holy Ghost, so how can I push you out?

古文：因攘袂曰： 郁郁殊不聊生！公能反乎？
现代文：因而挽起袖子说道： 整天郁闷过不下去了，你能造反吗？
English: So he rolled up his sleeves and said: I can't go on being depressed all day, can you rebel?

古文：与公反！ 
现代文：我与你一同反！ 
English: I'm with you!

古文：亮密以闻。
现代文：张亮密报给太宗。
English: Zhang Liang secretly reported the matter.

古文：上曰： 卿与君集皆功臣，语时旁无它人，若下吏，君集必不服。
现代文：太宗说： 你与侯君集都是朝廷的功臣，说话时身旁没有别人，如果审讯他，君集必然不服。
English: Taizong said, "You and Hou Junji are both heroes of the imperial court. When you speak, there is no one else around. If you put him on trial, he will certainly not submit.

古文：如此，事未可知，卿且勿言。 
现代文：那样，事情就不一定能弄清楚，你暂且不要说出去。 
English: In that case, you may not be able to clarify the matter, so please do not speak out for the time being.

古文：待君集如故。
现代文：太宗仍象以前那样待侯君集。
English: Taizong was still waiting for Houjunjun as before.

古文：鄜州都督尉迟敬德表乞骸骨；乙巳，以敬德为开府仪同三司，五日一参。
现代文：州都督尉迟敬德上表请求告老还乡；乙巳，朝廷任命敬德为开府仪同三司，五天一上朝。
English: The lieutenant of the provincial governor, Ji Jingde, petitioned the court to return to his hometown; the court appointed Ji Jingde as the keeper of the ceremony and the three departments, and he came to the court on the first day of the fifth month.

古文：丁未，上曰： 人主惟有一心，而攻之者甚众。
现代文：丁未，太宗说： 君主只有一颗心，而攻心的却有很多人。
English: Ding Wei, Taizong said: The monarch has only one heart, but there are many people who attack the heart.

古文：或以勇力，或以辩口，或以谄谀，或以奸诈，或以嗜欲，辐凑攻之，各求自售，以取宠禄。
现代文：有的以勇武力量，有的只凭口才，有的以谄谀逢迎，有的以奸诈邪恶，有的以嗜好欲望，各类人凑在一起，各自兜售自己的一套，以图取得恩宠。
English: Some by force of arms, some by persuasion, some by flattery, some by guile, some by covetousness, some by avarice, men of all sorts are gathered together, each selling his own doctrine, that he may obtain a blessing.

古文：人主少懈，而受其一，则危亡随之，此其所以难也。 
现代文：君主稍有松懈，而接受其中的一类人，则危亡随之而来，这便是君主行事之难呐！ 
English: The monarch is a bit lax, and accepting one of these types of people is followed by danger and death, which is the difficulty of the monarch's actions!

古文：戊申，上命图画功臣赵公长孙无忌、赵郡元王孝恭、莱成公杜如晦、郑文贞公魏征、梁公房玄龄、申公高士廉、鄂公尉迟敬德、卫公李靖、宋公萧瑀、褒忠壮公段志玄、夔公刘弘基、蒋忠公屈突通、郧节公殷开山、谯襄公柴绍、邳襄公长孙顺德、郧公张亮、陈公侯君集、郯襄公张公谨、卢公程知节、永兴文懿公虞世南、渝襄公刘政会、莒公唐俭、英公李世勣、胡壮公秦叔宝等于凌烟阁。
现代文：戊申，太宗命人在凌烟阁画上朝廷的大功臣。他们是：赵公长孙无忌、赵郡元王李孝恭、莱成公杜如晦、郑文贞公魏徵、梁公房玄龄、申公高士廉、鄂公尉迟敬德、卫公李靖、宋公萧、褒忠壮公段志玄、夔公刘弘基、蒋忠公屈突通、郧节公殷开山、谯襄公柴绍、邳襄公长孙顺德、勋公张亮、陈公侯君集、郯襄公张公谨、卢公程知节、永兴文懿公虞世南、渝襄公刘政会、莒公唐俭、英公李世、胡壮公秦叔宝等二十四人。
English: They are: Zhao Gongcheng Sun Mujie, Zhao County Yuan Wang Li Xiaogong, Lai Chenggong Du Rugao, Zheng Wenzheng Wei Zheng, Liang Gongfang Xuanling, Shengong Gao Shiliang, E civil servant Chi Jingde, Wei Gong Li Jing, Song Gong Xiao, Baozhong Zhuanggong Duan Zhixuan, Shao Gong Liu Hongji, Jiang Zhonggong Qu Jutong, Shou Jiegong Yin Kaishan, Shou Xianggong Chai Shao, Shou Xianggong Chun Shunde, Shou Xianggong Zhang Li

古文：齐州都督齐王祐，性轻躁，其舅尚乘直长阴弘智说之曰： 王兄弟既多，陛下千秋万岁后，宜得壮士以自卫。 
现代文：齐州都督齐王李，性情轻狂急躁，他的舅舅、尚乘局直长阴弘智劝他说： 您的兄弟较多，陛下一旦驾崩，您应当召募壮士来自我保护。 
English: The governor of Chizhou, Qi Wang Li, had a light-hearted and impatient temperament. His uncle, Yin Hongzhi, who was still the director of the bureau, advised him: Your brothers are more numerous. Once your majesty passes away, you should recruit strong men to protect yourself.

古文：祐以为然。
现代文：李深以为是。
English: Li Sheng thought so.

古文：弘智因荐妻兄燕弘信，祐悦之，厚赐金玉，使阴募死士。
现代文：弘智进而荐举妻兄燕弘信，李很喜欢他，赏赐很多金玉，让他暗中召募壮士。
English: Hongzhi then recommended his brother-in-law, Yan Hongxin. Li liked him very much and rewarded him with a lot of gold and let him secretly recruit strong men.

古文：上选刚直之士以辅诸王，为长史、司马，诸王有过以闻。
现代文：太宗挑选刚直的人来辅佐众位亲王，做长史和司马，诸亲王如有过失即禀报太宗。
English: Emperor Taizong selected upright people to assist the princes, to do long history and management, and the princes would report to Emperor Taizong if they made mistakes.

古文：祐昵近群小，好畋猎，长史权万纪骤谏，不听。
现代文：李亲近小人，又喜好打猎，长史权万纪直言切谏，不听其言。
English: Li is close to villains and likes hunting. Chang Shi Quan Wan Ji is outspoken and does not listen to others.

古文：壮士昝君謩、梁猛彪得幸于祐，万纪皆劾逐之，祐潜召还，宠之逾厚。
现代文：壮士昝君、梁猛彪得到李的宠幸，权万纪弹劾他们，并将他们赶走，李又暗中将他们召回，更加宠幸。
English: Li favored the strongmen Zou Jun and Liang Mengbiao. Quan Wanji impeached them and drove them away. Li secretly recalled them, and they became even more favored.

古文：上数以书切责祐，万纪恐并获罪，谓祐曰： 王审能自新，万纪请入朝言之。 
现代文：太宗多次寄书责备李，权万纪担心会与李一同获罪，便对李说： 亲王如果确实能悔过自新，我就请求到朝廷为您言明其事。 
English: Emperor Taizong repeatedly sent letters to reprimand Li. Guan Wanji, fearing that he would be punished along with Li, said to Li: "If the prince can truly repent and reform, I will ask him to come to the imperial court to clarify the matter for you."

古文：乃条祐过失，迫令表首，祐惧而从之。
现代文：于是条陈李的过失，逼迫他上表自首，李内心恐惧便应允。
English: As a result, Chen Li's mistake forced him to turn himself in, and Li's inner fear agreed.

古文：万纪至京师，言祐必能悛改。
现代文：权万纪到了长安，对太宗说李肯定能改过自新。
English: When Guan Wanji arrived in Chang'an, he told Taizong that Li would definitely be able to reform.

古文：上甚喜，勉万纪，而数祐前过，以敕书戒之。
现代文：太宗大为高兴，嘉勉权万纪，而数落李以前的过失，手书敕文告诫他。
English: Taizong was greatly pleased, praising Quan for his discipline, and admonishing him in a handwritten letter for his previous mistakes.

古文：祐闻之，大怒曰： 长史卖我！
现代文：李听说此事后，勃然大怒，说： 权长史出卖我！
English: When Li heard about this, he flew into a rage, saying, "The governor betrayed me!

古文：劝我而自以为功，必杀之。 
现代文：劝我悔改而却自己居功，我一定要杀了他。 
English: I'll kill him if he takes credit for convincing me to repent.

古文：上以校尉京兆韦文振谨直，用为祐府典军，文振数谏，祐亦恶之。
现代文：太宗认为校尉、京兆人韦文振谨慎正直，任用为齐王府典军，韦文振多次进谏，李也讨厌他。
English: Taizong thought that Wei Wen Zhen, the captain of the school and a citizen of Beijing and Shandong, was prudent and honest. He was appointed to the army of the King of Qi. Wei Wen Zhen was promoted many times, and Li also disliked him.

古文：万纪性褊，专以刻急拘持祐，城门外不听出，悉解纵鹰犬，斥君谟、猛彪不得见祐。
现代文：权万纪性情偏狭，专以刻薄约束李，城门外都不让他出去，将鹰犬等放掉，又斥责昝君、梁猛彪不让他们见李。
English: Guan Wanjie had a narrow-minded disposition and restricted Li with meanness. He did not let him go outside the city gate, released the eagle and dog, and reprimanded Yu Jun and Liang Mengbiao for not letting them see Li.

古文：会万纪宅中有塊夜落，万纪以为君謩、猛彪谋杀己，悉收系，发驿以闻，并劾与祐同为非者数十人。
现代文：恰巧权万纪宅院夜里落下土块，权万纪认为君、猛彪二人想谋害自己，便将他们拿入狱中，急发驿传文书上报太宗，并弹劾李一同为非作歹的几十人。
English: It so happened that a clod of earth fell in the night on the house of Guan Wanji. Guan Wanji thought that Jun and Meng Biao were plotting to kill him, so he put them in prison, quickly issued a document to report to Taizong, and impeached dozens of people who had committed crimes together with Li.

古文：上遣刑部尚书刘德威往按之，事颇有验，诏祐与万纪俱入朝。
现代文：太宗派部尚书刘德威前往按察，上告事多有验证，太宗下诏令李与权万纪一同入朝。
English: Liu Dewei, the secretary of the Tai Sect faction, went to investigate, and many of the complaints were verified. Emperor Taizong issued an edict ordering Li Rong and Quan Wanji to enter the imperial court together.

古文：祐既积忿，遂与燕弘信兄弘亮等谋杀万纪。
现代文：李对权万纪积怨较深，便和燕弘信的哥哥燕弘亮等密谋杀掉权万纪。
English: Li harbored a deep grudge against Quan Wanji and conspired with Yan Hongliang, the brother of Yan Hongxin, to murder Quan Wanji.

古文：万纪奉诏先行，祐遣弘亮等二十馀骑追射杀之。
现代文：权万纪奉诏令先行一步，李派燕弘亮等二十多人乘马追上，将权万纪射死。
English: Following the imperial edict, Quan Wanji took the first step, and more than 20 people including Li Pai and Yan Hongliang caught up with him on horseback and shot Quan Wanji dead.

古文：祐党共逼韦文振欲与同谋，文振不从，驰走数里，追及，杀之。
现代文：李同党一起逼迫韦文振让他与他们合谋，韦文振不从命，骑马逃奔几里地，被追上杀死。
English: Li and his party coerced Wei Wen Zhen into conspiring with them. Wei Wen Zhen did not give in and fled several miles on horseback. He was caught and killed.

古文：寮属股栗，稽首伏地，莫敢仰视。
现代文：其他僚属十分害怕，爬在地下磕头，不敢仰视。
English: Other colleagues were so scared that they crawled underground and did not dare to look up.

古文：祐因私署上柱国、开府等官，开库物行赏，驱民入城，缮甲兵、楼堞，置拓东王、拓西王等官。
现代文：李进而私自署为上柱国、开府等官职，大开府库物品行赏，又将百姓赶到城内，全副武装、修缮兵器、城楼，并设置拓东王、拓西王等官职。
English: Li then appointed himself as Shangzhu Guo, Kaifu and other official positions, rewarded the goods of the Great Kaifu Treasury, and drove the people into the city, fully armed, repaired weapons, city towers, and set up official positions such as Tuo Dong Wang and Tuo Xi Wang.

古文：吏民弃妻子夜缒出亡者相继，祐不能禁。
现代文：官吏百姓抛弃妻子儿女相继在夜间吊下绳索出城墙外逃，李不能禁止。
English: Li could not forbid officials and commoners from abandoning their wives and children and escaping outside the city walls at night by hanging down ropes.

古文：三月，丙辰，诏兵部尚书李世勣等发怀、洛、汴、宋、潞、滑、济、郓、海九州兵讨之。
现代文：三月，丙辰，太宗诏令兵部尚书李世等人征发怀、洛、汴、宋、潞、滑、济、郓、海九州兵马讨伐李。
English: In March, Emperor Taizong issued an imperial edict ordering the military department of Shangshu Li Shih and others to conscript soldiers and horses from Huai, Luo, Qian, Song, Qian, Nian, Jie, Qian, and Hai in Kyushu to fight against Li.

古文：上赐祐手敕曰： 吾常戒汝勿近小人，正为此耳。 
现代文：太宗赐给李手书敕文说： 我经常告诫你不要亲近小人，正是为此呀！ 
English: Emperor Taizong gave Li Shuxuan a letter saying, "I have often warned you not to get close to villains, and this is exactly why!

古文：祐召燕弘亮等五人宿于卧内，馀党分统士众，巡城自守。
现代文：李祐召燕弘亮等五人住在卧室内，其他同党分别统领士兵，巡守城墙自我防御。
English: Li Yu summoned Yan Hongliang and five others to live in the bedroom, and the other members of the same party separately led soldiers to patrol the city wall for self-defense.

古文：祐每夜与弘亮等对妃宴饮，以为得志；戏笑之际，语及官军，弘亮等曰： 王不须忧！
现代文：李每天夜晚与燕弘亮等人对着妃子饮酒，得意洋洋；谈笑之际，说到官府军队，弘亮等说： 大王不必忧虑。
English: Li drank alcohol every night with Yan Hongliang and others in front of the concubine, and was full of pride; when talking and laughing, when it came to the government army, Hongliang and others said: The great king need not worry.

古文：弘亮等右手持酒卮，左手为王挥刀拂之！ 
现代文：弘亮等右手端着酒怀，左手为王挥刀击退他们！ 
English: Hong Liang waited with a cup of wine in his right hand and a sword in his left hand to repel them!

古文：祐喜，以为信然。
现代文：李非常高兴，以为确实能这样。
English: Li was very happy and thought that this was really possible.

古文：传檄诸县，皆莫肯从。
现代文：又传布檄文到所属各县，但各县都不肯追从造反。
English: They also distributed copies of the article to their respective counties, but none of the counties were willing to follow suit.

古文：时李世勣兵未至，而青、淄等数州兵已集其境。
现代文：当时李世的兵马还未到，而青、淄等几州的兵众已聚集在齐州边境地带。
English: At that time, the soldiers and horses of Li Shih had not yet arrived, but the soldiers from several states such as Qing and Handan had already gathered in the border area of Qi Prefecture.

古文：齐府兵曹杜行敏等阴谋执祐，祐左右及吏民非同谋者无不响应。
现代文：齐王府兵曹杜行敏等人暗中谋划要抓住李，李身边的人及官吏百姓中非其死党者都群起响应。
English: Du Xingmin, a military commander from King Qi's palace, and others secretly plotted to capture Li. Li's entourage, officials and ordinary people, as well as his die-hard supporters, responded in droves.

古文：庚申，夜，四面鼓噪，声闻数十里。
现代文：庚申，夜间，四面击鼓呼叫，声闻达数十里。
English: Koshin, at night, drumming and shouting on all sides, heard for dozens of miles.

古文：祐党有居外者，众皆攒刃杀之。
现代文：李同伙有居住在外面的，众人挥刀将他们杀死。
English: Li's accomplices lived outside, and the crowd killed them with swords.

古文：祐问何声，左右绐云： 英公统飞骑已登城矣。 
现代文：李问这是什么声音，身边的人欺骗他说： 英公李世统率飞骑兵已经登上城墙了。 
English: When Li asked what the sound was, the people around him deceived him and said, "The cavalry led by the British general Li Shitong has already climbed the city wall."

古文：行敏分兵凿垣而入，祐与弘亮等被甲执兵之室，闭扉拒战，行敏等千馀人围之，自旦至日中，不克。
现代文：杜行敏分兵几路凿开城垣而入城，李与燕弘亮等披甲胄持兵器进入宫室内，关上门户抵抗，杜行敏等一千多人围攻，自早晨到中午，久攻不下。
English: Du Xingmin's detachment broke through the city wall several ways and entered the city. Li and Yan Hongliang, wearing armor and holding weapons, entered the palace room and closed the gate to resist. Du Xingmin and more than a thousand people besieged from morning to noon and could not be defeated for a long time.

古文：行敏谓祐曰： 王昔为帝子，今乃国贼，不速降，立为煨烬矣。 
现代文：杜行敏对李说： 大王从前为皇帝的儿子，如今乃是国贼，如不立即投降，将要被烧成灰烬了。 
English: Du Xingmin said to Li: "The great king was once the emperor's son, but now he is a traitor. If he does not surrender immediately, he will be burned to ashes."

古文：因命积薪，欲焚之。
现代文：于是命令士兵堆积柴草想要焚烧李藏身的房子。
English: He then ordered the soldiers to pile up firewood to burn down the house where Li was hiding.

古文：祐自牖间谓行敏曰： 即启扉，独虑燕弘亮兄弟死耳。 
现代文：李从窗户里对杜行敏说： 我立刻开门，只是担心燕弘亮兄弟必死无疑。 
English: Li said to Du Xingmin from the window: I immediately opened the door, but I was worried that Yan Hongliang's brother would undoubtedly die.

古文：行敏曰： 必相全。 
现代文：杜行敏说： 一定会保全他们的性命。 
English: Du Xingmin said: It will definitely save their lives.

古文：祐等乃出。
现代文：李等人听此言便走出来。
English: After hearing this, Li and the others walked out.

古文：或抉弘亮目，投睛于地，馀皆挝折其股而杀之。
现代文：有人挖下燕弘亮的眼睛，扔在地上，其余的人则打折他的四肢，最后将他杀死。
English: Some people gouged out Yan Hongliang's eyes and threw them on the ground, while others broke off his limbs and finally killed him.

古文：执祐出牙前示吏民，还，锁之于东厢，齐州悉平。
现代文：又将李捆绑起来带出衙署前示众，然后送回去，关押在东厢。齐州全部平定。
English: They also tied up Li and took him out of the police station for a public demonstration, then sent him back and detained him in the east wing. All of Qizhou was pacified.

古文：乙丑，敕李世勣等罢兵。
现代文：乙丑，太宗敕令李世等收兵。
English: Second Ugly, Emperor Taizong ordered Li Shih and others to gather troops.

古文：祐至京师，赐死于内侍省，同党诛者四十四人，馀皆不问。
现代文：李被押解到长安，赐死在内侍省，同党被诛的有四十四人，其余的人都不追究。
English: Li was escorted to Chang'an and sentenced to death in the Ministry of the Interior. Forty-four party members were arrested, and the rest were not investigated.

古文：祐之初反也，齐州人罗石头面数其罪，援枪前，欲刺之，为燕弘亮所杀。
现代文：李祐李当初谋反时，齐州人罗石头曾当面数落其罪行，并抢枪在手，上去想要刺杀李，被燕弘亮杀死。
English: When Li Youli was plotting a rebellion, Luo Shiwen, a resident of Chizhou, had confronted him with his crimes, grabbed his gun, and went up to assassinate Li. He was killed by Yan Hongliang.

古文：祐引骑击高村，村人高君状遥责祐曰： 主上提三尺剑取天下，亿兆蒙德，仰之如天。
现代文：李带领几名骑兵袭扰高村，村里人高君状站在远处责备他说： 当今皇上手提三尺剑打下江山，百姓们承蒙恩德，如对上天一般景仰。
English: Li led several cavalrymen to harass Gao Mura. The villagers stood at a distance like Gao Jun and reproached him, saying, "Today's emperor took a three-feet sword in his hand and struck down the country. The people are grateful for his kindness and admire him as if he were God.

古文：王忽驱城中数百人欲为逆乱以犯君父，无异一手摇泰山，何不自量之甚也！ 
现代文：你忽然驱使城内数百人想要作乱以冒犯你的父王，这与用一只手摇撼泰山有什么不同，你怎么能如此不自量力呢？ 
English: You suddenly drove hundreds of people in the city to want to riot in order to offend your father. How is this different from shaking Mount Tai with one hand? How can you be so reckless?

古文：祐纵击，虏之，惭不能杀。
现代文：李纵马出击，将其擒获，终因惭愧而没有杀他。
English: Li Zongma attacked and captured him, but eventually did not kill him out of shame.

古文：敕赠石头亳州刺史。
现代文：太宗敕令追赠罗石头为毫州刺史。
English: Emperor Taizong's imperial edict posthumously presented Luo Stone as a miller's stone.

古文：以君状为榆社令，以杜行敏为巴州刺史，封南阳郡公；其同谋执祐者官赏有差。
现代文：又任命高君状为榆社县令，杜行敏为巴州刺史，封为南阳郡公；合伙抓住李者都有不同的升官或赏赐。
English: He also appointed Gao Junjo as the county magistrate of Yushe County, Du Xingmin as the county magistrate of Bazhou County, and Feng as the county magistrate of Nanyang County. The partners who caught Li all received different promotions or rewards.

古文：上检祐家文疏，得记室郏城孙处约谏书，嗟赏之，累迁中书舍人。
现代文：太宗检核李家中文章奏疏，得到记室城人孙处约的谏书，颇为赞赏，几次升迁他官至中书舍人。
English: Taizong inspected the lack of articles in Li's family, and received a letter from Sun Shizhu, the person in charge of the record room, which was quite appreciated. He was promoted several times to the person in charge of the middle school.

古文：庚午，赠权万纪齐州都督，赐爵武都郡公，谥曰敬；韦文振左武卫将军，赐爵襄阳县公。
现代文：庚午，追赠权万纪为齐州都督，赐爵位武都郡公，谥号为敬；韦文振为左武卫将军，赐爵襄阳县公。
English: In the afternoon of the 7th day of the 7th month of the 7th year of the 8th month of the 8th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 10th year of the 10th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 12th year of the 12th year of the 13th year of the 13th year of the 14th year of the 14th year of the 14th year of the 15th year of the 15th year of the 16th year of the 15th year of the 16th year of the 16th year of the 17th year of the 16th year of the 17th year

古文：初，太子承乾喜声色及畋猎，所为奢靡，畏上知之，对宫臣常论忠孝，或至于涕泣，退归宫中，则与群小相亵狎。
现代文：起初，太子李承乾贪恋声色及打猎，极为奢侈，害怕被太宗皇帝知道，便对东宫臣僚时常谈论忠孝，有时甚至还要流泪，回到东宫，则与一群小人戏耍狎玩。
English: At first, Prince Ri Seung Gyeon was greedy for love and hunting, extremely extravagant, and afraid of being known by Emperor Taejong. He often talked about loyalty and filial piety to the East Palace ministers, sometimes even in tears. When he returned to the East Palace, he played with a group of villains.

古文：宫臣有欲谏者，太子先揣知其意，辄迎拜，敛容危坐，引咎自责，言辞辩给，宫臣拜答不暇。
现代文：宫中臣僚有人想要劝谏，太子先揣摸出他的意思，然后迎上前去行礼，面色凝重，正襟危坐，引咎自责，言辞颇多狡辩，进谏的臣僚急忙拜答，无暇再行劝。
English: Some of the courtiers in the palace wanted to persuade him. The prince first tried to figure out what he meant, and then came forward to salute. His face was solemn, he was sitting up straight, he was blaming himself, and his words were full of sophistry. The courtiers hurried to answer, and had no time to persuade him.

古文：宫省秘密，外人莫知，故时论初皆称贤。
现代文：东宫内部的秘密，外面人无法得知，所以当时议论起来颇多称赞之词。
English: The secrets inside the East Palace cannot be known by outsiders, so there was a lot of praise at the time.

古文：太子作八尺铜炉、六隔大鼎，募亡奴盗民间马牛，亲临烹者，与所幸厮役共食之。
现代文：太子制作八尺高的铜炉和六隔大鼎，召募一些逃亡官奴偷盗民间的牛马，亲自烹煮，与宠幸的仆人们一同吃掉。
English: The prince made an eight-foot-tall copper furnace and a six-part dowel, recruited some fugitive slaves to steal the people's cattle and horses, cooked them himself, and ate them with his favored servants.

古文：又好效突厥语及其服饰，选左右貌类突厥者五人为一落，辫发羊裘而牧羊，作五狼头纛及幡旗，设穹庐，太子自处其中，敛羊而烹之，抽佩刀割肉相啖。
现代文：又喜欢学说突厥语和穿戴其服饰，挑选身边容貌像突厥人的分五人为一落，梳上辫子穿上羊皮衣赶着羊，又制作五个狼头旗及长条旗，设立突厥人住的穹庐，太子自己身处其中，逮住羊烹煮，抽出佩刀割羊肉吃。
English: He also likes to learn the Turkish language and wear its clothing, choose five people who look like Turks around him, comb his braids and put on a sheepskin coat to drive sheep, and make five wolf head flags and a long striped flag, set up a dome where Turks live, the prince himself is in it, catch sheep to cook, draw a saber to cut mutton and eat it.

古文：又尝谓左右曰： 我试作可汗死，汝曹效其丧仪。 
现代文：又曾对身边的人说： 我试着假装可汗死了，你们众人模仿他们的丧礼。 
English: He also told those around him: "I am trying to pretend that the Khans are dead and you are all imitating their funerals.

古文：因僵卧于地，众悉号哭，跨马环走，临其身，剺面。
现代文：于是僵卧在地上，众人都号啕大哭，跨上马环绕着他的身体，又贴近他的身体，用刀划他的脸。
English: So he lay on the ground, and all the people wailed with a great wailing, and they encircled him on horses, and drew near to him and struck him on the face with their swords.

古文：良久，太欻起，曰： 一朝有天下，当帅数万骑猎于金城西，然后解发为突厥，委身思摩，若当一设，不居人后矣。 
现代文：过了很久，太子突然坐起，说道： 我一旦拥有天下，当亲率数万骑兵狩猎于金城西面，然后解开头发做突厥人，委身于思摩，如果担当典兵将领，不会甘居人后。 
English: After a long time, the prince suddenly sat up and said: Once I have the world, when I lead tens of thousands of cavalry hunting in the west of Jincheng, and then untie my hair to make a Turk, I will commit myself to Sima. If I am in charge of the ceremonial general, I will not be content to be a queen.

古文：左庶子于志宁、右庶子孔颖达数谏太子，上嘉之，赐二人金帛以风励太子，仍迁志宁为詹事。
现代文：左庶子于志宁、右庶子孔颖达多次劝谏太子，太宗赞许他们，赐给二人金银财物以讽谕激励太子，并且改任于志宁为太子詹事。
English: The left illegitimate son, Yu Shining, and the right illegitimate son, Kong Yingda, repeatedly advised the crown prince, and the Emperor Taizong praised them, gave them gold, silver and wealth to encourage the crown prince with ironic words, and reassigned them to Shining as the crown prince.

古文：志宁与左庶子张玄素数上书切谏，太子阴使人杀之，不果。
现代文：于志宁与左庶子张玄素多次上书直谏，太子暗中派人杀他们，没有成功。
English: Yu Shining and his left illegitimate son Zhang Xuan Su were repeatedly sued, and the prince secretly sent someone to kill them, without success.

古文：汉王元昌所为多不法，上数谴责之，由是怨望。
现代文：汉王李元昌常做不法之事，受太宗多次责怪，从此心中怨恨。
English: Han King Li Yuanchang often did illegal things and was repeatedly blamed by Emperor Taizong, which caused resentment in his heart.

古文：太子与之亲善，朝夕同游戏，分左右为二队，太子与元昌各统其一，被氈甲，操手槊，布陈大呼交战，击刺流血，以为娱乐。
现代文：太子和他关系密切，朝夕相处游玩，分身边的人为二队，太子与李元昌各统领其中一队，身披毛毡甲胄，手拿竹制长矛，摆下战阵大声呼喊着交战，击刺流血，做为娱乐。
English: The prince and he have a close relationship. They play together in the morning and in the evening. The people around them are divided into two teams. The prince and Li Yuanchang each lead one of the teams. Dressed in felt armor and holding bamboo spears, they shout loudly about the battle, fight and bleed, as entertainment.

古文：有不用命者，披树挝之，至有死者。
现代文：有不听命令的，吊在树上抽打，甚至有人被打死。
English: Those who disobeyed orders were hung from trees and beaten, and some were even beaten to death.

古文：且曰： 使我今日作天子，明日于苑中置万人营，与汉王分将，观其战斗，岂不乐哉！ 
现代文：太子还说： 假如我今天做大唐天子，明天就在禁苑中设置万人营房，与汉王分别统领，观看他们厮杀，岂不痛快！ 
English: The prince also said, "If I were the Great Tang Emperor today, tomorrow I would set up a barracks for ten thousand people in the Forbidden City, separate from the Han king, and watch them fight, wouldn't it be delightful!

古文：又曰： 我为天子，极情纵欲，有谏者辄杀之，不过杀数百人，众自定矣。 
现代文：又说： 我要是做天子，必然任情纵欲，有劝谏者一律杀掉。也不过杀几百人，众人便会自守安定了。 
English: And he said, If I be the Son of God, I will not suffer that any man should commit sin, but if any man preach any other doctrine, let him be put to death; and if a few hundred men be put to death, then all men will be saved.

古文：魏王泰多艺能，有宠于上，见太子有足疾，潜有夺嫡之志，折节下士以求声誉。
现代文：魏王李泰多才多艺，得到太宗宠爱，他看见太子有脚病，便暗地里产生夺嫡而立的想法，于是折节礼贤下士而捞取名声。
English: Li Tai, the king of Wei, was multi-talented and was favored by Emperor Taizong. When he saw that the prince had a foot disease, he secretly had the idea of seizing the throne, and thus gained fame as a corporal.

古文：上命黄门侍郎韦挺摄泰府事，后命工部尚书杜楚客代之，二人俱为泰要结朝士。
现代文：太宗让黄门侍郎韦挺管理魏王府中事务，后来又命工部尚书杜楚客取而代之，二人都为李泰联络朝中大臣。
English: Taizong asked Huangmen servant Wei Ting to manage the affairs of the Wei King's Middle Palace, and later ordered the Ministry of Industry's Shang Shu Du Chu to replace him. Both of them were Li Tai's liaison with the Minister of the Middle Kingdom.

古文：楚客或怀金以赂权贵，因说以魏王聪明，宜为上嗣；文武之臣，各有附托，潜为朋党。
现代文：杜楚客有时怀揣黄金以贿赂权贵，对他们说魏王如何聪明，应当立为太子；文武大臣，各有所托，暗中结为朋党。
English: Du Chu guests sometimes carried gold to bribe dignitaries, telling them how clever the Wei king was, and that he should be made the crown prince; ministers of literature and armed forces, each with their own agenda, were secretly made friends.

古文：太子畏其逼，遣人诈为泰府典签上封事，其中皆言泰罪恶，敕捕之，不获。
现代文：太子害怕李泰威胁自己的位置，便派人诈称为魏王府典签上书言事，都拆说李泰的罪过，太宗敕令逮捕这些告状人，查无所获。
English: The prince was afraid that Li Tai would threaten his position, so he sent someone to fraudulently sign a letter to the Wei royal court to denounce Li Tai's crimes. Emperor Taizong ordered the arrest of these accusers, but nothing was found.

古文：太子私幸太常乐童称心，与同卧起。
现代文：太子私下宠幸太常寺的乐童称心，与他同吃同住。
English: The prince was secretly fond of the music boy from Taejō-ji Temple and was so pleased with him that he lived and ate with him.

古文：道士秦英、韦灵符挟左道，得幸太子。
现代文：道士秦英、韦灵符以妖法道术，得以亲幸太子。
English: Taoists Qin Ying and Weiling Fu used demonic magic to become the lucky prince.

古文：上闻之，大怒，悉收称心等杀之，连坐死者数人，诮让太子甚至。
现代文：太宗听说后，勃然大怒，将称心等人全抓起来杀掉，连坐被斩首有数人，太宗并对太子大加斥责。
English: When Emperor Taizong heard of this, he flew into a rage. He arrested and killed all those who were sympathetic to him. Several people were beheaded in quick succession. Emperor Taizong also severely reprimanded the prince.

古文：太子意泰告之，怨怒逾甚，思念称心不已，于宫中构室，立其像，朝夕奠祭，徘徊流涕。
现代文：太子认为是李泰告发的，怨恨更深，不停地思念称心，在东宫中特筑一小屋，立称心的像，早晚祭奠，徘徊在室内，痛哭流涕。
English: The prince thought that Li Tai had reported him, and his resentment was even deeper. He kept thinking about his missing heart, built a special hut in the East Palace, set up a statue of his missing heart, held morning and evening memorial services, and lingered indoors, weeping bitterly.

古文：又于苑中作冢，私赠官树碑。
现代文：又在宫苑内堆成一个小坟，私下赠予称心官爵树立石碑。
English: In addition, a small grave was piled up in the palace garden, and a stone monument was privately presented to the proud official.

古文：上意浸不怿，太子亦知之，称疾不朝谒者动涉数月；阴养刺客纥干承基等及壮士百馀人，谋杀魏王泰。
现代文：太宗越来越不喜欢太子，太子也知道，动辄几个月称病不去朝见；暗中豢养刺客纥干承基等人及一百多名壮士，想要杀掉魏王李泰。
English: Emperor Taizong increasingly disliked the crown prince, and the crown prince knew it. He often said for months that he was ill and did not want to go to the imperial court; he secretly raised assassins such as Gan Chengji and more than a hundred strong men, who wanted to kill the Wei King Li Tai.

古文：吏部尚书侯君集之婿贺兰楚石为东宫千牛，太子知君集怨望，数令楚石引君集入东宫，问以自安之术。君集以太子暗劣，欲乘衅图之，因劝之反，举手谓太子曰： 此好手，当为殿下用之。 
现代文：吏部尚书侯君集的女婿贺兰楚石为东宫府千牛，太子知道侯君集一直有积怨，便多次让贺兰楚石带引侯君集到东宫，向他询问自我保全的策略，侯君集认为太子愚昧低能，便想乘机利用他，于是劝太子谋反，他举起手来对太子说： 这一双好手，当为殿下使用。 
English: The Prince's son-in-law, Horan Chuseki, who was in charge of the administrative department, knew that the Prince had a long-standing grudge against him, so he repeatedly asked Horan Chuseki to bring the Prince to the East Palace to ask him about self-preservation strategies. The Prince thought that the Prince was stupid and incompetent, and wanted to take advantage of him, so he persuaded the Prince to rebel. He raised his hand and said to the Prince: "This pair of good hands should be used for Your Highness."

古文：又曰： 魏王为上所爱，恐殿下有庶人勇之祸，若有敕召，宜密为之备。 
现代文：又说： 魏王受皇上宠爱，我担心殿下会有隋太子杨勇被免为平民的灾祸，如有敕令宣召进宫，应当秘密加以防备。 
English: He also said, "The Wei king was favored by the emperor, and I am worried that His Imperial Highness will have the Sui prince Yang Yong be spared the scourge of being a commoner. If there is a royal decree to summon him to the palace, it should be secretly guarded against.

古文：太子大然之。太子厚赂君集及左屯卫中郎将顿丘李安俨，使诇上意，动静相语。
现代文：太子大为赞同这种议论，用重礼贿赂侯君集以及左屯卫中郎将、顿兵人李安俨，让他们刺探太宗的心思，一有动静便告诉他。
English: The crown prince was very much in favour of this kind of argument, and he bribed Hou Junji, as well as Zuotun Wei Zhong Rong and Dong soldier Li Antao, with a heavy gift, asking them to probe Taizong's mind and tell him if there was any movement.

古文：安俨先事隐太子，隐太子败，安俨为之力战，上以为忠，故亲任之，使典宿卫。
现代文：李安俨先前侍奉隐太子李建成，李建成败亡后，李安俨为李建成拼死搏斗，太宗认为他忠诚，所以特别信任他，让他掌管宿卫。
English: Li Antao had previously served the crown prince, Li Jiancheng. After Li Jiancheng's defeat and death, Li Antao fought to the death for Li Jiancheng. Emperor Taizong believed that he was loyal, so he especially trusted him and put him in charge of the palace guards.

古文：安俨深自托于太子。
现代文：李安俨便将身家性命寄托在太子身上。
English: Li Anyao then put his life in the hands of the crown prince.

古文：汉王元昌亦劝太子反，且曰： 比见上侧有美人，善弹琵琶，事成，愿以垂赐。 
现代文：汉王李元昌也劝说太子谋反，还说道： 近来看见皇上身旁有一个美人，善于弹奏琵琶，事成之后，希望将美人赐给我。 
English: The Han king Li Yuanchang also persuaded the prince to rebel, adding: Recently, I saw a beautiful woman next to the emperor, who was good at playing the lute. After the event, I hope to give the beautiful woman to me.

古文：太子许之。
现代文：太子应允。
English: The prince consented.

古文：洋州刺史开化公赵节，慈景之子也，母曰长广公主；驸马都尉杜荷，如晦之子也，尚城阳公主；皆为太子所亲昵，预其反谋。
现代文：洋州刺史、开化公赵节，是赵慈景的儿子，母亲是高祖女儿长广公主；驸马都尉杜荷，是杜如晦的儿子，娶城阳公主为妻，二人均被太子所亲昵，参与了谋反事宜。
English: The son of Zhao Cijing, Yangzhou's chief historian and civilizing official Zhao Jie, his mother was Princess Changguang, the daughter of Gao Zu; the son of Du Rugao, Captain Du He, married Princess Chengyang. Both of them were favored by the prince and took part in plotting rebellion.

古文：凡同谋者皆割臂，以帛拭血，烧灰和酒饮之，誓同生死，潜谋引兵入西宫。
现代文：凡是同谋者都要割开手臂，用帛擦血，烧灰混在酒中喝掉，发誓同生死共患难，暗中谋划率领兵马进入西宫。
English: All the conspirators had to cut open their arms, wipe the blood with a broom, mix the burnt ashes with wine and drink it, swear to share the hardships of life and death, and secretly plan to lead the soldiers and horses into the West Palace.

古文：杜荷谓太子曰： 天文有变，当速发以应之，殿下但称暴疾危笃，主上必亲临视，因兹可以得志。 
现代文：杜荷对太子说： 天象有变化，应当迅即发兵以应天象，殿下只需称得暴病十分危险，皇上必然会亲自来探视，乘此机会可以得手。 
English: Du Ho said to the prince: The weather has changed, we should quickly send troops to deal with the weather. Your highness only needs to say that the violent disease is very dangerous. The emperor will certainly come to visit in person, and take this opportunity to win.

古文：太子闻齐王祐反于齐州，谓纥干承基等曰： 我宫西墙，去大内正可二十步耳，与卿为大事，岂比齐王乎！ 
现代文：太子听说齐王李在齐州谋反，对纥干承基等人说： 我住的东宫西墙，离皇上住的大内正好二十步左右，与你们谋划大事，岂是齐王所能比的！ 
English: When the prince heard that King Li of Qi was plotting a rebellion in Qi Province, he said to Zou Gan Chengji and the others: "I live in the East Palace on the West Wall, just twenty paces or so from the Emperor's residence in the Inner Court. Is it possible for King Li of Qi to plan a major event with you?

古文：会治祐反事，连承基，承基坐系大理狱，当死。
现代文：正赶上处理李谋反的事，牵连到纥干承基，纥干承基因此被关押在大理寺牢狱中，按其罪行，应当处死。
English: He was just in time to deal with the matter of Li Muotang, implicating Gan Chengji, who was therefore detained in the Dali Temple prison and should be executed according to his crime.

