古文：范雎者，魏人也，字叔。游说诸侯，欲事魏王，家贫无以自资，乃先事魏中大夫须贾。
现代文：他游说诸侯，想侍奉魏王，可是家里非常贫穷，没有办法筹集资金，于是就先去侍奉魏国中大夫须贾。
English: He lobbied the princes and wanted to serve the Wei king, but his family was very poor and had no way to raise funds, so he first went to serve the Wei middle doctor Su Jia.

古文：须贾为魏昭王使於齐，范雎从。
现代文：有一次，须贾为魏昭王出使到齐国，范雎也跟着一同前往。
English: On one occasion, Su Jia was sent by Wei Zhao Wang to Qi Province, and Fan Yu also went with him.

古文：留数月，未得报。
现代文：他们在齐国逗留了几个月，都无法完成任务。
English: They stayed in Qi for several months, but were unable to complete their mission.

古文：齐襄王闻雎辩口，乃使人赐雎金十斤及牛酒，雎辞谢不敢受。
现代文：当时齐襄王得知范雎很有口才，就派专人给范雎送去了十斤黄金以及牛肉美酒之类的礼物，但范雎一再推辞不敢接受。
English: At that time, King Qixiang learned that Fan Rong was very eloquent, so he sent a special person to send gifts such as ten catties of gold and beef wine to Fan Rong, but Fan Rong repeatedly refused to accept.

古文：须贾知之，大怒，以为雎持魏国阴事告齐，故得此馈，令雎受其牛酒，还其金。
现代文：须贾知道了这件事，大为恼火，认为范雎必是把他知道的魏国的秘密出卖给齐国了，所以才得到这种馈赠，于是他让范雎收下牛肉美酒之类的食品，将黄金退还回去。
English: When Su Jia found out about this, he was very angry and thought that Fan Qianlong must have sold the secrets of Wei that he knew to Qi, which is why he received this gift. So he asked Fan Qianlong to accept food such as beef and wine and return the gold.

古文：既归，心怒雎，以告魏相。
现代文：回到魏国后，须贾心里恼怒嫉恨范雎，就把这件事报告给魏国宰相。
English: After returning to Wei, Su Jia was angry and jealous of Fan Qi, so he reported the matter to the Prime Minister of Wei.

古文：魏相，魏之诸公子，曰魏齐。
现代文：魏国的宰相是魏国公子之一，叫魏齐。
English: The chancellor of Wei was one of the princes of Wei, called Wei Qi.

古文：魏齐大怒，使舍人笞击雎，折胁摺齿。
现代文：魏齐听了后大怒，就命令左右近臣用板子、荆条抽打范雎，将范雎的肋骨和牙齿都打断了。
English: After hearing this, Wei Qi flew into a rage and ordered his left and right vassals to beat Fan Qi with boards and sticks, breaking Fan Qi's ribs and teeth.

古文：雎详死，即卷以箦，置厕中。
现代文：当时范雎假装死去，魏齐就派人用席子把他卷了卷，扔在厕所里。
English: At that time, Fan Qi pretended to be dead, and Wei Qi sent someone to roll him up with a mat and throw him in the toilet.

古文：宾客饮者醉，更溺雎，故僇辱以惩後，令无妄言者。
现代文：又让宴饮的宾客喝醉了，轮番往范雎身上撒尿，故意污辱他借以惩一警百，让人们不得泄露国家的秘密。
English: He also had the guests at the banquet get drunk and take turns to urinate on Fan Qi, deliberately insulting him in order to punish a hundred policemen so that people would not divulge state secrets.

古文：雎从箦中谓守者曰： 公能出我，我必厚谢公。 
现代文：卷在席里的范雎对看守说： 您如果放走我，我日后必定重重地谢您。 
English: Fan Qi, who was curled up in a chair, said to the guard: If you let me go, I will surely thank you in the future.

古文：守者乃请出弃箦中死人。
现代文：看守有意放走范雎就向魏齐请示把席子里的死人扔出去。
English: When the guard intentionally let Fan Qi go, he asked Wei Qi to throw the dead man out of the mat.

古文：魏齐醉，曰： 可矣。 
现代文：魏齐这时已经喝得酩酊大醉，就顺口答应说： 可以。 
English: Wei Qi was already very drunk at this time, so he said yes.

古文：范雎得出。
现代文：范雎因而得以逃脱。
English: As a result, Fan Ye was able to escape.

古文：後魏齐悔，复召求之。
现代文：后来魏齐后悔了，又派人去搜索范雎。
English: Later, Wei Qi regretted it and sent someone to search for Fan Yu.

古文：魏人郑安平闻之，乃遂操范雎亡，伏匿，更名姓曰张禄。
现代文：魏国人郑安平听说了这件事，于是就带着范雎一起逃跑了，他们隐藏起来，范雎更改了姓名叫张禄。
English: Zheng Anping, a native of Wei, heard about this, so he ran away with Fan Lu. They hid, and Fan Lu changed her name to Zhang Lu.

古文：当此时，秦昭王使谒者王稽於魏。
现代文：在这个时候，秦昭王派出使臣王稽正到魏国。
English: At this time, King Qin Zhao sent an envoy, Wang Qizheng, to Wei.

古文：郑安平诈为卒，侍王稽。
现代文：郑安平就假装当差役，侍候王稽。
English: Zheng Anping pretended to be a police officer and waited on Wang Qi.

古文：王稽问： 魏有贤人可与俱西游者乎？ 
现代文：王稽问他： 魏国有贤能的人士可愿跟我一起到西方的秦国去游历？ 
English: Wang Jie asked him, "Would the wise and talented people of Wei be willing to travel with me to Qin in the west?"

古文：郑安平曰： 臣里中有张禄先生，欲见君，言天下事。
现代文：郑安平回答说： 我的乡里有位张禄先生，想求见您，与您一起谈论天下之事。
English: Zheng Anping replied, "In my hometown, there is a Mr. Zhang Luwu, who would like to see you and discuss world affairs with you."

古文：其人有仇，不敢昼见。 
现代文：不过，他有仇人，不敢白天出来与您相见。 
English: However, he has enemies and does not dare to come out during the day to meet you.

古文：王稽曰： 夜与俱来。 
现代文：王稽说： 夜里你跟他一起来好了。 
English: Wang Qi said, "You can come with him at night.

古文：郑安平夜与张禄见王稽。
现代文：郑安平就在夜里带着张禄来拜见王稽。
English: Zheng Anping brought Zhang Lu to see Wang Qim in the night.

古文：语未究，王稽知范雎贤，谓曰： 先生待我於三亭之南。 
现代文：两个人的话还没谈完，王稽就发现范雎是个贤才，便对他说： 先生请在三亭冈的南面等着我。 
English: Before the two men had finished talking, Wang Qiguang discovered that Fan Xuan was a genius, and said to him: "Sir, please wait for me on the south side of the Sanding Hill."

古文：与私约而去。
现代文：范雎与王稽私下约好见面时间就离去了。
English: Fan Qi and Wang Qi made a private appointment to meet and then left.

古文：王稽辞魏去，过载范雎入秦。
现代文：王稽辞别魏国上路后，经过三亭冈南边时，载上范雎便很快进入了秦国国境。
English: After Wang Qiji left Wei on the road, when he passed the south side of Sanjing Hill, he quickly entered the Qin State border with Fan Qi.

古文：至湖，望见车骑从西来。
现代文：车到湖邑时，远远望见有一队车马从西边奔驰而来。
English: When the car arrived at the lake town, a team of horses and carriages could be seen coming from the west.

古文：范雎曰： 彼来者为谁？ 
现代文：范雎便问： 那边过来的是谁？ 
English: Fan Ye then asked: Who is that coming over there?

古文：王稽曰： 秦相穰侯东行县邑。 
现代文：王稽答道： 那是秦国国相穰侯去东边巡行视察县邑。 
English: Wang Qian replied: That was the Qin State's State Counsellor, who went to the east to inspect counties and towns.

古文：范雎曰： 吾闻穰侯专秦权，恶内诸侯客，此恐辱我，我宁且匿车中。 
现代文：范雎一听是穰侯便说： 我听说穰侯独揽秦国大权，他最讨厌收纳各国的说客，这样见面恐怕要侮辱我，我宁可暂在车里躲藏一下。 
English: As soon as Fan Rong heard that it was Gong Hou, he said, "I heard that Gong Hou is the sole holder of the supreme power of Qin. He hates to receive lobbyists from all over the world. I'm afraid I'll be insulted. I'd rather hide in the car for a while."

古文：有顷，穰侯果至，劳王稽，因立车而语曰： 关东有何变？ 
现代文：不一会儿，穰侯果然来到，向王稽道过问候，便停下车询问说： 关东的局势有什么变化？ 
English: After a short while, Zhou Hou arrived and greeted Wang Jian, then stopped the car and asked: What changes have there been in the situation in Kanto?

古文：曰： 无有。 
现代文：王稽答道： 没有。 
English: Wang Qie replied: No.

古文：又谓王稽曰： 谒君得无与诸侯客子俱来乎？
现代文：穰侯又对王稽说： 使臣先生该不会带着诸侯的说客一同来到秦国的吧？
English: Yan Hou also said to Wang Qi: Shouldn't the ambassador come to Qin with the lobbies of the princes?

古文：无益，徒乱人国耳。 
现代文：这种人对秦国没有好吃，只会扰乱别人的国家罢了。 
English: This kind of person is not good for Qin, and will only disturb other people's countries.

古文：王稽曰： 不敢。 
现代文：王稽赶快回答说： 臣下不敢。 
English: Wangqi quickly replied, "Our vassals dare not leave."

古文：即别去。
现代文：两人随即告别而去。
English: The two then said goodbye and left.

古文：范雎曰： 吾闻穰侯智士也，其见事迟，乡者疑车中有人，忘索之。 
现代文：范雎对王稽说： 我听说穰侯是个智谋之士，处理事情多有疑惑，刚才他怀疑车中藏着人，可是忘记搜查了。 
English: Fan Qi said to Wang Qi: I heard that Yan Hou is a clever man, and he often has doubts about how to handle things. Just now, he suspected that there was a person hiding in the car, but he forgot to search.

古文：於是范雎下车走，曰： 此必悔之。 
现代文：于是范雎就跳下车，徒步赶路，说： 这件事穰侯不会甘休必定后悔没有搜查车子。 
English: So Fan Wei jumped out of the car and hurried on foot, saying, "I will not give up this matter, I must regret not having searched the car."

古文：行十馀里，果使骑还索车中，无客，乃已。
现代文：大约走了十几里路，穰侯果然派骑兵追回来搜查车子，没发现有人，这才作罢。
English: After about a dozen miles, the steward sent the cavalry to chase back and search the car. No one was found, so the search was called off.

古文：王稽遂与范雎入咸阳。
现代文：王稽于是与范雎一起进入了咸阳城。
English: Wang Qian then entered Xianyang City with Fan Qian.

古文：已报使，因言曰： 魏有张禄先生，天下辩士也。
现代文：王稽向秦王报告了出使情况后，趁机进言道： 魏国有个张禄先生，此人是天下难得的能言善辩之士。
English: After Wang Ji reported to King Qin about the situation of the dispatch, he took the opportunity to say: There is a Mr. Zhang Lu in Wei, this person is a rare person in the world who can speak well.

古文：曰 秦王之国危於累卵，得臣则安。然不可以书传也 。
现代文：他说 秦王的国家处境危险，就好比把鸡蛋一个一个地叠加起来，如果秦王能够得到并重用我，那就可以让国家安全。
English: He said, "Qin Wang's country is in a dangerous situation. It's like stacking eggs one on top of the other. If Qin Wang can get me and reuse me, that will make the country safe."

古文：臣故载来。 秦王弗信，使舍食草具。
现代文：但需面谈不能用书信传达，我所以把他载到秦国来。 秦王不相信范雎所说的话，只让范雎住在客舍，给他粗劣的饭食吃。
English: But a face-to-face interview cannot be conveyed by letter, so I brought him to Qin. The Qin king did not believe what Fan Qi said, and only let Fan Qi live in a guest house and gave him poor quality food.

古文：待命岁馀。当是时，昭王已立三十六年。
现代文：就这样，范雎等待秦王接见就等了一年多的时间。当时，秦昭王已经即位三十六年了。
English: In this way, Fan Xuan waited for more than a year for the Qin King to receive him. At that time, Qin Zhao Wang had been on the throne for 36 years.

古文：南拔楚之鄢郢，楚怀王幽死於秦。
现代文：秦国在南面夺取了楚国的鄢、郢重镇，楚怀王被幽禁在秦国，最后死在秦国。
English: In the south, Qin conquered the towns of Zou and Zouzhong in Chu. King Chu Huai was imprisoned in Qin and eventually died in Qin.

古文：秦东破齐。
现代文：在东面攻破了齐国。
English: In the east, they broke through Qi Province.

古文：湣王尝称帝，後去之。
现代文：此前齐湣王曾经自称东帝，不久又取消了这个帝号。
English: Previously, King Qizong had claimed to be the Eastern Emperor, but he soon cancelled this imperial title.

古文：数困三晋。厌天下辩士，无所信。
现代文：秦国还曾多次围攻韩、赵、魏三国，扩张了领土。秦昭王武功赫赫，因而讨厌那些说客，不相信他们所说的话。
English: Qin also repeatedly besieged Han, Zhao, and Wei, and expanded its territory. Qin Zhao Wang was a great martial artist, so he hated those lobbyists and did not believe what they said.

古文：穰侯，华阳君，昭王母宣太后之弟也；而泾阳君、高陵君皆昭王同母弟也。
现代文：穰侯、华阳君是昭王母亲宣太后的弟弟，而泾阳君、高陵君都是昭王的同胞弟弟。
English: Gonghou and Huayang are the younger brothers of Zhao Wang's mother, Empress Dowager Xuan, while Gongyang and Gaoling are Zhao Wang's younger brothers.

古文：穰侯相，三人者更将，有封邑，以太后故，私家富重於王室。
现代文：穰侯担任国相，华阳君、泾阳君和高陵君更番担任将军，他们都有自己的封地，由于宣太后庇护的缘故，他们私人的财富甚至超过了国家。
English: Gong Hou served as minister of state, Hua Yang Jun, Gong Yang Jun and Gao Ling Jun served as generals. They all had their own fiefdoms, and because of the protection of Empress Dowager Xuan, their private wealth even exceeded that of the state.

古文：及穰侯为秦将，且欲越韩、魏而伐齐纲寿，欲以广其陶封。
现代文：等到穰侯担任了秦国将军，他又要越过韩国和魏国去攻打齐国的纲邑、寿邑，想借此扩大他的陶邑封地。
English: When Yan Hou became the general of Qin, he wanted to cross Korea and Wei to attack Gangwu and Shouwu in Qi, hoping to expand his fief of Tao.

古文：范雎乃上书曰：
现代文：为此，范雎就上书启奏秦王说：
English: For this reason, Fan Ye said about the opening of the letter to Qin Wang:

古文：臣闻明主立政，有功者不得不赏，有能者不得不官，劳大者其禄厚，功多者其爵尊，能治众者其官大。
现代文：我听说圣明的君主推行政事，有功劳的不可以不给奖赏，有才能的不可以不授官职，功劳大的人俸禄就优厚，功绩多的人爵位高，能管众多事务的人官职大。
English: I have heard that a saintly monarch conducts the affairs of state. Those who have meritorious deeds should be rewarded, and those who are talented should be given official posts. Those who have great merits should be given generous salaries, those who have many merits should be given high ranks, and those who can manage many affairs should be given high official posts.

古文：故无能者不敢当职焉，有能者亦不得蔽隐。
现代文：所以能力不足的人不敢担当官职，有才能的也不会被埋没。
English: Therefore, people with insufficient ability dare not assume official positions, and talented people will not be buried.

古文：使以臣之言为可，原行而益利其道；以臣之言为不可，久留臣无为也。
现代文：假使大王您认为我的话可用，希望您推行并进一步使这种主张得以实现；如果认为我的话不可用，那么长时间的留我在秦国也没有什么意义。
English: If you think my words are useful, I hope you will promote and further implement this idea; if you do not think my words are useful, then my long stay in Qin will have no meaning.

古文：语曰： 庸主赏所爱而罚所恶；明主则不然，赏必加於有功，而刑必断於有罪。 
现代文：俗话说： 庸碌的君主奖赏他宠爱的人而惩罚他厌恶的人；圣明的君主就不这样，奖赏一定施给有功的人，刑罚一定判在有罪人的身上。 
English: As the saying goes: A mediocre ruler rewards those he likes and punishes those he dislikes; this is not the case with a saintly ruler. The reward must be given to the meritorious, and the punishment must be imposed on the guilty.

古文：今臣之胸不足以当椹质，而要不足以待斧钺，岂敢以疑事尝试於王哉！
现代文：如今我的胸膛耐不住铡刀和砧板，我的腰也承受不了斧钺的砍斫，怎么敢用毫无根据疑惑不定的主张来试探大王呢？
English: Now that my chest cannot bear the scythe and the chopping board, and my loins cannot bear the blows of the axe, how dare I test the great king with baseless, doubtful and uncertain propositions?

古文：虽以臣为贱人而轻辱，独不重任臣者之无反复於王邪？
现代文：就算您认为我是身份卑微而对我轻慢、侮辱，难道就不重视把我推荐给您的人对大王绝没有反复的态度吗？
English: Even if you think that I am a low-ranking official and treat me with contempt and insult, don't you care that the person who recommended me to you has never had a bad attitude towards the Great King?

古文：且臣闻周有砥砨，宋有结绿，梁有县藜，楚有和朴，此四宝者，土之所生，良工之所失也，而为天下名器。
现代文：况且我听说周室有砥砨，宋国有结缘，魏国有县藜，楚国有和氏璞玉，这四件宝玉，产于土中，而著名的工匠却误认为是石头，但它们终究成为天下的名贵器物。
English: Moreover, I heard that the Zhou dynasty had the jade, the Song dynasty had the jade, the Wei dynasty had the jade, and the Chu dynasty had the jade. These four precious stones were produced in the soil, and the famous craftsmen mistook them for stones, but they eventually became the most valuable objects in the world.

古文：然则圣王之所弃者，独不足以厚国家乎？
现代文：既然如此，那么圣明君主所抛弃的人，难道就不能够使国家强大吗？
English: That being the case, shouldn't those who are abandoned by the sacred monarch be able to make the country strong?

古文：臣闻善厚家者取之於国，善厚国者取之於诸侯。
现代文：我听说善于中饱私囊的大夫，是从诸侯国中取利；善于使一国富足的诸侯，是从其他诸侯国中取利。
English: I have heard it said that a doctor who is good at lining his own pockets is taking advantage of a vassal state; a vassal who is good at enriching his own country is taking advantage of another vassal state.

古文：天下有明主则诸侯不得擅厚者，何也？
现代文：而天下有了圣明的君主那么诸侯就无法独自富强，这是什么原因呢？
English: And if the world has a saintly monarch, then princes cannot become rich and powerful on their own. What is the reason for this?

古文：为其割荣也。
现代文：是因为它们会削割国家而使自我显贵。
English: It's because they can carve up the country and make themselves look good.

古文：良医知病人之死生，而圣主明於成败之事，利则行之，害则舍之，疑则少尝之，虽舜禹复生，弗能改已。
现代文：高明的医生能知道病人的生死，圣明的君主能洞察国事的成败，认为于国家有利的就实行，有害的就舍弃，有疑惑的就稍加试验，即使舜和禹死而复生，也不能改变这种方略。
English: A clever doctor can know the life and death of a patient, a saintly monarch can discern the success or failure of state affairs, and implement what he believes to be beneficial to the country, discard what is harmful, and experiment with what is doubtful. Even if Yu and Yu die and are revived, they cannot change this strategy.

古文：语之至者，臣不敢载之於书，其浅者又不足听也。
现代文：要说的至深话语，我不敢写出来，一些浅露的话又不值得大王您来听。
English: I dare not write the profound words I have to say, and some shallow words are not worth listening to.

古文：意者臣愚而不概於王心邪？
现代文：想来是我愚笨而不符合大王的心意吧？
English: So I'm stupid and not in line with the king's wishes?

古文：亡其言臣者贱而不可用乎？
现代文：还是推荐我的人人贱言微而不值得听信呢？
English: Or are all the people recommending me worthless and not worth listening to?

古文：自非然者，臣原得少赐游观之间，望见颜色。
现代文：如果不是这样，我希望您赐给少许游览观赏的空闲时间，让我拜见您一次。
English: If not, I hope you'll give me some free time to do some sightseeing and let me see you once.

古文：一语无效，请伏斧质。
现代文：如果我所说的话没有效果，就让我伏罪受死刑。
English: If what I say has no effect, let me be sentenced to death.

古文：於是秦昭王大说，乃谢王稽，使以传车召范雎。
现代文：在看完这封书信之后，秦昭王十分高兴，于是对王稽表达谢意，并让人用专门的马车召见范睢。
English: After reading this letter, Qin Zhao Wang was very happy, so he expressed his gratitude to Wang Qi and had a special carriage used to summon Fan Qi.

古文：於是范雎乃得见於离宫，详为不知永巷而入其中。
现代文：这样，范雎才得以去离宫拜见秦昭王，到了宫门口，他假装不知道是内宫的通道，就往里走。
English: In this way, Fan Xuan was able to leave the palace to visit Qin Zhao Wang. When he arrived at the palace gate, he pretended not to know that it was a passageway to the inner palace, and went inside.

古文：王来而宦者怒，逐之，曰： 王至！ 
现代文：这时恰巧秦昭王出来，宦官发了怒，驱赶范雎，喝斥道： 大王来了！ 
English: At this time, Qin Zhao Wang happened to come out, and the eunuch became angry, drove Fan Yu away, and shouted: The great king has come!

古文：范雎缪为曰： 秦安得王？
现代文：范雎故意乱嚷着说： 秦国哪里有王？
English: Fan Ye deliberately shouted out: Where is there a king in Qin?

古文：秦独有太后、穰侯耳。 
现代文：秦国只有太后和穰侯罢了。 
English: In Qin, only the empress dowager and the eunuchs were left.

古文：欲以感怒昭王。
现代文：他想用这些话激怒秦昭王。
English: He wanted to use these words to infuriate Qin Zhao Wang.

古文：昭王至，闻其与宦者争言，遂延迎，谢曰： 寡人宜以身受命久矣，会义渠之事急，寡人旦暮自请太后；今义渠之事已，寡人乃得受命。
现代文：昭王走过来，听到范雎正在与宦官争吵，便上前去迎接范雎，并向他道歉说： 我本该早就向您请教了，正遇到处理义渠事件很紧迫，我早晚都要向太后请示，现在义渠事件已经处理完毕，我才得机会向您请教。
English: King Zhao came over and heard Fan Rong was arguing with the eunuch, so he went forward to meet Fan Rong and apologized to him, saying, "I should have asked you for advice long ago. It is very urgent to deal with the Yiquan Incident. I have to ask the Empress Dowager sooner or later. Now that the Yiquan Incident has been dealt with, I have the opportunity to ask you for advice."

古文：窃闵然不敏，敬执宾主之礼。 
现代文：我这个人很糊涂、不聪敏，让我向您敬行一礼。 
English: I am a very confused and unintelligent person, so let me bow to you.

古文：范雎辞让。
现代文：范雎客气地还了礼。
English: Fan Ye politely returned the salute.

古文：是日观范雎之见者，群臣莫不洒然变色易容者。
现代文：这一天凡是看到范雎谒见昭王情况的文武百官，没有一个不是肃然起敬的。
English: On this day, none of the hundreds of civil and military officials who saw the situation of Fan Yu and Zhao Wang were not awestruck.

古文：秦王屏左右，宫中虚无人。
现代文：秦王屏退了左右两边的大臣和侍从，宫殿里没有别的人。
English: Qin Wangping withdrew the ministers and attendants on both sides, and there was no one else in the palace.

古文：秦王跽而请曰： 先生何以幸教寡人？ 
现代文：秦王长跪着向范睢请教说： 先生要如何教导我？ 
English: Qin Wangchang knelt down and asked Fan Rong for advice, saying, "How does Teacher want to teach me?

古文：范雎曰： 唯唯。 
现代文：范睢说： 嗯嗯。 
English: Fan Ye said, "Hmmmm.

古文：有间，秦王复跽而请曰： 先生何以幸教寡人？ 范雎曰： 唯唯。 
现代文：过了一会儿，秦王又一次长跪着向范睢问道： 先生要如何教导我？ 范睢说： 嗯嗯。 
English: After a while, Qin Wang knelt down again and asked Fan Yu: How does the teacher want to teach me? Fan Yu said: Hmmmm.

古文：若是者三。
现代文：像这样重复了三次。
English: Repeat like this three times.

古文：秦王跽曰： 先生卒不幸教寡人邪？ 
现代文：秦王长跪着对范睢说道： 先生终究不愿意教导我吗？ 
English: Qin Wangchang knelt down and said to Fan Yu: Is the teacher not willing to teach me after all?

古文：范雎曰： 非敢然也。
现代文：范睢说道： 我不敢这样做。
English: Fan Ye said: I don't dare to do this.

古文：臣闻昔者吕尚之遇文王也，身为渔父而钓於渭滨耳。
现代文：我听人说以前吕尚与周文王相遇的时候，自己只是个在渭河边垂钓的渔翁而已。
English: I heard that when Lushan met Zhou Wenwang before, he was just a fisherman fishing in the Fen River.

古文：若是者，交疏也。
现代文：在那个时候，他们的交情还很疏远。
English: At the time, their friendship was still distant.

古文：已说而立为太师，载与俱归者，其言深也。
现代文：等到周文王听完吕尚的话，就立刻把他封为太师，用马车拉着他一起返回，他们所谈的话就深切了。
English: When King Zhou Wen had finished listening to Lushan's words, he immediately made him Grand Master and took him back with him in a carriage. The words they spoke were profound.

古文：故文王遂收功於吕尚而卒王天下。
现代文：因此周文王就从吕尚那里得到了帮助，最终称王天下。
English: Therefore, King Zhou Wen received help from Lushan and eventually became king of the world.

古文：乡使文王疏吕尚而不与深言，是周无天子之德，而文武无与成其王业也。
现代文：假如周文王疏远吕尚，而且没有与吕尚深入交谈，那么周朝就不具备天子的德行，那么周文王、周武王也就没有人来辅佐他们成就大业了。
English: If King Zhouwen alienated Lushan and did not have in-depth conversations with Lushan, then the Zhou Dynasty would not have the virtue of the son of heaven, and King Zhouwen and King Zhouwu would not have anyone to assist them in achieving their great cause.

古文：今臣羁旅之臣也，交疏於王，而所原陈者皆匡君之事，处人骨肉之间，原效愚忠而未知王之心也。
现代文：现在我只是一个寄居在外地的人，跟大王的交情也很疏远，但我所想要对您陈说的都是匡扶国君的大事，处在大王与至亲骨肉的关系中来谈论大事，想要献出我对您的愚钝的忠诚，但却不了解大王内心的真实想法。
English: Now I am just a person living in a foreign country, and my friendship with the great king is also very distant, but what I want to tell you is the important thing of supporting the country's king, being in the relationship between the great king and the flesh and blood to talk about the big things, I want to offer my loyalty to you, but I don't know the true thoughts of the great king.

古文：此所以王三问而不敢对者也。
现代文：这正是为什么大王三次询问我而我不敢回答的原因。
English: That's why the king asked me three times and I didn't dare to answer.

古文：臣非有畏而不敢言也。
现代文：我并不是因为畏惧什么而不敢说话。
English: It's not that I'm afraid to say anything.

古文：臣知今日言之於前而明日伏诛於後，然臣不敢避也。
现代文：我知道今天在您面前说完话，明天就可能会被您下令杀掉，可是我却不敢回避这一点。
English: I know that after speaking in front of you today, you may order me to be killed tomorrow, but I dare not evade this.

古文：大王信行臣之言，死不足以为臣患，亡不足以为臣忧，漆身为厉被发为狂不足以为臣耻。
现代文：假如大王能够信任并施行我所提出的建议，死亡不足以让我担心，流放不足以让我苦恼，用漆涂满全身长出了疮癞、披散头发变成疯子，都不足以让我觉得羞耻。
English: If the Great King can trust and carry out my proposal, death is not enough for me to worry about, exile is not enough to distress me, paint all over my body, grow scars, lose my hair and turn into a madman, are not enough to make me feel ashamed.

古文：且以五帝之圣焉而死，三王之仁焉而死，五伯之贤焉而死，乌获、任鄙之力焉而死，成荆、孟贲、王庆忌、夏育之勇焉而死。
现代文：况且像五帝那样圣明的帝王也会死掉，像三王那样仁德的君主也会死掉，像春秋五霸那样贤能的国君也会死掉，像乌获、任鄙那样拥有巨大力量的勇士也会死掉，像成荆、孟贲、王庆忌、夏育那样勇敢的人也会死掉。
English: Moreover, the holy emperors like the Five Emperors will also die, the benevolent monarchs like the Three Kings will also die, the virtuous sovereigns like the Spring and Autumn Five Emperors will also die, the warriors with great power like Wu Guo and Ren Huan will also die, and the brave people like Cheng Jing, Meng Yao, Wang Qing Bo and Xia Yu will also die.

古文：死者，人之所必不免也。
现代文：死亡，是人们无法避免的。
English: Death is inevitable.

古文：处必然之势，可以少有补於秦，此臣之所大原也，臣又何患哉！
现代文：处于必然的情况之下，能够对秦国稍微有一些补益，就是我最大的愿望，我又有什么可担忧的呢！
English: Under the unavoidable circumstances, it is my greatest wish to be able to bring some benefits to Qin. What do I have to worry about?

古文：伍子胥橐载而出昭关，夜行昼伏，至於陵水，无以餬其口，行蒲伏，稽首肉袒，鼓腹吹篪，乞食於吴市，卒兴吴国，阖闾为伯。
现代文：当年伍子胥被装在口袋里逃出昭关，到了夜里才敢赶路，白天就隐藏起来，到了陵水后，没有可以用来充饥的食物，就用膝盖跪在地上匍匐着向前行走，裸露着上身对着别人磕头，鼓着肚子吹奏笛子，在吴国的集市上讨饭吃，但最终却能够令吴国兴盛，令吴王阖闾成了霸主。
English: At that time, Wu Ziqi was loaded in his pocket to escape from Zhaoguan. At night, he dared to hurry. During the day, he hid. After reaching Lingshui, there was no food that could be used to satisfy his hunger. He walked forward with his knees on the ground, bowed his head to others with his bare upper body, played the flute with his stomach full, and begged for food at the market in Wuxi. But in the end, he was able to make Wuxi prosperous and make Wuxi the overlord.

古文：使臣得尽谋如伍子胥，加之以幽囚，终身不复见，是臣之说行也，臣又何忧？
现代文：如果能让我像伍子胥那样可以尽情地施展智谋，就算是把我囚禁关押，到死不再与您相见，这样我的建议得到施行，我还有什么可担忧的呢？
English: If you can allow me, like Wu Zichuan, to use my wisdom to the best of my ability, even if I am imprisoned and will not see you again until I die, so that my advice can be implemented, what else should I worry about?

古文：箕子、接舆漆身为厉，被发为狂，无益於主。
现代文：箕子、接舆把漆涂在身上，浑身长满疮癞，披散头发，假装疯子，但对自己的君主没有好处。
English: The lame, the crippled, the lame-footed, the lame-footed, the lame-footed, the lame-footed, the lame-footed, the lame-footed, the lame-footed, the lame-footed, the lame-footed, the lame-footed, the lame-footed, the lame-footed, the lame-footed, the lame-footed.

古文：假使臣得同行於箕子，可以有补於所贤之主，是臣之大荣也，臣有何耻？
现代文：假如让我跟箕子有同样的遭遇披发装疯，可是能对我所认为的贤明的君主有所补益，就是我最大的荣耀，我又有什么可以羞耻的呢？
English: If I were to suffer the same fate as the cripple and pretend to be mad, but if I could be of some help to what I consider a wise monarch, that would be my greatest glory, and what would I have to be ashamed of?

古文：臣之所恐者，独恐臣死之後，天下见臣之尽忠而身死，因以是杜口裹足，莫肯乡秦耳。
现代文：我所感到担心的，只是怕我被杀死以后，天下的人见我把忠诚全都献出来，最后却落个被杀的下场，因此闭上自己的嘴，裹住自己的双脚，不肯到秦国来而已。
English: What I was worried about was that after I was killed, people around the world would see that I had given all my loyalty and finally ended up being killed, so I just kept my mouth shut, wrapped my feet, and refused to come to Qin.

古文：足下上畏太后之严，下惑於奸臣之态，居深宫之中，不离阿保之手，终身迷惑，无与昭奸。
现代文：您对上害怕太后的威严，对下又受到奸臣的迷惑，您居住在这幽深的宫殿里，离不开左右近臣的把持，一生都受到迷惑，没有帮助您辨认奸邪的人。
English: On the one hand, you are afraid of the majesty of the empress dowager, and on the other hand, you are confused by the treacherous vassals. You live in this deep palace, inseparable from the control of the left and right vassals. You have been confused all your life, and there is no help for you to identify the treacherous person.

古文：大者宗庙灭覆，小者身以孤危，此臣之所恐耳。
现代文：这样的结果，从大的方面说会导致国家灭亡，从小的方面说会使自己陷入孤立、危险的处境中，这是我感到恐惧的事情。
English: Such an outcome would, on a large scale, lead to the country's demise, and on a small scale, it would put us in an isolated and dangerous situation, which is something I am afraid of.

古文：若夫穷辱之事，死亡之患，臣不敢畏也。
现代文：像那受困被辱之类的事情，被杀死的灾祸，我是从不害怕的。
English: I've never been afraid of things like being trapped, humiliated, or killed.

古文：臣死而秦治，是臣死贤於生。 
现代文：如果我的死能够让秦国获得大治，这是我死掉比活着更有意义。 
English: If my death can bring about the great reformation of Qin, then it is more meaningful for me to die than to live.

古文：秦王跽曰： 先生是何言也！
现代文：秦王长跪着对范睢说道： 先生这是说什么呢！
English: Qin Wangchang knelt down and said to Fan Yu: "Teacher, what are you talking about?

古文：夫秦国辟远，寡人愚不肖，先生乃幸辱至於此，是天以寡人慁先生而存先王之宗庙也。
现代文：秦国的位置偏僻而且远离中原，寡人我又愚钝又没有出息，竟然有幸能够让先生屈尊来到秦国，这是上天保佑我烦劳先生来保存先王的宗庙。
English: Qin's location is remote and far away from the Central Plains, and I am a dull and unproductive person. I was fortunate enough to be able to have my master deign to come to Qin. This is God's blessing on my hard-working master to preserve the ancestral temple of the former king.

古文：寡人得受命於先生，是天所以幸先王，而不弃其孤也。
现代文：我能得到先生的教导，这正是上天保佑先王，没有抛弃他遗留下来的后代。
English: I can be taught by my master, which is exactly what God blessed the former king with, and did not abandon his remaining descendants.

古文：先生柰何而言若是！
现代文：先生为什么要说出那样的话来呢！
English: Teacher, why would you say such a thing!

古文：事无小大，上及太后，下至大臣，原先生悉以教寡人，无疑寡人也。 
现代文：事情无论大小，上到太后，下到大臣，希望先生毫无保留地教导我，不要再怀疑我了。 
English: No matter how big or small the matter is, whether it involves the empress dowager or a minister, I hope you will teach me without reservation and stop doubting me.

古文：范雎拜，秦王亦再拜
现代文：范睢下拜，秦王也回拜。
English: Fan Qian bowed down, Qin Wang also bowed back.

古文：范雎曰： 大王之国，四塞以为固，北有甘泉、谷口，南带泾、渭，右陇、蜀，左关、阪，奋击百万，战车千乘，利则出攻，不利则入守，此王者之地也。
现代文：范雎说： 大王的国家，四面都是坚固的要塞，北面有甘泉高山、谷口险隘，南面环绕着泾、渭二水，右边是陇山、蜀道，左边是函谷关、殽阪山，雄师百万，战车千辆，有利就进攻，不利就退守，这是用来创建王业的好地方。
English: Fan Yu said: The great king's country is surrounded by strong fortresses on all sides. On the north, there are Ganquan Mountain and Taniguchi Narrow Pass. On the south, it is surrounded by Kunlun and Qin Ershui. On the right, there are Shaoshan and Shu Dao. On the left, there are Hanzhaguan and Shaoshan Mountain. There are a million soldiers and a thousand chariots. If it is advantageous, it will attack, and if it is disadvantageous, it will retreat. This is a good place to create a king's business.

古文：民怯於私斗而勇於公战，此王者之民也。
现代文：百姓不敢因私事而争斗，却勇敢地为国家去作战，这是据以建立王业的好百姓啊。
English: The people do not dare to fight for their private affairs, but bravely fight for the country. These are the good people on which the king's career is built.

古文：王并此二者而有之。
现代文：现在大王同时兼有地利、人和这两种有利条件。
English: Now the great king has both the location and the people, both of which are advantageous.

古文：夫以秦卒之勇，车骑之众，以治诸侯，譬若施韩卢而搏蹇兔也，霸王之业可致也，而群臣莫当其位。
现代文：凭着秦国士兵的勇猛，战车和战马的众多，去制伏诸侯，就如同放出韩国壮犬去捕捉跛足的兔子那样容易，建立霸王的事业是完全能够办到的，可是您的臣子之中没有一个称职的。
English: With the bravery of the Qin soldiers, the numerous chariots and horses, it is as easy to subdue the princes as it is to release the Korean dogs to catch the lame rabbits. It is entirely possible to establish the cause of the overlord, but none of your courtiers are competent.

古文：至今闭关十五年，不敢窥兵於山东者，是穰侯为秦谋不忠，而大王之计有所失也。 秦王跽曰： 寡人原闻失计。 
现代文：秦国到现今闭关固守已经十五年，之所以不敢伺机向崤山以东进兵，这都是因为穰侯为秦国出谋划策不肯竭尽忠心，而大王的计策也有失误之处啊， 秦昭王长跪着说： 我愿意听一听我的失策之处。 
English: It has been fifteen years since Qin has been closed to the outside world, and the reason why it does not dare to wait for an opportunity to march to the east of Mount Lushan is because the princes are not willing to be loyal to Qin, and there are mistakes in the great king's strategy, Qin Zhaowang said kneeling: I am willing to listen to my mistakes.

古文：然左右多窃听者，范雎恐，未敢言内，先言外事，以观秦王之俯仰。
现代文：可是范雎发觉谈话时周围有不少偷听的人，心里惶惑不安，不敢谈宫廷内部太后专权的事，就先谈穰侯对诸侯国的外交谋略，借以观察一下秦王的态度。
English: However, when Fan Ye discovered that there were many eavesdroppers around him during the conversation, he was confused and uneasy, and did not dare to talk about the matter of the empress dowager's exclusive power within the palace. He first talked about the diplomatic strategy of the princes against the princes, in order to observe the attitude of King Qin.

古文：因进曰： 夫穰侯越韩、魏而攻齐纲寿，非计也。
现代文：于是凑向昭王面前说： 穰侯越过韩、魏两国去进攻齐国纲寿，这不是个好计策。
English: Therefore, he approached King Zhao and said: "It is not a good strategy for Gonghou to attack Qi Guo Gangshou by crossing Korea and Wei.

古文：少出师则不足以伤齐，多出师则害於秦。
现代文：出兵少就不能损伤齐国，出兵太多反会损害秦国自己。
English: Sending fewer troops will not damage Qi, but sending too many troops will damage Qin itself.

古文：臣意王之计，欲少出师而悉韩、魏之兵也，则不义矣。
现代文：我猜想大王的计策，是想自己少出兵而让韩、魏两国尽遣兵力来协同秦国，这也是不合理的。
English: I suspect that the king's strategy is to send fewer troops himself and let Han and Wei send their troops to cooperate with Qin, which is also unreasonable.

古文：今见与国之不亲也，越人之国而攻，可乎？
现代文：现在已经看出这两个友国实际并不真正亲善，您却要越过他们的国境去进攻齐国，可行吗？
English: Now it has been seen that these two friendly countries are not really friendly, but you want to cross their borders to attack Qi, is it feasible?

古文：其於计疏矣。
现代文：这在计策上实在是不够周密。
English: This is really not a well-thought-out strategy.

古文：且昔齐湣王南攻楚，破军杀将，再辟地千里，而齐尺寸之地无得焉者，岂不欲得地哉，形势不能有也。
现代文：况且曾有过这种失算的先例，先前齐湣王向南攻打楚国，杀楚军、斩楚将，开辟了千里之遥的领土，可是最后齐国连寸尺大小的土地也没得到，难道是不想得到土地吗，是形势迫使它不可能占有啊。
English: Moreover, there was a precedent for such a miscalculation. Previously, King Qizong went south to attack the State of Chu, killed the Chu army and defeated the Chu general, and opened up a territory thousands of miles away. However, in the end, the State of Qi did not get even an inch of land. Did it not want to get land? It was the situation that made it impossible for it to occupy.

古文：诸侯见齐之罢弊，君臣之不和也，兴兵而伐齐，大破之。
现代文：各诸侯国看到齐国已经疲惫困顿国力大衰，国君与臣属又不和，便发兵进攻齐国，一下就打败了它。
English: The various states saw that Qi was exhausted, its national strength was in decline, and the sovereign and his subjects were at odds, so they sent troops to attack Qi and defeated it at once.

古文：士辱兵顿，皆咎其王，曰： 谁为此计者乎？ 王曰： 文子为之。 
现代文：齐国将士受辱溃不成军，上下一片责怪齐王之声，说： 策划攻打楚国的是谁？ 齐王说： 是田文策划的。 
English: The soldiers of Qi were humiliated and defeated and could not form an army, and the voices of the Qi kings blamed each other, saying: Who planned to attack Chu? The king of Qi said: Tianwen planned it.

古文：大臣作乱，文子出走。
现代文：于是齐国大臣发动叛乱，田文被迫逃亡出走。
English: As a result, the Minister of Qi launched a rebellion, and Tianwen was forced to flee.

古文：攻齐所以大破者，以其伐楚而肥韩、魏也。
现代文：由此可见齐国大败的原因，就是因为它耗尽兵力攻打远方的楚国反而使韩、魏两国从中获得厚利。
English: From this, it can be seen that the reason for the great defeat of Qi was that it exhausted its forces to attack the distant state of Chu, but on the other hand, the two countries of Korea and Wei gained great profits from it.

古文：此所谓借贼兵而赍盗粮者也。
现代文：这就叫做把兵器借给强盗，把粮食送给窃贼啊。
English: This is called lending weapons to robbers and giving grain to thieves.

古文：王不如远交而近攻，得寸则王之寸也，得尺亦王之尺也。
现代文：大王不如结交远邦，转而攻打近处的国家，这样攻取一寸土地就成为您的一寸土地，攻取一尺土地也就成为您的一尺土地。
English: It is better for a great king to ally with a distant country than to attack a nearby country. In this way, if you capture an inch of land, it will become your inch of land, and if you capture a foot of land, it will become your foot of land.

古文：今释此而远攻，不亦缪乎！
现代文：如今放弃近国而攻打远邦，不是太荒谬了吗？
English: Now, isn't it too absurd to give up a nearby country and attack a faraway country?

古文：且昔者中山之国地方五百里，赵独吞之，功成名立而利附焉，天下莫之能害也。
现代文：再说，过去中山国领土有方圆五百里，赵国独自把它吞并了，功业建成，名声高杨，利益到手，天下没有谁能侵害它。
English: Moreover, in the past, Zhongshan's territory had a radius of 500 miles, and Zhao alone annexed it. It was a great achievement, with a high reputation and great benefits. No one in the world could infringe upon it.

古文：今夫韩、魏，中国之处而天下之枢也，王其欲霸，必亲中国以为天下枢，以威楚、赵。
现代文：现在韩、魏两国，地处中原是天下的中心部位，大王如果打算称霸天下，就必须先亲近中原国家把它作为掌握天下的关键，以此威胁楚国、赵国。
English: Now, Korea and Wei are both located in the Central Plains, which is the central part of the world. If the great king intends to dominate the world, he must first approach the Central Plains countries as the key to mastering the world, thus threatening Chu and Zhao.

古文：楚彊则附赵，赵彊则附楚，楚、赵皆附，齐必惧矣。
现代文：楚国强大您就亲近赵国，赵国强大您就亲近楚国，楚国、赵国都亲附您，齐国必然恐惧了。
English: If Chu is strong, you will be close to Zhao; if Zhao is strong, you will be close to Chu; if Chu and Zhao are close to you, Qi will be afraid.

古文：齐惧，必卑辞重币以事秦。
现代文：齐国恐惧，必定低声下气拿出丰厚财礼来奉事秦国。
English: Because of the fear of the Qin State, he must have humbly offered rich gifts to serve the Qin State.

古文：齐附而韩、魏因可虏也。 
现代文：齐国亲附了秦国，那么韩、魏两国便乘势可以收服了。 
English: If Qi was annexed by Qin, then Han and Wei would be able to take advantage of the situation.

古文：昭王曰： 吾欲亲魏久矣，而魏多变之国也，寡人不能亲。
现代文：昭王说： 我早就想亲近魏国了，可是魏国是个翻云覆雨变化无常的国家，我无法同它亲近。
English: Zhao Wang said: I have long wanted to get close to Wei, but Wei is a country that is subject to change and change, and I can't get close to it.

古文：请问亲魏柰何？ 
现代文：请问怎么才能亲近魏国？ 
English: How can I get close to Wei?

古文：对曰： 王卑词重币以事之；不可，则割地而赂之；不可，因举兵而伐之。 
现代文：范雎回答道： 大王可以先说好话送厚礼来靠拢它，不行的话，就割让土地收买它；再不行，寻找机会发兵攻打它。 
English: Fan Ye replied: The great king can first say good words and send gifts to draw it closer, if not, he can cede land to buy it; if not, he can look for an opportunity to send troops to attack it.

古文：王曰： 寡人敬闻命矣。 
现代文：昭王说： 我就恭候您的指教了。 
English: King Zhao said, "I'll wait for your advice."

古文：乃拜范雎为客卿，谋兵事。
现代文：于是授给范雎客卿官职，同他一起谋划军事。
English: As a result, he conferred an official post on Fan Yingkeqing, and planned the military together with him.

古文：卒听范雎谋，使五大夫绾伐魏，拔怀。
现代文：终于听从了范雎的谋略，派五大夫绾带兵攻打魏国，拿下了怀邑。
English: Finally, he listened to Fan Ye's strategy and sent the Five Great Masters and their soldiers to attack Wei and took over Huaiyun.

古文：後二岁，拔邢丘。
现代文：两年后，又夺取了邢丘。
English: Two years later, it seized Muxiu.

古文：客卿范雎复说昭王曰： 秦韩之地形，相错如绣。
现代文：客卿范雎后来又劝说昭王道： 秦、韩两国的地形，犬牙交错就像交织的刺绣一样互相交错。
English: Later, the guest of honor Fan Qi also persuaded Zhao Wang: The topography of Qin and South Korea, the interlaced canine teeth are interlaced like interwoven embroidery.

古文：秦之有韩也，譬如木之有蠹也，人之有心腹之病也。
现代文：秦国境内伸进韩国的土地，就如同树干中生了蛀虫，人身内患了心病一样。
English: If the territory of Qin State extends into the land of Korea, it would be like a tapeworm growing in a tree trunk or a person suffering from heart disease.

古文：天下无变则已，天下有变，其为秦患者孰大於韩乎？
现代文：天下的形势没有变化就罢了，一旦发生变化，给秦国造成祸患的还有谁能比韩国大呢？
English: As long as there is no change in the situation in the world, once there is a change, who else can cause a disaster to Qin than South Korea?

古文：王不如收韩。 
现代文：大王不如把韩国收拢住。 
English: It would be better for the emperor to contain South Korea.

古文：昭王曰： 吾固欲收韩，韩不听，为之柰何？ 
现代文：昭王说： 我本来就想收拢韩国，可是韩国不听从，对它该怎么办才好？ 
English: Zhao Wang said: I originally wanted to close South Korea, but South Korea did not obey, what should I do with it?

古文：对曰： 韩安得无听乎？
现代文：范雎回答道： 韩国怎么能不听从呢？
English: Fan Ye replied: How can South Korea not obey?

古文：王下兵而攻荥阳，则巩、成皋之道不通；北断太行之道，则上党之师不下。
现代文：您进兵去攻荥阳，那么韩国由巩县通成皋的道路被堵住；在北面切断太行山要道，那么上党的军队就不能南下。
English: If you march to attack Poyang, then the road from Gong County to Chengdu in South Korea will be blocked; if you cut off the Taigang Mountain Road in the north, then the army of the upper party will not be able to go south.

古文：王一兴兵而攻荥阳，则其国断而为三。
现代文：大王一旦发兵进攻荥阳，那么韩国就会被分割成三块孤立的地区。
English: Once the emperor sends troops to attack Shenyang, Korea will be divided into three isolated regions.

古文：夫韩见必亡，安得不听乎？
现代文：韩国眼见自己必然灭亡了，怎么能不听从您的号令呢？
English: How can South Korea not obey your order when it sees its inevitable demise?

古文：若韩听，而霸事因可虑矣。 
现代文：如果韩国服帖了，那么就可乘势盘算称霸的事业了。 昭王说： 太好了。 
English: If South Korea complies, then it can take advantage of the situation and plan for the cause of hegemony.

古文：王曰： 善。 
现代文：就准备派使臣到韩国去。
English: Japan is preparing to send an envoy to South Korea.

古文：且欲发使於韩。范雎日益亲，复说用数年矣，因请间说曰： 臣居山东时，闻齐之有田文，不闻其有王也；闻秦之有太后、穰侯、华阳、高陵、泾阳，不闻其有王也。
现代文：范雎一天比一天得到秦昭王信任，转眼间受到秦昭王的信用就有几年了，一次范雎请求昭王在闲暇方便之时进言议事说： 我居住在山东的时候，只听说齐国有田文，从没听说齐国有齐王；只听说秦国有太后、穰侯、华阳君以及高陵君、泾阳君，却没听说过秦国有位秦王。
English: Fan Qi gained more and more trust from Qin Zhao Wang day by day. In the blink of an eye, he had been trusted by Qin Zhao Wang for several years. Once, Fan Qi asked Qin Zhao Wang to have a discussion at his leisure, saying: When I lived in Shandong, I only heard that there were Tianwen in Qin Province, but I never heard that there was a Qin King in Qin Province. I only heard that there was a Empress Dowager in Qin Province, and that there were Princes Gonghou and Huayang, as well as Prince Gaoling and Prince Gongyang, but I never heard that there was a Qin King in Q

古文：夫擅国之谓王，能利害之谓王，制杀生之威之谓王。
现代文：独掌国家大权的称做王，能够兴利除害的称做王，掌握生杀予夺权势的称为王。
English: Those who hold the power of the state in their hands alone are called kings, those who are able to benefit and eliminate harm are called kings, and those who master life and death to seize power are called kings.

古文：今太后擅行不顾，穰侯出使不报，华阳、泾阳等击断无讳，高陵进退不请。
现代文：如今太后独断专行毫无顾忌，穰侯出使国外从不向大王报告，华阳君、泾阳君等惩处断罚随心所欲，高陵君任免官吏也从不请示。
English: Nowadays, the empress dowager has no scruples about acting on her own. The empress dowager never reports to the king when she sends an envoy abroad, Huayangun and Puyangun can punish and punish as they please, and Gaolingun never asks for permission to appoint and remove officials.

古文：四贵备而国不危者，未之有也。
现代文：这四种特权全都出现，但国家却没有出现危险的，那是从来没有过的。
English: All four of these prerogatives are present, but there is no danger to the state, there never was.

古文：为此四贵者下，乃所谓无王也。
现代文：人们处在这四种权贵的统治下，就是我所说的秦国不曾听说有君王。
English: The people are under the rule of these four kinds of magnates, that is, I have never heard of a king in Qin.

古文：然则权安得不倾，令安得从王出乎？
现代文：既然如此，那么大权怎么能不旁落，政令又怎么能从大王那里发布呢？
English: Since this is the case, how can the great power not fall by the wayside, and how can the decree be issued from the great king?

古文：臣闻善治国者，乃内固其威而外重其权。
现代文：我听说善于治国的君主，就是要在国内使自己的威势牢固，而对国外使自己的权力集中。
English: I have heard it said that a monarch who is good at governing a country wants to consolidate his power at home and concentrate his power abroad.

古文：穰侯使者操王之重，决制於诸侯，剖符於天下，政適伐国，莫敢不听。
现代文：穰侯的使臣操持着大王的重权，对诸侯国发号施令，他又向天下遍派持符使臣订盟立约，征讨敌方，攻伐别国，没有一个诸侯敢不听从他的号令。
English: The vassal of a vassal lord wields the authority of a great king and issues orders to the vassal states. He also dispatches vassal-holding envoys all over the world to conclude treaties, conquer enemies, and attack other countries. No vassal would dare to disobey his orders.

古文：战胜攻取则利归於陶，国弊御於诸侯；战败则结怨於百姓，而祸归於社稷。
现代文：如果打了胜仗，夺取了城地就把好处归入陶邑，国家一旦遭到困厄他便可在诸侯国中用事；如果打了败仗就会让百姓怨恨国君，而把祸患归于国家。
English: If he wins the battle and captures the city, he will attribute the benefits to the county, and if the country is in trouble, he can work in the vassal state; if he loses the battle, he will make the people resent the sovereign and attribute the disaster to the country.

古文：诗曰 木实繁者披其枝，披其枝者伤其心；大其都者危其国，尊其臣者卑其主 。
现代文：《诗》中说： 树上结果太多就要压折树枝，树枝断了就会伤害树心；封地城邑太大就要危害国都，抬高臣属就会压抑君主。 
English: "Poetry" said: If there are too many fruits on the tree, it will crush the branches, and if the branches are broken, it will hurt the heart of the tree; if the fief cities are too large, it will harm the capital, and if the vassals are too high, it will oppress the monarch.

古文：崔杼、淖齿管齐，射王股，擢王筋，县之於庙梁，宿昔而死。
现代文：从前崔杼、淖齿在齐国专权，崔杼射中齐庄公的大腿并杀死了他，淖齿抽了齐湣王的筋又把他悬吊在庙梁上，一夜就吊死了。
English: Once upon a time, Choe Ryong and Jang Tooth were in absolute power in the State of Qi. Choe Ryong shot King Choejo in the thigh and killed him. Jang Tooth pulled King Choejo's sinew and hung him on the temple beam. He was hanged overnight.

古文：李兑管赵，囚主父於沙丘，百日而饿死。
现代文：李兑在赵国专权，把赵武灵王囚禁在沙丘的宫里，一百天被困饿而死。
English: Li Dui, who had absolute power in the State of Zhao, imprisoned King Zhao Wuling in a palace in the sand dunes and starved him to death for a hundred days.

古文：今臣闻秦太后、穰侯用事，高陵、华阳、泾阳佐之，卒无秦王，此亦淖齿、李兑之类也。
现代文：如今我听说秦国的太后、穰侯专权，高陵君、华阳君和泾阳君相帮同，最终是不要秦王的，这也就是淖齿、李兑一类的人物啊。
English: Now I've heard that Qin's empress dowager, the exclusive power of the princes, Gao Lingjun, Huayangjun and Fenyangjun all help each other, and ultimately they don't want a Qin king, which is the same kind of character as Zhai Zu and Li Dui.

古文：且夫三代所以亡国者，君专授政，纵酒驰骋弋猎，不听政事。
现代文：再说夏、商、周三代亡国的原因，就是君主把大权全都交给宠臣，恣意饮酒纵情游猎，不理朝政。
English: Moreover, the reason why Xia, Shang, and the third generation of emperors ruined the country is that the monarch gave all the power to his favorite, indulged in drinking and hunting, and ignored the government.

古文：其所授者，妒贤嫉能，御下蔽上，以成其私，不为主计，而主不觉悟，故失其国。
现代文：他们授权任职的宠臣，一个个妒贤嫉能，瞒上欺下，谋取私利，从不为君主考虑，可是君主又不醒悟，因此丧失了自己的国家。
English: The favorites whom they authorized to hold office, one by one, were jealous, deceitful, self-serving, and never thought about the monarch, but the monarch did not wake up, so he lost his country.

古文：今自有秩以上至诸大吏，下及王左右，无非相国之人者。
现代文：如今秦国从小乡官到各个大官吏，再到大王的左右侍从，没有一个不是相国穰侯的亲信。
English: Nowadays, in Qin, from small township officials to high-ranking officials, to the king's right and left attendants, there is no one who is not a close friend of the prince.

古文：见王独立於朝，臣窃为王恐，万世之後，有秦国者非王子孙也。 
现代文：我看到大王在朝廷孤单一人，我暗自替您害怕，在您之后，拥有秦国的怕不是您的子孙了。 
English: I saw that the great king was all alone in the court. I was secretly afraid for you. After you, I'm afraid it won't be your descendants who will own Qin.

古文：昭王闻之大惧，曰： 善。 
现代文：昭王听了这番话如梦初醒大感惊惧，说： 说得对。 
English: After hearing these words, King Zhao woke up from a dream and was greatly alarmed, saying, "That's right.

古文：於是废太后，逐穰侯、高陵、华阳、泾阳君於关外。
现代文：于是废弃了太后，把穰侯、高陵君以及华阳君、泾阳君驱逐出国都。
English: As a result, the empress dowager was abolished, and Gonghou and Gaoling, as well as Huayang and Gongyang, were expelled from the capital.

古文：秦王乃拜范雎为相。
现代文：秦昭王就任命范雎为相国。
English: King Qin Zhaohong appointed Fan Kui as his son-in-law.

古文：收穰侯之印，使归陶，因使县官给车牛以徙，千乘有馀。
现代文：收回了穰侯的相印，让他回到封地陶邑去，由朝廷派给车子和牛帮他拉东西迁出国都，装载东西的车子有一千多辆。
English: The imperial court sent him a cart and oxen to help him move things out of the capital. There were more than a thousand carts loaded with things.

古文：到关，关阅其宝器，宝器珍怪多於王室。
现代文：到了国都关卡，守关官吏检查他的珍宝器物，发现珍贵奇异的宝物比国君之家还要多。
English: When he arrived at the capital checkpoint, the customs officials inspected his precious objects and found more rare and strange treasures than the emperor's house.

古文：秦封范雎以应，号为应侯。
现代文：秦昭王把应城封给范雎，封号称范雎。
English: Qin Zhao Wang gave the title of Yingcheng to Fan Xuan, and the title was called Fan Xuan.

古文：当是时，秦昭王四十一年也。
现代文：这个时候，是秦昭王四十一年。
English: At this time, it was the 41st year of the reign of Qin Zhao Wang.

古文：范雎既相秦，秦号曰张禄，而魏不知，以为范雎已死久矣。
现代文：范雎做了秦国相国之后，秦国人仍称他叫张禄，而魏国人对此毫无所知，认为范雎早已死了。
English: After Fan Kui became the prime minister of Qin, the Qin people still called him Zhang Lu, while the Wei people knew nothing about it and thought that Fan Kui had already died.

古文：魏闻秦且东伐韩、魏，魏使须贾於秦。
现代文：魏王听到秦国即将向东攻打韩、魏两国的消息，便派须贾出使秦国。
English: When the Wei king heard the news that Qin was about to attack Korea and Wei to the east, he sent Sujia as an envoy to Qin.

古文：范雎闻之，为微行，敝衣间步之邸，见须贾。
现代文：范雎得知须贾到了秦国，便隐蔽了相国的身分改装出行，他穿着破旧的衣服偷空步行到客馆，见到了须贾。
English: When Fan Qi learned that Su Jia had arrived in Qin, he concealed the identity of his home country to travel. Wearing worn-out clothes, he secretly walked to the guest house and saw Su Jia.

古文：须贾见之而惊曰： 范叔固无恙乎！ 范雎曰： 然。 
现代文：须贾一见范雎不禁惊愕道： 范叔你原来没有遭遇灾祸啊！ 范雎说： 是啊。 
English: At the sight of Fan Qi, Su Jia couldn't help but be stunned: Uncle Fan, you didn't encounter any disaster! Fan Qi said: Yes.

古文：须贾笑曰： 范叔有说於秦邪？ 
现代文：须贾笑着说： 范叔是来秦国游说的吧？ 
English: Xu Jia said with a smile: Uncle Fan came to Qin to lobby, right?

古文：曰： 不也。
现代文：范雎答道： 不是的。
English: Fan Ye replied: It is not.

古文：雎前日得过於魏相，故亡逃至此，安敢说乎！ 
现代文：我前时得罪了魏国宰相，所以流落逃跑到这里，哪里还敢游说呢！ 
English: I offended the Prime Minister of Wei some time ago, so I fled here, where else would I dare to lobby!

古文：须贾曰： 今叔何事？ 
现代文：须贾问道： 如今你在这里做些什么事情？ 
English: Sujia asked: What are you doing here now?

古文：范雎曰 臣为人庸赁。 
现代文：范雎答道： 我给人家当差役。 
English: Fan Ye replied: I work as an errand boy for someone.

古文：须贾意哀之，留与坐饮食，曰： 范叔一寒如此哉！ 
现代文：须贾听了有些怜悯他，便留下范雎一起坐下吃饭，又不无同情地说： 范叔怎么竟贫寒到这个样子！ 
English: After listening to him, Su Jia felt some pity for him, so he left Fan Qi to sit down to eat together. He also said, not without sympathy, "How can Uncle Fan be so poor!

古文：乃取其一綈袍以赐之。
现代文：于是就取出了自己一件粗丝袍送给了他。
English: So she took out a thick silk robe and gave it to him.

古文：须贾因问曰： 秦相张君，公知之乎？
现代文：须贾趁便问道： 秦国的相国张君，您知道这个人吗？
English: Su Jia took the opportunity to ask, "Qin's cousin Zhang Jun, do you know this person?

古文：吾闻幸於王，天下之事皆决於相君。
现代文：我听说他在秦王那里很得宠，有关天下的大事都由相国张君决定。
English: I heard that he was very favored by King Qin, and that important matters concerning the world were decided by Zhang Jun, his father-in-law.

古文：今吾事之去留在张君。
现代文：这次我办的事情成败也都取决于张君。
English: The success or failure of what I do this time also depends on Zhang Jun.

古文：孺子岂有客习於相君者哉？ 
现代文：你这个小子有没有跟相国张君熟悉的朋友啊？ 
English: Do you have any friends who are familiar with your brother-in-law Zhang Jun?

古文：范雎曰： 主人翁习知之。
现代文：范雎说： 我的主人很熟悉他。
English: Fan Ye said: My master is very familiar with him.

古文：唯雎亦得谒，雎请为见君於张君。 
现代文：就是我也能求见的，请让我把您引见给张君。 
English: Please let me introduce you to Zhang Jun.

古文：须贾曰： 吾马病，车轴折，非大车驷马，吾固不出。 
现代文：须贾很不以为然地说： 我的马病了，车轴也断了，不是四匹马拉的大车，我是决不出门的。 
English: Sujia said disapprovingly, "My horse is sick and the axle is broken. It's not a four-horse carriage. I'll never leave the house."

古文：范雎曰： 原为君借大车驷马於主人翁。 
现代文：范雎说：我愿意替您向我的主人借来四匹马拉的大车。 
English: Fan Ye said: I am willing to borrow a four-horse carriage from my master for you.

古文：范雎归取大车驷马，为须贾御之，入秦相府。
现代文：范雎回去弄来四匹马拉的大车，并亲自给须贾驾车，直进了秦国相府。
English: Fan Rong went back to get a four-horse carriage, and personally drove Su Jia straight into the Qin State Council.

古文：府中望见，有识者皆避匿。
现代文：相府里的人看到范雎驾着车子来了，有些认识他的人都回避离开了。
English: People in the neighboring prefectures saw Fan Yu driving a car, and some people who knew him avoided him and left.

古文：须贾怪之。
现代文：须贾见到这般情景感到很奇怪。
English: Such a scene was strange to Suja.

古文：至相舍门，谓须贾曰： 待我，我为君先入通於相君。 
现代文：走到相国住处的门口，范雎对须贾说： 您在这里等等我，我先进去替您向相国张君通报一声。 
English: When he reached the door of Zhang Jun's home, Fan Yu said to Su Jia, "Wait for me here. I will go first to inform Zhang Jun."

古文：须贾待门下，持车良久，问门下曰： 范叔不出，何也？ 
现代文：须贾就在门口等着，拽着马缰绳等了很长时间不见人来，便问门卒说： 范叔进去很长时间了不出来，是怎么回事？ 
English: Suja waited at the door, tugged at the reins and waited for a long time without seeing anyone, then asked the doorkeeper: Uncle Fan has been in for a long time and can't get out, what's going on?

古文：门下曰： 无范叔。 
现代文：门卒说： 这里没有范叔。 
English: The gatekeeper said, "There is no Uncle Fan here."

古文：须贾曰： 乡者与我载而入者。 
现代文：须贾说： 就是刚才跟我一起乘车进去的那个人。 
English: Suja said, "He's the one who got into the car with me just now."

古文：门下曰： 乃吾相张君也。 
现代文：门卒说： 他就是我们相国张君啊。 
English: The doorkeeper said: He is our compatriot Zhang Junzu.

古文：须贾大惊，自知见卖，乃肉袒行，因门下人谢罪。
现代文：须贾一听大惊失色，自知被诓骗进来，就赶紧脱掉上衣光着膀子双膝跪地而行，托门卒向范雎认罪。
English: As soon as Su Jia heard this, he was shocked and disgraced. Knowing that he had been tricked into coming in, he quickly took off his jacket and knelt down on his knees with his arms bare. The doorman confessed his guilt to Fan Yu.

古文：於是范雎盛帷帐，待者甚众，见之。
现代文：于是范雎派人挂上盛大的帐幕，召来许多侍从，才让须贾上堂来见。
English: So Fan Ye sent someone to hang up a grand tent and summoned many attendants, only to have Su Jia come to see him in court.

古文：须贾顿首言死罪，曰： 贾不意君能自致於青云之上，贾不敢复读天下之书，不敢复与天下之事。
现代文：须贾见到范雎连叩响头口称死罪，说： 我没想到您靠自己的能力达到这么高的尊位，我不敢再读天下的书，也不敢再参与天下的事了。
English: When Su Jia saw Fan Binglian, he smacked his head and said, "I didn't expect you to reach such a high rank by your own ability. I don't dare to read the world's books or participate in the world's affairs anymore."

古文：贾有汤镬之罪，请自屏於胡貉之地，唯君死生之！ 范雎曰： 汝罪有几？ 
现代文：我犯下了应该煮杀的大罪，把我抛到荒凉野蛮的胡貉地区我也心甘情愿，让我活让我死只听凭您的决定了！ 范雎说： 你的罪状有多少？ 
English: I have committed a great crime that deserves to be boiled and killed, and I am willing to throw me into the desolate and barbaric Hulun region, so let me live and let me die according to your decision! Fan Yu said: How many of your charges are there?

古文：曰： 擢贾之发以续贾之罪，尚未足。 
现代文：须贾连忙答道： 拔下我的头发来数我的罪过，也不够数。 
English: Su Jia quickly replied, "Pulling out my hair to count my sins is not enough.

古文：范雎曰： 汝罪有三耳。
现代文：范雎说： 你的罪状有三条。
English: Fan Ye said, "There are three charges against you.

古文：昔者楚昭王时而申包胥为楚卻吴军，楚王封之以荆五千户，包胥辞不受，为丘墓之寄於荆也。
现代文：从前楚昭王时申包胥为楚国谋划打退了吴国军队，楚王把楚地的五千户封给他作食邑，申包胥推辞不肯接受，因为他的祖坟安葬在楚国，打退吴军也可保住他的祖坟。
English: Once upon a time, during the reign of King Chu Zhao, Shen Baojun planned for the State of Chu to beat back the army of the State of Wu. The King of Chu granted him five thousand households in the State of Chu to make food villages. Shen Baojun refused to accept the offer, because his ancestral tomb was buried in the State of Chu. Beating back the army of the State of Wu could also preserve his ancestral tomb.

古文：今雎之先人丘墓亦在魏，公前以雎为有外心於齐而恶雎於魏齐，公之罪一也。
现代文：现在我的祖坟在魏国，可是你前时认为我对魏国有外心暗通齐国而在魏齐面前说我的坏话，这是你的第一条罪状。
English: Now my ancestral grave is in Wei, but you previously thought that I was secretly sympathetic to Wei and spoke ill of me in front of Wei. This is your first crime.

古文：当魏齐辱我於厕中，公不止，罪二也。
现代文：当魏齐把我扔到厕所里肆意侮辱我时，你不加制止，这是第二条罪状。
English: The second charge is that you did not stop Wei Qi from throwing me into the toilet and insulting me.

古文：更醉而溺我，公其何忍乎？
现代文：更有甚者你喝醉之后往我身上撒尿，你何等的忍心啊？
English: What's more, you pissed on me when you were drunk. How could you bear it?

古文：罪三矣。
现代文：这是第三条罪状。
English: This is my third count.

古文：然公之所以得无死者，以綈袍恋恋，有故人之意，故释公。 
现代文：但是你之所以能不被处死，是因为从今天你赠我一件粗丝袍看还有点老朋友的依恋之情，所以给你一条生路，放了你。 
English: But the reason why you can not be put to death is because from today you give me a thick silk robe to see if there is a little old friend's attachment, so I give you a way of life and let you go.

古文：乃谢罢。
现代文：于是辞开须贾，结束了会见。
English: So Suja resigned and the meeting ended.

古文：入言之昭王，罢归须贾。
现代文：随即范雎进宫把事情的原委报告了昭王，决定不接受魏国来使，责令须贾回国。
English: Immediately after that, Fan Xuan entered the palace and reported the original commission of the matter to King Zhao. He decided not to accept Wei's envoy and ordered Su Jia to return to China.

古文：须贾辞於范雎，范雎大供具，尽请诸侯使，与坐堂上，食饮甚设。
现代文：须贾去向范雎辞行，范雎便大摆宴席，把各诸侯国在秦国的使臣全都请来，与他同坐堂上，酒菜饭食摆设得很丰盛。
English: When Sujia went to resign to Fan Hui, Fan Hui made a grand banquet, invited all the envoys of the various states in Qin, and sat with him in the hall. The food and wine were richly decorated.

古文：而坐须贾於堂下，置豆其前，令两黥徒夹而马食之。
现代文：但是范雎让须贾坐在堂下，在他面前放了一槽草豆掺拌的饲料，又命令两个受过墨刑的犯人将他夹在中间，像喂马那样喂他吃饲料。
English: However, Fan Qi made Su Jia sit down in the hall, put a trough of feed mixed with soybeans in front of him, and ordered two prisoners who had been inked to sandwich him in the middle and feed him feed like a horse.

古文：数曰： 为我告魏王，急持魏齐头来！
现代文：范雎责令他道： 回去把我的话告诉魏王，赶紧把魏齐的脑袋献上来！
English: Fan Ye ordered him, "Go back and tell Wei Wang what I said. Quickly bring Wei Qi's head to me!"

古文：不然者，我且屠大梁。 
现代文：不然的话，我就要屠灭大梁。 
English: Otherwise, I will slaughter the girders.

古文：须贾归，以告魏齐。魏齐恐，亡走赵。匿平原君所。
现代文：须贾回到魏国，把情况告诉了魏齐，魏齐大为惊恐，便逃到了赵国，躲藏在平原君的家里。
English: Su Jia returned to Wei and told Wei Qi about the situation. Wei Qi was greatly alarmed and fled to Zhao, hiding in Pingyuan Jun's home.

古文：范雎既相，王稽谓范雎曰： 事有不可知者三，有不柰何者亦三。
现代文：范雎担任了秦相之后，王稽曾经对范雎说： 无法预料的事情有三件，毫无办法的也有三件。
English: After Fan Rong assumed the post of Qin Minister, Wang Qi once said to Fan Rong: There are three things that cannot be predicted, and there are also three things that cannot be done.

古文：宫车一日晏驾，是事之不可知者一也。
现代文：君王说不定哪一天死去，这是不可预知的第一件事情。
English: The king may die any day, and this is the first thing that cannot be predicted.

古文：君卒然捐馆舍，是事之不可知者二也。
现代文：您突然死去，这是不可预知的第二件事情。
English: You die suddenly, that's the second thing that's unpredictable.

古文：使臣卒然填沟壑，是事之不可知者三也。
现代文：假使我突然去，这是不可预知的第三件事情。
English: If I were to go suddenly, this would be the third unpredictable thing.

古文：宫车一日晏驾，君虽恨於臣，无可柰何。
现代文：如果君王有一天死去了，您即使因我没被君王重用而感到遗憾，那是毫无办法的。
English: If the king dies one day, even if you regret that I was not used by the king, there is nothing you can do about it.

古文：君卒然捐馆舍，君虽恨於臣，亦无可柰何。
现代文：如果您突然死去了，您即使为还未报答我而感到遗憾，也是毫无办法的。
English: If you die suddenly, there is nothing you can do, even if you regret that you have not repaid me.

古文：使臣卒然填沟壑，君虽恨於臣，亦无可柰何。 
现代文：假使我突然死去了，您即使因不曾及时推荐我而感到遗憾，也是毫无办法的。 
English: If I were to die suddenly, even if you regretted not recommending me in time, there would be nothing you could do.

古文：范雎不怿，乃入言於王曰： 非王稽之忠，莫能内臣於函谷关；非大王之贤圣，莫能贵臣。
现代文：范雎听了闷闷不乐，就入宫向秦王进言说： 没有王稽对您的忠诚，就不会有人把我带进函谷关；不是大王的贤能圣明，就不能使我如此显贵。
English: After listening to the gloomy and unhappy, Fan Ye went to the palace to speak to King Qin and said: Without Wang Qi's loyalty to you, no one would have brought me to Huan Guan; without the great king's wisdom and wisdom, I could not have been so prominent.

古文：今臣官至於相，爵在列侯，王稽之官尚止於谒者，非其内臣之意也。 
现代文：如今我的官位做到了相国，爵位已经封到列候，可是王稽还仅是个为大王传达命令的谒者，这不是他把我接到秦国来的本意。 
English: Now my official rank has made me a peer of the state, and my title of nobility has been sealed in the queue, but Wang Qi is still only a courier who conveys orders for the great king. This is not his original intention in bringing me to Qin.

古文：昭王召王稽，拜为河东守，三岁不上计。
现代文：秦昭王便召见了王稽，任命他做河东郡守，并且允许他三年之内可以不向朝廷汇报郡内的政治、经济情况。
English: King Qin Zhao then summoned Wang Qi, appointed him governor of Hedong County, and allowed him not to report the political and economic situation in the county to the imperial court for three years.

古文：又任郑安平，昭王以为将军。
现代文：范雎又向秦昭王举荐曾保护过他的郑安平，昭王便任命郑安平为将军。
English: Fan Qi also recommended Zheng Anping, who had protected him, to Qin Zhao Wang, who then appointed Zheng Anping as a general.

古文：范雎於是散家财物，尽以报所尝困戹者。
现代文：范雎于是散发家里的财物，用来报答所有那些曾经帮助过他而处境困苦的人。
English: Fan Qi then distributed the family's belongings to repay all those who had helped him and were in a difficult situation.

古文：一饭之德必偿，睚眦之怨必报。
现代文：凡是给过他一顿饭吃的小恩小惠他是必定报答的，而瞪过他一眼的小怨小仇他也是必定报复的。
English: He is sure to repay any small kindness or favor that has given him a meal, and he is also sure to take revenge on any small grudge or small enemy that has glared at him.

古文：范雎相秦二年，秦昭王之四十二年，东伐韩少曲、高平，拔之。
现代文：范雎任秦相的第二年，也就是秦昭王四十二年，秦国向东进攻韩国的少曲和高平，拿下了这两个城邑。
English: In the second year of Fan Yu's appointment as Qin emperor, that is, in the forty-second year of Qin Zhao's reign, Qin attacked the Korean provinces of Shaoqu and Gaoping in the east, capturing the two cities.

古文：秦昭王闻魏齐在平原君所，欲为范雎必报其仇，乃详为好书遗平原君曰； 寡人闻君之高义，原与君为布衣之友，君幸过寡人，寡人原与君为十日之饮。 
现代文：秦昭王听说魏齐藏在平原君的家里，就想着必须为范雎报仇，就假装交好写了一封信给平原君说： 我久闻您为人有高尚的道德情义，希望跟您交个像平民百姓一样无拘无束的知心朋友，您肯光临我这里小住几日的话，我愿同您开怀畅饮十天。 
English: When Qin Zhao Wang heard that Wei Qi was hiding in Pingyuan Jun's home, he thought that he had to avenge Fan Qi, so he wrote a letter to Pingyuan Jun, pretending to be a good friend, saying: I have long heard that you are a person of high morals, and I hope to make a close friend with you who is as unrestrained as the common people. If you are willing to stay here for a few days, I would like to drink with you for ten days.

古文：平原君畏秦，且以为然，而入秦见昭王。
现代文：平原君本就畏惧秦国，看了信又认为秦昭王真的有意交好，便到秦国见了秦昭王。
English: He was originally afraid of Qin. After reading the letter, he thought that Qin Zhaowang really wanted to make friends, so he went to Qin to meet Qin Zhaowang.

古文：昭王与平原君饮数日，昭王谓平原君曰： 昔周文王得吕尚以为太公，齐桓公得管夷吾以为仲父，今范君亦寡人之叔父也。
现代文：昭王陪着平原君宴饮了几天，便对平原君说： 从前周文王得到吕尚尊他为太公，齐桓公得到管夷吾尊他为仲父，如今范先生也可以说是我的叔父。
English: After several days of banqueting with Mr. Pingyuan, King Zhao said to Mr. Pingyuan, "Previously, King Zhouwen honored Lushang as his grand duke, King Qi Huan honored Guanyi as his father-in-law, and now Mr. Fan can also be said to be my uncle.

古文：范君之仇在君之家，原使人归取其头来；不然，吾不出君於关。 
现代文：范先生的仇人住在您家里，希望您派人把他的脑袋取来；不这样的话，我就不会让您离开函谷关。 
English: Mr. Fan's enemy lives in your house, and I hope you will send someone to get his head; otherwise, I will not let you leave Hakodate.

古文：平原君曰： 贵而为交者，为贱也；富而为交者，为贫也。
现代文：平原君说： 显贵了还要交低贱的朋友，是为了不忘低贱时的情谊；豪富了还要交贫困的朋友，是为了不忘贫困时的友情。
English: Mr. Plains said, "When you are distinguished, you still need to make low friends, so as not to forget the friendship when you are low; when you are rich, you still need to make poor friends, so as not to forget the friendship when you are poor.

古文：夫魏齐者，胜之友也，在，固不出也，今又不在臣所。 
现代文：魏齐，是我的朋友，就算他真的在我家，我也决不会把他交出来，何况现在他根本不在我家呢。 
English: Wei Qi is my friend. Even if he were really in my home, I would never hand him over. What's more, he is not in my home at all now.

古文：昭王乃遗赵王书曰： 王之弟在秦，范君之仇魏齐在平原君之家。
现代文：昭王又给赵国国君写了一封信说： 大王的弟弟在我秦国这里，而范先生的仇人魏齐就在平原君家里。
English: Zhao Wang also wrote a letter to Zhao Guo Guojun, saying, "The great king's younger brother is here in our Qin State, while Mr. Fan's enemy Wei Qi is at Pingyuan Jun's home.

古文：王使人疾持其头来；不然，吾举兵而伐赵，又不出王之弟於关。 
现代文：大王派人赶快拿他的脑袋来；不然的话，我要发动军队攻打赵国，而且不把大王的弟弟放出函谷关。 
English: Great King sent someone to get his head quickly; otherwise, I will launch an army to attack Zhao and not let Great King's younger brother out of Hantouguan.

古文：赵孝成王乃发卒围平原君家，急，魏齐夜亡出，见赵相虞卿。
现代文：赵孝成王看了信就派士兵包围了平原君的家宅，危急中，魏齐连夜逃出了平原君家，见到了赵国宰相虞卿。
English: When King Zhao Xiaocheng read the letter, he sent soldiers to surround Pingyuanjun's home. In a critical situation, Wei Qi escaped from Pingyuanjun's home overnight and met Zhao Guozhizhong Yuqing.

古文：虞卿度赵王终不可说，乃解其相印，与魏齐亡，间行，念诸侯莫可以急抵者，乃复走大梁，欲因信陵君以走楚。
现代文：虞卿估计赵王不可能说服，就解下自己的相印，跟魏齐一起逃出了赵国，两人抄小路奔逃，想来想去几个诸侯国都没有能急人之难而可以投靠的人，就又奔回大梁，打算通过信陵君投奔到楚国去。
English: Yuqing estimated that Zhao Wang could not be persuaded, so he unraveled his fingerprint and escaped from Zhao Province together with Wei Qi. The two of them took a side road and ran away. Thinking about it, there was no one in several provinces who could help him, so he ran back to Daliang, intending to run to Chu Province through Xinlingjun.

古文：信陵君闻之，畏秦，犹豫未肯见，曰： 虞卿何如人也？ 
现代文：信陵君听到这个消息，由于害怕秦国找上门来，一直犹豫，不肯接见他们，就问周围的人说： 虞卿这个人怎么样？ 
English: When Xinling heard this news, he was afraid that Qin would come looking for him, so he hesitated and refused to meet them. He asked the people around him, "What about this person Yuqing?

古文：时侯嬴在旁，曰： 人固未易知，知人亦未易也。
现代文：当时侯嬴也在旁边，就回答说： 人固然很难被别人了解，可了解别人也不是件容易的事。
English: Hou Yi, who was also present at the time, replied: Although it is difficult for people to be understood by others, it is not easy to understand others.

古文：夫虞卿蹑屩檐簦，一见赵王，赐白璧一双，黄金百镒；再见，拜为上卿；三见，卒受相印，封万户侯。
现代文：那个虞卿脚踏草鞋，肩搭雨伞，远行而到赵国，第一次见赵王，赵王赐给他白璧一对，黄金百两；第二次见赵王，赵王任命他为上卿；第三次见赵王，终于得到相印，被封为万户侯。
English: That prince of the state, with straw sandals on his feet and an umbrella on his shoulder, traveled far and wide to the state of Zhao. The first time he saw King Zhao, King Zhao gave him a pair of white shoes and a hundred taels of gold. The second time he saw King Zhao, King Zhao appointed him as the high lord. The third time he saw King Zhao, he finally got the seal and was named the prince of ten thousand households.

古文：当此之时，天下争知之。
现代文：当前，天下人都争着了解虞卿的为人。
English: At present, people all over the world are competing to understand the person of Yuqing.

古文：夫魏齐穷困过虞卿，虞卿不敢重爵禄之尊，解相印，捐万户侯而间行。
现代文：魏齐走投无路时投奔了虞卿，虞卿根本不把自己的高官厚禄看在眼里，解下相印，抛弃万户侯的爵位而与魏齐逃走。
English: When Wei Qi was cornered, he ran to Yu Jing. Yu Jing did not care about his high-ranking official's generous salary at all. He broke the seal, abandoned the title of Marquis of Wanyu and ran away with Wei Qi.

古文：急士之穷而归公子，公子曰 何如人 。
现代文：能把别人的困难当作自己的困难来投奔您，您还问 这个人怎么样 。
English: You ask how this person is, who is able to take on other people's problems as if they were your own.

古文：人固不易知，知人亦未易也！ 
现代文：人固然很难被别人了解，了解别人也实在不容易啊！ 
English: Of course, it is difficult for people to be understood by others, and it is really not easy to understand others!

古文：信陵君大惭，驾如野迎之。
现代文：信陵君听了这番话分明有讥讽自己的意味深感惭愧，赶快驱车到郊外去迎接他们。
English: After listening to these words, Mr. Shinryo, who clearly meant to ridicule himself, felt deeply ashamed, and quickly drove to the suburbs to meet them.

古文：魏齐闻信陵君之初难见之，怒而自刭。
现代文：可是魏齐听到的是信陵君当初不大肯接见他的消息，便一怒之下刎颈自杀了。
English: However, Wei Qi heard the news that Xinlingjun was initially reluctant to receive him, and he killed himself in a fit of rage.

古文：赵王闻之，卒取其头予秦。
现代文：赵王得知魏齐自杀身亡，终于取了他的脑袋送到秦国。
English: When Zhao Wang learned that Wei Qi had committed suicide, he finally took his head and sent it to Qin.

古文：秦昭王乃出平原君归赵。
现代文：秦昭王这才放平原君回赵。
English: It was only then that Qin Zhao Wang released Pingyuan back to Zhao.

古文：昭王四十三年，秦攻韩汾陉，拔之，因城河上广武。
现代文：昭王四十三年，秦国进攻韩国的汾陉，夺取了它，并在靠着黄河边上的广武山筑城。
English: In the forty-third year of the reign of King Zhao, the Qin State attacked the South Korean city of Ye, captured it, and built a city in Guangwu Mountain on the edge of the Yellow River.

古文：後五年，昭王用应侯谋，纵反间卖赵，赵以其故，令马服子代廉颇将。
现代文：五年之后，昭王采用范雎的谋略，施行反间计使赵国上当，赵国因为这个缘故，让马服君赵奢的儿子赵括代替廉颇统帅军队。
English: Five years later, King Zhao used Fan Xuan's strategy to implement a counter-measure to trick Zhao State. Because of this, Zhao State let Ma Fu Jun's son, Zhao Xiao, replace Liang Po as the commander of the army.

古文：秦大破赵於长平，遂围邯郸。
现代文：结果秦军在长平大败赵国军队，进而围攻邯郸。
English: As a result, the Qin army defeated the Zhao army in Changping and then besieged Yunnan.

古文：已而与武安君白起有隙，言而杀之。
现代文：此后不久范雎与武安君白起结下了怨仇，就向秦昭王进谗言而把白起杀了。
English: Soon after that, Fan Xuan and Wu'an Jun Baiqi forged a grudge, and he killed Baiqi for insulting Qin Zhaowang.

古文：任郑安平，使击赵。
现代文：于是秦昭王任用郑安平，派他领兵攻打赵国。
English: As a result, Qin Zhao Wang appointed Zheng Anping and sent him to lead the army to attack Zhao.

古文：郑安平为赵所围，急，以兵二万人降赵。
现代文：郑安平在战场上反被赵军团团围住，情况危急，他带领二万秦国士兵投降了赵国。
English: Zheng Anping was surrounded by Zhao's legions on the battlefield, and the situation was critical. He led twenty thousand Qin soldiers to surrender Zhao.

古文：应侯席请罪。
现代文：对此范雎自知罪责难逃，就跪在草垫上请求惩处治罪。
English: Knowing that he could not escape the blame, Fan Yu knelt down on a straw mat to plead for punishment.

古文：秦之法，任人而所任不善者，各以其罪罪之。
现代文：按照秦国法令，举荐了官员而被举荐的官员犯了罪，那么举荐人也同样按被举荐官员的罪名治罪。
English: According to the laws of Qin, if the official who recommended the official commits a crime, then the person who recommended the official will also be punished according to the crime committed by the recommended official.

古文：於是应侯罪当收三族。
现代文：这样范雎应判逮捕父、母、妻三族的罪刑。
English: In this way, Fan Qi should be sentenced to arrest his father, mother and wife.

古文：秦昭王恐伤应侯之意，乃下令国中： 有敢言郑安平事者，以其罪罪之。 
现代文：可是秦昭王担心伤害了范雎的感情，就下令国都内： 有敢于议论郑安平事的，一律按郑安平的罪名治罪。 
English: However, Qin Zhao Wang was worried about hurting Fan Yu's feelings, so he issued an order to the capital: Anyone who dared to discuss Zheng Anping's affairs would be punished according to Zheng Anping's crimes.

古文：而加赐相国应侯食物日益厚，以顺適其意。
现代文：同时加赏相国范雎更为丰厚的食物，来使范雎安心顺意。
English: At the same time, reward the rich food of the partner country, so as to make the partner feel at ease.

古文：後二岁，王稽为河东守，与诸侯通，坐法诛。
现代文：此后二年，王稽做河东郡守，曾与诸侯有勾结，因犯法而被诛杀。
English: In the following two years, Wang Qi, the governor of Hedong County, who had colluded with the princes, was beaten to death for breaking the law.

古文：而应侯日益以不怿。
现代文：为此，范雎因此一天比一天忧郁。
English: As a result, Fan Ye became more and more depressed day by day.

古文：昭王临朝叹息，应侯进曰： 臣闻 主忧臣辱，主辱臣死 。
现代文：后来，有一天秦昭王上朝时不断叹息，范雎走上前去说： 我听说 君主有了忧虑是臣下的耻辱，君主受到羞辱是臣下的死罪 。
English: Later, one day when King Qin Zhao ascended to the throne, he kept sighing. Fan Ye stepped forward and said, "I have heard that when a monarch is worried, it is a disgrace for his subjects, and when a monarch is humiliated, it is a capital offense for his subjects.

古文：今大王中朝而忧，臣敢请其罪。 
现代文：今天大王当朝处理政务而如此忧虑，我请求治我的罪。 
English: Today, the king is so worried about the government's handling of affairs, I ask to be punished for my sin.

古文：昭王曰： 吾闻楚之铁剑利而倡优拙。
现代文：昭王说： 我听说楚国的铁剑锋利而歌舞演技拙劣。
English: King Zhao said: I have heard that the iron swords of the State of Chu are sharp, but the singing and dancing performances are poor.

古文：夫铁剑利则士勇，倡优拙则思虑远。
现代文：这个国家的铁剑锋利那么士兵就勇敢，它的歌舞演技拙劣那么国君的谋计必定深远。
English: The iron sword of this country is sharp, so the soldiers are brave, its song and dance performance is clumsy, so the sovereign's strategy must be far-reaching.

古文：夫以远思虑而御勇士，吾恐楚之图秦也。
现代文：心怀深远的谋略而指挥勇敢的士兵，我担心楚国正在谋划如何攻打秦国。
English: Commanding brave soldiers with far-reaching plans, I am worried that Chu is plotting how to attack Qin.

古文：夫物不素具，不可以应卒，今武安君既死，而郑安平等畔，内无良将而外多敌国，吾是以忧。 
现代文：办事不早作准备，就不能够应付突然的变化。如今武安君已经死了，而郑安平等人叛变了，国内没有能征善战的大将而国外敌对国家很多，我因此忧虑。 
English: If you don't prepare in advance, you won't be able to cope with sudden changes. Now that Wu Anjun is dead, and Zheng Anping has defected, there is no general in the country who can fight well, and there are many hostile countries abroad, I am worried.

古文：欲以激励应侯。
现代文：秦昭王说这番话意思是激发鼓励范雎。
English: Qin Zhao Wang said that the words meant to inspire and encourage Fan Yu.

古文：应侯惧，不知所出。
现代文：而范雎听了却感到恐惧，也想不出什么办法来。
English: But when Fan Yu heard this, he felt afraid and couldn't think of any way to help.

古文：蔡泽闻之，往入秦也。
现代文：蔡泽得知这种情况，便从燕国来到秦国。
English: When Cai Ze learned of this situation, he came to Qin from Yan.

古文：蔡泽者，燕人也。
现代文：蔡泽，是燕国人。
English: Cai Ze is a native of Yan.

古文：游学干诸侯小大甚众，不遇。
现代文：曾周游列国从师学习并向许多大小诸侯谋求官职，但没有得到信用。
English: He had traveled around the countries to learn from his teachers and sought official positions from many princes and lords, but he did not get any credit.

古文：而从唐举相，曰： 吾闻先生相李兑，曰 百日之内持国秉 ，有之乎？ 
现代文：有一次他请唐举相面，说： 我听说先生给李兑相面，说 一百天内将掌握一国的大权 ，有这事吗？ 
English: On one occasion, he asked Tang to show his face, saying: I heard that you showed your face to Li Dui and said that you would have the power of a country within 100 days. Is this true?

古文：曰： 有之。 
现代文：唐举回答说： 有这事。 
English: Tang Jiu replied, "That's right.

古文：曰： 若臣者何如？ 
现代文：蔡泽说： 象我这样的人你看怎么样？ 
English: Cai Ze said: What do you think of people like me?

古文：唐举孰视而笑曰： 先生曷鼻，巨肩，魋颜，蹙齃，膝挛。
现代文：唐举仔细地看了一番便笑着说： 先生是朝天鼻，端肩膀，凸额头，塌鼻梁，罗圈腿。
English: Tang Zhu took a closer look and then said with a smile: The teacher has an upturned nose, pointy shoulders, a convex forehead, a flat bridge of the nose, and bowed legs.

古文：吾闻圣人不相，殆先生乎？ 
现代文：我听说圣人不在貌相，大概说的是先生吧？ 
English: I've heard that the saint is not in the picture, but presumably it's the gentleman?

古文：蔡泽知唐举戏之，乃曰： 富贵吾所自有，吾所不知者寿也，原闻之。 
现代文：蔡泽知道唐举是跟自己开玩笑，就说： 富贵那是我本来就有的，我所不知道的是寿命的长短，希望听听你的说法。 
English: Cai Ze knew that Tang Jiu was playing a joke on himself, so he said, "Richness is something I already have. What I don't know is the length of my life. I hope to hear what you have to say."

古文：唐举曰： 先生之寿，从今以往者四十三岁。 
现代文：唐举说： 先生的寿命，从今以后还有四十三岁。 
English: Tang Qiu said, "From now on, my life expectancy is still forty-three years old.

古文：蔡泽笑谢而去，谓其御者曰： 吾持粱刺齿肥，跃马疾驱，怀黄金之印，结紫绶於要，揖让人主之前，食肉富贵，四十三年足矣。 
现代文：蔡泽笑着表示感谢便走开了，随后对他的车夫说： 我端着米饭吃肥肉，赶着马车奔驰，手抱黄金大印，腰系紫色丝带，在人主面前备受尊重，享受荣华富贵，四十三年该满足了。 
English: Cai Ze smiled and thanked him and walked away, and then said to his coachman: I have carried rice to eat fat meat, driven a horse-drawn carriage, held a gold seal in my hand, and a purple ribbon around my waist. I have been highly respected in the eyes of my masters, and enjoyed glory and wealth. Forty-three years should be enough.

古文：去之赵，见逐。
现代文：便离开燕国到了赵国，但被赵国赶了出来。
English: He left Yan Province and went to Zhao Province, but was driven out by Zhao Province.

古文：之韩、魏，遇夺釜鬲於涂。
现代文：随即前去韩国、魏国，路上遇着强盗抢走了他的锅鼎之类的炊具。
English: He then went to Korea and Wei. On the way, he met a robber who took away his cooking utensils such as pots and pans.

古文：闻应侯任郑安平、王稽皆负重罪於秦，应侯内惭，蔡泽乃西入秦。
现代文：他听说范雎举荐的郑安平和王稽都在秦国犯下大罪，范雎内心惭愧抬不起头来，蔡泽向西来到秦国。
English: He heard that both Zheng Anping and Wang Qi, who were recommended by Fan Hui, had committed serious crimes in Qin. Fan Hui couldn't hold his head up in shame. Cai Ze went west to Qin.

古文：将见昭王，使人宣言以感怒应侯曰： 燕客蔡泽，天下雄俊弘辩智士也。
现代文：他准备去拜见秦昭王，先派人在范雎面前扬言一番来激怒范雎说： 燕国来的宾客蔡泽，那是个天下见识超群，极富辩才的智谋之士。
English: He was preparing to visit Qin Zhao Wang, and first sent someone to threaten him in front of Fan Hui to provoke Fan Hui, saying: "Cai Ze, the guest from Yan Guo, is a man of great insight and a very clever debater.

古文：彼一见秦王，秦王必困君而夺君之位。 
现代文：他只要一见秦王，秦王必定使您处于困境而剥夺您的权位。 
English: As long as he sees King Qin, King Qin will certainly put you in a difficult situation and deprive you of your power.

古文：应侯闻，曰： 五帝三代之事，百家之说，吾既知之，众口之辩，吾皆摧之，是恶能困我而夺我位乎？ 
现代文：范雎听这些话，说： 五帝三代的事理，诸子百家的学说，我是都通晓的，许多人的巧言雄辩，我都能折服他们，这个人怎么能使我难堪而夺取我的权位呢？ 
English: Hearing these words, Fan Ye said, "I am familiar with the five emperors and three generations, and the teachings of all the sons and daughters of a hundred families. I can subdue the eloquence of many people. How can this person embarrass me and seize my power?

古文：使人召蔡泽。
现代文：于是就派人去召蔡泽来。
English: So they sent someone to summon Cai Ze.

古文：蔡泽入，则揖应。
现代文：蔡泽进来了，只向范雎作了个揖。
English: When Cai Ze came in, he only made a pass at Fan Ye.

古文：应侯固不快，及见之，又倨，应侯因让之曰： 子尝宣言欲代我相秦，宁有之乎？ 
现代文：范雎本来就不痛快，等见了蔡泽，看他又如此傲慢，范雎就斥责他说： 你曾扬言要取代我做秦相，可曾有这种事吗？ 蔡泽回答说： 有的。 
English: Fan Xuan was not happy at all. When he saw Cai Ze and saw how arrogant he was, Fan Xuan scolded him and said, "You once threatened to replace me as the Qin Emperor. Has there ever been such a thing?" Cai Ze replied, "Yes."

古文：对曰： 然。 应侯曰： 请闻其说。 
现代文：范雎说： 让我听听你的说法。 蔡泽说： 呦！
English: Fan Ye said, "Let me hear what you have to say," and Cai Ze said, "Come on!

古文：蔡泽曰： 吁，君何见之晚也！夫四时之序，成功者去。
现代文：您认识问题怎么这么迟钝啊！一年之中春、夏、秋、冬四季更替，各自完成了它的使命就自动退去。
English: Why are you so slow to recognize the problem? The four seasons of spring, summer, autumn and winter change in the middle of the year, and when each has completed its mission, it automatically withdraws.

古文：夫人生百体坚彊，手足便利，耳目聪明而心圣智，岂非士之原与？ 
现代文：人的身体各个部分都很健壮，手脚灵活，耳朵听得清，眼睛看得明，心神聪慧，这难道不是士人的愿望吗？ 范雎说： 是的。 
English: All parts of the human body are robust, hands and feet are flexible, ears can hear clearly, eyes can see clearly, and the mind is intelligent. Isn't this the desire of a scholar? Fan Wei said: Yes.

古文：应侯曰： 然。 蔡泽曰： 质仁秉义，行道施德，得志於天下，天下怀乐敬爱而尊慕之，皆原以为君王，岂不辩智之期与？ 
现代文：蔡泽说： 以仁为本，主持正义，推行正道，广施恩德，愿在天下实现自己的志向，天下人拥护爱戴而尊敬仰慕他，都希望让他做君主，这难道不是善辩明智之士所期望的吗？ 范雎说： 是的。 
English: Cai Ze said: To be benevolent, to preside over justice, to promote the right path, to extend kindness, to be willing to realize one's own aspirations in the world, people around the world support, love, respect and admire him, and hope to make him a monarch. Isn't this what people who are good at arguing and wise expect? Fan Ye said: Yes.

古文：应侯曰： 然。 蔡泽复曰： 富贵显荣，成理万物，使各得其所；性命寿长，终其天年而不夭伤；天下继其统，守其业，传之无穷；名实纯粹，泽流千里，世世称之而无绝，与天地终始：岂道德之符而圣人所谓吉祥善事者与？ 
现代文：蔡泽又说： 位居富贵显赫荣耀，治理一切事物，使它们都能各得其所；性命活得长久，平安度过一生而不会夭折；天下都继承他的传统，固守他的事业，并永远流传下去；名声与实际相符完美无缺，恩泽远施千里之外，世世代代称赞他永不断绝，与天地一样长久：这难道不是推行正道广施恩德的效果而圣人所说的吉祥善事的吗？ 范雎说： 是的。 
English: Cai Ze also said: to be in a position of wealth and great glory, to govern all things, so that they can all find their place; to live a long life, to live a peaceful life without dying prematurely; the whole world has inherited his tradition, adhered to his cause, and will continue forever; reputation and reality are perfect, grace is thousands of miles away, generations have praised him forever and ever, and it is as long as heaven and earth: Isn't this the effect of promoting the right way of extensive charity and the auspicious good deeds said by the sage? Fan Yu said: Yes.

古文：应侯曰： 然。 蔡泽曰： 若夫秦之商君，楚之吴起，越之大夫种，其卒然亦可原与？ 
现代文：蔡泽说： 至于说到秦国的商鞅，楚国的吴起，越国的大夫文种，他们的悲惨结局也可羡慕吗？ 
English: Cai Ze said: As for the merchants of Qin, Wu Qi of Chu, and the doctors of Yue, can their tragic endings be envied?

古文：应侯知蔡泽之欲困己以说，复谬曰： 何为不可？
现代文：范雎知道蔡泽要用这些话来堵自己的嘴，从而说服自己，便故意狡辩说： 为什么不可以？
English: Fan Yu knew that Cai Ze wanted to use these words to gag himself, and thus convince himself, so he deliberately quibbled: Why not?

古文：夫公孙鞅之事孝公也，极身无贰虑，尽公而不顾私；设刀锯以禁奸邪，信赏罚以致治；披腹心，示情素，蒙怨咎，欺旧友，夺魏公子卬，安秦社稷，利百姓，卒为秦禽将破敌，攘地千里。
现代文：那个公孙鞅奉事秦孝公，终身没有二心，一心为公家而毫不顾念自身；设置刀锯酷刑来禁绝奸诈邪恶，切实论赏行罚以达到国家太平；剖露忠心，昭示真情，蒙受着怨恨指责，诱骗老朋友，捉住魏公子卬，使秦国的国家安定，百姓获利，终于为秦国擒敌将，破敌军，开拓了千里之遥的疆城。
English: That son-in-law served Qin Xiaogong wholeheartedly for life, with one heart and one mind for the public and no thought for himself; set up the sword and saw torture to prohibit treachery and evil, and earnestly reward and punish to achieve national peace; revealed loyalty, revealed true feelings, suffered resentment and criticism, deceived old friends, captured Wei Gongzihong, made the country of Qin stable and the people profitable, and finally defeated the enemy for Qin, defeated the enemy army, and opened up a thousand-mile-away frontier city.

古文：吴起之事悼王也，使私不得害公，谗不得蔽忠，言不取苟合，行不取苟容，不为危易行，行义不辟难，然为霸主强国，不辞祸凶。
现代文：吴起奉事楚悼王，使私人不能损害公家，奸佞谗言不能蔽塞忠臣，议论不随声附和，办事不苟且保身，不因危险而改变自己的行动，坚持大义不躲避灾难。就是这样为了使君主成就霸业，使国家强盛，决不躲避殃祸凶险。
English: Wu Qi served as the king's mourner, so that private people could not harm the public, treacherous words could not cover up loyal subjects, discussions did not go along with the voice, meticulousness and self-preservation, did not change their actions due to danger, adhered to the greater good and did not avoid disaster. In order to make the monarch achieve hegemony and make the country strong, he would never avoid disaster and danger.

古文：大夫种之事越王也，主虽困辱，悉忠而不解，主虽绝亡，尽能而弗离，成功而弗矜，贵富而不骄怠。
现代文：大夫文种奉事越王，君主即使遭困受辱，仍然竭尽忠心和毫不懈怠，君主即使面临断嗣亡国，也仍然竭尽全力挽救而不离开，越王复国大功告成而不骄傲自夸，自己富贵也不放纵轻慢。
English: Dr. Wenzhong served King Yue. Even when the monarch was besieged and humiliated, he remained loyal and did not slack off. Even when the monarch was faced with disinheritance and the fall of the country, he still did his best to save and did not leave. King Yue accomplished the great work of restoring the country without being proud and boastful, and he did not indulge in frivolity because he was rich.

古文：若此三子者，固义之至也，忠之节也。
现代文：像这三位先生，本来就是道德大义的标准，忠诚气节的榜样。
English: Like these three gentlemen, they were originally the standard of moral righteousness and the example of loyalty.

古文：是故君子以义死难，视死如归；生而辱不如死而荣。
现代文：因此君子为了大义遭难而死，视死如归；活着受辱不如死了光荣。
English: Therefore, it is better for a gentleman to die with honor than to live with dishonor.

古文：士固有杀身以成名，虽义之所在，虽死无所恨。
现代文：士人本就该具有牺牲性命来成就名声的志向，只要是为了大义的存在，即使死了也没有什么遗憾的。
English: A scholar should have the aspiration of sacrificing his life to achieve fame, as long as it is for the existence of justice, even if he dies, there is no regret.

古文：何为不可哉？ 
现代文：为什么不可以呢？ 
English: Why not?

古文：蔡泽曰： 主圣臣贤，天下之盛福也；君明臣直，国之福也；父慈子孝，夫信妻贞，家之福也。
现代文：蔡泽说： 君主圣明，臣子贤能，这是天下的大福；国君明智，臣子正直，这是一国的福气；父亲慈爱，儿子孝顺，丈夫诚实，妻子忠贞，这是一家的福分。
English: Cai Ze said: The sovereign is holy, the vassal is virtuous, which is a great blessing for the world; the sovereign is wise, the vassal is honest, which is a blessing for the country; the father is loving, the son is filial, the husband is honest, and the wife is loyal, which is a blessing for the family.

古文：故比干忠而不能存殷，子胥智而不能完吴，申生孝而晋国乱。
现代文：所以比干忠诚却不能保住殷朝，子胥多谋却不能保全吴国；申生孝顺可是晋国大乱。
English: Therefore, Bi Gan's loyalty could not save the Yin Dynasty, Zi Gan's resourcefulness could not save the State of Wu, and Shen Sheng's filial piety caused great turmoil in the State of Jin.

古文：是皆有忠臣孝子，而国家灭乱者，何也？
现代文：这些都是有忠诚的臣子、孝顺的儿子，反而国家灭亡、大乱的事例，这是为什么呢？
English: These are all examples of loyal subjects and dutiful sons, but on the other hand, the country is in ruin and chaos. Why is this?

古文：无明君贤父以听之，故天下以其君父为僇辱而怜其臣子。
现代文：是因为没有明智的国君贤能的父亲听取他们的声音，因此天下人都认为这样的国君和父亲是可耻的，而怜惜同情他们的臣子和儿子。
English: It is because there is no wise prince or able father to listen to their voices that the world thinks such princes and fathers shameful, and pities and sympathizes with their courtiers and sons.

古文：今商君、吴起、大夫种之为人臣，是也；其君，非也。
现代文：现在看来，商鞅、吴起、大夫文种作为臣子，他们是正确的；他们的国君，是错误的。
English: It now appears that Shang Pi, Wu Qi, and Dr. Wenzong, as courtiers, were right; their sovereigns were wrong.

古文：故世称三子致功而不见德，岂慕不遇世死乎？
现代文：所以世人称说这三位先生建立了功绩却不得好报，难道是羡慕他们不被国君体察而无辜死去吗？
English: So the world claims that these three gentlemen built a merit but did not get a good reward. Is it envy that they were not noticed by the sovereign and died innocently?

古文：夫待死而後可以立忠成名，是微子不足仁，孔子不足圣，管仲不足大也。
现代文：如果只有用死才可以树立忠诚的美名，那么微子就不能称为仁人，孔子不能称为圣人，管仲也不能称为伟大人物了。
English: If the only way to establish a reputation for loyalty is through death, then Micron cannot be called a benevolent person, Confucius cannot be called a saint, and Guanzhong cannot be called a great person.

古文：夫人之立功，岂不期於成全邪？
现代文：人们要建功立业，难道不期望功成人在吗？
English: People want to make achievements, don't they expect people to be successful?

古文：身与名俱全者，上也。
现代文：自身性命与功业名声都能保全的，这是上等。
English: To be able to save one's own life and one's professional reputation is the best.

古文：名可法而身死者，其次也。
现代文：功名可让后世效法而自身性命不能保全的，这是次等。
English: Those whose feats can be imitated by future generations, but whose lives cannot be saved, are inferior.

古文：名在僇辱而身全者，下也。 
现代文：名声被人诟辱而自身性命得以保全的，这是下等。 
English: If a man's reputation is sullied, but his life is spared, he is a scoundrel.

古文：於是应侯称善。
现代文：说到这里，范雎称赞讲得好。
English: When it comes to this, Fan Qi spoke well.

古文：蔡泽少得间，因曰： 夫商君、吴起、大夫种，其为人臣尽忠致功则可原矣，闳夭事文王，周公辅成王也，岂不亦忠圣乎？
现代文：蔡泽稍微捕捉到一些机会，趁机说： 商鞅、吴起、文种，这几个人作为别人的大臣，对君主竭尽忠诚，也创建了很大的功业，这是值得人们羡慕的，但闳夭当初侍奉周文王，周公旦辅佐周成王，他们难道不是竭尽了忠诚充满了智慧的吗？
English: Cai Ze slightly caught some opportunities and took advantage of the opportunity to say: Shang Xuan, Wu Qi, Wenzhong, these few people, as someone else's minister, have been loyal to the monarch and have also created great achievements, which is worthy of people's envy. However, at the beginning, Xingyao served King Zhou Wen and Zhou Gongdan assisted King Zhou Cheng. Didn't they be loyal and full of wisdom?

古文：以君臣论之，商君、吴起、大夫种其可原孰与闳夭、周公哉？ 
现代文：从君主和大臣的关系角度来讨论，商鞅、吴起、文种，跟闳夭、周公旦比起来，哪一种人更值得羡慕呢？ 范雎说道： 商鞅、吴起、文种不如闳夭、周公旦。 
English: From the perspective of the relationship between the monarch and the minister, what kind of people are more enviable than Shang Qi, Wu Qi, and Wen Zhuang, compared with Xing Yao and Zhou Gongdan? Fan Yu said: Shang Qi, Wu Qi, and Wen Zhuang are not as good as Xing Yao and Zhou Gongdan.

古文：应侯曰： 商君、吴起、大夫种弗若也。 蔡泽曰： 然则君之主慈仁任忠，惇厚旧故，其贤智与有道之士为胶漆，义不倍功臣，孰与秦孝公、楚悼王、越王乎？ 
现代文：蔡泽说： 既然这样，那么您所侍奉的君主慈爱仁德，任用忠臣，以厚道诚实的态度对待以前的朋友，他的贤能和智慧使他可以跟那些有才能的人像胶和漆那样亲密，他对人情义深厚，不会抛弃为他立了功的大臣，这位秦昭王与秦孝公、楚悼王、越王比起来，谁更好呢？ 
English: Cai Ze said: Since this is the case, then the monarch you serve is merciful and benevolent, appoints loyal retainers, treats former friends with a kind and honest attitude, his ability and wisdom enable him to be as close as glue and lacquer to those who have talent, he has a deep sense of humanity, and will not abandon the minister who has made a great contribution to him. Who is better than this Qin Zhao Wang and Qin Xiaogong, Chu Miao Wang, and Yue Wang?

古文：应侯曰： 未知何如也。 
现代文：范雎说： 没办法知道会是什么样。 
English: Fan Wei said: There is no way to know what it will be like.

古文：蔡泽曰： 今主亲忠臣，不过秦孝公、楚悼王、越王，君之设智，能为主安危修政，治乱彊兵，批患折难，广地殖穀，富国足家，彊主，尊社稷，显宗庙，天下莫敢欺犯其主，主之威盖震海内，功彰万里之外，声名光辉传於千世，君孰与商君、吴起、大夫种？ 应侯曰： 不若。 
现代文：蔡泽说： 现在您的君主亲近忠心的大臣，但也没有超过秦孝公、楚悼王、越王的程度，您施展自己的智慧，可以帮助君主解决危难，整治国家，平定叛乱，增强兵力，排除祸患，消除灾难，拓宽疆域，增种谷物，使国家富强，百姓富足，加强人主的权力，提高国家的地位，尊显王族高贵，天下诸侯没有敢于欺骗、侵犯您的君王，君主的威势可以震慑四海之内的任何诸侯，功业在万里之外的地方得到彰显，他的名声就像永远不灭的光辉一样流传到千秋万代以后，在这些方面您比起商鞅、吴起、大夫文种来怎么样？ 范雎说： 我比不上。 
English: Cai Ze said: Now your monarch is close to the loyal ministers, but it does not exceed the level of Qin Xiaogong, Chu Xi Wang, and Yue Wang. You can use your wisdom to help the monarch solve the crisis, rectify the country, quell the rebellion, strengthen the army, eliminate the scourge, eliminate the disaster, expand the territory, increase the cultivation of grain, make the country rich and strong, enrich the people, strengthen the power of the people, and improve the status of the country. Honor the nobility of the royal family. The princes of the world did not dare to deceive or violate your monarch. The power of the monarch can shock any prince in the four seas

古文：蔡泽曰： 今主之亲忠臣不忘旧故不若孝公、悼王、句践，而君之功绩爱信亲幸又不若商君、吴起、大夫种，然而君之禄位贵盛，私家之富过於三子，而身不退者，恐患之甚於三子，窃为君危之。
现代文：蔡泽说： 如今君王在亲近忠臣，没有忘记原来的朋友这一方面不如秦孝公、楚悼王、越王句践，而您所创建的功劳以及从君主那里得到的宠爱、信任、亲近又不如商鞅、吴起、文种那么多，可是您所得到的俸禄很多，所处的职位也非常高贵，你个人的财产超过了商鞅、吴起、文种三个人，假如自己不知道主动退位，恐怕以后所招致的祸患会比那三个人更加严重，我暗地里觉得您已经非常危险了。
English: Cai Ze said, "Nowadays, emperors are not as close to loyal subjects and have not forgotten their original friends as Qin Xiaogong, Chu Mui Wang, and Yue Wang Quan Chan, and the merit you have created and the favor, trust, and closeness you have received from the monarch are not as much as Shang Hui, Wuqi, and Wenchuan. However, you have received a lot of salary, and your position is also very noble. Your personal property exceeds that of Shang Hui, Wuqi, and Wenchuan. If you do not know about your active abdication, I am afraid that the disasters you will incur in the future will be more serious

古文：语曰 日中则移，月满则亏 。
现代文：俗话说 太阳到了正中的位置就会逐渐偏斜，月亮变得圆满以后就要开始亏缺 。
English: As the saying goes, when the sun reaches the middle position, it will gradually tilt, and when the moon becomes perfect, it will begin to be deficient.

古文：物盛则衰，天地之常数也。
现代文：凡事到达鼎盛的阶段以后就会开始走向衰落，这是存在于天地之间的一条普遍规律。
English: It is a universal law between heaven and earth that everything will begin to decline after reaching the peak stage.

古文：进退盈缩，与时变化，圣人之常道也。
现代文：进退伸缩，随着时势的变化而变化，这就是古代那些圣人所坚持的常理。
English: Advancing and retreating, expanding and contracting, changing with the changes of the times, this is the common sense upheld by those sages in ancient times.

古文：故 国有道则仕，国无道则隐 。
现代文：所以 当国家处于政治清明的时候就出来做官，当国家处于政治黑暗的时候就隐居起来 。
English: Therefore, when the country is in political clarity, they come out to work as officials, and when the country is in political darkness, they go into seclusion.

古文：圣人曰 飞龙在天，利见大人 。 不义而富且贵，於我如浮云 。
现代文：圣人说 像龙一样腾飞到天空，更有利于见到德行高尚的人 。 用不合乎道义的手段获得的财富和尊贵的地位，在我看来，就好像飘浮在天空中的云彩一样 。
English: The sages said, "It is better to soar into the sky like a dragon than to be seen by the virtuous." Wealth and position obtained through immoral means appear to me like clouds floating in the sky.

古文：今君之怨已雠而德已报，意欲至矣，而无变计，窃为君不取也。
现代文：如今您的仇已经报了，受的恩德也答谢完毕，心里所想的已经全都实现了，但是却没有应对变化的计策，我私下里觉得您很不明智。
English: Now your revenge has been paid, the favors you received have been repaid, and everything you had in mind has been realized, but there is no strategy to deal with the changes. I secretly think you are very unwise.

古文：且夫翠、鹄、犀、象，其处势非不远死也，而所以死者，惑於饵也。
现代文：况且像翡翠、鸿鹄、犀牛、大象那样的动物，它们所处的位置可以说与意外死亡离得很远，它们死亡的原因，是由于受到了诱饵的迷惑。
English: Moreover, animals such as jade, giant salamander, rhinoceros, and elephant are far away from accidental death, and the reason for their death is due to being confused by bait.

古文：苏秦、智伯之智，非不足以辟辱远死也，而所以死者，惑於贪利不止也。
现代文：以苏秦、智伯这些人的智慧，足够可以用来使他们避免遭受侮辱，远离死亡，但他们还是受到侮辱、死亡的原因，是由于他们受到了利益的诱惑。
English: The wisdom of Su Qin and Zhibo was enough for them to avoid humiliation and death, but they were still humiliated and died because they were tempted by profit.

古文：是以圣人制礼节欲，取於民有度，使之以时，用之有止，故志不溢，行不骄，常与道俱而不失，故天下承而不绝。
现代文：正是由于这一点，古代的圣人才创制了礼法，来控制自己的欲望，有限度地向老百姓索取，根据季节来让老百姓服役，征收财物要有一定的节制，因此才能使自己的意志不自满，行为不骄傲，始终符合道义而不会失去道义，所以天下能够代代相传不断绝。
English: It is precisely because of this that the ancient sages created the etiquette to control their desires, to request a limited amount from the common people, to let the common people serve according to the season, and to have a certain degree of restraint in the collection of wealth, so that their will is not complacent, their behavior is not proud, and they always conform to morality without losing morality, so the world can be passed down from generation to generation.

古文：昔者齐桓公九合诸侯，一匡天下，至於葵丘之会，有骄矜之志，畔者九国。
现代文：昔日齐桓公九次与诸侯会盟，一下子就使天下归于正统，但等到葵丘会盟时，由于他的心里有了一种骄傲自满的意思，反对他的诸侯有九个。
English: Once upon a time, when Prince Qi Kuan made nine alliances with the princes, he immediately made the world orthodox. However, when he made the alliance with Kwai Chuk, there were nine princes who opposed him because he had a sense of pride and complacency in his heart.

古文：吴王夫差兵无敌於天下，勇彊以轻诸侯，陵齐晋，故遂以杀身亡国。
现代文：吴王夫差手下的士兵在全天下的诸侯国中都找不到对手，他依仗着自身的勇敢和强大看不起诸侯，欺凌齐、晋两个国家，因此就以自己被杀、吴国灭亡做了最后的结局。
English: The soldiers under the command of Wu Wangfu could not find a rival in all the principalities in the world. Relying on his own bravery and strength, he looked down on the principalities and bullied the Qi and Jin states. As a result, he was killed and Wu was destroyed.

古文：夏育、太史噭叱呼骇三军，然而身死於庸夫。
现代文：夏育和太史噭都是怒吼一声就能让三军吃惊害怕的人，但是最后却都死在了普通人的手里。
English: Xia Yu and Taishuo are both people who can make the three armies surprised and scared with a roar, but in the end they both died at the hands of ordinary people.

古文：此皆乘至盛而不返道理，不居卑退处俭约之患也。
现代文：这都是因为他们处在极为强大的地位以后，就不再顾忌常规的道义和事理，不再保持谦虚谨慎的态度，不能节俭、约束自己所招惹来的祸患。
English: This is because after they are in an extremely powerful position, they no longer care about conventional morality and reason, no longer maintain a modest and prudent attitude, and cannot be frugal and restrain the evils they have caused.

古文：夫商君为秦孝公明法令，禁奸本，尊爵必赏，有罪必罚，平权衡，正度量，调轻重，决裂阡陌，以静生民之业而一其俗，劝民耕农利土，一室无二事，力田稸积，习战陈之事，是以兵动而地广，兵休而国富，故秦无敌於天下，立威诸侯，成秦国之业。
现代文：商鞅帮助秦孝公颁布了明确的法令，禁绝了产生奸邪的源头，尊荣的爵位必然是用来奖赏的，犯了罪的人也必然会受到惩罚，统一了重量、长度、容量的标准单位，调节了货物流通的轻重关系，铲平了田间纵横交错的田埂，使秦国百姓可以更加安定地从事生产，使老百姓的生活习俗也得到统一，鼓励老百姓积极从事农业生产，一个家庭如果有两个以上的成年男子就必须分居，人们努力地耕种田地，储存粮食，平时就操练军事战阵，因此军队出动就能扩张领土，军队休整就能使国家富足。所以秦国在天下诸侯中没有对手，在诸侯中树立了很高的威望，奠定了秦国伟大的功业。
English: Shangguan helped Qin Xiaogong to issue clear decrees, prohibit the source of treachery, honorable titles must be used to reward, and those who commit crimes must be punished, unified the standard units of weight, length, and capacity, adjusted the weight relationship of goods circulation, and leveled the fields of the fields, so that the people of Qin can more stably engage in production, so that the people's living customs are also unified, and encourage the people to actively engage in agricultural production. If there are more than two adult men in a family, they must live separately. People work hard to cultivate fields, store grain, and practice military battle lines in peacetime. Therefore, the

古文：功已成矣，而遂以车裂。
现代文：伟大的功业完成之后，商鞅最终却受到了车裂的刑罚。
English: After accomplishing great feats, Shangyu was finally punished with a broken car.

古文：楚地方数千里，持戟百万，白起率数万之师以与楚战，一战举鄢郢以烧夷陵，再战南并蜀汉。
现代文：楚国的土地方圆有几千里那么广大，手拿长戟的士兵有一百多万，但是白起带着几万人的秦军跟楚国交战，一战就占领了楚国的鄢、郢两地，烧毁了夷陵，再战就向南方吞并了蜀国、汉中两地。
English: The land area of the State of Chu is as wide as several thousand miles, and there are more than one million soldiers holding the Long March. However, the Qin Army, with tens of thousands of soldiers, fought against the State of Chu in vain. In the first battle, the Qin Army occupied the Shu and Shu regions of the State of Chu and burned the Yiling, and in the second battle, the Qin Army annexed the State of Shu and the Han Dynasty in the south.

古文：又越韩、魏而攻彊赵，北阬马服，诛屠四十馀万之众，尽之于长平之下，流血成川，沸声若雷，遂入围邯郸，使秦有帝业。
现代文：后来又越过韩、魏两国去攻打强大的赵国，在北方坑杀马服君的儿子，在长平屠杀了四十多万士兵，赵军的鲜血流成了河，血水流动的声音如同咆哮的雷声，于是进入赵国围攻邯郸，为秦国奠定成就帝业的基础。
English: Later, he crossed South Korea and Wei to attack the powerful state of Zhao. In the north, he killed the son of Ma Fuqun. In Changping, he slaughtered more than 400,000 soldiers. The blood of the Zhao army flowed into a river, and the sound of blood flowing was like roaring thunder. So he entered the siege of Zhao and laid the foundation for the empire of Qin.

古文：楚、赵天下之彊国而秦之仇敌也，自是之後，楚、赵皆慑伏不敢攻秦者，白起之势也。
现代文：楚、赵是天下诸侯中的两大强国，也是秦国的仇人，自从战争结束之后，楚国和赵国之所以畏惧屈服而不敢进攻秦国，都是因为白起的威势。
English: Chu and Zhao are the two great powers among the world's princes, and they are also the enemies of Qin. Since the end of the war, the reason why Chu and Zhao are afraid to attack Qin is because of their arrogance.

古文：身所服者七十馀城，功已成矣，而遂赐剑死於杜邮。
现代文：白起亲自率兵征服了七十多座城池，功业创建之后，最终却是被赐剑自杀，死在杜邮。
English: Baiqi personally led the troops to conquer more than seventy cities. After his achievements were created, he was eventually given a sword to commit suicide and died in Duyong.

古文：吴起为楚悼王立法，卑减大臣之威重，罢无能，废无用，损不急之官，塞私门之请，一楚国之俗，禁游客之民，精耕战之士，南收杨越，北并陈、蔡，破横散从，使驰说之士无所开其口，禁朋党以励百姓，定楚国之政，兵震天下，威服诸侯。
现代文：吴起帮助楚悼王确立了法令，削弱大臣手中的过大权力，降低大臣过于尊贵的地位，罢黜没有能力的官员，废去没有任何用处的官员，裁撤秘要的官员，杜绝私人的请求，统一楚国的生活习俗，禁止有人在楚国不从事生产而四处游荡，奖赏耕作努力、打仗勇敢的百姓和士兵，向南收服了杨越，向北吞并了陈、蔡两国，点破合纵、连横政策的无用之处，让那些游说楚国的人没有可以开口的机会，禁止大臣们结成朋党，鼓励百姓从事生产，使楚国的政治稳定，军事实力震慑天下，威势令各个诸侯国臣服。
English: Wu Qi helped Chu Mui Wang to establish decrees, weaken the excessive power in the hands of ministers, reduce the status of ministers who were too honorable, dismiss incompetent officials, abolish officials who were of no use, abolish secret officials, eliminate private requests, unify the living customs of Chu, prohibit people from wandering around without engaging in production in Chu, reward the people and soldiers who were brave in farming efforts and war, subdue Yang Yue to the south, and annex Chen and Cai to the north, break the uselessness of concurrent and consecutive policies, let those who lobbied Chu have no opportunity to speak, prohibit ministers from forming a party, encourage people to engage in production, and

古文：功已成矣，而卒枝解。
现代文：功业完成之后，吴起却被肢解而死。
English: After his work was completed, however, Wu Qi was dismembered and died.

古文：大夫种为越王深谋远计，免会稽之危，以亡为存，因辱为荣，垦草入邑，辟地殖穀，率四方之士，专上下之力，辅句践之贤，报夫差之雠，卒擒劲吴。令越成霸。
现代文：文种为越王谋划了深远的策略，避免了会稽被困亡国在即的危急，使危亡的形势变成了继续存在下去，借君臣受到的耻辱来谋求复仇的光荣，开垦长满野草的荒地，招纳百姓进入城邑，开辟农田来种植粮食，使四面八方的人都归在越王的统率之下，使从上到下的力量合在一处，辅佐句践这样贤能的君主，最终报了吴王夫差灭越的仇恨，终于消灭了强劲有力的吴国，让越国成为一代霸主。
English: Wenzong planned a far-reaching strategy for King Yue, avoided the imminent crisis of the trapped and defeated country, turned the crisis into a situation of continuing existence, borrowed the disgrace of the monarchs and ministers to seek the glory of revenge, reclaimed the wasteland full of wild grasses, recruited people into the cities, opened up farmland to grow food, so that people from all directions fell under the leadership of King Yue, so that the power from top to bottom was combined in one place. Such a wise monarch finally reported the hatred of King Wu sent to destroy Yue, finally eliminated the strong and powerful State of Wu, and let Yue become a generation of overlords.

古文：功已彰而信矣，句践终负而杀之。
现代文：文种的功劳已经如此彰显而确实了，可句践最终还是背弃道义杀害了他。
English: Wenxue's merits have been so prominent and certain, but eventually, Guzang betrayed morality and killed him.

古文：此四子者，功成不去，祸至於此。
现代文：我所说的这四位贤能的人，他们在功业创建以后没有离开，受到的灾祸就到了这种地步。
English: This is the extent of the calamity that has befallen the four able-bodied men I have mentioned, who have not left since the foundation of the work.

古文：此所谓信而不能诎，往而不能返者也。
现代文：这是所谓的能伸而不能屈、能进而不能退。
English: This is the so-called ability to extend and not bend, to advance and not retreat.

古文：范蠡知之，超然辟世，长为陶硃公。
现代文：范蠡懂得这个道理，于是超脱地躲避了世俗，长久地当着他的陶朱公。
English: Fan Ye understood this truth, so he detached himself from the world and stayed in front of his Tao Zhu Gong for a long time.

古文：君独不观夫博者乎？
现代文：您难道没看到过那些赌博的人吗？
English: Haven't you seen the people who gamble?

古文：或欲大投，或欲分功，此皆君之所明知也。
现代文：有时要一次下注来获利，有时要分成几次来下注获利，这些都是您很清楚地知道的。
English: You know very well that sometimes you have to win with a single bet and sometimes you have to win with several bets.

古文：今君相秦，计不下席，谋不出廊庙，坐制诸侯，利施三川，以实宜阳，决羊肠之险，塞太行之道，又斩范、中行之涂，六国不得合从，栈道千里，通於蜀汉，使天下皆畏秦，秦之欲得矣，君之功极矣，此亦秦之分功之时也。
现代文：如今您担任秦国的相国，拿出计谋用不着离开座位，制定策略用不着走出朝堂，坐在座位上就能够控制、指挥各个诸侯，利益施加在三川地区，借此来增加宜阳的实力，截断通往羊肠坂的险要道路，堵塞了通往太行山的交通要道，又斩断了范氏、中行氏这些韩国、魏国领土的信道，使那六个国家无法实行合纵的政策，修建的栈道有一千里，直接通往蜀国和汉中地区，令天下诸侯都从心里害怕秦国，秦国的欲望得到了满足，您创建的功劳也到达了极点，这也就到了秦国分次进行下注来获利的时候了。
English: Now that you are the consort of Qin, you don't need to leave your seat to come up with strategies, and you don't need to go out of the imperial hall to formulate strategies. You can control and command the various princes while sitting on your seat. You can exert interests in the Sanchuan region to increase the strength of Yiyang, cut off the dangerous road to Yangjiuzhan, blocked the important transportation route to Taihang Mountain, and cut off the channels of the South Korean and Wei territories such as the Fan and Zhongxing, so that the six countries can't implement the policy of convergence. There are a thousand miles of boardwalks built, directly leading to the Shu

古文：如是而不退，则商君、白公、吴起、大夫种是也。
现代文：假如您在这种情况下还不知道退隐，那您就会像商鞅、白起、文种那样了。
English: If you don't know how to retire in this situation, you will be like Shang Qi, Bai Qi, and Wen Xuan.

古文：吾闻之， 鉴於水者见面之容，鉴於人者知吉与凶 。
现代文：我听说过这样的话， 把水面当成镜子来照，可以看到自己的容颜，把别人当成镜子来照，能够知道自己的将来是吉还是凶 。
English: I have heard that if you look at the water surface as a mirror, you can see your own face, and if you look at others as a mirror, you can know whether your future will be good or bad.

古文：书曰 成功之下，不可久处 。
现代文：《书》中说 在功业已经完成的状态下，不可以长久地停留 。
English: It is said in the "Book" that one should not stay for a long time in a state where one's work has been completed.

古文：四子之祸，君何居焉？
现代文：前面所说的四个人的灾祸已经是一面很好的镜子了，您为什么要去承受呢？
English: The calamity of the four people mentioned above is already a good mirror, why should you bear it?

古文：君何不以此时归相印，让贤者而授之，退而岩居川观，必有伯夷之廉，长为应侯。世世称孤，而有许由、延陵季子之让，乔松之寿，孰与以祸终哉？
现代文：您为什么不趁着这个机会交出相印，让位给贤能的人来做秦国的相国，自己退隐之后，可以居住青山之上，悠然地欣赏流水，必然可以得到伯夷那样廉洁的美名，长久地当着自己的范雎，子孙世世代代都可以称侯，而且还能得到许由、延陵季子那样主动辞让高位的美名，像王乔、赤松子一样寿命长久，这么做比起终遭灾祸来怎么样？
English: Why don't you take advantage of this opportunity to hand over the seal of the emperors, and give way to the virtuous people to be the partner country of Qin. After you retire, you can live on the green mountains, leisurely enjoy the flowing water, and you will surely get a clean reputation like Bo Yi. You will be able to live in front of your fans for a long time, and your children and grandchildren will be able to praise you for generations to come. Moreover, you can get the reputation of actively resigning from high positions like Xu Yu and Yanling Qizi, and live a long life like Wang Qiao and Akamatsu Zi. How does this compare to the disaster?

古文：即君何居焉？
现代文：那么您觉得处于哪一种状况要好些呢？
English: So which situation do you think is better to be in?

古文：忍不能自离，疑不能自决，必有四子之祸矣。
现代文：假如不愿意自己主动离开，因为迟疑而无法自己做出决断，那么必然要招来前面所说四个人那样的灾祸。
English: If you are not willing to leave on your own initiative, and are unable to make your own decision because of hesitation, then you will inevitably incur the same disaster as the four people mentioned above.

古文：易曰 亢龙有悔 ，此言上而不能下，信而不能诎，往而不能自返者也。
现代文：《易》中说 龙飞到顶点要戒骄戒躁，否则会感到后悔 ，这说的是能上不能下，能伸不能屈，能进不能退的情况。
English: "Yi" said that if the dragon flies to the top, it should be cautious and cautious, otherwise it will feel regret, which means whether it can go up or down, whether it can stretch or bend, and whether it can enter or retreat.

古文：原君孰计之！ 
现代文：所以我希望您能够认真考虑这个问题！ 
English: So I hope you will seriously consider this issue!

古文：应侯曰： 善。
现代文：范雎说道： 说得好。
English: Fan Ye said: Well said.

古文：吾闻 欲而不知，失其所以欲；有而不知足，失其所以有 。
现代文：我听人说 一个人的欲望如果永远不感到满足，就会最终失去他想要达到的目的；一个人已经拥有很多但不知道停下来，就会失去他现在已经拥有的东西 。
English: I've heard it said that if a man's desires are never satisfied, he'll eventually lose what he's trying to achieve; if a man already has a lot but doesn't know when to stop, he'll lose what he already has.

古文：先生幸教，雎敬受命。 
现代文：有幸得到了先生的指教，我恭敬地接受您的意见。 
English: Having had the privilege of being mentored by him, I respectfully accept your opinion.

古文：於是乃延入坐，为上客。
现代文：于是请蔡泽坐在了席上，把他当成贵宾来招待。
English: So he invited Cai Ze to sit at the table and invited him as a distinguished guest.

古文：後数日，入朝，言於秦昭王曰： 客新有从山东来者曰蔡泽，其人辩士，明於三王之事，五伯之业，世俗之变，足以寄秦国之政。
现代文：几天之后，范雎上朝，对秦昭王进言说： 有位刚刚从崤山以东过来的客人叫蔡泽，此人是个很有口才的人，对三王的典事，五霸的业绩以及世俗的变迁都了如指掌，秦国的大政完全可以托付给他。
English: A few days later, Fan Ye said to Qin Zhaowang: There is a guest called Cai Ze who has just come from the east of Lushan. This person is a very eloquent person, who knows the ceremonies of the three kings, the performance of the five overlords and the secular changes. The great power of Qin can be completely entrusted to him.

古文：臣之见人甚众，莫及，臣不如也。
现代文：我见到的贤人很多，还没有谁赶得上他，我也不如。
English: I have seen a lot of sages, but no one has caught up with him, and I am no better.

古文：臣敢以闻。 
现代文：我冒昧地把这个情况报告给您。 
English: I take the liberty of reporting this to you.

古文：秦昭王召见，与语，大说之，拜为客卿。
现代文：秦昭王便召见了蔡泽，跟他谈话后，很喜欢他，授给他客卿职位。
English: Qin Zhao Wang then summoned Cai Ze. After talking with him, he liked him very much and gave him the position of guest minister.

古文：应侯因谢病请归相印。
现代文：范雎趁机推托有病请求送回相印。
English: Fan Wei took the opportunity to postpone the sick request to send back the photo print.

古文：昭王彊起应侯，应侯遂称病笃。
现代文：秦昭王还是竭力让他执事，范雎于是称说病重。
English: Qin Zhao Wang still tried his best to make him a deacon, so Fan Ye said that he was seriously ill.

古文：范雎免相，昭王新说蔡泽计画，遂拜为秦相，东收周室。
现代文：范雎被免掉了相国官职，昭王初次召见蔡泽就很赏识他的谋划，于是任命蔡泽担任秦国相国。向东灭掉了周朝。
English: Fan Xuan was removed from the post of the Minister of the State, and when King Zhao summoned Cai Ze for the first time, he was very appreciative of his plan, so he appointed Cai Ze as the Minister of the State of Qin. He eliminated the Zhou Dynasty to the east.

古文：蔡泽相秦数月，人或恶之，惧诛，乃谢病归相印，号为纲成君。
现代文：蔡泽在秦国做了几个月的相国，就有人恶语中伤，他害怕被杀，便推托有病送回了相印，他被赐给封号叫纲成君。
English: Cai Ze had been a consort of Qin for a few months, when he was slandered by someone. He was afraid of being killed, so he sent back the seal with the excuse that he was ill. He was given the seal name Gangchengjun.

古文：居秦十馀年，事昭王、孝文王、庄襄王。
现代文：蔡泽在秦国居住了十多年，曾奉事昭王、孝文王、庄襄王。
English: Cai Ze lived in Qin for more than ten years and served King Zhao, King Xiaowen and King Zhuangxiang.

古文：卒事始皇帝，为秦使於燕，三年而燕使太子丹入质於秦。
现代文：最后奉事秦始皇，曾为秦国出使燕国，三年后燕国太子丹到秦国作人质。
English: Finally, he served Qin Shi Huang, and was once sent to Yan for Qin. Three years later, Prince Dan of Yan went to Qin as a hostage.

古文：太史公曰：韩子称 长袖善舞，多钱善贾 ，信哉是言也！
现代文：太史公说：韩非子说 袖子长的人善于舞蹈，钱多的人善于做生意 。
English: Taishi said: Han Feizi said that people with long sleeves are good at dancing, and people with more money are good at doing business.

古文：范雎、蔡泽世所谓一切辩士，然游说诸侯至白首无所遇者，非计策之拙，所为说力少也。
现代文：这话说的很实在啊！范雎、蔡泽是人们所说的一代辩士，然而那些游说诸侯直至白发苍苍也没遇到知音的，并不是计策谋略拙劣，而是使游说获得功效的条件不够。
English: This is very true! Fan Qi and Cai Ze are what people call a generation of debaters. However, those who have lobbied the lords until they are white-haired and have not met a confidant are not poor strategists, but the conditions for lobbying to be effective are insufficient.

古文：及二人羁旅入秦，继踵取卿相，垂功於天下者，固彊弱之势异也。
现代文：到了他们二人寄居秦国，能够相继取得卿相地位，功名流传天下，其原因本是国家强弱的形势不同啊。
English: When the two of them came to live in Qin, they were able to successively obtain the status of chancellor, and their fame spread around the world. The reason for this is that the situation of the country's strength and weakness is different.

古文：然士亦有偶合，贤者多如此二子，不得尽意，岂可胜道哉！然二子不困戹，恶能激乎？
现代文：但是辩士也有偶然的机遇，许多象范雎、蔡泽一样贤能的人，由于没有机遇，不尽施展才能，这些人哪能说得尽呢！
English: But there are also occasional opportunities for debaters. Many talented people like Fan Jun and Cai Ze, because of lack of opportunities, do not fully display their talents. How can these people speak their hearts out?

古文：应侯始困，讬载而西，说行计立，贵平宠稽。
现代文：然而他们二人如果不遭到困厄境遇，又怎么能奋发有为呢？
English: But how could the two of them thrive if they didn't face adversity?

