古文：○仁宗一仁宗体天法道极功全德神文圣武睿哲明孝皇帝，讳祯，初名受益，真宗第六子，母李宸妃也。
现代文：仁宗体天法道极功全德神文圣武睿哲明孝皇帝，名祯，初名受益，真宗第六个儿子，母亲是李哀妃。
English: Emperor Zhenzong, the sixth son of Emperor Zhenzong and the sixth son of Emperor Zhenzong, the sixth son of Emperor Zhenzong and the sixth son of Emperor Zhenzong, the sixth son of Emperor Zhenzong and the sixth son of Emperor Zhenzong, the sixth son of Emperor Zhenzong and the sixth son of Emperor Zhenzong.

古文：大中祥符三年四月十四日生。
现代文：大中样符三年四月十四日出生。
English: He was born on April 14th, in his third year of junior high school.

古文：章献皇后无子，取为己子养之。
现代文：章献皇后没有儿子，取来养为自己的儿子。
English: The Empress Zhangxian had no son, so she raised him as her own.

古文：天性仁孝宽裕，喜愠不形于色。
现代文：仁宗天性仁孝，对人宽厚和善，喜怒不表现于外表。
English: Rinzong is kind and filial by nature. He is generous and kind to others, and his emotions do not show on the outside.

古文：七年，封庆国公。
现代文：大中样符七年封为庆国公。
English: The seven-year-old copy of the junior high school report card is the Qing Guo Gong.

古文：八年，封寿春郡王，讲学于资善堂。
现代文：大中样符八年封为寿春郡王，讲学于资善堂。
English: He was named King of Shuchun County in his eighth year of junior high school, and lectured at Shizen-do.

古文：天禧元年，兼中书令。
现代文：天禧元年兼中书令，次年进封瘴王。
English: In the first year of the Heian period, he was also appointed to the position of Chushiro, and the following year, he was appointed to the position of Shōnō.

古文：明年，进封升王。九月丁卯，册为皇太子，以参知政事李迪兼太子宾客。
现代文：九月初八，册封为皇太子，任参知政事李迪兼太子宾客。十四日，朝拜太庙。
English: On the 8th day of the 9th month of the year, he was enthroned as the crown prince, and served as a guest of the prince and the political advisor Li Di. On the 14th day, he paid homage to the Imperial Temple.

古文：癸酉，谒太庙。四年，诏五日一开资善堂，太子秉笏南乡立，听辅臣参决诸司事。
现代文：天禧四年，下诏五日一开资善堂，太子手握手板，南向站着，听辅臣参决各司事务。
English: In the fourth year of the reign of Emperor Tenmei, on the 5th day of the 5th day of the 5th day of the 5th day of the 5th day of the 5th day of the 5th day of the 5th day of the 5th day of the 5th day of the 5th day of the 5th day of the 5th day of the 5th day of the 5th day of the 5th day of the 5th day of the 5th day of the 5th day of the 5th day of the 5th day of the 5th day of the 5th day of the 5th day of the 5th day of the 5th day of the 5th day

古文：乾兴元年二月戊午，真宗崩，遗诏太子即皇帝位，尊皇后为皇太后，权处分军国事。
现代文：乾兴元年二月十九日，真宗逝世，遗诏太子即皇帝位，尊皇后为皇太后，代行处理军国事务。
English: On February 19th of the first year of the Qianxing Dynasty, Emperor Zhenzong passed away, leaving the imperial throne to the crown prince and the empress dowager to handle military affairs on his behalf.

古文：遣使告哀契丹。
现代文：派遣使臣向契丹发丧。
English: Sending envoys to mourn Khitan.

古文：己未，大赦，除常赦所不原者。
现代文：二十日，大赦，免除常赦得不到赦免的人。
English: On the 20th, there will be a general amnesty, exempting those who cannot be pardoned from the regular amnesty.

古文：百官进官一等，优赏诸军。
现代文：百官进升一等，优赏各军。
English: Hundreds of officials were promoted to the first grade, and each army was rewarded.

古文：山陵诸费，毋赋于民。
现代文：山陵开支，不要向百姓索取。
English: Do not ask for money from the people for the expenses of the mountain.

古文：庚申，命丁谓为山陵使。
现代文：二十一日，命令丁谓为山陵使。
English: On the 21st, Ding Zuo was ordered to be the envoy to the tomb.

古文：出遗留物赐近臣、宗室、主兵官。
现代文：拿出遗留物赐给近臣、宗室、带领军队的官员。
English: He took out the leftovers and gave them to his close vassals, family members, and officials who led the army.

古文：甲子，听政于崇政殿西庑。
现代文：二十五日，在崇政殿西厅治理国事。
English: On the 25th, he presided over state affairs in the West Hall of the Palace of Supreme State Power.

古文：乙丑，以生日为乾元节。
现代文：二十六日，以生日为乾元节。
English: On the 26th, the birthday is celebrated as the Lantern Festival.

古文：丙寅，遣使以先帝遗留物遗契丹。
现代文：二十七日，派遣使臣赠给契丹真宗皇帝的遗留物。
English: On the 27th, envoys were sent to present the relics to Emperor Qidan Zhenzong.

古文：进封泾王元俨为定王，赐赞拜不名。
现代文：进封径王赵元俨为定王，赐赞拜时不称呼姓名。
English: Zhao Yuanzhang, the king of Jinhui, is the king of Ding, and he does not use his name when giving praise.

古文：以丁谓为司徒兼侍中、尚书左仆射，冯拯为司空兼侍中、枢密使、尚书右仆射，曹利用为尚书左仆射兼侍中。
现代文：任命丁谓为司徒兼侍中和尚书左仆射，冯拯为司空兼侍中和枢密使、尚书右仆射，曹利用为尚书左仆射兼侍中。
English: Ding Zuo was appointed as the steward and attendant and the monk as the left attendant and attendant, Feng Zheng as the steward and attendant and confidential envoy, Shang Shu as the right attendant and attendant, Cao Lian as the left attendant and attendant and attendant.

古文：戊辰，贬道州司马寇准为雷州司户参军，尚书户部侍郎李迪为衡州团练副使，宣徽南院使曹玮为左卫大将军。
现代文：二十九日，贬道州司马寇准为雷州司户参军，尚书户部侍郎李迪为衡州团练副使，宣徽南院使曹玮为左卫大将军。
English: On the 29th, Daozhou Sima Ke was approved to join the army as Leizhou Sifu, Shangshu Sifu's attendant Li Di was the deputy envoy of Hengzhou Reunification, and the envoy of the Southern Yuan of Xuanhui Province Cao Wei was the General of the Left Division.

古文：三月乙酉，作受命宝。
现代文：三月十六日，制作受命宝。
English: On the 16th of March, they made the ordered treasure.

古文：庚寅，初御崇德殿，太后设幄次于承明殿，垂帘以见辅臣。
现代文：二十一日，初次到崇政殿，太后在承明殿设置帷幕，垂帘会见辅臣。
English: On the twenty-first day, for the first time, the empress dowager went to the Su Zheng Palace, set up a curtain in the Chengming Palace, and met with the aides.

古文：夏四月壬子，遣使以即位告契丹。
现代文：夏四月十三日，派遣使臣向契丹报告仁宗即位。
English: On the 13th day of the 4th month of the summer, envoys were dispatched to the Khitan Empire to report the enthronement of Emperor Nizong.

古文：丙寅，交州来贡。
现代文：二十七日，交州来进贡。
English: On the 27th, Jiaozhou came to pay tribute.

古文：五月乙亥，录系囚，杂犯死罪递降一等，杖以下释之。
现代文：五月初七，讯问记录囚犯罪状，杂犯死罪递降一等，杖刑以下释放。
English: On the seventh day of the fifth month, the interrogation recorded the criminal status of the prisoner, and the death penalty of the minor offender was downgraded to the first class, and he was released under the cane punishment.

古文：六月己酉，命参知政事王曾按视山陵皇堂。
现代文：六月十一日，命令参知政事王曾视察山陵皇堂。
English: On June 11th, he ordered the Vice-premier Wang Zhaozong to inspect the mountain imperial palace.

古文：丁巳，契丹使来祭奠吊慰。
现代文：十九日，契丹使臣来祭奠吊慰。
English: On the 19th, Khitan envoys came to pay tribute and offer condolences.

古文：庚申，入内内侍省押班雷允恭坐擅移皇堂伏诛。
现代文：二十二日，人内内侍省押班雷允恭因擅自迁移皇堂被处死。
English: On the 22nd, the person in charge of the Imperial Household Ministry, Abban Lei Yunqong, was executed for moving the Imperial Palace without permission.

古文：丁谓罢为太子少保、分司西京。
现代文：丁谓罢为太子少保，被安置到南京。
English: Ding was promoted to princeling and was sent to Nanjing.

古文：甲子，改命冯拯为山陵使。
现代文：二十六日，改命冯拯为山陵使。
English: On the 26th, Feng Zheng's name was changed to Mountain Relic Envoy.

古文：丙寅，降参知政事任中正为太子宾客。
现代文：二十八日，降参知政事任中正为太子宾客。
English: On the 28th, he was a guest of the crown prince while he was in the position of deputy governor.

古文：秋七月辛未，冯拯加昭文馆大学士，王曾为中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事、集贤殿大学士，吕夷简、鲁宗道参知政事。
现代文：秋七月初三，冯拯加为昭文馆大学士，王曾为中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事、集贤殿大学士；吕夷简、鲁宗道参知政事。
English: On the 3rd day of the 7th month of autumn, Feng Zengjia became a scholar of the Shouwen Library, Wang Zengjia became a scholar of the Shouwen Library, Wang Zengjia became a scholar of the Shouwen Library, Wang Zengjia became a scholar of the Shouwen Library, Wang Zengjia became a scholar of the Shouwen Library, Wang Zengjia became a scholar of the Shouwen Library, Wang Zengjia became a scholar of the Shouwen Library, Lu Yijian became a scholar of the Shouwen Library, and Lu Zongdao became a scholar of the Shouwen Library.

古文：乙亥，遣使报谢契丹。
现代文：初七，派遣使臣回访契丹。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, the envoys were sent to pay a return visit to Khitan.

古文：丙子，枢密副使钱惟演为枢密使。
现代文：初八，枢密副使钱惟演为枢密使。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, the deputy privy councillor Qian Zeng acted as the privy councillor.

古文：戊寅，改翼祖定陵为靖陵。
现代文：初十，改翼祖定陵为靖陵。
English: In the early 10th century, the Wing Ancestor Ding Mausoleum was changed to the Jing Mausoleum.

古文：辛卯，贬丁谓为崖州司户参军。
现代文：二十三日，贬丁谓为崖州司户参军。
English: On the 23rd, Gu Ding was called up to join the army as a member of the Yanshou family.

古文：八月壬寅，遣使贺契丹主及其妻生日、正旦。
现代文：八月初五，派遣使臣祝贺契丹主及其妻生日和新春。
English: On the fifth day of the eighth month, envoys were sent to congratulate the Khitan lord and his wife on their birthday and the new year.

古文：乙巳，皇太后同御承明殿垂帘决事。
现代文：初八，皇太后同御承明殿垂帘听政。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, the empress dowager, together with Emperor Gojomei, went to the palace to listen to the government.

古文：九月壬申，告大行皇帝谥于天地、宗庙、社稷。癸酉，上谥册于延庆殿。
现代文：九月初五，向天地、宗庙、社翟报告真宗皇帝溢号。初六，在延庆殿奉上溢册。
English: On the 5th day of the 9th month, the emperor's posthumous name was reported to heaven and earth, the ancestral temple and the community. On the 6th day of the 9th month, the posthumous record was presented to Yanqing Hall.

古文：己卯，命以天书从葬。
现代文：十二日，命令用天书从葬真宗。
English: On the 12th, the order was given to use the heavenly book to bury Zhenzong.

古文：冬十月壬寅，契丹使来贺即位。
现代文：冬十月初六，契丹使臣来祝贺即位。
English: On the 6th day of the 10th month of winter, Khitan envoys came to congratulate him on his accession to the throne.

古文：己酉，葬真宗皇帝于永定陵。
现代文：十三日，葬真宗皇帝于永定陵。
English: On the 13th, Emperor Jinsong was buried in Yongding Mausoleum.

古文：诏中外避皇太后父讳。
现代文：诏令中外避皇太后父亲讳。
English: The Empress Dowager's father is no longer to be seen in public.

古文：己未，祔真宗神主于太庙，庙乐曰《大明之舞》，以庄穆皇后配。
现代文：二十三日，在太庙附祭真宗神主，庙乐为大明之舞，以庄穆皇后配享。
English: On the 23rd, there was a memorial service for the Shinto deity of the True Sect at the Imperial Temple. The temple music was the Daming Dance, which was performed by Empress Shomu.

古文：辛酉，降东、西京囚罪一等，杖以下释之。
现代文：二十五日，降东、西京囚犯罪刑一等，杖刑以下释放。
English: On the 25th, the East and West Beijing prisoners were sentenced to first-class criminal punishment, and were released under the cane punishment.

古文：蠲山陵役户及灵驾所过民田租。
现代文：免除山陵役户和灵驾所过地区百姓田租。
English: Exemption from land rent for officials in charge of mountains and tombs and common people in the areas visited by the ghost train.

古文：十一月丁卯朔，钱惟演罢。
现代文：十一月初一，钱惟演被罢免。
English: On the first day of November, Qian was removed from his post.

古文：甲戌，唃厮啰、立遵求内附。
现代文：初八，角厮缪、李立遵请求内附。
English: Hatsuhachi, Kakuno Seimei, and Li Lizun's requests are enclosed.

古文：乙亥，以皇太后生日为长宁节。
现代文：初九，以皇太后生日为长宁节。
English: On the 9th day of the 9th month of the lunar calendar, the birthday of the Empress Dowager is celebrated as Changning Festival.

古文：辛巳，初御崇政殿西阁讲筵，命侍讲孙奭、冯元讲《论语》。
现代文：十五日，初次到崇政殿西阎讲筵，命令侍讲孙、冯元讲解论语。
English: On the fifteenth day, he went to the West Hall of the Great Hall of the People for the first time to give a sermon, and ordered the assistant preachers Sun and Feng Yuan to explain the sermon.

古文：壬午，以张知白为枢密副使。
现代文：十六日，任命张知白为枢密副使。
English: On the 16th, Zhang Zhibai was appointed as the Deputy Minister of the Privy Council.

古文：十二月壬戌，契丹使来贺明年正旦。
现代文：十二月二十七日，契丹使臣来祝贺明年新春。
English: On December 27th, Khitan envoys came to congratulate the next year's Spring Festival.

古文：是岁，苏州水，沧州海潮溢，诏振恤被水及溺死之家。
现代文：这一年，苏州水灾，沧州海潮溢出，下诏贩恤遭受水灾和淹死家庭。
English: This year, the Suzhou flood, the Cangzhou tidal overflow, and the Lower Yangtze River have all suffered floods and drowned families.

古文：南平王李公蕴遣使进贡。
现代文：南平王李公蕴派遣使臣进贡。
English: The king of Nanping, Li Gongyun, sent envoys to collect tribute.

古文：天圣元年春正月丙寅朔，改元。
现代文：天圣元年春正月初一，改元。
English: On the first day of the first month of the spring of the first year of the first century, the yuan was changed.

古文：庚午，契丹使初来贺长宁节。
现代文：初五，契丹使臣首次来祝贺长宁节。
English: On the fifth day of the first lunar month, the Qidan envoys came to congratulate the Changning Festival for the first time.

古文：癸未，命三司节浮费，遂立计置司。
现代文：十八日，命令三司节约浮费开支，于是设立计置司。
English: On the 18th, he ordered the three departments to economize on floating expenses, and then set up the accounting department.

古文：戊子，以京东、淮南水灾，遣使安抚。
现代文：二十三日，因京东、淮南水灾，派遣使臣安抚。
English: On the 23rd, due to floods in Jingdong and Huainan, envoys were dispatched to pacify.

古文：辛卯，发卒增筑京城。
现代文：二十六日，发动士兵增筑京城。
English: On the 26th, soldiers were dispatched to reinforce the capital.

古文：二月戊戌，许唃厮啰岁一入贡。
现代文：二月初四，允许角厮锣一人进贡。
English: On the 4th day of the 2nd month, one person from Kakunodate was allowed to pay tribute.

古文：丁巳，奉安太祖、太宗御容于南京鸿庆宫。壬戌，减诸节斋醮道场。
现代文：二十三日，在南京鸿庆宫恭敬安置太祖、太宗遗像。二十八日，减少节斋酷道场。
English: On the 23rd, the remains of Taizu and Taizong were respectfully placed in the Hongqing Palace in Nanjing. On the 28th, the number of festivals and festivals was reduced.

古文：三月甲戌，奉安真宗御容于西京应天院。丙子，诏减西京囚罪一等，徒以下释之。
现代文：三月十一日，在西京应天院恭敬安置真宗遗像。十三日，下诏减西京囚犯罪刑一等，徒刑以下释放。
English: On March 11th, a statue of Jinsong was respectfully placed in Xijing Yingtian Courtyard. On the 13th, the following edict reduced the criminal punishment of Xijing prisoners to the first class and released them from prison.

古文：赐城中民八十以上者茶帛，仍复其家。
现代文：赐城中百姓八十岁以上者茶帛，并免除其家赋役。
English: The people over the age of eighty in the city will be given tea bags, and their families will be exempted from labor service.

古文：甲申，诏自今营造，三司度实给用。
现代文：二十一日，下诏从今以后营造工程，三司审实供给开支费用。
English: On the 21st, it was announced that from now on, the construction project, the three departments will review the actual supply and expenditure costs.

古文：辛卯，司天监上《崇天历》。
现代文：二十八日，司天监呈上偿天历。
English: On the 28th, the chief overseer of heaven presented the heavenly calendar.

古文：行淮南十三山场贴射茶法。
现代文：实行淮南十三山场贴射茶法。
English: Implemented the Huainan thirteen mountain tea method.

古文：夏四月辛丑，罢礼仪院。
现代文：夏四月初八，废罢礼仪院。
English: On the eighth day of the fourth month of the summer, the Bailiwick was abolished.

古文：丁未，乾元节，百官及契丹使初上寿于崇德殿。
现代文：十四日，乾元节，百官和契丹使臣首次到崇德殿祝寿。
English: On the 14th day of the Lunar New Year, hundreds of officials and Khitan envoys came to Chongde Hall for the first time to celebrate his birthday.

古文：癸丑，诏文武官奏荫亲属从本资。
现代文：二十日，诏令文武官员奏荫补亲属一律按本资实行。
English: On the 20th, it was decreed that all civil and military officials and their relatives would be paid according to their capital.

古文：丁巳，诏近臣举谏官、御史各一人。
现代文：二十四日，下诏近臣推举谏官、御史各一人。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, one eunuch and one historian were selected from the closest vassals.

古文：五月甲子，行陕西、河北入中刍粮见钱法。
现代文：五月初二，实行陕西、河北人中粮草现钱法。
English: On the second day of the fifth month, Shaanxi and Hebei people's grain and grass present money method was implemented.

古文：庚午，诏礼部贡举。
现代文：初八，下诏礼部贡举。
English: On the 8th day of the 1st month, the tribute of the Imperial Rescript Department is over.

古文：辛未，录系囚。
现代文：初九，讯问记录囚犯罪状。
English: On the ninth day of the first month, the interrogation recorded the criminal status of the prisoner.

古文：甲戌，命鲁宗道按视滑州决河。
现代文：十二日，命令鲁宗道视察滑州黄河决口。
English: On the 12th, he ordered Lu Zongdao to inspect the mouth of the Yellow River in Leshou.

古文：庚寅，议皇太后仪卫制同乘舆。
现代文：二十八日，商议皇太后仪卫制度如同皇上。
English: On the 28th, the empress dowager's ceremonial guard system was discussed in the same way as the emperor's.

古文：六月甲辰，罢江宁府溧水县采丹砂。
现代文：六月十二日，废罢江宁府漂水县采丹砂。
English: On June 12th, the ban on sand dredging in Fengshui County, Jiangning Province, was lifted.

古文：乙卯，禁毁钱铸钟。
现代文：二十三日，禁止毁钱铸钟。
English: On the 23rd, it was forbidden to destroy money to make bells.

古文：秋七月壬申，除戎、泸州虚估税钱。
现代文：秋七月初十，废除戎州、沪州虚估税钱。
English: On the 10th day of the 7th month of the autumn, the miscalculation tax of Eonshu and Huzhou was abolished.

古文：诏职田遇水旱蠲租如例。
现代文：下诏：职田遇水早灾害按照规定免除租税。
English: The following edict: In the event of an early flood disaster, the occupational field is exempt from tax in accordance with the regulations.

古文：辛巳，蠲天下逋负。
现代文：十九日，免除全国拖欠的钱物。
English: On the 19th, the national arrears of money and goods were exempted.

古文：八月乙未，募民输芟塞滑州决河。
现代文：八月初四，招募百姓输草堵塞滑州黄河决口。
English: On the 4th of August, villagers were recruited to block the mouth of the Yellow River in Lishu with weeds.

古文：丙申，下德音，减天下囚罪一等，杖以下释之。
现代文：初五，颁降德音，减天下囚犯罪刑一等，杖刑以下释放。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the new year, he was awarded the first-class demotion, the first-class reduction of the criminal punishment of the world prisoner, and the release of the cane punishment.

古文：废郓州东平马监，以牧地赋民。
现代文：废除邪州东平马监，把牧地还给百姓。
English: Abolish the Yanzhou Dongping Horse Inspector and return the pastureland to the people.

古文：甲寅，芝生天安殿柱。
现代文：二十三日，天安殿柱生出芝草。
English: On the 23rd, grass sprouted from the pillar of Tian'anmen.

古文：九月丙寅，冯拯罢，以王钦若为门下侍郎、同中书门下平章事、昭文馆大学士。
现代文：九月初五，冯拯被罢免，任命王钦若为门下侍郎、同中书门下平章事、昭文馆大学士。
English: On the 5th day of the 9th month, Feng Zheng was removed from his post and Wang Qinruo was appointed as the under secretary, the under secretary of the same school, and the scholar of the Shouwen Library.

古文：辛巳，诏凡举官未改转而坐赃者，举主免劾。
现代文：二十日，下诏所举官员没有改转而因贪赃获罪，免除对推举人的弹勃。
English: On the 20th, the officials listed in the next edict did not change and were convicted of corruption, exempting the electors from impeachment.

古文：庚寅，宴崇德殿。
现代文：二十九日，宴饮崇德殿。
English: On the 29th, the banquet at the Chongde Hall began.

古文：闰月甲午，诏裁造院女工及营妇配南北作坊者，并释之。
现代文：闰九月初三，诏令裁造院女工和营妇配南北作坊者，一律释放。
English: On the 3rd day of the 9th month of the leap year, the Emperor issued an edict to dismiss the female workers of the construction institute and the female attendants of the north and south workshops, and all of them were released.

古文：戊戌，寇准卒于雷州。
现代文：初七，寇准在雷州逝世。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, Kou Jun died in Leizhou.

古文：己亥，冯拯卒。
现代文：初八，冯拯去世。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, Feng Zheng passed away.

古文：丁未，禁彭州九陇县采金。
现代文：十六日，禁止彭州九陇县采金。
English: On the 16th, gold mining in Jiuye County, Pengzhou was banned.

古文：丁巳，禁伎术官求辅臣、宗室荐举。
现代文：二十六日，禁止伎术官请求辅臣、宗室荐举。
English: On the 26th, it was forbidden for a conjurer to ask a vassal or a family member to recommend him.

古文：冬十月辛酉朔，徙陕西缘边军马屯内地。
现代文：冬十月初一，迁徙陕西沿边军马屯驻内地。
English: On the first day of October in winter, the border troops from Shaanxi were relocated to the inland.

古文：十一月丁酉，诏诸州配囚，录具狱与地里，上尚书刑部详覆。
现代文：十一月初七，下诏各州流配囚犯，详细记录案件情况和地里远近，呈上尚书刑部复核。
English: On the 7th day of the 11th month of the first month of the year, it was decided to allocate prisoners to each state, record the details of the case and the distance from the prison to the prison, and submit it to the Criminal Investigation Department for review.

古文：禁两浙、江南、荆湖、福建、广南路巫觋挟邪术害人者。
现代文：禁止两浙、江南、荆湖、福建、广南路巫女现男用邪术害人。
English: It is forbidden for witches in Zhejiang, Jiangnan, Jinghu, Fujian and Guangnan provinces to use magic to harm people.

古文：戊午，置益州交子务。
现代文：二十八日，设置益州交子务。
English: On the 28th, the Yizhou Stock Exchange was established.

古文：是岁，甘、沙州来贡，泾原咩迷卞杏家族纳质内附。
现代文：这一年，甘州、沙州来进贡，径原哮迷卞杏家族以人质内附朝廷。
English: This year, Ganzhou and Shazhou came to pay tribute, and the Jingyuan Shoumei Anxiong family took the imperial court hostage.

古文：二年春二月庚午，遣内臣收瘗汴口流尸，仍祭奠之。
现代文：天圣二年春二月十二日，派遣内臣收埋汁口漂浮尸体，并祭奠他们。
English: On February 12th, the second year of Tian Sheng's reign, he sent his vassals to bury the bodies floating in the estuary and pay tribute to them.

古文：三月丁酉，奉安真宗御容于景灵宫奉真殿。
现代文：三月初十，恭敬安置真宗遗像于景灵宫奉真殿。
English: On the 10th day of the 3rd month, the remains of the True Sect were respectfully placed in the Fengzhen Hall of the Jingling Palace.

古文：癸卯，王钦若上《真宗实录》。
现代文：十六日，王钦若呈上滇宗实录。
English: On the 16th, Wang Qinruo presented the authentic record of the Shang Dynasty.

古文：是月，赐礼部奏名进士、诸秋及第出身四百八十五人。
现代文：这个月，赐礼部奏名进士、各科及第出身四百八十五人。
English: This month, four hundred and eighty-five people from all disciplines and all walks of life were awarded the title of "Ceremonial Musicians."

古文：夏四月辛酉，诏三司岁市、绢非土产者罢之。
现代文：夏四月初四，下诏三司每年购买绸绢，如不是土产就废罢。
English: On the 4th day of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 5th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 7

古文：乙酉，录晋石氏后。
现代文：二十八日，录用后晋石氏后代。
English: On the 28th, the descendants of the post-Jinshi family were hired.

古文：五月乙未，录系囚。
现代文：五月初九，讯问记录囚犯罪状。
English: On May 9, the interrogation recorded the criminal status of the prisoner.

古文：六月壬申。罢天庆、天祺、天贶、先天、降圣节宫观然灯。
现代文：六月十六日，废罢天庆、天棋、天贩、先天、降圣节宫观燃灯。
English: On June 16th, Tianqing, Tianqi, Tianwang, Xian Tian and the Lantern Festival were cancelled.

古文：秋七月癸丑，奉安真宗御容于玉清昭应宫安圣殿。
现代文：秋七月二十八日，恭敬安置真宗遗像于玉清昭应宫安圣殿。
English: On the 28th day of the 7th month of autumn, the True Sect's relic was respectfully placed in the Tamakiyo Shoin-gu Shrine.

古文：八月丙辰朔，宴崇德殿，初用乐之半。
现代文：八月初一，宴饮崇德殿，初用乐之半。
English: On the first day of August, the banquet at the Chongde Hall is half over.

古文：诏举官己迁改而贪污者，举主以状闻，闻而不以实者坐之。
现代文：下诏所举官员已经迁改而贪赃者，举主上报情况；上报不实者，以罪论处。
English: If the officials mentioned in the following edict have been transferred and become corrupt, the informant shall report the situation; if the report is untrue, the offender shall be punished.

古文：己卯，幸国子监，谒孔子，遂幸武成王庙。
现代文：二十四日，到国子监，朝拜孔子，于是到武成王庙。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, he went to the Guozijian to worship Confucius, and then went to the King Wucheng Temple.

古文：甲申，太白入太微垣。
现代文：二十九日，太白星进人太微垣。
English: On the 29th, Taibai Xing entered Taibai Village.

古文：九月辛卯，祠太一宫，赐道左耕者茶帛。
现代文：九月初六，祭祀太一宫，赐道左耕者茶帛。
English: On the 6th day of the 9th month of the lunar calendar, a ceremony was held at Taichung Palace to bestow the Taoist Cultivator's Cup.

古文：冬十月丙辰，奉安真宗御容于洪福院。
现代文：冬十月初二，恭敬安置真宗遗像于洪福院。
English: On the second day of the first month of October in winter, the statue of the True Sect was respectfully placed in Hongfu Academy.

古文：十一月甲午，加上真宗谥。
现代文：十一月初十，加上真宗溢号。
English: On the tenth day of the first month of November, with the addition of the Shinshu exclamation mark.

古文：乙未，朝飨玉清昭应、景灵宫。
现代文：十一日，祭祀玉清昭应宫、景灵宫。
English: On the 11th day, there will be a ritual at the Jade Emperor's Palace of Zhaoying and Jingling.

古文：丙申，飨太庙。
现代文：十二日，祭祀太庙。
English: On the twelfth day, the ritual was held at Taimiao.

古文：丁酉，祀天地于圜丘，大赦。
现代文：十三日，在圆丘祭祀天地，大赦。
English: On the thirteenth day, at the round mound, the heavens and the earth were sacrificed, and a general amnesty was proclaimed.

古文：百官上尊号曰圣文睿武仁明孝德皇帝，上皇太后尊号曰应元崇德仁寿慈圣皇太后。
现代文：百官上尊号为圣文睿武仁明孝德皇帝，上皇太后尊号为庆元崇德仁寿慈圣皇太后。
English: The highest-ranking officials were given the honorific titles of Emperor Shengwenrui, Emperor WuRen, Emperor MingxiaoDe, and the empress dowager was given the honorific title Empress QingYuan, Empress Dowager ChongDe, Empress Dowager RenShouCi.

古文：赐百官诸军加等。
现代文：赐百官诸军加等。
English: He gave hundreds of officials to the army to raise their ranks.

古文：乙巳，立皇后郭氏。
现代文：二十一日，立皇后郭氏。
English: On the 21st, the Empress Guo Dynasty was established.

古文：辛亥，加恩百官。
现代文：二十七日，加恩百官。
English: On the 27th, Gahn was made a centurion.

古文：十二月庚午，诏开封府每岁正旦、冬至禁刑三日。
现代文：十二月十七日，下诏开封府每年新春、冬至禁刑三天。
English: On December 17th, the government of Kaifeng announced that the New Year and the winter solstice would be banned for three days.

古文：是岁，龟兹、甘肃来贡。
现代文：这一年，龟兹、甘州、肃州来进贡。
English: This year, Guizi, Ganzhou and Suzhou came to pay tribute.

古文：三年春正月辛卯，长宁节，近臣及契丹使初上皇太后寿于崇政殿。
现代文：天圣三年春正月初八，长宁节，近臣和契丹使臣在崇政殿祝寿皇太后。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the spring of the third year of Tian Sheng, Changning Festival, close vassals and Khitan envoys congratulated the Empress Dowager on her birthday at the Su Zheng Palace.

古文：二月戊寅，诏陕西灾伤州军，盗廪谷非伤主者，刺配邻州牢城，徒减一等。
现代文：二月二十五日，下诏陕西灾伤州军，盗仓谷没有伤到主人者，刺配邻州牢城，徒减一等。
English: On February 25th, the following decree was issued: Shaanxi suffered a disaster and injured the state army, and those who did not injure their masters in Canggu, stabbed the neighboring state prison, and were reduced by one rank.

古文：夏四月丁丑，诏三馆缮书藏太清楼。
现代文：夏四月二十六日，下诏三馆缮书藏太清楼。
English: On the 26th day of the 4th month of the summer, the next edict was issued to renovate the book collections of the three museums in Taichung.

古文：五月庚寅，录系囚。
现代文：五月初九，讯问记录囚犯罪状。
English: On May 9, the interrogation recorded the criminal status of the prisoner.

古文：癸巳，幸御庄观刈麦，闻民舍机杼声，赐织妇茶帛。
现代文：十二日，到御庄观割麦，听到百姓家机抒声，赐给织妇茶帛。
English: On the twelfth day, he went to Guanzhong to cut wheat, heard the people's chirping, and gave the weaver a tea urn.

古文：己亥，赐隐士林逋粟帛。
现代文：十八日，赐给隐士林通粟帛。
English: On the 18th, the hermit Lin Tong Maoxuan was given.

古文：己酉，禁臣僚奏荐无服子弟。
现代文：二十八日，禁止臣僚奏荐不是服亲子弟。
English: On the 28th, it was forbidden for ministers to report recommendations.

古文：六月壬戌，太白昼见。
现代文：六月十二日，太白星白天出现。
English: On June 12th, Taibai Star appeared in the daytime.

古文：癸酉，环、原州属羌叛寇边，环庆都监赵士隆等死之，遣使者安抚陕西。
现代文：二十三日，环州、原州属羌叛乱攻打边境，环庆都监赵士隆等战死，派遣使者安抚陕西。
English: On the 23rd, rebels from Huanzhou and Yuanzhou attacked the border, and the governor of Huanqing, Zhao Shilong, and others were killed in the fighting. An envoy was sent to pacify Shaanxi.

古文：秋七月戊子，诏诸路转运使察举知州、通判不任事者。
现代文：秋七月初九，下诏各路转运使察举知州、通判不称职者。
English: On the 9th day of the 7th month of the autumn, the transportation envoys of all routes were sent to Chizhou to investigate and adjudicate incompetents.

古文：丙午，诏边户为羌所扰者蠲租，复役二年。
现代文：二十七日，下诏边户为羌人所骚扰者免租、免役二年。
English: On the 27th, the next edict exempted those who had been harassed by hooligans from paying rent and from military service for two years.

古文：八月戊午，以忠州盐井岁增课、夔州奉节巫山县旧藉民为营田、万州户有税者岁籴其谷，皆为民害，诏悉除之。
现代文：八月初九，忠州盐井每年增税，夔州奉节、巫山县旧籍民为营田，万州每年来有税户谷，都为害百姓，下诏全部废除。
English: On the 9th day of the 8th month of the year, the annual tax increase in Yanjing, Chungju, the annual tax increase in Fengjie, the annual tax increase in Wushan County, and the annual tax increase in Wanzhou, all of which are harmful to the people, were abolished.

古文：辛未，蠲陕西州军旱灾租赋。
现代文：二十二日，免除陕西州军早灾地区租税。
English: On the 22nd, the Shaanxi Provincial Army was exempted from paying taxes in the disaster areas.

古文：九月乙巳，诏司天监奏灾异据占书以闻。
现代文：九月二十六日，下诏司天监据占书上奏灾异情况。
English: On September 26th, the next magistrate, Tian Jian, approved the report on the disaster situation.

古文：冬十月乙卯，太白犯南斗。
现代文：冬十月初七，太白星侵犯南斗星。
English: On the 7th day of the 10th month of winter, the Taibai Star invaded the Southern Dipper.

古文：辛酉，晏殊为枢密副使。
现代文：十三日，晏殊为枢密副使。
English: On the 13th, he was appointed as a Privy Vice-Minister.

古文：十一月己卯朔，罢贴射茶法。
现代文：十一月初一，废罢贴射茶法。
English: On the first day of November, the tea ceremony will be abolished.

古文：辛卯，以襄州水蠲民租。
现代文：十三日，因襄州水灾免除百姓租税。
English: On the 13th, due to the floods in Xiangzhou, the people were exempted from paying taxes.

古文：晋、绛、陕、解州饥，发粟振之。
现代文：晋、绛、陕、解州饥荒，开仓贩济饥民。
English: The famine in Jin, Lu, Shaanxi, and Dezhou was resolved, and warehouses were opened to help the starving people.

古文：戊申，王钦若卒。
现代文：三十日，王钦若去世。
English: On the 30th, Wang Qinruo passed away.

古文：十二月癸丑，王曾为门下侍郎、昭文馆大学士，张知白同中书门下平章事、集贤殿大学士。
现代文：十二月初五，王曾为门下侍郎、昭文馆大学士，张知白同中书门下平章事、集贤殿大学士。
English: On the 5th day of the 12th month of the year, Wang had been a disciple's attendant and a scholar of Shobunkwan University, and Zhang Chibai had been a disciple of Zhongshu and a scholar of Jixianden University.

古文：乙丑，张旻为枢密使。
现代文：十七日，张为枢密使。
English: On the 17th, Zhang became a Privy Counsellor.

古文：戊寅，太白昼见。
现代文：三十日，太白星白天出现。
English: On the 26th, a very white star appeared in the daytime.

古文：是岁，龟兹、甘州、于阗来贡。
现代文：这一年，龟兹、甘州、于闻来进贡。
English: This year, Guizi, Ganzhou and Yuwen paid tribute.

古文：环、庆蕃部嵬逋等内附。
现代文：环庆蕃部鬼通等内附朝廷。
English: The Imperial Court is included in the annals of the Qing Dynasty.

古文：补泾原降羌首领潘征为本族军主。
现代文：补径原降羌首领潘征为本族军主。
English: Pan Zheng, the leader of the Yuan dynasty, became the leader of the local army.

古文：四年春正月己亥，命章得象与流内铨同试百司人。
现代文：天圣四年春正月二十一日，命令章得象同流内锉官员一起考试百司官吏。
English: On the 21st day of the first month of spring in the fourth year of Tian Sheng, the order was issued to examine the officials of the Hundred Departments together with the officials of the Inner Court.

古文：庚子，泾原兵破康奴族。
现代文：二十二日，径原兵攻破康奴族。
English: On the 22nd, the Chiwara soldiers defeated the Kangnu people.

古文：二月甲寅，诏吏犯赃至流，按察官失举者，并劾之。
现代文：二月初七，下诏吏犯贪赃被处以流刑，按察官员没有发现，都要被弹勃。
English: On the 7th day of the 2nd month of the year, the following officials were sentenced to exile for corruption. If the investigating officials did not find it, they would all be shot.

古文：庚午，置西界和市场。
现代文：二十三日，设置西界和市场。
English: On the 23rd, the western sector and the market were set up.

古文：三月甲申，诏转运使、提点刑狱罢劝农司。
现代文：三月初七，下诏转运使、提点刑狱废罢劝农司。
English: On the seventh day of the third month of the year, the following edict was issued to transfer the envoy, raise the point of imprisonment and abolish the strike to persuade the agriculture department.

古文：己亥，鄜延蕃部首领曹守贵等内附。
现代文：二十二日，延蕃部首曹守贵等内附。
English: On the 22nd, Cao Shougui, the head of the Yancheng Department, and others were attached.

古文：夏四月壬子，诏京东西、河北、淮南平谷价。
现代文：夏四月初六，下诏京东西、河北、淮南平抑物价。
English: On the 6th day of the 4th month of the summer, the prices of Beijing East and West, Hebei and Huainan will be flat.

古文：五月己卯，诏礼部贡举。
现代文：五月初四，下诏礼部贡举。
English: On the fourth day of the fifth lunar month, the tribute of the Imperial Regalia Department will begin.

古文：壬午，诏大辟疑者奏谳，有司毋辄举驳。
现代文：初七，下诏判处死刑的案件有怀疑的，上报复核，有关部门不得反驳阻挠。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, if there is any doubt about the case sentenced to death under the edict, the relevant departments shall not refute the obstruction.

古文：戊子，录系囚。
现代文：十三日，讯问记录囚犯罪状。
English: On the 13th, the interrogation recorded the criminal status of the prisoner.

古文：己亥，诏士有文而行不副者，州郡毋得荐送。
现代文：二十四日，诏令言行不一致的士人，州郡不要荐举。
English: On the 24th, if a scholar's words and deeds are inconsistent with the edict, the state and county should not recommend him.

古文：闰月戊申，减江、淮岁漕米五十万石。
现代文：闰五月初三，减江淮每年槽米五十万石。
English: On the 3rd day of the 5th month of the leap year, the annual rice harvest in the Minjiang River and Huai River reaches 500,000 kilos.

古文：除舒州太湖等九茶场民逋钱十三万缗。
现代文：免除苏州太湖等九个茶场百姓拖欠钱十三万络。
English: Nine tea estates such as Taihu in Suzhou were exempted from 130,000 rupees in arrears.

古文：己酉，诏补太庙室长、斋郎。
现代文：初四，下诏补太庙室长、斋郎。
English: On the fourth day of the new year, the head of the office of the Imperial Household Agency and the chief priest of the temple came down.

古文：辛亥，复陕西永丰渠以通解盐。
现代文：初六，恢复陕西永丰渠以通解州盐。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, the Yongfeng Canal in Shaanxi Province was restored to allow the passage of salt.

古文：六月丁亥，建、剑、邵武等州军大水，诏赐被灾家米二石，溺死者官瘗之。
现代文：六月十三日，建、剑、邵武等州军大水，下诏赐给受灾家米二石，淹死者官府为之掩埋。
English: On June 13th, Jian, Jian, Shao Wu and other members of the provincial army were flooded, and the government issued an edict to give two stones of rice to the affected families. The government buried the drowned people.

古文：庚寅，大雨震电，京师平地水数尺。
现代文：十六日，降大雨，闪电，京师平地积水数尺。
English: On the 16th, there was heavy rain and lightning, and several feet of water accumulated on the flat ground of the Beijing Division.

古文：辛卯，避正殿，减常膳。
现代文：十七日，不上殿治理国事，减少饮食。
English: On the seventeenth day, he did not go to the palace to administer state affairs and reduced his diet.

古文：丁酉，降天下囚罪一等，徒以下释之。
现代文：二十三日，降天下囚犯罪刑一等，徒刑以下释放。
English: On the 23rd, he was given a first-class prison sentence and released.

古文：畿内、京东西、淮南、河北被水民田蠲其租。
现代文：瓷内、京东西、淮南、河北受水灾百姓免租税。
English: People affected by the floods in China, East and West Beijing, Huainan and Hebei are exempt from tax.

古文：癸卯，诏官物漂失，主典免偿。
现代文：二十九日，下诏官物漂失，主典之人不偿还。
English: On the 29th day of the following month, the official documents were lost, and the author of the document did not repay.

古文：流徙者，所在抚存之。
现代文：流移之人，所在抚恤慰问。
English: For those who have been displaced, we extend our sympathy and condolences.

古文：秋七月戊申，御长春殿，复常膳。
现代文：秋七月初五，到长春殿恢复饮食。
English: On the 5th day of the 7th month of the autumn, it was time to resume eating and drinking at the Changchun Palace.

古文：辛未，减两川岁输锦绮，易绫纱为绢，以给边费。
现代文：二十八日，减两川每年输纳锦绮，以绢代替绩纱，供作边费。
English: On the 28th, the two rivers were reduced to accepting cocoons every year, and cocoons were used instead of chiffon yarns for border expenses.

古文：壬申，诏诸路转运使举所部官通经术者。
现代文：二十九日，下诏转运使推举精通经术的所属官吏。
English: On the 29th, the following edict was issued to promote officials who are proficient in Confucianism.

古文：八月丁亥，筑泰州捍海堰。
现代文：八月十四日，修筑泰州捍海堰。
English: On August 14th, the construction of the Taizhou Hanhai Weir began.

古文：己丑，诏施州溪峒首领三年一至京师。
现代文：十六日，下诏施州溪酮首领三年至京师一次。
English: On the 16th, the leader of Shizhouxi Ketone announced that he would visit Beijing once every three years.

古文：九月乙卯，诏孙奭、冯元举京朝官通经术者。
现代文：九月十三日，下诏孙、冯元推举精通经术的京朝官。
English: On September 13th, Zhaosun and Fengyuan were elected as officials of the Beijing imperial court.

古文：庚申，诏礼部贡院：诸科通三经者荐擢之。
现代文：十八日，下诏礼部贡院，各科精通三经者推荐提升。
English: On the 18th day of the following year, the Ministry of Ceremonies paid tribute to the institute, and those who were proficient in the three scriptures were recommended for promotion.

古文：录周世宗从孙柴元亨为三班奉职。
现代文：录用周世宗从孙柴元亨为三班奉职。
English: Zhou Shizong was recruited from Sun Chai Yuanheng to serve in the third class.

古文：辛未，废襄、唐州营田务，以田赋民。
现代文：二十九日，废罢襄州、唐州营田务。把田还给百姓。
English: On the 29th, Xiangzhou and Tangzhou were abolished. The fields were returned to the people.

古文：冬十月甲戌朔，日有食之。
现代文：冬十月甲戊朔，日食。
English: Winter in October, solar eclipse.

古文：壬辰，诏郎中以上致仕，赐一子官。
现代文：二十日，下诏：郎中以上退休，赐一子官职。
English: On the 20th, the following edict was issued: Retire the junior high school students and above, and give one son an official post.

古文：甲午，昏雾四塞。
现代文：二十二日，昏暗大雾布满四周。
English: On the 22nd, a dark fog rolled in.

古文：丙申，奉安真宗御容于鸿庆宫。
现代文：二十四日，恭敬安置真宗遗像于鸿庆宫。
English: On the 24th, the relic of the True Sect was respectfully placed in the Hongqing Palace.

古文：十二月丁丑，发米六十万斛贷畿内饥。
现代文：十二月初五，发米六十万解贷给瓷内饥民。
English: On the 5th day of the 12th month, 600,000 tons of rice were loaned to the hungry people in China.

古文：丁亥，帝白太后，欲元日先上太后寿乃受朝，太后不可。
现代文：十五日，仁宗告诉太后，想在元日先向太后祝寿然后接受朝贺，太后没答应。
English: On the 15th, Ninsong told the empress dowager that he wanted to first wish her a happy birthday on New Year's Day and then receive morning greetings, but the empress dowager did not agree.

古文：王曾奏曰： 陛下以孝奉母仪，太后以谦全国体，请如太后令。 
现代文：王曾上奏说： 陛下以孝奉侍太后，太后以谦恭保全国体，请依从太后命令。 
English: Wang Zeng reported: "Your Majesty serves the Empress Dowager with filial piety, and the Empress Dowager protects the whole country with modesty. Please follow the Empress Dowager's order."

古文：五年春正月壬寅朔，初率百官上皇太后寿于会庆殿，遂御天安殿受朝。
现代文：天圣五年春正月初一，仁宗率百官到会庆殿向皇太后祝寿，然后到天安殿接受朝贺。
English: On the first day of the first month of the spring of the 5th year of the reign of Emperor Tensho, Emperor Ninsong led hundreds of officials to the Kaiqing Hall to wish the Empress Dowager a happy birthday, and then to the Tian'an Hall to receive morning greetings.

古文：己未，晏殊罢。
现代文：十八日，晏殊被罢免。
English: On the 18th, Gongshu was removed from office.

古文：戊辰，以夏竦为枢密副使。
现代文：二十七日，任命夏辣为枢密副使。
English: On the 27th, Xia Rao was appointed as the vice-minister of the privy council.

古文：二月癸酉，命吕夷简、夏竦修先朝国史，王曾提举。
现代文：二月初二，命令吕夷简、夏辣修撰真宗朝国史，王曾任提举。
English: On the second day of the second month of February, he ordered Lü Yijian and Xia Laxiu to compile a national history of the Zhenzong Dynasty, and Wang Zeng was appointed to promote it.

古文：丙子，诏振京东流民。
现代文：初五，下诏贩济京东流民。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, street hawkers began to give alms to Beijing's eastern exiles.

古文：丁丑，西域僧法吉祥等来献梵书。
现代文：初六，西域僧人法吉样等来进献梵书。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the new year, the monks from the western region, such as Fajizong, came to present the Sanskrit book.

古文：三月戊申，赐礼部奏名进士、诸科及第出身一千七十六人。
现代文：三月初七，赐礼部奏名进士、诸科及第出身一千零七十六人。
English: On the 7th day of the 3rd month of the year, the Ministry of Rites and Ceremonies gave awards to 1,076 people from various disciplines and backgrounds.

古文：秦州地震。
现代文：秦州发生地震。
English: An earthquake occurred in Qinzhou.

古文：罢琼州岁贡瑇瑁、龟皮、紫贝。夏四月壬辰，寿宁观火。
现代文：废罢秦州岁贡袱泪、紫贝等。夏四月二十二日，寿宁观发生火灾。
English: On the 22nd day of the 4th month of summer, a fire broke out in Shuningguan.

古文：五月庚子朔，诏武臣子孙习文艺者，听奏文资。
现代文：五月初一，下诏武臣子孙通晓文艺者，允许奏补文资。
English: On the first day of May, it was decreed that the descendants of samurai retainers who were literati and artists were allowed to supplement their literary resources.

古文：壬寅，太白昼见。
现代文：初三，太白星白天出现。
English: On the 22nd, Taibai Star appeared in the daytime.

古文：丙午，阅诸班骑射。
现代文：初七，检阅各班骑马射箭。
English: On the seventh day of junior high school, all classes were inspected on horseback and archery.

古文：辛亥，录系囚。
现代文：十二日，讯问记录囚犯罪状。
English: On the 12th, the interrogation recorded the criminal status of the prisoner.

古文：辛酉，命吕夷简等详定编敕。
现代文：二十二日，命令吕夷简等详定编救。
English: On the 22nd, he ordered Lü Yizhen and others to make a detailed rescue plan.

古文：癸亥，楚王元佐薨。
现代文：二十四日，楚王赵元佐逝世。
English: On the 24th, King of Chu, Zhao Yuanzuo passed away.

古文：是月，京畿旱，磁州虫食桑。
现代文：这个月，京瓷早灾，磁州虫吃桑。
English: This month, Kyocera was hit by an early disaster, and magnetite worms ate mulberry trees.

古文：六月甲戌，祈雨于玉清昭应宫、开宝寺。
现代文：六月初五，在玉清昭应宫、开宝寺祈祷降雨。
English: On the 5th day of the 6th lunar month, prayers for rain were held at the Jade Emperor's Palace and Kaiho-ji Temple.

古文：丙子，诏决畿内系囚。
现代文：初七，诏令处理京瓷关押囚犯。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, a decree was issued to deal with prisoners held by Kyocera.

古文：丁丑，雨。
现代文：初八，降雨。
English: It rained on the first day of the eighth month.

古文：癸未，罢诸营造之不急者。
现代文：十四日，废罢不急需的营造工程。
English: On the 14th, the urgently needed construction project was abandoned.

古文：秋七月己亥朔，振秦州水灾，赐被溺家钱米。
现代文：秋七月初一，贩济秦州水灾饥民，赐给淹水家钱米。
English: On the first day of autumn in July, a vendor gave rice to flood victims in flood-stricken and famine-stricken Jichin State.

古文：丙辰，发丁夫三万八千、卒二万一千、缗钱五十万塞滑州决河。
现代文：十八日，发丁夫三万八千、卒二万一千、络钱五十万堵塞滑州黄河决口。
English: On the 18th, the government spent 38,000 yuan, 21,000 yuan and 500,000 yuan to block the mouth of the Yellow River in Leshou.

古文：诏察京东被灾县吏不职者以闻。
现代文：下诏考察京东受灾县吏不称职的人上报朝廷。
English: Incompetent officials in the affected counties of Jingdong were reported to the imperial court.

古文：九月庚戌，阅龙卫神勇军习战。
现代文：九月十三日，检阅龙卫神勇军练习作战。
English: On September 13th, the Longwei Sheng Yongjun was inspected and practiced combat.

古文：冬十月辛未，罢陕西青苗钱。
现代文：冬十月初五，罢除陕西青苗钱。
English: On the 5th day of the 10th month of winter, Shaanxi Qingmiao Qian was ousted.

古文：癸酉，奉安真宗御容于慈孝寺崇真殿。
现代文：初七，恭敬安置真宗遗像于慈孝寺崇真殿。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the new year, the last remaining statue of the True Sect of Buddhism was respectfully placed in the Sozen-den hall of the Jiko-ji Temple.

古文：己丑，颁新定《五服敕》。
现代文：二十三日，颁布新定伍服救。
English: On the 23rd, the new regulations on rescue were promulgated.

古文：甲午，同皇太后幸御书院，观太宗、真宗御书。
现代文：二十八日，同皇太后一起到御书院，观看太宗、真宗御书。
English: On the 28th, together with the Empress Dowager, he went to the Imperial Academy to see the books of Taizong and Shinshu.

古文：乙未，诏西川、广南在官物故者，遣人护送其家属还乡，官为给食。
现代文：二十九日，下诏西川、广南在任官员去世者，派人护送家属还乡，官府供给食物。
English: On the 29th, following the death of incumbent officials in Xichuan and Guangnan, the government sent someone to escort their families back to their hometowns, and the government provided food.

古文：丙申，滑州言河平。
现代文：三十日，滑州报告说黄河决口止息。
English: On the 30th, Nanzhou reported that the Yellow River had stopped flowing.

古文：十一月丁酉朔，以陕西旱蝗，减其民租赋。
现代文：十一月初一，因陕西早灾蝗灾，减百姓租税。
English: On the first day of November, due to the locust plague in Shaanxi, people's taxes were reduced.

古文：庚子，遣使河北体量安抚。
现代文：初四，派使臣视察安抚河北。
English: On the fourth day of the first month, he sent an envoy to inspect and pacify Hebei Province.

古文：壬寅，复作指南车。
现代文：初六，又作指南车。
English: In the sixth year of junior high school, he also worked as a guide.

古文：辛亥，朝飨景灵宫。
现代文：十五日，祭祀景灵宫。
English: On the fifteenth day, the ceremony was held at Jingling Palace.

古文：壬子，飨太庙。
现代文：十六日，祭祀太庙。
English: On the sixteenth day, the ritual was held at the Imperial Temple.

古文：癸丑，祀天地于圜丘，大赦。
现代文：十七日，在圆丘祭祀天地，大赦。
English: On the 17th, the heavens and earth were sacrificed at the round mound, and the amnesty began.

古文：贺皇太后于会庆殿。丁巳，恭谢玉清昭应宫。
现代文：在会庆殿祝贺皇太后。二十一日，恭谢玉清昭应宫。
English: Congratulations to the Empress Dowager at the Kaikei-den. On the 21st, congratulations to Tamakiyo Akira.

古文：十二月辛未，加恩百官。
现代文：十二月初五，加恩百官。
English: On the fifth day of the twelfth month of the lunar calendar, Gan became the hundredth official.

古文：甲戌，诏辅臣南郊恩例外，更改一子官。
现代文：初八，下诏辅臣南郊按规定给予恩赏外，更改一子官职。
English: On the 8th day of the 1st month of the year, in addition to giving a reward to the assistant minister Nanjiao according to the regulations, one official position was changed.

古文：丁亥，诏百官宗室受赂、冒为亲属奏官者毋赦。
现代文：二十一日，下诏：百官宗室接受贿赂，冒为亲属奏补官职者，不予赦免。
English: On the 21st, the following edict was issued: the descendants of officials who accept bribes and pretend to be relatives to obtain official posts will not be pardoned.

古文：是岁，甘州及南平国王李公蕴遣人来贡。
现代文：这一年，甘州和南平国王李公蕴派人来进贡。
English: This year, the king of Ganzhou and Nanping, Li Gongyun, sent people to pay tribute.

古文：京兆府、邢，洺州蝗。
现代文：京兆府、邢州、洛州蝗灾。
English: Locust plagues in Jinghao Prefecture, Zhangzhou, and Lozhou.

古文：华州旱，虸方虫食苗。
现代文：华州早灾脚舫虫吃庄稼。
English: Washougal early blight foot aphid eating crops.

古文：六年春正月己酉，罢两川乾元节岁贡织佛。
现代文：天圣六年春正月十三日，两川罢除乾元节进贡织佛。
English: On the 13th day of the first month of spring in the sixth year of Tensho era, the two rivers were exempted from paying tribute to weave Buddha statues on the first day of the year.

古文：戊午，罢提点刑狱。
现代文：二十二日，废罢提点刑狱。
English: On the 22nd, the penalty of imprisonment was abolished.

古文：二月庚辰，大风，昼晦。
现代文：二月十五日，大风，白天昏暗。
English: On the 15th of February, it was very windy and the day was dark.

古文：壬午，张知白薨。
现代文：十七日，张知白逝世。
English: On the 17th, Zhang Zhibai passed away.

古文：三月丙申朔，日有食之。
现代文：三月初一，日食。
English: On the first day of March, there is a solar eclipse.

古文：壬子，以张士逊同中书门下平章事、集贤殿大学士。
现代文：十七日，任命张士逊为同中书门下平章事、集贤殿大学士。
English: On the 17th, Zhang Shisun was appointed as a member of the Lower Grade of the School of Letters and a member of the College of Scholars.

古文：癸丑，以姜遵为枢密副使。
现代文：十八日，任命姜遵为枢密副使。
English: On the 18th, Jiang Zun was appointed as the Privy Vice-Minister.

古文：己未，以范雍为枢密副使。
现代文：二十四日，任命范雍为枢密副使。
English: On the 24th, Fan Yong was appointed as the vice-minister of the privy council.

古文：壬戌，作西太一宫。
现代文：二十七日，作西太一宫。
English: On the 27th, the West Taichi-gu Shrine was built.

古文：夏四月戊辰，诏审官、三班院、吏部流内铨、军头司各引对所理公事。
现代文：夏四月初三，下诏审官院、三班院、吏部流内锉、军头司分别引对所理公事。
English: On the 3rd day of the 4th month of the summer, the Lower Court of the Supreme People's Procuratorate, the Third Division of the Supreme People's Procuratorate, the Inner Palace of the Ministry of Personnel, and the Office of the Commander-in-Chief of the People's Liberation Army conducted the official business.

古文：自帝为皇太子，辅臣参决诸司事于资善堂，至是始还有司。
现代文：从仁宗为皇太子时起，辅臣在资善堂参决各司事，到这时开始归还有关部门。
English: From the time when Emperor Nintsune was the crown prince, the vassals participated in the decision-making of the various officials in Shizen-do Hall, and at this time they began to return to the relevant departments.

古文：丁丑，贷河北流民复业者种食，复是年租赋。
现代文：十二日，贷给河北流民复业者种食，免除此年租税。
English: On the 12th, loans were made to Hebei refugees to grow food, and they were exempted from this year's tax.

古文：癸未，命官减三司岁调上供物。
现代文：十八日，命令官吏减三司岁调上供物。
English: On the 18th, officials were ordered to reduce the number of priests by three and increase the offerings.

古文：甲申旦，有星大如斗，自北流至西南，光烛地，有声如雷。
现代文：十九日早晨，有星大如斗，从北流至西南，光照地，有声如雷。
English: On the morning of the 19th, there was a star as big as a dipper, shining from the north stream to the southwest, with a sound like thunder.

古文：庚寅，下德音，以星变斋居，不视事五日。降畿内囚死罪，流以下释之。罢诸土木工。振河北流民过京师者。
现代文：二十五日，颁布德音：因星变斋居，五天不上朝治理国事；瓷内囚犯死罪予以减轻，流刑以下释放；废罢各土木工程；贩济路过京师的河北流民。
English: On the 25th, the following decrees were promulgated: due to the change of the stars, fast for five days, and do not go to the DPRK to administer state affairs; the death penalty of prisoners in China was mitigated, and they were released after being exiled; all civil engineering projects were abolished; and the Hebei exiles who were selling rice passed through Beijing Division.

古文：五月乙未朔，交阯寇边。
现代文：五月初一，交趾攻打边境。
English: On the first day of May, both sides attacked the border.

古文：六月丙寅，罢戎、泸诸州谷税钱。
现代文：六月初三，废除戎、沪各州谷税钱。
English: On the third day of the sixth month of the lunar calendar, the valley tax of Eun and Shanghai was abolished.

古文：秋七月壬子，江宁府、扬、真、润州江水溢，坏官民庐舍，遣使安抚振恤。
现代文：秋七月十九日，江宁府、扬州、真州、润州江水溢出，冲坏官民庐舍，派遣使臣安抚贩恤。
English: On the 19th day of the 7th month of autumn, the rivers of Jiangning, Yangzhou, Zhenzhou and Rongzhou overflowed, destroying the residences of officials and citizens, and envoys were dispatched to pacify the merchants.

古文：八月乙丑，诏免河北水灾州军秋税。
现代文：八月初三，诏令免除河北水灾州军秋税。
English: On the third day of August, a decree exempted the Hebei flood-stricken state army from the autumn tax.

古文：乙亥，河决澶州王楚埽。
现代文：十三日，黄河在擅州王楚塌决口。
English: On the thirteenth day, the Yellow River broke through the Wang Chuxiali Pass in Hengzhou.

古文：丙戌，录唐张九龄后。
现代文：二十四日，录用唐代张九龄后代。
English: On the 24th, the descendants of Zhang Jiuling of the Tang Dynasty were hired.

古文：九月己亥，诏京朝官任内，五人同罪奏举者，减一任。
现代文：九月初八，下诏：京朝官任内，五人同罪奏举者，减一任。
English: On the 8th day of the 9th month of the year, the following edict was issued: During the tenure of the Beijing court official, if five people report the same crime, one term will be deducted.

古文：癸卯，祠西太一宫。
现代文：十二日，祠祭西太一宫。
English: On the 12th, the ancestral hall festival was held at the West Taichi Shrine.

古文：甲辰，诏河北灾伤，民质桑土与人者悉归之，候岁丰偿所贷。
现代文：十三日，下诏：河北灾伤地区，全部归还百姓当作质物的桑土和人，等丰岁偿还所贷。
English: On the 13th, the following edict was issued: In the disaster-stricken areas of Hebei Province, all the mulberry soil and people used as materials by the people will be returned, and the loan will be repaid in good years.

古文：乙巳，遣使修诸路兵械。
现代文：十四日，派遣使臣修缮各路兵械。
English: On the 14th, envoys were dispatched to repair military equipment along all routes.

古文：冬十月甲申，除福州民逋官庄钱十二万八千缗。
现代文：冬十月二十三日，免除福州百姓拖欠的官庄钱十二万八千络。
English: In the winter of October 23rd, the people of Fuzhou were exempted from the arrears of the Guanzhuang money of 128,000 rupees.

古文：十一月戊午，京西言谷斗十钱。
现代文：十一月二十八日，京西报告说谷斗十钱。
English: On November 28th, West Beijing reported that the price of Gu Dou had risen to ten yuan.

古文：十二月癸亥，祠西太一宫。
现代文：十二月初三，祠祭西太一宫。
English: On the third day of the first month of December, the ancestral hall festival of the West Taichi Shrine is over.

古文：是岁，甘州、三佛齐来贡。
现代文：这一年，甘州、三佛齐来进贡。
English: This year, Gansu and the Three Buddhas came to pay tribute.

古文：七年春正月癸卯，曹利用罢。
现代文：天圣七年春正月十三日，曹利用被罢免。
English: On the 13th day of the first month of the spring of the seventh year of Tian Sheng, Cao Rong was dismissed.

古文：丙辰，降利用为左千牛卫上将军。
现代文：二十六日，曹利用贬降为左千牛卫上将军。
English: On the 26th, Cao Rong was demoted to General of Zuo Qian Niu Wei.

古文：二月庚申朔，鲁宗道卒。
现代文：二月初一，鲁宗道去世。
English: Lu Zongdao passed away on the first day of February.

古文：甲子，诏文臣历边有材勇、武臣之子有节义者，与换官，三路任使。
现代文：初五，下诏：任职沿边地区有材勇的文臣和有节义的武臣之子，给予换官，调往三路任职。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, the following edict was issued: the sons of the brave and virtuous vassals who served in the border regions and the sons of the brave and virtuous vassals were given a change of post and transferred to the third post.

古文：丙寅，张士逊罢，以吕夷简同中书门下平章事、集贤殿大学士。
现代文：初七，张士逊被罢免，任命吕夷简为同中书门下平章事、集贤殿大学士。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, Zhang Shisong was removed from his post, and Lü Yijian was appointed as a member of the lower level of the middle school and a member of the college of scholars.

古文：丁卯，以夏竦、薛奎参知政事，陈尧佐为枢密副使。
现代文：初八，任命夏辣、薛奎为参知政事，陈尧佐为枢密副使。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, Xia Lai and Xue Kui were appointed to the posts of party secretary and political affairs, and Chen Bingzuo was appointed to the post of vice-minister of the privy council.

古文：癸酉，贬曹利用为崇信军节度副使、房州安置，未至，自杀。
现代文：十四日，贬曹利用为崇信军节度副使，房州安置，没有到便自杀了。
English: On the 14th, Cao Cao took advantage of the fact that he was the deputy envoy of the Chongxin Army for the festival, and was resettled in Fangzhou. He committed suicide before he arrived.

古文：乙酉，以河北水灾，委转运使察官吏，不任职者易之。
现代文：二十六日，因河北水灾，委任转运使考核不称职者予以更换。
English: On the 26th, due to the floods in Hebei Province, the transfer agent was appointed to replace those who were incompetent in the assessment.

古文：闰月癸巳，募民入粟以振河北。
现代文：闰二月初四，募民人粟贩济河北。
English: On the fourth day of the second lunar month, people were recruited to become poppy sellers in Jihebei.

古文：戊申，禁京城创造寺观。
现代文：十九日，禁止京城创造寺观。
English: On the 19th, the creation of temples in Kyoto was banned.

古文：壬子，复制举六科，增高蹈丘园、沉沦草泽、茂才异等科，置书判拔萃科及试武举。
现代文：二十三日，恢复制举六科，增加高蹈丘圆、沉沦草泽、茂才异等科，设置书判拔萃科和试武举。
English: On the 23rd, the system of six subjects was restored, with the addition of subjects such as Gaochu Qiuyuan, Sunken Grassland, and Maozai Xie, and the establishment of the book judgment selection subject and trial martial arts.

古文：癸酉，置理检使，以御史中丞为之。
现代文：癸酉日，设置理校使，委任御史中承担任。
English: On the same day, the school secretary was set up and appointed to take over the post.

古文：三月乙丑，诏吏胥受赇毋用荫。
现代文：三月初六，下诏吏青接受贿赂不得用荫补官赎罪。
English: On the 6th day of the 3rd month of the year, the following edict was issued: Young officials who accept bribes are not allowed to use shadow officials to atone for their sins.

古文：辛巳，诏契丹饥民所过给米，分送唐、邓等州，以闲田处之。
现代文：二十二日，下诏：契丹饥民，所过给米，分送唐、邓州，以闲田安置。
English: On the 22nd, the following edict was issued: The starving people of Khitan were given rice, distributed to Tang and Dangzhou, and resettled in idle fields.

古文：癸未，诏百官转对，极言时政阙失，在外者实封以闻。
现代文：二十四日，下诏百官转对，极言朝政缺失，在外者密封上报。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, the following edict was issued: "One hundred officials have turned to the right, the imperial edict of the government is missing, and those who are outside the country should report it in a sealed envelope."

古文：夏四月庚寅，赦天下，免河北被水民租赋。
现代文：夏四月初二，赦免全国，免除河北遭受水灾百姓租税。
English: On the second day of the fourth month of the summer, the whole country was pardoned, and the people who suffered from floods in Hebei were exempted from taxes.

古文：辛卯，南平王李公蕴卒，其子德政遣人来告，以为交阯郡王。
现代文：初三，南平王李公蕴去世，其子李德政派人来报告，任他为交趾郡王。
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, the king of Nanping, Li Gongyun, died, and his son, Li Dezheng, sent someone to report that he was the king of Jiaozi County.

古文：五月乙未朔，诏礼部贡举。
现代文：五月乙未朔，下诏礼部贡举。
English: The month of May has not yet come, and the tribute of the Ministry of Ceremonies has begun.

古文：庚申，诏戒文弊。
现代文：初二，诏戒文弊。
English: In the second year of junior high school, the imperial edict forbidding cheating was issued.

古文：己巳，颁新令。
现代文：十一日，颁布新令。
English: On the 11th, a new order was issued.

古文：庚午，诏先朝文武官自刺史、少卿、监以上，并录其后。
现代文：十二日，下诏先朝武官从刺史、少卿监以上，一律录用他们的后代。
English: On the 12th, it was decreed that the military attachés of the first dynasty, from the rank of sashimi, to the rank of shōchōken and above, would all employ their descendants.

古文：癸酉，录系囚。
现代文：十五日，讯问记录囚犯罪状。
English: On the 15th, the interrogation recorded the criminal status of the prisoner.

古文：庚辰，御承明殿，臣僚请对者十九人，日昃乃罢。
现代文：二十二日，到承明殿，十九名臣僚请对，太阳下山才停止。
English: On the 22nd, nineteen ministers arrived at the Jomyeongjeon Palace. The sun did not set until the procession had ended.

古文：六月壬辰，置益、梓、广南路转运判官。
现代文：六月初五，设置益、梓、广南路转运判官。
English: On the 5th day of the 6th month of the year, the judges for the transportation of Yixing, Zi and Guangnan Road were set up.

古文：丁未，大雷雨，玉清昭应宫灾。
现代文：二十日，大雷，降大雨，玉清昭应宫受灾。
English: On the 20th, heavy thunder and heavy rain fell, and the Jade Emperor's Palace was affected.

古文：甲寅，王曾罢。
现代文：二十七日，王曾被罢免。
English: On the 27th, Wang Zeng was dismissed.

古文：秋七月癸亥，以玉清昭应宫灾，遣官告诸陵，诏天下不复缮修。
现代文：秋七月初六，因玉清昭应宫受灾，派遣官员告诉诸陵，诏令天下不再修复。
English: On the 6th day of the 7th month of the autumn, because of the damage to the Jade Emperor's Palace, officials were dispatched to tell the mausoleums that they would not be repaired.

古文：乙亥，诏殿直以上毋得换文资。
现代文：十八日，诏令殿直以上官不得换为文资。
English: On the 18th, it was decreed that officials with the title of Imperial Prince or higher were not allowed to be exchanged for literary and financial assets.

古文：乙酉，罢诸宫观使。
现代文：二十八日，废罢各宫观使。
English: On the twenty-eighth day, all the imperial envoys were dismissed.

古文：八月丁亥朔，日有食之。
现代文：八月初一，日食。
English: On the first day of August, a solar eclipse.

古文：诏罢天下职田，官收其入，以所直均给之。
现代文：下诏废罢天下职田，官府收其所获，用收获物换来的钱平均分给有关官吏。
English: The following edict abolished the ban on the world's rice fields, and the government received what it received, and the money exchanged for the harvest was divided equally among the relevant officials.

古文：己丑，以吕夷简为昭文馆大学士。
现代文：初三，任命吕夷简为昭文馆大学士。
English: In the third year of junior high school, Lyu Yijian was appointed as a scholar of the Shouwen Academy.

古文：辛卯，夏竦复为枢密副使，陈尧佐、王曙并参知政事。
现代文：初五，夏辣为枢密副使，陈尧佐、王曙为参知政事。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, Xia Lali was appointed Privy Vice-Minister, and Chen Yingzao and Wang Shuguo were appointed Vice-Premiers.

古文：己亥，诏命官犯正入赃，毋使亲民。
现代文：十三日，下诏命官犯贪赃罪，不得委任为亲民官。
English: On the 13th, the emperor issued an edict ordering officials to commit the crime of corruption and not to be appointed as pro-government officials.

古文：冬十月壬寅，阅虎翼武骑卒习战。
现代文：冬十月十七日，检阅虎翼武骑士兵练习作战。
English: On the 17th day of winter in October, the Tiger Wing cavalry soldiers were on parade to practice combat.

古文：丙午，京师地震。
现代文：二十一日，京城发生地震。
English: On the 21st, there was an earthquake in Kyoto.

古文：诏知州军岁举判、司、簿、尉可县令者一人。
现代文：下诏知州军每年推举判、司、簿、尉可以担任县令的人一名。
English: According to the following edict, the state army can nominate one person each year to serve as county magistrate, judge, secretary, bookkeeper and lieutenant.

古文：十一月癸亥，冬至，率百官上皇太后寿于会庆殿，遂御天安殿受朝。
现代文：十一月初九，冬至，仁宗率领百官到会庆殿向皇太后祝寿，然后到天安殿接受朝贺。
English: On the 9th day of the 11th month at the beginning of the month, the winter solstice, Emperor Ninsong led hundreds of officials to the Kaiqing Hall to wish the Empress Dowager a happy birthday, and then to the Tian'an Hall to receive morning greetings.

古文：庚午，诏天下孤独疾病者，致医药存视。
现代文：十六日，下诏天下孤独疾病的人，官府送给医药慰问他们。
English: On the 16th, it was announced that the government would send medicine to people suffering from loneliness.

古文：诏周世宗后，凡经郊祀，录其子孙一人。
现代文：下诏：周世宗的后代遇到郊祀时，录用子孙一人。
English: The following edict: When the descendants of Zhou Shizong encounter a suburb, one of the descendants will be hired.

古文：是岁，河北水。
现代文：这一年，河北水灾。
English: This year, Hebei was hit by floods.

古文：遣使决囚，振贫，瘗溺死者，给其家缗钱，察官吏贪暴不恤民者。
现代文：派遣使臣处决囚犯，贩济贫民，掩埋死者，赏给家属络钱，清理官吏中贪暴不抚恤百姓的人。
English: He sent envoys to execute prisoners, sold food to the poor, buried the dead, rewarded family members with money, and purged officials of those who were corrupt and did not care for the people.

古文：龟兹、下溪州黔州蛮来贡。
现代文：龟兹、下溪州黔州蛮来进贡。
English: Kamezi, Shimoheizhou, Banzhou came to pay tribute.

古文：八年春正月甲戌，曹玮卒。
现代文：天圣八年春正月二十一日，曹玮去世。
English: On the 21st day of the first month of the eighth year of the Spring, Cao Pi passed away.

古文：辛巳，作会圣宫于西京永安县。
现代文：二十八日，在西京永安县作会圣宫。
English: On the 28th, the construction of the Holy Palace was completed in Yong'an County, West Beijing.

古文：二月戊子，诏五代时官三品以上告身存者，子孙听用荫。
现代文：二月初五，下诏：五代时官职在三品以上委任官职的文凭尚存在的，允许子孙享受荫补。
English: On the 5th day of the 2nd month of the year, the following edict was issued: the diplomas of the five generations of officials with more than three official titles still exist, allowing their descendants to enjoy the shadow supplement.

古文：三月壬申，幸后苑，遂宴太清楼。
现代文：三月十九日，到后苑，于是宴饮太清楼。
English: On March 19th, they went to the backyard, and the banquet was held at the Taiching Building.

古文：乙亥，禁以财冒士族娶宗室女者。
现代文：二十二日，禁止以财富冒充士族娶宗室女儿。
English: On the 22nd, it was forbidden to use wealth to pretend to be a member of the warrior class to marry the daughter of the family.

古文：诏河北被水州县毋税牛。
现代文：下诏河北遭受水灾州县不交纳牛税。
English: The following states and counties in flood-stricken Hebei will no longer pay cattle tax.

古文：是月，赐礼部奏名进士、诸科及第出身八百二十二人。
现代文：这个月，赐礼部奏名进士、各科及第出身八百二十二人。
English: This month, 822 people from various disciplines and backgrounds were awarded the title of "Ceremonial Musicians."

古文：五月甲寅，赐信州龙虎山张乾曜号澄素先生。
现代文：五月初二，赐信州龙虎山张乾耀号澄素先生。
English: On the second day of the first month of May, Mr. Zhang Qianyao of Longhu Mountain, Xinzhou, presented the award to Mr. Cheng Su.

古文：丙辰，大雨雹。
现代文：初四，大规模降冰雹。
English: On the fourth day of the first month, a large-scale hailstorm occurred.

古文：辛酉，录系囚。
现代文：初九，讯问记录囚犯罪状。
English: On the 16th, the interrogation recorded the criminal status of the prisoner.

古文：六月癸巳，吕夷简上新修国史。
现代文：六月十一日，吕夷简呈上新修国史。
English: On June 11, Lyu Yijian presented a new revision of the national history.

古文：己亥，诏御史台狱勿关纠察司。
现代文：十七日，下诏御史台狱案不报告纠察司。
English: On the 17th, it was announced that the Goshidai prison case would not be reported to the Picketing Division.

古文：乙巳，亲试书判拔萃科及武举人。
现代文：二十三日，亲自策试书判拔萃科及武举人。
English: On the 23rd, he personally set up the examination book to judge the outstanding students and the candidates for promotion.

古文：秋七月丙子，策制举人。
现代文：秋七月二十五日，策试制举人。
English: On the 25th day of the 7th month of autumn, the selection of candidates began.

古文：八月丙戌，诏详定盐法。
现代文：八月初五，下诏详定盐法。
English: On the 5th of August, the detailed salt law was promulgated.

古文：丁亥，诏近臣宗室观祖宗御书于龙图、天章阁，又观瑞谷于元真殿，遂宴蕊珠殿。
现代文：初六，下诏近臣宗室到龙图阁、天章阁观看祖宗御书，又到元真殿观赏瑞谷，于是宴饮菜珠殿。
English: On the 6th day of the 6th month of the junior high school year, the father's family of a close vassal went to Longtu Pavilion and Tianzhang Pavilion to see the ancestor's book, and also went to Yuanzheng Hall to see Ruigu, so the banquet was held at Cuisine Hall.

古文：戊子，诏流配人道死者，其妻子给食送还乡里。
现代文：初七，下诏流配人途中死亡，其妻子给食送回乡里。
English: On the seventh day of the new year, a member of the lower Zhao school died on the way, and his wife sent him back to the countryside for food.

古文：九月癸丑，复置诸路提点刑狱官。
现代文：九月初三，重新设置各路提点刑狱官。
English: On the 3rd day of the 9th month of the year, all the correctional officers were redeployed.

古文：丙辰，罢转对。
现代文：初六，废罢转对。
English: Sixth year of junior high school, right after graduation.

古文：乙丑，姜遵卒。
现代文：十五日，姜遵逝世。
English: On the 15th, Jiang Zun passed away.

古文：己巳，以赵稹为枢密副使。
现代文：十九日，任命赵棋为枢密副使。
English: On the 19th, Zhao Qi was appointed as the vice-envoy of the Privy Council.

古文：冬十月壬辰，奉安太祖御容于太平兴国寺开先殿。
现代文：冬十月十二日，恭敬安置太祖遗像于太平兴国寺开先殿。
English: On October 12th in winter, the remains of the great ancestor were respectfully placed in the main hall of Taiping Xingguo Temple.

古文：丙申，弛三京、河中府、颍、许、汝、郑、郓、济、卫、晋、绛、虢、亳、宿等二十八州军盐禁。
现代文：十六日，放松三京、河中府、颖州、许州、汝州、郑州、军仔州、济州、卫州、晋州、绛州、貌州、毫州、宿州等二十八州军盐禁。
English: On the 16th, the salt ban was relaxed in 28 prefectures, including Sanjing, Hechuan, Yingzhou, Huzhou, Ruzhou, Zhengzhou, Junzi, Jeju, Weizhou, Jinzhou, Ganzhou, Maozhou, Maozhou and Shuzhou.

古文：壬寅，置天章阁待制。
现代文：二十二日，设置天章阁待制。
English: On the 22nd, Tianzhangge was put on standby.

古文：十一月丙寅，朝飨景灵宫。
现代文：十一月十七日，祭祀景灵宫。
English: On November 17th, the ritual at Jingling Palace began.

古文：丁卯，飨太庙。
现代文：十八日，祭祀太庙。
English: On the 18th, the ritual at the Imperial Temple was over.

古文：戊辰，祀天地于圜丘，大赦。
现代文：十九日，在圆丘祭祀天地，大赦。
English: On the 19th, at the round mound, the heavens and the earth were sacrificed, and an amnesty was declared.

古文：贺皇太后于会庆殿。十二月癸未，加恩百官。
现代文：到会庆殿祝贺皇太后。十二月初五，加恩百官。
English: On the fifth day of the twelfth month of the year, the hundred officials of Ga'n were gathered together.

古文：辛丑，西平王赵德明、交阯王李德政并加赐功臣。
现代文：二十三日，西平王赵德明、交趾王李德政都加赐功臣。
English: On the 23rd, the king of Xiping, Zhao Deming, and the king of Jiaozuo, Li Desheng, both gave awards to meritorious soldiers.

古文：是岁，高丽、占城、邛部川都蛮来贡。
现代文：这年，高丽、占城、邓部川蛮来进贡。
English: This year, Goryeo, Zhancheng, and Dengbei came to pay tribute.

古文：九年春正月辛亥，诏诸路转运判官员外郎以上，遇郊听任子弟。
现代文：天圣九年春正月初三，下诏诸路转运判官、员外郎以上官员遇郊祀时允许荫补子弟。
English: On the third day of the first month of the spring of the ninth year of Heaven, the following edict was issued to allow officials above the rank of magistrate of transportation and the rank of overseer to allow their children to accompany them when they went to the countryside for worship.

古文：丙辰，长宁节，百官初上皇太后寿于会庆殿。
现代文：初八，长宁节，百官到会庆殿向皇太后祝寿。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, Changning Festival, hundreds of officials came to the Great Hall to wish the Empress Dowager a happy birthday.

古文：辛未，减畿内民租。
现代文：二十三日，减免京瓷内百姓租税。
English: On the 23rd, tax reductions and exemptions for people in Kyocera were announced.

古文：二月癸巳，诏复郡县职田。
现代文：二月十六日，下诏恢复郡县职田。
English: On February 16th, county-level work sites were restored.

古文：三月甲寅，奉安太祖、太宗、真宗御容于会圣宫。
现代文：三月初七，恭敬安置太祖、太宗、真宗遗像于会圣宫。
English: On the 7th day of the 3rd month of the year, the remaining statues of Taizu, Taizong, and Shinshu were respectfully placed in the Sacred Palace.

古文：夏四月戊寅，诏以陇州论平民五人为劫盗抵死，主者虽更赦，并从重罚。
现代文：夏四月初一，下诏因陇州错误将平民五人作为劫盗掠死狱中，主管官吏虽然遇到赦免，也要从重处罚，不予赦免。
English: On the first day of April in the summer, the lower court sentenced five civilians to death in prison for robbing and plundering because of the mistake of Zhangzhou. Although the officials in charge were pardoned, they should be punished more severely and not be pardoned.

古文：乙巳，阅大乐。
现代文：二十八日，阅大乐。
English: On the 28th, the grand finale will be held.

古文：五月乙丑，录系囚。
现代文：五月十九日，讯问记录囚犯罪状。
English: On May 19, the interrogation recorded the criminal status of the prisoner.

古文：六月庚辰，宋绶上《皇太后仪制》。
现代文：六月初四，宋缓呈上东皇太后仪市少。
English: On the 4th day of the 6th month of the year, the Song Dynasty announced that the Dowager Empress Dowager of the Shangdong Dynasty had passed away.

古文：秋七月丙午朔，契丹使来告其主隆绪殂，遣使祭奠吊慰，及贺宗真立。
现代文：秋七月初一，契丹使臣来报告国主耶律隆绪去世，派人前往奠祭吊慰，并祝贺耶律宗真即位。
English: On the first day of autumn in July, the Khitan envoys came to report the death of the country's lord, Yerut Longsu, and sent people to offer condolences and congratulate Yerut Zongzhen on his accession to the throne.

古文：九月癸亥，祠西太一宫，赐道左耕者茶帛。
现代文：九月十八日，祠祭西太一宫，赐给道左耕者茶帛。
English: On September 18th, the ancestral hall festival of the West Taichi Shrine was held, and a bowl of tea was given to the farmers of Dosa.

古文：冬十月丙戌，诏公卿大夫励名节。
现代文：冬十月十二日，诏令公卿大夫保重名节。
English: On the 12th day of October in winter, the Emperor issued an edict to protect the name day of the noble doctor.

古文：乙未，诏常参官已授外任，毋得奏举选人。
现代文：二十一日，下诏常参官已授外任者，不得奏举选人。
English: On the twenty-first day of the following month, those who have been appointed to outside posts must not submit nominations.

古文：辛丑，罢益、梓、广南路转运判官。
现代文：二十七日，废罢益、梓、广南路转运判官。
English: On the 27th, the judge of the transfer of Guangnan Road, Zi, Zi and Guangnan Road was abolished.

古文：闰月戊辰，翰林侍读学士孙奭请老，命知兖州，曲宴太清楼送之。
现代文：闰十月二十四日，翰林院侍读学士孙请老退休，命令他为知充州，在太清楼设宴为他送行。
English: On October 24th, Sun Zhaolang, an attendant of the bachelor of Hanlin Academy, retired and ordered him to serve as a chicheng state, and set up a banquet for him at the Taiqing Building.

古文：十一月丁亥，驰两川矾禁。
现代文：十一月十四日，放松两川禁。
English: On November 14th, the ban on the two rivers was relaxed.

古文：己丑，祈雪于会灵观。
现代文：十六日，在会灵观祈祷降雪。
English: On the 16th, we prayed for snowfall at the spiritual retreat.

古文：丁酉，出知杂御史曹修古，御史郭劝、杨偕，推直官段少连。
现代文：二十四日，贬默知杂御史曹修古和御史郭劝、杨偕以及推直官段少连。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, he demoted Muxizhizhizhizhigoshi Cao Xugu and goshi Guo Xuan, Yang Xuan, and Shujian official Duan Shoran.

古文：十二月甲寅，诏吏部铨选人父母年八十以上者，权注近官。
现代文：十二月十一日，诏令吏部锉：选人父母年纪在八十岁以上的，可暂且注拟差遣近官。
English: On December 11th, the Imperial Edict issued by the Ministry of Civil Service announced that the parents of candidates over the age of 80 could temporarily be drafted to be dispatched as couriers.

古文：辛酉，大风三日。
现代文：十八日，刮了三天大风。
English: On the 18th, a strong wind blew for three days.

古文：是岁，契丹主及其国母遣使来致遗留物及谢吊祭。
现代文：这一年，契丹主及其国母遣使来赠送遗留物，并回访朝廷。
English: In that year, the Emir of Khitan and the Mother of the Nation sent envoys to present the relics and pay a return visit to the Imperial Court.

古文：南平王李德政遣人谢加恩。
现代文：南平王李德政派人来致谢加恩。
English: Nanping King Li Dezheng sent someone to visit Xie Jian.

古文：龟兹、沙州来贡。
现代文：龟兹、沙州来进贡。
English: Kamezi and Shazhou came to pay tribute.

古文：女真晏端等百八十四人内附。
现代文：女真晏端等一百八十四人内附。
English: One hundred and eighty-four people, including Onna Makoto, are included.

