古文：十有一年春正月，齐人、卫人、郑人盟于恶曹。
现代文：十一年春季正月，齐国人、卫国人、郑国人在恶曹结盟。
English: In the first month of the spring of the eleventh year, the people of Qi, the defenders of the country, and the people of Zheng formed an alliance against Cao Cao.

古文：夏五月癸未，郑伯寤生卒。
现代文：夏季五月，癸未日，郑庄公寤生去世。
English: In the summer of May, the day before yesterday, Zheng Zhuanggong passed away.

古文：秋七月，葬郑庄公。
现代文：秋季七月，郑庄公下葬。
English: In the autumn of July, Zheng Zhuang was buried.

古文：九月，宋人执郑祭仲。
现代文：九月，宋国人囚禁了郑国的祭仲。
English: In September, the Song people imprisoned Saizhong of Zheng.

古文：突归于郑。
现代文：公子突顺从祭仲的安排回到了郑国。
English: The prince suddenly obeyed the arrangement of the festival and returned to Zheng.

古文：郑忽出奔卫。
现代文：郑国太子忽逃到卫国。
English: Prince Zheng suddenly fled to the north of the country.

古文：柔会宋公、陈侯、蔡叔，盟于析。
现代文：大夫柔会见宋公、陈侯、蔡叔，并在折这个地方盟会。
English: Dr. Zhuo met with Song Gong, Chen Hou, and Cai Shu, and the alliance was formed at this time.

古文：公会宋公于夫钟。
现代文：鲁桓公在夫童会见宋庄公。
English: Lu Kuan met with Song Zhuang in Fudong.

古文：冬十有二月，公会宋公于阚。
现代文：冬季十二月，鲁桓公在鲁国的阚会见宋庄公
English: In the winter of December, Lu Huan met with Song Zhuang in Lu

古文：十一年春，齐、卫、郑、宋盟于恶曹。
现代文：十一年春季，齐国、卫国、郑国、宋国在恶曹举行会盟。
English: In the spring of the eleventh year, the states of Qi, Weiguo, Zheng and Song held a league in Wenzao.

古文：楚屈瑕将盟贰、轸。
现代文：楚国的屈瑕打算和贰、轸两国结盟。
English: Kengke of Chu planned to form an alliance with the states of Chu and Chu.

古文：郧人军于蒲骚，将与随、绞、州、蓼伐楚师。
现代文：郧国人的军队驻扎在蒲骚，准备和随、绞、州、蓼四国一起进攻楚国军队。
English: The troops of the Minoans were stationed in Buso, preparing to attack the Chu troops together with the Sui, Zhen, Zhou, and Minoan states.

古文：莫敖患之。
现代文：莫敖担心这件事。
English: There's nothing to worry about.

古文：鬥廉曰： 郧人军其郊，必不诫，且日虞四邑之至也。
现代文：鬬廉说： 郧国的军队驻扎在他们的郊区，一定缺乏警戒，并且天天盼望四国军队的来到。
English: Yu Lian said: Yu's troops are stationed in their suburbs, they must be lacking in vigilance, and they look forward to the arrival of Shikoku's troops every day.

古文：君次于郊郢以御四邑。
现代文：您驻在郊郢来抵御这四个国家，我们用精锐部队夜里进攻郧国。
English: You stay in the countryside to fend off the four nations, while we attack them at night with our elite troops.

古文：我以锐师宵加于郧，郧有虞心而恃其城，莫有斗志。
现代文：郧国一心盼望四国军队，而且又依仗城郭坚固，没有人再有战斗意志。
English: The country was looking forward to the arrival of the armies of the four countries. Moreover, the fortresses were strong, and no one had the will to fight.

古文：若败郧师，四邑必离。 
现代文：如果打败郧军，四国一定离散。 
English: If we defeat the Yunnan army, the four countries will certainly be separated.

古文：莫敖曰： 盍请济师于王？ 
现代文：莫敖说： 何不向君王请求增兵？ 
English: Mo Yan said, "Why don't you ask the king for more soldiers?"

古文：对曰： 师克在和，不在众。
现代文：鬬廉回答说： 军队能够获胜，在于团结一致，不在于人多。
English: Hao Lian replied: The army can win through unity, not through numbers.

古文：商，周之不敌，君之所闻也。
现代文：商朝敌不过周朝，这是您所知道的。
English: You know that the commercial enemy is none other than the Zhou Dynasty.

古文：成军以出，又何济焉？ 
现代文：整顿军队而出兵，又增什么兵呢？ 
English: Reorganize the army, send out soldiers, and what soldiers will be added?

古文：莫敖曰： 卜之。 
现代文：莫敖说： 占卜一下？ 
English: Mo Yan said, "How about divination?"

古文：对曰： 卜以决疑，不疑何卜？ 
现代文：鬬廉回答说： 占卜是为了决断疑惑，没有疑惑，为什么占卜？ 
English: "Divination is for the resolution of doubt, if there is no doubt, why divination?

古文：遂败郧师于蒲骚，卒盟而还。
现代文：于是就在蒲骚打败郧国军队，终于和贰、轸两国订立了盟约回国。
English: As a result, he defeated the Yi army in Puso, and finally concluded a treaty with the two countries to return to China.

古文：郑昭公之败北戎也，齐人将妻之，昭公辞。
现代文：郑昭公打败北戎的时候，齐侯打算把女儿嫁给他，昭公辞谢了。
English: When Zheng Zhaogong defeated Bei Rong, Qi Hou planned to marry his daughter to him, but Zhaogong declined.

古文：祭仲曰： 必取之。
现代文：祭仲说： 您一定要娶她。
English: Said Saichu: You must marry her.

古文：君多内宠，子无大援，将不立。
现代文：国君姬妾很多，您如果没有有力的外援，将不能继承君位。
English: There are many concubines of the sovereign. If you do not have strong foreign assistance, you will not be able to inherit the throne.

古文：三公子，皆君也。 
现代文：其他三位公子都可能做国君的。 
English: The other three princes are all potential kings.

古文：弗从。
现代文：昭公不同意。
English: Akihiro didn't listen.

古文：夏，郑庄公卒。
现代文：夏季，郑庄公死。
English: In the summer, Zheng Zhuanggong died.

古文：初，祭封人仲足有宠于庄公，庄公使为卿。
现代文：当初，祭地封人仲足受到郑庄公的宠信，庄公任命他做卿。
English: At the beginning, Zheng Zhuangguo was so fond of Zhongfu, the person who sealed the sacred place, that Zhuangguo appointed him as a lord.

古文：为公娶邓曼，生昭公，故祭仲立之。
现代文：祭仲为庄公娶了邓曼，生了昭公。所以祭仲立他为国君。
English: Saichu married Denman for Shoko and gave birth to Akiko. So Saichu made him the sovereign.

古文：宋雍氏女于宋庄公，曰雍姞，生厉公。
现代文：宋国的雍氏把女儿嫁给郑庄公，名叫雍姞，生了厉公。
English: The Song Dynasty's Yong clan married their daughter to Zheng Zhuang, whose name was Yong Yao, and gave birth to Li Gong.

古文：雍氏宗有宠于宋庄公，故诱祭仲而执之，曰： 不立突，将死。 
现代文：雍氏为人所尊重，受到宋庄公的宠爱，所以就诱骗祭仲而把他抓起来，说： 不立突为国君，就没有你的命。 
English: Since Yong was respected by people and favored by Song Zhuang, he tricked Saizhong and arrested him, saying, "If you don't become the ruler of the country, you won't live.

古文：亦执厉公而求赂焉。
现代文：雍氏还抓了厉公索取财货。
English: Mr. Yong was also caught soliciting money and goods from Mr. Li.

古文：祭仲与宋人盟，以厉公归而立之。
现代文：祭仲和宋国人结盟，让厉公归国而立他为国君。
English: Saizhong allied with the Song people, let Liguo return to the country and set him up as the sovereign.

古文：秋九月丁亥，昭公奔卫。
现代文：秋季，九月十三日，郑昭公逃亡到卫国。
English: In the autumn, on September 13th, Zheng Zhaogong fled to the defense of the country.

古文：己亥，厉公立。
现代文：二十五日，郑厉公立为国君。
English: On the 25th, Zheng Liguo became the sovereign.

