古文：古者天子建国，诸侯立家，自卿、大夫以至于庶人，各有等差，是以民服事其上，而下无觊觎。
现代文：古时天子建国，诸侯立家，上至卿大夫而下至平民百姓都各有一定的等级之差，造就使得人民能服从他们的长官，而下属也断绝了非分之想。
English: In ancient times, when the Son of Heaven founded a country, and princes founded a family, there was a certain difference in rank from the highest to the lowest, from the nobles to the doctors to the common people. This created a situation in which the people could obey their superiors, and subordinates could no longer have any ill-feelings.

古文：孔子曰： 天下有道，政不在大夫。 
现代文：孔子说： 天下太平，国家的最高政治权力就不会掌握在大夫之手。 
English: Confucius said: When the world is at peace, the country's highest political power will not be in the hands of doctors.

古文：百官有司奉法承令，以修所职，失职有诛，侵官有罚。
现代文：百官得以遵法听命，各司其职，失职的人得到查处，侵权的得到惩罚。
English: Officials were able to obey the law and perform their duties, and those who failed in their duties were investigated and punished, and those who violated rights were punished.

古文：夫然，故上下相顺，而庶事理焉。
现代文：这样一来，方能上通下顺，而万事条理井然。
English: In this way, the party can go up and down smoothly, and everything is logical.

古文：周室既微，礼乐征伐自诸侯出。
现代文：随着周王室的衰微，礼乐征伐的制定开始由诸侯各自做出。
English: With the decline of the Zhou royal family, the development of ceremonial music began to be made by the princes themselves.

古文：桓、文之后，大夫世权，陪臣执命。
现代文：齐桓公和晋文公以后，卿大夫专权，朝中重臣发号施令。
English: After the reigns of King Qiguan and King Jinwen, the authority of the court doctor was exclusive, and the senior vassals of the dynasty issued orders.

古文：陵夷至于战国，合从连衡，力政争强。
现代文：局势演变到了战国，则开始了诸侯之间的合纵连横，他们背弃了礼义，以声威和武力相抗争。
English: When the situation evolved into a warring state, the feuding between lords began. They abandoned civility and fought each other with authority and force.

古文：由是列国公子，魏有信陵、赵有平原、齐有孟尝、楚有春申，皆借王公之势，竞为游侠，鸡鸣狗盗，无不宾礼。
现代文：由此列国间的一些公子们，如魏国的信陵君，赵国的平原君，齐国的孟尝君，楚国的春申君，都凭藉王公贵族的权威，竞相成为游侠，那些鸡鸣狗盗之徒，没有不恭敬和归顺他们的。
English: As a result, some nobles of various countries, such as Xinlingjun of Wei, Pingyuanjun of Zhao, Mengyakun of Qi, and Chunshenjun of Chu, all competed to become rangers by virtue of the authority of princes and nobles. Those chicken-chirping thieves did not disrespect and submit to them.

古文：而赵相虞卿弃国捐君，以周穷交魏齐之厄；信陵无忌窃符矫命，戮将专师，以赴平原之急：皆以取重诸侯，显名天下，扼腕而游谈者，以四豪为称首。
现代文：而趟国相虞卿不惜离开国家和君主，以解救自己的好友魏齐于危难之中；信陵君魏无忌窃取兵符，假传君命，追杀大将，专师出征，以解赵国平原君被秦兵围困之急。他们都因为以诸侯间的关系为重而名扬天下。那些握腕而游谈的侠义之士，都以信陵君、平原君、孟尝君和春申君这 四豪 为领袖。
English: However, Guo Guozhongqing did not hesitate to leave the country and the monarch to rescue his friend Wei Qi in the midst of danger; Xinlingjun Wei did not hesitate to steal military insignia, falsely pass on the prince's life, pursue the general, and go to war as a specialist to solve the urgent need for Zhao Guo Pingyuanjun to be besieged by Qin soldiers. They are all famous for the importance of the relationship between the princes. Those chivalrous men who hold their arms and talk are all led by the four heroes: Xinlingjun, Pingyuanjun, Mengyakjun, and Chunshenjun.

古文：于是背公死党之议成，守职奉上之义废矣。
现代文：于是背叛朝廷、私结死党的协议成为现实，严守公职、尊奉君主的风气开始衰退。
English: As a result, the agreement to betray the imperial court and form a private party became a reality, and the tradition of strictly observing public duties and honoring the monarch began to decline.

古文：及至汉兴，禁网疏阔，未之匡改也。
现代文：等到汉朝兴起，禁令法规十分宽松，因此遣一状况仍未得到改变。
English: By the rise of the Han Dynasty, the prohibition laws were very lax, so the status of sending one remains unchanged.

古文：是故代相陈豨从车千乘，而吴濞、淮南皆招宾客以千数。
现代文：所以代国相陈稀有随从的车千乘，而吴王刘濞、淮南王刘安都招收宾客上千人。
English: Therefore, the acting head of state Chen Rongya accompanied by thousands of cars, while the king of Wu Liu Ye and the king of Huainan Liu An both received thousands of guests.

古文：外戚大臣魏其、武安之属竞逐于京师，布衣游侠剧孟、郭解之徒驰骛于闾阎，权行州域，力折公侯。
现代文：外戚大臣魏其侯窦婴、武安侯田蚣的属下在京城裹游逛生事，平民身份的游侠剧孟、郭解之流流窜于里巷，横行于州县，势力压过了公侯。
English: The subordinates of the maternal relative ministers Wei Qihou Douyou and Wu'an Hou Tianyao roamed around the capital causing trouble. The ranger dramas of Meng and Guo Jie, who had the status of commoners, were rampant in the streets, rampant in the prefectures and counties, and their power overwhelmed the princes.

古文：众庶荣其名迹，觊而慕之。
现代文：许多平民百姓把他们的声名和事迹做为一种荣耀，向往而又仰慕他们。
English: Many ordinary people regard their fame and deeds as a kind of glory, yearn for them and admire them.

古文：虽其陷于刑辟，自与杀身成名，若季路、仇牧，死而不悔也。
现代文：而他们虽然陷于刑法的罚处，也不惜杀身成名，就像季路、仇牧一样，死而无悔。
English: And although they were punished by the criminal law, they did not hesitate to kill themselves to become famous. Just like Ji Lu and Qiu Mu, they died without regret.

古文：故曾子曰： 上失其道，民散久矣。 
现代文：所以曾子说： 身居高位的人不依规矩行事，百姓早就离心离德了。 
English: Therefore, Zengzi said: People in high positions do not act according to the rules, and the people have long been alienated from morality.

古文：非明王在上，视之以好恶，齐之以礼法，民曷由知禁而反正乎！
现代文：没有圣明的君王在上，指示出世间的善恶，制定出国家的礼法，人民又从何知道禁例而自我纠正呢！
English: If there is no holy king above to point out the good and evil in the world and to establish the country's etiquette, how will the people know the prohibitions and correct themselves?

古文：古之正法：五伯，三王之罪人也；而六国，五伯之罪人也。
现代文：古代正统的看法是：五霸，是三王的罪人；而六国，又是五霸的罪人。
English: The ancient orthodox view was that the Five Dominions were the sinners of the Three Kingdoms, while the Six Kingdoms were the sinners of the Five Dominions.

古文：夫四豪者，又六国之罪人也。
现代文：如此看来，这四豪，又应是六国的罪人。
English: From this perspective, these four giants should also be the sinners of the six countries.

古文：况于郭解之伦，以匹夫之细，窃杀生之权，其罪已不容于诛矣。
现代文：况且郭解一类的人，以平民的低下身份，窃夺生杀的权力，他们的罪过已经是天地所不容的了。
English: Moreover, people like Guo Jie, who use their lowly status as civilians to steal the power to kill and kill, their sins are already intolerable.

古文：观其温良泛爱，振穷周急，谦退不伐，亦皆有绝异之姿。
现代文：然而反观他们的另一面，却是温良友爱，助人为乐，谦逊礼让，也都有不凡的风采。
English: However, looking back at the other side of them, they are gentle and friendly, helpful, humble and courteous, and also have an extraordinary style.

古文：惜乎不入于道德，苟放纵于末流，杀身亡宗，非不幸也。
现代文：可惜不合乎正统的道德规范，衹能归入不登大雅的末流，将他们杀身灭宗，也是理所应该！
English: It is a pity that they do not conform to the orthodox moral norms, and they can be classified as the lowest of the low, and they should be killed!

古文：自魏其、武安、淮南之后，天子切齿，卫、霍改节。
现代文：自从魏其侯窦婴、武安侯田纷和淮南王刘安之后，天子对他们切齿痛恨，卫青、霍去病以他们为反面的借鉴。
English: Since Wei's Prince Dou Yu, Wu'an's Prince Tian Ran and Huainan's King Liu An, Tian Zi hated them with a vengeance, and Wei Qing and Huo Di took them as a negative reference.

古文：然郡国豪桀处处各有，京师亲戚冠盖相望，亦古今常道，莫足言者。
现代文：然而郡国中的豪杰到处都有，京城中还有他们的亲友与其内外呼应，这也是古今正常的现象，没有什么可说的。
English: However, there are heroes everywhere in the county, and their relatives and friends in the capital resonate with them inside and outside. This is also a normal phenomenon from ancient times to the present. There is nothing to say.

古文：唯成帝时，外家王氏宾客为盛，而楼护为帅。
现代文：衹是成帝年间，外戚王氏家中的宾客盛极一时，而楼护是其中的统帅。
English: During the reign of Emperor Zengdi, the guests at the home of his maternal relative Wang were extremely popular, and the concierge was one of the leaders.

古文：及王莽时，诸公之间陈遵为雄，闾里之侠原涉为魁。
现代文：等到王莽上台时，诸公之间又以陈遵最有势力，而里巷中的侠士则以原涉为首领。
English: By the time Wang Mang came to power, Chen Zun was the most powerful among the princes, while the knights in the alley were led by Yuan Zhu.

古文：朱家，鲁人，高祖同时也。
现代文：朱家，鲁国人，与高祖生活在同时代。
English: The Zhu family, a native of Lu, lived at the same time as Gao Zu.

古文：鲁人皆以儒教，而朱家用侠闻。
现代文：鲁国人都以信奉儒教而著称，而朱家却以爱好游侠而闻名。
English: The Lu people are all educated in Confucianism, but the Zhu family is famous for being a knight.

古文：所臧活豪士以百数，其余庸人不可胜言。
现代文：他所收养的侠客豪士有上百人，另外还有许多平庸之人就更是不可胜数。
English: He has adopted hundreds of knights and dames, as well as countless mediocrities.

古文：然终不伐其能，饮其德，诸所尝施，唯恐见之。
现代文：但是他始终没有自我炫耀，一切施舍，惟恐被传扬出去。
English: But he never flaunted himself, and he gave away everything for fear that his generosity would be publicized.

古文：振人不赡，先从贫贱始。
现代文：周济他人，则先从贫贱者开始。
English: He relieves the difficulties of others, starting with the poor.

古文：家亡余财，衣不兼采，食不重味，乘不过軥牛。
现代文：以致他自家却穷得找不出多余的财产，衣服衹用素布，吃饭则不讲究味道，出门也衹乘小牛车而行。
English: His family was so poor that he couldn't find any extra money, his clothes were made of plain cloth, he didn't pay attention to the taste of his food, and he didn't go out of the house in a cart.

古文：专趋人之急，甚于己私。
现代文：专爱急人所急，把别人的事看得比自己的事还重要。
English: They are more concerned with other people's needs than their own, and consider other people's affairs more important than their own.

古文：既阴脱季布之厄，及布尊贵，终身不见。
现代文：虽然暗中帮助季布解脱了厄运，但等季布发达以后，却再也不去相见。
English: Although he secretly helped Ji Bu to get rid of his bad luck, he never saw him again after Ji Bu became rich.

古文：自关以东，莫不延颈愿交。
现代文：所以关东一带，没有人不希望与他结交。
English: Therefore, no one in the Kanto area does not want to make friends with him.

古文：楚田仲以侠闻，父事朱家，自以为行弗及也。
现代文：楚国的田仲以游侠闻名，拜朱家为义父，自以为自己与叁塞相比，实在望尘莫及。
English: Tian Zhong of Chu is famous for being a ranger, and Baizhu is his father-in-law. He thinks he is better than Fusai, but he is nothing compared to Fusai.

古文：田仲死后，有剧孟。
现代文：旦世死后，又出了一个赵孟。
English: After Tan Shih's death, another Zhao Meng emerged.

古文：剧孟者，洛阳人也。
现代文：剧孟，洛阳人。
English: Drama Meng, Luoyang people.

古文：周人以商贾为资，剧孟以侠显。
现代文：周人以经商为资本，剧孟却以豪侠著称。
English: Zhou was a businessman, while Meng was a playwright known for his heroic feats.

古文：吴、楚反时，条侯为太尉，乘传东，将至河南，得剧孟，喜曰： 吴、楚举大事而不求剧孟，吾知其无能为已。 
现代文：吴、楚叛乱时，条侯任太尉，乘传车到东方出任大将军，刚到河南，便得到了剧孟。他高兴地说： 吴、楚想成大事业却不去求得剧孟，我知道他们是不能成功的。 
English: When Wu and Chu rebelled, he rode a cart to the East to serve as a general. As soon as he arrived in Henan, he was awarded the Drama Medal. He said happily, "Wu and Chu want to be great, but they don't want the Drama Medal. I know they can't succeed."

古文：天下骚动，大将军得之若一敌国云。
现代文：当时天下一片骚乱，大将军得到了剧孟就好像夺取了一个敌国一样。
English: At that time, the whole world was in turmoil, and the general received the drama medal as if he had captured an enemy country.

古文：剧孟行大类朱家，而好博，多少年之戏。
现代文：剧孟的品行酷似朱家，而又喜好赌博，多与少年一同游戏。
English: Drama Meng's behavior is roughly similar to that of the Zhu family, but he likes to play chess, and what he does is mostly a young man's game.

古文：然孟母死，自远方送丧盖千乘。
现代文：然而剧孟的母亲去世，从远方来送殡的车有上千乘之多。
English: However, Meng's mother passed away, and there were thousands of funeral cars coming from far away.

古文：及孟死，家无十金之财。
现代文：等到剧孟死去，家裹却没有什么钱财了。
English: By the time Meng died, the family had little money left.

古文：而符离王孟，亦以侠称江、淮之间。
现代文：还有符离王孟，也因豪侠之名著称于江淮之间。
English: There is also Fu Liang Wang Meng, also known as the hero among the Jianghuai.

古文：是时，济南瞷氏、陈周肤亦以豪闻。
现代文：当时济南的氏、陈郡的周肤也以豪侠闻名。
English: At that time, the Zou clan of Jinan and the Zhou skin of Chen County were also famous for their heroic deeds.

古文：景帝闻之，使使尽诛此属。
现代文：景帝听说了他们，便派人把他们这一类人通通杀了。
English: When Emperor Jing heard about them, he sent someone to kill them all.

古文：其后，代诸白、梁韩毋辟、阳翟薛况、陕寒孺，纷纷复出焉。
现代文：后来，伐郡的诸家白氏、梁国的韩毋辟、阳翟的薛况、陕地的寒孺等，也纷纷地复出为有名的豪侠。
English: Later, the various families of the Bai clan in Fuxian County, the Han family in Liang Province, the impotent Xue Jiao, and the cold warriors in Shaanxi Province also made a comeback as famous heroes.

古文：郭解，河内轵人也，温善相人许负外孙也。
现代文：郭解，河内郡轵县人，是温地善相人许负的外孙。
English: Guo Jie, a native of Lu County, Hanoi County, is the great-grandson of Wen Di Xiangren.

古文：解父任侠，孝文时诛死。
现代文：郭解的父亲，以侠士为业，孝文帝时被杀。
English: Guo Jie's father, a knight by profession, was killed during the reign of Emperor Xiaowen.

古文：解为人静悍，不饮酒。
现代文：郭解为人性格沉静而勇悍，不爱饮酒。
English: Guo De's personality is calm and brave, and he doesn't like drinking.

古文：少时阴贼感概，不快意，所杀甚众。
现代文：他年少时阴狠暴躁，一有不快，就动武杀人，被他伤害的人很多。
English: When he was young, he was grim and grumpy. Whenever he was unhappy, he would resort to violence and kill people. He hurt a lot of people.

古文：以躯借友报仇，臧命作奸剽攻，休乃铸钱掘冢，不可胜数。
现代文：他能不惜性命地去血报私仇，还藏匿亡命之徒，进行抢劫盗窃活动，没事时就铸假钱、掘坟墓，其劣迹不可胜数。
English: He could spare his own life to take revenge, hide fugitives, rob and steal, mint counterfeit money and dig graves when nothing happened, and his bad deeds are countless.

古文：适有天幸，窘急常得脱，若遇赦。
现代文：亏得有上天保佑，他在危急时才常常得以解脱，就好像遇上了大赦。
English: But they can be blessed by God, and often escape in times of crisis, or encounter amnesty.

古文：及解年长，更折节为俭，以德报怨，厚施而薄望。
现代文：等到郭解已长大成人，便开始反省改过，进行自我约束，对怨仇回报以仁德，乐善好施而又清心寡欲。
English: When Guo Xie was old, he changed his behavior, controlled himself, repaid those who resented him with favors, gave a lot to others, and had little resentment towards others.

古文：然其自喜为侠益甚。
现代文：然而他想当侠士的理想却越发强烈。
English: But the idea that he himself likes to be a knight-errant is getting stronger and stronger.

古文：既已振人之命，不矜其功，其阴贼著于心本发于睚眦如故云。
现代文：虽然已经做了一些挺身救命、不为功名的善事，但其凶险的本性常常表现于眉宇之间，仍然像从前一样。
English: Although it has done some heroic, selfless good deeds, its sinister nature often shows between the eyebrows, still as before.

古文：而少年慕其行，亦辄为报仇，不使知也。
现代文：而许多少年仰慕他的品行，亦总爱铤而走险，伤人复仇，但郭解本人却无从得知这些事。
English: The boy at the time admired his actions and often took revenge for him, but did not let him know.

古文：解姊子负解之势，与人饮，使之釂，非其任，强灌之。
现代文：郭解姐姐的儿子仗着郭解的声势而很霸道，有一次他与别人一起喝酒，让人饮尽爵中之酒，那人承受不了，于是他就强灌那人喝。
English: The son of Guo Jie's sister was very domineering, taking advantage of Guo Jie's influence. Once he was drinking with someone else and made the other person drink all the wine in the jar. The other person could not bear it, so he forced the other person to drink it.

古文：人怒，刺杀解姊子，亡去。
现代文：那人大怒，刺杀了郭解姐姐的儿子逃去。
English: Enraged, the man stabbed Guo's sister's son to death and fled.

古文：解姊怒曰： 以翁伯时人杀吾子，贼不得！ 弃其尸道旁，弗葬，欲以辱解。
现代文：郭解姐姐发说： 竟敢在郭解在世之时杀死我的儿子，凶手却逃跑了厂于是就把儿子弃尸道旁，不加埋葬，想用羞辱激怒郭解。
English: Guo Jie's sister said, "How dare you kill my son while Guo Jie was still alive. The murderer ran away from the factory, so he abandoned his son on the side of the road, leaving him unburied. He wanted to provoke Guo Jie with humiliation."

古文：解使人微知贼处。
现代文：郭解派人打探到了杀人者的去处。
English: Guo Lijie sent someone to secretly find out where the murderer had gone.

古文：贼窘自归，具以实告解。
现代文：他走投无路，便自己跑来，将实情都告诉了郭解。
English: Embarrassed, the murderer came back automatically and told Guo Xie the true situation.

古文：解曰： 公杀之当，吾儿不直。 
现代文：郭解说： 你杀得对，是我家小儿不像话。 
English: Guo Xie said, "You are right to kill him. It is a disgrace to my family."

古文：遂去其贼，罪其姊子，收而葬之。
现代文：于是便放走了杀人贼，郭解把罪责归到了自己姐姐的儿子身上，将他的尸体收殓后而加以埋葬。
English: So he let the murderer go free. Guo Xie blamed the crime on his sister's son, collected his body and buried it.

古文：诸公闻之，皆多解之义，益附焉。
现代文：众人听说了这件事，都敬重郭解的仁义，跟随他的人也越发多了起来。
English: Upon hearing the news, people praised Guo Xie's moral behavior and became more attached to him.

古文：解出，人皆避，有一人独箕踞视之。
现代文：一次郭解外出，路入都躲避他，惟独有一人伸直张开了两腿坐在那裹看着他。
English: Once when Guo De went out, all the passers-by avoided him, except for one person who stretched out his legs and sat there looking at him.

古文：解问其姓名，客欲杀之。
现代文：郭解问他的姓名，他的随从则要杀了那人。
English: Guo asked his name, and his entourage wanted to kill the man.

古文：解曰： 居邑屋不见敬，是吾德不修也，彼何罪！ 
现代文：郭解说： 在巷舍间有人对我失敬，是因为我的品德还有问题，他有什么罪呢！ 
English: Guo said, "Someone disrespected me in the alley because my moral character is still a problem. What is his crime?

古文：乃阴请尉史曰： 是人吾所重，至践更时脱之。 
现代文：于是暗暗告诉尉史说： 这个人是我所敬重的，到征用值更之卒时请免用他。 
English: So he secretly told the lieutenant governor: "This man is someone I respect, so please don't use him when his expropriation value is even lower."

古文：每至直更，数过，吏弗求。
现代文：每到该那入值更时，他数次前去，管事的吏员都没有让他值更。
English: Whenever it was time to pay, he went there several times, but the clerk did not let him pay.

古文：怪之，问其故，解使脱之。
现代文：他很奇怪，询问其中的原因，吏员诉他是郭解使他免更的。
English: He was puzzled and asked why. The clerk told him that Guo Xie had exempted him from the penalty.

古文：箕踞者乃肉袒谢罪。
现代文：那对郭解失敬的人才袒露胸背向郭解谢罪。
English: As a result, he exposed his body and went to Guo Jie Xie.

古文：少年闻之，愈益慕解之行。
现代文：少年们听到了这件事，都越发敬慕郭解的品行。
English: When the boys heard the news, they admired Guo Jie's behavior more and more.

古文：洛阳人有相仇者，邑中贤豪居间以十数，终不听。
现代文：洛阳某人有一个仇人，城中名士豪客从中调解者有十多入，那仇人都不听劝。
English: Someone in Luoyang has an enemy, and there are more than ten mediators among the famous people in the city. That enemy does not listen to advice.

古文：客乃见解。
现代文：某人便来求郭解。
English: Someone came to solve the riddle.

古文：解夜见仇家，仇家曲听。
现代文：郭解夜晚去仇人家见他，那仇人终于屈从了他。
English: Guo Jie went to his enemy's house at night to see him, and the enemy finally gave in to him.

古文：解谓仇家： 吾闻洛阳诸公在间，多不听。
现代文：郭解对那人说： 我听说洛阳众人从中调解，你都不听。
English: Guo Xie said to the man, "I heard that people from Luoyang tried to mediate, but you wouldn't listen.

古文：今子幸而听解，解奈何从它县夺人邑贤大夫权乎！ 
现代文：现在幸能听了我郭解的劝说，可是我郭解又怎能以他方人的身份争夺本地名士们的权力呢！ 
English: Now, fortunately, I have listened to Guo De's persuasion, but how can I, Guo De, compete for the power of local celebrities as someone from the other side?

古文：乃夜去，不使人知，曰： 且毋庸，待我去，令洛阳豪居间乃听。 
现代文：于是他趁夜而归，没让别人知道此事，他说： 这次暂且不算数，等我离去，让洛阳豪客再来调解时再作数。 
English: So he took advantage of the night to return, without letting others know about it. He said: This time is not counted, wait until I leave, let Luoyang high rollers come to mediate, and then count.

古文：解为人短小，恭俭，出未尝有骑，不敢乘车入其县庭。
现代文：郭解身材短小，恭谦俭朴，出门从未有随从的车骑，也不敢乘车进入县中官庭。
English: Guo Jie is short in stature, modest and frugal. He has never been accompanied by a chauffeur when he goes out, nor does he dare to enter the county court by car.

古文：之旁郡国，为人请求事，事可出，出之；不可者，各令厌其意，然后乃敢尝酒食。
现代文：到了邻近的郡国，被入请求找事做，可以推脱的，就推脱了；不可以推脱的，都要让每个人满意，然后才敢吃别人的酒食。
English: When they arrived in a neighboring county, they were asked to find something to do. If they could get away with it, they got away with it. If they couldn't get away with it, they had to make everyone happy before they dared to eat other people's food and drink.

古文：诸公以此严重之，争为用。
现代文：众人都把这事看得很重，争相使用那些人。
English: Everyone took it very seriously and tried to use those people.

古文：邑中少年及旁近县豪夜半过门，常十余车，请得解客舍养之。
现代文：城镇中的少年们及邻近县裹的豪客们半夜登门来访郭解的，在他门前常停下马车十余辆之多，这多是请求收养郭解门客而来的。
English: The boys in the town and the rich people from the neighboring counties would visit Guo Xie in the middle of the night. More than ten horse-drawn carriages would often stop in front of his door. Most of them came to ask Guo Xie to adopt them.

古文：及徙豪茂陵也，解贫，不中訾。吏恐，不敢不徙。
现代文：等到要将豪民徙至茂陵时，郭解因贫穷，财产没达到应该迁徙的标准。而管事的官吏胆子小，不敢不让他迁徙。
English: When it came time to relocate the wealthy people to Muling, Guo Xie was poor and his property did not meet the standards for relocation, and the officials in charge were too timid to prevent him from moving.

古文：卫将军为言： 郭解家贫，不中徙。 
现代文：卫青将军替他讲话： 郭解家贫，不属于迁徙的对象。 
English: General Wei Qing spoke for him: Guo is a poor family man and does not belong to the migration target.

古文：上曰： 解布衣，权至使将军，此其家不贫！ 
现代文：皇上说： 郭解衹是一个布衣，竟能使将军为他说情，这还能算是贫穷吗！ 
English: The emperor said: Guo Xiekun is a commoner, but he can make a general intercede for him, is this really poverty?

古文：解徙，诸公送者出千余万。
现代文：郭解衹得迁徙，临行众人争来相送，送行的财物多至成千上万。
English: Guo Xiejun was forced to migrate, and on the eve of his departure, many people came to see him off, and there were as many as thousands of belongings.

古文：轵人杨季主子为县掾，隔之，解兄子断杨掾头。
现代文：轧县人杨季主的儿子任县裹的属吏，阻止相送的众人，郭解兄长的儿子竟把这姓杨的杀死，还取了首级。
English: Guo Jie's elder brother's son killed Yang Jie, the son of Yang Jie, the son of Yang Jie, the son of Guo Jie, the son of Guo Jie, the son of Guo Jie, the son of Guo Jie, the son of Yang Jie, the son of Guo Jie, the son of Guo Jie, the son of Guo Jie, the son of Guo Jie, the son of Guo Jie, the son of Guo Jie, the son of Guo Jie, the son of Guo Jie, the son of Guo Jie, the son of Guo Jie

古文：解入关，关中贤豪知与不知，闻声争交欢。
现代文：郭解入关后，关中的名士豪客不论认识的还是不认识的，都竞相来与他交结。
English: After Guo De entered the pass, celebrities and high rollers in the pass, whether they knew him or not, all competed to make contact with him.

古文：邑人又杀杨季主，季主家上书人又杀阙下。
现代文：本乡人又杀了杨季主，杨季主的家人上书告状又被杀于宫城之下。
English: Local villagers killed Yang Jizhong again, and Yang Jizhong's family members were also killed outside Miyagi after filing a complaint.

古文：上闻，乃下吏捕解。
现代文：皇上听说了此事，就派吏员来逮捕郭解。
English: When the emperor heard the news, he ordered officials to capture Guo Jie.

古文：解亡，置其母家室夏阳，身至临晋。
现代文：郭解闻风潜逃，安置老母家室到夏阳，自己则去了临晋。
English: Guo Jie fled, leaving his mother in Xiayang and himself in Linjin.

古文：临晋籍少翁素不知解，因出关。
现代文：临晋有个叫籍少翁的人慕其名却从未见过郭解，便将他私放出关。
English: In Linjin, there was a man by the name of Shao Weng, who had never seen Guo Jie, but he secretly released him.

古文：籍少翁已出解，解传太原，所过辄告主人处。
现代文：籍少翁放出了郭解，郭解又去了太原，所过之处，常把此事告诉给留宿的主人。
English: The young man released Guo De, Guo De went to Taiyuan, and often told the owner of the lodging where he stayed.

古文：吏逐迹至籍少翁，少翁自杀，口绝。
现代文：捕吏追循踪迹找到籍少翁，籍少翁情急而自杀，使人证从此断绝。
English: The arresting officers followed the trail to find the minor, and the minor committed suicide in a hurry, and the identity card was cut off.

古文：久之得解，穷治所犯为，而解所杀，皆在赦前。
现代文：过了许久终于捕得郭解，全面地调查了他所犯的罪行，但他的那些杀人罪行，却都发生在大赦以前，难以追究。
English: After a long time, Guo Xie was finally arrested and the crimes he committed were comprehensively investigated, but his murderous crimes all took place before the amnesty and are difficult to investigate.

古文：轵有儒生侍使者坐，客誉郭解，生曰： 解专以奸犯公法，何谓贤？ 
现代文：轵县有一个儒生陪从使者而坐，众人多为郭解美言，而儒生却说： 郭解专门以奸盗触犯公法，怎能说他是贤人呢？ 
English: In Handan County, a Confucian scholar was sitting with the envoy. Most of the people spoke well of Guo Ge, but the Confucian scholar said, "Guo Ge specifically violated public law by being a traitor. How can you say that he is a wise man?"

古文：解客闻之，杀此生，断舌。吏以责解，解实不知杀者，杀者亦竟莫知为谁。吏奏解无罪。
现代文：郭解的家客听到了此言，便暗杀了这个儒生，并切断了他的舌头，为此一案吏员又提郭解来讯质，郭解实在不知杀人者是谁，杀人者当时也确没有查清，吏员便上奏说郭解无罪。
English: Guo Xie's guest heard this and assassinated the Confucian scholar and cut off his tongue. The case officer also brought Guo Xie in for questioning. Guo Xie really did not know who the murderer was, and the murderer had not been identified at the time. The officer then reported that Guo Xie was not guilty.

古文：御史大夫公孙弘议曰： 解布衣为任侠行权，以睚眦杀人，解不知，此罪甚于解知杀之。
现代文：御史大夫公孙弘指出： 郭解身为一个布衣平民，却私结党羽，滥使权力，因小事而肆意杀人，郭解自己不知，这种罪行已超过了郭解知道的杀头之罪。
English: The chief historian, Gong Sunhong, pointed out: Guo De was a commoner in civilian clothes, but he formed a clique, abused his power, and killed people arbitrarily for trivial matters. Guo De did not know that this crime had exceeded Guo De's knowledge of the crime of beheading.

古文：当大逆无道。 
现代文：应该按大逆不道罪名来处置。 
English: Guo Jie was sentenced to the crime of high treason.

古文：遂族解。
现代文：于是皇上便下令将郭解全家处斩。
English: As a result, the emperor ordered Guo Jie's entire family to be beheaded.

古文：自是之后，侠者极众，而无足数者。
现代文：从此以后，各地所出的侠士极多，而却没有值得数说的。
English: Since then, there have been many knights from all over the country, but they are not worth mentioning.

古文：然关中长安樊中子，槐里赵王孙，长陵高公子，西河郭翁中，太原鲁翁孺，临淮皃长卿，东阳陈君孺，虽为侠而恂恂有退让君子之风。
现代文：但关中长安的樊中子，槐里的趟王孙，长陵的高公子，西河的郭翁中，太原的鲁翁孺，临淮的儿长卿，束阳的陈君孺等，他们虽然身为侠士却都有礼让谦逊的君子之风。
English: But Guanzhong Chang'an's Zou Zhongzi, Zou Li's Wang Sun, Changling's Gao Gongzi, Xihe's Guo Wenzhong, Taiyuan's Lu Wenzhong, Linhuai's Er Changqing, Sokyang's Chen Junyao, etc., although they are knights, they all have a courteous and humble gentleman's style.

古文：至若北道姚氏，西道诸杜，南道仇景，东道赵佗羽公子，南阳赵调之徒，盗跖而居民间者耳，曷足道哉！
现代文：至于北道的姚氏，西道的诸位杜氏，南道的仇景，束道的佗羽公子，南阳的赵调等人，都是强盗而混杂在平民之间，又何足挂齿啊！
English: As for the Yao clan of the North Road, the Du clan of the West Road, the Vendetta of the South Road, the Xuan Yu boy of the Bund Road, the Zhao tune of the Nanyang and others, they are all robbers and mixed among civilians, and what a shame!

古文：此乃乡者朱家所羞也。萭章字子夏，长安人也。
现代文：他们是朱家那样的人也会感到羞辱的。万章，字子夏，长安人。
English: They are people like the Zhu family who would also feel humiliated. Wanzhang, Zhizi Xia, Chang'an people.

古文：长安炽盛，街闾各有豪侠，章在城西柳市，号曰 城西萭章子夏 。
现代文：长安地方十分繁华，街市中有很多豪侠之士。万章住在城西的柳市，人称 城西万子夏 。
English: The Chang'an region is very prosperous, and there are many heroes in the city market. Wanzhang lives in the west of the city, Liushi, and is known as Wanzi Xia.

古文：为京兆尹门下督，从至殿中，侍中诸侯贵人争欲揖章，莫与京兆尹言者。
现代文：后来，他做了京兆尹的幕友，曾跟着京兆尹去过殿中，在那裹侍中、诸侯和贵人都争着要和万章作揖，却没有人去找京兆尹交谈。
English: Later, he became a shogun's friend of Jing Zhaoyun. He once followed Jing Zhaoyun to the Great Hall of the People, where lords and nobles were vying to serve with Wan Zhang, but no one went to talk to Jing Zhaoyun.

古文：章逡循甚惧。
现代文：万章十分局促退缩，也十分害怕。
English: Wanzhang was very shy and scared.

古文：其后京兆不复从也。
现代文：从此之后，京兆尹就再也不叫万章陪着自己了。
English: From then on, Jing Zhaoyun never asked Wan Zang to accompany him again.

古文：与中书令石显相善，亦得显权力，门车常接毂。
现代文：万章与中书令石显很要好，也藉了石显有权有势的光，所以他家门前的车马总是接连不断。
English: Wanzhang was very friendly with Shixian, the second-ranking official in the Chinese government, and also benefited from Shixian's power and influence, so there was always a succession of carriages and horses in front of his house.

古文：至成帝初，石显坐专权擅势免官，徙归故郡。
现代文：到了成帝初年，石显因为专权擅势的罪名而免了官，搬回家乡去了。
English: In the first year of Emperor Chengdu, Shi Xian was relieved of his duties for the crime of abuse of power and moved back to his hometown.

古文：显资巨万，当去，留床席器物数百万直，欲以与章，章不受。
现代文：那时石显家财千万，临走的时候，留了些床席器物值几百万，要送给万章，但万章没有接受。
English: At that time, Shi Xian's family wealth was tens of millions. Before leaving, he left some bed seats and utensils worth millions to be given to Wanzhang, but Wanzhang did not accept them.

古文：宾客或问其故，章叹曰： 吾以布衣见哀于石君，石君家破，不能有以安也，而受其财物，此为石氏之祸，萭氏反当以为福邪！ 
现代文：有些宾客询问其中的原因，万章感叹地说： 我是身穿布衣的平民百姓，承蒙石君怜惜，现在石君已破家败业，我不能相救，反而还去接受他的财物，难道这件石氏的祸事，我万氏反当作福气吗！ 
English: Some guests inquired about the reason for this, and Wanzhang said with a sigh: I am a commoner dressed in cloth, and I am grateful for Shi Jun's pity. Now that Shi Jun has lost his family and business, I can't help him, but I still accept his belongings. Is it possible that this is Shi's misfortune, but I, Wanzhang, consider it a blessing?

古文：诸公以是服而称之。
现代文：众人间听此言，无不口服心服，并交口称赞他的为人。
English: After hearing this, everyone was impressed and complimented him.

古文：河平中，王尊为京兆尹，捕击豪侠，杀章及箭张回、酒市赵君都、贾子光，皆长安名豪，报仇怨养刺客者也。
现代文：河平年间，王尊当上了京兆尹，开始捉捕豪侠之士，杀了万章和作箭的张回、酒市的趟君都、贾子光等人，他们都是长安城裹著名的豪侠，也是最爱私报仇怨和收养刺客的人。
English: During the Heping era, Wang Zun became Jing Zhaoyun and began to capture the heroes. He killed Wan Zhao and Zhang Hui, who made arrows, Watu Jundu, who went to the wine market, and Jia Ziguang and others. They were all famous heroes in Chang'an City, and they were also the ones who loved revenge and adopted assassins.

古文：楼护字君卿，齐人。
现代文：楼护，字君卿，齐国人。
English: The guardian of the building, known as Junqing, was from Qi.

古文：父世医也，护少随父为医长安，出入贵戚家。
现代文：他父亲是世传的医生，楼护小时候就随父亲在长安行医，出入于贵戚之家。
English: His father was a well-known doctor. As a child, the concierge followed his father to practice medicine in Chang'an and visited the homes of his relatives.

古文：护诵医经、本草、方术数十万言，长者咸爱重之，共谓曰： 以君卿之材，何不宦学乎？ 
现代文：楼护诵读医经、本草、方术书籍数十万言，长辈们都喜爱看重他，都对他说： 以你楼君卿的人才，何不学习做官呢？ 
English: Lou Guo recited hundreds of thousands of words from books on medicine, herbalism, and Chinese medicine. The elders loved and valued him, and said to him, "With your talent as lord of the palace, why don't you study to be an official?"

古文：由是辞其父，学经传，为京兆吏数年，甚得名誉。
现代文：由此楼护辞别了他的父亲，开始学习经传之书，当了京城的小吏数年，很有声誉。
English: As a result, he apologized to his father, began to study the book of scripture, and became a minor official in the capital for several years, with a great reputation.

古文：是时，王氏方盛，宾客满门，五侯兄弟争名，其客各有所厚，不得左右，唯护尽入其门，咸得其欢心。
现代文：这时王氏刚刚兴盛起来，满门都是宾客，五侯兄弟争名夺利，对宾客他们各人都有自己所厚待的人，宾客很难左右逢源，衹有楼护同时被他们都收入了门下，并得到了他们每人的欢心。
English: At this time, the Wang family had just flourished, and the whole door was full of guests. The five brothers were competing for fame and profit, and each of them had their own kind treatment for the guests. It was difficult for the guests to be right or left, and they were all taken under the door at the same time, and got the favor of each of them.

古文：结士大夫，无所不倾，其交长者，尤见亲而敬，众以是服。
现代文：楼护结交士大夫，对自己的一切无不倾露，他结交长辈，更显出亲切而敬重，大家都因此而佩服他。
English: The concierge befriended the doctor, revealing everything about himself. He befriended the elders, showing more affinity and respect. Everyone admired him for this.

古文：为人短小精辩，论议常依名节，听之者皆竦。
现代文：楼护为人矮小善辩，议论起来常常能联系到名誉与节操，使听者不由肃然起敬。
English: The guardian of the building is a small person and a good debater. When discussing, he can often relate to honor and discipline, so that the listener cannot help but be awed.

古文：与谷永俱为五侯上客，长安号曰 谷子云笔札，楼君卿唇舌 ，言其见信用也。
现代文：他与谷永都是五侯的上客，所以长安城中有句传言道 谷子云的笔札，楼君卿的唇舌 ，说的正是他们各自被世人看重的特长。
English: He and Gu Yong were both guests of the Five Princes, so there is a rumor in Chang'an City that the writing of Gu Ziyun and the lips and tongue of Lord Lou are their respective specialties valued by the world.

古文：母死，送葬者致车二三千两，闾里歌之曰： 五侯治丧楼君卿。 
现代文：楼护的母亲死了，送葬的人乘坐的车就来了二、三千辆，里巷的人编歌唱道： 楼君卿治丧五侯忙。 
English: The guardian's mother died, and two or three thousand cars came to take the mourners to the funeral. People in the alleys sang a song: "Mr. Lou is busy with the mourning of five towns."

古文：久之，平阿侯举护方正，为谏大夫，使郡国。
现代文：过了许久，平阿侯举荐楼护为方正之才，任谏大夫，又出使郡国。
English: After a long time, Ping A Hou recommended Lou Jiao as the talent of Fang Zheng, appointed him as a doctor, and sent him to the county.

古文：护假贷，多持币帛，过齐，上书求上先人冢，因会宗族故人，各以亲疏与束帛，一日数百金之费。
现代文：楼护负责监督官府借贷给穷人的财物，身边持有很多钱币和帛匹，路过齐国，上书请求为祖上的墓地上坟，由此与宗族亲友得以相会，便按关系亲疏的不同各自赠送了一些钱财帛匹，一天就散发了价值百金的赠礼。
English: The caretaker was in charge of supervising the property loaned to the poor by the government. He had a lot of coins and pennies with him. He was passing through Qi Province. He wrote a letter to request a burial place for his ancestor's grave. As a result, he was able to meet with relatives and friends of the clan. They each presented some money and pennies according to the difference in their relationship. A gift worth one hundred gold was distributed on the same day.

古文：使还，奏事称意，擢为天水太守。
现代文：出使回朝后，楼护禀报了出使的情况得到了皇上的满意，便升他做了天水郡太守。
English: After the emissary returned to the imperial court, Lou Jian reported the situation of the emissary to the satisfaction of the emperor, and he was promoted to the governor of Tianshui County.

古文：数岁免，家长安中。
现代文：又过了几年楼护被免官，家居在长安城中。
English: After a few more years, the guard was removed from his post, and his home was in Chang'an City.

古文：时成都侯商为大司马卫将军，罢朝，欲候护，其主簿谏： 将军至尊，不宜入闾巷。 
现代文：当时成都侯王商任大司马卫将军，一次上朝过后，想去看望楼护，他的主薄官劝说他： 将军你以至尊之身，不宜于出入里巷之中。 
English: At that time, General Ma Wei, the grand secretary of the Chengdu Marquis of Commerce, once wanted to visit the palace guard after visiting the emperor. His superior officer persuaded him: "General, you are the supreme body, it is not appropriate to enter and leave the alley.

古文：商不听，遂往至护家。
现代文：王商不听，于是就去了楼护家。
English: Wang Shang didn't listen, so he went to the concierge's house.

古文：家狭小，官属立车下，久住移时，天欲雨，主簿谓西曹诸掾曰： 不肯强谏，反雨立闾巷！ 
现代文：楼护的住处十分狭小，他们衹能站在车下，停了好长一段时间，天要下雨了，主簿官对西曹诸位属吏说： 大将军不听劝告，现在反而要站在里巷中淋雨！ 
English: The caretaker's quarters were too small for them to stand under the car, so they parked there for a long time. It was about to rain, and the chief bookkeeper said to the chief clerk's subordinates, "The general did not listen to my advice, but now he has to stand in the alley in the rain!"

古文：商还，或白主簿语，商恨，以他职事去主簿，终身废锢。
现代文：王商回去后，了解到主簿的这些话，对他十分反感，便以调动工作为由撤了他主簿的职，一生再没有让他当官。
English: After Wang Shang returned, he learned these words from the master book, and he was very disgusted with him. He withdrew his master book position on the grounds of job transfer, and never allowed him to be an official again.

古文：后护复以荐为广汉太守。
现代文：后来楼护重新被推荐当了广汉郡太守。
English: Later, Lou Guo was re-recommended to be the governor of Guanghan County.

古文：元始中，王莽为安汉公，专政，莽长子宇与妻兄吕宽谋以血涂莽第门，欲惧莽令归政。
现代文：元始年间，王莽任安汉公，专擅朝政，王莽的长子王室与其妻子的兄弟旦宽密谋用血涂抹在王差的宅门上，想威胁王莽使他交还朝政大权。
English: At the beginning of the year, Wang Mang was the Prince of Anhan and was exclusively in charge of the government. Wang Mang's eldest son, the royal family, conspired with his wife's brother, Dangguan, to smear blood on the door of Wang Chang's house in order to threaten Wang Mang into handing back the power of the government.

古文：发觉，莽大怒，杀宇，而吕宽亡。
现代文：此事发觉后，王莽大怒，杀了王宇，而吕宽却亡命出逃。
English: After discovering this, Wang Mang flew into a rage and killed Wang Yu, while Lü Guang fled for his life.

古文：宽父素与护相知，宽至广汉过护，不以事实语也。
现代文：旦宽的父亲一向与搂谨相识，旦直到了庐还郡路过搂谨处，没有告诉他真实情况。
English: Dangguan's father had always been acquainted with Zou Ji. When Dangguan arrived in Zouyuan County, he passed by Zou Ji's place and did not tell him the true situation.

古文：到数日，名捕宽诏书至，护执宽。
现代文：过了几天，指名追捕吕宽的诏书送到，楼护立即扣留了旦宽。
English: A few days later, the edict nominating the arrest of Lü Guang was delivered, and the guard immediately detained Dan Guang.

古文：莽大喜，征护入为前煇光，封息乡侯，列子九卿。
现代文：王菱因此而大喜，征召擅护为前辉光，封爵号为息乡侯，列于九卿之中。
English: As a result, Wang Ling was overjoyed. He was enlisted as a former eminent guard, and given the title of Xixianghou. He was listed as one of the nine nobles.

古文：莽居摄，槐里大贼赵朋、霍鸿等群起，延入前煇光界，护坐免为庶人。
现代文：王莽摄政期间，槐里地方的大盗贼赵朋、霍鸿等群起作乱，也蔓延到了前辉光管辖的区域，楼护因此获罪免官成为平民。
English: During Wang Mang's regency, the great thieves Zhao Peng, Hohong and other groups in the region of Bali started a riot, which also spread to the area under the jurisdiction of the former Huiguang. As a result, the guard was acquitted and became a civilian.

古文：其居位，爵禄赂遗所得亦缘手尽。
现代文：他在居官时，官俸赂金等所得财物也都随手用光。
English: When he was in office, his official salary, bribe money and other income and property were all used up.

古文：既退居里巷，时五侯皆已死，年老失势，宾客益衰。
现代文：回到了里巷之中，而当时五侯也都已死去，真是老年失势，连宾客也越来越少。
English: He returned to the middle of the alley, and at that time the five lords had all died. It was really a loss of power in old age, and even the guests were getting fewer and fewer.

古文：至王莽篡位，以旧恩召见护，封为楼旧里附城。
现代文：到了王莽篡位当了皇上，以旧情召见楼护，封他为楼旧里附城。
English: When Wang Mang usurped the throne and became emperor, he summoned the guardian of the building with his old feelings and made him the guardian of the building.

古文：而成都侯商子邑为大司空，贵重，商故人皆敬事邑，唯护自安如旧节，邑亦父事之，不敢有阙。
现代文：而成都侯王商的儿子王邑当了大司空，十分尊贵，王商的旧朋友都很敬重王邑，惟有楼护仍按以前的礼节对待他，王邑也以父辈看待楼护，不敢有所失礼。
English: However, Wang Yip, the son of the Chengdu lord Wang Shang, became the grand steward of the sky. He was very honorable. Wang Yip's old friends all respected Wang Yip. However, the concierge still treated him according to the previous etiquette. Wang Yip also regarded the concierge according to his father's generation and did not dare to be rude.

古文：时请召宾客，邑居樽下，称 贱子上寿 。
现代文：当时王邑曾召集宾客，王邑居于酒樽之下。称 贱子上寿 。
English: At that time, Wangyur had invited guests, and Wangyur was living under a wine barrel. It was called "Poor Woman's Birthday."

古文：坐者百数，皆离席伏，护独东乡正坐，字谓邑曰： 公子贵如何！ 
现代文：在坐的人有上百之多，都离席伏地行礼，而楼护却独自面向东方正襟危坐，后来还写信对王邑说： 王公子你尊贵的太过分了！ 
English: There were more than a hundred people sitting there, all bowing from their seats, while the doorkeeper sat alone, facing the east. Later, he wrote to Wangyi, "Prince, your dignity is too much!

古文：初，护有故人吕公，无子，归护。
现代文：当初，楼护有一个老友叫吕公，没有子嗣，便来楼护家寄住。
English: At first, the caretaker had an old friend named Lyu Gong, who had no children, so he came to stay at the caretaker's house.

古文：护身与吕公、妻与吕妪同食。
现代文：楼护与吕公、楼妻与吕妪在一起进食。
English: The guard and Lu Gong and the wife and Lu Yao are eating together.

古文：及护家居，妻子颇厌吕公。
现代文：等到楼护免官家居后，妻子很厌烦吕公。
English: After waiting for the building guard to leave the official residence, his wife was very tired of Lv Gong.

古文：护闻之，流涕责其妻子曰： 吕公以故旧穷老托身于我，义所当奉。 
现代文：楼护知道了此事，便哭泣着责怪他的妻子说： 吕公因为故旧之情和孤苦穷老而寄住到我家，从道义上说我们应该奉养他。 
English: When the caretaker found out about this, he wept and blamed his wife, saying, "Lukong stayed at my house because he was lonely and poor. Morally speaking, we should take care of him."

古文：遂养吕公终身。
现代文：于是奉养吕公终身。
English: As a result, Lv Gong was raised for life.

古文：护卒，子嗣其爵。
现代文：楼护死后，他的儿子继承了他的爵号。
English: After Lou Guo's death, his son inherited his title.

古文：陈遵字孟公，杜陵人也。
现代文：陈遵，字孟公，杜陵县人。
English: Chen Zun, also known as Meng Gong, was from Tuling County.

古文：祖父遂，字长子，宣帝微时与有故，相随博弈，数负进。
现代文：他的祖父叫陈遂，字长子，当汉宣帝微贱的时候，和他很要好，时常跟他一起赌博围棋，由此屡次欠了赌债。
English: His grandfather was named Chen Sui, the eldest son. When Emperor Xuan of Han was very poor, he was very close to him and often gambled Go with him. As a result, he repeatedly fell into gambling debt.

古文：及宣帝即位，用遂，稍迁至太原太守，乃赐遂玺书曰： 制诏太原太守：官尊禄厚，可以偿博进矣。
现代文：等到汉宣帝即位，便任用了陈遂，不久调他去做了太原太守，有一天宣帝赐予陈遂一道玺书说： 制诏给太原太守：现在你官尊禄厚，可以偿还赌博时输的钱了。
English: When Emperor Xuan of Han came to the throne, Chen Sui was appointed, and soon he was transferred to become the Taiyuan governor. One day, Emperor Xuan gave Chen Sui an imperial edict saying, "I hereby issue an edict to the Taiyuan governor: Now that you are a high-ranking official, you can pay back the money you lost while gambling.

古文：妻君宁时在旁，知状。 
现代文：你夫人君宁当时在场，知道实情。 
English: Your wife Jun Ning was present at the time and knew the truth.

古文：遂于是辞谢，因曰： 事在元平元年赦令前。 
现代文：陈遂于是辞谢宣帝说： 这些事都发生在元平元年赦令之前，不应再追究了。 
English: Chen Sui then thanked Emperor Xuan for his resignation and said, "These things all happened before the amnesty in the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, and should no longer be investigated.

古文：其见厚如此。
现代文：他竟被宣帝如此优待。
English: He was treated so well by Emperor Xuan.

古文：元帝时，征遂为京兆尹，至廷尉。
现代文：元帝时，征召陈遂做京兆尹，后来官做到廷尉。
English: At the time of Emperor Yuan, Chen Sui was conscripted to be Jing Zhaoyun, and later he became a court lieutenant.

古文：遵少孤，与张竦伯松俱为京兆史。
现代文：陈遵早年就失去了父亲，后来与一位名叫张竦号伯松的人都做了京兆史。
English: Chen Zun lost his father at an early age. Later, he made a Beijing zodiac history with a man named Zhang Ye Bo Song.

古文：竦博学通达，以廉俭自守，而遵放纵不拘，操行虽异，然相亲友，哀帝之末俱著名字，为后进冠。
现代文：张竦学问渊博，理事通达，以清廉节俭自我约束，而陈遵却放纵而不拘小节，然二人操守品行虽然不同，但互相之间却很亲近友爱，哀帝末年时，他们都已很具名望，成为了后进人士中的佼佼者。
English: Zhang Qian was well-educated, the director was well-versed, and self-disciplined with integrity and frugality, while Chen Zun was indulgent and informal. However, although the two people's ethics and behavior were different, they were very close and friendly to each other. By the end of the Emperor's life, they were already very famous and became the best among the less advanced people.

古文：并入公府，公府掾史率皆羸车小马，不上鲜明，而遵独极舆马衣服之好，门外车骑交错。
现代文：二人又都进了公府，公府中的掾史属官，都衹有些瘦马破车，从不讲究光鲜自己的外表，衹有陈遵极尽车马衣服的华丽，他的门外，总是车马交会，很有气派。
English: Both of them entered the government office again. Among the officials in the government office who were subordinate to the minister of history, Tudou was somewhat thin and had a broken carriage. He never paid attention to his appearance, but Chen Zun was extremely gorgeous in his carriage and horse clothes. Outside his door, there was always a carriage and horse fair, which was very elegant.

古文：又日出醉归，曹事数废。
现代文：每天他出去饮酒，定要大醉而归，以致对公事却屡次不去处理。
English: Every day he would go out drinking and would come home so drunk that he often did not do his work.

古文：西曹以故事適之，侍曹辄诣寺舍白遵曰： 陈卿今日以某事適。 
现代文：西曹按照旧有的规矩罚了他，伺候他的小吏总是到官舍中通告陈遵说： 陈卿今天又为了某事受了罚。 
English: Xizhao punished him according to the old rules, and the minor officials who served him always went to the official residence to inform Chen Zun, saying: "Chen Xing was punished for something again today.

古文：遵曰： 满百乃相闻。 
现代文：陈遵说： 等满了一百件，再来通告我。 
English: Chen Zun said, "Let me know when you have a hundred pieces."

古文：故事，有百適者斥，满百，西曹白请斥。
现代文：按旧的规矩，被罚一百次的人要被斥退，后来满了一百件时，西曹便请大吏斥退陈遵。
English: According to the old rules, a person who was fined a hundred times had to be expelled first. Later, when he had a hundred cases, Sicao asked the officials to expel Chen Zun.

古文：大司徒马宫大儒优士，又重遵，谓西曹： 此人大度士，奈何以小文责之？ 
现代文：那时大司徒马宫是位度量很大的人，他本来就宽容士子，又十分看重陈遵，于是就对西曹说： 此人是一位很有才干的高士，怎么可以用小规矩去责斥他呢？ 
English: At that time, Grand Master Tu Ma Gong was a very generous person. He was tolerant of scholars and highly valued Chen Zun. Therefore, he said to Xi Cao, "This man is a very talented high-ranking scholar. How can you use petty rules to reprimand him?"

古文：乃举遵能治三辅剧县，补郁夷令。
现代文：便举荐陈遵，称他能治理三辅中难以治理的艰巨属县，于是就让他补做了郁夷县令。
English: He recommended Chen Zun, saying that he could govern the difficult-to-govern difficult-to-govern county among the three auxiliary counties, so he asked him to supplement the Ikui County Ordinance.

古文：久之，与扶风相失，自免去。
现代文：过了很久，他由于和扶风的意见不合，便自己辞官而去。
English: After a long time, he resigned because of his disagreement with Fu Feng.

古文：槐里大贼赵朋、霍鸿等起，遵为校尉，击朋、鸿有功，封嘉威侯。
现代文：槐里地方的大盗贼趟朋、霍鸿等人群起造，陈遵正任校尉，他打击趟朋、霍鸿等很有功劳，便被封为嘉威侯。
English: Chen Zunzheng served as a lieutenant, and he was awarded the title of Jiawei Marquis for his great contribution to the fight against big thieves such as Wibong and Hohong in Bali.

古文：居长安中，列侯近臣贵戚皆贵重之。
现代文：他住在长安城中，所有列侯、近臣、贵戚都很看重他。
English: He lived in Chang'an City, and all his vassals, courtiers, and relatives held him in high regard.

古文：牧守当之官，及郡国豪桀至京师者，莫不相因到遵门。
现代文：凡是到任的郡县官，及郡国豪杰到京师来的，没有不同到陈遵门下拜访的。
English: All the county and prefectural officials in office, as well as the county and national heroes who came to Beijing, were no different from those who visited Chen Zunmen.

古文：遵嗜酒，每大饮，宾客满堂，辄关门，取客车辖投井中，虽有急，终不得去。
现代文：陈遵喜欢饮酒，每次举行大酒宴，等到宾客满堂时，常常关上了门，把客人车子上的键头投入井中，那怕有急事，也不能出去。
English: Chen Zun liked to drink alcohol. Every time he held a large wine banquet, when the hall was full of guests, he often closed the door and threw the key on the guest's car into the well. Even if there was an emergency, he could not get out.

古文：尝有部刺史奏事，过遵，值其方饮，刺史大穷，候遵沾醉时，突入见遵母，叩头自白当对尚书有期会状，母乃令从后阁出去。
现代文：曾经有一位部中的刺史因公来拜访陈遵，正好赶上他狂饮之时，刺史十分窘迫，待陈遵酩酊大醉时，他突然进去见了陈遵的老母，叩头告诉她自己和尚书约好还有公事要谈，陈遵母亲便叫他从后门出去。
English: Once upon a time, a senior official from the ministry came to visit Chen Zun on official business. Just in time for his binge drinking, the senior official was very distressed. When Chen Zun was very drunk, he suddenly went in to see Chen Zun's old mother. He told her that he had a book appointment with the monk and that he had business to discuss. Chen Zun's mother then told him to go out the back door.

古文：遵大率常醉，然事亦不废。
现代文：陈遵大概时常喝醉酒，但是公事并没有耽误。
English: Chen Zun is probably drunk all the time, but he doesn't procrastinate in his work.

古文：长八尺余，长头大鼻，容貌甚伟。
现代文：陈遵身高八尺多，头长鼻大，相貌一表堂堂。
English: Chen Zun is more than eight feet tall, with a large long nose and a distinguished appearance.

古文：略涉传记，赡于文辞。
现代文：略读了些传记，便会写作文辞。
English: After skimming a few biographies, I can write a speech.

古文：性善书，与人尺牍，主皆藏去以为荣。
现代文：他生性爱好写字，给他人写去的信简，都被对方珍藏起来以为荣耀。
English: He had a natural affinity for writing, and his letters to others were treasured and considered an honor.

古文：请求不敢逆，所到，衣冠怀之，唯恐在后。
现代文：每有请求，大家都不敢拒绝他，所到之处，整个上流社会都会思慕他，惟恐怠慢了他。
English: No one dared to refuse him every request, and wherever he went, the whole high society yearned for him, for fear of neglecting him.

古文：时列侯有与遵同姓字者，每至人门，曰陈孟公，坐中莫不震动，既至而非，因号其人曰陈惊坐云。
现代文：这时有一位和陈遵同姓同名的人，每当他走访到别人门前时便喊道 陈孟公到 ，于是座中没有不震惊的，等他进了门，却不是心目中的那个陈孟公，因此便称此人为陈惊坐。
English: At this time, there was a person with the same name as Chen Zunong. Whenever he visited someone's front door, he would call out "Chen Meng Gong has arrived," so there was no one who was not shocked. When he entered the door, he was not the Chen Meng Gong in his mind, so he called this person Chen Shuizan.

古文：王莽素奇遵材，在位多称誉者，由是起为河南太守。
现代文：王莽一向惊异陈遵的才干，在位的官吏们也大多称誉他，因此便任他做了河南郡的太守。
English: Wang Mang had always been amazed by Chen Zun's talent, and most of the reigning officials praised him, so he appointed him as the governor of Henan County.

古文：既至官，当遣从史西，召善书吏十人于前，治私书谢京师故人。
现代文：陈遵既已到任，便派了承差到西面去，招来了会写书札的书办十人，替自己写私信，感谢京城中的老朋友。
English: As soon as Chen Zun took office, he sent a letter of approval to Xiamen and invited ten clerks who could write bookmarks to write a personal letter for him, thanking his old friends in Beijing.

古文：遵冯几，口占书吏，且省官事，书数百封，亲疏各有意，河南大惊。
现代文：陈遵自己靠在茶几上，口述意思给书办，并且还一边省察着公事，很快就写了上百封信，亲近的和疏远的信的内容意思也各不相同，河南郡的人都因此而大为惊骇。
English: Chen Zun himself leaned on the coffee table and dictated his thoughts to the bookkeeper, and while reflecting on business affairs, he soon wrote hundreds of letters. The content and meaning of close and distant letters also differed, and the people of Henan County were greatly shocked.

古文：数月免。
现代文：过了几个月，他就被免了官。
English: A few months later, he was relieved of his duties.

古文：初，遵为河南太守，而弟级为荆州牧，当之官，俱过长安富人故淮阳王外家左氏饮食作乐。
现代文：当初陈遵任河南郡太守时，他的弟弟陈级则任荆州牧一职，要去赴任了，兄弟二人都路过一位长安富豪的家，这位富豪是故淮阳王的外家左氏，二人在他家饮酒作乐。
English: At the beginning, when Chen Zun was the governor of Henan County, and his younger brother Chen Rong was appointed as the governor of Jingzhou and was about to take up the post, both brothers passed by the home of a Chang'an millionaire, who was the late King Huaiyang's father-in-law Zuo, and the two of them were drinking and making merry at his home.

古文：后司直陈崇闻之，劾奏： 遵兄弟幸得蒙恩超等历位，遵爵列侯，备郡守，级州牧奉使，皆以举直察枉宣扬圣化为职，不正身自慎。
现代文：后来有个名叫陈崇的司直听说此事，便向朝廷参奏说： 陈遵兄弟侥幸蒙受圣恩，超越等级，历任官位，陈遵的爵号已到列侯，官职达到郡守，陈级也官至州牧，奉命出使，都应该以保举正直、监察邪曲、宣扬圣王教化为己任，但是他们现在却不修身自慎，专做有失体统的事。
English: Later, a magistrate named Chen Chong heard of the matter and reported to the imperial court: "Brother Chen Zun was fortunate enough to receive divine grace, surpassing his rank and successive official positions. Chen Zun's peerage has reached the rank of vassal, his official position has reached that of county governor, and his official rank has also reached that of state pastor. When dispatched by order, it should be their duty to safeguard honesty, monitor evil music, and propagate the enlightenment of the holy king. However, they are not practicing self-restraint, but only doing things that are unseemly.

古文：始遵初除，乘藩车入闾巷，过寡妇左阿君置酒歌讴，遵起舞跳梁，顿仆坐上，暮因留宿，为侍婢扶卧。
现代文：当初陈遵刚做官时，他竟乘着带篷的车子进入阎巷中，去寡妇左阿君家中摆酒唱歌，陈遵还起身狂舞，竟失足跌倒在座上，夜间又留宿在寡妇家，被侍婢拥扶着才去睡觉。
English: At first, when Chen Zunang was an official, he actually rode into the alley of hell in a car with a canopy and went to the house of the widow Zuo Agun to drink wine and sing. Chen Zun also got up and danced wildly, and actually lost his footing and fell down on the seat. At night, he stayed at the widow's house and was held by servants and maids before going to sleep.

古文：遵知饮酒饫宴有节，礼不入寡妇之门，而湛酒混肴，乱男女之别，轻辱爵位，羞污印韨，恶不可忍闻。
现代文：陈遵明知饮酒宴会都应该遵守礼节，依照礼节不得擅入寡妇家门，却仍旧沉溺于饮食享乐之中，还不顾忌男女有别的礼规，轻辱朝廷赐予的爵号，使官府的印绶蒙羞，这种恶名耳不忍闻。
English: Chen Zun knew that drinking banquets should abide by etiquette. According to etiquette, he was not allowed to enter the widow's house, but he still indulged in eating and enjoying. He also did not care about the different etiquette between men and women, despised the title given by the court, and made the official seal of the government dishonorable. This kind of notoriety is unbearable.

古文：臣请皆免。 
现代文：因此请求将他们二人一同免职。 
English: Therefore, it is requested that both of them be removed from office.

古文：遵既免，归长安，宾客愈盛，饮食自若。
现代文：陈遵既被免官，便又回到了长安，宾客却越来越多，饮食作乐仍和从前一样。
English: After Chen Zun was removed from office, he returned to Chang'an, but there were more and more guests, and the food and entertainment were still the same as before.

古文：久之，复为九江及河内都尉，凡三为二千石。
现代文：过了很久，陈遵又出任九江及河内两地的都尉，加起来共做了三次俸禄为二千石的官。
English: After a long time, Chen Zun served as the captain of Jiujiang and Hanoi, adding up to a total of three times the salary of two thousand koku.

古文：而张竦亦至丹阳太守，封淑德侯。
现代文：而张竦也官至丹阳太守，封爵号淑德侯。
English: And Zhang Ye also held the post of Danyang governor-general, and was given the title of Shude Hou.

古文：后俱免官，以列侯归长安。
现代文：后来他们都被免了官，衹剩有列侯的封爵在身而回到长安。
English: Later, all of them were relieved of their official positions, and all of them returned to Chang'an with the feudal titles still in their possession.

古文：竦居贫，无宾客，时时好事者从之质疑问事，论道经书而已。
现代文：张竦的居处很简陋，没有宾客往来，常常有好事的人跟着他责疑问难，也不过是谈论些道德经书而已。
English: Zhang Qian's residence is very simple, there is no guest traffic, and people who often have good things to do follow him, but it is nothing more than talking about some moral scriptures.

古文：而遵昼夜呼号，车骑满门，酒肉相属。
现代文：而陈遵却昼夜呼号，车骑满门，酒席肉宴连续不断。
English: Chen Zun, on the other hand, was called out day and night, cars and bicycles filled the door, and the banquet was continuous.

古文：先是，黄门郎扬雄作《酒箴》以讽谏成帝，其文为酒客难法度士，譬之于物，曰： 子犹瓶矣。
现代文：先前，黄门郎扬雄曾作《酒箴》以讽谏成帝，他在文章中假设一位酒客责难正人君子的法度士，并以物喻人，文中写道： 你就好像一个瓶子。
English: Previously, Huangmen Lang Yangxiong had written "Wine Proverbs" to satirize the emperor. In the article, he assumed that a drinker would rebuke the honest gentleman's fiduciary, and used the metaphor of a person to write: You are like a bottle.

古文：观瓶之居，居井之眉，处高临深，动常近危。
现代文：看那瓶子摆在井边上，处高临深，一动有危险。
English: Look at that bottle on the edge of the well. It's too high and too deep. It's dangerous to move it.

古文：酒醪不入口，臧水满怀，不得左右，牵于纆徽。
现代文：酒醪一滴不得进口，倒是藏满了井水，不能左右活动，就这样拴在井绳上。
English: Not a drop of wine lees can be imported, but they are full of well water and cannot move around, so they are tied to the well rope.

古文：一旦■碍，为■所轠，身提黄泉，骨肉为泥。
现代文：一旦失落，被井阑圈撞得粉身碎骨，便会整个散落入黄泉，骨肉化为泥土。
English: Once it is lost, it will be smashed to pieces by the hoop, and it will be scattered into hell, and the flesh and bones will turn into mud.

古文：自用如此，不如鸱夷。
现代文：这般自寻烦恼，倒不如那盛酒的皮囊。
English: It would have been better to have drunk the whole bottle of wine than to have troubled himself in this way.

古文：鸱夷滑稽，腹如大壶，尽日盛酒，人复借酤。常为国器，托于属车，出入两宫，经营公家。
现代文：因为皮囊圆吞如意，变化无穷，且又肚大如壶，整天都盛着美酒，别人还要用它来打酒，常做国家级的用具，托身在天子的后车中，出入于两宫之间，经营公家之事。
English: Because the leather purse is as round as you like, it changes endlessly, and its belly is as big as a pot, it holds fine wine all day long, others also use it to make wine, it is often used as a national-level tool, it is carried in the back of the heavenly son, it goes in and out between the two palaces, and it deals with public affairs.

古文：由是言之，酒何过乎！ 
现代文：由此说来，酒有什么过错呢！ 
English: So what's wrong with alcohol?

古文：遵大喜之，常谓张竦： 吾与尔犹是矣。
现代文：陈遵读过此文极为喜欢，便对张竦说： 我和你正像文中所写的。样。
English: Chen Zun read this article and liked it very much, so he said to Zhang Ye: You and I are just like what is written in the article.

古文：足下讽诵经书，苦身自约，不敢差跌，而我放意自恣，浮湛俗间，官爵功名，不减于子，而差独乐，顾不优邪！ 
现代文：你时刻讽诵诗书，苦身约束自己，不敢稍有差池，而我却任性放纵，沉浮于世俗之中，官爵功名，也不次于你，却独能享受快乐，这不比你更好些吗！ 
English: You are always reciting poetry, painstakingly restraining yourself, not daring to make any mistakes, while I am self-willed and indulgent, indulging in the mundane, with a title of nobility, no less than you, but only able to enjoy happiness, isn't this better than you!

古文：竦曰： 人各有性，长短自裁。
现代文：张竦说： 各人都有各人的性情，长短还要自己来裁定。
English: Zhang Ye said: Everyone has their own temperament, and you have to judge for yourself.

古文：子欲为我亦不能，吾而效子亦败矣。
现代文：你要像我一样生活是不实际的，而我要像你一样生活也同样是不实际的，如果我一味去仿效你，那也就会失败的。
English: It is impractical for you to live like me, and it is equally impractical for me to live like you, and if I try to imitate you, I will fail.

古文：虽然，学我者易持，效子者难将，吾常道也。 
现代文：不过向我学习的人更容易把握自己，而向你学习的人却难以成功，所以我这是正常之道呀！ 
English: But those who learn from me are more likely to master themselves, while those who learn from you are less likely to succeed, so this is the normal way!

古文：及王莽败，二人俱客于池阳，竦为贼兵所杀。
现代文：待到后来王莽失败，他们二人都客居在池阳，张竦被贼兵杀死。
English: Later, Wang Mang failed, both of them stayed in Chiyang, and Zhang Ye was killed by robbers.

古文：更始至长安，大臣荐遵为大司马护军，与归德侯刘飒俱使匈奴。
现代文：更始帝到了长安，大臣们都推荐陈遵来做大司马护军，并与归德侯刘飒一同出使匈奴。
English: When the emperor arrived in Chang'an, the ministers all recommended Chen Zun to be the chief of the horse guards, and he sent the Xiongnu together with the returning vassal Liu Bei.

古文：单于欲胁诎遵，遵陈利害，为言曲直，单于大奇之，遣还。
现代文：匈奴的单于胁迫陈遵投降匈奴，陈遵向他陈明利害，说清曲直，单于很佩服他。
English: The Xiongnu's sole purpose was to coerce Chen Zun into surrendering to the Xiongnu. Chen Zun made his interests clear to him, told him the truth, and admired him greatly.

古文：会更始败，遵留朔方，为贼所败，时醉见杀。
现代文：让他回了汉朝。正好遇上更始事败，陈遵就只好留居在朔方，后来又被贼兵打败，陈遵在酩酊大醉中被贼兵所杀。
English: He was allowed to return to the Han Dynasty. Chen Zun had to stay in the Shuo side when he was defeated for the first time. Later, he was defeated by the bandits. Chen Zun was killed by the bandits when he was very drunk.

古文：原涉字巨先。
现代文：原涉，字巨先。
English: The original is involved, the character is huge.

古文：祖父武帝时以豪桀自阳翟徙茂陵。
现代文：其祖父在汉武帝时以豪杰的身份从阳翟县迁徙来到茂陵。
English: His grandfather migrated from Yangshuo County to Muling as a hero during the reign of Emperor Hanwu.

古文：涉父哀帝时为南阳太守。
现代文：他的父亲在漠哀帝时作了南阳郡太守。
English: His father became the governor of Nanyang County at the time of Emperor Wu's death.

古文：天下殷富，大郡二千石列官，赋敛送葬皆千万以上，妻子通共受之，以定产业。
现代文：那时，天下富足，大郡太守死在任上的，所收到人家送来助办丧事的钱财都在千万以上，家属全数得到这笔钱，便可以用来置办产业。
English: At that time, the country was rich and prosperous, and the county magistrate died in office, and the money and wealth received from people to help organize the funeral were more than ten million. If all the family members received this money, it could be used to purchase property.

古文：时又少行三年丧者。
现代文：而当时又很少有人能够为死者守丧三年的。
English: At that time, very few people were able to observe a three-year mourning period for the dead.

古文：及涉父死，让还南阳赙送，行丧冢庐三年，由是显名京师。
现代文：而到了原涉父亲死后，原涉不仅退还了南阳郡人赠送的助丧钱财，还住进丫冢庐，为父亲守丧三年，因此他在京城就出了名。
English: However, after the death of his father, Yuan Zhu not only returned the money donated by the people of Nanyang County, but also lived in a maidservant's house and attended his father's funeral for three years. Therefore, he became famous in Beijing.

古文：礼毕，扶风谒请为议曹，衣冠慕之辐辏。
现代文：守丧礼刚一完毕，请他去作郡府议曹的使者就像疾风一样地赶来了，仰慕他的士大夫也从四面八方聚了过来。
English: As soon as the funeral ceremony was over, the messenger who had invited him to be the county councillor arrived like a whirlwind, and his admirers gathered from far and wide.

古文：为大司徒史丹举能治剧，为谷口令，时年二十余。
现代文：由于受到大司徒史丹的推荐，说他有处理繁难事务的才干，原涉便当上了谷县令，那时他年仅二十多岁。
English: He was only in his twenties when he was promoted to the post of Gu County magistrate on the recommendation of the chief magistrate, Stan, who said he had the ability to deal with difficult matters.

古文：谷口闻其名，不言而治。
现代文：谷县人早就听到过原涉的名声，所以不需要他开口发令，地方上就已经一派井然了。
English: The people of Gu County have long heard the reputation of the original, so they don't need him to issue an order, and the local people are already confused.

古文：先是，涉季父为茂陵秦氏所杀，涉居谷口半岁所，自劾去官，欲报仇。
现代文：早先，原涉的叔父被茂陵的秦氏杀害，原涉在谷口呆了半年多，因为自己去审理了此案而被免官，于是打算报仇。
English: Earlier, the uncle of the original involved was killed by the Qin clan in Maolin. The original involved stayed in Taniguchi for more than half a year, because he went to hear the case and was dismissed, so he planned to take revenge.

古文：谷口豪桀为杀秦氏，亡命岁余，逢赦出。
现代文：谷口的豪杰替原涉杀了秦氏，原涉因此逃亡在外一年多，遇上了大赦，才又重新露面。
English: Taniguchi's hero killed the Qin clan on behalf of the original suspect. As a result, the original suspect fled abroad for more than a year, was granted amnesty, and then reappeared.

古文：郡国诸豪及长安、五陵诸为气节者皆归慕之。涉遂倾身与相待，人无贤不肖阗门，在所闾里尽满客。
现代文：郡县和诸侯国的豪杰以及长安、五陵等地有气节的义士都倾慕他，于是原涉也对他们竭诚相待，不论品行好的还是不好的人都来结交原涉，一时间宾客盈门，连他家所居住的街巷也挤满了来客。
English: The heroes of counties and principalities, as well as the virtuous people of Chang'an, Wuling and other places, all admired him. Therefore, he treated them with sincerity. Regardless of whether they were good or bad, people came to make friends with him. For a while, the door was crowded with guests, and even the streets where his family lived were crowded with visitors.

古文：或讥涉曰： 子本吏二千石之世，结发自修，以行丧推财礼让为名，正复雠取仇，犹不失仁义，何故遂自放纵，为轻侠之徒乎？ 
现代文：有人讥讽原涉说： 你本是郡太守的后人，年轻时就能自我修养，后来因为为父亲守丧三年又退还了财产及为人谦恭而出名，即使因报仇而结仇，仍不失为一个仁义君子，又何必就放纵自己，去做那种轻薄的侠义之徒呢？ 
English: Some people scoffed at the original comment: You are the descendant of the county's daimyo. When you were young, you were able to cultivate yourself. Later, you became famous for mourning your father for three years, returning his property and being humble. Even if you take revenge, you are still a benevolent and righteous gentleman. Why do you have to indulge yourself and be such a frivolous chivalrous person?

古文：涉应曰： 子独不见家人寡妇邪？
现代文：原涉回答道： 你就没见到民间的寡妇吗？
English: Hara-Wan replied, "So you haven't seen a folk widow?"

古文：始自约敕之时，意乃慕宋伯姬及陈孝妇，不幸一为盗贼所污，遂行淫失，知其非礼，然不能自还。
现代文：起初自我约束的时候，心里想的是宋伯姬和陈孝妇的榜样，一旦遭遇不幸，被盗贼奸污，就会放荡起来，虽然明知违反礼教，但已不能回复到洁身白处的时候去了。
English: At the beginning of self-discipline, I thought of the example of Song Boji and Chen Xiaowen. Once I suffered misfortune and was raped by a thief, I would become debauched. Although I knew that I was violating the etiquette, I could not return to the time when I was clean.

古文：吾犹此矣！ 
现代文：我便是这样的啊！ 
English: That's just how I am!

古文：涉自以为前让南阳赙送，身得其名，而令先人坟墓俭约，非孝也。
现代文：原涉自以为从前退还了南阳人送来的助葬礼金和物品，固然获取了名声，但这却使父亲的坟墓简陋异常，而有失孝道。
English: Originally, Watanabe thought that he had returned the funeral money and items sent by Nanyang people. Although he gained fame, this made his father's grave unusually simple, and he lost his filial duty.

古文：乃大治起冢舍，周阁重门。
现代文：于是他便大修坟墓。并在墓旁建筑房舍，在阁楼四周建造重门。
English: So he repaired the tomb and built a house next to the tomb and a heavy gate around the attic.

古文：初，武帝时，京兆尹曹氏葬茂陵，民谓其道为京兆仟，涉慕之，乃买地开道，立表署曰南阳仟，人不肯从，谓之原氏仟。
现代文：当初武帝时，京兆尹曹氏安葬在茂陵，人民都称他的墓道为 京兆仟 。原涉羡慕它，就买地开墓道，建立表帜，题署为 南阳仟 ，人们不肯跟着这样叫，就称之为 原氏仟 。
English: At the time of Emperor Wu, the Jing Zhaoyin Cao clan was buried in the Mausoleum, and the people called his graveyard the Jing Zhaoying. Originally, he was envious of it, so he bought land to open a graveyard and set up a banner with the inscription Nanyang Ying. People did not want to be called like that, so they called it the Hara clan Ying.

古文：费用皆仰富人长者，然身衣服车马才具，妻子内困。
现代文：这一切的费用都依靠有钱有势的人供给，而原涉自身祇备有必需的衣物和车马，家中妻儿还生活在困苦之中。
English: All these expenses depend on the supply of rich and powerful people, but the original involves only the necessary clothing and horses, and the family's wife and children still live in poverty.

古文：专以振施贫穷赴人之急为务。
现代文：原涉专门做一些救济穷人、为人排忧解难的事。
English: Originally, it was about doing something to help the poor and relieve people's worries.

古文：人尝置酒请涉，涉入里门，客有道涉所知母病避疾在里宅者。涉即往候，叩门。
现代文：一次，有人置办酒宴请原涉，原涉刚走进里门，宾客中就有人告诉他说，他所知道的母亲有病的那一家，现在因病避居在里中，原涉随即便去登门探望，叩门。
English: Once, someone held a wine banquet to invite the original Watanabe. The original Watanabe had just walked through the door when one of the guests told him that the family whose mother he knew was ill was now living in the village due to illness. The original Watanabe then went to visit and knock on the door.

古文：家哭，涉因入吊，问以丧事。
现代文：听见家中有哭丧声，原涉就进去吊唁，又询问治丧的情况。
English: Hearing the sound of weeping and mourning at home, he went inside to offer condolences and inquire about the situation of the mourning.

古文：家无所有，涉曰： 但洁扫除沐浴，待涉。 
现代文：见到其家中一无所有，他便说： 请把屋子打扫干净，给死者洗一个澡，等着我回来。 
English: When he saw that there was nothing left in the house, he said, "Please clean the house, give the dead a bath and wait for me to come back."

古文：还至主人，对宾客叹息曰： 人亲卧地不收，涉何心乡此！愿撤去酒食。 
现代文：原涉回到置办酒席的主人处，对宾客们叹息道： 人家母亲去世了，躺在地上不能收殓，我哪有心思享用这些酒食啊！
English: Originally, Watanabe returned to the host who had set up the banquet, and sighed to the guests, "My mother passed away, and I can't sleep lying on the floor. How can I enjoy these foods and drinks?

古文：宾客争问所当得，涉乃侧席而坐，削牍为疏，具记衣被棺木，下至饭含之物，分付诸客。
现代文：请撤掉酒席吧。 宾客们抢着询问应当买些什么，原涉便按着哀怜丧家的礼节，侧身席地而坐，削好木简开出了一份购物清单，详细地列出了要购买的寿衣、被褥、棺木，以至死者嘴裹含的葬物等物品，分交给各位宾客去置办。
English: The guests rushed to ask what they should buy, and the undertaker, in accordance with the mourning etiquette, sat sideways on the floor, whittled a wooden block and opened a shopping list, listing in detail the items to be purchased, such as coats, bedding, coffins, and even funerary objects wrapped around the mouth of the deceased, and handed them to the guests to purchase.

古文：诸客奔走市买，至日昳皆会。
现代文：宾客们分头奔走购买，直到曰头偏西才都又回来会集。
English: The guests split up to go shopping, and it wasn't until the sun had set that they all came back together.

古文：涉亲阅视已，谓主人： 愿受赐矣。 
现代文：原涉亲自检视完毕，对主人说： 现在可以接受赐宴了。 
English: After inspecting the original binding in person, he said to the owner, "Now you can accept the gift banquet."

古文：既共饮食，涉独不饱，乃载棺物，从宾客往至丧家，为棺敛劳俫毕葬。
现代文：大家一同饮酒进食，而惟独原涉没有吃饱，于是就用车装载着棺木等物，领着宾客来到死者家裹，为死者入殓，并劝勉宾客等安葬完毕再离去。
English: Everyone drank alcohol and ate together, but the only reason was that they did not have enough to eat, so they loaded coffins and other things with a car, led the guests to the deceased's house, wrapped the coffin for the deceased, and advised the guests to wait until the burial was completed before leaving.

古文：其周急待人如此。
现代文：原涉就是这样急入之难、诚心待人的。
English: Originally, it was difficult to rush in and treat people with sincerity.

古文：后人有毁涉者曰 奸人之雄也 ，丧家子即时刺杀言者。
现代文：后来有人诋毁原涉，说他是 奸人之雄 ，死者的儿子立即就去把说这话的人刺杀了。
English: Later, someone slandered the original involved, saying that he was a traitor, and the deceased's son immediately went to assassinate the person who said this.

古文：宾客多犯法，罪过数上闻。
现代文：原涉的宾客多有犯法的，朝廷也多次听说他们的罪行。
English: Many of the guests originally implicated had broken the law, and the Imperial Court had heard about their crimes many times.

古文：王莽数收系欲杀，辄复赦出之。
现代文：王莽几次拘捕并要杀掉这些人，但又总是把他们赦免释放了。
English: Wang Mang arrested and wanted to kill these people several times, but always pardoned and released them.

古文：涉惧，求为卿府掾史，欲以避客。
现代文：原涉很害怕，便谋求到卿府去做属官，想藉此回避宾客。
English: Originally, he was very afraid, so he tried to avoid the guests by going to the palace to work as a vassal.

古文：文母太后丧时，守复土校尉。
现代文：正逢文母太后的丧事，原涉临时充任了复土校尉。
English: It was the time of the funeral of the Empress Dowager Wenmu, and Yuan Wu was temporarily appointed as the Fudo school captain.

古文：已为中郎，后免官。
现代文：以后做了中郎，不久又被免官。
English: Later he was made a middle-ranking official, but was soon removed from his post.

古文：涉欲上冢，不欲会宾客，密独与故人期会。
现代文：原涉想到冢舍去住，不想会见宾客，衹与老朋友秘密约会。
English: Originally, she wanted to live in a guest house, but didn't want to meet guests, so she went on a secret date with an old friend.

古文：涉单车驱上茂陵，投暮，入其里宅，因自匿不见人。
现代文：他独自驾车去茂陵，天快黑时，进入里中住宅，于是藏在家裹不肯见人。
English: He drove alone to Murying, and when it was almost dark, he entered the middle school residence, so he hid at home and refused to see anyone.

古文：遣奴至市买肉，奴乘涉气与屠争言，斫伤屠者，亡。
现代文：一天，原涉派奴仆到集市上去买肉，奴仆仗着原涉的气焰，与卖肉的争吵起来，并砍伤了卖肉者，然后逃跑了。
English: One day, the master sent a slave to the market to buy meat. The slave, taking advantage of the pride of the master, quarreled with the seller of meat, and cut the seller of meat, and then ran away.

古文：是时，茂陵守令尹公新视事，涉未谒也，闻之大怒。
现代文：逭时，代行茂陵县令的尹公新上任，而原涉却没去拜会，尹公知道后便大为恼怒。
English: At that time, Yin Gongxin, the acting Maoling County magistrate, took office, but did not go to the meeting. Yin Gong was very angry when he found out.

古文：知涉名豪，欲以示众厉俗，遣两吏胁守涉。
现代文：他深知原涉是有名的豪侠，就想藉这件事来显示威严，严肃风纪。他派了两个差役守候在原涉的家门两侧。
English: He was well aware that the man in question was a famous hero, and he wanted to use this incident to show his dignity and serious demeanor. He sent two officers to stand guard on both sides of the door of the house in question.

古文：至日中，奴不出，吏欲便杀涉去。
现代文：到了中午时分，见买肉的那个奴仆还不出来，差役就想杀掉原涉而去。
English: At noon, when the servant who had bought the meat did not come out, the policeman wanted to kill him and went away.

古文：涉迫窘不知所为。会涉所与期上冢者车数十乘到，皆诸豪也，共说尹公。
现代文：原涉处境窘迫，不知该怎么办才好，正巧遣时他所约好的要一同上坟的友人乘着几十辆车到了，他们都是当地的豪杰，便一起去劝说尹公。
English: He was in a predicament and didn't know what to do. At the right time, his friend, who he had arranged to go to the grave with, arrived in dozens of cars. They were all local heroes, so they went to persuade Yin Gong.

古文：尹公不听，诸豪则曰： 原巨先奴犯法不得，使肉袒自缚，箭贯耳，诣廷门谢罪，于君威亦足矣。 
现代文：尹公不听劝说，豪杰们便说： 原巨先的家奴犯了法，不能缉拿归案，那就让原巨先本人脱衣自缚，双耳插箭，到官门前来谢罪吧，这样对于维护您的威望也就足够了。 
English: Yin Gong did not listen to the persuasion, and the heroes said: The former great leader's family slave broke the law and cannot be prosecuted, so let the former great leader himself strip off his clothes, tie himself up, plug his ears with arrows, and come to the official's door to apologize. This is enough to maintain your prestige.

古文：尹公许之。
现代文：尹公这才答应。
English: Only then did Yin Gong agree.

古文：涉如言谢，复服遣去。
现代文：于是，愿丝照着豪杰们所说的办法去谢罪，尹公让他仍穿着衣服回家去了。
English: As a result, the hero and heroine followed the way to apologize, and Yin Gong let him go home with his clothes on.

古文：初，涉写新丰富人祁太伯为友，太伯同母弟王游公素嫉涉，时为县门下掾，说尹公曰： 君以守令辱原涉如是，一旦真令至，君复单车归为府吏，涉刺客如云，杀人皆不知主名，可为寒心。
现代文：当初，原涉与新丰的富豪祁太伯是朋友，而太伯的同母弟弟王游公却一向嫉恨原涉。王游公这时在县府做属官，就向尹公进言道： 您凭着一个代理县令就如此羞辱原涉，一旦正式县令到任，您依旧驾着单车回郡府去做府吏，而原涉的宾客朋友中刺客如云，杀了人都不知是谁干的，我真为您担心。
English: At the beginning, the original involved with Xinfeng's rich man Zou Taibo was a friend, but Taibo's younger brother Wang You Gong had always been jealous of the original involved. Wang You Gong was a subordinate official in the county government at the time, and he said to Yin Gong: You humiliated the original involved with a proxy county magistrate. Once the official county magistrate took office, you still drove your bicycle back to the county government to be a government official. And the original involved guests and friends included a lot of assassins. I don't know who killed them. I'm really worried about you.

古文：涉治冢舍，奢僣逾制，罪恶暴著，主上知之。
现代文：原涉修筑坟墓和房舍，奢侈过分，超越了法制，罪恶显著，这些皇帝也都知道。
English: These emperors were also known to be involved in the construction of tombs and houses, extravagant, beyond the rule of law, and obviously evil.

古文：今为君计，莫若堕坏涉冢舍，条奏其旧恶，君必得真令。
现代文：现在为您着想，不如把原涉修筑的坟墓和房屋捣毁，然后将他以往的罪恶分条上奏，您就一定会做得成正式县令。
English: Now, for your sake, it would be better to demolish the graves and houses originally involved in the construction, and then record his past crimes, and you will surely make it into an official county ordinance.

古文：如此，涉亦不敢怨矣。 
现代文：这样一来，原涉也就不敢怀恨了。 
English: In this way, the original involved would not dare to hold a grudge.

古文：尹公如其计，莽果以为真令。
现代文：尹公照着他的计谋行事，王莽果真任命尹公做了正式县令。
English: Yin Gong acted according to his plan, and Wang Mangguozhen appointed Yin Gong as the official county magistrate.

古文：涉由此怨王游公，选宾客，遣长子初从车二十乘劫王游公家。
现代文：原涉因此而怨恨王游公，便挑选宾客，让长子原初领着二十乘车去抢劫王游公的家。
English: As a result, Hara-Watan resented Wang You-Gong, so he selected guests and had his eldest son, Hara-Watan, lead twenty people in a car to rob Wang You-Gong's home.

古文：游公母即祁太伯母也，诸客见之皆拜，传曰 无惊祁夫人 。
现代文：王游公的母亲也就是祁太伯的母亲，宾客们见到她都俯首跪拜，并传原涉的话说： 不得惊动祁夫人。 
English: Wang Yougong's mother is also the mother of Zou Taibo. When the guests saw her, they all bowed their heads and kneeled, and passed on the original words: "Don't alarm Mrs. Zou."

古文：遂杀游公父及子，断两头去。
现代文：于是杀死了王游公和他的生父，把二人的头割下来，然后离去。
English: So he killed Wang You Gong and his biological father, cut off their heads, and then left.

古文：涉性略似郭解，外温仁谦逊，而内隐好杀。
现代文：原涉的性情有一些像郭解，外表温和仁厚谦逊，内中却藏着好杀之心。
English: The original temperament involved is somewhat like Guo Jie, mild-mannered and humble on the outside, but with a murderous heart on the inside.

古文：睚眦于尘中，触死者甚多。
现代文：在尘世中多有怨恨，因触犯他而被他杀死的人很多。
English: In the world, there are many grudges, and he has killed many people for offending him.

古文：王莽末，东方兵起，诸王子弟多荐涉能得士死，可用。
现代文：王莽末年，东方起兵反叛，有许多王府的子弟向王莽推荐原涉，称他能笼络人心，人家都乐于为他卖命，可以任用。
English: In the last years of Wang Mang's life, when the East rebelled, there were many sons of Wang Fu who recommended Wang Mang, saying that he could win people's hearts and that they were all willing to work for him and could be appointed.

古文：莽乃召见，责以罪恶，赦贳，拜镇戎大尹。
现代文：王莽于是召见原涉，因他所犯的罪恶而责备他，接着又赦免了他，并任命他为镇戎大尹。
English: Wang Mang then summoned the original subject and reproached him for the evil he had committed, then pardoned him and appointed him as Zhenwu Dayin.

古文：涉至官无几，长安败，郡县诸假号起兵攻杀二千石长吏以应汉。
现代文：原涉到任不久，长安兵败，附近郡县的一些豪强假藉名号纷纷起兵，攻杀郡守长官，响应汉军。
English: Not long after he took office, Chang'an was defeated, and some of the powerful people in the nearby counties took up arms, attacked and killed the county governor, and responded to the Chinese army.

古文：诸假号素闻涉名，争问原尹何在，拜谒之。
现代文：那些假藉名号者早就听说原涉的大名，便都争相打听原涉的住处，前往拜见。
English: Those who used fake names had already heard about the daimyo in question, so they all scrambled to find out where he lived and went to visit him.

古文：时莽州牧使者依附涉者皆得活。
现代文：当时王莽任用的州牧和使者凡是依附原涉的也都保全了性命。
English: At that time, the provincial herdsmen and envoys appointed by Wang Mang also saved the lives of all those who adhered to the original.

古文：传送致涉长安，更始西屏将军申徒建请涉与相见，大重之。
现代文：原涉被他们用驿车送到长安，更始帝的西屏将军申屠建请求原涉与他相见，对原涉大为器重。
English: They sent him to Chang'an by mule train. Moreover, Emperor Xiping's general Shen Tuo Jian asked him to meet him, which was very important to him.

古文：故茂陵令尹公坏涉冢舍者为建主簿，涉本不怨也。
现代文：曾经捣毁原涉坟墓房舍的那个原茂陵县令尹公，现在做了申屠建的主簿。原涉本已不再仇视尹公。
English: The former Maoling County magistrate Yin Gong, who once destroyed the original tomb-related buildings, has now become the main book of Shen Tuo Jian. The original tomb-related book no longer hates Yin Gong.

古文：涉从建所出，尹公故遮拜涉，谓曰： 易世矣，宜勿复相怨！ 
现代文：当他从申屠建的官府出来时，尹公故意迎上去拦住拜见原涉，对原涉说： 改朝换代啦，不应当再怀着怨恨了！ 
English: When he came out of the government office of Shen Tuo Jian, Yin Gong deliberately went up to stop him and said to him: "It's time to change the dynasty, there should be no more grudges!"

古文：涉曰： 尹君，何一鱼肉涉也！ 
现代文：原涉说： 尹君，你为何专把我当成鱼肉任意宰割啊！ 
English: "Yin Jun, why do you arbitrarily slaughter me as if I were fish meat?

古文：涉用是怒，使客刺杀主簿。
现代文：原涉因此而被激怒，便派宾客去刺杀了主簿尹公。
English: He was so enraged that he sent his guests to assassinate the chief steward, Yin Gong.

古文：涉欲亡去，申徒建内恨耻之，阳言 吾欲与原巨先共镇三辅，岂以一吏易之哉！ 
现代文：原涉打算逃走，申屠建觉得蒙受了耻辱因而对原涉怀恨在心。他假意说： 我要和原巨先共同镇抚三辅一带，怎么会因死了一个小吏就改变主意呢！ 
English: Watanabe had originally planned to run away, but Shin Tu Jian felt humiliated and held a grudge against Watanabe. He pretended to say, "I want to govern the Sanfu area together with the former emperor. How can I change my mind because a minor official has died?"

古文：宾客通言，令涉自系狱谢，建许之。
现代文：宾客把此话传告给原涉，并让他去自首投狱，向申屠建谢罪。
English: The guest reported this to the original suspect, and asked him to surrender to prison and apologize to Shen Tu.

古文：宾客车数十乘共送涉至狱。
现代文：申屠建同意这样办。于是，宾客们便乘着几十辆车一同送原涉去监狱。
English: Shen Tuo Jian agreed to do so. Therefore, the guests were taken to the prison in dozens of cars.

古文：建遣兵道徼取涉于车上，送车分散驰，遂斩涉，悬之长安市。
现代文：申屠建派兵途中拦截，在车上将原涉拘捕，护送的车辆一时分头疾驰逃散，于是当即就将原涉问斩，头颅被悬挂到了长安市上。
English: Shen Tuo Jian sent soldiers to intercept on the way, and arrested the original suspect in the car. The escorted vehicle immediately sped away, so the original suspect was immediately beheaded, and his head was hung in Chang'an City.

古文：自哀、平间，郡国处处有豪桀，然莫足数。
现代文：自哀帝、平帝年间，郡国处处都有豪杰之士，然而数量却无法统计。
English: During the reigns of Empress Dowager Zhao and Empress Dowager Ping, there were heroes everywhere in the county, but the number is impossible to count.

古文：其名闻州郡者，霸陵杜君敖、池阳韩幼孺、马领绣君宾、西河漕中叔，皆有谦退之风。
现代文：其中闻名于州郡的，有霸陵的杜君敖、池阳的韩幼孺、马领的绣君宾、西河的漕中叔等，他们都有谦逊礼让的风尚。
English: Among them, the famous ones in Zhoushu County include the domineering Du Junlun, the Han cub in Chiyang, the embroidered Junbin with a horse collar, and the Caozhong uncle in the West River. They all have a humble and courteous style.

古文：王莽居慑，诛锄豪侠，名捕漕中叔，不能得。
现代文：王莽摄政，要杀尽除光豪侠之士，指名捉捕漕中叔，却没有逮到。
English: Wang Mang, the regent, wanted to kill all but the light heroes, and designated an uncle to be caught, but he was not caught.

古文：素善强弩将军孙建，莽疑建藏匿，泛以问建。
现代文：漕中叔一向与强弩将军孙建亲善，王莽怀疑孙建窝藏了他，就询问孙建藏了没有。
English: Caozhong uncle has always been friendly with Qiangqian general Sun Jian. Wang Mang suspected that Sun Jian was hiding him, so he asked if Sun Jian was hiding him.

古文：建曰： 臣名善之，诛臣足以塞责。 
现代文：孙建说： 臣下我与漕中叔亲善，杀了我足以顶替他了。 
English: Sun Jian said: My vassal, I am friendly with Uncle Cao, killing me is enough to replace him.

古文：莽性果贼，无所容忍，然重建，不竟问，遂不得也。
现代文：王莽性情狭隘，毫无容忍之心，但很重视孙建，便不再追问，终于没有捉到漕中叔。
English: Wang Mang is narrow-minded and has no tolerance, but he attaches great importance to Sun Jian, so he no longer asked questions, and finally did not catch Cao Zhonglun.

古文：中叔子少游，复以侠闻于世云。
现代文：漕中叔的儿子漕少游，后又以豪侠身份闻名于世。
English: Uncle Cao's son, Cao Shaoyou, later became famous as a hero.

