古文：毛修之，字敬文，荥阳阳武人也。
现代文：毛修之，字敬文，荥阳阳武人。
English: Mao Xiu Zhi, the character Jing Wen, and Shenyang Yangwu Ren.

古文：父瑾，司马德宗梁秦二州刺史。
现代文：父毛瑾，任司马德宗的梁、秦二州刺史。
English: His father, Mao Xuan, was a disciple of Sima Dezong and a member of the Qin and Erzhou Dynasties.

古文：刘裕之擒挑泓，留子义真镇长安，以修之为司马。
现代文：刘裕擒获姚泓之后，留子刘义真镇守长安，任毛修之为司马。
English: After Liu Yuxuan won the Yao Wei, his son Liu Yizhen became the town guard of Chang'an, and Mao Xiu was appointed as the Sima.

古文：及赫连屈丐破义真于青泥，修之被俘，遂没统万。
现代文：等到赫连屈丐在青泥击败刘义真，毛修之被俘，便居住在统万。
English: He lived in Tongwan until Herien Kuge defeated Liu Yizhen in Qingde and Mao Xiu was captured.

古文：世祖平赫连昌，获修之。神中，以修之领吴兵讨蠕蠕大檀，以功拜吴兵将军，领步兵校尉。
现代文：世祖平定赫连昌，获得毛修之，神修年间，命毛修之统领吴兵讨伐蠕蠕大檀，因功拜授吴兵将军，领步兵校尉。
English: The founder of the world put down Herenchang and gained Mao Xiu, and during the years of spiritual practice, he ordered the leader of Mao Xiu's Wu army to fight against Demu Dattan, and was awarded the General of Wu Army and the captain of the infantry for his service.

古文：后从世祖征平凉有功，迁散骑常侍、侍前将军、光禄大夫。
现代文：后来因跟从世祖征讨平凉有功，迁任散骑常侍、前将军、光禄大夫。
English: Later, he was transferred to the post of straggler, former general, and doctor of Guanglu because of his meritorious service in following the ancestor's conquest.

古文：修之能为南人饮食，手自煎调，多所适意。
现代文：毛修之善于烹调南方人的食品，亲手调制，味道纯正。
English: Maoshu's ability to cook Southern delicacies with his own hands was well suited to the emperor's tastes.

古文：世祖亲待之，进太官尚书，赐爵南郡公，加冠军将军，常在太官，主进御膳。
现代文：世祖对他很好，毛修之进官太官尚书，赐爵南郡公，加授冠军将军，常在太官，主持进奉皇帝膳食。
English: The forefathers were very kind to him. Mao Xiu was promoted to the position of eunuch and given the title of Nanshongong, and was also awarded the title of champion general. He was often in the position of eunuch and presided over the meal for the emperor.

古文：从讨和龙，别破三堡，赐奴婢、牛羊。
现代文：毛修之跟从皇驾讨伐和龙，修之别破三堡，皇帝赐给奴婢、牛羊。
English: Mao Xiu followed the emperor to fight dragons, breaking three castles, and the emperor gave slaves, cattle and sheep.

古文：是时，诸军攻城，宿卫之士多在战陈，行宫人少。
现代文：当时，诸军攻城，禁卫将士多在战阵，行宫人手稀少。
English: At that time, the armies were besieging the city, the guards were mostly in the battle line, and the palace was short of manpower.

古文：云中镇将朱修之，刘义隆故将也，时从在军，欲率吴兵谋为大逆，因入和龙，冀浮海南归。
现代文：云中镇将朱之，是刘义隆过去的将领，当时跟从在军，欲率领吴兵行刺世祖，因入和龙，企图渡海南归。
English: Zhu Zhi, the commander of Yunzhong Town, was Liu Yilong's former general. At that time, he followed the army and wanted to lead the Wu soldiers to assassinate the ancestor. Because of the invasion and the dragon, he tried to cross the sea and return to the south.

古文：以告修之，修之不听，乃止。
现代文：告诉毛修之，修之不听，只好作罢。
English: I told Mao Xiu Zhi, but he didn't listen, so I had to give up.

古文：是日无修之，大变几作。
现代文：当时如没有毛修之，大变即会发生了。
English: If Mao Xiu is absent on the same day, there may be a big change.

古文：朱修之遂亡奔冯文通。
现代文：朱之便逃奔冯文通。
English: Zhu Zhi then fled to Feng Wentong.

古文：又以修之收三堡功多，迁特进、抚军大将军、金紫光禄大夫，位次崔浩之下。
现代文：皇帝又因毛修之收复三堡功劳居多，迁特进、抚军大将军、金紫光禄大夫，位置处在崔浩之下。
English: The emperor also received most of the credit for the recovery of the three castles due to Mao Xiu, and the positions of the special envoy, the general of the army, and the doctor of Jin Zi Guanglu were below Cui Hao.

古文：浩以其中国旧门，虽学不博洽，而犹涉猎书传。每推重之，与共论说。
现代文：崔浩因为他是中原名门旧族，虽然学识不甚渊博，而犹涉猎书传，每每推重毛修之，与他共同论说。
English: Cui Hao, because he is a member of the famous old tribe of the Central Plains, although his knowledge is not very profound, but he still hunts for books, and every time he pushes Mao Xiu, he discusses with him.

古文：言次，遂及陈寿《三国志》有古良史之风，其所著述，文义典正，皆扬于王廷之言，微而显，婉而成章，班史以来无及寿者。
现代文：讨论时，谈到陈寿《三国志》作者有古代良史风范，其所著述，文义典正，都是扬于王廷的文字，虽微却显，婉而成章，班史以来还没有超过陈寿的。
English: During the discussion, it was said that Chen Shou, the author of the "History of the Three Kingdoms," had a good historical style in ancient times. His writings, both literary and canonical, are the words of the royal court. Although they are subtle, they are clear, gentle and complete. They have not surpassed Chen Shou in history.

古文：修之曰； 昔在蜀中，闻长老言，寿曾为诸葛亮门下书佐，被挞百下，故其论武俟云 应变将略，非其所长 。 
现代文：毛修之说： 我过去在蜀地，听长老说，陈寿曾任诸葛亮门下书佐，被诸葛鞭挞百下，所以他论诸葛武侯说： 应变将略，非其所长。 
English: Mao Shuzhi said: I was in Shu in the past, and I heard the elders say that Chen Shou was once a disciple of Zhuge Liang, and was whipped by Zhuge Liang a hundred times. Therefore, he said of Zhuge Wuhou: "He is not a good leader, and he is not a good leader."

古文：浩乃与论曰： 承祚之评亮，乃有故义过美之誉，案其迹也，不为负之，非挟恨之矣。
现代文：崔浩于是与他论说道： 承祚评述诸葛亮的时候，是有故意过美之誉，按查诸葛亮的行迹，不是不相符，不是夹带私恨。
English: Cui Hao then argued with him and said: When Zheng Yao was commenting on Zhuge Liang, he deliberately exaggerated Zhuge Liang's reputation. According to the investigation of Zhuge Liang's deeds, it is not inconsistent, it is not accompanied by self-hatred.

古文：何以云然？
现代文：为什么这样说呢？
English: Why do you say that?

古文：夫亮之相刘备，当九州鼎沸之会，英雄奋发之时，君臣相得，鱼水为喻，而不能与曹氏争天下，委弃荆州，退入巴蜀，诱夺刘璋，伪连孙氏，守穷踦区之地，僭号边夷之间。
现代文：诸葛亮任刘备的丞相，正当九州鼎沸之际，英雄奋发之时，君臣相得，鱼水合欢，却不能与曹氏争夺天下，舍弃荆州，退入巴蜀，诱夺刘璋，伪连孙氏，据守穷困崎岖之地，僭号边夷之间。
English: Zhuge Liang served as Liu Bei's chancellor, when Kyushu was at its peak, when heroes were struggling, when princes and ministers got along, when fish and water mixed, but could not compete with the Cao clan for the world, abandoned Jingzhou, retreated to Bashu, lured Liu Bei, falsely linked the Sun clan, defended the poverty-stricken and rugged land, and stood between the Yao and the Bianyi.

古文：此策之下者，可与赵他为偶，而以为管萧之亚匹，不亦过乎？
现代文：这是下策了。诸葛亮可与赵他为偶，而拿他与管仲、萧何相比，不也是言过其实？
English: This is the next step. Zhuge Liang can be compared to Zhao He, and comparing him to Guanzhong and Xiao He, isn't that an exaggeration?

古文：谓寿贬亮非为失实。
现代文：说陈寿贬抑诸葛亮并未失实。
English: It is not untrue to say that Chen Shou belittled Zhuge Liang.

古文：且亮既据蜀，恃山嶮之固，不达时宜，弗量势力。
现代文：况且诸葛亮既然据有蜀地，依山势险固，不达时宜，不量势力。
English: Moreover, Zhuge Liang, since he has Shu land, is in a precarious position, not timely, and does not have much power.

古文：严威切法，控勒蜀人；矜才负能，高自矫举。
现代文：严威酷法，控制蜀人；矜才负能，意气矫举。
English: Strict and harsh laws, control the people of Shu; arrogance, arrogance.

古文：欲以边夷之众抗衡上国。
现代文：想以边夷之众与上国抗衡。
English: They want to compete with Shangguo with the people of Bianyi.

古文：出兵陇右，再攻祁山，一攻陈仓，疏迟失会，摧衄而反；后入秦川，不复攻城，更求野战。
现代文：出兵陇右，再攻祁山，又攻陈仓，疏漏迟缓失去时机，大败而返；后入秦川，不再攻城，要求野战。
English: He marched out to the right, attacked Shaoshan again, attacked Chencang again, missed the opportunity, lost the opportunity, and returned in defeat; then he entered Qinchuan, no longer attacked the city, and demanded a field battle.

古文：魏人知其意，闭垒坚守，以不战屈之。
现代文：魏兵知其意图，闭垒坚守，以不战使诸葛服。
English: Knowing his intention, the Wei soldiers held fast to the barricade and subdued Zhuge without a fight.

古文：子崇，字继祖，袭爵。
现代文：诸葛智穷势尽之后，郁愤攻心，发病而死。
English: At the time of his death, he posthumously conferred the titles of General of the Eastern Expedition and King of Nan County.

古文：盛乐太守。崇弟兴业，定阳、阐熙二郡太守。
现代文：由此说来，哪能与古代善战将帅见可而进，知难而退的做法相比呢？ 
English: From this, how can it be compared with the ancient practice of waging a good war, advancing when one sees an opportunity, and retreating when one sees a difficulty?

古文：刘休宾，字处干，本平原人。
现代文：修之附和崔浩的说法。太延二年，毛修之为外都大官。去世时，谥称恭公。刘休宾，字处干，本来是平原人。
English: In the second year of the Taiyuan era, Mao Shujing became a high-ranking official outside the capital. At the time of his death, he was nicknamed "Gong Gong." Liu Xiubin, nicknamed "Duan Gang," was originally from the plains.

古文：祖昶，从慕容德度河，家于北海之都昌县。
现代文：祖父刘昶，随从慕容德渡过黄河，家居于北海的都昌县。
English: Grandfather Liu Wei, who followed Murongde across the Yellow River, lived in Duchang County on the North Sea.

古文：父奉伯，刘裕时，北海太守。
现代文：父亲刘奉伯，刘裕时任北海太守。
English: Liu Fengbo's father, Liu Yu, was the governor of the North Sea at the time.

古文：休宾少好学，有文才，兄弟六人，乘民、延和等皆有时誉。
现代文：刘休宾年少时喜爱读书，颇有文才，兄弟六人，刘乘民、刘延和等在当时都颇有声誉。
English: When Liu Xubing was young, he loved to read and was quite talented in literature. His six brothers, Liu Xingmin, Liu Yanhe and others, were quite famous at that time.

古文：休宾为刘彧虎贲中郎将，稍迁幽州刺史，镇梁邹。
现代文：刘休宾任刘的虎贲中郎将，不久迁任幽州刺史，镇守梁邹。
English: Liu Xubin served as Liu's vice-commander of Tigress, and was soon transferred to the post of Yuzhou governor and town guard of Liangye.

古文：及慕容白曜军至升城，遣人说之，令降，休宾不从。
现代文：及至慕容白曜率领大军到达升城的时候，派人游说刘休宾，令其归降，刘休宾不肯答应。
English: When Murong Paiyang led the army to the city of Sheng, he sent someone to persuade Liu Xiubin to surrender, but Liu Xiubin refused to agree.

古文：刘彧龙骧将军崔灵延、行勃海郡房灵建等数十家皆入梁邹，同举休宾为征虏、衮州。
现代文：刘的龙骧将军崔灵延、代理渤海郡守房灵建等数十家都来到梁邹，共同推举刘休宾为征虏将军、兖州刺史。
English: Liu's Longjing general Cui Lingyan, the acting governor of Bohai County Shufang Lingjian and dozens of other families came to Liangyao to jointly nominate Liu Xubin as the conscript general and the history of Zhangzhou.

古文：会刘彧遣使授休宾辅国将军、衮州刺史。
现代文：刚好刘派遣使者前来授予刘休宾为辅国将军、兖州刺史。
English: It just so happened that Liu sent an envoy to confer Liu Xubing as a general of the auxiliary state and the history of Zhangzhou.

古文：休宾妻，崔邪利女也，生一男，字文晔。
现代文：刘休宾之妻，是崔邪利的女儿，生了一个儿子，字文晔。
English: Liu Xubin's wife, a daughter of Cui Yaxli, gave birth to a son, Zhi Wenlu.

古文：崔氏先归宁在鲁郡，邪利之降也，文晔母子遂与俱入国。
现代文：崔氏原先就已回到鲁郡省亲，崔邪利降魏以后，刘文晔母子就同他一道来到魏国。
English: Originally, the Cui clan had already returned to their relatives in Lu County, and after Cui Zili was reduced to Wei, Liu Wenyi's mother and son came to Wei with him.

古文：至是，白曜表请崔与文晔。既至，白曜以报休宾，又于北海执延和妻子，送至梁邹，巡视城下。
现代文：到这时，慕容白曜写信请崔氏与刘文晔前来，他们母子到来之后，慕容白曜就把这个消息告知刘休宾，又在北海扣押了刘延和的妻儿，把他们送到梁邹，在城下来回走动让刘休宾看见。
English: At this time, Murong Baiyou wrote a letter asking Cui and Liu Wenyi to come. After their mother and son arrived, Murong Baiyou informed Liu Xubing of this news. He also detained Liu Yanhe's wife and children in the North Sea, sent them to Liangyao, and walked back and forth down the city for Liu Xubing to see.

古文：休宾答白曜，许历城降，当即归顺，密遣兼主簿尹文达向历城，观国军形势。
现代文：刘休宾回答慕容白曜，许诺如果历城投降，他就立即归顺，又秘密派兼主簿尹文达去历城，观察魏军的形势。
English: Liu Xubing replied to Murong Paiyang, promising that if Licheng surrendered, he would immediately surrender. He also secretly sent Yin Wenda, who was also the chief accountant, to Licheng to observe the situation of the Wei army.

古文：文达诣白曜，诈言闻王临境，故来祗侯。
现代文：尹文达去见慕容白曜，诈称听说王亲来境内，因而前来恭候。
English: Yin Wenda went to see Murong Bai You, and falsely claimed that he had heard that the prince was coming to the territory, so he came to wait for him.

古文：私谓白曜曰； 刘休宾父子兄弟，累郡连州，今若识运知机，束手归化，不审明王加何赏叙？ 
现代文：尹文达私下里对慕容白曜说： 刘休宾父子兄弟，领辖许多州郡，如果他现在识时务知时机，就会束手归附魏国，不知你这位贤明之王对他们如何叙位加赏？ 
English: Yin Wenda said to Murong Baiyou in private: Liu Xubing and his brothers, who ruled over many states and counties, if he knew the time and knew the opportunity, he would return to Wei. I don't know how you, the wise king, would reward them?

古文：白曜曰： 休宾仕南，爵宠如此，今若不劳兵甲望风自降者，非直处卿富贵，兼还其妇兒。
现代文：慕容白曜说道： 刘休宾出任南朝，得到如此的官位与宠信，如今假若不劳兵动甲，望风而降的话，不但能升官富贵，还要送回他的妻儿。
English: Murong Bai You said: Liu Xubing served in the Southern Dynasty, received such an official position and favor, and now, if he did not work hard, he would not only be promoted and rich, but also send back his wife and children.

古文：休宾纵令不畏攻围，岂不怜其妻子也！
现代文：刘休宾纵令不怕我军围攻他的梁邹城，难道就不怜惜他的妻儿吗！
English: Even though Liu Xubing was not afraid of our army besieging his Liangyao City, did he not spare his wife and children?

古文：今在升城，卿自往见。 
现代文：他的妻儿现在就在升城，你可以亲自去见他们。 
English: His wife and children are in Seongnam now, and you can meet them in person.

古文：文达乃至升城，见休宾妻子。
现代文：尹文达于是到了升城，见到了刘休宾的妻儿。
English: So Yin Wenda went to Shengcheng and met Liu Xubin's wife and children.

古文：文晔攀援文达，哭泣号咷，以爪发为信。
现代文：刘文晔趴在尹文达身上，号啕痛哭，剪下自己的指甲和头发作为信物交给尹文达。
English: Liu Wenjuan fell on top of Yin Wenda, wept bitterly, and cut off her nails and hair as a token to give to Yin Wenda.

古文：文达回还，复经白曜，誓约而去。
现代文：尹文达返回时，又经过慕容白曜屯驻之地，同他订立誓约而去。
English: When Yin Wenda returned, he passed by the place where Murong Baiyou was stationed, made a pledge with him and left.

古文：白曜曰： 卿是休宾耳目腹心，亲见其妻子，又知我众旅少多。善共量议，自求多福。 
现代文：慕容白曜对他说： 你是刘休宾的耳目心腹，亲自见到了他的妻子，又了解我军部队有多少，你回去后同他好好商议，自求多福。 
English: Murong Bai You said to him: You are Liu Xubing's ears, eyes and heart, you have personally met his wife, and you know how many troops there are in our army. When you go back, you should have a good discussion with him and wish yourself good luck.

古文：文达还见休宾，出其妻兒爪发，兼宣白曜所言及国军形势，谓休宾曰： 升城已败，历城非朝则夕，公可早图之。 
现代文：尹文达返回后去见刘休宾，拿出他妻儿的指甲和头发，并告知慕容白曜所说的魏军形势，对刘休宾说： 升城已经失败，历城早晚也会被攻破，你要早早谋划归降的事。 
English: After returning, Yin Wenda went to see Liu Xubing, took out his wife and child's fingernails and hair, and informed him of the situation of the Wei army as mentioned by Murong Baiyou. He said to Liu Xubing: The promotion of the city has failed, the city of Licheng will be broken sooner or later, you should plan the return of the city early.

古文：休宾抚爪发泣涕曰： 妻子幽隔，谁不愍乎？
现代文：刘休宾抚摸着妻儿的指甲头发流泪说： 妻儿阻隔在异地，谁能不怜惜悲悯呢？
English: Liu Xiubin stroked his wife's and son's nails and hair and shed tears, saying, "My wife and son are separated in a foreign land. Who can help but feel pity for them?

古文：吾荷南朝厚恩，受寄边任，今顾妻子而降，于臣节足乎！ 
现代文：我蒙受南朝的厚恩，受托于边境重任，如果因顾惜妻子儿女而去投降，这难道是为臣者的节义吗！ 
English: I have been favored by the Southern Dynasty and entrusted with a heavy responsibility at the border. If I surrender out of consideration for my wife and children, is this really the righteousness of a courtier?

古文：然而密与其兄子闻慰议为降计。
现代文：然而他又秘密同他哥哥之子刘闻慰商议投降之计。
English: However, he secretly discussed the surrender plan with his brother's son, Liu Wenyong.

古文：闻慰曰： 此故当文达诳诈耳。
现代文：刘闻慰说： 这事可能是尹文达有意诳骗欺诈。
English: Liu Wenying said, "This may be an intentional deception and fraud by Yin Wenda.

古文：年常抄掠，岂有多军也？
现代文：魏国多年来侵犯抄掠，难道还有这么多的军队吗？
English: Wei has been invading, plundering and pillaging for many years. Does it really have so many troops?

古文：但可抚强兵，勤肃卫。方城狭嶮，何为便生忧怯，示人以弱也？ 
现代文：我们只能安抚强兵，严加防卫，小城地势险要可以固守，为什么要心生忧怯，在敌人面前表现虚弱呢。 
English: We can only appease the strong soldiers and strictly defend ourselves. If we can firmly defend a small town, why should we be worried and show weakness in front of the enemy?

古文：休宾又谓文达曰： 卿勿惮危苦，更为吾作一返，善观形势。 
现代文：刘休宾又对尹文达说： 你不要害怕危险和劳苦，再为我往返一次，好好观察对方的形势。 
English: Liu Xubing also said to Yin Wenda: Don't be afraid of danger and hardship, make another round trip for me, and carefully observe the other side's situation.

古文：于是遣文达偷道而出，令与白曜为期，克日许送降款。
现代文：于是派尹文达偷偷从小路出城，令他与慕容白曜约好日期，许诺届时前往归降。
English: So he sent Yin Wenda to sneak out of the city on a back road, and made him and Murong Bai arrange a date, promising to leave for the surrender at that time.

古文：文达既至，白曜喜曰： 非直休宾父子荷荣，城内贤豪，亦随人补授。
现代文：尹文达到来之后，慕容白曜大喜道： 不但刘休宾父子可以蒙受恩荣，梁邹城内的贤者豪士，也能够因人而授任官职。
English: After the arrival of Yin Wen, Murong Baiyou said with great joy: Not only can Liu Xubing and his son be honored, but also the sages and heroes in Liangyao can be appointed to official positions.

古文：卿便即为梁邹城主。 
现代文：你就作为梁邹城的戍主。 
English: You will emerge as the tyrant of Liangyao City.

古文：以酒灌地，启告山河曰； 若负休宾，使我三国覆没！ 
现代文：慕容白曜以酒洒地，面对山河盟誓说： 我若有负于刘休宾，就叫我三军覆没！ 
English: Murong Baiyang spilled wine on the ground and swore in front of the mountains and rivers: "If I fail Liu Xubin, I will be annihilated by the three armies!"

古文：初，白曜之表取休宾妻子也，显祖以道固即叛，诏授休宾持节，平南将军、翼州刺史平原公。
现代文：起初，慕容白曜上表取要刘休宾妻儿的时候，显祖由于崔道固已经叛降，诏令授予刘休宾为持节、平南将军、冀州刺史、平原公。
English: At first, when Murong Paiyang wanted Liu Xubin's wife and children, Xianzu, because Cui Daogu had already surrendered, issued a decree to award Liu Xubin as Jisai, Pingnan General, Jizhou Shishi, and Pingyuan Gong.

古文：至是付文达诏策。
现代文：到了这时，慕容白曜就把皇帝的诏策交付给尹文达。
English: At this time, Murong Baiyang delivered the emperor's edict to Yin Wenda.

古文：文达还，谓休宾曰： 白曜信誓如此，公可早为决计，恐攻逼之后，降悔无由。 
现代文：尹文达回到梁邹，对刘休宾说： 慕容白曜信誓旦旦，你可以趁早作出决断，恐怕等到他攻下城池，后悔就来不及了。 
English: When Yin Wenda returned to Liangyao, he said to Liu Xubing: "Murong Bai You vowed, you can make a decision as soon as possible. I'm afraid that when he captures the city, it will be too late to regret.

古文：休宾于是告兄子闻慰曰； 事势可知，汝早作降书。 
现代文：刘休宾于是告诉他的兄子刘闻慰说： 事情的势态已经知道了，你快些写好降书。 
English: Liu Xubing then told his elder brother Liu Wenzhong: "The state of affairs is already known, you should quickly write a letter of surrender.

古文：闻慰沉疑，固执不作，遂差本契。
现代文：刘闻慰沉默疑虑，固执而不肯写，于是就未具写文书条款。
English: Liu Wenjie was silent and hesitant, stubborn and unwilling to write, so he did not write the terms of the document.

古文：高白曜寻遣著作佐郎许赤虎夜至梁邹南门下，告城上人曰； 汝语刘休宾，何由遣文达频造仆射，许送降文，归诚大化，何得无信，违期不来！ 
现代文：慕容白曜不久就派著作佐郎许赤虎晚上去到梁邹城南门下，告诉城楼上的人说： 你去对刘休宾说，为什么派尹文达一再来造访慕容仆射，答应送交降书，归诚于我魏国，竟然言而无信，违期不来！ 
English: Soon after, Murong Baiyang sent the writer Sarang Xu, the Red Tiger, to go to the south gate of Liangyao in the evening, and told the people on the castle tower: "Go and tell Liu Xubing why he sent Yin Wenda to visit Murong Fusa again and again, promising to submit a letter of surrender and be sincere to our state of Wei, but he did not believe what he said and did not come on time!

古文：于是门人唱告，城内悉知，遂相维持，欲降不得，皆云： 刘休宾父子，欲以我城内人易荣位也。 
现代文：于是门上的人大声向城内传告，城中人全都知道了，就互相维系保持，想要投降也办不到，人们都说： 刘休宾父子两人，要把我们城内的人去交换荣显的地位。 
English: As a result, the people at the gate loudly announced to the city that the people in the city all knew about it, and they supported and maintained each other. It was impossible to surrender. People all said: Liu Xubin and his son, they want to exchange our people in the city for the status of glory.

古文：寻被攻逼，经冬至春。
现代文：不久梁邹城受到围逼，经过一冬一春。
English: Liangyao was soon besieged, and after one winter and one spring, it was liberated.

古文：历城降，白曜遣道固子景业与文晔至城下。
现代文：直到历城投降以后，慕容白曜派崔道固之子崔景业与刘文晔一起去到城下。
English: After the surrender of Licheng, Murong Baiyou sent Cui Jingye, the son of Cui Daogu, and Liu Wenyi to the outskirts of the city.

古文：休宾知道固降，乃出请命。
现代文：刘休宾知道崔道固已经投降，便出城请命归降。
English: Liu Xubing knew that Cui Daogu had already surrendered, so he went out of the city to ask for his surrender.

古文：白曜送休宾及宿有名望者十馀人，俱入代都为客。
现代文：慕容白曜遣送刘休宾和城中素有名望的十余人，全都到代都作为门客。
English: Murong Baiyang sent Liu Xubin and more than ten famous people in the city, all of whom have been his customers.

古文：及立平齐郡，乃以梁邹民为怀宁县，休宾为县令。
现代文：直到朝廷设立平齐郡，就把梁邹之民置为怀宁县，以刘休宾为县令。
English: Until the establishment of Pingqi County by the imperial court, the people of Liangyao were placed in Huaining County, with Liu Xubin as the county magistrate.

古文：延同二年卒。
现代文：刘休宾死于延兴二年。
English: Liu Xubing died in Yanxing two years ago.

古文：文晔，有志尚，综览群书，轻财重义。
现代文：刘文晔，为人很有志向节操，综览群书，轻财重义。
English: Liu Wenzhong is a person who is very ambitious to save energy, review books, and value money.

古文：太和中，坐从兄闻慰南叛，与二弟文颢、季友被徙北边，高祖特听还代。
现代文：太和年间，刘文晔因其从兄刘闻慰反叛到南朝而连坐获罪，与两个弟弟刘文颢、刘季友被贬徙到北方边地，高祖特许让他回到代都。
English: During the reign of the Empress Dowager Cixi, Liu Wenyi was convicted for rebelling from his brother Liu Wenyi to the Southern Dynasty. He and his two younger brothers, Liu Wenyi and Liu Jiyu, were exiled to the northern borderlands, and Gaozu gave him special permission to return to the capital.

古文：高宗曾幸方山，文晔大言于路侧曰： 求见圣明，申宣久屈。 
现代文：高祖曾驾幸方山，刘文晔在路旁大声叫道： 请求朝见圣上，申说我长期的冤屈。 
English: Gao Zu had been driving through the Happy Fangshan Mountains, and Liu Wenyi shouted out on the side of the road: "Ask to see the saint, and tell him about my long-standing grievances."

古文：高祖遣尚书李冲宣诏问曰： 卿欲何言，听卿面自申尽。 
现代文：高祖派尚书李冲宣诏问刘文晔说： 你有什么话要说，可听你当面尽情申述。 
English: Gao Zu sent Shangshu Li Chong Xuan Zhao to ask Liu Wenqi and said: "If you have anything to say, I can listen to you in person.

古文：于是引见。
现代文：于是皇帝接见刘文晔。
English: So the emperor received Liu Wenzhong.

古文：文晔对曰： 臣之陋族，出自平原，往因燕乱，流离河表，居齐以来，八、九十载。
现代文：刘文晔申述说： 臣的俗陋的家族，原籍在平原，往日由于慕容氏之乱，流离到黄河以外，定居在齐地以来，已有八九十年。
English: Liu Wenqi said: It has been eighty or ninety years since the vulgar family of the minister, originally from the plains, was displaced outside the Yellow River and settled in Qi due to the Murong Rebellion.

古文：真君十一年，世祖太武皇帝巡江之日，时年二岁，随外祖鲁郡太守崔邪利于邹山归国。
现代文：太平真君十一年，世祖太武皇帝巡视长江的时候，我才只两岁，跟随外祖父鲁郡太守崔邪利在邹山归属魏国。
English: In the eleventh year of Taiping Zhenjun, when the ancestor Emperor Taibu was patrolling the Yangtze River, I was only two years old, following my grandfather Lu County Governor Cui Yali in Shaoshan belonging to Wei.

古文：邪利蒙赐四品，除广宁太守。
现代文：崔邪利蒙朝廷赐给四品官职，任命为广宁太守。
English: Cui Yulimong was given four official posts by the imperial court and was appointed governor of Guangning.

古文：以臣年小，不及齿录。
现代文：由于臣年龄尚小，没有被授官。
English: Due to his young age, he was not promoted.

古文：至天安之初，皇威远被，臣亡父休宾，刘氏持节、衮州刺史，戍梁邹。
现代文：到天安初年，皇威远被南方，臣亡父刘休宾，是刘宋的持节、兖州刺史，戍守梁邹。
English: By the first year of Tiananmen, the emperor was far away from the south, and Liu Xubin, the deceased father of the emperor, was Liu Song's holding festival, the history of Zhangzhou, and the defense of Liangyao.

古文：时慕容白曜以臣父居全齐之要，水陆道冲，青冀二城，往来要路，三城岳峙，并拒王师。
现代文：当时慕容白曜因我父亲身居全齐险要之地，水陆交通的要冲，青冀二城，往来要道，三城鼎峙，共同抗拒王师。
English: At that time, because of my father's residence in Murongbaiyang, the whole region was in a critical situation. It was a crossroads of land and water transportation, the second city of Qinghai and Hebei, a major traffic route, and the three cities were in a standoff, jointly resisting Wang Shi.

古文：白曜知臣母子先在代京，表请臣母子慰劳。
现代文：慕容白曜得知臣母子原先住在代京，就上表请求让我母子前去安慰父亲。
English: When Murong Baiyang learned that the minister's mother and son had previously lived in Daikyo, he asked the table to let my mother and son go to comfort my father.

古文：臣即被先帝诏，遣乘传诣军，又赐亡父官爵。
现代文：臣立即奉先帝诏令，乘坐驿车去到军中，先帝又赐给亡父官爵。
English: The vassal immediately obeyed the Emperor's edict and went to the army in a carriage. The Emperor also gave his deceased father the title of peer.

古文：白曜遣右司马卢河内等送臣母子至邹。
现代文：慕容白曜派右司马卢河内等人送我母子到梁邹。
English: Murong Baiyou sent his right-hand man, Malu Hanyi, and others to escort my mother and son to Liangyao.

古文：臣既见亡父，备申皇泽。
现代文：臣见到亡父之后，详细申说先帝皇恩。
English: After the vassal saw his deceased father, he spoke in detail about the former emperor's grace.

古文：云： 吾蒙本朝宠遇，捍御籓屏，尊卑百口，并在二城。
现代文：他说： 我蒙受本朝宠遇，捍卫守御在边境之地，家中老幼百口人，都在这两座城中。
English: He said: I have been favoured by this dynasty, defending and guarding the land on the border, with hundreds of family members, young and old, in these two cities.

古文：吾若先降，百口必被诛灭，既不固诚于本朝，又令尊卑涂炭，岂堪为人臣以奉大魏乎？
现代文：我倘若一人先降，家中百口必定遭到诛灭，既不能守诚于本朝，又使家中老幼受到诛杀，难道能忍为人臣以侍奉大魏吗？
English: If I were to be the first to surrender, a hundred members of my family would certainly be annihilated. I would not be able to remain loyal to this dynasty, and my children and grandchildren would be killed. Could I bear to serve the Great Wei Dynasty as a vassal?

古文：汝且申吾意白仆射，降意已判，平历城，即率士众送款军前。 
现代文：你可以把我的意思转告慕容仆射，投降大魏的主意已定，等到平定历城之后，立即带领士众到军前归诚。 
English: You can convey my intention to Murong Fusa, the idea of surrendering to Wei has been decided, wait until after the subjugation of Licheng, and immediately lead the soldiers to the front to return.

古文：既克历城，白曜遣赤虎送臣并崔道固子景业等向梁邹。
现代文：历城被攻克之后，慕容白曜派许赤虎送我和崔道固之子崔景业等到梁邹。
English: After the city of Licheng was conquered, Murong Baiyou sent Xu Red Tiger to escort me and Cui Jingye, the son of Cui Daogu, to Liangyao.

古文：亡父既见赤虎之信，仰感圣朝远遣妻子，又知天命有归，拥众一万，以城降款。
现代文：亡父见到许赤虎带去的信，深深感激圣朝远送妻儿，又知道天命注定要归附，就带领一万部下，以其城诚心归降。
English: When his late father saw the letter brought by Xu Zhigao, he was deeply grateful to the Holy Father for sending his wife and children far away, and knowing that he was destined to return, he led ten thousand of his subordinates to surrender with his sincerity.

古文：乘驿赴台，蒙为客例。
现代文：后臣父乘驿车到达代都，按惯例作为门客。
English: Afterward, my father arrived at the capital in a tuk-tuk, and as usual, he was the gate guest.

古文：臣私衅深重，亡父以延兴二年孤背明世，血诚微心，未获申展。
现代文：臣个人罪孽深重，亡父于延兴二年与世长辞，一片至诚之心，未能得到申展。
English: The vassal was personally guilty of many sins. His late father passed away in Yanxing two years ago. He had a sincere heart and was not able to apply for the exhibition.

古文：如臣等比，并蒙荣爵，为在事孤抑，以人废勋。 
现代文：像我这样的情况的人，都蒙受荣爵，只有我独独受到压抑，功勋授予大概是因人而异。 
English: People in my position get knighthoods, I'm the only one who's been repressed, the honours probably vary from person to person.

古文：高祖曰； 卿诉父赏而卿父无勋。
现代文：高祖说： 你诉求父亲的赏赐，但你父亲并无功勋。
English: Gaozu said, "You are asking for your father's reward, but your father has no merit.

古文：历城齐之西关，归命请顺。
现代文：历城是齐地西边的关隘，归附朝命而请求降顺。
English: Licheng was a narrow pass on the west side of Qi Province. It submitted to the imperial command and requested to be surrendered.

古文：梁邹小戍，岂能获全？
现代文：梁邹是个小的戍城，怎么能得以保全？
English: Liangyao is a small town. How can it be preserved?

古文：何足以为功也？ 
现代文：你父据梁邹归诚，有多大的功劳。 
English: Your father's death is a great achievement.

古文：文哗对曰； 诚如圣旨，愚臣所见，犹有未申。
现代文：刘文晔回答说： 诚如圣上意旨，但愚臣的看法，还没有申述明由。
English: Liu Wenzhong replied, "It is true that it is the will of the Almighty, but the opinion of the foolish minister has not been stated clearly.

古文：何者？
现代文：为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：昔乐毅破齐七十馀城，唯有即墨独在，此岂非根亡而条立？
现代文：古时乐毅攻破齐国七十余城，仅有即墨独存，这难道不是根亡而枝立吗？
English: In ancient times, Le Yi conquered more than 70 cities in Qi, and only Jimo survived. Isn't this a root-and-branch development?

古文：且夫降顺之人，验之古今，未有不由危逼者。
现代文：而且降顺的人，考察古今之事，没有不是由于情况危机而被迫如此的。
English: Moreover, no one who surrenders, looking at things past and present, does so without being forced to do so by a crisis of circumstances.

古文：故黄权无路归款，列地封侯。
现代文：所以黄权走投无路而归降，得以列地封侯。
English: Therefore, Huang Quan was cornered and capitulated, and was able to be put under house arrest.

古文：且薛安都、毕众敬危急投命，并受茅土之爵。
现代文：薛安都、毕众敬在危急之时而投命，都接受了茅土之爵。
English: Both Xue Andu and Bi Zhongjing, who gave their lives in a time of crisis, accepted the title of Lord of the Thatch.

古文：论古则如彼，语今则如此，明明之世，不及比流。
现代文：论古就如彼，说今则如此，我处于明明之世，却不及于他们。
English: As he was in ancient times, so am I now. I am in the world, but not of it.

古文：窃惟梁邹严固，地据中齐，粟支十载，控弦数千万，方之升城，不可同日而语。
现代文：我私下考虑梁邹城池严固，地势居于中齐，城中粮食可吃十年，弓箭数千万，比之于升城，不可同日而语。
English: Privately, I think that Liangyao is a strong city, with the same geographical position as Shangcheng. The food in the city can be eaten for ten years, and the bows and arrows can be used for tens of millions. Compared to Shangcheng, it cannot be compared to the same day.

古文：升城犹能抗兵累旬，伤杀甚众，若臣亡父固守孤城，则非一朝可克。 
现代文：升城尚且能固守数十天，杀伤甚众，假若臣亡父固守梁邹孤城，那就不是一朝可以攻克的。 
English: Shangcheng was able to hold out for dozens of days, with many casualties. If the minister's late father had held out in the isolated city of Liangyao, it would not have been possible to conquer it overnight.

古文：高祖曰： 历城既陷，梁邹便是掌中，何烦兵力？ 
现代文：高祖说： 历城已经攻陷，梁邹便在手掌之中，何须烦劳兵力。 
English: Gao Zu said: Licheng has been conquered, Liangyao is in the palm of your hand, why bother with troops.

古文：对曰： 若如圣旨，白曜便应穷兵极意，取胜俯仰，何为上假赤虎之信，下炫知变之民？ 
现代文：刘文晔说： 如果像圣上所说，慕容白曜就应当穷兵极意，攻城取胜于俯仰之间，为什么还要上派许赤虎传信，下靠知变的城中之民？ 
English: Liu Wenqi said: If, as the saint said, the Murong Baiyang should be determined to fight to the bitter end, and it is better to attack the city than to surrender, why should it be necessary to send a red tiger to send a message, and rely on the people in the city who are wiser?

古文：高祖曰： 卿父此勋，本自至少，以卿才地，岂假殷勤？ 
现代文：高祖说： 你父亲这种功劳，本来就很少，就凭你的才气能力，难道还要倚仗对父亲的深情。 
English: Gao Zu said, "Your father's merit is very little. With your talent and ability, do you still have to rely on your father's affection?

古文：对曰： 臣尪愚六蔽，文武无施，响绝九拜，闻天无日，遭逢圣运，万死犹生。
现代文：刘文晔说： 臣愚劣无知，文武都不能施展，纵使呼叫之声遍及原野，也没有被朝廷听到的时日，幸赖遭逢圣明的气运，历万死而犹能生存。
English: Liu Wenyi said: "Vassals are stupid, inferior and ignorant. They can't do any martial arts. Even if the voice of the call spreads throughout the wilderness, it hasn't been heard by the imperial court for a long time. Fortunately, he was lucky enough to meet the saint, and he can still survive after thousands of deaths."

古文：但臣窃见徐衮是贼籓要，徐衮既降，诸诚皆应国有。
现代文：但臣私下得见徐兖是贼寇的边境要地，徐兖二州归降以后，各边戍尽为魏国所有。
English: However, the minister privately saw that Xuyi was an important border area for thieves and robbers. After the two states of Xuyi surrendered, all the border areas were owned by the State of Wei.

古文：而东徐州刺史张谠所戍团城，领二郡而已。
现代文：而东徐州刺史张谠所戍守的团城，仅只包括两个郡而已。
English: However, the Tuancheng, which was held by the East Xuzhou statesman Zhang Di, only included two counties.

古文：徐衮降后，犹闭门拒命，授以方岳，始乃归降。
现代文：徐兖二州归降后，张谠仍旧闭门拒降，朝廷授予他刺史之职，他才来归附。
English: After the surrender of Xuzhou and Erzhou, Zhang Ye still refused to surrender behind closed doors. The imperial court awarded him the post of chief historian, and only then did he come to surrender.

古文：父子二人，并蒙侯爵。
现代文：他父子二人，都蒙受封为侯爵。
English: Both he and his son were made marquesses.

古文：论功比勤，不先臣父。 
现代文：论功比勤，他都不强于我的父亲。 
English: In terms of merit, he's no better than my father.

古文：高祖曰： 卿引张谠，谠事小异。 
现代文：高祖说： 你引出张谠这个人，张谠的事与你父亲略有差异。 
English: Gao Zu said: You brought up Zhang Ye, this person. Zhang Ye's case is slightly different from your father's.

古文：对曰； 臣未识异状。 
现代文：刘文晔说： 臣不知道差异在什么地方。 
English: Liu Wenqi said: The minister does not know where the difference lies.

古文：高祖曰： 张谠始来送款，终不差信。
现代文：高祖说： 张谠一开始就来表示归降的诚意，最终也没有失去信用。
English: Gao Zu said: Zhang Ye expressed his sincerity of capitulation from the very beginning, and he did not lose his credibility in the end.

古文：卿父进非先觉，退又拒守，何得不异？ 
现代文：你的父亲在前不是早已觉悟，在后又据城拒守，怎么能说没有差异？ 
English: How can you say that there is no difference when your father was enlightened in the past, but refused to defend the city afterwards?

古文：对曰： 张谠父子，始有归顺之名，后有闭门之罪，以功补过，免罪为幸。
现代文：刘文晔回答说： 张谠父子，开始有归顺投诚之名，后来却有闭门拒守之罪，以功补过，免予治罪就是幸运了。
English: Liu Wenyi replied: Zhang Ye and his son initially had the name of Zhu Shun and Zhu Cheng, but later had the crime of refusing to keep the door closed. They made up for it with merit, and it was lucky that they were exempted from punishment.

古文：臣又见崔僧祐母弟，随其叔父道固在历城。
现代文：臣又见崔僧的母亲和弟弟，跟随他的叔父崔道固在历城。
English: The minister also saw Cui's mother and younger brother, who followed his uncle Cui Daogu to Licheng.

古文：僧祐遥闻王威远及，恐母弟沦亡，督率乡闾来欲救援。
现代文：崔僧老远听说魏军王威已至历城，恐怕母弟二人城陷身亡，就督率乡里之众要来救援。
English: Choe Son heard from afar that the Wei army Wang Wei had arrived in Licheng, and feared that his mother and younger brother had been trapped and killed. So he led the villagers to come to the rescue.

古文：既至郁洲，历城已没，束手归诚，救母弟之命。
现代文：他到达郁洲的时候，历城已经被攻克，只得束手归诚，以救母弟之命。
English: When he arrived in Yuzhou, Licheng had already been conquered, and he had to give up his life to save the lives of his mother and brother.

古文：圣朝嘉其附化，赏以三品。
现代文：圣朝嘉奖他前来归顺，赏给他三品之职。
English: The Holy Court commended him for coming to submit and awarded him the rank of Third Rank.

古文：亡父之诚，岂后僧祐？ 
现代文：臣亡父的诚心，难道比崔僧还有不及的吗？ 
English: Is the sincerity of the minister's late father less than that of the monk Cui?

古文：高祖曰： 僧祐身居东海，去留任意，来则有位，去则他人，是故赏之。
现代文：高祖说： 崔僧身居东海，去留都任凭他自己的本意，来则有他的职位，去则为他人之臣，由于这个缘故才奖赏他。
English: Gao Zu said, "Cui Monk lives in the East Sea, and it is up to him whether he stays or goes. When he comes, he has his position, and when he goes, he is someone else's vassal. That is why he was rewarded.

古文：卿父被围孤城，已是己物，所以不赏。 
现代文：你的父亲被围困在一座孤城，该城已是属我所有，所以对他不予封赏。 
English: Your father is besieged in a lonely city, which is already mine, so he will not be rewarded.

古文：对曰： 亡父据城归国，至公也；僧祐意计而来，为私也。
现代文：刘文晔说： 亡父据城归附魏国，这是最大的公；崔僧怀着自己的主意而来，这是为一己之私。
English: Liu Wenzhong said, "My late father's decision to annex the city to the State of Wei was the greatest act of public service; Cui Xiang came with his own idea, which was for his own benefit.

古文：为私蒙赏，至公不酬，臣未见其可。 
现代文：为私的人受赏，至公之人得不到酬报，臣看不出其中正确之处。 
English: I don't see what's so right about a private person being rewarded and a public person not being rewarded.

古文：高祖笑而不言。
现代文：高祖听了笑而不言。
English: Gaozu laughed and did not say a word.

古文：比部尚书陆叡叱文晔曰： 假令先朝谬赏僧祐，岂可谬相赏也！ 
现代文：比部尚书陆睿叱责刘文晔说： 即使是先朝错误地奖赏了崔僧，难道现在可以又错误地奖赏于你吗！ 
English: Lu Rui scolded Liu Wenzhong, saying, "Even if the previous government mistakenly rewarded Cui Xiang, can it now be mistakenly rewarded to you?

古文：文晔曰： 先帝中代圣主，与日月等曜，比隆尧舜，宰相则十乱五臣，今言谬赏，岂不仰诬先朝乎？ 
现代文：刘文晔说道： 先帝是大魏中代的圣主，与日月同辉，和尧舜并重，又有善于治理国家的宰相，现在你说先帝是错误的赏赐，难道不是对先朝的诬蔑吗？ 
English: Liu Wenyi said: The former emperor was the patron saint of the Middle Wei Dynasty, with the same glory as the sun and moon, the same importance as the dragon, and the prime minister who was good at governing the country. Now you say that the former emperor is a wrong reward, isn't it a slander against the former dynasty?

古文：尚书高闾曰： 卿谓母弟与妻子何者为重？ 
现代文：尚书高闾说： 你认为母弟与妻儿谁更为重要？ 
English: Shangshu Gaoqi said: Who do you think is more important, mother and brother or wife and children?

古文：文晔曰： 母弟为重。 
现代文：刘文晔说： 母弟为重要。 
English: Liu Wenzhong said, "Mother and brother are important.

古文：闾曰： 卿知母弟为重，朝廷赏僧祐是也。
现代文：高闾说： 你既然知道母弟更为重要，那么朝廷赏赐崔僧就是对的。
English: Gao Wei said: Since you know that mother and brother are more important, then it is right for the imperial court to reward the Cui monks.

古文：卿父为妻子而来，事何相反？ 
现代文：你的父亲是为妻儿而来，事情不是相反的吗？ 
English: Your father came for his wife and children. Isn't it the other way around?

古文：对曰： 僧祐若无母弟，来归以不？ 闾曰： 不来。 
现代文：刘文晔说： 崔僧如果没有母亲弟弟，他会前来归降吗？ 高闾说： 当然不会来。 
English: Liu Wenqi said, "If Cui Zeng did not have a mother and a brother, would he come to surrender?" Gao Wei said, "Of course not."

古文：文晔曰： 若僧祐赴母弟之难，此是其私。
现代文：刘文晔说： 像崔僧前往解救母弟之难，这是他的私心。
English: Liu Wenyu said: It was selfish of him to go to the rescue of his mother and brother like Cui Zang.

古文：而亡父本为大丈夫，立身处世，岂可顾妻子而亏高节也！
现代文：而亡父本是大丈夫，立身处世，难道能为了顾惜妻儿而有损于高尚的节操吗！
English: But the deceased father is all right, based on his life, can he undermine the noble discipline in order to take care of his wife and children?

古文：昔乐羊食子，有顾以不？
现代文：古时乐羊食子，他有所顾惜吗？
English: In the old days, he was a sheep eater. Did he have any regrets?

古文：亡父本心，实不垂顾，所以归化者，自知商周不敌，天命有所归。 
现代文：亡父的本心，其实不是为顾惜妻儿，他之所以归附朝廷的原因，是自知商不能敌周，天命有所归属。 
English: The real intention of the deceased father was actually not to take care of his wife and children. The reason why he attached himself to the imperial court was that he knew that merchants could not be enemies of Zhou, and it was his destiny to belong.

古文：高祖谓文晔曰： 卿之所诉，颇亦有途。
现代文：高祖对刘文晔说： 你所申诉的事，也颇有道理。
English: Gaozu said to Liu Wenyi, "What you are complaining about is quite reasonable.

古文：赏从重，罚从轻，寻敕酬叙。 
现代文：奖赏应当从重，处罚应当从轻，不久我将会敕令对你酬功叙官。 
English: The reward should be heavy, the punishment should be light, and soon I will order you to be awarded.

古文：文晔泣曰： 臣愚顿理极，再见无期，陛下既垂慈泽，愿敕有司，特赐矜理。 
现代文：刘文晔流泪说： 臣愚钝至极，恐怕再无机会见到圣上，陛下已经给予我仁慈和恩泽，希望能敕令有关部门，特别赐予我朝廷恩禄。 
English: Liu Wenyi shed tears and said, "I am afraid that I will not have another chance to meet His Holiness, as he is extremely stupid. Your Majesty has already given me mercy and grace, and I hope that you will order the relevant departments, in particular, to give me the imperial reward.

古文：高祖曰： 王者无戏，何待勤。 
现代文：高祖说： 王者无戏言，不必如此殷勤急切。 
English: Gao Zu said: The king has nothing to say, there is no need to be so eager.

古文：法凤兄弟无可收用，不蒙选授。
现代文：不久，赐予刘文晔爵位为都昌子，他受到朝廷很好的待遇。后授任他为协律中郎，改授羽林监。
English: Soon, Liu Wenxuan was given the title of Duke of Changzi, and he was treated very well by the imperial court. Later, he was appointed as a middle-ranking magistrate, and later as a forest inspector.

古文：后俱奔南。
现代文：世宗即位后，刘文晔任高阳太守。
English: After the enthronement of King Sejong, Liu Wenzhong became the governor of Goyang.

古文：法武后改名孝标云。
现代文：延昌年间，刘文晔去世。
English: During the Yanchang period, Liu Wenzhong passed away.

古文：房法寿，小名乌头，清河绎幕人也。
现代文：朝廷追赠他为平远将军、光州刺史，定谥号为贞。房法寿，小名乌头，清河绎幕人。
English: The imperial court posthumously bestowed him with the titles of General Pingyuan, Gwangju Satoshi, and his posthumous name was Zhen. He was also known as Fang Fazhou, his nickname was Utou, and he was a member of the Qing dynasty.

古文：幼孤，少好射猎，轻率勇果，结群小而为劫盗。
现代文：房法寿幼年时父亲去世，年轻时喜爱射猎，轻率而勇敢，聚结群小而进行偷盗。
English: Fang Fa Shou's father died when he was young. When he was young, he liked shooting, was reckless and brave, and gathered in small groups to steal.

古文：从叔元庆、范镇等坐法寿被州郡切责，时月相继，宗族甚患之。
现代文：他的从叔房元庆、房范镇等都因房法寿犯事而被州群有司深加责罚，日长月久，宗族的人对他都感到忧惧。
English: His uncles, Fang Yuanqing and Fang Fan Zhen, were all punished severely by the prefectural group of judges for the crime of Fang Fa Shou. For a long time, the people of the clan were worried about him.

古文：弱冠，州迎主簿。
现代文：房法寿二十岁时，州里召他为主簿。
English: When Fang Fa Shou was 20 years old, he was invited by the state to become the head librarian.

古文：后以母老，不复应州郡之命。
现代文：后来由于母亲年迈，他就不再在州郡任事。
English: Later, due to his mother's old age, he no longer worked for the county.

古文：常盗杀猪牛，以共其母。
现代文：经常偷杀别人的猪和牛，以此来供养他的老母。
English: He often steals other people's pigs and cows to feed his old mother.

古文：招集壮士，常有百数。
现代文：房法寿身边聚集许多年轻力壮的人，常常有上百人。
English: Many young and strong people gather around Fang Fazhou, often there are hundreds of people.

古文：母亡岁余，遇沈文秀、崔道固起兵应刘子勋。
现代文：房法寿的母亲去世一年多以后，正逢沈文秀、崔道固起兵响应刘子勋。
English: More than a year after the death of Fang Fazhou's mother, Shen Wenxiu and Cui Daogu raised an army in response to Liu Zixun.

古文：明僧暠、刘乘民起兵应刘彧，攻讨文秀。
现代文：明僧詗、刘乘民起兵响应刘，攻讨沈文秀。
English: In response to Liu, the Ming monks Zou and Liu Rongmin raised an army to attack and defeat Shen Wenshu.

古文：法寿亦与清河太守王玄邈起兵西屯，合讨道固。
现代文：房法寿也与清河太守王玄邈一道在西屯起兵，合攻崔道固。
English: Fang Fazhou also raised an army in Xitun together with Wang Xuanqian, the governor of Qinghe, and jointly attacked Cui Daogu.

古文：玄邈以法寿为司马，累破道固军，甚为历城所惮。
现代文：王玄邈以房法寿为司马，屡次打败崔道固的军队，历城守军十分惧怕他。
English: With Fang Fazhou as his steward, Wang Xuanqian repeatedly defeated Cui Daogu's army. The defenders of Licheng were very afraid of him.

古文：加法寿绥边将军、魏郡太守。
现代文：房法寿被授任为绥边将军、魏郡太守。
English: Fang Fazhou was appointed as the general of Lijiang and the governor of Wei County.

古文：子勋死，道固、文秀悉复归彧，乃罢兵。
现代文：刘子勋死后，崔道固、沈文秀全都又归附于刘，双方才停止了兵战。
English: After Liu Zixun's death, Cui Daogu and Shen Wenxiu all reverted to Liu, and only then did the two sides stop fighting.

古文：道固虑其扇乱百姓，遂切遣之。
现代文：崔道固害怕他煽惑扰乱百姓，就急切地要把他遣送到别处。
English: Cui Daogu, fearing that he would incite and disturb the people, was anxious to send him elsewhere.

古文：而法寿外托装办而内不欲行。
现代文：但房法寿表面上装做准备行装而内心里不肯走。
English: On the surface, however, Fang Fa Shou was preparing to leave, but deep inside, he refused to go.

古文：会从弟崇吉在升城，为慕容白曜所破，母妻没于白曜军。
现代文：正好房法寿的堂弟房崇古在升城，被慕容白曜所打败，母亲和妻子被拘押在慕容白曜的军队里。
English: Just as Fang Fa Shou's cousin Fang Chonggu was defeating Murong Bai You in Shengcheng, his mother and wife were detained in Murong Bai You's army.

古文：崇吉奔还旧宅。
现代文：房崇吉逃出回到他的旧居。
English: Fang Chongji escaped and returned to his former home.

古文：法寿与崇吉年志粗相谐协，而亲则从祖兄弟也。
现代文：房法寿与房崇吉年龄和志向都略为相似，但亲缘关系则是共祖父的兄弟。
English: Fang Fazhou and Fang Chongji are slightly similar in age and ambition, but they are related to each other as brothers of the same grandfather.

古文：崇吉以母妻见获，托法寿为计。
现代文：房崇吉由于母亲妻子被慕容白曜军俘获，就托请房法寿替他设法相救。
English: Since Fang Chongji's mother and wife were captured by the Murong Beiyang Army, he asked Fang Fa Shou to try to rescue him.

古文：法寿既不欲南行，恨道固逼切，又矜崇吉情理。
现代文：房法寿既不想到南边去，恨崔道固对自己逼迫，又从情理上怜惜房崇吉母妻。
English: Fang Fa Shou did not want to go to the south, he hated Cui Daogu for persecuting him, and he also pitied Fang Chongji's mother and wife.

古文：时道固以兼治中房灵宾督清河、广川郡事，戍盘阳。
现代文：当时崔道固以兼治中房灵宾督清河、广川郡事，戍守盘阳。
English: At that time, Cui Daogu was concurrently serving as Zhongfang Lingbin, the governor of Qinghe and Guangchuan counties, and was in charge of Panyang.

古文：法寿遂与崇吉潜谋袭灵宾，克之。
现代文：房法寿就与房崇吉暗中策划袭击房灵宾，攻占了盘阳。
English: Fang Fa Shou secretly plotted with Fang Chongji to attack Fang Lingbin and captured Panyang.

古文：仍归款于白曜以赎母妻。
现代文：接着归降于慕容白曜去赎取房崇吉的母亲妻子。
English: He then surrendered to Murong Baiyou to ransom Fang Chongji's mother and wife.

古文：白曜遣将军长孙观等自大山南入马耳观军入城，诏以法寿为平远将军，与韩骐驎对为冀州刺史，督上租粮。
现代文：慕容白曜派将军长孙观等人从大山南侧过马耳关而赶赴盘阳，送回了房崇吉的母妻。起初，崔道固派兵围攻盘阳，房法寿等人在城中拒守二十多天，长孙观领兵赶来，崔道固军才逃散。长孙观的军队进入城中，表请朝廷诏令房法寿为平远将军，与韩骐马对为冀州刺史，督运租粮。
English: Murong Baiyang sent General Cui Daogu and others to Panyang from the south side of the mountain through the Mal Pass and sent back Fang Chongji's mother and wife. At first, Cui Daogu sent troops to besiege Panyang, Fang Fazhou and others refused to stay in the city for more than 20 days. Cui Daogu's army only dispersed when Cui Daogu's troops arrived to lead the troops. Cui Daogu's army entered the city and asked the court to decree that Cui Daogu was General Pingyuan, and Han Yoma was the governor of Jizhou and the commander of grain transportation.

古文：以法寿从父弟灵民为清河太守，思顺为济南大守，灵悦为平原太守，伯怜为广川太守，叔玉为高阳太守，叔玉兄伯玉为河间太守，伯玉从父弟思安为乐陵太守，思安弟幼安为高密太守，以安初附。
现代文：朝廷任房法寿的叔伯兄弟房灵民为清河太守，房思顺为济南太守，房灵恍为平原太守，房伯怜为广川太守，房叔玉为高阳太守，房叔玉之兄房伯玉为河间太守，房伯玉的堂弟房思安为乐陵太守。房恩安之弟房幼安为高密太守，以安抚他们初来归附之心。
English: The uncles and brothers of Fong Fa Shou who were appointed to the imperial court, Fong Ling Min was the governor of Qinghe, Fong Sishun was the governor of Jinan, Fong Ling Tran was the governor of Pingyuan, Fong Bo Lei was the governor of Guangchuan, Fong Shuyu was the governor of Gaoyang, Fong Shuyu, the brother of Fong Shuyu, was the governor of Hebei, Fong Si'an, the cousin of Fong Shuyu, was the governor of Le Ling, and Fong En'an's brother, Fong You'an, was the governor of Gaomi, in order to appease

古文：及历城、梁邹降，法寿、崇吉等与崔道固、刘休宾俱至京师。
现代文：及至历城、梁邹归降之后，房法寿、房崇吉等人与崔道固、刘休宾一同到达京师。
English: After the fall of Licheng and Liangyao, Fang Fazhou, Fang Chongji and others arrived in Beijing together with Cui Daogu and Liu Xiubin.

古文：以法寿为上客，崇吉为次客，崔刘为下客。
现代文：朝廷以房法寿为上客，房崇吉为次客，崔道固、刘休宾为下客。
English: The imperial court chose Fang Fazhou as the guest of honor, Fang Chongji as the second guest, and Cui Daogu and Liu Xiubin as the guests of honor.

古文：法寿供给，亚于安都等。
现代文：房法寿所享受的供给，仅次于薛安都等人。
English: The supply enjoyed by Fang Fa Shou is second only to Xue Andu and others.

古文：汉阳既平，复为武昌王司马，带东魏郡太守，加宁朔将军，改爵清河子，卒官。
现代文：后来凭功劳赐给房法寿爵位为壮武侯，加授为龙骧将军，并赐给他田宅、奴婢。
English: Later, on the basis of merit, Fang Fazhou was given the title of Zhuangwu Marquis and the additional title of Longyu General, and he was given a farmhouse, slaves and maids.

古文：子敬宝袭爵。敬宝，亦壮健。
现代文：房法寿生性好酒，乐于施舍，他的亲戚故旧宾客全都与他同饥饱，因此他的酒坛里常常不丰足。
English: Fang Fa Shou was a good drinker and a generous giver. His relatives and former guests were all hungry with him, so his wine cellar was often not full.

古文：奉朝请、征北中兵参军、北征统军、宁远将军，每有战功。早卒。子去病袭。
现代文：毕众敬等人都同他友好往来。太和年间房法寿去世。朝廷追赠他为平东将军、青州刺史，定谥号为敬侯。
English: Bi Zhanqian and others all had friendly dealings with him. During the reign of Emperor Taizong, Fang Fasu passed away. The Imperial Court posthumously awarded him the titles of General Pingdong, Qingzhou Shishi, and the posthumous name of Jinghou.

古文：伯玉，坐弟叔玉南奔，徙于北边。
现代文：房伯玉，因其弟房叔玉叛逃到南朝而连坐获罪，被贬徙于北方边地。
English: Fang Bo-yu, because his brother Fang Shu-yu defected to the Southern Dynasty and was convicted, was exiled to the northern border.

古文：后亦南叛，为萧鸾南阳太守。
现代文：后来房伯玉也南叛，任萧鸾的南阳太守。
English: Later, Fang Bo-yu also rebelled against the South and became Nanyang's governor.

古文：高祖南伐，克宛外城，命舍人公孙延景宣诏于伯玉曰： 天无二日，土无两王，是以躬总六师，荡一四海。宛城小戍，岂足以御抗王威？
现代文：高祖率军南伐，攻占了宛城的外城，令舍人公孙延景向房伯玉宣诏说： 天无二日，地无两王，因此我亲自总领六军，荡平、统一四海，宛城是个小小的戍镇，难道足以抗拒王威？
English: Gao Zu led the army southward and captured the outer city of Wancheng. He ordered his grandson Yanjing to proclaim to Fang Boyu: There is no two days, there are no two kings, so I personally led the six armies, leveled and unified the four seas. Wancheng is a small town, is it enough to resist Wang Wei?

古文：深可三思，封侯胙土，事在俯仰。 
现代文：你应深刻三思，想要封侯受土，事在俯仰之间。 
English: You should think twice if you want to be a vassal. It's a matter of respect.

古文：伯玉对曰： 外臣荷国厚恩，奉任疆境，为臣之道，未敢听命。
现代文：房伯玉回答道： 外臣蒙受本国深厚的恩泽，奉任守卫边境，我要尽为臣之道，不敢听您之意。
English: Fang Bo-yu replied, "As a foreign minister entrusted with the duty of guarding the border, having received the profound gratitude of my country, I want to do my best as a minister, and I dare not listen to you.

古文：伏惟游銮远涉，愿不损神。 
现代文：我惟愿皇上銮舆远涉边地，不至于劳力损神。 
English: I only wish that the emperor would let me go far and wide, so that I would not waste my labor.

古文：高祖又遣谓曰： 朕亲率麾旆，远清江沔，此之小戍，岂足徘徊王师？
现代文：高祖又派使者对他说： 我亲自率领大军，远征江、沔，这个小小戍城，怎能让王师徘徊不前。
English: Gao Zu also sent an envoy to him, saying, "I personally led a large army on an expedition to the Yangtze River and the Yangtze River. How can this small Yunnan city keep Wang Shi from moving forward?

古文：但戎辂所经，纤介须殄，宜量力三思，自求多福。
现代文：但凡我的戎车所经之地，即使是如同纤介的小地也要消灭它，你应当量力三思，自求多福。
English: However, wherever My chariot passes, even if it is as small as a grain of mustard seed, you must destroy it. You should think about it carefully and seek blessings for yourself.

古文：且卿早蒙萧赜殊常之眷，曾不怀恩，报以尘露。
现代文：况且你早年蒙受萧赜异常的眷爱，难道就不曾感怀恩宠，报之以尘露之微。
English: Moreover, in your early years, you were extremely favored by Xiao Yao, didn't you feel the grace and reward him with a little bit of dust.

古文：萧鸾妄言入继道成，赜子无孑遗。
现代文：萧鸾胡说他入朝继承萧道成，却大肆诛剪，使萧赜之子一个也没有留下。
English: Xiao Yan Hu said that he had entered the court to succeed Xiao Daocheng, but he cut down trees so much that none of Xiao Yan's sons were left.

古文：卿不能建忠于前君，方立节于逆竖，卿之罪一。
现代文：你不能建忠于前君，却要立节于逆贼，这是你的一大罪过。
English: You can't be loyal to the former emperor, but you have to be loyal to the traitor. This is one of your major sins.

古文：又顷年伤我偏师，卿之罪二。
现代文：又连年挫伤我朝一部分军队，这是你的第二大罪过。
English: It is your second biggest crime to frustrate a part of the DPRK's army year after year.

古文：今鉴旆亲戎，清一南服，不先面缚，待罪麾下，卿之罪三。
现代文：现在我銮驾亲征，要使南方降服于中国，你不肯面缚归降，得罪于我的军队，这是你的第三大罪过。
English: Now that I am leading my own army to subjugate the south to China, you are unwilling to surrender and have offended my army. This is your third major sin.

古文：卿之此戍，多则一年，中则百日，少则三旬，克殄岂远？
现代文：你所守的戍城，多则一年，中则百日，少则三旬，被荡平的命运岂会长远。
English: The fortified city you are guarding has a year at most, a hundred days in the middle, and thirty days at most. Will the fate of being flattened be long-term?

古文：宜善思之，后悔无及。 
现代文：你应当好好思虑此事，以免后悔不及。 
English: You should think about it carefully, so as not to regret it.

古文：伯玉对曰： 昔蒙武帝恺悌之恩，忝侍左右，此之厚遇，无忘夙夜。
现代文：房伯玉回答道： 我往日曾蒙武帝和悦相待之恩，忝侍其左右，这种优厚的待遇，夙夜都不曾忘怀。
English: Fang Bo-yu replied, "In the past, I was treated kindly by Emperor Wu, and I served him around. I have never forgotten this kind of generous treatment, day or night.

古文：但继主失德，民望有归。
现代文：但继承他的人失去德行，民望另有归附。
English: However, his successors lost their virtue, and the people's hopes were attached to others.

古文：主上龙飞践极，光绍大宗，非直副亿兆之深望，实兼武皇之遗敕。
现代文：如今主上登基，继承先王大业，不但符合万民之深望，实际上秉持武皇之遗敕。
English: Now that the Lord has ascended to the throne, inheriting the great cause of the previous king, it is not only in line with the deep hopes of the people, but actually upholds the widow of Emperor Wu.

古文：是以勤勤恳恳，不敢失坠。
现代文：所以我勤勤恳恳，不敢有所失误。
English: So I am diligent and earnest, and dare not make any mistakes.

古文：往者，北师深入，寇扰边民，辄厉将士，以救苍生。
现代文：在过去，北军深入我地，侵扰边境百姓，我就勉励将士，以拯救苍生。
English: In the past, when the Northern troops penetrated deep into our country and harassed the border people, I urged the soldiers to save lives.

古文：此乃边戍常事，陛下不得垂责。 
现代文：这是边戍守将的通常之事，陛下不能予以责备。 
English: It's a common thing for border guards, and His Majesty can't be blamed.

古文：及克宛，伯玉面缚而降。
现代文：及至宛城被克，房伯玉面缚而降。
English: As far as Wancheng was concerned, Fang Boyu was bound and fell down.

古文：高祖引见伯玉并其参佐二百人，诏伯玉曰： 朕承天驭宇，方欲清一寰域，卿蕞尔小戍，敢拒六师，卿之愆罪，理在不赦。 
现代文：高祖接见房伯玉及其参佐二百人，诏令房伯玉说： 我秉承天命统驭天下，正要统一中国，你区区一个小戍，胆敢抗拒六军，你所犯下的罪责，理应不予赦免。 
English: Gao Zu received Fang Bo-yu and his 200 advisors, and ordered Fang Bo-yu to say: I uphold the heavenly mandate to rule the world, and I am about to unify China. You are just a pawn, daring to resist the Six Armies. The guilt you have committed should not be pardoned.

古文：伯玉对曰： 臣既小人，备荷驱使，缘百口在南，致拒皇略，罪合万死。 
现代文：房伯玉回答说： 臣既是小人，完全受人驱使，只因家中有百口之人在南边，以致抗拒皇帝的谋略，罪该万死。 
English: Fang Bo-yu replied, "Since the minister is a villain and is completely driven by others, just because there are a hundred people in his family in the south, he resisted the emperor's plan. The crime deserves death.

古文：高祖曰： 凡立忠抱节，皆应有所至。
现代文：高祖说： 凡是立忠守节的人，都应当有其去处。
English: Gao Zu said: All those who establish and observe the Loyalty Festival should have a place to go.

古文：若奉逆君，守迷节，古人所不为。
现代文：如果侍奉悖逆之君，死守迷乱之节，这是古人都不做的。
English: If you serve a disobedient ruler, you will keep the festival of bewilderment, which the ancients did not do.

古文：卿何得事逆贼萧鸾，自贻伊谴！ 
现代文：你却为舒适要侍奉逆贼萧鸾，自己招来那样的罪过！ 
English: But for the sake of comfort, you want to serve the traitor Xiao Yu, and you have brought such a sin upon yourself!

古文：伯玉对曰： 臣愚痴晚悟，罪合万斩，今遭陛下，愿乞生命。 
现代文：房伯玉回答说： 臣生性愚痴觉悟太晚，罪当万斩，如今遭逢陛下，希望能赐给一条生路。 
English: Fang Bo-yu replied, "It is too late for a vassal to become aware of his foolishness, and he should be punished for his crime. Now he has met His Majesty, and I hope to give him a way out.

古文：高祖曰： 凡人惟有两途：知机获福，背机受祸。
现代文：高祖说： 凡人只有两条路：识时务者得福，违背时势者受祸。
English: Gao Zu said: There are only two ways for ordinary people: those who are aware of the times will be blessed, and those who go against the times will be cursed.

古文：劳我王师，弥历岁月，如此为降，何人有罪！
现代文：劳我王师，经年累月，这样算作归降，那么什么人才是有罪呢！
English: After years and months of hard work, this is considered a capitulation, so who is guilty?

古文：且朕前遣舍人公孙延景城西共卿语云： 天无二日，土无二王。 
现代文：况且我在先前就派舍人公孙延景在城西对你说过： 天无二日，地无二王。 
English: Moreover, I have previously sent my grandson, Yanjing, to the west of the city to say to you: There are no two days, and there are no two kings.

古文：卿答云： 在此不在彼。 
现代文：你回答说： 我在此不在彼。 
English: You replied: I am not with him here.

古文：天道攸远，变化无方，卿宁知今日在此不在彼乎？ 
现代文：天道悠远，变化无方，你难道知道今天在此不在彼吗？ 
English: The way of heaven is long and ever-changing. Do you know that he is not here today?

古文：伯玉乞命而已，更无所言。
现代文：房伯玉无话可说，只有乞求赏命而已。
English: Fang Bo-yu had nothing to say but begged for his life.

古文：及母亡，景伯居丧，不食盐菜，因此遂为水病，积年不愈。孝昌三年卒于家，时年五十。
现代文：高祖由于房思安多次替房伯玉流泪请求，所以对他特予宥免。房伯玉在南朝的时候，曾把他的妾杨氏放逐出家为尼姑。他到了魏国以后，就让她还俗，对她又十分宠爱。
English: As Fang Sian repeatedly pleaded in tears on behalf of Fang Bo-yu, Gao Zu specially pardoned him. During the Southern Dynasty, Fang Bo-yu had banished his concubine Yang to become a nun. After he arrived in Wei, he had her return to secular life, and he was very fond of her.

古文：赠左将军、齐州刺史。
现代文：这件事被有司上奏朝廷，高祖听任他这样做。
English: This matter was reported to the imperial court by a superior officer, and Gaozu allowed him to do so.

古文：子文烈，武定中，尚书三公郎中。景先，字光胄。
现代文：世宗即位以后，授予房伯玉长史之职，兼游击将军，后出任为冯翊相，死于官任上。景先，字光胄。
English: After the enthronement of King Sejong, he gave Fang Bo the post of Yulan Changshi, also a guerrilla general, and later served as Feng Yuxiang, who died in office.

古文：幼孤贫，无资从师，其母自授《毛诗》、《曲礼》。
现代文：幼小孤贫，无钱从师受学，他的母亲自己教他《毛诗》、《曲礼》。
English: Young and poor, he had no money to study with a teacher. His mother taught him "Mao Poem" and "Song and Dance" by herself.

古文：年十二，请其母曰： 岂可使兄佣赁以供景先也？
现代文：十二岁半，向母亲请求说： 怎么可以让兄当雇工以供景先呢？
English: When he was twelve and a half years old, he asked his mother, "How can I let my brother work as a hired hand to supply the family?

古文：请自求衣，然后就学。 
现代文：我要求自求衣食，然后就学。 
English: I asked to feed and clothe myself, and then I went to school.

古文：母哀其小，不许。
现代文：母亲怜其幼小，不答应。
English: His mother, feeling sorry for her little son, did not agree.

古文：苦请，从之，遂得一羊裘，忻然自足。
现代文：房景先苦苦请求，就依了，于是得到一件羊皮袄，房景先欣然自足。
English: After much pleading, he agreed, and was given a sheepskin coat. He was happy to be self-sufficient.

古文：昼则樵苏，夜诵经史，自是精勤，遂大通赡。
现代文：他白天打柴做活，晚上诵读经史，勤奋好学，大通六艺。
English: During the day, he chopped wood and did chores. At night, he read the Bible and studied diligently. He excelled in six arts.

古文：太和中，例得还乡，郡辟功曹。
现代文：太和年间，依惯例得以还乡，郡府征为功曹。
English: During the Taiwa era, he was able to return to his hometown according to the usual practice, and was awarded the county post.

古文：州举秀才，值州将卒，不得对策。
现代文：州中举其为秀才，正逢州将卒，房景先不得对策。
English: He was praised as an outstanding talent in the middle of the state, and he graduated as a state general.

古文：解褐太学博士。
现代文：起官为太学博士。
English: He was promoted to the rank of Taihaku hakase.

古文：时太常刘芳、侍中崔光富世儒宗，叹其精博，光遂奏兼著作佐郎，修国史。
现代文：当时的太常刘芳、侍中崔光都是当代儒宗，赞叹房景先的学识渊博，崔光于是奏荐他为兼著作佐郎，修撰国史。
English: At that time, the first secretary Liu Fang and the chambermaid Cui Guang were both contemporary Confucianists. They admired Fang Jingsen's profound knowledge. Cui Guang then recommended him to be a scholar and write a national history.

古文：寻除司徒祭酒、员外郎。
现代文：不久除任司徒祭酒、员外郎。
English: He was soon removed from his positions as priest, priest, and priest.

古文：侍中穆绍又启景先撰《世宗起居注》。
现代文：侍中穆绍又启奏荐房景先撰写《世宗起居注》。
English: The chamberlain Musho also recommended that Fokye first write a "Note on Sejong's Residence."

古文：累迁步兵校尉，领尚书郎，齐州中正，所历皆有当官之称。
现代文：累迁为步兵校尉、领尚书郎、齐州中正，每任一职都有才当其官的称誉。
English: He was successively transferred to the positions of infantry captain, leader Shang Shuro, and vice-premier of the State of Qi, each of which had the reputation of being the best officer.

古文：景先沉敏方正，事兄恭谨，出告反面，晨昏参省，侧立移时，兄亦危坐，相敬如对宾客。
现代文：房景先沉敏方正，侍奉兄长恭敬谨细出入家门都向兄第禀报，早晚参省，侧立移时，兄也正襟危坐，两人相敬如对宾客。
English: He was the first to go to the provinces in the morning and evening, and when he moved, his brother was also sitting in front of him, and the two respected each other as if they were guests.

古文：兄曾寝疾，景先侍汤药，衣冠不解，形容毁瘁。
现代文：兄长曾经卧病在床，房景先在一旁侍奉汤药、衣冠不解，形容憔悴。
English: My elder brother was once sick in bed, and I was serving soup and medicine to him. I couldn't understand what he was saying, so I described him as a baboon.

古文：亲友见者莫不哀之。
现代文：亲友见后无不哀怜。
English: After seeing relatives and friends, there is nothing but pity.

古文：神龟元年，萧衍龙骧将军田申能据东义阳城内属，敕景先为行台，发二荆兵以援之，在军遇疾而还。
现代文：神龟元年，萧衍的龙骧将军田申能据东阳城内附，帝派房景先为行台，征发二荆州兵马声援他，房景先在军中遇病还朝。
English: In the first year of Shenkui, Xiao Yan's Longjing general Tian Shen Neng was attached to Dongyang City, and the emperor sent Fang Jingsen to the capital to recruit soldiers and horses from Erjing Prefecture to support him. When Fang Jingsen fell ill in the army, he returned to the capital.

古文：其年卒于家，时年四十三。
现代文：这一年在家里去世，时年四十三岁。
English: He died at home that year, aged 43.

古文：赠持节、冠军将军、洛州刺史，谥曰文景。
现代文：朝廷赠他为使持节、冠军将军、洛州刺史，谥称文景。
English: The imperial court gave him the title of "Champion General" and "Laoshou Scholar," also known as "Wenjing."

古文：先作《五经疑问》百余篇，其言该典，今行于时，文多，略举其切于世教者：
现代文：房景先生前撰《五经疑问》一百多篇，其言精当，今流行于世，原文很多，现略举其中有关世教的文字：
English: Mr. Fangjing has previously written more than one hundred articles of the "Five Questions of Confucianism." His words are incisive and are now popular in the world. There are many original texts. Here is a brief list of the texts related to world religion:

古文：问王者受命，木火相生曰：五精代感，禀灵者兴。
现代文： 问王者受命，木火相生曰：金、木、水、火、土五精交相感应，秉受灵气者兴盛。
English: The king's questioner was ordered to say that the five essences of gold, wood, water, fire, and earth interact with each other, and those who receive the aura will prosper.

古文：金德方隆，祯发华渚；水运告昌，瑶光启祚。
现代文：金德方隆，祥发华渚；水运告昌，瑶光启祚。
English: Jinde Fanglong, Xiangfa Huazhong; Water transportation is prosperous, and bright light is the beginning of spring.

古文：人道承天，天理应实，受谢既彰，玄命若契。
现代文：人道承天，天理应实，承受、凋谢既已彰明，玄冥命祚相合如契。
English: Humanism inherits from heaven, the heavenly principle should be true, the ability to endure and wither has already been made clear, and the life of the spirit and the life of the flesh are in perfect accord.

古文：相生之义，有允不违。
现代文：相生之义，相递不违。
English: In the sense of affinity, it's not a bad thing.

古文：至如汤武革命，杀伐是用，水火为次，遵而不改。
现代文：至如汤武革命，任用杀伐，水火为次，遵而不改。
English: Just like the Tangwu Revolution, the appointment of killing and felling, water and fire are secondary, and do not change.

古文：既事乖代终，而数同纳麓。
现代文：既然事乖代终，而数同纳麓。
English: Since things are going well, the number is the same.

古文：逆顺且殊，祯运宜异，而兆征不差，有疑符应。
现代文：逆顺且殊，祯运宜异，而兆征不差，有疑符应。
English: The contrary is favorable and special, the auspicious and unlucky are different, and the signs are not bad, there are doubtful signs.

古文：问禹以鲧配天，舜不尊父曰：明明上天，下土是冒。
现代文： 问禹以鲧配天，舜不受命说：明明上天，下土是冒。
English: Asked if he was a match for heaven, he said: "I am not under orders to go to heaven, but to go to the lower earth.

古文：道高者负扆四方，神积者郊原斯主。
现代文：道高的负四方，神积的郊原斯主。
English: The negative square of the road height, the suburb of the divine accumulation.

古文：是以则天，不能私其子；绍尧，不敢尊其父。
现代文：所以循天，不能私其子；尊尧，不敢尊其父。
English: Therefore, according to Heaven, you cannot have a son of your own; respect your father, but do not dare to respect your father.

古文：鲧既罪彰于山川，受殛于羽裔，化质与鳞甲为群。
现代文：鲧既然罪行彰于山川，受极于羽裔，化质与鱼兽为群。
English: Since the crime was committed in the mountains and rivers, it was greatly affected by the feather race, and the chemical substance was a group of fish and animals.

古文：铭精不能上乘箕尾，而厚尊配于国阳，当升烟之大礼。
现代文：铭精不能上乘冥尾，而厚尊配于国阳，当升烟之大礼。
English: The spirit of the inscription cannot be superior to the Meiwei, but the thick reverence is worthy of the Guoyang, when the smoke rises.

古文：苟存及躬，以乱祀典。
现代文：假如存之身边，便乱祭礼大典。
English: If it is around, it will disrupt the ceremony.

古文：降上帝为罪鬼之宾，奏夹钟为介虫之乐，奉天之道，不乃有沦乎？
现代文：如此降上帝为罪鬼之位，奏夹钟为介虫之乐，奉天的道教，不也沦落了吗？
English: In this way, God is relegated to the position of a criminal ghost, the chiming of the bell is the music of insects, and Taoism, which worships the heavens, is not also degraded?

古文：问汤尊稷废柱曰： 神积道存，异世同尊；列山见享，绵纪前代。
现代文： 问汤尊稷废柱曰：神积道存，异世同尊；列山被享，绵延前代。
English: Ask Tang Zong and Wasted Column: God accumulates Tao, different worlds have the same deity; mountains are enjoyed, stretching back to the previous generation.

古文：成汤革命承天，当愆阳之运，不思理数之有时，黜元功于百世。
现代文：成汤革命承天，当愆阳之运，他不思理数之有时，黜之功于百世。
English: The Chengdu-Tang Revolution is the result of God's providence. When the fortunes of the Warring States, he did not think about the number of times, the contribution of the Warring States to the world.

古文：且毕、箕感应，风雨异征，尊播殖之灵，而邀滂澍之润，升废之道，无乃谬与？
现代文：且毕、冥二宿感应，风雨出现异兆，尊崇播种繁殖的神灵，而邀滂润之祥，这升废之道，不也谬妄吗？
English: After all, it is said that the gods of the underworld and the underworld can be sensed, the signs of wind and rain appear, the gods of sowing and breeding are revered, and the auspiciousness of the harvest is invited. Isn't this path of waste also a fallacy?

古文：若柱不合荐，虞夏应失之于前；如以岁久宜迁，百神可计日而代。
现代文：如柱不应举荐，虞夏就应失在前面；如以岁久应迁，百神可计日而代。
English: If the pillar should not be recommended, Yu Xia should be lost in front; if the years should be moved, the hundred gods can count the days.

古文：求之二三，未究往旨。
现代文：我求之二三，并未穷究过去的道理。
English: I'm asking for a few things, and I haven't exhausted the past.

古文：问汤克桀，欲迁夏社为不可；武王灭纣，以亳社为亡国之诫曰：神无定方，唯人为主，道协无为，天地是依，弃德弗崇，百灵更祀。
现代文： 问汤克桀，欲迁夏社为不可；武王灭纣，以亳社为亡国之诫说：神无定方，惟人为主，道协无为，依从天地，弃德不崇，百灵更祀。
English: He asked Tong Ke Xuan if it was impossible to relocate the Xia Society; Wu Wang Zhi Xuan took the destruction of the Xia Society as a commandment for the destruction of the country and said: "God has no fixed place, only man is the master, Taoist Association does nothing, follows heaven and earth, abandons virtue, and worships hundreds of spirits."

古文：周武承天，礼存咸秩，升后稷当四圭之尊，贬土只隔牲币之享。
现代文：周武承天，礼存全秩，升崇后稷以当四圭之尊，贬土祗隔牲币之享。
English: Zhou Wu succeeds Tian, all ranks are preserved, after promotion, he is revered as the venerated saint of the four directions, the land is demoted, and the livestock money is divided.

古文：就如言之，稷禀灵威，诚允聿追之宜，社非商祖，孝孚乃考之咎，殷鉴致诫，何独在斯？
现代文：就如言之，稷秉掌灵威，诚该追配合适的位置，社非商神，孝合尔考之过失，殷商一朝的教训，岂止在此？
English: Just as the saying goes, if you hold the spirit, sincerity should be matched with the right position, society is not a merchant god, the fault of filial piety, the lesson of the merchants, is not here?

古文：问《易》著革命之爻，而无揖让之象曰：玄黄剖别，人道为尊，含灵伫化，故义始元首。
现代文： 问《易》著革命之爻，而没有揖让之象说：玄黄剖断分别，人道为尊上，含灵贮化，所以义始元首。
English: When asked if "Yi" was a symbol of revolution, but there was no symbol of concession, he said: "Xuanhuang was a symbol of separation, humanity was a symbol of dignity, and spirit was a symbol of accumulation, so he was the first head of state.

古文：是以飞龙启征，大人载就。
现代文：因此飞龙启征、大人乃就。
English: That's why dragons fly and grown-ups march.

古文：及理运相推，帝图异序。
现代文：等到理运相推，帝图异序。
English: Wait until the real movement pushes forward, and the imperial chart will be out of sequence.

古文：符玺郎王神贵答之，名为《辩疑》，合成十卷，亦有可观。
现代文：虞宾以为善终顺守，有惭未尽，不显揖让卦象，而著往日之美。哪能示百姓为贻这样的谋划，训万世而开安思之策？求之反哀，未识理恕。 符玺郎王神贵作书回答，名叫《辨疑》，合成十卷，也值一看。
English: Guobin thought that the good would eventually be preserved, but it was a shame that it was not done, and it did not appear to be a good idea, but it was the beauty of the past. How can the people be shown to be such a plan, to teach the world and open a peace of mind? It was a pity to ask for it, and it was not understood. Fu Yulang Wang Shen Gui wrote a book called "Dispute," composed of ten volumes, which is also worth a look.

古文：前废帝时奏上之。
现代文：前废帝时书奏上。
English: The former emperor's calligraphy is on display.

古文：帝亲自执卷，与神贵往复，嘉其用心，特除神贵子鸿彦为奉朝请。
现代文：皇帝亲自执卷，与神贵二人往复诘答，帝称其用心良苦，特别除授神贵的儿子王鸿彦为奉朝请一职。
English: The emperor personally held the scroll, and exchanged words with the two gods. The emperor said that they were well-intentioned. In particular, Wang Hongyan, the son of the gods, was given a post to serve the emperor.

古文：景先子延祐，武定末，太子家令。
现代文：景先子房延，武定末年，为太子家令。
English: Jingxian Zifang Yan, in the last years of Wuding, was a member of the prince's household.

