古文：汉自中平黄巾之乱，天下震扰。士大夫莫不择所从，以为全身远害之计，然非豪杰不能也。
现代文：汉朝自中平年间黄自军之乱起，天下动荡不宁，士大夫没有人不选择跟随的对象的，以此作为保全自身远避祸害的策略，然而不是英豪俊杰不能做到这一点。
English: In the Han Dynasty, from the time of the Yellow Self-army Rebellion in the years between the Middle and the Middle Ages, the world was turbulent and restless. There was no scholar who did not choose the object to follow, as a strategy to protect himself from the scourge. However, instead of being a hero, Junjie could not do this.

古文：荀彧少时，以颍川四战之地，劝父老亟避之，乡人多怀土不能去，彧独率宗族往冀州，袁绍待以上宾之礼。
现代文：荀彧年轻的时候，认为颖川是四面开阔易受攻击的地方，劝乡中父老赶快避开此地，乡里的人多怀念故土不能离去，荀彧独自带领同族的人前往冀州，袁绍以对待上等宾客的礼节对待他。
English: When Yao was young, he thought that Yingchuan was a place that was wide open and vulnerable to attack. He advised the villagers to avoid this place as soon as possible. Many people in the village miss their homeland and cannot leave. Yao alone led his compatriots to Jizhou. Yuan Shao treated him with the etiquette of a high-class guest.

古文：彧度绍终不能定大业，去而从曹操。
现代文：荀彧思量袁绍最终不能成就大业，就离开他而跟随了曹操。
English: Thinking that Yuan Shao would not be able to achieve the great cause in the end, he left him and followed Cao Cao.

古文：其乡人留者，多为贼所杀。
现代文：荀彧的同乡人留下来的，多被乱军杀了。
English: Most of his fellow villagers who stayed behind were killed by the rebels.

古文：袁绍遣使迎汝南士大夫，和洽独往荆州，刘表以上客待之。洽曰： 所以不从本初，避争地也。
现代文：袁绍派使者迎接汝南的士大夫，和洽却独自前往荆州，刘表以对待上等宾客那样的礼遇对待他，和洽说： 我不跟随袁绍的原因，是为了避开纷争之地。
English: Yuan Shao sent an emissary to greet the scholar and doctor from Runan, but He Chaotong went to Jingzhou alone. Liu Bei treated him with the courtesy of a high-class guest. He Chaotong said, "The reason I don't follow Yuan Shao is to avoid the place of conflict."

古文：昏世之主，不可黩近，久而不去，谗慝将兴。 
现代文：昏乱社会的君主，就能经常接近，长时间不离去，谗言邪念就会兴起。 
English: The ruler of a chaotic society can always approach, and if he does not leave for a long time, gossip and evil thoughts will arise.

古文：遂南之武陵，其留者多为表所害。
现代文：于是向南到武陵去，那些留下来的人多数被刘表杀害。
English: So they went south to Wuling. Most of those who stayed behind were killed by Liu Biao.

古文：曹操牧兖州，陈留太守张邈与之亲友。
现代文：曹操在兖州为兖州牧时，陈留太守张邈跟他是亲友。
English: When Cao Cao was the shepherd of Ganzhou in Ganzhou, Chen Liu Taishu Zhang Ye was a close friend of him.

古文：郡士高柔独以为邈必乘间为变，率乡人欲避之，众皆以曹、张相亲，不然其言。
现代文：郡士高柔却认为张邈一定会趁机会进行叛变，就打算带领乡人避开他，众人都认为曹操和张邈相互亲密，对他的话不以为然。
English: However, the county magistrate Gao Rong thought that Zhang Ye would definitely take advantage of the opportunity to rebel, and planned to lead the villagers to avoid him. Everyone thought that Cao Cao and Zhang Ye were close to each other, and did not agree with his words.

古文：柔举家适河北，邈果叛操。
现代文：高柔全家到了河北，张邈果然反叛曹操。
English: Gao Ju's whole family arrived in Hebei, and Zhang Ye indeed rebelled against Cao Cao.

古文：郭嘉初见袁绍，谓其谋臣辛评等曰： 智者审于量主，袁公多端寡要，好谋无决，难与共济大难，吾将更举以求主，子盍去乎？ 
现代文：郭嘉初次见到袁绍，对他的谋臣辛评等人说： 聪明的人对衡量他的主人是慎重的，袁绍头绪繁多，不得要领，喜欢图谋，却不能决断，很难跟他一起渡过大难，吾打算再次行动另找主人，你们怎么不离去呢？ 
English: Guo Jia saw Yuan Shao for the first time, and said to his advisers and others: A wise man is prudent in measuring his master. Yuan Shao has many clues, lacks essentials, likes to plot, but cannot make a decision. It is difficult to overcome great difficulties with him. I plan to move again to find another master. Why don't you leave?

古文：评等曰： 袁氏今最强，去将何之？ 
现代文：辛评等人说： 袁氏现在是最强大的，离开他将往哪儿去呢？ 
English: Xin Rui and others said: Yuan is now the most powerful, where will he go if he leaves?

古文：嘉不复言，遂去依曹操。
现代文：郭嘉不再说话，于是离开，依附了曹操。
English: Guo Jia stopped talking and left, clinging to Cao Cao.

古文：操召见，与论天下事。
现代文：曹操召见了他，跟他谈论天下大事。
English: Cao Cao summoned him to discuss world affairs.

古文：出曰： 真吾主也。 
现代文：郭嘉出来后说： 这才真正是我的主子。 
English: Guo Jia came out and said, "This is really my master."

古文：杜袭、赵俨、繁钦避乱荆州，钦数见奇于表，袭曰： 所以俱来者，欲全身以待时耳。子若见能不已，非吾徒敢。 
现代文：杜袭、赵俨和繁钦在荆州躲避战乱，繁钦在刘表面前多次显示出奇才，杜袭说： 我们一起来的原因，是想保全自身好等待时机而已，您如果不停地表现才能，就不是我们这一类人。 
English: Du Wei, Zhao Yao and Fanqin were hiding from the war in Jingzhou. Fanqin had shown his talent many times before Liu surface. Du Wei said: The reason we came together is to protect ourselves and wait for the right time. If you keep showing your talent, you are not our kind of people.

古文：及天子都许，俨曰： 曹镇东必能济华夏，吾知归矣。 
现代文：等到天子在许昌定都，赵俨说： 曹操一定能成就天下大事，我知道归顺谁了。 
English: When Tianzi arrived at the Xu Changding Capital, Zhao Wei said: Cao Cao will surely be able to achieve great things for the world. I know who to submit to.

古文：遂诣操。
现代文：于是投奔了曹操。
English: So Cao Cao came to the rescue.

古文：河间邢颛在无终，闻操定冀州，谓田畴曰： 闻曹公法令严，民厌乱矣，乱极则平。
现代文：河间的邢颛在无终时听说曹操平定了冀州，对田畴说： 听说曹操法令严明，百姓已经厌恶战乱了，乱到极点就会安定。
English: When he heard that Cao Cao had pacified Jizhou, he said to Tian Zhen: I heard that Cao Cao's decrees are strict, the people have abhorred war and chaos, and chaos to the extreme will be stable.

古文：请以身先。 
现代文：我请求先去投靠他。
English: I beg you to go to him first.

古文：遂装还乡里。
现代文：于是收拾行装回到故乡。
English: So they packed up and went back to their hometown.

古文：畴曰： 颛，天民之先觉者也。 
现代文：田畴说： 邢颛是知道天命的人中的先觉者。 
English: Tian Zang said: Zou is the forerunner among those who know the fate of the world.

古文：孙策定丹阳，吕范请暂领都督，策曰： 子衡已有大众，岂宜复屈小职！ 
现代文：孙策平定了丹阳，吕范请求暂时兼任都督，孙策说； 您已经有了大批人马，哪能再让您屈任小职位呢！ 
English: Sun Ce has pacified Danyang, and Lv Fan has requested to temporarily serve as governor, Sun Ce said; You already have a large number of people, how can you be relegated to a small position!

古文：范曰： 今舍本土而托将军者，欲济世务也。
现代文：吕范说： 我现在舍弃故土而投靠您的原因，是想济助社会。
English: Lu Fan said, "The reason why I am now abandoning my homeland and relying on you is that I want to help society.

古文：譬犹同舟涉海，一事不牢，即俱受其败，此亦范计，非但将军也。 
现代文：就如同同乘一条船渡海，有一件事不牢靠，就会共同受到它的破坏，这也是我自己的盘算，不仅仅是您的。 
English: Just like crossing the sea in the same boat, if one thing is not reliable, it will be jointly damaged by it. This is my own calculation, not just yours.

古文：策从之。
现代文：孙策听从了他。
English: Sun Ce obeyed him.

古文：周瑜闻策声问，便推结分好，及策卒权立，瑜谓权可与共成大业，遂委心服事焉。
现代文：周瑜听说孙策的名望，就辞绝结交的好友；等到孙策死后孙权即位，周瑜认为孙权是可以跟他共同成就大业的人，就一心为他服务了。
English: When Zhou Yu heard of Sun Ce's reputation, she gave up her friendship with him. When Sun Quan ascended to the throne after Sun Ce's death, Zhou Yu believed that Sun Quan was someone who could achieve great things with him, and she devoted herself to serving him.

古文：诸葛亮在襄阳，刘表不能起；一见刘备，事之不疑。
现代文：诸葛亮在襄阳时，刘表不能够起用他，但他一见到刘备，就毫不迟疑地为他服务。
English: When Zhuge Liang was in Yangyang, Liu Biao could not use him, but as soon as he saw Liu Bei, he did not hesitate to serve him.

古文：此诸人识见如是，安得困于乱世哉！
现代文：这些人有这样的卓识远见，怎么会在乱世中遭到困厄呢？
English: How could these people, with such insight and foresight, have been left stranded in the middle of a chaotic world?

