古文：周弘正弟弘直弘直子确袁宪周弘正，字思行，汝南安城人，晋光禄大夫顗之九世孙也。祖颙，齐中书侍郎，领著作。父宝始，梁司徒祭酒。
现代文：周弘正字思行，汝南安城人，是晋光禄大夫周顗的第九世孙。祖父周颙，是齐朝的中书侍郎，领著作。父亲且宣丝，是梁的司徒祭酒。
English: Zhou Hong Zheng Zi Si Xing, a native of Nan'an City, is the ninth-generation grandson of the Jin Guanglu doctor Zhou Qi. His grandfather Zhou Qi was a Chinese scribe in the Qi Dynasty and a scholar. His father, Xuan Si, was a priest of Liang.

古文：弘正幼孤，及弟弘让、弘直，俱为伯父侍中护军舍所养。
现代文：弘正逗幼年丧父，与弟至递、至堕都由伯父侍中护军且捡抚养。
English: Hong Zhengzhi lost his father when he was very young, and he and his younger brother were raised by his uncle, who was an aide-de-camp.

古文：年十岁，通《老子》、《周易》，舍每与谈论，辄异之，曰： 观汝神情颖晤，清理警发，后世知名，当出吾右。 
现代文：弘正那时十岁的时候就懂《老子》、《周易》，周舍每次与他谈论总是感到惊异，说： 看你敏捷聪悟，精明事理而又发语惊人，将来必定会在我之上。 
English: At that time, when Hong Zheng was ten years old, he understood "Lao Zi" and "Zhou Yi." Zhou She was always surprised every time she talked to him, saying: "Look at you, you are quick and clever, you are shrewd and astute, and your pronunciation is amazing. In the future, you will certainly be above me."

古文：河东裴子野深相赏纳，请以女妻之。
现代文：河东裴子野非常赏识他并与他结交，还表示愿意将女儿嫁给他。
English: Hedong Peizhino appreciated him very much and befriended him. He also expressed his willingness to marry his daughter to him.

古文：十五，召补国子生，仍于国学讲《周易》，诸生传习其义。
现代文：十五岁那年，且至逗被召补为国子学生，随即在国学裹讲解《周易》，儒生们都学习和撰述他的见解。
English: At the age of fifteen, he was called to be a student of the Kuomintang, and he immediately lectured on "Zhou Yi" in the Chinese Studies class, and the Confucian students all learned and wrote about his views.

古文：以季春入学，孟冬应举，学司以其日浅，弗之许焉。
现代文：他在三月入学，当年的十月就接受推荐参加对策考试，主管学校的官员认为他的资历太浅，不同意他应试。
English: He entered the school in March, and in October of that year he accepted a recommendation to take the countermeasures exam. The officials in charge of the school thought that his qualifications were too shallow and did not agree to him taking the exam.

古文：博士到洽议曰： 周郎年未弱冠，便自讲一经，虽曰诸生，实堪师表，无俟策试。 
现代文：博士到洽议论说： 周郎还不一一十岁，就独自主讲一经，虽说是诸生，但实际上却可以当老师，他就不必参加对策考试了。 
English: The doctor came to the discussion and said: Zhou Lang is not yet ten years old, and once he gives a lecture on his own, although he is mortal, he can actually be a teacher, and he does not have to take part in the countermeasure examination.

古文：起家梁太学博士。
现代文：于是周弘正就在家中以布衣身份直接出任梁朝的太学博士。
English: As a result, Zhou Hongzheng took on the role of the Liang Dynasty's Doctor of Theology at home.

古文：晋安王为丹阳尹，引为主簿。
现代文：晋安王蔻锢担任且盐尹时，请他为主簿。
English: When Jin'an Wang Qian was in charge and Yan Yin, he asked him to be the main book.

古文：出为鄴令，丁母忧去职。
现代文：后来从且荡调往经历任县令，因母亲去世而服丧离职。
English: Later, he was transferred to the post of county magistrate, and left the post due to the death of his mother.

古文：服阕，历曲阿、安吉令。
现代文：服丧期满后，历任曲阿、安吉县县令。
English: After the expiration of the mourning period, the successive leaders of Qu'ao and Anji counties were promoted to county magistrates.

古文：普通中，初置司文义郎，直寿光省，以弘正为司义侍郎。
现代文：普通年间，朝廷开始设置司文义郎逭一官职，在寿光省当值，并任命周弘正为司义侍郎。
English: In ordinary years, the imperial court began to set up an official post of Sifeng Yirong, who was on duty in Shouguang Province, and appointed Zhou Hongzheng as Sifeng Yirong.

古文：中大通三年，梁昭明太子薨，其嗣华容公不得立，乃以晋安王为皇太子，弘正乃奏记曰：
现代文：中大通三年，梁昭明太子去世，他的儿子被封为华容公而没有立为皇位继承人，却立晋宝王为皇太子，且至弘正上书说：
English: In the third year of the reign of Emperor Taizong, Prince Liang Zhaoming passed away. His son was named Prince Huarong, but he was not appointed as the heir to the throne. Instead, Prince Jinbao was appointed as the crown prince, and Zhi Hongzheng wrote:

古文：窃闻捴谦之象，起于羲、轩爻画，揖让之源，生于尧、舜禅受，其来尚矣，可得而详焉。
现代文：我私下听说谦逊这种美德，产生于伏羲、轩辕创立的《易。谦》，让位于贤的源头，是尧、舜的惮让，这一良好的风尚距离今天已经非常久远了，但仍然可以从古籍和传闻中详知其情。
English: Privately, I heard that the virtue of modesty, which originated from the "Easy. Modesty" created by Fuxiong and Xuanzang, has given way to the source of virtue, which is the "Humble. Modesty." This good tradition has been around for a very long time, but it can still be learned in detail from ancient books and rumors.

古文：夫以庙堂、汾水，殊途而同归，稷、契、巢、许，异名而一贯，出者称为元首，处者谓之外臣，莫不内外相资，表里成治，斯盖万代同规，百王不易者也。
现代文：以庙堂执政、汾水归隐而言，两者途径不同但目标一致，以后稷、商契、巢父、许由而论，他们名号各异而寓理则一，出世而任者即称世间君主，隐世而处者就叫方外之臣，而世间君主和方外之臣都无不相辅相成，共成天下大治，这大概是千秋万代都应共同遵循的准则，历代帝王都不会改变的吧。
English: In terms of ruling the temple hall and going into seclusion, the two methods are different but the goals are the same. In the future, they will be different names and the allegory will be the same. Those who are born in the world are called worldly monarchs, and those who are hidden in the world are called Fangwai vassals. And worldly monarchs and Fangwai vassals all complement each other and jointly achieve world governance. This is probably a standard that should be followed for thousands of generations. It will not change for successive emperors.

古文：暨于三王之世，浸以陵夷，各亲其亲，各子其子。
现代文：然而到了夏、商、周三代，这种谦让之风，开始逐渐衰落，帝王们都家传天下给自己的子弟亲属。
English: However, by the Xia, Shang, and San dynasties, this style of modesty began to gradually decline, and emperors passed it down to their children and relatives.

古文：乃至七国争雄，刘项竞逐，皇汉扇其俗，有晋扬其波，谦让之道废，多历年所矣。
现代文：接着战国七雄争夺天下，刘邦项羽竞逐帝位，汉代传布这种恶习，晋朝变本而加利，于是谦让遣一优良传统遂告废绝，至今已经是年深久了。
English: Then, the seven heroes of the Warring States competed for the world, Liu Bang and Xiang Yu competed for the imperial throne, the Han Dynasty propagated this bad habit, and the Jin Dynasty became a disaster, so the fine tradition of humbly surrendering to the emperor was abolished, and it has been around for a long time.

古文：夫文质递变，浇淳相革，还朴反古，今也其时。
现代文：啊，代代风尚依时序而转变，浇漓浮薄与淳朴敦厚互相替代，恢复远古的质朴之风，现在正是好时机啊。
English: Ah, the fashion of generations changes according to the chronological order, and thin and thick replace each other, restoring the ancient style of simplicity. Now is a good time.

古文：伏惟明大王殿下，天挺将圣，聪明神武，百辟冠冕，四海归仁。是以皇上发德音，下明诏，以大王为国之储副，乃天下之本焉。
现代文：我虔诚地认为明大王殿下您，天资卓越比得上圣人，既聪慧明智又神圣威武，朝中公卿拥护，天下黎民归心，因此皇上开恩德之口，下英明之诏，立大王您为皇太子，这乃是国脉延续的根基。
English: I devoutly believe that Your Imperial Highness, King Ming the Great, whose talent is superior to that of a saint, who is both intelligent and wise as well as holy and powerful, who is supported by the nobles of the court and the people of the world, and who has won the hearts and minds of the people of the world. Therefore, the Emperor's gracious words and wise edict to establish You, the Great King, as the crown prince, are the foundation for the continuation of the nation.

古文：虽复夏启、周诵，汉储、魏两，此数君者，安足为大王道哉。
现代文：即使是夏代的启、西周的姬诵、漠代的太子、曹魏的嗣君，这些王位帝位的继承人，哪裹值得向大王您道及呢。
English: Even if it were the Emperor of the Xia Dynasty, the Empress Dowager of the Western Zhou Dynasty, the Crown Prince of the Desert Dynasty, or the Heir of Cao Wei, which of these heirs to the throne deserve to be compared to you, the Great King?

古文：意者愿闻殿下抗目夷上仁之义，执子臧大贤之节，逃玉舆而弗乘，弃万乘如脱屣，庶改浇竞之俗，以大吴国之风。
现代文：不过我还是希望听说殿下能抗心希古，坚持春秋时期目夷崇尚仁德辞让宋国的大义，恪守春秋时期曹国子臧拒绝君位的高节，不乘龙车凤辇，抛弃君位就像脱掉鞋子那样干脆，那么就有可能改革上述那种由来已久的争权夺利的恶习，从而发扬光大吴国太伯的退让之风。
English: However, I still hope to hear that if His Imperial Highness can resist the temptation of ancient times, adhere to the Spring and Autumn Period's principle of adhering to the principles of benevolence and concession of the Song Dynasty, adhere to the Spring and Autumn Period's high festival of Cao Guozihong's refusal of the monarchy, do not ride the dragon and phoenix, and abandon the monarchy as simply as taking off shoes, then it is possible to reform the above-mentioned long-standing bad habit of competing for power and profit, thus carrying forward the concession style of the great Wu Guotai.

古文：古有其人，今闻其语，能行之者，非殿下而谁？
现代文：古时有揖让之人，现在也能听到对谦逊的赞美之声，今天能对此身体力行的人，除了殿下还有谁呢?
English: In ancient times, those who were self-indulgent could be heard praising modesty. Who else but His Imperial Highness can practice it today?

古文：能使无为之化，复兴于邃古，让王之道，不坠于来叶，岂不盛欤！
现代文：能够使顺应自然而不强求的教化，从远古复兴于当代，使谦辞王权帝位的风尚不泯减于将来，殿下的功德岂不是盛大丰美吗!
English: His Imperial Highness's merit of being able to bring about the enlightenment of conforming to nature without demanding, reviving from ancient times to the present, and ensuring that the tradition of humbly abdicating the throne does not diminish in the future, is nothing short of magnificent!

古文：岂不盛欤！
现代文：岂不是盛大丰美吗!
English: Wouldn't that be a grand and bountiful harvest!

古文：弘正陋学书生，义惭稽古，家自汝、颍，世传忠烈，先人决曹掾燕抗辞九谏，高节万乘，正色三府，虽盛德之业将绝，而狂直之风未坠。
现代文：我周弘正是个学识浅陋的书生，羞愧于稽考古代道义，但我们家族在汝、颍一带，世世代代忠烈相传，我先祖周颤任执法官员曾经多次直言切谏，在御宴时批评晋元帝自词为尧舜之君，表现出了高风亮节，又曾在逆贼大将军王敦面前义正辞严铮铮铁骨。
English: I, Zhou Hongzheng, am a poorly educated student, ashamed to review ancient morals, but our family has been passed down faithfully from generation to generation in the You and Yao areas. My ancestor, Zhou Chulian, a law enforcement official, has been outspoken many times, criticizing Emperor Jin Yuan at the banquet as the prince of Yao, showing a high wind and bright festival, and has been in front of the rebel general Wang Dun.

古文：是以敢布腹心，肆其愚瞽。如使刍言野说，少陈于听览，纵复委身烹鼎之下，绝命肺石之上，虽死之日，犹生之年。
现代文：如今虽然尧舜的德业濒临灭绝，但我为人的疏狂直率的作风并没有消失，所以敢于冒死说出肺腑之言，表达愚昧之见。假如我这些微不足道的村言鄙说，能供殿下听取一二，那么我纵然置身在烹鼎之中，绝命在伸冤石上，也好比是死而犹生、生而长存。
English: Today, although the virtue of the eunuch is on the verge of extinction, my style of being a maniac and forthright has not disappeared, so I dare to risk my life to speak my heart and express my foolish views. If I can listen to these insignificant village sayings for Your Highness, then even if I am in the middle of cooking and my life is on the stone of justice, it is like dying and still being alive, being born and surviving.

古文：其抗直守正，皆此类也。
现代文：他的坦率耿直笃守正道的诸多言行，都与逭相类似。
English: Many of his words and deeds, which are candid, upright and righteous, are similar to those of Gong.

古文：累迁国子博士。
现代文：连续升任为国子博士。
English: He was successively promoted to Dr. Kuniko.

古文：时于城西立士林馆，弘正居以讲授，听者倾朝野焉。
现代文：当时在都城建康城西设立了士林馆，周弘正在馆裹讲学任教，朝廷和社会上的学术人士全都前去听讲。
English: At that time, the Shilin Hall was set up in the west of Jiankang City in the capital, and Zhou Hong was teaching a lecture in the hall. All the scholars from the imperial court and society went to listen to the lecture.

古文：弘正启梁武帝《周易》疑义五十条，又请释《乾》、《坤》、《二系》曰： 臣闻《易》称立以尽意，系辞以尽言，然后知圣人之情，几可见矣。
现代文：周弘正向梁武帝奏陈了关于《周易》的五十条疑义，又请求解释《干》、《坤》、《二系》诸篇，说： 臣听说《易》中称说圣人取法万物来充分地表达自己的意思，又附以诠释性的文字以充分表达自己的见解，如此，那么后人就可以通过研究而懂得圣人的志，《易》中寓含的玄机奥妙也就灼然可见了。
English: Zhou Hongzheng recited to Emperor Liangwu the fifty doubts about "Zhou Yi," and also asked for an explanation of "Gan," "Kun" and "Second Generation," saying: "I have heard that in "Yi," it is said that the sage takes all things to fully express his meaning, and adds interpretive words to fully express his views. In this way, future generations can understand the saint's will through research, and the mysteries contained in "Yi" can be clearly seen.

古文：自非含微体极，尽化穷神，岂能通志成务，探赜致远。
现代文：然而如果对《易》不能品味隐微领悟透彻，不能曲尽其妙地掌握它千变万化的规律，又怎么可能通天下之志成天下之务，怎么可能探赜索隐钩深致远呢。
English: However, if you can't thoroughly understand the subtleties of Yi, and can't grasp its ever-changing laws, how is it possible to turn the world's aspirations into the world's affairs, and how is it possible to explore the hidden hooks?

古文：而宣尼比之桎梏，绝韦编于漆字，轩辕之所听莹，遗玄珠于赤水。
现代文：所以孑子把精求《易》理比喻为戴上脚缭手铐行走，他反反复复地翻阅《易》书，以至于穿连书简的牛皮条磨断了几根，连黄帝也疑惑不明，把握不住《易》的真谛。
English: Therefore, Xunzi likened the pursuit of "Yi" theory to wearing a gauntlet bracelet. He repeatedly read "Yi" book, so that the cowhide strip that connected the book ledger broke several roots. Even the Yellow Emperor was confused and could not grasp the true meaning of "Yi."

古文：伏惟陛下一日万机，匪劳神于瞬息，凝心妙本，常自得于天真，圣智无以隐其几深，明神无以沦其不测。
现代文：我虔诚地认为陛下日理万机，不费一时片刻的思索即可尽善尽美，而聚精会神地研思《易》理，则常常能领悟到纯真的本义。面对陛下，即使是圣人智者也不可能掩饰他们内心深处的隐情，神祇鬼怪也无法掩藏他们难以测度的变幻。
English: I devoutly believe that His Majesty is capable of doing anything at any time, and can achieve perfection without a moment's thought, and can often understand the true meaning of innocence by concentrating on the "I" principle. In the face of His Majesty, even sages and wise men cannot hide their innermost secrets, and gods and ghosts cannot hide their immeasurable changes.

古文：至若爻画之苞于《六经》，文辞之穷于《两系》，名儒剧谈以历载，鸿生抵掌以终年，莫有试游其籓，未尝一见其涘。
现代文：至于爻画的深意寓含在《六经》裹面，诠释的要义尽在《两系》之中，对此，名儒大家长年累月地高谈阔论，鸿生巨子经岁成年地抵掌而辩，但都没有谁能进入《易》的边缘，连皮毛也不曾达到。
English: As for the profound meaning of the painting of the dragonfly, it is contained in the "Six Classics," and the essence of the interpretation is in the "Two Systems." For this, the famous Confucian scholars have been talking about it for many years, and the Hongsheng giants have been arguing for years, but no one has been able to enter the edge of "Yi," even the fur has not reached.

古文：自制旨降谈，裁成《易》道，析至微于秋毫，涣曾冰于幽谷。
现代文：而自从陛下圣意下谕，审定了《易》义，剖析得至捆至微，于是诸多疑难涣然冰释。
English: However, since His Majesty's decree, the meaning of Yi has been verified and analyzed to the nth degree, and many doubts have been resolved.

古文：臣亲承音旨，职司宣授，后进诜诜，不无传业。
现代文：微臣我领受陛下旨意，在士林馆任职宣讲《易》学，后辈学子众多，今后《易》学不乏传人。
English: Obedient to His Majesty's will, I took up a post at the Shilin Museum to promote Yi studies. There are many younger generations of students, and there will be many successors of Yi studies in the future.

古文：但《乾》、《坤》之蕴未剖，《系》表之妙莫诠，使一经深致，尚多所惑。
现代文：衹是《干》、《坤》二卦的底蕴还没有剖析，《系辞》体现出的征兆也不曾诠释，使我们一深入到它们的堂奥，便有颇多疑惑。
English: That is to say, the roots of the "Gan" and "Kun" two gospels have not been analyzed, and the signs reflected in the "Declaration" have not been interpreted. As soon as we delve into their depths, we have a lot of doubts.

古文：臣不涯庸浅，轻率短陋，谨与受业诸生清河张讥等三百一十二人，于《乾》、《坤》、《二系》、《象》、《爻》未启，伏愿听览之闲，曲垂提训，得使微臣钻仰，成其笃习，后昆好事，专门有奉。
现代文：臣资质子庸浅薄，行事粗疏见识狭小，谨与儒生弟子清河张讥等三百一十二人，因《干》《坤》《二系》《象》《爻》诸篇尚未启蒙，惟愿陛下在处理国务之余，给以周详的讲解，使我得以深入研究，指导我专心学习，也使爱好《易》的后代弟子领受教诲而精通这门学问。
English: The 312 subjects, including the low-ranked proton, who acted in a careless and narrow-minded manner, and the Confucian disciple Qinghe Zhang Qian, have not yet been enlightened because of the "Gan," "Kun," "Dialect," "Elephant" and "Dragon" articles. I hope that His Majesty will give a detailed explanation while dealing with the state, so that I can study in depth, guide my concentrated study, and also enable future generations of disciples who love "Yi" to receive instruction and master this subject.

古文：自惟多幸，欢沐道于尧年，肄业终身，不知老之将至。
现代文：我自以为非常幸运，欣然受恩于当今如尧似舜的有道之君终身修习《易》学，以至不知老之将至。
English: I consider myself to be very fortunate, and I am grateful for the fact that today there are so many virtuous people who have been studying Yi for their entire lives, so that I don't know how long I will live.

古文：天尊不闻，而冒陈请，冰谷置怀，罔识攸厝。 
现代文：我们的上述愿望，陛下也许还不知道，所以冒着死罪请求如上，心裹却如履薄冰如临深渊似的战战兢兢，不知如何是好。 
English: Your Majesty may not yet be aware of the above-mentioned wish of ours, and therefore, I dare to ask for the death penalty as above, but my heart is like treading on thin ice, like approaching the abyss, trembling, and I don't know what to do.

古文：诏答曰： 设《卦》观象，事远文高，作《系》表言，辞深理奥，东鲁绝编之思，西伯幽忧之作，事逾三古，人更七圣，自商瞿禀承，子庸传授，篇简湮没，岁月辽远。
现代文：梁武帝下诏书回答说： 圣人通过《卦》来观照万事万物，这种事已经非常古远而《卦》理也莫测高深，圣人又撰写《系辞》以表述见解，却也辞意艰涩义理深奥，东鲁孑宣尼对《易》的穷思苦研，玺伯塑旦被拘囚在羞旦时发愤对《易》的推演，这类事都已远在夏商周三古时期，到现在人世历史已经换了秦遵魏置塞查銮七个朝代，自从查挞末期叠厘的童瞿领受王迂的《易》学，初期垒厘钟王卢传授直瞿的学说，至今已是岁月悠久，他们的书稿讲义都已湮没不存。
English: Emperor Liangwu replied in his edict: The sages used the "Gua" to contemplate all things, which is very ancient and the "Gua" is immeasurably profound. The sages also wrote the "Gua" to express their opinions, but the words are difficult and profound. Donglu Xuanni studied the "Yi" hard. Zibo Shoudan, who was incarcerated at the time of Shidan, was angry at the deduction of the "Yi." Such things have been far away in the ancient period of Xia Shanzhong. To date, the history of the world has been replaced by seven dynasties of Qin,

古文：田生表菑川之誉，梁丘擅琅邪之学，代郡范生，山阳王氏，人藏荆山之宝，各尽玄言之趣，说或去取，意有详略。
现代文：西汉武帝时期苗川的田生享有《易》学表率的盛誉，宣帝时期琅邪的梁丘贺也独擅《易》学之长，后来束汉明帝时期住锂的茎生，萱墓时期旦屋的王翅，他们对《易》都有卓越的见解，各自充分地阐发了《易》的旨趣，但各家的取舍详略，却又互有不同。
English: Tian Sheng of Miaochuan during the Western Han Dynasty's Emperor Wu enjoyed a high reputation for his ability to learn Yi. Liang Qiu He, who fought evil during the Emperor Xuan period, was also an expert in learning Yi. Later, Zhu Xi of Han Dynasty's Emperor Ming lived in the Stem of Lithium and Wang Ying of Tanya during the Tomb of the Ancestors. They both had excellent opinions on Yi, and each of them fully expounded the essence of Yi. However, each family's choice was detailed, but different from each other.

古文：近搢绅之学，咸有稽疑，随答所问，已具别解。
现代文：近来官宦士大夫们学《易》，也都提出疑询，我已随问随答，给各人作了诠释。
English: Recently, officials, scholars and doctors who have studied "Yi" have also raised questions. I have followed up with questions and gave an interpretation to each person.

古文：知与张讥等三百一十二人须释《乾》、《坤》、《文言》及《二系》，万机小暇，试当讨论。 
现代文：现在又得知你和张讥等三百一十二人要我解释《干》《坤》《文言》以及《二系》，当于处理国务而略有余暇之时，与你们一起共同探讨。 
English: Now that I know that you and Zhang Qian and the other 312 people want me to explain "Gan," "Kun," "Wenwen" and "Diaoyuan," I should discuss it with you when I have a little spare time to deal with state affairs.

古文：弘正博物知玄象，善占候。
现代文：周弘正知识渊博，能看透一些微妙的迹象，善于从中预测吉凶祸福。
English: Zhou Hongzheng is knowledgeable, can see through some subtle signs, and is good at predicting good luck, bad luck, and good fortune.

古文：大同末，尝谓弟弘让曰： 国家厄运，数年当有兵起，吾与汝不知何所逃之。 
现代文：大同末年，曾经对弟弟周弘让说： 国家将有厄运，数年之内必有战乱，我和你不知逃到哪裹去才能避开这次灾难。 
English: At the end of the Datong era, he once said to his younger brother Zhou Hongzhang: The country will have bad luck, there will be war within a few years, and you and I don't know where to flee to avoid this disaster.

古文：及梁武帝纳侯景，弘正谓弘让曰： 乱阶此矣。 
现代文：到梁武帝接纳北朝束魏的降将侯景时，周弘正对周弘让说： 战乱就从遣裹开始了。 
English: When Emperor Liangwu accepted the abdication of the Northern Dynasty, Zhou Hongzhang said to Zhou Hongzhang: The war began with the envoys.

古文：京城陷，弘直为衡阳内史，元帝在江陵，遗弘直书曰： 适有都信，贤兄博士平安。
现代文：当京城建康被侯景攻陷时，周弘直正在衡阳担任内史，梁元帝萧绎在江陵，写信给周弘直说： 刚从都城来了一位使者，从他那裹得知你两位哥哥平安。
English: When Jiankang, the capital, was conquered by Houjing, Zhou Hongzhi was in Hengyang working as an internal historian. Emperor Liang Yuan, who was in Jiangling, wrote to Zhou Hongzhi, saying, "A messenger has just come from the capital. From him I learned that your two brothers are safe.

古文：但京师搢绅，无不附逆，王克已为家臣，陆缅身充卒伍，唯有周生，确乎不拔。
现代文：但京城裹的官员，几乎没有不变节依附逆贼侯景的，王克已经做了侯景的家臣，陆缅加入了侯景的军队，惟有你哥哥周生，坚守大义不变节。
English: However, there are few officials in Beijing who still cling to the traitor Hou Jing. Wang Ke has already become Hou Jing's vassal, Lu Meng has joined Hou Jing's army, and only your brother Zhou Sheng adheres to the great righteousness and unchanging principle.

古文：言及西军，潺湲掩泪，恒思吾至，如望岁焉，松柏后凋，一人而已。 
现代文：他谈到我们西军时，泪水如流，常常盼念我去解救他们，就像农夫盼望年成丰收那样心切，孔子曾说 岁寒然后知松柏之后凋也，当前具备这种品格的就衹有令兄弘正一人罢了。 
English: When he spoke of our Western troops, his tears flowed freely, and he often longed for me to come and rescue them, just as a farmer longs for a good harvest. Confucius once said, "The year is cold, and then the pine trees wither away. The only one with this kind of character right now is my brother Hong Zheng."

古文：王僧辩之讨侯景也，弘正与弘让自拔迎军，僧辩得之甚喜，即日启元帝，元帝手书与弘正曰： 獯丑逆乱，寒暑亟离，海内相识，零落略尽。
现代文：王僧辩率领西军讨伐侯景的时候，周弘正与周弘让主动地逃出建康奔向西军，王僧辩见了他们非常欣喜，当天就派人告知了梁元帝，梁元帝亲笔写信给周弘正说： 自从像古代獯鬻那样的外族小丑侯景作乱以来，寒来暑往的几年之中，天下的知交朋友，死亡殆尽。
English: When Wang Sangye led the Western Army to fight Houjing, Zhou Hongzheng and Zhou Hongzheng took the initiative to escape from Jiankang and run to the Western Army. Wang Sangye was very pleased to see them, and sent a person to inform Emperor Liangyuan on the same day. Emperor Liangyuan personally wrote to Zhou Hongzheng, saying, "Since the foreign clown Houjing, who was like an ancient baboon, caused a disturbance, during the years of ups and downs, the world's known friends have died out.

古文：韩非之智，不免秦狱，刘歆之学，犹弊亡新，音尘不嗣，每以耿灼。
现代文：当年富有才智的韩非，尚且不免死在秦国狱中，学识丰富的刘歆，也在王莽新朝失败的混乱中自杀，如今你陷在建康城中音讯全无，我常常心怀耿耿忧思焦虑。
English: At that time, Han Fei, who was rich in intelligence, still inevitably died in the Qin State Prison, and Liu Ye, who was rich in knowledge, also committed suicide in the chaos of Wang Mang's failure of the New Dynasty. Now that you are stuck in Jiankang City, there is no news at all. I am often worried and anxious.

古文：常欲访山东而寻子云，问关西而求伯起，遇有今信，力附相闻，迟比来邮，慰其延伫。 
现代文：我常常打算像西汉人访求山东终子云，东汉人寻找关西杨伯起那样找你，今天恰恰见了王僧辩派来的人，他把你的信息全说给我听了，我正等待着你的来信，宽慰我对你的期盼。 
English: I have often planned to look for you like Western Han people visit Shandong Yanzi Yun and Eastern Han people look for Kansai Yang Boqi. Today, I just saw the person sent by Wang Sangye, who told me all your information. I am waiting for your letter to relieve my expectations of you.

古文：仍遣使迎之，谓朝士曰： 晋氏平吴，喜获二陆，今我破贼，亦得两周，今古一时，足为连类。 
现代文：于是派遣特使去迎接周弘正，又对朝廷官员说： 晋氏司马炎平定孙吴，很高兴地得到了陆机陆云，现在我讨伐侯景，也得到了周弘正周弘让，前代的司马炎和今天的我都在相同的时机下得到两位英才异士，足可以连类而及互相媲美了。 
English: So he sent a special envoy to meet Zhou Hongzheng, and said to the officials of the imperial court: "The Jin Dynasty's Sima Yan subdued Sun Wu, and I was pleased to get the land machine Luyun. Now I'm fighting against Houjing, and I also got Zhou Hongzheng. The previous generation of Sima Yan and today's me both got two exceptional talents at the same time, so they can be connected and comparable to each other.

古文：及弘正至，礼数甚优，朝臣无与比者。
现代文：当周弘正到了江陵时，受到了非常隆重的礼遇，朝中臣僚无人可以与之相比。
English: When Zhou Hongzheng arrived in Gangneung, he received a very grand courtesy, and no other ministers in the DPRK can be compared to him.

古文：授黄门侍郎，直侍中省。
现代文：梁丞童任命他为黄门侍郎，在侍中省值勤。
English: Liang Zhengdong appointed him as the Yellow Gate chamberlain, and he was on duty in the chamberlain's office.

古文：俄迁左民尚书，寻加散骑常侍。
现代文：不久升任为左民尚书，接着加任散骑常侍。
English: He was soon promoted to the post of Zuomin Shangshu, and then he was appointed to the post of Rong Sanjie.

古文：元帝尝著《金楼子》，曰： 余于诸僧重招提琰法师，隐士重华阳陶贞白，士大夫重汝南周弘正，其于义理，清转无穷，亦一时之名士也。 
现代文：元帝尝著《金楼子》一书，书中说： 在诸位高僧中我敬重招提琰法师，在隐士中敬重华阳陶贞白，在士大夫中敬重汝南周弘正，听他们讲说义理，清晰畅达，韵味无穷，他们都是当代的名流学士啊。 
English: Emperor Yuan tasted the book "Golden Staircase" and said in the book: Among all the high monks, I respect Zhaotian Mage, among the hermits, I respect Huayang Tao Zhenbai, and among the scholars, I respect Runan Zhou Hongzheng. Listening to them lecture on the principles of righteousness is clear and smooth, and the charm is endless. They are all contemporary famous scholars.

古文：及侯景平，僧辩启送秘书图籍，敕弘正雠校。
现代文：到侯景被消灭后，王僧辩将建康宫禁中的藏书图籍送到江陵，梁元帝诏令周弘正加以校勘考正。
English: After Houjing was eliminated, Wang Sangyan sent the collection of books and maps from the Jiankang Palace to Jiangling, and Emperor Liang Yuan ordered Zhou Hongzhen to check and correct them.

古文：时朝议迁都，朝士家在荆州者，皆不欲迁，唯弘正与仆射王裒言于元帝曰： 若束脩以上诸士大夫微见古今者，知帝王所都本无定处，无所与疑。
现代文：那时朝廷官员们议论是否迁都，凡是家在荆州的都不主张迁回建康，衹有周弘正和仆射王裒对梁元帝说： 如果在学校受过正规教育因而熟知古今历史的各位士大夫，他们知道帝王定都之处本来就不是一成不变的，对目前迁都与否应该不会产生疑义。
English: At that time, officials of the imperial court were discussing whether to move the capital, and no one who lived in Jingzhou advocated moving back to Jiankang. Zhou Hongzheng and his servant Wang Yao said to Emperor Liang Yuan: If you have received formal education in school and are familiar with ancient and modern history, they know that the location of the emperor's capital is not immutable, and there should be no doubt about whether or not to move the capital.

古文：至如黔首万姓，若未见舆驾入建鄴，谓是列国诸王，未名天子。
现代文：至于黎民百姓就不一样了，他们如果没有亲眼看见陛下圣驾进入建邺，就会认为陛下衹不过是诸侯等级的国王，是没有正式名分的天子。
English: As for the people of Li, they are not the same. If they do not see with their own eyes His Majesty the Emperor entering Jianye, they will think that His Majesty the Emperor is just a king of princely rank, the Son of Heaven without an official title.

古文：今宜赴百姓之心，从四海之望。 
现代文：所以我们认为应该迁回建康，以迎合百姓的心理，顺从天下人的愿望。 
English: Therefore, we believe that we should move back to Jiankang to cater to the psychology of the people and obey the wishes of the people of the world.

古文：时荆陕人士咸云王、周皆是东人，志愿东下，恐非良计。
现代文：逭时荆陕籍贯的人都说王裒、周弘正是东部地区人氏，所以他们主张东回建康，但恐怕不是好办法。
English: At that time, people from Shaanxi Province said that Wang Hui and Zhou Hong were from the eastern region, so they advocated the return of Jiankang to the east, but I'm afraid it's not a good idea.

古文：弘正面折之曰： 若东人劝东，谓为非计，君等西人欲西，岂成良策？ 
现代文：周弘正当面批驳他们，说： 如果东部人主张束迁回建康，就被认为不是好办法，那么你们西部人士希望就此定都西部的江陵，又难道是妥善之策? 
English: Zhou Hong justifiably criticized them, saying: If the easterners advocate the relocation of the capital back to Jiankang, it is considered not a good way, then you westerners hope to establish the capital in the west of Jiangling, is it a good strategy?

古文：元帝乃大笑之，竟不还都。
现代文：梁元帝听了大笑起来，最终还是决定不迁回建康。
English: Emperor Liang Yuan laughed out loud and finally decided not to move back to Jiankang.

古文：及江陵陷，弘正遁围而出，归于京师，敬帝以为大司马王僧辩长史，行扬州事。
现代文：到江陵失陷时，周弘正悄悄地逃出敌军重围，回到京师建康，梁敬帝任命他为大司马王僧辩的长史，代理扬州政事。
English: At the time of the fall of Gangneung, Zhou Hongzhu was quietly escaping from the encirclement of the enemy army and returning to Beijing to teach Jiankang. Emperor Liang Jing appointed him as the long-term secretary of Ma Wang's debate, acting for Yangzhou politics.

古文：太平元年，授侍中，领国子祭酒，迁太常卿、都官尚书。
现代文：太平元年，被任命为侍中，兼国子祭酒，又升任为太常卿、都官尚书。
English: In the first year of the Taiping era, he was appointed as a chamberlain, concurrently serving as Kuniko's sacrificial wine, and was also promoted to the position of Taijōkyō (Grand Councilor) and the highest-ranking official in the capital.

古文：高祖受禅，授太子詹事。
现代文：矗担速玺先受挥为帝，任命他为太子詹事。
English: Xuan Dang Hao was the first to be made emperor, and he was named Prince Zhan Zhi.

古文：天嘉元年，迁侍中、国子祭酒，往长安迎高宗。
现代文：天嘉元年，升任为侍中、国子祭酒，被派往长安迎接遭北周羁留的高宗陈顼。
English: In the first year of Tianjia, he was promoted to the position of a chamberlain and sent to Chang'an to welcome Gaozong Chen Yao, who had been detained by the Northern Zhou.

古文：三年，自周还，诏授金紫光禄大夫，加金章紫绶，领慈训太仆。
现代文：天嘉三年，从北周回来，天子下诏书任命他为金紫光禄大夫，加金章紫绶，兼慈训太仆。
English: In the third year of Tian Jia's reign, after returning from the Northern Zhou Dynasty, the emperor issued an edict appointing him as the doctor of the Golden Purple Award, the Gold Medal of the Purple Ribbon, and the Commendation of the Commendation of the Commendation of the Commendation.

古文：废帝嗣位，领都官尚书，总知五礼事。
现代文：废帝接位，周弘正兼都官尚书，总管吉、嘉、宾、军、凶五种礼仪的事务。
English: After the dethronement of the former emperor, Zhou Hongzheng also served as the city's ceremonial secretary, in charge of the five etiquettes of auspicious, auspicious, honored, military, and evil.

古文：仍授太傅长史，加明威将军。
现代文：随后又被任命为太傅长史，加授明威将军称号。
English: Subsequently, he was appointed as Taifu Changshi and given the title of Mingwei General.

古文：高宗即位，迁特进，重领国子祭酒，豫州大中正，加扶。
现代文：高宗即帝位，赐他为特进，又兼国子祭酒，迁任为蛰豫州大中正，赏赐扶护人员。
English: Gaozong was enthroned as emperor, he was given the title of "special promotion" and the title of "sacrificial wine of the son of the state," he was transferred to be the president of the Middle School of the University of Shenyang, and his supporters were rewarded.

古文：太建五年，授尚书右仆射，祭酒、中正如故。
现代文：太建五年，被任命为尚书右仆射，祭酒、中正两职仍旧。
English: In the fifth year of Taiken, he was appointed as Shangshu's right-hand man, and still held the posts of chief brewer and vice-premier.

古文：寻敕侍东宫讲《论语》、《孝经》。
现代文：不久产塞韶令他在东宫侍讲《论语》、《孝经》。
English: Soon after his birth, Empress Dowager Cixi ordered him to attend the lecture of "Analects" and "Filial Piety" in the East Palace.

古文：太子以弘正朝廷旧臣，德望素重，于是降情屈礼，横经请益，有师资之敬焉。
现代文：太子认为周弘正是朝廷旧臣，一向德高望重，于是放弃自己的尊贵身份，鞠躬礼敬，横摆经书请教，对他就如对师长那样敬重。
English: The prince thought that Zhou Hong was an old court official who had always been highly respected, so he gave up his noble status, bowed respectfully, and asked for advice from the scriptures. He respected him as much as he did the teacher.

古文：弘正特善玄言，兼明释典，虽硕学名僧，莫不请质疑滞。
现代文：周弘正特别擅长玄学，也兼通佛家经典，即使是饱学之士得道高僧，也没有不向他请教质疑的。
English: Zhou Hongzheng is particularly good at metaphysics, and is also familiar with Buddhist classics. Even if a well-educated person becomes a high priest, there is no one who does not ask him for advice.

古文：六年，卒于官，时年七十九。
现代文：太建六年，在任上去世，这年七十九岁。
English: Tai Jian died six years later, at the age of seventy-nine.

古文：诏曰： 追远褒德，抑有恒规。
现代文：为此，天子下韶书说： 追念和赞颂德行高尚的前人，这是永久不变的原则。
English: For this reason, the imperial edict said: "To remember and praise the virtuous and noble predecessors is a principle that will never change."

古文：故尚书右仆射、领国子祭酒、豫州大中正弘正，识宇凝深，艺业通备，辞林义府，国老民宗，道映庠门，望高礼阁，卒然殂殒，朕用恻然。
现代文：前尚书右仆射、兼国子祭酒、豫州大中正周弘正，仪容端庄见识精深，才艺齐备学业精通，好比是文章的苑林、义理的府库，他是国家享有盛誉的老臣，是民望所归的宗师，他的德行在学界光辉垂照，他的威望在礼部最为崇高，如今忽然去世，我为之恻然哀伤。
English: Zhou Hongzheng, who was a scholar of the Right Hand, a scholar of the Nation's Sacrifice, and a principal of the Middle School of the University of Yuzhou, had a dignified demeanor, a profound insight, a complete talent, and a mastery of studies. He was like a forest of articles and a repository of righteousness. He was a veteran minister with a high reputation in the country. He was a respected teacher. His virtue shone brightly in the academic world. His prestige was the highest in the ceremonial department. Now he has passed away suddenly. I am deeply saddened.

古文：可赠侍中、中书监，丧事所须，量加资给。 
现代文：可追赠为侍中、中书监，丧事费用，由国库优厚供给。 
English: Can be given posthumously as a chambermaid, middle school librarian, funeral expenses will be generously provided by the national treasury.

古文：便出临哭。
现代文：又亲自吊唁致哀。
English: He also sent his condolences in person.

古文：谥曰简子。
现代文：谧号简子。
English: His nickname is Jane Wang.

古文：所著《周易讲疏》十六卷，《论语疏》十一卷，《庄子疏》八卷，《老子疏》五卷，《孝经疏》两卷，《集》二十卷，行于世。
现代文：周弘正所著的《周易讲疏》十六卷，《论语疏》十一卷，《庄子疏》八卷，《老子疏》五卷，《孝经疏》两卷，《集》二十卷，都流行于世。
English: Zhou Hongzheng's "Zhou Yi Lectures" 16 volumes, "Analects" 11 volumes, "Zhuang Zi" 8 volumes, "Lao Zi" 5 volumes, "Xiao Jing" 2 volumes, "Collections" 20 volumes, are all popular in the world.

古文：子坟，官至吏部郎。
现代文：儿子周坟，官至吏部郎。
English: His son, Zhou Bin, rose to the rank of bureaucrat.

古文：弘正二弟：弘让，弘直。
现代文：周弘正有两位弟弟：周弘让、周弘直。
English: Zhou Hongzheng has two younger brothers: Zhou Hongzhang and Zhou Hongnao.

古文：弘让性简素，博学多通，天嘉初，以白衣领太常卿、光禄大夫，加金章紫绶。
现代文：周弘盏生性简约朴素，通晓多门学问，天嘉初年，以平民的身份领太常卿、光禄大夫，加金章紫绶。
English: Zhou Hongjian was born simple and unpretentious, familiar with many disciplines, and in the first year of Tianjia, he was awarded the title of Tai Changqing, Guanglu Doctor, and Gold Medal with Purple Ribbon as a civilian.

古文：弘直字思方，幼而聪敏。
现代文：周弘直字思方，幼年即聪明机敏。
English: Zhou Hong has a straightforward way of thinking, and he is smart and quick-witted even at a young age.

古文：解褐梁太学博士，稍迁西中郎湘东王外兵记室参军，与东海鲍泉、南阳宗懔、平原刘缓、沛郡刘同掌书记。
现代文：初入仕任梁朝的太学博士，逐渐升任为西中郎湘东王外兵记室参军，舆东海鲍泉、南阳宗懔、平原刘缓、迪郅塑噬同掌书记。
English: He began his career as a doctor of science in the Liang Dynasty, and was gradually promoted to join the army in the Foreign Enlistment Office of the Western Zhong Lang and the Eastern Xiang Wang, and served as the secretary of the East China Sea, Bao Quan, Nanyang Zonglu, Pingyuan Liu Xuan, and Duyun Shouguang.

古文：入为尚书仪曹郎。
现代文：后来调入朝廷担任尚书仪曹郎。
English: Later, he was transferred to the Imperial Court to serve as the secretary of the Imperial Household Agency.

古文：湘东王出镇江、荆二州，累除录事咨议参军，带柴桑、当阳二县令。
现代文：湘束王出京镇守江、荆二州时期内，周弘直连续任职，被任命为录事谘议参军，兼柴桑、赏堡二县县令。
English: During the period of Xiangzhu Wang's departure from Beijing, Zhen Shoujiang and Jing Erzhou, Zhou Hongzhi served continuously and was appointed as a record advisory to join the army, as well as the county magistrate of the two counties of Chai Sang and Baobo.

古文：及梁元帝承制，授假节、英果将军、世子长史。
现代文：当凿五童秉承皇帝旨意时，又被任命为假节、英果将军、世子长史。
English: When he chiseled five children to uphold the emperor's will, he was also appointed as the false festival, the general of Yingge, and the son of the long history.

古文：寻除智武将军、衡阳内史。
现代文：不多久又被任命为智武将军、衡阳内史。
English: Not long after, he was appointed as the general of Zhimu and the leader of Hengyang Inner History.

古文：迁贞毅将军、平南长史、长沙内史，行湘州府州事，湘滨县侯，邑六百户。
现代文：升任贞毅将军、平南长史、匡丝内史，代理渔业府政务，封为周遗星趣，食邑六百户。
English: He was promoted to General Zhengyi, Pingnan Changshi, Kuang Si Naishi, acting for the government affairs of the Fisheries Department, and was awarded the title of Zhou Ye Xingchu, with 600 households in his hometown.

古文：历邵陵、零陵太守、云麾将军、昌州刺史。
现代文：历任亘噬、墨医太守、云麾将军、旦业刺史。
English: Successive incumbents include Wataka, Moi Taishu, General Yunyang, and Tanyehashi.

古文：王琳之举兵也，弘直在湘州，琳败，乃还朝。
现代文：王壁起兵时，且至堕正在翅任职，王琳兵败后，才回到朝廷。
English: When Wang Bi raised an army, he was serving in the wing until his downfall, and only returned to the imperial court after Wang Lin's defeat.

古文：天嘉中，历国子博士、庐陵王长史、尚书左丞、领羽林监、中散大夫、秘书监，掌国史。
现代文：天嘉年间，历任国子博士、庐陵王长史、尚书左丞、兼羽林监、中散大夫、秘书监，职掌国史官署。
English: During the Tenjia era, he held the posts of Kuniko Doctor, Gongling Wang Changshi, Shang Shuzo, concurrently Ulin Supervisor, Zhong San Doctor, and Secretary Supervisor, and was in charge of the State History Office.

古文：迁太常卿、光禄大夫，加金章紫绶。
现代文：升任太常卿、光禄大夫，加金章紫绶。
English: He was promoted to Tai Changqing, Guanglu Doctor, and awarded the Gold Medal with Purple Ribbon.

古文：太建七年，遇疾且卒，乃遗疏敕其家曰： 吾今年已来，筋力减耗，可谓衰矣，而好生之情，曾不自觉，唯务行乐，不知老之将至。
现代文：左建七年，周弘直患病将死，于是写了遣书告诫家裹人说： 我今年以来，体力亏减，可以说是已经衰老了，不过我因为热恋生活，居然没有察觉到这种衰老，平时总是追求快乐自娱，以至于不知不觉地到了老年。
English: Zuo Jian was seven years old, Zhou Hongzhi was ill and about to die, so he wrote a letter to warn his family saying: Since this year, I have lost physical strength and can be said to have aged. However, because I am passionate about life, I actually did not notice this aging. In normal times, I always pursue happiness and self-amusement, so that I have unconsciously reached old age.

古文：今时制云及，将同朝露，七十馀年，颇经称足，启手告全，差无遗恨。
现代文：现在年寿的时限已经来临，生命如同早晨的露水很快就要消失，七十多年的岁月，很符合人生寿命的常规而说得上满足了，能够四肢俱在形体完备地善终，也比较满意而无所遗憾了。
English: Now the time limit for longevity has come, life is like the morning dew, it will soon disappear. The years of more than seventy years are very much in line with the normal life expectancy and can be said to be satisfied. Being able to die with all four limbs in perfect shape is also relatively satisfactory and no regrets.

古文：气绝已后，便买市中见材，材必须小形者，使易提挈。
现代文：我气绝之后，你们就买街市上现售的棺木，棺木要小型的，便于扛抬运载。
English: After I pass away, you will buy the coffins that are currently on sale on the street. The coffins should be small and easy to carry.

古文：敛以时服，古人通制，但下见先人，必须备礼，可著单衣裙衫故履。
现代文：为我的遗体装殓现时通行的服装，衹是自古以来通行约定，在阴间见到祖先，必须躬行大礼，所以必须穿单衣裙衫和原来的旧鞋。
English: To decorate my corpse with the current popular clothing, it has been customary since ancient times. To see your ancestors in the underworld, you must make a big bow, so you must wear a singlet and the original old shoes.

古文：既应侍养，宜备纷兑，或逢善友，又须香烟，棺内唯安白布手巾、粗香炉而已，其外一无所用。 
现代文：既然要侍奉先人，就应准备好抹布拭巾，有时良朋好友相聚，也要点燃香烟，因此棺内祇需放入白布手巾、粗糙香炉便可，除此之外全都不用。 
English: Since you want to serve your ancestors, you should prepare a rag and wipe, and sometimes friends and relatives get together and also light cigarettes, so you only need to put a white cloth hand towel and a rough incense burner in the coffin, and you don't need anything else.

古文：卒于家，时年七十六。
现代文：在家去世，逭年七十六岁。
English: He died at home at the age of seventy-six.

古文：有集二十卷。
现代文：有集二十卷。
English: There are 20 volumes in the series.

古文：子确。
现代文：儿子叫周确。
English: His son's name is Zhou Zhen.

古文：确字士潜，美容仪，宽大有行检，博涉经史，笃好玄言，世父弘正特所钟爱。
现代文：周确字士潜，仪容秀美，度量宽宏而严于律己，阅读了大量的经书史籍，非常爱好玄言哲理，为伯父周弘正所特别钟爱。
English: Zhou Zhengyi was a scholar, with a beautiful appearance. He was broad-minded but strict with himself. He read a lot of scriptures and history books. He was very fond of metaphysics and philosophy. He was especially loved by his uncle Zhou Hongzheng.

古文：解褐梁太学博士、司徒祭酒、晋安王主簿。
现代文：初入仕为梁朝的太学博士、司徒祭酒、晋安王主簿。
English: The first to enter the service were the Taigaku hakase of the Liang dynasty, the priest's sacrificial wine, and the Jinan king's ledger.

古文：高祖受禅，除尚书殿中郎，累迁安成王限内记室。
现代文：高祖陈霸先受禅为帝，任命他为尚书殿中郎，后经多次升迁而为安成王限内记室。
English: The great ancestor Chen Ba was first enthroned as emperor by Zen, who appointed him as the vice-chancellor of the Imperial Palace, and later, after several promotions, he became the secretary of King Ancheng.

古文：高宗即位，授东宫通事舍人，丁母忧，去职。
现代文：高宗即位后，任命他为东宫通事舍人，他因母亲去世服丧，离职。
English: After Emperor Gao Zong ascended to the throne, he appointed him as the secretary of the East Palace. He was bereaved by the death of his mother and left office.

古文：及欧阳纥平，起为中书舍人，命于广州慰劳，服阕，为太常卿。
现代文：到欧阳纥之乱被平定后，周确夺情出任中书舍人，奉命前往尘州慰劳平叛将士，服丧期满后，任太常卿。
English: After the Ouyang-Shan Rebellion was quelled, Zhou Jizhen was appointed as the person in charge of the surrender of Chinese books. He was ordered to go to Dangzhou to comfort the rebel generals. After the period of mourning, he was appointed as the First Secretary of the Central Military Commission.

古文：历太子中庶子、尚书左丞、太子家令，以父忧去职。
现代文：历任太子中庶子、尚书左丞、太子家令，又因父亲去世服丧离职。
English: He was an illegitimate child of successive crown princes, the middle son of Prince Shosho, and the second son of Prince Shosho, and also left the post due to the death of his father.

古文：寻起为贞威将军、吴令，确固辞不之官。
现代文：不多久起用为贞威将军、吴县令，却再三推辞不肯赴任。
English: Not long after, he was appointed as General Zhenwei and Wu County Governor, but he repeatedly declined to take up the post.

古文：至德元年，授太子左卫率、中书舍人，迁散骑常侍，加贞威将军、信州南平王府长史，行扬州事，为政平允，称为良吏。
现代文：至德元年，被任命为太子左卫率、中书舍人，升任散骑常侍，加贞威将军、信州南平王府长史，代理扬州政事。周确处理政事公平允当，被称赞为良吏。
English: In the first year of the German era, he was appointed as the Prince of the Left Division of the Imperial Guards, the Clerk of the Chinese Academy of Letters, promoted to the Cavalryman of the Horse, General Ga Zhenwei, the Governor of Nanping Wangfu of Shinshu, and the Acting Governor of Yangzhou. Zhou Ji handled political affairs fairly and appropriately, and was praised as a good official.

古文：迁都官尚书。
现代文：后又升任都官尚书。
English: Later, he was promoted to the post of Tokyo government official, Shosho.

古文：祯明初，遘疾、卒于官，时年五十九。
现代文：祯明之初，患病。在任上去世，遣年五十九岁。
English: He fell ill at the beginning of the Meiji era and died in office at the age of 59.

古文：诏赠散骑常侍、太常卿，官给丧事。
现代文：天子下诏追赠为散骑常侍、太常卿，由官府供给丧事费用。
English: Emperor Taizong posthumously granted him the title of Zangjie Changzhi and Taizongqing, and the government provided him with funeral expenses.

古文：袁宪，字德章，尚书左仆射枢之弟也。
现代文：袁宪字德章，是尚书左仆射直担的弟弟。
English: Yuan Xian Zi Dezhang is the younger brother of Shang Shuxu's left-hand man, Zhaozhishan.

古文：幼聪敏，好学，有雅量。
现代文：他幼年即聪明机敏，好学，有宽宏的度量。
English: As a child, he was bright, quick-witted, eager to learn, and generous.

古文：梁武帝修建庠序，别开五馆，其一馆在宪宅西，宪常招引诸生，与之谈论，每有新议，出人意表，同辈咸嗟服焉。
现代文：梁武帝兴办学校时，另外开设了五馆，其中一馆在袁宪的住宅西边，袁宪经常邀请儒生弟子，与他们谈论学术，常有新的见解，出乎一般人的见识之外，同辈人都表示赞叹佩服。
English: When Emperor Liangwu founded the school, he also opened another five halls, one of which is on the west side of Yuan Xian's residence. Yuan Xian often invited Confucian disciples to talk about academics with them. They often had new opinions that were beyond the ordinary people's understanding, and their peers expressed their admiration and admiration.

古文：大同八年，武帝撰《孔子正言章句》，诏下国学，宣制旨义。
现代文：大同八年，梁武帝撰写了《孔子正言章句》，并诏令下发给国学，宣讲由他裁定的主旨义理。
English: In the 8th year of the same year, Emperor Liangwu wrote the "Confucius's righteous sayings and sayings," and issued it to the Chinese Academy of Sciences under the imperial edict, preaching the main meaning and principle decided by him.

古文：宪时年十四，被召为国子《正言》生，谒祭酒到溉，溉目而送之，爱其神彩。
现代文：袁宪这年十四岁，被召入国学为《正言》弟子，他拜见了祭酒到溉，到溉以赞许的目光看着他送他出来，欣赏他的神采。
English: At the age of fourteen, Yuan Xian was called to study Chinese as a disciple of the "Motto." He saw the sacrificial wine to irrigation, to irrigation with approving eyes to watch him send him out, to appreciate his brilliance.

古文：在学一岁，国子博士周弘正谓宪父君正曰： 贤子今兹欲策试不？ 
现代文：袁宪学了一年，国子博士周弘正对他的父亲袁君正说： 令郎今年参加策试吗? 
English: Yuan Xian studied for one year. Dr. Zhou Hongzheng, the son of a countryman, said to his father, Yuan Junzheng: Will your son take part in the audition this year?

古文：君正曰： 经义犹浅，未敢令试。 
现代文：袁君正说： 他懂得的经义还肤浅，不敢让他策试。 
English: Yuan Junzheng said: His understanding of the principles of economics is still shallow, and he dares not let him try.

古文：居数日，君正遣门下客岑文豪与宪候弘正，会弘正将登讲坐，弟子毕集，乃延宪入室，授以麈尾，令宪树义。
现代文：遇了几天，袁君正派门客岑文豪跟袁宪一道去问候周弘正，恰逢周弘正正要登座讲学，等弟子都到齐了，周弘正这才请袁宪进入讲堂，给他一柄麈尾，叫他首先立论。
English: A few days later, Yuan Junzheng sent his disciple Zou Wenhao to greet Zhou Hongzheng together with Yuan Xian. It was just as Zhou Xianzheng was about to take the podium to give a lecture, and his disciples had all arrived. Zhou Xianzheng then invited Yuan Xianzheng into the lecture hall, gave him a pair of scissors, and told him to make a conclusion first.

古文：时谢岐、何妥在坐，弘正谓曰： 二贤虽穷奥赜，得无惮此后生耶！ 
现代文：当时谢岐、何妥在座，周弘正对他们说： 两位贤才虽然研究透了经义的深奥玄妙，是不是也有点畏惧这位后生呢! 
English: At that time, Xie Qi and He Tuo were present, and Zhou Hongzheng said to them: Although the two sages have studied the profound and mysterious meaning of the sutras, are they not a little afraid of this posterity?

古文：何、谢于是递起义端，深极理致，宪与往复数番，酬对闲敏。
现代文：于是何妥、谢岐二人轮番提出一个接一个的命题，这些命题都深奥到了思理的极致，袁宪与他们一来一往辩驳了多个回合，辩答之际意态悠闲、谈锋机敏。
English: As a result, He Tuo and Xie Qi took turns to put forward one proposition after another. These propositions were all profound to the extreme of reasoning. Yuan Xian and they went on to argue for several rounds. During the debate, their attitude was leisurely and they were quick-witted.

古文：弘正谓妥曰： 恣卿所问，勿以童稚相期。 
现代文：周弘正对何妥说： 任凭你们提问发难，不要以小孩子的水平来低估了他。 
English: Zhou Hongzheng said to He Zuo: Let your questions be difficult, don't underestimate him with the level of a child.

古文：时学众满堂，观者重沓，而宪神色自若，辩论有馀。
现代文：当时学者满堂，观者如堵，而袁宪面色平静神态如常，论辩应对裕如。
English: At that time, the hall was full of scholars, and the audience was stunned, but Yuan Xian's face was calm as usual, and the debate was lively.

古文：弘正请起数难，终不能屈，因告文豪曰： 卿还咨袁吴郡，此郎已堪见代为博士矣。 
现代文：周弘正也数次发言多方诘难，也终于不曾难倒他，于是就告知岑文豪说： 你回去和袁吴郡商议一下，逭小家伙现在就可以充任博士了。 
English: Zhou Hongzheng also made several speeches in many ways and difficulties, and finally did not stump him, so he told Yu Wenhao: You go back and discuss with Yuan Wu County, Yu Xiao Jie can now serve as a doctor.

古文：时生徒对策，多行贿赂，文豪请具束脩，君正曰： 我岂能用钱为儿买第耶？ 
现代文：那时参加策试的人，往往贿赂考官，岑文豪也提出为袁宪准备好馈赠礼品，袁君正说： 我怎么能用钱为儿子买一个中举及第呢! 
English: At that time, those who took part in the preparatory examinations often bribed the examiners. Yu Wenhao also proposed to prepare a gift for Yuan Xian. Yuan Junzheng said: How can I use money to buy a middle school graduation certificate for my son?

古文：学司衔之。
现代文：主管学校的官员对此怀恨在心。
English: School officials hold a grudge.

古文：及宪试，争起剧难，宪随问抗答，剖析如流，到溉顾宪曰： 袁君正其有后矣。 
现代文：当袁宪现场策试时，他们纷纷而起，抢着抛出一个个特大难题来刁难袁宪，但袁宪却应答如响，高言雄辩，剖析如流。到溉面向袁宪说： 袁君正有个好后代啊。 
English: When Yuan Xian was being tested on the spot, they rose up one after another, rushing to throw out one extremely difficult problem after another to embarrass Yuan Xian, but Yuan Xian answered loudly, spoke eloquently, and analyzed fluently. When they arrived, they said to Yuan Xian: Yuan Jun has a good offspring.

古文：及君正将之吴郡，溉祖道于征虏亭，谓君正曰： 昨策生萧敏孙、徐孝克，非不解义，至于风神器局，去贤子远矣。 
现代文：当袁君正去吴郡时，到溉为他在征虏亭饯行，并对他说： 上次策试，策生萧鱼岖、涂耋直并不是不懂经义，但风度神采和才识度量，距离令郎太远了。 
English: When Yuan Jun was on his way to Wuxi County, he stopped at Zheiru Pavilion to pray for him, and said to him, "The last time I tried, I did not understand the meaning of the sutras, but I was too far away from you in terms of demeanor and talent.

古文：寻举高第。
现代文：不久袁宪以成绩优等而中试。
English: Soon, Yuan Xian passed the midterm exam with excellent grades.

古文：以贵公子选尚南沙公主，即梁简文之女也。
现代文：以贵公子的资格被选配给南沙公主，南沙公主就是后来的个塞童蔻捆的女儿。
English: He was selected as a noble prince to marry Nansha Princess, who later became the daughter of a corsair.

古文：大同元年，释褐秘书郎。
现代文：中大同元年，初入仕为秘书郎。
English: In the first year of junior high school, he became a secretary for the first time.

古文：太清二年，迁太子舍人。
现代文：太清二年，升任太子舍人。
English: In the second year of the Qing Dynasty, he was promoted to crown prince.

古文：侯景寇逆，宪东之吴郡，寻丁父忧，哀毁过礼。
现代文：侯景逆乱时，袁宪出京向东到吴郡，不久因父亲去世服丧，哀伤过度而损坏了身体。
English: During the Houjing Rebellion, Yuan Xian went out of Beijing to the east to Wu County. Soon after, he was in mourning for his father's death, and his body was damaged by excessive grief.

古文：敬帝承制，征授尚书殿中郎。
现代文：董嘘秉承皇帝旨意时，特征他入京任命为尚书殿中郎。
English: When Dong Xiu adhered to the emperor's will, he was appointed as the vice-chancellor of Shangshu in Beijing.

古文：高祖作相，除司徒户曹。
现代文：高祖陈霸先任梁相时，任命他为司徒户曹。
English: When Gaozhu Chenba was first appointed as Liang Xiang, he appointed him as Szeto Tso.

古文：永定元年，授中书侍郎，兼散骑常侍。
现代文：永定元年，又被任命为中书侍郎，兼散骑常侍。
English: In the first year of the Yongding era, he was also appointed as the attendant of Chinese calligraphy, as well as the attendant of horseback riding.

古文：与黄门侍郎王瑜使齐，数年不遣，天嘉初乃还。
现代文：袁宪与黄门侍郎王瑜出使到北齐，被羁留了数年不让返回，直到天嘉初年才回到南陈。
English: Yuan Xian and Huang Men's servant Wang Yu were sent to North Qi and detained for several years before being allowed to return. They did not return to South Chen until the first year of Tian Jia.

古文：四年，诏复中书侍郎，直侍中省。
现代文：天嘉四年，天子下韶恢复袁宪中书侍郎的官职，在侍中省值勤。
English: In the fourth year of Tian Jia, Emperor Taizong restored the official post of Yuan Xian's attendant, and he was on duty in the attendant province.

古文：太建元年，除给事黄门侍郎，仍知太常事。
现代文：太建元年，被任命为给事黄门侍郎，接着又主持礼乐郊庙社稷的事务。
English: In the first year of the Tai Jian era, he was appointed as the attendant of the Yellow Gate, and then presided over the affairs of the ceremonial music of the suburb temple.

古文：二年，转尚书吏部侍郎，寻除散骑常侍，侍东宫。
现代文：二年，转任尚书吏部侍郎，不多久被任命为散骑常侍，侍奉东宫。
English: In the following year, he was transferred to the post of chamberlain of the Imperial Chancellery, and not long after that, he was appointed as a strolling equerry, serving the Eastern Court.

古文：三年，迁御史中丞，领羽林监。
现代文：三年，升任御史中丞，兼羽林监。
English: Three years later, he was promoted to goshi chujo (Junior Secretary of the Ministry of Civil Affairs) and concurrently to 羽林监 (Forest Inspector).

古文：时豫章王叔英不奉法度，逼取人马，宪依事劾奏，叔英由是坐免黜，自是朝野皆严惮焉。
现代文：当时豫章王叔英不遵法度，强行索取人马，袁宪依据实情在天子面前弹劾他，叔英因此遭到罢免贬斥，从此朝野人士都十分畏惧袁宪。
English: At that time, Yu Zhang Wang Shu Ying did not comply with the law and forcibly demanded a man and a horse. Yuan Xian impeached him in front of the heavenly son according to the facts. Shu Ying was dismissed and reprimanded for this reason. Since then, people in the court and in the field have been very afraid of Yuan Xian.

古文：宪详练朝章，尤明听断，至有狱情未尽而有司具法者，即伺闲暇，常为上言之，其所申理者甚众。
现代文：袁宪详知熟谙朝廷的法规制度，尤其能准确判决诉讼，如有案情还没有充分暴露而有关官员却行文了结的案件，就常常瞅准天子的闲暇时间，乘机提及，由于他申说而重新办理的案件很多。
English: Yuan Xian was familiar with the legal system of the imperial court in detail, and was especially able to accurately adjudicate lawsuits. If there were cases in which the facts of the case had not been fully revealed, but the relevant officials had written and concluded the case, he often took advantage of the leisure time of the emperor and took the opportunity to mention that there were many cases that were re-processed due to his request.

古文：尝陪宴承香阁，宾退之后，高宗留宪与卫尉樊俊徙席山亭，谈宴终日。
现代文：他曾经在承香合侍陪御宴，宾客散退之后，高宗留下袁宪和卫尉樊俊把筵席移到山亭裹，君臣谈话侍宴终日。
English: He was once at a banquet hosted by Emperor Chengxiang and his attendants. After the guests dispersed, Gao Zong left Yuan Xian and Wei Weijun to move the banquet to a mountain pavilion. The monarch and his attendants talked and dined all day.

古文：高宗目宪而谓俊曰 袁家故为有人 ，其见重如此。
现代文：高宗目光向着袁宪对樊俊称说 袁家仍然是有英才 ，袁宪就是这样地被看重。
English: Gao Zong looked at Yuan Xian and told Yao Jun that the Yuan family still had talent, and Yuan Xian was valued in this way.

古文：五年，入为侍中。
现代文：太建五年，袁宪调入宫廷担任侍中。
English: In the fifth year of the reign of Emperor Taiken, Yuan Xian was transferred to the court to serve as an attendant.

古文：六年，除吴郡太守，以父任固辞不拜，改授明威将军、南康内史。
现代文：六年，被任命为吴郡太守，袁宪因为父亲曾任此职而一再推辞不受任命，于是改任他为明威将军、南康内史。
English: Six years later, he was appointed governor of Wu County. Yuan Xian repeatedly refused to accept the appointment because his father had held this position before, so he was appointed as Mingwei General and Nan Kang Inner Historian.

古文：九年，秩满，除散骑常侍，兼吏部尚书，寻而为真。
现代文：九年，任期届满，被任命为散骑常侍，兼吏部尚书，不久即实授吏部尚书。
English: Nine years later, at the end of his term of office, he was appointed as the straggler's equerry, and also the secretary of the Ministry of Civil Affairs, and was soon awarded the title of secretary of the Ministry of Civil Affairs.

古文：宪以久居清显，累表自求解任。
现代文：袁宪认为自己担任轻闲而重要显贵的职务为时过久，感到有所不宜而多次表奏天子请求解职。
English: Yuan Xian thought that he had been holding the important and prestigious position for too long, and felt that it was not appropriate, so he repeatedly petitioned for dismissal.

古文：高宗曰： 诸人在职，屡有谤书。卿处事已多，可谓清白，别相甄录，且勿致辞。 
现代文：高宗说： 许多在职官员，屡屡被人书面检举，而你处理了很多事务，可以说清白廉洁，我不考察选用别的人，你也用不着辞职了。 
English: Gao Zong said: Many incumbent officials have been repeatedly reported in writing, and you have handled a lot of affairs. You can say that you are clean and honest. I will not consider selecting other people, and you do not have to resign.

古文：十三年，迁右仆射，参掌选事。
现代文：十三年，升任右仆射，参与职掌官员的遴选工作。
English: Thirteen years later, he was promoted to the post of right-hand man, and participated in the selection of officials.

古文：先是宪长兄简懿子为左仆射，至是宪为右仆射，台省内目简懿为大仆射，宪为小仆射，朝廷荣之。
现代文：在这以前袁宪的长兄简堑王已经担任左仆射，现在塞塞又担任右仆射，尚书省内的官员把简凿子看成大仆射，把袁宪看成小仆射，朝廷亦以此为荣。
English: Prior to this, Yuan Xian's eldest brother, King Jianye, had already served as the left minion, and now Xie Xie also served as the right minion. Officials in Shangshu Province regarded Jian Zhezi as a big minion and Yuan Xian as a small minion, and the imperial court was also proud of this.

古文：及高宗不豫，宪与吏部尚书毛喜俱受顾命。
现代文：当高宗病重临终之时，袁宪舆吏部尚书毛喜一同领受遣韶而为顾命大臣。
English: When Gao Zong was seriously ill and on his deathbed, Yuan Xian's public relations officer, Shangshu Mao Xi, received a demotion and became the minister of life.

古文：始兴王叔陵之肆逆也，宪指麾部分，预有力焉。
现代文：始兴王叔陵背叛作乱，童塞指挥部署平息这场叛乱，起了重大作用。
English: Shixing Wang Shuling's betrayal and rebellion, Tong Xie's command and deployment to quell this rebellion, played a major role.

古文：后主被疮病笃，执宪手曰： 我儿尚幼，后事委卿。 
现代文：篷王身上长了恶疮，病得很厉害，他握着袁塞的手叮嘱说： 我儿子还幼小，我死后的一切事情就委托给你了。 
English: His body was covered with sores and he was very ill. Holding Yuan Xie's hand, he told him, "My son is still young. After my death, I will entrust everything to you."

古文：宪曰： 群情喁喁，冀圣躬康复，后事之旨，未敢奉诏。 
现代文：袁宪说： 陛下被众情所仰慕，盼望圣体康复，至于陛下所谓的后事，我不敢领受圣旨。 
English: Yuan Xian said, "Your majesty is admired by everyone, and we hope for your recovery. As for the so-called aftermath of your majesty, I dare not accept the will of God.

古文：以功封建安县伯，邑四百户，领太子中庶子，馀并如故。
现代文：因为有功被封为建安县伯，食邑四百户，兼太子中庶子，其他官职仍旧。
English: Because of his meritorious service, he was given the title of Jian'an County magistrate, 400 households in the food village, and the prince's middle child, and other official positions are still outstanding.

古文：寻除侍中、信威将军、太子詹事。
现代文：没多久又被任命为侍中、信威将军、太子詹事。
English: Not long after, he was appointed as a chamberlain, General Shinwayo, and Prince Zhanji.

古文：至德元年，太子加元服，二年，行释奠之礼，宪于是表请解职，后主不许，给扶二人，进号云麾将军，置佐史。
现代文：至德元年，太子加冕，二年，为太子举行了用牛、羊、猪、皮、玉、帛祭奠先圣先师的入学大礼，这时袁宪又上表请求解除自己的职务，后主没有同意，还赐给他两名扶护人员，进升官号为云麾将军，授权让他自行安排下属官吏。
English: In the first year of the Heian period, the crown prince was crowned, and in the second year, a grand entrance ceremony was held for the prince with the sacrifice of cattle, sheep, pigs, skins, jade, and skulls. At this time, Yuan Xian also requested to be relieved of his duties. The latter did not agree, and also gave him two support personnel, promoted to the rank of General Yun Qi, and authorized him to arrange subordinate officials on his own.

古文：皇太子颇不率典训，宪手表陈谏凡十条，皆援引古今，言辞切直，太子虽外示容纳，而心无悛改。
现代文：皇太子很不遵守规章制度，袁宪就亲手写奏表提出了共十条规谏意见，都援引了古今事例，措词恳切而直率，太子虽然表面上接受，但内心并无悔改之意。
English: The crown prince did not comply with the rules and regulations. Yuan Xian proposed a total of ten rules and opinions on the handwritten score, all of which cited ancient and modern cases. The wording was sincere and straightforward. Although the prince accepted it on the surface, he had no intention of repenting.

古文：后主欲立宠姬张贵妃子始安王为嗣，尝从容言之，吏部尚书蔡徵顺旨称赏，宪厉色折之曰： 皇太子国家储嗣，亿兆宅心。卿是何人，轻言废立！ 
现代文：后主打算另立宠姬张贵妃所生的儿子始安王为皇位继承人，曾经不露声色地谈到了遣一想法，吏部尚书蔡征顺着后主的意思而称颂赞赏，袁宪就正言厉色地指责他： 皇太子是已经确定了的皇上的继承人，已经深入万民百姓之心，你是何等样人，敢轻率地谈说废立太子这样的大事! 
English: The heir-apparent planned to set up the son of Zhang Guifei's favorite concubine, Shi An Wang, as the heir to the throne. He once talked about the idea of sending one to the emperor, and the officials praised and appreciated Cai Zheng in accordance with the will of the heir-apparent. Yuan Xian accused him severely: The crown prince is the heir to the emperor who has been determined, and has penetrated into the hearts of all the people. What kind of person are you, daring to talk about such a big thing as abolishing the crown prince!

古文：夏，竟废太子为吴兴王。
现代文：结果这年的夏天，还是把太子废为吴兴王。
English: As a result, in the summer of this year, the crown prince was still abolished as Wu Xingwang.

古文：后主知宪有规谏之事，叹曰 袁德章实骨鲠之臣 ，即日诏为尚书仆射。
现代文：篷主知道袁宪有规谏之事，赞叹地称说 袁德章实在是一位骨鲠之臣 ，当天下旨任命他为尚书仆射。
English: The lord of the pavilion knew that Yuan Xian had a grudge against him, and said with admiration that Yuan Dezhang was indeed a loyal vassal. That day, he was appointed as Shang Shu's lackey.

古文：祯明三年，隋军来伐，隋将贺若弼进烧宫城北掖门，宫卫皆散走，朝士稍各引去，惟宪卫侍左右。
现代文：祯明三年，隋军南下伐陈，隋将贺若弼攻入京城焚烧皇宫北掖门，宫廷卫士都四散逃走，朝廷官员也陆续各自退避离开了，惟有袁宪一人还在后主身边侍奉。
English: In the third year of the Ming Dynasty, the Sui army went south to cut down Chen, the Sui general He Ruoqi entered the capital and burned the north gate of the imperial palace. The palace guards scattered and fled, and the imperial officials also retreated one after another. Only Yuan Xian was still serving at his master's side.

古文：后主谓宪曰： 我从来待卿不先馀人，今日见卿，可谓岁寒知松柏后凋也。 
现代文：后主对袁宪说： 我对你向来就没有比其他人更优惠，今日危难之际却衹见你一人，真可谓岁寒然后知松柏之后凋呀! 
English: The postmaster said to Yuan Xian: I have never been more favorable to you than other people, but today, when you are in danger, I see you alone. It is really cold and then the pine trees wither!

古文：后主遑遽将避匿，宪正色曰： 北兵之入，必无所犯，大事如此，陛下安之。
现代文：后主惊惧恐慌打算躲起来，袁宪面色严正地说： 隋军入宫，必不会冒犯圣驾，国家大事已经到了如此地步，陛下也祇好泰然处之。
English: After the master panicked and panicked and planned to hide, Yuan Xian looked stern and said: The Sui army entering the palace will certainly not offend the saint, the national event has reached such a stage, His Majesty should also be calm.

古文：臣愿陛下正衣冠，御前殿，依梁武见侯景故事。 
现代文：我希望陛下穿好帝衣戴上冕旒，高坐前殿，就像当年身处危境的凿盏童召见贼臣彊加以叱责那样堂堂正正地召见鹰军主将。 
English: I hope that His Majesty will put on the imperial robes, put on the crown and saddle, and sit high in the vestibule, just like the boy who was in danger was summoned to see the chief of the eagle army and reprimanded.

古文：后主不从，因下榻驰去。宪从后堂景阳殿入，后主投下井中，宪拜哭而出。
现代文：篷主不听从，随即下床奔逃而走，塞塞从后堂垦区屘尾追而入后苑，但后主还是跳入井中藏匿，袁宪只好拜哭一番然后离去。
English: The owner of the canopy did not listen, and immediately got out of bed and ran away. The dog chased him from the back hall to the back yard, but the owner still jumped into the well to hide. Yuan Xian had to cry and then leave.

古文：京城陷，入于隋，隋授使持节、昌州诸军事、开府仪同三司、昌州刺史。
现代文：京城失陷后，高祖进入隋曲，隋朝任命他为使持节、旦丛诸军事、开府仪同三司、昌州刺史。
English: After the fall of Beijing, Gao Zu entered Sui Qu, and the Sui Dynasty appointed him as the envoy of the festival, the military of the Tang Cong, the three divisions of the Kaifu ceremony, and the history of Changzhou.

古文：开皇十四年，诏授晋王府长史。
现代文：开皇十四年，天子下旨任命他为置王府长史。
English: In the fourteenth year of the emperor's reign, the emperor appointed him as the prefect of the imperial palace.

古文：十八年卒，时年七十。
现代文：十八年去世，这年七十岁。
English: He died eighteen years later, at the age of seventy.

古文：赠大将军，安城郡公，谥曰简。
现代文：追赠为大将军，封为安城郡公，谧号是个。
English: He was posthumously promoted to the rank of general and given the title of Ancheng County magistrate. His posthumous name was Mao.

古文：长子承家，仕隋至秘书丞、国子司业。
现代文：长子塞丞塞，在瞪曲任职官至秘书丞、国子司业。
English: The eldest son, Saichōse, rose through the ranks of office to secretary and secretary of state.

古文：史臣曰：梁元帝称士大夫中重汝南周弘正，信哉斯言也！
现代文：史臣曰：梁元帝说在士大夫中最为推重汝南周弘正，造句话是极为可信的!
English: The historian said: Emperor Liang Yuan said that among the scholar-officials, Runan Zhou Hongzheng was the most important. The made-up sentence is extremely credible!

古文：观其雅量标举，尤善玄言，亦一代之国师矣。
现代文：试看周弘正气度高超，尤其是精通玄学义理，的确是那个时代的国师啊。
English: Take a look at Zhou Hongzheng, he is a superb person, especially proficient in metaphysics and logic. He is indeed the national teacher of that era.

古文：袁宪风格整峻，徇义履道。
现代文：袁宪作风严正品行峻洁，履行道义信守臣责。
English: Yuan Xian's work style is strict, upright, and clean, and he fulfills his moral, faithful, and vassal responsibilities.

古文：韩子称为人臣委质，心无有二。
现代文：韩子曾说人臣向君主表示了献身大礼，就应永无二心。
English: Han Zi once said that once a vassal has shown a great gift of devotion to the monarch, there should be no second thoughts.

古文：宪弗渝终始，良可嘉焉。
现代文：袁宪对陈后主的忠心始终不渝，是非常值得称赞的。
English: Yuan Xian's unswerving loyalty to Queen Chen is very commendable.

