古文：十有三年春，齐师伐莒。
现代文：十三年春季，齐国军队攻打莒国。
English: In the spring of the 13th year of the Qin Dynasty, the Qin army attacked the State of Shandong.

古文：夏，楚子伐宋。
现代文：夏季，楚庄王攻打宋国。
English: In the summer, the king of Chu Zhuang attacked Song.

古文：秋，螽。
现代文：秋季，有螽虫。
English: In autumn, there are aphids.

古文：冬，晋杀其大夫先縠。
现代文：冬季，晋国杀掉自己的大夫先縠。
English: In winter, Jin killed his own doctor first.

古文：十三年春，齐师伐莒，莒恃晋而不事齐故也。
现代文：十三年春季，齐国军队进攻莒国，由于莒国依仗晋国而不奉事齐国的缘故。
English: In the spring of the thirteenth year, the Qi army attacked the Xiongnu, because the Xiongnu relied on the Jin and did not serve the Qi.

古文：夏，楚子伐宋，以其救萧也。
现代文：夏季，楚庄王进攻宋国，因为宋国曾救援萧国。
English: In the summer, the king of Chuzhuang attacked Song, because Song had rescued Xiao.

古文：君子曰： 清丘之盟，唯宋可以免焉。 
现代文：君子说： 清丘的结盟，只有宋国可以免去被讥议。 
English: The gentleman said, "Only the Song Dynasty can be exempted from being ridiculed for the alliance with Qingyue.

古文：秋，赤狄伐晋，及清，先縠召之也。
现代文：秋季，赤狄进攻晋国，到达清地，这是先縠把他们召来的。
English: In the autumn, the Red Di attacked Jin Province and reached Qingdi, which was the first time they had been summoned.

古文：冬，晋人讨邲之败，与清之师，归罪于先縠而杀之，尽灭其族。
现代文：冬季，晋国人追究邲地失败和清地战争的责任，归罪于先穀而杀死了他，把他的族人也全部杀掉了。
English: In the winter, the people of Jin Province held him responsible for the failure of the Battle of Shantian and the War of Qing, and blamed him for the death of Xiankui, and killed all of his people.

古文：君子曰： 恶之来也，己则取之，其先縠之谓乎。 
现代文：君子说  刑戮来到，那是自找 ，先縠就是这样的吧？ 
English: A gentleman said, "When the massacre comes, it's self-inflicted. That's what happens when you strike first, isn't it?"

古文：清丘之盟，晋以卫之救陈也讨焉。
现代文：清丘的盟约，晋国由于卫国救援陈国，就加以责备。
English: Qingqiu's treaty, Jin rebuked Chen for failing to defend the country and rescue Chen.

古文：使人弗去，曰： 罪无所归，将加而师。 
现代文：晋国使者不肯离去，说： 罪责如果无所归属，将要把战争加在你们头上。 
English: The envoy from Jin refused to leave, saying: "If there is no attribution of blame, war will be brought down on your heads."

古文：孔达曰： 苟利社稷，请以我说。罪我之由。
现代文：孔达说： 如果有利于社稷，就请用我的死来作为解说吧，罪过由于我。
English: Konda said: If it is good for society, please use my death as an explanation. The crime was my fault.

古文：我则为政而亢大国之讨，将以谁任？
现代文：我在执政，而面对大国的责备，这个罪责还能推给谁？
English: I am in power, and in the face of the blame of the great powers, who else can be blamed?

古文：我则死之。 
现代文：我愿意为此而死。 
English: I would die for this.

