古文：起重光大渊献，尽旃蒙单阏，凡五年。
现代文：起，止，一共五年
English: A total of five years

古文：太宗明皇帝下泰始七年
现代文：宋明帝泰始七年
English: The first seven years of the reign of Emperor Song Ming

古文：春，二月，戊戌，分交、广置越州，治临漳。
现代文：春季，二月，戊戌，刘宋从交州、广州分出一部分郡县，设立越州，州府设在临漳。
English: In the spring, in February, Emperor Wu and Liu Song separated a part of counties and counties from Jiaozhou and Guangzhou, establishing Yuezhou, and the state capital was set up in Linyi.

古文：初，上为诸王，宽和有令誉，独为世祖所亲。
现代文：当初，刘宋明帝还是亲王时，性情宽厚平和，有良好的声誉，只有他深受孝武帝的宠爱。
English: At first, when Liu Songming was still a prince, he had a generous and peaceful disposition and a good reputation. He was the only one who was deeply loved by Emperor Xiaowu.

古文：即位之初，义嘉之党多蒙全宥，随才引用，有如旧臣。
现代文：即位初年，对拥护寻阳政权的官员，大多数都留住他们的性命，加以原谅，而且按照各人的才干，分别任用，像对旧有臣下一样对待。
English: In the first year of his reign, he spared the lives of most of the officials who supported the Xuanyang regime, pardoned them, and appointed them individually according to their abilities, treating them like his former subjects.

古文：及晚年，更猜忌忍虐，好鬼神，多忌讳，言语、文书，有祸败、凶丧及疑似之言应回避者数百千品，有犯必加罪戮。改 騧 字为 瓜 ，以其似祸字故也。
现代文：到了晚年，却猜疑、嫉妒、残忍、暴虐，迷信鬼神巫术，忌讳多端。无论言论、文书，对祸、败、凶、丧以及含混难辨的话和字有成百上千条，都加以回避，如有触犯，一定加以惩罚和诛杀。把  改成  ，因为  看起来象 祸 字。
English: In his later years, however, he became suspicious, jealous, cruel, tyrannical, superstitious about ghosts and spirits and witchcraft, and had many taboos. Regardless of speech or writing, there are hundreds and thousands of words and characters related to calamity, defeat, evil, sorrow, as well as words and characters that are ambiguous and difficult to distinguish. They are all avoided, and if there is any offense, they must be punished and killed. Change it to, because it looks like a curse word.

古文：左右忤意，往往有刳斫者。
现代文：左右官员只要触犯禁忌，常常有被挖心或剖出五脏的人。
English: As long as officials on both sides violate taboos, there are often people whose hearts are dug out or whose guts are dissected.

古文：时淮、泗用兵，府藏空竭，内外百官，并断俸禄。
现代文：当时，淮河、泗水一带多次发生军事行动，当地府库空竭，朝廷内外的百官，全都断了俸禄。
English: At that time, there were many military operations around Huaihe and Surabaya, the local government treasury was depleted, and hundreds of officials inside and outside the imperial court all lost their salaries.

古文：而上奢费过度，每所造器用，必为正御、副御、次副各三十枚。
现代文：但明帝却过度奢侈浪费，每次制造器物用具，都要分为正用、备用、次备用，各制三十件。
English: However, the Ming Dynasty was excessively extravagant and wasteful. Every time they made utensils and tools, they had to be divided into regular use, spare use, and secondary use, with 30 items of each type.

古文：嬖幸用事，货赂公行。
现代文：侍候左右的亲信当权，贪赃枉法，贿赂公行。
English: Servant to the right and left cronies in power, corruption, bribery and corruption.

古文：上素无子，密取诸王姬有孕者内宫中，生男则杀其母，使宠姬子之。
现代文：明帝一直没有儿子，就把各亲王怀有身孕的姬妾秘密接到宫中，如生男孩，就把生母杀掉，由他自己的宠妃认作儿子。
English: Emperor Ming had never had a son, so he secretly brought the pregnant concubines of each prince to the palace. If a boy was born, he killed the birth mother, and his favorite concubine recognized him as her son.

古文：至是寝疾，以太子幼弱，深忌诸弟。
现代文：到这一年，明帝患病，因为太子年纪还小，他唯恐自己的弟弟们纂夺政权。
English: By this year, Emperor Ming fell ill, because the prince was still young, and he was afraid that his younger brothers would seize power.

古文：南徐州刺史晋平刺王休祐，前镇江陵，贪虐无度，上不使之镇，留之建康，遣上佐行府州事。
现代文：南徐州刺史晋平刺王刘休，从前镇守江陵时，贪污暴虐，无法无天。这次调任路过京师，明帝不让他去赴任，把他留在建康，派他的高级属官代理府州事务。
English: Southern Xuzhou stabbed the history of Jinping stabbed King Liu Xiu. When he used to guard Jiangling, he was corrupt, tyrannical and lawless. This time, he was transferred to a passing Beijing division. Emperor Ming did not let him go to his post, he left him in Jiankang and sent his senior subordinate officer to represent the prefectural affairs.

古文：休祐性刚很，前后忤上非一，上积不能平，且虑将来难制，欲方便除之。
现代文：刘休性情暴烈凶恶，冒犯明帝不止一次，明帝都记在心中，无法再忍，并且考虑到将来儿子没有能力控制他，所以准备找个机会把他除掉。
English: Liu Xiu's temper is violent and vicious, and he has offended Emperor Ming more than once. He cannot bear it any longer, and considering that his son will not be able to control him in the future, he is ready to find an opportunity to get rid of him.

古文：甲寅，休祐从上于岩山射雉，左右从者并在仗后。
现代文：甲寅，刘休随同明帝前往岩山射猎野鸡，兄弟二人向前奔驰，左右侍从被抛在后面。
English: A Yin and Liu Xiu accompanied Emperor Ming to the rocky mountains to shoot pheasants. The two brothers galloped forward, and the two attendants were left behind.

古文：日欲暗，上遣左右寿寂之等数人，逼休祐令坠马，因共殴，拉杀之，传呼 骠骑落马！ 
现代文：天将黄昏，明帝派亲信寿寂之等数人，把刘休从马背上挤下来，大家一拥而上，痛打一气，直至死亡，然后传呼： 骠骑将军落马！ 
English: As dusk approached, the Ming emperor sent a few people, including his close confidant Shou Zhanzhong, to push Liu Xiu off his horse. They all piled on and beat him until he was dead, and then called out: "Horseman, fall off your horse!"

古文：上阳惊，遣御医络驿就视，比其左右至，休祐已绝。去车轮，舆还第。
现代文：明帝假装大吃一惊，立即派出御医，一个接一个地前往诊视。等到刘休左右侍从赶到，刘休已气绝身亡，把他所乘车的轮子拆掉，改作病床，由人抬回家。
English: Emperor Ming pretended to be taken aback and immediately dispatched imperial doctors, who went to the clinic one after another. By the time Liu Xiu's attendants arrived, Liu Xiu had died of exhaustion, and the wheels of the car he was riding in were removed and turned into a hospital bed, and he was carried home.

古文：追赠司空，葬之如礼。
现代文：明帝下诏追赠刘休为司空，用应有丧礼安葬。
English: Emperor Ming decreed that Liu Xiu be posthumously awarded the title of Siku, and he was given a proper funeral and burial.

古文：建康民间讹言，荆州刺史巴陵王休若有至贵之相，上以此言报之，休若忧惧。
现代文：建康民间传播谣言，说荆州刺史巴陵王刘休若，有尊贵的面相。明帝写信将此言告诉了他，刘休若忧虑恐惧。
English: Jiankang people spread the rumor that Liu Xiu, the king of Jingzhou, had a noble face. Mingdi wrote a letter to him, telling him that Liu Xiu was worried and afraid.

古文：戊午，以休若代休祐为南徐州刺史。
现代文：戊午，明帝任命刘休若接替刘休为南徐州刺史。
English: In the afternoon, Emperor Ming appointed Liu Xiuyao to succeed Liu Xiu as the governor of South Xuzhou.

古文：休若腹心将佐，皆谓休若还朝，必不免祸。
现代文：刘休若心腹将领一致认为：刘休若只要回到建康，就难逃大祸。
English: Liu Xiu's confidants and generals all agreed that if Liu Xiu returned to Jiankang, he would not be able to escape the disaster.

古文：中兵参军京兆王敬先说休若曰： 今主上弥留，政成省阁，群竖恟々，欲悉去宗支以便其私。
现代文：中兵参军京兆人王敬先劝刘休若说： 现在，皇上病重正处在弥留之际，朝廷大权握在省之手，一群奸恶之徒，来势汹汹，准备把皇上的兄弟全部崐铲除，以此来满足自己的私欲。
English: Wang Jing first advised Liu Xiu to join the army, saying: "Nowadays, the emperor is gravely ill and on the verge of death, the imperial power is in the hands of the provincial government, and a group of treacherous villains have come threateningly, ready to eradicate all of the emperor's brothers in order to satisfy their own selfish desires.

古文：殿下声著海内，受诏入朝，必往而不返。
现代文：殿下的名声，传播海内，如接受诏书，前往京师朝见，一定有去无回。
English: The reputation of His Imperial Highness spreads overseas. If he accepts the imperial edict and goes to see the emperor in Beijing, there is no going back.

古文：荆州带甲十馀万，地方数千里，上可以匡天子，除奸臣，下可以保境土，全一身；孰与赐剑邸第，使臣妾饮泣而不敢葬乎！ 
现代文：荆州武装部队十余万，土地数千里。上可以辅佐天子，铲除奸臣；下可以保全一州，救自己一命。这和回到建康家宅，接受皇上赐给你自杀的佩剑，使你的臣妾饮泣吞声相比较，又怎么样呢！ 
English: Jingzhou has more than 100,000 armed forces and thousands of miles of land. On the one hand, you can support the Son of Heaven and root out treacherous vassals; on the other hand, you can protect one province and save your own life. How does this compare to returning to Jiankang's home, accepting the sword given to you by the emperor to commit suicide, and making your vassals and concubines swallow their tears?

古文：休若素谨畏，伪许之。
现代文：刘休若一向谨慎胆怯，于是假装答应。
English: Liu Xiu, who had always been cautious and timid, pretended to agree.

古文：敬先出，使人执之，以白于上而诛之。
现代文：王敬先一出王府，立刻派人把他抓起来，把他说的话奏报明帝，并将他处死。
English: As soon as Wang Jing first left the royal palace, he immediately sent someone to arrest him, report his words to Emperor Ming, and execute him.

古文：三月，辛酉，魏假员外散骑常侍邢祐来聘。
现代文：三月，辛酉，北魏代理员外散骑常侍邢前来聘问。
English: In March, Xin Xin, the Northern Wei agent, came to ask for a ride.

古文：魏主使殿中尚书胡莫寒简西部敕勒为殿中武士。
现代文：北魏国主派殿中尚书胡莫寒选拔西部敕勒部落中的武士，担任宫廷警卫。
English: The ruler of the Northern Wei Dynasty sent Shangshu Humo to select samurai from the western Zhao tribe to serve as palace guards.

古文：莫寒大纳货赂，众怒，杀莫寒及高平假镇将奚陵。
现代文：胡莫寒大肆收纳贿赂，激起民愤，民众诛杀胡莫寒及高平代理镇将奚陵。
English: Humo Khan accepted bribes in a big way, arousing public indignation. The people killed Humo Khan and Gaoping, and the town will be buried.

古文：夏，四月，诸部敕勒皆叛。
现代文：夏季，四月，敕勒部落全都起兵反叛。
English: In the summer, in April, the Mule tribe all rebelled.

古文：魏主使汝阴王天赐将兵讨之，以给事中罗云为前锋；敕勒诈降，袭云，杀之，天赐仅以身免。
现代文：北魏国主派汝阴王拓跋天赐率军讨伐，由给事中罗云担任前锋。敕勒部落诈降，袭击罗云，将其斩首，拓跋天赐仅逃出一命。
English: The ruler of the Northern Wei Dynasty sent Ruyin King Tuoba Tianfu to lead the army in the crusade, with Luo Yun as the vanguard. The Xule tribe betrayed and attacked Luo Yun, beheading him, and Tuoba Tianfu only escaped with his life.

古文：晋平刺王既死，建安王休仁益不自安。
现代文：晋平刺王刘休被杀之后，建安王刘休仁越发惶恐不安。
English: After the assassination of Liu Xiu, the King of the Jin and Ping Dynasties, Liu Xiu Ren, the King of Jian'an, became more and more anxious.

古文：上与嬖臣杨运长等为身后之计，运长等虑上晏驾后，休仁秉政，己辈不得专权，弥赞成之。
现代文：明帝常跟亲信杨运长等商讨身后之计，杨运长等也担心明帝死了之后，刘休仁当政，他们这些人不能独断专行，所以都赞成明帝的计划。
English: Emperor Ming often discussed his future plans with his close confidant Yang Yunchang and others. Yang Yunchang and others were also worried that after Emperor Ming died, Liu Xuren would come to power. These people could not act on their own, so they all agreed with Emperor Ming's plan.

古文：上疾尝暴甚，内外莫不属意于休仁，主书以下皆往东府访休仁所亲信，豫自结纳；其或在直不得出者，皆恐惧。
现代文：明帝一度病情十分危险，无论朝廷还是民间都把希望寄托在刘休仁主持朝政上，连主书以下的低级官员，都往东府拜访刘休仁的亲信，想预先结下交情。有些人正巧当班，不能出来从事结交活动，都心急而恐惧。
English: At one time, Emperor Ming's illness was very dangerous. Both the imperial court and the people pinned their hopes on Liu Xuren to preside over the imperial government. Even low-level officials below the chief secretary went to visit Liu Xuren's close friends in Dongfu to make friends in advance. Some people happened to be on duty and could not come out to engage in friendship activities. They were anxious and afraid.

古文：上闻，愈恶之。
现代文：明帝听说后，更为气愤。
English: After hearing this, Emperor Ming became even more angry.

古文：五月，戊午，召休仁入见，既而谓曰： 今夕停尚书下省宿，明可早来。 
现代文：五月，戊午，明帝命刘休仁进宫朝见，不久又通知他说： 今晚你可在尚书下省安歇，明天一早再来。 
English: In the afternoon of May, Emperor Ming ordered Liu Xuren to come to the palace for a morning meeting. Soon after, he told him, "You can rest tonight and come back tomorrow morning."

古文：其夜，遣人赍药赐死。
现代文：当夜，明帝派人送去毒药，强迫他吞服。
English: That night, Emperor Ming sent someone to bring him poison and forced him to swallow it.

古文：休仁骂曰： 上得天下，谁之力邪！
现代文：刘休仁骂道： 你能得到天下，是谁的力量！
English: Liu Xuren scolded, "If you can gain the whole world, whose power is it?

古文：孝武以诛钅且兄弟，子孙灭绝。今复为尔，宋祚其得久乎！ 
现代文：孝武帝因为诛杀兄弟的缘故，子孙灭绝，今天你又要诛杀兄弟，宋的统治岂能长久！ 
English: Emperor Xiaowu's descendants were exterminated because he killed his brother. Today, you are going to kill your brother. Won't Song's reign last long?

古文：上虑有变，力疾乘舆出端门，休仁死，乃入。下诏称： 休仁规结禁兵，谋为乱逆，朕未忍明法，申诏诘厉。休仁惭恩惧罪，遽自引决。
现代文：明帝担心有变，提起精神，乘轿到皇城端门坐镇，直到刘休仁气绝，才回后宫，下诏宣布： 刘休仁计划结交宫廷禁卫官兵，阴谋叛乱，朕不忍心把他交付法庭审判，而只下诏严厉斥责，刘休仁对自己的忘恩负义，畏惧羞愧，不能自容，服毒自杀。
English: Emperor Ming was worried about the change and raised his spirits. He took a carriage to the Imperial City and sat in the town. He did not return to the harem until Liu Xuren was exhausted. He issued an edict announcing: Liu Xuren planned to make friends with the palace guards and soldiers and plot a rebellion. I can't bear to bring him to court for trial. Instead, I just issued an edict severely reprimanding him. Liu Xuren was ungrateful to himself, afraid and ashamed, could not contain himself, and committed suicide by taking poison.

古文：可宥其二子，降为始安县王，听其子伯融袭封。 
现代文：可以宽恕他的两个儿子，贬刘休仁为始安县王，由其子刘伯融继承爵位。 
English: He can pardon his two sons, demote Liu Xuren to the king of Shian County, and let his son Liu Boyong inherit the title.

古文：上虑人情不悦，乃与诸大臣及方镇诏，称： 休仁与休祐深相亲结，语休祐云： 汝但作佞，此法自足安身；我从来颇得此力。 
现代文：明帝害怕引起公愤，乃颁发诏书给朝廷各大臣及地方官员，说： 刘休仁与刘休相交很深，刘休仁对刘休说： 你只管奉承皇上，这妙法足可以安身，我一向很得益于这种办法。 
English: Afraid of arousing public indignation, Emperor Ming issued an edict to the ministers of the imperial court and local officials, saying: Liu Xiuren had a deep friendship with Liu Xiu. Liu XiuRen said to Liu Xiu: You just have to flatter the emperor. This is a great way to calm down. I have always benefited from this method.

古文：休祐之陨，本欲为民除患，而休仁从此日生娆惧。吾每呼令入省，便入辞杨太妃。
现代文：刘休之死，本来只打算为民除害，可是刘休仁却从此越发恐慌，我每次传他进宫，他都进去向母亲杨太妃告别。
English: Liu Xiu's death was originally only intended to eliminate harm for the people, but Liu Xiu Ren has become more and more panicked. Every time I pass him into the palace, he goes in to say goodbye to his mother Yang Taifei.

古文：吾春中多与之射雉，或阴雨不出，休仁辄语左右云： 我已复得今一日。 
现代文：春天，我常常与他一块去打野鸡，偶遇阴天下雨，不能外出，刘休仁就告诉左右： 今天又多活了一天。 
English: In spring, I often went with him to hunt pheasants. When it was cloudy and rainy and we couldn't go out, Liu Xuren told everyone: "Today I've lived one more day."

古文：休仁既经南讨，与宿卫将帅经习狎共事。
现代文：刘休仁曾经因为南征的缘故，与皇家禁卫将领在一起共事，情投意合。
English: Liu Xuren once worked together with the commander of the royal bodyguard because of the Southern Expedition, and the feeling was mutual.

古文：吾前者积日失适，休仁出入殿省，无不和颜，厚相抚劳。
现代文：我以前有好些日子身体不适，刘休仁出入宫廷，见到这些将领，一律和颜悦色，进行安抚慰劳。
English: I used to have days when I was unwell. Liu XiuRen would go in and out of the court, and I would see these generals, all of whom had a pleasant countenance, soothing and comforting me.

古文：如其意趣，人莫能测。
现代文：像他这样的意图，别人无法加以估量。
English: Intentions like his cannot be measured by others.

古文：事不获已，反覆思惟，不得不有近日处分。恐当不必即解，故相报知。 
现代文：事情已经不能阻止了，反复思考，不得不做这项处分，恐怕你们不一定知道内情，崐所以特此向你们告知。 
English: The matter can no longer be stopped. After much deliberation, we had to take this action. I'm afraid you don't necessarily know the details, so I'd like to let you know.

古文：上与休仁素厚，虽杀之，每谓人曰： 我与建安年时相邻，少便款狎。景和、泰始之间，勋诚实重；事计交切，不得不相除，痛念之至，不能自巳。 
现代文：明帝与刘休仁素来十分友好，虽然他害死刘休仁，但常对人说： 我与建安王刘休仁，年纪差不多，幼年时候，便在一起玩耍，景和、泰始年间，他一片忠心，建功立业，功勋的确不小。可是，到了利害关头，不得不先行下手除掉他，哀痛想念之至，不能排除。 
English: Emperor Ming and Liu Xuren had always been very friendly. Although he killed Liu Xuren, he often said to people: I am about the same age as Liu Xuren, the King of Jian'an. When I was a child, we used to play together. During the reigns of King Jing and King Taizhi, he was very loyal, made great achievements, and his merits were indeed not small. However, when it came to a critical moment, I had to take the first step to get rid of him. I miss him so much that I can't rule him out.

古文：因流涕不自胜。
现代文：于是，流泪哭泣，悲不自胜。
English: As a result, they shed tears and weep and are inconsolable.

古文：初，上在籓与褚渊以风素相善；及即位，深相委仗。
现代文：当初，明帝为亲王时，因褚渊风度翩翩，气质雅素，而与他成为至好的朋友。
English: In the beginning, when Emperor Ming was a prince, he became best friends with Shanyuan because of Shanyuan's graceful demeanor and elegant temperament.

古文：上寝疾，渊为吴郡太守，急召之。
现代文：明帝即位后，彼此也十分信赖依托。明帝病重，褚渊正任吴郡太守，明帝急召褚渊入宫。
English: After Emperor Ming ascended the throne, they also relied on each other. Emperor Ming was seriously ill, and Gongyuan was serving as the governor of Wu County. Emperor Ming urgently summoned Gongyuan to the palace.

古文：既至，入见，上流涕曰： 吾近危笃，故召卿，欲使著黄衤罗耳。 
现代文：褚渊到京后，入宫晋见，明帝痛哭流涕说： 我的病情危险，所以召见你，打算请你穿黄棉袄！ 
English: After Gongyuan arrived in Beijing and met Emperor Jin at the palace, Emperor Ming cried bitterly and said, "My illness is dangerous, so I have summoned you, and I am going to ask you to wear yellow cotton socks!"

古文：黄衤罗者，乳母服也。
现代文：黄棉袄是乳母的服装，意为向他托孤。
English: The yellow cotton cocoon is the nanny's clothing, meaning to carry him.

古文：上与渊谋诛建安王休仁，渊以为不可，上怒曰： 卿痴人！不足与计事！ 
现代文：明帝与褚渊谋划诛杀建安王刘休仁，褚渊认为不能那样做，明帝大怒说： 你是个呆子，不足与你共计国家大事。 
English: Emperor Ming and Gongyuan plotted to assassinate Liu Xuren, the king of Jianan. Gongyuan thought it was not possible to do that. Emperor Ming said angrily, "You are an idiot, you are not enough for the national affairs."

古文：渊惧而从命。
现代文：褚渊惧怕，只好从命。
English: Shanyuan was afraid and had to take his own life.

古文：复以渊为吏部尚书。
现代文：于是，明帝再任命褚渊为吏部尚书。
English: As a result, Emperor Ming re-appointed Shanyuan as the head of the Ministry of Civil Affairs.

古文：庚午，以尚书右仆射袁粲为尚书令，褚渊为左仆射。
现代文：庚午，又提升尚书右仆射袁粲为尚书令，褚渊为左仆射。
English: In the afternoon of the 7th day of the 7th month, the right-hand servant of Shang Shu, Yuan Qi, was promoted to Shang Shu Ling, and Yu Yuan was promoted to the left-hand servant of Shang Shu Ling.

古文：上恶太子屯骑校尉寿寂之勇健；会有司奏寂之擅杀逻将，徙越州，于道杀之。
现代文：明帝对太子屯骑校尉寿寂之的勇敢雄健恐惧不安。正巧，有关部门奏报寿寂之擅自诛杀巡逻军官。明帝把寿寂之贬到越州，在途中把他杀掉。
English: Emperor Ming feared and worried about the bravery of the prince's cavalry lieutenant Shou Jaki. It so happened that the relevant departments reported that Shou Jaki had killed a patrol officer without authorization. Emperor Ming sent Shou Jaki to Yuezhou and killed him on the way.

古文：丙戌，追废晋平王休祐为庶人。
现代文：丙戌，将已杀死的晋平王刘休追废为平民。
English: He also abolished Liu Xiu, the murdered King of Jin and Ping, as a commoner.

古文：巴陵王休若至京口，闻建安王死，益惧。
现代文：巴陵王刘休若抵达京口，听到建安王刘休仁被毒死的消息，更加恐惧。
English: If Liu Xiu, the king of Bahrain, arrives in Beijing, he will be even more afraid to hear the news that Liu Xuren, the king of Jian'an, was poisoned to death.

古文：上以休若和厚，能谐缉物情，恐将来倾夺幼主，欲遣使杀之，虑不奉诏；欲征入朝，又恐猜骇。
现代文：明帝认为刘休若性情温和，品格憨厚，能调解纠纷，各方人士对他都十分敬重，害怕他将来有一天夺取幼主刘昱的帝位。明帝原打算派使臣前往诛杀刘休若，怕他拒不从命，打算征召他到朝廷朝见，又怕引起他猜疑震惊。
English: Emperor Ming thought that Liu Xiu Ruo had a gentle disposition, good character, and was able to mediate disputes. People from all sides held him in high esteem, fearing that he would one day seize the throne from his young master Liu Xuan. Emperor Ming originally planned to send envoys to kill Liu Xiu Ruo, fearing that he would refuse to die, intending to summon him to the imperial court, and fearing that he would arouse suspicion and shock.

古文：六月，丁酉，以江州刺史桂阳王休范为南徐州刺史，以休若为江州刺史。
现代文：六月，丁酉，明帝任命江州刺史桂阳王刘休范为南徐州刺史；任命刘休若为江州刺史。
English: In June, Ding Xi, the Ming emperor, appointed Guiyang King Liu Xiufan as the governor of South Xuzhou and appointed Liu Xiuro as the governor of Jiangsu.

古文：手书殷勤，召休若使赴七月七日宴。
现代文：明帝亲笔写信给刘休若，十分亲切地召刘休若前来京师，参加七月七日的皇家盛宴。
English: Emperor Ming personally wrote a letter to Liu Xuruo, very kindly inviting Liu Xuruo to come to Beijing to attend the royal feast on July 7.

古文：丁未，魏主如河西。
现代文：丁未，北魏国主前往河西。
English: Ding Wei, the ruler of the Northern Wei Dynasty, went to Hexi.

古文：秋，七月，巴陵哀王休若至建康；乙丑，赐死于第，赠侍中、司空。
现代文：秋季，七月，巴陵哀王刘休若，抵达建康。乙丑，明帝派人到巴陵王府，命刘休若自杀。追赠刘休若为侍中、司空。
English: In the autumn, in July, Liu Xiu Ruo, the king of Baling, arrived in Jiankang. Second, the Ming Emperor sent someone to the royal palace of Baling and ordered Liu Xiu Ruo to commit suicide. Liu Xiu Ruo was posthumously awarded the title of chamberlain and steward.

古文：复以桂阳王休范为江州刺史。
现代文：再命桂阳王刘休范回任江州刺史。
English: Guiyang King Liu Xiufan was reappointed as the governor of Jiangsu Province.

古文：时上诸弟俱尽，唯休范以人才凡劣，不为上所忌，故得全。
现代文：当时，明帝的所有兄弟全部铲除，只有刘休范因人品低劣，才能平庸，不为明帝所忌患，故得以保全性命。
English: At that time, all of Emperor Ming's brothers were eliminated. Only Liu Xiufan was able to preserve his life because he was of low moral character and could only be mediocre. He was not anathema to Emperor Ming.

古文：沈约论曰： 圣人立法垂制，所以必称先王，盖由遗训馀风，足以贻之来世也。
现代文：沈约论曰：圣人制定法律，建立制度，一定要称引古代明圣君王。其缘故，为的是古代明圣君王遗留下来的教训和风范，足以为后世的榜样。
English: Shen Yu's theory states that sages must have been inspired by the ancient Ming emperors in order to formulate laws and establish systems. This is because the teachings and manners left behind by the ancient Ming emperors are enough to serve as an example for future generations.

古文：太祖经国之义虽弘，隆家之道不足。
现代文：太祖文帝崐治理国家的规划虽然弘大，可是使家族兴隆的办法却有不足。
English: Although the great-great-grandfather Emperor Wen's plan to govern the country was grand, the means to make the family prosper were inadequate.

古文：彭城王照不窥古，徒见昆弟之义，未识君臣之礼，冀以家情行之国道，主猜而犹犯，恩薄而未悟，致以呵训之微行，遂成灭亲之大祸。
现代文：彭城王刘义康对历史一无所知，所以只看到兄弟之情，却不懂君臣之礼，想把家族中的亲情，用于治国之道。人主已经猜忌，他仍然冒犯；宠信已经衰竭，他仍然不醒悟。以致不过犯了只须斥责训诫的小过，却招来杀身灭门之大祸。
English: Liu Yikang, the king of Pengcheng, knew nothing about history, so he only saw brotherly love, but did not understand the courtesies of princes and ministers. He wanted to use the family's affection for the way of governing the country. The master was already suspicious, he still offended; the favorite was exhausted, he still did not wake up. So he only committed a minor offense that only needed to be reprimanded and admonished, but brought about the great disaster of killing himself.

古文：开端树隙，垂之后人。
现代文：开创猜忌的先例，为后人提供了启示。
English: The predecessors planted trees, the successors enjoyed the coolness.

古文：太宗因易隙之情，据已行之典，翦落洪枝，不得顾虑。
现代文：太宗明帝因袭猜忌的心理，依照先例，残杀兄弟，无所顾忌。
English: Taizong Mingdi, because of his suspicious mentality, killed his brother in accordance with precedent, without any scruples.

古文：既而本根无庇，幼主孤立，神器以势弱倾移，灵命随乐推回改，斯盖履霜有渐，坚冰自至，所由远矣！
现代文：随后，朝廷的根本受不到保护，幼主孤孤单单，坐在宝座之上，国家的威严与权柄因皇帝势弱而转移，皇室的命运也随着人心而改变。这就同降霜结冰一样，逐渐形成，原因可追溯到很久以前。
English: Subsequently, the imperial court was not protected at all, the young lord was lonely and sat on the throne, the country's majesty and power shifted due to the emperor's weakness, and the fate of the royal family changed with the hearts of the people. This was gradually formed like frost and ice, and the reasons can be traced back to a long time ago.

古文：裴子野论曰： 夫噬虎之兽，知爱己子；搏狸之鸟，非护异巢。
现代文：裴子野论曰：吞食猛虎的野兽，知道爱它的儿子；搏斗狸猫的飞鸟，不保护异类鸟的巢穴。
English: Peizhino said: The beast that devours a tiger knows how to love its son; the bird that fights a flying fox does not protect the nest of a strange bird.

古文：太宗保字螟蛉，剿拉同气，既迷在原之天属，未识父子之自然。宋德告终，非天废也。
现代文：太宗明帝为了保护他的养子，却屠杀一母同胞兄弟，昏庸无道已极，自然不了解兄弟天性、父子伦常。刘宋统治的败亡，并不是上天之意。
English: In order to protect his adopted son, Emperor Taizong of the Ming Dynasty massacred a mother, a brother and a compatriot. He was so deluded that he did not understand the nature of brothers and the relationship between father and son. The downfall of Liu Song's rule was not God's will.

古文：夫危亡之君，未尝不先弃本枝，妪煦帝孽；推诚嬖狎，疾恶父兄。
现代文：亡国之君，没有一个不是先砍断本枝，而去养育旁枝的。对邪恶的亲信推心置腹，对父亲或兄弟却深恶痛绝。
English: There is no prince of a ruined country who does not first cut off the main branch and nurture the side branches. He is loyal to his evil cronies, but hates his father or brother.

古文：前乘覆车，后来并辔。
现代文：前面的车子翻了，后面的车子仍并驾齐驱。
English: The car in front flipped over, the car behind was still driving side-by-side.

古文：借使叔仲有国，犹不先配天；而它人入室，将七庙绝祀；曾是莫怀，甘心扌前落。
现代文：如果兄弟继承帝位，祖先的灵位仍可配享上天，而他人登上宝座，七座祖庙的祭祀将全部断绝。不将此事挂怀，甘心把本枝一一剪落。
English: If a brother succeeds to the throne, the ancestor's spiritual position can still go to heaven, while someone else ascends to the throne, the seven ancestor temples will all be cut off. Do not worry about this matter, I am willing to cut off this branch one by one.

古文：晋武背文明之托，而覆中州者贾后；太祖弃初宁之誓，而登合殿者元凶。
现代文：晋武帝违背母亲王元姬的托付，结果贾后使中原沉沦。太祖文帝违背初宁陵誓言，结果元凶刘劭登上宝座。
English: Emperor Jinwu violated the entrustment of his mother, Wang Yuanji, and as a result, Empress Jia caused the Central Plains to sink. Grandfather Emperor Wen violated the oath of the Huning Tomb, and as a result, the culprit Liu Ye ascended the throne.

古文：祸福无门，奚其豫择！友于兄弟，不亦安乎！
现代文：祸福无门，哪能事先选择；兄弟相亲相爱，岂不平安！
English: There is no way to choose between good and evil, so how can we choose in advance? Isn't it peaceful to love each other as brothers and sisters?

古文：丙寅，魏主至阴山。
现代文：丙寅，北魏国主抵达阴山。
English: Cui Yin, the ruler of the Northern Wei Dynasty, arrived in Yinshan.

古文：初，吴喜之讨会稽也，言于上曰： 得寻阳王子房及诸贼帅，皆即于东戮之。 
现代文：当初，吴喜讨伐寻阳政权的会稽郡时，报告明帝说： 如果俘虏寻阳王刘子房与贼寇的将领，就在东部当场诛杀。 
English: At the beginning, when Wu Xi was fighting against the Qianyang regime's Qianjin County, he reported to Emperor Ming that: If the captives of Qianyang King Liu Zifang and the generals of the bandits are captured, they will be killed on the spot in the east.

古文：既而生送子房，释顾琛等。
现代文：后来活捉了刘子房，押送建康，并释放了吴郡太守顾琛等。
English: Later, Liu Zifang was captured alive, Jiankang was escorted away, and Wu County Governor Gu Yao was released.

古文：上以其新立大功，不问，而心衔之。
现代文：明帝因吴喜刚刚建立大功，没有追究，但内心深为痛恨。
English: Emperor Ming did not investigate Wu Xi because he had just made a great achievement, but he deeply hated him.

古文：及克荆州，剽掠，赃以万计。
现代文：等到攻克荆州，吴喜大肆抢劫，贪赃以万计。
English: By the time he conquered Jingzhou, Wu Xi had carried out large-scale robberies.

古文：寿寂之死，喜为淮陵太守，督豫州诸军事，闻之，内惧，启乞中散大夫，上尤疑骇。
现代文：寿寂之被诛杀时，吴喜正任淮陵太守，督豫州诸军事，得到消息，十分恐惧，上书明帝请求调任中散大夫，明帝大起疑心。
English: When Shoujia was killed, Wu Xizheng, who was the governor of Huairing and the military commander of Yuzhou, was very frightened when he received the news. He sent a letter to Emperor Ming requesting to be transferred to Dr. Zhongshan. Emperor Ming became very suspicious.

古文：或谮萧道成在淮阴有贰心于魏，上封银壶酒，使喜自持赐道成。
现代文：这时，有人暗中指控萧道成在淮阴私通北魏。明帝用银壶装酒，加上封条，派吴喜亲自送给萧道成。
English: At this time, someone secretly accused Xiao Daocheng of having an illicit affair in Huaiyin in the Northern Wei Dynasty. Emperor Ming personally sent Wu Xi to Xiao Daocheng with a silver pot of wine and a seal.

古文：道成惧，欲逃，喜以情告道成，且先为之饮，道成即饮之。
现代文：萧道成惊恐，打算逃走，吴喜把实情告诉萧道成，并且先饮下一些，萧道成才敢喝下。
English: Xiao Daocheng panicked and planned to run away. Wu Xi told Xiao Daocheng the truth and drank some water before Xiao Daocheng dared to drink.

古文：喜还朝，保证道成。
现代文：吴喜回到京师，向皇上保证萧道成忠贞。
English: Wu Xi returned to Beijing to assure the emperor of Xiao Daoreng's loyalty.

古文：或密以启上，上以喜多计数，素得人情，恐其不能事幼主；乃召喜入内殿，与共言谑甚款。
现代文：然而，有人秘密检举，明帝认为吴喜计谋太多，而又素有人缘，恐怕不能侍奉幼主，于是召吴喜到后宫内殿，纵情闲谈，间或打趣开开玩笑，十分亲密。
English: However, someone secretly reported that Emperor Ming thought that Wu Xi was too scheming and popular to be able to serve his young master, so he summoned Wu Xi to the inner palace of the harem, indulged in gossip, occasionally joked and joked, and was very intimate.

古文：既出，赐以名馔。寻赐死，然犹发诏赙赐。
现代文：吴喜告辞出来，明帝又赏赐给他名菜，接着命他自杀，但仍下诏颁发丧葬费用。
English: Wu Xi resigned, and Emperor Ming gave him a famous dish, then ordered him to commit suicide, but still issued an edict to pay the funeral expenses.

古文：又与刘勔等诏曰： 吴喜轻狡万端，苟取物情。
现代文：明帝又下诏刘等人，解释杀吴喜的原因说： 吴喜轻浮狡狯，变化万端，专会收买人心。
English: Emperor Ming also issued an edict to Liu and others, explaining the reason for killing Wu Xi, saying: Wu Xi is frivolous and cunning, ever-changing, and specializes in bribing people's hearts.

古文：昔大明中，黟、歙有亡命数千人，攻县邑，杀官长，刘子尚遣三千精甲讨之，再往失利。
现代文：从前，大明年间，黟县、歙县有亡命徒数千人，攻击县城，杀戮官员，刘子尚派三千精锐部队前去讨伐，但两次都被击败。
English: Once upon a time, during the Chinese New Year, there were thousands of exiles in Handan and Handan counties who attacked the county seat and killed officials. Liu Zichang sent three thousand elite troops to fight, but they were defeated both times.

古文：孝武以喜将数十人至县，说诱群贼，贼即归降。
现代文：孝武帝命吴喜率领几十人抵达县城，游说诱降群贼，群贼立即归降。
English: Emperor Xiaowu ordered Wu Xi to lead dozens of people to arrive at the county seat to persuade the bandits to surrender. The bandits immediately surrendered.

古文：诡数幻惑，乃能如此。
现代文：诡秘蛊惑之人，才能如崐此。
English: It takes a conniving, manipulative person to do something like this.

古文：及泰始初东讨，止有三百人，直造三吴，凡再经薄战，而自破冈以东至海十郡，无不清荡。
现代文：到了泰始初年，命吴喜东征，他只带三百人，竟能直入三吴，经过两次小小的搏战，自破冈以东，直至大海，共十郡，全部荡平。
English: In the first year of the Taizhi era, Wu Xi was ordered to march to the east. With only three hundred men, he was able to march straight into Sanwu. After two small battles, from the east of the Broken Hill to the sea, a total of ten counties were leveled.

古文：百姓闻吴河东来，便望风自退；若非积取三吴人情，何以得弭伏如此！
现代文：百姓听说吴喜到来，都望风自退，如果不是多年来赢得三吴人士的感情，怎么能使他们如此心服。
English: When the people heard of Wu Xi's arrival, they all hoped for the wind to recede. If they had not won the feelings of the people of Sanwu over the years, how could they have been so convinced?

古文：寻喜心迹，岂可奉守文之主，遭国家可乘之会邪！
现代文：探寻吴喜的心迹，绝不会尊奉正统君主，而坐失千载难篷的良机！
English: Exploring the heart of Wu Xi, will never honor the legitimate monarch, and miss the golden opportunity!

古文：譬如饵药，当人羸冷，资散石以全身，及热势发动，去坚积以止患，非忘其功，势不获已耳。 
现代文：譬如吃药，当人发冷时，应服热身之药；当人发热时，应服退热之药。并非忘掉他的功劳，而属迫不得已罢了。 
English: For example, when taking medicine, when a person feels cold, he should take medicine to warm up; when a person feels hot, he should take medicine to cool down. It is not to forget his merits, but it is a matter of necessity.

古文：戊寅，以淮阴为北兗州，征萧道成入朝。
现代文：戊寅，刘宋把淮阴划归北兖州，征召萧道成回京。
English: Wu Yin and Liu Song transferred Huaiyin to Beilun Prefecture, and called Xiao Daocheng back to Beijing.

古文：道成所亲以朝廷方诛大臣，劝勿就征，道成曰： 诸卿殊不见事！主上自以太子稚弱，翦除诸弟，何预它人！
现代文：萧道成的亲信认为，朝廷正在诛杀大臣，劝萧道成拒绝征召。萧道成说： 你们还没有看透当前的形势，皇上只因为太子年纪太小，所以把兄弟一一翦除，跟别人无关。
English: Xiao Daocheng's close confidants believed that the imperial court was trying to kill the minister and persuade Xiao Daocheng to refuse to be conscripted. Xiao Daocheng said: You have not seen through the current situation. The emperor only removed the brothers one by one because the prince was too young. It had nothing to do with others.

古文：今唯应速发；淹留顾望，必将见疑。
现代文：现在必须立即出发，稍微延误观望，一定受到猜疑。
English: Now it is necessary to leave immediately, to wait a little longer, to be suspected.

古文：且骨肉相残，自非灵长之祚，祸难将兴，方与卿等戮力耳。 
现代文：而且，骨肉相残，政权势必难以长久，大祸将临，各位要与我同心协力。 
English: Moreover, flesh and blood are hostile to each other, the regime is bound to be short-lived, and a great calamity is imminent. Everyone should work together with me.

古文：既至，拜散骑常侍、太子左卫率。
现代文：回京师之后，明帝任命萧道成为散骑常侍、太子左卫率。
English: After returning to Beijing, Emperor Ming appointed Xiao Dao to be a knight-errant and prince's bodyguard.

古文：八月，丁亥，魏主还平城。
现代文：八月，丁亥，北魏国主返回平城。
English: In August, Dinghai, the ruler of Northern Wei returned to Pingcheng.

古文：戊子，以皇子跻继江夏文献王义恭。
现代文：戊子，明帝把皇子刘跻过继给江夏文献王刘义恭。
English: According to legend, Emperor Ming passed Prince Liu to Jiangxia Literature King Liu Yigong.

古文：庚寅，上疾有间，大赦。
现代文：庚寅，明帝病势转轻，宣布大赦。
English: Gyeongin, Myeongdeok's condition improves, amnesty announced.

古文：戊戌，立皇子淮为安成王，实桂阳王休范之子也。
现代文：戊戌，明帝封皇子刘准为安成王。刘准实际上是桂阳王刘休范的儿子。
English: According to the legend, Liu Jun, the son of Emperor Wu of the Ming Dynasty, was crowned King Ancheng. In fact, Liu Jun was the son of Guiyang King Liu Xuan.

古文：魏显祖聪睿夙成，刚毅有断，而好黄、老、浮屠之学。每引朝士及沙门共谈玄理，雅薄富贵，常有遗世之心。
现代文：北魏献文帝拓跋弘从小就聪明睿智，刚毅果断，爱好黄老哲学和佛学，每次接见朝廷官员及和尚僧侣，共同谈玄论理，对世俗的荣华富贵，非常淡泊鄙薄，时常有离家修行的想法。
English: Northern Wei Emperor Tuoba Hong was clever and wise from an early age, strong and decisive, fond of ancient philosophy and Buddhism. Every time he met with court officials and monks, they talked about occult theories. He was very indifferent to worldly glory and wealth, and often had the idea of leaving home to practice.

古文：以叔父中都大官京兆王子推沉雅仁厚，素有时誉，欲禅以帝位。
现代文：认为叔父中都大官、京兆王拓跋子推沉稳文雅仁厚，一向有较高的声誉，打算把帝位禅让给他。
English: He thought that his uncle, the Beijing magistrate Wang Tuobaozi, was stable, elegant and benevolent, and had always had a high reputation. He planned to give him the imperial throne.

古文：时太尉源贺督诸军屯漠南，驰传召之。
现代文：当时，太尉源贺率各军驻防漠南，献文帝迅速传召他回京。
English: At that time, the Tai Li Yuan He led the army stationed in the south of the desert, and Emperor Xianwen quickly summoned him back to Beijing.

古文：既至，会公卿大议，皆莫敢先言。
现代文：源贺抵达时，正举行公卿会议，没有一个人敢先发言。
English: When Genga arrived, a meeting of court nobles was being held, and no one dared to speak first.

古文：任城王云，子推之弟也，对曰： 陛下方隆太平，临覆四海，岂得上违宗庙，下弃兆民。
现代文：任城王拓跋云是拓跋子推的弟弟，他说： 陛下正逢太平盛世，君临四海，怎么可以对上违背祖宗，对下抛弃人民。
English: The king of the city, Tuoba Yun, was the younger brother of Tuoba Zixing. He said, "Your majesty is in a time of peace and prosperity, reigning over the four seas. How can you go against your ancestors and abandon the people?

古文：且父子相传，其来久矣。
现代文：而且，父子相传，由来已久。
English: Moreover, it has been handed down from father to son for a long time.

古文：陛下必欲委弃尘务，则皇太子宜承正统。
现代文：陛下一定要放弃尘世上的俗务，那么皇太子理应继承大统。
English: His Majesty must give up worldly affairs, so the crown prince should inherit the throne.

古文：夫天下者，祖宗之天下。陛下若更授旁支，恐非先圣之意。启奸乱之心，斯乃祸福之原，不可不惧也。 
现代文：天下是祖先的天下，陛下如果把朝廷授予旁支，恐怕不是明圣祖先的本意，将要引起奸人的乱心，这是祸福的源头，不可不格外谨慎。 
English: The world is the world of the ancestors. If Your Majesty were to assign the imperial court to a side branch, I am afraid it would not be the intention of the holy ancestors. It would cause confusion in the hearts of traitors. This is the source of misfortune and blessing. We must be extremely cautious.

古文：源贺曰： 陛下今欲禅位皇叔，臣恐紊乱昭穆，后世必有逆祀之讥。愿深思任城之言。 
现代文：源贺说： 陛下现今打算禅位给皇叔，我深恐扰乱皇家祖庙祭祀的顺序，后世将讥讽我们逆祀。请三思任城王之言。 
English: Genga said, "Your Majesty is now planning to give the throne to your uncle. I am deeply afraid of disturbing the order of the royal ancestral temple's rituals. Future generations will ridicule us for worshipping the wrong way. Please think twice about what the king of the city has said."

古文：东阳公丕等曰： 皇太子虽圣德早彰，然实冲幼。陛下富于春秋，始览万机，奈何欲隆独善，不以天下为心，其若宗庙何！
现代文：东阳公拓跋丕等说： 皇太子虽然神圣恩德早已显彰，但年龄实在太小，而陛下正当壮年，刚开始亲自主持朝政，为何只顾独善其身，不把天下放在心上？
English: Dongyang Gongtuo et al. said: Although the crown prince's sacred grace has long been prominent, he is too young, and His Majesty is in his prime and has just begun to personally govern the court. Why does he only care about himself and not about the world?

古文：其若亿兆何！ 
现代文：如果那样的话，皇家祖庙将怎么办，亿万人民将怎么办！ 
English: If that were the case, what would happen to the Imperial Ancestral Temple, what would happen to hundreds of millions of people!

古文：尚书陆馛曰： 陛下若舍皇太子，更方诸王，臣请刎颈殿庭，不敢奉诏！ 
现代文：尚书陆说崐： 陛下若舍弃太子，传位亲王，我宁可在金銮殿上自刎，也不敢奉诏。 
English: Shang Shul said, "If Your Majesty abandons the crown prince and passes on the throne, I would rather commit suicide in the Golden Pavilion than carry out the edict."

古文：帝怒，变色；以问宦者选部尚书酒泉赵黑，黑曰： 臣以死奉戴皇太子，不知其它！ 
现代文：献文帝沉默不语。
English: Emperor Xianwen was silent.

古文：帝默然，时太子宏生五年矣，帝以其幼，故欲传位子推。
现代文：这一年，皇太子拓跋宏仅仅五岁。献文帝因他太小，所以准备传位给拓跋子推。
English: In this year, Crown Prince Tuoba Hong was only five years old. Emperor Xianwen, because he was too young, was preparing to pass the throne to Tuoba Hong.

古文：中书令高允曰： 臣不敢多言，愿陛下上思宗庙托付之重，追念周公抱成王之事。 
现代文：中书令高允说： 我不敢多言，愿陛下不忘祖先托付之重，而追念周公辅佐幼主成王的故事。 
English: In the letter, Gao Yun said: I dare not say more. May His Majesty not forget the heavy burden entrusted to him by his ancestors, but remember the story of Zhou Guo Zuo, the young prince who became king.

古文：帝乃曰： 然则立太子，郡公辅之，有何不可！ 
现代文：献文帝说： 那么，让皇太子登基，由各位辅佐，有何不可！ 
English: Emperor Xianwen said: Then, why not let the crown prince ascend to the throne, assisted by everyone!

古文：又曰： 陆馛，直臣也，必能保吾子。 
现代文：又说： 陆是忠直之臣，一定能保护我的儿子。 
English: He also said: Lu is a loyal and upright vassal and will definitely be able to protect my son.

古文：乃以馛为太保，与源贺持节奉皇帝玺绂传位于太子。
现代文：于是任命陆为太保，与源贺一同持节，把皇帝的玉玺呈献给皇太子拓跋宏。
English: So he appointed Lu as Taiho, and together with Geng He, they celebrated the festival and presented the emperor's jade scepter to Crown Prince Tuoba.

古文：丙午，高祖即皇帝位，大赦，改元延兴。
现代文：丙午，高祖孝文帝即位，宣布大赦，改年号为延兴。
English: In the afternoon of the third day, Emperor Gaozu Xiaowen ascended the throne, announced an amnesty, and changed the year name to Yanxing.

古文：高祖幼有至性，前年，显祖病痈，高祖新吮。
现代文：孝文帝从小就感情丰富，两年前，献文帝身上长疮，孝文帝亲自用嘴为父亲吮脓。
English: Emperor Xiaowen has been emotionally rich since childhood. Two years ago, Emperor Xianwen developed sores on his body, and Emperor Xiaowen himself used his mouth to comfort his father.

古文：及受禅，悲泣不自胜。
现代文：等到接受父亲的禅让，悲痛哭泣，不能自胜。
English: Waiting to accept his father's offer, he wept bitterly, unable to help himself.

古文：显祖问其故，对曰： 代亲之感，内切于心。 
现代文：献文帝问他缘故，他回答说： 接替父亲的位置，内心非常痛切。 
English: When the emperor asked him why, he replied, "I am very anxious to take over my father's position.

古文：丁未，显祖下诏曰： 朕希心玄古，志存淡泊，爰命储宫践升大位，朕得优游恭己，栖心浩然。 
现代文：丁未，献文帝下诏说： 朕向往太古生活，志向恬淡，不图名利，特命太子升为皇帝，朕只求悠闲自得，修身养性。 
English: Ding Wei, Emperor Xianwen issued a decree saying: I yearn for the ancient life, aspire to be modest, do not seek fame and fortune, specially appointed the crown prince to become emperor, I only seek leisure and self-sufficiency, self-cultivation and self-improvement.

古文：群臣奏曰： 昔汉高祖称皇帝，尊其父为太上皇，明不统天下也。
现代文：文武官员上奏说： 从前，汉高祖刘邦当了皇帝，尊称他的父亲为太上皇，表明并非自己统治天下。
English: "Once upon a time, Liu Bang, the ancestor of the Han Dynasty, became emperor. He referred to his father as the last emperor, indicating that he did not rule the world by himself.

古文：今皇帝幼冲，万机大政，犹宜陛下总之。谨上尊号曰太上皇帝。 
现代文：而今，皇上年纪幼小，朝廷大政仍宜由陛下掌管，谨恭上尊号太上皇帝。 
English: However, now that the Emperor is still young, it is still appropriate for His Majesty to be in charge of the great affairs of the Imperial Court, and I respectfully grant His Majesty the title of "Emperor."

古文：显祖从之。
现代文：献文帝同意。
English: The emperor agreed.

古文：己酉，上皇徙居崇光宫，采椽不斫，土阶而已；国之大事咸以闻。
现代文：己酉，太上皇帝迁到崇光宫居住，用刚刚采来未经砍伐的木材为房椽，台阶仍为土质，朝廷大事，仍向他请示。
English: When the emperor's mother-in-law moved to live in the Sogo Palace, she used freshly harvested, uncut wood for the eaves, the steps were still earthen, and she still asked him for advice on important matters of the imperial court.

古文：崇光宫在北苑中，又建鹿野浮图于苑中之西山，与禅僧居之。
现代文：崇光宫在北苑中，又在苑中西山兴建佛教寺庙，名叫鹿野浮图，让和尚僧侣居住。
English: Soguanggong was built in the middle of the North Garden, and a Buddhist temple, called Shikano Fudoh, was built on the West Hill in the middle of the garden for monks to live in.

古文：冬，十月，魏沃野、统万二镇敕勒叛，遣太尉源贺帅众讨之；降二千馀落，追击馀党至枹罕、金城，大破之，斩首八千馀级，虏男女万馀口，杂畜三万馀头。
现代文：冬季，十月，北魏沃野、统万二镇所辖的敕勒部落叛乱，派太尉源贺率军讨伐，接受两千多个帐篷的居民投降，追击残余势力。追到罕、金城时，大破敕勒军，杀八千余人，俘虏男女一万余人，牲畜三万余头。
English: In the winter, in October, when the Mullahs' tribe rebelled in the North Wei, Wano, and Tongwan 2 towns, he sent Lieutenant Yuan He to lead the army to fight. He accepted the surrender of more than two thousand tents and pursued the remaining forces. When he chased them to Han and Jincheng, he defeated the Mullahs' army, killed more than eight thousand people, captured more than ten thousand men and women, and more than thirty thousand head of livestock.

古文：诏贺都督三道诸军，屯于漠南。
现代文：孝文帝下诏，命源贺统领三路的几支军队，驻扎沙漠之南。
English: Emperor Xiaowen decreed that General He, the source of his life, would lead three armies, stationed in the south of the desert.

古文：先是，魏每岁秋、冬发军，三道并出，以备柔然，春中乃还。
现代文：在此之前，北魏每年秋冬之季，分东、中、西三路同时发兵，防备柔然汗国的入侵，直到次年春季中期，才撤退。
English: Prior to this, in the autumn and winter season of each year, the Northern Wei Dynasty sent troops simultaneously to the east, middle and west to prevent the invasion of the Khanate of Rouen, and did not withdraw until the middle of the following spring.

古文：贺以为： 往来疲劳，不可支久；请募诸州镇武健者三万馀人，筑三城以处之，使冬则讲武，春则耕种。 
现代文：源贺认为： 如此一往一来，士卒疲惫不堪，无法长期保持斗志。请求招募各州、镇壮士三万余人，沿边兴筑三座城，让他们据守，冬季练兵，春季种地。 
English: Genga thought: If this continues, the soldiers will be exhausted and unable to maintain their fighting spirit for a long time. He requested the recruitment of more than 30,000 strong men from each prefecture and town, and the construction of three cities along the border, so that they could defend themselves, train soldiers in the winter, and farm in the spring.

古文：不从。
现代文：朝廷不准。
English: Le Zhu Rong did not listen.

古文：庚寅，魏以南安王桢为都督凉州及西戎诸军事，领护西域校尉，镇凉州。
现代文：庚寅，北魏任命南安王拓跋桢为都督凉州及西戎诸军事，兼护西域校尉，镇守凉州。
English: In the Northern Wei Dynasty, King Tuobao of Nan'an was appointed as the governor of Liangzhou and the military commander of the Western Military Region, as well as the lieutenant of the Western Military Region and the town guard of Liangzhou.

古文：上命北琅邪、兰陵二郡太守垣崇祖经略淮北，崇祖自郁洲将数百人入魏境七百里，据蒙山。
现代文：刘宋明帝命北琅邪、兰陵二郡太守垣崇祖，策划收复淮河以北。垣崇祖率领数百人，从郁州出发，深入北魏七百里，占领蒙山。
English: Liu Song Ming's Emperor ordered the two counties of Lanling and Beibei to be recaptured north of the Huaihe River by the governor of the two counties, Gao Chongzu. Gao Chongzu led hundreds of people from Yuzhou, seven hundred miles deep into the Northern Wei Dynasty, to occupy Mengshan.

古文：十一月，魏东兗州刺史于洛侯击之，崇祖引还。
现代文：十一月，北魏东兖州刺史于洛侯反攻，垣崇祖带兵撤回。
English: In November, the Northern Wei's East Bozhou Province launched a counter-offensive against Luohu, and the troops led by Qi Chongzu retreated.

古文：上以故第为湘宫寺，备极壮丽；欲造十级浮图而不能，乃分为二。
现代文：明帝把原来的府邸改为庙院，称湘宫寺，装潢修建，极为壮观华丽。准备兴建十层佛塔，不能成功，于是便修成两座。
English: Emperor Ming changed the original mansion into a temple, called Xianggu Temple, which was decorated and built, extremely spectacular and gorgeous. Preparations to build a ten-story pagoda were not successful, so it was rebuilt into two.

古文：新安太守巢尚之罢郡入见，上谓曰： 卿至湘宫寺未？
现代文：新安太守巢尚之解除职务后，回京朝见，明帝对他说： 你去过湘宫寺没有？
English: When Emperor Ming met Emperor Anta after Emperor Anta had relieved Emperor Shang of his duties, Emperor Ming said to Emperor Anta, "Have you been to Xianggong Temple?

古文：此是我大功德，用钱不少。 
现代文：那可是我的大功德，花费不少钱。 
English: That's my big thing, spending a lot of money.

古文：通直散骑侍郎会稽虞愿侍侧，曰： 此皆百姓卖儿贴妇钱所为，佛若有知，当慈悲嗟愍；罪高浮图，何功德之有！ 
现代文：通直散骑侍郎会稽人虞愿正在一边侍立，说： 那是百姓用卖子、卖妻的钱所建造的，佛陀如果有灵，会慈悲为怀，哭泣哀叹。罪恶高过佛塔，有什么功德！ 
English: "It was built by the common people with money from selling their sons and wives. If Buddha had a soul, he would be compassionate, weep and lament. Sin is taller than the pagoda, what merit is there?

古文：侍坐者失色；上怒，使人驱下殿。
现代文：在座的人脸色全都大变，明帝大怒，命人把虞愿驱逐出殿。
English: The faces of all those present changed dramatically. Emperor Ming was furious and ordered someone to expel Guo Zhen from the palace.

古文：愿徐去，无异容。
现代文：虞愿慢慢离开，没有恐惧的表情。
English: Yu is willing to leave slowly, with no expression of fear.

古文：上好围棋，棋甚拙，与第一品彭城丞王抗围棋，抗每假借之，曰： 皇帝飞棋，臣抗不能断。
现代文：明帝爱下围棋，但棋艺非常拙劣，常跟围棋国手彭城丞王抗对弈。王抗只好常常暗中让他，说： 皇上一飞，臣无法切断。 
English: Emperor Ming loved to play Go, but his chess skills were very poor. He often played against the national Go player, Peng Cheng Rong Wang Rong. Wang Rong often had to secretly let him play, saying, "Once the emperor flies, the vassal cannot cut him off."

古文：上终不悟，好之愈笃。
现代文：明帝始终不知内情，对围棋越发爱不释手。
English: Emperor Ming did not know the inside story all the time, and he loved Go more and more.

古文：愿又曰： 尧以此教丹硃，非人主所宜好也。 
现代文：虞愿又说： 这是尧用来教他儿子丹朱的玩艺儿，不是人主所应该嗜好的。 
English: Yu Zhen also said: This is a toy that Zou uses to teach his son, Dan Zhu, and is not a hobby that a human owner should indulge in.

古文：上虽怒甚，以愿王国旧臣，每优容之。
现代文：明帝怒不可遏，但由于虞愿是自己任亲王时的旧属，所以总是非常宽容他。
English: Emperor Ming was furious, but because he was an old relative of Gu Zheng when he was a prince, he was always very tolerant of him.

古文：王景文常以盛满为忧，屡辞位任，上不许。
现代文：王景文一直为家门富贵过分而深感忧虑，屡次辞让官职，明帝都不准许。
English: Wang Jingwen has always been deeply worried about the excessive wealth of his family, and has repeatedly resigned from his official position, but Emperor Ming did not allow it.

古文：然中心以景文外戚贵盛，张永累经军旅，疑其将来难信，乃自为谣言曰： 一士不可亲，弓长射杀人。 
现代文：然而，明帝内心却因王景文是皇家外戚，地位高贵，家族昌盛，而孝昌侯张永长期率领大军，怀疑他们将来难以信任，于是，亲自写首歌谣： 一士不可亲，弓长射杀人。 
English: However, in the heart of the Ming Emperor, because Wang Jingwen was a royal relative, with a noble status and a prosperous family, and Xiaochang Hou Zhang Yong led a large army for a long time, he suspected that they would be difficult to trust in the future, so he personally wrote a song: "One must not be intimate, the long bow shoots murder."

古文：景文弥惧，自表解扬州，情甚切至。
现代文：王景文越发恐惧，再一次上书请求辞去扬州刺史，情意十分恳切。
English: Wang Jingwen became more and more afraid, and once again sent a letter requesting to resign from the post of Yangzhou governor, his feelings were very sincere.

古文：诏报曰： 人居贵要，但问心若为耳。
现代文：明帝下诏回答说： 一个人身居尊贵、重要职位，只要看他存心如何罢了。
English: Emperor Ming issued an edict in reply: "If a person holds an honorable and important position, it just depends on how he intends to use it.

古文：大明之世，巢、徐、二戴，位不过执戟，权亢人主。
现代文：大明之世，巢尚之、徐爰、戴法兴、戴明宝官职不过是个手持长矛的侍从，其权力竟大于人主。
English: In the world of Daiming, officials such as Shanzhi NEST, Xu Rong, Dai Faxing, and Deming Bao were mere attendants with spears, but their power was greater than that of their masters.

古文：今袁粲作仆射领选，而人往往不知有粲，粲迁为令，居之不疑；人情向粲，淡然亦复不改常日。以此居贵位要任，当有致忧竞不？
现代文：而今，袁粲任仆射兼管吏部，人们往往不知道袁粲是谁？袁粲提升为尚书令，他并没有丝毫猜疑，人们都亲近他，而他淡漠得跟平常一样，以这种态度身居高位重职，难道会感到惶惶不安？
English: But now, with Yuan Shao in the position of minion and administrator, people often do not know who Yuan Shao is. Yuan Shao was promoted to Shang Shuling, he did not have the slightest doubt, people were close to him, and he was indifferent as usual. With this attitude in a high-ranking and important position, would he feel panicked?

古文：夫贵高有危殆之惧，卑贱有填壑之忧，有心于避祸，不如无心于任运。
现代文：高贵固然有倾危的恐惧，卑贱也会有被填沟壑的忧虑。用尽心机避祸，不如不用心机，听候命运的安排，兴衰存亡，道理相同。 
English: Of course, the nobility has the fear of peril, and the lowly will also have the anxiety of being filled with ditches. It is better to use all your heart to avoid disaster than not to use your heart, to listen to the arrangement of fate, to rise and fall, and to survive, the same reason.

古文：存亡之要，巨细一揆耳。 太宗明皇帝下泰豫元年
现代文：泰豫元年春季正月，甲寅朔，刘宋明帝因患病很久，不能痊愈，于是改年号泰豫。
English: In the first month of the year of Taiyuan in the spring of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the

古文：春，正月，甲寅朔，上以疾久不平，改元。
现代文：戊午，皇太子刘昱在东宫接见四方前来朝贺的官员，并接受各地方的贡品及报告。
English: In the afternoon, Crown Prince Liu Bei received officials from the four regions at the East Palace, and accepted tributes and reports from all over the country.

古文：戊午，皇太子会四方朝贺者于东宫，并受贡计。
现代文：太阳蛮酋长桓诞，率领沔水以北，水、叶县以南，共计八万余帐落，投降北魏。
English: The Sun Barbarian chieftain, Huan Guo, led a total of more than 80,000 clans north of Surabaya and south of Sui and Ye counties to surrender to the Northern Wei Dynasty.

古文：大阳蛮酋桓诞拥沔水以北、滍、叶以南八万馀落降于魏，自云桓玄之子，亡匿蛮中，以智略为群蛮所宗。
现代文：桓诞自称是桓玄的儿子，当初逃到蛮族居住的山区，用他的智慧和谋略，受到各蛮族部落的推崇。北魏任命桓诞为征南将军、东荆州刺史，封襄阳王。
English: Huan Zhao claimed to be the son of Huan Xuan. He initially fled to the mountains where the barbarians lived. With his wisdom and strategy, he was respected by the barbarian tribes. The Northern Wei Dynasty appointed Huan Zhao as the general of the Southern Expedition, the governor of East Jingzhou, and the king of Xiangyang.

古文：魏以诞为征南将军、东荆州刺史、襄阳王，听自选郡县吏；使起部郎京兆韦珍与诞安集新民，区置诸事，皆得其所。
现代文：授权给他，可自己挑选郡太守、县令。朝廷派起部郎、京兆人韦珍同桓诞一起安抚慰问新居民，处理各种事务，安排得很适当。
English: Authorized to him, he can choose the county governor and county magistrate himself. The imperial court sent Kichiburo, Jinghao man Wei Zhen and Huan Xue to appease and comfort the new residents and deal with various affairs, and the arrangement was very appropriate.

古文：二月，柔然侵魏，上皇遣将击之；柔然走。
现代文：二月，柔然汗国南下侵北魏。北魏太上皇派将领迎战，柔然军撤退。
English: In February, the Khanate of Juran went south to invade the Northern Wei. The Northern Wei Emperor sent generals to meet the battle, and the Juran army retreated.

古文：东部敕勒叛奔柔然，上皇自将追之，至石碛，不及而还。
现代文：东部敕勒部落叛变，投奔柔然汗国，太上皇亲自率军追击，追到石碛，没有追上，回师。
English: The eastern Zhele tribe mutinied and fled to the Khanate of Juren. The Emperor personally led an army to chase them. They chased them to Shijiazhuang, but did not catch them and returned to their division.

古文：上疾笃，虑晏驾之后，皇后临朝，江安懿侯王景文以元舅之势，必为宰相，门族强盛，或有异图。
现代文：刘宋明帝病情加重，考虑到死后，皇后王贞风一定临朝主政，而她的哥哥江安侯王景文以国舅的势力非当宰相不可，王氏家族强大，可能会有篡位的想法。
English: Emperor Liu Songming's condition worsened, considering that after his death, Empress Wang Zhenfeng would definitely take over the imperial government, and her brother, Prince Wang Jingwen of Jiang'an, would inevitably become the prime minister with the power of his uncle. The Wang family was powerful and might have the idea of usurping the throne.

古文：己未，遣使赍药赐景文死，手敕曰： 与卿周旋，欲全卿门户，故有此处分。 
现代文：己未，明帝派人送毒药给王景文命他自杀，并亲写诏书说： 我与你为多年朋友，为了保全王家一门，所以做出这个决定。 
English: Not long after, Emperor Ming sent someone to poison Wang Jingwen and ordered him to commit suicide, and personally wrote an edict saying: I have been friends with you for many years, in order to preserve the royal family, so I made this decision.

古文：敕至，景文正与客棋，叩函看已，复置局下，神色不变，方与客思行争劫。
现代文：使节到时，王景文正与客人下围棋，打开封套看罢，放到棋盘下，神色不变，正想着与客人争先打劫。
English: When the envoy arrived, Wang Jingwen was playing Go with his guest. He opened the envelope, looked at it, and put it under the board. His expression did not change. He was thinking about competing with his guest to rob the house first.

古文：局竟，敛子内奁毕，徐曰： 奉敕见赐以死。 
现代文：一盘棋下完，把棋子收到盒内，王景文慢慢地说： 接到圣旨，命我自尽。 
English: After finishing a game of chess and receiving the pieces into the box, Wang Jingwen said slowly: "I have received the sacred will, I am ordered to commit suicide."

古文：方以敕示客。
现代文：这才把明帝的亲笔诏书拿给客人看。
English: It was only then that Emperor Ming's autographed edict was shown to the guests.

古文：中直兵焦度赵智略愤怒，曰： 大丈夫安能坐受死！州中文武数百，足以一奋。 
现代文：中直兵焦度、赵智略非常愤怒，说： 大丈夫怎么能坐以待毙，州中文武官员数百人，足可以一拼。 
English: Zhao Zhiliu was very angry, saying: "How can an able-bodied man sit still? There are hundreds of Chinese military officials in the state, and they can fight it out.

古文：景文曰： 知卿至心；若见念者，为我百口计。 
现代文：王景文说： 我知道你们的心，如果要想帮助我，应当为我家男女老少一百余口想一想！ 
English: Wang Jingwen said, "I know your hearts. If you want to help me, you should think about the more than one hundred men, women and children in my family!"

古文：乃作墨启答敕致谢，饮药而卒。
现代文：于是研墨写奏，回敬诏书，引罪自责，饮药身亡。
English: As a result, he studied ink writing, returned the imperial rescript, self-condemned himself, drank medicine and died.

古文：赠开府仪同三司。
现代文：明帝下诏追赠王景文为开府仪同三司。
English: Emperor Ming decreed that Wang Jingwen be posthumously awarded the title of Kaifu Yi Tong San Shi.

古文：上梦有人告曰： 豫章太守刘愔反。 
现代文：明帝梦见有人报告他说： 豫章太守刘谋反。 
English: In his dream, Emperor Ming saw someone report to him: "Yuzhang Daju Liu is plotting a rebellion.

古文：既寤，遣人就郡杀之。
现代文：梦醒后，派人前往郡城，杀了刘。
English: After waking up, he sent someone to the county seat to kill Liu.

古文：魏显祖还平城。
现代文：北魏献文帝返回平城。
English: Emperor Xianwen of the Northern Wei Dynasty returned to Pingcheng.

古文：庚午，魏主耕籍田。
现代文：庚午，北魏国主亲自主持耕田仪式。
English: In the late afternoon, the Northern Wei sovereign himself presided over the farmland ceremony.

古文：夏，四月，以垣崇祖行徐州事，徙戍龙沮。
现代文：夏季，四月，任命垣崇祖为代理徐州事，迁往龙沮戍守。
English: In the summer, in April, he appointed Gao Chongzu as the acting governor of Xuzhou and moved to Longshui.

古文：己亥，上大渐，以江州刺史桂阳王休范为司空，又以尚书右仆射褚渊为护军将军，加中领军刘勔右仆射，诏渊、勔与尚书令袁粲、荆州刺史蔡兴宗、郢州刺史沈攸之并受顾命。
现代文：己亥，明帝病危，任命江州刺史、桂阳王刘休范为司空，又命尚书右仆射褚渊为护军将军，加授中领军刘为右仆射。下诏指定褚渊、刘和尚书令袁粲、荆州刺史蔡兴宗、郢州刺史沈攸之同时接受托孤遗命。
English: When Emperor Ming was critically ill, he appointed Jiangzhou Shishi and Guiyang King Liu Xiufan as his subordinate generals, and also ordered Shangshu's right-hand man, Yaoyuan, to be the general to protect the army, and promoted Liu, the leader of the Central Army, to be his right-hand man. The following edict specified that Yaoyuan, Liu and Shishi Yuan Jun, Jingzhou Shishi Cai Xingzong, and Zhangzhou Shishi Shen You should also accept their lives.

古文：褚渊素与萧道成善，引荐于上，诏又以道成为右卫将军，领卫尉，与袁粲等共掌机事。
现代文：褚渊与萧道成的关系一向十分亲密，就把萧道成推荐给明帝，明帝再下诏，任命萧道成为右卫将军、兼卫尉，与袁粲等共同掌管朝廷大事。
English: The relationship between Gongyuan and Xiao Daocheng has always been very close, and Xiao Daocheng was recommended to Emperor Ming. Emperor Ming then issued an edict, appointing Xiao Daocheng as the right guard general and lieutenant, and jointly controlling the affairs of the imperial court with Yuan Qi and others.

古文：是夕，上殂。
现代文：当晚，明帝去世。
English: That night, Emperor Ming died.

古文：庚子，太子即皇帝位，大赦。
现代文：庚子，太子刘昱即皇帝位，宣布大赦。
English: Geng Zi, Prince Liu Bei, who became emperor, declared an amnesty.

古文：时苍梧王方十岁，袁粲、褚渊秉政，承太宗奢侈之后，务弘节俭，欲救其弊；而阮佃夫、王道隆等用事，货赂公行，不能禁也。
现代文：此时苍梧王刘昱年仅十岁。袁粲、褚渊主持朝政，在明帝奢侈糜烂的生活之后，力求节俭，想革除积弊。但是，阮佃夫、王道隆等人依然掌权，贿赂公开施行，袁粲、褚渊无力禁止。
English: At this time, Cangwu King Liu Ye was only ten years old. Yuan Shao and Gongyuan presided over the imperial government, and after the extravagant and corrupt life of the Ming Emperor, they tried to be frugal and wanted to eliminate the accumulated defects. However, Ruan Shufu, Wang Daolong and others were still in power, and bribery was openly practiced, and Yuan Shao and Gongyuan were powerless to prohibit it.

古文：乙巳，以安成王准为扬州刺史。
现代文：乙巳，任命安成王刘准为扬州刺史。
English: At this time, Ancheng Wang Liu Jun was appointed as Yangzhou prefect.

古文：五月，戊寅，葬明皇帝于高宁陵，庙号太宗。
现代文：五月，戊寅，将明帝安葬在高宁陵，庙号太宗。
English: In May, Wu Yin buried Emperor Ming in Gao Ning Mausoleum, with the temple name Taizong.

古文：六月，乙巳，尊皇后曰皇太后，立妃江氏为皇后。
现代文：六月，乙巳，尊嫡母、皇后王贞风为皇太后，封太子妃江简为皇后。
English: In June, His Imperial Highness's mother, Empress Wang Zhenfeng, became empress dowager, and the crown prince, Empress Jiang Jian, became empress.

古文：秋，七月，柔然部帅无卢真将三万骑寇魏敦煌，镇将尉多侯击走之。
现代文：秋季，七月，柔然汗国部落酋长无卢真率领骑兵三万人，攻击北魏的敦煌，镇守将领尉多侯击退柔然军。
English: In the autumn, in July, the tribal chief of the Juran Khanate, Wuluzhen, led 30,000 cavalry to attack Dunhuang in Northern Wei, and the town guard commander, Lieutenant Dohu, repelled the Juran army.

古文：多侯，眷之子也。
现代文：尉多侯是尉眷的儿子。
English: Lord Lieutenant is the son of Lord Lieutenant.

古文：又寇晋昌，守将薛奴击走之。
现代文：无卢真又侵犯晋昌，晋昌守将薛奴把他击退。
English: Wuluzhen invaded Jinchang again, and the Jinchang defender Xue Nong repulsed him.

古文：戊午，魏主如阴山。
现代文：戊午，北魏国主前往阴山。
English: In the afternoon, the Northern Wei sovereign went to the Yin Mountain.

古文：戊辰，尊帝母陈贵妃为皇太妃，更以诸国太妃为太姬。
现代文：戊辰，刘宋尊皇帝生母、贵妃陈妙登为皇太妃。改称各亲王的太妃为太姬。
English: Wu Chen, the birth mother of Emperor Liu Songzong, and Guifei Chen Miaodeng were crown princesses. The princesses of each prince were renamed as grand duchesses.

古文：右军将军王道隆以蔡兴宗强直，不欲使居上流，闰月，甲辰，以兴宗为中书监；更以沈攸之为都督荆、襄等八州诸军事、荆州刺史。
现代文：右军将军王道隆因为蔡兴宗刚强正直而不愿意让他扼守长江上游。闰七月，甲辰，任命蔡兴宗为中书监，调任沈攸之为都督荆、襄等八州诸军事和荆州刺史。
English: Because of Cai Xingzong's strength and honesty, Wang Daolong, the general of the Right Army, was not willing to let him hold the upper reaches of the Yangtze River. In leap July, Jia Chen, Cai Xingzong was appointed as the Central Library Supervisor, and Shen You was appointed as the governor of Jing, Xiang and other eight states.

古文：兴宗辞中书监不拜。
现代文：蔡兴宗推辞中书监的官职不肯就任。
English: Cai Xingzong refused to take up the post of librarian in his resignation.

古文：王道隆每诣兴宗，蹑履到前，不敢就席，良久去，竟不呼坐。
现代文：王道隆每次拜访蔡兴宗，都缓步轻行到面前，不敢径自坐下来，很久才离开，蔡兴宗也不请他入座。
English: Every time Wang Daolong visited Cai Xingzong, he walked slowly to the front, not daring to sit down, and left after a long time. Cai Xingzong did not invite him to sit down.

古文：沈攸之自以才略过人，自至夏口以来，阴蓄异志；及徙荆州，择郢州士马、器仗精者，多以自随。
现代文：沈攸之自认为才能胆略过人，自从镇守夏口以来，暗中准备，有夺取政权的野心。等调任荆州，临走时把郢州的兵士战马以及精良武器，尽量携带同往。
English: Shen Youzhi thought that he could outsmart others. Since he became the town guard of Xiakou, he secretly prepared and had the ambition to seize power. He was transferred to Jingzhou, and when he left, he tried to take soldiers and horses from Zhangzhou and sophisticated weapons with him.

古文：到官，以讨蛮为名，大发兵力，招聚才勇，部勒严整，常如敌至。
现代文：到荆州之后，借口讨伐蛮族，大肆动员境内人力，招兵买马，加强战斗训练，经常戒备，好像大敌当前一样。
English: After arriving in Jingzhou, on the pretext of fighting the barbarians, they mobilized manpower in the territory, recruited soldiers, strengthened combat training, and were always on the alert, as if the great enemy was present.

古文：举错专恣，不复承用符敕，朝廷疑而惮之。
现代文：各项措施，全都独断专行，不再使用朝廷的名义。朝廷怀疑他但又有所忌惮。
English: All the measures were carried out arbitrarily, and he no longer used the name of the imperial court. The imperial court suspected him, but they were also wary of him.

古文：为政刻暴，或鞭挞士大夫；上佐以下，面加詈辱。
现代文：沈攸之为政刻薄凶暴，有时甚至鞭打士大夫，对高级僚属以下的官吏，往往当面就诟骂侮辱。
English: Shen You is a political caustic and ferocious, sometimes even whipping the shidafu, and often verbally abuses and insults officials below senior colleagues in person.

古文：然吏事精明，人不敢欺，境内盗贼屏息，夜户不闭。
现代文：然而，沈攸之做事精明，别人不敢欺骗他。荆州境内，盗贼不敢轻举妄动，百姓夜不闭户。
English: However, Shen Youzhi is shrewd in doing things, others do not dare to deceive him. In Jingzhou, thieves do not dare to act rashly, and people do not close their homes at night.

古文：攸之赕罚群蛮太甚，又禁五溪鱼盐，蛮怨叛。
现代文：沈攸之对各蛮族部落勒索过分，又禁止五溪一带居民捕鱼、贩盐，各蛮族怨愤，起兵叛乱。
English: Shen Youzhi's extortion of the barbarian tribes was excessive. He also prohibited the residents of the Wuxi area from fishing and selling salt. The barbarians were angry and started a rebellion.

古文：酉溪蛮王田头拟死，弟娄侯篡立，其子田都走入獠中。
现代文：酉溪蛮族首领田头拟去世。他的弟弟田娄侯篡位，儿子田都逃到獠族地区。
English: The leader of the Shanxi barbarians, Tian Touqi, died. His younger brother, Tian Shihou, usurped the throne, and his son, Tian Du, fled to the Shan region of Luo.

古文：于是群蛮大乱，掠抄至武陵城下。
现代文：于是，众蛮族部落大乱，武装抢掠，兵至武陵城。
English: As a result, the barbarian tribes rioted, armed and looted, and the soldiers came to Wuling City.

古文：武陵内史萧嶷遣队主张英儿击破之，诛娄佩，立田都，群蛮乃定。
现代文：武陵内史萧嶷派队主张英儿击破蛮族各部落军，杀了田娄侯，恢复田都王位，众蛮族部落才安定。
English: Wuling Inner Historian Xiao Yao's faction advocated that Ying Er should defeat the barbarian tribal armies, kill Tian Ying Hou, restore the throne of Tian Du, and then the barbarian tribes would be stable.

古文：嶷，赜之弟也。
现代文：萧嶷是萧赜的弟弟。
English: Xiao Yao is Xiao Yao's younger brother.

古文：八月，戊午，乐安宣穆公蔡兴宗卒。
现代文：八月，戊午，乐安宣穆公蔡兴宗去世。
English: In August, at noon, Le An Xuan Mu leader Cai Xingzong passed away.

古文：九月，辛巳，魏主还平城。
现代文：九月，辛巳，北魏国主返回平城。
English: In September, the ruler of the Northern Wei Dynasty returned to Pingcheng.

古文：冬，十月，柔然侵魏，及五原。
现代文：冬季，十月，柔然汗国侵略北魏，逼近五原。
English: In winter, in October, the Mongolian Khanate invaded the Northern Wei and approached the Five Plains.

古文：十一月，上皇自将讨之。将度漠，柔然北走数千里，上皇乃还。
现代文：十一月，北魏太上皇亲自率军讨伐，准备北渡大沙漠，柔然军向北逃走数千里，太上皇这才班师回朝。
English: In November, the Northern Wei Empress Dowager personally led the army in a crusade to prepare for the Beidou Great Desert. The Juran Army fled thousands of miles northward, and the Empress Dowager returned to the North.

古文：丁亥，魏封上皇之弟略为文川王。
现代文：丁亥，北魏封太上皇的弟弟拓跋略为广川王。
English: Dinghai, the younger brother of the Northern Wei Emperor Tuoba, became the King of Guangchuan.

古文：己亥，以郢州刺史刘秉为尚书左仆射。
现代文：己亥，刘宋擢升郢州刺史刘秉为尚书左仆射。
English: Ji Hai and Liu Song were promoted to the leading positions, and Liu Bing was promoted to the leading position.

古文：秉，道怜之孙也，和弱无干能，以宗室清令，故袁、褚引之。
现代文：刘秉是刘道怜的孙子，性情温和懦弱，没有才干，只因他是皇族，清高显贵，所以袁粲、褚渊提出推荐他。
English: Liu Bing was the grandson of Liu Daorai. He was mild-tempered, cowardly, and incompetent. Just because he was a member of the imperial family and was high-ranking and distinguished, Yuan Qi and Yu Yuan recommended him.

古文：中书通事舍人阮佃夫加给事中、辅国将军，权任转重，欲用其所亲吴郡张澹为武陵郡；袁粲等皆不同，佃夫称敕施行，粲等不敢执。
现代文：中书通事舍人阮佃夫被加授为给事中、辅国将军，权势更加扩大，职位更重要。他打算任用他的亲信、吴郡人张澹为武陵郡太守，袁粲等都不同意，阮佃夫声称是奉圣旨，袁粲等不敢坚持。
English: He planned to appoint his close confidant, Zhang Ye, a native of Wu County, as the governor of Wuling County, but Yuan Ye and others did not agree. He claimed that he was following the sacred will, and Yuan Ye and others did not dare to insist.

古文：魏有司奏诸祠祀合一千七十五所，岁用牲七万五千五百。
现代文：北魏有关部门奏报：全国寺庙共一千零七十五所，每年祭祀用牲畜七万五千五百头。
English: The relevant departments of the Northern Wei Dynasty reported that there were a total of 1,075 temples across the country, with 75,500 head of livestock used for sacrifices each year.

古文：上皇恶其多杀，诏： 自今非天地、宗庙、社稷，皆勿用牲，荐以酒脯而已。 
现代文：太上皇厌恶他们杀害牲畜太多，下诏： 从今以后，除了祭祀天地、皇家祖庙、土神谷神，其他全不准用牲畜，只用酒和肉干就可以了。 
English: Emperor Taizong was disgusted by their excessive killing of livestock, and issued the following edict: From now on, except for the worship of Heaven and Earth, the Imperial Ancestral Temple, and the God of the Valley of Earth and Spirit, no livestock are to be used at all, and only wine and dried meat may be used.

古文：苍梧王上
现代文：苍梧王上
English: Cangwu Wangzhu

古文：太宗明皇帝下元徽元年春，正月，戊寅朔，改元，大赦。
现代文：宋苍梧王元徽元年春季，正月，戊寅朔，刘宋改年号元徽，实行大赦。
English: Song Cangwu Wang Yuanhui in the spring of the first year of the first month, Wu Yinshuo, Liu Song changed the year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of

古文：庚辰，魏员外散骑常侍崔演来聘。
现代文：庚辰，北魏员外散骑常侍崔演来访。
English: Geng Chen, the Northern Wei general, and his equerry Cui En came to visit.

古文：戊戌，魏上皇还，至云中。
现代文：戊戌，北魏太上皇率领大军回师，抵达云中。
English: In Wuyi, the Northern Wei Emperor led a large army back to the division and arrived in Yunzhong.

古文：癸丑，魏诏守令劝课农事，同部之内，贫富相通，家有兼牛，通借无者。
现代文：癸丑，北魏诏命各太守、县令都要鼓励农民耕田种桑，一郡一县之中，贫富应该互相帮助，家里有两头牛的，应借给没有牛的人一头。
English: In fact, the Northern Wei Zhao ordered all governors and county magistrates to encourage farmers to cultivate fields and plant mulberry trees. In a county, the rich and the poor should help each other. If there are two cows in a family, one should be lent to a person who does not have a cow.

古文：若不从诏，一门终身不仕。
现代文：如果不遵守诏书规定，全家人终身不能做官。
English: If the provisions of the edict are not complied with, the whole family will be banned from holding public office for life.

古文：戊午，魏上皇至平城。
现代文：戍午，北魏太上皇返平城。
English: At noon, the Northern Wei Emperor returned to Pingcheng.

古文：甲戌，魏诏： 县令能静一县劫盗者，兼治二县，即食其禄；能静二县者，兼治三县，三年迁为郡守。
现代文：甲戌，北魏下诏： 县令如果能平定一县的盗匪，准许他管辖两个县，并发双份奉禄。如果能平定两个县的盗匪，准许他兼管三个县，三年之后，提升为郡守。
English: Jiajing, the Northern Wei Dynasty issued the following edict: If the county order can suppress the bandits in one county, he is allowed to govern two counties and receive double honorarium. If he can suppress the bandits in two counties, he is allowed to manage three counties, and after three years, he will be promoted to county governor.

古文：二千石能静二郡上至三郡亦如之，三年迁为刺史。 
现代文：俸禄二千石的太守如果能平定二郡、三郡，也按照这个规律，三年之后，升为刺史。 
English: According to this rule, if a daimyo with a stipend of 2,000 koku can subdue two or three counties, he will be promoted to sashishi three years later.

古文：桂阳王休范，素凡讷，少知解，不为诸兄所齿遇，物情亦不向之，故太宗之末得免于祸。
现代文：桂阳王刘休范一向平凡庸俗，口舌木讷，愚昧无知，兄弟们都瞧不起他，社会上也没有人称赞他。所以，明帝对亲骨肉屠杀时，他得以幸免。
English: Liu Xuan, the king of Guiyang, had always been vulgar and vulgar, with a stilted tongue and ignorance. His brothers despised him, and no one praised him in society. Therefore, he was spared when Emperor Ming slaughtered his own flesh and blood.

古文：及帝即位，年在冲幼，素族秉政，近习用权。
现代文：太子刘昱即位时，年纪还幼小，寒门平民出身的官员主持朝政，左右亲近掌握大权。
English: When Prince Liu Bei ascended to the throne, he was still young, and officials from humble backgrounds presided over the imperial government, wielding great power with great closeness.

古文：休范自谓尊亲莫二，应入为宰辅；既不如志，怨愤颇甚。
现代文：刘休范自认为无论是地位尊贵还是皇家血统，都没有人能超过他，他应该到朝廷担任宰相。意愿未得实现，就异常怨恨，不能自制。
English: Liu Xiufan believed that no one could surpass him, regardless of his high status or royal lineage, and that he should serve as prime minister in the imperial court. If his wish was not fulfilled, he became extremely resentful and could not control himself.

古文：典签新蔡许公舆为之谋主，令休范折节下士，厚相资给。于是远近赴之，岁中万计；收养勇士，缮治器械。
现代文：典签、新蔡人许公舆做他的主要谋士，教刘休范礼贤下士，广交朋友，给他们优厚的待遇，于是，无论远近，许多人前来投奔，一年之中集结的人数以万计，并收养勇士，制造武器。
English: According to the legend, the new Cai people made Xu Gongyou his chief strategist, taught Liu Xiu Fan Lixian Corporal, made a wide range of friends, and gave them favorable treatment. As a result, no matter how far or near, many people came to flee, the number of people gathered in one year was tens of thousands, and they adopted warriors and made weapons.

古文：朝廷知其有异志，亦阴为之备。
现代文：朝廷察觉刘休范行为异常，定怀二心，因此也暗中戒备。
English: The imperial court sensed that Liu Xuan's behavior was abnormal and became suspicious, so they were also secretly on the alert.

古文：会夏口阙镇，朝廷以其地居寻阳上流，欲使腹心居之。
现代文：此时，正赶上夏口无人镇守，朝廷认为那里位居寻阳上游，打算派亲信去镇守。
English: At this time, there was no one to guard the town of Hatsukuchi. The imperial court believed that it was located in the upper reaches of the Hokkien Mountains, and planned to send a close confidant to guard the town.

古文：二月，乙亥，以晋熙王燮为郢州刺史。
现代文：二月，乙亥，任命晋熙王刘燮为郢州刺史。
English: In February, the Year of the Boar, the king of the Jin Dynasty, Liu Bei, was appointed as the crown prince of Zhangzhou.

古文：燮始四岁，以黄门郎王奂为长史，行府州事，配以资力，使镇夏口；复恐其过寻阳为休范所劫留，使自太洑径去。
现代文：刘燮本年才四岁，任命黄门郎王奂为长史代理府州事，配备雄厚的军事物资和兵力，镇守夏口，又唯恐刘燮等经过寻阳时被刘休范强行劫留，便让他们绕过寻阳，从太小路前往。
English: Liu Hui, who was only four years old this year, appointed Huangmen Lang Wang Hui as the long-term agent of the prefectural state affairs, equipped with abundant military supplies and troops, the town guard of Xiakou, and in case Liu Hui and others were forcibly detained by Liu Xiufan when passing through Fuxingyang, they were allowed to bypass Fuxingyang and go from the small road.

古文：休范闻之，大怒，密与许公舆谋袭建康；表治城湟，多解材板而蓄之。
现代文：刘休范得知后，勃然大怒，跟许公舆密谋袭击建康。他上疏朝廷，要求整修城池，但背地里却把很多筑城用的木板储藏起来。
English: When Liu Xiufan learned of this, he flew into a rage and plotted with Xu Gongyi to attack Jiankang. He went to the imperial court and demanded that the castle be renovated, but in the background he had stored many wooden planks for building the city.

古文：奂，景文之兄子也。
现代文：王奂是王景文的侄儿。
English: Wang Yao is the nephew of Wang Jingwen.

古文：吐谷浑王拾寅寇魏浇河。
现代文：吐谷浑王慕容拾寅，攻击北魏的浇河郡。
English: King Murong Shuyin of the Tuyun Kingdom attacked Gehe County of the Northern Wei Dynasty.

古文：夏，四月，戊申，魏以司空长孙观为大都督，发兵讨之。
现代文：夏季，四月，戊申，北魏任命司空长孙观为大都督，发兵讨伐他们。
English: In the summer, in April, Boushen, the Northern Wei Dynasty appointed Sikuo Chief Sun Guan as the grand governor, and sent troops to fight them.

古文：魏以孔子二十八世孙乘为崇圣大夫，给十户以供洒扫。
现代文：北魏任命孔子的第二十八代孙孔乘为崇圣大夫，由官府拨付十户人家，负责孔庙的清洁洒扫。
English: The Northern Wei Dynasty appointed the 28th generation of Confucius's grandson, Confucius, as the Chong Sheng Doctor. Ten households were allocated by the government to be responsible for cleaning the Confucius Temple.

古文：秋，七月，魏诏： 河南六州之民，户收绢一匹，绵一斤，租三十石。 
现代文：秋季，七月，北魏诏令 黄河以南六州百姓，每户人家，收征缎一匹，绵一斤，谷米三十石。 
English: In the autumn, in July, the Northern Wei Dynasty issued an edict to the people of the six states south of the Yellow River, each household was required to collect one yakitori, one cattail, and 30 kilos of grain.

古文：乙亥，魏主如阴山。
现代文：乙亥，北魏国主前往阴山。
English: In the year of the Rooster, the ruler of the Northern Wei Dynasty went to the Yin Mountain.

古文：八月，庚申，魏上皇如河西。
现代文：八月，庚申北魏太上皇前往河西。
English: In August, Emperor Gaoshen of the Northern Wei Dynasty went to Hexi.

古文：长孙观入吐谷浑境，刍其秋稼。
现代文：北魏长孙观进入吐谷浑境内，强行收割秋季成熟的庄稼。
English: The Northern Wei chancellor Sun Guan entered the territory of Tugu Hun and forcibly harvested the crops that were ripe in autumn.

古文：吐谷浑王拾寅窘急，请降，遣子斤入侍。
现代文：慕容拾寅窘困着急而请求投降，派他的儿子慕容斤前往北魏充当人质。
English: Distressed and anxious, Murong Shuyin asked for surrender and sent his son Murong Jian to the Northern Wei Dynasty to serve as a hostage.

古文：自是岁修职贡。
现代文：从此，吐谷浑每年都向北魏国进贡。
English: From then on, Tugu Hun paid tribute to Northern Wei every year.

古文：九月，辛巳，上皇还平城。
现代文：九月，六巳，北魏太上皇返回平城。
English: On the sixth day of the ninth month, the Northern Wei Empress Dowager returned to Pingcheng.

古文：遣使如魏。
现代文：刘宋派使节前往北魏。
English: Liu Song sent envoys to the Northern Wei Dynasty.

古文：冬，十月，癸酉，割南兗、豫州之境置徐州，治钟离。
现代文：冬季，十月，癸酉，刘宋分割南兖州、豫州若干郡，设立徐州，州府设在钟离。
English: In the winter, in October, Emperor Qianlong and Liu Song divided Nanluozhou and Yuzhou into several counties, established Xuzhou, and the state capital was set up in Zhongli.

古文：魏上皇将入寇，诏州郡之民十丁取一以充行，户收租五十石以备军粮。
现代文：北魏太上皇将要大举进攻刘宋，下令全国人民，十个青年中，征召一人入伍，每户征收五十石粮食，作为军粮储备。
English: The Northern Wei Empress Dowager was going to attack Liu Song in a big way, and ordered the people of the whole country, one out of ten young people, to be conscripted into the army, and each household was to collect fifty kilos of grain as military grain reserves.

古文：魏武都氐反，攻仇池，诏长孙观回师讨之。
现代文：北魏武都氐族部落谋反，攻击仇池。北魏国主下诏令长孙观回师讨伐他们。
English: In the Northern Wei Dynasty, the Wudu Yi tribe plotted a rebellion and attacked Quchi. The ruler of the Northern Wei Dynasty issued an imperial edict ordering the patriarch Sun Quanhuai to fight them.

古文：武都王杨僧嗣卒于葭芦，从弟文度自立为武兴王，遣使降魏；魏以文度为武兴镇将。
现代文：武都王杨僧嗣在葭芦去世。堂弟杨文度自立为武兴王，派人投降北魏。北魏任命杨文度为武兴镇将。
English: The king of Wudu, Yang Sangzhi, died in Huludao. His cousin, Yang Wendu, declared himself the king of Wuxing and sent men to surrender to the Northern Wei. The Northern Wei appointed Yang Wendu as the general of Wuxing Town.

古文：十一月，丁丑，尚书令袁粲以母忧去职。
现代文：十一月，丁丑，刘宋尚书令袁粲，因母亲去世，辞职守丧。
English: In November, Ding Yuxiu, Liu Song Shang Shuling and Yuan Qi, due to the death of their mother, resigned in mourning.

古文：癸巳，魏上皇南巡，至怀州。
现代文：癸巳，北魏太上皇南下巡视，抵达怀州。
English: Soon after, the Northern Wei Empress Dowager went on a inspection tour to the south and arrived in Waizhou.

古文：枋头镇将代人薛虎子，先为冯太后所黜，为门士。
现代文：枋头镇将代郡人薛虎子，先前因冒犯了冯太后，被贬为看门禁卫。
English: The mayor of Shantou Town, Xue Huzi, who represented the county, had previously been demoted to the role of gatekeeper for offending Empress Feng.

古文：时山东饥，盗贼竞起，相州民孙诲等五百人称虎子在镇，境内清晏，乞还虎子。
现代文：现在，山东大饥荒，盗贼竞相涌现。相州人孙诲等五百人联名上疏，指称薛虎子在任时，境内一片清平，请求重新起用薛虎子。
English: Now, with the great famine in Shandong, thieves are competing to emerge. Five hundred people, including Xiangzhou's own Sun Qian, have jointly come forward to allege that when Xue Huo Zi was in office, there was peace and tranquility in the territory, and to request that Xue Huo Zi be reinstated.

古文：上皇复以虎子为枋头镇将，即日之官，数州盗贼皆息。
现代文：太上皇再次任命薛虎子任枋头镇将。薛虎子当天即行上任，几个州盗贼归降平息。
English: Emperor Taizong reappointed Xue Huzi as Shantou Town Commander. Xue Huzi took office on the same day, and the bandits in several prefectures were subdued.

古文：十二月，癸卯朔，日有食之。
现代文：十二月，癸卯朔，出现日食。
English: In December, there was a solar eclipse.

古文：乙巳，江州刺史桂阳王休范进位太尉。
现代文：乙巳，江州刺史、桂阳王刘休范升任太尉。
English: At the same time, the governor of Jiangsu Province and the king of Guiyang, Liu Xiufan, was promoted to the rank of captain.

古文：诏起袁粲，以卫军将军摄职，粲固辞。
现代文：征召袁粲以卫军将军的身份，代理尚书令，袁粲坚决辞让。
English: Yuan Shao was called up as a general of the Guards, acting on Shang's written order, and Yuan Shao resolutely resigned.

古文：壬子，柔然侵魏，柔玄镇二部敕勒应之。
现代文：壬子，柔然汗国南下侵入北魏，柔玄镇所属的两个敕勒部落，起兵响应。
English: Jinzi, Zhuo Ran Khanate invaded the south of the Northern Wei Dynasty, Zhuo Xuan Town belongs to the two Zhele tribes, the soldiers responded.

古文：魏州镇十一水旱，相州民饿死者二千八百馀人。
现代文：北魏十一个州镇水旱成灾，相州百姓两千八百余人饿死。
English: During the Northern Wei Dynasty, eleven towns in the state suffered from floods and droughts, and more than 2,800 people in Xiangzhou died of starvation.

古文：是岁，魏妖人刘举聚众自称天子。
现代文：本年，北魏妖人刘举聚结部众，自称皇帝。
English: This year, the Northern Wei demon Liu Jie gathered a large number of followers and called himself an emperor.

古文：平原，提之子也。
现代文：齐州刺史武昌王拓跋平原讨伐，杀了刘举。
English: Qizhou assassinated Wuchang Wang in the Tuoba Plain Campaign and killed Liu Ji.

古文：太宗明皇帝下元徽二年
现代文：拓跋平原是拓跋提的儿子。二年
English: Tuoba Plains is the son of Tuoba Thi.

古文：春，正月，丁丑，魏太尉源贺以疾罢。
现代文：春季，正月，丁丑，北魏太尉源贺因病被解除职务。
English: In the spring, the first month of the year, Ding Yuxi, Northern Wei Lieutenant Yuan He was relieved of his duties due to illness.

古文：二月，甲辰，魏上皇还平城。
现代文：二月，甲辰，北魏太上皇返回平城。
English: In February, Emperor Jochen of the Northern Wei Dynasty returned to Pingcheng.

古文：三月，丁亥，魏员外散骑常侍许赤虎来聘。
现代文：三月，丁亥，北魏员外散骑常侍许赤虎来访。
English: In March, Dinghai, the Northern Wei Dynasty cavalry outside the cavalry came to visit the Red Tiger.

古文：夏，五月，壬午，桂阳王休范反。
现代文：夏季，五月，壬午，桂阳王刘休范起兵反抗朝廷。
English: In the summer, in May, at noon, Liu Xiufan, King of Guiyang, raised an army to rebel against the imperial court.

古文：掠民船，使军队称力请受，付以材板，合乎装治。数日即办。
现代文：掠夺百姓船只，让各军各队根据实力申报所需数量，发给他们木板，依照规格装配船只，数日之间就办理完毕。
English: They plundered the people's boats, let each army and team declare the required quantity according to their strength, issued them with wooden boards, assembled the boats according to specifications, and completed the process within a few days.

古文：丙戌，休范帅众二万、骑五百发寻阳，昼夜取道；以书与诸执政，称： 杨运长、王道隆蛊惑先帝，使建安、巴陵二王无罪被戮。望执录二竖，以谢冤魂。 
现代文：丙戌，刘休范率军两万人，骑兵五百人，从寻阳出发，昼夜不停地前进。写信给朝廷各位执政官员，宣称： 杨运长、王道隆蛊惑蒙蔽先帝，使建安、巴陵二位亲王无罪被杀，请逮捕这两个奸臣，用来向冤魂谢罪。 
English: He and Liu Xiufan led an army of twenty thousand men and five hundred cavalrymen, starting from Xuanyang and advancing day and night. He wrote to all the ruling officials of the imperial court, declaring: Yang Yunchang and Wang Daolong deceived the former emperor, so that the two princes of Jian'an and Baling were killed without guilt. Please arrest these two treacherous vassals and use them to thank the evil spirits.

古文：庚寅，大雷戍主杜道欣驰下告变，朝廷惶骇。
现代文：庚寅，大雷戍主杜道欣飞驰东下，报告事变，朝廷惶恐震惊。
English: Geng Yin and Du Daoxin, the leader of the great thunderbolt, flew to the east to report the incident, and the imperial court was shocked with fear.

古文：护军褚渊、征北将军张永、领军刘勔、仆射刘秉、右卫将军萧道成、游击将军载明宝、骁骑将军阮佃夫、右军将军王道隆、中书舍人孙千龄、员外郎杨运长集中书省计事，莫有言者。
现代文：护军褚渊、征北将军张永、领军刘、仆射刘秉、右卫将军萧道成、游击将军戴明宝、骁骑将军阮佃夫、右军将军王道隆、中书舍人孙千龄、员外郎杨运长在中书省紧急集会，商讨对策，没有人肯先发言。
English: Gongyuan, the guard, Zhang Yong, the general of the Northern Expedition, Liu, the leader of the army, Liu Bing, the general of the right guard, Xiao Daocheng, the general of the guerrilla, Dai Mingbao, the general of the cavalry, Ruan Shifu, the general of the right army, Wang Daolong, Sun Chiling, the person of the Chinese calligraphy, and Yang Yunchang, the person of the foreign language, held an emergency meeting in the Chinese calligraphy province to discuss countermeasures. No one was willing to speak first.

古文：道成曰： 昔上流谋逆，皆因淹缓致败。休范必远惩前失，轻兵急下，乘我无备。
现代文：萧道成说： 过去，凡是长江上游发动的叛乱，都因为行动迟缓，导致失败，刘休范一定吸取前人的教训，率轻装部队，急流东下，乘我们没有防备，来一个突然袭击。
English: Xiao Daocheng said: In the past, all the rebellions launched in the upper reaches of the Yangtze River have failed because of their slowness of action. Liu Xiufan must have learned the lessons of his predecessors, led light-armed troops, the rapids eastward, and took advantage of our unpreparedness to make a surprise attack.

古文：今应变之术，不宜远出；若偏师失律，则大沮众心。
现代文：当今应变的策略，是不派军到远处出征，因为只要一支军队被击败，军心就会大受沮丧。
English: The current contingency strategy is not to send troops far away, because as long as an army is defeated, the military spirit will be greatly depressed.

古文：宜顿新亭、白下，坚守宫城、东府、石头，以待贼至。
现代文：我们应该防守新亭、白下，坚守宫城、东府、石头，等待贼寇攻击。
English: We should defend Xinting, Baixia, adhere to Miyagi, Dongfu, Stone, and wait for the bandits to attack.

古文：千里孤军，后无委积，求战不得，自然瓦解。
现代文：他们一支孤军，千里而来，粮秣供应不上，求战不得，自然就会瓦解。
English: They are a lone army, coming from thousands of miles away, unable to supply food and water, unable to fight, and will naturally disintegrate.

古文：我请顿新亭以当其锋。
现代文：我请求驻防新亭，首先抵挡叛军的前锋，张永驻守白下，刘驻扎宣阳门，指挥各军。
English: I request that Xinting be garrisoned, first to resist the rebels' advance, Zhang Yong to garrison Baixia, Liu to garrison Xuanyang Gate, and to command the armies.

古文：征北守白下，领军屯宣阳门为诸军节度；诸贵安坐殿中，不须竞出，我自破贼必矣！ 因索笔下议。众并注 同 。
现代文：其他尊贵官员，可安坐殿中，不必争着出来，我一定能够击破贼寇。 于是，索取笔墨，写下记录，大家全都签注 同意 。
English: Other dignitaries can sit quietly in the hall, there is no need to fight to get out, I will surely be able to defeat the bandits. Therefore, I asked for pen and ink, wrote down the records, and everyone signed and agreed.

古文：孙千龄阴与休范通谋，独曰： 宜依旧遣军据梁山。 
现代文：孙千龄秘密与刘休范通谋，唯有他反对，说： 应该按照过去的办法，派军据守梁山。 
English: Sun Qianling secretly conspired with Liu Xiufan, but he was the only one who objected, saying: It is necessary to send troops to defend Liangshan according to the previous method.

古文：道成正色曰： 贼今已近，梁山岂可得至！
现代文：萧道成严肃地说： 贼寇已逼近梁山，我们派军怎么能赶到！
English: Xiao Daocheng said solemnly: The bandits have approached Liangshan, how can we send troops to catch up!

古文：新亭既是兵冲，所欲以死报国耳。
现代文：新亭是必争之地，我打算以死报效国家罢了。
English: Xinting is a military stronghold. I hope to serve the country with my death.

古文：常时乃可屈曲相从，今不得也！ 
现代文：平时我可以委曲求全，听你的意见，今天不行！ 
English: In normal times, I can compromise, listen to your opinion, but not today!

古文：坐起，道成顾谓刘勔曰： 领军已同鄙议，不可改易！ 
现代文：大家散会离座，萧道成回头看一下刘，说： 刘领军已经完全同意我的意见，不可变更！ 
English: Everyone dispersed and left the meeting. Xiao Daocheng looked back at Liu and said, "Liu Lianjun has fully agreed with my opinion and cannot be changed!

古文：袁粲闻难，扶曳入殿。
现代文：袁粲听到消息，让人扶着来到殿中。
English: Yuan Qi heard the news and was helped into the hall.

古文：即日，内外戒严。
现代文：当天，朝廷内外戒严。
English: On the same day, martial law was declared inside and outside the Imperial Court.

古文：道成将前锋兵出屯新亭，张永屯白下，前南兗州刺史沈怀明戍石头，袁粲、褚渊入卫殿省。
现代文：萧道成率领前锋军进驻新亭，张永进驻白下，前南兖州刺史沈怀明戍守石崐头，袁粲、褚渊进驻宫城，加强防卫。
English: Xiao Daocheng led the vanguard army into Xinting, Zhang Yongjin was stationed in Baixia, the former Southern Xizhou general Shen Huaiming was stationed in Shishantou, and Yuan Qi and Yu Yuan were stationed in Miyagi to strengthen the defense.

古文：时仑猝，不暇授甲，开南北二武库，随将士意所取。
现代文：时间紧迫，来不及点发武器，只好打开南北两个大军械库，由将士自己随意挑选。
English: With time running out and no time to fire their weapons, they had no choice but to open two large armouries, one in the north and the other in the south, for the soldiers to choose from as they wished.

古文：萧道成至新亭，治城垒未毕，辛卯，休范前军已至新林。
现代文：萧道成抵达新亭，开始修筑工事，但没有完成。
English: Xiao Daocheng arrived at Xinting and began construction work, but it was not completed.

古文：道成方解衣高卧以安众心，徐索白虎幡，登西垣，使宁朔将军高道庆、羽林监陈显达、员外郎王敬则帅舟师与休范战，颇有杀获。
现代文：辛卯，刘休范前锋军已到新林，萧道成脱衣大睡，以安定军心，从容不迫地拿出白虎幡，登上西城墙，派宁朔将军高道庆、羽林监陈显达、员外郎王敬则，率舰队迎战刘休范，获得相当大的战果。
English: Unexpectedly, Liu Xuan's vanguard army had arrived in Xinlin. Xiao Daocheng undressed and fell into a deep sleep in order to stabilize the military spirit. He calmly took out the white tiger banner and ascended the west city wall. He sent Ningshuo General Gao Daoqing, Ulin Supervisor Chen Xianda, and Foreigner Wang Jingzhe to lead the fleet to meet Liu Xuan, and achieved considerable results.

古文：壬辰，休范自新林舍舟步上，其将丁文豪请休范直攻台城。休范遣文豪别将兵趣台城，自以大众攻新亭垒。
现代文：壬辰，刘休范自新林登岸，他的部将丁文豪，请求刘休范直接攻打台城，刘休范不同意，另派丁文豪手下其他将领攻打台城，而自己率大军攻击新亭萧道成的营垒。
English: In the morning, Liu Xiufan disembarked from Xinlin. His subordinate, Ding Wenhao, asked Liu Xiufan to directly attack Taicheng. Liu Xiufan disagreed, and sent other generals under Ding Wenhao to attack Taicheng, while he led a large army to attack the camp of Xingting Xiao Ducheng.

古文：道成帅将士悉力拒战，自巳至午，外势愈盛，众皆失色，道成曰： 贼虽多而乱，寻当破矣。 
现代文：萧道成率军拼全力抵抗，从上午巳时苦战到午时，叛军攻势越来越猛，官军渐难支持，部众全都惊骇失色。萧道成说： 贼寇虽然多，可是杂乱无章，不久我们就会把他们击败。 
English: Xiao Daocheng led the army to resist with all their strength. From the early morning to the afternoon, the rebel offensive became more and more fierce, the government army was increasingly difficult to support, and the subordinates were all shocked and discolored. Xiao Daocheng said: Although there are many thieves and robbers, they are disorganized, and we will soon defeat them.

古文：休范白服，乘肩舆，自登城南临沧观，以数十人自卫。
现代文：刘休范身穿白色便服，坐着两人抬的轻便小轿，亲自登上新亭南面的临沧观，仅带数十名卫士。
English: Liu Xiufan, dressed in white civilian clothes and sitting in a light sedan carried by two people, personally boarded the Lincangyuan on the south side of the new pavilion, accompanied only by dozens of guards.

古文：屯骑校尉黄回与越骑校尉张敬儿谋诈降以取之。
现代文：官军屯骑校尉黄回与越骑校尉张敬儿，商量向刘休范诈降，以便偷袭他。
English: Huang Hui, a cavalry captain of the government army, and Zhang Jing'er, a cavalry captain of the Viet Nam army, discussed betraying Liu Xuan in order to attack him secretly.

古文：回谓敬儿曰： 卿可取之，我誓不杀诸王！ 
现代文：黄回对张敬儿说： 你可以取刘休范的性命，我曾发誓绝不诛杀亲王！ 
English: Huang Hui said to Zhang Jing'er: You can take Liu Xiufan's life, I have sworn never to kill the prince!

古文：敬儿以白道成。道成曰： 卿能力事，当以本州相赏。 
现代文：张敬儿把这打算报告萧道成，萧道成说： 如果你能够成功，就把本州赏赐给你。 
English: Zhang Jing'er reported this plan to Xiao Daocheng. Xiao Daocheng said, "If you can succeed, I will give you the reward of Honshu."

古文：乃与回出城南，放仗走，大呼称降。
现代文：张敬儿于是跟黄回出城南下，放下武器，边跑边大喊 投降 。
English: Zhang Jing'er then followed Huang Hui out of the city to the south, put down his weapons, and shouted "surrender" as he ran.

古文：休范喜，召至舆侧，回阳致道成密意，休范信之，以二子德宣、德嗣付道成为质。
现代文：刘休范大喜，把二人叫到轿旁，黄回假装传达萧道成的秘密旨意，刘休范信以为真，把两个儿子刘德宣、刘德嗣，送给萧道成作为人质。
English: Liu Xiufan was overjoyed and called the two men to the side of the car. Huang Hui pretended to convey Xiao Daocheng's secret intention. Liu Xiufan believed it to be true and sent Xiao Daocheng's two sons, Liu Dexuan and Liu Deci, as hostages.

古文：二子至，道成即斩之。
现代文：两个儿子一到，萧道成立即把他们斩首。
English: As soon as his two sons arrived, Xiao Dao beheaded them.

古文：休范置回、敬儿于左右，所亲李恒、钟爽谏，不听。
现代文：刘休范把黄回、张敬儿留在身边，他的亲信李恒、钟爽，都加以劝阻，刘休范不听。
English: Liu Xiufan kept Huang Hui and Zhang Jing'er by his side. His close friends Li Heng and Zhong Shuang all tried to dissuade him, but Liu Xiufan would not listen.

古文：时休范日饮醇酒，回见休范无备，目敬儿；敬儿夺休范防身刀，斩休范首，左右皆散走。敬儿驰马持首归新亭。
现代文：这时刘休范每天饮酒，黄回看刘休范没有防备，便向张敬儿使一个眼色，张敬儿抽出刘休范的防身佩刀，砍下刘休范的人头，侍卫人员惊慌逃窜，张敬儿骑马飞奔，带着刘休范的人头跑回新亭。
English: At this time, Liu Xiufan drank alcohol every day. Huang looked back and saw that Liu Xiufan was unprepared, so he winked at Zhang Jing'er. Zhang Jing'er took out Liu Xiufan's defensive sword and cut off Liu Xiufan's head. The guards panicked and fled. Zhang Jing'er galloped on horseback and ran back to Xinting with Liu Xiufan's head.

古文：道成遣队主陈灵宝送休范首还台。
现代文：萧道成派队主陈灵宝，把刘休范的人头送回宫城。
English: Xiao Daocheng sent team leader Chen Lingbao to take Liu Xuan's head back to Miyagi.

古文：灵宝道逢休范兵，弃首于水，挺身得达，唱云 已平 ，而无以为验，众莫之信。
现代文：陈灵宝途中遇到刘休范的军队，一时紧急，把刘休范的人头扔到路边的水沟里，脱身抵达宫城，大声高喊： 乱事已平！ 可是没有刘休范的人头做证，大家对此都不相信。
English: Chen Lingbao encountered Liu Xiufan's army on the way, and in an emergency, he threw Liu Xiufan's head into the ditch on the side of the road, escaped and arrived in Miyagi, shouting loudly: The chaos is over! However, without Liu Xiufan's head as proof, everyone does not believe this.

古文：休范将士亦不之知，其将杜黑骡攻新亭甚急。
现代文：刘休范的将士也不知道主帅已死，将领杜黑骡对新亭发动攻击，越攻越猛。
English: Liu Xuan's soldiers did not know that their commander was dead. General Du Heijie launched an attack on Xinting, and the attack became more and more fierce.

古文：萧道成在射堂，司空主簿萧惠朗帅敢死士数十人突入东门，至射堂下。
现代文：萧道成在射堂，叛军司空主簿萧惠朗率敢死队数十人，突破东门，直逼射堂。
English: Xiao Daocheng was in the hall, and the rebel leader Xiao Huilang led a death squad of dozens of people to break through the east gate and directly attack the hall.

古文：道成上马，帅麾下搏战，惠朗乃退，道成复得保城。
现代文：萧道成上马，率部下奋战，萧惠朗这才退走，萧道成得以再次保住新亭城池。
English: Xiao Daocheng mounted his horse and led his subordinates into battle. Xiao Huilang then retreated, and Xiao Daocheng was once again able to keep Xingting Castle.

古文：惠朗，惠开之弟也，其姊为休范妃。惠朗兄黄门郎惠明，明为道成军副，在城内，了不自疑。
现代文：萧惠朗是萧惠开的弟弟；他的姐姐是刘休范的妃子；萧惠朗的哥哥、黄门郎萧惠明此时任萧道成的军副，驻防城中，他并不认为自己会被怀疑。
English: Xiao Huilang was Xiao Huikai's younger brother; his older sister was Liu Xuan's concubine; Xiao Huilang's brother, Huangmen Lang Xiao Huiming, was stationed in the city as Xiao Dousheng's deputy, and he did not think he would be suspected.

古文：道成与黑骡拒战，自晡达旦，矢石不息；其夜，大雨，鼓叫不复相闻。
现代文：萧道成与杜黑骡酣战，自午后一直战到次日天明，流箭飞石，始终不停。
English: Xiao Daocheng fought with Du Hei Yao, from the afternoon until the next day's dawn, the flow of arrows and flying stones, always non-stop.

古文：将士积日不得寝食，军中马夜惊，城内乱走。
现代文：当天夜晚，天下大雨，战鼓和呐喊声音互不相闻，将领士卒整天整夜不吃不睡。而军中马匹忽然夜惊，跑出马厩，满城乱跑。
English: The soldiers were unable to sleep or eat for days on end, and the horses in the army were frightened at night and ran around the city.

古文：道成秉烛正坐，厉声呵之，如是者数四。
现代文：萧道成在指挥部手持蜡烛，正襟危坐，不断地厉声呵责，竟达四五次之多。
English: Xiao Daocheng held a candle in his hand at the headquarters, sat straight-faced, and constantly scolded, up to four or five times.

古文：丁文豪破台军于皁荚桥，直至硃雀桁南，杜黑骡亦舍新亭北趣硃雀桁。
现代文：叛军大将丁文豪，在皂荚桥击败官军，一直挺进到朱雀桁南。杜黑骡也舍弃新亭北上，到朱雀桁跟丁文豪会师。
English: The rebel general, Ding Wenhao, defeated the government army at Soju Bridge and advanced all the way to the south of Suzakujira. Du Heijie also abandoned Xinting and went north to join Ding Wenhao at Suzakujira.

古文：右军将军王道隆将羽林精兵在硃雀门内，急召鄱阳忠昭公刘勔于石头。
现代文：朝廷右军将军王道隆率羽林禁卫军的精锐，驻防在朱雀门内，看到形势危急，马上召驻守石头的鄱阳忠昭公刘增援。
English: The general of the right army of the imperial court, Wang Daolong, led the elite of the Yulin Imperial Guard, stationed in the Suzaku Gate. Seeing that the situation was critical, he immediately called in reinforcements from Liu Zhenyang, who was stationed at the Stone.

古文：勔至，命撤桁以折南军之势，道隆怒曰： 贼至，但当急击，宁可开桁自弱邪！ 
现代文：刘达到后，命令撤除朱雀桁，阻止叛军的攻击之势。王道隆大发雷霆，说： 贼兵到了，只应头痛击，怎么能撤除浮桥，先使自己居手劣势！ 
English: After Liu arrived, he ordered the removal of the Suzaku girder to stop the rebels from attacking. Wang Daolong was furious and said: The thief soldiers have arrived, they should only be hit on the head, how can they remove the pontoon bridge, first make themselves inferior!

古文：勔不敢复言。
现代文：刘不敢顶撞这位得宠的权贵，不再说什么。
English: Liu Mianli did not dare to speak again.

古文：道隆趣勔进战，勔渡桁南，战败而死。
现代文：王道隆催促刘进攻，刘过朱雀桁南下，战败身亡。
English: Wang Daolong urged Liu to attack, and Liu marched southward past Suzaku and was defeated and killed.

古文：黑骡等乘胜渡淮，道隆弃众走还台，黑骡兵追杀之。
现代文：杜黑骡等叛军乘胜渡过秦淮河，王道隆弃军而逃，奔向台城，杜黑骡追击，杀了王道隆。
English: Du Heihe and other rebels took advantage of the victory to cross the Qinhuai River. Wang Daolong abandoned the army and fled to Taicheng. Du Heihe pursued and killed Wang Daolong.

古文：黄门侍郎王蕴重伤，踣于御沟之侧，或扶之以免。
现代文：黄门侍郎王蕴身负重伤，倒在御水河旁，幸而有人扶起他逃走，才保住性命。
English: Huangmen waiter Wang Yun was seriously injured and fell down by the Misui River. Fortunately, someone helped him escape and saved his life.

古文：蕴，景文之兄子也。
现代文：王蕴是王景文哥哥的儿子。
English: Wang Yun is the son of Wang Jingwen's elder brother.

古文：于是中外大震，道路皆云 台城已陷 ，白下、石头之众皆溃，张永、沈怀明逃还。
现代文：民间到处传言说： 宫城已经陷落 。白下、石头驻军全都溃散，张永、沈怀明逃回。
English: Rumors spread everywhere among the people: Miyagi has fallen. In the end, all the stone garrisons were broken up, and Zhang Yong and Shen Huiming fled back.

古文：宫中传新亭亦陷，太后执帝手泣曰： 天下败矣！ 
现代文：宫中又传言新亭也已陷落，皇太后王贞风握着小皇帝的手，哭泣说： 天下败落了！ 
English: There were also rumours in the palace that Shinting had fallen. The empress dowager Wang Zhenfeng held the little emperor's hand and wept, saying: The world has fallen!

古文：先是，月犯右执法，太白犯上将，或劝刘勔解职。
现代文：在这之前，月亮侵犯右执法星，太白金星侵犯上将星，有人劝刘辞职。
English: Prior to this, the moon violated the right law enforcement star, the white gold star violated the general star, and some people advised Liu to resign.

古文：勔曰： 吾执心行己，无愧幽明，若灾眚必至，避岂得免！ 
现代文：刘说： 我们心检讨我的行为，无愧天地神明，如果灾难一定要来，躲也躲不掉！ 
English: Liu said: We review my behavior in our hearts, worthy of the gods of heaven and earth. If a disaster must come, it cannot be avoided!

古文：勔晚年颇慕高尚，立园宅，名为东山，遗落世务，罢遣部曲。
现代文：刘到了晚年，很追求高雅，建立林荫花园、修筑亭台楼阁，名叫东山，远离世俗杂务，遣散部曲。
English: In his later years, Liu pursued elegance, establishing a tree-lined garden and building a pavilion, called Dongshan, away from mundane chores, and dismissed the troupe.

古文：萧道成谓勔曰： 将军受顾命，辅幼主，当此艰难之日，而深尚从容，废省羽翼。一朝事至，悔可追乎！ 
现代文：萧道成劝告刘说： 将军接受先帝遗命，辅佐幼主，当此艰难的日子，却醉心于悠闲生活，翦除自己的羽翼，一旦发生大事，追悔莫及！ 
English: Xiao Daocheng advised Liu, saying: "The general accepted the last emperor's will and assisted the young master. However, in these difficult days, he is infatuated with a leisurely life and has spread his wings. In the event of a major event, he will regret it!

古文：勔不从而败。
现代文：刘不以为然，果然战败而亡。
English: Liu did not think so, and he was defeated and died.

古文：甲午，抚军长史褚澄开东府门纳南军，拥安成王准据东府，称桂阳王教曰： 安成王，吾子也，勿得侵犯。 
现代文：甲午，抚军长史褚澄，开东府门，迎接叛军，拥戴安成王刘准占领东府，宣称桂阳王刘休范有令： 安成王本是我的儿子，不可侵犯。 
English: In the afternoon of the first day of the second month, the commander-in-chief of the Guizhong army, Shi Jucheng, opened the gate of Dongfu to welcome the rebels, supported An Cheng Wang Liu Quan to occupy Dongfu, and declared that Guiyang King Liu Shufan had ordered: An Cheng Wang was my son, inviolable.

古文：澄，渊之弟也。
现代文：褚澄是褚渊的弟弟。
English: Hao Cheng is the younger brother of Hao Yuan.

古文：杜黑骡径进至杜姥宅，中书舍人孙千龄开承明门出降，宫省恇忧。
现代文：叛军将领杜黑骡一直挺进到杜姥宅。中书舍人孙千龄打开承明门出来投降，宫中和朝廷，乱成一团。
English: The rebel general Du Heibei advanced all the way to Du Ubaba's house. Sun Qianling, a scholar at the Chinese Academy of Sciences, opened the Chengming Gate and surrendered. The palace and the court were thrown into chaos.

古文：时府藏已竭，皇太后、太妃剔取宫中金银器物以充赏，众莫有斗志。
现代文：当时，国库已经枯竭，皇太后、皇太妃把宫中所有的金银财宝器物都捡剔出来，用作赏赐，无奈军士已经没有斗志。
English: At that time, the national treasury had been depleted, and the Empress Dowager and the Crown Princess had picked out all the gold, silver and treasures in the palace and used them as rewards. However, the sergeant had no fighting spirit.

古文：俄而丁文豪之从知休范已死，稍欲退散。
现代文：不久，丁文豪部队得知刘休范已死的消息，稍稍后退打算解散。
English: Soon after, Ding Wenhao's troops learned the news that Liu Xiufan had died, and they retreated a bit, intending to disband.

古文：文豪厉声曰： 我独不能定天下邪！ 
现代文：丁文豪厉声说： 难道我不能单独夺取天下！ 
English: Ding Wenhao snapped, "Can't I take over the world all by myself?

古文：许公舆诈称桂阳王在新亭，士民惶惑，诣萧道成垒投刺者以千数。
现代文：许公舆许诈称桂阳王刘休范没有死，正在新亭，官民恐惧困惑，纷纷奔往新亭，把萧道成的大营当成刘休范的大营，呈递求见的名片的人，多到数以千计。
English: Xu Gongshu fraudulently claimed that Guiyang King Liu Xiufan was not dead, but was in Xinting. Fearful and confused, officials and citizens rushed to Xinting in droves, mistaking Xiao Daocheng's camp for Liu Xiufan's camp. There were thousands of people who submitted business cards asking to see him.

古文：道成得，皆焚之，登北城谓曰； 刘休范父子昨已就戮，尸在南冈下。
现代文：萧道成看到后，把名片都烧掉，登上北城门，对大家说： 刘休范父子昨天已经被杀，尸体抛在劳山南冈下。
English: When Xiao Daocheng saw this, he burned all his business cards and went up to the north gate of the city to tell everyone: Liu Xiufan and his son had been killed yesterday, and their bodies had been thrown under the South Hill of Mt.

古文：身是萧平南，诸君谛视之，名刺皆已焚，勿忧惧也。 
现代文：我是平南将军萧道成，诸位不妨看个仔细。名片都已被烧掉，不必担心害怕。 
English: I am Pingnan General Xiao Daocheng. You may want to take a closer look. The business cards have all been burned. Don't be afraid.

古文：道成遣陈显达、张敬儿及辅师将军任农夫、马军主东平周盘龙等将兵，自石头济淮，从承明门入卫宫省。
现代文：萧道成派陈显达、张敬儿和辅师将军任农夫、马军主东平人周盘龙等率兵自石头渡秦淮河，从承明门入宫保卫宫廷及朝廷各机构。
English: Xiao Daocheng sent Chen Xianda, Zhang Jing'er and assistant division general Zhou Panlong to cross the Qinhuai River from the Stone and enter the palace from the Chengming Gate to defend the palace and all the institutions of the imperial court.

古文：袁粲慷慨谓诸将曰： 今寇贼已逼而众情离沮，孤子受先帝付托，不能绥靖国家，请与诸君同死社稷！ 
现代文：袁粲对各将领慷慨激昂地说： 现在，贼寇已逼到眼前，而人心离散，我受先帝托孤，不能安定国家，只有跟各位一道为国家效死。 
English: Yuan Shao said impassionedly to the generals: Now, the bandits have been forced to the front, and the hearts of the people are scattered. I am supported by the former emperor and cannot stabilize the country. I can only die for the country with you.

古文：被甲上马，将驱之。于是陈显达等引兵出战，大破杜黑骡于杜姥宅，飞矢贯达目。
现代文：穿上铠甲，跨上战马，准备冲出，陈显达等率军出战，与叛军展开激战，在杜姥宅大破杜黑骡，一支流箭射中陈显达的眼睛。
English: Put on armor, mounted a warhorse, ready to rush out, Chen Xianda and others led the army into battle, waged a fierce battle with the rebels, smashed Du Heijie in Du Ubaba's house, and shot Chen Xianda's eyes with a stray arrow.

古文：丙申，张敬儿等又破黑骡等于宣阳门，斩黑骡及丁文豪，进克东府，馀党悉平。
现代文：丙申，张敬儿等又在宣阳门大破叛军，杀了杜黑骡和丁文豪。乘胜攻克东府，叛党余孽全部平定。
English: Bishen, Zhang Jing'er and others defeated the rebels at Xuanyang Gate, killing Du Heixuan and Ding Wenhao. With the victory, they conquered Dongfu, and all the remnants of the rebels were pacified.

古文：萧道成振旅还建康，百姓缘道聚观，曰： 全国家者，此公也！ 
现代文：萧道成整顿大军，返抵建康。百姓夹道观看，说： 保全国家的就是这位将军啊！ 
English: Xiao Dao formed a rectification army and returned to Jiankang. The people watched and said: This general is the one who protects the country!

古文：道成与袁粲、褚渊、刘秉皆上表引咎解职，不许。
现代文：萧道成与袁粲、褚渊、刘秉都上表引咎辞职，没有批准。
English: Xiao Daocheng, Yuan Yu, Yu Yuan, and Liu Bing all submitted their resignations, without approval.

古文：丁酉，解严，大赦。
现代文：丁酉，解除戒严，宣布大赦。
English: Ding Rong, lift the martial law and declare an amnesty.

古文：柔然遣使来聘。
现代文：柔然汗国派使节来访。
English: The Khanate of Joran sent an envoy to visit.

古文：六月，庚子，以平南将军萧道成为中领军、南兗州刺史，留卫建康，与袁粲、褚渊、刘秉更日入直决事，号为 四贵 。
现代文：六月，庚子，擢升南平将军萧道成为中领军、南兖州刺史，留守京师建康，并与袁粲、褚渊、刘秉轮流进宫值班，裁决政事，当时称四人为四贵。
English: In June, Geng Zi promoted Nanping General Xiao Dao to become the leader of the central army and the history of Nanxizhou. Jian Kang, who stayed in Beijing, took turns with Yuan Shao, Yu Yuan, and Liu Bing to enter the palace on duty and adjudicate political affairs. At that time, the four were said to be the four precious ones.

古文：桂阳王休范之反也，使道士陈公昭作《天公书》，题云 沈丞相 ，付荆州刺史沈攸之门者。攸之不开视，推得公昭，送之朝廷。
现代文：桂阳王刘休范发动政变时，让道士陈公昭撰写《天公书》，上题 沈丞相 ，送交荆州刺史沈攸之的看门人，沈攸之没有打开看，就搜捕送书人，穷追深查，最后抓到陈公昭，把他送到朝廷。
English: When Liu Xiufan, the king of Guiyang, launched a coup, he asked the Taoist Chen Gongzhao to write "Tian Gongshu" (天公書), with the above title "Shen Chengxian" (沈丞相), and sent it to the gatekeeper of the Jingzhou assassin Shen Youzhi. Shen Youzhi did not open and read it, so he searched for and arrested the sender of the book, conducted an exhaustive investigation, and finally caught Chen Gongzhao and sent him to the imperial court.

古文：及休范反，攸之谓僚佐曰： 杜阳必声言我与之同。若不颠沛勤王，必增朝野之惑。 
现代文：等到刘休范谋反，沈攸之对他的同僚门客说： 刘休范一定声称我响应他的行动，如果不奋身勤王，必将曾加朝野对我的误会。 
English: When Liu Xiufan plotted a rebellion, Shen Youzhi said to his colleague and protégé: Liu Xiufan must have claimed that I responded to his actions. If I did not devote myself to the king, I would have added to the misunderstanding of me in the court.

古文：乃与南徐州刺史建平王景素、郢州刺史晋熙王燮、湘州刺史王僧虔、雍州刺史张兴世同举兵讨休范。
现代文：于是会同南徐州刺史建平王刘景素、郢州刺史晋熙王刘燮、湘州刺史王僧虔、雍州刺史张兴世，共同举兵，讨伐刘休范。
English: Therefore, together with Liu Jingsu, the king of Jianping in southern Xuzhou, Liu Kun, the king of Jinxi in Zhangzhou, Wang Xiangyan in Hunan, and Zhang Xingshi in Yongzhou, they jointly raised an army to fight Liu Xiufan.

古文：休范留中兵参军长惠连等守寻阳，燮遣中兵参军冯景祖袭之。
现代文：刘休范留下中兵参军毛惠连等守卫寻阳。刘燮派中兵参军冯景祖率军袭击毛惠连。
English: Liu Xiufan left Mao Huilian, a member of the Chinese People's Liberation Army, and other soldiers to guard Xiangyang. Liu Bei sent Feng Jingzu, a member of the Chinese People's Liberation Army, to attack Mao Huilian.

古文：癸卯，惠连等开门请降，杀休范二子，诸镇皆罢兵。
现代文：癸卯，毛惠连等开门投降，冯景祖诛杀刘休范的两个儿子，各州才把军队撤回去。
English: It took the states to withdraw their troops from the frontline, after Shao Wu, Mao Huilian and others opened their doors and surrendered, and Feng Jingzu assassinated Liu Xiufan's two sons.

古文：景素，宏之子也。
现代文：刘景素是刘宏的儿子。
English: Liu Jingsu is the son of Liu Hong.

古文：乙卯，魏诏曰： 下民凶戾，不顾亲戚，一人为恶，殃及阖门。
现代文：乙卯，北魏下诏说： 卑劣的小民，凶恶暴戾，从不顾及亲属，一个人作恶，祸及全家。
English: Second, the Northern Wei Dynasty issued the following edict: Despicable commoners, vicious and violent, never consider relatives, one person commits evil, and the whole family is plagued.

古文：朕为民父母，深所愍悼。
现代文：朕为百姓的父母，深感怜悯哀痛。
English: As the parents of the people, I feel deep pity and sorrow.

古文：自今非谋反、大逆、外叛，罪止其身。 
现代文：从今以后，除非是谋反、大逆、外叛，其他犯罪，只惩罚一人。 
English: From now on, only one person will be punished, except for crimes of conspiracy, high treason, rebellion and other crimes.

古文：于是始罢门、房之诛。
现代文：于是，撤销灭门、灭房的诛戮。
English: As a result, the door-killing and house-killing campaigns were revoked.

古文：魏显祖勤于为治，赏罚严明，慎择牧守，进廉退贪。
现代文：北魏献文帝拓跋弘治理国家勤劳辛苦，赏罚严明，对州、郡长官的挑选十分慎重，提拔廉洁官员，罢黜贪官污吏。
English: In the Northern Wei Dynasty, Emperor Qianwen worked hard and diligently to govern the country, and the rewards and punishments were strict. He was very careful in the selection of prefectural and county governors, promoted clean officials, and dismissed corrupt officials.

古文：诸曹疑事，旧多奏决，又口传诏敕，或致矫擅。
现代文：从前，各部门有疑难困惑之事，大多当面奏报，听候皇上裁决，然后再口头转达皇上的决定，这样有时会歪曲或假传圣旨。
English: In the past, when various departments had difficult and confusing matters, most of them reported in person, waited for the emperor's ruling, and then verbally conveyed the emperor's decision, which sometimes distorted or falsified the will.

古文：上皇命事无大小，皆据律正名，不得为疑奏；合则制可，违则弹诘，尽用墨诏，由是事皆精审。
现代文：太上皇献文帝命令，不管案件大小，都要根据法律辩证判断，不可以动不动就做为疑难上疏请示。合于法律的，朝廷会批准，违背法律的，朝廷会批驳，都是用手诏直接发出。
English: The Emperor Jianwen's order, regardless of the size of the case, should be based on the dialectical judgment of the law, and should not be treated as a difficult request. If it conforms to the law, the court will approve it, and if it violates the law, the court will refute it. It is issued directly by hand.

古文：尤重刑罚，大刑多令覆鞫，或囚系积年。
现代文：从此以后，诉讼案件，都能办得认真周密。太上皇尤其重视刑事判决，凡是死罪，很多都下令复审，有些囚犯在监狱中关押好几年没有定案。
English: From then on, lawsuits could be handled carefully and thoroughly. The emperor attached particular importance to criminal judgments. For all capital crimes, many were ordered to be reviewed, and some prisoners were held in prison for several years without a final decision.

古文：群臣颇以为言，上皇曰： 滞狱诚非善治，不犹俞于仑猝而滥乎！
现代文：群臣颇有意见，太上皇说： 长久羁押，当然不是好办法，但是不比草率乱杀要好吗？
English: The group of courtiers had a lot of opinions, and the emperor said: Of course, long-term detention is not a good way, but is it not better than hasty indiscriminate killing?

古文：夫人幽苦则思善，故智者以囹圄为福堂，朕特苦之，欲其改悔而加矜恕尔。 
现代文：人在监狱中受到痛苦，就会全心向善，所以聪明的人把监狱当作磨炼的场所。朕特别使犯人受一点苦楚，希望他们悔过自新，然后再对他们宽恕！ 
English: Suffering in prison makes people wholeheartedly good, so wise people use prison as a place of training. I especially make prisoners suffer a little, hope they repent, and then forgive them!

古文：由是囚系虽滞，而所刑多得其宜。
现代文：从此，囚犯虽然囚禁的时间较长，但给他们的处罚大多能够恰当。
English: Since then, although prisoners have been incarcerated for a longer period of time, the punishment given to them is mostly appropriate.

古文：又以赦令长奸，故自延兴以后，不复有赦。
现代文：太上皇还认为普遍赦免罪犯，反而鼓励犯罪，所以自延兴以后，北魏不崐再实行大赦。
English: Emperor Taizong also believed that generally pardoning criminals encouraged crime, so the Northern Wei Dynasty did not hesitate to implement amnesty after Yanxing.

古文：秋，七月，庚辰，立皇弟友为邵陵王。
现代文：秋季，七月，庚辰，封皇弟刘友为邵陵王。
English: In the autumn, in July, Geng Chen made Liu You, the younger brother of the emperor, the king of Shao Ling.

古文：乙酉，加荆州刺史沈攸之开府仪同三司，攸之固辞。
现代文：乙酉，加授荆州刺史沈攸之为开府仪同三司，沈攸之坚决辞让。
English: Yixuan, Jingzhou Zishi Shen Yau was awarded the Kefu Yi and the three divisions, and Shen Yau's resolute resignation.

古文：执政欲征攸之而惮于发命，乃以太后令遣中使谓曰： 公久劳于外，宜还京师。
现代文：朝廷执政官员打算征召沈攸之回到京师，却不敢发布调令，于是以皇太后王贞风的名义派宦官前去对沈攸之说： 你长久在外辛劳，应该返回京师了。
English: The ruling officials of the imperial court planned to call Shen Youyou back to Beijing Division, but they did not dare to issue a transfer order, so they sent a eunuch in the name of the Empress Dowager Wang Zhenfeng to say to Shen Youyou: You have been working hard for a long time, you should return to Beijing Division.

古文：任寄实重，未欲轻之；进退可否，在公所择。 
现代文：朝廷交付你的责任实在重要，并没有打算减轻之意。所以，进退与否，由你决定。 
English: The responsibility entrusted to you by the court is very important, and there is no intention to lessen it. Therefore, it is up to you to decide whether to advance or retreat.

古文：攸之曰： 臣无廓庙之资，居中实非其才。
现代文：沈攸之说： 我这个人，不是国家栋梁之材，供职京师，非我能力所及。
English: Shen Youzhi said: I, as a person, am not a pillar of the country. Serving as a Beijing teacher is beyond my ability.

古文：至于扑讨蛮、蜑，克清江、汉，不敢有辞。
现代文：可是，让我去讨伐蛮族、反民，平定长江、汉水一带的叛乱，不敢推辞。
English: However, I dare not refuse to go and fight the barbarians and anti-people and quell the rebellions along the Yangtze River and the Han River.

古文：虽自上如此，去留伏听朝旨。 
现代文：这虽然是我的自己提出的请求，但应去应留，仍俯首听候朝廷的安排。 
English: Although this is my own request, I should go and stay, and still bow down to the arrangements of the imperial court.

古文：乃止。
现代文：这项调动才作罢。
English: He dismissed the idea.

古文：癸巳，柔然寇魏敦煌，尉多侯击破之。
现代文：癸巳，柔然汗国攻击北魏的敦煌，被敦煌的尉多侯击败。
English: Soon after, the Khanate of Rouen attacked Dunhuang of the Northern Wei Dynasty, and was defeated by the vassals of Dunhuang.

古文：尚书秦： 敦煌僻远，介居西、北强寇之间，恐不能自固，请内徙就凉州。 
现代文：尚书奏称： 敦煌地方偏僻遥远，夹在西方、北方两大强寇之间，恐怕不能自保。不如放弃城池，把全部百姓迁到凉州。 
English: Shang Shuxiao said: Dunhuang is a remote and distant place, sandwiched between the two powerful invaders in the west and north, and I am afraid it cannot protect itself. It is better to abandon the city and move all the people to Liangzhou.

古文：群臣集议，皆以为然。给事中昌黎韩秀独以为： 敦煌之置，为日已久。虽逼强寇，人习战斗，纵有草窃，不为大害。
现代文：文武官员集会商议，都认为很对，只有给事中昌黎人韩秀反对，他认为： 敦煌设置城池，为时已经很久，虽然逼近强大的贼寇，但百姓对沙场战斗，已经习以为常。
English: Civil and military officials gathered for deliberation, all thought it was right, only to be opposed by Han Xiu, a person from Changli in the middle of the matter. He thought: Dunhuang has been setting up a city for a long time, although approaching powerful thieves, but the people have become accustomed to fighting on the battlefield.

古文：循常置戍，足以自全；而能隔阂西、北二虏，使不得相通。
现代文：即使有几个小贼，也翻不起大浪。按照平常的驻防，足以保全自己。而且，敦煌的地理位置非常重要，可隔断西方、北方二敌的接触，使得他们不能往来。
English: Even if there are a few petty thieves, they cannot turn back the big waves. According to the usual stationing, it is enough to protect themselves. Moreover, Dunhuang's geographical location is very important, it can cut off the contact between the two enemies in the west and the north, making them unable to communicate.

古文：今徙就凉州，不唯有蹙国之名，且姑臧去敦煌千有馀里，防逻甚难，二虏必有交通闚之志；若骚动凉州，则关中不得安枕。
现代文：如果把当地的百姓强行迁到凉州，不但蒙受丧失国土的罪名，而且，姑臧距离敦煌有千里之遥，布防？巡逻都非常困难，两个强敌一定有联盟、侵略的野心。如果骚乱了凉州，那么关中百姓就无法安心生活。
English: If the local people are forcibly relocated to Liangzhou, they will not only be accused of losing their land, but also, Gucheng is thousands of miles away from Dunhuang, and it is very difficult to set up defenses and patrols. The two strong enemies must have the ambition of alliance and aggression. If Liangzhou is disturbed, then the people of Guanzhong will not be able to live with peace of mind.

古文：又，士民或安土重迁，招引外寇，为国深患，不可不虑也。 
现代文：同时，官员或百姓如果有人因安土重迁而招引外寇前来，里应外合，势必成为国家深远的祸患，不可不考虑。 
English: At the same time, if officials or ordinary people invite foreign invaders to come because of the resettlement of the Andes, it will inevitably become a far-reaching disaster for the country, and must be considered.

古文：乃止。
现代文：于是，放弃敦煌的计划才停止。
English: He dismissed the idea.

古文：九月，丁酉，以尚书令袁粲为中书监、领司徒；加褚渊尚书令；刘秉丹阳尹。
现代文：九月，丁酉，任命尚书令袁粲为中书监，兼任司徒；褚渊为尚书令；刘秉为丹阳尹。
English: In September, Ding Jun, appointed Shang Shuling Yuan Jie as the Central Book Supervisor, concurrently serving as a scholar; Yu Yuan as Shang Shuling; Liu Bing as Danyang Yin.

古文：粲固辞，求反居墓所；不许。
现代文：袁粲坚决辞职，请求回到墓园，继续为亡母守丧，没有批准。
English: Yuan Qi resolutely resigned and requested to return to the cemetery to continue to mourn for his dead mother, but this was not approved.

古文：渊以褚澄为吴郡太守，司徒左长史萧惠明言于朝曰： 褚澄开门纳贼，更为股肱大郡，王蕴力战几死，弃而不收。
现代文：褚渊任命他的哥哥褚澄为吴郡太守，司徒左长史萧惠明在朝廷公开指责说： 褚澄大开城门，招引叛贼，现在却又主管重要的大郡。王蕴奋身力战，几乎送命，却被抛置脑后，没人理他。
English: Gongyuan appointed his brother Gongcheng to be the governor of Wu County, and the left-hand ruler of Sidu, Shi Xiao Huiming, publicly accused him in the imperial court, saying: Gongcheng opened the gates wide, attracted traitors, but now he is in charge of an important county. Wang Yun fought hard and almost died, but he was left behind, no one paid attention to him.

古文：赏罚如此，何忧不乱！ 
现代文：赏罚这样颠倒，何愁天下不乱！ 
English: Reward and punishment so upside down, why worry, the world is not chaotic!

古文：渊甚惭。
现代文：褚渊大为惭愧。
English: Shibuya is very ashamed.

古文：冬，十月，庚申，以侍中王蕴为湘州刺史。
现代文：冬季，十月，庚申，任命侍中王蕴为湘州刺史。
English: In winter, October, Goshun, Wang Yun, an aide-de-camp, was appointed as the history of Hunan Province.

古文：十一月，丙戌，帝加元服，大赦。
现代文：十一月，丙戌，刘宋皇帝刘昱行加冠礼，实行大赦。
English: In November, the pro-Han and Song emperors Liu Bei and Liu Xuan were crowned and granted amnesty.

古文：十二月，癸亥，立皇弟跻为江夏王，赞为武陵王。
现代文：十二月，癸亥，封皇弟刘跻为江夏王，刘赞为武陵王。
English: In December, in the Year of the Boar, Liu Zhan, the younger brother of Emperor Feng, became the King of Jiangxia, and Liu Zan became the King of Wuling.

古文：是岁，魏建安贞王陆馛卒。
现代文：本年，北魏建安贞王陆去世。
English: This year, the Northern Wei Jian An Zhen Wang Lu passed away.

古文：太宗明皇帝下元徽三年春，正月，辛巳，帝祀南郊、明堂。
现代文：三年春，正月，辛巳，帝祀南郊、明堂。
English: In the spring of the third year, the first month of the year, it was time for the emperor to visit the southern suburbs and Myeongdong.

古文：萧道成以襄阳重镇，张敬儿人位俱轻，不欲使居之；而敬儿求之不已，谓道成曰： 沈攸之在荆州，公知其欲何所作；不出敬儿，以表里制之，恐非公之利。 
现代文：春季，正月，辛巳，刘宋皇帝刘昱到南郊祭天，并在皇家明堂举行全国祭祀大典。中领军萧道成认为襄阳是北方的军事重镇，张敬儿地位低微，又没有威望，不打算让他据守襄阳。但张敬儿不断请求，对萧道成说： 沈攸之在荆州，你知道他将来会干出什么勾当，不让我去建立内外夹攻的局势，恐怕对你并没有益处。 
English: In the spring, in the first month of Xin Si, Emperor Liu Xuan of the Liu Song Dynasty went to the southern suburbs to offer sacrifices to Heaven, and held a national sacrificial ceremony in the Royal Ming Hall. Xiao Daocheng, the leader of the middle army, thought that Xiangyang was a military stronghold in the north. Zhang Jing'er had a low status and no prestige, and did not intend to let him defend Xiangyang. However, Zhang Jing'er continued to plead, saying to Xiao Daocheng: Shen Youzhi is in Jingzhou, you know what he will do in the future. If you do not allow me to establish a situation of internal and external

古文：道成笑而无言。
现代文：萧道成会心微笑，不再言语。
English: Xiao Daocheng smiled knowingly, no longer saying a word.

古文：三月，己巳，以骁骑将军张敬儿为都督雍、梁二州诸军事、雍州刺史。
现代文：三月，己巳，朝廷任命骁骑将军张敬儿为统领雍、梁二州诸军事，兼雍州刺史。
English: In March, the imperial court appointed Zhang Jing'er, a cavalry general, as the commander of the military forces of Yong and Liang two states, and the leader of Yongzhou.

古文：沈攸之闻敬儿上，恐其见袭，阴为之备。
现代文：沈攸之听到张敬儿西上的消息，害怕他来袭击，暗中戒备。
English: Shen Youzhi heard the news of Zhang Jing'er's arrival in the west, feared that he would attack, and secretly prepared.

古文：敬儿既至，奉事攸之，亲敬甚至，动辄咨禀，信馈不绝。
现代文：张敬儿到任所之后，对沈攸之十分亲切尊敬，几乎一举一动，都向沈攸之请示，书信和礼物，络绎不绝。
English: After Zhang Jing'er arrived at the post, he had a very intimate respect for Shen You, and almost every move he made was a continuous stream of requests, letters and gifts to Shen You.

古文：攸之以为诚然，酬报款厚。
现代文：沈攸之认为张敬儿果真一片真心，回报也十分丰厚。
English: Shen Youzhi believes that Zhang Jing'er is really sincere, and the rewards are also very rich.

古文：累书欲因游猎会境上，敬儿报以为： 心期有在，景迹不宜过敦。 
现代文：曾经几次建议，两人一块出城打猎，在两州疆界上会晤。张敬儿回信说： 只要心在一起，形迹最好不要过于亲近。 
English: She had suggested several times that the two of them go out hunting together and meet at the border between the two states. Zhang Jing'er wrote back, "As long as our hearts are together, it's best not to get too close."

古文：攸之益信之。敬儿得其事迹，皆密白道成。
现代文：沈攸之对张敬儿越发信任，而张敬儿得到沈攸之的隐密行动，都暗中报告萧道成。
English: Shen Youzhi trusted Zhang Jing'er more and more, and when Zhang Jing'er learned of Shen Youzhi's secret actions, he secretly reported to Xiao Daocheng.

古文：道成与攸之书，问： 张雍州迁代之日，将欲谁拟？ 
现代文：萧道成写信给沈攸之，问： 张敬儿调职的时候，你看由谁来接替合适？ 
English: Xiao Daocheng wrote to Shen Youlu, asking: When Zhang Jing'er is transferred, who do you think is suitable to take over?

古文：攸之即以示敬儿，欲以间之。
现代文：沈攸之就让张敬儿过目，打算离间张敬儿与萧道成之间的感情。
English: Shen Yuanzhi let Zhang Jing'er glance over, intending to separate the feelings between Zhang Jing'er and Xiao Daocheng.

古文：夏，五月，丙午，魏主使员外散骑常侍许赤虎来聘。
现代文：夏季，五月，丙午，北魏国主派员外散骑常侍许赤虎来访。
English: In the summer, in May, on the afternoon of the third day of the month, the ruler of the Northern Wei Dynasty sent a member of the imperial cavalry to visit the Red Tiger.

古文：丁未，魏主如武州山；辛酉，如车轮山。
现代文：丁未，北魏国主前往武州山。辛酉，前往车轮山。
English: Ding Wei, the ruler of the Northern Wei Dynasty, went to Wuzhou Mountain. Xin Wei, went to the Wheel Mountain.

古文：六月，庚午，魏初禁杀牛马。
现代文：六月，庚午，北魏第一次下令禁止屠宰牛马。
English: In the afternoon of June, the Northern Wei Dynasty banned the slaughter of cattle and horses for the first time.

古文：袁粲、褚渊皆固让新官。
现代文：袁粲、褚渊都坚决辞让新封的官职。
English: Both Yuan Qi and Yu Yuan resolutely resigned from their newly-appointed posts.

古文：秋，七月，庚戌，复以粲为尚书令，八月，庚子，加护军将军褚渊中书监。
现代文：秋季，七月，庚戌，再次任命袁粲为尚书令。八月，庚子，加授护军将军褚渊为中书监。
English: In the autumn, in July, Geng Zi re-appointed Yuan Zi as the Senior Superintendent of Books, and in August, Geng Zi conferred the title of Senior Superintendent of Books on Geng Yuan.

古文：冬，十二月，丙寅，魏徙建昌王长乐为安乐王。
现代文：冬季，十二月，丙寅，北魏改封建昌王拓跋长乐为安乐王。
English: Winter, December, He Yin, the Northern Wei Dynasty changed the feudal Chang Wang Tuoba Changle to the King of Happiness.

古文：己丑，魏城阳王长寿卒。
现代文：己丑，北魏城阳王拓跋长寿去世。
English: He was ugly, and the Northern Wei Chengyang King Tuoba died a long life.

古文：南徐州刺史建平王景素，孝友清令，服用俭素，又好文学，礼接士大夫，由是有美誉；太宗特爱之，异其礼秩。
现代文：南徐州刺史建平王刘景素孝敬父母，与兄弟友爱，清高显贵，日常生活节俭朴素，又喜爱文学，待人接物，谦卑有礼，受到大家一致称赞。
English: Jianping Wang Liu Jingsu, the king of southern Xuzhou, was revered by his parents and loved by his brothers. He was noble and dignified, his daily life was frugal and simple, he loved literature, he was kind to others, he was humble and courteous, and he was praised by everyone.

古文：时太祖诸子俱尽，诸孙唯景素为长；帝凶狂失德，朝野皆属意于景素。
现代文：明帝对他也非常喜爱。此时，文帝所生的儿子已全部死去，在孙子辈中，只有刘景素年纪最大。刘昱凶暴疯狂，毫无品德，朝廷和民间都寄希望于刘景素。
English: Emperor Ming was also very fond of him. At this time, all the sons born to Emperor Wen had died, and among the grandchildren, only Liu Jing Su was the oldest. Liu Xuan was violent and crazy, and had no moral character. Both the court and the people pinned their hopes on Liu Jing Su.

古文：帝外家陈氏深恶之，杨运长、阮佃夫等欲专权势，不利立长君，亦欲除之。
现代文：然而，刘昱舅父陈家的人，都对刘景素十分厌恶。杨运长、阮佃夫等人打算长期掌握权势，不希望拥立年纪大的君王，因此也打算铲除刘景素。
English: However, the Chen family of Liu Hui's uncle, Liu Jingsu, was very disgusted with him. Yang Yunchang, Nguyn Xuân Phúc and others planned to hold power for a long time and did not want to support an elderly king, so they also planned to eradicate Liu Jingsu.

古文：其腹心将佐多劝景素举兵，镇军参军济阳江淹独谏之，景素不悦。
现代文：刘景素的心腹将领，都劝刘景素发动兵变，只有镇军参军济阳人江淹劝说刘景素不要这样做，刘景素很不高兴。
English: Liu Jingsu's confidant generals all advised Liu Jingsu to launch a mutiny, but only the town army joined the army and Jiyang people flooded the river to persuade Liu Jingsu not to do so. Liu Jingsu was very unhappy.

古文：是岁，防阁将军王季符得罪于景素，单骑亡奔建康，告景素谋反。
现代文：本年，防将军王季符昌犯了刘景素，单枪匹马逃到建康，告崐发刘景素谋反。
English: This year, Wang Ji Fuchang, a defense general, committed a crime against Liu Jingsu, fled to Jiankang single-handedly, and accused Liu Jingsu of plotting a rebellion.

古文：运长等即欲发兵讨之，袁粲、萧道成以为不可；景素亦遣世子延龄诣阙自陈。
现代文：杨运长等立刻就要出动军队讨伐，袁粲、萧道成认为不能这样做。而刘景素也派他的继承人、世子刘延龄，到建康向朝廷说明真相。
English: Yang Yunchang and others wanted to immediately dispatch an army to fight, but Yuan Qi and Xiao Daocheng thought that this was not possible. Liu Jingsu also sent his heir, his son Liu Yanling, to Jiankang to explain the truth to the imperial court.

古文：乃徙季符于梁州，夺景素征北将军、开府仪同三司。
现代文：于是将王季符贬逐到梁州，免去刘景素征北将军、开府仪同三司的官职。
English: As a result, Wang Jifu was banished to Liangzhou, and Liu Jingsu was removed from the posts of General of the Northern Expedition, Kaifu Yi, and the Third Division.

