古文：○光宗光宗循道宪仁明功茂德温文顺武圣哲慈孝皇帝，讳惇，孝宗第三子也。
现代文：光宗循道宪仁明功茂德温文顺武圣哲慈孝皇帝，名，宋孝宗的第三个儿子。
English: Emperor Gwangjong, the third son of Emperor Song, is known as the third son of Emperor Gwangjong, the third son of Emperor Song.

古文：母曰成穆皇后郭氏。
现代文：母亲是成穆皇后郭氏。
English: His mother was Empress Guo of Chengmu.

古文：绍兴十七年九月乙丑，生于藩邸。
现代文：绍兴十七年九月乙丑日，生于王府。
English: Shaoxing in September 17th, the second day of the Ugly, was born in Wangfu.

古文：二十年赐今名，授右监门卫率府副率，转荣州刺史。
现代文：绍兴二十年，赐给现名，授为右监门卫率府副率，转为荣州刺史。
English: Twenty years in Shaoxing, he was given his current name, promoted to the vice-head of the Right Supervisor of the Gate Guards, and became the chief historian of Rongzhou.

古文：孝宗即位，拜镇洮军节度使、开府仪同三司，封恭王。
现代文：孝宗即位，授为镇姚军节度使、开府仪同三司，封为恭王。
English: When Emperor Xiaozong ascended to the throne, he was awarded the title of Zhenyao Military Festival Envoy, Kaifu Ceremonial and Three Departments, and was given the title of King Gong.

古文：及庄文太子薨，孝宗以帝英武类己，欲立为太子，而以其非次，迟之。
现代文：庄文太子逝世后，孝宗认为光宗英武才能像自己，想立为太子，但因为按长次轮不到他，迟迟没有决定。
English: After the death of Prince Zhuangwen, Xiaozong thought that Guangzong Yingwu could be like him and wanted to become the prince, but because he was not the next in line, he hesitated to make a decision.

古文：乾道六年七月，太史奏：木、火合宿，主册太子，当有赦。
现代文：乾道六年七月，太史上奏：木星、火星合宿，主册太子，应该宣布赦免。
English: In July of the sixth year of the dry road, the Taixing play: Jupiter, Mars training camp, the main prince, should announce the pardon.

古文：是时，虞允文相，因请蚤建储贰。
现代文：这时，虞允文为相，于是请求趁早确立皇太子。
English: At this time, Yu Yunwen was in the picture, so he requested that the crown prince be established as soon as possible.

古文：孝宗曰： 朕久有此意，事亦素定。
现代文：孝宗说： 肤很早就有这个愿望，谁来即位也成竹在胸。
English: Xiaozong said: I have had this wish for a long time, and whoever comes to the throne has it in his heart.

古文：但恐储位既正，人性易骄，即自纵逸，不勤于学，浸有失德。
现代文：但是担心皇太子位一旦宣布确定，人性容易向骄横方向发展，不严格要求自己，放纵贪逸，不用心学习，渐渐变得德性不高。
English: However, it is feared that once the crown prince's position is announced and confirmed, human nature will easily develop in the direction of arrogance, not strictly demanding oneself, indulging in greed, not paying attention to study, and gradually becoming less virtuous.

古文：朕所以未建者，更欲其练历庶务，通知古今，庶无后悔尔。 
现代文：肤所以没有宣布确定，是想再考验他处理政务的能力，让他通知古今，从而使自己和国家不至于后悔。 
English: The reason why he did not announce his decision was to further test his ability to handle government affairs and let him inform the past and the present, so that he and the country would not regret it.

古文：七年正月丙子朔，孝宗上两宫尊号册、宝，礼成。
现代文：乾道七年正月初一，孝宗上两宫尊号册宝，礼成。
English: On the first day of the first month of the seventh year of the Qian Dao, Xiaozong ascended the two palaces of the honorable title of treasure, and was honored.

古文：丞相允文复以请，孝宗曰： 朕既立太子，即令亲王出镇外藩，卿宜讨论前代典礼。 
现代文：承相虞允文又请求立太子，孝宗说： 肤一旦确立太子，即令亲王出镇外藩，你应该讨论前代典礼。 
English: His heir apparent, Yu Yunwen, also requested the establishment of a crown prince, and Takamune said: Once the crown prince is established, the prince will be ordered to leave the town and the domain. You should discuss the previous generation's ceremony.

古文：允文寻以闻。
现代文：虞允文不久将自己的讨论上报朝廷。
English: Yu Yunwen soon reported his discussions to the imperial court.

古文：二月癸丑，乃立帝为皇太子，庆王恺为雄武、保宁军节度使、判宁国府，进封魏王。
现代文：二月初八，确立光宗为皇太子；庆王赵恺为雄武、保宁军节度使，判宁国府，进封为魏王。
English: On the 8th day of the 2nd month of the year, Guangzong was established as the crown prince; Qing Wang Zhao Jun was appointed as the hero, the Boryeong army as the festival envoy, the Boryeong provincial capital was decided, and the Wei king was appointed.

古文：三月丁酉，受皇太子册。
现代文：三月二十三日，接受皇太子封册。
English: On March 23rd, he received the crown prince's seal.

古文：四月甲子，命判临安府，寻领尹事。
现代文：四月二十日，命令判临安府，不久领府尹事。
English: On April 20th, the order was given to Lin'an Prefecture, and soon after, to Yin County.

古文：帝之为恭王，与讲官商较前代，时出意表，讲官自以为不及。
现代文：光宗为恭王，与讲官讨论前代历史，经常说出些意想不到的意见，讲官自以为不及光宗。
English: Guangzong was a king of righteousness, and discussed the history of the previous generation with the lecturer. He often said some unexpected opinions. The lecturer thought he was not as good as Guangzong.

古文：逮尹临安，究心民政，周知情伪。
现代文：等到领临安府尹事，更加究心民政，事情的真假都弄得清清楚楚。
English: By the time the matter was brought to the Lin'an prefectural government, more attention was paid to civil affairs, and the truth and falsehood of the matter were made clear.

古文：孝宗数称之，且语丞相赵雄曰： 太子资质甚美，每遣人来问安，朕必戒以留意问学。 
现代文：孝宗多次予以称赞，而且对承相赵雄说： 太子资质很美，每次派人来问安，肤一定告诫太子要留意问学。 
English: Xiaozong praised him many times, and said to Zhao Xiong, the heir to the throne: The prince is very well qualified. Every time he sends someone to ask for greetings, he must warn the prince to pay attention to his studies.

古文：淳熙十四年十月乙亥，高宗崩。
现代文：淳熙十四年十月初八，高宗逝世。
English: On the 8th day of the 10th month of the 14th year of Aung Hee, Gao Zong passed away.

古文：十一月己亥，百官大祥毕，孝宗手诏： 皇太子可令参决庶务，以内东门司为议事堂。 
现代文：十一月初二，文武百官大样祭祀完毕，孝宗手诏说： 可以命令皇太子参加处理日常事务，以内东门司为议事堂。 
English: On the second day of the first month of November, after a large-scale sacrifice of hundreds of civil and military officials was completed, Xiaozong said with his hand: It is possible to order the crown prince to participate in the handling of daily affairs, and to use the Inner East Mansion as a meeting hall.

古文：十五年二月戊戌，帝始赴议事堂，自是，间日与辅臣公裳系鞋相见，内外除擢，自馆职、部刺史以上乃以闻。
现代文：淳熙十五年二月戊戊，光宗开始到议事堂。从此，光宗隔一日与辅臣相见，内外官员的升降，从馆职、部刺史以上的才上报。
English: In February of the 15th year of Aung Hee, Guang Zong began to go to the council hall. From then on, Guang Zong met with his aide-de-camp every other day, and the promotion and demotion of officials at home and abroad, from the post of librarian, to the post of chief historian, was reported.

古文：九月乙巳，又诏： 每遇朝殿，令皇太子侍立。 
现代文：九月十二日，又下诏说： 每次朝殿，让皇太子侍立。 
English: On September 12th, he issued another edict: "Every time the Imperial Court moves, let the crown prince stand in attendance."

古文：十一月，丞相周必大乞去，孝宗谕曰： 朕比年病倦，欲传位太子，卿须少留。 
现代文：淳熙十五年十一月，承相周必大请求离位，孝宗告诉他说： 肤近年患病，想传位太子，你必须留任一段时间。 
English: In November of the fifteenth year of Aung Hee, Zhou Bida, the heir to the throne, requested to abdicate. Xiaozong told him: "You have been ill in recent years. If you want to be crown prince, you must stay in office for a while."

古文：会陈康伯家以绍兴传位御札来上，十二月壬申，孝宗遣中使密持赐必大，因令讨论典礼，既又密以禅意谕参知政事留正。
现代文：恰逢陈康伯家以绍兴传位御札来上。十二月十一日，孝宗派遣中使秘密拿着御札赐给周必大，于是让他们讨论典礼，不久又秘密告诉参知政事留正想禅位的愿望。
English: Chen Kangbo's family arrived with Shaoxing's imperial edict of enthronement. On December 11, Xiaozong secretly gave the imperial edict to Zhou Bida during the dispatch, so they let them discuss the ceremony, and soon they secretly told the prefect that they wanted to meditate.

古文：十六年正月辛亥，两府奏事，孝宗谕以倦勤，欲禅位皇太子，退就休养，以毕高宗三年之制。
现代文：淳熙十六年正月二十日，两府奏事，孝宗说他懒于从政，想禅位皇太子，退位休养，服完高宗三年之丧。
English: On the 20th day of the first month of the 16th year of Aung Hee, the two prefectures filed a report, and Takamune said that he was lazy in politics, wanted to be a Zen crown prince, abdicated to recuperate, and completed the three-year mourning of Gaozong.

古文：因令必大进呈诏草。
现代文：于是命令周必大进呈草诏。
English: He then ordered Zhou Bidaijin to submit a written edict.

古文：二月壬戌，孝宗吉服御紫宸殿，行内禅礼，应奉官以次称贺。
现代文：淳熙十六年二月初二，孝宗穿吉服到紫哀殿，举行内禅礼，应奉官按顺序称庆祝贺。
English: On the second day of the second month of February in the 16th year of Aung Hee, Emperor Xiaozong wore the auspicious clothes and went to the Purple Shrine to hold the inner Zen ceremony.

古文：内侍固请帝坐，帝固辞。
现代文：内侍力请光宗坐，光宗力辞。
English: Naishiriki asks Mitsumune to sit down, and Mitsumune reluctantly agrees.

古文：内侍扶掖至七八，乃微坐，复兴。
现代文：内侍扶持七八次，才微微坐下又起身。
English: The chambermaid supports him seven or eight times, before he slowly sits down and gets up again.

古文：次丞相率百僚称贺，礼毕，枢密院官升殿奏事，帝立听。
现代文：然后承相率领百官称庆祝贺，礼毕，枢密院官升殿奏事，光宗站着听。
English: Then, the prime minister led hundreds of officials in the celebration of congratulations and salutations, the Privy Councillor ascended to the throne, and Mitsumune stood and listened.

古文：班退，孝宗反丧服，御后殿，帝侍立，寻登辇，同诣重华宫。
现代文：奏事官员退殿后，孝宗换上丧服，到后殿，光宗侍立于旁，不久登上车驾，一起到重华宫。
English: After the coroner's officer left the hall, Takamune changed into mourning clothes and went to the back hall, where Mitsumune stood by his side. Soon, they boarded a carriage and went to the Shigeha Palace together.

古文：帝还内，即上尊号曰至尊寿皇圣帝，皇后曰寿成皇后。
现代文：光宗回到宫内，即上尊号为至尊寿皇圣帝，皇后为寿成皇后。
English: When Emperor Guangzong returned to the Imperial Palace, his regnal name was changed to Supreme Emperor Shou and his empress to Empress Shoucheng.

古文：寿皇圣帝诏立帝元妃李氏为皇后。
现代文：寿皇圣帝下诏立光宗元妃李氏为皇后。
English: Emperor Shou Enlai decreed that Princess Lee, the daughter of Emperor Guangzong, should be the empress.

古文：甲子，帝率群臣朝重华宫。
现代文：初四，光宗率领大臣朝拜重华宫。
English: On the fourth day of the new year, Mitsumune led the ministers to pay homage to the Chonghua Palace.

古文：大赦，百官进秩一级，优赏诸军，蠲公私逋负及郡县淳熙十四年以前税役。
现代文：举行大赦，文武百官进升一等，优赏各军，免除公私拖欠钱物和各郡县淳熙十四年以前的税役。
English: An amnesty was held, a hundred civil and military officials were promoted to the first grade, and the army was rewarded, exempting the public and private arrears of money and goods and the taxes of counties and counties before the 14th year of Chunxi.

古文：丙寅，帝率群臣诣重华宫，上尊号册、宝。
现代文：初六，光宗率领大臣到重华宫，呈上尊号册宝。
English: On the 6th day of the 6th month of the junior high school year, Mitsumune led the minister to the Chunghwa Palace to present the treasures of the Imperial Family.

古文：以阁门舍人谯熙载、姜特立并知阁门事。
现代文：任命门舍人憔熙载、姜特立为知阁门事。
English: He appointed his disciples, Gong Xizai and Jiang Teli, as the heads of the Shigatse Sect.

古文：庚午，诏五日一朝重华宫。
现代文：初十，下诏五日朝拜重华宫一次。
English: On the 10th day of the first month, on the 5th day of the second month, he paid homage to Chonghua Palace once.

古文：辛未，尊皇太后曰寿圣皇太后。
现代文：十一日，尊皇太后为寿圣皇太后。
English: On the 11th day of the month, His Imperial Highness the Empress Dowager passed away.

古文：壬申，诏内外臣僚陈时政阙失，四方献歌颂者勿受。
现代文：十二日，下诏内外臣僚陈述时政缺失，对各地贡献和歌颂则不接受。
English: On the 12th, the ministers at home and abroad stated that there was a lack of current politics, and they would not accept contributions and songs from various regions.

古文：遣罗点等使金告即位。
现代文：派遣罗点等出使金朝报告光宗即位。
English: He dispatched Luo Deng and other envoys to the Kim dynasty to report the enthronement of Emperor Guangzong.

古文：癸酉，诏戒敕将帅。
现代文：十三日，诏令告诫整治将帅。
English: On the 13th, the imperial edict admonished the generals to rectify the situation.

古文：赐前宰执、从官诏，访以得失。
现代文：赐给前任宰执、从臣诏书，访问朝政得失。
English: An imperial edict was issued to the former emperor and vassal, and the benefits and disadvantages of visiting the imperial court.

古文：乙亥，诏两省官详定内外封章，具要切者以闻。
现代文：十五日，诏令两省官员详细审定内外封事章奏，摘录重要的言论上报。
English: On the 15th, officials of the two provinces were ordered to review the internal and external correspondence in detail, and to report important remarks.

古文：遣诸葛廷瑞等使金吊祭。
现代文：派遣诸葛廷瑞等出使金朝吊祭。
English: Send Zhuge Tingrui and other emissaries to the gold hanging ceremony.

古文：丙子，诏戒敕官吏。
现代文：十六日，下诏整治官吏。
English: On the 16th, he issued an edict to rectify government officials.

古文：己卯，诏官吏赃罪显著者，重罚毋贷。
现代文：十九日，诏令官吏贪赃严重者，从重处罚，不予宽免。
English: On the 19th, it was decreed that officials who are seriously corrupt will be severely punished and will not be pardoned.

古文：辛巳，以生日为重明节。
现代文：二十一日，以生日为重明节。
English: On the twenty-first day, the birthday is celebrated as Chongming Festival.

古文：丁亥，诏百官轮对。
现代文：二十七日，诏令百官轮对。
English: On the 27th, the imperial edict was issued to hundreds of officials.

古文：己丑，诏编《寿皇圣政》。
现代文：二十九日，下诏编撰涛皇圣班。
English: On the 29th, the following edict was compiled by Emperor Tao's sacred class.

古文：庾寅，诏中书舍人罗点县可为台谏者，点以叶适、吴镒、孙逢吉、张体仁、冯震武、郑湜、刘崇之、沈清臣八人上之。
现代文：三十日，诏令中书舍人罗点开列可以担任台谏官的姓名，罗点写出了叶适、吴锰、孙逢吉、张体仁、冯震武、刘混、刘崇之、沈清臣八人的名字报上去。
English: On the 30th, in the imperial edict, the scribe Luo Dian listed the names of those who could serve as Taiwan eunuchs. Luo Dian wrote down the names of eight people: Ye Shi, Wu Mangan, Sun Fengji, Zhang Tizhen, Feng Zhenwu, Liu Jian, Liu Chongzhi, and Shen Qingchen.

古文：三月壬辰，以周必大为少保，留正转正奉大夫。
现代文：三月初二，以周必大为少保，留正转为正奉大夫。
English: On the second day of March, Zhou Bida was promoted to junior doctor, and Ruizheng was promoted to senior doctor.

古文：丙申，遣沈揆等使金贺即位。
现代文：初六，派遣沈撰等出使金朝祝贺金主即位。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, Shen Zhen and others sent envoys to the Kim dynasty to congratulate the Kim ruler on his accession to the throne.

古文：诏侍从、两省、台谏，各举可任湖广及四川总领者一人。
现代文：诏令侍从、两省、台谏官员，分别举荐可以担任湖广和四川总领者一人。
English: The attendant of the imperial edict, officials of the two provinces and Taiwan Province, respectively, can recommend one person to serve as the leader of Hukang and Sichuan.

古文：己亥，子扩进封嘉王。
现代文：初九，儿子赵扩进封为嘉王。
English: At the age of nine, his son, Zhao Yanjin, was crowned King of Jiading.

古文：癸卯，金遣王元德等来告哀。
现代文：十三日，金朝派遣王元德等来报告国哀。
English: On the 13th, the Kim dynasty sent Wang Yuande and others to report the national mourning.

古文：戊申，以寿皇却五日之朝，诏自今月四朝重华宫。
现代文：十八日，因寿皇拒绝五日接受朝拜一次，下诏从今以后每月朝拜重华宫四次。
English: On the 18th, because Emperor Shou refused to accept the worship once on the 5th, it was decreed that from now on, the worship of Chonghua Palace would be held four times a month.

古文：甲寅，以史浩为太师，伯圭为少师，少保土歆为少傅，昭庆军节度使士岘为少保。
现代文：二十四日，以史浩为太师，伯圭为少师，少保士散为少傅，昭庆军节度使士崛为少保。
English: On the 24th, Shi Hao was promoted to Taishi, Bo Gui was promoted to Shoshi, Shoboshi was promoted to Shofu, and the Shogun's festival envoy was promoted to Shobo.

古文：戊午，金遣张万公等来致遗留物。
现代文：二十八日，金朝派遣张万公等来馈送遗留物。
English: On the 28th, the Kim dynasty dispatched Zhang Wankong and others to bring back the leftovers.

古文：己未，以左补阙薛叔似为将作监，右拾遗许及之为军器监。
现代文：二十九日，任命左补网薛叔似为将作监，右拾遗许及之为军器监。
English: On the 29th, Xue Shuxi of Zuoxi Network was appointed as the inspector, and Yu Xie of Zuoxi Network was appointed as the inspector.

古文：拾遗、补阙官自此罢。
现代文：拾遗、补网官从此罢废。
English: Since then, the officials responsible for collecting and supplementing the Internet have been dismissed.

古文：诏东宫书籍并赐嘉王。
现代文：诏令东宫书籍都赐给嘉王。
English: According to the imperial edict, all the books of the Eastern Palace were given to King Jia.

古文：夏四月丙寅，有事于太庙。
现代文：夏四月初六，祭祀太庙。
English: On the 6th day of the 4th month in summer, the ritual of Taimyo is held.

古文：丁卯，四川应起经、总制钱存留三年，代输盐酒重额。
现代文：初七，四川应该起发的经、总制钱存留三年，代替输纳盐酒重额。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, Sichuan should keep the issued money and the total money for three years to replace the heavy amount of salt and wine.

古文：癸酉，侄抦进封许国公。
现代文：十三日，侄赵俩进封为许国公。
English: On the 13th, his nephews Zhao and Li were enthroned as Xu Guogong.

古文：乙亥，以两浙犒赏酒库隶诸州，岁入六十五万，寻减三十万。
现代文：十五日，以两浙搞赏酒库隶属各州，每年收人六十五万，不久减为三十万。
English: On the 15th, the liquor stores in Zhejiang and Zhejiang were subordinated to the states, with an annual income of six hundred and fifty thousand, soon reduced to three hundred thousand.

古文：戊寅，金遣徒单镒等来告即位。
现代文：十八日，金朝派遣徒单锰等来报告金主即位。
English: On the 18th, the Kim dynasty sent a messenger to report the enthronement of Kim Jong-il.

古文：以权兵部侍郎何澹为右谏议大夫。
现代文：任命代理兵部侍郎何澹为右谏议大夫。
English: Appointed the acting Hyobu chamberlain, He Xuan, as the right-hand councilor.

古文：丙戌，有事于景灵宫。
现代文：二十六日，祭祀景灵宫。
English: On the 26th, the ceremony was held at Jingling Palace.

古文：五月甲午，以王蔺知枢密院事兼参知政事。
现代文：五月初五，任命王蔺为知枢密院事兼参知政事。
English: On the fifth day of the fifth month of May, Wang Xi was appointed to be the Secretary of the Privy Council and a member of the Council of State.

古文：丙申，周必大罢为观文殿大学士、判潭州。
现代文：初七，周必大罢为观文殿大学士，判潭州。
English: On the seventh day of his junior year, Zhou Bida became a scholar of the Academy of Confucianism, and was awarded the title of Tanzhou.

古文：常德府、辰、沅、靖州大水入其郛。
现代文：常德府、辰州、沉州、靖州大水进人城郭。
English: Changdefu, Chenzhou, Shenzhou, and Jingzhou dams have entered the city.

古文：丁酉，诏丞相以下月一朝重华宫。
现代文：初八，诏令承相以下官员，每月朝拜重华宫一次。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, officials below the rank of chancellor were ordered to pay homage to Chonghua Palace once a month.

古文：戊戌，罢周必大判潭州之命，许以旧官为醴泉观使。
现代文：初九，废罢周必大判谭州的命令，答应给以旧官为醛泉使。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, Zhou will cancel the strike according to the order of Tan Zhou, and promised to use the old officials as the source of aldehydes.

古文：戊申，以和义郡夫人黄氏为贵妃。
现代文：十九日，以和义郡夫人黄氏为贵妃。
English: On the 19th, Mrs. Huang, the wife of Heyi County, was appointed as the honorary consort.

古文：右丞相留正论知阁门事姜特立，罢之。
现代文：右承相留正弹勃知阎门事姜特立，罢除姜特立。
English: Jiang Teli, a right-wing successor to Zhou Yuanzheng, was ousted from his post.

古文：闰月庚申朔，诏内侍陈源许在外任便居住。
现代文：闰五月初一，诏令内侍陈源，允许在外随便居住。
English: On the first day of the leap month of May, Chen Yuan, a chambermaid, was allowed to live outside.

古文：免郡县淳熙十四年以前私负，十五年以后输息及本者亦蠲之。
现代文：免除郡县淳熙十四年以前私人拖欠钱物，十五年以后的息本也免除。
English: Exempt counties and counties from personal arrears of money and goods 14 years ago, and also exempt interest after 15 years.

古文：壬戌，以赵雄为宁武军节度使、开府仪同三司，进封卫国公，仍判江陵府。
现代文：初三，任命赵雄为宁武军节度使、开府仪同三司，进封为卫国公，仍判江陵府。
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, Zhao Xiong was appointed as the Ningwu army's festival envoy, the three departments of the Kaifu ceremony and the three departments of the imperial guard, and was still sentenced to Jiangling Prefecture.

古文：庚午，诏罢卖浙西常平官田。
现代文：十一日，诏令停止卖浙西常平官田。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the sale of government-owned land in western Zhejiang Province was suspended.

古文：癸酉，诏季秋有事于明堂，以高宗配。
现代文：十四日，诏秋季祭祀明堂，配以高宗。
English: On the 14th, the autumn festival was held in the Myodo hall, accompanied by Gao Zong.

古文：丙子，赵雄疾甚，改判资州。
现代文：十七日，赵雄病得厉害，改判资州。
English: On the 17th, Zhao Xiong fell seriously ill and his sentence was changed to Zizhou.

古文：戊寅，蠲郡县第五等户身丁钱及临安第五等户和买绢各一年，仍出钱二十三万缗振临安贫民。
现代文：十九日，免除郡县第五等户身丁钱和临安第五等户和买绢各一年，并且出钱二十三万络贩济临安贫民。
English: On the 19th, the county and county fifth-class households and Lin'an fifth-class households and buyers were exempted for one year, and 230,000 online merchants were paid to help the poor in Lin'an.

古文：己卯，阶州大水入其郛。
现代文：二十日，阶州大水进人城郭。
English: On the 20th, the Chaozhou flood entered the castle.

古文：壬午，大理狱空。
现代文：二十三日，大理狱处理完毕。
English: On the 23rd, the treatment of Dali Prison was completed.

古文：乙酉，御后殿虑囚。
现代文：二十六日，到后殿讯问记录囚犯罪状。
English: On the 26th, they went to the courtyard to interrogate and record the criminal status of the prisoner.

古文：六月庚寅，镇江大水入其郛。
现代文：六月初二，镇江大水进人外城。
English: On the second day of June, the Zhenjiang River flooded into the outer city.

古文：癸卯，诏自今臣僚奏请事涉改法者，三省、枢密院详具以闻。
现代文：十五日，下诏：自今以后臣僚奏请事涉改变法度者，三省、枢密院详细分析上报。
English: On the 15th, the following edict was issued: From now on, if ministers request that a matter involving a change in the law be reported, the three provinces and the Privy Council will analyze the report in detail.

古文：秋七月辛酉，儒林郎倪恕等以封事可采，迁官、免文解有差。
现代文：秋七月初三，儒林郎倪恕等因所上封事可以采用，迁官、免文解不等。
English: On the third day of the first month of the autumn and the third day of the seventh month, Julin Lang Ni Shou and others can be adopted due to the above-mentioned letter, ranging from relocation and exemption.

古文：戊辰，遣谢深甫等贺金主生辰。
现代文：初十，派遣谢深甫等祝贺金主生日。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, sent Xie Shenfu and others to congratulate the birthday of the gold master.

古文：庚辰，下诏恤刑。
现代文：二十二日，下诏慎用刑法。
English: On the 22nd, the Criminal Law was cautiously applied.

古文：八月甲午，升恭州为重庆府。
现代文：八月初七，升恭州为重庆府。
English: On the 7th day of the 8th month of the lunar calendar, Shingong Prefecture became Chongqing Prefecture.

古文：丙申，减两浙月桩等钱岁二十五万五千缗。
现代文：初九，减免每年两浙月桩钱等二十五万五千络。
English: In the first nine months of the year, the deduction and exemption of two Zhejiang months of pile money and so on will reach 255,000 rupees.

古文：己亥，王淮薨。
现代文：十二日，王淮逝世。
English: On the 12th, Wang Huai passed away.

古文：癸丑，金遣温迪罕肃等来贺即位。
现代文：二十六日，金朝派遣温迪罕肃等来祝贺光宗即皇帝位。
English: On the 26th, the Kim dynasty sent Wendy Han Su and others to congratulate Guangzong on his accession to the throne.

古文：九月癸亥，金遣完颜守真等来贺重明节。
现代文：九月初六，金朝派遣完颜守真等来祝贺重明节。
English: On the sixth day of the first month of September, the Kim dynasty sent Yan Shouzhen and others to congratulate the Chongming Festival.

古文：减绍兴和买绢岁额四万四千余匹。
现代文：减免绍兴和买绢岁额四万四千多匹。
English: More than 44,000 horses from Shaoxing and Mianyang were exempted.

古文：乙丑，戒执政、侍从、台谏，毋移书以荐举、请托。
现代文：初八，告诫执政、侍从、台谏官员，不要写信来荐举、请托。
English: On the first day of the eighth month, the ruling, attendants, and officials of the Taiwan Provincial Government should be cautioned not to write letters of recommendation or request.

古文：南剑州火，降其守臣一官，仍令优加振济。
现代文：南剑州发生火灾，降其守臣一官，并且命令优加贩济。
English: When a fire broke out in Southern Kenzhou, he was demoted to the position of retainer and ordered to sell rice.

古文：戊辰，诏侍从各举公正强敏之士，尝任守令及职事官、材堪御史者一人。
现代文：十一日，诏令侍从分别举荐公正强敏之士，曾经担任守令和职事官才能可以担任御史者一人。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the attendants of the imperial edict separately recommended a fair and sensitive person, who had served as a guard and a functionary before he could serve as a historian.

古文：甲戌，诏监司、帅守，秩满到阙，荐所部廉吏一二人。
现代文：十七日，诏令监司、帅守，任满到朝廷，荐举所部廉吏一至二人。
English: On the seventeenth day, the imperial edict ordered the superintendent and the marshal to be appointed to the imperial court, and recommended one or two corrupt officials from the headquarters.

古文：遣郭德麟等使金贺正旦。
现代文：派遣郭德麟等出使金朝祝贺正旦。
English: Guo Delin and others were sent to the Kim dynasty to congratulate Zhengdan.

古文：冬十月庚子，罢枢密院审察诸军之制。
现代文：冬十月十四日，废罢枢密院审察各军之制。
English: On the 14th day of October in winter, the system of having the Privy Council examine each army was abolished.

古文：壬寅，蠲楚州、高邮盱眙军民负常平米一万四千余石。
现代文：十六日，免除楚州、高邮军、盯胎军百姓欠负常平米一万四千多石。
English: On the 16th, the people of Chuzhou, Gaoyou Army, and Guotai Army were exempted from the debt of more than 14,000 koku of rice.

古文：甲寅，大阅。
现代文：二十八日，举行大阅。
English: On the 28th, a grand reading was held.

古文：十一月庚午，诏改明年为绍熙元年。
现代文：十一月十四日，诏令改明年为绍熙元年。
English: On November 14, the imperial edict changed the next year to the first year of the reign of Emperor Shōhō.

古文：复置嘉王府翊善，以秘书郎黄裳为之。
现代文：重新设置嘉王府诩善，任命秘书郎黄裳担任。
English: Re-established Jiawangfu Yongshen, appointed secretary Lang Huangxiao to serve.

古文：乙亥，诏陈源毋得辄入国门。
现代文：十九日，诏令陈源不得经常进人国门。
English: On the 19th, Chen Yuan was ordered not to enter other people's countries often.

古文：丁丑，减江、浙月桩钱额十六万五千余缗。
现代文：二十一日，减免江、浙月桩钱额十六万五千多络。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, the amount of reduction and exemption for Jiangsu and Zhejiang piles was more than 165,000 rupees.

古文：十二月壬子，金遣裴满余庆等来贺明年正旦。
现代文：十二月二十七日，金朝派遣裴满余庆等来祝贺明年新春。
English: On December 27th, the Kim dynasty sent Pei Man Yuqing and others to congratulate the next year's Spring Festival.

古文：绍熙元年春正月丙辰朔，帝率群臣诣重华宫，奉上寿圣皇太后、至尊寿皇圣帝、寿成皇后册宝。
现代文：绍熙元年春正月初一，光宗率领大臣到重华宫，奉上寿圣皇太后、至尊寿皇圣帝、寿成皇后册宝。
English: On the first day of the first month of the first month of the first month of the first month of the first month of the first month of the first month of the first month of the first month of the first month of the first month of the first month of the first month of the first month of the first month of the first month of the first month of the first month of the first month of the first month of the first month of the first month of the first month of the first month of the first month of the first month of the first month of the first month of the first month of the first month of the first month of the first month of the first month of the first month of the first month of the first month

古文：壬申，再蠲临安府民身丁钱三年。
现代文：十七日，又一次免除临安府百姓身丁钱三年。
English: On the 17th, the people of Lin'an were once again exempted from paying body tax for three years.

古文：壬午，何澹请置《绍熙会计录》。
现代文：二十七日，何澹请置韶熙会计录。
English: On the 27th, Ms. He asked for the records of Mr. He.

古文：诏何澹同户部长贰、检正、都司稽考财赋出入之数以闻。
现代文：诏令何澹与户部正副长官、检正、都司一起考察财政收人之数上报朝廷。
English: Zhao ordered He Jun to investigate the number of financial receivers together with the head and deputy head of the household department, the chief procurator, and the prefectural governor, and report it to the imperial court.

古文：二月丁酉，雨雹。
现代文：二月十三日，降冰雹。
English: On February 13, hail fell.

古文：辛亥，殿中侍御史刘光祖言：道学非程氏私言，乞定是非，别邪正。
现代文：二十七日，殿中侍御史刘光祖说： 道学并非程氏一家之言，请求确定是非，辨别邪正。 
English: On the 27th, Liu Guangzu, the chief steward of the palace, said: "Dogma is not the word of the Cheng family. I request you to determine what is right and what is wrong, and to distinguish between right and wrong.

古文：从之。
现代文：光宗采纳了。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：三月丁卯，诏秀王袭封，置园庙。
现代文：三月十三日，诏令秀王袭封，设置园庙。
English: On March 13th, Emperor Showa issued an imperial edict to seize the castle and set up a garden and temple.

古文：班安僖王讳。
现代文：颁安嘻王讳。
English: It's time for peace and quiet.

古文：录赵普后一人。
现代文：录用赵普后代一人。
English: One of Zhao Pu's descendants was hired.

古文：庚午，以久雨，释杖以下囚。
现代文：十六日，因久雨释放杖刑以下囚犯。
English: On the 16th, due to the continuous rain, the prisoners below the cane sentence were released.

古文：夏四月乙酉，诏两淮措置流民。
现代文：夏四月初二，诏令两淮安置流民。
English: On the second day of the fourth month of the summer, the imperial edict of resettling the displaced people was issued.

古文：己丑，以伯圭为太保、嗣秀王。
现代文：初六，任命赵伯圭为太保、嗣秀王。
English: In the sixth year of junior high school, Zhao Bokei was appointed as Taibo and Tsuguo.

古文：丁未，殿中侍御史刘光祖以论带御器械吴端罢。
现代文：二十四日，殿中侍御史刘光祖因弹勃带御器械吴端被罢免。
English: On the 24th, Liu Guangzu, the palace attendant, was removed from his post for playing Wu Duan, a stringed instrument.

古文：戊申，赐礼部进士余复以下五百三十有七人及第、出身。
现代文：二十五日，赐礼部进士余复以下五百三十七人及第、出身。
English: On the 25th, the Ministry of Ceremonies awarded the following 537 new recruits, including Yu Fu, with their ranks and origins.

古文：五月乙卯，赵雄坐所举以贿败，降封益川郡公，削食邑一千户。
现代文：五月初二，赵雄因所举荐官员行贿败露，降封益川郡公，削夺食邑一千户。
English: On the second day of May, Zhao Xiong was exposed for bribing the officials he recommended. He was demoted from the position of county magistrate of Yichuan County and deprived of a thousand households of food.

古文：己未，出吴端为浙西马步军副总管。
现代文：初六，出降吴端为浙西马步军副总管。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, Wu Duan became the deputy chief of the West Zhejiang Horse Infantry Corps.

古文：丙寅，修楚州城。
现代文：十三日，修筑楚州城。
English: On the 13th, Chuzhou City was built.

古文：丙子，太白昼见。
现代文：二十三日，太白星白天出现。
English: On the third day of the new year, a white star appeared during the day.

古文：六月丁亥，遣丘崈等贺金主生辰。
现代文：六月初四，派遣丘击等祝贺金主生日。
English: On the fourth day of the first lunar month of June, he sent a messenger to congratulate the emperor on his birthday.

古文：丙申，以上供等钱偿广州放免身丁钱数。
现代文：十三日，用上供等钱偿还广州放免身丁钱数。
English: On the 13th, he used the money from the offering to repay the amount of money from Guangzhou for his release.

古文：甲午，御后殿虑囚。
现代文：甲午日，到后殿讯问记录囚犯罪状。
English: On the afternoon of the first day, he went to the hall to interrogate and record the criminal status of the prisoner.

古文：秋七月癸丑，诏秀王诸孙并授南班。
现代文：秋七月初一，诏令秀王各孙都授为南班。
English: On the first day of the seventh month of autumn, the Emperor issued an edict that all of the grandchildren of King Show were to be assigned to the Southern Class.

古文：甲寅，以葛邲参知政事，给事中胡晋臣签书枢密院事。
现代文：初二，以葛哪为参知政事，给事中胡晋臣为签书枢密院事。
English: On the second day of the first semester, Ge Ne was appointed as a member of the Council of State, and Hu Jintao was appointed as the signatory of the document of the Privy Council.

古文：乙卯，以留正为左丞相，王蔺枢密院使。
现代文：初三，以留正为左承相，王蔺为枢密院使。
English: On the third day of the first month, Ruizheng was appointed as Zuo Zheng, and Wang Xi was appointed as the envoy of the Privy Council.

古文：癸酉，建秀王祠堂于行在。
现代文：二十一日，在行在建造秀王祠堂。
English: On the 21st, the construction of the Shu Wang Ancestral Hall was in progress.

古文：八月辛卯，立任子中铨人吏部帘试法。
现代文：八月初九，确立任子中锉人吏部廉吏法。
English: On the 9th day of the 8th month of the lunar calendar, the Law on the Elimination of Corrupt Officials was established.

古文：己亥，帝率君臣上《寿皇圣帝玉牒》、《日历》于重华宫。己酉，诏造新历。
现代文：十七日，光宗率领大臣到重华宫呈上涛皇圣帝玉碟、《日历。二十七日，诏令制作新历。
English: On the 17th, Guangzong led the minister to the Chonghua Palace to present the Shang Tao Emperor's sacred jade plate, the "calendar." On the 27th, the new calendar was made by imperial decree.

古文：九月丁巳，金遣王修等来贺重明节。
现代文：九月初六，金朝派遣王桔等来祝贺重明节。
English: On the 6th day of the 9th month, the Kim dynasty sent Wang Kuei and others to congratulate the Chongming Festival.

古文：己未，升剑州为隆庆府。
现代文：初八，升剑州为隆庆府。
English: On the 8th day of the first lunar month, Shengjian County became Longqing Prefecture.

古文：辛酉，雷。
现代文：初十，打雷。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, there was thunder.

古文：庚午，遣苏山等使金贺正旦。
现代文：十九日，派遣苏山等出使金朝祝贺新春。
English: On the 19th, Su Shan and others were dispatched to the Kim dynasty to congratulate the new spring.

古文：冬十月丁酉，诏内外诸军自今毋置额外制、领以下官。
现代文：冬十月十六日，诏令内外各军从今以后不要设置额外制、领以下官员。
English: On the 16th day of October in winter, the emperor ordered the armies at home and abroad not to set up officials below the rank of lieutenant colonel in the future.

古文：丙午，诏内外军帅各荐所部有将才者。
现代文：二十五日，诏令内外军帅各自荐举所部有将才者。
English: On the 25th, it was decreed that the field marshals at home and abroad should each recommend a talented general.

古文：庚戌，诏谕郡县吏奉法爱民。
现代文：二十九日，诏令告诫郡县官吏要奉法爱民。
English: On the 29th, the imperial edict warned county and prefectural officials to obey the law and love the people.

古文：十一月甲寅，安南入贡。
现代文：十一月初四，安南来进贡。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of November, Annan came to pay tribute.

古文：壬戌，潼川转运判官王溉撙节漕计，代输井户重额钱十六万缗，诏奖之。
现代文：十二日，撞川转运判官王溉节约财政开节，代输井户重额钱十六万络，下诏奖赏。
English: On the 12th, Wang Rili, the judge of the Kuching River transshipment, started the financial savings festival, and paid 160,000 rupees to the well delivery households, and issued a reward.

古文：十二月辛巳朔，赠左千牛卫大将军挺为保宁军节度使。
现代文：十二月初一，赠左千牛卫大将军赵挺为保宁军节度使。
English: On the first day of December, General Zhao Ting, Commander of the Baoding Army, was presented with a thousand cows.

古文：壬午，赐王伦谥曰节愍。
现代文：初二，赐王伦溢号为节憨。
English: On the second day of the new year, Wang Lun was given the posthumous name of Wang Lun.

古文：丙戌，罢王蔺枢密使。
现代文：初六，免除王蔺枢密使职务。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, Wang Xi was relieved of his duties as a privy envoy.

古文：戊子，以葛邲知枢密院事，胡晋臣参知政事兼同知枢密院事。
现代文：初八，任命葛哪为知枢密院事，胡晋臣为参知政事兼同知枢密院事。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, Ge Na was appointed as a member of the Privy Council, and Hu Jintao was appointed as a member of the Privy Council.

古文：癸卯，诏岁减广东官卖盐。
现代文：二十四日，诏令每年减免广东官卖盐。
English: On the 24th, the edict was issued to reduce and exempt the salt sold by Guangdong officials every year.

古文：丙午，金遣把德固等来贺明年正旦。
现代文：二十七日，金朝派遣把德固等来祝贺明年新春。
English: On the 27th, the Kim dynasty sent Degu and others to congratulate the next year's Spring Festival.

古文：戊申，浦城盗张海作乱，诏提点刑狱丰谊捕之。
现代文：二十九日，浦城盗贼张海作乱，诏令提点刑狱丰谊讨捕。
English: On the 29th, Zhang Hai, a thief in Pucheng, caused a disturbance, and the imperial edict raised the point of imprisonment and friendship to arrest him.

古文：二年春正月庚戌朔，命两淮行义仓法。
现代文：绍熙二年春正月初一，命令两淮地区推行义仓法。
English: On the first day of the first month of the second year of the Spring Festival, Shaoxi ordered the two Huai regions to implement the yizang law.

古文：壬子，诏尊高宗为万世不祧之庙。
现代文：初三，诏令尊高宗为万世不桃之庙。
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, the Emperor issued an edict declaring that Son Gojong was a temple that would never see the light of day.

古文：庚申，修六合城。
现代文：十一日，修筑六合城。
English: On the eleventh day, the construction of the six-in-one castle began.

古文：辛酉，金主母徒单氏殂。
现代文：十二日，金主母亲徒单氏去世。
English: On the 12th, Ms. Tsuchan, the owner's mother, passed away.

古文：戊寅，雷电，雨雹。
现代文：二十九日，雷电交加，降冰雹。
English: On the 29th, thunder and lightning were interspersed with hail.

古文：二月庚辰朔，大雨雪。
现代文：二月初一，降大雪。
English: On the first day of February, heavy snow fell.

古文：壬午，遣宋之瑞等使金吊祭。
现代文：初三，派遣宋之瑞等出使金朝吊祭。
English: On the third day of the junior high school year, Song Zhe Rui and others were dispatched to perform the hanging ceremony.

古文：癸未，名新历曰《会元》。
现代文：初四，称新历为会元。
English: On the fourth day of his junior year, he announced that New Calendar would be the club's new president.

古文：甲申，福建安抚使赵汝愚等以盗发所部，与守臣、监司各降秩一等，县令追停。
现代文：初五，福建安抚使赵汝愚等因盗贼发生在自己辖地，与守臣、监司各降职一等，县令追停。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, Fujian Pacifying Zhao Rugu and others were demoted to the first grade, together with the guards and supervisors, because the thieves occurred in their own jurisdiction, and the county order was suspended.

古文：乙酉，诏以阴阳失时，雷雪交作，令侍从、台谏、两省、卿监、郎官、馆职，各具时政阙失以闻。
现代文：初六，诏令因阴阳失调，雷雪交作，命令侍从、台谏、两省、卿监、郎官、馆职，分别陈述时政缺失上报朝廷。
English: On the sixth day of the first month of the year, due to the imbalance of yin and yang, the Emperor issued an edict, ordering the attendants, the Taiwu, the two provinces, the chancellor, the vassals, and the librarians to separately report the lack of politics to the Imperial Court.

古文：出米五万石赈京城贫民。
现代文：出米五万石贩济京城贫民。
English: Merchants of 50,000 koku of rice give to the poor in Beijing.

古文：权罢修皇后家庙。
现代文：暂且废除修理皇后家庙。
English: Temporarily abolish the repair of the Empress's family temple.

古文：辛卯，布衣余古上书极谏，帝怒，诏送筠州学听读。
现代文：十二日，布衣余古上书极谏，光宗愤怒，诏令送往箔州学听读。
English: On the twelfth day, Buyi Yu Gu was very angry with the book, and Guangzong was furious, and sent him to Huzhou to study and listen to it.

古文：丁未，金遣完颜回等来告哀。
现代文：二十八日，金朝派遣完颜扮等来告哀。
English: On the 28th, Kim Jong-il dispatched his entourage to pay their respects.

古文：三月丙辰，诏监司、郡守互送以赃论。
现代文：三月初八，下诏监司、郡守互相送物品以赃论罪。
English: On the eighth day of the third month, the magistrate and the county governor sent each other articles to discuss the crime.

古文：丁巳，诏自今边事令宰相与枢密院议，仍同签书。
现代文：初九，下诏自今以后边事命令宰相与枢密院共同商议，包括签书枢密院事在内。
English: On the 9th day of the first month, it was decreed that from now on, the Prime Minister and the Privy Council should jointly discuss the order of foreign affairs, including the signing of the Privy Council.

古文：丙寅，诏福建提点刑狱陈公亮、知漳州朱熹同措置漳、泉、汀三州经界。
现代文：十八日，诏令福建提点刑狱陈公亮、漳州知州朱熹共同处理漳、泉、汀三州经界。
English: On the 18th, Fujian ordered Chen Gongliang and Zhizhou Zhizhou Zhu Rong to jointly deal with the border disputes between the three states of Handan, Quan and Ting.

古文：丁卯，增广州摧锋军三百人。
现代文：十九日，增加广州摧锋军三百人。
English: On the 19th, the number of Guangzhou's front-line troops was increased by 300.

古文：癸酉，建宁府雨雹，大如桃李，坏民居五千余家。
现代文：二十五日，建宁府降冰雹，大如桃李，毁坏民居五千多家。
English: On the 25th, hailstones as big as peaches and plums fell in Jianning Prefecture, destroying more than 5,000 residences.

古文：温州大风雨，雷电，田苗桑果荡尽。
现代文：温州刮大风，降大雨，打雷降冰雹，田间庄稼和桑果被全部毁灭。
English: Wenzhou was hit by strong winds, heavy rain, thunder and hail. Crops and mulberries in the fields were all destroyed.

古文：丙子，出右司谏邓驲。
现代文：二十八日，贬右司谏邓珊。
English: On the 28th, the Right Rev. Deng Shan was demoted.

古文：夏四月乙酉，从寿皇圣帝、寿成皇后幸聚景园。
现代文：夏四月初八，随从寿皇圣帝、寿成皇后到聚景园。
English: In the summer, on the eighth day of the fourth month, he accompanied Emperor Shou and Empress Shoucheng to the scenic garden.

古文：丙申，诏侍从、两省、台谏及在外侍从之臣，各举所知尝任监司、郡守可充郎官、卿监及资历未深可充诸职事官者各三人。
现代文：十九日，下诏侍从、两省、台谏及在外侍从之臣，各自推举所知曾经担任监司、郡守可以充当郎官、卿监以及资历不深但可以充任职事官者，各三人。
English: On the 19th, there were three people each from the Lower Zhao's attendants, the two provinces, the Taiwan Straits and the foreign attendants, who were known to have served as supervisors, the county governor could act as a vassal, the lord supervisor, and those who were not well qualified but could serve as officials.

古文：辛丑，徽州火，二日乃灭。
现代文：二十四日，徽州发生火灾，两天才扑灭。
English: On the 24th, a fire broke out in Huizhou, which took two days to put out.

古文：五月己酉朔，福州水。
现代文：五月己酉朔，福州水灾。
English: In May, Fuzhou was hit by floods.

古文：辛亥，诏六院官许轮对，仍入杂压。
现代文：初四，诏令六院官可以轮对，仍然按上朝时的顺序。
English: On the fourth day of the new year, the emperor decreed that the six courtiers could take turns, still according to the order of the previous dynasty.

古文：庚申，诏侍从、经筵、翰苑官，自今并不时宣对，庶广咨询，以补治道。
现代文：十三日，诏令侍从、经筵、翰苑官，从今以后都不定时召对，希望从各方面听取意见，也有利于治国。
English: On the 13th, the Emperor issued an order that henceforth, attendants, eunuchs, and officials of the Imperial Household would no longer be summoned at regular intervals. He hoped that they would listen to opinions from all sides, which would also be beneficial to the governance of the country.

古文：戊长，金州大火。
现代文：二十一日，金州大水。
English: On the 21st, the Jinzhou flood came.

古文：己巳，潼川、崇庆二府、大安、石泉、淮安三军、兴、利、果、合、绵、汉六州大水。
现代文：二十二日，憧川、崇庆二府，大安、石泉、淮安三军，兴、利、果、合、绵、汉六州大水。
English: On the 22nd, the three armies of Yongchuan, Chongqing, Da'an, Shiquan and Huai'an, and the six states of Xing, Li, Guo, He, Mian and Han were in Dashui.

古文：六月戊寅，诏监司到任半年，条上裕民事，如郡守。
现代文：六月初一，下诏：监司到任半年，奏上便民实事，像郡守一样。
English: On the first day of June, the following edict was issued: Supervisors, who have been in office for half a year, should report on practical matters that are convenient for the people, just like county governors.

古文：庚辰，遣赵等贺金主生辰。
现代文：初三，派遣赵飒等人祝贺金主生日。
English: On the third day of junior high school, Zhao Wei and others were dispatched to congratulate Jin Shuxiong on his birthday.

古文：丁亥，以伯圭判大宗正事。
现代文：初十，任命赵伯圭判大宗正事。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, Zhao Bokei was appointed to judge major cases.

古文：癸巳，诏宰臣、执政，自今不时内殿宣引奏事。
现代文：十六日，诏令宰臣、执政，从今以后不定期到后殿奏事。
English: On the 16th, he issued an imperial edict ordering his vice-ministers to govern and henceforth to report to the inner palace at irregular intervals.

古文：秋七月丁未朔，诏故容州编管人高登追复元官，仍赠承务郎。
现代文：秋七月初一，下诏已故容州编管人高登追复原官，并且赠为承务郎。
English: On the first day of the seventh month of autumn, Gao Deng, the late editor-in-chief of Rongzhou, was restored to his former post and given the title of successor.

古文：己未，出会子百万缗，收两淮私铸铁钱。
现代文：十三日，调出会子一百万络，回收两淮私铸铁钱。
English: On the 13th, the exchange raised one million yuan and recovered two million yuan.

古文：乙丑，复置太医局。
现代文：十九日，重新设置太医局。
English: On the 19th, the Taiji Medical Bureau was re-established.

古文：己巳，兴州大水，漂没数千家。
现代文：二十三日，兴州大水，漂没数千家。
English: On the 23rd, thousands of homes were swept away in the flood in Xingzhou.

古文：八月戊寅，何澹以本生继母丧去官。甲申，宽两浙榷铁之禁。
现代文：八月初二，何澹因继母去世去官。初八，宽免两浙榷铁之禁。
English: On the 2nd day of the 8th month of the lunar calendar, he was removed from his post due to the death of his stepmother.

古文：九月壬子，金遣完颜兖等来贺重明节。
现代文：九月初六，金朝派遣完颜充等来祝贺重明节。
English: On the 6th day of the 9th month, Kim Jong-il sent his emissaries to congratulate the Chongming Festival.

古文：召知福州赵汝愚为吏部尚书。
现代文：召福州知州赵汝愚为吏部尚书。
English: Fuzhou Chizhou Zhao Rugu was called to the cadre.

古文：壬戌，禁职田折变。
现代文：十六日，禁止职田租折变。
English: On the 16th, it was forbidden to change the occupation field rent.

古文：癸亥，遣黄申等使金贺正旦。
现代文：十七日，派遣黄申等出使金朝祝贺正旦。
English: On the 17th, Huang Shin and others sent envoys to the Kim dynasty to congratulate Zhengdan.

古文：乙丑，以久雨，命大理、三衙、临安府及两浙决系囚，释杖以下。
现代文：初九，因久雨不晴，命令大理寺、三衙、临安府和两浙处理关押囚犯，杖刑以下囚犯释放。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, because it had been raining for a long time and the weather was cloudy, he ordered Dali Temple, Samcheok, Lin'an Prefecture and the two prefectures of Zhejiang to deal with the prisoners and release the prisoners who had been sentenced to caning.

古文：己巳，诏侍从于尝任卿监、郎官内，选堪断刑长贰一二人以闻。
现代文：十三日，诏令侍从官在曾经充任卿监、郎官官员内，选择可以主管断刑的正副长官一至二人报上。
English: On the 13th, the imperial edict ordered the attendant officers to select one or two officers who could be in charge of the punishment from among the officials who had served as chief inspectors and vassals.

古文：冬十月丙子朔，诏罢经界。
现代文：冬十月初一，下诏废罢经界。
English: On the first day of October in winter, the following edict abolished the Buddhist priesthood.

古文：丁丑，筑福州外城。
现代文：初二，修筑福州外城。
English: In the second year of junior high school, Fuzhou outer city was built.

古文：庚辰，减百官大礼赐物三之一。
现代文：初五，减免文武百官大礼赐物三分之一。
English: On the fifth day of the lunar new year, one-third of the gifts given by the civil and military officials will be reduced or exempted.

古文：甲申，复吴端带御器械。
现代文：初九，恢复吴端带御器械职务。
English: On the 9th day of the first month, Wu Duan was reinstated as the head of the instrument department.

古文：辛卯，诏守令毋征敛病民。
现代文：十六日，下诏守臣不要征敛患病百姓。
English: On the 16th, the emperor ordered the guards not to collect the sick people.

古文：庚子，下诏抚谕四川被水州军。
现代文：二十五日，下诏抚谕四川遭水灾州军。
English: On the 25th, the State Council issued the following edict to the Sichuan flood-stricken troops.

古文：十一月戊申，安定郡王子肜薨。
现代文：十一月初三，安定郡王赵阴乡去世。
English: On the third day of the first month of November, Zhao Yinxiang, the king of Ding'an County, passed away.

古文：己巳，册加高宗徽号曰受命中兴全功至德圣神武文昭仁宪孝皇帝。
现代文：二十四日，册加高宗封号为受命中兴全功至德圣神武文昭仁宪孝皇帝。
English: On the 24th, Emperor Wu Zhaorengenxianhong was given the title of Emperor Gaozong.

古文：辛未，有事于太庙。
现代文：二十六日，祭祀太庙。
English: On the twenty-sixth day, the temple was dedicated.

古文：皇后李氏杀黄贵妃，以暴卒闻。
现代文：皇后李氏杀黄贵妃，对外说是暴死。
English: Empress Li killed Huang Guifei, and it was said to be a violent death.

古文：壬申，合祭天地于圜丘，以太祖、太宗配，大风雨，不成礼而罢。
现代文：二十七日，在圆丘合祭天地，配以太祖、太宗，由于吹大风降雨，祭祀没有举行而罢。
English: On the 27th day, at the round mound of the festival of heaven and earth, with the ancestors and the emperor, due to heavy wind and rain, the sacrifice did not take place.

古文：帝既闻贵妃薨，又值此变，震惧感疾，罢称贺，肆赦不御楼。
现代文：光宗刚听说贵妃去世，又恰逢这一变异，震惊害怕而患病，废除称庆祝贺，赦免囚犯，不到殿楼。
English: Guangzong had just heard of the death of Guifei, and coincided with this mutation. Shocked and scared, he fell ill. He cancelled the celebration, pardoned prisoners, and did not go to the palace.

古文：寿皇圣帝及寿成皇后来视疾，帝自是不视朝。
现代文：寿皇圣帝和寿成皇后来探病，光宗从此不上朝处理国事。
English: Emperor Shou and Empress Shoucheng later visited him, and from then on, Emperor Guangzong did not go to the court to deal with state affairs.

古文：十二月庚辰，筑荆门军城。
现代文：十二月初六，修筑荆门军城。
English: On the 6th day of the 12th month, the construction of Jingmen Military City began.

古文：丁亥，帝始对辅臣于内殿。
现代文：十三日，光宗开始在内殿召对辅臣。
English: On the 13th, Mitsumune began to summon vassals in the inner hall.

古文：乙未，增楚州更戍兵一千五百人。
现代文：二十一日，增加楚州更戍兵一千五百人。
English: On the 21st, the number of Chuzhou soldiers was increased by 1,500.

古文：庚子，复出会子百万缗，收两淮铁钱。
现代文：二十六日，又拿出一百万络会子，回收两淮铁钱。
English: On the 26th, it took out another one million online members to recover the two Huai iron coins.

古文：辛丑，金遣完颜宗璧等来贺明年正旦。
现代文：二十七日，金朝派遣完颜宗璧等来祝贺明年新春。
English: On the 27th, the Kim dynasty sent Yan Zong Bi and others to congratulate the next year's Spring Festival.

古文：壬寅，资、简、普、荣四州及富顺监旱。
现代文：二十八日，资、简、普、荣四州和富顺监早灾。
English: On the 28th, the four prefectures of Zi, Jian, Pu and Rong and Fushun were affected by the earthquake.

古文：甲辰，诏庆远军承宣使、内侍省都知杨皓怀奸凶恣，刺面杖脊，配吉州；和州防御使、内侍省押班黄迈私相朋附，决杖、编管抚州。
现代文：三十日，下诏：庆远军承宣使、内侍省都知杨皓怀奸凶悠，刺面杖脊，流放吉州；和州防御使、内侍省押班黄迈私自朋附党派，决杖，编管抚州。
English: On the 30th, the following edict was issued: The Qingyuan Army, under the leadership of the propaganda envoy and the minister of the interior, Yang Jianhuai, who was a traitor and a villain, was exiled to Jizhou; and the state defense envoy and the minister of the interior, Oban Huangmai, who was a party member, was defeated and put in charge of Fuzhou.

古文：寻送皓抚州、迈常州居住。
现代文：不久送杨皓抚州、黄迈送常州居住。
English: He soon sent Yang Bing to live in Fuzhou and Huang Mai to Changzhou.

古文：是岁，建宁府、汀州水，阶、成、西和、凤四州及淮东旱，振之。
现代文：这一年，建宁府、汀州水灾，阶、成、西和、凤四州和淮东早灾，予以贩济。
English: This year, the floods in Jianningfu and Tingzhou, and the early disasters in Shifang, Chengdu, Xihe, Fengxizhou and Huaidong were the first to be affected.

古文：三年春正月乙巳朔，帝有疾，不视朝。
现代文：绍熙三年春正月初一，光宗有病，不上朝处理政事。
English: On the first day of the first month of the spring of the third year of the reign of Emperor Shao Xi, Guangzong was ill and did not go to the court to deal with political affairs.

古文：庚戌，蠲秀州上供米四万四千石。
现代文：初六，免除秀州上供米四万四千石。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, the 44,000-koku rice supplied to Xiuzhou was exempted.

古文：岁蠲四川盐酒重额钱九十万缗。
现代文：每年免除四川盐酒重额钱九十万络。
English: Sichuan salt liquor is exempted from a heavy fine of up to 900,000 rupees per year.

古文：出度僧牒二百，收淮东铁钱。
现代文：拿出度僧碟二百道，回收淮东铁钱。
English: Take out 200 disks and collect the Huadong iron money.

古文：丁巳，命夔路转运使通融漕计籴米，以备凶荒。
现代文：十三日，命令夔路转运通融财政收人市来粮米，以备灾荒。
English: On the 13th, he ordered the Kushiro Transportation and Logistics Finance Receiving Office to collect grain and rice from the market to prepare for the disaster.

古文：壬戌，罢文州民杂役。
现代文：十八日，废罢文州百姓杂役。
English: On the 18th, the strike of the people of Wenzhou was abolished.

古文：诏辅臣代行恭谢之礼。
现代文：诏令辅臣代行恭谢之礼。
English: He ordered the vice-minister to convey his thanks on his behalf.

古文：二月甲戌朔，复以两浙犒赏酒库隶户部。
现代文：二月初一，重新把两浙搞赏酒库隶归户部。
English: On the first day of February, the two Zhejiang bounty liquor stores were once again subordinated to the household department.

古文：丁酉，申严钱银过淮之禁。
现代文：二十四日，重申钱银过淮的禁令。
English: On the 24th, it reiterated the ban on money laundering.

古文：闰月丙午，禁郡县新作寺观。
现代文：闰二月初三，禁止郡县新建寺观。
English: On the third day of the second month of the leap year, it is forbidden to build new temples in counties.

古文：甲寅，以王蔺为端明殿学士、四川安抚制置使，蔺辞不行。
现代文：十一日，任命王蔺为端明殿学士、四川安抚制置使，王蔺推辞没有到任。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Wang Hui was appointed as an academician of the Duanming Palace and an envoy of the Sichuan Pacification System. Wang Hui's resignation did not take effect.

古文：壬戌，诏州县未断之讼，监司毋得移狱，违者许执奏。
现代文：十九日，下诏：州县没能决断的诉讼，监司不得移交案狱，违反者允许上奏。
English: On the 19th, the following edict was issued: if the state and county failed to decide on the lawsuit, the supervisor shall not transfer the case to the prison, and the violator shall be allowed to appeal.

古文：甲子，成都府路转运判官王溉以代民输激赏等绢钱三十三万缗，诏进一官，仍令再任。
现代文：二十一日，成都府路转运判官王溉，因代替百姓输纳激赏等绢钱三十三万络，下诏晋升一官，并且命令他继续任职。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, Wang Rili, the judge of the Chengdu prefectural road transit, was promoted to an official and ordered to continue to serve, because he lost 330,000 rupees in reward money on behalf of the people.

古文：诏卖郡县没官田屋及营田。
现代文：下诏出卖郡县没官田屋和营田。
English: The following edict sold county and county-owned government-owned rice fields and rice fields.

古文：三月甲戌，修天长县城。
现代文：三月初二，修筑天长县城。
English: On the second day of March, the construction of the Tianchang county seat began.

古文：辛巳，帝疾稍愈，始御延和殿听政。
现代文：初九，光宗病情有所好转，开始到延和殿处理政事。
English: On the ninth day of the ninth month, Guangzong's condition improved, and he began to go to Yanhe Hall to deal with political affairs.

古文：以子涛为安定郡王。
现代文：任命赵子涛为安定郡王。
English: Appointed Zhao Zitao as the king of Anning County.

古文：甲申，罢雅州税场五。
现代文：十二日，废罢雅州五处税场。
English: On the 12th, five tax offices in Yazhou were abolished.

古文：筑峡州城。
现代文：修筑峡州城。
English: The construction of Xiuzhou City.

古文：乙酉，留正乞去位，不许。
现代文：十三日，留正请求离职，没应允。
English: On the 13th, he requested to leave the company, but was not allowed to do so.

古文：庚寅，宜州蛮寇边，改知郁林州沙世坚知宜州讨之。
现代文：十八日，宜州蛮攻打边境，改知郁林州沙世坚为宜州知州率兵攻讨。
English: On the 18th, Yizhou launched a fierce attack on the border, and changed the name of Yulin Prefecture to Yizhou Zhizhou, with Sha Shijian leading the attack.

古文：辛卯，复监司列荐法。
现代文：十九日，恢复监司列荐法。
English: On the 19th, the Supervision Division reinstated the recommendation method.

古文：丁酉，罢广东增收盐斤钱。
现代文：二十五日，废罢广东增收盐斤钱。
English: On the 25th, the abolition of Guangdong's salt tax.

古文：己亥，诏技艺补授之人毋得奏补，著为令。
现代文：二十七日，下诏技艺补授之人，不得上奏补授，著为令。
English: On the 27th, it was announced that those who failed to pass the technical supplementary examination would not be allowed to play the supplementary examination.

古文：庚子，监察御史郭德麟以察事失体，出为湖北提举常平茶盐。
现代文：二十八日，监察御史郭德麟因察事失误，降为湖北提举常平茶盐。
English: On the 28th, due to an inspection error, Supervisor Guo Delin was demoted to Hubei Tihou Changping Tea Salt.

古文：夏四月癸卯，补童子吴钢官。
现代文：夏四月初二，补授童子吴钢官。
English: On the second day of the fourth month of the summer, the boy Wu Gangguan was given supplementary education.

古文：甲寅，振四川旱伤郡县。
现代文：十三日，贩济四川早灾郡县饥民。
English: On the 13th, vendors sold food to the hungry in the pre-disaster counties and counties of Sichuan.

古文：乙卯，以户部侍郎丘崈为焕章阁直学士、四川安抚制置使。
现代文：十四日，任命户部侍郎丘击为焕章阁直学士、四川安抚制置使。
English: On the 14th, he appointed the head of the Household as the direct scholar of the Huan Zhangge and the envoy of the Sichuan pacification system.

古文：戊午，帝朝重华宫。
现代文：十七日，光宗朝拜重华宫。
English: On the 17th, Emperor Guangzong paid homage to Chonghua Palace.

古文：丁卯，蠲临安民元年二年逋赋。
现代文：二十六日，免除临安百姓绍熙元年、二年拖欠赋税。
English: On the 26th, the people of Lin'an were exempted from the tax arrears of the first year and the second year.

古文：五月，帝有疾，不视朝。
现代文：五月，光宗有病，不上朝听政。
English: In May, Guangzong fell ill and did not go to the court to listen to politics.

古文：乙未，命汉阳、荆门军、复州行铁钱。
现代文：二十四日，命令汉阳、荆门二军和复州实行铁钱。
English: On the 24th, he ordered the two armies of Hanyang, Jingmen and Fuzhou to implement iron money.

古文：己亥，蠲四川水旱郡县租赋。
现代文：二十八日，免除四川水早灾郡县租税。
English: On the 28th, the counties and counties affected by the Sichuan floods were exempted from paying taxes.

古文：仍以两浙犒赏酒库隶诸州，令户部郎官提领，岁以四十五万缗为额，庚子晦，常德府大水入其郛。
现代文：仍然把两浙搞赏酒库划归各州，命令户部郎官主管，每年定为四十五万络。二十九日，天气阴晦，常德府大水进人外城。
English: He still assigned the two Zhejiang bounty warehouses to the states, and ordered the head of the household department to set it at 450,000 rupees per year. On the 29th, the weather was cloudy, and the Changde Prefecture flood entered the outer city.

古文：六月辛丑朔，下诏戒饬风俗，禁民奢侈与士为文浮靡、吏苟且饰伪者。
现代文：六月初一，下诏整治风俗，禁止百姓奢侈，士人为文浮丽，官吏苟且，文过饰非。
English: On the first day of June, the following edict was issued to rectify customs, prohibiting the people from extravagance, the scholars from being pompous, the officials from being scrupulous, and the writers from being over-decorated.

古文：以权礼部尚书陈骙同知枢密院事，甲辰，遣钱之望等贺金主生辰。
现代文：任命代理礼部尚书除癸为同知枢密院事。初四，派遣钱之望等祝贺金主生日。
English: The appointment of the acting ceremonial department is a matter for the Privy Council. On the fourth day of the first month, send money to congratulate the birthday of the donor.

古文：丁未，罢四川诸军岁起西兵。
现代文：初七，罢除四川各军岁起西兵。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, the Western soldiers were removed from the Sichuan troops.

古文：废光州定城监。
现代文：废罢光州定城监。
English: Abolished the strike of the prefectural city inspectors.

古文：壬子，虑囚。
现代文：十二日，讯问记录囚犯罪状。
English: On the 12th, the interrogation recorded the criminal status of the prisoner.

古文：戊午，以伯圭为太师。
现代文：十八日，任命赵伯圭为太师。
English: On the 18th, Zhao Bokei was appointed Grand Master.

古文：甲子，增捕获私铸铜钱赏格。
现代文：二十四日，增补捕获私铸铜钱奖赏标准。
English: On the 24th, the reward standard for the capture of privately minted copper coins was added.

古文：丙寅，以太尉郭师禹为少保。
现代文：二十六日，任命太尉郭师禹为少保。
English: On the 26th, Lieutenant Guo Shiyu was appointed as a Junior Guard.

古文：秋七月己巳，刺沿边盗万人为诸州禁军。
现代文：秋七月初一，刺沿边盗万人为各州禁军。
English: On the first day of autumn in July, tens of thousands of people along the border were banned from each state.

古文：壬申，监文思院常良孙坐赃，配海外。
现代文：初二，监文思院常良孙因赃被流放海外。
English: In the second year of junior high school, Tsuneyoshi Tsuneyoshi, the supervisor of Wenshi Academy, was exiled overseas because of cheating.

古文：益国公周必大坐缪举良孙，降荥阳郡公。
现代文：益国公周必大因错举常良孙，降为荣阳郡公。
English: Prince Zhou of Yikoku was demoted to Prince of Rongyang County for mistakenly appointing his great-grandson.

古文：省广西郡县官。
现代文：裁减广西郡县官。
English: Reduce the number of county officials in Guangxi.

古文：甲戌，台州水。
现代文：初四，台州水灾。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, Taizhou was hit by floods.

古文：壬午，泸州骑射卒张信等作乱，杀其帅臣张孝芳。
现代文：十二日，沪州骑射卒张信等叛乱，杀其帅臣张孝芳。
English: On the 12th, Huzhou cavalry Zhang Xin and others rebelled and killed his handsome vassal Zhang Xiaofang.

古文：甲申，军士卞进、张昌击杀信。
现代文：十四日，军士卞进、张昌击杀张信。
English: On the 14th, Sergeant Xingjin and Zhang Chang killed Zhang Xin.

古文：增嘉王府讲读官二员。
现代文：增补嘉王府讲读官二人。
English: Addition of two lecturers from Jiawangfu.

古文：壬辰，修扬州城。
现代文：二十二日，修筑扬州城。
English: On the 22nd, Yangzhou City was built.

古文：八月甲寅，诏两淮行铁钱交子。
现代文：八月十四日，下诏两淮实行铁钱交子。
English: On August 14th, the following edict of the two Huai implemented the iron money exchange.

古文：戊午，总领四川财赋杨辅奏：已蠲东、西两川畸零绢钱四十七万缗、激赏绢六万六千匹。
现代文：十八日，总领四川财赋杨辅上奏：已经免除两川奇零绢钱四十七万络，激赏绢六万六千匹。
English: On the 18th, Yang Fu, the general receiver of Sichuan's wealth, announced that he had already exempted 470,000 rupees of odd-numbered coins from the two rivers and rewarded 66,000 horses.

古文：诏奖之。
现代文：下诏奖励他。
English: The emperor rewarded him.

古文：自是岁以为例。
现代文：从此每年女口止匕。
English: Since then, it has been held every year.

古文：九月甲戌，修德安府外城。
现代文：九月初五，修筑德安府外城。
English: On the 5th day of the 9th month, the outer city of De'an was built.

古文：乙亥，金遣仆散端等来贺重明节。
现代文：初六，金朝派遣仆散端等来祝贺重明节。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, the Kim dynasty sent minions to congratulate the Chongming Festival.

古文：戊子，遣郑汝谐等使金贺正旦。
现代文：十九日，派遣郑汝谐等出使金朝祝贺正旦。
English: On the 19th, Zheng Ruchun and others were dispatched to the Kim dynasty to congratulate Zheng Dan.

古文：丙申，劝两淮民种桑。
现代文：二十七日，劝两淮百姓种桑。
English: On the 27th, he advised two Huai people to grow mulberry.

古文：冬十月壬寅，修大禹陵庙。
现代文：冬十月初三，修缮大禹陵庙。
English: On the third day of the tenth month of winter, the renovation of the Great Yu Mausoleum began.

古文：丙午，修潭州城。
现代文：初七，修筑潭州城。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, the construction of Tanzhou City began.

古文：辛亥，帝诣重华宫进香。
现代文：十二日，光宗到重华宫进香。
English: On the 12th, Guangzong went to the Chonghua Palace for incense.

古文：庚申，会庆节，丞相率百官诣重华宫拜表称贺。
现代文：二十一日，会庆节，承相率领文武百官到重华宫上表称庆祝贺。
English: On the twenty-first day of the festival, the prime minister led hundreds of military and civilian officials to the Chonghua Palace to express their congratulations.

古文：十一月壬申，振襄阳府被水贫民。
现代文：十一月初三，贩济襄阳府遭水灾贫民。
English: On the third day of the first month of November, the poor people of Xiangyang were flooded.

古文：癸酉，减蕲州岁铸钱二十万缗。
现代文：初四，减薪州岁铸钱二十万络。
English: On the fourth day of the new year, the salary of the state year-old minted money increased by 200,000 networks.

古文：丙戌，日南至，丞相率百官诣重华宫拜表称贺。
现代文：十七日，冬至，承相率文武百官到重华宫奉表称庆祝贺。
English: On the seventeenth day, the winter solstice, hundreds of civil and military officials, led by the heir to the throne, came to the Chonghua Palace to express their congratulations.

古文：兵部尚书罗点、给事中尤袤、中书舍人黄裳皆上疏请帝朝重华宫，吏部尚书赵汝愚亦因面对以请，帝开纳。
现代文：兵部尚书罗点、给事中尤裹、中书舍人黄裳都上疏请光宗朝拜重华宫，吏部尚书赵汝愚也因而当面请求，光宗接受了请求。
English: The Military Department's Shang Shu Luo Deng, the General Secretary of the Central Military Commission, and the General Secretary of the Central Military Commission, Huang Xiang, both invited Guangzong to pay homage to the Chonghua Palace. The General Secretary of the Central Military Commission, Zhao Rugu, also made a face-to-face request. Guangzong accepted the request.

古文：辛卯，帝朝重华宫，皇后继至，都人大悦。
现代文：二十二日，光宗朝拜重华宫，皇后随后而到，京城人们大为高兴。
English: On the 22nd, Emperor Guangzong paid homage to Chonghua Palace, followed by the empress. The people of Beijing were overjoyed.

古文：癸巳，蠲湖南北、京西、江西郡县月桩、经总制钱岁二十三万余缗。
现代文：二十四日，免除湖南北、京西、江西郡县月桩钱、经总制钱，每年二十三万余络。
English: On the 24th, the monthly pile money and the total system money of Hunan, Nanbei, West Beijing and Jiangxi counties were exempted, with an annual increase of more than 230,000 yuan.

古文：戊戌，诏李纯乃皇后亲侄，可特除阁门宣赞舍人。
现代文：二十九日，下诏：李纯是皇后亲侄，可以特例授为阁门宣赞舍人。
English: On the 29th, the following edict was issued: Li Chun was the niece of the empress, and he could be specially awarded the title of "Cabin Door Proclaimer."

古文：十二月癸卯，帝率群臣上《寿皇圣帝玉牒》、《圣政》、《会要》于重华宫。丙午，蠲归正人赋役三年。
现代文：十二月初五，光宗率领大臣到重华宫呈上涛皇圣帝玉碟、圣班、《会要。初八，免除归正人赋役三年。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of December, Guangzong led the ministers to the Chonghua Palace to present the Shang Tao Emperor's Holy Emperor's Jade Plate, Holy Class, "Important to the Association." In the eighth grade, the reformers were exempted from military service for three years.

古文：辛亥，以留正为少保。
现代文：十三日，任命留正为少保。
English: On the 13th, Ruzheng was appointed as Junior Security Officer.

古文：乙丑，金遣温敦忠等来贺明年正旦。
现代文：二十七日，金朝派遣温敦忠等来祝贺明年新春。
English: On the 27th, the Kim dynasty sent Wyndon Chung and others to congratulate the next year's Spring Festival.

古文：是岁，江东、京西、湖北水。
现代文：这一年，江东、京西、湖北发生水灾。
English: This year, floods occurred in Jiangdong, West Beijing, and Hubei.

古文：四年春正月己巳朔，帝朝重华宫。
现代文：绍熙四年春正月初一，光宗朝拜重华宫。
English: On the first day of the first month of the first month of the spring of the fourth year of the reign of Emperor Xiaoxi, Emperor Guangzong paid homage to the Chonghua Palace.

古文：辛卯，蠲临安府民身丁钱三年。
现代文：二十三日，免除临安府百姓身丁钱三年。
English: On the 23rd, the people of Lin'an were exempted from paying body tax for three years.

古文：二月戊戌朔，诏陈源特与在京宫观。
现代文：二月初一，诏令陈源特授给在京宫观。
English: On the first day of February, the imperial edict Chen Yuan specially awarded the view of the palace in Beijing.

古文：丙寅，贷淮西民市牛钱。
现代文：二十九日，贷给淮西百姓买牛钱。
English: On the 29th, he lent money to the people of Huaxi to buy cattle.

古文：出米七万石振江陵饥民。
现代文：出米七万石贩济江陵饥民。
English: Seventy-thousand-cubic-metre rice peddlers feed the hungry in Jiangling.

古文：甲戌，皇孙生。
现代文：三十日，皇孙出生。
English: On the 30th, the emperor's grandson was born.

古文：三月丙子，帝朝重华宫，皇后从。
现代文：三月初九，光宗朝拜重华宫，皇后随从。
English: On the 9th day of the 3rd month, Emperor Guangzong paid homage to Chonghua Palace, accompanied by the empress.

古文：辛巳，以葛邲为右丞相，胡晋臣知枢密院事，陈骙参知政事，赵汝愚同知枢密院事。
现代文：十四日，任命葛郡为右承相，胡晋臣为知枢密院事，除癸为参知政事，赵汝愚为同知枢密院事。
English: On the 14th, Ge County was appointed as the Minister of the Right, Hu Jintao as the Secretary of the Privy Council, Jiechi as the Councillor of the Privy Council, and Zhao Ruwu as the Secretary of the Privy Council.

古文：甲申，监察御史汪义端奏：汝愚执政，非祖宗故事，请罢之。
现代文：十七日，监察御史汪义端上奏：赵汝愚以宗室身份执政，不是朝廷的成例，请求罢除他。
English: On the 17th, Wang Yi, the inspector general of the Imperial Household Agency, issued a report: Zhao Rugu was ruling as a family member, which was not the usual practice of the imperial court, and requested that he be removed.

古文：疏三上，不报。
现代文：奏疏三次递上，没有得到回答。
English: The complaint was filed three times, but received no response.

古文：辛卯，义端罢。
现代文：二十四日，汪义端被罢免。
English: On the 24th, Wang Yibuan was removed from office.

古文：癸巳，帝从寿皇圣帝、寿成皇后幸聚景园。
现代文：二十六日，光宗跟随寿皇圣帝、寿成皇后到聚景园。
English: On the 26th, Guangzong followed Emperor Shou and Empress Shoucheng to the park.

古文：乙未，修巢县城。
现代文：二十八日，修筑巢县城。
English: On the 28th, the county seat was built.

古文：夏四月己酉，罢括卖四川沿边郡县官田。
现代文：夏四月十三日，废罢括卖四川沿边郡县官田。
English: On the 13th day of the 4th month of summer, the sale of government-owned land in counties along the Sichuan River was cancelled.

古文：五月丙寅朔，复永州义保。
现代文：五月初一，恢复永州义保。
English: On the first day of May, Yongzhou Yibo was restored.

古文：己巳，赐礼部进士陈亮以下三百九十有六人及第、出身。
现代文：初四，赐礼部进士陈亮等三百九十六人及第、出身。
English: In the fourth year of junior high school, three hundred and ninety-six people including Chen Liang, a member of the Ceremonial Department, were awarded.

古文：进士李侨年五十四，调成都司户参军，自以禄不及养，乞以一官回赠父母。
现代文：进士李侨五十四岁，调为成都司户参军，他觉得棒禄不足以维持生计，请求以一官回赠父母。
English: Fifty-four-year-old conscript Li Qiao, who was transferred to the Chengdu Household Division to join the army, felt that the bonus was not enough to make ends meet, and asked for a reward for his parents.

古文：帝嘉其志，特诏以本官致仕，父母皆与初品官封。
现代文：光宗称许他的志向，特下诏他以本官退休，父母都授给初品官封。
English: Guangzong praised his aspiration, and specifically decreed that he retire as an official, and both his parents were awarded the first official title.

古文：丙子，淮西大水。
现代文：十一日，淮西大水。
English: On the 11th day of the month, there was a big flood in Huaxi.

古文：丙戌，绍兴大水。
现代文：二十一日，绍兴大水。
English: On the 21st day of the month, Shaoxing was flooded.

古文：召浙东总管姜特立。
现代文：召回浙东总管姜特立。
English: Jiang Teli, the head of East Zhejiang, has been recalled.

古文：丞相留正以论特立不行，乞罢相，不报。
现代文：承相留正因弹勃姜特立没有实行，请求罢相，没有回答。
English: The request to postpone the performance due to the performance of Bo Jiang and Teli was not implemented, and the request to cancel the performance went unanswered.

古文：壬辰，太尉、利州安抚使吴挺卒。
现代文：二十七日，太尉、利州安抚使吴挺去世。
English: On the 27th, Wu Ting, the first lieutenant and pacifier of Lizhou, passed away.

古文：四川制置使丘崈承制以总领财赋杨辅权安抚使，命统制官李世广权管其军。
现代文：四川制置使丘击秉承朝命任命总领财赋杨辅为代理安抚使，命令统制官李世广代管其军。
English: The Sichuan-based envoy Qiu Bei, adhering to the order of the dynasty, appointed Yang Fu, the general leader of wealth, as the acting pacification envoy, and ordered the commanding officer Li Shiguang to manage his army on his behalf.

古文：六月丙申朔，留正出城待罪。
现代文：六月初一，留正出京城待罪。
English: On the first day of June, Ruzheng left Beijing to await trial.

古文：振江浙、两淮、荆湖被水贫民。
现代文：贩济江浙、两淮、荆湖遭水灾贫民。
English: Vendors help poor people affected by floods in Jiangsu, Zhejiang, Yuhai and Jinghu.

古文：戊戌，秘书省著作郎沈有开，著作佐郎李唐卿，秘书郎范黼、彭龟年，校书郎王奭，正字蔡幼学、颜棫、吴猎、项安世上疏，乞寝姜特立召命。
现代文：初三，秘书省著作佐郎李唐卿，秘书郎范敞、彭龟年，校书郎王，正字蔡幼学、颜域、吴猎、项安世上疏，请求停止执行召用姜特立的命令。
English: On the third day of junior high school, the secretary of the Ministry of Education and Culture, Mr. Sarang Li Tangqing, the secretary of the Ministry of Education and Culture, Mr. Lang Fan Dang, Mr. Peng Gui Nian, the secretary of the Ministry of Education and Culture, Mr. Lang Wang, the secretary of the Ministry of Education and Culture, Mr. Cai Ju Xue, Mr. Yan Gui, Mr. Wu Huan, and Mr. Xiang An, requested to stop the execution of the order to summon Jiang Teli.

古文：己亥，遣许及之等贺金主生辰。
现代文：初四，派遣许及之等祝贺金主生日。
English: On the 4th day of the first month of the school year, the students sent gifts to congratulate the principal on his birthday.

古文：壬寅，诏市淮马充沿江诸军战骑。
现代文：初七，诏令市买淮马充当沿江各军战骑。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, the city was ordered to buy Huai horses to act as war horses for the armies along the river.

古文：戊申，胡晋臣薨。
现代文：十三日，胡晋臣去世。
English: On the 13th, Hu Jintao passed away.

古文：己酉，御后殿虑囚。
现代文：十四日，到后殿讯问记录囚犯罪状。
English: On the 14th, they went to the courtyard to interrogate and record the criminal status of the prisoner.

古文：癸丑，蠲临安增民税钱八万余缗。
现代文：十八日，免除临安增加百姓税钱八万多络。
English: On the 18th, Lin'an was exempted from increasing people's taxes by more than 80,000 yuan.

古文：甲寅，太白昼见。
现代文：十九日，太白星白天出现。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the new year, Taibai Venus appeared in broad daylight.

古文：甲子，雨雹。
现代文：二十九日，降冰雹。
English: On the 29th, hail fell.

古文：秋七月乙丑朔，太白昼见。
现代文：秋七月初一，太白星白天出现。
English: On the first day of the seventh month of autumn, Taibai Star appears in the daytime.

古文：丙寅，大雨雹。
现代文：初二，大规模降冰雹。
English: On the second day of junior high school, a large-scale hailstorm occurred.

古文：己巳，留正复论姜特立，缴纳出身以来文字、待罪于范村。
现代文：初五，留正又弹勃姜特立，交纳出身以来文字，在范村待罪。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, Ruzheng again played Bo Jiang Teli. He had been writing since he was born, and was awaiting trial in Fan village.

古文：丙子，以不雨，命诸路提刑审断滞狱。
现代文：十二日，因不降雨命令各路提刑审断积滞案件。
English: On the 12th, due to the lack of rain, all roads were ordered to initiate criminal trials to break the backlog of cases.

古文：戊寅，命临安府及三衙决系囚，释杖以下。
现代文：十四日，命令临安府和三衙处理关押囚犯，释放杖刑以下囚犯。
English: On the 14th, it ordered the Lin'an government and the three counties to deal with the prisoners and release the prisoners under the cane punishment.

古文：壬午，以赵汝愚知枢密院事，吏部尚书余端礼同知枢密院事，陈源为内侍省押班。
现代文：十八日，任命赵汝愚为知枢密院事，吏部尚书余端礼为同知枢密院事，陈源为内侍省押班。
English: On the 18th, Zhao Ruwu was appointed as the Secretary of the Privy Council, Shang Shu Yu Duanli of the Ministry of Personnel was appointed as the Secretary of the Privy Council, and Chen Yuan was appointed as the Vice-Minister of the Imperial Household.

古文：癸未，禁邕州左、右两江贩鬻生口。
现代文：十九日，禁止琶州左、右两江贩卖生口。
English: On the 19th, the sale of raw fish in the two rivers to the left and right of Pazhou was banned.

古文：乙酉，叙州夷贼没该落无等寇边，遣兵讨平之。
现代文：二十一日，叙州夷贼没该落无等攻打边境，派遣军队讨平夷贼。
English: On the twenty-first day, the Syuzhou raiders should not have attacked the border and sent troops to fight the raiders.

古文：八月丙申，蠲绍兴丁盐、茶租钱八万二千余缗。
现代文：八月初二，免除绍兴丁盐钱、茶租钱八万二千多络。
English: On the second day of August, Shaoxing Ding salt money and tea rent money of more than 82,000 rupees were exempted.

古文：丁酉，罢郡县卖没官田。
现代文：初三，废罢州县出卖没官田。
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, there were no government-owned fields sold in the abandoned Bozhou County.

古文：癸丑，诏三省议振恤郡县水旱。
现代文：十九日，下诏三省商讨贩济抚恤郡县水灾早灾百姓。
English: On the 19th day of the month, the three provinces held a consultation to discuss the county and county flood early disaster victims.

古文：丁巳，赠吴挺少保；其子曦落阶官，起复濠州图练使、带御器械。
现代文：二十三日，赠吴挺为少保；其子吴曦特命为阶官，重新起用为壕州团练使、带御器械。
English: On the 23rd, Wu Ting was given the title of Minor Protector; his son Wu Xi was specially appointed as a magistrate, and was reappointed as a training envoy for the Hezhou Regiment, with his equipment.

古文：戊午，振江东、浙西、淮西旱伤贫民。
现代文：二十四日，贩济江东、浙西、淮西早灾地区贫民。
English: On the 24th, the poor in the early disaster areas in the east of Jijiang, west of Zhejiang and west of Huaixi were sold.

古文：九月己巳，金遣董师中等来贺重明节，庚午，重明节，百官上寿。
现代文：九月初六，金朝派遣董师中等来祝贺重明节。初七，重明节，文武百官向光宗祝寿。
English: On the 6th day of the 9th month, the Kim dynasty sent middle-ranking officials to congratulate the Chongming Festival. On the 7th day of the 9th month, the Chongming Festival, hundreds of civil and military officials congratulated Guangzong on his birthday.

古文：侍从、两省请帝朝重华宫，不听。
现代文：侍从、两省官员请求光宗朝拜重华宫，光宗没有采纳。
English: The attendants and officials of the two provinces requested Guangzong to pay homage to Chonghua Palace, but Guangzong did not accept.

古文：己卯，上寿圣皇太后尊号曰寿圣隆慈备福皇太后。
现代文：十六日，上寿圣皇太后尊号为寿圣隆慈备福皇太后。
English: On the 16th, the honorary title of the former Empress Dowager Shousheng was changed to Empress Dowager Shousheng Longji Beifu.

古文：壬午，遣倪思等使金贺正旦。
现代文：十九日，派遣倪思等出使金朝祝贺新春。
English: On the 19th, Ni Si and other emissaries were sent to the Kim dynasty to congratulate the new spring.

古文：甲申，帝将朝重华宫，皇后止帝，中书舍人陈傅良引裾力谏，不听。
现代文：二十一日，光宗将要朝拜重华宫。皇后制止光宗，中书舍人陈傅良拉着衣服的前襟力谏，没有得到采纳。
English: On the twenty-first day, Guangzong will pay homage to Chonghua Palace. The queen stopped Guangzong, and the Chinese scholar Chen Fuliang pulled the front lapel of his clothes. It was not accepted.

古文：戊子，著作郎沈有开、秘书郎彭龟年、礼部侍郎倪思等咸上疏，请朝重华宫。
现代文：二十五日，著作郎沈有开、秘书郎彭龟年、礼部侍郎倪思等都上疏，请求光宗朝拜重华宫。
English: On the 25th, the author's son, Shen Youkai, the secretary's son, Peng Kengnian, and the attendant of the ceremonial department, Ni Si, all went to the emperor and requested that Emperor Guangzong pay homage to Chonghua Palace.

古文：冬十月丙午，内教三衙诸军。
现代文：冬十月十三日，在皇城内训练三衙各军。
English: On the 13th day of the 10th month of winter, the armies of the Three Kingdoms were training in the imperial city.

古文：己酉，朝献于景灵宫。
现代文：十六日，祭祀景灵宫。
English: On the 16th, the ceremony was held at the Jingling Palace.

古文：夜，地震。
现代文：夜晚，发生地震。
English: In the evening, there was an earthquake.

古文：庚戌，朝献于景灵宫。
现代文：十七日，祭祀景灵宫。
English: On the 17th, the ceremony was held at Jingling Palace.

古文：夜，地又震。
现代文：夜晚，又发生地震。
English: In the evening, there was another earthquake.

古文：壬子，秘书省官请朝重华宫，疏三上，不报。
现代文：十九日，秘书省官员请求朝拜重华宫，三次递上疏章，没有得到回答。
English: On the 19th, the officials of the Ministry of the Secretary requested to pay homage to the Chonghua Palace, and submitted the seal three times, but did not receive an answer.

古文：甲寅，雨土。
现代文：二十一日，天上降土。
English: On the twenty-first day, the sky fell to the earth.

古文：工部尚书赵彦逾等上疏重华宫，乞会庆圣节勿降旨免朝。
现代文：工部尚书赵彦逾等上疏重华宫，请求会庆圣节不要降旨说免朝。
English: Shangshu Zhao Yan of the Ministry of Industry and Commerce, more than others, stressed the importance of the Imperial Palace and asked the association not to downgrade the celebration of the holy day and say that it was exempt from the dynasty.

古文：寿皇曰： 朕自秋凉以来，思与皇帝相见，卿等奏疏，已令进御前矣。 
现代文：寿皇说： 肤从秋凉以来，想与光宗相见，你们的奏疏，已经命令有关人员递上去了。 
English: Shouwang said, "I've been wanting to meet with Guangzong since the autumn chill, and I've ordered the relevant personnel to submit your report.

古文：明日会庆节，帝以疾不果朝，丞相葛邲率百官贺于重华宫。
现代文：第二天会庆节，光宗因病不朝拜重华宫，承相葛哪率领百官到重华宫祝贺。
English: On the second day of the festival, Guangzong did not pay homage to the Chonghua Palace due to illness, but led hundreds of officials to the Chonghua Palace for congratulations.

古文：侍从上章，居家待罪，诏不许。
现代文：侍从官上章，居家待罪，下诏不许如此。
English: An attendant of a high-ranking official should stay at home and wait for punishment. The following edict forbids this.

古文：嘉王府翊善黄裳上疏，请诛内侍杨舜卿。台谏张叔椿、章颖上疏，乞罢黜。
现代文：嘉王府诩善黄裳上疏，请求诛杀内侍杨舜卿；台谏张叔椿、章颖上疏，请求罢免职务。
English: Jia Wangfu's 善黄裳上疏, requested to kill the chambermaid Yang Yuqing; Taiwan's 张叔椿, Zhang Ying Shangnang疏, requested to be removed from office.

古文：戊午，太学生汪安仁等二百一十八人上书，请朝重华，皆不报。
现代文：二十五日，太学生汪安仁等二百一十八人上书，请朝拜重华宫，都没有得到回答。
English: On the 25th, two hundred and eighteen people, including Wang Anren, a student of the imperial court, petitioned to pay homage to the Chonghua Palace, but received no response.

古文：己未，丞相以下奏事重华宫。
现代文：二十六日，承相以下奏事朝拜重华宫。
English: On the 26th, the following ceremony was held to pay homage to Chonghua Palace.

古文：庚申，帝将朝重华宫，复以疾不果。
现代文：二十七日，光宗将要朝拜重华宫，又因病没有成行。
English: On the 27th, Guangzong was going to pay homage to Chonghua Palace, but due to illness, he did not make the trip.

古文：丞相以下上疏自劾，请罢政，彭龟年请逐陈源以谢天下，皆不报。
现代文：承相以下上疏自勃，请求罢政；彭龟年请求逐放陈源以谢全国，都没有得到回答。
English: In the following phase, there was a spontaneous uprising and a request for a strike; in the year of the tortoise, there was no answer to the request to expel Chen Yuan to thank the whole country.

古文：十一月辛未，日中有黑子。
现代文：十一月初八，太阳出现黑子。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of November, the sun began to show spots.

古文：壬申，侍从、两省赵彦逾等十一人同班奏事。
现代文：初九，侍从和两省官员赵彦逾等十一人同班奏事。
English: On the morning of the 9th day of the 9th month, the attendant and the official of the two provinces, Zhao Yan, and more than 11 other people in the same class made a report.

古文：癸酉，太白昼见，地生毛，夜有赤云白气。
现代文：初十，太白星白天出现，地生毛，夜里有赤云白气。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, a very white star appears during the day, the ground is hairy, and there are red clouds and white gas at night.

古文：戊寅，帝朝重华宫，都人大悦。
现代文：十五日，光宗朝拜重华宫，都人大悦。
English: On the fifteenth day, Emperor Guangzong paid homage to Chonghua Palace, which greatly pleased the people of the capital.

古文：遣右司郎官徐谊召留正于城外。
现代文：派遣右司郎官徐谊到城外召回留正。
English: He dispatched his right-hand man, the official Xu Yi, outside the city to call back Ruzheng.

古文：庚辰，正始入朝，复赴都堂视事。
现代文：十七日，留正开始人朝，又到都堂处理政事。
English: On the seventeenth day, Ruzheng started the people's court, and went to the capital to deal with political affairs.

古文：命姜特立还故官。
现代文：命令姜特立仍担任原官。
English: Jiang Teli was ordered to remain in his original post.

古文：日中黑子灭。
现代文：太阳中黑子消失。
English: Sunspots disappear in the sun.

古文：癸未，帝率群臣奉上皇太后册、宝于慈福宫。十二月戊戌，帝朝重华宫。
现代文：二十日，光宗率领大臣到慈福宫奉上皇太后册宝。十二月初五，光宗朝拜重华宫。
English: On the 20th, Guangzong led the ministers to Cifu Palace to present the collection of treasures to the Empress Dowager. On the 5th of December, Guangzong paid homage to Chonghua Palace.

古文：壬寅，右司谏章颖以地震请罢葛邲，疏十余上，不报。
现代文：初九，右司谏章颖因地震请求罢免葛哪，十多次上疏，没有得到回答。
English: On the first day of the ninth month, the right-hand woman, Zou Zhangying, requested that Ge Nian be dismissed because of the earthquake. After more than ten times of petitioning, she received no response.

古文：甲辰，命沿边守臣三年为任。
现代文：十一日，命令沿边守臣三年为一个任期。
English: On the 11th day of the month, it was ordered that the border guards would serve a three-year term.

古文：己酉，诏监司、帅守毋独员荐士。
现代文：十六日，诏令监司、帅守不要独自一人举荐士人。
English: On the 16th, it was decreed that supervisors and superintendents should not be alone in recommending scholars.

古文：庚戌，赵雄薨。
现代文：十七日，赵雄逝世。
English: On the 17th, Zhao Xiong passed away.

古文：甲寅，复四川盐合同场旧法。
现代文：二十一日，恢复四川盐合同场旧法。
English: On the 21st, the old law of the Sichuan salt contract field was restored.

古文：丁巳，振江、浙流民。
现代文：二十四日，贩济江、浙流民。
English: On the 24th, the traffickers of the Jijiang and Zhejiang refugees left.

古文：己未，金遣完颜弼等来贺明年正旦。
现代文：二十六日，金朝派遣完颜弼等来祝贺明年新春。
English: On the 26th, Kim Jong-un sent the first batch of lanterns to congratulate the upcoming Spring Festival.

古文：五年春正月癸亥朔，帝御大庆殿，受群臣朝，遂朝重华宫，次诣慈福宫，行庆寿礼。
现代文：绍熙五年春正月初一，光宗到大庆殿，接受大臣朝贺，于是朝拜重华宫，然后到慈福宫，行庆寿礼。
English: On the first day of the first month of the spring of the fifth year of the reign of Emperor Xiaoxi, Guangzong went to the Daqing Palace to receive congratulations from the minister, and then paid homage to the Chonghua Palace, and then went to the Cifu Palace to celebrate his birthday.

古文：推恩如淳熙十年故事。
现代文：像淳熙十年一样施加恩惠。
English: Like the 10 years of Aung San Suu Kyi's rule, favors were bestowed.

古文：癸酉，寿皇圣帝不豫。
现代文：十一日，寿皇圣帝染疾。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Emperor Shoko fell ill.

古文：丙子，大理狱空。
现代文：十四日，葛哪被罢免。
English: On the 14th, Ge was removed from office.

古文：癸未，葛邲罢。
现代文：二十四日，宽减绍兴百姓租税。
English: On the 24th, Shaoxing people's tax was further reduced.

古文：丙戌，宽绍兴民租税。二月乙未，赵汝愚、余端礼以奏除西帅不行，居家待罪。
现代文：二月初三，赵汝愚、余端礼因奏请免除西帅没能实行，居家待罪。
English: On the third day of the second month, Zhao Rugu and Yu Duan did not carry out the request to pardon Xi Shuai, and they stayed at home to wait for the punishment.

古文：戊戌，荆鄂诸军都统制张诏为成州团练使、兴州诸军都统制。
现代文：初六，荆、鄂各军都统制张诏为成州团练使、兴州各军都统制。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, the armies of Jing and H were placed under centralized control. Zhang Zhao was appointed as the Chengdu regimental drill instructor, and the armies of Xingzhou were placed under centralized control.

古文：庚戌，禁湖南、江西遏籴。
现代文：十八日，禁止湖南、江西遏来。
English: On the 18th, Hunan and Jiangxi were prohibited from entering.

古文：三月癸亥，合利州东、西为一路。
现代文：三月初二，合利州东、西路为一路。
English: On the second day of March, the east and west roads of Henglishu will become a single road.

古文：己巳，寿成皇后生辰，免过宫上寿。
现代文：初八，寿成皇后生日，免除过宫上寿。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, the birthday of the Empress Shoucheng, she was exempted from having a palace birthday.

古文：夏四月甲午，帝幸玉津园，皇后及后宫皆从。
现代文：夏四月初三，光宗到玉津园，皇后和后宫都跟随而去。
English: On the third day of the fourth month of the summer, Emperor Guangzong went to the Tamatsuen Garden, and the empress and the imperial court followed him.

古文：乙未，寿皇圣帝幸东园。
现代文：初四，寿皇圣帝到东园。
English: On the fourth day of the school year, His Imperial Highness the Emperor came to the East Garden.

古文：丙申，史浩薨。
现代文：初五，史浩逝世。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, Shi Hao passed away.

古文：己亥，朝献于景灵宫。
现代文：初储备，祭祀景灵宫。
English: The first reserve, the sacrificial Jingling Palace.

古文：壬寅，以不雨，使大理、三衙、临安府及两浙决系囚，释杖以下。
现代文：十一日，因不降雨命令大理寺、三衙、临安府和两浙处理关押囚犯，释放杖刑以下囚犯。
English: On the 11th, due to the lack of rain, it was ordered that Dali Temple, Samye, Lin'an and the two Zhejiang provinces should deal with the prisoners and release the prisoners under the cane punishment.

古文：癸卯，雨土。
现代文：二十日，降土。
English: On the 20th, the earth fell.

古文：甲辰，侍从入对，请朝重华宫。
现代文：十三日，侍从人对，请求朝拜重华宫。
English: On the thirteenth day, the attendants asked the emperor to pay homage to the Chonghua Palace.

古文：己酉，太学生程肖说等以帝未朝，移书大臣。事闻，帝将以癸丑日朝。
现代文：十八日，太学生程肖说等因光宗没有朝拜重华宫，致书大臣，事情传到光宗耳里，光宗表示将在二十二日朝拜。
English: On the 18th, the student Cheng Xiao said that because Guangzong did not pay homage to the Chonghua Palace, he wrote to the Minister of Books. The matter reached the ears of Guangzong. Guangzong said that he would pay homage on the 22nd.

古文：至期，丞相以下入宫门以俟，日昃，帝复以疾不果出。
现代文：到二十二日，承相以下官员到宫门等候，等到太阳偏西，光宗又因病没有成行。
English: On the twenty-second day, officials including Chojeong waited at the palace gate until the sun had set, but Kwangjong was again unable to travel due to illness.

古文：侍从、馆学官上疏，乞罢黜，居家待罪。职事官请去待罪者百余人，诏不许。
现代文：侍从、馆学官上疏，请求罢免，居家待罪；职事官请求离职待罪者一百多人，下诏不许待罪。
English: Attendants, librarians, and officials in the higher echelons requested to be dismissed and stayed at home to wait for punishment; more than a hundred officials requested to leave their posts to wait for punishment, but were not allowed to wait for punishment.

古文：丙辰，侍讲黄裳、秘书少监孙逢吉等再上疏以请。
现代文：二十五日，侍讲黄裳、秘书少监孙逢吉等又上疏请求罢职待罪。
English: On the 25th, Huang Mo, the assistant lecturer, and Sun Fengji, the secretary of the junior superintendent, and so on, went up and requested to resign from the post and wait for the crime.

古文：丁巳，起居郎兼权中书舍人陈傅良请以亲王、执政或近上宗戚一人充重华宫使。
现代文：二十六日，起居郎兼代理中书舍人陈傅良请求任命亲王、执政或接近皇上的宗亲一人担任重华宫使。
English: On the 26th, Kijiro and acting chancellery clerk Chen Fu-liang requested the appointment of a prince, ruler or close relative of the emperor to serve as the Chonghua Palace Envoy.

古文：台谏交章劾内侍陈源、杨舜卿、林亿年离间两宫，请罢逐之。
现代文：台谏交相上章弹勃内侍陈源、杨舜卿、林亿年离间两宫关系，请求罢免驱逐他们。
English: The Taiwan-Hong Kong diplomatic relations were strained, and the relationship between the two palaces was severed by the internal servants Chen Yuan, Yang Yuqing, and Lin Yiren, and they requested to dismiss and expel them.

古文：五月辛酉朔，辰州徭贼寇边。
现代文：五月初一，辰州摇贼攻打边境。
English: On the first day of May, the Chenzhou ruffians attacked the border.

古文：甲子，侍从入对，未得见。
现代文：初四，侍从人对，没有见到光宗。
English: On the fourth day of the new year, the attendants did not see Guangzong.

古文：宰执诣重华宫问疾，不及引。
现代文：宰执到重华宫探问孝宗病情。
English: The leader went to Chonghua Palace to inquire about Takamune's condition.

古文：陈傅良缴上告敕，出城待罪。
现代文：没有得到引见。陈傅良缴上告救，出城待罪。
English: Chen Fu Liang filed a complaint for help and left the city to await trial.

古文：丁卯，以寿皇圣帝疾棘，命丞相以下分祷天地、宗庙、社稷。
现代文：初七，寿皇圣帝病情加剧，命令承相以下分别祈祷天地、宗庙、社翟。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, Emperor Shōkō's illness worsened, and he ordered Shōsho to pray for heaven and earth, the ancestral temple, and the shrine, respectively.

古文：戊辰，丞相留正等请帝侍疾，正引裾随帝至福宁殿，久之，乃泣而出。
现代文：初八，承相留正等请光宗到福宁殿，过了很久以后，才哭泣着出来。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, the heir to the imperial family, Zeng Ruizheng, invited Guangzong to the Fu Ning Palace. After a long time, he came out crying.

古文：辛未，丞相以下以所请不从，求退，帝命皆退，于是丞相以下遂出城待罪。
现代文：十一日，承相以下官员因所提请求没被采纳，请求退职，光宗命令他们都退出职位，于是承相以下全被逐出城外待罪。
English: On the 11th day of the month, as the request was not accepted, the officials below Jang Sang-soo asked to resign, and Kwang Chung ordered them all to resign from their positions. As a result, Jang Sang-soo and his subordinates were all expelled from the city to await trial.

古文：知阁门事韩侂胄请宣押入城，许之。
现代文：知阎门事韩青宣押人城，光宗同意。
English: Guangzong agreed with Han Qing Xuancheng's decision to expel Han from the city.

古文：追封史浩为会稽郡王。
现代文：追封史浩为会稽郡王。
English: Succession of Shi Hao as County Auditor.

古文：乙亥。帝将朝重华宫，复不果。
现代文：十五日，光宗将要朝拜重华宫，又没有成行。
English: On the fifteenth day, Guangzong was going to pay homage to Chonghua Palace, but did not make the trip.

古文：戊寅，以寿皇圣帝疾，赦。
现代文：十八日，因孝宗寿皇圣帝患病，宣布赦免。
English: On the 18th, due to the illness of Emperor Takamatsu, the emperor pardoned him.

古文：权刑部尚书京镗入对，请朝重华宫。
现代文：代理刑部尚书京锁人对，请光宗朝拜重华宫。
English: The acting head of the criminal investigation department, Shang Shuxu, asked Guangzong to pay homage to Chonghua Palace.

古文：庚辰，丞相以下诣重华宫问疾。
现代文：二十日，承相以下官员到重华宫慰问孝宗病情。
English: On the 20th, officials from the line of succession went to Chonghua Palace to offer condolences on the illness of Emperor Xiaozong.

古文：癸未，起居舍人彭龟年叩头请奏事，诏令上殿，乃请朝重华宫。
现代文：二十三日，起居舍人彭龟年叩头请求奏事，被诏令上殿，于是请光宗朝拜重华宫。
English: On the 23rd, the householder, Peng Gui Nian, bowed his head and requested a report, and was ordered by the emperor to go to the palace, whereupon he invited Guangzong to pay homage to the Chonghua Palace.

古文：甲申，从官列奏以请，嘉王府翊善黄裳、讲读官沈有开、彭龟年奏，乞令嘉王诣重华宫问疾，许之。
现代文：二十四日，从官一起上奏请求，嘉王府诩善黄裳、讲读官沈有开、彭龟年上奏，请求嘉王到重华宫探问病情，同意了。
English: On the 24th, a request was made from the officials, and Jiahuangfu's chief official Zi Shen Huang, lecturing official Shen Youkai, and Peng Jueg, requested Jiahuang to go to Chonghua Palace to inquire about the condition of the disease, and he agreed.

古文：王至重华宫，寿皇为之感动。
现代文：嘉王到重华宫，寿皇为之感动。
English: Jiahuang went to Chonghua Palace, and Shouwang was deeply moved.

古文：丙戌，权户部侍郎袁说友入对，请朝重华宫。
现代文：二十六日，代理户部侍郎袁说友入对，请光宗朝拜重华宫。
English: On the 26th, the acting head of the household, Yuan Sayu Youyirong, invited Guangzong to pay homage to the Chonghua Palace.

古文：六月，遣梁总等贺金主生辰。
现代文：六月，派遣梁总等祝贺金主生日。
English: In June, it sent General Liang to congratulate Kim on his birthday.

古文：戊戌夜，寿皇圣帝崩，遗诰改重华宫为慈福宫，建寿成皇后殿于宫后，以便定省。
现代文：初九夜里寿皇圣帝逝世，遗诏改重华宫为慈福宫，在宫后建寿成皇后殿，以便早晚问安。
English: Emperor Shōkō passed away on the night of the 9th day of the 9th month, and his last will and testament changed the name of Shōkō Palace to Cifu Palace, and the Shōkō Palace was built at the back of the palace in order to say good morning and good night.

古文：以重华宫钱银一百万缗赐内外军。
现代文：把重华宫钱银一百万络赐给内外库。
English: He donated one million rupees worth of money and silver from the Chonghua Palace to the internal and external treasuries.

古文：先是，丞相留正、知枢密院事赵汝愚、参知政事陈骙、同知枢密院事余端礼闻寿皇圣帝大渐，见帝于后殿，力请帝朝重华宫，皇子嘉王亦泣以请，不听。
现代文：当初，承相留正、知枢密院事赵汝愚、参知政事除癸、同知枢密院事余端礼听说孝宗病危，在后殿与光宗见面，力请光宗朝拜重华宫，皇子嘉王也哭着请求，没有被采纳。
English: At first, Zhao Ruwu, the heir to the throne, the secretary of the Privy Council, Zhao Ruwu, the councillor of the Privy Council, and the councillor of the Privy Council, heard that Xiaozong was critically ill, met with Guangzong in the back hall, and urged Guangzong to pay homage to the Chonghua Palace. The prince, Ji Wang, also cried and begged, but was not accepted.

古文：至是，丞相正等闻寿皇圣帝崩，乃率百官听遗诰于重华宫。
现代文：到这时，承相留正等听到寿皇圣帝逝世的消息，于是率领文武百官到重华宫听遗诏。
English: By this time, Emperor Shōsō was waiting to hear the news of Emperor Shōsō's death, so he led hundreds of military and civilian officials to the Shōwa Palace to listen to the last will and testament.

古文：己亥，丞相以下上疏，请诣重华成礼。
现代文：初十，承相以下官员上疏，请到重华宫行丧礼。
English: On the 10th day of the first month of the year, the officials below the prime minister are absent, please go to the Chonghua Palace for the funeral.

古文：庚子，遣薛叔似等使金告哀。
现代文：十一日，派遣薛叔似等出使金朝报告孝宗逝世的消息。
English: On the 11th day, Xue Shuxiang and others sent an envoy to the Kim dynasty to report the news of the death of Xiaozong.

古文：辛丑，丞相率百官拜表，请就丧次成服。
现代文：十二日，承相率领文武百官上表，请求穿丧服行孝。
English: On the 12th, a hundred officials, led by the prime minister and military leaders, came up to the table and asked to wear mourning clothes to show their filial piety.

古文：壬寅，寿皇大敛。
现代文：十三日，寿皇大硷。
English: On the 13th, Emperor Shou's great funeral was held.

古文：皇子嘉王复入奏事，诏侯疾愈，过宫行礼。
现代文：皇子嘉王又进宫奏事，下诏等病情好转，到宫殿行礼。
English: Prince Jia Wang also went to the palace to report the matter. After the report, his condition improved, and he went to the palace to make a bow.

古文：丞相以下请皇太后垂帘听政，不许；请代行祭奠礼，许之。
现代文：承相以下官员请皇太后垂帘听政，没得到同意；请求代行祭奠礼，同意了。
English: The officials below the prime minister asked the empress dowager to listen to the government, but did not get approval; they requested that the memorial service be held on their behalf, and it was approved.

古文：仍有旨：皇帝有疾，听就内中成服。
现代文：并且有旨：皇帝有病，允许皇帝在宫内行丧礼。
English: And there was a decree: the emperor was ill, and the emperor was allowed to be buried in the palace.

古文：夜，白气亘天。
现代文：夜晚，白气覆盖天空。
English: At night, a white haze covers the sky.

古文：乙巳，尊寿圣隆慈备福皇太后为太皇太后，寿成皇后为皇太后。
现代文：十六日，尊寿圣隆慈备福皇太后为太皇太后，寿成皇后为皇太后。
English: On the 16th, the Empress Dowager of the Reign of the Reign of the Reign of the Reign of the Reign of the Reign of the Reign of the Reign of the Reign of the Reign of the Reign of the Reign of the Reign of the Reign of the Reign.

古文：己酉，白气亘天。
现代文：二十日，白气横贯天空。
English: On the 20th, white gas streaked across the sky.

古文：乙卯，遣林湜等使金致遗留物。
现代文：二十六日，派遣林提等出使金国贝曾送遗留物。
English: On the 26th, Lin Ti and other emissaries were dispatched to collect the leftovers sent by Kim Kwok Pei.

古文：秋七月辛酉，丞相留正称疾，乞罢政，遂逃归。
现代文：秋七月初二，承相留正称病，请求罢政，于是出走。
English: On the second day of the second month of autumn in July, Zheng Liusheng called in sick, requested a strike, and then left.

古文：初，正等屡请立嘉王为皇太子，帝许之。
现代文：起初，留正等多次请求立嘉王为皇太子，光宗同意了。
English: At first, Ruzheng and others repeatedly requested that Prince Jia be made crown prince, and Emperor Guangzong agreed.

古文：正拟指挥以进，奉御笔： 历事岁久，念欲退闲。 
现代文：留正草拟诏旨进呈，奉御笔： 历事岁久，念欲退闲。 
English: Remaining to draft the imperial edict and present it to the emperor, he wrote: "I have been here for a long time, and I want to retire.

古文：正得之，大惧，乃谋退焉。
现代文：留正得到后，非常恐惧，于是打算退走。
English: He was very scared after he got a chance to stay, so he planned to leave.

古文：甲子，太皇太后以皇帝疾未能执丧，命皇子嘉王即皇帝位于重华宫之素幄，尊皇帝为太上皇帝，皇后为寿仁太上皇后，移御泰安宫。
现代文：初五，太皇太后因光宗患病没能执丧，命令皇子嘉王在重华宫用白绢搭成的临时宫殿即皇帝位，尊光宗为太上皇帝，皇后为寿仁太上皇后，移驾泰安宫。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, the great empress dowager was unable to hold the funeral due to the illness of Guangzong, and ordered the prince Jia Wang to build a temporary palace with egrets in the Chonghua Palace, that is, the emperor's throne, with the honor of Guangzong as the empress dowager and the empress as the empress dowager of Shouren, and moved to the Tai'an Palace.

古文：庆元元年十一月戊戌，上尊号曰圣安寿仁太上皇帝。
现代文：庆元元年十一月十七日，上尊号为圣安寿仁太上皇帝。
English: On the 17th day of the 11th month of the 1st year of the Qing Dynasty, the emperor's posthumous name was changed to Emperor Sheng'an Shouren.

古文：六年八月庚寅，太上皇帝不豫。
现代文：庆元六年八月初七，太上皇帝染病。
English: On the 7th day of the 8th month of the 6th year of the Qing Dynasty, the empress dowager became ill.

古文：辛卯，崩于寿康宫，年五十有四。
现代文：初八，光宗在寿康宫逝世，终年五十四岁。
English: At the age of eight, Mitsumune died at Shukang Palace, at the age of fifty-four.

古文：十一月丙寅，谥曰宪仁圣哲慈孝皇帝，庙号光宗。
现代文：十一月十四日，溢号为宪仁圣哲慈孝皇帝，庙号光宗。
English: On the 14th of November, the prefix was changed to Emperor Xianren Shenzhe Ci Xiao, and the temple name was changed to Guangzong.

古文：嘉泰三年十一月壬申，加谥循道宪仁明功茂德温文顺武圣哲慈孝皇帝。
现代文：嘉泰三年十一月初八，加溢号为循道宪仁明功茂德温文顺武圣哲慈孝皇帝。
English: On the 8th day of the 11th month of the 3rd year of the Jia Tai Dynasty, Emperor Jianzhong of the Jia Tai Dynasty was crowned as the Emperor Jianzhong of the Jia Tai Dynasty.

古文：赞曰：光宗幼有令闻，向用儒雅。
现代文：评论说：光宗从小就有好名声，有意引用儒雅之士。
English: Comment: Ever since he was a child, Guangzong has had a good reputation for deliberately quoting Confucian classics.

古文：逮其即位，总权纲，屏嬖幸，薄赋缓刑，见于绍熙初政，宜若可取。
现代文：等到光宗即位后，总揽权纲，摒除小人，薄赋缓刑，出现在绍熙初政之时，应该说是可取的。
English: After the enthronement of Guangzong, the general power-grabbing program, the elimination of villains, and the suspension of sentences, appeared at the time of the first government of Shaoxi, which should be said to be desirable.

古文：及夫宫闱妒悍，内不能制，惊忧致疾。
现代文：到皇后嫉妒蛮横的时候，光宗不能控制她，惊扰致病。
English: When the empress became jealous and insolent, Guangzong could not control her, causing her illness.

古文：自是政治日昏，孝养日怠，而乾、淳之业衰焉。
现代文：从此政治日益昏暗，孝养一天比一天缺乏，朝廷从乾道、淳熙以来建立的功业从而衰落。
English: Since then, politics has become increasingly gloomy, filial piety is lacking day by day, and the achievements that the imperial court has built since the Qian Dao and Jun Xi have declined.

