古文：赵燕后胡服，王令让之曰： 事主之行，竭意尽力，微谏而不哗，应对而不怨，不逆上以自伐，不立私以为名。
现代文：赵燕迟迟不穿胡服，赵武灵王派人责备他说： 事奉君王，应该尽心竭力，用含义深远的言辞纳谏而不喧哗，回答君王提出的问题而没有怨言，不违背君王的意愿而自夸功绩，不树立私人的威信借此扬名。
English: When Zhao Yan hesitated to wear the robe, King Zhao Wuling sent a man to rebuke him, saying, "In serving the king, you should do your best, use profound words to accept commands without making a fuss, answer questions raised by the king without complaint, not go against the will of the king and boast of your achievements, and not establish personal prestige to make a name for yourself.

古文：子道顺而不拂，臣行让而不争。
现代文：做儿子的应该遵循教导，不违背父亲的心意，做臣子的应该行为谦让，不与君王争执。
English: As a son, you should follow the teachings and not go against your father's wishes. As a courtier, you should behave humbly and not argue with the king.

古文：子用私道者家必乱，臣用私义者国必危。
现代文：做儿子的使用不正当之道，家庭必定混乱，做臣子的使用不正当之义，国家必定危险。
English: If a son is used improperly, the family is bound to be chaotic; if a courtier is used improperly, the nation is bound to be in danger.

古文：反亲以为行，慈父不子；逆主以自成，惠主不臣也。
现代文：有反对父母的行为，慈爱的父亲也不把他当儿子看待；违背君王的意愿成就自己的事情，慈祥的君主也不把他当臣子。
English: If a man acts against his parents, a loving father does not consider him as a son; if he does something against the will of the king, a benevolent ruler does not consider him as a vassal.

古文：寡人胡服，子独弗服，逆主罪莫大焉。
现代文：寡人改穿胡服，你唯独不穿，罪过没有比违背君王意愿更大的了。
English: There is no greater sin than to go against the king's wishes.

古文：以从政为累，以逆主为高，行私莫大焉。
现代文：你把改穿胡服的政事作为负担，把违背君王的意愿作为高尚，推行私欲没有比这个更大的了。
English: You regard the political affairs of changing into the robe of Hu as a burden, and the violation of the will of the king as noble, and there is no greater pursuit of selfishness than this.

古文：故寡人恐亲犯刑戮之罪，以明有司之法。 
现代文：所以寡人担心你狍下遭受杀头的罪过，用以表明有司的法律严明。 
English: Therefore, many people are worried about the crime of beheading under your command, which is used to show that the law is strict.

古文：赵燕再拜稽首曰； 前吏命胡服，施及贱臣，臣以失令过期，更不用侵辱教，王之惠也。
现代文：赵燕再拜叩头至地多时说： 前些日子，官吏命令我改穿胡服，君王的恩惠已经赐给臣下，臣下认为自己违反穿胡服的命令并超过了限期，可是君主不用刑罚而改用教诲，这是君王的恩惠。
English: Zhao Yan bowed his head and said, "A few days ago, the officials ordered me to change into the Hu uniform. The king's favor has been bestowed upon his vassals. The vassals thought they had violated the order to wear the Hu uniform and had exceeded the time limit. However, the monarch did not use punishment but instead used admonition. This is the king's favor.

古文：臣敬循衣服，以待今日。 
现代文：臣下敬请遵循改穿胡服，正等待君王下命令的日子。 
English: Subjects, please follow the days when you change into Hu clothing and are waiting for the king's order.

