古文：起屠维大渊献，尽上章困敦，凡二年。
现代文：起屠维大渊献，尽上章困敦，一共两年。
English: From start to finish, a total of two years.

古文：肃宗文明武德大圣大宣孝皇帝下之上
现代文：肃宗文明武德大圣大宣孝皇帝下之上
English: under the reign of Emperor Xuanzong, the great saint of civilization and martial arts,

古文：乾元二年己亥，公元七五九年
现代文：唐肃宗乾元二年
English: In the second year of Qianyuan of the Tang Dynasty,

古文：春，正月，己巳朔，史思明筑坛于魏州城北，自称大圣燕王；以周挚为行军司马。
现代文：春季，正月己巳朔，史思明在魏州城北建筑祭坛，祭天称王，自称大圣燕王，任命周挚为行军司马。
English: In the spring, the first month of the year, Shi Siming built an altar in the north of the city of Weizhou, worshiped the king, called himself the great saint Yan Wang, and appointed Zhou Jing as the marching steed.

古文：李光弼曰： 思明得魏州而按兵不进，此欲使我懈惰，而以精锐掩吾不备也。
现代文：李光弼说： 史思明攻占魏州后，按兵不动，是想松懈我们的意志，然后用精兵突然袭击我们的不备。
English: Li Guangyao said: "After the capture of Weizhou, Shi Siming did not move his troops. He wanted to weaken our will, and then attacked us unprepared with elite soldiers.

古文：请与朔方军同逼魏城，求与之战。彼惩嘉山之败，必不敢轻出。
现代文：请让我与朔方军联兵进逼魏州城，向史思明挑战，史思明鉴于嘉山之败的经验，必定不敢轻易出战。
English: Please let me march into Weizhou City with the allied troops of the Shuo Army and challenge Shi Siming. In view of the experience of the defeat of Jiashan, Shi Siming will not dare to fight easily.

古文：得旷日引久，则鄴城必拔矣。
现代文：这样旷日持久，我们就能够收复邺城。
English: If this continues for a long time, we will be able to recapture Fucheng.

古文：庆绪已死，彼则无辞以用其众也。 
现代文：如果安庆绪败死，史思明就会失去号召力，难以指挥叛军。 
English: If An Qingxu is defeated and killed, Shi Siming will lose his appeal and it will be difficult to command the rebels.

古文：鱼朝恩以为不可，乃止。
现代文：而观军容使宦官鱼朝恩却认为此计不可行，只好作罢。
English: However, Gao Jun Rong made the eunuch fish Chao En think that this plan was not feasible and had to give up.

古文：戊寅，上祀九宫贵神，用王玙之言也。乙卯，耕藉田。
现代文：戊寅，肃宗采用王的建议，祭祀九宫贵神。乙卯，肃宗行藉田礼，亲自耕田，以示重农。
English: In the first half, Su Zong adopted the king's suggestion and offered sacrifices to the Nine Palace Gods. In the second half, Su Zong performed the rice-planting ceremony and personally cultivated the fields to show his importance as a farmer.

古文：镇西节度使李嗣业攻鄴城，为流矢所中，丙申，薨；兵马使荔非元礼代将其众。
现代文：镇西节度使李嗣业在攻打邺城时，被乱箭射中，丙申去世。兵马使荔非元礼代替他指挥军队。
English: Zhenxi Festival caused Li Siye to be shot by random arrows when attacking Shicheng, and Bingshen died. The soldiers and horses made Li Fei Yuanli command the army instead of him.

古文：初，嗣业表段秀实为怀州长史，知留后事，时诸军屯戍日久，财竭粮尽，秀实独运刍粟，募兵市马以奉镇西行营，相继于道。
现代文：起初，李嗣业奏请任命段秀实为怀州长史，主管留后事宜。此时，各路军队因为屯兵于邺城之下日久，财竭粮尽，而只有段秀实运送粮草，招兵买马，用以供应镇西行营兵，道路上络绎不绝。
English: At first, Li Siye requested the appointment of Duan Hsiu-sheng as the governor of Huai Province, in charge of staying behind. At this time, all the armies were exhausted due to the long stay of the garrison in Lucheng, and only Duan Hsiu-sheng transported grain and grass, recruited soldiers to buy horses, and used them to supply the town's westbound battalion. The roads were endless.

古文：二月，壬子，月食，既。
现代文：二月壬子，出现月全食。
English: In February, a total lunar eclipse occurred in Jinsi.

古文：先是百官请加皇后尊号曰 辅圣 ，上以问中书舍人李揆，对曰： 自古皇后无尊号，惟韦后有之，岂足为法！ 
现代文：此前，百官请求加封张皇后尊号为 辅圣 ，肃宗因此事问中书舍人李揆，李揆回答说： 自古以来皇后都没有尊号，只有中宗时韦皇后曾经有过尊号，怎么能够效法呢！ 
English: Previously, a hundred officials had requested that the honorary title of Empress Zhang be added as a subsidiary saint. Su Zong therefore asked the Chinese scholar Li Wei, Li Wei replied: Empresses have not had honorary titles since ancient times. Only the Empress of the Chinese Dynasty Shi Wei once had an honorary title. How can we follow suit?

古文：上惊曰 庸人几误我！ 
现代文：肃宗吃惊地说： 这些庸人几乎误了我的大事！ 
English: Surprised, Sozong said, "These mediocrities almost missed my big moment!"

古文：会月食，事遂寝。
现代文：适逢出现月食，于是此事搁置。
English: A lunar eclipse coincided, so the matter was shelved.

古文：后与李辅国相表里，横于禁中，干豫政事，请托无穷。
现代文：后来张皇后与宦官李辅国相互勾结，横行朝中，干预政事，无究尽地请托。
English: Later, Empress Zhang colluded with the eunuch, Li Shuo Guo, to run rampant in the court, interfere in political affairs, and make endless requests.

古文：上颇不悦，而无如之何。
现代文：肃宗虽然心中不满，但也无可奈何。
English: Although Su Zong is dissatisfied in his heart, there is nothing he can do.

古文：郭子仪等九节度使围鄴城，筑垒再重，穿堑三重，壅漳水灌之。
现代文：郭子仪等九节度使包围了邺城，筑垒两道，挖壕三重，堵塞漳河水灌城。
English: Guo Ziyi and other nine military commanders encircled the city of Handan, built two roads, dug three trenches, blocked the Handan River and flooded the city.

古文：城中井泉皆溢，构栈而居，自冬涉春，安庆绪坚守以待史思明，食尽，一鼠直钱四千，淘墙麦弋及马矢以食马。
现代文：邺城中井泉都水满溢出，人们只好构栈而住，从冬天一直到春天，安庆绪死死坚守，等待史思明率兵解围，城中粮食吃尽，以至一只老鼠值钱四千，士卒挖出墙中的麦秸及马粪来喂养战马。
English: The wells and springs in the city overflowed with water, and people had to live in stacks. From winter to spring, Anqingxu held out, waiting for Shi Siming to lead the troops to lift the siege. The food in the city was exhausted, so that a mouse was worth four thousand. The soldiers dug out the straw and horse manure in the wall to feed the horses.

古文：人皆以为克在朝夕，而诸军既无统帅，进退无所禀；城中人欲降者，碍水深，不得出。
现代文：人们都认为邺城危在旦夕，必能攻克，但是官军的各路军队因为没有统帅，进退没有统一指挥，城中的人想要投降，但因为水深不得出城。
English: People all thought that Lucheng was in imminent danger and could be conquered, but because the various armies of the government army had no commander, there was no unified command for advancing and retreating. People in the city wanted to surrender, but they could not leave the city because of the depth of the water.

古文：城久不下，上下解体。
现代文：这样邺城久攻不下，官军疲困解体，没有士气。
English: As a result, it took a long time to capture Lucheng, and the exhausted government army disintegrated, with no morale.

古文：思明乃自魏州引兵趣鄴，使诸将去城各五十里为营，每营击鼓三百面，遥胁之。
现代文：这时，史思明才率兵从魏州进军邺城，命令诸将在距离邺城五十里处扎营，每个营中击鼓三百面，遥为安庆绪声缓，威胁官军。
English: At this time, Shi Siming led the troops from Weizhou to march into Lucheng and ordered them to camp at a distance of 50 miles from Lucheng. Each battalion played 300 drums, and the sound of the distant Anqingxu was muffled, threatening the official army.

古文：又每营选精骑五百，日于城下抄掠，官军出，即散归其营；诸军人马牛车日有所失，樵采甚艰，昼备之则夜至，夜备之则昼至。
现代文：史思明又从每个营中挑选精锐骑兵五百，每天到城下抢掠，官军如果出来交战，他们就散归自己的军营中。这样官军各路的人马牛车每天都有丧失，甚至连采集薪柴都很艰难。官军白天防备，叛军骑兵就在夜里来骚扰，如果夜里防备，叛军就白天来。
English: Shi Siming also selected five hundred elite cavalry from each battalion to loot the city every day. If the government army came out to fight, they would scatter to their own military camps. In this way, the government army lost people and carts every day, and even collecting firewood was difficult. The government army was prepared during the day, and the rebel cavalry came to harass them at night. If they were prepared at night, the rebels would come during the day.

古文：时天下饥馑，转饷者南自江、淮，西自并、汾，舟车相继。
现代文：当时天下饥荒，军中所用粮饷都是南从江、淮地区，西自并州、汾州运来，船车相继不断。
English: At that time, there was famine in the world, and the grain used in the army was transported from the Jiang and Huai regions in the south, and from the Anhui Province and Zhangzhou Province in the west, and the ships and cars kept coming.

古文：思明多遣壮士窃官军装号，督趣运者，责其稽缓，妄杀戮人，运者骇惧；舟车所聚，则密纵火焚之；往复聚散，自相辨识，而官军逻捕不能察也。
现代文：于是史思明派壮士穿上官军的服装，窃取官军的号令，去督促运粮者，斥责他们缓慢，随便杀戮，使转运的人心中惊骇恐惧。他们又在运送粮饷船车聚集的地方，暗中放火焚烧。神出鬼没，聚散无常，他们自己能够相识别，但巡逻的官军士卒却抓不到，也侦察不出行迹。
English: Therefore, Shi Siming sent brave men to put on the clothes of the official army, steal the orders of the official army, go to supervise the grain transporters, scold them for slow and casual killing, and make the people who transported the grain shocked and frightened. They also secretly set fire to the places where the grain and straw trucks gathered. Out of nowhere, scattered, they can identify themselves, but they can't catch the officers and men on patrol, and they can't detect their movements.

古文：由是诸军乏食，人思自溃。
现代文：因此官军各路军队都缺乏粮食，人心涣散。
English: As a result, all branches of the imperial army were short of food, and the people were disunited.

古文：思明乃引大军直抵城下，官军与之刻日决战。
现代文：史思明这才率领大军直抵城下，与官军定好了决战的日期。
English: It was only then that Shi Siming led a large army straight to the city and set a date for the decisive battle with the government army.

古文：三月，壬申，官军步骑六十万陈于安阳河北，思明自将精兵五万敌之，诸军望之，以为游军，未介意。
现代文：三月壬申，官军步、骑兵六十万在安阳河北岸开摆阵势，史思明亲自率领精兵五万来交战，官军望见，以为是流动部队，不加介意。
English: In March of Jinshin, the official army of 600,000 infantry and cavalry took up positions on the north bank of the Anyang River. Shi Siming personally led 50,000 elite soldiers to engage in battle. The official army did not mind, thinking it was a mobile force.

古文：思明直前奋击，李光弼、王思礼、许叔冀、鲁炅先与之战，杀伤相半；鲁炅中流矢。
现代文：史思明身先士卒，率军冲锋，李光弼、王思礼、许叔冀与鲁炅先领兵迎战，杀伤各半，鲁炅还被乱箭射中。
English: Shi Siming was in the vanguard, leading the charge. Li Guangyao, Wang Sili, Xu Shujii and Lu Yao were the first to lead the troops into battle, with half of them killed and the other half wounded. Lu Yao was also hit by a stray arrow.

古文：郭子仪承其后，未及布陈，大风忽起，吹沙拔木，天地昼晦，咫尺不相辨。两军大惊，官军溃而南，贼溃而北，弃甲仗辎重委积于路。
现代文：郭子仪率兵紧跟在后面，还未及布阵，大风急起，吹沙拔木，天地一片昏暗，咫尺之间，人马不辨，两军都大吃一惊，接着官军向南溃退，叛军向北溃退，所丢弃的武器盔甲等军用物资满路都是。
English: Guo Ziyi and his soldiers followed closely behind, but before they could set up their lines, a strong wind sprang up, blowing sand and uprooting trees, the sky and the earth were dark, and there was no distinction between men and horses. Both armies were taken aback, and then the government army retreated to the south, and the rebel army retreated to the north. The discarded weapons, armor, and other military materials were all over the road.

古文：子仪以朔方军断河阳桥保东京。
现代文：郭子仪命令朔方军切断了河阳桥，以确保东京的安全。
English: Guo Ziyi ordered the Shuo army to cut off the Kawayang Bridge to ensure the safety of Tokyo.

古文：战马万匹，惟存三千，甲仗十万，遗弃殆尽。
现代文：一万匹战马仅剩下三千，十万盔甲兵器差不多全部丧失。
English: Of the ten thousand horses, only three thousand remained, and almost all of the one hundred thousand armoured weapons were lost.

古文：东京士民惊骇，散奔山谷，留守崔圆、河南尹苏震等官吏南奔襄、邓，诸节度各溃归本镇。
现代文：东京城中的官吏民众十分惊恐，都纷纷逃向山中，留守崔圆与河南尹苏震等官吏向南逃奔襄州、邓州，各路节度使也率领自己的兵马逃回本镇。
English: The officials and people in Tokyo Castle were so terrified that they all fled to the mountains. The officials who stayed behind, such as Cui Yuan and Henan Yin Suzhen, fled south to Xiangzhou and Dengzhou. The festival envoys from all directions also led their soldiers and horses to flee back to the town.

古文：士卒所过剽掠，吏不能止，旬日方定。
现代文：这些败兵沿路大肆抢掠，胡作非为，当地官吏和军中将帅无法制止，十多天才安定下来。
English: These defeated soldiers plundered and pillaged along the road. Local officials and military generals were unable to stop them, and it took more than ten days to settle down.

古文：惟李光弼、王思礼整勒部伍，全军以归。
现代文：只有李光弼与王思礼整理队伍，全军返回。
English: Only Li Guangyao and Wang Sili sorted out the team, and the whole army returned.

古文：子仪至河阳，将谋城守。师人相惊，又奔缺门。
现代文：郭子仪到达河阳，想要坚守河阳城，因为部队自相惊扰，又逃奔缺门。
English: Guo Ziyi arrived in Heyang and wanted to hold on to Heyang City, because the troops were alarmed by each other and ran away.

古文：诸将继至，众及数万，议捐东京，退保蒲、陕。
现代文：这时部将都陆续赶到，点检人马，才有几万，大家商议放弃东京，退保蒲州、陕州。
English: At this time, the authorities arrived one after another, and there were only tens of thousands of inspectors. Everyone discussed abandoning Tokyo, and withdrawing insurance from Puzhou and Shaanxi.

古文：都虞候张用济曰： 蒲、陕荐饥，不如守河阳，贼至，并力拒之。 
现代文：都虞侯张用济说： 蒲州与陕州连年饥荒，不如坚守河阳，叛军如果来攻，就全力坚守。 
English: Zhang Yijie, the Prince of the Capital, said: "Puzhou and Shaanxi have been suffering from famine for years. It is better to hold fast to Heyang. If the rebels attack, they will do their best to hold fast.

古文：子仪从之。
现代文：郭子仪同意。
English: Guo Ziyi agreed.

古文：使都游弈使灵武韩游瑰将五百骑前趣河阳，用济以步卒五千继之。
现代文：于是就派都游弈使灵武人韩游率领五百骑兵先进军河阳，张用济率领五千步兵继后。
English: As a result, he sent Du Youyou to make Han You, a spirited warrior, lead five hundred cavalrymen to the advanced army of Heyang, followed by Zhang Yoji leading five thousand infantrymen.

古文：周挚引兵争河阳，后至，不得入而去。
现代文：叛军的行军司马周挚领兵来争夺河阳，因为晚到一步，无法入城而退去。
English: The rebel army led by Sima Zhou earnestly marched to fight for the city of Heyang, but because they arrived one step late, they were unable to enter the city and withdrew.

古文：用济役所部兵筑南、北两城而守之。
现代文：张用济让士兵筑南、北两城准备坚守。
English: Zhang Yijie ordered soldiers to prepare to hold on to the two cities in the north and south of Chikuka.

古文：段秀实帅将士妻子及公私辎重自野戍渡河，待命于河清之南岸，荔非元礼至而军焉。
现代文：段秀实率领镇西将士的家眷以及公私物资从野戌渡过黄河，在河清县南面待命，荔非元礼到后遂驻军于此。
English: Duan Xiushi led the families of the Zhenxi soldiers as well as public and private materials to cross the Yellow River from Yucheng and stand by in the south of Heqing County. After the arrival of Li Fei Yuanli, the troops were stationed here.

古文：诸将各上表请罪，上皆不问，惟削崔圆阶封，贬苏震为济王府长史，削银青阶。
现代文：各路将帅都上表谢罪，肃宗都不责问，只是削夺了崔圆的封爵与官阶，并贬苏震为济王府长史，削夺银青光禄大夫官阶。
English: All the generals and admirals expressed their gratitude, and Su Zong did not reprimand them, but stripped Cui Yuan of his knighthood and official rank, and demoted Su Zhen to the position of the chief historian of the King's palace, and stripped Yin Qingguanglu of his official rank of doctor.

古文：史思明审知官军溃去，自沙河收整士众，还屯鄴城南。
现代文：史思明得知官军败退，就从沙河整顿兵马，还军邺城南面。
English: When Shi Siming learned that the government army had been defeated and retreated, he reorganized the soldiers and horses from the Shahe River and returned the army to the south of the city.

古文：安庆绪收子仪等营中粮，得六七万石，与孙孝哲、崔乾祐谋闭门更拒思明。
现代文：安庆绪收集了郭子仪军队败退时留在营中的粮食，有六七万石，于是就与孙孝哲、崔乾等计谋闭城门抗拒史思明。
English: An Qingxu collected the grain left in the camp when Guo Ziyi's army was defeated and retreated, which amounted to 670,000 koku, so he and Sun Xiaozhe, Cui Qian and others planned to close the city gate to resist Shi Siming.

古文：诸将曰： 今日岂可复背史王乎！ 
现代文：这时各位将领说： 我们现在怎么能够背叛史王呢！ 
English: At this time, the generals said: How can we betray Shi Wang now!

古文：思明不与庆绪相闻，又不南追官军，但日于军中飨士。
现代文：而史思明既不与安庆绪通报情况，也不南下追击官军，只是每天在军中宴请士卒。
English: However, Shi Siming did not inform An Qingxu of the situation, nor did he go south to pursue the government army, but only held a banquet for the soldiers in the army every day.

古文：张通儒、高尚等言于庆绪曰： 史王远来，臣等皆应迎谢。 
现代文：张通儒、高尚等人对安庆绪说： 史王远道率兵来救援我们，我们都应该去迎接感谢。 
English: Zhang Tongru, Gao Shang and others said to An Qingxu: Shi Wangyuan led the troops to rescue us, we should all go to meet the thanks.

古文：庆绪曰： 任公暂往。 
现代文：安庆绪说： 随你们去吧。 
English: An Qingxu said: Go ahead.

古文：思明见之涕泣，厚礼而归之。
现代文：史思明见到张通儒、高尚等，痛哭流涕，重加礼赏，然后让他们回去。
English: When Shi Siming saw Zhang Tongru, Gaosheng, etc., he cried bitterly, gave them a heavy reward, and then let them go back.

古文：经三日，庆绪不至。
现代文：过了三天，安庆绪还不来。
English: After exactly three days, An Qingxu still did not go to Shi Siming.

古文：思明密召安太清令诱之，庆绪窘蹙，不知所为，乃遣太清上表称臣于思明，请待解甲入城，奉上玺绶。
现代文：于是史思明就暗中把安太清召来，让他诱骗安庆绪，安庆绪无计可施，不知道怎么办才好，只好派安太清向史思明上表称臣，并说等待史思明安顿好部队入城后，就奉上皇帝印玺。
English: As a result, Shi Siming secretly summoned An Taiching and asked him to trick An Qingxu. An Qingxu was at a loss and did not know what to do, so she sent An Taiching to Shi Siming to praise him, and said that after waiting for Shi Siming to settle his troops and enter the city, she would present him with the emperor's seal.

古文：思明省表，曰： 何至如此！ 
现代文：史思明看了表书后说： 你何必要这样呢！ 
English: Shi Siming looked at the watch and said, "Why do you need this?"

古文：因出表遍示将士，咸称万岁。
现代文：并把表书拿出来让将士们看，将士们都呼喊万岁。
English: And he held out the watch book for the soldiers to see, and the soldiers all shouted hooray.

古文：乃手疏唁庆绪而不称臣，且曰： 愿为兄弟之国，更作籓篱之援。
现代文：因此史思明就亲手写信安慰安庆绪，并不称臣，只是说： 愿与你作为兄弟邻国，互相援助。
English: Therefore, Shi Siming personally wrote a letter to comfort An Qingxu, and did not praise the minister, but said: May you, as a brother and neighbor, help each other.

古文：鼎足而立，犹或庶几；北面之礼，固不敢受。 
现代文：我们之间地位平等，鼎足而立，这还差不多；如果向我称臣，万不敢接受。 
English: Between us, we are equal in status and stand on our own two feet, which is more or less the case. If you call me a vassal, I dare not accept it.

古文：并封表还之。
现代文：并把表书封缄后还给安庆绪。
English: And after sealing the form, he returned it to An Qingxu.

古文：庆绪大悦，因请歃血同盟，思明许之。
现代文：安庆绪十分高兴，因此请求与史思明歃血结盟，史思明同意。
English: An Qingxu was very happy, so he asked for a blood alliance with Shi Siming, and Shi Siming agreed.

古文：庆绪以三百骑诣思明营，思明令军士擐甲执兵以待之，引庆绪及诸弟入至庭下。
现代文：于是安庆绪带领三百名骑兵来到史思明军营中，史思明命令士卒全副武装以防备安庆绪，然后引安庆绪与他的几个弟弟进入庭中。
English: So An Qingxu led three hundred cavalrymen to the camp of Shi Siming. Shi Siming ordered the soldiers to be fully armed to guard against An Qingxu, and then led An Qingxu and several of his younger brothers into the courtyard.

古文：庆绪再拜稽首曰： 臣不克荷负，弃失两都，久陷重围，不意大王以太上皇之故，远垂救援，使臣应死复生，摩顶至踵，无以报德。 
现代文：安庆绪叩头再拜说： 作为臣下我治军无方，丧失东西二京，并陷于重兵包围之中，没有想到大王看在我父亲太上皇的情份上，远来救危，使我得以复生，恩深如海，终生难以报答。 
English: An Qingxu bowed his head and said, "As a vassal, I had no way to lead the army. I lost the two capitals of East and West, and was surrounded by heavy troops. I did not expect that the great king, seeing my father as the supreme emperor, would come from afar to save the day and bring me back to life. His kindness is as deep as the sea, and it would be difficult to repay it in my lifetime.

古文：思明忽震怒曰： 弃失两都，亦何足言。
现代文：史思明忽然大怒说： 丢失两京，何足挂齿。
English: Shi Siming suddenly said angrily, "It's a big deal to lose two capitals.

古文：尔为人子，杀父夺其位，天地所不容！
现代文：你身为人子，杀父篡位，为天地之所不容。
English: You, as a son of man, killing your father and usurping the throne, is unacceptable to heaven and earth.

古文：吾为太上皇讨贼，岂受尔佞媚乎！ 
现代文：我是为太上皇讨伐你这个逆贼，怎么肯受你讨好的假话欺骗呢！ 
English: I am fighting for the Emperor against you, a traitor, how can I be deceived by your flattering lies!

古文：即命左右牵出，并其四弟及高尚、孙孝哲、崔乾祐皆杀之；张通儒、李庭望等悉授以官。
现代文：当即命令左右的人把安庆绪连同他的四个弟弟以及高尚、孙孝哲、崔乾等全部杀掉。张通儒、李庭望等人都被授以官职。
English: He immediately ordered those around him to kill An Qingxu, his four younger brothers, Gaoshang, Sun Xiao Zhe, Cui Qian and others. Zhang Tongru, Li Tingwang and others were given official positions.

古文：思明勒兵入鄴城，收其士马，以府库赏将士，庆绪先所有州、县及兵皆归于思明。
现代文：然后史思明整军入邺城，收集了安庆绪的兵马，把府库中的财物分赏给将士，安庆绪原先所占据的州、县以及兵马都归史思明所有。
English: Then, Shi Siming's whole army entered Baicheng, collected An Qingxu's soldiers and horses, and distributed the property in the treasury to the soldiers. The prefectures, counties and soldiers and horses originally occupied by An Qingxu were all owned by Shi Siming.

古文：遣安太清将兵五千取怀州，因留镇之。
现代文：史思明又派安太清率兵五千攻取怀州，因此留安太清镇守怀州。
English: Shi Siming also sent An Taiqing and five thousand soldiers to attack Waizhou, so An Taiqing stayed to defend Waizhou.

古文：思明欲遂西略，虑根本未固，乃留其子朝义守相州，引兵还范阳。
现代文：史思明想立刻率兵向西发展，考虑到后方还不稳固，于是就把他的儿子史朝义留下镇守相州，自己率兵返回范阳。
English: Shi Siming wanted to immediately lead the troops to the west, considering that the rear was not yet stable, so he left his son Shi Chaoyi to guard the town of Xiangzhou, and led the troops back to Fanyang.

古文：甲申，回纥骨啜特勒、帝德等十五人自相州奔还西京，上宴之于紫宸殿，赏赐有差。
现代文：甲申，回纥将领骨啜特勒、帝德等十五人从相州逃回西京，肃宗于紫宸殿宴请他们，并赏赐给他们数量不等的财物。
English: Fifteen people, including Gao Shen, Hui Xuan, General Collarbone, and Teide, fled from Xiangzhou back to West Beijing, and lived in the Palace of the Grand Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager.

古文：庚寅，骨啜特勒等辞还行营。
现代文：庚寅，骨啜特勒等辞别，返回行营。
English: Geng Yin, bone sipper, etc. bid farewell and return to the camp.

古文：辛卯，以荔非元礼为怀州刺史，权知镇西、北庭行营节度使。
现代文：辛卯，肃宗任命荔非元礼为怀州刺史，代理镇西、北庭行营节度使。
English: Xinwu and Su Zong appointed Li Fei Yuanli as the official historian of Waizhou, acting as the official representative of Zhenxi and Beiting.

古文：元礼复以段秀实为节度判官。
现代文：荔非元礼又任命段秀实为节度判官。
English: Lih Fei Yuanli also appointed Duan Xiusheng as the judge of the festival.

古文：甲午，以兵部侍郎吕諲同平章事，乙未，以中书侍郎、同平章事苗晋卿为太子太傅，王玙为刑部尚书，皆罢政事。
现代文：甲午，肃宗任命兵部侍郎吕同平章事。乙未，任命中书侍郎、同平章事苗晋卿为太子太傅，王为刑部尚书，都免去他们的政事。
English: In the afternoon of the first day of the second month, Su Zong appointed Lü Tongping Zhangji, the attendant of the military department, and in the evening of the third day of the second month, he appointed Miao Jinqing, the attendant of the middle office, and Tongping Zhangji, the attendant of the middle office, as the prince's daifu, and the king as the director of the criminal department, and exempted them from political affairs.

古文：以京兆尹李岘行吏部尚书，中书舍人兼礼部侍郎李揆为中书侍郎，及户部侍郎第五琦并同平章事。
现代文：又任命京兆尹李岘为吏部尚书，中书舍人兼礼部侍郎李揆为中书侍郎，以及户部侍郎第五琦并同平章事。
English: He also appointed Jingzha Yin Lijun as the secretary of the personnel department, Lijun, the secretary of the middle school and the attendant of the ceremony department, as the secretary of the middle school, and the fifth secretary of the attendant of the household department and the same chapter.

古文：上于岘恩意尤厚，岘亦以经济为己任，军国大事多独决于岘。
现代文：肃宗特别赏识李岘，李岘也以经国治邦为己任，所以军国大事大多由李岘一人处理。
English: Su Zong was especially appreciative of Li Qiye, who also took it as his duty to rule the country, so most of the military affairs were handled by Li Qiye alone.

古文：于是京师多盗，李辅国请选羽林骑士五百以备巡逻。
现代文：当时京城盗贼横行，宦官李辅国请求挑选羽林军的五百骑兵以备巡逻搜捕。
English: At that time, thieves were rampant in Beijing, and the eunuch Li Shuoguo requested the selection of five hundred cavalrymen from the Ulin Army to patrol and search for them.

古文：李揆上疏曰： 昔西汉以南北军相制，故周勃因南军入北军，遂安刘氏。
现代文：李揆上疏说： 过去西汉王朝设置南北二军互相制约，所以周勃得以率南军进入北军，于是安定了刘氏王朝。
English: Li Yuxiang said: In the past, the Western Han Dynasty set up the North-South Second Army to restrict each other, so Zhou Bo was able to lead the South Army into the North Army, thus stabilizing the Liu Dynasty.

古文：皇朝置南、北牙，文武区分，以相伺察。
现代文：我们大唐王朝设置南牙与北牙，文臣与武将相区别，以使他们互相监督。
English: We, the Great Tang Dynasty, set up the South Fang and the North Fang, and distinguished the civil servants from the generals, so that they could supervise each other.

古文：今以羽林代金吾警夜，忽有非常之变，将何以制之！ 
现代文：现在用羽林军代替金吾卫巡夜，如果发生了突发事件，怎么控制局势呢！ 
English: Now, the Ulin Army is being used to replace the King's Guard night patrol. If an emergency occurs, how will the situation be controlled?

古文：乃止。
现代文：此事只好作罢。
English: He dismissed the idea.

古文：丙申，以郭子仪为东畿、山东、河东诸道元帅，权知东京留守。
现代文：丙申，肃宗任命郭子仪为东畿、山东、河东诸道元帅，暂代东京留守。
English: Su Zong appointed Guo Ziyi as the marshal of Donggi, Shandong, and Hedong Provinces, and he stayed in Tokyo temporarily.

古文：以河西节度使来瑱行陕州刺史，充陕、虢、华州节度使。
现代文：又任命河西节度使来为陕州刺史，并兼任陕州、虢州、华州节度使。
English: He also appointed the Hexi Festival Envoy to write the history of Shaanxi, and also served as the Shaanxi, Ganzhou and Huazhou Festival Envoy.

古文：夏，四月，庚子，泽潞节度使王思礼破史思明将杨旻于潞城东。
现代文：夏季，四月庚子，泽潞节度使王思礼于潞城东面击败史思明将领杨。
English: In the summer, in April, Geng Zi and Zeyu Festival, Wang Sili defeated Yang, the general of Shi Siming, in the east of Handan City.

古文：太子詹事李辅国，自上在灵武，判元帅行军司马事，侍直帷幄，宣传诏命，四方文奏，宝印符契，晨夕军号，一以委之，乃还京师，专掌禁兵，常居内宅，制敕必经辅国押署，然后施行，宰相百司非时奏事，皆因辅国关白、承旨。
现代文：太子詹事宦官李辅国，自肃宗在灵武时，就任元帅府行军司马，侍奉在肃宗左右，宣布诏敕诰命，肃宗把四方来的文书奏疏，军中的印玺符契以及军队的号令集训等事，钱都委任于他。到收复京师后，李辅国又专门掌管禁军，常常住在宫中的署舍里，肃宗所颁下的制敕，必须经过李辅国画押签署，然后才能施行，宰相以及百官有急事上奏时，都在通过李辅国禀告和受旨。
English: Prince Zhan's eunuch, Li Yuxuo, who had served Su Zong as the marshal of the marching army since Su Zong was in Lingwu, announced the imperial edict. Su Zong entrusted him with the collection of documents from all over the country, the printing contract of the army and the training of the army. After the restoration of the Beijing division, Li Yuxuo was in charge of the forbidden army and often lived in the palace. The imperial edict issued by Su Zong must be signed by Li Yuxuo before it can be implemented. When the prime minister and the hundred officials had urgent matters to report, they all reported to and received orders from

古文：常于银台门决天下事，事无大小，辅国口为制敕，写付外施行，事毕闻奏。
现代文：李辅国经常在银台门处理国家的政事，不管事情大小，都由李辅国口宣制敕，写好后交给外面去执行，等事情完结后才上奏给肃宗。
English: Li Fuguo often handled the country's political affairs at the Yintai Gate. Regardless of the size of the matter, Li Fuguo issued the edict by the mouth of Li Fuguo, and after it was written, it was handed over to the outside world for implementation. After the matter was completed, it was reported to Su Zong.

古文：又置察事数十人，潜令于人间听察细事，即行推按；有所追索，诸司无敢拒者。
现代文：李辅国又设置察事数十人，暗中让他们打听民间的秘密事情，然后再进行审讯。如果要追查什么案子，朝廷各部门都不敢加以拒绝。
English: Li Yu's state also set up dozens of inspectors, secretly letting them inquire into the secrets of the people, and then conduct an interrogation. If they wanted to investigate a case, all departments of the imperial court would not dare to refuse.

古文：御史台、大理寺重囚，或推断未毕，辅国追诣银台，一时纵之。
现代文：关在御史台与理寺内的重刑犯人，有的还没有审讯完毕，李辅国就追到银台门，一下子把这些人全部放掉。
English: Li Yuxuo chased some of the felons who were locked up in Muxitai Youli Temple to the Yintai Gate before the trial was over, and released all of them at once.

古文：三司、府、县鞫狱，皆先诣辅国咨禀，轻重随意，称制敕行之，莫敢违者。
现代文：御史台、中书省、门下省三司以及府、县审理案件，都要先报告李辅国，听候他的指示，随他的意思而判，声称是皇上的制敕，命令实行，没有人敢于违抗。
English: The Supreme Historian's Office, the Ministry of Chinese Literature, the three departments of the subordinate provinces, and the prefectures and counties should first report the cases to Li Yuxuo, listen to his instructions, judge according to his will, claim to be the emperor's control, implement the orders, and no one dares to defy.

古文：宦官不敢斥其官，皆谓之五郎。
现代文：宦官不能直呼李辅国的官名，都称他五郎。
English: Eunuchs cannot directly call the official name of the State of Li Yuxu, they all call him Goro.

古文：李揆山东甲族，见辅国执子弟礼，谓之五父。
现代文：李揆是崤山以东地区的名门大族，见了李辅国还要行子弟礼，称他为五父。
English: Li Qiye is a famous clan in the area east of Lushan. When he met Li Yuxu, he had to perform the son-in-law ceremony and called him the father of five.

古文：及李岘为相，于上前叩头，论制敕皆应由中书出，具陈辅国专权乱政之状，上感寤，赏其正直；辅国所行事，多所变更，罢其察事。
现代文：李岘做宰相以后，在肃宗面前叩头，论说皇上的制敕都应该由中书省出，并陈述了李辅国专权乱政的事例，肃宗因此醒悟，称赞李岘为人正直，李辅国做事也多所改变，罢掉了那些察事。
English: After Li Qiye became the prime minister, he kowtowed to Su Zong, arguing that the emperor's regulations should be omitted from the Chinese book, and stated the example of the chaotic government of the autocracy of Li Shuo. Su Zong thus woke up, praised Li Qiye as an honest person, and the work of Li Shuo also changed a lot, and eliminated those inspections.

古文：辅国由是让行军司马，请归本官，上不许。
现代文：李辅国因此又辞让元帅府行军司马一职，请求回归本官为太子詹事，肃宗不答应。
English: As a result, Li Fuguo also resigned from the post of marshal of the marching army, and requested to return to his post as the prince of Zhanji, but Su Zong did not agree.

古文：壬寅，制： 比缘军国务殷，或宣口敕处分。
现代文：肃宗下制说： 近来因为军国大事繁忙，有时让人宣布口敕处理政事。
English: Su Zongxie said: Recently, because of the busy military and national events, sometimes people announce that they will not deal with political affairs.

古文：诸色取索及杖配囚徒，自今一切并停。
现代文：从今以后，各种索取以及棍打发配囚犯之事，全部停止。
English: From now on, all forms of requisitioning, as well as the beating and handing over of prisoners, will be completely stopped.

古文：如非正宣，并不得行。
现代文：如果不是由中书省所宣布的敕命，都不能施行。
English: If it is not issued by the State Administration of Press and Publication, it cannot be enforced.

古文：中外诸务，各归有司。
现代文：朝野内外的一切事务，各归主管部门办理。
English: All affairs in and out of the morning and evening are handled by the competent departments.

古文：英武军虞候及六军诸使、诸司等，比来或因论竞，悬自追摄，自今一切须经台、府。如所由处断不平，听具状奏闻。
现代文：英武军的虞侯及禁军六军的各使、各司，近来有时为了竞争，就各自追踪犯人，从今以后，一切案件都要经过御史台与京兆府处理，如果台、府官员处理判决不公平，允许写状上奏。
English: The lords of the manor of the British armed forces and the envoys and divisions of the six armies of the forbidden army have recently sometimes pursued the criminals themselves for the sake of competition. From now on, all cases must be handled by the Imperial Historical Records Office and the Beijing and Shanghai Government. If the Taiwan and government officials handle the judgment unfairly, they are allowed to write a letter.

古文：诸律令除十恶、杀人、奸、盗、造伪外，馀烦冗一切删除，仍委中书、门下与法官详定闻奏。 
现代文：各种刑律除了十恶、杀人、奸、盗、伪造罪外，其余的过烦过多的条款，全部删除。并委托中书省、门下省与法官详细确定以后再上奏告知。 
English: In addition to the ten evils, homicide, treason, theft, and forgery, all the rest of the clauses of various criminal laws, which are too tedious and excessive, have been deleted. And the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology, the subordinate provinces and the judges have been entrusted to determine in detail and then submit the notice.

古文：辅国由是忌岘。
现代文：李辅国因此忌恨李岘。
English: As a result, Li Yu was hated by Li Shu.

古文：甲辰，置陈、郑、亳节度使，以邓州刺史鲁炅为之；以徐州刺史尚衡为青、密等七州节度使；以兴平军节度使李奂兼豫、许、汝三州节度使；仍各于境上守捉防御。
现代文：甲辰，唐朝设置陈州、郑州、亳州节度使，任命邓州刺史鲁炅为节度使，任命徐州刺史尚衡为青州、密州等七州节度使，兴平军节度使李奂兼任豫州、许州、汝州三州节度使。
English: At the time of Jia Chen, the Tang Dynasty set up Chenzhou, Zhengzhou, and Zhangzhou festival envoys, appointed Dengzhou Zhi Shilou as the festival envoy, appointed Xuzhou Zhi Shangheng as the festival envoy of seven states including Qingzhou and Mizhou, and appointed Xingping Army festival envoy Li Xi as the festival envoy of three states including Yuzhou, Huzhou, and Ruzhou.

古文：九节度之溃于相州也，鲁炅所部兵剽掠尤甚，闻郭子仪退屯河上，李光弼还太原，炅惭惧，饮药而死。
现代文：各节度使仍在自己的境内行使防御使与守捉使的职权。九节度使兵败相州以后，鲁炅部下的士卒抢掠尤其厉害，得知郭子仪兵退到黄河岸边，李光弼回军太原，鲁炅惭愧害怕，饮毒药而死。
English: Each section commander was still exercising the powers of defense commander and guarding and capturing commander in his own territory. After the defeat of the troops by the 9th section commander, the looting of the soldiers and pawns under Lu Xun was particularly severe. When it was learned that Guo Ziyi's soldiers had retreated to the bank of the Yellow River, and Li Guangyao had returned to Taiyuan, Lu Xun was ashamed and afraid, and drank poison and died.

古文：史思明自称大燕皇帝，改元顺天，立其妻辛氏为皇后，子朝义为怀王，以周挚为相，李归仁为将，改范阳为燕京，诸州为郡。
现代文：史思明自称大燕皇帝，改年号为顺天，立妻子辛氏为皇后，儿子史朝义为怀王，任命周挚为宰相，李归仁为大将，改范阳为燕京，各州改称为郡。
English: Shi Siming called himself Emperor Dayan, changed his era name to Shuntian, appointed his wife Xin as empress, his son Shi Chaoyi as King Huai, appointed Zhou Jing as prime minister, Li Guiren as general, changed Fanyang to Yanjing, and the states were renamed counties.

古文：戊申，以鸿胪卿李抱玉为郑、陈、颍、亳节度使。
现代文：戊申，肃宗任命鸿胪卿李抱玉为郑州、陈州、颍州、亳州节度使。
English: Wushen, Su Zong appointed Hongyu Sir Li Baoyu as the Zhengzhou, Chenzhou, Zhangzhou and Zhangzhou Festival envoy.

古文：抱玉，安兴贵之后也，为李光弼裨将，屡有战功，自陈耻与安禄山同姓，故赐姓李氏。
现代文：李抱玉是安兴贵的后代，李光弼部下裨将，多次立有战功，自己奏陈耻与安禄山同姓，所以被赐姓李氏。
English: Li Baoyu is a descendant of An Xinggui. Li Guangya's subordinates have made great achievements in war many times, and he himself has the same surname as An Lushan, so he was given the surname Li.

古文：回纥毘伽阙可汗卒，长子叶护先遇杀，国人立其少子，是为登里可汗。
现代文：回纥毗伽阙可汗去世，因为他的长子叶护已遇刺身亡，所以国人立他的小儿子为可汗，这就是登里可汗。
English: Uighur Vijayan Khan died, because his eldest son Ye Zong had been assassinated and killed, so the people of the country appointed his youngest son as Khan, this is the Tangri Khan.

古文：回纥欲以宁国公主为殉。公主曰： 回纥慕中国之俗，故娶中国女为妇。
现代文：回纥想要让宁国公主为毗伽阙可汗殉葬，公主说： 回纥因为羡慕中国的风俗，所以才娶中国女子为妻。
English: Hui Xuan wanted Princess Ning Guo to be buried as a martyr for Vijayan Khan. The princess said: Hui Xuan married a Chinese woman because he envied Chinese customs.

古文：若欲从其本俗，何必结婚万里之外邪！ 
现代文：如果想遵从你们本来的风俗，何必要同万里之外的中国女人结婚呢！ 
English: If you want to follow your original customs, why do you need to marry a Chinese woman thousands of miles away!

古文：然亦为之剺面而哭。
现代文：但公主还是按照回纥的风俗习惯，为回纥可汗割破面颊，流血哭泣。
English: However, the princess still cut her cheek and wept for Hui Xuan Khan in accordance with Hui Xuan customs and habits.

古文：凤翔马坊押官为劫，天兴尉谢夷甫捕杀之。
现代文：凤翔管马坊的押官因为抢劫，被天兴县尉谢夷甫抓住杀掉。
English: The arresting officer of Fengxiang Guanma Fang was caught and killed by Tianxing County Lieutenant Xie Yifu because of robbery.

古文：其妻讼冤。
现代文：押官的妻子为他的丈夫诉冤。
English: An arresting officer's wife is suing his husband.

古文：李辅国素出飞龙厩，敕监察御史孙蓥鞫之，无冤。
现代文：李辅国原本是飞龙马厩养马小儿出身，于是就命令监察御史孙蓥审问，结果不是冤案。
English: Li Yuxuo was originally from Feilong Horse Stable, so he ordered to supervise the interrogation of Gu Shi Sun Quan. The result was not a case of injustice.

古文：又使御史中丞崔伯阳、刑部侍郎李晔、大理卿权献鞫之，与蓥同。
现代文：李辅国又让御史中丞崔伯阳、刑部侍郎李晔、大理卿权献审问，结果与孙蓥相同。
English: Li Yu-kuo also had Choi Bo-yang, the Vice-Minister of History, Li Hao, the head of the Criminal Investigation Department, and Dali-qing Quan-cheng interrogated, and the results were the same as those of Sun Hao.

古文：妻犹不服。又使侍御史太平毛若虚鞫之。若虚倾巧士，希辅国意，归罪夷甫。
现代文：押官的妻子还不服，李辅国就又让侍御史太平人毛若虚审问，毛若虚本是小人，按照李辅国的意图，归罪于谢夷甫。
English: The wife of the arresting officer was still not satisfied, and Li Yuxuo again had the attendant historian and pacifist Mao Ruoqiu interrogated. Mao Ruoqiu was a villain, and according to Li Yuxuo's intention, he blamed Xie Yifu.

古文：伯阳怒，召若虚诘责，欲劾奏之。
现代文：崔伯阳十分愤怒，就把毛若虚叫来质问他，想上奏弹劾他。
English: Cui Boyang was very angry, so he called Mao Ruohu to question him and wanted to impeach him.

古文：若虚先自归于上，上匿若虚于帘下。
现代文：毛若虚自己先跑到肃宗那里，肃宗把毛若虚藏在帘子后面。
English: Mao Ruo Hui ran to Su Zong first, and Su Zong hid Mao Ruo Hui behind a curtain.

古文：伯阳寻至，言若虚附会中人，鞫狱不直。
现代文：不久崔伯阳来到，说毛若虚依附宦官，审理案件不公平。
English: Soon after, Cui Boyang arrived and said that if Mao was falsely clinging to eunuchs, it would be unfair to try the case.

古文：上怒，叱出之。
现代文：肃宗听后十分愤怒，就把崔伯阳喝斥出去。
English: Su Zong was very angry after listening to this, and he shouted Cui Boyang out.

古文：伯阳贬高要尉，献贬桂阳尉，晔与凤翔尹严向皆贬岭下尉，蓥除名，长流播州。
现代文：于是贬崔伯阳为高要县尉，大理卿权献为桂阳县尉，刑部侍郎李晔与凤翔尹严向也都被贬到岭南做县尉。监察御史孙蓥被削除名籍，流放到播州。
English: As a result, Cui Boyang was demoted to County Lieutenant of Gaoyao County, Daliqing Quanxian was demoted to County Lieutenant of Guiyang County, and Li Jun and Fengxiang Yin Yanxiang, both of whom served in the Criminal Investigation Department, were demoted to County Lieutenant of Lingnan County. Sun Quan, the Inspector-General of History, was stripped of his title and exiled to Banzhou.

古文：吏部尚书、同平章事李岘奏伯阳等无罪，责之太重；上以为朋党，五月，辛巳，贬岘蜀州刺史。
现代文：吏部尚书、同平章事李岘上奏，说崔伯阳无罪，处理太重而，肃宗认为李岘与崔伯阳等人结党，五月辛巳，贬李岘为蜀州刺史。
English: According to the official document of the Ministry of Civil Affairs and the official document of the Ministry of Civil Affairs, Li Xuan reported that Cui Boyang was not guilty, and the treatment was too heavy. Su Zong believed that Li Xuan and Cui Boyang and others had formed a party, and in May, Li Xuan was relegated to the history of Shuzhou.

古文：右散骑常侍韩择木入对，上谓之曰： 李岘欲专权，今贬蜀州，朕自觉用法太宽。 
现代文：右散骑常侍韩择木入朝应对，肃宗对他说： 李岘想要专权，现在已被贬为蜀州刺史，朕还觉得用法太宽大。 
English: In response to Han Zeki's entry into the imperial court, Su Zong said to him, "Li Gan wanted exclusive power, and now he has been relegated to a footnote in the history of Shuzhou. I still think this usage is too broad.

古文：对曰： 李岘言直，非专权。
现代文：韩择木回答说： 李岘直言不讳，并不是专权。
English: Han Zegi replied: Li Qiye is outspoken, it is not a monopoly.

古文：陛下宽之，只益圣德耳。 
现代文：陛下如果能够宽大地处理，只能够增加陛下的圣德。 
English: Your majesty can only increase your sanctity if you are able to deal with it generously.

古文：若虚寻除御史中丞，威振朝廷。
现代文：不久，毛若虚被任命为御史中丞，威震朝廷。
English: Soon after, Mao Ruohu was appointed to the post of Imperial Historian, which shook the imperial court.

古文：壬午，以滑、濮节度使许叔冀为汴州刺史，充滑、汴等七州节度使；以试汝州刺史刘展为滑州刺史，充副使。
现代文：壬午，肃宗任命滑、濮节度使许叔冀为汴州刺史，兼滑、汴等七州节度使；又任命试汝州刺史刘展为滑州刺史，兼节度副使。
English: In Ren'ao, Su Zong appointed Xu Shuji as the chief historian of Luzhou, and the chief historian of seven states including Luzhou and Handan; he also appointed Liu Zhan as the chief historian of Luzhou, and the deputy chief historian of seven states including Handan.

古文：六月，丁巳，分朔方置邠、宁等九州节度使。
现代文：六月丁巳，朝廷在朔方节度下分设州、宁州等九州节度使。
English: In June, the Imperial Court set up Kyushu festival envoys, including those from Shuzhou and Ningzhou, under the Shuo Fang Festival.

古文：观军容使鱼朝恩恶郭子仪，因其败，短之于上。
现代文：宦官观军容使鱼朝恩忌恨郭子仪，因此借相州之败，在肃宗面前进谗言。
English: The eunuch Gu Junrong hated Guo Ziyi because of the fish dynasty's favor, so he took advantage of the defeat of Xiangzhou to make slanderous remarks in front of Su Zong.

古文：秋，七月，上召子仪还京师，以李光弼代为朔方节度使、兵马元师。
现代文：秋季，七月，肃宗召郭子仪回京师，任命李光弼为朔方节度使、兵马元帅。
English: In the autumn, in July, Su Zong called Guo Zi Yi back to Beijing and appointed Li Guangyao as the party's envoy and marshal of soldiers and horses.

古文：士卒涕泣，遮中使请留子仪。
现代文：朔方士卒痛哭流涕，拦住传达命令的宦官，请求把郭子仪留下来。
English: Mr. Shuo, weeping bitterly, stopped the eunuch who was giving the order and begged him to keep Guo Ziyi.

古文：子仪绐之曰： 我饯中使耳，未行也。 
现代文：郭子仪欺骗士卒们说： 我先去送别传达命令的宦官，不是要离开。 
English: Guo Ziyi deceived the officers and said, "I'm going to see off the eunuch who conveyed the order first, but I'm not leaving."

古文：因跃马而去。
现代文：借此跳上马而去。
English: He jumped on his horse and rode away.

古文：光弼愿得亲王为之副，辛巳，以赵王系为天下兵马元帅，光弼副之，仍以光弼知诸节度行营。
现代文：李光弼希望能让一位亲王为天下兵马元帅，自己为副元帅，辛巳，肃宗任命赵王李系为天下兵马元帅，李光弼为副元帅，仍兼统诸节度行营。
English: Li Guangyao hoped to appoint a prince as the marshal of the world's horses and chariots and himself as the vice-marshal. However, Su Zong appointed Zhao Wang Lixian as the marshal of the world's horses and chariots and Li Guangyao as the vice-marshal, and still presided over all the festivals.

古文：光弼以河东骑五百驰赴东都，夜，入其军。
现代文：李光弼率领河东镇的五百骑兵驰往东都赴任，在夜晚进入朔方军。
English: Li Guangyao led the five hundred cavalrymen from Hedong Town to Dongdu to take office, and entered the Shuo Fang Army at night.

古文：光弼治军严整，始至，号令一施，士卒、壁垒、旌旗、精彩皆变。
现代文：李光弼治军严整，到达朔方军营中后，号令一经下达，朔方军的士卒、营垒、旌旗等军容为之一变。
English: Li Guangya controlled the army strictly, and after arriving at the middle of the Shuo army camp, as soon as the order was issued, the soldiers, barracks, and flags of the Shuo army changed completely.

古文：是时朔方将士乐子仪之宽，惮光弼之严。
现代文：这时朔方军的将士都喜欢郭子仪的宽厚，而害怕李光弼的严厉。
English: At this time, the soldiers of the Shuo army all liked Guo Ziyi's generosity, but were afraid of Li Guangyao's severity.

古文：左厢兵马使张用济屯河阳，光弼以檄召之。
现代文：朔方军左厢兵马使张用济率兵屯驻在河阳，李光弼发檄书召他。
English: The left wing of the Shuo army stationed Zhang Yijie and his soldiers in Heyang, and Li Guangya sent a letter to summon him.

古文：用济曰： 朔方，非叛军也，乘夜而入，何见疑之甚邪！ 
现代文：张用济说： 朔方军又不是叛兵，而李光弼却在夜晚来到军中，为什么要这样猜疑我们呢！ 
English: Zhang Yizi said: The Shuo Fang Army is not a rebel army, but Li Guangyao came to the army at night, why should he suspect us like this!

古文：与诸将谋以精锐突入东京，逐光弼，请子仪；命其士皆被甲上马，衔枚以待。
现代文：因此就与其他的将领商议，要用精锐骑兵突入东京，赶走李光弼，把郭子仪请回来。于是就命令士兵被甲上马，整装待发。
English: Therefore, he discussed with other generals to use elite cavalry to rush into Tokyo, drive out Li Guangyao, and invite Guo Ziyi back. So he ordered the soldiers to be mounted on horseback and ready to go.

古文：都知兵马使仆固怀恩曰： 鄴城之溃，郭公先去，朝廷责帅，故罢其兵柄。
现代文：这时都知兵马使仆固怀恩说： 九节度使邺城之败时，郭将军先领兵退却，朝廷责罚元帅，所以罢了他的兵权。
English: At this time, Du Zhi soldiers and horses sent their servant Gu Wai En to say: When the defeat of Lucheng occurred in the ninth quarter, General Guo led the troops to retreat first, and the court punished the marshal, so he gave up his military power.

古文：今逐李公而强请之，违拒朝命，是反也，其可乎！ 
现代文：现在如果赶走李将军而强请郭将军回来，这是反叛行为，怎么能行呢！ 
English: Now, if you expel General Li and forcefully invite General Guo to return, this is an act of rebellion, how can it be done!

古文：右武锋使康元宝曰： 君以兵请郭公，朝廷必疑郭公讽君为之，是破其家也。
现代文：右武锋使康元宝也说： 你率兵强请郭将军回来，朝廷一定会怀疑这是郭将军暗中指使你这么干，这不是要他家破人亡吗！
English: Kang Yuanbao, the right wing military commander, also said: If you lead a strong army and invite General Guo to return, the imperial court will certainly suspect that General Guo has secretly ordered you to do so. Isn't it to destroy his family?

古文：郭公百口何负于君乎！ 
现代文：郭将军百口之家有什么地方对不起你的呢！ 
English: General Guo, what's wrong with a hundred-member family? I'm sorry for you!

古文：用济乃止。
现代文：张用济听后才罢休。
English: Zhang Yizi listened and then stopped.

古文：光弼以数千骑东出汜水，用济单骑来谒。
现代文：李光弼率领数千名骑兵东出汜水县，张用济单枪匹马来晋见李光弼。
English: Li Guangyao led thousands of cavalry east out of Surabaya County, Zhang Jie single-handedly came to meet Li Guangyao.

古文：光弼责用济召不时至，斩之，命部将辛京杲代领其众。
现代文：李光弼责备张用济接到檄书后没有及时赶到，就杀了他，并命令部将辛京杲代他率兵。
English: Li Guangyao reproached Zhang Yizi for not arriving in time after receiving the imperial edict, then killed him, and ordered General Xin Jingyao to lead the troops on his behalf.

古文：仆固怀恩继至，光弼引坐，与语。
现代文：接着仆固怀恩到达，李光弼引他入座，与他谈话。
English: Then the servant Gu Wai Yan arrived, and Li Guangyao led him to a seat and talked with him.

古文：须臾，阍者曰： 蕃、浑五百骑至矣。 
现代文：不一会儿，看门的报告说： 来了蕃种和浑种的五百名骑兵。 
English: A moment later, the gatekeeper reported: "Five hundred cavalrymen, both black and white, have arrived.

古文：光弼变色。
现代文：李光弼听后大惊失色。
English: Li Guangyao was shocked and lost his composure.

古文：怀恩走出，召麾下将，阳责之曰： 语汝勿来，何得固违！ 
现代文：这时仆固怀恩走了出来，召来部下的将领，假装责备说： 我已经告诉你们不要来，为什么要违抗我的命令呢！ 
English: At this time, the servant Gu Wai'en came out, summoned his subordinate generals, and pretended to rebuke them, saying: "I have already told you not to come, why do you want to defy my order!

古文：光弼曰： 士卒随将，亦复何罪！ 
现代文：李光弼说： 士卒跟随自己的将帅，也没有什么过错。 
English: Li Guangyao said: "There is nothing wrong with soldiers following their generals.

古文：命给牛酒。
现代文：然后命令部下杀牛置酒招待这些士卒。
English: He then ordered his subordinates to slaughter a cow and serve wine to the soldiers.

古文：丁亥，以潞沁节度使王思礼兼太原尹，充北京留守、河东节度使。
现代文：丁亥，肃宗任命潞沁节度使王思礼兼任太原尹，并充任北京留守、河东节度使。
English: Dinghai and Su Zong appointed Wang Sili as the official envoy of the Qing Dynasty, and Wang Sili also served as the official envoy of the Taiyuan Emperor, and also served as the official envoy of the Qing Dynasty to Beijing, and the official envoy of the Qing Dynasty to Hedong.

古文：初，潼关之败，思礼马中矢而毙，有骑卒盩厔张光晟下马授之，问其姓名，不告而去。
现代文：当初，潼关战败时，王思礼的马中箭而死，这时有一名骑兵县人张光晟把自己的马给了他，王思礼问他的姓名，他没有告诉就走了。
English: At first, when Shaoguan was defeated, Wang Sili's horse was hit by an arrow and died. At that time, Zhang Guangyao, a cavalryman from the county, gave him his horse. Wang Sili asked his name, but he did not tell him and left.

古文：思礼阴识其状貌，求之不获。
现代文：王思礼暗中记住了张光晟的像貌，后来多方寻找，但没有找到。
English: Wang Sili secretly remembered Zhang Guangyao's likeness, and later searched for it in many ways, but did not find it.

古文：及至河东，或谮代州刺史河西辛云京，思礼怒之，云京惧，不知所出。
现代文：王思礼到了河东后，有人进谗言陷害代州刺史河西人辛云京，王思礼十分愤怒，辛云京惧怕，不知道如何办才好。
English: After Wang Sili arrived in Hedong, someone suggested framing Daizhou's Zhang Shi and West Heze's Xin Yunjing. Wang Sili was very angry, and Xin Yunjing was afraid and didn't know what to do.

古文：光晟时在云京麾下，曰： 光晟尝有德于王公，从来不敢言者，耻以此取赏耳。
现代文：这时张光晟在辛云京的部下，就对辛云京说： 我曾经帮助过王将军，向来不敢提起这件事的原因，是认为以这件事来取赏是耻辱。
English: At this time, Zhang Guangyao, who was one of Xin Yunjing's subordinates, said to Xin Yunjing: I once helped General Wang, and the reason why I have never dared to mention this matter is that I think it is a disgrace to take this matter as a reward.

古文：今使君有急，光晟请往见王公，必为使君解之。 
现代文：现在你有危急，请让我去见王将军，一定能为你解除危难。 
English: Now you are in a critical situation, please let me go to see General Wang, I will definitely be able to solve the crisis for you.

古文：云京喜，即遣之。
现代文：辛云京就高兴地让他去了。
English: Xin Yunjing happily let him go.

古文：光晟谒思礼，未及言，思礼识之，曰： 噫！
现代文：张光晟谒见王思礼，还没有说话，就被王思礼认了出来，说： 噫！
English: Zhang Guangyao saw Wang Sili, and before he could speak, he was recognized by Wang Sili, who said, "Hao!

古文：子非吾故人乎？
现代文：你难道不是我的救命恩人吗？
English: Aren't you the one who saved my life?

古文：何相见之晚邪！ 
现代文：为什么这样晚才见到你呢！ 
English: Why am I seeing you so late!

古文：光晟以实告，思礼大喜，执其手，流涕曰： 吾之有今日，皆子力也，吾求子久矣。 
现代文：张光晟就把实情告诉了王思礼。王思礼十分高兴，握着张光晟的手，涕泣呜咽地说： 我所以能有今天，都是因为你救我一命的功劳。
English: Zhang Guangyao told Wang Sili the truth. Wang Sili was very happy. Holding Zhang Guangyao's hand, he said with tears and sobs: "The reason I can be here today is because of you saving my life."

古文：引与同榻坐，约为兄弟。
现代文：我一直在寻找你。 于是引张光晟同床而坐，相约结为兄弟。
English: I've been looking for you, so I invited Zhang Guangyao to sit with me in bed, and we made a pact to become brothers.

古文：光晟因从容言云京之冤。
现代文：张光晟借机谈了辛云京的冤情。
English: Zhang Guangyao took the opportunity to talk about Xin Yunjing's grievances.

古文：思礼曰： 云京过亦不细，今日特为故人舍之。 
现代文：王思礼说： 辛云京罪过也不小，现在为你的情面而饶恕他。 
English: Wang Sili said: Xin Yunjing's crime is not small, now forgive him for your feelings.

古文：即日擢光晟为兵马使，赠金帛田宅甚厚。
现代文：当天，王思礼就提升张光晟为兵马使，并赠送给他许多钱财以及田地宅第。
English: On the same day, Wang Sirei promoted Zhang Guangyao to the post of Terracotta Warriors and Horses, and presented him with a lot of money and a farmhouse.

古文：辛卯，以朔方节度副使、殿中监仆固怀恩兼太常卿，进爵大宁郡王。
现代文：辛乙卯，肃宗任命朔方节度副使、殿中监仆固怀恩兼任太仆卿，进爵大宁郡王。
English: Xin Yiwu, Su Zong appointed Shuo Fang as the deputy envoy of the festival, and Gu Wai'en, the palace overseer, concurrently served as the eunuch, and was knighted as the king of Daning County.

古文：怀恩从郭子仪为前锋，勇冠三军，前后战功居多，故赏之。
现代文：仆固怀恩是郭子仪的前锋，勇冠三军，多次荣立战功，所以朝廷加以奖赏。
English: Gu Wai'en was Guo Ziyi's forward, he was the champion of three armies, and he was awarded many times, so the imperial court rewarded him.

古文：八月，乙巳，襄州将康楚元、张嘉延据州作乱，刺史王政奔荆州。
现代文：八月巳，襄州将领康楚元、张嘉延起兵作乱，占据了州城，襄州刺史王政逃向荆州。
English: In August, Yangzhou generals Kang Chuyuan and Zhang Jiayan led the troops in a riot and occupied the state capital. Yangzhou's ruler Wang Zheng fled to Jingzhou.

古文：楚元自称南楚霸王。
现代文：康楚元自称为南楚霸王。
English: Kang Chu Yuan called himself the King of Southern Chu.

古文：回纥以宁国公主无子，听归；丙辰，至京师。
现代文：回纥因为宁国公主没有儿子，让他回朝。丙辰，宁国公主回到京师。
English: Because Princess Ningguo did not have a son, he was allowed to return to China.

古文：戊午，上使将军曹日升往襄州慰谕康楚元，贬王政为饶州长史，以司农少卿张光奇为襄州刺史；楚元不从。
现代文：戊午，肃宗派将军曹日升到襄州安慰康楚元，并贬王政为饶州长史，任命司农少卿张光奇为襄州刺史，康楚元不答应。
English: In the afternoon, Cao Risheng, a general of the Su Sect, went to Xiangzhou to comfort Kang Chuyuan. He belittled Wang Zheng as Rao Guo Shi, and appointed Zhang Guangqi, the Vice-Minister of Agriculture, as Xiangzhou Shi Shi. Kang Chuyuan did not agree.

古文：壬戌，以李光弼为幽州长史、河北节度等使。
现代文：壬戌，任命李光弼为幽州长史、河北节度等使。
English: In addition, Li Guangyao was appointed as the special envoy of the Governor of Hebei Province, the Governor of Hebei Province and the Governor of Hebei Province.

古文：九月，甲午，张嘉延袭破荆州，荆南节度使杜鸿渐弃城走，澧、朗、郢、峡、归等州官吏闻之，争潜窜山谷。
现代文：九月甲午，张嘉延攻破荆州，荆南节度使杜鸿渐充城逃走，澧、朗、郢、峡、归等州的官吏闻风丧胆，也纷纷逃入山谷中。
English: On the afternoon of the first day of September, Zhang Jiayan invaded Jingzhou, and the Jingnan Festival caused Du Hong to gradually flee the city. The officials of the provinces of Yunnan, Lang, Yunnan, Sichuan, and Guizhou were so discouraged that they also fled into the valley.

古文：戊辰，更令绛州铸乾元重宝大钱，加以重轮，一当五十；在京百官，先以军旅毕无俸禄，宜以新钱给其冬料。
现代文：戊辰，肃宗又命令绛州铸造乾元重宝大钱，并在背部的外郭加上重轮，以一钱当五十钱用。当时在京城的百官因为战乱不断，都没有俸禄，这时用新铸的乾元重宝大钱支给他们的冬季俸禄。
English: At that time, Su Zong also ordered Bozhou to mint Qianyuan heavy treasure coins, and add a heavy wheel to the outer wall of the back, using one coin as fifty coins. At that time, the hundred officials in Beijing did not have a salary because of the continuous war, so the newly minted Qianyuan heavy treasure coins were used to pay their winter salary.

古文：丁亥，以太子少保崔光远为荆、襄招讨使，充山南东道处置兵马都使；以陈、颍、亳、申节度使王仲升为申、沔等五州节度使，知淮南西道行军兵马。
现代文：丁亥，任命太子少保崔光远为荆州、襄州招讨使，并兼任山南东道处置兵马都使。又任命陈州、颍州、亳州、申州节度使王仲升为申州、沔州等五州节度使，并领淮南西道行营的兵马。
English: Ding Hai appointed the prince Shao Bao Cui Guangyuan as the envoy to Jingzhou and Xiangzhou, and concurrently served as the envoy to Shannan to host and dispose of the soldiers and horses. He also appointed Wang Zhongsheng as the envoy to the festivals of five states including Chenzhou, Zhangzhou, Zhangzhou and Shenzhou, and led the soldiers and horses of Huainan West Road.

古文：史思明使其子朝清守范阳，命诸郡太守各将兵三千从己向河南，分为四道，使其将令狐彰将兵五千自黎阳济河取滑州，思明自濮阳，史朝义自白皋，周挚自胡良济河，会于汴州。
现代文：史思明让他的儿子史朝清守卫范阳，然后命令各郡太守各率兵三千跟随自己南下进攻河南地区，把军队分为四路：命部将令狐彰率兵五千从黎阳渡河进攻滑州，史思明自己率兵从濮阳渡黄河，史朝义率兵从白皋渡黄河，周挚率兵从胡良渡过黄河，约好在汴州会合。
English: Shishiming asked his son Shichaoqing to guard Fanyang, and then ordered the county governors to follow him south to attack the Henan region with three thousand soldiers each. The army was divided into four routes: the Ministry of Life ordered Fox Chang with five thousand soldiers to cross the river from Liyang to attack Luzhou, Shishiming himself led the soldiers from Shenyang to cross the Yellow River, Shichao Yi led the soldiers from Baiyun to cross the Yellow River, and carefully led the soldiers from Huliang to cross the Yellow River, and agreed to meet in Luzhou.

古文：李光弼方巡河上诸营，闻之，还入汴州，谓汴滑节度使许叔冀曰： 大夫能守汴州十五日，我则将兵来救。 
现代文：李光弼正在巡视黄河边上的各营部队，得知史思明率兵南下，立即返回汴州，对汴滑节度使许叔冀说： 你如果能够坚守汴州十五天，我就率兵来救。 
English: Li Guangyao was inspecting the battalions on the edge of the Yellow River. When he learned that Shi Siming had led his soldiers south, he immediately returned to Ganzhou. He said to Xu Shuji, the governor of Ganzhou, "If you can hold fast to Ganzhou for fifteen days, I will lead my soldiers to rescue you."

古文：叔冀许诺。
现代文：许叔冀说可以。
English: Xu Shuji said yes.

古文：光弼还东京。
现代文：于是李光弼回东京。
English: So Lee Kuan Yew returned to Tokyo.

古文：思明至汴州，叔冀与战，不胜，遂与濮州刺史董秦及其将梁浦、刘从谏、田神功等降之。
现代文：史思明率兵来攻汴州，许叔冀与史思明交战兵败，就与濮州刺史董秦及部将梁浦、刘从谏、田神功等投降了史思明。
English: Shi Siming led an army to attack Bozhou. Xu Shuji and Shi Siming were defeated in the battle, so he surrendered to Shi Siming together with the governor of Bozhou, Dong Qin, and the generals Liang Pu, Liu Conglu, and Tian Sheng.

古文：思明以叔冀为中书令，与其将李详守汴州；厚待董秦，收其妻子，置长芦为质；使其将南德信与梁浦、刘从谏、田神功等数十人徇江、淮。
现代文：史思明任命许叔冀为中书令，与他的部将李详一起守卫汴州。又厚待董秦，把他的妻子和儿子安置在长芦县，作为人质。史思明又让自己的部将南德信与梁浦、刘从谏、田神功等数十人攻略江、淮地区。
English: Shi Siming appointed Xu Shuji as the Censer and guarded Luzhou together with his subordinate Li Jiao. He also treated Dong Qin kindly and placed his wife and son in Changlu County as hostages. Shi Siming also let his subordinate Nan Dexin and dozens of people such as Liang Pu, Liu Conglu and Tian Shengong attack the Jiang and Huai regions.

古文：神功，南宫人也。思明以为平卢兵马使。
现代文：田神功是南宫县人，史思明任命他为平卢兵马使。
English: Tian Sheng Gong was from Nangong County, and Shi Siming appointed him as the highest-ranking envoy of Pinglu.

古文：顷之，神功袭德信，斩之。从谏脱身走。
现代文：不久，田神功就袭击杀死了南德信。刘从谏脱身逃走。
English: Soon after, Tian Shengong attacked and killed Nandeshin. Liu escaped from the shackles and fled.

古文：神功将其众来降。
现代文：田神功又率兵归顺了朝廷。
English: Tian Sheng Gong and his soldiers surrendered to the imperial court.

古文：思明乘胜西攻郑州。光弼整众徐行，至洛阳，谓留守韦陟曰： 贼乘胜而来；利在按兵，不利速战。
现代文：史思明率兵乘胜西攻郑州，李光弼整军缓缓而行，到了洛阳，对留守韦陟说： 叛军乘胜来攻，我们应该按兵不动，不宜与敌速战速决。
English: Shi Siming led the troops to take advantage of the victory to attack Zhengzhou in the west, and Li Guangya slowly marched to consolidate the army. When he arrived in Luoyang, he said to the left-behind Wei Wei: If the rebels take advantage of the victory to attack, we should not move according to the soldiers, and it is not appropriate to make a quick decision with the enemy.

古文：洛城不可守，于公计何如？ 
现代文：看形势洛阳城难以坚守，你有什么计策呢？ 
English: Looking at the situation, Luoyang City is difficult to hold on to. What are your strategies?

古文：陟请留兵于陕，退守潼关，据险以挫其锐。
现代文：韦陟请求留兵于陕郡，退守潼关，占据险要之地，以挫敌锋锐。
English: Wei Wei requested to stay in Shaanxi, retreat to Shaoguan, occupy the critical place to frustrate the enemy.

古文：光弼曰： 两敌相当，贵进忌退，今无故弃五百里地，则贼势益张矣。
现代文：李光弼说： 两军相当，贵进忌退，现在没来由地放弃五百里地，叛军的势力就会更加嚣张。
English: Li Guangyao said, "The two armies are equal. It is better to advance or retreat. If we give up the 500-mile area without any reason, the rebel forces will become more arrogant."

古文：不若移军河阳，北连泽潞，利则进取，不利则退守，表里相应，使贼不敢西侵，此猿臂之势也。夫辨朝廷之礼，光弼不如公；论军旅之事，公不如光弼。 
现代文：不如移军于河阳，北与泽潞兵相连，如果有利就进取，不利就退守，里外相应，使叛军不敢向西进攻，这形势就好似猿猴伸缩自如的手臂，说到朝廷中的礼仪，我不如你；如果论指挥军事，你不如我。 
English: It would be better to move the army to Kheyang. The north is connected to the Zeyi soldiers. If it is advantageous, it will advance, and if it is disadvantageous, it will retreat. The insurgents will not dare to attack the west. This situation is like a monkey's flexible arm. When it comes to etiquette in the imperial court, I am not as good as you; when it comes to commanding the military, you are not as good as me.

古文：陟无以应。
现代文：韦陟没有说话。
English: Wei Wei did not speak.

古文：判官韦损曰： 东京帝宅，侍中奈何不守？ 
现代文：这时判官韦损说： 东京大唐都城之一，不知道你为什么要放弃它而不坚守？ 
English: At this time, Judge Weizhao said: "Tokyo is one of the great Tang capital cities. I don't know why you would give it up and not hold on to it.

古文：光弼曰： 守之，则汜水、崿岭、龙门皆应置兵，子为兵马判官，能守之乎？ 
现代文：李光弼说： 如果要坚守东京，那么汜水、岭、龙门一带都要布兵设访，你是兵马判官，试想能够守得住吗？ 
English: Li Guangyao said, "If you want to hold on to Tokyo, then you have to deploy troops in and around Surabaya, Ling, and Longmen. You are the judge of soldiers and horses. Can you defend it?

古文：遂移牒留守韦陟使帅东京官属西入关，牒河南尹李若幽使帅吏民出城避贼，空其城。
现代文：于是李光弼下文书命令东京留守韦陟率领东京的官吏以及家属西入潼关，发文命令河南尹李若幽率领官吏民众出城躲避叛军，使东京变成一座空城。
English: As a result, Li Guangxun issued a document ordering Wei Wei to stay in Tokyo and lead the officials and families of Tokyo westward into Shaoguan, and issued a document ordering Henan Yin Li Ruoyu to lead the officials and people out of the city to evade the rebels, turning Tokyo into an empty city.

古文：光弼帅军士运油、铁诸物诣河阳为守备，光弼以五百骑殿。
现代文：李光弼则率领士卒把油、铁等军用物资运入河阳，准备防守，李光弼亲自领着五百骑兵殿后。
English: Li Guangyao, on the other hand, led his soldiers to transport oil, iron, and other military supplies into Heyang in preparation for the defense. Li Guangyao personally led five hundred cavalrymen to the rear of the palace.

古文：时思明游兵已至石桥，诸将请曰： 今自洛城而北乎，当石桥而进乎？ 
现代文：当时史思明的流动部队已经到了石桥，众将领问李光弼说： 现在是应该从洛阳城北绕过去呢，还是就从石桥上过去？ 
English: At that time, Shi Siming's mobile force had already arrived at the stone bridge. The generals asked Li Guangyao: "Should we now go around the north of Luoyang City, or should we go over the stone bridge?"

古文：光弼曰： 当石桥而进。 
现代文：李光弼说： 就从石桥上过去。 
English: Li Guangyao said: Just go over the stone bridge.

古文：及日暮，光弼乘炬徐行，部曲坚重，贼引兵蹑之，不敢逼。
现代文：到天黑时，李光弼命令士卒手持火炬，缓慢地前进，队伍严整，叛军紧紧地跟在后面，但不敢逼近。
English: By nightfall, Li Guangyao ordered his soldiers to march slowly with torches in hand. The rebels followed closely behind, but did not dare to approach.

古文：光弼夜至河阳，有兵二万，粮才支十日。
现代文：李光弼率兵晚上到达河阳，共有兵二万人，河阳城中的粮食仅能够十天吃。
English: Li Guangyao and his soldiers arrived in Hebei in the evening, with a total of 20,000 soldiers. The grain in Hebei could only be eaten for ten days.

古文：光弼按阅守备，部分士卒，无不严办。
现代文：李光弼检查守备，公布士卒防守，丝毫不敢大意。
English: Li Guangyao checked the defense, announced the defense, and did not dare to be careless.

古文：庚寅，思明入洛阳，城空，无所得，畏光弼掎其后，不敢入宫，退屯白马寺南，筑月城于河阳南以拒光弼。
现代文：庚寅，史思明率兵进入洛阳，城中已空，叛军什么都没有得到，因为害怕李光弼抄后路，所以不敢入宫，退兵驻扎在白马寺南面，又于河阳城南建筑月城，以防备李光弼。
English: When Geng Yin and Shi Siming led their troops into Luoyang, the city was already empty, and the rebels got nothing. Because they were afraid of Li Guangyao taking the back way, they did not dare to enter the palace. The soldiers were stationed in the south of the White Horse Temple, and built the Moon City in the south of the city of Heyang to guard against Li Guangyao.

古文：于是郑、滑等州相继陷没，韦陟、李若幽皆寓治于陕。
现代文：于是郑州、滑州等州相继落入叛军之手，韦陟与李若幽都领着官属寓居于陕州。
English: As a result, Zhengzhou, Nanzhou and other provinces successively fell into the hands of the rebels, and Wei Wei and Li Ruoyu led their officials to live in Shaanxi.

古文：冬，十月，丁酉，下制亲征史思明；群臣上表谏，乃止。
现代文：冬季，十月丁酉，肃宗下制书要亲自征讨史思明，因群臣上表书谏阻才罢。
English: In the winter, in October of Dingwu, Su Zong's book-making should personally solicit Shi Siming, because the courtiers were reluctant to submit the book.

古文：史思明引兵攻河阳，使骁将刘龙仙诣城下挑战。
现代文：史思明率兵来攻打河阳，派骁将刘龙仙到城下来挑战。
English: Shi Siming led an army to attack Heyang, and sent Zou to challenge Liu Longxian to come down to the city.

古文：龙仙恃勇，举右足加马鬣上，慢骂光弼。
现代文：刘龙仙仗着勇力，把右脚举起来放在马鬣上，谩骂李光弼。
English: Liu Longxian bravely put his right foot up on the stirrup and cursed Li Guangyao.

古文：光弼顾诸将曰： 谁能取彼者？ 
现代文：李光弼看着各位将领说： 那一位能为我把他的头颅取来？ 
English: Li Guangyao looked at the generals and said: Which one can bring me his head?

古文：仆固怀恩请行。光弼曰： 此非大将所为。 
现代文：仆固怀恩请战，李光弼说： 这件事不应该让你这样的大将去干。 
English: When Min Gu Wai Yan asked for a fight, Li Guangyao said: This matter should not be left to a general like you.

古文：左右言 裨将白孝德可往。 
现代文：这时左右的人说： 裨将白孝德可以胜任。 
English: At this time, people around said: Bai Xiaodong can be competent.

古文：光弼召问之。孝德请行。光弼问： 须几何兵？ 
现代文：于是李光弼就把白孝德召来询问，白孝德愿往，李光弼问道： 你需要多少兵马？ 
English: So Li Guangyao summoned Bai Xiaode to inquire. Bai Xiaode was willing to go. Li Guangyao asked: How many soldiers and horses do you need?

古文：对曰： 请挺身取之。 
现代文：白孝德回答说： 我一个人就行。 
English: Bai Xiaodu replied: I can go alone.

古文：光弼壮其志，然固问所须。
现代文：李我弼赞扬他的勇敢，但坚持问他需要什么支援。
English: Li Weiyu praised his bravery, but insisted on asking him what kind of support he needed.

古文：对曰： 愿选五十骑出垒门为后继，兼请大军助鼓噪以增气。 
现代文：白孝德说： 希望挑选五十名骑兵出营门为后援，并请求大军在后面擂鼓叫喊以助威。 
English: Bai Xiaode said: I hope to select fifty cavalrymen to go out of the camp gate as backup, and ask the army to beat drums and shout in the back to cheer.

古文：光弼抚其背而遣之。
现代文：李光弼拍着白孝德的肩膀鼓励他，然后让他出战。
English: Li Guangyao patted Bai Xiaode's shoulder to encourage him, and then let him go out to fight.

古文：孝德挟二矛，策马乱流而进。
现代文：白孝德挟着两根长矛，策马横过河流而进。
English: Bai Xiaode, holding two spears between his hands, rode his horse across the river.

古文：半涉，怀恩贺曰： 克矣。 
现代文：当白孝德半渡时，仆固怀恩道贺说： 白孝德能够战胜。 
English: When Bai Xiaodong was halfway across, the servant Gu Wai En congratulated him and said: Bai Xiaodong can win.

古文：光弼曰： 锋未交，何以知之？ 
现代文：李光弼说： 还没有交锋，你怎么能够知道呢？ 
English: Li Guangyao said, "You haven't faced each other yet, how can you know?

古文：怀恩曰： 观其揽辔安闲，知其万全。 
现代文：仆固怀恩说： 看白孝德手揽缰绳，如此沉着，可知他万无一失。 
English: The servant Gu Wai said, "Seeing Bai Xiaodong grasp the reins with such composure, you can see that he is infallible.

古文：龙仙见其独来，甚易之；稍近，将动，孝德摇手示之，若非来为敌者，龙仙不测而止。
现代文：刘龙仙看见白孝德单单枪匹马而来，很轻视他。当白孝德稍近时，刘龙仙准备动手，只见白孝德摆手示意，好像不是来交战的样子，刘龙仙不知道是怎么回事便停下来。
English: Liu Longxian saw Bai Xiaode coming single-handedly and despised him. When Bai Xiaode came a little closer, Liu Longxian was about to take action, only to see Bai Xiaode waving his hand, as if he was not coming to fight. Liu Longxian did not know what was going on and stopped.

古文：去之十步，乃与之言，龙仙慢骂如初。
现代文：当双方相距十步之遥时，白孝德才与刘龙仙说话，刘龙仙仍然不停地谩骂。
English: When the two sides were ten paces apart, Bai Xiaode only spoke to Liu Longxian, and Liu Longxian continued to curse.

古文：孝德息马良久，因瞋目谓曰： 贼识我乎？ 
现代文：白孝德把马停下来呆了许久，然后怒目对刘龙仙说： 叛贼认识我吗？ 
English: Bai Xiaode paused his horse for a long time, and then angrily said to Liu Longxian: "Does the traitor know me?

古文：龙仙曰： 谁也？ 
现代文：刘龙仙说： 你是谁？ 
English: Liu Longxian said: Who are you?

古文：曰： 我，白孝德也。 
现代文：白孝德说： 我是白孝德。 
English: Bai Xiaode said: I am Bai Xiaode.

古文：龙仙曰： 是何狗彘！ 
现代文：刘龙仙骂道： 你算什么猪狗！ 
English: Liu Longxian scolded: What a pig dog you are!

古文：孝德大呼，运矛跃马搏之。
现代文：这时白孝德大声高呼，跃马挥矛上前来搏击。
English: At this time, Bai Xiaode shouted loudly and jumped onto his horse to fight.

古文：城上鼓噪，五十骑继进。
现代文：城上也擂鼓呐喊，五十名骑兵也在后面杀出。
English: Drums and shouts were also heard in the city, and fifty horsemen also rode out behind.

古文：龙仙矢不及发，环走堤上。孝德追及，斩首，携之以归。
现代文：刘龙仙来不及拉弓发箭，绕道走上河堤，被白孝德追上，砍下头颅，持之以归。
English: Liu Longxian did not have time to draw his bow and arrows, took a detour to the riverbank, was caught by Bai Xiaodong, cut off his head, and returned with it.

古文：贼众大骇。
现代文：叛军士卒看见后十分惊骇。
English: The rebel sergeant-at-arms was horrified.

古文：孝德，本安西胡人也。
现代文：白孝德原是安西地区的胡人。
English: Bai Xiaode was originally a Hu people from the Anxi region.

古文：思明有良马千馀匹，每日出于河南渚浴之，循环不休以示多。
现代文：史思明有良马一千多匹，每天都出来在黄河南岸的沙洲上洗浴，往复不停，以显示马多。
English: Shi Siming has more than a thousand good horses, and every day they come out to bathe on the sandbar on the south bank of the Yellow River, and keep coming back and forth to show how many horses there are.

古文：光弼命索军中牝马，得五百匹，絷其驹于城内。
现代文：李光弼命令把军中的母马都挑选出来，共有五百匹，把马驹都圈在城内。
English: Li Guangyao ordered that all the mares in the army be selected, a total of five hundred horses, and that the stables be enclosed in the city.

古文：俟思明马至水际，尽出之，马嘶不已，思明马悉浮渡河，一时驱之入城。
现代文：等史思明的马来到水边时，就把这些母马全部放出去，一时嘶鸣不已，史思明的战马看见后，都纷纷渡过黄河来追赶母马，被李光弼的士卒全部赶入城中。
English: When Shi Siming's horses came to the water's edge, he let all of these mares out of the stables. For a while, they neighed incessantly. When Shi Siming's horses saw them, they all crossed the Yellow River to chase the mares. They were all driven into the city by Li Guangyao's soldiers.

古文：思明怒，列战船数百艘，泛火船于前而随之，欲乘流烧浮桥。
现代文：史思明十分愤怒，就在河中摆列了数百艘战船，在船队前摆上火船，想要顺流烧毁浮桥。
English: Shi Siming was so angry that he lined up hundreds of warships in the river, placed fire ships in front of the fleet, and wanted to burn the pontoon bridge downstream.

古文：光弼先贮百尺长竿数百枚，以巨木承其根，氈裹铁叉置其首，以迎火船而叉之。船不得进，须臾自焚尽。
现代文：李光弼先预备了数百根百尺长的木杆，用大木头撑住，把毡裹的铁叉安置在长杆前端，阻拦并叉住火船，使火船无法前进，不久就自动烧毁。
English: Li Guangyao first prepared hundreds of hundred-foot-long wooden poles, supported them with large logs, and placed the wrapped iron fork at the front end of the long pole, blocking and forking the fire ship, so that the fire ship could not advance, and soon it would automatically burn down.

古文：又以叉拒战船，于桥上发砲石击之，中者皆沉没，贼不胜而去。
现代文：然后又用铁叉拦住那些战船，从桥上用炮发射大石块攻击，被击中的船只纷纷沉没，叛军大败而退。
English: Then they stopped the warships with iron forks, fired cannons from the bridge to attack with large stones, the ships that were hit sank one after another, and the rebels were defeated and retreated.

古文：思明见兵于河清，欲绝光弼粮道，光弼军于野水渡以备之。
现代文：史思明又出兵于河清县，想要断绝李光弼的粮道，李光弼率兵进驻野水渡以抵御叛军。
English: Shishiming also sent troops to Heqing County to cut off Li Guangyao's food supply, and Li Guangyao led his troops into Yishuidu to fend off the rebels.

古文：既夕，还河阳，留兵千人，使部将雍希颢守其栅，曰： 贼将高庭晖、李日越、喻文景，皆万人敌也。思明必使一人来劫我。
现代文：到了晚上，李光弼还军河阳，留兵一千人，让部将雍希颢率领守卫营栅，并说： 叛军大将高庭晖、李日越、喻文景都是骁勇善战的将领，史思明必定要派其中一名来劫我们的军营。
English: In the evening, Li Guangya returned the army to Heyang, leaving a thousand soldiers and letting the general Yong Xizhe lead the guard of the camp gate, and said: The rebel generals Gao Tingyao, Li Riyue and Yu Wenjing are all brave and good generals, Shi Siming must send one of them to rob our camp.

古文：我且去之，汝待于此。
现代文：我暂且回河阳，你在这里等待。
English: I'll go back to Heyang for the time being. You wait here.

古文：若贼至，勿与之战。
现代文：如果叛军来了，不要与他们交战。
English: If the rebels come, don't fight them.

古文：降，则与之俱来。 
现代文：如果他们投降，就与他们一起回来。 
English: If they surrender, come back with them.

古文：诸将莫谕其意，皆窃笑之。
现代文：众将领都不理解李光弼所说的意思，所以偷偷地发笑。
English: The generals did not understand what Li Guangyao meant, so they secretly laughed.

古文：既而思明果谓李日越曰： 李光弼长于凭城，今出在野，此成擒矣。
现代文：不久，史思明果然对李日越说： 李光弼善于凭借城池而战，现在出兵在野外，正是打败他的大好时机。
English: Soon after, Shi Siming said to Li Yuexiu, "Li Guangyao is good at fighting from the city, and now that we are in the field, it is a great opportunity to defeat him."

古文：汝以铁骑宵济，为我取之，不得，则勿返。 
现代文：命令你率领精锐骑兵连夜渡过黄河，为我把他抓来，如果抓不到，你就不要回来见我。 
English: I order you to lead your elite cavalry across the Yellow River overnight and capture him for me. If you can't capture him, don't come back to see me.

古文：日越将五百骑晨至栅下，希颢阻壕休卒，吟啸相视。
现代文：李日越即率领五百骑兵早晨来到野水渡的营栅下，雍希颢让士兵隔着战壕休息，并呼喊着互相察看。
English: Li Riyue immediately led five hundred cavalrymen in the morning to the camp gate of the wild water crossing. Yong Xizhe let the soldiers rest across the trench and shouted to look at each other.

古文：日越怪之，问曰： 司空在乎？ 
现代文：李日越觉得奇怪，就问道： 李司空在吗？ 
English: Feeling more and more strange, Li Rijie asked: Is Li Sikuang here?

古文：曰： 夜去矣。 
现代文：雍希颢说： 李司空晚上已经走了。 
English: Yong Xizhe said: Li Sikuo had already left in the evening.

古文： 兵几何？ 
现代文：李日越又问： 你们有多少兵？ 
English: He also asked, how many soldiers do you have?

古文：曰： 千人。 
现代文：雍希颢说： 共有一千人。 
English: Yong Xizhe said: There are a total of one thousand people.

古文： 将谁？ 
现代文：李日越又问： 谁是将帅？ 
English: Li Riyue also asked: Who is the best general?

古文：曰： 雍希颢。 
现代文：雍希颢说： 雍希颢是将帅。 
English: He replied: "Yong Xizhe."

古文：日越默计久之，谓其下曰： 今失李光弼，得希颢而归，吾死必矣，不如降也。 
现代文：李日越听后，沉默了许久，然后对部下的将士说： 现在失掉了李光弼，就是抓住雍希颢回去，我也免不了一死，还不如投降为好。 
English: After listening to Li Rixue, he was silent for a long time, and then said to his subordinate soldiers: Now that I have lost Li Guangyao, even if I catch Yong Xiyao and go back, I can't avoid death, so I might as well surrender.

古文：遂请降。
现代文：于是就请求归降。
English: He then asked to surrender.

古文：希颢与之俱见光弼，光弼厚待之，任以心腹。
现代文：雍希颢与李日越一起来见李光弼，李光弼厚待李日越，并把他作为心腹将领。
English: Yong Xichen came to see Li Guangyao together with Li Riyue. Li Guangyao treated Li Riyue well and regarded him as a close confidant.

古文：高庭晖闻之，亦降。
现代文：高庭晖得知这件事后，也来投降。
English: When Gao Tingyao learned of this, he also surrendered.

古文：或问光弼： 降二将何易也？ 
现代文：有人问李光弼： 你为什么这么容易就招降了史思明的两员大将？ 
English: Someone asked Li Guangyao: Why did you recruit and demote two generals from Shi Siming so easily?

古文：光弼曰： 此人情耳。
现代文：李光弼说： 这都是利用人情。
English: Li Guangyao said: This is all about taking advantage of people's feelings.

古文：思明常恨不得野战，闻我在外，以为必可取。
现代文：史思明常恨不能与我在野外交战，得知我在城外，就以为一定能够抓到我。
English: Shi Siming often wished he could fight me in the field. When he learned that I was outside the city, he thought he could definitely catch me.

古文：日越不获我，势不敢归。
现代文：李日越没有抓到我，必定不敢回去。
English: The more Li Nichie fails to catch me, the more he will not dare to go back.

古文：庭晖才勇过于日越，闻日越被宠任，必思夺之矣。 
现代文：高庭晖的智谋勇气都在李日越之上，听说李日越受到重用和信任，一定想夺得李日越的地位。 
English: Gao Tingyao's wisdom and courage are superior to Li Ruxue's. I heard that Li Ruxue is highly regarded and trusted, and he must want to win Li Ruxue's position.

古文：庭晖时为五台府果毅。己亥，以庭晖为右武卫大将军。
现代文：高庭晖当时是五台府果毅都尉，己亥，朝庭任命高庭晖为右武卫大将军。
English: At that time, Gao Tingtao was the captain of Guoyi, Wudaifu, and the Imperial Court appointed Gao Tingtao as the right guard general.

古文：思明复攻河阳，光弼谓郑陈节度使李抱玉曰： 将军能为我守南城二日乎？ 
现代文：史思明又率兵进攻河阳，李光弼对郑陈节度使李抱玉说： 你能够为我坚守南城两天吗？ 
English: Shi Siming again led the troops to attack Heyang. Li Guangyao said to Zheng Chen, "Can you hold Nancheng for me for two days?"

古文：抱玉曰： 过期何如？ 
现代文：李抱玉说： 超过两天以后怎么办？ 
English: Li Baoyu said: What should be done after more than two days?

古文：光弼曰： 过期救不至，任弃之。 
现代文：李光弼说： 如果超过两天救兵不来，就随你放弃。 
English: Li Guangyao said: If the rescuers do not come for more than two days, you can give up.

古文：抱玉许诺，勒兵拒守。
现代文：李抱玉答应，然后整兵守城。
English: Li Baoyu agreed, and then the whole army defended the city.

古文：城且陷，抱玉绐之曰： 吾粮尽，明旦当降。 
现代文：城快要被攻陷时，李抱玉欺骗叛军说： 我们的粮食已经吃尽，明天早晨就投降。 
English: When the city was about to be captured, Li Baoyu deceived the rebels and said, "We have run out of grain and will surrender tomorrow morning."

古文：贼喜，敛军以待之。
现代文：叛军十分高兴，就收军等待。
English: The rebels were so pleased that they withdrew and waited.

古文：抱玉缮完城备，明日，复请战。
现代文：李抱玉乘机修补城池，准备守具，第二天，又请求交战。
English: Li Baoyu took the opportunity to repair the castle and prepare the defenses. The next day, he again requested a battle.

古文：贼怒，急攻之。
现代文：叛军十分愤怒，立刻又来攻城。
English: Enraged, the rebels immediately attacked the city again.

古文：抱玉出奇兵，表里夹击，杀伤甚众。
现代文：李抱玉出奇兵到叛军背后，内外夹击，叛军死伤众多。
English: Li Baoyu made a surprise attack on the back of the rebels. The rebels were attacked from both inside and outside, and many rebels were killed and injured.

古文：董秦从思明寇河阳，夜帅其众五百，拔栅突围，降于光弼。
现代文：叛将董秦跟随史思明攻打河阳，夜晚，率领部下士卒五百人，拔掉木栅突围出来，投降了李光弼。
English: The renegade general, Dong Qin, followed Shi Siming to attack Heyang. At night, he led 500 subordinates and surrounded Li Guangya by pulling down the wooden grating. Li Guangya surrendered.

古文：时光弼自将屯中潬，城外置栅，栅外穿堑，深广二丈。
现代文：当时李光弼亲自率兵驻扎在中，在城外设置了木栅，栅外又挖了壕沟，宽深各二丈。
English: At that time, Li Guangyao personally led the troops stationed in Zhong, set up a wooden grate outside the city, and dug a trench outside the grate, two feet wide and two feet deep.

古文：乙巳，贼将周挚舍南城，并力攻中氵单。
现代文：乙巳，叛军大将周挚放弃进攻南城，全力来攻中。
English: Suddenly, the rebel general Zhou earnestly gave up attacking Nancheng and made every effort to attack Zhongcheng.

古文：光弼命荔非元礼出劲卒于羊马城以拒贼。
现代文：李光弼命令荔非元礼率领精兵，在城外的低垣内迎击叛军。
English: Li Guangyao ordered Lih Fei Yuanli to lead the elite soldiers to meet the rebels outside the city.

古文：光弼自于城东北隅建小硃旗以望贼。
现代文：他自己于城东北角树起一面小红旗，在那里观察叛军。
English: He himself planted a small red flag in the northeast corner of the city, where he observed the rebels.

古文：贼恃其众，直进逼城，以车载攻具自随，督众填堑，三面各八道以过兵，又开栅为门。
现代文：叛军仗着兵力强大，一直进军到城下，用车载着攻城的战具相随，并督促士卒填埋壕沟，在城的三面共填了八条路准备通过，又打开木栅作为出口。
English: The rebels, relying on their strong military strength, marched all the way to the bottom of the city, accompanied by vehicles carrying siege weapons, and urged the soldiers to fill the trenches, filling a total of eight roads on three sides of the city to prepare for passage, and opening the wooden grate as an exit.

古文：光弼望贼逼城，使问元礼曰： 中丞视贼填堑开栅过兵，晏然不动，何也？ 
现代文：李光弼见叛军逼近城下，就派人问荔非元礼说： 你看见叛军填壕开栅准备通过，却安然不动，这是为什么呢？ 
English: When Li Guangyao saw the rebels approaching the city, he sent someone to ask Li Fei Yuanli, saying: You saw the rebels filling trenches and preparing to pass, but they did not move, why is that?

古文：元礼曰： 司空欲守乎，战乎？ 
现代文：荔非元礼说： 您是想坚守呢，还是想出战呢？ 
English: Lih Fei Yuanli said: Do you want to stick to it, or do you want to go to war?

古文：光弼曰： 欲战。 
现代文：李光弼说： 想出战。 
English: Li Guangyao said: I want to fight.

古文：元礼曰： 欲战，则贼为吾填堑，何为禁之？ 
现代文：荔非元礼说： 如果想出战，那么叛军正是在为我们填壕，为什么要禁止他呢？ 
English: Lih Fei Yuanli said: If he wants to go to war, then the rebels are just filling the trenches for us, why ban him?

古文：光弼曰： 善，吾所不及，勉之！ 
现代文：李光弼说： 你的计策好，我没有想到，希望你好好干。 
English: Li Guangyao said: Your strategy is good, I didn't think of it, I hope you do a good job.

古文：元礼俟栅开，帅敢死士突出击贼，却走数百步。
现代文：荔非元礼等到叛军打开栅门时，就率领敢死队突然杀出攻打叛军，击退了敌人数百步。
English: When the rebels opened the gate, Li Fei Yuanli suddenly led the death squad to attack the rebels and repelled the enemy for hundreds of steps.

古文：元礼度贼阵坚，未易摧陷，乃复引退，须其怠而击之。
现代文：荔非元礼考虑到叛军的战阵坚固，难以轻易摧垮，就领兵退了下来，想等到叛军大意的时候再进攻。
English: Considering that the rebels' battle line was solid and difficult to easily destroy, Lih Fei Yuanli withdrew his troops and wanted to wait until the rebels had made up their minds before attacking.

古文：光弼望见元礼退，怒，遣左右召，欲斩之。
现代文：李光弼看见荔非元礼率兵退了下来，不禁大怒，就派左右人去召荔非元礼，想要杀掉他。
English: When Li Guangyao saw that Li Fei Yuanli and his soldiers had retreated, he couldn't help but be furious, so he sent people around to summon Li Fei Yuanli and wanted to kill him.

古文：元礼曰： 战正急，召何为？ 
现代文：荔非元礼说： 战斗正是紧急时刻，召我有什么事呢？ 
English: Lih Fei Yuanli said, "Fighting is a time of emergency, what is the point of summoning me?

古文：乃退入栅中。
现代文：于是领兵退入栅中。
English: So the leader retreated into the palisade.

古文：贼亦不敢逼。
现代文：叛军不敢紧逼。
English: The rebels did not dare to press.

古文：良久，鼓噪出栅门，奋击，破之。
现代文：过了一会儿，荔非元礼率兵擂鼓呼叫杀出栅门，突然向叛军发起袭击，打败了敌人。
English: After a while, Li Fei Yuanli led the soldiers to beat the drums to call out the gate, suddenly launched an attack on the rebels, and defeated the enemy.

古文：周挚复收兵趣北城。
现代文：叛军大将周挚又收兵逼近北城。
English: The rebel general Zhou earnestly withdrew his troops and approached Beicheng.

古文：光弼遽帅众入北城，登城望贼曰： 贼兵虽多，嚣而不整，不足畏也。
现代文：李光弼立刻率兵到了北城，登上城头望着叛军说： 敌人虽然兵多，但混乱而不整齐，用不着害怕。
English: Li Guangyao immediately led his troops to Beicheng, climbed to the top of the city, looked at the rebels and said: Although the enemy has many soldiers, they are chaotic and disorganized, and there is no need to be afraid.

古文：不过日中，保为诸君破之。 
现代文：过不了中午，我保证为大家打败敌人。 
English: Before noon, I promise to defeat the enemy for everyone.

古文：乃命诸将出战。
现代文：于是就命令众将领出战。
English: So he ordered his generals to lead the troops into battle.

古文：及期，不决，召诸将问曰： 向来贼阵，何方最坚？ 曰： 西北隅。 
现代文：到中了中午，还没有决出胜负，于是李光弼就把从将领召来问道： 敌人的阵势一贯是哪个方面最强？ 他们说： 西北方向最强。 
English: By mid-afternoon, the outcome was still undecided, so Li Guangyao summoned his generals and asked: Which aspect of the enemy's position is consistently the strongest? They said: The northwest direction is the strongest.

古文：光弼命其将郝廷玉当之。
现代文：于是李光弼就命令部将郝廷玉到西北面坚守。
English: As a result, Li Guangyao ordered his troops to hold out in the northwest.

古文：廷玉请骑兵五百，与之三百。
现代文：郝廷玉请求给自己骑兵五百，李光弼只给了他三百。
English: Hao Tingyu asked for 500 cavalry, but Li Guangya only gave him 300.

古文：又问其次坚者。曰： 东南隅。
现代文：李光弼又问哪个方面的敌人兵力第二强，众将领说： 东南方向。 
English: Li Guangyao also asked which side of the enemy has the second strongest troops. The generals said: Southeast direction.

古文：光弼命其将论惟贞当之。
现代文：于是李光弼就命令部将论惟贞去东南面守卫。
English: As a result, Li Guangyao ordered the division to go to the southeast to guard Ong Weizhen.

古文：惟贞请铁骑三百，与之二百。
现代文：论惟贞请求精锐骑兵三百，李光弼只给了他二百。
English: On the subject of Wei Zhen, he asked for three hundred elite cavalry, but Li Guangyao only gave him two hundred.

古文：光弼令诸将曰： 尔辈望吾旗而战，吾飐旗缓，任尔择利而战；吾急飐旗三至地，则万众齐入，死生以之，少退者斩！ 
现代文：然后李光弼命令众将领说： 你们都看着我的旗子作战，如果我的旗子挥动缓慢，就任凭你们选择有利时机出战，如果我急速往地上挥动旗子三下，你们就全军齐发，冒死前进，稍有后退者杀！ 
English: Then Li Guangyao ordered the generals to say: You all watch my flag and go to war. If my flag waves slowly, let you choose a favorable time to go to war. If I wave the flag rapidly to the ground three times, you will all go together, advance at the risk of your lives, and kill anyone who retreats!

古文：又以短刀置靴中，曰： 战，危事。吾国之三公，不可死贼手。万一战不利，诸君前死于敌，我自刭于此，不令诸君独死也。 
现代文：然后李光弼又把一把短刀放置在自己的靴子中，说： 战斗是危险的事情，我身为国家的三公，不能够死于叛军之手，万一战斗失败，大家在前面死于敌手，我就在这里自刎而死，决不会只让大家战死。 
English: Then Li Guangyao put a knife in his boots and said: "Fighting is a dangerous thing. As the Three Sovereigns of the country, I cannot die at the hands of the rebels. In case the battle fails and everyone dies in front of the enemy, I will die here by self-immolation. I will never let everyone die in battle."

古文：诸将出战，顷之，廷玉奔还。
现代文：于是众将领出战，不一会儿，郝廷玉逃下阵来。
English: As a result, the generals led the troops into battle, and after a while, Gong Dingyu fled the battlefield.

古文：光弼望之，惊曰： 廷玉退，吾事危矣！ 
现代文：李光弼望见，大惊说： 郝廷玉逃下阵来，我的计划就危险了。 
English: Li Guangyao looked at him and said in shock: "Since Gong Dingyu has fled the battlefield, my plan is in danger."

古文：命左右取廷玉首，廷玉曰： 马中箭，非敢退也。 
现代文：于是命令左右的人去把郝廷玉的头颅割下来。郝廷玉说： 是我的坐骑中箭，并不是我怯战退了下来。 
English: So he ordered the people around him to cut off the head of Yao Tingyu. Yao Tingyu said, "It was my mount that was hit by the arrow, not me who withdrew in fear."

古文：使者驰报。
现代文：使者驰马来报告李光弼。
English: Envoys galloped to report to Li Guangyao.

古文：光弼令易马，遣之。
现代文：李光弼就命令换了一匹马，让郝廷玉重新上阵。
English: Li Guangyao ordered to change a horse, so that Gong Tingyu re-entered the battle.

古文：仆固怀恩及其子开府仪同三司瑒战小却，光弼又命取其首。
现代文：仆固怀恩和他的儿子开府仪同三司仆固与叛军交战稍有退却，李光弼又命令左右的人去把他们的头颅割下来。
English: Minion Gu Wai Yan and his son Kaifu Yi and the three minions fought with the rebels and retreated a little, and Li Guangyao ordered the people around to cut off their heads.

古文：怀恩父子顾见使者提刀驰来，更前决战。
现代文：仆固怀恩父子看见李光弼派来的人提刀骑马而来，就重新上前决战。
English: When the servants Gu Huai'en and his son saw the man sent by Li Guangya carrying a sword and riding a horse, they went forward again for the decisive battle.

古文：光弼连飐其旗，诸将齐进致死，呼声动天地，贼众大溃，斩首千馀级，捕虏五百人，溺死者千馀人。周挚以数骑遁去，擒其大将徐璜玉、李秦授，其河南节度使安太清走保怀州。
现代文：李光弼不断地挥动着手中的指挥旗，众将领都冒死进攻，呼喊之声惊天动地，叛军顿时大败，被杀一千余人，被俘虏五百人，掉进水中被淹死的有一千余人，周挚仅带领数名骑兵逃走，叛军大将徐璜玉、李秦授被俘。叛军的河南节度使安太清退保怀州。
English: Li Guangyao constantly waved the command flag in his hand. All the generals risked their lives to attack. Their shouts were earth-shattering. The rebels were immediately defeated. More than a thousand people were killed, five hundred were captured, and more than a thousand were drowned in the water. Zhou Wei only led a few cavalrymen to escape. The rebel generals Xu Bingyu and Li Qinju were captured. The Henan Festival of the rebels forced the Antae Qing to retreat to Bao Huizhou.

古文：思明不知挚败，尚攻南城，光弼驱俘囚临河示之，乃遁。
现代文：史思明不知道周挚已被打败，还在南城进攻，李光弼把俘虏的叛军赶到河边上让史思明观看，史思明才退去。
English: Shi Siming did not know that Zhou Jing had been defeated and was still attacking Nancheng. Li Guangyao drove the captured rebels to the riverside for Shi Siming to watch. Only then did Shi Siming retreat.

古文：丁巳，以李日越为右金吾大将军。
现代文：丁巳，任命李日越为右金吾大将军。
English: Ding Si, appointed Li Nichie as the Right Kingu General.

古文：邛、简、嘉、眉、泸、戎等州蛮反。
现代文：邛、简、嘉、眉、泸、戎等州蛮民反叛。
English: The barbarians in the provinces of Min, Chien, Jia, Mei, Handan and Eun rebelled.

古文：十一月，甲子，以殿中监董秦为陕西、神策两军兵马使，赐姓李，名忠臣。
现代文：十一月甲子，任命殿中监董秦为陕西、神策两军兵马使，赐姓名为李忠臣。
English: In November, Jia Zi appointed the palace supervisor, Dong Qin, as the envoy of the armies of Shaanxi and Shensi, and gave him the name Li Zhongcheng.

古文：康楚元等众至万馀人，商州刺史、充荆襄等道租庸使韦伦发兵讨之，驻于邓之境，招谕降者，厚抚之；伺其稍怠，进军击之，生擒楚元，其众遂溃；得其所掠租庸二百万缗，荆、襄皆平。
现代文：康楚元等人的兵众达一万余人，商州刺史兼荆、襄等道租庸使韦伦发兵讨叛，驻军于邓州境内，招降叛军，加以安抚，见叛军稍有松懈时，就率军进攻，活捉了康楚元，其部下溃败，缴获了康楚元所掠夺的租庸二百万缗钱，荆州与襄州平定。
English: Kang Chu Yuan and others had more than ten thousand soldiers. Shang Zhou, Tang Shishi, Jing and Xiang and other Taoist mercenaries made Wei Lun send troops to rebel, stationed troops in the territory of Deng Zhou, recruited rebels and pacified them. When the rebels were a little slack, he led the army to attack, captured Kang Chu Yuan alive, his subordinates were defeated, captured the two million baht of the mercenaries plundered by Kang Chu Yuan, and pacified Jing Zhou and Xiang Zhou.

古文：伦，见素之从祖弟也。
现代文：韦伦是韦见素的堂弟。
English: Waylon is Waylon's cousin.

古文：发安西、北庭兵屯陕，以备史思明。
现代文：朝廷征发安西、北庭兵屯于陕州，以防备史思明西侵。
English: The imperial court sent soldiers to Anxi and Beiting in Shaanxi to prevent Shi Siming from invading the west.

古文：第五琦作乾元钱、重轮钱，与开元钱三品并行，民争盗铸，货轻物重，谷价腾踊，饿殍相望。
现代文：根据第五琦的建议，铸造乾元钱、重轮钱，与开元钱一起流通，民间争相盗铸，以至钱轻物重，粮价暴涨，饿殍遍野。
English: According to the suggestion of the fifth generation, the casting of dry yuan money and heavy wheel money began to circulate together with the opening yuan money, and the people fought to steal the casting, so that the money was light and heavy, the grain price skyrocketed, and the hungry were everywhere.

古文：上言者皆归咎于琦，庚午，贬琦忠州长史。
现代文：上言给肃宗的人都把此事归咎于第五琦，庚午，肃宗贬第五琦为忠州长史。
English: The people who made the suggestion to Su Zong blamed the matter on the 5th generation, Geng Bao, and Su Zong denounced the 5th generation as the history of loyal governors.

古文：御史大夫贺兰进明贬溱州员外司马，坐琦党也。
现代文：又贬御史大夫贺兰进明为溱州员外司马，因为他是第五琦的同党。
English: He also demoted the chief historian, Helan Jinming, to the position of deputy secretary of state, because he was a member of the same party as the fifth secretary.

古文：十二月，甲午，吕諲领度支使。
现代文：十二月甲午，任命吕领度支使。
English: In the afternoon of December 1st, he was appointed as the Vice-Minister of Luling.

古文：乙巳，韦伦送康楚元诣阙，斩之。
现代文：乙巳，韦伦把康楚元送到朝廷，处死。
English: Suddenly, Wei Lun brought Kang Chu Yuan to the imperial court and executed him.

古文：史思明遣其将李归仁将铁骑五千寇陕州，神策兵马使卫伯玉以数百骑击破之于礓子阪，得马六百匹，归仁走。
现代文：史思明派遣部将李归仁率领精锐骑兵五千进攻陕州，神策兵马使卫伯玉率领数百名骑兵于礓子阪打败了李归仁，缴获战马六百匹，李归仁逃走。
English: The dispatching department of Shi Siming sent Li Guiren to lead 5,000 elite cavalry to attack Shaanxi, and Wei Boyu, led by hundreds of cavalry, defeated Li Guiren and captured 600 horses. Li Guiren fled.

古文：春，正月，辛巳，以李光弼为太尉兼中书令，馀如故。
现代文：肃宗任命卫伯玉为镇西、四镇行营节度使。李忠臣与叛将李归仁等战于永宁、莎栅之间，屡次败敌。
English: Su Zong appointed Wei Bo Yu as the envoy of the Western Zhen and the Four Zhen Campaign. Li Zhongchen and the renegade Li Guiren fought in Yongning and Shazhao, and repeatedly defeated the enemy.

古文：丙戌，以于阗王胜之弟曜同四镇节度副使，权知本国事。
现代文：上元元年春季，正月辛巳，肃州任命李光弼为太尉兼中书令，其余的官职如旧。丙戌，唐朝命令于阗国王尉迟胜的弟弟尉迟曜同四镇节度副使一起，暂时代理国王职务，处理国政。
English: In the spring of the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, in the first month of Xin Si, Li Guangyao was appointed by Suizhou as the first lieutenant and the second secretary, and the rest of the official positions were the same as before. In addition, the Tang Dynasty ordered the king's younger brother, the king's second lieutenant, to temporarily act as the king and handle state affairs together with the deputy envoy of the Four Towns Festival.

古文：党项等羌吞噬边鄙，将逼京畿，乃分邠宁等州节度为鄜坊丹延节度，亦谓之渭北节度。
现代文：党项等羌族侵吞唐朝的边疆，将逼近京效地区，于是唐朝分宁等州节度为坊丹延节度，也称为渭北节度。
English: Dangxiang and other Yi people invaded and occupied the Tang Dynasty's frontier, and they will approach the Beijing-Guangzhou region. Therefore, the Tang Dynasty's Banning and other states' festival will be the Fangdanyang Festival, also known as the Northern Wei Festival.

古文：以邠州刺史桑如珪领邠宁，鄜州刺史杜冕领鄜坊节度副使，分道招讨。
现代文：任命州刺史桑如为宁节度副使，州刺杜冕为坊节度副使，分道招讨党项等羌族。
English: He appointed Zhou Zhishisangru as the vice-envoy of the Ning Festival, Zhou Zhishisangdu as the vice-envoy of the Fang Festival, and the Dong people as the party members.

古文：戊子，以郭子仪领两道节度使，留京师，假其威名以镇之。
现代文：戊子，任命郭子仪兼任宁、坊节度使，留在京师，借他的威名以镇抚党项。
English: Wuzi, appointed Guo Ziyi concurrently appointed Ning, Fang Jiedu envoy, stayed in Beijing Division, and borrowed his prestige to lead the party.

古文：上祀九宫贵神。
现代文：肃宗祭祀九宫贵神。
English: Suizong's worship of the Nine Deities.

古文：二月，李光弼攻怀州，史思明救之。
现代文：二月，李光弼进攻怀州，史思明领兵来救。
English: In February, Li Guangyao attacked Waizhou, and Shi Siming led an army to rescue him.

古文：癸卯，光弼逆战于沁水之上，破之，斩首三千馀级。
现代文：癸卯，李光弼迎战于沁水岸边，打败了史思明，杀死叛军三千余人。
English: Meanwhile, Li Guangya fought on the shore of Surabaya, defeated Shi Siming, and killed more than three thousand rebels.

古文：忠州长史第五琦既行，或告琦受人金二百两，遣御史刘期光追按之。
现代文：第五琦被贬为忠州长史，已经上路赴任，这时有人告发第五琦接受了别人送给的黄金二百两，于是肃宗派御史刘期光追究按验。
English: At that time, someone reported that the Fifth Preceptor had accepted two hundred taels of gold given to him by someone else. Therefore, Liu Ciguang, the preceptor of the Su Sect, was investigated and punished.

古文：琦曰： 琦备位宰相，二百两金不可手挈；若付受有凭，请准律科罪。 
现代文：第五琦说： 我位至宰相，二百两黄金又不能放在手里拿着，如果有确凿的证据，请按法律处置。 
English: The fifth said: I am the prime minister, and I cannot hold two hundred taels of gold in my hand. If you have solid evidence, please handle it according to the law.

古文：期光即奏琦已服罪。
现代文：但刘期光却上奏说第五琦已经服罪。
English: However, Liu Jiguang reported that the fifth defendant had already pleaded guilty.

古文：庚戌，琦坐除名，长流夷州。
现代文：庚戌，第五琦因此案被削除名籍，流放到夷州。
English: As a result of the case, Geng Yao, the fifth son, was stripped of his family name and exiled to Yizhou.

古文：三月，甲申，改蒲州为河中府。
现代文：三月甲申，唐朝改蒲州为河中府。
English: In March of Jiaxing, the Tang Dynasty changed the name of Puzhou to Henan Province.

古文：庚寅，李光弼破安太清于怀州城下，夏，四月，壬辰，破史思明于河阳西渚，斩首千五百馀级。
现代文：庚寅，李光弼于怀州城下打败了安太清。夏季，四月壬辰，李光弼于河阳城西黄河中的沙洲上打败了史思明，杀死叛军一千五百余人。
English: In the summer, in April, Li Guangya defeated Shi Siming on a sandbank in the Yellow River west of Heyang City, killing more than 1,500 rebels.

古文：襄州将张维瑾、曹玠杀节度使史翙，据州反。
现代文：襄州将领张维瑾与曹杀死了节度使史，占据州城反叛。
English: Zhang Weiqi and Cao, the generals of Xiangzhou, killed the governor and occupied the provincial capital in rebellion.

古文：制以陇州刺史韦伦为山南东道节度使。
现代文：肃宗下制书任命陇州刺史韦伦为山南东道节度使。
English: Su Zong, Secretary of the Book Industry, appointed Zhangzhou's representative, Shi Weiren, as the host of the festival in Shannan.

古文：时李辅国用事，节度使皆出其门。
现代文：当时宦官李辅国专权用事，节度使的任命都要经过他的许可。
English: At that time, the eunuch Li Shu used the state's exclusive power, and the appointment of the regent had to go through his permission.

古文：伦既朝廷所除，又不谒辅国，寻改秦州防御使。
现代文：韦伦既是朝廷所任命，又不去谒见李辅国，不久就被改任命为秦州防御使。
English: Wei Lun was appointed by the imperial court, but he did not go to see Li Yuxuo, so he was soon reappointed as the Qin State Defense Envoy.

古文：己未，以陕西节度使来瑱为山南东道节度使。
现代文：己未，任命陕西节度使来为山南东道节度使。
English: In the meantime, the Shaanxi Festival Envoy has been appointed as the Shannan Host Festival Envoy.

古文：瑱至襄州，张维瑾等皆降。
现代文：来接到任命到达襄州，还没有交战，张维瑾等就都向他投降了。
English: When he arrived in Xiangzhou after receiving the appointment, there was no war yet, and Zhang Weizhong and others all surrendered to him.

古文：闰月，丁卯，加河东节度使王思礼为司空。
现代文：闰月丁卯，肃宗加封河东节度使王思礼为司空。
English: In the intercalary month of Dingwu, Su Zong's addition of the eastern section of the He River made Wang Sili the secretary of the sky.

古文：自武德以来，思礼始不为宰相而拜三公。
现代文：从唐高祖武德年间以来，王思礼是第一位没有做过宰相而拜为三公的人。
English: Since the time of Emperor Wu of the Tang Dynasty, Wang Sili was the first person to be worshipped as the Three Sovereigns without having been a prime minister.

古文：甲戌，徙赵王系为越王。
现代文：甲戌，肃宗改封赵王李系为越王。
English: Ji Kun, Su Zong changed his title from Zhao Wang Li to Yue Wang.

古文：己卯，赦天下，改元。
现代文：己卯，肃宗大赦天下，改乾元三年为上元元年。
English: Su Zong, Emperor of China, changed the year from Qianyuan 3rd year to Shangyuan 1st year.

古文：追谥太公望为武成王，选历代名将为亚圣、十哲。
现代文：追赠西周的姜太公吕望谥号为武成王，并选历代的名将为亚圣、十哲。
English: The posthumous name of Jiang Taigong Lvowon given to Xi Zhou was Wu Cheng Wang, and the names of successive dynasties would be Asheng and Shizhe.

古文：其中祀、下祀并杂祀一切并停。
现代文：命令中等、下等祭祀和其他杂祀全部停止。
English: The order was given to stop all middle- and lower-level sacrificial rites and other miscellaneous rites.

古文：是日，史思明入东京。
现代文：当天，史思明进入东京。
English: On the same day, Shi Siming entered Tokyo.

古文：五月，丙午，以太子太傅苗晋卿行侍中。
现代文：五月丙午，任命太子太傅苗晋卿为侍中。
English: In the afternoon of May 3rd, he appointed Crown Prince Daifu Miao Jinqing as a chamberlain.

古文：晋卿练达吏事，而谨身固位，时人比之胡广。
现代文：苗晋卿善于处理政事，但处事谨慎，明哲保身，当时的人把他比做东汉的胡广。
English: Miao Jinqing was good at handling political affairs, but he was prudent and cautious. People at the time compared him to Hu Guang of the Eastern Han Dynasty.

古文：宦者马上言受赂，为人求官于兵部侍郎、同中书门下三品吕諲，諲为之补官。
现代文：宦官马上言接受了贿赂，为行贿人向兵部侍郎、同中书门下三品吕求官，吕就将此人补选为官。
English: The eunuch immediately accepted the bribe, and for the bribe-giver, he asked the attendant of the military department and the junior secretary of the same department, Sanbon Ryu, for the position, and Ryu selected this person as the official.

古文：事觉，上言杖死。
现代文：这件事被发觉，马上言受杖刑而死。
English: The matter was discovered and he was immediately caned to death.

古文：壬子，諲罢为太子宾客。
现代文：壬子，吕被罢贬为太子宾客。
English: Imoko and Lu were relegated to being guests of the crown prince.

古文：癸丑，以京兆尹南华刘晏为户部侍郎，充度支、铸钱、盐铁等使。
现代文：癸丑，肃守任命京兆尹南华人刘晏为户部侍郎，兼度支、铸钱、盐铁等使。
English: At the same time, Su Shou appointed Liu Xuan, a Chinese from the south of Jing Zhaoyun, as a servant of the household department, and also as an envoy for dowry, minted money, and salt and iron.

古文：晏善治财利，故用之。
现代文：刘晏善于理财，所以肃宗重用他。
English: Liu Ye was good at financial management, so Su Zong made heavy use of him.

古文：六月，甲子，桂州经略使邢济奏：破西原蛮二十万众，斩其帅黄乾曜等。
现代文：六月甲子，桂州经略使邢济上奏说：打败了西原蛮二十万，并杀了他们的酋帅黄乾曜等人。
English: In June, Guizhou's Minister of Economic Affairs Luo Jizhe made a report to the emperor, saying that he had defeated 200,000 Nishihara and killed their chieftain Huang Qianyou and others.

古文：乙丑，凤翔节度使崔光远奏破泾、陇羌、浑十馀万众。
现代文：乙丑，凤翔节度使崔光远上奏说打败了泾州和陇州的羌族、浑族十余万军队。
English: In the Second Ugly, Fengxiang Festival, Cui Guangyuan said that he defeated more than 100,000 troops of the Yao and Hun ethnic groups in Luzhou and Luzhou.

古文：三品钱行浸久，属岁荒，米斗至七千钱，人相食。
现代文：开元钱、乾元重宝钱与重轮钱流通已久，适逢年荒，每斗米价值达七千钱，以至出现了人吃人的现象。
English: Kaiyuan money, Qianyuan heavy treasure money and heavy wheel money have been in circulation for a long time, coinciding with the annual famine, with the value of each bucket of rice reaching seven thousand money, and even the phenomenon of people eating people has appeared.

古文：京兆尹郑叔清捕私铸钱者，数月间，榜死者八百馀人，不能禁。
现代文：京兆尹郑叔清抓捕私自铸钱的人，数月之间，被打死的人就有八百多，但还是不能禁止。
English: Jing Zhao, Yin Zheng, and Uncle Qing arrested people who minted money illegally, and within a few months, more than eight hundred people were killed, but it still could not be banned.

古文：乃敕京畿，开元钱与乾元小钱皆当十，其重轮钱当三十，诸州更俟进止。
现代文：于是肃宗就下敕书于京畿道，命令开元钱与乾元重宝小钱都一钱当十钱，重轮钱以一钱当三十钱，其他的各州仍等待处理。
English: Therefore, Su Zong issued an edict in Gyeonggi Province, ordering that the newly minted yuan coins and the newly minted heavy treasure coins should be valued at ten yuan for one yuan, and thirty yuan for one yuan for the heavy treasure coins. The other provinces are still waiting to be dealt with.

古文：是时史思明亦铸顺天、得一钱，一当开元钱百。贼中物价尤贵。
现代文：当时史思明也铸造了顺天钱与得一钱，一钱当开元钱一百钱，所以叛军占据的地区物价尤其昂贵。
English: At that time, Shi Siming also minted Shun Tian Qian (顺天钱) and Get 1 Qian (得一钱), and 1 Qian was equivalent to 100 Yuan, so the price in the area occupied by the rebels was particularly expensive.

古文：甲申，兴王佋薨。
现代文：甲申，兴王李去世。
English: In Jiaxing, Xing Wang Li passed away.

古文：佋，张后长子也，幼曰定王侗。
现代文：李是张皇后的长子，幼子是定王李侗。
English: Li was the eldest son of Empress Zhang, and the youngest son was Dingwang Li Yao.

古文：张后以故数欲危太子，太子常以恭逊取容。
现代文：张皇后多次借故想要动摇太子李豫的地位，李豫总是恭恭敬敬地讨好张皇后。
English: Empress Zhang repeatedly used pretexts to try to shake the position of Prince Li Yu, but Li Yu always respectfully courted Empress Zhang.

古文：会佋薨，侗尚幼，太子位遂定。
现代文：这时兴王李去世，定王李侗年纪还幼小，太子李豫的地位才得以确定。
English: At this time, Xing Wang Li died, Ding Wang Li Yao was still young, and the status of Prince Li Yu was determined.

古文：乙酉，凤翔节度使崔光远破党项于普润。
现代文：乙酉，凤翔节度使崔光远于普润县打败了党项军队。
English: Acetylene, Fengxiang Festival made Cui Guang defeat the party army far away from Purun County.

古文：平卢兵马使田神功奏破史思明之兵于郑州。
现代文：平卢兵马使田神功上奏说在郑州打败了史思明的军队。
English: The Pinglu soldiers and horses defeated Shi Siming's army in Zhengzhou.

古文：上皇爱兴庆宫，自蜀归，即居之。
现代文：玄宗喜欢兴庆宫，所以从蜀中返回长安后，就一直居住在兴庆宫中。
English: Xuanzong liked Xingqing Palace, so after returning to Chang'an from Shuzhong, he has been living in Xingqing Palace.

古文：上时自夹城往起居，上皇亦间至大明宫。
现代文：肃宗经常从夹城中去问候请安，玄宗有时也到大明宫中来看望肃宗。
English: Su Zong often went from the city to say hello, and Xuanzong sometimes came to the Daming Palace to visit Su Zong.

古文：左龙武大将军陈玄礼、内侍监高力士久侍卫上皇；上又命玉真公主、如仙媛、内侍王承恩、魏悦及梨园弟子常娱侍左右。
现代文：左龙武大将军陈玄礼与内侍监高力士长期侍奉保卫玄宗。肃宗又命令玉真公主、如仙媛、内侍王承恩、魏悦以及梨园弟子等经常在玄宗左右，以使他欢娱。
English: General Zalongwu Chen Xuanli and the chamberlain Gao Lixiong served to protect Xuanzong for a long time. Su Zong also ordered Princess Yujin, such as Xianyuan, the chamberlain Wang Cheng'en, Wei Yue and the disciples of Liyuan to always be around Xuanzong to entertain him.

古文：上皇多御长庆楼，父老过者往往瞻拜，呼万岁，上皇常于楼下置酒食赐之；又尝召将军郭英乂等上楼赐宴。
现代文：玄宗经常登临长庆楼，经过的父老百姓看见后，总是下拜，并高呼万岁，玄宗就在楼下设置酒宴赏赐他们。玄宗又曾经把将军郭英等召上楼款待他们。
English: Xuanzong often visited Changqing Building. When the common people saw him, they always bowed down and shouted "long live!" Xuanzong would reward them with a wine banquet downstairs. Xuanzong also once invited General Guo Ying and others upstairs to entertain them.

古文：有剑南奏事官过楼下拜舞，上皇命玉真公主、如仙媛为之作主人。
现代文：有一次，剑南道来京师奏事的官吏经过，在楼下向玄宗拜舞，玄宗就命令玉真公主与如仙媛设宴招待。
English: On one occasion, an official from South Jian Province, who had come to Beijing to report on the situation, passed by and bowed to Xuanzong downstairs. Xuanzong then ordered Princess Yujin to host a banquet for her and Ruxianyuan.

古文：李辅国素微贱，虽暴贵用事，上皇左右皆轻之。
现代文：宦官李辅国出身贫贱，后来虽然飞黄腾达，在朝中巩专权用事，但玄宗左右的人都瞧不起他。
English: The eunuch, Li Yu, was born in a poor country. Although he later rose to prominence and wielded absolute power in the middle of the dynasty, people around Xuanzong despised him.

古文：辅国意恨，且欲立奇功以固其宠，乃言于上曰： 上皇居兴庆宫，日与外人交通，陈玄礼、高力士谋不利于陛下。
现代文：李辅国心中怀恨，并且想建立奇功借以贡固自己的地位，就对肃宗说： 上皇居住在兴庆宫中，每天都与外面的人交结，特别是陈玄礼与高力士，在谋划做不利于陛下的事。
English: Li Fuguo harbored a grudge in his heart and wanted to establish a status of being honored for his miraculous feats, so he said to Su Zong: "The retired emperor lives in the Xingqing Palace, and every day he is in contact with people from outside, especially Chen Xuanli and Gao Lixi, and they are plotting to do things that are not beneficial to His Majesty.

古文：今六军将士尽灵武勋臣，皆反仄不安，臣晓谕不能解，不敢不以闻。 
现代文：现在禁军的六军将士都是在灵武拥立陛下即位的元勋功臣，他们都议论纷纷，心中不安，我虽然多方给他们解释，但他们不听，所以不敢不向陛下报告。 
English: Now the soldiers of the Six Armies of the Forbidden Army are all the honored heroes and heroines who supported His Majesty's enthronement. They all talked about it and were uneasy. Although I tried to explain it to them, they didn't listen, so they didn't dare not to report it to His Majesty.

古文：上泣曰： 圣皇慈仁，岂容有此！ 
现代文：肃宗听后痛哭流涕地说： 父皇仁慈，怎么会有那种事呢！ 
English: After listening, Su Zong cried bitterly and said, "Father Emperor, how could such a thing happen!

古文：对曰： 上皇固无此意，其如群小何！
现代文：李辅国又说： 上皇固然不会做那种事，但在他周围的那些小人就难说了！
English: "Of course, the last emperor would never do such a thing, but those villains around him, it's hard to say!"

古文：陛下为天下主，当为社稷大计，消乱于未萌，岂得徇匹夫之孝！
现代文：陛下是天下的君主，应该为国家的前途着想，消除内乱于萌芽之时，怎么能够遵从凡夫之孝而误了国家的大事呢！
English: Your Majesty is the monarch of the world, and should think about the future of the country and eliminate civil unrest at the time of germination. How can you follow the filial piety of ordinary people and miss the important things of the country!

古文：且兴庆宫与闾阎相参，垣墉浅露，非至尊所宜居。
现代文：再说兴庆宫与坊市居民相混杂，宫墙低矮，不是上皇所应该居住的地方。
English: Moreover, the Xingqing Palace is mixed with the residents of Fang City, and the palace walls are low. It is not a place where the emperor should live.

古文：大内深严，奉迎居之，与彼何殊，又得杜绝小人荧惑圣听。
现代文：皇宫内戒备森严，如果把上皇迎进来居住，与兴庆宫没有什么不同，而且还能够杜绝那些小人蛊惑上皇。
English: The imperial palace is heavily guarded. If the emperor were to be welcomed to live there, it would be no different from the Xingqing Palace, and it would also be able to prevent those villains from deceiving the emperor.

古文：如此，上皇享万岁之安，陛下有三朝之乐，庸何伤乎！ 上不听。
现代文：这样，对于上皇来说可以享受终身之安，对于陛下来说可以一日三次去请安问好，有什么不好呢！ 
English: In this way, for the retired emperor, he can enjoy lifelong peace, and for his majesty, he can go three times a day to ask for peace and greetings. What's wrong with that?

古文：兴庆宫先有马三百匹，辅国矫敕取之，才留十匹。
现代文：肃宗不答应。兴庆宫原先有马三百匹，李辅国就假称有诏书命令取走了这些马，仅留下十匹。
English: Su Zong did not agree. Xingqing Palace originally had three hundred horses, but Li Yuxuo took away these horses under the pretense of an imperial edict, leaving only ten.

古文：上皇谓高力士曰： 吾儿为辅国所惑，不得终孝矣。 
现代文：玄宗对高力士说： 我的儿子听信了李辅国的谗言，不能够对我始终尽孝了。 
English: Xuanzong said to Gao Lixi: My son has believed Li Yuxu's words and can no longer be a filial son to me.

古文：辅国又令六军将士，号哭叩头，请迎上皇居西内。
现代文：李辅国又命令禁军六军将士在肃宗面前号哭叩头，请求将玄宗移居到太极宫内。
English: Li Yu-kuo also ordered the soldiers of the Six Armies of the Forbidden Army to prostrate themselves in front of Su Zong and request that Xuanzong be moved to the Taiji Palace.

古文：上泣不应。
现代文：肃宗哭泣不应。
English: You shouldn't cry.

古文：辅国惧。
现代文：李辅国感到惧怕。
English: Li Yuxuo was afraid.

古文：会上不豫，秋，七月，丁未，辅国矫称上语，迎上皇游西内，至睿武门，辅国将射生五百骑，露刃遮道奏曰： 皇帝以兴庆宫湫隘，迎上皇迁居大内。 
现代文：这时逢肃宗身体有病，秋季，七月丁未，李辅国伪称肃宗有话，迎接玄宗到太极宫游玩，等玄宗到了睿武门，李辅国就率领殿前射生手骑兵五百，手持出鞘的刀拦住道路上奏说： 皇上说兴庆宫低卑狭小，让我们来迎接上皇迁居到皇宫内。 
English: At this time, Su Zong was ill. In the autumn, in July, Ding Wei, Li Shuo Guo falsely claimed that Su Zong had something to say, and welcomed Xuanzong to visit the Taiji Palace. When Xuanzong arrived at the Ruiwu Gate, Li Shuo Guo led five hundred horsemen in front of the palace, holding a sheathed sword to block the road and said: The emperor said that the Xingqing Palace is low and narrow, let's welcome the emperor to move into the palace.

古文：上皇惊，几坠。
现代文：玄宗听后十分惊恐，差一点坠下马背。
English: After hearing this, Xuanzong was very frightened and almost fell off his horse.

古文：高力士曰： 李辅国何得无礼！ 
现代文：这时高力士说： 李辅国怎么能如此无礼呢！ 
English: At this time, Gao Lixi said, "How can Li Yuxuo be so rude!"

古文：叱令下马。
现代文：并且责骂令他下马。
English: and scolded him to get off his horse.

古文：辅国不得已而下。
现代文：李辅国不得已，只好下马。
English: As a last resort, Li Fuguo had no choice but to dismount.

古文：力士因宣上皇诰曰： 诸将士各好在！ 
现代文：然后高力士宣读玄宗的诰命说： 诸位将士不要无礼！ 
English: Then Koryoshi read out Hyunjong's death warrant and said, "Soldiers, don't be rude!

古文：将士皆纳刃，再拜，呼万岁。
现代文：于是这些将士都收起刀枪，拜了两拜，高呼万岁。
English: So all these soldiers put away their swords and guns, bowed twice, and shouted "long live."

古文：力士又叱辅国与己共执上皇马鞚，侍卫如西内，居甘露殿。
现代文：高力士又斥责李辅国，让他与自己一起拉着玄宗的马缰绳，护卫到了太极宫，居住在甘露殿。
English: Gao Lixi also reprimanded Li Yuxuo, and asked him to pull the reins of Xuanzong's horse with him, escort him to the Taiji Palace, and live in the Nectar Hall.

古文：辅国帅众而退。
现代文：李辅国这才领着将士退走。
English: It was only then that Li Fuguo led his soldiers to retreat.

古文：所留侍卫兵，才尪老数人。陈玄礼、高力士及旧宫人皆不能留左右。
现代文：留下的侍卫兵只有老弱病残数十人，陈玄礼、高力士以及过去的宫人都不能够留在玄宗身边。
English: Only dozens of old, weak and sick guards remained. Chen Xuanli, Gao Lixi and the former palace guards could not stay with Xuanzong.

古文：上皇曰： 兴庆宫，吾之王地，吾数以让皇帝，皇帝不受。
现代文：玄宗说： 兴庆宫本是我封王时居住地，我曾经多次要求让给皇帝，但皇帝不接受。
English: Xuanzong said, "The Xingqing Palace was originally my residence when I was crowned king. I asked the emperor to give it to me many times, but the emperor did not accept it.

古文：今日之徙，亦吾志也。 
现代文：现在迁出去也是我的心愿。 
English: Moving out now is also my heart's desire.

古文：是日，辅国与六军大将素服见上，请罪。
现代文：当天，李辅国即与六军将领身着白衣服去见肃宗请罪。
English: On the same day, Li Yuxuo and the general of the Sixth Army, dressed in white, went to see Suizong to plead guilty.

古文：上又迫于诸将，乃劳之曰： 南宫、西内，亦复何殊！
现代文：肃宗因为迫于诸位将领的压力，就慰劳说： 上皇居住在兴庆宫或太极宫，又有什么区别呢！
English: Su Zong, under pressure from the generals, consoled himself by saying: What difference does it make whether the emperor lives in the Xingqing Palace or the Taiji Palace?

古文：卿等恐小人荧惑，防微杜渐，以安社稷，何所惧也！ 
现代文：你们恐怕那些小人蛊惑人心，防微杜渐，是为了安定国家，又有什么可害怕的呢！ 
English: I'm afraid you have those villains to demagogue the people, to prevent any backsliding, to stabilize the country, and what is there to be afraid of!

古文：刑部尚书颜真卿首帅百寮上表，请问上皇起居。辅国恶之，奏贬蓬州长史。
现代文：刑部尚书颜真卿首先率领百官上表书，请问玄宗的起居饮食，遭到李辅国的忌恨，于是就上奏把颜真卿贬为蓬州长史。
English: Yan Zhenqing, the head of the criminal investigation department, first led hundreds of officials to write a report, asking about Xuanzong's living and eating habits, which was hated by Li Yuxuo. Therefore, Yan Zhenqing was downgraded to the governor of Penghu.

古文：癸丑，敕天下重稜钱皆当三十，如畿内。
现代文：癸丑，肃宗下敕书命令天下的重轮钱，如京畿道一样，都以一钱当三十钱。
English: At the same time, Su Zong issued an imperial edict ordering the world's heavy money, such as that of Gyeonggi Province, to be converted from one to thirty.

古文：丙辰，高力士流巫州，王承恩流播州，魏悦流溱州，陈玄礼勒致仕；置如仙媛于归州，玉真公主出居玉真观。
现代文：丙辰，将高力士流放到巫州，王承恩流放到播州，魏悦流放到溱州，陈玄礼被勒令退官。又把如仙媛安置到归州，玉真公主出宫居住在玉真观内。
English: Bin Chen exiled Gao Lixi to Wuzhou, Wang Chengren exiled to Banzhou, Wei Yue exiled to Zhangzhou, Chen Xuanli was ordered to retire. He also resettled Ruxianyuan to Guizhou, and Princess Yucheng left the palace to live in Yucheng.

古文：上更选后宫百馀人，置西内，备洒扫。
现代文：肃宗另挑选了后宫中的一百余人，安置在太极宫内，打扫庭院。
English: Su Zong also selected more than a hundred people from the harem, placed them in the Taiji Palace, and cleaned the courtyard.

古文：令万安、咸宜二公主视服膳；四方所献珍异，先荐上皇。
现代文：并命令万安公主与咸宜公主侍候玄宗的服饰饮食。对于各国各地所进献的美味佳肴，肃宗都先让送给玄宗品尝。
English: He also ordered Princess Wan'an and Princess Hamgyi to wait on Emperor Xuanzong while he dressed and ate. Emperor Xuanzong gave Emperor Xuanzong the first opportunity to taste the delicious dishes that were offered from all over the world.

古文：然上皇日以不怿，因不茹荤，辟谷，浸以成疾。
现代文：但是玄宗的心情越来越不好，又因为不吃荤肉，修炼辟谷方术，所以逐渐患了疾病。
English: However, Xuanzong's mood was getting worse and worse, and because he did not eat pork and practiced Qigong, he gradually fell ill.

古文：上初犹往问安，既而上亦有疾，但遣人起居。
现代文：肃宗开始时还去问候请安，不久肃宗也患病，只派人去问安。
English: At the beginning of Su Zong, he also went to say hello. Soon, Su Zong also fell ill and only sent someone to say hello.

古文：其后上稍悔寤，恶辅国，欲诛之，畏其握兵，竟犹豫不能决。
现代文：后来肃宗逐渐有所悔悟，怨恨李辅国，想要杀掉他，但又畏惧他手握兵权，犹豫不决。
English: Later, Su Zong gradually repented, resented Li Yuxuan, wanted to kill him, but was afraid of him holding military power, and hesitated.

古文：初，哥舒翰破吐蕃于临洮西关磨环川，于其地置神策军。
现代文：起初，哥舒翰于临洮西关磨环川打败了吐蕃，在那里设置了神策军。
English: At first, Goshukhan defeated Tubo at Guanma Huanchuan, west of Linyi, and set up the Shinsaka army there.

古文：及安禄山反，军使成如璆遣其将卫伯玉将千人赴难。
现代文：及至安禄山反叛，神策军使成如派部将卫伯玉率兵一千人入援，讨伐叛军。
English: As far as the Anlu Mountain rebellion, Shinsaku's army ordered Chengru to dispatch General Wei Bo-yu and a thousand soldiers to fight against the rebels.

古文：既而军地沦入吐蕃，伯玉留屯于陕，累官至右羽林大将军。
现代文：不久，神策军所占据的地区落入吐蕃之手，卫伯玉就率神策军驻扎在陕州，后官至右羽林大将军。
English: Soon after, the region occupied by the Shenzhao army fell into the hands of the Tuyi. Wei Bo-yu led the Shenzhao army and stationed it in Shaanxi. He was later promoted to the rank of General Uebayashi.

古文：八月，庚午，以伯玉为神策军节度使。
现代文：八月庚午，任命卫伯玉为神策军节度使。
English: In the late afternoon of August, Wei Bo-yu was appointed as the envoy of the Divine Policy Army.

古文：丁亥，赠谥兴王佋曰恭懿太子。
现代文：丁亥，肃宗追赠兴王李谥号为恭懿太子。
English: Dinghai, Su Zong posthumously presented Xing Wang with the title of Prince Gongjun.

古文：九月，甲午，置南都于荆州，以荆州为江陵府，仍置永平军团练兵三千人，以扼吴、蜀之冲，从节度使吕諲之请也。
现代文：九月甲午，于荆州设置南都，以荆州为江陵府，仍然设置永平军，有团练兵三千人，用以扼守吴、蜀两地的咽喉，这是根据节度使吕的请求而设置的。
English: On the afternoon of September 1st, the southern capital was set up in Jingzhou, with Jingzhou as the Jiangling Prefecture. The Yongping Army was still set up, with a regiment of three thousand soldiers to guard the throat of Wu and Shu, which was set up according to the request of Lv.

古文：或上言： 天下未平，不宜置郭子仪于散地。 
现代文：有人上言说： 天下还没有平定，不应该削夺郭子仪的实权。 
English: Some people said: The world has not yet been pacified, we should not take away Guo Ziyi's real power.

古文：乙未，命子仪出镇邠州；党项遁去。
现代文：乙未，肃宗即命郭子仪出镇州，党项军队闻风而退。
English: However, Su Zong immediately ordered Guo Ziyi to leave Zhenzhou, and the party troops retreated.

古文：戊申，制： 子仪统诸道兵自朔方直取范阳，还定河北，发射生英武等禁军及朔方、鄜坊、邠宁、泾原诸道蕃、汉兵共七万人，皆受子仪节度。 
现代文：戊申，肃宗下制书说： 命令郭子仪统帅各路兵马从朔方直捣范阳，然后回师平定河北地区，并征发殿前射生手英武军等禁军以及朔方、坊、宁、泾原等各路蕃人、汉人兵共七万人，都受郭子仪节制。 
English: Wushin, Su Zong's subordinate, wrote: Order Guo Ziyi, the commander of all the troops and horses, to directly attack Fanyang from the Shuo side, and then return to the division to pacify the Hebei region, and conscript the forbidden troops such as the shooters in front of the palace and the forbidden troops such as the Shuo side, Fang, Ning, and Suyuan, and a total of 70,000 soldiers and Han soldiers, all subject to Guo Ziyi's restraint.

古文：制下旬日，复为鱼朝恩所沮，事竟不行。
现代文：制书颁下后十天，因为受到宦官鱼朝恩的阻挠，此事竟作罢。
English: Ten days after the award for the production of the book, because of the obstruction of the eunuch fish Chaon, the matter was actually abandoned.

古文：冬，十月，丙子，置青、沂等五州节度使。
现代文：冬季，十月丙子，唐朝设置青州、沂州等五州节度使。
English: In winter, in October, the Tang Dynasty set up Qingzhou, Zhangzhou and other five-state festival envoys.

古文：十一月，壬辰，泾州破党项。
现代文：十一月壬辰，泾州兵打败党项军队。
English: In November of the same year, the Zhangzhou soldiers defeated the party's army.

古文：御史中丞李铣、宋州刺史刘殿皆领淮西节度副使。
现代文：御史中丞李铣与宋州刺史刘展都兼任淮西节度副使。
English: Grand Historian Li Jun and Song State Historian Liu Zhen both concurrently served as deputy envoys of Huaixi Festival.

古文：铣贪暴不法，展刚强自用，故为其上者多恶之；节度使王仲升先奏铣罪而诛之。
现代文：李铣贪婪残暴，不守法纪，刘展为人刚愎自用，所以做他们上司的人多厌恶他们。淮西节度使王仲升先上奏说李铣有罪，借机杀了他。
English: Li Yao was greedy and cruel, and did not abide by the law. Liu Zhan was a man of violence and self-serving, so the people who were their superiors hated them. Huaxi Festival made Wang Zhongsheng first report that Li Yao was guilty, and took the opportunity to kill him.

古文：时有谣言曰： 手执金刀起东方。 
现代文：当时有谣言说： 手执金刀起东方。 
English: At that time, there was a rumor that said: "The hand holding a golden sword leads to the East."

古文：仲升使监军使、内左常侍邢延恩入奏： 展倔强不受命，姓名应谣谶，请除之。 
现代文：于是王仲升就派监军使、内左常侍邢延恩入朝上奏说： 刘展倔强不服从命令，而且他的姓名与谣言相符合，请求除掉他，以防后患。 
English: As a result, Wang Zhongsheng sent the inspector of the military envoy and the inner left regular attendant Yan Yan into the imperial court to report: Liu Zhan stubbornly disobeyed orders, and his name was consistent with the rumors, and requested to get rid of him to prevent future troubles.

古文：延恩因说上曰： 展与李铣一体之人，今铣诛，展不自安，苟不去之，恐其为乱。
现代文：邢延恩乘机对肃宗献计说： 刘展是李铣的同党，现在李铣被杀，刘展心中不安，如果不设法除掉他，恐怕将会作乱。
English: Zou Yan'en took the opportunity to say to Su Zong Jianke: Liu Zhan is a party comrade of Li Lan. Now that Li Lan has been killed, Liu Zhan is uneasy. If you don't try to get rid of him, I'm afraid there will be a riot.

古文：然展方握强兵，宜以计去之。请除展江淮都统，代李峘，俟其释兵赴镇，中道执之，此一夫力耳。 
现代文：但是刘展正手握重兵，应该设计除去他，不如任命刘展为江淮都统，以代替李，等到他交出兵权赴任时，在半道上把他抓住，只需要派一个人杀他就行了。 
English: But Liu Zhan was holding a heavy army in his hand. They should have planned to remove him. It would have been better to appoint Liu Zhan as Jianghuai Du Tong to replace Li. When he handed over the military power to take office, they should have caught him halfway and only needed to send one person to kill him.

古文：上从之，以展为都统淮南东、江南西、浙西三道节度使；密敕旧都统李峘及淮南东道节度使邓景山图之。
现代文：肃宗同意，于是就任命刘展为都统淮南东、江南西、浙江西三道节度使，并下密敕给旧都统李与淮南东道节度使邓景山，让他们设法除掉刘展。
English: Su Zong agreed, so he appointed Liu Zhan as the festival envoy of the three provinces of Huai South East, Jiangnan West and Zhejiang West, and sent a secret message to the old Li of Huai South East and Deng Jingshan, the host festival envoy of Huai South, to let them try to get rid of Liu Zhan.

古文：延恩以制书授展，展疑之，曰： 展自陈留参军，数年至刺史，可谓暴贵矣。
现代文：邢延恩把任命的制书授给刘展时，刘展心中起疑，说： 我刘展原是陈留郡的一名参军，数年间官至刺史，可以算得上是飞黄腾达。
English: When Zou Yan'en gave Liu Zhan the appointment of book production to Liu Zhan, Liu Zhan had doubts in his heart and said: I Liu Zhan was originally a member of the army in Chenlu County, and for several years he was a high-ranking official. He can be regarded as a high-flyer.

古文：江、淮租赋所出，今之重任，展无勋劳，又非亲贤，一旦恩命宠擢如此，得非有谗人间之乎？ 
现代文：江、淮地区是国家租赋的主要产地，江淮都统是一个十分重要的职务，我刘展既没有显赫的功勋，又不是皇上的亲信，而一下子受到如此的重用和信任，是不是有小人进谗言想要陷害我呢？ 
English: The Jiangsu and Huai'an regions are the main sources of state rents, and the Jiangsu and Huai'an capital is a very important position. I, Liu Zhan, have neither outstanding merits nor am I a close confidant of the emperor, but I have been so reused and trusted all of a sudden. Is there a villain trying to frame me?

古文：因泣下。
现代文：并因此痛哭流涕。
English: And cry.

古文：延恩惧，曰： 公素有才望，主上以江、淮为忧，故不次用公。公反以为疑，何哉？ 
现代文：邢延恩害怕地说： 你本来就有能力，皇上认为江、淮地区地位重要，所以越级重用提拔你，而你反而疑心，这是为什么呢？ 
English: Zou Yan'en said fearfully, "You already have the ability. The emperor thinks that the status of the Jiangsu and Huai'an regions is important, so he promoted you to a higher rank, but you are suspicious. Why is that?

古文：展曰： 事苟不欺，印节可先得乎？ 延恩曰： 可。 
现代文：刘展说： 如果不是在欺骗我，是否可以把江淮都统的印玺和旌节先给我？ 邢延恩说： 可以。 
English: Liu Zhen said: If you are not deceiving me, can you give me the stamps and stamps of the Jianghuai and Du Du first? Zou Yan'en said: Yes.

古文：乃驰诣广陵，与峘谋，解峘印节以授展。
现代文：于是就驰马至广陵，与李密谋，把李的江淮都统印玺与旌节授给刘展。
English: So he galloped to Guangling, conspired with Li, and bestowed Li's Jianghuai Duoduo Yingzhuo and Zongjie to Liu Zhan.

古文：展得印节，乃上表谢恩，牒追江、淮亲旧，置之心膂，三道宫属遣使迎贺，申图籍，相望于道，展悉举宋州兵七千趣广陵。
现代文：刘展得到印玺与旌节后，就上表谢恩，然后下文书召来在江淮地区的亲信，委以重任，江淮地区三道的官吏都派使者来迎接恭贺，并申报地图和户籍，一路不绝，刘展率领宋州所有的七千兵往广陵去赴任。
English: After Liu Zhen received the imperial seal and the Dragon Boat Festival, he wrote a letter of thanks, and then the next letter summoned his close friends in the Jianghuai region and entrusted them with important tasks. The officials of the three provinces in the Jianghuai region sent envoys to welcome the congratulations, and declared the map and household registration. All the way, Liu Zhen led all the seven thousand soldiers in Songzhou to Guangling to take office.

古文：延恩知展已得其情，还奔广陵，与李峘、邓景山发兵拒之，移檄州县，言展反。
现代文：邢延恩得知刘展已经知道了他的阴谋，于是奔回广陵，与李、邓景山一起发兵阻挡刘展，并下檄书给各州县，说刘展谋反。
English: Zou Yan'en learned that Liu Zhan already knew about his plot, so he rushed back to Guangling, and together with Li and Deng Jingshan, he sent troops to block Liu Zhan, and sent a letter to all prefectures and counties, saying that Liu Zhan was plotting rebellion.

古文：展亦移檄言峘反，州县莫知所从。
现代文：而刘展也发布檄书说李谋反，各州县都不知道谁是谁非。
English: And Liu Zhen also issued a signed letter saying that Li Mokang was involved, and all the states and counties did not know who was to blame.

古文：峘引兵渡江，与副使润州刺史韦儇、浙西节度使侯令仪屯京口，邓景山将万人屯徐城。
现代文：李率兵渡过长江，与节度副使润州刺史韦儇、浙西节度使侯令仪屯兵京口，淮南东道节度使邓景山率兵一万人驻扎在徐城县。
English: Li led the troops across the Yangtze River, and together with the deputy governor of Renzhou, Zhang Shweiqian, the governor of West Zhejiang, the governor of Huainan, Deng Jingshan, and ten thousand soldiers stationed in Xucheng County.

古文：展素有威名，御军严整，江、淮人望风畏之。
现代文：刘展善于治军，素负盛名，江、淮地区的州县闻风丧胆。
English: Liu Zhan is good at governing the army, and has a reputation for success. The states and counties in the Jiangsu and Huai'an regions are known to be cowardly.

古文：展倍道先期至，使人问景山曰： 吾奉诏书赴镇，此何兵也？ 
现代文：刘展率兵昼夜兼程。提前到达，派人质问邓景山说： 我奉皇上的任命诏书而赴镇就任，你率兵阻拦是什么意思？
English: Liu Zhen led the soldiers on a round-the-clock journey. Arriving ahead of schedule, he sent someone to question Deng Jingshan and said: I went to the town to take office in accordance with the emperor's appointment edict, what do you mean by leading the troops to obstruct?

古文：景山不应。
现代文：邓景山不回答。
English: Deng Jingshan did not answer.

古文：展使人呼于阵前曰： 汝曹皆吾民也，勿干吾旗鼓。 
现代文：刘展就派人在邓景山的部队阵前高呼说： 你们都是我刘展的部下的百姓民众，请不要阻拦我的道路。 
English: Liu Zhen sent people to stand in front of Deng Jingshan's troops and shouted: "You are all the people of my subordinate Liu Zhen, please do not block my way.

古文：使其将孙待封、张法雷击之，景山众溃，与延恩奔寿州。
现代文：然后派部将孙待封和张法雷率兵攻击，邓景山溃败，与邢延恩逃奔寿州。
English: Then, he sent Sun Chihong and Zhang Falei to attack Deng Jingshan. Deng Jingshan was defeated and fled to Shoushou with Zou Yan'en.

古文：展引兵入广陵，遣其将屈突孝标将兵三千徇濠、楚，王恒将兵四千略淮西。
现代文：于是刘展率兵进入广陵，又派他的部将屈突孝标率兵三千攻掠濠州、楚州，王率兵四千攻略淮西。
English: As a result, Liu Zhan led his troops into Guangling, and sent his general, Qu Tuo Xiaobiao, to lead 3,000 soldiers to attack and plunder Zhangzhou and Chuzhou, while Wang led 4,000 soldiers to attack Huaxi.

古文：李峘辟北固为兵场，插木以塞江口。
现代文：李在京口开辟北固山为战场，用大木塞住长江口。
English: Li opened up the Beigu Mountain as a battlefield in Jingkou and blocked the mouth of the Yangtze River with large trees.

古文：展军于白沙，设疑兵于瓜洲，多张火、鼓，若将趣北固者，如是累日。
现代文：刘展驻扎在白沙，却在瓜州设疑兵，点燃许多火炬，擂打战鼓，好像要从这里进攻北固山，一连数天都是如此。
English: Liu Zhen was stationed in Baisha, but in Guazhou he set up suspicious soldiers, lit many torches, and beat war drums, as if he wanted to attack Beigushan from here. This was the case for several days in a row.

古文：峘悉锐兵守京口以待之。
现代文：李率领所有的精锐部队守卫京口等待刘展的进攻。
English: Li led all the elite troops to guard the entrance to Beijing, waiting for Liu Zhen to attack.

古文：展乃自上流济，袭下蜀。
现代文：但刘展却从上游渡过长江，袭击了下蜀。
English: However, Liu Zhan crossed the Yangtze River from upstream and attacked Lower Shu.

古文：峘军闻之，自溃，峘奔宣城。
现代文：李的军队得知了这一消息后，不战自溃，李本人逃向宣城。
English: After Li's army learned of this news, it collapsed without a fight, and Li himself fled to Xuancheng.

古文：甲午，展陷润州。
现代文：甲午，刘展攻陷润州。
English: In the afternoon of the 1st, Liu Zhan invaded Renzhou.

古文：升州军士万五千人谋应展，攻金陵城，不克而遁。
现代文：升州城中的士卒一万五千人谋划接应刘展，就攻打金陵城，没有攻克而逃散。
English: Fifteen thousand soldiers in the city of Shengzhou, plotting to take on Liu Zhan, attacked Jinling City, but fled without conquering it.

古文：侯令仪惧，以后事授兵马使姜昌群，弃城走。
现代文：浙西节度使侯令仪惧怕，就把后事托付给兵马使姜昌群，自己弃城逃走。
English: The Western Zhejiang Festival made Hou Lingyi afraid, so he entrusted the aftermath to the soldiers and horses to make Jiang Changqun abandon the city and flee.

古文：昌群遣其将宗犀诣展降。
现代文：而姜昌群却派自己的部将宗犀去投降了刘展。
English: On the other hand, Jiang Changqun sent his subordinate general Zong Xi to surrender to Liu Zhan.

古文：丙申，展陷升州，以宗犀为润州司马、丹杨军使；使昌群领升州，以从子伯瑛佐之。
现代文：丙申，刘展攻陷升州，任命宗犀为润州司马、丹杨军使，姜昌群暂时管理升州政事，并让自己的侄子刘伯瑛辅佐他。
English: Bishen, Liu Zhen attacked and occupied Shengzhou, and appointed Zong Sa as the Sima of Rongzhou, Danyang as the military envoy, Jiang Changqun temporarily managed the political affairs of Shengzhou, and let his nephew Liu Boying assist him.

古文：李光弼攻怀州，百馀日，乃拔之，生擒安太清。
现代文：李光弼率兵攻打怀州，一百多天才攻克，并活捉了安太清。
English: Li Guangyao led an army to attack Waizhou, which took more than a hundred days to conquer, and captured An Taiqing alive.

古文：史思明遣其将田承嗣将兵五千徇淮西，王同芝将兵三千人徇陈，许敬江将二千人徇兗郓，恭薛鄂将五千人徇曹州。
现代文：史思明派遣自己的部将田承嗣率兵五千攻略淮西地区，王同芝率兵三千攻略陈州，许敬江率兵二千攻略兖州、郓州，薛鄂率兵五千攻略曹州。
English: Shi Siming dispatched his subordinate general Tian Chengzhi with 5,000 soldiers to attack Huaxi region, Wang Tongzhi with 3,000 soldiers to attack Chenzhou, Xu Jingjiang with 2,000 soldiers to attack Ganzhou and Ganzhou, and Xue Er with 5,000 soldiers to attack Caozhou.

古文：十二月，丙子，党项寇美原、华原、同官，大掠而去。
现代文：十二月丙子，党项军队侵扰美原县与同官县，大肆掠夺而去。
English: On December 3rd, the party's army invaded Mihara County and Tongan County and plundered them.

古文：贼帅郭恽等引诸羌、胡败秦陇防御使韦伦，杀监军使。
现代文：强盗首领郭等人引导羌族各部落以及胡人的军队打败了秦陇防御使韦伦，杀死了朝廷派去的监军使。
English: The bandit leader Guo and others led the various tribes of the Yao people and the Hu people's army to defeat the Qin's defense envoy Weiren and kill the monitoring envoy sent by the imperial court.

古文：兗郓节度使能元皓击史思明兵，破之。
现代文：兖郓节度使能元皓率兵攻击并打败了史思明的军队。
English: Due to his self-discipline, Yuan Zang led his troops to attack and defeat Shi Siming's army.

古文：峘之去润州也，副使李藏用谓峘曰： 处人尊位，食人重禄，临难而逃之，非忠也；以数十州之兵食，三江、五湖之险固，不发一矢而弃之，非勇也。失忠与勇，何以事尹！
现代文：李弃润州而逃时，副使李藏用对李说： 你占据着重要的职位，享受着朝廷的俸禄，却临难而逃，这是不忠诚。你手握数十州的重兵，粮饷充足，又守着襟带三江、五湖的战略要地，面对反叛的敌人却不发一箭而弃城逃跑，是怯懦胆小的表现，丧失了忠心勇敢，还怎么做君主的臣子呢！
English: When Li abandoned Runzhou and fled, the vice-envoy Li Zangyong said to Li: You occupy an important position, enjoy the salary of the imperial court, but flee in the face of difficulties, this is disloyalty. You have dozens of states' heavy soldiers, sufficient grain, and guard the strategic areas of the Three Rivers and Five Lakes, but in the face of the rebel enemy, you abandon the city and flee without firing a single arrow. It is a manifestation of cowardice and timidity, and you have lost your loyalty and courage. How can you still be the monarch's vassal?

古文：藏用请收馀兵，竭力以拒之。 
现代文：我请求收集残兵，尽力抗拒敌人。 
English: I ask you to gather the remnants and resist the enemy to the best of your ability.

古文：峘乃悉以后事授藏用。
现代文：于是李就把后事全都委托给李藏用。
English: So Li entrusted all the aftercare to Li Zang.

古文：藏用收散卒，得七百人，东至苏州募壮士，得二千人，立栅以拒刘展。
现代文：李藏用收集散兵，共有七百人，又向东到苏州招募勇士，募得二千人，修治栅准备抵御刘展。
English: Li Zang gathered a total of seven hundred foot soldiers, and went east to Suzhou to recruit warriors, raising two thousand, to repair the fence and prepare to resist Liu Zhen.

古文：展遣其将傅子昂、宗犀攻宣州，宣歙节度使郑炅之弃城走，李峘奔洪州。
现代文：刘展派遣部将傅子昂与宗犀率兵攻打宣州，宣歙节度使郑炅之弃城逃走，李又逃向洪州。
English: Liu Zhen dispatched Fu Zi'ang and Zong Rai to attack Xuan Zhou, Xuan Zi and Zong Rai led the troops to attack Xuan Zhou, Xuan Zi and Zong Rai led the troops to attack Xuan Zhou, Xuan Zi and Zong Rai led the troops to attack Xuan Zhou, Xuan Zi and Zong Rai led the troops to attack Xuan Zhou, Xuan Zi and Zong Rai led the troops to attack Xuan Zhou, Xuan Zi and Zong Rai led the troops to attack Xuan Zhou, Xuan Zi and Zong Rai led the troops

古文：李藏用与展将张景超、孙待封战于郁墅，兵败，奔杭州。
现代文：李藏用与刘展的部将张景超、孙待封交战于郁墅，兵败逃奔杭州。
English: Li Zangyong fought with Liu Zhen's generals Zhang Jingchao and Sun Chifeng in Yu Villa, and fled to Hangzhou in defeat.

古文：景超遂据苏州，待封进陷湖州。
现代文：于是张景超占领了苏州，孙待封进兵攻陷了湖州。
English: As a result, Zhang Jingchao occupied Suzhou, and Sun Jiufeng's troops invaded Huzhou.

古文：展以其将许峄为润州刺史，李可封为常州刺史，杨持璧苏州刺史，待封领湖州事。
现代文：刘展任命他的部将许峄为润州刺史，李可封为常州刺史，杨持璧为苏州刺史，孙待封暂时管理湖州政事。
English: Liu Zhan appointed his subordinate Xu Jun to be the governor of Runzhou, Li Kefeng to be the governor of Changzhou, Yang Jibi to be the governor of Suzhou, and Sun Jiufeng to temporarily manage the affairs of Huzhou.

古文：景超进逼杭州，藏用使其将温晃屯馀杭。
现代文：张景超又率兵逼近杭州，李藏用就派部将温晁率兵屯驻在余杭县。
English: Zhang Jingchao and his soldiers approached Hangzhou, and Li Zangyong sent a detachment to station soldiers led by Wen Qi in Yuhang County.

古文：展以李晃为泗州刺史，宗犀为宣州刺史。
现代文：刘展又任命李晃为泗州刺史，宗犀为宣州刺史。
English: Liu Zhen also appointed Li Qiang as the governor of Zhangzhou and Zong Xi as the governor of Xuanzhou.

古文：傅子昂屯南陵，将下江州，徇江西。
现代文：傅子昂率兵屯驻于南陵县，想要攻掠江州，进占江南西道。
English: Fu Zi'ang and his troops were stationed in Nanling County and wanted to invade and plunder Jiangzhou and occupy the West Jiangnan Road.

古文：于是屈突孝摽陷濠、楚州，王恒陷舒、和、滁、庐等州，所向无不摧靡，聚兵万人，骑三千，横行江、淮间。
现代文：于是刘展的部将屈突孝率兵攻陷了濠州、楚州，王攻陷了舒州、和州、滁州、庐州等州，军队所向披靡，聚兵达一万人，骑兵三千，横行于江、淮地区。
English: As a result, Liu Zhen's general, Qu Tu Xiao, led his troops to invade and conquer Zhangzhou and Chuzhou, and Wang invaded and conquered Shuzhou, Hezhou, Zhangzhou, Zhangzhou and other provinces. The army was invincible, with a total of ten thousand soldiers and three thousand cavalry, and ran rampant in the Jiang and Huai regions.

古文：寿州刺史崔昭发兵拒之，由是恒不得西，止屯庐州。
现代文：由于寿州刺史崔昭发兵抵御，王不能够再向西进攻，只好屯兵于庐州。
English: As Shoushu stabbed Cui Zhao sent troops to resist, Wang could no longer attack to the west, and had no choice but to send troops to Bozhou.

古文：初，上命平庐都知兵马使田神功将所部精兵五千屯任城；邓景山既败，与刑延恩奏乞敕神功救淮南，未报。
现代文：起初，肃宗命令平卢兵马使田神功率领部下的五千精兵屯驻在任城，邓景山被刘展打败后，就与邢延恩上奏请求肃宗下敕书命令田神功率兵救援淮南，平定刘展。
English: At first, Su Zong ordered the Pinglu soldiers and horses to station five thousand elite soldiers under the leadership of Tian Sheng's power troops in Rencheng. After Deng Jingshan was defeated by Liu Zhen, he requested Su Zong to order Tian Sheng's power troops to rescue Huainan and pacify Liu Zhen.

古文：景山遣人趣之，且许以淮南金帛子女为赂，神功及所部皆喜，悉众南下，及彭城，敕神功讨展。
现代文：还没有得到回报，邓景山就派人催促田神功出兵，并许诺战胜后把淮南的财物女人都送给田神功，田神功与部下听后都很高兴，于是就全军南下，等到了彭城，肃宗命令田神功去讨伐刘展的敕书才下达。
English: Not having received a return, Deng Jingshan sent someone to urge Tian Shengong to send troops, and promised to give Tian Shengong the wealth and women of Huainan after the victory. Tian Shengong and his subordinates were very happy to hear this, so the whole army went south, and waited until Pengcheng, Su Zong ordered Tian Shengong to fight Liu Zhan before issuing the imperial edict.

古文：展闻之，始有惧色，自广陵将兵八千拒之，选精兵二千度淮，击神功于都梁山，展败，走至天长，以五百骑据桥拒战，又败，展独与一骑亡渡江。
现代文：刘展得知田神功率平卢兵来讨伐，才开始感到惧怕，于是率兵八千从广陵来迎战，并挑选了二千精兵渡过淮河，在都梁山进击田神功。刘展被打败，逃至天长县，率领骑兵五百占据河桥抵抗，又被打败，仅带领一名骑兵渡江逃跑。
English: Liu Zhen only began to feel fear when he learned that Tian Sheng's powerful Pinglu soldiers were coming to fight, so he led eight thousand soldiers from Guangling to fight, and selected two thousand elite soldiers to cross the Huai River and attack Tian Sheng in Du Liang Mountain. Liu Zhen was defeated, fled to Tianchang County, led five hundred cavalry to occupy the river bridge resistance, and was defeated again, leading only one cavalry to cross the river and escape.

古文：神功入广陵及楚州，大掠，杀商胡以千数，城中地穿掘略遍。
现代文：田神功率兵进入广陵与楚州，放纵士兵大肆掠夺，杀死胡商数以千计，为了寻求财宝，几乎挖遍城中各处。
English: Tian Shen's powerful soldiers entered Guangling and Chuzhou, indulged the soldiers to plunder, killed thousands of Hu merchants, and dug almost everywhere in the city in search of treasure.

古文：是岁，吐蕃陷廓州。
现代文：这一年，吐蕃军队攻陷了廓州。
English: This year, the Tubo Army defeated the Kuoshu.

