古文：△经一
现代文：经一
English: 1st floor

古文：明主之道，如有若之应密子也。
现代文：明君治理国家的原则，就像有若回答密子所说的那样，要有办法。
English: The principle of Ming-Jun's governance of the country, as if there is an answer to what Chikako said, there must be a way.

古文：明主之听言也，美其辩；其观行也，贤其远。
现代文：君主听取言论时，欣赏说话之人的口才；观察行为时，赞赏人远离实际的作风。
English: When the monarch listens to the speech, he appreciates the eloquence of the speaker; when he observes the behavior, he appreciates that the person is far from the actual style.

古文：故群臣士民之道言者迂弘，其行身也离世。
现代文：所以臣子和民众讲起话来，就高深莫测，做起事来就远离实际。
English: Therefore, when the courtiers and the people speak, they are inscrutable, and when they do things, they are far from reality.

古文：其说在田鸠对荆王也。
现代文：这章的解说反映在 说一 中田鸿回答楚王一段。
English: The explanation of this chapter is reflected in the passage of Nakata Hong's answer to Chu Wang.

古文：故墨子为木鸢，讴癸筑武宫。
现代文：所以有墨子用木头做茸巧而无用，讴癸用唱歌鼓舞修筑武宫的故事。
English: Therefore, there is a story of Mozi using wood to make shamrocks, but it was useless, and Zou used singing to inspire the construction of the Imperial Palace.

古文：夫药酒忠言，明君圣主之以独知也。
现代文：忠言就如药酒，只有英明的君主独自知道。
English: Good counsel is as good as medicine, and only a wise prince knows how to take it.

古文：△经二
现代文：经二
English: 2nd floor

古文：人主之听言也，不以功用为的，则说者多 棘刺 、 白马 之说；不以仪的为关，则射者皆如羿也。
现代文：君主听取意见，不把功效作为目的，进说的人就多半说些在棘刺上刻猴子、白马不是马那样的话；不把箭靶作为射击目标，射箭的人就都成为像羿一样的射箭能手了。
English: Monarchs listen to opinions, and if they don't take effectiveness as their goal, the people who say things like "carve a monkey on the thorn" and "a white horse is not a horse" will mostly say something; if they don't take the arrow target as the shooting target, the archer will become an archery expert like a dragonfly.

古文：人主于说也，皆如燕王学道也；而长说者，皆如郑人争年也。
现代文：君主对待进说，都像燕王派人学习不死之道一样被欺骗；而擅长辩说的人，都像郑人争论年龄长短一样没完没了。
English: Those who are good at arguing are as endless as the Zheng people arguing about the length of their lives.

古文：是以言有纤察微难而非务也。故季、惠、宋、墨皆画策也；论有迂深闳大，非用也。故畏震胆车言而拂难坚确，非功也，故务、卞、鲍、介、田仲皆坚瓠也。
现代文：因此，言谈也有细致、明察、微妙、难能但却不是迫切需要的，所以像季良、惠施、末研、墨翟这些人的学说，都像精绘竹简一样，华丽而无用；议论也有深远阔大但却不切实用的，所以像魏牟、长卢子、詹何、陈骈、庄周这些人的学说，都是像乱画鬼怪一样，空洞而失真；行动也有违反常规，一般人难以做到，表现十分坚定固执的，但对于国家并不实用，所以像务光、卞随、鲍焦、介子推、田仲这些人的作为，都和坚硬的实心葫芦一样，厚重而无益。
English: Therefore, words are also meticulous, clear-sighted, subtle, difficult, but not urgently needed, so the doctrines of people like Qiliang, Huishi, Muesen, and Muxuan are like fine-painted bamboo strips, gorgeous and useless; discussions are also far-reaching and broad, but not practical, so the doctrines of people like Weimu, Changluzi, Zhanhe, Chen Xuan, and Zhuang Zhou are like random drawings of ghosts, empty and distorted; actions are also unconventional, difficult for ordinary people to do, very firm and obstinate, but not practical for the country, so the actions of people like Wu Guang, Shuxu,

古文：且虞庆诎匠也而屋坏，范且穷工而弓折。
现代文：再说虞庆虽能把匠人驳得无话可说，匠人照他的话造出屋来最终还得坍塌；范且虽能把匠人说得无言可对，匠人照他的话造出弓来最终还得折断。
English: Furthermore, although Yu Qing could make the craftsman speechless, the craftsman who made the house according to his words would eventually collapse; and although Fan could make the craftsman speechless, the craftsman who made the bow according to his words would eventually break.

古文：是故求其诚者，非归饷也不可。
现代文：因此要想得到真实的东西，不能像小孩做游戏那样把泥巴当饭吃，最终还是不得不回去吃饭的。
English: Therefore, if you want to get the real thing, you can't eat mud as a meal like a child playing games, and eventually you have to go back to eat.

古文：△经三
现代文：经三
English: 3rd floor

古文：挟夫相为则责望，自为则事行。
现代文：怀着互相依赖的心理，就会责备和埋怨；怀着自己依靠自己的心理，事情就能办成。
English: With the mentality of interdependence, they will blame and complain; with the mentality of relying on themselves, things can be done.

古文：故父子或怨谯，取庸作者进美羹。
现代文：所以父子之间有时也会埋怨和责怪，而为了争取雇工多干活却给他们丰美的饭莱。
English: Therefore, there are sometimes complaints and blame between father and son, but in order to get employees to work more, they give them a rich meal.

古文：说在文公之先宣言，与勾践之称如皇也。
现代文：有关的解说在 说三 中文公伐宋先宣布宋君的罪状，越王勾践伐吴之前先宣布吴王筑如皇之台的罪状。
English: The relevant commentary is in the "Three Chinese Public Fires" Song first announced Song Jun's crime, and Yue Wang first announced Wu Wang's crime of building an imperial platform before he attacked Wu.

古文：故桓公藏蔡怒而攻楚，吴起怀瘳实而吮伤。
现代文：所以齐桓公隐藏对蔡国的恼怒，而以攻楚为幌子去灭掉蔡国；吴起怀着使士兵伤愈去拚命作战的念头而为他们吮吸伤口。
English: Therefore, Prince Qi Huan concealed his anger against Cai Guo and used the attack on Chu as a pretext to eliminate Cai Guo; Wu took up the idea of letting the soldiers heal and fight for their lives and sucked their wounds.

古文：且先王之赋颂，钟鼎之铭，皆播吾之迹，华山之博也。
现代文：再说颂扬先王的赋颂，铸刻在钟鼎上的铭文，都和赵武灵王在播吾山上刻的大脚印、秦昭襄王在华山上刻的大棋局一样，是虚假的。
English: Furthermore, the glorification of the ancestor's fu-song and the inscriptions engraved on the bell dials are as false as the great footprints engraved by King Zhao Wuling on Mount Boao and the great chess game engraved by King Qin Zhaoxiang on Mount Hua.

古文：然先王所期者利也，所用者力也。
现代文：然而前代帝王所期求的是利益，需要使用的是气力。
English: However, what previous emperors sought was profit, and what needed to be used was force.

古文：筑社之谚，自辞说也。
现代文：运用修筑社坛的谚语，是晋文公为自己辩解而鼓动他人卖力的办法。
English: Using the proverb of building social circles is a way for Jinwengong to justify himself and encourage others to work hard.

古文：请许学者而行宛曼于先王，或者不宜今乎？
现代文：允许学者瞎说，实行渺茫迂阔的先王之道，恐怕不适用于现在吧？
English: Allowing scholars to talk nonsense, implementing the vague and circuitous way of the past king, I'm afraid it does not apply to now, does it?

古文：如是，不能更也。
现代文：虽然这样，却又不能改变它。
English: Even though it's there, you can't change it.

古文：郑县人得车厄也，卫人佐弋也，卜子妻写弊裤也，而其少者也。
现代文：这就像郑县人得到车扼却误以为被人所欺，掌管射飞禽的卫国人射不到鸟，卜子之妻照旧裤子的样子毁坏新裤子，以及年轻人侍侯年纪大的人喝酒而机械模仿一样愚蠢。
English: This is just as stupid as the Zheng County people get a car but mistakenly think that they are being cheated by others, the patriots in charge of shooting birds can't shoot birds, the wife of the prophet destroys the new pants as the old pants look, and the young people wait for the older people to drink and imitate the machine.

古文：先王之言，有其所为小而世意之大者，有其所为大而世意之小者，未可必知也。
现代文：先王的言论，有涉及小事，当今社会上却理解为意义重大的；有涉及大事，当今社会上却理解为意义小的；这是没有人能够真正弄清楚的。
English: No one can really figure out the meaning of the words of the former king, some of which involve small things, but are understood as significant in today's society, and some of which involve big things, but are understood as insignificant in today's society.

古文：说在宋人之解书，与梁人之读记也。
现代文：有关的解说是宋国人误解书意做了蠢事，以及梁国人读书变呆。
English: The relevant commentary is that the Song people misunderstood the meaning of the book and did stupid things, and the Liang people became bored with reading.

古文：故先王有郢书，而后世多燕说。
现代文：所以先王的话有时像鄂人写信那样，而后人理解起来，却多属燕相看信时胡乱解释一类。
English: Therefore, the words of the former king are sometimes like the letters written by the people of H, but later people understand them, but they are mostly of the type of erratic interpretation when reading a letter.

古文：夫不适国事而谋先王，皆归取度者也。
现代文：不适合国家政事需要，却要谋求先王之道，全都如同郑人买鞋不相信自己的脚，却要回家去拿尺码一样。
English: It is not suitable for the needs of national politics, but we must seek the way of the first king, just as Zheng people do not believe their feet when buying shoes, but want to go home to get the size.

古文：△经四
现代文：经四
English: via four

古文：利之所在民归之，名之所彰士死之。
现代文：利益在什么地方，民众就归向什么地方；宣扬什么好名声，士人就拼死为它奋斗。
English: Wherever there is profit, the people will go there; wherever there is a good reputation to be promoted, the scholars will fight for it.

古文：是以功外于法而赏加焉，则上不信得所利于下；名外于法而誉加焉，则士劝名而不畜之于君。
现代文：因此对不符合法制的功劳给予赏赐，君主就不能从臣下那里得到利益；对不符合法制的名声给予赞誉，士人就会追求名誉而不顺从君主。
English: Therefore, if a reward is given for merit that is not in accordance with the legal system, the monarch will not be able to benefit from his subjects; if a reputation is praised that is not in accordance with the legal system, the scholar will pursue the honor and not obey the monarch.

古文：故中章、胥己仕，而中牟之民弃田圃而随文学者邑之半；平公腓痛足痹而不敢坏坐，晋国之辞仕托者国之锤。
现代文：所以中章、胥已做了官，中牟县的人就放弃田地而追随私学人士，人数占到全县的一半；晋平公敬重叔向，坐得腿痛脚麻也不敢违礼，晋国辞去官职和对贵族的依附，以便仿效叔向的人，就占到国家的一半。
English: Therefore, Zhongzhang and Zou have become officials, and the people of Zhongmou County have given up the fields and followed the private scholars, accounting for half of the county; Jinping Gong respected Uncle Xiang, and did not dare to violate the etiquette, and Jin Guo resigned the official post and the attachment to the nobles, in order to follow the example of Uncle Xiang, accounting for half of the country.

古文：此三士者，言袭法则官府之籍也，行中事则如令之民也，二君之礼太甚。
现代文：这三个人，假如言论合法，那也不过是照官府中的法典讲话；行为合宜，那也不过是遵从法令的人；而两个君主对他们的礼遇太过分了。
English: These three men, if they spoke lawfully, were only speaking according to the code of the government; if they behaved properly, they were only obeying the law; and the two monarchs treated them with too much courtesy.

古文：若言离法而行远功，则绳外民也，二君有何礼之？
现代文：如果他们的言论背离法制而行动没有什么功劳，那就是法度之外的人了，两个君主又为什么要敬重他们呢？
English: If their words deviate from the rule of law and their actions have no merit, then they are outside the rule of law, and why should the two monarchs respect them?

古文：礼之当亡。
现代文：敬重这种人，国家必定要灭亡。
English: Honour such a man, and the nation must perish.

古文：且居学之士，国无事不用力，有难不被甲，礼之则惰修耕战之功；不礼则周主上之法。
现代文：况且那些隐居而从事私学的人，国家没有战争时不耕田出力，国家有难时又不披甲打仗。敬重这种人，就会使那些守法的民众不再努力从事耕战；不敬重这种人，他们就会危害君主的法制。
English: Moreover, those who live in seclusion and are engaged in private study, when the country is not at war, they do not cultivate the fields, and when the country is in trouble, they do not wear armor to fight. Respecting such people will make those law-abiding people no longer work hard to engage in agricultural warfare; if they do not respect such people, they will endanger the monarch's legal system.

古文：国安则尊显，危则为屈公之威，人主奚得于居学之士哉？
现代文：国家安定，他们就尊贵显赫；国家遭到危难，他们就像屈公一样感到畏惧；君主从这些隐居而从事私学的人那里能得到什么呢？
English: When the state is secure, they are honored and celebrated; when the state is in danger, they are feared as a traitor; what can the prince expect from these secluded and self-taught men?

古文：故明主论李疵视中山也。
现代文：所以明君肯定李疵对中山国君的看法。
English: Therefore, Mingjun affirmed Li Qi's opinion of Zhongshan Guojun.

古文：△经五
现代文：经五
English: 5th floor

古文：《诗》曰： 不躬不亲，庶民不信。 
现代文：《诗》上说： 君主不以身作则，民众就不会相信。 
English: "Poetry" said: If the monarch does not lead by example, the people will not believe.

古文：傅说之以 无衣紫 ，缓之以郑简、宋襄，责之以尊厚耕战。
现代文：齐王的师傅用君主自己有不穿紫衣服以影响民众来说明这个道理；可以援引郑简公委任臣子做事而国治、宋襄公亲自参战而兵败的事例印证得失，根据尊重耕战的观点来加以批评。
English: King Qi's master used the example of whether or not the monarch himself wore purple clothes to influence the people to illustrate this principle; the examples of Zheng Jiankong appointing his vassals to do things and governing the country, and Song Xiangkong personally participating in the war and losing the battle can be cited to prove the gains and losses, and criticized according to the point of view of respecting the ploughing war.

古文：夫不明分，不责诚，而以躬亲位下，且为 下走睡卧 ，与去 掩弊微服 。
现代文：如果不明确君臣名分，不要求臣下真心实意地效力，反要亲自出马管理臣下，那将会像齐景公不用车子而下去奔跑，魏昭王读简学法而昏昏睡去，以及那种秘密巡视、微服出行的事情一样愚蠢。
English: If the roles of the prince and the vassal are not clearly defined, and the vassal is not required to serve sincerely, but must personally go out to manage the vassal, it will be as stupid as Qi Jing Gong running down without a car, Wei Zhao Wang reading the simplified learning method and falling asleep, and the kind of secret inspection and micro-suit travel.

古文：孔丘不知，故称犹盂；邹君不知，故先自僇。
现代文：孔子不懂这个道理，所以会说出君主像盂之类的话；邹君不懂这个道理，所以会做出先行羞辱自己的事情。
English: Confucius did not understand this principle, so he would say things like the monarch is like a baboon; the baboon does not understand this principle, so he will do things that humiliate himself first.

古文：明主之道，如叔向赋猎，与昭侯之奚听也。
现代文：明君的治国原则，就要像叔向分配猎获物和韩昭侯听取意见那样。
English: The principle of Ming Jun's governance is to listen to the opinions of his uncle and Han Zhaohou.

古文：△经六
现代文：经六
English: Route 6

古文：小信成则大信立，故明主积于信。
现代文：在小事上能够讲求信用，在大事上就能够建立起信用，所以明君要在遵守信用上逐步积累声望。
English: In minor matters, you can ask for credit, and in major matters, you can establish credit. Therefore, Mingjun should gradually accumulate reputation in terms of compliance with credit.

古文：赏罚不信，则禁令不行，说在文公之攻原与箕郑救饿也。
现代文：赏罚不讲信用，禁令就无法推行。有关的解说在 说六 中晋文公攻打原国和箕郑谈论救济饥荒。
English: If rewards and punishments are not credible, the ban cannot be implemented. The relevant commentary is in "Saying 6," in which Emperor Jin attacked the motherland and Emperor Zheng talked about famine relief.

古文：是以吴起须故人而食，文侯会虞人而猎。
现代文：因此吴起宁愿饿着肚子也要按照约会等老朋友来吃饭。魏文侯宁愿冒着大风也要守约和虞人说罢猎。
English: Therefore, Wu Qi would rather go hungry than eat according to the appointment of old friends. Wei Wenhou would rather brave the gale to keep the appointment with the rich man.

古文：故明主表信，如曾子杀彘也。
现代文：所以明君表明信用，要像曾子杀猪那样说到做到。
English: Therefore, Ming Jun showed his trust and said that he would do as Zeng Zi killed the pig.

古文：患在厉王击警鼓，与李悝谩两和也。△说一
现代文：不讲信用的祸患表现在楚厉王酒醉误击报警军鼓以及李悝欺骗左右两军。说一
English: The scourge of not talking about credibility is manifested in King Chu Li's drunken mistake of striking the alarm drum and Li Xi's deception of the left and right armies.

古文：宓子贱治单父。有若见之曰： 子何臞也？ 
现代文：宓子贱治理单父，有若会见他说： 您怎么这样瘦了？ 
English: Zou Zizian manages her single father. If she meets him, she will ask: "How did you lose so much weight?"

古文：宓子曰： 君不知齐不肖，使治单父，官事急，心忧之，故＃也。 
现代文：路子贱说： 君王不知道我没有德才，派我治理单父，政务紧急，我的心里忧愁，所以人就瘦了。 
English: Lu Zi Tian said: The king does not know that I do not have virtue, he sent me to govern a single father, government affairs are urgent, my heart is sad, so I am thin.

古文：有若曰： 昔者舜鼓五弦、歌《南风》之诗而天下治。
现代文：有若说： 从前舜弹奏着五弦琴，歌唱着《南风》诗就将天下治理好。
English: There is a saying: Once upon a time, a dragonfly played a five-stringed fiddle and sang the poem "South Wind" to rule the world well.

古文：今以单父之细也，治之而忧，治天下将奈何乎？
现代文：现在单父这么个小地方，治理起来却要发愁，那么治理天下该怎么办呢？
English: Now the single father is such a small place, but it is troublesome to govern, so how should the world be governed?

古文：故有术而御之，身坐于庙堂之上，有处女子之色，无害于治；无术而御之，身虽瘁臞，犹未益也。 
现代文：所以有了办法来统治国家，就是安闲地坐在朝廷里，脸上有少女般红润的气色，对治理国家也没有什么妨害；没有办法去统治国家，虽然身体劳累消瘦，也还是没有什么益处。 
English: So there is a way to rule the country, that is, to sit at ease in the imperial court, with a girlish rosy face, and there is no obstacle to governing the country; there is no way to rule the country, although the body is exhausted, there is still no benefit.

古文：楚王谓田鸠曰： 墨子者，显学也。
现代文：楚王对田鸠说： 墨子当下声名显赫的学者。
English: Chu Wang said to Tian Qi: Mozi is a prominent scholar.

古文：其身体则可，其言多而不辩，何也？ 
现代文：他亲自实践起来还是不错的，他讲的话很多，但没有文采，这是为什么呢？ 
English: His personal practice is still good, he speaks a lot, but there is no literary flair. Why is this?

古文：曰： 昔秦伯嫁其女于晋公子，令晋为之饰装，从衣文之媵七十人。
现代文：田坞说： 过去秦国君主把女儿嫁给晋国公子，叫晋国为他女儿准备好装饰，衣着华丽的陪嫁女子有七十人。
English: Tian Wu said: In the past, the Qin monarch married his daughter to the prince of Jin, and asked Jin to prepare decorations for his daughter. There were seventy gorgeous bridesmaids.

古文：至晋，晋人爱其妾而贱公女。
现代文：到了晋国，晋国人喜欢陪嫁媵妾，却看不起秦君的女儿。
English: When they arrived in Jin, the people of Jin liked to accompany and marry their concubines, but looked down on Qin's daughter.

古文：此可谓善嫁妾而未可谓善嫁女也。
现代文：这可以叫做善于嫁妾，不能说是善于嫁女儿。
English: This can be called being good at marrying concubines, but it cannot be said to be good at marrying daughters.

古文：楚人有卖其珠于郑者，为木兰之柜，薰以桂椒，缀以珠玉，饰以玫瑰，辑以翡翠。
现代文：楚国有个在郑国出卖宝珠的人，他用木兰为宝珠做了一个匣子，匣子用香料熏过，用珠玉做点缀，用红色的玉装饰，用翡翠连结。
English: In the State of Chu, there was a man who sold precious beads in the State of Zheng. He used a magnolia to make a box for the beads. The box was smoked with spices, embellished with jewels, decorated with red jade, and connected with jade.

古文：郑人买其椟而还其珠。
现代文：郑国人买了他的匣子，却把珠子还给了他。
English: The Zheng people bought his box, but gave the beads back to him.

古文：此可谓善卖椟矣，未可谓善鬻珠也。
现代文：这可以叫做善于卖匣子，不能说是善于卖宝珠。
English: This can be called being good at selling boxes, but cannot be said to be good at selling jewels.

古文：今世之谈也，皆道辩说文辞之言，人主览其文而忘有用。
现代文：现在社会上的言论，都说一些漂亮动听的话，君主只看文采而忽视了它们是否有用。
English: In today's society, everyone says something beautiful and charming. The monarch only looks at the beauty of the words and ignores whether they are useful or not.

古文：墨子之说，传先王之道，论圣人之言，以宣告人。
现代文：墨子的学说，传扬先王道术，阐明圣人言论，希望广泛地告知人们。
English: Mozi's doctrine, propagating the former king's Taoism, clarifying the saint's speech, hoping to widely inform people.

古文：若辩其辞，则恐人怀其文，忘其直，以文害用也。
现代文：如果修饰文辞的话，他就担心人们会留意于文采而忘了它的内在价值，从而造成因为文辞而损害实用的恶果。
English: If the words are embellished, he fears that people will pay attention to the poetry and forget its intrinsic value, resulting in a bad effect of the words to the detriment of the practical.

古文：此与楚人鬻珠、秦伯嫁女同类，故其言多不辩。 
现代文：这和楚人卖宝珠、秦君嫁女儿是同一类型的事，所以墨子的话很多，但不动听。 
English: This is the same type of thing as the Chu people selling precious beads and Qin Jun marrying his daughter, so Mozi's words are many, but not attractive.

古文：墨子为木鸢，三年而成，蜚一日而败。
现代文：墨子用木头制作了一只木鸢，三年才做成，结果飞了一天就坏了。
English: Mozi made a raft out of wood. It took three years to complete, but it broke after just one day in the air.

古文：弟子曰： 先生之巧，至能使木鸢飞。 
现代文：弟子说： 先生手艺真巧，竟能达到让木鸢高飞的境界。 
English: Disciple said: Teacher's craftsmanship is really skillful, he can even reach the realm of making the raft fly high.

古文：墨子曰： 吾不如为车輗者巧也。
现代文：墨子说： 我比不上制造车的人手艺高超。
English: Mozi said, "I can't match the craftsmanship of the people who make cars.

古文：用咫尺之木，不费一朝之事，而引三十石之任，致远力多，久于岁数。
现代文：他们用细小的木头，不费一天功夫，就能牵引三十石的重量，走很远的路，出很大的力，并且可以用很多年。
English: With a small piece of wood, they can pull a weight of thirty stone without a day's effort, travel a long distance, exert a lot of force, and can be used for many years.

古文：今我为鸢，三年成，蜚一日而败。 
现代文：现在我做了木鸢，花了三年时间做成，才飞了一天就坏了。 
English: Now I've made a raft, it took three years to make it, and it only flew for one day before it broke.

古文：惠子闻之曰： 墨子大巧，巧为輗，拙为鸢。 
现代文：惠子听到后说： 墨子真是太聪明了一一他知道做车较是精明的，做木鸢是笨拙的。 
English: On hearing this, Keiko said, "Moko is really so clever - he knows that making a car is rather clever, but making a raft is clumsy.

古文：宋王与齐仇也，筑武宫，讴癸倡，行者止观，筑者不倦。
现代文：宋国国君与齐王作对，专为习武修建宫殿。讴癸唱起歌来，走路的人停下来观看，建筑的人不感到疲劳。
English: The King of Song and the King of Qi opposed each other and built a palace specifically for martial arts. When the egrets began to sing, pedestrians stopped to watch, and the builders did not feel tired.

古文：王闻，召而赐之。
现代文：宋王听说后，召见讴癸并加以赏赐。
English: After King Song heard about it, he summoned Zang and rewarded him.

古文：对曰： 臣师射稽之讴又贤于癸。 
现代文：讴癸回答说： 我老师射稽的歌，唱得比我还好。 
English: Toad replied, "My teacher sings the jingle better than I do."

古文：王召射稽使之讴，行者不止，筑者知倦。
现代文：宋王召来射稽让他唱歌，但走路的人还不停地走，建筑的人也感到疲倦。
English: Song Wang summoned the acrobats to make him sing, but the walkers kept walking, and the builders also felt tired.

古文：王曰： 行者不止，筑者知倦，其讴不胜如癸美，何也？ 
现代文：宋王说： 走路的人还不停地走，建筑的人也感到疲劳，射稽唱得不如你好，这是为什么？ 
English: Song Wang said: People who are walking are still walking, people who are building are also tired, and the rehearsal singing is not as good as you. Why is this?

古文：对曰： 王试度其功。 
现代文：讴癸回答说： 大王可以检查一下我们两人的功效。 
English: Toad replied, "The Great King can check the effectiveness of the two of us.

古文：癸四板，射稽八板；擿其坚，癸五寸，射稽二寸。
现代文：讴癸唱歌时建筑的人只筑了四板，射稽唱歌时却筑了八板；再检查墙的坚固程度，讴癸唱歌时筑的墙能打进去五寸，射稽唱歌时筑的墙只能打进去两寸。
English: When the cymbals were singing, the builders only built four planks, but when they were practising, they built eight planks; when the strength of the wall was checked, the wall built when the cymbals were singing could only be penetrated five inches, while the wall built when they were practising could only be penetrated two inches.

古文：夫良药苦于口，而智者劝而饮之，知其入而已己疾也。
现代文：良药苦口，但聪明人却鼓励人喝下去，这是因为他知道喝下去后能使自己疾病痊愈。
English: Good medicine tastes bitter, but a wise man encourages people to drink it, because he knows that drinking it can cure his illness.

古文：忠言拂于耳，而明主听之，知其可以致功也。△说二
现代文：忠言逆耳，但明智君主愿意听取，这是因为他知道由此可以获得成功。说二
English: Word of advice falls on deaf ears, but the wise monarch is willing to listen because he knows that he can succeed.

古文：宋人有请为燕王以棘刺之端为母猴者，必三月斋，然后能观之。燕王因以三乘养之。
现代文：宋国有个请求替燕王在棘刺尖上雕刻猕猴的人，让燕王一定要在斋戒三个月以后才能观看，燕王就用近二十平方里土地的俸禄来供养他。
English: In the Song Dynasty, there was a man who asked Yan Wang to carve a macaque on the spike of a thorn, so that Yan Wang would have to fast for three months before he could watch it. Yan Wang used the salary of nearly twenty square miles of land to support him.

古文：右御冶工言王曰： 臣闻人主无十日不燕之斋。
现代文：右御属下的冶铁工匠对燕王说： 我听说君主没有十天不喝酒作乐的斋戒。
English: The smith under his right hand said to the king of the swallows: I have heard that the monarch does not fast for ten days without drinking and making merry.

古文：今知王不能久斋以观无用之器也，故以三月为期。
现代文：现在他知道君主不能长时间斋戒去观看那件没有用处的东西，所以就定了三个月的期限。
English: Now he knew that the monarch could not fast for a long time to see that useless thing, so he set a deadline of three months.

古文：凡刻削者，以其所以削必小。
现代文：凡是需要刻削的东西，用来刻削它的东西一定更小。
English: Whatever needs to be chiseled, the tool used to chisel it must be smaller.

古文：今臣冶人也，无以为之削，此不然物也。王必察之。 
现代文：我是一个铁匠，没有办法给他制作刻刀。那猕猴是不可能有的东西，大王一定要予以明察才是。 
English: I'm a blacksmith, and I can't make him a carving knife. That monkey is something impossible to have, so the king must inspect it.

古文：王因囚而问之，果妄，乃杀之。
现代文：燕王于是把那个宋人拘禁起来加以盘问，那个宋人果然在弄虚作假，燕王随后就杀了他。
English: Yan Wang then detained the Song person and interrogated him. The Song person was indeed faking, and Yan Wang then killed him.

古文：冶人又谓王曰： 计无度量，言谈之士多棘刺之说也。 
现代文：铁匠对燕王说： 计谋是没有一定的标准加以衡量的。
English: The blacksmith said to Yan Wang: There is no certain standard to measure the cunning.

古文：一曰：燕王征巧术之人，卫人诸以棘刺之端为母猴。
现代文：进说献计人士说的话，多半是这种要在棘刺尖上刻制称霸之类的胡言乱语。 
English: Most of the words uttered by those who say they are devising plans are nonsense like "carving hegemony on the spines of thorns."

古文：燕王说之，养之以五乘之奉。
现代文：另一种说法：燕王喜欢小巧玲珑的东西。
English: Another way of saying this is that the king of swallows likes things that are small and delicate.

古文：王曰： 吾试观客为棘刺之母猴。 
现代文：燕王说： 我想看看你雕刻在棘刺尖上弥猴。 
English: Yan Wang said: I want to see you carve a monkey on the spike.

古文：客曰： 人主欲观之，必半岁不入宫，不饮酒食肉，雨霁日出，视之晏阴之间，而棘刺之母猴乃可见也。 
现代文：卫人说： 君王要想看它，必须在半年中不到内宫住宿，不饮酒吃肉。在雨停日出、阴晴交错的时候再观赏，只有这样，才能看清楚我在棘刺尖上刻的猕猴。 
English: The guard said: "If the king wants to see it, he must not stay in the inner palace for half a year, not drink alcohol and eat meat. Watch it again when the rain stops, the sun rises, and it is cloudy and sunny. Only in this way can you see the macaque I carved on the thorn tip.

古文：燕王因养卫人，不能观其母猴。
现代文：燕王因而把这个卫人供养了起来，但不能看他刻的猕猴。
English: As a result, Yan Wang provided for this guardian, but was unable to see the macaque he had carved.

古文：郑有台下之冶者谓燕王曰： 臣为削者也。
现代文：郑国有个台下地方的铁匠对燕王说： 我是做削刀的人。
English: A local blacksmith in Zheng Guo said to Yan Wang: I am a sharpener.

古文：诸微物必以削削之，而所削必大于削。
现代文：各种微小曲东西一定要用削刀来雕刻，被雕刻的东西一定会比削刀大。
English: All kinds of tiny things must be carved with a whetstone, and the carved things must be larger than the whetstone.

古文：今棘刺之端不容削锋，难以治棘刺之端。王试观客之削，能与不能可知也。 王曰： 善。 
现代文：现在的情形是棘刺尖上容纳不下削刀的刀锋，削刀的刀锋难以刻削棘刺的顶端，大王不妨看看他的削刀，能不能在棘刺尖上刻东西也就清楚了。 燕王说： 好。 
English: Now the situation is that the blade of the whittling knife cannot be accommodated on the tip of the thorn, and the blade of the whittling knife is difficult to carve the top of the thorn. The king may wish to look at his whittling knife, and it will be clear whether it can carve something on the tip of the thorn. The king of swallows said: Good.

古文：谓卫人曰： 客为棘刺之？ 曰： 以削。 
现代文：于是对那个卫人说： 你在棘刺尖上制作猕猴，用什么来刻削？ 卫人说： 用削刀。 
English: So he said to the guard, "What did you use to carve the macaques on the spikes?" The guard said, "A whittling knife."

古文：王曰： 吾欲观见之。 
现代文：燕王说： 我想看看你的削刀。 
English: Yan Wang said: I want to see your whittling knife.

古文：客曰： 臣请之舍取之。 
现代文：卫人说： 请您允许我到到处去取削刀。 
English: The guard said, "Please allow me to go anywhere to get a whittling knife."

古文：因逃。
现代文：趁机就逃跑了。
English: He took the opportunity to run away.

古文：兒说，宋人，善辩者也，持 白马非马也 服齐稷下之辩者。
现代文：兒说是宋国人，是个善于辩说的学者。他曾经提出 白马不是马 说服了稷下的辩说家们。
English: He is said to be a native of the Song Dynasty and a scholar who is good at arguing. He once proposed that a white horse is not a horse, which convinced the debaters under his command.

古文：乘白马而过关，则顾白马之赋。
现代文：但他骑白马通过关头，还是要交白马税的。
English: But he still has to pay the white horse tax for riding a white horse through a crisis.

古文：故籍之虚辞则能胜一国，考实按形不能谩于一人。
现代文：所以，凭借虚浮言辞，他可以压倒一个国家；考察实际情形，他连一个也无法欺骗。
English: So, with false rhetoric, he can overpower a country; with reality, he cannot deceive even one.

古文：夫新砥砺杀矢，彀弩而射，虽冥而妄发，其端未尝不中秋毫也，然而莫能复其处，不可谓善射，无常仪的也；设五寸之的，引十步之远，非羿、逄蒙不能必全者，有常仪的也；有度难而无度易也。
现代文：用新磨出的利箭，张满弓弩发射出去，即使闭着眼睛胡乱发射，箭头没有不射中细小的东西。
English: With newly sharpened arrows, spread out with the crossbow, even if they are fired randomly with their eyes closed, the arrows do not miss anything small.

古文：有常仪的，则羿、逄蒙以五寸为巧；无常仪的，则以妄发而中秋毫为拙。
现代文：然而他不能再次射中原处，是不能认为该人善于射箭的，因为没有固定的箭靶作目标。设置一个直径五寸的箭靶，射程只有十步那么远，不是后羿和逢蒙这样的射箭能手，就不一定能全部射中了，因为已有固定的箭靶作为目标。
English: However, he couldn't hit the original spot again, and it can't be considered that the person is good at archery, because there is no fixed arrow target as the target. Set an arrow target with a diameter of five inches, the range is only ten steps away. If you are not an archer like Hou Yi and Feng Meng, you may not be able to hit all of them, because there is a fixed arrow target as the target.

古文：故无度而应之，则辩士繁说；设度而持之，虽知者犹畏失也，不敢妄言。
现代文：设靶射箭是困难的，无靶射箭是容易的。有固定的箭靶作为目标，人们会把后羿和逢蒙射中五寸直径的范围认作精巧；没有固定的箭靶作为目标，人们会把乱射射中细小的东西认作笨拙。
English: Target archery is difficult, target-free archery is easy. With a fixed target as the target, people will regard the five-inch diameter range of the dorsal fin and arch as delicate; without a fixed target as the target, people will regard the small things in random shooting as clumsy.

古文：今人主听说不应之以度，而说其辩，不度以功，誉其行而不入关。
现代文：所以，没有一定的标准加以衡量的话，辩士们就会用繁言絮语进说；设置一定的标准加以衡量的话，即便是很有智慧的人也怕言辞有，失，不敢乱说。
English: Therefore, if there is no certain standard to be measured, the debaters will use a lot of words; if there is a certain standard to be measured, even a very wise person is afraid of words.

古文：此人主所以长欺，而说者所以长养也。
现代文：现在君主听取言论，不是用一定的标准去衡量，而是喜欢他们动听的言辞；不是用功效去衡量，而是赞赏他们的行为，不问是否合乎准则。
English: Now monarchs listen to speeches, not to measure them by a certain standard, but to like their beautiful words; not to measure them by effectiveness, but to appreciate their actions, regardless of whether they meet the standards.

古文：客有教燕王为不死之道者，王使人学之，所使学者未及学而客死。
现代文：这是君主长期受欺骗，而游说的人长期被供养的原因。有个愿教燕王学习长生不死道术的客人，燕王派人去向他学习。派去学习的人还没来得及学到手，那个客人先死了。
English: This is the reason why the monarch has been deceived for a long time, and the lobbyists have been supported for a long time. There was a guest who was willing to teach King Yan the art of immortality, and King Yan sent someone to learn from him. The person who was sent to learn did not have time to learn, and the guest died first.

古文：王大怒，诛之。
现代文：燕王非常恼怒，杀了去学的人。
English: Yan Wang was very angry and killed the person who went to study.

古文：王不知客之欺己，而诛学者之晚也。
现代文：燕王不明白客人在欺骗自己，却怪罪去学的人太迟笨。
English: Yan Wang did not understand that the guests were deceiving themselves, but blamed those who were too slow to learn.

古文：夫信不然之物而诛无罪之臣，不察之患也。
现代文：相信没有根据的东西，而杀掉没有罪过的臣子，这就是不能明察的危害。
English: To believe in things that have no basis, and to kill a vassal who has committed no crime, this is the harm that cannot be seen.

古文：且人所急无如其身，不能自使其无死，安能使王长生哉？
现代文：况且人们最看重的无过于自己的生命，那个客人不能使自己不死，又怎能使燕王长生呢？
English: Besides, people value nothing more than their own lives. That guest can't make himself immortal, so how can he make Yan Wang live forever?

古文：郑人有相与争年者。
现代文：郑国有一对相互争论年龄大小的人。
English: In Zheng Guo, there is a couple who are arguing about their age.

古文：一人曰： 吾与尧同年。 
现代文：一个说； 我和唐尧同岁。 
English: One said: I am the same age as Tang Xuan.

古文：其一人曰： 我与黄帝之兄同年。 
现代文：另一说： 我和黄帝的哥哥同岁。 
English: Another said: I am the same age as Huang Di's brother.

古文：讼此而不决，以后息者为胜耳。
现代文：为此争执不下，只能是把最后停止争辩的人作为胜利者罢了。
English: The only way to settle the argument is to declare the winner to be the one who ends the argument last.

古文：客有为周君画筴者，三年而成。
现代文：有个为周君画竹简的客人，过了三年才完成。
English: There was a guest who drew bamboo strips for Zhou Jun, and it took three years to complete.

古文：君观之，与髹筴者同状。周君大怒。
现代文：周君前去观看，和漆过的竹简一样，周君非常气愤。
English: Zhou Jun went to watch, and like the painted bamboo strips, Zhou Jun was very angry.

古文：画筴者曰： 筑十版之墙，凿八尺之牖，而以日始出时加之其上而观。 
现代文：画竹简的人说； 筑一道十板高的墙，在墙上凿一个八尺大的窗，然后等到太阳刚出来时把竹简放在窗上对着阳光看看。 
English: The bamboo cutter said, "Build a wall ten boards high, cut an eight-foot window in the wall, and when the sun comes out, put the bamboo cutter on the window and look at the sun.

古文：周君为之，望见其状，尽成龙蛇禽兽车马，万物状备具。周君大悦。
现代文：周君照他的话做了，看见竹简上画的形状都成了龙、蛇、飞禽、走兽、车马等，万事万物的形状全都具备，周君非常高兴。
English: Zhou Jun did as he said, and was very happy to see that the shapes painted on the bamboo strips were all dragons, snakes, birds, beasts, chariots and horses, etc. Everything had a shape.

古文：此筴之功非不微难也，然其用与素髹筴同。
现代文：画这个竹简的功夫并非不微妙和难能，然而它的用途和未画花纹或只用漆漆过的竹简完全一样。
English: The effort of painting this bamboo is not without subtlety and difficulty, yet its use is exactly the same as unpainted or only lacquered bamboo.

古文：客有为齐王画者，齐王问曰： 画孰最难者？ 
现代文：有个替齐王画画的客人，齐王问道： 画什么最难？ 
English: There was a guest who painted for Qi Wang. Qi Wang asked: What is the most difficult thing to paint?

古文：曰： 犬马最难。 
现代文：客人说： 画狗马难。 
English: The guest said, "It's hard to draw a dog and a horse."

古文： 孰易者？ 
现代文： 画什么容易？ 
English: What is easy to draw?

古文：曰： 鬼魅最易。 
现代文：客人说： 画鬼怪容易。 
English: The guest said, "It's easy to draw ghosts.

古文：夫犬马，人所知也，旦暮罄于前，不可类之，故难。鬼魅无形者，不罄于前，故易之也。
现代文：狗马是人人皆知的，常常出现在人们眼前，不可能画得很像，所以难；鬼怪是无形的东西，没有在人的面前出现，所以画起来很容易。
English: Dogs and horses are well-known and often appear in front of people's eyes. It is impossible to draw them very similar, so it is difficult; ghosts are intangible things that do not appear in front of people, so it is easy to draw.

古文：齐有居士田仲者，宋人屈谷见之，曰： 谷闻先生之义，不恃仰人而食，今谷有巨瓠之道，坚如石，厚而无窍，献之。 
现代文：齐国有个隐士叫田仲，宋人屈谷见到他说： 我听说您很有骨气，不依靠别人吃饭。现在我有一个大葫芦，坚硬得像块石头，厚实得没有空隙，把它献给您了。 
English: There was a hermit named Tian Zhong in Qi Province. When the Song people Qu Gu saw him, he said, "I heard that you have a strong backbone and do not rely on others to eat. Now I have a large gourd, hard as a rock, thick with no gaps, and I dedicate it to you."

古文：仲曰： 夫瓠所贵者，谓其可以盛也。
现代文：田仲说： 葫芦可贵的地方在于可以用它装东西。
English: Tanaka said, "What makes gourds valuable is that they can be used to hold things.

古文：今厚而无窍，则不可以剖以盛物；而任重如坚石，则不可以剖而以斟。
现代文：现在它厚实得没有空隙，就不能剖开来装东西了；它重得像块坚硬的石头，就不能剖开来斟酒了。
English: Now it is so thick that there is no space, so you can't open it to load things; it weighs like a hard stone, so you can't open it to pour wine.

古文：吾无以瓠为也。 
现代文：我拿这个葫芦是毫无用处的。 
English: It's useless for me to take this gourd.

古文：曰： 然，谷将弃之。 
现代文：屈谷说： 说得对，我准备把它扔了。 
English: Kutsuya said, "That's right, I'm going to throw it away."

古文：今田仲不恃仰人而食，亦无益人之国，亦坚瓠之类也。
现代文：现在田仲不依靠别人吃饭，同时对国家也没有什么用处，正和坚硬的实心葫芦同一类型。
English: Now, Tian Zhong does not rely on others to eat, and at the same time, he is of no use to the country. He is the same type as a hard, solid gourd.

古文：虞庆为屋，谓匠人曰： 屋太尊。 
现代文：赵人虞卿建造房子，对工匠说： 房顶太高了。 
English: Zhao Renyuqing built a house and said to the craftsman: The roof is too high.

古文：匠人对曰： 此新屋也，涂濡而椽生。 虞庆曰： 不然。
现代文：工匠回答说： 这是新房子，泥巴是潮湿的，椽木也没有干透。 虞卿说： 不对。
English: The craftsman replied, "This is a new house, the mud is damp, and the beech wood is not completely dry.

古文：夫濡涂重而生椽挠，以挠椽任重涂，此宜卑。
现代文：潮湿的泥巴重量大，不干的椽木形体曲，用弯曲的椽木承受很重的泥巴，房顶就应当造得低一些。
English: The roof should be made lower, since wet mud weighs a lot and the dry beech wood is curved. The roof should be made lower, since the curved beech wood can bear heavy mud.

古文：更日久，则涂干而椽燥。
现代文：再过很长一段时间，泥巴也干了，椽木也干了。
English: After a long period of time, the mud dries up and the birch trees dry up.

古文：涂干则轻，椽燥则直，以直椽任轻涂，此益尊。 
现代文：泥巴干了就会变轻，椽木干了就会变直，用变直的椽木承受变轻的泥巴，房顶就会逐渐增高。 
English: When the mud dries, it will become lighter, when the birch dries, it will straighten, and when the straightened birch is used to bear the lighter mud, the roof will gradually increase in height.

古文：匠人诎，为之而屋坏。
现代文：工匠无话可说，按照虞卿的话造出房子来，房子坍塌了。
English: The craftsman had nothing to say. He built a house according to Yu Jing's words, and the house collapsed.

古文：一曰：虞庆将为屋，匠人曰： 材生而涂濡。
现代文：另一种说法：虞庆打算造房子，工匠说： 木材没有干透，泥巴是潮湿的。
English: Another way of saying this is that Yu Qing planned to build a house, but the craftsman said: The wood is not completely dry, and the mud is wet.

古文：夫材生则桡，涂濡则重，以桡任重，今虽成，久必坏。 
现代文：木材没干透就会弯曲，泥巴潮湿重量就大；用弯曲的木材承受重量大的泥巴，现在即使造成了，时间一长，必然坍塌。 
English: Wood bends before it is dry, and mud is heavy when wet; if you use bent wood to carry heavy mud, even if it is caused now, it will inevitably collapse over time.

古文：虞庆曰： 材干则直，涂干则轻。
现代文：虞庆说： 木材干了就会变直，泥巴干了就会变轻。
English: Yu Qing said, "When the wood dries, it will become straight, and when the mud dries, it will become light.

古文：今诚得干，日以轻直，虽久必不坏。 
现代文：现在情形是，木材和泥巴如果确实干起来后，它们会一天比一天变直变轻；即使是经时历久，房子一定不会坍塌。 
English: The situation now is that if the wood and mud do dry out, they will become straighter and lighter day by day; even if it takes a long time, the house will not collapse.

古文：匠人诎，作之成，有间，屋果坏。
现代文：工匠无话可说，就把房子造了起来。
English: The craftsman had nothing to say, so he built the house.

古文：范且曰： 弓之折，必于其尽也，不于其始也。
现代文：又过了些时候，房子果然坍塌了。范瞄说： 弓折断的时候，一定是在制作的最后阶段，而不是在制作的开始阶段。
English: Some time later, the house did indeed collapse. Fan Zai said: When the bow broke, it must have been in the final stage of production, not at the beginning of production.

古文：夫工人张弓也，伏檠三旬而蹈弦，一日犯机，是节之其始而暴之其尽也，焉得无折？
现代文：工匠张弓时，把弓放在校正器具上三十天，然后装上弦，却在一天内就把箭发射出去了。这是开始调节时缓慢而最后使用时急促，怎么能不折断呢？
English: When a craftsman bows, he puts the bow on the calibration device for thirty days, and then attaches the strings, but in one day the arrow is fired. This is slow to adjust at the beginning and fast to use at the end. How can it not break?

古文：且张弓不然：伏檠一日而蹈弦，三旬而犯机，是暴之其始而节之其尽也。 
现代文：我范睢张弓时就不是这样：用校正工具校上一天，随即装上弦，上弦三十天后才把箭发射出去，这就是开始的时候粗率，而最后有所节制。 
English: This was not the case with my Fan Yu bow: I sharpened it with a calibration tool for one day, then mounted the strings, and only fired the arrow after thirty days of stringing. This is rough at the beginning, and finally restrained.

古文：工人穷也，为之，弓折。
现代文：工匠无言可对，照范睢的话去做，结果弓折断了。
English: The craftsman was speechless and did as Fan Qi said, but the bow broke.

古文：范且、虞庆之言，皆文辩辞胜而反事之情。
现代文：范睢、虞庆的言论，都能做到文辞动听过人，但却违背了实际情况。
English: Both Fan Rong and Yu Qing's remarks can make people listen to them, but they go against the actual situation.

古文：人主说而不禁，此所以败也。
现代文：君主对这一类话喜爱而不加禁止，这就是事情败坏的根源。
English: The monarch's fondness for this sort of thing, without prohibiting it, is the root of the rot.

古文：夫不谋治强之功，而艳乎辩说文丽之声，是却有术之士而任 坏屋 、 折弓 也。
现代文：不谋求治国强兵的实际功效，却羡慕那种华丽动听诡辩，这就是排斥有法术的人士，而去采纳那种导致屋塌、弓折之类的胡说。
English: Instead of seeking the practical effect of governing the country and strengthening the army, they are envious of the gorgeous and beautiful sophistry, that is, the exclusion of people with magic and the adoption of nonsense that leads to the collapse of the roof and the breaking of the bow.

古文：故人主之于国事也，皆不达乎工匠之构屋张弓也。
现代文：所以君主处理国事时，总也不能通晓工匠造屋和张弓的道理。
English: Therefore, when dealing with state affairs, the monarch cannot always understand the principles of craftsmanship and bowing.

古文：然而士穷乎范且、虞庆者，为虚辞，其无用而胜，实事，其无易而穷也。
现代文：然而有术之士之所以被范睢、虞庆那样的人物所困窘。是因为他们讲起虚浮的话来，虽属毫无用处，却能取得胜利，干起实际的事来，虽属不可改变，却会受到失败。
English: However, the reason why wizards are embarrassed by people like Fan Qi and Yu Qing is because they talk about vanity, although useless, but can achieve victory, and do practical things, although immutable, but will be defeated.

古文：人主多无用之辩，而少无易之言，此所以乱也。
现代文：君主看重毫无用处的诡辩，看轻不可改变的言论，这也就是国家危乱的原因。
English: The monarch's preference for useless sophistry and contempt for unalterable pronouncements is the cause of the country's crisis.

古文：今世之为范且、虞庆者不辍，而人主说之不止，是贵 败 、 折 之类，而以知术之人为工匠也。
现代文：当代像范睢、虞庆那样的人物还在不断出现，而君主对他们仍然欣赏不止，这就是尊重导致屋塌、弓折之类的议论，而把懂得法术的人当作被动的工匠看待。
English: Contemporary figures such as Fan Qi and Yu Qing are still emerging, and the monarch still appreciates them more than anything else. This is the kind of respect that leads to arguments such as roof collapse and bow breakage, and people who know magic are regarded as passive craftsmen.

古文：工匠不得施其技巧，故坏屋折弓；知治之人不得行其方术，故国乱而主危。
现代文：工匠不能施展技巧，所以会有屋塌、弓折的结果；懂得治理国家的人不能实行自己的方略，所以国家混乱而君主处于险境。
English: Craftsmen cannot apply their skills, so there will be a result of roof collapse and bow break; people who know how to govern the country cannot implement their own strategy, so the country is in chaos and the monarch is in danger.

古文：夫婴兒相与戏也，以尘为饭，以涂为羹，以木为胾，然至日晚必归饷者，尘饭涂羹可以戏而不可食也。
现代文：小孩在一起做游戏时，把尘土当饭食，用泥巴当肉汁，用木头当肉块。但他们到了晚上是一定要回家吃饭的，因为泥巴做的饭菜可以玩耍，却不能真吃。
English: When the children play together, they use the dust as food, the mud as gravy, and the wood as meat, but in the evening they have to go home to eat, because food made of mud can be played with, but not really eaten.

古文：夫称上古之传颂，辩而不悫，道先王仁义而不能正国者，此亦可以戏而不可以为治也。
现代文：称说上古传颂的东西，动听却不真实；称道先王的仁义道德，却不能使国家走上正路，这样的情形也只能用来作游戏，而不能真的用来治国。
English: It can only be used to play games, not to govern the country. It can only be used to praise the benevolence and morality of the former king, but it cannot lead the country onto the right path.

古文：夫慕仁义而弱乱者，三晋也；不慕而治强者，秦也，然而未帝者，治未毕也。
现代文：因追求仁义而使国家衰弱混乱的，韩、赵、魏三国就是例子；不追求仁义而把国家治理得强盛的，秦国就是例子。然而秦国至今没有称帝，只是因为治理还不完善。
English: The three kingdoms of Han, Zhao, and Wei are examples of countries that became weak and chaotic due to the pursuit of benevolence and righteousness; Qin is an example of a country that became powerful without the pursuit of benevolence and righteousness. However, Qin has not proclaimed an emperor so far, simply because its governance is not yet perfect.

古文：△说三
现代文：说三
English: Say three

古文：人为婴兒也，父母养之简，子长人怨。子盛壮成人，其供养薄，父母怒而诮之。
现代文：人在婴儿时，父母对他扶养马虎，儿子长大了就要埋怨父母；儿子长大成人，对父母的供养微薄，父母就要怒责儿子。
English: When a person is an infant, his parents are negligent in raising him. When the son grows up, he must complain to his parents; when the son grows up, the parents are poorly provided for, and the parents must blame the son.

古文：子父至亲也，而或谯或怨者，皆挟相为而不周于为己也。夫卖庸而播耕者，主人费家而美食，调布而求易钱者，非爱庸客也，曰：如是，耕者且深，耨者熟耘也。
现代文：父子是至亲骨肉，但有时怒责，有时埋怨，都是因为怀着相互依赖的心理而又认为对方不能周到地照顾自己，雇用工人来播种耕耘，主人花费家财准备美食，挑选布币去交换钱币以便给予报酬，并不是喜欢雇工，而是说：这样做，耕地的人才会耕得深，锄草的人才会锄得净。
English: The father and son are very close, but sometimes they are angry, sometimes they complain, all because they are mutually dependent and think that the other party cannot take good care of themselves. Employing workers to sow and plow, the owner spends family money to prepare delicious food, and chooses cloth coins to exchange for coins in order to reward. They do not like to hire workers, but say: In this way, those who cultivate the land will be able to plow deeply, and those who weed will be able to plow cleanly.

古文：庸客致力而疾耘耕者，尽巧而正畦陌畦畤者，非爱主人也，曰：如是，羹且美，钱布且易云也。
现代文：雇工卖力而快速地耘田耕田，使尽技巧整理畦埂，目的并不是爱主人，而是说：这样做，饭菜才会丰美，钱币才容易得到。
English: The aim of the hired labourer who ploughs the field with great speed and skill, and arranges the ploughs with the utmost skill, is not to love his master, but to say: In this way, the meal will be rich, and the money will be easy to get.

古文：此其养功力，有父子之泽矣，而心调于用者，皆挟自为心也。
现代文：主人这样供养雇工，爱惜劳力，有父子之间的恩惠，而雇工专心一意地工作，都是怀着为自己的打算。
English: In this way the master provides for the hired worker and is generous with his labor, and there is favor between the father and the son, while the hired worker is devoted to his work with a view to his own gain.

古文：故人行事施予，以利之为心，则越人易和；以害之为心，则父子离且怨。
现代文：所以人们办事给人好处，如果从对人有利处着想，那么疏远的人也容易和好；如果从对人有害处着想，那么父子间也会分离并相互埋怨。
English: Therefore, people do things for the benefit of others. If you think from the perspective of benefit to others, then it is easy to reconcile estranged people; if you think from the perspective of harm to others, then the father and son will also be separated and complain to each other.

古文：文公伐宋，乃先宣言曰： 吾闻宋君无道，蔑侮长老，分财不中，教令不信，余来为民诛之。 
现代文：文公讨伐宋国。预先就公开宣布说： 我听说宋君昏乱，轻视侮辱德高望重的人，分配财产不公平，教诲和命令不守信用。我来此目的是为民除害。 
English: He publicly announced in advance: "I have heard that Song Jun is deranged, despises and insults people of high moral standing, distributes property unfairly, and does not keep promises in his teachings and orders. I have come here to eliminate harm to the people."

古文：越伐吴，乃先宣言曰： 我闻吴王筑如皇之台，掘渊泉之池，罢苦百姓，煎靡财货，以尽民力，余来为民诛之。 
现代文：越国讨伐吴国，事先就公开宣布说： 我听说吴王修筑如皇台观，挖掘深池，使百姓疲劳困苦，耗费财物，竭尽人力。我前来为民除害。 
English: When Yue attacked Wu, he publicly announced in advance: "I have heard that the king of Wu builds like a king, digs deep pits, makes the people tired and exhausted, consumes wealth, and exhausts manpower. I have come to eliminate harm to the people."

古文：蔡女为桓公妻，桓公与之乘舟，夫人荡舟，桓公大惧，禁之不止，怒而出之。
现代文：蔡侯的女儿是齐桓公的夫人。桓公和夫人一起坐船，夫人摇晃小船，桓公非常害怕，制止她但她也不停下来，桓公忿怒地离弃了她。
English: Cai Hou's daughter was the wife of Prince Qi Huan. Prince Huan and his wife were on a boat together, and his wife was rocking the boat. Prince Huan was very scared and stopped her, but she didn't stop, and Prince Huan angrily left her.

古文：乃且复召之，因复更嫁之。
现代文：后来桓公想再召回她，蔡国却进而把她改嫁了。
English: Later, Emperor Kan wanted to recall her, but Cai Guo proceeded to remarry her.

古文：桓公大怒，将伐蔡。
现代文：桓公非常气愤，准备讨伐蔡国。
English: Prince Kan was very angry and prepared to attack Tsai.

古文：仲父谏曰： 夫以寝席之戏，不足以伐人之国，功业不可冀也，请无以此为稽也。 
现代文：管仲劝谏说： 为了夫妻之间的一个玩笑，不值得讨伐人家的国家，既然不能指望因此建立什么功业，就请不要计较这件事了。 
English: Guanzhong advised Zou: "It's not worth fighting other people's countries for a joke between husband and wife. Since you can't expect to build any career, please don't care about this matter.

古文：桓公不听。
现代文：桓公不听劝谏。
English: Kan didn't listen.

古文：仲父曰： 必不得已，楚之菁茅不贡于天子三年矣，君不如举兵为天子伐楚。
现代文：管仲说： 必不得已的话，楚国不向周王朝进贡菁茅已有三年了，您不如起兵替天子讨伐楚国。
English: Guanzhong said: If you have to, it has been three years since Chu did not pay tribute to the Zhou Dynasty. You might as well raise an army to fight for Chu.

古文：楚服，因还袭蔡，曰： 余为天子伐楚，而蔡不以兵听从 ，遂灭之。
现代文：楚剧顺服了，随后回兵袭击蔡国，就说 我替天子讨伐楚国，而你们却不率领军队听命助攻。 然后就灭掉它。
English: Chu Opera obeyed, and then the returning soldiers attacked Cai Guo, and said, "I am fighting for the sake of Heaven against Chu Guo, but you are not leading the army to assist the attack according to your orders.

古文：此义于名而利于实，故必有为天子诛之名，而有报仇之实。 
现代文：这样在名义上是正义的，在实际上是有利的，所以一定会有替天子讨伐的名义，同时有报仇的实效。 
English: This is nominally just, but in reality it is advantageous, so there will definitely be the name of fighting for the heavenly son, and at the same time there will be the actual effect of revenge.

古文：吴起为魏将而攻中山，军人有病疽者，吴起跪而自吮其脓。
现代文：吴起担任魏军将领攻打中山国。士兵中有一个患了毒疮的人，吴起跪着亲自为他吸掉脓血。
English: Wu Qi served as the general of the Wei army to attack Zhongshan. Among the soldiers, there was a person suffering from poisonous sores. Wu Qi kneeled down and personally sucked out the blood for him.

古文：伤者之母立而泣，人问曰： 将军于若子如是，尚何为而泣？ 
现代文：这个士兵的母亲马上哭起来，有人问道： 将军如此对待你的儿子，还有什么可哭的？ 
English: The soldier's mother immediately burst into tears and was asked: "The general treated your son like this, what's there to cry about?"

古文：对曰： 吴起吮其父之创而父死，今是子又将死也，今吾是以泣。 
现代文：这位母亲回答说： 吴起吸他父亲的伤口，他父亲奋战而死；现在这孩子又会奋战而死了，现在我就是为此哭泣的。 
English: The mother replied: "Wuqi sucked his father's wound, his father fought and died; now this child will fight and die again, now I am crying about it."

古文：赵主父令工施钩梯而缘播吾，刻疏人迹其上，广三尺，长五尺，而勒之曰： 主父常游于此。 
现代文：赵武灵王命令工匠用钩梯攀登播吾山，在山上刻上脚印，宽三尺，长五尺，并刻上字说： 主父曾在此游玩。 
English: King Zhao Wuling ordered the craftsmen to climb Mount Boaz with a hook and ladder, carve footprints on the mountain, three feet wide and five feet long, and engrave the words: "My father used to play here."

古文：秦昭王令工施钩梯而上华山，以松柏之心为博，箭长八尺，棋长八寸，而勒之曰： 昭王尝与天神博于此矣。 
现代文：秦昭王命令工匠用钩梯登上华山，用松柏的心做成一副棋，银子长八尺，棋子长八寸，并刻上字说； 昭王曾在这里和天神下过棋。 
English: Qin Zhao Wang ordered craftsmen to climb Mount Huashan with a hook and ladder, and make a pair of chess pieces with the hearts of pine and cypress. The silver pieces were eight feet long, and the chess pieces were eight inches long, and inscribed with the words: "Zhao Wang once played chess with the gods here."

古文：文公反国至河，令笾豆捐之，席蓐捐之，手足胼胝，面目黧黑者后之。
现代文：晋文公回国，到黄河边，命令把流亡过程中用旧的食物用具、睡觉角具都丢掉，叫手脚磨出老茧和脸色黑的人退到后面去。
English: When he returned to China, he went to the Yellow River and ordered everyone to throw away the old food utensils and sleeping corners that they had used during their exile. He told them to make their hands and feet into calluses and to leave the dark-skinned people behind.

古文：咎犯闻之而夜哭。公曰： 寡人出亡二十年，乃今得反国。
现代文：狐偃听说后，就在晚上哭了起来，文公说： 我流亡二十年，现在才得以回国。
English: When Foxtrot heard of this, he began to cry in the evening. Wengong said: I have been in exile for twenty years, and only now have I been able to return to my country.

古文：咎犯闻之，不喜而哭，意不欲寡人反国耶？ 
现代文：你听说后不高兴，反而哭，你的意思是不想我回国吧？ 
English: When you heard about it, you weren't happy, but cried instead. You don't want me to go back to my country, do you?

古文：犯对曰： 笾豆所以食也，而君捐之；席蓐所以卧也，而君弃之。手足胼胝，面目黧黑，劳有功者也，而君后之。
现代文：狐偃回答说： 笾豆是用来盛食物的，席蓐是用来睡觉的，您却把它们扔了；手脚上有老茧，脸色发黑的，是劳而有功的人，您却让他们迟到后面。
English: The fox cub replied, "The peas are for food, the mats are for sleeping, and you have thrown them away; those with calluses on their hands and feet, with blackened faces, are hard-working and meritorious people, and you have let them lag behind.

古文：今臣有与在后，中不胜其哀。故哭。
现代文：现在我也有理由被归在后面，心中有说不出的哀痛，所以哭了。
English: Now I also have a reason to be left behind, and there is an inexpressible sorrow in my heart, so I cried.

古文：且臣为君行诈伪以反国者众矣。臣尚自恶也，而况于君。 
现代文：况且我为您返回曾多次采用诈伪欺骗的手段，我自己都感到讨厌自己，何况您呢？ 
English: Moreover, I have returned for you many times by means of fraud and deception, I myself feel disgusted with myself, how about you?

古文：再拜而辞。
现代文：连拜两拜就要告辞。
English: Even if you get two bows, you have to say goodbye.

古文：文公止之曰： 谚曰： 筑社者攐撅而置之，端冕而祀之。
现代文：文公阻止他说： 俗话说： 修筑土地神坛的人，撩起衣服树立社神，穿起礼服、戴上礼帽又去祭审讯祀。 
English: Wenguang stopped him and said, "As the saying goes, those who build a land shrine should take off their clothes to set up a shrine god, put on a ceremonial dress and a ceremonial hat, and then go to the place of worship.

古文：今子与我取之，而不与我治之，与我置之，而不与我祀之焉。 
现代文：现在你为我取得了国家，而不和我一起去治理；好比为我树立了社神，却不和我一起去祭祀一样。
English: Now you have acquired a country for me, but you do not govern it with me; just as you have established a god for me, but you do not go with me to offer sacrifices.

古文：乃解左骖而盟于河。
现代文：这怎么行呢？ 文公解下车子左边的马沉到河里，对着河神起了誓。
English: How can this be done? Wen Gongde got out of the car, the horse on the left sank into the river and swore to the river god.

古文：郑县人卜子使其妻为裤，其妻问曰： 今裤何如？ 
现代文：郑县有个叫卜子的人，叫他的妻子做裤子，他妻子问： 现衣这条裤子做成什么样子？ 
English: In Zheng County, there was a man named Bozi, who asked his wife to make trousers. His wife asked, "What does this pair of trousers look like?"

古文：夫曰： 象吾故裤。 
现代文：卜子说： 像我的旧裤子。 
English: Boozi said, "It's like my old pants.

古文：妻子因毁新令如故裤。
现代文：他妻子因而把新裤子弄破，使它像旧裤子。
English: As a result, his wife tore the new trousers so that they resembled the old ones.

古文：郑县人有得车轭者，而不知其名，问人曰： 此何种也？ 
现代文：郑县有人得到一个车辆，但不知它的名称，就问别人说： 这是什么东西？ 
English: Someone in Zheng County got a vehicle, but did not know its name, so he asked others: "What is this thing?"

古文：对曰： 此车轭也。 
现代文：别人回答说： 这是车辆。 
English: Someone else replied: "It's a chariot."

古文：俄又复得一，问人曰： 此何种也？ 
现代文：不久他又得到一个车轭，又问别人说： 这是什么？ 
English: After a while, he got another cart and asked the others, "What is this?"

古文：对曰： 此车轭也。 
现代文：别人回答说： 这是车轭。 
English: Someone else replied: "It's a chariot."

古文：问者大怒曰： 曩者曰车轭，今又曰车轭，是何众也？
现代文：问话的人非常气愤地说： 刚才说是车扼，现在又说是车辆，车轭怎么这样多呢？
English: The questioner was very angry and said: Just now it was a car, now it is a vehicle, how can there be so many carriages?

古文：此女欺我也！ 遂与之斗。
现代文：你在欺骗我！ 于是和答话人发生了争斗。
English: You're lying to me! and got into a fight with the caller.

古文：卫人有佐弋者，鸟至，因先以其裷麾之，鸟惊而不射也。
现代文：卫国有个管射飞禽的小官，鸟落下后，就先用头巾向鸟挥动，鸟受惊飞去而无法射中。
English: There is a minor official in the defense of the country who shoots birds. After the bird falls, he first swings at the bird with his headscarf. The bird is startled and flies away and cannot be shot.

古文：郑县人卜子妻之市，买鳖以归。过颍水，以为渴也，因纵而饮之，遂亡其鳖。
现代文：郑县人卜子的妻子来到集市，买厂甲鱼回家，过颖河时，以为甲鱼渴了，就放它到河里去喝水，结果丢了买的甲鱼。
English: The wife of Bo Zi, a resident of Zheng County, came to the bazaar to buy a turtle to take home. When she crossed the Ying River, she thought the turtle was thirsty, so she let it go into the river to drink water. As a result, she lost the turtle she bought.

古文：夫少者侍长者饮，长者饮，亦自饮也。
现代文：年纪轻的侍侯年纪大的人喝酒，年纪大的人喝，他自己也喝。
English: The younger waiter: The older man drinks, the older man drinks, he drinks.

古文：一曰：鲁人有自喜者，见长年饮酒不能釂则唾之，亦效唾之。
现代文：另一种说法：鲁国有个自以为高明的人，看见年纪大的人没能把杯中酒喝完就呕吐，也仿效着呕吐起来。
English: Another way of putting it is that a man in the country of Lu, who thought he was very clever, saw an older man vomit when he couldn't finish the wine in his glass, and followed suit.

古文：一曰：宋人有少者亦欲效善，见长者饮无余，非堪酒饮也，而欲尽之。书曰： 绅之束之。 
现代文：另一种说法：宋国有个年轻的人也想仿效高明的样子，看见年纪大的人喝酒一饮而尽，自己不会喝酒也想一饮而尽。古书上说： 反复约束自己。 
English: Another way of saying this is that there was a young man in Song who also wanted to emulate Gao Ming. When he saw an older man drinking, he wanted to drink himself to death. If he couldn't drink, he wanted to drink himself to death. An ancient book says: "Repeatedly discipline yourself."

古文：宋人有治者，因重带自绅束也。人曰： 是何也？ 
现代文：宋国有个研究这部书的人，就用重迭的带子把自己束缚起来。别人问： 这是为什么？ 
English: In the Song Dynasty, a person who was studying this book bound himself with overlapping tapes. Others asked: Why?

古文：对曰： 书言之，固然。 
现代文：他回答说： 书上是这样说的，当然要这样做。 
English: And he answered, It is written, and it shall be done.

古文：书曰： 既雕既琢，还归其朴。 
现代文：古书上说： 又雕又琢，还原它的本来面目。 
English: An ancient book says: Carve and polish, restore its original appearance.

古文：梁人有治者，动作言学，举事于文，曰： 难之。 
现代文：魏国有个研究这部书的人，一言一行都学习这句话，做任何事都讲求修饰，说道： 真是困难啊。 
English: In Wei, there was a person who studied this book, studying every word and line of this sentence, and doing everything to improve it, and said: It's really difficult.

古文：顾失其实。
现代文：结果反而失掉了他原来的样子。
English: As a result, he lost his original appearance.

古文：人曰： 是何也？ 
现代文：别人说； 这是为什么？ 
English: Others say; Why is that?

古文：对曰： 书言之，固然。 
现代文：他回答说： 书上是这样说的，当然要这样做。 
English: And he answered, It is written, and it shall be done.

古文：郢人有遗燕相国书者，夜书，火不明，因谓持烛者曰： 举烛 而误书 举烛 。
现代文：郢地有个给燕相写信的人，晚上正在写着，烛火不亮，就对拿烛的人说： 举烛。 嘴里说着 举烛 ，信中也误写上了 举烛 。
English: Suddenly, a person who was writing a letter to Yan Xiang was writing in the evening, and the candle was not lit, so he said to the person holding the candle: "Lift the candle." His mouth said "Lift the candle," and the letter also mistakenly wrote "Lift the candle."

古文：举烛，非书意也。
现代文：举烛，并不是信的本意。
English: Holding a candle is not the intention of the letter.

古文：燕相国受书而说之，曰： 举烛者，尚明也；尚明也者，举贤而任之。 
现代文：燕相收到信后却解释说： 举烛，也就是祟尚光明；所谓崇尚光明，也就是要选拔贤人加以任用。 
English: After receiving the letter, Yan Xiang explained: Raising a candle, that is, worshiping light; so-called worshiping light, that is, selecting a sage to be appointed.

古文：燕相白王，王大说，国以治。
现代文：燕相告诉燕王，燕王非常高兴。国家因此治理好了。
English: Yan Xiang told Yan Wang that Yan Wang was very happy. Therefore, the country was well governed.

古文：治则治矣，非书意也。
现代文：治理是治理好了，但这并不是信的本意。
English: Governance is good governance, but this is not the intention of the letter.

古文：今世学者，多似此类。
现代文：当代被提拔的学者大多都像这类人。
English: Most of today's promoted scholars are like this kind of person.

古文：郑人有且置履者，先自度其足而置之其坐，至之市而忘操之。
现代文：郑国有个打算买鞋的人，先自己量好脚的尺码，然后把它放在座位上，等到去集市时却忘了带上。
English: A man in Zhengguo who wanted to buy a pair of shoes first measured his feet, then put them on the seat, but forgot to take them with him when he went to the market.

古文：已得履，乃曰： 吾忘持度，反归取之。 
现代文：已经挑好了鞍，才说道： 我忘记拿尺码了。 
English: After he had picked out the saddle, he said, "I forgot to get the size."

古文：及反，市罢，遂不得履。
现代文：于是返回家里去取。等到再返回集市时，集市已经散了，结果没有买到鞋。
English: So he returned home to get them. By the time he returned to the market, it had already closed, and he ended up not being able to buy any shoes.

古文：人曰： 何不试之以足？ 
现代文：有人说! 为什么不用脚试试？ 
English: Some say! Why not try it with your feet?

古文：曰： 宁信度，无自信也。 
现代文：他说： 我宁愿相信尺码，不能相信自己的脚。 
English: He said: "I'd rather trust my size than my feet.

古文：△说四
现代文：说四
English: Say four

古文：王登为中牟令，上言于襄主曰： 中牟有士曰中章、胥己者，其身甚修，其学甚博，君何不举之？ 
现代文：王登任中牟县县令时，向赵襄子进言说： 中牟有中章和胥己两位文士，他们的品行很好，学识很渊博，您何不举用他们呢？ 
English: When Wang Deng was appointed as the county magistrate of Zhongmou County, he said to Zhao Xiangzi: Zhongmou has two scribes, Zhongzhang and Zou Ji. Their character is very good and their knowledge is very profound. Why don't you use them?

古文：主曰： 子见之，我将为中大夫。 
现代文：赵襄子说： 你让他们来见我，我将任命他们为中大夫。 
English: Zhao Xiangzi said: You let them come to see me, I will appoint them as junior doctors.

古文：相室谏曰： 中大夫，晋重列也。今无功而受，非晋臣之意。
现代文：赵襄子的家臣头目劝他说： 中大夫是晋国的重要官位，现在他们没有功劳就接受这么高的职权，不符合晋国提拔大臣的原意。
English: The head of Zhao Xiangzi's vassals advised him: "The position of Zhongdaifu is an important post in Jin, and it is not in line with the original intention of Jin to promote ministers to such a high position without merit.

古文：君其耳而未之邪！ 襄主曰： 我取登，既耳而目之矣，登之所取又耳而目之，是耳目人绝无已也。 
现代文：您恐也只是耳闻他们的名声，没有亲眼看到他们的实效吧！ 赵襄子说： 我取用王登，就是既用耳听又用眼看的；王登选拔的人，又要我亲自用耳听和用眼看。
English: Zhao Xiangzi said: I use Wang Deng, that is, I listen with my ears and see with my eyes; Wang Deng's selectors also want me to listen with my ears and see with my eyes.

古文：王登一日而见二中大夫，予之田宅。
现代文：这样亲自考察，就永远没有个完了。 王登在一天内使两个人见到赵襄子，被任命为中大夫，授予他们土地和房屋。
English: In one day, Wang Deng had two people meet Zhao Xiangzi, was appointed as a middle doctor, and granted them land and houses.

古文：中牟之人弃其田耘、卖宅圃而随文学者，邑之半。
现代文：中牟县里的人放弃耕田除草的农活，卖掉住宅和菜园，以便追随搞私学的文士，占了这个地区人口的一半。
English: People in Zhongmou County have given up farming and selling their houses and gardens to follow the self-taught scribes, accounting for half of the region's population.

古文：叔向御坐平公请事，公腓痛足痹转筋而不敢坏坐。
现代文：叔向在晋平公处陪坐，平公和他商量事情，平公腿痛脚麻以至抽筋，还是不敢坐得不端正。
English: Uncle Xiang sat with Jin Ping at his place, and Ping Gong discussed things with him. Ping Gong's legs were so sore that they had cramps, but he still dared not sit improperly.

古文：晋国闻之，皆曰： 叔向贤者，平公礼之，转筋而不敢坏坐。 
现代文：晋国人听说后，都说： 叔向是个贤人，平公对他有礼，以致抽筋也不敢坐得不端正。 
English: When the people of Jin heard about this, they all said, "Uncle Xiang is a wise man, and Ping Gong is so courteous to him that Cramp doesn't dare to sit improperly.

古文：晋国之辞仕托，慕叔向者国之锤矣。
现代文：晋国辞去官职以及对于贵族的依附而仿效叔向的人，一时间占了全国的一半。
English: The number of people in Jin Province who resigned from government posts and followed their uncle's example of clinging to the aristocracy, at one time accounted for half of the country.

古文：郑县人有屈公者，闻敌，恐，因死；恐已，因生。
现代文：郑县有个叫屈公的人，听到敌人来了，很害怕，吓得死了过去；害怕的情绪一过去，又活了过来。
English: In Zheng County, there was a man named Qu Gongma. When he heard that the enemy was coming, he was very scared. He was scared to death. As soon as the feeling of fear passed, he came back to life.

古文：赵主父使李疵视中山可攻不也。
现代文：赵武灵王派李疵察看中山国可不可以攻打。
English: King Zhao Wuling sent Li Qi to see if Zhongshan could be attacked.

古文：还报曰： 中山可伐也。
现代文：李疵回来报告说； 中山国可以攻打。
English: Li Qi reported back that Zhongshan Province could be attacked.

古文：君不亟伐，将后齐、燕。 
现代文：您不赶快攻打的话，就要落在齐国和燕国的后面。 
English: If you do not attack quickly, you will fall behind Qi and Yan.

古文：主父曰： 何故可攻？ 
现代文：武灵王说： 根据什么说可以攻打？ 
English: King Wuling said, "On what basis can we attack?"

古文：李疵对曰： 其君见好岩穴之士，所倾盖与车以见穷闾陋巷之士以十数，伉礼下布衣之士以百数矣。 
现代文：李疵回答说： 中山国君亲近隐居的人。他亲自驱车拜访并和他们同车，以便显扬居住在小街小巷里的读书人，人数要用十来计算。
English: Li Qi replied: Zhongshan Guojun is close to those who live in seclusion. He personally drove to visit them and drove with them in order to highlight the readers who live in the small streets and alleys. The number should be counted by ten.

古文：君曰： 以子言论，是贤君也，安可攻？ 
现代文：他用平等的礼节来对待不做官的读书人，人数要用百来计算了。 赵武灵王说： 按你的话来判断，中山国君是个贤明的君主，怎么可以攻打呢？ 
English: He treated the non-official readers with equal courtesy, and the number should be counted in hundreds. Zhao Wuling Wang said: Judging by your words, Zhongshan Guojun is a wise monarch, how can he be attacked?

古文：疵曰： 不然。夫好显岩穴之士而朝之，则战士怠于行阵；上尊学者，下士居朝，则农夫惰于田。
现代文：李疵说： 不是这样的，喜欢显扬隐士并让他们参加朝会，战士们打仗时就会懈怠；君主尊重学者，文士高居朝廷，农夫就懒于拼作。
English: Li Qi said: This is not the case. They like to show off the hermits and have them attend the imperial court meetings. Soldiers will slack off when fighting; the monarch respects scholars, scribes are high up in the imperial court, and farmers are too lazy to work hard.

古文：战士怠于行阵者，则兵弱也；农夫惰于田者，则国贫也。
现代文：战士打仗时懈怠、兵力就削弱了、农夫懒于耕作，国家就贫穷了。
English: When warriors are slack in war, the army is weakened; when farmers are lazy in farming, the country is impoverished.

古文：兵弱于敌，国贫于内，而不亡者，未之有也。
现代文：兵力比敌人弱，国家内部又穷，这样还不衰亡的，从未有过。
English: There has never been a state so weak in military strength compared to the enemy, and so poor within its borders, that has not yet perished.

古文：伐之不亦可乎？ 
现代文：攻打中山不是可行的吗？ 
English: Isn't it feasible to attack Zhongshan?

古文：主父曰： 善。 
现代文：赵武灵王说： 很好。 
English: Zhao Wuling Wang said: Very good.

古文：举兵而伐中山，遂灭也。
现代文：起兵攻打中山，随后灭亡了它。
English: He raised an army to attack Zhongshan, which was subsequently destroyed.

古文：△说五
现代文：说五
English: Say five.

古文：齐桓公好服紫，一国尽服紫。
现代文：齐桓公喜欢穿紫衣服，全国的人就都穿紫衣服。
English: King Qi Huan likes to wear purple clothes, and people all over the country wear purple clothes.

古文：当是时也，五素不得一紫。
现代文：在那时，五匹素布还抵不上一匹紫布。
English: At that time, five pieces of plain cloth could not match one piece of purple cloth.

古文：桓公患之，谓管仲曰： 寡人好服紫，紫贵甚，一国百姓好服紫不已，寡人奈何？ 
现代文：桓公为此事担忧，对管仲说： 我喜欢穿紫衣服，紫衣服特别贵，全国百姓喜欢穿紫衣服，日甚一日，不能停止，我对此怎么办？ 
English: King Huan was worried about this and said to Guanzhong, "I like to wear purple clothes. Purple clothes are very expensive. People all over the country like to wear purple clothes. I can't stop. What should I do about it?"

古文：管仲曰： 君欲止之，何不试勿衣紫也？
现代文：管仲说： 君王想要制止这种状况，为何不尝试着自己不去穿紫衣服呢？
English: Guanzhong said, "If the king wants to stop this situation, why doesn't he try not to wear purple himself?"

古文：谓左右曰： 吾甚恶紫之臭。
现代文：您就对近侍说： 我特别厌恶紫衣服的气味。 
English: You say to the waiter: I particularly dislike the smell of purple clothes.

古文：于是左右适有衣紫而进者，公必曰： 少却，吾恶紫臭。 公曰： 诺。 
现代文：如果在这个时候近侍中恰巧有穿紫衣服进见的人，您一定要说： 稍微退后一点，我厌恶紫衣服的气味。  桓公说： 好吧。 
English: If, at this time, one of the attendants happens to be wearing purple, you must say, "Step back a little, I hate the smell of purple."

古文：于是日，郎中莫衣紫，其明日，国中莫衣紫；三日，境内莫衣紫也。
现代文：在这一天，君主的侍从官没有一个人穿紫衣服；第二天，国都中没有一个人穿紫衣服；第三天，齐国境内没有一个人穿紫衣服。
English: On this day, none of the monarch's attendants wore purple; the next day, no one in the capital wore purple; on the third day, no one in Qi wore purple.

古文：一曰：齐王好衣紫，齐人皆好也。
现代文：另一种说法：齐王喜欢穿紫衣服，齐国人都喜欢穿紫衣服。
English: Another way of saying it is: King Qi likes to wear purple clothes, and the people of Qi like to wear purple clothes.

古文：齐国五素不得一紫。
现代文：齐国五匹素布抵不上一匹紫布。
English: Five pieces of plain cloth in Qi Province cannot match one piece of purple cloth.

古文：齐王患紫贵，傅说王曰： 《诗》云： 不躬不亲，庶民不信。
现代文：齐王担心紫布太贵。太傅规劝齐王说： 《诗》上说： 君主不以身作则，民众就不会相信。 
English: King Qi was worried that the purple cloth was too expensive. Taifu chastised and advised King Qi, saying, "The poem says, 'If the monarch does not lead by example, the people will not believe.'

古文：今王欲民无衣紫者，王请自解紫衣而朝，群臣有紫衣进者，曰： 益远！
现代文：现在大王要想使民众不穿紫衣服，就请先自己脱下紫衣服去上朝。群臣中有穿紫衣服进见的人，就说： 再离我远些，我厌恶那种气味。  
English: Now, if the great king wants to get the people to stop wearing purple, he should first take off his own purple clothes and go to the court. If any of his courtiers enter wearing purple, they should say, "Stay away from me, I hate that smell."

古文：寡人恶臭。 是日也，郎中莫衣紫；是月也，国中莫衣紫；是岁也，境内莫衣紫。
现代文：这一天，侍从官再没有一个穿紫衣服的；这个月，国都中再没有一个穿紫衣服的；这一年，齐国境内再没有一个穿紫衣服的。
English: On this day, there was no one wearing purple among the attendants; this month, there was no one wearing purple in the capital; this year, there was no one wearing purple in Qi.

古文：郑简公谓子产曰： 国小，迫于荆、晋之间。
现代文：郑简公对于产说： 郑国小；又夹在楚国和晋国的中间。
English: Zheng Jian Gong said to the production: Zheng Guo Xiao; also sandwiched between Chu and Jin.

古文：今城郭不完，兵甲不备，不可以待不虞。 
现代文：现在内城外城不完整，兵器铠甲不齐备，不能用来应付意外事变。 
English: Now the inner city and the outer city are incomplete, and the weapons and armor are not complete, and cannot be used to cope with unexpected events.

古文：子产曰： 臣闭其外也已远矣，而守其内也已固矣，虽国小，犹不危之也。
现代文：子产说： 我对外关闭得已足够严了，在内防卫得已足够牢了，虽然国家不大，也还不认为会有什么危险。
English: Zi Yuan said: I have closed the door to the outside world tightly enough, and I have defended myself firmly enough within the country. Although the country is not large, I do not think there will be any danger.

古文：君其勿忧。 
现代文：请您不必为这件事担忧。 
English: Please don't worry about it.

古文：是以没简公身无患。
现代文：因此直到郑简公去世，国家一直没有祸患。
English: Therefore, until the death of Zheng Jian Gong, the country has been free from disaster.

古文：一曰：子产相郑，简公谓子产曰： 饮酒不乐也。
现代文：另一种说法：子产担任郑相，郑简公对子产说： 喝起酒来都没法尽兴。
English: Another way of saying this is that Zheng Jian Gong said to his son-in-law, who served as Zheng Xiang, "I can't enjoy myself when I'm drunk."

古文：俎豆不大，钟鼓竽瑟不鸣，寡人之事不一，国家不定，百姓不治，耕战不辑睦，亦子之罪。
现代文：放祭品的器具不够大，钟鼓竿瑟不够响，我的事务不能专一，国家不安定，百姓不太平，耕战之士不能和睦相处，过些也算你的过失了。
English: The instruments for offering sacrifices are not big enough, the bells and drums are not loud enough, my affairs cannot be single-minded, the country is unstable, the people are not peaceful, the farmers and warriors cannot live in harmony, and anything else is your fault.

古文：子有职，寡人亦有职，各守其职。 
现代文：你有你的职事，我也有我的职事，咱们各自管好自己的职事吧。 
English: You have your job, I have my job, let's each take care of our own job.

古文：子产退而为政五年，国无盗贼，道不拾遗，桃枣廕于街者莫有援也，锥刀遗道三日可反。三年不变，民无饥也。
现代文：子产下朝后，经过五年的政事经营，国内没有盗贼，路不拾遗，桃树枣树的果实遮蔽街道，也没人伸手去摘，锥子刀子丢在路上，三天内就 有人送回，这种情形，其后三年不曾改变，民众没有挨饿的。
English: After the birth of the first son, after five years of political management, there were no thieves in the country, the road was not picked up, the fruits of the peach tree and the date tree covered the streets, and no one reached out to pick them up, the cone knife was left on the road, and someone sent it back within three days, this situation did not change for the next three years, and the people did not starve.

古文：宋襄公与楚人战于涿谷上，宋人既成列矣，楚人未及济，右司马购强趋而谏曰： 楚人众而宋人寡，请使楚人半涉，未成列而击之，必败。 
现代文：宋襄公和楚人在涿谷上打仗，宋人已经摆好了阵势，楚人还没有完全过河。宋右司马官购强快步上前进言道： 敌众我寡，请在楚人半渡，尚未摆好阵势时出击，一定能把他们打垮。 
English: Song Xianggong and the Chu people were fighting in the Fenwei Valley. The Song people had already set up their positions, but the Chu people had not yet completely crossed the river. Song Yu Sima Guan Bao stepped forward and said: "Enemies are few and far between. Please attack when the Chu people are halfway across the river and have not yet set up their positions. You will definitely be able to defeat them."

古文：襄公曰： 寡人闻君子曰： 不重伤，不擒二毛，不推人于险，不迫人于厄。不鼓不成列。
现代文：宋襄公说： 我听君子说过， 不要再伤害已经受了伤的人，不要捉拿年事已高的人，不要在别人危险时再推一把，不要在别人困迫时再加一码，不要进攻没有摆好阵势的敌军。 
English: Song Xianggong said: I have heard a gentleman say, "Don't hurt someone who has already been injured, don't capture someone who is old, don't push someone when they are in danger, don't add another yard when someone is in trouble, and don't attack an enemy army that is not well positioned."

古文：今楚未济而击之，害义。
现代文：现在楚军没有完全过河就去攻打，是有伤义理的。
English: Now that the Chu army has not completely crossed the river, it is illogical to attack.

古文：请使楚人毕涉成阵而后鼓士进之。 
现代文：还是等到楚人全部过了河，摆好阵势，然后再击鼓让战士们进攻吧。 
English: Or wait until all the Chu people have crossed the river, set up their positions, and then beat the drums for the soldiers to attack.

古文：右司马曰： 君不爱宋民，腹心不完，特为义耳。 
现代文：右司马说： 君王不爱惜宋国民众，不保全国家根本，只不过为的仁义虚名罢了。 
English: Right Sima said: The king did not spare the people of the Song Dynasty and did not preserve the country fundamentally, but it was just a false name of benevolence and righteousness.

古文：公曰： 不反列，且行法。 
现代文：襄公说： 不快回到队伍里去，将按军法处置! 
English: Xiang Gong said: If you don't return to the team soon, you will be dealt with according to military law!

古文：右司马反列，楚人已成列撰阵矣，公乃鼓之。
现代文：右司马回到队伍时，楚人已经排好行列、摆好阵势了、襄公这才击鼓进攻。
English: When the right Sima returned to the team, the Chu people had already lined up and set up their positions, and it was only then that Xiang Gong started to play the drums.

古文：宋人大败，公伤股，三日而死。
现代文：宋人大败，宋襄公伤及大腿，三天后就死了。
English: Song Ren suffered a crushing defeat, Song Xiang Gong was wounded in the thigh and died three days later.

古文：此乃慕自亲仁义之祸。
现代文：这就是追求亲自实行仁义带来的祸害。
English: This is the calamity brought about by the pursuit of personally practicing benevolence.

古文：夫必恃人主之自躬亲而后民听从，是则将令人主耕以为上，服战雁行也民乃肯耕战，则人主不泰危乎！
现代文：一定要依靠君主亲自去干，然后民众才听从，这就是要君主自己种田吃饭，自己排在队伍里打仗，然后民众才肯从事耕战。这样一来，君主不是太危险了吗？
English: It is necessary to rely on the monarch to do it himself, and then the people will obey. This means that the monarch must grow and eat his own food, fight in his own ranks, and then the people will be willing to engage in agricultural warfare. In this way, isn't the monarch too dangerous?

古文：而人臣不泰安乎！
现代文：而臣子不是太安全了吗？
English: But aren't the courtiers too safe?

古文：齐景公游少海，传骑从中来谒曰： 婴疾甚，且死，恐公后之。 
现代文：齐景公在渤海边游玩，释使从国都跑来谒见说： 曼婴病得很重，快要死了，恐怕您赶不上见他了。 
English: Qi Jing Gong was playing on the shore of the Bohai Sea. An envoy from the country came to see him and said: "The baby boy is very ill and is about to die. I'm afraid you won't be able to see him in time."

古文：景公遽起，传骑又至。
现代文：景公立刻起身，又有驿使到达。
English: King Jing immediately got up, and another messenger arrived.

古文：景公曰： 趋驾烦且之乘，使驺子韩枢御之。 
现代文：景公说： 赶快驾上烦且拉的车，叫马车官韩柩驾车。 
English: Jing Gong said, "Hurry up and drive the tiresome carriage, and tell the carriage officer, Han Ye, to drive."

古文：行数百步，以驺为不疾，夺辔代之御；可数百步，以马为不进，尽释车而走。
现代文：才跑了几百步，景公认为韩枢赶得不快，夺过缰绳，代他驾车，又跑了几百步路，景公认为马不往前奔，就干脆丢下车子，自己向前奔跑。
English: He only ran a few hundred steps, but Jing Gong thought that Han Zu was not happy with the pace, so he took over the reins and drove the car for him. He also ran a few hundred steps. Jing Gong thought that the horse would not run forward, so he simply dropped the car and ran forward himself.

古文：以且烦之良而驺子韩枢之巧，而以为不如下走也。
现代文：凭烦且这样的好马和车马官韩柩这样高超的驾驭本领，而齐景公竟会认为不如自已下车跑得快。
English: With such a good horse and such a superb driving skill of the carriage and horse officer Han Zheng, Qi Jing Gong would even think that he could not run as fast as he did.

古文：魏昭王欲与官事，谓孟尝君曰： 寡人欲与官事。 
现代文：魏昭王想亲自参与国家事务的管理，就对孟尝君说： 我想参与国家事务的管理。 
English: When Wei Zhao Wang wanted to personally participate in the management of state affairs, he said to Meng Yaojun: I want to participate in the management of state affairs.

古文：君曰： 王欲与官事，则何不试习读法？ 
现代文：孟尝君说： 大王想参与管理国家的事务，那么为什么不试着学习法令呢？ 
English: Meng Yijun said: The king wants to participate in the management of the country's affairs, so why not try to learn the laws?

古文：昭王读法十余简而睡卧矣。
现代文：昭王才读过十几条法令就躺下打瞌睡了。
English: After reading more than a dozen decrees, King Zhao lay down and dozed off.

古文：王曰： 寡人不能读此法。 
现代文：昭王说： 我不能阅读这些法令。 
English: Zhao Wang said: I can't read these decrees.

古文：夫不躬亲其势柄，而欲为人臣所宜为者也，睡不亦宜乎。
现代文：君主不亲自掌握权势，却想做臣子应当做的事情，那么打磕睡不也是很自然的吗？
English: Isn't it natural for a monarch to doze off if he doesn't personally hold the power but wants to do what a vassal should do?

古文：孔子曰： 为人君者犹盂也，民犹水也。
现代文：孔子说： 做君主的人好像盂，民众好像水。
English: Confucius said: The ruler is like a reed, and the people are like water.

古文：盂方水方，盂圜水圜。 
现代文：盂是方的，水就成方的；盂是圆的，水就成圆的。 
English: If the bowl is square, the water will be square; if the bowl is round, the water will be round.

古文：邹君好服长缨，左右皆服长缨，缨甚贵。
现代文：邹国国君爱用长长的帽带，近侍也都跟着用上了长长的帽带，帽带价格很高。
English: The king of the country likes to use a long hat band, and the attendants also use a long hat band. The price of the hat band is very high.

古文：邹君患之，问左右，左右曰： 君好服，百姓亦多服，是以贵。 
现代文：邹君为此担忧，问近侍，近侍说： 您喜欢佩带，百姓也都跟着佩带，因此责了起来。 
English: Zou Jun was worried about this and asked a courtier. The courtier said, "You like to wear the sash. The people also like to wear the sash. That's why I reprimanded you."

古文：君因先自断其缨而出，国中皆不服缨。
现代文：邹君于是先把自己的帽带割断，然后到外面出巡，邹国民众全都不再用长帽带了。
English: He cut his own headband first, and then went out on patrol. The people of Shandong no longer wore long headbands.

古文：君不能下令为百姓服度以禁之，乃断缨出以示先民，是先戮以莅民也。
现代文：君主不能下令定出民众佩带标准来加以禁止，却割断自己的帽带出巡，以示为民先导，这是先行侮辱自己，再去指导民众的做法。
English: The monarch cannot order the people to wear a standard to prohibit it, but cut off his hat and go on a tour to show that he is the people's forerunner. This is a practice of insulting himself first and then guiding the people.

古文：叔向赋猎，功多者受多，功少者受少。
现代文：叔向分配猎获物时，功劳多的分得多，功劳少的分得少。
English: When the uncle distributed the game to the uncle, the one with more merit got more, and the one with less merit got less.

古文：韩昭侯谓申子曰： 法度甚不易行也。 
现代文：韩昭侯对申不害说： 法度非常不容易推行。 
English: Han Zhaohou told Shen: "The law is very difficult to implement.

古文：申子曰： 法者，见功而与赏，因能而受官。
现代文：申不害说： 所谓法，就是验明功劳而给予赏赐，依据才能而授予官职。
English: Shen Fuxia said: The so-called law is to reward the merit and award the official position according to the talent.

古文：今君设法度而听左右之请，此所以难行也。 
现代文：现在君主设立了法度，却又听从近侍的请求，这是法度难以推行的原因。 
English: The reason why it is difficult to enforce the law now is that the monarch established the law, but heeded the request of his close attendants.

古文：昭侯曰： 吾自今以来，知行法矣，寡人奚听矣。 
现代文：昭侯说： 我从今以后知道如何推行法度了，知道听取什么意见了。 
English: Zhao Hou said: From now on, I know how to implement the law, and I know what opinions to listen to.

古文：一日，申子请仕其从兄官。
现代文：一天，申不害请求委任他的堂兄做官。
English: One day, Shin innocently asked for his cousin to be appointed as an official.

古文：昭侯曰： 非所学于子也。
现代文：昭侯说： 这不是我从你那儿学来的做法。
English: "It's not something I learned from you," Akihiro said.

古文：听子之谒，败子之道乎？
现代文：要是听从你的请求，不就破坏你的治国原则了吗？
English: If I obey your request, won't I be violating your principle of governing the country?

古文：亡其用子之谒。 申子辟舍请罪。
现代文：我没法采纳你的请求： 申不害诚惶诚恐地请求给予处罚。
English: I can't accept your request: I respectfully request that you be punished.

古文：△说六
现代文：说六
English: Say six

古文：晋文公攻原，裹十日粮，遂与大夫期十日。
现代文：晋文公攻打原国时，携带了十天的粮食，于是和大夫约定在十天内收兵。
English: When Jin Wenkong attacked his home country, he brought ten days of grain with him, so he agreed with the doctor to withdraw his troops within ten days.

古文：至原十日，而原不下，击金而退，罢兵而去。
现代文：到达原地十天，却没有攻下原国，文公鸣金后退，收兵离开原因。
English: It took ten days to reach the original place, but they did not conquer the original country. The reason for this was that Wenkong sent money back and withdrew his troops.

古文：士有从原中出者，曰： 原三日即下矣。 
现代文：有个从原国都城中出来的文士说： 原国三天内就可攻下了。 
English: A scribe who came out of the capital city of the original country said: The original country can be conquered in three days.

古文：群臣左右谏曰： 夫原之食竭力尽矣，君姑待之。 
现代文：群臣近侍进谏说： 原国城内已经粮食枯竭，力量耗尽了，君主暂且等一等吧。 
English: A group of courtiers close to the emperor said: "The city of the original country has run out of food and power, so the emperor should wait a while."

古文：公曰： 吾与士期十日，不去，是亡吾信也。
现代文：文公说： 我和武士约期十天，还不离开的话，那就失掉了我的信用。
English: Wenguang said, "I have a ten-day contract with the samurai, and if I don't leave, then I will lose my credibility."

古文：得原失信，吾不为也。 
现代文：得到原国而失掉信用，我是不干的。 
English: I won't do it if I lose the trust of my country of origin.

古文：遂罢兵而去。
现代文：于是收兵离去。
English: So they withdrew their troops and left.

古文：原人闻曰： 有君如彼其信也，可无归乎？ 
现代文：原国人听到后说： 君主有像他那样守信用的，怎好不归顺呢？ 
English: When the native people heard this, they said, "If the sovereign has kept his word as he has, why should we not submit to him?"

古文：乃降公。
现代文：就向晋文公投降了。
English: Subsequently, Emperor Jinwen surrendered.

古文：卫人闻曰： 有君如彼其信也，可无从乎？ 
现代文：卫国人听到后说： 君主有像他那样守信用的，怎么能不跟从他呢？ 
English: When the defenders of the country heard this, they said: If the sovereign has kept his word as he has, how can we not follow him?

古文：乃降公。
现代文：随后投降了晋文公。
English: Subsequently, Emperor Jinwen surrendered.

古文：孔子闻而记之曰： 攻原得卫者，信也。 
现代文：孔子听到后记下来说： 攻打原国而得到卫国，靠的是信用。 
English: When Confucius heard this, he jotted it down and said: To attack the motherland and defend it depends on trust.

古文：文公问箕郑曰： 救饿奈何？ 
现代文：晋文公问箕郑说： 怎样救济饥荒？ 
English: Jin Wenkong asked Zou Zheng: How to relieve famine?

古文：对曰： 信。 
现代文：箕郑回答说： 守信用。 
English: Zhai Zheng replied, "Keep your word."

古文：公曰： 安信？ 
现代文：文公说： 怎样守信用呢？ 
English: Wengong said: How to keep a good faith?

古文：曰： 信名，信事，信义。信名则群臣守职，善恶不逾，百事不怠；信事则不失天时，百姓不逾；信义则近亲劝勉，而远者归之矣。 
现代文：箕郑说： 在名位、政事、道义上都要守信用：名位上守信用，群臣就会尽职尽责，好的坏的不会混杂，各种政事不会懈怠；政事上守信用，就不会错过天时季节，百姓不会三心二意；道义上守信用，亲近的入就会努力工作，疏远的人就会前来归顺了。 
English: Zhai Zheng said: It is necessary to keep one's word in respect of one's title, political affairs, and morals. If one keeps one's word in respect of one's title, the ministers will perform their duties, the good and the bad will not be mixed, and there will be no slackness in various political affairs. If one keeps one's word in respect of political affairs, the time and season will not be missed, and the people will not be half-hearted. If one keeps one's word in respect of morals, the close ones will work hard, and the distant ones will come to submit.

古文：吴起出，遇故人而止之食。
现代文：吴起出门，碰到了老朋友，就留人家一起吃饭。
English: When Wu went out and met an old friend, he decided to have dinner with him.

古文：故人曰： 诺 期返而食。 吴子曰： 待公而食。 
现代文：老朋友说： 好吧。马上就会回来吃饭的。 吴起说： 我等您来吃饭。 
English: The old friend said, "Okay. I'll be back for dinner soon." Wu Qi said, "I'll wait for you to come for dinner."

古文：故人至暮不来，起不食而待之。
现代文：老朋友到晚上还没来，吴起不吃饭等候着他。
English: The old friend did not come until the evening, and Wu Qi waited for him without eating.

古文：明日早，令人求故人。
现代文：第二天早上，派人去请老朋友。
English: The next morning, send for an old friend.

古文：故人来，方与之食。
现代文：老朋友来了，吴起才和他一起吃饭。
English: An old friend came to visit, and Wu Qi had dinner with him.

古文：魏文侯与虞人期猎。
现代文：魏文侯和守山的人约定了打猎时间。
English: Wei Wenhou and the person guarding the mountain agreed on a hunting time.

古文：明日，会天疾风，左右止文侯，不听，曰： 不可以风疾之故而失信，吾不为也。 
现代文：第二天，正巧碰上天刮大风，近侍劝阻文侯不要再去，文侯不听，说： 不可因风大的缘故而失掉信用，我不能那样处身行事。 
English: The next day, just as it happened, there was a strong wind blowing in the sky. His close attendants tried to dissuade Wen Hou from going again, but Wen Hou did not listen and said, "We must not lose our trust because of the strong wind. I cannot behave like that."

古文：遂自驱车往，犯风而罢虞人。
现代文：于是亲自驾车前去，冒风告诉守山人打猎的事作罢。
English: So he drove there himself and told the mountain guards to stop hunting.

古文：曾子之妻之市，其子随之而泣，其母曰： 女还，顾反为女杀彘。 
现代文：曾子的妻子上集市去，小儿子跟在后面哭泣。孩子母亲说： 你回去，等我回来给你杀个猪吃。 
English: Zengzi's wife went to the bazaar, her little son crying behind her. The child's mother said, "Go back, and when I come back, I'll kill a pig for you to eat."

古文：妻适市来，曾子欲捕彘杀之。
现代文：她去集市回来，曾子打算抓猪来杀。
English: When she returned from the market, Zengzi planned to catch a pig and kill it.

古文：妻止之曰： 特与婴兒戏耳。 
现代文：妻子阻止说： 不过是和小孩开玩笑罢了。 
English: His wife tried to stop him, saying: "He's only joking with the children."

古文：曾子曰： 婴兒非与戏也。
现代文：曾子说： 小孩可不是开玩笑的对象。
English: Zeng Zi said: Children are not the object of jokes.

古文：婴兒非有知也，待父母而学者也，听父母之教。
现代文：小孩没什么才智，要靠父母作出样子才会跟着学，完全听从父母的教诲。
English: Children don't have much intelligence, and they have to rely on their parents to pretend to be able to learn, and completely follow their parents' teachings.

古文：今子欺之，是教子欺也。
现代文：现在你欺骗了他，也就是教儿子学会骗人。
English: Now you've lied to him, which is teaching your son to lie.

古文：母欺子，子而不信其母，非以成教也。 
现代文：做母亲的欺骗孩子，孩子就不相信母亲了，这不是进行教育的方法。 
English: If a mother deceives her child, the child will not believe the mother. This is not the way to educate.

古文：遂烹彘也。
现代文：于是就把猪杀掉煮了。
English: So they killed the pig and boiled it.

古文：楚厉王有警鼓与百姓为戒，饮酒醉，过而击之也。
现代文：楚厉王遇到军情警报，就立起军鼓作为号召，通知民众一起防守。
English: When King Chu Li encountered a military alert, he set up a military drum as a rallying call to inform the public to defend together.

古文：民大惊。使人止之曰： 吾醉而与左右戏击之也。 
现代文：他喝酒喝醉后，错误地敲响了军鼓，民众都非常惊慌。厉王派人安抗大家说： 我是醉酒后和近侍开玩笑，才错误地击了鼓。 
English: After drinking and getting drunk, he mistakenly struck the military drum, and the people were very alarmed. King Li sent someone to calm everyone down and said: I was drunk and joking with the attendants when I mistakenly struck the drum.

古文：民皆罢。
现代文：于是民众都松懈了下来。
English: As a result, people relaxed.

古文：居数月，有警，击鼓而民不赴，乃更令明号而民信之。
现代文：过了几个月，又遇到军情警报，厉王击鼓，民众却不去备战。于是他更改命令，明确信号，这样民众才信从了。
English: A few months later, there was another military alert, and the people did not prepare for war, so he changed the order and made the signal clear, so that the people would obey.

古文：李悝警其两和，曰： 谨警敌人，旦暮且至击汝。 
现代文：李悝警告左有壁垒的军队说； 小心地警惕敌人，他们早晚就会来袭击你们。 
English: Li Qiye warned the troops manning the barricades: "Be careful and watch out for the enemy, sooner or later they will come to attack you."

古文：如是者再三而敌不至，两和懈怠，不信李悝。
现代文：像这样的警告说了好多次，但敌人却没有来。
English: Warnings like this were given many times, but the enemy did not come.

古文：居数月，秦人来袭之，至几夺其军。此不信患也。
现代文：左右壁垒的军队都松懈了下来，不再相信李悝，过了几个月，秦人前来袭击他们，打起来后，几乎消灭李埋全军，这是不讲信用的祸害。
English: After a few months, the Qin people came to attack them. After the battle, they almost wiped out Li Bi's entire army, which was a disaster of bad faith.

古文：一曰：李悝与秦人战，谓左和曰： 速上！
现代文：另一种说法：李悝和秦人就要交战。他对左边壁垒的军队说： 快上。
English: Another way of saying this is that when Li Qiye and the Qin were about to fight, he said to the troops on the left side of the wall: "Hurry up.

古文：右和已上矣。 
现代文：右边壁垒的军队已经上阵了。 
English: The troops on the right ramparts are already in action.

古文：又驰而至右和曰： 左和已上矣。 
现代文：又骑马到右边壁垒的军队说： 左边壁垒的军队已经上阵了。 
English: And he rode to the army that was on the right side of the wall, and said, The army that is on the left side of the wall has set out.

古文：左右和曰： 上矣。 
现代文：两翼军队都说： 上阵吧。 
English: The armies on both sides said: "Let's go into battle."

古文：于是皆争上。
现代文：于是都争先恐后地上了阵。
English: So they all scrambled to get on the field.

古文：其明年，与秦人战。
现代文：过后第二年，和秦人交战。
English: The following year, war broke out with the Qin.

古文：秦人袭之，至几夺其军。
现代文：秦人前来偷袭，一交手，差点儿消灭魏军。
English: The Qin people came to make a surprise attack and almost wiped out the Wei army in a single battle.

古文：此不信之患。
现代文：这是不讲信用的祸害。
English: This is the scourge of bad faith.

古文：有相与讼者。
现代文：有两个有争吵，请子产为他们评理。
English: There are two quarrels, ask the children to judge for them.

古文：子产离之，而毋使通辞，到至其言以告而知也。
现代文：了产把他们隔离在两处，使他们互相不能交谈。然后把他们两人的话都颠倒其词告诉对方，是非曲直很快就知道了。
English: The midwife isolated them in two places so that they could not talk to each other, and then told them both the opposite of what they had said, and the rights and wrongs were soon known.

古文：惠嗣公使人伪关市，关市呵难之，因事关市以金，关市乃合之。嗣公谓关市曰： 某时有客过而予汝金，因谴之。 
现代文：卫嗣公派人扮成经过关卡的人，这个人在过关时受到了主管官吏的非难，该人于是贿赂这个官吏，才得以顺利过关。后来，卫嗣公对那官吏说： 某月某日，有个人给了你金钱，你就放他过关了。 
English: Later, Weizhikong said to the official: "On a certain day of a certain month, a person gave you money, and you let him pass through customs."

古文：关市大恐，以嗣公为明察。
现代文：关卡上管理官吏特别害怕，认为卫嗣公明察下情。
English: At the checkpoint, the management officials were particularly afraid, believing that Weizhong was watching the situation.

