古文：李崧，深州饶阳人。
现代文：李崧，深州饶阳人。
English: Li Wei, a native of Raoyang, Shenzhou.

古文：父舜卿，本州录事参军。
现代文：父亲李舜卿，任本州录事参军。
English: His father, Li Yingqing, was appointed to the Honshu Record to join the army.

古文：崧幼而聪敏，十余岁为文，家人奇之。
现代文：李崧小时就聪明伶俐，十多岁写的文章，家人都觉得奇异。
English: Li Yao was smart from an early age, and his family thought the article, written when he was more than 10 years old, was strange.

古文：弱冠，本府署为参军。
现代文：成年时在州府暂任参军。
English: When he came of age, he temporarily joined the army in the prefecture.

古文：其父尝谓宗人李鏻曰： 大丑生处，形奇气异，前途应不居徒劳之地，赖吾兄诲激之。 
现代文：他父亲曾对族人李磷说 ：大丑出生的地方，形势奇特，地气神异，以后当不居住在无所作为的地方。还靠大哥教诲鼓励他。 
English: His father once said to a member of his tribe, Li Phosphorus: "The place where the Ugly One was born, the situation is strange, the atmosphere is strange, in the future he should not live in a place where there is nothing to do." He also encouraged him by his elder brother's teachings.

古文：大丑即崧之小字也。
现代文：大丑即李崧的小字。
English: Da Ugly is the small character of Li Xuan.

古文：同光初，魏王继岌为兴圣宫使，兼领镇州节钺，崧以参军从事。
现代文：同光初年，魏王李继岌任兴圣宫使，兼镇州节度使，李崧为参军从事。
English: In the first year of Tongguang, Wei King Li Jizhi was appointed as the envoy of the Xing Sacred Palace, and also the envoy of the Zhenzhou Festival. Li Yong was engaged in joining the army.

古文：时推官李荛掌书，崧见其起草不工，密谓掌事吕柔曰： 令公皇子，天下瞻望，至于尺牍往来，章表论列，稍须文理合宜。李侍御起草，未能尽善。 
现代文：当时推官李荛掌管文书，李崧看见他起草的文牍不精，就私下对主事的吕柔说： 魏王是皇子，为天下人瞻望，对于尺牍往来，章表论事，还须文从理顺，李荛所起草的公文，未能尽善尽美。 
English: At that time, the magistrate Li Yan was in charge of the paperwork. Li Yan saw that the document he had drafted was not precise, so he privately said to the main task of Lurou: Wei Wang is the prince, for the people of the world to look forward to, for the exchanges of rulers, chapters and tables, and must be rationalized. The official document drafted by Li Yan could not be perfect.

古文：吕曰： 公试代为之。 
现代文：吕柔说： 那您试着代他写写。 
English: Lu Rong said: Then try to write for him.

古文：吕得崧所作，示卢质、冯道，皆称之。繇是擢为兴圣宫巡官，独掌奏记。
现代文：吕柔得到李崧的文笔，给卢质、冯道看，都称赞他，因此提升他为兴圣宫巡官，专门掌管奏章表记。
English: Lu Zhuo obtained Li Xi's writings, and both Lu Qing and Feng Dao praised him, so he was promoted to the inspector of the Xing Sheng Palace, specifically in charge of the score.

古文：庄宗入洛，授太常寺协律郎。
现代文：唐庄宗进洛阳后，授李崧为太常寺协律郎。
English: After Tangzhuang Zong entered Luoyang, he appointed Li Xi as the deputy of the Taiji Temple.

古文：王师伐蜀，继岌为都统，以崧掌书记。
现代文：唐军讨伐川蜀，李继岌任都统，以李崧掌管文书。
English: The Tang army besieged Sichuan and Shu, and Li Jizhe was appointed as the governor of the capital, with Li Xi in charge of paperwork.

古文：蜀平，枢密使郭崇韬为宦官诬构，继岌遂杀崇韬父子，外尚未知。
现代文：川蜀平定后，枢密使郭崇韬被宦官诬陷，李继岌杀了郭崇韬父子，外边还不知道。
English: After the Sichuan Shu was pacified, the eunuch framed Guo Chongyao, a confidential envoy, and Li Jie killed Guo Chongyao and his son, but the outside world did not know about it.

古文：崧白继岌曰： 王何为作此危事？
现代文：李崧对李继岌说 ：大王为何做这种危险的事？
English: Li Yan said to Li Jizhe, "Why did the great king do such a dangerous thing?"

古文：至于不容崇韬，至洛诛之未晚。
现代文：就是不容郭崇韬，等回洛阳后再杀他也不晚。
English: Even if he does not tolerate Guo Chongyao, it is not too late to kill him after returning to Luoyang.

古文：今悬军五千里，无咫尺书诏，便杀重臣，非谋也。 
现代文：现在孤军深入五千里，没有皇上片言只字的书信诏令，便杀重臣，这是不智。 
English: Now a lone army has penetrated five thousand miles. It is unwise to kill a senior minister without a written imperial edict from the emperor.

古文：继岌曰： 吾亦悔之。 
现代文：李继岌说 ：我也后悔这件事。 
English: Li Jizhe said: I also regret this.

古文：崧召书吏三四人，登楼去梯，取黄纸矫写诏书，倒使都统印发之。
现代文：李崧叫来文书三四人，登上楼抽掉梯子，取来黄纸伪造诏书，用李继岌的印章倒盖上印。
English: Li Qian called three or four clerks, went upstairs, pulled out the ladder, took the yellow paper to forge the edict, and stamped it upside down with Li Jizhe's seal.

古文：翌日，告诸军，军情稍定。
现代文：第二天，宣告各军，军心才逐渐安定。
English: The next day, each army was announced, and the military spirit gradually stabilized.

古文：及自蜀还，明宗革命，任圜以宰相判三司，用崧为盐铁推官，赐绯。
现代文：从川蜀回京，唐明宗即位，任圜以宰相的身分掌管三司，任李崧为盐铁推官，赐穿绯衣。
English: After returning to Beijing from Sichuan and Shandong, Tang Mingzong ascended to the throne, and appointed Yu as the prime minister in charge of the three departments, appointed Li Yu as the salt and iron promoter, and gave him the right to wear the imperial robe.

古文：丁内艰，归乡里。
现代文：服母丧，回乡。
English: Mourning his mother, he returns to his hometown.

古文：服阕，镇帅范延光奏署掌书记。
现代文：服丧毕，镇州主帅范延光奏请让李崧暂时掌管文书。
English: After the funeral, Zhenzhou coach Fan Yan Guangso asked Li Jun to temporarily take charge of the paperwork.

古文：延光为枢密使，拜拾遗，直枢密院，迁补阙、起居郎、尚书郎，充职如故。
现代文：范延光任枢密使时，任李崧为拾遗，隶枢密院，迁任补阙、起居郎和尚书郎。
English: When Fan Yankuang was appointed as a privy envoy, he was appointed as Li Jiao for the collection of relics, subordinate to the Privy Council, transferred to the post of completer, kijiro and monk.

古文：长兴末，改翰林学士。
现代文：长兴末年，改为翰林学士。
English: In the last years of Changxing, it was changed to Hanlin Baccalaureate.

古文：清泰初，拜端明殿学士、户部侍郎。
现代文：清泰初年，任端明殿学士、户部侍郎。
English: In the first year of the Qing Dynasty, he was appointed as a scholar of Duanming Palace and a chamberlain of the household.

古文：先是，长兴三年冬，契丹入云中，朝廷欲命重将镇太原。时晋祖为六军副使，以秦王从荣不轨，恳求外任，深有北门之望，而大臣以晋高祖方权兵柄，难以议之。
现代文：此前，在长兴三年冬，契丹入侵云中，朝廷将令大将镇守太原，当时石敬瑭任六军副使，因为秦王李从荣多行不法，石敬瑭恳求到地方上任职，很想去太原。而朝中大臣因为石敬瑭正掌握兵权，难以决定让他去太原。
English: Previously, in the winter of the third year of Changxing, when the Khitan invaded the clouds, the imperial court would order the general to guard Taiyuan. At that time, Shi Jingyao was the deputy envoy of the six armies, because the Qin King Li from Rongduo acted illegally. Shi Jingyao pleaded to serve locally and wanted to go to Taiyuan. And because Shi Jingyao was in control of military power, it was difficult to decide to let him go to Taiyuan.

古文：一日，明宗怒其未奏，范延光、赵延寿等无对，退归本院，共议其事，方欲以康义诚为之。
现代文：一天，明宗气愤大臣久议不决，范延光、赵延寿等无言以对，退回枢密院，一同议定这事，正准备让康义诚去。
English: One day, the Ming Dynasty minister of anger and indignation did not make a decision for a long time. Fan Yanguang, Zhao Yanshou and others were speechless and returned to the Privy Council. They agreed on this matter together and were preparing to let Kang Yicheng go.

古文：时崧最在下位，耸立请曰： 朝廷重兵多在北边，须以重臣为帅，以某所见，非石太尉不可也。 
现代文：这时李崧地位极低，却站出来请求说： 朝廷重兵大多在北方，须派重臣作为主帅，以我所见，非石太尉不可。 
English: At this time, Li Qiye, who had a very low status, came forward to make a request: Most of the imperial heavy soldiers are in the north, so we must send a senior minister as a commander. As far as I can see, it must be a stone lieutenant.

古文：会明宗令中使促之，众乃从其议。
现代文：恰逢明宗派宫廷使者催促这件事，大家于是听从李崧的提议。
English: When the Ming court emissary urged the matter, everyone followed Li Lan's suggestion.

古文：翌日，晋祖既受太原之命，使心腹达意于崧云： 垒浮图须与合却尖。 
现代文：第二天，石敬瑭在接受太原之命后，派心腹向李崧致意说： 君造七级浮屠，还望善始善终做成最后的塔顶啊。 
English: The next day, after accepting Taiyuan's order, Shi Jingyao sent his regards to Li Hongzhi, saying: You have built a seven-level pagoda, and I hope you will do your best to finish the top of the pagoda.

古文：盖感之深也。
现代文：可见其感激之深。
English: You can see how grateful they are.

古文：从幸鄴，丁外艰，恩制起复，崧上章数四，恳辞其命，优诏不允。
现代文：到清泰末年，晋高祖石敬瑭攻入洛阳，李崧与吕琦一起逃窜隐藏在伊阙的乡民家里。十来天后，晋高祖征召李崧为户部侍郎，主持户部工作，一个多月后，任中书侍郎、同平章事，与桑维翰同兼枢密使。
English: Towards the end of the Qing dynasty, Jingu Gao's ancestor, Shi Jingyu, invaded Luoyang, while Li Yu and Lu Yao fled together and hid in a villager's home in Yili. Ten days later, Jingu Gao's ancestor called on Li Yu to be the steward of the household, presiding over the work of the household, and more than a month later, he was appointed the steward of the middle school, the same as Ping Zhangji, and the same as San Weihan.

古文：复上章，不报，崧不得已而视事。
现代文：桑维翰镇守相州，不久，废除枢密院，将事务归于中书省管理，李崧加封为尚书右仆射。
English: Sang Weihan was appointed to guard Xiangzhou. Soon after, the Privy Council was abolished and its affairs were placed under the administration of the Ministry of Literature. Li Qiaofeng became the right-hand man of the Ministry of Literature.

古文：晋少帝嗣位，复用桑维翰为枢密使，命崧兼判三司。
现代文：晋少帝继位，重新任桑维翰为枢密使，命李崧兼管三司。
English: When Emperor Jin Shao succeeded to the throne, he reappointed San Weihan as a confidential envoy, and ordered Li Xi to take charge of the three departments.

古文：未几，代维翰为枢密使，与冯玉对掌机密。
现代文：不久，代替桑维翰为枢密使，与冯玉合作掌管枢密事务。
English: Soon, he replaced Sang Weihan as the Privy Counsellor and worked with Feng Yu to take charge of privy affairs.

古文：开运末，崧、玉信契丹之诈，经略瀛、郑，中渡之败，落其奸谋。
现代文：开运末年，李崧、冯玉误信契丹人的欺诈，进攻瀛州、莫州，在中渡之战中其奸计而战败。
English: At the end of the first year of the war, Li Yu and Feng Yu mistakenly believed that the Khitan were cheating, attacked Zhangzhou and Mozhou, and were defeated by their trickery in the Battle of Zhongdu.

古文：契丹入京师，赵延寿、张砺素称崧之才，契丹主善遇之，以崧为太子太师，充枢密使。
现代文：契丹攻陷京城后，赵延寿、张砺一直称赞李崧的才干，契丹国主优待他，任李崧为太子太师，兼任枢密使。
English: After the capture of Beijing by the Khitans, Zhao Yanshou and Zhang Ye always praised Li Ye's talent. The Khitans treated him favorably, and appointed Li Ye as the crown prince and grand master, and concurrently as a confidential envoy.

古文：契丹主尝谓左右曰： 我破南朝，只得李崧一人而已。 
现代文：契丹国主曾对身边的人说： 我攻破南朝，仅得到李崧一人而已。 
English: The Khitan sovereign once said to the people around him: I defeated the Southern Dynasty, and only Li Xi was the one who gained.

古文：从契丹北行，留于镇州。
现代文：李崧跟随契丹人北迁，后留在镇州。
English: Li Qian followed the Khitan people to the north, and later stayed in Zhenzhou.

古文：高祖平汴、洛，乃以崧之居第赐苏逢吉，第中宿藏之物，皆为逢吉所有。
现代文：汉高祖平定汴、洛，就将李崧的房屋赐给苏逢吉，李崧家中以前收藏的财宝，都归苏逢吉所有。
English: When Emperor Gaozhu of the Han Dynasty conquered Dingwu and Luo, he gave Li Lan's house to Su Fengji. The treasures previously collected by Li Lan's family all belong to Su Fengji.

古文：是秋，镇州逐满达勒，崧与冯道、和凝十数人归阙，授太子太傅。
现代文：那年秋天，镇州人赶走了契丹麻答，李崧与冯道、和凝等十多人回到京城，李崧被授予太子太傅。
English: In the autumn of that year, the people of Zhenzhou drove away Khitan Madat, and more than ten people, including Li Qian, Feng Dao, and He Jeng, returned to Beijing. Li Qian was awarded the title of Crown Prince.

古文：崧对朝之权右，谦挹承颜，未尝忤旨。
现代文：李崧对朝中的权贵，谦恭迎合，未曾拂逆他们的意思。
English: Li Xi courteously accommodated the dignitaries of the dynasty and never went against their wishes.

古文：尝以宅券献苏逢吉，不悦。
现代文：李崧干脆将自己房产契券都给了苏逢吉，苏逢吉不悦。
English: Li Yan simply gave Su Fengji all of his real estate deed certificates, and Su Fengji was not pleased.

古文：昉闻之汗出。有部曲葛延遇者，逋李屿船佣，屿挞之，督其所负，遇有同辈李澄亦事逢吉，葛延遇夜寄宿于澄家，以屿见督情告，遂一夕同谋告变。
现代文：李崧的两位弟弟李屿、李山义，贪杯无识，与杨、苏逢吉的子弟在酒席之间，时常提到被剥夺的房产一事，被苏逢吉知悉。有位叫葛延遇的部下，拖欠李屿商船的资财，李屿鞭打他，逼他交还所欠资财，遇上同伙李澄也服侍苏逢吉，葛延遇夜晚在李澄家寄宿，告诉他李屿催逼的情况，于是两人在一夜间串通告发李崧叛逆。
English: Li Yu's two younger brothers, Li Yu and Li Shan Yi, were greedy and ignorant, and often mentioned the fact that they had been deprived of real estate between drinking with Yang and Su Fengji's children, which was known to Su Fengji. A subordinate named Ge Yan Rong, who was in arrears of Li Yu's merchant ship, Li Yu whipped him and forced him to return the arrears. When he met an accomplice, Li Cheng, he also served Su Fengji. Ge Yan Rong stayed at Li Cheng's house at night and told him about the situation of Li Yu's urging, so the two of them issued a series of notices to Li Yu

古文：逢吉览状示史宏肇，其日逢吉遣吏召崧至第，从容语及葛延遇告变之事，崧以幼女为托，逢吉遣吏送于侍卫狱。
现代文：苏逢吉看完状词后交给史弘肇，那天苏逢吉派官员将李崧叫到家里，从容地谈到葛延遇告发之事，李崧将幼女托付给苏逢吉，苏逢吉派人送李崧到侍卫监狱。
English: After Su Fengji finished reading the indictment, he handed it to Shi Hongzhao. On that day, the Su Fengji officials called Li Yao to the house and calmly talked about Ge Yan being denounced. Li Yao entrusted his young daughter to Su Fengji, and Su Fengji sent someone to escort Li Yao to the prison.

古文：既行，崧恚曰： 自古未有不亡之国，不死之人。 
现代文：上路后，李崧气愤地说 ：自古以来没有不灭亡的国家，没有不死的人。 
English: After getting on the road, Li Yan said angrily: Since ancient times, there is no country that does not perish, there is no immortal person.

古文：及为吏所鞫，乃自诬伏罪，举家遇害，少长悉尸于市，人士冤之。
现代文：当被狱吏审讯时，李崧自己捏造罪行认罪，全家遇害，老少全抛尸街头，人家都认为死得冤枉。
English: When he was interrogated by prison officials, Li Yan fabricated a crime and pleaded guilty. The whole family was killed, and the bodies of the old and the young were thrown into the street. Everyone thought that the death was unjustified.

古文：《东都事略·王溥传》：世宗尝问： 汉相李崧蜡弹书结契丹，有记其词者否？ 
现代文：李崧与徐台符同学而友善，乾佑三年秋，徐台符梦见李崧对他说： 我的横冤，还得您向皇上申诉啊。 
English: In the autumn of the third year, Xu Taifu had a dream in which he saw Li Qian saying to him, "You still have to appeal to the emperor for my wrongdoing.

古文：诏授璨著作佐郎，后官至资善大夫。苏逢吉，长安人。
现代文：当苏逢吉、史弘肇被杀，那砍头示众的地方，就正是李崧被诛的地方，不久，葛延遇、李澄也被诛杀。苏逢吉，长安人。
English: When Su Fongji and Shi Hongzhao were killed, the place where their heads were chopped off was exactly the place where Li Yao was beaten to death. Soon, Ge Yan met and Li Cheng was also beaten to death. Su Fongji, Chang'an people.

古文：父悦，逢吉母早丧，而悦鳏居，旁无侍者。
现代文：父亲叫苏悦。苏逢吉母亲去世得早，苏悦没有再娶时，身边没有服侍的人。
English: Her father's name was Su Yue. Su Fengji's mother died early, and when Su Yue did not remarry, there was no one around to serve her.

古文：性嗜酒，虽所饮不多，然漱醪终日。
现代文：苏悦特别爱喝酒，虽然酒量不大，但整天都要有酒润口。
English: Su Yue especially likes to drink, although the amount of alcohol is not large, but there must be a wine moisturizer throughout the day.

古文：他人供膳，皆不称旨，俟逢吉庖炙，方肯下箸。
现代文：别人做的饭菜，都不能称他心意，要等逢吉下厨煮饭炒菜，他才肯拿起筷子。
English: Other people's cooking can't satisfy him. He has to wait for Feng Qi to cook and stir-fry before he's willing to pick up his chopsticks.

古文：悦初仕蜀，官升朝列，逢吉初学为文，尝代父染翰。
现代文：苏悦当初在蜀国做官，官位升到朝廷大臣，苏逢吉开始学习文章时，曾经代他父亲撰写文辞。
English: Su Yue was an official in Shu at the time and rose to the rank of imperial court minister. When Su Fengji began to study literature, he used to write literary works on behalf of his father.

古文：悦尝为高祖从事，甚见礼遇，因从容荐逢吉曰： 老夫耄矣，才器无取。
现代文：苏悦曾任汉高祖从事，很受礼遇。因而从容地推荐逢吉说 ：老夫我已年高了，才智器识没有可取的地方。
English: Su Yue was once engaged as the founder of Henkel, and was treated very politely. Therefore, she calmly recommended Feng Ji, saying: "I am old, and there is no place for intellectual knowledge.

古文：男逢吉粗学援毫，性复恭恪，如公不以犬之微，愿令事左右。 
现代文：我儿子逢吉粗浅地学过执笔行文，性情又恭顺忠诚，如您不在意他像猪狗一样卑贱低微，我愿让他在您身边奉侍。 
English: If you don't mind that my son, Fong Ji, is as lowly as a pig dog, with a crude knowledge of penmanship and a submissive and loyal disposition, I would like him to serve beside you.

古文：高祖召见，以神精爽惠，甚怜之。
现代文：高祖召见苏逢吉，因为他精灵聪明，高祖很喜爱他。
English: Gaozhu summoned Su Fengji because he was a clever elf and Gaozhu loved him very much.

古文：有顷，擢为宾佐，凡有谋议，立侍其侧。
现代文：不久，即擢升为宾佐，凡有谋划商议，他就站在高祖旁边奉侍。
English: Soon after, he was promoted to the position of Binso, and whenever there was a plan to discuss, he would stand next to Gaozu and serve.

古文：高祖素严毅，及镇太原，位望崇重，从事稀得谒见，惟逢吉日侍左右。
现代文：高祖一向严肃刚毅，到镇守太原时，地位高名声大，幕僚们很少能见上他一面，只有苏逢吉每天在高祖身边侍候。
English: Gaozu had always been serious and strong-willed. When he became the town guard of Taiyuan, his status was high and his reputation was great. The staff could rarely see him. Only Su Fengji waited by Gaozu's side every day.

古文：两使文簿，堆案盈几，左右不敢辄通，逢吉置于怀袖，俟其悦色则谘之，多见其可。
现代文：枢密院和中书府的文件档案，堆满了桌子板凳，身边的人都不敢轻易地转交给高祖，苏逢吉常把它藏在怀里或衣袖中，等高祖脸色欢愉时就请示他，大都能得到高祖的认可。
English: The documents and archives of the Privy Council and the Central Library were piled up on tables and benches, and people around him did not dare to hand them over to Gaozu easily. Su Fengji often hid it in his arms or sleeves, and when Gaozu looked happy, he would ask him to show it to him. Most of them could get Gaozu's approval.

古文：高祖建号于太原，逢吉自节度判官拜同平章事、集贤殿大学士。
现代文：高祖在太原建立年号时，苏逢吉从节度判官迁升为同平章事、集贤殿大学士。
English: When Gao Zu established the year in Taiyuan, Su Fengji was promoted from the judge of the festival to the peerage and the scholar of Jixian Temple.

古文：车驾至汴，朝廷百司庶务，逢吉以为己任，参决处置，并出胸臆，虽有当有否，而事无留滞。
现代文：高祖御驾到达汴京，朝廷各官府的众多事务，苏逢吉都引为己任，参与决定处理，发表自己的意见，虽然有被认可有被否定的，但事情从不拖延。
English: Gao Zu arrived in Beijing, and Su Fengji took responsibility for many affairs of the various government offices of the imperial court, participated in decision-making, and expressed his own opinions. Although some were recognized and some were denied, things were never delayed.

古文：会翰林学士李涛从容侍帝，言及霸府二相，官秩未崇，逢吉旋加吏部尚书，未几，转左仆射，监修国史。
现代文：这时翰林学士李涛优裕从容地侍候高祖，谈到霸府两处相位，官秩还不高，苏逢吉立即被提升为吏部尚书，不久，转任左仆射，监修国史。
English: At this time, the scholar of Hanlin, Li Tao Youyu, calmly waited for Gao Zu. When he talked about the two phases of the hegemony, the official rank was not high. Su Fengji was immediately promoted to the official department of Shangshu, and soon he was transferred to Zuofeisha, supervising the national history.

古文：从征杜重威于鄴下，数乘醉抵辱周太祖。
现代文：跟随征伐杜重威到邺都城下，多次乘着喝醉了酒去侮辱后来的周太祖郭威。
English: He followed the expedition of Du Chongwei to the city of Chengdu, and repeatedly rode drunk to insult the later Zhou Taizu Guowei.

古文：及高祖大渐，与杨邠、史宏肇等卧内同受顾命。
现代文：到高祖病情严重时，苏逢吉与杨、史弘肇等同在高祖卧榻旁边接受遗命。
English: When Gao Zu was seriously ill, Su Fengji, Yang, Shi Hongzhao and others accepted his death next to Gao Zu's bed.

古文：李涛与逢吉论甥舅之契，相得甚欢，涛之入相，逢吉甚有力焉。
现代文：李涛与苏逢吉攀论外甥与舅舅的亲戚关系，两人很合得来，李涛进登相位，苏逢吉出了大力。
English: Li Tao and Su Fengji discussed the relative relationship between nephew and uncle, and the two got along very well. Li Tao entered the phase, and Su Fengji made great efforts.

古文：会涛上章，请出两枢密为方镇，帝怒，罢涛相，勒归私第，时论疑涛承逢吉之风旨。
现代文：后李涛递上奏章，请求调出两位枢密使到地方镇守州府，汉隐帝大怒，罢免李涛相位，勒令他回老家赋闲，当时舆论怀疑李涛是听信了苏逢吉的馊主意。
English: After Li Tao submitted a petition, requesting the transfer of two confidential envoys to the local town to guard the state capital, Emperor Han Yan was furious, dismissed Li Tao and ordered him to return to his hometown. At that time, public opinion suspected that Li Tao had listened to Su Fengji's bad idea.

古文：先是，高祖践阼之后，逢吉与苏禹珪俱在中书，有所除拜，多违旧制，用舍升降，率意任情，至有自白丁而升宦路、由流外而除令录者，不可胜数。物论纷然。
现代文：在这以前，高祖登上帝位之后，苏逢吉与苏禹王圭都在中书省，对官吏的任命，大都违背旧有制度，废弃任用、提升贬降，全凭自己的意见感情，以致有平民而突然当上大官、流放在外的人而突然被授官录用的情况，多得数不尽，大家都议论纷纷。
English: Prior to this, after Gao Zu ascended to the throne, Su Fengji and Su Yu Wang Gui were both in the Central Literature Department. Most of the appointments of officials violated the old system, abandoned appointments, promotions and demotions, and relied entirely on their own opinions and feelings. As a result, there were countless cases of civilians suddenly becoming high-ranking officials and exiled people suddenly being awarded and recruited, and everyone was talking about it.

古文：邠每惩二苏之失，艰于除拜，至于诸司补吏，与门胄出身，一切停罢。时论以邠之蔽，固亦由逢吉、禹珪本不能至公于物之所致也。
现代文：高祖当时正倚重信任苏逢吉和苏禹王圭两位相，没有人敢出来说话。苏逢吉特别贪求财货，毫不顾忌回避，对想得到提拔的人，只要他稍有财物，苏逢吉就派人去露出口风，答应给他好的官位。
English: At that time, Gao Zu was relying heavily on the trust of Su Fengji and Su Yu Wang Gui, and no one dared to speak out. Su Fengji was particularly greedy for wealth and did not hesitate to evade. For those who wanted to be promoted, as long as he had a little wealth, Su Fengji would send someone to expose the wind and promise him a good official position.

古文：初，高祖至汴，以故相冯道、李崧为契丹所俘，伫于真定，乃以崧第赐逢吉，道第赐禹珪，崧于西洛有别业，亦为逢吉所有。
现代文：到杨当上相时，慢慢削夺两苏的权力，到这时苏逢吉才完全收手。当初，高祖到汴京时，因为以前的宰相冯道和李崧被契丹人俘虏，滞留在真定，就把李崧的宅第赐给苏逢吉，把冯道的宅第赐给苏禹王圭，李崧在西京洛阳还有别的产业，也被苏逢吉所占有。
English: At first, when Gaozu arrived in Beijing, because the former prime ministers Feng Dao and Li Qian were captured by the Khitan and stayed in Zhending, he gave Li Qian's mansion to Su Feng Ji, Feng Dao's mansion to Su Yu Wang Gui, and Li Qian had other properties in Luoyang, West Beijing, which were also occupied by Su Feng Ji.

古文：及真定逐契丹，崧、道归朝，崧弟屿以逢吉占据其第，时出怨言。未几，崧以西京宅券献于逢吉，不悦。
现代文：当真定人赶走了契丹人，李崧、冯道回到汉朝，李崧的弟弟李屿因为苏逢吉占据了他们家的房屋，经常口出怨言，不久，李崧将西京洛阳的住宅写成契约送给苏逢吉，苏逢吉不高兴。
English: When the Genghis Khan drove out the Khitans, Li Gan and Feng Dao returned to the Han Dynasty. Li Gan's younger brother Li Yu often complained because Su Fengji occupied their family's house. Soon, Li Gan signed a contract to give Su Fengji a house in Luoyang, West Beijing. Su Fengji was not happy.

古文：会崧有仆夫欲诬告谋反，逢吉诱致其状，即告史宏肇，令逮捕其家。
现代文：恰逢李崧的一个仆人想诬告李崧要谋反，苏逢吉引诱他写来状词，就报告给史弘肇，下令逮捕李崧家人。
English: When one of Li Lan's servants wanted to falsely accuse Li Lan of plotting a rebellion, Su Fengji lured him into writing a complaint, reported it to Shi Hongzhao, and ordered the arrest of Li Lan's family.

古文：逢吉遣直省吏召崧至第，即令监至侍卫狱。
现代文：苏逢吉派自己所属中书省的官吏把李崧叫到自己住处，立即命令收监送往侍卫监狱中。
English: Su Fengji sent an official from the Central Book Ministry, to which he belonged, to summon Li Yao to his residence and immediately ordered him to be taken into custody and sent to the guards' prison.

古文：翌日，所司以狱辞上，其李屿款招云： 与兄崧、弟鳷，与家僮二十人商议，比至山陵发引之时，同放火谋乱，其告是实。 
现代文：第二天，司法部门将状词送上，苏逢吉诱骗李崧的弟弟李屿招供说 ：我与哥哥李崧、弟弟李山义，以及家中僮仆二十人商量计议，等到高祖灵柩启行到山陵时，一同放火谋反作乱，状词所告都是事实。 
English: The next day, the judicial department sent a complaint to the court. Su Fengji had tricked Li Lan's younger brother Li Yu into confessing: "I, my brother Li Lan, my younger brother Li Shan Yi, and twenty household servants discussed and deliberated, and when Gao Zu Linglu set off for the mountain, we set fire together to plot a rebellion. The complaint is all true.

古文：盖自诬之辞也。
现代文：这是说自己的假话。
English: That's lying to yourself.

古文：逢吉仍以笔添注 二十人 字为 五十人 ，封下有司，尽诛崧家。
现代文：苏逢吉还要用笔将 二十人 添改为 五十人 ，封好送给司法部门，全部诛杀了李崧一家。
English: Su Fengji also wanted to use a pen to change the additional 20 people to 50 people, seal it and send it to the judicial department, and killed all the Li Rong family.

古文：时人冤之，归咎于逢吉。
现代文：当时人认为李崧一家死得冤枉，都责怪苏逢吉。
English: At that time, people thought that the deaths of the Li Rong family were unjustified, and all blamed Su Fengji.

古文：逢吉深文好杀，从高祖在太原时，尝因事，高祖命逢吉静狱，以祈福祐，逢吉尽杀禁囚以报。
现代文：苏逢吉善于组织状词，爱好杀戮，跟随高祖在太原时，曾经因为高祖生日一事，高祖命令苏逢吉疏理监狱囚犯，以求福禄保佑，苏逢吉竟然全部杀掉拘禁的囚犯，回报说将囚犯疏理了。
English: Su Fengji is good at organizing and likes to kill. When he followed Gaozhu in Taiyuan, Gaozhu once ordered Su Fengji to clean up the prisoners in the prison because it was Gaozhu's birthday. Su Fengji actually killed all the prisoners in custody and said that he had cleaned up the prisoners in return.

古文：及执朝政，尤爱刑戮。
现代文：到他执掌朝廷大政时，更加嗜好杀人。
English: By the time he was in charge of the imperial court, he was even more fond of killing.

古文：朝廷患诸处盗贼，遣使捕逐，逢吉自草诏意云： 应有贼盗，其本家及四邻同保人，并仰所在全族处斩。 
现代文：朝廷担忧各地的盗贼，派人捕捉，苏逢吉自己起草诏书，大意说： 对付所有的盗贼，盗贼的本家和四邻一同担保，盗贼所在全族都砍头。 
English: The imperial court was worried about thieves from all over the country and sent people to catch them. Su Fengji himself drafted an edict to the effect of: "Against all thieves, the thief's own family and four neighbors shall jointly guarantee, and the thief's whole family shall be beheaded."

古文：或谓逢吉曰： 为盗者族诛，犹非王法，邻保同罪，不亦甚乎？ 
现代文：有人对苏逢吉说 ：做了盗贼就诛灭他的家族，不合王法，而四邻的保人还要一同治罪，不是太过份了吗？ 
English: Someone said to Su Fengji, "If you are a thief, it is not in accordance with the king's law to destroy your family, but if you are the protector of your four neighbors, you have to punish them together. Isn't that too much?"

古文：逢吉坚以为是，仅去 全族 二字。
现代文：苏逢吉坚持认为自己是对的，而且竟然去掉 全族 两字。
English: Su Fengji insisted that he was right, and even removed the words "entire nation."

古文：时有郓州捕贼使臣张令柔尽杀平阴县十七村民，良由此也。
现代文：当时就有郓州捕捉贼盗的使臣张令柔全部杀死平阴县十七座村子的人民，确实都是因为苏逢吉的缘故。
English: At that time, Zhang Ling Rong, the envoy of Zhangzhou to catch thieves, killed all the people of 17 villages in Pingyin County, all because of Su Fengji.

古文：逢吉性侈靡，好鲜衣美食，中书供膳，鄙而不食，私庖供馔，务尽甘珍。尝于私第大张酒乐以召权贵，所费千余缗。
现代文：苏逢吉性爱奢侈挥霍，喜欢华丽的衣服，精美的食物，对中书省内集体的膳食，瞧不起而不吃，设立私人厨房供应膳食，尽力追求甘甜美味，曾经在家中大摆酒席女乐，以招待权贵，花费了一千多缗线。
English: Su Fengji indulged in extravagant sex, loved gorgeous clothes and exquisite food, looked down on the collective meals in Zhongshu Province and did not eat them, set up a private kitchen to serve meals, and tried his best to pursue sweet and delicious foods. He once held a grand banquet of women's music at home to invite dignitaries and spent more than a thousand baht.

古文：其妻武氏卒，葬送甚盛，班行官及外州节制，有与逢吉相款洽者，皆令赍送绫罗绢帛，以备缟素。失礼违度，一至如此。
现代文：他的妻子武氏死了，送葬非常隆盛，朝廷百官及州镇首脑，有与苏逢吉合得来的，都要他们赠送绫罗绸缎，用作丧礼，败坏礼制违背法度，竟到了这种地步。
English: His wife, Lady Wu, died, and the funeral was very lavish. Hundreds of officials from the imperial court and heads of prefectures and towns, some of whom were friends of Su Fengji, asked them to give gifts of silk and satin for the funeral. It is against the law to corrupt the etiquette to such an extent.

古文：又性不拘名教，继母死不行服，妻死未周，其子并授官秩。
现代文：又不遵守名分教规，继母死了不行服丧的礼节，妻子死了丧期未满，就把他儿子都授给官职。
English: Moreover, he did not observe the rules of titles and ranks, and appointed his sons to official positions because his stepmother died and he could not perform the funeral rites, and his wife died before the period of mourning was over.

古文：有庶兄自外至，不白逢吉，便见诸子，逢吉怒，且惧他日凌弱其子息，乃密白高祖，诬以他事杖杀之。
现代文：有一个旁支的哥哥从外地来，没有先见苏逢吉，就去见苏逢吉的几个儿子，苏逢吉生气，又怕他将来欺负自己的儿子，就偷偷告诉高祖，用其他的事诬告他，于是高祖派人用乱棍打死了他。
English: A brother from another branch came from out of town, and without seeing Su Fengji first, he went to see several of Su Fengji's sons. Su Fengji was angry, and afraid that he would bully his own son in the future, he secretly told Gaozhu and falsely accused him of other things, so Gaozhu sent someone to beat him to death with a club.

古文：乾祐二年秋，加守司空。
现代文：乾佑二年秋天，加封为守司空。
English: In the autumn of the second year of Qianyou, he was assigned to guard the sky.

古文：周太祖之将镇鄴也，逢吉奏请落枢密使，隐帝曰： 有前例否？ 
现代文：周太祖郭威镇守邺都时，苏逢吉奏请汉隐帝免去郭威枢密使的职务，隐帝问他 ：有前例吗？ 
English: When Guo Wei Zhen, the ancestor of Zhou Dynasty, was in charge of the capital, Su Feng Jisso asked Emperor Han to dismiss Guo Wei's envoy. Emperor Han asked him: Is there any precedent?

古文：逢吉奏曰： 枢密之任，方镇带之非便。 
现代文：苏逢吉回答说 ：枢密使这一职，由正任州镇职务的人兼任不方便。 
English: Su Fengji replied, "It is inconvenient for a person who is currently serving as a prefectural official to also serve as a privy councillor.

古文：史宏肇曰： 兼带枢密，所冀诸军禀畏。 
现代文：史弘肇说： 兼任枢密使，所希望的是使军队听从指挥有所敬畏。 
English: Shi Hongzhao said: Concurrently serving as a Privy Counsellor, what I hope is to make the army obey and respect the command.

古文：竟从宏肇之议。
现代文：最后隐帝听从了史弘肇的话。
English: In the end, Emperor Inti obeyed Shi Hongzhao's words.

古文：宏肇怨逢吉之异己，逢吉曰： 此国家之事也，且以内制外则顺，以外制内岂得便耶！ 
现代文：史弘肇责备苏逢吉排除异己，苏逢吉却说： 这是为了国家大事，再说在朝廷管理地方则顺当，在地方管理朝廷事务难道方便吗！ 
English: Shi Hongzhao accused Su Fengji of excluding dissidents, but Su Fengji said: This is for the sake of national affairs. Moreover, it is proper to manage local affairs at the imperial court, but is it convenient to manage imperial affairs at the local level?

古文：事虽不从，物议多之。
现代文：苏逢吉要做的事虽然没被听从，但是舆论都认为他不对。
English: What Su Fengji wanted to do was not obeyed, but the public opinion thought he was wrong.

古文：居无何，王章张饮，会逢吉与史宏肇有谑言，大为宏肇所诟，逢吉不校，几至殴击，逢吉驰马而归，自是将相失欢。
现代文：不多久，王章设宴招待同僚，苏逢吉与史弘肇开玩笑，被史弘肇大加羞辱，苏逢吉不与他对言，几乎要被史弘肇殴打，苏逢吉骑上马赶快跑回来，从此将相之间失去了和谐。
English: Not long after, Wang Zhang held a banquet to invite colleagues, Su Fengji and Shi Hongzhao joked, and was greatly humiliated by Shi Hongzhao. Su Fengji did not talk to him, and was almost beaten by Shi Hongzhao. Su Fengji got on a horse and quickly ran back. From then on, the harmony between the two parties was lost.

古文：逢吉欲希外任，以纾宏肇之怒，既而中辍。
现代文：苏逢吉想到地方上去任职，以避开史弘肇的怒气，不久又放弃这一想法。
English: Su Fengji thought of taking a local post to avoid Shi Hongzhao's wrath, but soon abandoned the idea.

古文：人问其故，逢吉曰： 苟领一方镇，只消得史公一处分。则为 粉矣。 
现代文：人们问他原因，苏逢吉说 ：如果统领一方州镇，只要史公稍加处置，我就成为粉末了。 
English: When people asked him why, Su Fengji said, "If I were in charge of a county town, as long as Shigong made a slight adjustment, I would be dust."

古文：李业辈恶宏肇、杨邠等，逢吉知之，每见业等，即微以言激怒之。
现代文：李业一帮人恨史弘肇、杨等人，苏逢吉知悉这一情况，每当见到李业等人时，就用不显露的话语激怒他们。
English: Li Ye's group hated Shi Hongzhao, Yang and others. Su Fengji knew this, and whenever he saw Li Ye and others, he used subtle words to infuriate them.

古文：及宏肇等被害，逢吉不预其谋，闻变惊骇，即受宣徽，权知枢密院事。
现代文：到史弘肇等人被害时，苏逢吉没有参预他们的谋划，听到事变感到惊骇，旋即接任宣徽使，临时掌管枢密院事务。
English: When Shi Hongzhao and others were killed, Su Fengji did not participate in their plans, was shocked to hear of the incident, and immediately took over as Xuanhui Envoy, temporarily in charge of the Privy Council affairs.

古文：寻令草制正授，制入，闻鄴兵至澶州乃止。
现代文：不久又受命起草诏令，诏令上交朝廷，听到邺兵已到澶州才停止。
English: Soon after, he was ordered to draft the imperial edict, which was submitted to the imperial court. He only stopped when he heard that the soldiers had arrived in Zhangzhou.

古文：事急，逢吉谓人曰： 萧墙之变，太觉匆遽，主上若有一言见问，必不至是矣。 
现代文：事情紧急，苏逢吉对人说 ：萧墙之内的变乱，太突然了，皇上若能问我一句话，一定不会乱到这个地步。 
English: The matter was urgent, and Su Fengji said to the man: "The turmoil within Xiaowan is too sudden. If the emperor could ask me one word, it would not be so chaotic."

古文：数夕宿于金祥殿之东，谓天官正王处讷曰： 夜来就枕未瞑，已见李崧在傍，生人与死人相接，无吉事也。 
现代文：几天夜晚苏逢吉都住在金祥殿东边，对天官正王处讷说： 夜里靠上枕头没有入睡，就看见李崧在旁边，活人跟死人见面，没好事了。 
English: For several nights, Su Fengji lived on the east side of the Jinshang Hall, and said to the heavenly official Zheng Wang: "I did not fall asleep when I leaned on the pillow at night, and I saw Li Qian next to me. The living and the dead meet, and there is nothing good.

古文：及周太祖自鄴至汴，官军败于刘子陂，是夕逢吉宿于七里郊，与同舍痛饮，醉将自刎，左右止之。
现代文：到周太祖郭威从邺都到汴州，汉朝官军在刘子陂被打败，这天晚上苏逢吉住在七里郊，与同住的人痛饮，喝醉了准备自杀，旁边的人阻止了他。
English: By the time of Guo Wei, the ancestor of the Zhou Dynasty, the official army of the Han Dynasty had been defeated in Liu Zixu from Shantou to Luzhou. That night, Su Fengji lived in Qili Suburb. He drank heavily with his roommate, got drunk and prepared to commit suicide. The people around him stopped him.

古文：至曙，与隐帝同抵民舍，遂自杀。
现代文：到天亮，与汉隐帝一同到民户家里，于是自杀了。
English: At dawn, he went with Emperor Han Ying to a private home, where he committed suicide.

古文：周太祖定京城，与聂文进等同枭于北市，释其家族。
现代文：周太祖平定京城，将苏逢吉与聂文进等人一同割下脑袋挂在北面街市上示众，放了他的家人。
English: Zhou Taizu subdued the capital, cut off Su Fengji's head and hung it on the north side of the market together with Yu Wenjin and others, and released his family.

古文：其枭首之处，适当李崧冤死之地。
现代文：那悬挂头颅的地方，恰好就是李崧被冤死的地方。
English: The place where the head is hanging is exactly the place where Li Yao was unjustly killed.

古文：广顺初，诏就西京赐其子庄宅各一区。
现代文：周太祖广顺初年，诏令在西京赐给苏逢吉的儿子们每人一所庄园和住宅。
English: In the first year of Zhou Taizu's Guangshun reign, Su Fengji's sons were each given a manor house and residence in Xijing by imperial edict.

