古文：荀勖善解音声，时论谓之闇解。
现代文：荀勖擅长音乐声律，当时的人们称他为 闇解 。
English: He was good at musical tunes, and people at that time called him the "Dark Solver."

古文：遂调律吕，正雅乐。
现代文：他于是调整音律，校正雅乐。
English: He then adjusted the musical notation and corrected the melody.

古文：每至正会，殿庭作乐，自调宫商，无不谐韵。
现代文：每到正月初一举行朝廷聚会时，他就会在殿堂上演奏音乐，他自己亲自调整五音，都非常的精确。
English: Whenever there was an imperial court gathering on the first day of the first month of the year, he would play music in the hall of fame. He adjusted the five tones himself, and they were very precise.

古文：阮咸妙赏，时谓神解。
现代文：阮咸对音律有很高的鉴赏能力，当时的人们都称他是神解。
English: Nguyn Ánh had a high appreciation for music, and people at that time called him the divine solution.

古文：每公会作乐，而心谓之不调。
现代文：每当官府集会奏乐的时候，他心里都认为音律不协调。
English: Every time he played music at a government meeting, he thought the music was out of tune.

古文：既无一言直勖，意忌之，遂出阮为始平太守。
现代文：没有一句是肯定荀勖的话，于是荀勖心里很顾忌他，荀勖被调出京出任始平太守。
English: There was not a single sentence that affirmed his words, so he was wary of him in his heart, and he was transferred out of Kyoto to serve as the first governor of Heping.

古文：后有一田父耕于野，得周时玉尺，便是天下正尺。
现代文：后来有一个农民在地里干活，得到周代一把玉尺，这个就是国家的标准尺。
English: Later, a farmer working in the fields received a jade ruler from the Zhou Dynasty, which is the national standard ruler.

古文：荀试以校己所治钟鼓、金石、丝竹，皆觉短一黍，于是伏阮神识。
现代文：荀勖试着用它来校对自己所调试的各种乐器的音律，才发现乐器的律管都较标准尺短了一粒米的长度，于是才佩服阮咸识见高超。
English: He tried to use it to calibrate the rhythms of the various musical instruments he was tuning, only to find that the tuning forks of the musical instruments were all a grain of rice shorter than the standard length, so he admired Nguyen Hanh's superior knowledge.

古文：荀勖尝在晋武帝坐上食笋进饭，谓在坐人曰： 此是劳薪炊也。 
现代文：荀勖曾经在晋武帝的宴席上吃笋下饭，他对在座的人说： 这是拿使用过度的木料作柴火煮的。 
English: At a banquet for Emperor Jinwu, Zou once ate a bowl of eel stew. He said to those present, "This was cooked over a wood fire using excessive amounts of wood.

古文：坐者未之信，密遣问之，实用故车脚。
现代文：座上的人不相信，暗中派人去问厨师，才知道的确是拿旧车轮作柴火煮成的。
English: The people at the table didn't believe it, and secretly sent someone to ask the chef, only to find out that it was indeed cooked using old car wheels as firewood.

古文：人有相羊祜父墓，后应出受命君。
现代文：有一个擅长看风水的人看了羊祜父亲的坟墓，说他的后代会出真命天子。
English: A person who was good at reading feng shui looked at the grave of Yang Xuan's father and said that his offspring would produce a true son.

古文：祜恶其言，遂掘断墓后，以坏其势。
现代文：羊祜讨厌他说的话，就把坟挖断，想破坏坟山的风水。
English: Disgusted with what he said, the shepherd dug up the grave and wanted to destroy the Feng Shui of the cemetery.

古文：相者立视之曰： 犹应出折臂三公。 
现代文：看风水的人又去看了看，说： 还要出一个断臂的三公。 
English: The feng shui expert looked at it again and said, "There should also be a three kings with a broken arm."

古文：俄而祜坠马折臂，位果至公。
现代文：不久羊祜从马背上摔了下来，摔断了手臂，后来果然升到公的官位。
English: Soon after, he fell off his horse and broke his arm. Later, he was promoted to a public official.

古文：王武子善解马性。
现代文：王济很了解马的秉性。
English: Wang Jie is very familiar with the nature of horses.

古文：尝乘一马，箸连钱障泥。前有水，终日不肯渡。
现代文：有次骑着一匹披挂连钱障泥的马，前路有水，马始终不肯渡过去。
English: Once I was riding a horse that was covered in mud and there was water in front of me, but the horse still refused to cross.

古文：王云： 此必是惜障泥。 
现代文：王济说： 这一定是爱惜障泥的缘故啊。 
English: Wang Jie said: This must be due to the love of mud.

古文：使人解去，便径渡。
现代文：令人把障泥解去，马果然径直渡了过去。
English: The mud was removed and the horse went straight across.

古文：陈述为大将军掾，甚见爱重。
现代文：陈述生前在大将军王敦手下做属吏，很受欣赏与器重。
English: He was a subordinate officer under the general Wang Dun during his lifetime, and was highly appreciated and respected.

古文：及亡，郭璞往哭之，甚哀，乃呼曰： 嗣祖，焉知非福！ 
现代文：他死了以后，郭璞去凭吊，非常哀伤，于是唤他说： 嗣祖，你这时死了，又焉知不是福分呢？ 
English: After he died, Guo Gan went to visit him, very sad, so he called him and said: "Heir, you died at this time, how do you know it wasn't a blessing?

古文：俄而大将军作乱，如其所言。
现代文：不久王敦就起兵作乱，果然如郭璞所言。
English: Not long after, Wang Dun raised an army and started a riot, just as Guo Yao had said.

古文：晋明帝解占冢宅，闻郭璞为人葬，帝微服往看。因问主人： 何以葬龙角？
现代文：晋明帝会按风水选择坟地和宅基地。他听说郭璞为别人找了一块坟地，就换上便服去察看，又问墓地主人： 为什么葬在龙角上？
English: Emperor Jinming would choose cemeteries and homesteads according to feng shui. He heard that Guo Gan had found a cemetery for someone else, so he changed into civilian clothes to inspect it and asked the owner of the cemetery: Why was he buried on Long Kok?

古文：此法当灭族！ 
现代文：这种葬法将会灭族的！ 
English: This kind of burial will destroy the tribe!

古文：主人曰： 郭云： 此葬龙耳，不出三年，当致天子。  
现代文：主人说： 郭璞说过，这是葬在龙耳上，不出三年，就会引来天子。 
English: The owner said, "Guo Yao said that this was buried in the dragon's ear, and in less than three years, it would attract the heavenly son.

古文：帝问： 为是出天子邪？ 
现代文：明帝问： 是引来天子，还是出个天子呢？ 
English: Emperor Ming asked: Is it to attract a son of heaven, or to produce a son of heaven?

古文：答曰： 非出天子，能致天子问耳。 
现代文：主人回答说： 不是出个天子，是能引得天子来问呀。 
English: The master replied, "It's not a miracle, but it's possible to get a miracle to ask."

古文：郭景纯过江，居于暨阳，墓去水不盈百步，时人以为近水。
现代文：郭景纯到了江南，住在暨阳县，他母亲的坟墓离大江不足百丈，当时有人认为离江太近了。
English: Guo Jingshun went to the south of the Yangtze River and lived in Jiyang County. His mother's grave was too close to the Yangtze River. At that time, some people thought that the Yangtze River was too close.

古文：景纯曰： 将当为陆。 
现代文：景纯说： 那里就会成为陆地。 
English: Jing Chun said: There it will become land.

古文：今沙涨，去墓数十里皆为桑田。
现代文：现在泥沙已经增高了，离开坟墓几十里远的地方都变成了农田。
English: Now the silt has risen, and all the land within a few dozen miles of the cemetery has been turned into good farmland.

古文：其诗曰： 北阜烈烈，巨海混混；垒垒三坟，唯母与昆。 
现代文：郭景纯有诗为记： 北阜烈烈，巨海混混；垒垒三坟，唯母与昆。 
English: Guo Jing has a pure poem as a record: North Fufu is fierce, the sea is chaotic; there are three cemeteries, but mother and Kun.

古文：王丞相令郭璞试作一卦，卦成，郭意色甚恶，云： 公有震厄！ 
现代文：丞相王导叫郭璞试着占一卦，等卦象出来后，郭璞的脸色很不好，说： 您会有遭到雷击的灾难。 
English: The chancellor, Wang Du, asked Guo Gan to try to guess a riddle. After the riddle came out, Guo Gan looked very bad and said, "You will have the disaster of being struck by lightning."

古文：王问： 有可消伏理不？ 
现代文：王导问： 那有没有消除灾难的办法？ 
English: Wang Dua asked: Is there any way to eliminate the disaster?

古文：郭曰： 命驾西出数里，得一柏树，截断如公长，置床上常寝处，灾可消矣。 
现代文：郭璞说： 坐车往西走几里地，你会看到那里有一棵柏树，截下一段和您一样高的树干，放在床上经常睡的那个位置，就可以消除这次灾难了。 
English: Guo Wei said, "If you drive a few miles to the west, you will see a cypress tree there. If you cut off a section of the tree trunk that is as tall as you, and put it in the position where you often sleep on your bed, you can eliminate this disaster.

古文：王从其语。
现代文：王导照他说的去做。
English: The king did as he was told.

古文：数日中，果震柏粉碎，子弟皆称庆。
现代文：过了几天，雷电果然把柏木击得粉碎，子侄们都表示庆贺。
English: A few days later, the thunder and lightning did indeed shatter the cypress tree, and the nephews and nieces all expressed their congratulations.

古文：大将军云： 君乃复委罪于树木。 
现代文：大将军王敦对郭璞说： 您竟然能把罪过推给树木！ 
English: General Wang Dun said to Guo Wei: You can even blame the trees!

古文：桓公有主簿善别酒，有酒辄令先尝。
现代文：桓温有一位主簿，擅长品酒，有酒总是让他先品尝。
English: Kuan Wen has an accountant. He is good at wine tasting. If there is wine, he always tastes it first.

古文：好者谓 青州从事 ，恶者谓 平原督邮 。
现代文：好酒，他就说是青州从事，不好的酒，他就说是平原督邮。
English: Good wine, he said, is made in Qingzhou, and bad wine, he said, is made in Pingyuan.

古文：青州有齐郡，平原有鬲县。 从事 言 到脐 ， 督邮 言在 鬲上住 。
现代文：这是因为青州有个齐郡，平原郡有个鬲县；所谓从事，说明酒力能达到肚脐下，所谓督邮，说明酒力到膈膜上就停住了。
English: This is because there is a Qi County in Qingzhou, and a Yu County in Pingyuan County; the so-called engaged, indicating that the alcohol can reach below the navel, the so-called supervision, indicating that the alcohol stopped on the film.

古文：郗愔信道甚精勤，常患腹内恶，诸医不可疗。
现代文：郗愔信奉天师道非常虔诚。他常常肚子有病，看了很多大夫都无法治好。
English: He is a very devout believer in the way of the heavenly teacher. He often has a stomach ailment, and has seen many doctors who have been unable to cure him.

古文：闻于法开有名，往迎之。
现代文：听说于法开的医术很好，就去把他接了过来。
English: Hearing that Yu Fa Kai's medical skills were very good, I went to fetch him.

古文：既来，便脉云： 君侯所患，正是精进太过所致耳。 
现代文：于法开来了就切脉，切完脉说： 君侯害的病，恰恰是过分虔诚所引起的呀。 
English: When he arrived, he cut the vein, and when he was finished, he said, "The illness that afflicted the prince was caused by excessive piety."

古文：合一剂汤与之。
现代文：就配了一付汤药给郗愔。
English: A pot of soup medicine was served to the cormorants.

古文：一服，即大下，去数段许纸如拳大；剖看，乃先所服符也。
现代文：一服药就大泻，泻下几堆像拳头那么大的纸团；剖开一看，原来是先前所吃下的符。
English: After taking the medicine, she had diarrhea and vomited up several fist-sized piles of paper. When she opened them, they turned out to be the charms she had eaten earlier.

古文：殷中军妙解经脉，中年都废。
现代文：中军将军殷浩精通医术，到中年就全都抛开不研究了。
English: The Chinese general Yin Hao was well-versed in medicine, but by middle age he had left it all behind and did no research.

古文：有常所给使，忽叩头流血。
现代文：有一个常使唤的仆人，忽然给他磕头，磕到头破血流。
English: A servant who was often called upon suddenly gave him a blow on the head, which made his head bleed.

古文：浩问其故？云： 有死事，终不可说。 
现代文：殷浩问他有什么事，他说： 有件人命事，不过终究不该说。 
English: Yin Hao asked him what was the matter. He said: There is a matter of life and death, but after all, it should not be said.

古文：诘问良久，乃云： 小人母年垂百岁，抱疾来久，若蒙官一脉，便有活理。
现代文：追问了很久，这才说道： 小人的母亲年纪将近百岁，从生病到现在已经很长时间了，如果承蒙大人诊一次脉，就有办法活下去。
English: After asking for a long time, he finally said: Xiao Ren's mother is nearly a hundred years old, and it has been a long time since she got sick. If she can get a pulse checked by an adult, she will be able to live.

古文：讫就屠戮无恨。 
现代文：事成以后，就算被杀也心甘情愿。 
English: After the deed is done, even if he is killed, he will do it willingly.

古文：浩感其至性，遂令舁来，为诊脉处方。
现代文：殷浩受到他真诚的孝心的感动，就叫他把母亲抬来，给他母亲诊脉开药方。
English: Impressed by his sincere filial piety, Yin Hao asked him to carry his mother to the hospital and prescribe a medicine for his mother's pulse.

古文：始服一剂汤，便愈。
现代文：才服了一付药，病就好了。
English: I just took a bunch of medicine and I'm better now.

古文：于是悉焚经方。
现代文：从此殷浩把医书全都烧了。 
English: From then on, Yin Hao burned all the medical books.

