古文：阳斐，字叔鸾，北平渔阳人也。
现代文：阳斐，字叔鸾，北平渔阳人。
English: Yangfei, also known as Shuxuan, is a fishing village in Beiping.

古文：父藻，魏建德太守，赠幽州刺史。
现代文：父亲阳藻，任魏建德太守，死后赠幽州刺史。
English: His father, Yangso, was appointed as Wei Jiande Taishu, and after his death, he presented Yuzhou Sanzhongshi.

古文：孝庄时，斐于西兖督护流民有功，赐爵方城伯。历侍御史，兼都官郎中、广平王开府中郎，修起居注。
现代文：孝庄帝时，阳斐在西兖州监督保护流民有功，赐爵方城伯，历任侍御史，兼都官郎中、广平王开府中郎，负责撰修起居注。
English: During the reign of Emperor Xiaozhuang, Yang Fei supervised and protected the displaced people in Xishuanzhou, and was awarded the title of Count of Fangcheng, successively served as an attendant to the emperor, and was also a junior official of the capital and a junior official of King Kaifu of Guangping, and was responsible for writing the commentary on living.

古文：兴和中，除起部郎中，兼通直散骑常侍，聘于梁。梁尚书羊侃，魏之叛人也，与斐有旧，欲请斐至宅，三致书，斐不答。
现代文：梁人说： 羊侃已经来了很长时间，而魏也已经亡国了，像李、卢等人也都去过羊侃家中，你又何必这样为难他呢? 阳斐说： 柳下惠可以做这种事，但我却不能做。 
English: Liang said, "Yokan has been here for a long time, and Wei has already lost his country. Like Li, Lu and others, they have also been to Yokan's home. Why do you have to make it so difficult for him?" Yang Fei said, "Yan can do such things, but I can't.

古文：梁人曰： 羊来已久，经贵朝迁革，李、卢亦诣宅相见，卿何致难？ 斐曰： 柳下惠则可，吾不可。 梁主乃亲谓斐曰： 羊侃极愿相见，今二国和好，天下一家，安得复论彼此？ 斐终辞焉。
现代文：梁帝亲自劝他说： 羊侃极想见你，如今我们两国和好，天下一家，怎么能再分彼此呢? 
English: Emperor Liang personally persuaded him, saying: Yang Kan desperately wants to see you. Now that our two countries are reconciled and the whole world is one family, how can we divide each other again?

古文：使还，除廷尉少卿。
现代文：他最终还是推辞没有前去。出使回来，任廷尉少卿。
English: In the end, he still declined to go. He returned from his mission as a court lieutenant.

古文：石济河溢，桥坏，斐修治之。又移津于白马，中河起石潬，两岸造关城，累年乃就。
现代文：黄河在石济决堤，把桥冲坏了，阳斐负责治理黄河，把渡口移到白马，在河中间筑起沙堆，两岸修起关城，用了好几年的时间才完成。
English: The Yellow River broke through the dike in Shijie and the bridge was washed away. Yangfei was responsible for managing the Yellow River, moving the ferry to Baima, building sand piles in the middle of the river, and repairing the gates on both sides. It took several years to complete.

古文：东郡太守陆士佩以黎阳关河形胜，欲因山即壑以为公家苑囿。
现代文：束郡太守陆士佩认为黎阳是关河形胜之地，想靠山就水修造皇家园林。
English: Lu Shipei, the governor of Sok County, believed that Liyang was the place of Guanhe, and he wanted to build a royal garden by relying on the water.

古文：遗斐书曰： 当谘大将军以足下为匠者。 斐答书拒曰： 当今殷忧启圣，运遭昌历。
现代文：他给阳斐写信说： 我将与大将军商量，让你主持这件事。 阳斐回信拒绝说： 国家经历了很多忧患，正要开启圣明。使国家昌盛。
English: He wrote to Yang Fei, saying, "I will consult with the general and let you preside over this matter." Yang Fei refused to reply, saying, "The country has experienced a lot of sorrow and is about to open the Holy Light and make the country prosperous."

古文：故大丞相天启霸功，再造太极；大将军光承先构，嗣绩丕显。
现代文：大丞相顺承天命开创霸业，建立了大齐；大将军继承祖先的功绩，逐步发扬光大。
English: Dajo-soh follows the destiny to create a domineering industry and established Dajo-chi; Dajo-jin inherits the achievements of ancestors and gradually carries forward the glory.

古文：国步始康，民劳未息。诚宜轻徭薄赋，勤恤民隐，诗不云乎：古之帝王亦有表山刊树，未足尽其意；下辇成宴，讵能穷其情。
现代文：国家刚刚走上康庄大路，百姓的劳役仍不能减缓，此时应该轻徭薄赋，抚恤民生疾苦。《诗经》上不是说吗： 百姓辛勤劳作，可以达到小康，施恩给中原的人民，以安抚四方。 古代帝王也有圈定山水的，还不能满足他们的心意；下了车辇摆起宴席，又怎能尽情表达情怀。
English: The country has just embarked on the road to prosperity, and the labor of the people still cannot be slowed down. At this time, it is necessary to be frivolous and thin, and to support the people's livelihood and suffering. Isn't it said in the "Book of Songs": The people work hard, can achieve moderate prosperity, and give grace to the people of the Central Plains to appease the four directions. The ancient emperors also had the mountains and rivers circled, but they still couldn't satisfy their hearts; they got off the chariot and set up a banquet, but how could they express their feelings?

古文：正足以靡天地之财用，剥生民之髓脑。
现代文：都是浪费天地间的财物，剥夺百姓的血汗。
English: All of them are a waste of the wealth of heaven and earth and deprive the people of their blood and sweat.

古文：是故孔子对叶公以来远，酬哀公以临民，所问虽同，所急异务故也。
现代文：所以孔子在回答叶公时说要招来远方的人，回答哀公时又说要治理好自己的百姓，问的问题虽然相同，急于处理的政务却并不相同。
English: Therefore, when Confucius was answering Ye Gong, he said that he wanted to invite people from far away, and when he was answering Yue Gong, he also said that he wanted to govern his own people well. Although the questions he asked were the same, the government affairs he was anxious to deal with were not the same.

古文：相如壮上林之观，扬雄骋羽猎之辞，虽系以隤墙填，乱以收□落网，而言无补于风规，祗足昭其愆戾也。 
现代文：司马相如称颂上林的壮观，扬雄赞美帝王出猎场面的浩大，虽说是推墙填沟，乘乱收网，但他们的言辞终究无益于讽谏劝规，衹会促成帝王的错误。 
English: Sima Xiangru praised the magnificence of going to the forest, Yang Xiong praised the vastness of the emperor's hunting scene, although it was to push the wall to fill the ditch and use random nets, but their words were ultimately not conducive to irony and persuasion, and would contribute to the emperor's mistakes.

古文：寻转尚书右丞。
现代文：不久改任尚书右丞。
English: He was soon transferred to the post of Shoshu Ujo.

古文：天保初，除镇南将军、尚书吏部郎中。
现代文：天保初年，任镇南将军、尚书吏部郎中。
English: In the first year of the Tenpo era, he was appointed as a general of the Zhenan army and a junior member of the Shoshu Rikibu.

古文：以公事免，久之，除都水使者。
现代文：因为公事被免官，过了很长时间，任都水使者。
English: After a long time, he was relieved of his duties and appointed as a water envoy.

古文：显祖亲御六军，北攘突厥，仍诏斐监筑长城。
现代文：显祖统领六军，向北进攻突厥，下令阳斐修筑长城。
English: Emperor Xianzu led the Six Armies to attack the Turks in the north and ordered Yangfei to build the Great Wall.

古文：作罢，行南谯州事，加通直散骑常侍，寿阳道行台左丞。
现代文：任务完成后，行南谯州事，加通直散骑常侍，寿阳道行台左丞。
English: After the completion of the task, he went to the southern part of Luzhou Province, and was appointed as a regular attendant of Jiaotong Zhizang Riding, and a left assistant of Shouyang Road.

古文：迁散骑常侍，食陈留郡干。
现代文：升任散骑常侍，享受陈留郡干禄。
English: He was promoted to the rank of samurai for horseback riding, and enjoyed the highest salary in Chenliu County.

古文：未几，除徐州刺史，带东南道行台左丞。
现代文：时间不长，任徐州刺史，带东南道行台左丞。
English: The time was not long, and he was appointed as the Xuzhou chief historian, and he led the south-eastern province to the left.

古文：干明元年，征拜廷尉卿，迁□大将军，兼都官尚书，行太子少傅，徙殿中尚书，以本官监瀛州事。
现代文：干明元年，征入任廷尉卿，改任卫大将军，兼都官尚书，行太子少傅。又调任殿中尚书，以本官去瀛州检查。
English: In the first year of the Ming Dynasty, he was conscripted to serve as a court lieutenant, and was appointed to the General of the Imperial Guard, and also served as the official secretary of the capital, and acted as the young tutor of the crown prince. He was also appointed to the official secretary of the palace, and went to Bozhou to inspect.

古文：抗表致仕，优诏不许。
现代文：他向皇帝上表章要求辞官，承蒙皇上优待没有允许。
English: He asked the emperor for his resignation, but the emperor did not allow it.

古文：顷之，拜仪同三司，食广阿县干。
现代文：不久任仪同三司。享受广阿郡干禄。
English: He was soon appointed to the Third Division. He enjoyed the Guang'a County Ganlu.

古文：卒于位。
现代文：死于任上。
English: He died in office.

古文：赠使持节、都督北豫光二州诸军事、骠骑大将军、仪同三司、中书监、北豫州刺史，谥曰敬简。
现代文：赠使持节、都督北豫州光州诸军事、骠骑大将军、仪同三司、中书监、北豫州刺史，谧号敬简。
English: He was bestowed with the title of Jixi, the military governor of Gwangju, the military commander of North Henan Province, the general of the cavalry, the third secretary of the Ministry of Ceremonies, the chief librarian of the People's Republic of China, the chief historian of North Henan Province, and the nickname Jing Jian.

古文：子师孝，中书舍人。
现代文：儿子阳师孝，任中书舍人。
English: His son, Yang Shih-hsiao, was appointed to the post of middle school teacher.

古文：卢潜，范阳涿人也。
现代文：卢潜，范阳涿县人。
English: Lu Qian, from Fanyang County.

古文：祖尚之，魏济州刺史。
现代文：祖父卢尚之，任魏济州刺史。
English: His grandfather, Lu Shangzhi, was the chief historian of Wei and Jeju.

古文：父文符，通直侍郎。
现代文：父亲卢文符，任通直侍郎。
English: His father, Lu Wenfu, was a chamberlain to Emperor Taizong.

古文：潜容貌伟，善言谈，少有成人志尚。
现代文：卢潜长得魁梧俊美，善于言辞，小时候就有大人的志向。
English: Lu Qian grew up to be handsome and handsome, good at words, and had the ambition of an adult when he was a child.

古文：仪同贺拔胜辟开府行参军，补侍御史。
现代文：仪同贺迈胜征用为开府行参军，补侍御史。
English: He was conscripted to join the army for the march to the capital, thus completing his service record.

古文：世宗引为大将军西合祭酒，转中外府中兵参军，机事强济，为世宗所知，言其终可大用。
现代文：世宗引荐他为大将军西合祭酒，改任中外府中兵参军，精明干练非常得力，为世宗所信任，认为他终究可以大用。
English: Sejong recommended him as a general for the West Gate Festival, and he was appointed as a middle-ranking soldier to join the army. He was shrewd and very capable, trusted by Sejong, and thought that he could be of great use after all.

古文：王思政见获于颍川，世宗重其才识。
现代文：王思政在颢川被捉获，世宗很看重他的才能。
English: Wang Sizheng was caught in the Li River, and Shizong highly valued his talent.

古文：潜曾从容白世宗云： 思政不能死节，何足可重！ 世宗谓左右曰： 我有卢潜，便是更得一王思政。 天保初，除中书舍人，以奏事忤旨免。
现代文：卢潜曾劝说世宗： 王思政不能以死殉节，有什么值得看重呢! 世宗对左右说： 我有了卢潜，等于又得了一个王思政。 天保初年，任中书舍人，因为奏事触犯了皇上的旨意被免官。
English: Lu Qian once persuaded Shizong: Wang Sizheng cannot be martyred by death, what is there worth valuing! Shizong said to the right and left: I have Lu Qian, it is equal to having another Wang Sizheng. In the first year of Tian Bao, he was dismissed from his post because he violated the emperor's will.

古文：寻除左民郎中，坐讥议魏书，与王松年、李庶等俱被禁止。
现代文：不久又任左民郎中，由于议论指责魏书》，和王松年、李庶等人一起被拘禁。
English: Soon after, he was detained along with Wang Songnian, Li Shizhu and others for criticizing Wei Shu.

古文：会清河王岳将救江陵，特赦潜以为岳行台郎。
现代文：当时清河王高岳准备救援江陵，特地赦免了卢潜并任命为高岳行台郎。
English: At that time, King Gao Yue of Qinghe was preparing to rescue Jiangling. He specifically pardoned Lu Qian and appointed him as Gao Yue's retainer.

古文：还，迁中书侍郎，寻迁黄门侍郎。
现代文：回来后，升任中书侍郎，不久又改黄门侍郎。
English: After his return, he was promoted to the position of Chusho-sajiro, and soon he was changed to the Yellow Gate-sajiro.

古文：黄门郑子默奏言，潜从清河王南讨，清河王令潜说梁将侯瑱，大纳赂遗，还不奏闻。
现代文：黄门郑子默向皇上告发说，卢潜跟着清河王高岳讨伐南方时，命他去游说梁将侯琐，大受贿赂，回来时也不向皇上报告。
English: Huangmen Zheng Zi tacitly reported to the emperor that when Lu Xun followed the Qing King Gao Yue to fight in the south, he ordered him to lobby Liang General Hou Zuo, took a large bribe, and did not report to the emperor when he returned.

古文：显祖杖潜一百，仍截其须，左迁魏尹丞。
现代文：显祖把卢潜杖打一百，截断胡须，贬为魏尹丞。
English: Emperor Xianzu beat Lu Qiancang into a hundred pieces, cut off his beard, and degraded him to Wei Yunzheng.

古文：寻除司州别驾，出为江州刺史，所在有治方。
现代文：不久任司州别驾，出任江州刺史，他管辖之地都能治理得好。
English: He was soon appointed as the secretary of the State Council, and served as the governor of Jiangsu Province. The places under his jurisdiction can be well governed.

古文：肃宗作相，以潜为扬州道行台左丞。
现代文：肃宗任丞相时，任命卢潜为扬州道行台左丞。
English: When Su Zong was appointed as chancellor, Lu Qian was appointed as Yangzhou Daogangdaizhao chancellor.

古文：先是梁将王琳为陈兵所败，拥其主萧庄归寿阳，朝廷以琳为扬州刺史，□潜与琳为南讨经略。
现代文：早先梁将王琳被陈兵打败，拥戴皇帝萧庄回到寿阳，朝廷任命王琳为扬州刺史，令卢潜和王琳为南讨经略。
English: Earlier, Liang general Wang Lin was defeated by Chen soldiers and returned to Shouyang with the support of Emperor Xiaozhuang. The imperial court appointed Wang Lin as Yangzhou chief historian, and Lu Xuan and Wang Lin as southern strategists.

古文：琳部曲义故多在扬州，与陈寇邻接。
现代文：王琳部下的亲朋故旧很多都在扬塑，和速接壤。
English: Many relatives and friends of Wang Lin's subordinates are reinventing themselves, bordering on rapprochement.

古文：潜辑谐内外，甚得边俗之和。
现代文：卢荡安抚内外，百姓和乐相处。
English: Lu Xiang appeased both inside and outside, and the people lived in harmony.

古文：陈秦、谯二州刺史王奉国、合州刺史周令珍前后入寇，潜辄破平之，以功加散骑常侍，食彭城郡干。
现代文：陈秦州、谯州刺史王奉国、合州刺史周令珍先后入侵，都被卢潜击退，因战功加散骑常侍，享受彭城郡干禄。
English: Chen Qinzhou, Zhangzhou prince Wang Bongguo, and Hezhou prince Zhou Lingzhen invaded successively. They were all repulsed by the Lu submarine. For their war exploits, they were given free riding attendants and enjoyed the Ganlu of Pengcheng County.

古文：迁合州刺史，左丞如故。
现代文：改任合州刺史，左丞依旧。
English: He was reassigned to the post of Hechu Shishi, but retained his position as Sajo.

古文：又除行台尚书，寻授仪同三司。
现代文：又任行台尚书，不久授仪同三司。
English: He also held the post of Gangdai Shangshu, and was soon awarded the ceremony with the three divisions.

古文：王琳锐意图南，潜以为时事未可。
现代文：王琳决心进攻南方，卢潜认为时机还不成熟。
English: Wang Lin was determined to attack the south, but Lu Qian believed that the time was not ripe.

古文：属陈遣移书至寿阳，请与国家和好。
现代文：陈派人到寿阳送信，请求和北齐通好。
English: Chen sent someone to Shouyang to send a request to communicate with North Qi.

古文：潜为奏闻，仍上启且愿息兵。依所请。
现代文：卢潜替他奏明朝廷，说对方愿意休兵罢战，皇上答应了逭一请求。
English: Lu Qian sent a message to the imperial court on his behalf, saying that the other side was willing to call a truce, and the emperor agreed to this request.

古文：由是与琳有隙，更相表列。
现代文：因此和王琳产生了矛盾，互相上表攻击。
English: As a result, he and Wang Lin came into conflict and openly attacked each other.

古文：世祖追琳入京，除潜扬州刺史，领行台尚书。
现代文：世祖令王琳入京，任卢潜为扬州刺史，领行台尚书。
English: The ancestor ordered Wang Lin to enter Beijing, and appointed Lu Qian as Yangzhou's historian, leading the Taishang book.

古文：潜在淮南十三年，任总军民，大树风绩，甚为陈人所惮。
现代文：卢潜在淮南任职十三年，总揽军政大权，非常有成绩，陈对他很害怕。
English: Lu Guanzhong served thirteen years in Huainan, and made great achievements in the overall military and political power grab. Chen was very afraid of him.

古文：陈主与其边将书云： 卢潜犹在寿阳，闻其何当还北，此虏不死，方为国患，卿宜深备之。 显祖初平淮南，给十年优复。
现代文：陈帝在写给边关守将的信中说： 卢潜仍驻守在寿阳，要打探他什么时候回朝，这个家伙一日不死，就是国家的祸患，你要对他加强戒备。 显祖刚平定淮南时，免除了十年的租税和徭役。
English: In a letter to the frontier guard general, Chen Di said: Lu Xun is still stationed in Shouyang, we should find out when he will return to the North, this guy will not die for a day, it is a national disaster, you should strengthen your vigilance against him. When Xianzu just conquered Huainan, he was exempted from ten years of taxes and corvee.

古文：年满之后，逮天统、武平中，征税烦杂。
现代文：十年之后，到了天堑、亘迢年间，各种税收非常繁杂。
English: Ten years later, at the dawn of the 21st century, various taxes are very complicated.

古文：又高元海执政，断渔猎，人家无以自资。
现代文：再加上高元痉执政时，禁止百姓捕鱼打猎，百姓没有了生活来源。
English: In addition, when Gao Yuanxuan was in power, he banned the people from fishing and hunting, and the people had no source of livelihood.

古文：诸商胡负官责息者，宦者陈德信纵其妄注淮南富家，令州县征责。
现代文：胡商欠了官家债务，太监陈德信放任他们胡说自己依附于淮南的富户，让州县去缴收。
English: Hu merchants owed debts to officials, and the eunuch Chen Dexin let them lie that they were dependent on the rich households in Huainan, and let the prefectures collect the debts.

古文：又□送突厥马数千疋于扬州管内，令土豪贵买之。
现代文：又下令把几千匹突厥马送到扬州境内，命令当地富豪收买。
English: He also ordered that several thousand Turkic horses be sent to the territory of Yangzhou, and ordered local rich people to buy the horses.

古文：钱直始入，便出□括江、淮间马，并送官□。
现代文：刚刚交完了钱，就又下令搜求江淮之间的马匹，全部收为官马。
English: As soon as he had finished paying the money, he ordered a search for horses between the Yangtze and Huai Rivers, and all of them were confiscated as official horses.

古文：由是百姓骚扰，切齿嗟怨。潜随事抚慰，兼行权略，故得宁靖。
现代文：由此百姓骚动，怨恨之极，卢潜逐事安抚民众，并利用权谋加以调和，江淮地区才得以平安无事。
English: As a result, the people were agitated and full of resentment. Lu Xun appeased the people one by one, and used power to mediate, so that the Jianghuai region was safe and sound.

古文：武平三年，征为五兵尚书。
现代文：武平三年，入朝任五兵尚书。
English: In the third year of Wuping, he was appointed to the Five Soldiers of the Imperial Palace.

古文：扬州吏民以潜戒断酒肉，笃信释氏，大设僧会，以香华缘道，流涕送之。
现代文：扬州的官员百姓因为卢潜信奉佛教，戒丁酒肉，就举办了大规模的僧会，用香花装饰在道路两旁，痛哭流涕地为他送行。
English: Because Lu Xun was a Buddhist and abstained from meat and wine, the officials and common people of Yangzhou held a large-scale monks' meeting, decorated the roadsides with fragrant flowers, and wept bitterly to see him off.

古文：潜叹曰： 正恐不久复来耳。 至邺未几，陈将吴明彻渡江侵掠，复以潜为扬州道行台尚书。
现代文：卢潜叹惜说： 恐怕时间不长我就又回来了。 到达邺不久，陈将吴明彻渡过长江侵掠，又任命卢潜为扬州道行台尚书。
English: Lu Qian sighed and said, "I'm afraid it won't be long before I'm back again." Shortly after arriving in Shandong, Chen sent Wu Mingche across the Yangtze River to invade and plunder, and appointed Lu Qian as Yangzhou Dao Xing Tai Shang Shu.

古文：五年，与王琳等同陷。
现代文：五年，和王琳等人同时被俘。
English: Five years, and Wang Lin and others were captured at the same time.

古文：寻死建业，年五十七，其家购尸归葬。
现代文：不久死在建业，时年五十七岁，他的家人买出他的尸体运回北方安葬。
English: Jianye died soon after, at the age of fifty-seven, and his family bought his body and brought it back to the north for burial.

古文：赠开府仪同三司、尚书右仆射、兖州刺史。
现代文：追封开府仪同三司、尚书右仆射、兖州刺史。
English: Tsuibo Kaifu ceremony with the three departments, Shangshu right-hand shooting, Zhangzhou stabbing history.

古文：无子，以弟士邃子元孝为嗣。
现代文：卢潜没有儿子，把弟弟卢士邃的儿子元孝指定为继承人。
English: Lu Qian did not have a son, and designated his brother Lu Shijun's son, Yuan Xiao, as his successor.

古文：士邃，字子淹，少为崔昂所知，昂云： 此昆季足为后生之俊，但恨其俱不读书耳。 历侍御史、司徒祭酒、尚书郎、邺县令、尚书左右丞、吏部郎中，出为中山太守，带定州长史。
现代文：卢达，字玉渔，年少时被崔显看重，崔显说： 这两兄弟是年轻一辈中的优秀人物，但很遣憾他们都不读书。 历任侍御史、司徒祭酒、尚书郎、塑壁令、尚书左右丞、吏部郎中，出任史山太守，带室州长史。
English: Luda, whose Chinese name is Yu Yu, was highly regarded by Choe Son when he was young. Choe Son said, "These two brothers are outstanding figures among the younger generation, but it is regrettable that they do not study. Successive attendants, priests, sacrificial wine, Shang Shuro, plasterer, Shang Shuro, and officials, served as the governor of Shishan and the governor's secretary.

古文：齐亡后卒。
现代文：变灭亡后去世。
English: He died after the revolution.

古文：潜从祖兄怀仁，字子友，魏司徒司马道将之子。
现代文：卢潜从祖兄卢怀仁，字子友，是魏司徒司马卢道将的儿子。
English: Lu Qian is the son of Lu Huairen's paternal uncle, Lu Huairen, also known as Ziyou, who was the son of the Wei general Sima Lu.

古文：怀仁涉学有文辞，情性恬靖，常萧然有闲放之致。
现代文：他研究学问而且有文采，性情恬静安详，有悠然自得的意趣。
English: He is scholarly and literate, with a quiet and serene disposition, and a leisurely and self-satisfied disposition.

古文：历太尉记室、弘农郡守，不之任，卜居陈留界。
现代文：历任太尉记室、弘农郡守，也不去赴任，选择在陈留县界内居住。
English: Successive Taifeng Keeper's Office and Hongnong County Governor did not go to office, choosing to live within the boundaries of Chenliu County.

古文：所著诗赋铭颂二万余言，又撰中表实录二十卷。
现代文：创作的诗、赋、铭、颂有两万多字，又撰写《中表实绿》二十卷。
English: He composed more than 20,000 words of poems, poems, epitaphs, and eulogies, and wrote 20 volumes of "Zhongbai Shigueru."

古文：怀仁有行检，善与人交，与琅邪王衍、陇西李寿之情好相得。
现代文：怀仁很有操行，善与人交往，和琅邪王衍、陇西李寿之彼此相知。
English: Huairen is very disciplined, good at interacting with people, and knows each other very well from Yuyao Wangyan and Shaanxi Li Shou.

古文：曾语衍云： 昔太丘道广，许劭知而不顾；嵇生性惰，钟会过而绝言。
现代文：曾经对王衍说： 当初太丘德行很深，许劭知道却不加注意；嵇康本性懒散，钟会拜访他却不说一句话。
English: He once said to Wang Yan: At the beginning, he was very virtuous, Xu Yao knew but did not pay attention; Yan Kang was lazy by nature, the bell would visit him but did not say a word.

古文：吾处季、孟之间，去其泰甚。 衍以为然。
现代文：我处在季孙氏和孟孙氏即上等和下等之间，去掉他们太绝对的东西。 王衍认为他说得对。
English: I am somewhere between the Ji Suns and the Meng Suns, that is, between the upper and lower classes, except for their too absolute things. Wang Yan thinks he is right.

古文：武平末卒。
现代文：武平末年去世。
English: Takehei died at the end of his life.

古文：怀仁兄子庄之，少有名望。
现代文：蛀兄长的儿子蓝之，年少时就有名望。
English: The elder brother's son, Lan Zhi, became famous when he was young.

古文：官历太子舍人、定州别驾、东平太守。
现代文：历任太子舍人、室业别驾、塞垩太守。
English: Successive crown princes renounced the throne, Muroyake, and Saeki became emperors.

古文：武平中都水使者，卒官。
现代文：亘迢年间任都水使者，死在任上。
English: He served as the water envoy to the capital for many years, and died in office.

古文：怀仁从父弟昌衡，魏尚书左仆射道虔之子。
现代文：怀仁叔伯弟弟旦堑，是垫尚书左仆射卢道崖的儿子。
English: Uncle Huairen's younger brother, Danzhao, was the son of Mat Shangshu's second-in-command, Lu Daoliang.

古文：武平末尚书郎。
现代文：亘侄末年任尚书郎。
English: In his last years, Watanabe served as Sho Shuro.

古文：沉靖有才识，风仪蕴籍，容止可观。
现代文：为人沉静有才识，宽厚有涵养，举止得体。
English: He is quiet and talented, generous and tolerant, and has a proper demeanor.

古文：天保中，尚书王昕以雅谈获罪，诸弟尚守而不坠，自兹以后，此道顿微。
现代文：天保年间，尚书王昕由于清谈获罪，他的弟弟仍然保持这种情操，但从此以后，清谈的风气就很淡了。
English: During the Tenpo era, Shang Shuxu Wang Yao was convicted of chatting, and his younger brother still maintained this sentiment, but from then on, the culture of chatting was very weak.

古文：昌衡与顿丘李若、彭城刘泰□、河南陆彦师、陇西辛德源、太原王修并为后进风流之士。
现代文：垦鱼和蛆丘奎羞、堑球刘泰珉、魉陆彦师、盐迺辛德源、立愿王恺都是年轻一代中的风流之士。
English: Lei Yu, Zouqiu Kuixi, Zhouqiu Liu, Zouqiu Liu, Zouqiu Lu, Zouqiu Xingdeyuan, Zouqiu Xingdeyuan, and Zouqiu Wang are all young people of the younger generation.

古文：昌衡从父弟思道，魏处士道亮之子，神情俊发，少以才学有盛名。
现代文：昌衡叔伯弟思道。是魏处士卢道亮的儿子，俊美豪放，少年时以富有才学而得盛名。
English: Chang Heng's uncle, Sidao, was the son of the Wei general Lu Daoliang. He was handsome and bold, and gained fame as a young man for his talent in learning.

古文：武平末，黄门侍郎，待诏文林馆。
现代文：武平末年，任黄门侍郎，待诏文林馆。
English: In the last years of Wu Ping's life, he served as the Yellow Gate's chamberlain and waited for the edict from Wenlin Pavilion.

古文：思道从父兄正达、正思、正山，魏右光禄大夫道约之子。
现代文：思道叔伯兄正达、正思、正山，是魏右光禄大夫卢道约的儿子。
English: Shidao's uncles Zhengda, Zhengsi and Zhengshan were the sons of Wei Uguanglu's doctor Lu Daoyao.

古文：正达尚书郎，正思北徐州刺史、太子詹事、仪同三司，正山永昌郡守。
现代文：正达任尚书郎，正思任北徐州刺史、太子詹事、仪同三司，正山任永昌太守。
English: Zhengda was appointed as Shang Shuro, Zheng Si was appointed as North Xuzhou Sisi, Prince Zhan Zhi, Ji Tong San Si, and Zhengshan was appointed as Yongchang Dazhong.

古文：兄弟以后舅，武平中并得优赠。
现代文：兄弟三人因为是皇后的舅舅，在武平年间都得到了优待。
English: Because the three brothers were the queens uncles, they all received preferential treatment during the Wuping years.

古文：正山子公顺，早以文学见知。武平中符玺郎，待诏文林馆。
现代文：正山的儿子公顺，早就以博学知名亘进年间任符玺郎，待韶文林馆。
English: Zhengshan's son, Gongshun, had long been known for his erudition and was appointed as a Fu Ying Lang, and was waiting for the Wenlin Pavilion.

古文：与博陵崔君洽、陇西李师上同志友善，从驾晋阳，寓居僧寺，朝士谓 康寺三少 ，为物论推许。
现代文：和担噬崔君洽、胧酉李师上志同道合。随从皇上到置历，寄住在寺院中，朝中大臣称他们为 康寺三少 ，被当时人所推许
English: He was a follower of Emperor Kangxi and lived in a temple. The ministers of the dynasty called them the "Three Minor Priests of Kangji," and they were highly praised by the people at the time.

古文：正达从父弟熙裕，父道舒。
现代文：正达叔伯弟熙裕，是卢道舒的儿子。
English: Zhengda's uncle, Xi Yu, was the son of Lu Daoshu.

古文：为长兄道将让爵，由是熙裕袭固安伯。
现代文：因为大哥卢道将让出了爵位，所以熙裕承袭了固安伯。
English: Because the eldest brother, Lu Daojin, gave up his title, Xi Yu succeeded Gu Anbo.

古文：虚淡守道，有古人之风，为亲表所敬重。
现代文：为人崇尚清淡守道，有古人的遣风，受到亲戚们的敬重。
English: He is a person who advocates a light-hearted way of life, has the spirit of the ancients, and is respected by his relatives.

古文：潜从祖兄愻之，魏尚书义僖之子。清靖寡欲，卒于司徒记室参军。
现代文：卢潜叔伯兄恳之，是魏尚书卢义僖的儿子清心寡欲，死时官任司徒记室参军。
English: Lu Qian's uncle was the son of Wei Shangshu Lu Yijun, a pure-hearted person who joined the army at the time of his death.

古文：崔劼，字彦玄，本清河人。
现代文：崔劫，字彦玄，原是清河人。
English: Cui Rong, also known as Yan Xuan, was originally from Qinghe.

古文：曾祖旷，南渡河，居青州之东，时宋氏于河南立冀州，置郡县，即为东清河郡人。
现代文：曾祖崔旷，南渡黄河，居住在青州之束，当时宋氏在黄河以南建立冀州，设置郡县，于是成为东清河郡人。
English: Cui Kuang, the ancestor of the Song Dynasty, crossed the Yellow River to the south and lived in the Bund of Qingzhou. At that time, the Song Dynasty established Jizhou in the south of the Yellow River and set up counties, so he became a citizen of East Qinghe County.

古文：南县分易，更为南平原贝丘人也。
现代文：南县又分成两部分，又成为东平原贝丘人。
English: South County was divided into two parts, and became the East Plains Becciu people.

古文：世为三齐大族。
现代文：崔家世代是三齐的望族。
English: The Cui family has been a prestigious family in Sanqi for generations.

古文：祖灵延，宋长广太守。
现代文：祖父崔灵延，任宋长广太守。
English: His grandfather, Cui Lingyan, was the governor of Song Changguang.

古文：父光，魏太保。
现代文：父亲崔光，任魏太保。
English: His father, Cui Guang, was Wei Taibo.

古文：劼少而清虚寡欲，好学有家风。
现代文：崔劫少年时就清虚白守没有奢望，为人好学深得家风。
English: When Cui Rong was a young boy, he had no hope of becoming a virtuous person. He was a good student and learned a lot from his family.

古文：魏末，自开府行参军历尚书仪曹郎、秘书丞，修起居注，中书侍郎。
现代文：魏末，由开府行参军历任尚书仪曹郎、秘书丞，修起居注，中书侍郎。
English: At the end of the Wei Dynasty, he joined the army from Kaifu and successively held the positions of Senior Secretary, Junior Secretary, Senior Secretary, Junior Secretary, and Junior Secretary.

古文：兴和三年，兼通直散骑常侍，使于梁。
现代文：兴和三年兼通直散骑常侍，出使梁。
English: In the three years of Xinghe, he also served as a non-commissioned officer, and sent Liang.

古文：天保初，以议禅代，除给事黄门侍郎，加国子祭酒，直内省，典机密。
现代文：天保初年，因为参与惮让，被任命为给事黄门侍郎，加国子祭酒。在内省值班，掌管机密。
English: In the first year of the Tenpo era, he was appointed as the attendant of the Yellow Gate and the giver of the sacred wine, and he was on duty at the Ministry of Internal Affairs, in charge of confidential information.

古文：清俭勤慎，甚为显祖所知。
现代文：为人清廉节俭，做事谨慎，非常被显祖信任。
English: He is honest, frugal and prudent. He is highly trusted by Xianzu.

古文：拜南青州刺史，在任有政绩。
现代文：任南青州刺史，很有政绩。
English: He made history in South Qingzhou and had great achievements in politics.

古文：皇建中，入为秘书监、齐州大中正，转鸿胪卿，迁□省度支尚书，俄授京省，寻转五兵尚书，监国史，在台阁之中，见称简正。
现代文：皇建年间，入朝任秘书监、齐州大中正，又改任鸿胪卿，升任并州省度支尚书，很快又授京省，不久又改任五兵尚书监国史，在朝中以严正着称。
English: During the years of imperial construction, he entered the imperial court as the secretary supervisor, the vice-president of the University of Chizhou, and was reappointed as the Hongyeqing, was promoted to the provincial governor of the province, and was soon awarded the Beijing Province, and was soon reappointed as the five soldiers' supervisor of the national history. He was famous for his strictness in the imperial court.

古文：世祖之将禅后主，先以问劼，劼谏以为不可，由是忤意，出为南兖州刺史。
现代文：世祖要把帝位让给后主，先向崔劫征求意见。崔劫劝他不要这样做，因此触犯了世祖，出任南兖州刺史。
English: The patriarch wanted to cede the imperial throne to his successor, and first sought advice from Choe Ryong. Choe Ryong advised him not to do so, and thus he offended the patriarch and became the crown prince of South Gyeongsang.

古文：代还，重为度支尚书、仪同三司，食文登县干。
现代文：后来又命别人接替他，让他回到朝中，重新任度支尚书、仪同三司，享受文登县干禄。
English: Later, he ordered someone else to succeed him, let him return to the court, and reappointed him as the Third Secretary of the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology and the Third Secretary of the Ministry of Culture, Sports, Science and Technology, and enjoyed the Ganlu of Wenden County.

古文：寻除中书令，加开府，待诏文林馆，监撰新书。
现代文：他回答说： 自从我任职以来，想为自己说一句晋身的话都感到耻辱。
English: He replied: "Since I've been in the job, I'm ashamed to say I've tried to put a positive spin on it.

古文：遇病卒，时年六十六。赠齐州刺史、尚书右仆射，谥曰文贞。
现代文：如果现在推荐了自己的孩子，和推荐自己有什么区别呢。 
English: What's the difference between recommending your own child and recommending yourself?

古文：初和士开擅朝，曲求物誉，诸公因此颇为子弟干禄，世门之冑，多处京官，而劼二子拱、撝并为外任。
现代文：最终也没有为孩子求得京官。
English: In the end, they did not win the capital for their child.

古文：弟廓之从容谓劼曰： 拱、撝幸得不凡，何为不在省府之中、清华之所，而并出外藩，有损家代。 劼曰： 立身以来，耻以一言自达，今若进儿，与身何异。 卒无所求。闻者莫不叹服。
现代文：听说这件事的人都为之叹服。
English: Everyone who heard about it was amazed.

古文：拱，天统中任城王湝丞相咨议参军、管记室。
现代文：崔拱，天统年间为任城王高浩的丞相谘议参军、管记室。
English: Cui Gong, during the reign of Emperor Tenmu, served as the chancellor of the city king Gao Hao to consult on joining the army and to manage the record office.

古文：撝，扬州录事参军。
现代文：崔捣，任扬州录事参军。
English: Cui Bin, appointed Yangzhou Record to join the army.

古文：廓之沉隐有识量，以学业见称。
现代文：廓之沉静有见识，以学业著称。
English: He is quiet and insightful, and is known for his studies.

古文：自临水令为琅邪王俨大司马西合祭酒，迁领军功曹参军。
现代文：由临水令调任琅邪王高俨的大司马西合祭酒，改领军功曹参军。
English: He was transferred from the waterfront command to be the grand master of the evil king Gao Zhen, and led the troops to join the army as Gong Cao.

古文：武平中卒。
现代文：武平年间去世。
English: He died in the Takehei era.

古文：卢叔武，范阳涿人，青州刺史文伟从子也。
现代文：卢叔武，越昙逐壁人，壹丛刺史卢王毖的侄子。
English: Lu Shouwu, the nephew of Emperor Shulu, was born in Yueyuan.

古文：父光宗，有志尚。
现代文：父亲卢光宗，有志向。
English: His father, Lu Guangzong, aspired to be a monk.

古文：叔武两兄观、仲宣并以文章显于洛下。
现代文：叔武的两位兄长卢塑、卢仲宣的文章在谴都非常有名。
English: The articles written by Uncle Wu's two elder brothers, Lu Shuo and Lu Zhongxuan, are very famous.

古文：叔武少机悟，豪率轻侠，好奇策，慕诸葛亮之为人。
现代文：查眯少年时很聪敏豪放任侠，喜欢奇策，仰慕诸葛亮的为人。
English: When he was a young boy, Zha Yu was a very intelligent, bold, and free-spirited person. He liked ingenious strategies and admired Zhuge Liang.

古文：为贺拔胜荆州开府长史。
现代文：任贺拔胜荆州开府长史。
English: He Ba won the election and became the governor of Jingzhou Kaifu.

古文：胜不用其计，弃城奔梁。
现代文：但贺拔胜不采纳他的计策，放弃城池投降丁梁。
English: However, He Baxing did not adopt his strategy and surrendered the city to Ding Liang.

古文：叔武归本县，筑室临陂，优游自适。
现代文：叔武回到本县，在池塘旁边盖起房子，悠然自得。
English: Uncle Wu returned to this county, built a house next to the pond, and enjoyed himself.

古文：世宗降辟书，辞疾不到。
现代文：世宗下令征召他入京，他推托有病不去。
English: Sejong ordered that he be conscripted into the capital, but he pretended to be ill and did not go.

古文：天保初复征，不得已，布裘乘露车至邺。
现代文：天保初年再一次征召，不得已，他穿布衣坐没有帷盖的车到邺。
English: In the first year of Tianbao, he was once again conscripted. As a last resort, he had to wear a cloth coat and take an open-top car to the capital.

古文：杨愔往候之，以为司徒咨议，称疾不受。
现代文：杨值去探望他，以他为司徒谘议，又自称身体多病不接受。
English: Yang Zheng went to visit him and consulted with him as a disciple. He also claimed that he was physically ill and did not accept it.

古文：肃宗即位，召为太子中庶子，加银青光禄大夫。
现代文：肃宗即位后，征召叔武为太子中庶子，加银青光禄大夫。
English: After the enthronement of Su Zong, Shu Wu was called up to be the Prince's middle child, and he was given the title of Qingguanglu Daifu.

古文：问以世事，叔武劝讨关西，画地陈兵势曰： 人□敌者当任智谋，智谋钧者当任势力，故强者所以制弱，富者所以兼贫。今大齐之比关西，强弱不同，贫富有异，而戎马不息，未能吞并，此失于不用强富也。
现代文：皇上向他询问天下大事，叔武建议讨伐关西，并在地上画出天下形势图说： 如果双方兵力相当就要使用智谋；如果智谋相当就要依靠势力。所以势力强大的可以制服弱小的，富庶的国家可以吞并贫穷的国家，如今大齐和关西相比，强弱不同，贫富有别，但连年用兵，却不能吞并，在于没有很好地利用自己的优势。
English: The emperor asked him about the world's major events. Uncle Wu suggested to fight against Kansai, and drew a world situation map on the ground, saying: If the two sides have equal military strength, they must use wisdom; if the wisdom is equal, they must rely on power. Therefore, the powerful can subdue the weak, and the rich country can annex the poor country. Today, compared with Dazhi and Kansai, the strong and weak are different, and the rich and poor are different, but even if they use soldiers every year, they cannot annex, because they have not made good use of their own advantages.

古文：轻兵野战，胜负难必，是胡骑之法，非深谋远算万全之术也。
现代文：动用轻装军队野战，很难取胜，这是胡人的战术，不是深谋远虑的万全之策。
English: It is difficult to win a field battle with lightly armed troops. This is a tactic of the Hu people, not a well-thought-out all-round strategy.

古文：宜立重镇于平阳，与彼蒲州相对，深沟高垒，运粮积甲，筑城戍以属之。
现代文：我们应在平阳设立重镇，和对方的蒲州对抗，深沟高垒，多多积聚粮草和武器，筑起城堡。
English: We should set up a stronghold in Pingyang and confront the other side in Puzhou, dig trenches and fortifications, accumulate grain and weapons, and build a castle.

古文：彼若闭关不出，则取其黄河以东，长安穷蹙，自然困死。
现代文：敌人如果闭关不出。可以攻取黄河以束的地区，长安就会陷入困顿，自然就困死了。
English: If the enemy can't close the gate, and the area where the Yellow River can be captured, Chang'an will be in trouble, and naturally it will be trapped.

古文：如彼出兵，非十万以上，不为我敌，所供粮食，皆出关内。
现代文：如果敌人出兵，不到十万以上，就不是我们的对手，供应的粮食，都出自关内。
English: If the enemy sends troops, less than a hundred thousand or more, it is not our opponent, the supply of grain, all come from Kansai.

古文：我兵士相代，年别一番，谷食丰饶，运送不绝。
现代文：我们的士兵，每年替换一次，粮食充足，供应不断。
English: Our soldiers, replaced once a year, are well fed and supplied.

古文：彼来求战，我不应之，彼若退军，即乘其弊。
现代文：他来进攻，我们不应战。他如果退兵，我们就趁着对方疲困之机追杀。
English: If he attacks, we should not fight. If he retreats, we should take advantage of the other side's fatigue to chase and kill him.

古文：自长安以西，民疏城远，敌兵来往，实有艰难，与我相持，农作且废，不过三年，彼自破矣。 帝深纳之。
现代文：从长安往西，人烟稀少城市之间间隔很远，敌军来往，有很大困难，如果和我方对峙，农业生产就会停顿，不出三年，敌军自然就瓦解了。 
English: From Chang'an to the west, the spacing between the sparsely populated cities is very long, and it is very difficult for the enemy forces to come and go. If there is a confrontation with us, agricultural production will come to a halt. Within three years, the enemy forces will naturally disintegrate.

古文：又愿自居平阳，成此谋略。
现代文：皇上采纳了他的意见。叔武又请求驻守平阳，以完成这一计谋。
English: He also asked for the order to personally guard Pingyang to realize this plan.

古文：上令元文遥与叔武参谋，撰平西策一卷。
现代文：皇上又命令元文遥和他一起筹划，写成《平西策》一卷。
English: The emperor also ordered Yuan Wenyao to plan with him and write a volume of "Ping Xi Zhe."

古文：未几帝崩，事遂寝。
现代文：不久肃宗去世，谋划也就作废了。
English: Soon after, Su Zong died, and the plan was scrapped.

古文：世祖践阼，拜仪同三司、都官尚书，出为合州刺史。
现代文：世祖登基后，任命叔武为仪同三司、都官尚书，出任合州刺史。
English: After the Emperor ascended to the throne, he appointed Shubu as the third secretary of the Imperial Household Agency and the top official of the capital, and appointed him as the chief historian of Hezhou.

古文：武平中，迁太子詹事、右光禄大夫。
现代文：武平年间，升任太子詹事、右光禄大夫。
English: During the Wu-Ping era, he was promoted to Crown Prince Zhan Zhi and Uguanglu Doctor.

古文：叔武在乡时有粟千石，每至春夏，乡人无食者令自载取，至秋，任其偿，都不计校。
现代文：叔武在家时有一千石粮食，春夏缺粮时，凡是没有粮食的人都可以自己来取，到了秋天，由他们偿还，多少也不计较。
English: When Uncle Wu was at home, he had a thousand koku of grain. When there was a shortage of grain in spring and summer, anyone who did not have grain could get it themselves. In the autumn, they would pay it back, no matter how little.

古文：然而岁岁常得倍余。
现代文：但每年都能有多出一倍的收获。
English: But the harvest can be doubled every year.

古文：既在朝通贵，自以年老，儿子又多，遂营一大屋，曰： 歌于斯，哭于斯。 魏收曾来诣之，访以洛京旧事，不待食而起，云： 难为子费。 叔武留之，良久食至，但有粟飧葵菜，木□盛之，片脯而已。
现代文：做了大官以后，因为年老，儿子又多，就盖了一间大房子，说： 高歌痛哭，都可以在此。 魏收曾经来拜访他，询问洛阳的一些往事，没有等叔武准备饭食就要告辞，说： 不想让你破费。 叔武挽留他，遇了好长时间才端上饭，却是小米饭和葵菜，用木碗盛着，另外有几片干肉而已。
English: After he became a high-ranking official, because he was old and had many sons, he built a large house and said, "You can sing and cry here." Wei Wei once visited him and asked him about some of Luoyang's past events. He did not wait for Shu Wu to prepare the meal before he left, saying, "I don't want you to waste money." Shu Wu kept him for a long time before serving the meal, but it was millet rice and sunflower greens, served in a wooden bowl, and there were only a few pieces of dried meat.

古文：所将仆从，亦尽设食，一与此同。
现代文：魏收带来的仆人侍从，都被留下吃饭，和毯业吃的完全一样。
English: The servants and attendants brought by Wei Hui were all left to eat, exactly the same as the carpets.

古文：齐灭，归范阳，遭乱城陷，叔武与族弟士遂皆以寒餧致毙。
现代文：齐灭亡后，圭退回到茎堕，正赶上战乱城池陷落，他和本家弟弟士遂都因饥寒交迫而死。
English: After Qi's death, Gui retreated back to Zhuodu, just in time for the fall of the war-torn city, and he and his younger brothers eventually died of hunger and cold.

古文：周将宇文神举以其有名德，收而葬之。
现代文：周将宇文神举因为他有名望德行，收殓起他的尸体殡葬了。
English: Zhou worshipped Yuwen Shen because he was famous for his virtuous deeds, and his body was collected and buried.

古文：叔武族孙臣客，父子规，魏尚书郎、林虑郡守。
现代文：叔武族孙臣客，父亲卢子规，任魏尚书郎、林虑郡太守。
English: Uncle of the Wu tribe, Sun Zhenke, father of Lu Ziqi, Wei Shang Shulang, Lin Qian County Governor.

古文：臣客风仪甚美，少有志尚，雅有法度，好道家之言。
现代文：臣客风度仪表俊美，从小就有大志，做事极有法度，喜好道家学说。
English: The courtiers are elegant and handsome. They have big ambitions since childhood, are very law-abiding, and are fond of Taoist teachings.

古文：其姊为任城王妃，天保末，任城王致之于朝廷，由是擢拜太子舍人。
现代文：他的姐姐是任城王王妃。天保末年，任城王把他推荐给朝廷，被提升为太子舍人。
English: His sister was Empress Dowager Rencheng. At the end of the Tenpo era, Empress Dowager Rencheng recommended him to the Imperial Court, and he was promoted to Prince Regent.

古文：迁司徒记室，请归侍祖母李。
现代文：改任司徒记室，请求回家侍奉祖母李氏。
English: He was reassigned to the secretary's office and asked to return home to serve his grandmother, Mrs. Li.

古文：李强之令仕，不得已而顺命，除太子舍人、太子中庶子。
现代文：李氏强迫他出来做官，不得已而听从，任太子舍人、太子中庶子。
English: The Li clan forced him to come out and become an official, and he had no choice but to obey. He was appointed as the prince's concubine and the prince's illegitimate son.

古文：武平中，兼散骑常侍聘陈，还，卒于路。
现代文：武平年问，兼散骑常侍访问南陈，回来时，死在路上。
English: Wu Pingnianqian, also a horseback riding attendant visiting Nanchen, died on the way back.

古文：赠郑州刺史、鸿胪卿。
现代文：追赠郑州刺史、鸿胪卿。
English: He was posthumously awarded the titles of Zhengzhou Shishi and Hongluoqing.

古文：阳休之，字子烈，右北平无终人也。
现代文：阳休之，字子烈，右北平郡无终人。
English: Yang Xiu Zhi, Zizi Liang, Right Beiping County has no permanent residents.

古文：父固，魏洛阳令，赠太常少卿。
现代文：父亲阳固，任魏洛阳令，追封太常少卿。
English: His father, Yang Gu, was appointed Wei Luo Yangling, and was later promoted to Taizhong Shaoqing.

古文：休之□爽有风概，少勤学，爱文藻，弱冠擅声，为后来之秀。
现代文：休之才华出众，性格豪爽。
English: Hu's talent is outstanding, and his personality is great.

古文：幽州刺史常景、王延年并召为州主簿。
现代文：很有风采。从小就勤奋学习，讲究文采，二十岁左右就有了很大的名气，是年轻人中的杰出人才。幽州刺史常景、王延年都召请他作州主簿。
English: He is very elegant. He has been studying diligently and paying attention to literature since he was a child. Around the age of 20, he has gained a great reputation and is an outstanding talent among young people. Yuzhou engraving history and Wang Yannian have invited him to be the main book of the state.

古文：魏孝昌中，杜洛周破蓟城，休之与宗室及乡人数千家南奔章武，转至青州。
现代文：魏孝昌年间，杜洛周攻破蓟城，休之和皇帝宗室及同乡几千家向南逃到章武，又辗转到了青州。
English: During the Wei and Xiaochang dynasties, Du Luo Zhou conquered Lucheng, and the emperor's family and thousands of his countrymen fled south to Zhangwu, and then to Qingzhou.

古文：是时葛荣寇乱，河北流民多凑青部。
现代文：此时葛荣作乱，黄河以北的流民都聚集到壹逊。
English: At this time, Ge Rong made a disturbance, and the exiles north of the Yellow River all gathered in Wison.

古文：休之知将有变，乃请其族叔伯彦等曰： 客主势异，竞相凌侮，祸难将作。
现代文：体之预料到将要发生变乱，就向族叔阳伯产请求说： 外来人口越来越多，已经超过了本地居民。
English: Anticipating that there would be turmoil, he appealed to the Shuyangboshan people, saying: The foreign population is increasing and has exceeded the local residents.

古文：如鄙情所见，宜潜归京师避之。 诸人多不能从。
现代文：双方互相侵扰，灾祸很快会发生，按我的看法，应该悄悄返回京城避难。 其他人都不听从他的劝告。
English: The two sides are encroaching on each other, the disaster will happen soon, in my opinion, should quietly return to Beijing to take refuge, others do not listen to his advice.

古文：休之垂涕别去。
现代文：休之流着泪告别众人离开了青塑。
English: With tears streaming down her cheeks, she bade farewell to everyone and left Qingpu.

古文：俄而邢杲作乱，伯彦等咸为土民所杀，一时遇害，诸阳死者数十人，唯休之兄弟获免。
现代文：不久亚遝叛乱，值童等人都被作乱的军民杀死，同时遇害。阳姓家族死了几十人，仅有休之兄弟幸免于难。
English: Soon after, there was a rebellion in Aachen, and the guards and other people were killed by the soldiers and civilians who caused the disturbance. Dozens of Yang family members died, and only Hui's brother survived.

古文：庄帝立，解褐员外散骑侍郎，寻以本官领御史，迁给事中、太尉记室参军，加轻车将军。
现代文：庄帝即位，休之出仕任员外敌骑侍郎，不久以本官领御史，升任给事中、太尉记室参军，加轻车将军。
English: When Emperor Zhuang ascended to the throne, he retired from the service and became a member of the Foreign Enemies Cavalry, and soon after, he was promoted to the rank of lieutenant general, and then to the rank of general of light vehicles.

古文：李神□监起居注，启休之与河东裴伯茂、范阳卢元明、河间邢子明等俱入撰次。
现代文：奎神俊负责起居注时，向皇上申请让阳休之、河东裴伯茂、范阳卢元明、河问邢子塱等人一起参加编写。
English: When Qui Shenjun was in charge of the commentary, he applied to the emperor to let Yang Xiu Zhi, Hedong Pei Bomao, Fan Yang Lu Yuanming, and He Er Zi Yao and others participate in the compilation.

古文：永安末，洛州刺史李海启除冠军长史。
现代文：丞窒末年，盗业刺史奎盗奏明皇上任命休之为冠军长史。
English: In the last years of the Joseon Dynasty, Emperor Taesong appointed him as the champion for a long time.

古文：普泰中，兼通直散骑侍郎，加镇远将军，寻为太保长孙稚府属。寻□与魏收、李同轨等修国史。
现代文：普泰年间，兼任通直散骑侍郎，加镇远将军，不久为太保长孙稚府属官，很快朝廷下令命休之和魏收、李同轨等人编修国史。
English: During the Putai era, he served concurrently as Tsuchizane Sanzhijirō (general of cavalry and cavalry) and Kazenyaku (general of cavalry and cavalry), and soon became a subordinate official of the Taiho Cho (chief of the Imperial Household Agency) Sun Chih-fu. Soon after, the imperial court ordered the suspension of the lives of Wajie, Wei Jie, Li Tonglu and others for compiling national history.

古文：太昌初，除尚书祠部郎中，寻进征虏将军、中散大夫。
现代文：太昌初，任尚书祠部郎中，很快升任征虏将军、中散大夫。
English: At the beginning of Taichang, he was appointed as a disciple of Shang Shuxi Shrine, and soon rose to the position of conscript general and Zhongshan doctor.

古文：贺拔胜出为荆州刺史，启补骠骑长史。
现代文：贺拔胜出任荆州刺史，补授休之为骠骑长史。
English: He Baxing was appointed as the Jingzhou stabbing history, and the supplementary award was suspended for a long time.

古文：胜为行台，又请为右丞。
现代文：贺拔胜任行台，又请求休之任右丞。
English: He Ba competently presided over the procession, and also asked to be relieved of his duties as the right-hand man.

古文：胜经略樊、沔，又请为南道军司。
现代文：后来贺拔胜到樊、沔负责军事时，又请他任南道军司。
English: Later, when He Baxian was in charge of military affairs in Shandong and Fujian, he also asked him to serve as the military governor of Southern Province.

古文：俄而魏武帝入关，胜令休之奉表诣长安参谒。
现代文：不久，魏武帝入关，贺拔胜请休之带着表章到长安拜见。
English: Soon after, Emperor Wei Xiaowu entered the pass, and He Bi Sheng was sent to Chang'an to pay homage.

古文：时高祖亦启除休之太常少卿。
现代文：同时高祖也请休之任太常少卿。
English: At the same time, Gaozu also resigned from the post of Vice-Minister.

古文：寻属胜南奔，仍随至建业。
现代文：不久贺拔胜投奔南方，休之也一同来到建业。
English: Soon after, He Bascheng defected to the south, and Huizhi also came to Jianye.

古文：休之闻高祖推奉静帝，乃白胜启梁武求还，以天平二年达邺，仍奉高祖命赴晋阳。
现代文：后来听说高祖拥戴静帝即位，就劝说贺拔胜向梁武帝请求回到北方，并在天平二年到达邺，又奉高祖的命令到了晋阳。
English: Later, when Gao Zu heard that Emperor Jing was enthroned, he persuaded He Baxian to ask Emperor Liangwu to return to the north, and he arrived in Handan in the second year of the Heian period, and then went to Jinyang by Gao Zu's order.

古文：其年冬，授世宗开府主簿。
现代文：逭一年冬天，授世宗开府主簿。
English: In the winter of the same year, Juseizong opened the main office.

古文：明年春，世宗为大行台，复引为行台郎中。
现代文：第二年春天，世宗任大行台，又任休之为行台郎中。
English: In the spring of the following year, Sejong was appointed to the post of Daigodai, and he was also appointed to the post of Jutairo junior high school.

古文：四年，高祖幸汾阳之天池，于池边得一石，上有隐起，其文曰 六王三川 。
现代文：天平四年，高祖来到汾阳的天池，在池边发现一块石头，石头上有凸起的花纹，形成四字 六王三川 。
English: In the fourth year of the balance, Gao Zu came to the Heavenly Pool in Shenyang. He found a stone on the edge of the pool. The stone had a raised pattern, forming the four-character Six Kings and Three Rivers.

古文：高祖独于帐中问之，此文字何义。
现代文：高祖单独把休之叫到帐中问他这四字是什么意思。
English: Gaozhu called Huizhi to his account alone and asked him what the four characters meant.

古文：对曰： 六者是大王之字，王者当王有天下，此乃大王符瑞受命之征。
现代文：他解释说： 六是您名字中的一个字，王即应当统治天下，这是大王接受天命的好征兆。
English: He explained: "Six is a letter in your name, meaning that the king should rule the world. This is a good sign that the great king has accepted his destiny.

古文：既于天池得此石，可谓天意命王也，吉不可言。 高祖又问三川何义。
现代文：既然逭块石头是在天池边发现的，可以说天意让王作天子，是非常吉利的。 高祖又问： 三川是什么意思? 
English: Since the stone was found at the edge of the Heavenly Pool, it can be said that it was God's will for the king to become the Son of God, which is very auspicious.Gao Zu also asked: What does "Three Rivers" mean?

古文：休之曰： 河、洛、伊为三川，亦云泾、渭、洛为三川。
现代文：他说： 黄河、洛水、伊水是三川，也可以说泾水、渭水、洛水是三川。
English: He said: The Yellow River, the Luoshui River and the Yishui River are the three rivers, and it can also be said that the Surabaya River, the Surabaya River and the Luoshui River are the three rivers.

古文：河、洛、伊，洛阳也；泾、渭、洛，今雍州也。
现代文：黄河、洛水、伊水的中心是洛阳，泾水、渭水、洛水的中心是现在的雍州。
English: The center of the Yellow River, Luoshui and Yishui is Luoyang, and the center of Surabaya, Surabaya and Luoshui is now Yongzhou.

古文：大王若受天命，终应统有关右。 高祖曰： 世人无事常道我欲反，今闻此，更致纷纭，慎莫妄言也。 
现代文：大王如果承受天命，最终必须占据关右地区。 高祖说： 人们在无事时尚且说我要谋反，如果听到了逭事，恐怕更要议论纷纷，你要小心不要乱说出去。 
English: If the great king is to fulfill his destiny, he must eventually occupy the Guanzhong region. Gao Zu said: People say that I want to rebel when there is nothing to do. If you hear an anecdote, I am afraid you will have to talk about it. You should be careful not to say anything out of place.

古文：元象初，录荆州军功，封新泰县开国伯，食邑六百户，除平东将军、太中大夫、尚书左民郎中。
现代文：元象初年，因赐荆州的军功，被封为新泰县开国伯，食邑六百户，任平束将军、太中大夫、尚书左民郎中。
English: In the first year of Yuanxiang, because of the military merit of Jingzhou, he was named the founding count of Xintai County, with 600 households in food villages, and was appointed as General Hirazuka, Taizhongdaifu, and Shangshuzaominro Junior High School.

古文：兴和二年，兼通直散骑常侍，副清河崔长谦使于梁。
现代文：兴和二年，兼任通直散骑常侍，作清河崔长谦的副使出使梁。
English: In the second year of the Heian period, he also served as the attendant of Tongzhizan riding, and served as the deputy envoy of Qinghe Cui Changqian.

古文：武定二年，除中书侍郎。
现代文：武定二年，任中书侍郎。
English: In the second year of Wuding, he was appointed to the post of secretary.

古文：时有人士戏嘲休之云： 有触藩之羝羊，乘连钱之骢马，从晋阳而向邺，怀属书而盈把。 尚书左丞卢斐以其文书请谒，启高祖禁止，会赦不治。
现代文：当时有人开玩笑地嘲讽他说： 在进退两难之际，骑着连钱青骢马，从晋阳来到邺，随身带着许多著作。 尚书左丞卢斐因为他经常倚仗着自己的著作结交权贵谋求私利，请求高祖予以禁止，结果正赶上大赦而没能治罪。
English: At that time, some people jokingly mocked him, saying: In the face of a dilemma, he rode a horse from Jinyang to Handan, and brought a lot of books with him. Shangshu Zuoren Lu Fei, because he often relied on his books to make friends with the powerful for personal gain, asked Gaozu to ban it, and as a result, he was unable to punish the crime just in time for the amnesty.

古文：五年，兼尚食典御。
现代文：武定五年，兼尚食典御。
English: In the fifth year of Wuding, he also became the Emperor's butler.

古文：七年，除太子中庶子，迁给事黄门侍郎，进号中军将军、幽州大中正。
现代文：七年，任太子中庶子，升给事黄门侍郎，进授为中军将军、幽州大中正。
English: In the seventh year, he was appointed the prince's middle child, promoted to the attendant of the Yellow Gate, promoted to the general of the Chinese army, and became the junior high school principal of Yuzhou University.

古文：八年，兼侍中，持节奉玺书诣□州，敦喻显祖为相国、齐王。
现代文：八年，兼侍中，持符节捧着皇帝的韶书到达并州，督促开导显祖就任相国、齐王。
English: In the eighth year, while serving as an attendant, he arrived in Anhui Province holding the Emperor's imperial edict on the Day of the Sign, and urged the enlightened Emperor Xianzu to take office as the King of Qi.

古文：是时，显祖将受魏禅，发晋阳，至平阳郡，为人心未一，且还□州，恐漏泄，仍断行人。
现代文：此时，显祖将要接受魏后主禅位，从晋阳进发，走到平城都，因为人心不齐，又退回并州，恐怕泄露消息，不准人来往。
English: At this time, Emperor Xianzu was about to accept the position of the Wei empress. He started from Jinyang and went to Pingcheng. Because of the lack of unity of the people, he returned to Anhui Province. I was afraid that the news would be leaked and people would not be allowed to come and go.

古文：休之性疏放，使还，遂说其事，邺中悉知。
现代文：休之本性疏放，所以显祖允许他回去，但他回去后就宣扬了出去，京城人都知道了造件事。
English: Hui's nature is liberal, so Xianzu allowed him to go back, but after he returned, he went out to spread the word, and everyone in Beijing knew about the construction.

古文：于后高德政以闻，显祖忿之而未发。
现代文：此后高德政把这件事告诉了显祖，显祖很生气但没有表露出来。
English: After that, Gao Desheng told Xianzu about the incident. Xianzu was very angry but did not show it.

古文：齐受禅，除散骑常侍，修起居注。
现代文：北齐建国后，休之任散骑常侍，修起居注。
English: After the founding of the Northern Qi Dynasty, he was appointed as a knight errant and a regular attendant.

古文：顷之，坐诏书脱误，左迁骁骑将军，积前事也。
现代文：时间不长，因为书写韶书错误而获罪，贬为骁骑将军，也是因他前事的缘故。
English: The time was not long, because he was found guilty of writing a bad book and was reduced to a cavalry general, also because of his previous affairs.

古文：寻以禅让之际，参定礼仪，别封始平县开国男，以本官兼领军司马。
现代文：很快因为在接受禅位的时候，需要商定礼仪，就别封他为始平县开国男，以原来的官职兼领军司马。
English: Soon, because it was necessary to agree on the etiquette when accepting the zen rank, he was appointed as the founding father of Shihping County, leading the Sima army with his original official position.

古文：后除都水使者，历司徒掾、中书侍郎，寻除中山太守。
现代文：后来任都水使者，历任司徒掾、中书侍郎。不久任中山太守。
English: Later, he served as a messenger of the capital water, successively as a magistrate magistrate and chancellery clerk. He was soon appointed the governor of Nakayama.

古文：显祖崩，征休之至晋阳，经纪丧礼。
现代文：显祖去世后，征召休之到置盐，管理丧葬事宜。
English: After the death of Xianzu, he was summoned to Jishan to manage the funeral affairs.

古文：干明元年，兼侍中，巡省京邑。
现代文：整塱元年，兼侍中，巡察京城地区。
English: In the first year of the purge, he was also a chamberlain and inspected the capital area.

古文：仍拜大鸿胪卿，领中书侍郎。
现代文：授大鸿胪卿，领中书侍郎。
English: He was awarded the title of Daihongshunqing, and became a junior secretary.

古文：皇建初，以本官兼度支尚书，加骠骑大将军，领幽州大中正。
现代文：皇建初，以本官兼任度支尚书，加骠骑大将军、领幽蛆大中正。
English: At the beginning of the construction of the imperial palace, he was appointed to the post of the commander of the cavalry, the general of the cavalry, and the vice-commander of the cavalry.

古文：肃宗留心政道，每访休之治术。
现代文：卢塞十分注意治国，常向休之询问治国之术。
English: Lucé was very attentive to statecraft and often asked Hugh about the art of statecraft.

古文：休之答以明赏罚，慎官方，禁淫侈，恤民患为政治之先。
现代文：休之告诉他要明赏罚，慎选官，禁止骄奢淫逸，留心百姓疾苦，这些都是治理天下的首要。
English: Huizhi told him to clearly reward and punish, carefully select officials, prohibit arrogance and lasciviousness, and pay attention to the sufferings of the people. These are the priorities for governing the world.

古文：帝深纳之。
现代文：皇上非常注意采纳他的意见。
English: The emperor accepted it completely.

古文：大宁中，除都官尚书，转七兵、祠部。
现代文：大宁年间，任都官尚书，又改任七兵尚书、祠部。
English: During the time of Danying, he was appointed to the post of the city official of Shangshu, and he was also appointed to the post of the seven soldiers of Shangshu and the ancestral hall.

古文：河清三年，出为西兖州刺史。
现代文：河清三年，出任西兖州刺史。
English: He served as the governor of Xishuanzhou for three years.

古文：天统初，征为光禄卿，监国史。
现代文：孟越初年，征入任光禄卿，负责编修国史。
English: In the first year of Meng Yue, he was conscripted into the post of Guangluqing, responsible for compiling national history.

古文：休之在中山及治西兖，俱有惠政，为吏民所怀。去官之后，百姓树碑颂德。
现代文：体之在中山和西兖州任职期间，都实行了宽容政策，深受当地官员和百姓的爱戴。他离任后，百姓树碑来颂扬他。
English: During his tenure in Zhongshan and Xishuangzhou, he implemented a policy of tolerance and was deeply loved by local officials and people. After he left office, the people erected a monument to praise him.

古文：寻除吏部尚书，食阳武县干，除仪同三司，又加开府。
现代文：不久任吏部尚书，享受阳武县干禄，任仪同三司，又加开府。
English: Soon, he was appointed as the secretary of the cadre department, enjoying the Yangwu County salary, the appointment of the ceremony and the three departments, and the opening of the prefecture.

古文：休之多识故事，谙悉氏族，凡所选用，莫不才地俱允。
现代文：体之掌握很多以往朝代的旧事，熟悉氏族的情况，他选拔的官员，才能和门第都很恰当。
English: He has a good grasp of many of the past dynasties, is familiar with the situation of the clan, and his selection of officials, talents and disciples are very appropriate.

古文：加金紫光禄大夫。
现代文：加金紫光禄大夫。
English: Wang Qi was also awarded the title of Jin Zi Guanglu Doctor.

古文：武平元年，除中书监，寻以本官兼尚书右仆射。
现代文：武平元年，任中书监，不久以本官兼尚书右仆射。
English: In the first year of the Wu-Ping Dynasty, he was appointed as a middle school librarian, and soon he was promoted to his present position as well.

古文：二年，加左光禄大夫，兼中书监。
现代文：二年，加左光禄大夫，兼中书监。
English: In the second year, he was promoted to the post of Zaganganglu Doctor and concurrently became the middle school librarian.

古文：三年，加特进。
现代文：三年，加特进。
English: Three years later, Gatte was promoted.

古文：五年，正中书监，余并如故。
现代文：五年，任中书监，其他官职依旧。
English: Five years later, he was appointed librarian, but his other official duties remained the same.

古文：寻以年老致仕，抗表辞位，帝优答不许。
现代文：不久因为年老退休，上表向皇上辞官，皇上特意优待他，没有允许。
English: Soon, because of his old age and retirement, he tendered his resignation to the Emperor. The Emperor treated him specially and did not allow it.

古文：六年，除正尚书右仆射。
现代文：六年，任正尚书右仆射。
English: In the sixth year, Ren Zheng Shang was shot by his right-hand man.

古文：未几，又领中书监。
现代文：不久，又领中书监。
English: Soon after, he was promoted to the post of librarian.

古文：休之本怀平坦，为士友所称。
现代文：体之襟怀坦荡，受到士人和朋友的称许。
English: He was praised by his peers and friends for his open-mindedness.

古文：晚节：说祖珽撰御览，书成，加特进，及珽被黜，便布言于朝廷，云先有嫌隙。
现代文：晚年的时候，说服担玺撰写《御览》，书写成后，加特进。担玺被罢官，他又四处散布言论，说舆!噬原先就有矛盾。
English: In his later years, he persuaded Danzhong to write "Observation," and after the book was written, Gatjin. Danzhong was dismissed, and he spread his remarks everywhere, saying that there was originally a contradiction.

古文：及邓长颙、颜之推奏立文林馆，之推本意不欲令耆旧贵人居之，休之便相附会，与少年朝请、参军之徒同入待诏。
现代文：到邓长颐、颜之推奏明皇上设立塞焚笪时，题之进本来不想让一些上年纪的权贵参加，休之就又依附他们，和一些年轻的朝请、参军一同入文林馆待诏。
English: When Emperor Ming set up the Great Wall of China, Emperor Deng and Empress Yan did not want to let some elderly dignitaries participate, so they attached themselves to them and invited some young people to join the army and enter the Wenlin Pavilion to wait for the imperial edict.

古文：又魏收监史之日，立高祖本纪，取平四胡之岁为齐元。
现代文：又魏收负责编写国史时，设《高祖本纪》，以平定四胡这一年为齐元年。
English: When Wei Jie was in charge of compiling the national history, he set up the "Gao Zu Benji" and made the year of the suppression of the Sihus the first year of Qi.

古文：收在齐州，恐史官改夺其意，上表论之。
现代文：当时魏收在齐州，恐怕史官改变了自己的意思，上表论说逭件事。
English: At that time, Wei Hui was in Qizhou. I am afraid that the historian changed his mind and said that the above table was not the case.

古文：武平中，收还朝，□集朝贤议其事。休之立议从天保为限断。
现代文：武平年间，魏收回朝，皇上下令召集朝中大臣商讨，休之提出应该以天保为分界。
English: During the Wu-Ping era, Wei withdrew from the court, and the emperor issued an order to convene the ministers of the north and the middle to discuss, and it was proposed that Tianbao should be the demarcation.

古文：魏收存日，犹两议未决。
现代文：魏收在世时，还议而不决。
English: When Wei Hui was alive, the two opinions were discussed but not resolved.

古文：收死后，便讽动内外，发诏从其议。
现代文：魏收死后，休之就说动内外大臣，最终皇上下令听从了他的意见。
English: After Wei Jie's death, he persuaded the Minister of the Interior and the Minister of the Interior to resign, and eventually the Emperor and the government obeyed his opinion.

古文：后领中书监，便谓人云： 我已三为中书监，用此何为？ 隆化还邺，举朝多有迁授，封休之燕郡王。
现代文：后来领中书监，他对人说： 我已经三任中书监，现在又任有什么用? 隆化年间回到邺，满朝官员都升了官级，封休之为燕郡王。
English: Later, when he was in charge of the middle school librarian, he said to the people, "I have been in charge of the middle school librarian for three years, what is the use of my appointment now? During the Longhua era, when I returned to Shandong, the officials of the whole dynasty were promoted to higher ranks, and he was dismissed as the King of Yan County.

古文：又谓其所亲云： 我非奴，何意忽有此授。 凡此诸事，深为时论所鄙。
现代文：他又对亲信说： 我不是奴仆，怎么能授我这一官职呢? 凡此种种都受到当时人的鄙弃。
English: He also said to his intimates: I am not a servant, how can I be given this office? All such things were despised by the people of that time.

古文：休之好学不倦，博综经史，文章虽不华靡，亦为典正。
现代文：休之好学不倦，博览群书，文章虽然说不上华丽，但也还典雅。
English: He is a restless learner, a well-read man, and his articles, though not very splendid, are also elegant.

古文：邢、魏殂后，以先达见推。
现代文：自从邢邵、魏收二人死后，他被推崇为前辈。
English: Since the deaths of Gong Shao and Wei Hui, he has been revered as a forerunner.

古文：位望虽高，虚怀接物，为搢绅所爱重。
现代文：地位和威望高了，待人接物却能虚怀若谷，受到士大夫的敬重。
English: Although the prestige of the position is very high, it can treat people with vanity and is respected and loved by the gentry.

古文：周武平齐，与吏部尚书袁聿修、□尉卿李祖钦、度支尚书元修伯、大理卿司马幼之、司农卿崔达拏、秘书监源文宗、散骑常侍兼中书侍郎李若、散骑常侍给事黄门侍郎李孝贞、给事黄门侍郎卢思道、给事黄门侍郎颜之推、通直散骑常侍兼中书侍郎李德林、通直散骑常侍兼中书舍人陆乂、中书侍郎薛道衡、中书舍人高行恭、辛德源、王劭、陆开明十八人同征，令随驾后赴长安。
现代文：周武帝平定齐国后，休之与吏部尚书袁聿修、卫尉卿李祖钦、度支尚书元脩伯、大理卿司马幼之、司农卿崔达孥、秘书监源文宗、散骑常侍兼中书侍郎李若、散骑常侍给事黄门侍郎李孝贞、给事黄门侍郎卢思道、给事黄门侍郎颜之推、通直散骑常侍兼中书侍郎李德林、通直散骑常侍兼中书舍人陆义、中书侍郎薛道衡、中书舍人高行恭、辛德源、王劭、陆开明十八人一起被征召，命他们随皇上到长安。
English: After Emperor Zhou Wuding conquered Qi, Yuan Shuxiu, the Secretary of the General Staff, Li Zuqin, the Lieutenant of the Guards, Du Zhi, the Secretary of the General Staff, Sima Youzhi, the Secretary of the General Secretary of the People's Commissariat of Agriculture, Cui Daru, the Secretary of the General Secretary of the People's Commissariat of Agriculture, Yuan Wenzong, the Cavalryman and the Secretary of the General Staff, Li Ruo, the Cavalryman and the Secretary of the General Staff, Li Xiaozhen, the Cavalryman and the Secretary of the General Staff, Lu Yi, the Cavalryman and the

古文：卢思道有所撰录，止云休之与孝贞、思道同被召者是其诬罔焉。
现代文：对这件事卢思道曾经有所记述，仅说阳休之和李孝贞、卢思道一起被征召是他记述错误。
English: Lu Sidao once wrote about this matter, but it was a mistake for him to say that Yang Xiu Zhi was drafted together with Li Xiaozhen and Lu Sidao.

古文：寻除开府仪同，历纳言中大夫、太子少保。
现代文：不久，休之任开府仪同，历任纳言中大夫、太子少保。
English: Soon after, he was appointed to the post of Kaifu, and successively held the posts of Nagan Chudafu and Taishi Shobo.

古文：大象末，进位上开府，除和州刺史。
现代文：大象末年，进位上开府，任和州刺史。
English: At the end of the elephant's life, he was promoted to the position of the head of the prefectural government, and was appointed as the prefect of Hezhou.

古文：隋开皇二年，罢任，终于洛阳，年七十四。
现代文：隋开皇二年，罢官，死在洛阳，时年七十四岁。
English: In the second year of the Sui Dynasty, he was dismissed and died in Luoyang at the age of seventy-four.

古文：所著文集三十卷，又撰幽州人物志并行于世。
现代文：着有文集三十卷，又撰写了《幽州人物志》，都流行于世。
English: He is the author of thirty volumes of anthologies, and also wrote "Yuzhou People's Biography," both of which are popular in the world.

古文：子辟强，武平末尚书水部郎中。
现代文：他的儿子壁彊，娄垩末年任尚书水部郎中。
English: His son, Kiseki, became the junior secretary of the Ministry of Education and Culture in his later years.

古文：辟强性疏脱，无文艺，休之亦引入文林馆，为时人嗤鄙焉。
现代文：壁疆性情疏略洒脱，没有文才，体之也引荐他入了文林馆，受到当时人们的讥笑和鄙视。
English: Kijiya's temperament was sparse and carefree, he had no literary talent, and he was also recommended to enter the Wenlin Museum, which was ridiculed and despised by the people at that time.

古文：袁聿修，字叔德，陈郡阳夏人。
现代文：袁聿修，字叔德，陈郡阳夏人。
English: Yuan Shuxiu, Zha Shude, Chen Gu Yang Xia Ren.

古文：魏中书令翻之子也，出后叔父跃。
现代文：是魏中书令袁翻的儿子，过继给叔叔袁跃。
English: He was the son of Yuan Tuo, a Wei official, and was adopted by his uncle Yuan Yue.

古文：七岁遭丧，居处礼度，有若成人。
现代文：七岁时父亲死了，他的行为都合乎法度，像成年人。
English: At the age of seven, his father died, and he behaved legally, like an adult.

古文：九岁，州辟主簿。
现代文：九岁时，州裹征召为主簿。
English: At the age of nine, he was conscripted by state officials.

古文：性深沉有鉴识，清净寡欲，与物无竞，深为尚书崔休所知赏。
现代文：为人深沉有见识，性情清静，与世无争，很受尚书崔休的信任赏识。
English: He is a person with deep insight, a calm disposition, and no quarrel with the world. He is highly trusted and appreciated by Shangshu Cui Xiu.

古文：魏太昌中，释褐太保开府西合祭酒。
现代文：魏太昌年间，出仕任太保开府西合祭酒。
English: During the reign of Emperor Taichang of the Wei Dynasty, he served as Taiho Kaifu and brewed Xiaosai liquor.

古文：年十八，领本州岛中正。
现代文：十八岁，领本州中正。
English: Eighteen years old, the leader of Honshu Junior High School.

古文：寻兼尚书度支郎，仍历五兵左民郎中。
现代文：不久兼尚书度支郎，历任五兵左民郎中。
English: He was soon promoted to Shudo Shiro, and became one of the five Minors of the Left.

古文：武定末，太子中舍人。
现代文：武定末年，任太子中舍人。
English: In the last years of Wuding's life, he renounced his position as crown prince.

古文：天保初，除太子庶子，以本官行博陵太守。
现代文：天保初年，任太子庶子，以本官代理博陵太守。
English: In the first year of the Tenpo era, he was appointed as the prince's illegitimate son, acting as the acting governor of Boling.

古文：数年，大有声绩，远近称之。
现代文：几年时间，治理得很有成绩和声誉，远近的人都称赞他。
English: For several years, he has governed with great success and reputation, and people from near and far have praised him.

古文：八年，兼太府少卿，寻转大司农少卿，又除太常少卿。
现代文：天保八年，兼太府少卿，不久改任大司农少卿，又任太常少卿。
English: Tenpo 8th year, concurrently Taifu shojo-kyo, soon to be changed to Daishi nong shojo-kyo, and then to Taijo shojo-kyo.

古文：皇建二年，遭母忧去职，寻诏复前官，加冠军、辅国将军，除吏部郎中。
现代文：皇建二年，为母亲守丧离职，不久皇上下令官复原职，加冠军、辅国将军，任吏部郎中。
English: In the second year of the Emperor's reign, he resigned from his post to attend his mother's funeral. Soon after, he was reinstated as the Emperor's second-in-command, given the title of champion and auxiliary general, and appointed as a junior official of the Ministry of Civil Affairs.

古文：未几，迁司徒左长史，加骠骑大将军，领兼御史中丞。
现代文：时间不长，升任司徒左长史，加骠骑大将军，兼御史中丞。
English: The time was not long, and he was promoted to the position of Sittusha no Choshi, Kagero no Kishi taisho, and also to the position of Goshi chujo.

古文：司徒录事参军卢思道私贷库钱四十万娉太原王乂女为妻，而王氏已先纳陆孔文礼娉为定，聿修坐为首僚，又是国之司宪，知而不劾，被责免中丞。
现代文：司徒录事参军卢思道私自从国库借了四十万钱娶太原王义的女儿为妻，但王压的女儿已经收过了坠王这的定礼，吏修是朝中的首席大臣，又是御史，知道了这件事却不加弹劾，因而获罪免去了御史中丞。
English: Lu Sidao and I borrowed 400,000 yuan from the state treasury to marry the daughter of King Taiyuan Wang Yi. However, the daughter of Wang Quan had already received the formalities of the king's demise. Li Xiu was the chief minister of the imperial court and the imperial historian. Although he knew about this matter, he did not impeach, and thus he was acquitted of the crime of the imperial historian.

古文：寻迁秘书监。
现代文：不久改为秘书监
English: Soon after, he was appointed secretary superintendent.

古文：天统中，诏与赵郡王叡等议定五礼。
现代文：玉统年间，皇上下令袁聿修和赵郡王高散等商讨制订五礼。
English: During the reign of Emperor Taizong, Yuan Shuxiu and Wang Gaosan of Zhao County discussed the formulation of the Five Rites.

古文：出除信州刺史，即其本乡也，时人荣之。
现代文：出任信州刺史，信州是他的家乡，当时都很羡慕。
English: Shinshu, his hometown, was very envious at the time.

古文：为政清靖，不言而治，长吏以下，爰逮□寡孤幼，皆得其欢心。
现代文：他做官清廉，无为而治，从长吏以下，一直到鳏寡孤幼，都很喜欢他。
English: He was a clean and honest official, ruling without doing anything, and everyone from officials down to widows and orphans liked him very much.

古文：武平初，御史普出过诣诸州，梁、郑、兖、豫疆境连接，州之四面，悉有举劾，御史竟不到信州，其见知如此。
现代文：武平初，御史广泛出动到各州视察，梁州、郑州、兖丛、邃业和值业接壤，这四州的长官，都受到弹劾，御史却没有到信州，聿修就是如此受到信任。
English: At the beginning of the Wuping era, Gushi was widely dispatched to inspect all the states, including Liangzhou, Zhengzhou, Gongcong, Tongye and Wenzhou. The governors of these four states were all impeached, but Gushi did not go to Shinshu. This is how Gushi was trusted.

古文：及解代还京，民庶道俗，追别满道，或将酒脯，涕泣留连，竞欲远送。
现代文：等到他兼职期满返回京城，追送的百姓挤满了道路。有的人带着酒肉，痛哭流涕地挽留他，都争着远送。
English: When he returned to Beijing at the end of his part-time job, the roads were crowded with people chasing him. Some people brought wine and meat, and held him back with tears, all fighting to send him away.

古文：既盛暑，恐其劳弊，往往为之驻马，随举一酌，示领其意，辞谢令还。
现代文：当时正是酷暑，为避免百姓过于劳累，聿修常常停下来，随手举起一杯酒，答谢百姓的厚意，并劝说百姓们回去。
English: It was a very hot day, and in order to prevent the people from being overworked, Gong Xiu often stopped, readily raised a glass of wine, thanked the people for their kindness, and persuaded the people to go back.

古文：还京后，州民郑播宗等七百余人请为立碑，敛缣布数百疋，托中书侍郎李德林为文以纪功德。
现代文：回到京城后，信州百姓塑播塞等七百多人请求为聿修立碑，筹集了几百匹布，委托中书侍郎李德林作文记载聿修的功德。
English: After returning to the capital, more than seven hundred people, including Shinshu citizens, requested the erection of a monument for Zou, collected several hundred pieces of cloth, and commissioned the Chinese scribe Li Delin to write a composition to record the merits of Zou.

古文：府省为奏，□报许之。
现代文：府省替百姓奏明朝廷，得到了皇上许可。
English: The prefectural and provincial governments petitioned the imperial court on behalf of the people, and received permission from the emperor.

古文：寻除都官尚书，仍领本州岛中正，转兼吏部尚书、仪同三司，尚书寻即真。
现代文：不久聿修被任都官尚书，仍领信州中正，又改兼吏部尚书、仪同三司。不久正式任尚书。
English: Soon after, Gong Xiu was appointed as the official secretary of the capital, still holding the title of Shinshu Zhongzheng, and was also changed to the official secretary of the personnel department and the official secretary of the three departments. Soon he was officially appointed as the official secretary.

古文：聿修少平和温润，素流之中，最有规检。
现代文：车修从小性情平和温顺，在士大夫中最有操守。
English: Ever since he was a child, he has had a peaceful and docile disposition, and he is the most conscientious doctor.

古文：以名家子历任清华，时望多相器待，许其风监。
现代文：以名家子弟而历任高官，当时的名流都很器重他，称许其风度和鉴识。
English: As the son of a famous family and a high-ranking official, the celebrities of the time were very respectful of him, praising his style and expertise.

古文：在郎署之日，值赵彦深为水部郎中，同在一院，因成交友。
现代文：在任郎官时，正好趟彦深任水部郎中，两人在一院办公，成了朋友。
English: When he was a junior official, it was just the right time for Hikobisa to be a junior official of the Ministry of Water Resources. The two of them worked at the same hospital and became friends.

古文：彦深后被沙汰停私，门生藜藿，聿修犹以故情，存问来往。
现代文：后来赵彦深被罢官在家闲居，别人都和他断绝了来往，聿修却记着旧情，去探望慰问他。
English: Later, Zhao Yanshen was dismissed from his post and lived idly at home. Other people cut off their contacts with him, but Zou Xiu remembered his old feelings and went to visit and console him.

古文：彦深任用，铭戢甚深，虽人才无愧，盖亦由其接引。
现代文：当彦深被起用后，也记住了这一段交往，所以聿修的提升虽然是量才录用，也归因于彦深的推荐。
English: When Hikoshin was appointed, he also remembered this period of interaction, so although the promotion of Tsukuda was only hired by quantity, it was also due to Hikoshin's recommendation.

古文：为吏部尚书以后，自以物望得之。
现代文：任吏部尚书以后，就是凭自己的声望而升官。
English: After he was appointed as an official of the Ministry of Justice, he thought he was quite popular.

古文：初冯子琮以仆射摄选，婚嫁相寻，聿修常非笑之，语人云： 冯公营婚，日不暇给。 及自居选曹，亦不能免，时论以为地势然也。
现代文：起初冯子琮以仆射兼管选拔官吏，总是选择豪门缔结婚姻关系，聿修常常讥笑他，对别人说： 冯公忙着为自己挑选亲家而日不暇给。 等他自己也负责铨选官吏时，也免不了走上子琮的老路，人们认为这是各人的地位造成的。
English: At the beginning, Feng Zixuan was in charge of selecting officials, and he always chose a wealthy family to enter into a marriage relationship. Zi Xiu often mocked him, saying to others: "Feng Gong is busy selecting relatives for himself, and he has no time to spare. When he himself is also responsible for selecting officials, he will inevitably follow the old path of Zixuan. People think that this is due to the status of each person.

古文：在官廉谨，当时少匹。
现代文：聿修为官很清廉，在当时很少有人像他这样。
English: Zou Xiu was a very clean official. At that time, there were very few people like him.

古文：魏、齐世，台郎多不免交通饟遗，聿修在尚书十年，未曾受升酒之馈。
现代文：魏、齐两世，台府郎官之间免不了相互来往馈赠，但他任尚书十年，却没有接受过任何礼物。
English: The Wei and Qi dynasties, the Taiwan government officials, inevitably exchanged gifts with each other, but he was a scholar for ten years, but he did not accept any gifts.

古文：尚书邢卲与聿修旧款，每于省中语戏，常呼聿修为清郎。
现代文：尚书邢邵和他是老朋友，常在尚书省和他开玩笑，把他叫做清郎。
English: Shang Shuxuan Shao and he are old friends. They often joke with him in Shang Shuxuan and call him Qing Rong.

古文：大宁初，聿修以太常少卿出使巡省，仍命考校官人得失。
现代文：大宁初，他以太常少卿身份巡察各地，朝廷命他考察官吏的功过得失。
English: At the beginning of the Daning Dynasty, he inspected various regions as Tai Chang Shaoqing, and the court ordered him to investigate the merits and demerits of officials.

古文：经历兖州，时邢卲为兖州刺史，别后，遣送白紬为信。
现代文：经过兖州时，邢邵正任兖州刺史，两人分手后，邢邵派人送他一些白绌。
English: When passing through Ganzhou, Zou Shao was in charge of the history of Ganzhou. After the two broke up, Zou Shao sent someone to give him some egrets.

古文：聿修退紬不受，与邢书云： 今日仰过，有异常行，瓜田李下，古人所慎，多言可畏，譬之防川，愿得此心，不贻厚责。 邢亦忻然领解，报书云： 一日之赠，率尔不思，老夫忽忽意不及此，敬承来旨，吾无间然。
现代文：聿修又退了回去，并给他写信说： 造一次来探望你，和你平时的行为不一样，古人从瓜田李下经过，都要避嫌，议论是可怕的，要想不让他们说三道四，就像堵住决堤的河水一样困难。你的心意我接受了，但不要给我留下白责。 邢邵也高兴地领会了他的意思，回信说： 今天送给你东西，都是因为我过于轻率没有多加思考，承蒙你来信教导，我心中已经没有隔阂了。
English: Zi Xiu retreated back again, and wrote to him, saying: To come to visit you once is different from your usual behavior. The ancients passed through the melon fields and under the linden trees, and they had to avoid offending. It is terrible to talk. It is as difficult to prevent them from talking as it is to stop the river from bursting its banks. I accepted your intention, but don't leave me with the guilt. Zi Shao also happily understood his meaning, and wrote back, "I gave you something today because I was too hasty and didn't give it much thought. Thanks to your letter, there is no longer a gap in my heart.

古文：弟昔为清郎，今日复作清卿矣。 及在吏部，属政塞道丧，若违忤要势，即恐祸不旋踵，虽以清白自守，犹不免请谒之累。
现代文：老弟你过去是清郎，现在成了清卿。 聿修在吏部时，国家已经到了政治败坏、道德沦丧的时候，如果触犯了权贵，恐怕立刻就会招来灾祸，所以他虽然清廉自守，仍然免不了和权贵们周旋而累及自己的品德。
English: Brother, you used to be a high-ranking official, but now you have become a high-ranking nobleman. When Zi Xiu was in the cadre department, the country had already reached the time of political corruption and moral decline. If he offended the powerful and noble, he was afraid that he would immediately bring disaster. Therefore, although he was clean and honest, he still had to deal with the powerful and noble, which affected his character.

古文：齐亡入周，授仪同大将军、吏部下大夫。
现代文：北齐灭亡后聿修归降了北周，授仪同大将军吏部下大夫。
English: After the demise of Northern Qi, Zou Xiu returned to Northern Zhou and was awarded the same rank as the general officers and subordinate doctors.

古文：大象末，除东京司宗中大夫。
现代文：大象末年，任束京司宗中大夫。
English: In the last years of his life, he was appointed as a junior doctor of the Kyoshu sect.

古文：隋开皇初，加上仪同，迁东京都官尚书。
现代文：隋开皇初，加上仪同，又任束京都官尚书。
English: In the first year of the Sui Dynasty, with the addition of the same title, he was transferred to the Tokyo Metropolitan Government.

古文：东京废，入朝，又除都官尚书。
现代文：废除束京后，回到朝中，又任都官尚书。
English: After the abolition of Sokkyo, he returned to the Imperial Court and was appointed to the post of Shosho.

古文：二年，出为熊州刺史。
现代文：开皇二年，出任熊州刺史。
English: In the second year of the Emperor's reign, he was appointed as the governor of Kumashu.

古文：寻卒，年七十二。
现代文：不久去世，时年七十二岁。
English: He died shortly afterwards, aged 72.

古文：子知礼，武平末仪同开府参军事。
现代文：儿子芝噬，亘迢末年任仪同开府参军事。
English: His son Zhifang, in his last years of life, was appointed to join the military together with Kaifu.

古文：隋开皇中，侍御史，历尚书民部考功侍郎。
现代文：鹰题皇年间任侍御史，历任尚书民部考功侍郎。
English: During the reign of Emperor Yingtai, he served as an attendant of history, and successively served as an attendant of the People's Literature Department.

古文：大业初，卒于太子中舍人。
现代文：太业初年，死于太子中舍人任上。
English: In the first year of Taiye's reign, he died and was succeeded by his second son.

古文：史臣曰：崔彦玄奕世载德，不忝其先；卢詹事任侠好谋，志尚宏远；阳仆射位高望重，郁为时宗；袁尚书清明在躬，以器能见任；与阳斐、卢潜并朝之良也。
现代文：史臣曰：崔彦玄历代都享受皇家的恩德，他能够做到不玷辱自己的祖先；卢詹事见义勇为喜好谋略，志向远大；阳休之权高望重，卓然超群，成为当时的楷模；袁聿修清正廉洁，以身作则，以才识高超被委以重任；他们和阳斐、卢潜等人都是朝中的杰出人才。
English: Shi Zhen said: Cui Yan Xuan has enjoyed the grace of the royal family throughout the ages, and he can do it without dishonoring his ancestors; Lu Zhan likes and plans to be courageous and ambitious; Yang Xiu's authority is highly respected and outstanding, becoming a model at that time; Yuan Shuxiu is honest and clean, leading by example, and is entrusted with important tasks with superior talent; they and Yang Fei, Lu Qian and others are outstanding talents in the dynasty.

古文：有齐季世，权归佞幸，赖诸君维持名教，不然则拔本塞源，裂冠毁冕，安可道哉。
现代文：北齐后期，权柄落入奸臣手中，幸亏有这些人维护了国家的正常秩序，如果没有他们，就会本源俱丧，忠臣受害，一切将无从谈起!
English: In the late Northern Qi period, power fell into the hands of treacherous vassals. Fortunately, these people maintained the normal order of the country. Without them, the original source would be lost, loyal vassals would suffer, and everything would be out of the question!

古文：赞曰：惟兹数公，心安宠辱，不夷不惠，坐镇流俗。
现代文：赞曰：惟有这几位大臣，坦然面对个人荣辱，行事中正，无偏无颇，威镇世俗。
English: Zang said: Only these several ministers, calmly face personal honor and disgrace, act in a positive, unbiased manner, and stand up to the world.

