古文：呜呼，盛衰之理，虽曰天命，岂非人事哉！
现代文：唉，国家兴亡盛衰的道理，虽说是出于天命的安排，难道就不是人事的作用吗？
English: Alas, isn't the reason for the rise and fall of a country, even if it is due to the arrangement of fate, the role of personnel?

古文：原庄宗之所以得天下，与其所以失之者，可以知之矣。
现代文：推究唐庄宗取得天下，和失去天下的原因，就可以明白了。
English: It can be understood by investigating the reasons why Tangzhuangzong gained the world and lost the world.

古文：世言晋王之将终也，以三矢赐庄宗而告之曰： 梁，吾仇也，燕王吾所立，契丹与吾约为兄弟，而皆背晋以归梁。此三者，吾遗恨也。
现代文：世人传说晋王临终的时候，拿出三支箭赐给唐庄宗并告诉他说： 梁，是我的仇敌；燕王是我拥立的，契丹和我相约为兄弟，但都背叛了晋而归附梁这三件事，是我终身的遗恨。
English: According to legend, when King Jin was on his deathbed, he took out three arrows and gave them to Tang Zhuangzong and told him: Liang is my enemy; Yan Wang is my supporter; Khitan and I are almost brothers, but both betrayed Jin and joined Liang. These three things are my lifelong hatred.

古文：与尔三矢，尔其无忘乃父之志！ 
现代文：给你这三支箭，你不要忘了你父亲的志愿！ 
English: Give you these three arrows, and do not forget your father's vow!

古文：庄宗受而藏之于庙。
现代文：唐庄宗接受了这三支箭并把它们珍藏在太庙中。
English: Tang Zhuangzong accepted the three arrows and treasured them in the Great Temple.

古文：其后用兵，则遣从事以一少牢告庙，请其矢，盛以锦囊，负而前驱，及凯旋而纳之。方其系燕父子以组，函梁君臣之首，入于太庙，还矢先王而告以成功，其意气之盛，可谓壮哉！
现代文：后来用兵打仗时，就派从事拿着少牢祭品到太庙祷告，请出箭来，装在锦囊里，背着箭走在军队前面，到战胜归来又送回太庙收藏当唐庄宗用绳子捆绑燕王父子，用木匣装上梁村臣的人头，进入太庙把箭归还给先王而报告成功，那时意气的旺盛，可说是豪壮极了！
English: Later, when soldiers were sent to fight, they were sent to the Imperial Temple to pray with the sacrificial offerings of the young prisoners. Please take out the arrows, put them in the broom bag, walk in front of the army with the arrows on your back, and then return to the Imperial Temple to collect them. When Tang Zhuangzong tied Yan Wang and his son with a rope, put the head of Liang Cunchen in a wooden box, and returned the arrows to the former king in the Imperial Temple to report the success, he was full of vigor, and could be said to be extremely heroic!

古文：及仇雠已灭，天下已定，一夫夜呼，乱者四应，苍皇东出，未及见贼而士卒离散，君臣相顾，不知所归，至于誓天断发，泣下沾襟，何其衰也！
现代文：等到仇敌已经消灭，天下已经平定，一个人晚上呼喊，叛乱的人就四面响应，庄宗匆忙惊慌地向东逃出，还没来得及看见贼军而士兵已经逃散离去，君臣面面相毖，不知该回到哪里，以至于割掉头发对天发誓，眼泪流下打湿了衣襟，多么衰弱啊！
English: Wait until the enemy has been eliminated, the world has been pacified, a person shouts in the evening, the rebels respond in all directions, Zhuangzong hurriedly and panickedly fled to the east, before he could see the thief army and the soldiers had fled and dispersed, the monarchs and subjects face each other, I do not know where to return, so much so that I cut my hair and swear to the sky, my tears wet my lapels, how weak!

古文：岂得之难而失之易欤？
现代文：岂不是取得天下艰难而失去天下容易吗？
English: Isn't it hard to gain the world but easy to lose it?

古文：抑本其成败之迹而皆自于人欤？
现代文：抑或推究他成败的轨迹，而都是出自别人吗？
English: Or did his trajectory of success and failure come from someone else?

古文：《书》曰： 满招损，谦得益。 
现代文：《尚书》说： 骄傲自满招致损害，谦虚谨慎得到好处。 
English: "Shangshu" said: Pride and complacency cause damage, modesty and prudence benefit.

古文：忧劳可以兴国，逸豫可以亡身，自然之理也。
现代文：忧虑辛劳能使国家兴盛，安逸享乐能使自身灭亡，这是自然而然的道理。
English: It is a self-evident truth that anxiety and hard work can make a country prosperous, while ease and enjoyment can bring about its own demise.

古文：故方其盛也，举天下之豪杰莫能与之争；及其衰也，数十伶人困之，而身死国灭，为天下笑。
现代文：因此当他强盛的时候，遍天下的英雄豪杰没有人能和他争斗；到他衰败的时候，几十个乐官围困他，居然身死国亡，被天下人耻笑。
English: Therefore, when he was strong, no one could fight with him, the hero of the whole world; when he was in decline, dozens of musicians besieged him, and he actually died and was ridiculed by the world.

古文：夫祸患常积于忽微，而智勇多困于所溺，岂独伶人也哉！作《伶官传》。
现代文：祸患常常是从细小的事物中稹累起来的，而智慧武勇又常常困于自己溺爱的东西，哪里只是伶人呢！因此作《伶官传》。
English: Misfortune often comes from small things, while wisdom and bravery are often caught up in the things they indulge in. Where are the eunuchs? This is why "The Eunuch's Life" was written.

古文：庄宗既好俳优，又知音，能度曲，至今汾、晋之俗，往往能歌其声，谓之 御制 者皆是也。
现代文：唐庄宗既喜欢乐舞艺人，又懂得音乐，会作曲，到现在汾、晋二州民间，大多能唱他作曲的歌，叫做 御制曲 的都是。
English: Tang Zhuozong not only liked music and dance artists, but also understood music and could compose music. To this day, most of the folk in Shandong and Jinzhou can sing songs composed by him, which are called imperial compositions.

古文：其小字亚子，当时人或谓之亚次。
现代文：他的小字叫亚子，当时有的人叫他亚次。
English: His nickname was Yazo, but at the time some people called him Aso.

古文：又别为优名以自目，曰李天下。
现代文：又另取艺名自称李天下。
English: He also took another stage name and called himself Li Tianxia.

古文：自其为王，至于为天子，常身与俳优杂戏于庭，伶人由此用事，遂至于亡。
现代文：从他做王开始，直到做天子时，常常和艺人们在庭中嬉戏，乐官从此专权，于是导致灭亡。
English: From the time he was king until he became the son of heaven, he often played with the artists in the courtyard. From then on, the musician had absolute power, which led to his downfall.

古文：皇后刘氏素微，其父刘叟，卖药善卜，号刘山人。
现代文：皇后刘氏素来微贱，她的父亲刘叟，卖药为生，擅长占卜，号称刘山人。
English: Empress Liu's family has always been lowly. Her father, Liu Yao, sold medicine for a living and was good at divination. He was known as Liu Shanren.

古文：刘氏性悍，方与诸姬争宠，常自耻其世家，而特讳其事。
现代文：刘氏性格强悍，正和嫔姬们争宠，常常以自己的家世为耻辱，十分忌讳这件事。
English: Liu's character is strong, and he is competing for the favor of the concubines. He often regards his own family history as a disgrace, and he is very ashamed of this.

古文：庄宗乃为刘叟衣服，自负蓍囊药笈，使其子继岌提破帽而随之，造其卧内，曰： 刘山人来省女。 
现代文：唐庄宗于是穿上刘叟的衣服，背上蓍草袋和药箱，让他的儿子李继岌手提破帽跟着他，来到刘氏卧室里，说： 刘山人前来看望女儿。 
English: Tang Zhuangzong then put on Liu Yao's clothes, put a grass bag and a medicine box on his back, and asked his son Li Jie to follow him with a broken hat, came to Liu's bedroom and said: Liu Shanren came to visit his daughter.

古文：刘氏大怒，笞继岌而逐之。
现代文：刘氏大怒，鞭笞李继岌赶他走。
English: Mr. Liu was furious and whipped Li Jizhe to drive him away.

古文：宫中以为笑乐。
现代文：宫廷中作为笑料逗乐。
English: It was played as a joke at court.

古文：其战于胡柳也，嬖伶周匝为梁人所得。
现代文：唐庄宗在胡柳打仗时，他宠爱的乐官周匝被梁人抓去。
English: When Tang Zhuozong was fighting in Huliu, his favorite music officer, Zhou Qi, was captured by Liang people.

古文：其后灭梁入汴，周匝谒于马前，庄宗得之喜甚，赐以金帛，劳其良苦。
现代文：后来消灭梁进入汴京，周匝到马前拜见，唐庄宗见到他很高兴，赐给他金银绸帛，慰劳他的辛苦。
English: Later, after Liang entered Shijing, Zhou Qi went to Maqian to visit him. Tang Zhuangzong was very happy to see him and gave him gold, silver and silk brocade to console him for his hard work.

古文：周匝对曰： 身陷仇人，而得不死以生者，教坊使陈俊、内园栽接使储德源之力也。
现代文：周匝回答说： 我落到仇敌手中，而能活着回来，是教坊使陈俊、内园栽接使储德源的力量。
English: Zhou Yu replied, "I fell into the hands of the enemy, but I was able to come back alive thanks to the power of Chen Jun, the teacher's aide, and Neiyuan, the gardener.

古文：愿乞二州以报此两人。 
现代文：希望求得两个州报答这两个人。 
English: The hope is to get two states to reward the two men.

古文：庄宗皆许以为刺史。
现代文：唐庄宗都同意任命他们做刺吏。
English: Tangzhuangzong agreed to appoint them as assassins.

古文：郭崇韬谏曰： 陛下所与共取天下者，皆英豪忠勇之士。
现代文：郭崇韬谏阻说： 和陛下共同夺取天下的人，都是英豪忠勇的人。
English: Guo Chongyong said: The people who conquered the world together with His Majesty are all heroic, loyal and brave.

古文：今大功始就，封赏未及于一人，而先以伶人为刺史，恐失天下心。不可！ 
现代文：如今大功刚刚告成，没有一个人受到封官赏爵，却先委任乐官做刺史，恐怕会丧失天下人心，不可以这样做！ 
English: Now the great work has just been completed, no one has been knighted, but first appointing a music official to do the history, I am afraid it will lose the hearts of the world, you can't do that!

古文：因格其命。
现代文：于是搁置了这一任命。
English: The appointment was then put on hold.

古文：逾年，而伶人屡以为言，庄宗谓崇韬曰： 吾已许周匝矣，使吾惭见此三人。
现代文：过了一年，乐官们多次提到这件事，唐庄宗对郭崇韬说： 我已答应周匝了，这样做让我羞于见到他们三个人。
English: After a year, the musicians mentioned the matter many times, and Tang Zhuozong said to Guo Chongyao: I have agreed to Zhou Yao, and doing so makes me ashamed to see the three of them.

古文：公言虽正，然当为我屈意行之。 
现代文：你说得虽对，但应为我委屈施行。 
English: Although you are right, it should be enforced for my grievance.

古文：卒以俊为景州刺史、德源为宪州刺史。
现代文：最终任陈俊为景州刺史、储德源为宪州刺史。
English: In the end, Chen Jun was appointed as the chief historian of Jingzhou, and Zhu Deyuan was appointed as the chief historian of Gansu.

古文：庄宗好畋猎，猎于中牟，践民田。中牟县令当马切谏，为民请，庄宗怒，叱县令去，将杀之。
现代文：唐庄宗喜好打猎，在中牟打猎时，践踏百姓的农田，中牟县令拦着马恳切谏阻，为百姓请求，唐庄宗发怒，呵叱县令离开，将要杀掉他。
English: Tang Zhuangzong was fond of hunting. When Zhongmou went hunting, he trampled on the people's farmland. The county magistrate of Zhongmou County stopped his horse and strongly objected, pleading for the people. Tang Zhuangzong got angry, scolded the county magistrate to leave, and was going to kill him.

古文：伶人敬新磨知其不可，乃率诸伶走追县令，擒至马前责之曰： 汝为县令，独不知吾天子好猎邪？
现代文：乐官敬新磨知道这样做不行，于是率领众伶人追上县令，把县令抓到马前斥责他说： 你身为县令，偏偏不知道我们天子喜欢打猎吗？
English: The music officer, Kei Shinma, knew that this would not work, so he led the crowd of eunuchs to catch up with the county magistrate, caught the county magistrate in front of his horse and scolded him, saying: As a county magistrate, don't you know that our heavenly son likes hunting?

古文：奈何纵民稼穑以供税赋！
现代文：怎么放纵老百姓种庄稼交纳赋税！
English: How dare the common people grow crops and pay taxes!

古文：何不饥汝县民而空此地，以备吾天子之驰骋？
现代文：为什么不让你的百姓挨饿空下这块地，以便让我们的天子驰骋打猎？
English: Why don't you let your people starve and empty this land, so that our heavenly son can gallop and hunt?

古文：汝罪当死！ 
现代文：你的罪应当被处死！ 
English: Your crime deserves the death penalty!

古文：因前请亟行刑，诸伶共唱和之。庄宗大笑，县令乃得免去。
现代文：于是上前请求赶快行刑，乐官们一同附和，唐庄宗大笑，县令纔得以免死离去。
English: So he came forward to ask for a speedy execution, the music officials joined in, Tang Zhuozong laughed loudly, and the county magistrate was able to escape death.

古文：庄宗尝与群优戏于庭，四顾而呼曰： 李天下，李天下何在？ 
现代文：唐庄宗曾和艺人们在庭上游戏，四下顾望呼喊说： 李天下，李天下在哪里？ 
English: Tang Zhuangzong used to play games with artists in the courtyard. He looked around and shouted: "Li Tianxia, where is Li Tianxia?"

古文：新磨遽前以手批其颊。
现代文：敬新磨急速上前给了唐庄宗一耳光。
English: Keishinma quickly stepped forward and gave Tang Zhuozong a slap in the face.

古文：庄宗失色，左右皆恐，群伶亦大惊骇，共持新磨诘曰： 汝奈何批天子颊？ 
现代文：唐庄宗变了脸色，左右的人都惊恐，艺人们也十分震惊害怕，一起抓住敬新磨责问说： 你怎么敢打天子耳光？ 
English: Tang Zhuangzong turned pale, people on both sides were alarmed, and the artists were also very shocked and afraid. Together, they grabbed Jing Xinma and asked: How dare you slap Tianzi?

古文：新磨对曰： 李天下者，一人而已，复谁呼邪！ 
现代文：敬新磨回答说： 李天下，只有一个人罢了，又呼叫谁呢！ 
English: Kei Shinma replied, "There is only one person in the whole world, so who should I call?

古文：于是左右皆笑，庄宗大喜，赐与新磨甚厚。
现代文：于是人们都笑了，唐庄宗很高兴，重重赏赐敬新磨。
English: As a result, people all laughed, and Tang Zhuozong was very happy and gave the new mill a lot of awards.

古文：新磨尝奏事殿中，殿中多恶犬，新磨去，一犬起逐之，新磨倚柱而呼曰： 陛下毋纵兒女啮人！ 
现代文：敬新磨曾在殿中奏事，殿廷中有很多恶狗，敬新磨离去，一条恶狗起身追他，敬新磨躲在柱子后呼叫说： 陛下不要放纵你的儿女咬人！ 
English: There were many vicious dogs in the palace. When Keishinma left, a vicious dog got up and chased him. Keishinma hid behind a pillar and called out, "Your Majesty, don't let your children bite people!"

古文：庄宗家世夷狄，夷狄之人讳狗，故新磨以此讥之。
现代文：唐庄宗家世本是蕃夷，蕃夷人忌讳称狗，因此敬新磨藉此讥讽他。
English: The head of the Tangzhuang family was originally a barbarian, and it was taboo for barbarians to call him a dog, so Jing Xinma used this to ridicule him.

古文：庄宗大怒，弯弓注矢将射之，新磨急呼曰： 陛下无杀臣！
现代文：唐庄宗大怒，拉弓搭箭将要射杀他，敬新磨急忙呼喊说： 陛下不要杀死我！
English: Tang Zhuangzong was furious. He drew his bow and arrow and was about to shoot him. Jing Xinma hurriedly shouted, "Your Majesty, don't kill me!"

古文：臣与陛下为一体，杀之不祥！ 
现代文：我和陛下是连为一体的，杀了我不吉祥！ 
English: Your Majesty and I are one, and it would be bad luck to kill me!

古文：庄宗大惊，问其故，对曰： 陛下开国，改元同光，天下皆谓陛下同光帝。
现代文：唐庄宗大惊失色，问他是什么缘故，回答说： 陛下建国时，改年号为同光，天下都称陛下为同光帝。
English: Tang Zhuangzong was taken aback and asked him why, he replied: When His Majesty founded the country, the year was changed to the same light, and the whole world called His Majesty the same light emperor.

古文：且同，铜也，若杀敬新磨，则同无光矣。 
现代文：同，就是铜，如果杀了我敬新磨，那么 同 就没有光泽了。 
English: Tong, that is copper, if you kill my respect for the new mill, then Tong will have no luster.

古文：庄宗大笑，乃释之。
现代文：唐庄宗大笑，于是放了弛。
English: Tang Zhuozong laughed loudly, then relaxed.

古文：然时诸伶，独新磨尤善俳，其语最著，而不闻其佗过恶。
现代文：但当时的乐官，只有敬新磨最擅长滑稽取笑，他的笑话最出名，而没有听说他别的过失罪恶。
English: However, at that time, only Kei Shinma, the music director, was the best at making fun, his jokes were the most famous, and there was no news of his other misdemeanors.

古文：其败政乱国者，有景进、史彦琼、郭门高三人为最。
现代文：那些败政乱国的伶人，以景进、史彦琼、郭门高三人为首。
English: Those who defeated the government and the country were led by three people: Jingjin, Shi Yanqiong, and Guo Mengao.

古文：是时，诸伶人出入宫掖，侮弄缙绅，群臣愤嫉，莫敢出气，或反相附托，以希恩倖，四方籓镇，货赂交行，而景进最居中用事。
现代文：这时，乐官们进出官廷，侮辱戏弄官吏，群臣愤慨憎恨，没有人敢吐露怨气，有的人反而依托乐官，来希求恩宠，四方的藩镇，争相行贿，而景进在其中最专权。
English: At this time, the music officials entered and left the court, insulted and teased the officials, the courtiers were indignant and hated, no one dared to vent their grudges, but some people relied on the music officials, came to seek favor, and the four provinces and towns competed to offer bribes, and Jingjin had the most exclusive power.

古文：庄宗遣进等出访民间，事无大小皆以闻。
现代文：唐庄宗派景进等人出访民间，事情无论大小都上报。
English: The Tangzhuang Sect's Jingjin and others visited the people, and all matters, big and small, were reported.

古文：每进奏事殿中，左右皆屏退，军机国政皆与参决，三司使孔谦兄事之，呼为 八哥 。
现代文：每当景进在殿中奏报事情，左右的人都叫退下，军机国事都参与决断，三司使孔谦把他当做哥哥事奉，称他为 八哥 。
English: Whenever Jingjin made a report in the palace, people on both sides of him were told to step back. Military and state affairs were all involved in the decision-making. The three departments asked Kong Qian to treat him as an older brother and called him the eighth brother.

古文：庄宗初入洛，居唐故宫室，而嫔御未备。
现代文：唐庄宗刚进入洛阳时，住在唐过去的宫室中，而官女嫔妃不全。
English: When Tangzhuangzong had just entered Luoyang, he lived in the palace of the Tang Dynasty, and the official concubine was incomplete.

古文：阉宦希旨，多言宫中夜见鬼物，相惊恐，庄宗问所以禳之者，因曰： 故唐时，后宫万人，今空宫多怪，当实以人乃息。 
现代文：宦官们迎合旨意，多次说晚上在宫中看见鬼怪，互相惊吓，唐庄宗询问祈祷消炎的办法，于是说： 过去唐代后官中宫女上万人，现在宫中空虚多怪，应当用人填补，纔能止绝鬼怪。 
English: The eunuchs complied with the will and said many times that they saw ghosts in the palace at night, scaring each other. Tang Zhuangzong inquired about the method of prayer to extinguish the flame, and then said: In the past, there were tens of thousands of palace maids in the Tang Dynasty, and now there is a strange emptiness in the palace. It should be filled with people, who can stop the ghosts.

古文：庄宗欣然。
现代文：唐庄宗欣然赞同。
English: Tang Zhuangzong readily agreed.

古文：其后幸鄴，乃遣进等采鄴美女千人，以充后宫。
现代文：后来到邺都，于是派景进等人挑选邺都的美女一千人，来充实后宫。
English: Later, he went to Shidu and sent Jingjin and others to select a thousand beautiful women from Shidu to enrich the harem.

古文：而进等缘以为奸，军士妻女因而逃逸者数千人。
现代文：而景进等人借机干坏事，军士的妻子女儿因此逃跑失散的有几千人。
English: But Jingjin and others took the opportunity to do bad things, and the wife and daughter of the sergeant ran away, leaving thousands of people separated.

古文：庄宗还洛，进载鄴女千人以从，道路相属，男女无别。
现代文：唐庄宗返回洛阳，景进用车载上邺都的美女一千人相随，路上前后相连，男女无别。
English: When Tang Zhuangzong returned to Luoyang, Jingjin used his car to carry a thousand beautiful women from the capital city of Handan, and they followed each other on the road. There was no difference between men and women.

古文：魏王继岌已破蜀，刘皇后听宦者谗言，遣继岌贼杀郭崇韬。
现代文：魏王李继岌攻破蜀，刘皇后听信宦官的诬告，派李继岌残杀郭崇韬。
English: The Wei king Li Jiji attacked and defeated Shu, and the Empress Liu listened to the false accusation of the eunuch and sent Li Jiji to brutally kill Guo Chongyi.

古文：崇韬素嫉伶人，常裁抑之，伶人由此皆乐其死。
现代文：郭崇韬素来憎恨乐官，常常制裁抑制他们，乐官因此都为他的死高兴。
English: Guo Chongxuan had always hated music officials and often punished and suppressed them, so music officials were happy about his death.

古文：皇弟存乂，崇韬之婿也，进谗于庄宗曰： 存乂且反，为妇翁报仇。 
现代文：皇帝的弟弟李存火，是郭崇韬的女婿，景进对唐庄宗进谗言说： 李存父要反叛了，替他的岳父报仇。 
English: The emperor's brother, Li Cunhu, was Guo Chongyi's son-in-law. Jingjin said to Tangzhuang Zongjin: Li Cunhu's father is going to rebel and avenge his father-in-law.

古文：乃囚而杀之。
现代文：于是拘囚李存父把他杀掉。
English: As a result, the prisoner Li Cunfa killed him.

古文：硃友谦，以梁河中降晋者，及庄宗入洛，伶人皆求赂于友谦，友谦不能给而辞焉。
现代文：朱友谦以梁河中府而向晋投降，到唐庄宗入洛阳时，乐官们都向朱友谦索贿，朱友谦拿不出来而推辞了。
English: Zhu Youqian surrendered to Jin in Lianghe Zhongfu, and when he went to Tangzhuang and entered Luoyang, the music officials all asked Zhu Youqian for bribes. Zhu Youqian could not take it out and refused.

古文：进乃谗友谦曰： 崇韬且诛，友谦不自安，必反，宜并诛之。 
现代文：景进于是说朱友谦的坏话： 郭崇韬被杀了，朱友谦心中不安，必定会反叛，应当一并杀掉。 
English: Jingjin then said bad words about Zhu Youqian: Guo Chongyao was killed, Zhu Youqian was uneasy in his heart, he would certainly rebel, and they should be killed together.

古文：于是及其将五六人皆族灭之，天下不胜其冤。
现代文：于是他和他的将领五六人都被灭族，天下认为他们很冤枉。
English: As a result, he and his five or six generals were exterminated, and the world thought they were very wronged.

古文：进，官至银青光禄大夫、检校左散骑常侍兼御史大夫，上柱国。
现代文：景逞，官做到银青光禄大夫、检校左散骑常侍兼御史大夫、上柱国。
English: Jing Gang, the official, became the silver Qingguanglu doctor, the school inspector, the left rider, the attendant and the chief historian, and the upper pillar of the country.

古文：史彦琼者，为武德使，居鄴都，而魏博六州之政皆决彦琼，自留守王正言而下，皆俯首承事之。
现代文：史彦琼，担任武德使，住在邺都，而魏博六州的政事都由史彦琼决定，从留守王正言以下，都俯首事奉他。
English: Shi Yanqiong, as a martial arts envoy, lived in Shendu, while the political affairs of the six states of Weibo were decided by Shi Yanqiong. From the time of Wang Zhengyan, they all bowed down and served him.

古文：是时，郭崇韬以无罪见杀于蜀，天下未知其死也，第见京师杀其诸子，因相传曰： 崇韬杀魏王继岌而自王于蜀矣，以故族其家。 
现代文：这时，郭崇韬在蜀无罪被杀，人们还不知道他的死，只见在京师杀死他的儿子们，因而流传说： 郭崇韬杀死魏王李继岌而自己称王于蜀中，因此他全家被灭族。 
English: At this time, Guo Chongzhen was killed without guilt in Shuzhong. People did not know about his death until they saw his sons killed in Jingshi. As a result, a legend spread: Guo Chongzhen killed the Wei king Li Jijia and proclaimed himself king in Shuzhong. As a result, his entire family was exterminated.

古文：鄴人闻之，方疑惑。
现代文：邺都人听了，正感到疑惑不解。
English: The whole city is puzzled.

古文：已而硃友谦又见杀。
现代文：不久，朱友谦又被杀掉。
English: Soon after, Zhu Youqian was killed again.

古文：友谦子廷徽为澶州刺史，有诏彦琼使杀之，彦琼秘其事，夜半驰出城。
现代文：朱友谦的儿子朱廷徽任澶州刺史，诏令史彦琼杀掉他，史彦琼对这事保密，半夜驰马出城。
English: Zhu Youqian's son, Zhu Tinghui, was appointed as the governor of Zhangzhou and ordered Shi Yanqiong to kill him. Shi Yanqiong kept the matter confidential and rode out of the city at midnight.

古文：鄴人见彦琼无故夜驰出，因惊传曰： 刘皇后怒崇韬之杀继岌也，已弑帝而自立，急召彦琼计事。 
现代文：邺都人见史彦琼无缘无故半夜驰马出城，于是震惊传布说： 刘皇后对郭崇韬杀死李继岌感到愤慨，已经杀掉皇帝，自己登位，紧急召史彦琼商议事情。 
English: People in Shidu saw Shi Yanqiong riding out of the city in the middle of the night for no reason, so they were shocked and spread the rumor that: Empress Liu was indignant at Guo Chongyi's killing of Li Jide, had killed the emperor, ascended to the throne herself, and urgently summoned Shi Yanqiong to discuss the matter.

古文：鄴都大恐。
现代文：邺都人十分恐惧。
English: People in Chengdu are very afraid.

古文：贝州人有来鄴者，传引语以归。戍卒皇甫晖闻之，由此劫赵在礼作乱。
现代文：有贝州来邺都的人，把这些话传回去了，戍守士兵皇甫晖听说此事，于是挟持趟在礼作乱。
English: Some people from Bozhou who came to Yunnan passed these words back to the soldiers of the garrison. When the soldiers of the garrison heard about this, they took it upon themselves to start a riot.

古文：在礼已至馆陶，鄴都巡检使孙鐸，见彦琼求兵御贼，彦琼不肯与，曰： 贼未至，至而给兵岂晚邪？ 
现代文：趟在礼到馆陶后，邺都巡检使孙铎，进见史彦琼求兵抵御贼人，史彦琼不肯给他，说： 贼兵还没有到，到了再给你军队难道就晚了吗？ 
English: After Li arrived at the Museum of Tao, Sun Yat-sen, the inspector of the capital, went to see Shi Yanqiong to ask for soldiers to resist the thieves. Shi Yanqiong refused to give him, saying: The thieves have not yet arrived, and when they do, will it be too late to give you an army?

古文：已而贼至，彦琼以兵登北门，闻贼呼声，大恐，弃其兵而走，单骑归于京师。
现代文：不久贼军到来，史彦琼率军登上北门，听见贼军的呼声，十分恐惧，丢下他的军队逃跑，一人骑马回到京师。
English: Soon the invaders arrived, Shi Yanqiong led the army to the north gate, heard the cries of the invaders, was very afraid, left his army to escape, and rode back to the Beijing division alone.

古文：在礼由是得入于鄴以成其叛乱者，由彦琼启而纵之也。
现代文：趟在礼因此能进入邺都，叛乱成功，都是史彦琼引起却又纵容作乱的结果。
English: As a result, Watanabe was able to enter the capital and the rebellion was successful, both of which were the result of Shi Yanqiong's instigation and connivance in creating turmoil.

古文：郭门高者，名从谦，门高其优名也。
现代文：郭门高，名叫从谦，门高是他的艺名。
English: Guo Menggao, his name is Cong Qian, and Menggao is his stage name.

古文：虽以优进，而尝有军功，故以为从马直指挥使。
现代文：虽然他是以艺人受到重用，但他曾立有军功，因此任命他为从马直指挥使。
English: Although he was valued as an entertainer, he had military merit, so he was appointed as a commander from Ma Zhiang.

古文：从马直，盖亲军也。
现代文：从马直是亲军。
English: From Ma Zhi is pro-army.

古文：从谦以姓郭，拜崇韬为叔父，而皇弟存乂又以从谦为养子。
现代文：郭从谦因为姓郭，于是拜郭崇韬为叔父，而皇帝的弟弟李存又又把郭从谦当作养子。
English: Because Guo Congqian's surname was Guo, Baiguo Chongyi became his uncle, while the emperor's younger brother Li Cun treated Guo Congqian as his adopted son.

古文：崇韬死，存乂见囚，从谦置酒军中，愤然流涕，称此二人之冤。
现代文：郭崇韬死，李存火被囚禁，郭从谦在军中摆下酒，愤愤然流泪，说这两个人冤枉。
English: Guo Chongxuan died, Li Cunhu was imprisoned, Guo Congxian set out wine in the army, wept with indignation, and said that these two people were wronged.

古文：是时，从马直军士王温宿卫禁中，夜谋乱，事觉被诛。
现代文：这时，从马直军士王温在宫中值夜守卫，晚上策谋作乱，事情败露被杀。
English: At this time, Wang Wen, a sergeant from Ma Zhiang, was on night guard duty in the palace. He plotted a riot in the evening, but the plot was uncovered and he was killed.

古文：庄宗戏从谦曰： 汝党存乂、崇韬负我，又教王温反。
现代文：唐庄宗对郭从谦开玩笑说： 你的同党李存父、郭崇韬辜负了我，你又唆使王温反叛，还想做什么呢？ 
English: Tang Zhuangzong jokingly said to Guo Congqian, "Your fellow Party members Li Cunmu and Guo Chongyi have failed me, and you have incited Wang Wen to rebel. What else do you want to do?

古文：复欲何为乎？ 从谦恐，退而激其军士曰： 罄尔之赀，食肉而饮酒，无为后日计也。 
现代文：郭从谦恐惧，退下后煽动他的士兵说： 全部用掉你们的家财，吃肉喝酒，不要为以后作打算。 
English: Guo Congxian was afraid, so he stepped back and incited his soldiers, saying, "Spend all your family wealth, eat meat and drink wine, and don't plan for the future.

古文：军士问其故，从谦因曰： 上以王温故，俟破鄴，尽坑尔曹。 
现代文：士兵们问他什么原因，郭从谦于是说： 皇上因为王温的缘故，等待攻破邺都，全部活埋你们。 
English: The soldiers asked him what the reason was, and Guo Congqian said: "Because of Wang Wen, the emperor is waiting to break through the capital and bury you all alive."

古文：军士信之，皆欲为乱。
现代文：士兵们相信了，都愿作乱。
English: The soldiers believed it and were ready to make trouble.

古文：李嗣源兵反，向京师，庄宗东幸汴州，而嗣源先入。
现代文：李嗣源的军队反叛，向京师进军，唐庄宗向束奔汴州，而李嗣源先到。
English: Li Siyuan's army rebelled and marched against the Beijing division, Tangzhuang Zongxiang clique rushed to Bozhou, and Li Siyuan arrived first.

古文：庄宗至万胜，不得进而还，军士离散，尚有二万馀人。
现代文：唐庄宗到万胜，不能入城而返回，士兵逃散，还剩下雨万多人。
English: Tangzhuang lived in Wansheng, but could not enter the city and returned. The soldiers fled, and there were still tens of thousands of people left.

古文：居数日，庄宗复东幸汜水，谋扼关以为拒。
现代文：过了几天，唐庄宗又束奔汜水，打算把守关口来抵抗。
English: A few days later, Tang Zhuangzong again set out to defend the pass.

古文：四月丁亥朔，朝群臣于中兴殿，宰相对三刻罢。
现代文：四月丁亥初一，在中兴殿接受群臣朝见，宰相面对三刻之久。
English: On the first day of the Dinghai Festival in April, he received a group of courtiers for an audience at the Zhongxing Palace, and the chancellor faced him for three hours.

古文：从驾黄甲马军阵于宣仁门、步军阵于五凤门以俟。
现代文：随行护驾的黄甲马军在宣仁门、步兵在五凤门摆开战阵来等候。
English: The Yellow Armored Cavalry accompanying the escort waited at Xuanren Gate, and the infantry waited at Wufeng Gate.

古文：庄宗入食内殿，从谦自营中露刃注矢，驰攻兴教门，与黄甲军相射。
现代文：唐庄宗到内殿进食，郭从谦从军营出来，露出刀、搭满箭，迅速进攻兴教门，和黄甲军互相对射。
English: Tang Zhuangzong went to the inner hall to eat, Guo Congxian came out of the military camp, exposed his sword and full of arrows, quickly attacked the Xingjia Gate, and the Yellow Armies fired at each other.

古文：庄宗闻乱，率诸王卫士击乱兵出门。乱兵纵火焚门，缘城而入，庄宗击杀数十百人。
现代文：唐庄宗听说兵变，率领各王卫士把乱兵赶出宫门，乱兵放火烧毁城门，攀着城墙攻入，唐庄宗杀死数十上百人。
English: Tangzhuangzong heard of the mutiny and led the royal guards to drive the ruffians out of the palace gate. The ruffians set fire to the city gate and climbed the city wall. Tangzhuangzong killed dozens and hundreds of people.

古文：乱兵从楼上射帝，帝伤重，踣于绛霄殿廊下，自皇后、诸王左右皆奔走。
现代文：乱军从楼上向皇帝射箭，皇帝受重伤，倒在绛霄殿廊下，从皇后到各王左右的人都逃跑了。
English: The rebels shot arrows at the emperor from upstairs. The emperor was seriously injured and fell down in the hallway of the imperial palace. Everyone from the empress to the kings fled.

古文：至午时，帝崩，五坊人善友聚乐器而焚之。
现代文：到午时，皇帝驾崩，五坊乐人善友，收聚乐器焚烧尸体。
English: By noon, the emperor had passed away, and the musicians of Wufang, who were good friends, gathered their musical instruments to burn the body.

古文：嗣源入洛，得其骨，葬新安之雍陵。
现代文：李嗣源进入洛阳，得到唐庄宗的骨殖，安葬在新安的雍陵。
English: Li Sigen entered Luoyang, obtained the bones of Tang Zhuangzong, and was buried in the Yongling Mausoleum in Xin'an.

古文：以从谦为景州刺史，已而杀之。
现代文：任郭从谦为景州刺史，不久杀了他。
English: Ren Guo stabbed Zong Qian for the history of Jingzhou and killed him soon after.

古文：《传》曰： 君以此始，必以此终。 
现代文：《传》说： 你从这里开始，必定在这里结束。 
English: "Legend" says: You start from here, you must end here.

古文：庄宗好伶，而弑于门高，焚以乐器。
现代文：唐庄宗喜好乐官，而被乐官郭门高杀掉，用乐器焚尸。
English: Tang Zhuangzong liked music officials, but he was killed by music official Guo Menggao and his corpse was burned with musical instruments.

古文：可不信哉！
现代文：能不相信吗！
English: Can you believe it!

古文：可不戒哉！
现代文：能不引以为戒吗！
English: Can we not take this as a warning?

