古文：宋绶，字公垂，赵州平棘人。
现代文：宋绶，字公垂，赵州平棘县人。
English: Song Yao, surnamed Gonglu, from Pingxian County, Zhao Prefecture.

古文：父皋，尚书度支员外郎、直集贤院。
现代文：父亲宋皋，任尚书度支员外郎、直集贤院等职。
English: His father, Song Xi, held the posts of Shang Shudu's branch member, Wairo, and Jixi Xian'in.

古文：绶幼聪警，额有奇骨，为外祖杨徽之所器爱。
现代文：宋绶小时聪明机敏，额上生有奇特的骨头，深受外祖父杨徽之的器重和宠爱。
English: As a child, Song Tao was clever and quick-witted. He had a peculiar bone on his forehead and was deeply loved by his grandfather Yang Huizhi.

古文：徽之无子，家藏书悉与绶。
现代文：杨徽之无子，家中藏书都送给了宋绶。
English: Yang Hui had no children, and all the books in his home were given to Song Tao.

古文：绶母亦知书，每躬自训教，以故博通经史百家，文章为一时所尚。
现代文：宋绶的母亲也知书达礼，经常亲自训导儿子，宋绶因此博通经史百家，所写的文章为当时人所推崇。
English: Song Tao's mother also knew how to read and write, and often personally tutored her son. As a result, Song Tao was well-versed in hundreds of classics, and the articles he wrote were highly respected by people at the time.

古文：初，徽之卒，遗奏补太常寺太祝。
现代文：当初，杨徽之死后，留下一份奏折，请求将外孙宋绶录用做太常寺太祝。
English: At first, after Yang Hui's death, he left a report requesting that his grandchild, Song Tao, be employed as a priest at Taizhong Temple.

古文：年十五，召试中书，真宗爱其文，迁大理评事，听于秘阁读书。
现代文：十五岁时，宋绶被召到中书省考试，宋真宗喜爱他的文章，因此升他为大理评事，准他随意到国家珍藏图书馆中读书。
English: At the age of fifteen, Song Zhenzong was summoned to the examination of the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology. Song Zhenzong liked his article, so he was promoted to Dali critic and allowed him to read at will in the national collection library.

古文：大中祥符元年，复试学士院，为集贤校理，与父皋同职。
现代文：大中祥符元年，再参加学士院考试，任集贤院校理，与父亲宋皋同任一样的官。
English: In the first year of the high school Xiangfu, he took the college entrance examination again and was appointed as the dean of the college, the same position as his father Song Xi.

古文：后赐同进士出身，迁大理寺丞。
现代文：后被赐同进士出身，升大理寺丞。
English: Later, he was given the title of Shodariji-jo after he was promoted to Shodariji-jo.

古文：及祀汾阴，召赴行在，与钱易、陈越、刘筠集所过地志、风物、故实，每舍止即以奏。
现代文：到皇帝在汾阳祭河神时，又召宋绶一起同行，与钱易、陈越、刘筠等负责搜集所过地方的方志、风土人物、历史掌故，每停留一地他们就将这些上奏告诉皇帝。
English: When the emperor went to the River God Festival in Fenyang, he also invited Song Tao to accompany him. Together with Qian Yi, Chen Yue, Liu Yao and others, they were responsible for collecting the histories of the places they passed through, the local customs, and the historical events. They told the emperor these inscriptions every time they stopped in a place.

古文：将祠亳州太清宫，以签书亳州判官事，入为左正言、同判太常礼院。
现代文：将要在亳州太清宫祭祀时，任宋绶为签书亳州判官事，又进升为左正言、同判太常礼院。
English: During the sacrificial rites of Bozhou Taiching Palace, Song Tao will be appointed as the judge of Bozhou, and will be promoted to Zuo Zhenggen and Tongzhan Taizhongli Academy.

古文：久之，判三司凭由司。
现代文：较长时间之后，又任判三司凭由司。
English: After a long period of time, the three judges were appointed by the judge.

古文：建言： 比岁下赦令释逋负，后期未报者六十八州。
现代文：曾提建议说： 去年下大赦释放逃犯罪人，但过期没向朝廷报告执行情况的州府多达六十八州。
English: There were as many as sixty-eight prefectures that did not report to the Imperial Court on the implementation of last year's amnesty for the release of fugitive criminals.

古文：请于诸路选官考核，欺半月以闻。 于是脱械系三千二百人，蠲积负数百万。
现代文：请在各路选派官员专门考核监督执行，规定半个月时必须上报。 于是被脱掉枷锁释放者达三千二百人，免除积蓄负担达数百万。
English: Please send officials to all electoral districts to supervise the implementation of the special assessment, and stipulate that it must be reported within half a month. As a result, 3,200 people were released from the shackles, and millions of people were relieved of the burden of savings.

古文：擢知制诰、判吏部流内铨兼史馆修撰、玉清昭应宫判官。
现代文：升任知制诰，担任吏部流内铨兼史馆修撰、玉清昭应宫判官。
English: He was promoted to the position of intellectual, and served as a member of the inner circle of the cadres, as well as a reviewer of the history museum, and a judge of the Yinggu Palace.

古文：累迁户部郎中、权直学士院，同修《真宗实录》，进左司郎中，遂为翰林学士兼侍读学士、勾当三班院。
现代文：积功升到户部郎中、权直学士院，参加《真宗实录》修撰，进升左司郎中，最后做了翰林学士兼侍读学士、勾当三班院。
English: He was promoted to the Junior High School of the Household Division and the Junior High School of the Kwon Chung Academy, participated in the compilation of the "True History of the True Religion," and was promoted to the Junior High School of the Left Division. Finally, he became the Hanlin Scholar and the Attendant Scholar, and worked at the Third Class Academy.

古文：始诏读唐史，固求解三班以颛进讲。
现代文：开始受皇上指示读唐朝历史，坚持向三班学者求教然后谨慎地给皇帝讲述。
English: He began to read the history of the Tang Dynasty under the instruction of the emperor, insisted on seeking advice from three groups of scholars, and then carefully told the emperor everything.

古文：同修国史，迁中书舍人。
现代文：参加修撰国史，升中书舍人。
English: He participated in the compilation of national history, and became a student of calligraphy in middle school.

古文：昭应宫灾，罢二学士。
现代文：昭应宫发生火灾，宋绶被免去两学士的头衔。
English: A fire broke out in the Zhaoying Palace, and Song Tao was stripped of his two bachelor's degrees.

古文：逾年，复翰林学士。
现代文：一年后，又恢复翰林学士。
English: A year later, he was reinstated as a Hanlin Scholar.

古文：史成，迁尚书工部侍郎兼侍读学士。
现代文：史书修成后，他升任尚书工部侍郎兼侍读学士。
English: After the completion of the history book, he was promoted to the post of attendant and bachelor of the Department of History and Literature.

古文：时太后犹称制，五日一御承明殿，垂帘决事，而仁宗未尝独对群臣也。
现代文：当时太后仍代行皇帝的职权，每五日来一次承明殿，垂帘听政，裁决大事，而宋仁宗却未曾单独接见臣下。
English: At that time, the empress dowager was still acting on behalf of the emperor's authority, coming to the imperial palace every five days, listening to politics and ruling on major events, but Song Renzong never received his vassals alone.

古文：绶奏言： 唐先天中，睿宗为太上皇，五日一受朝，处分军国重务，除三品以下官，决徒刑。
现代文：宋绶上奏说 ：唐朝先天年间，睿宗做太上皇，每五日上朝一次，处理军国大事，任免三品以下的官吏，裁决各种服苦役的刑罚。
English: "During the first few days of the Tang Dynasty, Ruizong became the emperor, and went to court once every five days to deal with military affairs, appoint and dismiss officials with less than three court ranks, and adjudicate various sentences of hard labor.

古文：宜约先天制度，令群臣对前殿，非军国大事，除拜皆前殿取旨。 书上，忤太后意，改龙图阁学士，出知应天府。
现代文：现在也应该参照唐朝先天时的制度，下令群臣在前殿上奏汇报，若不是军国大事，任免官吏之类都可直接听取皇帝的旨意。 奏书送上后，因违背太后意愿，宋绶被降为龙图阁学士，调出京城任应天知府。
English: Now, too, it is necessary to refer to the system of the Tang Dynasty a priori, and order the courtiers to report to the front hall, and if it is not a military matter, the appointment and dismissal of officials and the like can directly listen to the emperor's will.After the report was sent, for violating the will of the empress dowager, Song Xi was reduced to the rank of Longtuge bachelor, transferred out of Beijing and appointed to the Tianchi Prefecture.

古文：太后崩，帝思绶言，召还，将大用，而宰相张士逊沮止之，复加翰林侍读学士。
现代文：太后去世后，皇帝想起宋绶当日此言，便将他召回来，准备重用，但被宰相张士逊阻止，只复任翰林侍读学士。
English: After the death of the empress dowager, the emperor recalled Song Xi's words on that day and recalled him to prepare for a second term, but he was prevented by the prime minister Zhang Shisong and was only reinstated as Hanlin Attendant Bachelor.

古文：诏定章献明肃、章懿太后祔庙礼，绶援《春秋》考仲子之宫、唐坤仪庙故事，请别筑宫曰奉慈庙以安神主，事多采用。
现代文：皇上下诏议定章献明肃和章懿太后神主礻付入国庙祭祀的礼节，宋绶根据《春秋》中仲子的宫庙和唐朝仪坤庙的旧例，请求另筑建一宫，取名叫奉慈庙，专门安置她们的神主，这些建议大多都被皇上采用。
English: The emperor and empress agreed on the etiquette of dedicating Mingsu and the eulogy of the empress dowager to the national temple. According to the old example of Zhongzi's palace temple in "Spring and Autumn" and the Tang Dynasty Yi Kun Temple, Song Xi requested to build another palace, named Feng Ci Temple, to specially accommodate their deities. Most of these suggestions were adopted by the emperor.

古文：始置端明殿学士，以命绶，绶固辞。
现代文：宋朝开始设置端明殿学士，命宋绶担任此职，宋绶坚决辞谢。
English: The Song Dynasty began to set up the Academy of Duanming Palace, and ordered Song Xi to serve in this position. Song Xi firmly declined.

古文：又言： 帝王御天下，在总揽威柄。
现代文：又说： 帝王统治天下，最重要的是总揽权柄。
English: He also said: Emperors rule the world, and the most important thing is to seize power.

古文：而一纪以来，令出帘帷。
现代文：而近十年来，政令都出自帘帷之后的皇太后。
English: For nearly a decade, all government decrees have come from the empress dowager behind the curtain.

古文：自陛下躬亲万务，内外延首，思见圣政，宜惩违革弊，以新百姓之耳目。
现代文：自从陛下亲自处理各种事务，朝廷内外，都翘首盼望您的圣明之政，因此您应该惩办违令犯法者，革除弊政，让老百姓耳目一新。
English: Since Your Majesty has been personally handling all kinds of affairs, both inside and outside the Imperial Court, everyone has been looking forward to Your sacred government. Therefore, You should punish those who violate the law, eliminate maladministration, and let the people have a new look.

古文：而赏罚号令，未能有过于前日，岂非三事大臣不能推心悉力，以辅陛下之治耶？
现代文：而今赏罚号令，没有比以往更差的了，难道不是三公大臣不能推心尽力来辅佐陛下的统治吗？
English: And now that the punishment decrees are no worse than before, isn't it possible that the three ministers can't do their best to assist His Majesty's reign?

古文：顷太后朝多吝除拜，而邪幸或径取升擢，议者谓恩出太后。
现代文：从前太后执政时对于提拔官吏，做得太吝啬，而有的邪恶佞幸小人，却能被破格提拔超升，舆论认为是太后的恩典。
English: In the past, when the empress dowager was in power, she was too stingy in promoting officials, but some evil and fortunate villains were able to be promoted beyond the norm, and public opinion considered it to be the grace of the empress dowager.

古文：今恩赏虽行，又谓自大臣出，非大臣朋党罔上，何以得此。
现代文：如今对官吏的恩赏政策虽然施行，但人们却又说是出自大臣，若非大臣们互相勾结欺瞒皇上，怎会如此？
English: Although the policy of rewarding officials is now in effect, people still say that it came from the ministers. If the ministers did not collude with each other to deceive the Emperor, how could this have happened?

古文：朋党之为朝廷患，古今同之。
现代文：拉帮结党作为朝廷的一大弊病，古今都一样。
English: As one of the major ills of the imperial court, party-poisoning has been the same from ancient times to the present.

古文：或窥测帝旨，密令陈奏；或附会己意，以进退人。
现代文：或者窥测皇帝旨意，再密令下官依此陈奏；或者传达圣旨时附会自己的主意，以此决定官吏的升降进退。
English: Or to spy on the emperor's will, and then secretly order subordinates to act accordingly; or to add their own ideas when conveying the sacred will, in order to determine the promotion and demotion of officials.

古文：大官市恩以招权，小人趋利以售进，此风浸长，有蠹邦政。
现代文：大臣施恩揽权，小人买官逐利，此风渐长，有害国家政治。
English: Ministers seek power by granting favors, and villains buy officials for profit. This trend is growing and is harmful to national politics.

古文：太宗尝曰： 国家无外忧必有内患。
现代文：太宗曾说： 国家无外忧必有内患。
English: Emperor Taizong once said: If a country has no external worries, it must have internal problems.

古文：外忧不过边事，皆可预防；奸邪共济为内患，深可惧也。
现代文：外忧不过是边疆战争，都可预防；邪恶之人共同勾结为内患，就极为可怕。 
English: External troubles are nothing more than border wars, which can be prevented; internal troubles, caused by the collusion of evil people, are extremely terrible.

古文：真宗亦曰： 唐朋党尤盛，王室遂卑。
现代文：真宗也说 ：唐朝时拉帮结党最严重，王室因此衰弱。 
English: Shinsong also said: "During the Tang Dynasty, factionalism was at its worst, and the royal family was weakened as a result.

古文：愿陛下思祖宗之训，念王业艰难，整齐纲纪，正在今日。 张士逊罢，乃拜绶参知政事。
现代文：希望陛下思祖宗的训示，念王业的艰难，整顿纲纪，现在正是时候了。 宰相张士逊免职后，皇帝于是任命宋绶为参知政事。
English: I hope that His Majesty will bear in mind the teachings of his ancestors, remember the hardships of the king's career, and rectify the discipline. Now is the time. After Prime Minister Zhang Shisun was removed from office, the emperor then appointed Song Xi as a political advisor.

古文：初，有诏罢修寺观，而章惠太后以旧宅为道观，谏官、御史言之。
现代文：当初，皇上有令停止修建各种寺庙道观，而章惠太后却将旧宅第改作道观，谏官、御史都提出此事。
English: At first, the emperor ordered to stop the construction of all kinds of temples of Taoism, but Empress Dowager Zhang Hui changed the old mansion to Taoism. Eunuchs and imperial historians all raised the issue.

古文：帝曰： 此太后奁中物也，谏官、御史欲邀名邪？ 绶进曰： 彼岂知太后所为哉，第见兴土木违近诏，即论奏之。
现代文：皇帝说： 此是太后的奁中财产，谏官、御史批评此事难道是要博取名声？ 宋绶进谏说 ：他们怎知此是太后所作所为呢？只是见到大兴土木违背最近的诏令，就上奏议论。
English: The emperor said, "This is the property of the Empress Dowager's middle-ranking eunuchs. Are the eunuchs and imperial historians criticizing this in order to gain fame?" Song Xi Jinqi said, "How do they know that this was done by the Empress Dowager? It was only when they saw that the large-scale construction was in violation of the recent imperial edict that they reported it for discussion."

古文：且事有疑似，彼犹指为过，或陛下有大阙失，近臣虽不言，然传闻四方，为圣政之累，何可忽也。
现代文：而且这事只是有些疑似，他们还指责为过借，要是陛下有大缺失，近臣虽不说，然而传到四方都知，成为圣明政治的拖累，又怎能忽视？
English: Moreover, this matter is only somewhat dubious. They also accuse him of being too lenient. If His Majesty has a major shortcoming, his close advisers do not mention it, but it is known to all sides and has become a drag on politics, how can it be ignored?

古文：太祖尝谓唐太宗为谏官所诋，不以为愧。何若动无过举，使无得而言哉？ 
现代文：太祖曾说：唐太宗被谏官诋毁，还不以为愧，为何不做到行为无过错，使得谏官们没有话可说呢？ 
English: The great-grandfather once said, "Tang Taizong was slandered by eunuchs, but he was not ashamed of it. Why not act without fault, so that the eunuchs would have nothing to say?"

古文：郭皇后废，帝命绶作诏曰： 当求德阀，以称坤仪。 既而左右引富人陈氏女入宫，绶曰： 陛下乃欲以贱者正位中宫，不亦与前日诏语戾乎？ 后数日，王曾入对，又论奏之。
现代文：郭皇后被废掉后，皇帝命宋绶起草诏书说： 应当求得品德和门第高贵的人，以便与坤的名义相符。 后来左右的人引富人陈氏女入宫，宋绶说： 陛下难道要将下贱的人来作为后宫的主人，这不是与前日诏书的话相矛盾吗？ 几日后，王曾上奏时，也劝谏此事。
English: After Empress Guo was dethroned, the emperor ordered Song Tao to draft an edict saying, "It is necessary to find a person of noble character and lineage in order to match the name of Kun." Later, people from all walks of life brought the rich Chen family into the palace, and Song Tao said, "Does your majesty really want to make a lowly person the master of the harem? Isn't this contradictory to the words of the edict of the day before yesterday?" A few days later, when Wang Zeng read the edict, he also advised him on this matter.

古文：帝曰： 宋绶亦如此言。 时大臣继有论者，卒罢之。
现代文：皇帝说： 宋绶也如此说。 当时大臣们相继议论劝谏，皇帝终于不立陈氏做皇后。
English: The emperor said, "This was also said by Emperor Song of Han." At that time, the ministers successively discussed and persuaded the empress, and the emperor finally refused to make Chen the empress.

古文：帝春秋富，天下久无事，绶虑宴乐有渐，乃言： 人心逸于久安，而患害生于所忽。
现代文：皇帝年纪已大，天下又长期太平，宋绶考虑到贪图安乐之风有所增长，便说： 人心沉溺于安逸过久，灾患祸害便会在疏忽时发生。
English: The emperor was old and the country had been at peace for a long time. Considering the increasing trend of people's desire for comfort, Song Tao said: "The human heart indulges in comfort for too long, and calamities and disasters will occur when they are neglected."

古文：故立防于无事，销变于未萌。
现代文：所以应在无事时设防，在还未萌芽时便将变乱消灭。
English: Therefore, it is necessary to set up a defense when there is nothing to worry about, and eliminate the disturbance when it has not yet sprouted.

古文：事至而应，不亦殆欤？
现代文：事来了再应付，岂不危险？
English: Isn't it dangerous to deal with things after the fact?

古文：臣愿饬励群司，不以承平自怠。 又上： 驭下之道有三：临事尚乎守，当机贵乎断，兆谋先乎密。
现代文：臣希望皇上能整顿、勉励各级部门，不因天下太平便自己怠惰。 又上奏说： 驾驭下级之道有三点：办事坚守原则，当机立断，周密地事先分析。
English: The minister hoped that the emperor could rectify and encourage departments at all levels, and not be lazy because of the world peace. He also said in the report: There are three points to control the lower level: adhere to the principle of doing things, make decisions promptly, and carefully analyze in advance.

古文：能守则奸不能移，能断则邪不能惑，能密则事不能挠。
现代文：能坚持原则则奸人不能改变他，能果敢决断则不会被邪恶迷惑，能周密地谋划则事情不能扰乱他。
English: If he can stick to the principle, the deceiver cannot change him; if he can be decisive, he will not be fooled by evil; if he can plan carefully, things cannot disturb him.

古文：愿陛下念之！
现代文：希望陛下记住这三点！
English: I hope His Majesty remembers these three points!

古文：至若深居燕间，声味以调六气，节宣以顺四时，保养圣躬，宗社之休也。 再迁吏部侍郎。
现代文：若能在后宫中深居简出，声乐口味能与六气相调和，节敛和宣泄能顺随四时变化，保养圣体，那便是国家与宗庙的福！ 
English: If one can live a simple life in the harem, if one's vocal tastes can be harmonized with the six qi, if one's restraint and catharsis can follow the four o'clock change, and if one can maintain the holy body, then that is a blessing for the country and the ancestral temple!

古文：时宰相吕夷简、王曾论议数不同。
现代文：当时宰相吕夷简、王曾在多次议论大事时意见不同。
English: At that time, Prime Minister Lyu Yijian and Wang Zengzong had different opinions when discussing major events.

古文：绶多是夷简，而参知政事蔡齐间有所异，政事繇此依违不决，于是四人者皆罢。
现代文：宋绶多支持吕夷简，而参知政事蔡齐偶然会有不同意见，国家政事因此依违不能决定，于是四人都被罢免。
English: Song Gan mostly supported Lü Yijan, while the co-governor and politician Cai Qi occasionally had different opinions, so the national politics could not be decided, so all four were dismissed.

古文：绶以尚书左丞、资政殿学士留侍讲筵，权判尚书都省。
现代文：宋绶以尚书左丞、资政殿学士身份留下侍奉皇上给他讲课，权判尚书都官。
English: Song Xi, as the Vice Chancellor of the Imperial Academy of Letters and the Vice-Regent of the Imperial Academy of Arts, left to serve the emperor to give him a lecture, and the authority to judge the Vice-Chancellor of the Imperial Academy of Letters.

古文：岁余，加资政殿大学士，以礼部尚书知河南府。
现代文：一年多后，又加官做资政殿大学士，又以礼部尚书身份出任河南知府。
English: A little more than a year later, he was promoted to the post of Senior Vice-Minister of Finance and Administration, and also served as the governor of Henan Province with the title of Vice-Minister of Ceremonies.

古文：元昊反，刘平、石元孙败没，帝以手诏赐大臣居外者，询攻守之策。
现代文：西夏赵元昊叛乱，刘平、石元孙兵败战亡，皇帝亲下手诏向居守在外地的大臣们询求攻守的计策。
English: Western Xia's Zhao Yuanhao rebelled, Liu Ping and Shi Yuan Sun were defeated and killed, and the emperor personally asked the ministers living outside the country for strategies for attack and defense.

古文：绶画十事以献。
现代文：宋绶谋划了十件大事进奏。
English: Song Xi planned ten major events.

古文：复召知枢密院事，迁兵部尚书、参知政事。
现代文：复又被升任知枢密院事，后升兵部尚书、参知政事。
English: Fu was also promoted to the position of Privy Councillor, and later he was promoted to the post of the Minister of Military Affairs, and then to the post of the Vice-Governor.

古文：时绶母尚在，绶既得疾，不视事，犹起居自力，区处后事。
现代文：当时宋绶母亲尚在人世，宋绶得病后，不能处理政事，但仍坚持饮食起居自力，并准备好自己后事。
English: At that time, Song Jun's mother was still alive. After Song Jun fell ill, he was unable to handle political affairs, but he still insisted on eating and living independently, and prepared for his future.

古文：寻卒，赠司徒兼侍中，谥宣献。
现代文：不久去世，被追赠为司徒兼侍中，谥 宣献 。
English: He died soon after, and was posthumously awarded the title of sōtō and chamberlain, 宣献.

古文：绶性孝谨清介，言动有常。
现代文：宋绶生性孝顺、谨慎、清廉、耿直，说话做事很有规律。
English: Song Hao's nature is filial, prudent, incorruptible, and straightforward. He speaks and does things very regularly.

古文：为儿童时，手不执钱。
现代文：儿童时，手不抓钱。
English: When you're a child, you don't grasp for money.

古文：家藏书万余卷，亲自校雠，博通经史百家，其笔札尤精妙。
现代文：家中藏书万余卷，亲自校雠，博通经史百家，他的札记尤为精妙。
English: He has more than 10,000 volumes of books in his home collection, and has personally proofread hundreds of books on history. His notebooks are particularly exquisite.

古文：朝廷大议论，多绶所财定。
现代文：朝廷重大问题的讨论，多由宋绶裁定。
English: The discussion of major issues in the imperial court was mostly decided by Song Tao.

古文：杨亿称其文沈壮淳丽，曰： 吾殆不及也。 及卒，帝多取所书字藏禁中。
现代文：杨亿称赞他的文章深沉、端庄、淳厚、亮丽，他说 ：我可能不及他。 到宋绶去世，皇帝多取他所写的字藏在禁宫之中。
English: Yang Yili praised his article as profound, dignified, honest and bright, saying: I may not be as good as him.When Song Tao died, the emperor took many of the words he wrote and hid them in the Forbidden City.

古文：初，郊祀，绶摄太仆卿。
现代文：当初，举行郊祀，宋绶担任太仆卿。
English: At first, the suburb worship was held, and Song Tao served as the grand steward.

古文：帝问仪物典故，占对辨洽，因上所撰《卤簿图》十卷。
现代文：皇帝向他请教礼仪典故，他回答得清晰深刻，并上呈所撰写的《卤簿图》十卷。
English: When the emperor asked him for advice on etiquette and etiquette, he gave him a clear and profound answer, and presented him with the ten volumes of "Halobooks" he had written.

古文：子敏求。
现代文：他的儿子叫宋敏求。
English: His son is named Song Minqiu.

古文：敏求字次道，赐进士及第，为馆阁校勘。
现代文：宋敏求，字次道，赐进士及第，初任馆阁校勘。
English: Song Minqiu, Zi Dao, Zi Jinzhi and Dai, the first director of the pavilion school.

古文：预苏舜钦进奏院会，出签书集庆军判官。
现代文：因参加苏舜钦进奏院的集会，被调离京城，出任集庆军判官。
English: Because of his participation in Su Shiqin's march to the Song Academy, he was transferred out of the capital to serve as a judge of the rally.

古文：王尧臣修《唐书》，以敏求习唐事，奏为编修官。
现代文：王尧臣修《唐书》，因为宋敏求熟习唐朝的事情，便上奏请他担任编修官。
English: Wang Qianchen edited "Tang Shu" and Song Min asked him to serve as an editor because he wanted to familiarize himself with the Tang Dynasty.

古文：持祖母丧，诏令居家修书。
现代文：后因祖母去世服丧，皇帝下诏令他住在家中修史书。
English: After the death of his grandmother, the emperor issued a decree ordering him to stay at home and study history.

古文：卒丧，同知太常礼院。
现代文：服丧完毕，任同知太常礼院。
English: After the funeral, Ren Tongzhi went to Taizhong Ceremonial Hall.

古文：石中立薨，子继死，无他子。
现代文：石中立去世后，他的儿子也死了，没有其他儿子。
English: After he died, his son also died, and there were no other sons.

古文：其孙祖仁疑所服，下礼官议。
现代文：他的孙子石祖仁对服丧的礼节疑惑不懂，便交给礼官讨论。
English: His grandson, Shizuren, did not understand the etiquette of mourning, so he asked the etiquette officer to discuss it.

古文：敏求谓宜为服三年，当解官，斩衰。
现代文：宋敏求说应服三年的丧，并应辞官，斩衰。
English: Song Minqiu said that he should serve a three-year mourning period, and should resign from the post and die.

古文：同僚援据不一，判寺宋祁是其议，遂定为令。
现代文：同僚们援引依据不统一，判寺宋祁也同意宋敏求的说法，于是将此定为制度。
English: Colleagues cited the inconsistency of the basis, and Song Minqiu, the judge of the temple, also agreed with Song Minqiu's argument, so he defined this as a system.

古文：加集贤校理。
现代文：升任集贤校理。
English: Sima Guang plus Guan Ji Xian as the proofreader.

古文：从宋庠辟，通判西京。
现代文：后应宋庠的请求，随他出任西京通判。
English: Later, at the request of Song Tao, he followed him to serve as the West Beijing magistrate.

古文：为群牧度支判官。
现代文：后任群牧度支判官。
English: He later became the judge of herd management.

古文：坠马伤足，出知亳州。
现代文：因从马上跌下来伤了足，被降为亳州知府。
English: Because he fell from a horse and hurt his foot, he was demoted to the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：治平中，召为《仁宗实录》检讨官，同修起居注、知制诰、判太常寺。
现代文：治平年间，被朝廷召去担任《仁宗实录》检讨官，任同修起居注、知制诰、判太常寺等职。
English: During the Heian period, he was called by the Imperial Court to serve as a reviewer of the "Ninshu Record," and was appointed to positions such as a fellow practitioner's living note, intellectual control, and judge of Taiji Temple.

古文：英宗在殡，有言宗室服疏者可嫁娶，敏求以为大行未发引，不可。
现代文：宋英宗殡丧期间，有人说皇族宗室成员血缘关系较疏远的在丧期也可以婚嫁，宋敏求认为先皇帝还没有出殡，绝不可以婚嫁。
English: During the funeral of Song Yingzong, some people said that members of the royal family who were more distantly related could also get married during the period of mourning. Song Minqiu believed that the former emperor had not yet been buried and must not get married.

古文：逾年，又有言者。
现代文：一年后，又有人这么说。
English: A year later, someone else said it.

古文：敏求言宗室义服，服降而练，可嫁娶矣。
现代文：宋敏求说宗室普遍服丧，由穿丧服降到穿练服时，便可以嫁娶婚姻了。
English: Song Minqiu said that the family generally wears mourning clothes, and when they are reduced from wearing mourning clothes to wearing training clothes, they can get married.

古文：坐前后议异，贬秩知绛州。
现代文：因为他的说法前后互相矛盾，被贬职为绛州知府。
English: Because his statements contradicted each other, he was demoted to the post of governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：王珪、范镇乞留之，使成《实录》。
现代文：王王圭、范镇乞求朝廷留他，让他完成《仁宗实录》。
English: Wang Wang Gui and Fan Zhen begged the imperial court to let him stay and complete the "Nianzong Record."

古文：神宗曰： 典礼，国之所重，而误谬如是，安得无责。 然敏求议初不误，曾公亮恶礼院刘瑾附敏求为说，故因是去之。
现代文：宋真宗说： 典礼制度，是国家大事，而谬误得如此，哪能没有责任。 宋敏求的议论最初本没错，但曾公亮痛恨礼院里的刘瑾附和宋敏求的说法，所以要借此除去他。
English: Song Zhenzong said: "The ceremonial system is a national event, and there can be no responsibility for such a fallacy. Song Minqiu's argument was initially correct, but he had publicly hated Liu Yuxu and Song Minqiu's argument in the ceremonial hall, so he should be removed by this.

古文：是岁，即诏还。
现代文：当年，宋敏求就被诏令回京。
English: That year, Song Minqiu was ordered to return to Beijing.

古文：徐国公主以夫兄为侄奏官，敏求疏其乱天伦，执正之。
现代文：徐国公主将丈夫的兄长认作侄儿，并上奏官府，宋敏求上疏说这是乱了天伦，应将她抓捕正法。
English: Princess Xu Guo identified her husband's elder brother as her nephew and reported the matter to the government. Song Min appealed to the government, saying that this was a violation of the family relationship and that she should be arrested to rectify the situation.

古文：王安石恶吕公著，诬其言韩琦欲因人心，如赵鞅兴晋阳之甲，以逐君侧之恶，出之颍州。
现代文：王安石不喜欢吕公著，诬陷吕说过韩琦想要利用人心，如当年赵鞅在晋阳起兵，借此驱逐君主身边的恶人奸臣，将吕公著降为颍州知府。
English: Wang Anshi did not like Lü Gongzhu. He accused Lü of saying that Han Xuan wanted to take advantage of the people's hearts. For example, when Zhao Bei raised an army in Jinyang, he used it to expel the wicked and treacherous vassals around the monarch, and reduced Lü Gongzhu to the position of prefect of Zhangzhou.

古文：敏求当草制，安石谕旨使明著罪状，敏求但言敷陈失实。
现代文：宋敏求准备草拟诏书时，王安石传旨给他，要他在诏书中说明吕公著的罪状，而宋敏求却只说他敷陈失实。
English: When Song Minqiu was preparing to draft the edict, Wang Anshi sent him a message, asking him to explain the crimes committed by Lü Gongzhu in the edict, but Song Minqiu only said that he had distorted the truth.

古文：安石怒白于帝，命陈升之改其语，敏求请解职，未听。
现代文：王安石发怒，告诉皇帝，皇帝命陈升之将诏书中的话改了，宋敏求请求解除自己官职，皇帝没批准。
English: Wang Anshi became angry and told the emperor that the emperor had ordered Chen Shengzhu to change the words in the edict. Song Min asked to be relieved of his post, but the emperor did not approve.

古文：会李定自秀州判官除御史，敏求封还词头，遂以本官右谏议大夫奉朝请。
现代文：遇上李定自秀州判官升任御史，宋敏求将委任诏书封回不发，于是李定以本官右谏议大夫身份升为朝请大夫。
English: When Li Ding was promoted from the Xiuzhou magistrate to the imperial historian, Song Min asked that the letter of appointment be sealed and not issued, so Li Ding was promoted to the imperial doctor with the status of his own right.

古文：策试贤良方正，孔文仲对语切直，擢置优等，安石愈怒，罢文仲。
现代文：主持贤良方正的考试，因为孔文仲对答时语言切直不阿，便将他评为优等。王安石更加愤怒，罢免了孔文仲。
English: Wang Anshi was even more angry and dismissed Kong Wenzhong, who presided over the examination of Xianliang Fangzheng, because Kong Wenzhong's language was straightforward when answering.

古文：人为敏求惧，帝独全护之，除史馆修撰、集贤院学士。
现代文：人们都为宋敏求担忧，而皇帝却保护他，并任他为史馆修撰、集贤院学士。
English: People were worried about Song Minqu, but the emperor protected him and allowed him to write for the history museum and become a scholar of the Confucius Institute.

古文：邓润甫为帝言： 比群臣多尚告讦，非国家之美，宜登用敦厚之士，以变薄俗。 乃加敏求龙图阁直学士，命修《两朝正史》，掌均国公笺奏。
现代文：邓润甫对皇帝说 ：近来大臣们多喜欢互相攻击告发，并非国家的好现象，应该提拔任用敦厚的人，以便改变这种浅薄的风气。 于是升宋敏求为龙图阁直学士，命他修著《两朝正史》，掌管均国公的笺奏。
English: Deng Runfu said to the emperor, "Recently, ministers like to attack and denounce each other, which is not a good phenomenon for the country. It is necessary to promote and appoint strong-willed people in order to change this shallow culture." So, Sheng Song Min Kui became the direct master of Longtu Ge, ordered him to write "The Official History of the Two Dynasties," and presided over the performance of Ren Guogu.

古文：元丰二年，卒，年六十一。
现代文：元丰二年去世，享年六十一岁。
English: Yuan Feng died two years later at the age of 61.

古文：特赠礼部侍郎。
现代文：特例追赠为礼部侍郎。
English: A special case is the posthumous award of the title of Reibu-zamiro.

古文：敏求家藏书三万卷，皆略诵习，熟于朝廷典故，士大夫疑议，必就正焉。
现代文：宋敏求家中藏书达三万卷，都粗略地阅读诵习过，所以他对朝廷典故很熟悉，士大夫们每有疑议，必前来请求指正。
English: Song Minqiu has a collection of thirty thousand volumes at home. He has read and studied them all roughly, so he is very familiar with the allusions of the imperial court. Whenever the scholars have doubts, they must come to ask for correction.

古文：补唐武宗以下《六世实录》百四十八卷，它所著书甚多，学者多咨之。
现代文：他补修了唐武宗以下的《六世实录》共一百四十八卷，所著的其他著作很多，学者们大都参考这些书。
English: He revised a total of one hundred and forty-eight volumes of the "Sixth Generation Record" from Tang Wuzong onward, and wrote many other works, which scholars mostly refer to.

古文：尝建言： 河北、陕西、河东举子，性朴茂，而辞藻不工，故登第者少。
现代文：曾建议说 ：河北、陕西、河东等籍的举子，性格厚朴扎实，但辞藻却不工巧华丽，所以中进士的较少。
English: He once suggested that the children from Hebei, Shaanxi, and Hedong have a simple and solid character, but their words are not skillful and gorgeous, so there are fewer junior high school graduates.

古文：请令转运使择荐有行艺材武者，特官之，使人材参用，而士有可进之路。
现代文：请下令转运使选择那些有品行材艺武略的人，特例给他们升官，使人材能充分发挥其作用，而士子们有可以进升的途径。
English: Please order the transfer and selection of those who have the qualities and skills of martial arts, and give them a special promotion, so that the human resources can fully play their role, and the scholars have a way to advance.

古文：复圭临事敏决，称健吏，与人交不以利害避。然轻率躁急，无威重，喜以语侵人，独为王安石所知，故既废即起。
现代文：又各州郡只有学校而无学官，所以学生士子容易离开本乡本土到外面去拜师求学，请求在各州县设立学官。 
English: In addition, each state and county has only schools but no school officials, so it is easy for students and scholars to leave their hometowns and go outside to visit teachers and study, and request the establishment of school officials in each state and county.

古文：王博文，字仲明，曹州济阴人。
现代文：王博文，字仲明，曹州济阴县人。
English: Wang Bowen, surnamed Zhongming, from Jiyin County, Caozhou.

古文：祖谏，给事太宗藩邸，为西京作坊副使。
现代文：祖父王谏，曾在宋太宗没即位前的王府任职，做过西京作坊副使。
English: His grandfather, Wang Yao, had served in the royal court before Song Taizong ascended the throne, and had been a vice-envoy to the Western Capital Workshop.

古文：博文年十六，善属文，举进士开封府，以回文诗百篇为公卷，人谓之 王回文 。
现代文：王博文十六岁时，会写文章，在开封府考进士时，用一百篇回文诗作为考卷，人称他为 王回文 。
English: When Wang Bowen was 16 years old, he could write articles. When he took the entrance examination for the first time, he used one hundred palindromic poems as the examination paper. People called him Wang Palindrome.

古文：淳化三年，太宗亲试进士，以年少罢归。
现代文：淳化三年，宋太宗亲自考试进士，王博文因为年纪小被遣回家里。
English: In the third year of Chunhua, Song Taizong took the examination in person to become a scholar, and Wang Bowen was sent home because he was too young.

古文：后谏卒官庐州，州守刘蒙叟为言，召试舍人院，为安丰主簿，历南丰尉，有能名。
现代文：后祖父王谏在庐州做官时死了，庐州太守刘蒙叟为他讲话，王博文被召到京城参加舍人院考试。后任安丰县主簿，任南丰县尉时，以才干突出著名。
English: Wang Bowen was called to Beijing to participate in the examination of the People's Court. Later, when he was the chief bookkeeper of Anfeng County and the lieutenant of Nanfeng County, he was famous for his talent.

古文：调南剑州军事推官，改大理寺丞，监荆南榷货务，迁殿中丞。
现代文：调任南剑州军事推官，改任大理寺丞，监守荆南榷市货务，升殿中丞。
English: He was transferred to the post of the military governor of Southern Jianzhou, and was reassigned to the post of Daliji-joe, the supervisor of the goods of Jingnanlu City, and promoted to the post of Junior Secretary.

古文：陈尧咨荐之，试中书，赐进士第，擢知濠州，历真州。
现代文：经陈尧咨推荐，参加中书省考试，被赐进士及第，提升为濠州知州，历任真州知府。
English: On the recommendation of Chen Shizhe, he took the examination of the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology, and was promoted to the rank of Shizhou Zhizhou, and successively served as the governor of Zhenzhou.

古文：真宗幸亳，权江、淮制置司事。
现代文：宋真宗巡视亳州时，他任权江、淮制置司事。
English: When Song Zhenzong made an inspection tour of Bozhou, he appointed Quan Jiang and Huai Ze to be officials.

古文：改监察御史、梓州路转运使。
现代文：改任监察御史、梓州路转运使。
English: He was reassigned to the post of inspector-general of history and the post of transfer envoy of Zizhou Road.

古文：以疾，请出知海州，徙密州。
现代文：因生病，请求调离京城出任海州知府，后调任密州知府。
English: Due to illness, he requested to be transferred from Beijing to serve as the governor of Haizhou, and later he was transferred to the governor of Mizhou.

古文：负海有盐场，岁饥，民多盗鬻，吏捕之辄抵死。
现代文：海边有盐场，当年闹饥荒，老百姓很多都去盗卖海盐，官吏一旦将他们捕捉便动辄处以死罪。
English: There is a salt farm by the sea. During the famine, many ordinary people went to steal and sell sea salt. Once the officials caught them, they were sentenced to death.

古文：博文请弛盐禁，候岁丰乃复，从之。
现代文：王博文请求放松盐禁，等年成丰收时再恢复，朝廷同意。
English: Wang Bowen's request to relax the salt ban and wait for a good harvest before resuming it was approved by the imperial court.

古文：除殿中侍御史。
现代文：升任殿中侍御史。
English: He was promoted to the position of palace chamberlain.

古文：天禧中，朱能、王先在长安伪为《乾祐天书》，事觉，能既败死，先与其徒就禽，诏博文乘驿按劾。
现代文：天禧年间，朱能、王先在长安伪造《乾天书》，事被发觉，朱能失败战死，王先与部下被捕，皇帝下诏王博文乘驿车前往治罪惩处。
English: During the Jubilee Year, Zhu Neng and Wang Xian forged the "Book of the Dry Sky" in Chang'an. The matter was discovered, Zhu Neng failed and died in battle, Wang Xian and his subordinates were arrested, and the emperor ordered Wang Bowen to take a carriage to punish the crime.

古文：博文唯治首恶，胁从者七人，得以减论。
现代文：王博文只惩治了首恶分子，而七个从犯得到减罪从轻论处。
English: Wang Bowen only punished the ringleaders, while seven accomplices received reduced sentences.

古文：还为开封府判官，丁母忧。
现代文：回京后任开封府判官，遇上他母亲去世。
English: After returning to Beijing, he was appointed as a magistrate of Kaifeng Prefecture when his mother passed away.

古文：始，博文幼丧父，其母张氏改适韩氏。
现代文：当初，王博文幼年丧父，他的母亲张氏改嫁韩氏。
English: At first, Wang Bowen lost his father at a young age, and his mother, Ms. Zhang, remarried Mr. Han.

古文：及博文在朝，谓子无绝母礼，请得以恩封之。
现代文：到王博文在朝做官时，他说儿子不能绝弃对母亲应尽的礼，请求依恩诰封他的母亲。
English: When Wang Bowen was working as an official in the imperial court, he said that his son could not refuse to do his duty to his mother, and asked Ying En to enthrone his mother.

古文：母死，又谓古之为父后者不为出母服，以废宗庙祭也。
现代文：母亲死了，他又说古代作为父亲的后代，儿子不能为改嫁的母亲服丧，那样会废了自家祖庙的祭礼。
English: When his mother died, he also said that in ancient times, as a descendant of his father, a son could not mourn for his mother who had remarried. In that way, the ritual of his family's ancestral temple would be abolished.

古文：今丧者皆祭，无害于行服。
现代文：现在有丧的人都可祭祀，与穿丧服不冲突。
English: Now, people who are in mourning can offer sacrifices, and there is no conflict with wearing mourning clothes.

古文：乃请解官持服，然议者以丧而祭为非礼。
现代文：于是请求免官服丧，然而舆论认为服丧时祭祀是不符合礼节的。
English: He then requested to be exempted from official mourning, but the public opinion held that it was not proper to offer sacrifices during mourning.

古文：服除，为三司户部判官。
现代文：服丧完后，任三司户部判官。
English: After the funeral, he was appointed judge of the Third Division of the Household Division.

古文：出为河北转运使，迁侍御史、陕西转运使。
现代文：出任河北转运使，升侍御史、陕西转运使。
English: He served as the Hebei transit envoy, and was promoted to the position of imperial secretary and the Shaanxi transit envoy.

古文：属羌撒逋渴以族落数千帐叛，既又寇原州柳泉镇、环州鹁鸽泉砦，梧州刺史杜澄、内殿崇班赵世隆战没。
现代文：已臣服的羌人撒逋渴以部落数千户叛乱，后又侵犯原州柳泉镇、环州鹁鸽泉寨，梧州刺史杜澄、内殿崇班赵世隆阵亡。
English: The subjugated people of Shanshan rebelled with thousands of families of the tribe, and later invaded the town of Yuquan in Yuanzhou, the town of Dove Spring in Huanzhou, the city of Ducheng in Wuzhou, and the city of Zhao Shilong in Inner Temple.

古文：博文劾奏内侍都知周文质、押班王怀信为泾原、环庆两路钤辖，提重兵驻大拔砦，玩寇逗留，耗用边费，请用曹玮、田敏代。
现代文：王博文上奏弹劾内侍都知周文质、押班王怀信两人身为泾原、环庆两路钤辖，带领重兵驻守大拔寨时，玩忽敌寇，逗留不前，耗用边防军费，请求用曹玮、田敏两人取代二职。
English: Wang Bowen reported the impeachment of the two inner attendants, Du Zhi, Zhou Wenzhi, and the overseer, Wang Huixin, who were in charge of the two provinces of Yuyuan and Huanqing. When they led the heavy troops to garrison the large encampment, they neglected the enemy, lingered, consumed the military expenses of the border defense, and requested that the two positions be replaced by Cao Qi and Tian Min.

古文：既而文质、怀信坐法，遂以玮知永兴军，使节制边事。
现代文：后来周文质、王怀信两人被治罪，于是任曹玮知永兴军，使他负责节制边防军事。
English: Later, Zhou Wenzhong and Wang Huaxin were both punished, so Cao Shizhi was appointed to the Yongxing Army, making him responsible for controlling the border defense military.

古文：会玮病不行，又用敏为泾原路总管，寇遂平。
现代文：遇上曹玮生病不能赴任，又用田敏做泾原路总管，敌寇因此被平定。
English: When Cao Pi fell ill and was unable to take up his post, he appointed Tian Min as the general manager of Yuyuan Road. As a result, the enemy bandits were subdued.

古文：迁尚书兵部员外郎，为三司户部副使，再迁户部郎中、龙图阁待制、判吏部流内铨、权发遣三司使事。
现代文：升尚书兵部员外郎，任三司户部副使，再升户部郎中、龙图阁待制、判吏部流内铨、权发遣三司使事。
English: He was promoted to be a member of the Calligraphy and Military Science Department, and was appointed as the deputy envoy of the Third Division of the Household Department. He was then promoted to be a junior member of the Household Department, a member of the Longtu Pavilion, a member of the Judiciary Department, and a delegate to the Third Division of the Ministry.

古文：与监察御史崔暨、内侍罗崇勋同鞫真定府曹汭狱。
现代文：与监察御史崔暨、内侍罗崇勋一同审理真定府曹氵内一案。
English: Together with the inspector, Choi Ji, and the chambermaid, Luo Chongxun, he tried the case of Cao Xuanai in Jinding Prefecture.

古文：及还，权知开封府，进龙图阁直学士、知秦州。
现代文：回京后，任权知开封府，后进升龙图阁直学士，任秦州知州。
English: After returning to Beijing, he was appointed to Guanzhizhi, Kaifeng, and then to Qinzhou, Zhizhou.

古文：为走马承受贾德昌所毁，徙凤翔府，又徙永兴军。
现代文：被走马承受贾德昌毁谤，调任凤翔府知事，又调为永兴军知事。
English: He suffered the slander of Jia Dechang, was transferred to the governor of Fengxiang Prefecture, and was also transferred to the governor of Yongxing Army.

古文：明年，德昌以赃败，改枢密直学士，复知秦州。
现代文：第二年，贾德昌因贪赃枉法之事败露，王博文改任枢密直学士，再任秦州知州。
English: In the second year, Jia Dechang was exposed for corruption, and Wang Bowen was reappointed as Privy Academician, and then reappointed as Qinzhou Zhizhou.

古文：初，沿边军民之逃者必为熟户畜牧，又或以遗远羌易羊马，故常没者数百人。
现代文：当初，沿边一带逃亡的军民必定被已归服宋朝的羌族熟户收留当作农奴役使，或者被送给远方羌人交换羊马，因此常有数百数百的人失踪。
English: At the beginning, the soldiers and civilians who fled along the border must have been taken in as serf servants by the familiar families of the Yi people who had already submitted to the Song Dynasty, or they were sent to the distant Yi people to exchange sheep and horses, so there are often hundreds of hundreds of people missing.

古文：其禽生羌，则以锦袍、银带、茶绢赏之。
现代文：他们若擒捕了没有归服朝廷的生羌、熟户便会用锦袍、银带、茶绢之类的东西奖赏他们。
English: If they caught a roe deer that did not submit to the imperial court, their acquaintances would reward them with things such as gold robes, silver belts, and tea urns.

古文：间有自归，而中道为夏人所得，亦不能辨，坐法皆斩。
现代文：偶尔也有人自己返回来，但中途又被西夏人抓住，也不能分辨，都依法处斩。
English: Occasionally, some people returned on their own, but they were caught by the Xixia people halfway, and they could not be distinguished, and they were all executed according to law.

古文：博文乃遣习知边事者，密持信纸往招，至则悉贷其罪，由是岁减殊死甚众。
现代文：王博文于是派遣熟悉边防事务的人，秘密带着信符前往招抚，只要他们回来便都免其罪，由此每年都要减少很多被诛杀处死的人。
English: Wang Bowen then sent people who were familiar with border affairs to Fuzhou secretly with a letter, and as long as they returned, they would be exonerated, thus reducing the number of people who were beaten to death every year.

古文：朝廷下其法旁路。
现代文：朝廷将此法推广到其他邻近各路执行。
English: The imperial court extended this law to other nearby roads.

古文：又言河西回鹘多缘互市家秦、陇间，请悉遣出境，戒守臣使讥察之。
现代文：他又说河西的回鹘人有很多因为经商做买卖而移居在秦、陇之间，请朝廷将他们全部遣送出境，令守将严密检查。
English: He also said that there were many Uighurs in the west of the river who had migrated between Qin and Shan due to business and trade. He asked the imperial court to deport all of them and ordered the guards to closely inspect them.

古文：再迁右谏议大夫，以龙图阁学士复知开封府。
现代文：再升为右谏议大夫，以龙图阁学士身份复任开封府知府。
English: He was promoted again to the position of Doctor of the Right Division of the Legislative Yuan, and was reappointed as the prefect of Kaifeng with the status of a Longtu Ge bachelor.

古文：都城豪右邸舍侵通衢，博文制表木按籍，命左右判官分撤之，月余毕。
现代文：都城中富豪权贵的住宅侵占街道，王博文制作木表丈量，命令左右判官分头将违法侵占的建筑拆除，用了一月多时间完成。
English: The residences of the rich and powerful in the capital occupied the streets. Wang Bowen made a wooden meter and ordered the judges to dismantle the illegally occupied buildings. It took more than a month to complete.

古文：出知大名府，迁给事中。
现代文：出任大名府知事，升给事中。
English: He assumed the post of daimyo prefectural governor and was promoted to vice-governor.

古文：召权三司使，遂同知枢密院事，逾月而卒。
现代文：后被召回京城任代理三司使，最后任同知枢密院事，过了一个月便去世。
English: After that, he was recalled to Beijing to serve as acting Third Division envoy, and finally served as Tongzhi Privy Councillor. He passed away a month later.

古文：帝临奠，赠尚书吏部侍郎。
现代文：皇帝亲自前往祭奠，追赠他为尚书吏部侍郎。
English: The emperor himself went to the memorial service and presented him posthumously with the title of chamberlain of the Imperial Chancellery.

古文：博文以吏事进，多任剧繁，为政务平恕，常语诸子曰： 吾平生决罪，至流刑，未尝不阴择善水土处，汝曹志之。 然治曹汭狱，议者多谓博文希太后旨，纵崇勋傅致其罪。
现代文：王博文因做官能干受到进用，多次担任繁难复杂地区的长官，为政尽力宽恕平和，常对儿子们说： 我平生裁决罪犯，即使是判流放的刑，也未尝不私下挑选一个水土好的地方来处置，你们应当记住。 但审理曹氵内一案，舆论多认为王博文为了得到太后的赏识，纵容了罗崇勋诱供逼供，以便罗致他的罪状。
English: Wang Bowen was promoted because of his ability as a magistrate. He served as the governor of a difficult and complex region for many times. He tried his best to forgive and pacify for the sake of politics. He often said to his sons: I have always adjudicated criminals. Even if I sentenced them to exile, I would not hesitate to secretly choose a place with good soil and water to deal with them. You should remember this. However, in the trial of Cao Xuanai's case, the public opinion mostly believed that Wang Bowen, in order to gain the appreciation of the empress dowager, connived at inducing Luo Chongxun to make a confession in order

古文：子畴。
现代文：他的儿子叫王畴。
English: His son's name is Wang Zhuang.

