古文：高子业初任代州守，有诸生江槔与邻人争宅址。
现代文：高子业初任代州太守时，有秀才江槔和邻人争夺住屋，几乎发生殴斗。
English: When Gao Ziyi was first appointed as daizhou taishou, there was a dispute between the talented Jiang Zang and his neighbors over a house, and there was almost a fight.

古文：将哄，阴刃族人江孜等，匿二尸图诬邻人。
现代文：江槔暗中杀死族人江孜等两人，然后把尸体藏了起来，准备诬害邻人。
English: Jiang Yao secretly killed two people, including a member of the Jiangzi ethnic group, and then hid the bodies, preparing to frame his neighbors.

古文：邻人知，不敢哄，全畀以宅，槔埋尸室中。
现代文：邻人知情因而不敢和他殴斗，把住屋都给江槔，江槔就把尸体埋在房子里。
English: Knowing this, the neighbor did not dare to fight him, and gave the house to Jiang Yu. Jiang Yu then buried the body in the house.

古文：数年，槔兄千户楫枉杀其妻，槔嗾妻家讼楫，并诬楫杀孜事，楫拷死，无后，与弟槃重袭楫职。
现代文：数年后，江槔的哥哥江楫误杀了妻子，江槔于是唆使江楫妻子的家人去告江楫，同时诬陷江楫害死了江孜等两人。江楫被拷打而死，没有后代，就由弟弟江槃继承了职位。
English: A few years later, Jiang Chen's brother Jiang Chen accidentally killed his wife. Jiang Chen then instigated Jiang Chen's wife's family to sue Jiang Chen, and at the same time framed Jiang Chen for killing Jiang Zi and two others. Jiang Chen was tortured to death and had no offspring, so his brother Jiang Chen inherited the position.

古文：讼上监司台，付子业再鞫。
现代文：讼案呈上专管刑狱的监司，交付高子业再审查。
English: The case was submitted to the supervising director in charge of the prison, and was handed over to the college for further review.

古文：业问槔以孜等尸所在，槔对曰： 楫杀孜埋尸其室，不知所在。 
现代文：高子业问江槔，江孜等尸体在哪里，江槔说： 江楫杀死江孜后，把尸体埋在房子里，不知道确实的地点在何处。 
English: Gao Ziyan asked Jiang Yu where the bodies of Jiang Zi and others were. Jiang Yu said: After Jiang Yu killed Jiang Zi, he buried the bodies in the house. I don't know the exact location.

古文：曰： 楫何事杀孜？ 
现代文：高子业问： 江楫为什么要杀死江孜？ 
English: Gao Ziye asked: Why did Jiang Yu kill Jiang Zi?

古文：槔愕然，对曰： 为槔争宅址。 
现代文：江槔慌张地回答： 因为我和邻居争住屋。 
English: Jiang Yao replied in a panic: Because I am competing with my neighbor to live in the house.

古文：曰： 尔与同宅居乎？ 
现代文：高子业问道： 你和江楫是住的同一幢屋子吗？  没有住在一起。 
English: Gao Ziyan asked: Do you and Jiang Chen live in the same house? They don't live together.

古文：对曰： 异居。 曰： 为尔争宅址，杀人埋尸己室，有斯理乎？ 
现代文：高子业说： 他和你去争住屋，杀了人之后又把尸体埋在自己房子里，有这种道理吗？ 
English: Gao Ziyan said, "He quarreled with you about where to live, killed someone, and then buried the body in his own house. Is there any reason for this?

古文：问吏曰： 搜尸槔室否？ 
现代文：又问差役说： 在江槔的房子搜查过尸体没有？ 差役回答： 还没有。 
English: He also asked the police officer: "Have you searched Jiang Yu's house for the body?" The police officer replied: "Not yet."

古文：对曰： 未也。 乃命搜槔室，掘地得二尸于槔居所，刃迹宛然，槔服罪。
现代文：于是高子业命人搜查江槔的房子，果然在房子地下挖到两具尸体，刀刃砍伤的痕迹还很清楚，江槔才认罪。
English: So Gao Ziya ordered someone to search Jiang Wei's house, and sure enough, they dug up two bodies in the basement of the house. The marks of the knife blade were still very clear, and Jiang Wei confessed.

古文：州人曰： 十年冤狱，一旦得雪。 
现代文：州人都说： 十年的冤狱，如今才洗清。 
English: The people of the state all said: "Ten years of unjust imprisonment, and only now have I been cleared."

古文：州豪吴世杰诬族人吴世江奸盗，拷掠死二十余命，世江更数冬不死。
现代文：州中的大族吴世杰，诬害族人吴世江强奸盗窃，逼供拷打，吴世江幸而经过数年不死。
English: Wu Shijie, a member of a large clan in the state, falsely accused Wu Shijiang, a member of the same clan, of rape and theft, and forced him to confess under torture. Fortunately, Wu Shijiang did not die for several years.

古文：子业覆狱牍，问曰： 盗赃布裙一，谷数斛。
现代文：高子业重新审查讼案的记录，问吴世杰道： 窃盗的赃物有布裙一条、谷物数斛。
English: Gao Ziyang re-examined the records of the lawsuit and asked Wu Shijie: The stolen goods include a cloth skirt and several bags of grain.

古文：世江有田若庐，富而行劫，何也。 
现代文：吴世江有房子和田地，家境富裕，为什么要去盗窃这些东西？ 
English: Wu Shijiang has a house and fields, and his family is wealthy. Why would he steal these things?

古文：世杰曰： 贼饵色。 
现代文：吴世杰说： 是要劫色。 
English: Wu Shijie said, "It is to steal the limelight."

古文：对曰： 奸也。  何时？ 曰： 夜。 
现代文：于是高子叶又叫奸妇来问道： 窃贼怎么对你？  强奸。  什么时候？  半夜。 
English: So Takatsuba called the adulteress again and asked: How did the thief treat you? Rape. When? In the middle of the night.

古文：曰： 夜奸何得识贼名？ 
现代文： 半夜强奸，怎么知道窃贼是谁？ 
English: Rape in the middle of the night, how do you know who the thief is?

古文：对曰： 世杰教我贼名。 
现代文： 是吴世杰告诉我窃贼名字的。 
English: It was Wu Shijie who told me the name of the thief.

古文：世杰遂伏诬杀人罪。
现代文：吴世杰这才承认诬告杀人罪。
English: It was only then that Wu Shijie confessed to the crime of falsely accusing someone of murder.

