古文：庾悦，字仲豫，颍川焉陵人也。
现代文：庾悦字仲豫，颍川鄢陵人。
English: Zhaoyuan, Zhaoyuan, Zhaoyuan.

古文：曾祖亮，晋太尉。
现代文：曾祖庾亮，是晋朝的太尉。
English: Zeng Zu Rongliang was a lieutenant of the Jin Dynasty.

古文：祖羲，吴国内史。
现代文：祖父庾羲，是晋朝的吴国内史。
English: Grandfather Zhai is the central figure in the history of Wuzhong in the Jin Dynasty.

古文：父准，西中郎将、豫州刺史。
现代文：父亲庾准，是晋朝的西中郎将、豫州刺史。
English: His father, Zou Zhen, was the West Vice Admiral of the Jin Dynasty and the leader of Yuzhou.

古文：悦少为卫将军琅邪王行参军、司马，徙主簿，转右长史。
现代文：庾悦年轻时当卫将军琅王牙王的行参军、司马，又转任主簿，后又转任右长史。
English: When she was young, she joined the army as the general of the imperial guard, Sima, and was transferred to the position of chief record keeper, and later to the position of the right chief historian.

古文：桓玄辅政，领豫州，以悦为别驾从事史，迁骁骑将军。
现代文：桓玄辅佐晋朝，兼任豫州刺史，用庾悦当别驾从事史。庾悦又迁任骁骑将军。
English: In the Jin Dynasty, Kuan Xuan's assistant, also served as a historian of Yuzhou, and used Mu Yue as a special driver to engage in history. Mu Yue was also transferred to the general of the cavalry.

古文：玄篡位，徙中书侍郎。
现代文：桓玄篡位，庾悦转任中书侍郎。
English: Kangen usurped the position, and Kyoetsu was transferred to the position of chusho-sajiro.

古文：高祖定京邑，武陵王遵承制，以悦为宁远将军、安远护军、武陵内史。
现代文：高祖平定京城，武陵王司马遵承接朝廷命令，以庾悦为宁远将军、安远护军、武陵内史。
English: Gaozhu conquered the capital, and Wuling King Sima followed the order of the imperial court, with Mu Yue as the general of Ningyuan, the guardian of Anyuan, and the internal history of Wuling.

古文：以病去职。
现代文：又因病离职。
English: Another resignation due to illness.

古文：镇军府版咨议参军，转车骑从事中郎。
现代文：镇军府又任命庾悦为谘议参军，再转任车骑从事中郎。
English: The town's military government also appointed Miao Yue as an advisory member of the army, and then transferred him to be a middle-ranking officer in the cavalry.

古文：刘毅请为抚军司马，不就。
现代文：刘毅请庾悦当抚军司马，庾悦没有就任。
English: Liu Yi asked Mu Yue to be the commander of the army, but Mu Yue did not take up the post.

古文：迁车骑中军司马。从征广固，竭其诚力。
现代文：他又迁任车骑中军司马，随同高祖征讨广固，竭尽全力。
English: He was also transferred to the post of Sima of the Cavalry and Cavalry Corps, accompanied Gao Zu to conquer Guanggu, and did his best.

古文：卢循逼京都，以为督江州豫州之西阳新蔡汝南颍川司州之恆农扬州之松滋六郡诸军事、建威将军、江州刺史，从东道出鄱阳。
现代文：卢循进逼京城，高祖用他当督江州、豫州西阳、新蔡、汝南、颍川、司州的恒农、扬州的松滋六郡诸军事、建威将军、江州刺史，从东路到鄱阳。
English: Lu Xun advanced to Beijing, Gao Zu used him as the governor of Jiangzhou, Xiyang, Xin Cai, Runan, Luochuan, Hengnong, Songzhi and six counties of Songzhi in Yangzhou, General Jian Wei, and Jiangzhou Shishi, from the East Road to Shenyang.

古文：循遣将英纠千余人断五亩峤，悦破之，进据豫章，绝循粮援。
现代文：卢循部将英纟斗带一千多人截断五亩峤，庾悦击败他们，前进占据豫章，断绝了卢循的粮食道路。
English: Lu Xun's troops cut off five mu of land from Ying Xun Dou and more than a thousand people, and Ya Yue defeated them and advanced to occupy Yuzhang, cutting off Lu Xun's grain route.

古文：初，毅家在京口，贫约过常，尝与乡曲士大夫往东堂共射。
现代文：当初刘毅家在京口，非常贫穷，常常和乡亲士族人士一起到东堂射覆。
English: At the beginning, Liu Yi's family was very poor and lived in Jingkou. He often went to the East Hall together with people from his hometown.

古文：时悦为司徒右长史，暂至京，要府州僚佐共出东堂。
现代文：当时庾悦当司徒右长史，暂时到京口，邀请兖州府的将吏一起从东堂出来。
English: At that time, Zou Yue, when he was still a novice, temporarily went to Jingkou and invited the officials from Zhangzhou to come out of the East Hall together.

古文：毅已先至，遣与悦相闻，曰： 身久踬顿，营一游集甚难。
现代文：刘毅走在前面，派人告知庾悦，并说： 我好久以来一直很困顿，想弄一个游集地方也很难。
English: Liu Yi walked in front, sent someone to tell Zhai Yue, and said: I have been in a difficult situation for a long time, and it is difficult to get a gathering place.

古文：君如意人，无处不可为适，岂能以此堂见让。 
现代文：先生是大红人，任何一个地方都可以进行娱乐，我希望能把这个射堂让给我。 
English: My teacher is a very popular person. You can have fun anywhere. I hope I can have this shooting gallery.

古文：悦素豪，径前，不答毅语。
现代文：庾悦一向奢豪大方，这时只向前走，根本不回答刘毅的话。
English: Meiyue has always been extravagant and generous. At this time, she only walked forward and did not answer Liu Yi's words at all.

古文：众人并避之，唯毅留射如故。
现代文：众人都避开庾悦，只有刘毅继续射覆。
English: Many people avoided Miao Yue, only Liu Yi continued to fire.

古文：悦厨馔甚盛，不以及毅。
现代文：庾悦的酒席办得很丰盛，但没有叫刘毅。
English: Miao Yue's banquet was very sumptuous, but she did not invite Liu Yi.

古文：毅既不去，悦甚不欢，俄顷亦退。
现代文：刘毅也不离开，庾悦很不快活，过一会儿自动退走。
English: Liu Yi didn't leave either. Miao Yue was very unhappy and left automatically after a while.

古文：毅又相闻曰： 身今年未得子鹅，岂能以残炙见惠。 
现代文：刘毅又派人对庾悦说： 我今年没有吃过子鹅，也许你能把剩余的烤肉赐给我吃。 
English: Liu Yi also sent someone to say to Mu Yue: I haven't eaten any goslings this year, perhaps you can give me the rest of the roast meat to eat.

古文：悦又不答。
现代文：庾悦又不答应。
English: Mei Yue did not agree.

古文：卢循平后，毅求都督江州，以江州内地，治民为职，不宜置军府，上表陈之曰： 臣闻天以盈虚为道，治以损益为义。
现代文：卢循平定后，刘毅请求当都督江州军事，因为江州是内地，应该以治理百姓为务，不应设立军府，上表陈述说： 我听说天道有时盈满、有时虚空，循环不已。
English: After the pacification of Luqun, Liu Yi requested to be the military governor of Jiangzhou, because Jiangzhou is inland, it is necessary to govern the people, and it is not necessary to set up a military office. The above table stated: I heard that the heavenly way is sometimes full, sometimes empty, and the cycle continues.

古文：时否而政不革，民凋而事不损，则无以救急病于已危，拯涂炭于将绝。
现代文：政治则有时增加，有时减损，是它的特点。时代不好而政治不改革，人民凋零而事务不减，便无法诊救已危险的疾病，挽留将死去的人民。
English: Politics, on the other hand, is characterized by the fact that it sometimes increases and sometimes decreases. When times are bad and politics is not reformed, when the people are withered and affairs are not reduced, it is impossible to diagnose and treat dangerous diseases and retain people who are about to die.

古文：自顷戎车屡驾，干戈溢境，江州以一隅之地，当逆顺之冲，力弱民慢，而器运所继。
现代文：近来祸乱常常爆发，干戈不停。江州这么一小块地盘，正位于朝廷和叛军的中间，力量弱小，人民低劣，但是偷运财物不止。
English: Jiangzhou is such a small piece of land, right in the middle of the imperial court and the rebel army. The power is weak, the people are inferior, but the smuggling of goods is endless.

古文：自桓玄以来，驱蹙残毁，至乃男不被养，女无对匹，逃亡去就，不避幽深，自非财单力竭，无以至此。
现代文：从桓玄以来，加以驱使逼迫毁坏，以至男儿不被豢养，女子没有匹偶，百姓逃亡东西，躲避到深远的山区和水泽。如果不是财尽力竭，是不会到这步田地的。
English: From the time of King Huan Xuan, they have been driven to persecute and destroy, so that men are not reared, women have no mates, and the people flee to distant mountains and streams. If it were not for the exhaustion of wealth, they would not have come to this step of the field.

古文：若不曲心矜理，有所改移，则靡遗之叹，奄焉必及。
现代文：如果不善心抚慰，有所改革，那么就只能留下遗民的哀叹，这种情况必然会重新出现。
English: If we are not good at consoling and reforming, then we will only be left with the lamentations of the survivors, and this situation will inevitably reappear.

古文：臣谬荷增统，伤慨兼怀。
现代文：我偶然错被任为统督职务，非常同情这里人民的遭遇。
English: I was appointed to the post of governor-general by accident, and I am very sympathetic to the people here.

古文：夫设官分职，军国殊用，牧民以息务为大，武略以济事为先。
现代文：况且设立官职，军务和政务分开进行处理，治理人民以安定为主，开展军事以完成事务为重。
English: Moreover, an official position has been established, military affairs and government affairs are handled separately, the people are governed with stability as the main focus, and the military is carried out with a focus on completing affairs.

古文：今兼而领之，盖出于权事，因藉既久，遂为常则。
现代文：如今军政统一兼任，大概是暂时的措施。因袭一久，于是变成了老规矩。
English: Nowadays, military and political unification are concurrently in charge, which is probably a temporary measure. Because it has been around for a long time, it has become an old rule.

古文：江州在腹心之中，凭接扬、豫籓屏所倚，实为重复。
现代文：江州在国家腹心地区，连接扬州和豫州，屏障和防护的设置，确实是重复了。
English: Jiangzhou is in the center of the country, connecting Yangzhou and Yuzhou, and the barrier and protection set up is indeed repetitive.

古文：昔胡寇纵逸，朔马临江，抗御之宜，盖出权计。
现代文：当年胡人侵扰，纵马江边，抵抗他们的措施，大约出于权宜之计。
English: At that time, the Hu people invaded, along the Ma River, and the measures to resist them were probably a stopgap measure.

古文：以温峤明达，事由一己，犹觉其弊，论之备悉。
现代文：以温峤那么明达的人物，大小事都由自己决定，仍觉得那种弊端很多，谈这个问题时很详细。
English: As someone who knows so much about temperature control, I still feel that there are a lot of drawbacks, and I am very detailed when talking about this issue.

古文：今江右区区，户不盈数十万，地不逾数千里，而统司鳞次，未获减息，大而言之，足为国耻。
现代文：今日江东区区小块土地，户口不满几十万，地不过几千里，但统治的官府林立，没有减损。从大范围讲，确实是国家的耻辱。
English: Today, small plots of land in Jiangdong District have less than hundreds of thousands of hukou and only a few thousand li of land, but the ruling government offices stand in a row, and there is no derogation. On a large scale, it is indeed a national disgrace.

古文：况乃地在无军，而军府犹置，文武将佐，资费非一，岂所谓经国大情，扬汤去火者哉。
现代文：况且江州地方没有军队，但是军府仍然摆在那里，文武将吏，用费不少，这怎么是经营国家的好政策，扬汤去火，解决问题的好办法呢？
English: Moreover, there is no army in Jiangzhou, but the military government is still located there. The military officers and generals cost a lot of money. How is this a good policy for running the country, a good way to solve the problem?

古文：其州郡边江，民户辽落，加以邮亭嶮阔，畏阻风波，转输往还，常有淹废；又非所谓因其所利，以济其弊者也。
现代文：此州与长江相连，人民户口不多，加上驿亭艰险而远隔，转运往返，常常有浪费的。这不是因地制宜，消除弊端的办法。
English: This prefecture is connected to the Yangtze River, the number of people's hukou is small, coupled with the difficult and remote location of Fengting, transportation to and from the prefecture is often wasteful. This is not a way to eliminate the drawbacks according to local conditions.

古文：愚谓宜解军府，移治豫章，处十郡之中，厉简惠之政，比及数年，可有生气。
现代文：我认为应该解除军府，政务州府移到豫章，那里正处在十郡的中央。精简机构，提高效率，几年时间，就可以恢复生气。
English: In my opinion, the military government should be dissolved, and the state government should be moved to Yuanzhang, which is located in the center of the ten counties. Streamline the organization, improve efficiency, and in a few years, it will be able to regain its vitality.

古文：且属县凋散，亦有所存，而役调送迎，不得休止，亦谓应随宜并减，以简众费。
现代文：而且属县经济困难，也应该合计。而劳役征调和送迎公务，使人民不得休养，我认为应该随机减损，以缩小公用经费。
English: Moreover, it belongs to the economic difficulties of the county, and it should be totaled. While the transfer of laborers and the transfer of public services, so that the people can not rest and recuperate, I think it should be randomly deducted to reduce public funds.

古文：刺史庾悦，自临州部，甚有恤民之诚，但纲维不革，自非纲目所理。
现代文：刺史庾悦，从赴任州的长官以来，很有同情百姓的善心。但是纲经不明，自然不是轻易能整治的。
English: Since taking office as the prefect of the prefecture, Tsushi Shinya has been very sympathetic to the goodwill of the people. However, the scheme is not clear, and naturally it is not easy to rectify.

古文：寻阳接蛮，宜有防遏，可即州府千兵，以助郡戍。 
现代文：寻阳接近蛮人地区，应该有兵防守，可以就州府的一千兵士，帮助郡城的戍守工作。 
English: As Xuanyang is close to the barbarian areas, there should be soldiers to defend it. One thousand soldiers from the state capital can help defend the county seat.

古文：于是解悦都督、将军官，以刺史移镇豫章。
现代文：于是朝廷解除庾悦的都督和将军职务，以刺史的身份移镇豫章。
English: As a result, the imperial court relieved Mu Yue of his duties as governor and general, and transferred him to the town of Yuzhang as a successor.

古文：毅以亲将赵恢领千兵守寻阳，建威府文武三千悉入毅府，符摄严峻，数相挫辱。
现代文：刘毅以亲信部将赵恢带一千兵士守卫寻阳。建威军府的三千人都配到刘毅的军府中。刘毅的符令很严厉，多次侮辱庾悦。
English: Liu Yi sent Zhao Huai with a thousand soldiers to guard Xuanyang with his close confidants. Three thousand people from the Jianwei Military Government were assigned to Liu Yi's military government. Liu Yi's orders were very strict, and he repeatedly insulted Zou Yue.

古文：悦不得志，疽发背，到豫章少日卒，进年三十八。
现代文：庾悦很不得意，背上长了大疮，到豫章几天便死了，当年三十八岁。
English: Mo Yue was very disappointed, a large sore grew on her back, and she died a few days after arriving in Yuzhang, at the age of thirty-eight.

古文：追赠征虏将军。
现代文：被追认为征虏将军。
English: He was pursued as a conscript general.

古文：以广固之功，追封新阳县五等男。
现代文：又因为广固的战功，被追封为新阳县五等男。
English: In addition, because of his extensive war exploits, he was posthumously awarded the title of the fifth-ranked man in Xinyang County.

古文：王诞，字茂世，琅邪临沂人，太保弘从兄也。
现代文：王诞字茂世，琅王牙临沂人。是太保王弘的堂兄。
English: Wang Zhenzha was born in the Shige era, and was a cousin of the Taiho Wanghong.

古文：祖恬，中军将军。父混，太常。
现代文：祖父王恬，官至中军将军，父亲王混官至太常。
English: His grandfather, Wang Qian, was a general in the Chinese army, and his father, Wang Jian, was a general in the Chinese army.

古文：诞少有才藻，晋孝武帝崩，从叔尚书令珣为哀策文，久而未就，谓诞曰： 犹少序节物一句。 
现代文：王诞年轻时很有才华。晋朝孝武帝逝世，堂叔尚书令王王旬写哀悼文，好久都未写成功，便告诉王诞： 犹少序节物一句。 
English: Wang Guo was very talented when he was young. After Emperor Xiaowu of the Jin Dynasty died, his uncle Shang Shu ordered Wang Guo to write a letter of condolence. Wang Guo did not succeed in writing for a long time, so he told Wang Guo:

古文：因出本示诞。
现代文：于是拿出文章给王诞看。
English: So he took out the article and showed it to Wang Xizhe.

古文：诞揽笔便益之，接其秋冬代变后云： 霜繁广除，风回高殿。 
现代文：王诞提笔加了一句，接王王旬文中的 秋冬代变 后写道： 霜繁广除，风回高殿。 
English: Wang Xizhi took out his pen and added a sentence, which was written after the autumn and winter dynasties change in Wang Wang Shun's essay: The frosts spread far and wide, and the wind returned to the high palace.

古文：珣嗟叹清拔，因而用之。
现代文：王王旬叹赏这句非常清丽秀拔，于是用了它。
English: Wang Wangjun thought this sentence was very beautiful, so he used it.

古文：袭爵雉乡侯，拜秘书郎，琅邪王文学，中军功曹。
现代文：王诞继承雉乡侯，拜任秘书郎、琅王牙王文学、中军功曹。
English: Wang Xizhun inherited the title of Xiangxiang, and became the secretary of Xiangxiang, the king of Xiangxiang, the king of literature, and the military hero of the Chinese army.

古文：隆安四年，会稽王世子元显开后军府，又以诞补功曹。
现代文：隆安四年，会稽王的世子司马元显设置后军府，又用王诞补任功曹。
English: In the fourth year of the Longan era, Sima Yuanxian, the descendant of King Heungcheon, set up a military government, and also used the king's birthday to make up for his service.

古文：寻除尚书吏部郎，仍为后军长史，领庐江太守，加镇蛮护军。
现代文：不久又拜任尚书吏部郎，同时还当后军长史，兼庐江太守，加镇蛮护军。
English: Soon after that, he was appointed to the position of Shang Shuliriburo, and at the same time, he also served as the commander-in-chief of the army, the governor of the Li River, and the protector of the town.

古文：转龙骧将军、琅邪内史，长史如故。
现代文：转任龙骧将军、琅王牙内史，长史还照旧。
English: He was transferred to the posts of Longjing General and Longjing King's Inner Historian, but remained in Longjing as before.

古文：诞结事元显嬖人张法顺，故为元显所宠。
现代文：王诞结交司马元显的宠人张法顺，所以也被司马元显所宠爱。
English: Wang Xizhong befriended Sima Yuanxian's favorite Zhang Faxun, so he was also favored by Sima Yuanxian.

古文：元显纳妾，诞为之亲迎。
现代文：司马元显娶小老婆，王诞为他迎亲。
English: Sima Yuanxian married a younger wife, and the king was born to welcome him.

古文：随府转骠骑长史，将军、内史如故。
现代文：又随同本府转任骠骑长史，将军、内史还照旧。
English: He was also transferred to the post of Shunkei Choshi along with this government, but the posts of shogun and naishi remained the same.

古文：元显讨桓玄，欲悉诛桓氏，诞固陈修等与玄志趣不同，由此得免。修，诞甥也。
现代文：元显讨伐桓玄，想杀掉所有姓桓的人。王诞反复地陈说桓修和桓玄志趣不同，因此桓修等免除灾难，桓修是王诞的外甥。
English: Yuan Xian fought against Kuan Xuan and wanted to kill all people with the surname Kuan. Wang Xing repeatedly said that Kanshu and Kuan Xuan had different interests, so Kanshu and others were spared from disaster. Kanshu was Wang Xing's nephew.

古文：及玄得志，诞将见诛，修为之陈请；又言修等得免之由，乃徙诞广州。
现代文：到桓玄得势时，王诞将被杀，桓修又为王诞求情，陈说自己之所以活下来的原因。于是把王诞迁到广州。
English: When Kuan Xuan gained power, Wang Xat would be killed, and Kanshu pleaded for Wang Xat's life, explaining why he had survived. Therefore, Wang Xat was moved to Guangzhou.

古文：卢循据广州。以诞为其平南府长史，甚宾礼之。
现代文：卢循据有广州，用王诞当他的平南府长史，很重视他。
English: According to Lu Xun, he was born in Guangzhou, and he used the king's birthday as his Pingnan prefectural governor's birthday, attaching great importance to him.

古文：诞久客思归，乃说循曰： 下官流远在此，被蒙殊眷，士感知己，实思报答。
现代文：王诞久客异乡，想回到内地，于是游说卢循说： 下官流落在这里，承蒙你的特别看待。义士感激知已之人，我确实想报答于你。
English: Wang Xing, who had been away from home for a long time, wanted to return to the mainland, so he lobbied Lu Xuan and said: "The lower-ranking officials have been living here and have received your special consideration. The righteous are grateful to those who know, and I really want to repay you."

古文：本非戎旅，在此无用。
现代文：我本来不知军事，在此地没有什么用处。
English: I didn't know anything about the military, so I wasn't much use here.

古文：素为刘镇军所识，情味不浅，若得北归，必蒙任寄，公私际会，思报厚恩，愈于停此，空移岁月。 
现代文：一向被刘裕所熟知，情谊不浅。如果我能回到北方，必定会得到他的信任。公私之际，我一定想法报答你的厚恩，总比把我留在这里徒然浪费岁月强得多。 
English: I have always been well known to Liu Yu, and our friendship is not shallow. If I can return to the north, I will definitely gain his trust. In public and private occasions, I will definitely think about repaying your kindness, which is much better than leaving me here to waste my time.

古文：循甚然之。
现代文：卢循觉得他的话很有道理。
English: Lu Xun thought his words made a lot of sense.

古文：时广州刺史吴隐之亦为循所拘留，诞又曰： 将军今留吴公，公私非计。
现代文：当时广州刺史吴隐之也被卢循强迫留在身边。王诞又说： 将军今日留下吴公，于公于私都没有好处。
English: At that time, Lu Xun also forced the governor of Guangzhou, Wu Yingzhi, to stay with him. Wang Xatai also said: "The general leaving Wu Gong today is not good for the public or for me.

古文：孙伯符岂不欲留华子鱼，但以一境不容二君耳。 
现代文：孙伯符难道不想留下华子鱼吗？只因一土不容二王罢了。 
English: Didn't Sun Bofu want to keep the Chinese fish just because one place couldn't accommodate two monarchs?

古文：于是诞及隐之并得还。
现代文：于是王诞和吴隐之都得以回到北方。
English: As a result, the capitals of Wangjing and Wuyin were able to return to the north.

古文：除员外散骑常侍，未拜，高祖请为太尉咨议参军，转长史。
现代文：他回来便被任为员外散骑常侍，还未拜任，高祖便请他当太尉谘议参军，转任长史。
English: When he returned, he was appointed as a non-commissioned officer riding horseback. Before he took up his post, Gaozu asked him to join the army as a lieutenant to advise him, and he was transferred to Changshi.

古文：尽心归奉，日夜不懈，高祖甚委仗之。北伐广固，领齐郡太守。
现代文：王诞忠心侍奉刘裕，日夜不松懈。高祖很信任依仗他，北伐广固的时候，王诞兼任齐郡太守。
English: Wang Xing loyally served Liu Yu, day and night. Gao Zu trusted and relied on him. When the Northern Expedition was in full swing, Wang Xing also served as the governor of Qi County.

古文：卢循自蔡洲南走，刘毅固求追讨，高祖持疑未决，诞密白曰： 公既平广固，复灭卢循，则功盖终古，勋无与二，如此大威，岂可余人分之。
现代文：卢循从蔡州南逃，刘毅坚决请求追击，高祖犹豫不决。王诞私下对高祖说： 主公已经平定广固，再灭卢循可说是功高盖世，勋业无比。如此大权威怎么能让别人分享呢？
English: Lu Xun fled south from Caizhou, Liu Yi resolutely requested to pursue him, and Gaozu hesitated. Wang Xing said to Gaozu in private: The main hero has already pacified Guanggu, and the destruction of Lu Xun can be said to be a great achievement, and the distinguished career is incomparable. How can such great authority be shared by others?

古文：毅与公同起布衣，一时相推耳。
现代文：刘毅和主公同时以布衣崛起，只不过一时相互推让而已。
English: Liu Yi and his master rose to power at the same time, but only by giving in to each other.

古文：今既已丧败，不宜复使立功。 
现代文：如今他既然已失败过一次，不应该再叫他立功勋。 
English: Now that he has failed once, he should not be given credit for it again.

古文：高祖从其说。
现代文：高祖采纳了他的意见。
English: Gaozu adopted his opinion.

古文：七年，以诞为吴国内史。母忧去职。
现代文：义熙七年，以王诞为吴国内史，母亲去世，他辞了职。
English: In the seventh year of Yixi, with the birth of the king as the domestic history of Wu, his mother died, and he resigned.

古文：高祖征刘毅，起为辅国将军，诞固辞军号，墨绖从行。
现代文：高祖征讨刘毅，起任他为辅国将军。王诞坚决辞让将军称号，穿着丧服随从征讨。
English: Gao Zu enlisted Liu Yi and appointed him as an auxiliary general. Wang Xizhe resolutely gave up the title of general and followed the enlistment wearing mourning clothes.

古文：时诸葛长民行太尉留府事，心不自安，高祖甚虑之。
现代文：当时诸葛长民代管太尉留府事务，心中不安，高祖也很担心诸葛长民。
English: At that time, Zhuge Changmin, who was in charge of the affairs of the captain staying in the capital, was uneasy. Gaozu was also worried about Zhuge Changmin.

古文：毅既平，诞求先下，高祖曰： 长民似有自疑心，卿讵宜便去。 
现代文：刘毅平定后，王诞请求率先东下。高祖说： 诸葛长民似乎有猜疑的心思，你怎么能轻易东下。 
English: After Liu Yi was subdued, Wang Xizhe requested to take the lead in going east. Gao Zu said: Zhuge Changmin seems to have a suspicious mind, how can you easily go east.

古文：诞曰： 长民知我蒙公垂眄，今轻身单下，必当以为无虞，乃可以少安其意。 
现代文：王诞说： 诸葛长民知道我很得主公的垂青，今日我独身先到，必定以为没有什么事，正可以稍稍安定他的心绪。 
English: Wang Xizhe said: Zhuge Changmin knew that I was very favored by the lord. Today, I arrived first, single. He must have thought that there was nothing to worry about and that I could stabilize his mood a little.

古文：高祖笑曰： 卿勇过贲、育矣。 
现代文：高祖笑着说： 你真比贲和育还胆大啊！ 
English: Gaozu smiled and said, "You really are bolder than Gong He Yu!"

古文：于是先还。
现代文：于是王诞先回。
English: So the king's birthday came first.

古文：九年，卒，时年三十九。
现代文：九年，王诞去世，当年三十九岁。
English: In the ninth year, Wang Xing passed away, at the age of thirty-nine.

古文：以南北从征，追封作唐县五等侯。
现代文：因为南北两次随军征讨，被追封为作唐县五等侯。
English: Because the North and the South were twice requisitioned by the army, he was posthumously made the fifth-ranked lord of Tang County.

古文：子诩，宋世子舍人，早卒。
现代文：他的儿子王诩，当宋国的世子舍人，早死。
English: His son Wang Yao, who was the heir to the Song dynasty, died young.

