古文：郑简公使公孙成子来聘，平公有疾，韩宣子赞授客馆。
现代文：郑简公派子产出使晋国，晋平公患病，由韩宣子引导安排住在宾馆。
English: Zheng Jian Gong sent his son as an envoy to Jin Province, Jin Ping Gong fell ill, and was guided by Han Xuan Zi to arrange to stay in a hotel.

古文：客问君疾，对曰： 寡君之疾久矣，上下神祇不遍谕，而无除。
现代文：客人问起平公的病，宣子回答说： 我们国君生病已经很久了。天地上下的鬼神都一一祭祀祈祷过了，但病还是未除。
English: When the guests asked about TAIRA no Takamori's illness, Nobuko replied, "Our sovereign has been ill for a long time. All the gods and spirits in heaven and on earth have been offered sacrifices and prayers, but the illness has not been cured.

古文：今梦黄熊入于寝门，不知人杀乎，抑厉鬼邪！ 
现代文：如今梦见黄熊跑进他的卧室，不知道是主杀人呢，还是恶鬼在作祟呢？ 
English: Now he dreams of a yellow bear running into his bedroom. He doesn't know if it was the Lord who killed him, or if an evil spirit is haunting him.

古文：子产曰： 以君之明，子为大政，其何厉之有？
现代文：子产说： 凭你们国君的贤明，又有你主持国家大政，哪有什么恶鬼作祟之事呢？
English: Zi Yuan said: With the wisdom of your sovereigns, and you presiding over the country's great political affairs, what kind of evil spirit would do such a thing?

古文：侨闻之，昔者鮌违帝命，殛之于羽山，化为黄熊，以入于羽渊，实为夏郊，三代举之。
现代文：我听说，以前鮌违背了天帝的命令，被杀死在羽山，变成了黄熊，钻进了羽渊，成为夏禹郊祭的对象，夏、商、周三代都举行祭祀。
English: I heard that in the past, the dragonfly disobeyed the order of the Heavenly Emperor, was killed in the mountain of the feather, turned into a yellow bear, entered the abyss of the feather, and became the object of the XiaYu Suburban Festival. Sacrifices were held for Xia, Shang, and the third generation.

古文：夫鬼神之所及，非其族类，则绍其同位，是故天子祀上帝，公侯祀百辟，自卿以下不过其族。
现代文：鬼神凶吉所涉及的，不是他的同族，就是继承他的同样地位的人，所以天子祭祀天帝，公侯祭祀诸侯身份的神灵，从卿以下不过祭祀他的亲族。
English: Ghosts, gods, and bad luck involve not his fellow tribesmen, but people who have inherited the same status as him. Therefore, the heavenly son sacrifices the heavenly emperor, the prince sacrifices the deities of the princely status, and the relatives below the lord sacrifice his relatives.

古文：今周室少卑，晋实继之，其或者未举夏郊邪？ 
现代文：现在周王室逐渐衰落，晋国实际上继承了霸主的地位，恐怕是因为没有祭祀夏郊吧？ 
English: Now that the Zhou royal family is gradually declining, Jin has actually inherited the position of hegemon. I'm afraid it's because there are no summer festivals, right?

古文：宣子以告，祀夏郊，董伯为尸，五日，公见子产，赐之莒鼎。
现代文：宣子把子产的话报告了晋平公，于是便举行祭祀夏郊的仪式，由董伯作为祭祀的尸主，五天以后，平公病愈接见了子产，赐给他莒鼎。
English: Nobuko reported the news of the child's birth to Emperor Jinpyeong, and a ceremony was held in the summer suburb, with Dongbo as the sacrificial corpse. Five days later, Emperor Jinpyeong received the news of the child's birth and gave him the crown.

