古文：隐公三年 二月己巳，日有食之 。
现代文：隐公三年 二月己巳，有日食 。
English: In the 3rd year of Hinkō, there was a solar eclipse in February.

古文：《穀梁传》曰，言日不言朔，食晦。
现代文：《谷梁传》上说，说日食而不说朔日，这是晦曰日食。
English: "The Tale of Gu Liang" says that it is better to call it a solar eclipse rather than a new moon. This is the eve of a solar eclipse.

古文：《公羊传》曰，食二日。
现代文：《公羊传》上说，日食有两天。
English: According to the Ramayana, a solar eclipse lasts for two days.

古文：董仲舒、刘向以为，其后戎执天子之使，郑获鲁隐，灭戴，卫、鲁、宋咸杀君。
现代文：董仲舒、刘向以为，这以后戎执行天子的派使的任务，郑俘获隐公，灭亡了戴国，卫、鲁、宋都发生了杀君王的事。
English: Dong Zhongshu and Liu Xiang believed that after this, Rong executed the task of the envoy sent by the Son of Heaven, Zheng captured Yingguo, destroyed Dai Guo, and Wei, Lu and Song all killed kings.

古文：《左氏》刘歆以为正月二日，燕、越之分野也。
现代文：《左氏传》上刘歆以为正月二日，太阳的分野是燕、越。
English: On the 2nd day of the first month of the year, Liu Yao thought that the sun's field was Yan and Yue in "The Biography of Zuo Shiwen."

古文：凡日所躔而有变，则分野之国失政者受之。
现代文：大凡日所运行的轨迹有变，太阳所对的分野国家裹政治混乱的人就要遭受灾害。
English: The trajectory of everyday life has changed, and those who are in political turmoil in the countries of the sun's direction will suffer disasters.

古文：人君能修政，共御厥罚，则灾消而福至；不能，则灾息而祸生。
现代文：君主如能整治政事，诚心抵御那些处罚，造就可以消除灾害迎接福瑞；否贝，灾害就会滋生祸患就会到来。
English: If the monarch can rectify government affairs and earnestly resist those punishments, he can eliminate disasters and welcome prosperity; otherwise, disasters will breed disasters will come.

古文：故经书灾而不记其故，盖吉凶亡常，随行而成祸福也。
现代文：所以经书上记的灾害而不说明原因，是因为吉凶难定，随着人的行为而形成祸或福。
English: Therefore, the reason why the disasters recorded in the scriptures are not explained is because it is difficult to determine which is good and which is bad, and whether it is good or bad depends on people's actions.

古文：周衰，天子不班朔，鲁历不正，置闰不得其月，月大小不得其度。
现代文：周朝衰微，天子不颁布朔日，鲁国的历法不正确，设置闰月而不恰当，月份的大小不符合限度。
English: The Zhou Dynasty was in decline, the heavenly son did not promulgate the New Year's Day, the Lu calendar was incorrect, the leap month was set inappropriately, and the size of the month did not meet the limit.

古文：史记日食，或言朔而实非朔，或不言朔而实朔，或脱不书朔与日，皆官失之也。
现代文：历史上记载的日食，有的说是朔日而实际上不是朔日，有的不说是朔日而实际是朔日，有的脱漏没有记载朔日与日食，这都是官方的疏漏。
English: Some of the solar eclipses recorded in history are said to be New Year's Day but are not actually New Year's Day, some are not said to be New Year's Day but are actually New Year's Day, and some omissions do not record New Year's Day and solar eclipses. These are all official omissions.

古文：京房《易传》曰： 亡师兹谓不御，厥异日食，其食也既，并食不一处。
现代文：京房《易传》上说： 军队失败了这是不抵御造成的，出现的灾异就是日食，出现的日食是曰全食，并且日食出现不在一处。
English: Kyofang said in "I Chuan": The army failed. This was caused by not resisting. The disaster that occurred was a solar eclipse. The solar eclipse that occurred was a total eclipse, and there was no solar eclipse.

古文：诛众失理，兹谓生叛，厥食既，光散。
现代文：诛杀众人失理，造就会发生叛乱，出现的灾异是日全食，日光分散。
English: Fighting and killing people is irrational, so there will be a rebellion. The disaster that occurs is a total solar eclipse and the dispersion of sunlight.

古文：纵畔兹谓不明，厥食，先大雨三日，雨除而寒，寒即食。
现代文：放纵叛乱造就是不明智，出现的灾异是日食前大雨三日，雨停而天变寒，天寒就发生日食。
English: It is unwise to indulge in rebellion. The disaster that occurred was the heavy rain three days before the eclipse. When the rain stopped, the weather turned cold, and when the weather turned cold, the eclipse occurred.

古文：专禄不封，兹谓不安，厥食既，先日出而黑，光反外烛。
现代文：独霸俸禄而不封给，这就会不安定，就会出现日全食，首先太阳出来而变黑，曰光反向反照。
English: If the monopolist were to be given a salary without a seal, this would be unstable, and a total solar eclipse would occur. First, the sun would come out and turn black, i.e. the light would reflect backwards.

古文：君臣不通兹谓亡，厥蚀三既。
现代文：君臣之间不畅通就要亡国，于是三次日食都是曰全食。
English: If there is not smooth communication between the princes and ministers, the country will be destroyed, so the three solar eclipses are said to be total eclipses.

古文：同姓上侵，兹谓诬君，厥食四方有云，中央无云，其日大寒。
现代文：同姓犯上作乱，造就是加罪君主，出现的日食四方有云，中央无云，这一天就非常寒冷。
English: An eclipse occurs with clouds in all directions and no clouds in the center. This day is very cold.

古文：公欲弱主位，兹谓不知，厥食中白青，四方赤，已食地震。
现代文：公卿想削弱君主的地位，造就是不明智，出现的日食中央白青色，四方赤红色，日食停止时要地震。
English: The nobles wanted to weaken the position of the monarch, so it was unwise to make the eclipse appear white and blue in the center, red and red in all directions, and an earthquake when the eclipse stopped.

古文：诸侯相侵，兹谓不承，厥食三毁三复。
现代文：诸侯相互侵犯，造就是与身份不配，于是日食三次出现又三次恢复。
English: The feudal lords encroached on each other, creating a situation that was not worthy of their status. As a result, the solar eclipse occurred three times and was restored three times.

古文：君疾善，下谋上，兹谓乱，厥食既，先雨雹，杀走兽。
现代文：君主憎恨善行，在下的图谋犯上，造就是叛乱，要出现日全食，风雨冰雹先至，走兽被杀死。
English: Good deeds are abhorred by the monarch, rebellion is plotted, a total solar eclipse is to take place, hailstorms are to precede hailstorms, and animals are to be killed.

古文：弑君获位，兹谓逆，厥食既，先风雨折木，日赤。
现代文：杀死君主夺取王位造就是叛逆，要出现曰全食，先是狂风暴雨折断树木，后是太阳变为红色。
English: To kill a monarch and seize the throne was to commit treason, and to do so required a total eclipse, with violent storms ripping up trees and the sun turning red.

古文：内臣外乡，兹谓背，厥食食且雨，地中鸣。
现代文：朝内的臣僚倾向外边就是背叛，要出现日食并下雨，地中有呜叫声。
English: The inner and outer courtiers of the imperial court are inclined to betray the outside world. There will be a solar eclipse and rain, and there will be wailing in the land.

古文：冢宰专政，兹谓因，厥食先大风，食时日居云中，四方亡云。
现代文：冢宰专政这说明是沿袭下来的，其日食前先有大风，日食时曰居云中，四方无云。
English: This explanation is inherited from the Bozai Dictatorship. Before the solar eclipse, there was a strong wind. At the time of the solar eclipse, it was said to be in the clouds, with no clouds in all directions.

古文：伯正越职，兹谓分威，厥食日中分。
现代文：伯正超越自己的权限，就是争权，出现的日食是太阳从中间分为两半。
English: Bo is overstepping his authority, that is, he is competing for power. The solar eclipse appears when the sun is split in half from the middle.

古文：诸侯争美于上，兹谓泰，厥食日伤月，食半，天营而鸣。
现代文：诸侯在君王面前争夸自己这就是骄纵，其日食就损害月光，当吃掉月的一半时，天空由东到西有呜声。
English: It is the pride of princes to boast before kings; their eclipses consume the light of the moon, and when they have devoured half the moon, the sky cries out from east to west.

古文：赋不得，兹谓竭，厥星随而下。
现代文：收不到赋税，就是财源枯竭，出现日食并有星坠落。
English: If taxes are not collected, financial resources will dry up, there will be a solar eclipse, and the stars will fall.

古文：受命之臣专征云试，厥食虽侵光犹明，若文王臣独诛纣矣。
现代文：接受命令的臣可自行出兵征伐，其日食虽被遮住光线而仍有光亮，就像文王的臣私自诛杀纣王一样。
English: A vassal who accepts the order can send troops to fight on his own, and his eclipse will still be bright even though the light is covered, just like the vassal of King Wen who killed King Zhao by himself.

古文：小人顺受命者征其君云杀，厥食五色，至大寒陨霜，若纣臣顺武王而诛纣矣。
现代文：小入顺随接受命令的入去征伐他的君主也叫做篡杀，出现的日食呈五种颜色，到大寒降霜，就像纣王的大臣顺从武王而诛杀纣王一样。
English: Xiao Rong's obedience to the order to enter and conquer his monarch is also called usurpation. The solar eclipse that appears has five colors, and frost falls to the cold, just as the king's ministers obey the king and kill the king.

古文：诸侯更制，兹谓叛，厥食三复三食，食已而风。地动。
现代文：诸侯改变法定的规章就是叛逆，其日食反复出现，日食完了而后起风，就要地震。
English: Princes change the statutory regulations is a rebellion, its eclipse occurs repeatedly, the eclipse is over and then the wind rises, it will be an earthquake.

古文：適让庶，兹谓生欲，厥食日失位，光晻晻，月形见。
现代文：嫡退让权利给庶就会引起贪欲，出现的日食是太阳错位，曰光渐暗，月形现出。
English: The transfer of power from father to son will cause greed. The solar eclipse is a misalignment of the sun, which means that the light is fading and the moon is emerging.

古文：酒亡节兹谓荒，厥蚀乍青乍黑乍赤，明日大雨，发雾而寒。 
现代文：饮酒没有节制就是荒淫，出现的日食就会突然青色、突然黑色、突然赤色，第二天就要大雨，降雾，天气变寒。 
English: Drinking alcohol without restraint is debauchery. When a solar eclipse occurs, it will suddenly turn blue, suddenly black, suddenly red. The next day there will be heavy rain, fog, and the weather will turn cold.

古文：凡食二十占，其形二十有四，改之辄除；不改三年，三年不改六年，六年不改九年。
现代文：日食共有二十种预测，其形状就有二十四种情况，改过马上可以消除；如果不改就出现三年，三年不改就六年，六年不改就九年。
English: There are a total of twenty predictions for solar eclipses, and there are twenty-four conditions for the shape of the eclipse, which can be eliminated immediately after modification; if it is not changed, it will appear for three years, if it is not changed for three years, it will appear for six years, and if it is not changed for six years, it will appear for nine years.

古文：推隐三年之食，贯中央，上下竟而黑，臣弑从中成之形也。
现代文：推算隐公三年的日食，贯穿中央，上下居然变黑，这是臣弑君从中原成功的形状。
English: According to calculations, the solar eclipse in the third year of the hidden emperor will pass through the center, and the top and bottom will actually turn black. This is the shape of the success of Zeng Yaojun from the Central Plains.

古文：后卫州吁弑君而立。
现代文：后来卫国州吁弑君而自己登位。
English: Later, he ascended to the throne in his own right.

古文：桓公三年 七月壬辰朔，日有食之，既 。
现代文：桓公三年 七月壬辰朔日，有日食，日全食 。
English: In the 3rd year of King Kan, the new moon in July, there will be a solar eclipse, a total solar eclipse.

古文：董仲舒、刘向以为，前事已大，后事将至者又大，则既。
现代文：董仲舒、刘向以为从前的事已大，后事将要来到的更大，就要日全食。
English: Dong Zhongshu and Liu Xiang thought that what happened in the past was already big, and what will happen in the future will be even bigger, and it will be a total solar eclipse.

古文：先是，鲁、宋弑君，鲁又成宋乱，易许田，亡事天子之心；楚僭称王。
现代文：这以前鲁国、宋国弑了君主，鲁又造成宋国动乱，更换了许田，没有侍奉天子的心意；楚僭越称王。
English: Prior to this, the kingdoms of Lu and Song overthrew their monarchs, and Lu caused unrest in Song, replacing Xu Tian, and had no intention of serving the Son of Heaven; Chu Xuan Yue proclaimed himself king.

古文：后郑岠王师，射桓王，又二君相篡。
现代文：后来郑抵抗君王的军队，射杀桓王，厉公、昭公二君又相篡夺。
English: Later, Zheng resisted the king's army, shot King Kan, and the two princes, Li Gong and Zhaogong, usurped each other.

古文：刘歆以为六月，赵与晋分。
现代文：刘歆认为六月是趟与晋的分曰。
English: Liu Wei believes that June is the time to go to Jin.

古文：先是，晋曲沃伯再弑晋侯，是岁晋大乱，灭其宗国。
现代文：先是晋的曲沃伯再杀晋侯，这一年晋大乱，曲沃武公减了他们的宗国。
English: First, the prince of Jin, Qu Wo Bo, killed the prince of Jin, and then the prince of Jin, Qu Wo Wu, reduced their motherland.

古文：京房《易传》以为桓三年日食贯中央，上下竟而黄，臣弑而不卒之形也。
现代文：京房《易传》上认为桓公三年日食贯通中央，上下从头到尾变成黄色，这是臣弑君而不成的现象。
English: According to "I Chuan" of the Imperial Household Agency, the eclipse in the third year of King Kan's reign penetrated to the center, and the top and bottom turned yellow from end to end. This was a phenomenon that could not be attributed to the Emperor.

古文：后楚严称王，兼地千里。
现代文：后来楚严称王，兼并土地千里。
English: Later, Chu Yan became king and annexed thousands of miles of land.

古文：十七年 十月朔，日有食之 。
现代文：十七年 十月朔日，又出现日食 。
English: A solar eclipse occurred on the first day of October.

古文：《穀梁传》曰，言朔不言日，食二日也。
现代文：《谷梁传》上说，说是朔日而不说日子，是日食已二日。
English: "The Tale of Gu Liang" says that it is the new moon, not the day, but the eclipse is two days old.

古文：刘向以为是时卫侯朔有罪出奔齐，天子更立卫君。
现代文：刘向以为这时卫侯朔有罪逃到齐，天子改立了卫君。
English: Liu Xiang thought that at this time Wei Hou Shuo was guilty and fled to Qi, and Tianzi re-established Wei Jun.

古文：朔借助五国，举兵伐之而自立，王命遂坏。
现代文：朔藉助五国的兵力，兴兵讨伐卫君而自立为君，周王的命令已失去作用。
English: With the help of troops from five countries, Shuo raised an army to fight and defend the prince and became the prince himself. King Zhou's order has lost its effect.

古文：鲁夫人淫失于齐，卒杀桓公。
现代文：鲁夫人在齐纵欲放荡，最后杀了威公。
English: Lu's wife indulged in debauchery and finally killed Wei Gong.

古文：董仲舒以为，言朔不言日，恶鲁桓且有夫人之祸，将不终日也。
现代文：董仲舒认为说朔日不说日子，是讨厌鲁桓公将有夫人的祸患，将不会寿终正寝。
English: Dong Zhongshu believes that saying that the New Year's Day does not say the day is to hate the calamity that Lu Huan Gong will have a wife, and will not sleep for the rest of his life.

古文：刘歆以为楚、郑分。
现代文：刘歆以为在楚、郑的分曰。
English: Liu Wei thought that he was in the middle of Chu and Zheng.

古文：严公十八年 三月，日有食之 。
现代文：严公十八年 三月，又出现日食 。
English: In March of the 18th year of Yan Gong, another solar eclipse occurred.

古文：《穀梁传》曰，不言日，不言朔，夜食。史记推合朔在夜，明旦日食而出，出而解，是为夜食。
现代文：《谷梁传》上说，不说日子，不说朔日，是在夜裹日食，历史上推算是日月相会在夜里，第二天早晨日食而出，等日出来日食就停止了，造就是夜食。
English: "Guliangzhuan" said that without mentioning the day, without mentioning the new moon, the eclipse is wrapped in the night. Historically, it is estimated that the sun and moon will meet at night, and the eclipse will come out the next morning. When the sun comes out, the eclipse will stop, making it a night eclipse.

古文：刘向以为，夜食者，阴因日明之衰而夺其光，象周天子不明，齐桓将夺其威，专会诸侯而行伯道。
现代文：刘向以为夜食，是阴凭藉曰光的衰微夺了它的光，这象征周大子不英明，齐桓公将夺取它的权威，独自会合诸侯而行霸道。
English: Liu Xiang thought that the night eclipse was caused by the yin seizing its light by virtue of the fading of the sun. This symbolized that Zhou Da Zi was not wise, and that Prince Qi Kuan would seize its authority and gather the princes alone to exercise hegemony.

古文：其后遂九合诸侯，天子使世子会之，此其效也。
现代文：追以后齐桓公便九次会合诸侯，天子派世子去会见他们，造就是效应。
English: After the death of Emperor Qianlong, there were nine meetings of the princes, and the Son of Heaven sent his son to meet with them. This was the effect.

古文：《公羊传》曰食晦。
现代文：《公羊传》上说这是晦曰日食。
English: The Ramayana says that this is the eve of the solar eclipse.

古文：董仲舒以为，宿在东壁，鲁象也。
现代文：董仲舒认为宿星在束壁，鲁的象征。
English: Dong Zhongshu believes that the host star is in the bund wall, a symbol of Lu.

古文：后公子庆父、叔牙果通于夫人以劫公。
现代文：后来公子庆父、叔牙果然串通夫人劫持严公。
English: Later, his father and uncle colluded with his wife to kidnap Yan.

古文：刘歆以为，晦鲁、卫分。
现代文：刘歆以为晦曰是鲁、卫的分曰。
English: Liu Yao thought that the eve of the New Year was the division day of Lu and Wei.

古文：二十五年 六月辛未朔，日有食之 。
现代文：二十五年 六月辛未朔日，又出现日食 。
English: Twenty-five years ago, a solar eclipse occurred on the last day of June.

古文：董仲舒以为，宿在毕，主边兵夷狄象也。
现代文：董仲舒认为宿星在毕，是边境的兵有夷狄的象征。
English: Dong Zhongshu believes that the host star is in Bi, which is a symbol of the soldiers on the border.

古文：后狄灭邢、卫。
现代文：后来狄灭邢、卫。
English: Later, Di Xiaojuan and Wei Zong.

古文：刘歆以为，五月二日鲁、赵分。
现代文：刘歆以为五月二日是鲁、趟的分曰。
English: Liu Yao thought that May 2nd was the separation day of Lu and Zhao.

古文：二十六年 十二月癸亥朔，日有食之 。
现代文：二十六年 十二月癸亥朔日，又出现日食 。
English: In December of the twenty-sixth year, on the day of the new year, another solar eclipse occurred.

古文：董仲舒以为，宿在心，心为明堂，文武之道废，中国不绝若线之象也。
现代文：董仲舒以为宿星在心，心为明堂星，文王、武王的道统衰败，中国不绝就像丝线一样。
English: Dong Zhongshu thought that the lodestar is in the heart, the heart is the bright star, the moral system of King Wen and King Wu is decaying, and China is like a silk thread.

古文：刘向以为，时戎侵曹，鲁夫人淫于庆父、叔牙，将以弑君，故比年再蚀以见戒。
现代文：刘向认为这时戎正在侵犯曹，鲁夫人正与庆父、叔牙乱，君主将被弑，所以连年日食以为警戒。
English: Liu Xiang thought that at this time, Rong was encroaching on Cao, Lady Lu was in conflict with Qingfu and Uncle Fang, and the monarch would be captured, so he thought of the annual solar eclipse as a warning.

古文：刘歆以为，十月二日楚、郑分。
现代文：刘歆以为十月二日是楚、郑的分曰。
English: Liu Yao thought that October 2nd was the division day of Chu and Zheng.

古文：三十年 九月庚午朔，日有食之 。
现代文：三十年 九月庚午朔日，又有食 。
English: For thirty years, there has been food on the first day of the new moon in September.

古文：董仲舒、刘向以为后鲁二君弑，夫人诛，两弟死，狄灭邢，徐取舒，晋杀世子，楚灭弦。
现代文：董仲舒、刘向以为后来鲁国二君被弑，夫人被诛，两个弟弟也死亡，狄灭亡了邢，徐攻取了舒，晋侯杀了太子申生，楚人灭亡了弦。
English: Dong Zhongshu and Liu Xiang thought that later, the second prince of Lu was executed, his wife was executed, his two brothers also died, Di was killed, Xu captured Shu, Jinhou killed Prince Shen Sheng, and Chu people were killed.

古文：刘歆以为，八月秦、周分。
现代文：刘歆以为八月是秦、周的分曰。
English: Liu Yao thought that August was the division day of Qin and Zhou.

古文：僖公五年 九月戊申朔，日有食之 。
现代文：僖公五年 九月戊申朔日，又出现日食 。
English: A solar eclipse occurred again on the New Year's Day in September of the 5th year of King Min.

古文：董仲舒、刘向以为，先是齐桓行伯，江、黄自至，南服强楚。
现代文：董仲舒、刘向以为这之前齐桓公施行霸道，江、黄二国自行臣服，向南征服了强大的楚国。
English: Dong Zhongshu and Liu Xiang thought that before this, Qi Huan Gong had exercised hegemony, and Jiang and Huang had submitted themselves, and went south to conquer the powerful state of Chu.

古文：其后不内自正，而外执陈大夫，则陈、楚不附，郑伯逃盟，诸侯将不从桓政，故天见戒。
现代文：这以后国内不自己端正行为，而对外则扣押了陈国大夫，这样陈、楚就不归顺，郑伯逃脱结盟，诸侯将不听从齐桓公的政令，所以上天现出警戒。
English: After this, they did not behave properly at home, but detained Dr. Chen Guotong for the outside world. As a result, Chen and Chu did not surrender, Zheng Bo escaped and formed an alliance, and the princes did not obey the order of Prince Qi Huan. Therefore, there was a warning from heaven.

古文：其后晋灭虢，楚围许，诸侯伐郑，晋弑二君，狄灭温，楚伐黄，桓不能救。
现代文：这以后晋灭亡了虢，楚包围了许，诸侯讨伐郑，晋里克弑了奚齐、卓子二君，狄灭了周的温地，楚讨伐黄，齐桓公不能救援。
English: After this, Jin perished, Chu encircled Xu, the princes fought against Zheng, Jin Liqun defeated  Qi and Zhuo Zi Erjun, Di annihilated Zhou's Warm Land, Chu fought against Huang, and Qi Kuan Gong could not rescue.

古文：刘歆以为，七月秦、晋分。
现代文：刘歆以为七月是秦、晋的分曰。
English: Liu Bei thought that July was the division of the Qin and Jin dynasties.

古文：十二年 三月庚午朔，日有食之 。
现代文：十二年 三月庚午，又出现日食 。
English: In the late afternoon of March 12th, another solar eclipse occurred.

古文：董仲舒、刘向以为，是时楚灭黄，狄侵卫、郑，莒灭巳。
现代文：董仲舒、刘向认为这时楚灭掉黄，狄入侵犯卫、郑，莒灭掉了杞。
English: Dong Zhongshu and Liu Xiang believed that at this time, Chu eliminated Huang, Di Ying encroached on Wei and Zheng, and Zhai eliminated Zhou.

古文：刘歆以为，三月齐、卫分。
现代文：刘歆以为三月是齐、卫的分曰。
English: Liu Yao thought that March was the month of Qi and Wei.

古文：十五年 五月，日有食之 。
现代文：十五年 五月，又出现日食 。
English: In May of the fifteenth year, another solar eclipse occurred.

古文：刘向以为象晋文公将行伯道，后遂伐卫，执曹伯，败楚城濮，再会诸侯，召天王而朝之，此其效也。
现代文：刘向以为象征晋文公将施行霸道，后来果然攻打卫，扣留曹伯，打败楚师于城濮，再会盟诸侯，召来天王进行朝见，这就是验证。
English: Liu Xiang thought that the symbol of Jinwen Gong would be a domineering way, and later successfully attacked the guards, detained Cao Bo, defeated Chu Shi at the city gate, reunited the princes, and summoned the king for a court meeting. This is the verification.

古文：日食者臣之恶也，夜食者掩其罪也，以为上亡明王，桓、文能行伯道，攘夷狄，安中国，虽不正犹可，盖《春秋》实与而文不与之义也。
现代文：日食是臣的罪过，夜间日食是掩盖他的罪过，认为上无英明的君主，齐桓、晋文能行霸道，退却夷狄，安定中国，虽不正也还可以，这大概就是《春秋》上实际赞同而文字上不表达的意思。
English: A solar eclipse is a vassal's sin, and a solar eclipse at night is a cover-up of his sin. It is believed that there is no wise monarch, and that Emperor Qian and Emperor Jinwen can be domineering, retreating barbarians, and stabilizing China. Although it is not right, it is still possible. This is probably the meaning that "Spring and Autumn" actually agrees with and does not express in writing.

古文：董仲舒以为后秦获晋侯，齐灭项，楚败徐于娄林。
现代文：董仲舒认为后来秦国俘获晋侯，齐国灭掉项国，楚国在娄林打败了徐国。
English: Dong Zhongshu believed that later Qin captured Jin, Qi eliminated Xiang, and Chu defeated Xu in Yulin.

古文：刘歆以为，二月朔齐、越分。
现代文：刘歆以为二月朔日是齐、越的分日。
English: Liu Wei thought that the first day of February was the day of the division of Qi and Yue.

古文：文公元年 二月癸亥，日有食之 。
现代文：文公元年 二月癸亥，又有日食 。
English: A.D. In February, there was a snowstorm and a solar eclipse.

古文：董仲舒、刘向以为，先是大夫始执国政，公子遂如京师，后楚世子商臣杀父，齐公子商人弑君。皆自立，宋子哀出奔，晋灭江，楚灭六，大夫公孙敖、叔彭生并专会盟。
现代文：董仲舒、刘向以为这以前大夫开始执掌国家政权，公子遂到了京师，后来楚世子商臣杀父，齐公子商人弑君，都自立为王，宋子哀逃跑，晋人灭掉了江，楚人减掉了六国，大夫公孙敖、叔彭生一同专揽会盟。
English: Dong Zhongshu and Liu Xiang thought that before this, the doctor began to hold state power, and the prince finally came to Beijing. Later, the merchant and minister Chu Shi Zi killed his father, and the merchant and statesman Qi Shi Zi killed his father, and both of them became kings. Song Zi Ai ran away, the Jin people eliminated the river, the Chu people reduced the six countries, and the doctor Gong Sun Quan and the uncle Peng Sheng jointly organized the alliance.

古文：刘歆以为，正月朔燕、越分。
现代文：刘歆以为正月朔日是燕、越的分日。
English: Liu Wei thought that the new moon day of the first month was the day of the division of Yan and Yue.

古文：十五年 六月辛丑朔，日有食之 。
现代文：十五年 六月辛丑朔日，又出现日食 。
English: In the fifteenth year of the sixth month, on the first day of the new year, there was another solar eclipse.

古文：董仲舒、刘向以为，后宋、齐、莒、晋郑八年之间五君杀死。楚灭舒蓼。
现代文：董仲舒、刘向以为后来宋、齐、莒、晋、郑八年之间有五位君主被杀死，楚人灭掉了舒蓼。
English: Dong Zhongshu and Liu Xiang believed that five emperors were killed between Song, Qi, Zhou, Jin and Zheng eight years later, and the Chu people eliminated Shu.

古文：刘歆以为，四月二日鲁、卫分。
现代文：刘歆以为四月二日是鲁、卫的分曰。
English: Liu Wei thought that April 2nd was the day of the division of Lu and Wei.

古文：宣公八年 七月甲子，日有食之，既 。
现代文：宣公八年 七月甲子，又出现日食，日全食 。
English: In July of the eighth year of Xuan Gong, there was another solar eclipse, a total solar eclipse.

古文：董仲舒、刘向以为，先是楚商臣弑父而立，至于严王遂强。
现代文：董仲舒、刘向以为造之前楚商臣杀掉父亲而自立为王，到严王时就强大起来。
English: Dong Zhongshu and Liu Xiang thought that Chu Shangchen killed his father before he was born and became king, and when he became king, he became strong.

古文：诸夏大国唯有齐、晋，齐、晋新有篡弑之祸，内皆未安，故楚乘弱横行，八年之间六侵伐而一灭国，伐陆浑戎，观兵周室；后又入郑，郑伯肉袒谢罪；北败晋师于邲，流血色水；围宋九月，析骸而炊之。
现代文：诸华夏大国衹有齐、晋，齐、晋新近有篡位杀君的祸患，国内还没有安定，所以楚国乘着他们的衰弱横行霸道，它八年之间六次侵略别国还灭亡了一个国家；讨伐陆浑戎，在周室检阅部队；后来又进入郑国，郑伯肉袒谢罪；北面在恤打败了晋军，血流成河；围困宋九个月，宋人劈骸骨作为燃料。
English: The great Chinese states of Qi, Jin, Qi and Jin Xin have recently been plagued by the usurpation of the throne and the killing of the prince. The country is not yet stable, so Chu took advantage of their weakness to run amok. It invaded other countries six times in eight years and destroyed one country; it fought over the land of Hunrong and inspected the troops in the Zhou Room; later it entered Zheng Province, and Zheng Bo confessed his sins; the north side defeated the Jin army in Hunrong, and blood flowed into rivers; it besieged Song for nine months, and the Song people split the bones as fuel.

古文：刘歆以为，十月二日楚、郑分。
现代文：刘歆以为十月二日是楚、郑的分曰。
English: Liu Yao thought that October 2nd was the division day of Chu and Zheng.

古文：十年 四月丙辰，日有食之 。
现代文：十年 四月丙辰，又出现日食 。
English: Ten years later, on April Fool's Day, another solar eclipse occurred.

古文：董仲舒、刘向以为，后陈夏征舒弑其君，楚灭萧，晋灭二国，王札子杀召伯、毛伯。
现代文：董仲舒、刘向以为后来陈夏征舒杀了他的君主，楚人灭掉了萧国，晋人灭掉了两个国家，王札子杀了召伯、毛伯。
English: Dong Zhongshu and Liu Xiang thought that later Chen Xiazhengshu killed his monarch, the Chu people eliminated Xiao Guo, the Jin people eliminated two countries, and Wang Fazi killed Zhao Bo and Mao Bo.

古文：刘歆以为，二月鲁、卫分。
现代文：刘歆以为二月是鲁、卫的分曰。
English: Liu Wei believes that February is the month of Lu and Wei.

古文：十七年 六月癸卯，日有食之 。
现代文：十七年 六月癸卯，又出现日食 。
English: In June of 177, another solar eclipse occurred.

古文：董仲舒、刘向以为后邾支解鄫子，晋败王师于贸戎，败齐于鞍。
现代文：董仲舒、刘向以为后来邾人肢解了部子，晋在贸戎打败了周王的军队，在鞍打败了齐国的军队。
English: Dong Zhongshu and Liu Xiang later thought that Yan dismembered his subordinates, Jin defeated the army of King Zhou in Moyun, and defeated the army of Qi in Kama.

古文：刘歆以为，三月晦朓鲁、卫分。
现代文：刘歆以为三月的晦曰是鲁、卫的分日。
English: Liu Bei thought that the last day of March was the day of the division of Lu and Wei.

古文：成公十六年 六月丙寅朔，日有食之 。
现代文：成公十六年 六月丙寅朔，有日食 。
English: In the sixteenth year of his reign, in June, there was a solar eclipse.

古文：董仲舒、刘向以为，后晋败楚、郑于鄢陵，执鲁侯。
现代文：董仲舒、刘向以为后来晋打败了楚、在鄢陵打败了郑，控制了鲁侯。
English: Dong Zhongshu and Liu Xiang thought that later Jin defeated Chu, defeated Zheng in Fuling, and controlled Lu Hou.

古文：刘歆以为，四月二日鲁、卫分。
现代文：刘歆以为四月二日是鲁、卫的分曰。
English: Liu Wei thought that April 2nd was the day of the division of Lu and Wei.

古文：十七年 十二月丁巳朔，日有食之 。
现代文：十七年 十二月丁巳朔日，又出现日食 。
English: Seventeen years ago, in December, just after the new year, there was another solar eclipse.

古文：董仲舒、刘向以为，后楚灭舒庸，晋弑其君，宋鱼石因楚夺君邑，莒灭鄫，齐灭莱，郑伯弑死。
现代文：董仲舒、刘向以为后来楚人灭掉舒庸，晋杀了他们的君主厉公，宋国的大夫鱼石依靠楚国夺取了宋国的彭城，莒人灭掉了部，齐人减掉了莱，郑伯被杀死。
English: Dong Zhongshu and Liu Xiang thought that the Chu people later eliminated Shu Yong and Jin killed their monarch Li Gong. The Song Dynasty's doctor Yu Shi relied on Chu to seize the Song Dynasty's Pengcheng. The Qin people eliminated Bu, the Qi people eliminated Lai, and Zheng Bo was killed.

古文：刘歆以为九月周、楚分。
现代文：刘歆以为九月是周、楚的分日。
English: Liu Yao thought that September was the division day of Zhou and Chu.

古文：襄公十四年 二月乙未朔，日有食之 。
现代文：襄公十四年 二月乙未朔日，又出现日食 。
English: In February of the 14th year of King Xiang, a solar eclipse occurred.

古文：董仲舒、刘向以为，后卫大夫孙、甯共逐献公，立孙剽。
现代文：董仲舒、刘向以为后来卫大夫孙林、宁殖共同赶走了献公，立穆公的孙子剽。
English: Later, Dong Zhongshu and Liu Xiang thought that the guards Sun Lin and Ning Xuan jointly drove away the offering, and the grandson of Mu Gong was born.

古文：刘歆以为，前年十二月二日宋、燕分。
现代文：刘歆以为前年十二月二日是宋、燕的分曰。
English: Liu Yao thought that December 2 of the previous year was the separation day of Song and Yan.

古文：十五年 八月丁巳朔，日有食之 。
现代文：十五年 八月丁巳朔日，又出现日食 。
English: Fifteen years ago, in August, there was a solar eclipse.

古文：董仲舒、刘向以为，先是晋为鸡泽之会，诸侯盟，又大夫盟，后为溴梁之会，诸侯在而大夫独相与盟，君若缀斿，不得举手。
现代文：董仲舒、刘向以为这之前晋国举办鸡泽的会盟，诸侯结盟，又有大夫结盟，后又举办溴梁的会盟，诸侯在而大夫单独互相结盟，君王大权旁落，连手都不能举起。
English: Dong Zhongshu and Liu Xiang thought that before this, Jin had held the alliance of Jizhe, the alliance of princes, and the alliance of doctors, and later held the alliance of Brongliang, the princes and doctors had separately allied with each other, the king's great power fell by the wayside, and they could not even raise their hands.

古文：刘歆以为，五月二日鲁、赵分。
现代文：刘歆以为五月二日是鲁、赵的分曰。
English: Liu Yao thought that May 2nd was the separation day of Lu and Zhao.

古文：二十年 十月丙辰朔，日有食之 。
现代文：二十年 十月丙辰朔日，又出现日食 。
English: Twenty years ago, a solar eclipse occurred on the first day of the new moon in October.

古文：董仲舒以为，陈庆虎、庆寅蔽君之明，邾庶其有叛心，后庶其以漆、闾丘来奔，陈杀二庆。
现代文：董仲舒以为陈国的庆虎、庆寅蒙蔽君主使君主不明，邾人庶其有反叛之心，后来庶其从漆、闾丘逃奔，陈杀二庆。
English: Dong Zhongshu thought that Chen Guo's Qinghu and Qingyin had blinded the monarch to make the monarch unknown, and that he had a rebellious heart. Later, he fled from Urushi and Mengqiu, and Chen killed Erqing.

古文：刘歆以为，八月秦、周分。
现代文：刘歆以为八月是秦、周的分日。
English: Liu Yao thought that August was the division day of Qin and Zhou.

古文：二十一年 九月庚戌朔，日有食之 。
现代文：二十一年 九月庚戌朔日，又出现日食 。
English: A solar eclipse occurred on the 21st day of the 9th month.

古文：董仲舒以为晋栾盈将犯君，后入于曲沃。
现代文：董仲舒以为晋乐盈将要侵犯君主，后来进入曲沃。
English: Dong Zhongshu thought that Jin Le Ying was going to encroach on the monarch, and later entered Quwo.

古文：刘歆以为，七月秦、晋分。 十月庚辰朔，日有食之 。
现代文：刘歆以为七月是秦、晋的分。 十月庚辰朔日，又有日食 。
English: Liu Yao thought that July was the division of Qin and Jin, and October was the new moon day, and there was a solar eclipse.

古文：董仲舒以为，宿在轸、角，楚大国象也。
现代文：董仲舒以为宿星在轸星、角星，楚是大国的象征。
English: Dong Zhongshu believed that the Pleiades, Orion, and Chu were the symbols of great powers.

古文：后楚屈氏谮杀公子追舒，齐庆封胁君乱国。
现代文：后来楚国屈氏越权杀了公子追舒，齐国庆封威胁君主叛乱国家。
English: Later, the Qu clan of Chu overstepped its authority and killed the prince Tsuishu, and the Qing dynasty of Qi threatened the monarch of the rebellious country.

古文：刘歆以为，八月秦、周分。
现代文：刘歆以为八月是秦、周的分日。
English: Liu Yao thought that August was the division day of Qin and Zhou.

古文：二十三年 二月癸酉朔，日有食之 。
现代文：二十三年 二月癸酉朔日，又出现日食 。
English: In February 23rd, a solar eclipse occurred.

古文：董仲舒以为，后卫侯入陈仪，甯喜弑其君剽。
现代文：董仲舒以为后来卫侯衍进入卫国的陈仪，宁喜杀了他的君主剽。
English: Dong Zhongshu thought that Wei Houyan would later enter Chen Yi, the protector of the country, and he would rather kill his monarch Zhou.

古文：刘歆以为，前年十二月二日宋、燕分。
现代文：刘歆以为前年十二月二日是宋、燕的分曰。
English: Liu Yao thought that December 2 of the previous year was the separation day of Song and Yan.

古文：二十四年 七月甲子朔，日有食之，既 。
现代文：二十四年 七月甲子朔日，又出现日食，日全食 。
English: In July, the solar eclipse, a total solar eclipse, occurred.

古文：刘歆以为，五月鲁、赵分。 八月癸巳朔，日有食之 。
现代文：刘歆以为五月是鲁、趟的分曰。 八月癸巳朔，有日食 。
English: Liu Yao thought that May was the month of Lu and Wa, and August was the month of Shu, and there was a solar eclipse.

古文：董仲舒以为，比食又既，象阳将艳，夷狄主上国之象也。后六君弑，楚子果从诸侯伐郑，灭舒鸠，鲁往朝之，卒主中国，伐吴讨庆封。
现代文：董仲舒以为多次日食又都是日全食，象征阳气将要断绝，夷狄有主持上国的象征，后来六位君主被杀，楚子果然跟从诸侯攻打郑，灭掉了舒鸠，鲁襄王去朝见，终于掌管了中国，攻打吴讨伐庆封。
English: Dong Zhongshu thought that many solar eclipses were total solar eclipses, symbolizing that the yang energy would be cut off, and the yidis had a symbol of presiding over the country. Later, six monarchs were killed. Chu Zi indeed followed the lords to attack Zheng and eliminated Shu Yao. Lu Xiang Wang went to the court and finally took control of China and attacked Wu to fight Qingfeng.

古文：刘歆以为，六月晋、赵分。
现代文：刘歆以为六月是晋、赵的分月。
English: Liu Yao thought that June was a parting month for Jin and Zhao.

古文：二十七年 十二月乙亥朔，日有食之 。
现代文：二十七年 十二月乙亥朔日，又有日食 。
English: In December of the 27th year, on the day of the Chinese New Year, there was another solar eclipse.

古文：董仲舒以为，礼义将大灭绝之象也。
现代文：董仲舒以为这是礼义将要大灭绝的象征。
English: Dong Zhongshu thought that this was a symbol of the mass extinction of etiquette.

古文：时，吴子好勇，使刑人守门；蔡侯通于世子之妻；莒不早立嗣。
现代文：当时吴子好勇，使受刑的人守门；蔡侯与儿妻私通；莒不早日立嗣。
English: At that time, Wu Zi was brave and made the prisoners guard the gate; Cai Hou had sexual intercourse with his son's wife; Zou soon became the heir.

古文：后阍戕吴子，蔡世子般弑其父，莒人亦弑君而庶子争。
现代文：后来守门人杀了吴子，蔡世子般杀了他的父亲，莒人亦杀了他们的君千而庶子争权。
English: Later, the gatekeeper killed Wu Zi, Cai Shizi killed his father, and the eunuchs also killed their kings, and the illegitimate children fought for power.

古文：刘向以为，自二十年至此岁，八年间日食七作，祸乱将重起，故天仍见戒也。
现代文：刘向认为自二十年至今，八年间日食七次，祸乱将要重起，所以上天多次警戒。
English: Liu Xiang believes that since 20 years ago, there have been seven solar eclipses in eight years, and the calamity will recur, so he has repeatedly warned the heavens.

古文：后齐崔杼弑君，宋杀世子，北燕伯出奔，郑大夫自外入而篡位，指略如董仲舒。
现代文：后来齐崔杼弑君，宋杀了世子，北燕伯逃跑，郑大夫从外回来篡位，发生的这一切正如董仲舒所言。
English: Later, Qi Cui Rongjun, Song killed his son, Bei Yanbo fled, Dr. Zheng came back from abroad to usurp the throne, all of this happened just as Dong Zhongshu said.

古文：刘歆以为，九月周、楚分。
现代文：刘歆以为九月是周、楚的分月。
English: Liu Yao thought that September was the division month of Zhou and Chu.

古文：昭公七年 四月甲辰朔，日有食之 。
现代文：昭公七年 四月甲辰朔日，又出现日食 。
English: In the seventh year of King Zhaogong, a solar eclipse occurred on the first day of the fourth month.

古文：董仲舒、刘向以为，先是楚灵王弑君而立，会诸侯，执徐子，灭赖，后陈公子招杀世子，楚因而灭之，又灭蔡，后灵王亦弑死。
现代文：董仲舒、刘向以为这之前楚灵王杀君而自立为王，会盟诸侯，拘捕了徐子，减掉了赖，后来陈公子招杀掉太子，楚乘机灭掉了陈，又灭掉了蔡，后来楚灵王也被杀死。
English: Dong Zhongshu and Liu Xiang thought that before this, King Chuling had killed the prince and became the king independently. They allied with the princes, arrested Xu Zi, reduced Lai, and later recruited Chen Gongzi to kill the prince. Chu took the opportunity to eliminate Chen and eliminate Cai. Later, King Chuling was also killed.

古文：刘歆以为，二月鲁、卫分。
现代文：刘歆认为二月是鲁、卫的分月。
English: Liu Wei believes that February is the month of Lu and Wei.

古文：传曰晋侯问于士文伯曰： 谁将当日食？ 
现代文：传上说晋侯问于士文伯说： 谁将遇上日食? 
English: According to legend, Jin Hou asked Yu Shwenbo: "Who will encounter the solar eclipse?"

古文：对曰： 鲁、卫恶之，卫大鲁小。 
现代文：回答说： 鲁、卫讨厌它，卫是大国鲁是小国。 
English: He replied: Lu and Wei hate it. Wei is a big country, and Lu is a small country.

古文：公曰： 何故？ 
现代文：晋侯说： 为什么? 
English: Kan said, "Why is that?

古文：对曰： 去卫地，如鲁地，于是有灾，其卫君乎？
现代文：回答说： 离开卫地到鲁地，于是有灾，大概是卫国君主吧?
English: He replied, "Leaving the Imperial Capital to go to Ludi, there was a disaster. Was it the Emperor of the Imperial Capital?

古文：鲁将上卿。 
现代文：鲁将要为上卿。 
English: Lu is going to be Shangnian.

古文：是岁，八月卫襄公卒，十一月鲁季孙宿卒。
现代文：这一年八月卫襄公卒，十一月鲁季孙宿卒。
English: In August of this year, Wei Xiang officially graduated, and in November, Lujisun graduated.

古文：晋侯谓士文伯曰： 吾所问日食从矣，可常乎？ 
现代文：晋侯告诉士文伯说： 我所问的日食的事灵验了，可以经常这样占卜吗? 
English: Jinhau told Shwenbo: "The eclipse I asked about has come to pass. Can you always use this kind of divination?

古文：对曰： 不可。
现代文：回答说： 不可。
English: Fan Ye replied, "It's not appropriate."

古文：六物不同，民心不壹，事序不类，官职不则，同始异终，胡可常也？
现代文：六物不同，民心不一样，事物的次序没有同一，官职没准则，起点相同结果不同，怎么能经常这样占卜呢?
English: Six things are different, people's hearts are different, the order of things is not the same, there is no official standard, the starting point is the same, the result is different, how can you always do this kind of divination?

古文：《诗》曰： 或宴宴居息，或尽悴事国。 其异终也如是。 公曰： 何谓六物？ 
现代文：《诗经》上说： 有的人，悠闲安居纵情志；有的人，精疲力竭勤王事，他们最后结果就是这样不同。 晋侯说： 六物是什么? 
English: "The Book of Songs" says: Some people live a leisurely life and indulge in passion; some people are exhausted and diligent in royal affairs, and their final results are so different. Jin Hou said: What are the six things?

古文：对曰： 岁、时、日、月、星、辰是谓。 
现代文：回答说： 岁、时、曰、月、星、辰叫做六物。 
English: He answered, "Year, hour, day, month, star, and hour are called the six things.

古文：公曰： 何谓辰？ 
现代文：晋侯说： 什么叫辰? 
English: Jin Hou said: What is "Chen"?

古文：对曰： 日月之会是谓。 
现代文：回答说： 曰、月相会就叫辰。 
English: He replied, "It is the time when the moon is full.

古文：公曰： 《诗》所谓 此日而食，于何不臧 ，何也？ 
现代文：晋侯说： 《诗经》上所说的 这日食，更不好，奈何坏事突然降!
English: Jin Hou said, "This solar eclipse mentioned in the "Book of Songs" is even worse, but what a sudden drop in bad things!

古文：对曰： 不善政之谓也。
现代文：，是为什么呢? 回答说： 这是国家的统治管理工作不好。
English: "Why?" he replied, "It's because the country's governance is not working well."

古文：国无政，不用善，则自取適于日月之灾。
现代文：国家管理不好，又不友善，这是自取日月的变异而遭受的灾祸。
English: The country is badly managed and unfriendly. This is a calamity brought about by the sun and the moon.

古文：故政不可不慎也，务三而已：一曰择人，二曰因民，三曰从时。 
现代文：所以统治国家大事不可不谨慎，衹不过致力三件事而已：一是选择用人，二是依靠人民，三是顺从时令。 
English: Therefore, it is necessary to be prudent in governing the affairs of the country, but we must strive to do three things: one is to choose to employ people, the second is to rely on the people, and the third is to obey the times.

古文：此推日食之占循变复之要也。
现代文：造就是推算日食的占卜循环变复的最基本的要点。
English: This is the most basic point of calculating the cycle of eclipse divination.

古文：《易》曰： 县象著明，莫大于日月。 
现代文：《易经》上说： 显示明显的现象，没有比日月更大的了。 
English: In the I Ching, it says, "There is no phenomenon more significant than the sun and the moon.

古文：是故圣人重之，载于三经。
现代文：因此圣人很重视，记载在三经上。
English: Therefore, the saint attaches great importance to it, and it is recorded in the Three Sutras.

古文：于《易》在 丰 之 震 曰： 丰其沛，日中见昧，折其右肱，亡咎。 
现代文：在《易》中则是《丰卦》的《震卦》上说： 幡幔盛大，曰中见到昏暗，折断右肱的臣，就可以免去灾祸。 
English: In "Yi," it is said in "Zhen Gua" of "Feng Gua" that: "If the banner is grand, and it is dark in the middle of the day, if the vassal breaks his right arm, he will be spared the disaster."

古文：于《诗·十月之交》，则著卿士、司徒，下至趣马、师氏，咸非其材。
现代文：在《诗》的《十月之交》上，就着明卿士、司徒，下至趣马、师氏，都不是有才的人。
English: In the "October Friendship" of the "Poem," it is clear that the noblemen, scholars, and scholars, down to the fun horses and masters, are not talented people.

古文：同于右肱之所折，协于三务之所择，明小人乘君子，阴侵阳之原也。
现代文：与折断右肱相同，合于三件事所选择的，显明了小人压服君子，阴侵犯阳的根源。
English: In the same way as the breaking of the right shinbone, the choice of three things reveals the root cause of the villain crushing the gentleman and the yin encroaching on the yang.

古文：十五年 六月丁巳朔，日有食之 刘歆以为，三月鲁、卫分。
现代文：十五年 六月丁巳朔日，又出现日食 。刘歆以为三月是鲁、卫的分月。
English: In the fifteenth year, June was a new moon, and there was another solar eclipse. Liu Yao thought that March was the moon of Lu and Wei.

古文：十七年 六月甲戌朔，日有食之 。
现代文：十七年 六月甲戌朔日，又出现日食 。
English: Seventeen years ago, on the first day of the sixth month of the lunar calendar, there was another solar eclipse.

古文：董仲舒以为时宿在毕，晋国象也。
现代文：董仲舒以为这时宿星在毕，是晋国的象征。
English: At this time, Dong Zhongshu thought that the star was at the end of its journey and was a symbol of Jin.

古文：晋厉公诛四大夫，失众心，以弑死。
现代文：晋厉公诛杀四位大夫，失去众人之心，因此被杀死。
English: Jin Liguang killed four doctors and lost everyone's hearts, so he was killed.

古文：后莫敢复责大夫，六卿遂相与比周，专晋国，君还事之。
现代文：以后再没有敢责备大夫的，六卿于是结伙营私，专擅晋国政事，君主返还后事奉他们。
English: Since then, no one dared to reproach the doctor, so the six nobles banded together to do their own thing. They were exclusively in charge of state affairs, and the monarch served them after his return.

古文：日比再食，其事在春秋后，故不载于经。
现代文：食一再发生，造事在春秋以后，所以不记载在经上。
English: Feeding occurs repeatedly, and things happen after spring and autumn, so they are not recorded in the sutra.

古文：刘歆以为鲁、赵分。
现代文：刘歆以为是鲁、趟的分日。
English: Liu Yao thought it was Lu, the day of the trip.

古文：《左氏传》平子曰： 唯正月朔，慝未作，日有食之，于是乎天子不举，伐鼓于社，诸侯用币于社，伐鼓于朝，礼也。
现代文：《左氏传》上的季平子说： 衹有在正月朔日，阴气不发作，有日食，于是乎天子不举盛馔，击鼓于社庙，诸侯用缯帛祭土神，在朝廷击鼓，这是表示敬意。
English: Ji Ping Zi in "The Biography of Zuo" said: "There was a new moon day in the first month of the year, when the yin and yang did not occur, and there was a solar eclipse. Therefore, it was a sign of respect that the heavenly son did not hold a grand gong and play the drum in the shrine and temple, and the princes used the gong to sacrifice the earth god and play the drum in the imperial court.

古文：其余则否。 
现代文：其余则不造样。 
English: The rest do not make samples.

古文：太史曰： 在此月也。日过分而未至，三辰有灾，百官降物，君不举，避移时，乐奏鼓，祝用币，史用辞，啬夫驰，庶人走，此月朔之谓也。
现代文：太史说： 在这个月，是过了春分还未到夏至，日、月、星三辰有灾，百官素服，君主不举盛馔，躲避一段时间，奏乐击鼓，告神祈福用缯帛，史官用言辞，啬夫疾驰，庶人逃走，这是这个月因朔食的关系。
English: Taishi said: In this month, it is after the vernal equinox but before the summer solstice, the sun, the moon and the stars are plagued with calamities, all officials are plainclothes, the monarch does not hold a grand feast, avoids for a period of time, plays drums, prays to God with a gong, the historian uses words, the miser gallops, and the common man flees. This is the relationship between this month and the new moon.

古文：当夏四月，是谓孟夏。 
现代文：正当夏的四月，就是夏季第一个月。 
English: April, when it is summer, is the first month of summer.

古文：说曰：正月谓周六月，夏四月，正阳纯乾之月也。
现代文：解说是： 正月是周的六月，夏的四月，是正阳纯干的月份。
English: The commentary is: the first month is the June of the week, the April of the summer, is the month of the pure dry sun.

古文：慝谓阴爻也，冬至阳爻起初，故曰复。
现代文：阴气就是阴爻，冬至时阳爻是起初，所以说是恢复。
English: Yin qi is yang qi, winter solstice is the beginning of yang qi, so it is said to be restored.

古文：至建巳之月为纯乾，亡阴爻，而阴侵阳，为灾重，故伐鼓用币，责阴之礼。
现代文：到建巳之月是纯干，无阴爻，而阴侵犯阳，有重灾，所以击鼓作乐用缯帛，这是求阴之礼。
English: The moon at the time of construction is pure and dry, with no yin and yang, but yin encroaches on yang, and there is a serious disaster, so the drums are used for music. This is a prayer for yin.

古文：降物，素服也。
现代文：降物，即素服。
English: Droppings, i.e. plain clothes.

古文：不举，去乐也。
现代文：不举盛撰，免去作乐。
English: If you don't write well, you don't make music.

古文：避移时，避正堂，须时移灾复也。
现代文：躲避一段时间，避开正堂，是要等待时移灾复。
English: Avoiding for a period of time, avoiding the main hall, is to wait for the disaster to pass.

古文：啬夫，掌币吏。
现代文：啬夫，是掌钱财的官吏。
English: A miser is a government official who handles money.

古文：庶人，其徒役也。
现代文：庶人，就是服劳役的人。
English: A commoner is a person who performs labor service.

古文：刘歆以为，六月二日鲁、赵分。
现代文：刘歆以为六月二日是鲁、赵的分。
English: Liu Yao thought that June 2 was the time for Lu and Zhao to split up.

古文：二十一年 七月壬午朔，日有食之 。
现代文：二十一年 七月壬午朔日，又出现日食 。
English: The 21st day of the 7th month, there was another solar eclipse.

古文：董仲舒以为周景王老，刘子、单子专权，蔡侯朱骄，君臣不说之象也。
现代文：董倥赶以为且基王年老，玺匠、里王独揽大权，墓堡塞骄纵，这是君臣不愉快的象征。
English: It is a symbol of the monarch's displeasure that the king is old, the cupbearer and the second-in-line to the throne monopolize power, and the tombs are full of arrogance.

古文：后蔡侯朱果出奔，刘子、单子立王猛。
现代文：后来蔡侯朱果然逃走，刘子、单子立猛为王。
English: Later, Cai Hou Zhu escaped, and Liu Zi and Shan Zi became kings.

古文：刘歆以为，五月二日鲁、赵分。
现代文：刘歆以为五月二日是鲁、赵的分曰。
English: Liu Yao thought that May 2nd was the separation day of Lu and Zhao.

古文：二十二年 十二月癸酉朔，日有食之 。
现代文：二十二年 十二月癸酉朔日，又出现日食 。
English: On December 22nd, a solar eclipse occurred.

古文：董仲舒以为，宿在心，天子之象也。
现代文：董住厘以为宿星在心，这是天子的象征。
English: Dong Sumili thought that the star was in his heart, which was a symbol of the Son of Heaven.

古文：后尹氏立王子朝，天王居于狄泉。
现代文：后来尹氐立王子塑为王，天王避其难居于狄泉。
English: Later, the prince was made king by Yin Zhi, and it was difficult for the heavenly king to avoid living in Diquan.

古文：刘歆以为，十月楚、郑分。
现代文：刘歆以为十月是楚、郑的分月。
English: Liu Yao thought that October was the month of Chu and Zheng.

古文：二十四年 五月乙未朔，日有食之 。
现代文：二十四年 五月乙未朔日，又出现日食 。
English: A solar eclipse occurred on the second day of the second month of May.

古文：董仲舒以为，宿在胃，鲁象也。
现代文：董佺赶以为宿星在胃，是叠围的星象。
English: Dong Yao immediately thought that the host star was in the stomach, it was a star cluster.

古文：后昭公为季氏所逐。
现代文：后来昭公被圣氏赶走。
English: Later, Akihito was driven away by the Shō clan.

古文：刘向以为，自十五年至此岁，十年间天戒七见，人君犹不寤。
现代文：刘向以为自十五年到这一年，十年间上天警戒出现七次，君主还不醒悟。
English: Liu Xiang thought that since the fifteenth year to this year, the heavenly warning has appeared seven times in ten years, and the monarch has not woken up.

古文：后楚杀戎蛮子，晋灭陆浑戎，盗杀卫侯兄，蔡、莒之君出奔，吴灭巢，公子光杀王僚，宋三臣以邑叛其君。
现代文：后来楚子杀了戏蛮王，置国灭掉了陆运戏，盗贼杀了堑堡的兄长，蔡君、莒君逃往国外，吴灭掉了巢国，公子光杀了君王僚，宋国有三臣带着他们的封地反叛君主。
English: Later, Chu Zi killed the king of the barbarians, Jing Guo eliminated the land transport opera, the thieves killed the brother of the bunker, Cai Jun and Zou Jun fled abroad, Wu eliminated the nesting country, Guo Zi Guang killed the king's colleagues, and Song Guo had three ministers rebel against the monarch with their fiefs.

古文：它如仲舒。
现代文：这些正如仲舒所言。
English: All of this is just as Zhongshu said.

古文：刘歆以为，二日鲁、赵分。
现代文：刘歆以为二日是鲁、赵的分日。
English: Liu Yao thought that the second day was Lu and Zhao's allotted day.

古文：是月斗建辰。
现代文：这个月斗宿在建辰。
English: This month's dojo is in Jiancheng.

古文：《左氏传》梓慎曰： 将大水。 
现代文：《左氏传》上的梓慎说： 将有大水。 
English: Zi Sheng in "The Biography of Zuo" said: There will be a flood.

古文：昭子曰： 旱也。
现代文：昭子说： 干旱。
English: Akiko said: Drought.

古文：日过分而阳犹不克，克必甚，能无旱乎！
现代文：太阳过春分而阳仍不胜，阳胜一定很厉害，能没有旱灾吗?
English: The sun has passed the vernal equinox, but the sun is still not victorious. The victory of the sun must be very powerful. Can there be no drought?

古文：阳不克，莫将积聚也。 
现代文：阳不胜，莫非是将要进行积聚吧。 
English: Yang invincible, it must be that the accumulation will take place.

古文：是岁秋，大雩，旱也。
现代文：这年秋，大雩求雨，干旱。
English: In the autumn of this year, Dafu was begging for rain and drought.

古文：二至二分，日有食之，不为灾。
现代文：冬至和夏至春分和秋分，有日食，不会造成灾害。
English: The winter solstice and summer solstice, as well as the vernal and autumnal equinoxes, have solar eclipses, and will not cause disasters.

古文：日月之行也，春秋分日夜等，故同道；冬夏至长短极，故相过。
现代文：曰月的运行，春分和秋分曰与夜等，本来同足规律；冬至夏至是长短的极端，所以相互经过。
English: The movement of the moon, the vernal equinox and the autumnal equinox, day and night, etc., are originally the same regularity; the winter solstice and the summer solstice are the extremes of long and short, so they pass each other.

古文：相过同道而食轻，不为大灾，水旱而已。
现代文：相互经过同一轨道日食就轻，不会造成大灾害，水旱而已。
English: If they both pass through the same orbit, the eclipse will be light and will not cause any major disasters, just droughts.

古文：三十一年 十二月辛亥朔，日有食之 。
现代文：三十一年 十二月辛亥朔日，又出现日食 。
English: On December 31st, the New Year's Day, there was another solar eclipse.

古文：董仲舒以为，宿在心，天子象也。
现代文：董仲舒以为宿星在心，是天子的象征。
English: Dong Zhongshu thought that the star was in his heart and was a symbol of the Son of Heaven.

古文：时京师微弱，后诸侯果相率而城周，宋中几亡尊天子之心，而不衰城。
现代文：当时京师衰微，后来诸侯果然相率为周修筑城墙，宋大夫中几没有尊重天子的心意，不用草去筑城。
English: At that time, the capital was in decline. Later, the princes built the city wall in a week. Dr. Song did not respect the will of God and did not use grass to build the city.

古文：刘向以为，时吴灭徐，而蔡灭沈，楚围蔡，吴败楚入郢，昭王走出。
现代文：刘向以为这时吴国灭亡了徐国，蔡国减掉了沈，楚国围困蔡国，吴国打败楚国进入郢都，昭王逃走。
English: Liu Xiang thought that at this time, the State of Wu was destroyed by the State of Xu, the State of Cai was reduced by the State of Shen, the State of Chu was besieged by the State of Cai, the State of Wu defeated the State of Chu and entered the Yidu, and the King of Zhao fled.

古文：刘歆以为，二日宋、燕分。
现代文：刘歆以为二日是宋、燕的分曰。
English: Liu Yao thought that the second day was the division day of Song and Yan.

古文：定公五年 三月辛亥朔，日有食之 。
现代文：定公五年 三月辛亥朔日，又出现日食 。
English: In the fifth year of King Sejong's reign, a solar eclipse occurred on the New Year's Day in March.

古文：董仲舒、刘向以为，后郑灭许，鲁阳虎作乱，窃宝玉大弓，季桓子退仲尼，宋三臣以邑叛。
现代文：董仲舒以为后来郑国灭掉了许国，鲁国阳虎作乱，窃走宝玉大弓，季桓子解雇了仲尼，宋三臣带着封邑叛乱。
English: Dong Zhongshu thought that later, Zheng Guo wiped out Xu Guo, Lu Guo Yanghu made a riot, stole the precious jade bow, Ji Huan Zi fired Zhongni, Song Sanchen led the rebellion with the fief.

古文：刘歆以为，正月二日燕、赵分。
现代文：刘歆以为正月二日是燕、趟的分日。
English: Liu Yao thought that the second day of the first month was the day for swallowing and wading.

古文：十二年 十一月丙寅朔，日有食之 。
现代文：十二年 十一月丙寅朔日，又出现日食 。
English: In November of the twelfth year, the new moon day, another solar eclipse occurred.

古文：董仲舒、刘向以为，后晋三大夫以邑叛，薛弑其君，楚灭顿、胡，越败吴，卫逐世子。
现代文：董仲舒、刘向以为后来晋国三个大夫带着封邑叛乱，薛杀了他的君主，楚人灭掉了顿、胡，越人打败了吴国，卫赶走太子蒯瞋。
English: Dong Zhongshu and Liu Xiang believed that later, the three doctors of Jin Province led the rebellion of the fiefs, Xue killed his monarch, the Chu people eliminated the Dong and Hu, the Yue people defeated the State of Wu, and the Wei drove away the prince.

古文：刘歆以为，十二月二日楚、郑分。
现代文：刘歆以为十二月二日是楚、郑的分日。
English: Liu Yao thought that December 2nd was the distribution day of Chu and Zheng.

古文：十五年 八月庚辰朔，日有食之 。
现代文：十五年 八月庚辰朔日，又出现日食 。
English: Fifteen years later, in August, the New Year's Day, another solar eclipse occurred.

古文：董仲舒以为，宿在柳，周室大坏，夷狄主诸夏之象也。
现代文：董仲舒以为宿星在柳，这是周室要大衰，夷狄掌管诸夏的象征。
English: Dong Zhongshu thought that the host star was in the willow, which was a symbol of the Zhou dynasty's decline and the Yidi dynasty's rule over the Xia dynasty.

古文：明年，中国诸侯果累累从楚而围蔡，蔡恐，迁于州来。
现代文：第二年，中国诸侯果然连续不断跟从楚而围困蔡，蔡国感到害怕，迁到楚国的州来。
English: In the second year, the Chinese princes followed Chu and besieged Cai continuously. Cai Guo was afraid and moved to the state of Chu.

古文：晋人执戎蛮子归于楚，京师楚也。
现代文：晋人控制戎蛮子赤归于楚，以楚为京师。
English: The Jin people controlled the Red Army and the Red Army was under the control of Chu, and Chu was the capital.

古文：刘向以为，盗杀蔡侯，齐陈乞弑其君而立阳生，孔子终不用。
现代文：刘向以为蔡公孙翩杀蔡侯申，齐陈乞弑其君而立阳生，孔子终于不用。
English: Liu Xiang thought that Cai Gongsun killed Cai Houshen, Qi Chen begged for his prince and established Yang Sheng, and finally Confucius was not needed.

古文：刘歆以为，六月晋、赵分。
现代文：刘歆以为六月是晋、赵的分月。
English: Liu Yao thought that June was a parting month for Jin and Zhao.

古文：哀公十四年 五月庚申朔，日有食之 。
现代文：哀公十四年 五月庚申朔日，又出现日食 。
English: In the 14th year of King Aiko's reign, in May, the New Year's Day, another solar eclipse occurred.

古文：在获麟后。
现代文：这在获麟以后。
English: This was after he won the title.

古文：刘歆以为，三月二日齐、卫分。
现代文：刘歆以为三月二日是齐、卫的分曰。
English: Liu Wei thought that March 2 was the day of the division of Qi and Wei.

古文：凡春秋十二公，二百四十二年，日食三十六。
现代文：春秋总计有十二公，二百四十二年，出现日食一共三十六次。
English: In total, there are 12 solar eclipses in spring and autumn, and in 242 years, there will be a total of 36 solar eclipses.

古文：《穀梁》以为，朔二十六，晦七，夜二，二日一。
现代文：《谷梁》上记载朔日二十六次，晦曰七次，夜间两次，二日的一次。
English: "Gu Liang" records 26 times on the new moon, seven times on the eve of the new moon, twice at night, and once on the second day.

古文：《公羊》以为，朔二十七，二日七，晦二。
现代文：《公羊》上记载朔日二十七次，二日的七次，晦日二次。
English: "Ram" records 27 ascents on New Year's Day, 7 on the 2nd, and 2 on the last day of the year.

古文：《左氏》以为，朔十六，二日十八，晦一，不书日者二。
现代文：《左氏》上记载朔日十六次，二日的十八次，不记日的二次。
English: "Zao Shi" records sixteen times on the new year's day, eighteen times on the second day, and twice on other days.

古文：高帝三年十月甲戌晦，日有食之，在斗二十度，燕地也。后二年，燕王臧反，诛，立卢绾为燕王，后又反，败。
现代文：高帝三年十月甲戌晦日，又出现日食，在斗星二十度，是燕地，二年后，燕王臧荼反叛，被诛，立卢绾为燕王，后来又反叛，失败。
English: On the eve of the third year of Emperor Gao's reign in October, there was another solar eclipse. At the 20th degree of the star, it was the land of swallows. Two years later, the Swallow King rebelled, was captured, and established Lu Wei as the Swallow King. Later, he rebelled and failed.

古文：十一月癸卯晦，日有食之，在虚三度，齐地也。
现代文：十一月癸卯晦日，又出现日食，在虚星三度，是齐地。
English: On the last day of November, there was another solar eclipse. The three degrees of the imaginary star were at the same level.

古文：后二年，齐王韩信徙为楚王，明年废为列侯，后又反，诛。
现代文：后二年，齐王韩信调职为楚王，过了一年废为列侯，后又反叛，被诛。
English: Two years later, Han Xin, the king of Qi, was transferred to be the king of Chu. After a year, he was abolished as a vassal, and then he rebelled and was exiled.

古文：九年六月乙未晦，日有食之，既，在张十三度。
现代文：九年六月乙未晦日，出现日食，且是日全食，在张星十三度。
English: On the eve of the ninth year of June, a solar eclipse occurred, and it was a total solar eclipse, at the 13th degree of Zhangxing.

古文：惠帝七年正月辛丑朔，日有食之，在危十三度。
现代文：惠帝七年正月辛丑朔日，又出现日食，在危星十三度。
English: In the first month of the seventh year of Emperor Hui, on the day of the new moon, there was another solar eclipse, with the danger star at 13 degrees.

古文：谷永以为，岁首正月朔日，是为三朝，尊者恶之。
现代文：谷永以为在岁首正月朔日，这是正月初一，地位尊贵的人讨厌这事。
English: Gu Yong thought that it was the first day of the first month of the first month of the first month of the first month of the first month of the first month of the first month of the first month of the first month of the first month of the first month of the first month.

古文：五月丁卯，先晦一日，日有食之，几尽，在七星初。
现代文：五月丁卯，在晦曰的前一天，出现日食，出现的时间很短，很快时间久过去了。在七星初。
English: In May, on the day before the New Year's Eve, a solar eclipse occurred, the time of occurrence was very short, and soon the time passed for a long time.

古文：刘向以为，五月微阴始起而犯至阳，其占重。
现代文：刘向以为五月微阴方起就侵犯到阳，其占卜重复。
English: Liu Xiang thought that the sun would invade the moon from May onwards, and his divination was repeated.

古文：至其八月，宫车晏驾，有吕氏诈置嗣君之害。
现代文：到了这年八月，皇帝死亡，有吕氏伪造设置嗣君的灾害。
English: In August of that year, the emperor died, and there was the calamity of the Lv clan forging and setting up an heir.

古文：京房《易传》曰： 凡日食不以晦、朔者，名曰薄。
现代文：京房《易传》上说： 大凡日食不在晦朔日的，就叫逼迫。
English: Kyobo said in "I Chuan": If the great solar eclipse is not in the new year, it is called persecution.

古文：人君诛将不以理，或贼臣将暴起，日月虽不同宿，阴气盛，薄日光也。 
现代文：君主诛杀将领没有道理，或贼臣将暴起，曰月虽不同在一宿，阴气盛，也会逼迫曰光。 
English: There is no reason for the monarch to kill the generals, or the vassals will rise up violently, saying that although the moon is different in one night, it is gloomy, it will also persecute the sun.

古文：高后二年六月丙戌晦，日有食之。
现代文：高后二年六月丙戌晦曰，又出现日食。
English: In June of the second year after high school, there was another solar eclipse.

古文：七年正月己丑晦，日有食之，既，在营室九度，为宫室中。
现代文：七年正月己丑晦曰，又出现日食，且是日全食，在营室星九度，这是在宫室中。
English: In the first month of the seventh year, the eclipse appeared again, and it was a total solar eclipse. It was 9 degrees in the camp room, which was in the palace room.

古文：时高后恶之，曰： 此为我也！ 
现代文：当时高后讨厌这事，说： 这是我！ 
English: At the time, the high school senior hated it and said, "This is me!

古文：明年应。
现代文：过了一年高后崩。
English: He dropped out after a year of high school.

古文：文帝二年十一月癸卯晦，日有食之，在婺女一度。
现代文：文帝二年十一月癸卯晦曰，又出现日食，在婺女星一度。
English: On the eve of November in the second year of Emperor Wen, another solar eclipse occurred, this time in the constellation of Sagittarius.

古文：三年十月丁酉晦，日有食之，在斗二十二度。
现代文：三年十月丁酉晦曰，又出现日食，在斗星二十二度。
English: In October of the third year, on the eve of the Ding'an Festival, there was another solar eclipse, at the 22nd degree of the zodiac.

古文：十一月丁卯晦，日有食之，在虚八度。
现代文：十一月丁卯晦日，有出现日食，在虚星八度。
English: On the eve of November Dingwu, there will be a solar eclipse, in the imaginary star octave.

古文：后四年四月丙辰晦，日有食之，在东井十三度。
现代文：后四年四月丙辰晦曰，又出现日食，在柬井星十三度。
English: Four years later, on the eve of the fourth lunar month of April, another solar eclipse occurred, which occurred at the 13th degree of the ecliptic.

古文：七年正月辛未朔，日有食之。
现代文：七年正月辛未朔日，又出现日食。
English: In the first month of the seventh year, on the eve of the new year, another solar eclipse occurred.

古文：景帝三年二月壬牛晦，日有食之。在胃二度。
现代文：景帝三年二月壬午晦日，又出现日食，在胃星二度。
English: In February of the third year of King Jing's reign, on the eve of the lunar new year, another solar eclipse occurred.

古文：七年十一月庚寅晦。日有食之，在虚九度。
现代文：七年十一月庚寅晦曰，又出现日食，在虚星九度。
English: In November of the seventh year, the solar eclipse occurred, and the false star was nine degrees.

古文：中元年十二月甲寅晦，日有食之。
现代文：中元年十二月甲寅晦日，又出现日食。
English: A solar eclipse occurred again on the eve of the lunar new year in December.

古文：中二年九月甲戌晦，日有食之。
现代文：中二年九月甲戌晦日，又出现日食。
English: In September of the second year of middle school, on the eve of Jiaxuan, another solar eclipse occurred.

古文：三年九月戊戌晦，日有食之。几尽，在尾九度。
现代文：三年九月戊戌晦日，又出现日食，几乎食尽，在尾星九度。
English: In September of the third year, on the eve of the New Year, there was another solar eclipse. It was almost completely eclipsed, and the tail star was nine degrees.

古文：六年七月辛亥晦，日有食之，在轸七度。
现代文：六年七月辛亥晦日，又出现日食，在轸星七度。
English: In July of the sixth year, on the eve of Xinhai, there was another solar eclipse.

古文：后元年七月乙巳，先晦一日，日有食之，在翼十七度。
现代文：后元年七月乙巳，在晦曰前一天，又出现日食，在翼星十七度。
English: After the first year in July, on the day before the New Year's Eve, there was another solar eclipse, in the 17th degree of the wing star.

古文：武帝建元二年二月丙戌朔，日有食之，在奎十四度。
现代文：武帝建元二年二月丙戌朔日，又出现日食，在奎星十四度。
English: In February of the second year of Emperor Wu Jianyuan, there was another solar eclipse, at the 14th degree of the Kui star.

古文：刘向以为，奎为卑贱妇人，后有卫皇后自至微兴，卒有不终之害。
现代文：刘向认为奎星为卑贱妇人，后来有衔皇后从卑贱跃居高位，终于遭夭折的灾害。
English: Liu Xiang thought that Kuixing was a lowly woman, and later a high-ranking empress jumped from lowly to high-ranking, and finally suffered the disaster of premature death.

古文：三年九月丙子晦，日有食之，在尾二度。
现代文：三年九月丙子晦曰，又出现日食，在尾星二度。
English: In September of the third year, on the eve of the third month, there was another solar eclipse, twice in the tail star.

古文：五年正月己巳朔，日有食之。
现代文：五年正月己巳朔日，又出现日食。
English: In the first month of the fifth year, it was the new year's day, and there was another solar eclipse.

古文：元光元年二月丙辰晦，日有食之。
现代文：元光元年二月丙辰晦日，又出现日食。
English: A solar eclipse occurred on the eve of Hsinchu in February of the first year of the Yuan dynasty.

古文：七月癸未，先晦一日，日有食之，在翼八度。
现代文：七月癸未，在晦曰前一天，又出现日食，在翼星八度。
English: At the end of July, the day before the New Year's Eve, there was another solar eclipse, in the pterodactyl octave.

古文：刘向以为，前年高园便殿灾，与春秋御廪灾后日食于翼、轸同。
现代文：刘向以为前年高园便殿发生灾害，与春秋皇帝粮仓的灾害，后来日食在翼星、轸星相同。
English: Liu Xiang thought that the disaster that occurred in the toilet of Gaoyuan the previous year was the same as the disaster in the granary of the Spring and Autumn Emperor, and later the solar eclipse in the Pleiades and the Pleiades.

古文：其占，内有女变，外为诸侯。
现代文：这次占卜，内有女变，外为诸侯祸患。
English: This time, the divination contained a woman's change, but it turned out to be a disaster for the princes.

古文：其后陈皇后废，江都、淮南、衡山王谋反，诛。
现代文：这以后陈皇后被废，江都、淮南、衡山王谋反，被诛。
English: After this, Empress Chen was deposed, and the kings of Jiangdu, Huainan, and Hengshan rebelled and were executed.

古文：日中时食从东北，过半，晡时复。
现代文：正午时日食，从束北开始，日食过半，申时复原。
English: At noon, the solar eclipse will start from the north of the bundle, the eclipse will be more than half over, and it will recover at the time of the lunar eclipse.

古文：元朔二年二月乙巳晦，日有食之，在胃三度。
现代文：元朔二年二月乙巳晦日，又出现日食，在胃星三度。
English: On the last day of the second month of the second year of the second month of the second year of the second year of the second year of the second year of the second year of the second year of the second year of the second year of the second year of the second year of the second year of the second year of the second year of the second year of the second year of the second year of the second year of the second year of the second year of the second year of the second year of the second year of the second year of the second year of the second year of the second year of the second year of the second year of the second year of the second year of the second year of the second year of the second year

古文：六年十一月癸丑晦，日有食之。
现代文：六年十一月癸丑晦日，又出现日食。
English: In November of the same year, on the eve of the New Year, there was another solar eclipse.

古文：元狩元年五月乙巳晦，日有食之，在柳六度。
现代文：元狩元年五月乙巳晦曰，又出现日食，在柳星六度。
English: At the end of May in the first year of the Genkari era, there was another solar eclipse, which occurred at the 6th degree of the willow star.

古文：京房《易传》推以为，是时日食从旁右，法曰君失臣。
现代文：京房《易传》推算以为这时日食在太阳的右旁，从规律上说君要失臣。
English: Kyobo's "Easy Biography" reckons that the eclipse is on the right side of the sun at this time, and it is said that you will lose your position.

古文：明年丞相公孙弘薨。
现代文：过了一年丞相公孙弘薨。
English: A year later, the prime minister, Kinsun Hirohito, resigned.

古文：日食从旁左者，亦君失臣；从上者，臣失君；从下者，君失民。
现代文：日食在左旁，君也要失臣；从上，臣失君；从下，君失民。
English: If the eclipse is on the left, you will lose subjects; if it is on the top, subjects will lose you; if it is on the bottom, people will lose you.

古文：元鼎五年四月丁丑晦，日有食之，在东井二十三度。
现代文：元鼎五年四月丁丑晦曰，又出现日食，在柬井星二十三度。
English: In April of the 5th year of the Yuan Dynasty, there was another solar eclipse, with a magnitude of 23.

古文：元封四年六月己酉朔，日有食之。
现代文：元封四年六月己酉朔日，又出现日食。
English: In June of the fourth year of the Yuan Dynasty, a solar eclipse occurred.

古文：太始元年正月乙巳晦，日有食之。
现代文：太始元年正月乙巳晦日，又出现日食。
English: On the eve of the first day of the first month of the first year of the year, another solar eclipse occurred.

古文：四年十月甲寅晦，日有食之，在斗十九度。
现代文：四年十月甲寅晦曰，又出现日食，在斗星十九度。
English: In October of the fourth year, the solar eclipse occurred again, at the 19th degree of the zodiac.

古文：征和四年八月辛酉晦，日有食之，不尽如钩，在亢二度。哺时食从西北，日下晡时复。
现代文：征和四年八月辛酉晦曰，又出现日食，没有食尽如钩，在亢星二度，申时日食从西北开始，曰下申时复原。
English: In August of the 4th year of Zheng He, there was another solar eclipse, but it was not completely eclipsed. Twice, the solar eclipse started from the northwest at the time of Yin, and it was restored at the time of Yin.

古文：昭帝始元三年十一月壬辰朔，日有食之，在斗九度，燕地也。
现代文：昭帝始元三年十一月壬辰朔日，又出现日食，在斗星九度，在燕地。
English: In November of the third year of Emperor Zhao's reign, there was another solar eclipse. It occurred at the ninth degree of the zodiac, in the land of swallows.

古文：后四年，燕剌王谋反，诛。
现代文：过了四年，燕剌王谋反，被诛。
English: After four years, the Tern King plotted a rebellion and was captured.

古文：元凤元年七月己亥晦，日有食之，几尽，在张十二度。
现代文：元凤元年七月己亥晦日，又出现日食，很快食尽，在张星十二度。
English: In July of the first year of Fengxian, on the eve of Ji Hai, another solar eclipse occurred, and it was quickly consumed, reaching 12 degrees in Zhangxing.

古文：刘向以为，己亥而既，其占重。后六年，宫车晏驾，卒以亡嗣。
现代文：刘向以为己亥日食，这次占卜日食最重，过了六年皇帝死亡，死后没有继嗣。
English: Liu Xiang thought that he was a solar eclipse, and this solar eclipse was the heaviest. After six years, the emperor died, and there was no heir after his death.

古文：宣帝地节元年十二月癸亥晦，日有食之，在营室十五度。
现代文：宣帝地节元年十二月癸亥晦日，又出现日食，在营室星十五度。
English: On the eve of the Emperor's Birthday in December of the first year, there was another solar eclipse, and the star was fifteen degrees in the camp room.

古文：五凤元年十二月乙酉朔，日有食之，在婺女十度。
现代文：五凤元年十二月乙酉朔日，又出现日食，在婺女星十度。
English: In December of the first year of Wu Feng, there was another solar eclipse, rising ten degrees in the constellation of Virgo.

古文：四年四月辛丑朔，日有食之，在毕十九度。是为正月朔，慝未作，《左氏》以为重异。
现代文：四年四月辛丑朔日，又出现日食，在毕星十九度，这为正月朔，阴气未开始，《左氏》以为有重大变异。
English: In April of the fourth year, on the day of the new moon, there was another solar eclipse, at the 19th degree of the zodiac, which was the new moon, and the gloomy weather had not yet begun. "Zao Shi" thought that there was a major change.

古文：元帝永光二年三月壬戌朔，日有食之，在娄八度。
现代文：元帝永光二年三月壬戌朔日，又出现日食，在娄星八度。
English: In March of the second year of the Yuan Emperor Yongguang, there was another solar eclipse, in the eighth degree of the zodiac.

古文：四年六月戊寅晦，日有食之，在张七度。
现代文：四年六月戊寅晦日，又出现日食，在张星七度。
English: In June of the fourth year, on the eve of Wu Yin, another solar eclipse occurred, rising seven degrees above the horizon.

古文：建昭五年六月壬申晦，日有食之，不尽如钩，因入。
现代文：建昭五年六月壬申晦日，又出现日食，没食尽如钩，接着就落下去了。
English: On the eve of Jinshin in June of the 5th year of Jian Zhao, another solar eclipse occurred, and it did not eclipse completely, and then it fell.

古文：成帝建始三年十二月戊申朔，日有食之，其夜未央殿中地震。
现代文：成帝建始三年十二月戊申朔日，又出现日食，这一夜未央殿内有地震。
English: In the third year of Emperor Chengzong's reign, in December, the New Year's Day, there was another solar eclipse. That night, there was an earthquake in the Great Hall.

古文：谷永对曰： 日食婺女九度，占在皇后。
现代文：谷永答对皇上说： 日食在婺女星九度，应验在皇后。
English: Gu Yong replied to the emperor, "The eclipse of the sun occurs on the 9th day of the 9th month of the 9th month of the 9th month of the 9th month of the 9th month of the 9th month of the 9th month of the 9th month of the 9th month of the 9th month of the 9th month of the 9th month of the 9th month of the 9th month of the 9th month of the 9th month of the 9th month of the 9th month of the 9th month of the 9th month of the 9th month of the 9th month of the 9th month of the 9th month of the 9th month of the 9

古文：地震萧墙之内，咎在贵妾。
现代文：地震在院内，灾害在宠贵的妾。
English: Earthquake in the hospital, disaster in the favorite concubine.

古文：二者俱发，明同事异人，共掩制阳，将害继嗣也。
现代文：这二者一起发生，表明同一件事发生在不同人身上，共同掩蔽阳气，将有害继嗣。
English: These two occur together, indicating that the same thing happened to different people, together covering the yang, will be harmful to the heirs.

古文：亶日食，则妾不见；亶地震，则后不见。
现代文：一旦日食则妾不见；一旦地震则皇后不见。
English: If there is a solar eclipse, the concubine will disappear; if there is an earthquake, the queen will disappear.

古文：异日而发，则似殊事；亡故动变，则恐不知。
现代文：不在一天发生，则似不同的事；无故动变，则恐不知。
English: If it doesn't happen in a day, it's like a different thing; if it changes without reason, it's like I don't know.

古文：是月，后、妾当有失节之邮，故天因此两见其变。
现代文：这个月后妾当有失节之过，所以上天为此两次出现灾变。
English: After this month, the concubine was supposed to have committed a breach of discipline, so there were two disasters in heaven for this reason.

古文：若曰，违失妇道，隔远众妾，妨绝继嗣者，此二人也。 
现代文：像是说，违失妇道，疏远众妾，妨绝继嗣的，就是这两人。 
English: As if to say, it is these two people who have violated the women's way, alienated all the concubines, and hindered the line of succession.

古文：杜钦对亦曰： 日以戊申食，时加未。
现代文：杜钦答对皇上也说： 日食在戊申时，正和未时靠近。
English: Du Qin also said to the emperor: The eclipse of the sun at the time of Boshin is close to the time of the sun.

古文：戊未，土也，中宫之部。
现代文：戊未，属上，是中宫地区。
English: Wuwei, which belongs to Shang, is the Zhongguo region.

古文：其夜殿中地震，此必適妾将有争宠相害而为患者。
现代文：这一夜殿中地震，必定有嫡妾争宠造成灾害的祸患发生。
English: The earthquake in the palace that night must have been caused by the evil of concubines competing for favors.

古文：人事失于下，变象见于上。
现代文：人间的变故过失在下，变异的现象在上。
English: Human error is at the bottom, and the phenomenon of mutation is at the top.

古文：能应之以德，则咎异消；忽而不戒，则祸败至。
现代文：如能用德行来回应，则怪异的灾祸可消；如怠忘而不警戒，则祸患破败将至。
English: If you can respond with virtue, then the strange disaster can be eliminated; if you forget and do not alert, then the disaster will be ruined.

古文：应之，非诚不立，非信不行。 
现代文：回应，不真诚不能立，不诚实不能行。 
English: Response, insincerity can not stand, dishonesty can not do.

古文：河平元年四月己亥晦，日有食之，不尽如钩，在东井六度。
现代文：河平元年四月己亥晦曰，又出现日食，没有食尽如钩，在东井星六度。
English: In April of the first year of the Heping era, there was another solar eclipse, but it did not eclipse completely, and it was six degrees in the east.

古文：刘向对曰： 四月交于五月，月同孝惠，日同孝昭。东井，京师也，且既，其占恐害继嗣。 
现代文：刘向答对皇上说： 四月交叉于五月，与孝惠同月，与孝昭同，东井星代表京师地区，且是曰全食，其占卜恐有害继嗣。 
English: Liu Xiangda said to the emperor: April crosses in May, the same month as Xiao Hui, the same as Xiao Zhao, Dongjing star represents the Beijing region, and it is said to be a total eclipse, and its divination is feared to be harmful to successors.

古文：日蚤食时，从西南起。
现代文：曰早食时，从西南开始。
English: When eating breakfast, start from the southwest.

古文：三年八月乙卯晦，日有食之，在房。
现代文：三年八月乙卯晦曰，又出现日食，在房星。
English: In August of the third year, on the eve of the eclipse, there was another solar eclipse.

古文：四年三月癸丑朔，日有食之，在昴。
现代文：四年三月癸丑朔日，又出现日食，在昴星。
English: In March of the same year, a solar eclipse occurred in the constellation of Cancer.

古文：阳朔元年二月丁未晦，日有食之，在胃。
现代文：阳朔元年二月丁未晦日，又出现日食，在胃星。
English: In February of the first year of Yangshuo, on the eve of the New Year, there was another solar eclipse.

古文：永始元年九月丁巳晦，日有食之。
现代文：永始元年九月丁巳晦日，又出现日食。
English: On the eve of September in the first year of the Edo period, another solar eclipse occurred.

古文：谷永以京房《易占》对曰： 元年九月日蚀，酒亡节之所致也。
现代文：谷永以京房《易占》答对皇上说： 元年九月日食，饮酒无节制所致。
English: Gu Yong replied to the emperor with a copy of "Easily Conquered" by the Imperial Household Agency, saying: The solar eclipse in September of the first year was caused by excessive drinking.

古文：独使京师知之，四国不见者，若曰，湛湎于酒，君臣不别，祸在内也。 
现代文：仅使京师知道这日食，四方都不知道，像是说，沉迷于酒，君臣不分，灾祸将发生在朝内。 
English: Only the Beijing division knew about the eclipse, but the four quarters did not know, such as being addicted to alcohol, the monarch and the minister were not separated, and the disaster would occur in the imperial court.

古文：永始二年二月乙酉晦，日有食之。
现代文：永始二年二月乙酉晦日，又出现日食。
English: In February of the second year of the Edo period, on the eve of the New Year, another solar eclipse occurred.

古文：谷永以京房《易占》对曰： 今年二月日食，赋敛不得度，民愁怨之所致也。
现代文：谷永以京房《易占》答对皇上说： 今年二月日食，是田地税不合限度，人民忧愁怨恨所致。
English: Gu Yong replied to the emperor with a copy of the "Easy Occupation" of the Imperial Palace, saying: The solar eclipse in February this year was caused by the land tax not meeting the limit and the people's sorrow and resentment.

古文：所以使四方皆见，京师阴蔽者，若曰，人君好治宫室，大营坟墓，赋敛兹重，而百姓屈竭，祸在外也。 
现代文：所以使四方皆能见到，而京师阴蔽不见，像是说，君主好建宫室，大造坟墓，田地税过重，而使百姓穷尽，灾祸将在朝外发生。 
English: Therefore, so that all four sides can see, and the Beijing division is not obscured, it is said that the monarch would like to build a palace, build a large tomb, the field tax is too heavy, and the people are exhausted, and the disaster will occur outside the court.

古文：三年正月己卯晦，日有食之。
现代文：三年正月己卯晦日，又出现日食。
English: On the last day of the first month of the third year, there was another solar eclipse.

古文：四年七月辛未晦，日有食之。
现代文：四年七月辛未晦曰，又出现日食。
English: In July of the same year, there was another solar eclipse.

古文：元延元年正月己亥朔，日有食之。
现代文：元延元年正月己亥朔日，又出现日食。
English: The New Year's Day of the first month of the first year of the Yuan Dynasty was the New Year's Day, and a solar eclipse occurred.

古文：哀帝元寿元年正月辛丑朔，日有食之，不尽如钩，在营室十度，与惠帝七年同月日。
现代文：哀帝元寿元年正月辛丑朔日，又出现日食，没食尽如钩，在营室星十度，与惠帝七年同曰月。
English: On the first day of the first month of the first year of Emperor Yuan Shou's life, there was a solar eclipse, and the eclipse did not run out of food, and the star was ten degrees in the camp room. It was the same month as Hui Di's seventh year.

古文：二年三月壬辰晦，日有食之。
现代文：二年三月壬辰晦曰，又出现日食。
English: In March of the following year, on the eve of the Imjin Festival, another solar eclipse occurred.

古文：平帝元始元年五月丁已朔，日有食之，在东井。
现代文：平帝元始元年五月丁巳朔日，又出现日食，在东井星。
English: In May of the first year of the Pingdi era, there was another solar eclipse, this time in Dongjing.

古文：二年九月戊申晦，日有食之，既。
现代文：二年九月戊申晦日，又出现日食，日全食。
English: In September of the second year, on the eve of Boshin, there was another solar eclipse, a total solar eclipse.

古文：凡汉著纪十二世，二百一十二年，日食五十三，朔十四，晦三十六，先晦一日三。
现代文：总计汉记载纪年的共十二世，二百一十二年，日食五十三次，朔日十四次，晦日三十六次，在晦曰前一天有三次。
English: In total, there were fifty-three solar eclipses, fourteen on New Year's Day, thirty-six on New Year's Eve, and three on the day before New Year's Eve.

古文：成帝建始元年八月戊午，晨漏未尽三刻，有两月重见。
现代文：成帝建始元年八月戊午，晨漏时未到三刻，有两月重现。
English: In August of the first year of Emperor Chengzai's reign, at 3 o'clock in the afternoon, the time of morning sickness did not reach 3 o'clock, and there were two months of recurrence.

古文：京房《易传》曰：  妇贞厉，月几望，君子征，凶。 言君弱而妇强，为阴所乘，则月并出。
现代文：京房《易传》上说  妇女常节，月近望日，男子远征，凶象，是说男子弱而妇女强，被阴所乘隙，所以两个月亮一同出现。
English: According to the "I Chuan" of the Beijing House, the women's regular festival, the moon is close to the sun, the men's expedition, and the fierce elephant. It means that men are weak and women are strong, and they are taken advantage of by the yin, so the two moons appear together.

古文：晦而月见西方谓之朓，朔而月见东方谓之仄慝，仄慝则侯王其肃，朓则侯王其舒。 
现代文：晦日而月亮出现在西方称为跳，朔日而月见东方称为仄慝，仄慝则侯王就庄重，跳则侯王就舒缓。 
English: The New Year's Eve when the moon appears in the west is called "Jump," and the New Year's Day when the moon appears in the east is called "Zhenyao." When the moon appears in the east, it is called "Zhenyao." When the moon appears in the west, it is called "Zhenyao." When it appears in the east, it is called "Zhenyao."

古文：刘向以为，朓者疾也，君舒缓则臣骄慢，故日行迟而月行疾也。
现代文：刘向以为跳就是快速，君主舒缓而臣傲慢，所以太阳运行迟缓月亮就运行疾速。
English: Liu Xiang thought that the jump is fast, the monarch is soothing and the minister is arrogant, so the sun runs slowly and the moon runs rapidly.

古文：仄慝者不进之意。君肃急则臣恐惧，故日行疾而月行迟，不敢迫近君也。
现代文：仄慝是不前进的含意，君主庄重臣就恐惧，所以太阳运行疾月亮就运行迟缓，不敢接近君主。
English: Because the sun runs fast and the moon runs slowly, they do not dare to approach the monarch.

古文：不舒不急，以正失之者，食朔日。
现代文：不舒不急，以纠正有过错的，日食在朔日。
English: There is no rush to correct the mistake, the eclipse is on New Year's Day.

古文：刘歆以为，舒者侯王展意颛事，臣下促急，故月行疾也。
现代文：刘歆以为舒者侯王陈述善事，臣下办事就小心谨慎，所以月行疾速。
English: Liu Bei thought that the prince of Shu would declare good deeds, and the vassals would be careful and prudent in doing things, so the moon moved rapidly.

古文：肃者王侯缩不任事，臣下驰纵，故月行迟也。
现代文：庄重的王侯行动迟缓做事不负责，臣下就懈怠放纵，所以月行迟缓。
English: A dignified prince is slow to act and is not responsible for doing things, and his subjects are lazy and indulgent, so the moon is slow to rise.

古文：当春秋时，侯王率多缩不任事，故食二日仄慝者十八，食晦日朓者一，此其效也。
现代文：在春秋之时，侯王大多行动迟缓任事不负责，所以日食二日仄慝十八次，日食在晦日跳一次，造就是征验。
English: At the time of spring and autumn, most of the Hou Wang were slow to act and were not responsible for their duties, so the solar eclipse on the second day was eighteen times, and the solar eclipse on the last day of the year was once, which was caused by conscription.

古文：考之汉家，食晦朓者三十六，终亡二日仄慝者，歆说信矣。此皆谓日月乱行者也。
现代文：考核汉家，日食在晦日跳共三十六次，最终没有二日仄慝的，刘歆所说可信，造都是说月乱行的。
English: According to the assessment of the Han family, the solar eclipse jumped a total of thirty-six times on the last day of the year. In the end, there was no two-day eclipse, and what Liu Wei said was credible.

古文：元帝永光元年四月，日色青白，亡景，正中时有景亡光。
现代文：元帝永光元年四月，曰光呈青白色，日下无影，中午时有影无光。
English: In April of the first year of the reign of Emperor Yongguang, the light was bluish-white, there was no shadow under the sun, and there was no shadow at noon.

古文：是夏寒，至九月，日乃有光。
现代文：这年夏天凉寒，到了九月，太阳才有光。
English: The summer of that year was cool and cold, and the sun did not shine until September.

古文：京房《易传》曰： 美不上人，兹谓上弱，厥异日白，七日不温。
现代文：京房《易传》上说： 在高位的统治者不美善，是说那些在高位的统治者的不足，它的灾异是阳光呈白色，七日不暖。
English: Kyofang said in "I Chuan": Rulers in high places are not good. It means that those rulers in high places are deficient. Its disaster is that the sun is white and it is not warm for seven days.

古文：顺亡所制兹谓弱，日白六十日，物亡霜而死。
现代文：君主顺从臣下没有法制造就是不足，太阳呈白色有六十日，作物没有霜而死。
English: The sun is white for sixty days, and crops die without frost.

古文：天子亲伐，兹谓不知，日白，体动而寒。
现代文：天子亲自征伐，造就是不明智，太阳出现白色，物体动而有寒气。
English: The Son of Heaven personally led the expedition. It was unwise to build it, the sun appeared white, and objects moved and there was cold air.

古文：弱而有任，兹谓不亡，日白不温，明不动。
现代文：如果不足但有法制，就不会衰亡，太阳呈白色而不温暖，表明不动荡，君主有过而公然行动，造就不用陈述表白。
English: If there is not enough, but there is a legal system, there will be no decline and fall, the sun is white and not warm, indicating no turbulence, the monarch has been and overt action, creating no statement statement.

古文：辟愆公行，兹谓不伸，厥异日黑，大风起，天无云，日光晻。不难上政，兹谓见过，日黑居仄，大如弹丸。 
现代文：它的灾异是阳光呈黑色，大风起，天无云，曰光昏昧。不责备君主的政事，这就是见过不问，曰旁有一黑块，大如弹丸。 
English: Its misfortune is that the sun is black, a gale is blowing, the sky is cloudless, the light is dim. Do not blame the monarch's politics, this is not seen, say, there is a black block next to it, as big as a projectile.

古文：成帝河平元年正月壬寅朔，日月俱在营室，时日出赤。
现代文：成帝河平元年正月壬寅朔日，日月都在营室星，当时日出呈赤色。
English: On the first day of the first month of the first year of Emperor Heping, the sun and the moon were in the camp star, and the sunrise was red.

古文：二月癸未，日朝赤，且入又赤，夜月赤。
现代文：二月癸未，早晨日出是赤色，太阳落下时又是赤色，夜间月光呈赤色。
English: In late February, the sunrise is red in the morning, the sun is red when it sets, and the moonlight is red at night.

古文：甲申，日出赤如血，亡光，漏上四刻半，乃颇有光，烛地赤黄，食后乃复。
现代文：甲申，日出呈赤色像血一样，没有光，记时器四刻半时，才稍有光亮，照在地上为赤黄色，日食后才恢复。
English: In Jiaxing, the sunrise is red like blood, there is no light, the timer is four and a half hours, only a little light, shining on the ground is reddish yellow, and it is restored after the eclipse.

古文：京房《易传》曰： 辟不闻道兹谓亡，厥异日赤。 
现代文：京房《易传》上说： 君主不闻道就要灭亡，它的灾异是太阳呈赤色。 
English: Kyofusa said in "I Chuan": Monarchs will perish if they do not listen to the way, and its disaster is that the sun is red.

古文：三月乙未，日出黄，有黑气大如钱，居日中央。
现代文：三月乙未，日出是黄色，有黑气如钱大，呈现在太阳中央。
English: In March, the sunrise is yellow, with black gas as big as money, appearing in the center of the sun.

古文：京房《易传》曰： 祭天不顺兹谓逆，厥异日赤，其中黑。
现代文：京房《易传》上说： 祭天如不恭顺就是违逆，出现的灾异是太阳呈赤色，它的中央是黑色。
English: Kyobo said in "I Chuan": "If you don't worship the heavens, you are disobeying the law. The calamity that occurs is that the sun is red and its center is black.

古文：闻善不予，兹谓失知，厥异日黄。 
现代文：听到善言不赞许，造就是失知，出现的异常现象是太阳呈黄色。 
English: Hearing kind words and disapproval, the result is ignorance, and the abnormal phenomenon is that the sun is yellow.

古文：夫大人者，与天地合其德，与日月合其明，故圣王在上，总命群贤，以亮天功，则日之光明，五色备具，烛耀亡主；有主则为异，应行而变也。
现代文：德行高尚的人，与天地合德，与日月同明，所以圣王在上，总体命令群贤，来宣扬上天的功劳，那么太阳的光明，五色具备，照耀无主；有主就呈异常现象，跟随人的行为而变化。
English: A virtuous person is in harmony with heaven and earth, and is as bright as the sun and the moon. Therefore, the holy king is above, and he commands all the sages to proclaim the merits of heaven. Then, the light of the sun, which has five colors, shines without an owner. If there is an owner, it is an abnormal phenomenon, and it changes according to people's behavior.

古文：色不虚改，形不虚毁，观日之五变，足以监矣。
现代文：色不是白白地改动的，形不是白白地毁坏的，观看曰光的五种变化，足可以看出吉凶。
English: The color is not changed in vain, the shape is not destroyed in vain. Watching the five changes of light, you can see the good and bad.

古文：故曰： 县象著明，莫大乎日月 ，此之谓也。
现代文：所以说 天象最明显的，没有比日月更大的了 ，就是这种说法。
English: Therefore, it is said that the most obvious celestial phenomenon is that there is nothing bigger than the sun and the moon.

古文：严公七年 四月辛卯夜，恒星不见，夜中星陨如雨 。
现代文：严公七年 四月辛卯夜，恒星不见，半夜星像雨一样坠落到地上 。
English: In the seventh year of Yan Gong, the star disappeared in the night of Xinwu in April. At midnight, the star fell to the ground like rain.

古文：董仲舒、刘向以为，常星二十八宿者，人君之象也；众星，万民之类也。
现代文：董仲舒、刘向以为常见的星二十八宿，是君主的象征；众星是万民一类的象征。
English: Dong Zhongshu and Liu Xiang believed that the 28 common stars were a symbol of the monarch; the stars were a symbol of all the people.

古文：列宿不见，象诸侯微也；众星陨坠，民失其所也。
现代文：众星宿不出现，象征诸侯的衰败；众星陨落，是表示万民将不知所措。
English: The stars do not appear, symbolizing the decline of the princes; the stars fall, indicating that the people will be at a loss.

古文：夜中者，为中国也。
现代文：在半夜，表示在中国地区。
English: In the middle of the night, said to be in the China area.

古文：不及地而复，象齐桓起而救存之地。
现代文：不及地而回，象征齐桓公起来挽救了中国。
English: He came back just short of the ground, symbolizing that Qi Huan stood up and saved China.

古文：乡亡桓公，星遂至地，中国其良绝矣。
现代文：以前桓公死时，星陨落到地上，中国确实要断绝了。
English: In the past, when Huan Gong died, the star fell to the ground, and China really wanted to break away.

古文：刘向以为，夜中者，言不得终性命，中道败也。或曰象其叛也。言当中道叛其上也。
现代文：刘向以为半夜，是说不能寿终正寝，要中途衰败，有的说象征叛乱，是说中途反叛他的君主。
English: Liu Xiang thought that the middle of the night meant that he could not go to sleep at the end of his life, that he had to decline halfway through, and some said that it symbolized rebellion, that it meant rebelling against his monarch halfway through.

古文：天垂象以视下，将欲人君防恶远非，慎卑省微，以自全安也。
现代文：天显示征兆以告示天下人，要扶持君主防患恶远离非，要小心谨慎，以保自己的安全。
English: The heavens show signs to announce to the people of the world that they should support the monarch to prevent evil and stay away from wrongdoing, and that they should be careful and prudent to ensure their own safety.

古文：如人君有贤明之材，畏天威命，若高宗谋祖己，成王泣《金縢》，改过修正，立信布德，存亡继绝，修废举逸，下学而上达，裁什一之税，复三日之役，节用俭服，以惠百姓，则诸侯怀德，士民归仁，灾消而福兴矣。
现代文：如君主有贤明的才能，敬畏上天知晓命运，像高宗与祖己筹谋，成王哭泣《金滕》一样，改正错误修行正道，树立信用布施道德，使灭亡的国家复存，以保继嗣，整治衰败，举荐逸民，广泛地向群下学习，把行为及时禀告上天，裁减十分之一的赋税，恢复一年劳役不超过三日，减省费用节约服饰，以优待百姓，这样诸侯怀念恩德，士民走向仁义的道路，如此就会灾消而福至。
English: If the monarch has the talent of wisdom, fears the heavens, knows the fate, corrects the mistakes, practices the right path, establishes trust, spreads morality, revives the perished country, protects the heirs, rectifies the decline, recommends the outstanding people, learns extensively from the group, reports the behavior to the heavens in a timely manner, cuts one-tenth of the tax, restores one-year labor service to no more than three days, saves costs, saves clothes, and treats the people with preferential treatment, so that the princes will remember the grace, and the scholars and the people will go to the path of benevolence, then the disaster will disappear and the blessing will come.

古文：遂莫肯改寤，法则古人，而各行其私意，终于君臣乖离，上下交怨。
现代文：如不肯改正醒悟，效法古人，而各自按自己意志行事，最后君臣将要分道扬镳，上下埋怨。
English: If they are not willing to correct and wake up, follow the example of the ancients, and each act according to their own will, the monarchs and ministers will eventually go their separate ways, complaining up and down.

古文：自是之后，齐、宋之君弑，谭、遂、邢、卫之国灭，宿迁于宋，蔡获于楚，晋相弑杀，五世乃定，此其效也。
现代文：从这以后，齐、宋国君被杀，谭、遂、邢、卫四国被灭，宿迁移到宋，蔡军被楚国俘获，晋国国内相互残杀，经过五代才得以安定，造就是所得的报应。
English: From then on, Qi and Song Guojun were killed, Tan, Sui, Song and Wei were destroyed, and the capital was moved to Song. Cai's army was captured by Chu, and they killed each other in Jin. It took five generations to stabilize the situation, and this was the reward.

古文：《左氏传》曰： 恒星不见，夜明也；星陨如雨，与雨偕也。 
现代文：《左氏传》上说： 恒星不见，夜明也；星陨如雨，与雨偕也。 
English: "The Legend of Zuo" said: "When the stars disappear, so does the night; when the shooting stars rain, so does the hail."

古文：刘歆以为昼象中国，夜象夷狄。
现代文：刘歆以为白天象征中国，夜象征夷狄。
English: Liu Wei thought that the daytime symbolized China, while the night symbolized the barbarians.

古文：夜明，故常见之星皆不见，象中国微也。 星陨如雨 ，如，而也，星陨而且雨，故曰 与雨偕也 ，明雨与星陨，两变相成也。
现代文：夜间明亮，所以常见的星皆不见，象征中国衰微。 星陨如雨 ，如，而也，星坠而且有雨，故说 与雨偕也 ，表明雨与星坠，两种灾害互相而成。
English: The night is bright, so the common stars are not visible, symbolizing the decline of China. Star meteorites are like rain, such as, but also, star falls and there is rain, so it is said with raindrops, indicating that rain and star falls, two kinds of disasters are intertwined.

古文：《洪范》曰： 庶民惟星。 
现代文：《洪范》上说： 平民是星。 
English: "Hong Fan" said: Civilians are the stars.

古文：《易》曰： 雷雨作， 解 。 
现代文：《易经》上说： 雷雨作，是《解卦》。 
English: "I Ching" said: "The thunderstorm is the beginning of the commentary."

古文：是岁，岁在玄枵，齐分野也。
现代文：这一年岁星在玄枵星附近，是齐国分野。
English: This one-year-old star is in the vicinity of the star Xuan Zang, which is the field of Qi Guozong.

古文：夜中而星陨，象庶民中离上也。
现代文：半夜星坠，象征平民中途要叛离君主。
English: A star falls at midnight, symbolizing that the common people want to break away from the monarch.

古文：雨以解过施，复从上下，象齐桓行伯，复兴周室也。
现代文：雨因以消解转移，复又上下，象征齐桓公施行霸道，复兴周室。
English: Due to the dissolving and shifting of the rain, it goes up and down again, symbolizing that King Qi Huan exercised tyranny and revived the Zhou dynasty.

古文：周四月，夏二月也，日在降娄，鲁分野也。
现代文：周的四月，是夏的二月，曰在降娄星，是鲁国的分野。
English: Zhou's April, is the summer of February, is said to be in the declining gibbous star, is the field of Lu.

古文：先是，卫侯朔奔齐，卫公子黔牟立，齐帅诸侯伐之，天子使使救卫。
现代文：在此以前，卫侯朔逃奔到齐国，卫公子黔牟立，齐国率诸侯讨伐他，天子派使者救卫。
English: Prior to this, Wei Hou Shuo fled to Qi Province, and Wei Gongzi led the princes to fight against him. Qi Province led the princes to fight against him, and Heaven sent an envoy to save him.

古文：鲁公子溺颛政，会齐以犯王命，严弗能止，卒从而伐卫，逐天王所立。不义至甚，而自以为功。
现代文：鲁公子溺独揽政权，并会齐师伐卫触犯王命。严公不能阻止，终于随从去伐卫，驱逐天王所立的黔牟，不义之极，却自以为功。
English: Lu Gongzi seized power single-handedly, and violated the king's order by leading an army of guards. Yan Gong could not stop him, and finally he followed the guards to expel the king's magistrates. It was the height of injustice, but he took credit for it.

古文：民去其上，政繇下作，尤著，故星陨于鲁，天事常象也。
现代文：百姓失去君主，国家的政令由下面来发出，更加明显，所以星坠在鲁国，这是天事经常的象征。
English: The people have lost their monarch, and the state's decrees are issued from below, more clearly, so the star falls in the country of Lu, which is a symbol of frequent weather events.

古文：成帝永始二年二月癸未，夜过中，星陨如雨，长一二丈，绎绎未至地灭，至鸡鸣止。
现代文：成帝永始二年二月癸未，已过半夜，星坠而且有雨，光长一二丈，未到地就减了，到鸡鸣时停止。
English: In February of the second year of Emperor Yongzheng's reign, it was already past midnight, the stars were falling and there was rain. The light was one or two feet long, and it decreased before reaching the ground, and stopped when the rooster crowed.

古文：谷永对曰 日月星辰烛临下土，其有食陨之异，则遐迩幽隐靡不咸睹。
现代文：谷永答对皇上说： 日月星辰照临地上，它有日食星坠的灾异，这样远近隐蔽都没有不被看到的。
English: Gu Yong replied to the emperor, "The sun, moon, and stars shine on the earth, and it has the misfortune of eclipsing the stars, so they are not hidden far and near without being seen.

古文：星辰附离于天，犹庶民附离王者也。
现代文：星辰依附于天，就像庶民依附帝王。
English: Stars cling to the heavens, just as commoners cling to emperors.

古文：王者失道，纲纪废顿，下将叛去，故星叛天而陨，以见其象。
现代文：帝王失道，法度衰败，臣下将叛逆离去，所以星叛离天而陨落，以现出它的象征。
English: The emperor lost his way, the law fell into decay, and his vassals rebelled and left, so the star rebelled and fell from the sky to show its symbol.

古文：《春秋》记异，星陨最大，自鲁严以来，至今再见。
现代文：《春秋》上记的灾异，星陨落最大，自鲁严公以来，到现在出现了两次。
English: The calamity recorded in "Spring and Autumn" is the biggest star fall, and since Lu Yan Gong, it has now appeared twice.

古文：臣闻三代所以丧亡者，皆繇妇人群小，湛湎于酒。
现代文：臣听说三代丧亡的原因，都是由于妇人和小人，沉湎于酒。
English: The minister heard that the reason for the loss of three generations was due to women and villains, addicted to alcohol.

古文：《书》云： 乃用其妇人之言，四方之逋逃多罪，是信是使。 
现代文：《书》经上说： 竟因其妇人的话，天下各地逃亡的大多是罪人，还亲近信用他们。 
English: The Scripture says, "Many of those who flee for refuge to every corner of the earth because of her are wicked men, yet she keeps close to them and trusts in them.

古文：《诗》曰： 赫赫宗周，褒姒灭之。 
现代文：《诗经》上说： 宗周赫赫势大，褒姒却能灭它!
English: "The Book of Songs" says: Zong Zhou He He was very powerful, but he was demoted.

古文： 颠覆厥德，荒沈于酒。 及秦所以二世而亡者，养生大奢，奉终大厚。
现代文：， 道德品质被你败坏干净，沉湎于酒，等到秦朝过了两代就灭亡了，养生太奢侈，送终极为富厚。
English: The moral character was corrupted by you, indulged in wine, and died after two generations of the Qin Dynasty. The regimen was too extravagant, and the send-off was extremely rich.

古文：方今国家兼而有之，社稷宗庙之大忧也。 
现代文：现在国家兼而有之，这是社稷宗庙的大忧。 
English: Now the state has both, which is a big worry for the Shifang ancestral temple.

古文：京房《易传》曰： 君不任贤，厥妖天雨星。 
现代文：京房《易传》上说： 君主不任用贤能，它的妖异就是天上的星像雨一样陨落。 
English: Kyofusa said in "I Chuan": The monarch does not appoint a virtuous person, and the strangeness of it is that the stars in the sky fall like rain.

古文：文公十四年 七月，有星孛入于北斗 。
现代文：文公十四年 七月，有彗星进入北斗 。
English: In July of the 14th year of King Wen, a comet entered the Big Dipper.

古文：董仲舒以为，孛者恶气之所生也。
现代文：董仲舒以为彗星是恶气所产生的。
English: Dong Zhongshu thought the comet was caused by evil gas.

古文：谓之孛者，言其孛孛有所妨蔽，暗乱不明之貌也。
现代文：称为孛，是说它光芒四射有所妨蔽，暗乱不明的样子。
English: It's called a chrysalis, which means that its radiance is somewhat obstructed, and it has a dark and unclear appearance.

古文：北斗，大国象。
现代文：北斗是大国的象征。
English: The Big Dipper is a symbol of a great power.

古文：后齐、宋、鲁、莒、晋皆弑君。
现代文：后来齐、宋、鲁、莒、晋都发生弑君的事。
English: Later, Qi, Song, Lu, Zhou, and Jin all had the same thing happen.

古文：刘向以为，君臣乱于朝，政令亏于外，则上浊三光之精，五星赢缩，变色逆行，甚则为孛。
现代文：刘向认为君臣在朝廷动乱，政令在外有损，这样就会向上混润日、月、星三光的精气，使金、木、水、火、土五星的长短变化，变色逆行，严重的就形成彗星。
English: Liu Xiang believed that the princes and ministers were in turmoil in the imperial court, and the government decrees were detrimental to the outside world. As a result, the essence of the sun, moon, and stars of the three lights would be mixed upward, causing the five stars of gold, wood, water, fire, and earth to change in length, and the color change would be retrograde. In severe cases, comets would form.

古文：北斗，人君象；孛星，乱臣类，篡杀之表也。
现代文：北斗，君主的象征；彗星，代表乱臣一类，是篡位杀君的标志。
English: The Big Dipper, a symbol of the monarch; the comet, representing a class of unruly vassals, is a sign of usurpation.

古文：《星传》曰 魁者，贵人之牢。 
现代文：《星传》上说 魁星，是贵人的监牢 。
English: In "The Tale of the Stars," it is said that Qui Xing is a prison for nobles.

古文：又曰 孛星见北斗中，大臣诸侯有受诛者。 
现代文：又说 彗星出现在北斗中，大臣诸侯中就有要受到诛杀的 。
English: It was also said that if a comet appeared in the Big Dipper, all the ministers and lords would be killed.

古文：一曰魁为齐、晋。
现代文：一说魁星为齐、晋的象征。
English: It is said that the stars of the zodiac are aligned, which is a symbol of Jin.

古文：夫彗星较然在北斗中，天之视人显矣，史之有占明矣，时君终不改寤。
现代文：彗星明显的在北斗中，上天对人的显示就很明显，历史上的预兆很明白了，而当时的君主终不醒悟。
English: When the comet is clearly visible in the Big Dipper, God's revelation to man is obvious, the omens in history are very clear, and the monarch at that time did not wake up.

古文：是后，宋、鲁、莒、晋、郑、陈六国咸弑其君，齐再弑焉。
现代文：造以后，宋、鲁、莒、晋、郑、陈六国都发生了杀君的事，齐再次杀君。
English: After the creation, the six countries of Song, Lu, Jie, Jin, Zheng and Chen all killed the prince, and they all killed the prince again.

古文：中国既乱，夷狄并侵，兵革从横，楚乘威席胜，深入诸夏，六侵伐，一灭国，观兵周室。晋外灭二国，内败王师，又连三国之兵大败齐师于鞍，追亡逐北，东临海水，威陵京师，武折大齐。
现代文：中国已经动乱，夷狄一同侵犯，战争连续不断，楚凭藉战胜的威势，深入各中原国家，六次侵掠，灭掉一个国家，在周朝检阅军队，晋向外灭掉了二国，在内打败了周王的军队，又联合鲁、卫、齐三国军队在搴地大败齐国军队，追赶逃兵，向东到达海滨，威势盖过京师，用武力使强大的齐国折服。
English: China has been in turmoil, invaded by both the Yid and the Di, and the war has been continuous. Chu, with the might of victory, penetrated deep into the Central Plains countries, invaded and plundered six times, wiped out one country, inspected the army in the Zhou Dynasty, eliminated two countries in the outside, defeated the army of King Zhou in the inside, and defeated the army of Qi in the three countries of Lu, Wei, and Qi in Shantian, chased the deserters, reached the seashore in the east, overpowered the Beijing Division, and forced the powerful Qi to submit.

古文：皆孛星炎之所及，流至二十八年。
现代文：这都是彗星的火焰所触及的。火焰流十八年。
English: It was all touched by the comet's flame, a stream of flame eighteen years in the making.

古文：《星传》又曰： 彗星入北斗，有大战，其流入北斗中，得名人；不入，失名人。 
现代文：《星传》上又说： 彗星进入北斗，将有大战。它的火焰流入北斗中，可得到名臣，不进入，就失名臣。 
English: "Star Legend" also says: If a comet enters the Big Dipper, there will be a great battle. If its flame flows into the Big Dipper, it can gain a great vassal, but if it does not enter, it will lose a great vassal.

古文：宋华元，贤名大夫，大棘之战，华元获于郑，传举其效云。
现代文：宋华元，是贤明大夫，宋地大棘之战，华元被郑人俘获，宣扬攻克的效果。
English: Song Huayuan is a wise doctor, the battle of the great thorn in the Song Dynasty, Huayuan was captured by Zheng people, and preached the effect of conquering.

古文：《左氏传》曰有星孛北斗，周史服曰： 不出七年，宋、齐、晋之君皆将死乱。 
现代文：《左氏传》上说有星孛在北斗，周史服说： 不超过七年，宋、齐、晋的君主都将死于动乱。 
English: In "The Legend of Zuo," it is said that there is a star in the Big Dipper, and Zhou Shifu said: Within seven years, the monarchs of Song, Qi, and Jin will all die in the turmoil.

古文：刘歆以为，北斗有环域，四星入其中也。
现代文：刘歆以为北斗有环晕区，这是四星进入它的中间。
English: Liu Wei thought that the Big Dipper had a halo area, which was the four stars entering its middle.

古文：斗，天之三辰，纲纪星也。
现代文：斗，天的三辰，是纲纪星。
English: Dou, the three stars of the sky, is the star of Gangji.

古文：宋、齐、晋，天子方伯，中国纲纪，彗所以除旧布新也。
现代文：宋、齐、晋，天子方伯，是中国的纲纪。彗星是用来除旧布新的。
English: Song, Qi, Jin, Tianzi Fangbo, is China's Gangxi. Comet is used to remove old cloth and make new.

古文：斗七星，故曰不出七年。
现代文：斗有七星，所以说不出七年。
English: There are seven stars, so we cannot say seven years.

古文：至十六年，宋人弑昭公；十八年，齐人弑懿公，宣公二年，晋赵穿弑灵公。
现代文：至十六年，宋人杀昭公；十八年，齐人杀懿公；宣公二年，晋趟穿杀灵公。
English: In the 16th year, the Song people killed Zhaogong; in the 18th year, the Qi people killed Yaogong; in the 2nd year of Xuanguang, the Jin people killed Linggong.

古文：昭公十七年 冬，有星孛于大辰 。
现代文：昭公十七年 冬，有星孛在大辰 。
English: In the winter of the seventeenth year of Zhaogong, a star appeared in Datun.

古文：董仲舒以为，大辰心也，心为明堂，天子之象。
现代文：董仲舒认为大辰即心，心为明堂，天子的象征。
English: Dong Zhongshu believes that the big clock is the heart, the heart is the bright hall, the symbol of the Son of Heaven.

古文：后王室大乱，三王分争，此其效也。
现代文：后来王室大乱，三王争斗，造就是它的效应。
English: Later, the royal family was in turmoil, and the three kings were fighting, which was the effect of it.

古文：刘向以为，《星传》曰 心，大星，天王也。
现代文：刘向以为《星传》上说： 心，是大星，代表天王。
English: Liu Xiang thought that "Star Story" said: The heart is the great star, representing the heavenly king.

古文：其前星，太子；后屋，庶子也。
现代文：它前边的那颗星，代表太子；后边的那颗星，代表庶子。
English: The star in front of it represents the crown prince; the star behind it represents the illegitimate child.

古文：尾为君臣乖离。 
现代文：尾星代表君臣离心离德。 
English: On behalf of the princes and ministers, the tail star represents the centrifugal separation of Germany.

古文：孛星加心，象天子適庶将分争也。
现代文：孛星加入心星，象征天子嫡庶将有争斗。
English: Krypton joins the Heart Star, symbolizing that the heavenly sons and daughters will have a fight.

古文：其在诸侯，角、亢、氐，陈、郑也；房、心，宋也。
现代文：它表现在诸侯方面，角、亢、氐三星，象征陈国、郑国；房、心二星，象征宋国。
English: It manifests itself in the realm of the princes. The three stars of the horn, beak, and hoe symbolize the states of Chen and Zheng; the two stars of the house and heart symbolize the state of Song.

古文：后五年，周景王崩，王室乱，大夫刘子、单子立王猛，尹氏、召伯、毛伯立子晁。
现代文：过了五年，周景王崩，王室混乱，大夫刘子、单子立王猛，尹氏、召伯、毛伯立子鼂。
English: After five years, Zhou Jing Wang collapsed, the royal family was in disarray, the doctor Liu Zi, the single son Wang Meng, Yin, Zhao Bo, and Mao Bo were born.

古文：子晁，楚出也。
现代文：子鼂，楚王姊妹的儿子。
English: Zixuan, the son of King Chu's sister.

古文：时楚强，宋、卫、陈、郑皆南附楚。
现代文：当时楚是强国，宋、卫、陈、郑都南向依附楚国。
English: At that time, Chu was a powerful country, and Song, Wei, Chen, and Zheng were all dependent on Chu.

古文：王猛既卒，敬王即位，子晁入王城，天王居狄泉，莫之敢纳，五年，楚平王居卒，子晁奔楚，王室乃定。
现代文：王猛死后，敬王即位，子鼂进入王城，天王居住狄泉，没有敢接纳的。又过了五年，楚平王居卒，子鼂逃奔楚国，王室才得安定。
English: After the death of Wang Meng, Kei Wang ascended to the throne, Zi Yao entered the royal city, and Tian Wang lived in Di Quan, which no one dared to accept. It took another five years for the royal family to be stabilized after King Chu Ping died and Zi Yao fled to Chu.

古文：后楚帅六国伐吴，吴败之于鸡父，杀获其君臣。
现代文：后来楚国率六国攻打吴国，吴国在鸡父打败了楚国，并俘获了他的君臣。
English: Later, the State of Chu led six countries to attack the State of Wu, and the State of Wu defeated the State of Chu at the Chicken Father and captured his princes and ministers.

古文：蔡怨楚而灭沈，楚怒，围蔡。
现代文：蔡国怨恨楚国就灭掉了沈国，楚国发怒，围攻蔡国。
English: Cai Guo's resentment of Chu Guo eliminated Shen Guo, and Chu Guo became angry and besieged Cai Guo.

古文：吴人救之，遂为柏举之战，败楚师，屠郢都，妻昭王母，鞭平王墓。
现代文：吴人援救蔡国，与楚国在柏举交战，打败了楚国的军队，在楚国的郢都进行屠杀，奸淫了昭王的母亲，鞭打平王的坟墓。
English: The Wu people rescued Cai Guo, fought with Chu Guo at Baijiu, defeated the army of Chu Guo, carried out massacres in the capital of Chu Guo, raped the mother of King Zhao, and whipped the tomb of King Ping.

古文：此皆孛彗流炎所及之效也。
现代文：这都是孛彗的流光所及的结果。
English: This is all the result of the comet's stream of light.

古文：《左氏传》曰： 有星孛于大辰，西及汉。
现代文：《左氏传》上说： 有星孛在大辰星，西到天河。
English: "The Legend of Zuo" says: There is a star cluster in the Big Star, west to the Tianhe.

古文：申繻曰： 彗，所以除旧布新也，天事恒象。
现代文：鲁大夫申缩说： 彗星，是用来除旧布新的，是天事经常的现象。
English: Dr. Lu Shengjiao said: Comets are used to remove old cloth and make new ones, and are a frequent phenomenon of weather.

古文：今除于火，火出必布焉。
现代文：今除旧官于火星，火星出必布新官。
English: Now that the old officials have been removed from Mars, new officials will emerge from Mars.

古文：诸侯其有火灾乎？ 
现代文：诸侯难道有火灾吗? 
English: Are there fires in the lordships?

古文：梓慎曰： 往年吾见，是其征也。
现代文：梓慎说： 前些年我所看见的，就是这种征兆。
English: Zi Shen said: What I have seen in the past few years is just such a sign.

古文：火出而见，今兹火出而章，必火入而伏，其居火也久矣，其与不然乎？
现代文：火星出而显现，现在火星出而彰明，必定是火星入而潜伏，其居火星已很久了，不就是这样吗?
English: Mars is emerging, now Mars is emerging, it must be Mars that is entering and lurking, it has been on Mars for a long time, isn't that so?

古文：火出，于夏为三月，于商为四月，于周为五月。
现代文：火星出，在夏为三月，在商为四月，在周为五月。
English: Mars is rising, in summer it is March, in business it is April, and in the week it is May.

古文：夏数得天，若火作，其四国当之，在宋、卫、陈、郑乎？
现代文：夏的月数得于天，如若火兴起，将有四国遭受火灾，在宋、卫、陈、郑。
English: The number of months in summer is determined by the heavens. If fire breaks out, Shikoku will be affected by fire, including Song, Wei, Chen, and Zheng.

古文：宋，大辰之虚；陈，太昊之虚；郑，祝融之虚；皆火房也。
现代文：宋，大辰星的故城；陈，太昊星的故城；郑，祝融星的故城，都是火星的房星。
English: Song, the ancient city of the great clock star; Chen, the ancient city of the great clock star; Zheng, the ancient city of the congratulation star, are the house stars of Mars.

古文：星孛及汉；汉，水祥也。
现代文：星孛到天河；天河，水吉凶的预兆。
English: The star flies to the Tianhe River; the water of the Tianhe River is a harbinger of good and evil.

古文：卫，颛顼之虚，其星为大水。水，火之牡也。
现代文：卫国，是颛顼帝王的故城，这星为大水，水，是火的阳性。
English: The patron of the country is the old city of Emperor Wu, and this star is big water. Water is the masculine of fire.

古文：其以丙子若壬午作乎？
现代文：其以丙子像壬午一样的兴起吗?
English: Is it the rise of the likes of Ningbo?

古文：水火所以合也。
现代文：水火所以能相合。
English: Water and fire go together.

古文：若火入而伏，必以壬午，不过见之月。  明年 夏五月，火始昏见，丙子风。
现代文：若火入而潜伏，必定以壬午相合，不过当月。 ，第二年 夏五月，火星开始在黄昏出现，丙子时有风。
English: If the fire enters and lurks, it must coincide with the meridian, but that month., the following year, in the summer of May, Mars began to appear at dusk, and there was wind at the time of spring equinox.

古文：梓慎曰： 是谓融风，火之始也。
现代文：梓慎说： 这是春天的风，火开始发生。
English: Zi Shen said: This is the wind of spring, the fire began to occur.

古文：七日其火作乎？
现代文：七日这火能兴起吗? 
English: Can this fire be kept up for seven days?

古文：戊寅风甚，壬午大甚，宋、卫、陈、郑皆火。 
现代文：戊寅时风很大，壬午时更大。宋、卫、陈、郑都属于火。 
English: The wind is strong at Wu Yin, and stronger at Ren Wu. Song, Wei, Chen, and Zheng all belong to fire.

古文：刘歆以为，大辰，房、心、尾也，八月心星在西方，孛从其西过心东及汉也。
现代文：刘歆以为大辰星，即房、心、尾三星，八月心星在西方，孛星从它西边经过心，束到天河。
English: Liu Ye thought that the Big Star, namely the house, heart and tail three stars, the August Heart Star is in the west, and the Dragonfly Star passes through the heart from its west and is bundled to the Tianhe River.

古文：宋，大辰虚，谓宋先祖掌祀大辰星也。
现代文：宋，大辰星的故城，是说宋的先祖掌管祭祀大辰星。
English: Song, the ancient city of the great clock, is said to be the ancestor of Song in charge of the worship of the great clock.

古文：陈，太昊虚，虙羲木德，火所生也。
现代文：陈，是太吴星的故城，伏羲属木德，火所产生的地方。
English: Chen is the old city of Taiwuxing, Fuxi is Mude, and it is the place where fire originated.

古文：郑，祝融虚，高辛氏火正也。
现代文：郑，祝融星的故城，高辛氏是火正。
English: Zheng, the former city of Zhu Rongxing, Gao Xin is on fire.

古文：故皆为火所舍。
现代文：故皆为火星的房舍。
English: Therefore, they are all houses of Mars.

古文：卫，颛顼虚，星为大水，营室也。
现代文：卫，是颛顼的故城，星为大水，是营室星。
English: Wei, is the old city of Handan, the star is the big water, is the camp star.

古文：天星既然，又四国失政相似，及为王室乱皆同。
现代文：天星既然如此，四国失政又是如此相似，这跟王室的动乱都相同。
English: Since this is the case with the heavenly star, the failure of the Shikoku government is so similar, which is the same as the turmoil of the royal family.

古文：哀公十三年 冬十一月，有星孛于东方 。
现代文：哀公十三年 冬十一月，有彗星出现在东方 。
English: In the winter of November in the 13th year of King Aigong's reign, a comet appeared in the east.

古文：董仲舒、刘向以为，不言宿名者，不加宿也。
现代文：董仲舒、刘向以为不说宿名，是因为不在二十八宿之中。
English: Dong Zhongshu and Liu Xiang thought that they did not say the name of the inn because they were not among the 28 inns.

古文：以辰乘日而出，乱气蔽君明也。
现代文：在辰时乘着太阳出来而出来，扰乱气掩蔽君主的明智。
English: It is wise to come out with the sun at the hour of the hour, to disturb the air and cover the monarch.

古文：明年，《春秋》事终。
现代文：第二年，《春秋》事终。
English: The following year, "Spring and Autumn" came to an end.

古文：一曰，周之十一月，夏九月，日在氐。
现代文：一说，周的十一月，即夏的九月，是在氐星。
English: One says that the November of the week, that is, the September of the summer, is in the Pleiades.

古文：出东方者，轸、角、亢也。
现代文：出现在东方的，是轸、角、亢三星。
English: Appearing in the east are the cormorant, horned cormorant, and three-star cormorant.

古文：轸，楚；角、亢，陈、郑也。
现代文：轸象征楚国；角、亢象征陈国、郑国。
English: The dragonfly symbolizes the State of Chu; the horn and dragonfly symbolize the State of Chen and the State of Zheng.

古文：或曰角、亢大国象，为齐、晋也。
现代文：有的说角、亢二星是大国的象征，代表齐国、晋国。
English: Some say that the horn and the two stars are symbols of great powers, representing Qi and Jin.

古文：其后楚灭陈，田氏篡齐，六卿分晋，此其效也。
现代文：这以后楚国灭了陈国，田氏篡权齐国，六卿瓜分齐国，造就是它的效应。
English: After this, Chu State destroyed Chen State, the Tian Clan usurped Qi State, and the Six Lords carved up Qi State. This was its effect.

古文：刘歆以为，孛，东方大辰也，不言大辰，旦而见与日争光，星入而彗犹见。
现代文：刘歆认为孛，是东方的大辰星，不说大辰。早晨衹见与日争光，众星隐入而独见彗星。
English: Liu Wei believed that the dragonfly was the great star in the east, not to mention the great clock. In the morning, the dragonfly saw the sun compete for light, the stars disappeared and the comet appeared.

古文：是岁，再失闰，十一月实八月也。
现代文：这一年再次错过闰月，十一月实是八月。
English: This year, the leap month was missed again, and November is actually August.

古文：日在鹑火，周分野也。
现代文：曰在鹑火，是周的分野。
English: "At the campfire, it's Zhou's field.

古文：十四年冬， 有星孛 ，在获麟后。
现代文：十四年冬， 有孛星 ，在西狩获麟以后。
English: In the winter of the 14th year, there was a shooting star, after the western hunt for the unicorn.

古文：刘歆以为不言所在，官失之也。
现代文：刘歆以为不说在什么地方，是史官漏记的结果。
English: Liu Wei thought that the failure to mention the place was the result of the historian's omission.

古文：高帝三年七月，有星孛于大角，旬余乃人。
现代文：高帝三年七月，有彗星在大角星，旬余才不见。
English: In July of the third year of Emperor Gao's reign, there was a comet in the constellation of Arcturus, but it did not disappear until the following year.

古文：刘向以为，是时项羽为楚王，伯诸侯，而汉已定三秦，与羽相距荥阳，天下归心于汉，楚将灭，故彗除王位也。
现代文：刘向以为这时项羽为楚王，称霸诸侯，而汉已平定三秦，与项羽相距荣阳，天下都倾心于汉，楚国将要灭亡，所以彗星是除王位的。
English: Liu Xiang thought that at this time, Xiang Yu was the king of Chu, dominating the princes, while Han had conquered Sanqin, Rongyang was far away from Xiang Yu, the whole world was devoted to Han, and Chu was about to perish, so the comet was removed from the throne.

古文：一曰，项羽坑秦卒，烧宫室，弑义帝，乱王位，故彗加之也。
现代文：一说，项羽埋葬秦兵，焚烧宫室，杀义帝，破坏王位，故彗星加罪于他。
English: One said, Xiang Yu buried the Qin soldiers, burned the palace, killed the Emperor, and destroyed the throne, so the comet added to his guilt.

古文：文帝后七年九月，有星孛于西方，其本直尾、箕，末指虚、危，长丈余，及天汉，十六日不见。
现代文：文帝后七年九月，有彗星出现在西方，它身向尾、箕二星，末端指向虚、危二星，长一丈有余，直到天河，过了十六日不见了。
English: In September of the seventh year after Emperor Wen, a comet appeared in the west. Its body pointed toward the tail and the two stars, and its end pointed toward the false and the two dangerous stars. It grew quite a bit until it reached the Tianhe River, and it disappeared after 16 days.

古文：刘向以为，尾宋地，今楚彭城也。
现代文：刘向以为尾星正是宋地，现今楚国的彭城。
English: Liu Xiang thought that the tail star was the Song Dynasty, now Pengcheng in Chugoku.

古文：箕为燕，又为吴、越、齐。
现代文：箕星正是燕地，又是吴、越、齐三地。
English: The bright star is the swallow's place, and also the three places of Wu, Yue and Qi.

古文：宿在汉中，负海之国水泽地也。
现代文：宿星在天河之中，北负大海的水泽之国。
English: The host star is in the middle of the Tianhe River, and the north is the country of Mizusawa, which faces the sea.

古文：是时，景帝新立，信用晁错，将诛正诸侯王，其象先见。
现代文：这时景帝新立，信用晁错，将要被诛杀以端正诸侯，它的星象先出现。
English: At this time, Emperor Jing was newly established, his credibility was erroneous, and he was going to be killed to straighten out the vassals. His constellation appeared first.

古文：后三年，吴、楚、四齐与赵七国举兵反，皆诛灭云。
现代文：过了三年，吴、楚、四齐与趟七国兴兵反叛，都被诛杀。
English: Three years later, Wu, Chu, and Sichi rebelled with soldiers from seven countries and were all killed.

古文：武帝建元六年六月，有星孛于北方。
现代文：武帝建元六年六月，有彗星出现在北方。
English: In June of the sixth year of Emperor Wu's reign, a comet appeared in the north.

古文：刘向以为，明年淮南王安入朝，与太尉武安侯田蚡有邪谋，而陈皇后骄恣。其后，陈后废；而淮南王反，诛。
现代文：刘向以为第二年淮南王刘安入朝，与太尉武安侯田蚣有邪恶的阴谋，而陈皇后骄傲放纵，这以后陈后废，而淮南王反叛，被诛杀。
English: Liu Xiang thought that in the second year of Huainan King Liu An's accession to the imperial court, he had an evil plot with Lieutenant Wu An Hou Tianyao, while Empress Chen was proud and indulgent. After this, Chen was dethroned, and King Huainan rebelled and was killed.

古文：八月，长星出于东方，长终天，三十日去。
现代文：八月，长星出现在东方，长度跨天空，三十曰才退去。
English: In August, a long star appeared in the east, its length spanning the sky, and it took thirty days to recede.

古文：占曰： 是为蚩尤旗，见则王者征伐四方。 
现代文：占卜说： 这是蚩尤的旗，出现了就是君王要征伐四方。 
English: The soothsayer said, "This is the banner of Kuju, and when it appears, it means that the king is about to invade the four directions."

古文：其后，兵诛四夷，连数十年。
现代文：这以后军队诛杀了四夷，接连数十年。
English: After that, the army slaughtered the Si Yi people for decades.

古文：元狩四年四月，长星又出西北。是时，伐胡尤甚。
现代文：元狩四年四月，长星又出现在西北，这时征伐胡人正甚。
English: In April of the 4th year of the Yuan Dynasty, Changxing appeared again in the northwest, at which time the conquest of the Hu people was in full swing.

古文：元封元年五月，有星孛于东井，又孛于三台。
现代文：元封元年五月，有彗星出现在束井星，又出现在三台星。
English: In May of the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, a comet appeared in the star of Sokai and in the star of Sandai.

古文：其后江充作乱，京师纷然。
现代文：这以后江充作乱，京师动荡。
English: Since then, Jiangcheng has been in turmoil, and Beijing has been in turmoil.

古文：此明东井、三台为秦地效也。
现代文：这表明束井、三台二星为秦地的征验。
English: This indicates that Sakui, Sandai and Daxing are Qin's land requisition.

古文：宣帝地节元年正月，有星孛于西方，去太白二丈所。
现代文：宣帝地节元年正月，有彗星出现在西方，离太白二丈的地方。
English: In the first month of the Xuan Di Festival in the first year of the year, a comet appeared in the west, far away from Taibai.

古文：刘向以为，太白为大将，彗孛加之，扫灭象也。
现代文：刘向以为太白代表大将，有彗星加于它，是毁灭的象征。
English: Liu Xiang thought that Taibai represented the general, and a comet was added to it, which was a symbol of destruction.

古文：明年，大将军霍光薨，后二年家夷灭。
现代文：过了一年大将军霍光薨，又过两年全家被消灭。
English: One year later, General Huo Guangya was killed, and two years after that, his entire family was wiped out.

古文：成帝建始元年正月，有星孛于营室，青白色，长六七丈，广尺余。
现代文：成帝建始元年正月，有彗星出现在营室星，长六七丈，宽一尺多。
English: In the first month of the first year of the Emperor Cheng Jian Shi, a comet appeared in the camp room star, six or seven feet long and more than a foot wide.

古文：刘向、谷永以为，营室为后宫怀任之象，彗星加之，将有害怀任绝继嗣者。
现代文：刘向、谷永以为营室星是后宫怀孕的象征，彗星加害于它，将有害怀孕而继绝嗣。
English: Liu Xiang and Gu Yong thought that the camp star was a symbol of harem pregnancy, and the comet harmed it, causing harmful pregnancy and subsequent extinction.

古文：一曰，后宫将受害也。
现代文：一说，后宫将受害。
English: One said that the harem would suffer.

古文：其后，许皇后坐祝诅后宫怀妊者废。
现代文：这以后许皇后因犯诅咒后宫怀孕的罪被废。
English: After this, Empress Xu was deposed for the crime of cursing the harem and becoming pregnant.

古文：赵皇后立妹为昭仪，害两皇子，上遂无嗣。
现代文：赵皇后立，妹为昭仪，杀害两皇子，帝王就绝了继嗣。
English: Empress Zhao, whose younger sister was Zhaoyi, killed two princes, and the emperor had no heir.

古文：赵后姊妹卒皆伏辜。
现代文：赵后姊妹最后都服罪。
English: All of Zhao's sisters eventually pleaded guilty.

古文：元延元年七月辛未，有星孛于东井，践五诸侯，出河戍北率行轩辕、太微，后日六度有余，晨出东方。十三日夕见西方，犯次妃、长秋、斗、填，蜂炎再贯紫宫中。
现代文：元延元年七月辛未，有彗星出现在东井星，经过五诸侯星，出了河戍北就径直通过轩辕、太微二星，落后太阳六度多，早晨出现在东方，十三日傍晚出现在西方，经过次妃、长秋、斗、填四星，尖锐的火炎两次贯穿紫宫星座中。
English: In July of the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, a comet appeared in the East Star, passed through the Five Princes' Star, went out of the north of Hebei and went straight through the Xuanlong and Taimiao two stars, more than six degrees behind the sun, appeared in the east in the morning, appeared in the west in the evening of the 13th, and passed through the Second Princess, the Long Autumn, the Dragon Boat, and the Filling Four Stars, and the sharp flame twice ran through the Purple Palace constellation.

古文：大火当后，达天河，除于妃后之域。
现代文：大火星抵挡在后，通达天河，落在居住后妃的区域。
English: Great Mars resists behind, reaches the Tianhe River, and lands in the area where the Empress lives.

古文：南逝度犯大角、摄提，至天市而按节徐行，炎入市，中旬而后西去，五十六日与仓龙俱伏。
现代文：南逝度经过大角、摄提二星，至天市星而按节令缓慢运行，火炎入市，中旬以后西去，五十六天后与仓龙共同潜伏。
English: The Southern Death March passes through the Big Horn, picks up two stars, and runs slowly according to the festival until the Heavenly City Star. The flame enters the city, goes west after the middle of the day, and lurks together with the warehouse dragon after fifty-six days.

古文：谷永对曰： 上古以来，大乱之极，所希有也。
现代文：谷永答对皇上说： 从上古以来，大乱到极点，是少有的。
English: Gu Yong replied to the emperor, "Since ancient times, it is rare for a great disturbance to reach its climax.

古文：察其驰骋骤步，芒炎或长或短，所历奸犯，内为后宫女妾之害，外为诸夏叛逆之祸。 
现代文：察看它的驰骋步骤，芒炎或长或短，所经历触犯的地方，内有后宫女妾灾害，外有中原各国叛逆的灾祸。 
English: Observe its galloping steps, whether it is long or short, and the places where it has been violated, including the harem concubine disasters, and the rebellious disasters of the Central Plains countries.

古文：刘向亦曰： 三代之亡，摄提易方；秦、项之灭，星孛大角。 
现代文：刘向也说： 三代的衰亡，是因摄提星变更了方位；秦、项的灭亡，是彗星出现在大角所致。 
English: Liu Xiang also said: The decline and fall of the three dynasties was caused by the change of the direction of the shooting star; the death of Qin and Xiang was caused by the appearance of the comet in the Big Horn.

古文：是岁，赵昭仪害两皇子。
现代文：这一年，赵昭仪杀害两个皇太子。
English: That year, Zhao Zhaoyi killed two crown princes.

古文：后五年，成帝崩，昭仪自杀。
现代文：过了五年成帝崩，压仪自杀。
English: After five years, Emperor Chengdi passed away, and Compressors committed suicide.

古文：哀帝即位，赵氏皆免官爵。徙辽西。
现代文：直查即位，走巡都免了官爵，迁徙到辽酉。
English: Directly ascending the throne, he was exempted from the peerage and moved to Liaowu.

古文：哀帝亡嗣。
现代文：塞壶断绝了继嗣。
English: The cork broke the heir.

古文：平帝即位，王莽用事，追废成帝赵皇后、哀帝傅皇后，皆自杀。
现代文：芒童即位，王菱执政，追废了盛壶赵皇后、塞查傅皇后，都自杀。
English: Meng Tong ascended to the throne, Wang Ling was in power, the Empress Zhao and the Empress Sechafu were deposed, and they both committed suicide.

古文：外家丁、傅皆免官爵，徙合浦，归故郡。
现代文：外祖工、仅两家都被免了官爵，迁徙到金适，回到故郡。
English: Only two families of gynaecological workers were exempted from official titles, moved to Jinshi and returned to the former county.

古文：平帝亡嗣，莽遂篡国。
现代文：芒查断了继嗣，王菱便篡夺了国家。
English: Mengcha cut off the heir, and Wang Ling usurped the country.

古文：釐公十六年 正月戊申朔，陨石于宋，五。是月，六鶂退飞过宋都 。
现代文：僖公十六年 正月戊申朔日，陨石坠落在宋国，一共五块，这个月有六只鹏鸟回飞经过宋都 。
English: On the first day of the first month of the 16th year of King Gong, the meteorite fell on Song, a total of five pieces. This month, six birds flew back through the Song capital.

古文：董仲舒、刘向以为，象宋襄公欲行伯道将自败之戒也。
现代文：董仲舒、刘向以为这是象征宋襄公想行霸道将要自败的警戒。
English: Dong Zhongshu and Liu Xiang thought that this was a symbol of Song Xianggong's desire to be domineering and a warning of self-defeat.

古文：石，阴类；五，阳数；自上而陨，此阴而阳行，欲高反下也。
现代文：石是阴类，五是阳数，自上而坠落，这是阴却出现阳行，想高飞反而下落。
English: Stone is the yin type, five is the yang number, falling from the top. This is the yin but the yang line appears. If you want to fly high, fall instead.

古文：石与金同类，色以白为主，近白祥也。
现代文：石与金同类，颜色以白为主，近似白祥。
English: The stone is of the same kind as gold, the color is mainly white, similar to Bai Xiang.

古文：鶂，水鸟，六，阴数；退飞，欲进反退也。
现代文：鹄水鸟，六只是阴数，回飞，是欲进反而后退。
English: Water strider, six is a negative number, fly back, is to advance but retreat.

古文：其色青，青祥也，属于貌之不恭。
现代文：它的颜色是青，是青祥，属于容貌不恭。
English: Its color is blue, it is Qingxiang, and it belongs to the family of Qingxiang.

古文：天戒若曰，德薄国小，勿持炕阳，欲长诸侯，与强大争，必受其害。
现代文：上天似乎警戒说，德薄国小，不要自持张皇自大，想超过诸侯，与强国大国相争，一定遭受他们的祸害。
English: The heavens seem to warn that Germany is a small country, do not be arrogant, want to surpass the princes, and compete with the powerful countries, and must suffer their scourge.

古文：襄公不寤，明年齐桓死，伐齐丧，执滕子，围曹，为盂之会，与楚争盟，卒为所执。后得反国，不悔过自责，复会诸侯伐郑，与楚战于泓，军败身伤，为诸侯笑。
现代文：襄公不醒悟，第二年齐威公死，宋襄公攻打齐而死，宋人拘捕滕子，又包围曹，举行盂地的会盟，与楚国争盟主，终为楚人控制，后来得以回国，仍不悔过自责，又会盟诸侯讨伐郑国，与楚战于泓水，兵败身体受伤，为诸侯所耻笑。
English: Prince Xiang did not wake up. In the following year, Prince Qi Wei died, and Prince Song Xiang died after attacking Qi. The Song people arrested Tengzi and encircled Cao. They held an alliance in Shandong and competed with Chu for the alliance. Eventually, they were controlled by the Chu people. Later, they were able to return to China. They still did not repent of their self-reproach. They also allied the princes to fight against Zheng, and fought with Chu in Surabaya. They were defeated and injured, and the princes were ashamed.

古文：《左氏传》曰：陨石，星也；鶂退飞，风也。
现代文：《左氏传》上说：陨石，就是星；鹏鸟回飞，就是风。
English: According to "The Legend of Zuo," a meteorite is a star; a penguin flying back is the wind.

古文：宋襄公以问周内史叔兴曰： 是何祥也？
现代文：宋襄公以此事询问周的内史叔兴说： 这是什么祥?
English: Song Xianggong asked Zhou's Inner Historian Shu Xing about this and said: What is this Xiang?

古文：吉凶何在？ 
现代文：吉凶在什么地方? 
English: Where is the culprit?

古文：对曰： 今兹鲁多大丧，明年齐有乱，君将得诸侯而不终。 
现代文：回答说： 今年鲁国多有帝王、皇后及嫡长子的丧礼，明年齐国将动荡不定，君想率领诸侯而不会有始终。 
English: He replied, "This year, there are many funerals of the emperor, empress and eldest son in Lu. Next year, Qi will be unstable. If you want to lead the princes, you won't always be able to.

古文：退而告人曰： 是阴阳之事，非吉凶之所生也。
现代文：回来后告人说： 这是阴阳的事，不是吉凶所发生的。
English: After returning home, he told his accusers: "This is a matter of yin and yang, not a matter of good luck or bad luck.

古文：吉凶繇人，吾不敢逆君故也。 
现代文：吉凶由人，这是我不敢违背君王的原因。 
English: This is the reason why I dare not disobey the king.

古文：是岁，鲁公子季友、鄫季姬、公孙兹皆卒。
现代文：这一年鲁公子季友、部季姬、公孙兹全死了。
English: That year, Lu Gongzi, Ji You, Bu Ji Ji and Gong Sunzi all died.

古文：明年，齐桓死，適庶乱。
现代文：过了一年，齐桓公死，嫡庶间乱成一团。
English: A year later, Prince Qi Kuan died, and the direct descendants became a group.

古文：宋襄公伐齐行伯，卒为楚所败。
现代文：宋襄公讨伐齐施行霸道，终于被楚国打败。
English: Song Xiangong's crusade and enforcement of hegemony were finally defeated by the State of Chu.

古文：刘歆以为，是岁岁在寿星，其冲降娄，降娄，鲁分野也，故为鲁多大丧。
现代文：刘歆以为这一年岁星在寿星，它碰撞降娄星。降娄星是鲁国的分野，所以鲁国多大丧。
English: Liu Wei thought that this year's year star was in the birthday star, and it collided with the descending star. The descending star is the field of Lu country, so Lu country suffered a great loss.

古文：正月，日在星纪，厌在玄枵。
现代文：正月，日在星纪星，迫近于玄枵星。
English: The new moon, the day of the sidereal calendar, is approaching the star Hyades.

古文：玄枵，齐分野也。
现代文：玄枵星，是齐国的分野。
English: Xuan Zang Xing, is Qi Guo's field.

古文：石，山物；齐，大岳后。
现代文：石，是山的产物；齐，是大岳后裔。
English: Stone is a product of the mountain; Qi is a descendant of Mt.

古文：五石象齐桓卒而五公子作乱，故为明年齐有乱。
现代文：五石象征齐威公卒而五公子作乱，所以说明年齐国有乱。
English: The five stones symbolize the public servants of Qiwei, while the five boys caused a disturbance, so it means that there was a disturbance in Qi in the year.

古文：庶民惟星，陨于宋，象宋襄将得诸侯之众，而治五公子之乱。
现代文：庶民是星，陨石坠于宋国，象征宋襄公将得诸侯之众，而治五公子作乱。
English: The common people are the stars, and the meteorite fell in the Song Dynasty, symbolizing that the Prince Song Xiang won the people of the princes, and the five princes caused the turmoil.

古文：星陨而鶂退飞，故为得诸侯而不终。
现代文：星坠而鹅回飞，是因为得诸侯而不能始终。
English: The reason why the star falls and the goose flies back is that it is necessary to have princes and cannot always fly.

古文：六鶂象后六年伯业始退，执于盂也。
现代文：六鹏象征后六年霸业开始退缩，而在盂地被控制。
English: Six years after the symbol of the Six-Year Plan, hegemony began to recede, and it was controlled in Shantou.

古文：民反德为乱，乱则妖灾生，言吉凶繇人，然后阴阳冲厌受其咎。
现代文：民众反德作乱，乱就会有妖孽灾害发生，说吉凶由人，然后阴阳冲撞倾覆而受凶灾。
English: If the people rebel against Germany and make a riot, there will be evil disasters in the riot, saying that good or evil depends on people, and then yin and yang will collide and overturn and suffer a disaster.

古文：齐、鲁之灾非君所致，故曰 吾不敢逆君故也 。
现代文：齐国、鲁国的灾害非君主所导致，所以说 这是我不违背君的原因 。
English: The disasters of Qi and Lu were not caused by the monarch, so this is the reason why I do not disobey you.

古文：京房《易传》曰： 距谏自强，兹谓却行，厥异鶂退飞。
现代文：京房《易传》上说： 拒绝别人的规劝而逞强，就是倒退而行，出现的灾异就是鵾鸟回飞。
English: Jing Fang said in "Easy Biography": Refusing to be persuaded by others and being strong is to go backwards, and the disaster that occurs is the ostrich flying back.

古文：適当黜，则鶂退飞。 
现代文：嫡长应当废免，鹞鸟就退飞。 
English: The patriarch should be abolished, and the ostriches should fly away.

古文：惠帝三年，陨石绵诸，一。
现代文：惠帝三年，一块陨石落在了绵诸。
English: Three years after Hui Di, a meteorite fell on Mianzhu.

古文：武帝征和四年二月丁酉，陨石雍，二，天晏亡云，声闻四百里。
现代文：武帝征和四年二月丁酉，有两块陨石坠于雍地，天青色，没有云，声音在方圆四百里内都听得见。
English: Wu Dizheng and February Dinglong, two pieces of meteorites fell to the earth, sky blue, no clouds, the sound can be heard within a radius of four hundred miles.

古文：元帝建昭元年正月戊辰，陨石梁国，六。
现代文：元帝建昭元年正月戊辰，有六块陨石坠于梁国。
English: In the first month of the first year of Emperor Jian Zhao, six meteorites fell in Liang Province.

古文：成帝建始四年正月癸卯，陨石槁，四，肥累，一。
现代文：成帝建始四年正月癸卯，有十块陨石坠于稿县，一块坠于肥累县。
English: In the first month of the fourth year of the reign of Emperor Chengjian, there were ten meteorites that fell in Monjo County and one in Hailu County.

古文：阳朔三年二月壬戌，陨石白马，八。
现代文：阳朔三年二月壬戌，有八块陨石坠于白马瑟。
English: In February of the third year of Yangshuo, eight meteorites fell on Baimaser.

古文：鸿嘉二年五月癸未，陨石杜衍，三。
现代文：鸿嘉二年五月癸未，有三块陨石坠于杜衍县。
English: In late May of the second year of Hongjia, three meteorites fell in Duyan County.

古文：元延四年三月，陨石都关，二。
现代文：元延四年三月，有两块陨石坠于都关县。
English: In March of the 4th year of the Yuan Dynasty, two meteorites fell in Duguan County.

古文：哀帝建平元年正月丁未，陨石北地，十。
现代文：哀帝建平元年正月丁未，有十块陨石坠于北地县。
English: In the first month of the first year of Emperor Jianping, ten meteorites fell in Beidi County.

古文：其九月甲辰，陨石虞，二。
现代文：这年九月甲辰，有两块陨石坠于虞县。
English: In September of that year, two meteorites fell in Yu County.

古文：平帝元始二年六月，陨石巨鹿，二。
现代文：平帝元始二年六月，有两块陨石坠于钜鹿县。
English: In June of the second year of the Heian period, two meteorites fell in Elk County.

古文：自惠尽平，陨石凡十一，皆有光耀雷声，成、哀尤屡。
现代文：自惠帝到平帝止，共有十一块陨石坠落，都有光耀雷声，成帝、哀帝时尤其频繁。
English: From Emperor Hui to Emperor Ping, a total of eleven meteorites have fallen, all of which have glowing thunder. They are particularly frequent during the enthronement and mourning of emperors.

