古文：陈奇，字脩奇，河北人也，自云晋凉州刺史骧之八世孙。
现代文：陈奇，字修奇，河北人，自称是晋凉州刺史陈骧的八代孙。
English: Chen Qi, also known as Xiu Qi, is a native of Hebei Province. He claims to be the eighth-generation grandson of the Jin Liangzhou statesman Chen Qi.

古文：祖刃，仕慕容垂。
现代文：祖陈刃，仕官慕容垂。
English: The ancestor Chen blade, the servant Mu Rongtui.

古文：奇少孤，家贫，而奉母至孝。
现代文：陈奇少孤，家贫，而奉养母亲至为孝顺。
English: Chen Qi is a little orphan, his family is poor, but he is very filial to his mother.

古文：龆龀聪识，有夙成之美。
现代文：少小聪敏，有早成美称。
English: Xiao Xiao Congmin, known as Hao Chengmei.

古文：性气刚亮，与俗不群。
现代文：性气刚亮，与俗不群。
English: He is strong-willed and does not mingle with the common people.

古文：爱玩经典，博通坟籍，常非马融、郑玄解经失旨，志在著述《五经》。
现代文：喜爱玩习经典，博通典籍，经常指责马融、郑玄解经失旨，立志著书述说《五经》。
English: He likes to play with the classics, has a broad knowledge of classics, often accuses Ma Rong and Zheng Xuan of failing to interpret the scriptures, and is determined to write a book to narrate the "Five Classics."

古文：始注《孝经》、《论语》，颇传于世，为搢绅所称。
现代文：始注《孝经》、《论语》，很是流行，为显贵所称赞。
English: The opening notes of "The Filial Piety Sutra" and "The Analects" were very popular and praised by dignitaries.

古文：与河间邢祐同召赴京。
现代文：陈奇与河间邢祐同召赴京。
English: Chen Qi and Kawama Shinsuke were summoned to Beijing together.

古文：时秘书监游雅素闻其名，始颇好之，引入秘省，欲授以史职。
现代文：当时秘书监游雅素闻其名，开始很是喜欢他，引入秘书省，想授给他史职。
English: At that time, Ya Su, the secretary of the Supervision of Tourism, heard of his name and initially liked him very much. He introduced him to the Ministry of Secretaries and wanted to give him the post of historian.

古文：后与奇论典诰及《诗书》，雅赞扶马郑。
现代文：后来与陈奇讨论到典诰及《诗》、《书》，游雅赞扬马、郑。
English: Later, he and Chen Qi discussed the classics, poems, and books, and Yuya praised Ma and Zheng.

古文：至于《易讼卦》天与水违行，雅曰： 自葱岭以西，水皆西流，推此而言，《易》之所及自葱领以东耳。 
现代文：至于《易·讼卦》天与水违行，游雅说： 从葱岭以西，水皆西流，推此而言，《易》所谈到的应是从葱岭以东的情况。 
English: As for the violation of heaven and water in Yi Jinggua, Youya said: From the west of Qiu Ling, all water flows to the west. In this respect, Yi should have talked about the situation from the east of Qiu Ling.

古文：奇曰：《易》理绵广，包含宇宙。
现代文：陈奇说： 《易》理绵远广大，包含宇宙。
English: Chen Qi said: "Yi" is vast and vast, including the universe.

古文：若如公言，自葱领以西，岂东向望天哉？ 
现代文：如像您所说的，自葱岭以西，难道东向望天吗？ 
English: As you said, from the west of Qiuling, does the east look at the sky?

古文：奇执义非雅，每如此类，终不苟从。
现代文：陈奇执义非难游雅，每每都如此类，始终不苟从。
English: Chen Qi adhered to the principle that it is not difficult to travel to Ya, and he always followed it.

古文：雅性护短，因以为嫌。
现代文：游雅生性护短，便以为嫌。
English: Yuya has a short attention span, so she thinks it's disgusting.

古文：尝众辱奇，或尔汝之，或指为小人。
现代文：曾经当众侮辱陈奇，或尔汝地直接称呼，或者指他为小人。
English: He once insulted Chen Qi in public, or called him directly, or referred to him as a villain.

古文：奇曰： 公身为君子，奇身且小人耳。 
现代文：陈奇说： 公身为君子，奇身份是小人罢了。 
English: Chen Qi said: He is a gentleman in his official capacity, but he is a villain in his private capacity.

古文：雅曰： 君言身且小人，君祖父是何人也？ 
现代文：游雅说： 君言身份是小人，君祖父是何人？ 
English: Youya said, "Kunyan's identity is a villain. How many people were your grandfathers?

古文：奇曰： 祖，燕东部侯釐， 雅质奇曰： 侯釐何官也？ 
现代文：陈奇说： 祖，燕东部侯矨。 游雅质难陈奇说： 侯矨是什么官啊？ 
English: Chen Qi said, "Father, Yan Dongfang is a courtier. It is difficult for you to be elegant." Chen Qi said, "What kind of official is a courtier?

古文：奇曰： 三皇不传礼，官名岂同哉？
现代文：陈奇说： 三皇不传礼，官名哪里会相同呢？
English: Chen Qi said: If the three emperors do not pass on the rite, where will the official names be the same?

古文：故昔有云师、火正、鸟师之名。
现代文：故过去有云师、火正、鸟师的名称。
English: Therefore, in the past, there were the names of Yun Shi, Hu Zheng, and Bird Shi.

古文：以斯而言，世革则官异，时易则礼变。
现代文：由此而言，世代变化则官名不同，时间推移则礼制改变。
English: Therefore, the change of generations is the change of official names, and the change of time is the change of etiquette.

古文：公为皇魏东宫内侍长，侍长竟何职也？ 
现代文：公为皇魏东宫内侍长，侍长究竟是什么职务呢？ 
English: The prince is the chamberlain of the imperial palace of the Eastern Wei Dynasty. What exactly is the position of the chamberlain?

古文：由是雅深憾之。
现代文：从此游雅深深记恨于怀。
English: Since then, Yuya has held a deep grudge against her.

古文：先是敕以奇付雅，令铨补秘书，雅既恶之，遂不复叙用焉。
现代文：开始皇帝下诏把陈奇交给游雅，令其补秘书的缺，游雅既然讨厌他了，这事也就搁下了。
English: At first, the emperor issued an edict to give Chen Qi to Youya to make up for the lack of a secretary. Since Youya hated him, the matter was shelved.

古文：奇冗散数年，高允与奇仇温古籍，嘉其远致，称奇通识。非凡学所窥。
现代文：陈奇闲置数年，高允与陈奇校正古籍，称赞其远见卓识，表扬陈奇的通识渊博，说他不是平凡的学者所能赶得上的。
English: Chen Qi idled for several years, Gao Yun and Chen Qi corrected ancient books, praised his foresight, praised Chen Qi's profound knowledge, and said that he was not an ordinary scholar.

古文：允微劝雅曰： 君朝望具瞻，何为与野儒办简牍章句？ 
现代文：高允微劝游雅说： 君您在朝野都有很高的声望，为什么要与野儒去辨什么简牍章句呢？ 
English: Gao Yunwei advised Youya, saying: You have a high reputation in both the imperial court and the countryside. Why should you have to argue with a barbarian about what is a simple and concise sentence?

古文：雅谓允有私于奇，曰： 君宁党小人也！ 
现代文：游雅说高允偏袒陈奇，说： 君难道是结党小人？ 
English: Youya said that Gao Yun favored Chen Qi, saying: Are you a party-forming villain?

古文：乃取奇所注《论语》、《孝经》焚于坑内。
现代文：于是拿出陈奇所注的《论语》、《孝经》在坑内烧了。
English: So they took out the Analects and the Filial Piety Sutra, which Chen Qi had annotated, and burned them in the pit.

古文：奇曰： 公贵人，不乏樵薪，何乃燃奇《论语》？ 
现代文：陈奇说： 公是贵人，不缺柴烧，为什么要烧掉陈奇的《论语》呢？ 
English: Chen Qi said: The public is noble, there is no shortage of firewood, why burn Chen Qi's "Analects"?

古文：雅愈怒，因告京师后生不听传授。
现代文：游雅更加愤怒，因此告诉京城后生不听陈奇的传授。
English: Yuya was even more angry, so she told the future students of Beijing not to listen to Chen Qi's teaching.

古文：而奇无降志，亦评雅之失。
现代文：而陈奇并没有投降的意思，也评论游雅的过失。
English: But Chen Qi did not mean to surrender, and also commented on Youya's mistake.

古文：雅制昭皇太后碑文，论后名字之美，比谕前魏之甄后。
现代文：游雅撰写昭皇太后的碑文，论太后名字之美，把她比成前魏的甄后。
English: Youya wrote the inscription of the Empress Dowager Zhao, on the beauty of the Empress Dowager's name, comparing her to the former Wei queen.

古文：奇刺发其非，遂闻于上。
现代文：陈奇挑剔其失误，被皇上听到了。
English: Chen Qi criticized his mistakes and was heard by the emperor.

古文：诏下司徒检对碑史事，乃郭后，雅有屈焉。
现代文：下诏司徒检对碑文史事，本是郭后，是游雅的不对。
English: According to the following imperial edict, the scholarly examination of the inscription history, the original is Guo Hou, and it is Yu Ya who is wrong.

古文：有人为谤书，多怨时之言，颇称奇不得志。
现代文：有人写谤讥之书，内容多有怨时的言辞，颇为陈奇的不得志鸣不平。
English: Some people write a book of slander and ridicule, the content of which is mostly the rhetoric of grievances, which is quite strange.

古文：雅乃讽在事云： 此书言奇不遂，当是奇假人为之。
现代文：游雅便讥刺说： 这文字说陈奇不得志，应当是陈奇唆使别人这样做的。
English: Youya then said sarcastically, "This text says that Chen Qi had no ambition, it should be Chen Qi who instigated others to do so."

古文：如依律文，造谤书者皆及孥戮。 
现代文：如依律文，制造毁谤之书的人都要戮灭一族的。 
English: According to the law, anyone who produces a slanderous book is to be put to death.

古文：遂抵奇罪。时司徒、平原王陆丽知奇见枉，惜其才学，故得迁延经年，冀有宽宥。
现代文：于是列举陈奇的罪行，当时司徒、平原王陆丽知道陈奇被冤枉了，爱怜其才学，所以把陈奇一案拖延了年把时间，希望能够得到宽释。
English: Then, they listed Chen Qi's crimes. At that time, Szeto and Pingyuan Wang Luli knew that Chen Qi had been wronged, and they only learned by pitying him. Therefore, they delayed Chen Qi's case for years, hoping to be released.

古文：但执以狱成，竟致大戮，遂及其家。
现代文：但是狱讼定案，最终陈奇还是被杀，且殃及一家。
English: However, the prison case was finalized, and Chen Qi was eventually killed, which affected the whole family.

古文：奇于《易》尤长。在狱尝自筮卦，未及成，乃揽破而叹曰： 吾不度来年冬季！ 
现代文：陈奇尤其擅长《易》，在狱中曾自己给自己算卦，没等算完，便击破而叹说： 我活不过来年冬天！ 
English: Chen Qi is particularly good at "Yi." While in prison, he used to calculate a fortune for himself. Before the calculation was finished, he broke it and sighed, "I can't live until next winter!"

古文：及奇受害，如其所占。
现代文：等到陈奇受害，与所占卜的没有任何差异。
English: By the time Chen Qi fell victim, there was no difference from what he had divined.

古文：奇初被召，夜梦星坠压脚，明而告人曰： 星则好风，星则好雨，梦星厌脚，必无善征。
现代文：陈奇当初被召，夜晚梦见星星坠落压在脚上，第二天告诉别人说： 星主好风，星主好雨，梦见星星压脚，必无善兆。
English: Chen Qi was called at the beginning. At night, he dreamed of stars falling and pressing down on his feet. The next day, he told others, "The Lord of the stars is a good wind, the Lord of the stars is a good rain. If you dream of stars pressing down on your feet, it is not a good omen."

古文：但时命峻切，不敢不赴耳。 
现代文：但是时命严峻急切，不敢不去呀。 
English: But life is serious and urgent, I dare not go.

古文：少而孤贫，雅好《诗》、《传》，曾受业于渤海程玄，后遂博观众籍。
现代文：陈奇妹妹嫁给常氏，有个儿子叫矫之，仕官郡守。神龟年间，上书陈述时政所宜，言辞颇为忠诚，清河王元怿称美其文。陈奇所注的《论语》，矫之传掌下来，未能流行于世，其义与郑玄经解多有不同，往往与司徒崔浩的相同。刘献之，博陵饶阳人。
English: Chen Qi's younger sister was married to Chang, and they had a son named Jiao Zhi, who was a county magistrate. During the years of the Divine Turtle, the written statement was appropriate for the times, and the words were quite loyal. King Yuan of the Qing Dynasty called it a beautiful poem. The "Discourse" written by Chen Qi, handed down by Jiao Zhi, failed to become popular in the world. Its meaning is different from that of Zheng Xuan's interpretation of the sutras, and is often the same as that of Stu Cuihao. Liu Xian Zhi, a native of Boling Raoyang.

古文：见名法之言，掩卷而笑曰： 若使杨墨之流不为此书，千载谁知其小也！ 
现代文：少时失去父母，十分贫困，却十分喜欢《诗经》、《左传》，曾经在渤海程玄那里读书受业，便博览群书。看到名家、法家之言，掩书讥笑说： 假使杨墨之流不写此书，千年之后谁人知道他们是如此之渺小呢？ 
English: At a young age, he lost his parents and was very poor, but he was very fond of "The Book of Songs" and "Zo Zhuan." He had studied under Bohai Chengxuan, and was well versed in books. When he saw the words of famous families and legal scholars, he covered up the books and sneered, "If Yang Mo's family did not write this book, who would know after a thousand years that they were so insignificant?"

古文：曾谓其所亲曰： 观屈原《离骚》之作，自是狂人，死其宜矣，何足惜也！
现代文：他曾经对其亲人说： 看屈原《离骚》之作，自觉他是狂人，他死固然很合适，有什么可痛惜的！
English: He once said to his relatives: "Looking at Qu Yuan's "Leaving So-and-So," I realized that he was a madman. His death was certainly appropriate, what is there to regret!"

古文：吾常谓濯缨洗耳，有异人之迹；哺糟歠醨，有同物之志。
现代文：我常说涤缨洗耳，有异人形迹；食糟啜酉离，有同物节志。
English: I often say that polyester washes the ears, there are different traces; food waste sips away, there are congeners.

古文：而孔子曰： 我则异于是，无可无不可。 
现代文：而孔子说： 我却与此不同，遇事无可无不可。 
English: But Confucius said, "I am different from them.

古文：诚哉斯言，实获我心。
现代文：此言太对，正合我心。 
English: That's so true, it really resonated with me.

古文：时人有从献之学者，献之辄谓之曰： 人之立身，虽百行殊途，准之四科，要以德行为首。
现代文：当时有人跟随刘献之问学，刘献之就对他说： 为人立身，虽然百行异途，但按照四科而论，应当以德行为第一位。
English: At that time, some people followed Liu Xianzhi to inquire about learning, and Liu Xianzhi said to him: To stand up for people, although there are a hundred different paths, but according to the four disciplines, moral conduct should be the first.

古文：君若能入孝出悌，忠信仁让，不待出户，天下自知。
现代文：君如能入孝出悌，忠信仁让，便足不出户，就可知名天下。
English: If you can be filial, loyal, and kind, then you can stay at home and be known all over the world.

古文：傥不能然，虽复下帷针股，蹑屩从师，正可博闻多识，不过为土龙乞雨，眩惑将来，其于立身之道有何益乎？
现代文：如不能这样，即使刺股读书，负笈从师，也只能做到博闻多识，只不过能做些土龙求雨，眩惑将来的事，这对于立身之道有何益处？
English: If this is not possible, even if you study diligently and follow the teacher, you can only achieve knowledge and knowledge, but you can do some things like begging for rain and dazzling the future. What is the benefit of this for the way of life?

古文：孔门之徒，初亦未悟，见旱鱼之叹，方归而养亲。
现代文：孔门之徒，当初也不明此理，看见皋鱼叹无亲可奉，方才归而养亲。
English: The followers of Confucius did not understand this at first, but when they saw that the carp had no relatives to worship, they returned to raise relatives.

古文：嗟乎先达，何自觉之晚也！
现代文：嗟叹先达，可曾自觉悟此为晚！
English: It is too late to lament, but it is too late to realize!

古文：束脩不易，受之亦难，敢布心腹，子其图之。 
现代文：学费束修来之不易，我受之也难，故吐心腹之意，你们三思。 
English: It is not easy to pay tuition fees, and it is difficult for me to accept it. Therefore, I would like to express my sincerity. Please think twice.

古文：由是四方学者莫不高其行义而希造其门。
现代文：从此以后，天下求学的人无不高仰其行义却很少登门造访。
English: Since then, students all over the world have held him in high esteem for his righteous deeds, but they rarely visit his house.

古文：献之善《春秋》、《毛诗》，每讲《左氏》，尽隐公八年便止，云义例己了，不复须解。由是弟子不能究竟其说。
现代文：刘献之擅长《春秋》、《毛诗》，每次讲解《左氏传》，讲完隐公八年的事情便停止了，说义例已讲完，不用再往下讲，因此弟子不能穷尽其说。
English: Liu Xianzhi is good at "Spring and Autumn" and "Mao poetry." Every time he explains "The Biography of Zuo," he stops after the story of the eight years of Yin Gong. He said that he has finished the story and does not need to go any further, so his disciple cannot exhaust it.

古文：后本郡举孝廉，非其好也，逼遗之，乃应命，至京，称疾而还。
现代文：后来本郡推举孝廉，这本不是他所爱做的事，人们逼他应举，只好应命，到了京师，便自称有病，还归本郡。
English: Later, the county promoted Xiaolian, which was not something he liked to do. People forced him to accept the promotion, so he had to follow orders. When he arrived in Beijing, he claimed to be ill and returned to the county.

古文：高祖幸中山，诏征典内校书，献之喟然叹曰： 吾不如庄周散木远矣！
现代文：高祖到中山，诏书征拜他为典内校书，献之仰天长叹说： 我不如庄周尚能为散木远矣！
English: Gao Zu went to Zhongshan, the imperial edict solicited him to become the school book of the ceremony, and he dedicated it to the heavens and sighed: I am not as good as Zhuang Zhou, but I can still scatter wood far away!

古文：一之谓甚，其可再乎。 
现代文：一次就够了，怎么能再来一次呢？ 
English: Once is enough, how can I do it again?

古文：固以疾辞。
现代文：称病坚决推辞。
English: A person who insists on quitting but comes to worship him as a teacher.

古文：时中山张吾贵与献之齐名，海内皆曰儒宗。
现代文：当时中山张吾贵与刘献之齐名，海内人士称他们为儒家宗师。
English: At that time, Zhongshan Zhangugui and Liu Xian were equally famous, and people at home called them the Confucian masters.

古文：吾贵每一讲唱，门徒千数，其行业可称者寡。
现代文：张吾贵每一次讲唱经书，门徒都达数千人，其中德行学业可以称许的很少。
English: Every time Zhang Wugui recites the scriptures, there are thousands of disciples, among whom there are very few who can be commended for their virtuous studies.

古文：献之著录，数百而已，皆经通之士。
现代文：刘献之著录，参与的数百人罢了，都是通经的人。
English: According to Liu Xian's book, the hundreds of people who took part in the event were all well-versed in the scriptures.

古文：于是有识者辨其优劣。
现代文：于是有见识的人便辨别二人优劣。
English: So people with insight can tell the difference between the two.

古文：出后，兰告家人。少时而患卒。
现代文：魏朝紧接丧乱之后立朝，《五经》大义虽然都有师讲说，但天下学生还有很多疑难问题，这些疑难都由刘献之裁决。
English: The Wei Dynasty was established immediately after the turmoil, and although there are teachers to explain the great principles of the Five Classics, students around the world still have many difficult questions. These difficult questions are all decided by Liu Xian.

古文：孙惠蔚，字叔炳，武邑武遂人也，小字陀罗。自言六世祖道恭为晋长秋卿，自道恭至惠蔚世以儒学相传。
现代文：六艺的文字，他虽然没有全注，但他所标出的意旨，与旧的意义很不相同，刘献之撰《三礼大义》四卷，《三传略例》三卷，《注毛诗序义》一卷，现在流行于世，加上《章句疏》三卷。注《涅经》未完便去世了。孙惠蔚，字叔炳，武邑武遂人，小字陀罗。自称六世祖道恭为晋长秋卿，从道恭到惠蔚世代以大儒传家。
English: Although he did not fully annotate the text of the six arts, the meaning he marked was very different from the old meaning. Liu Xian wrote the "Three Rites and Great Virtues" in four volumes, the "Three Short Stories" in three volumes, the "Introduction to the Annotated Poetry" in one volume, which is now popular in the world, and the "Chapter and Verse" in three volumes. He died before he finished the "Book of Nirvana." Sun Hui Wei, Zi Xuan, Wuyi Wu Sui Ren, Xiao Zi Dara. He claimed to be the sixth ancestor of Tao Qiong as the Jin Chang Qiuqing,

古文：惠蔚年十三，粗通《诗》、《书》及《孝经》、《论语》；十八，师董道季讲《易》；十九，师程玄读《礼经》及《春秋》三《传》。
现代文：孙惠蔚十三岁时，粗通《诗》、《书》及《孝经》、《论语》；十八岁时，师从董道季讲《易》；十九岁，师从程玄读《礼经》及《春秋三传》。
English: At the age of thirteen, Sun Huiwei read "Poetry," "Book" and "Filial Piety" and "Analects." At the age of eighteen, he learned from Dong Daojie to read "I"; at the age of nineteen, he learned from Cheng Xuan to read "Rite of Spring" and "Three Classics of Spring and Autumn."

古文：周流儒肆，有名于冀方。
现代文：游历儒堂，在冀州一带相当出名。
English: He traveled around the Confucian meeting place, and his fame spread throughout Jizhou.

古文：太和初，郡举孝廉，对策于中书省。
现代文：太和初年，郡中推举他为孝廉，对策于中书省。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Xiaowen of the Northern Wei Dynasty, the people of the county recommended Sun Huiwei as a filial piety, and he was allowed to make a statement on political affairs.

古文：时中书监高闾宿闻惠蔚，称其英辩，因相谈，荐为中书博士。
现代文：当时中书监高闾久闻孙惠蔚名字，称其英辩，因而与他交谈，推荐他为中书博士。
English: At that time, Sun Huiwei's name had long been known to the Chinese Literature Supervisor of Gaochun High School, who had talked with him and recommended him as a doctor of Chinese Literature.

古文：转皇宗博士。
现代文：转任皇宗博士。
English: He was transferred to the post of Dr. Kozo.

古文：闾被敕理定雅乐，惠蔚参其事。
现代文：高闾承诏理定雅乐，孙惠蔚参预此事。
English: Gao Wei was ordered to sort out and compile the elegant music, and Sun Huiwei took part in this matter.

古文：及乐成，闾上疏请集朝贵于太乐，共研是非。
现代文：等到乐定成，高闾上疏请召集朝中贵宦到太乐署，讨论是非。
English: Wait until the music is set, please call up the Korean and Chinese dignitaries to the music department to discuss the pros and cons.

古文：秘书令李彪自以才辩，立难于其间，闾命惠蔚与彪抗论，彪不能屈。
现代文：秘书令李彪自负才辩，在其中诘难，高闾让孙惠蔚与李彪辩论，李彪不能说服他。
English: The secretary told Li Biao to be proud of his ability to argue, which was difficult. Gao Gan let Sun Huiwei debate with Li Biao, but Li Biao could not convince him.

古文：黄门侍郎张彝常与游处，每表疏论事，多参访焉。
现代文：黄门侍郎张彝经常与他游玩相处，每逢上表陈疏论事，多参访于他。
English: Huangmen waiter Zhang Qian often played with him and visited him whenever there was a dispute.

古文：十七年，高祖南征，上议告类之礼。
现代文：太和十七年，高祖南征，上议告类之礼。
English: In the 17th year of the Taihe era, Gao Zu's Southern Expedition was announced.

古文：及太师冯熙薨，惠蔚监其丧礼，上书令熙未冠之子皆服成人之服。
现代文：等到太师冯熙逝世，孙惠蔚监护他的丧礼，上书请求让冯熙还没成年的儿子都穿成人的丧服。
English: When Grandmaster Feng Xi passed away, Sun Huiwei oversaw his funeral and sent a letter requesting that all of Feng Xi's underage sons wear adult funeral attire.

古文：惠蔚与李彪以儒学相知，及彪位至尚书，惠蔚仍太庙令。
现代文：孙惠蔚与李彪以儒学相知，等到李彪官做到尚书，孙惠蔚仍为太庙令。
English: Sun Huiwei and Li Biao understood each other because of Confucian learning. After Li Biao became an official, Sun Huiwei continued to serve as the Grand Priest.

古文：高祖曾从容言曰： 道固既登龙门而孙蔚犹沉涓浍，朕常以为负矣。 
现代文：高祖曾经从容地说： 道固既登龙门而孙惠蔚还沉秽地，朕常常觉得心中有愧。 
English: Gao Zu once said calmly: Daogu has already ascended the Dragon Gate and Sun Hui Wei is still obscene, I often feel ashamed in my heart.

古文：虽久滞小官，深体通塞，无孜孜之望，儒者以是尚焉。
现代文：孙惠蔚虽然久滞小官，但深深理解为官通塞之变，没有孜孜求官的愿望，儒者以此推崇他。
English: Although Sun Huiwei has been a minor official for a long time, he can deeply appreciate the principle of reaching stagnation without any resentment, and Confucians praise him for this.

古文：二十二年，侍读东宫。
现代文：二十二年，孙惠蔚侍读东宫。
English: In the 22nd year of the Taiwa era, Sun Huiwei served as an attendant at the East Palace.

古文：先是七庙以平文为太祖，高祖议定祖宗，以道武为太祖。
现代文：这以前七庙以平文为太祖，高祖议定祖宗，以道武为太祖。
English: Prior to this, the seven temples took Pingwen as the grand ancestor, Gaozu as the agreed ancestor, and Daowu as the grand ancestor.

古文：祖宗虽定，然昭穆未改。
现代文：祖宗虽然确定下来，但庙中昭穆次序仍然未改。
English: Although the ancestral line has been established, the deities around the great-grandfather have not changed.

古文：及高祖崩，祔神主于庙，时侍中崔光兼太常卿，以太祖既改，昭穆以次而易。
现代文：等到高祖逝世，附神主牌位于祖庙，当时侍中崔光兼任太常卿，认为太祖既改，昭穆应依次而易。
English: By the time Gao Zu passed away, the main plaque with the deities was located in the ancestral temple. At that time, the chamberlain Cui Guang also served as the Tai Changqing, and he thought that since the great ancestor had changed, Shomu should follow suit.

古文：兼御史中尉、黄门侍郎邢峦以为太祖虽改，昭穆仍不应易，乃立弹草欲按奏光。
现代文：兼御史中尉、黄门侍郎邢峦认为太祖虽改，昭穆仍然不该改变，于是立弹劾书章要追究崔光责任。
English: In addition, the lieutenant of the imperial history and the attendant of the Yellow Gate thought that although the great ancestor had changed, Akim still should not change, so the impeachment letter was set up to investigate the responsibility of Cui Guang.

古文：光谓惠蔚曰： 此乃礼也，而执法欲见弹劾，思获助于硕学。 
现代文：崔光对孙惠蔚说： 这是礼制，而执法之人要弹劾我，我只有向硕学大儒求援来了。 
English: Cui Guang said to Sun Hui Wei: This is the etiquette, and the law enforcers want to impeach me. I only came to seek help from the great scholar Zhuo.

古文：惠蔚曰： 此深得礼变。 
现代文：孙惠蔚说： 您的意见深得礼制变化要旨。 
English: Sun Huiwei said, "Your opinion has deeply captured the essence of the change in the etiquette system.

古文：寻为书以与光，赞明其事。
现代文：很快写了封信给崔光，说明此事。
English: Sun Huiwei said, "This is very much in line with the change in etiquette," and quickly wrote to Cui Guang to help clarify the matter.

古文：光以惠蔚书呈宰辅，乃召惠蔚与峦庭议得失，尚书令王肃又助峦，而峦理终屈，弹事遂寝。
现代文：崔光把孙惠蔚的信递交给宰相，于是召孙惠蔚与邢峦在官衙辩论得失，尚书令王肃又帮助邢峦，而邢峦最终还是理屈，弹劾的事就放下了。
English: Cui Guang handed Sun Hui Wei's letter to the prime minister, then summoned Sun Hui Wei to debate the merits and demerits with Zou at the cabinet meeting. Shang Shuling ordered Wang Su to help Zou, and Zou finally reasoned, and the impeachment matter was dropped.

古文：世宗即位之后，仍在左右敷训经典，自冗从仆射迁秘书丞、武邑郡中正。
现代文：世宗即位之后，孙惠蔚仍然在其左右教授经典，官职从冗从仆射迁升至秘书丞、武邑郡中正。
English: After the enthronement of King Sejong, Sun Hui-wei was still teaching classics around him, and his official position was moved from the position of a courtier to the position of secretary-general and then to the position of middle-ranking official in Wuyi County.

古文：惠蔚既入东观，见典籍未周，乃上疏曰： 臣闻圣皇之御世也，必幽赞人经，参天二地，宪章典故，述遵鸿猷。
现代文：孙惠蔚既入东观，看到典籍不周备，于是上疏说： 臣听说圣皇治世，必定赞扩经典，参天礼地，宪章典故，述遵鸿儒。
English: After Sun Huiwei entered the Eastern Outlook, he saw that the classics were not well-prepared, so he said: "When a minister hears that the holy emperor is reigning, he must praise and expand the classics, the rites of heaven, the charter allusions, and describe Zun Hongru.

古文：故《易》曰： 观乎天文以察时变，观乎人文以化成天下。 
现代文：所以《易》说： 观乎天文以察时变，观乎人文以化成天下。 
English: Therefore, "Yi" said: Observe the astronomy to observe the time change, observe the humanities to transform into the world.

古文：然则《六经》、百氏，图书秘籍，乃承天之正术，治人之贞范。
现代文：所以六经、百氏、图书秘籍，是承接上天之术，是治人的规范。
English: Therefore, the Six Classics of Confucianism, the Hundred Classics of Confucianism, and the Secret Books of Confucianism are the embodiment of God's art, and are the norms for governing people.

古文：是以温柔疏远，《诗书》之教；恭俭易良，《礼乐》之道。
现代文：所以温柔疏远，是《诗》、《书》之教；恭俭易良，是《礼》、《乐》之道。
English: Therefore, gentle alienation is the teaching of "Poetry" and "Book"; frugality is easy and good, is the way of "Rite" and "Music."

古文：爻彖以精微为神，《春秋》以属辞为化。
现代文：爻彖以精微为神，《春秋》以辞意为化。
English: "Spring and Autumn" embodies the spirit of refinement.

古文：故大训炳于东序，艺文光于麟阁。
现代文：因此大训昭明于东序之堂，艺文光耀于麟阁之上。
English: Therefore, the Great Teaching shines brightly in the hall of the Eastern Rite, and the artistic literature shines brightly in the pavilion of the Eastern Rite.

古文：斯实太平之枢宗，胜残之要道，有国之灵基，帝王之盛业。
现代文：这些实在都是致太平的主要典籍，胜残的要道，乃是国家的灵基，帝王的盛业。
English: These are indeed the main classics for peace, the key to victory and defeat, the foundation of the country, and the prosperity of the emperor.

古文：安上靖民，敦风美俗，其在兹乎？
现代文：安定政权，安抚百姓，调化风俗，都是依据它们吧？
English: The stability of the regime, the pacification of the people, the modulation of customs, are all based on them, right?

古文：及秦弃学术，《礼经》泯绝。
现代文：等到秦代毁弃学术，《礼经》绝迹。
English: By the time the Qin Dynasty abandoned learning, the "Book of Rites" had disappeared.

古文：减兴求访，典文载举，先王遗训，粲然复存。
现代文：汉兴求访，典文渐举，先王遗训，灿然复存。
English: Han Xing paid a visit, the texts were gradually cited, and the former king's teachings were brilliantly revived.

古文：暨光武拨乱，日不暇给，而入洛之书二千余两。
现代文：到光武拨乱反正，日不暇给，而入洛阳的书仍只有二千余两。
English: By the time of the Guangwu Disturbance, there was not enough time in the day, and there were still only more than 2,000 books in Luoyang.

古文：魏晋之世，尤重典坟，收亡集逸，九流咸备。
现代文：魏、晋朝，尤其重视典籍，收亡集逸，九流典籍皆备。
English: During the Wei and Jin Dynasties, the classics were especially valued, and the classics of the nine schools were collected and preserved.

古文：观其鸠阅史篇，访购经论，纸竹所载，略尽无遗。
现代文：检视他们校集史篇，访购经论，纸竹所载，巨细无遗。
English: They examined the history of their school collection, visited and purchased the scriptures, and read them on paper and bamboo, all in great detail.

古文：臣学阙通儒，思不及远，徒循章句，片义无立，而兹造曲覃，厕班秘省，忝官承乏，唯书是司。
现代文：为臣学识不足称为通儒，思虑不及绵远，徒循章句，片义不曾述立。而皇恩慈爱，照及愚陋，我得以任职秘书省，忝居承乏，职在掌书。
English: Because of my lack of knowledge, I am called a Confucianist, my thoughts are not far-reaching, I just follow the chapters and sentences, and I have never stated a single meaning. However, the emperor's kindness and mercy, as well as stupidity, I was able to serve as the secretary of the ministry, I lived in poverty, and I was in charge of the book.

古文：而观、阁旧典，先无定目，新故杂糅，首尾不全。
现代文：而臣看观、阁旧典，先前没有确定目次，新故混杂，首尾不全。
English: However, the table of contents has not been determined for the "Minister of the People's Court" and the "Old Book of the Palace," and the new and the old are mixed and incomplete.

古文：有者累帙数十，无者旷年不写。
现代文：有的累重数十，没有的多年不誊写。
English: Some have accumulated dozens, while others have not been copied for years.

古文：或篇第褫落，始末沦残；或文坏字误，谬烂相属。
现代文：或者有的篇第脱漏，始末残缺；有的文坏字误，谬误多烂相属。
English: Or there is an omission in the first part of the article, which is incomplete from beginning to end; or there is a grammatical error, which is a fallacy.

古文：篇目虽多，全定者少。
现代文：篇目虽说很多，全然不缺的很少。
English: Although there are a lot of articles, there are very few that are complete.

古文：臣今依前丞臣卢昶所撰《甲乙》新录，欲裨残补阙，损并有无，校练句读，以为定本，次第均写永为常式。
现代文：臣今天依照前丞臣卢昶所写的《甲乙新录》，打算修残补阙，损并有无，校正句读，制成定本，次第均写，永为常式。
English: Today, in accordance with the "Jia Yi Xin Lu" written by the former prime minister Lu Wei, the minister intends to repair the damage, correct the damage, proofread the sentence, make it into a final version, and write it all down, forever.

古文：其省先无本者，广加推寻，搜求令足。
现代文：那些省中先没有的版本，广加推寻，搜求令足。
English: Secretary of the Ministry of the original version is not, extensive exploration and search. Search version to supplement.

古文：然经记浩博，诸子纷纶，部帙既多，章篇纰缪，当非一二校书，岁月可了。
现代文：然而经记书籍浩博，诸子纷论，部卷既多，章篇错误，不是一两名校书官，经过一些年的工作就可做完的。
English: However, there are so many books of sutras, so many sermons, so many volumes, so many mistakes in chapters, that not one or two school scribes can complete the work in a few years.

古文：今求令四门博士及在京儒生四十人，在秘书省专精校考，参定字义。
现代文：今请求让四门博士以及在京的儒生四人，在秘书省专门从事精校工作，参定字义。
English: I now request that the four doctors and four Confucian students in Beijing, who specialize in the secretarial department, be allowed to participate in the meaning of the word.

古文：如蒙听许，则典文允正，群书大集。 
现代文：如果陛下同意，则会使经典文字允当正确，书籍定会大为丰富起来。 
English: If His Majesty agrees, then the classic text will be correct and the books will be greatly enriched.

古文：诏许之。
现代文：帝下诏同意。
English: The emperor issued an imperial edict approving it.

古文：又兼黄门侍郎，迁中散大夫，仍兼黄门。
现代文：又兼任黄门侍郎，迁任中散大夫，仍兼任黄门侍郎。
English: He also served as the Yellow Gate Attendant, moved to the position of Zhongshan Doctor, and still served as the Yellow Gate Attendant.

古文：久之，正黄门侍郎，代崔光为著作郎，才非文史，无所撰著，唯自披其传注数行而已。
现代文：很久以后，转为正黄门侍郎，代崔光为著作郎，他非文史之才，没有撰述，只自披其传注数行而已。
English: After a long time, he became the official Huangmen waiter, and the deputy Cui Guang became the author. He was not a literary historian, he did not write, he only wrote a few lines.

古文：迁国子祭酒、秘书监，仍知史事。
现代文：迁任国子祭酒、秘书监，仍掌史事。
English: He was reassigned to the position of Kuniko Matsuri sake, secretary supervisor, and still concurrently held the position of Shosho-ro.

古文：延昌二年，追赏侍讲之劳，封枣强县开国男，食邑二百户。
现代文：延昌二年，朝廷追赏他的侍讲功劳，封枣强县开国男，食邑二百户。
English: In the second year of Yanchang, the imperial court rewarded him for his services as a courtier, sealing Zaoqiang County as the founding father of the country, with more than 200 households.

古文：肃宗初，出为平东将军、济州刺史。
现代文：肃宗初年，出任平东将军、济州刺史。
English: In the first year of Suzong, he served as the general of Pingdong and the governor of Jeju.

古文：特乞加以显谥，追以好爵，仰申朝廷尚德之风，下示学徒稽古之利。
现代文：还京后，除任光禄大夫。魏朝初年以来，儒生大多仕途潦倒，孙惠蔚最为显达。他先单名蔚，正始年间，在宫内侍讲，夜晚论述佛经。皇帝听了很舒服，下诏让他加上 惠 ，号称 惠蔚法师 了。
English: After returning to Beijing, he was removed from the post of Guanglu doctor. Since the first year of the Wei Dynasty, most of the Confucians have failed in their careers, and Sun Huiwei is the most prominent. He first had the single name Wei, and during the first year, he lectured in the palace, and discussed Buddhist scriptures at night. The emperor listened very comfortably, and the next edict asked him to add Hui, known as Huiwei Master.

古文：若宸鉴昭回，曲垂矜采，则荒坟千载，式贵生平。 卒无赠谥。董徵，字文发，顿丘卫国人也。
现代文：神龟元年卒于任上，时年六十七岁。朝廷赐给他帛五百匹，赠大将军、瀛州刺史，谥称戴。董徵，字文发，顿丘卫国人。
English: He died in his first year in office, at the age of sixty-seven. The imperial court gave him thirty-five hundred horses, and presented him with the titles of grand general, Zhangzhou Sashi, and Dai. Dong Zheng, Zhi Wen Fa, and Dongqiu Wei Guo Ren.

古文：祖英，高平太守。
现代文：祖董英，任高平太守。
English: Zou Dongying, Ren Gaoping became the de facto ruler.

古文：父虬，郡功曹。
现代文：父董虬，终官郡功曹。
English: His father, Dong Hao, was a county official.

古文：徵身长七尺二寸，好古，学尚雅素。
现代文：董徵身长七尺二寸，好古，学尚雅素。
English: Dong Zheng is seven feet two inches tall. He is old-fashioned and elegant.

古文：年十七，师清河监伯阳，受《论语》、《毛诗》、《春秋》、《周易》，就河内高望崇受《周官》，后于博陵刘献之遍受诸经。
现代文：年纪十七，从师清河监伯阳，受《论语》、《毛诗》、《春秋》、《周易》，师从河内高望崇受《周官》，后来又从师博陵刘献之广受众经。
English: At the age of seventeen, he received "Analects of Confucius," "Mao Poetry," "Spring and Autumn" and "Zhou Yi" from his teacher, Qinghecun Boyang. His teacher from Hanoi was highly respected and revered for "Zhou Guan," and later he received the widely popular sutras from his teacher, Boling Liu.

古文：数年之中，大义精练，讲授生徒。
现代文：数年之中，诸书大义精练，收徒讲授。
English: In the past few years, all the books have been refined and taught.

古文：太和末，为四门小学博士。
现代文：太和末年，任四门小学博士。
English: At the end of his life, he was appointed as a doctor of Shimen Elementary School.

古文：后世宗诏徵入璇华宫，令孙惠蔚问以《六经》，仍诏征教授京兆、清河、广平、汝南四王，后特除员外散骑侍郎。
现代文：后来世宗下诏让董徵入华宫，令孙惠蔚问他《六经》，仍下诏让董徵教授京兆、清河、广平、汝南四王。后来特除员外散骑侍郎。
English: Later, King Sejong issued an edict to conscript Dong into the Imperial Palace, and ordered Sun Huiwei to ask him about the "Six Classics," and still issued an edict to conscript Dong to teach the four kings of Jingzhao, Qinghe, Guangping, and Runan. Later, he was dismissed from the imperial court.

古文：清河王怿之为司空、司徒，引征为长流参军。
现代文：清河王元怿任司空、司徒，引董徵为长流参军。
English: The king of Qinghe, Yuan Zang, appointed Siku and Sito, and invited Dong Zhao to join the army as a long-term member.

古文：怿迁太尉，征为仓曹参军。
现代文：元怿迁任太尉，征任仓曹参军。
English: Yuan Xuanqian was promoted to the rank of captain and Cang Cao was conscripted into the army.

古文：出为氵市郡太守，加扬烈将军。
现代文：出任沛郡太守，加扬烈将军。
English: General Gayanre became the governor of Pei County.

古文：入为太尉司马，俄加辅国将军。
现代文：入朝任太尉司马，不久加辅国将军。
English: Entered the imperial court as First Lieutenant Sima, and was soon promoted to General of the Auxiliary Province.

古文：未几，以本将军除安州刺史。
现代文：没多久，以本将军除任安州刺史。
English: It didn't take long for General Ippon to be removed from his post as governor of Anzhou.

古文：徵因述职，路次过家，置酒高会，大享邑老，乃言曰： 腰龟返国，昔人称荣；仗节还家，云胡不乐。 
现代文：董徵因入廷述职，路过家乡，摆设酒宴，大享乡老，说： 腰带龟符返国，过去的人都称这很荣耀；仗节还家，为何不快乐一番。 
English: Dong Zheng, due to report for duty at the court, passed by his hometown, held a wine banquet, and enjoyed the old people of his hometown. He said, "Returning to the country with a belt and turtle charm, people in the past called it a great honor; returning home on the war anniversary, why not be the happiest."

古文：因诫二三子弟曰： 此之富贵，匪自天降，乃勤学所致耳。 
现代文：因之又告诫家门子弟说： 我今天的富贵，不是从天降下的，乃是勤学的结果。 
English: For this reason, he also admonished the younger members of his family, saying: My wealth today did not come down from heaven, but is the result of diligent study.

古文：时人荣之。
现代文：当时人都以他为荣。
English: At that time, everyone was proud of him.

古文：入为司农少卿、光禄大夫。
现代文：入朝为司农少卿、光禄大夫。
English: Entered the imperial court as Sifu Shokei and Koroku no daibu.

古文：征出州入卿，匪唯学业所致，亦由汝南王悦以其师资之义。
现代文：董徵出州入卿，不仅是学业好的原因，也是由于汝南王元悦以他是自己恩师，出面为他请官所致。
English: It was not only because of his good academic performance that Dong was selected to be a prefect, but also because Runan King Yuan Rong took him as his mentor and offered him a position.

古文：为之启请焉。永安初，加平东将军，寻以老解职。永熙二年卒。
现代文：永安初年，加授平东将军，不久以年老卸职。永熙二年去世。
English: In the first year of Yongan, he was awarded the title of General Pingdong, but he soon retired due to old age. He died in the second year of Yongxi.

古文：出帝以徵昔授父业，故优赠散骑常侍、都督相殷沧三州诸军事、车骑大将军、仪同三司、尚书左仆射、相州刺史，谥曰文烈。
现代文：出帝以董徵过去曾给其父授业，故优赠散骑常侍、都督湘殷沧三州诸军事、车骑大将军、仪同三司、尚书左仆射、相州刺史，谥曰文烈。
English: In the past, Emperor Emeritus Dong Zheng had taught his father. Therefore, Emperor Emeritus Dong Zheng awarded him with the titles of stagiaire, military governor of the three states of Hunan, Yunnan, and Sichuan, general of cavalry, grandmaster of ceremonies, grandmaster of the three departments, grandmaster of calligraphy, grandmaster of calligraphy, grandmaster of calligraphy, grandmaster of calligraphy, grandmaster of calligraphy, grandmaster of calligraphy, grandmaster of calligraphy, grandmaster of calligraphy, grandmaster of calligraphy, grandmaster of calligraphy, grandmaster of calligraphy, grandmaster

古文：子仲曜，武定末，仪同开府属。刁冲，字文朗，渤海饶安人也，镇东将军雍之曾孙。
现代文：刁冲，字文朗，渤海饶安人，镇东将军刁雍的曾孙。
English: He is the great-grandson of Zhendong General Zhenyong, the great-grandson of Zhenchong, the great-grandson of Zhiwenlang, the great-grandson of Bohai Raoan.

古文：十三而孤，孝慕过人。
现代文：十三岁成为孤儿，孝顺过于常人。
English: Orphaned at the age of thirteen, he is more dutiful than the average person.

古文：其祖母司空高允女，聪明妇人也，哀其早孤，抚养尢笃。
现代文：他的祖母是司空高允的女儿，是位聪明的妇女，哀伤他少小即成孤儿，抚养他尤为精心。
English: His grandmother was the daughter of Sikuo Gaoyun, a clever woman, who grieved when he was orphaned at a young age and raised him with particular care.

古文：冲免丧后便志学他方，高氏泣涕留之，冲终不止。
现代文：刁冲丧期满后便有志到他方求学，高氏流着眼泪挽留他，而刁冲执意要走。
English: After the expiration of the mourning period, Zou Chong had the ambition to study in another country. Gao kept him with tears, while Zou Chong insisted on going.

古文：虽家世贵达，乃从师于外，自同诸生。
现代文：虽然他家世显贵，而他仍在外从师，把自己当一般生徒一样看待。
English: Although he comes from a distinguished family, he is still an outside teacher and sees himself as an ordinary student.

古文：于时学制，诸生悉日直监厨，冲虽有仆隶，不令代己，身自炊爨。
现代文：当时学制，诸生都要轮流值日下厨，刁冲虽然有仆役奴隶，不让其代己下厨，生火做饭。
English: At that time, the school system required all students to take turns cooking on duty. Although He Chong had servants and slaves, he did not allow them to cook for him and make fire for cooking.

古文：每师受之际，发情精专，不舍昼夜，殆忘寒暑。
现代文：每次听讲的时候，他总是专心致志，不分日夜，不知寒暑，刻苦学习。
English: Every time he listens to a lecture, he always pays close attention, and studies hard day and night, regardless of whether it is hot or cold.

古文：学通诸经，偏修郑说，阴阳、图纬、算数、天文、风气之书莫不关综，当世服其精博，刺史郭祚闻其盛名，访以疑义，冲应机解辩，无不祛其久惑。
现代文：刁冲学通众经，偏修郑玄之说，阴阳、图纬、算数、天文、风气的书籍无不融会贯通，当世的人佩服他的精湛渊博。刺史郭祚听说他的盛名，以疑难问题寻访于他，刁冲当即解释辨析，无不消除其长久的疑惑。
English: According to Zheng Xianzhi, a student of Gongchong's, all the books on yin and yang, graphs and latitudes, arithmetic, astronomy, and customs were thoroughly integrated, and people in the world admired his exquisite and profound knowledge. When the scholar Guo Wei heard of his fame, he visited him with difficult questions, and Gongchong immediately explained and analyzed, eliminating his long-term doubts.

古文：后太守范阳卢尚之、刺史河东裴植并征冲为功曹、主簿，非所好也，受署而已，不关事务。
现代文：后来太守范阳人卢尚之、刺史河东人裴植都征刁冲为功曹、主簿，这都不是他所喜欢的，刁冲只是挂名而已，不参与具体事务。
English: Later, Lu Shangzhi, the governor-general of Fanyang, and Pei Zhi, the governor-general of East Sichuan Province, both selected Gongchong as a meritorious person and the chief accountant. This was not to his liking. Gongchong was only a figurehead and did not participate in specific affairs.

古文：惟以讲学为心，四方学徒就其受业者岁有数百。
现代文：只以讲学为本业，四方学徒到他这里学习的每年都有数百人。
English: He is a lecturer by profession, and hundreds of students from the four directions come to study with him every year.

古文：冲虽儒生，而执心壮烈，不畏强御。
现代文：刁冲虽是儒生，却心怀壮烈，不畏强暴。
English: Although Gongchong was a Confucian scholar, he had a strong spirit and was not afraid of violence.

古文：延昌中，世宗舅司徒高肇擅恣威权，冲乃抗表极言其事，辞旨恳直，文义忠愤。
现代文：延昌年间，魏世宗的舅舅司徒高肇擅弄威权，刁冲于是上表痛陈这事，辞意恳切忠直，字字激愤，句句忠烈。
English: During the Yanchang period, Wei Shizong's uncle, Sittu Gaozhao, was indulging in authoritarianism. Therefore, Xuchang expressed his regret over the matter, his words were sincere and loyal, his words were angry, and his words were loyal.

古文：太傅、清河王怿览而叹息。
现代文：太傅、清河王元怿看完上表，叹息不已。
English: Taifu and Qinghe Wangyuan after reading the above table, sighed.

古文：先是冲曾祖雍作《行孝论》以诫子孙，称： 古之葬者衣之以薪，不封不树，后世圣人易之棺椁。
现代文：以前，刁冲曾祖刁雍写《行孝论》以告诫子孙，称： 古代死了的人以薪为衣，不起冢也不树碑，后代圣人变而为以棺椁下葬。
English: In the past, Gongchong's great-grandfather Gong Yong wrote "On Filial Piety" to admonish his descendants, saying: "In ancient times, the dead were clothed in sackcloth, and no tombstone was erected. Later generations of saints were buried in coffins."

古文：其有生则不能致养，死则厚葬过度。
现代文：这有生则不能奉养，死则厚葬过度的嫌疑。
English: In this case, if there is life, it cannot be supported, and if there is death, there is a suspicion of excessive burial.

古文：及于末世，至蘧蒢裹尸，倮而葬者。
现代文：到了末世，就草席裹尸，裸而葬之。
English: At the end of the world, the bodies were wrapped in straw mats and buried naked.

古文：确而为论，并作折衷。
现代文：此论很恰当，并非折衷之说。
English: This is a fair point, not a compromise.

古文：既知二者之失，岂宜同之。
现代文：我们既然知道二者失之偏颇，哪还能与其苟同呢。
English: Since we know that both are biased, how can we agree with them?

古文：当令所存者棺厚不过三寸，高不过三尺，弗用缯彩，敛以时服。
现代文：我们所应采取的应是棺椁厚不过三寸，高不过三尺，不用绸缎，装殓只穿平时衣服。
English: What we should adopt is that the coffin should be no more than three inches thick and no more than three feet high, with no silk lining, and only ordinary clothes should be worn for decoration.

古文：轜车止用白布为幔，不加画饰，名为清素车。
现代文：丧车只用白布为幔，不加画饰，起名叫清素车。
English: The funeral car is only made of white cloth, without any decoration, and is called the Qingxu car.

古文：又去挽歌、方相，并盟器杂物。 
现代文：还省去挽歌，驱邪神像，还有神器杂物等一并去除。 
English: It also omitted elegies, images of exorcists, as well as artifact debris, which were also removed.

古文：及冲祖遵将卒，敕其子孙令奉雍遗旨。
现代文：等刁冲祖刁遵快死时，嘱咐子孙要他们遵照刁雍遗旨。
English: When he died, he ordered his descendants to carry out his last wishes.

古文：河南尹丞张普惠谓为太俭，贻书于冲叔整议其进退。
现代文：河南尹丞张普惠说这样做过于节俭，写信给刁冲的叔父刁整讨论此事是否合适。
English: Henan Yincheng Zhang Puhui said that this was too frugal, and wrote to Hao Chong's uncle Hao Jie to discuss whether this was appropriate.

古文：整令与通学议之，冲及致书国学诸儒以论其事，学官竟不能答。
现代文：刁整令刁冲与学识渊博的人讨论此事，刁冲于是写信给国子学中的学者们讨论此事，学官们竟不能给出一个答复。
English: Gong Zi ordered Gong Chong to discuss the matter with knowledgeable people. Gong Chong then wrote to scholars at Kuniko to discuss the matter, but the scholars could not give an answer.

古文：冲以嫡传祖爵东安侯。
现代文：刁冲因为嫡传，袭爵东安侯。
English: Because he was a direct descendant, he succeeded to the title of Lord of Dongan.

古文：京兆王继为司空也，并以高选频辟记室参军。
现代文：京兆王元继任司空，频频辟他为记室参军。
English: Jing Zhao Wang Yuan succeeded Siku, and frequently sent him to join the army as a recorder.

古文：肃宗将亲释奠，于是国子助教韩神固与诸儒诣国子祭酒崔光、吏部尚书甄琛，举其才学，奏而征焉。
现代文：肃宗准备亲自祭奠神灵，于是国子助教韩神固与众儒者到国子祭酒崔光、吏部尚书甄琛那里，推举其才学，请他赴驾，朝廷应允了。
English: Su Zong was preparing to personally offer sacrifices to the deities, so Guo Zi's assistant teacher Han Shengu and all the Confucianists went to Guo Zi's sacrificial wine Cui Guang, and the headmaster Shang Shu Zhen Qi, to select his talent for learning, and asked him to drive, and the court agreed.

古文：赠骠骑大将军、瀛州刺史，谥曰康。李业兴，上党长子人也。
现代文：等到他去世，国子博士高凉及范阳卢道侃、卢景裕等人又上书陈述刁冲学识品行，商议奏请朝廷谥为安宪先生，以太牢的礼仪祭奠他。冲儿子刁钦，字志儒，早亡。李业兴，上党长子人。
English: After his death, Dr. Guo Zi Gao Liang, Fan Yang, Lu Dao Kan, Lu Jing Yu and others also submitted a letter stating that they would act in accordance with the principles of learning and morality, and requested the Imperial Court to be Mr. An Xian, and to pay tribute to him with ethereal etiquette. Chong's son Yu Qin, a Zhiru, died prematurely. Li Ye Xing, the eldest son of the upper party.

古文：祖虬，父玄纪，并以儒学举孝廉。
现代文：祖父李虬，父玄纪，都因儒学渊博被推举为孝廉。
English: His grandfather, Li Xi, and his father, Xuanzi, were both promoted to the rank of filial piety because of their profound knowledge of Confucianism.

古文：玄纪卒于金乡令。
现代文：玄纪死于金乡令任上。
English: Li Xuanji died after taking up the post of Jinxiangling official.

古文：业兴少耿介。志学精力，负帙从师，不惮勤苦。
现代文：李兴业少年时代就很忠直，潜心学习，负书从师，不怕辛苦。
English: As a boy, Li Xingye was very loyal and devoted to his studies. He was not afraid of hard work.

古文：耽思章句，好览异说。
现代文：精研经书章句，爱看奇闻异说。
English: He studied the scriptures and loved to read fanciful stories.

古文：晚乃师事徐遵明于赵魏之间。时有渔阳鲜于灵馥亦聚徒教授，而遵明声誉未高，著录尚寡。
现代文：稍晚在赵、魏之间师事徐遵明。当时有渔阳人鲜于灵馥也聚徒讲学，而遵明声誉还没多高，著录尚少。
English: A little later, between Zhao and Wei, the teacher was Xu Zunming. At that time, the Yuyang people were less than Lingyao also gathered to lecture, and Zunming's reputation was not very high, and there were few books.

古文：业兴乃诣灵馥黉舍，类受业者。
现代文：业兴于是到灵馥的学校中去，看起来像个学生。
English: Li Xingye went to the same school as other students.

古文：灵馥乃谓曰： 李生久遂羌博士，何所得也？ 
现代文：灵馥于是说： 李生你久随徐遵明都学到了些什么？ 
English: Lingyao then said: Li Sheng, what have you learned from following Xu Zunming for so long?

古文：业兴默尔不言。
现代文：业兴默不作声。
English: Li Xingye was silent.

古文：及灵馥说《左传》，业兴问其大义数条，灵馥不能对。
现代文：等到灵馥讲说《左传》，业兴拣几条传中大义问灵馥，灵馥无法回答。
English: While waiting for Xiang Yu Lingyao to explain "Zo Zhuan," Li Xingye asked him several major questions, which Xiang Yu Lingyao could not answer.

古文：于是振衣而起曰： 羌弟子正如此耳！ 
现代文：于是业兴振衣而起说： 羌弟子正像我这样！ 
English: Li Xingye then stood up trembling and said: "This disciple is just like you!

古文：遂便径还。
现代文：扬长而归。
English: So I went straight back.

古文：自此灵馥生徒倾学而就遵明。
现代文：从此以后，灵馥的学生纷纷改换门庭，来到徐遵明这里。
English: Since then, Lingya's students have changed the courtyard and come to Xu Zunming here.

古文：遵明学徒大盛，业兴之为也。
现代文：徐遵明学生大增，全是李业兴的功劳。
English: The large increase in the number of Xu Zunming students is entirely due to the efforts of Li Yexing.

古文：后乃博涉百家，图纬、风角、天文、占候无不详练，尤长算历。
现代文：后来，李业兴广泛涉猎百家之学，图纬、占卜、天文各种学问无不详知明晓，尤其擅长算术历法。
English: Later, Li Yexing extensively dabbled in the study of a hundred schools, and was familiar with all kinds of knowledge of geography, divination, and astronomy. He was particularly good at arithmetic and calendar.

古文：虽在贫贱，常自矜负，若礼待不足，纵于权贵，不为之屈。
现代文：李业兴虽然贫寒，却很自负傲气，如别人礼待不周，即使权贵之人，他也不低头。
English: Although he was born poor, he was often very conceited, and if he was not treated with sufficient etiquette, even the powerful aristocrats would not yield to them.

古文：后为王遵业门客。
现代文：后来当王遵业的门客。
English: Later, he became a diner under Wang Zunye.

古文：举孝廉，为校书郎。
现代文：被推举为孝廉，任校书郎。
English: His recommendation was Takakado Takakado, who became the school's teacher.

古文：以世行赵匪历，节气后辰下算，延昌中，业兴乃为《戊子元历》上之。
现代文：因当时流行赵匪欠的历法，这部历法节气比时间变化晚了一些节拍，延昌年间，李业兴编出一部《戊子元历》献给朝廷。
English: Due to the popular Zhao Gangye calendar at the time, this calendar was a few beats later than the time change. During the Yanchang period, Li Ye Xing compiled a "Wu Zi Yuan Calendar" dedicated to the imperial court.

古文：于时屯骑校尉张洪、荡寇将军张龙祥等九家各献新历，世宗诏令共为一历。
现代文：当时，屯骑校尉张洪、荡寇将军张龙祥等九家各自献上一部新的历法，世宗下诏，让把它们合为一部。
English: At that time, nine families, including the cavalry lieutenant Zhang Hong and the bandit general Zhang Longxiang, each presented a new calendar, and Shizong issued an edict to combine them into one.

古文：洪等后遂共推业兴为主，成《戊子历》，正光三年奏行之。
现代文：张洪等人于是共同推荐李兴业为主，编成《戊子历》。正光三年，奏请推行新历。
English: Zhang Hong and others then jointly recommended Li Xingye as the main author and compiled the "Wu Zi Calendar." Three years later, the new calendar was implemented.

古文：事在《律历志》，累迁奉朝请。
现代文：事情记录在《律历志》。迁任奉朝请。
English: The matter was recorded in the "Law Calendar."

古文：临淮王彧征蛮，引为骑兵参军。
现代文：临海王元征伐蛮族引征他为骑兵参军。
English: Linhai Wangyuan's conquest of the barbarians led him to join the cavalry.

古文：后广陵王渊北征，复为外兵参军。
现代文：后来广陵王元渊北征，又为外兵参军。
English: Later, Guangling Wang Yuan Yuan went on the Northern Expedition and joined the army as a foreign soldier.

古文：业兴以殷历甲寅，黄帝辛卯，徒有积元，术数亡缺，业兴又修之，各为一卷，传于世。
现代文：李业兴考虑到殷商甲寅历，黄帝辛卯历，空有积元，术数亡缺，业兴又加以修订，各写一卷，又流传于世。
English: Li Ye Xing took into account the Yin Shang Jia Yin calendar, the Yellow Emperor Xin Wu calendar, the empty integral, and the missing number of operations. Ye Xing also revised them, wrote one volume each, and passed on to the world.

古文：建义初，敕典仪注，未几除著作佐郎。
现代文：建义初年，授官典仪注，没多久升任著作佐郎。
English: In the first year of Jianyi, he was awarded the official ceremony, and shortly after that he was promoted to the post of Shososaro.

古文：永安二年，以前造历之勋，赐爵长子伯。
现代文：永安二年，因他以前造历书的功劳，朝廷赐给他长子伯爵位。
English: In the second year of Yongan, the imperial court gave his eldest son the title of count because of his previous achievements in making almanacs.

古文：遭忧解任，寻起复本官。
现代文：后来因居丧解职，不久又恢复原职。
English: He was later relieved of his duties due to his death, but was reinstated soon after.

古文：元晔之窃号也，除通直散骑侍郎。
现代文：元晔窃居魏政权，任他为通直散骑侍郎。
English: Yuan Shikai was a usurper in the Wei regime, and he was appointed as Tsundao Sanzhi's equerry.

古文：普泰元年，沙汰侍官，业兴仍在通直，加宁朔将军。
现代文：普泰元年，淘汰侍官，李业兴仍在通直郎位，又加授宁朔将军。
English: In the first year of Putai, after the elimination of the attendants, Li Ye Xing was still in the position of Tong Zhi Lang, and was awarded the title of Ning Shuo General.

古文：又除征虏将军、中散大夫，仍在通直。
现代文：后又授征虏将军、中散大夫，仍在通直职位。
English: Later, he was also awarded the title of General of Conscription and the title of Dr. Zhongshan, and he is still in the position.

古文：太昌初，转散骑侍郎，仍以典仪之勤，特赏一阶，除平东将军、光禄大夫，寻加安西将军。
现代文：太昌初年，转任散骑侍郎，因他典制仪式勤勤恳恳，特地赏升一阶，除授平东将军、光禄大夫，不久又加安西将军。
English: In the first year of Taichang, he was transferred to the post of horseback riding attendant, and because of his diligence and sincerity in the ceremony, he was specially rewarded with a promotion of one rank, in addition to General Pingdong, Doctor Guanglu, and soon General Anxi.

古文：后以出帝登极之初，预行礼事，封屯留县开国子，食邑五百户。转中军将军、通直散骑常侍。
现代文：后又以出帝登基时，参与安排典礼仪式，被封为屯留县开国子，食邑五百户，转任中军将军、通直散骑常侍。
English: Later, when Emperor Dezong ascended to the throne, he participated in the arrangement of the ceremony, was named the son of the founder of Tunliu County, 500 households, transferred to the general of the Chinese army, and became a regular attendant.

古文：永熙三年二月，出帝释奠，业兴与魏季景、温子升、窦瑗为摘句。
现代文：永熙三年二月，出帝祭神，李业兴与魏季景、温子升、窦援为帝选祭辞。
English: In February of the third year of Yongxi, Li Yexing and Wei Jiqing, Wenzhisheng and Douan were selected as the imperial candidates.

古文：后入为侍读。
现代文：后来选入内宫，任帝侍读。
English: Later, he entered the Imperial Palace as an attendant.

古文：迁鄴之始，起部郎中辛术奏曰： 今皇居徒御，百度创始，营构一兴，必宜中制。
现代文：魏都刚迁到邺城时，起部郎中辛术启奏说： 如今皇驾东移，百般创始，营造一事，必须合乎节度。
English: When Wei Du had just moved to Shicheng, Xin Shu, a disciple of the founder, said: Now that the emperor has moved to the east, all kinds of founding and construction must be in accordance with the rules.

古文：上则宪章前代，下则模写洛京。
现代文：上应参照前代范式，下应比照京洛规模。
English: The previous paradigm should be referred to above, and the scale of Beijing-Laos should be compared below.

古文：今鄴都虽旧，基址毁灭，又图记参差，事宜审定。
现代文：如今邺都虽旧，房基殿址毁灭，又加上当初图样模糊，营造事宜应该审定。
English: Today, although the capital is old, the site of the foundation of the palace has been destroyed, and the original design is blurred, the construction should be approved.

古文：臣虽曰职司，学不稽古，国家大事非敢专之。
现代文：臣虽居职在此，但不精古式，国家大事不敢妄自定夺。
English: Although the vassal is in office here, it is not refined, and national events dare not be arbitrarily decided.

古文：通直散骑常侍李业兴硕学通儒，博闻多识，万门千户，所宜访询。
现代文：通直散骑常侍李业兴是硕学大儒，博闻多识，营造大事，应征求他的意见。
English: Li Yexing, a regular attendant of the Zongzhong Sanzhong, is a great scholar, knowledgeable and knowledgeable, creating great events, and his opinion should be solicited.

古文：今求就之披图案记，考定是非，参古杂今，折中为制，召画工并所须调度，具造新图，申奏取定。
现代文：现在请求皇上让我到他那里去展披图记，考定是非，验古论今，仔细定夺，召集画工并所须调度，设计新图，申奏皇上裁决。
English: Now I ask the emperor to let me go to him to exhibit the drawings, judge the rights and wrongs, examine the ancients, carefully decide, convene the painters and the necessary scheduling, design new drawings, and appeal to the emperor's ruling.

古文：庶经始之日，执事无疑。 
现代文：臣希望开始营造的时候，百事顺当。 
English: When the minister wanted to start construction, everything went smoothly.

古文：诏从之。
现代文：皇帝下诏，同意这个意见。
English: He complied.

古文：天平二年，除镇南将军，寻为侍读。
现代文：天平二年，朝廷提升李业兴为镇南将军，不久又任侍读。
English: In the second year of Tianping, the imperial court promoted Li Ye Xing to Zhenan General, and he was soon appointed as an attendant.

古文：于时尚书右仆射、营构大将高隆之被诏缮治三署乐器、衣服及百戏之属，乃奏请业兴共参其事。
现代文：这时尚书右仆射、营构大将军高隆之被召修缮治理三署乐器、衣服以及百戏之类，高隆之奏请李业兴一同参预此事。
English: This fashion book right-hand shooting, construction general Gao Longzhi was called to repair and manage three departments of musical instruments, clothes and a hundred plays and so on. Gao Longzhi invited Li Ye Xing to participate in this matter.

古文：四年，与兼散骑常侍李谐、兼吏部郎卢元明使萧衍，衍散骑常侍朱异问业兴曰： 魏洛中委粟山是南郊邪？ 
现代文：天平四年，与兼散骑常侍李谐、兼吏部郎卢元明一起出使萧衍。萧衍的散骑常侍朱异问李业兴： 魏国洛中的委粟山是帝都的南郊吗？ 
English: In the fourth year of Tianping, he dispatched Xiao Yan together with Li Jini, also a rider, and Lang Lu Yuanming, also an official. Xiao Yan's rider Zhu Yixing asked Li Yexing: Is Wei Guozhong's Maoshan a southern suburb of the imperial capital?

古文：业兴曰： 委粟是圆丘，非南郊。 
现代文：业兴说： 委粟是园丘，不是南郊。 
English: Li Ye Xing said, "Qingwu Mountain is a round hill, not a southern suburb.

古文：异曰： 北间郊、丘异所，是用郑义。
现代文：朱异说： 北边郊、丘不是同一个地方，用的是郑侯之义。
English: Zhu Yixing said: The northern suburbs and hills are not the same place, they are using Zheng Hou's meaning.

古文：我此中用王义。 
现代文：我们这里只用王义。 
English: We only use Wang Yi here.

古文：业兴曰： 然，洛京郊、丘之处专用郑解。 
现代文：李业兴说： 是的，洛京郊、丘之处专门采用郑解。 
English: Li Ye Xing said: Yes, the outskirts of Luojing and the hills are specially using Zheng He.

古文：异曰： 若然，女子逆降傍亲亦从郑以不？ 
现代文：朱异说： 如像这样，女子降嫁旁亲也从郑义不？ 
English: Zhu Yixing said: If this is the case, does a woman's marriage to a relative also come from Zheng Yi?

古文：业兴曰： 此之一事，亦不专从。
现代文：业兴说： 这一桩事，也不全从。
English: Li Ye Xing said, "This matter cannot just be based on one explanation.

古文：若卿此间用王义，除禫应用二十五月，何以王俭丧礼禫用二十七月也？ 
现代文：像你说的这儿专从王义，丧期应为二十五个月，为什么王俭的《丧礼》上写除去丧服应为二十七个月呢？ 
English: As you said here, according to Wang Yi, the period of mourning should be twenty-five months. Why is it written in Wang Jian's "Funeral" that the removal of mourning clothes should be twenty-seven months?

古文：异遂不答。
现代文：朱异没法回答。
English: Zhu Rong didn't answer.

古文：业兴曰： 我昨见明堂四柱方屋，都无五九之室，当是裴頠所制。
现代文：李业兴又说： 我昨天看见明堂建制是四根柱子的方形屋宇，都没有五九的室制，应当是裴危页所制。
English: Li Ye Xing also said, "I saw yesterday that the Myeongdong structure is a square building with four pillars. It does not have a five-nine-room structure. It should have been built by Pei Kegui."

古文：明堂上圆下方，裴唯除室耳。
现代文：明堂上圆下方，裴只去除侧室而已。
English: At the bottom of the upper circle of the Ming Hall, Bae only removed the side room.

古文：今此上不圆何也？ 
现代文：而今却见明堂上面不圆，是怎么回事？ 
English: But now it is clear that the top of the hall is not round, what is going on?

古文：异曰： 圆方之说，经典无文，何怪于方？ 
现代文：朱异说： 圆方之说，经典无记载，为什么以方怪明堂？ 
English: Zhu Yixing said: According to the theory of the round square, there is no record in the classics. Why is the square square strange?

古文：业兴曰： 圆方之言，出处甚明，卿自不见。
现代文：李业兴说： 圆方之言，出处很明确，只是你没有看见罢了。
English: Li Ye Xing said, "The source of these remarks by Yuanfang is very obvious, you just haven't read them yourself.

古文：见卿录梁主《孝经义》亦云上圆下方，卿言岂非自相矛盾！ 
现代文：我见你记录的梁主《孝经义》也说上圆下方，你今天又说没有此说，岂不是自相矛盾？ 
English: I see that the Liang Lord's "Filial Piety" that you recorded also said the upper circle and the lower circle, and you said today that you did not say this. Isn't it a contradiction?

古文：异曰： 若然，圆方竟出何经？ 
现代文：朱异说： 若是这样，圆方之说出自何经？ 
English: Zhu Ying said: As you said, which classic does the saying of the round square come from?

古文：业兴曰： 出《孝经援神契》。 
现代文：李业兴说： 出自《孝经·援神契》。 
English: Li Ye Xing said, "It's from the Filial Piety and Benevolence Pact."

古文：异曰： 纬候之书，何用信也！ 
现代文：朱异说： 纬侯之书，有什么可信的？ 
English: Zhu Yixing said, "What is credible about Wei Hou's book?

古文：业兴曰： 卿若不信，灵威仰、叶光纪之类经典亦无出者，卿复信不？ 
现代文：李业兴说： 你若不信，《灵威仰》、《叶光纪》之类经典也属无稽之列，你信不？ 
English: Li Ye Xing said, "If you don't believe it, classics such as "Ren Wei Rong" and "Ye Guang Ji" are also nonsense, don't you believe it?

古文：异不答。
现代文：朱异不答。
English: Li Yi did not answer.

古文：萧衍亲问业兴曰： 闻卿善于经义，儒、玄之中何所通达？ 
现代文：萧衍亲自问李业兴说： 听说你擅长经义，儒、玄之中有何深研？ 
English: Xiao Yan asked Li Ye Xing in person and said, "I heard that you are good at the classics and the classics, what is the depth of your research in Confucianism and the classics?

古文：业兴曰： 少为书生，止读五典，至于深义，不辨通释。 
现代文：业兴说： 少年作为书生，只读五典，至于深义，不辨通释。 
English: Ye Xing said: As a scholar, the boy only read the five classics, but as for the profound meaning, he did not distinguish between them.

古文：衍问《诗周南》，王者之风，系之周公，《邵南》，仁贤之风，系之《邵公》。
现代文：萧衍问： 《诗经·周南》，王者之风，系指周公；《邵南》，仁贤之风，系指邵公。
English: Xiao Yan asked: "Shijing·Zhou Nan," the wind of the king, refers to Zhou Gong; "Shao Nan," the wind of benevolence, refers to Shao Gong.

古文：何名为系？ 
现代文：什么叫 系 ？ 
English: Why is it called a system?

古文：业兴对曰： 郑注《仪礼》云： 昔大王、王季居于岐阳，躬行《邵南》之教，以兴王业。
现代文：李业兴回答说： 郑玄注《仪礼》说：过去大王、王季居住岐阳，实行《邵南》之教，以兴王业。
English: Li Ye Xing replied: Zheng Xuan's commentary on "Rites and Rituals" said: In the past, the great king, Wang Ji, lived in Qiyang and practiced the teachings of "Shaonan" to promote Wangye.

古文：及文王行今《周南》之教以受命。
现代文：等到文王施行《周南》之教以受周命。
English: Wait until King Wen implements the teachings of "Zhou Nan" to receive Zhou's order.

古文：作邑于酆，分其故地，属之二公。名为系。 
现代文：在丰地建都城，分原来地方给二公。所以名 系 。 
English: The capital city was built in Fengdi, and the original land was divided into two parts, hence the name.

古文：衍又问： 若是故地，应自统摄，何由分封二公？ 
现代文：萧衍又问： 如是故地，应该自己统管，为什么要分封给二公？ 
English: Xiao Yan also asked: If this is the case, they should govern themselves, why should they be given to two princes?

古文：业兴曰： 文王为诸侯之时所化之本国，今既登九五之尊，不可复守诸侯之地，故分封二公。 
现代文：李兴业说： 文王作为诸侯时所居守的封国，既登上皇位之后，便不能再守留原来作为诸侯所守之地，所以分封二公。 
English: Li Xingye said, "The fiefdoms that King Moon used to live in when he was a vassal were no longer able to remain as vassal lands after he ascended the throne, so they were divided into two parts.

古文：衍又问： 《干卦》初称 潜龙 ，二称 见龙 。至五 飞龙 。
现代文：萧衍又问： 《乾卦》开头称 潜龙 ，二称 见龙 ，到第五称 飞龙 。
English: Xiao Yan also asked: "The Analects of Confucius" begins with the term "submerged dragon," the second term is "seen dragon," and the fifth term is "flying dragon."

古文：初可名为虎。 
现代文：其实首卦可以称为 虎 。 
English: In fact, the first chapter can be called "Tiger."

古文：问意小乖。
现代文：提问颇怪。
English: It's a strange line of questioning.

古文：业兴对： 学识肤浅，不足仰酬。 
现代文：业兴回答说： 我学识肤浅，不足以回答这个问题。 
English: Ye Xing replied, "My knowledge is too shallow to answer this question.

古文：衍又问： 《尚书》 正月上日受终文祖 ，此是何正？ 
现代文：萧衍又问： 《尚书》 正月初一受终文祖 ，这是何种历法？ 
English: Xiao Yan also asked: "Shangshu" The first day of the first month is the first day of the last month, what kind of calendar is this?

古文：业兴对： 此是夏正月。 
现代文：李业兴回答说： 这是夏历正月。 
English: Li Yerxing replied, "This is the first month of the lunar calendar.

古文：衍言何以得知，业兴曰： 案《尚书中候运行篇》云 日月营始 ，故知夏正。 
现代文：萧衍说： 你从哪知道？ 业兴说： 查《尚书中候运行篇》说 日月开始 ，故知是夏正。 
English: Xiao Yan said, "How did you know?" Ye Xing said, "Looking up "The Book of Changes" says that the sun and the moon begin, so I knew it was summer.

古文：衍又问： 尧时以何月为正？ 
现代文：萧衍又问： 尧时以哪一月为正？ 
English: Xiao Yan also asked: Which month is the beginning of the leap year?

古文：业兴对： 自尧以上，书典不载，实所不知。 
现代文：业兴回答说： 从尧以上，书典无记，实在不知何月为正。 
English: Ye Xing replied, "From  and above, there is no record in the book, and I really don't know which month is positive.

古文：衍又云：  寅宾出日 ，即是正月。 日中星鸟，以殷仲春 ，即是二月。
现代文：萧衍又说：  寅宾出日 ，即是正月。 日中星鸟，是殷仲春 ，即是二月。
English: Xiao Yan also said: Yinbin sunrise, that is, the first month; the star bird in the middle of the day, is Yinzhongchun, that is, February.

古文：此出尧典，何得云尧时不知用何正也？ 
现代文：这出自《尧典》，怎么可以说尧时不知道用什么历法？ 
English: This is from the Book of Changes. How can you say that you don't know what calendar to use?

古文：业兴对： 虽三正不同，言时节者皆据夏时正月。
现代文：业兴回答说： 虽然三正不同，说时节都根据夏历正月。
English: Ye Xing replied: Although the three seasons are different, they are all based on the first month of the lunar calendar.

古文：《周礼》，仲春二月会男女之无夫家者。
现代文：《周礼》，仲春二月男女中未婚者相会。
English: In "Weekly Ritual," unmarried men and women meet in mid-spring in February.

古文：虽自周书，月亦夏时，尧之日月，亦当如此。
现代文：这话虽然出自周朝书籍，月份指的也是夏时。尧的日月，也当如此。
English: Although this quote is from a Zhou dynasty book, the month also refers to summertime, as does the hazy sun and moon.

古文：但所见不深，无以辨析明问。 
现代文：但我所见典册不多，无法辨析清楚。 
English: But I haven't seen many of them, so I can't tell for sure.

古文：衍又曰： 《礼》，原壤之母死，孔子助其沐椁。
现代文：萧衍又说： 《礼》载，原壤的母亲死了，孔子帮助其洗棺。
English: Xiao Yan also said: According to "Li," the mother of the original soil died, and Confucius helped to wash the coffin.

古文：原壤叩木而歌曰： 久矣不讬音。
现代文：原壤叩木唱着说： 很久了，我与音乐久违了。
English: "It's been a long time, I've been away from music for a long time.

古文：狸首之班然，执女手之卷然。 
现代文：狸首并排怡然，我握你手心情舒畅。 
English: Our heads are side by side, and I feel comfortable shaking your hand.

古文：孔子圣人，而与原壤为友？ 
现代文：孔子是圣人，而与原壤是朋友？ 
English: Confucius is a saint, but is he friends with the original soil?

古文：业兴对： 孔子即自解，言亲者不失其为亲，故者不失其为故。 
现代文：业兴回答说： 郑玄注说：孔子自己有解释，叫亲人不失其为亲人，故交还是故交。 
English: Ye Xing replied: Zheng Xuan said: Confucius himself has an explanation, so that relatives do not lose their relatives, so friends or former friends.

古文：又问： 原壤何处人？ 
现代文：萧衍又问： 原壤哪里人？ 
English: Xiao Yan also asked: Where did the original soil come from?

古文：业兴对曰： 郑注云：原壤，孔子幼少之旧。
现代文：业兴回答说： 郑玄注说：原壤，孔子幼少时的朋友。
English: Ye Xing replied: Zheng Xuan said, "The original soil is a childhood friend of Confucius.

古文：故是鲁人。 
现代文：所以是鲁国人。 
English: That's why he's a native of Lu.

古文：衍又问： 孔子圣人，所存必可法。
现代文：萧衍又问： 孔子是圣人，所留下的所做所为必可为效法的对象。
English: Xiao Yan also asked: Confucius is a saint. What he left behind and what he did can surely be an object of imitation.

古文：原壤不孝，有逆人伦，何以存故旧之小节，废不孝之大罪？ 
现代文：原壤不孝，有悖人伦，孔子何以存故旧的小节，废原壤不孝的大罪？ 
English: The original soil is not filial, which is contrary to human ethics. Why did Confucius keep the old subsection and abandon the great sin of not being filial?

古文：业兴对曰： 原壤所行，事自彰著。
现代文：李业兴回答说： 原壤所做，事自明显。
English: Li Yerxing replied: What the original soil has done is obvious.

古文：幼少之交，非是今始，既无大故，何容弃之？
现代文：孔子与他幼小之交，不是今始，既没有大的原因，怎么能舍弃不管？
English: Confucius's childhood friendship with him was not new, and there was no great reason for it. How could he give it up?

古文：孔子深敦故旧之义，于理无失。 
现代文：孔子深明故交之义，合于道理。 
English: Confucius was very clear about the meaning of friendship, which makes sense.

古文：衍又问： 孔子圣人，何以书原壤之事，垂法万代？ 
现代文：萧衍又问： 孔子圣人，为什么书录原壤一事，作为千秋万代效法的对象？ 
English: Xiao Yan also asked: Confucius the sage, why did he write about the original soil as the object of imitation for thousands of generations?

古文：业兴对曰： 此是后人所录，非孔子自制。
现代文：李业兴回答说： 这是后人所录，不是孔子自述。
English: Li Yerxing replied: This was recorded by later generations, not by Confucius himself.

古文：犹合葬于防，如此之类，《礼记》之中动有百数。 
现代文：就像合葬于防之类事情，像这样的情况，《礼记》之中，不下百处。 
English: There are hundreds of cases like this in "Li Ji," such as being buried together in defense.

古文：衍又问： 《易》曰太极，是有无？ 
现代文：萧衍又问： 《易》说太极，是有还是无？ 
English: Xiao Yan also asked: "Yi" says Taiji, is there or not?

古文：业兴对： 所传太极是有，素不玄学，何敢辄酬。 
现代文：业兴回答说： 所传太极是有，只因我一向不深研此类玄学，不敢妄自对答。 
English: Ye Xing replied, "The teachings of Taiji exist, it's just that I've never studied this kind of metaphysics in depth, so I don't dare to answer questions.

古文：还，兼散骑常侍。加中军大将军。
现代文：回来兼散骑常侍，加中军大将军。
English: Came back and rode around as a regular attendant, and became a general in the Chinese army.

古文：后罢议事省，诏右仆射高隆之及诸朝士与业兴等在尚书省议定五礼。
现代文：后来撤除议事省，皇帝下诏让右仆射高隆之及众朝官与李业兴等人在尚书省讨论制定五礼。
English: Later, the deliberation ministry was removed, and the emperor issued an edict to have his right-hand man, Gao Long Zhi, and all the imperial officials discuss and formulate the Five Rites with Li Ye Xing and others in Shangshu Province.

古文：兴和初，又为《甲子元历》，时见施用。
现代文：兴和初年，又编《甲子元历》，当时被采用。
English: In the first year of the Heian period, the "Koshi Yuan Calendar" was compiled and adopted at that time.

古文：复预议《麟趾新制》。
现代文：又参与讨论《麟趾新制》。
English: He also participated in the discussion of the "New System for Toji."

古文：武定元年，除国子祭酒，仍侍读。
现代文：武定元年，除授国子祭酒，仍任侍读。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Xiaozhing, Li Ye Xing was appointed as the chief priest of the National Children's Festival, and still served as an attendant.

古文：三年，出除太原太守。
现代文：武定三年，出任太原太守。
English: In the third year of Wuding, he served as the governor of Taiyuan.

古文：齐献武王每出征讨，时有顾访。
现代文：齐献武王每次出朝征讨，时常求教于他。
English: Qi Xianwu every time he went to the imperial court to fight, he often asked him for advice.

古文：五年，齐文襄王引为中外府谘议参军。后坐事禁止。
现代文：武定五年，齐文襄王引荐他任中外府谘议参军，后因事被软禁起来。
English: In the fifth year of Wuding, Qi Wenxiang Wang recommended him to be appointed as a consultant to the central and foreign governments to join the army, and later he was put under house arrest.

古文：业兴乃造《九宫行棋历》，以五百为章，四千四十为部，九百八十七为斗分，还以己未为元，始终相维，不复移转，与今历法术不同。
现代文：李业兴于是创《九宫行棋历》，以五百为一章，四千四十为一部，九百八十七为斗分，还以己未为元，此历始终相系，不再移转像一般历法，与今天的历法方式不同。
English: Li Ye Xing then created "Jiu Gong Xing Gu Calendar," with five hundred as a chapter, four thousand and forty as a part, nine hundred and eighty-seven as a score, and also with himself as the source, this calendar is always the same, no longer moving like a general calendar, different from today's calendar.

古文：至于气序交分，景度盈缩，不异也。
现代文：至于节气时序交合分离，日影度数盈缩，则一样。
English: As for the exchange and demarcation of the solar terms, the length of the solar shadow is no different.

古文：七年，死于禁所，年六十六。
现代文：武定七年，死在软禁地，年六十六岁。
English: Wu Ding was seven years old when he died under house arrest at the age of 66.

古文：业兴爱好坟籍，鸠集不已，手自补治，躬加题帖，其家所有，垂将万卷。
现代文：李业兴爱好书籍，收集不已，亲手补治残缺，亲自加以题帖，家藏书籍，积至万卷。
English: Li Yexing loved books and collected them endlessly. He repaired the damaged ones with his own hands and inscribed them with his own inscriptions. His collection of books amounted to ten thousand volumes.

古文：览读不息，多有异闻，诸儒服其渊博。
现代文：而他则读书不止，常有异事发现，众儒者佩服他的学识渊博。
English: On the other hand, he read a lot and often found unusual things. Confucians admired his profound knowledge.

古文：性豪侠，重意气。
现代文：李业兴性格豪爽侠义，重义气。
English: Li Yexing's character is heroic, chivalrous and loyal.

古文：人有急难，委之归命，便能容匿。
现代文：如人家有急难，投奔他那里，他便收留藏匿。
English: If anyone comes to him in trouble, he will take him and hide him.

古文：与其好合，倾身无吝。
现代文：人家与他情投意合，他便能倾注身心，绝不吝啬。
English: If someone has an affinity with him, he will be able to pour his heart and soul into it, and will never be stingy.

古文：若有相乖忤，便即疵毁，乃至声色，加以谤骂。
现代文：如有矛盾，他便会中伤别人，以至于怒形于色，横加诅骂。
English: If there is a contradiction, he will slander others to the point of anger and cursing.

古文：性又躁隘，至于论难之际，高声攘振，无儒者之风。
现代文：性情又很急躁偏狭，以至于辩论的时候，高声粗语，伸拳振臂，没有儒者风度。
English: His temperament is also very impatient and narrow-minded, so much so that when he debates, he uses high-pitched foul language, shakes his fist, and has no Confucian demeanor.

古文：每语人云 但道我好，虽知妄言，故胜道恶。
现代文：他经常跟别人说： 只要说我好，虽然我明知那是假话，但比说坏处强。 
English: He often said to others: "Just say I'm good, although I know it's a lie, but it's better than saying bad things."

古文：务进忌前，不顾后患，时人以此恶之。
现代文：只求进职，忌讳他人比他强，做起事来不问后果，当时的人因这一点，厌恶他。
English: He was aggressive, jealous of those who were better than him, and reckless with the consequences, which made people dislike him at the time.

古文：至于学术精微，当时莫及。
现代文：但他学术精深的程度，当时无人能赶得上。
English: As for his academic acumen and subtle demeanor, no one could match him at the time.

古文：子崇祖，武定中，太尉外兵参军。
现代文：子李崇祖，武定年间，任太尉外兵参军。
English: His son, Li Chongzu, joined the army as a foreign soldier during the Wuding era.

古文：崇祖弟遵祖，太昌中，业兴传其长子伯以授之。
现代文：崇祖弟遵祖，太昌年间，业兴把长子伯的爵位传给了他。
English: During the reign of Emperor Taichang, the younger brother of Emperor Chongzhu, Emperor Zunzhu, was given the title of the eldest son by Emperor Ye Xing.

古文：齐受禅，例降。
现代文：齐立国，按例降爵。
English: After accepting the compromise, the peerage was reduced as usual.

