古文：文之为德也大矣，与天地并生者。
现代文：文的意义是很重大的。它和天地一起产生，怎么诠释它更为合适呢？
English: The meaning of the text is very important. It is produced together with heaven and earth, how to interpret it more appropriately?

古文：何哉？夫玄黄色杂，方圆体分，日月叠璧，以垂丽天之象；山川焕绮，以铺理地之形：此盖道之文也。
现代文：从宇宙混沌到天地分判，出现了两块圆玉似的日月，显示出天上光辉灿烂的景象；山河壮阔，来展示大地的相貌。这也许就是大自然所作的文章了吧。
English: From the chaos of the universe to the division of heaven and earth, two round-ball-like suns and moons appeared, showing the brilliant scene in the sky; mountains and rivers were magnificent, to show the appearance of the earth. This may be the article made by nature.

古文：仰观吐曜，俯察含章，高卑定位，故两仪既生矣。
现代文：抬头就可以看到星光璀璨，低头就可以看到山河逶迤。上下的位置确定后，天地就产生了。
English: If you look up, you can see the starry sky, and if you look down, you can see the mountains and rivers. After the upper and lower positions were determined, heaven and earth came into being.

古文：惟人参之，性灵所钟，是谓三才。
现代文：天地之间的人与二者互相配合，凝聚着天地的性灵，这就是道家所称的 三才 。
English: The people between heaven and earth cooperate with each other, condensing the spirit of heaven and earth. This is what Taoists call the Three Talents.

古文：为五行之秀，实天地之心，心生而言立，言立而文明，自然之道也。
现代文：人是万物的灵长，是天地的本心。人都具有思想感情，从而产生出语言来；语言产生之后，就会有文章，这也是自然之间的规律。
English: Man is the source of all things, the original mind of heaven and earth. All people have thoughts and feelings, and thus produce language; after language is produced, there will be articles, which is also the law of nature.

古文：傍及万品，动植皆文∶龙凤以藻绘呈瑞，虎豹以炳蔚凝姿；云霞雕色，有逾画工之妙；草木贲华，无待锦匠之奇。
现代文：将文章的理念推广到世间万物，无论是动物或植物都有文章可循。龙和凤以美丽的鳞羽，表现出吉祥的征兆；虎和豹以身上的花纹，来呈现英姿。云霞的彩色，比画师的点染还美妙；草木的花朵，也并不依靠匠人来加工点缀。
English: The concept of the article is extended to all things in the world, whether they are animals or plants, there are articles to follow. Dragons and phoenixes show auspicious signs with beautiful scales and feathers; tigers and leopards present heroic figures with patterns on their bodies. The colors of clouds and haze are more beautiful than the dyeing of painters; flowers of plants and trees do not rely on craftsmen to process and embellish.

古文：夫岂外饰，盖自然耳。
现代文：这些都不是外加的装饰，都是自然的文章罢了。
English: These aren't added embellishments, they're natural textures.

古文：至于林籁结响，调如竽瑟；泉石激韵，和若球锽：故形立则章成矣，声发则文生矣。
现代文：还有林木的孔窍因风而发出声响，好像琴瑟和鸣一般；泉流石上激起的音韵，又好像磬钟齐奏一般。所以，形体确立之后自然的文章也就完成了，声音就是文章的词句。
English: Also, the holes of the forest trees emit sounds due to the wind, like the harmonies of the harpsichord; the rhythms stirred up on the stone of the spring stream are also like the chiming of the gongs. Therefore, after the shape is established, the natural article is completed, and the sound is the words of the article.

古文：夫以无识之物，郁然有采，有心之器，其无文欤？
现代文：就连这些没有意识的事物，都有浓郁的文采；那么富有智慧的人，怎么能没有文章出现呢？
English: Even these unconscious things have a strong literary style; so how can a wise person appear without an article?

古文：人文之元，肇自太极，幽赞神明，《易》象惟先。庖牺画其始，仲尼翼其终。而《乾》、《坤》两位，独制《文言》。
现代文：人类最早的文章，应当是始于天地分开前的那一团气。深刻地阐明这个微妙的道理的，应该是《易经》中的卦象。伏羲以八卦开头，而孔子以辅助性的《十翼》结尾。而对《乾》、《坤》两卦，孔子特地写了《文言》进行解释。
English: Mankind's earliest writings must have begun with the chaos that existed before the separation of heaven and earth. The first to profoundly elucidate this subtle truth must have been the Gua Zi in the I Ching. Fuxi begins with the Eight Trigrams, while Confucius ends with the auxiliary Ten Wings. Confucius specifically wrote the Analects of Confucius to explain both the Qian and Kun trigrams.

古文：言之文也，天地之心哉！
现代文：可见语言需要文字来辅助渲染，这才是天地之间的本心所在！
English: It can be seen that language needs words to assist rendering, which is the true meaning of heaven and earth!

古文：若乃《河图》孕乎八卦，《洛书》韫乎九畴，玉版金镂之实，丹文绿牒之华，谁其尸之？
现代文：如果说伏羲的八卦是因为黄河里的龙马献上了图，大禹制定九畴是因为神龟送来书，那么玉板金字和绿竹赤文又是谁做的呢？
English: If it is said that Fuxi's Eight Trigrams is because Longma in the Yellow River presented a map, and Dayu formulated the Nine Domains because the Divine Turtle sent a book, then who made the gold letters on the jade plate and the red on the green bamboo?

古文：亦神理而已。
现代文：也许只有神才会给出这样的启示吧。
English: Perhaps only God can give such a revelation.

古文：自鸟迹代绳，文字始炳，炎皞遗事，纪在《三坟》，而年世渺邈，声采靡追。
现代文：自从古人从鸟爪感悟出文字代替了结绳记事后，文章的作用就开始显露了。炎帝和太皞遗留的事迹，被记载在《三坟》里，但因为年代久远而无从追寻。
English: Ever since the ancients sensed from the claws of birds that writing had replaced the tying of ropes in recording events, the role of the article began to reveal itself. The deeds left behind by Emperor Yan and Empress Dowager Cixi were recorded in the "Three Graves," but because of the passage of time, they could not be traced.

古文：唐虞文章，则焕乎始盛。
现代文：唐虞时代的文章，其文采开始丰富。
English: The essays of the Tang and Yu dynasties began to be rich in literature.

古文：元首载歌，既发吟咏之志；益稷陈谟，亦垂敷奏之风。
现代文：天子开始用唱歌的形式来表达心中的情怀和志向；伯益和后稷进谏的意见，也展示了进言的风尚。
English: Tianzi began to use the form of singing to express his heart's feelings and aspirations; Bo Yi and Hou Yi's opinions also showed the style of speech.

古文：夏后氏兴，业峻鸿绩，九序惟歌，勋德弥缛。
现代文：夏朝兴盛了起来，其业绩非常宏大，各个领域都井井有条，称赞夏朝的功勋和功德。
English: The Xia dynasty flourished, its performance was very grand, and all fields were well organized, praising the merits and merits of the Xia dynasty.

古文：逮及商周，文胜其质，《雅》、《颂》所被，英华日新。
现代文：到了商周时期，文采要比之前的质朴风格更加精彩，《雅》和《颂》的出现，使得文章更加文采斐然且日新月异。
English: During the Shang and Zhou dynasties, the prose style was more splendid than the previous rustic style. The appearance of "Ya" and "Ode" made the articles more brilliant and ever-changing.

古文：文王患忧，繇辞炳曜，符采复隐，精义坚深。
现代文：周文王受难时所作的卦辞和爻辞，其内涵丰富且文采俱佳，意义精深且内涵坚毅。
English: Zhou Wenzhong's gaga and eulogy at the time of his martyrdom is rich in connotation, well written, profound in meaning, and full of fortitude.

古文：重以公旦多材，振其徽烈，剬诗缉颂，斧藻群言。
现代文：更有周公才华横溢，振兴文王的事业，作诗作颂引导大众的言论和辞藻。
English: Moreover, Zhou Gong was brilliant, reviving the cause of King Wen, writing poems and eulogies to guide the public's speech and rhetoric.

古文：至若夫子继圣，独秀前哲，熔钧六经，必金声而玉振；雕琢情性，组织辞令，木铎启而千里应，席珍流而万世响，写天地之辉光，晓生民之耳目矣。
现代文：直到孔子继承了先圣的遗志，超过了前人的光辉，编定六经，成为先贤文采的集大成者；同时他潜心陶冶情操，组织修辞，使他的教令就像铃声一样能够收到千里之外民众的响应，他的思想就像是珍珠一样流传千古，发扬了天地的光辉，同时也开启了万世子民的智慧。
English: Until Confucius inherited the last will of the first saint, surpassed the brilliance of his predecessors, compiled the Six Classics, and became the compiler of the literary masterpieces of the sages; at the same time, he devoted himself to cultivating sentiment and organizing rhetoric, so that his edicts could receive the response of the people thousands of miles away like the ringing of a bell. His thoughts were like pearls, spreading through the ages, spreading the glory of heaven and earth, and at the same time opening the wisdom of the people of all ages.

古文：爰自风姓，暨于孔氏，玄圣创典，素王述训，莫不原道心以敷章，研神理而设教，取象乎《河》、《洛》，问数乎蓍龟，观天文以极变，察人文以成化；然后能经纬区宇，弥纶彝宪，发挥事业，彪炳辞义。
现代文：从伏羲到孔子，前者开创，后者加以发挥，都是根据自然之道的基本精神来进行著作，钻研精深的道理来从事教育。他们效法河图和洛书用蓍草和龟甲来占卜，观察天文以穷究各种变化，学习过去的典籍来完成教化；然后才能治理国家，制定出恒久的根本大法，发展各种事业，使文辞义理发挥巨大的作用。
English: From Fuxi to Confucius, the former pioneered and the latter developed, all of them wrote books in accordance with the basic spirit of the Way of Nature, and studied profound principles to engage in education. They followed the river map and Luo Shu to use alfalfa and tortoise shell for divination, observed astronomy to investigate various changes, and studied the classics of the past to complete enlightenment. Only then could they govern the country, formulate a permanent fundamental law, develop various undertakings, and make the grammar and logic play a huge role.

古文：故知道沿圣以垂文，圣因文而明道，旁通而无滞，日用而不匮。
现代文：由此可知：自然之道依靠圣人来表达在文章里边，圣人通过文章来阐明自然之道；到处都行得通而没有阻碍，天天可以运用而不觉得贫乏。
English: From this we can see that the way of nature depends on the sage to express it in the text, and the sage through the article to clarify the way of nature; it can be practiced everywhere without hindrance, and can be used every day without feeling poor.

古文：《易》曰∶ 鼓天下之动者存乎辞。 
现代文：《周易·系辞》里说： 能够鼓动天下的，主要在于文辞。 
English: "Zhou Yi · Kezhu" said: It is mainly in the words that can inspire the world.

古文：辞之所以能鼓天下者，乃道之文也。
现代文：文辞之所以能够鼓动天下，就因为它是符合自然之道的原故。
English: The reason why literature can inspire the world is because it is in line with the natural way.

古文：赞曰：
现代文：总结：
English: Summary:

古文：道心惟微，神理设教。
现代文：自然之道的基本精神是精妙的，应根据这种精妙的道理来设立教化。
English: The basic spirit of the Way of Nature is subtle, and enlightenment should be established according to this subtle principle.

古文：光采元圣，炳耀仁孝。
现代文：古代圣人使这些道理发出光芒，也使伦理道德获得了宣扬。
English: The sages of antiquity shed light on these principles, and ethics and morality were also propagated.

古文：龙图献体，龟书呈貌。
现代文：这是由于最早有了黄河里的龙献出了图，洛水里的龟献出了书。
English: This is due to the fact that the dragon in the Yellow River first presented a map, and the turtle in the Luo River presented a book.

古文：天文斯观，民胥以效。
现代文：因此，在观察天文的同时，也该学习人文来完成教育。
English: Therefore, while observing astronomy, we should also study humanities to complete our education.

