古文：世论行善者福至，为恶者祸来。
现代文：世人议论做好事的福至，干坏事的祸来。
English: The world is talking about the blessing of doing good and the curse of doing evil.

古文：福祸之应，皆天也，人为之，天应之。
现代文：福与祸的报应，都由天定。人做出来，由天报应。
English: Fortune and misfortune are all determined by heaven. Man-made things are rewarded by heaven.

古文：阳恩，人君赏其行；阴惠，天地报其德。
现代文：公开做了好事，君主会奖励他的操行；暗中做了好事，天地会报应他的德行。
English: If he does a good deed in public, the monarch will reward his conduct; if he does a good deed in secret, heaven and earth will reward his virtue.

古文：无贵贱贤愚，莫谓不然。
现代文：不论贵、贱、贤、愚的人，没有认为不是这样的。
English: No one, high or low, wise or foolish, thinks otherwise.

古文：徒见行事有其文传，又见善人时遇福，故遂信之，谓之实然。
现代文：由于他们不仅看见过去的事例有文字记载，又看见做好事的人时常得福，所以就相信了，认为确实是这样。
English: And when they saw not only that the things which had happened were written, but also that there was a blessing for those who did good, they believed and were persuaded that these things were so.

古文：斯言或时贤圣欲劝人为善，著必然之语，以明德报；或福时适遇者以为然。
现代文：这话或许是圣贤想规劝人们做好事，用一定会行善得福，为恶遭祸的说法，来表明有德必得好报；或许是做好事的人当时碰巧得福，遇见这种情况的人就认为行善得天好报这种情况是确实的。
English: It may be that the sages wanted to persuade people to do good deeds, using the saying that it is certain to do good and be blessed, and to suffer evil, to show that virtue must be rewarded; it may be that people who did good things happened to be blessed at that time, and people who encountered this situation thought that it was true that doing good was rewarded by heaven.

古文：如实论之，安得福佑乎？
现代文：如果按照实际情况来判断，怎么会有上天赐福保佑的事呢？
English: If we judge according to the actual situation, how can there be such a thing as God's blessing?

古文：禁惠王食寒菹而得蛭，因遂吞之，腹有疾而不能食。
现代文：楚惠王吃凉酸菜发现有蚂蟥，于是就吞食了，之后腹部得病不能吃东西。
English: After eating cold sauerkraut, King Chu Hui found that there were maggots, so he swallowed it. After that, he got sick in the abdomen and couldn't eat.

古文：令尹问： 王安得此疾也？ 
现代文：令尹问安道： 君王怎么得这病的？ 
English: Ling Yin asked An Dao: How did the king get this disease?

古文：王曰： 我食寒菹而得蛭，念谴之而不行其罪乎？
现代文：惠王回答说： 我吃凉酸菜发现有蚂蟥，想如果责备厨师而不治他们的罪呢？
English: Hui Wang replied, "When I eat cold sauerkraut and find maggots, I wonder if I should blame the chef instead of punishing them?

古文：是废法而威不立也，非所以使国人闻之也；谴而行诛乎？
现代文：这是破坏法令而使自己威严建立不起来的做法，我没有这样做的原因是怕百姓知道。
English: The reason I didn't do it is that I didn't want the people to know.

古文：则庖厨监食者法皆当死，心又不忍也。
现代文：要责备并给予他们惩罚呢？那厨师和管膳食的人按法律都该处死，心又不忍。
English: Shall he reprove, and rebuke them? shall the cook and the chief baker be put to death for the transgression of the law?

古文：吾恐左右见之也，因遂吞之。 
现代文：我害怕左右的人看见，于是就吞食了。 
English: I was afraid that people around me would see, so I swallowed it.

古文：令尹避席再拜而贺曰： 臣闻天道无亲，唯德是辅。
现代文：令尹离开自己的座位再次叩拜并恭贺说： 我听说天道是没有亲疏的，只帮助有德行的人。
English: Leaving his seat, Ling Yin once again bowed and congratulated, saying, "I've heard that the Heavenly Realm has no relatives, and only helps those who are virtuous.

古文：王有仁德，天之所奉也，病不为伤。 
现代文：君王具有仁德，靠天的帮助，病不会造成伤害。 
English: The king has benevolence, relying on the help of heaven, and the disease will not cause harm.

古文：是夕也，惠王之後而蛭出，及久患心腹之积皆愈。
现代文：这天晚上，惠王去后宫厕所排出了蚂蟥，同时病了很久的心腹积块也全都痊愈了。
English: That evening, Hui Wang went to the toilet of the harem to expel the maggots. At the same time, the heart and abdomen lumps that had been ill for a long time were all healed.

古文：故天之亲德也，可谓不察乎！
现代文：所以上天是爱护有德行的人的，这还能说不清楚吗！
English: Is it not clear, then, that Heaven is the protector of the virtuous?

古文：曰：此虚言也。
现代文：我说，这是句假话。
English: I don't think that's true.

古文：案惠王之吞蛭，不肖之主也。
现代文：考察惠王吞吃蚂蟥，可以看出他是不贤明的君主。
English: An examination of Hui Wang eating grasshoppers shows that he is an unwise monarch.

古文：有不肖之行，天不佑也。
现代文：有不贤明的德行，上天不会保佑。
English: Heaven will not bless an unwise virtue.

古文：何则？
现代文：为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：惠王不忍谴蛭，恐庖厨监食法皆诛也。
现代文：惠王不忍心责备冷酸菜中有蚂蟥的事，恐怕厨师和管膳食的人按照法律都被杀掉。
English: Hui Wang did not have the heart to reproach cold sauerkraut with maggots. I am afraid that the cook and the person in charge of the meal were killed in accordance with the law.

古文：一国之君，专擅赏罚；而赦，人君所为也。
现代文：一国的君主，独断全国的奖励与惩罚；而赦免罪人的权力，也是君主所掌握。
English: The sovereign of a country dictates the rewards and punishments of the whole country; and the power to pardon sinners is also in the hands of the monarch.

古文：惠王通谴菹中何故有蛭，庖厨监食皆当伏法。然能终不以饮食行诛於人，赦而不罪，惠莫大焉。
现代文：惠王用通常责备酸菜中为什么会有蚂蟥的作法，厨师和管膳食的人都该被依法处死，然而最终能不因饮食问题把人处死，并赦免，不判罪，其恩惠没有比这更大的了。
English: Hui Wang used the usual way of blaming why there were ants in the sauerkraut, and the cook and the person in charge of the meal should be executed according to law. However, in the end, there is no greater blessing than to be able to put people to death without food problems, and to pardon them and not convict them.

古文：庖厨罪觉而不诛，自新而改後。
现代文：厨师的罪过被发觉而没有杀他，自然会自新，改过以后不再犯。
English: If the chef's crime is discovered and he is not killed, he will naturally reform and not commit it again.

古文：惠王赦细而活微，身安不病。
现代文：惠王宽恕小罪，使地位低微的人保全了性命，自身也会平安而不生病。
English: Hui Wang forgives minor sins, so that people of low status can save their lives, and they will be safe and not get sick.

古文：今则不然，强食害己之物，使监食之臣不闻其过，失御下之威，无御非之心，不肖一也。
现代文：现在则不是这样，惠王硬吃下有害自己的东西，让管理膳食的臣子不知道自己的过错，失去了统治臣民的威严，可见没有制止错误的意思，这是不贤明之一。
English: This is not the case now. Hui Wang ate something harmful to himself, so that the vassal who managed the meal did not know his fault and lost the dignity of ruling the subjects. It can be seen that there was no intention to stop the mistake. This is one of the unwise things.

古文：使庖厨监食失甘苦之和，若尘土落於菹中，大如虮虱，非意所能览，非目所能见，原心定罪，不明其过，可谓惠矣。
现代文：即使厨师和管膳食的人调味不当，或把尘土落在酸菜中，大小如虱子的卵，不是一般注意力所能察觉，不是眼睛所能看见，在推究动机定罪时，没有揭发他的过错，就可以说是极大的恩惠了。
English: Even if the cook and the person in charge of the meal had seasoned the cabbage improperly, or had put dust in the sauerkraut, the size of the egg of the hazelnut is not perceptible to the ordinary attention, it is not visible to the eye, and in the investigation of the motive and conviction, it can be said to be a great favor that his fault was not revealed.

古文：今蛭广有分数，长有寸度，在寒菹中，眇目之人犹将见之，臣不畏敬，择濯不谨，罪过至重。
现代文：现今蚂蟥体宽可以用分来计算，身长可以用寸来衡量，掉在凉酸菜中，就是瞎了一只眼也还能看见，臣子对君王没有怕惧，又不恭敬，挑选洗涤不小心，罪过极大。
English: Nowadays, the width of an ant's body can be calculated by fractions, the height can be measured by inches, and if it falls into cold sauerkraut, even if it is blind, it can still see with one eye. The courtiers are not afraid of the king and do not respect him. The careless choice of washing is a great sin.

古文：惠王不谴，不肖二也。
现代文：而惠王却不责备，这是不贤明之二。
English: However, Hui Wang did not reprimand him, which is the second unwise thing.

古文：菹中不当有蛭，不食投地；如恐左右之见，怀屏隐匿之处，足以使蛭不见，何必食之？
现代文：酸菜中不该有蚂蟥，不能吃就应扔在地上；如果怕左右侍臣看见，可以把它揣在怀里，然后丢在隐蔽的地方，完全可以使蚂蟥不被人看见，又何必吃下去呢？
English: There should be no maggots in the sauerkraut, and if you can't eat it, you should throw it on the ground. If you are afraid that the attendants will see it, you can carry it in your arms and then throw it in a hidden place. You can completely prevent the maggots from being seen, so why should you eat it?

古文：如不可食之物，误在菹中，可复隐匿而强食之，不肖三也。
现代文：如果不能吃的东西误落在酸菜中，难道能再悄悄地硬吃下去吗？
English: If something you can't eat accidentally lands in the sauerkraut, will you be able to quietly eat it again?

古文：有不肖之行，而天佑之，是天报佑不肖人也。
现代文：这是不贤明之三。有不贤明的德行，而上天保祐他，这是上天善报保佑不贤明的人。
English: This is the third type of unskillfulness. If one has unskillful virtue, and Heaven protects him, this is Heaven's reward and blessing for the unskillful person.

古文：不忍谴蛭，世谓之贤。
现代文：不忍心责备厨师和管膳食的人就吞食蚂蟥，世人于是认为贤明。
English: If you can't bring yourself to scold the cook and the server, swallow the maggots, and the world will think you're wise.

古文：贤者操行，多若吞蛭之类。吞蛭天除其病，是则贤者常无病也。
现代文：贤者的操行，大多像吞食蚂蟥之类，吞下蚂蟥天就解除他的病，这样贤者永远不会生病。
English: Most of the actions of a sage are like swallowing grasshoppers. If he swallows a grasshopper, it will cure his illness, so a sage will never get sick.

古文：贤者德薄，未足以言。
现代文：像这样的贤者品德太差，不足以称道。
English: A sage such as this has too little virtue to be commended.

古文：圣人纯道，操行少非，为推不忍之行，以容人之过。
现代文：圣人的道德纯厚，操行很少有不对的地方，做出怜悯人的德行，以宽容人过失的事，一定很多。
English: A saint's morality is pure, there is rarely anything wrong with his conduct, and he must have done many things such as the virtue of being compassionate and forgiving people's faults.

古文：必众多矣。然而武王不豫，孔子疾病，天之佑人，何不实也？
现代文：然而周武王有病，孔子生病，天保祐人，为什么与实际情况不相符合呢！
English: However, Zhouwu Wang is ill, Confucius is ill, Tianbao Youren is ill, why is it not consistent with the actual situation!

古文：或时惠王吞蛭，蛭偶自出。
现代文：或许是惠王吞下蚂蟥，蚂蟥正好自然被排出。
English: Perhaps Hui Wang swallowed the maggot, and the maggot was just naturally expelled.

古文：食生物者无有不死，腹中热也。
现代文：人吃了活的东西在肚子里没有不死的，因为腹中是热的。
English: There is nothing in the belly of him that eateth that liveth, and shall not die: for it is warm in the belly.

古文：初吞时蛭未死，而腹中热，蛭动作，故腹中痛。
现代文：刚吞下的时候，蚂蟥没有死，由于腹中热，蚂蟥翻动起来，所以腹中感觉疼痛。
English: When I just swallowed it, the maggot did not die. Due to the heat in my stomach, the maggot stirred, so I felt pain in my stomach.

古文：须臾，蛭死腹中，痛亦止。
现代文：一会儿蚂蟥死了，腹痛也就停止。
English: After a while, the grasshopper died and the stomachache stopped.

古文：蛭之性食血，惠王心腹之积，殆积血也。
现代文：蚂蟥的本性吸血，惠王心腹的积块，大概是瘀血。
English: The nature of grasshoppers is to suck blood, and the blockage in Hui Wang's abdomen is probably blood stains.

古文：故食血之虫死，而积血之病愈。
现代文：所以吸血的虫死了，瘀血的病也就痊愈了。
English: So the blood-sucking insect died, and the blood-sucking disease was cured.

古文：犹狸之性食鼠，人有鼠病，吞狸自愈。
现代文：就像野猫本性吃老鼠，人得了鼠病，吞吃野猫就会自动痊愈一样。
English: Just as a wildcat naturally eats mice, if a person gets rat disease, eating a wildcat will automatically cure it.

古文：物类相胜，方药相使也。
现代文：物类相互克制，开方配药正是利用它们相克的特点。
English: Substances restrain each other, and the prescription of drugs is precisely the use of their characteristics to overcome each other.

古文：食蛭虫而病愈，安得怪乎？
现代文：吃下蚂蟥病痊愈了，这有什么值得奇怪的！
English: What's so strange about being cured of scabies after eating it?

古文：食生物无不死，死无不出，之後蛭出，安得佑乎？
现代文：人吃了活的东西在肚子里没有不死的，死后没有不被排出的。死后蚂蟥被排出，怎么能是天保祐呢！
English: When a person eats a live thing, there is nothing in the stomach that will not die, and nothing that will not be expelled after death. After death, if maggots are expelled, how can it be Tianbaoyu?

古文：令尹见惠王有不忍之德，知蛭入腹中必当死出，因再拜，病贺不为伤。著已知来之德，以喜惠王之心，是与子韦之言星徙、太卜之言地动无以异也。
现代文：令尹看见惠王有怜悯人的品德，知道蚂蟥进入人腹中肯定要死，然后被排出体外，于是又叩拜又恭贺惠王的病不会造成伤害，是要显示自己知道未来的客观规律，以讨惠王的心欢喜，这跟子韦说宋景公说了三句怜惜人的话火星就会移动离开心宿，太卜在齐景公面前吹嘘自己能使地震动，没有两样。
English: When Yin saw that Hui Wang had the virtue of compassion for people, and knew that the maggots entering the human abdomen would certainly die and then be expelled from the body, he also bowed and congratulated Hui Wang's illness would not cause harm, to show that he knew the objective law of the future, and to please the king's heart. This was no different from Zi Wei saying that if Song Jing Gong said three words of compassion for people, the Mars would move away from the heart, and Taibu boasting in front of Qi Jing Gong that he could make the earth shake.

古文：宋人有好善行者，三世不改，家无故黑牛生白犊。
现代文：宋国有个人喜欢做好事，祖孙三代都不懈怠。家中不知道什么缘故黑牛生了白犊，便去问孔子。
English: Individuals in the Song Dynasty liked to do good deeds, and the three generations of grandparents and grandchildren did not slack off. The family did not know why the black cow gave birth to a white calf, so they went to ask Confucius.

古文：以问孔子，孔子曰： 此吉祥也，以享鬼神。 
现代文：孔子说： 这是吉祥的征兆，用它去祭鬼神。 
English: Confucius said, "This is an auspicious omen, use it to worship ghosts and gods."

古文：即以犊祭。
现代文：于是立刻用白犊去祭祀。
English: So they immediately used egrets to make the sacrifice.

古文：一年，其父无故而盲。
现代文：过了一年，他父亲的眼睛无缘无故地瞎了。
English: A year later, his father's eyes went blind for no reason.

古文：牛又生白犊。
现代文：之后，黑牛又生了一头白犊，他父亲又让他儿子去问孔子。
English: Later, the black cow gave birth to a white calf, and his father told his son to ask Confucius.

古文：其父又使其子问孔子，孔子曰： 吉祥也，以享鬼神。 复以犊祭。
现代文：孔子仍然说： 是吉祥的征兆，用它去祭鬼神。 又立即用白犊去祭祀。
English: Confucius still said: It is an auspicious sign, use it to sacrifice ghosts and gods, and immediately use the egret to sacrifice.

古文：一年，其子无故而盲。
现代文：过了一年，他儿子的眼睛又无缘无故地瞎了。
English: A year later, his son's eyes went blind again for no reason.

古文：其後楚攻宋，围其城。
现代文：那之后楚国攻打宋国，包围了宋城。
English: After that, Chu attacked Song and besieged Songcheng.

古文：当此之时，易子而食之，析骸而炊之。
现代文：在这时候，彼此交换孩子来吃，劈开人骨来烧。
English: At this time, they exchange children with each other to eat, and split human bones to burn.

古文：此独以父子俱盲之故，得毋乘城。
现代文：就唯独因为他父子双眼都瞎了的缘故，可以不登城守卫。
English: Only because he and his son are both blind, can he not go up to guard the city.

古文：军罢围解，父子俱视。
现代文：等楚军退去，城的包围解除了，他父子的眼睛一齐恢复了视力。
English: When the Chu army retreated, the siege of the city was lifted, and his father's and son's eyes both regained their sight.

古文：此修善积行神报之效也。
现代文：这就是修善积德天神报应的证明。
English: This is the proof of the divine retribution of cultivating virtue and accumulating virtue.

古文：曰：此虚言也。
现代文：我认为，这是假话。
English: I don't think that's true.

古文：夫宋人父子修善如此，神报之，何必使之先盲後视哉？
现代文：宋人父子修善像这样，天神报答他们，为什么一定要让他们先瞎然后再恢复视力呢？
English: Songren father and son cultivate virtue like this, the gods reward them, why do they have to make them blind first and then restore their eyesight?

古文：不盲常视，不能护乎？
现代文：眼睛不瞎经常看得见，就不能保护他们吗？
English: Can't they be protected if their eyes are not blind and they can often see?

古文：此神不能护不盲之人，则亦不能以盲护人矣。
现代文：这样天神不能保护眼睛不瞎的人，那么也就不能用使人失明的办法来保护人了。
English: In this way, the angels cannot protect those whose eyes are not blind, so they cannot protect people by making them blind.

古文：使宋、楚之君合战顿兵，流血僵尸，战夫禽获，死亡不还。以盲之故，得脱不行，可谓神报之矣。
现代文：假使宋国与楚国的君主使两军交锋兵器都用钝了，战士流血死掉，被俘虏，死去回不了家，他们却因眼瞎的缘故，能脱身不去打仗，可以说是天神报答他们了。
English: If the monarchs of Song and Chu made the weapons of the two armies blunt, the soldiers bled to death, were captured, and died unable to return home, but because of their blindness, they were able to escape and not go to war, it can be said that the gods have rewarded them.

古文：今宋、楚相攻，两军未合，华元、子反结言而退，二军之众，并全而归，兵矢之刃无顿用者。
现代文：如今宋军与楚军相互围攻，两军并没有交锋，宋国大臣华之与楚军大将子反口头达成协议各自退兵，双方军队都完整地撤回，武器的锋刃没有用坏的。
English: Now, the Song and Chu armies are besieging each other. The two armies have not clashed. Song Minister Hua Zhi and the Chu general have verbally agreed to withdraw their troops. Both armies have withdrawn completely. The sharp edges of the weapons have not been damaged.

古文：虽有乘城之役，无死亡之患。
现代文：即使有登城的战斗，也没有死亡的威胁。
English: Even if there is fighting in the city, there is no threat of death.

古文：为善人报者，为乘城之间乎？
现代文：说善人得报应指的是登城守卫这段时间吗？
English: When you say that good people get their comeuppance, are you referring to the time when you were guarding the city?

古文：使时不盲，亦犹不死。
现代文：如果当时他们不瞎，也还是不会死。
English: If they hadn't been blind, they still wouldn't have died.

古文：盲与不盲，俱得脱免，神使之盲，何益於善！
现代文：眼睛瞎不瞎，一样能摆脱而免死。天神让他们瞎了眼，对行善的人有什么好处呢！
English: Whether one's eyes are blind or not, it is the same to escape death. What good is it for a doer of good if the angels blind them?

古文：当宋国乏粮之时也，盲人之家，岂独富哉？
现代文：在宋国缺乏粮食的时侯，瞎了眼睛的人家，难道能独家富裕吗？
English: In the Song Dynasty, when there was a shortage of grain, could a blind man's family become rich by itself?

古文：俱与乘城之家易子骸，反以穷厄独盲无见，则神报佑人，失善恶之实也。
现代文：一起参与登城守卫的人家都交换孩子来吃，劈人骨来烧的时候，反而因贫困偏偏瞎了眼看不见东西的，却成了天神报应保祐的人，真是违背了善恶的实际情况。
English: When the families of those who participated in the city's defense all exchanged children to eat and human bones to burn, those who were blinded by poverty and could not see became the guardians of the gods. This was a violation of the reality of good and evil.

古文：宋人父子前偶自以风寒发盲，围解之後，盲偶自愈。
现代文：或许是宋人父子以前正好自己因为风寒发病瞎了眼，楚军围城解除之后，失明碰巧自己好了。
English: Perhaps it was Songren father and son who just happened to have been blinded themselves due to the onset of wind and cold. After the siege of the Chu army was lifted, the blindness happened to be cured.

古文：世见父子修善，又用二白犊祭，宋、楚相攻独不乘城，围解之後父子皆视，则谓修善之报、获鬼神之佑矣。
现代文：世人看见他们父子做好事，又用二头白犊祭祀，宋军与楚军相互攻打，唯独他们没有登城守卫，包围解除以后，他们父子的眼睛又都恢复了视力，就说这是修善的报应，得到了鬼神的保祐。
English: The world saw their father and son doing good deeds, and using two-headed egrets to perform sacrifices. The Song and Chu armies fought against each other, but they did not go to the city to guard. After the siege was lifted, their father's and son's eyes regained their sight. They said that this was the reward for their good deeds, and they received the protection of ghosts and gods.

古文：楚相孙叔敖为兒之时，见两头蛇，杀而埋之，归，对其母泣。
现代文：楚国令尹孙叔敖是孩子的时候，看见了两个头的蛇，于是把它杀死并埋掉。回家对着他母亲哭泣。
English: When he was a child, the king of Chu, Yin Sunxiu, saw a snake with two heads, killed it and buried it. He went home and cried to his mother.

古文：母问其故，对曰： 我闻见两头蛇死。
现代文：母亲问他原因，回答说： 我听说遇见两个头的蛇的人会死。
English: His mother asked him why and he replied, "I heard that if you meet a snake with two heads, you will die."

古文：向者，出见两头蛇，恐去母死，是以泣也。 
现代文：刚才出去，碰见了两个头的蛇，恐怕就要撇下母亲死去，因此哭泣。 
English: I just went out and came across a two-headed snake. I'm afraid I'm going to leave my mother to die, so I'm crying.

古文：其母日： 今蛇何在？ 
现代文：他母亲说： 现在蛇在什么地方？ 
English: His mother said: Where is the snake now?

古文：对日： 我恐後人见之，即杀而埋之。 
现代文：回答说： 我恐怕后来的人看见，就杀掉埋了。 
English: And he said, Lest perhaps they which come after me see me, and kill me, and bury me.

古文：其母日： 吾闻有阴德者，天必报之。
现代文：他母亲说： 我听说暗中有德行的人，天会以福佑报答他。
English: His mother said, "I have heard that if a person is secretly virtuous, the heavens will reward him with blessings.

古文：汝必不死，天必报汝。 
现代文：你一定不会死，天肯定要报答你的。 
English: You will not die, and heaven will definitely reward you.

古文：叔敖竟不死，遂为楚相。
现代文：孙叔敖终于没有死，并做了楚国的令尹。
English: Sun Shuxuan finally did not die, and became the ruler of Chu.

古文：埋一蛇，获二佑，天报善明矣。
现代文：埋掉一条两头蛇，得到二次保祐，天报应做好事的人，这是明明白白的。
English: It is very clear that those who bury a two-headed snake will get a second blessing, and those who do good deeds will be rewarded.

古文：曰：此虚言矣。夫见两头蛇辄死者，俗言也；有阴德天报之福者，俗议也。
现代文：我认为，这是假话，因为看见两个头的蛇就会死，这是老百姓说的；暗中有德行的人，天会报答他福禄，这是老百姓的议论。
English: I think it's a lie, because seeing a snake with two heads means death, that's what the common people say; if someone is secretly virtuous, heaven will reward him with a blessing, that's what the common people say.

古文：叔敖信俗言而埋蛇，其母信俗议而必报，是谓死生无命，在一蛇之死。
现代文：孙叔敖相信老百姓的话埋掉两头蛇，他母亲相信老百姓的议论，认为一定会有好报，这就是说人的生死不决定于命，而决定于一条两头蛇的死活。
English: Sun Shuxuan believed in the people's words to bury the two-headed snake, and his mother believed in the people's discussion and thought that there would definitely be a good report. This means that a person's life and death are not determined by life, but by the life and death of a two-headed snake.

古文：齐孟尝君田文以五月五日生，其父田婴让其母曰： 何故举之？ 
现代文：齐国孟尝君田文因为五月五日出生，他父亲田婴责怪他母亲说： 为什么要养活他呢？ 
English: Because Mengyun Tianwen from Qi Province was born on May 5, his father Tianying blamed his mother and said, "Why should I feed him?

古文：曰： 君所以不举五月子，何也？ 
现代文：孟尝君长大后问他父亲： 你不愿抚养五月出生的孩子，为什么呢？ 
English: When Meng Yuqun grew up, he asked his father: You don't want to raise a child born in May, why?

古文：婴曰： 五月子长与户同，杀其父母。 
现代文：田婴说： 五月出生的孩子长到跟门一样高，就会克死他的父母。 
English: Tianying said, "If a child born in May grows to be as tall as a door, he will kill his parents."

古文：曰： 人命在天乎？
现代文：孟尝君反问道： 人命由天决定呢？
English: Meng Yakun asked: Is human life determined by the heavens?

古文：在户乎？
现代文：还是由门决定呢？
English: Or is it up to the door?

古文：如在天，君何忧也；如在户，则宜高其户耳，谁而及之者！ 
现代文：如果由天决定，你担忧什么！如果由门决定，那就应该把门增高，谁还能长到跟门一样高！ 
English: If it is determined by the sky, what are you worried about! If it is determined by the door, then the door should be increased, who can grow as high as the door!

古文：後文长与一户同，而婴不死。
现代文：后来田文长得跟门一样高，而田婴并没有死。
English: Later, Tianwen grew as tall as a door, but Tianying did not die.

古文：是则五月举子之忌，无效验也。
现代文：所以五月养孩子的忌讳，没有被验证。
English: Therefore, the taboo of raising children in May has not been verified.

古文：夫恶见两头蛇，犹五月举子也。
现代文：讨厌看见两个头的蛇，就像讨厌五月养孩子一样。
English: Hate to see a two-headed snake, just like hate to raise a child in May.

古文：五月举子，其父不死，则知见两头蛇者，无殃祸也。
现代文：五月养孩子，他的父亲没有死，就知道看见两头蛇的人，没有祸害。
English: May raise a child whose father is not dead, and know that there is no evil in the man who sees a two-headed snake.

古文：由此言之，见两头蛇自不死，非埋之故也。
现代文：由此说来，看见两头蛇本来不会死，并不是他埋掉两头蛇的缘故。
English: Therefore, seeing the two-headed snake would not have caused his death, not because he buried the two-headed snake.

古文：埋一蛇，获二福，如埋十蛇，得几佑乎？
现代文：埋掉一条两头蛇，能得到二次保佑，如果埋掉十条两头蛇，要得到几次保祐呢？
English: If you bury a two-headed snake, can you get a second blessing? If you bury ten two-headed snakes, how many blessings will you get?

古文：埋蛇恶人复见，叔敖贤也。
现代文：埋掉蛇是怕别人再看见，这是孙叔敖的贤行。
English: To bury a snake is to be afraid that others will see it again. This is the virtuous act of Sun Shouqi.

古文：贤者之行，岂徒埋蛇一事哉？
现代文：贤人的贤行，难道只有埋蛇一桩事情吗？
English: Is it only a matter of burying a snake for a wise man to act wisely?

古文：前埋蛇之时，多所行矣。
现代文：在埋蛇以前的时间里，应该已做了很多的好事。
English: In the time before burying the snake, he must have done a lot of good things.

古文：禀天善性，动有贤行。
现代文：从天那里禀承了善性，一举一动都会是贤行。
English: They have inherited goodness from heaven, and every move they make will be virtuous.

古文：贤行之人，宜见吉物，无为乃见杀人之蛇。
现代文：有贤行的人，应该见到吉祥的东西，不应该只看见会克死人的两头蛇。
English: A virtuous person should see auspicious things, not just two-headed snakes that can kill people.

古文：岂叔敖未见蛇之时有恶，天欲杀之，见其埋蛇，除其过，天活之哉？
现代文：难道是孙叔敖还没有见到蛇的时候就有罪恶，天想杀他，见他埋掉两头蛇，解除了他的罪过，是天使他活下来的吗？
English: Could it be that when Sun Shuhei hadn't yet seen the snake, he had sinned, and the heavens wanted to kill him? Seeing him bury the two-headed snake, he was absolved of his sin. Was it an angel that allowed him to survive?

古文：石生而坚，兰生而香。如谓叔敖之贤在埋蛇之时，非生而禀之也。
现代文：石头本性坚硬，兰草生来幽香，如果说孙叔敖的贤行只在埋蛇的时候，那就不是生来就从天那儿禀承了善性。
English: Stone is hard by nature, and bluegrass is fragrant by nature. If it is said that Sun Shuxuan's virtuous deed was only when he buried a snake, then he was not born inheriting goodness from heaven.

古文：儒家之徒董无心，墨家之役缠子，相见讲道。
现代文：儒家的门徒董无心，墨家的弟子缠子，相互见面交流学术思想。
English: The disciple of Confucianism, Dong Wu Xin, and the disciple of Mo family, Zangzi, met each other to exchange academic thoughts.

古文：缠子称墨家佑鬼神，是引秦穆公有明德，上帝赐之十九年，缠子难以尧、舜不赐年，桀、纣不夭死。
现代文：缠子称颂墨家尊重鬼，因此招致秦穆公有贤明的德行，上天赏他多活十九年。董子以尧、舜没有受到上天赏给的年寿，桀、纣也没有夭折来进行反驳。
English: Tang Zi praised the Mo family for their respect for ghosts, which led to Qin Mu Gong's wise and virtuous conduct, and Heaven rewarded him with an extra nineteen years of life. Dong Zi countered by saying that Zou and Zou did not receive the years of life given by Heaven, and Zou and Zou did not die prematurely.

古文：尧、舜、桀、纣犹为尚远，且近难以秦穆公、晋文公。
现代文：尧、舜、桀、纣的时代就算久远，姑且用秦穆公、晋文公来辩驳。
English: The era of,,,  is long gone, so let's use Qin Mu Gong and Jin Wen Gong to argue.

古文：夫谥者，行之迹也，迹生时行，以为死谥。穆者误乱之名，文者德惠之表。
现代文：谥号是人生前行为的写照，朝廷考察生前的行为，作为死后的谥号。 穆 是行为错乱的称号， 文 是有道德、贤惠的标志。
English: 号 is a portrayal of one's pre-life behavior, and the imperial court examines one's pre-life behavior as a posthumous 号. 穆 is the title of disordered behavior, and 文 is a sign of morality and virtue.

古文：有误乱之行，天赐之年；有德惠之操，天夺其命乎？
现代文：为什么有错乱的行为，上天赏给他年寿；而有道德、贤惠操行的，上天却要缩短他的寿命呢？
English: Why is it that if a man acts erratically, Heaven will give him a long life, but if he is moral and virtuous, Heaven will shorten his life?

古文：案穆公之霸，不过晋文；晋文之谥，美於穆公。
现代文：考察一下秦穆公的霸业超不过晋文公，晋文公的谥号比秦穆公美。
English: Let's take a look at Qin Mu Gong's domineering career, but Jin Wengong is superior, and Jin Wengong's nickname is better than Qin Mu Gong.

古文：天不加晋文以命，独赐穆公以年，是天报误乱，与 穆公 同也。
现代文：天不给晋文公增加寿命，而偏偏赏给秦穆公的年寿，这说明天对人报应的错乱，跟秦穆公的行为一样。
English: Heaven did not increase the life span of Jinwen Gong, but rather rewarded the longevity of Qinmu Gong. This shows that the disorder of Heaven's retribution to man is the same as the behavior of Qinmu Gong.

古文：天下善人寡，恶人众。
现代文：天下的好人少，坏人多。
English: There are fewer good people in the world, and more bad people.

古文：善人顺道，恶人违天。
现代文：好人遵循道义，坏人违反天意。
English: Good people follow morality, bad people go against God's will.

古文：然夫恶人之命不短，善人之年不长。天不命善人常享一百载之寿，恶人为殇子恶死，何哉？
现代文：然而坏人的命长，好人的命短。天不要好人常享有一百年的寿命，坏人早死短命，这是为什么呢？
English: However, the life of a bad person is long, and the life of a good person is short. Why is it that good people often enjoy a hundred-year life span, while bad people die early and have a short life span?

