古文：陆光祖，字与绳，平湖人。
现代文：陆光祖，字与绳，平湖人。
English: Lu Guangzu, character and rope, Pinghu people.

古文：祖淞，父杲，皆进士。
现代文：祖父陆淞，父亲陆杲，都是进士。
English: His grandfather Lu Yao and father Lu Yao were both conscripts.

古文：淞，光禄卿。
现代文：陆淞任光禄卿。
English: Lu Xuan was appointed as Guangluqing.

古文：杲，刑部主事。
现代文：陆杲任刑部主事。
English: Lu Wei was appointed as the head of the criminal department.

古文：光祖年十七，与父同举于乡。
现代文：陆光祖十七岁时，与父亲同时在乡试中举。
English: When Lu Guangzu was 17 years old, he and his father took the junior high school entrance examination at the same time.

古文：寻登嘉靖二十六年进士，除浚县知县。
现代文：不久考中嘉靖二十六年的进士，授职为睿县知县。
English: Soon after, he was awarded the title of Ruixian Zhixian in the 26th year of Jiajing.

古文：兵部尚书赵锦檄畿辅民筑塞垣，光祖言不便。
现代文：兵部尚书赵锦发布命令让京郊的百姓修筑边墙，陆光祖称不利。
English: Shangshu Zhaojin of the Ministry of Military Affairs issued an order for the people in the suburbs of Beijing to build a border wall, which Lu Guangzu called unfavorable.

古文：锦怒，劾之。
现代文：赵锦恼怒，弹劾他。
English: Zhao Jin was furious and impeached him.

古文：光祖言于巡抚，请输雇值，民乃安。
现代文：陆光祖向巡抚陈述，请求发放雇工费，百姓才安定。
English: Lu Guangzu made a statement to the governor, requesting the payment of labor costs, so that the people would be stable.

古文：郡王夺民产，光祖裁以法。
现代文：郡王抢夺民产，陆光祖依法加以制裁。
English: The county king robbed people's property, and Lu Guangzu imposed sanctions according to the law.

古文：迁南京礼部主事，请急归。
现代文：他调任南京礼部主事，因急事请假回乡。
English: He was transferred to be the head of the Nanjing Ceremonial Department, but had to return to his hometown due to an emergency.

古文：补祠祭主事，历仪制郎中。
现代文：回任后补祠祭主事，历任仪制朗中。
English: After returning to his post, he was in charge of the temple's memorial service, and has been a member of the ceremony committee ever since.

古文：严讷为尚书，雅重光祖，议无不行。
现代文：严讷任尚书，向来器重陆光祖，他的提议没有不批准的。
English: Yan Ne Ren Shangshu, who has always been a strong supporter of Lu Guangzu, did not disapprove of his proposal.

古文：及讷改吏部，调光祖验封郎中，改考功。
现代文：等到严讷改任吏部职，调陆光祖担任验封郎中，又改任考功郎中。
English: Wait until Yan Na was reassigned to the position of cadre, and Lu Guangzu was transferred to the position of inspecting seal, and he was also reassigned to the position of examining merit.

古文：王崇古、张瀚、方逢时、王一鹗挂物议，力雪之。
现代文：王崇古、张瀚、方逢时、王一鹗为舆论困扰，陆光祖极力替他们洗刷。
English: Wang Chonggu, Zhang Han, Fang Fengjie, and Wang Yijie were troubled by public opinion, and Lu Guangzu tried his best to clean up after them.

古文：既而改文选，益务汲引人才，登进耆硕几尽。
现代文：不久他改任文选郎中，更加尽职发掘人才，对那些素有威望的士大夫尽数选用。
English: Soon after, he was transferred to the position of literary selector, and he was more conscientious about discovering talent, selecting as many prestigious scholars and doctors as possible.

古文：又破格擢廉能吏王化、江东、邵元善、张泽、李珙、郭文通、蔡琮、陈永、谢侃。
现代文：又破格提拔廉洁、能干的官吏王化、江东、邵元善、张泽、李珙、郭文通、蔡琮、陈永、谢侃。
English: In addition, Wang Hua, Jiang Dong, Shao Yuan Zhen, Zhang Ze, Li Wei, Guo Wentong, Cai Wei, Chen Yong and Xie Kan, who are clean and capable officials, have been promoted in an unprecedented manner.

古文：或由乡举贡士，或起自书吏。
现代文：他们或者是由乡里举荐的贡士，或者是由书吏中提拔。
English: They were either recommended by the townspeople, or promoted by the librarian.

古文：由是下僚竞劝，讷亦推心任之，故光祖得行其志。
现代文：因此下层官吏竞相勉励，严讷也全力任用他，所以陆光祖能够实现意愿。
English: Therefore, the lower-level officials competed to encourage him, and Yan Ne also made every effort to appoint him, so Lu Guangzu was able to realize his wishes.

古文：左侍郎朱衡衔光祖，有后言，御史孙丕扬遂以专擅劾光祖。
现代文：左侍郎朱衡怀恨陆光祖，在背后议论，御史孙丕扬就以专权之罪弹劾陆光祖。
English: The left-hand man, Zhu Heng, held a grudge against Lu Guangzu and discussed the matter behind his back. The right-hand man, Sun Xiangyang, then impeached Lu Guangzu for the crime of autocracy.

古文：时已迁太常少卿，坐落职闲住。
现代文：当时他已调任太常少卿，被撤职闲居。
English: At that time, he had been transferred to the position of too-frequent minor lord and was dismissed to idle.

古文：大学士高拱掌吏部，谋倾徐阶。
现代文：大学士高拱掌管吏部，谋划倾覆徐阶。
English: Gao Gong, a college graduate, was in charge of the cadre department and plotted to overthrow Xu Shao.

古文：阶宾客皆避匿，光祖独为排解。
现代文：徐阶的宾客都躲避了，唯独陆光祖替他申辩。
English: Xu Jia's guests all ducked out, leaving Lu Guangzu to plead on his behalf.

古文：及拱罢，杨博代为吏部，义之，特起南京太仆少卿。
现代文：等到高拱罢职，杨博代替他负责吏部，认为他仗义，特意启用陆光祖为南京太仆少卿。
English: When Gao Gong retired, Yang Bo replaced him in charge of the cadre department. He thought that Gao Gong was a righteous man and specially appointed Lu Guangzu as the Nanjing Taigu Shaoqing.

古文：未上，擢本寺卿。
现代文：还没上任，就升任本寺卿。
English: He was promoted to chief priest of this temple before he took office.

古文：又就进大理卿。
现代文：不久又升任大理寺卿。
English: He was soon promoted to the position of Daritei chieftain.

古文：半道丁父艰。
现代文：半路上闻报父亲去世，回家奔丧。
English: Halfway there, he heard the news of his father's death and rushed home to mourn.

古文：万历五年，起故官。
现代文：万历五年出任原职。
English: He has been in his current position for five years.

古文：张居正以夺情杖言者，光祖遗书规之。
现代文：张居正因为居丧未满夺情出任官职，杖责议论的人，陆光祖送信规劝他。
English: Zhang Jiusheng was appointed to an official position because he was not satisfied with his position. Lu Guangzu sent a letter to the person who was responsible for the discussion to persuade him.

古文：及王用汲劾居正，居正将中以危祸，光祖时入为大理卿，力解得免。
现代文：等到王用汲弹劾张居正，张居正即将重惩他时，当时任大理寺卿的陆光祖极力解救使他幸免。
English: When Wang Yingqiu impeached Zhang Juzheng, and Zhang Juzheng was about to severely punish him, Lu Guangzu, who was the head of Dali Temple at the time, tried his best to save him.

古文：居正与光祖同年相善，欲援为助，光祖无诡随。
现代文：张居正与陆光祖同年考取进士，相互友好，想引荐他做助手，陆光祖不屈身相随。
English: Zhang Juzheng and Lu Guangzu took the entrance examination in the same year. They were friendly with each other and wanted to recommend him as an assistant. Lu Guangzu did not give in.

古文：及迁工部右侍郎，以议漕粮改折忏居正，御史张一鲲论之，光祖遽引归。
现代文：等到他调任工部右侍郎，因为议论漕运改为折色银两而违逆了张居正，御史张一鲲疏论他，陆光祖就称病回乡了。
English: When he was transferred to the post of the right-hand man of the Ministry of Works, because Zhang Jizheng disobeyed because the discussion of rowing was changed to folding color and silver, and the historian Zhang Yijie talked about him, Lu Guangzu said that he was ill and returned to his hometown.

古文：十一年冬，荐起南京兵部右侍郎。
现代文：万历十一年冬天，他被举荐担任南京兵部右侍郎。
English: In the winter of the eleventh year of Wanli, he was recommended to serve as the Right Attendant of the Nanjing Military Department.

古文：甫旬日，召为吏部。
现代文：才过十来天，就召任他为吏部职。
English: It was only ten days later that he was called to the position of director.

古文：悉引居正所摈老成人，布九列。
现代文：他把张居正所摒弃的老成人全部召回安排在九卿各部中，安置了很多人。
English: He recalled all the old adults abandoned by Zhang Jizheng and placed them in the various departments of the Nine Elders, and placed many people.

古文：李植、江东之力求居正罪，光祖言居正辅翼功不可泯，与言路左。
现代文：李植、江东之极力请求治张居正的罪，陆光祖称张居正辅佐的功绩不可抹杀，与舆论相反。
English: Li Zhi and Jiang Dongzhi strongly requested the punishment of Zhang Jizheng's crime, and Lu Guangzu said that the merits of Zhang Jizheng's assistant could not be erased, contrary to public opinion.

古文：植辈以丁此吕故攻尚书杨巍，光祖右巍诋言者。言者遂群攻光祖，乃由左侍郎出为南京工部尚书。
现代文：李植等人因为丁此吕以前攻击尚书杨巍，陆光祖支持杨巍诋毁议论的人，议论的人于是群起攻击陆光祖，他由左侍郎出任南京工部尚书。
English: Li Zhi and others, because Ding Guolu had previously attacked Yang Xuan of Shangshu, and Lu Guangzu supported Yang Xuan to discredit the talkers, the talkers then attacked Lu Guangzu in droves. He was appointed as the left attendant of Shangshu of Nanjing Engineering Department.

古文：御史周之翰劾光祖附宗人炳得清华，帝不问。
现代文：御史周之翰弹劾陆光祖依附同族的人陆炳得到清高显贵的官职，神宗不理会。
English: Grand Historian Zhou Zhihang impeached Lu Guangzu, who relied on a person of the same ethnic group, Lu Yao, to obtain a high-ranking official position, but the Shensong did not pay attention.

古文：御史杨有仁遂劾光祖受赇请属，巍力保持之，事得寝，光祖竟引疾去。
现代文：御史杨有仁就弹劾陆光祖收受贿赂，请求将他交给官吏治罪，杨巍极力保护他，事情得以平息，陆光祖最后称病离职。
English: Gu Shi Yang Youren impeached Lu Guangzu for accepting bribes and requested that he be handed over to officials to be punished. Yang Hui tried his best to protect him, and the matter was settled. Lu Guangzu eventually resigned, saying he was ill.

古文：十五年，起南京刑部尚书，就改吏部。
现代文：万历十五年，他出任南京刑部尚书，改派到吏部。
English: After fifteen years, he was assigned to the Criminal Investigation Department of Nanjing and was reassigned to the Criminal Investigation Department.

古文：率同官劾东厂太监张鲸，且乞宥李沂。
现代文：率领同僚弹劾东厂太监张鲸，并且请求宽恕李沂。
English: He led his colleagues to impeach Zhang Jiali, the eunuch of the East Factory, and asked for forgiveness from Li Junxun.

古文：已，言国本未定，由鲸构谋，请除之以安宗社。
现代文：此后，称皇储未定，是因为张鲸搞阴谋，请求清除他以便安定宗庙社稷。
English: After that, he said that the crown prince was undecided because Zhang Jiali was plotting and requested that he be purged in order to stabilize the family temple.

古文：及帝召还鲸，复率同官极谏。
现代文：等到神宗召回张鲸，他又率领同僚极力劝谏。
English: When Shenzong recalled Zhang Jiali, he and his colleagues tried their best to persuade him.

古文：入为刑部尚书。
现代文：他入朝担任刑部尚书。
English: He entered the imperial court as a clerk of the Penal Department.

古文：帝尝书其名御屏。吏部尚书宋纁卒，遂用光祖代，而以赵锦代光祖。
现代文：神宗曾将他的名字书写于御屏上，吏部尚书宋纟熏去世，于是起用陆光祖代替，让赵锦代替陆光祖的原职。
English: Shenzong had written his name on the screen, but the official Shangshu Song Yuxuan passed away, so he replaced him with Lu Guangzu, and let Zhao Jin replace Lu Guangzu's original position.

古文：御史王之栋言二人不当用。帝怒，贬之栋杂职。
现代文：御史王之栋称他们两人不应当任用，神宗恼怒，将王之栋降职为杂仆。
English: Wang Zhidong said that the two of them should not be appointed, and Shenzong was so angry that he demoted Wang Zhidong to a servant.

古文：时部权为内阁所夺，纁力矫之，遂遭挫，光祖不为慑。
现代文：当时部中的权力被内阁夺取了，宋纟熏极力矫正，遭受挫折，陆光祖不为惊惧。
English: At that time, the power of the ministry was seized by the cabinet, Song Shuxuan tried his best to correct it, suffered setbacks, and Lu Guangzu was not alarmed.

古文：尝以事与大学士申时行迕。
现代文：曾经因事与大学士申时行相抵触。
English: He once fell foul of the university's disciplinary code.

古文：时行不悦，光祖卒无所徇。
现代文：申时行不高兴，陆光祖最终没有顺从。
English: When Shen Xingxing was not happy, Lu Guangzu finally did not obey.

古文：时行谢政，特旨用赵志皋、张位，时行所密荐也。
现代文：申时行辞职，神宗特意授旨起用赵志皋、张位，都是申时行暗中推荐的。
English: The resignation of Shin Shigyo and the appointment of Zhao Zhisheng and Zhang Yi by Shenzong were secretly recommended by Shin Shigyo.

古文：光祖言，辅臣当廷推，不当内降。
现代文：陆光祖称，辅佐大臣应当由朝廷推荐，不应当由宫内降旨。
English: Lu Guangzu said that the assistant minister should be recommended by the imperial court, and should not be appointed by the imperial court.

古文：帝命不为后例。
现代文：皇上这次的命令应下不为例。
English: The Emperor's order this time should be no exception.

古文：二十年，大计外吏，给事中李春开、王遵训、何伟、丁应泰，御史刘汝康皆先为外吏，有物议，悉论黜之。
现代文：万历二十年全面考察地方官吏，给事中李春开、王遵训、何伟、丁应泰，御史刘汝康都先在京城之外任过职，名声不好，全部被罢黜。
English: After 20 years of comprehensive investigation of local officials, Li Chunkai, Wang Zunxun, He Wei, Ding Yingtao, and Mishi Liu Rukang were all removed from their posts because of their bad reputation.

古文：又举许孚远、顾宪成等二十二人，时论翕然称焉。
现代文：又举荐许孚远、顾宪成等二十二人，当时的舆论一致称赞。
English: Twenty-two people, including Xu Fuyuan and Gu Xiancheng, were also recommended, which was unanimously praised by the public opinion at that time.

古文：顷之，以推用饶伸、万国钦忏旨，文选郎王教以下尽逐。
现代文：不久，因为推举饶申、万国钦与圣旨抵触，文选郎王教以下的人全被驱逐。
English: Soon, because the nomination of Raoshen and Wankokuchin conflicted with the Holy Will, all the people below Wenxuan Lang Wang Jiao were expelled.

古文：光祖谓事由己，引罪乞休，为郎官祈宥，不许。
现代文：陆光祖称事情的起因在自己，告罪请求退休，为郎官请求宽恕，神宗没有批准。
English: Lu Guangzu said that the cause of the matter was himself, pleaded guilty and asked to retire, and asked for forgiveness for his vassal, but Shenzong did not approve.

古文：及会推阁臣，廷臣循故事，首光祖名。
现代文：等到推举内阁大臣，朝廷大臣遵循旧例，首先报上陆光祖的姓名。
English: When it came time to nominate cabinet ministers, the ministers of the imperial court followed the old practice and first announced the name of Lu Guangzu.

古文：诏报曰： 卿前请廷推，推固宜首卿。 
现代文：神宗下诏答复： 你先前请求朝廷推举，推举的原来首先就是你。 
English: Shenzong replied with an imperial edict: You previously asked the imperial court to nominate you, and you were the first to be nominated.

古文：光祖知不能容，日怀去志。
现代文：陆光祖知道皇上不容忍自己，每天都怀藏离去的打算。
English: Lu Guangzu knew that the emperor did not tolerate him, and every day he harbored the intention to leave.

古文：无何，以王时槐、蔡悉、王樵、沈节甫老成魁艾，特推荐之，给事中乔胤遂劾光祖及文选郎邹观光。
现代文：不久，因为王时槐、蔡悉、王樵、沈节甫等德高望重，特别推荐给皇上，给事中乔胤就弹劾陆光祖和文选郎邹观光。
English: Soon after, Qiao Yin impeached Lu Guangzu and Wenxuan Langyi for sightseeing, because Wang Shijun, Cai Xie, Wang Qian and Shen Qifu were highly respected and specially recommended to the emperor.

古文：光祖遂力求去，许驰驿。在籍五年卒。
现代文：陆光祖就极力请求离去，神宗允许他乘坐驿车，回乡五年后去世。
English: Lu Guangzu strongly requested to leave, and Shenzong allowed him to take a taxi. He died five years after returning to his hometown.

古文：人服其量。
现代文：被赠封为太子太保，谥号庄简。
English: He was given the title of Crown Prince Taibo, and his posthumous name was Zhuo Jian.

古文：孙鑨，字文中。父升，字志高，都御史燧季子也。
现代文：陆光祖为人耿介有骨气，见识高明，通晓朝廷典制，每当议论大政方针，他一言确定要害。孙鑨，字文中，父亲孙升，字志高，是都御史孙燧的小儿子。
English: Lu Guangzu was a person with backbone, insightful, and knowledgeable about the imperial court ceremony system. Whenever he discussed major political policies, he determined the key words. Sun Yat-sen, whose father was Sun Sheng, was the youngest son of Sun Yat-sen.

古文：嘉靖十四年进士及第。授编修，累官礼部侍郎。
现代文：嘉靖十四年中进士及第，授职为编修，升任过礼部侍郎。
English: In the 14th year of the Jiajing Dynasty, he was promoted to the third and fourth rank, and was promoted to the position of editor. He was also promoted to the position of chamberlain of the ceremonial department.

古文：严嵩枋国，升其门生也，独无所附丽。
现代文：严嵩当权，孙升是他的门生，唯独没有依附他。
English: Yan Song was in power, and Sun Sheng was his protégé, but he did not cling to him.

古文：会南京礼部尚书缺，众不欲行，升独请往。
现代文：遇上南京礼部尚书空缺，众人都不想去，唯独孙升请求前往。
English: When there was a vacancy in Nanjing's etiquette department, no one wanted to go, except for Sun Sheng, who requested to go.

古文：卒，赠太子少保，谥文恪。
现代文：死后，赠封为太子少保，谥号文恪。
English: After his death, he was given the title of Prince Junior Protector, and his posthumous name was Wen Ke.

古文：升尝念父死宸濠之难，终身不书宁字，亦不为人作寿文。
现代文：孙升曾经怀念父亲死于宸濠之难，终身不写宁字，也不替别人写祭文。
English: Sun Sheng once missed his father's death in the calamity of Yunnan, and did not write the word "Ning" for the rest of his life, nor did he write dedicatory texts for others.

古文：居官不言人过，时称笃行君子。
现代文：做官不说别人的过错，当时称为坚定行事的君子。
English: At that time, officials who did not point out the faults of others were called gentlemen who acted firmly.

古文：四子，鑨、铤、錝、鑛。铤，南京礼部右侍郎。錝，太仆卿。
现代文：有四个儿子，孙鑨、孙铤、孙钅宗、孙钅广，孙铤是南京礼部右侍郎，孙钅宗是太仆卿。
English: They had four sons, Sun Hao, Sun Hao, Sun Hao Zong, and Sun Hao Guang. Sun Hao was the Right Attendant of the Nanjing Ceremonial Department, and Sun Hao Zong was the Servant of the Emperor.

古文：鑛自有传。鑨举嘉靖三十五年进士，授武库主事。
现代文：孙鑨考取嘉靖三十五年的进士，授职为武库主事。
English: Sun Yat-sen took the entrance examination for the 35th year of Jiajing and was appointed as the chief of the arsenal.

古文：历武选郎中，尚书杨博深器之。
现代文：历任武选郎中，尚书杨博很器重他。
English: Among all the successors of Wu Xuan, Shangshu Yangbo was very fond of him.

古文：世宗斋居二十年，谏者辄获罪。
现代文：世宗在宫中斋戒二十年，劝谏的人动辄获罪。
English: Shizong fasted for twenty years in the palace, and anyone who tried to persuade him was punished.

古文：鑨请朝群臣，且力诋近幸方士，引赵高、林灵素为喻。
现代文：孙鑨请求皇帝接见大臣们，并且极力抨击宠幸的方士，引用赵高、林灵素做比喻。
English: Sun Yat-sen asked the emperor to receive the ministers, and strongly criticized the favored magicians, citing Zhao Gao and Lin Lingsu as a metaphor.

古文：中贵匿不以闻，鑨遂引疾归。
现代文：显贵的侍从宦官将奏章藏匿不转交皇帝，孙鑨称病回乡。
English: The distinguished eunuch's attendants hid the score and did not pass it on to the emperor. Sun Yat-sen claimed to be ill and returned to his hometown.

古文：隆庆元年，起南京文选郎中。
现代文：隆庆元年他出任南京文选郎中。
English: In the first year of the Longqing era, he became a member of the Nanjing Literature Selection Committee.

古文：万历初，累迁光禄卿。
现代文：万历初年，调任光禄卿，称病回乡。
English: In the first year of the Wanli era, he was transferred to the post of Guangluqing, but he claimed to be ill and returned to his hometown.

古文：引疾归。里居十年，坐卧一小楼，宾客罕见其面。
现代文：在家乡住了十年，居住在一座小楼中，宾客很少见他的面。
English: He has lived in his hometown for ten years, in a small building, and guests rarely see him.

古文：起故官，进大理卿。
现代文：后起用原职，晋升为大理卿。
English: Later, he resumed his original position and was promoted to the position of Daliqing.

古文：都御史吴时来议律例，多纰盭，鑨力争之。帝悉从驳议。
现代文：都御史吴时来议论律例，错误很多，孙鑨极力争辩，皇帝全部听从了批驳的意见。
English: When the governor of the capital, Wu Shi, came to discuss the laws and regulations, there were many mistakes. Sun Yat-sen argued strenuously, and the emperor listened to all the objections.

古文：历南京吏部尚书，寻改兵部，参赞机务。
现代文：他担任南京吏部尚书，不久改任兵部职，参与机要事务。
English: He served as the secretary of the Nanjing Personnel Department, and was soon transferred to the Military Department to participate in important affairs.

古文：命甫下，会陆光祖去，廷推代者再，乃召为吏部尚书。
现代文：任命刚下达，遇上陆光祖离职。朝廷一再推举代替的人，才召他担任吏部尚书。
English: The appointment had just been issued, when Lu Guangzu left his post. The imperial court repeatedly elected a replacement, only to call him to serve as the secretary of the personnel department.

古文：吏部自宋纁及光祖为政，权始归部。
现代文：吏部从宋纟熏到陆光祖主事，权力才回归吏部。
English: From Song Dynasty to the time of Lu Guangzu, the cadres were in charge of the affairs, and only then did the power return to the cadres.

古文：至鑨，守益坚。
现代文：到了孙鑨时期，部权守卫得更为坚定。
English: During the Sun Yat-sen period, the power of the ministry was more firmly guarded.

古文：故事，冢宰与阁臣遇不避道，后率引避。
现代文：先例，吏部尚书与内阁大臣相遇不回避，后来都回避了。
English: As a precedent, the Secretary of the Ministry of Civil Service, Shang Shu, did not avoid meeting with the cabinet minister, but later avoided it.

古文：光祖争之，乃复故。
现代文：陆光祖争辩，才又恢复旧制。
English: Lu Guangzu argued, and the old system was restored.

古文：然阴戒驺人异道行，至鑨益径直。
现代文：然而暗暗告诫骑马的侍从另选道路走，到了孙鑨时就径直走了。
English: However, he secretly warned the attendant riding the horse to take a different route, and when he reached Sun Yat-sen, he went straight.

古文：张位等不能平，因欲夺其权。
现代文：张位等人心中不平，想剥夺他的权力。
English: Zhang Yi and others were not happy and wanted to deprive him of his power.

古文：建议大僚缺，九卿各举一人，类奏以听上裁，用杜专擅。
现代文：建议大的臣僚的空缺，九卿各举荐一个人，一样上奏听侯皇帝裁决，以便杜绝专权。
English: Suggesting a vacancy for a high-ranking minister, each of the nine lords recommended a person, as well as reported to the emperor for adjudication, in order to prevent dictatorship.

古文：鑨言： 廷推，大臣得共衡可否，此 爵人于朝，与众共之 之义，类奏启幸途，非制。 
现代文：孙鑨说： 朝廷推举，大臣能共同衡量可否，这是 在朝廷给人封爵，与众人共同商议 的意思，一次推举多人易开启宠幸之路，不是例制。 
English: Sun Yat-sen said, "The imperial court selects, and the ministers can jointly measure whether they can be knighted or not. This is the meaning of giving a knighthood to people at the imperial court and discussing with everyone. It is easy to open the road to favoritism by selecting many people at once, and it is not a case-by-case system."

古文：给事中史孟麟亦言之。
现代文：给事中史孟麟也这么认为。
English: This is also the view of Shi Menglin, who is in charge of the case.

古文：诏卒如位议。
现代文：诏令最终采纳了张位的建议。
English: The edict finally accepted Zhang's suggestion.

古文：自是吏部权又渐散之九卿矣。
现代文：从此吏部的权力又渐渐分散到九卿手中。
English: From then on, the power of the cadres was gradually dispersed into the hands of the nine nobles.

古文：二十一年，大计京朝官，力杜请谒。
现代文：万历二十一年全面考察京官、朝官，他极力杜绝私人请托。
English: In the 21st year of Wanli, he made an all-round inspection of Beijing officials and imperial officials, and he tried his best to eliminate private requests.

古文：文选员外郎吕胤昌，鑨甥也，首斥之。
现代文：文选员外郎吕胤昌，是孙鑨的外甥，首先被贬斥。
English: The author's brother-in-law, Lyu Yinchang, who is Sun Yat-sen's nephew, was the first to be denounced.

古文：考功郎中赵南星亦自斥其姻。
现代文：考功郎中赵南星也自己贬责了姻亲。
English: Zhao Nansing, one of the winners of the examination, also criticized his in-laws.

古文：一时公论所不予者贬黜殆尽，大学士赵志皋弟预焉。
现代文：一时间公论不容的人被全部贬责、罢黜，大学士赵志皋的弟弟亦在其中。
English: All those who were not allowed to speak publicly for a while were reprimanded and dismissed, including the younger brother of university scholar Zhao Zhixuan.

古文：由是执政皆不悦。
现代文：因此执政大臣都不高兴。
English: As a result, the ruling ministers are not happy.

古文：王锡爵方以首辅还朝，欲有所庇。
现代文：王锡爵刚刚回朝担任首辅，想有所庇护。
English: Wang Xizhe had just returned to the North to serve as First Assistant Minister, and he wanted to be protected.

古文：比至而察疏已上，庇者在黜中，亦不能无憾。
现代文：等他到的时候，监察的奏疏已经呈送皇上了，庇护的人也在罢黜之列，也不能不生遗憾。
English: By the time he arrived, the inspector's report had already been submitted to the emperor, and the people who had given him asylum were also among those who had been dismissed. He could not help but feel regret.

古文：会言官以拾遗论劾稽勋员外郎虞淳熙、职方郎中杨于廷、主事袁黄。鑨议谪黄，留淳熙、于廷。
现代文：遇上言官弹劾稽勋员外郎虞淳熙、职方郎中杨于廷、主事袁黄，孙鑨提议贬责袁黄，留用虞淳熙、杨于廷。
English: When the speaker impeached the inspector Yu Junxi, Yang Yuting, and Yuan Huang, Sun Yat-sen proposed to reprimand Yuan Huang and retain Yu Junxi and Yang Yuting.

古文：诏黄方赞画军务，亦留之。
现代文：诏令袁黄正在谋划军务，也留任。
English: General Yuan Huang, who is planning military affairs, will also remain in office.

古文：给事中刘道隆遂言淳熙、于廷不当议留，乃下严旨责部臣专权结党。
现代文：给事中刘道隆称虞淳熙、杨于廷不应当留任，于是皇帝严厉责备部臣结党专权。
English: During the incident, Liu Daolong said that Yu Junxi and Yang Yuting should not remain in office, so the emperor severely reproached the subordinates for forming a party monopoly.

古文：鑨言： 淳熙，臣乡人，安贫好学。
现代文：孙鑨说： 虞淳熙是我的同乡，安贫好学。
English: Sun Yat-sen said, "Yu Chunxi is my fellow villager. He is poor but eager to learn.

古文：于廷力任西事，尚书石星极言其才。
现代文：杨于廷努力处理西部事务，尚书石星极力称道他的才干。
English: Yang Yuting worked hard to deal with western affairs, and Shang Shuxi Shixing highly praised his ability.

古文：今宁夏方平，臣不敢以功为罪。
现代文：现在宁夏刚平定，我不敢视功绩为罪过。
English: Now that Ningxia has just been pacified, I dare not regard my achievements as a crime.

古文：且既名议覆，不嫌异同。
现代文：况且既然由部里报告处理意见不嫌弃异同。
English: Moreover, since it is the ministry that reports on the handling of opinions, differences and similarities are not to be rejected.

古文：若知其无罪，以谏官一言而去之，自欺欺君，臣谊不忍为也。 
现代文：如果知道他没有罪，因为谏官的一句话就驱逐他，欺骗自己欺骗君主，我确实不能容忍。 
English: If, knowing that he is not guilty, I expel him because of a word of a eunuch, deceiving myself and deceiving the sovereign, I really cannot tolerate it.

古文：帝以鑨不引罪，夺其俸，贬南星三官，淳熙等俱勒罢。
现代文：皇帝认为孙鑨不认罪，剥夺了他的俸禄，将赵南星降了三级，虞淳熙等人勒令罢免。
English: The emperor thought that Sun Yat-sen did not plead guilty, deprived him of his salary, reduced Zhao Nanxing to the third level, and ordered Yu Junxi and others to be dismissed.

古文：鑨遂乞休，且白南星无罪。
现代文：于是孙鑨请求退休，并称赵南星无罪。
English: As a result, Sun Yat-sen asked to retire and said that Zhao Nansing was not guilty.

古文：左都御史李世达以己同掌察，而南星独被谴，亦为南星、淳熙等讼。帝皆不听。
现代文：左都御史李世达认为与自己共同负责监察，而唯独赵南星遭谴责，也替赵南星、虞淳熙等人鸣冤，皇帝都不听。
English: The left imperial governor Li Shida thought that he was jointly responsible for supervision, but only Zhao Nansing was condemned, and he also complained on behalf of Zhao Nansing, Yu Junxi and others. The emperor did not listen.

古文：于是佥都御史王汝训，右通政魏允贞，大理少卿曾乾亨，郎中于孔兼，员外郎陈泰来，主事顾允成、张纳升、贾严，助教薛敷教交章讼南星冤，而泰来词尤切，其略曰：
现代文：因此佥都御史王汝训，右通政魏允贞，大理少卿曾乾亨，郎中于孔兼，员外郎陈泰来，主事顾允成、张纳升、贾岩，助教薛敷教相继替赵南星鸣冤，而且陈泰来的言辞尤为恳切。它大略说：
English: For this reason, Zhao Nanxing's vassals Wang Ruxun, Yu Tong Zheng, Wei Yunzheng, Dali Shaoqing Zeng Qianheng, his son-in-law Yu Kongjian, his son-in-law Chen Tairai, the headmaster Gu Yuncheng, Zhang Nasheng, Jia Yan, and the assistant teacher Xue Shikijiao successively took up Zhao Nanxing's cause, and Chen Tairai's words were particularly earnest. It roughly said:

古文：臣尝四更京察。
现代文： 我曾经四次考察京官。
English: I have visited Beijing four times.

古文：其在丁丑，张居正以夺情故，用御史朱琏谋，借星变计吏，箝制众口。
现代文：丁丑年，张居正因为守丧未满期而强夺情做官，采纳御史朱琏的计谋，借星象变化考核官吏，钳制众人的口舌。
English: In the year of Ding Jiu, Zhang Jiusheng forcibly took a position as an official because he had not completed the period of mourning, adopted the stratagem of the imperial historian Zhu Xi, used the change of the stars to assess officials, and restrained everyone's speech.

古文：署部事方逢时、考功郎中刘世亨依违其间。
现代文：负责部事的方逢时、考功郎中刘世亨调和其中。
English: The person in charge of the ministry, Fang Fuxi, and the winner of the examination, Liu Shihong, were reconciled.

古文：如蔡文范、习孔教辈并挂察籍，不为众所服。
现代文：像蔡文范、习孔教等人都受到纠察停职，不为众人信服。
English: Like Cai Wenfan, Xi Kongjiao and others, they were picketed and suspended, and they were not convinced by the crowd.

古文：辛巳，居正威福已成，王国光唯诺惟谨，考功郎中孙惟清与吏科秦耀谋尽锢建言诸臣吴中行等。
现代文：辛巳年，张居正已成威福之势，王国光只是唯唯诺诺以图谨慎，考功郎中孙惟清和吏科秦耀密谋将提意见的吴中行等各位大臣全部禁锢。
English: In the year of Xin Si, Zhang Jizheng had already become a powerful force. Wang Guoguang was just being prudent and cautious. Sun Weixing, a meritorious scholar, and Ke Qin Yao, an official, conspired to imprison all the ministers, including Wu Zhongxing, who had offered their opinions.

古文：今辅臣赵志皋、张位、抚臣赵世卿亦挂名南北京察，公论冤之。
现代文：现任辅佐大臣赵志皋、张位，抚臣赵世卿也在南北两京接受考察，舆论认为冤枉。
English: The current Vice-Minister Zhao Zhixuan and Vice-Minister Zhao Shixing were also inspected in the two capitals, and the public opinion considered this to be unjustified.

古文：丁亥，御史王国力折给事中杨廷相、同官马允登之邪议。
现代文：丁亥年，御史王国极力驳斥给事中杨廷相、同僚马允登的邪议。
English: In the year of Ding Hai, the Imperial History Kingdom vigorously refuted the evil opinion of Yang Tingxiang and his colleague Ma Yunden.

古文：而尚书杨巍素性模棱，考功郎徐一槚立调停之画。
现代文：但是尚书杨巍向来模棱两可，考功郎徐一木贾马上进行调停。
English: However, Shangshu Yang Wei has always been ambiguous, and Xu Yigi Jia, the exam winner, immediately mediated.

古文：泾、渭失辩，亦为时议所议。
现代文：不辨泾、渭，也被当时的舆论讥讽。
English: Regardless of whether it was  or, it was ridiculed by public opinion at the time.

古文：独今春之役，旁咨博采，核实称情，邪谄尽屏，贪墨必汰；乃至鑨割渭阳之情，南星忍秦、晋之好，公正无逾此者。
现代文：只有今年春天的事情，广泛咨询，博采众意，符合实情，合乎情理，失当的谄媚被全部摒弃，贪官污吏必作淘汰；至于孙鑨割除甥舅的情感，赵南星忍受断绝姻亲交好，没有比这更公正的。
English: Only in the spring of this year, the matter was widely consulted, popularized, consistent with the truth, reasonable, and the improper flattery was all abandoned, and the corrupt officials must be eliminated; as for Sun Yat-sen's feelings of cutting off his nephew, Zhao Nansing endured the severance of the friendship between the in-laws, there is nothing more fair than this.

古文：元辅锡爵兼程赴召，人或疑其欲干计典。
现代文：首辅王锡爵兼程赴命，有人还怀疑他想干预考察大典。
English: Some people also suspect that he wanted to interfere with the inspection of the Great Codex.

古文：今其亲故皆不能庇，欲甘心南星久矣。
现代文：现在他的亲朋故友都不能庇护，对赵南星很久就不甘心了。
English: Now that his relatives, friends and old friends cannot shelter him, he has not been able to put up with Zhao Nanxing for a long time.

古文：故道隆章上，而专权结党之旨旋下。
现代文：所以刘道隆的奏章呈上，马上就有指控他专权结党的批示下达。
English: Therefore, as soon as Liu Daolong's petition was submitted, the order to accuse him of forming an authoritarian party was immediately issued.

古文：夫以吏部议留一二庶僚为结党，则两都大僚被拾遗者二十有二人，而阁臣议留者六，詹事刘虞夔以锡爵门生而留，独可谓之非党耶？
现代文： 因为吏部商议留用一两个僚属就是结党，那么两都的大臣有二十二人被指出过失，内阁大臣商议留用六个人，詹事刘虞夔因是王锡爵的门生而被留用，独可以不称作结党吗？
English: Because the cadre department's deliberation to retain one or two subordinates is the formation of a party, then 22 ministers of the two cities were pointed out to be at fault, the cabinet minister deliberated to retain six people, and Liu Yuxuan was retained because he was Wang Xizhe's protégé, but can it not be called a party formation?

古文：且部权归阁，自高拱兼摄以来，已非一日。尚书自张瀚、严清而外，选郎自孙鑛、陈有年而外，莫不奔走承命。
现代文：况且吏部的权力归属内阁，从高拱兼管以来，已经不只一天，尚书除张瀚、严清之外，选郎除孙钅广、陈有年之外，没有不奔走遵命的。
English: Moreover, the power of the cadre department belongs to the cabinet. Since Gao Gong also took charge, it has been more than a day. Except for Zhang Han and Yan Qing, and except for Sun Bingguang and Chen Younian, there is no one who does not rush to obey orders.

古文：其流及于杨巍，至刘希孟、谢廷寀而扫地尽矣。
现代文：延及杨巍，到刘希孟、谢廷审的时候就完全威望扫地。
English: As far as Yang Hui is concerned, when Liu Ximeng and Xie Ting were put on trial, their prestige was completely destroyed.

古文：尚书宋纁稍欲振之，卒为故辅申时行齮龁以死。
现代文：尚书宋纟熏想稍作振兴，最终被前任首辅申时行倾轧而死。
English: Shangshu Song Jianxuan wanted to do a little revitalization, and was eventually crushed to death by his predecessor, chief aide Shen Xingxing.

古文：尚书陆光祖、文选郎王教、考功郎邹观光矢志澄清，辅臣王家屏虚怀以听，铨叙渐清。乃时行身虽还里，机伏垣墙，授意内榼张诚、田义及言路私人，教、观光遂不久斥逐。
现代文：尚书陆光祖、文选郎王教、考功郎邹观光立志要澄清，辅臣王家屏虚怀纳言，逐渐权衡清楚，只是申时行人虽回到了乡里，置身家院，授意宫廷的太监张诚、田义和舆论界的私交，将王教、邹观光很快贬斥。
English: Wang Shu, Lu Guangzu, Wen Xuan, Wang Jiao, and Gao Gong, determined to clarify that Wang Jiao's aide Wang Jia Ping was being insincere, and gradually weighed it clearly. However, although the aide had returned to the countryside, he was in the courtyard of the house, and the eunuchs of the court, Zhang Cheng and Tian Yi, and the private friends of the public opinion, quickly disparaged Wang Jiao and Wang Jiao.

古文：今祖其故智，借拾遗以激圣怒，是内榼与阁臣表里，箝勒部臣，而陛下未之察也。
现代文：现在仿效他的故伎，借纠正过失来激起皇帝恼怒，这是宦官与内阁大臣内外勾结，钳制吏部大臣，但是陛下没有察觉。 
English: Now, emulating his old trick of provoking the emperor's anger by correcting his mistakes, the eunuch colluded with the cabinet minister inside and outside the country to bribe the minister of personnel, but his majesty did not notice.

古文：疏入，帝怒，谪孔兼、泰来等。
现代文：奏疏呈送皇宫，皇帝发怒，贬责了于孔兼、陈泰来等人。
English: When the report was sent to the imperial palace, the emperor was angry and reprimanded Yu Kongqian, Chen Tairai and others.

古文：世达又抗疏论救，帝怒，尽斥南星、淳熙、于廷黄为民。
现代文：李世达又上奏救助，皇帝恼怒，将赵南星、虞淳熙、于廷黄全部贬为平民。
English: Li Shida again came to the rescue, and the emperor was so angry that he reduced Zhao Nanxing, Yu Junxi, and Yu Tinghuang to commoners.

古文：鑨乃上疏言： 吏部虽以用人为职，然进退去留，必待上旨。
现代文：孙鑨上奏称： 吏部虽然以录用人才为职责，他们的进退去留，必须等待上面的指令。
English: Sun Yuxuan said: Although the personnel department is responsible for recruiting talents, their entry and exit must wait for the above instructions.

古文：是权固有在，非臣部得专也。
现代文：权力本来就在皇上，不是吏部专有。
English: The power was originally vested in the emperor, not in the cadres.

古文：今以留二庶僚为专权，则无往非专矣；以留二司属为结党，则无往非党矣。
现代文：现在因为留用两位僚属就是专权，那么所为就没有不是专权的。因为留用两名属吏就是结党，那么所为就没有不是结党的。
English: Now, because retaining two subordinates is an autocracy, then what you are doing is not an autocracy. Because retaining two subordinates is a party, then what you are doing is not a party.

古文：如避专权结党之嫌，畏缩选忄耎，使铨职之轻自臣始，臣之大罪也。
现代文：如果回避专权、结党的嫌疑，畏缩怯懦，使选官的职责从我开始被看轻，是我的大罪过。
English: If I evade the suspicion of despotism and party-building, if I cower in cowardice, and cause the duties of electing officials to be looked down upon from the start, it will be my great sin.

古文：臣任使不效，徒洁身而去，俾专权结党之说终不明于当时，后来者且以臣为戒，又大罪也。 
现代文：我任职不力，只好洁身离去，使专权结党的说法最终不在现在明确，后继者又以我为戒，这又是我的大罪过。 
English: I was not able to perform my duties well, so I had no choice but to resign, so that the argument of the formation of an authoritarian party is not finally clear now, and the successor is warned by me, which is also my great sin.

古文：固请赐骸骨，仍不允。
现代文：坚持恳请告老还乡，皇帝仍不同意。
English: The emperor still did not agree, insisting that he should be allowed to return to his hometown.

古文：鑨遂杜门称疾。
现代文：孙鑨就闭门称病。
English: Sun Yat-sen announced his illness behind closed doors.

古文：疏累上，帝犹温旨慰留，赐羊豕、酒酱、米物，且敕侍郎蔡国珍暂署选事，以需鑨起。
现代文：多次上奏，皇帝仍然下温旨安慰挽留，赏赐他猪羊、酒酱、粮食，并且指令侍郎蔡国珍暂时负责选任官吏的事务，等待孙鑨康复。
English: After the performance was repeated many times, the emperor still consoled and retained Sun Yat-sen, rewarded him with pigs and sheep, wine and sauce, and grain, and ordered the attendant Cai Guozhen to temporarily take charge of the selection of officials, waiting for Sun Yat-sen to recover.

古文：鑨坚卧三月，疏至十上，乃许乘传归。
现代文：孙鑨坚持卧病多月，上奏十多次，才被批准乘坐驿车回乡。
English: Sun Yao insisted on being bedridden for more than a month and performed more than ten times before he was allowed to take a taxi back to his hometown.

古文：居三年卒。赠太子太保，谥清简。
现代文：居家三年后去世，赠封为太子太保，谥号清简。
English: After three years of living at home, he passed away. He was given the title of Crown Prince Taibo, and his posthumous name was Qing Jian.

古文：久之，移疾归。
现代文：孙鑨曾说： 大臣不称职，就应当辞职。
English: Sun Yat-sen once said: If a minister is incompetent, he should resign.

古文：廷臣累荐，悉报寝。
现代文：否则，虽有职位在，也是谨身自守罢了。 
English: Otherwise, even if there is a position available, it's just a matter of being careful.

古文：卒，赠光禄少卿。陈有年，字登之，余姚人。
现代文：他的志向、气节就是如此。陈有年，字登之，余姚人。
English: His aspiration and temperament are just like that. Chen has years of experience, his name is famous, and he is from Yuyao.

古文：父克宅，字即卿，正德九年进士。
现代文：父亲陈克宅，字即卿，正德九年的进士。
English: His father, Chen Kezhu, was nicknamed "Chongqing," and was a member of the Zhengde Clan for nine years.

古文：嘉靖中官御史。
现代文：嘉靖年间任御史。
English: He held the post of Imperial Historian during the reign of Emperor Jiajing.

古文：哭争 大礼 ，有大僚欲去，克宅扼其项曰： 奈何先去为人望？ 
现代文：哭争 大礼 ，有位大臣想离去，陈克宅抓住他的颈项说： 为什么要先离去被别人责怪？ 
English: A minister wanted to leave, Chen Kezhu grabbed him by the scruff of the neck and said, "Why do you want to leave first and be blamed by others?"

古文：其人愧而止。
现代文：那人惭愧地止步了。
English: The man paused, ashamed.

古文：俄系狱廷杖。
现代文：不久他被投入监狱遭廷杖。
English: He was soon thrown into prison and beaten with a cane.

古文：获释，先后按贵州、河南，多所弹劾。
现代文：释放后，先后巡按贵州、河南，多次进行弹劾。
English: After his release, he went on a tour of Guizhou and Henan, and was impeached several times.

古文：吏部尚书廖纪姻为所劾罢，恶之，出为松潘副使。
现代文：吏部尚书廖纪的姻亲被他弹劾，憎恨他，将他调出京城任命为松潘副使。
English: The in-laws of the official Shangshu Liao Ji were impeached by him, hated him, transferred him out of Beijing and appointed him as the deputy envoy of Songpan.

古文：累迁右副都御史，巡抚贵州。
现代文：调任右副都御史，巡抚贵州。
English: He was transferred to the post of the right vice-governor of the capital, and became the governor of Guizhou.

古文：都匀苗王阿向作乱，据凯口囤。
现代文：都匀的苗王阿向叛乱，占据凯口囤。
English: Miao Wang Ah Xiang of Duyun rebelled and occupied Kaikoura.

古文：克宅与总兵官杨仁攻斩阿向。论功，进秩。
现代文：陈克宅与总兵杨仁攻伐并斩杀了阿向，论功晋级。
English: Chen Kezhu and the general Yang Ren attacked and killed Ah Xiang, and were promoted on merit.

古文：旋移抚苏、松。
现代文：不久调任苏、松巡抚。
English: He was soon transferred to the post of Su and Song governor.

古文：既行，而阿向党复叛，坐罢官候勘。
现代文：起程时，阿向的党羽又叛乱，他被罢官听候审查。
English: At the start of the journey, Ah Xiang's party members rebelled again, and he was dismissed pending a review.

古文：巡抚汪珊讨平贼，推功克宅。
现代文：巡抚汪珊讨伐平定乱贼，归功于陈克宅。
English: It is attributed to Chen Kezhu that the procurator Wang Shan fought and subdued the ruffians.

古文：克宅已卒，乃赐恤典。
现代文：陈克宅已经去世，就对他做了赏赐、抚恤。
English: Chen Kezhu had already passed away, so they gave him a reward and a pension.

古文：有年举嘉靖四十一年进士，授刑部主事。
现代文：陈有年考取嘉靖四十一年的进士，授职为刑部主事。
English: Chen Yulian took the examination for the 41st year of Jiajing, and was appointed as the head of the criminal department.

古文：改吏部，历验封郎中。
现代文：改任吏部，历任验封郎中。
English: He was reassigned to the Department of Clerical Affairs, and successively held the posts of crown prince and vassal.

古文：万历元年，成国公朱希忠卒，其弟锦衣都督希孝贿中官冯保援张懋例乞赠王，大学士张居正主之。
现代文：万历元年，成国公朱希忠去世，他的弟弟锦衣都督朱希孝贿赂宦官冯保援引张懋的例子请求赠封王号，大学士张居正支持他。
English: In the first year of the Wanli era, Prince Zhu Xizhong of Chengguo died. His younger brother, the Governor of Jinling, Zhu Xixiao, bribed the eunuch Feng Bao, citing the example of Zhang Ye, to request that he be given the title of king. Zhang Juzheng, a university scholar, supported him.

古文：有年持不可，草奏言： 令典：功臣殁，公赠王，侯赠公，子孙袭者，生死止本爵。
现代文：陈有年坚决不赞同，上奏说： 根据令典：功臣死了，公赠封为王，侯赠封为公，子孙世袭的人，生死只享受原来的爵位。
English: Chen Younian resolutely disagreed, and said in his report: According to the edict: if a meritorious subject dies, he will be given the title of king as a gift from the public, and the title of lord as a gift from the lord, and the descendants will only enjoy the original title of nobility in life and death.

古文：懋赠王，廷议不可，即希忠父辅亦言之。
现代文：张懋赠封为王，朝廷议论不同意，就是朱希忠的父亲朱辅也这么认为。
English: Zhang Ye was crowned king, but the court disagreed. Even Zhu Xizhong's father, Zhu Yu, thought so.

古文：后竟赠，非制。
现代文：后来竟然被封赠，不合制度。
English: Later, it was even awarded, which was not in accordance with the system.

古文：且希忠无勋伐，岂当滥宠。 
现代文：况且朱希忠没有讨敌功勋，怎么能乱加宠幸？ 
English: Moreover, Zhu Xizhong did not win the enemy's merit, how could he add favors?

古文：左侍郎刘光济署部事，受指居正，为删易其稿。
现代文：左侍郎刘光济负责吏部事务，按张居正的意思，删改奏稿。
English: Liu Guangji, the left attendant, was in charge of the affairs of the cadre department. According to Zhang Jizheng's intention, he deleted and modified the transcript.

古文：有年力争，竟以原奏上。居正不怿，有年即日谢病去。
现代文：陈有年极力争辩，最后将原奏章呈上，张居正不高兴，陈有年当天就称病离去。
English: Chen Younian argued strenuously, and finally presented the original score. Zhang Juzheng was not happy, and Chen Younian left the same day, saying that he was ill.

古文：十二年起稽勋郎中，历考功、文选，谢绝请寄。
现代文：万历十二年他出任稽勋郎中，历任考功、文选郎中，谢绝说情。
English: In the twelfth year of Wanli, he was appointed as one of the most honored scholars, and he refused to plead for mercy.

古文：除目下，中外皆服。
现代文：朝廷内外都佩服他的为人。
English: Both inside and outside the court admired him as a person.

古文：迁太常少卿，以右佥都御史巡抚江西。
现代文：调任太常寺少卿，担任右佥都御史巡视江西。
English: He was transferred to the post of Shokei (Junior Secretary) of Taejoji Temple, and served as the Right Deputy Governor of the Capital to inspect the history of Jiangxi Province.

古文：尚方所需陶器，多奇巧难成，后有诏许量减，既而如故。
现代文：为皇帝供给用品的尚方官需要的陶器，大都很奇巧，难以制作，后来有诏令允许适当减少，不久又照旧额了。
English: Most of the pottery needed by the Shang officials to supply the emperor with supplies was very strange and difficult to produce. Later, a decree was issued to allow a proper reduction, and soon it was back to the old amount.

古文：有年引诏旨请，不从。
现代文：陈有年引用诏令请求裁减，未获同意。
English: Chen Younian cited the imperial edict to request a reduction, which was not approved.

古文：内阁申时行等固争，乃免十之三。
现代文：内阁大臣申时行等人坚持争辩，才减免十分之三。
English: Cabinet Minister Shin Shigyo and others persisted in their arguments, only to get a reduction of three-tenths.

古文：南畿、浙江大祲，诏禁邻境闭籴，商舟皆集江西，徽人尤众。
现代文：南畿、浙江遭大灾，诏令禁止邻地买进粮食，商船都汇聚江西，安徽人最多。
English: Nanki and Zhejiang suffered great disasters, the edict forbade neighboring areas to buy grain, merchant ships gathered in Jiangxi, and Anhui had the largest number of migrants.

古文：而江西亦岁俭，群乞有年禁遏。
现代文：而且江西当年收成也不好，众人请求陈有年禁止。
English: Moreover, the harvest in Jiangxi that year was not good, and many people asked for the ban on Chen Younian.

古文：有年疏陈济急六事，中请稍弛前禁，令江西民得自救。
现代文：陈有年上奏陈述救急的六件事，其中请求稍稍松弛先前的禁令，使江西的百姓得以自救。
English: Chen You made a report on six urgent matters last year, in which he requested a slight relaxation of the previous ban, so that the people of Jiangxi could save themselves.

古文：南京御史方万山劾有年违诏。
现代文：南京御史方万山弹劾陈有年违背诏令。
English: The governor of Nanjing, Fang Wanshan, impeached Chen Yuxian for violating the imperial edict.

古文：帝怒，夺职归。
现代文：皇帝恼怒，剥夺了他的官职令他回乡。
English: Enraged, the emperor stripped him of his official position and ordered him to return to his hometown.

古文：荐起督操江，累迁吏部右侍郎。
现代文：后来受举荐督办江防，渐渐升任吏部右侍郎。
English: Later, he was recommended to be the superintendent of the river defense, and gradually rose to the position of the right hand man of the personnel department.

古文：改兵部，又改吏部。
现代文：改任兵部职，后改任吏部。
English: He was reassigned to the military department, and later to the public relations department.

古文：尚书孙鑨、左侍郎罗万化皆乡里，有年力引避，朝议不许。
现代文：尚书孙钅龙、左侍郎罗万化都是他的同乡，陈有年极力回避，朝廷商讨没有同意。
English: Shang Shushun, Sun Yulong, and Zuozhirang, Luo Wanhua, were all his countrymen. Chen Younian tried his best to avoid them, and the imperial court did not agree to discuss the matter.

古文：寻由左侍郎擢南京右都御史。
现代文：不久，他由左侍郎升任南京右都御史。
English: Soon, he was promoted from the Left Attendant to the Right Metropolitan Historian of Nanjing.

古文：二十一年与吏部尚书温纯共典京察，所黜咸当。
现代文：万历二十一年他与吏部尚书温纯共同主持对京官的考核，所做的罢黜之事都很得当。
English: In the 21st year of Wanli, he co-chaired the assessment of the Beijing officials with Shang Shuxu and Wen Chun of the Personnel Department, and the dismissal was very appropriate.

古文：未几，遂代纯位。
现代文：不久就取代了温纯的职位。
English: He soon replaced the mild-mannered groom.

古文：其秋，鑨谢事，召拜吏部尚书。
现代文：当年秋天，孙钅龙辞职，他被任命为吏部尚书。
English: In the autumn of that year, Sun Yulong resigned, and he was appointed secretary of the Personnel Department.

古文：止宿公署中，见宾则于待漏所。
现代文：住宿在办公地，会见宾客就在等待朝见皇帝的地方。
English: Accommodation is in the office, and guests are met in the place where they are waiting to meet the emperor.

古文：引用僚属，极一时选。
现代文：引荐、录用僚属，为当时选官的极品。
English: Recommending and recruiting colleagues was the pinnacle of the selection process at the time.

古文：明年，王锡爵将谢政，廷推阁臣，诏无拘资品。
现代文：第二年，王锡爵准备离职，朝廷推举内阁大臣，诏令不拘资历、官品。
English: The following year, as Wang Xizhe prepared to leave office, the imperial court appointed him as a cabinet minister, regardless of his seniority and official rank.

古文：有年适在告，侍郎赵参鲁、盛讷、文选郎顾宪成往咨之，列故大学士王家屏、故礼部尚书沈鲤、故吏部尚书孙鑨、礼部尚书沈一贯、左都御史孙丕扬、吏部侍郎邓以赞、少詹事冯琦七人名上。
现代文：陈有年正在休假，侍郎赵参鲁、盛讷，文选郎顾宪成前往咨询他，开列出前任大学士王家屏、前任礼部尚书沈鲤、前任吏部尚书孙钅龙、礼部尚书沈一贯、左都御史孙丕扬、吏部侍郎邓以缵、少詹事冯琦等七人的名字。
English: Chen Younian was on vacation. Attendants Zhao Sanlu, Shengna, and Wenxuan Lang Gu Xiancheng went to consult him and listed the names of seven people, including the former university judge Wang Jiaping, the former etiquette official Shangshu Shenqi, the former etiquette official Shangshu Sun Yulong, the former etiquette official Shangshu Shengang, the left capital grand secretary Sun Xiangyang, the etiquette official Deng Yixin, and the minor official Zhan Zhi Fengqi.

古文：盖鑨丕扬非翰林，为不拘资，琦四品，为不拘品也。
现代文：孙钅龙、孙丕扬不是翰林出身，为不拘泥资格，冯琦为四品官是不拘品级。
English: Sun Yulong and Sun Qiangyang are not from Hanlin, they are not qualified, and Feng Rong is a four-grade official.

古文：家屏以争国本去位，帝意雅不欲用。
现代文：王家屏因为争辩立太子而离职，皇帝的意思一向就不想任用他。
English: Wang Jiaping left his post because of the dispute over the appointment of the crown prince, and the emperor never wanted to appoint him.

古文：又推及吏部尚书、左都御史非故事，严旨责让。
现代文：又牵涉到吏部尚书，左都御史不是先例，皇帝严加责备。
English: In addition, the Imperial Records of the Left Capital was not a precedent, and the emperor severely reprimanded it.

古文：谓： 不拘资品乃昔年陆光祖自为内阁地。
现代文：称： 不拘泥资历、品级是当年陆光祖为自己进入内阁留的晋升之路。
English: Said: regardless of seniority and grade, it was the promotion path that Lu Guangzu entered the cabinet for himself.

古文：今推鑨、丕扬，显属徇私。
现代文：现在推举孙钅龙、孙丕扬，显然是徇私情。
English: Now, the choice of Sun Yulong and Sun Xiangyang is obviously a result of personal feelings.

古文：前吏部尝两推阁臣，可具录姓名以上。 
现代文：以前吏部曾经两次推举内阁大臣，可以详细抄录姓名呈上。 
English: In the past, the Ministry of Public Administration has twice elected cabinet ministers, and you can submit a detailed transcript of their names.

古文：于是备列沈鲤、李世达、罗万化、陈于陛、赵用贤、朱赓、于慎行、石星、曾同亨、邓以竖等。
现代文：因此详细列举了沈鲤、李世达、罗万化、陈于陛、赵用贤、朱赓、于慎行、石星、曾同亨、邓以缵等人。
English: Therefore, Shen Qi, Li Shida, Luo Wanhua, Chen Yu Shi, Zhao Yixian, Zhu Xi, Yu Shengxing, Shi Xing, Zeng Tongheng, Deng Yixuan and others were listed in detail.

古文：而世达故左都御史也，帝复不悦。谓： 诏旨不许推都御史，何复及世达。
现代文：然而李世达以前是左都御史，皇帝又不高兴，称： 诏令中不许推荐都御史，为什么又提到李世达。
English: However, Li Shida was previously Zuo Miyoshi, and the emperor was not happy, saying: In the edict, it is not allowed to recommend Miyoshi, so why mention Li Shida again.

古文：家屏旧辅臣，不当擅议起用。 
现代文：王家屏是旧辅臣，不应当擅自提议起用。 
English: Wang Jiaping is a former aide-de-camp and should not be appointed without authorization.

古文：乃用命于陛、一贯入阁，而谪宪成及员外郎黄缙、王同休，主事章嘉祯、黄中色为杂职。
现代文：于是命令陈于陛、沈一贯进入内阁，并且贬责顾宪成以及员外郎黄缙、王同休，主事辛嘉祯、黄中色任闲杂的官职。
English: Therefore, he ordered Chen Yuxing and Shen to always enter the cabinet, and reprimanded Gu Xiancheng, as well as the members Huang Qi, Wang Tongxiu, the leader Xin Jiayuan, and Huang Zhongxie, for their idle official positions.

古文：锡爵首疏救，有年及参鲁等疏继之，帝并不纳。
现代文：王锡爵首先上奏救助，陈有年和赵参鲁等人接着上奏，皇帝却不采纳。
English: Wang Xizhe was the first to play the rescue, followed by Chen Youlian and Zhao Sanlu, but the emperor did not adopt it.

古文：赵志皋张位亦佯为言。
现代文：赵志皋、张位也假装劝谏。
English: Zhao Zhixuan and Zhang Yi also pretended to persuade him.

古文：而二人者故不由廷推，因谓： 辅臣当出特简，廷推由陆光祖交通言路为之，不可为法。 
现代文：但是他们两个人都不是由朝廷推举，于是说： 辅臣应当出自特别选择，朝廷推举是由陆光祖联络言官们所为，不可以效法。 
English: However, neither of them was chosen by the imperial court, so he said, "Aide-de-camp should come from a special selection, the imperial court selection was made by Lu Guangzu's liaison officers, and cannot be imitated."

古文：帝喜。
现代文：皇帝欢喜。
English: The emperor was delighted to hear this.

古文：隆旨再谯责，遂免缙等贬谪，但停俸一年。
现代文：下御旨再度责难，免除对黄缙等人的贬责，但是停发一年的俸禄。
English: The imperial command reprimanded him again, exempting Huang Qi and others from the reprimand, but suspended his salary for one year.

古文：给事中卢明诹疏救宪成。
现代文：给事中卢明诹上奏救助顾宪成。
English: In the middle of the matter, Lu Mingxuan played the role of rescuing Gu Xiancheng.

古文：帝怒，贬明诹秩，斥宪成为民。
现代文：皇帝发怒，降了他的职，将顾宪成贬为平民。
English: Enraged, the emperor demoted him and reduced Gu Xiancheng to a commoner.

古文：有年抗疏言： 阁臣廷推，其来旧矣。
现代文：陈有年上奏申辩： 内阁大臣由朝廷推举，源于旧制。
English: Chen You submitted a defense last year: Cabinet ministers are selected by the imperial court, which originates from the old system.

古文：是廷推与推及吏部，皆非自今创也。
现代文：过去杨巍负责选拔官吏，我负责文选，朝廷推举六个人任内阁大臣，现在首辅王锡爵就是当年所推举的。
English: In the past, Yang Mi was responsible for the selection of officials, I was responsible for the selection of writers, and the imperial court selected six people to be cabinet ministers. Now, Wang Xizhe of Shufu is the one who was selected that year.

古文：至不拘资品，自出圣谕，臣敢不仰承。 因固乞骸骨。
现代文：我的家乡以前就有两位内阁大臣，弘治时期的谢迁，嘉靖时期的吕本，都是由朝廷推举的，至于不拘官吏资格品级，出于皇上诏谕，我怎么敢不遵奉。 因而请求告老回乡。
English: In my hometown, there have been two cabinet ministers before. Xie Qian in the Hongzhi period and Lv Ben in the Jiajing period were both elected by the imperial court. As for the imperial edict, I dare not disobey it, regardless of the official's qualification level. Therefore, I requested to return to my hometown.

古文：帝得疏，以其词直，温旨慰答。
现代文：神宗接到奏疏，认为他话语耿直，用温和的语气加以安慰。
English: Shenzong received the message, thought his words were sincere, and consoled him with a gentle tone.

古文：有年自是累疏称疾乞罢。
现代文：陈有年从此不断上奏称病请求罢职。
English: Since then, Chen Younian has repeatedly reported illness and requested to resign.

古文：帝犹慰留，赉食物、羊酒。
现代文：皇帝依然安慰挽留，赏赐食物、羊和酒。
English: The emperor still consoled him and rewarded him with food, sheep and wine.

古文：有年请益力。
现代文：陈有年请求更为积极。
English: Chen Younian's request is more active.

古文：最后，以身虽退，遗贤不可不录，力请帝起废。
现代文：最后，他认为自身虽然告退，遗漏的贤士不能不录用，极力请求皇帝起用废黜的人。
English: Finally, he thought that although he had resigned, the omitted sage could not but be hired, and he strongly requested the emperor to appoint the deposed person.

古文：帝报闻。
现代文：皇帝答复知道了。
English: The emperor said he understood.

古文：有年遂杜门不出。
现代文：陈有年就闭门不出。
English: Chen has not been able to leave the house for years.

古文：数月中，疏十四上。
现代文：几个月，上奏十四次。
English: A few months later, it was played fourteen times.

古文：乃予告，乘传归。
现代文：才被准许告退，乘驿车回乡。
English: He was only allowed to resign and return to his hometown by tuk-tuk.

古文：归装，书一箧，衣一笥而已。
现代文：回乡的行旅只有一箱书、一竹箱衣服而已。
English: Only a box of books and a bamboo box of clothes are left from the trip back home.

古文：二十六年正月卒，年六十有八。
现代文：万历二十六年正月去世，享年六十八岁。
English: He passed away in the first month of the 26th year of Wanli at the age of 68.

古文：孙丕扬，字叔孝，富平人。
现代文：孙丕扬，字叔孝，富平人。
English: Sun Jianyang, nicknamed "Uncle Xiao," was born in Fuping.

古文：嘉靖三十五年进士。授行人。擢御史。
现代文：嘉靖三十五年的进士，授职为行人，升任御史。
English: In the 35th year of the Jiajing Emperor, he was promoted to the rank of journeyman and promoted to the position of imperial historian.

古文：历按畿辅、淮、扬，矫然有风裁。
现代文：历任京郊、淮、扬地区巡按，纠正过失雷厉风行。
English: Successive governors of the Beijing Suburbs, Huai and Yang regions have carried out inspection and rectification of faults.

古文：隆庆中，擢大理丞。
现代文：隆庆年间，升任大理丞。
English: During the Longqing era, he was promoted to the post of grand secretary.

古文：以尝劾高拱，拱门生给事中程文诬劾丕扬，落职候勘。
现代文：因为曾经弹劾高拱，高拱的门生给事中程文诬陷并弹劾孙丕扬，他被罢官等候审查。
English: Because he once impeached Gao Gong, Gao Gong's protégé, framed Sun Xiangyang and impeached him, he was removed from office pending review.

古文：拱罢，事白，起故官。
现代文：高拱被罢免后，事情弄明白了，他又官复原职。
English: After Gao Gong was dismissed, the matter became clear, and he was reinstated.

古文：万历元年擢右佥都御史，巡抚保守诸府。
现代文：万历元年他升任右佥都御史，巡抚保定各府。
English: In the first year of the Wanli era, he was promoted to the position of Utsunomiya Imperial Historian, and the governor of all the prefectures in Baoding.

古文：以严为治，属吏皆惴惴。
现代文：因为严格治政，属官都惴惴不安。
English: Because of the strict governance, officials are very uneasy.

古文：按行关隘，增置敌楼三百余所，筑边墙万余丈。
现代文：巡视关隘，增设了三百多所敌楼，修筑了一万多丈的边防墙。
English: They inspected the pass, added more than three hundred enemy buildings, and built a border wall more than ten thousand meters high.

古文：录功，进右副都御史。
现代文：论功绩，历任右副都御史。
English: In terms of achievements, the successors of the right vice-governor are the best.

古文：中官冯保家在畿内，张居正属为建坊，丕扬拒不应。
现代文：宦官冯保的家在京城，张居正吩咐替他修建住宅，孙丕扬拒不理睬。
English: The eunuch Feng Bao's home was in Beijing. Zhang Ju was ordering the construction of a residence for him, but Sun Yat-sen refused to listen.

古文：知二人必怒，五年春引疾归。
现代文：知道冯、张两人会发怒，万历五年春天他称病回乡了。
English: Knowing that Feng and Zhang would be angry, in the spring of the fifth year of Wanli, he claimed to be ill and returned to his hometown.

古文：其冬大计京官，言路希居正指劾之。
现代文：当年冬天考核京官，言官们迎合张居正而弹劾他。
English: In the winter of that year, when Beijing officials were being evaluated, they pandered to Zhang Jizheng and impeached him.

古文：诏起官时，调南京用。
现代文：诏令他起用官职时，调至南京听用。
English: When the emperor ordered him to take up an official post, he was transferred to Nanjing to serve.

古文：御史按陕西者，知保等憾不已，密讽西安知府罗织其赃。
现代文：巡按陕西的御史，知道冯保等人不满，暗中示意西安知府罗织他的罪名。
English: According to the official history of Shaanxi, knowing that Feng Bao and others were dissatisfied, he secretly suggested that Xi'an Zhifu Luo fabricate his charges.

古文：知府遣吏报御史，吏为虎噬。及再报，则居正已死，事乃解。
现代文：知府派小吏答复御史，不料小吏被老虎吃了，等到再做答复，而张居正已经死亡，事情才作罢。
English: The prefectural government sent a minor official to answer the enquirer. However, the minor official was eaten by a tiger. It was decided to wait until he could answer the enquirer, and since Zhang Jiusheng was already dead, the matter was dropped.

古文：起应天府尹。
现代文：他出任应天府尹。
English: He assumed the post of Ying Tianfu Cang Yin.

古文：召拜大理卿，进户部右侍郎。
现代文：受任为大理寺卿，升任户部右侍郎。
English: He was appointed as the Lord of Dali Temple and promoted to the position of the right hand man of the household.

古文：十五年，河北大饥。
现代文：万历十五年，河北发生大饥荒。
English: In the 15th year of Wanli, a great famine occurred in Hebei.

古文：丕扬乡邑及邻县蒲城、同官至采石为食。
现代文：孙丕扬的家乡和邻县蒲城、同官的人采石为食。
English: People in Sun Jianyang's hometown and neighboring county of Pucheng and his colleagues quarried stone for food.

古文：丕扬伤之，进石数升于帝，因言： 今海内困加派，其穷非止啖石之民也。
现代文：孙丕扬很伤感，送了几升石头给皇上，趁势劝谏： 现在全国困于加派，穷困的并非只有吃石粉的百姓。
English: Sun Jianyang was very sad, sent several liters of stone to the emperor, and took advantage of the situation to persuade him: Now the whole country is in trouble, and it is not only the people who eat stone powder who are poor.

古文：宜宽赋节用，罢额外徵派有诸不急务，损上益下，以培苍生大命。 
现代文：应该放宽赋税节俭开支，罢除额外的征派和诸类不急的事务，损害官方而有益于下民，培育苍生的性命。 
English: It is necessary to relax the tax and expenditure frugality, cancel the extra levy and other non-urgent matters, harm the official and benefit the people, and cultivate the life of the people.

古文：帝感其言，颇有所减罢。
现代文：神宗被他的话感动，很有些减裁、罢除。
English: Shinso was moved by his words and made some reductions and deletions.

古文：寻由左侍郎擢南京右都御史，以病归。召拜刑部尚书。
现代文：不久，他由左侍郎升任南京右都御史，称病回乡，又召回任命为刑部尚书。
English: Not long after, he was promoted from the left-hand waiter to the governor of the right-hand capital of Nanjing, but he claimed to be ill and returned to his hometown. He was then recalled and appointed as the head of the criminal investigation department.

古文：丕扬以狱多滞囚，由公移牵制。
现代文：孙丕扬认为监狱中滞留囚徒过多，是因为公文传递的牵制。
English: Sun Xiangyang believes that the reason why there are too many prisoners in the prison is due to the restriction of the transmission of official documents.

古文：议刑部、大理各置籍，凡狱上刑部，次日即详谳大理，大理审允，次日即还刑部，自是囚无淹系。
现代文：提议在刑部、大理寺各设簿籍，凡是狱案上报刑部，第二天就详细报告大理寺，大理寺审核批准后的次日就反馈到刑部，从此囚徒就没有长期被关押的了。
English: It is proposed to set up books and records in the Criminal Investigation Department and Dali Temple, and report to the Criminal Investigation Department whenever there is a prison case, and report to Dali Temple in detail the next day, and report back to the Criminal Investigation Department the next day after the examination and approval of Dali Temple. From now on, prisoners will not be detained for a long time.

古文：寻奏： 五岁方恤刑，恐冤狱无所诉。
现代文：不久他上奏： 五年一次的刑事抚恤刚完，恐怕有冤狱没有地方投诉。
English: Soon he began to play: "The five-year criminal pension has just ended, I'm afraid there is no place to complain about unjust imprisonment.

古文：请敕天下抚按，方春时和，令监司按行州县，大录系囚，按察使则录会城囚。
现代文：请敕令全国的巡抚巡按官，在春气暖和时令监司巡视州县，审查囚徒，按察使则审查省会的囚徒。
English: I would like to ask you to instruct the supervisors and inspectors throughout the country to inspect the prisoners in counties and prefectures in the warm spring weather, and inspect the prisoners in provincial capitals in accordance with the instructions of the inspectors.

古文：死罪矜疑及流徒以下可原者，抚按以达于朝，期毋过夏月。
现代文：对死罪有疑以及流徙之下可以赦免的人，由抚按官送交朝廷，希望不要超过夏天。
English: Those who are suspected of capital crimes and those who can be pardoned while in exile will be sent to the imperial court by the sub-prefect, hopefully not later than the summer.

古文：轻者立遣，重者仍听部裁，岁以为常。 
现代文：罪轻的人马上遣送，罪重的人仍然听候刑部裁决，每年如此。 
English: People with minor offenses are immediately deported, while those with serious offenses are still awaiting the decision of the penal department, as is the case every year.

古文：帝报从之。已，条上省刑省罚各三十二事。
现代文：神宗答复同意，以后，他逐条陈述了减少刑罚的三十二件事。
English: Shenzong replied that he agreed, and then he went through the thirty-two cases of sentence reduction one by one.

古文：帝称善，优诏褒纳。自是刑狱大减。
现代文：皇帝称好，下优诏褒奖，从此刑狱大为减少。
English: The emperor commended him and issued an imperial edict of commendation, greatly reducing his prison sentence.

古文：有内坚杀人，逃匿禁中。
现代文：有宫中小内臣杀了人，逃避到皇宫。
English: Arimiya, a middle or junior vassal, killed someone and fled to the Imperial Palace.

古文：丕扬奏捕，卒论戍。
现代文：孙丕扬上奏要求逮捕，终于将其发配边关。
English: Sun Yanyang appealed for arrest, and was finally sent to the border.

古文：改左都御史。陈台规三事，请专掌印、重巡方、久巡城，著为令。
现代文：后改任左都御史，他陈述三条台规，请求专管印玺、重视巡查、长期巡城，定为命令。
English: After he was appointed as the governor of the Left Capital, he stated three rules, requesting to be in charge of printing money, pay attention to inspection, and long-term patrol, which was set as an order.

古文：已，又言： 闾阎民瘼非郡邑莫济，郡邑吏治非抚按监司莫清。
现代文：而后，他又称： 乡里百姓的疾苦只有郡邑官员才能解决，郡邑的吏治只有抚按监司才能清正。
English: Later, he also said: Only county officials can solve the problems of the people in the countryside, and only the Fuxing Supervisor can clean up the administration of county officials.

古文：抚按监司风化，非部院莫饬。
现代文：抚安监司的风化，只有部院能够整治。
English: Only the ministry can rectify the demeanor of the Fudan Safety Supervisor.

古文：请立约束颁天下，奖廉抑贪，共励官箴。 
现代文：请求订立条约颁布全国，奖励清廉抑制贪赃，共同遵循官箴。 
English: Request the conclusion of a treaty to be promulgated nationwide, reward integrity and curb corruption, and jointly follow the official motto.

古文：帝咸优诏报许。
现代文：神宗都下优诏答复可行。
English: It is possible for the Shinshu Sect to give a positive reply.

古文：二十二年，拜吏部尚书。
现代文：万历二十二年他担任吏部尚书。
English: For 22 years, he served as the secretary of the Ministry of Civil Affairs.

古文：丕扬挺劲不挠，百僚无敢以私干者，独患中贵请谒。
现代文：孙丕扬刚直不屈，众官不敢徇私，只忧虑显贵的太监的拜访。
English: Sun Yat-sen was unyielding, and officials did not dare to meddle in his personal affairs. They were only worried about visits from prominent eunuchs.

古文：乃创为掣签法，大选急选，悉听其人自掣，请寄无所容。一时选人盛称无私，然铨政自是一大变矣。
现代文：于是他创立抽签法，大选特选官吏，全部听凭他们自己抽签，请托属意之事无法施行，一时间选拔的人盛赞他无私，选官之事从此大变。
English: So he created the lottery method, the general election specially selected officials, all by their own lottery, please entrust the matter can not be implemented, a time when the selection of people praised his selflessness, the selection of officials has since changed dramatically.

古文：二十三年，大计外吏。
现代文：万历二十三年全面考核京城之外的官吏。
English: In the 23rd year of the Wanli era, officials outside the capital were comprehensively evaluated.

古文：九江知府沈铁尝为衡州同知，发巡抚秦耀罪，江西提学佥事马犹龙尝为刑部主事，定御史祝大舟赃贿，遂为庇者所恶。
现代文：九江知府沈铁曾经担任衡州同知，揭发巡抚秦耀的罪行，江西提学佥事马犹龙任刑部主事时，判定御史祝大舟收受贿赂，于是庇护祝的人憎恨。
English: The governor of Jiujiang Province, Shen Tie, once served as a confidant of the governor of Hengzhou, exposing the crimes of the governor Qin Yao. When Ma Yulong, the head of the criminal investigation department, was appointed governor of Jiangxi Province, he judged Zhu Dazhou to accept bribes, so he was hated by the people who protected Zhu.

古文：考功郎蒋时馨黜之，丕扬不能察。
现代文：考功郎蒋时馨罢黜了他，孙丕扬没有察觉。
English: He was ousted by Jiang Shixin, a meritorious scholar, but Sun Yat-sen did not notice.

古文：及时馨为赵文炳所劾，丕扬力与辨雪。
现代文：等到蒋时馨被赵文炳弹劾，孙丕扬极力替他辩解。
English: When Jiang Shixin was impeached by Zhao Wenyi, Sun Yanyang tried his best to defend him.

古文：谓衅由丁此吕，此吕坐逮。
现代文：称此是丁此吕的罪过，丁此吕遭逮捕。
English: He said that this was Ding Guoliu's fault, and Ding Guoliu was arrested.

古文：丕扬又力诋沈思孝，于是思孝及员外郎岳元声连章讦丕扬。
现代文：孙丕扬又极力抨击沈思孝，因此沈思孝和员外郎岳元声接连上奏攻击孙丕扬。
English: Sun Shiyang also vigorously attacked Shen Sihiao, so Shen Sihiao and the member of the Foreign Affairs Office, Yue Yuanxuan, attacked Sun Shiyang one after another.

古文：丕扬请去甚力。
现代文：孙丕扬极力恳请离去。
English: Sun Yuyang implored him to leave.

古文：其冬，帝以军政故，贬两京言官三十余人。
现代文：当年冬天，神宗因为军政事务，贬责了两京三十多名言官。
English: In the winter of that year, Shinso reprimanded more than thirty officials in the two capitals for military and political affairs.

古文：丕扬犹在告，偕九卿力谏，弗纳。
现代文：孙丕扬仍在休假，就与九卿极力劝谏，神宗没接纳。
English: While Sun Yat-sen was still on vacation, he and the nine emperors tried their best to persuade him, but Shenzong did not accept.

古文：已而帝恶大学士陈于陛论救，谪诸言官边方。
现代文：不久，神宗厌恶大学士陈于陛进行救助，将各位言官贬到边关。
English: Soon, Shenzong detested the fact that the scholar Chen Yuxing came to the emperor's rescue, and he relegated the officials to the side of the road.

古文：丕扬等复抗疏谏，帝益怒，尽除其名。
现代文：孙丕扬等人又上奏劝谏，神宗因此更加恼怒，将他们全部除名。
English: Sun Jianyang and others also appealed to him, which made Shenzong even more angry, and he expelled them all.

古文：初，帝虽以夙望用丕扬，然不甚委信。
现代文：起初，神宗虽然很想任用孙丕扬，但不甚信任。
English: At first, although Shenzong was eager to appoint Sun Yat-sen, he did not really trust him.

古文：有所推举，率用其次。
现代文：有所举荐，都录用了列在第二位的候选者。
English: If there was a recommendation, the second-ranked candidate was hired.

古文：数请起废，辄报罢。
现代文：多次请求启用罢官的人，都宣告作罢。
English: Those who have repeatedly requested the dismissal of the official have all announced their resignation.

古文：丕扬以志不行，已怀去志，及是杜门逾半岁。
现代文：孙丕扬因为不得志，已经有了离去的打算，因此闭门不出达半年。
English: Because he was discouraged, Sun Yanyang had already planned to leave, so he did not close the door for half a year.

古文：疏十三上，多不报。
现代文：十三次上奏，都没有答复。
English: Thirteen times, there was no answer.

古文：至四月，温谕勉留，乃复起视事。
现代文：到了四月，神宗下温诏勉励、挽留，他才又开始办事。
English: It was not until April that he began to work again, encouraged and retained by Shinso Shimoonsho.

古文：主事赵学仕者，大学士志皋族弟也，坐事议调，文选郎唐伯元辄注饶州通判。
现代文：主事赵学仕是大学士赵志皋的族弟，因为犯事而面临降职，文选郎唐伯元将他定为饶州通判。
English: The director, Zhao Xuxi, is the younger brother of the university scholar Zhao Zhixi, who is facing a demotion because of the crime. The editor-in-chief, Tang Boyuan, has designated him as the Raozhou judge.

古文：俄学仕复以前事被讦，给事中刘道亨因劾吏部附势，语侵丕扬。
现代文：不久赵学仕又因为以前的事遭攻击，给事中刘道亨弹劾吏部趋炎附势，言辞触犯了孙丕扬。
English: Soon after, Zhao Xueshi was attacked again because of the previous incident, in which Liu Daoheng's impeachment of the cadres became a hot topic, and his words violated Sun Yat-sen.

古文：博士周献臣有所陈论，亦颇侵之。
现代文：博士周献臣的陈述，也对他颇有触犯。
English: He was also offended by the statement of Dr. Zhou Xiancheng.

古文：丕扬疑道亨受同官周孔教指，献臣又孔教宗人，益疑之，复三疏乞休。
现代文：孙丕扬怀疑刘道亨受同僚周孔教的指使，周献臣又是周孔教的同宗，更加怀疑，又多次上奏请求退休。
English: Sun Yuyang suspected that Liu Daoheng was ordered by his colleague Zhou Kongjiao, and Zhou Xiancheng was a member of the same family as Zhou Kongjiao. He was even more suspicious, and repeatedly petitioned for retirement.

古文：最后贻书大学士张位，恳其拟旨允放。
现代文：最后写信给大学士张位，恳求他起草旨令同意放他回乡。
English: Finally, he wrote to Zhang Yi, a university scholar, imploring him to draft an order to allow him to return to his hometown.

古文：位如其言。
现代文：张位照他的话办了。
English: Zhang Yi did as he said.

古文：丕扬闻，则大恚，谓位逐己，上疏诋位及道亨、孔教、献臣、思孝甚力。
现代文：孙丕扬听说了，又大为愤恨，称张位排挤自己，上奏极力抨击张位和刘道亨、周孔教、周献臣、沈思孝。
English: Upon hearing this, Sun Yuyang became very angry, saying that Zhang Yi had excluded him, and went on to strongly criticize Zhang Yi, Liu Daoheng, Zhou Kongjiao, Zhou Xiancheng, and Shen Sihiao.

古文：帝得疏，不直丕扬。
现代文：神宗得到奏疏，认为孙丕扬不正直。
English: Shenzong received a report and thought that Sun Yat-sen was not honest.

古文：位亦疏辩求退，帝复诏慰留，而位同官陈于陛、沈一贯亦为位解。
现代文：张位也上奏辩解，请求告退，神宗又下诏安慰、挽留，而且张位的同僚陈于陛、沈一贯也替张位开脱。
English: Zhang Yi also made a defense and requested to withdraw, and Shenzong also issued an edict to comfort and retain Zhang Yi, and Zhang Yi's colleagues Chen Yu Shi and Shen Gang also excused Zhang Yi.

古文：丕扬再被责让，许驰传去。
现代文：孙丕扬再度被责备，批准他乘驿车离去。
English: Mr. Sun was reprimanded again and allowed to leave in a taxi.

古文：久之，起南京吏部尚书，辞不就。
现代文：此后很久，他被委任为南京吏部尚书，推辞不上任。
English: Long after that, he was appointed as the Nanjing Librarian, but he refused to resign.

古文：及吏部尚书李戴免，帝艰其代，以侍郎杨时乔摄之。
现代文：等到吏部尚书李戴被免职，神宗为代替的人发愁，让侍郎杨时乔负责。
English: When Li Dai, the secretary of the personnel department, was dismissed, Shenzong was worried about the person to replace him, and let Yang Shijiao, the waiter, take charge.

古文：时乔数请简用尚书。
现代文：杨时乔多次请求选拔尚书。
English: Yang Shijiao repeatedly requested the selection of Shang Shu.

古文：帝终念丕扬廉直，三十六年九月，召起故官。
现代文：神宗最终思念孙丕扬廉洁、正直，万历三十六年九月召用他担任原职。
English: Shenzong finally thought highly of Sun Yat-sen's integrity and honesty, and appointed him to his original post in September of the 36th year of Wanli.

古文：屡辞，不允。
现代文：他屡屡推辞，神宗不同意。
English: He repeatedly declined, but Shinzō did not agree.

古文：明年四月始入都，年七十有八矣。
现代文：第二年四月才进京，他已经七十八岁。
English: He only moved to Beijing in April of the following year, when he was already 78 years old.

古文：三十八年大计外吏，黜陟咸当。
现代文：三十八年考核京城之外的官吏，罢免与提拔都很恰当。
English: Thirty-eight years of assessment of officials outside the capital, dismissal and promotion are very appropriate.

古文：又奏举廉吏布政使汪可受、王佐、张偲等二十馀人，诏不次擢用。
现代文：又上奏举荐廉吏布政使汪可受、王佐、张亻思等二十多人，诏令全部录用。
English: In addition, more than 20 people, including Wang Kechu, Wang Zuo, and Zhang Shuxi, who were recommended by corrupt officials, were recommended, and all of them were hired.

古文：先是，南北言官群击李三才、王元翰，连及里居顾宪成，谓之东林党。
现代文：在此之前，南北两京的言官都攻击李三才、王元翰，牵连到居住家乡的顾宪成，称为东林党。
English: Prior to this, the spokesmen of the North and South Beijing both attacked Li Sancai and Wang Yuanhan, implicating Gu Xiancheng, who lived in his hometown and was known as the Donglin Party.

古文：而祭酒汤宾尹、谕德顾天飐各收召朋徒，干预时政，谓之宣党、昆党；以宾尹宣城人，天飐昆山人也。
现代文：祭酒汤宾尹和谕德顾天浚各自召门徒，干预时政，称为宣党、昆党；因为汤宾尹是宣城人，顾天浚是昆山人。
English: Tang Bin Yin and De Gu Tianjun each called disciples and intervened in politics, and were called Xuan Party and Kun Party, because Tang Bin Yin was from Xuancheng and Gu Tianjun was from Kunshan.

古文：御史徐兆魁、乔应甲、刘国缙、郑继芳、刘光复、房壮丽，给事中王绍徽，朱一桂、姚宗文、徐绍吉、周永春辈，则力排东林，与宾尹、天飐声势相倚，大臣多畏避之。
现代文：御史徐兆魁、乔应甲、刘国缙、郑继芳、刘光复、房壮丽，给事中王绍徽、朱一桂、姚宗人、徐绍吉、周永春等人，极力排斥东林党人，与汤宾尹、顾天浚相互声援，大臣大都畏惧，回避他们。
English: Gu Shi, Xu Zhaokui, Qiao Yingjia, Liu Guojun, Zheng Jifang, Liu Guangfu, Fang Zhuangli, Wang Shaohui, Zhu Yigui, Yao Zongren, Xu Shaoji, Zhou Yongchun and others, strongly rejected the Donglin Party members, and supported each other with Tang Binyin and Gu Tianjun. Most ministers were afraid of them and avoided them.

古文：至是，继芳巡按浙江，有伪为其书抵绍徽、国缙者，中云 欲去福清，先去富平；欲去富平，先去耀州兄弟 。
现代文：到此时，郑继芳巡按浙江时，有人以他的名义伪造信函抨击王绍徽、刘国缙。信中说： 欲除去福清，先要除去富平；欲除去富平，先要除去耀州兄弟。 
English: At this time, when Zheng Jifang was touring Zhejiang, someone forged a letter in his name to criticize Wang Shaohui and Liu Guozhen. The letter said: If you want to remove Fuqing, you must first remove Fuping; if you want to remove Fuping, you must first remove the Yaozhou brothers.

古文：又言 秦脉斩断，吾辈可以得志 。
现代文：又称： 秦脉被斩断后，我们可以实现抱负。 
English: Also known as: After the Qin vein is cut off, we can achieve our ambitions.

古文：福清谓叶向高，耀州谓王国、王图，富平即丕扬也。
现代文：福清指叶向高，耀州指王国、王图，富平就是孙丕扬。
English: Fu Qing refers to Ye Xiang Gao, Yaozhou refers to the kingdom, Wang Tu, Fuping is Sun Xuan Yang.

古文：国时巡抚保定，图以吏部侍郎掌翰林院，与丕扬皆秦人，故曰 秦脉 。
现代文：王国当时是保定巡抚，王图任吏部侍郎负责翰林院，与孙丕扬都是秦地人，所以称 秦脉 。
English: At that time, the kingdom was the governor of Baoding, and Wang Tu was appointed as the steward of the cadre department in charge of the Hanlin Academy. Both he and Sun Yanyang were Qin people, so they were called Qin veins.

古文：盖小人设为挑激语，以害继芳辈，而其书乃达之丕扬所。丕扬不为意。
现代文：大概是小人所设计的挑逗语言，陷害郑继芳等人，该信送到孙丕扬的住所，孙丕扬并不介意。
English: It was probably a provocative language designed by a villain to frame Zheng Jifang and others. The letter was sent to Sun Yanyang's residence, and Sun Yanyang did not mind.

古文：会御史金明时居官不职，虑京察见斥，先上疏力攻图，并诋御史史记事、徐缙芳，谓为图心腹。
现代文：遇上御史金明时为官不称职，顾虑京官考核中受斥责，先上奏极力攻击王图并抨击御史史记事、徐缙芳，称他们是王图的心腹。
English: When confronted with the incompetence of Gu Shi Jinming as an official, he was concerned that he would be reprimanded by Beijing officials in the assessment. He first attacked Wang Tu and criticized Gu Shi Ji Ji and Xu Yifang, saying that they were Wang Tu's henchmen.

古文：及图、缙芳疏辩，明时再劾之，因及继芳伪书事。
现代文：等到王图、徐缙芳上奏辩解，金明时再度弹劾他们，并提到伪造的郑继芳的信。
English: After Wang Tu and Xu Yifang made their defense, Jin Ming again impeached them and mentioned the forged letter of Zheng Jifang.

古文：国缙疑书出缙芳及李邦华、李炳恭、徐良彦、周起元手，因目为 五鬼 ；五人皆选授御史候命未下者也。
现代文：刘国缙怀疑信出自徐缙芳和李邦华、李炳恭、徐良彦、周起元之手，因此称他们为 五鬼 ；当时五个人都当选御史待命。
English: Liu Guozhen suspected that the letter came from the hands of Xu Yifang and Li Banghua, Li Yigong, Xu Liahong, and Zhou Qimuan, so he called them the Five Ghosts; at that time, five people were elected to stand by the history.

古文：当是时，诸人日事攻击，议论纷呶，帝一无所问，则益植党求胜，朝端哄然。
现代文：当时，人们每天攻击，议论纷纷，神宗从没过问，他们更是培植党羽以求取胜，朝廷上热闹得很。
English: At that time, people were attacking every day, and there was a lot of discussion. Shenzong never asked questions, and they even cultivated party wings in order to win. The court was very lively.

古文：及明年三月，大计京官。丕扬与侍郎萧云举、副都御史许弘纲领其事，考功郎中王宗贤、吏科都给事中曹于汴、河南道御史汤光京、协理御史乔允升佐之。
现代文：到了第二年三月全面考核京官，孙丕扬与侍郎萧云举、副都御史许弘纲负责此事，考功郎中王宗贤、吏科都给事中曹于汴、河南道御史汤兆京、协理御史乔允升做助手。
English: In March of the following year, a comprehensive assessment of the Beijing officials was carried out, with Sun Xiangyang, his chamberlain Xiao Yunju, and deputy governor Xu Honggang in charge of the matter, while the examination's laureate Wang Zongxian, and officials Cao Yuxuan, governor of Henan Province Tang Zhaojing, and deputy governor Qiao Yunsheng served as assistants.

古文：故御史康丕扬、徐大化，故给事中钟兆斗、陈治则、宋一韩、姚文蔚，主事郑振先、张嘉言及宾尹、天飐、国缙咸被察，又以年例出绍徽、应甲于外。
现代文：前任御史康丕扬、徐大化，前任给事中钟兆斗、陈治则、宋一韩、姚文尉，主事郑振先、张嘉言和汤宾尹、顾天浚、刘国缙都被纠察，又以年例的名义将王绍徽、乔应甲调出京城。
English: The previous superintendent of history, Kang Xiangyang, and Xu Dahu, the former supervisors Zhong Zhaodu, Chen Zhizhe, Song Yihan, and Yao Wenzhu, and the supervisors Zheng Zhenxian, Zhang Jiagang, and Tang Binyin, Gu Tianjun, and Liu Guojun were all picketed, and Wang Shaohui and Qiao Yingjia were transferred out of Beijing on an annual basis.

古文：群情翕服，而诸不得志者深衔之。
现代文：群情得以收敛，但是诸位不得志的人很恼恨。
English: The crowd managed to calm down, but those of you who didn't make it were furious.

古文：当计典之初举也，兆京谓明时将出疏要挟，以激丕扬。
现代文：在考核之初的举荐时，汤兆京称金明时即将上奏要挟，以刺激孙丕扬。
English: At the time of the recommendation at the beginning of the assessment, Tong Zhaojing said that Jin Ming was about to make a threat to stimulate Sun Xuanyang.

古文：丕扬果怒，先期止明时过部考察，特疏劾之。
现代文：孙丕扬果然恼怒，先制止金明时到吏部考察，特意上奏弹劾他。
English: Sun Yat-sen was so angry that he first stopped Jin Ming from going to the cadre department for inspection, and then deliberately impeached him.

古文：旨下议罪，而明时辩疏复犯御讳。
现代文：神宗下旨追究罪过，金明时的辩解又触犯神宗的避讳。
English: The Shinto sect issued an order to investigate the crime, and Kim Myung Seok's defense violated the Shinto sect's taboo.

古文：帝怒，褫其职。
现代文：神宗恼怒，剥夺了他的官职。
English: Enraged, the emperor deprived him of his post.

古文：其党大哗。
现代文：他的党徒大为哗然。
English: His party was in an uproar.

古文：谓明时未尝要挟兆京，只以劾图一疏实之，为图报复。
现代文：称金明时不曾要挟汤兆京，只有弹劾王图是事实，遭到王图的报复。
English: He said that Kim Ming did not blackmail Tong Zhaojing at that time, only the impeachment of Wang Tu was a fact, and he suffered retaliation from Wang Tu.

古文：于是刑部主事秦聚奎力攻丕扬，为宾尹、大化、国缙、绍徽、应甲、嘉言辨。
现代文：因此刑部主事秦聚奎极力攻击孙丕扬，替汤宾尹、徐大化、刘国缙、王绍徽、乔应甲、张嘉言辩护。
English: Therefore, the head of the Criminal Investigation Department, Qin Jukui, vigorously attacked Sun Yuyang and defended Tang Binyin, Xu Dahua, Liu Guozhen, Wang Shaohui, Qiao Yingjia and Zhang Jiagang.

古文：时部院察疏犹未下，丕扬奏趣之，因发聚奎前知绩溪、吴江时贪虐状。
现代文：当时部院的考核报告还没有下达，孙丕扬上奏催促，趁机揭发秦聚奎以前在绩溪、吴江知县任上贪婪、残暴的罪状。
English: At that time, the assessment report of the ministry and academy had not yet been issued, and Sun Yanyang took the opportunity to expose the crimes of greed and brutality committed by Qin Jukui before he took office in Jixi and Wujiang County.

古文：帝方向丕扬，亦褫聚奎职。
现代文：神宗倾向孙丕扬，将秦聚奎的官职也剥夺了。
English: Sun Yat-sen, who was inclined towards the Shinto religion, also deprived Qin Ju-kui of his official position.

古文：由是党人益愤，谓丕扬果以伪书故斥绍徽、国缙，且二人与应甲尝攻三才、元翰，故代为修隙，议论汹汹。
现代文：因此他的党羽们更加愤怒，称孙丕扬果真利用伪书故意贬斥王绍徽、刘国缙，况且两人与乔应甲曾经攻击过李三才、王元翰，所以代他们报复，议论纷纷。
English: As a result, his party members were even more angry, saying that Sun Yat-sen had indeed used a fake book to deliberately disparage Wang Shaohui and Liu Guozhen. Moreover, the two and Qiao Yingjia had attacked Li Sancai and Wang Yuanhan, so they took revenge on their behalf, and there was a lot of discussion.

古文：弘纲闻而畏之。累请发察疏，亦若以丕扬为过当者。
现代文：许弘纲听说后感到畏惧，多次请求下发考核的报告，也认为孙丕扬处理过分。
English: After hearing this, Xu Honggang felt intimidated and repeatedly requested that the assessment report be issued. He also thought that Sun Yat-sen's handling of the matter was excessive.

古文：党人藉其言，益思撼丕扬。
现代文：秦的党羽们借助他的话，更加想打倒孙丕扬。
English: With the help of his words, Qin's partisans wanted to overthrow Sun Xiangyang even more.

古文：礼部主事丁元荐甫入朝，虑察疏终寝，抗章责弘纲，因尽发昆、宣党构谋状。
现代文：礼部主事丁元荐刚进入朝廷，顾虑考核报告最后搁置，上奏指责许弘纲，趁势详尽揭发了昆、宣两党的阴谋。
English: The head of the ceremonial department, Ding Yuan Xian, had just entered the imperial court, and finally shelved the concerns assessment report, blamed Xu Honggang, and took advantage of the situation to expose the conspiracy of Kun and Xuan in detail.

古文：于是一桂、继芳、永春、光魁、宗文争击元荐，为明时等讼冤。
现代文：因此朱一桂、郑继芳、周永春、徐兆魁、姚宗文争相攻击丁元荐，替金明时等人诉讼冤屈。
English: Therefore, Zhu Yigui, Zheng Jifang, Zhou Yongchun, Xu Zhaokui, and Yao Zongwen vied with each other to attack Ding Yuanxian and sue for the grievances of Jin Mingxi and others.

古文：赖向高调获，至五月察疏乃下。
现代文：幸亏叶向高调解，到五月才下发考核报告。
English: Fortunately, thanks to Ye Xianggao's mediation, the assessment report was not issued until May.

古文：给事中彭惟成、南京给事中高节，御史王万祚、曾成易犹攻讦不已。
现代文：给事中彭惟成、南京给事中高节，御史王万祚、曾成易仍然不断攻击。
English: In the case of Peng Weicheng, Nanjing in the case of Zhong Gao Jie, Wang Wanzhong, Zeng Chengyi still continue to attack.

古文：丕扬以人言纷至，亦屡疏求去，优诏勉留。
现代文：孙丕扬认为人们议论不断，也屡次上奏请求离去，神宗下优诏挽留。
English: Sun Xiangyang believes that people are constantly discussing, and they have repeatedly requested to leave, and the Shensong has retained the Yuanzhao.

古文：先是，杨时乔掌察，斥科道钱梦皋等十人，特旨留任。
现代文：在此之前，杨时乔负责考核，贬斥了科道钱梦皋等十人，神宗下特旨留用他们。
English: Prior to this, Yang Shijiao was in charge of the assessment, and dismissed ten people such as Kedo Qianmengtao, and retained them under the special order of Shenzong.

古文：至是丕扬亦奏黜之，群情益快。
现代文：此时孙丕扬也上奏罢免他们，群情大快。
English: At this time, Sun Yat-sen also played a tune to dismiss them, and the crowd was excited.

古文：丕场以白首趋朝，非荐贤无以报国。
现代文：孙丕扬以白首之躯回朝视事，不举荐贤明无以报效国家。
English: Sun Yat-sen returned to the imperial court in the form of a white-headed corpse to supervise affairs. Without recommending the wise, there is no way to repay the country.

古文：先后推毂林居耆硕，若沈鲤、吕坤、郭正域、丘度、蔡悉、顾宪成、赵南星、邹元标、冯从吾、于玉立、高攀龙、刘元珍、庞时雍、姜士昌、范涞、欧阳东凤辈。
现代文：先后推举隐居的贤人，像沈鲤、吕坤、郭正域、丘度、蔡悉、顾宪成、赵南、邹元标、冯从吾、于玉立、高攀龙、刘元珍、庞时雍、姜士昌、范涞、欧阳东风等人。
English: Reclusive sages such as Shen Qi, Lu Kun, Guo Zhengwei, Qudu, Cai Si, Gu Xiancheng, Zhao Nan, Xing Yuanbiao, Feng Congwu, Yu Yuling, Gao Panglong, Liu Yuanzhen, Pang Shiyong, Jiang Shichang, Fan Qi, Ouyang Dongfeng and others were successively elected.

古文：帝雅意不用旧人，悉寝不报。
现代文：神宗一向不录用旧臣，全部没有批复。
English: Shenzong has never hired former ministers, and there has been no reply.

古文：丕扬又请起故御史钱一本等十三人，故给事中钟羽正等十五人，亦报罢。
现代文：孙丕扬又请求起用前任御史钱一本等十三人，前任给事中钟羽正等十五人，也答复作罢。
English: Sun Yat-sen also requested the appointment of thirteen people such as the former imperial historian Qian Bin, and the former gave fifteen people such as Zhong Yu Zheng in the matter, and also refused to answer.

古文：丕扬齿虽迈，帝重其老成清德，眷遇益隆。
现代文：孙丕扬虽然年迈，神宗看重他老练清廉，对他眷念更深。
English: Although Sun Xiangyang was old, Shenzong valued his experience and integrity, and was even more fond of him.

古文：而丕扬乞去不已，疏复二十余上。既不得请，则于明年二月拜疏径归。
现代文：然而孙丕扬不断请求离去，上奏二十多次，得不到批准，就在第二年二月上奏之后径直回乡。
English: However, Sun Yat-sen kept requesting to leave, and went to the capital more than 20 times. However, he could not get approval, so he went straight back to his hometown after going to the capital in February the following year.

古文：时咸议阁臣怯，而惜纟熏等用未竟也。
现代文：叶向高听说了，急忙上奏神宗。神宗下诏令他乘驿车，并派有司问候。
English: Ye Xianggao heard about it and hurried to play for Shenzong. Shenzong ordered him to take a taxi and sent his greetings.

古文：国珍素以学行称，风力不及孙鑨、陈有年，而清操似之，均为时望所属。家居十三年卒，年八十四。赠太子太保，谥恭靖。
现代文：不久孙丕扬上奏答谢，趁势陈述四件时政，神宗又下优诏答复他。他在家居住两年后去世，享年八十三岁，赠封为太保。天启初年，追赠谥号恭介。
English: Soon after, Sun Yat-sen wrote a letter of thanks, taking advantage of the situation to state four current affairs, and Shenzong replied to him with a letter of commendation. He died two years after living at home, at the age of 83, and was awarded the title of Taibo. In the first year of the Apocalypse, he was posthumously awarded the posthumous title of Kyosuke.

古文：杨时乔，字宜迁，上饶人。
现代文：杨时乔，字宜迁，上饶人。
English: Yang Shijiao, Ziyi Qian, Shangrao Ren.

古文：嘉靖四十四年进士。
现代文：嘉靖四十四年的进士。
English: The 44th year of Jiajing.

古文：除工部主事。
现代文：授职为工部主事。
English: The awarding of the post is the responsibility of the engineering department.

古文：榷税杭州，令商人自署所入，输之有司，无所预。
现代文：在杭州征专卖税，命令商人自己报告收入，向有司交税，不做干预。
English: In Hangzhou, a monopoly tax was levied, and merchants were ordered to report their own income, pay taxes to the government, and not to interfere.

古文：隆庆元年冬，上时政要务，言： 几之当慎者三，以日勤朝讲为修德之几，亲裁章奏为出令之几，听言能断为图事之几。
现代文：隆庆元年冬天，上奏时政的要务，称： 有三件事应当慎重：每天勤于朝讲是培养品德的要务，亲自裁决奏章是发出指令的要务，听取劝谏能够做出判断是谋划事情的要务。
English: In the winter of the first year of the Longqing era, he gave a speech on the important tasks of contemporary politics, saying: There are three things that should be carefully considered: it is important to cultivate moral character by diligently giving speeches every day, it is important to issue instructions by personally judging the speeches, and it is important to plan things by listening to advice and being able to make judgments.

古文：弊之最重者九：曰治体怠弛，曰法令数易，曰赏罚无章，曰用度太繁，曰鬻官太滥，曰庄田扰民，曰习俗侈靡，曰士气卑弱，曰议论虚浮。
现代文：有九大弊端：对国体的治理松弛懈怠，多次变更法令，赏罚没有规章，开支浩繁，滥卖官职、庄田，骚扰百姓，习俗侈靡，士气低落软弱，议论空虚。
English: There are nine major drawbacks: the governance of the National Games is slack and slack, the laws and regulations have been changed many times, there are no rules for rewards and punishments, the expenses are huge, the official posts and villages are sold indiscriminately, the people are harassed, the customs are extravagant, the morale is low and weak, and the discussion is empty.

古文：势之偏重者三：宦寺难制也，宗禄难继也，边备难振也。 
现代文：三种现象趋于严重：宦官、寺庙难以控制，宗族的俸禄难以继续，边防难以振兴。 
English: Three phenomena tend to be serious: it is difficult to control eunuchs and temples, it is difficult to continue the clan's salary, and it is difficult to revitalize border defense.

古文：疏入，帝褒纳，中外传诵焉。
现代文：奏疏呈入，朝廷褒扬并采纳了，朝廷内外传诵一时。
English: The imperial court commended and adopted it, and it was widely read inside and outside the court.

古文：擢礼部员外郎，迁南京尚宝丞。
现代文：他升任礼部员外郎，调任南京尚宝丞。
English: He was promoted to Geiro, member of the etiquette club, and transferred to Nanjing Shangbao Rong.

古文：万历初，以养亲去。
现代文：万历初年，他以安葬亲人而离职。
English: In the first year of Wanli, he left his post after burying a relative.

古文：服除，起南京太仆丞，复迁尚宝。
现代文：丧服解除，出任南京太仆丞，又调任尚宝司，称病回乡。
English: He was relieved of his mourning clothes and appointed as the Nanjing Taipuzhong, and was also transferred to the Shangbao Division, saying that he was ill and returning to his hometown.

古文：移疾归。时乔雅无意荣进，再起再告。
现代文：杨时乔一向无意荣升，一再起用一再告退。
English: Yang Shijiao has always had no intention of promotion, and has been repeatedly appointed and repeatedly resigned.

古文：阅十七年始荐起尚宝卿，四迁南京太常卿。
现代文：过了十七年才被推荐担任尚宝卿，四次调任后升南京太常卿。
English: It took seventeen years before he was recommended to serve as Shang Baoqing, and he was promoted to Nanjing Tai Changqing after being transferred four times.

古文：疏请议建文帝谥，祠礼死节诸臣。
现代文：上奏请求讨论建文帝的谥号，祭祀去世的有气节的大臣。
English: The prelude requests a discussion of Emperor Jianwen's posthumous name, the deceased minister of the Air Festival.

古文：就迁通政使。
现代文：调任通政使。
English: Transferred to the position of political envoy.

古文：秩满，连章乞休，不允。
现代文：任期满后，他接连上奏请求退休，神宗不允许。
English: After the expiration of his term of office, he successively requested retirement, which was not allowed by Shenzong.

古文：三十一年冬，召拜吏部左侍郎。
现代文：万历三十一年，他被召见委任为吏部左侍郎。
English: In the 31st year of the lunar calendar, he was summoned and appointed as the left attendant of the cadre department.

古文：时李戴已致仕，时乔至即署部事。
现代文：当时李戴已经辞官，杨时乔上任就负责部中事务。
English: At that time, Li Dai had already resigned, and Yang Shijiao was responsible for the affairs of the ministry when he took office.

古文：绝请谒，谢交游，止宿公署，苞苴不及门。
现代文：杜绝拜访，推辞交游，住宿在办公地，行贿者到不了他的门庭。
English: Eliminate visits, refuse to travel, stay at the office, and the bribe-giver can't get to his front yard.

古文：及大计京朝官，首辅沈一贯欲庇其所私，惮时乔方正，将令兵部尚书萧大亨主之，次辅沈鲤不可而止。
现代文：等到全面考核京官、朝官时，首辅沈一贯想庇护他的私交，顾忌杨时乔清正，准备指派兵部尚书萧大亨主持，次辅沈鲤不赞同就终止了。
English: When it came to the overall assessment of the Beijing officials and the imperial officials, the chief aide, Shen Rong, always wanted to protect his personal friends, and was wary of Yang Shijiao Qingzheng, and was preparing to assign the military commander, Shang Shu Xiao Tycoon, to preside over the meeting. The second aide, Shen Wei, did not agree, and the meeting was terminated.

古文：时乔乃与都御史温纯力锄政府私人。若给事中钱梦皋、御史张似渠、于永清辈，咸在察中，又以年例出给事中钟兆斗于外。
现代文：杨时乔与都御史温纯积极清除内阁的亲信，像给事中钱梦皋；御史张似渠、于永清等人，都在纠察之列，又以年例的名义将给事中钟兆斗调出京城。
English: Yang Shijiao and Metropolitan Governor Wenjun actively purged the cabinet's cronies, such as Qian Mengyao; Governor Zhang Liguo, Yu Yongqing and others were on the picket line, and transferred Zhong Zhaodu out of Beijing in the name of annual events.

古文：一贯大愠，密言于帝，留察疏不下。
现代文：沈一贯很恼恨，暗中劝说神宗，扣留了考核的奏章不下发。
English: Shen has always been very angry, secretly persuading Shenzong, withholding the assessment of the score from being issued.

古文：梦皋亦假楚王事再攻郭正域，谓主察者为正域驱除。
现代文：钱梦皋也借助楚王的事情再度攻击郭正域，称主持考核的人受郭正域驱使。
English: Qian Mengyao also used the King of Chu incident to attack Guo Zhengwei again, saying that the person who presided over the assessment was driven by Guo Zhengwei.

古文：帝意果动，特留梦皋；已，尽留科道之被察者，而严旨责时乔等报复。
现代文：皇帝果然心动，特意留用钱梦皋；此后，将被纠察的科道全部留用，并且下严旨责备杨时乔等人。
English: The emperor was so moved that he purposely kept the use of money as a nightmare; thereafter, he kept all the picketed science and technology, and issued a strict order to reproach Yang Shijiao and others.

古文：时乔等惶恐奏辨，请罢斥，帝不问。
现代文：杨时乔等人惶恐地上奏辩解，请求罢免，神宗不予追究。
English: Yang Shijiao and others panicked and pleaded on the ground, requesting to be dismissed, but Shenzong was not investigated.

古文：梦皋既留，遂合兆斗累疏攻纯，并侵时乔。时乔求去。
现代文：钱梦皋被留用，就与钟兆斗多次上奏攻击温纯，并且触及杨时乔，杨时乔请求离去。
English: When Qian Mengyao was retained, he and Zhong Zhaodu repeatedly played up to attack Wen Chun, and touched Yang Shijiao, and Yang Shijiao asked to leave.

古文：已而员外郎贺灿然请斥被察科道，亦诋纯挟权斗捷，顾独称时乔。
现代文：不久员外郎贺灿然请求贬斥被纠察的科道，也抨击温纯擅权争斗，唯独称赞杨时乔。
English: Not long after, He Canran, a member of the Foreign Minister's retinue, requested to denounce the picketed science and technology, and also criticized Wen Chun's power struggle, but praised Yang Shijiao.

古文：又言： 陛下睿断躬操，非阁臣所能窃弄 ，意盖为一贯解。
现代文：又称 陛下亲自处事英明果断，不是内阁大臣能暗中愚弄的 ，意思大概是为沈一贯解脱。
English: Also known as "His Majesty personally handles affairs wisely and decisively, not a cabinet minister can secretly fool," the meaning is probably to liberate Shen.

古文：时乔以与纯共事，复疏请贬黜，不报。
现代文：杨时乔因为与温纯共事，又上奏请求贬官，神宗没有答复。
English: Shenzong did not reply to Yang Shijo's request to demote him because he worked with Wenjun.

古文：及纯去，梦皋、兆斗亦引归。
现代文：等到温纯离去，钱梦皋、钟兆斗也引退了。
English: By the time Wen Chun left, Qian Mengtuo and Zhong Zhaoduo had also retired.

古文：帝复降旨谯让，谓 祖宗朝亦常留被察科道，何今日揣疑君父，诬诋辅臣 。
现代文：神宗又降旨责备，称 先祖也时常留用被纠察的科道，为什么现在怀疑君主，诬蔑辅臣 。
English: Shenzong also issued a reprimand, saying that the ancestors also often retained the picketed science, why now doubt the monarch and slander the vassal.

古文：因责诸臣朋比，令时乔策励供职，而尽斥灿然及刘元珍、庞时雍辈。
现代文：趁机责备各位大臣结帮入伙，命令杨时乔尽心尽职，将贺灿然和刘元珍、庞时雍等人全部贬职。
English: He took the opportunity to reproach the ministers for ganging up on him, ordered Yang Shijiao to do his duty, and demoted He Canran, Liu Yuanzhen, and Pang Shiyong.

古文：时乔叹曰： 主察者逐，争察者亦窜矣，尚可靦颜居此乎？ 
现代文：杨时乔叹息道： 主持纠察的人被驱逐，提议纠察的也如鼠窜，还有脸面在此吗？ 
English: Yang Shijo sighed, "The person who presided over the picket was expelled, and the person who proposed the picket is also like a rat, is there still a face here?

古文：九疏引疾，竟不得请。
现代文：他多次上奏称病，最终未获批准。
English: He repeatedly reported being ill, but was ultimately not allowed to return.

古文：时中外缺官多不补，而群臣省亲养病给假，及建言诖误被谴者，充满林下，率不获召。
现代文：当时朝廷内外空缺很多，官职还没有补充人，而且大臣们探亲养病请假，以及劝谏而被连累遭遣送的人，遍布乡间，都得不到召见。
English: At that time, there were many vacancies both inside and outside the Imperial Court, and there was no one to fill the posts. Moreover, ministers who took time off to visit relatives and recover from illness, as well as those who were sent to the countryside after being persuaded to do so, could not be summoned.

古文：时乔乃备列三百余人，三疏请录用。
现代文：杨时乔就开列了三百多人的名单，多次上奏请求录用。
English: Yang Shijiao made a list of more than three hundred people and repeatedly requested to be hired.

古文：三十四年，皇长孙生，有诏起废，时乔复列上迁谪邹元标等九十六人，削籍范俊等一百十人。
现代文：三十四年，皇长孙出世，神宗下诏起用罢官的人，杨时乔又列举受降职的邹元标等九十六人，被剥夺官籍的范俊等一百一十人，神宗最终没有理会。
English: In the thirty-fourth year, when Emperor Chosun was born, Emperor Shenzong issued an edict to dismiss ninety-six officials, including Yang Shijiao, who had been demoted, and one hundred and ten people, including Fan Jun, who had been deprived of his official status. Emperor Shenzong eventually ignored the edict.

古文：帝卒不省。明年，大计外吏。
现代文：第二年全面考核京城外的官吏。
English: In the second year, officials outside the capital will be comprehensively assessed.

古文：时乔已偕副都御史詹沂受事，居数日，帝忽命户部尚书赵世卿代时乔，遂中辍；盖去冬所批察疏，至是误发之也。
现代文：杨时乔已经与副都御史詹沂接受任务，过了几天，神宗忽然命令户部尚书赵世卿代替杨时乔，于是中途放弃。大概去年冬天所批复的考核报告，现在误发了。
English: After a few days, Shenzong suddenly ordered the head of the household, Shangshu Zhao Shijing, to replace Yang Shijiao, so he gave up halfway. The assessment report, which was approved last winter, has now been sent out by mistake.

古文：辅臣朱赓谓非体，立言于帝。
现代文：辅臣朱赓称不成体统，马上告诉了神宗。
English: Zhu Xi, an aide-de-camp, said that it would not become a system, and immediately told Shenzong.

古文：帝亦觉其误，即日收还。
现代文：皇帝也发觉了错误，当天收回报告。
English: The emperor also discovered the error and retracted the report the same day.

古文：时乔坚辞不肯任，吏科陈治则劾其怨怼无人臣礼。
现代文：杨时乔坚决推辞不肯上任，吏科陈治则弹劾他有怨愤不合大臣的礼仪。
English: Yang Shijiao resolutely refused to take office, and the official Chen Zhi impeached him for having a grudge that did not conform to the minister's etiquette.

古文：有旨诘责，时乔乃再受事。
现代文：神宗下旨责备，杨时乔才又负责事务。
English: Shenzong issued a reprimand, and Yang Shijiao was put in charge of affairs.

古文：永年伯王栋卒，其子明辅请袭。
现代文：永年伯王栋去世，他的儿子王明辅请求世袭。
English: Yongnian Bo Wangdong passed away, and his son Wang Mingyu requested to inherit the throne.

古文：时乔以外戚不当传世，固争之，弗听。
现代文：杨时乔认为外戚不应当传承封爵，坚持争辩，皇帝不听。
English: Yang Shijo thought that his relative should not inherit the title of knight, and insisted on arguing, but the emperor would not listen.

古文：时一贯已罢，言路争击其党。
现代文：当时沈一贯已经被罢免，言路争相攻击他的党羽。
English: At the time, Shen had already been ousted, and his supporters were attacking him.

古文：而李廷机者，一贯教习门生也，阁臣阙，众多推之；惟给事中曹于汴、宋一韩、御史陈宗契持不可。
现代文：但是李廷机是沈一贯教导的门生，内阁大臣空缺，众人都推举他，只有给事中曹子汴、宋一韩，御史陈宗契坚持不同意。
English: However, Li Tingchi was a protégé of Shen's consistent teachings. There was a vacancy for a cabinet minister, and everyone nominated him. Only Cao Ziqi, Song Yihan, and Minister of History Chen Zongqi persisted in disagreeing.

古文：时乔卒从众议。
现代文：杨时乔最终遵从了众人的意见。
English: In the end, Yang Shijiao complied with everyone's opinions.

古文：未几，又推黄汝良、全天叙为侍郎，诸攻一贯者益不悦。
现代文：不久，又推举黄汝良、全天叙担任侍郎，那些攻击沈一贯的人更加不高兴。
English: Soon after, Huang Ruliang and Quan Tian Xiu were promoted to waiters. Those who had been attacking Shen were even more displeased.

古文：给事中王元翰、胡忻遂交劾时乔。时乔疏辨，力求罢。
现代文：给事中王元翰、胡忻便接连弹劾杨时乔，杨时乔上奏辩解，极力请求罢职。
English: During the incident, Wang Yuanhan and Hu Yao successively impeached Yang Shijiao, and Yang Shijiao made a defense and strongly requested to resign.

古文：当是时，帝委时乔铨柄，又不置右侍郎，一人独理部事，铨叙平允。
现代文：当时，神宗授予杨时乔选拔官吏的权力，又不设置右侍郎，他一个人单独负责吏部事务，选官很公允。
English: At that time, Shenzong granted Yang Shijiao the power to select officials, and did not set up a right attendant. He alone was responsible for the affairs of the cadre department, and the selection of officials was very fair.

古文：然堂陛扞格，旷官废事，日甚一日，而中朝议论方嚣，动见掣肘。
现代文：然而朝廷的阻格，官吏闲置，事情荒废，一天胜过一天，而且朝廷议论纷纷，动不动就受牵制。
English: However, the gridlock of the imperial court, the idleness of officials, the waste of things, the day is better than the day, and the imperial court has many discussions and is constantly constrained.

古文：时乔官位未崇，又自温纯去，久不置都御史，益无以镇厌百僚。
现代文：杨时乔官职不显赫，又自温纯离去后，很久不设置都御史，更不能镇住僚属。
English: Yang Shijiao's official position is not prominent, and since the departure of Wen Chun, he has not set up a capital history for a long time, nor can he live with his colleagues.

古文：由是上下相凌，纪纲日紊，言路得收其柄。时乔亦多委蛇，议者谅其苦心，不甚咎也。
现代文：因此上下欺凌，纲纪一天天紊乱，言路掌握了权力，杨时乔也多有屈从，议论的人谅解他的苦衷，不多追究他。
English: As a result, there is bullying up and down, discipline is disordered day by day, words and ways have seized power, and Yang Shijiao is also more submissive. People who talk about him understand his plight and do not investigate him much.

古文：秉铨凡五年。最后起故尚书孙丕扬。未至，而时乔已卒。
现代文：负责选官五年，最后起用以前的尚书孙丕扬，没有到任，杨时乔已经去世。
English: In charge of selecting officials for five years, the last to be appointed was the former Shangshusun Xiangyang, but he did not take office, and Yang Shijiao has passed away.

古文：箧余一敝裘，同列赙襚以殓。
现代文：箱中只有一件破旧的毛皮衣，同僚们募捐收殓了他。
English: There was only a tattered fur coat in the box, and his colleagues collected donations to buy it for him.

古文：诏赠吏部尚书，谥端洁。
现代文：诏令封赠吏部尚书，谥号端洁。
English: He was given the title of "Shang Shu" (尚書) in the imperial edict, and his nickname was "Duan Jie" (端洁).

古文：时乔受业永丰吕怀，最不喜王守仁之学，辟之甚力，尤恶罗汝芳。
现代文：杨时乔受业于永丰吕怀，最不喜欢王守仁的学说，力加排斥，尤其厌恶罗汝芳。
English: Yang Shijiao was educated at Yongfeng Luhai. He disliked the teachings of Wang Shouren the most and strongly rejected them. In particular, he disliked Luo Rufang.

古文：官通政时具疏斥之曰： 佛氏之学，初不溷于儒。乃汝芳假圣贤仁义心性之言，倡为见性成佛之教，谓吾学直捷，不假修为。
现代文：在任职通政使司时，他上疏斥责说： 佛氏之学，起初并不与儒学相混，是罗汝芳借圣贤仁义心性之说，倡导为见性成佛的宗教，说我的学说简省快捷，不待清修。
English: When he was serving as the political envoy, he reprimanded Zhang Zuo, saying, "The Buddha's teachings were not mixed with Confucianism at first. It was Luo Rufang who advocated the religion of attaining Buddhahood through wisdom and benevolence, and said that my teachings were simple and quick, and did not need to be refined.

古文：于是以传注为支离，以经书为糟粕，以躬行实践为迂腐，以纲纪法度为桎梏。
现代文：于是传疏注释为琐碎，以经书为糟粕，以躬行实践为迂腐，以纲纪法度为束缚。
English: As a result, the commentary of Zhuangsu was trivial, the scripture was rubbish, the practice was pedantic, and the rules and regulations of the discipline were a shackle.

古文：逾闲荡检，反道乱德，莫此为甚。
现代文：超越礼法，败坏道德，没有比这更严重了。
English: There is nothing more serious than transgressing etiquette and corrupting morals.

古文：望敕所司明禁，用彰风教。 
现代文：望敕令主管官员明示禁止，以彰明纲常名教。 
English: The supervising official expressly prohibited it in order to emphasize the importance of regular education.

古文：诏从其言。
现代文：神宗下诏同意了他的意见。
English: The Emperor accepted his suggestion.

