古文：宗越，南阳叶人也。
现代文：宗越，南阳叶县人。
English: Zong Yue, from Nanyangye County.

古文：本爲南阳次门。
现代文：本来是南阳的次等门第。
English: Originally, it was a second-class family in Nanyang.

古文：安北将军赵伦之镇襄阳，襄阳多杂姓，越更被黜爲役门。
现代文：安北将军赵伦之镇守襄阳，襄阳有很多杂姓，宗越更被降为贱役门第。
English: Anbei General Zhao Lun's town guarded Xiangyang. Xiangyang has many miscellaneous surnames, and Zong Yue was even reduced to a low-ranking official.

古文：出身补郡吏。
现代文：最初出来做官补任郡吏。
English: He initially came out to be a supplementary official and a county official.

古文：父爲蛮所杀，越于市中刺杀雠人。
现代文：父亲被蛮人所杀，宗越在街市上刺杀了仇人。
English: His father was killed by a savage, and Zong Yue stabbed his enemy to death in the market.

古文：太守夏侯穆嘉其意，擢爲队主。
现代文：太守夏侯穆嘉奖他的这种精神，把他提拔为队主。
English: Governor Xia Houmu commended him for this spirit and promoted him to team leader.

古文：蛮有爲寇盗者，常使越讨伐，往辄有功。
现代文：蛮人中有盗贼的，常常派宗越去讨伐，去则立功。
English: Among the barbarians, those who were thieves often sent Zong Yue to fight, and they were rewarded for their efforts.

古文：家贫无以市马，刀楯步出，单身挺战，衆莫能当。
现代文：他家中贫穷没有钱买马，总是手拿刀盾步行出阵，单身挺战，众人都不能抵挡。
English: His family was poor and did not have the money to buy a horse. He always went out on foot with a sword and shield in hand. He was single and could not resist the crowd.

古文：每一捷，郡将辄赏钱五千，因此得买马。
现代文：每一次战胜，郡将就赏钱五千，因此能够买到一匹马。
English: For each victory, the county will award five thousand, so you can buy a horse.

古文：元嘉二十四年，啓文帝求复次门，移户属冠军县，许之。
现代文：元嘉二十四年，他上表文帝，请求恢复次等门第，迁移户口归属冠军县，允许了。
English: In the 24th year of Yuan Jia, he petitioned Emperor Wen for the restoration of the second-class family and the transfer of his hukou to Champion County, which was allowed.

古文：二十七年，随柳元景侵魏，领马幢隶柳元怙有战功，还补后军参军督护，随王诞戏之曰： 汝何人，遂得我府四字。 
现代文：二十七年，他随从柳元景侵魏，隶属于柳元怙，负责马幢，立了战功，回来后补任后军参军都护，随王刘诞开玩笑说： 你是什么人，便得到了我府中的这四个字？ 
English: In the 27th year, he followed Liu Yuanjing to invade Wei, was subordinated to Liu Yuanjun, was in charge of the horse building, and made war exploits. After returning, he was appointed as a post-army member of the army to protect the capital. With Wang Liu Xue jokingly said: Who are you, you got these four words from my government?

古文：越答曰： 佛狸未死，不忧不得谘议参军。 
现代文：宗越回答说： 佛俚还没有死，不愁得不到咨议参军。 
English: Zong Yue replied: "Buddha is not dead yet, so it is not a problem to get advice to join the army.

古文：诞大笑。
现代文：刘诞大笑。
English: Liu Xizhao laughed loudly.

古文：孝武即位，以爲江夏王义恭大司马行参军、济阳太守。
现代文：孝武帝即位，任命他为江夏王刘义恭大司马行参军、济阳太守。
English: Emperor Xiaowu ascended to the throne and appointed him as the grand secretary of Jiangxia King Liu Yigong to join the army and become the governor of Jiyang.

古文：臧质、鲁爽反，朝廷致讨，越战功居多，追奔至江陵。
现代文：臧质、鲁爽反叛，朝廷进行讨伐，宗越的战功居多，追赶到了江陵。
English: Zong Yue, courageous and rebellious, the imperial court carried out a crusade, Zong Yue's war exploits were the most, and he was chased to Jiangling.

古文：时荆州刺史朱修之未至，越多所诛戮，又逼略南郡王义宣子女，坐免官系尚方，寻被宥。
现代文：当时荆州刺史朱修之还没有到，宗越斩杀很多，又追获南郡王刘义宣子女，因此被免官囚禁在尚方狱中，不久被宽恕。
English: At that time, the Jingzhou assassin Zhu Xiuzhi had not yet arrived, Zong Yue had killed many people, and also caught the children of the southern county king Liu Yixuan, so he was dismissed and imprisoned in Shangfang Prison, and was soon pardoned.

古文：追论前功，封范阳县子。
现代文：追论前面的功劳，封为范阳县子。
English: Following up on the previous achievements, he was awarded the title of Fanyang County Son.

古文：大明三年，爲长水校尉。
现代文：大明三年，他担任长水校尉。
English: Daming three years, he served as the Changshui school captain.

古文：竟陵王诞据广陵反，越领马军隶沈庆之攻诞。
现代文：竟陵王刘诞占据广陵造反，宗越率领马军隶属于沈庆之进攻刘诞。
English: Liu Xing, the king of mausoleums, occupied Guangling and rebelled. Zong Yue led the horse army to attack Liu Xing, who was subordinate to Shen Qing.

古文：及城陷，孝武使悉杀城内男丁。
现代文：城池攻陷后，孝武帝命令把城内的成年男子全部杀死。
English: After the fall of the castle, Emperor Xiaowu ordered all the adult men in the city to be killed.

古文：越受旨行诛，躬临其事，莫不先加捶挞，或有鞭其面者，欣欣然若有所得，凡杀数千人。改封始安县子。
现代文：宗越受旨进行杀戮，亲身执行任务，无不先加以抽打，还有的是先鞭打他们的脸部，他欣欣然若有所得，共杀了几千人，改封为始安县子。
English: Zong Yue was ordered to carry out the killing, and he personally carried out the task, first beating them, and then whipping them in the face. He gladly killed several thousand people if he could, and changed his name to Shi'an County.

古文：前废帝景和元年，进爵爲侯，召爲游击将军、直合，领南济阴太守，改领南东海太守。
现代文：前废帝景和元年，晋升爵位为侯，召为游击将军、直阁，兼任南济阴太守，改兼南东海太守。
English: In the first year of the former Emperor Jinghe, he was promoted to the peerage of marquis, called to be a guerrilla general and direct cabinet, concurrently served as the governor of Nanjiyin, and concurrently served as the governor of the South East China Sea.

古文：帝凶暴无道，而越、谭金、童太一并爲之用命，诛戮群公及何迈等，莫不尽心竭力，故帝凭其爪牙，无所忌惮。
现代文：废帝凶暴无道，而宗越、谭金、金童都为他效命，处死群公和何迈等，无不尽心竭力，所以废帝凭借他们为爪牙，无所顾忌。
English: Emperor Wudi was vicious and ruthless, and Zong Yue, Tan Jin, and Jintong all worked for him, executed Qun Gong and He Mai, and so on, and made every effort, so Emperor Wudi had no scruples in using them as minions.

古文：赐与越等美女金帛，充牣其家。
现代文：赐给宗越等美女金帛，充满他们家中。
English: To beauties such as Zong Yue, he gave gold ingots, which filled their homes.

古文：越等武人粗强，识不及远，感一往意气，皆无复二心。
现代文：宗越等武人粗大强壮，见识不远，感激以往的意气，都没有二心。
English: The warriors such as Zong Yue are big and strong, they are not far-sighted, they are grateful for the spirit of the past, and they have no second thoughts.

古文：帝时南巡，明旦便发，其夕悉听越等出外宿，明帝因此定乱。
现代文：废帝当时南巡，第二天早晨就出发，当天夜里完全听任宗越等人出外住宿，明帝因此顺利平定了混乱局面。
English: The deposed emperor was on a southern tour at the time, and set off the next morning. That night, he completely allowed Zong Yue and others to stay outside, and the Ming emperor successfully smoothed out the chaotic situation.

古文：明晨越等并入，被抚接甚厚。
现代文：第二天清晨，宗越等人都回到宫中，受到了很优厚的抚慰。
English: The next morning, Zong Yue and the others all returned to the palace, where they received generous consolation.

古文：越改领南济阴太守，本官如故。
现代文：宗越改兼南济阴太守，本官依旧。
English: Zong Yue was also made the governor of South Jilin Province, but his position remained the same.

古文：越等既爲废帝尽心，虑明帝不能容之。
现代文：宗越既然很为废帝尽心，担心明帝不能容纳。
English: Since Zong Yue was very devoted to the former emperor, he was worried that the Ming emperor would not be able to accommodate him.

古文：上接待虽厚，内并怀惧。
现代文：皇上接待虽然很厚，但心里却很恐惧。
English: Although the emperor was well received, he was very frightened.

古文：上意亦不欲使其居中，从容谓曰： 卿遭离暴朝，勤劳日久，兵马大郡，随卿等所择。 
现代文：皇上的意思也不愿意让他们继续住在宫里，便从容地对他们说： 卿遭遇到暴虐的朝廷，辛苦的时间很久了，兵马大郡，随卿挑选。 
English: The emperor was not willing to let them continue to live in the palace, so he calmly said to them: Sir, you have encountered a tyrannical court, it has been a long time, soldiers and horses, follow Sir's selection.

古文：越等素已自疑，及闻此旨，皆相顾失色。
现代文：宗越等平素里就已经自生怀疑，等听到了这种意思，都相顾失色。
English: Zong Yue and others have always had their own suspicions, and when they heard this meaning, they all lost their color.

古文：因谋作难，以告沈攸之，攸之具白帝，即日下狱死。
现代文：于是便阴谋作乱，他们把这种想法告诉了沈攸之，沈攸之又完全报告了明帝，当天就把他们下狱处死。
English: So they plotted to make trouble. They told Shen Youzhi about this idea, and Shen Youzhi fully reported it to Emperor Ming. They were sent to prison and executed on the same day.

古文：越善立营阵，每数万人止顿，自骑马前行，使军人随其后，马止营合，未尝参差。
现代文：宗越善于建立营阵，常常是几万人驻扎，自己骑着马在前面走，让军人跟随在后面，马停下来，营房也就建成了，不曾参差不齐。
English: Zong Yue was good at setting up a camp, often with tens of thousands of people stationed, he rode his horse in front, let the soldiers follow behind, the horse stopped, the barracks were built, and they were not uneven.

古文：及沈攸之代殷孝祖爲南讨前锋，时孝祖新死，衆心并惧。
现代文：等沈攸之代替殷孝祖做南讨的先锋，当时殷孝祖刚刚死去，众人心里都很恐惧。
English: Shen Youzhi replaced Yin Xiaozu as the vanguard of the Southern Expedition. At that time, Yin Xiaozu had just died, and everyone was very afraid.

古文：武念位至南阳太守，长生甯蛮校尉，曹欣之骁骑将军；蔡那见子道恭传。吴喜，吴兴临安人也。
现代文：沈攸之感叹说： 宗公可惜，自有他的过人之处。 但宗越性格严酷，喜欢进行刑杀，当时王玄谟带兵也少有恩德，将士们为他们编了歌谣说： 宁作五年徒，不逐王玄谟，玄谟犹尚可，宗越更杀我。 吴喜，吴兴临安人。
English: Shen Yuanzhi lamented, "It's a pity for Zong Gong, he had his good points. However, Zong Yue had a harsh personality and liked to carry out torture and killing. At that time, Wang Xuan Mu led the soldiers with few virtues. The generals made up songs for them, saying, "I'd rather be a five-year-old apprentice than follow Wang Xuan Mu. Xuan Mu is not bad, but Zong Yue would rather kill me. Wu Xi, Wu Xing Lin'an people."

古文：本名喜公，明帝减爲喜。
现代文：本来名字叫喜公，明帝给他减为喜。
English: Originally, his name was Xigong, but Emperor Ming reduced it to Xigong.

古文：出身爲领军府白衣吏。
现代文：最初做官是当领军府的白衣吏。
English: His first official position was as a white-coated official in charge of the War Office.

古文：少知书，领军将军沈演之使写起居注，所写既毕，闇诵略皆上口。
现代文：少年知书，领军将军沈演之让他写起居注，写完以后，暗诵大略都能上口。
English: The boy knows the book, the leader of the army, General Shen Yuan, let him write a footnote, after writing, he can recite the outline.

古文：演之尝作让表，未奏失本，喜经一见即写，无所漏脱。
现代文：沈演之曾经写了一份辞让表，还没有上奏，奏折丢了，吴喜曾经见过一次，就把它写了下来，没有一点遗漏。
English: Shen Yanzhi once wrote a resignation letter, but it has not yet been played, and the transcript has been lost. Wu Xi once saw it and wrote it down, without missing a single point.

古文：演之甚知之。
现代文：沈演之十分欣赏他。
English: It's a very understated way to appreciate him.

古文：因此涉猎史、汉，颇见古今。
现代文：由此他涉猎《史记》、《汉书》，颇了解古今之事。
English: As a result, he dabbled in "Histories" and "Chinese Classics" and has a good understanding of the past and the present.

古文：演之门生朱重人入爲主书，荐喜爲主书吏，进爲主图令史。
现代文：沈演之的学生朱重人入宫担任主书，推荐吴担任主书吏，晋升为主图令史。
English: Zhu Chongren, a student of Shen Yanzhi, entered the palace as the chief scribe, recommended Wu as the chief scribe, and was promoted as the chief scribe.

古文：文帝尝求图书，喜开卷倒进之，帝怒遣出。
现代文：文帝曾经找图书，吴喜开卷倒着送上，文帝很生气，把他赶了出来。
English: Once, Emperor Wendi was looking for a book, and Wu Xi opened the volume and handed it to him upside down. Emperor Wendi was very angry and threw him out.

古文：会太子步兵校尉沈庆之征蛮，啓文帝请喜自随，爲孝武所知。
现代文：正遇上太子步兵校尉沈庆之征讨蛮人，上书文帝请求让吴喜跟随自己，后被孝武帝所欣赏。
English: Just as he was encountering the prince's infantry lieutenant Shen Qing's crusade against the barbarians, Emperor Wenshu requested that Wu Xi follow him, which was later appreciated by Emperor Xiaowu.

古文：稍迁至河东太守、殿中御史。
现代文：逐步升迁为河东太守、殿中御史。
English: He was gradually promoted to the position of the governor-general of the eastern part of the river, and became the lord of the palace.

古文：明帝即位，四方反叛，喜请得精兵三百致死于东。
现代文：明帝即位，四方反叛，吴喜请求得到精兵三百人到东方效死。
English: Emperor Ming ascended to the throne, four sides rebelled, and Wu Xi asked for three hundred elite soldiers to go to the East to die.

古文：帝大悦，即假建武将军，简羽林勇士配之。
现代文：文帝非常高兴，就封他为建武将军，挑选羽林勇士配备给他。
English: Emperor Wen was so pleased that he appointed him as the general of Jianwu and selected warriors from Hualin to equip him.

古文：议者以喜刀笔吏，不尝爲将，不可遣。
现代文：谈论的人认为吴喜是耍笔杆的，不曾做过将领，不可以派他去。
English: The interviewees believed that Wu Xi was a pen-pusher and had never been a general, so he could not be sent.

古文：中书舍人巢尚之曰： 喜随沈庆之累经军旅，性既勇决，又习战阵，若能任之，必有成绩。 
现代文：中书舍人巢尚之说： 吴喜跟随沈庆之久经军营生活，性格既勇敢，又熟悉战阵，如果能任用他，必然会有成绩。 
English: Shang Zhi, a Chinese scholar, said: Wu Xi has followed Shen Qingzhuang for a long time and lived in a military camp. His character is both brave and familiar with the battlefield. If he can be appointed, he will certainly have achievements.

古文：喜乃东讨。
现代文：吴喜于是东讨。
English: Wu Xi then went to the East.

古文：喜在孝武世既见驱使，性宽厚，所至人并怀之。
现代文：吴喜在孝武帝时代常被任用，性格宽厚，所到之处人们都很怀念他。
English: Wu Xi was often appointed in the era of Emperor Xiaowu. He had a generous personality, and people missed him everywhere he went.

古文：及东讨，百姓闻吴河东来，便望风降散，故喜所至克捷。
现代文：及至东讨，百姓听说吴河东来了，便望风归降或逃散，因此吴喜所到的地方都打了胜仗。
English: As far as the eastward march, when the people heard that the eastward flow of the Wu River was coming, they hoped that the wind would retreat or disperse. Therefore, wherever Wu Xi went, he won the battle.

古文：迁步兵校尉，封竟陵县侯。
现代文：升迁为步兵校尉，封为竟陵县侯。
English: He was promoted to the rank of infantry captain, and given the title of the Marquis of Jingling County.

古文：东土平定，又率所领南讨，迁寻阳太守。
现代文：东部平定，他又率领部队南讨，调任寻阳太守。
English: The eastern part was pacified, and he led the troops to the south and was transferred to the position of Hoyang Taishu.

古文：泰始四年，改封东兴县侯，除右军将军、淮阳太守，兼太子左卫率。
现代文：泰始四年，改封为东兴县侯，任命为右军将军、淮阳太守，兼太子左卫率。
English: In the fourth year of Taizhi, he was given the title of Dongxing County marquis, appointed as the right army general, the governor of Huaiyang, and the leader of Prince Zuowei.

古文：五年，转骁骑将军，太守、兼率如故。
现代文：五年，转为骁骑将军，太守、兼率职务依旧。
English: Five years later, he was transferred to the post of Shunkei Shogun (general of cavalry), but he still held the posts of Taishu (governor-general) and concurrent leader.

古文：其年，大破魏军于荆亭。
现代文：这一年，在荆亭大破魏军。
English: This year, the Wei army was defeated in Jing Ting.

古文：六年，又率军向豫州拒魏军，加都督豫州诸军事。
现代文：六年，又率领军队向豫州抵御魏军，加都督豫州诸军事。
English: In the sixth year, he also led the army to Yuzhou to resist the Wei army, and became the military governor of Yuzhou.

古文：明年还建邺。
现代文：第二年返回建邺。
English: He returned to Jianye the following year.

古文：初，喜东征，白明帝得寻阳王子房及诸贼帅即于东枭斩。
现代文：起初，吴喜东征，告诉明帝如果抓到了寻阳王刘子房和各个贼帅，就在东部斩首。
English: At first, Wu Xi marched eastward, telling the Ming Emperor that if he caught the Sun King Liu Zifang and the various thieves, he would be beheaded in the east.

古文：东土既平，喜见南贼方炽，虑后翻覆受祸，乃生送子房还都。
现代文：东部平定以后，吴喜见南贼正凶，担心以后翻覆受祸，便把刘子房活着送回都城。
English: After the eastern part was pacified, Wu Xi saw that the southern bandits were vicious and feared that they would be overthrown in the future, so he sent Liu Zifang back to the capital alive.

古文：凡诸大主帅顾琛、王昙生之徒皆被全活。
现代文：其他几个主帅顾琛、王昙生等人都被保全了性命。
English: Several other coaches, including Gu Jun and Wang Xinsheng, were spared their lives.

古文：上以喜新立大功，不问而心衔之。
现代文：皇上因为吴喜刚立了大功，没有过问，而心里却挂念着。
English: The emperor did not question Wu Xigang's great achievements, but he was concerned about him.

古文：及平荆州，恣意剽虏，赃私万计。
现代文：等平定了荆州，他恣意抢掠，贪赃私藏数以万计。
English: After Jingzhou was pacified, he looted and plundered at will, stealing and hiding tens of thousands of treasures.

古文：又尝对客言汉高、魏武本是何人。
现代文：又曾经对客人说汉高祖、魏武帝原本是什么人。
English: He also once told a guest who Emperor Gaozu and Emperor Wu of Wei were originally.

古文：上闻之益不悦。
现代文：皇上听了十分不高兴。
English: The Emperor was very unhappy to hear this.

古文：后寿寂之死，喜内惧，因乞中散大夫。
现代文：后来寿寂之死了，吴喜心里很恐惧，于是乞求做中散大夫。
English: After Shoujia's death, Wu Xi was very scared, so he begged to be a Zhongshan doctor.

古文：上尤疑之。
现代文：皇上尤其怀疑他。
English: The Emperor was particularly suspicious of him.

古文：及上有疾，爲身后之虑，疑其将来不能事幼主，乃赐死。
现代文：等皇上有了病，为身后的事情打算，怀疑他将来不能侍奉幼主，于是便赐他自杀。
English: When the emperor fell ill, he planned for the future and suspected that he would not be able to serve his young master in the future, so he ordered him to commit suicide.

古文：上召入内殿，与言谑酬接甚款，赐以名馔并金银御器。
现代文：皇上把他召入内殿，和他开玩笑，谈话很融洽，赐给他名食和皇帝用的金银器具。
English: The emperor called him into the inner hall, joked with him, the conversation was very harmonious, and gave him famous food and gold and silver utensils for the emperor.

古文：敕将命者勿使食器宿喜家。
现代文：而又指示执行命令的人不要让食器在吴喜家里过夜。
English: He also instructed the person who carried out the order not to let the dishes stay overnight in Wu Xi's home.

古文：上素多忌讳，不欲令食器停凶祸之室故也。
现代文：皇上平素多忌讳，不想让食器停放在凶祸房中，所以才这样安排。
English: The emperor is usually a bit of a taboo-breaker, and he didn't want the tableware to be placed in the evil room, which is why he arranged it this way.

古文：及喜死，发诏赙赠，子徽人袭。
现代文：等吴喜死了以后，发诏令赠予财物办理丧事，儿子吴徽人承袭了他的爵位。
English: After Wu Xi's death, a decree was issued to donate property for the funeral, and his son Wu Huiren inherited his title.

