古文：子夏问于孔子曰： 居父母之仇如之何？ 
现代文：子夏问孔子说： 应该如何对待杀害父母的仇人？ 
English: Zixia asked Confucius, "How should I treat the enemy who killed my parents?"

古文：孔子曰： 寝苫枕干，不仕弗与共天下也。
现代文：孔子说： 睡在草垫上，枕着盾牌，不做官，和仇人不共戴天。
English: Confucius said: "Sleep on a straw mat, with a shield on your pillow, do not be an official, and do not share the sky with your enemy."

古文：遇于朝市，不返兵而斗。 
现代文：不论在集市或官府，遇见他就和他决斗，兵器常带在身，不必返家去取。 
English: Whether at the bazaar or the government office, if you meet him, you have to fight him. You always have your weapon with you, so you don't have to go back home to get it.

古文：曰： 请问居昆弟之仇如之何？ 
现代文：子夏又问： 请问应该如何对待杀害亲兄弟的仇人？ 
English: Zixia also asked: What should we do with the enemies who kill our brothers and sisters?

古文：孔子曰： 仕，弗与同国，衔君命而使，虽遇之不斗。 
现代文：孔子说： 不和他在同一个国家里做官，如奉君命出使，即使相遇也不和他决斗。 
English: Confucius said: If you do not hold an official position in the same country as him, if you are sent by the emperor, even if you meet him, do not fight with him.

古文：曰： 请问从昆弟之仇如之何？ 
现代文：子夏又问： 请问应该如何对待杀害叔伯兄弟的仇人？ 
English: Zixia also asked: How should I treat the enemy who killed my uncle and brother?

古文：曰： 不为魁，主人能报之，则执兵而陪其后。 
现代文：孔子说： 自己不要带头动手，如果受害人的亲属为他报仇，你可以拿着兵器陪在后面协助。 
English: Confucius said: Don't take the lead yourself. If the victim's relatives take revenge for him, you can accompany them with weapons to help.

古文：孔子适卫，遇旧馆人之丧，入而哭之哀。
现代文：孔子到卫国去，遇到曾经住过的馆舍的主人死了，孔子进去吊丧，哭得很伤心。
English: When Confucius went to the old imperial capital, he found that the owner of the guesthouse where he had once lived had died. Confucius went inside to mourn and wept bitterly.

古文：出使子贡脱骖以赠之。
现代文：出来以后，让子贡解下驾车的骖马送给丧家。
English: After coming out, let Zigong dismount the driving horse and give it to the bereaved family.

古文：子贡曰： 所于识之丧，不能有所赠，赠于旧馆，不已多乎？ 
现代文：子贡说： 对于仅仅相识的人的丧事，不用赠送什么礼物。把马赠给旧馆舍的主人，这礼物是不是太重了？ 
English: Zigong said, "For the funeral of someone you just met, you don't need to give a gift. Is it too heavy to give a horse to the owner of the old mansion?"

古文：孔子曰： 吾向入哭之，遇一哀而出涕，吾恶夫涕而无以将之，小子行焉。 
现代文：孔子说： 我刚才进去哭他，正好一悲痛就落下泪来，我不愿光哭而没有表示，你就按我说的做吧。 
English: Confucius said, "I just went in to cry for him, and tears fell as soon as I felt sad. I don't want to cry without expressing myself, just do as I say."

古文：季平子卒，将以君之玙璠敛，赠以珠玉。
现代文：季平子去世以后，将要用国君用的美玉玙璠来殉葬，同时还要用很多珠宝玉石。
English: After the death of Ji Ping Zi, she will be buried with the beautiful jade urn used by the sovereign, and also with a lot of jewelry jade.

古文：孔子初为中都宰，闻之历级而救焉，曰： 送而以宝玉，是犹曝尸于中原也，其示民以奸利之端，而有害于死者，安用之。
现代文：这时孔子刚刚当上中都宰，听说后，登上台阶赶去制止。他说： 送葬时用宝玉殉葬，这如同把尸体暴露在野外一样。这样做会引发民众获取奸利的念头，对死者是有害的，怎能用呢？
English: At this time, Confucius had just been appointed as the head of the Central Government. When he heard of this, he rushed up the steps to stop it. He said, "Using precious gems for funerals is like exposing a corpse to the open air. Doing so will arouse the people's desire to gain profits. It is harmful to the dead. How can it be used?"

古文：且孝子不顺情以危亲，忠臣不兆奸以陷君。 
现代文：况且孝子不因为顾及自己的感情而危害亲人，忠臣不能给邪恶的人造成机会来陷害国君。 
English: Moreover, a filial son does not harm his relatives out of consideration for his own feelings, and a loyal subject cannot create an opportunity for an evil person to frame the sovereign.

古文：乃止。
现代文：于是停止了用玙璠珠玉陪葬。
English: He dismissed the idea.

古文：子路与子羔仕于卫，卫有蒯聩之难。
现代文：子路和子羔同时在卫国做官，卫国的蒯聩发动了叛乱。
English: At the same time, Zilu and Zilang were both officials in the Great Patriotic War, and the cormorants of the Great Patriotic War launched a rebellion.

古文：孔子在鲁，闻之曰： 柴也其来，由也死矣。 
现代文：孔子在鲁国听到这件事，说： 高柴会回来，仲由会死于这次叛乱啊！ 
English: When Confucius heard about this in the State of Lu, he said, "Gao Chai will come back, and Zhong Yu will die in this rebellion!"

古文：既而卫使至，曰： 子路死焉。 夫子哭之于中庭，有人吊者，而夫子拜之，已哭，进使者而问故，使者曰： 醢之矣。 
现代文：孔子在正室厅堂哭起来。有人来慰问，孔子拜谢。哭过之后，让使者进来问子路死的情况。使者说： 已经被砍成肉酱了。 
English: Confucius began to cry in the hall of the main room. Someone came to offer condolences, and Confucius thanked them. After crying, he asked the messenger to come in and inquire about the circumstances of Zilu's death. The messenger said, "He has been chopped into meat sauce."

古文：遂令左右皆覆醢，曰： 吾何忍食此。 
现代文：孔子让身边的人把肉酱都倒掉，说： 我怎忍心吃这种东西呢？ 
English: Confucius asked the people around him to throw away the meat sauce and said, "How can I bear to eat such a thing?

古文：孔子之弟子琴张与宗鲁友。
现代文：孔子的弟子琴张和宗鲁是朋友。
English: Confucius' disciple Qin Zhang and Zonglu are friends.

古文：卫齐豹见宗鲁于公子孟絷，孟絷以为参乘焉，及齐豹将杀孟絷，告宗鲁，使行。
现代文：卫国的齐豹把宗鲁推荐给公子孟絷，孟絷让他做了参乘。齐豹将要杀孟絷时，告诉了宗鲁，让宗鲁先走。
English: Qipao, the defender of the country, recommended Zonglu to his son Meng Yao, and Meng Yao let him participate. When Qipao was about to kill Meng Yao, he told Zonglu to go first.

古文：宗鲁曰： 吾由子而事之，今闻难而逃，是僭子也。
现代文：宗鲁说： 由于您的锥荐，我侍奉了孟絷，现在听到他有难而逃走，这使您的话没有信用。
English: Zonglu said, "Because of your recommendation, I served Meng Yao, and now I hear that he is in trouble and has fled, which makes your words not credible.

古文：行事乎，吾将死以事周子，而归死于公孟可也。 
现代文：做你的事吧，我打算以死来保守您的秘密，回去再为孟絷而死，可以吧。 
English: Do your thing. I'm going to die to keep your secret. Go back and die for Meng Xuan, okay?

古文：齐氏用戈击公孟，宗以背蔽之，断肱中，公孟、宗鲁皆死。
现代文：齐氏用戈敲击公孟，宗鲁用背部来遮蔽他，折断了胳膊，戈击中公孟，孟絷和宗鲁都死了。
English: Qi struck Meng Meng with a club, Zonglu covered him with his back and broke his arm. The club hit Meng Meng, and both Meng Yao and Zonglu died.

古文：琴张闻宗鲁死，将往吊之。
现代文：琴张听到宗鲁死了，打算前去吊唁。
English: When Qin Zhang heard that Zonglu had died, he planned to go to pay his respects.

古文：孔子曰： 齐豹之盗，孟絷之贼也，汝何吊焉？
现代文：孔子说： 齐豹所以成为坏人，孟絷所以被杀害，你为什么还去吊唁呢？
English: Confucius said, "This is why Qi Bao became a villain, and why Meng Yao was killed. Why do you still go to offer condolences?

古文：君不食奸，不受乱，不为利病于回⑤，不以回事人，不盖非义，盖⑥揜不犯非礼，汝何吊焉？ 
现代文：君子不食坏人的俸禄，不接受动乱，不为利益而容忍邪恶，不用邪恶的方法待人，不掩盖不义的事，不做出非礼的行为。
English: A gentleman does not eat the salary of a bad person, does not accept turmoil, does not tolerate evil for profit, does not treat people in an evil way, does not cover up injustice, and does not commit indecent acts.

