古文：刘鄩，密州安丘县人也。
现代文：刘鄩，密州安丘县人。
English: Liu Wei, a native of Anqiu County, Mizhou.

古文：祖绶，密州户掾，累赠左散骑常侍。
现代文：祖父刘绶，任密州户掾，追赠为左散骑常侍。
English: Liu Yao's grandfather, who served as the head of the Miizhou household, was posthumously awarded the title of "Left-Handed Cavalryman."

古文：父融，安丘令，累赠工部尚书。
现代文：父亲刘融，任安丘县令，追赠为工部尚书。
English: His father, Liu Rong, served as the Anqiu County magistrate, and was posthumously awarded the title of Minister of Industry.

古文：鄩幼有大志，好兵略，涉猎史传。
现代文：刘鄩年幼时心有大志，爱好用兵谋略，涉猎史籍书传。
English: When Liu Wei was young, he had a great ambition, liked to use military strategy, and dabbled in historical books.

古文：唐中和中，事青州节度使王敬武为小校。
现代文：唐中和年间，跟随青州节度使王敬武任小校。
English: In the middle and middle of the Tang Dynasty, Wang Jingwu was appointed to a small school following the Qingzhou Festival.

古文：敬武卒，三军推其子师范为留后，朝廷命崔安潜镇青州，州人拒命。
现代文：王敬武去世后，青州三军推举他的儿子王师范为青州留后，朝廷命令崔安潜镇守青州，青州人抗拒朝廷的任命。
English: After the death of Wang Jingwu, the three armies of Qingzhou elected his son Wang Shifan to stay in Qingzhou. The imperial court ordered Cui An to stay in Qingzhou. The people of Qingzhou resisted the appointment of the imperial court.

古文：棣州刺史张蟾将袭师范，师范遣都指挥使卢宏攻棣州，宏反与蟾通，伪旋军以袭师范。
现代文：棣州刺史张蟾准备攻袭王师范，王师范派都指挥使卢弘进攻棣州，卢弘反而与张蟾勾通，假装凯旋回师以袭击王师范。
English: Zhang Ye, the governor of Zhangzhou, was preparing to attack Wang Shifan. Wang Shifan's faction ordered Lu Hong to attack Zhangzhou, but Lu Hong colluded with Zhang Ye to attack Wang Shifan by pretending to be a victorious returning officer.

古文：师范知之，设伏兵以迎宏，既而享之，先诫鄩曰： 宏至即斩之。 
现代文：王师范知道这回事，埋伏士兵迎接卢弘，接着设宴招待他，预先告诫刘鄩说： 卢弘一来就杀死他。 
English: Wang Shifan knew about this. The soldiers ambushed Lu Hong to welcome him, then set up a banquet to invite him. He warned Liu Bei in advance, saying, "If Lu Hong comes, kill him."

古文：鄩如约，斩宏于座上，同乱者皆诛之。
现代文：刘鄩按照约定，在酒席上杀死卢弘，与他一同作乱的人都被诛杀了。
English: According to the agreement, Liu Yao killed Lu Hong at the banquet, and all the people who made trouble with him were beaten to death.

古文：师范以鄩为马步军副都指挥使，攻下棣州，杀张蟾，朝廷因授师范平卢军节度使。
现代文：王师范任刘鄩为马军步军副总指挥使，攻下棣州，杀死张蟾，朝廷便授王师范为平卢军节度使。
English: Wang Shifan appointed Liu Wei as the deputy commander-in-chief of the infantry of the horse army, captured Zhangzhou, killed Zhang Wei, and the court awarded Wang Shifan as the commander-in-chief of the Pinglu army.

古文：光化初，师范表鄩为登州刺史。岁余，移刺淄州，署行军司马。
现代文：光化初年，王师范上表推荐刘鄩任登州刺史，一年多后，改任淄州刺史，暂任行军司马。
English: In the first year of the Gwanghwa era, Wang Shifan recommended Liu Xuan to be the governor of Gwanghwa Province, and more than a year later, he was appointed governor of Gwanghwa Province, temporarily acting as the military commander.

古文：天复元年，昭宗幸凤翔，太祖率四镇之师奉迎于岐下。
现代文：天复元年，唐昭宗被迫移驾凤翔，梁太祖率领四镇的军队到岐下奉迎昭宗回到长安。
English: In the first year of Tianfu, Tang Zhaozong was forced to move to Fengxiang, and Liang Taizu led the four-town army to Qishie to welcome Zhaozong back to Chang'an.

古文：李茂贞与内官韩全诲矫诏征天下兵入援，师范览诏，慷慨泣下，遣心腹乘虚袭取太祖管内州郡。
现代文：李茂贞与宦官韩全诲假托昭宗诏令征聚天下兵马到凤翔攻打太祖、援救昭宗，王师范看罢诏令，慷慨哭泣流泪，派遣部下心腹乘虚袭取大梁辖区内的州郡。
English: Li Maozhen and eunuch Han Quanzhong falsely relied on Zhaozong's edict to gather the world's soldiers and horses to Fengxiang to attack Taizu and rescue Zhaozong. Wang Shifan read the edict, wept generously and shed tears, and dispatched his subordinates to take advantage of the false attack to capture the states and counties in Dalian's jurisdiction.

古文：《金华子》云：鄩入据子城，甲兵精锐，城内人皆束手，莫敢旅拒。
现代文：原定所在地方同一天暗自发兵，但事情大多泄露，只有刘鄩率领偏师攻陷了兖州城，于是占据了兖州。开始，刘鄩派细作装扮成卖油的人，侦察兖州城内虚实以及进入的道路，看到外城下面有一水洞可以带着部队进城，就记住这个地方。
English: The soldiers were secretly dispatched on the same day to the place where they were supposed to be, but most of the events were leaked. Only Liu Ye led the division to capture Zhangzhou City, and then occupied Zhangzhou. At the beginning, Liu Ye sent people carefully dressed as oil sellers to reconnoiter the inside and outside of Zhangzhou City as well as the entrance road. When they saw a water cave under the outer city that could bring troops into the city, they remembered this place.

古文：加以州将悍，人情不附，鄩因而抚治，民皆安堵。
现代文：刘鄩于是告诉王师范，请得五百名步兵。半夜从水洞偷偷进城，一个晚上就平定了兖州城，军队和城镇都平安，市民不受惊扰。
English: Liu Bei then told Wang Shifan that he had invited five hundred infantrymen to sneak into the city from the water hole in the middle of the night, and they had leveled Zhangzhou City in one night. The army and the town were safe, and the citizens were not disturbed.

古文：太祖命大将葛从周攻之。
现代文：梁太祖命令大将葛从周攻打刘鄩。
English: Liang Taizu ordered General Ge Zhou to attack Liu Bei.

古文：时从周为节度使，领兵在外，州城为鄩所据，家属悉在城中。
现代文：当时葛从周任节度使，领兵在外，州城被刘鄩占据，家属全在城中。
English: At that time, Ge was away from Zhou as the commander of the festival and the leader of the troops, the state capital was occupied by Liu Bei, and his family members were all in the city.

古文：鄩善抚其家，移就外第，供给有礼，升堂拜从周之母。
现代文：刘鄩好生地安抚他的家属，搬往外面的住宅，供给衣食，恭敬有礼，上堂拜见葛从周的母亲。
English: Liu Yan tried his best to appease his family members, moved out of the house, provided food and clothing, and respectfully went to the court to meet Ge Cong Zhou's mother.

古文：及从周攻城，鄩以板舆请母登城，母告从周曰： 刘将军待我甚至，不异于兒，新妇已下，并不失所。
现代文：到葛从周进攻州城时，刘鄩用轿子抬着葛从周的母亲登上城墙，葛母告诉他儿子葛从周说： 刘将军待我非常周到，跟自己儿子没有两样，从媳妇以下，都不失身份地位。
English: When Ge Zhou attacked the state capital, Liu Yao used a palanquin to carry Ge Zhou's mother up to the city wall. Ge's mother told her son Ge Zhou: "General Liu treated me very considerately. He was no different from his own son. From his daughter-in-law down, they all lost their status.

古文：刘将军与尔各为其主，尔其察之。 
现代文：刘将军与你各为自己的主人卖命，你要体谅他。 
English: General Liu and you are each working for your own master. You should be considerate of him.

古文：从周歔欷而退。
现代文：葛从周感叹欷虚欠而退。
English: Ge Zhou sighed and retreated.

古文：鄩料简城中老疾及妇人浮食百姓不足与守者，悉出之于外，与将士同甘苦，分衣食，以抗外军，戢兵禁暴，居人泰然。
现代文：刘鄩挑出城中老弱病残以及妇女等消耗粮食而不能守城的百姓，全部放出城外，自己与将士们同甘共苦，分衣推食，以抗拒城外军队，约束部下，严禁暴虐，居民泰然平安。
English: Liu Bei picked out the old, the weak, the sick, and the women in the city who consumed grain and could not defend the city, and all of them were sent out of the city. He and his soldiers shared the joys and sorrows, distributed clothes and food, resisted the troops outside the city, restrained his subordinates, strictly prohibited tyranny, and the residents were calm and safe.

古文：从周攻围既久，鄩无外援，人情稍有去就之意。
现代文：葛从周进攻包围已经很久，刘鄩没有外援，军心逐渐有了背弃他而投降的意向。
English: Ge had been surrounded by Zhou's attack for a long time, Liu Bei had no foreign aid, and the military gradually had the intention to abandon him and surrender.

古文：一日，节度副使王彦温逾城而奔，守陴者从之而逸，鄩之守兵禁之不可，鄩即遣人从容告彦温曰： 请副使少将人出，非素遣者请勿带行。 
现代文：一天，节度副使王彦温翻越城墙逃跑，守城士兵也跟着他逃亡，刘鄩的守军禁止不住，刘鄩就派人从容告诉王彦温说： 请副节度使少带人马出城，不是平素管辖的部众请不要带走。 
English: One day, the deputy governor Wang Yanwen climbed over the city wall to escape, and the soldiers guarding the city also fled with him. Liu Ye's defenders could not stop him, so Liu Ye sent someone to calmly tell Wang Yanwen: "Please ask the deputy governor to let a few people leave the city. Please do not take away the subordinates who are not under your usual jurisdiction."

古文：又扬言于众曰： 素遣从副使行者即勿禁，其擅去者族之。 
现代文：又对部众扬言说 ：平素跟随副节度使的人要走都不禁止，其他擅自逃走的就杀了他的全家。 
English: He also threatened his subordinates, saying, "Those who always follow the orders of the vice-governor are not forbidden to leave, but if anyone else escapes without permission, his entire family will be killed."

古文：守民闻之皆感，奔逸者乃止。
现代文：守城市民听到都感到疑惑，逃奔的人才停止。
English: When the citizens of the city heard this, they were all puzzled, and only those who had run away stopped.

古文：外军闻之，果疑彦温有奸，即戮之于城下，自是军城遂固。
现代文：城外军队听到后，果然怀疑王彦温有诈，就把他杀死在城下，从此军队城池更加牢固。
English: After hearing this, the out-of-town troops suspected Wang Yanwen of treachery and killed him at the foot of the city. From then on, the army was more firmly entrenched.

古文：及王师范兵力渐窘，从周以祸福谕鄩，俾之革面，鄩报曰： 俟青州本使归降，即以城池还纳。 
现代文：到王师范兵力逐渐衰竭，葛从周用祸福的道理晓谕刘鄩，劝他反正投降，刘鄩回报说： 等青州节度使王师范归顺投降，我就把城池献还。 
English: When Wang Shifan's forces were gradually exhausted, Ge Zhou used the principle of good and evil to tell Liu Bei to surrender anyway. Liu Bei replied, "I will give back the city when the Qingzhou Festival makes Wang Shifan surrender."

古文：天复三年十一月，师范告降，且言先差行军司马刘鄩领兵入兗州，请释其罪，亦以告鄩，鄩即出城听命。
现代文：天复三年十一月，王师范宣告投降，并说先前是他派行军司马刘鄩领兵入据兖州，请赦免他的罪过，又将情况告诉刘鄩，刘鄩才出城听从发落。
English: In November of the following year, Wang Shifan announced his surrender, and said that he had previously sent marching sergeant Liu Ye to lead the troops into Zhangzhou. Please forgive his sins, and tell Liu Ye the situation. Liu Ye only left the city to listen to the situation.

古文：太祖嘉其节概，以为有李英公之风。
现代文：梁太祖嘉奖刘鄩的节操风概，认为他有唐朝英国公李责力的节操。
English: Liang Taizu praised Liu Ye's style of self-restraint, and believed that he had the self-restraint of the Tang Dynasty British.

古文：鄩既降，从周具行装服马，请鄩归大梁。
现代文：刘鄩投降后，葛从周具办行装衣服车马，请刘鄩前往大梁。
English: After Liu Bei's surrender, Ge loaded clothes and horses from the Zhou Furniture Office and asked Liu Bei to go to Daliang.

古文：鄩曰： 未受梁王舍释之旨，乘肥衣裘，非敢闻命。 
现代文：刘鄩说： 我还没有听到梁王赦免我的命令，现在乘肥马穿皮衣，我不敢听从这样的吩咐。 
English: Liu Ye said, "I haven't yet heard the order from King Liang to pardon me. Now I'm riding a fat horse and wearing a fur coat. I don't dare to obey such an order."

古文：即素服跨驴而发。
现代文：于是穿着平常衣服，坐着驴子出发。
English: So he put on ordinary clothes and set off on a donkey.

古文：及将谒见，太祖令赐冠带，鄩曰： 累囚负罪，请就絷而入。 
现代文：到将谒见太祖时，太祖令赐给他冠服衣带，刘鄩说： 我是被关押起来的囚犯，犯有罪行，请捆起我入见。 
English: When it came time for the audience with the great-grandfather, the great-grandfather gave him a crown, robe, and belt. Liu Ye said, "I am a prisoner who has been incarcerated. I have committed a crime. Please tie me up and take me to the audience."

古文：太祖不许。
现代文：太祖不答应。
English: The great-grandfather did not agree.

古文：及见，慰抚移时，且饮之酒，鄩以量小告太祖。
现代文：到相见时，太祖慰问安抚多时，又赐刘鄩饮酒，刘鄩告诉太祖自己酒量很小。
English: At the time of the meeting, the great-grandfather consoled and appeased him for a long time, and gave Liu Ye alcohol. Liu Ye told the great-grandfather that his alcohol consumption was very small.

古文：未几，表为鄜州留后。
现代文：太祖说 ：您占取兖州时，肚量是多么大啊！ 
English: The great-grandfather said: When you occupied Zhangzhou, how big your belly was!

古文：是时，邠、岐之众，屡寇其境，鄩御捍备至，太祖以其地远，虑失鄩，即令弃郡引军屯于同州。
现代文：旋即授与他元从都押牙官职。太祖手下各位将领，都是四镇旧人，而刘鄩一旦以一羁押降将的身份，骤然居于众人之上，到与各将领相见，刘鄩都对他们施行朝廷拜揖的礼仪，太祖尤其惊异而器重他。不久，上表推荐刘鄩为州留后。
English: The generals under the great-grandfather were all old men from the four towns, but Liu Ye, once he was given the status of a retired general, suddenly stood above everyone else. When he met with the generals, Liu Ye performed the etiquette of court obeisance to them. The great-grandfather was particularly surprised and respected him. Soon, the above table recommended Liu Ye to stay behind.

古文：天祐二年二月，授右金吾卫大将军，充街使。三年正月，太祖授元帅之任，以鄩为元帅府都押牙，执金吾如故。
现代文：这时，州、岐下的部众，多次寇犯刘鄩的边界，刘鄩防备抵御十分周到，太祖因为刘鄩辖地偏远，担心失去刘鄩，就令刘鄩放弃州，领军屯驻于同州。天三年正月，太祖接受元帅的任命，以刘鄩为元帅府都押牙，仍如前任右金吾卫大将军。
English: At this time, the subordinates of the state and Qi repeatedly invaded Liu Bei's borders, and Liu Bei's defense was very thoughtful. Because Liu Bei's jurisdiction was remote and he was worried about losing Liu Bei, Taizu ordered Liu Bei to abandon the state and lead the army stationed in the same state. In the first month of the third year of the Tian, Taizu accepted the appointment of the marshal, with Liu Bei as the marshal, he was still like the former Ugu Wei general.

古文：开平元年，授右金吾上将军，充诸军马步都指挥使。
现代文：开平元年，任右金吾上将军，兼任各军马步军都指挥使。
English: In the first year of the Heian period, he was appointed to the post of General of the Right Jingu, and also served as the commanding officer of each army.

古文：其年秋，与诸将征潞州，迁检校司徒。
现代文：同年秋，与诸将征讨潞州，迁升为检校司徒。
English: In the autumn of the same year, he went to Bozhou with other generals and was promoted to the position of school inspector.

古文：三年二月，转右威卫上将军，依前诸军马步都虞候。
现代文：三年二月，转任右威卫上将军，仍依前兼任马步都虞候。
English: In February of the third year, he was transferred to the post of General of the Right Division of Inner Palace Guards, and still concurrently held the post of Governor of Ma Bu.

古文：五月，改左龙武统军，充侍卫亲军马步军都指挥使。
现代文：五月，改任左龙武统军，兼任侍卫亲军马军步军都指挥使。
English: In May, he was reassigned to the United Left Armies, and concurrently served as the commander of the guards of the pro-army horse army.

古文：其年夏，同州刘知俊反，引岐人袭据长安，分兵扼河、潼。
现代文：那年夏天，同州刘知俊反叛，引来岐人袭击并占领了长安，分兵扼守黄河、潼关。
English: That summer, Liu Zhijun of the same prefecture rebelled, leading the people of Qi to attack and occupy Chang'an, and detachments of soldiers guarded the Yellow River and Shaoguan.

古文：太祖幸陕，命鄩西讨，即奋取潼关，擒知俊弟知浣以献。遂引兵收复长安，知俊弃郡奔凤翔。
现代文：梁太祖到达陕地，命令刘鄩向西征讨，刘鄩即奋勇夺取潼关，活捉了刘知俊的弟弟刘知浣献上，接着领兵收复长安，刘知俊放弃同州逃往凤翔。
English: When Liang Taizu arrived in Shaanxi, he ordered Liu Zhen to go west to fight. Liu Zhen then bravely seized Shaoguan, captured Liu Zhijun's brother Liu Zhijun alive, and then led the troops to recover Chang'an. Liu Zhijun abandoned the same state and fled to Fengxiang.

古文：太祖以鄩为佑国、同州军两使留后。寻改佑国军为永平军，以鄩为节度使、检校司徒，行大安尹、金州管内观察使。
现代文：太祖任刘鄩为佑国、同州军两使留后，旋即改佐国军为永平军，任刘鄩为节度使、检校司徒，代理大安尹、金州管区内观察使。
English: After the great-great-grandfather appointed Liu Wei as the envoy of the Sasakuni and Tongzhou armies, he immediately changed the Sasakuni army to the Yongping army, appointed Liu Wei as the envoy of the festival, the inspector of the school, the acting Daan Yin, and the observation envoy in the Jinzhou region.

古文：是时，西鄙未宁，密迩寇境，鄩练兵抚众，独当一面。
现代文：这时，西部边陲未得安宁，切近敌寇边境，刘鄩训练士兵抚慰民众，独当一面。
English: At this time, the western borderlands had not yet been pacified and were close to the enemy's border. Liu Ye trained soldiers to comfort the people and took the lead.

古文：四年，加检校太保、同平章事。
现代文：开平四年，加封检校太保、同平章事。
English: After four years of opening and leveling, the school inspection and protection, and the same level were added.

古文：庶人友珪篡位，加检校太傅。
现代文：庶人朱友王圭篡位，加封检校太傅。
English: The commoner Zhu Yu Wang Gui usurped the throne and was given the additional title of proctor of the school.

古文：乾化三年正月，丁内艰，友珪命起复视事。
现代文：乾化三年正月，服母丧。朱友王圭命他起复任事。
English: In the first month of the third year of Qianhua, his mother passed away. Zhu Youwang Gui ordered him to resume his duties.

古文：未帝即位，尤深倚重。
现代文：梁末帝即位，更加深深倚重他。
English: The enthronement of Emperor Liang Mucai made him even more important.

古文：明年夏，诏鄩归阙，授开封尹，遥领镇南军节度使。
现代文：第二年夏天，诏令刘鄩回京，授予开封尹，遥任镇南军节度使。
English: In the summer of the following year, the emperor ordered Liu Bei to return to Beijing and appointed Kaifeng Yin as the envoy to the Southern Zhenjun Festival.

古文：旋属晋人寇河朔，鄩奉诏与魏节度使杨师厚御之而退。
现代文：旋即遇上晋人寇犯河朔，刘鄩奉诏与魏博节度使杨师厚打退了他们。
English: As soon as they encountered the invaders from Jin, Liu Bei and Wei Bo ordered Yang Shihou to repel them.

古文：九月，徐州节度使蒋殷据城叛。
现代文：九月，徐州节度使蒋殷据城反叛。
English: In September, the Xuzhou Festival made Jiang Yin rebel against the city.

古文：时朝廷以福王友璋镇徐方，殷不受代，末帝遣鄩与郓帅牛存节率兵攻之。
现代文：当时朝廷任命福王朱友璋镇守徐州，蒋殷不接受替代，末帝派刘鄩与郓州统帅牛存节领兵攻打他。
English: At that time, the imperial court appointed Fu Wang Zhu Youjun to defend Xuzhou, Jiang Yin did not accept the replacement, and the last emperor sent Liu Wei and the commander of Zhangzhou, Niu Cunjie, to lead the troops to attack him.

古文：殷求援于淮夷，伪吴杨溥遣大将硃瑾领众赴援，鄩逆击破之。
现代文：蒋殷向淮南吴国求援，伪吴国君主杨溥派大将朱瑾带领部众奔赴支援，刘鄩迎击打败了他。
English: Jiang Yin appealed to Huainan and Wuzhou for help, the pseudo-Wuzhou monarch Yang Di sent General Zhu Xi to lead the troops to support him, but Liu Bei defeated him.

古文：贞明元年春，城陷，殷举族自燔，于火中得其尸，枭首以献，诏加检校太尉。
现代文：贞明元年春天，徐州城被刘鄩攻陷，蒋殷全家自焚，从火中找到他的尸首，割下脑袋献给朝廷，诏令加封刘鄩为检校太尉。
English: In the spring of the first year of the Zhenming Dynasty, Xuzhou City was invaded by Liu Bei, Jiang Yin's whole family set themselves on fire, found his corpse from the fire, cut off his head and dedicated it to the imperial court, and ordered Liu Bei to be promoted to the rank of inspector.

古文：三月，魏杨师厚卒，朝廷分相、魏为两镇，遣鄩率大军屯南乐，以讨王镕为名。
现代文：三月，魏博节度使杨师厚去世，朝廷分相、魏为两镇，派刘鄩率领大军屯驻南乐，以征讨王为名。
English: In March, the Wei Bo Festival caused the death of Yang Shihou, and the imperial court divided Wei into two towns and sent Liu Bei to lead a large army to settle in Nanle, in the name of conquering the king.

古文：既而魏军果乱，囚节度使贺德伦，送款于太原。
现代文：不久魏军果然叛乱，囚禁节度使贺德伦送与太原晋人以交好。
English: Soon after, the Wei army did indeed rebel, and the imprisonment of Xi Du caused He Delun to make friends with the Taiyuan Jin.

古文：六月，晋王入魏州，鄩以精兵万人自洹水移军魏县，晋王来觇，鄩设伏于河曲丛木间，俟晋王至，大噪而进，围之数匝，杀获甚众，晋王仅以身免。
现代文：六月，晋王进入魏州，刘鄩率领精兵一万人从洹水移军魏县，晋王前来侦察，刘鄩在河道拐弯的丛林间埋伏士兵，等晋王一到，大声呐喊向前，包围了几层，杀伤和俘获了很多人，晋王仅得以只身逃脱。
English: In June, Jin Wang entered Weizhou. Liu Bei led ten thousand elite soldiers from Surabaya to Wei County. Jin Wang came to investigate. Liu Bei ambushed the soldiers in the jungle around the bend of the river. When Jin Wang arrived, he shouted loudly and surrounded several floors, killing and capturing many people. Jin Wang was only able to escape alone.

古文：是月，鄩潜师由黄泽西趋太原，将行，虑为晋军所追，乃结刍为人，缚旗于上，以驴负之，循堞而行，数日，晋人方觉。
现代文：同月，刘鄩偷偷率领部队由黄泽向西奔袭太原，将要出发时，担心被晋军追击，于是扎茅草为人，将旗帜缚在茅草人身上，用驴子载着茅草人，顺着矮城墙行走，几天后，晋人才发觉。
English: In the same month, Liu Bei secretly led the troops from Huangze to the west to attack Taiyuan. When they were about to leave, they were worried about being chased by the Jin army, so they tied the thatch to a man, tied the flag to the thatch man, carried the thatch man with a donkey, and walked along the low city wall. A few days later, the Jin people found out.

古文：军至乐平，会霖雨积旬，师不克进，鄩即整众而旋。
现代文：刘鄩部队开到乐平，遇上数十天大雨，部队不能前进，刘鄩只好整顿部队而回。
English: Liu Bei's troops drove to Leping and encountered dozens of days of heavy rain. The troops could not advance, so Liu Bei had to reorganize the troops and return.

古文：魏之临清，积粟之所，鄩引军将据之，遇晋将周阳五自幽州率兵至，鄩乃取贝州，与晋军遇于堂邑，鄩邀击却之，追北五十余里，遂军于莘县。
现代文：魏州的临清，是储积粮食的地方，刘鄩带领军队准备攻占它，遇上晋军将领周阳五从幽州领兵来到，刘鄩于是占领贝州，与晋军在堂邑相遇，刘鄩拦截打退了周阳五部队，追击败军五十多里，于是在莘县驻军。
English: Linqing in Weizhou is a place where grain is stored. Liu Bei led the army to prepare to capture it. He met the Jin general Zhou Yangwu who came from Yuzhou to lead the army. Liu Bei then occupied Beizhou and met the Jin army in Tongyi. Liu Bei intercepted and repulsed Zhou Yangwu's army and chased the defeated army for more than fifty miles, and then garrisoned the army in Yuxian.

古文：增城垒，浚池隍，自莘及河，筑甬道以通饷路。
现代文：增修城墙，疏浚城池，从莘县到黄河，筑起甬道以运输粮饷。
English: Additional city walls were built, the city pond was dredged, and a causeway was built to transport grain and straw from Min County to the Yellow River.

古文：八月，末帝赐鄩诏曰： 阃外之事，全付将军。
现代文：八月，梁末帝赐给刘鄩诏书说： 朝廷以外之事，全托付给将军。
English: In August, Emperor Liangmu issued an edict to Liu Bei, saying, "In matters other than the imperial court, entrust everything to the generals."

古文：河朔诸州，一旦沦没，劳师弊旅，患难日滋，退保河需，久无斗志。
现代文：河朔各州，一旦而被沦陷，师旅疲劳委顿，患难天天滋生，退守黄河，久无斗志。
English: As soon as the states of Hebei and Shandong were invaded, the division and brigade were exhausted, the hardships multiplied day by day, and they retreated to the Yellow River without any fighting spirit for a long time.

古文：昨东面诸侯，奏章来上，皆言仓储已竭，飞挽不充，于役之人，每遭擒掳，夙宵轸念，惕惧盈怀。
现代文：昨日东边诸侯送上奏章，都说仓库府藏已竭，飞车运输也供不应求，服役之人，常遭俘获，我日夜操心，忧虑满怀。
English: Yesterday, the lords of the eastern provinces sent a report, saying that the warehouse of the government had been exhausted, the rapid transport was also in short supply, and the servicemen were often captured. I was worried day and night, full of worries.

古文：将军与国同休，当思良画，如闻寇敌兵数不多，宜设机权，以时翦扑，则予之负荷，无累先人。 
现代文：将军与国家同命运，当考虑良策，如果打听到敌兵数量不多，就应筹划机谋，及时扑灭，那么我也就不至于辱没先人。 
English: The general and the country share the same fate. When considering a good strategy, if the number of enemy soldiers is small, it is necessary to plan a strategy and extinguish it in time. Then I will not humiliate my predecessors.

古文：鄩奏曰： 臣受国深恩，忝兹阃政，敢不枕戈假寐，罄节输忠。
现代文：刘鄩上奏说： 臣蒙受国家深恩，忝掌朝廷大政，岂敢不枕戈待旦，尽节效忠。
English: Liu Xuan Shangsoo said: "As a vassal who has been deeply favored by the state and has been entrusted with the great power of the imperial court, how dare you not wait for death and be loyal to the end?

古文：昨者，比欲西取太原，断其归路，然后东收镇、冀，解彼连鸡，止于旬时，再清河朔。
现代文：前日正要向西夺取太原，切断晋军归路，然后向东收取镇、冀两州，解除他们彼此策应之势，只在十天半月之间，就能再度澄清河朔。
English: On the previous day, they were about to seize Taiyuan in the west, cutting off the Jin army's return route, and then take the town and Hebei two states in the east, releasing them from their mutual countermeasures. Only in ten and a half days will they be able to clarify Hexuo again.

古文：岂期天方稔乱，国难未平，才出师徒，积旬霖潦，资粮殚竭，军士札瘥，切虑苍黄，乖于统摄，乃询部伍，皆欲旋归。
现代文：哪想到上天正促成战乱，国难尚未平定，才出兵，就遇上数十天大雨，军资粮食竭尽，兵士死伤。痛感苍天，不与我同谋，于是征询士兵，都想回师。
English: Who would have thought that the heavens were promoting war, that the national calamity had not yet been pacified, and that it was only after the troops were sent out that there were dozens of days of heavy rain, that military resources and food were exhausted, and that soldiers were killed and wounded. I felt painfully that the heavens were not my accomplice, so I consulted the soldiers, and they all wanted to return to the division.

古文：凡次舍经行，每张犄角，又欲绝其饷道，且据临清。
现代文：凡驻扎行军，常张掎角之势，我又想切断晋军粮道，准备占领临清。
English: Whenever troops were stationed and marching, the situation was often tense. I also wanted to cut off the Jin army's food supply and prepare to occupy Linqing.

古文：才及宗城，周阳五奄至，骑军驰突，变化如神。
现代文：才到宗城，周阳五突然来到，骑军驰突，变化如神。
English: Just arrived at the ancestral city, Zhou Yang Wu suddenly came, the cavalry galloped, the change was like a god.

古文：臣遂领大军，保于莘县。深沟高垒，享士训兵，日夜戒严，伺其进取。侦视营垒，兵数极多。楼烦之人，皆能骑射，最为勍敌，未可轻谋。
现代文：臣于是率领大军，固守莘县，深沟高垒，犒劳训练士兵，日夜戒严，伺机进取，侦察敌军营垒，兵数极多，楼烦人都能骑马射箭，是非常厉害的劲敌，未可轻易图谋。
English: The minister then led a large army, adhering to the county of Zou, deep ditch high bastion, hard work training soldiers, day and night martial law, waiting for the opportunity to advance, reconnaissance of the enemy camp, the number of soldiers is extremely large, the building bothersome people can ride horses and shoot arrows, is a very powerful rival, not easy to conspire.

古文：臣若苟得机宜，焉敢坐滋患难。
现代文：臣若能找到机会，怎敢坐视国家患难？
English: How dare ministers sit back and watch the country suffer, if they can find the opportunity?

古文：臣心体国，天鉴具明。 
现代文：臣心体察国家，明鉴于天。 
English: The vassal mind observes the country, and clearly sees the future.

古文：末帝又遣使问鄩决胜之策，鄩曰： 臣无奇术，但人给粮十斛，尽则破敌。 
现代文：末帝又派使者询问刘鄩决胜的策略，刘鄩说 ：臣无奇术，只要每人供给十斛粮食，就能全部攻破敌人。 
English: The last emperor also sent an envoy to inquire about Liu Bei's strategy for winning the decisive battle. Liu Bei said, "There is no magic trick. As long as each person supplies ten bags of grain, they can all defeat the enemy."

古文：末帝大怒，让鄩曰： 将军蓄米，将疗饥耶？
现代文：末帝大怒，责备刘鄩说 ：将军积蓄粮食，是为了吃饱肚子呢，还是要打败敌人呢？ 
English: The last emperor was furious and scolded Liu Bei, saying, "Did the general stockpile grain to fill his stomach or to defeat the enemy?"

古文：将破贼耶？ 
现代文：于是派朝中使者前来督战。
English: As a result, he sent an envoy from Korea and China to supervise the battle.

古文：乃遣中使督战。鄩集诸校而谋曰： 主上深居宫禁，未晓兵机，与白面兒共谋，终败人事。
现代文：刘鄩召集各位将校商议说： 主上深居宫禁之中，不懂用兵谋略，与白面书生共谋，终将坏我大事。
English: Liu Ye called together the officers and men of the school for discussion and said, "Our lord is under house arrest. He does not know how to use military strategy. If he conspires with white-faced scholars, he will eventually ruin our great cause."

古文：大将出征，君命有所不受，临机制变，安可预谋。
现代文：大将出征，君主的命令可以不接受，随机应变，岂可预先谋划？
English: Generals go to war, the monarch's orders may or may not be accepted, random contingency, is it possible to plan in advance?

古文：今揣敌人，未可轻动，诸君更筹之。 
现代文：现揣摩敌情，不可轻举妄动，请诸君另外筹划计谋。 
English: You should not act rashly, considering the current hostile situation. I ask you all to make other plans.

古文：时诸将皆欲战，鄩默然。
现代文：这时诸将都想出战，刘鄩默然不语。
English: At this time, all generals wanted to go to war, but Liu Ye remained silent.

古文：他日，复召诸将列坐军门，人具河水一器，因命饮之，众未测其旨，或饮或辞。
现代文：另一天，刘鄩又召集众将排坐在军门，每人准备一罐黄河水，命他们喝下，众人不理解他的意思，有的喝了，有的不喝。
English: On another day, Liu Ye again gathered the generals to sit in a row at the military gate. Each of them prepared a can of Yellow River water and ordered them to drink it. The people did not understand his meaning. Some drank it and some did not.

古文：鄩曰： 一器而难若是，滔滔河流，可胜既乎！ 
现代文：刘鄩说 ：一罐水尚且如此为难，滔滔黄河，哪能喝得完？ 
English: Liu Wei said: A can of water is still so difficult, the Yellow River is so vast, how can you drink it all?

古文：众皆失色。
现代文：众将都为之失色。
English: The generals have all been discredited.

古文：居数日，鄩率万余人薄镇、定之营。时鄩军奄至，上下腾乱，杀获甚众。
现代文：不几天，刘鄩率领一万多人逼近镇州、定州敌营，当时刘鄩军队突然扑来，敌人上下奔突混乱，被杀死俘获很多。
English: Within a few days, Liu Bei led more than ten thousand people to approach the enemy camps in Zhenzhou and Dingzhou. At that time, Liu Bei's army suddenly attacked, the enemy rushed up and down in confusion, and many were killed and captured.

古文：少顷，晋军继至，乃退。
现代文：不久，晋人援军相继来到，刘鄩才领兵撤退。
English: Soon, Jin reinforcements arrived one after another, and Liu Bei led the troops to retreat.

古文：二年三月，鄩自莘引军袭魏州，与晋王战于故元城，王师败绩，鄩脱身南奔，自黎阳济河至滑州。
现代文：贞明二年三月，刘鄩从莘县带领部队袭击魏州，与晋王在故元城交战，战败，刘鄩脱身南奔，从黎阳渡过黄河到达滑州。
English: In March of the second year of Zhenming, Liu Bei led the troops from Lu County to attack Weizhou, fought with Jin Wang in the former Yuancheng, and was defeated. Liu Bei escaped to the south and crossed the Yellow River from Liyang to Slanting.

古文：寻授滑州节度使，诏屯黎阳。
现代文：旋即被授为滑州节度使，诏令驻守黎阳。
English: He was immediately appointed as the festival envoy of Slum, and ordered to stay in Liyang.

古文：三年二月，晋王悉众来攻黎阳，鄩拒之而退。
现代文：三年二月，晋王调集全部兵力进攻黎阳，刘鄩击退了晋军。
English: In February of the third year, Jin Wang mobilized all his forces to attack Liyang, and Liu Bei repulsed the Jin army.

古文：及归阙，再授开封尹，领镇南军节度使。
现代文：到刘鄩回京后，再次被授为开封尹，遥任镇南军节度使。
English: After Liu Bei returned to Beijing, he was once again awarded the title of Kaifeng Yin, and was appointed as the envoy of the Southern Zhenjun Army.

古文：其年，河朔失守，朝廷归咎于鄩，鄩亦不自安，上表避位。
现代文：那年，河朔失守，朝廷归咎于刘鄩，刘鄩也自感不安，上表辞职。
English: That year, the imperial court blamed Liu Bei for the loss of the defense of Hexuo, and Liu Bei also felt uneasy and resigned from the table.

古文：九月，落平章事，授亳州团练使。
现代文：九月，免去平章事，被授为亳州团练使。
English: In September, he was exempted from the award and was awarded the title of Zhangzhou Rehearsal Envoy.

古文：属淮人寇蔡、颍、亳三郡，鄩奉命渡淮，至霍丘，大歼贼党。
现代文：恰逢淮南吴国军队寇犯蔡、颍、亳三郡，刘鄩奉命渡过淮水，到达霍丘，歼灭了大量贼党。
English: At the same time, the Huainan and Wuxi armies invaded the three counties of Cai, Qu and Jie. Liu Qian was ordered to cross Huai Shui and reach Huoqiu, annihilating a large number of thieves.

古文：五年，兗州节度使张万进反，北结晋人为援，末帝遣鄩攻之，鄩为兗州安抚制置使。
现代文：五年，兖州节度使张万进反叛，向北连结晋人作为支援，末帝派刘鄩攻打他，任刘鄩为兖州安抚制置使。
English: In the fifth year, Zhang Wanjin rebelled against the Bozhou Festival and rode north with the Jin people as support. The last emperor sent Liu Bei to attack him and appointed Liu Bei as the Bozhou pacification envoy.

古文：是冬，万进危蹙，小将邢师遇潜应王师，遂拔其城，枭万进首以献。
现代文：这年冬天，张万进危急，小将邢师遇暗中接应朝廷军队，刘鄩于是占领了兖州城，割下张万进首级献给朝廷。
English: In the winter of that year, Zhang Wanjin was in a critical situation, and the young general Zou Shi secretly received the imperial army. Liu Bei then occupied Zhangzhou City and cut off Zhang Wanjin's head and dedicated it to the imperial court.

古文：十一月，制授泰宁军节度使、检校太尉、同平章事。
现代文：十一月，诏令授刘鄩为泰宁军节度使、检校太尉、同平章事。
English: In November, Liu Wei was awarded the title of the Taining Army's envoy to the Qing Dynasty, the title of lieutenant of the inspection school, and the title of Tongping.

古文：六年六月，授河东道招讨使，与华州尹皓攻取同州。
现代文：贞明六年六月，授刘鄩河东道招讨使，与华州尹皓一起攻取同州。
English: In June of the sixth year of Zhenming, Liu Qihe was awarded the host recruiting envoy, and together with Huazhou Yin Qi, he conquered the same state.

古文：先是，河中硃友谦袭取同州，以其子令德为留后，表请旄钺，末帝怒，命鄩讨之。
现代文：在此之前，河中朱友谦袭击占领了同州，以他儿子朱令德为同州留后，上表朝廷请求旄节斧钺，末帝大怒。这时便命令刘鄩征讨他。
English: Prior to this, Zhu Youqian attacked and occupied the same prefecture in the middle of the river, and after his son Zhu Lingde stayed in the same prefecture, he asked the imperial court for help. The last emperor was furious. At this time, he ordered Liu Bei to recruit him.

古文：其年九月，晋将李嗣昭率师来援，战于城下，王师不利，败兵走河南；桥梁陷，溺死者甚众，鄩以余众退保华州罗文寨。
现代文：同年九月，晋军将领李嗣昭领军前来救援，在同州城下交战，朝廷军队作战不利，兵败逃往黄河以南，桥梁坍塌，淹死许多人，刘鄩率残余部众退守华州罗文寨。
English: In September of the same year, the Jin army general Li Shizhao led the army to come to the rescue, fought under the city of Tongzhou, the imperial army was not good at fighting, the soldiers fled south of the Yellow River, the bridge collapsed, and many people drowned. Liu Ye led the remaining troops to retreat to Luowenzhai, Huazhou.

古文：先是，鄩与河中硃友谦为婚家，及王师西讨，行次陕州，鄩遣使赍檄与友谦，谕以祸福大计，诱令归国，友谦不从，如是停留月余。
现代文：在这以前，刘鄩与河中朱友谦是姻亲，到朝廷军西讨同州，到达陕州时，刘鄩派遣使者带着檄文送与朱友谦，以祸福大计晓谕他，诱使他回归朝廷，朱友谦不听从，因此而停留了一个月。
English: Prior to this, Liu Bei was a relative by marriage of Zhu Youqian of Central China. He went to the west of the imperial army to discuss Tongzhou. When he arrived in Shaanxi, Liu Bei sent an envoy with a letter to Zhu Youqian, telling him about the calamities and blessings, and enticing him to return to the imperial court. Zhu Youqian did not listen, so he stayed for one month.

古文：尹皓、段凝辈素忌鄩，遂构其罪，言鄩逗留养寇，俾俟援兵，末帝以为然。
现代文：尹皓、段凝一帮人平素妒忌刘鄩，于是罗织他的罪名，说刘鄩拖延时机养寇成患，让朱友谦等来援兵，末帝也认为是这样。
English: Yin Qi and Duan Jian, a group of people, were jealous of Liu Bei, so they fabricated his crime, saying that Liu Bei delayed the opportunity to become a robber and let Zhu Youqian and others come to help, and the late emperor also thought so.

古文：及兵败，诏归洛，河南尹张宗奭承朝廷密旨，逼令饮鸩而卒。
现代文：到刘鄩兵败后，诏令刘鄩回到洛阳，河南尹张宗接受朝廷密旨，迫使刘鄩饮毒药而亡。
English: After Liu Bei's defeat, the emperor ordered Liu Bei to return to Luoyang, and Yin Zhangzong of Henan accepted the secret order of the imperial court to force Liu Bei to drink poison and die.

古文：时年六十四，诏赠中书令。
现代文：这时年六十四岁，诏令追赠为中书令。
English: At the age of sixty-four, the Imperial Edict was posthumously changed to the Chinese Edict.

古文：子遂凝、遂雍别有传。贺瑰，字光远，濮阳人也。
现代文：贺瑰，字光远，濮阳人。
English: He Gui, the characters are far away, the characters are from Shenyang.

古文：曾祖延，以瑰贵，赠左监门上将军。
现代文：曾祖贺延，因贺瑰而尊贵，追赠为左监门上将军。
English: Zengzu He Yan, who was honored because of He Gui, was posthumously awarded the title of General of the Left Guards.

古文：祖华，赠左散骑常侍。
现代文：祖父贺华，追赠为左散骑常侍。
English: His grandfather, He Hua, was posthumously awarded the title of Zuo Sanzhishi no Tsuneishi.

古文：父仲元，赠刑部尚书。
现代文：父亲贺仲元，追赠为刑部尚书。
English: His father, He Zhongyuan, was posthumously awarded the title of Minister of Justice.

古文：瑰少倜傥，负雄勇之志，遇世乱入军。
现代文：贺瑰小时洒脱不羁，有英雄勇敢的气概，遇上乱世而从军。
English: He Gui was a free-spirited person with heroic and brave spirit. He joined the army when the world was in turmoil.

古文：硃瑄为濮州刺史兼郓州马步军都指挥使，拔为小将。
现代文：朱王宣任濮州刺史兼郓州马军步军都指挥使时，提拔贺瑰为小将。
English: When Zhu Wang was appointed as the governor of Bozhou and the commander of the foot soldiers of the Bozhou Horse Army, He Gui was promoted to the rank of junior general.

古文：唐光启初，郓州三军推瑄为留后，以瑰为马步军都指挥使，表授检校工部尚书。
现代文：唐朝光启初年，郓州三军推举朱王宣为留后，以贺瑰为马军步军都指挥使，表奏朝廷授与检校工部尚书。
English: In the first year of the Tang Dynasty, after Zhu Wangxuan was selected by the three armies of Bozhou to stay, He Gui was appointed as the commander of the infantry of the horse army, and presented the imperial court with the award of the inspection department.

古文：及瑄与太祖构隙，瑰受瑄命，数领军于境上。
现代文：到朱王宣与太祖产生冲突时，贺瑰受朱王宣之命，多次领军驻防边境。
English: When a conflict arose between Zhu Wangxuan and Taizu, He Rui was ordered by Zhu Wangxuan to repeatedly lead troops to garrison the border.

古文：乾宁二年十月，太祖亲征兗、郓。
现代文：乾宁二年十月，太祖亲自征伐兖州、郓州。
English: In October of the second year of the Qianning Dynasty, Taizu personally conquered Zhangzhou and Zhangzhou.

古文：十一月，瑄遣瑰与太原将何怀宝率兵万余人以援硃瑾，师次待宾馆，断我粮运。
现代文：十一月，朱王宣派贺瑰与晋军将领何怀宝率领一万多士兵援助朱瑾，部队驻扎在待宾馆，切断了梁军的粮道。
English: In November, Zhu Wangxuan sent He Gui and Jin general He Huai Bao to lead more than ten thousand soldiers to aid Zhu Xi. The troops were stationed at the waiting hotel, cutting off the food supply of Liang's army.

古文：太祖侦知之，自中都引军夜驰百余里，迟明至钜野东，与瑰等接战，兗人大败。瑰窜于棘冢之上，大呼曰： 我是郓州都将贺瑰，愿就擒，幸勿伤也！ 
现代文：太祖知悉后，从中都领军连夜急驰一百多里，天亮时到达巨野的东边，与贺瑰等交战，兖州人大败，贺瑰窜到长满荆棘的高坟上面，大叫道： 我是郓州都将贺瑰，愿降，请不要伤害我。 
English: After the great-grandfather learned of this, the leader of the army from the capital sped more than a hundred miles overnight, reaching the east side of the huge field at dawn, fighting with He Gui and others. The people of Zhangzhou were defeated, and He Gui went to the high grave full of thorns and shouted: I am Zhangzhou will He Gui, I am willing to surrender, please do not hurt me.

古文：太祖闻之，驰骑至冢前，遂擒之。
现代文：太祖听到后，奔马到高坟前，于是擒获了他。
English: When the great-grandfather heard this, he ran to Gao Ming's grave and captured him.

古文：并获何怀宝及将吏数十人，徇于兗壁之下，悉命戮之，唯留瑰一人，释缚，置之麾下；寻署为教练使，奏授检校左仆射。
现代文：同时俘获了何怀宝以及将官几十人，在兖州城下示众，下令全部杀死，只留贺瑰一人，解开捆绑贺瑰的绳索，把他安置在太祖手下，不久暂任他为教练使，上奏朝廷授与检校左仆射。
English: At the same time, He Huai Bao and dozens of generals were captured, and they were paraded in front of Zhangzhou City. He ordered that all of them be killed, leaving only He Gui alone. He untied the ropes that bound He Gui and placed him under the command of his great-grandfather. Soon after, he temporarily appointed him as a coach, and reported to the imperial court to award him the title of "school inspection left-handed archer."

古文：瑰感太祖全宥之恩，私誓以身报国。
现代文：贺瑰感念太祖保全他性命的大恩，私下发誓以身相报。
English: He Juxi thought of the great favor of his great-grandfather to save his life, and privately swore to repay the favor.

古文：天复中，预平青州王师范，以功授曹州刺史兼先锋都指挥使，加检校司空。
现代文：天复年间，贺瑰参与平定青州王师范的战役，因功授与他曹州刺史兼先锋都指挥使，加封检校司空。
English: During the era of Tianfu, He Gui took part in the campaign to subdue Wang Shifan of Qingzhou. For his services, he was awarded the title of Caozhou Sashimi and Pioneer Commander, and was also awarded the title of Caozhou Inspector of Schools.

古文：天祐二年，与杨师厚从太祖平荆、襄，授荆南两使留后，未几，征还，为行营左厢步军都指挥使。
现代文：天二年，与杨师厚一起跟从太祖平定荆州、襄州，授与荆南两使留后，不久，召回，任行营左厢步军都指挥使。
English: In the second year of Tian Tian, together with Yang Shihou, he followed his great-grandfather to pacify Jingzhou and Xiangzhou, awarded the Jingnan two envoys to stay, and soon recalled, and commanded the left camp infantry.

古文：开平二年十月，授左龙虎军马步都指挥使。
现代文：开平二年十月，授与左龙虎军马军步军都指挥使。
English: In October of the second year of the First Sino-Japanese War, he was awarded the post of commander-in-chief of the Left Dragon and Tiger Army and the Horse Army.

古文：十二月，改左卫上将军，充六军马步都虞候。
现代文：十二月，改任左卫上将军，兼任六军马步军都虞候。
English: In December, he was transferred to the post of General of the Left Division, and concurrently served as the commander of the Sixth Army and Horse Cavalry Corps.

古文：三年五月，转右龙虎统军，未几，加检校司徒、邢州团练使。
现代文：三年五月，转任右龙虎统军，不久，加封检校司徒、邢州团练使。
English: In May of the third year, he was transferred to the Right Dragon and Tiger United Army, and soon after, he became a member of the Jafeng Inspection School and a member of the Zhangzhou Reunification Army.

古文：四年二月，改泽州刺史，充昭义军节度留后、检校太保，进封开国侯。
现代文：四年二月，改任泽州刺史，兼任昭义军节度留后、检校太保，进封开国侯。
English: In February of the fourth year, he was reassigned to the post of the governor of Zezhou, and concurrently served as the commander of the Shouyi Army, the inspector of schools, and the governor of Jinfu.

古文：乾化二年七月，授相州刺史，寻加检校太傅。有顷，转左龙虎统军。
现代文：乾化二年七月，授与相州刺史，接着加封检校太傅，不久，转任左龙虎统军。
English: In July of the second year of the Qianhua era, he was awarded the title of "Sangzhou Sashih," and then he was given the title of "Jiefang Qianzhou Taifu," and soon he was transferred to the "Left Dragon and Tiger United Army."

古文：贞明二年，庆州叛，为李继陟所据，瑰以本官充西面行营马步军都指挥使兼诸军都虞候，与张筠破泾、凤之众三万，下宁、衍二州。
现代文：贞明二年，庆州反叛，被李继陟占据，贺瑰以原官的身份兼任西面行营马步军都指挥使兼各军都虞候，与张筠一起打败泾州、凤翔三万敌人，攻下宁、衍二州。
English: In the second year of Zhenming, Gyeongju rebelled and was occupied by Li Jizhe. He Gui, as the original official, also served as the commander of the westward marching horse-marching army and the governor of each army. Together with Zhang Jizhe, he defeated 30,000 enemies in Bozhou and Fengxiang, and conquered Ning and Yan two states.

古文：三年秋，庆州平。
现代文：三年秋天，庆州平定。
English: In the autumn of the third year, Gyeongju was pacified.

古文：十二月，瑰以功授滑州宣义军节度使，依前检校太傅，加同平章事，寻授北面行营招讨使。
现代文：十二月，贺瑰因功授与滑州宣义军节度使，封为检校太傅，加平章事，不久授任北面行营招讨使。
English: In December, He Rui was awarded the festival envoy of the Glushan Xuanyi Army for his meritorious service. He was appointed as the inspector of the school, and soon he was appointed as the envoy to the north.

古文：四年春，晋人取杨刘城据之。
现代文：四年春天，晋人攻占了杨刘城。
English: In the spring of the fourth year, the Jin people captured Yang Liu City.

古文：八月，瑰与许州节度使谢彦章领大军营于濮州之行台村，对垒数月。
现代文：八月，贺瑰与许州节度使谢彦章率领大军在濮州的行台村扎营，与晋军对阵几个月。
English: In August, He Gui and the Xuzhou Festival made Xie Yanzhang lead a large army to camp in Xingzhou's Xingtai Village and fight against the Jin army for several months.

古文：一日，晋王以轻骑挑战，瑰与彦章发伏兵奋击，晋王仅以身免。
现代文：一天，晋王率轻骑挑战，贺瑰与谢彦章出动伏兵奋力攻击，晋王只身逃脱。
English: One day, Jin Wang led a light riding challenge, He Gui and Xie Yan Zhang sent out ambush soldiers to attack, and Jin Wang escaped alone.

古文：先是，瑰与彦章不协，是岁冬十二月，复为诸军都虞候硃珪所构，瑰乃伏甲士，杀彦章及濮州刺史孟审澄、别将侯温裕等于军，以谋叛闻。
现代文：此前，贺瑰与谢彦章不和，这年冬季十二月，又被诸军都虞候朱王圭挑拨，贺瑰于是埋伏甲士，在军中杀害谢彦章以及濮州刺史孟审澄、别将侯温裕等人，谎报说他们谋反被诛。
English: Previously, He Gui and Xie Yanzhang did not get along. In December of this winter, he was once again provoked by Zhu Wanggui, the military governor of the capital. He Gui then ambushed Gao soldiers, killed Xie Yanzhang, as well as Zhangzhou assassin Meng Xuancheng, general Hou Wenyu and others in the army, and falsely reported that they were plotting to rebel.

古文：是月，瑰与晋人大战于胡柳陂，晋人败绩，临阵斩晋将周阳五。
现代文：同月，贺瑰与晋军在胡柳陂大战，晋军战败，临阵斩杀晋将周阳五。
English: In the same month, He Gui and the Jin army fought in the Battle of Huliangye, the Jin army was defeated, and the Jin general Zhou Yangwu was killed.

古文：既晡，瑰军亦败。
现代文：到傍晚，贺瑰军队又战败。
English: In the evening, He Gui's army was defeated again.

古文：五年春正月，晋人城德胜，夹河为栅。
现代文：五年春天正月，晋军在德胜筑城，在黄河两岸建起营寨。
English: In the first month of the spring of the fifth year, the Jin army built a city in Desheng and built a camp on both sides of the Yellow River.

古文：四月，瑰率大军攻其南栅，以艨艟战舰扼其中流，晋人断我艨艟，济军以援南栅，瑰退军于行台，寻以疾卒，时年六十二。
现代文：四月，贺瑰率领大军攻打晋军南岸营寨，用大船战舰阻扼中流，晋军切断连接的大船，增兵援救南岸营寨，贺瑰军队退到行台。接着因病去世，时年六十二岁。
English: In April, He Gui led a large army to attack the Jin army's South Bank encampment, using large warships to block the middle stream, the Jin army cut off the connected large ships, reinforcements rescued the South Bank encampment, and He Gui's army retreated to Xingtai. Then he died of illness, at the age of sixty-two.

古文：诏赠侍中。
现代文：诏令追赠为侍中。
English: He was posthumously awarded the title of samurai.

