古文：宣帝高宗孝宣皇帝讳顼，字绍世，小字师利，始兴昭烈王第二子也。
现代文：高宗孝宣皇帝名陈顼，字绍世，小字师利，始兴昭烈王第二个儿子。
English: Emperor Gao Zongxiao Xuan's name was Chen Zhen, his Chinese name was Shao Shih, his Chinese name was Shili, and he was the second son of King Shi Xingxiao.

古文：梁中大通二年七月辛酉生，有赤光满堂室。
现代文：梁中大通二年七月辛酉日出生，有红光照亮整座房屋。
English: When Liang Zhongdazhong was born in July of the second year, there was a red light illuminating the entire house.

古文：少宽大，多智略。
现代文：少年时性格宽容，多有智谋。
English: When he was a boy, he had a tolerant personality and was more resourceful.

古文：及长，美容仪，身长八尺三寸，手垂过膝。
现代文：到长大后，容貌俊美，身长八尺三寸，手长超过膝盖。
English: When he grew up, he was handsome, eight feet three inches tall, and his hands were longer than his knees.

古文：有勇力，善骑射。
现代文：勇敢有气力，善于骑马射箭。
English: Brave and strong, good at horseback riding and archery.

古文：高祖平侯景，镇京口，梁元帝征高祖子侄入侍，高祖遣高宗赴江陵，累官为直阁将军、中书侍郎。
现代文：高祖平定侯景时镇守京口，梁元帝征召高祖的子侄入朝侍卫，高祖派高宗去江陵，历官至直合将军、中书侍郎。
English: Gaozu was in charge of guarding the gates of Beijing when he subdued Houjing, Emperor Liang Yuan called Gaozu's nephew to join the imperial bodyguard, Gaozu sent Gaozong to Gangneung, and he rose through the ranks to become the general of Zhihe and the attendant of the imperial secretary.

古文：时有马军主李总与高宗有旧，每同游处。高宗尝夜被酒，张灯而寐，总适出，寻返，乃见高宗身是大龙，总便惊骇，走避他室。
现代文：当时有个马军将官李总与高宗以前有交情，经常在一起游玩，高宗曾经在夜晚酒醉，张灯睡觉，李总正好出去，不久又返回，便看见高宗身体是一条大龙，李总于是惊骇，跑开躲避到其他房间。
English: At that time, there was a horse general Li Zong who had a friendship with Gao Zong before and often played together. Gao Zong was drunk at night and slept with a lamp. Li Zong just went out and soon returned. He saw that Gao Zong's body was a big dragon. Li Zong was shocked and ran away to hide in other rooms.

古文：及江陵陷，高宗迁于关右。
现代文：江陵陷落后，高宗被迁徙于盟左。
English: After the fall of Gangneung, Gaozong was moved to Mengzuo.

古文：永定元年，遥袭封始兴郡王，邑二千户。
现代文：陈武帝丞宣元年，遥袭封始兴郡王，食邑二千户。
English: In the first year of Emperor Chen Wu's reign, the county of Shixing, with a population of 2,000 households, was conquered from afar.

古文：三年，世祖嗣位，改封安成王。
现代文：三年，世祖继承帝位，改封安盛王。
English: Three years later, Shizu succeeded to the throne and changed his title to King Ansei.

古文：天嘉三年，自周还，授侍中、中书监、中卫将军，置佐史。
现代文：玉台三年，从韭墨南归，授侍中、中书监、中卫将军，设置佐史。
English: In the third year of Yutai, he returned to the south from Shimo, and was awarded the titles of Junior Chamberlain, Senior Clerk of the Privy Council, and General of the Middle Guard.

古文：寻授使持节、都督扬南徐东扬南豫北江五州诸军事、扬州刺史，进号骠骑将军，馀如故。
现代文：不久又任使持节、都督握卢途塞墨直辽韭红五州诸军事、荡刺史，进号为骠骑将军，其余职务如故。
English: Soon, he was appointed as the envoy to hold the festival, the governor of the capital, the commander of the five states of the military and the history of the five states, and the number was the general of the cavalry, and the rest of the posts remained the same.

古文：四年，加开府仪同三司。
现代文：四年，加开府仪同三司。
English: Four years later, he was promoted to the Third Division of Kaifu Ceremonies.

古文：六年，迁司空。
现代文：六年，迁任司空。
English: Six years later, he was transferred to Soku.

古文：天康元年，授尚书令，馀并如故。
现代文：天康元年，任尚书令，其余职务如故。
English: In the first year of Tian Kang, he was appointed as Shang Shuling, and the rest of his duties remain unchanged.

古文：废帝即位，拜司徒，进号骠骑大将军，录尚书，都督中外诸军事，给班剑三十人。
现代文：废帝即位，拜司徒，进号骠骑大将军，绿尚书事，都督中外诸军事，给班剑三十人。
English: The deposed emperor ascended to the throne, and was worshipped by the scribes, and was given the title of general and cavalry general, and received letters from the emperor, and the military from all over the world, and thirty people were given the sword.

古文：光大二年正月，进位太傅，领司徒，加殊礼，剑履上殿，增邑并前三千户，馀并如故。
现代文：塑达二年正月，进位太傅，兼领司徒，加以特殊的礼遇，允许佩剑穿履上殿，增加封邑合并先前所封共三千户，其余职务如故。
English: In the first month of the second year of Sui, he was promoted to the position of Taifu, concurrently leading the Sifu, with special courtesy, allowing the sword to be worn in the hall, increasing the number of fiefs and combining the previously sealed total of three thousand households, and the remaining positions remained unchanged.

古文：十一月甲寅，慈训太后令废帝为临海王，以高宗入纂。
现代文：十一月寅日，慈训太后韶令庆童为堕迤王，以直塞继承帝位。
English: In November, Empress Dowager Cixin decreed that Qing Tong was the dethroned empress dowager and that he would succeed to the imperial throne.

古文：太建元年春正月甲午，即皇帝位于太极前殿，诏曰： 夫圣人受命，王者中兴，并由懿德，方作元后。
现代文：太建元年春正月甲午日，产塞在塞捶趔垩即皇帝位，下诏说： 大抵圣人接受天命，帝王中兴王朝，都是因为具有崇高的美德，才能成为天下之主。
English: On the afternoon of the first day of the first month of the spring of the first year of the Tai Jian era, the emperor, who was born in Saigon, the emperor, issued an edict saying: Most saints accept the fate of heaven, and the emperor of the Zhongxing Dynasty, because of his lofty virtue, can become the lord of the world.

古文：高祖武皇帝揖拜尧图，经纶禹迹，配天之业，光辰象而利贞，格地之功，侔川岳而长远。
现代文：高祖武皇帝接受前朝禅让，经营帝业。业绩符合天命，北极帝星光照四方而大得民心；功劳感动地神，与江河山岳那样绵延久远。
English: Emperor Gao Zuwu accepted the previous emperor's offer of Zen and ran the imperial business. The performance was in line with the destiny of heaven. The North Pole Emperor's star shone in all directions and won the hearts of the people; the merit moved the gods of the earth and lasted as long as the rivers and mountains.

古文：世祖文皇帝体上圣之姿，当下武之运，筑宫示俭，所务唯德，定鼎初基，厥谋斯在。
现代文：世祖文皇帝具备上圣的姿质，又承当了天下武运，修筑宫殿崇尚节俭，行为具有美德，在国朝初建时安定了社稷，治国谋略依然存在。
English: The world's first emperor, Emperor Wen, had the stature of a saint, undertook the world's military campaigns, built palaces, advocated frugality, acted with virtue, stabilized the society at the beginning of the dynasty, and the strategy for governing the country still exists.

古文：朕以寡薄，才非圣贤，夙荷前规，方传景祚。
现代文：朕功寡德薄，才干比不上前代圣贤，衹是一贯遵循先帝的法度，方能延续美好的国运。
English: My merits are few and my talents are not as great as those of the previous generation of sages. I must always follow the laws of the former emperor in order to continue the good fortune of the country.

古文：虽复亲承训诲，志守籓维，咏季子之高风，思城阳之远托，自元储绍国，正位君临，无道非几，伫闻刑措。
现代文：虽然又亲身承受先帝的教诲，托朕志在镇守藩国屏卫朝廷，赞叹季子让位的高风，思量先帝托孤的重任。自从太子继位，正式君临天下，常有无道之举，长久不用刑法。
English: Although he personally received the teachings of the former emperor, he aspired to guard the imperial court in the garrison of the domain, admired the high wind of the abdication of the emperor, and thought about the important task of the former emperor. Since the prince's succession, the official ruler of the world, there are often unscrupulous moves, and criminal law has not been used for a long time.

古文：岂图王室不造，频谋乱阶，天步艰难，将倾宝历，仰惟嘉命，爰集朕躬。
现代文：难道是因为王室不兴旺，而频频出现动乱因素，因为天步艰难，而要倾覆国家社稷吗?仰思上天的嘉命，全部集中于朕一身。
English: Is it because the royal family is not flourishing, and there are frequent factors of unrest, because the pace of life is difficult, and we want to overthrow the national society?

古文：我心贞确，坚誓苍昊，而群辟启请，相喧渭桥，文母尊严，悬心长乐，对扬玺绂，非止殷汤之三辞，履涉春冬，何但代王之五让。
现代文：我心坚贞不移，向苍天发誓决无二心。但是群臣奏请朕继位，京城群情喧喧，慈训太后尊贵严厉，在长乐宫中挂念朝廷大事。面对皇帝玉玺和皇袍，我何止像殷朝汤王那样再三推辞，历经冬春，何止似荡伐塞鱼那样一再逊让。
English: My heart is steadfast, and I swear to the heavens that I have no second thoughts. However, the courtiers have invited me to succeed, the Beijing crowd is noisy, the Empress Dowager Cixi is dignified and strict, and I am concerned about the imperial events in the Changle Palace. Faced with the emperor's jade bracelet and imperial robe, I have repeatedly declined like the Tang King in the Yin Dynasty, and after the winter and spring, I have repeatedly conceded like a fished fish.

古文：今便肃奉天策，钦承介圭。
现代文：如今朕严肃地承奉天命，恭敬地承接玉玺。
English: Now I earnestly carry out the mission of heaven, and respectfully accept the imperial edict.

古文：若据沧溟，逾增兢业。
现代文：朕深感责任重大就好像在大海中航行，愈发小心谨慎。
English: I feel a great sense of responsibility. It's like sailing in the ocean. I've become more and more cautious.

古文：思所以云行雨施，品物咸亨，当与黔黎，普同斯庆。
现代文：思虑如何广施恩泽，使万物全都兴旺，应当舆天下百姓共同享受福祉。
English: Thought should be given to how to bestow bounty so that all things can prosper, and the people of the world can enjoy common welfare.

古文：可改光大三年为太建元年。
现代文：可以将年号光大三年改为太建元年。
English: It is possible to change the year from the third year of Guangda to the first year of Taijian.

古文：大赦天下。
现代文：大赦天下。
English: Amnesty for the whole world.

古文：在位文武赐位一阶，孝悌力田及为父后者赐爵一级，异等殊才，并加策序。
现代文：在职的文武官员都赐一阶官位，孝顺友悌努力种田以及成为父亲继承人的男子赐给一级爵位，超过常人具有特殊才能的人，都在朝廷的策书中备列。
English: All civil and military officials on duty were given the first-class official rank, the filial piety and hard work of farming and the man who became his father's heir were given the first-class knighthood, and those who had special talents beyond ordinary people were all included in the imperial court's policy book.

古文：鳏寡孤独不能自存者，人赐谷五斛。 
现代文：鳏夫寡妇孤独不能自己料理生活者，每人赐谷五斛。 
English: A widower, a widow, and a lonely person who can't cook for themselves will each receive five grains of barley.

古文：复太皇太后尊号曰皇太后。立妃柳氏为皇后，世子叔宝为皇太子，皇子南中郎将、江州刺史康乐侯叔陵为始兴王，奉昭烈王祀。
现代文：恢复太皇太后的尊号为皇太后，立妃子柳氏为皇后，世子叔寅为皇太子，皇子南中郎将、江州刺史康乐侯叔陵为始兴王，承继昭至生王的祠庙。
English: The honorific titles of the grand empress dowager were restored to empress dowager, the title of empress dowager was reinstated, the title of empress dowager was reinstated, the title of crown prince was reinstated, the title of crown prince was reinstated, the title of crown prince was reinstated, the title of crown prince was reinstated, the title of crown prince was reinstated, the title of crown prince was reinstated, the title of crown prince was reinstated, the title of crown prince was reinstated, and the title of crown prince was reinstated.

古文：乙未，舆驾谒太庙。
现代文：乙末日，皇帝乘舆驾谒见太庙。
English: On the last day of the second month, the emperor went to see the imperial temple.

古文：丁酉，分命大使巡行四方，观省风俗。
现代文：丁酉日，分派各路大使巡视全国，观察各地风俗。
English: On Ding Xi Day, ambassadors from all over the country were dispatched to inspect the country and observe local customs.

古文：征南大将军、开府仪同三司、新除中抚大将军章昭达进号车骑大将军，新除中军大将军、开府仪同三司、南徐州刺史淳于量为征北大将军，镇北将军、开府仪同三司、南徐州刺史、新除镇西将军、郢州刺史黄法抃进号征西大将军，新除安南将军、开府仪同三司、湘州刺史吴明彻进号镇南将军，镇东将军、扬州刺史、鄱阳王伯山进号中卫将军，尚书仆射沈钦为尚书左仆射，度支尚书王劢为尚书右仆射，护军将军沈恪为镇南将军、广州刺史。
现代文：征南大将军、开府仪同三司、新任中抚大将军章旦董湩进号为车骑大将军，新任中军大将军、开府仪同三司、南徐州刺史淳于量为征北大将军，镇北将军、开府仪同三司、南徐州刺史、新任镇西将军、郢州刺史黄法戴进号为征西大将军，新任安南将军、开府仪同三司、湘州刺史吴明彻进号为镇南将军，镇束将军、扬州刺史、鄱阳王陈伯山进号为中卫将军，尚书仆射沈钦任尚书左仆射，度支尚书王勘任尚书右仆射，护军将军沈恪任镇南将军、广州刺史。
English: The general of the Southern Expeditionary Army, Kaifu Yi Tong San Si, and the newly appointed general of the Central Military Government, Zhangdan Dong Yujing, will be the general of the cavalry, the newly appointed general of the Chinese Army, Kaifu Yi Tong San Si, and the South Xuzhou general, Zhenbei General, Kaifu Yi Tong San Si, and the South Xuzhou general, the newly appointed general of the Western Expeditionary Army, and the newly appointed general of the Western Expeditionary Army, the newly appointed general of Annan, Kaifu Yi Tong San Si, and the Hunan general, Wu Ming Che, will be the general of the Southern Expeditionary

古文：辛丑，舆驾亲祠南郊。
现代文：辛丑，皇帝舆驾亲临南郊祭祀。
English: Sin ugly, the emperor personally came to the southern suburbs to worship.

古文：壬寅，以皇子建安侯叔英为宣惠将军、东扬州刺史，改封豫章王。
现代文：壬寅，任命皇子建安侯陈叔英为宣惠将军、束扬州刺史，改封为豫章王。
English: Ren Yin appointed the prince Jian An Hou Chen Shu Ying as the general of Xuan Hui and the governor of Yangzhou, and changed his title to Yu Zhang Wang.

古文：豊城侯叔坚改封长沙王。
现代文：丰城侯陈叔坚改封为长沙王。
English: Fengcheng marquis Chen Shujian changed his title to Changsha king.

古文：癸卯，以明威将军周弘正为特进。
现代文：癸卯日，任命明威将军周弘正为特进。
English: On the same day, Mingwei General Zhou Hongzheng was appointed as a special envoy.

古文：戊午，舆驾亲祠太庙。
现代文：戊午，皇帝舆驾亲临太庙祭祀。
English: In the afternoon, the emperor personally came to the temple for the ritual.

古文：二月庚午，皇后谒太庙。
现代文：二月庚午，皇后拜谒太庙。
English: In the late afternoon of February, the empress paid a visit to the Grand Empress Dowager.

古文：辛未，皇太子谒太庙。
现代文：辛未日，皇太子拜谒太庙。
English: On the day of Xinwei, the crown prince paid homage to the Empress Dowager.

古文：乙亥，舆驾亲耕藉田。
现代文：乙亥，皇帝舆驾亲临藉田耕作。
English: Yi Hai said that the emperor personally cultivated the borrowed land.

古文：夏五月甲午，齐遣使来聘。
现代文：夏五月甲午，韭查派遣使者来问安修好。
English: On the afternoon of the first day of the fifth month of the summer, Yingcha sent an envoy to ask for peace and reconciliation.

古文：丁巳，以吏部尚书、领大著作徐陵为尚书右仆射，太子詹事、驸马都尉沈君理为吏部尚书。
现代文：丁巳日，任命吏部尚书、领大著作徐陵为尚书右仆射，太子詹事、驸马都尉这星理为吏部尚书。
English: On the day of Ding Si, he appointed the official Shang Shu, the leader of the Great Work, Xu Ling, as the official Shang Shu's right-hand man, and the prince Zhan Zhi and the commander of the imperial horse, Xing Li, as the official Shang Shu.

古文：秋七月辛卯，皇太子纳妃沈氏，王公已下赐帛各有差。
现代文：秋七月辛卯日，皇太子娶沈氏为妃子，自王公以下各级官员按等级赏给绢帛。
English: On the day of Xinwu in the autumn of July, the crown prince married Shen as his concubine, and officials at all levels from the prince on down were awarded gongs according to their ranks.

古文：丁酉，以平东将军、吴郡太守晋安王伯恭为中护军，进号安南将军。
现代文：丁酉，任命平束将军、吴郡太守晋安王陈伯恭为中护军，进号为安南将军。
English: Ding Xi, appointed General Ping Zuc, Wu County Governor Jinan Wang Chen Boqiong as the middle guard, and the new name was General Annan.

古文：九月甲辰，以新除中护军晋安王伯恭为中领军。
现代文：九月甲辰日，以新任中护军晋安王伯恭为中领军。
English: On the first day of September, the newly appointed middle guard Jinan Wang Boqiong became the leader of the middle guard.

古文：冬十月，新除左卫将军欧阳纥据广州举兵反。
现代文：冬十月，新任左卫将军欧阳纥盘据广州举兵谋反。
English: In the winter of October, Ouyang Xuanpan, the new left guard general, raised an army in Guangzhou to rebel.

古文：辛未，遣车骑将军、开府仪同三司章昭达率众讨之。
现代文：辛末日，派遣车骑将军、开府仪同三司章压达率大军讨伐匦垦匿茎。
English: At the end of the Heian period, he dispatched the cavalry and cavalry generals, Kaifu Yi and the three subordinate generals to fight against the enemy.

古文：壬午，舆驾亲祠太庙。
现代文：壬午日，皇帝舆驾亲临太庙祭祀。
English: In the morning of the third day of the third month, the emperor personally came to the temple to offer sacrifices.

古文：二年春正月乙酉，以征西大将军、开府仪同三司、郢州刺史黄法抃为中权大将军。
现代文：二年春正月乙酉，任命征西大将军、开府仪同三司、竖州刺史黄法毡为中权大将军。
English: In the first month of the second year of spring, he appointed General of the Western Expedition, Kaifu Yi Tong San Shi, and Zhizhou Sisi Huang Fahu as General of the Central Powers.

古文：丙午，舆驾亲祠太庙。
现代文：丙午日，皇帝舆驾亲临太庙祭祀。
English: On the afternoon of the third day, the emperor personally came to the temple to offer sacrifices.

古文：二月癸未，仪同章昭达擒欧阳纥送都，斩于建康市，广州平。
现代文：二月癸未，仪同章昭达擒获欧阳纥送往京都，在要谜街市将他斩首示众，卢业之乱被平定。
English: On the last day of February, Ouyang Zhen was sent to Kyoto by his comrade Zhaoda Zhen, who beheaded him in front of the public at the Jiemen Street Market, and the Luye Rebellion was put down.

古文：三月丙申，皇太后崩。
现代文：三月丙申日，皇太后驾崩。
English: In March, the Empress Dowager passed away.

古文：丙午，曲赦广、衡二州。
现代文：丙午日，特赦广、衡。丁未，大赦天下。
English: On the afternoon of the third day of the third month, the amnesty was extended to Guang and Heng. Ding Wei was pardoned by the emperor.

古文：丁未，大赦天下。又诏自讨周迪、华皎已来，兵交之所有死亡者，并令收敛，并给棺槥，送还本乡；疮痍未瘳者，各给医药。
现代文：又下诏自从讨伐周迪、华皎以来，士兵交战所有死亡者，都下令给予收殓，并且给予棺木，送归本乡；创伤没有痊愈者，都给予药物治疗。
English: He also decreed that since the crusade against Zhou Di and Huayu, all soldiers who have died in battle have been ordered to be given a coffin and sent back to their hometowns; those whose wounds have not healed have been given drug treatment.

古文：夏四月乙卯，临海王伯宗薨。
现代文：夏四月乙卯日，临海王伯宗去世。
English: On the second day of the fourth month of the summer, Linhai Wang Bozong passed away.

古文：戊寅，皇太后祔葬万安陵。
现代文：戊寅，皇太后合葬于万安陵。
English: Wu Yin, the empress dowager, was buried together in the Wan'an Mausoleum.

古文：闰月戊申，舆驾谒太庙。
现代文：闰四月戊申日，皇帝舆驾拜谒太庙。
English: On April Fool's Day, the emperor came to pay homage to the Yunyang Temple.

古文：己酉，太白昼见。
现代文：己酉日，太白星在白天出现。
English: On the same day, a white star appeared in the daytime.

古文：五月乙卯，仪同黄法抃献瑞璧一。
现代文：五月乙卯，仪同黄法毡贡献一方瑞璧。
English: In May, Yi and Huang contributed to the success of Rui Bi.

古文：壬午，齐遣使来吊。
现代文：壬午日，齐派使者来吊唁太后。
English: On the morning of the third day of the third month, Qi sent an envoy to offer condolences to the Empress Dowager.

古文：六月戊子，新罗国遣使献方物。
现代文：六月戊子，新罗国派使者贡献地方特产。
English: In June, Silla sent an envoy to contribute local specialties.

古文：辛卯，大雨雹。
现代文：辛卯日，下大冰雹。
English: On a bitterly cold day, large hailstones fell.

古文：乙巳，分遣大使巡行州郡，省理冤屈。
现代文：乙巳日，分派各路大使巡视州郡，审理申诉冤屈的刑狱。
English: On the 21st, ambassadors from various countries were dispatched to inspect counties and prefectures to hear complaints and grievances of prisoners.

古文：戊申，车骑将军、开府仪同三司章昭达进号车骑大将军，安南将军、广州刺史沈恪进号镇南将军。
现代文：戊申日，车骑将军、开府仪同三司章昭达进号为车骑大将军，安南将军、广州刺史沈恪进号为镇南将军。
English: On Busshen Day, the general of the cavalry, Kaifu Yi, and the three officers, Zhaoda Jin, were named the general of the cavalry, and the general of Annan and the general of Guangzhou, Shen Ke, were named the general of Zhenan.

古文：秋八月甲申，诏曰： 怀远以德，抑惟恒典，去戎即华，民之本志。
现代文：秋八月甲申，下诏说： 以仁德来安抚远方百姓，或许是永恒的典则，离弃北戎而归附华夏，这是人民的本愿。
English: In the autumn and August of Jiaxin, the following edict said: To appease the distant people with benevolence and virtue is perhaps an eternal principle. To abandon Bei Rong and join Huaxia is the original wish of the people.

古文：顷年江介襁负相随，崎岖归化，亭候不绝，宜加恤养，答其诚心。
现代文：近年来，长江沿岸的百姓携家相随，历经曲折归化本朝，一路上络绎不绝，应该加以抚恤，报答他们的一片诚心。
English: In recent years, the people along the Yangtze River have been accompanied by their families. After experiencing twists and turns, they have been naturalized into this country, and they have never stopped along the way. They should be given a pension to repay their sincerity.

古文：维是荒境自皞，有在都邑及诸州镇，不问远近，并蠲课役。
现代文：衹要是从敌占区逃脱，移居到都邑以及各个州郡的百姓，无论远近，都免除租赋和劳役。
English: Those who escaped from the enemy-occupied areas and resettled in the capital and various counties and prefectures, no matter how far away, were exempted from rent and labor service.

古文：若克平旧土，反我侵地，皆许还乡，一无拘限。
现代文：如果平定旧有的国土，恢复我被侵占的土地，都允许他们返回本乡，不许有任何限制。
English: If the former national territory is pacified and the occupied land is restored, they will be allowed to return to their hometowns without any restrictions.

古文：州郡县长明加甄别，良田废村，随便安处。
现代文：州郡县各级长官应该清楚地加以甄别，有良田而无人居住的村落，听任他们安置居住。
English: State, county and prefectural governors at all levels should clearly screen them and allow them to resettle villages that have good fields but are uninhabited.

古文：若辄有课订，即以扰民论。 
现代文：倘若对他们征收赋税，就以扰民论处。 
English: If taxes are imposed on them, they will be punished for disturbing the public.

古文：又诏曰： 民惟邦本，著在典谟，治国爱民，抑又通训。
现代文：又下诏说： 百姓是国家的根本，遣记载于典策上，治理国家必须爱护民众，或许是圣人一贯的训示。
English: The following edict also said: The people are the foundation of the country. The edict is recorded in the imperial edict. To govern the country, the people must be cherished. This may have been a sage's consistent instruction.

古文：朕听朝晏罢，日昃劬劳，方流惠泽，覃被亿兆。
现代文：朕每天听朝政很长时间，日夜勤劳，方才能够施行恩惠，被及千万百姓。
English: I have been listening to the government for a long time every day, working hard day and night, so that I can do favors and be favored by tens of millions of people.

古文：有梁之季，政刑废缺，条纲弛紊，僭盗荐兴，役赋征徭，尤为烦刻。
现代文：在梁朝的末叶，政法刑律荒废缺乏，律条纲纪松弛紊乱，僭号盗贼聚集，征收赋税徭役，尤为烦多刻薄。
English: At the end of the Liang Dynasty, the political and criminal laws were in disrepair, the rules and regulations were slack and disorderly, the thieves gathered, and the tax collectors were particularly troublesome and mean.

古文：大陈御宇，拯兹馀弊，灭扈戡黎，弗遑创改，年代弥流，将及成俗，如弗解张，物无与厝，夕惕疚怀，有同首疾。
现代文：大陈王朝统治天下，拯救梁朝的余弊，消灭戡定割据政权，无暇创新改革弊政，随着年代迁延，将要成为习俗，如果不能更改，那么国家无法治理，为此朕谨慎焦虑，有如心痛首疾。
English: The great Chen Dynasty will rule the world, save the remaining evils of the Liang Dynasty, eliminate the entrenched power, and have no time to innovate and reform the maladministration. With the passage of time, it will become a custom. If it cannot be changed, then the country cannot be governed. For this reason, I am cautious and anxious, like a headache.

古文：思从卑菲，约己济民，虽府帑末充，君孰与足，便可删革，去其甚泰，冀永为定准，令简而易从。
现代文：思量从简节省开支，约束自己拯济百姓，即使官府财物不很充实，难道还满足不了君主的消费。对此可以适当删革，省去奢靡部分，希望永远成为定则，法令简略而容易遵循。
English: Thought should be given to saving expenses, restraining oneself from rescuing the people. Even if the government's property is not very rich, can it still not satisfy the monarch's consumption? This can be appropriately cut, and the extravagant part can be omitted. I hope it will always be the rule, and the laws are simple and easy to follow.

古文：自今维作田，值水旱失收，即列在所，言上折除。
现代文：从今以后农田作物，如果遇到水旱之灾而歉收，要立即列出受灾所在地区，向朝廷报告适当扣除赋税。
English: From now on, if there is a bad harvest of farmland crops due to floods and droughts, it is necessary to immediately list the affected areas and report to the imperial court for appropriate tax deduction.

古文：军士年登六十，悉许放还。
现代文：军士年满六十者，全部允许返回故乡。
English: All sergeants over the age of 60 are allowed to return to their hometowns.

古文：巧手于役死亡及与老疾，不劳订补。
现代文：供劳役的巧匠如果死亡或者年老生病，不必补充。
English: If a journeyman for labor service dies or falls ill from old age, he does not need to be supplemented.

古文：其籍有巧隐，并王公百司辄受民为程廕，解还本属，开恩听首。
现代文：有些百姓隐瞒了户籍，或者依附于王公百官门下受到庇荫，解除他们隶属身份回归本来的属籍，赐予恩惠听任他们回归故乡。
English: Some people have concealed their household registration, or have been sheltered under the patronage of hundreds of officials who are attached to the prince, and have been relieved of their subordinate status and returned to their original nationality, and have been granted favors to allow them to return to their hometown.

古文：在职治事之身，须递相检示，有失不推，当局任罪。
现代文：在职任事的官员，必须互相检查，有过失而不加推究，当局长官承担罪责。
English: Officials who are on duty must check each other, and if there is a fault, it will not be investigated, and the head of the authority will bear criminal responsibility.

古文：令长代换，具条解舍户数，付度后人。
现代文：郡县令长替换，要具体条陈治下的户籍人，交付给后来任职的官员。
English: When replacing the county magistrate, it is necessary to specify the household registration person under Chen's rule and deliver it to the official who will take office later.

古文：户有增进，即加擢赏；若致减散，依事准结。
现代文：户口有增加，便给予提拔和赏赐；如果户口减少，则依照法律予以处分。
English: If the number of hukou is increased, they will be promoted and rewarded; if the number of hukou is reduced, they will be punished according to the law.

古文：有能垦起荒田，不问顷亩少多，依旧蠲税。 
现代文：耕垦荒田，不论多少亩顷，依旧准予免除赋税。 
English: Cultivating wasteland, no matter how many mu, is still exempt from tax.

古文：戊子，太白昼见。
现代文：戊子日，太白星白天出现。
English: On the day of the phoenix, the white star appears in the daytime.

古文：九月乙丑，以散骑常侍镇东将军吴兴太守杜棱为特进、护军将军。
现代文：九月乙丑，任命散骑常侍、镇束将军、吴兴太守杜棱为特进、护军将军。
English: In September of the second month of the year, he appointed the horseback riding attendant, the general of the garrison, and the Wu Xing governor Du Ren as the special advance and the general of the escort.

古文：冬十月乙酉，舆驾亲祠太庙。
现代文：冬十月乙酉日，皇帝舆驾亲临太庙祭祀。
English: In the winter of October, the Emperor himself came to the Imperial Temple for the sacrifice.

古文：十一月辛酉，高丽国遣使献方物。
现代文：十一月辛酉，高丽国派使者贡献地方特产。
English: In November, Koryo sent an envoy to contribute local specialties.

古文：十二月癸巳夜，西北有雷声。
现代文：十二月癸巳夜，西北方有雷声。
English: On the evening of December 30th, there was thunder in the northwest.

古文：三年春正月癸丑，以尚书右仆射、领大著作徐陵为尚书仆射。
现代文：三年春正月癸丑，任命尚书右仆射、领大著作徐陵为尚书仆射。
English: In the first month of the third year of the Spring and the first month of the Year of the Dog, he appointed Shang Shuxu, the right-hand man of Sha, and Xu Ling, the leader of the university, as the leading man of Sha.

古文：辛酉，舆驾亲祠南郊。
现代文：辛酉，皇帝舆驾亲往南郊祭祀。
English: The emperor personally drove to the southern suburbs to offer sacrifices.

古文：辛未，亲祠北郊。
现代文：辛末日，亲往北郊祭祀。
English: On the last day of Xin, I personally went to the northern suburbs to worship.

古文：二月辛巳，舆驾亲祠明堂。
现代文：二月辛巳日，皇帝舆驾亲临明堂祭祀。
English: On February Xin Si Day, the emperor personally drove to the Ming Hall for the sacrifice.

古文：丁酉，亲耕籍田。
现代文：丁酉日，皇帝亲自在藉田耕种。
English: On the day of Ding Xi's death, the emperor himself was cultivating rice in a borrowed field.

古文：三月丁丑，大赦天下。
现代文：三月丁丑，大赦天下。
English: March ding ugly, amnesty all over the world.

古文：自天康元年讫太建元年，逋馀军粮、禄秩、夏调未入者，悉原之。
现代文：白天康元年至太建元年，应交纳朝廷而拖欠的军粮、俸禄、夏季征调赋税，都予以免除。
English: From the first year of the reign of Emperor Kangtian to the first year of the reign of Emperor Taijian, military rations, salaries, and summer levies and taxes that should have been paid to the imperial court and were in arrears were all exempted.

古文：又诏犯逆子弟支属逃亡异境者，悉听归首；见絷系者，量可散释；其有居宅，并追还。
现代文：又下韶犯逆反罪行者的子弟旁属逃亡到异国者，全部听任他们回归故乡；现今仍被拘禁者，酌情予以释放；他们原有屋宅，一并追还。
English: In addition, the children and other relatives of those who have fled to foreign countries who have committed treason will all be allowed to return to their hometowns; those who are still detained will be released as appropriate; and their original houses will be returned together.

古文：夏四月壬辰，齐遣使来聘。
现代文：夏四月壬辰，齐派使者来聘问。
English: In the summer of April, Qi sent an envoy to inquire.

古文：五月戊申，太白昼见。
现代文：五月戊申日，太白星白天出现。
English: On May 9th, the white star appeared in the daytime.

古文：辛亥，辽东、新罗、丹丹、天竺、盘盘等国并遣使献方物。
现代文：辛亥日，辽东、新罗、丹丹、天竺、盘盘等国都派使者献上地方特产。
English: On the day of Xinhai, Liaodong, Silla, Dandan, Tianzhu, Panpan and other countries sent envoys to present local special products.

古文：六月丁亥，江阴王萧季卿以罪免。
现代文：六月丁亥日，江阴王萧季卿因罪过免去王爵。
English: In June, on Dinghai Day, the King of Jiangyin, Xiao Jixing, was pardoned for his crime.

古文：甲辰，封东中郎将长沙王府谘议参军萧彝为江阴王。
现代文：甲辰，封束中郎将长沙王府谘议参军萧彝为江阴王。
English: Jia Chen, a middle-ranking official in charge of sealing, advised the Changsha royal court to join the army, and Xiao Wei became the king of Jiangyin.

古文：秋八月辛丑，皇太子亲释奠于太学，二傅、祭酒以下赉帛各有差。
现代文：秋八月辛丑，皇太子亲临太学祭奠先圣先师，按照官阶赐给太傅、少傅、祭酒以下学官绢帛各有差别。
English: In autumn and August, the crown prince comes to Taigaku in person to hold a ceremony to commemorate the death of the first priest. According to the official ranks, there is a difference in the rank given to taifu, shofu, and those with less than the sacrificial wine.

古文：九月癸酉，太白昼见。
现代文：九月癸酉日，太白星白天出现。
English: On the third day of September, Taibai Star appeared in the daytime.

古文：冬十月甲申，舆驾亲祠太庙。
现代文：冬十月甲申日，皇帝舆驾亲临太庙祭祀。
English: In the winter of October, on the 6th day of the 6th month, the emperor himself came to the temple to offer sacrifices.

古文：乙酉，周遣使来聘。
现代文：乙酉日，周派遣使者来聘问。
English: On the day of the earthquake, Zhou sent an envoy to inquire.

古文：己亥，丹丹国遣使献方物。
现代文：己亥，丹丹国派使者献上地方特产。
English: In Jihai, Dandan Province sent an envoy to present local special products.

古文：十二月壬辰，车骑大将军、司空章昭达薨。
现代文：十二月壬辰日，车骑大将军、司空章昭达去世。
English: On December 1st, Zhang Zhaoda, the general of cavalry and cavalry, passed away.

古文：四年春正月丙午，以云麾将军、江州刺史始兴王叔陵为湘州刺史，进号平南将军；东中郎将、吴郡太守长沙王叔坚为宣毅将军、江州刺史；尚书仆射、领大著作徐陵为尚书左仆射；中书监王劢为尚书右仆射。
现代文：四年春正月丙午日，任命云麾将军、江州刺史始兴王叔陵为湘州刺史，进号为平南将军；束中郎将、吴郡太守长沙王叔坚为宣毅将军、江州刺史；尚书仆射、领大著作徐陵为尚书左仆射；中书监王勤为尚书右仆射。
English: On the afternoon of the 3rd day of the 1st month of the 4th year of the Spring, the general Yunyun and the governor of Jiangsu Province Shi Xing Wang Shuling were appointed as the governor of Hunan Province and the general of Binan Province; the general of Sokzhong and the governor of Wu County Changsha Wang Shujian were appointed as the general of Xuan Yi Province and the governor of Jiangsu Province; the general of Shangshu and the leading scholar Xu Ling were appointed as the left-hand officers of Shangshu; the supervisor of Chinese literature Wang Qin was appointed as the right-hand officer of Shangshu.

古文：庚申，以丹阳尹衡阳王伯信为信威将军、中护军。
现代文：庚申日，任命丹阳尹衡阳王伯信为信威将军、中护军。
English: On Goshun's day, Danyang Yin Hengyang Wang Boxin was appointed as the general of Xinwei and the middle protector.

古文：庚午，舆驾亲祠太庙。
现代文：庚午日，皇帝舆驾亲临太庙祭祀。
English: On the morning of the second day of the third lunar month, the emperor personally came to the temple to offer sacrifices.

古文：二月乙酉，立皇子叔卿为建安王，授东中郎将、东扬州刺史。
现代文：二月乙酉日，立皇子陈叔卿为建安王，任命为束中郎将、束扬州刺史。
English: On February 2nd, the prince Chen Shujing was established as the king of Jian'an, and was appointed as the general of Sokcho and the governor of Sokyo.

古文：三月壬子，以散骑常侍孙瑒为安西将军、荆州刺史。
现代文：三月壬子日，任命散骑常侍孙场为安西将军、荆州刺史。
English: In March, on Jinsi Day, Sun Yat-sen's equestrian attendant, Sun Yat-sen, was appointed as Anxi General and Jingzhou Chief Historian.

古文：乙丑，扶南、林邑国并遣使来献方物。
现代文：乙丑日，扶南、林邑国都派使者来贡献地方特产。
English: On the day of the second Ugly Duckling, the provinces of Funan and Linyi sent emissaries to contribute local special products.

古文：夏四月戊子，以中权大将军、开府仪同三司黄法抃为征南大将军、南豫州刺史。
现代文：夏四月戊子日，任命中权大将军、开府仪同三司黄法毡为征南大将军、南豫州刺史。
English: In the summer of April, on the day of Wu Zi, he appointed Zhong Quan, Kaifu Yi, and Huang Fa Jun, the three chiefs, to be the generals to conquer the south and write the history of southern Yuzhou.

古文：五月癸卯，尚书右仆射王劢卒。
现代文：五月癸卯日，尚书右仆射王勘去世。
English: On the last day of May, Shangshu's right-hand man, Shaowangkan, passed away.

古文：六月辛巳，侍中、镇右将军、右光禄大夫杜棱卒。
现代文：六月辛巳日，侍中、镇右将军、右光禄大夫丝蕉去世。
English: In June, on the day of Xin Si, the middle-ranking samurai, General Zhen Yu, and Doctor Uguo Lu passed away.

古文：秋八月辛未，周遣使来聘。
现代文：秋八月辛末日，周遣使者来聘间。
English: On the last day of the autumn and August, the envoys from the envoys came to Zhou.

古文：丁丑，景云见。
现代文：丁丑日，出现祥云。
English: On the day of Ding Jiu, a auspicious cloud appeared.

古文：戊寅，诏曰： 国之大事，受赈兴戎。
现代文：戊寅日，下韶说： 命令将帅出兵作战，是国家大事。
English: On the day of Wu Yin, the lower court said: Ordering the commander-in-chief to send troops to fight is a national event.

古文：师出以律，禀策于庙，所以乂安九有，克成七德。
现代文：出师要有定律，在太庙禀受策略，目的是为了天下安定，维护成功七德。
English: There should be a law to become a teacher, and a strategy to be accepted in the temple. The purpose is to stabilize the world and maintain the seven virtues of success.

古文：自顷扫涤群秽，廓清诸夏，乃貔貅之戮力，亦帷幄之运筹。
现代文：近来荡涤群秽，廓清各地诸侯割据，是因为军旅努力作战，也是朝廷帷幄运筹的结果。
English: In recent times, the separation of the hordes and the separation of the lords from the various regions in the Qing Dynasty was due to the efforts of the military brigade to fight, and was also the result of the operational planning of the imperial court.

古文：虽左衽已戡，干戈载戢，呼韩来谒，亭鄣无警，但不教民战，是谓弃之，仁必有勇，无忘武备。
现代文：虽然北方虏狄的威胁已经消除，干戈兵器已经收集起来，北朝首领派使者来拜谒，亭堠烽火台没有警报；但是不教百姓备战，就是抛弃他们，仁德一定要有勇力，不能忘记军备。
English: Although the threat of the Northern Ruudi has been eliminated, the weapons of war have been collected, the leaders of the Northern Dynasty have sent envoys to pay homage, and there is no warning in the pavilion; but if you do not teach the people to prepare for war, you will abandon them. Humanity must have courage and must not forget armaments.

古文：磻溪之传韬诀，谷城之授神符，文叔悬制戎规，孟德颇言兵略。
现代文：吕尚传授韬略，黄石公授给张良神符，汉光武帝刘秀制定战争法规，魏武帝曹操常论说军事战略。
English: Lushang taught military strategy, Huangshi taught Zhang Liang Shenfu, Han Emperor Guangwu Liu Xiu formulated the laws of war, Wei Emperor Cao Cao often discussed military strategy.

古文：朕既惭暗合，良皆披览。
现代文：朕惭愧自己的兴趣舆这些古人不谋而合，又认真研读了所有兵书。
English: I am ashamed to say that my interests coincided with those of the ancients, and I carefully studied all the military books.

古文：兼昔经督戎，备尝行阵，齐以七步，肃之三鼓，得自胸襟，指掌可述。
现代文：加上以前曾经统率过军队，曾经编排遇各种战阵，以步伐来使军队整齐，以军鼓来使军队整肃，这些法则胸中有数，在指掌之间便可以运用自如。
English: In addition, he had previously led an army, had arranged various battle formations, used steps to make the army tidy, and used drums to make the army tidy. These rules are in his heart and can be used freely between his fingertips.

古文：今并条制，凡十三科，宜即班宣，以为永准。 
现代文：现在一并制定条例，共十三科，应该立即加以宣布颁发，成为永久的法则。 
English: Now, regulations are being formulated together, a total of thirteen subjects, which should be announced and issued immediately to become a permanent rule.

古文：乙未，诏停督湘、江二州逋租，无锡等十五县流民，并蠲其徭赋。
现代文：乙末日，下诏停止催交湘、江二州拖欠的租赋，无锡等十五县的流民，都免除徭役和赋税。
English: On the last day of the second month, the emperor issued an edict to stop urging the payment of rent arrears from Hunan and Jiangsu, and the displaced people in Wuxi and other 15 counties were exempted from forced labor and taxes.

古文：九月庚子朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：九月庚子朔日，出现了日食。
English: On the first day of the ninth month, a solar eclipse occurred.

古文：辛亥，大赦天下。
现代文：辛亥日，大赦天下。
English: On the day of Xinhai, there will be a general amnesty.

古文：又诏曰： 举善从谏，在上之明规；进贤谒言，为臣之令范。
现代文：又下诏说： 任用贤才听从谏言，是君主遵循的开明规训；进荐贤人谏言朝政，是臣子良好的规范。
English: The next edict also said: "Appointing sages to listen to advice is an enlightened discipline followed by the monarch; recommending sages to advise the government is a good standard for courtiers."

古文：朕以寡德，嗣守宝图，虽世袭隆平，治非宁一。
现代文：朕凭藉寡薄德行，继承皇位，虽说世道承袭太平，但是治国并未达到天下安宁统一的境地。
English: I succeeded to the imperial throne by virtue of my meager virtue. Although I inherited a peaceful world, I did not govern the country in a peaceful and unified manner.

古文：辨方分职，旰食早衣；傍阙争臣，下无贡士。
现代文：朕日夜辛劳治国，辨别臣子才干从而分派不同职务；但是身旁缺乏直言静臣，下无荐举上来的贤才。
English: I work hard day and night to govern the country, identify the talents of ministers and assign them to different positions; but there is a lack of outspoken and quiet ministers around me, and there is no recommended talent.

古文：何其阙尔，鲜能抗直。
现代文：多么缺乏这种官员，很少有人抗颜直谏。
English: What a dearth of such officials there is, and how few dare to stand up to them.

古文：岂余独运，匪荐谠言。
现代文：难道是我独断专行，不能容纳直率的言论。
English: Is it me who is arbitrary and can't tolerate straightforward speech?

古文：置鼓公车，罕论得失；施石象魏，莫陈可否。
现代文：在公车官署放置鼙鼓，但是很少有人议论朝政的得失；在宫门外安放石碑，没有人陈述国策的可否。
English: A gong and drum were placed in the public bus office, but few people discussed the gains and losses of the imperial government; a stone monument was placed outside the palace gate, and no one stated whether the national policy was possible or not.

古文：硃云摧槛，良所不逢；禽息触楹，又为难值。
现代文：朱云直言上疏折断栏槛，这样的忠臣的确难逢；禽息以头叩楹柱力荐百里奚，又特别难得。
English: Zhu Yun bluntly said that it is rare for such a loyal vassal to break the bar, and it is especially rare for a bird's breath to knock the pillar with its head.

古文：至如衣褐以见，檐簦以游，或耆艾绝伦，或妙年异等，干时而不偶，左右莫之誉，黑貂改弊，黄金且殚，终其滞淹，可为太息。
现代文：至于像穿粗衣带雨笠的游说之士，或者年老而才干超群，或者年轻而能力非同凡响，却干谒时政而不被赏识，左右大臣不能称誉他们，以至于像苏秦那样，黑貂裘衣变色破敝了，黄金用尽了，最终还是失意不遇，遣真令人叹息。
English: As for the lobbyists in coarse clothes and raincoats, or those who are old and extremely talented, or those who are young and have extraordinary abilities, but are not appreciated, the ministers of the left and right cannot praise them, so that, like Su Qin, the black satin coat has changed color and worn out, the gold has been used up, and in the end they have not met with disappointment, which is really sighing.

古文：又贵为百辟，贱有十品，工拙并骛，劝沮莫分，街谣徒拥，廷议斯阙。
现代文：又，尊贵者是百官，卑贱者有十敷种，巧拙贤愚同时擢拔，奖赏和处罚没有差别，街头的歌谣百姓的欲求，在朝廷议政时没有人反映。
English: Moreover, the dignitaries are hundreds of officials, the lowly have ten kinds, the skillful and the wise and the foolish are promoted at the same time, there is no difference between reward and punishment, the songs of the street and the desires of the people are not reflected in the deliberation of the court.

古文：实朕之弗明，而时无献替。
现代文：这实在因为朕不开明，致使时人没有进谏之言。
English: This is really because I am not clear, resulting in people not understanding what I am saying.

古文：永言至治，何乃爽欤？
现代文：总是说要使天下大治，如果长此以往是何等荒唐?
English: They always say they want to make the world a better place. If this continues, how absurd will it be?

古文：外可通示文武：凡厥在位，风化乖殊，朝政纟比蠹，正色直辞，有犯无隐。
现代文：可以通告朝外的文武官员：凡是在任职时所见到风俗败坏、朝政纰漏等情况，都应该正色直言，有过错不要隐瞒。
English: It is possible to inform the civil and military officials outside the DPRK that they should be honest and forthright when they see the corruption of customs and the malfeasance of the DPRK when they are in office, and that they should not conceal their mistakes.

古文：兼各举所知，随才明试。
现代文：还要荐举各人知晓的贤人，随各自所具有的才能加以明确地试用。
English: And let the wise men, whom every man knoweth, be called unto the council; and let them try every man, according to his works.

古文：其莅政廉秽，在职能否，分别矢言，俟兹黜陟。 
现代文：对官员从政的清廉或污秽，在职是否能干，都要分别直言，等待朝廷罢免或者擢拔。 
English: Officials in politics, whether they are clean or dirty, whether they are competent or not, should be told directly, and wait for the court to remove or promote them.

古文：丙寅，以故太尉徐度、仪同杜棱、仪同程灵洗配食高祖庙庭，故车骑将军章昭达配食世祖庙庭。
现代文：丙寅日，以已故太尉徐度、仪同杜棱、仪同程灵洗配食高祖庙庭，已故车骑将军章昭达配食世祖庙庭。
English: On the day of Yin Yin, the late Tai Lai Xu Du, Yi Tong Du Ren and Yi Tong Cheng Ling Xi were served in the ancestral temple garden of Gao Zu, and the late cavalry general Zhang Zhaoda was served in the ancestral temple garden.

古文：冬十月乙酉，舆驾亲祠太庙。
现代文：冬十月乙酉日，皇帝舆驾亲临太庙祭祀。
English: In the winter of October, the Emperor himself came to the Imperial Temple for the sacrifice.

古文：戊戌，以镇南将军、广州刺史沈恪为领军将军。
现代文：戊戌日，任命镇南将军、广州刺史沈恪为领军将军。
English: On the first day of the New Year, Zhenan General and Guangzhou Jishi Shen Ke were appointed as the leading generals.

古文：十一月己亥夜地震。
现代文：十一月己亥夜发生地震。
English: In November, an earthquake occurred in Jihaizhou at night.

古文：闰月辛未，诏曰： 姑熟饶旷，荆河斯拟，博望关畿，天限严峻，龙山南指，牛渚北临，对熊绎之馀城，迩全琮之故垒，良畴美柘，畦畎相望，连宇高甍，阡陌如绣。
现代文：闰十一月辛末日，下诏说： 姑熟一带富饶广阔，有型辽环绕，搂望旦是京都关隘，天险严峻，南向垄旦，北临生壁，面对宜娘开国的遣城，连接全珪当年的旧营垒，肥沃的田亩茂盛的桑柘，在田野之间相望成片，连绵的屋宇，高耸的楼房，将大地装点得花团锦簇。
English: On the last day of the month of November, the following edict was issued: The area around Guju is rich and vast, surrounded by Liao-type mountains, surrounded by Kyoto Pass and severe natural hazards, surrounded by mountains to the south, surrounded by walls to the north, facing the capital city of the founding of the Republic of China, connected by the old fortifications of the year of Quanzhou, with fertile fields and lush mulberry, looking into each other between fields, continuous houses, towering buildings, decorating the earth with flowers.

古文：自梁末兵灾，凋残略尽，比虽务优宽，犹未克复，咫尺封畿，宜须殷阜。
现代文：自从梁末兵祸，这一地区几乎彻底地凋敝残破，最近虽然对这裹特别予以优待宽厚，但是依然没有恢复到原先的境况，逭裹距京城很近，应该富饶起来。
English: Since the Liangbei military disaster, this area has been almost completely devastated. Recently, although this area has been given special preferential treatment, it has still not recovered to its original state. It is very close to Beijing and should be rich.

古文：且众将部下，多寄上下，军民杂俗，极为蠹秏。
现代文：况且众将领的部下，大多寄居附近，军民风俗混杂，极为耗费财物。
English: Moreover, the subordinates of the generals mostly lived in the vicinity, and the military and folk customs were mixed, which was extremely costly.

古文：自今有罢任之徒，许分留部下；其已在江外，亦令迎还，悉住南州津里安置。
现代文：从今以后离职的军人，允许分别留居此地；如果这些人已经在长江流域以外地区，也可以让他们返回，全部安置在南州津裹。
English: From now on, military personnel who have left the service are allowed to stay here separately; if these people have been outside the Yangtze River basin, they can also be returned and all resettled in Nanzhou.

古文：有无交货，不责市估；莱荒垦辟，亦停租税。
现代文：无论他们是否从事买卖活动，都一律免除市场税收；开垦荒田，也停缴租税。
English: Regardless of whether they are engaged in trading activities, they are all exempt from market tax; reclamation of wasteland is also exempt from tax.

古文：台遣镇监一人，共刺史、津主分明检押，给地赋田，各立顿舍。 
现代文：朝廷派镇监一人，同刺史、津主一起辨明检验离职军人的身份，提供土地赋田，各自建立房舍。 
English: The imperial court sent a town supervisor to identify the identity of the soldiers who had left the military, together with the chief inspector and the lord of Tsu, to provide land for farming and to build their own houses.

古文：十二月壬寅，甘露降乐游苑。
现代文：十二月壬寅，甘露降落乐游苑。
English: In December, Renzhin, nectar falls to the amusement park.

古文：甲辰，舆驾幸乐游苑，采甘露，宴群臣。
现代文：甲辰日，皇帝舆驾亲临銮游茎，采集甘露，宴请群臣。
English: On the day of Jia Chen, the emperor personally drove to Linyi to visit the stem, collect nectar, and invite a group of ministers.

古文：丁卯，诏曰： 梁氏之季，兵火荐臻，承华焚荡，顿无遗构。
现代文：丁卯日，下韶说： 幽末叶，兵祸连结，承华宫焚毁殆尽，没有遣存任何建筑。
English: On the day of Dingwu's death, the lower echelon said, "It's the end of the year, military disasters are linked, Chenghua Palace has been burned to the ground, and no buildings have been preserved.

古文：宝命惟新，迄将二纪，频事戎旅，未遑修缮。
现代文：大陈改朝换代，至今将近二十年，频繁地从事征战，没有空闲修缮宫殿。
English: In the nearly 20 years since the Great Chen Revolution and the change of dynasties, he has been frequently engaged in military campaigns and has not been idle in repairing palaces.

古文：今工役差闲，椽楹有拟，来岁开肇，创筑东宫，可权置起部尚书、将作大匠，用主监作。 
现代文：如今工匠劳役有闲暇，梁柱等材料也储备了，明年开工，建造束宫，可以暂时任命起部尚书、将作大匠，监管遣件事。 
English: Now that the craftsmen and laborers have leisure time and the materials such as beams and columns have been reserved, the construction of the palace will start next year. They can be temporarily appointed as the head of the department and the master craftsman to supervise the relocation.

古文：五年春正月癸酉，以征北大将军、开府仪同三司、南徐州刺史淳于量为中权大将军；宣惠将军、豫章王叔英为南徐州刺史，进号平北将军；吏部尚书、驸马都尉沈君理为尚书右仆射，领吏部。
现代文：五年春正月癸酉，任命征北大将军、开府仪同三司、亩涂刺史一为中权大将军；宣惠将军、建童工童速为亩途州刺史，进号平北将军；吏部尚书、驸马都尉逸丑迳为尚书右仆射，兼任吏部尚书。
English: In the first month of the fifth year of Spring, he appointed General of the Northern Expeditionary Force, Kaifu Yi Tong 3rd Division, Mu Tu Zhishi 1 as General of the Central Power; General of the Northern Expeditionary Force, Xuan Hui, and Jian Cang Tong as General of the Southern Expeditionary Force, and promoted to General of the Northern Expeditionary Force; General of the Northern Expeditionary Force, Shanshu Yu, and General of the Northern Expeditionary Force, Ma Du Fu Yi Tong 3rd Division, and Mu Tu Zhishi 1 as General of the Central Power; General of the Northern Expeditionary Force, Xuan Hui, General of the Northern Expeditionary Force, Jian

古文：辛巳，舆驾亲祠南郊。
现代文：辛巳，皇帝舆驾亲往南郊祭祀。
English: Soon, the emperor himself began to offer sacrifices in the southern suburbs.

古文：甲午，舆驾亲祠太庙。
现代文：甲午，皇帝舆驾亲临太庙祭祀。
English: On the afternoon of the first day of the second month, the emperor personally came to the temple to offer sacrifices.

古文：二月辛丑，舆驾亲祠明堂。
现代文：二月辛丑，皇帝舆驾亲临明堂祭祀。
English: It was so ugly that the emperor himself had to offer a sacrifice to the Myodo.

古文：乙卯，夜有白气如虹，自北方贯北斗紫宫。
现代文：乙卯日，夜晚有白气如虹，从北方贯穿直至紫微星座。
English: On the second day of the month, the night is white as a rainbow, extending from the north to the violet constellation.

古文：三月壬午，分命众军北伐，以镇前将军、开府仪同三司吴明彻都督征讨诸军事。
现代文：三月壬午日，分派众军北伐，任命镇前将军、开府仪同三司县旦困都督征讨诸军事。
English: On the afternoon of March 13th, he dispatched troops to the Northern Expedition, and appointed General Zhenzhen, Kaifu Yi, and the governor of Sansi County, Danzui, to be conscripted into the military.

古文：丙戌，西衡州献马生角。
现代文：丙戌，西衡州献上的马生出角。
English: Propylene, horse shoots out of the corner presented by West Hengzhou.

古文：己丑，皇孙胤生，内外文武赐帛各有差，为父后者爵一级。
现代文：己丑曰，皇孙陈胤出生，朝廷内外文武官员赐给数目不等的绢帛，有子女的男子赐爵一级。
English: Ji Jiu said that when the grandson of the emperor, Chen Yin, was born, the civil and military officials inside and outside the imperial court gave him a number of titles, and men with children were given a first-class knighthood.

古文：北讨大都督吴明彻统众十万，发自白下。
现代文：北讨大都督吴明彻统率十万大军，从白下出发。
English: Wu Mingche, the grand governor of the Northern Expedition, led a 100,000-strong army and set out from Baixia.

古文：夏四月癸卯，前巴州刺史鲁广达克齐大岘城。
现代文：夏四月癸卯日，前巴州刺史鲁广达攻克北齐的大岘城。
English: On the third day of the fourth month of the summer, the former Pazhou Jishu Guangda conquered the Dadu City in North Qi.

古文：辛亥，吴明彻克秦州水栅。
现代文：辛亥曰，吴明彻攻克秦州水军营栅。
English: Xinhai said that Wu Mingcher conquered the Qin State Water Army camp gate.

古文：庚申，齐遣兵十万援历阳，仪同黄法抃破之。
现代文：庚申日，齐派兵十万援救历阳，仪同黄法毡打败他们。
English: On Goshun's Day, Qi sent 100,000 soldiers to rescue Liyang, and Yi and Huang Fahu defeated them.

古文：辛酉，齐军救秦州，吴明彻又破之。
现代文：辛酉日，齐军援救秦州，吴明彻又打败他们。
English: On Xinwu Day, the Qi army came to the rescue of Qinzhou, and Wu Mingcher defeated them again.

古文：癸亥，诏北伐众军所杀齐兵，并令埋掩。
现代文：癸亥日，下韶北伐众军所杀死的齐兵，全部予以掩埋。
English: On the Day of the Boar, the Qi soldiers killed by the troops of the Northern Expeditionary Army of the Lower Han Dynasty were all buried.

古文：甲子，南谯太守徐槾克石梁城。
现代文：甲子日，南谯太守徐幔攻克石梁城。
English: On the first day of the year of the Goat, Southern Wei's grand marshal Xu Xi conquered Shiliang City.

古文：五月己巳，瓦梁城降。
现代文：五月己巳日，瓦梁城投降。
English: On the same day in May, Waliang surrendered.

古文：癸酉，阳平郡城降。
现代文：癸酉日，阳平郡城投降。
English: On the third day, Yangping County surrendered.

古文：甲戌，徐槾克庐江郡城。
现代文：甲戌日，徐樱攻克庐江郡城。
English: On the day of Jiajing, Xu Ying captured the county town of Kejiang.

古文：丙子，黄法抃克历阳城。
现代文：丙子日，黄法毡攻克历阳城。
English: On the third day of the third month, Huang Faqin conquered Liyang City.

古文：己卯，北高唐郡城降。
现代文：己卯日，北高唐郡城投降。
English: On the same day, Beigao Tang County surrendered.

古文：辛巳，诏征南大将军、开府仪同三司、南豫州刺史黄法抃徙镇历阳，齐改县为郡者并复之。
现代文：辛巳日，诏令征南大将军、开府仪同三司、南豫州刺史黄法毡移军镇守历阳城，北齐将县改为郡的一并恢复原来建制。
English: On the same day, Emperor Qin issued an imperial edict to recruit the Southern General, Kaifu Yi and the three divisions, and to transfer troops from the Southern Yuzhou to the Huangfa Junction to defend Liyang City, and Northern Qi changed the county to the county and restored the original system.

古文：乙酉，南齐昌太守黄咏克齐昌外城。
现代文：乙酉日，南齐昌太守黄咏攻克齐昌的外城。
English: On the second day of the second month of the year, Huang Qi, the governor of South Qichang, invaded the outer city of Qichang.

古文：丙戌，庐陵内史任忠军次东关，克其东西二城，进克蕲城。
现代文：丙戌日，庐陵内史任忠进军束关，攻克东西二城，又进军攻克蕲城。
English: On the 6th day of the 6th month, Ren Zhong marched into Shouguan, conquered the two cities in the east and west, and marched into and conquered Lucheng.

古文：戊子，又克谯郡城，秦州城降。
现代文：戊子日，又攻克谯郡城，秦州城投降。
English: On the day of the Empress Dowager Cixi's birthday, the city of Qin County was conquered, and the city of Qin State surrendered.

古文：癸巳，瓜步、胡墅二城降。
现代文：癸巳日，瓜步、胡墅二城投降。
English: On the following day, Guapu and Huzhu surrendered.

古文：六月庚子，郢州刺史李综克滠口城。
现代文：六月庚子日，郢州刺史李综攻克瀑城。
English: In June, Geng Zi Day, Zhangzhou stabbed the history of Li Si to conquer the waterfall city.

古文：乙巳，任忠克合州外城。
现代文：乙巳日，任忠攻克合州外城。
English: On the second day, Ren Zhong attacked the outlying city of Kehezhou.

古文：庚戌，淮阳、沭阳郡并弃城走。
现代文：庚戌日，淮阳、沭阳二郡的守将都弃城逃跑。
English: On the day of the Geng Zi Festival, the governors of the two counties of Huaiyang and Fenyang abandoned the city and fled.

古文：癸丑，景云见。
现代文：癸丑日，出现祥云。
English: On April Fool's Day, a lucky cloud appeared.

古文：豫章内史程文季克泾州城。
现代文：豫童内史程文季攻克泾州城。
English: Yu Tong Nai's Cheng Wen Ji conquered Zhangzhou City.

古文：乙卯，宣毅司马湛陀克新蔡城。
现代文：乙卯日，宣毅司马湛陁攻克新蔡城。
English: On the second day of the second month of the second month, Xuan Yi, Sima Zhanqi and others conquered Xin Cai City.

古文：癸亥，周遣使来聘。
现代文：癸亥日，周派使者来聘问。
English: On April Fool's Day, Zhou sent an envoy to ask questions.

古文：黄法抃克合州城。
现代文：黄法堑攻克金州城。
English: Huang Fa Ying conquered Jinzhou City.

古文：吴明彻师次仁州，甲子，克其州城。
现代文：呈旦困进军包出，甲子日，攻克州城。
English: On the first day of the siege, they marched into Baoding, and on the second day of the siege, they conquered the city of Shuzhou.

古文：是月，治明堂。
现代文：本月，修治明堂。
English: This month, Shujimeido.

古文：秋七月乙丑，镇前将军、开府仪同三司吴明彻进号征北大将军。
现代文：秋七月乙丑日，镇前将军、开府仪同三司吴塱做进号为征北大将军。
English: On the 1st day of the 2nd month of the autumn and the 7th month of the year, Gen. Zhenmae, Gen. Kaifu, and the 3rd Division of the 3rd Division of the 3rd Division of the 3rd Division of the 3rd Division of the 3rd Division of the 3rd Division of the 3rd Division of the 3rd Division of the 3rd Division of the 3rd Division of the 3rd Division of the 3rd Division of the 3rd Division of the 3rd Division of the 3rd Division of the 3rd Division of the 3rd Division of the 3rd Division of the 3rd Division of the 3rd Division of the 3rd Division of the 3

古文：戊辰，齐遣众二万援齐昌，西阳太守周炅破之。
现代文：戊辰，齐派军队二万人援助变旦，酉堡太守凰垦打败查军。
English: Wuchen, Qi dispatched an army of twenty thousand people to aid Zhudan, and the commander of the fortress, Huo Gan, defeated the Zha army.

古文：己巳，吴明彻军次峡口，克其北岸城，南岸守者弃城走。
现代文：己巳曰，呈盟翅进军蛆，攻克北岸城，南岸的守军弃城逃跑。
English: According to him, the allies marched into the city and conquered the north bank, while the defenders on the south bank abandoned the city and fled.

古文：周炅克巴州城。
现代文：且星攻克旦业城。
English: and conquered the city of Danyang.

古文：淮北绛城及谷阳士民，并诛其渠帅，以城降。
现代文：缝球以及毅墨的士民，皆诛杀守城的将领，献城投降。
English: All the citizens, including those who sewed the ball and ink, killed the generals guarding the city and surrendered the city.

古文：丙戌，吴明彻克寿阳外城。
现代文：丙戌日，吴明彻攻克寿阳的外城。
English: On the same day, Wu Mingcher conquered the outer city of Shouyang.

古文：八月乙未，山阳城降。
现代文：八月乙末日，山阳城投降。
English: On the last day of August, Sanyang surrendered.

古文：壬寅，盱眙城降。
现代文：壬寅日，贬监越投降。
English: On Renin Day, Dajian Yue surrendered.

古文：戊申，罢南齐昌郡。
现代文：戊申日，撤除南齐昌郡。
English: On Wushen Day, Southern Qichang County was abolished.

古文：壬子，戎昭将军徐敬辩克海安城。
现代文：壬子日，戎昭将军徐苞噬攻克海安城。
English: On the day of Imzi, the general of the army Zhao Xu conquered the city of Hai'an.

古文：青州东海城降。
现代文：壹业的塞啦投降。
English: Give up your career and surrender.

古文：戊午，平固侯陈敬泰等克晋州城。
现代文：戊午日，垩里堡陈敬泰等人攻克置业城。
English: On the afternoon of the third day, Chen Jingtai and others from the Baili Fort conquered the city of Oye.

古文：九月甲子，阳平城降。
现代文：九月甲子日，阳平城投降。
English: On September 1st, Yangpyeong surrendered.

古文：壬申，高唐太守沈善度克马头城。
现代文：壬申日，高唐太守沈善度攻克马头城。
English: On the day of Jinshin, the high Tang Dynasty governor Shen Zandu conquered the Ma Tou City.

古文：甲戌，齐安城降。
现代文：甲戌日，齐安城投降。
English: On Armistice Day, Qi'an surrendered.

古文：丙子，左卫将军樊毅克广陵楚子城。
现代文：丙子日，左卫将军樊毅攻克广陵的楚子城。
English: On the third day of the third month, the left guard general Zou Yi conquered the Chu Zi city of Guangling.

古文：癸未，尚书右仆射、领吏部、驸马都尉沈君理卒。
现代文：癸末日，尚书右仆射、领吏部、驸马都尉沈君理去世。
English: On the last day of the year, Shang Shuxu's right-hand man Shuai, the leader of the officers, and the commander of the cavalry Shen Junli passed away.

古文：丁亥，前鄱阳内史鲁天念克黄城小城，齐军退保大城。
现代文：丁亥曰，前鄱阳内史鲁天念攻克黄城的小城，齐军退却防守大城。
English: Ding Hai said that the former Shiyang Inner Shilutian wanted to conquer the small city of Huangcheng, and the Qi army retreated to defend the big city.

古文：戊子，割南兗州之盱眙郡属谯州。
现代文：戊子日，分割南兖州的盱眙郡归属谯州。
English: On the Day of Pei Zi, the county of Pei, which was divided from the southern part of Pei Zhou, belonged to Pei Zhou.

古文：壬辰晦，夜明。
现代文：壬辰晦日，夜晚出现光明。
English: On the eve of Imjin, the night appears bright.

古文：黄城大城降。
现代文：黄城的大城投降。
English: The great city of Huangcheng surrenders.

古文：冬十月甲午，郭默城降。
现代文：冬十月甲午日，郭默城投降。
English: On the afternoon of the first day of October in winter, Guo Meicheng surrendered.

古文：戊戌，以中书令王瑒为吏部尚书。
现代文：戊戌日，任命中书令王埸为吏部尚书。
English: On the same day, Wang Xi was appointed as the secretary of the Ministry of Personnel.

古文：己亥，以特进、领国子祭酒周弘正为尚书右仆射。
现代文：己亥日，任命特进、领国子祭酒周弘正为尚书右仆射。
English: On the day of Ji Hai, Zhou Hongzheng, the designated special envoy and the leader of the National Children's Festival, was appointed as Shangshu's right-hand man.

古文：乙巳，吴明彻克寿阳城，斩王琳，传首京师，枭于硃雀航。
现代文：乙巳日，吴明彻攻克寿阳城，诛杀王琳，将其首级传送至京师，悬挂于朱雀航示众。
English: On the 21st, Wu Mingcher conquered Shouyang City, killed Wang Lin, and sent his head to the Beijing division, hanging it in Suzakehang for the public to see.

古文：丁未，齐兵万人至颍口。樊毅击走之。
现代文：丁未日，齐兵上万人来到颖，被樊毅打跑。
English: On the day before yesterday, tens of thousands of Qi soldiers came to Ying and were beaten by Xing Yi.

古文：辛亥，齐遣兵援苍陵，又破之。
现代文：辛亥日，齐派兵救援苍陵，又被打败。
English: On the day of Xinhai, Qi sent soldiers to rescue Goryeong and was defeated again.

古文：丙辰，诏曰： 梁末得悬瓠，以寿阳为南豫州，今者克复，可还为豫州。
现代文：丙辰日，下诏说： 梁朝末叶收复悬瓠，划分寿阳为南豫州，如今又收复此城，可以还归豫州。
English: On the 4th day of the 4th month, the next imperial edict said: At the end of the Liang Dynasty, Shouyang was divided into Southern Henan, and now this city has been recovered, it can also be returned to Henan.

古文：以黄城为司州，治下为安昌郡，鳷湍为汉阳郡，三城依梁为义阳郡，并属司州。 
现代文：以黄城归属于司州，下属于安昌郡，渡湍归汉阳郡，三城依照梁朝建制设义阳郡，一并属于司州。 
English: With Huangcheng belonging to Shizhou, its subordinate belongs to Anchang County, Wudu belongs to Hanyang County, and the three cities are set up in Yiyang County in accordance with the Liang Dynasty establishment system, and all belong to Shizhou.

古文：以征北大将军、开府仪同三司吴明彻为豫州刺史，进号车骑大将军；征南大将军、开府仪同三司、南豫州刺史黄法抃为征西大将军、合州刺史。
现代文：任命征北大将军、开府仪同三司吴明彻为豫州刺史，进号车骑大将军；征南大将军、开府仪同三司、南豫州刺史黄法毡为征西大将军、合州刺史。
English: He appointed the general of the Northern Expeditionary Force, Kaifu Yi, and the Third Division, Wu Mingcher, as the general of the Western Expeditionary Force, and the general of the Southern Expeditionary Force, Kaifu Yi, and the Third Division, Huang Fahui, as the general of the Western Expeditionary Force, and the general of the Western Expeditionary Force, Hezhou.

古文：戊午，湛陀克齐昌城。
现代文：戊午日，湛陁攻克齐昌城。
English: On the afternoon of the third day, Zhanhan captured Qichang City.

古文：十一月甲戌，淮阴城降。
现代文：十一月甲戌曰，进堕拯投降。
English: In November, Jia Rong said that he would surrender.

古文：庚辰，威虏将军刘桃根克朐山城。
现代文：庚辰日，威虏将军刘桃根攻克胞业继。
English: On the day of Geng Chen, the tyrant general Liu Momogen defeated the brotherhood.

古文：辛巳，樊毅克济阴城。
现代文：辛巳日，矾堑攻克遭篮球。
English: On that fateful day, I was defeated by a basketball.

古文：己丑，鲁广达等克北徐州。
现代文：己丑日，垒庐达等人攻克韭盆塑。
English: On the day of his death, he was defeated by others such as Jie Bingda.

古文：十二月壬辰朔，诏曰： 古者反噬叛逆，尽族诛夷，所以藏其首级，诫之后世。
现代文：十二月壬辰朔日，下韶说： 古代谋反叛逆国家的人，全族予以诛减，之所以保存他们的首级，是为了警告后世。
English: On New Year's Day in December, the lower court said: "In ancient times, people who plotted to rebel against the state were punished by the whole nation. The reason why their heads were preserved was to warn future generations.

古文：比者所戮止在一身，子胤或存，枭悬自足，不容久归武库，长比月支。
现代文：近来所诛杀的仅限于谋反者一身，儿子后代有些予以宽赦，悬首示众就足够了，不必长久放在武库中，长时间与箭靶一类的军器放在一起。
English: The recent executions have been limited to the conspirators, and some of their descendants have been pardoned. It is enough to hang their heads in public, and they do not have to be kept in the arsenal for a long time, together with military equipment such as arrow targets.

古文：恻隐之怀，有仁不忍。
现代文：朕恻隐怜悯的胸怀，具有仁德而不忍心如此处置。
English: I have a compassionate heart, and I am kind, but I can't bear to do this.

古文：维熊昙朗、留异、陈宝应、周迪、邓绪等及今者王琳首，并还亲属，以弘广宥。 
现代文：熊昙朗、留异、陈宝应、周迪、邓绪等人以及现在王琳的首级，一并还给他们的亲属，从而弘扬朝廷宽大恩德。 
English: Xiong Yulang, Ruoyi, Chen Baoying, Zhou Di, Deng Xu and others, and now Wang Lin's head, were returned to their relatives together, thus promoting the magnanimity of the imperial court.

古文：乙未，谯城降。
现代文：乙末日，谯城投降。
English: On the last day of the second month, Handan surrendered.

古文：乙巳，立皇子叔明为宜都王，叔献为河东王。
现代文：乙巳日，封皇子叔明为宜都王，叔献为河东王。
English: On the 19th day of the month, Fong's son Shuming was crowned King of Yidu, and Shukan was crowned King of Hedong.

古文：壬午，任忠克霍州城。
现代文：壬午，任忠攻克霍州城。
English: At Renwu, Ren Zhong attacked Kezhou City.

古文：六年春正月壬戌朔，诏曰： 王者以四海为家，万姓为子，一物乖方，夕惕犹厉，六合未混，旰食弥忧。
现代文：六年春正月壬戌朔，下诏说： 帝王以四海为家，将百姓视为儿女，某一方面缺乏规矩，尚且十分小心忧惧，而天下未能统一，更是忧虑得寝食不安。
English: In the first month of the sixth year of the Spring, the following edict was issued: The emperor regards the four seas as his home and the people as his children. In one respect, he lacks discipline, but he is also very cautious and worried. If the world is not unified, he is even more worried and has trouble sleeping and eating.

古文：朕嗣纂鸿基，思弘经略，上符景宿，下叶人谋，命将兴师，大拯沦溺。
现代文：朕继承帝业，思量大展宏图，上符合天意，下协洽臣民的心意，选拔将帅出兵，大力拯救沦陷于异族的百姓。
English: I will inherit the imperial inheritance, think big, act in accordance with the will of heaven above and the will of the subjects below, select a commander to send troops, and vigorously save the people who have fallen into a foreign race.

古文：灰琯未周，凯捷相继，拓地数千，连城将百。
现代文：季节气候尚未变化，胜利的捷报便接踵而至，开拓土地数千里，攻克城市将近上百座。
English: The season and climate have not yet changed, and the victory reports have come one after another, opening up thousands of miles of land and conquering nearly a hundred cities.

古文：蠢彼馀黎，毒兹异境，江淮年少，犹有剽掠，乡闾无赖，摘出阴私，将帅军人，罔顾刑典，今使苛法蠲除，仁声载路。
现代文：那些遣存下来的夷狄愚蠢至极，毒害沦陷区百姓，江淮一带的少年，尚有抢劫偷盗之举，乡间里巷的无赖之徒，时常干出不可见人之事，将领同部下士兵，不顾刑法典章。现今废除残酷的刑法，从而使朝廷的仁慈在民间传颂。
English: Those who survived were extremely stupid, poisoned the people in the occupied areas, robbed and stole from young boys in the areas along the Yangtze River and Huai River, were rogues in the countryside, and often did things that were out of the ordinary. The generals and soldiers under their command disregarded the Criminal Law. Now the cruel Criminal Law has been abolished, so that the benevolence of the imperial court can be extolled by the people.

古文：且肇元告庆，边服来荒，始睹皇风，宜覃曲泽，可赦江右淮北南司、定、霍、光、建、朔、合、豫、北徐、仁、北兗、青、冀，南谯、南兗十五州，郢州之齐安、西阳，江州之齐昌、新蔡、高唐，南豫州之历阳、临江郡土民，罪无轻重，悉皆原宥。
现代文：况且刚开始获得成功，边境荒远之地的百姓，才刚刚睹朝廷的风仪，应该对他们特别赐予恩泽，可以赦免长江以西淮河以北的南司、定、霍、光、建、朔、合、豫、北徐、仁、北兖、青、冀、南谯、南兖十五州，和郢州的齐安、西阳二郡，江州的齐昌、新蔡、高唐三郡，南豫州的历阳、临江二郡的士民，罪过无论轻重，全部予以宽免。
English: Moreover, they have just begun to achieve success. The people in the remote border areas have just witnessed the demeanor of the imperial court. They should be given special grace. They can be pardoned from the 15 prefectures of Nanshi, Ding, Huo, Guang, Jian, Shuo, Heping, Beichuan, Xu, Ren, Beichuan, Qing, Hebei, Nancheng and Nancheng west of the Yangtze River and north of the Huai River, and the two counties of Qian and Xiyang in Zhangzhou, the three counties of Qichang, Xincai and Gaotang in Jiangzhou, and the two counties of

古文：将帅职司，军人犯法，自依常科。 
现代文：将帅官府，军人犯法，自当依照平常法律处置。 
English: If a general or a government official or a soldier violates the law, he or she shall be dealt with in accordance with the ordinary law.

古文：以翊前将军新安王伯固为中领军，进号安前将军；安前将军、中领军晋安王伯恭为安南将军、南豫州刺史。
现代文：任命翊前将军新安王伯固为中领军，进号为安前将军；安前将军、中领军晋安王伯恭为安南将军、南豫州刺史。
English: He appointed the former general Xin'an Wang Baogu as the central leader of the army, and the former general An as the leading general; the former general An and the leader of the army Jin'an Wang Baogong as the general Annan and the leader of the south Henan Province.

古文：壬午，舆驾亲祠太庙。
现代文：壬午，皇帝舆驾亲临太庙祭祀。
English: In the morning of the third day of the third month, the emperor personally came to the temple to offer sacrifices.

古文：甲申，广陵金城降。
现代文：甲申日，广陵的中城投降。
English: On the day of Jiaxun, the central city of Guangling surrendered.

古文：周遣使来聘。
现代文：周派使者来聘问。
English: Zhou sent an envoy to ask questions.

古文：高丽国遣使献方物。
现代文：高丽国派使者献上地方特产。
English: Koryo dispatches envoys to offer tribute to local specialties.

古文：二月壬辰朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：二月壬辰朔日，出现了日食。
English: A solar eclipse occurred on New Year's Day in February.

古文：辛亥，舆驾亲耕籍田。
现代文：辛亥日，皇帝舆驾亲自耕种藉田。
English: On the day of Xinhai, the emperor personally cultivated the borrowed land.

古文：丙辰，以中权大将军、开府仪同三司淳于量为征西大将军、郢州刺史。
现代文：丙辰日，任命中权大将军、开府仪同三司淳于量为征西大将军、郢州刺史。
English: On the 4th day of the 4th month, General Zhong Quan, Kaifu Yi and Sanji Junyuryo were appointed as General of the Western Expedition, and the history of Zhangzhou was written.

古文：三月癸亥，诏曰： 去岁南川颇言失稔，所督田租于今未即。
现代文：三月癸亥日，下诏说： 去年直丛许多地方报告说歉收，所催缴的田租至今没有收上来。
English: In March, on the Day of the Boar, the following edict was issued: Last year, many localities in Zhouzhuang reported poor harvests, and the land rents that were collected have not been collected.

古文：豫章等六郡太建五年田租，可申半至秋。
现代文：邃童等六郡基建五年的田租，半数可以延期至今秋缴纳。
English: Half of the land rent for the five-year construction of infrastructure in six counties, including Xingtong, can be deferred until this autumn.

古文：豫章又逋太建四年检首田税，亦申至秋。
现代文：邃童登又拖欠左建四年检核出来的田税，也可以延期至今秋。
English: Shandong Dengden is also in arrears of the field tax that came out of Zuo Jian's four-year inspection, and it can also be postponed until this fall.

古文：南康一郡，岭下应接，民间尤弊，太建四年田租未入者，可特原除。
现代文：直鏖遣一郡，连接左尘蛊附近，百姓生活尤其艰难，太建四年没有交纳的租税，可以特别加以免除。
English: People in Zhouzhangyuan County, which is connected to Zuoying County, have a particularly difficult life. The tax that Tai Jian has not paid for four years can be specially exempted.

古文：庶修垦无废，岁取方实。 
现代文：大抵衹有不荒废垦田耕种，每年的收成才会充实。 
English: In most cases, there is no wastage in the cultivation of rice fields, and the annual harvest will be enriched.

古文：夏四月庚子，彗星见。
现代文：夏四月庚子曰，出现了彗星。
English: In the summer of April, Genko said, a comet appeared.

古文：辛丑，诏曰： 戢情怀善，有国之令图，拯弊救危，圣范之通训。
现代文：辛丑曰，下韶说： 怀有善良情感，是一国之主的崇高德行，拯救苦难危急的百姓，是先圣垂范的通则。
English: Xin Ug said, the lower jaw said: "Having good feelings is the noble virtue of the master of a country, and saving the people in distress is the general rule of the prelate."

古文：近命师薄伐，义在济民，青、齐旧隶，胶、光部落，久患凶戎，争归有道，弃彼农桑，忘其衣食。
现代文：近来派军队征伐，目的在于救济民众，青、齐二州原来的百姓，婴、光二州一带的村落，长期遭受凶暴的兵祸，争先归顺有道的圣朝，放弃了他们的农耕蚕桑，完全不顾衣食来源。
English: Recently, the army was sent to conquer, with the aim of relieving the people, including the original people of the two prefectures of Qing and Qi, and the villages around the two prefectures of Ying and Guang, who have long suffered from the ferocious military disaster, scrambled to return to the righteous Holy Dynasty, abandoned their farming of silkworms, and completely disregarded the source of food and clothing.

古文：而大军未接，中途止憩，朐山、黄郭，车营布满，扶老携幼，蓬流草跋，既丧其本业，咸事游手，饥馑疾疫，不免流离。
现代文：而朝廷大军无力接待，只好在道路上住宿休息，朐山、黄郭一带，布满了车马营帐，百姓们扶老携幼，跋涉于草丛荒路之上，既丧失了他们生存的本业，又全都无所事事地流浪，就难免发生饥馑和时疫流行，难免流离失所。
English: But the imperial army was unable to receive them, so they had to stay and rest on the road. The Lushan and Huangguo areas were full of caravans and horse camps, and the people helped the elderly with their children and trudged along the grassy road. Since they had lost their livelihood and were all wandering around doing nothing, it was inevitable that famine and seasonal epidemics would occur, and they would inevitably be displaced.

古文：可遣大使精加慰抚，仍出阳平仓谷，拯其悬磬，并充粮种。
现代文：可派遣大使勤加抚慰，又拿出旦旺仓中的谷米，拯救倒悬的饥民，并且充实他们的种子粮。
English: He will send his ambassadors to comfort them, and they will bring forth grain out of the barns, and they will feed the hungry with increase of grain.

古文：劝课士女，随近耕种。
现代文：劝勉督促男女百姓，就近耕种土地。
English: Encourage and urge men and women to cultivate the land nearby.

古文：石鳖等屯，适意修垦。 
现代文：亘盥等处的山地，让他们随意开垦耕种。 
English: In mountainous areas such as Wugu, let them cultivate as much as they want.

古文：六月壬辰，尚书右仆射、领国子祭酒周弘正卒。
现代文：六月壬辰日，尚书右仆射、领国子祭酒周弘正去世。
English: In June, on the day of the Imjin, Shoshu's right-hand man, Sho, and the leader of the national children's festival, Zhou Hongzheng, died.

古文：乙巳，以中卫将军、扬州刺史鄱阳王伯山为征北将军、南徐州刺史，中护军衡阳王伯信为宣毅将军、扬州刺史。
现代文：乙巳日，任命中卫将军、扬州刺史鄱阳王值山为征北将军、卢涂业刺史，中护军面垦旺但值为宣毅将军、荡业刺史。
English: On the second day of the month, he appointed Zhongwei General, Yangzhou Chief of Staff Shenyang Wang Zhenshan as the General of the Northern Expedition, Lu Tuye as the General of the Northern Expedition, and Zhongguo General of Staff Xuan Yi as the General of the Northern Expedition.

古文：冬十一月乙亥，诏北讨行军之所，并给复十年。
现代文：冬十一月乙亥日，下诏北伐各军经过的地方，全部免除徭役十年。
English: In the winter of November, on the day of the Chinese lunar new year, the emperor decreed that all the armies of the Northern Expedition would be exempted from military service for ten years.

古文：十二月癸巳，平南将军、湘州刺史始兴王叔陵进号镇南将军。
现代文：十二月癸巳，平南将军、湘州刺史始兴王圭已医进号镇南将军。
English: At the end of December, General Pingnan and Xiangzhou chief historian Shi Xing Wang Gui had been promoted to General Zhenan.

古文：戊戌，以吏部尚书王瑒为尚书右仆射，度支尚书孔奂为吏部尚书。
现代文：戊戌日，任命吏部尚书王场为尚书右仆射，度支尚书孔奂为吏部尚书。
English: On the 6th day of the 7th month, Shang Shuxu Wangfang was appointed as Shang Shuxu's right-hand man, and Du Zhi Shang Shuxu Kongjun was appointed as Shang Shuxu's right-hand man.

古文：丙午，安右将军、左光禄大夫王通加特进。
现代文：丙午日，安右将军、左光禄大夫王通加特进。
English: On the afternoon of the third day, General An Yu and Dr. Wang Tongat, the doctor of the Left Guanglu, marched in.

古文：七年春正月辛未，舆驾亲祠南郊。
现代文：七年春正月辛未日，皇帝舆驾亲往南郊祭祀。
English: On the last day of the first month of spring in the seventh year, the emperor personally drove to the southern suburbs to offer sacrifices.

古文：乙亥，左卫将军樊毅克潼州城。
现代文：乙亥日，左卫将军变攻克遭业城。
English: On the 1st day of the 2nd month of the Chinese lunar calendar, General Zuo Wei launched a counter-offensive against the city.

古文：辛巳，舆驾亲祠北郊。
现代文：辛巳日，皇帝舆驾亲往北郊祭祀。
English: On the day of Xin Si, the emperor personally drove to the northern suburbs to offer sacrifices.

古文：二月戊申，樊毅克下邳、高栅等六城。
现代文：二月戊申日，变主攻克工巫、产扭等六城。
English: In February, on the day of Wushen, it was changed to focus on six cities, such as Kengwu and Shantou.

古文：三月辛未，诏豫、二兗、谯、徐、合、霍、南司、定九州及南豫、江、郢所部在江北诸郡置云旗义士，往大军及诸镇备防。
现代文：三月辛末日，诏令辽、二兖、盏、途、金、霍、直司、室九州以及查辽、辽、郢等州所管辖在垦红以北的各郡安置举旗归顺的义士，随往大军以及各州郡镇守防备。
English: On the last day of Xin in March, he ordered Liao, Erqi, Zhan, Tu, Jin, Huo, Zhi, Muro, Kyushu, as well as the counties under the jurisdiction of Zhaliao, Liao, and Handan to resettle the loyalists who raised flags and surrendered in the counties north of Xinhong, and the accompanying large army and the counties and towns of each state to be on the alert.

古文：戊寅，以新除征西大将军、合州刺史、开府仪同三司黄法抃为豫州刺史。
现代文：戊寅日，任命新任征西大将军、盒刺史、开府仪同三司董迭堑为塑出刺史。
English: On the day of Wu Yin, he appointed the newly appointed general of the Western Expeditionary Force, the box stabbing history, the Kaifu ceremony and the three directors to shape the stabbing history.

古文：改梁东徐州为安州，武州为沅州。移谯州镇于新昌郡，以秦郡属之。
现代文：将銮翘时的塞剀改称室，盏业改称远蛆。将盗业移镇于新昌郡，以童塑归属于这个州。
English: He changed the name of Jiaozhou to Shijie, and the name of Jiaozhou to Yuancheng. He moved the town of Jiaozhou to Xinchang County, and attributed it to this state as Tongzhuang.

古文：盱眙、神农二郡还隶南兗州。
现代文：旦逊、主蝗二郡又还原隶属于尘窒业。
English: Danson, the main locust two counties were also originally subordinated to the dust industry.

古文：夏四月丙戌，有星孛于大角。
现代文：夏四月丙戌日，有彗星出现于大角星座。
English: On the last day of summer in April, a comet appeared in the constellation of Aries.

古文：庚寅，监豫州陈桃根于所部得青牛，献之，诏遣还民。
现代文：庚寅日，代理豫州刺史陈桃根在治下区域内获得青牛，献上，韶令送还给百姓。
English: On the day of Geng Yin, Chen Taogen, the acting governor of Yuzhou, obtained young cattle in the area under his administration, presented them, and ordered them to be returned to the people.

古文：甲午，舆驾亲祠太庙。
现代文：甲午日，皇帝舆驾亲临太庙祭祀。
English: On the afternoon of the first day of the second month, the emperor personally came to the temple to offer sacrifices.

古文：乙未，陈桃根又表上织成罗文锦被各二，诏于云龙门外焚之。
现代文：乙末日，陈桃根又表奏献上锦罗和锦被各二百端，诏令在云龙门外焚毁。
English: On the last day of the second month, Chen Taogen also presented 200 pieces of brocade and 200 pieces of brocade, and ordered them to be burned outside the Yunlong Gate.

古文：壬子，郢州献瑞钟六。
现代文：壬子日，郢州献上六枚瑞钟。
English: On the day of Imzi, Bozhou presented six Zui bells.

古文：五月乙卯，割谯州之秦郡还隶南兗州。
现代文：五月乙卯日，分割谯州的秦郡隶属于南兖州。
English: On the second day of May, Qin County, which divided Luzhou, was subordinated to Nanluozhou.

古文：分北谯县置北谯郡，领阳平所属北谯、西谯二县。
现代文：分出北谯县建立北谯郡，下属原由阳平郡管辖的北谯、西谯二县。
English: Beilun County was established from Beilun County, and it was subordinated to the two counties of Beilun and Xilun, which were originally under the jurisdiction of Yangping County.

古文：合州之南梁郡，隶入谯州。
现代文：合州的南梁郡，归入谯塑。
English: Hezhou's Nanliang County, which is included in Handan Plastics.

古文：六月丙戌，为北讨将士死王事者克日举哀。
现代文：六月丙戌日，为为国牺牲的北伐将士定期举哀。
English: On June 3rd, regular memorial services are held for the Northern Expedition soldiers who sacrificed their lives for the country.

古文：壬辰，以尚书右仆射王瑒为尚书仆射。
现代文：壬辰日，任命尚书右仆射王埸为尚书仆射。
English: On the day of Imjin, he appointed Shang Shuxu's right-hand man, Sha Wangjun, as Shang Shuxu's right-hand man.

古文：己酉，改作云龙、神虎门。
现代文：己酉日，改建云龙门、神兽门。
English: On the same day, the Cloud Dragon Gate and the Divine Beast Gate were rebuilt.

古文：秋八月壬寅，移西阳郡治保城。
现代文：秋八月壬寅，将西阳郡治所迁移于保城。
English: In autumn and August, the Xiyang County Government Office was moved to Baocheng.

古文：癸卯，周遣使来聘。
现代文：癸卯日，周派使者来聘问。
English: On the same day, Zhou sent an envoy to ask questions.

古文：闰九月壬辰，都督吴明彻大破齐军于吕梁。
现代文：闰九月壬辰日，都督吴明彻在吕梁大败齐军。
English: On leap September, the day of Imjin, the governor Wu Mingche defeated the Qi army in Luliang.

古文：是月，甘露频降乐游苑。
现代文：本月，甘露频频降于乐游苑。
English: This month, nectar frequently falls in Le Youyuan.

古文：丁未，舆驾幸乐游苑，采甘露，宴群臣，诏于苑龙舟山立甘露亭。
现代文：丁末日，皇帝舆驾来到乐游苑，采集甘露，宴请群臣，诏令在苑中的龙舟山建甘露亭。
English: On the last day of Ding Dynasty, the emperor came to Le Youyuan to collect nectar, invite courtiers to a banquet, and ordered the construction of a nectar pavilion on Longzhou Mountain in the garden.

古文：冬十月戊午，以征北将军、南徐州刺史鄱阳王伯山为征南将军、江州刺史；安前将军、中领军新安王伯固为南徐州刺史，进号镇北将军；信威将军、江州刺史长沙王叔坚为云麾将军、中领军。
现代文：冬十月戊午日，任命征北将军、南徐州刺史叠压旺灿为征南将军、辽业刺史，安前将军、中领军堑塞王值旦为直涂刺史，进号为镇北将军，信威将军、丝业刺史长沙王查哩为云麾将军、中领军。
English: On the afternoon of the third day of October in winter, General Zheng Bei and South Xuzhou embroiderer Wang Can were appointed as General Zheng Nan and Liao Ye embroiderer respectively, General An Qian and the leader of the middle army, King Wansai, as the direct embroiderer, General Zhen Bei as the forward, General Xin Wei and the leader of the silk industry, General Changsha and the leader of the middle army.

古文：己巳，立皇子叔齐为新蔡王，叔文为晋熙王。
现代文：己巳日，封皇子叔齐为新蔡王，叔文为晋熙王。
English: On the same day, Feng's uncle Qi became the new King Cai, and his uncle Wen became King Jinxi.

古文：十一月庚戌，以征西大将军、开府仪同三司、郢州刺史淳于量为中军大将军。
现代文：十一月庚戌日，任命征西大将军、开府仪同三司、墨刺史莲王量为中军大将军。
English: In November, Genghis Khan appointed General of the Western Expedition, Kaifu Yi Tong San Sisi, and Motsi Shilian Wang Rui as the generals of the Chinese army.

古文：十二月丙辰，以新除云麾将军、郢州刺史长沙王叔坚为平越中郎将、广州刺史，东中郎将、东扬州刺史建安王叔卿为云麾将军、郢州刺史，宣惠将军宜都王叔明为东扬州刺史。
现代文：十二月丙辰日，任命新任云麾将军、竖刺史长沙王查哩为平越中郎将、庐刺史，束中郎将、塞荡刺史建塞王赵鲤任云麾将军、坚业刺史，宣惠将军宜都王赵塱任塞翅业刺史。
English: On December 31st, the newly-appointed General Yun Xuan and the chief of staff of the General Staff Changsha Wang Chali were appointed as the general of the General Staff of the General Staff of the General Staff of the General Staff of the General Staff of the General Staff of the General Staff of the General Staff of the General Staff of the General Staff of the General Staff of the General Staff of the General Staff of the General Staff of the General Staff of the General Staff of the General Staff of the General Staff of the General Staff of the General Staff of the General Staff of the General Staff of the General Staff.

古文：壬戌，以尚书仆射王瑒为尚书左仆射，太子詹事、扬州大中正陆缮为尚书右仆射，国子祭酒徐陵为领军将军。
现代文：壬戌日，任命尚书仆射王墨为尚书左仆射，太子詹事、握蛆大中正陆馑为尚书右仆射，国子祭酒篮陆为领军将军。
English: On the following day, he appointed Shang Shuxu's servant Sha Wangmo as Shang Shuxu's left-hand servant Sha, Prince Zhan Zhi, Jixi Da Zhong Zheng Lu Yao as Shang Shuxu's right-hand servant Sha, and Guozhi's sacrifice Shuhan Lu as the leading general.

古文：甲子，南康郡献瑞钟。
现代文：甲子日，直尘郡献上瑞钟。
English: On the day of the birth of the first son, Zui Zhong was presented by Zhouzhen County.

古文：八年春正月庚辰，西南有紫云见。
现代文：八年春正月庚辰日，西南方出现了紫云。
English: On the day of Geng Chen in the first month of spring in the eighth year, a purple cloud appeared in the southwest.

古文：二月壬申，车骑大将军、开府仪同三司吴明彻进位司空。
现代文：二月壬申日，车骑大将军、开府仪同三司吴明彻官职晋升为司空。
English: In February, on Jinshin Day, the General of Cavalry and Cavalry, Kaifu Yi and the Third Division Wu Mingche were promoted to the position of Air Officer.

古文：丁丑，诏江东道太建五年以前租税夏调逋在民间者，皆原之。
现代文：丁丑日，韶令长江以东地区太建五年以前百姓所拖欠的夏季征调的租税，一律予以免除。
English: On Dingwuxi Day, the State Council ordered that the taxes levied in the summer that were overdue by the people in the Taijian area east of the Yangtze River five years ago would be exempted.

古文：夏西月甲寅，诏曰： 元戎凯旋，群师振旅，旌功策赏，宜有飨宴。
现代文：夏四月甲寅曰，下韶说： 统兵大将凯旋而归，各支军队士气振奋，表彰功勋封赏官爵，应该飨宴功臣。
English: Xia April Kato said, the lower jaw said: the general of the united front has returned in triumph, the morale of all branches of the army has been invigorated, the recognition of merits has been rewarded with a knighthood, and meritorious soldiers should be feasted.

古文：今月十七日，可幸乐游苑，设丝竹之乐，大会文武。 
现代文：本月十七日，朕将亲临乐游苑，陈设丝竹音乐，大会文武百官。 
English: On the 17th of this month, I will personally visit the music park, set up silk bamboo music, and hold a literary and military conference.

古文：己未，舆驾亲祠太庙。
现代文：己末日，皇帝舆驾亲临太庙祭祀。
English: At the end of his life, the emperor himself came to the Imperial Temple to offer sacrifices.

古文：五月庚寅，尚书左仆射王瑒卒。
现代文：五月庚寅日，尚书左仆射王埸去世。
English: On the day of Geng Yin in May, Shangshu's left-hand man, Sha Wangtao, passed away.

古文：六月癸丑，以云麾将军、广州刺史长沙王叔坚为合州刺史，进号平北将军。
现代文：六月癸丑日，任命云麾将军、广州刺史长沙王童哩为金业刺史，进号为平北将军。
English: On the Day of the Ugly Duckling in June, he appointed General Yun Qi, the Guangzhou chief historian Changsha Wang Tongli as the gold industry chief historian, and the new name was General Pingbei.

古文：甲寅，以尚书右仆射陆缮为尚书左仆射，新除晋陵太守王克为尚书右仆射。
现代文：甲寅日，任命尚书右仆射陆缮为尚书左仆射，新任晋陵太守王克为尚书右仆射。
English: On the day of Jia Yin, he appointed Shangshu's right-hand man, Sha Lu, as Shangshu's left-hand man, and Wang Ke, the newly-appointed governor of Jinling, as Shangshu's right-hand man.

古文：秋八月丁卯，以车骑大将军、司空吴明彻为南兗州刺史。
现代文：秋八月丁卯日，任命车骑大将军、司空吴明銮为宜銮丛刺史。
English: In the autumn and August of Dingwu, the general of cavalry and cavalry, Sikuo Wu Mingyao, was appointed as the leader of Yiqiu Cong.

古文：九月戊戌，以皇子叔彪为淮南王。
现代文：九月戊戌日，封皇子赵座为进直至。
English: In September, Emperor Zhao's son, Zhao Za, ascended to the throne.

古文：冬十一月乙酉，以平南将军、湘州刺史长沙王叔坚为平西将军、郢州刺史。
现代文：冬十一月乙酉日，任命平南将军、迩业刺史垦室哇圭哩为平西将军、坚业刺史。
English: On the first day of November in the winter, he appointed General Pingnan and his secretary, Wa Guili, as General Pingxi and his secretary, Jianye.

古文：丁酉，分江州晋熙、高唐、新蔡三郡为晋州。
现代文：丁酉日，分割辽的置叠、直庐、麦噬三郡为置业。
English: On the day of Ding Xi, Liao's stacked, straight, and wheat phagocytosis were divided into three counties for purchase.

古文：辛丑，以冠军将军庐陵王伯仁为中领军。
现代文：辛丑日，任命冠军将军庐陆王值仁为中领军。
English: On that fateful day, the champion general, Gong Lu Wang Zhiren, was appointed as the leader of the middle army.

古文：十二月丁卯，以新除太子詹事徐陵为右光禄大夫。
现代文：十二月丁卯日，任命新任太子詹事徐陵为右光禄大夫。
English: In December Dingwu Day, the newly appointed prince Zhan Zhi Xuling was appointed as the doctor of Uguanglu.

古文：九年春正月辛卯，舆驾亲祠北郊。
现代文：九年春正月辛卯日，皇帝舆驾亲往北郊祭祀。
English: In the first month of spring in the ninth year, on the day of Xinwu, the emperor personally drove to the northern suburbs to offer sacrifices.

古文：壬寅，以湘州刺史、新除中卫将军始兴王叔陵为扬州刺史；云麾将军建安王叔卿为湘州刺史，进号平南将军。
现代文：壬寅日，任命湘州刺史、新任中卫将军、始兴王赵堕为扰继刺史，云麾将军、建宝玉超翅为湘州刺史，进号为平南将军。
English: On the day of Ren Yin, he appointed Xiangzhou stabbing history, the newly appointed middle guard general, Shi Xing Wang Zhao Rui as disturbing successor stabbing history, General Yun Qi, and Jian Baogu super wing as Xiangzhou stabbing history, and the promotion number was General Pingnan.

古文：二月壬子，舆驾亲耕藉田。
现代文：二月壬子日，皇帝舆驾亲临藉田耕种。
English: In February, on Jinsi Day, the emperor personally came to cultivate the fields.

古文：夏五月丙子，诏曰： 朕昧旦求衣，日旰方食，思弘亿兆，用臻俾乂，而牧守莅民，廉平未洽，年常租赋，多致逋馀，即此务农，宜弘宽省。
现代文：夏五月丙子曰，下诏说： 朕总是天刚亮就起床，日已晚方进食，希望亿万百姓安居乐业，从而使天下大治，但是刺史太守地方长官治理百姓，尚缺清廉的品行，因而舆清平的时代不相和谐，以至于每年应该缴纳的租赋，拖欠不少数额，针对这一情况管理农务，应该弘扬宽厚俭省的政策。
English: "I always get up at the crack of dawn, and eat late at night. I hope that hundreds of millions of people can live and work in peace and happiness, so that the world can be ruled by peace. However, the local governors who govern the people still lack clean and honest behavior, so the era of public peace is not harmonious. So much so that the rent that should be paid every year is in arrears by a considerable amount. In response to this situation, the management of agricultural affairs should promote the policy of generosity and thrift.

古文：可起太建已来讫八年流移叛户所带租调，七年八年叛义丁、五年讫八年叛军丁、六年七年逋租田米粟夏调绵绢丝布麦等，五年讫七年逋赀绢，皆悉原之。 
现代文：可以征收太建元年以来至八年的被流放叛军家庭所应缴的租调，太建七、八两年归顺朝廷的叛军兵丁和从五年至八年被俘的叛军兵丁，要征收他们太建六、七两年拖欠的田租米粟和夏季征调的绵绢丝布麦子等物，五年至七年拖欠的财物绢帛，全部予以免除。 
English: The families of rebels who were exiled from the first year to the eighth year of Taijian can be levied to pay the rent, and the rebel soldiers who surrendered to the imperial court in the seventh and eighth years of Taijian and the rebel soldiers who were captured from the fifth to the eighth years of Taijian can be levied to collect the field rent, rice, corn, and other items that are in arrears in the sixth and seventh years of Taijian, and the cotton silk cloth and wheat that are in arrears in the summer, and the property and money that are in arrears from the fifth to the seventh years of Taijian, all of which are exempted.

古文：秋七月乙亥，以轻车将军、丹阳尹江夏王伯义为合州刺史。
现代文：秋七月乙亥，任命轻车将军、丹阳尹江夏王伯义为合州刺史。
English: In the autumn and July of Yihai, the general of light vehicles, Danyang Yinjiang Xia Wang Bo Yi, was appointed as the chief historian of Hezhou.

古文：己卯，百济国遣使献方物。
现代文：己卯日，百济国派使者献上地方特产。
English: On the same day, Baekje sent an envoy to present local special products.

古文：庚辰，大雨，震万安陵华表。
现代文：庚辰日，下大雨，万安陵前的华表被震。
English: On the day of Geng Chen, it rained heavily and the clock in front of the Wan'an Mausoleum was shaken.

古文：己丑，震慧日寺刹及瓦官寺重门，一女子于门下震死。
现代文：己丑日，慧日寺庙宇以及瓦官寺重门被震，有一女子在门下被震死。
English: On the day of Jiushi, the temples of Huizhi Temple and the heavy gate of Wakan Temple were shaken, and a woman was shaken to death under the gate.

古文：冬十月戊午，司空吴明彻破周将梁士彦众数万于吕梁。
现代文：冬十月戊午日，司空吴明彻在吕梁打败周将梁士彦数万军队。
English: On the afternoon of the third day of October in winter, Siku Wu Mingcher defeated tens of thousands of troops of Zhou general Liang Shihyan in Luliang.

古文：十二月戊申，东宫成，皇太子移于新宫。
现代文：十二月戊申日，东宫建成，皇太子移居新宫殿内。
English: On December 30, the East Palace was completed, and the crown prince moved into the new palace.

古文：十年春正月己巳朔，以中领军庐陵王伯仁为平北将军、南徐州刺史，翊左将军、右光禄大夫、领太子詹事徐陵为领军将军。
现代文：十年春正月己巳朔，任命中领军庐陵王伯仁为平北将军、南徐州刺史，翊左将军、右光禄大夫、兼太子詹事徐陵为领军将军。
English: In the first month of the 10th year of the Spring, the central leader of the army, Baoling Wang Boren, was appointed as the general of Pingbei, Nan Xuzhou Shishi, Shizao general, Uguanglu doctor, and prince Zhan Shixu Xuling as the leading general.

古文：二月甲子，北讨众军败绩于吕梁，司空吴明彻及将卒已下，并为周军所获。
现代文：甲子日，北伐众军在吕梁战败，司空吴旦困及以下的将领士兵，全被凰军俘获。
English: On the first day of the year, the Northern Expeditionary Army was defeated in Luliang, and the general and soldiers of the Sikuo Wudang and below were all captured by the Huo Army.

古文：三月辛未，震武库。
现代文：三月辛末日，武库发生地震。
English: At the end of March, an earthquake hit the arsenal.

古文：丙子，分命众军以备周：中军大将军、开府仪同三司淳于量为大都督，总水陆诸军事；明威将军孙瑒都督荆、郢水陆诸军事，进号镇西将军；左卫将军樊毅为大都督，督硃沛、清口上至荆山缘淮众军，进号平北将军；武毅将军任忠都督寿阳、新蔡、霍州等众军，进号宁远将军。
现代文：丙子，分派众军来防备北周进攻：中军大将军、开府仪同三司淳于量为大都督，总领水陆诸军事；明威将军孙埸都督荆、郢水陆诸军事，进号为镇西将军；左卫将军樊毅为大都督，统领朱沛、清口以束至荆山沿着淮河一带的众军，进号为平北将军；武毅将军任忠都督寿阳、新蔡、霍州等地各部军队，进号为宁远将军。
English: Cui Zi, dispatched troops to prevent the northern Zhou attack: the general of the Chinese army, Kaifu Yi, and the three divisions of the Junyuan were the grand governors, the general of the territorial water and land military; the Mingwei general Sun Yuxi, the governor of the Jing and the Surabaya water and land military, was the Zhenxi general; the left guard general Zou Yi was the grand governor, the commander of the Zhu Pei, Qingkou and the troops along the Jing Mountain along the Huai River, and the marching number was the Pingbei general; the general Wu Yi was the loyal governor of the Shouyang, Xin Cai,

古文：乙酉，大赦天下。
现代文：乙酉日，大赦天下。
English: On April Fool's Day, there will be a general amnesty.

古文：丁酉，以中军大将军、开府仪同三司、护军将军淳于量为南兗州刺史，进号车骑将军。
现代文：丁酉日，任命中军大将军、开府仪同三司、护军将军淳于量为南兖州刺史，进号为车骑将军。
English: On the day of Ding Rong's death, the general of the Chinese army, Kaifu Rongidong San Sisi, and the general of the escorting army, Jun Yuquan, were appointed as the governor of Nanluozhou, and Jin He was appointed as the general of the cavalry.

古文：夏四月庚戌，诏曰： 懋赏之言，明于训诰，挟纩之美，著在抚巡。
现代文：夏四月庚戌，下韶说： 依功授官之言，记载于《尚书仲虺之诰》，战士受到君王抚慰而倍感温暖的美谈，记载于《左氏春秋》之上。
English: In the summer of April, Geng Zheng, the lower eunuch, said: "According to the words of meritorious promotion, it is recorded in the "Shang Shu Zhong Zheng's Eulogy," and the beautiful story of the warrior being soothed by the king and feeling warm, is recorded in the "Soji Spring and Autumn."

古文：近岁薄伐，廓清淮、泗，摧锋致果，文武毕力，栉风沐雨，寒暑亟离，念功在兹，无忘终食。
现代文：最近几年用兵征伐，廓清淮河、泗水一带的妖氛，挫败敌军锋芒取得丰硕战果，文武官员齐心协力，战士们栉风沐雨，一年四季与家人分离，感念这种功劳，饮食之时也不能忘怀。
English: In recent years, soldiers have been recruited to clear the evil atmosphere around the Huaihe River and Surabaya, defeat the enemy's sharp edge and achieve fruitful results. Civil and military officials have made concerted efforts, and soldiers have braved the wind and rain and been separated from their families all year round. This kind of merit should not be forgotten when eating.

古文：宜班荣赏，用酬厥劳。
现代文：应该按照等次予以奖赏，以此报赏他们的功续。
English: They should be rewarded in an equitable manner for their efforts.

古文：应在军者可并赐爵二级，并加赉恤，付选即便量处。 
现代文：对现役的将士都踢爵二级，并且赐给财物接济他们，交付官府根据才干立即予以任用。 
English: For active-duty soldiers, they will all be stripped of their second-class titles, and they will be given property to help them, and the government will immediately appoint them according to their talents.

古文：又诏曰： 惟尧葛衣鹿裘，则天为大，伯禹弊衣菲食，夫子曰 无间然 ，故俭德之恭，约失者鲜。
现代文：又下韶说： 追想先前尧帝穿粗布衣鹿皮裘，效法天道而成为伟大君主，大禹衣食简陋，孔子赞叹道 没有谁能舆他相提并论 ，因而恭敬地恪守俭朴德行，治国纲领就很少有过失。
English: He also said, "Recall that Emperor Zhou wore coarse cloth and deerskin, and became a great monarch by following the heavenly way. Emperor Yu wore simple clothes and ate simple food. Confucius praised that no one could compare with him. Therefore, he respectfully adhered to the principles of thrift, simplicity, and virtue, and rarely made mistakes in governing the country.

古文：朕君临宇宙，十变年籥，旰日勿休，乙夜忘寝，跂予思治，若济巨川，念兹在兹，懔同驭朽。
现代文：朕统治天下，已有十年，曰暮不得休息，二更难以安寝，迫切盼望天下大治，小心翼翼犹如渡过大江，念念不忘国事，谨慎警惕就像驾驭朽车。
English: I have been ruling the world for ten years. It is impossible to rest at night, and it is even more difficult to sleep at night. I am eagerly looking forward to the world's great rule. I am as careful as if I had crossed a great river. I never forget the affairs of state. Prudence and vigilance are like driving a rotten car.

古文：非贪四海之富，非念黄屋之尊，导仁寿以置群生，宁劳役以奉诸己。
现代文：朕并非贪图天下富有，也不看重帝位的尊贵，衹是要为天下百姓带去仁爱长寿，尽量减少劳役来奉养自己。
English: I do not covet the riches of the world, nor do I value the dignity of the imperial throne. I want to bring benevolence and longevity to the people of the world, and minimize labor to support myself.

古文：但承梁季，乱离斯瘼，宫室禾黍，有名亡处，虽轮奂未睹，颇事经营，去泰去甚，犹为劳费。
现代文：然而承接梁朝末年，战乱造成满目疮痍，宫殿襄到处长满禾黍野草，已经有名无实，虽说现有宫殿并非高大华美，但也颇费经营修治，省去豪华奢靡，但仍然耗费了财力。
English: However, at the end of the Liang Dynasty, the war caused widespread devastation, and the palace was covered with weeds and wild grass everywhere, and it was already famous. Although the existing palace was not tall and gorgeous, it was also quite expensive to operate and repair, and it was not luxurious, but it still consumed financial resources.

古文：加以戎车屡出，千金日损，府帑未充，民疲征赋。
现代文：加上军队频繁征战，每天损耗千金，府库财物空乏，百姓疲于应付战争赋税。
English: Coupled with the frequent military conscription, thousands of money are lost every day, the treasury is empty, and the people are tired of paying war taxes.

古文：百姓不足，君孰与足？
现代文：百姓不富足，君主如何能够富足呢?
English: If the people do not have enough, how will you have enough?

古文：兴言静念，夕惕怀抱，垂训立法，良所多惭。
现代文：在静思默想和言谈之中，胸中不免疑虑恐惧，对照平常训导群臣建立的法度，的确颇感惭愧。
English: In the midst of meditation and conversation, doubts and fears inevitably arise in my heart, and compared to the laws established by the usual training of ministers, I really feel quite ashamed.

古文：斫雕为朴，庶几可慕，雉头之服既焚，弋绨之衣方袭，损撤之制，前自朕躬，草偃风行，冀以变俗。
现代文：去浮华尚质朴，确实值得追慕，奇异名贵的服装已经焚毁，穿上了黑色粗厚的丝锑，减省费用的制度，就从朕自身做起，风吹而草伏，希望以此来改变习俗。
English: It is indeed worthy of admiration to go to the pompous and rustic. The strange and expensive clothing has been burned and put on a thick black silk scarf. The cost-cutting system starts with myself. The wind blows and the grass withers. I hope to change the custom with this.

古文：应御府堂署所营造礼乐仪服军器之外，其馀悉皆停息；掖庭常供、王侯妃主诸有俸恤，并各量减。 
现代文：御府官署所营造的器物除礼乐仪服军器以外，其余各种器物停止营造。宫廷内的常供应、王侯及其妃子郡主有俸禄者，都酌量减少。 
English: With the exception of ceremonial costumes and military equipment, the construction of all kinds of equipment made by the prefectural government offices has been stopped. The amount of regular supplies in the palace and those who have a salary for the prince and his concubine have been reduced.

古文：丁巳，以新除镇右将军新安王伯固为护军将军。
现代文：丁巳。任命新任镇右将军新安王伯固为护军将军。
English: Ding Mi. appointed the newly appointed Zhenyu General Xin An Wang Bo Gu as the escort general.

古文：戊午，樊毅遣军度淮北对清口筑城。
现代文：戊午日，樊毅派军队渡过淮北在清筑城。
English: At noon on the same day, Zhai Yi sent troops across Huaibei to attack Qingzhu City.

古文：庚申，大雨雹。
现代文：庚申，下大冰雹。
English: Heavy hail fell in Koshin.

古文：壬戌，清口城不守。
现代文：壬戌日，清口城被周军攻克。
English: On the same day, Qingkou City was conquered by the Zhou army.

古文：五月甲申，太白昼见。
现代文：五月甲申，白天出现太白星。
English: In May, in Jiaxun, a very white star appeared in the daytime.

古文：六月丁卯，大雨，震大皇寺刹、庄严寺露盘、重阳阁东楼、千秋门内槐树、鸿胪府门。
现代文：六月丁卯，大雨，大皇寺庙宇、庄严寺承露盘、重阳阁的束楼、千秋门内的槐树、鸿胪府的大门都被震。
English: In June, due to heavy rain, the Great Emperor's Temple, the Solemn Temple, the Chung Yeung Pagoda, the Chung Yeung Pagoda, the banyan tree inside the Millennium Gate, and the gate of Hung Hom were all shaken.

古文：秋七月戊戌，新罗国遣使献方物。
现代文：秋七月戊戌日，新罗国派使者献上地方特产。
English: On the first day of autumn in July, Silla sent an envoy to present local special products.

古文：乙巳，以散骑常侍、兼吏部尚书袁宪为吏部尚书。
现代文：乙巳曰，任命散骑常侍、兼吏部尚书袁宪为吏部尚书。
English: Yixi said that Yuan Xian was appointed as the riding attendant and the secretary of the personnel department.

古文：八月乙丑朔，改秦郡为义州。
现代文：八月乙丑朔日，将秦郡改为义州。
English: On August 2nd, he changed Qin County to Yizhou.

古文：戊寅，陨霜，杀稻菽。
现代文：戊寅日，降霜，冻坏稻谷豆类。
English: Wu Yin day, frost, frost damage rice and beans.

古文：九月壬寅，以平北将军樊毅为中领军。
现代文：九月壬寅日，任命平北将军樊毅为中领军。
English: In September, on Renin Day, he appointed the general of Pingbei Province, Zou Yi, as the leader of the central army.

古文：乙巳，立方明坛于娄湖。
现代文：乙巳，在娄湖建立方明坛。
English: It is time to build the Fangming Altar in Wuhu.

古文：戊申，以中卫将军、扬州刺史始兴王叔陵兼王官伯临盟。
现代文：戊申日，任命中卫将军、扬州刺史始兴王叔陵兼任王官伯赴娄湖盟誓。
English: On the day of Wushen, Zhongwei General Yangzhou Zhishi Shi Xing Wang Shuling was appointed as the royal official to go to Wuhu to take the oath.

古文：甲寅，舆驾幸娄湖临誓。
现代文：甲寅日，皇帝舆驾亲临娄湖盟誓。
English: On the first day of the year, the emperor personally went to Wuhu to take the oath.

古文：乙卯，分遣大使以盟誓班下四方，上下相警戒也。
现代文：乙卯日，分派大使将盟誓颁布四方，朝廷上下相互警戒。
English: On the second day of the month, the assigned ambassadors will swear to promulgate the Quartet, and the imperial court will alert each other.

古文：壬戌，以宣惠将军江夏王伯义为东扬州刺史。
现代文：壬戌日，任命宣惠将军江夏王伯义为东扬州刺史。
English: On the day of Linglong, the proclamation of General Jiang Xia Wang Bo Yi was appointed as the history of East Yangzhou.

古文：冬十月戊寅，罢义州及琅邪、彭城二郡。
现代文：冬十月戊寅日，撤除义州和琅邪、彭城二郡。
English: In the winter of October, on the day of Wu Yin, the two counties of Yizhou, Shiyan and Pengcheng were removed.

古文：立建兴，领建安、同夏、乌山、江乘、临沂、湖熟等六县，属扬州。
现代文：建立建兴郡，管辖建安、同夏、乌山、江垂、堕近、塑垫等六县，归属于荡业。
English: Jianxing County was established, with jurisdiction over six counties, including Jian'an, Tongxia, Wushan, Jiangtui, Fucheng, and Pudong, belonging to Xingye.

古文：戊子，以尚书左仆射陆缮为尚书仆射。
现代文：戊子日，任命尚书左仆射陆缮为尚书仆射。
English: On the day of the birth of the Empress Dowager Cixi, Lu Zuo, Shang Shuxu's left-hand man, was appointed as Shang Shuxu's right-hand man.

古文：十一月辛丑，以镇西将军孙瑒为郢州刺史。
现代文：十一月辛丑日，任命镇西将军孙埸为郢州刺史。
English: In November, Zhenxi General Sun Yat-sen was appointed as the first governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：十二月乙亥，合州庐江蛮田伯兴出寇枞阳，刺史鲁广达讨平之。
现代文：十二月乙亥日，合州的庐江蛮人田伯兴率众出山劫掠銮盐，刺史叠卢崖讨伐平定了他们。
English: On December 21st, Tian Boxing, a barbarian from the Minjiang River in Hezhou, led a group of people out of the mountains to plunder salt. They were defeated in the battle at the Lulou Cliff.

古文：十一年春正月丁酉，龙见于南兗州永宁楼侧池中。
现代文：十一年春正月丁酉日，龙出现于南兖州永宁楼旁的水池中。
English: On the 11th day of the first month of spring, the dragon appeared in the pond next to the Yongning Building in Nanluozhou.

古文：二月癸亥，舆驾亲耕藉田。
现代文：二月癸亥曰，皇帝舆驾亲临藉田耕种。
English: In February of the year of the boar, the emperor himself came to cultivate the fields.

古文：三月丁未，诏淮北义人率户口归国者，建其本属旧名，置立郡县，即隶近州，赋给田宅，唤订一无所预。
现代文：三月丁末日，韶令淮北地区率居民归顺国家的义民，允许依照他们原来籍贯的旧名，建立郡县，就近归属于各州，赐给田地住宅，不向他们征求任何劳役租赋。
English: On the last day of March, the emperor ordered the residents of Huaibei District to submit to the country's righteous people, allowed them to establish counties according to the old names of their original hometowns, and assigned the nearest counties to the states, granted them field houses, and did not solicit any labor rent from them.

古文：夏五月乙巳，诏曰： 昔轩辕命于风后、力牧，放勋咨尔稷、契、硃武，冕旒垂拱，化致隆平。
现代文：夏五月乙巳日，下诏说： 古代黄帝任命风后、直丝、这里为辅佐大臣，向担、望、面生咨询治国方略，身为帝王垂衣拱手，天下风化达到大治。
English: On the 21st day of the fifth month of the summer, the following imperial edict was issued: The ancient Yellow Emperor appointed Feng Que, Zhi Si, here as the assistant minister, to consult with Shan, Wang, and Meng Sheng on the strategy of governing the country. As the emperor, he had no choice but to do so, and the world had reached the stage of great governance.

古文：爰逮汉列五曹，周分六职，设官理务，各有攸司，亦几期刑措，卜世弥永，并赖群才，用康庶绩。
现代文：到了坠伐官署列置五曹，且堑官署分设六职，设置官员管理政务，各自履行不同职能，也差不多做到刑法宽平，传世长久，遣全有赖于群官才力，因而创造出丰功伟绩。
English: By the time of the establishment of five posts in the Quarrymen's Department, and six posts in the Eunuch's Department, officials were set up to manage government affairs, each performing different functions, and the criminal law was almost balanced and passed down for a long time. The appointment of officials depended on the talent of group officials, thus creating great achievements.

古文：朕日昃劬劳，思弘治要，而机事尚拥，政道未凝，夕惕于怀，罔知攸济。
现代文：朕日夜勤劳国事，希望天下大治，但是仍有重要事务无暇处理，政治之道尚未安稳，内心惊惧不安，不知如何措置。
English: I work day and night on national affairs, hoping for world peace, but there are still important matters that I have no time to deal with, the political road is not yet stable, my heart is frightened and uneasy, and I don't know what to do.

古文：方欲仗兹舟楫，委成股肱，征名责实，取宁多士。
现代文：正想依靠官员的协助，倚重股肱大臣，循其名而求其实，仰仗济济才士朕才得以安闲。
English: I just want to rely on the assistance of officials, rely on the minister, follow his name and seek the truth, and rely on talented people so that I can be at ease.

古文：自今应尚书曹、府、寺、内省监、司文案，悉付局参议分判。
现代文：从今以后尚书省的曹、府、寺，宫中官署的监、司所有文案，都要交付局中参议分析定夺。
English: From now on, all the drafts of the Cao, prefectures, and temples of Shangshu Province, as well as the supervisors and directors of the Imperial Household Agency, must be submitted to the Central Advisory Bureau for analysis and approval.

古文：其军国兴造、征发、选序、三狱等事，前须详断，然后启闻。
现代文：各部门有关军队国家的各项事务如兴建工程、征发租赋劳役、选拔各级官员、处理刑狱案件等，先都要详细断察，然后再上报朝廷。
English: The various departments concerned with the military and state affairs, such as construction projects, the collection and distribution of rents, the payment of labor service, the selection of officials at all levels, and the handling of prison cases, must first be inspected in detail, and then reported to the imperial court.

古文：凡诸辩决，务令清乂，约法守制，较若画一，不得前后舛互，自相矛盾，致有枉滞。
现代文：所有要辩论决断的事务，一定要清楚明晰，严守法律制度，对各种事务的处理标准要划一，不得前后抵触，自相矛盾，以至于产生偏差和阻碍。
English: All matters to be debated and decided must be clear and precise, the legal system must be strictly observed, the standards for handling various matters must be uniform, and there must be no contradiction and self-contradiction, so as to cause deviation and obstruction.

古文：纡意舞文，纠听所知，靡有攸赦。 
现代文：一旦有人曲意玩弄法律条文以谋私利，被发觉后要予以追究纠察，不得宽恕。 
English: Once someone is found to be manipulating the provisions of the law for personal gain, they should be investigated and picketed, and should not be pardoned.

古文：甲寅，诏曰： 旧律以枉法受财为坐虽重，直法容贿其制甚轻，岂不长彼贪残，生其舞弄？
现代文：甲寅日，又下韶说： 旧有的法律规定对徇私枉法接受贿赂的罪行虽然予以严厉的处罚，但是对那些并不违反法律而接受贿赂的行为处理很轻，这样一来岂不是助长那种贪婪风气，滋生玩弄法律徇私舞弊的弊端?
English: On the first day of the second month, he also said: Although the old law provides for severe punishment for the crime of accepting bribes in a self-serving manner, but the treatment of those who do not violate the law and accept bribes is very light. Is this not conducive to the greedy culture and breed the drawbacks of playing with the law and favoritism?

古文：事涉货财，宁不尤切？
现代文：事情阗涉到财物，难道不是迫在眉睫需要解决的问题吗?
English: When it comes to property, isn't there an immediate problem that needs to be solved?

古文：今可改不枉法受财者，科同正盗。 
现代文：现在可以将不违法而接受贿赂者的处罚，改为舆违法接受贿赂者同等处罚。 
English: It is now possible to change the punishment for those who accept bribes without violating the law to the same punishment for those who accept bribes without violating the law.

古文：六月庚辰，以镇前将军豫章王叔英为镇南将军、江州刺史。
现代文：六月庚辰日，任命镇前将军豫章王叔英为镇南将军、江州刺史。
English: On the day of Geng Chen in June, he appointed the former Zhenzhen general Yu Zhang Wang Shuying as Zhennan general and Jiangzhou chief historian.

古文：丙戌，以征南将军、江州刺史鄱阳王伯山为中权将军、护军将军。
现代文：丙戌日，任命征南将军、江州刺史鄱阳王伯山为中权将军、护军将军。
English: On the same day, he appointed the general of the Southern Expedition and the governor of Jiangsu Province, Wang Bozhan, as the general of the central power and the general of the military escort.

古文：秋七月辛卯，初用大货六铢钱。
现代文：秋七月辛卯日，开始通用大货币六铢钱。
English: In the autumn and July, the general currency, six-baht coins, began to circulate.

古文：八月甲子，青州义主硃显宗等率所领七百户入附。
现代文：八月甲子日，青州义民头领朱颢宗等人率领部下七百户归附朝廷。
English: On August 1st, Zhu Yanzong, the leader of the Qingzhou Upright Citizens, and others led their subordinates to annex 700 households to the imperial court.

古文：丁卯，舆驾幸大壮观阅武。
现代文：丁卯日，皇帝舆驾亲临大壮观检阅军队。
English: On the day of Dingwu, the emperor personally came to inspect the army in a grand and spectacular manner.

古文：戊寅，舆驾还宫。
现代文：戊寅曰，皇帝舆驾返回皇宫。
English: "The emperor is returning to the imperial palace," said Wu Yin.

古文：冬十月甲戌，以安前将军、祠部尚书晋安王伯恭为军师将军，尚书仆射陆缮为尚书左仆射。
现代文：冬十月甲戌日，任命安前将军、祠部尚书晋塞王值茎为军师将军，尚书仆射堕蛮为尚书左仆射。
English: In the winter of October, on Armistice Day, General Anzen and the head of the ancestral hall, Shangshu Jinsai Wang Wenzhu, were appointed as the general of the military division, and Shangshu Zuozhuang was appointed as Shangshu Zuozhuang.

古文：十一月辛卯，诏曰： 画冠弗犯，革此浇风，孥戮是蹈，化于薄俗。
现代文：十一月辛卯，下韶说： 上古虞舜时期以画衣冠来代替刑罚而百姓不犯法，商汤时期犯罪要诛及子孙，要以这些方法来改革当时浇薄风俗。
English: In November of Xinwu, the lower court said: In the period of the last century, the people did not break the law by painting clothes and crowns instead of punishment. In the Shang and Tang dynasties, crimes were punished and their descendants were punished. These methods should be used to reform the customs at that time.

古文：朕肃膺宝命，迄将一纪，思经邦济治，忧国爱民，日仄劬劳，夜分辍寝，而还淳反朴，其道靡阶，雍熙盛美，莫云能致。
现代文：朕恭敬地继承帝位，至今已近十二年，希望治理国家达到天下大治，忧国爱民，日暮尚在操劳，半夜才能就寝，但是社会风俗的还朴归真，这条道路还没有迈开第一步，和乐强大美好的盛世，没有迹象表明可以达到。
English: It has been nearly twelve years since I respectfully succeeded to the throne. I hope to govern the country to achieve world-class governance, care for the country and love the people. The twilight is still working, and I can only go to bed in the middle of the night. However, social customs are still primitive. This road has not yet taken the first step. Harmony is powerful and beautiful. There is no sign that it can be achieved.

古文：遂乃鞫讯之牒，盈于听览，舂釱之人，烦于牢犴。
现代文：因此审理刑狱的文件，官府裹堆积了许多，犯罪受刑罚的人，充满了牢房。
English: As a result, a lot of documents related to the trial of prisoners have been piled up in government offices, and the cells have been filled with people who have been punished for crimes.

古文：周成刑措，汉文断狱，杼轴空劳，邈焉既远。
现代文：周成王时刑法措置不用，汉文帝亲自审理案件犯罪者很少，朕徒然辛勤治理国家，距离周成、汉文时的盛世相差甚远。
English: At the time of King Zhoucheng, criminal law measures were not used, Emperor Hanwen personally tried cases, and there were few criminals. We worked hard to govern the country in vain. It was a far cry from the prosperous times of Zhoucheng and Hanwen.

古文：加以蕞尔丑徒，轶我彭、汴，淮、汝氓庶，企踵王略，治兵誓旅，义存拯救。
现代文：加上渺小凶恶的北虏，侵占我彭州、汴州一带，淮水、汝水地区的农夫百姓，急切盼望王朝收复失地，因而治理军队派兵出战，目的在于拯救沦陷区百姓。
English: In addition to the petty and vicious North Korean invaders, the farmers and people in the areas of Pengzhou, Zhangzhou, Huai Shui and Riushui, who occupied our country, eagerly hoped that the dynasty would recover the lost land. Therefore, the governing army sent troops to fight, with the aim of saving the people in the fallen area.

古文：飞刍挽粟，征赋颇烦，暑雨祁寒，宁忘咨怨。
现代文：调集粮草，征战的赋役十分繁重，战士长期忍受夏日的暑雨和冬日的严寒，岂能没有咨怨。
English: The mobilization of grain and grass, the conscription for war are very heavy, and the soldiers have to endure the summer heat and rain and the winter cold for a long time.

古文：兼宿度乖舛，次舍违方，若曰之诚，责归元首，愧心斯积，驭朽非惧。
现代文：加上住宿行军全违背方略，如此严重的教训，责任归咎于指挥军队的统帅，朕内心十分愧疚，犹如驾驭朽车岂能不恐惧。
English: In addition to the fact that the stay-at-home march completely violated the strategy, such a serious lesson, the responsibility is attributed to the commander-in-chief of the army, my heart is very guilty, as if driving a rotten car can not but fear.

古文：即建子令月，微阳初动，应此嘉辰，宜播宽泽，可大赦天下。 
现代文：在这美好的十一月中，阳气虽然微弱却已开始发动，与逭舒心的时光相适应，应该散播朝廷宽厚的德泽，可以大赦天下。 
English: In this beautiful month of November, although the yang qi is weak, it has already begun to mobilize. In line with the time of peace and comfort, the generous virtue of the imperial court should be spread, and the world can be amnestied.

古文：甲午，周遣柱国梁士彦率众至肥口。
现代文：甲午日，周派柱国梁士彦率军众抵达肥口。
English: On the afternoon of the first day of the second month, Zhou sent the pillar country Liang Shihang to lead the army to arrive in Hekou.

古文：戊戌，周军进围寿阳。
现代文：戊戌日，周军进兵围困寿阳。
English: On the 6th day of the 7th month, Zhou's army entered and besieged Shouyang.

古文：辛丑，以车骑将军、开府仪同三司、南兗州刺史淳于量为上流水军都督；中领军樊毅都督北讨诸军事，加安北将军；散骑常侍、左卫将军任忠都督北讨前军事，加平北将军；前豊州刺史皋文奏率步骑三千趣阳平郡。
现代文：辛丑日，任命车骑将军、开府仪同三司、南兖州刺史淳于量为长江上流的水军都督；中领军樊毅都督北伐诸军事，加安北将军；散骑常侍、左卫将军任忠都督北伐前军事，加平北将军；前丰州刺史皋文奏率领步兵骑兵三千奔赴阳平郡。
English: On the day of Xinwu, he appointed General of Cavalry and Chariots, Kaifu Yidong of the Third Division, and the commander of the Southern Yunnan Province, Shishi Junyu, as the governor of the naval forces in the upper reaches of the Yangtze River; the commander of the central army, Shunyi, the governor of the Northern Expedition, as the military commander, Ga'an Bei; the cavalryman and the left guard general, Renzhong, as the pre-Northern Expedition military commander, and Ga'ping Bei; the former Toyozhou commander, Shishi Yuwenso, led 3,000 infantry and cavalry to Yangping County.

古文：癸卯，任忠率步骑七千趣秦郡。
现代文：癸卯，任忠率领步兵骑兵七千奔赴秦郡。
English: At this time, Ren Zhong led 7,000 infantry and cavalry to Qin County.

古文：丙午，新除仁威将军、右卫将军鲁广达率众入淮。
现代文：丙午日，新任仁威将军、右卫将军鲁广达率领军众进入淮河地区。
English: On the afternoon of the third day, the newly appointed General Ren Wei and the Right Guard General Lu Guangda led the troops into the Huaihe area.

古文：是日，樊毅领水军二万自东关入焦湖，武毅将军萧摩诃率步骑趣历阳。
现代文：当天，樊毅带领水军二万人从东关进入焦湖，武毅将军萧摩诃率步兵骑兵奔赴历阳。
English: On the same day, Zhai Yi led 20,000 sailors from Dongguan into Jiao Lake, and General Wu Yi led the infantry and cavalry to Liyang.

古文：戊申，豫州陷。
现代文：戊申日，豫州被周攻陷。
English: On the day of Boshin, Yuzhou was invaded and occupied by Zhou.

古文：辛亥，霍州又陷。
现代文：辛亥，霍州又被攻陷。
English: In Xinhai, Hozhou was invaded again.

古文：癸丑，以新除中卫大将军、扬州刺史始兴王叔陵为大都督，总督水步众军。
现代文：癸，任命新任中卫大将军、扬州刺史始兴王叔陵为大都督，总领水步众军。
English: , appointed a new lieutenant general, Yangzhou Zhishi Shi Xing Wang Shuling as the grand governor, the general of the territorial army.

古文：十二月乙丑，南北兗、晋三州，及盱眙、山阳、阳平、马头、秦、历阳、沛、北谯、南梁等九州，并自拔还京师。
现代文：十二月乙丑，南北兖、晋三州，同盱眙、山阳、阳平、马头、秦、历阳、沛、北谯、南梁等九郡，守军自行弃城还回京城。
English: In December, the defenders abandoned the city on their own and returned to Beijing. The defenders were from nine counties, including Nanfangye, Jin Sanzhou, Tongye, Sanyang, Yangping, Ma Tou, Qin, Liyang, Pei, Beilun and Nanliang.

古文：谯、北徐州又陷。
现代文：谯州、北徐州又被攻陷。
English: Zhangzhou and North Xuzhou were also conquered.

古文：自是淮南之地尽没于周矣。
现代文：从此以后淮南地区全部被周占领。
English: From then on, all of Huainan was occupied by Zhou.

古文：己巳，诏曰： 昔尧、舜在上，茅屋土阶，汤、禹为君，藜杖韦带。
现代文：己巳日，下诏说： 古代尧、舜身为帝王，住茅屋履土阶，汤、禹身为君主，拄藜杖系皮带。
English: On the same day, the following edict was issued: In ancient times, the emperor was the king, lived in a thatched cottage and walked on the steps, the emperor was the king, and the scepter was a leather belt.

古文：至如甲帐珠络，华榱璧珰，未能雍熙，徒闻侈欲。
现代文：至于上等罗帐缀珠丝络，华丽壁柱装饰璧瑺之类，并不能带来太平盛世，而祇是徒然令人闻说穷奢极欲而已。
English: As for the fine lattice-work with beaded filigree, or the ornate wall-pillars with ornate lattice-work, these do not bring peace and prosperity, but only a vain desire to be extravagant.

古文：朕企仰前圣，思求讼平，正道多违，浇风靡乂。
现代文：朕追慕古代圣王，希望刑狱公平，但是正义之道多有违背，浇薄风气正在蔓延。
English: I admire the ancient holy kings and hope that prison sentences are fair, but the path of justice is often violated, and the culture of leniency is spreading.

古文：至今贵里豪家，金铺玉舄，贫居陋巷，彘食牛衣，称物平施，何其辽远。
现代文：如今豪贵人家，金铺地玉作鞋，贫居陋巷人家，吃猪食穿草衣，要使事物公平，是何等遥远。
English: Nowadays, how far away it is for the rich and noble, who make shoes from gold and jade, and the poor and destitute, who eat pig food and wear grass clothes, to make things fair.

古文：爟烽未息，役赋兼劳，文吏奸贪，妄动科格。
现代文：战火没有止息，劳役赋税又使百姓劳困，执法的官吏奸猾贪婪，妄自滥用刑律条规。
English: The war has not stopped, the labor tax has made the people work hard, the law enforcement officials are cunning and greedy, and they have abused the criminal law.

古文：重以旗亭关市，税敛繁多，不广都内之钱，非供水衡之费，逼遏商贾，营谋私蓄。
现代文：又加上集市的旗亭关卡，税收繁重，不是为了充实京都内的钱财，也不是供应水军船械的费用，他们威逼勒索商买，完全是谋求私人的积蓄。
English: In addition, the market's flagship checkpoint imposes heavy taxes. It is not for the purpose of enriching the money and wealth in Kyoto, nor is it the cost of supplying naval and naval equipment. They force extortion merchants to buy it, and it is entirely for the purpose of seeking private savings.

古文：靖怀众弊，宜事改张。
现代文：沉思这种种弊端，应该予以改变。
English: Reflecting on these ills, they should be changed.

古文：弗弘王道，安拯民蠹？
现代文：如果不弘扬王道，怎能拯救百姓的苦难?
English: If we do not promote the royal way, how can we save the suffering of the people?

古文：今可宣勒主衣、尚方诸堂署等，自非军国资须，不得缮造众物。
现代文：现在可以宣示主衣、尚方等官署，倘若不是军事国政所需，不准建造各种器物。
English: It is now possible to announce to the government offices such as the Ministry of the Interior and the Ministry of Defense that if it is not necessary for military and national affairs, it is not allowed to build all kinds of equipment.

古文：后宫僚列，若有游长，掖庭启奏，即皆量遣。
现代文：后宫的各级官吏，假若有事要颁布，上给朝廷的奏章，都必须立即酌情遣送处理。
English: Officials at all levels of the harem, if there is something to be promulgated, the report to the imperial court, must be immediately dispatched and dealt with as appropriate.

古文：大予秘戏，非会礼经，乐府倡优，不合雅正，并可删改。
现代文：大予令官署演出的稀奇戏目，与礼经上的规定不同，乐府倡优演奏的音乐，凡不合雅正之音的，都可加以删除更改。
English: Unlike the rules of the etiquette, the music performed by the music school can be deleted and changed if it does not meet the standards of elegance and sincerity.

古文：市估津税，军令国章，更须详定，唯务平允。
现代文：集市价格渡口税收，军队令规国家典章，更须详实划定，一定要公平允当。
English: Market prices, port taxes, military orders and regulations, and national ordinances must be delineated in detail and must be fair.

古文：别观离宫，郊间野外，非恒飨宴，勿复修治。
现代文：别观离宫，处在城郊野外，并非经常飨宴聚会，不必又加修治。
English: Unlike the palace, it is located on the outskirts of the city, it is not a regular feast gathering, and there is no need to repair it.

古文：并勒内外文武车马宅舍，皆循俭约，勿尚奢华。
现代文：并且命令朝廷内外各级文武官员的车马住宅，都要遵循节俭的原则，不要崇尚奢侈豪华的风气。
English: Moreover, he ordered that the carriage and horse residences of the officials at all levels inside and outside the imperial court should follow the principle of frugality, and should not advocate the luxury style.

古文：违我严规，抑有刑宪。
现代文：违背我严厉法规，或许会受到刑律的制裁。
English: Violations of our strict code may result in criminal penalties.

古文：所由具为条格，标榜宣示，令喻朕心焉。 
现代文：所有这些规定都要一一列出条例，张贴在榜上宣示天下，使大家都明白朕的本心。 
English: All these provisions should be listed one by one in the regulations, posted on the list and announced to the world, so that everyone understands my true intentions.

古文：癸酉，遣平北将军沈恪、电威将军裴子烈镇南徐州，开远将军徐道奴镇栅口，前信州刺史杨宝安镇白下。
现代文：癸酉，派平北将军沈恪、电威将军裴子烈镇守南徐州，开远将军徐道奴镇守栅口，前信州刺史杨宝安镇守白下。
English: , sent the Pingbei general Shen Gu, the telegraph general Pei Zili to guard the southern Xuzhou, the Kaiyuan general Xu Daonu to guard the gate, and the former Shinshou general Yang Baoan to guard the Baixia.

古文：戊寅，以中领军樊毅为镇西将军、都督荆郢巴武四州水陆诸军事。
现代文：戊寅曰，任命中领军樊毅为镇西将军、都督荆郢巴武四州水陆诸军事。
English: Wu Yin said that the appointment of the central leader of the army, Zou Yi, as the general of Zhenxi and the governor of Jingyubabu was the military of the four states of water and land.

古文：十二年春正月戊戌，以散骑常侍、左卫将军任忠为平南将军、南豫州刺史，督缘江军防事。
现代文：十二年春正月戊戌曰，任命散骑常侍、左卫将军任忠为干南将军、南豫州刺史，掌管沿长江军事防御事项。
English: In the first month of the spring of the 12th year of the Wu Dynasty, Ren Zhong, the cavalry officer and the left guard general, was appointed as the general of the south and the governor of South Yuzhou, in charge of the military defense along the Yangtze River.

古文：三月壬辰，以平北将军庐陵王伯仁为翊左将军、中领军。
现代文：三月壬辰，任命平北将军庐陵王伯仁为翊左将军、中领军。
English: In March of the year of Imjin, he appointed the general of North Pyongan Province, Goryeong Wang Boren, as the general of South Pyongan Province and the leader of the central army.

古文：夏四月癸亥，尚书左仆射陆缮卒。
现代文：夏四月癸亥日，尚书左仆射陆缮去世。
English: On April Fool's Day in the summer, Shang Shuxu's left-hand man Shao Lu Zuo passed away.

古文：乙丑，以宣毅将军河东王叔献为南徐州刺史。
现代文：乙丑，任命宣毅将军河东王叔献为南徐州刺史。
English: Second, he appointed Xuan Yi General Hedong Wangxiu to be the history of South Xuzhou.

古文：己卯，大雩。壬午，雨。
现代文：己卯，皇帝亲自祭天求雨。壬午曰，下雨。
English: However, the emperor himself prayed to the heavens for rain. On the morning of the third day, it rained.

古文：五月癸巳，以军师将军、尚书右仆射晋安王伯恭为尚书仆射。
现代文：五月癸巳，任命军师将军、尚书右仆射晋安王伯恭为尚书仆射。
English: In May of the same year, the general of the army division and Shang Shuxu's right-hand man Jinan Wang Bokong was appointed as Shang Shuxu's right-hand man.

古文：六月壬戌，大风坏皋门中闼。
现代文：六月壬戌日，大风刮坏皋门中间的小门。
English: On June 7th, a strong wind broke the small door in the middle of the gate.

古文：秋八月己未，周使持节、上柱国、郧州总管荥阳郡公司马消难以郧、随、温、应、土、顺、沔、儇、岳等九州，鲁山、甑山、沌阳、应城、平靖、武阳、上明、涢水等八镇内附。
现代文：秋八月己未，周朝的使持节、上柱国、郧州总管荣阳郡公司马消难率领郧、随、温、应、土、顺、沔、澴、岳等九州，和鲁山、甑山、沌阳、应城、平靖、武阳、上明、损水等八镇归顺朝廷。
English: Autumn and August had not yet come, and the Zhou Dynasty's Envoy Festival, Shangzhu Province, and Yongyang County, the general manager of Zhangzhou, led by Ma Xidan, led the eight towns of Shun, Su, Wen, Ying, Tu, Shun, Shun, Shun, Ying, and Yue in Kyushu, and the eight towns of Luzhan, Shunshan, Chaoyang, Yingcheng, Pingjing, Wuyang, Shangming, and Zhisui in Shun to the imperial court.

古文：诏以消难为使持节、侍中、大都督、总督安随等九州八镇诸军事、车骑将军、司空，封随郡公，给鼓吹、女乐各一部。
现代文：诏令司马消难为使持节、侍中、大都督、总管安随等九州八镇诸军事、车骑将军、司空，封随郡公，赐给鼓吹、女乐各一部。
English: The imperial edict ordered Sima Qishan to make the eight towns of Kyushu military, chariot and cavalry generals, Sima Ku, Fuzhi Gu, and give a part of each to the propaganda and women's music.

古文：庚申，诏镇西将军樊毅进督沔、汉诸军事。
现代文：庚申日，诏令镇西将军樊毅再督沔水、漠水地区诸军事。
English: On Goshun's day, Zhenxi General Zou Yi was ordered to take command of the military in Surabaya and the desert areas.

古文：遣平南将军、南豫州刺史任忠率众趣历阳；通直散骑常侍、超武将军陈慧纪为前军都督，趣南兗州。
现代文：派平南将军、南豫州刺史任忠率领军队奔赴历阳；通直散骑常侍、超武将军陈慧纪为前军都督，奔赴南兖州。
English: He sent General Pingnan and Southern Yuzhou's Jishi Renzhong to lead the army to Liyang; General Chen Huiji, the former military governor, led the army to Southern Luzhou.

古文：戊辰，以新除司空司马消难为大都督水陆诸军事。
现代文：戊辰日，任命新任司空司马消难为大都督水陆诸军事。
English: On the day of Pentecost, Sima Qiu, the newly-appointed Secretary of the Air Force, was appointed as the Grand Governor of the Army, Navy and Air Force.

古文：庚午，通直散骑常侍淳于陵克临江郡。
现代文：庚午日，通直散骑常侍淳于陵攻克临江郡。
English: On the afternoon of the 6th day of the 7th month, the cavalrymen led by Jun Yu Ling conquered Linjiang County.

古文：癸酉，智武将军鲁广达克郭默城。
现代文：癸酉曰，智武将军鲁广达攻克郭默城。
English: On the same day, General Zhiwu Lu Guangda attacked Guo Mei City.

古文：甲戌，大雨霖。
现代文：甲戌曰，下大雨。
English: It's raining heavily in Jiaxuan.

古文：丙子，淳于陵克祐州城。
现代文：丙子日，淳于陵攻克佑州城。
English: On the third day of the third month, Jun Yuling captured Yuzhou City.

古文：九月癸未，周临江太守刘显光率众内附。
现代文：九月癸末日，周朝的临江太守刘显光率部下归顺朝廷。
English: At the end of September, Zhou Dynasty's Linjiang governor Liu Xianguang led his subordinates to submit to the imperial court.

古文：是夜，天东南有声，如风水相击，三夜乃止。
现代文：这天夜晚，天东南方出现声响，犹如风水相击，三夜才止息。
English: On this night, there was a sound in the southeastern part of the sky, as if the wind and water were colliding, which lasted for three nights.

古文：丙戌，改安陆郡为南司州。
现代文：丙戌日，将安陆郡改为南司州。
English: On the same day, Anlu County was changed to Nanshi County.

古文：丁亥，周将王延贵率众援历阳，任忠击破之，生擒延贵等。
现代文：丁亥日，周将王延贵率军队援救历阳，任忠击败周军，生俘王延贵等人。
English: On Dinghai Day, Zhou general Wang Yangui led the army to rescue Liyang, Ren Zhong defeated the Zhou army, and captured Wang Yangui and others alive.

古文：己酉，周广陵义主曹药率众入附。
现代文：己酉日，周广陵郡的义民头领曹药率军众入朝归顺。
English: On the same day, the head of the Yimin in Zhou Guangling County, Cao Yao, led the army to surrender to the imperial court.

古文：冬十月癸丑，大雨雹震。
现代文：冬十月癸丑日，下大冰雹，并有地震。
English: In winter, on October's Ugly Day, there were large hailstones and an earthquake.

古文：十一月己丑，诏曰： 朕君临四海，日旰劬劳，思弘至治，未臻斯道。
现代文：十一月己丑日，下韶说： 朕统治天下，日夜辛劳，希望天下大治，但未能达到这个目标。
English: On his birthday in November, he said: "I rule the world. I toil day and night, hoping for world peace, but I have not been able to achieve this goal.

古文：而兵车骤出，军费尤烦，刍漕控引，不能征赋。
现代文：况且大规模出兵作战，军费开支尤其烦重，粮草的调集转运，不能征收赋税。
English: Moreover, the large-scale dispatch of troops to fight, military spending is particularly burdensome, and the collection and transportation of grain and grass cannot be taxed.

古文：夏中亢旱伤农，畿内为甚，民失所资，岁取无托。
现代文：今年夏季大早伤害农田，京城附近尤为严重，百姓失去生活资源，一年的所需没有着落。
English: Early this summer, farmland was damaged, especially in the vicinity of the capital city. People lost their living resources, and the needs for the year did not materialize.

古文：此则政刑未理，阴阳舛度，黎元阻饥，君孰与足？
现代文：这是因为国家政治刑律尚不完善，阴阳失去调和，普通百姓忍饥受饿，君主怎么能富足呢?
English: This is because the national political code is still imperfect, yin and yang have lost harmony, ordinary people are starving, how can the monarch be rich?

古文：靖言兴念，余责在躬，宜布惠泽，溥沾氓庶。
现代文：冷静地想想，责任在我身上，应该广布朝廷的恩泽，普遍惠顾农民百姓。
English: Think about it calmly, the responsibility is on me, I should spread the grace of the imperial court and generally patronize the peasants.

古文：其丹阳、吴兴、晋陵、建兴、义兴、东海、信义、陈留、江陵等十郡，并诸署即年田税、禄秩，并各原半，其丁租半申至来岁秋登。 
现代文：丹腥、昱垦、置尘、塑、羞墨、塞遵、值羞、速留、江陵等十郡，和各官署属田当年要上交的田税、官员的俸禄，都免除一半，丁租的一半延缓到明年秋收后上交。 
English: Ten counties, including Danghai, Handan, Jiedao, Shifang, Shimo, Jiezhu, Shizhu, Shizhu, Hailu and Gangneung, as well as all government-owned fields, are exempted from paying half of the field tax and official's salary, and the payment of half of the ding rent is delayed until after the next autumn harvest.

古文：十二月庚辰，宣毅将军、南徐州刺史河东王叔献薨。
现代文：十二月庚辰日，宣毅将军、南徐州刺史河东王叔献去世。
English: On December Gengchen Day, General Xuan Yi, the uncle of Wang Shidong of South Xuzhou, passed away.

古文：十三年春正月壬午，以车骑将军、开府仪同三司淳于量为左光禄大夫；中权将军、护军将军鄱阳王伯山即本号开府仪同三司；镇右将军、国子祭酒新安王伯固为扬州刺史；军师将军、尚书仆射晋安王伯恭为尚书左仆射；安右将军、丹阳尹徐陵为中书监，领太子詹事；吏部尚书袁宪为尚书右仆射。
现代文：十三年春正月壬午日，任命车骑将军、开府仪同三司蓬王量为左光禄大夫；中权将军、护军将军鄱阳王伯山以本将军号开府仪同三司；镇右将军、国子祭酒新安王伯固任扬州刺史；军师将军、尚书仆射晋安王伯恭任尚书左仆射；安右将军、丹阳尹徐陵为中书监，兼太子詹事；吏部尚书袁宪为尚书右仆射。
English: On the afternoon of the 13th day of the first month of spring, the general of cavalry and cavalry, Kaifu Yi, and the three sub-commanders, Peng Wang Rong, were appointed as the doctor of Zuo Guanglu; the general of central power and the general of garrison, Shanyang Wang Bishan, was appointed as the general of central power and the three sub-commanders of Kaifu Yi; the general of town and country, Xin'an Wang Bago, was appointed as the governor of Yangzhou; the general of military division, Shang Shubaisha, was appointed as the governor of Shang Shubaisha; the general of Anhui, Dany

古文：庚寅，以轻车将军、卫尉卿宜都王叔明为南徐州刺史。
现代文：庚寅日，任命轻车将军、卫尉卿宜都王叔明为南徐州刺史。
English: On the day of Geng Yin, Wang Shuming, General of Light Vehicles and Captain of the Imperial Guard of Yidu, was appointed as the history of South Xuzhou.

古文：二月甲寅，诏赐司马消难所部周大将军田广等封爵各有差。
现代文：二月甲寅日，诏令赐给司马消难部下的原周朝大将军田广等人不同等级的封爵。
English: On February Katoin, the Imperial Edict granted the peerage of different ranks to the former Zhou Dynasty general Tian Guang, who was a subordinate of Sima Qianlu.

古文：乙亥，舆驾亲耕藉田。
现代文：乙亥曰，皇帝舆驾亲自耕种藉田。
English: Yi Hai said that the emperor personally cultivated the borrowed land.

古文：夏四月乙巳，分衡州始兴郡为东衡州，衡州为西衡州。
现代文：夏四月乙巳日，分割衡州的始兴郡为束衡州，衡州改为西衡州。
English: On the 21st day of the 4th month of summer, Shixing County, which was divided into Hengzhou, was renamed Sokhengzhou, and Hengzhou was renamed West Hengzhou.

古文：五月丙辰，以前镇西将军樊毅为中护军。
现代文：五月丙辰日，任命前镇西将军樊毅为中护军。
English: On the first day of May, the former Zhenxi General Zou Yi was appointed as the middle protector.

古文：六月辛卯，以新除中护军樊毅为护军将军。
现代文：六月卒卯日，任命新任中护军樊毅为护军将军。
English: On the last day of June, he appointed the newly-appointed middle-ranking bodyguard, Zou Yi, as the bodyguard general.

古文：秋九月癸亥，夜，大风至自西北，发屋拔树，大雷震雹。
现代文：秋九月癸亥日，夜晚，大风从西北吹来，掀掉屋顶拔起树木，巨雷震动又下大冰雹。
English: In autumn and September, on the day of the year of the boar, in the evening, a strong wind blew from the northwest, tearing off the roof and uprooting trees, thunder shook and large hailstones fell.

古文：冬十月癸未，以散骑常侍、丹阳尹毛喜为吏部尚书，护军将军樊毅为镇西将军、荆州刺史。
现代文：冬十月癸末日，任命散骑常侍、丹阳尹毛喜为吏部尚书，护军将军樊毅为镇西将军、荆州刺史。
English: On the last day of winter in October, he appointed Danyang Yin Mao Xi, the horseback riding attendant, as the secretary of the cadre department, Zhou Xi, the general of the garrison, as the general of the garrison, and Jing Zhou, the chief historian.

古文：改鄱阳郡为吴州。
现代文：将鄱阳郡改为吴州。
English: Poyang County was changed to Wuzhou.

古文：壬寅，丹丹国遣使献方物。
现代文：壬寅日，丹丹国派遣使者献上地方特产。
English: On Renin Day, Dandan sent an envoy to present local special products.

古文：十二月辛巳，彗星见。
现代文：十二月辛巳曰，出现了彗星。
English: In December, a comet appeared.

古文：己亥，以翊右将军、卫尉卿沈恪为护军将军。
现代文：己亥日，任命翊右将军、卫尉卿沈恪为护军将军。
English: On Ji Hai Day, General Zou Yu and Lieutenant Shen Ke were appointed as the escorting generals.

古文：十四年春正月己酉，高宗弗豫。
现代文：十四年春正月己酉日，高宗病重。
English: On the first day of the first month of the 14th year of the Spring, Gao Zong fell seriously ill.

古文：甲寅，崩于宣福殿，时年五十三。
现代文：甲寅日，在宣担腿驾崩，当时五十三岁。
English: He was 53 years old at the time of his death.

古文：遗诏曰： 朕爰自遘疾，曾未浃旬，医药不瘳，便属大渐，终始定分，夫复奚言。
现代文：遣诏说： 朕自患病以来，时间还不到十天，医药不起作用，便病危不起了，人的生死寿命都有定分，朕又有什么可说的呢?
English: The envoy said: Since I have been ill, the time is less than ten days, medicine does not work, then the disease is not dangerous, people's life and death have a certain score, what can I say?

古文：但君临寰宇，十有四载，诚则虽休勿休，日慎一日，知宗庙之负重，识王业之艰难。
现代文：衹是我统治天下，已有十四年，的确是具有美德而不自夸，每日谨慎小心地处理政务，知道宗庙社稷责任重大，认识到帝业守成的艰难。
English: I have been ruling the world for 14 years, and I am indeed a virtuous person who does not boast, who handles government affairs carefully every day, who knows the great responsibilities of the imperial family and society, and who understands the difficulties of safeguarding the imperial cause.

古文：而边鄙多虞，生民未乂，方欲荡清四海，包吞八荒，有志莫从，遗恨幽壤。
现代文：但是边境颇多忧患，人民不得安宁，正要荡清四海，统一天下，然而大志不能实现，九泉之下遣恨无穷。
English: However, there were many troubles at the border, and the people were restless. They were about to clear the four seas and unify the country. However, their ambition could not be realized, and there was endless resentment under all circumstances.

古文：皇太子叔宝继体正嫡，年业韶茂，纂统洪基，社稷有主。
现代文：皇太子叔宝是朕的嫡传后裔，年轻有为，继承皇位大业，社稷已有君主。
English: Crown Prince Shubao is my direct descendant, young and accomplished, inheriting the imperial throne, and has become a monarch.

古文：群公卿士，文武内外，俱罄心力，同竭股肱，送往事居，尽忠诚之节，当官奉职，引翼亮之功。
现代文：群公卿士，朝廷内外文武官员，都要倾注心力，共同竭力辅助朝廷，平常往来迎送处理政务，都要尽忠诚的节操，当官尽心职守，建立辅佐朝廷的功绩。
English: A group of nobles and court nobles, as well as civil and military officials inside and outside the imperial court, should devote their efforts to jointly assist the imperial court. They should meet regularly to deal with government affairs. They should all be loyal and conscientious, and officials should be conscientious in their duties to establish the merit of assisting the imperial court.

古文：务在叶和，无违朕意。
现代文：一定要精诚团结，不要违背朕的意愿。
English: We must unite wholeheartedly and not go against my wishes.

古文：凡厥终制，事从省约。
现代文：凡是丧葬事宜，都要遵从节省的原则。
English: In all funeral matters, the principle of economy should be observed.

古文：金银之饰，不须入圹，明器之具，皆令用瓦。
现代文：金银一类的饰物，不必埋入坟墓中，陪葬的器具，一律用瓦器制作。
English: Ornaments such as gold and silver do not have to be buried in the grave, and the accompanying burial utensils are all made of earthenware.

古文：唯使俭而合礼，勿得奢而乖度。
现代文：衹要做到节俭而符合礼仪，不得因豪奢而违背制度。
English: One must be frugal and conform to etiquette, and must not violate the system by being extravagant.

古文：以日易月，既有通规，公除之制，悉依旧准。
现代文：新君掌权太后避位，已经有通行规定，帝王因公除丧服的制度，全依据旧有准则。
English: The new monarch takes power and the empress dowager abdicates. There are already common regulations, and the system of removing the emperor's mourning clothes for official reasons is entirely based on the old standards.

古文：在位百司，三日一临，四方州镇，五等诸侯，各守所职，并停奔赴。 
现代文：在朝任职的百官，三日后临朝，地方的各级长官，五等爵位的诸侯，都各自执行自己的职守，一律停止赴朝廷奔丧。 
English: The hundreds of officials serving in the imperial court, the crown prince, local governors at all levels, and lords of the fifth class of peerage, all performed their duties and stopped going to the imperial court for fun three days later.

古文：二月辛卯，上谥孝宣皇帝，庙号高宗。
现代文：二月辛卯，定皇上谧号为孝宣皇帝，庙号为高宗。
English: In February Xinwu, Emperor Ding's posthumous name was Emperor Xiaoxuan, and his temple name was Gaozong.

古文：癸巳，葬显宁陵。
现代文：癸巳，葬在显宁陵。
English: He was buried in the Hsiening Mausoleum.

古文：高宗在田之日，有大度干略，及乎登庸，实允天人之望。
现代文：高宗在野之时，便有宏大器度和干练才略，当他即位为帝时，的确允合天意人愿。
English: When Gaozong was in the field, he had a grand manner and ability, and when he ascended to the throne, he truly fulfilled the wishes of Heaven.

古文：梁室丧乱，淮南地并入齐，高宗太建初，志复旧境，乃运神略，授律出师，至于战胜攻取，献捷相继，遂获反侵地，功实懋焉。
现代文：梁朝丧乱，淮南一带的土地全被北齐占领，高宗在太建初年，志在收复旧有疆土，于是运用神机妙策，授命将帅出兵，至于战胜敌军攻取失地，捷报相继而至，最终收复了被侵占的土地，功绩实在丰厚。
English: The Liang Dynasty was in disarray, and the lands around Huainan were all occupied by the Northern Qi. Gaozong, in the first year of the Taijian Dynasty, aspired to recover the old territory, so he used a clever strategy and was ordered to dispatch troops. As for defeating the enemy and capturing the lost land, the good news came one after another, and finally recovered the occupied land, and the achievements were really rich.

古文：及周灭齐，乘胜略地，还达江际矣。
现代文：等到周灭掉齐，乘胜掠取土地，又进攻到长江边上。
English: Wait until Zhou is wiped out, take advantage of the victory to plunder the land, and attack the edge of the Yangtze River.

古文：史臣曰：高宗器度弘厚，亦有人君之量焉。
现代文：史臣曰：高宗器度弘伟宽厚，也有帝王的器量。
English: Shichen said: Gao Zong's vessel is magnificent and generous, and also has the capacity of an emperor.

古文：世祖知冢嗣仁弱，弗可传于宝位，高宗地居姬旦，世祖情存太伯，及乎弗悆，大事咸委焉。
现代文：世祖明白自己的继承人仁厚柔弱，不可以将帝位传给他，高宗的地位相当于周公姬旦，世祖又存有吴太伯谦让的情怀。当他病危不能痊愈时，将国家大事完全委托给高宗。
English: The ancestor knew that his heir was too benevolent and weak, and could not pass the imperial throne to him. Gaozong's status was equivalent to that of Zhou Gong Hetan, and the ancestor also had the feelings of Wu Tai Bo's humility. When he was critically ill and could not recover, he entrusted the national affairs entirely to Gaozong.

古文：至于纂业，万机平理，命将出师，克淮南之地，开拓土宇，静谧封疆。
现代文：高宗继位后，国家事务治理允当，选派将帅出兵北伐，攻克淮南一带的失地，开拓疆土，使国内安宁。
English: After Gao Zong's succession to the throne, the state affairs were well managed, and the general-in-chief was selected to send troops to the Northern Expedition to conquer the lost land around Huainan, open up the territory, and bring domestic peace.

古文：享国十馀年，志大意逸，吕梁覆军，大丧师徒矣。
现代文：统治国家十多年，志向远大而意气骄逸，因而招致在吕梁全军覆没，丧失了大量兵员。
English: Ruling the country for more than ten years, he was ambitious and arrogant, which led to the destruction of the entire army in Luliang and the loss of a large number of soldiers.

古文：江左削弱，抑此之由。
现代文：江束的削弱，大概这是重要原因。
English: The weakening of the river system is probably an important reason for this.

古文：呜呼！
现代文：呜呼!
English: Alas!

古文：盖德不逮文，智不及武，虽得失自我，无御敌之略焉。
现代文：高宗的功德不及文帝，智谋不及武帝，虽说所得所失都是因为个人但也是因为缺乏防御敌人的策略。
English: Gaozong's merits were not as good as Emperor Wen's, and his wisdom was not as good as Emperor Wu's. Although the gains and losses were all due to individuals, they were also due to the lack of a strategy to defend against the enemy.

