古文：东方
现代文：东方
English: The East

古文：角宿二星，为天关，其间天门也，其内天庭也。
现代文：角宿二颗星，是天关，它的中间是天门，它的里面是天庭。
English: The two stars of Kakunodate are heaven's gate, its middle is the heavenly gate, and its inside is heaven's garden.

古文：故黄道经其中，七曜之所行也。
现代文：所以黄道经过它当中，是七曜运行的轨道。
English: Therefore, the ecliptic of the sun's movement passes through it, which is the orbit of the sun, moon and five stars.

古文：左角为天田，为理，主刑。
现代文：左角是天田，是狱官，主管刑罚。
English: In the left corner is Amada, the warden in charge of punishment.

古文：其南为太阳道。
现代文：它的南面是太阳道。
English: To the south of it is the Sun Road.

古文：右角为将，主兵。
现代文：右角是将，主管军事。
English: In the right corner is the general, in charge of military affairs.

古文：其北为太阴道。
现代文：它的北面是太阴道。
English: To the north of it is the Great Vagina.

古文：盖天之三门，犹房之四表。
现代文：大概天的三个门，如同房屋的四面。
English: In general, the three gates of heaven are like the four watches of the house star.

古文：星明大，吉，王道太平，贤者在朝；动摇、移徙，王者行；左角赤明，狱平；暗而微小，王道失。
现代文：星明亮光大，吉利，国家政治太平，贤能的人在朝廷；星动摇、迁移不定，王者出走；左角发红明亮，刑狱公平；暗淡而微小，国家政治失误。
English: The star is bright and large, auspicious, the national politics is peaceful, the capable people are in the court; the star wavers, the migration is uncertain, the king leaves; the left corner is red and bright, the prison is fair; dim and small, the national politics is wrong.

古文：陶隐居曰： 左角天津，右角天门，中为天关。 
现代文：陶隐居说： 左角天津，右角天门，中为天关。 
English: Tao Yingju said: Tianjin in the left corner, Tianmen in the right corner, and Tianguan in the middle.

古文：日食角宿，王者恶之；晕于角内，有阴谋，阴国用兵得地，又主大赦。
现代文：太阳在角宿亏蚀，王者厌恶这种情况；日晕在角宿内，有阴谋，耍阴谋的国家发动战争夺得土地，又预兆大赦。
English: The sun is eclipsed in Capricorn, the king is disgusted with this situation; the sun is eclipsed in Capricorn, there is a conspiracy, the scheming country launches a war to seize land, and also portends amnesty.

古文：月犯角，大臣忧狱事，法官忧黜。
现代文：月亮侵犯角宿，大臣忧虑刑狱诉讼案件，执法官忧虑被罢黜。
English: The moon encroaches on the corner inn, the minister is worried about the prison litigation case, and the magistrate is worried about being dismissed.

古文：又占忧在宫中。
现代文：又占验忧患发生在宫中。
English: It also accounts for the fact that the affliction occurred in the palace.

古文：月晕，其分兵起；右角，右将灾；左亦然。或曰主水；色黄，有大赦。
现代文：月晕，它的分野地区发生战事；月晕在右角，右将军有灾祸；在左角，也这样，有人说是预兆水灾；月晕色黄，有大赦。
English: The crescent moon, its field areas of war; the crescent moon in the right corner, the right general disaster; in the left corner, the same, some people say it is a sign of floods; yellow crescent moon, there is amnesty.

古文：月晕三重，入天门及两角，兵起，将失利。
现代文：月晕三层，进入天门和两角，发生战争，将军失利。
English: Three layers of moon halo, enter the gate of heaven and the two corners, war occurs, the general is defeated.

古文：岁星犯，为饥。
现代文：岁星侵犯，是饥荒。
English: When the year star strikes, there is famine.

古文：荧惑犯之，国衰，兵败；犯左角，有赦；右角，兵起；守之，谗臣进，政事急；居阳，有喜。
现代文：荧惑星侵犯它，国家衰亡，战争失败；侵犯左角，有赦免；侵犯右角，发生战争；占据角宿，谗佞的臣下进用，政事危急；处在阳面，有喜事。
English: If the planet Fluoride invades it, the country will decline and the war will be lost; if it invades the left corner, there will be an amnesty; if it invades the right corner, there will be a war; if it occupies the corner inn, the vassals of the dragonfly will be used, and there will be a political crisis; if it is in the sun, there will be a happy event.

古文：填星犯角为丧，一曰兵起。
现代文：镇星侵犯角宿是丧事，一说发生战争。
English: Zhenxing's encroachment on Jiuyuan is a sad event, and it is said that there will be a war.

古文：太白犯角，群臣有异谋。
现代文：太白星侵犯角宿，群臣有叛异的谋划。
English: Taibai invaded Kakunodate, and the retainers plotted to rebel.

古文：辰星犯，为小兵；守之，大水。
现代文：辰星侵犯，是小的战争；占据角宿，发大水。
English: It is a small war to invade a star; it is a big war to occupy a corner.

古文：客星犯，兵起，五谷伤；守左角，色赤，为旱；守右角，大水。
现代文：客星侵犯，发生战争，五谷受损伤；占据左角，星色赤，是旱灾；占据右角，发大水。
English: The guest star encroaches, there is a war, the grain is damaged; occupy the left corner, the star is red, it is a drought; occupy the right corner, there is a flood.

古文：彗星犯之，色白，为兵；赤，所指破军；出角，天下兵乱。
现代文：彗星侵犯，星色白，是战争；星色赤，所指向的军队被攻破；从角宿出来，天下战乱。
English: Comet encroaches, starry white, it is war; starry red, the pointed army is broken; out of the horn, the world is at war.

古文：星孛于角，白，为兵；赤，军败；入天市，兵、丧。
现代文：变星在角宿，白色，是战争；赤色，军队打败仗；进入天市垣，战争、丧事。
English: Variable stars in Kakunodate, white, is war; red, the army defeated the war; into the sky, war, funeral.

古文：流星犯之，外国使来；入犯左角，兵起。
现代文：流星侵犯，外国使节前来；进入侵犯左角，发生战事。
English: Meteor encroaches, foreign envoys come; into the encroaching left corner, a battle occurs.

古文：云气黄白入右角，得地；赤入左，有兵；入右，战胜；黑白气入于右，兵将败。
现代文：云气黄白色进入右角，夺得土地；赤色进入左角，有战争；进入右角，战争胜利；黑白色云气进入到右角，战争将失败。
English: The yellow and white clouds enter the right corner and win the land; the red enters the left corner and there is a war; the right corner and the war is won; the black and white clouds enter the right corner and the war is lost.

古文：按汉永元铜仪，以角为十三度；而唐开元游仪，角二星十二度。
现代文：按汉永元铜仪，认为角宿是十三度；而唐开元游仪，角宿二颗星是十二度。
English: According to the Han Yongyuan bronze standard, the Angle Inn is considered to be thirteen degrees; while the Tang Kaiyuan travel standard, the two stars of the Angle Inn are twelve degrees.

古文：旧经去极九十一度，今测九十三度半。
现代文：从前的经残离极九十一度，现在测定九十三度半。
English: The previous record was 91 degrees, but it is now 93 and a half degrees.

古文：距星正当赤道，其黄道在赤道南，不经角中；今测角在赤道南二度半，黄道复经角中，即与天象合。
现代文：角宿的距星正对着赤道，它的黄道在赤道南，不经过角宿当中；现在测定角宿在赤道南二度半，黄道又经过角宿当中，就和天象相合。
English: The distance star of the Pleiades is directly opposite the equator, and its ecliptic begins in the south of the equator, without passing through the Pleiades; now the Pleiades is measured to be two and a half degrees south of the equator, and the ecliptic passes through the Pleiades, which coincides with the celestial phenomenon.

古文：景祐测验，角二星十二度，距南星去极九十七度，在赤道外六度，与《乾象新书》合，今从《新书》为正。
现代文：景佑观测验证，角宿二颗星是十二度，距星南边的星离极九十七度，在赤道外六度，与《干象新书》相合，现在依从《新书》为正。
English: According to the observation and verification of Jingyou, the two stars of Pleiades are twelve degrees, the star on the south side of the star is ninety-seven degrees away from the pole, and it is six degrees outside the equator, which coincides with the "New Book of Dry Elephants" and is now positive according to the "New Book."

古文：南门二星，在库楼南，天之外门也，主守兵禁。
现代文：南门二颗星，在库楼南面，是天的外门，主管守卫军事禁区。
English: The two stars on the south gate, on the south side of the warehouse, are the outer gate of heaven, and are responsible for guarding the military restricted area.

古文：星明，则远方来贡；暗，则夷叛；中有小星，兵动。
现代文：星色明亮，那么远方来进贡；暗淡，那么束夷叛乱；中间有小星，军队动荡。
English: The stars are bright, so far away to pay tribute; dim, so far away to rebel; there are small stars in the middle, the army is in turmoil.

古文：客、彗守之，兵起。
现代文：客星、彗星占据南门，发生战争。
English: A guest star and a comet occupy the South Gate, and a war breaks out.

古文：库楼十星，六大星库也，南四星楼也，在角宿南。
现代文：库楼十颗星，六颗大星是库，南面四颗星是楼，在角宿南面。
English: Ten stars for the library, six stars for the library, and four stars for the building on the south side, on the south side of Kakunodate.

古文：一曰天库，兵车之府也。
现代文：一说名叫天库，是兵器战车的库房。
English: One of them is called the "heavenly vault," which is the storehouse of the weapon chariot.

古文：旁十五星，三三而聚者柱也，中央四小星衡也。
现代文：旁边十五颗星，三三而聚在一起的是柱，中央四颗小星是衡。
English: Next to it are fifteen stars, the three-three clustered together is the column, and the four small stars in the center are the balance.

古文：芒角，兵起；星亡，臣下逆；动，则将行；实，为吉；虚，乃凶。
现代文：星发射光芒，发生战争；垦消亡，臣下叛逆；星移动，那么将军出走；星充实，是吉利；星空虚，就凶险。
English: A star emits light, and war breaks out; a dragonfly dies, and a vassal rebels; a star moves, and a general flees; a star is full, and there is good luck; a star is empty, and there is danger.

古文：岁星犯之，主兵。
现代文：岁星侵犯，预兆战争。
English: The invasion of the year star, the omen of war.

古文：荧惑犯之，为兵、旱。
现代文：荧惑星侵犯，是战争、旱灾。
English: Fluorescent planet encroachment, is war, drought.

古文：月入库楼，为兵。
现代文：月亮进入库楼，是战争。
English: When the moon enters the storehouse, it's war.

古文：彗、孛入，兵、饥。
现代文：彗星、变星进入，战争，饥荒。
English: Comets, variable stars come in, war, famine.

古文：客星入，夷兵起。
现代文：客星进入，束夷发生战争。
English: The guest star enters, and war breaks out in Sokyo.

古文：流星入，兵尽出。
现代文：流星进入，兵器都出府库。
English: Meteors enter, weapons leave the warehouse.

古文：赤云气入，内外不安。
现代文：赤色云气进入，朝廷内外不安定。
English: A red cloud entered, causing instability inside and outside the imperial court.

古文：天库生角，有兵。
现代文：天库生出尖角，有战争。
English: Out of the vault of heaven cometh forth sharpness and there is war.

古文：平星二星，在库楼北，角南，主平天下法狱，廷尉之象。
现代文：平星二颗星，在库楼北面，角宿南面，主管平定天下刑法讼案，是廷尉的象征。
English: The two stars of Pingxing, on the north side of the warehouse and on the south side of the corner lodge, are responsible for settling criminal lawsuits around the world, and are the symbol of the imperial lieutenant.

古文：正，则狱讼平；月晕，狱官忧。
现代文：星端正，那么讼案公平；月晕，狱官有忧患。
English: If the stars are right, the case is fair; if the moon is dark, the warden is in trouble.

古文：荧惑犯之，兵起，有赦。
现代文：荧惑星侵犯，战争发生，有赦免。
English: Fluorescent planet invaded, war breaks out, there's an amnesty.

古文：彗星犯，政不行，执法者黜。
现代文：彗星侵犯，政令不能实行，执法官被罢黜。
English: The comet encroached, the decree could not be implemented, and the magistrate was dismissed.

古文：平道二星，在角宿间，主平道之官。
现代文：平道二颗星，在角宿中间，主管铺平道路的官。
English: Two stars on the flat road, in the middle of the corner inn, the official in charge of paving the road.

古文：武密曰： 天子八达之衢，主辙轼。 
现代文：武密说： 天子四通八连之衢，主辙轼。 
English: Wu Mi said: The Son of Heaven is the root of the eight links, and the Lord is the root.

古文：明正，吉；动摇，法驾有虞。
现代文：星光明端正，吉利；动摇，皇帝的车驾有危险。
English: When the star is bright, it is auspicious; when it is wavering, it is dangerous for the emperor to drive.

古文：岁星守之，天下治。
现代文：岁星占据平道，天下太平。
English: The stars of the year occupy a level path, and the world is at peace.

古文：荧惑、太白守，为乱。
现代文：荧惑星、太白星占据，是动乱。
English: Fluorescent planet, too white star occupy the ring, is turmoil.

古文：客星守，车驾出行。
现代文：客星占据，车驾出行。
English: The guest stars occupy the stage and travel by car.

古文：流星守，去贤用奸。
现代文：流星占据，斥离贤臣，起用奸佞。
English: The shooting star occupies, drives away the wise men, and raises the ruffian.

古文：天田二星，在角北，主畿内封域。
现代文：天田二颗星，在角宿北面，主管王畿内的领地。
English: The two stars of Amida, located north of Tsunoyado, are in charge of the territory within Wangki.

古文：武密曰： 天子籍田也。 
现代文：武密说： 天子籍出也。 
English: Wu Mi said, "It's time for me to be registered as a son of heaven."

古文：岁星守之，谷稔。
现代文：岁星占据天田，谷物成熟。
English: The stars of the year occupy Amada, and the grain is ripe.

古文：荧惑守之，为旱。
现代文：荧惑星占据天田，是旱灾。
English: Fluorescence bewitching occupies the star, is a drought.

古文：太白守，谷伤。
现代文：太白星占据，谷物受伤害。
English: Too white stars occupy, the grain is harmed.

古文：辰星守，为水灾。
现代文：辰星占据，是水灾。
English: If the stars are out, it's a flood.

古文：客星守，旱、蝗。
现代文：客星占据，旱灾，蝗灾。
English: Guest stars occupy, droughts, locust plagues.

古文：天门二星，在平星北。
现代文：天门二颗星，在平星北面。
English: The two stars of Heaven's Gate are to the north of Pingxing.

古文：武密云： 在左角南，朝聘待客之所。 
现代文：武密说： 在左角南，朝聘待客之所。 
English: Wu Mi said: In the south of the left corner, there is a place to wait for guests.

古文：星明，万方归化；暗，则外兵至。
现代文：星明亮，万方归顺；暗淡，那么外族军队来到。
English: When the stars are bright, all is well; when the stars are dim, foreign armies come.

古文：月晕其外，兵起。
现代文：月晕出现在它的外边，战争发生。
English: A crescent appears outside it, and war breaks out.

古文：荧惑入，关梁不通；守之，失礼。
现代文：荧惑星进入，城关桥梁不通行；占据天门，丧失礼仪。
English: The fluorescent planet enters, the city gate bridge is impassable; it occupies the gate of heaven, and the etiquette is lost.

古文：太白守，有伏兵。
现代文：太白星占据，有伏兵。
English: Too white stars occupy, there is an ambush.

古文：客星犯，有谋上者。
现代文：客星侵犯，有图谋犯上的人。
English: A guest star trespassing, someone plotting to commit a crime.

古文：进贤一星，在平道西，主卿相举逸材。
现代文：进贤一颗星，在平道西面，主管卿相推举杰出的人才。
English: Jin Xian is a star, and in the west side of Pingdao, the competent minister will nominate outstanding talents.

古文：明，则贤人用；暗，则邪臣进。
现代文：星明亮，那么贤人被任用；暗淡，那么奸邪之臣进用。
English: The brighter the star, the more wise men are appointed; the dimmer the star, the more treacherous ministers are appointed.

古文：太阴、岁星犯之，大臣死。
现代文：太阴、岁星侵犯，大臣死。
English: The yin and the yang invade, and the minister dies.

古文：荧惑犯，为丧，贤人隐。
现代文：荧惑星侵犯，是丧事，贤人隐逸。
English: The invasion of a fluorescent planet is a sad event, and wise men hide.

古文：太白犯之，贤者退。
现代文：太白星侵犯，贤者引退。
English: Too white star encroaches, sage retires.

古文：岁星、太白、填星、辰星合守之，其占为天子求贤。
现代文：岁星、太白星、镇星、辰星共同占据进贤，它的占验是天子访求贤人。
English: The year star, the white star, the town star, and the hour star jointly occupy the wise men, and its horoscope is the visit of the Son of Heaven to the wise men.

古文：黄白紫气贯之，草泽贤人出。
现代文：黄白紫气横贯它，在草野的贤人出仕。
English: The yellow-white-purple air runs across it, and wise men serve in the fields and meadows.

古文：周鼎三星，在角宿上，主流亡。
现代文：周鼎三颗星，在角宿的上面，主管流浪逃亡。
English: Zhou Ding three stars, in the corner of the hotel above, the head of the vagrants fled.

古文：星明，国安；不见，则运不昌；动摇，国将移。
现代文：星明亮，国家安定；不出现，那么国运不昌；星动摇，国家要迁移。
English: The star is bright, the country is stable; if it does not appear, then the national fortune is not good; if the star wavers, the country will have to relocate.

古文：《乾象新书》引郏鄏定鼎事，以周衰秦无道，鼎沦泗水，其精上为星。
现代文：《干象新书》引用郊鄂定鼎的事，因为周衰微，秦无道，鼎沉入泗水，它的精灵升天为星。
English: "Dry Elephant New Book" quoted the matter of Ding Ding in Suburban A, because Zhou waned, Qin had no way, Ding sank into the turbid water, and its spirit ascended to heaven as a star.

古文：李太异曰： 商巫咸《星图》已有周鼎，盖在秦前数百年矣。 
现代文：李太异说： 商代巫咸的《星图》已有周鼎，大概在秦以前数百年了。 
English: Li Taiyi said: The "Star Chart" of the Shang Dynasty Wuxian has been around for hundreds of years, probably hundreds of years before Qin.

古文：按《步天歌》，库楼十星，柱十五星，衡四星，平星、平道、天田、天门各二星，进贤一星，周鼎三星，俱属角宿。
现代文：按《步天歌》，库楼十颗星，柱星十五颗星，衡星四颗星，平星、平道、天田、天门各二颗星，进贤一颗星，周鼎三颗星，都属于角宿。
English: According to the "Walking Celestial Song," the ten stars of the library, the fifteen stars of the pillar star, the four stars of the weight star, the two stars of the flat star, the flat road, the Amida, and the Heavenly Gate, the one star of the Jinxian, and the three stars of the Zhou Ding, all belong to the corner inn.

古文：而《晋志》以左角为天田，别不载天田二星，《隋志》有之。
现代文：而《晋书，天文志》以为左角是天田，另外不载录天田二颗星，《隋书天文志》有它。
English: However, "Jin Shu, Astronomy" thought that the left corner was Amida, and did not record Amida's two stars. "Sui Shu, Astronomy" had it.

古文：平道、进贤、周鼎，《晋志》皆属太微垣，库楼并衡星、柱星、南门、天门、平星皆在二十八宿之外。
现代文：平道、进贤、周鼎座在《晋书天文志》中都属于太微垣，库楼连同衡星、柱星、南门、天门、平星都在二十八宿之外。
English: Pingdao, Jinxian, and Zhou Dingza all belong to Taiyuan in the "Jinshu Astronomical History," and Ku Lou, along with Hengxing, Zhongxing, Nanmen, Tianmen, and Pingxing, are all outside the twenty-eight quarters.

古文：唐武密及景祐书乃与《步天歌》合。
现代文：唐朝武密和景佑的历书就和《步天歌》吻合。
English: The almanacs of Wu Mi and Jing You of the Tang Dynasty coincide with the "Walking Song of Heaven."

古文：亢宿四星，为天子内朝，总摄天下奏事。
现代文：亢宿四颗星，是天子的内朝，总管天下的奏事。
English: The four stars of Oshuku are the Inner Court of the Son of Heaven, the chief steward of the world.

古文：听讼、理狱、录功。
现代文：审判诉讼、审理刑案、登记功绩。
English: adjudicating lawsuits, hearing criminal cases, and registering achievements.

古文：一曰疏庙，主疾疫。
现代文：一说是疏庙，主管疾病瘟疫。
English: One of them is called "Shuo Miao," which is in charge of diseases and plagues.

古文：星明大，辅忠民安；动，则多疾。
现代文：星明亮光大，辅臣忠诚人民安定；动摇，那就多病。
English: The star is bright and brilliant, the vassals are loyal and the people are stable; if it wavers, it is likely to be ill.

古文：为天子正坐，为天符。
现代文：是天子的正座，是天的符命。
English: It is the enthronement of the Son of Heaven, and it is the fate of Heaven.

古文：秋分不见，则谷伤籴贵。
现代文：秋分日不出现，那磨谷物受伤害，谷物买价很贵。
English: If the autumnal equinox does not appear, the milling grain will be damaged, and the purchase price of the grain will be very expensive.

古文：太阳犯之，诸侯谋国，君忧。
现代文：太阳侵犯，诸侯图谋篡国，君主有忧患。
English: The sun is encroaching, the princes are plotting to usurp the country, and the monarch is worried.

古文：日晕，其分大臣凶，多雨，民饥、疫。
现代文：日晕，它分野地区的大臣有凶险，多雨，人民饥荒，瘟疫。
English: The sun is fading, and the ministers of the regions in its field are in danger, rainy, people are starving, and there is a plague.

古文：月犯之，君忧或大臣当之；左为水，右为兵。
现代文：月亮侵犯，君主有忧患或有大臣担当；侵犯左面是水灾，右面是战争。
English: The moon encroaches, the monarch is worried or a minister is in charge; the left side of the invasion is a flood, and the right side is a war.

古文：月晕，其分先起兵者胜；在冬，大人忧。
现代文：月晕，它分野地区先起兵的一方胜利；在冬季出现，王公大人有忧患。
English: The moon halo indicates the victory of the side that started the war first; if it appears in winter, the prince will be in trouble.

古文：岁星犯之，有赦，谷有成；守之，有兵，人多病；留三十日以上，有赦；又曰： 犯则逆臣为乱。 
现代文：岁星侵犯，有赦免，谷物有收成；占据亢宿，有战争，人民多病；占据三十天以上，有赦免；又说： 岁星侵犯那么叛逆之臣作乱。 
English: If the year star encroaches, there will be amnesty, and the grain will be harvested; if the year star encroaches, there will be war, and the people will be sickly; if the year star encroaches for more than thirty days, there will be amnesty; also said: If the year star encroaches, then the rebellious vassals will make trouble.

古文：荧惑犯，居阳，为喜；阴，为忧；有芒角，大人恶之；守之久，民忧，多雨水，又为兵。
现代文：荧惑星侵犯，处在阳面，是喜事；在阴面，是忧患；有光芒，王公大人厌恶这种情况；占据亢宿很久，人民忧患，多雨水，又是战争。
English: The invasion of the fluorescent planets, on the sunny side, is a happy event; on the dark side, it is a sorrow; there is light, the princes detest this situation; occupy the residence for a long time, the people are worried, there is a lot of rain, and there is war.

古文：填星犯，谷伤，民亡；逆行，女专政，逆臣为谋；守之，有兵。
现代文：镇星侵犯，谷物有伤害，人民流亡；逆向运行，妇女专权执政，叛逆之臣有阴谋；占据亢宿，有战争。
English: Towns are invaded, crops are damaged, people are exiled; running in the opposite direction, women's dictatorship is in power, traitorous vassals are plotting; occupation of homesteads, war.

古文：太白犯之，国亡，民灾；逆行，为兵乱；有芒角，贵臣戮；守之，有水旱灾，或为丧。
现代文：太白星侵犯，国家灭亡，人民受灾；逆向运行，就是战乱；有光芒，贵臣遭杀戮；占据亢宿，有水灾旱灾，或是丧事。
English: If a white star encroaches, the country will perish, and the people will suffer disaster; if it moves in the opposite direction, there will be war; if there is light, the dignitaries will be killed; if there is a flood, drought, or death.

古文：辰星犯之，为水，又为大兵；守之，米贵，民疾，岁旱，盗起，民相恶。
现代文：辰星侵犯，是水灾，又是大的战争；占据亢宿，米价昂贵，人民疾病，年景干旱，盗贼发生，人民互相憎恨。
English: The invasion of the stars and planets is a flood and a big war; the occupation of Shushan, the high price of rice, the people's diseases, the drought, the occurrence of thieves, and the people's hatred of each other.

古文：客星犯，国不安；色赤为兵、旱，黄为土功；青黑，使者忧；守之谷伤。一云有赦令；黑，民流。
现代文：客星侵犯，国家不安定；星色赤红是战争、旱灾，黄色是水土工程；青黑色，出使的人有忧患；占据亢宿，谷物有伤害，一说有赦免令；黑色，人民流亡。
English: If a guest star invades, the country is unstable; if a star is red, it means war or drought; if it is yellow, it means water and land projects; if it is blue and black, it means trouble for the emissary; if it occupies a post, it means damage to the grain; if it is said that there is an amnesty; if it is black, it means the people are in exile.

古文：彗犯，国灾；出，则有水、兵、疫、臣叛；白，为丧。
现代文：彗星侵犯，国家有灾难；从亢宿出去，就有水灾、兵灾、瘟疫、臣子叛乱；白色，是丧事。
English: If a comet invades, the country will suffer a disaster; if it goes out of Shibuya, there will be a flood, a military disaster, a plague, and a rebellion of courtiers; if it is white, it is a funeral.

古文：孛星犯，国危，为水，为兵；入，则民流；出，则其国饥。
现代文：变星侵犯，国家危难，是水灾，是战争；进入亢宿，那么人民流亡；从亢宿出去，国家就闸饥荒。
English: If a variable star invades, the country is in danger, if there is a flood, there is a war; if it enters Oshuku, then the people are exiled; if it goes out of Oshuku, the country will face famine.

古文：流星入，外国使来，谷熟；出，为天子遣使，赦令出。
现代文：流星进入，外国使节来到，谷物成熟；从亢宿出去，是天子派遣使节，赦免令发出。
English: Meteors enter, foreign envoys arrive, and grain ripens; the Son of Heaven sends envoys, and the decree of amnesty is issued.

古文：李淳风曰： 流星入亢，幸臣死。 
现代文：李淳风说： 流星进入亢宿，宠幸之臣死。 
English: Li Junfeng said: A meteorite enters the mansion, and the favored vassal dies.

古文：云气犯之，色苍，民疫；白，为土功；黑，水；赤，兵。
现代文：云气侵犯亢宿，星色苍，人民遭瘟疫；星色白，是水土工程；黑色，水灾；赤色，战争。
English: When clouds invade Lushan, the sky is starry and the people are plagued by plague; when the sky is white, it is a water and soil project; when it is black, it is a flood; when it is red, it is a war.

古文：一云：白，民虐疾；黄，土功。
现代文：一说星色白，人民得虐疾；黄色，有水土工程。
English: They say that the stars are white, the people have malaria; yellow, there are water and soil projects.

古文：右亢宿四星，汉永元铜仪十度，唐开元游仪九度。
现代文：以上亢宿四颗星，汉朝永元的铜仪定为十度，唐朝开元的游仪定为九度。
English: The above four stars of Bozhou, the Han Dynasty Yongyuan's bronze medal was set at ten degrees, and the Tang Dynasty Kaiyuan's tour medal was set at nine degrees.

古文：旧去极八十九度，今九十一度半。
现代文：过去离极是八十九度，现在是九十一度半。
English: It used to be eighty-nine degrees, now it is ninety-one and a half.

古文：景祐测验，亢九度，距南第二星去极九十五度。
现代文：景佑问观测验证，亢宿九度，距星南第二星离极九十五度。
English: According to the observation and verification of Jing You, the Pleiades is nine degrees away from the South Star, and the second star is ninety-five degrees away from the South Star.

古文：大角一星，在摄提间，天王坐也。
现代文：大角一颗星，在摄提中间，是天王的座位。
English: The great horn, a star, in the middle of the picture, is the seat of the heavenly king.

古文：又为天栋，正经纪也。
现代文：又是天栋，是端正秩序的。
English: It is also the pillar of heaven, used to straighten out the common law.

古文：光明润泽，为吉；青，为忧；赤，为兵；白，为丧；黑，为疾；色黄而静，民安；动，则人主好游。
现代文：星光明润泽，是吉利；青色，是忧患；赤色，是战争；白色，是丧事；黑色，是疾病；星色黄而沉静，人民安定；动播，那么人主喜欢游玩。
English: The stars are bright and moist, it is good luck; blue, it is sorrow; red, it is war; white, it is mourning; black, it is disease; the stars are yellow and calm, the people are stable; moving, then the people like to play.

古文：月犯之，大臣忧，王者恶之。
现代文：月亮侵犯，大臣有忧患，王者厌恶这种情况。
English: The moon encroaches, the minister is troubled, and the king abhors the situation.

古文：月晕，其分人主有服。
现代文：月晕，它分野地区的人主有服丧之事。
English: Moon halo, the people in this area are in mourning.

古文：五星犯之，臣谋主，有兵。
现代文：五星侵犯，臣子谋算君主，有战争。
English: Five-star encroachments, courtiers plotting against the monarch, wars.

古文：太白守之，为兵。
现代文：太白星占据大角，是战争。
English: Too white stars occupy the big horn, it is war.

古文：彗星出，其分主更改，或为兵。
现代文：彗星从大角出来，它分野地区的人主更换，或是战争。
English: When the comet comes out of the Big Horn, it will bring about a change of leadership in the region, or war.

古文：天子失仁则守之。
现代文：天子失去仁政，就占据大角。
English: If the Son of Heaven loses benevolence, he will occupy the Great Horn.

古文：孛星犯，为兵；守之，主忧。
现代文：变星侵犯，是战争；占据大角，人主有忧患。
English: To encroach on a variable star is war; to occupy a great horn is distress.

古文：客星犯、守，臣谋上；出，则人主受制。
现代文：客星侵犯并占据，臣子谋逆君主；从大角出去，那么入主受挟制。
English: If the guest star invades and occupies, the vassal plots against the sovereign; if the guest star goes out from the great horn, then the lord will be taken hostage.

古文：流星入，王者恶之；犯之，边兵起。
现代文：流星侵入，王者厌恶这种情况；侵犯它，边境发生战争。
English: The meteor invades, the king abhors the situation; invade it, and there is war on the frontier.

古文：云气青，主忧；白，为丧；黄气出，有喜。
现代文：云气青色，人主有忧患；白色，是丧事；黄色云气涌出，有喜事。
English: The clouds are blue when there is sorrow; white when there is mourning; and yellow when there is joy.

古文：折威七星，在亢南，主斩杀，断军狱。
现代文：折威七颗星，在亢宿南面，主管斩首杀人，判决军队的讼案。
English: The seven-pointed star, in the south of Oshuku, the head of the decapitation murder, the judgment of the army's case.

古文：月犯之，天子忧。
现代文：月亮侵犯，天子有忧患。
English: The moon encroaches, and the son of heaven is troubled.

古文：五星犯，将军叛。
现代文：五星侵犯，将军背叛。
English: Five-star encroachment, general betrayal.

古文：彗、孛犯，边将死。
现代文：彗星、变星侵犯，边境的将军死。
English: Comets, invading variable stars, the death of a border general.

古文：云气犯，苍白，兵乱；赤，臣叛主；黄白，为和亲；出，则有赦；黑气入，人主恶之。
现代文：云气侵犯，星色苍白，军队叛乱；赤色，臣下叛逆君主；黄白色，是和亲；从大角出去，就有赦免；黑色云气进入，人主厌恶这种情况。
English: The clouds invade, the stars are pale, the army revolts; red, the vassals rebel against the monarch; yellow and white, it is amicable; out of the big horn, there is amnesty; black clouds enter, the human masters abhor this situation.

古文：摄提六星，左右各三，直斗杓南，主建时节，伺禨祥。
现代文：摄提穴颗星，左右各三颗，在斗杓的正南面，主管建立四季的节气，观察吉凶。
English: There are three stars on the right and three stars on the left, and on the south side of the Du Fu, the supervisor establishes the four seasons and observes the auspicious and inauspicious.

古文：其星为盾，以夹拥帝坐，主九卿。
现代文：它的星是檐，用来夹持拥护帝座，主管九卿。
English: Its star is the dragonfly, which is used to hold and support the imperial throne, presided over by the Nine Lords.

古文：星明大，三公恣，主弱；色温不明，天下安；近大角，近戚有谋。
现代文：星明亮光大，三公恣肆，君主懦弱；星温和不明亮，天下安定；接近大角，近系的亲戚有图谋。
English: The star is bright and large, the three princes are reckless, the monarch is weak; the star is mild and not bright, the world is stable; close to the Big Horn, close relatives have plans.

古文：太阴入，主受制。
现代文：太阴进入，君主受挟制。
English: As the new moon sets in, the monarch is caught in the middle.

古文：月食，其分主恶之。
现代文：月食，它分野地区的人主厌恶这种情况。
English: Lunar eclipses, it turns out, are loathed by most people in the region.

古文：荧惑、太白守，兵起，天下更主。
现代文：荧惑星、太白星占据摄提，战争发生，天下更换君主。
English: Fluorescent planets and too-white stars dominate photography, war breaks out, and monarchs change all over the world.

古文：彗、孛入，主自将兵；出，主受制。
现代文：彗星、变星进入，君主亲自带兵；从摄提出去，君主受挟制。
English: When comets and variable stars enter, the monarch himself leads the troops; when they leave, the monarch is held hostage.

古文：流星入，有兵；出，有使者出；犯之，公卿不安。
现代文：流星进入，有战争；从摄提出去，有使者出使；侵犯摄提，公卿大臣不安全。
English: If a meteor enters, there will be war; if it leaves the palace, an envoy will be sent; if it invades the palace, it will be unsafe for nobles and ministers.

古文：云气入，赤，为兵，九卿忧；色黄，喜；黑，大臣戮。
现代文：云气进入，星色赤，是战争，九卿有忧患；星色黄，喜事；黑色，大臣被杀。
English: The clouds enter, the stars are red, it's war, the nine lords are in trouble; the stars are yellow, it's a happy event; black, the minister is killed.

古文：阳门二星，在库楼东北，主守隘塞，御外寇。
现代文：阳门二颗星，在库楼东北面，主管守卫关隘边塞，防御外敌侵略。
English: The two stars of Yangmen, on the northeast side of the warehouse, are in charge of guarding the narrow border, defending against foreign invasion.

古文：五星入，五兵藏。
现代文：五星进入，五种兵器收藏。
English: Five stars to enter, five weapons to collect.

古文：彗星守之，外夷犯塞、兵起。
现代文：彗星占据阳门，外族侵犯边塞，战争发生。
English: Comets occupy Yangmen, foreigners invade the border fortress, and war breaks out.

古文：赤云气入，主用兵。顿顽二星，在折威东南，主考囚情状，察诈伪也。
现代文：顿顽二颗星，在折威东南面，主管考问囚犯真情寅状，是审察欺诈虚伪的。
English: Two stars, in the southeast of Weihai, the superintendent interrogated the prisoner's true feelings. It was an examination of fraud and hypocrisy.

古文：星明，无咎；暗，则刑滥。
现代文：星明亮，没有过错；暗淡，那么刑罚滥施。
English: If the star is bright, there is no sin; if it is dim, there is no punishment.

古文：彗星犯之，贵人下狱。
现代文：彗星侵犯，贵人入狱。
English: Comet trespasses, noblemen go to jail.

古文：按《步天歌》，大角一星，折威七星，左、右摄提总六星，顿顽、阳门各二星，俱属角宿。
现代文：按《步天歌》，大角一颗星，折威七颗星，左右摄提总共六颗星，顿顽、阳门各二颗星，都属于角宿。
English: According to the "Walking Song of Heaven," Big Horn has one star, Biwei has seven stars, the left and right sides have a total of six stars, and Dunguo and Yangmen have two stars each, all of which belong to the Corner Inn.

古文：而《晋志》以大角、摄提属太微垣，折威、顿顽在二十八宿之外。
现代文：而《晋书，天文志》认为大角、摄提属于太微垣，折威、顿顽在二十八宿之外。
English: On the other hand, "Jinshu, an Astronomical History" believes that Dajiao and Zhoti belong to Taiyuan, while Ori Wei and Dongnuo are outside the twenty-eight towns.

古文：阳门则见于《隋志》，而《晋史》不载。
现代文：阳门则见于《隋书，天文志》，而《晋史》不载录。
English: Yangmen is found in the "Sui Book, Astronomy," but it is not recorded in the "History of Jin Dynasty."

古文：武密书以摄提、折威、阳门皆属角、亢。
现代文：武密的书认为摄提、折威、阳门都属于角宿、亢宿。
English: Wu Mi's book believes that Zheti, Oriwei, and Yangmen all belong to Jiao-juku and Ya-juku.

古文：《乾象新书》以右摄提属角，左摄提属亢，余与武密书同。
现代文：《干象新书》认为右摄提属于角宿，左摄提属于亢宿，其余的与武密的书相同。
English: "Ganxiang New Book" believes that the right photo belongs to the corner, the left photo belongs to the corner, and the rest are the same as the WuMi book.

古文：《景祐》测验，乃以大角、摄提、顿顽、阳门皆属于亢，其说不同。
现代文：景佑观测验证，就认为大角、摄提、顿顽、阳门都属于亢宿，它的说法不同。
English: According to the observation and verification of Jingyou, it is believed that Daju, Zhoti, Dongyu and Yangmen all belong to Xizhu, but it is not the same.

古文：氐宿四星，为天子舍室，后妃之府，休解之房。
现代文：氐宿四颗星，是天子的住房居室，后妃的府第，休息松弛的房舍。
English: The four-star Banyan Tree Inn is the dwelling room of the son of heaven, the residence of the empress, and a relaxing place to rest.

古文：前二星，适也；后二星，妾也。
现代文：前面二颗星是嫡妻，后面二颗星是妾。
English: The first two stars are the legitimate wife, and the last two stars are the concubine.

古文：又为天根，主疫。
现代文：又是天根，主管瘟疫。
English: It's Tengen again, in charge of the plague.

古文：后二星大，则臣奉度，主安；小，则臣失势；动，则徭役起。
现代文：后面二颗星大，那么臣子遵循法度，君主安全；小，那么臣子失去权势；动摇，那么徭役兴起。
English: If the latter two stars are large, then the vassal obeys the law and the monarch is safe; if small, then the vassal loses power; if wavering, then the eunuch rises.

古文：日食，其分，卿相有谗谀，一曰王者后妃恶之，大臣忧。
现代文：日食，它分野地区的卿相有进谗言谄媚的，一说王者后妃厌恶这种情况，大臣有忧患。
English: The sun eclipses, and the nobles in the region of the field are flattered and flattered, saying that the king and queen are disgusted with this situation, and the minister is worried.

古文：日晕，女主恣，一曰国有忧，日下兴师。
现代文：日晕，女主放肆，一说国家有忧患，京城发动军队。
English: The sun is fading, the hostess is presumptuous, the country is in trouble, the capital is mobilizing the army.

古文：月食其宿，大臣凶，后妃恶之，一曰籴贵。
现代文：月贪在氐宿，大臣凶险，后妃厌恶这种情况，一说米的买价贵。
English: The moon is greedy in Shibuya, the minister is dangerous, and the empress is disgusted with this situation, saying that the purchase price of rice is expensive.

古文：月晕，大将凶，人疫；在冬，为水，主危，以赦解之。
现代文：月晕，大将有凶险，人民有瘟疫；在冬季，是水灾，君主危难，用赦免来解除。
English: The moon is eclipsed, there will be great danger, the people have the plague; in winter, it is a flood, the monarch is in danger, and amnesty is used to relieve it.

古文：月犯，左右郎将有诛，一曰有兵、盗。
现代文：月亮侵犯，左右郎将被杀，一说有战争、盗贼。
English: The moon will invade, the left and right will be killed, there will be war, there will be thieves.

古文：犯右星，主水；掩之，有阴谋，将军当之。
现代文：侵犯右面的星，预兆水灾；月亮掩盖右面的星，有阴谋，将军承担责任。
English: If the star on the right is violated, it portends a flood; if the moon hides the star on the right, there is a conspiracy, and the general will be held responsible.

古文：岁星犯，有赦，或立后；守之，地动，年丰；逆行，为兵。
现代文：岁星侵犯，有赦免，或立皇后；占据氐宿，地震，年成丰收；逆向运行，是战争。
English: When the year star encroaches, there is an amnesty, or the establishment of an empress; when the year star encroaches, there is an amnesty, or the establishment of an empress; when the year star encroaches, there is an earthquake; when the year star encroaches, there is a bumper harvest; when the year star encroaches, there is a war.

古文：荧惑犯之，臣僭上，一云将军忧；守，有赦。
现代文：荧惑星侵犯氐宿，臣下僭越主上，一说将军有忧患；占据氐宿，有赦免。
English: The planet of fluorescence invades the mansion, the vassal trespasses on the master, and the general is said to be in distress; he occupies the mansion, and is pardoned.

古文：填星犯，左右郎将有诛；守之，有赦；色黄，后喜，或册太子；留舍，天下有兵；齐明，赦。
现代文：镇星侵犯，左右郎将被杀；占据氐宿，有赦免；星色黄，皇后有喜，或册立太子；占据住舍，天下有战争；四星都明亮，赦免。
English: Invade the town star, the left and right lords will be killed; occupy the inn, there will be pardon; the star is yellow, the queen is happy, or the crown prince is appointed; occupy the house, there is war in the world; the four stars are bright, pardon.

古文：太白犯之，郎将诛；入，其分疾疫；或云犯之，拜将；乘右星，水灾。
现代文：太白星侵犯，郎将被杀；进入，其分野地区疾病瘟疫漫延；有人说侵犯氐宿，拜授将军；登上右面的星，水灾。
English: If Taibai invaded, his son-in-law would be killed; if he entered, disease and plague would spread in his domain; if he invaded Oshuku, he would be promoted to general; if he boarded the star on the right, there would be a flood.

古文：辰星犯，贵臣暴忧；守之，为水，为旱，为兵；入守，贵人有狱；乘左星，天子自将。
现代文：辰星侵犯，贵臣突然有忧患；占据氐宿，是永灾，是旱灾，是战争；进入占据，贵人有官司；登上左面的星，天子自己率领军队。
English: When the star of the hour encroaches, the dignitaries are suddenly in trouble; when the capital is occupied, it is a permanent disaster, a drought, and a war; when the capital is occupied, the dignitaries have lawsuits; when the capital is boarded by the star on the left, the heavenly son himself leads the army.

古文：客星犯，牛马贵；色黄白，为喜，有赦，或曰边兵起，后宫乱；五十日不去，有刺客。
现代文：客星侵犯，牛马价贵；星色黄白，是喜事，有赦免，有人说边境发生战争，后宫作乱；辰星五十天不离去，有刺客。
English: The guest star encroaches, the cattle and horses are expensive; the star color yellow and white is a happy event, there is a pardon, some people say that there is a war on the border, the harem is in turmoil; the star does not leave for fifty days, there is an assassin.

古文：彗星犯，有大赦，籴贵；灭之，大疫；入，有小兵，一云主不安。
现代文：彗星侵犯，有大赦，米的买价贵；掩灭氐宿，大瘟疫；进入，有小的战争，一说君主不安全。
English: Comets invade, there is an amnesty, the price of rice is expensive; the destruction of Xizhou, a great plague; entry, there is a small war, a monarch is not safe.

古文：孛星犯，籴贵；出，则有赦；入，为小兵；或云犯之，臣干主。
现代文：变星侵犯，米的买价贵；从氐宿出去，就有赦免；进入，是小的战争；有人说侵犯氐宿，臣子干犯主上。
English: If a variable star invades, the purchase price of rice is expensive; if you go out of Xizhou, you will be pardoned; if you go in, it will be a small war; some people say that if you invade Xizhou, your vassals will commit crimes against you.

古文：流星犯，秘阁官有事；在冬夏，为水、旱；《乙巳占》，后宫有喜；色赤黑，后宫不安。
现代文：流星侵犯，秘阁官有变故；在冬季夏季，是水灾、旱灾；《乙巳占》，后宫有喜事；星色赤黑，后宫不安定。
English: If a meteor strikes, there will be a change of cabinet secretaries; in winter and summer, there will be floods and droughts; if the moon is eclipsed, there will be joy in the harem; if the stars are red and black, the harem will be unstable.

古文：云气入，黄为土功；黑主水；赤为兵；苍白为疾疫；白，后宫忧。
现代文：云气进入，星色黄是水土工程；黑色预兆水灾；赤色是战争；苍白色是疾病瘟疫；白色，后宫有忧患。
English: When the cloud enters, the yellow star is the water and soil project; the black omen is the flood; the red is the war; the pale white is the disease and plague; the white, the harem is in trouble.

古文：按汉永元铜仪、唐开元游仪，氐宿十六度，去极九十四度。
现代文：按汉朝永元的铜仪，唐朝开元的游仪，氐宿十六度，离极是九十四度。
English: According to Yongyuan's bronze instrument of the Han Dynasty and Kaiyuan's travel instrument of the Tang Dynasty, Lushu is 16 degrees, and the furthest is 94 degrees.

古文：景祐测验与《乾象新书》皆九十八度。
现代文：景佑观测验证和《干象新书》都是九十八度。
English: The observation and verification of Jingyou and the "Hengxiang New Book" are all ninety-eight degrees.

古文：天乳一星，在氐东北，当赤道中。
现代文：天乳一颗星，在氐宿东北面，正处在赤道当中。
English: A star in the sky, in the northeast of Oshuku, right in the middle of the equator.

古文：明，则甘露降。
现代文：星明亮，那么天降甘美的雨露。
English: The stars are bright, so the sky falls sweet dew.

古文：彗、客入，天雨。
现代文：彗星、客星进入，天下雨。
English: Comets and guest stars enter, and it rains.

古文：将军一星，骑将也，在骑官东南，总领车骑军将、部阵行列。
现代文：将军一颗星，是骑兵的将领，在骑官的东南面，总领战车骑兵军士将官、布置阵法行伍列队。
English: General one star, is the general of the cavalry, in the southeast side of the cavalry officer, the commander of the chariot cavalry sergeant general, the deployment of the formation marching line.

古文：色动摇，兵外行。
现代文：星色动摇，军队向外出动。
English: The stars are wavering, and the troops are moving out.

古文：太白、荧惑、客星犯之，大兵出，天下乱。
现代文：太白星、荧惑星、客星侵犯将军，大军出征，天下动乱。
English: Too-white stars, fluorescent planets, and guest stars invade the car and bicycle, the army goes to war, and the world is in turmoil.

古文：招摇一星，在梗河北，主北兵。
现代文：招摇一颗星，在梗河的北面，主管北方战争。
English: Shake a star, in the north of the river, in charge of the northern war.

古文：芒角、变动，则兵大行；明，则兵起；若与栋星、梗河、北斗相直，则北方当来受命中国。
现代文：星出现光芒、有变动，那么军队大规模出动；星明亮，那么战争发生；如果与楝星、梗河、北斗相遇，那么北方应当来接受我国中原的册命。
English: If the star appears to shine and change, then the army will be dispatched on a large scale; if the star is bright, then war will occur; if it encounters the Pleiades, the Stygian, and the Big Dipper, then the north should come to accept the mandate of the Central Plains of our country.

古文：又占：动，则近臣恣；离次，则库兵发；色青，为忧；白，为君怒；赤，为兵；黑，为军破；黄，则天下安。
现代文：又占验：星动摇，那么近臣放肆；偏离位置，那么军库兵器散发；星色青，是忧患；白色，是君主动怒；赤色，是战争；黑色，是兵败；黄色，那么天下安定。
English: Another horoscope test: if the star wavers, then the vassal is impudent; if it deviates from the position, then the arsenal weapons are distributed; if the star is blue, it is sorrow; white, it is the ruler's active anger; red, it is war; black, it is military defeat; yellow, then the world is stable.

古文：彗星犯，北边兵动；出，其分夷兵大起。
现代文：彗星侵犯，北方边境的军队出动；从招摇出来，它分野地区的夷族军队大规模地发动战争。
English: Comet invasion, the northern border of the army dispatched; from the swagger, it fielded large-scale military forces of the barbarians in the region to wage war.

古文：孛犯，蛮夷乱。
现代文：变星侵犯，蛮族夷族叛乱。
English: Invaded by a variable star, the barbarian barbarians rebelled.

古文：客星出，蛮夷来贡，一云北地有兵、丧。
现代文：客星从招摇出来，蛮族夷族来进贡，一说北方地区有战争、丧事。
English: Guest stars come out of the clouds, barbarians and barbarians come to pay tribute, and it is said that there is war and mourning in the northern region.

古文：流星出，有兵。
现代文：流星从招摇出来，有战争。
English: The shooting stars come out of the sky, and there is war.

古文：云气犯，色黄白，相死；赤，为内兵乱；色黄，兵罢；白，大人忧。
现代文：云气侵犯，星色黄白，宰相死；赤色，是国内军队叛乱；星色黄，战争结束；白色，王公大人有忧患。
English: The clouds are encroaching, the stars are yellow and white, the prime minister is dead; red, the domestic army is rebelling; the stars are yellow, the war is over; white, the prince is in trouble.

古文：帝席三星，在大角北，主宴献酬酢。
现代文：帝席三颗星，在大角北面，主管宴饮敬酒朝聘应答之礼。
English: Imperial seat three stars, on the north side of the large horn, the head of the banquet, the toast, and the reply.

古文：星明，王公灾；暗，天下安；星亡，大人失位；动摇，主危。
现代文：星明亮，王公大人有灾祸；暗淡，天下安定；星隐逸，王公大人失去官位；动摇，君主危急。
English: The star is bright, the prince has a calamity; dim, the world is stable; the star is receding, the prince has lost his official position; wavering, the monarch is in danger.

古文：彗犯，主忧，有乱兵。
现代文：彗星侵犯，君主有忧患，有叛乱的军队。
English: Comets invade, monarchs are troubled, rebellious armies arise.

古文：客星犯，主危。
现代文：客星侵犯，君主危难。
English: The guest star encroaches, the monarch is in danger.

古文：亢池六星，在亢宿北。
现代文：亢池六颗星，在亢宿北面。
English: Tsugaike six stars, in the north of Oshuku.

古文：亢，舟也；池，水也。主渡水，往来送迎。
现代文：亢是船；池是水。主管渡水，往来送迎。
English: The raft is the boat; the pool is the water. The supervisor will cross the water to meet and greet guests.

古文：微细，凶；散，则天下不通；移徙不居其度中，则宗庙有怪。
现代文：星细小，凶险；扩散，那么天下不通航；移动不处在亢池垣度之中，那么宗庙有鬼怪。
English: If the stars are small, it is dangerous; if they are diffuse, the world is not navigable; if the movement is not in the middle of the pond, then there are ghosts in the ancestral temple.

古文：五星犯之，川溢。
现代文：五星侵犯亢池，河水外溢。
English: Five-star encroached on Dianchi Lake, the river overflowed.

古文：客星犯，水，虫多死。
现代文：客星侵犯，水灾，虫类多死。
English: Invasions, floods, and the death of many insects.

古文：武密云： 主断军狱，掌弃市杀戮。 
现代文：武密说： 主管判决军队的讼案，掌管弃尸街市、杀人。 
English: Wu Mi said: "He is in charge of adjudicating military cases, in charge of the abandoned corpse market, and in charge of homicide.

古文：与旧史异说。
现代文：和过去的史书的说法不同。
English: That's not what the history books said.

古文：骑官二十七星，在氐南，天子虎贲也，主宿卫。
现代文：骑官二十七颗星，在氐宿南面，是天子的勇士，主管官禁值班守卫。
English: The twenty-seven-star cavalry officer, in the south of Oshuku, is a warrior of the Son of Heaven. The officer in charge is prohibited from guarding on duty.

古文：星众，天下安；稀，则骑士叛；不见，兵起。
现代文：星众多，天下安定；稀少，那么骑兵士官叛乱；不出现，战争发生。
English: When the stars are numerous, the world is stable; when they are few, the cavalry mutinies; when they are absent, war breaks out.

古文：五星犯，为兵。
现代文：五星侵犯，是战争。
English: Five-star encroachment is war.

古文：客星守之，将出有忧，士卒发。
现代文：客星占据骑官，将领出征有忧患，士兵发难。
English: The guest stars occupy the cavalry officers, the generals are in trouble, and the soldiers are in trouble.

古文：流星入，兵起，色苍白，将死。
现代文：流星进入，战争发生；星色苍白，将领死。
English: Meteors enter, war happens; stars turn pale, generals die.

古文：梗河三星，在帝席北，天矛也。一曰天锋，主北边兵，又主丧，故其变动应以兵、丧。
现代文：梗河三颗星，在帝席北面，是天矛，一说天锋，主管北方边境的战争，又主管丧事，所以它的变动要用战争、死丧来对应。
English: The three stars on the north side of the imperial throne are the celestial spear and the celestial vanguard, which are in charge of the war on the northern border and the funeral, so its changes must be matched with war and death.

古文：星亡，国有兵谋。
现代文：星消失，国家有战争的阴谋。
English: The stars are disappearing, the country is plotting war.

古文：彗星犯之，北兵败。
现代文：彗星侵犯梗河，北方军队失败。
English: The comet encroached on the Yinghe River, and the northern army was defeated.

古文：客星入，兵出，阴阳不和。一云北兵侵中国。
现代文：客星进入，军队出征，阴阳不调和；一说北方军队入侵我国中原。
English: The guest star enters, the army goes to war, yin and yang are not reconciled; it is said that the northern army invaded the Central Plains of our country.

古文：流星出，为兵。
现代文：流星从梗河出来，是战争。
English: When the meteor comes out of the river, it's war.

古文：赤云气犯，兵败；苍白，将死。
现代文：赤色云气侵犯，战争失败；苍白色，将领死。
English: Red clouds invade, war is lost; pale clouds lead to death.

古文：车骑三星，在骑官南，总车骑将，主部阵行列。
现代文：车骑三颗星，在骑官南面，总领战车骑兵将官，主管布置阵法行伍列队。
English: There are three stars on the chariot and cavalry. On the south side of the cavalry officer, the general leading the chariot and cavalry general is in charge of arranging the formation and marching in line.

古文：变色动摇，则兵行。
现代文：星变色动摇，那么军队出动。
English: The star changes color and wavers, then the army moves in.

古文：太白、荧惑、客星犯之，大兵出，天下乱。
现代文：太白星、荧惑星、客星侵犯车骑，大 军出征，天下动乱。
English: Too-white stars, fluorescent planets, and guest stars invade the car and bicycle, the army goes to war, and the world is in turmoil.

古文：阵车三星，在氐南，一云在骑官东北，革车也。
现代文：阵车三颗星，在氐宿南面，一说在骑官东北，是兵车。
English: The three stars of the phalanx of chariots are the chariots to the south of Oshuku and to the northeast of the cavalry officers.

古文：太白、荧惑守之，主车骑满野，内兵无禁。
现代文：太白星、荧惑星占据阵车，预兆战车骑兵布满田野，国内军队没有约束。
English: Too-white stars and fluorescent planets occupy the chariots, omen chariots and cavalry cover the fields, and the domestic army is not constrained.

古文：天辐二星，在房西斜列，主乘舆，若《周官》巾车官也。
现代文：天辐二颗星，在房宿西面斜着排列，主管皇帝乘车，像《周官》的巾车官。
English: The two stars of the heavenly spokes are arranged diagonally on the west side of the inn, and the emperor in charge is riding in the car, like the carriage officer in "Chou Guan."

古文：近尾，天下有福。
现代文：靠近尾宿，天下有福气。
English: Close to Oyado, the world is blessed.

古文：五星、客、彗犯之，则辇毂有变。
现代文：五星、客星、彗星侵犯天辐，那么天子乘车有变故。
English: If five stars, a guest star, or a comet encroach on the celestial spokes, then there is a reason for the celestial son to travel by car.

古文：一作天福。
现代文：一作天福。
English: A work of heaven's blessing.

古文：按《步天歌》，已上诸星俱属氐宿。
现代文：按《步天歌》，以上各星都属于氐宿。
English: According to the "Walking Song of Heaven," all of the above stars belong to Xizhou.

古文：《乾象新书》以帝席属角，亢池属亢；武密与《步在歌》合，皆属氐，而以梗河属亢。
现代文：《干象新书》认为帝席属于角宿，亢池属于亢宿；武密和《步天歌》说法相合，都属于氐宿，但认为梗河属于亢宿。
English: "Ganxiang New Book" believes that the imperial seat belongs to the corner lodge, and the pond belongs to the cormorant; Wu Mi and the "Walking Song" say that they both belong to the cormorant, but the cormorant river belongs to the cormorant.

古文：《占天录》又以阵车属于亢，《乾象新书》属氐，余皆与《步天歌》合。
现代文：《占天录》又认为阵车属于亢宿，《干象新书》认为属于氐宿，其余都和《步天歌》说法相合。
English: "Zhan Tian Lu" also believes that the phalanx car belongs to Bozhuang, "Gan Xiang New Book" believes that it belongs to Bozhuang, and the rest are consistent with the "Walking Song."

古文：房宿四星，为明堂，天子布政之官也，亦四辅也。
现代文：房宿四颗星，是明堂，是天于颁布政令的办公地方，也是四辅。
English: The four-star accommodation is the main hall, the office where the decree was issued, and the four auxiliary halls.

古文：下第一星，上将也；次，次将也；次，次相也；上星，上相也。
现代文：下面第一颗星，是上将；下一颗，是次将；再下一颗，是次相；上面的星，是上相。
English: The first star below is the first phase; the next star is the second phase; the next star is the second phase; the star above is the first phase.

古文：南二星君位，北二星夫人位。
现代文：南面二颗星是君主的位置，北面二颗星是夫人的位置。
English: The two stars to the south are the position of the monarch, and the two stars to the north are the position of the consort.

古文：又为四表，中为天衢、为天关，黄道之所经也。
现代文：又是四表，当中是天衢、是天关，黄道经历的轨道。
English: Again, there are four tables, among which are the heavens, the gates of heaven, and the orbit of the zodiac.

古文：南间曰阳环，其南曰太阳；北间曰阴环，其北曰太阴。
现代文：南面空间叫阳环，它的南面叫太阳；北面空间叫阴环，它的北面叫太阴。
English: The southern space is called Yanghuan, and its southern side is called Sun; the northern space is called Yinhuan, and its northern side is called Taiyin.

古文：七曜由乎天衢，则天下和平，由阳道，则旱、丧；由阴道，则水、兵。
现代文：日月五星经由天衢，那么天下和平；经由阳道，那么有旱灾、丧事；经由阴道，那么有水灾、战争。
English: If the sun, moon and five stars pass through the heavens, there will be peace; if they pass through the yang, there will be drought and death; if they pass through the vagina, there will be floods and wars.

古文：亦曰天驷，为天马，主车驾。
现代文：也叫天驷，是天马，主管马拉的车。
English: Also known as the Heavenly Horse, it is the Heavenly Horse, which is responsible for the chariot used by the emperor.

古文：南星曰左骖，次左服，次右服，次右骖。
现代文：南面的星叫左骖，下一颗左服，其次一颗右服，再次一颗右黪。
English: The star in the south is called the left beak, the next one the left beak, the next one the right beak, and the next one the right beak.

古文：亦曰天厩。又主开闭，为畜藏之所由。
现代文：也叫天厩，又主管开关门，是储藏经由的地方。
English: Also known as the sky stable, or the supervisor switch and close door, is the place where the storage passes through.

古文：星明，则王者明；骖星大，则兵起；离，则民流；左骖、服亡，则东南方不可举兵；右亡，则西北不可举兵。
现代文：星明亮，那么王者明智；胶星大，那么战争发生；星离散，那么人民流亡；左黪、左服消失，那么东南方不能发动战争；右黪、右服消失，那么西扎方不能发动战争。
English: If the star is bright, then the king is wise; if the star is large, then war occurs; if the star is dispersed, then the people are exiled; if the left arm and left garment disappear, then the southeast cannot wage war; if the right arm and right garment disappear, then the west side cannot wage war.

古文：日食，其分为兵，大臣专权。
现代文：日食，其分野地区有战争，大臣专权。
English: The sun eclipses, there is war in the area, and the minister has exclusive power.

古文：日晕，亦为兵，君臣失政，女主忧。
现代文：日晕，也是战争，君臣政治失误，女主有忧患。
English: The sun is eclipsed, there is also a war, the monarch and his ministers make political mistakes, and the mistress is troubled.

古文：月食其宿，大臣忧，又为王者昏，大臣专政。
现代文：月食在这个星宿，大臣有忧患，又是王者昏庸，大臣专政。
English: The eclipse of the moon is in this star, the minister is troubled, and the king is dull, the minister is dictatorial.

古文：月晕，为兵；三宿，主赦，及五舍不出百日赦。
现代文：月晕，是战争；日晕三夜，预兆赦免，到五夜，不出一百天有赦免。
English: When the moon is eclipsed, there is war; when the sun is eclipsed for three nights, the omen is pardon; when the moon is eclipsed for five nights, the omen is pardon; when the moon is eclipsed for three nights, the omen is pardon; when the moon is eclipsed for five nights, the omen is pardon; when the moon is eclipsed for three nights, the omen is pardon; when the moon is eclipsed for three nights, the omen is pardon; when the moon is eclipsed for five nights, the omen is pardon; when the moon is eclipsed for

古文：太阴犯阳道，为旱；阴道，为雨；中道，岁稔。又占上将诛。
现代文：太阴侵犯阳道，是旱灾；侵犯阴道，是大雨；侵犯中道，年成丰收，又占验上将被杀。
English: If the lunar eclipse encroaches on the Yang Road, it is a drought; if it encroaches on the Vagina Road, it is a heavy rain; if it encroaches on the Middle Road, it is a bumper harvest, and if it encroaches on the Upper Road, it will be killed.

古文：当天门、天驷，谷熟。
现代文：太阴正对着天门、天驷，谷物成熟。
English: The yin and yang is facing the heavenly gate, the heavenly bowl, and the grain is ripening.

古文：岁星犯之，更政令，又为兵，为饥，民流；守之，大赦，天下和平，一云良马出。
现代文：岁星侵犯房宿，更改政令，又是战争、是饥荒，人民流亡；占据房宿，大赦，天下和平，一说良马出现。
English: The year star encroaches on the lodging house, changes the government decree, is war, is famine, people are exiled; occupy the lodging house, amnesty, world peace, and a good horse appears.

古文：荧惑犯，马贵，人主忧；色青，为丧；赤，为兵；黑，将相灾；白芒，火灾；守之，有赦令；十日勾巳者，臣叛。
现代文：荧惑星侵犯，马价贵，君主有忧患；星色青，是丧事；赤色，是战争；黑色，将相有灾祸；白色光芒，火灾；占据房宿，有赦免令；形成勾已十天的，臣下叛乱。
English: Fluorescent planets invade, horses are expensive, the monarch is in distress; starry blue, it is a funeral; red, it is a war; black, it will be a disaster; white light, fire; occupy the house, there is a pardon order; the formation has been ten days, the vassal rebellion.

古文：填星犯之，女主忧，勾巳，相有诛；守之，土功兴，一曰旱、兵，一曰有赦令。
现代文：镇星侵犯房宿，女主有忧患；形成勾巳，宰相有被杀的；占据房宿，水土工程大兴，一说旱灾、战争，一说有赦免。
English: The town star encroaches on the room, the hostess is in distress; a quarrel is formed, the prime minister is killed; the room is occupied, the water and soil project is booming, one says drought, war, and one says there is amnesty.

古文：太白犯，四边合从；守之，为土功；出入，霜雨不时。
现代文：太白星侵犯，四方边境结盟联合；占据房宿，是水土工程；在房宿出来进去，霜冻下雨不按正常的季节。
English: Too white star encroachment, four-way border alliance and union; occupy the room, is the water and soil project; in the room out and in, frost and rain do not follow the normal season.

古文：辰星犯，有殃；守之，水灾。一云北兵起，将军为乱。
现代文：辰星侵犯，有灾祸；占据房宿，水灾，一说北方发生战争，将军作乱。
English: If the star attacks, there will be disaster; if houses are occupied, there will be floods; if there is a war in the north, there will be a riot.

古文：客星犯，历阳道，为旱；阴道，为水，国空，民饥；色白，有攻战；入，为籴贵。
现代文：客星侵犯，经历阳道，是旱灾；经历阴道，是水灾，国家空虚，人民饥荒；星色白，有攻击战斗；进入，是米的买价贵。
English: The invasion of the guest star, the experience of the sun path, is the drought; the experience of the vagina, is the flood, the country is empty, the people are hungry; the star is white, there is an attack and battle; the entry, is the price of rice is expensive.

古文：彗星犯，国危，人乱，其分恶之。
现代文：彗星侵犯，国家危难，人民动乱，它的分野地区厌恶这种情况。
English: Comet encroachment, national crisis, people's unrest, its fields and regions abhor this situation.

古文：孛星犯，有兵，民饥，国灾。
现代文：变星侵犯，有战争，人民饥荒，国家灾难。
English: Variable star invasion, war, people's famine, national disaster.

古文：流星犯之，在春夏，为土功；秋冬，相忧；入，有丧。
现代文：流星侵犯，在春季夏季，是水土工程；在秋季冬季，宰相有忧患；进入，有丧事。
English: Meteor intrusion, in the spring and summer, is a water and soil project; in the autumn and winter, the prime minister has sorrow; entering, there is a funeral.

古文：《乙巳占》：出，其分天子恤民，下德令。
现代文：《乙巳占》：从房宿出来，在其分野地区，天子体恤人民，颁布德政的旨令。
English: "Yi Si Zhan": came out of the room, in his field area, Tian Zi sympathized with the people, promulgated the decrees of the German government.

古文：云气入，赤黄，吉；如人形，后有子；色赤，宫乱；苍白气出，将相忧。
现代文：云气进入，星色赤黄，吉利；像人形，皇后有子；星色赤，宫内混乱；苍白色云气出现，将相有忧患。
English: The clouds enter, the stars are red and yellow, good luck; like a doll, the queen has a son; the stars are red, the palace is in chaos; the pale clouds appear, there will be sorrow.

古文：按汉永元铜仪、唐开元游仪，房宿五度。
现代文：按汉朝永元铜仪，唐朝开元游仪，房宿五度。
English: According to the Han Dynasty Yongyuan bronze instrument, the Tang Dynasty Kaiyuan tour instrument, accommodation five degrees.

古文：旧去极百八度，今百十度半。
现代文：从前离极是一百零八度，现在一百一十度半。
English: Formerly it was one hundred and eight degrees; now it is one hundred and ten and a half degrees.

古文：景祐测验，房距南第二星去极百十五度，在赤道外二十三度。
现代文：景佑年问观测验证，房宿距星南第二颗星离极是一百一十五度，在赤道外二十三度。
English: According to the observation and verification of Jingyou Nianqian, the house is one hundred and fifteen degrees away from the second star in the south, and it is twenty-three degrees outside the equator.

古文：《乾象新书》在赤道外二十四度。
现代文：《干象新书》在赤道外二十四度。
English: The Dry As A New Book is set twenty-four degrees outside the equator.

古文：键闭一星，在房东北，主关籥。
现代文：键闭一颗星，在房宿东北面，主管门闩锁钥。
English: There is a star on the north-east side of the rooming house, which is responsible for the latch lock key.

古文：明，吉；暗，则宫门不禁。
现代文：星明亮，吉利；暗淡，那么宫门不能禁闭。
English: The star is bright, auspicious; if it is dim, then the palace gate cannot be closed.

古文：月犯之，大臣忧，火灾。
现代文：月亮侵犯键闭，大臣有忧患，火灾。
English: The moon encroaches, the key is closed, the minister is in trouble, and there is a fire.

古文：岁星守之，王不宜出。
现代文：岁星占据键闭，王不适宜出行。
English: The year star occupies the key closed, the king is not suitable for travel.

古文：填星占同。
现代文：镇星的占验相同。
English: The horoscope of the town star is the same.

古文：太白犯，将相忧。
现代文：太白星侵犯，将相有忧患。
English: If it is encroached upon by a too-white star, it will bring sorrow to the couple.

古文：荧惑犯，主忧。
现代文：荧惑星侵犯，君主有忧患。
English: Fluorescent planet encroaches, the monarch is worried.

古文：彗星、客星守之，道路阻，兵起，一云兵满野。
现代文：彗星、客星占据键闭，道路险阻，战争发生，一说兵士布满田野。
English: Comets and guest stars occupy the key, roads are dangerous, wars occur, and soldiers are said to cover the fields.

古文：钩钤二星，在房北，房之钤键，天之管籥。
现代文：钩钤二颗星，在房宿北面，是房宿的关键，天的锁钥。
English: The two stars on the hook, on the north side of the room, are the key to the room, the key to the sky.

古文：王者至孝则明。又曰明而近房，天下同心。
现代文：王者极其孝顺，星就明亮；又说明亮而按近房宿，天下同心。
English: The king is extremely filial, the star is bright; it is also said to be bright and close to the house, and the whole world is of the same mind.

古文：房、钩钤间有星及疏折，则地动，河清。
现代文：房宿、钩钤之间有星以及拉键开锁，就有地震，黄河变清。
English: If there is a star between the lodgings and the hooks, or if the key is pulled to open the lock, there will be an earthquake, and the Yellow River will become clear.

古文：月犯之，大人忧，车驾行。
现代文：月亮侵犯，王公大人有忧患，车驾出行。
English: The moon encroaches, Wang Gong adults are worried, travel by car.

古文：月食，其分将军死。
现代文：月食，它分野地区的将军死。
English: Lunar eclipse, it field area of the general died.

古文：岁星守之，为饥；去其宿三寸，王失政，近臣起，乱。
现代文：岁星占据钩钤，是饥荒；距离这个星宿三寸，帝王政治失误，近臣起来作乱。
English: When the star of the year occupies the hook, it is famine; when the star is three inches away, the emperor makes a political mistake, and his close vassals rise up to make trouble.

古文：荧惑守之，有德令。
现代文：荧惑星占据钩钤，有德政的旨令。
English: Fluorescent planets occupy the hook, and there is a decree from the German government.

古文：太白守，喉舌忧。
现代文：太白星占据，帝王的喉舌有忧患。
English: Too white stars occupy, the emperor's mouth is troubled.

古文：填星守，王失土。
现代文：镇星占据，帝王丧失领土。
English: Town star occupied, emperor lost territory.

古文：彗星犯，宫庭失业。
现代文：彗星侵犯，宫庭丢失产业。
English: Comet intrudes, Miyatani loses business.

古文：客星、流星犯，王有奔马之败。
现代文：客星、流星侵犯，帝王有奔马的失败。
English: Invaded by guest stars and meteors, the emperor was defeated by a galloping horse.

古文：东咸、西咸各四星，东咸在心北，西咸在房西北，日、月、五星之道也。
现代文：束咸西咸各四颗星，柬咸在心宿北面，西咸在房宿西北，是日、月、五星的轨道。
English: There are four stars in each of the four constellations, with Cambrian in the north of Antares, and West Aries in the northwest of Aries. These are the orbits of the sun, moon, and five stars.

古文：为房之户，以防淫泆也。
现代文：是房宿的门户，用来防止淫荡放纵。
English: It is the gateway to lodgings, used to prevent licentious indulgence.

古文：明，则信吉。
现代文：星明亮，那么确实吉利。
English: If the star is bright, then it is indeed lucky.

古文：东咸近钩钤，有谗臣入。
现代文：束咸靠近钩钤，有谗佞的臣下入朝。
English: Sok Haman was close to the hook, and the vassal with the hook entered the court.

古文：西咸近上及动，有知星者入。
现代文：西咸靠近上面又动摇，有了解星象的人入朝。
English: Xixian is close to the top and shakes, and people who understand the stars enter the dynasty.

古文：月、五星犯之，有阴谋，又为女主失礼，民饥。
现代文：月亮、五星侵犯，有阴谋，又是女主失去礼仪，人民饥荒。
English: The moon and the five stars encroach, there are conspiracies, the mistress loses her etiquette, and the people are starving.

古文：荧惑犯之，臣谋上。
现代文：荧惑星侵犯，臣下图谋犯上。
English: Fluorescent planet encroachment, vassals plotting to commit.

古文：与太白同犯，兵起。
现代文：与太白星一起侵犯，战争发生。
English: With the invasion of Taibai Star, the war broke out.

古文：岁星、填星犯之，有阴谋。
现代文：岁星、镶星侵犯，有阴谋。
English: The year star, the star-studded invasion, there is a conspiracy.

古文：流星犯，后妃恣，王有忧。
现代文：流星侵犯，后妃放肆，帝王有忧患。
English: Meteors invade, concubines are licentious, emperors are troubled.

古文：客星犯，主失礼，后妃恣。
现代文：客星侵犯，君主失去礼仪，后妃放肆。
English: The guest star encroaches, the monarch loses etiquette, the empress is impudent.

古文：罚三星，在东、西咸正南，主受金罚赎。
现代文：罚三颗星，在束咸、西咸正南面，主管接受黄金罚罪赎罪。
English: A fine of three stars, in the south of Sok Haman and Xixian, the supervisor will accept a golden fine to atone for the crime.

古文：曲而斜列，则刑罚不中。
现代文：曲折而斜着排列，那么刑罚不恰当。
English: If they are crooked and diagonally arranged, then the punishment is inappropriate.

古文：彗星、客星犯之，国无政令，忧多，枉法。
现代文：彗星、客星侵犯，国家没有政令，忧患多，歪曲法律。
English: Comets and guest stars invade, the country has no government decrees, there are many troubles, and laws are distorted.

古文：日一星，在房宿南，太阳之精，主昭明令德。
现代文：日一颗星，在房宿南面，太阳的精华，主管昭彰显明美好的德行。
English: The sun is a star, in the southern side of the room, the essence of the sun, the head of Zhao Shoujing's beautiful virtue.

古文：明大，则君有德令。
现代文：星明亮光大，那么人君有德政的旨令。
English: If the star is bright and shines brightly, then everyone has a moral imperative.

古文：月犯之，下谋上。
现代文：月亮侵犯，臣下图谋犯上。
English: The moon encroaches, the vassal plots.

古文：岁星守，王得忠臣，阴阳和，四夷宾，五谷丰。
现代文：岁星占据，帝王得到忠臣，阴阳调和，四方异族宾服，五谷丰登。
English: The years and stars occupy, the emperor gets loyal followers, the yin and yang are reconciled, the four directions and different ethnic groups are guests, and the wealth of the five provinces is increased.

古文：太白、荧惑犯之，主有忧。
现代文：太白星、荧惑星侵犯，君主有忧患。
English: Too white star, fluorescent planet encroach, the monarch is worried.

古文：客星、彗星犯之，主失位。
现代文：客星、彗星侵犯，君主失去君位。
English: Invaded by a guest star or comet, the monarch lost his throne.

古文：从官二星，在房宿西南，主疾病巫医。
现代文：从官二颗星，在房宿西南面，主管疾病、巫师和医师。
English: Two-star magistrate, southwest of the lodge, in charge of diseases, sorcerers and physicians.

古文：明大，则巫者擅权。
现代文：星明亮光大，那么巫师擅权。
English: The stars are bright and the wizards are powerful.

古文：彗、孛犯之，巫臣作乱。
现代文：彗星、变星侵犯，巫臣作乱。
English: Comets, variable stars invade, witches and wizards make trouble.

古文：云气犯，黑，为巫臣戮；黄，则受爵。
现代文：云气侵犯，星色黑，是巫臣被杀；黄色，那么巫臣接受封爵。
English: If the clouds encroach and the stars are black, the wizard is killed; if they are yellow, the wizard is knighted.

古文：按《步天歌》，以上诸星俱属在房。
现代文：按《步天歌》，以上各星都属于房宿。
English: According to the "Walking Song of Heaven," the above stars all belong to the room.

古文：日一星，《晋》、《隋志》皆不载，以他书考之，虽在房宿南，实入氐十二度半。
现代文：日一颗星，《晋书》、《隋书天文志》都不载录，用其它的害考察它，虽然在房宿南面，其实进入氐宿十=度半。
English: Day one star, "Jin Shu," "Sui Shu Astronomy" are not recorded, with other harm to examine it, although in the room accommodation south, in fact, into the room accommodation ten = degree and a half.

古文：武密书及《乾象新书》惟以东咸属心，西咸属房，与《步天歌》不同，余皆吻合。
现代文：武密书及《干象新书》只认为束咸属于心宿，西咸属于房宿，和《步天歌》不同，其余都吻合。
English: The Wu-Ming Book and the "Ganxiang New Book" only think that Shuqian belongs to the heart, and Xixian belongs to the room, which is different from the "Walking Song of Heaven," and the rest are consistent.

古文：心宿三星，天王正位也。
现代文：心宿三颗星，是天王的正位。
English: Three stars in the constellation of the Heart is the right position for the King of Heaven.

古文：中星曰明堂，天子位，为大辰，主天下之赏罚；前星为太子；后星为庶子。
现代文：中间的星叫明堂，天子的位置，是大辰，主管天下的赏罚；前面的星是太子；后面的星是庶子。
English: The star in the middle is called Myeongdong, and the position of the heavenly son is Daejeon, who is in charge of the rewards and punishments of the world; the star in front is the prince; the star behind is the bastard.

古文：星直，则王失势。
现代文：星排列平直，那么帝王失去权势。
English: When the stars align, the emperor loses his power.

古文：明大，天下同心；天下变动，心星见祥；摇动，则兵离民流。
现代文：星明亮光大，天下同心；天下发生事变动乱，心星出现吉祥的征兆；星摇动，那么军队离散人民流亡。
English: The star shines brightly, the whole world is of the same mind; the world is in turmoil, the heart star shows auspicious signs; the star shakes, then the army disperses and the people go into exile.

古文：日食，其分刑罚不中，将相疑，民饥，兵、丧。
现代文：日食，它分野地区的刑罚不恰当，将相猜疑，人民饥荒，战争、丧事。
English: The eclipse of the sun, the inappropriate punishment of its field area, the mutual suspicion, the famine of the people, the war, and the funeral.

古文：日晕，王者忧之。
现代文：日晕，王者忧虑这种情况。
English: The sun is setting, and the king is worried about the situation.

古文：月食其宿，王者恶之，三公忧，下有丧。
现代文：月食在这个星宿，王者厌恶这种情况，三公有忧患，下僚有丧事。
English: The eclipse of the moon is in this constellation, the king is disgusted with this situation, the three kings are in trouble, and the subordinates are in mourning.

古文：月晕，为旱，谷贵，虫生，将凶。
现代文：月晕，是旱灾，谷物价贵，害虫滋生，将领凶险。
English: The moon is waning, there is a drought, grain prices are high, pests are breeding, and the generals are in danger.

古文：与五星合，大凶。
现代文：与五星聚合，大凶险。
English: With the five-star aggregation, great danger.

古文：太阴犯之，大臣忧；犯中央及前后星，主恶之；出心大星北，国旱；出南，君忧，兵起。
现代文：太阴侵犯，大臣有忧患；侵犯中央及前后星，君主厌恶这种情况；从心宿大星北面出去，国家旱灾；从南面出去，君主有忧患，战争发生。
English: If the Moon encroaches, the minister is in trouble; if the Sun encroaches on the center and the planets, the monarch abhors the situation; if the Sun goes out of the north, the country is in drought; if the Moon goes out of the south, the monarch is in trouble, and war occurs.

古文：岁星犯之，有庆贺事，谷丰，华夷奉化；色不明，有丧，旱。
现代文：岁星侵犯，有庆贺的事情，谷物丰登，各族人民接受教化；星不明亮，有丧事、旱灾。
English: The new year's star encroaches, there are celebrations, grain is abundant, and people of all ethnic groups receive enlightenment; the star is not bright, there are funerals and droughts.

古文：荧惑犯之，大臣忧；贯心，为饥；与太白俱守，为丧。
现代文：荧惑星侵犯，大臣有忧患；贯穿心宿，是饥荒；与太白星一起占据心宿，是丧事。
English: The minister is in distress when the fluorescent planet encroaches; famine when it penetrates the heart; and mourning when it occupies the heart together with the white star.

古文：又曰：荧惑居其阳，为喜；阴，为忧。
现代文：又说荧惑星处在它的阳面，是喜事；在阴面，是忧患。
English: It is also said that the fluorescent planet is on its sunny side, which is a joy; on the dark side, it is a sorrow.

古文：又曰：守之，主易政；犯，为民流，大臣恶之；守星南，为水；北，为旱；逆行，大臣乱。
现代文：又说占据心宿，君主更改政治；侵犯，是人民流亡，大臣厌恶这种情况；占据星的南面，是水灾；占据北面，是旱灾；逆向运行，大臣叛乱。
English: It is also said that to occupy the heart, the monarch changes politics; to invade, the people are exiled, and the minister abhors this situation; to occupy the south of the star, it is a flood; to occupy the north, it is a drought; to run in the opposite direction, the minister rebels.

古文：填星犯之，大臣喜，谷丰；守之，有土功；留舍三十日有赦；居久，人主贤；中犯明堂，火灾；逆行，女主干政。
现代文：镇星侵犯，大臣欢喜，谷物鬯登；占据心宿，有水土工程；占据停止三十天有赦免；停留很久，人主贤明；指向正中侵犯明堂，火灾；逆向运行，女主干预政治。
English: The town star encroaches, the minister rejoices, the grain is piled up; occupies the heart lodging, there is a water and soil project; occupies the stop for thirty days, there is an amnesty; stays for a long time, the master is wise; points to the middle to encroach on the bright hall, fire; runs in the opposite direction, the mistress intervenes in politics.

古文：太白犯，籴贵，将军忧，有水灾，不出一年有大兵；舍之，色不明，为丧；逆行环绕，大人恶之。
现代文：太白星侵犯，买米债贵，将军有忧患，有水灾，不出一年有大的战争；住宿在心宿，星不明亮，是丧事；逆向环绕心宿运行，王公大人厌恶这种情况。
English: Too white star encroaches, buying rice is expensive, the general has sorrow, there is a flood, and there is a big war in less than a year; accommodation in the heart, the star is not bright, it is a funeral; running in the opposite direction around the heart, the princes detest this situation.

古文：辰星犯明堂，则大臣当之，在阳为燕，在阴为塞北，不则地动、大雨；守之，为水，为盗。
现代文：辰星侵犯明堂，那么大臣承担责任，在阳面是燕国，在阴面是塞北，否则就地震、下大雨；占据心宿，是水灾，是盗贼。
English: If the morning star encroaches on the bright hall, then the minister will bear the responsibility. On the sunny side is the swallow country, on the dark side is the north of the island, otherwise it will be an earthquake, heavy rain; occupy the heart of the inn, is a flood, is a thief.

古文：客星犯之，为旱；守之，为火灾；舍之，则籴贵，民饥。
现代文：客星侵犯，是旱灾；占据心宿，是火灾；住宿在心宿，那么买米债贵，人民饥荒。
English: If the guest star invades, it is drought; if the guest star occupies the inn, it is fire; if the guest star stays in the inn, it is expensive to buy rice, and the people are starving.

古文：彗星犯之，大臣相疑；守之而出，为蝗、饥，又曰为兵。
现代文：彗星侵犯，大臣互相猜疑；占据心宿后出去，是蝗灾、饥荒，又说是战争。
English: Comets invade, ministers are suspicious of each other; locusts, famine, and war come out after occupying the heart.

古文：星孛，其分有兵、丧，民流。
现代文：出现变星，其分野地区有战争、丧事，人民流亡。
English: A variable star appears, and war, mourning, and people's exodus occur in its field area.

古文：流星犯，臣叛；入之，外国使来；色青，为兵，为忧；黄，有土功；黑，为凶。
现代文：流星侵犯，臣下叛变；进入心宿，外国使者前来；星色青，是战争、是忧患；色黄，有水土工程；色黑，是凶险。
English: Meteor invasion, vassals mutiny; into the heart of the inn, foreign envoys come; star blue, is war, is sorrow; yellow, there are water and soil projects; black, is danger.

古文：云气人，色黄，子孙喜；白，乱臣在侧；黑，太子有罪。
现代文：云气进入，星色黄，子孙有喜事；色白，乱臣在君侧；色黑，太子有罪。
English: The clouds enter, the stars are yellow, the descendants are happy; the color is white, the chaotic ministers are on the side of the monarch; the color is black, the prince is guilty.

古文：按汉永元铜仪、唐开元游仪，心三星皆五度，去极百八度。
现代文：按汉朝永元铜仪，唐朝开元游仪，心宿三颗星都是五度，离极一百零八度。
English: According to the Han Dynasty Yongyuan bronze instrument and the Tang Dynasty Kaiyuan tour instrument, the three stars of the heart are five degrees, and the extreme is one hundred and eight degrees.

古文：景祐测验，心三星五度，距西第一星去极百十四度。
现代文：景佑观测验证，心宿三颗星五度，距星西第一星离极一百一十四度。
English: According to the observation and verification of Jingyou, the three stars of the three stars are five degrees, and the first star in the west is one hundred and fourteen degrees away from the pole.

古文：积卒十二星，在房西南，五营军士之象，主卫士扫除不祥。
现代文：积卒十二颗星，在房宿西南面，五营军士的象征，主管卫士扫除不吉祥。
English: Accumulating twelve stars, in the southwest of the rooming house, the symbol of the five battalion sergeant, the head guard sweeps away the unlucky.

古文：星小，为吉；明，则有兵；一星亡，兵少出；二星亡，兵半出；三星亡，兵尽出。
现代文：星小，是吉利；明亮，就有战争；少一颗星，军队少量出战；少雨颗星，军队一半出战；少三颗星，军队全部出战。
English: If a star is small, it is lucky; if it is bright, there will be war; if there is one less star, a small number of troops will go to war; if there is one less star, half the troops will go to war; if there are three less stars, all the troops will go to war.

古文：五星守之，兵起；不则近臣诛。
现代文：五星占据积卒，战争发生；否则就有近臣被杀。
English: If the Five Stars occupy the pawns, war will break out; otherwise, close vassals will be killed.

古文：彗星、客星守之，禁兵大出，天子自将。
现代文：彗星、客星占据积卒，禁军大规模出战，天子亲自率领。
English: The comet and the guest star occupy the pawn, the forbidden army goes to war on a large scale, led by the heavenly son himself.

古文：云气犯之，青赤，为大臣持政，欲论兵事。
现代文：云气侵犯，星色青赤，是大臣把持朝政，要议论战争。
English: The clouds are encroaching, the stars are blue and red, the ministers are in charge of the government, and they want to talk about the war.

古文：按《步天歌》，积卒十二星属心，《晋志》在二十八宿之外，唐武密书与《步天歌》合。
现代文：按《步天歌》，积卒十二颗星属于心宿，《晋书，天文志》在二十八星宿之外，唐朝武密的书和《步天歌》相合。
English: According to "Walking Song of Heaven," the twelve stars of the accumulation point belong to the heart destination, "Jin Shu, Astronomy" is in addition to the twenty-eight stars, and the book of Wu Mi of the Tang Dynasty and "Walking Song of Heaven" are the same.

古文：《乾象新书》乃以积卒属房宿为不同，今两存其说。
现代文：《干象新书》就认为积卒属于房宿是不同的说法，现在两存其说。
English: "Gengxiang New Book" believes that the accumulation of the dead belongs to the room is a different argument, and now there are two.

古文：尾宿九星，为天子后宫，亦主后妃之位。
现代文：尾宿九颗星，是天子的后宫，也主管后妃的地位。
English: The nine-pointed star of the tail lodge is the harem of the heavenly son, and is also responsible for the status of the empress.

古文：上第一星，后也；次三星，夫人；次星，嫔妾也。
现代文：上面第一颗星，是皇后；接着三颗星，是夫人；再下面的星，是嫔妾。
English: The first star above is the queen; the next three stars are the wife; and the star below is the concubine.

古文：亦为九子。
现代文：也象征九个子女。
English: It also symbolizes nine children.

古文：均明，大小相承，则后宫有序，子孙蕃昌。
现代文：都明亮，大小互相承接，那磨后宫有秩序，子孙繁息昌盛。
English: All are bright, large and small are connected to each other, there is order in the mill's harem, and the descendants are flourishing.

古文：明，则后有喜，谷熟；不明，则后有忧，谷荒。
现代文：星明亮，那么皇后有喜，谷物成熟；不明亮，那么皇后有忧患，谷物荒芜。
English: If the star is bright, then the queen is happy and the grain is ripe; if it is not bright, then the queen is sad and the grain is barren.

古文：日食，其分将有疾，在燕风沙，兵、丧，后宫有忧，人君戒出。
现代文：日食，其分野地区将有疾病，在燕地有风沙、战争、丧事，后宫有忧患，人君警戒外出。
English: During the solar eclipse, there will be diseases in the field areas, sandstorms, wars, and funerals in the swallow areas, sorrow in the harem, and people should be careful when going out.

古文：日晕，女主丧，将相忧。
现代文：日晕，女主有丧事，将相有忧患。
English: The sun is fading, the mistress is in mourning, there will be sorrow.

古文：月食，其分贵臣犯刑，后宫有忧。
现代文：月食，它分野地区的贵臣触犯刑罚，后宫有忧虑。
English: The eclipse of the moon, the dignitaries in the areas affected by it have committed criminal offenses, and the harem is worried.

古文：月晕，有疫，大赦，将相忧，其分有水灾，后妃忧。
现代文：月晕，有瘟疫，有大赦，将相有忧患，其分野地区有水灾，后妃有忧患。
English: The moon has a halo, there is a plague, there is an amnesty, there will be sorrow, there will be floods in their areas, and there will be sorrow for the empress.

古文：太阴犯之，臣不和，将有忧。
现代文：太阴侵犯，臣下不和，将领有忧患。
English: The Great Yin encroaches, the vassals do not get along, and the generals are in trouble.

古文：岁星犯，谷贵；入之，妾为嫡，臣专政；守之，旱，火灾。
现代文：岁星侵犯，谷物昂贵；进入，妾成为嫡妻，臣下专政；占据尾宿，旱灾，火灾。
English: The year star encroaches, the grain is expensive; enters, the concubine becomes the legitimate wife, the vassal dictatorship; occupies the tail lodge, the drought, the fire.

古文：荧惑犯之，有兵；留二十日，水灾；留三月，客兵聚；入之，人相食，又云宫内乱。
现代文：荧惑星侵犯，有战争；占据二十天，水灾；占据三个月，客籍军士聚集；侵入尾宿，人吃人，又说宫内作乱。
English: Fluorescent planets invade, there is war; occupy twenty days, floods; occupy three months, guest sergeants gather; invade tail quarters, people eat people, and also say that the palace is in turmoil.

古文：填星犯之，色黄，后妃喜；入，为兵、饥、盗贼；逆行，妾为女主；守之而有芒角，更姓易政。
现代文：镇星侵犯，星色黄，后妃有喜事；进入，是战争、饥荒、盗贼；逆向运行，妾成为女主；占据尾宿而发出光芒，王朝改姓，政权改变。
English: The town star invades, the star is yellow, the empress has a happy event; entering, it is war, famine, thieves; running in reverse, the concubine becomes the mistress; occupying the tail end and emitting light, the dynasty changes its name, and the regime changes.

古文：太白犯、入，大臣起兵；久留，为水灾；出、入、舍、守，籴贵，兵起，后宫忧；失行，军破城亡。
现代文：太白星侵犯进入，大臣发动战争；长久占据，是水灾；在心宿出来、进去、住宿、占据，买米价贵，战争发生，后宫有忧患；运行失误，军队被攻破，城池被灭亡。
English: If a great white star invades and enters, the minister will launch a war; if it occupies for a long time, it will be a flood; if it stays out, enters, stays, and occupies, it will be expensive to buy rice; if there is a war, there will be trouble in the harem; if there is a mistake in operation, the army will be defeated, and the city will be destroyed.

古文：辰星犯守，为水灾，民疾，后宫有罪者，兵起；入，则万物不成，民疫。
现代文：辰星侵犯并占据，是水灾，人民疾病，后富有获罪的人，战争发生；进入，那么万物都长不成，人民传染瘟疫。
English: If the star invades and occupies, it is a flood, the people are sick, the rich are punished, the war occurs; if it enters, then nothing can grow, and the people are infected with the plague.

古文：客星犯、入，宫人恶之；守之，贱女暴贵；出，则为风、为水，后宫恶之，兵罢，民饥多死。
现代文：客星侵犯进入，宫女讨厌这种情况；占据尾宿，贫贱女子骤然显贵；从尾宿出来，就是风灾，是水灾，后宫厌恶这种情况，战争停止，人民饥荒，很多人饿死。
English: A guest star intrudes into the harem, and the concubine hates this situation; a poor woman suddenly becomes distinguished when she occupies the afterlife; when she comes out of the afterlife, it is a disaster, it is a flood, the harem hates this situation, the war stops, the people are starving, and many people starve to death.

古文：彗星犯，后惑主，宫人出，兵起，宫门多土功；出入，贵臣诛，有水灾。
现代文：彗星侵犯，皇后迷惑君主，宫女出逃，战争发生，宫门多有土木工程；从尾宿出来又侵入，贵臣被杀，有水灾。
English: Comets invade, empresses confuse monarchs, palace maids flee, war breaks out, there are many civil engineering projects at the palace gates; intruders come out from the rear of the palace, dignitaries are killed, and there are floods.

古文：孛犯，多土功，大臣诛；守之，宫人出；出，为大水，民饥。
现代文：变星侵犯，多土木工程，大臣被杀；占据尾宿，宫女出逃；从尾宿出来，是大水，人民饥荒。
English: Variable stars invaded, many civil works, the minister was killed; occupied the tail lodge, the princess fled; from the tail lodge, there was a flood, and the people were starving.

古文：流星入、犯，色青，旧臣归；在春夏，后宫有口舌；秋冬，贤良用事；出，则后宫喜，有子孙；色白，后宫妾死；出入，风雨时，谷熟，入，后族进禄；青黑，则后妃丧。
现代文：流星侵入进犯，星色青，从前的臣下归附；在春季夏季，后官有口舌争端；秋季冬季，贤良的人执政；从尾宿出来，那么后宫有喜事，右子孙；星色白，后宫的妾死亡；出来又进去，风雨适合季节，谷物成熟；进入，皇后的家族增进官爵俸禄；星色青黑，那么后妃有丧事。
English: Meteor invades and attacks, star color blue, former vassals are attached; in spring and summer, officials have verbal disputes; in autumn and winter, virtuous people govern; out of the tail lodge, then there is a happy event in the harem, the right offspring; star color white, the harem's concubine died; out and in again, wind and rain are suitable for the season, grain is ripe; entering, the queen's family increases the official salary; star color blue-black, then the empress has a funeral.

古文：云气入，色青，外国来降；出，则臣有乱。
现代文：云气进入，星色青，外国来归降；从尾宿出去，那么臣下有叛乱。
English: The clouds enter, the stars are blue, the foreigners come to surrender; if they go out from Oyado, then there will be a rebellion among the subjects.

古文：赤气入，有使来言兵。
现代文：赤色云气进入，有使者来谈军事。
English: Red clouds roll in, and an emissary arrives to discuss military matters.

古文：黑气入，有诸侯客来。
现代文：黑色云气进入，有诸侯的客人前来。
English: The black clouds rolled in, and guests from all over the country came.

古文：按汉永元铜仪，尾宿十八度，唐开元游仪同。
现代文：按汉朝永元铜仪，尾宿十八度，唐朝瞾元游仪相同。
English: According to the Han Dynasty Yongyuan bronze instrument, it is the same as the late 18th century and the Tang Dynasty Yongyuan bronze instrument.

古文：旧去极百二十度，一云百四十度；今百二十四度。
现代文：从前离极是一百二十度，一说一百四十度；现在是一百二十四度。
English: Formerly it was a hundred and twenty degrees; then it was a hundred and forty; now it is a hundred and twenty-four.

古文：景祐测验，亦十八度，距西行从西第二星去极百二十八度，在赤道外二十二度。
现代文：景佑间观测验证，也是十八度，距星西行从西第二颗星离极是一百二十八度，在赤道外二十二度。
English: The observation and verification between Jingyou is also eighteen degrees, and the second star from the west to the west is one hundred and twenty-eight degrees, and it is twenty-two degrees outside the equator.

古文：《乾象新书》二十七度。
现代文：《干象新书》说是二十七度。
English: "Ganxiang New Book" says that it is 27 degrees.

古文：神宫一星，在尾宿第三星旁，解衣之内室也。
现代文：神宫一颗星，在尾宿第三颗星旁边，是脱衣服的内室。
English: One star in the shrine, next to the third star in the inn, is the inner room for undressing.

古文：天江四星，在尾宿北，主太阴。
现代文：天江四颗星，在尾宿北面，主管太阴。
English: Tianjiang four stars, in the tail of the north side of the inn, the head of the yin.

古文：明动，为水，兵起；星不具，则津梁不通；参差，马贵。
现代文：星明亮动摇，是水灾，战争发生；星数不全，那么桥梁不通行；参差不齐，马匹价贵。
English: If the stars are bright and wavering, it is a flood, if there is war; if the number of stars is incomplete, then the bridges are impassable; if the stars are uneven, then the horses are expensive.

古文：月犯，为兵，为臣强，河津不通。
现代文：月亮侵犯，是战争，是臣下强悍，河水渡口不通行。
English: The moon's encroachment is war, the vassal is strong, and the river crossing is impassable.

古文：荧惑犯，大旱；守之，有立主。
现代文：荧惑星侵犯，大旱；占据天江，有人拥立君主。
English: Fluorescent planets invade, drought; occupy the Tianjiang River, some people support the monarch.

古文：太白犯，暴水。
现代文：太白星侵犯，暴发水灾。
English: Too white stars encroach, and floods break out.

古文：彗星犯，为大兵。
现代文：彗星侵犯，是大的战争。
English: Comet encroachment is a big war.

古文：客星入，河津不通。
现代文：客星侵入，河水渡口不通行。
English: Guest stars invade, river crossings are impassable.

古文：流星犯，为水，为饥。
现代文：流星侵犯，是水灾，是饥荒。
English: Meteor strikes, floods, famine.

古文：赤云气犯，车骑出；青，为多水；黄白，天子用事，兵起；入，则兵罢。
现代文：赤色云气侵犯，战车骑兵出动；青色，是多雨水；黄白色，天子当政，战争发生；进入，那么战争停止。
English: Red clouds invade, chariots and cavalry are dispatched; blue, there is a lot of rain; yellow and white, God is in charge, war occurs; enter, then the war stops.

古文：傅说一星，在尾后河中，主章祝官也，一曰后宫女巫也，司天王之内祭祀，以祈子孙。
现代文：傅说一颗星，在尾宿后面的银河中，是主管祭祀赞颂祝祷的官，一说是后宫的女巫，执行天王的内宫祭祀，用来祈求子孙。
English: Fu said that there was a star in the Milky Way behind the tail lodge that was the official in charge of sacrificial rites, praise and prayer, and that it was the witch of the harem that performed the inner palace ritual of the king and was used to pray for descendants.

古文：明大，则吉，王者多子孙，辅佐出；不明，则天下多祷祠；亡，则社稷无主；入尾下，多祝诅。
现代文：垦明亮光大，就吉利，王者多子孙，辅佐大臣出现；不明亮，那么天下多祈神求福；星消失，那么国家没有君主；进入尾宿下面，多有向神鬼祈求对仇怨的诅咒。
English: When the sky is bright and large, it is auspicious, the king has many children and grandchildren, and the vice-minister appears; when it is not bright, the world prays to the gods for blessings; when the stars disappear, the country has no monarch; when entering the lower part of the tail lodge, many people pray to the gods and demons for a curse against hatred.

古文：《左氏传》 天策焞输 ，即此星也。
现代文：《左氏传》 天策惇焯 ，就是这颗星。
English: In "The Tale of Zuo," it is this star.

古文：彗星、客星守之，天子不享宗庙。
现代文：彗星、客星占据傅说，天子不祭祀供奉宗庙。
English: Comets and guest stars occupy the sky, Fu said, and the heavenly son does not offer sacrifices to the ancestral temple.

古文：赤云气入，巫祝官有诛者。
现代文：赤色云气进入，巫祝官有被杀的。
English: A red cloud came in, and some magicians and officials were killed.

古文：鱼一星，在尾后河中，主阴事，知云雨之期。
现代文：鱼一颗星，在尾宿后的银河中，主管天阴的事，预知起云下雨的时期。
English: The fish is a star, in the Milky Way after the tail lodge, in charge of the sky, foreseeing the period of clouds and rain.

古文：明大，则河海水出；不明，则阴阳和，多鱼；亡，则鱼少；动摇，则大水暴出；出，则河大鱼多死。
现代文：星明亮光大，那么黄河大海的水溢出；星不明亮，那么阴阳调和，多鱼；消失，那么鱼少；星动摇，那么大水骤然爆发；从银河出来，那么黄河里的大鱼很多死亡。
English: If the star is bright and large, then the water of the Yellow River sea will overflow; if the star is not bright, then the yin and yang will be reconciled and there will be more fish; if it disappears, then there will be fewer fish; if the star is shaken, then the water will suddenly erupt; if it comes out of the Milky Way, then many big fish in the Yellow River will die.

古文：月晕或犯之，则旱，鱼死。
现代文：月晕或月亮侵犯，就干旱，鱼死。
English: When the moon is eclipsed or the moon encroaches, there is drought, and the fish die.

古文：荧惑犯其阳，为旱；阴，为水。
现代文：荧惑星侵犯它的阳面，是旱灾；侵犯阴面，是水灾。
English: Fluorescent planets invade its sunny side, it is a drought; invade the dark side, it is a flood.

古文：填星守之，为旱。
现代文：镇星占据鱼，是旱灾。
English: Town star occupy fish, is a drought.

古文：赤云气犯出，兵起，将忧；入，兵罢；黄白气出，兵起。
现代文：赤色云气侵犯又出来，战争发生，将领有忧患；进入，战争停止；黄白色云气出现，战争发生。
English: Red clouds invade and come out, war breaks out, the generals are worried; enter, war stops; yellow and white clouds appear, war breaks out.

古文：龟五星，在尾南，主卜，以占吉凶。
现代文：龟五颗星，在尾宿南面，主管占卜，用来占验吉凶。
English: Turtle five stars, in the south of the tail lodge, the head of divination, used to tell fortunes.

古文：星明，君臣和；不明，则上下乖。
现代文：星明亮，君臣和谐；不明亮，那么上下不合。
English: If the stars are bright, the monarchs and ministers will be in harmony; if they are not bright, then there will be discord.

古文：荧惑犯，为旱；守，为火。
现代文：荧惑星侵犯，是旱灾；占据，是火灾。
English: Fluorescent planets invade, there is drought; occupy, there is fire.

古文：客星入，为水，忧。
现代文：客星侵入，是水患。
English: It's a flood.

古文：流星出，色赤黄，为兵；青黑，为水，各以其国言之。
现代文：流星出现，星色赤黄，是战争；星色青黑，是水灾，分别根据其所在国的情况进行解说。
English: When a meteor appears, its reddish-yellow color indicates a war, while its blue-black color indicates a flood. Explanations are given according to the situation in the country in which the meteor is located.

古文：赤云气出，卜祝官忧。
现代文：赤色云气出现，卜祝官有忧患。
English: A red cloud appeared, and the well-wishers were worried.

古文：按神宫、傅说、鱼各一星，天江四星，龟五星，《步天歌》与他书皆属尾。
现代文：按神宫、傅说、鱼各一颗星，天江四颗星，龟五颗星，《步天歌》和其它书都说属于尾宿。
English: According to Jingu and Fu, the fish have one star each, the Tianjiang River has four stars, and the turtle has five stars. "Walking Heavenly Songs" and other books all say that it belongs to the tail lodge.

古文：而《晋志》列天江于天市垣，以傅说、鱼、龟在二十八宿之外，其说不同。
现代文：而《晋书，天文志》把天江列在天市垣，以为傅说、鱼、龟在二十八宿之外，它的说法不同。
English: However, "Jinshu, an Astronomical History" lists Tianjiang as a crane in Tiancheng, thinking that Fu said that fish and turtles are outside the twenty-eight quarters, but it is different.

古文：箕宿四星，为后宫妃后之府，亦曰天津，一曰天鸡。主八风，又主口舌，主蛮夷。
现代文：箕宿四颗星，是后宫妃嫔皇后的住所，也叫天津，一称天鸡，主管八方的风，又主管口舌争端，主管蛮族夷族。
English: The four-star Poyang is the residence of the Empress Dowager Cormorant. It is also called Tianjin, also known as Tianji. It is in charge of the winds of the eight directions, the disputes of the spoken language, and the barbarians and barbarians.

古文：星明大，谷熟；不正，为兵；离徙，天下不安；中星众亦然，籴贵。
现代文：星明亮光大，谷物成熟；星不正，是战争；星离开移动，天下不安定；箕宿当中的星多，也是这样，米买价贵。
English: The stars are bright and shiny, and the grain is ripe. If the stars are not right, it is war. If the stars move away, the world is unstable. If there are many stars in the heavens, it is the same. Rice is expensive.

古文：凡日月宿在箕、壁、翼、轸者，皆为风起；舌动，三日有大风。
现代文：凡是日月在箕宿、壁宿、翼宿、斡宿的时候。都是大风刮起；星像舌一样波动，三天有大风。
English: Whenever the sun and the moon are in conjunction, in conjunction, in conjunction, in conjunction, in conjunction, in conjunction, in conjunction, in conjunction, in conjunction, in conjunction, in conjunction, in conjunction, in conjunction, in conjunction, in conjunction.

古文：日犯或食其宿，将疾，佞臣害忠良，皇后忧，大风沙。
现代文：太阳侵犯或者蚀食这个星宿，将领有病，奸佞之臣陷害忠良之臣，皇后有忧患，刮大风沙。
English: The sun encroaches or erodes this star constellation, the general is ill, the treacherous vassal traps the loyal vassal, the queen is in distress, and the sandstorm is blowing.

古文：日晕，国有妖言。
现代文：日晕，国家有妖妄的言论。
English: The sun is fading, and the country is in the grip of delirious rhetoric.

古文：月食，为风，为水、旱，为饥，后恶之。
现代文：月食，是风灾，是水灾、旱灾，是饥荒，皇后厌恶这种情况。
English: Lunar eclipses are caused by windstorms, floods, droughts, and famines, and the empress abhors such situations.

古文：月晕，为风，谷贵，大将易，又王者纳后。
现代文：月晕，是风灾，谷物价贵，大将更换，又王者接纳皇后。
English: The moon is eclipsed, there is a storm, grain prices are high, generals are replaced, and the king receives the queen.

古文：月犯，多风，籴贵，为旱，女主忧，君将死，后宫干政。
现代文：月亮侵犯，多风，买米价贵，是旱灾，女主有忧患，君主将要死，后宫干预政事。
English: The moon is encroaching, it's windy, it's expensive to buy rice, there's a drought, the mistress is worried, the monarch is about to die, the harem is interfering in politics.

古文：岁星入，宫内口舌，岁熟，在箕南，为旱；在北，为有年；守之，多恶风，谷贵，民饥死。
现代文：岁星进入，宫内有口舌争端，年成好；在箕宿南面，是旱灾；在北面，是好年成；占据箕宿，多邪恶的风，谷物价贵，人民饥饿而死。
English: The year star enters, there is a verbal dispute in the palace, the year is good; in the south of Oshuku, it is a drought; in the north, it is a good year; Oshuku is occupied, many evil winds, grain prices are expensive, people die of hunger.

古文：荧惑犯，地动；入，为旱；出，则有赦；久守，为水；逆行，诸侯相谋，人主恶之。
现代文：荧惑星侵犯，地震；进入，是旱灾；出来，就有赦免；长久占据，是水灾；逆向运行，诸侯互相图谋，人主厌恶这种情况。
English: Fluorescent planet invasion, earthquake; entering, is drought; coming out, there is amnesty; long-term occupation, is flood; reverse running, princes conspire with each other, human masters abhor this situation.

古文：填星犯，女主忧；久留，有赦；守之，后喜，有土功；色黄光润，则太后喜；又占：守，有水；守九十日，人流，兵起，蝗。
现代文：镇星侵犯，女主有忧患；长久停留，有赦免；占据箕宿，皇后有喜事，有土木工程；星色黄而光润，那么太后有喜事；又有占验：占据，有水灾；占据九十天，人民流亡，战争发生，煌灾。
English: If the town is invaded by a star, the lady will have sorrow; if she stays for a long time, she will be pardoned; if she occupies an inn, the queen will have a happy event, there will be civil engineering; if the star is yellow and bright, then the empress will have a happy event; and there will be a divination test: if she occupies, there will be a flood; if she occupies for ninety days, the people will be exiled, a war will occur, and there will be a great disaster.

古文：太白犯，女主喜；入，则有赦；出，为土功，籴贵；守之，为旱，为风，民疾；出入留箕，五谷不登，多蝗。
现代文：太白星侵犯，女主有喜事；进入，就有赦免；出来，是土木工程，买米价贵；占据箕宿，是旱灾，是风灾，人民疾病；出去进来停留在箕宿，五谷没有收成，多蝗虫。
English: If the white star encroaches, the hostess will have a happy event; if it enters, there will be an amnesty; if it comes out, it is a civil engineering project, and it is expensive to buy rice; if it occupies the lodging, it is a drought, a windstorm, and a people's disease; if it goes out, it comes in and stays in the lodging, there is no harvest, and there are many locusts.

古文：辰星犯，有赦；守，则为旱；动摇、色青，臣自戮，又占：为水溢、旱、火灾、谷不成。
现代文：辰星侵犯，有赦免；占据，就是旱灾；动摇，星色青，臣下自杀，又占验是大水溢出、旱灾、火灾、谷物不成熟。
English: For aggression, there is pardon; for occupation, there is drought; for wavering, the stars are blue, and the vassals commit suicide; and for the test of divination, there is overflowing water, drought, fire, and unripe grain.

古文：客星入犯，有土功，宫女不安，民流；守之，为饥；色赤，为兵；守其北，小熟；东，大熟；南，小饥；西，大饥；出，其分民饥，大臣有弃者；一云守之，秋冬水灾。
现代文：客星进入侵犯，有土木工程，宫女不安定，人民流亡；占据箕宿，是饥荒；星色赤，是战争；占据箕宿的北面，收成小；柬面，收成大；南面，小饥荒；西面，大饥荒；出去，它分野地区的人民饥荒，大臣有废置的；一说占据箕宿，秋季冬季有水灾。
English: The guest star enters the encroachment, there are civil engineering projects, the concubine is unstable, and the people are exiled; the occupation of Oshuku is famine; the star is red, it is war; the north side of Oshuku is occupied, the harvest is small; the Cambodian side is occupied, the harvest is large; the south side is occupied, the famine is small; the west side is occupied, the famine is large; the west side is occupied, the people in the area are starving, the minister has abandoned; the north side of Oshuku is occupied, the harvest is small; the Cambodian side is occupied, the harvest is large; the south side is occupied

古文：彗星犯守，东夷自灭；出，则为旱，为兵，北方乱。
现代文：彗星侵犯并占据，东方夷族自己灭亡；出去，就是旱灾，是战争，北方叛乱。
English: Comets invade and occupy, Eastern barbarians self-destruct; go out, is drought, is war, northern rebellion.

古文：孛犯，为外夷乱，籴贵；守之，外夷灾；出，为谷贵，民死，流亡；春夏犯之，金玉贵；秋冬，土功兴；入，则多风雨；色黄，外夷来贡。
现代文：变星侵犯，是境外夷族叛乱，买米价贵；占据箕宿，境外夷族有灾祸；出来，是谷物价贵，人民死亡，流离逃亡；春季夏季侵犯，金玉价贵；秋季冬季侵犯，土木工程大兴；进入，就多风雨；星色黄，境外夷族来进贡。
English: The variable star invasion is the rebellion of the foreign barbarians, and the price of buying rice is expensive; the occupation of the foreign barbarians is disastrous; the grain price is expensive, the people die, and the displaced people flee; the spring and summer invasion is expensive, the price of gold is expensive; the autumn and winter invasion is civil engineering; the entry is windy and rainy; the star is yellow, and the foreign barbarians come to pay tribute.

古文：云气出，色苍白，国灾除；入，则蛮夷来见；出而色黄，有使者；出箕口，敛，为雨；开，为多风少雨。
现代文：云气出现，星色苍白，国家的灾难免除；进入，那么蛮族夷族来朝见；出去而星色黄，有使者；从箕宿的箕口出来，收敛，是雨；箕口张开，是多风少雨。
English: When clouds appear, the stars are pale and the country is spared disaster; when they enter, barbarians and barbarians come to see the morning; when they leave, the stars are yellow and there are messengers; when they come out of the gate of the inn, it is rain; when the gate is open, it is windy and rainy.

古文：按汉永元铜仪，箕宿十度，唐开元游仪十一度。
现代文：按汉朝永元铜仪，箕宿十度，唐朝开元游仪定为十一度。
English: According to the Han Dynasty Yongyuan Bronze Statuette, Xizhu ten degrees, and the Tang Dynasty Kaiyuan Tour Statuette eleven degrees.

古文：旧去极百十八度，今百二十度。
现代文：从前离极一百一十八度，现在一百二十度。
English: It was a hundred and eighteen degrees; it is now a hundred and twenty degrees.

古文：景祐测验，箕四星十度，距西北第一星去极百二十三度。
现代文：景佑观测验证，箕宿四星十度，距星西北第一星离棰一百二十三度。
English: According to the observation and verification of Jingyou, the four stars of the Pleiades are ten degrees away, and the first star in the northwest is one hundred and twenty-three degrees away from the Pleiades.

古文：糠一星，在箕舌前，杵西北。
现代文：糠一颗星，在箕宿舌的前面，杵的西北。
English: There is a star in front of the beak of the peregrine falcon, northwest of the beak.

古文：明，则丰熟；暗，则民饥，流亡。
现代文：星明亮，就丰收成熟；暗淡，人民就饥荒，流亡。
English: When the stars are bright, the harvest is ripe; when the stars are dim, the people are hungry and in exile.

古文：杵三星，在箕南，主给庖舂。
现代文：杵三星在箕宿南面，主管供给厨房舂米。
English: A three-star restaurant in the south of Oshuku, the manager supplies the kitchen with glutinous rice.

古文：动，则人失釜甑；纵，则丰；横，则大饥；亡，则岁荒；移徙，则人失业。
现代文：星动摇，男巧么人民失去釜甑；三星纵向排列，就丰收；横向排列，就有大饥荒；消失，那么年成荒芜；移动迁徙，那么人民失去产业。
English: If the stars waver, the people will lose their homes; if the stars align vertically, there will be a good harvest; if they align horizontally, there will be a great famine; if they disappear, there will be a year of desolation; if they move or migrate, the people will lose their industries.

古文：荧惑守，民流。
现代文：荧惑星占据，人民流亡。
English: Fluorescent planets occupy, people are exiled.

古文：客星犯、守，岁饥。
现代文：客星侵犯并占据，年成饥荒。
English: Invaders invade and occupy, and famine ensues.

古文：彗、孛犯，天下有急兵。
现代文：彗星、变星侵入，天下有紧急的战争。
English: Comets and variable stars invade, and there is an emergency war in the world.

古文：按《晋志》，糠一星、杵三星在二十八宿之外。
现代文：按《晋书》，糠一颗星、杵三颗星在二十八宿之外。
English: According to the "Jin Shu," one star and three stars are outside the twenty-eight inns.

古文：《乾象新书》与《步天歌》皆属箕宿。
现代文：《干象新书》和《步天歌》记载都属于箕宿。
English: The records of "Ganxiang New Book" and "Walking Song of Heaven" both belong to Xizhu.

古文：北方
现代文：北方
English: The North

古文：南斗六星，天之赏禄府，主天子寿算，为宰相爵禄之位，传曰：天庙也。
现代文：南斗六颗星，天的赏赐福禄的官府，主管天子的寿数，是宰相爵禄的地位，史传说是天庙。
English: Nandu six stars, heaven's reward of the government, the head of the number of years of life, is the status of the prime minister, the historical legend is the temple of heaven.

古文：丞相太宰之位，褒贤进士，禀受爵禄，又主兵。
现代文：丞相太宰的地位，褒奖贤能，进献才士，承受爵禄，又主管战争。
English: The position of the prime minister, praising and rewarding merit, promoting talent, receiving a peerage, and being in charge of war.

古文：一曰天机。
现代文：一称天机。
English: It is also known as a celestial machine.

古文：南二星魁，天梁也。
现代文：南面二颗星叫魁，是天梁。
English: The two stars in the south are called Kui and are celestial beams.

古文：中央二星，天相也。
现代文：中央二颗星，是天相。
English: The two stars in the centre are the constellations.

古文：北二星，天府廷也。
现代文：北面二颗星，是天的官府廷堂。
English: The two stars in the north are the Imperial Palace in the sky.

古文：又谓南星者，魁星也；北星，杓也，第一星曰北亭，一曰天开，一曰鈇锧。
现代文：又称做南星的，是魁星；称做北星，是杓，第一颗星叫北亭，一叫天开，一叫鈇钻。
English: Also known as the South Star, is the Queen Star; known as the North Star, is the Dragonfly, the first star is called Beiting, one is called Tiankai, one is called the Dragonfly.

古文：石申曰： 魁第一主吴，二会稽，三丹阳，四豫章，五庐江，六九江。 
现代文：石申说： 魁星第一颗主管昊，第二颗主管会稽，第三颗主管丹阳，第四颗主管豫章，第五颗主管庐江，第六颗主管九江。 
English: Shi Shen said: Quixing's first supervisor is Hao, the second supervisor is Caijing, the third supervisor is Danyang, the fourth supervisor is Yuzhang, the fifth supervisor is Minjiang, and the sixth supervisor is Jiujiang.

古文：星明盛，则王道和平，帝王长龄，将相同心；不明，则大小失次；芒角动摇，国失忠臣，兵起，民愁。
现代文：星明亮旺盛，那么王道和平，帝王长寿，将相同心；不明亮，那么大小失去秩序；星发射光芒、动摇，国家失去忠臣，战争发生，人民愁苦。
English: If the star is bright and vigorous, then the royal road will be peaceful and the emperor will live a long life. If it is not bright, then the size will be out of order; the star will emit light and shake, the country will lose loyal subjects, war will occur, and the people will suffer.

古文：日食在斗，将相忧，兵起，皇后灾，吴分有兵。
现代文：日食在斗宿，将相有忧患，战争发生，皇后有灾祸，昊的分野地区有战争。
English: If the eclipse occurs in Douju, there will be sorrow, war will occur, the queen will have a disaster, and there will be war in Hao's field.

古文：日晕，宰相忧，宗庙不安。
现代文：日晕，宰相有忧患，宗庙不安全。
English: The sun is fading, the prime minister is worried, the ancestral temple is not safe.

古文：月食，其分国饥，小兵，后、夫人忧。
现代文：月食，它分野地区的国家饥荒，小的战争，皇后、夫人有忧患。
English: Lunar eclipses, famine in countries in its sphere, small wars, the queen and her consort in distress.

古文：月晕，大将死，五谷不生。
现代文：月晕，大将死，谷物不生长。
English: The moon is faint, the general is dead, and the grain does not grow.

古文：月犯，将臣黜，风雨不时，大臣诛；一岁三入，大赦；又占：入，为女主忧，赵、魏有兵；色恶，相死。
现代文：月亮侵犯，将军大臣被罢黜，刮风下雨不按时节，大臣被杀；一年内三次进入，有大赦；又占验：进入，是女主有忧患，赵国、魏国有战争；星色恶劣，丞相死。
English: The moon invaded, the general and the minister were deposed, the wind blew and the rain did not follow the seasons, the minister was killed; three times in one year, there was an amnesty; and the divination test: to enter, the hostess was in distress, Zhao and Wei had a war; the star color was bad, and the emperor and empress died.

古文：岁星犯，有赦；久守，水灾，谷贵；守及百日，兵用，大臣死。
现代文：岁星侵犯，有赦免；长久占据，水灾，谷物价贵；占据到一百天，动用军队，大臣死。
English: Invaded by the year star, there is amnesty; occupied for a long time, floods, grain prices are expensive; occupied for a hundred days, the army is used, and the minister dies.

古文：荧惑犯，有赦，破军杀将，火灾；入二十日，籴贵；四十日，有德令；守之，为兵、盗；久守，灾甚；出斗上行，天下忧；不行，臣忧；入，内外有谋；守七日，太子疾。
现代文：荧惑星侵犯，有赦免。攻破军队，杀死将领，火灾；进入二十天，买米价贵；进入四十天，有施布德政的旨令；占据斗宿，是战争、盗贼；长久占据，灾情严重；出现在斗宿运行，天下忧患；不运行，臣下有忧患；进入，朝廷内外有图谋；占据七天，太子病。
English: Infringement of the planet fluoride, there is amnesty; break through the army, kill the generals, fire; enter twenty days, buy expensive rice; enter forty days, there is the order of the Shibude government; occupy the dojo, it is war, thieves; occupy for a long time, the disaster is serious; appear in the dojo and run, the world is in trouble; do not run, the subjects are in trouble; enter, there are schemes inside and outside the court; occupy seven days, the prince is ill.

古文：填星犯，为乱；入，则失地；逆行，地动；出、入、留二十日，有大丧；守之，大臣叛。又占；逆行，先水后旱；守之，国多义士。
现代文：镇星侵犯，是叛乱；进入，就丧失领土；逆向运行，地震；出来、进去并停留二十天，有大丧事；占据斗宿，大臣叛乱；又占验：逆向运行，先水灾后旱灾；占据斗宿，国家多义士。
English: To invade a town and star is a rebellion; to enter, a loss of territory; to run in the opposite direction, an earthquake; to leave, enter and stay for twenty days, a great tragedy; to occupy a duel residence, a minister's rebellion; and to try to occupy again: to run in the opposite direction, first a flood and then a drought; to occupy a duel residence, the country is too loyal.

古文：太白犯之，有兵，臣叛；留守之，破军杀将；与火俱入，白烁，臣子为逆；久，则祸大。
现代文：太白星侵犯它，有战争，臣下叛乱；停留占据斗宿，攻破军队，杀死将领；与火星一起进入，发白闪烁，臣子叛逆；时间长久，祸患就大。
English: Too white a star invades it, there is war, the vassals rebel; stays to occupy the battlefield, breaks through the army, kills the generals; enters with Mars, glows white, the vassals rebel; the time is long, the disaster is great.

古文：辰星犯，水，谷不成，有兵；守之，兵、丧。
现代文：辰星侵犯，水灾，谷物不成熟，有战争；占据斗宿，战争、丧事。
English: The stars and planets encroach, there is a flood, the grain does not ripen, there is a war; there is a battle, a war, a funeral.

古文：客星犯，兵起，国乱；入，则诸侯相攻，多盗，大旱，宫庙火，谷贵；七日不去，有赦。
现代文：客星侵犯，战争发生，国家动乱；进入，那么诸侯相互攻击，多盗贼，大旱，皇宫宗庙火灾，谷物价贵；七天不离开，有赦免。
English: If a guest star invades, war breaks out, and the country is in turmoil; if a prince enters, the princes will attack each other, there will be many thieves, there will be a great drought, the imperial palace and ancestral temple will be set on fire, and grain prices will be high; if a prince does not leave for seven days, he will be pardoned.

古文：彗星犯，国主忧；出，则其分有谋，又为水灾，宫中火，下谋上，有乱兵；入，则为火，大臣叛。
现代文：彗星侵犯，国主忧患；从南斗出去，那么它的分野地区有阴谋，又是水灾，宫中火灾，臣下谋逆主上，有乱军；进入，就是火灾，大臣叛乱。
English: Comet intrudes, the sovereign is worried; from Nanto out, then its field area has a conspiracy, it is also a flood, a fire in the palace, a vassal plots against the lord, there is a rebel army; entering, it is a fire, a minister rebellion.

古文：孛犯入，下谋上，有乱兵；出，则为兵，为疾，国忧。
现代文：变星侵犯进来，臣下谋逆主上，有乱军；出去，就是战争，是疾病，国家有忧患。
English: Variable stars invade, vassals plot against the lord, there is a rebel army; out, it is war, it is disease, the country is in distress.

古文：流星入，蛮夷来贡；犯之，宰相忧，在春天子寿，夏为水，秋则相黜，冬大臣逆；色赤而出斗者，大臣死。
现代文：流星进入，蛮族夷族来进贡；侵犯，宰相有忧患，在春季是天子长寿，在夏季是水灾，在秋季就是宰相被罢黜，在冬季是大臣叛逆；星色赤而且出现在南斗的，大臣死。
English: If a meteor enters, barbarian barbarians will come to pay tribute; if there is an invasion, the prime minister will be in trouble; if it is spring, the emperor will live a long life; if it is summer, there will be a flood; if it is autumn, the prime minister will be ousted; if it is winter, the minister will rebel; if the star is red and appears in the Southern Cross, the minister will die.

古文：云气入，苍白，多风；赤，旱；出，有兵起，宫庙火；入，有两赤气，兵；黑，主病。
现代文：云气侵入，星色苍白，多风；星色赤，旱灾；出去，有战争发生，皇宫宗庙火灾；侵入，有两道赤色云气，战争；黑色，人主有病。
English: Ingress of clouds, starry pale, windy; starry red, drought; go out, there is a war, the imperial palace and temple are on fire; intrusion, there are two red clouds, war; black, people are sick.

古文：按汉永元铜仪，斗二十四度四分度之一，唐开元游仪，二十六度。
现代文：按汉朝永元的铜仪，斗宿二十四又四分之一度；唐朝开元游仪，二十六度。
English: According to the bronze instrument of the Han Dynasty Yongyuan, Douju is twenty-four and a quarter degrees; the Tang Dynasty Kaiyuan Yuyi, twenty-six degrees.

古文：去极百十六度，今百十九度。
现代文：离极一百一十六度，现在一百一十九度。
English: One hundred and sixteen degrees from the pole, now one hundred and nineteen degrees.

古文：景祐测验，亦二十六度，距魁第四星去极百二十二度。
现代文：景佑问观测验证，也是二十六度，距星斗魁第四星离极一百二十二度。
English: According to the observation and verification of Jing Youqin, it is also 26 degrees, and it is 122 degrees away from the fourth star of the constellation.

古文：鳖十四星，在南斗南，主水族，不居汉中，川有易者。
现代文：鳖十四颗星，在南斗南面，主管水族中不处在天河中而河流有改变的。
English: There are fourteen stars on the southern side of the Southern Cross, and the leading aquarists are not in the Heavenly River, but the river has changed.

古文：荧惑守之，为旱。
现代文：荧惑占据鳖星，是旱灾。
English: Fluorescence bewitching occupies the star, is a drought.

古文：辰星守，为火。
现代文：辰星占据，是火灾。
English: It is fire that occupies the hour and the star.

古文：客星守，为水。
现代文：客星占据，是水灾。
English: The guest star occupies, it is a flood.

古文：流星出，色青黑，为水；黄，为旱。
现代文：流星出现，星色青黑，是水灾；黄色，是旱灾。
English: When a meteor appears, the star is bluish-black, signifying a flood; yellow, a drought.

古文：云气占同。
现代文：云气的占验相同。
English: It's the same thing with cloud seeding.

古文：一曰有星守之，白衣会，主有水。
现代文：一说有星占据鳖星，平民聚会，主管有水。
English: It is said that there are stars to occupy the stars, civilians to gather, and supervisors to have water.

古文：天渊十星，一曰天池，一曰天泉，一曰天海，在鳖星东南九坎间，又名太阴，主灌溉沟渠。
现代文：天渊十颗星，又叫天池，又叫天泉，又叫天海，在鳖星东南九坎中间，名称又叫太阴，主管灌概沟渠。
English: The ten stars in the abyss of heaven are also called the celestial pool, the celestial spring, and the celestial sea. In the middle of the nine canyons southeast of the Pleiades, the name is also called Taiyin, and it is in charge of draining the ditch.

古文：五星守之，大水，河决。
现代文：五星占据天渊，发大水，黄河决口。
English: The five stars occupy the abyss of the sky, the great water flows, and the Yellow River breaks through.

古文：荧惑入，为旱。
现代文：荧惑星进入，是旱灾。
English: Fluorescent planet enters, drought ensues.

古文：客星入，海鱼出。
现代文：客星进入，海里的鱼涌出。
English: The guest star enters, the fish in the sea gushes out.

古文：彗星守之，川溢伤人。
现代文：彗星占据天渊，河水溢出伤害人民。
English: Comets occupy the heavens, rivers overflow and harm people.

古文：狗二星，在南斗魁前，主吠守，以不居常处为灾。
现代文：狗二颗星，在南斗魁的前面，主管吼叫守护。它不居留在正常处所，认为是灾祸。
English: Dog two stars, in front of the Southern Douquan, the supervisor yells guard. It does not stay in the normal place, it is considered to be a disaster.

古文：荧惑犯之，为旱。
现代文：荧惑星侵犯，是旱灾。
English: Fluorescent planet encroaches, drought ensues.

古文：客星入，多土功，北边饥；守之，守御之臣作乱。
现代文：客星进入，多土木工程，北方边区饥荒；占据狗星，守卫防御的大臣作乱。
English: The guest star enters, many civil engineering projects, famine in the northern border area; occupy the dog star, the minister guarding the defense makes trouble.

古文：建六星，在南斗魁东北，临黄道，一曰天旗，天之都关。
现代文：建六颗星，在南斗魁的东北面，下临黄道，又叫天旗，天的总关隘。
English: Build six stars, on the northeast side of Nandoukui, next to the zodiac, also known as the celestial flag, the sky's total pass.

古文：为谋事，为天鼓，为天马。
现代文：是谋划事情，是天鼓，是天马。
English: The supervisor plans things, acts as the day's drum, acts as the day's horse.

古文：南二星，天库也。
现代文：南面二颗星，是天的库藏。
English: The two stars to the south are called the Celestial Treasury.

古文：中二星，市也，鈇锧也。
现代文：中间二颗星，是集市，是刑具鈇钻。
English: The two stars in the middle are the bazaar and the torture device.

古文：上二星，为旗跗。
现代文：上面二颗星，是天旗的基部。
English: The two stars above are the base of the flag.

古文：斗建之间，三光道也，主司七曜行度得失，十一月甲子天正冬至，大历所起宿也。
现代文：斗宿建座之间，是子条光道，主管执行日月五星运行度数的得失，十一月甲子天正是冬至，是大历所由开始的星宿。
English: Between the fight accommodation and the construction of the seat, it is the sub-strip light path, the supervisor performs the gains and losses of the sun, the moon and the five stars running frequency, and the November Koshiten is the winter solstice, which is the star where the Great Calendar began.

古文：星动，人劳役。
现代文：星动摇，人民从事劳役。
English: The stars are wavering, and the people are engaged in labor.

古文：月犯之，臣更天子法；掩之，有降兵。
现代文：月亮侵犯它，臣下改变天子的法制；遮住它，有投降的军队。
English: The moon encroaches on it, and the subjects change the law of the son of heaven; cover it, and there is a surrendering army.

古文：月食，其分皇后娣侄当黜。
现代文：月食，它分野地区的皇后从嫁的妹妹和侄女应当废黜。
English: Lunar eclipse, it field areas of the empress Dowager's sister and niece should be dethroned.

古文：月晕，大将死，五谷不成，蛟龙见，牛马疫。
现代文：月晕，大将死，五谷不成熟，蛟龙出现，牛马有瘟疫。
English: The moon is faint, the general is dead, the grain is immature, the dragon appears, and the cattle and horses have the plague.

古文：月与五星犯之，大臣相谮有谋，亦为关梁不通，大水。
现代文：月亮和五星侵犯它，大臣相互诬陷对方有阴谋，也是关隘桥梁不通行，发大水。
English: The Moon and the Five Stars have encroached on it, ministers have framed each other as having a plot, bridges are impassable, and there is a lot of water.

古文：岁星守，为旱，籴贵，死者众，诸侯有谋；入，则有兵。
现代文：岁星占据，是旱灾，买米价贵，死的人多，诸侯有阴谋；进入，就有战争。
English: When the year star dominates, there is drought, rice is expensive to buy, many people die, the lords have conspiracies; when it enters, there is war.

古文：荧惑守之，臣有黜者，诸侯有谋，籴贵；入，则关梁不通，马贵；守旗跗三十日，有兵。
现代文：荧惑星占据建星，臣下有被罢黜的，诸侯有谋逆，买米价贵；进入，那么关隘桥梁不通行，马价贵；占据天旗基部三十天，有战争。
English: Fluorescent planets occupy the construction stars, subjects have been ousted, lords have conspired to rebel, rice is expensive to buy; if you enter, then the narrow bridges are impassable, horses are expensive; occupy the base of the celestial flag for thirty days, there is a war.

古文：填星守之，王者有谋。
现代文：镇星占据建星，王者有图谋。
English: The town star occupies the construction star, and the king has a plot.

古文：太白守，外国使来。
现代文：太白星占据，外国使者前来。
English: Too white stars occupy, foreign envoys come.

古文：辰星守，为水灾，米贵，多病。
现代文：辰星占据，是水灾，米价贵，多疾病。
English: The stars are occupied by floods, rice is expensive, and there are many diseases.

古文：彗、孛、客星犯之，王失道，忠臣黜。
现代文：彗星、变星、客星侵犯，帝王有失常道，忠臣被罢黜。
English: Comets, variable stars, and guest stars invade, emperors go astray, and loyal subjects are deposed.

古文：客星守之，道路不通，多盗。
现代文：客星占据建星，道路不通行，多盗贼。
English: The guest stars occupy the established stars, the roads are impassable, and there are many thieves.

古文：流星入，下有谋；色赤，昌。
现代文：流星进入，臣下有谋逆；星色赤，昌盛。
English: The meteor enters, the vassal has a plot; the star is red, prosperity.

古文：天弁九星弁一作辨，在建星北，市官之长，主列肆、阛阓、市籍之事，以知市珍也。
现代文：天弁九颗星，弁又作辨。在建星的北面，是市官的首长，主管街市店铺、市区、商人户籍的事情，是因为它了解集市而被珍贵的。
English: On the north side of Jianxing, it is the head of the city government, in charge of street market stores, urban areas, and merchant household registration. It is precious because it understands the market.

古文：明盛，则万物昌；不明及彗、客犯之，籴贵；久守之，囚徒起兵。
现代文：星明亮旺盛，就万物昌盛；不明亮以及彗星、客星侵犯，买米价贵；长久占据天弁，囚犯发动战争。
English: When the star is bright and vigorous, everything prospers; when it is not bright and is invaded by comets and guest stars, it is expensive to buy rice; when it occupies the celestial body for a long time, prisoners wage war.

古文：天鸡二星，在牛西，一在狗国北，主异鸟，一曰主候时。
现代文：天鸡二颗星，在牛宿的西面，一在狗国星的北面，主管奇异的禽乌，一说主管物候时令。
English: The two stars of the celestial rooster, in the west of the cattle inn, one in the north of the dog country star, are responsible for the strange bird, one is said to be responsible for the weather.

古文：荧惑舍之，为旱，鸡多夜鸣。
现代文：荧惑星住宿在天鸡，是旱灾，鸡多夜里呜州。
English: Fluorescent planet stays in Tianji, is drought, chicken more night in Wuzhou.

古文：太白、荧惑犯之，为兵。
现代文：太白星、荧惑星侵犯，是战争。
English: Too white star, fluorescent planet encroachment, is war.

古文：填星犯之，民流亡。
现代文：镇星侵犯，人民流浪逃亡。
English: The town was invaded and the people fled.

古文：客星犯，水旱失时；入，为大水。
现代文：客星侵犯，水旱失去正常季节；进入，是大水。
English: Invaded by a guest star, floods and droughts lose their normal seasons; heavy water comes in.

古文：狗国四星，在建星东南，主三韩、鲜卑、乌桓、玁狁、沃且之属。
现代文：狗国四颗星，在建星的东南面，主管三韩、鲜卑、乌桓、猎狁、沃且等属国。
English: The four stars of the Dog Kingdom, on the southeast side of the star, are responsible for the three provinces of Korea, Sembi, Wuhuan, Jiaotong, and Woqi.

古文：星不具，天下有盗；不明，则安；明，则边寇起。
现代文：星体不全，天下有盗贼；星不明亮，就安定；星明亮，那么边区盗匪起事。
English: If the stars are not complete, there will be thieves in the world; if the stars are not bright, there will be stability; if the stars are bright, then there will be bandits in the outlying areas.

古文：月犯之，乌桓、鲜卑国乱。
现代文：月亮侵犯，乌桓、鲜卑国叛乱。
English: The moon invaded, the dark clouds gathered, and the country of Xianbei rebelled.

古文：荧惑守之，外夷兵起。
现代文：荧惑占据狗国，境外夷族发生战争。
English: Flirtatiousness occupies the dog country, and a war breaks out among the barbarians outside the country.

古文：太白守之，鲜卑受攻。
现代文：太白星占据狗国，鲜卑受到攻击。
English: The too-white star occupies the dog country, and the fresh inferiority complex is attacked.

古文：客星守，其王来中国。
现代文：客星占据，它的君王来到我国中原。
English: The guest star occupies, its monarch comes to the Central Plains of our country.

古文：天籥八星，在南斗杓第二星西，主开闭门户。
现代文：天籥八颗星，在南三卜的斗杓第二星的西面，主管开闭门户。
English: There are eight stars in the heavens, and on the west side of the second star in the Southern Three Kingdoms, a portal is opened and closed.

古文：明，则吉；不备，则关籥无禁。
现代文：星明亮，就吉利；星不全，那么门闩锁钥没有禁闭。
English: If the star is bright, it is lucky; if the star is incomplete, then the door latch key is not locked.

古文：客星、彗星守之，关梁闭塞。
现代文：客星、彗星占据天钥，关隘桥梁闭塞。
English: Guest stars and comets occupy the key to the sky, and the narrow bridge is blocked.

古文：农丈人一星，在南斗西南，老农主稼穑者，又主先农、农正官。
现代文：农丈人一颗星，在南斗西南面，老农主管种田的，又主管先农、农正官。
English: The farmer's father-in-law is a star, in the southwest of Nantou, the old farmer is in charge of the farmland, and is also in charge of the pioneer farmer and the agricultural official.

古文：星明，岁丰；暗，则民失业；移徙，岁饥。
现代文：星明亮，年成鬯收；暗淡，那么人民失去产业；星移动迁徙，年成饥荒。
English: If the star is bright, the year will be a harvest; if it is dim, the people will lose their industry; if the star moves and migrates, the year will be a famine.

古文：客星、彗星守之，民失耕，岁荒。
现代文：客星、彗星占据农丈人，人民失去耕作，年成荒芜。
English: The guest stars and comets occupied the farmers, the people lost their farming, and the land became barren.

古文：按《步天歌》，已上诸星皆属南斗。
现代文：按《步天歌》，以上各星都属于南斗宿。
English: According to the "Walking Song of Heaven," the above stars all belong to Nandoujuku.

古文：《晋志》以狗国、天鸡、天弁、天籥、建星皆属天市垣，余在二十八宿之外。
现代文：《晋书，天文志》认为狗国、天鸡、天弁、天钥、建星都属于天市垣，其余在二十八宿之外。
English: "Jinshu, the History of Astronomy" believes that the Dog Kingdom, the Chicken Heaven, the Heaven's Gate, the Heaven's Key, and the Creation Star all belong to the Heavenly City Wall, and the rest are outside of the Twenty-eight Quarters.

古文：《乾象新书》以天籥、农丈人属箕，武密又以天籥属尾，互有不同。
现代文：《干象新书》认为天钥、农丈人星属于箕宿，武密又认为天钥星属于尾宿，互有不同。
English: "Ganxiang New Book" believes that the key to the sky and the farmer's son star belong to Xizhou, and Wu Min also believes that the key to the sky star belongs to the tail, which are different from each other.

古文：牛宿六星，天之关梁，主牺牲事。
现代文：牛宿六颗星，是天的关隘桥梁，主管宰杀牲畜以供祭祀的事务。
English: Ushi-juku six stars, is the bridge of heaven, in charge of slaughtering livestock for sacrifice.

古文：其北二星，一曰即路，一曰聚火。
现代文：它北面的二颗星，一颗叫即路，一颗叫聚火。
English: There are two stars to the north of it, one is called the immediate road and the other is called the gathering fire.

古文：又曰：上一星主道路，次二星主关梁，次三星主南越。
现代文：又说上面一颗星主管道路，接着二颗星主管关隘桥梁，再接着三颗星主管南越。
English: He also said that the first star was for roads, followed by two stars for bridges, and then three stars for South Vietnam.

古文：明大，则王道昌，关梁通，牛贵；怒，则马贵；动，则牛灾，多死；始出而色黄，大豆贱；赤，则豆有虫；青，则大豆贵；星直，籴贱；曲，则贵。
现代文：星明亮光大，就王道昌明，关隘桥梁通行，牛价贵；星暴亮，那么马价贵；动摇，那么牛有灾祸，多死亡；开始出现时星色黄，大豆价钱便宜；赤色，那么豆有虫灾；青色，那么大豆价贵；星排列平直，买米价格便宜；排列曲折，就贵。
English: If the star is bright and large, the royal road will be clear, the narrow bridge will be passable, and the price of cattle will be expensive; if the star is bright, the price of horses will be expensive; if the star is shaken, the cattle will be plagued and many will die; if the star is yellow when it first appears, the price of soybeans will be cheap; if it is red, the beans will be plagued by insects; if it is blue, the price of soybeans will be expensive; if the stars are in a straight line, the price of buying rice will be cheap; if they are in a zigzag line, the price will be

古文：日食，其分兵起；晕，为阴国忧，兵起。
现代文：日食，其分野地区发生战争；日晕，是阴国有忧患，战争发生。
English: The solar eclipse, its field areas of war; the sun halo, is the country of gloom and war.

古文：月食，有兵；晕，为水灾，女子贵，五谷不成，牛多暴死，小儿多疾。
现代文：月食，有战争；月晕，是水灾，女子贵重，五谷不成熟，牛多暴死，小儿多病。
English: The eclipse of the moon, there is a war; the moon's halo, is a flood, women are precious, crops are immature, cattle often die violently, children are often ill.

古文：月晕在冬三月，百四十日外有赦；晕中央大星，大将被戮。
现代文：周晕在冬季三月，一百四十天后有赦免；月晕在中央大星，大将被杀。
English: Zhou halo in the winter of March, one hundred and forty days later there is an amnesty; moon halo in the central great star, the great will be killed.

古文：月犯之，有水，牛多死，其国有忧。
现代文：月亮侵犯，有水灾，牛多死亡，它的国家有忧患。
English: The moon encroaches, there are floods, many cattle die, and there are troubles in his country.

古文：岁星入犯，则诸侯失期；留守，则牛多疫，五谷伤；在牛东，不利小儿；西，主风雪；北，为民流；逆行，宫中有火；居三十日至九十日，天下和平，道德明正。
现代文：岁星进入侵犯，那么诸侯到预定期限不来朝见；停留占据，那么牛多瘟疫，五谷受损伤；在牛宿束面，对小儿不利；在牛宿西面，预兆风雪；在牛宿北面，是人民流亡；逆向运行，宫中有火灾；居留三十天到九十天，天下和平，道德清明。
English: If the year star enters the encroachment, then the princes will not come to the court for a predetermined period of time; if the stay is occupied, then the cattle will have more plagues and the grain will be damaged; in the Cattle Depot, it is unfavorable for children; in the west of the Cattle Depot, the omen is snow; in the north of the Cattle Depot, it is the people's exile; running in the opposite direction, there is a fire in the palace; staying for thirty days to ninety days, the world is peaceful and morality is clear.

古文：荧惑犯之，诸侯多疾，臣谋主；守，则谷不成，兵起；入或出守斗南，赦。
现代文：荧惑星侵犯，诸侯多病，臣下谋逆主上；占据，那么谷物不成熟，战争发生；进入或出来占据斗宿南面，赦免。
English: Fluorescent planets invade, princes are sickly, vassals plot against the lord; occupy, then the grain is not ripe, war occurs; enter or come out to occupy the south side of Dooshu, pardon.

古文：填星犯之，有土功；守之，雨雪，民人、牛马病。
现代文：镇星侵犯，有土木工程；占据牛宿，下雪，人民、牛马疾病。
English: Town star encroachment, there are civil engineering projects; occupy cattle inn, snow, people, cattle and horse diseases.

古文：太白犯之，诸侯不通；守，则国有兵起；入，则为兵谋，人多死。
现代文：太白星侵犯，诸侯不友好来往；占据，那么国家有战争发生；进入，就是战争阴谋，人民多死亡。
English: Too white stars invade, lords are not friendly to each other; occupy, then the country has a war; enter, it is a war plot, people are more dead.

古文：辰星犯，败军移将，臣谋主。
现代文：辰星侵犯，军队战败，将军调动，臣下谋逆主上。
English: The hour star encroaches, the army is defeated, the general is transferred, and the vassal plots against the lord.

古文：客星犯守之，牛马贵，越地起兵；出，牛多死，地动，马贵。
现代文：客星侵犯占据牛宿，牛马价贵，越地发生战争；从牛宿出来，牛多死亡，地震，马价贵。
English: The guest star invaded and occupied the cattle inn, the cattle and horses were expensive, and a war broke out across the land; out of the cattle inn, many cattle died, there was an earthquake, and the horses were expensive.

古文：彗星犯之，吴分兵起；出，为籴贵，牛死。
现代文：彗星侵犯，昊地分野地区战争发生；从牛宿出来，是买米价贵，牛死亡。
English: Comet intruded, war broke out in the Haodi field area; rice was expensive to buy and cattle died after coming out of the cattle camp.

古文：孛犯，改元易号，籴贵，牛多死，吴、越兵起，下当有自立者。
现代文：变星侵犯，政变纪元，更换年号，买米价贵，牛多死亡，昊、越发生战争，下层当有人自立为王。
English: Variable star invasion, coup era, change of year, expensive rice, more cattle deaths, more and more wars, when someone from the lower class becomes king.

古文：流星犯之，王欲改事；春夏，谷熟；秋冬，谷贵；色黑，牛马昌，关梁入贡。
现代文：流星侵犯，帝王要改革政事；春季夏季，谷物成熟；秋季冬季，谷物价贵；星色黑，牛马蕃盛，关隘桥梁纳入贡品。
English: Meteor invasion, the emperor wants to reform government affairs; spring and summer, grain ripens; autumn and winter, grain prices are high; starry black, cattle and horses are in full bloom, and Guanqiao Bridge is included in the tribute.

古文：云气苍白横贯，有兵、丧；赤，亦为兵；黄白气入，牛蕃息；黑，则牛死。
现代文：云气苍白横贯牛宿，有战争、丧事；赤色，也是战争；黄白气侵入，牛繁殖；黑色，那么牛死亡。
English: Pale clouds of gas run across the cowshed, there is war, mourning; red, also war; yellow-white gas invades, cattle breed; black, then cattle die.

古文：按汉永元铜仪，以牵牛为七度，唐开元游仪八度。
现代文：按汉朝永元铜仪，认为牵牛是七度，唐朝开元游仪，八度。
English: According to the Han Dynasty Yongyuan bronze instrument, it is considered that the cow is seven degrees, and the Tang Dynasty opened the Yuan You instrument, eight degrees.

古文：旧去极百六度，今百四度。
现代文：从前离极一百零六度，现在一百零四度。
English: It used to be 106 degrees, now it's 104 degrees.

古文：景祐测验，牛六星八度，距中央大星去极百十度半。
现代文：景佑观测验证，牛宿六星八度，距星中央大星离极一百一十度半。
English: According to the observation and verification of Jingyou, Ushijuku is six star octaves, and the distance from the central star is one hundred and ten degrees and a half.

古文：天田九星，在斗南，一曰在牛东南，天子畿内之田。
现代文：天田九颗星，在斗宿南面，一说在牛宿东南，是天子王畿内的田地。
English: The nine stars of Tian Tian, to the south of Doushuku, and to the southeast of Niu Shuku, are the fields in Tian Zi Wang Kinai.

古文：其占与角北天田同。
现代文：它的占验与角宿北面的天田相同。
English: Its occupancy rate is the same as that of Amada, north of Kakunodate.

古文：客星犯之，天下忧。
现代文：客星侵犯，天下忧患。
English: When a guest star invades, the whole world is in trouble.

古文：彗、孛犯守之，农夫失业。
现代文：彗星、变星侵犯并占据天田，农夫失去产业。
English: Comets and variable stars invade and occupy Amata, farmers lose their industry.

古文：河鼓三星，在牵牛西北，主天鼓，盖天子及将军鼓也。
现代文：河鼓三颗星，在牵牛星西北，主管天鼓，大概是天子和将军的鼓。
English: The three stars of the river drum, in the northwest of the cowherd star, are responsible for the heavenly drum, which is probably the drum of the god and the general.

古文：一曰三鼓，主天子三将军，中央大星为大将军，左星为左将军，右星为右将军。
现代文：又叫三武，主管天子三将军，中央大星是大将军，左边的星是左将军，右边的星是右将军。
English: Also called Sanbu, the three generals in charge of heaven and earth, the central star is the general, the star on the left is the left general, and the star on the right is the right general.

古文：左星，南星也，所以备关梁而拒难也，设守险阻，知谋徵也。
现代文：左星是南星，是用来守备关隘桥梁而抵抗发难的，在险阻的地方设置守备，是懂得谋略的证明。
English: The left star is the south star, which is used to guard the bridge against difficulties, and setting up a guard in a dangerous place is proof of knowing how to strategize.

古文：鼓欲正直而明，色黄光泽，将吉；不正，为兵、忧；星怒，则马贵；动，则兵起；曲，则将失计夺势；有芒角，将军凶猛象也；乱摇，差度乱，兵起。
现代文：鼓要端正平直而且明亮，星色黄而星光润泽，将军吉利；不端正，是战争、忧患；星暴亮，那么马价贵；动摇，那么战争发生；曲折，那么将军计谋失误，被夺去优势；有光芒，是将军凶猛的征象；动摇，衡量选择紊乱，战争发生。
English: The drum should be upright, straight and bright, the star is yellow and the star is shiny, the general is lucky; if it is not upright, it is war, sorrow; if the star is bright, then the horse is expensive; if it is shaken, then war occurs; if it is twisted, then the general has made a mistake in planning and has been deprived of his advantage; if it has a glow, it is a sign of the general's ferocity; if it is shaken, the measurement is disordered, and war occurs.

古文：月犯之，军败亡。
现代文：月亮侵犯，军队矢败溃亡。
English: The moon invaded, and the army was defeated and routed.

古文：五星犯之，兵起。
现代文：五星侵犯，战争发生。
English: Five-Star encroaches, war breaks out.

古文：彗星、客星犯，将军被戮。
现代文：彗星、客星侵犯，将军被杀。
English: Comet, guest star encroach, general killed.

古文：流星犯，诸侯作乱。
现代文：流星侵犯，诸侯作乱。
English: Meteors invade, lords riot.

古文：黄白云气入之，天子喜；赤，为兵起；出，则战胜；黑，为将死。
现代文：黄白色云气进入，天子有喜事；赤色，是战争发生；出去，那么作战获胜；黑色，是将军死亡。
English: Yellow and white clouds enter, the son of heaven has a happy event; red, a war occurs; go out, then the battle is won; black, the general dies.

古文：青气入之，将忧；出，则祸除。
现代文：青色云气进入河鼓，将军有忧患；出去，那么祸患消除。
English: When the blue cloud enters the river drum, the general is worried; when it goes out, the disaster is eliminated.

古文：左旗九星，在河鼓左旁，右旗九星，在牵牛北、河鼓西南，天之鼓旗旌表也。
现代文：左旗九颗星，在河鼓左边，右旗九颗星在牵牛星北面、河鼓西南面，是天的战鼓军旗和表彰的标志。
English: The nine stars of the left flag are to the left of the river drum, and the nine stars of the right flag are to the north of the Cowherd Star and to the southwest of the river drum. They are the flag of the Heavenly War Drum Army and the symbol of commendation.

古文：主声音、设险、知敌谋。
现代文：主管声音、设置险阻、了解敌人的计谋。
English: Supervise sound, set up obstacles, understand the enemy's strategy.

古文：旗星明大，将吉。
现代文：旗星明亮光大，将军吉利。
English: The flag star shines brightly, bringing good luck to the general.

古文：五星犯守，兵起。
现代文：五星侵犯并占据，战争发生。
English: Five Star invaded and occupied, and war broke out.

古文：织女三星，在天市垣东北，一曰在天纪东，天女也，主果蓏、丝帛、珍宝。
现代文：织女三颗星，在天市垣东北面，一说在天纪束，是天女，主管果兢、丝帛、珍宝。
English: The three stars of the Weaver Maiden, in the northeast of the Heavenly City Wall, are said to be in the heavenly discipline bundle, and are heavenly maidens, in charge of fruit jars, silk cocoons, and treasures.

古文：王者至孝，神祗咸喜，则星俱明，天下和平；星怒而角，布帛贵。
现代文：王者极其孝顺，天神地只都高兴，那么星都明亮，天下和平；星暴亮而有光芒，布帛价贵。
English: The king is extremely filial, the angels and the earth are only happy, then the stars are bright, the sky is peaceful; the star is bright and has light, and the cloth is expensive.

古文：陶隐居曰： 常以十月朔至六七日晨见东方。 
现代文：陶隐居说： 通常是在十月初一到初六初七早晨出现在东方。 
English: Tao Yingju said: It usually appears in the east from the first to the sixth to the seventh morning of October.

古文：色赤精明者，女工善；星亡，兵起，女子为候。
现代文：星色纯赤而明亮的，女工做得好；星消失，战争发生，女子是被观测季节的物候。
English: The star is pure red and bright, the female worker is doing well; the star disappears, the war occurs, and the woman is the phenomenon of the observed season.

古文：织女足常向扶筐，则吉；不向，则丝绵大贵。
现代文：织女的足部正常伸向扶筐，就吉利；不伸向，那么丝绵非常贵。
English: If the weaver's foot normally extends to the basket, it is lucky; if it does not extend, then the silk is very expensive.

古文：月晕，其分兵起。
现代文：月晕，其分野地区发生战争。
English: The moon is eclipsed, and war breaks out in the area.

古文：荧惑守之，公主忧，丝帛贵，兵起。
现代文：荧惑星占据织女，公主有忧患，丝帛价贵，战争发生。
English: Fluorescent planets occupy Vega, the princess is in trouble, silk cocoons are expensive, and war breaks out.

古文：彗星犯，后族忧。
现代文：彗星侵犯，皇后家族有忧患。
English: The comet has invaded, and the Empress's family is in distress.

古文：星孛，则有女丧。
现代文：出现星变，就有妇女丧亡。
English: When there is a star shift, women die.

古文：客星入，色青，为饥；赤，为兵；黄，为旱；白，为丧；黑，为水。
现代文：客星进入，星色青，是饥荒；赤色，是战争；黄色，是旱灾；白色，是丧事；黑色，是水灾。
English: The guest star enters, the star is blue, it is famine; red, it is war; yellow, it is drought; white, it is mourning; black, it is flood.

古文：流星入，有水、盗，女主忧。
现代文：流星进入，有水灾、盗贼，女主有忧患。
English: Meteors enter, there are floods, thieves, the mistress is troubled.

古文：云气入，苍白，女子忧；赤，则为女子兵死；色黄，女有进者。
现代文：云气进入，星色苍白，女子有忧患；赤色，就是女子战死；星色黄，妇女有进仕的。
English: When the cloud enters, the star color is pale, and the woman has sorrow; the red color means that the woman died in battle; the star color is yellow, and the woman has promotion.

古文：渐台四星，在织女东南，临水之台也，主晷漏、律吕事。
现代文：渐台四颗星，在织女星东南面，是临水的台，主管日晷更漏、音乐声调的事情。
English: The four stars of the crescent, to the southeast of Vega, are the ones that are close to the water, and are in charge of the sun's position and the tone of the music.

古文：明，则阴阳调而律吕和；不明，则常漏不定。
现代文：明亮，那么阴阳协调，而且音乐声调和谐；不明亮，那么正常的滴漏不稳定。
English: If it is bright, the yin and yang are in harmony and the music is harmonious; if it is not bright, the normal drip is not stable.

古文：客星、彗星犯之，阴阳反戾。
现代文：客星、彗星侵犯，阴阳违反。
English: The guest star, the comet intrudes, the yin and yang intrude.

古文：辇道五星，在织女西，主王者游嬉之道。
现代文：辇道五颗星，在织女星西面，主管王者游玩嬉戏的道路。
English: On the five-star road, on the west side of Vega, there is a road for the king to travel and play.

古文：汉辇道通南北宫，其象也。
现代文：汉朝辇道通南北宫，是它的形象。
English: It is the image of the Han Dynasty's Southern and Northern Courts.

古文：太白、荧惑守之，御路兵起。
现代文：太白星、荧惑星占据此星，御路上发生战争。
English: A too-white star and a fluorescent planet occupy the planet, and a war breaks out on the way.

古文：九坎九星，在牵牛南，主沟渠、导引泉源、疏泻盈溢，又主水旱。
现代文：九坎九颗星，在牵牛星南面，主管沟渠、引导泉凉、疏通排泻满溢的大水，又主管水灾旱灾。
English: Nine canyons and nine stars, on the south side of Altair, are responsible for ditches, guiding springs, dredging and draining overflowing water, and are also responsible for floods and droughts.

古文：星明，为水灾；微小，吉。
现代文：星明亮，是水灾；星微小，吉利。
English: The star is bright, it is a flood; the star is small, it is lucky.

古文：月晕，为水；五星犯之，水溢。
现代文：月晕，是水灾；五星侵犯，水流外溢。
English: The moon's halo is a flood; the five stars encroach, and the water overflows.

古文：客星入，天下忧。
现代文：客星进入，天下忧患。
English: A guest star enters, and the whole world is worried.

古文：云气入，青，为旱；黑，为水溢。
现代文：云气进入，色青，是旱灾；色黑，是河水溢出。
English: The cloud enters, the blue color is the drought; the black color is the overflow of the river.

古文：罗堰三星，在牵牛东，拒马也，主堤塘，壅蓄水源以灌溉也。
现代文：罗堰三颗星，在牵牛星柬面，是战具拒马，主管堤防塘堰，堵住蓄积水源，用来灌溉。
English: Luo weir three stars, in the cowherd star camel face, is a war tool to repel horses, in charge of dike pond weir, block the accumulation of water, used for irrigation.

古文：星明大，则水泛溢。
现代文：星明亮光大，那么江河水外溢。
English: When the stars are bright, the rivers overflow.

古文：天桴四星，在牵牛东北横列，一曰在左旗端，鼓桴也，主漏刻。
现代文：天桴四颗星，横向排列在牵牛星东北面，一说在左旗顶端，是鼓槌，主管漏壶时刻。
English: The four stars of the heavens, horizontally arranged on the northeast side of the Altair, one at the top of the left flag, is the drumstick, in charge of the time of leakage.

古文：暗，则刻漏失时。
现代文：星光暗淡，那么刻漏记时失准。
English: The starlight is dim, so when you miss the mark, you miss the mark.

古文：武密曰： 主桴鼓之用。 
现代文：武密说： 主管槌鼓的使用。 
English: Wu Mi said: Supervise the use of mallets and drums.

古文：动摇，则军鼓用；前近河鼓，若桴鼓相直，皆为桴鼓用。
现代文：星动摇，那么战鼓使用；前方接近河鼓，好像是槌和鼓相遇，都是用来擂鼓的。
English: If the star wavers, then the war drum is used; if the river drum is close to the front, it seems that the mallet and the drum meet, and both are used to beat the drum.

古文：太白、荧惑守之，兵鼓起。
现代文：太白星、荧惑星占据此星，战鼓敲起。
English: Too white star, fluorescent planet occupy this star, war drums beat.

古文：客星犯之，主刻漏失时。
现代文：客星侵犯，预兆刻壶滴漏记时失准。
English: The guest star encroaches, and the omen clock loses its accuracy when the kettle misses the mark.

古文：按《步天歌》，已上诸星俱属牛宿。
现代文：按《步天歌》，以上各星都属于牛宿。
English: According to the "Walking Song of Heaven," all of the above stars belong to the Cow Inn.

古文：《晋志》以织女、渐台、辇道皆属太微垣，以河鼓、左旗、右旗、天桴属天市垣，余在二十八宿之外。
现代文：《晋书，天文志》认为织女、渐台、辇道都属于太微垣，认为河鼓、左旗、右旗、天桴属于天市垣，其余在二十八宿之外。
English: "Jinshu, Tenmonshi" believes that Weaver Girl, Shantai and Shindo all belong to Taibigaki, and that River Drum, Left Banner, Right Banner and Heaven's Beacon belong to Amaichi-gaki, and the rest are outside the twenty-eight towns.

古文：武密以左旗属箕属斗，右旗亦属斗，渐台属斗，又属牛，余与《步天歌》同。
现代文：武密认为左旗属于箕宿属于斗宿，右旗也属于斗宿，渐台属于斗宿，又属于牛宿，其余和《步天歌》相同。
English: Wu Mi thought that the left banner belonged to the Shishuku and the Doujuku, the right banner also belonged to the Doujuku, the zigzag platform belonged to the Doujuku, and also belonged to the Niujuku, and the rest were the same as "Walking Song of Heaven."

古文：《乾象新书》则又以左旗、织女、渐台、辇道、九坎皆属于斗。
现代文：《干象新书》却又认为左旗、织女、渐台、辇道、九坎都属于斗宿。
English: However, "Gensho Shinsho" also believes that Zuoqi, Weaving Girl, Zhantai, Shindo and Jiukan all belong to Douju.

古文：须女四星，天之少府，贱妾之称，妇职之卑者也，主布帛裁制、嫁娶。
现代文：须女四颗星，天的少府，贱妾的称谓，是妇职中的卑职，主管布帛的裁制、嫁娶。
English: The title of the four-star goddess, the heaven's young ruler, the lowly concubine, is a lowly position in the women's profession, in charge of cutting cloth and marrying.

古文：星明，天下丰，女巧，国富；小而不明，反是。
现代文：星明亮，天下丰收，女工灵巧，国家富足；星细小而不明亮，与此相反。
English: The stars are bright, the harvest is bountiful, the women are skillful, and the country is rich; the stars, on the contrary, are small and dim.

古文：日食在女，戒在巫祝、后妃祷祠，又占越分饥，后妃疾。
现代文：日食在女宿，要警戒巫祝、皇后嫔妃祈神求福，又占验越分野地区有饥荒，皇后嫔妃有病。
English: The solar eclipse is in the women's hostel, we should be alert to witchcraft, the empress Dowager is praying to the gods for good luck, and there is famine in the area of Zhanqian Yue, and the empress Dowager is sick.

古文：日晕，后宫及女主忧。
现代文：日晕，后宫及女主有忧患。
English: Sun halo, the harem and the mistress are in distress.

古文：月食，为兵、旱，国有忧。
现代文：月食，是战争、旱灾，国家有忧患。
English: Lunar eclipses are associated with war, drought, and national distress.

古文：月晕，有兵谋不成；两重三重，女主死。
现代文：月晕，有军事阴谋不成功；月晕两重三重，女主死亡。
English: The moon was faint, there was a military plot that did not succeed; the moon was faint twice or thrice, and the mistress died.

古文：月犯之，有女惑，有兵不战而降，又曰将军死。
现代文：月亮侵犯，有妇女迷惑君主，有军队不战而降，又说将军死亡。
English: The moon has invaded, a woman has bewitched the monarch, an army has surrendered without a fight, and a general is said to be dead.

古文：岁星犯之，后妃喜，外国进女；守之，多水，国饥，丧，籴贵，民大灾，荧惑犯之，大臣、皇后忧，布帛贵，民大灾；守之，土人不安，五谷不熟，民疾，有女丧，又为兵；入则籴贵；逆行犯守，大臣忧；居阳，喜；阴，为忧。
现代文：岁星侵犯，后妃有喜事，外国进献女子；占据此宿，多水灾，国家饥荒，丧事，买米价贵，人民有大灾难。荧惑星侵犯，大臣、皇后有忧患，布帛价贵，人民有大灾难；古据此宿，土人不安定，五谷不成熟，人民有疾病，有妇女丧亡，又是战事；进入，那么买米价贵；逆向运行进入并占据，大臣有忧患；处在阳面，有喜事；在阴面，是忧患。
English: When the year star invades, the empress has a joyous event, the foreign country advances a woman; when this lodging is occupied, there are many floods, national famine, mourning, the price of buying rice is expensive, and the people have a great disaster. When the fluorescent planet invades, the minister and the queen have sorrow, the price of cloth is expensive, and the people have a great disaster; according to the ancients, the local people are unstable, the grain is immature, the people have disease, there is a woman's death, and there is war; when it enters, then the price of buying rice is expensive; when the reverse movement enters and occupies, the minister has sorrow

古文：填星犯守，有苛政，山水出，坏民舍，女谒行，后专政，多妖女；留五十日，民流亡。
现代文：镇星侵犯并占据，有苛酷的政治，山洪爆发，冲壤民宅，女谒者通行，皇后专政，多妖冶的妇女；停留五十天，人民流离逃亡。
English: Zhenxing invaded and occupied, there were harsh politics, flash floods broke out, storming of private houses, women passers-by, the queen's dictatorship, many women; stay for fifty days, people displaced and fled.

古文：太白犯之，布帛贵，兵起，天下多寡女；留守，有女丧，军发。
现代文：太白星侵犯，布帛价贵，战争发生，天下多寡妇；占据，有妇女丧亡，军队出发。
English: Too white stars invade, cloth coats are expensive, war occurs, there are many widows in the world; occupy, there are women killed, the army departs.

古文：辰星犯，国饥，民疾；守之，天下水，有赦，南地火，北地水，又兵起，布帛贵。
现代文：辰星侵犯，国家饥荒，人民有病；占据此宿，天下水灾，有赦免，南方地区火灾，北方地区水灾，又战争发生，布帛价贵。
English: The hour and the star invade, the country is starving, the people are sick; the occupation of this lodging, the world is flooded, there is amnesty, the southern region is on fire, the northern region is flooded, and there is war, the cloth is expensive.

古文：客星犯，兵起，女人为乱；守之，宫人忧，诸侯有兵，江淮不通，籴贵。
现代文：客星侵犯，战争发生，女人作乱；占据在此宿，宫女有忧患，诸侯有战争，江淮不通行，买米价贵。
English: The guest star encroaches, war breaks out, women make trouble; occupy this inn, the princess is troubled, the princes have war, the river Huai is impassable, and the price of buying rice is expensive.

古文：彗星犯，兵起，女为乱；出，为兵乱，有水灾，米盐贵。
现代文：彗星侵犯，战争发生，女人作乱；出来，是军队叛乱，有水灾，米盐价贵。
English: Comets invade, wars break out, women make trouble; out comes the army in revolt, there are floods, and rice and salt are expensive.

古文：星孛，其分兵起，女为乱，有奇女来进；出入，国有忧，王者恶之。
现代文：星变出现，其分野地区发生战争，妇女作乱，有奇女子来进献；出去又进入，国家有忧患，王者厌恶这种情形。
English: Star changes appear, wars occur in their areas, women make trouble, strange women come and make offerings; they go out and come in again, the country is in distress, and the king abhors this situation.

古文：流星犯，天子纳美女，又曰有贵女下狱；抵须女，女主死。
现代文：流星侵犯，天子接纳美女，又说有贵女人下狱；到达须女，女主死亡。
English: The meteorite invades, the heavenly son accepts the beautiful woman, and it is said that a noble woman goes to prison; when it reaches the noble woman, the lady dies.

古文：《乙巳占》：出入而色黄润，立妃后；白，为后宫妾死。
现代文：《乙巳占》：出去又进入而且星色黄润，册立嫔妃皇后；色白，是后宫的妾死亡。
English: "Yi Si Zhan": went out and entered again, and the star color was yellowish, and the queen was crowned; the color was white, and the concubine of the harem died.

古文：云气入，黄白，有嫁女事；白，为女多病；黑，为女多死；赤，则妇人多兵死者。
现代文：云气进入，星色黄白，有嫁女的事；色白，是女人多病；色黑，是女人多死亡；色赤，那么妇女多有因战争而死的。
English: When the cloud enters, the stars are yellow and white, and there is a wedding; white, the woman is more sick; black, the woman is more dead; red, the woman is more dead due to war.

古文：按汉永元铜仪，以须女为十一度。
现代文：按汉朝永元铜仪，认为须女是十一度。
English: According to the Han Dynasty Yongyuan bronze standard, it is believed that the number of women is eleven.

古文：景祐测验，十二度，距西南星去极百五度，在赤道外十四度。
现代文：景佑观测验证，十二度，距西南星离极一百零五度，在赤道外十四度。
English: According to the observation and verification of Jingyou, it is 12 degrees, 105 degrees away from the extreme southwest star, and 14 degrees outside the equator.

古文：十二国十六星，在牛女南，近九坎，各分土居列国之象。
现代文：十二国十六颗星，在牛宿女宿南面，靠近九坎，各自分封领土、处在各个国家的形象。
English: Sixteen stars of the twelve countries, on the south side of the Cow Inn and Maid Inn, near Jiukan, each with its own territory, located in the image of each country.

古文：九坎之东一星曰齐，齐北二星曰赵，赵北一星曰郑，郑北一星曰越，越东二星曰周，周东南北列二星曰秦，秦南二星曰代，代西一星曰晋，晋北一星曰韩，韩北一星曰魏，魏西一星曰楚，楚南一星曰燕，有变动，各以其国占之。
现代文：九坎的束边一颗星叫齐，齐星北面一一颗星叫趟，赵星北面一颗星叫郑，郑星北面一颗星叫越，越星东面二颗星叫周，周星东面南北排列二颗星叫秦，秦星南面二颗星叫代，代星西面一颗星叫晋，晋星北面一颗星叫韩，韩星北面一颗星叫魏，魏星西面一颗星叫楚，楚星南面一颗星叫燕，星象有变动，分别以它的国家占验。
English: A star on the edge of the bundle of nine stars is called Qi, a star on the north side of Qi star is called Trip, a star on the north side of Zhao star is called Zheng, a star on the north side of Zheng star is called Yue, two stars on the east side of Yue star are called Zhou, two stars on the east side of Zhou star are called Qin, two stars on the south side of Qin star are called Dai, a star on the west side of Dai star is called Jin, a star on the north side of Jin star is called Han, a star on the north side of Han star is called Wei, a star on the west side of

古文：陶隐居曰： 越星在婺女南，郑一星在越北，赵二星在郑南，周二星在越东，楚一星在魏西南，燕一星在楚南，韩一星在晋北，晋一星在代北，代二星在秦南，齐一星在燕东。 
现代文：陶隐居说： 越星在婺女南面，郑一颗星在越星北面，趟二颗星在郑星南面，周二颗星在越星束面，楚一颗星在魏星西南面，燕一颗星在楚星南面，韩一颗星在晋星北面，晋一颗星在代星北面，代二颗星在秦星南面，齐一颗星在燕星柬面。 
English: Tao Yingzhu said: Yue star is in the south of Zhenya, Zheng one star is in the north of Yue star, Wu two stars are in the south of Zheng star, Tuesday star is in the south of Yue star, Chu one star is in the southwest of Wei star, Yan one star is in the south of Chu star, Han one star is in the north of Jin star, Jin one star is in the north of Zheng star, Zheng two stars are in the south of Qin star, Qi one star is in the south of Yan star.

古文：离珠五星，在须女北，须女之藏府，女子之星也。
现代文：离珠五颗星，在须女北面，须女的库藏，是女子的星。
English: Five points away from the Pearl Star, on the north side of the Suzhou constellation, it is the prefecture of Suzhou, and it is the star of women.

古文：又曰：主天子旒珠、后夫人环珮。
现代文：又说主管天子的旒珠，皇后、夫人的环佩。
English: Also said to be in charge of the heavenly son's bead, the queen, the lady's charm.

古文：去阳，旱；去阴，潦。
现代文：离开阳面，旱灾；离开阴面，涝灾。
English: Away from the sun, drought; away from the shade, hail.

古文：客星犯之，后宫有忧。
现代文：客星侵犯，后宫有忧患。
English: The guest star encroaches, the harem is in trouble.

古文：奚仲四星，在天津北，主帝车之官。
现代文：奚仲四颗星，在天津北面，主管皇帝车驾的官。
English: In the north of Tianjin, the official in charge of the emperor's chauffeur.

古文：凡太白、荧惑守之，为兵祥。
现代文：大凡太白星、荧惑星占据此星，是战争的征兆。
English: If a great white star or a fluorescent planet occupies this star, it is a sign of war.

古文：天津九星，在虚宿北，横河中，一曰天汉，一曰天江，主四渎津梁，所以度神通四方也。
现代文：天津九颗星，在虚宿北面，横在银河中，又叫天汉，又叫天江，主管江淮河济四条大水的桥梁，是用来渡过神灵通往四方的。
English: The nine stars of Tianjin, in the north of the imaginary world, across the Milky Way, are also called Tianhan and Tianjiang. They are responsible for the four large water bridges of the Jianghuaihe River, and are used to cross the gods to the four directions.

古文：一星不备，津梁不通；明，则兵起；参差，马贵；大，则水灾；移，则水溢。
现代文：一颗星不全备，桥梁不通行；星明亮，那么战争发生；星参差不齐，马价贵；星光大，就是水灾；移动，那么江河水溢出。
English: If a star is not complete, the bridge is not passable; if the star is bright, then war occurs; if the star is uneven, the horse is expensive; if the star is very bright, it is a flood; if it moves, then the river water overflows.

古文：彗、孛犯之，津败，道路有贼。
现代文：彗星、变星侵犯，渡口破败，道路有盗贼。
English: Comets and variable stars encroach, ferry ports are in ruins, and there are thieves on the roads.

古文：客星犯，桥梁不修；守之，水道不通，船贵。
现代文：客星侵犯，桥梁不修缮；占据此星，水路不通行，船价贵。
English: Invade the guest star, the bridge is not repaired; occupy the guest star, the waterway is impassable, and the ship price is high.

古文：流星出，必有使出，随分野占之。
现代文：流星从天津出来，一定有使者派出去，随不同的分野而占验它。
English: When a meteor comes out of Tianjin, there must be an emissary sent out to observe it according to different fields.

古文：赤云气入，为旱；黄白，天子有德令；黑，为大水；色苍，为水，为忧；出，则祸除。
现代文：赤色云气进入，是旱灾；黄白色，天子有德政的旨令；黑色，是大水；苍色，是水灾，是忧患；赤云出去，那么祸患免除。
English: When red clouds come in, it is drought; when yellow and white clouds come in, it is the decree of the Son of Heaven; when black clouds come in, it is flood; when pale clouds come out, it is sorrow; when red clouds go out, it is exemption from calamity.

古文：败瓜五星，在匏瓜星南，主修瓜果之职，与匏瓜同占。
现代文：败瓜五颗星，在匏瓜星南面，主管种养瓜果的职务，和匏瓜星有相同的占验。
English: In the south of the five stars of the losing melon, the person in charge of cultivating melon fruits has the same horoscope as the star of the losing melon.

古文：匏瓜五星一作瓠瓜，在离珠北，天子果园也，其西觜星主后宫，不明，则后失势；不具或动摇，为盗；光明，则岁丰；暗，则果实不登。
现代文：匏瓜五颗星又作瓠瓜。在离珠北面，是天子的果园，它西边的觜星主管后宫。星不明亮，那么皇后失去权势；星不全或动摇，是盗贼；星光亮，那么年成丰收；暗淡，那么果实不丰收。
English: Five stars make a melon. To the north of the pearl is the orchard of the son of heaven, and the star of the west is the harem. If the star is not bright, then the queen loses power; if the star is incomplete or wavering, it is a thief; if the star is bright, then the year is a bumper harvest; if it is dim, then the fruit is not a bumper harvest.

古文：彗、孛犯之，近臣僭，有戮死者。
现代文：彗星、变星侵犯，近臣僭越，有被杀死的。
English: Comets, variable stars invade, close vassals overstep their bounds, some are killed.

古文：客星守之，鱼盐贵，山谷多水；犯之，有游兵不战。
现代文：客星占据此星，鱼盐价贵，山谷多水；侵犯，有散兵游勇不打仗。
English: The guest star occupies this star, the fish salt is expensive, the valley is watery; encroachment, there are scattered soldiers daring not to fight.

古文：苍白云气入之，果不可食；青，为天子攻城邑；黄，则天子赐诸侯果；黑，为天子食果而致疾。
现代文：苍白色云气进入此星，果实不能吃；青色，是天子攻打城邑；黄色，那么天子赐给诸侯果子；黑色，是天子吃了果子而得病。
English: Pale-white clouds enter the planet, and the fruit cannot be eaten; blue, the Son of Heaven attacks the city; yellow, then the Son of Heaven gives the fruit to the princes; black, the Son of Heaven eats the fruit and falls ill.

古文：扶筐七星，为盛桑之器，主劝蚕也，一曰供奉后与夫人之亲蚕。
现代文：扶筐七颗星，是盛放桑叶的器具，是主管鼓励养蚕的，一说是供给皇后与夫人亲自养蚕用的。
English: The basket with seven stars is a device for storing mulberry leaves. It was used by the superintendent to encourage the raising of silkworms, and it is said to have been used by the queen and her wife to raise silkworms themselves.

古文：明，吉；暗，凶；移徙，则女工失业。
现代文：星明亮，吉利；暗淡，凶险；移动迁徙，那么女工失去职业。
English: The star is bright, auspicious; dim, dangerous; mobile migration, then the female worker loses her job.

古文：彗星犯，将叛。
现代文：彗星侵犯，将军叛变。
English: Comets invade, generals mutiny.

古文：流星犯，丝绵大贵。
现代文：流星侵犯，丝绵非常贵。
English: Meteors invade, silk is very expensive.

古文：按《步天歌》，已上诸星俱属须女，而十二国及奚仲、匏瓜、败瓜等星，《晋志》不载，《隋志》有之。
现代文：按《步天歌》，以上各星都属于须女，而十二国及奚仲、匏瓜、败瓜等星，《晋书，天文志》不载录，《隋书，天文志》有它们。
English: According to the "Walking Celestial Song," each of the above stars belongs to Sujiao, while the stars of the Twelve Kingdoms and Jizhong, Zongguo, Zeguo, etc. are not recorded in the "Jin Shu, Astronomy," but are recorded in the "Sui Shu, Astronomy."

古文：《晋志》又以离珠、天津属天市垣，扶筐属太微垣。
现代文：《晋书，天文志》又认为离珠、天津属于天市垣，扶筐属于太微垣。
English: "Jinshu, Astronomy" also believes that Yizhu and Tianjin belong to Tianchi, and Fuxi belongs to Taiyuan.

古文：《乾象新书》以周、越、齐、赵属牛，秦、代、韩、魏、燕、晋、楚、郑属女。
现代文：《干彖新书》认为周、越、齐、赵星属于牛宿，秦、代、韩、魏、燕、晋、楚、郑属于女宿。
English: According to the "Ganjing New Book," Zhou, Yue, Qi and Zhao Xing belonged to the Cattle Inn, while Qin, Dai, Han, Wei, Yan, Jin, Chu and Zheng belonged to the Women's Inn.

古文：武密以离珠、匏瓜属牛又属女，以奚仲属危。
现代文：武密认为离珠、匏瓜属于牛宿又属于女宿，认为奚仲属于危宿。
English: Wu Mi believes that the Pearl and the Melon belong to the Cow Inn and the Girl's Inn, and that the Yizhong belongs to the Danger Inn.

古文：《乾象新书》以离珠、匏瓜属牛，败瓜属斗又属牛，以天津西一星属斗，中属牛，东五星属女。
现代文：《干象新书》认为离珠、匏瓜属于牛宿，败瓜属于斗宿又属于牛宿，认为天津西面一颗星属于斗宿，中间属于牛宿，束面五颗星属于女宿。
English: "Dry Elephant New Book" believes that the pearl and the melon belong to the cow inn, the lost melon belongs to the fight inn and belongs to the cow inn, that one star on the west side of Tianjin belongs to the fight inn, the middle belongs to the cow inn, and the five stars on the bund face belong to the girl's inn.

古文：虚宿二星，为虚堂，冢宰之官也，主死丧哭泣，又主北方邑居、庙堂祭祀祝祷事。
现代文：虚宿二颗星，是空的厅堂，是冢宰的官，主管死丧时哭泣，又主管北方的城邑居室、庙堂的祭祀、求神祈祷之事。
English: The two stars are empty halls. They are the officials in charge of crying at the time of death and mourning. They are also in charge of the living rooms of the northern towns, the sacrifices in the temples, and the prayers for the gods.

古文：宋均曰： 危上一星高，旁两星下，似盖屋也。 
现代文：宋均说： 危宿上面一颗星高，旁边两颗星低，像盖屋。 
English: Song Jun said: There is a high star above the dangerous lodging and two low stars next to it, like a roofed house.

古文：盖屋之下，中无人，但空虚似乎殡宫，主哭泣也。
现代文：在盖屋星下面，屋里役人，只是空荡荡的像停放灵柩的殡宫，是主管哭泣的。
English: Under the starry roof, the officials in the room, just empty like a funeral parlor with a coffin parked, are crying.

古文：明，则天下安；不明，为旱；欹斜上下不正，享祀不恭；动，将有丧。
现代文：星明亮，那么天下安定；不明亮，是旱灾；星倾斜上下不正，供奉祭祀不恭敬；星动摇，将有丧事。
English: If the star is bright, then the world is stable; if it is not bright, it is a drought; if the star is tilted up and down, it is not right, and the offering of sacrifices is not respectful; if the star is shaken, there will be a funeral.

古文：日食，其分其邦有丧。
现代文：日食发生在它的分野地区，它的国家有丧事。
English: Solar eclipses occur in its territory, its country is in mourning.

古文：日晕，民饥，后妃多丧。
现代文：日晕，人民饥荒，皇后妃子多丧事。
English: The sun was fading, the people were starving, and the Empress Dowager was often in mourning.

古文：月食，主刀剑官有忧，国有丧。
现代文：月食，主管剑的官吏有忧患，国家有丧事。
English: When the moon is eclipsed, officials in charge of swords are troubled, and the country is in mourning.

古文：月晕，有兵谋，风起则不成，又为民饥。月犯之，宗庙兵动，又国忧，将死。
现代文：月晕，有战争阴谋，风刮起来就不成功，又是人民饥荒月亮侵犯，宗庙发生军事动乱，又国家有忧患，将军死亡。
English: The moon is faint, there is a war plot, the wind is not successful when it blows, the people are starving, the moon is encroaching, there is military turmoil in the ancestral temple, the country is in distress, and the general is dead.

古文：岁星犯，民饥；守之，失色，天王改服；与填星同守，水旱不时。
现代文：岁星侵犯，人民饥荒；占据此宿，星失色，天王改变服饰；和镇星一起占据，水旱不按季节。
English: The year star encroaches, the people are starving; occupy this lodging, the star fades, the heavenly king changes clothes; occupy together with the town star, the water and drought are not according to the season.

古文：荧惑犯之，流血满野；守之，为旱，民饥，军败；入，为火灾，功成见逐；或勾巳，大人战不利。
现代文：荧惑星侵犯，流血满野；占据此宿，是旱灾，人民饥荒，军队叛乱；进入，是火灾，功成被放逐；或者形成勾巳，王公大人作战不利。
English: Fluorine planet invasion, bloodshed all over the field; occupy this lodging, it is drought, people's famine, army rebellion; enter, it is fire, achievement is banished; or form hookworm, Wang Gong adults are unfavorable in battle.

古文：填星犯之，有急令；行疾，有客兵；入，则有赦，谷不成，人不安；守之，风雨不时，为旱，米贵，大卜欲危宗庙，有客兵。
现代文：镇星侵犯，有紧急的命令；运行快速，有外来军队侵犯；进入，就有赦免，谷物不成熟，人民不安定；占据此宿，风雨不按季节，是旱灾，米价贵，王公大人要危害宗庙，有外来军队侵犯。
English: If the town is invaded, there is an urgent order; if it runs fast, there is an invasion of foreign troops; if it is entered, there is an amnesty, the grain is not ripe, the people are unstable; if it is occupied, the wind and rain are not seasonal, it is a drought, the price of rice is expensive, the prince wants to harm the ancestral temple, and there is an invasion of foreign troops.

古文：太白犯，下多孤寡，兵，丧；出，则政急；守之，臣叛君；入，则大臣下狱。
现代文：太白星侵犯，民间多孤儿寡妇，战争，丧事；出去，那么政治紧急；占据此宿，臣下背叛君王；进入，那么大臣入狱。
English: Too white stars invade, people are more orphans and widows, war, funerals; go out, then political emergency; occupy this inn, vassals betray the king; enter, then the minister goes to prison.

古文：辰星犯，春秋有水；守之，亦为水灾，在东为春水，南为夏水，西为秋水，北冬有雷雨、水。
现代文：辰星侵犯，春季秋季有水灾；占据此宿，也是水灾，在束面是春季大水，在南面是夏季大水，在西面是秋季大水，在北面是冬季有雷雨、水灾。
English: The stars and planets encroach, and there are floods in spring and autumn; the locusts that occupy this lodging are also floods, and there are spring floods in Sokumen, summer floods in the south, autumn floods in the west, and thunderstorms and floods in the winter in the north.

古文：客星犯，籴贵；守之，兵起，近期一年，远则二年，有哭泣事；出，为兵、丧。
现代文：客星侵犯，买米价贵；占据此宿，战争发生，近期一年，远则二年，有哭泣的事情；出去，是战争、丧事。
English: The guest star encroaches, the price of buying rice is expensive; occupy this lodging, the war occurs, the recent year, the distant two years, there is a crying thing; go out, it is a war, a funeral.

古文：彗星犯之，国凶，有叛臣；出，为野战流血；出入，有兵起，芒焰所指国必亡。
现代文：彗星侵犯，国家凶险，有叛乱之臣；出去，是旷野战争流血；出去又进入，有战争发生，光芒星焰所指的国家一定灭亡。
English: Comets invade, nations are in peril, there are rebellious vassals; wars are fought and blood is shed in the wilderness; wars break out and are fought in the wilderness, and the nations that the stars and constellations point to are destroyed.

古文：星孛其宿，有哭泣事；出，则为野战流血，国有叛臣。
现代文：星变出现在这个星宿，有哭泣的事情；出去，就是旷野战争流血，国家有叛乱之臣。
English: Star Change appears in this constellation, there are crying things; go out, that is, the wilderness war bloodshed, the country has rebellious vassals.

古文：流星犯，光润出入，则冢宰受赏，有赦令；色黑，大臣死；入而色青，有哭泣事；黄白，有受赐者；出，则贵人求医药。
现代文：流星侵犯，犀光润泽而出来又进入，那么宰相受到奖赏，有赦免令；星色黑，大臣死亡；进入而星色青，有哭泣的事情；星色黄白，有受赏赐的；出去，那么贵人寻求医药。
English: If a meteor strikes, the rhinoceros comes out shining and enters again, then the prime minister receives a reward and there is a pardon; if the star is black, the minister dies; if it enters and the star is blue, there is crying; if the star is yellow and white, there is a reward; if it goes out, then the nobles seek medicine.

古文：云气黄入，为喜；苍，为哭；赤，火；黑，水；白，有币客来。
现代文：云气黄色而进入，是喜事；苍色，是哭泣的事；赤色，火灾；黑色，水灾；白色，有钱客来。
English: The clouds enter yellow for joy, pale for weeping, red for fire, black for floods, and white for rich guests.

古文：按汉永元铜仪，以虚为十度，唐开元游仪同。
现代文：按汉朝永元铜仪，以虚宿为十度，唐朝瞾元游仪相同。
English: According to the Han Dynasty Yongyuan bronze instrument, the imaginary lodging is ten degrees, which is the same as the Tang Dynasty Yongyuan bronze instrument.

古文：旧去极百四度，今百一度。
现代文：从前离极一百零四度，现在一百零一度。
English: It used to be 104 degrees, now it's 1001.

古文：景祐测验，距南星去极百三度，在赤道外十二度。
现代文：景佑观测验证，距星南星离极一百零三度，在赤道外十二度。
English: According to the observation and verification of Jingyou, the distance from the star to the South Star is one hundred and three degrees from the pole, and twelve degrees outside the equator.

古文：司命二星，在虚北，主举过、行罚、灭不祥，又主死亡。
现代文：司命二颗星，在虚宿北面，主管揭发过失、执行刑罚、灭除不祥之兆，又主管死亡。
English: The two stars of the overseer's life, in the north of the imaginary place, the overseer exposes faults, executes punishments, eliminates ominous signs, and the overseer dies.

古文：逢星出司命，王者忧疾，一曰宜防祅惑。
现代文：遇见有星从司命出来，王者忧虑疾病，一说应该防止妖怪蛊惑。
English: When a star appeared from the constellation, the king was worried about illness and said that it was necessary to prevent the bewitchment of monsters.

古文：司禄二星，在司命北，主增年延德，又主掌功赏、食料、官爵。
现代文：司禄二颗星，在司命北面，主管增添年岁扩展德行，又主管论功行赏、食物料理，官位爵禄。
English: There are two stars in Siroku. In the north of Simei, the supervisor adds years of age and expands virtue, and also supervises the award of merit, food and cuisine, and the official rank award.

古文：司危二星，在司禄北，主矫失正下，又主楼阁台榭、死丧、流亡。
现代文：司危二颗星，在司禄北面，主管矫治过失，纠正臣下，又主管楼阁台榭、死丧、流亡。
English: In the north of Shilu, Shigu, the second star, is in charge of rectifying faults and correcting subordinates, and is also in charge of building, death, and exile.

古文：司非二星，在司危北，主司候内外，察愆尤，主过失。
现代文：司非二颗星，在司危北面，主管执法监察朝廷内外，督察过失错误，主管过失。
English: The two stars of Sifu, in the north of Siga, are in charge of law enforcement and supervision inside and outside the imperial court, inspector fault and error, and supervisor fault.

古文：《乾象新书》：命、禄、危、非八星主天子已下寿命、爵禄、安危、是非之事。
现代文：《干象新书》：司命、司禄、司危、司非八颗星主管天子以下寿命、爵禄、安危、是非的事情。
English: "Ganxiang New Book": Eight stars are in charge of life expectancy, honor, danger, and right and wrong.

古文：明大，为灾；居常，为吉。
现代文：明亮光大，是灾祸；处在正常情况，是吉兆。
English: If it is bright and large, it is a disaster; if it is normal, it is a good omen.

古文：哭二星，在虚南，主哭泣、死丧。
现代文：哭二颗星，在虚宿南面，主管哭泣、死丧。
English: Crying two stars, in the south of the false lodging, the supervisor is crying and dying.

古文：月、五星、彗、孛犯之，为丧。
现代文：月亮、五星、彗星、变星侵犯，是丧事。
English: The moon, five stars, comets, and variable stars encroaching is a tragedy.

古文：泣二星在哭星东，与哭同占。
现代文：泣二颗星在哭星束面，和哭星有相同的占验。
English: Weeping two stars in the weeping star bunch surface, and weeping star have the same horoscope.

古文：天垒城一十三星，在泣南，圜如大钱，形若贯索，主鬼方、北边丁零类，所以候兴败存亡。
现代文：天垒城十三颗星，在泣星南面，圆如大钱，形状像贯穿在绳子上，主管鬼方、北方边区的丁零之类，用来观察兴盛败落生存灭亡。
English: The thirteen stars of Heaven's Stronghold, on the south side of the Weeping Star, are round like money and shaped like a rope. They are in charge of the direction of ghosts, the northern border region of Ding Zi and the like, and are used to observe the prosperity and decline, survival and extinction.

古文：荧惑入守，夷人犯塞。
现代文：荧惑进入并占据，夷族人侵犯边塞。
English: Fluorescence entered and occupied, and the barbarians invaded the border fortress.

古文：客星入，北方侵。
现代文：客星进入，北方入侵。
English: A guest star enters, the North invades.

古文：赤云气掩之，北方惊灭，有疾疫。
现代文：赤色云气遮住它，北方突然灭亡，有疾病瘟疫。
English: Red clouds cover it; the north is suddenly destroyed; there is disease and pestilence.

古文：离瑜三星，在十二国东，《乾象新书》在天垒城南。
现代文：离瑜三颗星，在十二国束面，《干象新书》在天垒城南面。
English: Three stars away from Yu, on the surface of the Twelve Kingdoms, and "The Dry Elephant New Book" on the south side of Fortress City.

古文：离，圭衣也；瑜，玉饰，皆妇人见舅姑衣服也。
现代文：离，是圭衣；瑜，玉饰，都是妇人见公婆时穿的衣服。
English: Li, is Gui clothing; Yu, jade ornaments, are all clothes worn by women when they see their in-laws.

古文：微，则后宫俭约；明，则妇人奢纵。
现代文：星微小，那么后官俭朴节约；星明亮，那么妇人奢侈放纵。
English: When the star is small, women are frugal and thrifty; when the star is bright, women are extravagant and indulgent.

古文：客星、彗星入之，后宫无禁。
现代文：客星、彗星进入，后宫没有约束。
English: When a guest star or comet enters, the harem is not restrained.

古文：败臼四星，在虚、危南，两两相对，主败亡、灾害。
现代文：败臼四颗星，在虚宿、危宿南面，两两相对，主管失败灭亡、灾害。
English: Four stars, in the south of the false lodge and the dangerous lodge, are in conflict with each other, leading to failure, death and disaster.

古文：石申曰： 一星不具，民卖甑釜；不见，民去其乡。 
现代文：石申说： 一颖星不全备，人民卖甑釜；隐匿不现，人民离开他们的故乡。 
English: Shi Shen said: "If a single star is not complete, the people will sell their pots and pans; if it is hidden, the people will leave their hometowns."

古文：五星入，除旧布新。
现代文：五星进入，除旧布新。
English: Five stars enter, remove old cloth and make new.

古文：客星、彗星犯之，民饥，流亡。
现代文：客星、彗星侵犯，人民饥荒，流亡。
English: Invaded by guest stars and comets, the people starved and fled.

古文：黑气入，主忧。
现代文：黑色云气进入，人主有忧患。
English: The black clouds are coming in, and people are worried.

古文：按《步天歌》，已上诸星俱属虚宿。
现代文：按《步天歌》，以上各星都属于虚宿。
English: According to the "Walking Song of Heaven," all of the above stars are imaginary.

古文：司命、司禄、司危、司非、离瑜、败臼，《晋志》不载，《隋志》有之。
现代文：司命、司禄、司危、司非、离瑜、败臼，《晋书天文志》没有载录，《隋书，天文志》有它们。
English: Simin, Siroku, Sige, Sifei, Liyu, Zheyu, are not recorded in the "Jinshu Astronomy," but they are recorded in the "Sui Shu, Astronomy."

古文：《乾象新书》以司命、司禄、司危、司非属须女；泣星、败臼属危。
现代文：《干象新书》认为司命、司禄、司危、司非都属于须女；泣星、败臼属于危宿。
English: "Ganxiang New Book" believes that Simin, Siroku, Sige, and Sifu all belong to Sujian; Weeping Star and Ruins belong to Jieju.

古文：武密书与《步天歌》合。
现代文：武密书和《步天歌》吻合。
English: Wu Mishu and "Walking Song of Heaven" coincide.

古文：危宿三星，在天津东南，为天子宗庙祭祀，又为天子土功，又主天府、天市、架屋、受藏之事。
现代文：危宿三颗星，在天津东南面，是天子的宗庙祭祀，又是天子的土木工程，又主管天府、天市、盖房、收藏的事务。
English: The three stars in the south-east of Tianjin are the ancestral temple of Tianzi, the civil engineering project of Tianzi, and the affairs of Tianfu, Tianshi, Gaifang and collection.

古文：不明，客有诛，土功兴；动或暗，营宫室，有兵事。
现代文：星不明亮，客人有被杀的，土木工程大兴；星摇动或暗淡，营造官室，有战争。
English: The stars are not bright, guests have been killed, civil engineering is booming; the stars are wavering or dim, government offices are being built, and there is war.

古文：日食，陵庙摧，有大丧，有叛臣。
现代文：日食，陵墓宗庙摧毁，有大的丧事，有叛乱的臣下。
English: A solar eclipse, the destruction of a mausoleum and temple, a great funeral, and rebellious vassals.

古文：日晕，有丧。
现代文：日晕，有丧事。
English: The sun is setting, there's a funeral.

古文：月食，大臣忧，有丧，宫殿圮。
现代文：月食，大臣有忧息，有丧事，宫殿倒塌。
English: The moon is eclipsed, the minister is sad, there is a funeral, the palace collapses.

古文：月晕，有兵、丧，先用兵者败。
现代文：月晕，有战争、丧事，先用兵的一方失败。
English: The moon is waning, there are wars and funerals, and the side that uses soldiers first loses.

古文：月犯之，宫殿陷，臣叛主，来岁籴贵，有大丧。
现代文：月亮侵犯它，宫殿陷落，臣下背叛主上，第二年买米价贵，有大的丧事。
English: The moon invaded it, the palace fell, the vassals betrayed the lord, the next year it was expensive to buy rice, and there was a great funeral.

古文：岁星犯守，为兵、役徭，多土功，有哭泣事，又多盗。
现代文：岁星侵犯并占据，是战争、徭役，多土木工程，有哭泣的事情，又多盗贼。
English: Years of invasion and occupation, war, conscription, lots of civil engineering, lots of crying, lots of thieves.

古文：荧惑犯之，有赦；守之，人多疾，兵动，诸侯谋叛，宫中火灾；守上星，人民死，中星诸侯死，下星大臣死，各期百日十日；守三十日，东兵起，岁旱，近臣叛；入，为兵，有变更之令。
现代文：荧惑星侵犯，有赦免；占据危宿，人民多病，军队骚动，诸侯阴谋背叛，宫中发生火灾；占据上面的星，人民死，占据中间的星，诸侯死，占据下面的星，大臣死，分别期限在一百天、十天；占据三十天，东方战争发生，这年干旱，近臣背叛；进入，是战争，有改革的旨令。
English: Infringement of a fluorescent planet, there is an amnesty; occupy a dangerous place, the people are sickly, the army is agitated, the princes plot and betray, a fire occurs in the palace; occupy the upper star, the people die, occupy the middle star, the princes die, occupy the lower star, the minister dies, respectively, the deadline is one hundred days, ten days; occupy thirty days, the Eastern War occurs, this year is dry, the vassal betrays; enter, it is a war, there is a reform decree.

古文：填星守之，为旱，民疾，土功兴，国大战；犯之，皇后忧，兵，丧；出、入、留、舍，国亡地，有流血；入，则大乱，贼臣起。
现代文：镇星占据危宿，是旱灾，人民有病，土木工程兴起，国家爆发大的战争；侵犯，皇后有忧患，战争、丧事；出去、进入、停留、住宿，国家丧失领土，有流血事件；进入，那么大乱，贼臣起事。
English: Towns and stars occupy dangerous lodgings, there is drought, the people are sick, civil engineering projects arise, the country breaks out in a big war; invasion, the queen is in distress, war, funeral; go out, enter, stay, stay, the country loses territory, there is bloodshed; enter, so much turmoil, vassals rise up.

古文：太白犯之，为兵，一曰无兵兵起，有兵兵罢，五谷不成，多火灾；守之，将忧，又为旱，为火；舍之，有急事。
现代文：太白星侵犯，是战争，一说没有军队而战争发生，有军队而战争停止，五谷不成熟，多火灾；占据危宿，将军有忧患，又是旱灾，是火灾；住宿在危宿，有紧急的事情。
English: If there is too much aggression, it is war; if there is no army, it is war; if there is an army, it is not war; if there is not enough grain, it is fire; if there is a general in trouble, it is drought; if there is an emergency, it is fire; if there is accommodation in a dangerous place, it is an emergency.

古文：辰星犯之，大臣诛，法官忧，国多灾；守之，臣下叛，一云皇后疾，兵、丧起。
现代文：辰星侵犯，大臣被杀，法官有忧患，国家多灾难；占据危宿，臣下叛乱，一说皇后疾病，战争、丧事发生。
English: The hour star intrudes, the minister is killed, the judge is troubled, the country is plagued with calamities; the dangerous place is occupied, the vassal rebels, the queen is said to be ill, war and death occur.

古文：客星犯，有哭泣，一曰多雨水，谷不收；入之，有土功，或三日有赦；出，则多雨水，五谷不登；守之，国败，民饥。
现代文：客星侵犯，有哭泣的事，一谎多雨水，谷物没有收成；进入危宿，有土木工程，或者三天有赦免；出去，就多雨水，五谷不丰收；占据危宿，国家衰败，人民饥荒。
English: If a guest star invades, there will be weeping; if it rains too much, there will be no grain harvest; if it enters a dangerous place, there will be civil engineering works, or there will be an amnesty for three days; if it goes out, there will be more rain, and the grain harvest will not be abundant; if it occupies a dangerous place, the country will decline, and the people will starve.

古文：彗星犯之，下有叛臣兵起；出，则将军出国，易政，大水，民饥。
现代文：彗星侵犯，下面有叛逆之臣发动战争；出去，那么将军逃出国界，更换政权，大水，人民饥荒。
English: Comets invade, traitorous ministers wage war below; go out, then generals flee abroad, regimes change, floods, people starve.

古文：孛犯，国有叛者兵起。
现代文：变星侵犯，国内有叛逆者发动战争。
English: A mutant star has invaded, and a rebel within the country has started a war.

古文：流星犯之，春夏为水灾，秋冬为口舌；入，则下谋上；抵危，北地交兵。
现代文：流星侵犯，在春季夏季是水灾，秋季冬季是口舌争端；进入，那么臣下图谋主上；到达危宿，北方地区交战。
English: Meteor invasion, in the spring and summer is a flood, in the autumn and winter is a verbal dispute; enter, then the vassals plot against the master; reach the dangerous place, the northern region is at war.

古文：《乙巳占》：流星出入色黄润，入民安，谷熟，土功兴；色黑，为水，大臣灾。
现代文：《乙巳占》：流星出来又进去，星色黄而润泽，人民安定，谷物成熟，土木工程兴起；星色黑，是水灾，大臣有灾祸。
English: "Yi Si Zhan": The meteor comes out and goes in again, the star is yellow and moist, the people are stable, the grain is ripe, and civil engineering is on the rise; the star is black, it is a flood, and the minister has a disaster.

古文：云气入，苍白，为土功；青，为国忧；黑，为水，为丧；赤，为火；白，为忧，为兵；黄出入，为喜。
现代文：云气进入，星色苍白，是土木工程；青色，是国家的忧患；黑色，是水灾；是丧事；赤色，是火灾；白色，是忧患，是战争；星色黄而出去又进来，是喜事。
English: The clouds enter, the stars are pale, it is civil engineering; blue, it is national distress; black, it is flood; it is mourning; red, it is fire; white, it is distress, it is war; the stars are yellow and go out and come in, it is joy.

古文：按汉永元铜仪，以危为十六度；唐开元游仪十七度。
现代文：按汉朝永元铜仪，认为危宿是十六度；唐朝开元游仪，十七度。
English: According to the Han Dynasty Yongyuan Bronze Statuette, it is considered that the dangerous accommodation is 16 degrees; the Tang Dynasty Kaiyuan Tour Statue, 17 degrees.

古文：旧去极九十七度，距南星去极九十八度，在赤道外七度。
现代文：从前离极九十七度，距星南星离极九十八度，在赤道外七度。
English: Formerly, it was ninety-seven degrees from the pole, ninety-eight degrees from the pole of the southern star, and seven degrees outside the equator.

古文：虚梁四星，在危宿南，主园陵寝庙、祷祝。
现代文：虚梁四颗星，在危宿南面，主管园陵寝庙、祈祷祝福。
English: The four stars of the false beam, in the south of the dangerous lodging, are in charge of the garden mausoleum, the sleeping temple, and the prayer and blessing.

古文：非人所处，故曰虚梁。
现代文：不是人居住的地方，所以叫虚梁。
English: It's not a place where people live, that's why it's called "Kukuryo."

古文：一曰宫宅屋帏帐寝。
现代文：一说宫宅屋帏帐寝。
English: It is said that Miyatakeya slept with his wife.

古文：太白、荧惑犯之，为兵。
现代文：太白星、荧惑星侵犯，是战争。
English: Too white star, fluorescent planet encroachment, is war.

古文：彗、孛犯，兵起，宗庙改易。
现代文：彗星、变星侵犯，战争发生，宗庙改变。
English: Comets and variable stars invade, wars occur, and ancestral temples change.

古文：天钱十星，在北落师门西北，主钱帛所聚，为军府藏。
现代文：天钱十颗星，在北落师门西北面，主管钱帛的积聚，是军队的库藏。
English: Tianqian ten stars, in the northwest of the north gate, is responsible for the accumulation of money, and is the repository of the army.

古文：明，则库盈；暗，为虚。
现代文：星明亮，那么库藏充满；暗淡，是空虚。
English: As the stars are bright, so are the treasuries full; as they are dim, so is the emptiness.

古文：太白、荧惑守之，盗起。
现代文：太白星、荧惑星占据此星，盗贼大兴。
English: Too white star, fluorescent planet occupy this star, the thieves are very happy.

古文：彗、孛犯之，库藏有贼。
现代文：彗星、变星侵犯，库藏有盗贼。
English: Comets and variable stars invade, and there are thieves in the treasury.

古文：坟墓四星，在危南，主山陵、悲惨、死丧、哭泣。
现代文：坟墓四颗星，在危宿南面，主管山陵、悲惨、死丧、哭泣。
English: The tomb of the four stars, in the south of the dangerous lodge, is in charge of the mountains, misery, death, and weeping.

古文：大曰坟，小曰墓。
现代文：大的叫坟，小的叫墓。
English: The big ones are called graves, the small ones are called tombs.

古文：五星守犯，为人主哭泣之事。
现代文：五星占据侵犯，是人主哭泣的事情。
English: The Five-Star Movement's encroachment is a crying matter.

古文：杵三星，在人星东，一云在臼星北，主舂军粮。
现代文：杵三颗星，在人星束面，一说在臼星北面，主管舂军粮。
English: There are three stars in the constellation, one in the north of the north star, which is in charge of the military grain.

古文：不具，则民卖甑釜。
现代文：星敷不全备，那么人民卖甑釜。
English: If the astrolabe is not complete, then the people will sell the caldron.

古文：臼四星，在杵星下，一云在危东。
现代文：臼四颗星，在杵星下面，一说在危宿柬面。
English: There are four stars in the mortar, under the bright star, and one says that it is in a dangerous place.

古文：杵臼不明，则民饥；星众，则岁乐；疏，为饥；动摇，亦为饥；杵直下对臼，则吉；不相当，则军粮绝；纵，则吉；横，则荒；又臼星覆，岁饥；仰，则岁熟。
现代文：杵星、臼星不明亮，那么人民饥荒；星数众多，那么年景丰乐；稀疏，是饥荒；星动摇，也是饥荒；杵星竖直向下对着臼星，就吉利；不相对，那么军粮断绝；纵向排列，就吉利；横向，就是饥荒；又臼星反扣，年成饥荒；向上仰着，那么年成丰收。
English: If the hammer and mortar are not bright, then the people are starving; if there are many stars, then the year will be prosperous; if there are few stars, then there will be famine; if the stars are wavering, then there will be famine; if the hammer and mortar are vertically facing the mortar, then there will be good luck; if they are not facing each other, then there will be no grain for the army; if they are vertically aligned, then there will be good luck; if they are horizontally aligned, then there will be famine; if the hammer and mortar are reversed, then there will be famine; if they are upturned, then there will be

古文：彗星犯之，民饥，兵起，天下急。
现代文：彗星侵犯，人民饥荒，战争袋生，天下危急。
English: Comets invade, people starve, war rages, the world is in peril.

古文：客星守之，天下聚会米粟。
现代文：客星占据此星，天下积聚会合粮食。
English: The guest star occupies this star, and the world accumulates and gathers grain.

古文：盖屋二星，在危宿南九度，主治宫室。
现代文：盖屋二颗星，在危宿南面九度，主管修治宫室。
English: Two stars for the roof, nine points for the south side of the dangerous accommodation, and the supervisor is Shuji Miyamuro.

古文：五星犯之，兵起。
现代文：五星侵犯，战争发生。
English: Five-Star encroaches, war breaks out.

古文：彗、孛犯守，兵灾尤甚。
现代文：彗星、变星侵犯，战祸尤其厉害。
English: Comets and variable stars invade, and the scourge of war is particularly severe.

古文：造父五星，在传舍南，一曰在腾蛇北，御官也。
现代文：造父五颗星，在传舍南面，一说在腾蛇北面，是驾车的官。
English: The five-pointed star of the founding father, on the south side of the mission house, and the one said to be on the north side of the rattlesnake, are the driving officers.

古文：一曰司马，或曰伯乐，主御营马厩、马乘、辔勒。
现代文：又叫司马，或叫伯乐，主管控制经营马圈、马车、辔勒。
English: Also called Sima, or Bo Le, the supervisor controls the management of the horse ring, carriage, and mule.

古文：移处，兵起，马贵；星亡，马大贵。
现代文：移动位置，战争发生，马价贵；星隐亡，马价非常贵。
English: Move location, war occurs, horse price is expensive; star disappears, horse price is very expensive.

古文：彗、客入之，仆御谋主，有斩死者，一曰兵起；守之，兵动，厩马出。
现代文：彗星、客星进入，驾车的奴仆谋逆人主，有被斩死的，一说战争发生；占据此星，军队骚动，圈里的马跑出来。
English: Comet, guest star enters, driving slaves plot against their masters, some are beheaded, a war occurs; occupy this star, the army stirs, the horses in the circle run out.

古文：人五星，在虚北，车府东，如人形，一曰主万民，柔远能迩；又曰卧星，主夜行，以防淫人。
现代文：人五颗星，在虚宿北面，车府束面，像人的形状，一说主管万民，笼络远方的人归顺，亲善近处的人感化；又叫卧星，主管夜里出行，用来防止淫荡的人。
English: People five stars, in the north of the virtual lodging, the Chefu Sokumen, like the shape of a person, one said to be in charge of the people, to entice people from afar to submit, to be influenced by people in the vicinity; also called the sleeping star, in charge of traveling at night, used to prevent people from lasciviousness.

古文：星亡，则有诈作诏者，又为妇人之乱；星不具，王子有忧。
现代文：星隐逸，就有伪作诏书的人，又是妇人的祸乱；星数不全备，王子有忧患。
English: When the stars go out, there are forgeries, and the scourge of women; when the number of the stars is not complete, there is sorrow for princes.

古文：客、彗守犯，人多疾疫。
现代文：客星、彗星占据侵犯，人民多疾病瘟疫。
English: Guest stars and comets invade, and the people suffer from many diseases and plagues.

古文：车府七星，在天津东，近河，东西列，主车府之官，又主宾客之馆。
现代文：车府七颗星，在天津东面，接近银河，东西向排列，主管车府的官，又主管宾客的旅馆。
English: Chefu seven stars, in the east of Tianjin, close to the Milky Way, east-west alignment, in charge of Chefu officials, but also in charge of the guests of the hotel.

古文：星光明，润泽，必有外宾，车驾华洁。
现代文：星光明，润泽，一定有外国的宾客，车驾华丽整洁。
English: The stars are bright and shiny, there are bound to be foreign guests, and the car is immaculately clean.

古文：荧惑守之，兵动。
现代文：荧惑星占据此星，军队骚动。
English: Fluorescent planets occupy the star, armies riot.

古文：彗、客犯之，兵车出。
现代文：彗星、客星侵犯，战车出动。
English: Comet, guest star encroaching, chariots moving out.

古文：钩九星，在造父西河中，如钩状。
现代文：钩九颗星，在造父西面的银河中像钩子的形状。
English: Hook nine stars, shaped like hooks in the Milky Way on the western side of the Milky Way.

古文：星直，则地动；他星守，占同。
现代文：星列平直，就地震；其它星占据，占验相同。
English: If the stars are in a straight line, there will be an earthquake; if other stars dominate, the horoscope will be the same.

古文：一曰主辇舆、服饰。
现代文：一说主管车辇、服饰。
English: Said the person in charge of cars and clothes.

古文：明，则服饰正。
现代文：星明亮，那么服饰端正。
English: The stars are bright, so the dress is neat.

古文：按《步天歌》，已上诸星俱属危宿。
现代文：按《步天歌》，以上各星都属于危宿。
English: According to the "Walking Song of Heaven," all of the above stars are dangerous.

古文：《晋志》不载人星、车府，《隋志》有之。
现代文：《晋书，天文志》不载录入星、车府，《隋书天文志》有它们。
English: "Jin Shu, Astronomy" does not record the star, Chefu, "Sui Shu Astronomy" has them.

古文：杵、臼星，《晋》、《隋志》皆无。
现代文：杵星、臼星，《晋书，天文志》、《隋书，天文志》都没有。
English: Neither are the Pleiades, the Muses, the "Book of the Jin Dynasty, an Astronomical History," nor the "Book of the Sui Dynasty, an Astronomical History."

古文：造父、钩星，《晋志》属紫微垣，盖屋、虚梁、天钱在二十八宿外。
现代文：造父、钩星，《晋书，天文志》属于紫微垣，盖屋、虚梁、天钱在二十八宿之外。
English: Zofu, Hook Star, "Jinshu, Astronomy" belong to Zi Weigaki, while Gaiya, Huliang, and Tianqian are outside the 28 wards.

古文：《乾象新书》以车府西四星属虚，东三星属危。
现代文：《干象新书》认为车府西面四颗星属于虚宿，柬面三颗星属于危宿。
English: "Ganxiang New Book" believes that the four stars on the west side of Chefu belong to the false accommodation, and the three stars on the Cambodian side belong to the dangerous accommodation.

古文：武密书以造父属危又属室，余皆与《步天歌》合。
现代文：武密书认为造父属危宿又属于室宿，其余都和《步天歌》吻合。
English: Wu's book believes that the founding father belongs to the dangerous place and belongs to the room, and the rest are consistent with the "Walking Song."

古文：按《乾象新书》又有天纲一星，在危宿南，入危八度，去极百三十二度，在赤道外四十一度。
现代文：按《干象新书》又有天纲一颗星在危宿南面，进入危宿八度，离极一百三十二度，在赤道外四十一度。
English: According to the "Dry Elephant New Book," there is also a star in the heavens that rises in the south of Jeopardy, enters the Jeopardy octave, is one hundred thirty-two degrees away from the pole, and is forty-one degrees outside the equator.

古文：《晋》、《隋志》及诸家星书皆不载，止载危、室二宿间与北落师门相近者。
现代文：《晋书，天文志渗、《隋书天文志》及各家星书都不载录，只载录危、室二宿中间的和北落师门相接近的。
English: "Jin Shu," "Astronomical History of the Sui Dynasty," "Astronomical History of the Sui Dynasty" and other star books do not contain records, but only record the dangerous, the middle of the second house and the north-falling door.

古文：近世天文乃载此一星，在鬼、柳间，与外厨、天纪相近。
现代文：近世的天文书就载录逭一颗星，在鬼、柳宿之间，和外厨、天纪相接近。
English: Astronomy books of the early modern period recorded a star that was close to the heavens, between the devil and the willow tree.

古文：然《新书》两天纲虽同在危度，其说不同，今姑附于此。
现代文：可是《新书》两天纲虽然同在危宿的垣度之内，它的说法不同，现在姑且附在这里。
English: However, although the "New Book" two-day program is within the scope of the dangerous lodging, its statement is different, and it is now attached here.

古文：营室二星，天子之宫，一曰玄宫，一曰清庙，又为军粮之府，主土功事。
现代文：营室二颗星，是天子的宫殿，一颗叫玄宫，一颗叫清庙，又是军粮的府库，主管土木工程的事情。
English: There are two stars in the camp, one is the palace of the Son of Heaven, one is called the Gengu, one is called the Qing Temple, and the other is the treasury of military supplies, in charge of civil engineering.

古文：一曰室一星为天子宫，一星为太庙，为王者三军之廪，故置羽林以卫；又为离宫阁道，故有离宫六星在其侧。
现代文：一说室宿一颗星是天子宫殿，一颗星是太庙，是王者三军的粮仓，所以设置羽林军来保卫；又是皇帝别官的阁道，所以有离宫六星在它的旁边。
English: It is said that Muroshuku, one star, is the palace of the Son of Heaven, one star is the Great Temple, and it is the granary of the king's three armies, so it is set up to protect the Ulin Army; it is also the lofty road of the emperor's other officials, so there are six stars next to it.

古文：一曰定室，《诗》曰 定之方中 也。
现代文：一说又叫定室，即《诗》中所说的 定之方中 。
English: It is also called the "setting room," that is, the "setting direction" mentioned in the poem.

古文：星明，国昌；不明而小，祠祀鬼神不享；动，则有土功事；不具，忧子孙；无芒、不动，天下安。
现代文：星明亮，国家昌盛；不明亮而且小，鬼神不享用祭祀供品；星动摇，就有土木工程的事情；星数不全备，忧虑子孙；星没有光芒、不摇动，天下安定。
English: If the star is bright, the country is prosperous; if it is not bright and small, the ghosts and gods do not enjoy the sacrificial offerings; if the star is shaken, there will be civil engineering; if the number of stars is not complete, the descendants will be worried; if the star has no light and does not shake, the world will be stable.

古文：日食在室，国君忧，王者将兵，一曰军绝粮，土卒亡。
现代文：日食在室宿，国君有忧患，王者率领军队，一说军队断粮，士兵逃亡。
English: The eclipse is in Murojuku, the sovereign is in distress, the king is leading the army, the army is short of food, and the soldiers are fleeing.

古文：日晕，国忧，女主忧黜。
现代文：日晕，国家有忧患，女主忧虑被废黜。
English: The sun is fading, the country is in trouble, and the mistress is worried about being deposed.

古文：月食，其分有土功，岁饥。
现代文：月食，其分野地区有土木工程，这年饥荒。
English: Lunar eclipse, its field area has civil engineering, this year famine.

古文：月晕，为水，为火，为风。
现代文：月晕，是水灾，是火灾，是风灾。
English: The moon's halo is a flood, a fire, and a windstorm.

古文：月犯之，为土功，有哭泣事。
现代文：月亮侵犯，是土木工程，有哭泣的事情。
English: The moon is encroaching, it's civil engineering, there's crying going on.

古文：岁星犯之，有急而为兵；入，天子有赦，爵禄及下；舍室东，民多死；舍北，民忧；又曰守之，宫中多火灾，主不安，民疫。
现代文：岁星侵犯，有危急而发生战事；进入，天子有赦免，爵禄惠及臣下；住宿在室宿束面，人民多死亡；住宿在室宿北面，人民有忧患；又说占据在室宿，皇宫中多火灾，人主不安全，人民有瘟疫。
English: If the year star invades, there is danger and war breaks out; if the emperor enters, the son of heaven has pardon, and the nobles and vassals benefit; if the emperor stays in Muroshuku, the people are more likely to die; if the emperor stays in the north of Muroshuku, the people are more likely to suffer; if the emperor stays in Muroshuku, there are more fires in the palace, the people are not safe, and the people are more likely to suffer from the plague.

古文：荧惑犯，岁不登；守之，有小灾，为旱，为火，籴贵；逆行守之，臣谋叛；入，则创改宫室；成勾巳者，主失宫。
现代文：荧惑星侵犯，年成不丰收；占据室宿，有小的灾祸，是旱灾，是火灾，买米债贵；逆向运行占据室宿，臣下图谋叛逆；进入，那么改建官室；形成勾巳的，人主失去官室。
English: Fluorescent planets invade, the year ends with a poor harvest; occupy Murojuku, there is a small disaster, it is a drought, it is a fire, it is expensive to buy rice; reverse run occupy Murojuku, the vassals plot rebellion; enter, then rebuild the government office; form a hook, the owner loses the government office.

古文：填星犯，为兵；守之，天下不安，人主徙宫，后、夫人忧，关梁不通，贵人多死；久守，大人恶之，以赦解，吉；逆行，女主出入恣；留六十日，土功兴。
现代文：镇星侵犯，是战争；占据室宿，天下不安定，人主迁移皇官，皇后、夫人有忧患，关隘桥梁不通行，贵人多死亡；长久占据，王公大人厌恶这种情况，用赦免解除，吉利；逆向运行，女主出入放肆；占据六十天，土木工程兴起。
English: The invasion of the town and star is war; the occupation of the room and lodging, the world is unstable, the master moves the imperial officials, the queen and the wife are in distress, the narrow bridges are impassable, and the nobles are mostly dead; the long-term occupation, the prince abhors this situation, and the amnesty is used to release, good luck; the reverse operation, the hostesses enter and leave freely; the occupation of sixty days, the rise of civil engineering.

古文：太白犯五寸许，天子政令不行；守，则兵大忌之，以赦令解；一曰太子、后妃有谋；若乘守勾巳、逆行往来，主废后妃，有大丧，宫人恣；去室一尺，威令不行；留六十日，将死；入，则有暴兵。
现代文：太白星侵犯五寸左右，天子政令不执行；占据，那么战争非常忌讳这种情况，用赦免令解除；一说太子、皇后嫔妃有图谋；如果登临占据形成勾巳、逆向运行来来往往，人主废黜皇后嫔妃，有大的丧事，宫女放肆；距离室宿一尺，威权法令不能施行；占据六十天，将军死；进入，就有突发战争。
English: If the white star encroaches on about five centimeters, the emperor's decree will not be implemented; if it occupies, then war is a very taboo situation, and it will be lifted with an amnesty; if it is said that the prince and the empress are scheming; if it is occupied and occupied, it will form a hook, the reverse operation will come and go, the ruler will depose the empress, there will be a big funeral, and the courtesan will be reckless; if it is a foot away from the room, the authoritarian decree cannot be implemented; if it occupies for sixty days, the general will die; if it enters, there will be a sudden war.

古文：辰星犯之，为水；入，则后有忧，诸侯发动于西北。
现代文：辰星侵犯，是水灾；进入，那磨皇后有忧患，诸侯在西北发动。
English: The invasion of the star of the hour is a flood; the entry of the hour is the sorrow of the queen, and the lords launch it in the northwest.

古文：客星犯入，天子有兵事，军饥，将离，外兵来；出于室，兵先起者败。
现代文：客星侵犯进入，夭子有战争，军队饥荒，将军离职，外族军队前来；从室宿出去，先起兵的一方失败。
English: A guest star invades, there is a war, the army is starving, the general leaves office, a foreign army comes; from the room and lodge, the first side to start the army fails.

古文：彗星出，占同；或犯之，则弱不能战；出入犯之，则先起兵者胜，一曰出室为大水。
现代文：彗星从室宿出来，占验相同；或侵犯它，那么软弱不能战斗；出来进去侵犯，那么先起兵的一方胜利，一说从室宿出来，是大水。
English: If a comet comes out of Murojuku, the fortune-telling is the same; if it is invaded, it is too weak to fight; if it comes out and invades, the side that started the war first wins; if it comes out of Murojuku, it is a flood.

古文：孛犯或出入，先起兵者胜；出，有小灾，后宫乱。
现代文：变星侵犯或出来进去，先起兵的一方胜利；出去，有小的灾祸，后宫混乱。
English: Variable stars invade or come out and go in, the first to raise an army wins; go out, there is a small disaster, the harem is in chaos.

古文：武密曰： 孛出，其分有兵、丧；道藏所载，室专主兵。 
现代文：武密说： 变星出来，其分野地区有战争、丧事；道藏所记载的，室宿专门主管战争。 
English: Wu Mi said, "When a variable star comes out, there will be wars and funerals in its field area. According to the records of the Taoist Archives, Muroshuku was specifically in charge of wars.

古文：流星犯，军乏粮，在春夏将军贬，秋冬水溢。
现代文：流星侵犯，军中缺粮，在春季夏季将军被贬，在秋季冬季大水溢出。
English: Meteor invasion, shortage of grain in the army, in the spring and summer the general was demoted, in the autumn and winter the water overflowed.

古文：《乙巳占》曰： 流星出入色黄润，军粮丰，五谷成，国安民乐。 
现代文：《乙巳占》说： 流星出来进去，星色黄而润泽，军粮充足，五谷成熟，国家安定，人民欢乐。 
English: "Yi Si Zhan" said: The meteor comes out and goes in, the star is yellow and moist, the military food is sufficient, the grain is ripe, the country is stable, and the people are happy.

古文：云气入，黄，为土功；苍白，大人恶之；赤，为兵，民疫；黑，则大人忧。
现代文：云气进入，星色黄，是土木工程；色苍白，王公大人厌恶这种情况；色赤，是战争，人民有瘟疫；色黑，那么王公大人有忧患。
English: The clouds enter, the stars are yellow, it is a civil engineering project; the color is pale, the prince dislikes this situation; the color is red, it is a war, the people have a plague; the color is black, then the prince has sorrow.

古文：按汉永元铜仪，营室十八度，唐开元游仪十六度。
现代文：按汉朝永元铜仪，营室十八度；唐朝开丞游仪，十六度。
English: According to the Han Dynasty Yongyuan Bronze Statuette, the camp room is 18 degrees; the Tang Dynasty Kaizhen You Statuette, 16 degrees.

古文：旧去极八十五度。
现代文：从前离极八十五度。
English: It used to be 85 degrees.

古文：景祐测验，室十六度，距南星去极八十五度，在赤道外六度。
现代文：景佑间观测验证，室宿十六度，距星南星离极八十五度，在赤道外六度。
English: According to the observation and verification between Jingyou and Muroshuku, Muroshuku is 16 degrees away, 85 degrees away from the South Star, and 6 degrees away from the equator.

古文：雷电六星，在室南，明动，则雷电作。
现代文：雷电六颗星，在室宿南面，明亮又动摇，那么雷电发作。
English: Lightning six stars, in the southern side of Murojuku, bright and shaky, then lightning strikes.

古文：离宫六星，两两相对为一坐，夹附室宿上星，天子之别宫也，主隐藏止息之所。
现代文：离宫六颗星，两两相对是一座，夹附着室宿的上星，是天子的别宫，主管隐藏停止休息的处所。
English: Six stars away from the palace, two against one, the upper star attached to the room, is the other palace of the son of heaven, the place where the supervisor hides and stops the rest.

古文：动摇，为土功；不具，天子忧。
现代文：星光动摇，是土木工程；星数不全备，天子有忧患。
English: If the stars waver, it is a civil engineering project; if the number of stars is not complete, it is a cause for concern.

古文：太白、荧惑入，兵起；犯或勾巳环绕，为后妃咎。
现代文：太白星、荧惑星进入，战争发生；侵犯或形成勾巳环绕，是后妃有过错。
English: Too white star, fluorescent planet enters, war occurs; encroachment or formation of hooks surround, it is the queen's fault.

古文：彗星犯之，有修除之事。
现代文：彗星侵犯，有打扫楼坛的事情。
English: Comet encroachment, there is a matter of cleaning the basement.

古文：垒壁阵十二星一作壁垒，在羽林北，羽林之垣垒，主天军营。
现代文：垒壁阵十二颗星，又作壁垒。在羽林北面，是羽林的壁垒，主管天的军营。
English: On the north side of Hualin, there is the Hualin Wall, which is the military camp in charge of heaven.

古文：星明，国安；移动，兵起；不见，兵尽出，将死。
现代文：星明亮，国家安定；移动，战争发生；隐匿不现，军队都出动，将军死亡。
English: The star is bright, the country is stable; moving, the war occurs; hiding, the army is dispatched, the general dies.

古文：五星入犯，皆主兵。
现代文：五星进入侵犯，都预兆战争。
English: If the Five-Star Movement invades, it will be a harbinger of war.

古文：太白、辰星，尤甚。
现代文：太白星、辰星，尤其厉害。
English: Taibai Xing and Chen Xing are particularly bad.

古文：客星入，兵大起，将吏忧。
现代文：客星进入，战争大规模爆发，将军官吏有忧患。
English: A guest star enters, a large-scale war breaks out, and the military and government officials are worried.

古文：流星入南，色青，后忧；入北，诸侯忧；色赤黑，入东，后有谋；入西，太子忧；黄白，为吉。
现代文：流星进入南部，星色青，皇后有忧患；进入北部，诸侯有忧患；星色赤黑，侵入束部，皇后有图谋；进入西部，太子有忧患；色黄白，是吉利。
English: The meteor enters the south, the star is blue, the queen is in distress; enters the north, the princes are in distress; the star is red and black, invading the cords, the queen is scheming; enters the west, the prince is in distress; yellow and white, is lucky.

古文：腾蛇二十二星，在室宿北，主水虫，居河滨。
现代文：腾蛇二十二颗星，在室宿北面，主管水虫，处在银河岸上。
English: Twenty-two stars, on the north side of Murojuku, in charge of water insects, located on the Milky Way shore.

古文：明而微，国安；移向南，则旱；向北，大水。
现代文：星明亮而微小，国家安定；向南移动，就干旱；向北，发大水。
English: The star is bright and small, the country is stable; moving south, it is arid; moving north, it is flooded.

古文：彗、孛犯之，水道不通。
现代文：彗星、变星侵犯，水路不通行。
English: Comets and variable stars invade, and waterways become impassable.

古文：客星犯，水物不成。
现代文：客星侵犯，水中作物没有收戍。
English: Invaded by the guest star, the crops did not grow in the water.

古文：土功吏二星，在壁宿南，一曰在危东北，主营造宫室，起土之官。
现代文：土功吏二颗星，在壁宿南面，一说在危宿东北面，主管营造宫室，是起土动工的官。
English: The two stars of the earthwork officer, in the south of the wall lodge, one said in the northeast of the dangerous lodge, the person in charge of building the palace room, is the official who started the groundwork.

古文：动摇，则版筑事起。
现代文：星动摇，那么夯土建筑的事业兴起。
English: The stars wavered, and the business of rammed earth construction took off.

古文：北落师门一星，在羽林军南，北宿在北方，落者，天军之藩落也，师门犹军门。
现代文：北落师门一颗星，在羽林军南面，北宿在北方，落是天的军队的篱笆，师门如同军门。
English: The north gate is a star, in the south of the Ulin army, the north lodge is in the north, the fall is the fence of the army of heaven, the gate is like a military gate.

古文：长安城北门曰 北落门 ，象此也。
现代文：长安城北门叫 北落门 ，就取象于此。
English: The north gate of Chang'an City is called the North Gate, which is taken from here.

古文：主非常以候兵。
现代文：主管意外的变故以侦察军队的动向。
English: The superintendent made an unexpected detour to reconnoiter the troop movements.

古文：星明大，安；微小、芒角，有大兵起。
现代文：星明亮光大，安全；微小、有光芒，有大的战争爆发。
English: Stars are big and bright and safe; small and shiny and big wars break out.

古文：岁星犯之，吉。
现代文：岁星侵犯，吉利。
English: Happy New Year, Geely.

古文：荧惑入，兵弱不可用。
现代文：荧惑星进入，军队软弱不能用。
English: Fluorescent planet enters, army too weak to use.

古文：客星犯之，光芒相及，为兵，大将死；守之，边人入塞。
现代文：客星侵犯，星的光芒互相触及，是战争，大将死亡；占据此星，边区的人进入边塞。
English: The guest star encroaches, the star's rays touch each other, it is war, the general dies; occupying this star, the people of the border region enter the border fortress.

古文：流星出而色黄，天子使出；入，则天子喜；出而色赤，或犯之，皆为兵起。
现代文：流星从此星出来而星色黄，天子的使者派出；进入，那么天子有喜事；出去而星色赤，或侵犯，都是战争发生。
English: When a meteor comes out of the star and is yellow, it is a messenger sent by the Son of Heaven; when it enters, the Son of Heaven is happy; when it goes out and is red, or when it invades, it is a war.

古文：云气入，苍白，为疾疫；赤，为兵；黄白，喜；黑云气入，边将死。
现代文：云气进入，色苍白，是疾病瘟疫；色赤，是战争；色黄白，喜事；黑色云气进入，边区的将军死亡。
English: The clouds enter, the color is pale, it is disease and plague; the color is red, it is war; the color is yellow and white, it is a happy event; the black clouds enter, the general in the border area died.

古文：八魁九星，在北落东南，主捕张禽兽之官也。
现代文：八魁九颗星，在北落师门东南面，是主管捕捉禽兽的官吏。
English: On the southeast side of the Fomalhaut Gate, the official in charge of capturing animals and beasts.

古文：客、彗入，多盗贼，兵起。
现代文：客星、彗星进入，多盗贼，战争发生。
English: A guest star, a comet enters, more thieves, war breaks out.

古文：太白、荧惑入守，占同。
现代文：太白星、荧惑星进入并占据，占验相同。
English: Too-white stars and fluorescent planets enter and occupy, and the horoscope is the same.

古文：天纲一星，在北落西南，一曰在危南，主武帐宫舍，天子游猎所会。
现代文：天纲一颗星，在北落师门西南，一说在危宿南面，主管皇帝的营帐和皇官住宿，天子游猎时的集会地方。
English: A star in the constellation of the Heavens, in the south-west of the Fomalhaut Gate, one said to be in the south of the dangerous lodging, in charge of the emperor's camp and the accommodation of the imperial officials, and the meeting place of the heavenly son when hunting.

古文：客、彗入，为兵起，一云义兵。
现代文：客星、彗星进入，是战争发生，一说是义兵。
English: When a guest star or comet enters, it means war has broken out, and it is said to be a volunteer.

古文：羽林军四十五星，三三而聚散，出垒壁之南，一曰在营室之南，东西布列，北第一行主天军，军骑翼卫之象。
现代文：羽林军四十五颗星，三三成队而聚合分散，从垒壁的南面出来，一说在营室的南面，东西向分布排列，北面第一行主管天军，是军中骑兵在两翼护卫的形象。
English: The forty-five stars of the Uebayashi army, three-thirty percent of the team, but aggregated and dispersed, came out from the south side of the foundation wall. One said that on the south side of the camp, they were arranged in an east-west distribution. On the north side, the first line was in charge of the heavenly army. It was the image of the cavalry in the army guarding the two wings.

古文：星众，则国安；稀，则兵动；羽林中无星，则兵尽出，天下乱。
现代文：星数众多，那磨国家安定；稀疏，那么军队骚动；羽林军中没有星，那么军队悉数出动，天下动乱。
English: If there are many stars, the country will be stable; if there are few stars, the army will be in turmoil; if there are no stars in the Ulin Army, the entire army will be mobilized, and the country will be in turmoil.

古文：月犯之，兵起。
现代文：月亮侵犯，战争发生。
English: Moon encroaches, war breaks out.

古文：岁星入，诸侯悉发兵，臣下谋叛，必败伏诛。
现代文：岁星进入，诸侯都发兵，臣下图谋叛逆，一定失败处死。
English: When the new year came, all the lords sent troops, and their vassals plotted to rebel. If they failed, they would be executed.

古文：太白入，兵起。
现代文：太白星进入，战争发生。
English: Too white star enters, war occurs.

古文：填星入，大水。
现代文：镇星进入，发大水。
English: When the town star enters, there is a lot of water.

古文：五星入，为兵。
现代文：五星进入，是战争。
English: Five Star enters, it's war.

古文：荧惑、太白经过，天子以兵自守。
现代文：荧惑星、太白星经过，天子带领军队自卫。
English: The fluorescent planet and the too-white star passed by, and the heavenly son led the army to defend themselves.

古文：荧惑入而芒赤，兴兵者亡。
现代文：荧惑星进入而光芒赤色，起兵的人灭亡。
English: The fluorescent planet enters and glows red, and the soldiers perish.

古文：客星入，色黄白，为喜；赤，为臣叛。
现代文：客星进入，星色黄白，是喜事；星色赤，是臣下叛乱。
English: When the guest star enters, the yellow and white star color is a happy event; the red star color is the rebellion of the vassal.

古文：流星入南，色青，后有疾；入北，诸侯忧；入东而赤黑，后有谋；入西，太子忧。
现代文：流星进入南部，星色青，皇后有病；进入北部，诸侯有忧患；进入柬部而星色赤黑，皇后有图谋；进入西部，太子有忧患。
English: When the meteor enters the south, the star is blue and the queen is ill; when it enters the north, the princes are worried; when it enters Cambodia and the star is red and black, the queen is scheming; when it enters the west, the prince is worried.

古文：云气苍白入南，后有忧；北，诸侯忧；黑，太子、诸侯忌之；出，则祸除；黄白，吉。
现代文：云气苍白进入南部，皇后有忧患；进入北部，诸侯有忧患；黑色，太子、诸侯忌讳这种情况；出去，那么祸患消除；黄白色，吉利。
English: If the clouds are pale when they enter the south, the empress will be in trouble; if they enter the north, the princes will be in trouble; if they are black, the princes and princes will abhor the situation; if they go out, the disaster will be eliminated; if they are yellow and white, it will be good luck.

古文：斧钺三星，在北落师门东，芟刈之具也，主斩刍稾以饲牛马。
现代文：斧钹三颗星，在北落师门束面，是除草刈麦的农具，主管切割干草来喂牛马。
English: The axe with three stars, on the face of the north-facing door beam, is an agricultural tool for weeding and cutting wheat, and is responsible for cutting hay to feed cattle and horses.

古文：明，则牛马肥腯；动摇而暗，或不见，牛马死。
现代文：星明亮，那么牛马肥壮；星动摇而且暗淡，或不出现，牛马死亡。
English: The star is bright, so the cow and horse are fat; the star wavers and is dim, or does not appear, the cow and horse die.

古文：《隋志》、《通志》皆在八魁西北，主行诛、拒难、斩伐奸谋。
现代文：《隋害，天文志》、《通志》都在八魁的西北面，主管执行死刑、抵御发难、斩杀有奸诈图谋的人。
English: The Sui Dynasty, the History of Astronomy, and the History of Communication are all located in the northwest of Hakkai. They are in charge of executing the death penalty, resisting the onset of difficulties, and killing people who have treacherous plans.

古文：明大，用兵将忧；暗，则不用；移动，兵起。
现代文：星明亮光大，动用军队，将军有忧患；暗淡，就不动用军队；移动，战争发生。
English: If the star is bright and shines brightly, the army will be mobilized and the general will be in trouble; if it is dim, the army will not be mobilized; if it moves, there will be war.

古文：月入，大臣诛。
现代文：月亮进入，大臣被杀。
English: The moon sets and the minister is killed.

古文：岁星犯，相诛。
现代文：岁星侵犯，宰相被杀。
English: The prime minister was assassinated.

古文：荧惑犯，大臣戮。
现代文：荧惑星侵犯，大臣被杀。
English: Fluorescent planet encroached, minister was killed.

古文：填星入，大臣忧。
现代文：镇星进入，大臣有忧患。
English: As the town star enters, the minister is worried.

古文：太白入，将诛。
现代文：太白星进入，将军被杀。
English: Taibai entered, and the general was killed.

古文：客、彗犯，斧钺用；又占：客犯，外兵被擒，士卒死伤，外国降；色青，忧；赤，兵；黄白，吉。
现代文：客星、彗星侵犯，斧铁刑具被使用；又占验：客星侵犯，外族军队被擒，士兵死伤，外国投降；星色青，有忧患；色赤，战争；色黄白，吉利。
English: The guest star and the comet invade, and the axe and iron torture tools are used; and the horoscope: the guest star invades, the foreign army is captured, the soldiers are killed and wounded, and the foreign country surrenders; the star color is blue, there is sorrow; the color is red, war; the color is yellow and white, auspicious.

古文：按《步天歌》，已上诸星皆属营室。
现代文：按《步天歌》，以上各星都属于营室。
English: According to "Walking Song," the above stars all belong to the camp.

古文：雷电、土功吏、斧钺，《晋志》皆不载，《隋志》有之。
现代文：雷电、土功吏、斧钹，《晋书，天文志》都不载录，《隋书天文志》有它们。
English: Thunder and lightning, earthworker, axe, "Jin Shu, Astronomy" are not recorded, "Sui Shu, Astronomy" has them.

古文：垒壁阵、北落师门、天纲、羽林军，《晋志》在二十八宿外，腾蛇属天市垣。
现代文：垒壁阵、北落师门、天纲、羽林军，《晋书天文志》在二十八宿之外，腾蛇属于天市垣。
English: Bastion, Beilokshi Gate, Tian Gang, Ulin Army, "Jinshu Astronomy" are outside the twenty-eight lodges, and Tengsa belongs to the Heavenly City Wall.

古文：武密书以腾蛇属营室，又属壁宿。
现代文：武密书认为腾蛇属于营室，又属于壁宿。
English: Wu Mishu believed that Tengsa belonged to the camp room, and also belonged to the wall lodge.

古文：《乾象新书》以西十六星属尾、属危，东六星属室；羽林军西六星属危，东三十九星属室；以天纲属危，斧钺属奎。
现代文：《干象新书》认为西十六星属于尾宿、属于危宿，束六星属于室宿；羽林军西六颗星属于危宿，东三十九颗星属于室宿；以天纲属于危宿，斧铁属于奎宿。
English: "The Dry Elephant New Book" believes that the west sixteen stars belong to the tail lodge, belong to the dangerous lodge, and the six stars belong to the room lodge; the six stars in the west of the Ulin Army belong to the dangerous lodge, and the thirty-nine stars in the east belong to the room lodge; to the heavens belong to the dangerous lodge, and the axe iron belongs to the Kui lodge.

古文：《通占录》又以斧钺属壁、属奎，说皆不同。
现代文：《通占录》又认为斧铁属于壁宿、属于奎宿，说法都不同。
English: "Tong Zhan Lu" also believes that the axe iron belongs to the wall lodge, belongs to the Kui lodge, and the explanations are different.

古文：壁宿二星，主文章，天下图书之秘府。
现代文：壁宿二颗星，主管文章，是天下图书的珍秘库藏。
English: With two stars and a leading article, Wandeshuku is a treasured repository of the world's books.

古文：明大，则王者兴，道术行，国多君子；星失色，大小不同，王者好武，经术不用，图书废；星动，则有土功。
现代文：星明亮光大，那么王者兴起，道德学术盛行，国家多君子；星失去光色，大小不同，王者喜好武力，经术不被采用，图书废弃；星动摇，就有土木工程。
English: If the star is bright and large, the king will rise, moral and academic will prevail, and the country will have more gentlemen; if the star loses its luster, the size will be different, the king will prefer force, the scripture will not be adopted, and the book will be abandoned; if the star wavers, there will be civil engineering.

古文：日食于壁，阳消阴坏，男女多伤，国不用贤。
现代文：日食在壁宿，阳气消解，阴气破坏，男女多受伤，国家不任用贤能之士。
English: The eclipse is in the wall lodging, the yang qi is dissipated, the yin qi is destroyed, men and women are mostly injured, and the country does not appoint people of merit.

古文：日晕，名士忧。
现代文：日晕，名士有忧患。
English: The sun is fading, celebrities are worried.

古文：月食，其分大臣忧，文章士废，民多疫。
现代文：月食，其分野地区的大臣有忧患，文章之士被废弃，人民多瘟疫。
English: The eclipse of the moon, the ministers in their areas are worried, the writers are abandoned, and the people are plagued.

古文：月晕，为风、水，其分有忧。
现代文：月晕，是风灾、水灾，萁分野地区有忧患。
English: The halo of the moon is wind and flood disasters, and there are troubles in the fields.

古文：月犯之，国有忧，为饥，卫地有兵。
现代文：月亮侵犯它，国家有忧患，是饥荒，卫地有战争。
English: The moon encroaches on it, the country is troubled, there is famine, and there is war in the Holy Land.

古文：岁星犯之，水伤五谷；久守或凌犯、勾巳，有兵起。
现代文：岁星侵犯，水灾损害五谷；长久占据或侵入进犯、环绕而行，有战争发生。
English: The year star encroaches, the flood damages the valley; long-term occupation or invasion, encirclement, war occurs.

古文：荧惑犯之，卫地忧；守之，国旱，民饥，贤不用；一占：王有大灾。
现代文：荧惑星侵犯，卫地有忧患；占据壁宿，国家干旱，人民饥荒，贤士不被任用；有一种占验：王者有大的灾祸。
English: Fluorescent planets encroach, there is sorrow in the health land; occupy the wall lodging, the country drought, the people famine, the wise men are not appointed; there is a test: the king has a great disaster.

古文：填星犯守，图书兴，国王寿，天下丰，国用贤；一占：物不成，民多病；逆行成勾巳者，有土功；六十日，天下立王。
现代文：镇星侵犯并占据，图书兴盛，国王长寿，天下丰收，国家任用贤才；有一种占验：作物不成熟，人民多病；逆向运行形成勾巳，有土木工程；六十天，天下拥立君主。
English: Towns and stars invade and occupy, books flourish, kings live long, the world harvests, the country appoints sages; there is a divination test: crops are immature, people are sickly; reverse running forms hooks, there are civil engineering projects; sixty days, the world supports the monarch.

古文：太白犯之一二寸许，则诸侯用命；守之，文武并用，一曰有军不战，一曰有兵丧，一曰水灾，多风雨；一曰犯之多火灾。
现代文：太白星侵犯壁宿一二寸左右，那么诸侯服从命令；占据壁宿，文武并用，一说有军队不作战，一说有战争丧亡，一说水灾，多风雨；一说侵犯，多火灾。
English: If a white star encroaches on a walled city by an inch or two, then the princes will obey the order; if they occupy a walled city, they will use both literature and arms. If they say they have an army, they will not fight. If they say they have a war, they will be killed. If they say they have a flood, there will be more wind and rain. If they say they have an invasion, there will be more fire.

古文：辰星犯，国有盖藏保守之事，王者刑法急；守之，近臣忧，一曰其分有丧，有兵，奸臣有谋；逆行守之，桥梁不通。
现代文：辰星侵犯，国家有掩盖遮藏保守的事情，王者的刑法苛急；占据壁宿，近臣有忧患，一说其分野地区有丧事，有战争，奸臣有阴谋；逆向运行并占据壁宿，桥梁不通行。
English: The stars and planets encroach; the state covers up, conceals, and protects; the king's criminal law is harsh; he occupies the outposts; his close vassals are worried; he says there is a funeral in his province, there is a war, and his treacherous vassals are plotting; he runs in the opposite direction and occupies the outposts; the bridges are impassable.

古文：客星犯之，文章士死，一曰有丧；入，为土功，有水；守之，岁多风雨；舍，则牛马多死。
现代文：客星侵犯，文章之士死亡，一说有丧事；进入，是土木工程，有水灾；占据壁宿，年内多风雨；住宿在壁宿，那么牛马多死亡。
English: The guest star encroaches, the article person dies, and it is said that there is a funeral; the entry is a civil engineering project, there is a flood; occupy the wall lodging, there are many wind and rain during the year; stay in the wall lodging, then more cattle and horses die.

古文：彗星犯之，为兵，为火，一曰大水，民流。
现代文：彗星侵犯，是战争，是火灾，一说发大水，人民流亡。
English: Comet intrusion, is war, is a fire, said to be a flood, the people fled.

古文：孛犯，为兵，有火、水灾。
现代文：变星侵犯，是战争，有火灾水灾。
English: A variable star invades, there is war, there are fires and floods.

古文：流星犯，文章废；《乙巳占》曰： 若色黄白，天下文章士用。 
现代文：流星侵犯，文章废弃；《乙巳占》说： 假使星色黄白，天下的文章之士被任用。 
English: Meteors invade, articles are scrapped; "Yi Si Zhan" said: If the stars are yellow and white, the world's writers are appointed.

古文：赤云气入之，为兵；黑，其下国破；黄，则外国贡献，一曰天下有烈士立。
现代文：赤色云气进入壁宿，是战争；黑色，它下面的国家破灭；黄色，那么外国来进贡，一说天下有刚烈之士产生。
English: When the red cloud enters the wall, it is war; when the black cloud enters, it is the collapse of the country below; when the yellow cloud enters, it is the arrival of foreign tribute; when the yellow cloud enters, it is the birth of the brave.

古文：按汉永元铜仪，东壁二星九度。
现代文：按汉朝永元铜仪，束壁宿二颗星九度。
English: According to the Yongyuan bronze standard of the Han Dynasty, Sokubeyado has two stars and nine degrees.

古文：旧去极八十六度。
现代文：从前离极八十六度。
English: It used to be 86 degrees.

古文：景祐测验，壁二星九度，距南星去极八十五度。
现代文：景佑观测验证，壁宿二颗星九度，距星南星离极八十五度。
English: According to the observation and verification of Jingyou, the two stars of the wall lodge are nine degrees, and the distance from the star to the south star is eighty-five degrees.

古文：天厩十星，在东壁之北，主马之官，若今驿亭也，主传令置驿，逐漏驰骛，谓其急疾与晷漏竞驰也。
现代文：天厩十颗星，在束壁宿的北面，主管马的官，像现在的驿站邮亭，主管传布诏令设置驿使，追着时间奔驰猛赶，是说它的疾速和时间竞争奔驰。
English: Ten stars in the sky stable, in the north of Sokubi lodge, the official in charge of horses, like the post office of the post station now, the official in charge of promulgating the edict to set up the courier, the time-chasing gallop, is to say that its speed and time competition gallop.

古文：月犯之，兵马归。
现代文：月亮侵犯，军队战马归田。
English: The moon encroaches, and the army's war horses return to the field.

古文：彗星入，马厩火。
现代文：彗星进入，马厩失火。
English: Comet in, stables on fire.

古文：客星入，马出行。
现代文：客星进入，马出厩行走。
English: The guest star enters, the horse walks out of the stable.

古文：流星入，天下有惊。
现代文：流星进入，天下惊动。
English: A meteor enters, and the whole world is alarmed.

古文：霹雳五星，在云雨北，一曰在雷电南，一曰在土功西，主阳气大盛，击碎万物。
现代文：霹雳五颗星，在云雨北面，一说在雷电南面，一说在土功西面，主管阳气大盛，击碎万物。
English: There are five stars, one in the north of the clouds and rain, one in the south of the thunder and lightning, and one in the west of the land reclamation. The yang qi is in full swing, smashing everything.

古文：与五星合，有霹雳之应。
现代文：和五星会合，有雷电的响应。
English: and the five-star meeting, there was a thunderous response.

古文：云雨四星，在雷电东，一云在霹雳南，主雨泽，成万物。
现代文：云雨四颗星在雷电束面，一说在霹雳南面，主管雨露，养成万物。
English: The four stars of the cloud and rain are on the surface of the thunder and lightning beam, and one is said to be on the south side of the dragonfly, which is in charge of the rain and dew, and nurtures all things.

古文：星明，则多雨水。
现代文：星明亮，就多雨水。
English: The brighter the star, the more rain.

古文：辰星守之，有大水；一占：主阴谋杀事，孳生万物。
现代文：辰星占据此星，有大水；又占验：主管阴谋杀害的事情，滋生万物。
English: The Hour Star occupies this planet, there is a great deal of water; it is also a divination: it is in charge of conspiring to kill things, and it breeds all things.

古文：鈇锧五星，在天仓西南，刈具也，主斩刍饲牛马。
现代文：鈇踬五颗星，在天仓西南面，是割麦的农具，主管切割干草喂牛马。
English: Five stars, in the southwest of Tiancang, are agricultural tools for cutting wheat, and supervisors cut hay to feed cattle and horses.

古文：明，则牛马肥；微暗，则牛马饥饿。
现代文：星明亮，那么牛马肥壮；微小丽暗淡，那么牛马受饿。
English: The star is bright, so the cow and horse are fat; the tiny beauty is dim, so the cow and horse are hungry.

古文：按《步天歌》，壁宿下有鈇锧五星，《晋》、《隋志》皆不载。
现代文：按《步天歌》，壁宿下有鈇钻五颗星，《晋书，天文志》、《隋书天文志》都不载录。
English: According to the "Walking Heavenly Song," there are five stars under the wall lodging, "Jin Shu, Astronomy," "Sui Shu Astronomy" are not recorded.

古文：《隋志》八魁西北三星曰鈇锧，又曰鈇钺，其占与《步天歌》室宿内斧钺略同，恐即是此误重出之。
现代文：《隋书，天文志》八魁西北三星叫鈇钻，又叫鈇铁，它的占验和《步天歌》室宿内的斧钹大体相同，恐怕就是这里的错误重复出现。
English: "The Book of the Sui Dynasty, the History of Astronomy," the northwest three stars of the Eight Divisions are called the "diamond," also called the "iron," and its divination is roughly the same as the "axe" in the room of "Walking Song," I am afraid that this is where the error repeats itself.

古文：霹雳五星、云雨四星，《晋志》无之，《隋志》有之。
现代文：霹雳五颗星、云雨四颗星，《晋书，天文志》没有它们，《隋书天文志》有它们。
English: "Jin Shu, Astronomy" does not have them, but "Sui Shu, Astronomy" has them.

古文：武密书以云雨属室宿。天厩十星，《晋志》属天市垣，其说皆不同。
现代文：武密的书认为云雨属于室宿，天厩十颗星《晋书，天文志》属于天市垣，它们的说法都不同。
English: Wu Mi's book believes that Yunyu belongs to Murojuku, and Tianmaya ten stars "Jin Shu, Astronomy" belongs to Tianchigaki, and their statements are different.

