古文：神武皇帝十五男：武明娄皇后生文襄皇帝、文宣皇帝、孝昭皇帝、襄城景王淯、武成皇帝、博陵文简王济，王氏生永安简平王浚，穆氏生平阳靖翼王淹，大尔朱氏生彭城景思王浟、华山王凝，韩氏生上党刚王涣，小尔朱氏生任城王湝，游氏生高阳康穆王湜，郑氏生冯翊王润，冯氏生汉阳敬怀王洽。
现代文：神武皇帝十五个儿子：武明娄皇后生文襄皇帝、文宣皇帝、孝昭皇帝、襄城景王高清、武成皇帝、博陵文简王高济，王氏生永安筒子王高浚，穆氏生平阳靖翼王高淹，大氽朱氏生彭城景思王高澈、华山王高凝，韩氏生上党刚肃王高涣，小氽朱氏生任城王高浩，游氏生高阳康穆王高浞，郑氏生冯翊王高润，冯氏生汉阳敬怀王高洽。
English: Emperor Shenwu's fifteen sons: Empress Wu Mingyao gave birth to Emperor Wenxiang, Emperor Wenxuan, Emperor Xiaozhao, Xiangcheng King Gaoqing, Emperor Wucheng, Boling King Gaoji, Wang Shi gave birth to King Yonganzhu Zi, Mu Shi gave birth to King Pingyang Jingyi, Daxing Zhu gave birth to King Pengcheng Jingshi, Huashan Wang gave birth to King Gaojing, Han Shi gave birth to King Gangsoo, Xiaojing Zhu gave birth to King Gaohao, You Shi gave birth to King Gaoyang Kangmu, Zheng Shi gave birth to King Fengyu,

古文：永安简平王浚，字定乐，神武第三子也。
现代文：永安简平王高浚，字定乐，神武的第三个儿子。
English: Yongan Jianping Wang Gaojun, the third son of Shenwu.

古文：初，神武纳浚母，当月而有孕，及产浚，疑非己类，不甚爱之。
现代文：起初神武娶高浚的母亲，当月就有了身孕，等到生了高浚，怀疑不是自己的后代，不很喜欢他。
English: At first, Shenwu married Gao Jun's mother, and became pregnant that month. When Gao Jun was born, he suspected that he was not his own offspring and did not like him very much.

古文：而浚早慧，后更被宠。
现代文：但高浚很早就聪明，后来更受到宠爱。
English: But Gao Jun was very smart when he was very young, and later he was gradually favored by his father.

古文：年八岁时，问于博士卢景裕曰：  祭神如神在。 
现代文：年龄八岁时，向博士卢景裕问道： 祭神如神在。
English: When he was eight years old, he asked Dr. Lu Jingyu: "The enshrined deities are like gods.

古文：为有神邪，无神邪？ 
现代文：是有神呢，还是没有神呢? 
English: Is there a God, or is there no God?

古文：对曰； 有。 
现代文：回答说： 有。 
English: And he said, I have.

古文：浚曰： 有神当云祭神神在，何烦 如 字？ 
现代文：高浚说： 有神应当说祭神神在，为什么麻烦如，字? 
English: Gao Jun said: If there is a god, it should be said that the deity is there, why bother with the word?

古文：景裕不能答。
现代文：卢景裕不能回答。
English: Jingyu couldn't answer at all.

古文：及长，嬉戏不节，曾以属请受纳，大见杖罚，拘禁府狱，既而见原。
现代文：等长大后，嬉戏没有节制，曾因请托接受贿赂，被用棍棒狠狠地惩罚了一顿，关在官府的牢狱裹，不久被饶恕。
English: When he grew up, he played without restraint. Once, for accepting a bribe, he was severely punished with a club, locked up in a government prison, and was soon pardoned.

古文：后稍折节，颇以读书为务。
现代文：后来渐渐克制自己，把读书当成正事。
English: Later, I gradually restrained myself and took reading seriously.

古文：元象中，封永安郡公。
现代文：元象年间，封为永安郡公。
English: During the Yuanxiang era, he was appointed as the Yongan County magistrate.

古文：豪爽有气力，善骑射，为文襄所爱。
现代文：豪爽有气力，善于骑马射箭，受到文襄的宠爱。
English: He was courageous and generous, very strong, good at riding and archery, and was loved by Emperor Gao Cheng.

古文：文宣性雌懦，每参文襄，有时涕出。
现代文：文宣性情懦弱，每次参见文襄，有时流着眼泪出来。
English: Wen Xuan's disposition is weak, every time he sees Wen Xiang, he sometimes bursts into tears.

古文：浚常责帝左右，何因不为二兄拭鼻，由是见衔。
现代文：高浚常常责备皇帝身边的人，为什么不替二哥擦鼻子，因此被记恨。
English: Gao Jun often reproached the people around the emperor for not wiping the second brother's nose, so he was remembered with hatred.

古文：累迁中书监、兼侍中。
现代文：逐渐升迁到中书监、兼侍中。
English: He was promoted several times, rising to the post of junior high school librarian and junior high school attendant.

古文：出为青州刺史，颇好畋猎，聪明矜恕，上下畏悦之。
现代文：出任青州刺史，很喜欢打猎，聪明宽厚有同情心，上下的人又怕他又喜欢他。
English: He likes hunting very much, is intelligent, generous and compassionate, and people up and down are afraid that he likes him again.

古文：天保初，进爵为王。
现代文：天保初年，进升爵位为王。
English: In the first year of the Tenpo era, he was promoted to the peerage.

古文：文宣末年多酒，浚谓亲近曰： 二兄旧来不甚了了，自登祚已后，识解顿进。
现代文：塞宣末年经常饮酒，直逡对亲近的人说： 二哥过去不怎么聪明，自从登基以后，见识有了长进。
English: At the end of his life, Emperor Sethuan was a frequent drinker, and Naosuke said to those close to him, "My second brother was not very smart in the past, but since he ascended to the throne, his insight has grown.

古文：今因酒败德，朝臣无敢谏者，大敌未灭，吾甚以为忧，欲乘驿至邺面谏，不知用吾不。 
现代文：现在因为饮酒败坏德行，朝中大臣没有敢规劝的，大敌没有消灭，我感常忧虑，想乘驿马到邺城当面规劝，不知听不听我的。 
English: Now, because drinking has corrupted morals, the ministers of the two Koreas do not dare to give advice, and the great enemy has not been eliminated. I often feel worried and want to take a pack horse to persuade them in person in Yeongseong. I don't know whether they will listen to me or not.

古文：人有知，密以白帝，又见衔。
现代文：有人知道了，秘密把这事告诉了皇帝，又被记恨。
English: Someone heard about it, reported the secret to Emperor Wenxuan, and was hated again.

古文：八年来朝，从幸东山。
现代文：天保八年前来朝见，跟随皇帝到了东山。
English: Tenpo came to see the emperor eight years ago and followed the emperor to Higashiyama.

古文：帝裸裎为乐，杂以妇女，又作狐掉尾戏。
现代文：皇帝裸露身体取乐，伴有妇女，又做狐狸掉尾巴的游戏。
English: Emperor Wenzhong was fond of playing naked for fun and with women, and also liked to play the game of a fox losing its tail.

古文：浚进言此非人主所宜。
现代文：高逡进言，这不是君主应该做的。
English: This is not what a monarch should do, Gao said.

古文：帝甚不悦。
现代文：皇帝非常不高兴。
English: The emperor was very unhappy.

古文：浚又于屏处召杨遵彦，讥其不谏。
现代文：直堕又在隐蔽的地方找来彊：垦，指责他不去规劝。
English: He also told those on his right and left to step back, summoned Yang Zunyan, and criticized him for not advising the emperor.

古文：帝时不欲大臣与诸王交通，遵彦惧以奏。
现代文：皇帝当时不愿意大臣和各王结交来往，挝遵童害怕把逭事上奏。
English: At that time, the emperor did not want his ministers to make friends with the kings, and Lao Zundong was afraid to report the anecdote.

古文：帝大怒曰： 小人由来难忍！ 遂罢酒还宫。
现代文：皇帝大怒说： 小人我从来难以忍耐 于是停止酒宴回到宫中。
English: The emperor was furious and said, "I have never been able to tolerate such a villain," so he stopped the banquet and returned to the palace.

古文：浚寻还州，又上书切谏。
现代文：高浚不久返回青州，又上书恳切规劝。
English: Gao Jun soon returned to Qingzhou, and again wrote a letter of earnest exhortation.

古文：诏令征浚，浚惧祸，谢疾不至。
现代文：皇帝下诏书命令征召直逡，产逡害怕有祸，称病不来。
English: The emperor issued an imperial edict ordering the conscription of maidservants, and the midwives, fearing disaster, said they would not come because of illness.

古文：上怒，驰驿收浚，老幼泣送者数千人。
现代文：皇帝发怒，乘坐驿马快行来拘捕高浚，老老小小哭着送行的有几千人。
English: Enraged, Emperor Wenxuan sent someone to fly to Qingzhou to arrest Gao Jian. Thousands of men, women and children in Qingzhou wept to see him off.

古文：至，盛以铁笼，与上党王涣俱置北城地牢下，饮食溲秽共在一所。
现代文：到了以后，装在铁笼裹，和上党王直逸一起关在北城的地牢下，吃竭大小便都在一个地方。
English: When he arrived, he was put in an iron cage and locked up with the top Party boss, Zhaoyi, under a dungeon in Beicheng. He had to defecate and urinate in the same place.

古文：明年，帝亲将左右临穴歌讴，令浚和之。
现代文：第二年，皇帝亲自带着身边的人来到洞穴边唱歌，命令高浚应和。
English: The next year, the emperor himself brought people around him to the edge of the cave to sing, and ordered Gao Jun to respond.

古文：浚等惶怖且悲，不觉声战。
现代文：高浚等人支害怕悲伤，不觉声音打战。
English: Gao Jun and others were panicked and scared, and they were very sad, and their voices trembled.

古文：帝为怆然，因泣，将赦之。
现代文：皇帝感到伤心，于是哭了起来，打算赦免他们。
English: Emperor Wenxuan was moved to tears and prepared to pardon him.

古文：长广王湛先与浚不睦，进曰： 猛兽安可出穴。 帝默然。
现代文：长广王高湛先前同高浚不和，进言说： 猛兽怎么能够出洞 皇帝沉默。
English: Changguang Wang Gao Zhan had previously been at odds with Gao Jun, and said: How can a ferocious beast come out of a cave? The emperor was silent.

古文：浚等闻之，呼长广小字曰： 步落稽，皇天见汝！ 
现代文：产涂等人听到后，呼喊着长广王的小名说： 步莲稽，上天看见你了! 
English: After hearing this, Shantou and the others shouted the nickname of Changguang Wang and said: "Buxue Lianqi, heaven has seen you!

古文：左右闻者，莫不悲伤。
现代文：周围听到的，没有不悲伤的。
English: People on both sides were sad to hear it.

古文：浚与涣皆有雄略，为诸王所倾服，帝恐为害，乃自刺涣，又使壮土刘桃枝就笼乱刺。
现代文：产逡和产渔都有雄才大略，被各王倾心佩服，皇帝担心受害，就亲自刺高涣，又命壮士刘型噬走近铁笼。
English: He was admired by all the kings. The emperor, fearing that he would be harmed, personally stabbed the stilt, and ordered the strong man Liu Jie to approach the iron cage.

古文：槊每下，浚、涣辄以手拉折之，号哭呼天。
现代文：槊每次刺下，高浚、高涣就用手拉住折断，号哭着呼喊上天。
English: Every time the dragonfly stings, Gao Jun and Gao Yao hold the broken branch with their hands and cry and shout to the heavens.

古文：于是薪火乱投，烧杀之，填以石土。
现代文：于是将柴火乱扔过去，烧死了他们，填入石头和土。
English: So they threw firewood all over the place, burned them, and filled the trenches with stones and earth.

古文：后出，皮发皆尽，尸色如炭，天下为之痛心。
现代文：后来挖出来，皮和头发都没了，尸体的颜色就像木炭。天下人为他们感到痛心。
English: He was later exhumed, his skin and hair all burned away, his corpse the color of charcoal, and the world was outraged.

古文：后帝以其妃陆氏配仪同刘郁捷，旧帝苍头也，以军功见用，时令郁捷害浚，故以配焉。
现代文：后来皇帝将直浚的妃子陆氏配给仪同刘郁捷，他是已故皇帝的奴仆，因作战有功被任用，当时命令刘郁捷杀害王浚，所以将陆氏配给他。
English: Later, the emperor gave the imperial concubine Lu to Liu Yujie, who was a servant of the late emperor and had been appointed for distinguished service in battle. At that time, Liu Yujie was ordered to kill Wang Jun, so Lu was given to him.

古文：后数日，帝以陆氏先无宠于浚，敕与离绝。
现代文：过了几天，皇帝因陆氏先前没受到产篮的宠爱，诏令和刘郁捷离婚。
English: A few days later, the emperor issued a decree to divorce Liu Yujie because Lu had not previously been favored by the birthing basket.

古文：乾明元年，赠太尉。
现代文：茎塱元年，赠直逡为太尉。
English: In the first year of Tsukuda's reign, Naosuke was awarded the rank of Taijo (second lieutenant).

古文：无子，诏以彭城王浟第二子准嗣。
现代文：产堕没有儿子，下诏书将堑球王产邀的第二个儿子产准过继给他。
English: Zangpo did not have a son, and the next imperial edict allowed the second son, who was invited by Zanggu Wangzang, to be adopted by him.

古文：平阳靖翼王淹，字子邃，神武第四子也。
现代文：平阳靖翼王高淹，字子邃，神武的第四个儿子。
English: Pingyang Jingyi Wang Gao, the fourth son of Shenwu.

古文：元象中，封平阳郡公，累迁尚书左仆射。
现代文：元象年间，封为平阳郡公，逐渐升迁到尚书左仆射。
English: During the Yuanxiang period, he was appointed as the governor of Pingyang County, and was gradually promoted to Shang Shuzhu Zuopuzha.

古文：天保初，进爵为王，历位尚书令、开府仪同三司、司空、太尉。
现代文：天保初年，进升爵位为王，历任尚书令、开府仪同三司、司空、太尉。
English: In the first year of the Tenpo era, he was promoted to the peerage as the king, and successively held the posts of Shang Shuling, Kaifu Yi, Tong San Shi, Sikuo, and Tai Ye.

古文：皇建初，为太傅，与彭城、河间王并给仗卫、羽林百人。
现代文：皇建初年，任太傅，和彭城王、河间王都给随身卫士、羽林军一百人。
English: In the first year of the Emperor's reign, Emperor Taifu, the King of Pengcheng, and the King of Kawama all gave one hundred bodyguards, the Ulin Army.

古文：大宁元年，迁太宰。
现代文：大宁元年，升任太宰。
English: In the first year of the Danin era, he was promoted to Dazaifu.

古文：性沉谨，以宽厚称。
现代文：性格沉稳谨慎，以宽厚著称。
English: His personality is calm and prudent, and he is known for his generosity.

古文：河清三年，薨于晋阳，或云鸩终。
现代文：河清三年，在晋阳薨，有人说是被毒酒毒死。
English: In the third year of Heqing, in Jinyang County, some people said that he was poisoned by poisoned wine.

古文：还葬邺，赠假黄钺、太宰、录尚书事。
现代文：送回葬在邺城，追蹭假黄铁、太宰、录尚书事。
English: He was sent back to be buried in Lucheng, and the false Huang Tie, Dazai, and the record of Shang Shuji were chased away.

古文：子德素嗣。
现代文：儿子高德素继承王位。
English: His son, Gao Desu, succeeded to the throne.

古文：彭城景思王浟，字子深，神武第五子也。
现代文：彭城景思王高澈，字子深，神武的第五个儿子。
English: Pengcheng King Gao Che, the fifth son of Shenwu.

古文：元象二年，拜通直散骑常侍，封长乐郡公。
现代文：元象二年，授任通直散骑常侍，封为长乐郡公。
English: In the second year of Yuanxiang, he was awarded the title of Zongzhichangzhanjie zhangzhi, and was appointed as the head of Changle County.

古文：博士韩毅教浟书，见浟笔迹未工，戏浟曰： 五郎书画如此，忽为常侍开国，今日后宜更用心。 
现代文：博士韩毅教高澈写字，看到高澈的笔迹不工整，对高沘开；玩笑说： 五郎写字作画像这样，忽然成为常侍开国，今后应更加用心。 
English: Dr. Han Yi taught Gao Che to write. When he saw that Gao Che's handwriting was not neat, he opened his eyes to Gao; he jokingly said: "Goro writes like a picture, suddenly becoming a regular attendant to the founding of the country, he should be more careful in the future."

古文：浟正色答曰： 昔甘罗幼为秦相，未闻能书。凡人唯论才具何如，岂必动夸笔迹。
现代文：高澈神色严肃地回答说： 以前甘罗少年成为秦国的丞相，没有听说他能够写字，所有人衹评论才干怎么样，难道一定要夸耀写字的笔迹。
English: Gao Che replied with a serious expression: Before the boy Ganluo became the prime minister of Qin, no one had heard that he could write. Everyone was commenting on his talent. Did he really have to boast about his handwriting?

古文：博士当今能者，何为不作三公？ 
现代文：博士现在能写字，为什么不作三公? 
English: Doctor, you are the best at calligraphy today. Why not be one of the three princes?

古文：时年盖八岁矣。
现代文：当时年纪大约八岁。
English: He was about eight years old at the time.

古文：毅甚惭。
现代文：韩毅十分惭愧。
English: Han Yi was very ashamed.

古文：武定六年，出为沧州刺史，为政严察，部内肃然。
现代文：武定六年，出任沧州刺史，治理政事严厉明察，辖界内秩序井然。
English: In the sixth year of Wuding's reign, he served as the chief historian of Cangzhou, strictly supervised the administration of state affairs, and maintained order within his jurisdiction.

古文：守令参佐，下及胥吏，行游往来，皆自赍粮食。
现代文：太守县令僚属，下到小吏，出行往来，都自带粮食。
English: From the highest to the land steward, staff officer and vassal, and down to the eunuch, they all brought their own rations when they came and went on official business.

古文：浟纤介知人间事。
现代文：高澈精细知道人世的事情。
English: Gao Che knows everything about the human world.

古文：有隰沃县主簿张达尝诣州，夜投人舍，食鸡羹，浟察知之。
现代文：有个湿沃县主簿张达曾经到州裹，夜晚投宿在别人家裹，吃了鶸汤，高澈调查知道了这事。
English: Zhang Da, the chief bookkeeper of Shuwao County, once went to Shuzhou, stayed at someone else's home at night, and ate bean soup. Gaochu investigation found out about this.

古文：守令毕集，浟对众曰： 食鸡羹何不还价直也？ 
现代文：太守县令全都来了，高澈对大家说： 吃了鶸汤为什么不付钱。 
English: The county governors all came, and Gao Che said to everyone: Why don't you pay for the soup?

古文：达即伏罪。
现代文：张达立即认罪。
English: Zhang Da immediately pleaded guilty.

古文：合境号为神明。
现代文：整个境内称他像神一样明智。
English: He was known throughout the land as being as wise as a god.

古文：又有一人从幽州来，驴驮鹿脯。
现代文：又有一个人从幽州来，驴子驮着鹿脯。
English: Another person came from Yuzhou, walked to Cangzhou with a donkey carrying venison, and walked very slowly due to foot pain.

古文：至沧州界，脚痛行迟，偶会一人为伴，遂盗驴及脯去。
现代文：到了沧州界内，脚痛走得慢，偶然遇上一个人作同伴，就偷走了驴和鹿脯离去。
English: When he arrived in Cangzhou, he walked slowly because of his sore feet. By chance, he met a companion and stole a donkey and a deer.

古文：明旦，告州。
现代文：第二天，告到州裹。
English: The next day, it was reported to the state.

古文：浟乃令左右及府僚吏分市鹿脯，不限其价。
现代文：高澈就命令身边的人和官府中的僚属分别去买鹿脯，不限它的价钱。
English: Gao Che ordered people around him and his colleagues in the government to buy deer antler separately, regardless of its price.

古文：其主见脯识之，推获盗者。
现代文：鹿脯的主人看到鹿脯认得是自己的，追究捉住了盗贼。
English: When the owner saw the venison, he recognized it as his own and caught the thief.

古文：转都督、定州刺史。
现代文：转任都督、定州刺史。
English: He was also transferred to the post of governor of the capital, Dingzhou.

古文：时有人被盗黑牛，背上有白毛。
现代文：当时有人被偷走了黑牛，背上有白毛。
English: At that time, a family's black cow was stolen, and white hair grew on the cow's back.

古文：长史韦道建谓中从事魏道胜曰： 使君在沧州日，擒奸如神，若捉得此贼，定神矣。 
现代文：长史韦道建对中从事魏道胜说： 使君在沧州的时候，捉邪恶像神一样，如果捉住这个盗贼，一定是神了。 
English: Long Shi Wei Daojian, who was engaged in Wei Daosheng in the confrontation, said: When Zijun was in Cangzhou, he caught evil like a god. If he catches this thief, he must be a god.

古文：浟乃诈为上府市牛皮，倍酬价直，使牛主认之，因获其盗。
现代文：高澈就假装为上级官署买牛皮，付给加倍的价钱，让牛的主人辨认，于是捉住了偷牛的盗贼。
English: Gao Che pretended to buy the cowhide for the higher authority, paid double the price so that the owner of the cow could be identified, and then caught the thief who stole the cow.

古文：建等叹服。
现代文：韦道建等人感叹钦服。
English: Wei Daojian and others are very impressed.

古文：又有老母姓王，孤独，种菜三亩，数被偷。
现代文：又有姓王的老妈妈，孤身独处，种了三亩菜，几次被偷。
English: There is also an old woman surnamed Wang, who is all alone, grows three mu of vegetables, and has been robbed many times.

古文：浟乃令人密往书菜叶为字，明日市中看菜叶有字，获贼。
现代文：高澈就命令人秘密地在菜叶上写上字，第二天在集市上看到菜叶上有字，捉住了盗贼。
English: Gao Che then ordered someone to secretly write the word on the vegetable leaf. The next day, he saw the word on the vegetable leaf at the market and caught the thief.

古文：尔后境内无盗，政化为当时第一。
现代文：以后辖界内没有盗贼，治政教化是当时第一。
English: After that, no one in Dingzhou ever stole again, and political indoctrination was the top priority at the time.

古文：天保初，封彭城王。
现代文：天保初年，封为彭城王。
English: In the first year of Tianbao, he was named the king of Pengcheng.

古文：四年，征为侍中，人吏送别悲号。
现代文：天保四年，征召任侍中，百姓官吏送别时悲伤地哭号。
English: In the fourth year of the Tenpo era, he was conscripted as a chamberlain, and the people and officials wept with sadness when they saw him off.

古文：有老公数百人相率具馔曰： 自殿下至来五载，人不识吏，吏不欺人，百姓有识已来，始逢今化。
现代文：有几百个老翁相继而来摆好食物说： 自从殿下来逭裹五年了，人不认识官吏，官吏不欺负人，老百姓有记忆以来，开始遇上今天的教化。
English: Several hundred old men came one after another to set out the food and said: It has been five years since the prince came down to earth. People do not know officials, officials do not bully people, and the common people have memories. Since then, they have begun to encounter today's indoctrination.

古文：殿下唯饮此乡水，未食此乡食，聊献疏薄。 
现代文：殿下衹喝造裹的水，没有吃这裹的食物，姑且表示微薄的心意。 
English: His Royal Highness sipped the boiled water, but did not eat any of the food in the package, which was a sign of his meager intentions.

古文：浟重其意，为食一口。
现代文：高澈被他们的心意所感动，吃了一口。
English: He respected the feelings of the elderly and took a bite of the food they had brought.

古文：七年，转司州牧，选从事皆取文才士明剖断者，当时称为美选。
现代文：天保七年，转任司州牧，选拔从事官都选取有文才能明辨决断的人，当时称为美好的选择。
English: In the seventh year of the Tenpo era, he was transferred to the position of Shishu Makimori. He selected officials who were talented and discerning readers. At the time, people praised this as a fair and correct selection.

古文：州旧案五百余，浟未期悉断尽。
现代文：州裹的旧案五百多个，高澈不到一年全都断案完毕。
English: There are more than 500 old cases involving the state, and all of them have been closed in less than a year.

古文：别驾羊修等恐犯权戚，乃诣阁谘陈。
现代文：别驾羊脩等人担心触犯权贵外戚，就到门上禀告陈述。
English: Don't worry about offending the relatives of the powerful and noble, they went to the door to report the obituary.

古文：浟使告曰： 吾直道而行，何惮权戚，卿等当成人之美，反以权戚为言。 
现代文：高澈派人告诉说： 我是走直道，为什么害怕权贵外戚，卿等应当成人之美，反而拿权贵外戚作为说辞。 
English: Gao Qiao sent a person to tell him: I am on the straight path, why should I be afraid of powerful relatives, lords, etc. who should be adult beauty, but instead take powerful relatives as an excuse.

古文：修等惭悚而退。
现代文：羊脩等人又惭愧又惊恐地退了回去。
English: Embarrassed and frightened, the shepherd and the others retreated.

古文：后加特进，兼司空、太尉，州牧如故。
现代文：后来加授特进，兼司空、太尉，如往常任州牧。
English: Later, he was appointed as a special envoy, and concurrently held the positions of secretary of the Air Force, lieutenant, and state secretary of history.

古文：太妃薨，解任，寻诏复本官。
现代文：太妃薨，解除职任，不久诏令恢复本任官职。
English: Tohei II was relieved of his duties, but was soon reinstated by imperial decree.

古文：俄拜司空，兼尚书令。
现代文：不久授任司空，兼尚书令。
English: Soon after, he was promoted to the position of Siku, and also became a calligrapher.

古文：济南嗣位，除开府仪同三司、尚书令、领大宗正卿。
现代文：济南王继承皇位，授任开府仪同三司、尚书令、领大宗正卿。
English: The king of Jinan succeeded to the imperial throne and was appointed Kaifu Yi Tong San Shi, Shang Shu Ling, and leader Daizong Zhengqing.

古文：皇建初，拜大司马，兼尚书令，转太保。
现代文：皇建初年，授任大司马，兼尚书令，转太保。
English: In the first year of the Emperor's reign, he was appointed to the post of grand steward, and he was also appointed to the post of imperial secretary, and he was also transferred to the post of imperial bodyguard.

古文：武成入承大业，迁太师、录尚书事。
现代文：武成继承大业，迁任太师、录尚书事。
English: Wu Cheng inherited the great cause, was transferred to the position of Grand Master, and recorded the records.

古文：浟明练世务，果于断决，事无大小，咸悉以情。
现代文：高澈通晓政务，果断作出决定，事无论大小，全都出自情感。
English: He is a well-practiced observer of world affairs, quick to make decisions, and deals with things, no matter how big or small, in a reasonable manner.

古文：赵郡李公统预高归彦之逆，其母崔氏即御史中丞崔昂从父子，兼右仆射魏收之内妹也。
现代文：趟郡李公统参预高归彦的叛乱，他的母亲崔氏就是御史中丞崔昂从父的女儿，又是右仆射魏收的妻妹。
English: Li Gongtong participated in Gao Guihang's rebellion. His mother, Cui, was the daughter of the imperial historian Cui Ang, and the wife and sister of his right-hand man, Sha Wei Jie.

古文：依令，年出六十，例免入官。
现代文：按照法令，年龄超过六十，照例免除没入官府。
English: According to the law: after the age of sixty, it is customary to be registered as a civil servant.

古文：崔增年陈诉，所司以昂、收故，崔遂获免。
现代文：崔氏增加年岁陈诉，主管部门因崔昂、魏收的缘故，崔氏就获得免入官府。
English: Mr. Cui filed a lawsuit to increase his age, but because of Cui Ang and Wei Hui, he was pardoned and appointed to the post.

古文：浟摘发其事，昂等以罪除名。
现代文：高澈揭发了这件事，崔昂等人因罪免除官职。
English: Gao Yao exposed the affair, and Cui Ang and others were convicted and removed from office.

古文：自车驾巡幸，浟常留邺。
现代文：自从皇帝在外出巡，高澈经常留在邺城。
English: Since the emperor was away on a tour, Gao Che often stayed in Handan.

古文：河清三年三月，群盗田子礼等数十人谋劫浟为主，诈称使者，径向浟第，至内室，称敕牵浟上马，临以白刃，欲引向南殿。
现代文：河清三年三月，田子礼等几十人的一群盗贼图谋劫持高澈为君主，假装说是使者，径直去高漱的住宅，到了内室，说有韶令将高澈牵上马，用刀刃逼着，想带到南殿。
English: In March of the third year of Heqing, a group of thieves, including several dozen people such as Tian Zili, plotted to kidnap Gao Che for the monarch. They pretended to be messengers and went straight to Gao Shu's residence. When they got to the inner room, they said that there was an imperial order to take Gao Che on a horse, force him with a blade, and want to take him to the south hall.

古文：浟大呼不从，遂遇害，时年三十二，朝野痛惜焉。
现代文：高澈大声呼喊不肯服从，于是被害，当时年纪三十二岁，朝野对此感到痛惜。
English: Gao Che shouted loudly and refused to obey, and was killed. He was thirty-two years old at the time, and Asano felt sorry about this.

古文：初浟未被劫前，其妃郑氏梦人斩浟头持去，恶之，数日而浟见杀。
现代文：当初高澈被劫持前，他的妃子郑氏梦见有人砍下高澈的头带走，厌恶这个梦，几天后高澈被杀。
English: At first, before Gao Che was kidnapped, his concubine Zheng Shiren dreamt that someone cut off Gao Che's head and took it away. She hated this dream, and Gao Che was killed a few days later.

古文：赠假黄钺、太师、太尉、录尚书事，给辒辌车。
现代文：赠假黄绒、太师、太尉、录尚书事，给韫棘车。
English: Give away fake yellows, grand masters, grand lieutenants, record books, and give them cars with thorns.

古文：子宝德嗣，位开府，兼尚书左仆射。
现代文：儿子高实德继承王位，官位开府，兼尚书左仆射。
English: His son, Gao Shide, succeeded to the throne and became the head of the government.

古文：上党刚肃王涣，字敬寿，神武第七子也。
现代文：上党刚肃王高涣，字敬寿，神武的第七个儿子。
English: The 7th son of Jimmu, the king of Gansu at the time of the Shang Dynasty, Gao Jiu, also known as Jimmu.

古文：天姿雄杰，俶傥不群，虽在童幼，恒以将略自许。
现代文：姿容雄伟高大，豪爽洒脱不同寻常，虽然在童年，经常以用兵的谋略自夸。
English: Majestic and tall in stature, he is unusually bold and free-spirited, although in his childhood he often boasted of his military strategy.

古文：神武壮而爱之，曰： 此儿似我。 
现代文：神武认为豪壮而喜爱他，说： 这儿子像我。 
English: And his father saw that he was a goodly child, and he loved him, and said, This is my son.

古文：及长，力能扛鼎，材武绝伦。
现代文：等到长大，力气大能举起大鼎，才能武艺无人可比。
English: When he grew up, his strength was at its peak, and his talent for martial arts was second to none.

古文：每谓左右曰： 人不可无学，但要不为博士耳。 
现代文：经常对身边的人说： 人不可不学习，但不要做博士罢了。 
English: He often said to people around him: "One must not not study, but don't read too much and become a doctor.

古文：故读书颇知梗概，而不甚耽习。
现代文：所以读书祇知大概，并不深入学习。
English: Therefore, he only reads to understand the general outline, but does not study seriously.

古文：元象中，封平原郡公。
现代文：元象年间，封为平原郡公。
English: At the time of Yuan Zhao, he was made the governor of Pingyuan County.

古文：文襄之遇贼，涣年尚幼，在西学，闻宫中哗，惊曰： 大兄必遭难矣！ 
现代文：文襄遇到盗贼，高涣年纪还小，在西房学习，听到宫中喧闹，惊讶地说： 大哥一定遭难了! 
English: Wen Xiang encountered a thief, Gao Yao was still young, studying in the west wing, heard the noise in the palace, and said in surprise: Big brother must be in trouble!

古文：弯弓而出。
现代文：拉开弓出来。
English: Take your bow and arrows and come out.

古文：武定末，除冀州刺史，在州有美政。
现代文：武定末年，授任冀州刺史，在州裹治政有好名声。
English: At the end of Wuding's life, he was appointed as the governor of Jizhou Province and enjoyed a good reputation in the province.

古文：天保初，封上党王，历中书令、尚书左仆射。
现代文：天保初年，封为上党王，历任中书令、尚书左仆射。
English: In the first year of the Tenpo era, he was given the title of Shang Dangwang, and successively held the positions of Zhongshu Rong and Shangshu Zuojie.

古文：与常山王演等筑伐恶诸城。
现代文：同常山王高演等修筑伐恶各城。
English: In the same way, Shanzang Wang Gao Rong and others began to build up the cities.

古文：遂聚邺下轻薄，凌犯郡县，为法司所纠。文宣戮其左右数人，涣亦被谴。
现代文：于是聚集邺下轻浮无赖的人，欺凌郡县，被主管法律的官员举报，文宣杀了他身边的几个人，高涣也受到责备。
English: As a result, the frivolous scoundrels gathered under his command, bullied the county, and were reported by the officials in charge of the law. Wen Xuan killed several people around him, and Gao Yao was also blamed.

古文：六年，率众送梁王萧明还江南，仍破东关，斩梁特进裴之横等，威名甚盛。
现代文：天保六年，带领军队护送梁王萧明回长江以南，于是攻下东关，杀了梁特进裴之横等人，威名大震。
English: In the sixth year of Tianbao, he led the army to escort Liang Wang Xiao Ming back to the south, broke Liang's east pass, and killed Liang's special envoy Pei Zhi Heng and others, with great prestige.

古文：八年，录尚书事。
现代文：天保八年，录尚书事。
English: In the eighth year of the Tenpo era, he was awarded the title of "Recorded Biography."

古文：初，术士言亡高者黑衣，由是自神武后，每出行，不欲见沙门，为黑衣故也。
现代文：当初，占卜预测吉凶的人说使高氏灭亡的是穿黑衣服的，因此从神武以后，每次出行，不愿看到和尚，因他们穿黑衣服的缘故。
English: At first, fortune-tellers said that it was the black-clad people who caused Gao's downfall, so every time I went out after Shenwu, I didn't want to see the monks because they were wearing black.

古文：是时文宣幸晋阳，以所忌问左右曰： 何物最黑？ 
现代文：这时文宣到晋阳，将这个忌讳问身边的人说： 什么东西最黑? 
English: At this time, Emperor Wenxuan went to Jinyang and asked the people around him about his taboo: What is the darkest thing?

古文：对曰： 莫过漆。 
现代文：回答说： 莫过于漆。 
English: People on both sides answer: the darkest thing is paint.

古文：帝以涣第七子为当之，乃使库真都督破六韩伯升之邺征涣。
现代文：文宣帝因高涣是第七个儿子和 漆 对应，就派库真都督破六韩伯升到邺城征召高涣。
English: Emperor Wenzhong, because Gao Yao was the seventh son of his father, sent Ku Zhen, the governor of the capital, to break through the six Han brothers and go to Lucheng to recruit Gao Yao.

古文：涣至紫陌桥，杀伯升以逃，凭河而度，土人执以送帝。
现代文：高涣到了紫陌桥，杀了破六韩伯升逃走，徒步涉水过河，当地人捉住了他送给皇帝。
English: When he reached the Zi Miao Bridge, he killed Han Bo Sheng and fled, wading across the river. The locals caught him and sent him to Emperor Wenxuan.

古文：铁笼盛之，与永安王浚同置地牢下。
现代文：用铁笼装着他，和永安王高浚一起关在地牢下。
English: He was put in an iron cage and locked in a dungeon with Yongan Wang Gaozhun.

古文：岁余，与浚同见杀，时年二十六。
现代文：一年多后，和高浚一起被杀，当时年纪二十六岁。
English: More than a year later, he was killed together with Gao Jun, who was 26 years old at the time.

古文：以其妃李氏配冯文洛，是帝家旧奴，积劳位至刺史，帝令文洛等杀涣，故以其妻妻焉。
现代文：将他的妃子李氏配给冯文洛，冯文洛是皇帝家旧时的奴仆，积累功劳官位做到刺史，皇帝下令冯文洛等人杀了高涣，所以将他的妻子嫁给他。
English: He assigned his concubine, the Li clan, to Feng Wenluo. Feng Wenluo was an old servant of the emperor's family, accumulating merits and official positions to make history. The emperor ordered Feng Wenluo and others to kill Gao Yao, so he married his wife to him.

古文：至乾明元年，收二王余骨葬之，赠司空，谥曰刚肃。
现代文：到了干明元年，收集二王残剩的骨骸埋葬了他们，赠司空，谧号称刚肃。
English: In the first year of the Qianming era, the Imperial Court reburied the remaining bones of Gaozhu and Gaozhu, posthumously awarding Gaozhu the title of Siku and the posthumous title of Gansu.

古文：有敕李氏还第。
现代文：有诏令李氏回藩王府。
English: An imperial edict ordered the Li clan to return to the royal palace.

古文：而文洛尚以故意，修饰诣李，李盛列左右，引文洛立于阶下，数之曰： 遭难流离，以至大辱，志操寡薄，不能自尽，幸蒙恩诏，得反藩闱。
现代文：但冯文洛还有旧情，打扮一番到李氏那裹。李氏排列好很多身边的人，带着冯文洛站在台阶下，责骂他说： 遭难流落，以至受巨大的耻辱，志节操守寡薄，不能自杀，幸亏蒙受恩德的诏书，能够返回藩王的宫室。
English: But Feng Wenluo still had old feelings, and he dressed up like the Li clan. The Li clan lined up a lot of people around him, took Feng Wenluo to stand at the bottom of the steps, and scolded him, saying: Suffering hardships, and even suffering great shame, and having a weak moral code, he could not commit suicide. Fortunately, he received an edict of grace and was able to return to the palace of the king.

古文：汝是谁家孰奴，犹欲见侮！ 
现代文：你是谁家的奴仆，还能再被你侮辱! 
English: Whose servant are you, that I should be insulted by you again?

古文：于是杖之一百，流血洒地。
现代文：于是用棍棒打了冯文洛一百下，流出的血洒在地上。
English: So he clubbed Feng Wenluo a hundred times, and the blood spilled onto the ground.

古文：涣无嫡子，庶长子宝严以河清二年袭爵，位金紫光禄大夫、开府仪同三司。
现代文：高涣没有正妻所生的儿子，姬妾生的大儿子高实严在河清二年继承爵位，官位金紫光禄大夫、开府仪同三司。
English: Gao Yao did not have a son born to his legal wife, and his eldest son, Gao Shiyan, who was born to his concubine, inherited the title of nobility in the second year of Heqing, with the official ranks of Jin Zi Guanglu Doctor, Kaifu Yi and San Shi.

古文：襄城景王淯，神武第八子也。
现代文：襄城景王高清，神武的第八个儿子。
English: Xiangcheng King Gaoqing, Shenwu's eighth son.

古文：容貌甚美，弱年有器望。
现代文：容貌很美，二十上下的年龄就有才气和名望。
English: She is very beautiful, and at the age of twenty or so, she has talent and fame.

古文：元象中，封章武郡公。
现代文：元象年间，封为章武郡公。
English: During the Yuanxiang era, he was given the title of Zhangwu County official.

古文：天保初，封襄城郡王。
现代文：天保初年，封为襄城郡王。
English: In the first year of the Tenpo era, he was named the king of Xiangcheng County.

古文：二年春，薨。
现代文：天保二年春天，薨。
English: In the spring of the second year of the Tenpo era, there was a thunderstorm.

古文：齐氏诸王选国臣府佐，多取富商群小、鹰犬少年，唯襄城、广宁、兰陵王等颇引文艺清识之士，当时以此称之。
现代文：齐氏各王选拔封国臣子僚属，大多选取富商的子弟、架鹰牵犬的年轻人，祇有襄城王、广宁王、兰陵王等招引有文才学问高洁有见识的人，在当时因此受到称赞。
English: All the kings of the Qi Dynasty selected the sons and grandsons of the ministers of the state, and most of them chose the sons and grandsons of the rich merchants and the young men with eagles and dogs. Only the King of Xiangcheng, the King of Guangning, the King of Lanling, and so on, invited people with literary talent, learning, refinement, and insight, and were praised for this at the time.

古文：乾明元年二月，赠假黄铖、太师、太尉、录尚书事。
现代文：干明元年二月，赠假黄铁、太师、太尉、录尚书事。
English: In February of the first year of the Ming Dynasty, he was awarded the titles of Huang Tie, Taishi, and Taifu, and his records were recorded.

古文：无子，诏以常山王演第二子亮嗣。
现代文：没有儿子，下诏书将常山王高演的第二个儿子高亮继承爵位。
English: Without a son, the next imperial decree will be the second son of King Gao Yuan of Changshan, Gao Liang, to inherit the title.

古文：亮字彦道，性恭孝，美风仪，好文学。
现代文：直台字彦道，性情恭谨孝顺，风度仪表美好，喜欢文学。
English: Straight-backed character Hikondo, good-natured, respectful, filial, good manners, likes literature.

古文：为徐州刺史，坐夺商人财物免官。
现代文：任徐州刺史，因夺取商人财物被免除官职。
English: Ren Xuzhou stabbed history, was removed from office for seizing merchants' property.

古文：后主败奔邺，亮从焉，迁兼太尉、太傅。
现代文：后主战败逃奔邺城，高亮跟随着他，升任兼太尉、太傅。
English: After the defeat of the main battle, he fled to Lucheng, Gao Liang followed him, and was promoted to the rank of captain and lieutenant.

古文：周师入邺，亮于启夏门拒守。
现代文：周国军队进入邺城，高亮在启夏门拒守。
English: Zhou's army entered Lucheng, and Gaoliang resisted at the summer gate.

古文：诸军皆不战而败，周军于诸城门皆入，亮军方退走。
现代文：各军都不战就溃败，周国军队在各城门都进入了，高亮军队才退走。
English: All the armies were defeated without a fight. The Zhou army entered all the city gates, and the Gaoliang army retreated.

古文：亮入太庙行马内，恸哭拜辞，然后为周军所执。
现代文：高亮进入太庙阻拦人马通行的木障内，痛哭行礼辞别，然后被挝军队捉住。
English: He could not commit suicide because of his weak self-discipline. Fortunately, the imperial court issued an edict.

古文：入关，依例授仪同，分配远边，卒于龙州。
现代文：进入盟内，依照旧例授予仪同，分配到遥远的边境，死在龙州。
English: You can go back to the royal palace, but you are a slave to someone, and you still want to insult me!

古文：任城王湝，神武第十子也，少明慧。
现代文：任城王直擅，控远的第十个儿子。年轻时聪明颖慧。
English: He was the tenth son of the ruler of Rencheng, Zhaoshan, and was very intelligent and clever when he was young.

古文：天保初封。
现代文：刮呈初年封为任垣玉。
English: He was crowned king in the first year of the Tenpo era.

古文：自孝昭、武成时，车驾还邺，常令湝镇晋阳，总并省事，历司徒、太尉、并省录尚书事。
现代文：自从耋晅、重眯时，皇帝回到錾撼，常常命令产遣镇守置荡，总领茬省事，历任司徒、太尉、差省绿尚书事。
English: From the time of the imperial edict and the second imperial edict, the emperor returned to Shandong, and often ordered the production and dispatch of the town guard to be set up, the general leader to save the province, and the successors of the scholar, the captain, and the poor province to be green.

古文：天统三年，拜太保、并州刺史，别封正平郡公。
现代文：天统三年，授任太保、并州刺史，另封正平郡公。
English: In the third year of the reign of Emperor Tenmu, he was awarded the title of Taibo, and the title of State Historian, as well as the title of Zhenping County Governor.

古文：时有妇人临汾水浣衣，有乘马人换其新靴驰而去者，妇人持故靴，诣州言之。
现代文：当时有个妇人在汾水边洗衣服，有骑马的人换走她的新靴子奔驰离去，妇人拿着逭人的旧靴子，到州裹告了这事。
English: At that time, a woman was washing clothes near Surabaya. A man on a horse took her new boots and rode away. The woman took the man's old boots and reported the matter to the state.

古文：湝召城外诸妪，以靴示之，绐曰： 有乘马人在路被贼劫害，遗此靴焉，得无亲属乎？ 
现代文：高潸召来城外各老妇人，把靴子拿给她们看，哄骗说： 有个骑马的人在路上被贼寇拦劫杀害，留下遣双靴子，难道没有亲属吗? 
English: Gao Yao summoned all the old women outside the city, took off his boots, showed them to them, and cajoled them to say: There was a man on horseback who was robbed and killed by robbers on the road, leaving behind a pair of boots. Didn't he have any relatives?

古文：一妪抚膺哭曰： 儿昨著此靴向妻家。 
现代文：一个老妇人拍着胸口哭着说： 我儿子昨天穿着逭靴子去妻子家。 
English: One old woman, crying and beating her chest, said: "My son went to his wife's house yesterday in his boots.

古文：如其语，捕获之。
现代文：按她说的话，抓获了这个人。
English: As she said, this person has been caught.

古文：时称明察。
现代文：当时称高浩头脑明智观察精细。
English: At that time, Gao Hao was said to have a wise and well-observed mind.

古文：武平初，迁太师、司州牧，出为冀州刺史，加太宰，迁右丞相、都督、青州刺史。
现代文：亘旺初年，迁任太师、丑业牧，出任冀业刺史，加授太宰，迁任右丞相、都督、青州刺史。
English: In the first year of Wang Wang, he was transferred to the post of Grand Master, Ugly Pastoral, served as Jiye Sashishi, awarded the title of Dazai, and transferred to the post of Minister of the Right, Governor of the Capital, and Sashishi of Qingzhou.

古文：湝频牧大藩，虽不洁己，然宽恕为吏人所怀。
现代文：高潸一再主管大州，虽然自己不够廉洁，然而宽恕待人被官吏百姓所怀念。
English: Gao Yao was repeatedly in charge of Dazhou. Although he was not clean enough, he was forgiven by the officials and the people.

古文：五年，青州崔蔚波等夜袭州城，湝部分仓卒之际，咸得齐整，击贼，大破之。
现代文：天统五年，青州崔蔚波等人夜裹袭击州城，高潸在仓促之间指挥调度，都整齐有序，攻打贼寇，把他们打得大败。
English: In the fifth year of reunification, Qingzhou Cui Uibo and others attacked the state capital at night, and Gao Gan commanded the dispatching in a hurry. They were all neat and orderly, attacked the bandits, and defeated them.

古文：拜左丞相，转瀛州刺史。
现代文：授任左丞相，转任瀛州刺史。
English: He was given the title of minister of the left and transferred to the post of secretary of state of Zhangzhou.

古文：及后主奔邺，加湝大丞相。
现代文：等到后主逃奔邺城，加授高阶大丞相。
English: After his master fled to Lucheng, he was awarded the title of senior vice-premier.

古文：及安德王称尊号于晋阳，使刘子昂修启于湝： 至尊出奔，宗庙既重，群公劝迫，权主号令，事宁终归叔父。 
现代文：等到安德王在置荡称帝，派型王显写信给产道： 皇帝出奔，宗庙既然重要，各王公大臣逼迫劝进，暂且行使君主的号令，事情安定后终究还给叔父。 
English: When King Ando was on the verge of proclaiming himself emperor, he sent Wang Xian a letter to the birth canal: The emperor has fled, since the ancestral temple is important, the princes and ministers should force him to enter, temporarily carry out the monarch's command, and eventually return him to his uncle after things have stabilized.

古文：湝曰： 我人臣，何容受此启。 
现代文：直道说： 我是臣子，怎能容忍接受这样的信。 
English: They all said, "I am a courtier, how can I accept such a letter?"

古文：执子昂送邺。
现代文：将刘子昂抓起来送到邺城。
English: Liu Zi'ang was arrested and sent to Handan.

古文：帝至济州，禅位于湝，启竟不达。
现代文：皇帝到达擅，把帝位让给产道，信竟然没有送到。
English: When the emperor arrived in Shaoshan, he abdicated the imperial throne to the birth canal, but the letter was not delivered.

古文：湝与广宁王孝珩于冀州召募得四万余人，拒周军。
现代文：高迫和卢空王直耋茧在冀业招募到四万多人，抵御墨厘军队。
English: Gao Zuo and Lu Kuang Wang Naosuke recruited more than forty thousand people in Jiye to resist the Mori army.

古文：周齐王宪来伐，先遣送书并赦诏，湝并沉诸井。
现代文：且查王室文襄帝前来讨伐，先派人送来信和赦免的韶书，高谐都沉到井裹。
English: Emperor Wenzhong of the Qing Dynasty came to fight, and first sent people to send letters and letters of pardon, and the high harmony sank to the bottom of the well.

古文：战败，湝、孝珩俱被擒。
现代文：战败，高遣、产耋堕都被活捉。
English: Defeated soldiers, high-ranking officers, and those who had died in childbirth were all captured alive.

古文：宪曰： 任城王何苦至此？ 
现代文：皇文襄帝说： 任擅王何苦这样? 
English: Emperor Wenxiang said, "Why is it so hard to appoint a ruler?

古文：湝曰： 下官神武帝子，兄弟十五人，幸而独存，逢宗社颠覆，今日得死，无愧坟陵。 
现代文：直遣说： 下官是控亘堕的儿子，兄弟十五人，幸运地独自活下来，遇到宗庙社稷颠覆，今天能够死去，无愧于祖上的陵墓。 
English: Zhouzhan said, "The lower-ranking official is the son of Guan Watan, the brother of fifteen people, luckily survived alone, encountered the subversion of the ancestral temple and society, and can die today, worthy of the ancestral tomb.

古文：宪壮之，归其妻子。
现代文：宇文宪认为他豪壮，送还他的妻子儿女。
English: Yu Wenxian admired him very much and returned him to his wife.

古文：将至邺城，湝马上大哭，自投于地，流血满面。
现代文：将要到邺城，高遣在马上大哭，自己一头栽在地上，血流满面。
English: About to go to Lucheng, Gao Yuan burst into tears on the horse. He fell to the ground with blood streaming down his face.

古文：至长安，寻与后主同死。
现代文：到了长安，不久和后主一同死去。
English: After arriving in Chang'an, he soon died together with his successor Gao Wei.

古文：妃卢氏，赐斛斯征，蓬首垢面，长斋不言笑。
现代文：妃子卢旦赐给魁堑蛮，她头发蓬乱满脸污垢，吃长斋不说不笑。
English: The concubine Lutan is given to Qui Yu Man. Her hair is unkempt, her face is covered with dirt, and she doesn't speak or smile when she is fasting.

古文：征放之，乃为尼。
现代文：斛斯征放了她，就作了尼姑。
English: He released her and she became a nun.

古文：隋开皇三年，表请文帝葬湝及五子于长安北原。
现代文：堕优塱皇三年，上表请求隋文帝在长安北原安葬了高潸以及五个儿子。
English: Three years after Emperor Gaozong's downfall, Emperor Suiwen, at the request of the above table, buried Gaozong and his five sons in Beibuan, Chang'an.

古文：高阳康穆王湜，神武第十一子也。
现代文：高阳康穆王矗堡，越宝的第十一个儿子。
English: Goyang Kangmu Wanggao, the eleventh son of Emperor Shenwu.

古文：天保元年封。
现代文：天保元年封王。
English: He was crowned king in the first year of the Tenpo era.

古文：十年，稍迁尚书令。
现代文：天保十年，逐渐升迁到尚书令。
English: Ten years after Tianbao, it was gradually promoted to Shang Shuling.

古文：以滑稽便辟，有宠于文宣，常在左右，行杖以挞诸王。
现代文：以滑稽巧言，受到文宣帝的宠爱。经常在身边，执行杖刑来打各王。
English: He was favored by Emperor Wenzhong for his witty witticisms. He was often at his side, beating kings with a cane.

古文：太后深衔之。
现代文：太后深深地记恨他。
English: The Empress Dowager deeply resented him.

古文：其妃父护军长史张晏之尝要道拜湜，湜不礼焉。帝问其故，对曰： 无官职汉，何须礼。 
现代文：他妃子的父亲护军长史张晏之曾经在路上给高浞行礼，高浞没有回礼，皇帝问其中的缘故，回答说： 没有官职的人，为什么需要回礼。 
English: His concubine's father, the head of the military escort, Zhang Xizhi, had once bowed to Gao Yao on the road, but Gao Yao did not return the bow. The emperor asked the reason for this and replied: "People who do not have official positions, why do they need to return the bow?"

古文：帝于是擢拜晏之为徐州刺史。
现代文：皇帝于是提拔张晏之为徐州刺史。
English: Emperor Wenzhong then promoted Zhang Ye to the post of Xuzhou chief historian.

古文：文宣崩，兼司徒，导引梓宫，吹笛，云 至尊颇知臣不 ，又击胡鼓为乐。
现代文：文宣帝崩逝，兼任司徒，在前面引导棺椁，吹着笛子，说 至尊知道臣子吗 ，又敲击胡鼓奏乐。
English: When Emperor Wenxuan passed away, he also served as an attendant, guiding the coffin in front, playing the flute, saying, "Does the Supreme Ruler know his vassals?," and playing the bugle.

古文：太后杖湜百余，未几薨。
现代文：太后用棍棒打了高浞一百多下，不久薨。
English: The empress dowager clubbed the stilt more than a hundred times, and it soon died.

古文：太后哭之哀，曰： 我恐其不成就，与杖，何期带创死也！ 
现代文：太后哭得很悲哀，说： 我恐怕他不能成器，用杖打他，哪想到他受伤而死。 
English: The Queen Mother wept bitterly and said, "I'm afraid he won't make it. If I beat him with a cane, I don't want him to get hurt and die."

古文：乾明初，赠假黄钺、太师、司徒、录尚书事。
现代文：干明初年，追赠假黄铁、太师、司徒、录尚书事。
English: In the first year of Ganming, the fake Huang Tie, Taishi, Sito, and the record book were posthumously presented.

古文：子士义袭爵。
现代文：儿子高士义继承爵位。
English: His son Gao Shiyi succeeded to the title.

古文：博陵文简王济，神武第十二子也。
现代文：博陵文简王高济，神武的第十二个儿子。
English: Boling Wenjian Wang Gaoji, the twelfth son of Shenwu.

古文：天保元年封。
现代文：天保元年封王。
English: He was crowned king in the first year of the Tenpo era.

古文：济尝从文宣巡幸，在路忽忆太后，遂逃归。
现代文：高济曾经跟随文宣帝出巡，在路上忽然思念太后，于是逃了回去。
English: Gaoji once accompanied Emperor Wenxuan on a tour, and suddenly missed the empress dowager on the way, so he fled back.

古文：帝怒，临以白刃，因此惊恍。
现代文：皇帝发怒，用刀刃逼着他，因此受惊神情洸惚。
English: The emperor was enraged and forced him with the blade of his sword, causing him to look shocked and bewildered.

古文：历位太尉。
现代文：历任太尉。
English: Successive first lieutenants.

古文：河清初，出为定州刺史。
现代文：河清初年，出任定州刺史。
English: In the first year of Heqing, he served as the governor of Dingzhou.

古文：天统五年，在州语人云： 计次第亦应到我。 
现代文：天统五年，在州裹告诉别人说： 按次序也该轮到我了。 
English: Five years after the reunification of China, he told others in the prefecture: "It's my turn in order."

古文：后主闻之，阴使人杀之。
现代文：后主听说后，秘密派人杀了他。
English: After the master heard about it, he secretly sent someone to kill him.

古文：赠假黄钺、太尉、录尚书事。
现代文：追赠假黄铁、太尉、录尚书事。
English: He was posthumously awarded the titles of fake Huang Tie, Taifu, and recorded in the records.

古文：子智袭爵。
现代文：儿子高智继承爵位。
English: His son Gao Zhi inherited the title.

古文：华山王凝，神武第十三子也。
现代文：华山王高凝，神武的第十三个儿子。
English: Huashan Wang Gaojun, the thirteenth son of Shenwu.

古文：天保元年，封新平郡王；九年，改封安定；十年，封华山。
现代文：天保元年，封为新平郡王；天保九年，改封安定王；天保十年，封华山王。
English: In the first year of the Tenpo era, he was given the title of the King of Xinping County; in the ninth year of the Tenpo era, he was given the title of the King of Stability; in the tenth year of the Tenpo era, he was given the title of the King of Huashan.

古文：历位中书令、齐州刺史，就加太傅。
现代文：历任中书令、齐州刺史，加授太傅。
English: He has been awarded the title of Shurei, the title of Chizhou Shishi, and the title of Taifu.

古文：薨于州，赠左丞相、太师、录尚书。
现代文：在州裹薨，赠左丞相、太师、录尚书。
English: He was given the title of Zuo Zheng, Zuo Zheng, Zuo Zheng, Zuo Zheng.

古文：凝诸王中最为孱弱，妃王氏，太子洗马王洽女也，与仓头奸，凝知而不能限禁。
现代文：高凝是各王中最孱弱的，妃子王氏，是太子洗马王洽的女儿，和奴仆通奸，高凝知道了却不能制止。
English: Gao Jing was the weakest of all the kings. She was the daughter of the prince Zema Wangchao and the daughter of the prince's concubine. She committed adultery with a servant. Gao Jing knew about it but couldn't stop it.

古文：后事发，王氏赐死，诏杖凝一百。
现代文：后来事情暴露，王氏被赐自尽，下韶书棍打高凝一百。
English: Later, the affair was exposed, and Mr. Wang was given the choice to commit suicide by beating himself to death with a book club.

古文：其愚如此。
现代文：他的愚钝就像这样。
English: He's just so stupid!

古文：冯翊王润，字子泽，神武第十四子也。
现代文：冯翊王高润，字子泽，神武的第十四个儿子。
English: Feng Yu Wang Gao Run, Zizhe, the fourteenth son of Emperor Shenwu.

古文：幼时，神武称曰： 此吾家千里驹也。 
现代文：小时候，神武称赞他说： 这是我家的千里驹。 
English: When he was a child, Emperor Shenwu praised him saying, "This is my family's milestone!"

古文：天保初封。
现代文：天保初年封王。
English: He was crowned king in the first year of the Tenpo era.

古文：历位东北道大行台、右仆射、都督、定州刺史。
现代文：历任东北道大行台、右仆射、都督、定州刺史。
English: He was successively the governor of Dongbei Province, the governor of Dongbei Province, the governor of Dongbei Province, the governor of Dongbei Province, and the governor of Dongbei Province.

古文：润美姿仪，年十四五，母郑妃与之同寝，有秽杂之声。
现代文：高润姿容仪表美好，十四五岁，母亲郑妃和他同睡，有淫秽嘈杂的声音。
English: Gao Run has a beautiful appearance and appearance. He is 14 or 15 years old. His mother, Zhengfei, sleeps with him. He has an obscene and noisy voice.

古文：及长，廉慎方雅，习于吏职，至摘发隐伪，奸吏无所匿其情。
现代文：等到长大，清廉谨慎方正高雅，对官吏的职事熟悉，直到揭发无人知道的奸伪之事，奸邪的官吏不能隐瞒他们的实情。
English: When they grow up, they will be honest, prudent, upright and elegant, and familiar with the duties of officials. Until they expose the treacherous things that no one knows, the treacherous officials cannot hide their truth.

古文：开府王回洛与六州大都督独孤枝侵窃官田，受纳贿赂，润按举其事。
现代文：开府王迥洛和六州大都督独孤枝侵占盗窃官田，收受贿赂，高润检举了遣事。
English: The governor of Kaifu, Wang Bingluo, and the governors of six prefectures were the only ones to occupy stolen government land and accept bribes. Gaorun reported them to the government.

古文：二人表言，王出送台使，登魏文旧坛，南望叹息，不测其意。
现代文：这两人揭露说，王出来为台使送行，登上魏文帝的旧坛，望着南方叹息，猜测不到他心中的意思。
English: These two people revealed that Wang came out to see off the Taiwanese envoy, climbed the old altar of Emperor Weiwen, looked at the south and sighed, and could not guess his heart's meaning.

古文：武成使元文遥就州宣敕曰： 冯翊王少小谨慎，在州不为非法，朕信之熟矣。
现代文：武成派元文遥到州裹宣布韶书说： 冯翊王年轻时就谨慎，在州裹不干非法的事，朕深深信任他。
English: Emperor Wucheng sent Yuanwen to Dingzhou to announce the imperial edict, saying: King Feng Rong has been very cautious since childhood and does not do anything illegal in the state.

古文：登高远望，人之常情，鼠辈欲横相间构，曲生眉目。 
现代文：登高望远，人之常情，鼠辈小人想轻易挑拨离间，横生事端。 
English: Climbing high and far away, people's common feelings, mice and villains want to easily sow discord and cause trouble.

古文：于是回洛决鞭二百，独孤枝决杖一百。
现代文：于是王迥洛被判决鞭打二百，独孤枝被判决杖打一百。
English: As a result, Wang Hailo was whipped 200 times and beaten with 100 canes.

古文：寻为尚书令，领太子少师，历司徒、太尉、大司马、司州牧、太保、河南道行台、领录尚书，别封文成郡公、太师、太宰，复为定州刺史。
现代文：不久任尚书令，兼任太子少师，历任司徒、太尉、大司马、司州牧、太保、河南道行台、领录尚书，另封文成郡公，太师、太宰，又任定州刺史。
English: He was soon appointed as Shang Shuling (尚書令) and concurrently served as the prince's junior teacher, and successively held the positions of Sitoro (司徒), Taifu (太尉), Daisima (大司馬), Shuzhou Maki (司州牧), Taibo (太保), Henan Dao Xingtai (河南道行台) and Lianhuo Shangshu (領录尚書). He was also appointed as the governor of Wencheng County, Taishi (太师) and Dazai (太宰), and was also appointed as the chief historian of Dingzhou.

古文：薨，赠假黄钺、左丞相。
现代文：薨，追赠假黄钹、左丞相。
English: He died.

古文：子茂德嗣。
现代文：儿子高茂德继承爵位。
English: His son, Gao Mude, succeeded to the title.

古文：汉阳敬怀王洽，字敬延，神武第十五子也。
现代文：汉阳敬怀王直捡，字塑王，魑的第十五个儿子。
English: Hanyang Qianhuai Wang Zhiqi, the 15th son of the 15th son of the 15th son of the 15th son of the 15th son of the 15th son of Hanyang Qianhuai Wang Zhiqi, the 15th son of the 15th son of Hanyang Qianhuai Wang Zhiqi, the 15th son of Hanyang Qianhuai Wang Zhiqi, the 15th son of Hanyang Qianhuai Wang Zhiqi, the 15th son of Hanyang Qianhuai.

古文：天保元年封。
现代文：型呈元年封王。
English: He was crowned king in the first year of the Tenpo era.

古文：五年，薨，年十三。
现代文：型呈五年，薨，时年十三岁。
English: The type is five years old,, and the year is thirteen.

古文：乾明元年，赠太保、司空。
现代文：莲塱元年，追蹭太保、司空。
English: In the first year of the Lotus Sutra, Taiho and Siku were chased away.

古文：无子，以任城王第二子建德为后。
现代文：没有儿子，将任球王的第二个儿子产建坛作为后嗣。
English: If there is no son, Rinchen Dorjee Rinpoche will make Rinchen Dorjee Rinpoche's second son, Sang Jiantan, the heir.

