古文：徐文远，洛州偃师人，陈司空孝嗣玄孙，其先自东海徙家焉。
现代文：徐文远，洛州偃师县人，陈朝司空徐孝嗣的玄孙，其先祖从东海郡迁家于此。
English: Xu Wenyuan, a native of Loushi County, Lozhou, the great-great-grandson of Chen Chaozikong and Xu Xiaozhi, whose ancestors moved here from Donghai County.

古文：父彻，梁秘书郎，尚元帝女安昌公主而生文远。
现代文：父亲徐彻，梁朝秘书郎，娶梁元帝女儿安昌公主为妻而生文远。
English: His father, Xu Che, the secretary of the Liang Dynasty, married Princess Anchang, the daughter of Emperor Liang Yuan, and was born in Wenyuan.

古文：属江陵陷，被虏于长安，家贫无以自给。
现代文：当时正遇江陵沦陷，被掳掠到长守，家境贫寒无法自给。
English: At that time, he was in the midst of the fall of Gangneung and was taken captive to Nagamori. His family was poor and unable to provide for themselves.

古文：其兄休，鬻书为事，文远日阅书于肆，博览《五经》，尤精《春秋左氏传》。
现代文：文远的哥哥徐休卖书度日。文远每天都到书店去翻阅书籍，广泛阅览《五经》，尤其精通《春秋左氏传》。
English: Wenyuan's brother Xu Xiu sold books to make ends meet. Wenyuan went to the bookstore every day to flip through books and read the "Five Classics" extensively. He was especially proficient in "The Spring and Autumn Legend of Zuo Shi."

古文：时有大儒沈重讲于太学，听者常千余人。
现代文：当时有个大儒生沈重在太学讲经，听讲的常常达到一千多人。
English: At that time, there was a great Confucian scholar who lectured earnestly in Taiyue, and the audience often reached more than a thousand people.

古文：文远就质问，数日便去。
现代文：文远到太学去问问题就正于沈重，几天后就离去了。
English: When Wen Yuan went to Taishu to ask questions, he was so depressed that he left after a few days.

古文：或问曰： 何辞去之速？ 
现代文：有人问他： 为什么这么快就告辞而去？ 
English: Someone asked him: Why did you leave so quickly?

古文：答曰： 观其所说，悉是纸上语耳，仆皆先已诵得之。
现代文：他回答： 听他所讲的，都是些书本上的话，我先前已全部记诵知道了。
English: He replied, "What I heard him say is what is written in the books, and I have learned it all by heart."

古文：至于奥赜之境，翻似未见。 
现代文：至于文中深奥蕴藉的境界，反倒好像没见到。 
English: As for the realm of profound implication in the text, on the contrary, it does not seem to have been seen.

古文：有以其言告重者，重呼与议论，十余反，重甚叹服之。
现代文：有人把他的话告诉沈重，沈重便把他找去讨论问题，共有十多次。沈重对他大为叹服。
English: Someone told Shengru about his words, and Shengru then sought him out to discuss the issue, more than a dozen times in total. Shengru was very impressed with him.

古文：文远方正纯厚，有儒者风。
现代文：文远为人方正纯厚，有儒士的风范。
English: Wenyuan is a person of upright and pure character, with the demeanor of a Confucian.

古文：窦威、杨玄感、李密皆从其受学。
现代文：窦威、杨玄感、李密等人都曾由他传授过学业。
English: Dou Wei, Yang Xuanquan, Li Mi and others were all taught by him.

古文：开皇中，累迁太学博士。
现代文：隋文帝开皇年间，升任太学博士。
English: During the reign of Emperor Sui, he was promoted to Doctor of Theology.

古文：诏令往并州，为汉王谅讲《孝经》、《礼记》。
现代文：奉诏命到并州去，为汉王杨谅讲授《孝经》、《礼记》。
English: He was ordered by the emperor to go to Anhui Province to give lectures on "The Book of Filial Piety" and "The Book of Etiquette" to King Yang Peng of Han.

古文：及谅反，除名。
现代文：到谅反叛后，文远被除名。
English: After forgiving the rebellion, Wenyuan was removed from the list.

古文：大业初，礼部侍郎许善心举文远与包恺、褚徽、陆德明、鲁达为学官，遂擢授文远国子博士，恺等并为太学博士。
现代文：隋炀帝大业初，礼部侍郎许善心举荐文远与包恺、褚徽、陆德明、鲁达为学官，便被提拔授官国子博士，包恺等人一并为太学博士。
English: At the beginning of Emperor Sui's reign, the attendant of the etiquette department, Xu Zenshin, recommended that Wenyuan, Baojun, Yan Hui, Lu Deming, and Luda be appointed as academicians, and they were promoted to the position of Dr. Kuniko, and Baojun and others were all promoted to the position of Dr. Taigaku.

古文：时人称文远之《左氏》、褚徽之《礼》、鲁达之《诗》、陆德明之《易》，皆为一时之最。
现代文：当时的治学之人称文远的《左氏春秋》、褚徽的《礼记》、鲁达的《诗经》、陆德明的《易经》，都是一时之最。
English: The scholars at that time said that Wenyuan's "The Spring and Autumn of Zuo," Zou Hui's "Rituals," Luda's "Book of Songs" and Lu Deming's "Book of Changes" were the best of their time.

古文：文远所讲释，多立新义，先儒异论，皆定其是非，然后诘驳诸家，又出己意，博而且辨，听者忘倦。
现代文：文远讲解阐释经书，多创立新义，前代儒者有分歧的议论，他都能判定是非，然后诘难驳斥诸家，又能自出己意，渊博而明晰，听讲的人忘其倦怠。
English: Wenyuan explains and interprets the scriptures, creates new meanings, and the previous generation of Confucians have divergent discussions. He can judge right and wrong, and then refute all families, and can come up with his own ideas, profound and clear, and listeners forget their fatigue.

古文：后越王侗署为国子祭酒。
现代文：后来越王杨侗征召他为国子祭酒。
English: Later, the king of Vietnam, Yang Pi, conscripted him as the son of the country to make the sacrificial wine.

古文：时洛阳饥馑，文远出城樵采，为李密军所执。
现代文：当时洛阳城发生饥荒，文远出城打柴采野菜，被李密的军队所俘虏。
English: At that time, a famine occurred in Luoyang City, and Wenyuan went out of the city to collect firewood and vegetables, and was captured by Li Mi's army.

古文：密令文远南面坐，备弟子礼北面拜之。
现代文：李密让文远面朝南面而坐，自己执弟子礼节向北面拜见他。
English: Li Mi let Wen sit far away facing south, and he followed the disciple's etiquette to visit him to the north.

古文：文远曰： 老夫畴昔之日，幸以先王之道，仰授将军。
现代文：文远说： 老夫在过去的日子里，幸亏以先王的治世之道传授给将军。
English: Wen Yuan said: In the past days, thanks to the old man, the former king's way of governance was passed on to the general.

古文：时经兴替，倏焉已久。
现代文：世事经历兴衰更替，转眼已过了很久。
English: It has been a long time since the world has experienced the vicissitudes of rise and fall.

古文：今将军属风云之际，为义众所归，权镇万物，威加四海，犹能屈体弘尊师之义，此将军之德也，老夫之幸也！
现代文：如今将军正处风云际会之时，为众望所归，权倾万物、威震四海，还能屈身施礼以弘扬尊礼的道义，这是将军的德行，也是老夫的幸事。
English: Now, when the general is in the midst of a stormy meeting, he is the object of everyone's hopes, power over all things, majestic in the four seas, and he can still bow down and give a salute to promote the morality of respect. This is the general's virtue, and it is also the old man's blessing.

古文：既荷兹厚礼，安不尽言乎！但未审将军意耳！
现代文：既然蒙如此厚礼，哪能不尽言尽责，只是还不明将军的意旨！
English: Since he received such a generous gift, how can he not do his best, but he still does not know the general's intention!

古文：欲为伊、霍继绝扶倾，虽迟暮，犹愿尽力；若为莽、卓乘危迫险，则老夫耄矣，无能为也。 
现代文：若愿做伊尹、霍去病扶持即将倾覆的社稷，我虽已迟暮之年，仍愿竭尽全力；如果像王莽、董卓一样乘人之危窃夺大位，那么老夫的确是老了，没有能力做什么了。 
English: If I am willing to be the one to help Yi Yin and Huo go sick and support the society that is about to be overthrown, I am still willing to do my best, even though I am already in my twilight years. If, like Wang Mang and Dong Zhuo, I take advantage of people's danger to steal the throne, then the old man is indeed old and has no ability to do anything.

古文：密顿首曰： 昨奉朝命，垂拜上公，冀竭庸虚，匡奉国难。
现代文：李密叩拜道： 昨日奉朝廷命令，蒙授任上公，希望能竭尽我一切平庸弱小的力量，以匡辅奉济国难。
English: Li Mi bowed and prayed, "Yesterday, by order of the imperial court, I was conferred the title of Shangguo, and I hope to exert all my mediocre and feeble powers to help the country in its difficulties.

古文：所以未朝见者，不测城内人情。
现代文：之所以还没有进京朝见，是因为不了解城内人心向背。
English: The reason why he hasn't come to see me in the morning is because he doesn't understand that the hearts of the people in the city are turning away from him.

古文：且欲先征化及，报复冤耻，立功赎罪，然后凯旋，入拜天阙。
现代文：而且想先征讨化及，待报仇雪耻，立功赎罪，然后凯旋而归，进京朝拜。
English: Moreover, he wanted to conquer and vanquish first, wait for revenge and disgrace, make meritorious deeds to atone for sins, and then return triumphantly and go to Beijing to pay homage.

古文：此密之本意，惟先生教之。 
现代文：这就是我李密的本意，请先生教正。 
English: That's what I meant, Li Mi. Please correct me.

古文：文远曰： 将军名臣之子，累显忠节，前受误于玄感，遂乃暂坠家声。
现代文：文远道： 将军是名臣之子，屡次显扬忠诚节义，前番被杨玄感所误，于是才使家声暂时受挫。
English: Wenyuan said: The general is the son of a famous minister. He has repeatedly demonstrated his loyalty and righteousness. Yang Xuanxuan made a mistake in the first step, which caused the family's voice to be temporarily frustrated.

古文：行迷未远，而回车复路，终于忠孝，用康家国，天下之人，是所望于将军也。 
现代文：所行迷途不远，而回过头来复归正路，最终实行忠孝，以使家国安康，这是天下民众有望于将军的。 
English: The lost path is not far away, and turning around and returning to the right path, and finally practicing loyalty and filial piety, in order to make the home country healthy, is what the people of the world expect from the general.

古文：密又顿首曰： 敬闻命矣，请奉以周旋。 
现代文：李密又叩头说道： 谨听您的吩咐，请容奉命周旋。 
English: Li Mi bowed again and said, "I will do as you say. Please allow me to serve you."

古文：及征化及还，而王世充已杀元文都等，权兵专制。
现代文：到征讨化及回来，王世充已经杀了元文都等人，掌握了兵权独断专行。
English: When Wang Shichong returned from the campaign, he had already killed Yuanwendu and others, and had seized the military power to act arbitrarily.

古文：密又问计于文远，答曰： 王世充亦门人也，颇得识之。
现代文：李密又向文远询问计谋，文远答道： 王世充也是我的门人，我与他很熟悉。
English: Li Mi also asked Wenyuan about his strategy. Wenyuan replied: Wang Shichong is also my disciple, I am very familiar with him.

古文：是人残忍，意又褊促，既乘此势，必有异图。
现代文：这个人很残忍，心胸又狭窄，既然达到如此权势，必定有所图谋。
English: This man is cruel, narrow-minded and, having achieved such power, he must have an agenda.

古文：将军前计为不谐矣，非破王世充，不可朝觐。 
现代文：将军先前的计划已经不妥了。非击败王世充，不能进京朝见君主。 
English: The general's previous plan was no longer appropriate. Without defeating Wang Shichong, he could not enter Beijing to meet the monarch.

古文：密曰： 尝谓先生儒者，不学军旅之事，今筹大计，殊有明略。 
现代文：李密说： 我曾认为先生是一介儒生，不熟悉军旅战争的事，今日运筹大计，却可见很有英明的韬略。 
English: Li Mi said: I used to think that my husband was a Confucian scholar and was not familiar with military and war affairs. Today, I can see that he is a very wise strategist.

古文：及密败，复入东都，王世充给其廪食，而文远尽敬，见之先拜。
现代文：李密失败后，文远重又进入东都，王世充供给他官仓粮食，而文远对世充却很恭敬，见到王世充就先行拜礼。
English: After the defeat of Li Mi, Wenyuan entered Dongdu again. Wang Shichong provided him with official storehouse grain, but Wenyuan was very respectful to Shichong. When he saw Wang Shichong, he bowed before him.

古文：或问曰： 闻君踞见李密，而敬王公，何也？ 
现代文：有人问他： 听说您跪坐着见李密，却又礼敬王公，这是为什么呢？ 
English: Someone asked him: I heard that you kneeled and sat to see Li Mi, but you also bowed to the prince. Why is that?

古文：答曰： 李密，君子也，能受郦生之揖；王公，小人也，有杀故人之义。
现代文：回答说： 李密，是君子，能接受郦生一类人的行揖；王公，是小人，有杀害故人的意思。
English: He replied, "Li Mi is a gentleman and can accept the actions of someone like Xing Sheng; Wang Guo is a villain and has the intention of killing the deceased.

古文：相时而动，岂不然欤！ 
现代文：察看时机而动，难道不是这样吗？ 
English: Isn't that what you do when you see an opportunity?

古文：后王世充僭号，复以为国子博士。
现代文：后来王世充自立称帝，又任命他为国子博士。
English: Later, Wang Shicheng proclaimed himself emperor and appointed him as the son of the state.

古文：因出樵采，为罗士信获之，送于京师，复授国子博士。
现代文：后因出城打柴，被罗士信所获，送到京城，重被授官国子博士。
English: Later, because he went out of the city to collect firewood, he was caught by Luo Shixin, sent to Beijing, and re-awarded the post of Kuniko Doctor.

古文：武德六年，高祖幸国学，观释奠，遣文远发《春秋》题，诸儒设难蜂起，随方占对，皆莫能屈。
现代文：武德六年，唐高祖亲临国子监，观看祭奠先师的仪式，命文远阐发《春秋》题旨，众儒生设难，质询如蜂起，文远随书写问题的木板出示应口对答，都不能挫败他。
English: In the sixth year of Wudeh, Emperor Gaozhu of Tang Dynasty personally came to the Guozijian, watched the ceremony of commemorating the forerunner, ordered Wenyuan to expound the theme of "Spring and Autumn," all Confucian students set up difficulties, questions such as uprising, Wenyuan with the wooden board of writing questions to present the answer, can not defeat him.

古文：封东莞县男。
现代文：封爵东莞县男。
English: He was knighted as the man of Dongguan County.

古文：年七十四，卒官。
现代文：七十四岁时，逝世于任上。
English: He died in office at the age of seventy-four.

古文：撰《左传音》三卷、《义疏》六十卷。
现代文：撰有《左传音》三卷、《义疏》六十卷。
English: He wrote three volumes of Zuo Chuanyin and sixty volumes of Yi Shuo.

古文：孙有功，自有传。
现代文：孙子徐有功，另外有传。
English: Grandson Xu has merit, in addition, there is a legend.

古文：陆德明，苏州吴人也。
现代文：陆德明，苏州吴县人。
English: Lu Deming, from Suzhou's Wuxian County.

古文：初受学于周弘正，善言玄理。
现代文：最初从师受学于周弘正，善于谈论玄理。
English: He initially studied under Zhou Hongzheng and is good at talking about metaphysics.

古文：陈大建中，太子征四方名儒，讲于承先殿。德明年始弱冠，往参焉。
现代文：陈朝太建年间，太子征召四方有名儒生，在承光殿讲解经典，德明刚满二十岁便前去参与其事。
English: During the reign of Emperor Taiken of the Chen dynasty, the prince conscripted famous Confucian scholars from all over the country to explain the classics at the Chengguang Palace. Deming, who had just turned twenty, went to participate in the event.

古文：国子祭酒徐克开讲，恃贵纵辨，众莫敢当；德明独与抗对，合朝赏叹。
现代文：国子祭酒徐克开堂讲经，凭借位尊纵论，众人没有敢于交锋的，只有德明与他抗衡论争，全朝人对他赞叹不已。
English: Xu Keking, the son of the emperor, held a sermon at the opening of the sermon hall, and people did not dare to fight with him because of his position. Only Deming fought with him, and the whole dynasty was full of admiration for him.

古文：解褐始兴王国左常侍，迁国子助教。
现代文：入仕任始兴王国左常侍，转任国子助教。
English: He entered the service as the left attendant of Shixing Kingdom, and was transferred to the position of assistant professor of Kuniko.

古文：陈亡，归乡里。
现代文：陈朝灭亡，他回到故乡。
English: After the fall of the Chen dynasty, he returned to his hometown.

古文：隋炀帝嗣位，以为秘书学士。
现代文：隋炀帝即位，任用德明为秘书学士。
English: Emperor Sui Xuan ascended to the throne and appointed Deming as his secretary.

古文：大业中，广召经明之士，四方至者甚众。
现代文：大业年间，广为征召通晓经书的士子，四方前来应召的人很多。
English: During the Great Work, there was a widespread call for scholars who were familiar with the scriptures, and many people came from all over to answer the call.

古文：遣德明与鲁达、孔褒俱会门下省，共相交难，无出其右者。
现代文：让德明与鲁达、孔褒都在门下省会齐，相互诘难质询，没有人比得上德明。
English: Let Deming and Luda, Kongbo are all under the door of the provincial capital, and challenge each other, no one can match Deming.

古文：授国子助教。
现代文：授官国子助教。
English: Kuniko is promoted to assistant professor.

古文：王世充僭号，封其子为汉王，署德明为师，就其家，将行束脩之礼。
现代文：王世充篡位称帝，封他的儿子为汉王，拟请德明为师，准备到德明家中行拜师的礼节。
English: Wang Shichong usurped the throne and proclaimed himself emperor, crowned his son as the King of Han, planned to ask Deming to be his teacher, and prepared to go to Deming's home to perform the etiquette of worshiping the teacher.

古文：德明耻之，因服巴豆散，卧东壁下。
现代文：德明以此事为耻，便服用了巴豆散，卧床于书房中。
English: Ashamed of this, Deming took some bean curd powder and lay down in his study.

古文：王世充子入，跪床前，对之遗痢，竟不与语。
现代文：王世充的儿子进房后跪在床前，德明当着他的面拉痢，竟不与他答话。
English: After Wang Shichong's son entered the room, he knelt in front of the bed. Deming pulled diarrhea in front of his face, but did not answer him.

古文：遂移病于成皋，杜绝人事。
现代文：于是因病迁移到成皋，谢绝一切世事。
English: As a result, he moved to Chengdu due to illness, and renounced all worldly affairs.

古文：王世充平，太宗征为秦府文学馆学士，命中山王承乾从其受业。
现代文：王世充铲平后，唐太宗征召德明为秦府文学馆学士，命令中山王李承乾跟德明从师受业。
English: After Wang Shichong was leveled, Tang Taizong enlisted Deming as a bachelor of the Qin Literature Museum, and ordered Zhongshan King Li Chengqian and Deming to become teachers.

古文：寻补太学博士。
现代文：不久补官太学博士。
English: He was soon promoted to the post of Vice-Minister of Education.

古文：后高祖亲临释奠，时徐文远讲《孝经》，沙门惠乘讲《波若经》，道士刘进喜讲《老子》，德明难此三人，各因宗指，随端立义，众皆为之屈。
现代文：后来高祖亲临国子学祭奠先师的仪式，当时徐文远讲授《孝经》，沙门惠乘讲授《波若经》，道士刘进喜讲授《老子》，德明诘难这三个人，各依不同学术的主要意旨，随事端而自立其义，众人都被他所折服。
English: Later, Gao Zu personally attended the ceremony to commemorate the forerunners of Guozixue. At that time, Xu Wenyuan lectured on the "Filial Piety Sutra," Shamen Huirong lectured on the "Hora Sutra," and the Taoist Liu Jinxi lectured on the "Lao Zi." These three people, each according to the main intention of different academic, became independent of each other. Everyone was impressed by him.

古文：高祖善之，赐帛五十匹。
现代文：高祖称赞他，赐给他绸帛五十匹。
English: Gaozong praised him and gave him fifty silkworms.

古文：贞观初，拜国子博士，封吴县男。
现代文：贞观初年，拜官国子博士，封爵吴县男。
English: In the first year of Zhenguan, Dr. Kuniko Baikan, the man from Wuxian County, was knighted.

古文：寻卒。
现代文：不久去世。
English: He died soon after.

古文：撰《经典释文》三十卷、《老子疏》十五卷、《易疏》二十卷，并行于世。
现代文：撰有《经典释文》三十卷、《老子疏》十五卷、《易疏》二十卷，一并流传于世。
English: He wrote 30 volumes of "Classic Commentary," 15 volumes of "Lao Zi Zuo" and 20 volumes of "Yi Zuo," all of which have been passed down to the world.

古文：太宗后尝阅德明《经典释文》，甚嘉之，赐其家束帛二百段。
现代文：太宗后来曾经阅读德明的《经典释文》，很称赞这部书，赏赐给他家二百段束帛。
English: Later, Emperor Taizong read Deming's "Classic Commentary" and highly praised the book, awarding his family a two-hundred-dan bundle of money.

古文：子敦信，龙朔中官至左侍极，同东西台三品。
现代文：儿子陆敦信，高宗龙朔年间官做到左侍极，同东、西台三品官。
English: Lu Dunxin's son, Gaozong Longshuo, became the highest-ranking left-hand officer and the highest-ranking officer of the East and West Regions.

古文：曹宪，扬州江都人也。
现代文：曹宪，扬州江都县人。
English: Cao Xian is from Yangzhou Jiangdu County.

古文：仕隋为秘书学士。
现代文：在隋朝任官做秘书学士。
English: In the Sui Dynasty, he was appointed as a secretary.

古文：每聚徒教授，诸生数百人。
现代文：常常聚集生徒传授学业，有弟子数百人。
English: Students often gather to teach their studies, and there are hundreds of disciples.

古文：当时公卿已下，亦多从之受业。
现代文：当时公卿以下官员，也多向他从师受业。
English: At that time, officials below the rank of noble were mostly apprenticed to him.

古文：宪又精诸家文字之书，自汉代杜林、卫宏之后，古文泯绝，由宪，此学复兴。
现代文：曹宪还精通各家文字学书籍，从汉代杜林、卫宏以后，古文几乎泯灭绝迹，由曹宪文字学得以复兴。
English: Cao Xian was also well versed in various philological books. From the Han Dynasty, after Durin and Wei Hong, ancient texts were almost extinct, and Cao Xian revived philology.

古文：大业中，炀帝令与诸学者撰《桂苑珠丛》一百卷，时人称其该博。
现代文：隋大业年间，炀帝命他与众学者撰写了《桂苑珠丛》一百卷，当时人称他博学多识。
English: During the Sui Dynasty, Emperor Qian ordered him and all scholars to write a hundred volumes of "Guiyuan Pearl Grove." At that time, people said that he was very knowledgeable.

古文：宪又训注张揖所撰《博雅》，分为十卷，炀帝令藏于秘阁。
现代文：曹宪又解说注释张揖所撰写的《博雅》一书，分为十卷，炀帝命令将此书收藏于秘书阁。
English: Cao Xian also explained the annotation of the book "Boya" written by Zhang Ye, which is divided into ten volumes. Emperor Qian ordered this book to be kept in the secretarial cabinet.

古文：贞观中，扬州长史李袭誉表荐之，太宗征为弘文馆学士。
现代文：唐代贞观年间，扬州长史李袭誉上表推荐曹宪，太宗征召为弘文馆学士，曹宪因年老而没上京就任。
English: During the Zhenguan period of the Tang Dynasty, Yang Guo Shi Li Gui Ren recommended Cao Xian to the table, Taizong was conscripted as a scholar of the Hongwen Museum, Cao Xian did not go to Beijing to take office because of his old age.

古文：以年老不仕，乃遣使就家拜朝散大夫，学者荣之。
现代文：于是又派遣使臣到他家去授予官职，任朝散大夫，学者都引以为荣。
English: As a result, envoys were sent to his home to confer official positions, and scholars were proud to be appointed as Chosan doctors.

古文：太宗又尝读书有难字，字书所阙者，录以问宪，宪皆为之音训及引证明白，太宗甚奇之。
现代文：太宗又曾于读书中遇到难字，字书上也查不到的，就抄录下来问曹宪，曹宪替这些字都一一注音、解说，并加以清楚明晰的引证，太宗对此异常惊奇。
English: Taizong had also encountered difficult words in a reading book, and when he couldn't find the words in the book, he copied them down and asked Cao Xian. Cao Xian annotated and explained each of these words, and made clear and clear citations. Taizong was extremely surprised by this.

古文：年一百五岁卒。
现代文：一百零五岁去世。
English: He died at the age of 105.

古文：所撰《文选音义》，甚为当时所重。
现代文：所撰写的《文选音义》，很为当时所推重。
English: He wrote "Wenzheng Xinyi," which was highly regarded at the time.

古文：初，江、淮间为《文选》学者，本之于宪，又有许淹、李善、公孙罗复相继以《文选》教授，由是其学大兴于代。
现代文：当初，江淮流域研究《文选》的学者，全都以曹宪的学问为本，又有许淹、李善、公孙罗等人相继以《文选》传授学业，由此其学说大兴于当时。
English: At the beginning, the scholars who studied "Wenxuan" in the Jianghuai River Basin were all based on Cao Xian's learning, and Xu Dun, Li Shan, Gongsun Luo and others successively taught their studies with "Wenxuan," which made its doctrine very popular at that time.

古文：许淹者，润州句容人也。
现代文：许淹，是润州句容县人。
English: Xu Dun is from Junyong County, Renzhou.

古文：少出家为僧，后又还俗。
现代文：年少出家为和尚，后来又还了俗。
English: He became a monk at a young age and later returned to secular life.

古文：博物洽闻，尤精诂训。
现代文：博识多知，尤其精通于训诂学。
English: Knowledgeable and knowledgeable, especially proficient in the training of cadres.

古文：撰《文选音》十卷。
现代文：撰有《文选音》十卷。
English: He is the author of ten volumes of "Wenxianyin."

古文：李善者，扬州江都人。
现代文：李善，扬州江都县人。
English: Li Shan, from Yangzhou Jiangdu County.

古文：方雅清劲，有士君子之风。
现代文：方正文雅清秀挺拔，有士君子的学者风度。
English: The Founder was gentle, elegant, handsome and upright, with the scholarly demeanor of a gentleman.

古文：明庆中，累补太子内率府录事参军、崇贤馆直学士，兼沛王侍读。
现代文：明庆年间，升任太子内率府录事参军、崇贤馆直学士，兼沛王侍读。
English: During the Ming and Qing dynasties, he was promoted to join the army under the leadership of the crown prince, became a direct bachelor of the Chongxian Hall, and was also an attendant of King Pei.

古文：尝注解《文选》，分为六十卷，表上之。赐绢一百二十匹，诏藏于秘阁。
现代文：曾注释解说《文选》，撰书六十卷，上表进奉皇帝，赐绢一百二十匹，诏令收藏于秘阁。
English: He once annotated and explained "Wen Xuan" (Selected Works) and wrote sixty volumes. The above table was presented to the emperor, and he was given one hundred and twenty horses, which he ordered to be kept in a secret cabinet.

古文：除潞王府记室参军，转秘书郎。
现代文：授官潞王府记室参军，转任秘书郎。
English: He was given a post in the King's Privy Council, joined the army and was transferred to the position of secretary.

古文：乾封中，出为经城令。
现代文：乾封年间，出京任经城县令。
English: During the Qianfeng era, he went to Beijing and was appointed as the magistrate of Jingcheng County.

古文：坐与贺兰敏之周密，配流姚州。
现代文：因与贺兰敏之过从密切而获罪，流放到姚州。
English: He was sentenced to exile in Yaozhou for being too close to Helan Min.

古文：后遇赦得还，以教授为业，诸生多自远方而至。
现代文：后遇赦免得以返回，以传授学业为事，弟子多从远方而来。
English: He was later pardoned and allowed to return, and he devoted himself to teaching. Many of his disciples came from far away.

古文：又撰《汉书辩惑》三十卷。
现代文：又撰有《汉书辩惑》三十卷。
English: He has also written 30 volumes of "Chinese Debate."

古文：载初元年卒。
现代文：武后载初元年去世。
English: Wu Houkai passed away in the first year of the 21st century.

古文：子邕，亦知名。
现代文：儿子李邕，也知名。
English: His son, Li Xi, is also famous.

古文：公孙罗，江都人也。
现代文：公孙罗，扬州江都县人。
English: Gongsun Luo, from Yangzhou Jiangdu County.

古文：历沛王府参军，无锡县丞。
现代文：历任沛王府参军、无锡县丞。
English: Successive governors of Peiwangfu joined the army and served as Wuxi county magistrate.

古文：撰《文选音义》十卷，行于代。
现代文：撰有《文选音义》十卷，流传于当时。
English: He wrote the ten-volume anthology "Wenzheng Xinyi," which was circulated at the time.

古文：欧阳询，潭州临湘人，陈大司空頠之孙也。
现代文：欧阳询，谭州临湘县人，陈朝大司空欧阳危页的孙子。
English: Ouyang Qian, a resident of Linxiang County, Tanzhou, is the grandson of Chen Chao Daishi, the founder of the Kuo Ouyang Gui Pao.

古文：父纥，陈广州刺史，以谋反诛。
现代文：父亲欧阳纥，陈朝广州刺史，因谋反被杀。
English: Ouyang Xuan, Chen's father, was killed in Guangzhou for plotting rebellion.

古文：询当从坐，仅而获免。
现代文：询本会被牵连处罪，不过侥幸获免。
English: The inquirer was implicated and punished, but luckily he was exonerated.

古文：陈尚书令江总与纥有旧，收养之，教以书计。
现代文：陈朝尚书令江总与纥有旧谊，收养了询，教他文字筹算。
English: Chen Zhaozhong made Jiang Zong have an old friendship with Zou, adopted Zou, and taught him to write and calculate.

古文：虽貌甚寝陋，而聪悟绝伦，读书即数行俱下，博览经史，尤精《三史》。
现代文：询虽然面貌很丑陋，却聪颖绝伦，读书即可数行并下，广泛阅览经书史籍，尤精通《三史》。
English: Although his appearance was very ugly, he was extremely intelligent. He could read several lines at a time and read widely from historical books, especially the "Three Histories."

古文：仕隋为太常博士。
现代文：在隋朝任太常博士。
English: In the Sui Dynasty, he held the post of Taizhong Doctor.

古文：高祖微时，引为宾客。
现代文：高祖微贱时，曾招其为宾客。
English: When Gao Zu was a lowly peasant, he invited him to be his guest.

古文：及即位，累迁给事中。
现代文：到即位后，询官至给事中。
English: After the enthronement, the enquirer left the room.

古文：询初学王羲之书，后更渐变其体，笔力险劲，为一时之绝。人得其尺牍文字，咸以为楷范焉。
现代文：询始学王羲之书法，后来则渐渐变化字体，笔力奇险遒劲，为当时一绝，人们得到他的尺牍文字，都用作典范楷模。
English: He began to learn Wang Qian's calligraphy, and later gradually changed the font, the penmanship was amazing, and at that time, people got his Chinese characters, which were used as a model.

古文：高丽甚重其书，尝遣使求之。
现代文：高丽国很看重其书法，曾派遣使者求取其书作。
English: Goryeo attaches great importance to his calligraphy and once sent an envoy to ask for his writings.

古文：高祖叹曰： 不意询之书名，远播夷狄，彼观其迹，固谓其形魁梧耶！ 
现代文：高祖感叹道： 想不到询之书法声名，远播夷狄外族，他们观询墨迹，一定以为其形体高大魁梧吧！ 
English: Gao Zu lamented, "I couldn't imagine that the calligraphy fame of the Enquirer would spread far and wide among the foreign people. When they look at the ink stains, they must think that its shape is tall and huge!

古文：武德七年，诏与裴矩、陈叔达撰《艺文类聚》一百卷。奏之，赐帛二百段。
现代文：武德七年，诏令询与裴矩、陈叔达编撰《艺文类聚》一百卷，书成奏呈皇上，赐丝绸二百段。
English: In the seventh year of Emperor Wu De's reign, he issued an edict to consult with Pei Rong and Chen Shuda to compile one hundred volumes of the "Collection of Arts and Literature," which was presented to the emperor in the form of a book, and was given two hundred pieces of silk.

古文：贞观初，官至太子率更令、弘文馆学士，封渤海县男。年八十余卒。
现代文：贞观初年，官至太子率更令、弘文馆学士，封爵渤海县男，八十余岁去世。
English: In the first year of Zhenguan, he was promoted from an official to a prince, graduated from the Hongwen Academy, and was knighted. He died at the age of over eighty.

古文：子通，少孤，母徐氏教其父书。
现代文：其子欧阳通，年幼丧父，母亲徐氏教他学习父亲的书法。
English: His son, Ouyang Tong, lost his father at a young age. His mother, Ms. Xu, taught him his father's calligraphy.

古文：每遗通钱，绐云： 质汝父书迹之直。 
现代文：每次给通钱，便诈称： 这是抵押你父亲书法墨宝的钱。 
English: Every time he gave her money, he would falsely say, "This is the money for the mortgage of your father's calligraphy and ink treasure."

古文：通慕名甚锐，昼夜精力无倦，遂亚于询。
现代文：通钦慕其父名望很是锐意进取，昼夜书写，孜孜不倦，于是其书法成就仅次于询。
English: Tong admires his father's fame and is very enterprising, writing day and night, tirelessly, so his calligraphy achievements are second only to the inquiry.

古文：仪凤中，累迁中书舍人。
现代文：仪凤年间，官至中书舍人。
English: During the Yi and Feng era, officials were reluctant to read Chinese books.

古文：丁母忧，居丧过礼。
现代文：遇母亲去世，守丧超过礼仪。
English: When her mother died, the funeral service went beyond protocol.

古文：起复本官，每入朝，必徒跣至皇城门外。
现代文：服未满复起用为原职，每次入朝，必光脚徒步走到皇城门外。
English: Every time he enters the imperial palace, he has to walk barefoot outside the imperial gate.

古文：直宿在省，则席地藉藁。
现代文：在官署中值夜班，便席地藉草而卧。
English: In the government office on night duty, lying on the grass.

古文：非公事不言，亦未尝启齿。
现代文：非公事不说话，也未曾欢笑。
English: Never spoke out of turn, never laughed.

古文：归家必衣缞绖，号恸无恆。
现代文：回家一定要穿上孝服，哀号悲恸异常。
English: You must put on your filial piety when you go home, and the wailing is extremely sad.

古文：自武德已来，起复后而能哀戚合礼者，无与通比。
现代文：从高祖武德年间以来，服未满被起用能哀戚合于礼的人，没有能与通相比的。
English: Since the time of Gao Zuwude, there has been no one comparable to Tong who has been appointed to the post of minister without having served his full term.

古文：年凶未葬，四年居庐不释服，家人冬月密以氈絮置所眠席下，通觉，大怒，遽令彻之。
现代文：因荒年未安葬其母，通住倚庐四年不除丧，十冬腊月家人暗中将毡絮放在他睡觉垫的席子下面，通发觉后，非常愤怒，马上令人撤去毡絮。
English: Due to the fact that his mother was not buried in the year of famine, he lived in a coffin for four years without removing the coffin. In the tenth winter, his family secretly placed the coffin under the mat of his sleeping mat. When he found out, he was very angry and immediately had the coffin removed.

古文：五迁，垂拱中至殿中监，赐爵渤海子。
现代文：通五次迁任，垂拱年间官至殿中监，赐爵渤海子。
English: He was transferred five times, and in his twilight years he rose to the position of palace middle warden, and was given the title of Duke.

古文：天授元年，封夏官尚书。
现代文：天授元年，封为夏官尚书。
English: In the first year of Tianju, he was awarded the title of Xia Guan Shang Shu.

古文：子奢风流蕴藉，颇滑稽，又辅之以文义，由是数蒙宴遇，或使论难于前。十五年卒。张士衡，瀛州乐寿人也。
现代文：天授二年，迁职司礼卿，兼任纳言事。做卿相一个多月，适逢凤阁舍人张嘉福等人请求立武承嗣为皇太子，通与岑长倩坚执己见，认为不可，于是忤逆诸武意愿，为酷吏陷害，被杀。神龙初年，追复其官职封号。张士衡，瀛州乐寿县人。
English: In the second year of the Tenju era, he was transferred to the post of the Secretary of the Ministry of Rites and Ceremonies, and concurrently served as a member of the Council of State. He served as the Secretary for more than a month, when Zhang Jiafu and others, who lived in Fengge, requested that the heir of Wu be appointed as the crown prince. Tong and Zhang Changxu Jian held their own opinion and thought it was impossible, so Zhang Jian went against the wishes of Zhu and was framed as a cruel official and was killed. In the first year of the Dragon, he recovered his official title. Zhang Shiheng, from Leju County, Zhangzhou.

古文：父之庆，齐国子助教。
现代文：父亲张之庆，为齐朝国子助教。
English: His father, Zhang Zhiqing, was an assistant professor of Qi Dynasty.

古文：士衡九岁丧母，哀慕过礼。父友齐国博士刘轨思见之，每为掩泣。谓其父曰： 昔伯饶号 张曾子 ，亦岂能远过！
现代文：士衡九岁时母亲去世，他哀悼思慕超过礼仪，父亲的朋友齐朝国子博士刘轨思见到他，常常掩面而泣，对他父亲说： 从前伯饶号 张曾子 ，又岂能远过于此！
English: When Shi Heng was nine years old, his mother passed away. He mourned and yearned more than the etiquette. When his father's friend Qi Chaoguo and Dr. Liu Liusi saw him, he often hid his face and cried, saying to his father: Once upon a time, he was called Bo Rao Zhang Zengzi, and how can he be much more than this!

古文：吾闻君子不亲教，当为成就之。 
现代文：我听说君子不亲自持教，我当为你成就他。 
English: I've heard that a gentleman doesn't teach by himself, I should do it for you.

古文：及长，轨思授以《毛诗》、《周礼》，又从熊安生及刘焯受《礼记》，皆精究大义。
现代文：待士衡长大后，轨思给他讲授《毛诗》、《周礼》，士衡又跟熊安生和刘焯学习《礼记》，都能精研深究其中的主要论旨。
English: After Shiheng grew up, Guo Si taught him "Mao Poetry" and "Weekly Ritual." Shiheng also studied "Rituals" with Xiong An Sheng and Liu Ye, and was able to study the main arguments in it.

古文：此后遍讲《五经》，尤攻《三礼》。
现代文：此后，遍读《五经》，尤注意攻读《三礼》。
English: After that, he read through the "Five Classics," paying particular attention to studying the "Three Rites."

古文：仕隋为余杭令，后以年老归乡里。
现代文：在隋朝做官任余杭县令，后以年老辞归乡里。
English: In the Sui Dynasty, he was appointed as the governor of Yuhang County, and then retired to his hometown.

古文：贞观中，幽州都督、燕王灵夔备玄纁束帛之礼，就家迎聘，北面师之。
现代文：贞观年间，幽州都督燕王李灵夔准备了黑色的束帛作为礼物，到士衡家去迎聘他，拜他为师。
English: During the Zhenguan period, the Yuzhou governor Yan Wang Li Lingyao prepared a black satchel as a gift and went to Shi Heng's home to hire him and worship him as a teacher.

古文：庶人承乾在东宫，又加旌命。
现代文：庶人承乾在太子宫，又对他加以表扬征召。
English: The commoner Cheng Jian was in the prince's womb, and he was commended and conscripted.

古文：及至洛阳宫谒见，太宗延之升殿，赐食，擢授朝散大夫、崇贤馆学士。
现代文：待到洛阳宫谒见皇上，太宗请他登上殿前台阶，赐给他食物，提拔授官朝散大夫、崇贤馆学士。
English: When he arrived at Luoyang Palace to see the emperor, Emperor Taizong invited him to climb the front steps of the palace, gave him food, and promoted him to the posts of Chosan Doctor and Chongxian Academy.

古文：承乾见之，问以齐氏灭亡之由绪，对曰： 齐后主悖虐无度，昵近小人。至如高阿那瑰、骆提婆、韩长鸾等，皆奴仆下才，凶险无赖，是信是使，以为心腹。
现代文：承乾看见他，问他齐朝灭亡的原因，回答道： 齐后主昏悖暴虐无度，亲近小人，以致像高阿那、骆提婆、韩长鸾等人，都是些奴仆下等之才，凶狠险恶无赖之辈，他却相信他们任用他们，把他们当作心腹。
English: Cheng Qian saw him and asked him the reason for the downfall of the Qi dynasty. He replied: The Qi emperors were reckless, ruthless, and close to villains, so much so that people like Gao Anah, Luo Ti Bao, Han Changtao, and so on, were all low-level servants, vicious and sinister scoundrels. However, he believed that they appointed them and treated them as confidants.

古文：诛害忠良，疏忌骨肉。
现代文：他们诛杀迫害忠臣良将，疏远猜忌骨肉至亲。
English: They kill and persecute loyal and good generals, and alienate and distrust their own relatives.

古文：穷极奢靡，剥丧黎元。
现代文：穷奢极欲，伤害百姓。
English: They want to be extravagant and hurt the people.

古文：所以周师临郊，人莫为用，以至覆灭，实此之由。 
现代文：因此当北周的军队兵临城下时，没有人为齐朝效力，以至于灭亡，实在的原因正在于此。 
English: Therefore, when the Northern Zhou army soldiers came to the city, no one worked for the Qi Dynasty, so that they died, the real reason is here.

古文：承乾又问曰： 布施营功德，有果报不？ 
现代文：承乾又问道： 以布施的方法来求取功德，真有因果报应不？ 
English: Cheng Qian also asked: Is there really a karmic retribution for seeking merit through the method of giving alms?

古文：对曰： 事佛在于清净无欲，仁恕为心。
现代文：回答道： 侍奉佛法在于清净无欲，怀有仁恕之心。
English: He replied, "The best way to serve the Dharma is to be pure and without desire, and to have a forgiving heart."

古文：如其贪婪无厌，骄虐是务，虽复倾财事佛，无救目前之祸。
现代文：如果贪婪无厌，骄纵暴虐，虽然倾尽财力侍奉佛法，也不能拯救眼前的灾祸。
English: If one's greed is insatiable, if one is arrogant and tyrannical, even if one devotes all one's financial resources to serving the Dharma, it will not be able to save one from the impending disaster.

古文：且善恶之报，若影随形，此是儒书之言，岂徒佛经所说。
现代文：况且善与恶的报应，如影随形，这是儒家典籍上的话，哪里只是佛经上说的。
English: Moreover, the retribution of good and evil follows one another like a shadow, which is a saying in Confucian classics, but nowhere is it mentioned in Buddhist scriptures.

古文：是为人君父，当须仁慈；为人臣子，宜尽忠孝。
现代文：因此为人君父的，应该仁慈；为人臣子的，当尽忠孝。
English: Therefore, if you are a father, you should be kind; if you are a minister, you should be loyal.

古文：仁慈忠孝，则福祚攸永；如或反此，则殃祸斯及。
现代文：能做到仁慈忠孝，则福祉帝位长久；如果与此相反，那么灾祸就要降临。
English: If benevolence and filial piety can be achieved, the welfare of the emperor will last long; if the opposite is true, then disaster will come.

古文：此理昭然，愿殿下勿为忧虑。 
现代文：此中道理昭然若揭，愿殿下不要为此忧虑。 
English: The reason for this is crystal clear, and His Royal Highness should not worry about it.

古文：及承乾废黜，敕给乘传，令归本乡。
现代文：到承乾太子位被废除后，诏敕车马给他，让他回归本乡。
English: After the position of Prince Cheng Qian was abolished, he was given a carriage and horses and allowed to return to his hometown.

古文：十九年卒。
现代文：贞观十九年去世。
English: Zhenguan died 19 years later.

古文：士衡既礼学为优，当时受其业擅名于时者，唯贾公彦为最焉。
现代文：士衡以礼学为最优秀，当时跟随他受业而大有名望于一时的，其中以贾公彦最为著名。
English: Shihira was the best at etiquette, and was very famous for a while when he followed him into the profession, with Jia Kimihiko being the most famous.

古文：贾公彦，洺州永年人。
现代文：贾公彦，洛州永年县人。
English: Jia Kimihiko, from Yongnian County, Luzhou.

古文：永徽中，官至太学博士。
现代文：永徽年间，官做到太学博士。
English: During the Yonghui era, officials achieved the title of Doctor of Science.

古文：撰《周礼义疏》五十卷、《仪礼义疏》四十卷。
现代文：撰有《周礼义疏》五十卷、《仪礼义疏》四十卷。
English: He wrote 50 volumes of "Zhouli Yi Shuo" and 40 volumes of "Ji Li Yi Shuo."

古文：子大隐，官至礼部侍郎。
现代文：儿子贾大隐，官至礼部侍郎。
English: His son, Jia Daiyin, rose through the ranks to become a chamberlain in the Ceremonial Department.

古文：时有赵州李玄植，又受《三礼》于公彦，撰《三礼音义》行于代。
现代文：当时有赵州的李玄植，又向贾公彦学习《三礼》，撰有《三礼音义》流传于当世。
English: At that time, there was Li Xuan Zhi from Zhao Prefecture, who also learned the "Three Rites" from Jia Gongyan, and wrote the "Three Rites of Music," which has been passed down to the present day.

古文：玄植兼习《春秋左氏传》于王德韶，受《毛诗》于齐威，博涉汉史及老、庄诸子之说。
现代文：玄植同时向王德韶研习《春秋左氏传》，而由齐威讲授《毛诗》，广博地涉猎汉代的历史以及老庄诸子的学说。
English: At the same time, Xuanzhi studied "The Biography of Spring and Autumn Zuo" from Wang Deqi, while Qi Wei lectured on "Mao Poetry," extensively delving into the history of the Han Dynasty and the doctrine of Lao Zhuang's sons.

古文：贞观中，累迁太子文学、弘文馆直学士。
现代文：贞观年间，升任太子文学、弘文馆直学士。
English: During the Zhenguan years, he was promoted to the Prince of Literature, and became a direct bachelor of the Hongwen Museum.

古文：高宗时，屡被召见。
现代文：高宗时，屡次被召见，与道士、和尚在皇帝面前讲解经书义理。
English: During the reign of Emperor Gaozong, he was repeatedly summoned to lecture on the principles of scripture with Taoists and monks in front of the emperor.

古文：与道士、沙门在御前讲说经义，玄植辨论甚美，申规讽，帝深礼之。后坐事左迁汜水令，卒官。
现代文：玄植辩论很漂亮，申叙了规劝讽谏之意，高宗对他很是礼重。后来因事被牵累获罪，被贬为汜水县令，逝世于任上。
English: The debate on the grounds was very beautiful, and Gao Zong was very polite to him. Later, he was implicated in a crime, was demoted to the county magistrate of Surabaya, and died in office.

古文：张后胤，苏州昆山人也。
现代文：张后胤，苏州昆山县人。
English: Zhang Houyin, from Suzhou's Kunshan County.

古文：父中，有儒学，隋汉王谅出牧并州，引为博士。
现代文：父亲张中，擅长儒学，隋朝汉王杨谅出任并州太守时，引用为博士。
English: His father, Zhang Zhong, was good at Confucianism, and was cited as a doctor when the Sui Dynasty and the Han Dynasty appointed Wang Yang Peng as the provincial governor.

古文：后胤从父在并州，以学行见称。
现代文：后胤跟随父亲在并州，以学问操行为人称道。
English: Houyin followed his father to Bianzhou, and was praised for his academic performance.

古文：时高祖镇太原，引居宾馆。
现代文：当时唐高宗镇守太原，召引他为宾客住在宾馆里。
English: At that time, Tang Gaozong, the warden of Taiyuan, invited him to stay as a guest in a hotel.

古文：太宗就受《春秋左氏传》。
现代文：太宗到宾馆去请他讲授《春秋左氏传》。
English: Emperor Taizong went to the hotel to ask him to give a lecture on "The Spring and Autumn Legend of Zuo Shi Huang."

古文：武德中，累除燕王谘议参军。
现代文：高祖武德年间，授官燕王咨议参军。
English: During Gao Zuwude's time, he was awarded the rank of officer and was advised by Yan Wang to join the army.

古文：贞观中，后胤上言： 陛下昔在太原，问臣： 隋氏运终，何族当得天下？ 
现代文：太宗贞观年间，后胤上书道： 陛下从前在太原时，问臣下： 隋代国运终结，哪个家族会得到天下？ 
English: During the reign of Taizong Zhenguan, Houyin wrote: His Majesty was once in Taiyuan, and asked his vassals: When the Sui Dynasty ended, which family would rule the world?

古文：臣奉对： 李姓必得。
现代文：臣下曾回答： 李姓必得。
English: A vassal once replied: The surname Li is a must.

古文：公家德业，天下系心，若于此首谋，长驱关右，以图帝业，孰不幸赖！ 
现代文：明公家的德行事业，天下人系于心中，若在此倡谋，长驱直入关中，以图谋帝王大业，谁不庆幸仰赖！ 
English: The virtuous career of the Ming court nobles is in the hearts of the people of the world. If you take the initiative in this, drive straight into the middle of the pass, and attempt the great cause of the emperor, who would not be happy to rely on it!

古文：此实微臣早识天命。 
现代文：这实在是微臣早识上天的意旨。 
English: This is truly the will of the Weizhong Emperor.

古文：太宗曰： 此事并记之耳。 
现代文：太宗说道： 这事我也记得。 
English: Taizong said, "I remember that too."

古文：因诏入赐宴，言及平昔，从容谓曰： 今弟子何如？ 
现代文：便召后胤进宫赐宴，讲到以前的事，便从容地对后胤说： 如今我这弟子怎么样？ 
English: Then he called Houyin into the palace to give a banquet. After talking about the past, he calmly said to Houyin, "How is this disciple of mine now?

古文：后胤对曰： 昔孔子领徒三千，达者无子男之位。
现代文：后胤回答道： 从前孔子领有三千弟子，显达的还没有子爵男爵的爵位。
English: Houyin replied, "Once upon a time, Confucius had three thousand disciples, but none of them achieved the rank of viscount or baron.

古文：臣翼赞一人，为万乘主，计臣功逾于先圣。 
现代文：臣下辅佐赞助一人，便成为一国天子，算算臣下的功劳还要超过先圣孔子了。 
English: If a vassal-assistant patronizes one person, he will become a national godson, and the merit of his vassals will exceed that of the first saint, Confucius.

古文：太宗甚悦，赐良马五匹，拜燕王府司马。迁国子祭酒，转散骑常侍。
现代文：太宗非常高兴，赐给良马五匹，授官燕王府司马，升任国子祭酒，转官散骑常侍。
English: Taizong was very pleased and gave him five fine horses. He was awarded the post of Yan Wangfu's steward, promoted to the post of the son of the country's sacrificial wine, and transferred to the post of horseback riding attendant.

古文：永徽初，请致仕，加金紫光禄大夫，给赐并同职事。
现代文：永徽初年，请求辞官，便加官金紫光禄大夫，供给赏赐之物与在职官吏一样。
English: In the first year of Yonghui, he asked to be demoted, and was promoted to Jin Ziguanglu Doctor, offering the same rewards as officials in office.

古文：卒，赠礼部侍郎，陪葬昭陵。
现代文：去世后追赠为礼部侍郎，陪葬于昭陵。
English: After his death, he was posthumously awarded the title of Reibu-zirō, and was buried in Shoryo.

古文：盖文达，冀州信都人也。
现代文：盖文达，冀州信都县人。
English: Gaewenda, a native of Xindu County, Jizhou.

古文：博涉经史，尤明《三传》。
现代文：广泛涉猎经书史籍，尤其精通《三传》。
English: Extensively dabbled in historical books, especially proficient in the "Three Traditions."

古文：性方雅，美须貌，有士君子之风。
现代文：禀性方正文雅，须眉漂亮，相貌俊美，有富有学问志操的学士君子风度。
English: He has a gentle and elegant demeanor, beautiful eyebrows, good looks, and a scholarly and gentlemanly demeanor.

古文：刺史窦抗尝广集儒生，令相问难，其大儒刘焯、刘轨思、孔颖达咸在坐，文达亦参焉。
现代文：刺史窦抗曾广为召集儒生，让他们互相问难辩驳，那些大儒刘焯、刘轨思、孔颖达等人都在座，文达也参加了。
English: Zhang Shiduo was widely known for convening Confucian students and having them question and argue with each other. Those great Confucian scholars Liu Xuan, Liu Leuxi, Kong Yingda and others were all present, and Wenda also participated.

古文：既论难，皆出诸儒意表，抗大奇之，问曰： 盖生就谁受学？ 
现代文：开始诘难驳辩之后，文达的谈论都使众儒生大出意料之外，窦抗非常惊奇，问道： 盖生是拜谁为师求学的？ 
English: After starting to refute the difficult refutation, the discussion of Wenda surprised all the Confucian students. Dou Qi was very surprised and asked: Who did Ge Sheng study under?

古文：刘焯对曰： 此生岐嶷，出自天然。
现代文：刘焯回答道： 该生年轻聪慧，出于天赋。
English: Liu Wei replied, "This student is young, intelligent, and talented.

古文：以多问寡，焯为师首。 
现代文：在学问上他是以多问少，我刘焯是他为首的老师。 
English: In terms of learning, he is the one who asks more and learns less, and I, Liu Ye, am his teacher.

古文：抗曰： 可谓冰生于水而寒于水也。 
现代文：窦抗说： 这真是冰由水而生成却比水要寒冷啊。 
English: Dou Qi said, "It's true that ice is made from water, but it's colder than water."

古文：武德中，累授国子助教。
现代文：武德年间，升任国子助教。
English: During Wude's tenure, he was promoted to assistant professor.

古文：太宗在籓，召为文学馆直学士。
现代文：太宗还在藩国的时候，征召他为文学馆直学士。
English: When Taizong was still in the domain, he was enlisted as a direct graduate of the Literature Museum.

古文：贞观十年，迁谏议大夫，兼弘文馆学士。
现代文：贞观十年，授官谏议大夫，兼弘文馆学士。
English: Zhenguan for ten years, was awarded the title of Doctor of Political Science, and was also a graduate of the Hongwen Academy.

古文：十三年，除国子司业。
现代文：贞观十三年，任职国子司业。
English: In the thirteenth year of Zhenguan's reign, he assumed the post of Secretary of the Imperial Household Agency.

古文：俄拜蜀王师，以王有罪，坐免。
现代文：不久授官蜀王师，后因蜀王有罪，被牵累免官。
English: Soon after, he was appointed as Shu Wang's teacher, but was later removed from his post due to Shu Wang's guilt.

古文：十八年，授崇贤馆学士。
现代文：贞元十八年，授予他崇贤馆学士。
English: In the 18th year of the Zhengyuan era, he was awarded a bachelor's degree from the Chongxian Academy.

古文：寻卒。
现代文：不久去世。
English: He died soon after.

古文：其宗人文懿，亦以儒业知名，当时称为 二盖 焉。
现代文：他的族人盖文懿，也以儒家学业知名，当时称为 二盖 。
English: His kinsman, Gai Wenjun, also known for his Confucian studies, was then known as Nige.

古文：文懿者，贝州宋城人也。
现代文：文懿，是贝州宗城人。
English: Wenyi is from Beshuzongcheng.

古文：武德初，历国子助教。
现代文：武德初年，任国子助教。
English: In his first year at Wude, he was appointed assistant professor to Kuniko.

古文：注官之次，子儒但高枕而卧，时云 句直平配 。
现代文：当时高祖另外在秘书省设置学校，以教育皇帝、诸王的儿子，任命文懿为博士。
English: At that time, Gaozu also set up a school in the Ministry of Secretaries to educate the sons of emperors and kings, and appointed Wenyi as a doctor.

古文：由是补授失序，无复纲纪，道路以为口实。
现代文：文懿曾开坛讲授《毛诗》，阐发题旨，当时公侯卿士都聚集一堂，互相诘问辩驳，文懿阐发宣扬风雅之旨，很得诗人的意趣。
English: At that time, princes and nobles gathered in a hall to question and argue with each other. Wen Jiabao expounded and preached the style of elegance, which was very interesting to the poet.

古文：其所注《史记》，竟未就而终。敬播，蒲州河东人也。
现代文：贞观年间，在国子博士位上去世。敬播，蒲州河东人。
English: During the Zhenguan era, he passed away while holding the doctorate of Kuniko.

古文：贞观初，举进士。
现代文：贞观初年，考中进士。
English: In the first year of Zhenguan, he passed the middle school entrance examination.

古文：俄有诏诣秘书内省佐颜师古、孔颖达修《隋史》，寻授太子校书。
现代文：不久有诏命让他到秘书内省辅佐颜师古、孔颖达修撰《隋史》，不久授官太子校书。
English: Soon after, there was an imperial edict ordering him to go to the secretary of the Ministry of the Interior to assist Zayang Shigu and Kong Yingda in compiling the "Sui History," and soon he was awarded the post of the prince's school book.

古文：史成，迁著作郎，兼修国史。
现代文：《隋史》撰成，转任著作郎，兼修撰官编修国史。
English: "Sui History" was compiled, and he was transferred to the post of author, and also served as a scribe and editor of national history.

古文：与给事中许敬宗撰《高祖》、《太宗实录》，自创业至于贞观十四年，凡四十卷。奏之，赐物五百段。
现代文：与给事中许敬宗撰写《高祖实录》、《太宗实录》，从唐代开国到贞观十四年，共四十卷，上书进奉皇上，被赐予杂帛五百段。
English: At the same time, Xu Jingzong wrote "Gao Zu Shih Lu" and "Taizong Shih Lu," a total of forty volumes from the founding of the Tang Dynasty to the 14th year of Zhenguan. The book was presented to the emperor, and he was given five hundred paragraphs.

古文：太宗之破高丽，名所战六山为驻跸，播谓人曰： 圣人者，与天地合德，山名驻跸，此盖以銮舆不复更东矣。 
现代文：太宗击败高丽国，给作战地六山起名为驻跸，敬播对人说： 圣人与天地合德，山名叫驻跸，这就是说皇帝的车驾不会到达更东边了。 
English: Emperor Taizong defeated the Koryo Kingdom and named the six mountains at the battle site "Jingyeong." The respected broadcaster said to the people: "The sage is in harmony with heaven and earth. The mountain is named "Jingyeong." This means that the emperor's chariot will not reach further east.

古文：卒如所言。
现代文：最终如他所说。
English: In the end, it was as he said.

古文：时梁国公房玄龄深称播有良史之才，曰： 陈寿之流也。 
现代文：当时梁国公房玄龄极赞敬播有良史的才能，说他是 陈寿之流的史才 。
English: At that time, Liang Guo's public official, Xu Rongling, highly praised Jing Bo's talent of having a good history, saying that he was a historical talent of Chen Shou's school.

古文：玄龄以颜师古所注《汉书》，文繁难省，令播撮其机要，撰成四十卷，传于代。
现代文：玄龄因颜师古所注《汉书》文字繁芜意思难明，让敬播择取其中精要之处撰成四十卷，流传于当世。
English: Due to the complicated meaning of the "Chinese Book" annotated by the ancient Chinese calligrapher, Genling let the respected broadcaster select the most important points and compile it into forty volumes, which have been passed down to the present day.

古文：寻以撰实录功，迁太子司议郎。
现代文：不久因撰写实录有功，升任太子司议郎。
English: He was soon promoted to the position of the Crown Prince's Councilor due to his success in writing a report.

古文：时初置此官，极为清望。
现代文：当时刚开始设置这一官职，极负清高的名望。
English: At that time, this official position had just been established, and it had a very high reputation.

古文：中书令马周叹曰： 所恨资品妄高，不获历居此职。 
现代文：中书令马周叹道： 所恨的是空有极高的资格品位，却不能获得担任此职。 
English: The Chinese text made Ma Zhou sigh: What I hate is that I have a very high qualification grade, but I can't get this position.

古文：参撰《晋书》，播与令狐德棻、阳仁卿、李严等四人总其类。
现代文：参与撰写《晋书》，敬播与令狐德、阳仁卿、李严等四人按类汇总。
English: The four people who participated in the writing of "Jin Shu," including Jingbai and Lingfude, Yang Renqing, and Li Yan, are summarized by category.

古文：会刑部奏言： 准律：谋反大逆，父子皆坐死，兄弟处流。
现代文：适逢刑部上奏言事道： 法律条文有：谋反是大逆不道之罪，父亲儿子都要判处死刑，兄弟处以流放。
English: At the same time, the Criminal Investigation Department made a report, saying: The legal provisions include: conspiracy to commit treason is a crime of high treason, both father and son shall be sentenced to death, and brothers shall be sentenced to exile.

古文：此则轻而不惩，望请改从重法。 
现代文：此种惩处太轻不能达到惩戒目的，希望改用重刑。 
English: This kind of punishment is too light to achieve the purpose of discipline, and it is hoped to switch to a heavy sentence.

古文：制遣百僚详议。
现代文：皇帝诏命百官详加议论。
English: The emperor issued an imperial edict ordering officials to discuss the matter in detail.

古文：播议曰： 昆季孔怀，天伦虽重，比于父子，性理已殊。
现代文：敬播谈道： 兄弟相亲，天伦关系虽然很深重，但与父子关系相比，情理已很不同。
English: Jinghan said: Although the relationship between brothers and sisters is very deep, compared with the relationship between father and son, the reason is very different.

古文：生有异室之文，死有别宗之义。
现代文：活着有不同居室的形式，死后有别宗异支的意义。
English: There are different forms of living rooms in life, and the meaning of different sects after death.

古文：今有高官重爵，本廕唯逮子孙；祚土锡珪，余光不及昆季。
现代文：如今有高官重爵，余荫庇护只达到儿子孙子；有封土赐王圭，余荫好处也不及于兄弟手足。
English: Nowadays, there are high-ranking officials and grand dukes, and Yiyin's protection only extends to his son and grandson; there is a fiefdom given to Wang Gui, and Yiyin's benefits are not as good as brothers and sisters.

古文：岂有不沾其廕，辄受其辜，背礼违情，殊为太甚！
现代文：岂有不沾荫庇之惠，却要受牵累获罪的？这样背礼违情，实在太过分了。
English: Is there anyone who has not benefited from the shadow of the eavesdropper, but must be involved in sin? Such a breach of duty is really too much.

古文：必期反兹春令，踵彼秋荼，创次骨于道德之辰，建深文于措刑之日，臣将以为不可。 
现代文：一定要反对礼部的律令，而遵从那秋荼般苛繁的刑法，便是在道德之世而行严刑峻法，在太平刑措之日却费尽心机罗织人的罪名，那我认为是不当的。 
English: One must oppose the precepts of the Ministry of Rites and Ceremonies, while obeying the draconian criminal law is to carry out severe punishments in the world of morality, but on the day of the Taiping criminal law, it is not appropriate in my opinion.

古文：诏从之。
现代文：诏命采纳了他的意见。
English: He complied.

古文：永徽初，拜著作郎。
现代文：永徽初年，授官著作郎。
English: In the first year of Yonghui, he was awarded the title of scholar.

古文：与许敬宗等撰《西域图》。
现代文：与许敬宗等人合撰《西域图》。
English: He co-authored "The Map of the Western Regions" with Xu Jingzong and others.

古文：后历谏议大夫、给事中，并依旧兼修国史。
现代文：后历任谏议大夫、给事中，并依旧兼修国史。
English: Afterward, he was appointed as a doctor of public deliberation, and in the middle of the case, and still studied national history.

古文：又撰《太宗实录》，从贞观十五年至二十三年，为二十卷。奏之，赐帛三百段。
现代文：又撰写《太宗实录》，从贞观十五年到贞观二十三年，共二十卷，上书奉献皇上，赐给绸帛三百段。
English: He also wrote "Taizong Shih Lu," from the 15th year of Zhenguan to the 23rd year of Zhenguan, a total of 20 volumes, dedicated to the emperor, and given to the emperor 300 pieces of silk.

古文：后坐事出为越州都督府长史。
现代文：后因事获罪贬为越州都督府长史。
English: Later, he was found guilty and demoted to the position of governor of Yue Prefecture.

古文：龙朔三年，卒官。
现代文：龙朔三年，逝世于任所。
English: He died in office three years later.

古文：播又著《隋略》二十卷。
现代文：敬播又著有《隋略》二十卷。
English: He is also the author of "Sui Liang" with 20 volumes.

