古文：娄室，字斡里衍，完颜部人。
现代文：娄室，字斡里衍，是完颜部人。
English: 室, whose Chinese name is 斡里衍, is a member of the beauty department.

古文：年二十一，代父白荅为七水诸部长。
现代文：他二十一岁时，代替父亲白答做七水各部的头领。
English: When he was twenty-one years old, he replaced his father Baitu as the head of all departments of the seven waters.

古文：太祖克宁江州，使娄室招输系辽籍女直，遂降移敦益海路太弯照撒等。
现代文：太祖攻克宁江州，让娄室传令给属于辽籍的女真人，招降了移瞛益海路太弯照撒等人。
English: The great-grandfather conquered the Ningjiang Province, and sent a message from the imperial court to Jianzhen, who belonged to the Liao nationality, to invite others to move to the Yiyi Sea Road.

古文：败辽兵于婆刺赶山。
现代文：娄室在婆剌赶山打败辽兵。
English: He defeated the Liao soldiers in the mountains.

古文：复败辽兵，擒两将军。
现代文：再次打败辽兵时，擒获了两名将军。
English: When he defeated the Liao soldiers again, he captured two generals.

古文：既而益改、捺末懒两路皆降。
现代文：之后，益改、捺末懒两路都投降。
English: After that, both the reformist and the lazy capitulated.

古文：进兵咸州，克之。
现代文：娄室进军咸州，攻占下来。
English: Shishitsu marched into Hamshu and captured it.

古文：诸部相继来降，获辽北女直系籍之户。
现代文：因各部相继来归降，又获得原属于辽国北女真籍的户口。
English: Due to the successive relegation of various ministries, they also obtained the hukou that originally belonged to Beimenzhen of Liao Province.

古文：辽都统耶律讹里朵以二十余万众来戍边。
现代文：辽国都统耶律讹里朵带二十多万人前来戍守边境。
English: The capital of Liao, Yerutunli, brought more than 200,000 people to guard the border.

古文：太祖趋达鲁古城，次宁江州西，召娄室。
现代文：太祖赶赴达鲁古城，到了宁江州西边，召见娄室。
English: The great-grandfather rushed to the ancient city of Daru, arrived in the west of Ningjiang, and summoned his concubine.

古文：娄室见上于军中。
现代文：娄室在军营中进见皇上。
English: His wife went to see the Emperor in the military camp.

古文：上见娄室马多疲乏，以三百给之，使隶右翼宗翰军，与银术可纵兵冲其中坚，凡九陷阵，皆力战而出。
现代文：皇上看到娄室的战马大多疲乏，给了他三百匹马，并让他在右翼宗翰的军队里听从调用，与银术可一起发兵冲击敌军最重要的力量。九次攻入阵地，都奋力激战一番才出阵。
English: The emperor saw that most of Shishitsu's horses were tired, so he gave him three hundred horses and told him to obey the call in the right wing Zonghan's army. Together with the silver art, he could send troops to attack the enemy's most important force. Nine times he broke into the position, and he fought hard before he went into battle.

古文：复与银术可戍边。
现代文：后来，娄室又和银术可戍守边关。
English: Later, Yushitsu and Ginjutsu were able to defend the border.

古文：及九百奚营等部来降，则与银术可攻黄龙府，上使完颜浑黜、婆卢火、石古乃以兵四千助之，败辽兵万余于白马泺。
现代文：到九百奚营等部落来投降的时候，娄室与银术可攻打黄龙府，皇上派完颜浑黜、婆卢火、石古乃领四千军兵去援助，在白马泺打败一万多辽兵。
English: By the time the tribes such as the Nine-Hundred Yi Battalion came to surrender, Yimuro and Nijutsu were able to attack Huanglongfu, and the emperor sent Yan Hunyu, Baloo Hui, and Shigu Nai with four thousand soldiers to help, defeating more than ten thousand Liao soldiers in Baimao.

古文：宗雄等下金山县，使娄室分兵二千，招沿山逃散之人。
现代文：宗雄等人来到金山县，让娄室分派出军兵二千人，招收沿山逃散的人。
English: Muneo and others came to Jinshan County, and asked the government to send 2,000 soldiers to recruit people who had fled along the mountains.

古文：耶律捏里军蒺藜山，斡鲁古、娄室等破之，遂取显州。
现代文：耶律捏里在蒺藜山驻军，斡鲁古、娄室等人攻破他的军队，接着占领显州。
English: Yeruchu stationed troops in Shaoshan, and Yulugu, Yishu, and others defeated his army, and then occupied Hsien Chou.

古文：太祖取黄龙府，娄室请曰： 黄龙一都会，且僻远，苟有变，则邻郡相扇而起。
现代文：太祖攻取了黄龙府，娄室请求说： 黄龙府是一个都市，而且位置偏远，假如有变故，那么相邻郡县会互相煽动而起。
English: The great-grandfather conquered Huanglongfu, and the chamber pleaded: Huanglongfu is a city, and the location is remote. If there is any change, then the neighboring counties will incite each other.

古文：请以所部屯守。 
现代文：请让我领部下驻守。 
English: Please have my lieutenants stand by.

古文：太祖然之，仍合诸路谋克，命娄室为万户，守黄龙府。
现代文：太祖应允，于是会集各路谋克，任命娄室为万户，把守黄龙府。
English: The great-great-grandfather agreed, so he gathered all the ways to seek help, and appointed his son as the guardian of Huanglongfu.

古文：进都统，从杲取中京，与希尹等袭走迪六、和尚、雅里斯等，败奚王霞末，降奚部西陈度讹里刺。
现代文：娄室进升为都统，随同杲攻克中京，与希尹等人一起打跑迪六、和尚、雅里斯等人，战败奚王霞末，招降了奚部西节度讹里剌。
English: Gongshu was promoted to Tudong, conquered Zhongjing with Gong, and together with Xi Yin and others, fought against Di Liu, Monk, Yaris and others, defeated Gong Wang Xia Mian, and defeated Xibe Xi Jiedu Gongli Gong.

古文：辽主自鸳鸯泺西走，娄室等追至白水泺，获其内库宝物。
现代文：辽国君主从鸳鸯泺向西逃走，娄室等人追赶到白水泺，缴获了他库中宝物。
English: The ruler of Liao fled west from Handan, and Handan and others chased him to Baishui Handan and seized the treasures in his treasury.

古文：数字遂与阇母攻破西京。复与阇母至天德、云内、宁边、东胜，其官吏皆降，获阿疏。
现代文：娄室与母一同攻破西京，又与母来到天德、云内、宁边、东胜，当地的官吏全都投降，并抓获了阿疏。
English: Shishimuro and his mother broke through West Beijing together, and came with his mother to Tiantai, Yunnan, Yongbyon, Dongsheng. The local officials all surrendered and captured Aso.

古文：夏人救辽，兵次天德，娄室使突捻、补攧以骑二百为候兵，夏人败之，几尽。
现代文：夏国人援救辽国，出兵到了天德，娄室派突睰、补扌颠带二百骑兵去做侦察兵，被夏人打败，几乎全部战死。
English: The Xia people came to the rescue of Liao, and dispatched troops to Tiantai. The Yixing Emperor sent 200 cavalrymen to reconnaissance, and they were defeated by the Xia people, and almost all of them died in the battle.

古文：阿士罕复以二百骑往，遇伏兵，独阿士罕脱归。
现代文：阿土罕又带了二百骑兵前往，遇上伏兵，只有阿土罕逃脱回来。
English: Atukhan went there with another two hundred cavalry and was ambushed. Only Atukhan managed to escape and return.

古文：时久雨，诸将欲且休息，娄室曰： 彼再破吾骑兵，我若不复往，彼将以我怯，即来攻我矣。 
现代文：当时下了很长时间的雨，各将官想暂且休息一下，娄室说： 敌军第二次打败我方骑兵，我们如果不再去，他们会以为我们怯懦，就要来进攻我们。 
English: At that time, it rained for a long time, and the generals wanted to take a break. Shishitsu said, "The enemy has defeated our cavalry for the second time. If we don't go, they will think we are cowardly and attack us."

古文：乃选千骑，与习失、拔离速往。
现代文：于是，娄室挑选出上千骑兵，与习失、拔离速一同前往。
English: As a result, thousands of cavalrymen were selected by Shishitsu, and they went along with the training loss and withdrawal speed.

古文：斡鲁壮其言，从之。
现代文：斡鲁觉得娄室的话很壮烈，也跟随他去。
English: Yulong Lu felt that the words of the eunuch were very powerful, and also followed him.

古文：娄室迟明出陵野岭，留拔离速以兵二百据险守之。获生口问之，其帅李良辅也。
现代文：娄室在将近天明的时候出了陵野岭，留下拔离速率领二百兵士据守在险要地方，抓到俘虏来审问，得知他们的元帅是李良辅。
English: When it was nearly dawn, Gongshu left Neungnoling. He left behind a detachment of 200 soldiers under his command, who were stationed in a dangerous place. He captured prisoners to interrogate them, and learned that their field marshal was Li Liangyu.

古文：将至野谷，登高望之。夏人恃众而不整，方济水为阵，乃使人报斡鲁。
现代文：快走到野谷时，娄室登上高处眺望，看见夏人依仗人多，军队不严整，正在临水列开阵势，于是娄室派人向斡鲁报告。
English: When they were about to reach the valley, Shishimuro climbed to a high place to look around and saw that there were a lot of summer people, the army was not well organized, and they were setting up a position near the water, so Shishimuro sent someone to report to Gyoru.

古文：娄室分军为二，迭出迭入，进退转战三十里。
现代文：娄室把军队分为两部分，频频出入敌阵，进退辗转三十里。
English: Gongshu divided the army into two parts, frequently entering and leaving the enemy lines, advancing and retreating for thirty miles.

古文：过宜水，斡鲁军亦至，合击败之。
现代文：渡过宜水时，斡鲁的军队也赶到了，两军会合打败了敌人。
English: When they crossed the Yishui River, the troops of Yanglu also arrived, and the two armies met and defeated the enemy.

古文：辽都统大石犯奉圣州，壁龙门东二十五里，娄室、照里、马和尚等以兵取之，生获大石，其众遂降。
现代文：辽国都统大石进犯奉圣州，在龙门以东二十五里处扎下营垒，娄室、照里、马和尚等人率军攻下营垒，活捉大石，他的部属也就都投降了。
English: Daxi, the capital of Liao, invaded Feng Sheng Prefecture and set up a camp 25 miles east of Longmen. The army led by Yuxiu, Tsering, Ma and others captured the camp and captured Daxi alive. His subordinates also surrendered.

古文：辽辟里刺守奉圣州，弃城遁去。
现代文：辽国辟里剌驻守奉州，却弃城逃遁。
English: Liao Guo Bei Liya garrisoned in Fengzhou, but abandoned the city and fled.

古文：后与宗望追辽帝，娄室，蒲宗以二十骑候敌，败其军三千人于三山，有千人将趋奉圣州，蒲察复败之，擒其主帅而还。
现代文：后来娄室与宗望共同追击辽国皇帝，娄室、蒲察带着二十名骑兵等候敌军，在三山打败敌军三千人，有一千人要赶往奉圣州，蒲察又把他们战败，抓住其主帅后回兵。
English: Later, Shishimuro and Zongwang jointly chased the Liao Emperor. Shishimuro and Pucha took twenty cavalrymen to wait for the enemy army, defeated three thousand enemy soldiers in Sanzhan, and one thousand soldiers wanted to rush to Fongshan Prefecture. Pucha defeated them again, captured their commander and then returned to the army.

古文：夏人屯兵于可敦馆，宗翰遣娄室戍朔州，筑城于霸德山西南二十里，遂破朔州西山兵二万，擒其帅赵公直。
现代文：夏国人在可敦馆驻扎军队，宗翰派娄室戍守朔州，在霸德山西南方二十里处修筑城池，由此攻破朔州西山的两万敌军，擒获敌军主帅赵公直。
English: Xia Guozhong stationed troops in Kedong Pavilion, and Zonghan sent Jishang to defend Shuozhou, and built a castle 20 miles southwest of Badeshan, thus defeating 20,000 enemy troops in the West Mountain of Shuozhou and capturing the enemy commander Zhao Gongzhi.

古文：其后复袭辽帝于余都谷，获之。
现代文：然后又在余都谷袭击辽国皇帝，并把他抓获。
English: Then they attacked the Liao Emperor in Yudogaya and captured him.

古文：赐铁券，惟死罪乃笞之，余罪不问。
现代文：皇上赐与铁券，只有犯下死罪的人处笞刑，其他罪责不予追究。
English: The emperor gave out iron coupons, and only those who committed capital crimes were punished with flogging, and other criminal responsibilities were not investigated.

古文：银术可围太原，宋统制刘臻救太原，率众十万出寿阳，娄室击破之，继败宋兵数千于榆次。
现代文：银术可围攻太原，宋国统制刘臻救助太原，率领十万人从寿阳出兵，娄室战败了他，既而在榆次打败宋兵数千人。
English: Yinzhu could besiege Taiyuan. Liu Zhen, who was in charge of the Song government, came to the rescue of Taiyuan and led 100,000 soldiers from Shouyang. Yiming defeated him, and in the process defeated thousands of Song soldiers.

古文：宋张灏军出汾州，拔离速击走之。
现代文：宋国张灏从汾州出兵，拔离速把他击退。
English: Zhang Ye of Song dispatched troops from Ganzhou to repel him.

古文：灏复营文水，数室也突葛速、拔离速与战，灏大败。
现代文：张灏又在文水扎下营盘，娄室和突葛速、拔离速与之交战，张灏大败。
English: Zhang Rong also camped under Wen Shui Zha, and fought with Yishu, Zhuge Sui, and Bu Li Sui. Zhang Rong was soundly defeated.

古文：宗翰定太原，娄室取汾、石二州，及其属县温泉、方山、离石，蒲察降寿阳，取平定军及乐平，复招降辽州及榆社、辽山、和顺诸县。
现代文：宗翰平定了太原，娄室攻下汾州、石州，以及两州所属的温泉、方山、离石等县。蒲察降伏寿阳，攻取平定军和乐平，又招降了辽州和榆社、辽山、和顺等县。
English: Zonghan leveled Taiyuan, and Jishu conquered Bozhou, Shizhou, and the hot springs, Fangshan, and Liaoshi counties belonging to the two states. Pucha surrendered to Shouyang, captured the Peacemaking Army and Leping, and brought down Liaozhou and Shisha, Liaoshan, and Shun counties.

古文：宗翰趋汴州，使娄室等自平阳道先趋河南，曰： 若至泽州，与赛里、婆卢火、习失遇，当与俱进。 
现代文：宗翰赶往汴州，让娄室等人从平阳的道路经过先去河南，并说： 如果到了泽州与赛里、婆卢火、习失相遇，就应和他们一同前行。 
English: Zonghan hurried to Bozhou, and let Gongshu and the others pass through the Pingyang Road to Henan first, and said: If you encounter Sai Li, Baloo Hui, and Xi Lu in Bozhou, you should go with them.

古文：习失之前军三谋克，败宋兵三千于襄垣，遇伏兵二千，又败之。
现代文：习失前锋部队的三位谋克，在襄垣打败了三千宋兵，遭遇伏兵二千，又把他们打败。
English: The three strategists of the losing forward force defeated three thousand Song soldiers in Xiangyuan, encountered two thousand ambushes, and defeated them again.

古文：撒刺荅破天井关，复破步兵于孔子庙南，遂降河阳。
现代文：撒剌答攻克天井关，又在孔子庙南面打败宋国步兵，于是降伏了河阳。
English: The Saracens responded by conquering Tiantian Pass and defeating the Song infantry south of the Confucius Temple, after which they surrendered to the Kheyang.

古文：娄室军至，既渡河，遂薄西京。
现代文：娄室的军队到达，渡过黄河，进逼西京。
English: Shishitsu's army arrived, crossed the Yellow River, and forced its way into Saikyo.

古文：城中兵来拒战，习失逆击败之，西京降。
现代文：城中军兵出战抵抗，习失迎击，打败他们，西京投降。
English: The soldiers in the city went out to fight and resist. They failed to meet the attack, defeated them, and West Beijing surrendered.

古文：娄室取偃师，永安军、巩县降。
现代文：娄室攻取偃师，永安军、巩县投降。
English: The Yongan Army and the Gongxian Army surrendered.

古文：撒刺荅败宋兵于汜水。
现代文：撒剌答在汜水打败宋兵。
English: The Saracens defeated the Song soldiers at Surabaya.

古文：于是，荥阳、荥泽、郑州、中牟相次皆降。
现代文：这时候，荥阳、荥泽、郑州、中牟都相继投降。
English: At this time, Fenyang, Heze, Zhengzhou and Zhongmou all surrendered one after another.

古文：宗翰已与宗望会军于汴，使娄室率师趋陕津，攻河东郡县之未下者。
现代文：宗翰已经和宗望在汴会合，派娄室率军队奔赴陕津，攻打河东还未占领的郡县。
English: Zonghan has already met with Zongwang in Handan and sent troops led by Handan to Shaanxi to attack the counties that have not yet been occupied in Hedong.

古文：阿离士罕败敌于河上，撒按败敌于陕城下，鹘沙虎降虢州守陴卒三百人，遂克陕府。
现代文：阿离土罕在黄河上游打败敌军，撒按在陕城下打败敌军，鹘沙虎降伏虢州守军三百人，于是攻占陕府。
English: A Lijituhan defeated the enemy army in the upper reaches of the Yellow River, Sajang defeated the enemy army in the lower reaches of Shaanxi City, and Bansha Tiger surrendered three hundred Bozhou defenders, thus capturing Shaanxi Province.

古文：习古乃、桑衮破陕之散卒于平陆西北。
现代文：习古乃、桑衮在平陆的西北打败陕府的散落军兵。活女另外在平陆攻破敌军。
English: Xi Gu Neng and Mulberry Defeated the Scattered Soldiers of Shaanxi Province in the Northwest of Pinglu, and the Living Woman Defeated the Enemy Army in Pinglu.

古文：活女别破敌于平陆。娄室破蒲、解之军二万，尽覆之，安邑、解州皆降，遂克河中府，降绛、慈、隰、石等州。
现代文：娄室进攻蒲、解的二万大军，全部战胜，安邑、解州也全都投降，又攻克河中府，使绛州、慈州、隰州、石州等地投降。
English: The 20,000-strong army of Putu and Jie, which attacked Putu and Jie, were all defeated. Anyi and Jie all surrendered. They also conquered Hezhongfu and forced Jie, Cizhou, Jie and Shizhou to surrender.

古文：宗翰往洛阳，使娄室取陕西，败宋将范致虚军，下同、华二州，克京兆府，获宋制置使傅亮，遂克凤翔。
现代文：宗翰到洛阳去，派娄室攻取陕西，打败宋国大将范致虚的军队，攻下同、华二州，占领京兆府，抓获宋国设置使傅亮，随之又攻克凤翔。
English: Zonghan went to Luoyang, sent the imperial office to conquer Shaanxi, defeated the army of the Song general Fan Zhixu, captured Tong and Huazhou, occupied Jingzhao Prefecture, captured the Song imperial envoy Fu Liang, and then conquered Fengxiang.

古文：阿邻等破宋大兵于河中，斡鲁破宋刘光烈军于冯翊，讹特刺、桑衮败敌于渭水，遂取下邽。
现代文：阿邻等人在河中战败宋国大军，斡鲁在冯翊战败宋国刘光烈的军队，讹特剌、桑衮在渭水打败敌兵，又攻占下絡。
English: A Niang and others defeated the Song Dynasty army in the middle of the river, Yang Lu defeated the Song Dynasty Liu Guanglie's army in Fenghuang, and Zou Teyu and Mulberry defeated the enemy soldiers in Surabaya and captured the lower pass.

古文：宗翰会京辅伐康王，命娄室、蒲察专事陕西，以婆卢火、绳果监战。
现代文：宗翰会同宗辅讨伐康王，命令娄室、蒲察专门在陕西处事，让婆卢火、绳果监战。
English: Zonghan and Zongfu assisted in fighting against King Faokang, and ordered Yiming and Pucha to work exclusively in Shaanxi, with Baloo Hui and Zhuangguo supervising the battle.

古文：绳果等遇敌于蒲城及同州，皆破之。
现代文：绳果等人在蒲城和同州遇上敌兵，都打胜了。
English: Rope fruit and others encountered enemy soldiers in Putuo and Tongzhou, and all of them were victorious.

古文：娄室、蒲察克丹州，破临真，进克延安府，遂降绥德军及静边、怀远等城寨十六，复破青涧城。
现代文：娄室、蒲察攻克丹州，占领临真，进军攻下延安府，于是降伏了绥德军以及静边、怀远等十六座城寨，又攻占了青涧城。
English: Shishimuro and Pucha conquered Danzhou, occupied Linzhen, marched into Yan'an, and conquered Yan'an. As a result, they surrendered the German army in Shandong, as well as 16 fortresses such as Jingbian and Huayuan, and captured the city of Qingdao.

古文：宋安抚使折可求以麟、府、丰三州，及堡寨九，降于娄室。
现代文：宋国安抚使折可求拿麟、府、丰三个州，以及九座城堡营寨来归降娄室。
English: The Song appeasement envoys could ask for the three prefectures of Lin, Fu and Feng, as well as nine castles to return to the imperial court.

古文：晋宁所部九寨皆降，而晋宁军久不下，娄室欲去之，赛里不可，曰： 此与夏邻，且生他变。 
现代文：晋宁部所属的九个城寨全都投降，而晋宁军却许久攻不下来，娄室想要离去，赛里不许可，说 ：这里和夏国相邻，还是想想别的办法。 
English: The nine fortresses belonging to the Jin Ning Department all surrendered, but the Jin Ning Army could not be defeated for a long time. When Yishuo wanted to leave, Sai Li did not allow it, saying, "This is adjacent to Xia Guo, let's think of another way."

古文：城中无井，日取河水以为饮，乃决渠于东，泄其水，城中遂困。
现代文：城里没有水井，每天要取河水饮用，娄室就在城东面决开水渠，使河水流泄掉，于是城里窘困。
English: There were no wells in the city, so people had to fetch water from the river every day to drink. To the east of the city, Yushitsu cut a canal to let the water flow out, and the city was in dire straits.

古文：李位、石乙启郭门降，诸将率兵入城。
现代文：李位、石乙打开城门投降，各将率兵入城。
English: Li Yi and Shi Yi opened the city gate and surrendered, and each general led his troops into the city.

古文：守将徐徽言据子城，战三日，众溃，徽言出奔，获之。
现代文：守城的将领徐徽言据守附属小城，打了三天，众军溃败，徐徽言出城奔逃，被抓住。
English: The general guarding the city, Xu Huiyan, defended the small town attached to the city, fought for three days, the army was defeated, Xu Huiyan ran out of the city and was caught.

古文：使之拜，不听，临之以兵，不为动，絷之军中。使先降者谕之使降，徽言大骂，与统制孙昂皆不屈，乃并杀之。
现代文：让他下拜，他不听从，把兵刃放在他面前，他也不变脸色，于是把他带进军营，让先前投降的人劝告他投降，徐徽言大骂，和统制孙昂都不屈服，就把他们一起杀死了。
English: He made him bow down, but he didn't listen. He put the sword in front of him, but he didn't change his face. So he took him into the military camp, and had those who had previously surrendered advise him to surrender. Xu Huiyan swore loudly, and he didn't give in to the commanding officer Sun Ang, so he killed them together.

古文：遂降定安堡、渭平寨及鄜、坊二州。
现代文：接着，降伏定安堡、渭平寨和、坊两个州。
English: Next, the two provinces of Ding'anburg, Fenpingzhai and Fang surrendered.

古文：于是，娄室、婆卢火守延安，折可求屯绥德，蒲察还守蒲州。
现代文：这时，娄室、婆卢火驻守延安，折可求屯兵绥德，蒲察回去把守蒲州。
English: At this time, Shishimuro and Baloo were stationed in Yan'an, so they could ask Shide to stay, and Pucha to go back and guard Puzhou.

古文：延安、鄜、坊州皆残破，人民存者无几，娄室置官府辑安之。
现代文：延安、州、坊州都很残破，活下来的百姓没有多少了，娄室设置官府妥善安抚人民。
English: Yan'an, Zhouzhou and Fangzhou are all in ruins, and there are not many people left alive. The government has set up a control room to properly appease the people.

古文：别将斡论降建昌军。
现代文：副将斡论降伏建昌军。
English: The vice-general mediated the surrender of the Jianchang Army.

古文：京兆府叛，娄室复讨平之。遂与阿卢补、谋里也至三原，讹哥金、阿骨欲击淳化兵，败之。
现代文：京兆府反叛，娄室又去征讨，平息了叛乱，然后和阿鲁补、谋里也来到三原，讹哥金、阿骨欲攻击淳化的军队，打败了他们。
English: Jingzhaofu rebelled, and Yiming went to subjugate and quell the rebellion, and then he, Arochi, and Mochi also came to Mihara, and Yan Gejin and Arochi attacked Junhua's army and defeated them.

古文：娄室攻乾州，已筑甬道，列〈石驳〉具，而州降。
现代文：娄室进攻乾州，已经筑起甬道，列出炮台器具，可是乾州投降了。
English: Shishitsu attacked Kenzhou, had built a causeway and laid out artillery, but Kenzhou surrendered.

古文：遂进兵克邠州，军于京兆。
现代文：又进军攻克州，在京兆驻军。
English: He also marched into Kezhou and garrisoned troops in Jingzhao.

古文：陕西城邑已降定者，辄复叛，于是睿宗以右副元帅，总陕西征伐。
现代文：陕西已经归降的城池，随后又反叛，因此睿宗任命娄室为右副元帅，统领军队去陕西征伐。
English: Shaanxi had already surrendered and then rebelled, so Ruizong appointed Yiming as the right deputy marshal and led the army to invade Shaanxi.

古文：时娄室已有疾，睿宗与张浚战于富平，宗弼左翼军已却，娄室以右翼力战，军势复振，张浚军遂败。
现代文：这时娄室已经有病，睿宗与张浚在富平交战，宗弼的左翼军已经撤退，娄室率右翼竭力出战。我军形势重新振作，张浚的军队于是溃败。
English: At this time, Gongshu was already ill, Ruizong and Zhang Jun fought in Fuping, Zongshu's left-wing army had retreated, and Gongshu led the right-wing army to fight. Our army situation was reinvigorated, and Zhang Jun's army was defeated.

古文：睿宗曰： 力疾鏖战，以徇王事，遂破巨敌，虽古名将何以加也。 
现代文：睿宗说 ：娄室带病奋战，为君王事业效力，战败大敌，即便是古代名将，有谁能胜过他呢？ 
English: Ruizong said: He fought hard with illness, worked for the cause of the king, and defeated the great enemy. Even if he was an ancient famous general, who could beat him?

古文：以所用犀玉金银器，及甲胄，并马七匹与之。
现代文：睿宗把自己使用的犀玉金银器皿，以及盔甲、好马七匹，一齐赏给娄室。
English: Ruizong presented the rhinestone gold and silver utensils he used, as well as the armor and seven good horses, to the imperial family.

古文：耶卢椀群牧使，迭刺部族节度使，同知大兴尹、兼中都路兵马都总管，改武宁军节度使，广宁尹。
现代文：天会八年，娄室去世。天会十三年，皇上赠与他泰宁军节度使之职，并兼任侍中，加封太子太师。皇统元年，皇上赠与他开府仪同三司之职，追封他为莘王。按正隆时期的例律改赠给他金源郡王的封号，纎祭在太宗庙廷，谥号 壮义 。
English: In the thirteenth year of the Tenmei era, the emperor bestowed upon him the title of Taining Army Commander, and he also served as an attendant, and was given the title of crown prince. In the first year of imperial unification, the emperor bestowed upon him the title of Kaifu Yi and the title of Sanji, and he was posthumously given the title of King of Jinyuan County. According to the rules of the Zhenglong period, he was given the title of King of Jinyuan County, the imperial banquet was held at the Taizong Temple, and his posthumous name was Zhuangyi.

古文：卒，年六十二。银术可，宗室子。
现代文：娄室的儿子是活女、谋衍、石古乃。银术可，皇亲宗室子弟。
English: The sons of Empress Dowager Cixi were Zhi Niang, Mu Yan, and Shigu Nai, all of whom were sons of Empress Dowager Cixi.

古文：太祖嗣位，使蒲家奴如辽取阿疏，事久不决，乃使习古乃、银术可继往。
现代文：金太祖阿骨打嗣位后，派遣蒲家奴到辽国去讨还阿疏，事情久拖不决，太祖于是又派习古乃、银术可继续前往。
English: After Kim Taejo's great-great-grandfather Akechi became heir to the throne, he sent Pu Jia Nu to Liao to try to win back Ah So. The matter dragged on for a long time, so the great-great-grandfather also sent Xi Kunai and Yin Shu to continue the journey.

古文：当是时，辽主荒于政，上下解体。
现代文：在那个时候，辽国君主荒废朝政，上下解体。
English: At that time, the monarch of Liao wasted the dynastic politics, and the top and bottom disintegrated.

古文：银术可等还，具以辽政事人情告太祖，且言辽国可伐之状。
现代文：银术可等回来后，把辽国政事人情详细向太祖做了汇报，而且说可以攻伐辽国的情况。
English: After returning, Yinzhu Ke made a detailed report to Taizu on the political and personnel situation in Liao, and said that the situation in Liao could be attacked.

古文：太祖决意伐辽，盖自银术可等发之。
现代文：太祖下决心攻伐辽国，完全是因为银术可等人的劝谏。
English: The great-grandfather's determination to invade Liao was entirely due to the persuasion of the silver art.

古文：太祖与耶律讹里朵战于达鲁古城，辽兵二十余万，银术可、娄室率众冲其中坚，凡九陷阵，辄战而出，大败辽军。
现代文：金太祖与辽国耶律讹里朵双方在达鲁古城开战。辽兵有二十多万，银术可、娄室率领众将士向辽兵的中坚力量冲击，共九次陷入敌阵，都边战边突围，终于把辽军打得大败。
English: The two sides of the Jin Taizu and the Liao Yerudongrido started the war in the ancient city of Daru. The Liao soldiers had more than two hundred thousand, and the silver art can, led by the Yixing room, led the soldiers to the core strength of the Liao soldiers. A total of nine times fell into the enemy line, the capital side broke through the siege, and finally the Liao army was defeated.

古文：银术可为谋克，遂与娄室戍边，复与娄室、浑黜、婆卢火、石古乃等攻黄龙府，败辽兵万余于白马泺。
现代文：银术可是谋克，于是与娄室一起戍守边疆，又和娄室、浑黜、婆卢火、石古乃等人一起进攻黄龙府，在白马泺打败辽军一万多人。
English: However, Gijutsu plotted to defeat him, so he defended the frontier together with Shishimuro, and attacked Huanglongfu together with Shishimuro, Hunyu, Baloo, Shikunai and others, defeating more than 10,000 Liao troops in Baimao.

古文：太祖拒辽兵，银术可守达鲁古城。
现代文：金太祖抗拒辽兵，银术可守卫达鲁古城。
English: King Taizu resisted the Liao soldiers, and the silver art could guard the ancient city of Daru.

古文：收国二年，分鸭挞、阿懒所迁谋克二千户，以银术可为谋克，屯宁江州。
现代文：收国二年，从鸭挞、阿懒分离迁移的谋克二千户，让银术可作为谋克，去屯守宁江州。
English: In the second year of the National Reunification, 2,000 households were separated and relocated from Yaxuan and Alao, so that the silver art could be used as a strategy to occupy Ningjiang Province.

古文：辽大册使习泥烈遣回，约以七月半至，而尽九月习泥烈未来，上使诸军过江屯驻。
现代文：辽国大册使习泥烈被遣回，大约应该七月中旬到，而九月末习泥烈没来，皇上派诸军过江屯扎驻守。
English: Liao Guo Dai Quan ordered Xi De Liang to be sent back. He should have arrived around the middle of July, but Xi De Liang did not come at the end of September. The emperor sent troops across the river to garrison.

古文：辽曳刺、麻答十三人，兵士八人纵火于浑河，以绝刍牧。
现代文：辽国曳剌、麻答十三人，士兵八人到浑河放火，要烧绝牧草。
English: Thirteen people from Hikifune and Mata in Liao Province and eight soldiers set fire to the Hunhe River to burn away the pasture grass.

古文：银术可获之，乃知辽边吏乙薛使之，太祖命释之。
现代文：银术可擒获了他们，才知道是辽国边境戍卫官乙薛指使他们干的，太祖命令放了他们。
English: They were caught by the silversmiths, only to find out that the Liao border guard, Yixue, had ordered them to do it, and the great-grandfather ordered them to be released.

古文：从都统杲克中京，银术可与习古乃、蒲察、胡巴鲁率兵三千，击奚王霞末于京西七十里，霞未弃兵遁。
现代文：银术可随从都统杲攻克中京，他与习古乃、蒲察、胡巴鲁率领三千兵马，在京西七十里的地方攻击奚王霞末，霞末丢下队伍只身逃跑没有踪影。
English: He and Xi Kunai, Pucha, and Hubaru led three thousand soldiers and horses to attack the warlord Xia Matsu in a place seventy miles west of Beijing. There was no trace of Xia Matsu leaving the army and fleeing alone.

古文：辽主西奔天德，银术可以兵绝其后，辽主遂见获。
现代文：辽国君主向西逃奔天德，银术可带兵阻绝他后面的人马，于是捉获了辽主。
English: The monarch of Liao fled westward to Tiande, and the silversmiths could bring soldiers to block the people and horses behind him, so they captured the Liao Lord.

古文：后从宗翰伐宋，围太原，宗翰进兵至泽州，及宗翰还西京，太原未下，皆命银术可留兵围之。
现代文：后来，银术可跟随宗翰攻伐宋军，包围太原，宗翰进军到达泽州，直到宗翰返回西京，太原没有攻下，于是命令银术可留兵围太原。
English: Later, Gijutsu followed Zonghan to attack the Song army and encircle Taiyuan. Zonghan marched to Zezhou, until Zonghan returned to West Beijing. Taiyuan was not conquered, so he ordered Gijutsu to stay and encircle Taiyuan.

古文：招讨都监马五破宋兵于文水。
现代文：招讨都监马五在文水打败宋兵。
English: Invite the city supervisor Ma Wu to defeat the Song soldiers in Wenshui.

古文：节度使耿守忠等败宋黄迪兵于西都谷，所杀不可胜计。
现代文：节度使耿守忠等在西都谷打败宋黄迪的军队，杀死敌人不计其数。
English: Geng Shouzhong and others defeated Song Huangdi's army in Xidu Valley and killed countless enemies.

古文：宋樊夔、施诜、高丰等军来救太原，分据近部，银术可与习失、杯鲁、完速大破之。
现代文：宋朝樊夔、施诜、高丰等人的军队来援救太原，分别占据临近部落，银术可和习矢、杯鲁、完速杀得他们大败。
English: The armies of Song Dynasty, Shi Dynasty, Gaofeng and others came to the rescue of Taiyuan and occupied the neighboring tribes separately. Yin Shu was defeated by Xi Ya, Cup Lu, and Guanzhong.

古文：索里乙室，破宋兵于太谷。
现代文：索里乙室在太谷打败宋兵。
English: Sori Isshitsu defeats Song soldiers in Taiyuan.

古文：宋兵据太谷、祁县，阿鹘懒、拔离速复取之。种师中出井陉，据榆次，救太原，银术可使斡论击之，破其军。
现代文：宋兵占据太谷、祁县，阿鹘懒、拔离速又收复了这些地方，种师中从井陉出兵，占据榆次，企图援救太原，银术可派斡论攻击种师中，打败了他的军队。
English: The Song soldiers occupied Taiyuan and Jixian, and the lazy and hasty returnees recaptured these places. Among the seed divisions, soldiers were dispatched from Jingyi to occupy Jiji, in an attempt to rescue Taiyuan. The silver art could be sent to attack the seed division, and defeated his army.

古文：活女斩师中于杀熊岭，进攻宋制置使姚古军于隆州谷，大败之。
现代文：活女在杀熊岭杀了种师中，进攻宋制置使姚古的军队占据的隆州古，杀得姚古军队大败。
English: The living woman killed the seed division in the killing of Xiongling, and the attack of Song Dynasty made the army of Yao Gu occupy Longzhou Gu, and the army of Yao Gu was defeated.

古文：撒里土败宋军于回马口，郭企忠歼宋军于五台。
现代文：撒里土在回马口战败宋军，郭企忠在五台歼灭宋军。
English: Salitu defeated the Song Army in Huimagou, and Guo Qizhong annihilated the Song Army in Wutai.

古文：及宗翰定太原，与宗望会兵于汴，银术可等攻汴城，克之。
现代文：等到宗翰夺定太原，与宗望在汴京会师的时候，银术可等人率兵攻打汴城，胜利克城。
English: When Zonghan conquered Taiyuan and joined forces with Zongwang in Shijiazhuang, Yinzhu led the troops to attack Shicheng and defeated the city.

古文：师还，银术可降岢岚、宁化等军，攻岚州拔之，招降火山军。
现代文：挥师还朝路上，银术可又招降了岢岚、宁化的宋朝军队，攻打岚州并夺取了这座城，又招降了火山的军队。
English: Waving the division is still on the way to the morning, the silver art can also recruit and demote the Song Dynasty army of Zhou and Ninghua, attack Zhangzhou and seize the city, and recruit and demote the volcanic army.

古文：与希尹同赐铁券。
现代文：银术可因战功卓著，与希尹同时被赐给铁券。
English: Because of his outstanding war service, the silversmith was awarded an iron certificate at the same time as Xi Yin.

古文：宗翰趋洛阳，赛里取汝州，银术可取邓州，杀其将李操等。
现代文：宗翰进军洛阳，赛里攻取汝州，银术可攻占邓州，杀了邓州守将李操等人。
English: Zonghan marched into Luoyang, Sai Li captured Ruzhou, Yin Shu could capture Denzhou, and killed Denzhou keeper Li Cao and others.

古文：萨谋鲁入襄阳，拔离速入均州，马五取房州，擒转运使刘吉、邓州通判王彬。
现代文：萨谋鲁进入襄阳，拔离速进入均州，马五攻取房州，抓获了转运使刘吉、邓州通判王彬。
English: Sapo Lu entered Xiangyang, Zhaozhou entered Junzhou at full speed, Ma Wu captured Fangzhou, Liu Ji, the transporter, and Wang Bin, the judge of Dengzhou, were captured.

古文：拔离速破唐、蔡、陈三州，克颍昌府，沙古质别克旧颍昌。
现代文：拔离速攻破唐、蔡、陈三州，攻克颍昌府，沙古质另外攻克了旧颍昌。
English: He broke through the Tang, Cai and Chen Three Provinces at once and conquered Beichang Prefecture. In addition, he conquered the old Beichang.

古文：宗翰会伐康王，银术可守太原。
现代文：宗翰会合人马讨伐康王，银术可守卫太原。
English: Zonghan gathered people and horses to fight against King Kang, and the silver art could guard Taiyuan.

古文：天会十年，为燕京留守。
现代文：天会十年，银术可任燕京留守。
English: Ten years after the heavenly meeting, the silver art can stay in Yanjing.

古文：天会十三年，致仕，加保大军节度使，同中书门下平章事，迁中书令，封蜀王。
现代文：天会十三年，银术可交还官职，加封保大军节度使、同中书门下平章事，后升迁为中书令，被封为蜀王。
English: In the thirteenth year of the Heavenly Association, the silver art can be returned to the official position, plus the protection of the great army, the festival envoy, and the same as the Chinese calligraphy, and then promoted to the Chinese calligraphy, and was named Shu Wang.

古文：天眷三年，薨，年六十八。
现代文：天眷三年，银术可逝世，享年六十八岁。
English: As luck would have it, he died three years later at the age of sixty-eight.

古文：以正隆例赠金源郡王，配飨太宗庙廷。
现代文：皇上以正隆惯例赠谥金源郡王，分配享受太宗庙廷。
English: The emperor presented the county king of Jinyuan with the Zhenglong custom and allocated him to enjoy the Taizong temple court.

古文：大定十五年，谥武襄，改配享太祖庙廷，子彀英。
现代文：大定十五年，又赠谥 武襄 ，改配享太祖庙廷。
English: In the fifteenth year of Dading, he was also given the title of Wu Xiang, and was assigned to enjoy the ancestral temple court.

古文：彀英，本名挞懒。
现代文：银术可有一个儿子叫彀英。彀英，本名叫挞懒。
English: Genshu has a son named Hao Ying. Hao Ying's real name is Hao Lazy.

古文：幼警敏有志胆，初丱角，太祖见而奇之。
现代文：幼年时候，他就聪明机警，有志有胆，当初他束发成两角时，太祖阿骨打见到他，对他的机敏很惊奇。
English: When he was a child, he was smart and alert, ambitious and daring. When he was a toddler, his great-grandfather Akone met him and was surprised by his cleverness.

古文：年十六，父银术可授以甲，使从伐辽，常为先锋，授世袭谋克。
现代文：他十六岁的时候，他的父亲银术可授给他铠甲，让他跟随自己攻伐辽国，常常命令他当先锋，皇上授他世袭谋克。
English: When he was sixteen years old, his father gave him armor, let him follow him to invade Liao, often ordered him to be the vanguard, and the emperor gave him hereditary leadership.

古文：宗翰自太原还西京，银术可围守之，彀英在行间，屡有功。
现代文：宗翰从太原回到西京，银术可围守太原，彀英在行伍之间，屡次立功。
English: Zonghan returned to West Beijing from Taiyuan. He could encircle Taiyuan with silversmithing, and Xing Ying repeatedly made meritorious contributions while marching in the army.

古文：宋兵数万救太原，至南关，银术可与弟拔离速、完颜娄室等击之，当隘巷间，一卒挥刀向拔离速，彀英以刀断其腕，一卒复从旁以枪刺之，彀英断其枪，追杀之。
现代文：宋国派兵数万人去救太原，大军到太原南关，银术可和他的弟弟拔离速、完颜娄室等迎击宋兵，在一条狭窄的巷子里，一个宋国军卒挥刀向拔离速砍来，彀英眼疾手快，一刀砍断了这名军卒的手腕；另一军卒又从旁拿枪向拔离速刺杀，彀英又砍断了他的枪，并追杀他。
English: Song sent tens of thousands of soldiers to save Taiyuan. The large army went to the south pass of Taiyuan, and the silversmith could meet the Song soldiers with his younger brother, Bajiaxing, Guan Yanqiao and so on. In a narrow alley, a Song soldier waved a knife to cut Bajiaxing, and Zou Ying was quick-eyed and cut the soldier's wrist with a knife; another soldier took a gun from the side to stab Bajiaxing, and Zou Ying cut his gun and chased him.

古文：拔太原，下河东诸州，攻汴京，皆有功。
现代文：夺取太原，下河东诸州，攻打汴京，彀英都立下了战功。
English: The capture of Taiyuan, the capture of the states east of the Lower River, and the attack on Beijing, all contributed to the success of the war.

古文：与都统马五徇地汉上，至上蔡，以先锋破孔家军。
现代文：彀英和都统马五率军队巡行汉水流域，到上蔡，彀英当先锋打败了孔家军。
English: Gong Ying and Du Tongma led five armies to patrol the Han River basin. When they reached Shangcai, Gong Ying was the vanguard and defeated Kong Jia's army.

古文：睿宗攻开州，彀英先登，流矢中其口，睿宗亲视之，创未愈，强起之，攻大名府。
现代文：睿宗攻打开州，彀英率先登城，不幸被流箭射中嘴巴，睿宗亲自探视他，创伤没有痊愈，他强撑着起来，去进攻大名府。
English: Ruizong attacked the opening of the state, Zou Ying took the lead in the city, unfortunately he was shot in the mouth by a stray arrow, Ruizong personally visited him, the wound did not heal, he braced himself and went to attack the daimyofu.

古文：第功，宗弼第一，彀英次之。
现代文：论功排次序，宗弼第一，彀英仅次于他。
English: In terms of the order of merit, Zong Qi was the first, followed by Xing Ying.

古文：攻东平，彀英居最。
现代文：攻打东平，彀英功劳位居第一。
English: In attacking Dongping, Zou Ying ranked first in merit.

古文：拔离速袭宋康王于扬州，彀英为先锋。
现代文：拔离速去扬州袭击宋康王，彀英是先锋。
English: He immediately went to Yangzhou to attack Song Kang Wang, with Gong Ying leading the way.

古文：拔离速追宋孟后于江南，彀英前行趋潭州。
现代文：拔离速在江南追踪宋孟后，彀英前行奔往潭州。
English: After pulling off the speed to track Song Meng in the south of the Yangtze River, Hao Ying rushed forward to Tanzhou.

古文：宋大兵在常武，彀英以选兵薄其城，败千余人。
现代文：宋国大军驻在常武，彀英用精选出来的兵士迫近常武城，打败宋军一千多人。
English: The Song Grand Army was stationed in Changwu, and Zou Ying used carefully selected soldiers to approach Changwu City and defeat more than a thousand Song soldiers.

古文：明日，城中出兵来战，彀英以五百骑败之，获马二百匹，遂攻常武。
现代文：第二天，城中出兵来应战，彀英指挥五百骑兵打败了他们，获得战马二百匹，于是进一步攻打常武城。
English: The next day, soldiers were sent from the city to fight, and Xing Ying, commanding five hundred cavalry, defeated them, gaining two hundred horses, and then further attacked Changwu City.

古文：拔离速以诸军为大阵，居其后，彀英以五百骑为小阵，当前行，即麾兵驰宋军，宋军乱，遂大败之。
现代文：拔离速把诸军摆成阵，位居彀英后面，彀英率领五百骑兵摆成小阵，冲在前面，彀英当即指挥骑兵驰向宋军，宋军大乱，于是杀得宋军大败。
English: Huan Ying led five hundred cavalrymen to form a small line and rushed to the front. Huan Ying immediately commanded the cavalry to rush to the Song Army. The Song Army was in chaos, and the Song Army was defeated.

古文：拔离速观其周旋，叹赏之。
现代文：拔离速阵前观看彀英率骑兵在宋军中盘旋厮杀，赞赏惊叹不已。
English: Before pulling away from the rapid formation, he watched the cavalry led by Gong Ying circling and fighting in the Song Army, and was amazed with admiration.

古文：其后河东郡县多叛，彀英以先锋攻绛州，克之。
现代文：在此之后，河东的郡县中多有叛乱的，彀英又以先锋的身份攻打绛州，攻克了。
English: After this, there were many rebellions in the counties and counties of Hedong, and Zou Ying attacked Zhangzhou as a pioneer and conquered it.

古文：复攻沁州，飞炮击其石胁，归营中。
现代文：又攻沁州，突然飞过来炮弹片击伤了彀英的右腋下肋骨，众人把他抬回到营中休息。
English: They attacked Bozhou again. Suddenly, a shell fragment flew over and injured Xing Ying's right armpit ribs. Everyone carried him back to the camp to rest.

古文：诸军攻沁州，三日不能下，别将骨赧强起彀英指麾士卒，遂克之。
现代文：各路军队攻打沁州，三天未能打下来，副将骨赤皮强扶起彀英，彀英指挥士卒，终于攻克了沁州城。
English: Troops from all directions attacked Zhangzhou, but failed to knock it down for three days. Vice-commander Bone Redskin rallied Zhang Ying, and Zhang Ying, the commander, finally conquered Zhangzhou City.

古文：摄河东路都统，从左监军移刺余睹招西北诸部。
现代文：彀英代理河东路都统，跟随左监军移剌余睹招抚西北各部落。
English: Zou Ying acted as the representative of Hedong Road, and followed the Left Supervision Army to move to the northwest to see and appease the tribes.

古文：彀英将骑三千五百，平其九部，获生口三千，马牛羊十五万。
现代文：彀英率领骑兵三千五百人马扫平了其中九个部落，擒获俘虏三千人，马、牛、羊共十五万匹。
English: Xing Ying led 3,500 cavalrymen and horses to sweep nine of the tribes, capturing 3,000 prisoners and a total of 150,000 horses, cattle and sheep.

古文：以先锋破宋吴山军，再战再胜，遂恤宋兵于隘，死者不可胜计，宋兵遁去。
现代文：他作为先锋官带兵攻打宋吴山的军队，再战再胜，在隘挫败宋兵，宋兵死者数不胜数，余下的都逃命去了。
English: As a vanguard officer, he led troops to attack Song Wushan's army, fought and won again, and defeated Song soldiers in the narrow. Song soldiers died in countless numbers, and the rest fled for their lives.

古文：宗弼再取和尚原，彀英以本部破宋五万人，遂夺新叉口，宗弼留兵守之。
现代文：宗弼又去攻打和尚原，彀英带领自己的部队攻破宋军五万人的防守，夺得新叉口，宗弼留下人马驻守这个地方。
English: Zonglu also went to attack Monzhangyuan. Qu Ying led his troops to break through the Song army's 50,000-man defense and capture Xinhakou. Zonglu left men and horses to guard this place.

古文：是夜，大雪，道路皆冰，和尚原宋兵势重不可径取，宗弼用彀英微，入自傍近高山丛薄翳薈间，出其不意，遂取和尚原。
现代文：当天夜里，天降大雪，道路都结了冰，和尚原宋兵势力强大不能够正面攻取。宗弼采用彀英提供的策略，从傍近高山树丛草木繁茂能遮蔽的地方插入敌营，出其不意地进攻，终于夺取了和尚原。
English: On the night of the same day, heavy snow fell and the roads were iced over, so the powerful Monchohara Song soldiers were unable to attack head-on. Using the strategy provided by Xing Ying, Zonglu entered the enemy camp from a place that could be covered by the lush vegetation of the nearby alpine trees, attacked unexpectedly, and finally captured Monchohara.

古文：彀英请速入大散关，自以本部为殿，以备伏兵。
现代文：彀英提请宗弼快速进入大散关，自己带领本部走在最前面开路，以防备敌方有伏兵。
English: Zou Ying asked Zong Yao to quickly enter the Great Sankuan Pass, and he led the headquarters to walk in the forefront to open the way, in case the enemy had an ambush.

古文：宗弼至仙人关，彀英先攻之，宗弼止之，彀英不止，宗弼以刀背击其兜鍪，使之退，彀英曰： 敌气巳沮，不乘此而取之，后必悔之。 
现代文：宗弼到达仙人关，彀英先要攻关，宗弼制止他，彀英不听，宗弼用刀背击他的头盔，命令他退下，彀英说 ：敌兵士气已经沮丧，不乘这个时机攻取它，以后一定要对此后悔的。 
English: Zonglu arrived at the Immortal Pass, Zouying wanted to attack the pass first, Zonglu stopped him, Zouying did not listen, Zonglu hit his helmet with the back of his sword and ordered him to retreat, Zouying said: The enemy's morale has been depressed, if you do not take this opportunity to capture it, you will regret it in the future.

古文：已而果然。
现代文：结果果然如彀英所说。
English: Afterward, it really was like that.

古文：宗弼叹曰： 既往不咎。 
现代文：宗弼叹气说 ：既往不咎。 
English: Zong Yu sighed and said, "I don't blame you for the past."

古文：乃班师。
现代文：于是班师回朝。
English: As a result, the team returned to Japan.

古文：彀英殿，且战且却，遂达秦中。
现代文：彀英仍然在最前面开路，边战边退，就这样到了秦中。
English: Xing Ying still led the way at the forefront, retreating while fighting, and thus arrived in Qinzhong.

古文：齐国初废，元帅右监军撒离喝驰驿抚治诸郡，至同州，故齐观察使李世辅出迎，阳坠马称折臂，归。
现代文：齐国刚废除的时候，元帅右监军撒离喝奉旨安抚治理各郡，车马疾行，沿途驿站供夫马粮食，兼程而进。他到达同州，原齐国观察使李世辅出城迎接，假装坠落马下，自称胳膊摔折了，让人抬回去。
English: When the State of Qi had just been abolished, the Marshal of the Right Supervision of the Army left his post with the order to pacify and govern the counties. The horses and carriages sped along, and along the way, the post stations provided food for the horses and carriages. He arrived in Tongzhou. The former State of Qi observers sent Li Shizhu out of the city to meet him. He pretended to fall under the horse, claimed to have broken his arm, and had someone carry him back.

古文：撒离喝入城，世辅诈使通判献甲，以壮士十人，被甲上厅事，世辅自壁后突出，执撒离喝。
现代文：撒离喝入城，李世辅使诡计派遣一名通判去向撒离喝献铠甲，这通判让十名壮士披甲上厅侍候，世辅突然从影壁后面出来，让壮士抓了撒离喝。
English: When Salih Drank entered the city, Li Shifu used trickery to send a general to present armor to Salih Drank. This general allowed ten strong men to wear armor and wait in the hall. The general suddenly came out from behind the shadow wall and let the strong men catch Salih Drank.

古文：彀英方索马于外，变起仓卒，不得入。城门已闭，皆有兵卫，至东门，合荅雅领骑三十余，与彀英遇，遂斩门者出。
现代文：彀英刚刚牵马到了城外，事变发生得太仓促，彀英来不及入城，城门已经关闭，而且都有卫兵把守，到了东门，遇到了合答雅带领三十多骑人马，于是打破东门杀了守卫。
English: Hao Ying had just taken his horse outside the city. The incident happened too hastily. Hao Ying did not have time to enter the city. The city gate was already closed and guarded by guards. When he arrived at the east gate, he encountered He Duya leading more than 30 horsemen, so he broke through the east gate and killed the guards.

古文：而世辅拥众自西门出，彀英与合荅雅袭之，一进一退以缀世辅，使不得速。
现代文：然而李世辅一伙人已从西门出城，彀英与合答雅袭击他们，一进一退以拖住李世辅，让他不能快速行进。
English: However, Li Shiyu's group had already left the city from the West Gate. Xing Ying and Hetaoya attacked them, advancing and retreating to hold Li Shiyu and prevent him from moving quickly.

古文：世辅虑救兵至，乃要撒离喝与之盟，勿使追之。
现代文：李世辅怕撒离喝的救兵来到，于是想让撒离喝与他联盟，不要让彀英等人追他。
English: Li Shifu was afraid that the rescuers of Salix would come, so he wanted Salix to ally with him, and not let Xing Ying and others chase him.

古文：留撒离喝于道侧，彀英识其声，与骑而归。
现代文：李世辅把撒离喝留在道旁，彀英听出了撒离喝的声音，救他上了马一起归来。
English: Li Shifu left his horse by the side of the road. Xing Ying heard the horse's voice and helped him get back on the horse.

古文：除安远大将军，摄太原尹，四境咸治，兼摄河东南、北两路兵马都总管。
现代文：彀英拜安远大将军之职，兼任太原府尹，从此四处边境都很安定。彀英当时还兼任河东南、北两路兵马都总管。
English: In addition to his duties as General Bai Anyuan, Gong Ying also served as the governor of Taiyuan, and the four borders were stable from then on. At that time, Gong Ying also served as the commander-in-chief of the south-east and north of the river.

古文：朝廷以河南、陕西与宋，已而复取之，师至耀州。
现代文：朝廷把河南、陕西给了宋朝，不久又收复回来，军队直开到耀州。
English: The imperial court gave Henan and Shaanxi to the Song Dynasty, and soon recovered them, and the army drove straight to Yaozhou.

古文：宋人每旦出城，张旗阅队，抵暮而还。
现代文：宋朝人每天早上天明出城，张开旗帜检阅队伍，到黄昏时收兵回城。
English: In the Song Dynasty, people would leave the city at dawn every morning, unfurl banners to review the troops, and gather the troops back to the city at dusk.

古文：道隘，骑不得逞。
现代文：道路狭窄，骑兵不能施展优势。
English: The road was narrow and the cavalry could not press their advantage.

古文：彀英请兵五百，薄暮先使五十人趋山巅，令之曰： 旦日视敌出，举帜指其所向。 
现代文：彀英请求带兵五百人，头一天黄昏时候先派五十人赶到山顶，命令他们说 ：明天天明看到敌人出城，你们就举起旗帜，指向他们所面向的方位。 
English: Su Ying asked him to lead five hundred soldiers. At dusk on the first day, he first sent fifty men to the top of the mountain and ordered them: "Tomorrow, when you see the enemy leave the city, you will raise the flag and point to the direction they are facing.

古文：乃以余兵伏山谷间。
现代文：把剩余的四百五十人埋伏在山谷间。
English: They ambushed the remaining four hundred and fifty men in the valley.

古文：明日，城中人出阅如前，山巅旗举，伏兵发，宋兵争驰入城。
现代文：第二天天刚明，城中宋人像以前一样出城阅兵，这时候山顶上彀英的兵士举起了旗帜，他事先安排在山谷间的伏兵迅速行动，宋兵争先恐后奔驰入城。
English: The next day, just after dawn, the Song people in the city went out of the city for a military parade as before. At this time, the soldiers of Xingying on the top of the mountain raised the flag. He had previously arranged for the ambush between the valleys to act quickly, and the Song soldiers rushed into the city.

古文：彀英麾军登城，拔宋帜，立金军旗帜。
现代文：彀英指挥自己的队伍登城，拔下宋军的旗帜，树立起金军的旗帜。
English: Xing Ying led his team to the city, pulled down the Song Army's banner, and raised the banner of the Golden Army.

古文：宋兵后者望见之不敢入，遂降，城中人亦降。
现代文：宋兵跑在后面未进城的看见城上金军旗帜便停步不前，不敢入城，于是纷纷投降，城中宋兵也投降了。
English: Song soldiers ran behind and did not enter the city, but when they saw the banner of the Golden Army on the city, they stopped and did not dare to enter the city, so they surrendered one after another, and Song soldiers in the city also surrendered.

古文：宋吴玠拥重兵据泾州，泾原以西多应之。元帅撒离喝欲退守京兆，俟河南、河东军。
现代文：宋朝吴拥有重兵占据泾州，泾原以西各地宋军多数与他呼应，金军元帅撒离喝想退兵把守京兆，等候河南、河东军队。
English: The Song Dynasty of Wu had a heavy army occupying Bozhou, and the majority of the Song Army in various regions west of the Plains of China echoed him. The marshal of the Jin Army, Sa Liang, wanted to withdraw from the army to guard Jingzhao, waiting for the army of Henan and Hedong.

古文：彀英曰： 我退守，吴玠必取凤翔、京兆、同、华，据潼关，吾属无类矣。 
现代文：彀英说： 我军退守，吴一定会去攻取凤翔、京兆、同、华等地，占据潼关，那样，我们的属下被杀戮将无一幸免。 
English: Zou Ying said, "Our army has retreated, Wu will definitely go to capture Fengxiang, Jingzhao, Tong, Hua and other places and occupy Shaoguan. In that way, none of our subordinates will be spared from being killed."

古文：撒离喝曰： 计将安出？ 
现代文：撒离喝说 ：你说采取什么对策？ 
English: Saying, "What countermeasures do you say should be taken?"

古文：彀英曰： 事危矣，不如速战。
现代文：彀英说： 事情危急了，不如速战速决。
English: Hao Ying said: The situation is critical, it is better to act quickly.

古文：我军阵泾之南原，宋兵必自西原来。
现代文：我军在泾州的南原摆开阵势，宋兵必然会从西原来。
English: Our army has set up a position in the southern plains of Luzhou, and the Song soldiers will inevitably come from the west.

古文：彀英与斜补出各以选骑五百摧其两翼，元帅当其中击之，可以得志。 
现代文：彀英与斜补出各率精选骑兵五百人马分别摧毁宋兵两翼，元帅向他们中间进攻，可以得到成功。 
English: Xing Ying and Diagon made up 500 cavalry selected at each rate to destroy the two wings of the Song soldiers separately, and the marshal attacked them in the middle, which could be successful.

古文：监军拔离速曰： 二子当其左右，拔离速愿当其中。
现代文：监军拔离速说： 他们二位分别攻击宋兵左右两侧，拔离速愿意进攻他的中部。
English: "The two of them will attack Song's right and left sides separately, and Bu Liakou is willing to attack his middle," said the supervisor of Bu Liakou.

古文：元帅据冈阜，多张旗帜为疑兵，可以得志。 
现代文：元帅您可以占据山脊，多多插上旗帜作为疑兵，可以得到成功。 
English: Marshal, you can occupy the ridge, plant more flags as a suspect, and you can succeed.

古文：撒离喝从之。
现代文：撒离喝听从了他们的建议。
English: Mr. Saduka heeded their advice.

古文：吴玠兵果自西原来，彀英、斜补出击其左右，自旦至午，吴玠左右军少退，拔离速当其前冲击之，遂败玠军，僵尸枕藉，大涧皆满。
现代文：吴的队伍果然从西原来，彀英、斜补出打他左右两侧，从天明至中午，吴左右翼军队逐渐退却，拔离速迎着吴军正前方发动冲击，终于打败了吴的军队，当时战死者僵尸遍地，纵横相枕而卧，山间流水里都躺满了。
English: Wu's troops did indeed come out from the west to attack his right and left sides. From dawn to noon, Wu's left and right-wing troops gradually retreated and attacked the front of Wu's army at full speed, finally defeating Wu's army. At that time, the dead zombies were everywhere, lying horizontally and vertically, and the mountains were full of running water.

古文：自此蜀人丧气，不敢复出，关、陕遂定。
现代文：从此蜀人丧气，不敢再出兵，于是关、陕地方也安定了。
English: From then on, the people of Shu were discouraged and no longer dared to send troops, so the Guan and Shaanxi regions also became stable.

古文：历行台吏部工部侍郎，从宗弼巡边，迁刑部尚书，转元帅左都监。
现代文：彀英历任行台吏部工部侍郎，随从宗弼巡视边境，后来升迁为刑部尚书，又转任元帅左都监。
English: Zou Ying served as a chamberlain of the Work Department of the Office of the Governor of Taiwan, and followed Zong Yao to patrol the border. Later, he was promoted to Shang Shu of the Penal Department, and transferred to the post of Marshal Zuo Jian.

古文：天德二年，迁右监军。
现代文：天德二年，又升迁任右监军。
English: Two years later, he was promoted to the position of right supervisor.

古文：元帅府罢，改山西路统军使，领西南、西北两路招讨兵马，坐无功，降临海军节度使，历平阳、太原尹。
现代文：在元帅府任职免除后，改任山西路统军使，带领西南、西北两路招讨兵马，由于这个阶段坐而无功，被降职任临海军节度使，历任平阳、太原府尹。
English: After he was relieved of his duties at the Marshal's Palace, he was appointed as the Shanxi Road Union Envoy, leading the southwest and northwest routes to recruit soldiers and horses. Due to this phase, he was ineffective, and was demoted to the position of the Navy Festival Envoy, and successively held the positions of Pingyang and Taiyuan.

古文：正隆末，为中都留守，兼西北面都统，讨契丹撒八，驻军归化州。
现代文：正隆末年作为中都留守，兼西北面都统，征讨契丹撒八，将军队驻扎在归化州。
English: At the end of the Zhenglong's life, he stayed behind in the central part of the country and unified the northwestern part of the country, enlisted the help of the Khitan Saba, and stationed the army in the naturalized state.

古文：世宗即位于辽阳悻使彀英侄阿鲁瓦持诏往归化，命彀英为左副元帅，就遣使召陕西统军徒单合喜，宣大定改元诏、赦于西南、西北招讨司，河东、河北、山东诸路州镇，调猛安军屯京畿。
现代文：金世宗在辽阳即位，派遣彀英的侄子阿鲁瓦带着御诏前往归化，任命彀英为左副元帅，让他派使者召见陕西统军徒单合喜，宣布用大定年号取代元诏，免除西南、西北招讨司，河东、河北、山东诸路州镇，调猛安的军队去驻守京城。
English: Kim Sejong ascended to the throne in Liaoyang, sent Gong Ying's nephew Aruwa to be naturalized with the imperial edict, appointed Gong Ying as the left deputy marshal, asked him to send an envoy to summon the Shaanxi United Army, announced that the imperial edict would be replaced with the great fixed year, exempted the southwest and northwest recruiting stations, and the towns of Hedong, Hebei and Shandong, and transferred the troops of Mengyuan to garrison Beijing.

古文：阿鲁瓦见彀英，彀英犹豫未决，士卒皆欲归世宗，彀英不得已，乃受诏。
现代文：阿鲁瓦见到彀英，说了世宗旨意，彀英犹豫不决，但士卒们都想归顺世宗，彀英不得已，才接受了诏书。
English: When Aruwa saw Xing Ying, he told her about the purpose of the world. Xing Ying hesitated, but the officials all wanted to follow the world. Xing Ying had no choice but to accept the edict.

古文：以元帅令下诸路，亟泥马槽二万具，诸路闻之，以为大军且至，然后遣人宣赦，所至皆听命。
现代文：他以元帅的身份下令下属各路军队，急忙修建泥马槽二万具，其他诸路军听说这事，以为世祖的大军就要到了。然后彀英派人去宣布他们无罪，所到之处大家都听从命令。
English: As a field marshal, he ordered his subordinate armies to hastily build 20,000 muddy horse troughs. When the other armies heard about this, they thought that the great army of the ancestors was about to arrive. Then Zou Ying sent people to declare their innocence, and everyone everywhere obeyed the order.

古文：大定元年十一月，彀英以军至中都，同知留守璋请至府议事。
现代文：大定元年十一月，彀英率军到中都，同知留守璋请他到府中议事。
English: In November of the first year of Dading, Zou Ying led his army to the capital, and his friend, who had stayed behind, asked him to come to the capital for a discussion.

古文：彀英疑璋有谋，乃阳许诺，排节仗若将往者，遂率骑从出施仁门，驻兵通州。
现代文：彀英怀疑璋设有圈套，就表面上假装答应，安排礼节仪仗像要前往的样子，暗中却率领骑兵随从出了施仁门，驻扎在通州。
English: Xing Ying suspected that Gong had set up a trap. On the surface, he pretended to agree and arranged a ceremonial battle as if he wanted to go, but secretly he led the cavalry out of Shiren Gate and stationed in Tongzhou.

古文：见世宗于三河。诏彀英以便宜规措河南、陕西、山东边事。
现代文：彀英在三河面见世宗，世宗诏令彀英顺便规划安排一下河南、陕西、山东边境事务。
English: Qian Ying met with Shizong on the surface of the three rivers, and Shizong ordered Qian Ying to plan and arrange the border affairs of Henan, Shaanxi and Shandong.

古文：二年正月，至南京，遂复汝、颍、嵩等州县，授世袭猛安。
现代文：二年正月，彀英到南京，又收复了汝、颍、嵩等州县，皇上授他世袭猛安的称号和荣誉。
English: In the first month of the second year, Zou Ying went to Nanjing and recovered the counties of Ru, Zou and Song. The emperor awarded him the title and honor of hereditary Meng'an.

古文：入拜平章政事，罢为东京留守，未行，改济南尹。
现代文：并召他入宫拜平章政事，后罢免。又任命为东京留守，还未去上任，又改任为济南府尹。
English: He was also appointed to stay in Tokyo, and before he took office, he was reappointed as Jinan governor.

古文：初，彀英宿将恃功，在南京颇渎货，不恤军民。
现代文：当初，彀英宿将依仗有功劳，在南京居功自傲，贪污了不少财物，不体谅军情民情。
English: At first, Zou Yingshuk will rely on the merits of the war, be proud of his achievements in Nanjing, embezzle a lot of property, and not consider the military situation and the people's feelings.

古文：诏使问以边事，彀英不答，谓诏使曰： 尔解何事，待我到阙奏陈。 
现代文：皇上诏令询问他边境的情况，彀英不予回答，对下诏书的使者说： 你懂得什么事？等我进宫禀报陈述。 
English: The Emperor's edict asked him about the situation at the border, but Zou Ying refused to answer and said to the envoy of the next edict: What do you know? Wait for me to enter the palace and report the statement.

古文：及召入，竟无一语及边事者。
现代文：等到召他入宫，他的汇报竟一句也没有涉及边事的。
English: When he was summoned to the palace, his report did not mention a single incident.

古文：在相位多自专，己所欲辄自奏行之。
现代文：彀英在相位时很自尊，自己想办的事就自己上奏实行。
English: Zou Ying is very self-respecting when she is on stage, and she performs what she wants to do on her own.

古文：除留守，辄忿忿不接宾客，虽近臣往亦不见。
现代文：罢除他东京留守职务，他就忿忿不平不接待宾客，即使是近臣，他往往也不接见。
English: When he was relieved of his duty to stay behind in Tokyo, he grudgingly refused to receive guests. Even close retainers, he often did not receive them.

古文：上怒，遂改济南。
现代文：皇上恼怒，于是改派他到济南。
English: The emperor was so angry that he reassigned him to Jinan.

古文：上数之曰： 朕念卿父有大功于国，卿旧将亦有功，故改授此职，卿宜知之。
现代文：皇上数落他说 ：朕念卿之父亲对国家有大功，卿的旧将也都有功，所以才改授你济南府尹的职务，卿应该知道这些。
English: The emperor scolded him, saying, "I know that your father did a great service to the country, and your father's generals also did a great service. That's why I gave you the post of Jinan prefect, and you should know this.

古文：若复不悛，非但不保官爵，身亦不能保也。 
现代文：如果仍然不肯悔过，非但不能保住官爵，身家性命也不能保了。 
English: If he still refuses to repent, he will not only lose his title, but also his life.

古文：彀英顿首谢。
现代文：彀英叩头谢恩。
English: Thank you for kowtowing to Zou Ying.

古文：久之，改平阳尹，致仕。
现代文：过了很长一段时间，改任彀英为平阳府尹，他辞官不做。
English: After a long period of time, he was reassigned to Pingyang Fufu Yin, but he did not resign.

古文：起为西京留守，以母忧去官。
现代文：又起用为西京留守，彀英因为母亲服丧而辞去了官位。
English: He was also appointed to stay in West Beijing, but resigned from his post because of his mother's funeral.

古文：寻以本官起复。
现代文：后来又被找到起用，官复原职。
English: He was later found a new job and reinstated.

古文：俄复为东京，历上京，诏曰： 上京王业所起，风俗日趋诡薄，宗室聚居，号为难治。
现代文：不久又被派往东京，又历任上京尹，皇帝下诏书说 ：上京王室基业兴起，风俗日趋虚伪、诡诈，皇家宗室聚居，号令不听，难以治理。
English: Soon he was sent to Tokyo again, and successively held the post of Shangjing Yin, and the emperor issued an imperial edict saying: the foundation of the Shangjing royal family has risen, the customs are increasingly hypocritical and deceitful, the royal families live together, do not listen to orders, and are difficult to govern.

古文：卿元老大臣，众所听服，当正风俗，检制宗室，持以大体。 
现代文：卿是元老大臣，众人都听从服你，应当匡正风俗，检查制约宗室，坚持义理，顾全国家大局。 
English: Your Excellency is a veteran minister, everyone obeys you. It is necessary to rectify customs, check and restrict the family line, adhere to the principle of righteousness, and take into account the overall situation of the country.

古文：十五年。致仕。
现代文：大定十五年，彀英辞去了在上京的职务。
English: In the fifteenth year of Dading, Zou Ying resigned from his post in Beijing.

古文：久之，史臣上《太宗》、《睿宗实录》，上曰： 当时旧人亲见者，惟彀英在。 
现代文：又过了许久，史臣向皇上进献了《太宗、睿宗实录》，皇上说： 太宗、睿宗当政时亲眼看见这些事的，只有彀英一人还在。 
English: After a long time, Shichen presented the Emperor with "The True Record of Taizong and Ruizong," and the Emperor said, "Taizong and Ruizong saw these things with their own eyes when they were in power, and only He Ying is still alive."

古文：诏修撰温迪罕缔达往北京就其家问之，多更定焉。
现代文：于是下令让修订、编撰这部实录的温迪罕缔达前往北京彀英家里访问他，许多不实或有误之处得到了更正。
English: Therefore, he ordered that Wendy Han Jieda, who revised and compiled this documentary, visit him at his home in Beijing, and many untruths or errors were corrected.

古文：十九年，薨，年七十四。
现代文：十九年，彀英逝世，享年七十四岁。
English: In 1919, Zou Ying died at the age of 74.

古文：最前后以功被赏者十有一，金为两二百五十，银为两六千五百，绢为疋八百，绵为两二千，马三百十有四，牛羊六千五百，奴婢百三十人。
现代文：彀英前后总计以功劳被赏赐十一次，他曾受赏黄金二百五十两，白银六千五百两，绢八百匹，绵二千匹，马三百十四匹，牛羊六千五百头，奴婢一百三十人。
English: He was awarded a total of 11 times. He was awarded 2502 gold, 65002 silver, 800 donkeys, 2000 mules, 314 horses, 6500 head of cattle and sheep, and 130 slaves.

