古文：《易》曰 憧憧往来，朋从尔思。 
现代文：咸卦九四爻辞说： 思虑不能专一，因而有往来不定，憧憧万端，存有各种思虑，他的朋党也相率地、互相地遵从他的思想。 
English: "Thoughts cannot be one-pointed, so there are ups and downs, longing and yearning, there are all kinds of thoughts, and his friends and party also follow his thoughts proportionately and mutually.

古文：子曰： 天下何思何虑？
现代文：孔子说： 天下的事物，有何足以困扰忧虑的呢？
English: Confucius said, "What is there in the world to worry about?

古文：天下同归而殊途，一致而百虑。
现代文：天下同归于一个目标，所走的途径有不同。
English: The whole world has the same goal, but the paths they take are different.

古文：天下何思何虑？
现代文：同归于一个好的理想，有百种不同的思虑。 
English: There are a hundred different considerations which go to make up a good ideal.

古文：日往则月来，月往则日来，日月相推而明生焉。
现代文：宇宙自然的运行，循环不息，日月往来交替，因而有光明的出现。
English: The natural movement of the universe, the continuous cycle, the alternation of the sun and the moon, and thus the appearance of light.

古文：寒往则暑来，暑往则寒来，寒暑相推而岁成焉。
现代文：寒暑往来的交替，遂有春夏秋冬四时递相推移的岁序。
English: The alternation of cold and hot alternates, and finally there is a chronological order of spring, summer, autumn and winter.

古文：往者屈也，来者信也，屈信相感而利生焉。
现代文：已往的事情，已经屈缩，将来的事情，即将伸展，屈缩伸张，互相交感而用，而利益的产生，也就在其中了。
English: The things of the past have been contracted, and the things of the future are about to be stretched, contracted and stretched, mutually sympathetic, and the generation of profit is also in the middle.

古文：尺蠖之屈，以求信也；龙蛇之蛰，以存身也。
现代文：屈行虫把身子屈缩起来，正是养精蓄锐，等待时机的来临，以求伸展行进的准备。龙蛇之类，严冬酷寒的时候在土洞里冬眠，以保全它们的躯体。
English: Writhing worms contract their bodies to keep themselves sharp, waiting for the right time to stretch out and prepare to move. Dragons and snakes, for example, hibernate in caves during the bitter cold of winter to preserve their bodies.

古文：精义入神，以致用也；利用安身，以崇德也。过此以往，未之或知也；穷神知化，德之盛也。 《易》曰： 困于石，据于蒺藜，入于其宫，不见其妻，凶。 
现代文：困卦六三爻辞说： 前进则受困于坚硬的巨石，后退则又依据于多刺的蒺藜上面，异常痛苦。如此的进退失据，没有归宿，即使返家，也见不到自己的妻子，是多么不利。 
English: "It is extremely painful to move forward while being trapped by a hard boulder, and to move backward while resting on the top of a thorny beak. It is so unfavorable to be unable to move forward or backward, to have no place to return to, and to not be able to see one's wife even when returning home.

古文：子曰： 非所困而困焉，名必辱。
现代文：孔子说： 不是自己所应经历的困境，却为了欲望而受困，必遭致声名俱裂的恶果。
English: Confucius said: It is not the predicament that you should experience, but if you are trapped for the sake of desire, you will suffer the evil consequences of reputation.

古文：非所据而据焉，身必危。
现代文：不是自己所应后退的据点，却后退以安身，必遭致身家危殆的恶果。
English: It is not a stronghold that you should retreat from, but if you retreat in order to secure yourself, you will inevitably suffer the evil consequences of endangering yourself.

古文：既辱且危，死期将至，妻其可得见耶！ 
现代文：名辱身危，已步入死亡之境地，妻子那里能见到呢？ 
English: With his reputation in danger and his life on the brink of death, where can his wife find him?

古文：《易》曰： 公用射隼于高墉之上，获之，无不利。 
现代文：《易经》解卦上六的爻辞说： 王公出猎，登在高墙上瞄射鹰隼，一箭命中，象征着无往不利。 
English: "I Ching" commentary on the first six verses says: Wang Gong went hunting, climbed on a high wall to aim at eagle beak, one arrow hit, symbolizing no disadvantage.

古文：子曰： 隼者，禽也；弓矢者，器也；射之者，人也。
现代文：孔子说： 隼是鹰鸟，弓矢是打猎的利器，能执弓而射中禽兽的是人。
English: Confucius said: "The falcon is an eagle bird, the bow and arrow is a sharp hunting tool, and the person who can hold the bow and shoot the beast is a person.

古文：君子藏器于身，待时而动，何不利之有？
现代文：君子蕴藏着弘大的才器在身上，等待时机的来临，而有所动，还有什么不利的呢？
English: A gentleman has a huge talent in his body, waiting for the right time to come, but if he makes a move, what's the downside?

古文：动而不括，是以出而有获，语成器而动者也。 
现代文：君子不鸣则已，一鸣惊人，同理，有所行动时，决无闭结与障碍，精准无比，出外必有收获。
English: A gentleman does not chant, but a chant is amazing, the same reason. When there is an action, there is absolutely no closure and obstacle, the precision is incomparable, and there must be a harvest outside.

古文：子曰： 小人不耻不仁，不畏不义，不见利不劝，不威不惩。
现代文：这就是平常已经蕴蓄结成了弘大的才器，然后再有所行动，是以出而有获，无事不成。 
English: This is usually a great talent that has been accumulated and then acted upon. There is nothing to be gained by going out, and nothing to be achieved.

古文：小惩而大诫，此小人之福也。《易》曰： 履校灭趾，无咎。 
现代文：孔子说： 世上令人感到可耻可畏的是不仁不义，但小人却不以不仁为耻，不怕背信弃义，甘心去做伤天害理的事情，纯粹以利为义，无利益可得，就不知道勤勉向上，不用刑罚来恫吓，就不知道害怕。
English: Confucius said: What is shameful and dreadful in the world is that people are unkind and unjust, but the villain is not ashamed of being unkind, is not afraid of treachery, and is willing to do things that offend heaven and reason. If one is purely righteous and has nothing to gain, then one does not know how to be diligent, and if one does not use punishment to intimidate, then one does not know how to be afraid.

古文：此之谓也。  善不积不足以成名，恶不积不足以灭身。小人以小善为无益而弗为也，以小恶为无伤而弗去也，故恶积而不可掩，罪大而不可解。
现代文：善行不积累，就不足以成名于天下，罪恶不累积，也不足以自灭其身，小人做事，完全以利害关系为出发点，以为做出小小善事，不会得到什么好处，便索性不去做了，以为做些小的差错，无伤大体，便不改过，因此日积月累，罪恶便盈满天下，以致无法掩盖和不可解救的地步。
English: Without the accumulation of good deeds, it is not enough to become famous in the world. Without the accumulation of sins, it is not enough to self-destruct. The villain does things entirely from the perspective of interests. If he thinks that he will not get any benefit from doing small good deeds, he will simply not do it. If he thinks that making small mistakes is harmless, he will not change it. Therefore, with the accumulation of days and months, the sins will fill the world, so that it can not be covered up and can not be saved.

古文：《易》曰： 何校灭耳，凶。  
现代文：《易经》噬嗑卦上九爻辞上说： 罪恶深重，刑具已负荷在头部，两耳都灭没了，这是凶害达到了极点。  
English: In the ninth chapter of the "I Ching," he said: "The crime is serious. The torture device has been loaded on the head, and both ears have been destroyed. This is the ultimate evil.

古文：子曰： 危者，安其位者也；亡者，保其存者也；乱者，有其治者也。
现代文：孔子说： 凡是获得危险的人，都是因为他先前安逸于他的职位上。灭亡的家国，是因为先前自以为国家可以长存的了。
English: Confucius said: Anyone who is in danger is because he was previously comfortable in his position. The destruction of his home country is because he previously thought that the country could last.

古文：是故君子安而不忘危，存而不忘亡，治而不忘乱，是以身安而国家可保也。
现代文：扰乱的国家，是因为先前自以为已经治好，而忽略荒殆，因此国家扰乱以致灭亡。所以君子必须居安思危，在安定的时候，不要忘记危险，幸存亡国的苦痛，治理的时候不忘祸乱的惨烈，以如此的谨慎之心，本身安定，国家可以常保。
English: The reason why a country is in turmoil is because it previously thought it had been cured, but neglected its desolation, and as a result, the country was in turmoil, leading to its demise. Therefore, a gentleman must live with a sense of danger. In times of stability, do not forget the danger, the pain of surviving the ruined country, and when governing, do not forget the tragedy of the disaster. With such a cautious heart, the country itself is stable, and the country can be preserved.

古文：《易》曰： 其亡其亡，系于苞桑。  
现代文：《易经》否卦九五爻辞上说： 它将危亡吧，将危亡吧？
English: "I Ching" negates the nine-syllable five-syllable phrase, saying: Will it perish, will it perish?

古文：子曰： 德薄而位尊，知小而谋大，力少而任重，鲜不及矣。
现代文：天下国家的治安，就好像维系在丛生的苞桑一样，是要常常戒慎警惕的呀。  孔子说： 德性浅薄而身居尊位，才知狭小而图谋大事，力量很小，却担当天下的重任，很少有不及于灾祸的。
English: Confucius said: Virtue is shallow and holds a high position, talent is narrow and plans great things, strength is small, but it is responsible for the world's important tasks, and rarely is it less than a disaster.

古文：《易》曰： 鼎折足，覆公餗，其形渥，凶。 
现代文：《易经》鼎卦九四爻辞上说： 鼎足折断，倾覆了公爵的美食，象征着倾覆家园，身遭刑辱，四非常凶害的。 
English: "I Ching" Ding Gua Jiuzhong said in his eulogy: "Ding Gua Jiuzhong has broken its foot, overthrown the duke's food, symbolized the overthrow of the homeland, suffered humiliation, four very vicious.

古文：言不胜其任也。 
现代文：这是说才力不足以胜任的危险啊！ 
English: This is the danger of saying that talent is not enough to be competent!

古文：子曰： 知几其神乎！
现代文：孔子说： 能预先晓得几微的事理，则将达到神妙的境界了吧？
English: Confucius said, "If you can know a few things in advance, you will reach a wonderful state, right?"

古文：君子上交不谄，下交不渎，其知几乎？
现代文：可说是神妙的人物了吧？君子对上决不谄媚阿谀，对下绝不傲慢，坚定立场，不致于受到危害的牵连，可说是位知道神机妙算的人了吧？
English: Can it be said that he is a miraculous figure? A gentleman is never obsequious to his superiors, never arrogant to his inferiors, stands firm, and does not get involved in harm. Can it be said that he is a man who knows magic tricks?

古文：几者，动之微，吉之先见者也。君子见几而作，不俟终日。
现代文：几是事情微妙的动机，能先见到吉利的征兆的人吧，君子能见机未然，所以能够把握时机的来临而兴起，而有所行动，不必等待以后。
English: Some things are subtle motivations, those who can see the signs of good luck first, gentlemen can see the opportunity before it happens, so they can grasp the opportunity and rise up, and take action without having to wait.

古文：《易》曰： 介于石，不终日，贞吉。 
现代文：《易经》豫卦六二爻辞上说： 被坚硬的石头所阻隔，不必等到整天才离开，要想到当下脱离此境，这时贞固而吉利的。 
English: "I Ching" Yu Gua 62, said in his eulogy: Being blocked by hard stones, you don't have to wait until the whole day to leave, you should think about getting out of this situation now, when you are chaste and lucky.

古文：介如石焉，宁用终日？
现代文：像被硬石所阻隔，应当机立断而离开，何待终日？
English: If you are blocked by a hard stone, you should leave immediately. Why wait all day?

古文：断可识矣。君子知微知彰，知柔知刚，万夫之望。 
现代文：君子晓得事理的微妙，也知道事理的彰显，知道柔弱的以面，也晓得刚强的一面，能通达而应变自如，就是万众所景仰的人物了。 
English: A gentleman knows the subtleties of reason, also knows the manifestation of reason, knows the soft side of weakness, also knows the strong side, can reach and adapt freely, is a person admired by all.

古文：子曰： 颜氏之子，其殆庶几乎？
现代文：孔子赞赏他的学生颜回说： 颜家的这位子弟，要算位知几通达的君子了吧！
English: Confucius praised his student Yan Hui and said, "This son of the Yan family must be a gentleman who knows a few things.

古文：有不善未尝不知，知之未尝复行也。
现代文：有了过失，没有自己不知道的，一经反省发觉以后，立即改正，从此不再犯了。
English: If there is a fault, there is nothing that you do not know, once you discover it after reflection, you should immediately correct it and never do it again.

古文：《易》曰： 不远复，无祗悔，元吉。  
现代文：《易经》复挂初九爻辞上说： 迷途了，走到未远的地方，即时回头猛省，便不至于有太大的悔吝，经此警觉，则有大吉。 
English: "I Ching" reprinted the ninth day of the first month of the year, saying: "If you get lost, go to a place that is not far away, and immediately turn back, you will not have too much remorse, and through this vigilance, you will have good luck.

古文：天地氤氲，万物化醇。
现代文：天地二气缠绵交密，互相会和，使万物感应，精纯完固。
English: The two airs of heaven and earth are entangled and intertwined, harmonizing with each other, causing all things to be sensitive, pure and perfect.

古文：男女构精，万物化生。
现代文：万物之中，雌雄男女，形体交接，阴阳相感，遂得以生生不息。
English: Among all things, male and female, male and female, body-to-body, yin and yang, so they can live forever.

古文：《易》曰： 三人行则损一人，一人行则得其友。 
现代文：《易经》损卦六三上说： 三人同行，各有主张，行动难以统一，势必减损一人的成见，一人独行，反而容易得到志同道合的友伴，同心协力，共患难，共甘苦。 
English: The "I Ching" said in the 63rd chapter of the "Changing of the Balance": "Three people walking side by side, each with their own opinions, it is difficult to unify their actions, it is bound to detract from one person's prejudices, one person walks alone, but on the contrary, it is easy to get like-minded friends, work together, share difficulties, and share joys and sorrows."

古文：言致一也。
现代文：是说理无二致力，天下的事理都归于一致的呀。 
English: It is said that there is no reason but effort, and all things in the world are consistent.

古文：子曰： 君子安其身而后动，易其心而后语，定其交而后求。君子修此三者，故全也。
现代文：孔子说： 君子必先安定其身，然后才可以有所作为，心平气和，然后说话，先以诚信待人，建立信誉，然后才可以对人有所要求，君子有了此三项基本修养，与人必能和睦相处，无所偏失。
English: Confucius said: A gentleman must first stabilize his body, then he can make a difference, be calm, then speak, first treat people with integrity, build credibility, and then he can make demands on people. With these three basic cultivation, a gentleman will be able to get along with people harmoniously and without any deviation.

古文：危以动，则民不与也；惧以语，则民不应也；无交而求，则民不与也；莫之与，则伤之者至矣。《易》曰： 莫益之，或击之，立心勿恒，凶。  
现代文：冒险的举动，人们不会拥护你的。用言语去威惧人民，人民不会去响应的。诚信和恩惠尚未施于人民，竟要对人民有所征发和要求，则人民不会理会赞助的。若无人赞助理会，则随时有人会伤害你的。所以《易经》益卦上九爻辞上说： 没有得人助益，有时也会遭人攻击，立心不坚定恒久的人，有凶。  
English: If you take a risky move, people will not support you. If you use words to intimidate the people, the people will not respond. If you ask for and demand something from the people, the people will not pay attention to the sponsorship. If there is no sponsorship, someone will hurt you at any time. Therefore, the "I Ching" Yiguo said in a nutshell: If you do not get help from others, you will sometimes be attacked by others. If you do not have a firm determination, you will have bad luck.

