古文：妖怪东柯院王守贞彭颙吕师造崔彦章润州气黄极熊勋王建封广陵士人
现代文：妖怪东柯院王守贞彭颙吕师造崔彦章润州气黄极熊勋王建封广陵士人
English: The specter of the East Geological Academy Wang Shou Zhen Peng Jian Lv Shi Zou Cui Yan Zhang Renzhou Qi Huang Polar Bear Xun Wang Jianfeng Guangling Scholars

古文：张銿宗梦征黄仁浚孙德遵
现代文：张銿宗梦征黄仁浚孙德遵
English: Zhang Yanzong dreams of conquering Huang Ren, Sun Dezhong dredges up Sun Dezhong

古文：人妖东郡民胡顼乌程县人李宣妻赵宣母马氏妇杨欢妻寿安男子崔广宗
现代文：人妖东郡民胡顼乌程县人李宣妻赵宣母马氏妇杨欢妻寿安男子崔广宗
English: Li Xuan, wife of Zhao Xuan, mother of Ma Shi, wife of Yang Huan, wife of Shuan, husband of Cui Guangzong

古文：许州僧田瞫元镐无足妇人娄逞孟妪黄崇嘏白项鸦
现代文：许州僧田瞫元镐无足妇人娄逞孟妪黄崇嘏白项鸦
English: Huzhou monks and nuns, women with no legs, men, women, women, women, women, women, women, women, women, women, women, women, women, women, women, women, women, women, women, women, women, women, women, women, women, women, women, women, women, women, women, women, women, women, women, women, women, women, women, women, women, women, women, women, women, women, women, women

古文：妖怪
现代文：妖怪
English: The specter is rising

古文：东柯院
现代文：东柯院
English: East China Normal University

古文：陇城县有东柯僧院，甚有幽致。
现代文：陇城县有一个东柯僧院，有很多幽雅别致的景观。
English: There is a Dongke Monastery in Lucheng County, with many elegant and unique landscapes.

古文：高槛可以眺远，虚窗可以来风。
现代文：高高的栏杆可以眺望远处，打开窗子可以迎来微风。
English: The high railing offers a view into the distance, and the windows can be opened to let in the breeze.

古文：游人如市。
现代文：院里的游人多如集市。
English: The number of visitors in the courtyard is like a fair.

古文：忽一日，有妖异起。
现代文：忽然有一天，有妖魅出现。
English: Suddenly, one day, a genie appears.

古文：空中掷下瓦砾，扇扬灰尘，人莫敢正立。
现代文：空中扔下来瓦砾，飘下纷纷扬扬的灰尘，人们没有敢正面站立的。
English: People did not dare to stand in front of the rubble that was thrown into the air and the dust that floated down.

古文：居僧晚夕不安，衣装道具，有时失之复得。
现代文：居住在院中的僧人早晚不得安宁，他们的衣装用具有时候失而复得。
English: Sooner or later, the monks who live in the monastery cannot be left in peace. Their clothes are sometimes lost and then found again.

古文：有道士者闻之曰：妖精安敢如是？
现代文：有一位道士听了之后说：妖精哪敢如此？
English: One Taoist said after listening: "How dare the fairies do this?

古文：余能去之。
现代文：我能把它除掉！
English: I can get rid of it!

古文：院僧甚喜，促召至。
现代文：院里的僧人非常高兴，马上把他找来。
English: The monks in the monastery were very happy and immediately called for him.

古文：道士入门，于殿上禹步，诵天蓬咒，其声甚厉。
现代文：道士进了门，在大殿上走禹步，朗诵天蓬咒，他的声音很高亢。
English: The Taoist priest entered the door, walked up and down the hall, reciting the Mantle of Heaven. His voice was very high pitched.

古文：良久，失其冠。
现代文：许久，他的帽子不见了。
English: Before long, his hat was gone.

古文：人见其空中掷过垣墙矣。
现代文：有人看见他的帽子被扔到墙外去了。
English: His hat was seen to be thrown over the wall.

古文：复取之，结缨而冠，诵咒不已。
现代文：他又捡回来，把帽子系在头上，不停地念咒。
English: He picked it up again, put it on his head and kept chanting.

古文：逡巡。衣褫带解，裤并失。
现代文：很快，衣带解开了，衣服脱下了，裤子也一起不见了。
English: Soon, the straps were undone, the clothes were off, and the pants were gone.

古文：随身有小袱，贮符书法要，顷时又失之。
现代文：他随身带有一个小包袱，里面存放的是符书之类的重要东西，顷刻间也丢失了。
English: He had a small bag with him, which contained important things such as runes, but it was also lost in an instant.

古文：道士遂狼狈而窜。
现代文：道士于是就狼狈地溜走了。
English: The Taoist priest then ran away in confusion.

古文：累日后，邻村有人，于藩篱之下掘土，获其袱。
现代文：一连过去几天之后，邻村有一个人在篱笆下挖土，挖到了道士的小包袱。
English: A few days later, a man from a neighbouring village was digging under the fence and unearthed the Taoist's small bag.

古文：县令杜延范，正直之人也。
现代文：县令杜延范是个正直之人，亲自去看。
English: County magistrate Du Yanfan is an honest person, go and see for yourself.

古文：自往观之，曰：安有此事。至则箕踞而坐。
现代文：他说：哪有这种事！到了以后就傲慢地坐在那里。
English: He said, "No way! When I got there, I sat there arrogantly.

古文：妖于空中，抛小书帖，纷纷然不知其数。
现代文：妖怪从空中往下抛掷小书帖，乱纷纷地不计其数。
English: The yokai throw small bookmarks down from the sky, and they scatter in countless numbers.

古文：多成绝句，凌谑杜令。
现代文：书帖上写的多数是绝句，取笑杜县令。
English: Most of the entries in the book are aphorisms, poking fun at the Du County edict.

古文：记其一二曰：虽共蒿兰伍，南朝有宗祖。
现代文：记得其中一二首，一首是：虽共蒿兰伍，南朝有宗祖。
English: I remember one or two of them, one of which was: Although they both lived in Lanwu, the Southern Dynasty had an ancestor.

古文：莫打绿袍人，空中且歌舞。
现代文：莫打绿袍人，空中且歌舞。
English: Can't beat the green-robed man, singing and dancing in the air.

古文：又曰：堪怜木边土，非儿不似女。
现代文：另一首是：堪怜木边土，非儿不似女。
English: Another song is: "Can't help but love wood and soil, but not like a girl."

古文：瘦马上高山，登临何自苦。
现代文：瘦马上高山，登临何自苦。
English: If you're too skinny to climb a mountain, what's the point?

古文：延范觉之，亦遽还。
现代文：杜延范觉察了，也急忙回去了。
English: Du Yanfan noticed this and hurried back.

古文：其不记者，绝句甚多。
现代文：那些没记住的绝句有很多。
English: There are a lot of unremembered last words.

古文：又有巡官王昭纬，恃其血气方刚，往而诟詈，至则为大石中腰而回。
现代文：还有一个叫王昭纬的巡官，依仗他血气方刚，到东柯院来破口大骂，刚到就被大石头打中了腰而灰溜溜地回去了。
English: There was also an inspector named Wang Zhaowei, who, relying on his strong constitution, came to the East China Normal University to curse loudly. Just after he arrived, he was hit in the waist by a large rock and went back in a grimace.

古文：王守贞
现代文：王守贞
English: Wang Shouzhen

古文：徐州有寄褐道士王守贞，蓄妻子而不居宫观。
现代文：徐州有一个不出家的道士叫王守贞，他有妻有子，不住在道观里。
English: In Xuzhou, there is a non-monastic Taoist named Wang Shouzhen. He has a wife and a child, and does not live in a Taoist monastery.

古文：行极凡鄙。
现代文：他的行为极其卑鄙。
English: His behaviour was utterly despicable.

古文：常游太满宫，窃携道流所佩之箓而归，置于卧榻蓐席之下，覆以妇人之衣。亵黩尤甚。
现代文：他曾经游太满宫，偷拿道士们佩带的符箓回来，放在床上的褥子底下，用他老婆的衣服盖上，亵黩得非常严重。
English: He once went to the Grand Palace, stole the charms worn by the Taoists, put them under the mattress on the bed, and covered them with his wife's clothes. This was a very serious desecration.

古文：怪异数见：灯檠自行，猫儿语：莫如此，莫如此。
现代文：他家里怪事屡屡出现：灯架自己行走，猫儿会说话：不要这样！
English: Strange things keep appearing in his house: the lampshade walks by itself, the cat can talk: don't do it!

古文：不旬日，夫妻皆卒。
现代文：不要这样！不到十天，夫妻二人都死了。
English: Don't do it! Within ten days, both husband and wife were dead.

古文：彭颙
现代文：彭颙
English: Peng Quan

古文：宣州盐铁院官彭颙，常病数月，恍惚不乐。
现代文：宣州盐铁院的长官彭颙，曾经病了几个月，精神恍惚，郁郁不乐。
English: Peng Yao, the director of the Xuanzhou Salt and Iron Institute, had been ill for several months. He was in a daze and depressed.

古文：每出外厅，辄见俳优乐工数十人，皆长数寸。
现代文：他每次走出外厅，就看见歌妓乐工几十人，都几寸高。
English: Every time he walks out of the outer hall, he sees dozens of geisha musicians, all a few inches tall.

古文：合奏，百戏并作，朱紫炫目。
现代文：各种乐器合奏。各种戏曲一块表演，五彩斑斓夺目。
English: A variety of musical instrument ensembles. A variety of operas performed together, a dazzling array of colors.

古文：颙视之，或时欣笑，或愤懑，然无如之何。
现代文：彭颙见了，有的时候欣然微笑，有的时候愤懑。但是没有什么办法。
English: When Peng Yao saw him, sometimes he smiled with pleasure, sometimes with anger. But there was nothing he could do.

古文：他人不见也。
现代文：别人看不见。
English: I can't see anyone else.

古文：颙后病愈，亦无复见。
现代文：彭颙后来病好了，也没有再看见。
English: Peng Yao later recovered from his illness and was never seen again.

古文：后十余年，乃卒。
现代文：后来过了十几年他才死。
English: He died ten years later.

古文：吕师造
现代文：吕师造
English: Lu Shizhuo

古文：吕师造为池州刺史，颇聚敛。
现代文：吕师造是池州刺史，很能勒索百姓财物。
English: Lv Shizhu is a notorious criminal in Chizhou, who is very good at extorting people's property.

古文：常嫁女于扬都，资送甚厚。
现代文：他曾经把女儿嫁到扬州，陪嫁的东西非常多。
English: He once married his daughter to Yangzhou, and there were a lot of things to accompany the marriage.

古文：使家人送之，晚泊竹筱江岸上。
现代文：他派人往扬州送这些东西，晚上停泊在江岸上。
English: He sent someone to Yangzhou to deliver these things, and anchored on the riverbank in the evening.

古文：忽有一道士，状若狂人，来去奔走。
现代文：忽然有一个道士，样子象个狂人，来回地奔跑。
English: Suddenly, there was a Taoist monk running back and forth like a madman.

古文：忽跃入舟，直穿舟中过。随其所经，火即大发。
现代文：忽然又跳到船上，直接从船中穿过，随着他经过的地方，立刻着起大火。
English: Suddenly he jumped on board again, went straight through the boat, and immediately started a fire wherever he went.

古文：复登后船，火亦随之。
现代文：他又登上后一条船，火也跟过去。
English: He got back on the last boat and the fire went with him.

古文：凡所载之物，皆为煨烬，一老婢发亦尽，余人与船，了无所损。
现代文：凡是船中装载的东西，全都化为灰烬。一位老婢女的头发也落光了。其余的人和船，丝毫没有损坏。
English: Everything in the boat was reduced to ashes, including the hair of an old servant girl. The rest of the people and the boat were not damaged at all.

古文：火灭，道士亦不复见。
现代文：火灭，道士也不见了。
English: The fire is out, and the Taoist priest is gone.

古文：崔彦章
现代文：崔彦章
English: Choe Heon-jong

古文：饶州史崔彦章，送客于城东。
现代文：饶州刺史崔彦章，在城东送客。
English: Raozhou assassin Cui Yanzhang, seen off guests in the east of the city.

古文：方宴，忽有小车，其色如金，高尺余，巡席而行，若有求觅。
现代文：刚开宴，忽然有一辆一尺来高的金黄色小车巡着席而走，好象寻找什么。
English: Just after the banquet had begun, a foot-tall, golden-yellow car suddenly circled the table, as if searching for something.

古文：至彦章前，遂止不行。
现代文：小车走到崔彦章跟前就停止不前了。
English: When the trolley reached Cui Yanzhang, it stopped.

古文：彦章因即绝倒，舆归州而卒。
现代文：崔彦章于是就昏倒，用车运回去就死了。
English: Cui Yanzhang then fainted and died after being transported back by car.

古文：润州气
现代文：润州气
English: Rongzhou gas

古文：戊子岁，润州有气如虹，五彩夺目。
现代文：戊子年，润州出现了一股好象彩虹的气体，五彩夺目。
English: In the year of Bo Zi, a rainbow-like stream of gas appeared in Renzhou, with a dazzling array of colors.

古文：有首如驴，长数十丈。
现代文：前头象一头驴，几十丈长。
English: His forehead is like a donkey's.

古文：环厅事而行，三周而灭。
现代文：气体环绕着厅堂而行，绕了三圈之后才消失。
English: The gas circled the hall, circling three times before disappearing.

古文：占者曰：厅中将有哭声，然非州府之咎也。
现代文：占卜的人说：这厅中将要出现哭声，但不是州府的灾祸。
English: The soothsayer said: There will be weeping in this hall, but not the calamity of the State House.

古文：顷之，其国太后殂，发哀于此堂。
现代文：不一会儿，他们的皇太后死了，在这座厅堂中发丧。
English: Soon after, their empress dowager died and was mourned in this hall.

古文：黄极
现代文：黄极
English: The yellow pole

古文：甲午岁，江西馆驿巡官黄极，子妇生子男，一首两身相背，四手四足。
现代文：甲午年，江西馆驿巡官黄极，他的儿媳妇生了一个男孩，一个脑袋，两个身子背靠背，四只手四只脚。
English: In the year of the horse, Huang Ji, the inspector of the Jiangxi Pavilion, and his daughter-in-law gave birth to a boy, one head, two bodies back to back, four hands and four feet.

古文：建昌民家生牛，每一足，更附出一足。
现代文：建昌一百姓家的牛生了一头小牛，每条腿上又附有一条腿。
English: In Jianchang, a cow belonging to a local family gave birth to a calf with one leg attached to each leg.

古文：投之江中，翌日浮于水上。
现代文：把它扔到江中，第二天漂在水上。
English: Throw it in the river and the next day it's floating on the water.

古文：南昌新义里地陷，长数十步，广者数丈，狭者七八尺。
现代文：南昌新义里地陷，几十步长，宽的地方几丈，窄的地方七八尺。
English: Nanchang Xinyili Depression, dozens of paces long, wide places a few feet, narrow places seven or eight feet.

古文：其年，节度使徐知询卒。
现代文：这一年，节度使徐知询死了。
English: This year, the festival caused the death of Xu Zhisheng.

古文：熊勋
现代文：熊勋
English: Xiong Xun

古文：军吏熊勋，家于建康长乐漫之东。
现代文：军吏熊勋，家住在建康长乐漫的东面。
English: Military officer Xiong Xun lives in the east of Jiankang Changle.

古文：常日晚出，屋上有二物，大如卵，赤而有光，往来相驰逐。
现代文：曾经在天晚的时候出来，见屋上有两个东西，鸡蛋那么大，色红而有光，一来一往互相追逐。
English: I once came out in the evening and saw two things on the roof, the size of eggs, red and shiny, chasing each other.

古文：家人骇惧。
现代文：家人害怕。
English: The family is scared.

古文：有亲客壮勇，登屋捕之。得其一，乃辟缯綵包一鸡卵壳也。
现代文：有一位壮勇的亲近客人到屋上去捕捉那两个东西，捉到一个，原来是用丝绸包着的一个鸡蛋壳。
English: An intrepid nearby guest went up to the roof to catch the two objects, and caught one, which turned out to be an eggshell wrapped in silk.

古文：剉而焚之，臭闻数里。
现代文：打碎它用火烧，臭味传出好几里。
English: Smash it up and burn it. The smell will travel for miles.

古文：其一走去，不复来矣。
现代文：那个跑掉的，不再来了。
English: The one that got away, he's not coming back.

古文：家亦无恙。
现代文：他家也安全无恙。
English: His family is also safe and well.

古文：王建封
现代文：王建封
English: Wang Jianfeng

古文：江南军使王建封，骄恣奢僭。
现代文：江南军使王建封，骄横放纵，奢侈过度。
English: Wang Jianfeng, the commander of the Southern Jiangsu Army, was arrogant, indulgent, and extravagant.

古文：筑大第于淮之南。暇日临街，坐窗下。
现代文：他在淮水南面造了一处大宅第。一日闲来无事，他坐在临街的窗下。
English: He built a large house on the south side of Huai Shui. After a day of idleness, he sat under the window facing the street.

古文：见一老妪，携少女过于前。
现代文：看见一位老太太领一位少女从眼前走过。
English: I saw an old lady leading a young girl past me.

古文：衣服褴缕，而姿色绝世。
现代文：那少女衣服破烂，但是姿色绝世。
English: The girl's clothes were tattered, but her appearance was flawless.

古文：建封呼问之。云：孤贫无依，乞食至此。
现代文：王建封把她喊到跟前问话，她们说：我们孤寡贫穷没有依靠，要饭来到这里。
English: Wang Jianfeng called her forward for questioning, and they said: "We are single, poor, and have no means of support. We came here to beg for food.

古文：建封曰：吾纳尔女，而给养尔终身，可乎？
现代文：王建封说：我纳你的女儿为妾，供养你终身，可以吗？
English: Wang Jianfeng said: May I take your daughter as a concubine and support you for life?

古文：妪欣然。
现代文：老太太很高兴。
English: The old lady was delighted.

古文：建封即召入，命取新衣二袭以衣之。
现代文：王建封就让她们到家里来，让人取来两套衣服给她们穿上。
English: Wang Jianfeng asked them to come to his home and let him fetch two sets of clothes for them to wear.

古文：妪及女始脱故衣，皆为凝血，聚于地。
现代文：老太太和少女刚脱下旧衣服，二人全都变成凝血，聚集在地上。
English: The old lady and the girl had just taken off their old clothes when they both became blood-curdling and gathered on the ground.

古文：旬月，建封被诛。
现代文：一个月之后，王建封被诛杀。
English: A month later, Wang Jianfeng was beaten to death.

古文：广陵士人
现代文：广陵士人
English: Guangling Scholars

古文：广陵有士人，常张灯独寝。
现代文：广陵有一位士人，常常点着灯独自睡觉。
English: There is a scholar in Guangling who often sleeps alone with a light on.

古文：一夕，中夜而寤。
现代文：一天晚上，睡到半夜就醒了。
English: One night, after sleeping until midnight, I woke up.

古文：忽有双髻青衣女子，资质甚丽，熟寐于其足。
现代文：忽然有一位梳着双髻的，姿色非常美丽的青衣女子，熟睡在他的脚下。
English: Suddenly, there was a very beautiful woman in a blue dress with braided hair, sleeping soundly at his feet.

古文：某知其妖物也，惧不敢近，复寝如故。
现代文：他知道她是妖怪，吓得不敢接近她，又象原来一样睡了。
English: He knew she was a ghost, was too scared to approach her, and went back to sleep as before.

古文：向晓乃失，门户犹故扃闭。
现代文：天将亮的时候女子才不见了，门窗仍然关闭着。
English: The woman only disappeared at dawn, when the doors and windows were still closed.

古文：自是夜夜恒至。
现代文：从此，这女子夜夜都来。
English: From then on, he came every evening.

古文：有术士，为书符，施髻中。
现代文：有一位术士，为他写了一道符，让他放到了发髻之中。
English: A sorcerer wrote a spell for him and put it in his hair.

古文：其夜，佯寝以伺之。
现代文：那天夜里，他装睡等着她。
English: That night, he pretended to be asleep and waited for her.

古文：果见自门而入，径诣髻中，解取符。灯下视之，微笑。
现代文：果然见她从门进来，她径直到发髻中拿出那符来，在灯下看，微笑。
English: Sure enough, I saw her come through the door, and she went all the way to the hairpin, pulled out the sign, looked under the lamp, and smiled.

古文：讫，复入置髻中，升床而寝。
现代文：看完了，又放回发髻中，上床睡下。
English: After reading it, I put it back in my hair and went to bed to sleep.

古文：甚惧。
现代文：他非常害怕。
English: He was very scared.

古文：后闻玉笥山有道士，符禁神妙，乃往访之。
现代文：后来听说玉笥山上有一位道士，符咒禁语非常精妙，就前去求访。
English: Later, he heard that there was a Taoist on Jade Mountain, and the magic spell was very exquisite, so he went to visit.

古文：既登舟，遂不至。
现代文：上船之后，女子就不来了。
English: After getting on the boat, the woman did not come back.

古文：途次豫章，暑夜，乘月行舟。
现代文：中途停在豫章，夜里很热，乘月行船。
English: We stopped in Yuzhang halfway, it was very hot at night, and we took the boat on the moon.

古文：时甚热，乃尽开船窗而寝。
现代文：当时由于天热，就全打开船窗睡觉。
English: At that time, due to the heat of the day, they all slept with the windows open.

古文：中夜，忽复见。
现代文：睡到半夜，那女子又出现了。
English: After sleeping until midnight, the woman reappeared.

古文：寐于床后。某即潜起，急捉其手足，投之江中，紞然有声。
现代文：她睡在床后，他就偷偷地起来，急忙捉住她的手脚，扔到江里去，发出打鼓一样的声音。
English: When she was asleep on the bed, he secretly got up, quickly grabbed her hands and feet and threw them into the river, making a sound like a drum.

古文：因尔遂绝。
现代文：于是这妖物就绝迹了。
English: As a result, the monster became extinct.

古文：张銿
现代文：张銿
English: Zhang Ye

古文：兖州录事参军张銿者，少年时，尝居淄州。
现代文：兖州录事参军张銿，年轻的时候，曾经住在淄州。
English: Zhang Ye, a young man, once lived in Zhangzhou.

古文：第中忽多鬼怪，唯不睹其形质。
现代文：他的宅第里忽然出现了许多鬼怪，只是看不到鬼怪的模样。
English: Many ghosts suddenly appeared in his house, but the appearance of the ghosts could not be seen.

古文：家僮辈捧执食馔，皆为鬼所搏，复置空器。
现代文：家僮们捧端着饭菜，全都被鬼夺去，又把空食器放回来。
English: The housemates were holding their meals, all of which were snatched away by the ghost, and they put the empty dishes back.

古文：或以器皿掷于空中，久之方堕。
现代文：有时把器皿扔到空中，很长时间才掉下来。
English: Sometimes they throw the vessels into the air, and it takes a long time for them to fall.

古文：或舍自行于地，更相击触。
现代文：有时全都自己走在地上，还互相撞击。
English: Sometimes they all walk on the ground by themselves and even bump into each other.

古文：又飞火块著人身，烧而不痛，若有诟詈之者，即砖石瓦砾，应声而至。
现代文：还把火块扔到人身上，烧而不痛。如果有诟骂鬼怪的，立即就会有砖瓦石块应声打来。
English: They also throw fire bricks on people, which burn without pain. If someone curses a ghost, bricks and stones will immediately follow.

古文：常有一儒生，不信其事，仗剑入宿于舍。
现代文：曾经有一个儒生，不相信这件事，带着剑住进来。
English: There was once a Confucian scholar who did not believe this and came to live here with a sword.

古文：其剑为瓦石所击，锋刃缺折。
现代文：那剑被瓦石打得锋刃断缺。
English: The blade of the sword was broken by the stone.

古文：又有称禁咒者，将入其门，倏见瓦石交下，不能复前。
现代文：又有一个自称会符咒的，要进这门的时候，突然看到瓦石交加而下，不能再往前走。
English: There was another one who claimed to be able to cast spells, but when he was about to enter the gate, he suddenly saw that the stones were stacked on top of each other, and he couldn't go any further.

古文：宾客来者，或被搏其巾帻，掷致他所，至有露顶而逸者。
现代文：来过的宾客，有的被抢去了头巾，扔到别的地方，以至有光着脑袋就逃的。
English: Some of the guests who came were robbed of their headscarves and thrown elsewhere, and some even fled with their heads bare.

古文：如是累旬方已，其家竟亦无他。
现代文：如此连连折腾了十天才停止，他的家最终也没有别的怪事。
English: This went on for ten days before it stopped, and eventually nothing else strange happened in his home.

古文：宗梦征
现代文：宗梦征
English: by Zong Mengsheng

古文：晋蔡州巡官宗梦征，善医，居东京。
现代文：晋朝蔡州巡官宗梦征，善长医药，住在东京。
English: Zong Mengsheng, the inspector general of Caizhou during the Jin Dynasty, was good at medicine and lived in Tokyo.

古文：开运二年秋，解玉巷东有病者，夜深来召，乘马而至。
现代文：开运二年秋天，解玉巷东有一个有病的，深夜来找他看病，是骑马来的。
English: In the autumn of the second year of operation, there was a sick man in the east of Jieyu Alley. He came late at night to see a doctor. He came on horseback.

古文：将及四更，去解玉巷口民家门前，有一物，立而动，其形颇伟，若黑雾亭亭然。
现代文：将近四更的时候，到解玉巷口平民家的门前，发现一个东西，站着而且会动，形体很大，象高高立起的黑雾。
English: When I was nearly four years old, I went to the door of a commoner's house at the junction of Xieyu Alley and found a thing, standing and moving, with a large shape, like a high-rise black fog.

古文：仆者前行，愕立毛竖，马亦鼻鸣耳耸不进。
现代文：仆人走在前面，吓得停步，毛发悚立。马也鼻子翕张，耳朵竖起，不敢前进。
English: The servant walked in front, stopped in fright and his hair stood on end. The horse's nose twitched and its ears pricked up, afraid to go forward.

古文：宗则强定心神，策马而去。
现代文：宗梦征强定心神，驱马走过去。
English: Zong Mengzheng strengthened his mind and drove the horse over.

古文：比其患者之家，则不能诊脉，尤觉恍惚矣。
现代文：等到了患者之家，已经吓得不能诊脉，感到特别恍惚。
English: By the time I got to the patient's home, I was too scared to take a pulse, and I felt particularly dazed.

古文：既归伏枕，凡六七日方愈。
现代文：回家之后，一下子病倒，六七天之后才好。
English: After I got home, I suddenly fell ill. It took six or seven days before I got better.

古文：黄仁浚
现代文：黄仁浚
English: Huang Renzhong

古文：舒州司士参军黄仁浚，自言壬子岁，罢陇州汧阳主簿，至凤翔城。
现代文：舒州司士参军黄仁浚自己说，壬子年他罢了陇州汧阳主薄的官职，到了凤翔城。
English: Huang Renzhun, a Shuzhou magistrate who joined the army, said that he left the official post of the governor of Shanzhou and Shiyang and came to Fengxiang City.

古文：有文殊寺，寺中土偶数十躯，忽自然摇动，状如醉人，食顷不止。
现代文：凤翔城里有一座文殊寺，寺中有几十个泥像。这些泥像忽然自己摇动，样子象喝醉了的人，一顿饭的工夫没停止。
English: In Fengxiang City, there is a Wenshu Temple, and there are dozens of mud statues in the temple. These mud statues suddenly shake themselves, looking like a drunk person, and the time of a meal has not stopped.

古文：观者如堵，官司禁止之。
现代文：围观的人山人海，官府禁止围观。
English: A sea of onlookers. The government has banned onlookers.

古文：至今未知其应。
现代文：至今不知有什么应验。
English: To this day, I don't know what happened.

古文：孙德遵
现代文：孙德遵
English: Sun Dezhun

古文：舒州都虞侯孙德遵，其家寝堂中铁灯擎，忽自摇动，如人撼之，至明日，有一婢偶至灯擎所，忽然尔仆地，遂卒。
现代文：舒州都虞侯孙德遵，他家寝室里的铁灯架，忽然自己摇动，象人撼动了它。到了第二天，有一个婢女偶尔来到灯架旁边，忽然倒在地上，于是就死了。
English: Sun Dezun, a feudal lord in the capital of Shuzhou, suddenly shook the iron lamp stand in his bedroom by himself. The elephant shook it. The next day, a servant girl occasionally came to the lamp stand, suddenly fell to the ground, and died.

古文：人妖
现代文：人妖
English: Shinya

古文：东郡民
现代文：东郡民
English: Donggunmin Village

古文：汉建安中，东郡民家有怪事。
现代文：汉朝建安年间，东郡一户平民家里有怪事。
English: During the Jian'an period of the Han Dynasty, a strange thing happened in the home of a commoner in Dong County.

古文：无故瓮器自发，訇訇作声，若有人击。
现代文：无缘无故瓮、罐等器皿自己就打开了，发出訇訇的响声，就像有人击打似的。
English: For no reason, pots, jars and other utensils open by themselves, emitting a banging sound, as if someone were hitting them.

古文：盘案在前，忽然便失。
现代文：盘子、案子本来在眼前，忽然就没了。
English: The plate and the case were right in front of me, but suddenly they were gone.

古文：鸡生辄失子。
现代文：鸡生了蛋动不动就不见了。
English: Once the chicken has laid its eggs, it disappears without moving.

古文：如是数岁，人共恶之。
现代文：如此好几年。人们都很讨厌。
English: It's been like this for years. People are disgusting.

古文：乃多作美食，覆盖著一室中，阴藏户间伺之。
现代文：就多做了些好吃的，覆盖起来放在一个屋里，偷偷藏在门后等着。
English: They made some more delicious food, covered it up and put it in a room, secretly hiding behind the door and waiting.

古文：果复来发。
现代文：果然又来打开。
English: And sure enough, it opened again.

古文：闻声，便闭户周旋。
现代文：一听到声音，便关了门窗和它周旋。
English: As soon as he heard the sound, he closed the doors and windows and circled around it.

古文：室中了无所见，乃暗以杖挝之。
现代文：屋里什么也看不见，就暗自用木棒打它。
English: Unable to see anything in the room, he secretly beat it with a wooden stick.

古文：至久，于室隅闻有呻呼之声，乃开户视之。
现代文：打到很久，听到屋角上有呻吟的声音，这才打开门来看。
English: After a long beat, I heard a moaning sound in the corner of the roof and opened the door to take a look.

古文：得一老翁，可百余岁，言语状貌，颇类于兽。
现代文：见到一个老头，能有一百多岁，说话和模样，很像野兽。
English: To see an old man, who can be more than a hundred years old, speak and look like a beast.

古文：遂周问，及于数里外得其家。
现代文：于是就到处打听，在几里外找到他家。
English: So they asked around and found his home a few miles away.

古文：云，失来十余年，得之哀喜。
现代文：家里人说，他丢失十多年了，找到他真是又悲又喜。
English: The family member said that he had been lost for more than ten years, and it was both sad and happy to find him.

古文：后岁余，复失之。
现代文：后来一年多，他又丢失了。
English: More than a year later, he lost it again.

古文：闻陈留界复有怪如此，时犹以为此翁。
现代文：听说陈留一带又有这样的怪物，当时人们还以为就是这个老头。
English: When people heard that there was another monster like this in the Chenliu area, they thought it was the old man.

古文：胡顼
现代文：胡顼
English: Hu Yao

古文：夏县尉胡顼，词人也。
现代文：夏县县尉胡顼，是个词人。
English: Xia County Lieutenant Hu Yao is a poet.

古文：尝至金城县界，止于人家。
现代文：有一次他到金城县去，住在一户人家里。
English: Once he went to Jincheng County and lived in a family's home.

古文：人为具食，顼未食，私出。
现代文：人家给他准备了吃的东西，胡顼没吃，私自跑了出去。
English: They prepared something for him to eat, but he didn't eat it, so I ran out.

古文：及还，见一老母，长二尺，垂白寡发，据案而食，饼果且尽。
现代文：等到回来，他看见一位老女人，二尺高，垂着稀疏的白头发，占着桌案正在吃，饼果将被她吃光。
English: When he came back, he saw an old woman, two feet tall, with thin white hair hanging down, occupying the table and eating, and she would eat all the cookies.

古文：其家新妇出，见而怒之，搏其耳，曳入户。
现代文：那家的新媳妇出来，见了她很生气，揪着她的耳朵拽进屋里。
English: The family's new daughter-in-law came out, was angry to see her, grabbed her by the ear and dragged her into the house.

古文：顼就而窥之，纳母于槛中，窥望两目如丹。
现代文：胡顼走上前去窥视，见新媳妇把老女人装进笼子里。老女人的两只眼睛，向外窥望，红如丹砂。
English: Hu Yao stepped forward to peep, and saw the new daughter-in-law put the old woman into the cage. The old woman's two eyes, peeking out, were red as snow.

古文：顼问其故，妇人曰：此名为魅，乃七代祖姑也。寿三百余年而不死，其形转小。
现代文：胡顼问这是为什么，妇人说：这个人叫做 魅 ，是上七辈祖奶奶，活了三百多岁而不死。她的身形变小了。
English: Hu Yao asked why this was, and the woman said: This person is called Mei, is the seventh generation of grandparents, lived more than three hundred years without dying. Her body has become smaller.

古文：不须衣裳，不惧寒暑。锁之槛，终岁如常。
现代文：不需要衣服，不怕冷热，锁在笼子里，四季如常。
English: No need for clothes, no fear of cold or heat, locked in a cage, four seasons as usual.

古文：忽得出槛，偷窃饭食得数斗。故号为魅。
现代文：偶然从笼子里跑出来，偷饭吃能吃好几斗，所以才叫做 魅 。
English: Accidentally running out of the cage, stealing food to eat can eat several buckets, so it is called "charm."

古文：顼异之。所在言焉。
现代文：胡顼感到惊奇，奇就奇在妇人说的话里边。
English: Hu Yao was surprised, and wondered at the woman's words.

古文：乌程县人
现代文：乌程县人
English: People from Wucheng County

古文：吴孙休时，乌程有人，因重疾愈而能响言，音闻十数里外。
现代文：三国东吴孙休的时候，乌程有一个人，因为重病痊愈后能喊出很响的话，声音能传出十几里外。
English: When the Three Kingdoms period was ending, there was a man in Wucheng who, after recovering from a serious illness, was able to shout so loudly that his voice could be heard more than ten miles away.

古文：所闻之处，即若座间。
现代文：所能听到的地方，就像他在座间。
English: As far as you can hear, it's like he's singing in the audience.

古文：其邻家，有子居外，久不归省。其父假之，使为责词。
现代文：他的邻居，有个儿子住外地，很长时间没回来探家，邻居就借助他来对儿子说了些责备的话。
English: His neighbor had a son who lived out of town and hadn't been back to visit for a long time, so the neighbor used him to say some words of reproach to his son.

古文：子闻之，以为鬼神，颠沛而归。
现代文：儿子听到了，以为是鬼神，就风尘仆仆地回来了。
English: My son heard it and thought it was a ghost, so he hurried back.

古文：亦不知所以然也。
现代文：也不知他为什么能这样。
English: I don't know how he does it.

古文：李宣妻
现代文：李宣妻
English: Li Xuanzhu

古文：晋安帝义熙中，魏兴李宣妻樊氏，有娠，过期不孕。
现代文：晋安帝义熙年间，魏兴人李宣的妻子樊氏，怀了孕，过了期也没生。
English: During the reign of Emperor Yixi of the Jin and An dynasties, the wife of Li Xuan, a Wei Xing person, was pregnant, but she did not give birth after the due date.

古文：而额上有疮，儿穿之而出。
现代文：而她额头上有疮，婴儿从疮口生出来。
English: And she had sores on her forehead, and babies were coming out of the sores.

古文：赵宣母
现代文：赵宣母
English: Zhao Xuanmu

古文：长山赵宣母，妊身，臂上生疮，儿从疮中出。
现代文：长山赵宣的母亲，怀了孕，臂上生了疮，婴儿从疮里生出来。
English: Changshan Zhao Xuan's mother, pregnant, had a sore on her arm, and the baby was born from the sore.

古文：马氏妇
现代文：马氏妇
English: Ma's Wife

古文：后蜀李势末年，马氏妇妊身，儿从肋下出，母子无恙。
现代文：后蜀李势末年，一个姓马的妇女怀了孕，孩子从胸侧生出来，母子都安全无恙。
English: In the later years of the Shu-Li Dynasty, a woman surnamed Ma became pregnant. The child was born from the side of the chest, and both mother and child were safe and sound.

古文：其年，势为桓温所灭。
现代文：那年李势被桓温灭亡。
English: That year, Li Xiang was killed by Kanwen.

古文：杨欢妻
现代文：杨欢妻
English: Yang Huanzhu

古文：宋孝武时，荆州人杨欢妻，于股中生女。
现代文：南朝宋孝武帝时，荆州人杨欢的妻子，从大腿上生了个女儿。
English: During the Southern Dynasty of Emperor Song Xiaowu, the wife of Yang Huan, a native of Jingzhou, gave birth to a daughter in her lap.

古文：及孝武崩，子业立。狂勃，被废见害。
现代文：到孝武帝死后，刘子业登基，因狂暴被废除，被害死。
English: After the death of Emperor Xiaowu, Liu Ziye ascended to the throne, but was overthrown by violence and killed.

古文：所生女，至齐犹存。
现代文：杨欢妻所生的女儿到了齐朝还活着。
English: The daughter born to Yang Huan's wife was still alive in the Qi Dynasty.

古文：寿安男子
现代文：寿安男子
English: Shouan men's wrestling

古文：寿安男子，不知姓名。
现代文：寿安有一位男子，不知道他的姓名。
English: There is a man in Shouan, I don't know his name.

古文：肘拍板，鼻吹笛，口唱歌。能半面笑，半面啼。
现代文：他的肘能拍板，鼻能吹笛，口能唱歌，能半张脸笑，半张脸哭。
English: His elbows can clap, his nose can play the flute, his mouth can sing, he can smile with half his face and cry with half his face.

古文：一乌犬解人语，应口所作，与人无殊。
现代文：一只黑狗能听懂人语，答应后做的事情，和人没什么两样。
English: A black dog can understand human speech, and what it does after agreeing to do is no different from humans.

古文：崔广宗
现代文：崔广宗
English: Choe Kwang-jong

古文：清河崔广宗者，开元中为蓟县令。
现代文：清河人崔广宗，开元年间是蓟县县令。
English: Cui Guangzong, a native of Qinghe, was the county magistrate of Jixian County during the first year of the year.

古文：犯法，张守珪致之极刑。
现代文：他犯了法，张守珪判他极刑。
English: He broke the law, and Zhang Shouyi sentenced him to capital punishment.

古文：广宗被枭首，而形体不死。
现代文：崔广宗被砍了头，但是形体不死。
English: Cui Guangzong was beheaded, but his body did not die.

古文：家人舁归。
现代文：家人把他抬回去。
English: His family carried him back.

古文：每饥，即画地作饥字，家人遂屑食于颈孔中，饱即书止字。
现代文：每当他饿了，就在地上写一个饥字，家人就从脖孔中填加碎食，饱了就写一个止字。
English: Whenever he was hungry, he would write a hunger character on the ground, and his family members would fill his throat with food scraps and write a stop character when he was full.

古文：家人等有过犯，书令决之。
现代文：家人有犯过错的，他就写字决定怎么处治。
English: If a family member makes a mistake, he writes a letter and decides how to handle it.

古文：如是三四岁，世情不替。
现代文：如此三四年，世情没有变化。
English: For the past three or four years, the situation has not changed.

古文：更生一男。
现代文：他妻子又生了一个男孩。
English: His wife gave birth to another boy.

古文：于一日书地云：后日当死，宜备凶具。
现代文：有一天他在地上写道：后天会死的，应该准备好凶具。
English: One day he wrote on the ground: I will die the day after tomorrow, I should prepare the murder weapon.

古文：如其言也。
现代文：果然象他说的那样。
English: It was exactly as he said.

古文：许州僧
现代文：许州僧
English: Xuzhou Monk

古文：许州有一老僧，自四十岁已后，每寝熟，即喉声如鼓簧，若成韵节。
现代文：许州有一位老僧，从四十岁以后，每当睡熟，喉声就象奏乐，好象有节奏。
English: There is an old monk in Xuzhou who, after the age of forty, whenever he falls asleep, his throat sounds like music, as if it has a rhythm.

古文：许州伶人伺其寝，即谱其声，按之丝竹，皆合古奏。
现代文：许州从事演唱的人等他睡了，就谱录他的声音，用乐器一奏，都合乎古乐。
English: Singers in Xuzhou wait for him to fall asleep, then record his voice and play it on a musical instrument. It sounds like ancient music.

古文：僧觉，亦不自知。
现代文：老僧醒了自己也不知道。
English: The old monk woke up and didn't even know it.

古文：二十余年如此。
现代文：二十多年都这样。
English: It's been like this for more than 20 years.

古文：田瞫
现代文：田瞫
English: Tianluo

古文：秀才田瞫云，大和六年秋，凉州西县百姓妻，产一子。
现代文：秀才田瞫说，大和六年秋天，凉州西县的一个百姓的妻子，生下一个儿子。
English: "In the autumn of the sixth year of the Yamato era, the wife of a commoner in the west county of Liangzhou gave birth to a son.

古文：四手四足，一身分两面，顶上发一穗，长至足。
现代文：四只手四只脚，一个身子两张脸，头顶上的头发长成一穗，发长到脚。
English: Four hands, four feet, one body, two faces, and the hair on the top of his head grew to a full head, and the hair on his feet.

古文：时朝伯峻为县令。
现代文：当时朝伯峻是县令。
English: At that time, Chohoshun was the county magistrate.

古文：元镐
现代文：元镐
English: Yuanxuan

古文：故京兆少尹元镐，任虢县令日，怒一狱子王行约者。
现代文：原京兆少尹元镐，任虢县县令的时候，对一个叫王行约的狱卒很生气。
English: Former Beijing Minor Yin Yuanjun, when he was the county magistrate of Handan County, was very angry with a jailer named Wang Xingyao.

古文：命曳之，去巾，既无毛发，而有两角，长三四寸。
现代文：让人上前拽他，除去他的头巾，见他没有头发，却有两只角，角长三四寸。
English: And they brought him forth, and stripped him, and, lo, he had no hair, but had two horns of four and three inches.

古文：镐曰：真牛头也。
现代文：元镐说：真是牛头。
English: Motohiro said, "It really is a cow's head."

古文：遂舍之。
现代文：就放了他。
English: and they let him go.

古文：无足妇人
现代文：无足妇人
English: The legless woman

古文：晋少主之代，有妇人，仪状端严，衣服铅粉，不下美人。
现代文：晋少主的时候，有一位妇人，仪表容貌端庄，衣服华丽，不比美人差。
English: When Jin was a young lord, there was a woman with a dignified appearance and gorgeous clothes, no less than a beauty.

古文：而无腿足，繇带以下，像截而齐，余皆具备。
现代文：但是她没有腿和脚，腰带以下，象截的那么齐，其余的都具备。
English: But she doesn't have legs and feet, below the waist she is as flat as a pancake, the rest is all there.

古文：其父载之于独车，自邺南游浚都，乞丐于市，日聚千人。
现代文：她父亲单独用一辆车载着她，从邺南游浚都，在市上要饭，每天都聚集上千人。
English: Her father used a single car to carry her from southern Anhui Province to Danzhong, where she begged for food in the market, attracting thousands of people every day.

古文：至于深坊曲巷，华屋朱门，无所不至。
现代文：至于深街曲巷、豪门大家，她没有不去的地方。
English: As for everyone in the deep streets, winding alleys, and high-end stores, she has no place to go.

古文：时人嗟异，皆掷而施之。
现代文：时人慨叹她的怪异，都投掷钱物施舍于她。
English: At the time, people lamented her eccentricity and threw money and gifts at her.

古文：后京城获北戎间谍，官司案之，乃此妇为奸人之领袖。
现代文：后来京城抓获一个北戎的间谍，官府一查，原来这妇人是奸人的领袖。
English: Later, a Beijong spy was caught in Beijing, and after an investigation by the government, it turned out that this woman was the leader of the traitors.

古文：所听察甚多，遂戮之。
现代文：她弄到的情报很多，于是就杀了她。
English: She got a lot of information, so they killed her.

古文：娄逞
现代文：娄逞
English: 逞

古文：南齐东阳女子娄逞，变服诈为丈夫。粗会棋博，解文义。游公卿门。
现代文：南齐东阳女子娄逞，变换服饰扮作男子，多少懂一些棋艺博戏，粗通文义，交游于公卿门第。
English: The Dongyang women of Nanqi are bold, change their clothes to look like men, have some knowledge of chess and games, are not well versed in literature, and mingle with the gentry.

古文：仕至扬州从事而事泄。
现代文：做官做到扬州从事而事情泄漏了。
English: The official was in Yangzhou at the time and the matter was leaked.

古文：明帝令东还，始作妇人服。
现代文：齐明帝让她东归，才穿上女人的服装。
English: Emperor Qiming only allowed her to return to the East after she had put on a woman's dress.

古文：叹曰：有如此伎，还为老妪，岂不惜哉。
现代文：她叹道：我有这样的本事，回家当个老太太，难道不可惜吗？
English: She sighed, "Isn't it a pity that I have the ability to go home as an old lady?"

古文：史臣曰：此人妖也。
现代文：史臣说：这是个人妖。
English: "It's a personal demon," Mr. Shih said.

古文：阴为阳，事不可。
现代文：阴变成阳。这样的事是不可以的。
English: Yin becomes yang. Such a thing is not allowed.

古文：后崔惠景举事不成应之。
现代文：后来崔惠景举大事不成应了这件事。
English: Later, Cui Huijing made a big fuss about this matter.

古文：孟妪
现代文：孟妪
English: Meng Wei

古文：彭城刘颇，常谓子婿进士王胜话，三原县南董店，店东壁，贞元末，有孟妪，年一百余而卒。
现代文：彭城的刘颇，曾经对他的女婿进士王胜说，三原县南董店东面隔壁，贞元末年有一个姓孟的老太太，活了一百多岁才死。
English: Liu Po of Pengcheng once told his son-in-law, Jin Shi Wang Sheng, that there was an old lady surnamed Meng in the late Zhenyuan period, who lived more than a hundred years before she died, next to the east side of Nantong Store in Mihara County.

古文：店人悉曰张大夫店。
现代文：这个店人们都叫它张大夫店。
English: People call this store "Dr. Zhang's Store."

古文：颇自渭北入城，止于媪店。见有一媪，年只可六十已来。
现代文：刘颇从渭北入城，住在老妇人店里，见有一位老妇人，年龄约摸六十来岁。
English: Liu Po entered the city from the north of Shandong Province and lived in an old woman's shop. He saw an old woman who was about sixty years old.

古文：衣黄绸大裘，乌帻，跨门而坐焉。
现代文：她穿黄绸子大皮袄，戴黑头巾，跨门坐在那里。
English: Dressed in a large yellow silk saree and a black headscarf, she sits astride the gate.

古文：左卫李胄曹，名士广。其妪问广何官，广具答之。
现代文：左卫李胄曹，名叫士广，那老太太问李士广做什么官，李士广作了详细回答。
English: The left guard, Li Xizhao, was named Shiguang. The old lady asked Li Shiguang what kind of official he was. Li Shiguang gave a detailed answer.

古文：其媪曰：此四卫耳，大好官。
现代文：那老妇人说：这是四卫，大好官！
English: The old woman said, "This is Sifu, the great official!"

古文：广即问媪曰：何以言之。
现代文：李士广就问老妇人：为什么这么说呢？
English: Li Shiguang asked the old woman: Why did you say that?

古文：媪曰：吾年二十六，嫁于张詧为妻。
现代文：老妇人说：我二十六岁的时候，嫁给张詧为妻。
English: The old woman said, "When I was twenty-six years old, I married Zhang Ye.

古文：詧为人多力，善骑射。
现代文：张詧很有力气，善于骑马射箭。
English: Zhang Qian is very strong and good at horseback riding and archery.

古文：郭汾阳之总朔方，此皆部制之郡。灵夏邠泾岐蒲是焉。
现代文：郭子仪总镇朔方，这都是他的部下辖制的郡，灵、夏、邠、泾、岐、蒲就是。
English: Guo Ziyi's general town is Shuo Fang. These are all counties under his jurisdiction, namely Ling, Xia, Handan, Handan, Qi and Pu.

古文：吾夫张詧，为汾阳所任，请重衣赐，常在汾阳左右。
现代文：我丈夫张詧，就是郭子仪任用的，受到过许多赏赐，常在郭子仪的左右。
English: My husband Zhang Ye, who was appointed by Guo Ziyi, has received many awards and is often at Guo Ziyi's side.

古文：詧之貌，酷相类吾。
现代文：张詧的相貌，和我特别相象。
English: Zhang Ye's appearance is very similar to mine.

古文：詧卒，汾阳伤之。
现代文：张詧死后，郭子仪很悲伤。
English: After Zhang Xuan's death, Guo Ziyi was very sad.

古文：吾遂伪衣丈夫衣冠，投名为詧弟，请事汾阳。
现代文：我就穿了丈夫的衣服，戴了丈夫的帽子，假扮张詧的弟弟，请求到郭子仪手下做事。
English: I put on my husband's clothes, put on my husband's hat, pretended to be Zhang Ye's younger brother, and asked to work under Guo Ziyi.

古文：汾阳大喜，令替缺。
现代文：郭子仪大喜，让我顶替了空缺。
English: Guo Ziyi was overjoyed and let me fill the vacancy.

古文：如此又寡居一十五年。
现代文：这样就又寡居了一十五年。
English: Thus she remained a widow for another fifteen years.

古文：自汾阳之薨，吾已年七十二。
现代文：郭子仪死时，我已经七十二岁。
English: When Guo Ziyi died, I was already 72 years old.

古文：军中累奏，兼御史大夫。
现代文：军中连连奏请，让我兼做御史大夫。
English: I'd like to be a liaison officer in the army.

古文：忽思茕独，遂嫁此店潘老为妇。
现代文：我忽然觉得孤独，就嫁给这个店潘老汉为妇。
English: I suddenly felt lonely, so I married Pan Lao Han from this store.

古文：迩来复诞二子，曰滔，曰渠。
现代文：近来又生了两个儿子，叫潘滔、潘渠。
English: Recently, she gave birth to two more sons, named Pan Tao and Pan Qu.

古文：滔五十有四，渠年五十有二。
现代文：潘滔五十有四。潘渠五十有二。
English: Pan Tao has four in fifty. Pan Qu has two in fifty.

古文：是二儿也，颇每心记之。
现代文：这两个儿子，刘颇常常在心中记起。
English: These two sons, Liu Po often remembered in his heart.

古文：与子婿王胜，话人间之异者。
现代文：他和女婿王胜，述说人间的怪异。
English: He and his son-in-law, Wang Sheng, narrate the strangeness of the human world.

古文：黄崇嘏
现代文：黄崇嘏
English: Huang Chongyao

古文：王蜀有伪相周庠者，初在邛南幕中，留司府事。
现代文：五代前蜀的伪相叫周庠。他当初在邛南幕府中，留下管理府事。
English: The fifth generation of the former Shu's pseudo-relative is called Zhou Yu. He was originally in the Southern Shogunate and left to manage the affairs of the government.

古文：时临邛县送失火人黄崇嘏，才下狱，便贡诗一章曰：偶离幽隐住临邛，行止坚贞比涧松。
现代文：当时临邛县送来一个叫黄崇嘏的失火人，才下狱便献诗一首说：偶离幽隐住临邛，行止坚贞比涧松。
English: At that time, Linyi County sent a fireman named Huang Chongyao, and only after he was released from prison, he dedicated a poem saying: "I occasionally live in Linyi, and I am more steadfast than the pine trees."

古文：何事政清如水镜，绊他野鹤向深笼。
现代文：何事政清如水镜，绊他野鹤向深笼。
English: Everything about politics is as clear as a mirror. If you trip him up, he'll run for the hills.

古文：周览诗，遂召见。
现代文：周庠读完诗，就召见他。
English: After Zhou Jun finished reading the poem, he summoned him.

古文：称乡贡进士，年三十许，祗对详敏。即命释放。
现代文：称他是乡贡进士。他年龄在三十岁左右，恭敬地回答问题详细敏捷，周庠就下令释放他。
English: He was about thirty years old, respectfully answered questions in detail and quickly, and Zhou Bin ordered him to be released.

古文：后数日，献歌。
现代文：几天后，他献来一首歌。
English: A few days later, he came up with a song.

古文：周极奇之，召于学院与诸生侄相伴。
现代文：周庠认为他不一般，把他召入学院，与各位读书的子侄为伴。
English: Zhou Yu thought he was unusual and invited him to the academy to be with his sons and nephews who were studying there.

古文：善棋琴，妙书画。
现代文：黄崇嘏善长下棋和弹琴，妙于书画。
English: Huang Chongyao was good at playing chess and the piano, and excelled at painting and calligraphy.

古文：翌日，荐摄府司户参军。
现代文：第二天，他被推荐代理府司户参军。
English: The next day, he was recommended by the deputy governor to join the army.

古文：颇有三语之称，胥吏畏伏，案牍丽明。
现代文：很有三语的美称，小官吏敬畏他，他办的案牍文书漂亮清楚。
English: He is well-known for his proficiency in three languages, minor officials revere him, and his paperwork is beautiful and clear.

古文：周既重其英聪，又美其风采。
现代文：周庠既器重他的聪明，又赞美他的风采。
English: Zhou Rong not only valued his wisdom, but also praised his style.

古文：在任将逾一载，遂欲以女妻之。
现代文：他在任将超过一年，周庠就想要把女儿嫁给他为妻。
English: After he had been in office for more than a year, Zhou Yiming wanted to marry his daughter to him.

古文：崇嘏又袖封状谢，仍贡诗一篇曰：一辞拾翠碧江涯，贫守蓬茅但赋诗。
现代文：黄崇嘏又带上一封辞谢信，仍献诗一首说：一辞拾翠碧江涯，贫守蓬茅但赋诗。
English: Huang Chongyao also brought a letter of resignation and thanks, and still presented a poem saying: one word picks up the verdant beauty of the river, the poor keep the pontoon, but the poem.

古文：自服蓝衫居扳椽，永抛鸾镜画蛾眉。
现代文：自服蓝衫居扳椽，永抛鸾镜画蛾眉。
English: He wears a blue shirt, lives in a broom closet, and always draws moth brows in front of a mirror.

古文：立身卓尔青松操，挺志铿然白璧姿。
现代文：立身卓尔青松操，挺志铿然白璧姿。
English: Standing tall with a youthful posture, she looks determined and radiant.

古文：幕府若容为坦腹，愿天速变作男儿。
现代文：幕府若容为坦腹，愿天速变作男儿。
English: If the shogunate is tolerant and easy-going, I hope it will quickly turn into a man.

古文：周览诗，惊骇不已，遂召见诘问。
现代文：周庠看完诗，惊骇不已，于是就召见她，盘问她。
English: After reading the poem, Zhou Ye was shocked, so he summoned her and interrogated her.

古文：乃黄使君之女，幼失覆荫，唯与老奶同居，元未从人。
现代文：原来她是黄使君的女儿，从小失去母爱，只和老祖母同居，一直没有嫁人。
English: It turned out that she was the daughter of Huang Jizhong, who had lost her mother's love since childhood, only lived with her old grandmother, and had never married.

古文：周益仰贞洁，郡内咸皆叹异。
现代文：周庠更加仰慕她的贞洁，郡内全都叹她与众不同。
English: Zhou Qi admired her chastity even more, and everyone in the county lamented that she was different.

古文：旋乞罢，归临邛之旧隐，竟莫知存亡焉。
现代文：不久她请求免官，回到临邛旧居，竟不知她是存是亡。
English: Soon after, she asked to be relieved of her duties and returned to her former home in Linyi, not knowing whether she was alive or dead.

古文：白项鸦
现代文：白项鸦
English: White-necked crow

古文：契丹犯阙之初，所在群盗蜂起，戎人患之。
现代文：契丹进犯京城之初，所在之地盗贼蜂起，戎人很担忧。
English: At the beginning of the Khitan invasion of the capital, the thieves revolted in the place where they were located, and the eunuchs were very worried.

古文：陈州有一妇人，为贼帅，号曰白项鸦。
现代文：陈州有一个妇人，是盗贼之帅，外号白项鸦。
English: There is a woman in Chenzhou who is a handsome thief, nicknamed the White-Necked Raven.

古文：年可四十许，形质粗短，发黄体黑。
现代文：年龄有四十来岁，形貌又粗又短，头发黄，身体黑。
English: He was in his forties, short and stocky, with yellow hair and a dark complexion.

古文：来诣戎王，袭男子姓名，衣中拜跪，皆为男子状。
现代文：她来拜见戎王，用的是男子的姓名，衣服、头巾、拜跪，全是男子模样。
English: She came to pay homage to King Jung, using a man's name, clothes, headscarf, kneeling, all in the guise of a man.

古文：戎王召见，赐锦袍银带鞍马，署为怀化将军。
现代文：戎王召见她，赐给她锦袍、银带、鞍马，让她暂任怀化将军。
English: King Eun summoned her, gave her a brocade robe, a silver belt, and a pommel horse, and let her temporarily serve as the general of Huaihua.

古文：委之招辑山东诸盗，赐与甚厚。
现代文：委派她招安山东的盗贼，赏赐非常丰厚。
English: The thief in Shandong Province who appointed her received a very rich reward.

古文：伪燕王赵延寿，召问之。妇人自云，能左右驰射，被双鞬，日可行二百里。盘矛击剑，皆所善也。
现代文：伪燕王赵延寿召问她，妇人自己说，她能左右骑着马射箭，挎双弓，一天能走二百里，举枪击剑，都是她善长的。
English: Zhao Yanshou, the False Swallow King, summoned her for questioning. The woman herself said that she could ride a horse and shoot arrows left and right, carry two bows, walk two hundred miles a day, and hold a gun and sword, all of which she was good at.

古文：其属数千男子，皆役服之。
现代文：她手下几千男子，都听她使唤。
English: She has thousands of men at her beck and call.

古文：人问有夫否，云，前后有夫数十人，少不如意，皆手刃之矣。
现代文：有人问她有丈夫没有，她说，前后有丈夫几十人，稍有不如意，全都让她亲手杀了。
English: Someone asked her if she had a husband, and she said that she had had dozens of husbands in the past and present, all of whom she had killed with her own hands.

古文：闻者无不嗟愤。
现代文：听说的没有不气愤的。
English: I'm outraged by what I've heard.

古文：旬日在都下。乘马出入。又有一男子，亦乘马从之。
现代文：十天以后在都下，她骑着马出入，又有一个男子，也骑着马跟着她。
English: Ten days later, in the capital, she rode in and out, and another man, also on horseback, followed her.

古文：此人妖也。
现代文：这是个人妖。
English: It's a personal demon.

古文：北戎乱中夏，妇人称雄，皆阴盛之应。
现代文：北戎叛乱中夏，这妇人称雄，都是阴盛的表现。
English: In the middle of the Bei Rong Rebellion in the summer, this woman was a hero, all of which were manifestations of gloom.

古文：妇人后为兖州节度使符彦卿戮之。
现代文：这妇人后来被兖州节度使符彦卿杀死。
English: The woman was later killed by Zhangzhou Jiedu, who was sent by Fu Yanqing to assassinate her.

