古文：完颜素兰，一名翼，字伯扬，至宁元年策论进士也。
现代文：完颜素兰一名叫翼，字伯扬，至宁元年以策论而考中进士。
English: In the first year of the Ning Dynasty, Su Lan, also known as "Wing" and "Bo Yang," won the junior high school entrance examination with his strategy theory.

古文：贞祐初，累迁应奉翰林文字，权监察御史。
现代文：贞初年，累迁任应奉翰林文字，代理监察御史。
English: In the first year of Zhen, he was successively transferred to Feng Hanlin, acting as inspector of imperial history.

古文：二年，宣宗迁汴，留皇太子于燕都，既而召之，素兰以为不可，平章高琪曰： 主上居此，太子宜从。
现代文：二年，金宣宗迁往汴京，先留皇太子镇守燕都，后来又要召回太子，完颜素兰认为不应当。平章高琪说 ：皇帝住在这里，太子就应当跟从。
English: In the second year, Kim Xuan Zong moved to Yanjing. First, he left the crown prince to guard Yandu, and later he wanted to recall the prince. However, Su Lan did not think it was appropriate. Pingzhang Gaoqi said, "The emperor lives here, so the prince should follow."

古文：且汝能保都城必完否？ 
现代文：况且你能保证都城一定完整稳固吗？ 
English: Moreover, can you guarantee that the capital will be complete and stable?

古文：素兰曰： 完固不敢必，但太子在彼则声势俱重，边隘有守则都城可无虞。
现代文：素兰说 ：完整稳固我不敢肯定，但太子在那里就声势俱重，边隘有守卫则都城可以无忧。
English: Suran said: I'm not sure if it's complete and stable, but the crown prince has a lot of influence there, and if there are guards on the borders, the capital can be worry-free.

古文：昔唐明皇幸蜀，太子实在灵武，盖将以系天下之心也。 
现代文：过去唐明皇去蜀，而太子却住在灵武，这是要用来连结天下人的心啊！ 
English: In the past, Emperor Tang Ming went to Shu, but the prince stayed in Lingwu. This is to be used to connect the hearts of the world!

古文：不从，竟召太子从。
现代文：可是，皇帝不肯听从，竟然召回太子从驾。
English: However, the emperor would not listen, and even recalled the crown prince from his carriage.

古文：七月，车驾至汴，素兰上书言事，略曰： 昔东海在位，信用谗谄，疏斥忠直，以致小人日进，君子日退，纪纲紊乱，法度益隳。
现代文：七月，车驾到了汴京，完颜素兰上书奏事，大意说： 以前东海王在位，信用谗佞之臣，疏远忠直之士，以致小人日进，君子日退，纲纪混乱，法度越来越坏。
English: In July, the car arrived in Beijing, and after the painting was completed, Su Lan submitted a written report, to the effect that: In the past, when the East Sea King was on the throne, he trusted his vassals and alienated the loyal people, so that the villain advanced day by day, the gentleman retreated day by day, the discipline was chaotic, and the rule of law became worse and worse.

古文：风折城门之关，火焚市里之舍，盖上天垂象以儆惧之也。
现代文：风吹折城门之闩，火焚毁市内之房舍，这是上天垂象以警告他。
English: The wind breaks the bolts of the gates, and the fire consumes the houses of the city. It is as if the heavens had rung out a warning to him.

古文：言者劝其亲君子、远小人、恐惧修省，以答天变，东海不从，遂至亡灭。
现代文：有人进言劝他亲近君子，疏远小人，怀恐惧之心自我约束以应答天变，东海王不肯听从，因而导致灭亡。
English: Some people urged him to be close to the gentleman, alienate the villain, and self-discipline with fear to respond to the natural change. The East Sea King refused to listen, which led to his death.

古文：夫善救乱者必迹其乱之所由生，善革弊者必究其弊之所自起，诚能大明黜陟以革东海之政，则治安之效可指日而待也。
现代文：善于救乱的必然考察乱由何处所生，善于革除弊端的必然研究弊端起自何方。如果能大明升降，变革东海王之旧政，则大治安定的成效可以指日而待了。
English: Good at the inevitable investigation of where the chaos came from, good at eliminating the drawbacks, and good at the inevitable study of where the drawbacks come from. If we can rise and fall, and reform the old government of the East Sea King, then the effect of the great peace and stability can be expected.

古文：陛下龙兴，不思出此，辄议南迁，诏下之日，士民相率上章请留，启行之日，风雨不时、桥梁数坏，人心天意亦可见矣。
现代文：陛下创兴帝业，不思由此而出，便商议南迁，下诏之日，士民相率上奏章请留，启程之日风雨不因时而至，桥梁几次毁坏，人心天意也已可见了。
English: His Majesty created the empire, and without thinking about it, he began to discuss moving to the south. On the day of the imperial edict, the scholars and the people were asked to leave the imperial rescript. On the day of departure, the wind and rain did not come from time to time, the bridge was destroyed several times, and the will of the people was already visible.

古文：此事既往，岂容复追，但自今尤宜戒慎，覆车之辙不可引辕而复蹈也。 
现代文：此事已经过去，岂容重又追悔，但自今之后，万事应警戒谨慎，覆车之辙，不可再拉后车而重蹈了。 
English: The matter is over, and there is neither tolerance nor remorse, but from now on, everything should be cautious and cautious, and the same thing should not be repeated.

古文：又曰： 国家不可一日无兵，兵不可一日无食。
现代文：他又说： 国家不可一日无兵，兵不可一日无食。
English: He also said, "A country cannot go a day without a soldier, and a soldier cannot go a day without food."

古文：陛下为社稷之计，宫中用度皆从贬损，而有司复多置军官，不恤妄费，甚无谓也。
现代文：陛下为社稷计划，宫中用度都已减少，而有关方面却又多设军官，不惜费用，很无必要。
English: His Majesty's plans for social security have reduced the amount of time spent in the palace, but the relevant parties have increased the number of officers, at any cost, which is unnecessary.

古文：或谓军官之众所以张大威声，臣窃以为不然。
现代文：有人说军官众多能够壮大声威，臣私下认为不然。
English: Some people say that a large number of officers can build up a strong reputation, but the vassal privately thinks otherwise.

古文：不加精选而徒务其多，缓急临敌其可用乎？
现代文：不加精选而只求量多，危急时对敌能够有用吗？
English: Is it possible to be of use to the enemy in a time of crisis if you only ask for more quantity without careful selection?

古文：且中都惟其粮乏，故使车驾至此。
现代文：况且中都因为缺粮，所以车驾来到这里。
English: Moreover, they all came here by car because of the food shortage.

古文：稍获安地，遂忘其危而不之备，万一再如前日，未知有司复请陛下何之也。 
现代文：稍得一块安定的地方，便忘记危难而不做准备，万一再如前日景况，有关方面不知将再请陛下去何处呢？ 
English: As soon as they get a stable place, they forget about the danger and do not prepare. In the unlikely event that the situation is the same as the previous day, I do not know where the relevant parties will ask His Majesty to go next.

古文：三年正月，素兰自中都计议军事回，上书求见，乞屏左右。
现代文：三年正月，完颜素兰从中都商议军事回京，他上书求见皇帝，请求屏去左右侍从。
English: In the first month of the third year, after Yan Xulan returned to Beijing from Zhongdu to discuss military affairs, he sent a letter to the emperor, requesting him to send attendants to the left and right.

古文：上遣人谕之曰： 屏人奏事，朕固常尔。
现代文：皇帝派人对他说： 屏人以奏事，这是我常有的。
English: The emperor sent someone to say to him, "It is not unusual for me to send someone to report to you.

古文：近以游茂因缘生疑间之语，故凡有所引见，必令一近臣立侍，汝有封章，亦无患不密也。 
现代文：近来因游茂的事而产生了猜疑的说法，所以凡是有人求见，必让一位近臣立侍于旁，你有密封奏章也不必怕不守秘密了。 
English: Recently, suspicion has arisen due to the matter of Yu Mao, so whenever someone asks for an audience, they must have a close subordinate stand by. If you have a sealed score, you don't have to be afraid of not keeping secrets.

古文：寻召至近侍局，给纸劄令书所欲言，书未及半，上出御便殿见之，悉去左右，惟近侍局直长赵和和在焉。
现代文：不久召他到了近侍局，给他纸张让他直书所要说的话，还没有写到一半，皇帝出临便殿召见他，让左右随从全都离开，只有近侍局直长赵和长在旁。
English: Soon after, he summoned him to the Privy Council and gave him a piece of paper to write down what he wanted to say. Before he was halfway through, the emperor summoned him to the Imperial Palace and ordered all of his attendants to leave, except for the head of the Privy Council, Zhao He.

古文：素兰奏曰： 臣闻兴衰治乱有国之常，在所用之人如何耳。
现代文：完颜素兰上奏说： 我一向听说，兴衰治乱，是国家常有之事，在于所用的人如何罢了。
English: I have always heard that it is a common thing for a country to rise and fall, and that it depends on the people who are in charge.

古文：用得其人，虽衰乱尚可扶持，一或非才，则治安亦乱矣。
现代文：使用得人，虽然衰乱也仍可以支持，如果有一个不适合的，那么，即使原来国家得到治理和安定，也很快就发生混乱。
English: If there is an unsuitable one, then even if the country is governed and stabilized, chaos will soon occur.

古文：向者飐军之变，中都帅府自足剿灭，朝廷乃令移剌刺塔不也等招诱之，使帅府不敢尽其力，既不能招，愈不可制矣。
现代文：以往礣军的变故，中都帅府自然足以剿灭他们，朝廷却令移剌塔不也等去招降，使帅府不敢尽力讨伐，这样既没有招降，也变得难以制服了。
English: In the past, due to the changes in the Wei army, the Central Military Government was naturally enough to annihilate them. However, the imperial court ordered the Shifang Pagoda to surrender, so that the Military Government did not dare to fight hard. In this way, they did not surrender, and it became difficult to subdue them.

古文：至于伯德文哥之叛，帅府方议削其权，而朝廷传旨俾领义军，文哥由是益肆，改除之令辄拒不受，不臣之状亦显矣。
现代文：至于伯德文哥的叛乱，帅府正商议削除他的权力，而朝廷传旨让他统领义军，文哥因此更加放肆，改任他的旨令便拒不接受，这种不像臣子的模样也就明显了。
English: As for the rebellion of Baode Wenge, the general's government was discussing the removal of his power, and the imperial court issued an order to let him lead the rebel army. Wenge was therefore more presumptuous and refused to accept the order to reassign him. This appearance of not being a courtier was also obvious.

古文：帅府方且收捕，而朝廷复赦之，且不令隶帅府。
现代文：帅府正准备逮捕他，而朝令又让赦免他，而且不让他隶属帅府。
English: The general's office was preparing to arrest him, but the imperial edict pardoned him and did not allow him to be affiliated with the general's office.

古文：国家付方面于重臣，乃不信任，顾养叛贼之奸，不知谁为陛下画此计者。
现代文：国家把一个方面的责任交给重臣，却并不信任他，这是助长叛贼的奸诈，不知是谁替陛下策划的计谋。
English: It is the treachery of a traitor to be trusted by his country, who have entrusted him with a part of their business, and who have not trusted him, and it is the treachery of a traitor to be trusted by his country, who have entrusted him with a part of their business, and it is the treachery of a traitor to be trusted by his country, and it is the treachery of a traitor to be trusted by his country.

古文：臣自外风闻，皆平章高琪之意，惟陛下裁察。 
现代文：我在外听到传闻，说都是平章高琪的意见，请陛下裁决详察。 
English: I heard a rumor outside that it was all Pingzhang Gaoqi's opinion, and I asked His Majesty to examine the ruling in detail.

古文：上曰： 汝言皆是。
现代文：皇帝说： 你所说的很对。
English: The emperor said, "What you said is right.

古文：文哥之事，朕所未悉，诚如所言，朕肯赦之乎？
现代文：伯德文哥的事情，我并不知，如像你所说的，我又肯赦免他吗？
English: I don't know anything about the matter of Bordevin's brother. As you said, would I pardon him?

古文：且汝何以知此事出于高琪？ 
现代文：况且你又怎么知道这事出于高琪的主意？ 
English: Besides, how do you know it was Gao Qi's idea?

古文：素兰曰： 臣见文哥牒永清副提控刘温云： 所差人张希韩至自南京，道副枢平章处分，已奏令文哥隶大名行省，勿复遵中都帅府约束 。
现代文：素兰说 ：我见到伯德文哥写给永清副提控刘温的公文，里面说： 所派的人张希韩从南京回来，说是由副枢密使平章处置，已上奏让伯德文哥隶属大名行省，不用再遵从中都帅府的约束。 
English: Suran said: I saw the official document that Baode Wenge wrote to Liu Wen, the Yongqing Deputy Prosecuting Attorney, which said: The person Zhang Xihan sent back from Nanjing said that it was handled by the Deputy Privy Envoy Ping Zhang, and that it had been reported that Baode Wenge was subordinate to the province of Daming, and no longer had to comply with the constraints of the Central Government.

古文：温即具言于帅府。
现代文：刘温详告帅府。
English: Liu Wen then reported the matter to Shuai Prefecture.

古文：然则，罪人与高琪计结明矣。 
现代文：那么，罪人和术虎高琪勾结同谋事情十分明显了。 
English: So, it is quite obvious that the criminal and the magic tiger Gao Qi colluded and conspired.

古文：上颔之。
现代文：皇帝点了点头。
English: Emperor Xuanzong did not say a word.

古文：素兰续奏曰： 高琪本无勋劳，亦无公望，向以畏死故擅诛胡沙虎，盖出无聊耳。
现代文：完颜素兰继续奏道： 高琪本无功劳，也没有声望，原是因为怕死而擅自杀了胡沙虎，这也没有可称赞的。
English: Guan Yan Su Lan continued to play: Gao Qi had no merit and no reputation, but because he was afraid of death, he killed himself. This is not praiseworthy.

古文：一旦得志，妒贤能，树奸党，窃弄国权，自作威福。
现代文：他一旦得志，嫉妒贤能，树结奸党，窃弄国权，作威作福。
English: Once he has made up his mind, he envies the virtuous, betrays the party, usurps state power, and seeks glory.

古文：去岁，都下书生樊知一者诣高琪言： 飐军不可信，恐终作乱。 
现代文：去年，都下书生樊知一见高琪后，对他说： 礣军不可相信，只怕终将作乱。 
English: Last year, after seeing Gao Qi for the first time, Duxun scholar Yan Zhuang said to him: "You can't trust the Yan army. I'm afraid they'll eventually make trouble."

古文：遂以刀杖决杀之，自是无复敢言军国利害者。
现代文：高琪便用刀杖打杀他，从此以后再没有人敢于进言国家大事。
English: Gao Qi then beat him to death with a cane, and from then on, no one dared to have a say in national affairs.

古文：宸聪之不通，下情之不达，皆此人罪也。
现代文：皇上信息不通，下情难以上达，都是这个人的罪责。
English: The Emperor's lack of information, and the difficulty of reaching him, were all the fault of this man.

古文：及飐军为变，以党人塔不也为武宁军节度使往招之，已而无成，则复以为武卫军使。
现代文：当礣军作乱时，高琪派他同党塔不也当武宁军节度使前去招抚，结果一无所成，又任命他当武卫军使。
English: When the Han army made a disturbance, Gao Qi sent him with the party tower to be the messenger of the Wu Ning army, but the result was nothing, and he was also appointed as the envoy of the armed forces.

古文：塔不也何人，且有何功，而重用如此。
现代文：塔不也是什么样的人，况且有什么功绩，而这样重用？
English: What kind of person is the tower, and what kind of merit does it have, and how is it reused?

古文：以臣观之，此贼变乱纪纲，戕害忠良，实有不欲国家平治之意。
现代文：以臣所见，这个奸贼败乱法度，残杀忠良，实在不希望国家得到平静和治理。
English: As far as his subjects were concerned, this traitor had subverted the rule of law, murdered the loyal, and really did not want the country to be pacified and governed.

古文：昔东海时，胡沙虎跋扈无上，天下知之，而不敢言，独台官乌古论德升、张行信弹劾其恶，东海不察，卒被其祸。
现代文：原在东海王时，胡沙虎飞扬跋扈，目无皇上，天下共知，却不敢讲，只有朝官乌古论德升、张行信弹劾他的罪恶，东海王不觉醒终于遭祸。
English: Originally, when he was the king of the East Sea, Hu Shahu flew high and high, his eyes were supreme, the whole world knew about it, but he did not dare to speak about it. Only the imperial officials Uguon Desheng and Zhang Xingxin impeached him for his sins, and the king of the East Sea did not wake up and finally suffered a disaster.

古文：今高琪之奸，过于胡沙虎远矣。台谏职当言责，迫于凶威，噤不敢忤。
现代文：如今高琪的奸恶远远超过了胡沙虎，御史台谏官应当进言，但迫于他的凶焰，闭口不敢得罪。
English: Nowadays, Gao Qi's treachery far exceeds that of Hu Shazhu, and the imperial eunuch should speak up, but he is forced by his fierce flames to keep his mouth shut and dare not offend.

古文：然内外臣庶见其恣横，莫不扼腕切齿，欲一剚刃，陛下何惜而不去之耶。
现代文：但内外朝臣民众见他这样横行，无不扼腕切齿痛恨，想要一刀刺死他，陛下有何可惜不除去他呢？
English: However, when courtiers at home and abroad see him running amok like this, they all hate him and want to stab him to death, so why doesn't His Majesty remove him?

古文：臣非不知言出而患至，顾臣父子迭仕圣朝，久食厚禄，不敢偷安。
现代文：臣并不是不知道话一说出而祸患将至，但臣父子连续在圣朝任职，久食朝廷厚禄，不敢苟且偷安。
English: It was not that the vassal did not know that disaster would come as soon as the words were uttered, but the vassal father and son continuously served in the Holy Court, long enjoyed the wealth of the imperial court, and did not dare to steal peace.

古文：惟陛下断然行之，社稷之福也。 
现代文：望陛下断然处置，这是社稷之福啊！ 
English: The welfare of society depends on His Majesty's decisive action!

古文：上曰： 此乃大事，汝敢及之，甚善。 
现代文：皇帝说： 这是件大事，你敢于提及，很好！ 
English: The emperor said, "This is a very important matter. If you dare to mention it, great!

古文：素兰复奏： 丞相福兴，国之勋旧，乞召还京，以镇雅俗，付左丞彖多以留后事，足也。 
现代文：素兰又奏道 ：丞相福兴，是国家旧功臣，请召回京，以安定众人之心，并让左丞彖多处置后事就足够了。 
English: Suran also said, "Consul-General Fu Xing is an old national hero, please recall him to Beijing to stabilize the hearts of the people, and it is enough to let Zuo Zheng handle the aftermath.

古文：上曰： 如卿所言，二人得无相恶耶？ 
现代文：皇帝说： 如你所说，两人能不相斗吗？ 
English: The emperor said: As you said, can the two not fight?

古文：素兰曰： 福兴、彖多同心同德，无不协者。 
现代文：素兰说： 福兴、彖多能够同心同德，事事无不协调。 
English: Suran said: Fu Xing and Hao Duo are able to work together with the same spirit, and everything is coordinated.

古文：上曰： 都下事殷，恐丞相不可辍。 
现代文：皇帝说： 京都事多，恐怕丞相不可空缺。 
English: The emperor said: There are many things to do in Kyoto, so I'm afraid there can't be a vacancy for chancellor.

古文：素兰曰： 臣闻朝廷正则天下正，不若令福兴还，以正根本。 
现代文：素兰说： 臣下听说，朝廷正则天下正，不如让福兴回朝，以正根本。 
English: Suran said: My subjects have heard that the imperial court is the most righteous in the world, so it is better to let Fu Xing return to the imperial court to be the most righteous.

古文：上曰： 朕徐思之。 
现代文：皇帝说： 让我慢慢考虑。 
English: The emperor said: Let me think about it.

古文：素兰出，上复戒曰： 今日与朕对者止汝二人，慎无泄也。 
现代文：素兰辞出，皇帝又告诫他说： 今天和我对答的只有你们两人，一定不得泄漏。 
English: Suran resigned, and the emperor admonished him: "You two are the only ones to answer me today. You mustn't leak it."

古文：厥后，上以素兰屡进直言，命再任监察御史。
现代文：后来，皇帝因完颜素兰敢于直言进谏，让他再次担任监察御史。
English: Later, the emperor allowed him to serve as inspector-general of history again because he dared to speak his mind.

古文：四年三月，言： 臣近被命体问外路官，廉干者拟不差遣，若懦弱不公者罢之，具申朝廷，别议拟注。
现代文：四年三月，素兰进奏： 臣近来被任命前去查问外路官员情况，清廉有才干的不动，懦弱不公正的加以罢免，详细申奏朝廷，另外考虑使用。
English: In March of the fourth year, Su Lan insinuated: The minister had recently been appointed to go and inquire about the situation of the foreign affairs officials, the corrupt and talented ones would not move, the cowardly and unfair ones would be dismissed, and the imperial court would be petitioned in detail, and other uses would be considered.

古文：臣伏念彼懦弱不公之人虽令罢去，不过止以待阙者代之，其能否又未可知，或反不及前官，盖徒有选人之虚名，而无得人之实迹。
现代文：臣想到那些懦弱而不公正的人虽让罢免，也不过是让候补官员来代替他，候补官员有没有本领也不清楚，说不定有的还不如前官，这样就只有选拔人员的虚名，而无得人之实绩。
English: The vassal thought that those cowardly and unjust people, although they were allowed to be dismissed, were only allowed to be replaced by alternate officials. It was not clear whether the alternate officials had any skills, and perhaps some were not as good as the former officials. In this way, there was only the false name of the selectors, but no real achievement.

古文：古语曰： 县令非其人，百姓受其殃。 
现代文：古语说： 县令不合适，百姓受灾殃。 
English: An ancient saying goes: The county ordinance is inappropriate, and the people will suffer disaster.

古文：今若后官更劣，则为患滋甚，岂朝廷恤民之意哉？
现代文：现在如果后任官员更差，就将为害更严重，这哪里是朝廷爱惜民众的想法呢？
English: Now, if the succeeding officials are worse, the harm will be more serious. Where is the imperial court's concern for the people?

古文：夫守令，治之本也。
现代文：守和令，是治国的根本。
English: Keeping the peace is fundamental to governing the country.

古文：乞令随朝七品、外路六品以上官，各举堪充司县长官者，仍明著举官姓名，他日察其能否，同定赏罚，庶几其可。
现代文：请让随朝七品、外路六品以上官员，各自举荐能够充当县长官的人，并写明举荐官员名字，以后考察是否有才能，同时接受赏赐或责罚，大约可以成事。
English: Please let the officials with the rank of the seventh grade or above and the rank of the sixth grade or above each recommend a person who can serve as the county magistrate, and write the name of the recommending official. Later, examine whether they have talent, and accept rewards or punishments at the same time. It can be done.

古文：议者或以阂选法、紊资品为言，是不知方今之事与平昔不同，岂可拘一定之法，坐视斯民之病而不权宜更定乎。 
现代文：在商议时有主张采用核选法，打乱资历品级等，这是不知道今天的情况和平时不同，怎能拘泥于一种定法，坐视民众疾患而不暂时加以改定呢？ 
English: During the deliberation, there was a proposal to adopt the verification method, disrupt the seniority grade, etc. It is not known that today's situation is different from that of peacetime. How can we stick to a fixed method, sit back and watch the people's diseases without temporarily changing it?

古文：诏有司议行之。
现代文：皇帝诏令有关方面商议实行。
English: The Emperor's edict shall be implemented after consultation with the relevant parties.

古文：时哀宗为皇太子，春宫所设师保赞谕之官多非其人，于是素兰上章言： 臣闻太子者天下之本也，欲治天下先正其本，正本之要无他，在选人辅翼之耳。
现代文：当时，哀宗还是皇太子，东宫所设置的师保、赞、谕官员大多不得其人。于是，素兰上奏说： 臣听说，太子是天下的根本，要治理天下必须先正其本，正本的要务没有别的，在于选用人员辅助他。
English: At that time, Aizong was still the crown prince, and most of the tutors, admirers, and officials set up by the East Palace were not his people. Therefore, Su Lan said: The minister heard that the prince is the foundation of the world, and in order to govern the world, he must first correct his original, and the main task of the original is nothing else, but to select people to assist him.

古文：夫生于齐者能齐言而不能楚语，未习之故也。
现代文：那些生长在齐地的人能说齐地方言，不能讲楚地语言，这是没有学过的缘故。
English: Those who grew up in Qiji can speak the Qiji dialect, but cannot speak the Chu language, because they have not learned it.

古文：人之性亦在夫习之而已。
现代文：人的性情也在于学习。
English: It's also human nature to want to learn.

古文：昔成王在襁褓中，即命周、召以为师保，戒其逸豫之心，告以持守之道，终之功光文、武，垂休无穷。
现代文：以前成王还在襁褓之中时，就任命周公和召公作为师保，禁戒他有追求安逸舒适的想法，告诉他保持和守成大业之道，终于使他功业光及文王武王，垂荫于无穷。
English: In the past, when Cheng Wang was still in his infancy, he appointed Zhou Gong and Zhao Gong as his tutors. He forbade him to pursue the idea of ease and comfort, told him to maintain and adhere to the way of great cause, and finally made his career light and King Wenwu, shadowed in infinity.

古文：钦惟陛下顺天人之心，预建春宫。
现代文：唯愿陛下顺应天人之心，预建东宫。
English: May His Majesty comply with the heart of God and man and pre-build the East Palace.

古文：皇太子仁孝聪明出于天资，总制枢务固已绰然有余，倘更选贤如周、召之俦者使之夹辅，则成周之治不足侔矣。 
现代文：皇太子仁慈聪明，出于天生，总管朝中要事原已绰然有余，如果再选拔如周公、召公那样贤能的人加以辅佐，那么成、周之治也不足相比了。 
English: The crown prince is kind and clever. By nature, he is more than capable of being the head of the important affairs of the dynasty. If he were to be assisted by someone as capable as Zhou Gong or Zhao Gong, then the achievements and governance of Zhou would not be enough.

古文：上称善。
现代文：皇帝很赞同。
English: The Emperor approves.

古文：未几，擢为内侍局直长，寻迁谏议大夫，进侍御史。
现代文：不久，任命完颜素兰担任内侍局直长，很快又迁任谏议大夫，进任侍御史。
English: Soon after, Yan Suran was appointed as the director of the Bureau of Inner Palace Attendants, and was soon transferred to the position of the doctor of the imperial court, and then to the position of the imperial palace attendant.

古文：兴定二年四月，以蒲鲜万奴叛，遣素兰与近侍局副使内族讹可同赴辽东，诏谕之曰： 万奴事竟不知果何如，卿等到彼当得其详，然宜止居铁山，若复远去，则朕难得其耗也。 
现代文：兴定二年四月，因为蒲鲜万奴叛乱，皇帝派完颜素兰和近侍局副使皇族讹可同往辽东，并对他们说： 蒲鲜万奴的事情不知结果如何，卿等到那里以后应当能知道详情，然而只应当住到铁山，如果再住远了，那我就难以得到消息了。 
English: In April of the second year of Xingding, because of the rebellion of Pu Xianvannu, the emperor sent Yan Suran and the deputy envoy of the Bureau of the Imperial Household to Liaodong, and said to them: I do not know the outcome of Pu Xianvannu's affairs. Sir, when you get there, you should be able to know the details. However, you should only live as far as Iron Mountain. If you live further away, it will be difficult for me to get information.

古文：又曰： 朕以讹可性颇率易，故特命卿偕行，每事当详议之。 
现代文：又说： 我因为讹可性情比较轻率，所以特地让你同行，每事必须详细商议。 
English: He also said, "Because of my reckless nature, I have specially asked you to accompany me. Everything must be discussed in detail.

古文：素兰将行，上言曰： 臣近请宣谕高丽复开互市事，闻以诏书付行省必兰出。
现代文：完颜素兰将要出发时，又对皇帝说： 臣近日请求通告高丽重开交易市场事，听说已有诏书交令行省必兰出示布告。
English: When Yan Suran was about to leave, he also said to the emperor: The minister recently requested to announce the reopening of the trading market in Korea. I heard that there was an edict ordering the governor to present a proclamation.

古文：若令行省就遣谕之，不过邻境领受，恐中间有所不通，使圣恩不达于高丽，高丽亦无由知朝廷本意也。
现代文：如果让行省出示布告，不过邻近边境地方能够领受了，只怕中间有所阻塞，使朝廷圣恩不能送达高丽国，高丽国也没有办法知道朝廷的本意。
English: If the provinces were asked to present the proclamation, but the border areas were able to receive it, there would only be a blockage in the middle, so that the imperial grace could not reach Korea, and Korea would have no way of knowing the intention of the imperial court.

古文：况彼世为藩辅，未尝阙臣子礼，如遣信使明持恩诏谕之，贷粮、开市二者必有一济。
现代文：况且高丽世代是藩国，从未缺过臣子的礼节，如派使者送信，公开带着恩诏告诉他们，那么借粮、互开市易二者之间必定有一件可以办成。
English: Moreover, the Goryeo generation was a feudal state and never lacked the etiquette of a vassal. If an envoy was sent to inform them openly with an edict, then there must be something that can be done between borrowing grain and reciprocally opening markets.

古文：苟俱不从，则其曲在彼，然后别议图之可也。 
现代文：如果都不听从，那么理屈在对方，然后再另外考虑办法对付。 
English: If neither side listens, then the other side will have to come up with a reason, and then they will have to think of another way to deal with it.

古文：上是其言，于是遣典客署书表刘丙从行。
现代文：皇帝赞同他的意见，于是派典客署书表刘丙和他同行。
English: The emperor agreed with his opinion, so he sent the guest book to Liu He to accompany him.

古文：及还，授翰林待制。
现代文：当回京时，被任命为翰林待制。
English: When he returned to Beijing, he was appointed as a trainee at Hanlin.

古文：正大元年正月，诏集群臣议修复河中府，素兰与陈规等奏其未可，语在《规传》。
现代文：正大元年正月，皇帝诏令群臣商议修复河中府，完颜素兰和陈规等都上奏认为不行，言论载于《陈规传》。
English: In the first month of the first year of Zhengda, the emperor issued an imperial edict ordering the courtiers to discuss the restoration of Hezhongfu. Both Guan Xulan and Chen Gui believed that it was not possible, and their remarks are recorded in "Chen Gui Biography."

古文：是月，转刑部郎中。
现代文：当月，转任刑部郎中。
English: In the same month, he was transferred to the position of junior vice-minister of the Ministry of Justice.

古文：时南阳人布陈谋反，坐系者数百人，司直白华言于素兰曰： 此狱诖误者多，新天子方务宽大，他日必再诏推问，比得昭雪，死于榜笞之下者多矣。 
现代文：当时，南阳人布陈谋反，因为坐罪而被捕的有几百人。司直白华对完颜素兰说 ：此案捕错的人很多，新天子正力求宽大待民，他日必定再下诏重审，但等到昭雪时，死在刑罚拷打下的人就会很多了。 
English: At that time, the people of Nanyang were plotting a rebellion, and several hundred people were arrested for the crime of sedition. Shi Zhi Baihua said to Yan Suran: There are many people who have been wrongly arrested in this case. The new emperor is trying to be lenient to the people. He will certainly issue a retrial decree on the next day, but by the time it snows, there will be many people who have died under punishment and torture.

古文：素兰命华及检法边泽分别当死、当免者，素兰以闻，止坐首恶及拟伪将相者数人，余悉释之。
现代文：完颜素兰便让白华和检法官边泽将应当死刑和应当赦免的人分别开来，完颜素兰向朝廷上奏后，只判了首恶者和准备担任伪将相的几个人的罪，其余全部释放。
English: Su Lan then asked Bai Hua and the procurator, Heng Ze, to separate those who should be sentenced to death and those who should be pardoned. After Su Lan made a report to the court, only the chief villain and a few people who were preparing to serve as fake generals were convicted, and the rest were released.

古文：八月，权户部侍郎。
现代文：八月，被任命代理户部侍郎。
English: In August, he was appointed acting head waiter.

古文：二年三月，授京西司农卿，俄改司农大卿，转御史中丞。
现代文：二年三月，任京西司农卿，不久又改为司农大卿，转任御史中丞。
English: In March of the second year, he was appointed as the Beijing West Division of the Secretary of Agriculture, and soon changed to the Secretary of Agriculture, and was transferred to the Vice-Minister of History.

古文：七年七月，权元帅右都监、参知政事，行省於京兆。
现代文：七年七月，代理元帅右都监、参知政事，在京兆设置行省。
English: In July of the seventh year, the Acting Marshal, the Right Supervisor of the Capital, and the Councillor of the Government, set up the Ministry in Beijing.

古文：未几，迁金安军节度使，兼同、华安抚使。
现代文：不久，又改任金安军节度使，兼同、华安抚使。
English: Not long after, he was also appointed as the envoy of the Kim An Army, and concurrently, the envoy of China's pacification.

古文：既而召还朝，行至陕被围，久之，亡奔行在，道中遇害。
现代文：接着又被召回朝廷，当行至陕州被包围，过了很久，逃亡奔往皇帝行宫，在途中遇害。
English: Then he was recalled to the imperial court, and when he went to Shaanxi Province, he was besieged. After a long time, he fled to the imperial palace, and was killed on the way.

古文：素兰莅官以修谨得名，然苛细不能任大事，较之辈流颇可称。
现代文：完颜素兰当官以严于自律和办事谨严而得名，但过于注重小节而不能担任大事，在同辈之中是比较值得称赞的。
English: It is quite commendable among his contemporaries that, although he is known for his strict self-discipline and meticulous work, he is too focused on minor matters to be able to take on major responsibilities.

古文：自擢为近侍局直长，每进言多有补益。
现代文：自从被提拔担任近侍局直长以后，往往在进谏时多有补益。
English: Since he was promoted to the post of the immediate chief of the Privy Council, he has often had a lot of benefits when he was promoted.

古文：其居父丧，不饮酒，庐墓三年，时论以为难。
现代文：他守父丧时，不喝酒，住在墓边草庐中达三年之久，当时人都认为是难以做到的。
English: During his father's funeral, he did not drink alcohol and lived in a grass hut next to the grave for three years, which was considered difficult at the time.

古文：陈规，字正叔，绛州稷山人。
现代文：陈规，字正叔，绛州稷山人。
English: Chen Gui, Zhaozheng Uncle, Loushou Lushan people.

古文：明昌五年词赋进士，南渡为监察御史。
现代文：明昌五年中词赋科进士，南渡为监察御史。
English: In the 5th year of the Ming Dynasty, Nandu was promoted to inspector of history.

古文：贞祐三年十一月，上章言： 参政侯挚初以都西立功，获不次之用，遂自请镇抚河北。
现代文：贞三年十一月，上奏章称： 参政侯挚开始因都西立功，得到越级任用，于是自己请求镇守安抚河北。
English: In November of the third year of Zhen's reign, the inscribed chapter said: Hou Zhen began to make contributions to politics because of the west of the capital, and was appointed to a higher level, so he asked the town guard to pacify Hebei.

古文：陛下遽授以执政，盖欲责其报效也。
现代文：陛下就让他掌理政事，大概想激励他感恩尽力报效。
English: His Majesty put him in charge of government affairs, probably to encourage him to be grateful and do his best.

古文：既而盘桓西山，不能进退，及召还阙，自当辞避，乃恬然安居，至于按阅仓库，规画榷酤，岂大臣所宜亲。
现代文：不久逗留西山，不能进退，等到召他回朝，自己应当推辞避让，却心安理得地处在这个职位，至于察看仓库，规划专卖，怎么是大臣应该做的事。
English: He stayed in Xishan for a short time, unable to advance or retreat, and when he was called back to the North, he should have refused to make concessions, but he was in this position with peace of mind. As for inspecting the warehouse and planning the monopoly, what should the minister do?

古文：方今疆土日蹙，将帅乏人，士不选练，冗食猥多，守令贪残，百姓流亡，盗贼滋起，灾变不息，则当日夜讲求其故，启告陛下者也，而挚未尝及之。
现代文：当今国土每日减少，将帅缺人，军士不进行择选锻炼，吃闲饭的众多，郡守县令贪婪残暴，百姓流落逃亡，盗贼蜂起，灾变不息，那就应当日夜研究探讨原因，报告陛下，而挚不曾涉及这些事。
English: Today's country is shrinking day by day, there is a shortage of generals and admirals, there is a lack of selection and training for sergeants and lieutenants, there are too many idle eaters, the county governors are greedy and cruel, the people are fleeing, the thieves are rising up, and the disasters are incessant. Therefore, it is necessary to study and investigate the causes day and night and report to Your Majesty, but I have never dealt with these matters.

古文：伏愿陛下特赐省察，量其才分别加任使，无令负天下之谤。 
现代文：希望皇上特赐对他考察，衡量他的才干，量才加以任用，不要使您蒙受天下人的指责。 
English: I hope that the Emperor will grant you the privilege of examining him, measuring his talent, and appointing him only according to his ability, so that you will not be criticized by the people of the world.

古文：不报。
现代文：没有答复。
English: It didn't make the papers.

古文：又言： 警巡使冯祥进由刀笔，无他才能，第以惨刻督责为事。
现代文：又说 ：警巡使冯祥由刀笔吏进升，无其他才能，只会从事残酷刻薄的责罚。
English: He also said: "Police inspector Feng Xiang rose from a clerk to a pen pusher. He has no other talent and only engages in cruel and mean punishment."

古文：由是升职，恐长残虐之风，乞黜退以励余者。 
现代文：因这升职，恐怕助长残暴虐待的风气。请求斥退他来劝勉其他人。 
English: The promotion, he feared, would foster a culture of brutality and abuse, and he asked to be removed as a warning to others.

古文：诏即罢祥职，且谕规曰： 卿知臣子之分，敢言如此，朕甚嘉之。 
现代文：下诏立即罢免冯祥职务，并且告诉规说： 你知道臣子的职分，敢这样说，我十分赞赏。 
English: He issued an edict to immediately remove Feng Xiang from his post, and told Gui, "You know the duties of a courtier, I really appreciate you daring to say this.

古文：四年正月，上言： 伏见沿河悉禁物斛北渡，遂使河北艰食，人心不安。
现代文：四年正月，上书说： 看见沿黄河全禁止物资北运，于是使河北吃粮困难，人心不安。
English: In the first month of the fourth year, the letter said: Seeing the northward transportation of prohibited materials along the Yellow River, Hebei had difficulty eating grain, and people were uneasy.

古文：昔秦、晋为仇，一遇年饥则互输之粟。今圣主在上，一视同仁，岂可以一家之民自限南北，坐视困馁而不救哉。
现代文：从前秦晋为敌，一遇荒年就互相输送粮食，如今皇上在上，一视同仁，怎么可以把一家之民自己限定南方北方，坐视贫困饥饿而不去拯救呢。
English: Formerly, the Qin and Jin dynasties were enemies. Whenever there was a famine, they would send grain to each other. But now that the emperor is on high, he treats everyone the same. How can he limit the people of a family to the south and north, and ignore poverty and hunger without trying to save them?

古文：况军民效死御敌，使复乏食，生亦何聊，人心一摇，为害不细。
现代文：何况军民拼死御敌，使再缺粮，生存依靠什么？人心一动摇，为害不小。
English: What's more, the military and the people are fighting to the death against the enemy, so that if there is a shortage of grain, what will they rely on for survival? If the people's hearts are shaken, it will be no small harm.

古文：臣谓宜于大阳、孟津等渡委官阅视，过河之物，每石官收不过其半，则富有之家利其厚息，辐凑而往，庶几公私俱足。 
现代文：我看应在大阳、孟津等渡口派官监督，过河的物资每石官府收取不超过一半，那么富有人家贪其厚利，人物相聚而去，也许可以公私都可充足。 
English: In my opinion, officials should be sent to supervise the ferry ports such as Dayang and Mengjin, and the government should collect no more than half of the materials crossing the river for each stone. Then the rich people will be greedy for their profits, and people will gather together and leave, and it may be sufficient for both public and private.

古文：宰执以河南军储为重，诏两渡委官取其八，二以与民，至春泽足，大兵北还，乃依规请。
现代文：宰执以河南军队储备为重，要求诏令两渡委官取过河物资八成，二成给民，到春天雨水充足，大兵北回，这才按陈规请求的意见办。
English: Taking Henan's army reserves as a priority, the commander-in-chief demanded that the two waterway commissioners should be ordered to take 80% of the river-crossing materials and give 20% to the people. By spring, there would be enough rain and the soldiers would return to the north. This was done according to the opinions requested by the old rules.

古文：制可。
现代文：皇帝许可。
English: The post-Bukou system can work.

古文：三月，上言： 臣因巡按至徐州。
现代文：三月，上书说： 我因为巡察到徐州。
English: In March, the letter said: I came to Xuzhou because of the inspection.

古文：去岁河北红袄盗起，州遣节度副使纥石烈鹤寿将兵讨之，而乃大掠良民家属为驱，甚不可也。乞明敕有司，凡鹤寿所虏俱放免之，余路军人有掠本国人为驱者，亦乞一体施行，庶几河朔有所系望，上恩无有极已。 
现代文：去年河北盗贼红袄军兴起，州里派节度副使纥石烈鹤寿领兵征讨，却大掠良民家属为奴，非常不合适，请求明白告诉有司，凡鹤寿所俘获的都释放，其他各路军人有抢掠本国百姓为奴的，也请一并实施放归。河朔也许可以系着希望，皇上的恩惠没有止境。 
English: Last year, the Red Kite Army of thieves in Hebei Province rose up. The prefectural government sent the vice-envoy of the festival, Zou Shi Ronglu Shou, to lead the soldiers to collect, but he plundered the families of the good people as slaves, which was very inappropriate. The request clearly told the emperor that all the prisoners captured by Shou were released, and other soldiers from all directions who plundered their own people as slaves were also asked to return together. The emperor may be able to hope that the emperor's favor has no end.

古文：事下尚书省，命徐州、归德行院拘括放之，有隐匿者坐掠人为奴婢法，仍许诸人告捕，依令给赏，被虏人自诉者亦赏之。
现代文：事下尚书省，命徐州、归德行院搜求拘留被掠者放掉他们，有隐匿的按掠人为奴婢法定罪，仍旧允许大家举报协助捉拿，按法令付给赏钱，被掠人自己说明也给奖赏。
English: Under the circumstances, the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology ordered the Xuzhou and Guidong Courts to conduct a search for the detained victims to release them. There is a hidden statutory crime of holding the captors as slaves. Everyone is still allowed to report and assist in the capture, and reward money will be paid according to the law. The victims themselves will also be rewarded.

古文：四月，上言： 河北濒河州县，率距一舍为一寨，籍居民为兵。
现代文：四月，又说： 河北临近河州县，通常相距三十里建一个兵营，登记居民为兵。
English: In April, he also said: Hebei is close to Hezhou County, usually 30 miles apart, build a military camp and register residents as soldiers.

古文：数寨置总领官一人，并以宣差从宜为名。
现代文：几个兵营设置一名总领官，并以宣差从宜为名。
English: A commander-in-chief was set up in several barracks, with the title of Xuanzang Congyi.

古文：其人大抵皆闲官，义军之长、偏裨之属尤多无赖辈，征逐宴饮取给于下，日以为常。
现代文：那些人大多是闲散官员，义兵的头目、偏将的部属无赖这类人尤其多，朋友互相邀请宴饮所需费用要下面供给，习以为常。
English: Most of those people are idle officials, especially the leaders of volunteer soldiers and the subordinates of rogues. It is common for friends to invite each other to a banquet, and the expenses required for the banquet should be provided below.

古文：及敌至则伏匿不出，敌去骚扰如初。
现代文：等到敌人来了就躲着不出来，敌人离去又骚扰百姓如初。
English: When the enemy came, they could not hide, and when the enemy left, they harassed the people as before.

古文：此辈小人假以重柄，朝廷号令威权无乃太轻乎。
现代文：这帮小人如授以权柄，国家号令的权威不是太轻吗？
English: If these villains are given power, isn't the authority of the state's decree too light?

古文：臣谓宜皆罢之，第委宣抚司从宜措画足矣。 
现代文：我说应当都免职，只委托宣抚司从宜谋划足够了。 
English: I said that they should all be removed from office, and that it was enough to entrust the Public Relations Department with appropriate planning.

古文：制可。
现代文：皇帝许可。
English: The post-Bukou system can work.

古文：七月，上章言：
现代文：七月，上奏章说：
English: In July, the first movement says:

古文：陛下以上圣宽仁之姿，当天地否极之运，广开言路以求至论，虽狂妄失实者亦不坐罪。臣忝耳目之官，居可言之地，苟为缄默，何以仰酬洪造。
现代文： 陛下用上圣宽仁的姿态，面对天地不通的恶运，广开言路以求最好的言论，虽枉妄失实的也不治罪，我愧为皇上的耳目之官，处在可以说话的地方，如果闭口不言，用什么来报答皇上的深恩。
English: Your Majesty, with the attitude of a saint, faced with the bad luck of not being able to communicate with heaven and earth, opened his mouth wide to find the best words, and although he did not commit any crime, I am ashamed to be the emperor's ears and eyes, in a place where I can speak, if I keep my mouth shut, what can I use to repay the emperor's deep gratitude.

古文：谨条陈八事，愿不以人微而废之，即无可采，乞放归山林以惩尸禄之罪。
现代文：我小心地分列陈述八件事，希望皇上不因为我职位低下而废弃，假如无可采用，请求解除我官职作为受禄而不尽职的处罚。
English: I carefully listed eight things, hoping that the emperor would not discard them because of my low position, and if they could not be used, I would ask to be relieved of my official duties as a punishment for not doing my duty.

古文：一曰责大臣以身任安危。
现代文： 一曰：要求大臣以身承担国家百姓的安危。
English: On the first day, the minister was asked to personally assume the responsibility for the safety of the country's people.

古文：今北兵起自边陲，深入吾境，大小之战无不胜捷，以致神都覆没，翠华南狩，中原之民肝脑涂地，大河以北莽为盗区。臣每念及此，惊怛不已。
现代文：今北兵起自边境，深入我境，大小之战无不胜捷，以致国都被攻破，皇上南迁，中原之民肝脑涂地，大河以北成为匪区，臣每想到这，惊恐不已。
English: Now the soldiers of the North have risen from the border and penetrated deep into our territory. Battles of all sizes have been victorious, so that the country has been invaded, the emperor has moved south, the people of the Central Plains have been brainwashed, and the north of the Tahe River has become a bandit area. Every time I think about this, I am terrified.

古文：况宰相大臣皆社稷生灵所系以安危者，岂得不为陛下忧虑哉。
现代文：况且宰相大臣都是关系国家百姓安危的人，怎么可以不替皇上分忧呢。
English: Moreover, the Prime Minister and the Prime Minister are people who are concerned about the safety and security of the people of the country, how can they not share the emperor's worries?

古文：每朝奏议，不过目前数条，特以碎末，互生异同，俱非救时之急者。
现代文：每朝奏议也不过眼前数件事，只是琐屑小事，相互产生不同意见，都不是拯救时运的迫切的事情。
English: Every morning, there are only a few things to be discussed, but they are just trivialities, and the differences of opinion that arise between them are not urgent matters that can save the current situation.

古文：况近诏军旅之务，专委枢府，尚书省坐视利害，泛然不问，以为责不在己，其于避嫌周身之计则得矣，社稷生灵将何所赖。
现代文：况且最近诏命军队事务，专交枢府处理，尚书省旁观利害，都不过问，认为责任不在自己，这对于避嫌保身的盘算是达到目的了，国家百姓将依赖什么呢？
English: Moreover, recently, the emperor has ordered the military affairs to be handled exclusively by the central government, and the ministry of education and research has stood by and watched the interests, but did not ask questions, believing that the responsibility was not their own. This is a plan to avoid suspicion and protect themselves, and the goal has been achieved. What will the people of the country rely on?

古文：古语云： 疑则勿任，任则勿疑。 
现代文：古语说 ：疑则勿任，任则勿疑。 
English: An ancient saying goes: Let doubt be, let doubt go.

古文：又曰： 谋之欲众，断之欲独。 
现代文：又说 ：谋划要众人，决断靠个人。 
English: He also said, "Planning should be done by all, but decisions should be made by individuals."

古文：陛下既以宰相任之，岂可使亲其细而不图其大者乎。
现代文：陛下既然任命了宰相，怎么能让他亲自处理细小事而不考虑大事呢？
English: Since His Majesty has appointed a prime minister, how can he let him personally handle the small things without considering the big things?

古文：伏愿特同睿断，若军伍器械、常程文牍即听枢府专行，至于战守大计、征讨密谋皆须省院同议可否，则为大臣者知有所责，而天下可为矣。
现代文：希望皇上杰出远断，像军队编制、兵器、普通文书就听凭枢府专门执行。至于战守大计、征讨密谋都要经省院同议可否。那么做大臣知道有什么职责，天下可以治理了。
English: It is to be hoped that the Emperor will be so far-sighted that matters such as the composition of the armed forces, armaments, and general documents will be left to the special execution of the Central Government. As for the general plans for the war and defense, and the collection of conspiracies, will they all be subject to the same discussion by the Provincial Council? Then, as a minister, he will know what his duties are, and the country can be governed.

古文：二曰任台谏以广耳目。
现代文： 二曰：任用台谏来扩大耳目。
English: The second day: Appoint a stage manager to expand the ears and eyes.

古文：人主有政事之臣，有议论之臣。
现代文：人主有管理政事的臣子，有提出议论的臣子。
English: There are vassals who manage government affairs, and there are vassals who put forward arguments.

古文：政事之臣者宰相执政，和阴阳，遂万物，镇抚四夷，亲附百姓，与天子经纶于庙堂之上者也。
现代文：政事之臣由宰相执政，他们负责协调阴阳，成长万物，镇抚四方，厚待百姓，和皇上一起在朝廷处理国家大事。
English: The ministers of state are led by the prime minister. They are responsible for coordinating yin and yang, the growth of all things, pacifying the four directions, being kind to the people, and dealing with national affairs together with the emperor in the imperial court.

古文：议论之臣者谏官御史，与天子辨曲直、正是非者也。
现代文：议论之臣是谏官御史，负责和天子辩论善恶、纠正对错。
English: The subject of discussion is the eunuch, the historian, who is responsible for debating good and evil with the Son of Heaven and correcting right and wrong.

古文：二者岂可偏废哉。
现代文：两者怎么能偏向废弃一方呢！
English: How can both be biased towards the abandonment side!

古文：昔唐文皇制中书门下入阁议事皆令谏官随之，有失辄谏。
现代文：从前唐文皇规定中书门下入议事都叫谏官跟着他，有过错就进谏。
English: According to the regulations of the Tang Dynasty Emperor Wen, eunuchs were required to follow him when entering into a discussion, and if they made a mistake, they would be punished.

古文：国朝虽设谏官，徒备员耳，每遇奏事皆令回避。
现代文：我朝虽设谏官，只是充数罢了，每遇议事都叫回避。
English: Although I set up eunuchs in my reign, it was only to fill the number, and every time there was a discussion, they avoided it.

古文：或兼他职，或为省部所差，有终任不觌天颜、不出一言而去者。
现代文：有的兼任其他职务，有的被省部差使，有的直到结束任职没见过皇上，不出一言而离任。
English: Some concurrently held other positions, some were sent by provincial ministries, and some did not see the emperor until the end of their term of office, leaving office without a word.

古文：虽有御史，不过责以纠察官吏、照刷案牍、巡视仓库而已，其事关利害或政令更革，则皆以为机密而不闻。
现代文：虽有御史，不过要求他督察官吏、查看文书、巡视仓库而已，那些关系国家利害或政令更替改革的大事，就都因为机密而没有听到。
English: Although there was an imperial edict, it only required him to inspect officials, check documents, and inspect warehouses. Those important matters related to national interests or the replacement of decrees and reforms were not heard because of confidentiality.

古文：万一政事之臣专任胸臆、威福自由，或掌兵者以私见败事机，陛下安得而知之。
现代文：万一政事之臣随心所欲、作威作福，或掌握军队的官员因私见败坏成事的机会，皇上怎么能够知道这些？
English: In the unlikely event that a political vassal acts as he pleases, lording it over others, or seizing an opportunity for military officials to accomplish something because of their own corrupt views, how can the emperor know about these things?

古文：伏愿遴选学术讠夹博、通晓世务、骨鲠敢言者以为台谏，凡事关利害皆令预议，其或不当，悉听论列，不许兼职及充省部委差，苟畏徇不言则从而黜之。
现代文：望挑选学问渊博、通晓世务、骨鲠敢说的人作为台谏，凡事关利害都叫他们参与商议，其中或许有不恰当的，全听凭议论，不许兼职和充当省部官员被差遣，如果害怕、顺从不发言就由此贬退。
English: It is hoped to select people who are well-educated, well-versed in world affairs, and have the courage to speak their minds, and invite them to participate in discussions on all matters of interest. Some of them may be inappropriate, all listen to discussions, do not allow part-time jobs and be sent to serve as provincial and ministerial officials, and if they are afraid, obedient and do not speak, they will be degraded.

古文：三曰崇节俭以答天意。
现代文： 三曰：崇尚节俭以答天意。
English: The third day: advocating frugality in response to God's will.

古文：昔卫文公乘狄人灭国之余，徙居楚丘，才革车三十两，乃躬行俭约，冠大帛之冠，衣大布之衣，季年致騋牝三千，遂为富庶。
现代文：从前卫文公乘狄人灭国后，迁居楚丘，仅有兵车三十辆，就躬行节约，戴粗帛做的帽子，穿粗布缝的衣服，晚年有马三千匹，于是变为财产丰厚。
English: When he moved to Chuqiu after the destruction of the country, he only had thirty chariots, so he lived frugally, wearing a hat made of coarse straw and clothes sewn from coarse cloth. In his later years, he owned three thousand horses, which made him wealthy.

古文：汉文帝承秦、项战争之后，四海困穷，天子不能具钧驷，乃示以敦朴，身衣弋绨，足履革舄，未几天下富安，四夷咸服。
现代文：汉文帝继承秦、项战争的后果，四海困穷，天子不能具备同色的四匹马，就以敦朴示众，身穿黑粗丝织品，脚穿兽皮鞋，没多久天下富足安定，四方国家都臣服。
English: Emperor Hanwen inherited the consequences of the wars of Qin and Xiang. The four seas were impoverished, and the son of heaven could not have four horses of the same color. He showed the public with simplicity, wearing black coarse silk fabrics and animal skin shoes. Soon the world was rich and stable, and the countries of the four directions were subjugated.

古文：国家自兵兴以来，州县残毁，存者复为土寇所扰，独河南稍完，然大驾所在，其费不赀，举天下所奉责之一路，顾不难哉。
现代文：我国自从战争发动以来，州县残毁，存活的又被土寇侵扰，唯独河南稍完整，但皇帝在这里，应花的费用不可估量，要求一路负责全国的供给，反而不困难吗？
English: Since the war was launched, our country has seen its prefectures and counties destroyed, and those that survived have been invaded by the Turks. Only Henan Province is somewhat intact, but here, the emperor should spend immeasurable expenses, demanding to be responsible for the supply of the whole country, but is it not difficult?

古文：赖陛下慈仁，上天眷佑，蝗灾之余而去岁秋禾、今年夏麦稍得支持。
现代文：依靠皇上慈仁，上天爱护保佑，蝗灾过后，去年秋稻、今年夏麦稍微可以支撑。
English: Relying on the benevolence of the emperor and the protection and blessing of heaven, after the locust disaster, last year's autumn rice and this year's summer barley can be supported slightly.

古文：夫应天者要在以实，行俭者天必降福，切见宫中及东宫奉养与平时无异，随朝官吏、诸局承应人亦未尝有所裁省。
现代文：应和上天的关键在于诚实，奉行节俭的天必降福，我私下看见宫中及东宫奉养与平时无异，随朝官吏、各局承应人也未曾有所裁减。
English: The key to being in harmony with Heaven is honesty. Those who practice frugality will be blessed by Heaven. Privately, I saw that the upkeep of the Imperial Palace and the East Palace was no different from that of ordinary times. The number of government officials and those in charge of various bureaus had not been reduced since the reign of the Emperor.

古文：至于贵臣、豪族、掌兵官，莫不以奢侈相尚，服食车马惟事纷华。
现代文：至于贵臣、豪族、掌兵官没有人不把奢侈作为时尚，服饰、车马只要豪华富丽。
English: As for the dignitaries, powerful clans, and military commanders, there was no one who did not regard luxury as a fashion, and the clothing, chariots, and horses were only luxurious.

古文：今京师鬻明金衣服及珠玉犀象者日增于旧，俱非克己消厄之道。
现代文：现在京城卖明金衣服及珠玉犀象的比从前日增，全不是克制自己消除灾难之道。
English: Now that the number of people selling bright gold clothes and jeweled rhinoceroses in Beijing has increased from the previous day, it is not at all a way to restrain oneself and eliminate the disaster.

古文：愿陛下以卫文公、汉文帝为法，凡所奉之物痛自樽节，罢冗员，减浮费，戒豪侈，禁戢明金服饰，庶皇天悔祸，太平可致。
现代文：愿陛下效法卫文公、汉文帝，凡所献之物要彻底进行节制，罢免闲散官员，减少多余费用，戒除奢侈，禁止明金服饰，期望上天有所系望，太平可致。
English: May His Majesty, following the example of Emperor Wei and Emperor Han, thoroughly control everything that is offered, dismiss idle officials, reduce unnecessary expenses, ban extravagance, prohibit gold-plated clothing, and hope that the heavens have a plan and peace can be achieved.

古文：四曰选守令以结民心。
现代文： 四曰：选好郡守县令结交民心。
English: The fourth day: choose a good county magistrate to win the people's hearts.

古文：方今举天下官吏军兵之费、转输营造之劳，皆仰给河南、陕西。
现代文：当今全天下官吏军队的费用、转运输送建造的劳役，都依靠河南、陕西供给。
English: Today, the entire country relies on Henan and Shaanxi to supply the cost of government officials and the military, as well as the transportation and construction labor.

古文：加之连年蝗旱，百姓荐饥，行赈济则仓廪悬乏，免征调则用度不足，欲其实惠及民，惟得贤守令而已。
现代文：加之连年蝗灾旱灾，百姓频遇饥荒，进行救济就仓库空了，免除征调就开支不足，想把那些好处还给百姓，只有得到有德有才的郡守县令罢了。
English: In addition, there have been locust plagues and droughts for years in a row, the people often suffer from famine, the relief warehouses are empty, and the exemption from requisition is insufficient. If you want to return those benefits to the people, you only need to get a virtuous county magistrate.

古文：当赋役繁殷、期会促迫之际，若措画有方则百姓力省而易办，一或乖谬有不胜其害者。
现代文：当赋役繁多、期限催促紧迫的时候，如筹划有方那么百姓力省而且易办，一旦荒谬背理就有不胜其害的。
English: When there are many assignments and the deadline is pressing, if there is a way to plan, then people will save effort and it will be easy to do. Once there is an absurd contradiction, it will be harmful.

古文：况县令之弊无甚于今，由军卫监当进纳劳效而得者十居八九，其桀黠者乘时贪纵，庸懦者权归猾吏。
现代文：况且县令的弊病没有比今天更厉害的了。由军卫监当进纳劳效而得官的十居八九，其中的凶暴狡猾之徒趁机贪财放纵，庸懦的权归猾吏。
English: Moreover, the ills of the county magistrate are no more severe than they are today. Of the tens of thousands of officials who have been appointed by the military health inspector as a reward for their labor, the cruel and cunning ones take advantage of the opportunity to indulge in greed, and the cowardly ones take advantage of the opportunity to seize power.

古文：近虽遣官廉察，治其奸滥，易其疲软，然代者亦非选择，所谓除狼得虎也。
现代文：近来虽派官廉察，惩处那些奸诈过度，整治那些松懈软弱，然而替代的也没经过选择，所谓除狼得虎。
English: Recently, although officials have been sent to investigate corruption, punish those who are treacherous and excessive, and rectify those who are lax and weak, but the replacement has not been selected, the so-called removal of the wolf from the tiger.

古文：伏乞明敕尚书省，公选廉洁无私、才堪牧民者，以补州府官。
现代文：请求明确告诉尚书省，公选廉洁无私、才能可以治理百姓的人，用来补充州县官。
English: The request clearly told Shangshu that the public election of people who are honest and selfless and can govern the people should be used to supplement the state and county officials.

古文：仍清县令之选，及责随朝七品，外任六品以上官各保堪任县令者一员，如他日犯赃并从坐。
现代文：仍旧要清理县令的人选，和要随朝七品、外任六品以上官员各保胜任县令一员，如他日触犯贪赃条例一并跟着定罪。
English: It is still necessary to clean up the candidates for county magistrates, and it is necessary to appoint one competent county magistrate for each of the seven-ranked officials and six-ranked officials, and if they violate the corruption regulations on the next day, they will be convicted together.

古文：其资历已系正七品，及见任县令者，皆听寄理，俟秩满升迁。复令监察以时巡按，有不法及不任职者究治之，则实惠及民而民心固矣。
现代文：那资历已到正七品，和被任县令的人，都听凭委托治理，有职有权，等到任期届满升职，再命令监察按时巡视，有违法和不能胜任职位的追究治理他们，那么百姓有了好处民心就稳固了。
English: Those whose seniority has reached the seventh grade, and those who have been appointed as county magistrates, are subject to entrusted governance, have the right to hold office, and wait until the expiration of their term of office to be promoted, and then order the supervision to inspect on time, and have illegal and incompetent positions investigated and governed them, then the people have the benefit and the people's hearts are stable.

古文：五曰博谋群臣以定大计。
现代文： 五曰：和群臣多谋划以定大计。
English: On the fifth day, he and his retainers made more plans and came up with a grand plan.

古文：比者徙河北军户百万余口于河南，虽革去冗滥而所存犹四十二万有奇，岁支粟三百八十余万斛，致竭一路终岁之敛，不能赡此不耕不战之人。
现代文：近来迁河北军户百万余口到河南，虽然去掉了多余的，所存还有四十二万多，年支粟三百八十余万斛，以致竭尽一路终年的征收，不能够供给这些不耕不战的人。
English: Recently, more than one million surplus military households in Hebei Province have been relocated to Henan Province. Although the surplus has been eliminated, there are still more than 420,000 surplus households, with an annual income of more than 3.80 million yuan. As a result, it is not possible to supply these people who do not farm and do not fight.

古文：虽无边事，亦将坐困，况兵事方兴，未见息期耶。
现代文：虽无边事，也将坐困，何况兵事方兴，未见停止的日期呢。
English: Although there is nothing to do, it will also be in trouble, not to mention that the military affairs are booming, and there is no date to stop it.

古文：近欲分布沿河，使自种殖，然游惰之人不知耕稼，群饮赌博习以成风，是徒烦有司征索课租而已。
现代文：近来想把他们沿黄河分布，使他们自己种植，然而游荡懒惰的人不知道农事，群饮赌博习以成风，这空烦有司征索课租罢了。
English: Recently, there have been attempts to distribute them along the Yellow River so that they can grow their own crops. However, the lazy people who roam around do not know anything about farming, and drinking and gambling in groups have become a common practice. This is nothing more than a school rent collection agency.

古文：举数百万众坐糜廪给，缓之则用阙，急之则民疲，朝迁惟此一事已不知所处，又何以待敌哉。
现代文：几百万人不劳而获而由官方供给，缓之则用缺，急之则民疲，朝廷只这一件事已经不知道如何处理，又凭什么对付敌人呢？
English: The imperial court does not know how to deal with this one case, and what can it rely on to deal with the enemy?

古文：是盖不审于初，不计其后，致此误也。
现代文：这因为开始没有周密的考虑，不估计后果，引来这么大的错误。
English: It is because there was no careful consideration at the beginning, and no estimate of the consequences, that such a big mistake was made.

古文：使初迁时去留从其所愿，则欲来者是足以自赡之家，何假官廪，其留者必有避难之所，不必强遣，当不至今日措画之难。
现代文：假使当初迁移时去留征求他们的意见，那么想来的是可以自己供给的家庭，怎用借助官府的供给，那些留下的人必有避难的场所，不必强遣，应当没有今日谋划的困难。
English: If, at the time of the initial relocation, they had stayed behind to seek their opinions, they would have wanted to come to a family that could provide for itself, rather than relying on the government to provide for them. Those who stayed behind would have had a place to take refuge, without having to be forced to do so. They would not have had the difficulties of planning today.

古文：古昔人君将举大事，则谋及乃心，谋及卿士、庶人、卜筮，乞自今凡有大事必令省院台谏及随朝五品以上官同议为便。
现代文：古时君主将要举办大事，就与忠于王室的人商讨，与卿士、庶人、卜筮商讨，请求自今凡有大事一定叫省院台谏及随朝五品以上官员共同商议为便。
English: In ancient times, when the monarch was about to hold a major event, he would consult with those who were loyal to the royal family, with nobles, commoners, and commoners, and request that from now on, whenever there was a major event, it would be convenient to call the provincial academician and officials above the fifth grade to consult together.

古文：六曰重官赏以劝有功。
现代文： 六曰：重视官职的赏赐来劝勉功臣。
English: The sixth day: encourage meritorious vassals to attach importance to the reward of official posts.

古文：陛下即位以来，屡沛覃恩以均大庆，不吝官爵以激人心，至有未满一任而并进十级，承应未出职而已带骠骑荣禄者，冗滥之极至于如此，复开鬻爵进献之门，然则被坚执锐效死行阵者何所劝哉。
现代文：陛下即位以来，屡施深厚的恩惠与天下同庆，不吝官爵以激励人心，以致有没到任期届满而一连升十级，承应还没有出任职位而已带有骠骑荣誉俸禄的，冗滥之极至于如此，又开卖爵进献之门，那么对披坚执锐拼死阵前的将士怎么勉励呢？
English: Since His Majesty's accession to the throne, he has repeatedly extended profound favors to celebrate with the world, and has not spared officials and nobles to inspire people's hearts, so that there are those who have not reached the expiration of their term of office and have been promoted ten levels in a row, those who have not yet assumed their positions but have received honorable remuneration, and those who are extremely verbose, as well as those who have opened the door for the introduction of nobles, so how can we encourage the soldiers who are determined to fight to the death?

古文：官本虚名，特出于人主之口，而天下之人极意趋慕者，以朝廷爱重耳。
现代文：官本虚名，只是出于君主之口，而天下之人一心追慕的，在于朝廷爱惜重视。
English: The false reputation of officialdom only comes from the mouth of the monarch, but people all over the world admire the love and attention of the imperial court.

古文：若不计勋劳，朝授一官，暮升一职，人亦将轻之而不慕矣。
现代文：如果不考虑功劳的大小，朝授给一官，暮提升一职，人们也将轻视它而不仰慕了。
English: If, regardless of the size of the merit, it is awarded to an official and promoted to a post, people will despise it and not admire it.

古文：已然之事既不可咎，伏愿陛下重惜将来，无使公器为寻常之具，功赏为侥幸所乘。
现代文：已经这样的事就不能责怪了，愿陛下珍惜将来，不要让公器成为平常的用具，使功赏为侥幸者所用。
English: Already such a thing cannot be blamed, may His Majesty cherish the future, do not let the official tool become an ordinary tool, so that the reward is used by the lucky ones.

古文：又今之散官动至三品，有司艰于迁授，宜於减罢八资内量增阶数，易以美名，庶几历官者不至于太骤，而国家恩权不失之太轻矣。
现代文：又如今天的散官动辄三品，有司很难迁任授职，应在减罢八资内衡量增加阶数，换上好名，也许可能使升官的不至于太快，而国家恩权不失之太轻。
English: Just as today's lower-ranking officials can be promoted up to three grades, and it is difficult for a senior official to be transferred from one post to another, the number of ranks to be increased should be measured within the reduction and abolition of eight ranks, and replaced with a good name. This may prevent the promotion from being too fast, and the state's power from being too light.

古文：七曰选将帅以明军法。
现代文： 七曰：选好将帅以明军法。
English: The seventh day: choose a good general with a clear military law.

古文：夫将者国之司命，天下所赖以安危者也。
现代文：将是掌握国家命运的人，天下安危所依赖的人。
English: They will be the ones who hold the fate of the country in their hands, the ones on whom the safety of the world depends.

古文：举万众之命付之一人，呼吸之间以决生死，其任顾不重欤？
现代文：拿万众的生命交给一人，呼吸之间就决定生死，他的责任还不重大吗？
English: To entrust the lives of all mankind to one man, to decide between life and death in the space of a breath, is his responsibility not great?

古文：自北兵入境，野战则全军俱殃，城守则阖郡被屠，岂皆士卒单弱、守备不严哉，特以庸将不知用兵之道而已。
现代文：自从北兵入境，野战则全军覆没，守城就全郡被杀，怎么能说都是士卒单弱、守备不严呢，只因为庸将不懂用兵之道罢了。
English: Since the entry of the Northern soldiers, the whole army has been wiped out in the field battle, and the whole county has been killed in the defense of the city. How can it be said that the soldiers are weak and the defense is not strict, just because the general does not know how to use soldiers.

古文：古语云： 三辰不轨，取士为相。
现代文：古语说 ：日月星不按规道运行，取士为相。
English: An ancient saying says: The sun, moon and stars do not run according to a regular course, but take turns.

古文：四夷交侵，拔卒为将。 
现代文：四方敌人入侵，拔卒为将。 
English: Four sides of the enemy invaded, pulling out pawns.

古文：今之将帅，大抵先论出身官品，或门阀膏粱之子，或亲故假托之流，平居则意气自高，遇敌则首尾退缩，将帅既自畏怯，士卒夫谁肯前。
现代文：今天当将帅大都先论出身官品，有的是门阀膏粱之子，有的是亲朋故旧借力相托的一帮人，平居则意气自高，遇敌则首尾退缩，将帅既然自己畏怯，士卒谁肯向前。
English: Today, when it comes to generals, most of them are from official ranks. Some are the sons of gatekeepers, some are a group of people who rely on their relatives and friends. Those who live in the same house are high-spirited, and those who encounter enemies are always flinching. Since generals are timid, who is willing to move forward?

古文：又居常裒刻，纳其馈献，士卒因之以扰良民而莫可制。
现代文：又平时搜括财物，接受贿赠，士卒为此骚扰百姓而不可禁止。
English: In addition, it cannot be prohibited for officers to harass the public by searching for stolen property and accepting bribes in normal times.

古文：及率之应敌，在途则前后乱行，屯次则排门择屋，恐逼小民，恣其求索，以此责其畏法死事，岂不难哉。
现代文：等到率领他们应战，在途中则先后乱行，住宿则排门选屋，恐逼小民，听凭他们勒索，因此要求他们敬畏法律战死沙场，怎么不难呢！
English: Wait until you lead them into battle, and on the way, you will go on a rampage one after another, and you will line up the accommodation, intimidate the common people, and listen to their blackmail, so you ask them to fear the law and die in the battlefield, how is that not difficult!

古文：况今军官数多，自千户而上，有万户、有副统、有都统、有副提控，十羊九牧，号令不一，动相牵制。
现代文：况今军官太多，从千户起上有万户、有副统、有都统、有副提控，十羊九牧，号令不一，动不动相互牵制。
English: Moreover, there are too many officers nowadays. From a thousand households, there are ten thousand households, there are sub-districts, there are sub-districts, there are sub-sub-sub-sub-sub-sub-sub-sub-sub-sub-sub-sub-sub-sub-sub-sub-sub-sub-sub-sub-sub-sub-sub-sub-sub-sub-sub-sub-sub-sub-sub-sub-sub-sub-sub-sub-sub-sub-sub-sub-sub-sub-sub-sub-sub-sub-sub-sub-sub-sub-sub-sub-sub-sub-sub-

古文：切闻国初取天下，元帅而下，惟有万户，所统军士不下数万人，专制一路，岂在多哉？
现代文：私下听说国初取天下，元帅以下只有万户，所统军士不下数万人，专制一路怎么在于将领的多少呢！
English: Privately, I heard that when a country takes over the world for the first time, there are only 10,000 households below the rank of marshal, and no less than tens of thousands of soldiers and sergeants, so how does the autocracy depend on the number of generals?

古文：多则难择，少则易精。
现代文：多就难以选配，少则易精。
English: More is difficult to match, less is easy to refine.

古文：今之军法，每二十五人为一谋克，四谋克为一千户，谋克之下有蒲辇一人、旗鼓司火头五人，其任战者才十有八人而已。
现代文：如今的军法，每二十五人为一谋克，四谋克为一千户，谋克之下有蒲辇一人、旗鼓司火头五人，其中能打仗的才十有八人而已。
English: In today's military law, every twenty-five people is a strategist, and four strategists are a thousand households. Under the strategist, there is one puppet master and five fire chiefs, of which only eight out of ten can fight.

古文：又为头目选其壮健以给使令，则是一千户所统不及百人，不足成其队伍矣。
现代文：又做头目的挑选其中的健壮之士用来派遣传令，那么这一千户所统不到百人，不足成其队伍了。
English: If the leader also selects one of the able-bodied men to send a messenger, then this thousand households are less than a hundred people, which is not enough to form a team.

古文：古之良将常与士卒同甘苦，今军官既有俸廪，又有券粮，一日之给兼数十人之用。
现代文：古代的良将常与士卒同甘苦，如今军官已有俸禄，又有券粮，一天的供给合数十人之用。
English: In ancient times, good generals often shared the same joys and sorrows with their subordinates. Today, officers already receive a salary, as well as vouchers for grain. A day's supply is enough for dozens of people.

古文：将帅则丰饱有余，士卒则饥寒不足，曷若裁省冗食而加之军士哉。
现代文：将帅则丰饱有余，士卒则饥寒不足，何不裁减多余的将省下多出的粮加给军士。
English: Generals are more than well-fed, officers and men are less hungry and cold, why not reduce the surplus and add the extra grain to the sergeants.

古文：伏乞明敕大臣，精选通晓军政者，分诣诸路，编列队伍，要必五十人为一谋克，四谋克为一千户，五千户为一万户，谓之散将。
现代文：请求明白告诉大臣，精选通晓军政的人，分别到各路，编列队伍，一定要五十人为一谋克，四谋克为一千户，五千户为一万户，称之散将。
English: The request clearly tells the minister that carefully selected people who are familiar with military and political affairs should go to each road and make up a team. It must be fifty people for one plan, four plans for one thousand households, five thousand households for ten thousand households, and call it scattered.

古文：万人设一都统，谓之大将，总之帅府。
现代文：万人设一都统，称之大将，使帅府统帅他们。
English: The people set up a unified government and called it the general, and made the governor general to lead them.

古文：数不足者皆并之，其副统、副提控及无军虚设都统、万户者悉罢省。
现代文：数不足的都合并，那些副统、副提控及无军虚设都统、万户的全部免去。
English: Those that are insufficient in number will be merged, and those sub-units, sub-sub-sub-sub-sub-sub-sub-sub-sub-sub-sub-sub-sub-sub-sub-sub-sub-sub-sub-sub-sub-sub-sub-sub-sub-sub-sub-sub-sub-sub-sub-sub-sub-sub-sub-sub-sub-sub-sub-sub-sub-sub-sub-sub-sub-sub-sub-sub-sub-sub-sub-sub-sub-sub-sub-sub-sub-sub-sub-sub-sub-sub-sub-sub-sub-sub

古文：仍敕省院大臣及内外五品以上，各举方略优长，武勇出众、材堪将帅者一二人，不限官品，以充万户以上都统、元帅之职。
现代文：仍旧令省院大臣及内外五品以上官，各举荐专长谋略、武勇出众、才能可以胜任将帅的人一、二名，不限官品，用来充当万户以上都统、元帅之职。
English: He still ordered the ministers of the provincial councils and the officials of the five grades and above at home and abroad to each recommend one or two people with expertise, strategy, outstanding bravery and talent who could be competent as marshals, without limitation of official ranks, to serve as marshals and marshals of more than 10,000 households.

古文：千户以下，选军中有谋略武艺为众所服者充。
现代文：千户以下选军中有谋略武艺为大家所佩服的人充任。
English: Among the less than one thousand households that voted for the military, those who are admired for their strategy and martial arts will fill the position.

古文：申明军法，居常教阅，必使将帅明于奇正虚实之数，士卒熟于坐作进退之节。
现代文：申明军法，平时教育检阅，一定要使将帅明白奇正虚实的规律，士兵熟练掌握坐作进退的基本规则。
English: It is affirmed that the military law and peacetime education review must make the generals understand the laws of reality and reality, and the soldiers master the basic rules of sitting and advancing.

古文：至于弓矢铠仗须令自负，习于劳苦。
现代文：至于弓矢铠仗须令自己背，习惯于劳苦。
English: As for bows and arrows, you must train yourself and get used to hard work.

古文：若有所犯，必刑无赦。
现代文：如果有犯军法，一定惩罚不赦免。
English: If there is a violation of the Military Law, the punishment will not be pardoned.

古文：则将帅得人，士气日振，可以待敌矣。
现代文：那么将帅得人，士气日振，可以等待敌人了。
English: Then you will be handsome, morale will be high, and you can wait for the enemy.

古文：八曰练士卒以振兵威。
现代文： 八曰：操练士卒以振兵威。
English: The eighth day: The drill sergeants leave with a bang.

古文：昔周世宗常曰： 兵贵精而不贵多，百农夫不能养一战士，奈何朘民脂膏养此无用之卒。
现代文：从前周世宗常说： 兵贵精而不贵多，百农夫不能养一战士，剥削百姓财富养活这些无用之卒怎么办。
English: Once upon a time, Zhou Shizong used to say: soldiers are precious, but not too precious. A hundred farmers cannot feed one soldier. How can we exploit the wealth of the people to feed these useless pawns?

古文：苟健懦不分，众何以劝。 
现代文：如果强壮、软弱不分开，众人用什么来勉励。 
English: If the strong and the weak are not separated, what will the people do for encouragement?

古文：因大搜军卒，遂下淮南，取三关，兵不血刃，选练之力也。
现代文：就大阅部队，顺利地攻克淮南、取三关，兵不血刃，这是选择和操练的威力。
English: It is the power of selection and drill to successfully conquer Huainan and take three passes without bloodshed.

古文：唐魏徵曰： 兵在以道御之而已。
现代文：唐代魏征说 ：军队在于用什么方法去治理它罢了。
English: Wei Zheng of the Tang Dynasty said: the army is only concerned with what method to use to govern it.

古文：御壮健足以无敌于天下，何取细弱以增虚数。 
现代文：统帅强壮的队伍足以无敌于天下，为什么要用弱小的士兵来增虚数。 
English: The commander of a strong team is invincible in the world, why should he use weak soldiers to increase the false number.

古文：比者凡战多败，非由兵少，正以其多而不分健懦，故为敌所乘，懦者先奔，健者不能独战而遂溃，此所以取败也。
现代文：比较起来，凡战多败，不是由于兵少，正以其多而不分健懦，因此被敌人所利用，两军对阵懦者先逃，健者不能独战就散乱，这是战败的原因。
English: Comparatively speaking, when a battle is more or less successful, it is not because there are fewer soldiers, but because there are more of them, regardless of whether they are strong or weak. Therefore, they are taken advantage of by the enemy. When two armies fight, the weak flee first, while the strong cannot fight alone and scatter. This is the reason for defeat.

古文：今莫若选差习兵公正之官，将已籍军人随其所长而类试之。
现代文：如今不如选差熟悉士兵的公正之官，将已在册军人按他所长而分类考考他。
English: Now it is not so much a matter of selecting an officer of justice who is familiar with soldiers, but of classifying and examining an enlisted soldier according to his abilities.

古文：其武艺出众者别作一军，量增口粮，时加训练，视等第而赏之。
现代文：其中的武艺出众者另建一军，加量增加口粮，平时加强训练，按照等级次序给予赏赐。
English: Among them, those who excel in martial arts will build another army, increase rations, strengthen training in peacetime, and be rewarded in accordance with the rank order.

古文：如此，则人人激厉，争效所长，而衰懦者亦有可用之渐矣。
现代文：如此，则人人激励，争效所长，而衰懦者也渐渐变为可用了。
English: In this way, everyone is encouraged to compete for the best, and the weak gradually become available.

古文：昔唐文皇出征，常分其军为上中下，凡临敌则观其强弱，使下当其上，而上当其中，中当其下。
现代文：从前唐文皇出征，常分其军为上中下，凡临敌就观察他们的强弱，使下挡其上，而上挡其中，中挡其下。
English: In the past, when the Tang Emperor went to war, he often divided his army into the upper, middle and lower ranks. Whenever he faced an enemy, he would observe their strength and weakness, and make the lower ranks stand on top, while the upper ranks stood in the middle, and the middle ranks stood below.

古文：敌乘下军不过奔逐数步，而上军中军已胜其二军，用是常胜。
现代文：敌军追逐下军不过追出几步，而上军中军已胜其两军，采用这个方法常常胜利。
English: The enemy only chased the retreating army for a few steps, but the advancing army had already defeated its two armies, and this method was often successful.

古文：盖古之将帅亦有以懦兵委敌者，要在预为分别，不使混淆耳。
现代文：古时候将帅也有用弱兵舍弃给敌人，关键在预先分开区别，不使混淆罢了。 
English: In ancient times, it was also useful to abandon the best soldiers to the enemy. The key is to distinguish them in advance, so as not to confuse them.

古文：上览书不悦，诏付尚书省诘之。
现代文：宣宗看了奏章不高兴，诏令交尚书省责问他。
English: Xuan Zong was not happy when he read the play, so he was ordered by the Emperor to report to the Ministry of Education and Culture.

古文：宰执恶其纷更诸事，谓所言多不当。
现代文：宰执讨厌他乱变各事，说所言多不当。
English: The boss hated him for changing things and said that what he said was inappropriate.

古文：于是规惶惧待罪，诏谕曰： 朕始以规有放归山林之语，故令诘之，乃辞以不职忌讳，意谓朕恶其言而怒也。
现代文：于是，陈规惶惧等罪，下诏告诉说 ：我当初因陈规有放归山林这样的话，所以叫人责问他，他即用不知道忌讳来推辞，想说我是厌恶他的话而生气。
English: As a result, Chen Gui, fearing that he would be punished, issued the following edict: "I asked someone to scold him for saying that Chen Gui should be allowed to return to the mountains and forests, and he used the excuse that he did not know the taboo, trying to say that I was angry because I disliked his words.

古文：朕初无意加罪，其令御史台谕之。 
现代文：我开始无意加罪，让御史台告诉他。 
English: I started to unintentionally add insult to injury and asked the historian to tell him.

古文：寻出为徐州帅府经历官。
现代文：不久出任徐州帅府经历官。
English: Soon after, he was appointed as the experience officer of Xuzhou Shuaifu.

古文：正大元年，召为右司谏，数上章言事，寻权吏部郎中。
现代文：正大元年，召为右司谏，多次上奏章论事，随即代理吏部郎中。
English: In the first year of Zhengda University, he was called to be the right secretary, repeatedly went to the chapter to discuss the matter, and then became the acting secretary.

古文：时诏群臣议修复河中府，规与杨云翼等言： 河中今为无人之境，陕西民力疲乏，修之亦不能守，不若以见屯军士量力补治，待其可守即修之未晚也。 
现代文：当时诏令群臣商议修复河中府，陈规与杨云翼等人说： 河中现在成为无人地区，陕西民力疲乏，修复它也不能守，不如用被屯军士量力补治，等到它可以防守到时修复也不晚。 
English: At that time, the emperor ordered a group of ministers to discuss the restoration of Hezhongfu, and Chen Gui and Yang Yunyi and others said: Hezhong has now become an uninhabited area, Shaanxi's people are exhausted, and it can not be repaired. It is better to use the soldiers who were stationed there to repair it. It is not too late to repair it until it can be defended.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇帝听从了。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：未几，坐事解职。
现代文：不久，因事获罪解除职务。
English: He was soon relieved of his duties after being found guilty.

古文：初，吏部尚书赵伯成坐铨选吏员出身王京与进士王著填开封警巡判官见阙，为京所讼免官，规亦坐之。
现代文：当初，吏部尚书赵伯成因为选拔吏员出身王京与进士王著填开封警巡判官现缺，被王京诉讼免去官职，陈规也跟着获罪。
English: At first, Zhao Bocheng, the clerk of the clerk department, was removed from his official position by Wangjing lawsuit, and Chen Gui was also convicted, because he had selected clerks from Wangjing and Jin Shi Wang to fill the vacancy of the police inspector.

古文：是年十一月，改充补阙。
现代文：这年十一月，改为充任补缺。
English: In November of this year, it was changed to a full-time vacancy.

古文：十二月，言将相非材，且荐数人可用者。
现代文：十二月，说将帅没有才能，并且推荐几个可以使用的人。
English: In December, he said that Zheng Shuai had no talent, and recommended several people who could be used.

古文：二年正月，规及台谏同奏五事：一，乞尚书省提控枢密院，如大定、明昌故事。
现代文：二年正月，陈规与台谏同奏五事：一，请求让尚书省提控枢密院，按照大定、明昌成例。
English: In the first month of the second year, Chen Gui and the Taiwanese emperor played five things together: First, he requested that Shangshu Province take control of the Privy Council, in accordance with the precedent of Dading and Mingshang.

古文：二，简留亲卫军。
现代文：二，选拔留下亲卫军。
English: Second, the selection left the SS.

古文：三，沙汰冗军，减行枢密院、帅府。
现代文：三，淘汰多余军队，减少行枢密院、帅府。
English: Third, weed out superfluous troops and reduce the number of officials in the Privy Council and the General Headquarters.

古文：四，选大臣为宣抚使，招集流亡以实边防。
现代文：四，选大臣任宣抚使，召集逃亡、流落在外的人来充实边防。
English: Fourthly, to elect ministers to serve as envoys, and to summon fugitives and exiles to strengthen the border defense.

古文：五，选官置所，议一切省减。
现代文：五、选拔官吏设置处所，议一切节省。
English: Fifth, the selection of officials, the establishment of offices, and the discussion of all savings.

古文：略施行之。
现代文：大致执行了这些。
English: That's pretty much what they did.

古文：四月，以大旱诏规审理冤滞，临发上奏： 今河南一路便宜、行院、帅府、从宜凡二十处，陕西行尚书省、帅府五，皆得以便宜杀人，冤狱在此，不在州县。 
现代文：四月，因大旱下诏陈规审理冤案漏案。临行上奏说： 现在河南一路便宜、行院、帅府、从宜一共二十处，陕西行尚书省两个，帅府五个，都可以斟酌事势自行杀人，冤案在这里不在州县。 
English: In April, due to the drought, the trial of the unjust case was omitted from the trial of the unjust case. Prior to the trip, the report said: Now Henan is cheap all the way, there are a total of twenty hospitals, counties and counties, and two Shaanxi provinces and five counties. They can kill themselves according to the situation. The unjust case is not in the state or county.

古文：又曰： 雨水不时则责审理，然则职燮理者当何如？ 
现代文：又说： 雨水不按时就要审理冤案，那么有职办这些事的人该怎么办？ 
English: He also said: "If the rain does not come on time, we will have to hear a case of injustice, so what should those who have the authority to do these things do?

古文：上善其言而不能有为也。
现代文：皇帝认为他提得好，但不能有什么作为。
English: The emperor thought he had made a good suggestion, but could do nothing.

古文：十一月，上召完颜素兰及规入见，面谕曰： 宋人轻犯边界，我以轻骑袭之，冀其惩创告和，以息吾民耳。
现代文：十一月，皇帝召完颜素兰及规入见，当面告诉说： 宋人随便侵犯边境，我方用轻骑袭击他们，希望他们被打击后请求议和，来使百姓得到休息。
English: In November, after summoning Yan Xulan and Gui Rong, the emperor told him face to face: "The Song people have violated the border at will. We attacked them with light cavalry. I hope that after they are attacked, they will request peace talks to give the people a rest.

古文：宋果行成，尚欲用兵乎。
现代文：宋果然求和，还要用兵吗？
English: Song successfully sued for peace, do you still need to use soldiers?

古文：卿等当识此意。 
现代文：你们应该懂得这个意思。 
English: You should know what that means.

古文：规进曰： 帝王之兵贵于万全，昔光武中兴，所征必克，犹言 每一出兵，头须为白 。
现代文：陈规说： 皇帝的军队贵在万无一失，从前光武中兴，所征伐的地方一定攻克，还说 每一出兵，头须为白 。
English: Chen Gui said, "The emperor's army is precious and infallible. Since the time of Guangwu and Zhongxing, the conquered places must be conquered. He also said that every troop must have a white head.

古文：兵不妄动如此。 
现代文：军队不妄动如此。 
English: Armies don't move like that.

古文：上善之。
现代文：皇上认为说得好。
English: The emperor thought Sima Xiangru spoke very well.

古文：四年三月，上召群臣喻以陕西事曰： 方春北方马渐羸瘠，秋高大势并来，何以支持。
现代文：四年三月，皇上召见群臣把陕西事务告诉他们说 ：当春，北方马逐渐瘦弱，如等到秋天大军一起开来，用什么来支撑？
English: In March of the fourth year, the emperor summoned a group of courtiers to tell them about the affairs of Shaanxi Province, saying: In the spring, the northern horse gradually became weak. If you wait until the autumn when the army comes together, what will you use to support it?

古文：朕已喻合达尽力决一战矣，卿等以为如何？ 
现代文：我已告诉合达尽力决一死战，你们认为怎么样？ 
English: I've told the gang to fight to the death, what do you think?

古文：又言和事无益，撒合辇力破和议，赛不言： 今已遣和使，可中辍乎。 
现代文：又说议和没有好处，撒合辇竭力破坏和议，赛不说： 现在已经派出议和使臣，可中途停止吗？ 
English: And they said, There is no profit in peace: and the Sadducees sought to overthrow the peace: but would he not say, Now that the counsel is established, and ambassadors have been sent, it is not lawful to put it off?

古文：余皆无言，规独进曰： 兵难遥度，百闻不如一见。
现代文：其余人都无言，独规进言说： 军队虽然难以推测，百闻不如一见。
English: The rest were speechless, but one in particular said: Although it is difficult to predict the military, seeing is believing.

古文：臣尝任陕西官，近年又屡到陕西，兵将冗懦，恐不可用，未如圣料。 
现代文：我曾任陕西官，近年又屡到陕西，兵将闲散懦弱，恐怕不可以使用，不像皇上估计的那样。 
English: I was once an officer in Shaanxi, and in recent years I have been to Shaanxi many times. The generals are idle and cowardly, and I'm afraid they can't be used, unlike the emperor's estimate.

古文：言未终，乌古论四和曰： 陈规之言非是，臣近至陕西，军士勇锐，皆思一战。 
现代文：话没说完，乌西论四和说： 陈规说得不对，臣最近到陕西，军士勇锐，都想一战。 
English: Before the speech was over, Wuxi said about Sihe: Chen Gui is not right, the minister recently came to Shaanxi, the sergeant is brave, and they all want to fight.

古文：监察御史完颜习显从而和之，上首肯，又泛言和事。
现代文：监察御史完颜习显跟着附和，皇上点头表示同意。
English: The inspector of imperial history, Kanyan Xi Xian, followed suit, and the emperor nodded his head in agreement.

古文：规对曰： 和事固非上策，又不可必成，然方今事势不得不然。
现代文：又一般地议了议和议。规回答说 ：和议本非上策，又不可必成，然而如今时势逼我们不得不这样。
English: He replied: "Harmony is not the best policy, nor is it inevitable, but the current situation forces us to do so."

古文：使彼难从，犹可以激厉将士，以待其变。 
现代文：假使对方不愿意答应我们，还可以激励将士，以待其变。 
English: If the other side is not willing to agree to us, we can also motivate the soldiers to wait for it to change.

古文：上不以为然。
现代文：皇上不以为然。
English: The Emperor was not impressed.

古文：明日，又令集议省中，欲罢和事，群臣多以和为便，乃诏行省斟酌发遣，而事竟不行。
现代文：第二日，又令群臣集体在省中商议，想停止和议，群臣大多认为和议有利。于是下诏行省斟酌遣发，而此事竟不行。
English: On the second day, he ordered the group of ministers to collectively discuss in the province, and wanted to stop the peace talks. Most of the ministers thought that the peace talks were beneficial. Therefore, he issued an edict to the province to consider dispatching, but this was not possible.

古文：十月，规与右拾遗李大节上章，劾同判大睦亲事撒合辇谄佞，招权纳贿及不公事。
现代文：十月，陈规与右拾遗李大节上奏章，弹劾同判大睦亲事撒合辇谄媚、弄权、纳贿和处理问题不公等事。
English: In October, the Chen Gui and the Right Revival Li Day Festival was held, and impeachment and sentencing were carried out for the following matters: family affairs, power-grabbing, bribe-taking, and unfair handling of problems.

古文：由是撒合辇竟出为中京留守，朝廷快之。
现代文：为此撒合辇终于出任中京留守，朝廷为这高兴。
English: For this reason, Sahakian finally left for the capital, and the imperial court was delighted.

古文：五年二月，又与大节言三事： 一，将帅出兵每为近臣牵制，不得专辄。
现代文：五年二月，又和大节一起提出三事：一，将帅出征每次被近臣牵制，不能专擅。
English: In February of the fifth year, three things were proposed together with the Great Festival: First, the general was constrained by his vassals every time he went to war, and he could not be exclusive.

古文：二，近侍送宣传旨，公受赂遗，失朝廷体，可一切禁绝。
现代文：二，近侍送交、宣布、传达旨意，公然接受贿赠，丧失朝廷礼仪，应一切禁绝。
English: Second, courtiers who deliver, announce, and convey the will, openly accept bribes, and lose the imperial court etiquette should all be banned.

古文：三，罪同罚异，何以使人。 
现代文：三，罪同罚异，用什么来使用人？
English: Third, crime and punishment are different, what is the use of using people?

古文：上嘉纳焉。
现代文：皇帝赞许并接受了。
English: At that time, it was widely believed that Shi Hao was a recommended candidate.

古文：初，宣宗尝召文绣署令王寿孙作大红半身绣衣，且戒以勿令陈规知。
现代文：当初，宣宗曾召文绣署令王寿孙做大红半身绣衣，并且告诫他不要让陈规等人知道。
English: At first, Emperor Xuanzong had summoned the Literary and Embroidery Bureau to order Wang Shousun to make a big red half-body embroidered dress, and warned him not to let Chen Gui and others know.

古文：及成，进，召寿孙问曰： 曾令陈规辈知否？ 
现代文：等到做成，进献，召寿孙问说 ：曾经让陈规那帮人知道没有？ 
English: When it was ready, Shousun called for donations and asked, "Did you ever let Chen Gui's gang know?"

古文：寿孙顿首言： 臣侍禁庭，凡宫省大小事不敢为外人言，况亲被圣训乎。 
现代文：王寿孙叩头说： 我在宫廷服侍，凡是宫省大小事不敢对外人说，何况是亲自被皇上教诲的事呢。 
English: Wang Shousun bowed his head and said, "I am serving at the court, and I dare not tell outsiders about all the small and big things of the palace, let alone the things that I was personally taught by the emperor.

古文：上因叹曰： 陈规若知，必以华饰谏我，我实畏其言。 
现代文：皇帝因此叹息说 ：陈规如果知道，一定用不应华丽装饰来规劝我，我实在怕他说。 
English: The emperor therefore sighed and said, "If I knew the old rules, I would certainly use them to dissuade me from using ornate decorations. I am really afraid of him."

古文：盖规言事不假借，朝望甚重，凡宫中举事，上必曰： 恐陈规有言。 
现代文：陈规议论事情没有宽容，朝中声望十分高，凡宫中提出事情，皇帝一定说 ：恐怕陈规有意见。 
English: Chen Gui had no tolerance for discussing things, and his reputation in the court was very high. Whenever the court raised an issue, the emperor would say, "I'm afraid Chen Gui has an opinion."

古文：一时近臣切议，惟畏陈正叔耳，挺然一时直士也。
现代文：一时近臣恳切评论，皇上只怕陈正叔，他挺然成为当时正直名士。
English: At one time, a close courtier commented earnestly that the emperor was only afraid of Uncle Chen Zheng, who had indeed become an honest celebrity at that time.

古文：后出为中京副留守，未赴，卒，士论惜之。
现代文：后出任中京副留守，没有到任，去世，士人评论十分痛惜。
English: After taking up the post of vice-governor of Chukyo, he stayed behind, did not arrive at his post, and passed away, which was highly deplored by scholars.

古文：规博学能文，诗亦有律度。
现代文：陈规博学能文，诗也做得合辙入格律。
English: Stereotypes abound in literature, and poetry is made to fit the mold.

古文：为人刚毅质实，有古人风，笃于学问，至老不废。
现代文：为人刚毅质朴诚实，有古人风度，坚持学习到老不废。
English: He is a man of fortitude, simple and honest, with the demeanor of the ancients, and insists on studying until he is old.

古文：浑源刘从益见其所上八事，叹曰： 宰相材也。 
现代文：浑源刘从益见到他上书的八事，叹息说： 宰相材料。 
English: When Hunyuan Liu Congyi saw the eight things he had written, he sighed and said: Prime minister material.

古文：每与人论及时事辄愤惋，盖伤其言之不行也。
现代文：每与人论及时事总是愤怒惋惜，因为伤心他的建议不被实施。
English: Whenever he speaks to people about current affairs, it is always with anger and regret, because he is sad that his proposals are not being implemented.

古文：南渡后，谏官称许古、陈规，而规不以讦直自名，尤见重云。
现代文：南渡后，谏官称颂许古、陈规，而规不用揭发别人的阴私来树自名，更被敬重。
English: After arriving in the south, the eunuchs praised Xu Gu and Chen Gu, while Gu did not have to expose the secrets of others to make a name for himself, and was even more respected.

古文：死之日，家无一金，知友为葬之。
现代文：死的那天，家无一金，知己朋友安葬了他。
English: On the day of his death, his family had no money, and he was buried by a close friend.

古文：子良臣。
现代文：儿子叫良臣。
English: His son's name is Ryosen.

古文：许古，字道真，汾阳军节度使致仕安仁子也。
现代文：许古，字道真，是辞职的原汾阳军节度使许安仁的儿子。
English: Xu Gu, whose family name is Daozhen, is the son of Xu Anren, the former commander of the Shenyang Army who resigned.

古文：登明昌五年词赋进士第。
现代文：明昌五年以词赋科中进士。
English: In the 5th year of the Ming Dynasty, he became a junior high school student of Ci Fu Ke.

古文：贞祐初，自左拾遗拜监察御史。
现代文：贞初年，从左拾遗拜任监察御史。
English: In the first year of her reign, she assumed the position of inspector general of history from the left.

古文：时宣宗迁汴，信任丞相高琪，无恢复之谋，古上章曰：
现代文：当时宣宗迁都汴京，信任丞相术虎高琪，没有恢复国家的计谋，许古上奏说：
English: At that time, Emperor Xuanzong moved the capital to Beijing, trusted the chancellor Juhu Gaoqi, and did not restore the country's strategy, Xu Gu Shangsoo said:

古文：自中都失守，庙社陵寝、宫室府库，至于图籍重器，百年积累，一朝弃之。
现代文： 自从中都失守，宗庙、社坛、陵寝、宫室、府库，甚至图书典籍、重器等，百年积累，一朝遗弃。
English: Since the center of the capital was lost, the ancestral temple, the shrine, the mausoleum, the palace, the prefectural treasury, and even books, heavy equipment, etc., accumulated for hundreds of years, were all abandoned.

古文：惟圣主痛悼之心至为深切，夙夜思惧所以建中兴之功者，未尝少置也。
现代文：唯圣主痛惜之心十分深切，日夜思念，希望重建中兴之功，未曾搁置一时。
English: Yu Shengkun's heart of regret is very deep. He thinks about it day and night, hoping to rebuild ZTE's achievements, and has not put it aside for a moment.

古文：为臣子者食禄受责，其能无愧乎！
现代文：当臣子的食禄受责，能不感到惭愧吗？
English: When a courtier's food allowance is blamed, can you not feel ashamed?

古文：且闾阎细民犹颙望朝廷整训师徒，为恢复计。
现代文：况且民间小民，仍盼望朝廷重整军队，以图恢复。
English: Moreover, the common people still hoped that the imperial court would reorganize the army in an attempt to recover.

古文：而今才闻拒河自保，又尽徙诸路军户河南，彼既弃其恒产无以自生，土居之民复被其扰，臣不知谁为此谋者。
现代文：而今刚听说要拒守黄河，以求自保，又全部迁徙各路军户到河南，他们既已抛弃其永久的产业，难以为生，本地居民又受到他们的干扰，臣不知是谁替陛下设此计谋的。
English: But now I have just heard that they want to refuse to defend the Yellow River in order to protect themselves, and they have all migrated to Henan. They have already abandoned their permanent property, and it is difficult for them to make a living. The local residents are also disturbed by them. I don't know who set up this scheme for His Majesty.

古文：然业已如是，但当议所以处之，使军无妄费，民不至困穷则善矣。
现代文：但事情业已如此，便应当商议如何处置，使军队不乱花费，民众不致困穷就是好事了。
English: But now that this is the case, we should discuss how to deal with it, so that the army does not spend recklessly and the people do not become impoverished.

古文：臣闻安危所系，在于一相，孔子称： 危而不持，颠而不扶，则将焉用？ 
现代文： 臣听说国家安危责任在于一个丞相，孔子说： 危险时不能把持，颠扑时不能扶正，还有什么用处？ 
English: The minister heard that the responsibility for national safety and security lies with a prime minister. Confucius said: When in danger, you can't control it. When in a panic, you can't correct it. What's the use?

古文：事势至此，不知执政者每对天颜，何以仰答清问也。
现代文：事态发展到这种地步，不知执政大臣每当面对皇上时，怎样应答所问。
English: The situation has developed to such an extent that I do not know how the ruling minister will respond to questions whenever he faces the emperor.

古文：今之所急，莫若得人，如前御史大夫裴满德仁、工部尚书孙德渊，忠谅明敏，可以大用，近皆许告老，愿复起而任之，必能有所建立以利国家。
现代文：今日所急的，比不上得人才，像前御史大夫裴满德仁、工部尚书孙德渊，为人忠诚，办事敏捷，是可以大用之才，近来都允许他们告老还乡。希望能够重新起用，必定能够有所建树，以利国家。
English: What is urgent today cannot be compared to getting talented people, such as the former chief historian Pei Man De Ren and the head of the Ministry of Industry and Trade, Shang Shusun De Yuan. They are loyal, quick to do things, and can be of great use. Recently, they have been allowed to return to their hometowns. I hope that they can be reappointed, and they will certainly be able to do something to benefit the country.

古文：太子太师致仕孙铎，虽颇衰疾，如有大议犹可赐召，或就问之。
现代文：太子太师已辞职的孙铎，虽有病衰弱，如商议大事，仍可召问，或前去问询。
English: Although Sun Yat-sen, the crown prince and grandmaster, has resigned, he is ill and weak. If there are important matters to be discussed, he can still be summoned or go to inquire.

古文：人才自古所难，凡知治体者皆当重惜，况此耆旧，岂宜轻弃哉。
现代文：人才为自古所难得，凡是知道治理国家的人都应当珍惜，况且像这样的老臣，怎么能轻易放弃呢？
English: Talent has been hard to come by since ancient times, and anyone who knows how to govern a country should be treasured. Moreover, how can such an old minister give up so easily?

古文：若乃临事不尽其心，虽尽心而不明於理，得无益、失无损者，纵其尚壮，亦安所用。
现代文：如果是遇事不能尽心，或虽尽心却不明事理，得之无益、失之无损的，虽然健壮，又有何用？
English: What is the use of being robust if, in the event of an emergency, one cannot give one's best, or if, despite giving one's best, one does not know what to do, and gains nothing and loses nothing?

古文：方时多难，固不容碌碌之徒备员尸素，以塞贤路也。
现代文：如今多难，更不容许有碌碌无为之徒，尸位素餐，以塞贤路。
English: Nowadays, it is much more difficult, and it is even more unacceptable, to have idle idle idle idle idle idle idle idle idle idle idle idle.

古文：惟陛下宸衷刚断，黜陟一新，以幸天下。
现代文：唯望陛下自行决断，赏罚一新，使天下有幸。
English: I only hope that His Majesty will decide on his own, reward and punish a new one, and make the world a happier place.

古文：臣前为拾遗时，已尝备论择相之道，乞取臣前奏并今所言，加审思焉。
现代文：臣原任拾遗时，已经详论选相之道，请取臣以前的奏文和今日进言，详加思考。
English: When the retainer was appointed to collect the remains, he had already discussed in detail the way of selecting the prime minister. Please take the previous message from the retainer and today's speech and think about it in detail.

古文：臣又闻将者民之司命，国家安危所系，故古之人君必重其选，为将者亦必以天下为己任。
现代文： 臣又听说将领是民众的司命，国家安危所系，所以古代国君必定注重选拔，当将领的也必定要以天下为己任。
English: The minister also heard that generals were responsible for the lives of the people and the safety of the country. Therefore, the ancient sovereigns must have paid attention to the selection, and the generals must also take the world as their own responsibility.

古文：夫将者贵谋而贱战，必也赏罚使人信之而不疑，权谋使人由之而不知，三军奔走号令以取胜，然后中心诚服而乐为之用。
现代文：当将领的贵于用谋略而贱于作战，必定在赏罚时使人信任而不生疑，权谋使人听从而不知原委，三军根据号令奔驰作战以取胜，然后心中诚服，乐于为其所用。
English: When generals are more concerned with strategy and less concerned with fighting, they must make people trust and not doubt when rewarding and punishing, make people listen to authority and not know the original committee, and make the three armies fight according to the command to win, and then they are sincerely convinced and willing to use it.

古文：迩来城守不坚，临战辄北，皆以将之不才故也。
现代文：近来守城不坚固，临战便败北，都是因为将领没有才能的缘故。
English: Recently, the defense of the city is not strong, and it is defeated before the battle, all because the generals have no talent.

古文：私于所昵，赏罚不公，至于众怨，而惧其生变，则抚摩慰籍，一切为姑息之事。
现代文：偏向所昵爱的人，赏罚不能公正，以至于众人抱怨，而害怕他们产生变乱，便加以安抚慰问，这种做法都是姑息养奸之道。
English: It is a way of indulging adultery to favor one's favorite, to reward and punish unfairly, to the point that people complain, and then, fearing that they will create turmoil, to placate and console them.

古文：由是兵轻其将，将畏其兵，尚能使之出死力以御敌乎？
现代文：于是，兵士轻视将领，将领害怕士兵，还能让他们出死力打敌人吗？
English: So the soldiers despise the generals, the generals fear the soldiers, but can they make them fight the enemy to the death?

古文：愿令腹心之臣及闲于兵事者，各举所知，果得真才，优加宠任，由战功可期矣。
现代文：希望任用心腹之臣以及熟悉用兵的人，各举荐所深知的，如果得到真有才能的，优加宠任，那么建立战功就能够指望了。
English: It is hoped that only those who are well-intentioned vassals and those who are familiar with the use of soldiers, who are well-known to each recommendation, if they get really talented, superior and favored, then they can count on the establishment of war exploits.

古文：如河东宣抚使胥鼎、山东宣抚使完颜弼、涿州刺史内族从坦，昭义节度使必兰阿鲁带，或忠勤勇干，或重厚有谋，皆可任之，以扞方面。
现代文：像河东宣抚使胥鼎、山东宣抚使完颜弼、涿州刺史皇族从坦、昭义节度使必兰阿鲁带，有的忠义勤谨，勇敢能干，有的严正忠厚，很有智谋，都是可以任用他们独挡一面的。 
English: Some of them are loyal, diligent, brave and capable, while others are strict, loyal and resourceful. They can be appointed to stand on their own. For example, the governor of Hedong Province, the governor of Shandong Province, the governor of Shandong Province, the governor of Shanxi Province, the governor of Luzhou Province, the governor of Shandong Province, the governor of Shandong Province, the governor of Shandong Province, the governor of Shandong Province, the governor of Shandong Province, the governor of Shandong Province, the governor of Shandong Province, and the governor of Shandong Province.

古文：又曰：河北诸路以都城既失，军户尽迁，将谓国家举而弃之，州县官往往逃奔河南。
现代文：又说： 河北各路因都城丢失，军户南迁，认为国家准备全部放弃，州县官员往往逃到河南。
English: He also said: Due to the loss of the capital city, all roads in Hebei have been lost, military households have moved south, believing that the country is ready to give up everything, and state and county officials often flee to Henan.

古文：乞令所在根括，立期遣还，违者勿复录用。
现代文：请命令各地追查，限定日期返回，违抗的不再任用。
English: Please order all regions to investigate, set a deadline to return, and no longer appoint those who defy.

古文：未尝离任者议加恩赉，如愿自效河北者亦听陈请，仍先赏之，减其日月。
现代文：没有离任的考虑加以赏赐，如果自愿到河北效命的也可听从所请，仍先赏赐，缩短提升的日期。
English: There is no consideration of leaving office to be rewarded, and if those who voluntarily go to Hebei to serve can also follow the request, they will still be rewarded first, shortening the promotion date.

古文：州县长贰官并令兼领军职，许择军中有才略胆勇者为头目，或加爵命以收其心，能取一府者即授以府长官，州县亦如之，使人怀复土之心。
现代文：州县长佐官员都要兼任军职，允许他们选择军队中有才能胆略勇敢者充当头目，或者加封爵级官职以收得其心，能攻下一府的即任命为府中长官，州县也是这样，让人人怀有收复故土之心。
English: The officials of prefectural and county governors and vice-governors must also serve as military officials, allowing them to choose the most talented, daring and courageous person in the army to act as the leader, or add a knighthood to win their hearts. If they can attack a prefecture, they will be appointed as prefectural and county governors, and the same is true for prefectures and counties, so that everyone has the heart to recover their homeland.

古文：别遣忠实干济者，以文檄官赏招诸胁从人，彼既苦于敌役，来者必多，敌势当自削。
现代文：另外选派忠实能干的人，带文书去宣布封官赏赐给那些胁从者，他们既然苦于为敌充当役使，前来投顺的必定很多，敌人势力自然就会削弱。
English: In addition, faithful and capable people were selected to bring documents to announce the awarding of rewards to those who had been intimidated. Since they had to work hard to serve the enemy, there must be many who came to surrender, and the enemy's power would naturally weaken.

古文：有司不知出此，而但为清野计，事无缓急惟期速办，今晚禾十损七八，远近危惧，所谋可谓大戾矣。
现代文：有关方面不知出此计谋，而只是主张清野，事情不管紧要不紧要，一味要求在期限内办完。如今庄稼损失十分之七八，远近感到危险与恐惧，所提出的计谋可说是大错了。 
English: The parties concerned do not know about this strategy, but only advocate a clear field, whether the matter is urgent or not, and insist that it be completed within the time limit. Now that the loss of crops is seven or eight out of ten, danger and fear are felt far and wide, and the strategy proposed can be said to be a big mistake.

古文：又曰：京师诸夏根本，况今常宿重兵，缓急征讨必由于此，平时尚宜优于外路，使百姓有所蓄积，虽在私室犹公家也。
现代文：又说： 京都为诸夏的根本，况且如今常驻守重兵，早晚征讨必定由此而出，平时还应当比外路更加优待他们，让百姓们有所积蓄，虽然藏在私室也仍和公家一样。
English: He also said, "Kyoto is the foundation of all the other capitals, and moreover, it is now permanently guarded by heavy troops. Sooner or later, conscription will surely result from this. In normal times, they should be treated more favorably than outsiders, so that the people have some savings, although they are hidden in their private rooms, they are still the same as the public.

古文：今有司搜括余粮，致转贩者无复敢入，宜即止之。
现代文：今有关方面搜括余粮，以致转运商贩不敢再来，应当立即制止这样做。
English: The relevant authorities are now collecting surplus grain, so that transporters do not dare to come again. This should be stopped immediately.

古文：臣顷看读陈言，见其尽心竭诚以吐正论者，率皆草泽疏贱之人，况在百僚，岂无为国深忧进章疏者乎？
现代文： 臣近来读了向朝廷陈述意见的各种言论，见其中竭尽忠诚而发正直言论的大都是草泽荒野之人，在百官中，难道没有为国深忧愿进章奏的人吗？
English: The minister recently read the various speeches that presented opinions to the imperial court, and saw that most of them were people from the grassy moors who were loyal and honest. Among the hundreds of officials, was there not someone who was deeply concerned about the country and wanted to play the role?

古文：诚宜明敕中外，使得尽言不讳，则太平之长策出矣。
现代文：实应明示中外，让他们尽言而无所隐讳，则太平之长策就会出现。 
English: If China and other countries should make it clear and let them say what they have to say without hiding anything, then the long-term strategy of peace will emerge.

古文：诏付尚书省，略施行焉。
现代文：皇帝诏付尚书省，略加施行。
English: The emperor decreed the reform of the Ministry of Education and slightly increased its powers.

古文：寻迁尚书左司员外郎，兼起居注，无何，转右司谏。
现代文：不久，升为尚书左司员外郎，兼起居注，没多少时候，又转任右司谏。
English: Soon after, he was promoted to Gairo, the left secretary of the Imperial Household Agency, and concurrently he became a jutsu, and before long, he was transferred to Maro, the right secretary of the Imperial Household Agency.

古文：时丞相高琪立法，职官有犯皆的决，古及左司谏抹捻胡鲁剌上言曰： 礼义廉耻以治君子，刑罚威狱以治小人，此万世不易论也。
现代文：当时丞相高琪立法，官员有犯罪的都立刻判决。许古和左司谏抹睰胡鲁剌上奏说 ：礼仪廉耻用来管束君子的，刑罚威狱用以惩罚小人的，这是万世不变之论。
English: At that time, the chancellor Gao Qi legislated, and officials who committed crimes were immediately sentenced. Xu Guo and the left priest, Maggot Hulun, said: the etiquette is used to control the gentleman, and the punishment is used to punish the villain. This is a theory that will never change.

古文：近者朝廷急于求治，有司奏请从权立法：职官有犯应赎者亦多的决。
现代文：近来朝廷急于求得治理，有关方面奏请权且立法：职官有犯法应当听赎的也大多立决。
English: Recently, the imperial court has been anxious to obtain governance, and the relevant parties have the right to petition and legislate: most of the officials who have violated the law should be redeemed.

古文：夫爵禄所以驭贵也，贵不免辱，则卑贱者又何加焉。
现代文：爵禄是用以驾驭贵者的，贵而不免受辱，那么卑贱者又能怎么样呢？
English: Peerage is used to control the noble, the noble is not immune to humiliation, so what can the lowly do?

古文：车驾所驻非同征行，而凡科征小过皆以军期罪之，不已甚乎。
现代文：京城是车驾所在地，不同于在出征的军队里，而凡是细小的过错均以军法加罪，不是太过分了吗？
English: The capital city is the location of the car drive, which is different from being in the army on a mission, and every small mistake is punished by military law. Isn't it too much?

古文：陛下仁恕，决非本心，殆有司不思宽静可以措安，而专事督责故耳。
现代文：陛下仁慈，这样做决非出于本心，只是有关方面不考虑宽和仁静可以安宁，而专事督责的缘故。
English: Your Majesty's benevolence, this is by no means done out of sincerity, but only because the relevant parties do not consider that leniency and benevolence can be peaceful, but only supervision.

古文：且百官皆朝廷遴选，多由文行、武功、阀阅而进，乃与凡庶等，则享爵禄者亦不足为荣矣。
现代文：况且百官都是朝廷选拔起来，多因有文行、武功、资历而给予任用的，却和凡人等同，那么享受爵位俸禄也不足为荣了。
English: Moreover, all the officials were selected by the imperial court, and most of them were appointed because of their literary achievements, military exploits, and seniority, but they were equal to ordinary people, so it was not enough to enjoy the salary of a knighthood.

古文：抑又有大可虑者，为上者将曰官犹不免，民复何辞，则苛暴之政日行。
现代文：况且还有更大可忧虑的事，那些在上位的人将会说，官员犯法尚且免不了受罚，民众又有何可说？那么苛暴的政令就会越来越大行其道。
English: A bigger worry is that those in power will say that officials can break the law and still be punished, but what about the people? Then draconian decrees will become more and more common.

古文：为下者将曰彼既亦然，吾复何耻，则陵犯之心益肆。
现代文：在下位的人也将会说，那些人也这样受责，我又有什么觉得耻辱的，这样违法之心就会更加放肆。
English: The lower ranks will also say, those people are also blamed in this way, I have nothing to feel ashamed of, so the illegal heart will become more presumptuous.

古文：其弊岂胜言哉。
现代文：其弊端何须多说？
English: What more needs to be said about its drawbacks?

古文：伏愿依元年赦恩 刑不上大夫 之文，削此一切之法，幸甚。 
现代文：恳请朝廷依照元年赦恩的 刑不上大夫 的条文，除去所有这方面法令，有幸之极。 
English: I would like to implore the Imperial Court to remove all the relevant laws and regulations in accordance with the provisions of the amnesty of the first year of the year.

古文：上初欲行之，而高琪固执以为不可，遂寝。
现代文：皇帝开始想要实行，但术虎高琪坚持不能改，于是没有实行。
English: At first, the emperor wanted to implement it, but Zhuhu Gaoqi insisted that it could not be changed, so it was not implemented.

古文：四年，以右司谏兼侍御史。
现代文：四年，以右司谏兼任侍御史。
English: Four years later, he was appointed to the post of Ujitsuko, concurrently holding the post of Samurai Governor.

古文：时大兵越潼关而东，诏尚书省集百官议，古上言曰： 兵逾关而朝廷甫知，此盖诸将欺蔽罪也。
现代文：当时，敌兵大军已越过潼关向东，皇帝诏令尚书省聚集百官商议，许古上书奏道： 敌兵越过潼关而朝廷刚刚知道，这是众将欺瞒朝廷之罪。
English: At that time, the enemy army had already crossed the pass to the east. The emperor issued an imperial edict ordering Shangshu to gather hundreds of officials to discuss the matter. Xu Gu wrote: The enemy soldiers crossed the pass and the imperial court had just learned about it. This was a crime of the generals to deceive the imperial court.

古文：虽然，大兵驻阌乡境，数日不动，意者恐吾河南之军逆诸前，陕西之众议其后，或欲先令觇者伺趋向之便，或以深入人境非其地利而自危，所以观望未遽进也。
现代文：虽然如此，敌军停留在阌乡境内几天不动，是担心我河南的军队拦截于前，陕西的部众谋攻其后，或者先派人侦察窥测适合进军的道路，或则认为入侵到别国境内不合地利而自觉危险，所以观望不敢速进。
English: In spite of this, the enemy troops stayed in the territory of Handan for several days without moving. It was because they were worried that the troops from Henan would intercept them first and the troops from Shaanxi would attack them later, or they sent people to spy out the road suitable for marching, or they thought that it was inappropriate to invade the territory of another country and were aware of the danger, so they did not dare to look ahead.

古文：此时正宜选募锐卒并力击之，且开其归路，彼既疑惑，遇敌必走，我众从而袭之，其破必矣。 
现代文：这时正应选择和募集精锐士卒奋力进击，并且放开敌军归路，敌人既然疑惑不前，遇到袭击必定退走，我军跟从追击，必定打败他们。 
English: At this time, it is time to select and recruit elite soldiers to attack vigorously, and let the enemy troops return. Since the enemy is doubtful, they must retreat when attacked, and our army will follow the pursuit and defeat them.

古文：上以示尚书省，高琪沮其议，遂不行。
现代文：皇帝将奏书交给尚书省看，高琪反对他的意见，因而不能实行。
English: The emperor sent the report to Shang Shuxuan for review, but Gao Qi objected to his opinion, so it could not be implemented.

古文：是月，始置招贤所，令古等领其事。
现代文：当月，设立了招贤所，命令许古等负责这件事。
English: That month, a recruitment office was set up, and Xu Gu and others were ordered to take charge of the matter.

古文：兴定元年七月，上闻宋兵连陷赣榆、涟水诸县，且获伪檄，辞多诋斥，因谕宰臣曰： 宋人构祸久矣，朕姑含容者，众虑开兵端以劳吾民耳。
现代文：兴定元年七月，皇帝听说宋军接连攻陷赣榆、涟水各县，并且缴获伪檄文，言辞中多有诋毁指责之语，因而对宰臣们说： 宋人想制造祸端为时已久，我所以姑且容忍，是因为大家担心一开战事就会有劳我方民众。
English: In July of the first year of the Xingding era, the emperor heard that the Song army had successively attacked and besieged the counties of Zhu and Lishui, and had captured false imperial edicts. Many of the words were slanderous and accusatory, so he said to his vassals: It's been a long time since the Song people wanted to create a disaster, so I'll just tolerate it, because everyone is worried that our people will have to work once the war starts.

古文：今数见侵，将何以处，卿等其与百官议。 
现代文：如今屡次入侵，将怎样处理，卿等和百官们共同商议。 
English: Now that there have been repeated incursions, how to deal with them is being discussed jointly by the lord and the officials.

古文：于是集众议于都堂，古曰： 宋人孱弱，畏我素深，且知北兵方强，将恃我为屏蔽，虽时跳梁，计必不敢深入，其侮嫚之语，特市井屠沽儿所为，乌足较之。
现代文：于是召集百官在都堂商议。许古说 ：宋人懦弱，一向十分害怕我国，况且知道北兵正值强盛，准备依仗我方作为屏障，虽然有时挑衅，估计必定不敢深入，所写的辱骂之辞，不过是市井中小人的作为，何足计较？
English: Xu Gu said, "The Song people are cowardly and have always been very afraid of our country. Moreover, they know that the Northern soldiers are strong and ready to rely on us as a barrier. Although they are sometimes provoked, it is estimated that they will not dare to go deeper. The abusive words they wrote are just the actions of small and medium-sized people in the market. Why should they care?

古文：止当命有司移文，谕以本朝累有大造，及圣主兼爱生灵意。
现代文：只应命令有关方面移送文书，告谕宋人本朝屡有大的举动，以及圣主兼爱生灵的本意。
English: It is only necessary to order the relevant parties to transfer the documents, to inform the Song people of the numerous great actions of this dynasty, and the intention of the Lord and the love of the living.

古文：彼若有知，复寻旧好，则又何求。
现代文：宋人若理解此意，重修旧好，则求之不得。
English: If the Song people understood this and restored the old order, it would be a great achievement.

古文：其或怙恶不悛，举众讨之，顾亦未晚也。 
现代文：对方如果作恶不改，发兵攻讨，想也未晚。 
English: If the other side does evil and does not change, it is not too late to send troops to attack.

古文：时预议者十余人，虽或小异而大略则一，既而丞相高琪等奏： 百官之议，咸请严兵设备以逸待劳，此上策也。 
现代文：当时参预商议的十多人，虽然意见小有差异而大体一致，接着丞相高琪等上奏说： 百官商议时，都请设置军队以逸待劳，这是上策。 
English: At that time, more than ten people participated in the preliminary discussion, although there were minor differences in opinions, they were generally consistent, and then the prime minister Gao Qi and other officials said: When the officials are discussing, please set up the army to wait for labor, this is the best policy.

古文：上然之。
现代文：皇帝也赞同。
English: She wrote a very elegant and beautiful piece of music, and the emperor gladly accepted her suggestion.

古文：时朝廷以诸路把军官时有不和不听，更相诉讼，古上言曰： 臣以为善者有劝，恶者有惩，国之大法也。
现代文：当时朝廷因为各路主管军官经常发生不和而不听指挥，他们还更加紧相互诉讼。许古上奏说 ：臣认为善者应当奖励，恶者应受惩罚，这是国家的大法。
English: At that time, the imperial court did not listen to the command because the officers in charge of each road often had discord, and they also more closely litigated against each other. Xu Gu said: The minister believes that the good should be rewarded and the wicked should be punished, which is the great law of the country.

古文：苟善恶不闻，则上下相蒙，惩劝无所施矣。 
现代文：如果善恶都不清，那么上下就相互蒙蔽，奖惩都难以施行了。 
English: If good and evil are not clear, then the upper and lower levels will deceive each other, and it will be difficult to implement rewards and punishments.

古文：上嘉纳之。
现代文：皇帝表示赞赏和采纳。
English: The Emperor approved and adopted his opinion.

古文：古以朝廷欲举兵伐宋，上疏谏曰： 昔大定初，宋人犯宿州，已而屡败，世宗料其不敢遽乞和，乃敕元帅府遣人议之，自是太平几三十年。
现代文：许古因朝廷准备发兵讨伐宋朝，上疏进谏说： 原在大定初年，宋人入侵宿州，后来屡遭失败，世宗预料他们不敢立即求和，便令元帅府派人前去议和，从那时太平了近三十年。
English: Xu Gu, because the imperial court was preparing to send troops to fight the Song Dynasty, said: Originally, in the first year of Dading, the Song people invaded Suizhou, and later suffered repeated failures. Shizong expected that they would not dare to immediately sue for peace, so he ordered the marshal's office to send people to negotiate peace. Since then, there has been peace for nearly thirty years.

古文：泰和中，韩侂胄妄开边衅，章宗遣驸马仆撒揆讨之。
现代文：泰和年间，韩胄乱开边境之祸端，章宗派驸马仆散揆讨伐。
English: During the reign of King Taejo, Han Ye disrupted the opening of the border, and Zhang Zong sent his servants to fight against Han Ye.

古文：揆虑兵兴费重不能久支，阴遣侂胄族人赍乃祖琦画像及家牒，伪为归附，以见丘崇，因之继好，振旅而还。
现代文：仆散揆担心开战以后费用很多不能支持很久，暗地派韩胄的族人带着他祖父韩琦的画像以及家谱，伪装投降，见到了丘崇，因而得以继续和好，全军回师。
English: Fearing that he would not be able to support himself for long after the war had begun, his servant Sanzang secretly sent Han Xuan's people with a picture of his grandfather Han Xuan and a family tree to surrender in disguise. They met with Qiu Chong, and thus were able to continue the reconciliation, and the whole army returned to the division.

古文：夫以世宗、章宗之隆，府库充实，天下富庶，犹先俯屈以即成功，告之祖庙，书之史册，为万世美谈，今其可不务乎？
现代文：以世宗、章宗时的兴盛，府库充实，天下富裕，尚且首先委屈求全以取得成功，告于祖庙，记入史册，成为万世的美谈，如今能不这样做吗？
English: With the prosperity of the Shizong and Zhangzong dynasties, the government treasury is full, the world is rich, and yet the first thing to do is to strive for success, announce it in the ancestral temple, record it in the history books, and become a beautiful story for all ages, can we not do this now?

古文：今大兵少息，若复南边无事，则太平不远矣。
现代文：今日大兵稍微止息，如果再南边无事，那么太平之日不远了。
English: Today, the soldiers have calmed down a little, and if there is nothing further south, then the day of peace is not far off.

古文：或谓专用威武可使宋人屈服，此殆虚言，不究实用。
现代文：有人认为使用军威可以使宋人屈服，这是假话，不能实用。
English: Some people think that the use of military power can make the Song people give in. This is a lie and cannot be practical.

古文：借令时获小捷，亦不足多贺。
现代文：就算一时得到小胜，也不足以多加庆贺。
English: Even if you get a small victory, it's not enough to celebrate.

古文：彼见吾势大，必坚守不出，我军仓猝无得，须还以就粮，彼复乘而袭之，使我欲战不得、欲退不能，则休兵之期殆未见也。
现代文：他方见我来势盛大，必定坚守不出，我军匆忙而无所得，必须回军来取粮，对方乘机来袭击，将使我方要战不得，要退不能，那时休兵的日期就难以等到了。
English: If the other side sees that I am coming with great strength, it will certainly not be able to hold out. Our army is in a hurry and has no income. It must return to the army to get grain. If the other side takes the opportunity to attack, it will make us unable to fight and unable to retreat. At that time, it will be difficult to wait for the date of the truce.

古文：况彼有江南蓄积之余，我止河南一路征敛之弊，可为寒心。
现代文：况且对方有江南积蓄的余财，我方只有河南一路征敛的残弊之力，实在令人寒心。
English: Moreover, the other side has the surplus wealth accumulated in the south of the Yangtze River, and we only have the power of Henan to collect all the way, which is really chilling.

古文：愿陛下隐忍包容，速行此策，果通知，则大兵闻之，亦将敛迹，以吾无掣肘故也。
现代文：愿陛下暂且隐忍包容，速速行此良策。如果通和，那么北方敌兵得知也将收敛不来，因为我方将没有掣肘的缘故。
English: May His Majesty be patient and tolerant for the time being, and quickly implement this good policy. If peace is made, then the enemy soldiers in the north will not be able to converge, because we will not be constrained.

古文：河南既得息肩，然后经略朔方，则陛下享中兴之福，天下赖涵养之庆矣。
现代文：河南得到休息，然后经营北方，那么陛下享有中兴之福，而天下人赖以涵养而大加庆贺了。
English: If Henan gets a break and then manages the north, then His Majesty will enjoy the blessing of rejuvenation, and the people of the world will rely on self-cultivation and celebrate.

古文：惟陛下略近功、虑后患，不胜幸甚。 
现代文：愿陛下放弃眼前之功，考虑后患，是大幸！ 
English: May His Majesty give up the present work and consider the future, it is a great happiness!

古文：上是其言，即命古草议和牒文。既成，以示宰臣，宰臣言其有哀祈之意，自示微弱，遂不用。
现代文：皇帝赞同他的话，立即让许古草写和议文书，写成之后出示宰臣，宰臣们认为其中有哀求的语意，是自示衰弱，于是未加采用。
English: The emperor agreed with his words and immediately asked Xu Guo Cao to write a peace proposal document. After it was written, it was presented to the aides-de-camp. The aides-de-camp thought that it contained a plea and was a sign of weakness, so it was not adopted.

古文：监察御史粘割梭失劾榷货司同提举毛端卿贪污不法，古以词理繁杂，辄为删定，颇有脱漏，梭失以闻，削官一阶，解职，特免殿年。
现代文：监察御史粘割梭失弹劾榷货司同提举毛端卿有贪污不法的行为，许古认为奏文写得文字杂乱，便替他删削更定，中间颇有些脱漏，粘割梭失将这件事奏闻皇上，许古被削去一级官阶，解除职务，以当年末等政绩而特予罢免。
English: The inspector of imperial history, the secretary of impeachment, and the secretary of the Department of Warehousing and Supply jointly raised the allegation that Mao Tuanqing had engaged in illegal acts of corruption. Xu Gu thought that the report was written in a disorganized manner, so he edited and corrected it for him, and there were quite a few omissions in the middle. The secretary of impeachment reported the matter to the emperor. Xu Gu was stripped of his first-class official rank, relieved of his duties, and dismissed with special reference to his political achievements at the end of that year.

古文：三年正月，尚书省奏谏官阙员，因以古为请，上曰： 朕昨暮方思古，而卿等及之，正合朕意，其趋召之。 
现代文：三年正月，尚书省因谏官缺人而上奏，请召用许古。皇帝说： 我昨天晚上正在想许古事，而你们也正提及他，正合我意，可前去召来。 
English: In the first month of the third year, the province of Shangshu was in need of eunuchs, so they summoned Xu Gu. The emperor said, "I was thinking about Xu Gu last night, and you were also mentioning him, which is just what I wanted, so you can go ahead and summon him."

古文：复拜左补阙。
现代文：便又任命他为左补阙。
English: He was then appointed as a left-back.

古文：八月，削官四阶，解职。
现代文：八月，又被削去四级官阶，解除职务。
English: In August, he was demoted four ranks and relieved of his duties.

古文：初，朝廷遣近侍局直长温敦百家奴暨刑部侍郎奥屯胡撒合徙吉州之民于丹以避兵锋，州民重迁，遮道控诉，百家奴谕以天子恐伤百姓之意，且令召晋安兵将护老幼以行。
现代文：起初，朝廷派近侍局直长温敦百家奴和刑部侍郎奥屯胡撒合去迁移吉州的民众，送往丹地以避兵灾，州民舍不得迁移，便拦路控诉。百家奴告诉他们，这是天子恐怕百姓们遭受伤亡才这样决定的，并且让召来晋安的兵士准备护送老幼上路。
English: At first, the imperial court sent Wyndon Hyakken, the director of the Privy Council, and Otun Husa, the sergeant of the Criminal Investigation Department, to relocate the people of Jizhou. They were sent to Dandi to avoid military disaster. The people of the state were reluctant to move, so they blocked the road and filed a complaint. Hyakken told them that this was decided by the Son of Heaven, who feared that the people would suffer casualties, and let the soldiers called to Jin'an prepare to escort the old and young on the road.

古文：众意兵至则必见强也，乃噪入州署，索百家奴杀之。
现代文：百姓认为兵来以后肯定强迫迁移，便鼓噪着拥进州署，抓住百家奴以后把他打死了。
English: The people thought that the soldiers must have forced them to move, so they noisily crowded into the state office, seized the slave and beat him to death.

古文：胡撒合畏祸，矫徇众情，与之会饮歌乐尽日，众肩舁导拥，欢呼拜谢而去。
现代文：胡撒合担心惹出大祸，便假装迎合众人的情绪，和他们一起欢饮，歌舞作乐，整整搞了一整天，民众前呼后拥，抬着他欢呼拜谢，然后散去。
English: The Hussars, fearing that they might provoke a catastrophe, pretended to welcome the mood of the common people, drank with them, sang and danced, and played all day long. The people crowded around him, carried him, cheered and bowed before him, and then dispersed.

古文：既还，诏古与监察御史纥石烈铁论鞫之，谕旨曰： 百家奴之死，皆胡撒合所卖也，其阅实以闻。 
现代文：回京以后，皇帝让许古和监察御史纥石烈铁论审讯他，并传旨说： 百家奴的死都是胡撒合出卖的，你们审问清楚后上奏。 
English: After returning to Beijing, the emperor had Xu Gu and the inspector of the Imperial Palace, Zhu Shishi, interrogate him, and sent a message saying: The deaths of hundreds of slaves were all betrayed by the Hussars, you should interrogate clearly and then report.

古文：奥屯胡撒合既下狱，上怒甚，亟欲得其情以正典刑，而古等颇宽纵之。
现代文：奥屯胡撒合被捕下狱之后，皇帝极为恼怒，非常想要拿出证据来将胡撒合处以极刑。
English: After the arrest and imprisonment of Otun Husakho, the emperor was very angry and very eager to come up with evidence to have Husakho sentenced to death.

古文：胡撒合自缢死，有司以故出论罪，遂有是罚。
现代文：而许古他们以为应当从宽处理，胡撒合自缢而死，有关方面以许古故意放纵论罪，因而受到这种处罚。
English: However, they thought that Xu Gu should be treated more leniently. He committed suicide, and the relevant authorities said that Xu Gu deliberately indulged in crime, and thus received this punishment.

古文：哀宗初即位，召为补阙，俄迁左司谏，言事稍不及昔时。
现代文：哀宗初即位，召回朝廷担任补阙，不久又迁任左司谏，但他进谏言事也稍不及以前了。
English: When Emperor Aizong ascended the throne, he was called back to the imperial court to serve as a fill-in-the-blank, and soon he was transferred to the position of the left priest, but he was not as active as before.

古文：未几，致仕，居伊阳，郡守为起伊川亭。
现代文：不久，辞去官职，居住在伊阳，郡守给他建造了伊川亭。
English: Soon after, he resigned from his government post and lived in Iyang, where the county governor built him the Ichuan Pavilion.

古文：古性嗜酒，老而未衰，每乘舟出村落间，留饮或十数日不归，及溯流而上，老稚争为挽舟，数十里不绝，其为时人爱慕如此。
现代文：许古嗜好饮酒，到年老而未减，他经常乘船到村落中去，被人留下饮酒，有时十多天不回家，当他沿河逆流而上时，老幼争着替他牵拉船只，几十里路来人不断。他就是这样得到当时人的爱慕。
English: Xu Gu's penchant for drinking did not diminish in his old age. He often went to villages by boat and was left to drink. Sometimes he did not return home for more than ten days. When he went upstream along the river, the old and the young fought to pull the boat for him, and people came from dozens of miles away. This is how he gained the admiration of the people at the time.

古文：正大七年卒，年七十四。
现代文：正大七年去世，年纪七十四岁。
English: Zhengda died seven years later, at the age of 74.

古文：古平生好为诗及书，然不为士大夫所重，时论但称其直云。
现代文：许古平生喜爱做诗写书，但并不为士大夫们所看重，时论只是称赞他的为人正直。
English: Throughout his life, Xu Gu loved to write poetry and write books, but he was not valued by the scholars and doctors. They only praised him for his honesty.

