古文：宇文述，字伯通，代郡武川人也。
现代文：宇文述字伯通，代郡武川人。
English: He was born in Bukawa, Wakayama Prefecture.

古文：高祖侰与敦、曾祖长寿、祖孤，仕魏，并为沃野镇军主。
现代文：高祖亻君与敦、曾祖长寿、祖孤，仕于魏朝，都是担任沃野镇军主。
English: Gao Zu Shijun, Dong, Zengzu Longevity, and Zu Guo served in the Wei Dynasty, and all of them served as the commander of the Wuye Town.

古文：父盛，仕周，位上柱国、大宗伯。
现代文：父宇文盛，仕于周朝，位居上柱国、大宗伯。
English: His father, Uwen Sheng, served the Zhou Dynasty and was ranked as Shangzhu Guo and Da Zongbo.

古文：述少骁锐，便弓马。
现代文：宇文述少年时骁悍英勇，擅长骑马射箭。
English: According to Yuwen, he was brave and courageous as a boy, and was good at riding horses and archery.

古文：年十一时，有相者谓曰： 公子善自爱，后当位极人臣。 
现代文：十一岁时，有一个相面的人对宇文述说 ：公子善自珍重，后来应当做极高的官。 
English: When he was eleven years old, an acquaintance said to him, "He is a good and self-respecting boy. He should become a very high-ranking official."

古文：周武帝时，以父军功，起家拜开府。
现代文：周武帝时，宇文述因父亲的军功，起于家乡，拜授开府。
English: During the reign of Emperor Zhou Wu, because of his father's military exploits, Wu Wenshu started from his hometown and was awarded the title of Kaifu.

古文：述性谨密，周大冢宰宇文护甚爱之，以本官领护亲信。
现代文：宇文述生性严谨周密，周朝大冢宰宇文护十分喜爱他，让宇文述以本官兼领其亲信。
English: Uwenshu was a rigorous and meticulous person. Uwenshu was very much loved by Uwenshu, the grand vizier of the Zhou Dynasty, who allowed Uwenshu to serve as his own official as well as the leader of his close confidants.

古文：及武帝亲总万机，召为左宫伯，累迁英果中大夫，赐爵博陵郡公，改封濮阳郡公。
现代文：周武帝亲自执政，召宇文述任左宫伯，多次升迁至英果中大夫，赐爵博陵郡公，改封为濮阳郡公。
English: Emperor Zhou Wudong personally ruled the country, and he appointed Yu Wenshu as Prince of the Left Court, promoted him several times to the position of Yingge Junior Doctor, gave him the title of Duke of Boling County, and changed his title to Duke of Shenyang County.

古文：尉迟迥作乱，述以行军总管从韦孝宽击之，破迥将李隽军于怀州，又与诸将破尉惇于永平桥。
现代文：尉迟迥兴兵作乱，宇文述以行军总管之职跟从韦孝宽讨伐叛军，在怀州击败尉迟迥部将李隽的军队，又和诸将一起在永平桥打败尉。
English: As the general in charge of marching, he followed Wei Xiaokuan to fight against the rebels. He defeated the army of the general in charge of marching, Li Xi, in Huizhou, and defeated the general in charge of marching in Yongping Bridge together with other generals.

古文：以功超拜上柱国，进爵褒国公。
现代文：因军功越级提升为上柱国，晋爵褒国公。
English: He was promoted to Shangzhu Guo due to his military achievements. He was awarded the title of Shangzhu Guo.

古文：开皇初拜右卫大将军。
现代文：隋文帝开皇初年，宇文述任右卫大将军。
English: In the first year of the Sui Emperor's reign, Yu Wenshu was appointed the commander of the Right Division of the Imperial Guard.

古文：平陈之役，以行军总管自六合而济。时韩擒、贺若弼两军趣丹阳，述据石头以为声援。
现代文：平定陈国的战役中，宇文述以行军总管之职率兵自六合渡江，当时，韩擒、贺若弼两支兵马赶赴丹阳，宇文述占据石头城作为声援。
English: In the campaign to pacify Chen Guo, Uwen Shu, as the commander-in-chief of the march, led the soldiers from Liuhe to cross the river. At that time, Han Zheng and He Ruoqi's two armies rushed to Danyang, and Uwen Shu occupied Stone City as a show of solidarity.

古文：陈主既禽，而萧瓛、萧岩据东吴地。
现代文：陈后主被擒获后，萧王献、萧岩据守东吴之地。
English: After Chen Houchen was captured, Xiao Wangchen and Xiao Yan defended Dongwu.

古文：述领行军总管元契、张默言等讨之，落丛公燕荣以舟师自东海至，亦受述节度，于是吴会悉平。
现代文：宇文述率领行军总管元契、张默言等人前往讨伐，落丛公燕荣率领水军从东海赶至，也接受宇文述的指挥，于是东吴之地全部平定。
English: Yu Wenshu led the general manager of the marching army, Yuan Qi, Zhang Miaoyan and others to go to the crusade, and Yang Rong led the navy from the East China Sea, and also accepted the command of Yu Wenshu, so the East and the West were all pacified.

古文：以功授子化及为开府，徙拜安州总管。
现代文：因功授其子宇文化及为开府，改任安州总管。
English: He was promoted to the post of Anzhou governor for his contribution to teaching his son about world culture and for founding the prefecture.

古文：时晋王广镇扬州，甚善于述，奏为寿州总管。
现代文：当时，晋王杨广镇守扬州，对宇文述十分友善，奏请宇文述为寿州总管。
English: At that time, the Jin king Yang Guangzhen was in charge of Yangzhou, and he was very friendly to Wu Wenshu. He asked Wu Wenshu to be the general manager of Shoushou.

古文：王时阴有夺宗之志，请计于述。
现代文：晋王当时有阴谋夺取皇太子之位的意思，向宇文述请求计谋。
English: At that time, Jin Wang had the intention of plotting to seize the crown prince's position, and asked Wu Wenshu for a plan.

古文：述曰： 皇太子失爱已久。
现代文：宇文述说 ：皇太子早已失去了皇上的欢爱。
English: "The crown prince has long lost the emperor's favor," Umen narrated.

古文：大王才能盖世，数经将领，主上之与内宫，咸所钟爱，四海之望，实归大王。
现代文：大王才能盖世，多次担任将领，皇上和内宫，都很钟爱。天下的希望，实际上已归于大王。
English: Only a great king can lead the world, and he has served as a general many times. He is loved by the emperor and the inner court. In fact, the hope of the world has been attributed to the great king.

古文：然废立国家大事，能移主上者，唯杨素耳。
现代文：然而，废立太子是国家大事，能够改变皇上的主意的，只有杨素一人而已。
English: However, the dethronement of the crown prince is a national event, and only Yang Su can change the emperor's mind.

古文：移素谋者，唯其弟约。
现代文：能够改变杨素主意的人。只有他的弟弟杨约。
English: The only person who can change Yang Su's mind is his younger brother Yang You.

古文：述雅知约，请朝京师，与约共图废立。 
现代文：述平素和杨约相知。请求去京师朝见，与杨约共同商议废立太子的大事。 
English: He said that he and Yang Yo knew each other. He asked to go to Beijing to meet with the emperor and discuss the important matter of abolishing the crown prince.

古文：晋王大悦，多赍金宝，资述入关。
现代文：晋王十分高兴，送给宇文述很多金银财宝，资助宇文述赴京。
English: Jin Wang was very pleased and gave Uwenshu a lot of gold, silver and treasure to fund Uwenshu's trip to Beijing.

古文：述数请约，盛陈器玩，与之酣暢，因共博戏，每阳不胜，输所将金宝。
现代文：宇文述多次邀请杨约，摆出许多玉器珍玩，和杨约开怀畅饮，于是一起赌博游戏，每次都假作不胜，把带来的金银财宝输掉。
English: Yu Wenshu repeatedly invited Yang Yo, put out many jade treasures to play with, and drank with Yang Yo, so they played gambling games together, each time pretending to be invincible, and lost the gold and silver treasures they brought.

古文：约所得既多，稍以谢述。
现代文：杨约得到了很多的财宝，对宇文述稍稍表示感谢。
English: Yang You got a lot of treasure, and expressed a little gratitude to Yu Wenshu.

古文：述因曰： 此晋王赐述，令与公为欢。 
现代文：宇文述因而说： 这是晋王赐给我的，令我和公好好乐一乐。 
English: Therefore, Uwen said, "This was given to me by the King of Jin, so that I and my husband could have a good time.

古文：约大惊曰： 何为者？ 
现代文：杨约大为吃惊，问道 ：为什么这样？ 
English: Yangyou was very surprised and asked, "Why is this happening?"

古文：述因为王申意。
现代文：宇文述于是代为说明晋王的意图。
English: Yuwen then explained Jin Wang's intention on his behalf.

古文：约然其说，退言于素，亦从之。
现代文：杨约认为宇文述说的对，回去后就对杨素说了，杨素也听从晋王的旨意。
English: Yang You thought that what Yu Wen said was right, and after he returned, he told Yang Su. Yang Su also obeyed the will of the King of Jin.

古文：于是晋王与述情好益密，命述子士及尚南阳公主，后赏赐不可胜计。
现代文：于是，晋王和宇文述的交情更为密切，命令宇文述之子宇文士及娶南阳公主，前后赏赐的财物无法计算。
English: As a result, the friendship between Jin Wang and Uwenshu became even closer, and he ordered Uwenshu's son, Uwenshi, to marry Nanyang Princess. It is impossible to calculate the wealth he bestowed on her.

古文：及晋王为皇太子，以述为左卫率。
现代文：晋王成为皇太子之后，任命宇文述为左卫率。
English: After Jin Wang became the crown prince, he appointed Wu Wenshu as the left guard.

古文：旧令，率官第四品，以述素贵，遂进率品第三，其见重如此。
现代文：按照旧有的法令，率官为四品官，因为宇文述平常就很宠贵，就晋位率官为三品官。宇文述受到的重视如此。
English: According to the old law, the leading official was a four-ranked official, and because Uwentsu was usually very expensive, the promotion leading official was a three-ranked official. This is how much importance Uwentsu received.

古文：炀帝嗣位，拜左卫大将军，参掌武官选事。
现代文：炀帝继位后，宇文述受任左卫大将军，参与掌管选拔武官的事情。
English: After Emperor Shun succeeded to the throne, Uwen recounted that he was appointed General of the Left Division and participated in the selection of military attachés.

古文：后改封许国公，寻加开府仪同三司，每冬正朝会，辄给鼓吹一部。
现代文：后来改封为许国公，不久加授开府仪同三司，每逢冬月正旦朝廷聚会，就赐给鼓吹乐一部。
English: Later, he was given the title of Xu Guogong. Soon, he was also given the title of Kaifu Yi and the title of Sanzhi. Whenever the Zhengdan imperial court gathered in the winter months, he was given a part of the propaganda music.

古文：从幸榆林，时铁勒契弊歌稜攻败吐谷浑。其部携散，遂遣使请降，求救。
现代文：跟从炀帝巡幸榆林。当时，铁勒契弊歌秣打败吐俗浑，吐俗浑部四散，派使者向隋朝请求投降，并请求救援。
English: At that time, Tielechi Weiguo defeated Tuxukhun and sent an envoy to the Sui Dynasty to ask for surrender and rescue.

古文：帝令述以兵抚纳降附。
现代文：炀帝令宇文述率兵安抚纳降。
English: Emperor Qian ordered Uwen to lead the troops to appease and accept the surrender.

古文：吐谷浑见述拥强兵，惧不敢降，遂西遁。
现代文：吐谷浑见宇文述拥有强大的兵力，惊恐不已，不敢投降，就向西逃跑了。
English: Seeing that Yu Wenshu had a strong army, he was terrified and did not dare to surrender, so he fled to the west.

古文：述追至曼头城，攻拔之。
现代文：宇文述率兵追至曼头城，攻下此城。
English: Yu Wenshu led the troops to chase Mantou City and captured the city.

古文：乘胜至赤水城，复拔之。
现代文：宇文述乘胜至头赤水城，又攻下赤水城。
English: Yu Wenshu took advantage of the victory to advance to the first Red Water City, and then captured the Red Water City.

古文：其余党走屯丘尼川，进击，大破之，获其王公、尚书、将军二百人。
现代文：吐谷浑的剩余党徒逃走，驻扎在丘尼川。宇文述率兵进击，大破其剩余党徒，俘获其王公、尚书、将军二百人。
English: The remaining party members of Tukuhun fled and were stationed in the Chuni River. Wu Wenshu led the troops to attack, defeated his remaining party members, and captured his prince, Shangshu, and 200 generals.

古文：浑主南走雪山，其故地皆空。
现代文：吐谷浑主南逃到雪山，其原来所属的地方都没了人迹。
English: The lord of Tugu, Hunnan, fled south to the Snowy Mountains, and there is no trace of him in any of the places he once belonged to.

古文：帝大悦。
现代文：炀帝十分高兴。
English: The emperor was very happy to hear this.

古文：明年，从帝西巡至金山，登燕支，述每为斥候。
现代文：第二年，跟从炀帝西巡至金山，登上燕支山，宇文述每天站岗放哨。
English: In the second year, he went on a patrol from the west of Shunde to Jinshan and ascended Yanzhi Mountain. Wu Wenshu stood guard every day.

古文：时浑贼复寇张掖，述进击走之。
现代文：这时，吐谷浑兵马又侵犯张掖，宇文述领兵进击，击退敌兵。
English: At this time, the soldiers and horses of Tuyuhun invaded Zhangye again, and Yu Wenshu led the troops to attack and repel the enemy soldiers.

古文：还至江都宫，敕述与苏威常典选举，参预朝政。
现代文：回至江都宫，敕令宇文述与苏威经常主持选举官吏，参预朝政。
English: Back at the Jiangdu Palace, Gong Ling Yu Wenshu and Su Wei often presided over the election of officials and participated in pre-imperial politics.

古文：述时贵重，委任与威等，其亲爱则过之。
现代文：宇文述当时宠贵，把重任交给苏威等人，而受到炀帝的亲善宠爱则超过他们。
English: According to Uwen, he was a favorite at that time, and he gave the important task to Su Wei and others, but he was favored by Emperor Zhao's friendship more than them.

古文：帝所得远方贡献及四时口味，辄见班赐，中使相望于道。
现代文：炀帝得到的远方贡品和四季食物，有朝会时就赏赐给宇文述，前往问讯的宫中使者十分频繁。
English: The tributes from afar and the food of the four seasons received by Emperor Xuan were given to Wu Wenshu when there was a morning meeting, and the messengers from the palace who went to inquire were very frequent.

古文：述善于供奉，俯仰折旋，容止便辟，宿卫咸取则焉。
现代文：宇文述善于侍奉其上，俯仰周旋，一副逢迎谄媚的样子，宫中卫士都向他学习。
English: Yu Wenshu was good at serving above him, bowing down to him, and flirting with him. He always had a charming appearance. The palace guards all learned from him.

古文：又有巧思，凡所装饰，皆出人意表。
现代文：又有精巧的构思，凡是装饰之物，都出乎人们的意料。
English: There are also ingenious ideas, all of which are decorative objects, all of which are unexpected.

古文：数以奇服异物进宫掖，由是帝弥悦焉。
现代文：多次把奇装异服和怪异之物送进宫中，炀帝因此更加喜欢他。
English: He often brought strange clothes and strange objects into the palace, which made Emperor Gong even more fond of him.

古文：言无不从，势倾朝廷。
现代文：话说出来没有人不听从，权势超过了朝中所有的人。
English: When he speaks, no one disobeys him, and his power surpasses that of anyone else in the North Korean regime.

古文：左卫将军张瑾与述连官，尝有评议，偶不中意，述张目瞋之，瑾惶惧而走。
现代文：左卫将军张瑾和宇文述官署相连，曾经评议是非，偶尔不中宇文述之意，宇文述就瞪大眼睛怒视张瑾，张瑾惊惶畏惧地逃走。
English: The left guard general Zhang Qian and Yu Wenshu's office were connected. They used to discuss the rights and wrongs, and occasionally did not understand the meaning of Yu Wenshu. Yu Wenshu stared at Zhang Qian with wide eyes, and Zhang Qian fled in fear.

古文：文武百僚莫敢违忤。
现代文：文武百官没有人敢违背和抵忤宇文述的意思。
English: No one in the world of literature and martial arts dares to go against the spirit of the universal literature.

古文：性贪鄙，知人有珍异物，必求取，富商大贾及陇右诸胡子弟，皆接以恩意，呼之为兒。
现代文：宇文述生性贪婪卑鄙，知道别人有珍奇之物，就一定要得到，富商大贾和陇西诸胡子弟，宇文述都用恩宠和他们交结，称他们作儿子。
English: Uwenshu is greedy and despicable by nature. When he knows that others have rare things, he must get them. The rich merchant Dajia and the bearded brothers in Shaanxi, Uwenshu used grace to make friends with them and called them his sons.

古文：由是竞加馈遗，金宝累积。
现代文：因此，都争相赠送财物，金银财宝堆积如山。
English: As a result, they all scrambled to give away their possessions, and gold and silver treasures piled up like a mountain.

古文：后庭曳罗绮者甚众，家僮千余人，皆控良马，被服金玉。
现代文：后院中身穿罗绮的美女非常多。家僮一千多人，都骑有骏马衣着华丽。
English: In the backyard, there are a lot of beautiful women in pigtails. There are more than a thousand people in the family, all riding horses and wearing gorgeous clothes.

古文：及征高丽，述为扶余道军将，临发，帝谓曰： 礼，七十者行役以妇人从，公宜以家累自随。
现代文：征伐高丽的时候，宇文述任扶余首军将。将要出发的时候，炀帝对宇文述说 ：根据礼法，七十岁的人行军打仗，带着妻子同行，公应当让家室跟随着。
English: At the time of the conquest of Korea, Umenso was appointed to lead the rest of the army. When it was time to leave, Emperor Min said to Umenso, "According to the etiquette, a seventy-year-old man marches to war, accompanied by his wife, and the emperor should let his family follow."

古文：古称妇人不入军，谓临战时耳。
现代文：古时候说妇女不能进入军中，说的是临战的时候。
English: In ancient times, it was said that women could not join the army, and this was said in times of war.

古文：至军垒间，无所伤也。
现代文：至于在军营之中，则没有什么损害。
English: As for inside the barracks, there was no damage.

古文：项籍虞兮，即其故事。 
现代文：项籍和虞姬，就是先例。 
English: Meng Jia and Yu Ji are the precedents.

古文：述与九军至鸭绿水，粮尽，议欲班师。
现代文：宇文述和九路军马到鸭绿水，军粮已尽，商议准备班师而回。
English: Yu Wenshu and the 9th Route Army horses went to Yalu Water, the military food was exhausted, they discussed the preparation of the squadron and returned.

古文：诸将多异同，述又不测帝意。
现代文：诸将意见多有不同，宇文述又不知道炀帝的意图。
English: The generals had different opinions, and Wu Wen did not know the Emperor's intention.

古文：会乙支文德来诣其营，述先与于仲文俱奉密旨，令诱执文德。
现代文：适逢乙支文德来到营中，宇文述和于仲文先前都奉有秘密旨令，令诱捕乙支文德。
English: When Eulji Mende came to the camp, both Yu Wenshu and Yu Zhongwen had previously received a secret order to trap Eulji Mende.

古文：既而缓纵，文德逃归，述内不自安，遂与诸将度水追之。
现代文：文德到了营中，因动作迟缓，又让他逃了回去，宇文述心中不安，就和众将渡水追击。
English: When Wende arrived at the camp, he was slow to act, so he let him run back. Une was uneasy in his heart, so he and the other generals chased him across the water.

古文：时文德见述军中多饥色，欲疲述众，每斗便北。
现代文：当时，乙支文德见宇文述军中士卒多有饥饿之色，想让宇文述之军疲惫，每次战斗都假作失败。
English: At that time, Eulji Mende saw that most of the sergeants of the Uwentsu army were starving, and he wanted to make the Uwentsu army tired, and each battle was pretended to be a failure.

古文：述一日中七战皆捷，既恃骤胜，又内逼群议，遂进，东济萨水，去平壤城三十里，因山为营。
现代文：宇文述一日之中七战，皆获胜利，既依恃骤然取得的胜利，内又为众议逼迫，于是就又进击，东渡了萨水，距平壤城三十里，依山安营扎寨。
English: Yuwen described seven battles in one day, all of which were victorious. Not only did he rely on the sudden victory, but he was also forced by public opinion, so he attacked again, eastward to Sashui, thirty miles from Pyongyang City, and camped in the mountains.

古文：文德复遣使伪降，请述曰： 若旋师者，当奉高元朝行在所。 
现代文：乙支文德又派遣使者假作投降，向宇文述请求道 ：如果撤兵的话，我们会送高元到皇帝所在的地方相见。 
English: Eulji Mende also sent an envoy pretending to be a surrender, requesting from Uwentsu, "If you withdraw your troops, we will send Gao Yuan to meet you where the emperor is."

古文：述见士卒疲弊，不可复战，又平壤险固，卒难致力，遂因其诈而还。
现代文：宇文述见士兵疲惫不堪，不能再战，平壤城又很险固，一时间难以攻下，于是就利用其诈谋而回师。
English: Seeing that the soldiers were exhausted and could not fight any more, and that Pyongyang City was very precarious and difficult to capture for a while, Yuwen took advantage of their trickery to return to the division.

古文：众半济，贼击后军。于是大溃不可禁止，九军败绩，一日一夜，还至鸭绿水，行四百五十里。
现代文：众军渡河渡至一半时，贼兵攻击后边的军队，于是众军溃败，不能禁止，九路兵马大败，一天一夜逃至鸭绿水，行程四五十里。
English: When the army was half-way across the river, the robber soldiers attacked the army behind, so the army was defeated, it could not be stopped, the nine armies and horses were defeated, and they fled to Yalu one day and one night, a journey of forty or fifty miles.

古文：初度辽，九军三十万五千人，及还至辽东城，唯二千七百人。
现代文：当初过辽东时，九路军马共三十万五千人，等回到辽东城时，只剩下二千七百人。
English: When they first crossed Liaodong, there were a total of 305 thousand soldiers and horses of the Ninth Route Army. When they returned to Liaodong City, there were only 2700 people left.

古文：帝怒，除其名。
现代文：炀帝大怒，将宇文述除去名籍。
English: Emperor Xuan was furious and removed Wu Wenshu from the family register.

古文：明年，帝又事辽东，复述官爵，待之如初。
现代文：第二年，炀帝又起征辽之战，恢复宇文述的官职爵位，对宇文述像当初一样。
English: In the following year, Emperor Xuan initiated the War of the Conquest of Liao and restored the official rank and title of Yu Wenshu, and treated Yu Wenshu the same as before.

古文：从至辽东，与将军杨义臣率兵复临鸭绿水。
现代文：宇文述跟从炀帝到辽东，和将军杨义臣率兵又到鸭绿水边。
English: Yu Wenshu followed Emperor Qian to Liaodong, and he and General Yang Yichen led the troops to the edge of the Yalu River.

古文：会杨玄感作乱，帝召述驰驿讨玄感。
现代文：适逢杨玄感兴兵作乱，炀帝令宇文述迅速回师征讨杨玄感。
English: When Yang Xuanxuan incited soldiers to riot, Emperor Qian ordered Wu Wenshu to quickly go back to his master to solicit Yang Xuanxuan's help.

古文：时玄感逼东都，闻述军至，西遁将图关中。
现代文：当时，杨玄感兵逼东都洛阳，听说宇文述率兵而至，向西逃跑，准备夺取关中。
English: At that time, Yang Xuan sent soldiers to force the eastern capital Luoyang, and heard that Yu Wenshu led the troops to flee to the west, preparing to seize Guanzhong.

古文：述与刑部尚书卫玄、右骁卫大将军来护兒、武卫将军屈突通等蹑之。
现代文：宇文述和刑部尚书卫玄、右骁卫大将军来护儿、武卫将军屈突通等率兵紧追。
English: Yu Wenshu and the troops of the Criminal Investigation Department, including Shang Shuwei Xuan, the General of the Right Division of the National Guard, and the General of the National Guard, Qu Jutong, were in hot pursuit.

古文：至阌乡皇天原，与玄感相及，斩其首，传行在所。
现代文：到了阌乡皇天原，追上了杨玄感，将杨玄感斩首，传至皇帝所在之处。
English: When he arrived at Emperor Tianyuan's hometown of Handan, he caught up with Yang Xuanquan, beheaded him, and sent him to the emperor's place.

古文：复从东征，至怀远而还。
现代文：又跟随炀帝东征，至怀远而回。
English: He also followed the Eastern Expedition of Emperor Xizong and went back as far as he wanted.

古文：突厥之围雁门也，帝大惧，述请溃围而出。
现代文：突厥军队围困雁门，炀帝十分恐惧，宇文述请求突出重围。
English: The Turkic army besieged the Wild Goose Gate, Emperor Gong was very afraid, and Yu Wenshu requested that the siege be intensified.

古文：来护兒及樊子盖并固谏，帝乃止。
现代文：来护儿和樊子盖一起坚决谏阻，炀帝才作罢。
English: Together, the nanny and the cripple resolutely resisted, only to be stopped by the emperor.

古文：及围解，次太原，议者多劝帝还京师，帝有难色。
现代文：雁门之围解除后，回至太原，人们多劝炀帝回京师，炀帝面有难色。
English: After the siege of the Wild Goose Gate was lifted, when he returned to Taiyuan, many people urged Emperor Gong to return to Beijing, but Emperor Gong was reluctant.

古文：述奏曰： 从官妻子多在东都，请便道向洛阳，自潼关入。 
现代文：宇文述奏道： 跟随陛下的官员，妻子儿女多在东都，请求顺道向洛阳，从潼关而入。 
English: Yuwen recited: The officials who followed His Majesty, whose wives and children were mostly in Dongdu, requested to go to Luoyang and enter from Shaoguan.

古文：帝从之。
现代文：炀帝听从宇文述的建议。
English: The emperor obeyed.

古文：寻至东都，又观望帝意，劝幸江都宫。
现代文：不久回到东都洛阳，宇文述又观察炀帝的意思，劝炀帝驾幸江都宫。
English: Soon after returning to Luoyang, the eastern capital, Yu Wenzhu observed the emperor's intention and advised him to go to Jiangdu Palace.

古文：述于江都遇疾，及疾笃，帝令中使相望于第，谓述有何言。
现代文：宇文述在江都患有疾病，病重的时候，炀帝不停地令宫中使者到其宅第探望，问宇文述有什么话说。
English: Yu Wenshu suffered from illness in Jiangdu, and when he was seriously ill, Emperor Qian constantly sent emissaries from the palace to visit his home to ask what Yu Wenshu had to say.

古文：述曰： 愿陛下一能降临。 
现代文：宇文述说： 希望陛下能够降临敝宅一次。 
English: Uwen said: I hope His Majesty can come to my house once.

古文：帝遣司宫魏氏谓曰： 公危笃，朕惮相烦动。
现代文：炀帝派遣司宫魏氏对宇文述说： 公病危重，朕恐怕相烦劳。
English: Emperor Xian dispatched the Secretary of the Palace Wei to Yuwen to say: The public illness is critical, I am afraid I am tired.

古文：必有言，可陈也。 
现代文：有什么一定要说，可以陈说。 
English: If you have something to say, you can say it.

古文：述流涕曰： 臣子化及，早预籓邸，愿陛下哀怜之。
现代文：宇文述流着泪说： 臣之子化及，很早就预置藩邸，希望陛下能够哀怜他。
English: Uwen said with tears streaming down his face, "He became the son of a vassal and was given the residence of the domain very early on. I hope His Majesty will be able to take pity on him."

古文：士及夙蒙天恩，亦堪驱策。
现代文：士及原就承蒙陛下之恩，也可以驱使。
English: Thanks to the grace of His Majesty, we can also drive them.

古文：臣死后，智及不可久留，愿早除之，望不破门户。 
现代文：臣死之后，智及不能久留，愿陛下早除之，希望不要毁坏门户。 
English: After the death of a vassal, wisdom cannot stay for long. May His Majesty remove it as soon as possible, and I hope that he will not destroy the portal.

古文：魏氏返命，隐其言，因诡对曰： 述唯忆陛下耳。 
现代文：魏氏回去复命，把这些话遮掩过去，因而胡乱回答说： 宇文述只是怀念陛下罢了。 
English: Mr. Wei went back to return the order to cover up these words, so he answered in a haphazard manner: "Uwen's story is just about missing His Majesty."

古文：帝泫然曰： 述忆我耶？ 
现代文：炀帝流着泪说 ：宇文述怀念我吗？ 
English: Shao Di said with tears: Does Yu Wenshu miss me?

古文：将亲临之，宫人百僚谏乃止。
现代文：准备亲自前往看望，宫人和文武百官劝谏才作罢。
English: He was preparing to visit her in person, but was dissuaded from doing so by the palace staff and hundreds of civil and military officials.

古文：及薨，帝为废朝，赠司徒、尚书令、十郡太守，班剑四十人，辒辌车，前后部鼓吹，谥曰恭。
现代文：宇文述死，炀帝因此而废止朝会，追赠宇文述为司徒、尚书令、十郡太守，仪仗四十人。可卧的丧车一辆，前后鼓吹乐各一部，谥号曰恭。
English: After the death of Uwen Du, Emperor Qian abolished the imperial court, and posthumously awarded Uwen Du with the titles of Sitor, Shang Shuling, and the governor of ten counties, with a ceremonial retinue of forty people. There was one funeral carriage that could be used as a bed, with each part of the hearse moving forward and backward, and the name of the hearse was Xie Gong.

古文：性凶险，不循法度，好乘肥挟弹，驰鹜道中，由是长安谓之轻薄公子。
现代文：诏令黄门侍郎裴矩以太牢之礼祭之，鸿胪监督护丧事。宇文化及是宇文述的长子。生性凶恶阴险，不遵循法律制度，喜欢骑着骏马，挟带弹弓，在路上奔驰，因此，长安人称他为轻薄公子。
English: It was decreed that Huangmen's steward Pei Jiao would be in charge of the ceremonial of the eulogy, and Hung Ho would supervise the funeral. He was the eldest son of Yu Cunhua and Yu Wenshu. He was born vicious and sinister, did not follow the legal system, liked to ride a horse, carry a slingshot, and gallop on the road, so the people of Chang'an called him a light-skinned boy.

古文：炀帝为太子时，常领千牛出入卧内。
现代文：隋炀帝为太子时，宇文化及常以千牛之职出入炀帝卧室内房。
English: When Emperor Xuanzong of the Sui Dynasty was crown prince, Yu Cultura often entered and left Emperor Xuanzong's bedchamber and inner room on the duty of a thousand cows.

古文：累迁至太子仆，以受纳货贿，再三免官。
现代文：多次升迁至太子仆，因为接受贿赂，多次被免官。
English: He was promoted many times to the position of the prince's servant, and was dismissed many times for accepting bribes.

古文：太子嬖昵之。俄而复职，又以其弟士及尚南阳公主。
现代文：太子宠爱亲昵宇文化及，很快又复职，又令其弟宇文士及娶南阳公主为妻。
English: The prince loved the intimacy and culture of Wu, and was soon reinstated. He also made his brother Wu a scholar and married Princess Nanyang.

古文：由此益骄，处公卿间，言辞不逊，多所凌轹。
现代文：宇文化及因此更加骄横，和公卿相处，言辞很不恭敬，许多人受其欺凌。
English: He is more arrogant than ever, mingles with nobles, speaks disrespectfully, and bullies many.

古文：见人子女狗马珍玩，必请托求之。
现代文：看见别人有漂亮的女子和狗马珍玩，就一定要托人求得。
English: If you see someone else with a beautiful woman playing with a dog or a horse, you must ask someone to get it.

古文：常与屠贩者游，以规其利。
现代文：经常和屠户商贩交游，从中取利。
English: They often make friends with butchers and take advantage of them.

古文：炀帝即位，拜太仆少卿，益恃旧恩，贪冒尤甚。
现代文：隋炀帝继位，宇文化及为太仆少卿，更加倚仗旧有的恩宠，贪婪骄横更甚。
English: The Sui and Qian emperors succeeded to the throne, and the Yu culture, as well as the too-servant-less-lord, relied more on the old grace, and the greed and arrogance were even greater.

古文：炀帝幸榆林，化及与弟智及违禁与突厥交市。
现代文：炀帝巡幸榆林，化及和弟弟智及违反禁令，和突厥人贸易交往。
English: Emperor Gao made a tour of Yulin, where he met his brother Zhi and violated the ban to trade with the Turks.

古文：帝大怒，囚之数月。
现代文：炀帝大怒，将宇文化及囚禁了几个月。
English: Emperor Qian was furious and imprisoned Yu Qian and his son for several months.

古文：还京师，欲斩之而后入城，解衣辫发讫，以主救之，乃释，并智及并赐述为奴。
现代文：回京城时，准备把他杀了再入城，已经剥下了衣服，辫好了头发，就要行刑时，因炀帝解救才把他释放，和宇文智及一并赐给宇文述做奴隶。
English: When he returned to the capital, he was ready to kill him and re-enter the city. He had already stripped off his clothes and combed his hair. When he was about to be executed, he was only released because Emperor Xian rescued him. He was given to Yu Wenshu as a slave together with Yu Wenshu.

古文：述薨后，炀帝追忆之，起化及为右屯卫将军，将作少监。
现代文：宇文述死后，炀帝怀念他，起用宇文化及任右屯卫将军，宇文智及任将作少监。
English: After the death of Uwenshu, Emperor Gong remembered him, appointed U Bunka and appointed him as General of the Right Tunwei, and appointed U Wenshu and appointed him as Junior Inspector.

古文：时李密据洛口，炀帝惧，留淮左，不敢还都。
现代文：当时，李密占据洛口，炀帝恐惧，留在淮南，不敢回京都。
English: At that time, Li Mi occupied Locoqou, Emperor Gong was afraid, stayed in Huainan, and did not dare to return to Kyoto.

古文：从驾骁果多关中人，久客羁旅，见帝无西还意，谋欲叛归。
现代文：跟随炀帝车驾的勇猛果敢之士大多是关中人，长久客居旅途，见炀帝没有西归的意思，想谋划反叛归乡。
English: Most of the brave and courageous people who followed Emperor Gong's chariot were Guanzhong people, who had been traveling for a long time. Seeing that Emperor Gong had no intention of returning to the West, they wanted to plan a rebellion to return to their hometown.

古文：时武贲郎将司马德戡总领骁果，屯于东城，风闻兵士欲叛，未审，遣校尉元武达阴问知情，因谋构逆。
现代文：当时，武贲郎将司马德戡统领骁勇果敢之士，驻扎在东城，听到士兵想反叛的风声，不知真假，就派校尉元武达私下秘密询问知情人，因而阴谋造反。
English: At that time, Takehiro stationed Sima Deya, the leader of the brave and courageous soldiers, in Dongcheng. Hearing the rumor that the soldiers wanted to rebel, whether true or not, he sent Lieutenant Yuan Wuda to secretly interrogate the insiders, thus plotting a rebellion.

古文：共所善武贲郎将元礼、直阁裴虔通互相扇惑曰： 闻陛下欲筑宫丹阳，人人并谋逃去。
现代文：司马德戡又与关系友善的武贲郎将元礼、直阁裴虔通互相蛊惑煽动说： 听说陛下想在丹阳筑造宫殿，人人都谋划着逃走。
English: Sima Dejun and the well-connected Wu Xiulang also incited and instigated the Yuanli and Zhogu Peiqian through mutual seduction, saying: I heard that His Majesty wanted to build a palace in Danyang, and everyone was planning to escape.

古文：我欲言之，恐先事见诛。
现代文：我想向陛下上言，恐怕还没上言就被杀掉了。
English: I want to appeal to His Majesty, but I'm afraid I'll be killed before I can.

古文：今知而不言，后事发当族，将如之何？ 
现代文：如今，知道而不进言，后来发生了事情当有灭族之罪，不知该怎么办才好？ 
English: Today, knowing but not speaking out, things happened later, when there is a crime of extermination, I don't know what to do?

古文：虔通曰： 主上实尔。 
现代文：裴虔通说 ：主上实际上就是这样。 
English: Pei Xiantong said, "This is basically how it is.

古文：德戡又谓两人曰： 我闻关中陷没，李孝常以华阴叛，陛下囚其二弟，将尽杀之。
现代文：司马德戡又对二人说 ：我听说关中陷落，李孝常在华阴反叛，陛下把他的两个弟弟囚禁起来，准备都杀掉。
English: Sima Deyao also said to the two, "I heard that Guanzhong had fallen, that Li Xiaozang had rebelled in Huayin, and that His Majesty had imprisoned his two younger brothers and was preparing to kill them both.

古文：吾辈家属在西安，得无此虑？ 
现代文：我们这些人的家属都在西安，能没有这种忧虑吗？ 
English: Our families are all in Xi'an, can we not have such worries?

古文：虔通等曰： 正恐旦暮及诛，计无所出。 
现代文：裴虔通等人说 ：正是恐怕家属早晚被杀，却又无计可施。 
English: Pei Qiantong and others said: I am afraid that it is the family members who will be killed sooner or later, but there is nothing that can be done.

古文：德戡曰： 骁果若走，可与俱去。 
现代文：司马德戡说： 骁勇果敢之士如果逃走，可和他们一起逃离。 
English: Sima Deyao said: "If the brave and daring escape, you can escape with them.

古文：虔通等曰： 诚如公言。 
现代文：裴虔通等人说： 就依公所说的这样。 
English: Pei Qiantong and others said, "This is what the emperor said.

古文：因递相招诱。
现代文：因而互相传递讯息，招纳引诱。
English: As a result, they pass on messages to each other and attract recruits.

古文：又转告内史舍人元敏、鹰扬郎将孟景、符玺郎牛方裕，直长许弘仁、薛世良、城门郎唐奉义、医正张恺等，日夜聚博，约为刎颈交，言无回避，于坐中辄论叛计，并相然许。
现代文：又转告内史舍人元敏、鹰扬郎将孟景、符玺郎牛方裕，直长许弘仁、薛世良、城门郎唐奉义、医正张恺等人，日夜聚会赌博，结为生死之交，说话没有什么回避，在聚会之中就商议反叛之计，都互相赞同应允。
English: He also reported that in the course of history, Yuan Min, Ying Yang Lang, Meng Jing, Fu Ye Lang, Niu Fang Yu, Xu Hongren, Xue Shiliang, Tang Bongyi, I Zheng, and others gathered day and night to gamble. They were friends for life and death, and there was nothing to avoid talking about. During the gathering, they discussed the plan of rebellion, and they all agreed to agree.

古文：时李质在禁，令骁果守之，中外交通，所谋益急。
现代文：当时，李质在宫禁中，令骁勇果敢之士守卫宫廷，宫中和外界交往通讯，谋划更为急切。
English: At that time, Li Qian was under house arrest, and he ordered his brave and courageous men to guard the palace. The palace communicated with the outside world, and the planning was more urgent.

古文：又赵行枢先交智及；勋侍杨士览者，宇文氏之甥。二人同以告智及。
现代文：另外，赵行枢先前与宇文智及有交往，勋侍杨士览，是宇文氏的外甥，二人一同把事情告诉宇文智及。
English: In addition, Zhao Xingzhu had previously had dealings with Yu Wenzhi, and his valet, Yang Shizhan, was Yu Wenzhi's nephew. The two of them told Yu Wenzhi about the matter together.

古文：智及素狂勃，闻之喜，即共见德戡，期以三月十五日举兵同叛，劫十二卫武马，虏掠居人财物西归。
现代文：宇文智及平常就狂妄悖逆，听说后非常高兴，就一同去见司马德戡，约定三月十五日一同举兵反叛，抢劫十二卫武的马匹，掠夺居民的财物西归。
English: Uwen Zhi and his usual arrogant and rebellious nature were very happy when they heard of the move. They went together to see Sima Deyao and agreed to raise an army together on March 15th to rebel, rob the horses of twelve guardsmen, and plunder the property of residents returning to the west.

古文：智及曰： 不然。
现代文：智及说： 不然。
English: Wisdom and said: Otherwise.

古文：今天实丧隋，英雄并起，因行大事，此帝王业也。 
现代文：如今苍天实是灭亡隋朝，英雄四起，借机而行大事，这就是帝王大业。 
English: Now that the Sui Dynasty is doomed, heroes are on the rise, taking the opportunity to do great things. This is the emperor's great cause.

古文：德戡然之。
现代文：司马德戡认为说得对。
English: Sima Deguan thought that he was right.

古文：行枢、世良请以化及为主，约定，方告化及。
现代文：赵行枢和薛世良请求推化及为主，约定之后，才告诉宇文化及。
English: Zhao Xingzhu and Xue Shiliang requested to promote and prioritize, and after the agreement, they told Yu Culture and.

古文：化及性驽怯，初闻之，大惧，色动流汗，久之乃定。
现代文：宇文化及生性无能怯懦，刚听说此事，十分恐惧，面色改变，汗流浃背，很久很久才决定下来。
English: Uygur culture and innate incompetence and cowardice, just heard about this, very afraid, face changed, sweaty, and decided to come down for a long time.

古文：义宁二年三月一日，德戡欲告众人，恐心未一，更谲诈以胁骁果，谓许弘仁、张恺曰： 君是良医，国家所使，出言惑众，众必信。
现代文：义宁二年三月一日，司马德戡想告诉众人，担心众人不能一心，又生诡诈来威胁骁勇果敢之士，对许弘仁和张恺说 ：你们都是良医，受国家支使，说出话来迷惑众人，众人必定相信。
English: On March 1 of the second year of Yining, Sima Dejun wanted to tell everyone that he was worried that everyone could not be united, and that he would use trickery to threaten the brave and courageous. He said to Xu Hongren and Zhang Ye: You are both good doctors, supported by the state, say things to confuse people, and people will certainly believe you.

古文：君可入备身府，遍告所识者，言陛下闻骁果欲叛，多醖毒酒，因享会，尽鸠杀之，独与南人留此。
现代文：你们可以进入备身府，告诉认识的人，说陛下听说骁勇果敢之士准备反叛，酿造了很多毒酒，借助宴会的机会，把骁勇果敢之士全都毒死，只把南方人留在这里。
English: You can go to the Preparation House and tell everyone you know that your majesty heard that the brave men were preparing to rebel, brewed a lot of poisoned wine, and used the opportunity of the banquet to poison all the brave men, leaving only the southerners here.

古文：群情必骇，因而举事，无不谐矣。 
现代文：这样，众人必定害怕，因此而反叛，没有不成功的。 
English: Thus, the people must have been afraid, and therefore rebelled, not without success.

古文：其月五日，弘仁等宣布此言，骁果递相告，谋反逾急。
现代文：这个月五日，许弘仁等人散布这些言论，骁勇果敢之士互相转告，谋划造反更加急切。
English: On the fifth day of this month, Xu Hongren and others spread these remarks, and the brave and daring people told each other that they were planning to rebel more urgently.

古文：德戡等知计行，遂以十日总召故人，谕以所为。
现代文：司马德戡等人知道计谋已经实现，就在三月十日召集原来那些人，把想要造反的事情向众人说明。
English: Sima Deyao and others knew that the plot had been realized, and on March 10th they called together the original people and explained to everyone what they wanted to rebel against.

古文：众皆伏曰： 唯将军命！ 
现代文：众人都伏地说： 只听从将军的命令！ 
English: Everyone said in a hushed voice: "Just follow the general's orders!"

古文：其夜，奉义主闭城门，门皆不下钥，至夜三更。
现代文：这天夜里，唐奉义主持关闭城门，门上的钥匙都不取下来。
English: On this night, Tang Bongyi presided over the closing of the city gate, and the keys on the door were not taken down.

古文：德戡于东城内集兵，得数万人，举火与城外相应。
现代文：到了夜里三更时分，司马德戡在东城内集合兵马，共有几万人，燃起大火和城外相呼应。
English: At three o'clock in the morning, Sima Deyu gathered tens of thousands of soldiers and horses in the east of the city, ignited a fire and echoed outside the city.

古文：帝闻有声，问是何事。
现代文：炀帝听到有声音，问是什么事情。
English: He heard a voice and asked what was going on.

古文：虔通伪曰： 草坊被烧，外人救火，故喧嚣耳。 
现代文：裴虔通谎称： 草坊被烧了，外边的人救火，所以声音很嘈杂热闹。 
English: Pei Qiantong falsely claimed: "The hayloft was burned, and people outside were fighting the fire, so the noise was very noisy and lively.

古文：中外隔绝，帝以为然。
现代文：宫中和外界隔绝，炀帝相信了裴虔通的话。
English: Isolated from the outside world in the palace, Emperor Qian believed Pei Qiantong's words.

古文：孟景、智及于城外得千余人，劫候卫武贲冯普乐，共布兵捉郭下街巷。
现代文：孟景和宇文智及在城外聚集一千多人，劫持候卫武贲冯普乐，一同布兵在城下大街小巷里抢劫。
English: Meng Jing and Yu Wenzhi gathered more than a thousand people outside the city, kidnapped Weiwuying Feng Pule, and together they looted the streets and alleys under the city.

古文：至五更，德戡授虔通兵，以换诸门卫士。
现代文：到了五更时分，司马德戡把兵交给裴虔通，将各个城门的卫兵换下来。
English: At five o'clock, Sima Deyu handed over the soldiers to Pei Qiantong and changed the guards at each gate.

古文：虔通因自开门，领数百骑，至成象殿，杀将军独孤盛。
现代文：裴虔通于是自开城门，率领几百名骑兵，来到成象殿，杀掉将军独孤盛。
English: Pei Qiantong then opened the city gate, led several hundred cavalry, came to Chengxiang Hall, and killed the general.

古文：武贲郎将元礼遂引兵进。宿卫者皆走。
现代文：武贲郎将元礼就领兵冲入，宫中卫士都逃跑了。
English: When Takehiro led the troops into the palace at the time of the New Year, the palace guards fled.

古文：虔通进兵排左閤，驰入永巷问： 陛下安在？ 
现代文：裴虔通继续进兵，推开左边的阁门，直入永巷，问道： 陛下在哪里？ 
English: Pei Qiantong continued to advance, pushed open the left-hand attic door, went straight into Yongxiang, and asked: Where is His Majesty?

古文：有美人出房，指云： 在西閤。 
现代文：有一美人从房中走出，手指西边说： 在西阁。 
English: A beautiful woman came out of the room, pointing to the west and saying, "In the west pavilion."

古文：从往执帝。
现代文：跟着前去捉拿炀帝。
English: Go ahead and capture the Emperor.

古文：帝谓虔通曰： 卿非我故人乎！
现代文：炀帝问裴虔通说 ：卿不是我的旧友吗？
English: Emperor Qian asked Pei Qiantong, "Isn't he an old friend of mine?"

古文：何恨而反？ 
现代文：有什么怨恨而造反呢？ 
English: What kind of grudge would cause them to rebel?

古文：虔通曰： 臣不敢反，但将士思归，奉陛下还京师耳。 
现代文：裴虔通说： 臣不敢造反，只是将士想回故乡，奉陛下回京师罢了。 
English: Pei Qiantong said: The vassal dares not rebel, he just wants to return to his hometown and serve his majesty as a teacher in Beijing.

古文：帝曰： 即为汝归。 
现代文：炀帝说： 就让你们回去。 
English: Hao Di said: Just let you go back.

古文：虔通自勒兵守之。
现代文：裴虔通自己统率军队守卫。
English: Pei Qiantong himself led the army guard.

古文：至旦，孟景以甲骑迎化及。
现代文：到了天亮，孟景率领铁甲骑兵迎接宇文化及。
English: At dawn, Meng Jing led the cavalry of iron armor to meet Yu Wenhua.

古文：化及未知事果，战栗不能言，人有谒之，但低头据案，答曰 罪过 。
现代文：宇文化及不知道事情的结果，浑身发抖不能说话，有人拜见，只是低着头依着桌案，回答说： 罪过。 
English: Uneducated and unaware of the outcome of the matter, trembling all over and unable to speak, someone asked to see him, but he just bowed his head and leaned on the table and replied: "Guilty."

古文：时士及在公主第，弗之知也。
现代文：这时，宇文士及在公主宅第，不知道此事。
English: At this time, Uwenshi and the others at the princess's house did not know about it.

古文：智及遣家僮庄桃树就第杀之，桃树不忍，执诣智及，久之乃见释。
现代文：宇文智及派遣家僮庄桃树到公主宅第杀之，桃树不忍心杀他，抓来见智及，很久才被释放。
English: Uwen Zhi and sent his family member Zhuangzhuang Taoshu to the princess's residence to kill him. Taoshu could not bear to kill him, so he brought him to see Zhi and was not released for a long time.

古文：化及至城门，德戡迎谒，引入朝堂，号为丞相。
现代文：宇文化及到了城门，司马德戡迎接拜见，领入朝堂中，称宇文化及为丞相。
English: When U Bunka arrived at the city gate, Sima Deyu greeted him and led him into the imperial hall, calling him U Bunka and the prime minister.

古文：令将帝出江都门以示群贼，因复将入。
现代文：命令带炀帝出江都门见众叛军，因而又带了进来。
English: He was ordered to take Emperor Gong out of the Jiangdu Gate to meet the rebels, so he brought Luo in again.

古文：遣令狐行达弑帝于宫中。
现代文：派遣令狐行达在宫中把炀帝杀害。
English: He dispatched Gu Xingda to kill Emperor Xizong in the palace.

古文：又执朝臣不同己者数十人，及诸王外戚，无少长皆害之。
现代文：又把与己见不同的几十名朝中大臣抓起来，同时抓起来的还有诸王的外戚，不分老少一并杀害。
English: He also arrested dozens of ministers of the DPRK and China who had different views from his own, as well as the maternal relatives of kings, and killed them all, regardless of age.

古文：唯留秦孝王子浩，立以为帝。
现代文：只留下了秦孝王之子杨浩，立为皇帝。
English: Only Yang Hao, the son of Qin Xiaowang, was left as emperor.

古文：十余日，夺江都人舟楫，从水路西归。
现代文：过了十多天，抢夺江都人的舟船，由水路向西归去。
English: After more than ten days, they robbed the boats of the people in Jiangdu and returned to the west by water.

古文：至显福宫，宿公麦孟才、折冲郎将沈光等谋击化及，反为所害。
现代文：到了显福宫，宿公麦孟才、折冲郎将沈光等人谋划袭击宇文化及，反被宇文化及杀害。
English: When they arrived at the Xianfu Palace, the innkeepers, Mai Mengcai and Ori Chongro, plotted with Shen Guang and others to attack the Yu culture and were killed by the Yu culture.

古文：化及于是入据六宫，其自奉一如炀帝故事。
现代文：宇文化及于是占据六宫，其自奉一切都像炀帝原来一样。
English: Yu culture and thus occupy the six palaces, its self-worship everything is like the emperor originally.

古文：每帐中南面端坐，人有白事者，默然不对。
现代文：常常在帐中面南端正而坐，有人汇报事情，闭口无言，不作回答。
English: He often sits in the middle of the table facing south, and when someone reports something, he shuts up and doesn't answer.

古文：下牙时，方收取启状。共奉义、方裕、世良、恺等参决之。
现代文：等到下牙床时，才把奏状收过来，和唐奉义、牛方裕、薛世良、张恺等人商议裁决。
English: He waited until he was in the dentist's chair to collect the petition and discuss the ruling with Tang Bongyi, Niu Fangyu, Xue Shiliang, Zhang Qian and others.

古文：行至徐州，水路不通，复夺人车牛，得二千两，并载宫人珍宝。
现代文：行至徐州，水路不通，又抢夺百姓的车辆和牛，得到二千辆牛车，都用来运载宫人和珍宝。
English: When they went to Xuzhou, the waterway was impassable, and they also robbed the people's vehicles and cattle, and obtained two thousand oxcarts, all of which were used to transport palace people and treasures.

古文：其戈甲戎器，悉令军士负之。
现代文：铠甲兵器，都命令士兵背着。
English: Armour-piercing weapons were ordered to be carried on the soldier's back.

古文：道远疲极，三军始怨。
现代文：路途遥远，士兵非常疲劳，三军都开始怨恨起来。
English: The journey is long, the soldiers are very tired, and all three armies are beginning to resent each other.

古文：德戡失望，窃谓行枢曰： 君大误我。
现代文：司马德戡很失望，私下对赵行枢说： 你把我耽误得不轻！
English: Sima Deyao was very disappointed and privately said to Zhao Xingzhu: You have delayed me too much!

古文：当今拨乱，必藉英贤，化及庸暗，事将必败，若何？ 
现代文：如今治理乱世，一定要借重英雄贤才。宇文化及平庸暗昧，事情必将失败，怎么办呢？ 
English: Today, to govern the chaotic world, we must rely on heroes and sages. Universal culture and mediocrity are dark, things will fail, what should we do?

古文：行枢曰： 废之何难！ 
现代文：赵行枢说 ：废掉他有什么困难的！ 
English: Zhao Xingzhu said, "There is no difficulty in abolishing him!"

古文：因共李孝本、宇文导师、尹正卿等谋，以后军万余兵袭杀化及，立德戡为主。
现代文：于是就和李孝本、宇文导师、君正卿等人商议，打算用一万多后军袭击杀死宇文化及，立司马德戡作为君主。
English: Therefore, he discussed with Li Xiaobun, Uwen Tutor, Jun Zhengqing and others, and planned to use more than ten thousand troops to attack and kill U Bunka and establish Sima Degu as the monarch.

古文：弘仁知之，密告化及，尽收德戡及支党杀之。
现代文：许弘仁得知此事，秘密告诉宇文化及，把司马德戡和其党羽都抓起来杀了。
English: When Xu Hongren learned of this, he secretly told U Culture and arrested and killed Sima Dejun and his followers.

古文：引兵向东郡，通守王轨以城降之。
现代文：领兵向东都洛阳进发，通守王轨献城投降。
English: The leader of the army marched to the eastern capital Luoyang and surrendered the city of Wangluo.

古文：元文都推越王侗为主，拜李密为太尉，令击化及。
现代文：元文都推举越王杨侗为君主，任李密为太尉，命令进击宇文化及。
English: In the Yuan Dynasty, the king of Yue, Yang Jie, was elected as the monarch, Li Mi was appointed as the first lieutenant, and the order was given to invade and conquer Yunnan.

古文：密壁清淇，与徐世勣以烽火相应。
现代文：李密在清淇安营扎寨，和徐世勋用烽火相呼应。
English: Li Mi set up camp in Qingqi, echoing Xu Shixun's campfire.

古文：化及数战不利，其将军于弘达为密所禽，送于侗所，镬烹之。
现代文：宇文化及多次交战不利，其将军于弘达被李密擒获，送到杨侗那里，投进锅里煮了。
English: U Culture and many battles were unfavorable, and its general, Yu Hongda, was captured by Li Miyao, sent to Yang Miyao, and thrown into a pot to boil.

古文：化及粮尽，度永济渠，与密决战于童山。
现代文：宇文化及粮食用尽，渡过永济渠，和李密在童山决战。
English: Having exhausted Yu's culture and grain, he crossed the Yongji Canal and fought a decisive battle with Li Mi at Tongshan.

古文：遂入汲郡求军粮，又遣使拷掠东郡人吏，责米粟。
现代文：就进入汲郡搜求军粮，又派遣使者拷打掳掠东郡的百姓官员，勒索粮食。
English: He entered Kyu County to search for military supplies, and sent envoys to torture and kidnap civilian officials in Dong County to extort grain.

古文：王轨怨之，以城归李密。
现代文：王轨怨恨宇文化及，献城归顺李密。
English: Wang Lule held a grudge against Yu Culture and dedicated the city to Shun Li Mi.

古文：化及大惧，自汲郡将图以北诸州。
现代文：宇文化及非常害怕，自汲郡开始，准备夺取北面的州县。
English: Yu culture and very afraid, starting from the county, ready to seize the north of the county.

古文：其将陈智略率岭南骁果万余人，张童兒率江东骁果数千人，皆叛归李密。
现代文：其部将陈智略率领岭南骁勇果敢之士一万多人，张童儿率江东骁勇果敢之士几千人，皆叛附李密。
English: Chen Zhiliu led more than ten thousand people in Lingnan and Zhang Tong'er led several thousand people in Jiangdong, all of whom rebelled against Li Mi.

古文：化及尚有众二万，北走魏县。
现代文：宇文化及还有二万兵马，向北逃往魏县。
English: Yu Wenchuan and another 20,000 soldiers and horses fled north to Wei County.

古文：张恺与其将陈伯谋去之，事觉，为化及所杀。
现代文：张恺和其部将陈伯谋划离开宇文化及，事情败露，被宇文化及杀害。
English: Zhang Rong and his subordinates plotted to get Chen Bo out of Yu Culture and, when the plot was exposed, he was killed by Yu Culture and.

古文：腹心稍尽，兵势日蹙，兄弟更无他计，但相聚酣宴，奏女乐。
现代文：心腹之人杀戮殆尽，兵力一天比一天少，宇文化及兄弟无计可施，只是互相聚会畅饮，欣赏女乐。
English: The loyalists have all been killed, the number of soldiers is dwindling day by day, and there is nothing to be done for Yu Kun and his brothers. They just get together to drink and enjoy women's music.

古文：醉后，尤智及曰： 我初不知，由汝为计，强来立我。
现代文：醉酒之后，宇文化及责怪智及说： 我当初不知何事，任由你谋划，强行立我。
English: After getting drunk, Yu Guanzhong blamed Zhi and said: I didn't know what was going on at first, so I let you scheme and force me to stand up.

古文：今所向无成，负弑主之名，天下所不纳。
现代文：如今到哪里都没有成功，背着杀害主上的罪名，天下人都不会接纳我们。
English: Now we haven't been successful anywhere, and with the accusation of killing the Lord behind us, the world won't accept us.

古文：灭族岂非由汝乎？ 
现代文：灭族之罪难道不是因为你吗？ 
English: Wasn't it because of you that the crime of genocide was committed?

古文：抱其两子而泣。
现代文：抱着两个儿子哭起来。
English: She hugged her two sons and began to cry.

古文：智及怒曰： 事捷之日，都不赐尤；及其将败，乃欲归罪。
现代文：智及大怒说 ：事情成功的时候，不加责备。到了将要失败的时候，就想把罪名归于我。
English: "When things are going well, they don't blame me, and when things are going badly, they want to blame me," said Tomochi angrily.

古文：何不杀我以降建德！ 
现代文：为什么不杀了我去投降窦建德呢？ 
English: Why not kill me to surrender Dou Jiande?

古文：兄弟数相斗阋，言无长幼，醒而复饮，以此为恆。
现代文：兄弟之间多次互相争斗，说话没有长幼之分，酒醒后又饮，经常就是这样。
English: The brothers fought with each other many times. There was no distinction between the elder and the younger. When they sobered up, they would drink again, which was often the case.

古文：自知必败，乃叹曰： 人生故当死，岂不一日为帝乎！ 
现代文：宇文化及自知必定失败，就叹息说： 人生固然会死，岂不做一天皇帝呢？ 
English: Knowing that he was doomed to fail, he sighed and said, "Life will certainly die, but wouldn't it be great to become emperor one day?"

古文：于是鸠杀浩，僭皇帝位于魏县，国号许，建元为天寿，置百官。
现代文：于是毒杀杨浩，在魏县自就皇帝位，国号许，建元为天寿，设置文武百官。
English: Therefore, he poisoned Yang Hao, and made himself emperor in Wei County. The country was named Xu, the founder was Tianshou, and a hundred civil and military officials were set up.

古文：攻元宝藏于魏州，反为所败，乃东北趣聊城，将招携海内诸贼。
现代文：进攻魏州的元宝藏，反被元宝藏打败，于是就向东北逃往聊城，准备招揽天下诸处贼兵。
English: He attacked the Yuan treasury in Weizhou, but was defeated by the Yuan treasury, so he fled to the northeast to Liaocheng, preparing to recruit thieves from all over the world.

古文：遣士及徇济北，征求饷馈。
现代文：派遣宇文士及到济北，征求粮饷。
English: They sent scholars to Jibei to solicit grain.

古文：大唐遣淮安王神通安抚山东，神通围之十余日，不克而退。
现代文：大唐派遣淮安王神通安抚山东，神通围困宇文化及十多日，没有攻下，就退兵了。
English: Datang sent Huai'an Wang Shentong to pacify Shandong. Shentong besieged Uculture for more than ten days, but withdrew after failing to capture it.

古文：窦建德悉众攻之。
现代文：窦建德聚集全部兵力攻击宇文化及。
English: Dou Jiande gathered all the forces to attack Yu Qun and.

古文：先是，齐州贼帅王薄闻其多宝物，诈来投附。
现代文：在此之前，齐州贼帅王薄听说宇文化及有许多宝物，假装来投降。
English: Prior to this, the Qizhou thief Wang Bo pretended to surrender after he heard that there were many treasures in Yu culture.

古文：化及信之，与共居守。
现代文：宇文化及相信王薄，和王薄一起居住守卫。
English: Yu culture and believe that Wang Bo, and Wang Bo live together guard.

古文：至是，薄引建德入城，禽化及，悉虏其众。
现代文：到了这个时候，王薄引窦建德入城，擒获宇文化及，将其部属全部俘虏。
English: At this time, Wang Bo led Dou Jiande into the city, captured Yu Wenhua and took all his subordinates captive.

古文：先执智及、元武达、孟景、杨士览、许弘仁等，皆斩之。
现代文：先将宇文智及、元武达、孟景、杨士览、许弘仁等人抓起来，都一起杀了。
English: They first arrested and killed Uwen Zhi, Yuan Wuda, Meng Jing, Yang Shizhan, Xu Hongren and others.

古文：化及败后，归于大唐，即授徐州总管，转辰州刺史，封长蛇男。
现代文：于是用囚车把宇文化及载至大陆县城下，逐条宣布其弑主篡逆的罪行，将其和二个儿子承基、承趾一同斩首。
English: Therefore, they took U Bunka and his son to the town of Mainland County in a prison van, announced the crime of treason committed by his tyrannical master one by one, and beheaded him together with his two sons, Shoji and Shoji.

古文：寻以隋朝弑逆之罪，除名，徙于岭表而死。
现代文：把宇文化及的首级传送到突厥义城公主那里，在突厥宫庭枭首示众。
English: He sent the U Culture and the head to the Turkic princess of Yicheng, and displayed the head in the courtyard of the Turkic palace.

古文：王世充，字行满，本西域胡人也。
现代文：宇文士及从济北向西回归长安。王世充字行满，祖先是西域胡人。
English: Uwenshi and returned to Chang'an from the west of Jeonbuk. Wang Shicheng is full of characters, and his ancestors are the Hu people of the western region.

古文：祖支颓褥，徙居新丰。
现代文：祖父支颓褥，迁居新丰。
English: His grandfather, Shikun, moved to Xinfeng.

古文：颓褥死，其妻少寡，与仪同王粲野合，生子曰琼，粲遂纳之以为小妻。
现代文：支颓褥死后，其妻年轻守寡，和仪同王粲私通，生子名曰琼，王粲就把她娶作小妾。
English: After the death of Shixuan, his wife, a young widow, had an affair with Yi and Wang Yao. The child's name was Qiong, and Wang Yao married her as a concubine.

古文：其父收幼孤，随母嫁粲，粲爱而养焉，因姓王氏。
现代文：王世充的父亲收自幼丧父，随母嫁到王粲家，王粲喜爱他而收养了他。因而随姓王。
English: Wang Shichong's father was adopted at a young age and married into Wang Yao's family. Wang Yao loved him and adopted him, hence the surname Wang.

古文：官至怀、汴二州长史。
现代文：官至怀、汴二州长史。
English: An official to his heart's content, and the history of two governors.

古文：世充卷发豺声，沉猜多诡诈，颇窥书传，尤好兵法，晓龟策推步盈虚，然未尝为人言也。
现代文：王世充头发卷曲，声似豺狼，性好猜疑，诡计多端，读了许多经史，特别喜爱兵法，通晓占卜星相盈虚之术，然而却不曾为人指点过。
English: Wang Shih is curly-haired, has the voice of a jackal, is suspicious and cunning, has read a lot of scriptures, is particularly fond of military tactics, and is well-versed in the art of divination, yet he has never been pointed out to anyone.

古文：开皇中，为左翊卫，后以军功拜仪同，授兵部员外郎。
现代文：隋文帝开皇年间，任左翊卫，后来又因军功任仪同，授予兵部员外郎之职。
English: During the reign of Emperor Sui Wen, he was appointed as Zuo Ye, and later, due to his military service, he was awarded the post of Foreign Minister.

古文：善敷奏，明习法律，而舞弄文墨，高下在心。
现代文：善于敷陈奏进，熟悉法度律令，舞弄笔墨文章，高低上下存于心中。
English: He is good at applying the rules and regulations, familiar with the laws and regulations, plays with the pen and ink articles, and has the ups and downs in his heart.

古文：或有驳难之者，世充利口饰非，辞义锋起，从虽知其否而莫能屈，称为明辩。
现代文：或有驳论辩难的人，王世充快牙利口，文过饰非，文词犀利，众人虽然知道王世充不对，却又没有人能够让他屈服，都称他能言善辩。
English: There may be those who refute the arguments, but Wang Shixing is a fast talker, with a penchant for embellishing the truth, and a sharp wit. Although everyone knows that Wang Shixing is not right, but no one can make him give in, they all say that he can speak well.

古文：炀帝世，累迁至江都郡丞。
现代文：隋炀帝时，逐步升迁至江都郡丞。
English: During the reign of the Sui Dynasty, he was gradually promoted to the post of county magistrate of Jiangdu.

古文：时帝数幸江都，世充善候人主颜色，阿谀顺旨，每入言事，帝善之。
现代文：当时，炀帝多次巡幸江都，王世充善于体察君主的脸色，阿谀逢迎，顺从旨意，每次入宫说事情，炀帝都善待他。
English: At that time, Emperor Zhaozhou made many visits to the imperial capital, and the king was very good at observing the monarch's face. He was always welcomed, obeyed the will, and said things every time he entered the palace. Emperor Zhaozhou treated him well.

古文：又以郡丞领江都宫监，乃雕饰池台，阴奏远方珍物，以媚于帝，由是益昵之。
现代文：又以郡丞之职兼领江都宫监，于是就雕刻文饰池塘台榭，秘密进奉远方的珍奇物品，以取悦予炀帝，因此，炀帝更加宠信他。
English: He also served as the county magistrate and the palace inspector of the provincial capital, so he carved the ornamental ponds and piers and secretly sent exotic items from afar to please Emperor Xuan. As a result, Emperor Xuan trusted him more.

古文：大业八年，隋始乱，世充内怀徼幸，卑身礼士，阴结豪俊，多收众心。
现代文：大业八年，隋朝天下开始出现动乱，王世充内怀侥亻幸之心，屈己礼士，私下结交英雄豪杰，广泛收买人心。
English: In the eighth year of the Taiei era, the Sui Dynasty and the world began to experience turmoil. Wang Shichong harbored a sense of luck, was a self-effacing gentleman, made friends with heroes and heroines in private, and extensively bribed people's hearts.

古文：江淮间人素轻薄，又属贼盗群起，人多犯法，有系狱抵罪者，世充枉法出之，以树私恩。
现代文：江淮之间的百姓素来轻薄，又逢盗贼四起之时，违犯法纪的人很多，有的人下狱抵罪，王世充违背法纪把他们放出来，树立个人的恩义。
English: The people between the Jianghuai River and the Huai River have always been frivolous, and when thieves are on the rise, there are many people who violate laws and regulations. Some people go to prison to atone for their crimes, and Wang Shichong released them in violation of laws and regulations to establish personal gratitude.

古文：及杨玄感反，吴人硃燮、晋陵人管崇起兵江南以应之，自称将军，拥众十余万。
现代文：杨玄感造反的时候，吴地人朱燮、晋陵人管崇在江南起兵响应，自称将军，拥兵十多万。
English: When Yang Xuanxuan rebelled, Zhu Xi, a native of Wu, and Guanzhong, a native of Jinling, responded by raising an army in the south of the Yangtze River. They called themselves generals and were supported by more than 100,000 soldiers.

古文：帝遣将军吐万绪、鱼俱罗讨之，不能克。
现代文：炀帝派遣将军吐万绪、鱼俱罗讨伐，不能取得胜利。
English: Emperor Qian sent his generals to fight the fish club, but they were unable to achieve victory.

古文：世充募江都万余人，击频破之。
现代文：王世充在江都招募一万多人，打击叛军，多有胜利。
English: Wang Shichong recruited more than 10,000 people in Jiangdu to fight against the rebels, with many victories.

古文：每有克捷，必归功于下，所获军实，皆推与士卒，身无所取。
现代文：每次取得胜利，一定归功于部下，获得的军粮财物，都分给士兵，自己分文不取。
English: Every time a victory is achieved, it must be credited to the subordinates. The military food and property obtained are all distributed to the soldiers, and they do not take a penny.

古文：由此人争为用，功最居多。
现代文：因此，人们都争相为他所用，取得的功劳最多。
English: As a result, people are vying to be used by him and get the most credit.

古文：十年，齐郡贼帅孟让自长白山寇掠诸郡，至盱眙，有众十余万。
现代文：大业十年，齐郡贼兵元帅孟讠襄自长白山而下侵犯掳掠诸郡，到了盱眙，已有十多万人。
English: In the tenth year of the Great Leap Forward, the Qi County thief-soldier Marshal Meng Yuxiang descended from the Changbai Mountain to invade and plunder counties. By the time he arrived in Qi, there were more than one hundred thousand people.

古文：世充以兵拒之，而羸师示弱，保都梁山为五栅，相持不战。
现代文：王世充率兵迎战，用老弱残兵向敌兵示弱，依据都梁山结为五座营寨，与敌相持而不交战。
English: Wang Shichong led the troops into battle, using the old and weak remnants to show weakness to the enemy soldiers. According to the Du Liang Mountain, there were five camps, and they did not fight with the enemy.

古文：后因其懈驰，出兵奋击，大破之，乘胜尽灭诸贼，让以数十骑遁去，斩首万人，六畜军资，莫不尽获。
现代文：后来，利用敌兵松懈，出兵奋然进击，大破敌军，乘胜将众贼兵消灭殆尽，孟讠襄带着几十名骑兵逃跑了，斩首一万人，各种牲畜和军用物品，都全部缴获。
English: Later, taking advantage of the slackness of the enemy soldiers, he sent troops to attack vigorously, broke the enemy army, and wiped out the thieves with victory. Meng Yuxiang fled with dozens of cavalrymen, beheaded 10,000 people, and all kinds of livestock and military items were all captured.

古文：帝以世充有将帅才略，始遣领兵，讨诸小盗，所向破之。
现代文：炀帝因王世充有将帅的才能和谋略，才开始派遣他统领军队，讨伐各处小伙盗贼，所向必胜。
English: Because Wang Shiyi was endowed with the talent and strategy of a general, Emperor Qian began to send him to lead the army to fight young thieves everywhere, and he was sure to win.

古文：然性多矫伪，诈为善，能自勤苦，以求声誉。
现代文：然而，王世充生性多矫饰虚伪，假装行善，能够自我辛劳吃苦，用来博取好名声。
English: However, Wang Shixing sex is more pretentious and hypocritical, pretending to do good and being able to work hard to gain a good reputation.

古文：十一年，突厥围帝于雁门，世充尽发江都人往赴难。
现代文：大业十一年，突厥兵将炀帝围困在雁门关，王世充出动江都的全部兵马，往赴国难。
English: In the eleventh year of the Taie period, the Turkic soldiers besieged Emperor Xizang at the Gate of the Wild Goose, and Wang Shih sent all his soldiers and horses to the capital of the Yangtze River. It was difficult for him to go to the country.

古文：在军中，垢面悲泣，晓夜不解甲，藉草而坐。
现代文：在军营中，王世充满面污垢，悲痛流涕，昼夜不解甲胄，依草而坐。
English: In the military camp, Wang Shiyu is covered with dirt, grief flows, day and night he does not take off his armor and sits by the grass.

古文：帝闻之，以为爱己，益信任之。
现代文：炀帝听说这些，认为王世充爱戴自己，更加信任他。
English: When Emperor Xuan heard this, he thought that Wang Shihong loved him and trusted him even more.

古文：十二年，迁为江都通守。
现代文：大业十二年，王世充升任江都通守。
English: In the twelfth year of the Taiei era, Wang Shichong was promoted to the post of the governor of Jiangdu.

古文：时厌次人格谦为盗数年，兵十余万，在豆子中。
现代文：当时，厌次人格谦已是多年为强盗，拥兵十多万，驻扎在豆子中。
English: At that time, Yan Jie had been a bandit for many years, with more than a hundred thousand soldiers, stationed in the middle of the beans.

古文：世充破斩之，威振群贼。
现代文：王世充打败格谦军，将格谦斩首，威势震动众盗贼。
English: Wang Shichong defeated Ge Qian's army, beheaded Ge Qian, and shook the thieves with his might.

古文：又击卢明月，破之于南阳。
现代文：又进击卢明月，大败卢明月于南阳。
English: He attacked Lu Mingyue again and defeated Lu Mingyue in Nanyang.

古文：后还江都，帝大悦，自执杯酒以赐之。
现代文：后来回到江都，炀帝非常高兴，亲自端着一杯酒赐给王世充。
English: Later, when he returned to Jiangdu, Emperor Gong was very happy and personally gave Wang Shichong a glass of wine.

古文：时世充又知帝好内，乃言江淮良家多有美女，愿备后庭，无由自进。
现代文：这时，王世充又得知炀帝喜好女色，就进言说江淮善良之家有很多美女，都愿意进入后宫，只是没有缘由自我进献。
English: At this time, Wang Shichong also learned that Emperor Qian liked women, and he said that there were many beautiful women in the House of Jianghuai Kindness, and they were all willing to enter the harem, but there was no reason for self-sacrifice.

古文：帝愈喜，因密令世充阅观诸女，资质端丽合法相者，取正库及应入京物以聘纳之。
现代文：炀帝更加高兴，于是私下命令王世充仔细观察各位女子，端庄秀丽合乎容貌标准的，就拿正库里的财物支付入京所需之物，用以聘纳这些女子。
English: Emperor Xuan was even more pleased, so he privately ordered Wang Shichong to carefully observe all the women, and if the dignified beauty met the appearance standard, he would take the property in the main library to pay for the items needed to enter Beijing, and use them to hire these women.

古文：所用不可胜计，帐上所司云敕别用，不显其实。
现代文：所用的钱财无法计算，帐面上所说是敕令另有用途，不记录其实际数目。
English: The amount of money used cannot be calculated. What is said in the accounts is that the royal order was used for other purposes, and the actual amount is not recorded.

古文：有合意者，则厚赏世充，或不中者，又以赉之。
现代文：有中意的女子，炀帝就对王世充重加赏赐，有的不中意，也给予赏赐。
English: If there is a woman he likes, Emperor Xizong will reward Wang Shihong, and if there is a woman he doesn't like, he will also reward her.

古文：后令以船送东京，而道路贼起，使者苦役，于淮泗中沉船溺杀之者，前后十数。
现代文：后来，命令用船把搜罗来的美女送到东京洛阳，而路途中盗贼四起，护送的使者感到这种差役辛苦，就在淮水和泗水中把船弄沉，将那些美女都淹死，前前后后有十多起。
English: Later, the order was given to send the collected beauties by boat to Luoyang, Tokyo, but on the way there were four robberies. The escorting emissaries felt that this kind of duty was hard work, so they sank the boat in the Huaihe and Bohai waters and drowned those beauties. There were more than ten cases before and after.

古文：或有发露，世充为秘之，又遽简阅以供进。
现代文：有的暴露了出来，王世充就替他们遮掩，又仓促简单地选择一些女子用来进献。
English: Some were exposed, and Wang Shichong covered them up, and hastily and simply chose some women to use for the offering.

古文：是后益见亲昵。
现代文：这之后，王世充更受亲宠。
English: After that, Wang Shichong became even more popular.

古文：遇李密攻陷兴洛仓，进逼东都，官军数败，光禄大夫裴仁基以武牢降于密。
现代文：逢上李密攻下兴洛仓，进逼东都洛阳，官军屡遭失败，光禄大夫裴仁基献武牢城投降李密。
English: On the occasion of Li Mi's attack on Xinglucang, Luoyang, the eastern capital of Luoyang, the government army repeatedly failed, and Guanglu doctor Pei Renji surrendered to Li Mi.

古文：帝恶之，大发兵，将讨焉。
现代文：炀帝深恨李密，大规模地发动兵马，准备讨伐李密。
English: Emperor Qian deeply hated Li Mi and mobilized troops and horses on a large scale in preparation for a campaign against Li Mi.

古文：特发中诏遣世充为将，军于洛口以拒密。
现代文：特意颁布诏令，派遣王世充为将军，驻扎在洛口抵挡李密。
English: He issued a special edict, dispatching Wang Shichong as a general to be stationed in Lokou to resist Li Mi.

古文：前后百余战，互有胜负。
现代文：前前后后交战一百多次，互相有胜有负。
English: They have fought back and forth more than a hundred times, with both sides winning and losing.

古文：世充乃引军度洛水，逼仓城。
现代文：王世充就率领兵马渡过洛水，进逼仓城。
English: Wang Shichong led the soldiers and horses across the Luoshui River and entered the Jiaochang City.

古文：李密与战。世充败绩，赴水溺死者万余人。
现代文：李密与之交战，王世充被打败，落在水中淹死的有一万多人。
English: Li Mi fought with it, Wang Shichong was defeated, and more than 10,000 people drowned in the water.

古文：时天寒，大雨雪，兵既度水，衣皆沾湿，在道冻死者又数万人，比至河阳，才以千数。
现代文：当时天气寒冷，下着很大的雪，士兵渡过洛水之后，衣服湿透了，冻死在路途上的又有几万人，等到了河阳，才剩下几千人。
English: At that time, the weather was cold and it was snowing heavily. After the soldiers crossed the Luoshui River, their clothes were soaking wet. Tens of thousands of people froze to death on the way, and only a few thousand remained by the time they reached Heyang.

古文：世充自系狱请罪，越王侗遣使赦之，召令还都。
现代文：王世充自囚于牢狱之中，向越王杨侗请罪，越王杨侗派使者敕免他，召令王世充回东都洛阳。
English: Wang Shichong imprisoned himself in prison and pleaded guilty to the king of Yue, Yang Hui, who sent an envoy to pardon him and summon Wang Shichong back to the eastern capital Luoyang.

古文：收合亡散，屯于含嘉城中，不敢复出。
现代文：王世充收罗逃散的士兵，驻扎在含嘉城中，不敢再出来。
English: Wang Shichong collected the soldiers who fled Luo and stationed them in Hanjia City. They did not dare to come out again.

古文：宇文化及杀帝于江都，世充与太府卿元文都、将军皇甫无逸、右司郎卢楚奉侗为主。
现代文：宇文化及在江都杀害炀帝，王世充和太府卿元文都、将军皇甫无逸、右司郎卢楚尊奉杨侗为君王。
English: Emperor Yu was assassinated in Jiangdu, and Wang Shichong and Dafuqing Yuanmingdu, the general Emperor Fu Muxu, and his right-hand man Lu Chuzun were crowned by Yang Jie.

古文：侗以世充为吏部尚书，封郑国公。
现代文：杨侗任命王世充为吏部尚书，封爵郑国公。
English: Yang Hui appointed Wang Shichong as the secretary of the cadre department and knighted Zheng Guogong.

古文：及侗用元文都、卢楚之谋，拜李密为太尉、尚书令，密遂称臣，复以兵拒化及于黎阳，遣使献捷。
现代文：杨侗用元文都、卢楚的计谋，任命李密为太尉、尚书令，李密就向杨侗称臣，又率兵在黎阳抵抗宇文化及，派遣使者进奉俘虏和战利品。
English: Yang Pi used the stratagems of Yuanmingdu and Lu Chu to appoint Li Mi as the first lieutenant and Shang Shuling. Li Mi praised Yang Pi as his vassal, led the troops to resist the Yu culture in Liyang, and sent emissaries to bring prisoners and spoils of war.

古文：众皆悦，世充独谓其麾下诸将曰： 文都之辈，刀笔吏耳。
现代文：众人都很高兴，只有王世充对其属下诸位将领说： 元文都一类人，不过是撰写公文和诉状的人罢了。
English: Everyone was happy, except for Wang Shicheng, who said to his subordinate generals, "All the Yuanmen are the same, they are just people who write official documents and appeals.

古文：吾观其势，必为李密所禽。
现代文：我看这种形势，一定会成为李密的俘虏。
English: In this situation, I think I will definitely become Li Mi's prisoner.

古文：且吾军人马每与密战，杀其父兄子弟，前后已多，一旦为之下，吾属无类矣。 
现代文：况且，我们的军队兵马经常和李密交战，杀害其父兄子弟，前后已经很多了，一旦成为他的部下，我们就没一个人能够活得了。 
English: Moreover, our soldiers and horses often fight with Li Mi and kill his brothers and sisters, there have been many before and after. Once we become his subordinates, none of us can survive.

古文：出此言以激怒其众。
现代文：王世充说出这些话，用来激怒众将。
English: Wang Shicheng said these words to infuriate the generals.

古文：文都知而大惧，与楚等谋，将因世充入内，伏甲而杀之。
现代文：元文都知道后十分害怕，与卢楚等人商议，准备利用王世充入宫的机会，埋伏士兵将王世充杀掉。
English: After the original text was known, he was very afraid, discussed with Lu Chu and others, and prepared to use the opportunity of Wang Shicheng entering the palace to kill Wang Shicheng by ambushing soldiers.

古文：期有日矣，将军段达遣女婿张志以楚等谋告之。
现代文：日期已经约定好了，将军段达派遣女婿张志把卢楚等人的阴谋告诉了王世充。
English: The date had already been set, and General Duan Da sent his son-in-law Zhang Zhi to tell Wang Shichong about the conspiracy of Lu Chu and others.

古文：世充夜勒兵围宫城，将军费曜、田世阇等与战于东太阳门外。
现代文：王世充夜里率兵围住宫城，将军费曜、田世等人在东太阳门外与王世充大战。
English: Wang Shicheng led his troops to surround Miyagi at night. General Fei You, Tian Ze and others fought with Wang Shicheng outside the East Sun Gate.

古文：曜军败，世充遂攻门而入。
现代文：费曜等人被打败，王世充就攻入宫城门。
English: After the defeat of Fei You and others, Wang Shicheng broke into the palace gate.

古文：无逸以单骑遁走。
现代文：皇甫无逸单人匹马逃走。
English: The Empress Dowager escaped alone on horseback.

古文：获楚，杀之。
现代文：王世充捉获卢楚，把他杀了。
English: Wang Shicheng caught Lu Chu and killed him.

古文：时宫门尚闭，世充遣人扣门言于侗曰： 元文都等欲执皇帝降于李密，段达知而以告臣。
现代文：这时，宫门还关闭着，王世充派人敲门对杨侗说 ：元文都等人想把皇帝抓起来投降李密，段达知道后告诉了臣。
English: At this time, the palace gate was still closed. Wang Shichong sent someone to knock on the door and said to Yang Zhen: Yuanwen and others all wanted to arrest the emperor and surrender to Li Mi. Duan Da knew this and told the minister.

古文：臣非敢反，诛反者耳。 
现代文：臣不敢造反，只是要诛杀反叛者。 
English: The vassal did not dare to rebel, but only wanted to fight and kill the rebels.

古文：文都闻变，入奉侗于乾阳殿，陈兵卫之。
现代文：元文都得知发生了变故，入宫奉杨侗到乾阳殿，列兵保卫杨侗。
English: Yuanwen all learned that there had been a change of fortune, and Yang Hui went to Qianyang Palace to enter the palace, and the soldiers protected Yang Hui.

古文：令将帅乘城以拒难，兵败，侗命开门以纳世充。
现代文：命令将帅利用宫城来抵抗，军队被打败，杨侗命令打开宫门让王世充进来。
English: The commander-in-chief ordered to use Miyagi to resist, the army was defeated, and Yang Mi ordered to open the palace gate to let Wang Shicheng in.

古文：世充悉遣人代宿卫者，明日入谒，顿首流涕而言曰： 文都等无状，谋相屠害，事急为此，不敢背国。 
现代文：王世充派人把宫中的侍卫全部替换下来，第二天入宫谒见，叩首流涕，对杨侗说 ：元文都等人无礼，阴谋相互屠杀，事情紧急才这样做，不敢背叛国家。 
English: Wang Shichong sent someone to replace all the guards in the palace, and the next day he went to the palace for a meeting, bowed his head and said to Yang Xuan: "All the Yuanmen were rude and plotted to kill each other. They only did this when things were urgent. They dared not betray the country."

古文：侗与之盟。
现代文：杨侗和王世充盟誓。
English: Yang Hui and Wang Shicheng swear an oath.

古文：世充寻遣韦节等讽侗，命拜为尚书左仆射、总督内外诸军事。
现代文：不久，王世充又派遣韦节等人劝杨侗，任王世充为尚书左仆射、总督内外诸军事。
English: Soon after, Wang Shichong sent Wei Jie and others to persuade Yang Jie to appoint Wang Shichong as his right-hand man, governor and military leader.

古文：又授其兄恽为内史令，入居禁中。
现代文：又授任王世充的兄长王恽为内史令，进入宫中居住。
English: He also appointed Wang Shichong's elder brother, Wang Xuan, as the Inner Historian, and he lived in the palace.

古文：未几，李密破化及还，其劲兵良马多战死，士卒皆倦。
现代文：不久，李密打败宇文化及而回，精兵良马大多战死，士兵都很疲倦。
English: Soon after, Li Mi defeated Yu Wencun and turned back, most of the elite soldiers were killed, and the soldiers were very tired.

古文：世充欲乘其弊而击之，恐人心不一，乃假托鬼神，言梦见周公，乃立祠于洛水之上，遣巫宣言周公欲令仆射急讨李密，当有大功，不则兵皆疫死。
现代文：王世充正想利用李密士卒疲惫之机，打击李密军，恐怕人们不一心，就假托鬼神，说是梦见了周公，就在洛水上游修建宙宇，派遣巫师张扬说 ：周公想令仆射急速讨伐李密，会取得很大成功，不然的话士兵都要因瘟疫而死掉。 
English: Wang Shicheng was trying to take advantage of Li Mi's exhaustion to attack Li Mi's army. I'm afraid that people were not of one mind, so they pretended to be ghosts and gods, saying that they had dreamed of Zhou Gong, building the universe in the upper reaches of Luoshui, and sending the sorcerer Zhang Yang to say: Zhou Gong wants to make the minions quickly fight Li Mi, it will be very successful, otherwise the soldiers will all die from the plague.

古文：世充兵多楚人，俗信妖妄，故出此言以惑之。
现代文：王世充的士兵大都是楚地人，风俗迷信妖魅荒诞，所以就说出这些话来迷惑士兵。
English: Most of Wang Shichong's soldiers were from Chudi, and their customs and superstitions were grotesque, so he uttered these words to confuse the soldiers.

古文：众皆请战，世充简练精勇得二万余人，马千余匹，营洛水南。
现代文：众士卒都请求作战，王世充精选训练精壮英勇的士兵二万多人，马一千多匹，在洛水南岸安下营寨。
English: All the soldiers and officers requested to fight, and Wang Shicheng carefully selected and trained more than 20,000 strong and brave soldiers and more than 1,000 horses, and set up camp on the south bank of Luoshui.

古文：密军偃师北山上，时密新得志于化及，有轻世充之心，不设壁垒。
现代文：李密的兵马驻扎在偃师北山上。这时，李密刚刚打败宇文化及，正是得意之时，有轻视王世充的意思，没有修筑工事。
English: Li Mi's soldiers and horses were stationed at the top of the North Mountain of Shanshi. At that time, Li Mi had just defeated U Culture and, just when he was at his best, he had the intention of despising Wang Shichong and did not carry out construction work.

古文：世充遣二百余骑，潜入北山，伏溪谷中，令军秣马蓐食。
现代文：王世充派遣二百多名骑兵，悄悄进入北山，埋伏在山谷中，命令士兵喂饱马，早晨还未起床就在寝席上进食。
English: Wang Shichong dispatched more than two hundred horsemen, quietly entered the North Mountain, ambushed in the valley, ordered the soldiers to feed the horses, and ate on the bed before getting up in the morning.

古文：既而宵济，人马奔驰，比明而薄密。
现代文：一切准备好之后，夜里渡河，人马疾驰，到天亮的时候接近了李密的营寨。
English: After everything was ready, they crossed the river at night, galloping at full speed, and by dawn they were close to Li Mi's camp.

古文：密出兵应之，阵未成列而两军合战，其伏兵蔽山而上，潜登北原，乘高而下，压密营。
现代文：李密出兵应战，还没摆好阵势，两军混战在一起。伏兵借助山的隐蔽而上，偷偷登上了北原，从高处冲下，驰压李密的兵营。
English: Li Mi sent out troops to fight, but they had not yet set up their positions, and the two armies fought together. The ambushed soldiers took advantage of the mountain's concealment to climb up, secretly ascended to the North Plain, rushed down from a height, and pressed Li Mi's barracks.

古文：营中乱，无能拒者，即入纵火。
现代文：营中大乱，没有人能够抵挡，伏兵就进入营中放火。
English: The camp was in chaos, no one could resist, and the ambushers entered the camp and set it on fire.

古文：密军大惊而溃，降其将张童兒、陈智略。
现代文：李密的军队十分惊恐，四散溃败，其将张童儿、陈智略投降。
English: Li Mi's army was very frightened, scattered and defeated, and he surrendered Zhang Tong'er and Chen Zhili.

古文：进下偃师。
现代文：进军攻下偃师。
English: Marching into the city, they captured the Shun division.

古文：初，世充兄伟及子玄应隋化及至东郡，密得而囚之于城中。
现代文：当初，王世充兄长和其子玄应跟随宇文化及到东郡，李密俘获他们，囚禁在城中。
English: At first, Wang Shicheng's elder brother and his son Xuan Ying followed Yu Wen and went to Dong County. Li Mi captured them and imprisoned them in the city.

古文：至是，尽获之。
现代文：至此，都全部获得释放。
English: So far, all of them have been released.

古文：又执密长史邴元真妻子、司马郑虔象之母及诸将子弟，皆抚慰之，各令潜呼其父兄。
现代文：又俘获李密的长史邴元真的妻子儿女，司马郑虔象的母亲和李密诸将官的子弟，都加以安抚慰问，让他们各自偷偷地呼唤他们的父兄归附。
English: He also comforted the wives and children of Li Mi's eldest son Shi Xuan Yuanzheng, the mother of Sima Zheng Qianxiang, and the children of Li Mi's generals, and let them secretly call for their fathers and brothers to join him.

古文：兵次洛口，元真、郑虔象等举仓城以应之。
现代文：军队到了洛口，邴元真、郑虔象等人献仓城以响应王世充。
English: When the army arrived in Lokou, Yu Yuanzheng, Zheng Qianxiang and others offered their warehouses in response to Wang Shichong.

古文：密以数十骑遁逸，世充收其众而还。
现代文：李密带着几十名骑兵逃遁，王世充收罗众兵而回。
English: Li Mi fled with dozens of cavalrymen, and Wang Shichong returned with a large number of soldiers.

古文：东尽于海，南至于江，悉来归附。
现代文：东边到大海，南边到长江，都来归附王世充。
English: From the east to the sea, and from the south to the Yangtze River, they all came to belong to Wang Shichong.

古文：世充又令韦节讽侗，拜己为太尉，置署官属，以尚书省为其府。
现代文：王世充又令韦节劝杨侗，任命自己为太尉，设置官署和属官，把尚书省作为自己的官府。
English: Wang Shichong also ordered Wei Jie to persuade Yang Jie to appoint himself as a captain, set up a government office and subordinate officials, and take Shangshu Province as his government office.

古文：寻自称郑王，遣其将高略帅师攻寿安，不利而旋。
现代文：不久，自称郑王，派遣部将高略率师进攻寿安，交战不利而回师。
English: Soon, he called himself Zheng Wang and dispatched a division to attack Shou'an at a high rate, but the engagement was unfavorable and he returned to his division.

古文：又帅师攻围谷州，三日而退。
现代文：又率师围攻谷州，三天就退兵了。
English: He also led his division to besiege Guzhou, but withdrew after three days.

古文：明年，自称相国，受九锡，备法物，是后不朝侗矣。
现代文：第二年，王世充自称相国，接受九锡，准备帝王仪仗队所用的器物，这之后就不朝拜杨侗了。
English: In the second year, Wang Shichong claimed to be a compatriot, accepted Jiuxi, and prepared the utensils used by the imperial guard of honor. After that, he did not worship Yang Xi.

古文：有道士桓法嗣者，自言解图谶，世充昵之。
现代文：有一道士名桓法嗣，自称能解图谶，王世充亲昵他。
English: Wang Shichong befriended a man named Huan Fa He, who claimed to be able to solve the riddle.

古文：法嗣乃上《孔子闭房记》，画作丈夫持一干以驱羊。
现代文：法嗣就上《孔子闭房记》，画的是一男子手持一杆驱赶羊。
English: "Confucius' Diary of a Locked Room" by Haji depicts a man driving away a sheep with a club in his hand.

古文：法嗣云： 杨，隋姓也。
现代文：法嗣说 ：杨是隋朝的姓。
English: Haji said: Yang is the surname of the Sui Dynasty.

古文：干一者，王字也。
现代文：干字加一，是王字。
English: If you add one to a dry character, it's a king character.

古文：王居杨后，明相国代隋为帝也。 
现代文：姓王的在姓杨的后面，明摆说是相国代替隋朝成为皇帝。 
English: The surname Wang, after the surname Yang, is said to have replaced the Sui Dynasty as emperor.

古文：又取《庄子人间世》、《德充符》二篇上之，法嗣释曰： 上篇言世，下篇言充，此则相国名矣。
现代文：又取《庄子》中的《人间世》和《德充符》二篇上奉王世充，法嗣解释说： 上篇说的是 世 ，下篇说的是 充 ，这就是相国的名字。
English: He also took "Human World" and "Dechongfu" from "Zhuang Zi" and presented them to Wang Shizhong. He explained: "The first part says "World," and the second part says "Chong," which are the names of the two countries.

古文：当德被人间，而应符命为天子也。 
现代文：应当恩德遍及人间，应符命而成为天子。 
English: Benevolence should pervade the human world, and he should fulfill his destiny and become the Son of Heaven.

古文：世充大悦曰： 此天命也。 
现代文：王世充非常高兴地说 ：这是天命啊！ 
English: Wang Shichong was very happy and said, "This is fate!"

古文：再拜受之。
现代文：再次拜谢，接受法嗣的上书。
English: Once again, I thank you and accept your appeal.

古文：即以法嗣为谏议大夫。
现代文：随即任命法嗣为谏议大夫。
English: Subsequently, the heir to the law was appointed as the doctor of deliberation.

古文：世充又罗取杂鸟，书帛系其颈，自言符命而散之于空。
现代文：王世充又用罗网捕获各种鸟，把帛书系在鸟颈上，自称上应符命而把它们放回天空。
English: Wang Shichong also caught various birds with a trawl net, tied a scribble on the bird's neck, and put them back into the sky, claiming that they should meet their fate.

古文：或有弹射得鸟而来献者，亦拜官爵。
现代文：有人用弹弓射得鸟而来进献，也授官封爵。
English: Someone who shot a bird with a slingshot came to make a donation, and was also awarded a knighthood.

古文：既而废侗，阴杀之，僭即皇帝位，建元曰开明，国号郑。
现代文：接着废除杨侗，将他私下杀害，自己超越本分即皇帝位，建元曰开明，国号为郑。
English: Then he abolished Yang Pi, killed him in private, and overstepped his duty, i.e. the emperor's position. The founding of the Yuan Dynasty was said to be enlightened, and the country's name was Zheng.

古文：大唐太宗帅师围之。世充频出兵，战辄不利，诸城相继降款。
现代文：大唐太宗率军围攻王世充，世充频繁出兵迎战，一交战就失利，许多城池相继投降。
English: Datang Taizong led the army to besiege Wang Shichong, Shichong frequently sent troops to fight, one battle was lost, and many cities surrendered one after another.

古文：世充窘迫，遣使请救于窦建德，建德率兵援之。
现代文：王世充十分困窘，派遣使者向窦建德求救，窦建德率兵救援。
English: Wang Shichong was very embarrassed and sent an envoy to Dou Jiande for help. Dou Jiande led the rescue.

古文：至武牢，太宗破之，禽建德以诣城下。
现代文：兵至武牢，太宗大败其军，擒获窦建德来城下。
English: The soldiers went to the military prison, Taizong defeated his army and captured Dou Jiande, who came to the castle.

古文：世充将溃围而出，诸将莫有应之者，于是出降。
现代文：王世充准备突出重围逃跑，众将没有人响应他，于是出城投降。
English: Wang Shichong prepared to break out of the encirclement and escape, but no one responded to him, so he left the city and surrendered.

古文：至长安，为仇家所杀。
现代文：到了长安，被仇人杀害。
English: In Chang'an, he was killed by the enemy.

