古文：伤寒，阴阳易之为病，其人身体重，少气，少腹里急，或引阴中拘挛，热上冲胸，头重不欲举，眼中生花，膝胫拘急者，烧裩散主之。
现代文：伤寒病后因男女交接而发生的阴阳易病，表现为身体沉重，气少不足以息，小腹挛急疼痛，甚或牵引阴部挛急疼痛，热气上冲至胸部，头重不能抬起，眼睛发花，膝与小腿肚拘急痉挛，用烧裤散主治。
English: After typhoid fever, due to the male-female sexual intercourse, the yin and yang are susceptible to disease, which is manifested as heavy body, shortness of breath, acute pain in the small abdomen, even acute pain in the anus, hot air rushing to the chest, unable to lift the weight of the head, eyes blooming, urgent cramps in the knees and calves, and treatment with hot pants.

古文：烧裩散方
现代文：烧裤散方
English: Simmered Pants Spread

古文：右取妇人中裩近隐处，剪烧灰，以水和服方寸匕，日三服。
现代文：妇人内裤，在靠隐蔽处剪取一块，烧成灰以上一味药，用水冲服一药匙，一日服三次。
English: women's panties, cut off a piece at the hiding place, burned to ashes or more than a spoonful of medicine, washed with water, taken three times a day.

古文：小便即利，阴头微肿，则愈。
现代文：服后小便很快通畅、阴茎头部稍肿的，这是疾病将要痊愈之兆。
English: After taking the medicine, urination is fast and smooth, and the head of the penis is slightly swollen, which is a sign that the disease will be cured.

古文：妇人病，取男子裩当烧灰。
现代文：如果是妇女患病，则剪取男人内裤烧灰服用。
English: If it is a woman who is ill, the man's underpants are cut off and burned.

古文：大病差后，劳复者，枳实栀子汤主之。
现代文：伤寒大病初愈，因劳累过度而复发，症见发热、心烦、脘腹胀满的，用枳实栀子豉汤主治。
English: If a typhoid serious illness has just begun to heal, but has relapsed due to overwork, and the symptoms are fever, upset stomach, and bloated abdomen, the soup made from bonito flakes should be used as the main treatment.

古文：若有宿食者，加大黄如博棋子大五六枚。枳实栀子豉汤方
现代文：枳实栀子豉汤方枳实三枚，炙栀子十四个，剖开豆豉一升，布包取淘米水七升，空煮至四升，加入枳实、栀子，煎煮成二升，再加入豆豉，煮五、六滚，去掉药渣，分两次温服。
English: Stewed three pieces of bean paste, roasted fourteen pieces of bean paste, opened the bean paste one liter, took seven liters of rice water from the cloth bag, boiled to four liters, added the bean paste, the bean paste, boiled to two liters, then added the bean paste, boiled five or six times, removed the drug residue, divided into two warm clothes.

古文：枳实三枚栀子十四枚豉一升右三味，以清浆水七升，空煮取四升，内枳实、栀子，煮取二升，下豉，更煮五六沸，去滓，温分再服，复令微似汗。伤寒差已后，更发热者，小柴胡汤主之。脉浮者，以汗解之；脉沉实者，以下解之。
现代文：服药后，应复盖衣被，使病人微微出汗。如果内有宿食、大便不通的，可加围棋子大小的大黄五六颗，服药后就会痊愈。伤寒病，病已痊愈，又再发热，如果兼见少阳脉证的，用小柴胡汤主治；如果兼见脉浮的，用发汗法以解表祛邪；如果兼见脉沉实有力的，用攻下法祛除里实。
English: After taking the medicine, the patient should be covered with a quilt to make the patient sweat slightly. If there is stale food in it and the stool does not pass, five or six rhubarb the size of a chess piece can be added, and it will be cured after taking the medicine. For typhoid fever, if the disease has been cured and the fever occurs again, if there is evidence of a weak yang vein, it should be mainly treated with a small chaihu decoction; if there is a weak pulse, it should be solved by sweating; if there is a strong pulse, it should be removed by tapping.

古文：大病差后，从腰以下有水气者，牡蛎泽泻散主之。
现代文：患伤寒大病，痊愈后，自腰以下出现水肿、小便不通畅的，用牡蛎泽泻散主治。
English: If you are seriously ill with typhoid fever, and after recovery, you have edema from the waist down, and your urine does not flow smoothly, use oyster laxative to treat it.

古文：牡蛎泽泻散方
现代文：牡蛎泽泻散方
English: Oyster miso soup

古文：牡蛎泽泻栝蒌根蜀漆葶苈商陆根海藻以上各等分右七味，异捣下筛为散，更入臼中治之，白饮和服方寸匕。
现代文：牡蛎炒泽泻蜀漆用温水洗，去掉腥味葶苈子炒商陆根炒海藻用水洗，去掉咸味瓜萎根各等分以上七味药，分别捣细过筛为散，再放入药臼中研治。每次用米汤调服一方寸匕，每日服三次。
English: Wash oysters with warm water to remove oyster sauce, wash seaweed with warm water to remove oyster sauce, remove salted melon wilted root with more than equal parts of seven-flavor medicine, and separately mash through a sieve to disperse, and then put into a mortar to cure. Each time, mix with rice soup to serve one inch of ginger, and serve three times a day.

古文：小便利，止后服，日三服。
现代文：服后小便通畅的，停止继续服药。
English: If you urinate freely after taking the medicine, stop taking the medicine.

古文：大病瘥后，喜唾，久不了了者，胸上有寒，当以丸药温之，宜理中丸。
现代文：大病愈后，总爱泛吐唾沫，不能自制，长期迁延不愈的，这是脾虚不能摄津、寒饮停聚胸膈所致，应当用丸药温补，可用理中丸。
English: After recovering from a serious illness, people tend to spit profusely, cannot control themselves, and do not recover for a long time. This is caused by the inability to regulate the spleen and the stagnation of cold drinks in the chest and abdomen. It should be warmed up with a pill, and a rational pill can be used.

古文：伤寒解后，虚羸少气，气逆欲吐者，竹叶石膏汤主之。
现代文：伤寒热病，大热已解，余热未尽，气阴两伤，出现虚弱消瘦、气少不足以息、气逆要呕吐的，用竹叶石膏汤主治。
English: For typhoid fever, if the fever has been resolved, the residual heat is not exhausted, the qi and yin are both injured, weakness and emaciation appear, the qi is not enough to breathe, and the qi should be vomited, use bamboo leaf gypsum soup.

古文：竹叶石膏汤方
现代文：竹叶石膏汤方
English: Bamboo leaf gypsum soup

古文：竹叶二把石膏一斤半夏半升麦门冬一升人参三两甘草二两粳米半升右七味，以水一斗，煮取六升，去滓，内粳米，煮米熟，汤成，去米，温服一升，日三服。
现代文：竹叶二把石膏一斤半夏半升，用水洗麦门冬一升，去心人参二两甘草二两，炙粳米半斤以上七味药，用水一斗，先加入前六味药煎煮至六升，去掉药渣，再加入粳米煎煮，待米熟汤成，去掉米，每次温服一升，每日服三次。
English: Bamboo leaves, two handfuls of gypsum, half a kilo, half a litre in summer, washed wheat, half a litre in winter, de-pickled ginseng, two handfuls of licorice, roasted glutinous rice, more than half a kilo of seven-flavour medicine, one bucket of water, first add the first six-flavour medicine, boil it to six litres, remove the residue, then add boiled glutinous rice, wait for the rice to become cooked, remove the rice, warm-serve one litre each time, serve three times a day.

古文：病人脉已解，而日暮微烦，以病新差，人强与谷，脾胃气尚弱，不能消谷，故令微烦，损谷则愈。
现代文：病人病脉已解，脉呈平和之象，却每于傍晚时分出现轻微的心烦，这是疾病刚愈，脾胃机能还很虚弱，消化力差，由于勉强进食，不能消化的缘故。此时，只须适当减少饮食，就会痊愈。
English: The patient's disease has been resolved, the pulse is peaceful, but every evening there is a slight upset. This is due to the fact that the disease has just been cured, the spleen and stomach function is still very weak, and the digestion is poor, due to the reluctance to eat and the inability to digest. At this time, it is only necessary to reduce the diet appropriately, and it will be cured.

