古文：仇士良，字匡美，循州兴宁人。
现代文：仇士良，字匡美，循州兴宁人。
English: Qiu Shiliang, also known as Kuangmei, was from Xunzhou Xingning.

古文：顺宗时得侍东宫。
现代文：顺宗时在东宫侍候太子。
English: Shunsong was waiting for the crown prince in the East Palace.

古文：宪宗嗣位，再迁内给事，出监平卢、凤翔等军。
现代文：宪宗即位，升为内给事，出而监督平卢、凤翔等军。
English: Gensong ascended to the throne, was promoted to the position of an internal official, and came out to supervise the armies of Pinglu and Fengxiang.

古文：尝次敷水驿，与御史元稹争舍上厅，击伤稹。
现代文：曾夜宿敷水驿，与御史元稹争住上房，将元稹打伤。
English: Once, he lodged in Mizukuchi's room at night and fought with Goshi Motomine to stay in the upper room, injuring Motomine.

古文：中丞王播奏御史、中使以先后至得正寝，请如旧章。
现代文：中丞王播上奏说御史和中使应以到达先后来定谁住上房。要求皇帝按旧章处理。
English: Chujo Wang broadcasted a report saying that the imperial historian and the Chinese envoy should arrive first and then decide who would live in the house. He asked the emperor to deal with it according to the old chapter.

古文：帝不直稹，斥其官。
现代文：皇帝不为元稹申理，斥了他的官。
English: The emperor did not approve of Yuan Shao and dismissed his officials.

古文：元和、大和间，数任内外五坊使，秋按鹰内畿，所至邀吏供饷，暴甚寇盗。
现代文：从元和元年到大和年间，仇士良多次任内外五坊使，秋季到内畿试鹰，所到之处，要官吏供饷，其凶暴甚于盗寇。
English: From the Yuan and the first year of the year to the years of the Great Harmony, Qiu Shiliang served as the envoy of the five provinces at home and abroad for many times. In the autumn, he went to Nanking to test the eagle. Wherever he went, he needed officials to provide him with food, and his ferocity was worse than that of a robber.

古文：文宗与李训欲杀王守澄，以士良素与守澄隙，故擢左神策军中尉兼左街功德使，使相糜肉。
现代文：文宗即位后，曾与李训商议，欲杀死王守澄。因仇士良一向与王守澄有矛盾，所以将仇士良升为左神策军中尉兼左街功德使，让他们相互排挤。
English: After Emperor Wenzong ascended to the throne, he discussed with Li Xun to kill Wang Shoucheng. Since Qiu Shiliang had always been in conflict with Wang Shoucheng, he promoted Qiu Shiliang to the rank of lieutenant of Zuo Sheng Cho's army and Zuo Jie meritorious envoy, so that they would crowd each other out.

古文：已而训谋悉逐中官，士良悟其谋，与右神策军中尉鱼弘志、大盈库使宋守义挟帝还宫。
现代文：后来，李训想把所有的宦官都驱逐掉。仇士良发觉了他的计划，就与右神策军中尉鱼弘志、大盈库使宋守义挟持皇帝从含元殿回宫。
English: Later, Li Xun wanted to expel all the eunuchs. When Qiu Shiliang discovered his plan, he, together with Yu Hongzhi, a lieutenant of the Right Divine Providence Army, and Song Shouyi, an envoy of the Grand Treasury, seized the emperor from the Han Yuan Palace and returned to the palace.

古文：王涯、舒元舆已就缚，士良肆胁辱，令自承反，示牒于朝。
现代文：王涯、舒元舆已被抓获，仇士良百般胁迫凌辱，要他们自己承认欲造反，把他们写的坦白交代在朝中传观。
English: Wang Ya and Shu Yuan Mei have been captured, and their enemies have coerced and humiliated them in all kinds of ways, demanding that they admit their desire to rebel and share their written confessions with the central government.

古文：于时莫能辨其情，皆谓诚反，士良因纵兵捕，无轻重悉毙两军，公卿半空。
现代文：那时没人能认真调查辨别，看了他们的交代，都说的确是他们谋反。仇士良借此纵兵滥捕，横加屠戮，不管罪轻罪重，不管有罪无罪，全由两军杀害，朝廷公卿几乎一半被杀。
English: At that time, no one could seriously investigate and distinguish, and after reading their accounts, they all said that it was indeed they who plotted the rebellion. Qiu Shiliang used this to carry out indiscriminate arrests and massacres, regardless of the severity of the crime, regardless of guilt or innocence, all were killed by the two armies, and almost half of the court nobles were killed.

古文：事平，加特进、右骁卫大将军，弘志右卫上将军兼中尉，守义右领军卫上将军。
现代文：事情结束以后，加封仇士良为特进、右骁卫大将军，封鱼弘志为右卫上将军兼中尉，封宋守义为右领军卫上将军。
English: After the incident was over, Quchishiliang was given the additional titles of "special envoy" and "major general of the Right Division of the Middle Palace Guards," Yu Hongzhi was given the title of "senior general and lieutenant of the Right Division of the Middle Palace Guards," and Song Shouyi was given the title of "senior general of the Right Division of the Middle Palace Guards."

古文：李石辅政，棱棱有风岸，士良与论议数屈，深忌之，使贼刺石于亲仁里，马逸而免。
现代文：宰相李石辅政，严峻而有风节，仇士良多次与他议论朝事都辩不过他，心中十分忌恨，派刺客在亲仁里暗杀李石，马受惊奔驰回宅，才得免死。
English: The Prime Minister, Li Shih-kuo, was a stern and vengeful man. His enemy, Li Shiliang, argued with him many times about North Korean affairs, but he could not argue with him. His heart was full of hatred. He sent an assassin to assassinate Li Shih in his relatives' home. The horse was startled and galloped back home. Only then did he avoid death.

古文：石惧，辞位，士良益无惮。
现代文：李石害怕无辜丧生，坚持辞去宰相位，出京任荆南节度使。李石走后，仇士良更是肆无忌惮了。
English: Fearing that innocent lives would be lost, Li Shishi insisted on resigning his position as prime minister and leaving Beijing to become Jingnan's envoy to the festival. After Li Shishi left, Qiu Shiliang became even more unscrupulous.

古文：泽潞刘从谏本与训约诛郑注。
现代文：泽潞的昭义节度使刘从谏本来与李训相约诛杀郑注。
English: Zehuan's Zhao Yi Festival made Liu Conglu originally make an appointment with Li Xun to kill Zheng Zhu.

古文：及训死，愤士良得志，乃上书言： 王涯等八人皆宿儒大臣，愿保富贵，何苦而反。
现代文：及至李训被杀，刘从谏对仇士良的凶残及得志十分反感，于是上书皇帝： 王涯等八人都是学者大臣，即从为个人保富贵而言，也必不会谋反。
English: As far as Li Xun was killed, Liu Conglu was very disgusted with the viciousness and ambition of the enemy scholar, so he wrote to the emperor: Wang Ya and other eight people are scholars and ministers, that is, from the perspective of personal wealth preservation, they will not rebel.

古文：今大戮所加已不可追，而名之逆贼，含愤九泉。
现代文：如今身已被害，无法改变，但还要称他们为逆贼，他们定含恨九泉。
English: Now that they have been victimized, they cannot change, but they still call them traitors, and they are filled with hatred.

古文：不然，天下义夫节士，畏祸伏身，谁肯与陛下共治耶？ 
现代文：如不为他们昭雪恢复名誉，以后，天下的忠义之士高节亮风之人都畏祸远避，还有谁肯来与陛下共商治国大计呢？ 
English: If we do not restore the honor of them, in the future, the loyal people of the world will fear and shun, and who else will come to discuss the grand plan of governing the country with His Majesty?

古文：即以训所移书遣部将陈季卿以闻。
现代文：还将李训所写的文书等派部将陈季卿送上朝。
English: They also sent Chen Jieqing's documents and other materials written by Li Xun to the imperial court.

古文：季卿至，会石遇盗，京师扰，疑不敢进。
现代文：季卿来到京师，正碰上李石遇刺，京师骚动不安。
English: When Ji Qing came to Beijing Division, he came across the assassination of Li Shi, and Beijing Division was in turmoil.

古文：从谏大怒，杀季卿，腾书于朝。
现代文：陈季卿也疑虑重重，不敢进都。刘从谏大怒，一气之下杀了陈季卿，另派人飞驰送书入朝。
English: Chen Jiqing was also full of doubts and did not dare to enter the capital. Liu Conglu was furious and killed Chen Jiqing in a fit of rage. He also sent people to rush to send books to the North.

古文：又言： 臣与训诛注，以注本宦竖所提挈，不使闻知。
现代文：还上言说 ：臣与李训相约诛杀郑注，因为郑注本就是宦竖所提携的，不用告知陛下。
English: It was also said that the minister and Li Xun made an appointment to kill Zheng Zhu, because Zheng Zhu was the one who was affiliated with Zhu, so there was no need to inform His Majesty.

古文：今四方共传宰相欲除内官，而两军中尉闻，自救死，妄相杀戮，谓为反逆。
现代文：如今到处传言宰相要除尽内官，而两军中尉听说后，为图自救，竟然妄加杀戮，还说是铲除逆贼。
English: Now there are rumours everywhere that the prime minister wants to get rid of all the secretaries, and when the lieutenants of the two armies heard about it, in order to save themselves, they went so far as to kill, and they also said that they wanted to eradicate the traitors.

古文：有如大臣挟无将之谋，自宜执付有司，安有纵俘劫、横尸阙下哉？
现代文：即使有大臣心怀作乱之谋，也应该将他逮捕交与有司，岂有纵人随意抓杀以致横尸殿前的呢？
English: Even if there is a minister who is plotting to create a disturbance, he should be arrested and handed over to the authorities. Is it possible to arrest and kill someone at will, so that the corpse is lying in front of the palace?

古文：陛下视不及，听未闻也。
现代文：而陛下却看不到听不见。
English: Your Majesty, on the other hand, can neither see nor hear.

古文：且宦人根党蔓延在内，臣欲面陈，恐横遭戮害，谨修封疆，缮甲兵，为陛下腹心。
现代文：再说宦人根牵蔓延，党同友攀在宫内形成密网，臣本想当面陈述，但怕横遭毒害。臣当认真治理属地，缮甲练兵，做陛下的心腹。
English: Furthermore, it is said that the root of the scandal has spread, and party comrades have formed a secret network within the palace. The vassal originally wanted to make a statement in person, but was afraid of being poisoned. The vassal should seriously govern the territory, train soldiers, and be the confidant of His Majesty.

古文：如奸臣难制，誓以死清君侧。 
现代文：如果奸臣难以制伏，臣誓以死入朝清君侧。 
English: If the treacherous vassal is difficult to subdue, the vassal will swear by death to side with the Emperor.

古文：书闻，人人传观。士良沮恐，即进从谏检校司徒，欲弭其言。
现代文：刘从谏的奏书送达，人人传观，仇士良颇为震恐沮丧，乃建议将刘从谏升任检校司徒，想堵塞他的进言。
English: When Liu Conglu's report was delivered, everyone was watching, and Qiu Shiliang was quite shocked and dismayed. He suggested that Liu Conglu be promoted to the post of school inspector, and wanted to block his input.

古文：从谏知可动，复言： 臣所陈系国大体，可听，则宜洗宥涯等罪；不可听，则赏不宜妄出。
现代文：刘从谏估量形势可动，再上书说： 臣所陈述的都维系国家大体，如有说得对的，则应该为王涯等人昭雪平冤；如说得不对，则不应该给我奖赏。
English: Liu Conglu estimated that the situation could be moved, and then wrote: What the minister has stated is in line with the country as a whole. If it is correct, it should be a vindication for Wang Ya and others; if it is not correct, it should not be rewarded to me.

古文：安有死冤不申，而生者荷禄？ 
现代文：哪有死者不申而生者借之而得官的道理呢？ 
English: Is there any reason why the dead should not speak and the living should take advantage of this to gain office?

古文：固辞。
现代文：坚持推辞赏赐。
English: Insist on refusing the reward.

古文：累上书，暴指士良等罪。
现代文：他还多次上书，揭发仇士良等人的罪行。
English: He also wrote several times to expose the crimes of Qiu Shiliang and others.

古文：帝虽不能去，然倚其言差自强。
现代文：皇帝虽然无力排除仇士良等宦官，但终究因刘从谏而使仇士良等有所收敛。
English: Although the emperor was powerless to expel eunuchs such as Qiu Shiliang, Liu Conglu finally managed to restrain Qiu Shiliang.

古文：自是郁郁不乐，两军球猎宴会绝矣。
现代文：从此，皇帝郁郁不乐，两军的戏狩猎宴会等事也停了。
English: From then on, the emperor was depressed and unhappy, and the hunting banquets of the two armies also stopped.

古文：开成四年，苦风痹，少间，召宰相见延英，退坐思政殿，顾左右曰： 所直学士谓谁？ 
现代文：开成四年，皇帝染风疾，病略见好，召宰相到延英殿朝见。见毕，皇帝退坐思政殿，问左右说： 当班的学士是谁？ 
English: In the fourth year of the emperor's reign, the emperor fell ill with a cold, and after a brief recovery, he summoned the prime minister to the Yan Ying palace for a meeting. Seeing this, the emperor withdrew to the Sisi palace and asked: "Who is the scholar in your class?"

古文：曰： 周墀也。 
现代文：左右回答： 是周墀。 
English: Left and right answers: It is Zhou Yong.

古文：召至，帝曰： 自尔所况，朕何如主？ 
现代文：乃召周墀入殿，皇帝说： 就你的看法说，我可比前代哪个君主？ 
English: Inviting Zhou Jun into the hall, the emperor said, "In your opinion, which previous monarch can I be compared to?

古文：墀再拜曰： 臣不足以知，然天下言陛下尧、舜主也。 
现代文：周墀跪拜说 ：臣才不足以判断，不过我听天下人都说陛下可比古时的尧舜。 
English: Zhou Ye knelt down and said, "It is not enough to be a minister to judge, but I have heard from people all over the world that Your Majesty is comparable to the emperors of ancient times."

古文：帝曰： 所以问，谓与周赧、汉献孰愈？ 
现代文：皇帝说： 我怎敢上比尧舜，所以要问你，你看我比周赧王、汉献帝如何？ 
English: The emperor said, "How dare I compare myself to Zhou Enlai, so I would like to ask you, how do you think I compare to Zhou Enlai and Han Xiandi?"

古文：墀惶骇曰： 陛下之德，成、康、文、景未足比，何自方二主哉？ 
现代文：周墀吓了一跳，说： 陛下圣德，周成王、周康王、汉文帝、汉景帝虽比不上，何至于自比那两个亡国之君呢？ 
English: Zhou Yu was startled and said: Your Majesty, although Zhou Cheng Rong, Zhou Kang Rong, Han Wen Di and Han Jing Di are not comparable, how about comparing yourself to those two ruined kings?

古文：帝曰： 赧、献受制强臣，今朕受制家奴，自以不及远矣！ 
现代文：皇帝说： 周赧王、汉献帝不过是受制于强藩，今日我却受家奴钳制，只怕比周赧王、汉献帝还不如呢。 
English: The emperor said: King Zhou Enlai and Emperor Han Xiandi were only subject to the strong domain, but today I am subject to the domestic slave system. I am afraid that I am not as good as King Zhou Enlai and Emperor Han Xiandi.

古文：因泣下，墀伏地流涕。
现代文：说着泪下，周墀也跪伏流泪。
English: Speaking through tears, Zhou Qi also knelt down and shed tears.

古文：始，枢密使刘弘逸薛季棱、宰相李珏杨嗣复谋奉太子监国，士良与弘志议更立，珏不从，乃矫诏立颍王为皇太弟，士良以兵奉迎，而太子还为陈王。
现代文：后来就不再朝见大臣，终致病危。起先，枢密使刘弘逸、薛季眣，宰相李珏、杨嗣复打算奉太子监国。仇士良及鱼弘志则商议改立太子。李珏不答应。仇士良竟然颁发伪诏，立穆宗第五子颍王鏶为皇太弟，暂领军国大事，仇士良派兵奉迎颍王，而太子依然还为陈王。
English: At first, the Privy Council envoys Liu Hongyi and Xue Jizhe, and the prime ministers Li Lan and Yang Shifu planned to appoint the crown prince as the overseer of the country. Qiu Shiliang and Yu Hongzhi discussed the appointment of the crown prince. Li Lan did not agree. Qiu Shiliang even issued a false edict, appointing the fifth son of Mu Zong, Zang Wangtao, as the crown prince, temporarily leading the military affairs of the country. Qiu Shiliang sent soldiers to welcome Zang Wang, but the crown prince was still Chen Wang.

古文：初，庄恪太子薨，杨贤妃谋引安王，不克。
现代文：当初，庄恪太子去世，杨贤妃想立安王溶为太子，没有成功。
English: At first, Prince Zhuang Jia passed away, and Yang Xianfei wanted to make An Wangyong the prince, but it was not successful.

古文：武宗已立，士良发其事，劝帝除之以绝人望，故王、妃皆死。
现代文：武宗即位，仇士良又提起此事，劝皇帝除掉这三人，武宗应允，于是杨贤妃、安王溶、太子陈王成美三人皆遭赐死。
English: When Emperor Wuzong ascended the throne, his enemy Liang brought up the matter again, urging the emperor to get rid of the three, and Emperor Wuzong agreed. As a result, Yang Xianfei, An Wangyong, and Prince Chen Wangchengmi were all put to death.

古文：士良迁骠骑大将军，封楚国公，弘志韩国公，实封户三百。
现代文：仇士良升任骠骑大将军，封爵楚国公，封鱼弘志韩国公，实封三百户。
English: Qiu Shiliang was promoted to General of the Horse Cavalry, given the title of Duke of Chu Province, and given the title of Prince of South Korea, with a total of 300 households.

古文：俄而珏、嗣复罢去，弘逸、季棱诛矣。
现代文：不久，李珏、杨嗣复罢官，刘弘逸、薛季眣被杀。
English: Soon after, Li Yu and Yang Shifu were dismissed from their posts, and Liu Hongyi and Xue Jizhe were killed.

古文：帝明断，虽士良有援立功，内实嫌之，阳示尊宠。
现代文：皇帝沉毅果断，喜怒皆不形于色。仇士良虽有帮他取得帝位之功，但他心中实不喜欢仇士良，只是表面上尊宠。
English: The emperor was stoic and resolute, and his emotions were indifferent. Although Qiu Shiliang had helped him gain the imperial throne, he did not really like Qiu Shiliang in his heart, but only respected him on the surface.

古文：李德裕得君，士良愈恐。
现代文：宰相李德裕得到皇帝的信任，仇士良心中虚怯。
English: Premier Li Deyu gained the emperor's trust, and the enemy's conscience was shaken.

古文：会昌二年，上尊号，士良宣言 宰相作赦书，减禁军缣粮刍菽 以摇怨，语两军曰： 审有是，楼前可争。 
现代文：会昌二年，皇帝将受尊号，仇士良当着众人扬言： 宰相做赦书，将要削减军人衣粮及马饲料。 以此来煽动怨恨，他还对两军说： 如果的确如此，宣布的那天，大家可在楼前争议。 
English: In the second year of Huichang, when the emperor was to receive the title of honor, Qiu Shiliang threatened in front of everyone: The prime minister will make a pardon letter and will cut the soldiers' clothing, grain and horse feed. In order to incite resentment, he also said to the two armies: If this is indeed the case, on the day of the announcement, everyone can dispute in front of the building.

古文：德裕以白帝，命使者谕神策军曰： 赦令自朕意，宰相何豫？尔渠敢是？ 
现代文：李德裕将情况报告皇帝，皇帝派使者去晓谕神策军 ：赦令是我的意思，不是出于宰相，你们怎么敢这样？ 
English: Li Deyu reported the situation to the emperor, and the emperor sent an envoy to tell the Shinsengumi: "The pardon order was my idea, not the prime minister's. How dare you do this?

古文：士乃怗然。
现代文：士兵们都释然服帖。
English: The soldiers obeyed without hesitation.

古文：士良惶惑不自安。
现代文：仇士良则惶惑不安。
English: Qiu Shiliang was bewildered and anxious.

古文：明年，进观军容使，兼统左右军，以疾辞，罢为内侍监，知省事。
现代文：第二年，晋升仇士良为观军容使，兼统左右军，仇士良推托有病辞谢，就罢官仅任内侍监，主管省事。
English: In the second year, Qiu Shiliang was promoted to the position of observer and envoy of the army, and he also unified the left and right armies. However, Qiu Shiliang resigned on the pretext that he was ill, and he was dismissed from his post, and he was only appointed as an internal chamberlain, in charge of provincial affairs.

古文：固请老，诏可。
现代文：仇士良坚持告老，要求退休，皇帝同意。
English: Qiu Shiliang insisted on retiring and asked to retire, and the emperor agreed.

古文：寻卒，赠扬州大都督。
现代文：不久去世，追赠扬州大都督。
English: He died soon after and was posthumously awarded the title of Yangzhou Grand Governor.

古文：士良之老，中人举送还第，谢曰： 诸君善事天子，能听老夫语乎？ 
现代文：仇士良告老还乡，所有的宦官都送他回宅，仇士良感谢说： 各位好生侍奉天子，肯听我一句劝告吗？ 
English: Qiu Shiliang returned to his hometown, and all the eunuchs sent him back home. Qiu Shiliang thanked them and said, "You are all good at serving the Son of Heaven. Will you listen to a word of advice from me?

古文：众唯唯。
现代文：众人洗耳恭听。
English: Everyone listened attentively.

古文：士良曰： 天子不可令闲暇，暇必观书，见儒臣，则又纳谏，智深虑远，减玩好，省游幸，吾属恩且薄而权轻矣。
现代文：仇士良说 ：天子，不能让他有闲暇，他一闲暇就一定看书，见文臣，就会接纳劝谏，就会深谋远虑，就会减少娱乐，就会减少出游，我辈人就会宠薄而权轻了。
English: Qiu Shiliang said: Son of Heaven, he should not be allowed to have leisure. As soon as he has leisure, he will surely read books. If he sees a scholar, he will accept advice, he will think deeply, he will reduce entertainment, he will reduce travel, and our generation will be pampered and have less power.

古文：为诸君计，莫若殖财货，盛鹰马，日以球猎声色蛊其心，极侈靡，使悦不知息，则必斥经术，阇外事，万机在我，恩泽权力欲焉往哉？ 
现代文：为你们诸位打算，最好是广收珍宝，盛养鹰马，每天都以猎声色迷惑皇上的心，让他穷极侈靡，让他玩得不知疲倦，那他就会讨厌治国之术，不知外界情况。万种机要全在我手，恩泽和权力还能跑得了吗？ 
English: To plan for all of you, it is best to collect a wide range of treasures, raise eagles and eagles, and confuse the emperor's heart with the sound of hunting every day, let him be extremely extravagant, let him play tirelessly, then he will hate the art of governing the country, not knowing the external situation. All kinds of machines should be in my hands, can grace and power still run?

古文：众再拜。
现代文：众人再拜称谢。
English: Everyone thanked him again.

古文：士良杀二王、一妃、四宰相，贪酷二十馀年，亦有术自将，恩礼不衰云。
现代文：仇士良杀了两个王、一个妃、四个宰相，贪鄙残酷二十多年，但也有办法自我控制，所以皇帝的恩宠礼遇始终不衰。
English: Qiu Shiliang killed two kings, a princess, and four prime ministers. He was greedy and cruel for more than twenty years, but he also had the means to control himself, so the emperor's grace and courtesy never faltered.

古文：死之明年，有发其家藏兵数千物，诏削官爵，籍其家。
现代文：他死的第二年，有人揭发他家私藏兵器几千件，于是诏令削其官爵，抄没其家。
English: In the second year of his death, someone revealed that his family had thousands of weapons in their private collection, so the imperial edict stripped him of his title and confiscated his home.

古文：始，士良、弘志愤文宗与李训谋，屡欲废帝。
现代文：当初，仇士良、鱼弘志恨文宗，与李训谋划，打算废掉皇帝。
English: At first, Qiu Shiliang and Yu Hongzhi hated Wenzong and plotted with Li Xun to depose the emperor.

古文：崔慎由为翰林学士，直夜未半，有中使召入，至秘殿，见士良等坐堂上，帷帐周密，谓慎由曰： 上不豫已久，自即位，政令多荒阙，皇太后有制更立嗣君，学士当作诏。 
现代文：那时，崔慎由任翰林学士，值班到半夜时，有中使来召他入内，到了秘殿，见仇士良等人坐在堂上，帷帐遮得严严密密。仇士良对崔慎由说 ：皇上病了已很久了。自从他即位以来，政令多荒缺。皇太后有制，要改立嗣君，你是学士应当写诏书。 
English: At that time, Cui Shanyu was on duty as a scholar of Hanlin and was on duty until midnight, when a middle-ranking envoy came to call him in. When he arrived at the secret hall, he saw Qiu Shiliang and others sitting in the hall, tightly covered by the curtain. Qiu Shiliang said to Cui Shanyu: The emperor has been ill for a long time. Since he ascended the throne, there have been a lot of decrees. The empress dowager has a system to appoint a successor. If you are a scholar, you should write an edict.

古文：慎由惊曰： 上高明之德在天下，安可轻议？
现代文：崔慎由大惊，说： 皇上高明之德天下皆闻，怎可以随便议论？
English: Cui Sheng was taken aback and said, "The Emperor's high moral character is known all over the world. How can we talk about it casually?

古文：慎由亲族中表千人，兄弟群从且三百，何可与覆族事？
现代文：我慎由亲族有上千人，兄弟群从也近三百人，怎可参与灭族之事？
English: I have over a thousand relatives and nearly three hundred brothers and sisters. How can I participate in the genocide?

古文：虽死不承命。 
现代文：我今日虽死也不敢从命。 
English: Even if I died today, I wouldn't dare to take my own life.

古文：士良等默然，久乃启后户，引至小殿，帝在焉。
现代文：仇士良等默不做声，好久好久，才打开后门，领他到一个小殿，皇帝在那里。
English: Qiu Shiliang waited in silence for a long time before he opened the back door and led him to a small hall, where the emperor was.

古文：士良等历阶数帝过失，帝俯首。
现代文：仇士良等上阶指责皇帝的过失，皇帝低头不语。
English: Qiu Shiliang and other high-ranking officials accused the emperor of negligence, and the emperor bowed his head and said nothing.

古文：既而士良指帝曰： 不为学士，不得更坐此。 
现代文：后来，仇士良指着皇帝说： 要不是因为崔学士，你不会再坐在这里了。 
English: Later, Qiu Shiliang pointed his finger at the emperor and said, "If it wasn't for Cui Baozhang, you wouldn't be sitting here anymore.

古文：乃送慎由出，戒曰： 毋泄，祸及尔宗。 
现代文：最后送崔慎由出来，告诫他说： 今天的事不许泄露，当心招祸你全族。 
English: Finally, he sent Cui Shanyu out and warned him, "Don't let today's events leak out. Beware of bringing disaster to your entire family."

古文：慎由记其事，藏箱枕间，时人莫知。
现代文：崔慎由把这事记载下来，藏在箱底，当时人没一个知道。
English: Cui Shanyu recorded the incident and hid it in the bottom of the box. No one knew about it at the time.

古文：将没，以授其子胤，故胤恶中官，终讨除之，盖祸原于士良、弘志云。
现代文：在他将死时，把它交给儿子崔胤。所以崔胤十分厌恶中官，终究要把他们除尽。其祸根就在于仇士良和鱼弘志等人。
English: When he was about to die, he gave it to his son, Choi In. Therefore, Choi In had a strong aversion to middle-ranking officers and eventually wanted to exterminate them. The root of his evil lay in his enemies, such as Kuchishiryo and Ushihiroshi.

