古文：冯子曰：智非语也，语智非智也，喋喋者必穷，期期者有庸，丈夫者何必有口哉!
现代文：原文冯梦龙说：智慧不等于言语本身，言语上的聪明机巧不等于一个人有智慧，喋喋不休的人一定不会有好结果，反倒是那些看似不能言的人能够成功，因此智慧的人，又何需机巧的语言能力呢？
English: Original Feng Menglong said: "Wisdom is not equal to language itself. Verbal cleverness is not equal to a person having wisdom. People who chatter incessantly will not have good results. On the contrary, those who seem to be unable to speak can succeed. Therefore, why do wise people need clever language skills?

古文：固也，抑有异焉。两舌相战，理者必伸；两理相质，辩者先售。
现代文：然而也有另一个看待这个问题的角度，两方不同的言论激辩，有理的一方当然会获胜；两种不同的道理互相质难，善于辩解的一方会占得先机。
English: However, there is another way of looking at this issue. Two different sides of speech are arguing, and the reasonable side will of course win; two different reasons are difficult to challenge each other, and the one who is good at defending will take the lead.

古文：子房以之师，仲连以之高，庄生以之旷达，仪、衍以之富贵，端木子以之列于四科，孟氏以之承三圣。
现代文：历史上张良因此成为王者之师，鲁仲连因此获得了高名，庄子因此而有旷达的哲学，张仪、公孙衍因此而享有荣华富贵，子贡因此成为孔子的学生，孟子因此继承了儒家思想。
English: Historically, Zhang Liang became the king's teacher for this reason, Lu Zhonglian became famous for this reason, Zhuo Zi had a broad philosophy for this reason, Zhang Yi and Gong Sunyan enjoyed glory and wealth for this reason, Zigong became a student of Confucius for this reason, and Mencius inherited Confucianism for this reason.

古文：故一言而或重于九鼎，单说而或强于十万师，片纸书而或贤于十部从事，口舌之权顾不重与？ 谈言微中，足以解纷 ； 言之无文，行之不远 。
现代文：因此，有时一句话比朝廷的权威还重要，有时一个游说可以敌过十万军队，有时一纸建言比所有的州郡佐吏的辛苦工作还要有用，又怎么能不重视言语呢？精微的言论，可以解开纷杂的困境。语言虽然有道理但是没有文采，就不会流传久远。
English: Therefore, sometimes a word is more important than the authority of the imperial court, sometimes a lobby can defeat a hundred thousand troops, sometimes a piece of advice is more useful than all the hard work of state and county officials, and how can we not pay attention to words? Subtle speech can solve complex dilemmas. Language, although reasonable, but without literary style, will not spread for a long time.

古文：君子一言以为智，一言以为不智。
现代文：而言语是否有智慧也可以看出来，内心有充溢的智慧，自然会生出智慧的言语来。
English: And whether the words are wise or not can also be seen. If there is abundant wisdom in the heart, it will naturally produce wise words.

古文：智泽于内，言溢于外。《诗》曰： 唯其有之，是以似之。 
现代文：《诗经》说： 因为内在是这个样子，因此表象看来是这样的。 
English: The "Song of Songs" says: Because the inside is like this, so the appearance looks like this.

古文：此之谓也。
现代文：说的就是这个意思。
English: This is exactly what is happening.

