古文：○真腊真腊国，在林邑西南，本扶南之属国也。
现代文：真腊国在林邑国的西南方，本来是扶南国的附属国。
English: Jinla Province is located in the southwestern part of Linyi Province. Originally, it was a subordinate province of Funan Province.

古文：去日南郡舟行六十日，而南接车渠国，西有硃江国。
现代文：离日南郡有乘船走六十天的路程，南与车渠国接壤，西与朱江国相邻。
English: It is a sixty-day journey by boat from Nichinan County, which is bordered by Zhucheng Province in the south and Zhujiang Province in the west.

古文：其王姓刹利氏，名质多斯那。
现代文：国王姓刹利，名叫质多斯那。
English: The king's name was Zacharias, and his name was Zedekiah.

古文：自其祖渐已强盛，至质多斯那，遂兼扶南而有之。
现代文：从他的祖父开始逐渐强大兴旺起来，到质多斯那时，就兼并了扶南国而归为己有。
English: From the time of his grandfather, it gradually became powerful and prosperous, and by the time of Gedos, it had annexed Funan Province and made it its own.

古文：死，子伊奢那先代立。居伊奢那城，郭下二万余家。
现代文：质多斯那死后，他的儿子伊奢那先继承王位，居住在伊奢那城，城中共有两万多户人家。
English: After the death of Gedaliah, his son Elkanah succeeded to the throne and lived in the city of Elkanah, which had more than twenty thousand households.

古文：城中有一大堂，是王听政之所。
现代文：城中有一座大殿堂，这是国王听政的地方。
English: There is a large hall in the city, which is where the king listens to the government.

古文：总大城三十，城有数千家，各有部帅，官名与林邑同。
现代文：全国有大城三十座，每城有几千户人家，各有官员，官职名称与林邑国的官职名称相同。
English: There are 30 large cities across the country, each with thousands of households, and each has its own officials, whose official titles are the same as those of Lin's county.

古文：其王三日一听朝，坐五香七宝床，上施宝帐。
现代文：国王三天上一次朝，上朝时坐在五香七宝床上，床上悬挂宝帐。
English: The king woke up once every three days, and when he woke up, he sat on the five-spice and seven-treasures bed, and the treasure account was hanging on the bed.

古文：其帐以文木为竿，象牙、金钿为壁，状如小屋，悬金光焰，有同于赤土。
现代文：那宝帐用彩木做撑竿，象牙、金钿做壁，形状像小屋一样，摆动时金光闪闪，如同红玉一般。
English: The treasure book is made of colored wood as a support, ivory and gold braid as a wall, shaped like a hut, and when it swings, it glitters like a ruby.

古文：前有金香炉，二人侍侧。
现代文：面前摆有金香炉，两个侍卫分站两侧。
English: There is a gold incense burner in front of him, and two guards are stationed on either side.

古文：王着朝霞古贝，瞒络腰腹，下垂至胫，头戴金宝花冠，被真珠璎珞，足履革屣，耳悬金珰。
现代文：国王身着古贝朝霞衣，腰腹围着彩服，向下垂到小腿，头戴金宝花帽，身上披满珍珠璎珞，脚穿皮靴，耳上挂着金王当。
English: The king was dressed in a gubei morning dress, with a girdle around his waist and belly, and a colorful robe that hung down to his calves. He was wearing a gold and white flowered hat, a body covered with pearls, leather boots on his feet, and a gold scepter hanging from his ear.

古文：常服白叠，以象牙为屩。
现代文：平常穿白叠服，用象牙做拖鞋。
English: They usually wear white overalls and use ivory to make slippers.

古文：若露发，则不加璎珞。
现代文：如果不带帽子，就不披挂珍珠璎珞。
English: If you don't wear a hat, you don't wear pearls.

古文：臣人服制，大抵相类。
现代文：官与民的穿着，大体相似。
English: The dress of officials and the people is generally similar.

古文：有五大臣，一曰孤落支，二曰高相凭，三曰婆何多陵，四曰舍摩陵，五曰髯多娄，及诸小臣。
现代文：真腊国有五个大臣，第一个叫孤落支，第二个叫高相凭，第三个叫婆何多陵，第四个叫舍摩陵，第五个叫髯多娄，还有众多小臣。
English: There are five ministers in the State of Jinla. The first one is called Kuo Luo Zhi, the second one is called Gao Xiang Biao, the third one is called Bao He Duo Ling, the fourth one is called Xie Ma Ling, the fifth one is called Gao Duo Ling, and there are also many minor ministers.

古文：朝于王者，辄以阶下三稽首。
现代文：朝见国王时，就在台阶下叩三下头。
English: When he saw the king in the morning, he tapped his head three times at the bottom of the steps.

古文：王唤上阶，则跪，以两手抱膊，绕王环坐。
现代文：国王叫进殿，大臣才上台阶，进殿后大臣就跪着，用两手抱着胳膊，在国王周围坐着。
English: The king called him into the hall, and the minister only went up the steps. After entering the hall, the minister knelt down, holding his arms in his hands, and sat around the king.

古文：议政事讫，跪伏而去。
现代文：参议政事完毕，跪趴着离开国王。
English: The councillor left the king on his knees.

古文：阶庭门阁，侍卫有千余人，被甲持仗。
现代文：朝廷台阶门阁，卫士有一千多人，都身披铠甲手拿兵器。
English: There are more than a thousand guards at the Imperial Staircase Gate, all clad in armor and armed with weapons.

古文：其国与参半、硃江二国和亲，数与林邑、陀桓二国战争。
现代文：真腊国跟参半、朱江两国结亲和好，而多次跟林邑、陀桓两国发生战争。
English: Manchukuo made peace with Shannan and Zhujiang, but repeatedly went to war with Lin'ur and Dahuan.

古文：其人行止皆持甲仗，若有征伐，因而用之。
现代文：就在平时他们也都披铠甲，手持兵器，如果发生征战，就用武器。
English: Even in peacetime, they all wear armor and carry weapons, and if there is a war, they use weapons.

古文：其俗非王正妻子，不得为嗣。
现代文：真腊国的风俗是：不是国王正妻的儿子，不能作为王位的继承人。
English: It is the custom in the land of Jinra that if you are not the son of the king's lawful wife, you cannot succeed to the throne.

古文：王初立之日，所有兄弟并刑残之，或去一指，或劓其鼻，别处供给，不得仕进。
现代文：国王初即王位的那一天，所有弟兄同时用刑，使他们残废，有的割去一个手指，有的割掉鼻子，并发放到边远地方，供给他们生活费用，不允许他们做官。
English: On the day of the king's accession to the throne, all the brothers were punished at the same time, they were disabled, some cut off a finger, some cut off their noses, and sent to remote places to provide them with living expenses, and they were not allowed to work as officials.

古文：人形小而色黑。妇人亦有白者。
现代文：真腊国人的体形矮小，肤色黑，而女人中也有白肤色的。
English: The people of Manchukuo are short in stature and have a dark complexion, but there are also white-skinned women.

古文：悉拳发垂耳，性气捷劲。
现代文：真腊国人都卷曲着头发，垂到耳下。行动敏捷，性格刚劲。
English: The people of Mana have curly hair that hangs down to their ears. They are quick-moving and have a strong character.

古文：居处器物，颇类赤土。
现代文：家具器物的色彩跟赤玉的色彩很相似。
English: The color of furniture and utensils is very similar to the color of red gems.

古文：以右手为净，左手为秽。
现代文：他们认为右手洁净，左手污秽。
English: They believe that the right hand is clean and the left hand is dirty.

古文：每旦澡洗，以杨枝净齿，读诵经咒。
现代文：每天早晨洗漱，用杨树枝漱口之后，诵读经文。
English: Every morning, after washing and rinsing his mouth with poplar twigs, he would recite scriptures.

古文：又澡洒乃食，食罢还用杨枝净齿，又读经咒。
现代文：再洗漱然后才吃早饭，吃完又用杨树枝净齿，再诵读经文。
English: After washing and rinsing, they ate breakfast. After eating, they used poplar branches to clean their teeth, and then recited scriptures.

古文：饮食多苏酪、沙糖、秔粟、米饼。
现代文：多吃苏酪、沙糖、禾亢粟、米饼。
English: Eat more cheese, sugar, poppy seeds, and rice cakes.

古文：欲食之时，先取杂肉羹与饼相和，手擩而食。
现代文：吃的时候，先拿熟杂肉羹跟米饼之类食物相混和，用手捏成团吃。
English: When eating, first take the cooked meat jelly and mix it with food such as rice cakes, and knead it into a ball with your hands.

古文：娶妻者，唯送衣一具，择日遣媒人迎妇。
现代文：娶媳妇的人，只送一套衣服作为聘礼，再选择吉日让媒人将新娘接到男家。
English: A man who marries his daughter-in-law only sends a set of clothes as a betrothal gift, and then chooses a lucky day for the matchmaker to bring the bride to the man's house.

古文：男女二家各八日不出，昼夜燃灯不息。
现代文：迎亲后男女两家八天内家人不准外出，日夜点灯不灭。
English: After welcoming relatives, the families of both men and women are not allowed to go out for eight days, and the lights are kept on day and night.

古文：男婚礼毕，即与父母分财别居。
现代文：男子结婚后，就与父母分家产，另起炉灶生活。
English: After a man marries, he divides the family property with his parents and starts a new life.

古文：父母死，小兒未婚者，以余财与之。
现代文：父母死后还有未结婚的小儿子，就将剩余的家产给予他。
English: If there is still an unmarried younger son after the death of the parents, the remaining family property will be given to him.

古文：若婚毕，财物入官。
现代文：如果儿子们全结了婚，剩余财物就归官府所有。
English: If all the sons are married, the remaining property will be owned by the government.

古文：其丧葬，兒女皆七日不食，剔发而哭，僧尼、道士、亲故皆来聚会，音乐送之。
现代文：给父母办丧事时，儿女们都七天不吃东西，剃光头发哭丧，僧人尼姑、道士、亲戚朋友都来聚会，并奏乐送葬。
English: When a funeral is held for the parents, the children do not eat for seven days, shave their hair and weep. Monks, nuns, Taoists, relatives and friends all come to the gathering and play music for the funeral.

古文：以五香木烧尸，收灰以金银瓶盛，送于大水之内。
现代文：用五香木将尸体火化，把骨灰用金银瓶装着，投入大水之中。
English: The body will be cremated with five-spice wood, and the ashes will be placed in gold and silver bottles and thrown into the water.

古文：贫者或用瓦，而以彩色画之。
现代文：贫穷人家有的用瓦罐装骨灰，并在瓦罐上涂上彩图。
English: Some poor families use earthenware jars to hold the ashes, and paint pictures on the jars.

古文：亦有不焚，送尸山中，任野兽食者。
现代文：也有不火化的，直接把尸体送到山上，任野兽食用。
English: There are also those who do not cremate, but send the bodies directly to the mountains for wild animals to eat.

古文：其国北多山阜，南有水泽，地气尤热，无霜雪，饶瘴疠毒虫。
现代文：真腊国北方有很多山峰，南面是水泽，气温相当高，全年没有霜雪，多有瘴气，经常流行疟疾等传染病，毒蜂蜇人时有发生。
English: There are many mountain peaks in the north of the country, and marshes in the south. The temperature is quite high, there is no frost and snow throughout the year, and there is a lot of argon gas. Infectious diseases such as malaria are often prevalent, and poisonous bee stings sometimes occur.

古文：土宜粱稻，少黍粟，果菜与日南、九真相类。
现代文：水土适宜种植高粱稻谷，很少种植黍子玉米，水果、蔬菜品种跟日南、九真国大抵相同。
English: The soil and water are suitable for growing sorghum rice, and it is rare to grow hazelnut corn. The varieties of fruits and vegetables are mostly the same as in Nichinan and Kuching.

古文：异者有婆那娑树，无花，叶似柿，实似冬瓜；奄罗树，花叶似枣，实似李；毗野树，花似木瓜，叶似杏，实似楮；婆田罗树，花叶实并似枣而小异；歌毕佗树，花似林檎，叶似榆而厚大，实似李，其大如升。
现代文：不同的是：种有婆那娑树，不开花，叶子像柿子叶，果实像冬瓜；奄罗树，花和叶像枣树，果实像李子；毗野树，花像木瓜，叶像杏子，果实像楮树的果实；婆田罗树，花、叶、果实都极像枣树而略有不同；歌毕他树，花像林禽，叶子像榆树叶而较肥大，果实像李子，有升那样大。
English: The differences are as follows: there is a species of Bana eucalyptus, which does not bloom, the leaves are like persimmon leaves, and the fruit is like winter melon; Amara tree, the flowers and leaves are like jujube trees, and the fruit is like plums; Biyan tree, the flowers are like papayas, the leaves are like apricots, and the fruit is like the fruit of eucalyptus trees; Bata tree, the flowers, leaves, and fruits are very much like jujube trees, but slightly different; Gobi tree, the flowers are like woodland birds, the leaves are like eucalyptus leaves, but more

古文：自余多同九真。
现代文：其余的树种跟九真国大多相同。
English: The rest of the tree species are mostly the same as those in Jiuzhen.

古文：海中有鱼名建同，四足，无鳞，其鼻如象，吸水上喷，高五六十尺。
现代文：海里有一种鱼，名叫建同，有四只脚，没有鳞，它的鼻子似象鼻，吸水后，向上喷水高达五六丈。
English: There is a kind of fish in the sea, named Jiantong, with four feet and no scales. Its nose looks like an elephant's trunk. After absorbing water, it sprays water up to five or six meters high.

古文：有浮胡鱼，其形似且，嘴如鹦鹉，有八足。
现代文：还有一种叫浮胡鱼，它的形状像鱼且，嘴像鹦鹉，长有八只脚。
English: There is also a species called the puffer fish, which is shaped like a fish and has a parrot-like beak and eight legs.

古文：多大鱼，半身出水，望之如山。
现代文：海里有很多很大的鱼，大鱼跃出水面半截身子，看上去像山。
English: There are a lot of big fish in the sea. The big fish jumps out of the water half-cut, looking like a mountain.

古文：每五六月中，毒气流行，即以白猪、白牛、白羊于城西门外祠之。
现代文：每年的五六月里，当毒气流行时，真腊国人就把白猪、白牛、白羊作为祭品放到城西门外祭祀。
English: In May and June of each year, when poison gas was prevalent, the people of Jinla placed white pigs, white cows, and white sheep outside the west gate of the city as offerings.

古文：不然者，五谷不登，六畜多死，人众疾疫。
现代文：如果不像这样做，那么五谷就不能丰收，六畜大多死亡，很多人就要患病。
English: If this is not done, then the grain harvest will not be abundant, most of the livestock will die, and many people will fall ill.

古文：近都有陵伽钵婆山，上有神祠，每以兵五千人守卫之。
现代文：都城附近有陵伽钵婆山，山上有神庙，常年用五千卫士守卫着它。
English: In the vicinity of the capital, there is a temple on Mount Negarakabha, which is guarded by five thousand guards all year round.

古文：城东有神名婆多利，祭用人肉。
现代文：都城的东面，有个名叫婆多利的神，其祭品用的是人肉。
English: To the east of the capital, there is a deity called Bhaduri, whose sacrifices are made of human flesh.

古文：其王年别杀人，以夜祀祷，亦有守卫者千人。
现代文：国王年年杀人，在夜晚用人肉祭祀神仙。有的神庙的守卫有上千人。
English: The king killed people year after year, and at night he used human flesh to sacrifice to the gods. Some temples had more than a thousand guards.

古文：其敬鬼如此。
现代文：真腊国就像这样崇敬鬼神。
English: This is how the country of Mana reveres ghosts and gods.

古文：多奉佛法，尤信道士，佛及道士并立像于馆。
现代文：他们大多信奉佛法，尤其信奉道士，把佛和道士的像同时立在庙宇里。
English: Most of them believe in Buddhism, especially Taoism, and have statues of both Buddha and Taoism in their temples.

古文：大业十二年，遣使贡献，帝礼之甚厚，其后亦绝。
现代文：隋炀帝大业十二年，真腊国王派使者向隋朝进贡，隋炀帝盛情款待，此后再没有向隋朝进贡。
English: In the twelfth year of the reign of Emperor Sui, King Zhenla sent an envoy to pay tribute to the Sui Dynasty. Emperor Sui treated the envoy with great hospitality, and thereafter no tribute was paid to the Sui Dynasty.

