古文：黔国公沐昌祚卒，子启元嗣爵。
现代文：黔国公沐昌柞去世，孙沐启元继承爵位。
English: Sun Muqian succeeded to the title of nobility after the death of Sun Muqian.

古文：邑诸生往祭其父，中门启，一生翘首内望，门吏杖箠通捶，用棒打之。
现代文：城里的众儒生去祭吊沐启元的祖父，中门打开，有一人抬头朝门内看，守门的官吏竟用杖打他。
English: All the Confucianists in the city went to sacrifice and hang the grandfather of Mu Qi Yuan. When the middle door was opened, one person looked up and looked inside the door. The official guarding the door actually beat him with a cane.

古文：多土怒，亦箠其人，反为众桀奴所伤，遂诉于直指挺直不阿金公。
现代文：儒生们愤怒了，也打守门人，反而被沐府凶暴的奴仆所打伤，于是儒生到朝廷直接派来的官员金公那里诉说。
English: Enraged, the Confucians also beat the doorkeepers. On the other hand, they were injured by the violent servants of the Mufu, so the Confucians went to the official Jin Gong, who was directly sent by the imperial court, to complain.

古文：公讳瑊，将逮诸奴，奴耸启元先疏诬多士。
现代文：金公名碱，他打算逮捕那些奴仆，奴仆怂恿沐启元先上疏诬告众儒生。
English: He planned to arrest the servants who had falsely accused the Confucian scholars.

古文：事下御史，金逮奴如故。
现代文：事情告到监察御史处，金公照旧逮捕奴仆。
English: The matter was reported to the Office of the Inspector-General of History, and Kim Gong-woo arrested the servant as before.

古文：启元益嗔，征兵祭纛，环直指门，发巨炮恐之，金不为动。
现代文：沐启元更加生气，调动军队、祭奠军旗，包围了金公的衙门，发射大炮恐吓金公，金公不因此而动摇。
English: Mu Qiyuan became even more angry, mobilized the army, dedicated the military flag, surrounded Jin Gong's gate, fired cannons to intimidate Jin Gong, and Jin Gong did not waver.

古文：沐遂掠多士数十人，毒痛之，囊其首于木。
现代文：沐启元于是拷打数十名儒生，残害他们，用木枷夹他们的头。
English: Mu Qi Yuan then tortured dozens of Confucian students, mutilated them, and clamped their heads with wooden shackles.

古文：金戒多士毋与争，急疏闻。
现代文：金公告诫众儒生不要和沐启元争，急忙上疏，让朝廷知道。
English: The gold bulletin admonished all Confucian students not to quarrel with Muqi Yuan, and to hurry up and renounce, so that the imperial court would know.

古文：下黔督张鹤鸣勘，张奏以实。
现代文：朝廷下令贵州省总督张鹤鸣核实，张鹤鸣据实上奏。
English: The imperial court ordered the governor of Guizhou Province, Zhang Hurming, to verify, and Zhang Hurming duly reported.

古文：时魏珰专政，下调停旨，而启元愈猖狂不可制。
现代文：当时魏挡专政，下了调停的旨令，因而沐启元更加猖狂，不能控制。
English: At that time, the Wei Bao dictatorship issued an order to mediate, which made the Muqi Yuan even more rampant and uncontrollable.

古文：母宋夫人惧斩世绪，泣三日，以毒进，启元陨，事乃解。
现代文：他的母亲宋夫人害怕断送世代相传的爵禄，哭泣了三天，用毒药毒死了沐启元，事情才得以缓解。
English: His mother, Mrs. Song, was afraid to give up the peerage that had been passed down from generation to generation. She cried for three days and poisoned Mu Qianyuan with poison before the matter could be resolved.

古文：宋夫人疏请，孙稚未胜爵服，乞权署名，俟长赐袭。
现代文：宋夫人上疏请求，孙子年幼，无法胜任爵禄地位，请暂时署名，等长大后再赐他继承爵位。
English: Mrs. Song Shangsu requested that since her grandson was too young to be eligible for a peerage, she should sign for the time being, and then grant him a peerage when he was older.

古文：会今上登极，怜之，辄赐敕实授。
现代文：时逢崇祯皇帝继位，可怜沐昌柞的孙子，于是下令授以实爵。
English: When Emperor Chongzhen succeeded to the throne, he felt sorry for Mu Changzhen's grandson, so he ordered that he be awarded the title of Baron.

古文：即今嗣公沐天波，时仅岁一周支也。
现代文：就是现在继黔国公爵的沐天波，他继承爵位时才满一周岁。
English: Mu Tianbo, who is now the successor to the Duke of Yunnan, was only one year old when he inherited the title.

古文：普名胜者，阿迷州土寇也。
现代文：普名胜是阿迷州的土匪。
English: Its most famous attraction is the bandits of Amaizhou.

古文：祖者辂，父子为乱三乡、维摩间。
现代文：其祖父者格，和儿子在三乡县、维摩州一带作乱。
English: His grandfather, Zhige, and his son wreaked havoc in Sanxiang County and Wima Prefecture.

古文：万历四十二年，广西郡守萧以裕，调宁州禄土司兵合剿，一鼓破之，辂父子俱就戳，始复维摩州，开三乡县。
现代文：万历四十二年，广西府知府萧以裕，调集宁州禄土司的军队，合兵围剿，一下子就打败叛军，者格和儿子一起被杀，朝廷才恢复维摩州，设置三乡县。
English: In the 42nd year of Wanli, Xiao Yiyu, the governor of Guangxi Prefecture, mobilized the army of the governor of Ningzhou, surrounded and defeated the rebels at once. He and his son were killed together. Only then did the imperial court restore Wimao Prefecture and set up three townships and counties.

古文：时名胜走阿迷，宁州禄洪欲除之。
现代文：当时普名胜逃到阿迷州，宁州土司禄洪打算除掉他。
English: At that time, Pu Nansheng fled to Amanzhou, and Ningzhou Tusi Lukhong planned to get rid of him.

古文：临安守梁贵梦、郡绅王中丞抚民，畏宁州强，留普树之敌，曲庇名胜。
现代文：临安府知府梁贵梦、府中的乡绅王抚民，担心宁州土司强大，留下普名胜可以与宁州土司对立，便曲意包庇普名胜。
English: Liang Guimeng, governor of Lin'an Prefecture, and Wang Fudumin, a squire in the prefecture, were worried about the power of Ningzhou Tusi, leaving the universal famous scenic spots to oppose the Ningzhou Tusi, and they wanted to cover the universal famous scenic spots.

古文：初犹屯阿迷境，后十余年，兵顿强，残破诸土司，遂驻州城，尽夺州守权。
现代文：开始普名胜还屯住在阿迷州边境，之后十余年，普名胜的兵力很快强大，消灭了众多的土司，于是驻进州城，夺取了阿迷州的全部政权。
English: At the beginning, Pu Nansheng still lived on the border of Amanzhou. After more than ten years, Pu Nansheng's army quickly became strong and eliminated many local officials, so he stationed in the state capital and seized all power in Amanzhou.

古文：崇祯四年，抚臣王伉忧之，裹毡笠，同二骑潜至州，悉得其叛状，疏请剿。
现代文：崇祯四年，巡抚王伉担忧，裹着毡子斗笠，和二名骑手潜入阿迷州，全部得知了普名胜叛乱的情况，上疏请求围剿。
English: In the fourth year of the reign of Emperor Chongzhen, the governor Wang Yao was worried. Wrapped in a mule headdress, he and two horsemen sneaked into Amanzhou. They all learned about the situation of the Pu Nansheng rebellion, and Shangsu requested to encircle it.

古文：上命川、贵四省合剿之。
现代文：崇祯皇帝命令四川、贵州等四省合兵围剿。
English: Emperor Chongzhen ordered Sichuan, Guizhou and other four provinces to join forces to encircle Yunnan.

古文：石屏龙土司兵先薄漾田，为所歼。
现代文：石屏州龙土司的军队首先逼近漾田，被普名胜所歼灭。
English: The army of Long Tusi of Shiping Prefecture first approached Putian and was annihilated by the famous place.

古文：三月初八日，王中丞亲驻临安，布政周世昌统十三参将，将本省兵万七千人，逼沈家坟。
现代文：三月初八日，王巡抚亲自驻扎临安府，布政使周士昌统领十三位参将，率领云南省的军队一万七千人，逼近沈家坟。
English: On the 8th day of the 3rd month of the year, the governor Wang personally stationed in Lin'an, and sent the political envoy Zhou Shichang to lead the thirteen generals and 17,000 soldiers from Yunnan Province to approach the tomb of Shen Jia.

古文：贼命黎亚选扼之，不得进，相持者二月。
现代文：叛军命令黎亚选阻扼官军，周士昌不能前进，双方相持了两个月。
English: The rebels ordered Liya to block the official army, Zhou Shichang could not advance, and the two sides held each other for two months.

古文：五月初二日，亚选自营中潜往为名胜寿，醉返营。
现代文：五月初二日，黎亚选从军队中潜回去为普名胜祝寿，喝醉酒后返回军营。
English: On the second day of the first month of May, Lia Yuan sneaked back from the army to celebrate the birthday of the famous victory, and returned to the military camp after getting drunk.

古文：一童子泄其事于龙。
现代文：一个年青人把此事泄露给龙土司。
English: A young man leaked the story to Long Tusi.

古文：龙与王土司夜劫之，遂斩黎；进薄州城，环围四月，卒不下。
现代文：龙土司和王土司连夜强攻，于是杀掉黎亚选；进逼阿迷州城，包围了四个月，最终没能攻下。
English: Long Tusi and Wang Tusi attacked overnight, and killed Li Yaxuan; they besieged Amanzhou City for four months, but ultimately failed to capture it.

古文：时州人廖大亨任职方郎，贼恃为奥援，潜使使入京纵反间，谓普实不叛，王抚起衅徼功，百姓悉糜烂。
现代文：当时阿迷州人廖大亨担任职方郎，叛军依靠他为有力的靠山，暗中派使者到京城肆意地提供假情况，说普名胜其实没有叛乱，王巡抚挑起争端以邀功，百姓全都被摧残。
English: At that time, Liao Tycoon, a native of Amanzhou, served as the official henchman. The rebels relied on him as a powerful supporter, secretly sending emissaries to the capital to provide false information, saying that there was actually no rebellion in the capital. The governor provoked a dispute to claim credit, and the people were all destroyed.

古文：于是部郎疏论普地不百里，兵不千人，即叛可传檄定，何骚动大兵为？
现代文：于是兵部职方郎上疏，说普名胜的土地不到百里，军队不到干人，即使反叛也可以用一道命令传檄平定，何必调动大批军队去打？
English: As a result, the staff of the Ministry of Military Affairs went back and forth, saying that the land of the general scenic spot was less than a hundred miles, the army was less than a hundred men, even if the rebellion could be suppressed with a single order, why should a large number of troops be mobilized to fight?

古文：而王宫谕锡衮、杨庶常绳武，各上疏言宜剿。
现代文：而宫谕王锡衰、庶常杨绳武，分别上疏说应当围剿。
English: However, the palace ordered Wang Xizhen and the commoner Yang Jianwu to separate, saying that they should be encircled.

古文：事下枢部议。
现代文：此事下达中枢部门议论。
English: The matter was referred to the central department for discussion.

古文：先是王抚疏名胜包藏祸心已久，前有司养疽莫发奸，致成难图蔓草，上因切责前抚、按。
现代文：在这之前，王巡抚上疏说普名胜包藏祸心由来已久，前任长官像生毒疮怕痛而不割一样，没有揭发其奸邪，导致形成野草蔓延难除的形势，皇上因此严词谴责前任巡抚、巡按御史。
English: Prior to this, the previous governor, Wang Shangsuo, said that there had been a long history of universal fame, victory, and hidden evil, and that the previous governor had not exposed his treachery like a poisonous sore that was afraid of pain and would not be cut, leading to the formation of a situation in which weeds spread and were difficult to remove. Therefore, the emperor severely condemned the previous governor and the inspector.

古文：而前抚闵洪学已擢冢宰，惧勿能自解，即以飞语怂恿大司马。
现代文：而前任巡抚阂洪学已提升为吏部尚书，害怕无法自我辨解，就用流言怂恿兵部尚书。
English: However, the previous governor, Gong Hongxue, had been promoted to the position of the secretary of the personnel department. Afraid of not being able to distinguish himself, he used the rumor to become the secretary of the military department.

古文：大司马已先入部郎言，遂谓名胜地不当一县，抚、按比周，张大其事势，又延引日月，徒虚糜县官饷。
现代文：兵部尚书已经先听到兵部职方郎的话，于是认为普名胜的地域抵不上一个县，巡抚、巡按御使互相勾结，扩大事态，又拖延时间，只会白费朝廷粮响。
English: Shang Shu of the Ministry of Military Affairs had already heard the words of the official of the Ministry of Military Affairs, so he thought that the area of the general scenic spot could not match a county. The governor and the envoy colluded with each other to expand the situation and delay the time, which would only waste the money of the court.

古文：疏上，严旨逮伉及按臣赵世龙。
现代文：此疏上奏，朝廷严令逮捕巡抚王伉、巡按御史赵世龙。
English: The Imperial Court issued a strict order to arrest Wang Xi, the inspector, and Zhao Shilong, the inspector.

古文：十月十五日，抚、按俱临安就逮。
现代文：十月十五日，巡抚、巡按御史在临安府被捕。
English: On October 15, the governor and the inspector were arrested in Lin'an.

古文：十二月十八，周世昌中铳死，十三参将悉战没。
现代文：十二月十八日，周士昌中火器而死，十三名参将全部战死。
English: On December 18, Zhou Shichang was killed in a firefight, and all thirteen generals were killed.

古文：五年正月朔，贼悉兵攻临安，诈郡括万金犒之，受金，攻愈急。
现代文：崇祯五年正月初一，叛军调全部军队攻临安府，欺骗临安府搜括一万两银子搞劳他们，接到银两后，攻府城更加急迫。
English: On the first day of the first month of the fifth year of Chongzhen, the rebels transferred all the troops to attack Lin'an, deceived Lin'an to collect ten thousand taels of silver to make them work, and after receiving the silver taels, the attack on the capital was even more urgent.

古文：迨十六，城垂破，贼忽退师，以何天衢袭其穴也。
现代文：到十六日，府城即将被攻破，叛军忽然退兵，那是因为何天衙偷袭了他们的巢穴。
English: On the 16th, the capital was about to be breached, and the rebels suddenly withdrew. This was due to a surprise attack on their lair.

古文：天衢，江右人，居名胜十三头目之一，见名胜有异志，心不安，妻陈氏力劝归中朝，天衢因乞降，当道以三乡城处之，今遂得其解围力。
现代文：何天衙是江西省人，是普名胜的十三头目之一，看到普名胜心怀异志，内心不安，妻子陈氏竭力劝他归顺朝廷，何天衡于是请求投降，当权者将他安置在三乡县城，现在就靠他的力量解除了包围。
English: He Tianyao was from Jiangxi Province and was one of the 13 leaders of Pu Nansheng. Seeing Pu Nansheng harboring dissent and feeling uneasy, his wife Chen tried her best to persuade him to submit to the imperial court. He Tianyao then requested to surrender. The authorities placed him in the county seat of Sanxiang, and now he has lifted the siege by his own efforts.

古文：后普屡以兵攻三乡，各相拒，无所胜，乃退兵，先修祖父怨于宁州。
现代文：后来普名胜多次率领军队进攻三乡县城，双方相持不下，普名胜不能取胜，才退兵，去找宁州土司报祖父、父亲之仇。
English: Later, Pu Nansheng repeatedly led the army to attack the three townships and the county seat, and the two sides could not stand each other. Pu Nansheng could not win, so he left the army and went to Ningzhou Tusi to avenge his grandfather and father.

古文：方攻宁时，洪已奉调中原，其母集众目，人犒五金、京青布二，各守要害，贼不得入。
现代文：正要攻宁州时，土司禄洪已奉命调往中原，他的母亲招集众头目，搞劳每人五两银子、两匹京城的青布，要他们守卫要道，叛军不能攻入。
English: When they were about to attack Ningzhou, the local magistrate Lukhong had been ordered to move to the Central Plains. His mother summoned all the leaders, paid each of them five taels of silver and two horses of the blue cloth of the capital, and asked them to guard the important roads so that the rebels could not invade.

古文：后洪返，谓所予太重，责之金，诸族目悉解体。
现代文：后来禄洪返回，认为给得太多，索回银两，各部族的头目全都离心离德。
English: Later, Lukhong returned, thinking that he had given too much, asked for the silver back, and the leaders of each tribe all left Germany.

古文：贼谍知，乘之入，洪走避抚仙湖孤山，州为残破。
现代文：叛军刺探到此情况，乘机攻入宁州，禄洪逃到抚仙湖孤山避难，宁州被攻破。
English: Rebel spies detected this situation and took the opportunity to invade Ningzhou. Lu Hong fled to the lonely mountains of Fuxian Lake for refuge, and Ningzhou was finally breached.

古文：岁余，洪复故土，郁郁死。
现代文：过了一年多，禄洪恢复了故土，忧郁而死。
English: After more than a year, Lukhong recovered his homeland and died of melancholy.

古文：贼次攻石屏州，及沙土司等十三长官，悉服属之。
现代文：叛军接着进攻石屏州，以及沙土司等十三个长官司，这些地区全都臣服于普名胜。
English: The rebels then attacked Shiping Prefecture, as well as thirteen prefectures such as Shatusi, all of which were subject to Pu Nansheng.

古文：志欲克维摩州南鲁白城，即大举。
现代文：普名胜立志要攻克维摩州南部的鲁白城，于是大举进攻。
English: Pu Nian Sheng was determined to conquer the city of Rubai in the south of Vimy Province, so he launched a large-scale attack.

古文：鲁白城在广南西南七日程，临安东南九日程，与交趾界，城天险，为白彝所踞。
现代文：鲁白城在广南府西南，有七天的路程，在临安府东南，有九天的路程，和交趾接界，依傍天险筑城，被白彝盘踞。
English: Lubaicheng is located in the southwest of Guangnan, seven days' journey away, and in the southeast of Lin'an, nine days' journey away. It is bordered by Hekiaotou, built along the Tianjiang River, and surrounded by egrets.

古文：名胜常曰： 进图中原，退守鲁白，吾无忧矣。 
现代文：普名胜常说： 进图谋中原，退死守鲁白，我没有后顾之忧了。 
English: Pu Nian Sheng often said: "Go to the Central Plains, die defending Lu Bai, I don't have to worry about it."

古文：攻之三年，不能克。
现代文：攻了三年，没能攻克。
English: They have been attacking for three years, but have not been able to conquer Togo.

古文：七年九月，忽病死。
现代文：崇祯七年九月，普名胜忽然病死。
English: In September of the seventh year of Chongzheng, Pu Nansheng suddenly died of illness.

古文：子福远，方九岁。
现代文：儿子普福远才有九岁。
English: His son, Pu Fuyuan, is only nine years old.

古文：妻万氏，多权略，威行远近。
现代文：妻子万氏擅长权术谋略，威势通行远近。
English: His wife, Ms. Wan, is good at power strategy, and her power can be seen from far and near.

古文：当事者姑以抚了局，酿祸至今，自临安以东、广西以南，不复知有明官矣！
现代文：当权的人姑且用安抚的方法了结局势，酿成的灾祸延续到现在，从右安府以东、广西府以南，人们不知道还有明朝的官员了！
English: Even though the people in power used appeasement to end the situation, the resulting disaster continues to this day. From the east of Uanfu and the south of Guangxi, people do not know that there are still officials from the Ming Dynasty!

古文：至今临安不敢一字指斥，旅人询及者，辄掩口相戒，府州文移，不过虚文。
现代文：至今临安府不敢对此事指责一句，旅客询问到此事，总是掩口戒备，府、州的公文下达，不过是一纸虚文。
English: To this day, Lin'an government has not dared to utter a single word of reproach on this matter. When asked about this matter by tourists, they always keep their mouths shut. The official document issued by the government and the state is nothing but a fake document.

古文：予过安庄，见为水西残破者，各各有同仇志，不惜为致命；而此方人人没齿无怨言，不意一妇人威略乃尔！
现代文：我过安庄时，看到被水西土司残害的人，人人都有报仇的共同志向，不惜为此而献出生命；而这里人人闭口无怨言，想不到一个妇人的威势、谋略竟然如此！
English: When I passed through Anzhuang, I saw the people who were killed by Shuixi Tusi, everyone had a common desire for revenge, and would not hesitate to give their lives for it; and here everyone kept their mouths shut without complaint, I could not imagine the power and strategy of a woman!

古文：南包沙土司，抵蒙自县；北包弥勒州，抵广西府；东包维摩州，抵三乡县；西抵临安府；皆其横压之区。
现代文：往南包括沙土司，抵达蒙自县；往北包括弥勒州，抵达广西府；往东包括维摩州，抵达三乡县；往西抵达临安府，都是万氏横行压迫的地区。
English: To the south, including Shatuji, it reached Mengzi County; to the north, including Maile County, it reached Guangxi Prefecture; to the east, including Wima County, it reached Sanxiang County; and to the west, it reached Lin'an Prefecture, all of which were areas of rampant oppression by the Wan clan.

古文：东唯三乡何天衢，西唯龙鹏龙在田，犹与抗斗，余皆闻风慑伏。
现代文：东边只有三乡县的何天衙，西边只有龙鹏的龙在田，还能与万氏抗争，其余的都闻风丧胆，慑于威势而屈服。
English: On the east side, there is only Ho Tianzhu of Sanxiang County, and on the west side, there is only Long Peng's Long Zetian, which can still fight against Wan Shi. The rest are discouraged and give in to the pressure.

古文：有司为之笼络，仕绅受其羁靮，意即受其控制者，十八九。
现代文：地方官被万氏笼络，官吏、乡绅受万氏束缚的，达十分之八九。
English: Eighty-nine out of ten local officials were ensnared by the Wan clan, as well as officials and country squires.

古文：王伉以启衅被逮，后人苟且抚局，举动如此，朝廷可谓有人乎！
现代文：王伉因为挑起争端的罪名被捕，后来的官苟且安抚了事，如此举动，能认为朝廷有人吗！
English: Wang Yao was arrested for the crime of provoking a dispute, and later officials carefully calmed down the situation. With such a move, can you think that the imperial court is someone!

古文：夫伉之罪，在误用周世昌，不谙兵机，弥连数月，兵久变生耳。
现代文：王伉的过失，在于误用周士昌，不通用兵的谋略，战争长达数月，用兵时间一久要发生变故的。
English: Wang Yao's fault was that he misused Zhou Shichang's troops and did not use the soldiers' strategy. The war lasted for several months, and the soldiers had to be used for a long time.

古文：当时止宜责其迟，留策其后效。
现代文：当时只应当责备王伉用兵迟缓，应留下来，督促他，看以后的表现。
English: At that time, he should only have reproached Wang Qi for being slow in using soldiers, and should have stayed and urged him to see how he would perform in the future.

古文：临敌易帅且不可，遽就军中逮之，亦太甚矣。
现代文：面对敌人更换主帅尚且不行，何况突然到军中逮捕主帅呢，太过分了！唉！
English: In the face of the enemy, it is not enough to change the coach, let alone suddenly go to the army to arrest the coach, it is too much! Alas!

古文：嗟乎！朝廷于东西用兵，事事如此，不独西南彝也！
现代文：朝廷对周边用兵事事如此，不只是对西南地区的少数民族如此啊！
English: The imperial court did this to the surrounding soldiers, not just to the ethnic minorities in the southwestern region!

