古文：母曰元献皇后杨氏。
现代文：肃宗名亨，是玄宗的第三个儿子。母亲是元献皇后杨氏。
English: Su Zong Mingheng was the third son of Emperor Xuanzong. His mother was the former Empress Yang.

古文：初名嗣升，封陕王。
现代文：李亨最初的名字是嗣升，被封为陕王。
English: Li Heng's original name was Shi Sheng, and he was named King of Shaanxi.

古文：开元四年，为安西大都护。
现代文：开元四年，任安西大都护。
English: In the fourth year of the founding of the People's Republic of China, he was appointed as the Anxi Capital Protector.

古文：性仁孝，好学，玄宗尤爱之，遣贺知章、潘肃、吕向、皇甫彬、邢等侍读左右。
现代文：性情仁爱重孝，喜爱学习，玄宗特别钟爱他，派贺知章、潘肃、吕向、皇甫彬、邢王寿等在他身边讲学。
English: His disposition was benevolent and filial, and he loved to study. Xuanzong was especially fond of him, and sent He Zhizhang, Pan Su, Lv Xiang, Wang Fubin, Zou Wang Shou and others to lecture around him.

古文：十五年，更名浚，徙封忠王，为朔方节度大使、单于大都护。
现代文：开元十五年，更名为李浚，改封为忠王，任朔方节度大使、单于大都护。
English: In the fifteenth year of the first century, he changed his name to Li Jun, changed his title to Zhongwang, and was appointed as the ambassador of the Spring Festival and the guardian of the capital.

古文：十八年，奚、契丹寇边，乃以肃宗为河北道行军元帅，遣御史大夫李朝隐等八总管兵十万以伐之。
现代文：开元十八年，奚与契丹侵犯边境，玄宗便让肃宗任河北道行军元帅，派御史大夫李朝隐等八个总管的军队十万人去征讨。
English: In the 18th year of the first century, when the Xiongnu and Khitan invaded the border, Xuanzong appointed Su Zong as the marshal of the march of Hebei Province, and sent the army of eight chiefs, including the chief historian Li Chaoying, to collect 100,000 troops.

古文：居二岁，朝隐等败奚、契丹于范阳北，肃宗以统帅功迁司徒。
现代文：任职二载，李朝隐等在范阳北边打败奚与契丹，肃宗以统帅之功晋升为司徒。
English: After two years in office, Li Chaoying and others defeated Zhai and Qidan on the north side of Fanyang, and Su Zong was promoted to the position of the commander.

古文：二十三年，又更名玙。
现代文：开元二十三年，又更名为李。
English: On the 23rd day of the first month of the year, it was renamed as Li Zong.

古文：二十五年，皇太子瑛废死，明年，立为皇太子。
现代文：开元二十五年，皇太子李瑛被废黜死去，次年，肃宗被立为皇太子。
English: In the 25th year of the first century, the crown prince Li Ying was deposed and died, and the following year, Su Zong was appointed crown prince.

古文：有司行册礼，其仪有中严、外办，其服绛纱。
现代文：官吏们举行册封典礼，礼仪有中严、外办，服饰为绛纱。
English: The officials held a ceremony of canonization, the etiquette was strict and formal, and the dress was made of embroidery.

古文：太子曰： 此天子礼也。 
现代文：肃宗说： 这是天子的礼仪。 
English: Su Zong said, "This is the etiquette of the Son of Heaven.

古文：乃下公卿议。
现代文：于是下令让公卿大臣商议。
English: He then ordered that the court nobles and ministers be allowed to deliberate.

古文：太师萧嵩、左丞相裴耀卿请改 外办 为 外备 ，绛纱衣为硃明服，乃从之。
现代文：太师萧嵩、左丞相裴耀卿请将 外办 改为 外备 ，绛纱衣改用朱明服，肃宗才同意。
English: Grandmaster Xiao Song and Left Minister Pei Yaoqing, please change the outside office to the outside office, and change the embroidered gauze to Zhu Ming clothing. Su Zongcai agreed.

古文：二十八年，又更名绍。
现代文：开元二十八年，又更名为李绍。
English: In the 28th year of the year of the founding of the People's Republic of China, it was renamed as Li Shaowu.

古文：天宝三载，又更名亨。
现代文：天宝三载，再更名为李亨。
English: Tianbao for three years and then changed its name to Li Heng.

古文：安禄山来朝，太子识其有反相，请以罪诛之，玄宗不听。
现代文：安禄山来京朝见，李亨看出他有反相，请求玄宗论罪诛除他，玄宗不同意。
English: When An Lushan came to Beijing to see the emperor, Li Heng saw that he had a rival and asked Xuanzong to expel him. Xuanzong did not agree.

古文：禄山反。
现代文：安禄山果然反叛。
English: Anlu Mountain has indeed rebelled.

古文：十五载，玄宗避贼，行至马嵬，父老遮道请留太子讨贼，玄宗许之，遣寿王瑁及内侍高力士谕太子，太子乃还。
现代文：天宝十五载，玄宗躲避叛贼，走到马嵬坡，父老乡亲拦路请求留下太子李亨讨伐叛贼，玄宗应允，派寿王李瑁与内侍高力士传谕太子，李亨于是回转返还。
English: In the fifteenth year of the Heavenly Treasure, Xuanzong evaded the traitors and went to Ma'anpo. His father and fellow villagers blocked the road and asked the prince Li Heng to stay and fight the traitors. Xuanzong agreed. He sent the Shou Wang Li Jie and the inner servant Gao Lixi to tell the prince. Li Heng then turned around and returned.

古文：六月丁酉，至渭北便桥，桥绝，募水滨居民得三千馀人，涉而济。
现代文：六月十五日，行至渭水北边的便桥，桥已断，李亨招募到渭水岸边的居民三千余人，水过河。
English: On June 15, Li Heng went to the north side of Surabaya to build a footbridge, but the bridge was broken. Li Heng recruited more than 3,000 residents on the shore of Surabaya, and the water crossed the river.

古文：遇潼关散卒，以为贼，与战，多伤，既而觉之，收其馀以涉，后军多没者。
现代文：遇到潼关溃散的士卒，误以为是贼兵，与他们交战，众多人受伤，之后才发觉是误会，收留其余部，一道水过河，后军士卒多有被淹死者。
English: When they encountered the soldiers who had broken out of Shaoguan, they mistook them for robber soldiers and fought with them. Many people were injured, but it was later discovered that it was a misunderstanding. The rest of the soldiers were taken in, and they crossed the river together. Many of the soldiers later drowned.

古文：夕次永寿县，吏民稍持牛酒来献。
现代文：当夜歇驻永寿县，当地官吏与百姓尽都带着牛和酒前来进献。
English: On that night, he was stationed in Yongshou County, and local officials and people all came with cattle and wine to make offerings.

古文：新平郡太守薛羽、保定郡太守徐闻贼且至，皆弃城走。
现代文：新平郡太守薛羽、保定郡太守徐听说叛贼将要到来，都弃城逃跑。
English: Xue Yu, the governor of Xinping County, and Xu, the governor of Baoding County, heard that the traitors were about to arrive, and both abandoned the city and fled.

古文：己亥，太子次保定，捕得羽、，斩之。
现代文：十七日，皇太子李亨歇驻保定，捕获薛羽、徐，将其斩首。
English: On the 17th, Crown Prince Li Hengxie stationed in Baoding, captured Xue Yu and Xu, and beheaded them.

古文：辛丑，次平凉郡，得牧马牛羊，兵始振。
现代文：十九日，歇驻平凉郡，得到牧马牛羊，军队才开始振奋起来。
English: On the 19th, the army was stationed in Pingliang County and received pasture horses, cattle and sheep. Only then did the army begin to cheer up.

古文：朔方留后支度副使杜鸿渐、六城水陆运使魏少游、节度判官崔漪、支度判官崔简金、关内盐池判官李涵、河西行军司马裴冕迎大子治兵于朔方。
现代文：朔方留后支度副使杜鸿渐、六城水陆运使魏少游、节度判官崔漪、支度判官崔简金、关内盐池判官李涵、河西行军司马裴冕迎接太子李亨，在朔方整顿军队。
English: Du Hongqian, deputy commander of the Shuo army, Wei Shaoyu, commander of the Six-City Water and Land Transport, Cui Wei, commander of the Shuo army, Cui Jianjin, commander of the Shuo army, Li Han, commander of the Guanai-Yanchi army, and Ma Peihuan, commander of the Shuo army, met Prince Li Heng and reorganized the army in Shuo.

古文：庚戌，次丰宁，见大河之险，将保之，会天大风，迥趋灵武。
现代文：二十八日，歇驻丰宁，见大河险要，想占据它，适逢天起大风，回转疾奔灵武。
English: On the 28th, he stopped in Fengning, saw that the river was in danger and wanted to occupy it, when a strong wind arose, he turned around and rushed to Lingwu.

古文：七月辛酉，至于灵武。
现代文：七月初九，到达灵武。
English: On the ninth day of the seventh month, I arrived in Lingwu.

古文：壬戌，裴冕等请皇太子即皇帝位。
现代文：初十，裴冕等人请皇太子李亨就皇帝位。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, Fei Guan and others invited Crown Prince Li Heng to become emperor.

古文：甲子，即皇帝位于灵武，尊皇帝曰上皇天帝，大赦，改元至德。
现代文：十二日，李亨在灵武登皇位，奉玄宗为上皇天帝，施行大赦，改年号为 至德 。
English: On the twelfth day, Li Heng ascended to the throne in Lingwu, honored Xuanzong as the last emperor, implemented an amnesty, and changed the year name to Shide.

古文：赐文武官阶、勋爵，版授老太守、县令。
现代文：赐予文武官员官阶、勋衔、爵位，授予贤德老人太守、县令荣衔。
English: Civil and military officials were given official ranks, honors, and peerages, and virtuous old men were awarded the titles of grand marshal and county magistrate.

古文：裴冕为中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：裴冕任中书令、同中书门下平章事。
English: Fei Guanyin was appointed as the middle school secretary, and the middle school teacher was promoted to the lower school secretary.

古文：甲戌，安禄山寇扶风，太守薛景仙败之。
现代文：二十二日，安禄山进犯扶风，太守薛景仙将其打败。
English: On the 22nd, Anlu Mountain attacked Fufeng, and the governor Xue Jingsian defeated it.

古文：八月辛卯，张巡及安禄山将李廷望战于雍丘，败之。
现代文：八月初十，张巡与安禄山部将李廷望在雍丘交战，打败李廷望。
English: At the beginning of August 10th, Zhang Jun and Anlu Shanbu fought Li Tingwang in Yongqiu, defeating Li Tingwang.

古文：十月辛巳朔，日有食之。
现代文：十月初一，日月合朔，有日蚀。
English: On the first day of October, the sun and moon are new, and there is a solar eclipse.

古文：癸未，次彭原郡。
现代文：初三，肃宗歇驻彭原郡。
English: In the third year of junior high school, Su Zonghe was stationed in Pengyuan County.

古文：诏御史谏官论事勿先白大夫及宰相。
现代文：诏令御史谏官议事不要先禀告大夫与宰相。
English: The edict ordered the magistrate not to inform the doctor and the prime minister first.

古文：始鬻爵、度僧尼。
现代文：开始实行卖爵、剃度僧尼。
English: The practice of selling titles of nobility and tonsuring monks and nuns began.

古文：房琯为招讨西京、防御蒲潼两关兵马元帅，兵部尚书王思礼副之。
现代文：房任招讨西京、防御蒲潼两关兵马元帅，兵部尚书王思礼任其副职。
English: Fang was appointed as the marshal of the army and cavalry of the Western Capital and the defense of Budai, and Shangshu Wang Sili of the Military Department was appointed as his deputy.

古文：南军入于宜寿，中军入于武功，北军入于奉天。
现代文：南军进入宜寿，中军进入武功，北军进入奉天。
English: The Southern Army entered Yishu, the Central Army entered Wugong, and the Northern Army entered Mingtian.

古文：辛卯，河南节度副使张巡及令狐潮战于雍丘，败之。
现代文：十一日，河南节度副使张巡与令狐潮在雍丘交战，打败令狐潮。
English: On the 11th, Zhang Jun, deputy envoy of Henan Festival, fought against Lingfuchao in Yongqiu and defeated Lingfuchao.

古文：辛丑，房琯以中军、北军及安禄山之众战于陈涛斜，败绩。
现代文：二十一日，房率中军、北军与安禄山部众在陈涛斜作战，大败。
English: On the twenty-first day, Fang led the Central Army, the Northern Army and the Anlu mountain troops to fight in Chen Tao slope, and suffered a crushing defeat.

古文：癸卯，琯又以南军战，败绩。
现代文：二十三日，房又率南军与其作战，大败。
English: On the 23rd, Fang again led the Southern Army into battle, and was soundly defeated.

古文：是月，遣永王璘朝上皇帝于蜀郡。
现代文：本月，肃宗派永王李瞞赴蜀郡朝见上皇天帝玄宗。
English: This month, Yong Wang Lichai of the Su Sect went to Shuxi County to see Emperor Xuanzong.

古文：璘反，丹徒郡太守阎敬之及璘战于伊娄埭，死之。
现代文：李瞞反叛，丹徒郡太守阎敬之与李瞞在伊娄埭作战，身亡。
English: Li Shizhe rebelled, Dantsu County Governor Yan Keizhi fought with Li Shizhe in Ili and was killed.

古文：十一月辛卯，河西地震。
现代文：十一月初一，河西地震。
English: On the first day of November, there was an earthquake in Hexi.

古文：戊午，崔涣为江南宣慰使。
现代文：初八，崔涣任江南宣慰使。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, Cui Yao was appointed as the propaganda and consolation envoy to the south of the Yangtze River.

古文：郭子仪率回纥及安禄山战于河上，败之。
现代文：郭子仪率回纥军与安禄山在黄河边作战，打败安禄山。
English: Guo Ziyi led the Uighur army to fight with Anlu Mountain on the Yellow River and defeated Anlu Mountain.

古文：史思明寇太原。
现代文：史思明进犯太原。
English: Shi Siming attacked Taiyuan.

古文：十二月，安禄山陷鲁、东平、济阴三郡。
现代文：十二月，安禄山攻破鲁、东平、济阴三郡。
English: In December, Anlu Mountain broke through Lu, Dongping and Jiyin counties.

古文：戊子，给复平原郡二载。
现代文：初九，肃宗诏令免除彭原郡徭役两年。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, Su Zong issued an edict exempting Pengyuan County from military service for two years.

古文：安禄山陷颍川，执太守薛愿及长史庞坚。
现代文：安禄山攻破颍川，俘虏太守薛愿与长史庞坚。
English: Mount Anlu breached the Li River, and the captives included the grand marshal Xue Jian and the chancellor Pang Jian.

古文：是岁，吐蕃陷隽州，岭南溪獠梁崇牵陷容州。
现代文：本年，吐蕃军攻破州，岭南的溪僚人梁崇牵攻破容州。
English: This year, the Tubo army broke through the state, and Liang Chong, a member of the south ridge of Lingnan, broke through the state.

古文：二载正月，永王璘陷鄱阳郡。
现代文：至德二载正月，永王李瞞攻下鄱阳郡。
English: In the first month of the second month of the year, Yong Wang Li Xie conquered Poyang County.

古文：乙卯，安庆绪杀其父禄山。
现代文：初六，安庆绪杀其父安禄山。
English: At the age of six, An Qingxu killed his father, An Lushan.

古文：丙寅，河西兵马使孟庭伦杀其节度使周佖，以武威郡反。
现代文：十七日，河西兵马使孟庭伦杀其节度使周亻必，据有武威郡反叛。
English: On the seventeenth day, the Hexi soldiers and horses sent Meng Tinglun to kill Zhou Xunbi, who was said to have rebelled in Wuwei County.

古文：乙亥，安庆绪将尹子奇寇睢阳郡，张巡败之。
现代文：二十六日，安庆绪部将尹子奇进犯睢阳郡，张巡将其挫败。
English: On the 26th day of the month, Anqing sent Yin Ziqi to attack Fenyang County, and Zhang Jun defeated him.

古文：二月戊子，次于凤翔。
现代文：二月初十，肃宗停驻凤翔。
English: On the tenth day of the second month, Su Zong stopped at Fengxiang.

古文：李光弼及安庆绪之众战于太原，败之。
现代文：李光弼与安庆绪的部众在太原作战，将其打败。
English: Li Guangyao fought with An Qingxu's followers in Taiyuan and defeated them.

古文：丁酉，关西节度兵马使郭英乂及安庆绪战于武功，败绩。
现代文：十九日，关西节度使郭英耣在武功与安庆绪作战，大败。
English: On the 19th, the Kansai Festival made Guo Yingyao fight with An Qingxu in martial arts, and he was defeated.

古文：庆绪陷冯翊郡，太守萧贲死之。
现代文：安庆绪攻破冯翊郡，太守萧贲身亡。
English: An Qingxu defeated Fengye County, and the governor Xiao Yao was killed.

古文：庆绪将蔡希德寇太原。
现代文：安庆绪部将蔡希德进犯太原。
English: Anqing Yingbu attacked Cai Xide in Taiyuan.

古文：戊戌，庶人璘伏诛。
现代文：二十日，将被废黜为平民的李瞞处死。
English: On the 20th, Li Xie, who was to be deposed as a commoner, was executed.

古文：庚子，敦子仪及安庆绪战于潼关，败之。
现代文：二十二日，郭子仪与安庆绪在潼关作战，将其打败。
English: On the 22nd, Guo Ziyi fought with An Qingxu in Shaoguan and defeated him.

古文：壬寅，河西判官崔偁克武威郡，孟庭伦伏诛。
现代文：二十四日，河西判官崔翶攻克武威郡，孟庭伦被处死。
English: On the 24th, the judge of Hexi, Cui Ying, invaded Kewei County, and Meng Tinglun was executed.

古文：甲辰，郭子仪及安庆绪战于永丰仓，败之，大将李韶光、王祚死之。
现代文：二十六日，郭子仪与安庆绪在永丰仓作战，将其打败；大将李韶光、王祚阵亡。
English: On the 26th, Guo Ziyi fought with An Qingxu in Yongfeng Cang and defeated him; Generals Li Yuguang and Wang Qiming were killed in the battle.

古文：三月辛酉，韦见素、裴冕罢。
现代文：三月十三日，韦见素、裴冕被免职。
English: On March 13, Wei Mingsu and Pei Guan were removed from their posts.

古文：宪部尚书致仕苗晋卿为左相。
现代文：已辞官归居的宪部尚书苗晋卿任左相。
English: Constitutional Minister Shoshu Miao Jinqing, who had resigned from his post and returned home, was appointed Minister of the Left.

古文：四月戊寅，郭子仪为关内、河东副元帅。
现代文：四月初一，郭子仪任关内、河东副元帅。
English: On April 1, Guo Ziyi was appointed deputy marshal of Guennai and Hedong.

古文：壬午，瘗阵亡者。
现代文：初五，掩埋阵亡将士。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, the dead soldiers were buried.

古文：庚寅，郭子仪及安庆绪李归仁战于刘运桥，败之。
现代文：十三日，郭子仪与安庆绪部将李归仁在刘运桥作战，打败李归仁。
English: On the 13th, Guo Ziyi and Anqing Xube fought Li Guiren at Liu Yun Bridge and defeated Li Guiren.

古文：五月癸丑，子仪及庆绪将安守忠战于清渠，败绩。
现代文：五月初六，郭子仪与安庆绪部将安守忠在清渠作战，大败。
English: On the 6th day of the 5th month, Guo Ziyi and Anqing Xube sent An Shou Zhong to fight in the Clear Channel, and were soundly defeated.

古文：丁巳，房琯罢，谏议大夫张镐为中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：初十，房被免职，谏议大夫张镐任中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
English: On the 10th day of the first month of the year, Fong was relieved of his duties, and the doctor Zhang Ye was appointed as the junior secretary of the middle school and the junior secretary of the middle school.

古文：六月癸未，尹子奇冠睢阳。
现代文：六月初七，尹子奇进犯睢阳。
English: On the 7th day of the 6th month, Yin Ziqi invaded Shenyang.

古文：丁酉，南充郡民何滔执其太守杨齐曾以反，剑南节度使卢元裕败之。
现代文：二十一日，南充郡平民何滔抓了本郡太守杨齐曾反叛，剑南节度使卢元裕将其打败。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, the civilians of Nanchong County caught Yang Qi, the governor of the county, who had rebelled, and the Jianan Festival made Lu Yuanyu defeat him.

古文：七月己酉，太白经天。
现代文：七月初三，太白星白昼行经天空。
English: On the third day of the seventh lunar month, a white star streaked across the sky in broad daylight.

古文：丁巳，安庆绪将安武臣陷陕郡。
现代文：十一日，安庆绪部将安武臣攻破陕郡。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Anqing Xube defeated Anwu County.

古文：八月丁丑，焚长春宫。
现代文：八月初一，焚毁长春宫。
English: On the first day of August, the Changchun Palace was burned down.

古文：甲申，崔涣罢。
现代文：初八，崔涣免职。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, Cui Yao was relieved of his duties.

古文：张镐兼河南节度使，都统淮南诸军事。
现代文：张镐兼河南节度使，统领淮南所有军事。
English: Zhang Qian was also Henan's ceremonial envoy, commanding all military forces in Huainan.

古文：灵昌郡太守许叔冀奔于彭城。
现代文：灵昌郡太守许叔冀逃奔至彭城。
English: Lingchang County Governor Xu Shuji fled to Pengcheng.

古文：癸巳，大阅。
现代文：十七日，肃宗对军队大检阅。
English: On the 17th, Su Zong inspected the troops.

古文：闰月甲寅，安庆绪寇好畤，渭北节度使李光进败之。
现代文：闰八月初九，安庆绪进犯好，渭北节度使李光进将其打败。
English: On the 9th day of the 8th month of the leap year, An Qingxu made a good attack, and Li Guangjin defeated it.

古文：丁卯，广平郡王俶为天下兵马元帅，郭子仪副之，以朔方、安西、回纥、南蛮、大食兵讨安庆绪。
现代文：二十二日，广平郡王李任天下兵马元帅，郭子仪任其副职，率领朔方、安西、回纥、南蛮、大食军队讨伐安庆绪。
English: On the 22nd, Wang Li of Guangping County was appointed as the world's field marshal, and Guo Ziyi was appointed as his deputy. They led the armies of Shuofang, Anxi, Huizhou, Nanban and Daxi to fight against Anqingxu.

古文：辛未，京畿采访宣慰使崔光远及庆绪战于骆谷，败之。行军司马王伯伦战于苑北，死之。
现代文：二十六日，京畿采访宣尉使崔光远与安庆绪在骆谷作战，将其打败；行军司马王伯伦在苑北作战，阵亡。
English: On the twenty-sixth day of the month, the Gyeonggi Interrogation and Propaganda Officer sent Cui Guangyuan and An Qingxu to fight in Luogu and defeated them; the marching Sima Wang Buren fought in Yunbei and died in battle.

古文：九月丁丑，庆绪陷上党郡，执节度使程千里。
现代文：九月初二，安庆绪攻破上党郡，俘虏节度使程千里。
English: On the second day of the first month of September, Anqingxu broke through Shangdang County, and the captives of the festival made Cheng Qianli.

古文：壬寅，广平郡王俶及庆绪战于澧水，败之。
现代文：二十七日，广平郡王李与安庆绪在沣水作战，打败安庆绪。
English: On the 27th, Wang Li of Guangping County fought with An Qingxu in Surabaya, defeating An Qingxu.

古文：癸卯，复京师。
现代文：二十八日，收复京城长安。
English: On the 28th, Beijing Chang'an was recaptured.

古文：庆绪奔于陕郡。
现代文：安庆绪逃奔到陕郡。
English: An Qingxu fled to Shaanxi.

古文：尚书左仆射裴冕告太清宫、郊庙、社稷、五陵，宣慰百姓。
现代文：尚书左仆射裴冕祭告太清宫、郊庙、社稷、五陵，宣慰百姓。
English: Shangshu Zuofu shot Fei Guan Festival to tell the Taiqing Palace, suburban temples, shrines, five mausoleums, and comfort the people.

古文：十月戊申，广平郡王俶及安庆绪战于新店，败之，克陕郡。
现代文：十月初四，广平郡王李与安庆绪在新店作战，打败安庆绪，攻克陕郡。
English: At the beginning of October 4, Wang Li of Guangping County fought with An Qingxu in Xindian, defeated An Qingxu and conquered Shaanxi County.

古文：壬子，复东京，庆绪奔于河北。
现代文：初八，收复东京洛阳，安庆绪逃往河北。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, Luoyang in Tokyo was recaptured, and An Qingxu fled to Hebei.

古文：兴平军兵马使李奂及庆绪之众战于武关，败之，克上洛郡。
现代文：兴平军兵马使李奂与安庆绪部众在武关作战，将其打败，攻克上洛郡。
English: The soldiers and horses of the Xingping Army made Li Qian fight with the people of Anqing in Wuguan, defeated them, and conquered Shangluo County.

古文：吐蕃陷西平郡。
现代文：吐蕃军攻破西平郡。
English: The Tubo army broke through Xiping County.

古文：癸丑，安庆绪陷睢阳，太守许远及张巡、郓州刺史姚訚、左金吾卫将军南霁云皆死之。
现代文：初九，安庆绪攻破睢阳，太守许远与张巡、郓州刺史姚门言、左金吾卫将军南霁云俱都牺牲。
English: On the 9th day of the first month, Anqingxu defeated Poyang, and the grand marshals Xu Yuan and Zhang Jun, the governor of Bozhou Zhishi Yao Mengyan, and the general of ZuoJingWu NanJingYun all died.

古文：癸亥，给复凤翔五载，版授父老官。
现代文：十九日，免除凤翔的徭役五年，授予当地父老荣衔。
English: On the 19th, Fengxiang was exempted from five years of military service and was awarded the title of local patriarch.

古文：遣太子太师韦见素迎上皇天帝于蜀郡。
现代文：派太子太师韦见素到蜀郡迎还上皇天帝玄宗。
English: He sent the crown prince and grand master Wei Jian Su to Shu County to welcome back the last emperor Emperor Xuanzong.

古文：丁卯，至自灵武，飨于太庙，哭三日。
现代文：二十三日，肃宗自灵武返京，合祭太庙，哭泣三日。
English: On the 23rd, Su Zong returned to Beijing from Lingwu, joined the festival at the Great Temple, and wept for three days.

古文：己巳，关内节度使王思礼及安庆绪战于绛郡，败之。
现代文：二十五日，关内节度使王思礼与安庆绪在绛郡作战，打败安庆绪。
English: On the 25th, the Guanai Festival made Wang Sili and An Qingxu fight in Ya County, defeating An Qingxu.

古文：十一月丙子，张镐率四镇伊西北庭行营兵马使李嗣业、陕西节度使来瑱、河南都知兵马使嗣吴王祗克河南郡县。
现代文：十一月初二，张镐率领四镇、伊西、北庭行营兵马使李嗣业、陕西节度使来調、河南都知兵马使嗣吴王李祗攻克河南道的郡县。
English: On the second day of the first month of November, Zhang Ye led the four towns, Issi and Beiting to invade the counties and counties of Henan Province.

古文：庚子，作九庙神主，告享于长乐殿。
现代文：二十六日，制作先祖九庙的神主，在长乐殿祭告先祖。
English: On the 26th, the deities of the nine temples that produced the ancestors made offerings to the ancestors at the Changle Temple.

古文：十二月丙子，上皇天帝至自白蜀郡。
现代文：十二月初三，上皇天帝玄宗自蜀郡返还京城。
English: On the third day of the first month of December, Emperor Xuanzong returned the capital from Shu County.

古文：甲寅，苗晋卿为中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：十一日，苗晋卿任中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
English: On the 11th day, Miao Jinqing was appointed as the junior secretary of the middle school and the junior secretary of the middle school.

古文：戊午，大赦。
现代文：十五日，施行大赦。
English: On the 15th, a general amnesty was implemented.

古文：灵武元从、蜀郡扈从官三品以上予一子官，四品以下一子出身。
现代文：授予自始从灵武相随从、赴蜀郡的侍从官员三品以上者之子一人官职，四品以下者其一子授予吏部中试的出身。
English: From the beginning, one official post was awarded to the son of an attendant official who was from Lingwuxiang and went to Shu County and had three or more prizes, and one official post was awarded to the son of an attendant official who was from Lingwuxiang and went to Shu County, and one official post was awarded to the son of an attendant official who was from Lingwuxiang and went to Shu County.

古文：瘗阵亡者，致祭之，给复其家二载。
现代文：掩埋阵亡者，致以祭礼，免除其家庭徭役两年。
English: burying the dead in a ceremony, and exempting their families from forced labor for two years.

古文：免天下租、庸来岁三之一。
现代文：免除全国次年的租赋、应缴绢帛的三分之一。
English: Exemption from the next year's rent, up to one-third of the rent payable.

古文：禁珠玉、宝钿、平脱、金泥、刺绣。
现代文：禁止进献珠玉、宝钿、平脱、金泥、刺绣。
English: It is forbidden to offer jewels, precious stones, flat jewelry, gold dust, and embroidery.

古文：复诸州及官名。
现代文：恢复各州州名与官称。
English: Restoration of the names and official titles of the states.

古文：以蜀郡为南京，凤翔郡为西京，西京为中京。
现代文：将蜀郡作为南京，凤翔郡为西京，西京长安改为中京。
English: Shu County was changed to Nanjing, Fengxiang County was changed to Xijing, and Xijing Chang'an was changed to Zhongjing.

古文：给复潞州五载，并邓许滑宋五州、雍兵好畤奉先县二载，益州三载。
现代文：免除潞州的徭役五年，免除并、邓、许、滑、宋五个州，雍丘、好、奉先三县徭役两年，免除益州徭役三年。
English: He was exempted from the forced labor in Ganzhou for five years, and was exempted from the forced labor in the five provinces of Anhui, Deng, Xu, Nanning and Song, the forced labor in the three counties of Yongqiu, Gaoxian and Fengxian for two years, and the forced labor in Yizhou for three years.

古文：赐文武官阶、勋、爵，父老八十以上版授，加绯衣、银鱼，民酺五日。
现代文：赐予文武官员官阶、勋衔、爵位；八十岁以上父老授予荣衔，并加赐四、五品官员穿用的绯衣和银制鱼形佩饰；百姓聚饮五日。
English: Civil and military officials were given official ranks, honors, and peerages; fathers and grandfathers over the age of eighty were awarded honorary titles, and four and five-star officials were given a formal dress and silver fish-shaped jewelry; the people gathered for five days.

古文：广平郡王俶为太尉，进封楚王。
现代文：广平郡王李任太尉，晋封为楚王。
English: Li Ren, the king of Guangping County, was promoted to the rank of lieutenant and crowned King of Chu.

古文：苗晋卿为侍中，崔圆为中书令，李麟同中书门下三品。
现代文：苗晋卿任侍中，崔圆任中书令，李麟为同中书门下三品。
English: Miao Jinqing served as a chamberlain, Cui Yuan as a secretary, and Li Lin as the third-ranked secretary.

古文：进封子南阳郡王系为赵王，新城郡王仅鼓王，颍川郡王亻闲衮王，东阳郡王侹泾王。
现代文：肃宗晋封其子南阳郡王李系为赵王，新城郡王李仅为彭王，颍川郡王李亻间为兖王，东阳郡王李亻廷为泾王。
English: Su Zong Jinfeng's son Nanyang County King Li is Zhao King, Xincheng County King Li is only Peng King, Beichuan County King Li Yiming is Zhai King, Dongyang County King Li Yueting is Zhai King.

古文：封子僙为襄王，倕杞王，偲召王，佋兴王，侗定王。
现代文：封其子李亻黄为襄王，李亻垂为杞王，李亻思为召王，李亻召为兴王，李侗为定王。
English: He named his son Li Shuguang as the king of Xiang, Li Shuntian as the king of Shao, Li Shuxi as the king of Zhao, Li Shouzhao as the king of Xing, and Li Shizhao as the king of Ding.

古文：乙丑，史思明降。
现代文：二十二日，史思明投降。
English: On the 22nd, Shi Siming surrendered.

古文：壬申，达奚珣等伏诛。
现代文：二十九日，达奚繤等人伏法处死。
English: On the 29th, Daju and others were sentenced to death.

古文：乾元元年正月戊寅，上皇天帝御宣政殿，授皇帝传国、受命宝符，册号曰光天文武大圣孝感皇帝。
现代文：乾元元年正月初五，上皇天帝玄宗亲临宣政殿，传给肃宗传国玉玺，受命宝符，册封肃宗帝号 光天文武大圣孝感皇帝 。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the first year of Qianyuan, Emperor Xuanzong came to the Xuancheng Palace in person, passed on the State Jade Scepter to Emperor Suizong, and was ordered to seal the Emperor Suizong's name as the Emperor Guangxu Tianwenwuda Sheng Xiaogan.

古文：乙酉，出宫女三千人。
现代文：十二日，肃宗诏谕放出宫女三千人。
English: On the 12th, Emperor Suzong issued an edict to release three thousand palace maids.

古文：庚寅，大阅。
现代文：十七日，对军队大检阅。
English: On the 17th, a large-scale inspection of the army began.

古文：二月癸卯，安庆绪将能元皓以淄、青降，以元皓为河北招讨使。
现代文：二月初一，安庆绪部将能元皓献淄、青二州降顺朝廷，朝廷委派能元皓任河北招讨使。
English: On the first day of February, Anqing and Xubei offered Nengyuan and Qingyuzhou to the imperial court, and the imperial court appointed Nengyuan as the envoy of Hebei Province.

古文：乙巳，上上皇天帝册号曰圣皇天帝。
现代文：初三，肃宗给玄宗进献册号为 圣皇天帝 。
English: On the third day of the first month, Su Zong presented the book to Xuanzong with the title "Holy Emperor Tian Di."

古文：丁未，大赦，改元。
现代文：初五，施行大赦，改年号为乾元。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, an amnesty was implemented, and the year name was changed to Qianyuan.

古文：赠死事及拒伪命者官。
现代文：追赠以死报国与拒不接受安禄山伪朝任命者官称。
English: The posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous

古文：成都、灵州扈从三品以上予一子官，五品以上一子出身，六品以下叙进之。
现代文：赐予成都、灵州的随从官员三品以上者其子之一官职，五品以上者其子之一吏部中选出身，六品以下者按等级递升任职。
English: Accompanying officials in Chengdu and Lingshou will be given one of their sons an official post if they have three or more pins, one of their sons will be given an official post if they have five or more pins, and one of their sons will be given an official post if they are selected from the cadres. Those with six or fewer pins will be promoted according to their rank.

古文：免陷贼州三岁税。
现代文：免除沦陷于安禄山叛军的各州赋税三年。
English: Exempted the states that fell to the rebels in Anlu Hills from paying taxes for three years.

古文：赐文武官阶、爵。
现代文：赐予文武官员官阶、爵位。
English: Civil and military officials were given official ranks and peerages.

古文：三月甲戌，徙封俶为成王。
现代文：三月初二，改封李为成王。
English: On the second day of March, Li was renamed Chengwang.

古文：戊寅，立淑妃张氏为皇后。
现代文：初六，立淑妃张氏为皇后。
English: On the 6th day of the 6th month of the first year of junior high school, Li Shuxi became the empress of the Zhang clan.

古文：四月辛亥，祔神主于太庙。
现代文：四月初十，肃宗奉新近故去的先帝神位到太庙祭祀。
English: On the 10th day of the 4th month of the year, Su Zong went to the Imperial Temple to offer sacrifices to the newly deceased Emperor.

古文：甲寅，朝享于太庙，有事于南郊。
现代文：十三日，到太庙祭祀，在京城南郊祭天。
English: On the 13th, a ritual was held at the Imperial Temple, followed by a festival in the southern suburbs of the capital.

古文：乙卯，大赦，赐文武官阶、勋、爵，天下非租、庸毋辄役使，有能赈贫究宠以官爵，京官九品以上言事，二王、三恪予一子官。
现代文：十四日，施行大赦，赐予文武官员官阶、勋衔、爵位，规定：不够承担租、庸的未成年男丁不要动辄役使；凡能救济贫困者授予官爵以示尊荣；诏谕九品以上的京官议政；凡按诸侯国国君对待的以往王朝帝王后裔，授予其子一人官职。
English: On the 14th, an amnesty was implemented, awarding civil and military officials with official ranks, honors, and peerages, stipulating that: underage males who are not able to bear rent and poverty should not engage in forced labor; those who can help the poor should be awarded official ranks as a sign of honor; Beijing officials above the ninth grade should discuss politics; descendants of previous dynasties who are treated as princes should be awarded official positions.

古文：史思明杀范阳节度副使乌承恩以反。
现代文：同日，史思明杀了范阳节度副使乌承恩反叛。
English: On the same day, Shi Siming killed Fan Yang, vice-envoy of the Qing Dynasty, who had rebelled against Wu Cheng'en.

古文：五月戊子，张镐罢。
现代文：五月十七日，张镐被免职。
English: On May 17th, Zhang Ye was removed from his post.

古文：乙未，崔圆、李麟罢。
现代文：二十四日，崔圆、李麟被免职。
English: On the 24th, Cui Yuan and Li Lin were dismissed.

古文：太常少卯王玙为中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：太常少卿王任中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
English: Too often, Shokei Wang was appointed as the junior secretary of the middle school and the junior secretary of the middle school.

古文：七月，党项羌寇边。
现代文：七月，党项的羌族侵扰边境。
English: In July, the Party-designated Yi people invaded the border again.

古文：九月丙子，招讨党项使王仲升杀拓拔戎德。
现代文：九月初七，招讨党项使王仲升杀了拓拔戎德。
English: On the 7th day of the 9th month of the year, Wang Zhongsheng killed Tuoba Rongde by inciting the party.

古文：庚寅，郭子仪率李光弼、李嗣业、王思礼、淮西节度使鲁炅、兴平军节度使李奂、滑濮节度使许叔冀、平卢兵马使董秦、郑蔡节度使季广琛以讨安庆绪。
现代文：二十一日，郭子仪率李光弼、李嗣业、王思礼、淮西节度使鲁炅、兴平军节度使李奂、滑濮节度使许叔冀、平卢兵马使董秦、郑蔡节度使季广琛以讨伐安庆绪。
English: On the twenty-first day, Guo Ziyi led Li Guangyao, Li Shiye, Wang Sili, Huaxi Sect to Luye, Xingping Army Sect to Liye, Nianye Sect to Xu Shuji, Pinglu Army and Horse Sect to Dong Qin, Zheng Cai Sect to Ji Guangyao to fight against Anqingxu.

古文：癸巳，大食、波斯寇广州。
现代文：二十四日，大食、波斯军侵犯广州。
English: On the 24th, the Persian army invaded Guangzhou.

古文：十月甲辰，立成王俶为皇太子。
现代文：十月初五，立成王李为皇太子。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of October, Li Chengwang became crown prince.

古文：大赦。
现代文：施行大赦。
English: Amnesty for criminals.

古文：赐文武官阶、爵，五品以上子为父后者勋两转。
现代文：赐予文武官员官阶、爵位，五品以上官员勋官在其父之下者爵官两级。
English: Civil and military officials were given official ranks and titles of nobility, and officials with five or more pins were awarded two levels of nobility if they were younger than their fathers.

古文：举忠正孝友甚东宫官者。
现代文：选拔为人忠贞正直孝亲爱弟、能担任太子宫官员的人才。
English: The selection is for loyal, honest, filial and dear younger brothers, and those who can serve as officials of the imperial palace.

古文：十一月壬申，王思礼及安庆绪战于相州，败之。
现代文：十一月初三，王思礼与安庆绪在相州作战，打败安庆绪。
English: On the third day of the first month of November, Wang Sili and An Qingxu fought in Xiangzhou and defeated An Qingxu.

古文：十二月庚戌，户部尚书李亘都统淮南、江东、江酉节度使。
现代文：十二月十二日，户部尚书李簊任都统淮南、江东、江西节度使。
English: On December 12, the head of the Household Division, Shangshu Li Jun, was appointed as the special envoy to Huainan, Jiangdong and Jiangxi.

古文：丁卯，史思明陷魏州。
现代文：二十九日，史思明攻破魏州。
English: On the 29th, Shi Siming defeated Weizhou.

古文：二年正月己巳，群臣上尊号曰乾元大圣光天文武孝感皇帝。
现代文：乾元二年正月初一，群臣给肃宗敬献尊号为乾元大圣光天文武孝感皇帝。
English: On the first day of the first month of the second year of Qianyuan, a group of courtiers gave Su Zong the honorific title of Emperor Qianyuan Da Shengguang Astronomical Wu Xiaogan.

古文：郭子仪及安庆绪战于愁思冈，败之。
现代文：郭子仪与安庆绪在愁思冈作战，打败安庆绪。
English: Guo Ziyi and An Qingxu fought in Shuxi Hill and defeated An Qingxu.

古文：丁丑，祠九宫贵神。
现代文：初九，肃宗祭祀九宫贵神。
English: On the 9th day of the 9th month, Su Zong held a ceremony to worship the Nine Palace Gods.

古文：戊寅，耕籍田。
现代文：初十，在籍田上举行亲耕典礼。
English: On the tenth day of the new year, a ceremony was held on the family farm.

古文：二月壬戌，中书门下虑囚。
现代文：二月二十五日，中书门下省讯察记录囚犯的罪状。
English: On February 25th, the Provincial Information Office of the People's Republic of China inspected and recorded the prisoners' criminal records.

古文：三月己巳，皇后亲蚕。
现代文：三月初三，张皇后举行躬践蚕事的仪式。
English: On the third day of the third month of March, Empress Zhang held a ceremony to practice sericulture.

古文：壬申，九节度之师溃于滏水。
现代文：初六，九节度的军队在滏水溃败。
English: On the 6th and 9th day of the first month of the year, the army in Surabaya was routed.

古文：史思明杀安庆绪。
现代文：史思明杀死安庆绪。
English: Shi Siming killed An Qingxu.

古文：东京留守崔圆、河南尹苏震、汝州刺史贾至奔于襄、邓。
现代文：东京留守崔圆、河南尹苏震、汝州刺史贾至逃往襄、邓。
English: Cui Yuan who stayed in Tokyo, Yin Su Zhen from Henan Province, and Jia Shishi from Ruzhou fled to Xiang and Deng.

古文：郭子仪屯于东京。
现代文：郭子仪驻军东京。
English: Guo Ziyi stationed in Tokyo.

古文：丁亥，以旱降死罪，流以下原之；流民还者给复三年。
现代文：二十一日，因旱灾对死罪囚犯减刑，判流放罪以下的犯人免刑；流民还乡者免除三年徭役。
English: On the 21st, due to the drought, the death penalty for prisoners was reduced, and prisoners sentenced to less than the crime of exile were exempted from punishment; those who returned from exile were exempted from three years of forced labor.

古文：甲午，兵部侍郎吕諲同中书门下平章事。
现代文：二十八日，兵部侍郎吕加同中书门下平章事。
English: On the 28th, Lü Jia, the attendant of the Military Department, was promoted to the position of the second-ranked disciple of Zhongshu.

古文：乙未，苗晋卿、王玙罢。
现代文：二十九日，苗晋卿、王被免职。
English: On the 29th, Miao Jinqing and Wang were dismissed.

古文：京兆尹李岘为吏部尚书，中书舍人李揆为中书侍郎，户部侍郎第五琦：同中书门下平章事。
现代文：京兆尹李山见任吏部尚书，中书舍人李揆任中书侍郎，户部侍郎第五琦，并加同中书门下平章事。
English: Jing Zhaoyin Lishan was appointed as the secretary of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office

古文：丙申，郭子仪为东畿、山南东、河南等道诸节度防御兵马元帅。
现代文：三十日，郭子仪任东畿、山南东、河南等道诸节度防御兵马元帅。
English: On the 30th, Guo Ziyi was appointed marshal of the troops and horses for the defense of Donggi, Shannan Dong, Henan and other provinces.

古文：四月庚子，王思礼及史思明战于直千岭，败之。
现代文：四月初四，王思礼与史思明在直千岭作战，打败史思明。
English: On the fourth day of the fourth month of April, Wang Sili and Shi Siming fought in Zhiqiling, defeating Shi Siming.

古文：壬寅，诏减常膳服御，武德中尚作坊非赐蕃客、戎祀所须者皆罢之。
现代文：初六，肃宗下诏：减省平日膳食、服饰车马诸物；武德年间设置的宫中杂物营造作坊制作之物，除赐给外邦宾客、军戎祭祀所必须的器物外，其他全部停造。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, Emperor Suzong issued an edict: cut back on daily meals, clothing, chariots and horses, and all other things; the palace's miscellaneous items that had been set up during the Wude era were replaced with items made in workshops, and all other items were stopped, except for items given to foreign guests and items necessary for military rituals.

古文：五月辛巳，贬李岘为蜀州刺史。
现代文：五月十六日，将李山见贬为蜀州刺史。
English: On May 16th, Li Shandi was relegated to a footnote in the history of Shuzhou.

古文：七月辛巳，赵王系为天下兵马元帅，李光弼副之。
现代文：七月十七日，赵王李系任天下兵马元帅，李光弼任副帅。
English: On July 17th, Zhao Wang Lijie was appointed as the Marshal of the world's soldiers and horses, and Li Guangyao was appointed as the Vice-Marshal.

古文：辛卯，吕諲罢。
现代文：二十七日，吕被免职。
English: On the 27th, Lu was removed from his post.

古文：八月乙巳，襄州防御将康楚元、张嘉廷反，逐其刺史王政。
现代文：八月十二日，襄州防御将领康楚元、张嘉延反叛，驱逐了本州刺史王政。
English: On August 12th, Kang Chuyuan and Zhang Jianyan, the defense generals of Xiangzhou, rebelled and drove out Honshu Sisi Wang Zheng.

古文：九月甲子，张嘉延陷刑州。
现代文：九月初一，张嘉延攻破荆州。
English: On the first day of September, Zhang Jianyan invaded Jingzhou.

古文：丁亥，太子少保崔光远为荆襄招讨、山南东道处置兵马使。
现代文：二十四日，太子少保崔光远任荆襄招讨、山南东道处置兵马使。
English: On the 24th, Crown Prince Shao Bao Cui Guangyuan sent an envoy to invite Jingxiang and Shannan to host and dispose of the soldiers and horses.

古文：庚寅，史思明陷东京及齐、汝、郑、滑四州。
现代文：二十七日，史思明攻破东京与齐、汝、郑、滑四州。
English: On the 27th, Shi Siming defeated Tokyo and Qi, Ru, Zheng and Niu Shizhou.

古文：十月乙巳，李光弼及史思明战于河阳，败之。
现代文：十月十二日，李光弼与史思明在河阳作战，打败史思明。
English: On October 12th, Li Guangyao fought with Shi Siming in Heyang and defeated Shi Siming.

古文：壬戌，吕諲起复。
现代文：二十九日，吕重被起用。
English: On the 29th, Lv Chung was appointed to the position.

古文：十一月庚午，贬第五琦为忠州刺史。
现代文：十一月初七，将第五琦贬为忠州刺史。
English: On the 7th day of the 11th month of the lunar calendar, the 5th day of the 11th month was relegated to the history of Chungju.

古文：十二月乙巳，康楚元伏诛。
现代文：十二月十三日，康楚元被处死。
English: On December 13, Kang Chuyuan was executed.

古文：史思明寇陕州，神策军将卫伯玉败之。
现代文：史思明进犯陕州，神策军将领卫伯玉将其打败。
English: Shishiming invaded Shaanxi, and was defeated by the general of the Shenzhao Army, the general of the Shenzhao Army, and the general of the Shenzhao Army, Bo Yu.

古文：上元元年三月丙子，降死罪，流以下原之。
现代文：上元元年三月十五日，对死罪囚犯减刑，流放罪以下的犯人免刑。
English: On March 15, 1861, the death penalty was commuted for death row prisoners, and those with less than banishment were pardoned.

古文：四月戊申，山南东道将张维瑾反，杀其节度使史翙。
现代文：四月十八日，山南东道将领张维瑾反叛，杀了其节度使史岁羽。
English: On April 18th, Zhang Weiqi, the host general of Shannan, rebelled and killed his festival to make history.

古文：丁巳，有彗星出于娄、胃。
现代文：二十七日，在天区的娄、胃二星宿间出现彗星。
English: On the 27th, a comet appeared in the sky between the two stars of the constellation Crux and the Stomach.

古文：己未，来瑱为山南东道节度使，以讨张维瑾。
现代文：二十九日，来調任山南东道节度使，以讨伐张维瑾。
English: On the 29th, he was transferred to the post of Shannan Host Festival Envoy to fight against Zhang Weiwei.

古文：闰月辛酉，有彗星出于西方。
现代文：闰四月初一，在西方天区出现彗星。
English: On the first day of leap April, a comet appeared in the western sky.

古文：甲戌，徙封系为越王。
现代文：十四日，改封李系为越王。
English: On the 14th, he changed his title from Li to Yue Wang.

古文：己卯，大赦，改元，赐文武官爵。
现代文：十九日，施行大赦，更改年号，赐予文武官员爵位。
English: On the 19th, an amnesty was implemented, the year was changed, and civil and military officials were given peerages.

古文：追封太公望为武成王。
现代文：追封太公望吕尚为武成王。
English: Lushang, the successor to Emperor Taigong, was crowned King Wucheng.

古文：复死刑三覆奏。
现代文：恢复死刑复奏审议三次的制度。
English: The three-stage system of death penalty review will be restored.

古文：是月，大饥。
现代文：本月，发生大饥荒。
English: This month, a major famine broke out.

古文：张维瑾降。
现代文：张维瑾投降。
English: Zhang Weiwei surrendered.

古文：五月丙午，太子太傅苗晋卿为侍中。
现代文：五月十三日，太子太傅苗晋卿任侍中。
English: On May 13, Miao Jinqing, the prince's great-grandfather, was appointed as a chamberlain.

古文：壬子，吕諲罢。
现代文：十九日，吕被免职。
English: On the 19th, Lv was removed from office.

古文：六月乙丑，凤翔节度使崔光远及羌、浑、党项战于泾、陇，败之。
现代文：六月初七，凤翔节度使崔光远与羌、浑、党项军在泾、陇一带作战，打败敌军。
English: On the 7th day of the 6th month of the year, the Fengxiang Festival made Cui Guangyuan fight with the Shao, Hun and Dangxiang armies in the Shao and Shao areas and defeat the enemy army.

古文：乙酉，又败之于普润。李光弼及史思明战于怀州，败之。
现代文：二十七日，在普润，崔光远再次打败羌、浑、党项军。同日，李光弼在怀州与史思明作战并打败他。
English: On the 27th, in Purun, Cui Guangyuan once again defeated the Shao, Hun and Dangxiang armies. On the same day, Li Guangyuan fought and defeated Shi Siming in Waizhou.

古文：七月丁未，圣皇天帝迁于西内。
现代文：七月十九日，圣皇天帝玄宗迁居西内。
English: On July 19, Emperor Xuanzong moved to Xinai.

古文：十一月甲午，扬州长史刘展反，陷润州。
现代文：十一月初八，扬州长史刘展反叛，攻破润州。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of November, Yang governor Shi Liu Zhen rebelled and invaded Rongzhou.

古文：丙申，陷升州。
现代文：初十，攻破升州。
English: On the 10th day of the 1st month, he broke through Shoshu.

古文：壬子，李峘、淮南节度使邓景山及刘展战于淮上，败绩。
现代文：二十六日，李簊、淮南节度使邓景山在淮上与刘展作战，大败。
English: On the 26th, Li Qian and Huainan Jiedu made Deng Jingshan fight Liu Zhan on Huai, and suffered a crushing defeat.

古文：是岁，吐蕃陷廓州。
现代文：本年，吐蕃军攻破廓州。
English: This year, the Tubo Army defeated the Kuoshu.

古文：西原蛮寇边，桂州经略使邢济败之。
现代文：西原蛮侵扰边境，桂州经略使邢济将其击败。
English: Nishihara invaded the border and was defeated by Guizhou's economy.

古文：二年正月甲寅，降死罪，流以下原之。
现代文：上元二年正月二十八日，对死罪囚犯减刑，流放罪以下的犯人免刑。
English: On the 28th day of the first month of the second year of the first century, the death penalty was commuted for prisoners, and prisoners who had committed less than the crime of banishment were pardoned.

古文：乙卯，刘展伏诛。
现代文：二十九日，刘展伏法处死。
English: On the 29th, Liu Zhenfu was put to death.

古文：二月己未，奴剌、党项羌寇宝鸡，焚大散关，寇凤州，刺史萧忄曳死之，凤翔尹李鼎败之。
现代文：二月初四，奴剌、党项羌军队进犯宝鸡，火焚大散关，进攻凤州，刺史萧忄曳死难，凤翔尹李鼎打败敌军。
English: On the 4th day of the 2nd month of the year, the army of Nuxuan and the Party's Zhangye marched into Baoji, set fire to the Great Sankuan, attacked Fengzhou, killed Shi Xiaohui, and defeated the enemy army of Fengxiang, Yin and Liding.

古文：戊寅，李光弼及史思明战于北邙，败绩。
现代文：二十三日，李光弼在北邙与史思明作战，大败。
English: On the 23rd, Li Guangyao fought against Shi Siming in Beilun and was soundly defeated.

古文：思明陷河阳。
现代文：史思明攻破河阳。
English: Shi Siming broke through Heyang.

古文：癸未，贬李揆为袁州长史。
现代文：二十八日，将李揆贬为袁州长史。
English: On the 28th, Li Yu was demoted to Yuan Guo Shi.

古文：河中节度使萧华为中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：河中节度使萧华任中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
English: At the mid-river festival, Xiao Hua was appointed as the attendant of the middle school, and the middle school's teacher was promoted.

古文：乙酉，来瑱及史思明战于鲁山，败之。
现代文：三十日，来調在鲁山与史思明作战，打败史思明。
English: On the 30th, Lai Tong fought with Shi Siming in Lushan and defeated him.

古文：三月甲午，史朝义寇陕州，神策军节度使卫伯玉败之。
现代文：三月初九，史朝义进犯陕州，神策军节度使卫伯玉将其打败。
English: On the 9th day of the 3rd month, Shi Chao Yi invaded Shaanxi Province, and Wei Bo Yu defeated him with the help of Shen Zhe Army.

古文：戊戌，史朝义杀其父思明。
现代文：十三日，史朝义杀其父史思明。
English: On the 13th, Shi Chao killed his father Shi Siming.

古文：李光弼罢副元帅。
现代文：李光弼被免去副元帅职务。
English: Li Guangyao was removed from the post of vice-marshal.

古文：四月己未，吏部侍郎裴遵庆为黄门侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：四月初五，吏部侍郎裴遵庆任黄门侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
English: On the fifth day of the fourth month of the lunar calendar, Pei Zunqing, the attendant of the personnel department, was appointed as the attendant of the Yellow Gate, and He Ping, the bookkeeper of the same school, was appointed.

古文：乙亥，青密节度使尚衡及史朝义战，败之。
现代文：二十一日，青密节度使尚衡与史朝义作战，将其打败。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, the Qing Emperor sent Shang Heng to fight against Shi Chao Yi and defeated him.

古文：丁丑，衮郓节度使能元皓又败之。
现代文：二十三日，兖郓节度使能元皓再次反叛史朝义。
English: On the twenty-third day of the month, the emperor once again rebelled against the imperial court.

古文：壬午，剑南东川节度兵马使段子璋反，陷绵州，遂州刺史嗣虢王巨死之，节度使李奂奔于成都。
现代文：二十八日，剑南东川节度兵马使段子璋反叛，攻破绵州，遂州刺史、嗣虢王李巨阵亡，节度使李奂逃往成都。
English: On the 28th, the soldiers and horses of the Jiannan Dongchuan Festival made Duan Zixuan rebel, defeated Mianzhou, and Suizhou's prince and heir to the throne, Li Jiu, died in battle. The festival made Li Zixuan flee to Chengdu.

古文：五月甲午，史朝义将令狐彰以滑州降。
现代文：五月初十，史朝义的部将令狐彰献出滑州归降。
English: On the 10th day of the 5th month of the 1st year of the 3rd month of the 4th year of the 5th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 7th year of the 8th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 10th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 12th year of the 12th year of the 13th year of the 13th year of the 14th year of the 13th year of the 14th year of the 15th year of the 15th year of the 15th year of the 16th year of the 16th year of the 17

古文：戊戌，平卢军节度使侯希逸及史朝义战于幽州，败之。
现代文：十四日，平卢军节度使侯希逸在幽州与史朝义作战，打败史朝义。
English: On the 14th, the Pinglu military festival made Hou Xiyi fight against Shichao Yi in Yuzhou, defeating Shichao Yi.

古文：庚子，李光弼为河南道副元帅。
现代文：十六日，李光弼任河南道副元帅。
English: On the 16th, Li Guangyao was appointed deputy marshal of Henan Province.

古文：剑南节度使崔光远克东川，段子璋伏诛。
现代文：剑南节度使崔光远攻克东川，段子璋伏法处死。
English: At the Jian'nan Festival, Cui Guangyuan defeated Dongchuan and was executed by hanging.

古文：七月癸未朔，日有食之。
现代文：七月初一，日月合朔，有日蚀。
English: On the first day of July, the sun and the moon are new, and there is a solar eclipse.

古文：八月辛巳，殿中监李国贞都统朔方、镇西、北庭、兴平、陈郑、河中节度使。
现代文：八月二十九日，殿中监李国贞任都统朔方、镇西、北庭、兴平、陈郑、河中节度使。
English: On August 29th, the court chancellor Li Guozhen was appointed as the festival envoy to Shuo Fang, Zhenxi, Beiting, Xingping, Chen Zheng, and Hechong.

古文：九月壬寅，大赦，去 乾元大圣光天文武孝感 号，去 上元 号，称元年，以十一月为岁首，月以斗所建辰为名。
现代文：九月二十一日，施行大赦，肃宗自去 乾元大圣光天文武孝感 的尊号，去掉 上元 年号，仅称 元年 ，以夏历十一月为岁首，月序以北斗星斗柄所指的十二辰为名。
English: On September 21st, an amnesty was carried out, and Su Zong gave up the honorific title of "Qianyuan Da Shengguang Tianwenwu Xiaoxiang," and removed the name of the year of the previous year, only called the first year of the year, with the first day of the year in November of the lunar calendar, and the name of the twelfth hour of the month in the name of the Big Dipper.

古文：赐文武官阶、勋、爵，版授侍老官，先授者叙进之。
现代文：赐予文武官员官阶、勋号、爵位；授予贤德老人荣誉官衔，先前已授有的依次递加。
English: The civil and military officials were given official ranks, honorary titles, and peerages; the virtuous old people were awarded honorary titles, and the previously awarded ones were successively added.

古文：停四京号。
现代文：停止使用四京的称号。
English: To stop using the title of Shikyo.

古文：元年建子月癸巳，曹州刺史常休明及史朝义将薛崿战，败之。
现代文：元年十一月十二日，曹州刺史常休明与史朝义部将薛萫作战，打败薛萫。
English: On November 12th, the first year of the new year, Caozhou assassinated the historical Chang Xuming and the historical Chao Yibe general Xue Yao in battle, defeating Xue Yao.

古文：己亥，朝圣皇天帝于西内。
现代文：十八日，肃宗至西内朝见圣皇天帝玄宗。
English: On the 18th, Su Zong went to the Inner West to see Emperor Xuanzong.

古文：建丑月辛亥，有事于南郊。己未，来瑱及史朝义战于汝州，败之。
现代文：二十五日，卫伯玉在永宁打败史朝义。二十八日，肃宗在太清宫举行有受祭者装扮人享用祭品的 朝献 祭祀。二十九日，在太庙及元献皇后庙祭祀。
English: On the 25th, Wei Bo-yul defeated Shi Chao-yi in Yongning. On the 28th, Su Zong held a morning sacrifice at the Taiqing Palace, with worshippers dressed up to enjoy the offerings. On the 29th, a sacrifice was held at the Tai Temple and the Queen's Temple.

古文：乙亥，侯希逸及朝义将李怀仙战于范阳，败之。
现代文：十二月初一，肃宗在京城南郊祭天。初九，来調在汝州战胜史朝义。二十五日，侯希逸在范阳战胜史朝义部将李怀仙。
English: On the first day of December, Su Zong held a festival in the southern suburbs of Beijing. On the ninth day of the month, Lai Tong defeated Shi Chaoyi in Ruzhou. On the 25th day, Hou Xiyi defeated Shi Chaoyi in Fanyang.

古文：宝应元年建寅月甲申，追册靖德太子琮为皇帝，妃窦氏为皇后。
现代文：宝应元年正月初四，追封靖德太子李琮为皇帝，李琮妃窦氏为皇后。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the first month of the first year of Baoying, the prince of Jingde, Li Qian, was made emperor, and Li Qianfei Dou became the empress.

古文：乙酉，葬王公妃主遇害者。
现代文：初五，安葬王公、妃子、公主中的遇害者。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, the victims of the princes, concubines, and princesses were buried.

古文：丙戌，盗发敬陵、惠陵。
现代文：初六，敬陵、惠陵被盗掘。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, the Jingling Tomb and the Huiling Tomb were stolen and excavated.

古文：甲辰，李光弼克许州。
现代文：二十四日，李光弼攻克许州。
English: On the 24th, Li Guangya invaded Keshu.

古文：吐蕃请和。
现代文：同日，吐蕃求和。
English: On the same day, Tubo sued for peace.

古文：戊申，史朝义陷营州。
现代文：二十八日，史朝义攻破营州。
English: On the 28th, Shi Chao Yi invaded Yingzhou.

古文：建卯月辛亥，大赦。
现代文：二月初一，施行大赦。
English: An amnesty came into effect on the first day of February.

古文：赐文武官阶、爵。
现代文：赐予文武官员官阶、爵位。
English: Civil and military officials were given official ranks and peerages.

古文：五品以上清望及郎官、御史荐流人有行业情可矜者。
现代文：让五品以上家世清白、为人敬重的人士及郎官、御史推举被流放人员中有操行功业、值得矜怜的人。
English: Let more than five generations of pure lineage, respectable people and vassals, and those who have performed meritorious deeds and are worthy of pity among the exiles selected by history.

古文：停贡鹰、鹞、狗、豹。
现代文：停止向朝廷进贡鹰、鹞、狗、豹。
English: Stop paying tribute to the imperial court in the form of eagles, kites, dogs, and leopards.

古文：以京兆府为上都，河南府为东都，凤翔府为西都，江陵府为南都，太原府为北都。
现代文：以京兆府作为上都，河南府为东都，凤翔府为西都，江陵府为南都，太原府为北都。
English: With Jingzhao as the upper capital, Henan as the eastern capital, Fengxiang as the western capital, Jiangling as the southern capital, and Taiyuan as the northern capital.

古文：壬子，羌、浑、奴剌寇梁州。
现代文：初二，羌、浑、奴剌军进犯梁州。
English: On the second day of the first month, the Qin, Hun, and Nu armies invaded Liangzhou.

古文：癸丑，河东军乱，杀其节度使邓景山，都知兵马使辛云京自称节度使。
现代文：初三，河东兵变，杀了节度使邓景山，都知兵马使辛云京自称节度使。
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, there was a mutiny in Hedong, and Deng Jingshan, the commander of the festival, was killed. Xin Yunjing, the commander of the soldiers and horses, claimed to be the commander of the festival.

古文：乙丑，河中军乱，杀李国贞及其节度使荔非元礼。
现代文：十五日，河中兵变，杀了李国贞及节度使荔非元礼。
English: On the 15th, there was a mutiny in the middle of the river, and Li Guozhen and the regent Li Fei Yuanli were killed.

古文：戊辰，淮西节度使王仲升及史朝义将谢钦让战于申州，败绩。
现代文：十八日，淮西节度使王仲升在申州与史朝义部将谢钦让作战，大败。
English: On the 18th, the Huaxi Festival caused Wang Zhongsheng to fight against the historical and political leader Xie Qinzhang in Shenzhou, and he was defeated.

古文：庚午，敦子仪知朔方、河中、北庭、潞仪泽沁节度行营，兴平、定国军兵马副元帅。
现代文：二十日，郭子仪主管朔方、河中、北庭及潞、仪、泽、沁诸州节度行营，并任兴平、定国军兵马副元帅。
English: On the 20th, Guo Ziyi was in charge of the Suo Fang, Hechu, Beiting, and Shun, Yi, Ze, and Jiu Zhuzhou festivals, and served as deputy marshal of the Xingping and Dingguo armies.

古文：壬申，鄜州刺史成公意及党项战，败之。
现代文：二十二日，州刺史成公意战胜党项军。
English: On the 22nd, the prefectural army defeated the party army.

古文：建辰月壬午，大赦，官吏听纳赃免罪，左降官及流人罚镇效力者还之。
现代文：三月初三，施行大赦：官吏听任僚属纳赃者免罪，被贬降级的官员与流放到藩镇效力的人员返还原处。
English: On the third day of the third month of March, an amnesty was implemented: officials who listened to their subordinates were pardoned, and officials who were demoted and those who were exiled to serve in the hanzhong were returned to their original places.

古文：甲午，奴剌寇梁州。
现代文：十五日，奴剌军进犯梁州。
English: On the 15th, the Nuba army invaded Liangzhou.

古文：戊申，萧华罢。
现代文：二十九日，萧华被免职。
English: On the 29th, Xiao Hua was removed from office.

古文：户部侍郎元载同中书门下平章事。
现代文：户部侍郎元载加中书门下平章事。
English: It has been reported that the head of the household, a chamberlain, was forced to resign from his post.

古文：建巳月庚戌，史朝义寇泽州，刺史李抱玉败之。
现代文：四月初一，史朝义进犯泽州，刺史李抱玉将其打败。
English: On the first day of April, Shi Chao Yi invaded Zezhou, and stabbed Shi Li Baoyu to defeat him.

古文：壬子，楚州献定国宝玉十有三。
现代文：初三，楚州进献定国宝玉十三件。
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, thirteen pieces of national treasure jade from Chuzhou were presented.

古文：甲寅，圣皇天帝崩。
现代文：初五，圣皇天帝玄宗逝世。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, Emperor Xuanzong passed away.

古文：乙丑，皇太子监国。
现代文：十六日，皇太子李亻叔代理国政。
English: On the 16th, Crown Prince Ri Yong Suk took over as acting head of state.

古文：大赦，改元年为宝应元年，复以正月为岁首，建巳月为四月。
现代文：施行大赦，改 元年 为宝应元年，恢复以夏历正月为岁首，周历 建巳 月为四月。
English: An amnesty was implemented, the first year of the year was changed to the first year of Baoying, the beginning of the year was restored to the first month of the summer calendar, and the month of April was restored to the first month of the lunar calendar.

古文：丙寅，闲厩使李辅国、飞龙厩副使程元振迁皇后于别殿，杀越王系、兗王亻闲。
现代文：十七日，闲厩使李辅国、飞龙厩副使程元振将皇后迁至别殿，杀了越王李系、兖王李亻间。
English: On the seventeenth day, the idle stable sent Li Suo Guo and the flying dragon stable deputy sent Cheng Yuan Zhen to move the queen to the annex, and killed the king of Yue, Li Xie, and the king of Yao, Li Xuan.

古文：是夜，皇帝崩于长生殿，年五十二。
现代文：此夜，肃宗在长生殿逝世，终年五十二岁。
English: On this night, Su Zong died in the Chosei-den, at the age of fifty-two.

古文：代宗睿文孝武皇帝讳豫，肃宗长子也。母曰章敬皇后吴氏。
现代文：代宗，名豫，肃宗的长子。母亲是章敬皇后吴氏。
English: Daizong, Nanyu, Su Zong's eldest son. His mother was Empress Zhang Jing of the Wu clan.

古文：玄宗诸孙百馀人，代宗最长，为嫡皇孙。
现代文：玄宗的孙子一百余人，代宗年岁最长，是嫡皇孙。
English: There are more than one hundred grandsons of Emperor Xuanzong. Emperor Daizong is the oldest, and he is the legitimate grandson of the emperor.

古文：聪明宽厚，喜愠不形于色，而好学强记，通《易》象。
现代文：他天姿聪明，为人宽厚，喜怒不形于色，又好学强记，通晓《易》理卦象。
English: He is intelligent by nature, generous by nature, indifferent to emotions, and good at learning and memorizing, and is familiar with the "Easy" logic elephant.

古文：初名俶，封广平郡王。
现代文：起初名，受封为广平郡王。
English: At first, he was named Guangping County King.

古文：安禄山反，玄宗幸蜀肃宗，留讨贼，代宗常从于兵间。
现代文：安禄山反叛，玄宗去往蜀郡，肃宗留下讨伐叛贼，代宗常在征战中随从肃宗。
English: Anlu Mountain rebelled, Xuanzong went to Shu County, Su Zong stayed behind to fight the rebels, and Daizong often followed Su Zong in the war.

古文：肃宗已即位，郭子仪等兵讨安庆绪，未克。
现代文：肃宗登基之后，郭子仪等征讨安庆绪，没有成功。
English: After Su Zong ascended to the throne, Guo Ziyi and others tried to recruit An Qingxu, but without success.

古文：肃宗在岐，至德二载九月，以广平郡王为天下兵马元帅，率朔方、安西、回纥、南蛮、大食等兵二十万以进讨，百官送于朝堂，过阙而下，步出木马门，然后复骑，以安西、北庭行营节度使李嗣业为前军，朔方、河西、陇右节度使郭子仪为中军，关内行营节度使王思礼为后军，屯于香积寺。
现代文：肃宗在岐州，至德二载九月，委任广平郡王李为天下兵马元帅，率领朔方、安西、回纥、南蛮、大食等军队二十万人进讨；文武百官在朝堂送行，经过宫阙时，他下马步行出木马门，然后上马，以安西、北庭行营节度使李嗣业为前军，朔方、河西、陇右节度使郭子仪为中军，关内行营节度使王思礼为后军，驻扎在香积寺。
English: Su Zong arrived in Qizhou in September of the 2nd year of the reign of Emperor Dezong, and appointed Wang Li of Guangping County to be the marshal of the world's soldiers and horses, leading 200,000 troops from Shuo, Anxi, Huizhou, Nanban, Daxi, etc. to march forward. Hundreds of civil and military officials escorted him in the imperial court, and when he passed through the imperial palace, he dismounted and walked out of the wooden horse gate, and then mounted his horse. With the Anxi and Beiting marching festival, Li Siye was the front army, with the Shuo, Hexi, and Shiyu festival, Gu

古文：败贼将安守忠，斩首六万级。
现代文：打败贼将安守忠，斩敌军六万首级。
English: Defeating the thieves will keep the peace and sever the heads of 60,000 enemy soldiers.

古文：贼将张通儒守长安，闻守忠败，弃城走，遂克京城，乃留思礼屯于苑中，代宗率大军以东。
现代文：贼将张通儒驻守长安，听说安守忠失败，弃城逃跑，从而收复京城，留王思礼屯驻宫苑，代宗率大军东征。
English: Thieves stationed Zhang Tongru in Chang'an. When they heard that Zhang Tongru had failed, they abandoned the city and fled. As a result, they were able to recapture the capital. Wang Silei stayed in the palace and led a large army eastward on behalf of the emperor.

古文：安庆绪遣其将严庄拒于陕州，代宗及子仪、嗣业战陕西，大败之，安庆绪奔于河北，遂克东都。
现代文：安庆绪派部将严庄在陕州抵御，代宗与郭子仪、李嗣业在陕州西部与严庄作战，大败严庄，安庆绪逃往河北，趁势收复东都。
English: An Qingxu's faction resisted Yan Zhuang in Shaanxi Province. Daizong fought with Guo Zi Yi and Li Siye against Yan Zhuang in western Shaanxi Province. They were soundly defeated. An Qingxu fled to Hebei Province and took advantage of the situation to recapture Dongdu.

古文：肃宗还京师。
现代文：肃宗返回京城长安。
English: Suizong returned to the capital Chang'an.

古文：十二月，进封楚王。
现代文：十二月，晋封李为楚王。
English: In December, Li was promoted to King of Chu.

古文：乾元元年三月，徙封成王。
现代文：乾元元年三月，改封他为成王。
English: In March of the first year of Qianyuan, his title was changed to Chengwang.

古文：四月，立为皇太子。
现代文：四月，被立为皇太子。
English: In April, he was appointed crown prince.

古文：初，太子生之岁，豫州献嘉禾，于是以为祥，乃更名豫。
现代文：当初，太子李出生的那年，豫州进献嘉禾，因此认为很吉祥，于是将他改名豫。
English: At first, the year Prince Li was born, Yuzhou presented Jiahe, so it was considered very auspicious, so he changed his name to Yu.

古文：肃宗去上元三年号，止称元年，月以斗所建辰为名。
现代文：肃宗去掉上元三年年号，仅称 元年 ，月序以北斗星斗柄所指十二辰为名。
English: Su Zong removed the name of the third year of the Yuan Dynasty, calling it only the first year, and the month order was named after the twelve hours of the Big Dipper.

古文：元年建巳月，肃宗寝疾，乃诏皇太子监国。
现代文：元年四月，肃宗卧病，诏令皇太子李豫代理国政。
English: In April of the first year, Su Zong was bedridden and ordered the crown prince Li Yu to take over state affairs.

古文：而楚州献定国宝十有三，因曰： 楚者，太子之所封，今天降宝于楚，宜以建元。 
现代文：本月楚州进献定国宝玉十三件，于是认为 楚州，是太子的封地，如今上天降宝在楚地，应以此建立新年号 。
English: This month, thirteen pieces of national treasure jade were presented from Chuzhou. Therefore, it is believed that Chuzhou, the fief of the prince, is now the treasure of heaven in Chudi, and it should be used to establish the New Year.

古文：乃以元年为宝应元年。
现代文：便将元年改为宝应元年。
English: The first year of the year was changed to the first year of the year.

古文：肃宗张皇后恶李辅国，欲图之，召问太子，太子不许，乃与越王系谋之。
现代文：肃宗的张皇后憎恶李辅国，想除掉他，召来太子问他的意见，太子李豫不同意，便与越王李系合谋。
English: The empress Zhang of Su Zong detested Li Yu Guo and wanted to get rid of him. She summoned the prince to ask his opinion. The prince Li Yu did not agree and conspired with the king of Yue.

古文：肃宗疾革。
现代文：肃宗病危。
English: Suson is critically ill.

古文：四月丁卯，皇后与系将召太子入宫，飞龙副使程元振得其谋，以告辅国。
现代文：四月十八日，张皇后与越王李系想召太子入宫，飞龙副使程元振得知他们的计谋，将其计谋告诉李辅国。
English: On April 18th, Empress Zhang and the king of Yue, Li Ke, wanted to call the prince into the palace. The deputy envoy of the Flying Dragon, Cheng Yuan Zhen, learned of their plan and told his plan to the State of Li Yue.

古文：辅国止太子无人，率兵入，杀系及衮王亻闲，幽皇后于别殿。
现代文：李辅国制止太子李豫不要进宫，然后带兵入宫，杀了李系与兖王李亻间，将张皇后幽禁在别殿。
English: Li Suo Guo stopped Prince Li Yu from entering the palace, and then he brought soldiers into the palace, killed Li Xie and the king of Qi, Li Yan, and imprisoned the queen Zhang in the other palace.

古文：是夕，肃宗崩，乃迎太子见群臣于九仙门。
现代文：这天夜晚，肃宗逝世，李辅国等迎接太子李豫在九仙门与群臣相见。
English: On this night, Su Zong passed away, Li Yue Guo and others greeted Prince Li Yu at the Nine Immortals Gate to meet with the courtiers.

古文：明日，发丧。
现代文：次日，发布讣告。
English: The next day, the obituary was published.

古文：己巳，即皇帝位于柩前。
现代文：二十日，代宗在肃宗灵柩前登皇位。
English: On the 20th, Daizong ascended the throne in front of Su Zong's coffin.

古文：癸酉，始听政。
现代文：二十四日，开始临朝听政。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, the imperial court began to listen to politics.

古文：甲戌，奉节郡王适为天下兵马元帅，郭子仪罢副元帅。
现代文：二十五日，奉节郡王李适任天下兵马元帅，免去郭子仪副元帅职务。
English: On the 25th day of the second lunar month, Wang Li was appointed as the world's military marshal, and Guo Ziyi was relieved of his duties as deputy marshal.

古文：乙亥，进封适为鲁王。
现代文：二十六日，晋封李适为鲁王。
English: On the 26th, Li Si was promoted to King of Lu.

古文：五月壬午，李辅国为司空。
现代文：五月初四，李辅国任司空。
English: On the fourth day of the fifth lunar month, Li Yuxu was appointed as the State Secretary of the Air Force.

古文：庚寅，追尊母为皇太后。
现代文：十二日，代宗追尊生母为皇太后。
English: On the twelfth day of the month, Daizong Suitsong's biological mother became the empress dowager.

古文：丙申，李光弼及史朝义战于宋州，败之。
现代文：十八日，李光弼与史朝义在宋州作战，打败史朝义。
English: On the 18th, Li Guangyao and Shi Chaoyi fought in Songzhou and defeated Shi Chaoyi.

古文：丁酉，大赦。
现代文：十九日，施行大赦。
English: On the 19th, a general amnesty was implemented.

古文：刺史予一子官，赐文武官阶、爵，子为父后者勋一转。免民逋租宿负。
现代文：授予刺史的一个儿子官职，赐予文武官员官阶、爵位，勋官在其父之下的加勋官一级，免除百姓历久拖欠的租赋。
English: He conferred an official post on one of the sons of Sisi, gave the civil and military officials the official rank and title, and the officers of honor under his father the level of officers of honor, and exempted the people from the long-delayed rent.

古文：进封子益昌郡王邈为郑王，延庆郡王迥韩王。
现代文：晋封其子益昌郡王李邈为郑王，延庆郡王李迥为韩王。
English: His son, Yi Chang County King Li Xi, was promoted to King Zheng, and Yanqing County King Li Xi was promoted to King Han.

古文：追复庶人王氏为皇后，瑛、瑶、琚皆复其封号。
现代文：被废黜为平民的王氏追复为皇后，李瑛、李瑶、李琚均恢复其原封号。
English: Wang, who had been dethroned as a commoner, was reinstated as empress, and Li Ying, Li Ye, and Li Ye all resumed their original titles.

古文：六月辛亥，追废皇后张氏、越王系、衮王亻闲皆为庶人。
现代文：六月初三，将皇后张氏、越王李系、兖王李亻间一并追废为平民。
English: On the third day of the first month of June, Empress Zhang, King Yue of the Li dynasty, and King Zhao of the Li dynasty were all abolished as commoners.

古文：七月乙酉，杀山南东道节度使裴。
现代文：七月初八，杀山南东道节度使裴罫。
English: On the 8th day of the 7th month of the year, the host of the festival in the southern part of the mountain was killed.

古文：癸巳，剑南西川兵马使徐知道反。
现代文：十六日，剑南西川兵马使徐知道反叛。
English: On the 16th, the soldiers and horses of Jianan and Xichuan let Xu know about the rebellion.

古文：八月己未，知道伏诛。
现代文：八月十二日，徐知道伏法处死。
English: On August 12, Xu was sentenced to death.

古文：辛未，台州人袁晁反。
现代文：二十五日，台州人袁晁反叛。
English: On the 25th, the Taizhou people rebelled against Yuan Shao.

古文：乙亥，徙封适为雍王。
现代文：二十九日，改封李适为雍王。
English: On the 29th, Li Si was renamed Yong Wang.

古文：九月戊子，凤州刺史吕日将及党项羌战于三嗟谷，败之。
现代文：九月十二日，凤州刺史吕日将在三嗟谷与党项羌军作战，打败羌军。
English: On September 12th, Lv Rih, the governor of Fengzhou, will fight against the Kuomintang army in Samcheok Valley and defeat the Kuomintang army.

古文：丙申，回纥请助战。
现代文：二十日，回纥请求助战。
English: On the 20th, Hui Xuan called for help.

古文：壬寅，大阅。
现代文：二十六日，对军队进行大检阅。
English: On the 26th, a major inspection of the army was carried out.

古文：癸卯，袁晁陷信州。
现代文：二十七日，袁晁攻破信州。
English: On the 27th, Yuan Shao defeated Shinshu.

古文：十月乙卯，陷温、明二州。
现代文：十月初十，袁晁再破温、明二州。
English: At the beginning of October, Yuan Shao broke through Wen and Ming two states.

古文：诏浙江水旱，百姓重困，州县勿辄科率，民疫死不能葬者为瘗之。
现代文：同日，下诏：浙江遭受水灾害，百姓极为困苦，各州县不要动辄征税敛赋；百姓因疫病而死不能安葬者代为埋葬。
English: On the same day, the following edict was issued: Zhejiang has suffered from water disasters, the people are extremely poor, all states and counties should not impose taxes and fees; if the people die due to the epidemic and cannot be buried, they should be buried instead.

古文：辛酉，雍王适讨史朝义。
现代文：十六日，雍王李适讨伐史朝义。
English: On the 16th, the Yong Wang and Li Shih marched to fight against the Qing Dynasty.

古文：壬戌，盗杀李辅国。
现代文：十七日，刺客暗杀了李辅国。
English: On the 17th, assassins assassinated Li Shuoguo.

古文：癸酉，雍王适克怀州。甲戌，败史朝义于横水，克河阳、东都，史朝义将张献诚以汴州降。
现代文：二十八日，雍王李适攻克怀州；二十九日，在横水打败史朝义，攻克河阳、东都，史朝义部将张献诚献出汴州归降。
English: On the 28th, the Yong Wang Li Si conquered Huai Zhou; on the 29th, he defeated Shi Chao Yi in Hengshui, conquered Heyang and Dongdu, and Shi Chao Yi submitted Zhang Xiancheng to Zhang Zhou.

古文：十一月丁亥，朝义将薛嵩以相、卫、洺、邢四州降。
现代文：十一月十二日，史朝义部将薛嵩献出相、卫、氵名、邢四州归降。
English: On November 12th, Shi Chao Yibe surrendered Xue Song to the Four Provinces of Xiang, Wei, Yan, and Yan.

古文：丁酉，朝义将张忠志以赵、定、深、恒、易五州降。
现代文：二十二日，史朝义部将张忠志献出赵、定、深、恒、易五州归降。
English: On the 22nd, Shi Chao and Yibe offered Zhang Zhongzhi to Zhao, Ding, Shen, Heng and Yi to surrender.

古文：己亥，朔方行营节度使仆固怀恩为朔方、河北副元帅。
现代文：二十四日，朔方行营节度使仆固怀恩任朔方、河北副元帅。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, Shuo Fang marched into the camp and appointed his servant Gu Wai'en as deputy marshal of Shuo Fang and Hebei Province.

古文：十二月己酉，太府左藏库火。
现代文：十二月初五，太府的左藏库失火。
English: On the 5th day of the 12th month, the Zuozang Repository in Taifu caught fire.

古文：戊辰，瘗京城内外暴骨。
现代文：二十四日，掩埋京城内外暴露的尸骸。
English: On the 24th, the corpses exposed in and around the capital were buried.

古文：甲戌，李光弼及袁晁战于衢州，败之。
现代文：三十日，李光弼在衢州与袁晁作战，打败袁晁。
English: On the 30th, Li Guangyao fought with Yuan Shao in Zhangzhou and defeated Yuan Shao.

古文：是岁，舒州人杨昭反，杀其刺史刘秋子。
现代文：本年，舒州人杨昭反叛，杀了本州刺史刘秋子。
English: This year, Yang Zhao from Shuzhou rebelled and killed Liu Qiuzi, the head of state.

古文：西原蛮叛。
现代文：西原蛮族反叛。
English: The barbarians of Nishihara rebelled.

古文：吐蕃寇秦、成、渭三州。
现代文：吐蕃军进犯秦、成、渭三州。
English: The army of Tubo invaded Qin, Cheng and He three provinces.

古文：广德元年正月癸未，京兆尹刘晏为吏部尚书、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：广德元年正月初九，京兆尹刘晏任吏部尚书、同中书门下平章事。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the first year of the Guangde era, Jing Zhaoyin Liu Wei was appointed as the secretary of the personnel department and the secretary of the middle school.

古文：甲申，史朝义自杀，其将李怀仙以幽州降，田承嗣以魏州降。
现代文：初十，史朝义自杀，他的部将李怀仙献幽州归降，田承嗣献魏州归降。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, Shi Chaoyi committed suicide. His subordinate, Li Huaixian, offered to surrender Yuzhou, and Tian Chengzhi offered to surrender Weizhou.

古文：壬寅，山陵使、山南东道节度使来瑱有罪，伏诛。
现代文：二十八日，山陵使、山南东道节度使来調获罪，被处死。
English: On the 28th, Shanling Envoy and Shannan Host Festival Envoy were convicted and executed.

古文：三月甲辰，山南东道兵马使梁崇义自南阳入于襄州。
现代文：三月初一，山南东道兵马使梁崇义从南阳进入襄州。
English: On the first day of March, Shannan's host soldiers and horses sent Liang Chongyi from Nanyang into Xiangzhou.

古文：辛酉，葬至道大圣大明孝皇帝于泰陵。
现代文：初四，李光弼打败袁晁。十八日，将玄宗安葬在泰陵。
English: On the fourth day of the first month, Li Guangyao defeated Yuan Shao. On the 18th, he buried Xuanzong in Tai Ling.

古文：甲子，党项羌寇同州，郭子仪败之于黄堆山。
现代文：二十一日，党项羌军进犯同州，郭子仪在黄堆山打败羌军。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, Guo Ziyi defeated the Shan army in Huangdui Mountain after the Shan army invaded Tongzhou.

古文：庚午，葬文明武德大圣大宣孝皇帝于建陵。六月，同华节度使李怀让自杀。七月壬寅，群臣上尊号曰宝应元圣文武孝皇帝。
现代文：二十七日，将肃宗安葬在建陵。六月，同华节度使李怀让自杀。七月初一，群臣给代宗敬献尊号 宝应元圣文武孝皇帝 。
English: On the 27th, Su Zong was buried in Jianling Mausoleum. In June, the Tonghua Festival caused Li Huajang to commit suicide. On the first day of July, a group of courtiers gave the title of reverence to Emperor Baoying Yuan Shengwen Wu Xiao.

古文：壬子，大赦，改元。
现代文：十一日，施行大赦，更改年号为广德。
English: On the 11th, an amnesty was implemented, and the year name was changed to Guangde.

古文：免民逋负，户三丁免其一庸、调；给复河北三年；回纥行营所经，免今岁租。
现代文：免除百姓拖欠的租赋，每户三个成年男丁中免除一人应缴的绢帛和力役；免除河北三年徭役；回纥军行军所经过的地方，免除本年的租赋。
English: The people were exempted from the arrears of rent, and one of the three adult males in each household was exempted from the compulsory military service; the three-year military service in Hebei was exempted; and the rent of this year was exempted in the places where the Uighur army marched.

古文：赐内外官阶、勋、爵。
现代文：赐予宫廷内外官员官阶、勋号、爵位。
English: Officials both inside and outside the court were given official ranks, honorary titles, and peerages.

古文：给功臣铁券，藏名于太庙，图形于凌烟阁。
现代文：赐给功臣世代享受特权的铁券，将其姓名收存在太庙，将其形貌绘画在凌烟阁。
English: The generation of heroes and heroines were given iron coupons to enjoy privileges, their names were stored in the Great Temple, and their figures were painted in Lingyakou.

古文：吐蕃陷陇右诸州。
现代文：同日，吐蕃军攻破陇右各州。
English: On the same day, the Tubo army broke through all the states on the right.

古文：八月，仆固怀恩反。
现代文：八月，仆固怀恩反叛。
English: In August, the Minion Wynn rebelled.

古文：九月壬寅，裴遵庆宣慰仆固怀恩于汾州。
现代文：九月初二，裴遵庆赴汾州宣慰仆固怀恩。
English: On the second day of September, Pei Zunqing went to Bozhou to console his servant Gu Wai En.

古文：乙丑，泾州刺史高晖叛附于吐蕃。
现代文：二十五日，泾州刺史高晖反叛归附吐蕃。
English: On the 25th day of the month, Zhangzhou Zishi Gaoqi rebelled and was annexed to Tubo.

古文：十月庚午，吐蕃陷邠州。
现代文：十月初一，吐蕃军攻破州。
English: On the first day of October, the Tubo army broke through the state.

古文：辛未，寇奉天、武功，京师戒严。
现代文：初二，吐蕃军进犯奉天、武功，京城戒严。
English: On the second day of the first month, the Tubo army invaded Bongtian and Wugong, and the capital was placed under martial law.

古文：壬申，雍王适为关内兵马元帅，郭子仪副之。
现代文：初三，雍王李适任关内兵马元帅，郭子仪任副帅。
English: In the third year of junior high school, Yong Wang Li was appointed as the marshal of soldiers and horses in Guanai, and Guo Ziyi was appointed as the deputy marshal.

古文：癸酉，渭北行营兵马使吕日将及吐蕃战于盩厔，败之。
现代文：初四，渭北行营兵马使吕日将在周至与吐蕃军交战，打败吐蕃军。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, the soldiers and horses of the north-bound battalion of Lv will fight with the Tubo army in Zhou and defeat the Tubo army.

古文：乙亥，又战于盩厔，败绩。丙子，如陕州。
现代文：初六，在周至再战，吕日将大败。初七，代宗去陕州。
English: On the 6th day of the first month, in the Zhou to rematch, Lü will be defeated. On the 7th day of the first month, Daizong went to Shaanxi.

古文：丁丑，次华阴。
现代文：初八，歇驻华阴。
English: On the 8th day of the 8th month, Huayin will be closed.

古文：丰王珙有罪，伏诛。
现代文：丰王李珙获罪被处死。
English: Feng Wang Li Yao was found guilty and executed.

古文：戊寅，吐蕃陷京师，立广武郡王承宏为皇帝。
现代文：初九，吐蕃军攻破京城长安，立广武郡王李承宏为皇帝。
English: On the 9th day of the 9th month, the Tubo army broke through the capital Chang'an, and the king of Guangwu County, Li Chenghong, was made emperor.

古文：辛巳，次陕州。
现代文：十二日，代宗歇驻陕州。
English: On the 12th, Zonghe was stationed in Shaanxi.

古文：癸巳，吐蕃溃，郭子仪复京师。
现代文：二十四日，吐蕃军溃败，郭子仪收复京城。
English: On the 24th, the Tubo army was defeated, and Guo Ziyi recaptured the capital.

古文：南山五谷人高玉反。
现代文：南山五谷人高玉反叛。
English: Nanshan and Wugu people rebelled against Gao Yu.

古文：十一月壬寅，广州市舶使吕太一反，逐其节度使张休。
现代文：十一月初三，广州市舶使吕太一反叛，驱逐了本州节度使张休。
English: On the third day of the first month of November, Lv Taiyi, the naval envoy of Guangzhou, rebelled and expelled Zhang Xiu, the naval envoy of Honshu.

古文：十二月辛未，刘晏宣慰上都。
现代文：十二月初三，刘晏宣慰上都。
English: On the third day of the first month of December, Liu Xi Xuan comforted Shangdu.

古文：甲午，至自陕州。
现代文：二十六日，代宗从陕州返回京城。
English: On the 26th, Daizong returned to Beijing from Shaanxi.

古文：乙未，苗恶卿、裴遵庆罢。
现代文：二十七日，苗晋卿、裴遵庆被免职。
English: On the 27th, Miao Jinqing and Pei Zunqing were dismissed.

古文：检校礼部尚书李岘为黄门侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：检校礼部尚书李山见任黄门侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
English: The proctor of the proctor of the proctor of the proctor of the proctor of the proctor of the proctor of the proctor of the proctor of the proctor of the proctor of the proctor of the proctor

古文：丙申，放承宏于华州。
现代文：二十八日，将李承宏流放华州。
English: On the 28th, Li Chenghong was exiled to Huazhou.

古文：吐蕃陷松、维二州。
现代文：吐蕃军攻破松、维二州。
English: The Tubo army conquered Song and Wei Erzhou.

古文：西原蛮陷道州。
现代文：西原蛮族军攻破道州。
English: The Nishihara barbarian army broke through Dōshū.

古文：二年正月丙午，诏举堪御史、谏官、刺史、县令者。
现代文：广德二年正月初一，代宗下诏：举荐能担任御史、谏官、刺史、县令的人才。
English: On the first day of the first month of the second year of Guangde, the daimong issued an edict: recommend talents who can serve as imperial historian, eunuch, scribe, and county magistrate.

古文：乙卯，立雍王适为皇太子。
现代文：初十，立雍王李适为皇太子。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, Yong Wang Lisi was appointed crown prince.

古文：癸亥，刘晏、李岘罢。
现代文：十八日，刘晏、李山见被免职。
English: On the 18th, Liu Wei and Li Shanmi were removed from their posts.

古文：右散骑常侍王缙为黄门侍郎，太常卿杜鸿渐为兵部侍郎：同中书门下平章事。
现代文：右散常侍王缙任黄门侍郎，太常卿杜鸿渐任兵部侍郎，并加同中书门下平章事。
English: U-san's constant attendant Wang Qian served as the Yellow Gate attendant, and the too-constant secretary Du Hongqian served as the Hyobu attendant, and he also added Zhongshumen's subordinate Taira Shoji.

古文：郭子仪兼河东副元帅。
现代文：郭子仪兼河东副元帅。
English: Guo Ziyi is also the deputy marshal of Hedong.

古文：二月辛未，仆固怀恩杀朔方军节度留后浑释之。
现代文：二月初三，仆固怀恩杀了朔方军节度留后浑释之。
English: On the third day of the second month of the year, Gu Wai'en's servant killed the military commander of the Shuo side and left him penniless.

古文：癸酉，朝献于太清宫。甲戌，朝享于太庙。
现代文：初五，代宗在太清宫举行受祭者装扮人享用祭品的 朝献 祭祀。初六，祭祀太庙。
English: On the 5th day of the first month, Daizong held a morning offering ritual at the Taiqing Palace, in which the worshippers dressed up and enjoyed the offerings. On the 6th day of the first month, a ritual was held at the Grand Temple.

古文：乙亥，有事于南郊。
现代文：初七，在京城南郊祭天。
English: On the seventh day of the new year, a festival is held in the southern suburbs of Kyoto.

古文：己丑，大赦。
现代文：二十一日，施行大赦。
English: On the 21st, a general amnesty was implemented.

古文：赐内外官阶、爵；武德功臣子孙予一人官；成都、灵武元从三品以上加赐爵一级，余加一阶；宝应功臣三品以上官一子，仍赐爵一极，馀加阶、勋两转，五品以上为父后者勋两转。
现代文：赐予宫廷内外官员官阶、爵位；授予高祖武德时期的功臣其子孙一人官职；成都、灵武最初追随肃宗的人、三品以上官员加赐爵位一级，其余官员加官阶一级；宝应时期的功臣、现三品以上官员的儿子一人再赐爵位一级，其余官员加官阶、爵官两级；五品以上官员勋官在其父之下者加勋官二级。
English: Officials inside and outside the court were given official ranks and titles of nobility; meritorious scholars of the Gaozhuwude period and their descendants were awarded official positions; those who initially followed Su Zong in Chengdu and Lingwu were awarded the first level of knighthood for officials with three or more titles, and the remaining officials were awarded the first level of official rank; meritorious scholars of the Baoying period and the sons of current officials with three or more titles of nobility were awarded the first level of knighthood, and the remaining officials were awarded the second level of nobility and two levels of knighthood; officials with five or more titles of nobility were awarded the second level

古文：三月辛丑，给复河南府二年。
现代文：三月初四，免除河南府徭役二年。
English: On the fourth day of March, he was exempted from Henan Provincial Military Service for two years.

古文：甲子，盛王琦薨。
现代文：二十七日，盛王李琦去世。
English: On the 27th, the king of Sheng, Li Yong, passed away.

古文：四月甲午，禁钿作珠翠。
现代文：四月二十七日，禁止制作镶嵌珠宝的首饰。
English: On April 27th, the production of jewel-encrusted jewelry was banned.

古文：五月，洛水溢。
现代文：五月，洛水泛滥。
English: In May, Luoshui was flooded.

古文：六月丁卯，有星陨于汾州。
现代文：六月初一，有流星陨落在汾州。
English: On the first day of June, a meteorite landed in Ganzhou.

古文：七月庚子，初税青苗。
现代文：七月初五，开始实行青苗税。
English: On the fifth day of the seventh month, the implementation of the young seedlings tax began.

古文：己酉，李光弼薨。
现代文：十四日，李光弼逝世。
English: On the 14th, Li Guangyao passed away.

古文：八月丙寅，王缙为侍中，都统河南、淮南、山南东道节度行营事。
现代文：八月初一，王缙任侍中，总领河南、淮南、山南东道节度行营事务。
English: On the first day of August, Wang Hui was appointed as a chamberlain, leading Henan, Huainan and Shannan to host the festival.

古文：壬申，王缙罢侍中。
现代文：初七，王缙被免去侍中职务。
English: On the seventh day of the new year, Wang Yao was removed from his position as an attendant.

古文：癸巳，吐蕃寇邠州，邠宁节度使白孝德败之于宜禄。
现代文：二十八日，吐蕃军进犯州，宁节度使白孝德在宜禄将其打败。
English: On the 28th, the Tubo army invaded the state, and Ning Jiedu led Bai Xiaodue to defeat it in Yilu.

古文：九月己未，剑南节度使严武及吐蕃战于当狗城，败之。
现代文：九月二十五日，剑南节度使严武在当狗城打败吐蕃军。
English: On September 25th, the Jiannan Festival caused Yan Wu to defeat the Tubo Army in Dangucheng.

古文：是秋，有蜮。
现代文：秋季，发生蝗虫灾害。
English: In autumn, locust plagues occur.

古文：十月丙寅，吐蕃寇邠州。丁卯，寇奉天，京师戒严。
现代文：十月初二，吐蕃军进犯州；初三，进犯奉天，京城戒严。
English: On the second day of the first month of October, the Tubo army invaded the prefecture; on the third day of the first month, they invaded Bongtian, and the capital was placed under martial law.

古文：庚午，严武克吐蕃盐川城。
现代文：初六，严武攻克吐蕃盐川城。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the new year, the battle to conquer Tujiaqiao Yangtze River City began.

古文：是月，突厥寇丰州，守将马望死之。
现代文：初七，朔方兵马使郭在西打败吐蕃军。本月，突厥军进犯丰州，守将马望死难。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, the soldiers and horses of Shuo and Fang led Guo to defeat the Tubo army in the west. This month, the Turkic army invaded Fuzhou, and the guard horses were in a desperate situation.

古文：十一月乙未，吐蕃军溃，京师解严。
现代文：十一月初三，吐蕃军溃败，京城长安解除戒严。
English: On the third day of the first month of November, the Tubo army was defeated, and martial law was lifted in the capital Chang'an.

古文：河西节度使杨志烈及仆固怀恩战于灵州，败绩。
现代文：河西节度使杨志烈在灵州与仆固怀恩作战，大败。
English: The Hexi Festival made Yang Zhirong fight with Minion Gu Wai in Lingshou, and he was defeated.

古文：癸丑，袁晁伏诛。
现代文：二十日，袁晁伏法处死。
English: On the 20th, Yuan Shufu was executed.

古文：免越州今岁田租之半，给复温、台、明三州一年。
现代文：免除越州本年田租的一半，免除温、台、明三州徭役一年。
English: Waive half of the current year's field rent in Yuezhou, and waive one year's labor service in Wenzhou, Taizhou and Ming.

古文：十二月乙丑，高玉伏诛。
现代文：十二月初二，高玉被处死。
English: On the second day of December, Gao Yu was executed.

古文：丙寅，众星陨。
现代文：初三，成群的流星陨落。
English: On the third day of the new year, hordes of meteors fell.

古文：是岁，西原蛮陷邵州。
现代文：本年，西原蛮族军攻破邵州。
English: This year, the barbarian army of the Western Plains invaded Shaozhou.

古文：永泰元年正月癸巳，大赦，改元。
现代文：永泰元年正月初一，施行大赦，更改年号。
English: On the first day of the first month of the first year of Yongtai, an amnesty was implemented and the year name was changed.

古文：是月，歙州人杀其刺史庞浚。
现代文：本月，歙州人杀了本州刺史庞浚。
English: This month, the people of Zhangzhou killed the head of the state, Zhangshi Pangjun.

古文：二月戊寅，党项羌寇富平。
现代文：二月十六日，党项羌军进犯富平。
English: On February 16th, the party's troops marched into Fuping.

古文：庚辰，仪王璲薨。
现代文：十八日，仪王李王遂去世。
English: On the 18th, the king of ceremonies, King Li, passed away.

古文：三月庚子，雨木冰。
现代文：三月初九，雨水着树成冰。
English: On the 9th of March, the rain turned the trees to ice.

古文：庚戌，吐蕃靖和。
现代文：十九日，吐蕃求和。
English: On the 19th, Tubo sued for peace.

古文：辛亥，大风拔木。
现代文：二十日，大风拔起树木。
English: On the 20th, high winds uprooted trees.

古文：四月己巳，自春不雨，至于是而雨。
现代文：四月初八，开春以来一直无雨，至本日才降雨。
English: On the eighth day of the fourth month, there had been no rain since the beginning of spring, and it has only rained today.

古文：是夏，盩厔穞麦生。
现代文：本年夏季，周至出现不种自生的稆麦。
English: In the summer of this year, there was no self-sown buckwheat.

古文：七月辛卯，平卢、淄青兵马使李怀玉逐其节度使侯希逸。
现代文：七月初一，平卢、淄青兵马使李怀玉驱逐节度使侯希逸。
English: On the first day of July, Pinglu and Jiaqing Terracotta Warriors and Horses sent Li Huaiyu to expel the festival envoy Hou Xiyi.

古文：八月庚辰，王缙为河南副元帅。
现代文：八月二十一日，王缙任河南副元帅。
English: On August 21, Wang Hui was appointed as the Vice Marshal of Henan Province.

古文：仆固怀恩及吐蕃、回纥、党项羌、浑、奴剌寇边。
现代文：仆固怀恩与吐蕃、回纥、党项羌、浑、奴剌诸族军队侵掠边境。
English: Dugu Wai'en invaded and plundered the border with the armies of the Tubo, Hui, Danzhong, Hun, and Nong armies.

古文：九月庚寅，命百官观浮屠象于光顺门。
现代文：九月初一，代宗命令百官到光顺门观看佛像。
English: On the first day of September, Emperor Daizong ordered hundreds of officials to come to the Guangshun Gate to see the Buddha statue.

古文：辛卯，太白经天。
现代文：初二，太白星白昼行经天空。
English: On the fifth day, a white star streaked across the sky.

古文：甲辰、吐蕃寇醴泉、奉天，党项羌寇同州，浑、奴剌寇盩厔，京师戒严。
现代文：十五日，吐蕃军进犯醴泉、奉天，党项羌军进犯同州，浑、奴剌军进犯周至，京城戒严。
English: On the fifteenth day, the Tubo army invaded Shiquan and Bongtian, the Danzhong army invaded Tongzhou, and the Hun and Nuo armies invaded Zhou, and the capital was placed under martial law.

古文：己酉，屯于苑，郭子仪屯于泾阳。
现代文：二十日，在宫苑驻军，郭子仪在泾阳驻军。
English: On the 20th, troops were stationed in Gongyuan, and Guo Ziyi was stationed in Shenyang.

古文：丁巳，同华节度使周智光及吐蕃战于澄城，败之。
现代文：二十八日，同华节度使周智光在澄城打败吐蕃军。
English: On the 28th, the Tonghua Festival made Zhou Zhiguang defeat the Tubo Army in Chengcheng.

古文：智光入于鄜州，杀其刺史张麟，遂焚坊州。
现代文：周智光进入州，杀其刺史张麟，趁势火烧坊州。
English: Zhou Zhiguang entered the state, killed his assassin Zhang Lin, and took advantage of the situation to burn Fangzhou.

古文：十月，沙陀杀杨志烈。
现代文：十月，沙陀军杀杨志烈。
English: In October, the Shado Army killed Yang Zhilei.

古文：己未，吐蕃至分阝州，与回纥寇边。
现代文：初一，吐蕃军至州；与回纥军侵掠边境。
English: On the first day of the first month, the Tubo army reached the state; and the Uighur army invaded and plundered the border.

古文：辛酉，寇奉天。
现代文：初三，进犯奉天。
English: On the third day of junior high school, Feng Tian attacked.

古文：癸亥，寇同州。
现代文：初五，进犯同州。
English: On the fifth day of the new year, Tongzhou was attacked.

古文：乙丑，寇兴平。
现代文：初七，进犯兴平。
English: On the seventh day of the seventh month of the first year of junior high school, Xingping committed a crime.

古文：丁卯，回纥、党项羌请降。
现代文：初九，回纥、党项羌请求降顺。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, the request for the return of the imperial edict and the party's request for the downgrade came up.

古文：癸酉，郭子仪及吐蕃战于灵台，败之。
现代文：十五日，郭子仪在灵台打败吐蕃军。京城解除戒严。
English: On the fifteenth day, Guo Ziyi defeated the Tubo army in Lingtai. The capital lifted martial law.

古文：京师解严。闰月辛卯，朔方副将李怀光克灵州。
现代文：闰十月初三，朔方副将李怀光收复灵州。
English: On the third day of the first month of October, the vice-commander of the Shuo faction, Li Huaiguang, recaptured Lingzhou.

古文：辛亥，剑南西山兵马使崔旴反，寇成都，节度使郭英乂奔于灵池，普州刺史韩澄杀之。
现代文：二十三日，剑南、西山兵马使崔旰反叛，进犯成都，节度使郭英耣逃往灵池，普州刺史韩澄杀了他。
English: On the 23rd, soldiers and horses from Jian'nan and Xishan led Cui Yao to rebel and attack Chengdu, and soldiers and horses led Guo Yingyao to flee to Lingchi. Han Cheng, the governor of Puzhou, killed him.

古文：癸丑，敛民赀作浮屠供。
现代文：二十五日，聚敛民财用作佛寺供物。
English: On the 25th, they collected people's money to donate to a Buddhist temple.

古文：大历元年二月，吐蕃遣使来朝。
现代文：大历元年二月，吐蕃派使臣前来朝见。
English: In February of the first year of the great calendar, envoys from Tubo came to see the emperor.

古文：壬子，杜鸿渐为山南西道、剑南东西川、邙南、西山等道副元帅。
现代文：二十六日，杜鸿渐任山南西、剑南东、西川、邛南、西山等道副元帅。
English: On the 26th, Du Hongxuan was appointed deputy marshal of Shannan West, Jian Nan Dong, Xichuan, Hunan, Xishan and other provinces.

古文：三月癸未，剑南东川节度使张献诚及崔旴战于梓州，败绩。
现代文：三月二十八日，剑南东川节度使张献诚在梓州与崔旰作战，大败。
English: On March 28th, the Jianan Dongchuan Festival sent Zhang Xiancheng to fight Cui Yao in Zizhou, and he was soundly defeated.

古文：七月癸酉，洛水溢。
现代文：七月二十日，洛水泛滥。
English: On July 20th, the Luo River was flooded.

古文：九月辛巳，吐蕃陷原州。
现代文：九月二十八日，吐蕃军攻破原州。
English: On September 28, the Tubo army broke through Wonju.

古文：十一月甲子，大赦，改元，给复流民归业者三年。
现代文：十一月十二日，施行大赦，更改年号，免除归返本业的流民徭役三年。
English: On November 12th, an amnesty was implemented, the year was changed, and the displaced people who returned to their jobs were exempted from forced labor for three years.

古文：十二月己亥，有彗星出于瓠瓜。
现代文：十二月十八日，在天区的天鸡星官间出现彗星。
English: On December 18th, a comet appeared between the stars in the sky.

古文：癸卯，周智光反，杀虢州刺史庞充。
现代文：二十二日，同华节度使周智光反叛，杀了虢州刺史庞充。
English: On the 22nd, the Tonghua Festival made Zhou Zhiguang rebel and killed Zhangzhou assassin Pangcheng.

古文：是冬，无雪。
现代文：本年冬季，无雪。
English: There was no snow this winter.

古文：郑王邈为天下兵马元帅。
现代文：郑王李邈任天下兵马元帅。
English: Zheng Wang Lijun was appointed the marshal of the world's soldiers and horses.

古文：二年正月丁巳，郭子仪讨周智光。
现代文：大历二年正月初六，郭子仪征讨周智光。
English: On the sixth day of the first month of the second year of the lunar calendar, Guo Ziyi summoned Zhou Zhiguang.

古文：己未，同华将李汉惠以同州降。
现代文：初八，同华的将领李汉惠献出同州归降。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, Tonghua's general Li Hanhui surrendered Tongzhou.

古文：甲子，周智光伏诛。
现代文：十三日，周智光伏法处死。
English: On the 13th, Zhou Zhi was executed by photovoltaic method.

古文：淮西节度使李忠臣入于华州。
现代文：淮西节度使李忠臣进入华州。
English: Huaxi Festival made Li Zhongchen enter Huazhou.

古文：戊寅，给复同、华二州二年。
现代文：二十七日，免除同、华二州徭役二年。
English: On the 27th, he was exempted from military service for two years.

古文：八月壬寅，杀附马都尉姜庆初。
现代文：八月二十五日，杀驸马都尉姜庆初。
English: On August 25th, Jiang Qinghuo, the commander of the horse cavalry, was killed.

古文：九月甲寅，吐蕃寇灵州。乙卯，寇邠州。
现代文：九月初七，吐蕃军进犯灵州；初八，进犯州。
English: On the 7th day of the 9th month, the Tubo army invaded Lingzhou; on the 8th day of the 9th month, they invaded Zhou.

古文：郭子仪屯于泾阳，京师戒严。
现代文：郭子仪驻军泾阳，京城戒严。
English: Guo Ziyi stationed troops in Shenyang, and the capital was placed under martial law.

古文：乙丑，昼有星流于南方。
现代文：十八日，白昼有流星飞向南方。
English: On the 18th, a meteor flew south during the day.

古文：是秋，桂州山獠反。
现代文：这年秋季，桂州山僚族反叛。
English: In the autumn of that year, the Shanli people of Guizhou rebelled.

古文：十月戊寅，朔方军节度使路嗣恭及吐蕃战于灵州，败之。
现代文：十月初一，朔方军节度使路嗣恭在灵州打败吐蕃军。京城长安解除戒严。
English: On the first day of October, the military festival of the Shuo and Fang armies enabled Lu Shigong to defeat the Tubo army in Lingshou. The capital Chang'an was relieved of martial law.

古文：京师解严。十一月辛未，雨木冰。
现代文：十一月二十五日，雨水着树成冰。
English: On November 25th, rainwater turned trees into ice.

古文：壬申，京师地震。
现代文：二十六日，长安地震。
English: On the 26th, the Chang'an earthquake.

古文：三年二月癸巳，商州兵马使刘洽杀其刺史殷仲卿。
现代文：大历三年二月十八日，商州兵马使刘洽杀了本州刺史殷仲卿。
English: On the 18th day of the 2nd month of the 3rd year of the lunar calendar, the soldiers and horses of Shangzhou sent Liu Cai to kill the Honshu assassin Yin Zhongqing.

古文：三月乙巳朔，日有食之。
现代文：三月初一，日月合朔，有日蚀。
English: On the first day of March, the sun and the moon are new, and there is a solar eclipse.

古文：五月乙卯，追号齐王倓为皇帝，兴信公主女张氏为皇后。
现代文：五月十二日，追称齐王李亻炎为皇帝，兴信公主之女张氏为皇后。
English: On May 12, the king of Qi, Li Shanyan, was posthumously named emperor, and Princess Xingxin's daughter, Zhang, was named empress.

古文：癸亥，地震。
现代文：二十日，地震。
English: On the 20th, an earthquake.

古文：六月壬寅，幽州兵马使硃希彩杀其节度使李怀仙，自称留后。
现代文：六月三十日，幽州兵马使朱希彩杀了本州节度使李怀仙，自称留后。
English: On June 30, Zhu Xi Cai, the commander of Yu Prefecture's soldiers and horses, killed the commander of the Honshu Festival, Li Huai Xian, and claimed to stay behind.

古文：闰月庚午，王缙兼幽州卢龙军节度使。
现代文：闰六月二十八日，王缙兼幽州卢龙军节度使。
English: On the 28th day of the leap month of June, Wang Qian and the Yuzhou Lulong Army Festival envoy set out.

古文：七月壬申，滤州刺史杨子琳反，陷成都，剑南节度留后崔宽败之，克成都。
现代文：七月初一，泸州刺史杨子琳反叛，攻破成都，剑南节度留后崔宽将其打败，收复成都。
English: On the first day of July, Zhang Zhou rebelled against Shi Yang Zilin and broke through Chengdu. After the Jianan Festival, Cui Guang defeated him and recovered Chengdu.

古文：子琳杀夔州别驾张忠。
现代文：杨子琳杀了夔州别驾张忠。
English: Yang Zilin killed Zhang Zhou, not Zhang Zhong.

古文：戊寅，吐蕃遣使来朝。
现代文：初七，吐蕃派使臣来朝。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, Tubo sent envoys to the imperial court.

古文：八月己酉，吐蕃寇灵州。丁卯，寇邠州，京师戒严。
现代文：八月初八，吐蕃军进犯灵州；二十六日，进犯州，京城戒严。
English: On the 8th day of the 8th month of August, the Tubo army invaded Lingzhou; on the 26th day of the month, the city was placed under martial law.

古文：戊辰，邠宁节度使马璘及吐蕃战，败之。
现代文：二十七日，宁节度使马瞞与吐蕃军交战，打败吐蕃军。
English: On the 27th, Ning Jiedu led Ma Xie and the Tubo Army into battle, defeating the Tubo Army.

古文：庚午，王缙兼河东节度使。
现代文：二十九日，王缙兼河东节度使。
English: On the 29th, Wang Qian and the Hedong Festival envoy left.

古文：九月丁丑，济王环薨。
现代文：九月初六，济王李环去世。
English: On the 6th day of the 9th month, King Lihuan of Jiefang passed away.

古文：壬午，吐蕃寇灵州，朔方将白元光败之。
现代文：十一日，吐蕃军进犯灵州，朔方将领白元光将其打败。
English: On the 11th day, the Tubo army invaded Lingzhou, and the Shuo general Baiyuan Guang defeated it.

古文：壬辰，又败之于灵武。
现代文：二十一日，在灵武再次打败吐蕃军。
English: On the 21st, they defeated the Tubo army again in Lingwu.

古文：戊辰，京师解严。
现代文：二十七日，京城解除戒严。
English: On the 27th, martial law was lifted in Kyoto.

古文：十二月辛酉，泾原兵马使王童之谋反，伏诛。
现代文：十二月二十一日，泾原兵马使王童之谋反，伏法处死。
English: On December 21st, the soldiers and horses of Yuyuan sent Wang Tong to plot a rebellion, and he was sentenced to death.

古文：四年正月甲戌，杀颍州刺史李岵。
现代文：大历四年正月初五，杀颍州刺史李岵。
English: On the 5th day of the 1st month of the 4th year of the Chinese lunar calendar, the murder of Li Xuan, the governor of Zhangzhou, occurred.

古文：二月乙卯，杜鸿渐罢副元帅。
现代文：二月十六日，杜鸿渐被免除副元帅职务。
English: On February 16, Du Hongxian was relieved of his duties as vice-marshal.

古文：丙辰，京师地震。
现代文：十七日，长安地震。
English: On the 17th, the Chang'an earthquake occurred.

古文：三月，遣御史税商钱。
现代文：三月，派御史抽商业税钱。
English: In March, the Imperial Household Agency began to collect commercial tax money.

古文：甲戌，免京兆今岁税。
现代文：初六，免除京兆本年租税。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the new year, Keizho will be exempt from this year's tax.

古文：五月丙戌，京师地震。
现代文：五月十九日，京城长安地震。
English: On May 19, the Beijing Chang'an earthquake occurred.

古文：六月戊申，王缙罢副元帅、都统。
现代文：六月十二日，王缙被免除副元帅、都统职务。
English: On June 12, Wang Yao was relieved of his duties as vice-marshal and head of the Central Military Commission.

古文：七月癸未，降死罪，流以下原之。
现代文：七月十八日，对死罪囚犯减刑，判流放罪以下的犯人免刑。
English: On July 18th, the death penalty was commuted for death row prisoners, and prisoners sentenced to less than banishment were pardoned.

古文：十月丁巳，大雾。
现代文：十月二十三日，大雾。
English: October 23rd, heavy fog.

古文：十一月辛未，禁畿内弋猎。
现代文：十一月初七，禁止在京城及旁邑境内射猎。
English: On the 7th day of the 11th month, shooting is prohibited in the territory of Beijing and its surrounding towns.

古文：壬申，杜鸿渐罢。
现代文：初八，杜鸿渐被免职。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, Du Hongxian was removed from office.

古文：癸酉，元载权知门下省事。
现代文：初九，元载暂行主持门下省事务。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, Yuan Zai temporarily presided over the provincial affairs under him.

古文：甲戌，吐蕃寇灵州，朔方军节度留后常谦光败之。
现代文：初十，吐蕃军进犯灵州，朔方军节度留后常谦光将其打败。
English: On the 10th day of the first month, the Tubo Army invaded Lingzhou, and the Shuo Army defeated the Chang Xianguang Army after a long siege.

古文：丙子，左仆射裴冕同中书门下平章事。
现代文：十二日，左仆射裴冕加同中书门下平章事。
English: On the twelfth day, the left attendant shot the feather crown and added the same to the middle of the book.

古文：癸巳，裴冕兼河南、淮西、山南东道副元帅。
现代文：二十九日，裴冕兼河南、淮西、山南东道副元帅。
English: On the 29th, Fei Guanyuan also became the vice-marshal of Henan, Huaixi and Shannan.

古文：十二月戊戌，裴冕薨。
现代文：十二月初四，裴冕逝世。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of December, Fei Guanzhong passed away.

古文：是岁，广州人冯崇道、桂州人硃济时反，容管经略使王翃败之。
现代文：本年，广州人冯崇道、桂州人朱济时反叛，容管经略使王罖打败了他们。
English: This year, Guangzhou's Feng Chongdao and Guizhou's Zhu Jizhi rebelled, and Wang Xi defeated them.

古文：五年正月辛卯，凤翔节度使李抱玉为河西、陇右、山南西道副元帅。
现代文：大历五年正月二十七日，凤翔节度使李抱玉任河西、陇右、山南西道副元帅。
English: On the 27th day of the first month of the fifth year of the lunar calendar, the Fengxiang Festival appointed Li Baoyu as the deputy marshal of Hexi, Zouyou and Shannan West Road.

古文：三月癸酉，内侍监鱼朝恩有罪自杀。
现代文：三月初十，内侍监鱼朝恩有罪自杀。
English: On the 10th day of the 3rd month, the supervisor of the inner court, Yu Chaon, committed suicide.

古文：丙戌，以昭陵皇堂有光，赦京兆、关辅。
现代文：二十二日，因昭陵皇堂放出光华，对京兆、关辅地区施行赦免。
English: On the 22nd, due to the release of Guanghua from the Zhaoling Imperial Palace, an amnesty was issued for the Jingzhao and Guanfu areas.

古文：四月庚子，湖南兵马使臧玠杀其团练使崔灌。
现代文：四月初八，湖南兵马使臧杀了团练使崔灌。
English: On the eighth day of the fourth month, the Hunan soldiers and horse envoys killed the regimental training envoy Cui Guan.

古文：己未，有彗星出于五车。
现代文：二十七日，在 五车 星官的五星间出现彗星。
English: On the 27th, a comet appeared between the five stars of the five chariots.

古文：五月己卯，有彗星出于北方。
现代文：五月十七日，在北方天空有彗星出现。
English: On May 17th, a comet appeared in the northern sky.

古文：六月己未，以彗星灭，降死罪，流以下原之。
现代文：六月二十八日，为了不再出现流星，对死罪囚犯减刑，判流放罪以下刑罚的犯人免刑。
English: On June 28th, in order to prevent meteorites from appearing again, the sentences of death row prisoners were reduced, and those sentenced to less than banishment were pardoned.

古文：录魏徵、王珪、李靖、李勣、房玄龄、杜如晦之后。
现代文：录用魏征、王王圭、李靖、李责力、房玄龄、杜如晦的后代。
English: The descendants of Wei Zheng, Wang Wang Gui, Li Jing, Li Baili, Fang Xuanling and Du Rugao were hired.

古文：是岁，湖南将王国良反，及西原蛮寇州县。
现代文：本年，湖南的将领王国良反叛，与西原蛮族劫掠州县。
English: This year, the generals of Hunan rebelled against Wang Guoliang and plundered Zhoushu County with the barbarians of the Western Plains.

古文：六年二月壬寅，李抱玉罢山南西道副元帅。
现代文：大历六年二月十五日，免去李抱玉的山南西道副元帅职务。
English: On February 15 of the sixth year of the lunar calendar, Li Baoyu was relieved of his duties as deputy marshal of Shannan West Road.

古文：三月，王翃败梁崇牵，克容州。
现代文：三月，王罖打败梁崇牵，收复容州。
English: In March, Wang Qi defeated Liang Chongtui and recovered Yongzhou.

古文：四月戊寅，蓝田西原地陷。
现代文：四月二十二日，蓝田西原地陷。
English: April 22nd, Lantian Nishihara landslide.

古文：禁大繝、竭凿六破锦及文纱吴绫为龙、凤、麒麟、天马、辟邪者。
现代文：禁止在大纟间、竭凿六破锦与纹纱吴绫等上织绣龙、凤、麒麟、天马、辟邪诸神物形象锦纹。
English: It is forbidden to weave embroidered dragons, phoenixes, unicorns, heavenly horses, devils, and other images of gods and goddesses between large brocades, on six-layer brocades, and on yarn-woven brocades.

古文：五月戊申，杀殿中侍御史陆珽、成都府司录参军事李少良、大理评事韦颂。
现代文：五月二十三日，杀殿中侍御史陆王廷、成都府司录参军事李少良、大理评事韦颂。
English: On May 23rd, Lu Wangting, the palace attendant and historian, Li Shaoliang, the Chengdu prefectural secretary and military officer, and Wei Song, the Dali critic, were killed.

古文：七年二月庚午，江水泛溢。
现代文：大历七年二月十九日，江州地段的长江泛滥。
English: On February 19th, the seventh year of the lunar calendar, the Yangtze River in the Jiangzhou section began to flood.

古文：五月乙酉，大雨雹，大风拔木。
现代文：五月初五，大降冰雹，大风拔起树木。
English: On the fifth day of the fifth lunar month, large hailstones fell, and the wind uprooted trees.

古文：乙未，以旱大赦，减膳，彻乐。
现代文：十五日，因旱灾施行大赦，代宗减省膳食，停止奏乐。
English: On the 15th, due to the drought, an amnesty was implemented, and the vicar reduced meals and stopped playing music.

古文：是秋，幽州卢龙将李怀瑗杀其节度使硃希彩，经略军副使硃泚自称留后。
现代文：本年秋季，幽州卢龙军将领李怀瑗杀了节度使朱希彩，经略军副使朱氵此自称留后。
English: In the autumn of this year, Li Huaiqi, the general of the Yuzhou Lulong Army, killed Zhu Xicai, the commander of the festival, and Zhu Xicai, the deputy commander of the military, claimed to stay behind.

古文：十月乙亥，以淮南旱，免租、庸三之二。
现代文：十月二十八日，因淮南旱灾，减免该地区租赋与应缴绢帛的三分之二。
English: On October 28th, due to the drought in Huainan, two-thirds of the rent and fees payable in the region were reduced and exempted.

古文：十一月庚辰，免巴、蓬、渠、集、壁、充、通、开八州二岁租、庸。
现代文：十一月初四，免除巴、蓬、渠、集、壁、充、通、开八个州两年的租、庸赋税。
English: At the beginning of November 4th, the eight states of Ba, Peng, Qu, Ji, Wai, Chong, Tong and Kai were exempted from two years of rent and yang tax.

古文：十二月丙寅，雨土，有长星出于参。
现代文：十二月二十四日，空中降土如雨；属彗星一类的 长星 在参宿七星间出现。
English: On December 24th, it rained in the sky; a comet-like long star appeared between the seven stars of Betelgeuse.

古文：八年正月甲辰，诏京官三品以上及郎官、御史岁举刺史、县令一人。
现代文：大历八年正月二十八日，诏令：三品以上的京官以及郎官、御史，每年各举荐刺史、县令一人。
English: On the 28th day of the 1st month of the 8th year of the lunar calendar, the imperial edict was issued: for the officials of the capital with more than three titles, as well as the vassals and officials, one person should be recommended each year for the post of sashimi and prefectural governor.

古文：五月辛卯，郑王邈薨。
现代文：五月十七日，郑王李邈去世。
English: On May 17th, Zheng Wang Lijun passed away.

古文：壬辰，赦京师。
现代文：十八日，对京城长安施行赦免。
English: On the 18th, an amnesty was implemented for the residents of Beijing Chang'an.

古文：癸卯，降死罪，流以下原之。
现代文：二十九日，对死罪囚犯减刑，判流放罪以下刑罚的犯人免刑。
English: On the 29th, the death penalty was commuted for death row prisoners, and those sentenced to less than banishment were pardoned.

古文：八月己未，吐蕃寇灵州，郭子仪败之于七级渠。
现代文：八月十六日，吐蕃军进犯灵州，郭子仪在七级渠将其打败。
English: On August 16th, the Tubo army invaded Lingzhou, and Guo Ziyi defeated it in the seven-level canal.

古文：甲子，废华州屯田给贫民。
现代文：二十一日，废止华州的屯田，将它分给贫民耕作。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, the state of Huazhou abolished tonden and distributed it to the poor for cultivation.

古文：九月壬午，循州刺史哥舒晃反，杀岭南节度使吕崇贲。
现代文：九月初十，循州刺史哥舒晃反叛；朝廷杀了岭南节度使吕崇贲。
English: On the 10th day of the 9th month of the 1st month of the 1st year of the 9th month of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9

古文：戊子，诏京官五品以上、两省供奉官、郎官、御史言事。
现代文：十六日，诏令五品以上的京官、中书门下两省供奉官、郎官、御史议政。
English: On the 16th, the imperial edict removed from the capital officials of the Fifth Rank and above, as well as officials of the two provinces under the tutelage of Chusho, vassals, and goshi.

古文：十月庚申，吐蕃寇泾、邠。
现代文：十月十八日，吐蕃军进犯泾、二州。
English: On October 18th, the Tubo army invaded Shandong and Erzhou.

古文：丙寅，朔方兵马使浑瑊及吐蕃战于宜禄，败绩。
现代文：二十四日，朔方兵马使浑蠨在宜禄与吐蕃军交战，大败。
English: On the 24th day of the month, the Shuo side sent troops and horses to fight with the Tubo army in Yiluo, and suffered a great defeat.

古文：泾原节度使马璘及吐蕃战于潘原，败之。九年二月辛未，徐州兵乱，逐其刺史梁乘。
现代文：泾原节度使马瞞在潘原打败吐蕃军。大历九年二月初二，徐州发生兵变，驱逐本州刺史梁乘。
English: On the 2nd day of the 2nd month of the 9th year of the lunar calendar, there was a mutiny in Xuzhou, and the governor of Honshu, Liang Cheng, was expelled.

古文：四月壬辰，大赦。
现代文：四月二十四日，施行大赦。
English: On 24 April, the amnesty came into effect.

古文：十月壬申，信王瑝薨。
现代文：十月初六，信王李王皇去世。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of October, Emperor Xianwang passed away.

古文：乙亥，凉王璿薨。
现代文：初九，凉王李去世。
English: At the age of nine, Liang Wang Li passed away.

古文：壬辰，降京师死罪，流以下原之。
现代文：二十六日，对京城长安的死罪囚犯减刑，判流放罪以下刑罚的犯人免刑。
English: On the 26th, the death penalty was commuted for death row prisoners in Beijing Chang'an, and prisoners sentenced to less than banishment were pardoned.

古文：十年正月丁酉，昭义军兵马使裴志清逐其节度使薛崿，叛附于田承嗣。
现代文：大历十年正月初三，昭义军兵马使裴志清驱逐节度使薛萫，反叛投靠田承嗣。
English: On the 3rd day of the 1st month of the 10th year of the lunar calendar, the soldiers and horses of the Shouyi Army led by Pei Zhiqing drove out the commander of the festival, Xue Yao, and the rebel, Yan Tian, took over.

古文：壬寅，寿王瑁薨。
现代文：初八，寿王李瑁去世。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, the birthday king, Li Xi, passed away.

古文：戊申，田承嗣反。
现代文：十四日，田承嗣反叛。
English: On the 14th, Tian Cheng He rebelled.

古文：癸丑，承嗣陷洺州。
现代文：十九日，田承嗣攻破氵名州。
English: On the 19th, Tian Chengxi defeated Shengmeizhou.

古文：乙卯，剑南西川节度使崔宁及吐蕃战于西山，败之。
现代文：二十一日，剑南西川节度使崔宁在西山打败吐蕃军。
English: On the twenty-first day of the year, the Jianan Xichuan Festival caused Cui Ning to defeat the Tubo Army in Xishan.

古文：二月乙丑，田承嗣陷卫州，刺史薛雄死之。
现代文：二月初一，田承嗣攻破卫州，刺史薛雄身亡。
English: On the first day of February, Tian Cheng He broke through Weizhou and stabbed Shi Xue Xiong to death.

古文：辛未，封子述为睦王，逾郴王，连恩王，遘鄜王，造忻王，暹韶王，运嘉王，遇端王，遹循王，通恭王，逵原王，逸雅王。
现代文：初七，代宗封其子李述为睦王，李逾为郴王，李连为恩王，李遘为王，李造为忻王，李暹为韶王，李运为嘉王，李遇为端王，李为循王，李通为恭王，李逵为原王，李逸为雅王。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, Li Shu, the son of the acting Zongfeng, became the King of Mutu, Li Xiao became the King of Shun, Li Lian became the King of En, Li Yao became the King, Li Zou became the King of Shun, Li Siem became the King of Shun, Li Yun became the King of Jia, Li Yu became the King of Huan, Li Xiu became the King of Shun, Li Tong became the King of Gong, Li Yao became the King of Yuan, and Li Yat became the King of Ya.

古文：丙子，河阳军乱，逐三城使常休明。
现代文：十二日，河阳军队骚乱，驱逐了三城使常休明。
English: On the 12th day of the month, the Kheyang army rioted and drove out the three city envoys Chang Xiuming.

古文：三月甲午，陕州军乱，逐其观察使李国清。
现代文：三月初一，陕州军队骚乱，驱逐本州观察使李国清。
English: On the first day of March, the army of Shaanxi Province rioted and expelled the provincial observer Li Guoqing.

古文：四月癸未，河东节度使薛兼训等讨田承嗣。
现代文：四月二十一日，河东节度使薛兼训等讨伐田承嗣。
English: On April 21st, the Hedong Festival made Xue Jianxun and others succeed to the felling fields.

古文：给复昭义五州二年。
现代文：免除昭义军五州徭役二年。
English: The Shōyō army was exempted from military service in the five prefectures for two years.

古文：甲申，大雨雹，大风拔木。
现代文：二十二日，大降冰雹，大风拔起大树。
English: On the 22nd, large hailstones fell, and the wind uprooted large trees.

古文：五月乙未，魏博将霍荣国以礠州降。甲寅，大雨雹，大风拔木，震阙门。
现代文：五月初二，魏博将领霍荣国献石慈州归降，二十二日，大降冰雹，大风拔树，雷击宫殿阙门。
English: On the second day of the first month of May, the Wei Bo general Huo Rong made a stone offering to Cizhou to return and surrender. On the 22nd day, large hailstones fell, high winds uprooted trees, and lightning struck the palace gate.

古文：六月甲戌，成德军节度使李宝臣及田承嗣战于冀州，败之。
现代文：六月十二日，成德军节度使李宝臣与田承嗣在冀州作战，打败田承嗣。
English: On June 12th, the German army sent Li Baochen and Tian Chengzhi to fight in Jizhou, defeating Tian Chengzhi.

古文：七月己未，杭州海溢。
现代文：七月二十八日，杭州海潮泛滥。
English: On July 28th, Hangzhou was flooded by the tidal wave.

古文：八月巳丑，田承嗣寇礠州。
现代文：八月二十八日，田承嗣进犯石慈州。
English: On August 28th, Tian Chengxi marched into Shishi Cizhou.

古文：九月壬寅，降京师死罪，流以下原之。
现代文：九月十一日，对京城的死罪囚犯减刑，宽免流放罪以下犯人。
English: On September 11th, the death penalty was commuted for prisoners in Beijing, and the following prisoners were pardoned.

古文：壬子，吐蕃寇临泾。
现代文：二十一日，吐蕃军进犯临泾。
English: On the twenty-first day, the Tubo army invaded Linyi.

古文：癸丑，寇陇州。
现代文：二十二日，进犯陇州。
English: On the 22nd, they invaded Zhangzhou.

古文：丙辰，李抱玉败之于义宁。
现代文：二十五日，李抱玉在义宁打败吐蕃军。
English: On the 25th, Li Baoyu defeated the Tubo army in Yining.

古文：丁巳，马璘又败之于百里城。
现代文：二十六日，马瞞在百里城再次打败吐蕃军。
English: On the 26th, Ma Xie defeated the Tubo army again in Baili City.

古文：十月辛酉朔，日有食之。
现代文：十月初一，日月合朔，有日蚀。
English: On the first day of October, the sun and moon are new, and there is a solar eclipse.

古文：甲子，昭义军节度使李承昭及田承嗣战于清水，败之。
现代文：初四，昭义军节度使李承昭在清水打败田承嗣。初六，贵妃独孤氏去世。
English: On the 4th day of the 4th month of the 1st year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3

古文：丙寅，贵妃独孤氏薨。
现代文：初七，追立独孤氏为皇后。
English: On the seventh day of her junior year, Doko was crowned empress.

古文：丁卯，追册为皇后。十一月丁酉，魏博将吴希光以瀛州降。
现代文：十一月初七，魏博将领吴希光献瀛州归降。
English: On the 7th day of the 11th month, Wu Xiguang, the general of Wei Bo, surrendered Zhangzhou.

古文：丁未，岭南节度使路嗣恭克广州，哥舒晃伏诛。
现代文：十七日，岭南节度使路嗣恭收复广州，哥舒晃伏法处死。
English: On the 17th day of the Lingnan Festival, Lu Shigong was allowed to recapture Guangzhou, while his brother Shu Jiefu was executed.

古文：十一年正月庚寅，田承嗣降。
现代文：大历十一年正月初一，田承嗣投降。
English: On the first day of the first month of the eleventh year of the lunar calendar, Tian Chengzhi surrendered.

古文：辛亥，崔宁及吐蕃战，败之。
现代文：二十二日，崔宁打败吐蕃军。
English: On the 22nd, Cui Ning defeated the Tubo army.

古文：五月，汴宋都虞候李灵耀反，杀濮州刺史孟鉴。
现代文：五月，汴宋都虞候李灵耀反叛，杀了濮州刺史孟鉴。
English: In May, Li Lingyao rebelled against the Song and Song dynasties and killed Meng Jian, the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：七月庚寅，田承嗣寇滑州，永平军节度使李勉败绩。
现代文：七月初五，田承嗣进犯滑州，永平军节度使李勉大败。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of July, Tian Chengzhi attacked Leshou, and the Yongping Army defeated Li Mian.

古文：八月甲申，淮西节度使李忠臣、河阳三城使马燧及李勉讨李灵耀。
现代文：八月二十九日，淮西节度使李忠臣、河阳三城使马燧与李勉讨伐李灵耀。
English: On August 29th, the Huaixi Festival sent Li Zhongchen, and the three cities of Heyang sent Ma Jun and Li Qian to fight against Li Lingyao.

古文：闰月丁酉，太白昼见。
现代文：闰八月十二日，白天出现太白星。
English: On the 12th day of the 8th month, a very white star appeared in the daytime.

古文：九月乙丑，李忠臣、马燧及李灵耀战于郑州，败绩。
现代文：九月十二日，李忠臣、马燧与李勉在郑州与李灵耀作战，大败。
English: On September 12th, Li Zhongcheng, Ma Jun and Li Zhen fought against Li Lingyao in Zhengzhou and were soundly defeated.

古文：十月乙酉，战于中牟，败之。
现代文：十月初一，在中牟，打败李灵耀。
English: On the first day of October, he defeated Li Lingyao in Zhongmou.

古文：壬辰，忠臣又败之于西梁固。
现代文：初八，李忠臣在西梁固再败李灵耀。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, Li Zhongchen defeated Li Lingyao again in Xilianggu.

古文：壬寅，淮南节度使陈少游及李灵耀战于汴州，败之。
现代文：十八日，淮南节度使陈少游与李灵耀在汴州作战，打败李灵耀。
English: On the 18th, the Huainan Festival made Chen Shaoyou and Li Lingyao fight in Ganzhou, defeating Li Lingyao.

古文：丙子，田承嗣以兵援灵耀，李忠臣败之于匡城。
现代文：二十二日，田承嗣派兵援助李灵耀，李忠臣在匡城将其打败。
English: On the 22nd, Tian Chengxi sent troops to aid Li Lingyao, and Li Zhongchen defeated him in Kuangcheng.

古文：甲寅，灵耀伏诛。
现代文：三十日，李灵耀伏法处死。
English: On the 30th, Li Lingyao was sentenced to death.

古文：十二年三月庚午，赦田承嗣。
现代文：大历十二年三月十八日，赦免田承嗣。
English: On March 18 of the twelfth year of the great calendar, he pardoned Tian Chengzhi.

古文：辛巳，元载有罪伏诛。
现代文：二十九日，元载因罪伏法处死。
English: On the 29th, Yuan Zai was executed for the crime of lying in wait.

古文：贬王缙为括州刺史。
现代文：将王缙贬为括州刺史。
English: Wang Qian will be relegated to the annals of history.

古文：四月壬午，太常卿杨绾为中书侍郎，礼部侍郎常衮为门下侍郎：同中书门下平章事。
现代文：四月初一，太常卿杨绾任中书侍郎，礼部侍郎常衮行任门下侍郎，并加同中书门下平章事。
English: On the first day of April, Yang Jie, the First Secretary of the Central Committee, was appointed the secretary of the Central Committee, the secretary of the Ministry of Ceremonies was appointed the secretary of the Central Committee, and the secretary of the Central Committee was appointed the secretary of the Central Committee.

古文：癸巳，诏谏官献封事勿限时，侧门论事者随状面奏，六品以上官言事投匦者无勒副章。
现代文：十二日，下诏：谏官呈献密封奏章不受时间限制，侧门议论政事者随呈状面奏，六品以上官员议政投奏章于朝堂匦函的不强求呈递副本。
English: On the twelfth day of the month, the following edict was issued: Eunuchs were allowed to present sealed musical scores without time limit; those who discussed political affairs at the side door were required to present written scores; and officials of more than six ranks who discussed political issues were required to present copies of written scores in a sealed letter to the Imperial Court.

古文：丁酉，吐蕃寇黎、雅二州，崔宁败之。
现代文：十六日，吐蕃军进犯黎、雅二州，崔宁打败吐蕃军。
English: On the 16th, the Tubo army invaded Lijiang and Yaxu, and Cui Ning defeated the Tubo army.

古文：是月，金州人卓英璘反。
现代文：本月，金州人卓英瞞反叛。
English: This month, Jinzhou resident Zhuo Ying secretly rebelled.

古文：六月乙巳，英璘伏诛。
现代文：六月二十五日，卓英瞞伏法处死。
English: On June 25th, Zhuo Ying was put to death.

古文：给复金州二年。
现代文：免除金州徭役二年。
English: He was exempted from serving as Jinzhou magistrate for two years.

古文：丁未，以旱降京师死罪，流以下原之。
现代文：二十七日，因旱灾，对京城死罪囚犯减刑，宽免流放罪以下的犯人。
English: On the 27th, due to the drought, the death penalty was commuted for capital prisoners in Beijing, and prisoners with less than the crime of banishment were pardoned.

古文：七月己巳，杨绾薨。
现代文：七月二十日，杨绾去世。
English: On July 20, Yang Mi passed away.

古文：丙子，诏尚书、御史大夫、左右丞、侍郎举任刺史者。
现代文：二十七日，下诏：尚书、御史大夫、左右丞、侍郎举荐担任刺史的人选。
English: On the 27th, the following edict was issued: Shoshu, Mishi no daibu, Zoka no jo, and Jiro were recommended as candidates for the post of sashishi.

古文：九月庚午，吐蕃寇坊州。
现代文：九月二十二日，吐蕃军进犯坊州。
English: On September 22, the Tubo Army marched into Fangzhou.

古文：十一月壬子，山南西道节度使张献恭及吐蕃战于岷州，败之。
现代文：秋季，黄河泛滥。十一月初四，山南西道节度使张献恭在岷州打败吐蕃军。
English: In autumn, the Yellow River flooded. On the fourth day of the first month of November, the Shannan West Road Festival made Zhang Xianyang defeat the Tubo Army in Zhangzhou.

古文：十二月丁亥，崔宁及吐蕃战于西山，败之。是岁，恒、定、赵三州地震。
现代文：十二月初九，崔宁在西山打败吐蕃军。本年，恒、定、赵三州发生地震。
English: On the 9th day of the 12th month, Cui Ning defeated the Tubo army in Xishan. This year, an earthquake occurred in the three states of Heng, Ding and Zhao.

古文：冬，无雪。
现代文：冬季，无雪。
English: In winter, there is no snow.

古文：十三年正月戊辰，回纥寇并州。
现代文：大历十三年正月二十一日，回纥军侵犯并州。
English: On the 21st day of the first month of the 13th year of the lunar calendar, the Uighur army invaded and annexed the prefecture.

古文：癸酉，河东节度留后鲍防及回纥战于阳曲，败绩。
现代文：二十六日，河东节度留后鲍防在阳曲与回纥军交战，大败。
English: On the 26th, after the Hedong Festival, Baofeng fought with the Uighur army in Yangqu and suffered a great defeat.

古文：二月庚辰，代州刺史张光晟成回纥战于羊虎谷，败之。四月甲辰，吐蕃寇灵州，常谦光败之。
现代文：二月初三，代州刺史张光晟在羊虎谷打败回纥军。四月二十八日，吐蕃军进犯灵州，常谦光将其打败。
English: On the 3rd day of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the year, Zhang Guangyao, the governor of Daizhou, defeated the Uighur army in Yanghu Valley. On the 28th day of the 4th month, the Tubo army invaded Lingzhou, and Chang Qianguang defeated it.

古文：十月己丑，禁京畿持兵器捕猎。
现代文：十月十七日，禁止京畿境内持兵器捕猎。
English: On October 17, hunting with weapons was prohibited in Gyeonggi Province.

古文：是岁，郴州黄芩山崩。
现代文：本年，郴州黄芩山山崩。
English: This year, a landslide occurred in Huangpi Mountain, Zhangzhou.

古文：十四年二月癸未，魏博节度使田承嗣卒，其兄子悦自称留后。
现代文：大历十四年二月十二日，魏博节度使田承嗣死去，其侄田悦自称留后。
English: On the 12th day of the 2nd month of the 14th year of the lunar calendar, Wei Bo Jiedu caused Tian Chengzhi to die, and his nephew Tian Yue claimed to stay behind.

古文：三月丁未，汴宋将李希烈逐其节度使李忠臣，自称留后。
现代文：三月初六，汴宋将领李希烈驱逐节度使李忠臣，自称留后。
English: On the 6th day of the 3rd month, the general of the Song Dynasty, Li Xili, expelled the regent, Li Zhongcheng, claiming to stay behind.

古文：五月辛酉，不豫，诏皇太子监国。
现代文：五月二十一日，代宗发病，诏令皇太子李适代理国政。
English: On May 21, Emperor Daizong fell ill and ordered Crown Prince Li Si to take over state affairs.

古文：是夕，皇帝崩于紫宸内殿，年五十三。
现代文：当晚，代宗在紫宸内殿逝世，终年五十三岁。
English: That evening, Daizong passed away in the inner hall of the Purple Pagoda, at the age of 53.

古文：赞曰：天宝之乱，大盗遽起，天子出奔。
现代文：评说：天宝年间，安史之乱骤起，天子逃出国都。
English: Comment: During the Tenpo era, the Anshi Rebellion suddenly broke out, and the emperor fled the capital.

古文：方是时，肃宗以皇太子治兵讨贼，真得其职矣！
现代文：正当此时，肃宗以皇太子身分总掌军旅，讨伐逆贼，真太适合他的职份了！
English: Just at this time, Su Zong, as the crown prince, was in charge of the general army brigade, fighting against the traitors. It was really suitable for his position!

古文：然以僖宗之时，唐之威德在人，纪纲未坏，孰与天宝之际？
现代文：然而，就僖宗时的情况而论，这时李唐王朝的声威恩惠仍存世间，国家的纲常法纪尚未毁坏，哪比得上天宝之际？
English: However, as far as the situation at the time of Emperor Xizong is concerned, at that time, the prestige and benevolence of the Li and Tang dynasties still existed in the world, and the country's legal system had not yet been destroyed.

古文：而僖宗在蜀，诸镇之兵纠合戮力，遂破黄巢而复京师。
现代文：但僖宗身在蜀地，各镇军旅集结协力，终于打败黄巢收复京都。
English: However, Emperor Shōzō was in Shōchi, and the town's military brigades pooled their efforts to finally defeat the Yellow Nest and recapture Kyoto.

古文：由是言之，肃宗虽不即尊位，亦可以破贼矣。
现代文：以此而言，肃宗即使不登帝位，也可凭此打败逆贼了。
English: In this sense, even if Su Zong did not ascend to the throne, he could still defeat the traitors.

古文：盖自高祖以来，三逊于位以授其子，而独睿宗上畏天戒，发于诚心，若高祖、玄宗，岂其志哉！
现代文：自高祖李渊以来，有三代皇帝让位其子，其中仅睿宗李旦是上畏天戒，出自诚心，而高祖、玄宗，哪是他们本心呢！
English: Since Emperor Gaozong Li Yuan, there have been three generations of emperors who have abdicated in favor of their sons. Among them, only Emperor Ruizong of the Li Dynasty feared God and was sincere, while Emperor Gaozong and Emperor Xuanzong did not.

古文：代宗之时，馀孽犹在，平乱守成，盖亦中材之主也！
现代文：代宗之时，安史余孽仍在，他靖乱守成，亦属中等才能的君主了。
English: At the time of the founding of the dynasty, Anshi Yuqi was still alive, and he, Jingran Shoucheng, was also a monarch of moderate talent.

