古文：贞观三年，太宗谓侍臣曰： 君臣本同治乱，共安危，若主纳忠谏，臣进直言，斯故君臣合契，古来所重。
现代文：贞观三年，唐太宗对侍臣说： 无论国家安定还是混乱，安全还是危险，君臣都应该同舟共济。如果君主能接受忠言，臣子能够直言进谏，那么君臣之间就会非常默契，这是自古以来治国所重视的方法。
English: In the third year of Zhenguan, Tang Taizong said to his courtiers: No matter whether the country is stable or chaotic, safe or dangerous, the monarchs and courtiers should be in the same boat. If the monarch can accept loyal advice, and the courtiers can speak frankly, then there will be a very tacit understanding between the monarchs and courtiers. This is a method that has been valued in statecraft since ancient times.

古文：若君自贤，臣不匡正，欲不危亡，不可得也。
现代文：如果君主认为自己贤明，而臣子却不加以纠正，想要不亡国，是不可能的。
English: If the sovereign thinks he is wise, and the vassal does not correct him, it is impossible for him not to ruin the country.

古文：君失其国，臣亦不能独全其家。
现代文：君主要是失掉了江山，臣子也就不能保全自己的家族。
English: You have mainly lost the country, and the vassal cannot protect his family.

古文：至如隋炀帝暴虐，臣下钳口，卒令不闻其过，遂至灭亡，虞世基等寻亦诛死。
现代文：像隋炀帝，他为人非常暴虐，臣下不敢进言，这使他不知道自己的过失，最后国破家亡，大臣虞世基等人不久也被杀死。
English: Like Emperor Sui, he was very tyrannical, and his subjects did not dare to speak out, which made him unaware of his own faults. In the end, the country was destroyed, and Minister Yu Shiji and others were soon killed.

古文：前事不远，朕与卿等可得不慎，无为后所嗤！ 
现代文：这个惨痛的教训离我们并不远，我和各位大臣能不谨慎吗？我们不能被后人所耻笑啊。 
English: This painful lesson is not far from us. Can I and the ministers not be prudent? We cannot be ridiculed by posterity.

古文：贞观四年，太宗论隋日。魏征对曰： 臣往在隋朝，曾闻有盗发，炀帝令於士澄捕逐。
现代文：贞观四年，唐太宗谈论隋朝统治的时候，魏徵对答说： 我过去在隋朝，曾听说有盗窃案发生，炀帝派於士澄追捕。
English: In the fourth year of Zhenguan, when Tang Taizong talked about the rule of the Sui Dynasty, Wei Zheng replied: I was in the Sui Dynasty in the past, and I heard that there was a theft case, and Emperor Gao sent a group to Shicheng to hunt it down.

古文：但有疑似，苦加拷掠，枉承贼者二千余人，并令同日斩决。
现代文：只要发现可疑的人，就苦苦拷打，被迫含冤承认自己是盗贼的有二千多人，隋炀帝下令在同一天全都斩决。
English: As long as suspicious people were found, they were severely tortured, and more than two thousand people were forced to wrongfully admit that they were thieves. Emperor Sui Xuan ordered all of them to be executed on the same day.

古文：大理丞张元济怪之，试寻其状。乃有六七人，盗发之日，先禁他所，被放才出，亦遭推勘，不胜苦痛，自诬行盗。
现代文：大理丞张元济感到奇怪，试查有关案件的文书，竟有六七人在盗窃案发生的那天，原先就关押在别的地方，盗案发生后才放出来，可也被审问拷打，受不了痛苦，自己屈认行盗。
English: Zhang Yuanji, the chief judge, was surprised to find out from the relevant case documents that 67 people were originally detained in other places on the day of the theft, and were only released after the theft occurred. However, they were also interrogated and tortured. Unable to bear the pain, they confessed to the theft.

古文：元济因此更事究寻，二千人内惟九人逗遛不明。
现代文：张元济因此再进行推究，这二千人中只有九个人当时行踪不清楚。
English: Zhang Yuanji therefore carried out further investigations. Of these two thousand people, the whereabouts of only nine were unclear at the time.

古文：官人有谙识者，就九人内四人非贼。
现代文：官吏中有熟悉这些人的，证明九个人里有四个不是盗贼。
English: Officials familiar with the men testified that four of the nine were not thieves.

古文：有司以炀帝已令斩决，遂不执奏，并杀之。 
现代文：有关部门因为炀帝已下令斩决，就不把真相上奏，结果把这两千人统统杀掉。 
English: The relevant departments did not report the truth to the emperor because he had already ordered the executions, and as a result, these two thousand people were all killed.

古文：太宗曰： 非是炀帝无道，臣下亦不尽心。
现代文：太宗说： 这不仅是隋炀帝暴虐无道，臣下们也不尽心办事。
English: Emperor Taizong said: This is not only the tyranny of the Sui and Qin emperors, but also the subordinates are not doing their best.

古文：须相匡谏，不避诛戮，岂得惟行谄佞，苟求悦誉？
现代文：他们应当匡正谏诤，不怕有杀身之祸，怎能一味谄媚奉迎，不讲原则地去讨皇上的欢心和称誉。
English: They should rectify their ways, and not be afraid of the disaster of killing themselves. How can they blindly flatter and flatter, and seek the Emperor's favor and praise without principles?

古文：君臣如此，何得不败？
现代文：隋朝君臣都是这样，怎么能不失败？
English: Sui dynasty, emperor and ministers were all like this, how could they not fail?

古文：朕赖公等共相辅佐，遂令囹圄空虚。
现代文：我依靠你们共同辅佐，就能使监狱空无一人。
English: With your help, I can empty the prisons.

古文：愿公等善始克终，恒如今日！ 
现代文：希望你们能善始善终，常像今天一样。 
English: I hope you can start well and end well, as you did today.

古文：贞观六年，太宗谓侍臣曰： 朕闻周、秦初得天下，其事不异。
现代文：贞观六年，唐太宗对侍臣说： 我听说周朝与秦朝刚得到天下的时候，治理国家的方法是相同的。
English: In the sixth year of Zhenguan, Tang Taizong said to his attendant: I heard that when the Zhou Dynasty and the Qin Dynasty just gained the world, the method of governing the country was the same.

古文：然周则惟善是务，积功累德，所以能保八百之基。
现代文：但是周朝推行仁政，积累功德，所以能够将自己的基业保持八百年。
English: However, the Zhou Dynasty implemented benevolent politics and accumulated merits, so it was able to maintain its foundation for eight hundred years.

古文：秦乃恣其奢淫，好行刑罚，不过二世而灭。
现代文：而秦朝恣意妄为，骄奢淫逸，所以只经历了两代帝王就灭亡了。
English: But the Qin Dynasty acted arbitrarily and arrogantly, so it only experienced two generations of emperors before it perished.

古文：岂非为善者福祚延长，为恶者降年不永？
现代文：这难道不是行善可以延长福祚，作恶可使国运衰败吗？
English: Isn't it true that doing good can prolong one's good fortune, while doing evil can cause one's national fortune to decline?

古文：朕又闻桀、纣帝王也，以匹夫比之，则以为辱；颜、闵匹夫也，以帝王比之，则以为荣。
现代文：我又听说桀、纣是帝王，但是凡夫俗子都对他们的行为感到羞耻，颜回、闵损是普通百姓，但帝王却以他们的言行为荣耀。
English: I've also heard that the emperor and the emperor are emperors, but ordinary people are ashamed of their actions. Ordinary people are embarrassed and humiliated, but the emperor is glorified by their words and actions.

古文：此亦帝王深耻也。
现代文：这也是帝王应该感到羞惭的。
English: This is something the emperor should be ashamed of.

古文：朕每将此事以为鉴戒，常恐不逮，为人所笑。 
现代文：我时常用这些事对照自己的行为，并经常告诫自己，担心自己哪里做得不好，被人耻笑。 
English: I used to compare these things with my own behavior, and often admonished myself, worried about what I did not do well and was ridiculed.

古文：魏征对曰： 臣闻鲁哀公谓孔子曰： 有人好忘者，移宅乃忘其妻。 
现代文：魏徵听后，意味深长地说： 我听说鲁哀公对孔子说： 有个人很健忘，他换了住宅就把自己的妻子给忘了。 
English: After listening to Wei Zheng, he said meaningfully: I heard that Lu Aigong said to Confucius: There is a man who is very forgetful, he changed his house and forgot his wife.

古文：孔子曰： 又有好忘甚于此者，丘见桀、纣之君乃忘其身。 
现代文：孔子说： 还有比这个人更健忘的，我看桀、纣这些君主，他们就非常健忘，连自己都给忘了。 
English: Confucius said, "There is no one more forgetful than this man. When I look at these emperors, they are so forgetful that they even forget themselves."

古文：愿陛下每以此为虑，庶免后人笑尔。 
现代文：希望陛下以此为戒，以免被后人耻笑。 
English: I hope that His Majesty will take this as a warning, so as not to be ridiculed by future generations.

古文：贞观十四年，太宗以高昌平，召侍臣赐宴于两仪殿，谓房玄龄曰： 高昌若不失臣礼，岂至灭亡？
现代文：贞观十四年，唐太宗因为平定了高昌，在两仪殿招待各位大臣。席间，唐太宗对房玄龄说： 高昌如果不丧失作为臣子的礼节，怎么会遭到灭亡呢？
English: In the 14th year of Zhenguan, Emperor Taizong of Tang invited various ministers to the Hall of the Two Ceremonies because he had conquered Gaochang. During the meal, Emperor Taizong said to Fang Xuanling: If Gaochang does not lose the etiquette of a courtier, how can it be destroyed?

古文：朕平此一国，甚怀危惧，惟当戒骄逸以自防，纳忠謇以自正。
现代文：我每次平定了一个地方，都心怀畏惧，勉励自己切莫骄奢淫逸，应该把接纳忠言、纠正自己的错误作为自己的责任。
English: Every time I pacified a place, I was afraid and encouraged myself not to be arrogant and extravagant. I should take it as my responsibility to accept loyal advice and correct my mistakes.

古文：黜邪佞，用贤良，不以小人之言而议君子，以此慎守，庶几于获安也。 
现代文：治理国家就要任用贤良正直的人，罢免奸邪谄媚的人，不要听信小人的谣言，以免误解了正人君子。无论做什么都要谨慎，国家就可望得到太平。 
English: To govern the country, it is necessary to appoint virtuous and honest people, to dismiss treacherous and evil and charming people, and not to listen to the rumors of villains, so as not to misunderstand the upright gentleman. No matter what you do, you must be careful, and the country can be expected to be peaceful.

古文：魏征进曰： 臣观古来帝王拨乱创业，必自戒慎，采刍荛之议，从忠谠之言。
现代文：魏徵趁机进言道： 我观察自古以来的帝王，他们在创业的时候，都能够有所警戒，倾听老百姓的呼声，采纳忠诚的意见。
English: Wei Zheng took the opportunity to say: I have observed emperors since ancient times. When they start a business, they can be vigilant, listen to the voices of the people, and adopt loyal opinions.

古文：天下既安，则瓷情肆欲，甘乐谄谀，恶闻正谏。
现代文：天下太平之后，他们就开始穷奢极欲，只喜欢听谄媚讨好的话，厌恶逆耳忠言。
English: After the world was at peace, they began to crave luxury, only liked to listen to flattering words, and detested insincere words.

古文：张子房，汉王计画之臣，及高祖为天子，将废嫡立庶，子房曰： 今日之事，非口舌所能争也。 
现代文：张良是汉代的开国元勋，汉高祖称帝之后，想废掉嫡出的太子另立庶出的公子，张良说： 这件事不是口头说说就可以决定的。 
English: Zhang Liang was the founding father of the Han Dynasty. After Emperor Gaozu of the Han Dynasty became emperor, he wanted to abolish the prince born in wedlock and establish a prince born out of wedlock. Zhang Liang said: This matter cannot be decided verbally.

古文：终不敢复有开说。
现代文：之后，张良就再也不敢开口提这件事情了。
English: After that, Zhang Liang no longer dared to open his mouth to mention this matter.

古文：况陛下功德之盛，以汉祖方之，彼不足准。
现代文：况且陛下目前功德卓越，汉高祖还不足以与您相提并论。
English: Moreover, His Majesty's current merits are outstanding, and Henkel Zu is not enough to be compared with you.

古文：即位十有五年，圣德光被，今又平殄高昌。屡以安危系意，方欲纳用忠良，开直言之路，天下幸甚。
现代文：陛下即位已有十五年，圣德广播，现在又平定了高昌，还能够心怀忧患意识，采纳忠言，广开言路，真是国家的大幸。
English: Fifteen years have passed since His Majesty ascended the throne. He has broadcast the gospel, and now he has pacified Gaochang. He is still able to have a sense of sorrow in his heart, adopt loyal counsel, and open up a wide path of speech. This is truly a great blessing for the country.

古文：昔齐桓公与管仲、鲍叔牙、宁戚四人饮，桓公谓叔牙曰： 盍起为寡人寿乎？ 
现代文：过去齐桓公和管仲、鲍叔牙、宁戚四个人一起饮酒，齐桓公对鲍叔牙说： 我的国家能够长寿吗？ 
English: In the past, Prince Qi Huan drank alcohol with four people: Guanzhong, Bao Shuya and Ning Qi. Prince Qi Huan said to Bao Shuya: Can my country have a long life?

古文：叔牙奉觞而起曰： 愿公无忘出在莒时，使管仲无忘束缚于鲁时，使宁戚无忘饭牛车下时。 
现代文：鲍叔牙举起酒杯站立着说： 愿主公不忘过去逃亡在莒时的情形，管仲不忘在鲁国被囚禁的情形，宁戚不忘当年在车下喂牛时的情形。 
English: Bao Shuzha raised his glass and stood up and said: "May the lord not forget the situation when he fled to Shandong in the past, Guanzhong not forget the situation when he was imprisoned in Lu, and Ningzhi not forget the situation when he was feeding cattle under the car that year.

古文：桓公避席而谢曰： 寡人与二大夫能无忘夫子之言，则社稷不危矣！  
现代文：齐桓公听后，站起来感激地说： 我和管仲、宁戚如果能不忘你这番话，那么国家就不会有危险了。  
English: After listening, Qi Kuan Gong stood up gratefully and said, "If I and Guan Zhong and Ning Qi can not forget your words, then the country will not be in danger."

古文：太宗谓征曰： 朕必不敢忘布衣时，公不得忘叔牙之为人也。 
现代文：唐太宗听了，感激地对魏徵说： 我一定不会忘记自己身为平民的时候，你也一定不要忘记鲍叔牙的为人。 
English: Tang Taizong listened and gratefully said to Wei Zheng: I will never forget myself when I was a commoner, and you must not forget Bao Shuya as a person.

古文：贞观十四年，特进魏征上疏曰：
现代文：贞观十四年，特进魏徵上书说：
English: In the 14th year of Zhenguan, the special envoy Wei Zheng said:

古文：臣闻君为元首，臣作股肱，齐契同心，合而成体，体或不备，未有成人。
现代文：为臣听说国君就像是一个人的脑袋，大臣就像是一个人的四肢，只有同心协力地配合起来，才能构成一个人的整体。缺少任何一部分，都不能算是一个完整的人。
English: As a vassal, I heard that the sovereign is like a person's head, and the minister is like a person's limbs. Only when they work together can they form a person's whole. If any part is missing, it cannot be considered a complete person.

古文：然则首虽尊高，必资手足以成体；君虽明哲，必藉股肱以致治。
现代文：脑袋虽然高贵重要，但必须有四肢的配合，才能成为一个整体。国君虽然英明，但必须依靠大臣的辅佐才能把国家治理好。
English: Although the head is noble and important, it must have the cooperation of the limbs in order to become a whole. Although the sovereign is wise, he must rely on the assistance of the minister to govern the country well.

古文：《礼》云： 民以君为心，君以民为体，心庄则体舒，心肃则容敬。 《书》云： 元首明哉！
现代文：《礼记》上说： 百姓把国君看成是自己的心，国君把百姓看成是自己的体，内心端正，身体才会舒畅健康，内心肃穆，面容才会恭敬。《书经》上说： 国君英明！大臣贤良！
English: "Li Ji" said: The people regard the sovereign as their own heart, and the sovereign regards the people as their own body. The heart is upright, the body will be comfortable and healthy, the heart will be solemn, and the face will be respectful. "Shuxing" said: The sovereign is wise! The minister is virtuous!

古文：股肱良哉！
现代文：百姓安康！ 
English: People are in good health!

古文：庶士康哉！ 
现代文：又说： 国君无能，大臣懒惰，万事不成！ 
English: He also said: The sovereign is incompetent, the ministers are lazy, and nothing gets done!

古文： 元首丛脞哉！股肱惰哉！万事堕哉！ 然则委弃股肱，独任胸臆，具体成理，非所闻也。
现代文：所以，国君抛开大臣而独断专行地把国家治理得很有条理，这样的事从来没有听说过。
English: Therefore, it is unheard of for a sovereign to set aside his ministers and arbitrarily govern the country in a very systematic manner.

古文：夫君臣相遇，自古为难。
现代文：君臣要配合协调、相得益彰，自古以来就是很难得的。
English: Since ancient times, it has been rare for princes and ministers to cooperate, coordinate and complement each other.

古文：以石投水，千载一合，以水投石，无时不有。
现代文：就像把石头投进水中，让石头顺从流水，千年才能遇上一次；而让流水顺从石头，时时刻刻都能发生。
English: It is like throwing a stone into the water and letting the stone obey the flow of water, which can only happen once in a thousand years; but letting the flow of water obey the stone can happen all the time.

古文：其能开至公之道，申天下之用，内尽心膂，外竭股肱，和若盐梅，固同金石者，非惟高位厚秩，在于礼之而已。
现代文：君臣能够秉持公正的道义，让天下人才发挥各自的才能，国君在内尽心尽力，大臣在外竭力辅佐，二者融洽得就像汤中的盐和梅，坚固得就像金石一样。达到这样的境界，不是靠高官厚禄，而在于以礼相待。
English: A prince and a vassal can uphold the moral principles of fairness and let the world's talents play out their respective talents. A sovereign can do his best at home, and a minister can do his best to assist abroad. The two go together like salt and plum in soup, and are as solid as gold. To reach such a state, it is not by virtue of high officials, but by treating each other with courtesy.

古文：昔周文王游于凤凰之墟，袜系解，顾左右莫可使者，乃自结之。
现代文：过去周文王游凤凰台时，系袜的带子开了，他看了看周围的人没有一个可以使唤的，便自己把袜带系好了。
English: In the past, when Zhou Wenwang toured Fengtai, the band for tying his socks came undone. He looked around and saw that there was no one around to help him, so he tied the band himself.

古文：岂周文之朝尽为俊乂，圣明之代独无君子者哉？
现代文：难道周文王的朝臣全都贤良，而今天的圣明时代倒没有君子吗？
English: Could it be that the courtiers of King Chouwen were all virtuous, while there are no gentlemen in today's Ming Dynasty?

古文：但知与不知，礼与不礼耳！
现代文：只不过是了解不了解，礼遇不礼遇罢了。
English: It's just a matter of understanding or not understanding, courtesy or not.

古文：是以伊尹，有莘之媵臣；韩信，项氏之亡命。
现代文：伊尹是有莘国的陪嫁之臣，韩信是从项羽手下逃亡的大将。
English: Yi Yin was a vassal with a concubine from the State of Yan, and Han Xin was a general who escaped from the hands of Xiang Yu.

古文：殷汤致礼，定王业于南巢，汉祖登坛，成帝功于垓下。
现代文：商汤给伊尹以礼遇，在伊尹的帮助下，成就了帝业；汉高祖请韩信登坛拜将，于是在垓下成就了帝功。
English: Shang Tang gave courtesy to Yi Yin, and with the help of Yi Yin, he achieved imperial success; Han Gao Zu invited Han Xin to the altar to pay homage, so he achieved imperial success under the yoke.

古文：若夏桀不弃于伊尹，项羽垂恩于韩信，宁肯败已成之国，为灭亡之虏乎？
现代文：如果夏桀不嫌弃伊尹，项羽施恩于韩信，难道会丧失已成之国而做亡国之虏吗？
English: If Xia Yao does not disdain to abandon Yi Yin, and Xiang Yu is kind to Han Xin, will he lose the established country and become a captive of the lost country?

古文：又微子，骨肉也，受茅土于宋；箕子，良臣也，陈《洪范》于周，仲尼称其仁，莫有非之者。
现代文：还有微子，他是商纣王的骨肉同胞，武王灭商以后受封于宋；箕子是位良臣，为周武王陈述《洪范》，孔子称赞他的仁德，没有人不赞成。
English: There is also Micron, who is a flesh-and-blood compatriot of King Shangdi. After King Wu exterminated the merchants, he was given a title in the Song Dynasty. Xunzi was a good minister, and he recited "Hong Fan" for King Zhou. Confucius praised his benevolence, and no one disapproved.

古文：《礼记》称： 鲁穆公问于子思曰： 为旧君反服，古欤？ 
现代文：《礼记》上说： 鲁穆公问子思： 被放逐的朝臣，仍为原来的君主服丧，古来有这种情况吗？ 
English: "Rituals" said: Rumu asked his son: Exiled courtiers, still mourning for the original monarch, has this been the case since ancient times?

古文：子思曰： 古之君子，进人以礼，退人以礼，故有旧君反服之礼也。
现代文：子思说： 古代的君主，用人时以礼相待，辞退时也以礼相待，所以量不在朝，仍有为君主服丧的礼仪。
English: Zisi said: The ancient monarchs treated each other with courtesy when they employed people, and also treated each other with courtesy when they dismissed them. Therefore, the measure is not in the morning, and there is still the etiquette of mourning for the monarch.

古文：今之君子，进人若将加诸膝，退人若将队诸渊。
现代文：然而现在的君主，用人时恨不得搂在怀里，辞退时恨不能推下深渊。
English: However, the current monarch, when he employs someone, can't help but cradle him in his arms, and when he dismisses him, can't help but push him into the abyss.

古文：毋为戎首，不亦善乎，又何反服之礼之有？  齐景公问于晏子曰： 忠臣之事君如之何？ 
现代文：不兴兵讨伐他就不错了，还谈得上什么服丧之礼？  齐景公问晏子： 忠臣是如何对待君主的？ 
English: It would have been fine if he had not raised an army to fight him, but what kind of funeral ceremony is there to talk about? Qi Jing Gong asked the mule: How did the loyal subject treat the monarch?

古文：晏子对曰： 有难不死，出亡不送。 
现代文：晏子说： 君主有难不以身殉，君主流亡不相送。 
English: Xunzi said, "It is difficult for a monarch not to die, and it is impossible for a reigning monarch not to die.

古文：公曰 裂地以封之，疏爵而待之，有难不死，出亡不送，何也？ 
现代文：齐景公说： 君主为臣子分封土地，加官晋爵，为什么臣子要这样对待君主呢？ 
English: Lord Qi Jing said: The monarch allocates land to his vassals and promotes them to higher ranks. Why should the vassals treat the monarch in such a way?

古文：晏子曰： 言而见用，终身无难，臣何死焉？
现代文：晏子说： 忠臣的建议被采纳，君主就会终身无难，忠臣还为谁而死呢？
English: Xunzi said, "If a loyal subject's suggestion is accepted, the monarch will be safe for life. For whom would a loyal subject die?

古文：谏而见纳，终身不亡，臣何送焉？
现代文：忠臣的规劝被接受，君主就会终身太平，臣子又去为谁送行呢？
English: If the exhortation of a loyal subject is accepted, the monarch will be at peace for life. Who will the subject see off?

古文：若言不见用，有难而死，是妄死也；谏不见纳，出亡而送，是诈忠也。 
现代文：如果忠言不被采纳，有难而死，这是妄死；如果臣子不进献良言，等君主死了去相送，那是虚伪的忠诚。 
English: If a loyal counsel is not accepted, and one dies with difficulty, it is a wanton death; if a vassal does not come forward to offer a good counsel, and waits until the monarch is dead to send him off, it is a hypocritical loyalty.

古文：《春秋左氏传》曰： 崔杼弑齐庄公，晏子立于崔氏之门外，其人曰： 死乎？ 
现代文：《春秋左氏传》上说： 崔杼杀死了齐庄公，晏子站在崔府大门外，有人问他： 齐庄公死了吗？ 
English: "Chunqiu Zuo's Biography" said: "Cui Yongzhu killed Qi Zhuanggong. Zou Zi stood outside the gate of Cui Fu. Someone asked him: "Is Qi Zhuanggong dead?"

古文：曰： 独吾君也乎哉！
现代文：晏子说： 难道只是我的君主死了吗，我也死了。 
English: The cripple said, "Is it only my lord who is dead? I am dead too."

古文：吾死也？ 
现代文：那人又问： 送别了吗？ 
English: The man asked again: "Is it time to say goodbye?"

古文：曰： 行乎？ 
现代文：晏子说： 是我的罪吗？
English: The cripple said, "Is it my fault?

古文：曰： 吾罪也乎哉！
现代文：君主为了国家而死，我也会跟着死。
English: If the monarch dies for the country, I will die with him.

古文：吾亡也？故君为社稷死，则死之；为社稷亡，则亡之。
现代文：如果君主是为了自己死的，不是他的亲戚，谁会为他痛哭，为他而死呢？ 
English: If the prince died for himself and not for his kinsmen, who would weep for him and die for him?

古文：若为己死，为己亡，非其亲昵，谁敢任之？ 
现代文：于是开门而入，抱着齐庄公的尸体痛哭，过后，又站起来大步离去。 
English: So she opened the door, hugged the dead body of Qi Zhuanggong and cried bitterly. Later, she stood up and strode away.

古文：门启而入，枕尸股而哭，兴，三踊而出。 孟子曰： 君视臣如手足，臣视君如腹心；君视臣如犬马，臣视君如国人；君视臣如粪土，臣视君如寇仇。 
现代文：孟子说： 君主把臣子看成手足，臣子就会视君主如心腹；君主把臣子看做犬马，臣子就会把君主视做陌路人；君主把臣子看做粪土，臣子就会把君主视做仇敌。 
English: Mencius said: If the sovereign regards the vassal as a limb, the vassal will regard the sovereign as a confidant; if the sovereign regards the vassal as a dog, the vassal will regard the sovereign as a stranger; if the sovereign regards the vassal as dung, the vassal will regard the sovereign as an enemy.

古文：虽臣之事君无二志，至于去就之节，当缘恩之厚薄，然则为人主者，安可以无礼于下哉？
现代文：虽然臣子对待君主没有二心，至于进退的礼节，应当以君主对臣子的恩德而定，然而作为君主，怎么可以对臣下无礼呢？
English: Although a vassal treats the sovereign with no ambivalence, as for the etiquette of advancement and retreat, it should be determined by the monarch's kindness to the vassal, but as a monarch, how can he be rude to his vassal?

古文：窃观在朝群臣，当主枢机之寄者，或地邻秦、晋，或业与经纶，并立事立功，皆一时之选，处之衡轴，为任重矣。
现代文：我私下观察在朝身任要职的众大臣，有的是在西北地区担任过边防的重臣，有的是在朝廷参与朝政的要员。他们都建功立业，功勋卓著，都是当代优秀的人才。他们处在最关键的重要地位，责任非常重大。
English: Privately, I have observed the ministers who hold important positions in the imperial court, some of whom have served as chief ministers of border defense in the northwest region, and some of whom have participated in imperial politics at the imperial court. They have all made great achievements and distinguished themselves. They are all outstanding contemporary talents. They are in the most critical and important position, and their responsibilities are very great.

古文：任之虽重，信之未笃，则人或自疑。
现代文：朝廷给他们的责任虽然重，但对他们的信任却不深。
English: Although the responsibilities given to them by the court are heavy, the trust in them is not deep.

古文：人或自疑，则心怀苟且。心怀苟且，则节义不立。节义不立，则名教不兴。名教不兴，而可与固太平之基，保七百之祚，未之有也。
现代文：这样就会使人有时产生疑虑，有疑虑就会怀有得过且过的态度，怀有得过且过的态度，就树立不起忠君报国的节义，节义树立不起来，纲常名教就不能振兴，名教不能振兴，而想巩固太平基业，保住七百年的大唐国运，是不可能的事。
English: In this way, people will sometimes have doubts, and if they have doubts, they will have an attitude of getting by, and if they have an attitude of getting by, they will not be able to establish the festival of loyalty to the king and the proclamation of the country, the festival cannot be established, the famous religion cannot be revitalized, the famous religion cannot be revitalized, and it is impossible to consolidate the Taiping Foundation and maintain the seven hundred years of the Great Tang Dynasty.

古文：又闻国家重惜功臣，不念旧恶，方之前圣，一无所间。
现代文：我又听说国家爱惜功臣，对他们过去的过错不再计较。
English: I also heard that the country cherishes its heroes and no longer cares about their past mistakes.

古文：然但宽于大事，急于小罪，临时责怒，未免爱憎之心，不可以为政。
现代文：这与以前圣明的国君所做的没有什么区别。但是陛下对大事宽大，对小过错反而严厉处理，有时发脾气训斥人，不免带有偏见。这样是不能处理好朝政的。
English: This is no different from what the holy emperors did in the past. However, His Majesty is lenient with big things, but stern with small mistakes. Sometimes he loses his temper and reprimands people, and he is inevitably biased. This is not the way to handle imperial politics.

古文：君严其禁，臣或犯之，况上启其源，下必有甚，川壅而溃，其伤必多，欲使凡百黎元，何所措其手足？
现代文：国君法令严厉，还有些臣子敢于触犯，更何况在上位的人带头违犯，下面就更加不可收拾了。就像河水冲垮堤坝，泛滥成灾，伤害的人一定很多。那黎民百姓又该怎么办呢？
English: The sovereign's edicts are strict, and some courtiers dare to violate them. What's more, if those at the top take the lead in violating them, it will be even more unmanageable from below. It's like a river bursting through a dam, flooding, and injuring a lot of people. So what should the people of Lai do?

古文：此则君开一源，下生百端之变，无不乱者也。
现代文：这就是说，国君开启了一个弊端，下面就会出现一百个弊端，这样一来，天下就没有不乱的地方。
English: That is to say, once the ruler of a country opens up a fault, a hundred faults will appear underneath, and as a result, there will be no place in the world that is not in turmoil.

古文：《礼记》曰： 爱而知其恶，憎而知其善。 
现代文：《礼记》上说： 喜欢一个人要知道他的缺点，不喜欢一个人要知道他的优点。 
English: "The Book of Etiquette" says: If you like a person, you should know his shortcomings; if you don't like a person, you should know his strengths.

古文：若憎而不知其善，则为善者必惧；爱而不知其恶，则为恶者实繁。
现代文：如果憎恶一个人就抹杀了他的优点，那么做善事的人一定会产生恐惧情绪；如果喜爱一个人就包庇他的缺点，那么做坏事的人就会越来越多。《诗经》上说： 国君如果发起怒来，作乱者就会很快收敛。 
English: If hating a person wipes out his merits, then a person who does good deeds will certainly have fear; if loving a person covers his shortcomings, then more and more people will do bad things. "The Book of Songs" says: If the sovereign is angry, the troublemaker will quickly subside.

古文：《诗》曰： 君子如怒，乱庶遄沮， 然则古人之震怒，将以惩恶，当今之威罚，所以长奸。此非唐、虞之心也，非禹、汤之事也。《书》曰： 抚我则后，虐我则仇。 荀卿子曰： 君，舟也，民，水也。水所以载舟，亦所以覆舟。 
现代文：然而，古人的震怒，是为了惩处邪恶的人，当今的严厉惩罚，却助长了奸邪的风气。这不是尧、舜那样圣明君主的本意，也不是禹、汤那样贤明的国君所应该做的事。《尚书》中说： 爱抚我的人就是我的国君，残暴地对待我的人就是我的仇人。 荀子说： 君主是船，百姓是水。水可以载船，也可以覆船。 
English: However, the fierce anger of the ancients was to punish the wicked, but today's severe punishment has promoted the culture of treachery. This is not the original intention of the holy monarchs like Yao and Shun, nor is it what the wise sovereigns like Yu and Tang should do. "Shang Shu" said: The one who caresses me is my sovereign, and the one who treats me cruelly is my enemy. Zizi said: The sovereign is a ship, and the people are water. Water can carry the ship, and it can also wrap the ship.

古文：故孔子曰： 鱼失水则死，水失鱼犹为水也。 
现代文：所以孔子说： 鱼失去了水就会死，水里没有了鱼还是水。 
English: Therefore, Confucius said: "If a fish loses water, it will die. If there is no fish in the water, it is still water."

古文：故唐、虞战战栗栗，日慎一日。
现代文：所以，尧、舜这样圣明的君主总是小心翼翼地治理国家，一天比一天谨慎。
English: That is why such holy monarchs as Emperor Zhou and Empress Dowager Cixi always govern the country carefully, and become more and more prudent day by day.

古文：安可不深思之乎？安可不熟虑之乎？
现代文：因此，治理国家怎么可以不深思？怎么可以不熟虑呢？
English: Therefore, how can the governance of the country not be thoughtful? How can it not be deliberate?

古文：夫委大臣以大体，责小臣以小事，为国之常也，为治之道也。
现代文：让大臣负责国家大事，让小臣负责具体的小事，这是治国的普遍道理，也是处理政务的正确法则。
English: It is the general principle of governing the country and the correct rule for handling government affairs to let the minister be responsible for major national affairs and let the junior minister be responsible for specific minor matters.

古文：今委之以职，则重大臣而轻小臣；至于有事，则信小臣而疑大臣。
现代文：现在委任职权时，却是重视大臣而轻视小臣，遇到事情时，又轻信小臣而怀疑大臣。
English: Now, when it comes to the power of appointment, it is the minister who is valued and the junior minister who is despised, and when things happen, it is the junior minister who is trusted and the minister who is doubted.

古文：信其所轻，疑其所重，将求至治，岂可得乎？
现代文：这是信任自己所轻视的而怀疑自己所重视的。这种做法，怎么能实现天下大治呢？
English: This is trusting what you despise and doubting what you value. How can this approach achieve world domination?

古文：又政贵有恒，不求屡易。
现代文：再者，朝政贵在有稳定的规范，不能经常变化。
English: In addition, there is a stable norm in the rule of law, which cannot be changed frequently.

古文：今或责小臣以大体，或责大臣以小事，小臣乘非所据，大臣失其所守，大臣或以小过获罪，小臣或以大体受罚。
现代文：现在有时责令小臣办大事，有时又责令大臣去管理小事，小臣处在他不该占据的位置，而大臣又失去他应当担当的职责。大臣或者因为小过错而获罪，小臣或者因为大事故而受罚。
English: Now, sometimes a minister is ordered to do big things, and sometimes a minister is ordered to manage small things. The minister is in a position he should not occupy, and the minister has lost the responsibilities he should assume. The minister may be punished for a small mistake, and the minister may be punished for a big accident.

古文：职非其位，罚非其辜，欲其无私，求其尽力，不亦难乎？
现代文：职责和职位不相符合，所惩罚的事情，不属于他们各自的职责。要求他们没有私心，竭尽全力，岂不是很难吗？
English: Their duties and positions do not match, and the things they are punished for do not belong to their respective duties. Isn't it difficult to ask them not to be selfish and to do their best?

古文：小臣不可委以大事，大臣不可责以小罪。
现代文：小臣不可以让他们做大事，对大臣不能因为小过错就治罪。
English: Ministers should not be allowed to do big things, and ministers should not be punished for small mistakes.

古文：任以大官，求其细过，刀笔之吏，顺旨承风，舞文弄法，曲成其罪。
现代文：给予很高的职位，追究细小的罪过，于是那些刀笔小吏就会顺着陛下的旨意，捕风捉影，舞文弄法，曲成其罪。
English: Give a high position, investigate minor offenses, and those petty officials will follow your majesty's will, catch the wind, dance, and twist into their crimes.

古文：自陈也，则以为心不伏辜；不言也，则以为所犯皆实。
现代文：大臣为自己辩解表白，就认为他是不肯服罪；不辩解表白，就以为都是事实。
English: If the minister makes a statement in his own defense, he is considered to be unwilling to plead guilty; if he does not make a statement in his own defense, he is considered to be telling the truth.

古文：进退惟谷，莫能自明，则苟求免祸。
现代文：真是进退两难，不能自己分辨，于是只好苟且免祸。
English: It's a real dilemma, I can't tell the difference myself, so I just have to be careful.

古文：大臣苟免，则谲诈萌生。谲诈萌生，则矫伪成俗。矫伪成俗，则不可以臻至治矣。
现代文：大臣苟且免祸就会谲诈萌生，谲诈萌生就会虚伪成风，虚伪成风就不能实现天下大治啊！
English: If ministers are not careful, blackmail will emerge. If blackmail emerges, hypocrisy will become the order of the day. If hypocrisy becomes the order of the day, it will be impossible to achieve world peace!

古文：又委任大臣，欲其尽力，每官有所避忌不言，则为不尽。
现代文：朝廷任命大臣，都是想让他们竭尽全力。而大臣却有所避讳不敢讲话，这就叫未尽全力。
English: When the imperial court appoints ministers, they want them to do their best. However, the ministers are reluctant to speak out, which is called not doing their best.

古文：若举得其人，何嫌于故旧。
现代文：如果选拔的官员得当，即使是故旧又有什么关系。
English: It doesn't matter if it's old-fashioned, as long as the officials are properly selected.

古文：若举非其任，何贵于疏远。
现代文：如果选拔的官员不得当，即使关系疏远也不算可贵。
English: If the elected official is not up to the job, even a distant relationship is not valuable.

古文：待之不尽诚信，何以责其忠恕哉！
现代文：自己不给予别人充分的信任，又怎能要求别人忠恕呢？
English: How can you ask for someone's loyalty if you don't fully trust them yourself?

古文：臣虽或有失之，君亦未为得也。
现代文：臣子虽然有时会犯过错，可是国君如此对待也不算得当！
English: Although courtiers sometimes make mistakes, it is not proper to treat the sovereign in such a way!

古文：夫上之不信于下，必以为下无可信矣。
现代文：皇上既然对臣下不信任，那么必然认为臣下无可信之处。
English: Since the emperor did not trust his vassals, he must have believed that they were untrustworthy.

古文：若必下无可信，则上亦有可疑矣。
现代文：如果臣下都不值得信任，那么皇上必然也有让人可疑的地方。
English: If his subjects are not to be trusted, then the emperor must be suspect.

古文：《礼》曰： 上人疑，则百姓惑。下难知，则君长劳。 
现代文：《礼记》上写道： 地位高的人互相猜疑，那么百姓就感到无所适从；臣子言行莫测，那么国君就会不放心。 
English: "Li Ji" wrote: If high-ranking people are suspicious of each other, then the people will feel bewildered; if courtiers are unpredictable, then the sovereign will not be reassured.

古文：上下相疑，则不可以言至治矣。
现代文：国君与臣子之间互相不信任，就谈不上天下大治了。
English: If there is no mutual trust between the sovereign and the vassal, there can be no talk of world domination.

古文：当今群臣之内，远在一方，流言三至而不投杼者，臣窃思度，未见其人。
现代文：如今诸位臣子天各一方，相距遥远，对于三番五次的谣言而不信以为真的人，据我所知还未曾有过。
English: Today, your courtiers are far and wide apart, and as far as I know, there has never been anyone who did not believe that the rumours were true.

古文：夫以四海之广，士庶之众，岂无一二可信之人哉？
现代文：我国疆域辽阔，人口众多，难道连一两个值得信赖的人都没有吗？
English: With our vast territory and large population, don't we have even one or two trustworthy people?

古文：盖信之则无不可，疑之则无可信者，岂独臣之过乎？
现代文：用信任的态度去选择人，就没有绝对不能用的人；用怀疑的态度去选择人，就选不到信得过的人，难道这只是臣子的过失吗？
English: If you choose people with an attitude of trust, there will be no absolutely useless people; if you choose people with a skeptical attitude, you will not be able to choose trustworthy people. Is this just the fault of the courtiers?

古文：夫以一介庸夫结为交友，以身相许，死且不渝，况君臣契合，寄同鱼水。
现代文：即使普通人，一旦结为朋友，都可以用生命来报答，纵然死也不会改变，更何况君臣之间默契得如同鱼和水的关系呢？
English: Even if ordinary people, once they make friends, can repay with their lives, even if they die, they will not change, let alone the relationship between monarchs and ministers that is like fish and water?

古文：若君为尧、舜，臣为稷、契，岂有遇小事则变志，见小利则易心哉！
现代文：如果国君像尧、舜那样，臣子像稷、契一样，怎么会有遇到小的事情就改变志向，碰到小的利益就变心的道理呢？
English: If the sovereign is like Zou and Zou, and the courtiers are like Zou and Qi, how can there be a reason to change the ambition when encountering small things, and to change the heart when encountering small interests?

古文：此虽下之立忠未有明著，亦由上怀不信，待之过薄之所致也。
现代文：这虽然是由于臣下不够忠心耿耿，也是由于国君心怀猜疑、对待下属过于苛求的缘故。
English: Although this was due to the fact that his subjects were not loyal enough, it was also due to the fact that the sovereign was suspicious and treated his subordinates too harshly.

古文：岂君使臣以礼，臣事君以忠乎！
现代文：这怎么谈得上君以礼待臣、臣以忠事君呢？
English: How can it be said that the prince treats the vassal with courtesy and the vassal is loyal to the prince?

古文：以陛下之圣明，以当今之功业，诚能博求时俊，上下同心，则三皇可追而四，五帝可俯而六矣。
现代文：凭陛下的聪明才智和现在的成就，要是能诚恳广泛地寻求贤能的人，君臣同心同德，就会天下大治，就可以与三皇五帝相提并论了。
English: With His Majesty's ingenuity and current achievements, if we can earnestly and widely seek out virtuous people, monarchs and subjects with the same heart and the same morality, the world will be ruled by a great power, and it can be compared to the three kings and five emperors.

古文：夏、殷、周、汉，夫何足数！ 
现代文：夏、商、周、汉，又算得了什么！
English: Xia, Shang, Zhou, Han, what's the difference!

古文：太宗深嘉纳之。
现代文：太宗十分赞许并采纳了这个意见。
English: Emperor Taizong highly appreciated and adopted this opinion.

古文：贞观十六年，太宗问特进魏征曰： 朕克己为政，仰企前烈。
现代文：贞观十六年，太宗问特进魏徵： 我克制个人的私欲，仰慕效法前代圣贤。
English: In the 16th year of Zhenguan, Taizong asked for special entry into Wei Zheng: I restrain my personal selfish desires and admire the emulation of the previous generation of sages.

古文：至于积德、累仁、丰功、厚利，四者常以为称首，朕皆庶几自勉。
现代文：至于积德、累仁、丰功、厚利，我时常把它们放在首位，用于勉励自己。
English: As for the accumulation of virtues, hard work, great achievements, and great profits, I always put them in the first place and use them to encourage myself.

古文：人苦不能自见，不知朕之所行，何等优劣？ 
现代文：世上每个人都苦于不能全面地了解自己，不知这四个方面，我哪些做得好哪些做得差呢？ 
English: Everyone in the world suffers from not being able to fully understand themselves. Without knowing these four aspects, what have I done well and what have I done poorly?

古文：征对曰： 德、仁、功、利，陛下兼而行之。
现代文：魏徵回答说： 德、仁、功、利四个方面，陛下都在做。
English: Wei Zheng replied, "Your Majesty is doing everything in the four aspects of virtue, benevolence, merit and benefit.

古文：然则内平祸乱，外除戎狄，是陛下之功。
现代文：在我看来，陛下对内平定各种祸乱，对外消灭了戎狄对边疆的威胁，这是陛下的功劳。
English: In my opinion, it is to His Majesty's credit that he has quelled all kinds of calamities at home and eliminated the military threat to the frontier abroad.

古文：安诸黎元，各有生业，是陛下之利。
现代文：安抚百姓，使他们生活有依靠，这是陛下的功德。
English: It is His Majesty's merit to pacify the people and make their lives dependable.

古文：由此言之，功利居多，惟德与仁，愿陛下自强不息，必可致也。 
现代文：从这方面看，陛下的功利占了多数，只是德与仁这两方面，希望陛下自强不息，必定可以做到。 
English: From this point of view, His Majesty's merits and demerits account for the majority, but in terms of virtue and benevolence, I hope that His Majesty will continue to strengthen himself and will surely be able to do so.

古文：贞观十七年，太宗谓侍臣曰： 自古草创之主，至于子孙多乱，何也？ 
现代文：贞观十七年，唐太宗对侍从的大臣们说： 从古以来开创基业的君主，到他子孙手里往往发生祸乱，这是什么缘故？ 
English: In the seventeenth year of Zhenguan, Emperor Taizong of Tang said to his attendant ministers: Since ancient times, the monarch who created the foundation has often had disasters in the hands of his descendants. Why is this?

古文：司空房玄龄曰： 此为幼主生长深宫，少居富贵，未尝识人间情伪，治国安危，所以为政多乱。 
现代文：司空房玄龄说： 这是因为幼主生长在深宫之内，从小过着富贵生活，并不知道民间事情的真伪、治理国家的安危，所以当政就多祸乱。 
English: Sikyong Xuanling said: This is because the young lord grew up in a deep palace, lived a rich life from an early age, and did not know the truth and falsity of civil affairs and the danger of governing the country, so being in power is more disastrous.

古文：太宗曰： 公意推过于主，朕则归咎于臣。
现代文：太宗说： 你的意思是把过失推之于君主，我则要归罪于臣下。
English: Emperor Taizong said, "You mean to blame the fault on the sovereign, but I want to blame it on the vassal.

古文：夫功臣子弟多无才行，藉祖父资荫遂处大官，德义不修，奢纵是好。
现代文：那些功臣子弟多数无才无德，靠祖父、父亲的资荫就做上大官，不修身养性，只爱奢侈放纵。
English: Most of those sons and daughters of meritorious vassals are without talent or virtue. They rely on their grandfathers' and fathers' wealth to become high-ranking officials. They do not cultivate their physical fitness and only love luxury and indulgence.

古文：主既幼弱，臣又不才，颠而不扶，岂能无乱？
现代文：君主既然幼弱，臣下又没有才能，遇到国家倾危不能匡正扶持，怎能不发生祸乱？
English: Since the monarch is young and weak, and his vassals are not talented, and they cannot support him when the country is in danger, how can there not be a disaster?

古文：隋炀帝录宇文述在藩之功，擢化及于高位，不思报效，翻行弑逆。
现代文：隋炀帝记取宇文述在自己当晋王时的功劳，把他的儿子宇文化及提升为高官显位，可是宇文化及不考虑如何报效，反而叛逆弑君。
English: Sui and Yan emperors took into account the merits of Uwen Shu when he was the king of Jin, and promoted his son, Uculture Yu, to a high-ranking position. However, Uculture Yu did not consider how to repay the favor, but instead rebelled against Yan Jun.

古文：此非臣下之过欤？
现代文：这难道不是臣下的罪过吗？
English: Is this not the fault of the vassals?

古文：朕发此言，欲公等戒勖子弟，使无愆过，即家国之庆也。 
现代文：我讲这话，希望你们训诫勉励自己的子弟，使他们不要犯严重的过错，就是家国值得庆幸的了。 
English: I say this in the hope that you will admonish and encourage your sons not to commit the grave errors for which your country is justly famous.

古文：太宗又曰： 化及与玄感，即隋大臣受恩深者子孙，皆反，其故何也？ 
现代文：太宗又说： 宇文化及和杨玄感，都是隋朝大臣中间受恩深重者的子孙，后来都谋反，这是什么缘故？ 
English: Taizong also said, "Both Yu Wenhua and Yang Xuanquan are the descendants of those who were highly favored by the Sui Dynasty ministers, and later both plotted to rebel. What is the reason for this?

古文：岑文本对曰： 君子乃能怀德荷恩，玄感、化及之徒，并小人也。
现代文：岑文本回答说： 君子才能够感恩戴德，杨玄感、宇文化及之流，都是小人。
English: The scribe replied, "It takes a gentleman to be grateful. Yang Xuanquan, Yu Cultura, and the like are all villains.

古文：古人所以贵君子而贱小人。 
现代文：古人所以要看重君子而鄙视小人。 
English: That is why the ancients valued the gentleman and despised the villain.

古文：太宗曰： 然。 
现代文：太宗说： 你说得对！ 
English: Taizong said, "You're right!

