古文：微子去之，箕子为之奴，比干谏而死。
现代文：微子离开了纣王，箕子做了他的奴隶，比干竭力劝谏纣王被剖心而死。
English: Micron left Shao Wang, Shao Zi became his slave, Bi Gan tried his best to persuade Shao Wang to be dissected and die.

古文：孔子曰： 殷有三仁焉。 
现代文：孔子说：  殷朝有这三位仁人啊！ 
English: Confucius said, "There are these three benevolent people in the Yin Dynasty!

古文：柳下惠为士师，三黜。
现代文：柳下惠担任掌管刑罚的官，被罢免了很多次。
English: Yanagishita served as the official in charge of criminal punishment and was dismissed many times.

古文：人曰： 子未可以去乎？ 
现代文：有人说： 你不可以离开鲁国吗？ 
English: Some people say: Can't you leave Russia?

古文：曰： 直道而事人，焉往而不三黜？
现代文：柳下惠说： 用正直之道来侍奉人，去哪里而能不被多次罢免呢？
English: Yanagishita Hui said: To serve others with honesty, where can I go without being dismissed many times?

古文：枉道而事人，何必去父母之邦？ 
现代文：不用正直之道来侍奉人，又为什么一定要离开故国家园呢？ 
English: If you don't have to be honest to serve others, why do you have to leave your homeland?

古文：齐景公待孔子曰： 若季氏，则吾不能。 以季、孟之间待之，曰： 吾老矣，不能用也。 
现代文：齐景公讲到对待孔子的礼节时说： 像鲁国国君对待季氏那样对待孔子，那我做不到，只能用低于季氏而高于孟氏的规格来对待他。 又说： 我老了，不能用了。 
English: When talking about the etiquette of treating Confucius, Qi Jinggong said: "I cannot treat Confucius as the prince of Lu treated Ji, so I can only treat him with a standard lower than Ji's and higher than Meng's." He also said: "I am too old to use it."

古文：孔子行。
现代文：孔子离开了齐国。
English: Confucius had to leave China.

古文：齐人归女乐，季桓子受之，三日不朝，孔子行。
现代文：齐国人赠送了一些歌女给鲁国，季桓子接受了，三天不上朝。于是孔子离开了。
English: The people of Qi presented a number of female singers to the state of Lu. Ji Huan Zi accepted and did not go to the imperial court for three days. Confucius then left.

古文：楚狂接舆歌而过孔子曰： 凤兮凤兮，何德之衰？
现代文：楚国的狂人接舆唱着歌经过孔子的车旁，他唱道： 凤凰啊，凤凰啊，你的德运怎么这么衰弱呢？
English: A madman from the state of Chu passed by Confucius' car, singing a song. He sang: "Phoenix, phoenix, how is your German fortune so weak?

古文：往者不可谏，来者犹可追。
现代文：过去的已经无可挽回，未来的还可以补救。
English: The past is irretrievable, the future can be remedied.

古文：已而已而，今之从政者殆而！ 
现代文：算了吧，算了吧。现在的当政的那些人太危险！ 
English: The people in power now are beyond redemption!

古文：孔子下，欲与之言，趋而辟之，不得与之言。
现代文：孔子下车，想同他谈谈，他却赶快避开，孔子没能和他交谈。
English: Confucius got out of the car and wanted to talk to him, but he quickly avoided him. Confucius could not talk to him.

古文：长沮、桀溺耦而耕，孔子过之，使子路问津焉。
现代文：长沮、桀溺在一起耕种，孔子路过，让子路去打听一下渡口在哪里。
English: Confucius passed by, and asked Zi Lu to find out where the ferry was.

古文：长沮曰： 夫执舆者为谁？ 
现代文：长沮问子路： 那个拿着驾车的人是谁？ 
English: Long Q&A: Who is the man holding the steering wheel?

古文：子路曰： 为孔丘。 
现代文：子路说： 是孔丘。 
English: Zilu replied, "It is Kongqiu."

古文：曰： 是鲁孔丘与？ 
现代文：长沮又问； 是鲁国的孔丘吗？ 
English: Nagasena asked again: Is it Confucius of Lu?

古文：曰： 是也。 
现代文：子路说： 是的。 
English: "Yes," he replied.

古文：曰： 是知津矣。 
现代文：长沮说： 那他应该已经知道渡口的位置了。 
English: Chang De said: Then he should already know the location of the ferry.

古文：问于桀溺，桀溺曰： 子为谁？ 
现代文：子路又去向打听桀溺。桀溺说： 你是谁？ 
English: Zi Lu went to inquire about Gong Dang again. Gong Dang said, "Who are you?"

古文：曰： 为仲由。 
现代文：子路说： 我是仲由。 
English: Zi Lu said: I am Zhong Yu.

古文：曰： 是鲁孔丘之徒与？ 
现代文：桀溺说： 你是鲁国孔丘的弟子吗？ 
English: Zhaodong said: Are you a disciple of Confucius of Lu?

古文：对曰： 然。 
现代文：子路说： 是的。 
English: Zi Lu said: Yes.

古文：曰： 滔滔者天下皆是也，而谁以易之？
现代文：桀溺说： 普天之下到处都像滔滔洪水一样混乱，和谁去改变这种状况呢？
English: Zhaodong said: All over the world, there is chaos like a raging flood, and who will change this situation?

古文：且而与其从辟人之士也，岂若从辟世之士？ 
现代文：你与其跟从逃避坏人的人，还不如跟从逃避污浊尘世的人呢？ 
English: Is it not better for you to follow one who flees from evil than to follow one who flees from the splendor of the world?

古文：耰而不辍。
现代文：说完，仍旧不停地做田里的农活。
English: Having said that, I still do farm work in the fields.

古文：子路行以告，夫子怃然曰： 鸟兽不可与同群，吾非斯人之徒与而谁与？
现代文：子路回来后把情况报告给孔子。孔子很失望地说： 人是不能与飞禽走兽合群共处的，如果不同世上的人群打交道还与谁打交道呢？
English: When Zi Lu returned, he reported the situation to Confucius. Confucius was very disappointed and said, "It is impossible for human beings to live together with birds and beasts. If you don't deal with the people of the world, who will you deal with?"

古文：天下有道，丘不与易也。 
现代文：如果天下太平，我就不会与你们一道来从事改革了。 
English: If the world were at peace, I would not have come with you to carry out reforms.

古文：子路从而后，遇丈人，以杖荷蓧。
现代文：子路跟随孔子出行，落在了后面，遇到一个老丈，用拐杖挑着除草的工具。
English: Zi Lu travels with Confucius, gets left behind, and meets an old man who is picking up a weeding tool with a cane.

古文：子路问曰： 子见夫子乎？ 
现代文：子路问道： 你看到我的老师了吗？ 
English: Zilu asked, "Have you seen my teacher?"

古文：丈人曰： 四体不勤，五谷不分，孰为夫子？ 
现代文：老丈说： 你这个人四肢不劳动，五谷分不清，谁知道你的老师是什么人？ 
English: The father-in-law said, "You are a person who doesn't work and can't tell the difference between food and drink. Who knows who your teacher is?

古文：植其杖而芸，子路拱而立。
现代文：说完，便扶着拐杖去除草。子路拱着手恭敬地站在一旁。
English: When he had finished, he used his crutch to clear away the grass and stood respectfully at one side with his arm outstretched.

古文：止子路宿，杀鸡为黍而食之，见其二子焉。
现代文：老丈留子路到他家住宿，杀了鸡，做了小米饭给他吃，让自己的两个儿子出来拜见子路。
English: Old Zi Lu's husband came to stay at his home, killed a chicken, made millet rice for him to eat, and let his two sons come out to visit Zi Lu.

古文：明日，子路行以告，子曰： 隐者也。 
现代文：第二天，子路赶上孔子，把这件事向他作了报告。孔子说： 这是个隐士啊。 
English: The next day, Zilu caught up with Confucius and reported the matter to him. Confucius said, "This is a hermit."

古文：使子路反见之，至则行矣。子路曰： 不仕无义。
现代文：叫子路回去再看看他。子路到了那里，老丈已经走了。子路说： 不做官是不合义理的。
English: He told Zilu to go back and look at him again. When Zilu got there, his father-in-law had already left. Zilu said, "It is unreasonable not to be an official."

古文：长幼之节不可废也，君臣之义如之何其废之？
现代文：长幼间的关系，是不可能废弃的；君臣间的关系，怎么能废弃呢？
English: The relationship between elders and children cannot be abandoned; how can the relationship between monarchs and ministers be abandoned?

古文：欲洁其身而乱大伦。
现代文：他想不玷污自身，却忽视了君臣间的大伦理。
English: He did not want to tarnish himself, but he ignored the great ethics between monarchs and subjects.

古文：君子之仕也，行其义也，道之不行已知之矣。 
现代文：君子出来做官，是为了实行道义。主张不能实行，我早就知道了。 
English: A gentleman comes out to be an official in order to implement morality. I have known for a long time that the idea cannot be implemented.

古文：逸民：伯夷、叔齐、虞仲、夷逸、朱张、柳下惠、少连。
现代文：被遗落的人有：伯夷、叔齐、虞仲、夷逸、朱张、柳下惠、少连。
English: Those who were left behind included: Bo Yi, Shu Qi, Yu Zhong, Yi Yi, Zhu Zhang, Liu Shimo Hui, and Shoren.

古文：子曰： 不降其志，不辱其身，伯夷、叔齐与！ 
现代文：孔子说： 不降低自己的志向，不辱没自己的身份，就是伯夷和叔齐吧！ 
English: Confucius said: If you do not lower your aspirations and do not disgrace your identity, then you are the same as Bo Yi and Uncle Qi!

古文：谓： 柳下惠、少连降志辱身矣，言中伦，行中虑，其斯而已矣。 
现代文：又说： 柳下惠、少连降低了自己的志向，辱没了自己的身份，但言语合乎伦理，行为经过考虑，也就是如此罢了。 
English: He also said: Liu Shimo Hui and Shaolian have lowered their aspirations and humiliated their identity, but their words are ethical and their actions are considered, that's all.

古文：谓： 虞仲、夷逸隐居放言，身中清，废中权。
现代文：又说： 虞仲、夷逸，避世隐居，放肆直言，立身清白，弃官合乎权宜。
English: He also said: Yu Zhong, Yi Yi, avoid the world and live in seclusion, speak boldly and frankly, stand up with a clean conscience, and it is expedient to resign.

古文：我则异于是，无可无不可。 
现代文：我就和他们不一样，没有什么可以，也没有什么不可以。 
English: I am different from them, there is nothing I can do and nothing I cannot do.

古文：太师挚适齐，亚饭干适楚，三饭缭适蔡，四饭缺适秦，鼓方叔入于河，播鼗武入于汉，少师阳、击磬襄入于海。
现代文：太师挚到齐国去了，亚饭乐师干到楚国去了，三饭乐师缭到蔡国去了，四饭乐师缺到秦国去了，打鼓的乐师方叔去了黄河地区，敲小鼓的乐师武去了汉水一带，少师阳和击磬的襄到了海滨。
English: The grand maestro went to Qi Province, the Asian rice musician went to Chu Province, the three rice musicians went to Cai Province, the four rice musicians went to Qin Province, the drummer musician Uncle Fang went to the Yellow River area, the drummer musician Wu went to the Hanshui area, and Shao Shiyang and the percussionist Xiang went to the seashore.

古文：周公谓鲁公曰： 君子不施其亲，不使大臣怨乎不以，故旧无大故则不弃也，无求备于一人。 
现代文：周公对鲁公说： 一个有道的国君不疏远他的亲族；不使大臣怨恨没有被任用；故旧朋友如果没有大的过错，就不要抛弃他们；不要对一个人求全责备。 
English: Zhou Gong said to Lu Gong: A virtuous ruler does not alienate his relatives; does not make ministers resent not being appointed; therefore, if old friends do not have major faults, do not abandon them; do not seek full blame on one person.

古文：周有八士：伯达、伯适、仲突、仲忽、叔夜、叔夏、季随、季騧。
现代文：周代有八个有名的士人：伯达、伯适、仲突、仲忽、叔夜、叔夏、季随、季寡。
English: In the Zhou Dynasty, there were eight famous scholars: Boda, Bo Shi, Zhong Tu, Zhong Hu, Shuya, Shuxia, Qi Sui and Qi Gui.

