古文：王沈，字处道，太原晋阳人也。
现代文：王沈，字处道，太原晋阳人。
English: Wang Shen, also known as Cheng Dao, was a native of Taiyuan and Jinyang.

古文：祖柔，汉匈奴中郎将。
现代文：祖父王柔，是汉朝匈奴中郎将。
English: His grandfather, Wang Rong, was a Han Dynasty Xiongnu general.

古文：父机，魏东郡太守。
现代文：父亲王机，是魏东郡太守。
English: His father, Wang Ji, was the governor of Weidong County.

古文：沈少孤，养于从叔司空昶，事昶如父。奉继母寡嫂以孝义称。
现代文：王沈少年丧父，由堂房叔父司空王昶领养，侍奉王昶如同生父，侍奉继母寡嫂以孝义著称。
English: After Wang Shen lost his father, he was adopted by his cousin and uncle, Siku Wang Yao. He served Wang Yao as if he were his own father, and his stepmother and widowed sister-in-law were known for their filial piety.

古文：好书，善属文。
现代文：好读书，善于写文章。
English: Good at reading, good at writing articles.

古文：大将军曹爽辟为掾，累迁中书门下侍郎。
现代文：大将军曹爽征召他为属官，逐渐迁任中书门下侍郎。
English: The great general Cao Shuang conscripted him as a subordinate officer, and he was gradually transferred to the position of a junior attendant.

古文：及爽诛，以故吏免。
现代文：曹爽被诛时，因旧官吏身份被罢免。
English: When Cao Shuang was arrested, he was dismissed because of his status as a former official.

古文：后起为治书侍御史，转秘书监。
现代文：以后被任命为治书侍御史，转任秘书监。
English: Later, he was appointed to the post of secretary, and then to the post of superintendent of secretaries.

古文：正元中，迁散骑常侍、侍中，典著作。
现代文：正元年间，迁升为散骑常侍、侍中，主管着作。
English: During the first year of the Heian period, he was promoted to Sanzhishi-no-Zenshishi, Samurai, and was in charge of writing.

古文：与荀顗、阮籍共撰《魏书》，多为时讳，未若陈寿之实录也。
现代文：与荀颉、阮籍一同撰写《魏书》，常有隐讳，不像陈寿那样如实记录。
English: He co-wrote the "Wei Shu" with Zhai and Ruan Ji, but he often kept secrets, unlike Chen Shou, who recorded truthfully.

古文：时魏高贵乡公好学有文才，引沈及裴秀数于东堂讲宴属文，号沈为文籍先生，秀为儒林丈人。
现代文：当时魏高贵乡公好学有文才，邀请王沈及裴秀多次在束堂讲学宴饮写文章，号称王沈为文籍先生，裴秀为儒林丈人。
English: At that time, Wei Gao Gui Township invited Wang Shen and Pei Xiu, who were good students with literary talent, to write articles at the lecture banquet in the Bundang Hall for many times. Wang Shen was known as a literary scholar, and Pei Xiu was known as a Confucian father-in-law.

古文：及高贵乡公将攻文帝，召沈及王业告之，沈、业驰白帝，以功封安平侯，邑二千户。
现代文：高贵乡公将要攻打文帝，召王沈及王业告诉他们，王沈、王业赶紧报告了文帝，因有功被封为安平侯。食邑两千户。
English: The noblemen of the town were going to attack Emperor Wen, and they called Wang Shen and Wang Ye to tell them. Wang Shen and Wang Ye quickly reported to Emperor Wen, and they were awarded the title of Anping Marquis for their service. They fed two thousand households in the town.

古文：沈既不忠于主，甚为众论所非。
现代文：由于王沈对主人不忠，很是被舆论指责。
English: Because Wang Shen was unfaithful to his master, he was criticized by the public opinion.

古文：寻迁尚书，出监豫州诸军事、奋武将军、豫州刺史。
现代文：不久升任尚书，出京为监豫州诸军事、奋武将军、豫州刺史。
English: He was soon promoted to Shangshu, and went to Beijing to supervise the military of Yuzhou, General Tengwu, and the history of Yuzhou.

古文：至镇，乃下教曰： 自古贤圣，乐闻诽谤之言，听舆人之论，刍荛有可录之事，负薪有廊庙之语故也。
现代文：到了任所，就教导说： 古代的圣贤，喜欢听批评的话，听下人的言论，割草砍柴者也有可以记录的事，背柴人能说出朝廷的事。
English: When he arrived at the post, he taught: The ancient sages liked to listen to criticism, to listen to the words of subordinates, the grass cutter and the wood cutter also had things to record, and the wood carrier could tell things about the imperial court.

古文：自至镇日，未闻逆耳之言，岂未明虚心，故令言者有疑。
现代文：自从到了任所那天，未听到逆耳之言，难道是因为我未表明虚心，因而让人有疑虑吗?
English: Since the day I took office, I haven't heard a word against me. Is it because I haven't shown myself to be weak-willed that people have doubts about me?

古文：其宣下属城及士庶，若能举遗逸于林薮，黜奸佞于州国，陈长吏之可否，说百姓之所患，兴利除害，损益昭然者，给谷五百斛。
现代文：通告所属城及士民百姓，如果能从民间推举隐逸的贤才，在州国罢黜奸邪之臣，陈述官吏的好坏，诉说百姓的忧患，兴利除害，效果显著的，赠谷物五百斛。
English: Announce to the people of the city and the people of the people, if they can nominate a hidden genius from the people, remove a traitorous vassal in the state, state the quality of officials, tell the people's worries, benefit and eliminate harm, if the effect is significant, give 500 baht of grain.

古文：若达一至之言，说刺史得失，朝政宽猛，令刚柔得适者，给谷千斛。
现代文：如果是至理名言，评说刺史的得失，朝政的宽严，使刚柔得当的，赠谷物一千斛。
English: If it is a wise saying, commenting on the gains and losses of history, the leniency and severity of the imperial government, and making the rigid and soft, give a thousand baht of grain.

古文：谓余不信，明如皎日。 
现代文：不要说我不讲信用，我的诚信如同明亮的太阳。 
English: Don't say I'm not trustworthy, my integrity is like the bright sun.

古文：主簿陈廞、褚曰： 奉省教旨，伏用感叹。
现代文：主簿陈厂、褚碧说： 手捧捆读教令旨意，令我们感叹。
English: Zou Bi, the chief librarian of the library, said, "We were impressed by the way he read the edict with his hands clasped.

古文：劳谦日昃，思闻苦言。
现代文：劳累谦逊从早到晚，还想着听到批评的言论。
English: Toil and humbleness from morning to night, and to listen to criticism.

古文：愚谓上之所好，下无不应。
现代文：我们认为上之所好下为效法。
English: We believe that the best way is to emulate the best.

古文：而近未有极谏之辞，远无传言之箴者，诚得失之事将未有也。
现代文：然而身边没有极力劝谏的事，远处没有规劝之言，实在是因为有关得失的事几乎没有。
English: However, there is no strong persuasion around, and there is no word of exhortation in the distance, because there is almost nothing about gains and losses.

古文：今使教命班下，示以赏劝，将恐拘介之士，或惮赏而不言；贪赇之人，将慕利而妄举。
现代文：现在把教令颁布下去，表示有赏赐有鼓励，恐怕廉正自守的人，有的将害怕赏赐而不说话；贪图钱财的人，将为了获利而胡乱检举。
English: Now that the edict has been promulgated, indicating that there will be rewards and encouragement, I am afraid that those who are honest and self-respecting will be afraid of rewards and will not speak; those who are greedy for money will make wild accusations in order to make a profit.

古文：苟不合宜，赏不虚行，则远听者未知当否之所在，徒见言之不用，谓设有而不行。
现代文：假如征求的言论不合时宜，没有颁发不符实际的赏赐，那么远方得知此事的人不知事情的底细，徒然看到允诺不兑现，会说空设悬赏而不执行。
English: If the solicited speech is untimely, and the unrealistic reward is not issued, then the person who knows the matter from afar does not know the details of the matter, sees the promise is not fulfilled in vain, and will say that the reward is empty and will not be implemented.

古文：愚以告下之事，可小须后。 
现代文：我们认为告示下民的事，可稍等以后再说。 
English: We think we can wait a little longer to announce it to the public.

古文：沈又教曰： 夫德薄而位厚，功轻而禄重，贪夫之所徇，高士之所不处也。
现代文：王沈又教导说： 道德浅薄而官位高，功劳轻微而俸禄重，这是贪婪的人所追求的，是人品高洁的人所不取的。
English: Wang Shen also taught: Shallow morality and high official rank, light merit and heavy salary, this is what greedy people pursue, and what people with high moral character do not take.

古文：若陈至言于刺史，兴益于本州，达幽隐之贤，去祝鮀之佞，立德于上，受分于下，斯乃君子之操，何不言之有！直言至理，忠也。
现代文：假如向刺史陈述至理名言，以使本州振兴，举荐幽隐的贤人，摒除祝舵那样的奸佞，在上树立了德行，在下受到赏赐，这是君子的操行，怎么会有不说的情况呢!直言至理，这是忠。
English: If, in order to invigorate our state, we recite the wise sayings of the sages to the sages of history, recommend the hidden sages, eliminate the traitors like Zhu Rudder, establish virtue in the upper world and be rewarded in the lower world, this is the conduct of a gentleman, how can there be a situation of not saying it! To speak the truth, this is loyalty.

古文：惠加一州，仁也。
现代文：给一州人好处，这是仁。
English: It is benevolence to give benefits to the people of Ichizhou.

古文：功成辞赏，廉也。
现代文：功劳告成而推辞赏赐，这是廉。
English: It is ungrateful to refuse a reward when one's work is complete.

古文：兼斯而行，仁智之事，何故怀其道而迷其国哉！ 
现代文：行事兼及忠、仁、廉，是仁义明智的事，为什么胸怀道德而在本州有疑惑呢! 
English: It is a wise and virtuous thing to be loyal, benevolent, and honest, so why do you have doubts about morality in your home state?

古文：褚复白曰： 尧、舜、周公所以能致忠谏者，以其款诚之心著也。
现代文：撞智又说： 尧、舜、周公所以能招来忠谏，是因为他们恳切真诚之心显著。
English: Qian Zhizhi also said: The reason why Zou, Zou and Zhou Gong can attract loyal followers is because their earnest and sincere hearts are conspicuous.

古文：冰炭不言，而冷热之质自明者，以其有实也。
现代文：冰炭不说话，而冷热的本质自然明了，是因为冰炭有冷热的实质。
English: Ice and coal do not talk, but the nature of hot and cold is naturally clear, because ice and coal have the essence of hot and cold.

古文：若好忠直，如冰炭之自然，则谔谔之臣，将济济而盈庭；逆耳之言，不求而自至。
现代文：如果喜好忠诚正直，就像冰炭那样自然，直言进谏之臣将充满朝堂；不顺耳的言论不求自来。
English: If the liking for loyalty and honesty were as natural as ice and coal, the palace would be full of outspoken and progressive courtiers; unpleasant remarks would not come from nowhere.

古文：若德不足以配唐虞，明不足以并周公，实不可以同冰炭，虽悬重赏，忠谏之言未可致也。
现代文：如果德不足以与唐、虞匹配，明不足以与且公为伍，实质不能与冰炭比拟，虽然悬重赏，忠诚劝谏的言论不会自来。
English: If the virtue is not enough to match with Tang and Yu, the clarity is not enough to be in the company of the public, and the essence cannot be compared with the ice and coal, although there is a heavy reward, the speech of loyal persuasion will not come from itself.

古文：昔魏绛由和戎之功，蒙女乐之赐，管仲有兴齐之勋，而加上卿之礼，功勋明著，然后赏劝随之。
现代文：过去魏绛因为有与外族结盟的功劳，蒙受了歌舞伎乐的赏赐，管处有振兴变量的功勋，因而待他上卿之礼，功勋显著，然后伴随以赏赐鼓励。
English: In the past, Wei Wei was awarded the Kabuki Music Prize for his achievements in forming an alliance with a foreign ethnic group. The management office recognized his contribution to the revitalization of the economy. Therefore, he was treated as a nobleman. His achievements were significant, and were accompanied by rewards and encouragement.

古文：未闻张重赏以待谏臣，悬谷帛以求尽言也。 
现代文：没听说悬重赏来等待进谏的大臣，用谷物来求得忠言。 
English: It is not unheard of for a minister, who is waiting to be promoted to the throne, to use grain to win the loyalty of his ministers.

古文：沈无以夺之，遂从议。
现代文：王沉没有驳倒他，于是听从了褚碧的意见。
English: Wang Shen did not refute him, so he listened to Zou Bi's opinion.

古文：沈探寻善政，案贾逵以来法制禁令，诸所施行，择善者而从之。
现代文：王沈探寻善治，按照贾逵以来的法制禁令，所施行的方针，挑好的执行。
English: Wang Shen explored good governance, in accordance with the legal prohibition since Jia Jia, the implementation of the policy, and the implementation of the best.

古文：又教曰： 后生不闻先王之教，而望政道日兴，不可得也。
现代文：又教导说： 年轻人不学习先王的教化，而指望政治道德一天比一天兴盛，那是不可能的。
English: He also taught: It is impossible for young people to expect political morality to flourish day by day without learning from the enlightenment of the previous king.

古文：文武并用，长久之道也。
现代文：文武兼用，是长治久安的办法。
English: The combination of literature and martial arts is a way to achieve long-term peace and stability.

古文：俗化陵迟，不可不革。
现代文：民间风化衰败，不能不革新。
English: Folk customs decay, it is necessary to innovate.

古文：革俗之要，实在敦学。
现代文：改革旧俗的关键，实在在于重视学习。
English: The key to reforming the old customs is to attach importance to learning.

古文：昔原伯鲁不悦学，闵马父知其必亡。
现代文：从前原伯鲁不好学，闵马父知道他必败。
English: Once upon a time, the original Bo Lu was not a good student, and his father knew that he would fail.

古文：将吏子弟，优闲家门，若不教之，必致游戏，伤毁风俗矣。 
现代文：将领官吏的子弟，在家中悠闲，如果不教育他们，必定会游戏人生，伤风败俗。 
English: The children of generals and officials are at ease at home. If you don't educate them, they will inevitably play with life and break the rules.

古文：于是九郡之士，咸悦道教，移风易俗。
现代文：于是九郡之士，都喜欢道德教化，移风易俗。
English: As a result, the people of the nine counties all like moral enlightenment and changing customs.

古文：迁征虏将军、持节、都督江北诸军事。
现代文：升任征虏将军、持节、都督江北诸军事。
English: He was promoted to conscript general, military commander, and governor of Jiangbei Province.

古文：五等初建，封博陵侯，班在次国。
现代文：五等爵位刚建立时，封为博陵侯，位在封国二等。
English: When the fifth-class peerage was first established, he was given the title of Bolinghou, which was the second-class title in the feudal state.

古文：平蜀之役，吴人大出，声为救蜀，振荡边境，沈镇御有方，寇闻而退。
现代文：平定蜀国的战役，吴国人大举出动，声称救蜀，使边境动荡。王沈镇守防御有方，敌人闻声而退。
English: In the campaign to pacify Shu, the people of Wu launched a large-scale attack, claiming to save Shu and destabilizing the border. Wang Sheng defended the town well, and the enemy retreated.

古文：转镇南将军。
现代文：转任镇南将军。
English: Transferred to the post of General Zhenan.

古文：武帝即王位，拜御史大夫，守尚书令，加给事中。
现代文：武帝登上王位，拜王沈为御史大夫，守尚书令，加给事中。
English: Emperor Wu ascended to the throne, and Baowang Shen was appointed to the post of imperial historian. He was also given the title of Shou Shang Shurong (守尚書令).

古文：沈以才望，显名当世，是以创业之事，羊祜、荀勖、裴秀、贾充等，皆与沈谘谋焉。
现代文：王沈凭才气名望，在当时名声显赫，因此创业的事，羊祜、荀勖、裴秀、贾充等人，都跟王沈商议谋划。
English: Wang Shen was famous for his talent, and his fame was prominent at that time. Therefore, when it came to starting a business, Yang Xuan, Yao Xuan, Pei Xiu, Jia Chong and others all discussed and planned with Wang Shen.

古文：及帝受禅，以佐命之勋，转骠骑将军、录尚书事，加散骑常侍，统城外诸军事。
现代文：武帝接受禅让之时，因为辅立皇上的功勋，转任骠骑将军、绿尚书事，加散骑常侍，统城外诸军事。
English: At the time of Emperor Wu's acceptance of Zen's resignation, because of the merits of supporting the emperor, he was transferred to the post of general of cavalry, the post of secretary, the post of attendant of cavalry, and the military outside the city.

古文：封博陵郡公，固让不受，乃进爵为县公，邑千八百户。
现代文：封他为博陵郡公，坚决推辞不接受，于是进爵为县公，封邑一千八百户。
English: He was given the title of Boling County Governor, but he refused to accept it. Therefore, he was given the title of County Governor, and the number of fiefs increased to 1,800.

古文：帝方欲委以万机，泰始二年薨。
现代文：皇帝正想任他为执政大臣，泰始二年，去世。
English: The emperor was thinking of appointing him as the ruling minister, but he died two years later.

古文：帝素服举哀，赐秘器朝服一具、衣一袭、钱三十万、布百匹、葬田一顷，谥曰元。
现代文：皇帝穿素服致哀，赐棺木朝服一套、衣一套、钱三十万、布百匹、供安葬的田地一顷，谧号元。
English: The emperor wore plain clothes to mourn, and gave the coffin a set of morning dress, a set of clothes, 300,000 yuan, 100 pieces of cloth, one hectare of land for burial, and 1,000 yuan.

古文：明年，帝追思沈勋，诏曰： 夫表扬往行，所以崇贤垂训，慎终纪远，厚德兴教也。
现代文：第二年，皇帝追思王沈的勋绩，下诏书说： 表扬过去的功德，是为了崇敬贤能流传古训，对死者慎重对先人纪念，是为了崇德兴教。
English: The following year, the emperor reflected on Wang Shen's achievements, and issued an edict saying: To praise the merits of the past is to venerate the virtuous and spread the ancient teachings, to commemorate the dead and the ancestors carefully is to revere virtue and promote education.

古文：故散骑常侍、骠骑将军、博陵元公沈蹈礼居正，执心清粹，经纶坟典，才识通洽。
现代文：已故散骑常侍、骠骑将军、博陵元公王沈，遵循礼仪身居正道，忠诚清廉纯正，精研古籍，才识渊博。
English: The late knight errant, cavalry general, and the former prince of Boling, Shen, followed the etiquette and lived a righteous life. He was loyal, honest and pure. He studied ancient books and was very knowledgeable.

古文：入历常伯纳言之位，出干监牧方岳之任，内著谋猷，外宣威略。
现代文：在朝廷内历任常伯纳言的官位，出外担负治理一方的重任，对内出谋划策，对外显示威力谋略。
English: In the imperial court, he always held the official position of Bernadon, and shouldered the important task of governance when he went abroad. He made strategic suggestions when he went abroad, and showed powerful strategies to the outside world.

古文：建国设官，首登公辅，兼统中朝，出纳大命，实有翼亮佐世之勋。
现代文：建立国家设置官职时，首先登上三公辅相之位，兼管内朝，发布皇上号令，实在有辅佐国家的功勋。
English: When the state established official positions, he was the first to ascend to the position of the three public assistant ministers, concurrently in charge of the Inner Court, and issued the imperial decree. He really has the merit of assisting the country.

古文：其赠沈司空公，以宠灵既往，使没而不朽。
现代文：追赠王沈司空公，以此对既往表示恩宠，使死而不朽。
English: Wang Sheng Shikong posthumously, in order to show grace to the past and make death immortal.

古文：又前以翼赞之勋，当受郡公之封，而固辞恳至，嘉其让德，不夺其志。
现代文：此外，以前因辅佐的功勋，应当受郡公的封爵，然而他坚决推辞，赞美他谦让的品德，不改变他的遣志。
English: In addition, he should have been knighted by the county magistrate for his services as an assistant, but he firmly refused, praising his humble character and not changing his ambition.

古文：可以郡公官属送葬。
现代文：可以让郡公的属吏送葬。
English: County officials may be allowed to attend funerals.

古文：沈素清俭，不营产业。
现代文：王沈平素清廉俭朴，不置产业。
English: Wang Shenping was simple, frugal, and did not own any property.

古文：其使所领兵作屋五十间。 
现代文：派他所率领的兵士建房五十间。 
English: He sent his soldiers to build fifty houses.

古文：子浚嗣。
现代文：儿子王浚继嗣。
English: His son Wang Jun succeeded him.

古文：后沈夫人荀氏卒，将合葬，沈棺榇已毁，更赐东园秘器。
现代文：后来王沈的夫人荀氏去世，将合葬，王沈的棺材已经腐朽，重新赐贵族用的棺材。
English: Later, Wang Shen's wife, Ms. Zou, passed away, and they will be buried together. Wang Shen's coffin has rotted, and a new coffin for aristocrats has been given.

古文：咸宁中，复追封沈为郡公。
现代文：咸宁年间，又追封王沈为郡公。
English: During the Xianning era, Wang Sheng was also made county magistrate.

古文：浚字彭祖。
现代文：王浚字彭祖。
English: Wang Junzi Peng Zu.

古文：母赵氏妇，良家女也，贫贱，出入沈家，遂生浚，沈初不齿之。
现代文：母亲姓趟，是清白人家的女儿，家境贫寒，因出入王沈家，于是生了王浚，王沈起初鄙视他。
English: His mother's family name was Wat, she was the daughter of a white man from Qing Dynasty, and her family was poor. Due to her moving in and out of Wang Shen's family, she gave birth to Wang Jun. At first, Wang Shen despised him.

古文：年十五，沈薨，无子，亲戚共立浚为嗣，拜驸马都尉。
现代文：王浚年龄十五岁时，王沈去世，没有儿子，亲戚共同立王浚为后嗣，官拜驸马都尉。
English: When Wang Jun was fifteen years old, Wang Shen died without a son. Relatives jointly appointed Wang Jun as his heir, and he was given the official title of "Captain of the Horse."

古文：太康初，与诸王侯俱就国。
现代文：太康初年，和众王侯都去了封国。
English: In the first year of Taikang, he and all the princes went to fiefdoms.

古文：三年来朝，除员外散骑侍郎。
现代文：三年回京朝见，授员外散骑侍郎。
English: Three years later, he returned to Kyoto for a morning meeting.

古文：元康初，转员外常侍，迁越骑校尉、右军将军。
现代文：元康初年，转任员外常侍，升越骑校尉、右军将军。
English: In the first year of Yuan Kang, he was transferred to the post of non-commissioned officer, and was promoted to cavalry lieutenant and general of the right army.

古文：出补河内太守，以郡公不得为二千石，转东中郎将，镇许昌。
现代文：出京任河内太守，又因郡公不能任太守，转任东中郎将，镇守许昌。
English: He went to Beijing to serve as the governor of Hanoi, and because the county magistrate could not serve as governor, he was transferred to the position of East Vice Admiral, and the town guard became Xu Chang.

古文：及愍怀太子幽于许昌，浚承贾后旨，与黄门孙虑共害太子。
现代文：愍怀太子被幽禁在许昌时，王浚秉承贾后的旨意，与黄门孙虑一起杀害太子。
English: When Prince Yan Huai was imprisoned in Xuchang, Wang Jun, adhering to the will of Empress Jia, killed the prince together with Huangmen Sun Qian.

古文：迁宁北将军、青州刺史。
现代文：升任宁北将军、青州刺史。
English: He was promoted to the position of Ningbei general and Qingzhou chief historian.

古文：寻徙宁朔将军、持节、都督幽州诸军事。
现代文：不久改任宁朔将军、持节、都督幽州诸军事。
English: He was soon appointed as the general of Ningshuo, Jisai, and the military governor of Yuzhou.

古文：于时朝廷昏乱，盗贼蜂起，浚为自安之计，结好夷狄，以女妻鲜卑务勿尘，又以一女妻苏恕延。
现代文：当时朝廷昏乱，盗贼群起，王浚为了自己的安全着想，与夷狄结交，把一女嫁给鲜卑务勿尘，另一女嫁给苏恕延。
English: At that time, the imperial court was in disarray and thieves were on the rise. Wang Jun, for the sake of his own safety, made friends with the Yidi and married one woman to Xianbei and another to Su Shiyan.

古文：及赵王伦篡位，三王起义兵，浚拥众挟两端，遏绝檄书，使其境内士庶不得赴义，成都王颖欲讨之而未暇也。
现代文：赵王司马伦篡位后，三王起兵举义，王浚领兵观望，阻止檄文传递，使他境内的人民不能参加义军，成都王司马颖想讨伐王浚而没有时间。
English: After Zhao Wang Sima Lun usurped the throne, the three kings raised an army to fight for justice. Wang Jun led the army to wait and prevent the passing of the imperial edict, so that the people in his territory could not join the rebel army. Chengdu Wang Sima Ying wanted to fight Wang Jun but did not have time.

古文：伦诛，进号安北将军。
现代文：赵王司马伦被诛灭，王浚进号为安北将军。
English: Zhao Wang Simarun was annihilated, and Wang Junjin became the general of Anbei.

古文：及河间王颙、成都王颖兴兵内向，害长沙王乂，而浚有不平之心。
现代文：等到河间王司马颐、成都王司马颖举兵攻打洛阳，杀害长沙王司马义，而王浚心中愤愤不平。
English: When Wang Simak of Kawama and Wang Simaying of Chengdu raised an army to attack Luoyang and killed Wang Simai of Changsha, Wang Jun was indignant.

古文：颖表请幽州刺史石堪为右司马，以右司马和演代堪，密使演杀浚，并其众。
现代文：司马颖上表请求幽州刺史石堪为右司马，用右司马和演代替石堪，密令和演杀王浚，吞并王浚的军队。
English: Sima Ying requested Yuzhou to appoint Shishi Shikan as the right secretary, to replace Shikan with the right secretary He Yuan, to secretly order He Yuan to kill Wang Jun and to annex Wang Jun's army.

古文：演与乌丸单于审登谋之，于是与浚期游蓟城南清泉水上。
现代文：和演和乌丸单于审登谋划此事，于是与王浚约定去蓟城南清泉水上游玩。
English: He and Wu Marun alone planned the matter in the trial, so they agreed with Wang Jun to go to the south of the city to play in the clear spring water.

古文：蓟城内西行有二道，演浚各从一道。
现代文：蓟城内往西走有两条路，和演、王浚各走一条路。
English: There are two ways to go westward in Lucheng, and He Yuen and Wang Jun each go one way.

古文：演与浚欲合卤簿，因而图之。
现代文：和演准备在与王浚会合仪仗队时趁机下手。
English: When Wang Jun met with the honor guard, he took advantage of the opportunity to attack.

古文：值天暴雨，兵器沾湿，不果而还。
现代文：时值天降暴雨，兵器都淋湿了，没能实现预谋而返回。
English: At the time, it was raining heavily, and the weapons were wet, so they could not realize their plan and returned.

古文：单于由是与其种人谋曰： 演图杀浚，事垂克而天卒雨，使不得果，是天助浚也。
现代文：单于因此与同族人谋划说： 和演计划杀王浚，眼看要成功而天竟下起雨来，使计划没有实现，这是天助王浚啊。
English: For this reason alone, he plotted with his compatriots, saying, "The war plan to kill Wang Jun was expected to be successful, but it rained, so the plan did not come to fruition. This is God's help to Wang Jun."

古文：违天不祥，我不可久与演同。 
现代文：违背天意不吉利，我不能长期与和演同谋。 
English: Contrary to the will of heaven, I can't be a long-term accomplice of He Yuan.

古文：乃以谋告浚。
现代文：于是把计谋告诉王浚。
English: So he told Wang Jun about the plot.

古文：浚密严兵，与单于围演。
现代文：王浚暗中命军队戒严，和单于包围了和演。
English: Wang Jun secretly ordered the army to impose martial law, and surrounded He Shan Yu.

古文：演持白幡诣浚降，遂斩之，自领幽州。
现代文：和演拿着白幡去王浚那裹投降，于是杀了和演，王浚自己占据幽州。
English: He took the white flag and went to Wang Jun to surrender, so he killed He Yuan and Wang Jun occupied Yuzhou.

古文：大营器械，召务勿尘，率胡晋合二万人，进军讨颖。
现代文：大规模营造器械，召务勿尘，率领胡人晋人合计两万，进军征讨司马颖。
English: Large-scale construction of equipment, do not call dust, led by Hu Jinjin a total of twenty thousand people, marched to recruit Sima Ying.

古文：以主溥祁弘为前锋，遇颖将石超于平棘，击败之。
现代文：以主簿祁弘为前锋，在平棘遭遇司马颖的将领石超，打败石超。
English: With the main book Zou Hong as the striker, he encountered Sima Ying's general Shi Chao in Pingxian, and defeated Shi Chao.

古文：浚乘胜遂克鄴城，士众暴掠，死者甚多。
现代文：王浚乘胜攻克邺城，士兵残暴掠夺，死的人很多。
English: Wang Jun took advantage of the victory to attack the city of Keju, the soldiers plundered brutally, and many people died.

古文：鲜卑大略妇女，浚命敢有挟藏者斩，于是沉于易水者八千人。
现代文：鲜卑人大肆掠夺妇女，王浚下令胆敢挟藏妇女的斩首，于是抛入易水的有八千人。
English: Wang Jun ordered the beheading of a woman who dared to hide, and eight thousand people were thrown into the river.

古文：黔庶荼毒，自此始也。
现代文：百姓遭祸，就是从这时开始的。
English: That's when the trouble started for the people.

古文：浚还蓟，声实益盛。
现代文：王浚回到蓟，名声实力更盛。
English: When Wang Jun returned to Handan, his reputation and strength were even stronger.

古文：东海王越将迎大驾，浚遣祁弘率乌丸突骑为先驱。
现代文：东海王司马越将迎奉皇帝，王浚派遣祁弘率领乌丸用于突击的骑兵为前锋。
English: The East Sea king Sima Yue will welcome the emperor, and Wang Jun will send Zou Hong to lead the cavalry for the assault of Wu Maru as the forward.

古文：惠帝旋洛阳，转浚骠骑大将军、都督东夷河北诸军事，领幽州刺史，以燕国增博陵之封。
现代文：惠帝回洛阳，王浚转任骠骑大将军、都督束夷河北诸军事，兼幽州刺史，用燕国增加博陵的封地。
English: When Emperor Hui returned to Luoyang, Wang Jun was transferred to the post of general of the imperial cavalry, the military governor of Hebei Province, and the governor of Yuzhou Province, and he used Yan Province to increase the fief of Boling.

古文：怀帝即位，以浚为司空，领乌丸校尉，务勿尘为大单于。
现代文：怀帝即位，任命王浚为司空，兼乌丸校尉，务勿尘为大单于。
English: When Emperor Huai ascended the throne, he appointed Wang Jun as the Air Vice-Marshal and Wu Maru Lieutenant.

古文：浚又表封务勿尘辽西郡公，其别部大飘滑及其弟渴末别部大屠甕等皆为亲晋王。
现代文：王浚又上表请封务勿尘为辽西郡公，封他的部属大飘滑及其弟渴末的部属大屠瓮等人都为亲晋王。
English: Wang Jun also made the above request to seal the dust as the governor of Liaoxi County, and his subordinate Da Fudaipiao and his younger brother, the subordinate Da Tuyao, were all pro-Jin Wang.

古文：永嘉中，石勒寇冀州，浚遣鲜卑文鸯讨勒，勒走南阳。
现代文：永嘉年间，石勒入侵冀州，王浚派遣鲜卑人文鸯征讨石勒，石勒跑到南阳。
English: During the Yongjia era, Shiller invaded Jizhou, Wang Jun sent Xianbei to conquer Shiller, and Shiller went to Nanyang.

古文：明年，勒复寇冀州，刺史王斌为勒所害，浚又领冀州。
现代文：第二年，石勒又侵犯冀州，刺史王斌被石勒杀害，王浚又兼管冀州。
English: The next year, Shiller invaded Jizhou again, assassinated Wang Bin, who was also in charge of Jizhou.

古文：诏进浚为大司马，加侍中、大都督、督幽冀诸军事。
现代文：诏书进封王浚为大司马，加侍中、大都督、督幽冀诸军事。
English: According to the imperial edict, Wang Jun was promoted to the rank of grand steward, and he was also promoted to the ranks of attendant, grand governor, and governor of Yuji.

古文：使者未及发，会洛京倾覆，浚大树威令，专征伐，遣督护王昌、中山太守阮豹等，率诸军及务勿尘世子疾陆眷，并弟文鸯、从弟末柸，攻石勒于襄国，勒率众来距，昌逆击败之。
现代文：使者没来得及派出，正赶上洛京倾覆，王浚大树权威，决定征伐，派遣都护王昌、中山太守阮豹等人，率领众军及务勿尘的长子疾陆眷和弟弟文鸯、堂弟末坯，在襄国攻打石勒。石勒率兵抵御，王昌迎击打败了他。
English: The envoys did not have time to be sent, and they were just in time for the fall of Luojing. Wang Juncu, with the authority of a great tree, decided to go on a campaign, sending Wang Chang, the guardian of the capital, and Ruan Bao, the governor of Zhongshan, to lead the troops and the eldest son, Zhi Lu, and the younger brother, Wenyi, and the younger cousin, Muduo, to attack Shi Le in Xiangguo. Shi Le led the troops to resist, and Wang Chang defeated him.

古文：末柸逐北入其垒门，为勒所获。
现代文：末校因追逐败兵进入石勒营垒的大门，被石勒俘获。
English: The last school entered the gate of Shiloh's camp in pursuit of the defeated soldiers and was captured by Shiloh.

古文：勒质末柸，遣间使来和，疾陆眷遂以铠马二百五十匹、金银各一簏赎末柸，结盟而退。
现代文：石勒以末极为人质，派遣密使求和，疾陆眷用披甲的战马二百五十匹、金银各一箱赎末衽，结盟以后退兵。
English: Shi Le took the latter as a hostage, sent a secret envoy to beg for peace, and hastily used two hundred and fifty armored horses and a box of gold and silver to ransom the latter, and withdrew after the alliance.

古文：其后浚布告天下，称受中诏承制，乃以司空荀籓为太尉，光禄大夫荀组为司隶，大司农华荟为太常，中书令李絙为河南尹。
现代文：此后王浚布告天下，声称接受诏命秉承旨意，任命司空荀藩为太尉，光禄大夫荀组为司隶，大司农华苍为太常，中书令李絚为河南尹。
English: After that, Wang Jun announced to the world that he accepted the imperial edict in accordance with his will, and appointed the Secretary of the Kuangye Domain as the first lieutenant, the Guanglu Chief of the Department of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the

古文：又遣祁弘讨勒，及于广宗。
现代文：又派遣祁弘征讨石勒，到达广宗。
English: He also sent Zeng Hong to conquer Shiloh and arrived at Guangzong.

古文：时大雾，弘引军就道，卒与勒遇，为勒所杀。
现代文：当时大雾，祁弘领着军队上路，仓猝间与石勒相遇，被杀害。
English: At that time, it was foggy, and Zou Hong led the army on the road. He suddenly encountered Shi Le and was killed.

古文：由是刘琨与浚争冀州。
现代文：由此刘琨与王浚争冀州。
English: As a result, Liu Bei and Wang Jun fought for Jizhou.

古文：琨使宗人刘希还中山合众，代郡、上谷、广宁三郡人皆归于琨。
现代文：刘琨派宗族中人刘希回中山纠集人马，代郡、上谷、广响三郡人都归顺了刘琨。
English: Liu Xi, a member of Liu Bei's clan, sent Liu Bei back to Zhongshan to gather people and horses. The three counties of Dai County, Shanggu and Guangxiang all surrendered to Liu Bei.

古文：浚患之，遂辍讨勒之师，而与琨相距。
现代文：王浚感到忧虑，于是停止了讨伐石勒，而舆刘琨对峙。
English: Wang Jun was worried, so he stopped the crusade against Shi Le, while Liu Ye confronted him.

古文：浚遣燕相胡矩督护诸军，与疾陆眷并力攻破希。
现代文：王浚派遣燕相胡矩督护诸军，和疾陆眷合力打败刘希。
English: Wang Jun dispatched Yan Xiang Hu Rong to supervise and protect the troops, and worked with Liu Xi to defeat Liu Xi.

古文：驱略三郡士女出塞，琨不复能争。
现代文：驱赶掠夺三郡男女出塞，刘琨没有力量再争战。
English: After driving out and plundering the men and women of the three counties, Liu Bei did not have the strength to fight again.

古文：浚还，欲讨勒，使枣嵩督诸军屯易水，召疾陆眷，将与之俱攻襄国。
现代文：王逡收兵，打算讨伐互勤，派枣崖督统诸军在易水驻兵，召疾陆眷，将和他一同攻打襄国。
English: Wang Hui called up his troops, intending to fight against the cross-exchange of labor, and sent Zaojiaqin to command the troops stationed in Yishui. He also called up his disabled relatives, who would fight against Xiangguo together with him.

古文：浚为政苛暴，将吏又贪残，并广占山泽，引水灌田，渍陷冢墓，调发殷烦，下不堪命，多叛入鲜卑。
现代文：王浚苛刻暴虐，将领官吏又贪婪残暴，一起大肆侵占山泽，引水灌田，淹陷坟墓，调用派遣频繁，下边人受不了，很多叛逃到鲜卑。
English: Wang Jun was harsh and tyrannical, and the generals and officials were greedy and cruel. Together, they aggressively occupied the mountains and rivers, diverted water to irrigate the fields, flooded the graves, and sent out dispatches frequently. The people below could not stand it, and many defected to Xianbei.

古文：从事韩咸切谏，浚怒，杀之。
现代文：从事韩咸恳切劝谏，王浚发怒，杀了他。
English: Engaged in Han Xian earnestly advised him, Wang Jun was furious and killed him.

古文：疾陆眷自以前后违命，恐浚诛之。
现代文：疾陆眷自认为前后违背了命令，怕王浚杀他。
English: Shiluguan thought that he had disobeyed the order, and was afraid that the king would kill him.

古文：勒亦遣使厚赂，疾陆眷等由是不应召。
现代文：石勒也派人贿赂，疾陆眷等人因此不接受召唤。
English: Shearer also sent someone to bribe, so the relatives and others did not accept the summons.

古文：浚怒，以重币诱单于猗卢子右贤王日律孙，令攻疾陆眷，反为所破。
现代文：王浚发怒，用重金引诱单于猗卢的儿子右贤王曰律孙，令他攻打疾陆眷，反而被疾陆眷打败。
English: Wang Jun became enraged and used a large sum of money to lure Shan Yu Lu's son, Yu Xian Wang, also known as Ritsun, so that he would attack the weak Lu clan. However, he was defeated by the weak Lu clan.

古文：时刘琨大为刘聪所迫，诸避乱游士多归于浚。
现代文：当时刘琨被刘聪逼迫得紧，那些避乱流浪的人很多归附了王浚。
English: At that time, Liu Bei was being pressed hard by Liu Cong, and many of those who fled the turmoil and wandered became Wang Jun's followers.

古文：浚日以强盛，乃设坛告类，建立皇太子，备置众官。
现代文：王浚一天天强盛，于是设祭坛行告庙，立皇太子。设置官员。
English: Wang Jun became more and more powerful day by day, so he set up an altar to announce the temple, established a crown prince, and set up officials.

古文：浚自领尚书令，以枣嵩、裴宪并为尚书，使其子居王宫，持节，领护匈奴中郎将，以妻舅崔毖为东夷校尉。
现代文：王浚自己兼尚书令，让枣嵩、裴宪并任尚书，让儿子居住王宫，持节，领护匈奴中郎将，让妻舅崔毖任束夷校尉。
English: Wang Jun himself also held the title of Shang Shuling, and let Zaosong and Pei Xian also hold the title of Shang Shuling, and let his son live in the royal palace, hold festivals, and receive and protect the Xiongnu Vice Admiral, and let his uncle-in-law Cui Jun hold the title of Shuai Captain.

古文：又使嵩监司冀并兗诸军事、行安北将军，以田徽为兗州，李恽为青州。
现代文：又让枣嵩监司冀并兖诸军事、行安北将军，让田徽任兖州刺史，李惮任青州刺史。
English: He also made Zaosong, the supervisor of Jihe, a military general and the general of Xing'anbei, Tian Hui, the governor of Zhangzhou, and Li Shuolu, the governor of Qingzhou.

古文：恽为石勒所杀，以薄盛代之。
现代文：李惮被石勒杀害，由薄盛代替他。
English: Li Shuo was killed by Shi Le, and replaced by Bo Sheng.

古文：浚以父字处道，为 当涂高 应王者之谶，谋将僭号。
现代文：王浚因为父亲字处道，与 当涂高 应称王的谶语，谋划称帝。
English: Wang Jun, because of his father's name, and the slang of "Dang Tu Gao" should be called the king, planned to be called the emperor.

古文：胡矩谏浚，盛陈其不可。
现代文：胡矩劝谏王浚，极力陈述称不行。
English: Hu Rui advised Zou Wangjun and stated emphatically that it was not possible.

古文：浚忿之，出矩为魏郡守。
现代文：王浚怨恨他，把胡矩派出任魏郡守。
English: Wang Jun resented him and sent Hu Jian to serve as the governor of Wei County.

古文：前渤海太守刘亮、从子北海太守搏、司空掾高柔并切谏，浚怒，诛之。
现代文：前渤海太守刘亮、侄儿北海太守王搏、司空掾高柔都恳切劝谏，王浚发怒，杀了他们。
English: Liu Liang, the former governor of Bohai Sea, Wang Bo, the nephew of the governor of the North Sea, and Gao Rong, the governor of the North Sea, all earnestly advised him, but Wang Jun got angry and killed them.

古文：浚素不平长史燕国王悌，遂因他事杀之。
现代文：王浚一向怨恨长史燕国人王悌，便藉口其他事杀了他。
English: Wang Jun always resented Wang Xuan, a citizen of Changshi Yan, and killed him on the pretext of other things.

古文：时童谣曰： 十囊五囊入枣郎。 
现代文：当时童谣说： 十口袋五口袋，全进了枣郎的口袋。 
English: At that time, the nursery rhyme said: "Ten pockets, five pockets, all went into Zaozaburo's pocket."

古文：枣嵩，浚之子婿也。
现代文：枣嵩，是王浚的女婿。
English: Zao Song is Wang Jun's son-in-law.

古文：浚闻，责嵩而不能罪之也。
现代文：王浚听到童谣，斥责枣嵩而不能治他的罪。
English: Wang Jun heard the nursery rhyme and reprimanded Zaosong, but could not punish him.

古文：又谣曰： 幽州城门似藏户，中有伏尸王彭祖。 
现代文：又有童谣说： 幽州城门像仓库，中有死尸王彭祖。 
English: There is also a nursery rhyme that says: Yuzhou's city gate is like a warehouse, with the dead body of King Peng Zu inside.

古文：有狐踞府门，翟雉入听事。
现代文：有狐狸蹲坐在府门，野鸡飞进厅事堂。
English: There is a fox squatting at the gate, and a pheasant flying into the hall.

古文：时燕国霍原，北州名贤，浚以僭位事示之，原不答，浚遂害之。
现代文：当时燕国人霍原，是北方州郡的名人贤士，王浚把僭位称王的事对他讲，霍原不回答，王浚便杀害了他。
English: At that time, Huo Yuan, a native of Yan Guo, was a famous sage of Beizhou County. Wang Jun told him about the title of king. Huo Yuan did not answer, so Wang Jun killed him.

古文：由是士人愤怨，内外无亲。
现代文：由此官民怨恨，内外没有亲信。
English: As a result, there is resentment among officials and the public, and there are no close confidants at home or abroad.

古文：以矜豪日甚，不亲为政，所任多苛刻；加亢旱灾蝗，士卒衰弱。
现代文：由于王浚骄横日甚一日，不管政务，所任用之人多数都刻薄残暴；加上大旱蝗灾，士卒衰弱。
English: As the king's arrogance increased day by day, regardless of government affairs, most of the people appointed were mean and cruel; coupled with the drought and locusts, the officials were weak.

古文：浚之承制也，参佐皆内叙，唯司马游统外出。
现代文：王浚奉旨授官时，僚属都在朝内任职，惟有司马游统出京。
English: When Wang Jun was appointed by order, his colleagues and subordinates all served in the imperial court, except for Sima Youtong who went to Beijing.

古文：统怨，密与石勒通谋。
现代文：游统发怒，暗中与石勒合谋。
English: Yu Du became angry and secretly conspired with Shi Le.

古文：勒乃诈降于浚，许奉浚为主。
现代文：石勒便假装向王浚投降，答应尊奉王浚为人主。
English: Shi Le pretended to surrender to Wang Jun and promised to serve Wang Jun as his master.

古文：时百姓内叛，疾陆眷等侵逼。
现代文：当时百姓内乱，疾陆眷等人侵犯进逼。
English: At that time, there was civil unrest among the people, and those who were ill or had relatives in the mainland invaded and forced their way in.

古文：浚喜勒之附己，勒遂为卑辞以事之。献遗珍宝，使驿相继。
现代文：王浚对石勒归附自己感到高兴，石勒就以谦卑的言辞来事奉他，供献珍宝，使者不断。
English: Wang Jun was pleased that Shi Le had attached himself to him. Shi Le served him with humble words, offered precious treasures, and sent messengers continuously.

古文：浚以勒为诚，不复设备。
现代文：王浚认为石勒诚信，不再设防。
English: Wang Jun believes that Shiller is honest and will no longer set up defenses.

古文：勒乃遣使克日上尊号于浚，浚许之。
现代文：石勒便派遣使者约定日期为王浚加尊号，王浚答应了他。
English: Shi Le then sent an emissary to set a date for Wang Jun to ascend the throne, and Wang Jun agreed.

古文：勒屯兵易水，督护孙纬疑其诈，驰白浚，而引军逆勒。
现代文：石勒在易水驻军，督护孙纬怀疑其中有诈，急速报告王浚，并领兵阻挡石勒。
English: Shi Le garrisoned troops in Yishui. Supervisor Sun Wei suspected that there was fraud, quickly reported to Wang Jun, and led troops to block Shi Le.

古文：浚不听，使勒直前。
现代文：王浚不听，让石勒径直前进。
English: Wang Jun did not listen, and let Shi Le go straight ahead.

古文：众议皆曰： 胡贪而无信，必有诈，请距之。 
现代文：大家议论都认为： 胡人贪婪而不讲信义，其中必定有诈，请阻拦他。 
English: Everyone said: "If Hu is greedy and not trustworthy, there must be fraud, please stop him."

古文：浚怒，欲斩诸言者，众遂不敢复谏。
现代文：王浚发怒，要杀那些发议论的人，大家便不敢再劝谏。
English: Wang Jun was so angry that he wanted to kill those who had spoken out, and no one dared to try to persuade him.

古文：盛张设以待勒。
现代文：大肆铺张接待石勒。
English: A lavish reception was held for Shiller.

古文：勒至城，便纵兵大掠。
现代文：石勒到了城中，就放纵士兵大肆掠夺。
English: When Shiller arrived in the city, he allowed the soldiers to plunder freely.

古文：浚左右复请讨之，不许。
现代文：王浚手下人又请求讨伐他，王浚不答应。
English: Wang Jun's subordinates also requested to fight him, but Wang Jun did not agree.

古文：及勒登听事，浚乃走出堂皇，勒众执以见勒。
现代文：等到石勒登上厅事堂，王浚这才跑出大厅，被石勒手下人抓住见石勒。
English: It was not until Shi Le boarded the hall that Wang Jun ran out of the hall and was caught by Shi Le's men.

古文：勒遂与浚妻并坐，立浚于前。
现代文：石勒便与王浚的妻子并排而坐，让王浚站在面前。
English: Shi Le then sat side by side with Wang Jun's wife and let Wang Jun stand in front of him.

古文：浚骂曰： 胡奴调汝公，何凶逆如此！ 
现代文：王浚骂道： 胡奴欺骗你老子，怎么如此凶逆! 
English: Wang Jun scolded: "Hun deceived you, old man, how can you be so vicious!

古文：勒数浚不忠于晋，并责以百姓馁乏，积粟五十万斛而不振给。
现代文：石勒数落王浚不忠于晋，并用百姓饥饿困乏，库存五十万斛粮食而不用于赈济的事责问他。
English: Shi Liao accused Wang Jun of being disloyal to Jin, and accused him of starving the people and stockpiling half a million catties of grain instead of using it for relief.

古文：遂遣五百骑先送浚于襄国，收浚麾下精兵万人，尽杀之。
现代文：于是派五百骑兵先押送王浚回襄国，收捕王浚部下精兵上万人，全杀死。
English: Therefore, he sent five hundred cavalrymen to escort Wang Jun back to Xiang, and captured tens of thousands of Wang Jun's elite soldiers, killing them all.

古文：停二日而还，孙纬遮击之，勒仅而得免。
现代文：住了两天后撤回，孙纬拦击他，石勒勉强得以逃脱。
English: After staying for two days and withdrawing, Sun Wei intercepted him, and Shi Le was barely able to escape.

古文：勒至襄国，斩浚，而浚竟不为之屈，大骂而死。
现代文：石勒到了襄国，杀王浚，而王浚始终不屈服，大骂而死。
English: When Shi Le arrived in Xiang Province, he killed Wang Jun, but Wang Jun did not give in and cursed him to death.

古文：无子。
现代文：王浚没有儿子。
English: Wang Jun has no son.

古文：太元二年，诏兴灭继绝，封沈从孙道素为博陵公。
现代文：太元二年，下诏书令兴灭国继绝世，封王沈的侄孙道素为博陵公。
English: In the 2nd year of the Taiyuan era, the next imperial edict ordered the rise and fall of the country successively, and the nephew of King Shen was named Boling.

古文：卒，子崇之嗣。
现代文：死，儿子崇之继嗣。
English: After his death, his son, Takashi, became his successor.

古文：义熙十一年，改封东莞郡公。
现代文：义熙十一年，改封为东莞郡公。
English: In the eleventh year of the reign of Emperor Yixi, he was given the title of Dongguan County Governor.

古文：宋受禅，国除。
现代文：宋接受禅让，封国被取消。
English: Song accepted Zen's concession, and the fiefdom was abolished.

古文：荀顗，字景倩，颍川人，魏太尉彧之第六子也。
现代文：荀颉字景倩，颖川人，是魏太尉荀或的第六个儿子。
English: He was from Yingchuan and was the sixth son of Wei Taiyi.

古文：幼为姊婿陈群所赏。
现代文：年幼时被姐夫陈群赏识。
English: He was recognized by his brother-in-law Chen Qun at a young age.

古文：性至孝，总角知名，博学洽闻，理思周密。
现代文：生性极孝顺，幼年就有名声，学识广博，思维周密。
English: They are extremely filial by nature, have a reputation from a young age, are well-educated and have a well-thought-out mind.

古文：魏时以父勋除中郎。
现代文：魏时因为父亲的功勋被任命为中郎。
English: Because of his father's meritorious service, Wei was appointed as the middle son.

古文：宣帝辅政，见顗奇之，曰： 荀令君之子也。 
现代文：宣帝辅佐朝政，见到荀颢感到惊奇，说 真是荀令君的儿子啊 。
English: Emperor Xuan's aide-de-camp, Emperor Xuanzong, was surprised to see Yao and said, "He really is the son of Yao Lingjun."

古文：擢拜散骑侍郎，累迁侍中。
现代文：提升为散骑侍郎，逐级升官任侍中。
English: He was promoted to the rank of Sanzhiyajirō, and successively promoted to the rank of Samurai Chūn.

古文：为魏少帝执经，拜骑都尉，赐爵关内侯。
现代文：为魏少帝讲授经典，官拜骑都尉，赐他关内侯的爵位。
English: He lectured classics for Emperor Wei, and was given the title of Guan Nei Marquis.

古文：难钟会《易》无互体，又与扶风王骏论仁孝孰先，见称于世。
现代文：责难钟会治《易》没有互体，又与扶风王司马骏论仁和孝谁为首，被世人称道。
English: There is no contradiction between the reproach of the clock and the rule of "Yi," and who is the leader of benevolence and filial piety with the support of the wind king Sima Qian, and is praised by the world.

古文：时曹爽专权，何晏等欲害太常傅嘏，顗营救得免。
现代文：当时曹爽独揽大权，何晏等人想害太常傅嘏，荀颢营救使他得以免难。
English: At that time, Cao Shuang was in sole possession of power, and He Zhen and others wanted to harm him, but he was rescued and saved.

古文：及高贵乡公立，顗言于景帝曰： 今上践阼，权道非常，宜速遣使宣德四方，且察外志。 
现代文：高贵乡公即位，荀颉对景帝说： 如今皇上登基，获得君权的途径不同寻常，应赶快派人赴各地宣布仁德，并且观察外界的动向。 
English: When the noble townsman ascended the throne, Zou said to Emperor Jing: Now that the emperor has ascended to the throne, the way to obtain the monarchy is unusual. It is necessary to quickly send people to all parts of the country to declare benevolence and observe the trend of the outside world.

古文：毌丘俭、文钦果不服，举兵反。
现代文：母丘俭、文钦果然不服，发兵反叛。
English: His mother, Qiu Jian, and Wen Qin were not convinced and rebelled.

古文：顗预讨俭等有功，进爵万岁亭侯，邑四百户。
现代文：荀颉参与讨伐册丘俭等人有功，进爵为万岁亭侯，封邑四百户。
English: Those who participated in the crusade, such as Zhuan Qiu Jian, made contributions and were ennobled as long-serving princes, including 400 households in fiefdoms.

古文：文帝辅政，迁尚书。
现代文：文帝辅佐朝政时，升任尚书。
English: During the reign of Emperor Wen, he was promoted to Shangshu.

古文：帝征诸葛诞，留顗镇守。
现代文：文帝征讨诸葛诞，留荀颉镇守。
English: Emperor Wen subdued Zhuge Zi, and he became the keeper of the town.

古文：顗甥陈泰卒，顗代泰为仆射，领吏部，四辞而后就职。
现代文：荀颉的外甥陈泰死了，荀颉代替陈泰任仆射，兼管吏部，四次推辞然后就职。
English: Zou's nephew Chen Tai died. Zou replaced Chen Tai as the second-in-command, also in charge of the personnel department. Zou resigned four times and then took office.

古文：顗承泰后，加之淑慎，综核名实，风俗澄正。
现代文：荀颢接任陈泰，更加恭慎，综合考核名望与实际，风俗澄清。
English: Chen Tai's successor, more cautious, comprehensive assessment of fame and reality, and clarification of customs.

古文：咸熙中，迁司空，进爵乡侯。
现代文：咸熙年间，升任司空，进爵为乡侯。
English: During the reign of Emperor Xianxi, he was promoted to the position of Jieku, and was ennobled as a township lord.

古文：顗年逾耳顺，孝养蒸蒸，以母忧去职，毁几灭性，海内称之。
现代文：荀颉年过六十岁，孝顺奉养一片诚心，因为母亲的丧事而辞去职务，悲哀得几乎丧失了理智，海内都称赞他。
English: He was over sixty years old, had a sincere heart of filial piety, resigned from his post because of his mother's death, and was so sad that he almost lost his mind. He was praised by the whole country.

古文：文帝奏，宜依汉太傅胡广丧母故事，给司空吉凶导从。
现代文：文帝上奏，应依照汉太傅胡广为母亲办丧事的先例，给司空设置葬礼仪仗随从。
English: Emperor Wenzong should follow the example of Emperor Hu Guang of the Han Dynasty in arranging a funeral for his mother, and set up a funeral retinue for Siku.

古文：及蜀平，兴复五等，命顗定礼仪。
现代文：等到蜀被平定，兴立五等爵位，命令荀颛制定礼仪。
English: Wait until Shu is subdued, establish five peerages, and order the eunuch to formulate etiquette.

古文：顗上请羊祜、任恺、庚峻、应贞、孔颢共删改旧文，撰定晋礼。
现代文：荀韵上疏请羊祜、任恺、庾峻、应贞、孔颢共同删改旧典章，撰定晋礼仪。
English: In the rhyme, Yang Zheng, Ren Zheng, Zheng Jun, Ying Zhen and Kong Zheng were invited to jointly delete and amend the old ordinance and compile the Jin etiquette.

古文：咸熙初，封临淮侯。
现代文：咸熙初年，被封为临淮侯。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Xianxi, he was given the title of Linhuai Hou.

古文：武帝践阼，进爵为公，食邑一千八百户。
现代文：武帝登上皇位，进升爵位为公，食邑一千八百户。
English: Emperor Wu ascended to the throne, promotion to a peerage was made public, and 1,800 households in Zhucheng were affected.

古文：又诏曰： 昔禹命九官，契敷五教，所以弘崇王化，示人轨仪也。
现代文：又下韶说： 过去禹任命九官，契推行五教，用以崇大王道教化，显示法度礼仪。
English: He also said, "In the past, Yu appointed nine officials to promote the Five Teachings, with the purpose of exalting the king, enlightening the way, and showing the etiquette of the law.

古文：朕承洪业，昧于大道，思训五品，以康四海。
现代文：我接受大业，对大道昏昧，想用五伦教导百姓，来使四海平安。
English: I accept the great cause, I am ignorant of the road, I want to use the five elements to teach the people, to make the four seas peaceful.

古文：侍中、司空顗，明允笃诚，思心通远，翼亮先皇，遂辅朕躬，实有佐命弼导之勋。
现代文：侍中、司空荀颛，公正诚信，志向远大，辅佐先皇，又辅佐我，实在有佐助辅导帝王的功勋。
English: As a chamberlain, a secretary and a courier, he was fair, honest and ambitious. He assisted the former emperor, and he assisted me. He truly had the merit of assisting and guiding the emperor.

古文：宜掌教典，以隆时雍。
现代文：应该掌管教化礼典，使时世更安定太平。
English: They should take charge of the edification ceremony to make the times more stable and peaceful.

古文：其以顗为司徒。 
现代文：任命荀颉为司徒。 
English: Zou was appointed as a magistrate.

古文：寻加侍中，迁太尉、都督城外牙门诸军事，置司马亲兵百人。
现代文：不久加任侍中，升任太尉、都督城外牙门诸军事，设置司马亲兵一百人。
English: He was soon appointed to the position of chamberlain, promoted to the rank of captain, and became the military governor of the Outer Gate of the city, with one hundred of Sima's own soldiers.

古文：顷之，又诏曰： 侍中、太尉顗，温恭忠允，至行纯备，博古洽闻，耆艾不殆。
现代文：不久，又下诏说： 侍中、太尉荀频，温和恭敬忠诚公允，品行清纯，博通古事知识渊博，高龄而不懈怠。
English: Not long after, he issued another edict saying, "The chamberlains and eunuchs are often gentle, respectful, loyal and fair, have pure moral character, are well-versed in ancient knowledge, and do not slacken in their old age.

古文：其以公行太子太傅，侍中、太尉如故。 
现代文：让其代理太子太傅，侍中、太尉的官职依旧。 
English: Let it be the acting prince taifu, and the official positions of chamberlain and lieutenant will remain unchanged.

古文：时以《正德》、《大豫》雅颂未合，命顗定乐。
现代文：当时因为《正德》、《大豫》中的雅颂不相配合，命令荀颢定乐。
English: At that time, because the elegant chant in "Zhengde" and "Da Yu" did not match, he ordered the music to be played.

古文：事未终，以泰始十年薨。
现代文：事情未完，于泰始十年去世。
English: Things were not finished, and he died ten years later.

古文：帝为举哀，皇太子临丧，二宫赙赠，礼秩有加。
现代文：皇帝为他举哀，皇太子亲临丧礼，皇帝、皇后为丧事鑪赠物品，礼节等级超过常规。
English: The emperor mourned for him, the crown prince attended the funeral, the emperor and the empress presented gifts for the funeral, and the level of etiquette exceeded the norm.

古文：诏曰： 侍中、太尉、行太子太傅、临淮公顗，清纯体道，忠允立朝，历司外内，茂绩既崇，训傅东宫，徽猷弘著，可谓行归于周，有始有卒者矣。
现代文：诏书说： 侍中、太尉、行太子太傅、临淮公荀颤，品行清纯遵循道义，在朝诚信公允，历任内外官职，大功显赫，教导太子，弘扬善美之道，可以说是行为圆满，有始有终的人。
English: The imperial edict said: the chamberlains, the grand lieutenants, the crown prince, the crown prince, and the crown prince, have pure moral conduct, follow moral principles, be honest and fair in the DPRK, have held various posts at home and abroad, have made great contributions, taught the crown prince, and promoted the way of goodness and beauty. It can be said that they are people with perfect behavior and have a beginning and an end.

古文：不幸薨殂，朕甚痛之。
现代文：不幸去世，我很是哀痛。
English: I am deeply saddened by his untimely death.

古文：其赐温明秘器、朝服一具，衣一袭。
现代文：赐棺木、朝服一具、衣一套。谧号康。 
English: He was given a coffin, a morning suit and a set of clothes. His posthumous name was Kang.

古文：谥曰康。 又诏曰： 太尉不恤私门，居无馆宇，素丝之志，没而弥显。
现代文：又下诏说： 太尉不顾及自己的家，居住没有华丽的房屋，俭朴的志向，死后更为闻名。
English: He also said: The captain did not care about his home, did not live in ornate houses, and had a frugal attitude, which became even more famous after his death.

古文：其赐家钱二百万，使立宅舍。 
现代文：赐他家钱二百万，让他们建造宅第。 
English: Give his family two million and let them build a mansion.

古文：咸宁初，诏论次功臣，将配飨宗庙。
现代文：咸宁初年，下诏书给功臣排出高低，将在宗庙中拊祭。
English: In the first year of Xianning, the imperial edict issued to the meritorious vassals ranked them in order of merit, and they will be enshrined in the ancestral temple.

古文：所司奏顗等十二人铭功太常，配飨清庙。
现代文：主管官吏奏请将荀颢等十二人在太常那裹铭刻功绩，拊祭于宗庙。
English: The officials in charge requested that twelve people, including Xie, inscribe their achievements at Taizhong, and make a sacrificial offering at the ancestral temple.

古文：顗明《三礼》，知朝廷大仪，而无质直之操，唯阿意苟合于荀勖、贾充之间。
现代文：荀频懂《三礼》，知道朝廷大礼，然而没有正直的节操，衹是在荀勖、贾充之间曲意迎合。
English: He often understands the "Three Rites" and knows the Imperial Salute, but there is no honest discipline. He is pandering to the melody between Zou and Jia Chong.

古文：初，皇太子将纳妃，顗上言贾充女姿德淑茂，可以参选，以此获讥于世。
现代文：当初，皇太子将要娶妃，荀颉进言说贾充的女儿恣容品德美好，可以参选，因此受到当时人讥笑。
English: At first, the crown prince was going to marry his fiancee, and Hao Jinrong said that Jia Chong's daughter was of good moral character and could run for election, so she was ridiculed at the time.

古文：顗无子，以从孙徽嗣。
现代文：荀颛没有儿子，让侄孙荀徽继嗣。
English: Yao did not have a son, so let his grandnephew Yao Hui be his successor.

古文：中兴初，以顗兄玄孙序为顗后，封临淮公。
现代文：晋偏安南渡初年，荀颉兄长的玄孙荀序作荀颉的后人，封为临淮公。
English: In the first year after the arrival of Emperor Jin in the south, the great-great-grandson of Emperor Jin's elder brother, Emperor Jinxu, who was the descendant of Emperor Jin, was named Lin Huai.

古文：序卒，又绝，孝武帝又封序子恆继顗后。
现代文：荀序死，又无人继承，孝武帝又封荀序的儿子荀恒继嗣荀颛。
English: Emperor Wu died without an heir, and Emperor Xiaowu appointed Emperor Wu's son, Emperor Yu Heng, as his successor.

古文：恆卒，子龙符嗣。
现代文：荀恒死，儿子荀龙符继嗣。
English: Jian Heng died and was succeeded by his son Jian Long Fu.

古文：宋受禅，国除。
现代文：宋接受禅让，封国被取消。
English: Song accepted Zen's concession, and the fiefdom was abolished.

古文：荀勖，字公曾，颍川颍阴人，汉司空爽曾孙也。
现代文：荀勖字公曾，颖川颍阴人，是汉朝司空荀爽的曾孙。
English: Zou Zi Gong Zeng, a native of Zouyin in Yingchuan, was the great-grandson of the Han Dynasty's Sikyong Shuangru.

古文：祖棐，射声校尉。
现代文：祖父荀莱，任射声校尉。
English: His grandfather, Yu Lai, was a lieutenant in the Imperial Artillery.

古文：父肸，早亡。
现代文：父亲荀肿，死得早。
English: His father was bloated and died early.

古文：勖依于舅氏。
现代文：荀勖寄身于舅舅家。
English: She stayed with her uncle.

古文：岐嶷夙成，年十余岁能属文。
现代文：聪慧早成，十多岁能写文章。
English: Conghui is precocious and can write articles at the age of more than ten.

古文：从外祖魏太傅钟繇曰： 此兒当及其曾祖。 
现代文：堂外祖父魏太傅钟繇说： 遣孩子将赶上他曾祖父。 
English: Wei Tai Fu's great-grandfather Zhong Qi said: "The children will catch up with their great-grandfather.

古文：既长，遂博学，达于从政。
现代文：长大以后，学识广博，善于从政。
English: After growing up, he has a broad knowledge and is good at politics.

古文：仕魏，辟大将军曹爽掾，迁中书通事郎。
现代文：在魏做官，为大将军曹爽的属官，升任中书通事郎。
English: He served as an officer in Wei, and was a subordinate officer of the great general Cao Shuang, and was promoted to the position of Zhongshu Tsujiro.

古文：爽诛，门生故吏无敢往者，勖独临赴，众乃从之。
现代文：曹爽被杀，门生故吏没有敢去赴丧的，惟独荀勖去，众人才跟着去。
English: When Cao Shuang was killed, his disciples and senior officials did not dare to go to the funeral, but they went alone, and many people followed.

古文：为安阳令，转骠骑从事中郎。
现代文：任安阳令，转任骠骑从事中郎。
English: Appointed to the post of Anyang, he was transferred to the post of middle-ranked horseman.

古文：勖有遗爱，安阳生为立祠。
现代文：荀勖有留下的爱心，安阳的门生为他立了祠堂。
English: With the love he left behind, Anyang's protégé built an ancestral hall for him.

古文：迁廷尉正，参文帝大将军军事，赐爵关内侯，转从事中郎，领记室。
现代文：升任廷尉正，参文帝大将军军事，赐他关内侯的爵位，转任从事中郎，兼记室。
English: He was promoted to the rank of imperial lieutenant general and the military general of Emperor Sangwen, given the title of Marquis of Guanai, and transferred to the post of middle steward and secretary.

古文：高贵乡公欲为变时，大将军掾孙佑等守阊阖门。
现代文：高贵乡公想发动政变时，大将军掾孙佑等人守阗阖门。
English: When the noble townspeople wanted to launch a coup d'état, the great general Sun Sun You and others guarded the gate.

古文：帝弟安阳侯干闻难欲入，佑谓干曰： 未有入者，可从东掖门。 
现代文：文帝的弟弟安阳侯司马干听说有难要进城，孙佑对司马干说： 没有进去的人，可从东掖门进。 
English: Emperor Wen's younger brother, Anyang Householder Sima Gan, heard that it was difficult to enter the city. Sun You said to Sima Gan: Those who have not entered can enter from the East Gate.

古文：及干至，帝迟之，干以状白，帝欲族诛佑。
现代文：司马干赶到，文帝嫌他来迟了，司马干把原因告诉他，文帝想灭孙佑的家族。
English: Sima Gan arrived, and Emperor Wendi thought he was late. Sima Gan told him the reason, that Emperor Wendi wanted to destroy Sun You's family.

古文：勖谏曰： 孙佑不纳安阳，诚宜深责。
现代文：荀勖进谏说： 孙佑不接纳安阳侯，确实应该责罚。
English: Hao Jinjun said: Sun You did not accept Anyang Hou, and should indeed be punished.

古文：然事有逆顺，用刑不可以喜怒为轻重。
现代文：然而事情有轻重，用刑不能根据喜怒决定。
English: However, things are weighty, and punishment cannot be decided on the basis of emotions.

古文：今成倅刑止其身，佑乃族诛，恐义士私议。 
现代文：如今成悴受刑限于自身，而孙佑却全族被杀，恐怕正义之人私下议论。 
English: Now that the punishment is limited to himself, while Sun You was killed by the whole family, I'm afraid that righteous people will discuss it in private.

古文：乃免佑为庶人。
现代文：于是把孙佑免为平民。
English: As a result, Sun Yu was exempted from becoming a commoner.

古文：时官骑路遗求为刺客入蜀，勖言于帝曰： 明公以至公宰天下，宜杖正义以伐违贰。
现代文：当时官骑路遣请求以刺客身份进入蜀国，苟勖对文帝说： 明公靠公正主宰天下，应该凭仗正义去讨伐悖逆。
English: At that time, the official cavalry sent a request to enter the State of Shu as an assassin, and Goguryeo said to Emperor Wen: The Ming Dynasty ruled the world by virtue of justice, and should fight against rebellion by virtue of justice.

古文：而名以刺客除贼，非所谓刑于四海，以德服远也。 
现代文：如果靠刺客除去敌人，就不是所谓四海的典范，靠德使远方臣服。 
English: If you rely on assassins to eliminate the enemy, you are not the so-called model of the four seas, but rely on virtue to subjugate the distant lands.

古文：帝称善。
现代文：文帝认为对。
English: Wen Di thought it was right.

古文：及钟会谋反，审问未至，而外人先告之。
现代文：钟会谋反时，详情还没探到，而外人先来报告。
English: When the bell ringers plotted a rebellion, the details had not yet been discovered, and outsiders were the first to report.

古文：帝待会素厚，未之信也。
现代文：文帝一向对钟会优厚，不信他会谋反。
English: Emperor Wen has always been generous to the Bell Association, I do not believe he will rebel.

古文：勖曰： 会虽受恩，然其性未可许以见得思义，不可不速为之备。 
现代文：荀勖说： 钟会虽然受到恩惠，然而他生性不见得想着忠义，不能不赶快防备。 
English: Zou said: Although Zhonghui was favored, he was not naturally inclined to be loyal, so he had to be prepared.

古文：帝即出镇长安，主簿郭奕、参军王深以勖是会从甥，少长舅氏，劝帝斥出之。
现代文：文帝立即出外镇守长安，主簿郭奕、参军王深因为荀勖是钟会的堂甥，是甥舅关系，年轻时在舅舅家长大，劝文帝斥退他。
English: Emperor Wen immediately went out to guard the town of Chang'an. Guo Yi, the chief accountant, and Wang Sheng, who joined the army, persuaded Emperor Wen to expel him because he was a nephew of the Bell Association and grew up in his uncle's family when he was young.

古文：帝不纳，而使勖陪乘，待之如初。
现代文：文帝不采纳，而让荀勖陪乘，待他如同先前一样。
English: Emperor Wen did not accept the request, but let Yao accompany him and treated him as before.

古文：先是，勖启 伐蜀，宜以卫瓘为监军 。
现代文：这以前，荀勖陈述 讨伐蜀，应任命卫璇为监军 。
English: Prior to this, Wei Xuan declared the campaign against Shu, and Wei Xuan should be appointed as the supervisor.

古文：及蜀中乱，赖瓘以济。
现代文：等到蜀地战乱，全靠卫璇维持。
English: Until the war in Shunde, it was all maintained by the garrison.

古文：会平，还洛，与裴秀、羊祜共管机密。
现代文：钟会之乱被平定，回洛阳，舆裴秀、羊枯共同掌管机要部门。
English: The Bell Association Rebellion was quelled, and back in Luoyang, Miao Peixiu and Yang Jian jointly took charge of important departments.

古文：时将发使聘吴，并遣当时文士作书与孙皓，帝用勖所作。
现代文：当时将派使者去吴国访问，并且让当时的文人给孙皓文书，文帝选用荀勖写的文书。
English: At that time, an envoy would be sent to visit the State of Wu, and the literati of the time would be asked to give Sun Yat-sen documents, and Emperor Wen would select documents written in cursive.

古文：皓既报命和亲，帝谓勖曰： 君前作书，使吴思顺，胜十万之众也。 
现代文：孙皓答覆同意和亲，文帝对荀勖说： 你以前写的文书，使吴国心想归顺，胜过十万军队。 
English: Sun Yat-sen replied that he agreed to make peace. Emperor Wen said to Sun Yat-sen, "The document you wrote before has made the heart of the State of Wu want to surrender more than a hundred thousand troops.

古文：帝即晋王位，以勖为侍中，封安阳子，邑千户。
现代文：文帝登上晋王位，任命荀勖为侍中，封为安阳子，食邑一千户。
English: Emperor Wen ascended the throne of Jin, appointed Zou as an attendant, named him Anyangzi, and fed a thousand households.

古文：武帝受禅，改封济北郡公。
现代文：武帝接受禅让，改封济北郡公。
English: Emperor Wu accepted Zen's resignation and changed his title to Jeibei County Governor.

古文：勖以羊祜让，乃固辞为侯。
现代文：荀勖因为羊祜谦让，坚决推辞而为侯。
English: Because of the sheep's meek yielding, resolute refusal, it was a martyrdom.

古文：拜中书监，加侍中，领著作，与贾充共定律令。
现代文：官拜中书监，加侍中，兼管著作，与贾充共同制定律令。
English: He was a librarian in the court of the emperor, and an attendant in the court of the emperor. He was also in charge of writing, and he and Jia Chong jointly formulated the ritsuryo.

古文：充将镇关右也，勖谓冯紞曰： 贾公远放，吾等失势。
现代文：贾充将去镇守关右，荀勖对冯鱿说： 买公被派往远处，我们这些人失去势力。
English: Jia Chong will go to the town to guard Guan Yu. Zou said to Feng Yao: Buyong has been sent far away, and we have lost our power.

古文：太子婚尚未定，若使充女得为妃，则不留而自停矣。 
现代文：太子婚事还没定，如果使买充的女儿作太妃，那么贾充不用挽留而自己就走不成了。 
English: The matter of the prince's marriage has not yet been decided. If the daughter of Maidong is made a princess, then Jia Chong will not need to be retained and will not be able to leave.

古文：勖与紞伺帝间并称 充女才色绝世，若纳东宫，必能辅佐君子，有《关雎》后妃之德。 
现代文：荀勖与冯鱿趁皇帝有空时都说 买充的女儿才能容貌举世无双，如果娶到东宫，必定能辅佐太子，有《关雎》中后妃的德行 。
English: When the emperor had free time, Zou and Feng Zou both said that Maizhong's daughter's talent and appearance were unparalleled in the world. If she married into the East Palace, she would certainly be able to assist the prince, and she would have the virtue of the empress dowager in Guan Zhou.

古文：遂成婚。
现代文：于是成婚。
English: So they got married.

古文：当时甚为正直者所疾，而获佞媚之讥焉。
现代文：当时很是被正直的人厌恶，而被讥讽为谄媚。
English: At the time he was widely loathed by honest people and derided as a sycophant.

古文：久之，进位光禄大夫。
现代文：很久之后，升为光禄大夫。
English: After a long time, he was promoted to chief doctor of Guanglu.

古文：既掌乐事，又修律吕，并行于世。
现代文：掌管礼乐之事后，又修定乐律，都在世上流行。
English: After taking charge of the liturgical music, he also revised the melody, both of which are popular in the world.

古文：初，勖于路逢赵贾人牛铎，识其声。
现代文：当初，苟勖在路上听见赵商人的牛铃。记住了声音。
English: At first, Gou Yao heard the cowbell of a Zhao merchant on the road. He remembered the sound.

古文：及掌乐，音韵未调，乃曰： 得赵之牛铎则谐矣。 
现代文：等到掌管礼乐，音韵未和谐，就说： 得到赵的牛铃就和谐了。 
English: When he was in charge of the ritual music, he said, "If you get Zhao's cowbell, it will be harmonious."

古文：遂下郡国，悉送牛铎，果得谐者。
现代文：于是下令各郡国，都送牛铃，音乐果然和谐了。
English: So he ordered all the counties to send cowbells, and the music did indeed become harmonious.

古文：又尝在帝坐进饭，谓在坐人曰： 此是劳薪所炊。 
现代文：又曾在皇帝座前吃饭，对在座的人说： 这饭菜是用车脚烧成的。 
English: He also once dined in front of the emperor's throne and said to the people present: This meal was cooked with the feet of a cart.

古文：咸未之信。
现代文：都不信他的话。
English: They didn't believe him.

古文：帝遣问膳夫，乃云： 实用故车脚。 
现代文：皇帝派人间厨师，回答说： 确实用的是旧车脚。 
English: The emperor sent a human cook, who replied, "It is true that they use old cart feet.

古文：举世伏其明识。
现代文：大家都佩服他的明识。
English: Everyone admires his lucidity.

古文：俄领秘书监，与中书令张华依刘向《别录》，整理记籍。
现代文：不久兼任秘书监，与中书令张华依照刘向《别绿》，整理簿记典籍。
English: Soon, he also served as the secretary supervisor, and arranged the bookkeeping classics according to Liu Xiang's "Be Green" with the Chinese book order Zhang Hua.

古文：又立书博士，置弟子教习，以钟、胡为法。
现代文：又设置书博士，安排弟子教授学习，效法钟繇、胡昭。
English: He also set up a doctoral program in calligraphy, arranged for his disciples to teach, and followed the example of Zhong Xi and Hu Zhao.

古文：咸宁初，与石苞等并为佐命功臣，列于铭飨。
现代文：咸宁初年，与石苞等人一同因为是辅佐功臣，在刻石配飨之列。
English: In the first year of Xianning, together with Shijie and others, because he was an assistant to a meritorious subject, he was included in the list of engraved stones.

古文：及王浚表请伐吴，勖与贾充固谏不可，帝不从，而吴果灭。
现代文：王浚上表请求伐吴时，荀勖与贾充坚决劝谏反对，皇帝不听从，而吴国果然被减。
English: When Wang Jun made a request to invade Wu, Yao and Jia Chong resolutely advised Yao against it. The emperor did not listen, and Wu was indeed reduced in size.

古文：以专典诏命，论功封子一人为亭侯，邑一千户，赐绢千匹。
现代文：因为荀勖专管诏书，论功封一个儿子为亭侯，食邑一千户，赐绢一千匹。
English: Because he was in charge of the imperial edict, he was given the title of a prince, a thousand households, and a thousand horses.

古文：又封孙显为颍阳亭侯。
现代文：又封孙子荀显为颖阳亭侯。
English: He also named his grandson, Yu Xian, as the lord of Yingyangting.

古文：及得汲郡冢中古文竹书，诏勖撰次之，以为《中经》，列在秘书。
现代文：得到汲郡墓中古文竹书后，下诏荀勖撰编，作为《中经》，列入宫内藏书。
English: After obtaining the ancient text "Zhu Shu" in the tomb of Gu County, he compiled the following "Zhu Xi Zi" as the "Middle Classic" and included it in the imperial collection.

古文：时议遣王公之国，帝以问勖，勖对曰： 诸王公已为都督，而使之国，则废方任。
现代文：当时讨论派遣王公去封国，皇帝问荀勖，荀勖回答说： 各位王公已是都督，而让他们去封国，就废弃了地方长官之职。
English: At that time, there was a discussion about sending princes to seal the country. The emperor asked the eunuch, and the eunuch replied: The princes are already governors of the capital, and if they were allowed to seal the country, the position of local governors would be abolished.

古文：又分割郡县，人心恋本，必用嗷嗷。
现代文：再说分割郡县，人心依恋原状，必定会发出不满之声。
English: Moreover, the division of counties and counties, people's attachment to the status quo ante, will certainly give rise to dissatisfaction.

古文：国皆置军，官兵还当给国，而阙边守。 
现代文：封国都设置军队，还要提供官兵给封国，而使边防守备受到损害。 
English: All the vassal states set up armies, and they also had to provide officers and soldiers to the vassal states, and the border defense preparedness was damaged.

古文：帝重使勖思之，勖又陈曰： 如诏准古方伯选才，使军国各随方面为都督，诚如明旨。
现代文：皇帝让荀勖重新考虑此事，荀勖又陈书说： 诏令探究古代诸侯挑选人才，使军队封国各随所在地为都督，那的确如同圣明的诏书所言。
English: The emperor asked the emperor to reconsider the matter, and the imperial edict said, "The imperial edict to investigate the selection of talents by ancient princes, and to make the military seal the country with each location as the governor, that is indeed as the sacred imperial edict said.

古文：至于割正封疆。使亲疏不同诚为佳矣。
现代文：至于分割封疆，使亲疏关系在封地上有所区别，也的确是好事。
English: As for the division of the fiefdoms, it is indeed a good thing to make the kinship and estrangement in the fiefdoms different.

古文：然分裂旧土，犹惧多所摇动，必使人心聪扰，思惟窃宜如前。
现代文：然而分裂旧有的郡县，仍怕产生不安定，必定使人心慌乱，我的看法还如同先前。
English: However, I still hold the same opinion as before, that splitting up the old counties and counties is still likely to create instability and is bound to make people nervous.

古文：若于事不得不时有所转封，而不至分割土域，有所损夺者，可随宜节度。
现代文：假如根据实际不得不随时有所转封，而不至于分割地域，有所变动的话，可以按时调度。
English: If, according to the actual situation, it is necessary to change the seal at any time, without dividing the region, if there is any change, it can be scheduled on time.

古文：其五等体国经远，实不成制度。
现代文：按五等爵位封国，其实不成制度。
English: According to the fifth grade peerage, the country is actually not a system.

古文：然但虚名，其于实事，略与旧郡县乡亭无异。
现代文：然而仅是虚名，究其实质，大致和旧的郡县乡亭无差别。
English: However, it is only a false name, and its essence is roughly the same as the old county township pavilion.

古文：若造次改夺，恐不能不以为恨。
现代文：如果轻易改变，恐怕产生遣憾。
English: If it's easy to change, I'm afraid there will be regrets.

古文：今方了其大者，以为五等可须后裁度。
现代文：如今大的方面已定制，五等爵位可以等以后再裁定。
English: Now the big aspects have been settled, the peerage can wait to be decided later.

古文：凡事虽有久而益善者，若临时或有不解，亦不可忽。 
现代文：凡事虽然有谋划越久越好的情况，如果一时有的不明白，也不能忽视。 
English: Although it is always better to have a plan, if you do not understand something for a while, you cannot ignore it.

古文：帝以勖言为允，多从其意。
现代文：皇帝认为荀勖的话对，多依从他的意见。
English: The emperor thought his words were right and followed his advice.

古文：时又议省州郡县半吏以赴农功，勖议以为： 省吏不如省官，省官不如省事，省事不如清心。
现代文：当时又讨论精减州郡县半数吏人去从事农业，荀勖认为：省吏不如省官，省官不如省事，省事不如无为而治。
English: At that time, it was also discussed to reduce half of the officials in counties and counties to engage in agriculture. Zou believed that: provincial officials are not as good as provincial officials, provincial officials are not as good as provincial affairs, and provincial affairs are not as good as doing nothing.

古文：昔萧曹相汉，载其清静，致画一之歌，此清心之本也。
现代文：过去萧何、曹参作漠丞相，无为而治，百姓歌唱他们的法度划一，这是清心的根本。
English: In the past, Xiao He and Cao San served as muezzin ministers, ruling without doing anything, and the people sang their law uniformly. This is the foundation of a pure heart.

古文：汉文垂拱，几致刑措，此省事也。
现代文：汉文帝无为而治，几乎使刑罚搁置不用，造就是省事。
English: Emperor Hanwen ruled by doing nothing, and almost put the punishment on hold, which saved a lot of trouble.

古文：光武并合吏员，县官国邑裁置十一，此省官也。
现代文：漠光武帝合并吏员，县官国邑减十分之一，逭就是省官。
English: Mokgwangwu Emperor combined officials, county officials and counties reduced by one-tenth, and provincial officials increased.

古文：魏太和中，遣王人四出，减天下吏员，正始中亦并合郡县，此省吏也。
现代文：魏太和年间，派遣使臣去各地，削减天下吏员，正始年间也曾合并郡县，造就是省吏。
English: During the Wei and Taiping dynasties, envoys were sent to various regions to reduce the number of bureaucrats. During the Zheng He years, counties were also merged to create provincial bureaucrats.

古文：今必欲求之于本，则宜以省事为先。
现代文：如果一定要从根本解决，就应该从省事开始。
English: If we must solve the problem from the bottom up, we should start with saving money.

古文：凡居位者，使务思萧曹之心，以翼佐大化。
现代文：凡是居官位的人，务必效法萧何、曹参之所为，来辅佐国家。
English: All those who hold official positions must follow the example of Xiao He and Cao San to assist the country.

古文：笃义行，崇敦睦，使昧宠忘本者不得容，而伪行自息，浮华者惧矣。
现代文：行仁义，重和睦，使贪宠忘本的人不被宽容，那么虚伪的行径自然止息，浮华的人感到惧怕。
English: Those who practice benevolence and righteousness, and emphasize harmony, so that those who are greedy and forgetful are not tolerated, then the hypocritical behavior will naturally cease, and the flashy people will feel afraid.

古文：重敬让，尚止足，令贱不妨贵，少不陵长，远不间亲，新不间旧，小不加大，淫不破义，则上下相安，远近相信矣。
现代文：重视恭敬谦让，崇尚知止知足，让贱不害贵，少不欺长，远不离亲，新不离旧，小不凌大，奢不失义，这就上下安心，远近信任。
English: Attaching importance to respect, modesty and concession, advocating knowledge and contentment, not harming the inferior, not deceiving the superior, not alienating the distant, not alienating the new, not alienating the old, not overpowering the small, and not losing the sense of justice, this will ensure peace of mind up and down, and trust from near and far.

古文：位不可以进趣得，誉不可以朋党求，则是非不妄而明，官人不惑于听矣。
现代文：官位不能靠趋附得到，名誉不能靠朋党营求，这样就是非分明，任官不被视听所迷惑。
English: An official position cannot be obtained by clinging, and honor cannot be sought by friends of the party. In this way, it is not clear, and the appointment of officials is not confused by audio-visual.

古文：去奇技，抑异说，好变旧以徼非常之利者必加其诛，则官业有常，人心不迁矣。
现代文：废除歪门邪道，压制异端邪说，对喜好改变现状从而求取不正常利益的人加以责罪，公务就会稳定，人心就会安定。
English: Abolish crooked doors and evil ways, suppress heresies and heresies, and punish those who seek abnormal benefits by changing the status quo, and the public affairs will be stable and the people's hearts will be stable.

古文：事留则政稽，政稽则功废。
现代文：拖延就会停滞，停滞就会荒废。
English: Procrastination leads to stagnation, and stagnation leads to waste.

古文：处位者而孜孜不怠，奉职司者而夙夜不懈，则虽在挈瓶而守不假器矣。
现代文：居官的人孜孜不倦，有职的人昼夜不懈，那么虽然官位低微也能谨慎守职。
English: Those who hold public office are tireless, and those who have a job are tireless day and night. So, even though their official rank is low, they can be cautious in their duties.

古文：使信若金石，小失不害大政，忍忿悁以容之。
现代文：使信义像金石一样坚固，小的失误不伤害大政，任劳任怨而宽容。
English: Make sincerity and righteousness as solid as a rock, small mistakes will not harm the great policy, and be tolerant of any grievances.

古文：简文案，略细苛，令之所施，必使人易视听，愿之如阳春，畏之如雷震。
现代文：简化公文案卷，省略细碎繁杂，发布的命令，一定要使人容易理解。盼望政令如盼阳春，畏惧政令如避雷震。
English: Simplify the official document file, omit the detailed and complex, and the issued order must be easy to understand. Looking forward to the decree is like looking forward to the spring, and fearing the decree is like a lightning rod.

古文：勿使微文烦挠，为百吏所黩，二三之命，为百姓所餍，则吏竭其诚，下悦上命矣。
现代文：不要让隐微不明的文辞烦扰，被百官所轻慢，不要让反覆无常的政令，被百姓讨厌，这样官吏就十分尽忠，下级乐于接受上司的命令。
English: Don't let the vaguely unclear wording bother you, don't let it be despised by hundreds of officials, and don't let the capricious decrees be hated by the people, so that officials are very loyal and subordinates are willing to accept the orders of their superiors.

古文：设官分职，委事责成。
现代文：设置官员划分职权，交付事情责求完成。
English: Set up officials to divide responsibilities, and deliver things to be completed.

古文：君子心竞而不力争，量能受任，思不出位，则官无异业，政典不奸矣。
现代文：君子争胜而不以势相争，根据能力授官，思虑不超越权位，这样官吏就不做本职以外的事，法典制度就不会败坏。
English: In this way, officials will not do things outside their duties, and the code system will not be corrupted.

古文：凡此皆愚心谓省事之本也。
现代文：上述都是我心中想到的省事之本。
English: All of the above come to my mind as a no-brainer.

古文：苟无此愆，虽不省吏，天下必谓之省矣。
现代文：假如没有上面提到的，即使不减省官吏，天下也一定认为已减省了。
English: If there is none of the above, even if the provincial officials are not reduced, the world will certainly think that the province has been reduced.

古文：若欲省官，私谓九寺可并于尚书，兰台宜省付三府。
现代文：如果想减省官吏，我认为九寺可以与尚书合并，兰台应精减归于三府。
English: If you want to reduce the number of provincial officials, I think that the nine temples can be merged with Shangshu, and Lantai should be reduced to the three provinces.

古文：然施行历代，世之所习，是以久抱愚怀而不敢言。
现代文：然而已经施行了几代，被世人习惯，因此早有这个想法而不敢说。
English: However, it has been practiced for several generations, and people are used to it, so they have had this idea for a long time and are afraid to say it.

古文：至于省事，实以为善。
现代文：至于省事，实在是好事。
English: As for saving trouble, it's really a good thing.

古文：若直作大例，皆减其半，恐文武众官郡国职业，及事之兴废，不得皆同。
现代文：假如仅仅制定大的条例，凡事都减省一半，恐怕文武百官郡国职事，以及事务的兴废。不能一概而论。
English: If we just make a big regulation and reduce everything by half, I am afraid that there will be hundreds of civil and military officials, county and state officials, and the rise and fall of affairs. It cannot be generalized.

古文：凡发号施令，典而当则安，傥有驳者，或致壅否。
现代文：凡发号施令，符合法度并且公允就安定，假如杂乱无章，会导致阻塞。
English: If the order is lawful and fair, it will be stable. If it is disorderly, it will lead to obstruction.

古文：凡职所临履，先精其得失。
现代文：凡职权内所做的事，先精审得失。
English: In all matters done within the scope of authority, the gains and losses should be carefully examined first.

古文：使忠信之官，明察之长，各裁其中，先条上言之。
现代文：让忠信之官，明察之长，各自裁决取其中，先分条上报。
English: Let the loyal officials and the chief inspectors make their own decisions and report them in separate articles.

古文：然后混齐大体，详宜所省，则令下必行，不可摇动。
现代文：然后再综合意见，详细列出应减省的事，那么命令一下必定执行，不能动摇。
English: After that, we will synthesize the opinions and make a detailed list of the things that should be reduced. Then, once the order is given, it must be implemented and cannot be shaken.

古文：如其不尔，恐适惑人听，比前行所省，皆须臾辄复，或激而滋繁，亦不可不重。 
现代文：如果不这样，恐怕会迷惑人们的视听。考核以前所减省的，都在短期内恢复，或许因而更繁杂，也不能不恢复。
English: If not, I'm afraid it will confuse people's audio-visual. All the savings made before the assessment will be restored in the short term, perhaps making it more complicated, and it must be restored.

古文：勖论议损益多此类。
现代文：荀勖议论利弊大多属这一类。
English: Most of the arguments about the pros and cons fall into this category.

古文：太康中诏曰： 勖明哲聪达，经识天序，有佐命之功，兼博洽之才。
现代文：太康年间诏书说： 苟勖明哲豁达，通晓上天的安排，有辅佐皇上的功绩，博学多闻。
English: During the Taikang era, the imperial edict said: "He is a keen scholar, open-minded, familiar with the arrangements of heaven, has supported the emperor's exploits, and is well-read.

古文：久典内任，著勋弘茂，询事考言，谋猷允诚。
现代文：长期在朝内任职，功勋显赫，咨询事情考定言论，谋划公允诚信。
English: He has served in the DPRK for a long time, and has made outstanding achievements. He consults on matters, makes judgments, and plans in a fair and honest manner.

古文：宜登大位，毗赞朝政。
现代文：应该登上高位，辅助朝政。
English: He should ascend to a high position and assist the imperial government.

古文：今以勖为光禄大夫、仪同三司、开府辟召，守中书监、侍中、侯如故。 
现代文：任命荀勖为光禄大夫、仪同三司、开府辟召，守中书监、侍中、侯依旧。 
English: He was appointed as the doctor of Guanglu, the third secretary of the Ministry of Ceremonies and Ceremonies, and the first secretary of the Ministry of Civil Affairs. He was also appointed as the inspector of books, the chamberlain, and the steward.

古文：时太尉贾充、司徒李胤并薨，太子太傅又缺，勖表陈： 三公保傅，宜得其人。
现代文：当时太尉贾充、司徒李胤都死了，太子太傅的职务又空缺。荀勖上表陈述： 三公保傅，应该有称职的人选。
English: At that time, First Lieutenant Jia Chong and Second Lieutenant Li Yin had both died, and the post of Crown Prince Taifu was vacant.  The above table states: Three public security guards, there should be a competent candidate.

古文：若使杨珧参辅东宫，必当仰称圣意。
现代文：如果让杨珧参与辅佐太子，必定能满足皇帝心意。
English: If Yang Mi is allowed to participate in assisting the crown prince, it will surely satisfy the emperor's will.

古文：尚书令卫瓘、吏部尚书山涛皆可为司徒。
现代文：尚书令卫璀、吏部尚书山涛都可为司徒。
English: Shangshu Lingwei, Libu Shangshu, and Shantao can all be Sittu.

古文：若以瓘新为令未出者，涛即其人。 
现代文：如果因为卫璀新任尚书令不便出任的话，山涛就是可任命的人。 
English: If it is inconvenient for the newly-appointed Minister of Public Security, Shang Shuling, to take office, Shantao is the person who can be appointed.

古文：帝并从之。
现代文：皇帝都依从了他。
English: Emperors obeyed him.

古文：明年秋，诸州郡大水，兗土尤甚。
现代文：第二年秋天，各州郡发大水，兖地尤其严重。
English: In the autumn of the following year, all prefectures and counties were flooded, and flooding was particularly serious.

古文：勖陈宜立都水使者。
现代文：荀勖陈述应该设都水使者。
English: The statement should be made by the water envoy.

古文：其后门下启通事令史伊羡、赵咸为舍人，对掌文法。
现代文：遣之后门下省启奏通事令史伊羡、赵咸任舍人，对答掌管法令条文。
English: After the dispatch, Shi Yisen and Zhao Xian, who were in charge of the opening and replying of the provincial government, took charge of the provisions of the law.

古文：诏以问勖，勖曰：今天下幸赖陛下圣德，六合为一，望道化隆洽，垂之将来。
现代文：诏书以此事询问荀勖，荀勖说： 如今天下有幸仰仗陛下的圣德，天下统一，期望道德教化兴盛，流传到未来。
English: The imperial edict inquired about this matter from Zou, and Zou said: If today we are fortunate enough to rely on the holiness of His Majesty, the world will be unified, and we expect moral enlightenment to flourish and spread to the future.

古文：而门下上称程咸、张恽，下称此等，欲以文法为政，皆愚臣所未达者。
现代文：而门下省首先推崇程咸、张惮，然后又称这类人，想凭着文书法令从政，这都是我不明白的。
English: But I don't understand why the province under his tutelage would first of all promote Cheng Xian and Zhang Shuo, and then also call these people, who want to be in politics by virtue of legal documents and decrees.

古文：昔张释之谏汉文，谓兽圈啬夫不宜见用；邴吉住车，明调和阴阳之本。
现代文：从前张释之劝谏汉文帝，说兽圈啬夫不应被重用；邴吉途中停车，阐明调和阴阳之本。
English: In the past, Zhang Xie advised Emperor Wen of the Han Dynasty, saying that the animal circle miser should not be reused; He Ji stopped on the way to clarify the principle of reconciling yin and yang.

古文：此二人岂不知小吏之惠，诚重惜大化也。
现代文：他们两人难道不知道小官吏的聪明吗，实在是重视化育万物啊。
English: Don't the two of them know how clever petty officials are? They really value the cultivation of all things.

古文：昔魏武帝使中军司荀攸典刑狱，明帝时犹以付内常侍。
现代文：过去魏武帝派中军司荀攸掌管刑法，明帝时仍把此任交付给内常侍。
English: In the past, Emperor Weiwu had sent the Chinese military secretary Zou You to be in charge of criminal law, but Emperor Ming still gave this position to the Inner Chamberlain.

古文：以臣所闻，明帝时唯有通事刘泰等官，不过与殿中同号耳。
现代文：据我所知，明帝时惟有通事刘泰等官，不过与殿中称呼相同罢了。
English: As far as I know, there were only officials such as Liu Tai in Ming Dynasty, but they were called by the same name as those in the palace.

古文：又顷言论者皆云省官减事，而求益吏者相寻矣。
现代文：再说近来论说的人都说要省官员减事务，然而请求增加官吏的也连续不断。
English: Moreover, recently, people have been talking about reducing the number of provincial officials, but there have also been continuous requests to increase the number of officials.

古文：多云尚书郎太令史不亲文书，乃委付书令史及干，诚吏多则相倚也。
现代文：都说尚书郎太令史不亲自管文书，而交付书令史办理，实在是因为官吏多了就相互依赖。
English: It is said that Shang Shulang did not personally manage the documents, but the delivery of the documents was handled by Shulang Shi, because there were more officials and they depended on each other.

古文：增置文法之职，适恐更耗扰台阁，臣窃谓不可。 
现代文：增置掌管法令条文的官职，恐怕更烦扰台合，我认为不可行。 
English: I think it is not feasible to add an official position in charge of the provisions of laws and regulations, which may further disturb Taiwan-China relations.

古文：时帝素知太子暗弱，恐后乱国，遣勖及和峤往观之。
现代文：当时皇帝早就知道太子愚昧软弱，恐怕日后搞乱国家，派荀勖及和娇前去观察太子。
English: At that time, the emperor had already known that the prince was stupid and weak, and he was afraid that he would mess up the country in the future, so he sent Gao and He Jiao to observe the prince.

古文：勖还盛称太子之德，而峤云太子如初。于是天下贵峤而贱勖。
现代文：荀勖回来后盛赞太子的品德，而和娇说太子和以前一样于是天下尊重和崤而看不起荀勖。
English: After Yao came back, he praised the prince's virtue, but the world respected and despised Yao, just as it did with Jiao and the prince.

古文：帝将废贾妃，勖与冯紞等谏请，故得不废。
现代文：皇帝将要废买妃，荀勖与冯鱿等人劝谏，因而未废。
English: The emperor was going to abolish the imperial concubine, and Zou and Feng Yu and others persuaded Zou, so it was not abolished.

古文：时议以勖倾国害时，孙资、刘放之匹。
现代文：当时的议论认为苟勖倾覆国家危害时政，与孙资、刘放是一类人。
English: At that time, it was argued that Gou Gan's overthrow of the state was harmful to current politics, and that he was in the same category as Sun Zi and Liu Fang.

古文：然性慎密，每有诏令大事，虽已宣布，然终不言，不欲使人知己豫闻也。
现代文：然而荀勖性情缜密，每当有诏令大事，虽然已经宣布，但他始终不提及，不愿使别人知道自己事先就知道了。
English: However, because of his meticulous nature, whenever there was an important edict, although it had been announced, he never mentioned it, not wanting others to know that he knew about it in advance.

古文：族弟良曾劝勖曰： 公大失物情，有所进益者自可语之，则怀恩多矣。 
现代文：同族兄弟萄良曾劝苟勖说： 你太不近人情了，有关提拔进升的事自然可以对别人说，那么心怀感激的就多了。 
English: Fellow brother Zhu Liang once advised Gong Liang: "You are too impersonal. You can naturally tell others about your promotion and advancement, so you should be more grateful."

古文：其婿武统亦说勖 宜有所营置，令有归戴者 。
现代文：他女婿武统也劝荀勖 应该有所安排，使得有归附拥戴的人 。
English: His son-in-law, Wu Tong, also advised him that arrangements should be made so that there are people who are attached to and support him.

古文：勖并默然不应，退而语诸子曰： 人臣不密则失身，树私则背公，是大戒也。
现代文：荀勖都沉默不回答，事后对几个儿子说： 当臣的不守秘密是不忠，树立私情就会背公，这是大戒。
English: Xingdu remained silent and did not answer, and later said to several sons: "If a vassal does not keep secrets, he is disloyal. If he establishes personal feelings, he will betray the public interest. This is a great commandment."

古文：汝等亦当宦达人间，宜识吾此意。 
现代文：你们也将在人间做官，应懂得我的意思。 
English: You will also hold office on earth, you should understand what I mean.

古文：久之，以勖守尚书令。
现代文：很久以后，任荀勖守尚书令。
English: A long time later, he was appointed to the post of governor-general.

古文：勖久在中书，专管机事。
现代文：荀勖长期在中书，专管机要大事。
English: Long-term in the Chinese book, the special management machine is very important.

古文：及失之，甚罔罔怅恨。
现代文：等到失去中书的职位，很是惘然遣憾。
English: It is with great regret that I have lost my position at Zhongshu.

古文：或有贺之者，勖曰： 夺我凤皇池，诸君贺我邪！ 
现代文：也有向荀勖祝贺的，荀勖说： 夺去了我的凤凰池，你们还祝贺我! 
English: There were also those who congratulated the dragonfly. The dragonfly said, "You have taken away my phoenix pond, and you still congratulate me!

古文：及在尚书，课试令史以下，核其才能，有暗于文法，不能决疑处事者，即时遣出。
现代文：等到在尚书省任职，检查考试令史以下的官吏，考核他们的能力，有不明法令条文，不能解决疑难事情的，立即打发走。
English: Wait until they take office in Shangshu Province, check the officials who are below the history of the examination, assess their ability, have unclear laws and regulations, can not solve difficult things, and immediately send them away.

古文：帝尝谓曰： 魏武帝言 荀文若之进善，不进不止；荀公达之退恶，不退不休 。二令君之美，亦望于君也。 
现代文：皇帝曾对他说： 魏武帝说 荀文若举荐能人，不达目的不罢休；荀公达斥退恶人，不达目的不罢休，二位贤君的美德，也能在你身上看到。 
English: The emperor once said to him: Emperor Wu of Wei said, "If you recommend a capable person, do not stop if it does not achieve the goal; if you expel a wicked person, do not stop if it does not achieve the goal; the virtues of the two wise men can also be seen in you.

古文：居职月余，以母忧上还印绶，帝不许。
现代文：在职一个多月，因为母亲去世上交印绶，皇帝不允许。
English: He had been in office for more than a month, but because of his mother's death, he was not allowed by the emperor to submit the imperial seal.

古文：遣常侍周恢喻旨，勖乃奉诏视职。
现代文：派常侍周恢宣旨，荀勖便奉命治政。
English: He sent his aide-de-camp Zhou Jiao to issue an edict, and Zou was ordered to govern.

古文：勖久管机密，有才思，探得人主微旨，不犯颜忤争，故得始终全其宠禄。
现代文：荀勖长期管理机要大事，有才气，能推测到国君隐微的想法，不触犯国君违旨相争，因而能始终保全他的地位俸禄。
English: Long-term management machine is important, talented, can speculate on the subtle thoughts of the sovereign, and does not violate the sovereign's order, so he can always maintain his status and salary.

古文：太康十年卒，诏赠司徒，赐东园秘器、朝服一具、钱五十万、布百匹。
现代文：太康十年去世，下韶追赠司徒，赐高贵棺木、朝服一套、钱五十万、布一百匹。
English: When Taikang died ten years later, he bequeathed a noble coffin, a set of imperial robes, five hundred thousand yuan and one hundred pieces of cloth to the scholar.

古文：遣兼御史持节护丧，谥曰成。
现代文：派兼御史持节护丧，谧号成。
English: The group also held a memorial service on the Imperial History Memorial Day, and his posthumous name was inscribed.

古文：勖有十子，其达者辑、籓、组。
现代文：荀勖有十个儿子，其中显赫的有荀辑、荀藩、荀组。
English: He had ten sons, among whom the prominent ones were Gongzhi, Gonghan, and Gonggu.

古文：辑嗣，官至卫尉。
现代文：荀辑继嗣，官至卫尉。
English: He was the successor of Kaji and rose to the rank of lieutenant of guards.

古文：卒，谥曰简。
现代文：死后，谧号简。
English: After her death, her nickname was Jane.

古文：子畯嗣。
现代文：儿子荀峻继嗣。
English: His son, Shunjun, became his successor.

古文：卒，谥曰烈。
现代文：死后，谧号烈。
English: After his death, his fame spread.

古文：无嫡子，以弟息识为嗣。
现代文：没有嫡子，让弟弟的儿子苟识继嗣。
English: If there is no legitimate son, let the younger brother's son find a successor.

古文：辑子绰。
现代文：荀辑还有个儿子荀绰。
English: Gongzhi also has a son, Gongzhuo.

古文：绰字彦舒，博学有才能，撰《晋后书》十五篇，传于世。
现代文：荀绰字彦舒，博学多才，撰《晋后书》十五篇，流传于世。
English: He was known as Yan Shu and was a polymath. He wrote 15 articles of the "Book of Promotion," which have been passed down to the world.

古文：永嘉末，为司空从事中郎，没于石勒，为勒参军。
现代文：永嘉末年，任司空从事中郎，被石勒俘获，任石勒的参军。
English: At the end of Yongjia's life, he was assigned to be a middle-ranking official, and was captured by Shi Le, who was forced to join the army.

古文：籓字大坚。
现代文：籓蘑字大坚。
English: 菇字大坚.

古文：元康中，为黄门侍郎，受诏成父所治钟磬。
现代文：元康年间，任黄门侍郎，接受诏书完成父亲研究的钟磬。
English: During the Yuan and Kang dynasties, he served as a Yellow Gate chamberlain, and received an imperial edict to complete his father's research on Zhong Xi.

古文：以从驾讨齐王冏勋，封西华县公。
现代文：因为跟从皇帝讨伐齐王司马冈的功勋，被封为西华县公。
English: Because of his meritorious service in following the emperor in the crusade against King Sima Gang, he was made the governor of Xihua County.

古文：累迁尚书令。
现代文：逐渐升迁任尚书令。
English: He was gradually promoted to the post of Shang Shuling.

古文：永嘉末，转司空，未拜而洛阳陷没，籓出奔密。
现代文：永嘉末年，转任司空，还未上任而洛阳陷落，荀藩出逃投奔到密。
English: At the end of Yongjia's life, he was transferred to the position of Siku, but before he took office, Luoyang fell, and he fled from the Han Dynasty to the Ming Dynasty.

古文：王浚承制，奉籓为留台太尉。
现代文：王浚秉承旨意，尊奉荀藩为留台太尉。
English: Wang Jun adhered to the will, and became the second lieutenant of the Han Dynasty.

古文：及愍帝为太子，委籓督摄远近。
现代文：愍帝作了太子，委任荀藩监督远近之官。
English: Emperor Yao became the crown prince and appointed the overseer of the Yao Domain as the official of the far and near.

古文：建兴元年薨于开封，年六十九，因葬亡所。
现代文：建兴元年死于开封，时年六十九岁，于是葬在去世的地方。
English: Jian Xing died in Kaifeng in the first year of the year, at the age of sixty-nine, and was buried in the place where he died.

古文：谥曰成，追赠太保。
现代文：谧号成，追赠太保。
English: He received the posthumous title of Taibo.

古文：籓二子：邃、闿。
现代文：荀藩有两个儿子：荀邃、荀阖。
English: The Yan clan had two sons: Yan and Wu.

古文：邃字道玄，解音乐，善谈论。
现代文：荀邃字道玄，懂音乐，善谈论。
English: He is a scholar of Taoism, knows music, and is good at talking.

古文：弱冠辟赵王伦相国掾，迁太子洗马。
现代文：二十岁左右被征召为赵王司马伦相国掾，升任太子洗马。
English: Around the age of twenty, he was called up to serve as Zhao Wang Sima Lun's minister of state and was promoted to prince.

古文：长沙王乂以为参军。
现代文：长沙王司马义任命他为参军。
English: Changsha King Sima Yi appointed him to join the army.

古文：乂败，成都王为皇太弟，精选僚属，以邃为中舍人。
现代文：司马义失败，成都王是皇太弟，精选幕僚，任命苟邃为中舍人。
English: Sima Yi failed, Chengdu Wang was the emperor's younger brother, selected staff members, and appointed Gou Ye as the mediator.

古文：鄴城不守，随籓在密。
现代文：邺城失守，跟随荀藩在密。
English: Shicheng lost, followed by Shifang in secret.

古文：元帝召为丞相从事中郎，以道险不就。
现代文：元帝召他为丞相从事中郎，因为路途艰险没有去就职。
English: Emperor Yuan called him to be the middle son of the prime minister, but he did not take up the post because of the difficult journey.

古文：愍帝就加左将军、陈留相。
现代文：愍帝随即加封他为左将军、陈留相。
English: Emperor Qian then promoted him to General of the Left, Chen Ruxiang.

古文：父忧去职，服阕，袭封。
现代文：父亲死后辞职，服丧完毕，继承封爵。
English: After his father's death, he resigned, and after the funeral, he inherited the title of knight.

古文：愍帝欲纳邃女，先征为散骑常侍。
现代文：愍帝想娶荀邃的女儿，先征苟邃为散骑常侍。
English: Emperor Yao wanted to marry Yao's daughter, so he first recruited Guo Yao as a horseback riding attendant.

古文：邃惧西都危逼，故不应命，而东渡江，元帝以为军谘祭酒。
现代文：荀邃怕西都凶险，因而不接受任命，而东渡长江，元帝任命他为军谘祭酒。
English: He was afraid of the dangers in the west, so he did not accept the appointment, but when he went to the Yangtze River in the east, Emperor Yuan appointed him as a military adviser.

古文：太兴初，拜侍中。
现代文：太兴初年，官拜侍中。
English: At the beginning of the Taiko era, he was a courtier and a junior high school student.

古文：邃与刁协婚亲，时协执权，欲以邃为吏部尚书，邃深距之。
现代文：荀邃与刁协是姻亲，当时刁协掌握大权，想让荀邃作吏部尚书，荀邃坚决拒绝。
English: Yu and Yu Xie were in-laws. At that time, Yu Xie held great power and wanted to make Yu Xie head of the personnel department. Yu Xie resolutely refused.

古文：寻而王敦讨协，协党与并及于难，唯邃以疏协获免。
现代文：不久王墓讨伐王坦，王协的同党都遭了难，惟有苞邃因为疏远刁协而获免。
English: Wang Tang was soon defeated by Wang He, and all of Wang Xie's co-partisans suffered hardships. Only Zou was spared because he had alienated Zi Xie.

古文：敦表为廷尉，以疾不拜。
现代文：王敦上表请封荀邃为廷尉，荀邃以有病为由不接受。
English: Wang Dun asked the court to appoint him as a courtier, but he refused on the grounds that he was ill.

古文：迁太常，转尚书。
现代文：升任太常，转任尚书。
English: Promoted to Taizang, transferred to Shangshu.

古文：苏峻作乱，邃与王导、荀崧并侍天子于石头。
现代文：曲堕作乱，苞邃舆王遵、苞盛一同在亘玺侍奉天子。
English: The music falls into disorder, and King Jun and King Sheng serve the Son of Heaven together in eternity.

古文：峻平后卒，赠金紫光禄大夫，谥曰靖。
现代文：苏峻被平定后去世，赠金紫光禄大夫，谧号靖。
English: After Su Jun was subdued, he died and was given the title of Jin Ziguanglu Doctor and the posthumous name of Jing.

古文：子汪嗣。
现代文：儿子苟汪继嗣。
English: His son, Gou Wang, became his successor.

古文：闿字道明，亦有名称，京都为之语曰： 洛中英英荀道明。 
现代文：闿字道明，也有名望，京都称颂他说： 盗中精英荀道明。 
English: He is also famous and praised by Kyoto, who said, "He is the most elite thief in China."

古文：大司马、齐王冏辟为掾。
现代文：大司马、变王司马同征他为属官。
English: Dai Sima and Zeng Wang Sima enlisted with him as subordinate officers.

古文：冏败，暴尸已三日，莫敢收葬。
现代文：司马同失败，尸体暴露在外三天，没人敢收葬。
English: Sima Tong failed, the body was exposed for three days, and no one dared to bury it.

古文：闿与冏故吏李述、嵇含等露板请葬，朝议听之，论者称焉。
现代文：苟合与司马冈过去的属吏李述、嵇含等公开上疏请求下葬，朝廷议论依从了他们，评论此事的人称赞他们。
English: Gonghe and Simao Gang's former subordinate officials, Li Shu and Zou Han, publicly requested to be buried. The imperial court complied with them, and the commentators praised them.

古文：为太傅主簿、中书郎。
现代文：任太傅主簿、中书郎。
English: He served as Taifu's chief secretary and Chushuro.

古文：与邃俱渡江，拜丞相军谘祭酒。
现代文：与荀邃都渡过垦辽，官拜丞相军谘祭酒。
English: They both crossed the Jiaoliao River, and the officials asked the prime minister and the army for the ceremonial wine.

古文：中兴建，迁右军将军，转少府。
现代文：中兴开始，升任右军将军，转任少府。
English: He was promoted to General of the Right Army and transferred to the position of Junior Prefect.

古文：明帝尝从容问王暠曰： 二荀兄弟孰贤？ 
现代文：明帝曾不动声色地问王廛说： 两位董压兄弟谁贤能? 
English: Emperor Ming once calmly asked Wang Xi, "Who are the two Dong brothers?

古文：暠答以闿才明过邃。
现代文：茎廛以苞膶的才能聪明超过荀邃作了回答。
English: The stem warbler replied that the warbler was cleverer than the grasshopper.

古文：帝以语庾亮，亮曰： 邃真粹之地，亦闿所不及。 
现代文：皇帝把逭话对庾亮说，座亳说： 萤邃纯真之处，也是苞周所比不上的。 
English: The emperor told Luo Liang what Luo Liang had said, and Luo Za said: "Luo Liang's innocence is incomparable to that of Luo Zhou.

古文：由是议者莫能定其兄弟优劣。
现代文：因此议论的人没人能确定兄弟二人的优劣。
English: Therefore, no one can determine the relative merits of the two brothers.

古文：历御史中丞、侍中、尚书，封射阳公。
现代文：历任御史中丞、侍中、尚书，封爵为挝区公。
English: He was successively appointed to goshi chujo, samurai chujo, and shoshu, and was knighted as the governor of Laos.

古文：太宁二年卒，追赠卫尉，谥曰定。
现代文：友宁二年去世，追赠卫尉，谧号宣。
English: Tomonin died two years later and was posthumously awarded the rank of Lieutenant of the Imperial Guard, with the posthumous name of Xuan.

古文：子达嗣。
现代文：儿子董达继嗣。
English: His son Dong Da succeeded him.

古文：组字大章。
现代文：组字大章。
English: The grouping of characters is a large chapter.

古文：弱冠，太尉王衍见而称之曰： 夷雅有才识。 
现代文：二十岁左右，太尉王蛮见到他称赞说： 文雅有才识。 
English: When he was around twenty years old, the eunuch Wang Man saw him and praised him, saying, "He is refined and talented."

古文：初为司徒左西属，补太子舍人。
现代文：起初任司徒左西属，补任太子舍人。
English: At first, he was assigned to the Western Branch of the Left Division of the Inner Palace Guards, and was later appointed to the position of Crown Prince.

古文：司徒王浑请为从事中郎，转左长史，历太子中庶子、荥阳太守。
现代文：司徒工运请他任从事中郎，转任左长史，历任太子中庶子、荥阳太守。
English: Szeto Workers' Movement asked him to serve as a middle-ranking official, and he was transferred to the position of Left Long History. He was an illegitimate child of successive crown princes, and became the governor of Shenyang.

古文：赵王伦为相国，欲收大名，选海内德望之士，以江夏李重及组为左右长史，东平王堪沛国刘谟为左右司马。
现代文：赵王司马伦作相国，想获取好名声，选择国内有德行的人，让江夏李重和荀组任左右长史，东平王堪、沛国刘谟任左右司马。
English: Zhao Wang Sima Lun, as a neighboring country, wanted to gain a good reputation and choose a person with domestic virtue, so that Jiangxia Li Chong and Yu Gui served as the left and right long history, Dongping Wang Kan and Pei Gu Liu Moo served as the left and right Sima.

古文：伦篡，以组为侍中。
现代文：司马伦篡位，让荀组任侍中。
English: Smalen usurped the position, and let Gong Gui serve as an aide-de-camp.

古文：及长沙王乂败，惠帝遣组及散骑常侍闾丘冲诣成都王颖，慰劳其军。
现代文：长沙王司马义失败，惠帝派荀组及散骑常侍间丘冲到成都王司马颖那裹，慰劳他的军队。
English: After the defeat of Wang Sima Yi in Changsha, Emperor Hui sent a troop of horses and cavalry to rush to Chengdu to comfort Wang Sima Yingna and his army.

古文：帝西幸长安，以组为河南尹。
现代文：皇帝西至长安，让荀组任河南尹。
English: Emperor Xizong went to Chang'an, and let Gong set up Henan Yin.

古文：迁尚书，转卫尉，赐爵成阳县男，加散骑常侍、中书监。
现代文：升任尚书，转任卫尉，赐成阳县男的爵位，加散骑常侍、中书监。
English: He was promoted to Shangshu, transferred to the position of Lieutenant of the Guards, given the title of the son of Chengyang County, and was given the additional titles of Sanzhiyi attendant and middle school librarian.

古文：转司隶校尉，加特进、光禄大夫，常侍如故。
现代文：转任司隶校尉，加特进、光禄大夫，常侍依旧。
English: He was reassigned to the positions of captain of the brigade, captain of the brigade, captain of the brigade, captain of the brigade, captain of the brigade.

古文：于时天下已乱，组兄弟贵盛，惧不容于世，虽居大官，并讽议而已。
现代文：那时天下已乱，荀组兄弟显贵兴盛，害怕不容于时，所以虽居高官，仅劝谏议论而已。
English: At that time, the whole country was in turmoil, and the brothers of the Yan group were prominent and prosperous. They were afraid that the time was not right, so although they were high-ranking officials, they only advised and discussed.

古文：永嘉末，复以组为侍中，领太子太保。
现代文：永嘉末年，又以组为侍中，兼太子太保。
English: At the end of Yongjia's life, he also served as an aide-de-camp to Kumi, and was also the prince's bodyguard.

古文：未拜，会刘曜、王弥逼洛阳，组与籓俱出奔。
现代文：未就任，适逢刘曜、王弥进逼洛阳，组与籓都出奔。
English: Before taking office, Liu You and Wang Ya entered Luoyang at the right time, and the group and Zou all ran away.

古文：怀帝蒙尘，司空王浚以组为司隶校尉。
现代文：怀帝蒙难，司空王浚让组作司隶校尉。
English: With Emperor Huai in trouble, Sikuo Wangjun relinquished his position as captain to the rest of the group.

古文：组与籓移檄天下，以琅邪王为盟主。
现代文：组与籓迁移送檄文，以琅邪王为盟主。
English: The group and the dragonfly migrated to send the message, with the dragonfly evil king as the leader.

古文：愍帝称皇太子，组即太子之舅，又领司隶校尉，行豫州刺史事，与籓并保荥阳之开封。
现代文：愍帝称皇太子时，荀组就是太子的舅舅，又兼任司隶校尉，行豫州刺史事，与荀藩一同保卫荣阳郡的开封。
English: When Emperor Qian was called the crown prince, the Qigong group was the prince's uncle, and also served as the lieutenant of the division, and carried out the historical affairs of Henan Province, and defended the opening of Rongyang County with the Qigong clan.

古文：建兴初，诏籓行留台事。
现代文：建兴初年，诏任荀藩行留台事。
English: In the first year of the reconstruction, he resigned from the Shih clan to stay in Taiwan.

古文：俄而籓薨，帝更以组为司空，领尚书左仆射，又兼司隶，复行留台事，州征郡守皆承制行焉。
现代文：不久荀藩死，皇帝又以荀组为司空，领尚书左仆射，又兼司隶，又行留台事，州郡的征伐守卫都由他根据旨意行事。
English: Soon after the death of the Yan clan, the emperor appointed the Yan group as the secretary of the sky, led by Shangshu Zuopuzha, and also the secretary and subordinate, and also carried out the matter of remaining in Taiwan. The conquest and guard of the state and county were all carried out by him according to his will.

古文：进封临颍县公，加太夫人、世子印绶。
现代文：进封为临颖县公，授太夫人、世子印绶。
English: Jinfeng was Linying County's prince, conferred the title of grand duchess, and became the heir to the throne.

古文：明年，进位太尉，领豫州牧、假节。
现代文：第二年，进位为太尉，兼豫州牧、假节。
English: In the second year, he was promoted to the rank of first lieutenant, and also served as the pastor of Yuzhou and the head of the holiday.

古文：元帝承制，以组都督司州诸军，加散骑常侍，余如故。
现代文：元帝秉承旨意，任命荀组都督司州诸军，加散骑常侍，其他职位依旧。
English: In accordance with the will of the Yuan Emperor, he appointed Yu Gui as the governor of the capital, the governor of the state and the army, and the non-commissioned officers, the other positions are still the same.

古文：顷之，又除尚书令，表让不拜。
现代文：不久，又任命他为尚书令，上表辞让不就职。
English: Not long after, he was appointed to the post of Shang Shuling, and the above expression of resignation did not take office.

古文：及西都不守，组乃遣使移檄天下共劝进。
现代文：西都失守，荀组派遣使节在全国传送檄文劝元帝即帝位。
English: The western capital was lost, and the imperial group sent envoys across the country to convey the imperial edict to persuade the Yuan emperor to ascend the throne.

古文：帝欲以组为司徒，以问太常贺循。
现代文：皇帝想任命荀组为司徒，以此事问太常贺循。
English: The emperor wanted to appoint Xinggui as a tutor, so he often inquired about this.

古文：循曰： 组旧望清重，忠勤显著，迁训五品，实允众望。 
现代文：贺循说： 荀组名重忠诚，功绩显著，升任他教诲五常，实在是众望所归。 
English: He Xun said: "He Gu was famous for his loyalty and outstanding achievements. He was promoted to the position of the five permanent teachers. He is truly a man of great expectations.

古文：于是拜组为司徒。
现代文：于是任荀组为司徒。
English: As a result, Ren Yao group became the leader.

古文：组逼于石勒，不能自立。
现代文：荀组被石勒逼迫，不能自立。
English: This group was persecuted by Shi Le and could not stand on its own.

古文：太兴初，自许昌率其属数百人渡江，给千兵百骑，组先所领仍皆统摄。
现代文：太兴初年，从许昌率领他的部属几百人渡江，给他千名兵士百匹战马，荀组先前所率领的人仍全部由他统辖。
English: In the first year of Taixing, he led several hundred of his subordinates from Xu Chang to cross the river and gave him a thousand soldiers and a hundred horses. The people who had previously led the group were still under his control.

古文：顷之，诏组与太保、西阳王羕并录尚书事，各加班剑六十人。
现代文：不久，诏令荀组与西阳王司马莱同为绿尚书事，各加佩剑仪仗六十人。
English: Not long after, Zhaoringshan group and Xiyang Wang Sima Lai were jointly awarded the title of "Green and Honorable," with each adding 60 people to the ceremonial sword.

古文：永昌初，迁太尉，领太子太保。
现代文：永昌初年，升太尉，领太子太保。
English: In the first year of Yongchang, he was promoted to the rank of captain and became the prince's bodyguard.

古文：未拜，薨，年六十五。
现代文：未就职，去世，时年六十五岁。
English: He died before taking office at the age of sixty-five.

古文：谥曰元。
现代文：谧号元。
English: 号元.

古文：子奕嗣。
现代文：儿子荀奕继嗣。
English: His son, Zou Yi, became his successor.

古文：奕字玄欣。
现代文：荀奕字玄欣。
English: 奕字玄欣.

古文：少拜太子舍人、驸马都尉，侍讲东宫。
现代文：年轻时官拜太子舍人、驸马都尉，在东宫侍讲。
English: When he was young, he served as an attendant to the crown prince and the lieutenant of the imperial horse, and lectured at the East Palace.

古文：出为镇东参军，行扬武将军、新汲令。
现代文：出任镇束参军，行扬武将军、新汲令。
English: Zhenzuk joined the army, and was promoted to Yangwu General and Xinqiu Commander.

古文：愍帝为皇太子，召为中舍人，寻拜散骑侍郎，皆不就。
现代文：愍帝为皇太子，召他为中舍人，不久任散骑侍郎，都不就任。
English: Emperor Shun was the crown prince, he was called the middle son, and he was soon appointed as a horseman, but he did not take office.

古文：随父渡江。
现代文：跟随父亲渡江。
English: He followed his father across the river.

古文：元帝践阼，拜中庶子，迁给事黄门郎。
现代文：元帝登上皇位，拜为中庶子，升任给事黄门郎。
English: The former emperor ascended the throne, and Bae, the middle child, was promoted to the position of crown prince.

古文：父忧去职，服阕，补散骑常侍、侍中。
现代文：因父亲丧事离任，服丧完毕，补任散骑常侍、侍中。
English: Due to the death of his father, he left his post, and after the funeral, he was appointed as a horseback riding attendant and a chamberlain.

古文：时将缮宫城，尚书符下陈留王，使出城夫。奕驳曰： 昔虞宾在位，《书》称其美；《诗》咏《有客》，载在《雅》《颂》。
现代文：当时将要修缮宫城，尚书向陈留王下发符节，让他出修城的劳役，荀奕驳议说： 从前虞相让其位，《尚书》称颂以德相让的美德；《诗经》中的《有客》，记载在《雅》、《颂》中。
English: At that time, the palace city was going to be repaired. Shangshu sent a festival of charms to Chen Liu Wang, asking him to serve as a laborer to repair the city. Zou Yi objected and said: From the past, Gu Xiang gave up his position. "Shangshu" extolled the virtue of giving up virtue; "There is a guest" in the "Book of Songs" was recorded in "Ya" and "Ode."

古文：今陈留王位在三公之上，坐在太子右，故答表曰书，赐物曰与。
现代文：如今陈留王地位在三公之上，位次比太子高，因而答表叫作书，赏赐物品称为与。
English: Nowadays, Chen Liu Wang's status is higher than that of the three princes, and his rank is higher than that of the prince. Therefore, the answer sheet is called a book, and the reward items are called gifts.

古文：此古今之所崇，体国之高义也。
现代文：这是古今都崇尚的，是治国的大义。
English: This is what has been advocated from ancient times to the present, and it is the great justice of governing the country.

古文：谓宜除夫役。 
现代文：我认为应除去劳役。 
English: I think we should get rid of the draft.

古文：时尚书张闿、仆射孔愉难奕，以为： 昔宋不城周，《阳秋》所讥。
现代文：当时尚书张阖、仆射孔愉反驳荀奕，认为： 从前宋不为周筑城，被《春秋》讥讽。
English: At that time, the poet Zhang Ye and his acolyte Xie Kongyun refuted Zou Yi, saying: It was not Zhou who built the city in the former Song Dynasty, which was ridiculed by "Spring and Autumn."

古文：特蠲非体，宜应减夫。 
现代文：免除劳役不符体制，可以减少役夫数目。 
English: Exemption from labor service does not conform to the system, can reduce the number of servants.

古文：奕重驳，以为： 《阳秋》之末，文武之道将坠于地，新有子朝之乱，于时诸侯逋替，莫肯率职。
现代文：苟奕又反驳，认为： 《春秋》之末，文王、武王的道义将要败坏，又有子朝的作乱，当时诸侯混战，没人肯遵循职守。
English: Gou Yi also refuted, saying that: At the end of "Spring and Autumn," the morality of King Wen and King Wu will be corrupted, and there will be chaos caused by the Zi Dynasty. At that time, the princes were fighting, and no one was willing to follow their duties.

古文：宋之于周，实有列国之权。
现代文：宋对于周来说，实际有列国之权。
English: As far as Zhou was concerned, the Song Dynasty actually had the power to rule over other countries.

古文：且同巳勤王而主之者晋，客而辞役，责之可也。
现代文：况且宋追随了勤王的晋并奉晋为盟主，作为客而推辞劳役，指责它是可以的。
English: Moreover, Song followed the king-loving Jin and followed Jin as the commander-in-chief. As a guest, he refused to perform labor service, and it is possible to criticize him.

古文：今之陈留，无列国之势，此之作否，何益有无！
现代文：如今的陈留王，没有列国的权势，让他派劳役，有什么好处呢?
English: Today's Chen Liu Wang does not have the power of the nations, so what is the benefit of letting him send laborers?

古文：臣以为宜除，于国职为全。 
现代文：我认为应该免除，这样对于国家职权是完美的。 
English: I think there should be an exemption, that would be perfect for a national mandate.

古文：诏从之。
现代文：韶书依从了他。
English: He complied.

古文：时又通议元会日帝应敬司徒王导不。
现代文：当时又共同议论元旦朝会那天皇帝是否应当礼敬司徒王导。
English: At that time, they also discussed together whether the emperor should pay respects to the disciple Wang Du on the day of the New Year's Day imperial meeting.

古文：博士郭熙、杜援等以为礼无拜臣之文，谓宜除敬。
现代文：博士郭熙、杜援等人认为礼仪中没有君拜臣的记载，说应当免除行礼。
English: Dr. Guo Xi, Du Yuan and others believe that there is no record of the prince bowing to the minister in the etiquette, saying that the salute should be exempted.

古文：侍中冯怀议曰： 天子修礼，莫盛于辟雍。
现代文：侍中冯怀议论说： 天子制定礼仪，没有比建学礼仪更盛大的了。
English: Attendant Feng Huai commented: There is nothing more grand than establishing a school of etiquette.

古文：当尔之日，犹拜三老，况今先帝师傅。
现代文：在那一天，还要拜三老，何况是先帝的师傅。
English: On that day, you also have to bow to the Three Elders, not to mention the former emperor's master.

古文：谓宜尽敬。 
现代文：我认为应当极尽恭敬。 
English: I think it should be treated with the utmost respect.

古文：事下门下，奕议曰： 三朝之首，宜明君臣之体，则不应敬。
现代文：事情交到门下省，荀奕议论说： 元旦的朝会，应该明确君臣的礼节，因而不该以君敬臣。
English: The matter was handed over to the subordinate province, and Zou Yi argued: The New Year's Day imperial court should clarify the etiquette of the monarchs and ministers, and therefore should not honor the monarchs and ministers.

古文：若他日小会，自可尽礼。
现代文：如果是其他日子的朝会，自然可以尽礼。
English: If it is a morning meeting on other days, it is natural to bow.

古文：又至尊与公书手诏则曰 顿首言 ，中书为诏则云 敬问 ，散骑优册则曰： 制命 。今诏文尚异，况大会之与小会，理岂得同！ 
现代文：此外帝王给公手诏时说 顿首言 ，中书之诏书则说 敬问 ，散骑册命时则说 制命，如今诏书行文尚且有区别，何况大朝会与小朝会，按理怎么能相同呢？ 
English: In addition, when the emperor gave the imperial edict to the court, he said, "The first word," the imperial edict of the middle book said, "Respectfully," and when the imperial edict of the cavalry was issued, it said, "Order." Nowadays, there are still differences in the wording of the imperial edict, not to mention the difference between the Great Imperial Council and the Small Imperial Council. How can they be the same?

古文：诏从之。
现代文：下韶依从了他。
English: He complied.

古文：咸和七年卒，追赠太仆，谥曰定。
现代文：咸和七年死，追赠太仆，谧号定。
English: Xianhe died seven years later and was posthumously awarded the title of Great Servant.

古文：冯紞，字少胄，安平人也。
现代文：冯鱿字少胄，安平人。
English: Feng Xuan was a minor official and an ordinary person.

古文：祖浮，魏司隶校尉。
现代文：祖父冯浮，是魏司隶校尉。
English: His grandfather, Feng Fu, was a lieutenant of Wei Sili.

古文：父员，汲郡太守。
现代文：父亲冯员，是汲郡太守。
English: His father, Feng Jian, was the governor of Ku County.

古文：紞少博涉经史，识悟机辩。
现代文：冯鱿少年时广读经书史籍，聪明善辩。
English: When he was a boy, Feng Jun read widely from scriptures and historical books. He was clever and good at debate.

古文：历仕为魏郡太守，转步兵校尉，徙越骑。
现代文：历任魏郡太守，转步兵校尉，调任越骑。
English: Successive Wei County Governor, turned infantry captain, transferred to Yueqi.

古文：得幸于武帝，稍迁左卫将军。
现代文：受到武帝重用，不久升任左卫将军。
English: He was heavily used by Emperor Wu and was soon promoted to General of the Left Division.

古文：承颜悦色，宠爱日隆。贾充、荀勖并与之亲善。
现代文：能顺承取悦皇上，宠爱有加，贾充、荀勖都和他亲善。
English: He was able to please the emperor, and was well-liked. Jia Chong and Zou were all on friendly terms with him.

古文：充女之为皇太子妃也，紞有力焉。
现代文：贾充的女儿作皇太妃，冯鱿在这件事上出了力。
English: As the daughter of Jia Chong, the Empress Dowager, Feng Yu exerted his strength in this matter.

古文：及妃之将废，紞、勖干没救请，故得不废。
现代文：贾妃将要被废时，冯鱿、荀勖竭力救助，因而没有被废。
English: When Jiafei was about to be abolished, Feng Yu and Zou Zeng tried their best to save her, so she was not abolished.

古文：伐吴之役，紞领汝南太守，以郡兵随王浚入秣陵。
现代文：伐吴之战，冯鱿兼汝南太守，带郡兵跟随王浚进入秣陵。
English: In the Battle of Faw Wu, Feng Xuan, the governor of Yunnan, led the county soldiers to follow Wang Jun into Fuling.

古文：迁御史中丞，转侍中。
现代文：升任御史中丞，转任侍中。
English: He was promoted to goshi chujo, and then to samurai chujo.

古文：帝病笃得愈，紞与勖见朝野之望，属在齐王攸。攸素薄勖。
现代文：皇帝重病而康复后，冯鱿与荀勖见朝廷内外的愿望，都寄托在齐王司马攸身上司马攸一向看不起荀勖。
English: After the emperor recovered from a serious illness, Feng Li and Zou Yan saw that the wishes of the imperial court and outside were pinned on Qi King Sima You, who had always looked down on Zou Yan.

古文：勖以太子愚劣，恐攸得立，有害于己，乃使紞言于帝曰： 陛下前者疾若不差，太子其废矣。
现代文：荀勖因为太子愚蠢，恐怕司马攸会继位，对自己有害，于是叫冯鱿对皇帝说： 陛下前些时疾病要是未康复，太子恐怕被废了。
English: Because of the stupidity of the prince, I was afraid that Sima You would succeed to the throne, which would be harmful to himself, so I asked Feng Yu to say to the emperor: If your majesty has not recovered from his illness, I am afraid that the prince will be abolished.

古文：齐王为百姓所归，公卿所仰，虽欲高让，其得免乎！
现代文：查王是百姓归心，公卿仰望的人，即便他品德高想推让，能免得了吗!
English: Chao Wang is a man whom the common people can relate to, and whom nobles look up to. Even if he is of high moral character and wants to make concessions, can he avoid it?

古文：宜遣还籓，以安社稷。 
现代文：应打发他回封国，以安定国家。 
English: He should be sent back to the motherland to stabilize the country.

古文：帝纳之。
现代文：皇帝采纳了他的话。
English: The emperor took him at his word.

古文：及攸薨，朝野悲恨。
现代文：等到司马攸去世，朝廷内外悲伤怨恨。
English: When Sima You died, there was sadness and resentment inside and outside the court.

古文：初，帝友于之情甚笃，既纳紞、勖邪说，遂为身后之虑，以固储位。
现代文：起初，皇上的兄弟之情很深厚，采纳了冯鱿、苟勖的邪说后，开始为自己死后的事担心，以便稳固皇储的地位。
English: At first, the emperor's brotherly feelings were very deep. After he adopted the heresies of Feng Xuan and Guo Xuan, he began to worry about what would happen after his death in order to stabilize the position of the crown prince.

古文：既闻攸殒，哀恸特深。
现代文：听到司马攸的死讯后，哀恸特别深。
English: After hearing the news of Sima You's death, the grief was particularly deep.

古文：紞侍立，因言曰： 齐王名过于实，今得自终，此乃大晋之福。
现代文：冯鱿站在旁边，便说： 齐王名过其实，如今死去，这是大晋之福。
English: Feng Yu stood beside him and said, "King Qi's fame is exaggerated. Now he is dead. This is the blessing of the Great Jin."

古文：陛下何乃过哀！ 
现代文：陛下何必过分哀伤! 
English: Your Majesty, don't be too sad!

古文：帝收泪而止。
现代文：皇帝不再哭泣。
English: The emperor no longer wept.

古文：初谋伐吴，紞与贾充、荀勖同共苦谏不可。
现代文：起初谋划伐吴，冯鱿和买充、荀勖共同竭力劝谏说不行。
English: At first, he planned to cut down Wu, but Feng Li, Maizhong and Zou jointly tried their best to persuade Zou that it was impossible.

古文：吴平，紞内怀惭惧，疾张华如雠。
现代文：吴被平定，冯鱿心怀惭愧恐惧，恨张华如同仇人。
English: Wu was subdued, and Feng Rong was filled with shame and fear, and hated Zhang Hua like an enemy.

古文：及华外镇，威德大著，朝论当征为尚书令。
现代文：张华出京镇守后，威望显著，朝廷的议论认为应当任他为尚书令。
English: After Zhang Hua went to guard the capital, his prestige was significant, and the imperial court argued that he should be appointed as Shang Shuling.

古文：紞从容侍帝，论晋魏故事，因讽帝，言华不可授以重任，帝默然而止。
现代文：冯鱿从容侍奉皇帝，议论晋、魏的历史，趁势劝皇帝，说不能把重任交给张华，皇帝没有说话而不再任命。
English: Feng Li served the emperor with ease, discussed the history of Jin and Wei, and took advantage of the situation to persuade the emperor that he could not give the important task to Zhang Hua. The emperor did not speak and no longer appointed him.

古文：事具《华传》。
现代文：事情详细记载在本书《张华传》。
English: The incident is recorded in detail in the book "Zhang Hua Chuan."

古文：太康七年，紞疾，诏以紞为散骑常侍，赐钱二十万、床帐一具。
现代文：太康七年，冯鱿患病，下诏任命他为散骑常侍，赐钱二十万、床帐一套。
English: In the seventh year of Taikang, Feng Xuan fell ill. The emperor appointed him as a knight errant, and gave him 200,000 yuan and a set of bed sheets.

古文：寻卒。
现代文：不久死去。
English: He died soon after.

古文：二子：播、熊。
现代文：有两个儿子：冯播、冯熊。
English: They have two sons: Feng Biao and Feng Xiong.

古文：播，大长秋。
现代文：冯播，任大长秋。
English: Feng Bo, appointed to the post of senior Changqiu.

古文：熊字文罴，中书郎。
现代文：冯熊字文熊，任中书郎。
English: Feng Xiong, also known as Wen Xiong, is a middle school teacher.

古文：紞兄恢，自有传。
现代文：冯鱿的兄长冯恢，本书另有传。
English: Feng Wei's brother, Feng Wei, is also mentioned in the book.

古文：史臣曰：夫立身之道，曰仁与义。
现代文：史臣曰：所谓立身之道，是仁和义。
English: Shichen said: The so-called way to stand up is benevolence and righteousness.

古文：动静既形，悔吝斯及。
现代文：一个人的行为已成，悔恨也就跟随其后。
English: A man's deed is done, and remorse follows.

古文：有莘之媵，殊《北门》之情；渭滨之叟，匪西山之节。
现代文：有莘的媵妾，不同于《北门》中表现出的情操；渭水之滨的老叟，没有伯夷、叔齐在西山表现出的节气。
English: A concubine with a dragonfly is different from the sentiment shown in "North Gate"; the old dragonfly on the shore of Surabaya does not have the solar terms shown by Bo Yi and Shu Qi in Xishan.

古文：汤武有以济其功，夏殷不能讥其志。
现代文：汤、武能够完成他们的功业，夏、殷不能讥讽他们的志向。
English: Tang and Wu can complete their work, and Xia and Yin cannot ridicule their aspirations.

古文：王沈才经文武，早尸人爵，在魏参席上之珍，居晋为幄中之士，桐宫之谋遽泄，武闱之祸遂臻。
现代文：王沈有文武之才，早有爵位，在魏享有宴席上的珍馐，在晋作朝廷中的谋臣，高贵乡公将攻文帝的谋划被突然泄露，武闱之祸跟着就到。
English: Wang Shen was talented in literature and military affairs, he already had a knighthood, he enjoyed the delicacies at the banquet in Wei Dynasty, and he was promoted to be a strategist in the imperial court. The noble general's plan to attack Emperor Wen was suddenly leaked, and the calamity of martial law followed.

古文：是知田光之口，岂燕丹之可绝；豫让之形，非智氏之能变。
现代文：由此知道田光的嘴，难道是燕丹能堵得住的吗?豫让的行动，不是智伯可以改变的。
English: From this we know that Tian Guang's mouth, is it Yandan that can stop it? The action of conceding is not something that Zhi Bo can change.

古文：动静之际，有据蒺藜，仁义之方，求之弥远矣。
现代文：动静之间，有如抓住蒺藜，仁义之道，追求而相距更远。
English: Between movement and stillness, it is like grasping a shovel, pursuing the path of benevolence and righteousness, and the distance is even farther.

古文：彭祖谒由捧雉，孕本贸丝，因家乏主，遂登显秩。
现代文：彭祖生母地位低下，孕育他的是位良家贫妇，因为王家缺乏继承人，彭祖于是登上显赫的官位。
English: The status of Peng Zu's birth mother was low, and he was born to a poor woman from a good family. Because the royal family lacked an heir, Peng Zu ascended to a prominent official position.

古文：拥北州之士马，偶东京之糜沸，自可感召诸侯，宣力王室。
现代文：拥有北州的士卒兵马，适逢东京之乱，本来可以感召诸侯，效力于王室。
English: With the soldiers and horses of Hokushu, coinciding with the Tokyo War, it would have been possible to inspire the lords to serve the royal family.

古文：而乘间伺隙，潜图不轨，放肆獯虏，迁播乘舆。
现代文：然而他乘着仇杀之际。暗中图谋作乱，放纵夷狄，四处征战。
English: However, he took advantage of the opportunity to take revenge. He secretly plotted to create turmoil, indulged in excesses, and fought everywhere.

古文：遂使漳滏萧然，黎元涂地。
现代文：使得漳、滏萧条，百姓遭难。
English: This has caused depression in the provinces of Handan and Handan, and the people are suffering.

古文：纵贪夫于藏户，戮高士于燕垂，阻越石之内难，邀世龙之外府。
现代文：以府库放纵贪婪的人，在北疆杀戮有识之士，阻止了刘琨的发难，却把石勒引到外府。
English: Using the prefectural treasury to indulge the greedy and killing those with insight in Northern Xinjiang, he prevented the outbreak of the crisis in Liu Bei, but led Shi Le to the outer prefectures.

古文：恶稔毒，坐致焚燎，假手仇敌，方申凶犷，庆封之戮，慢骂何补哉！
现代文：蓄毒而成病，导致灾祸，假仇敌之手，施展凶蛮，庆封被杀，馒骂又有何用!
English: Accumulating poison and becoming ill, leading to disaster, the hand of a false enemy, displaying ferocity, being killed, what is the use of abuse!

古文：公曾，慈明之孙；景倩，文若之子，践隆堂而高视，齐逸轨而长骛。
现代文：公曾，是慈明的孙子；景倩，是文若的儿子，登上高堂而目光高远，沿着先哲的法度而驰骋。
English: Gong Zeng, the grandson of Zhi Ming, and Jing Zheng, the son of Wen Ruo, ascended the high court and looked far and wide, following the precepts of the sages.

古文：孝敬足以承亲，周慎足以事主，刊姬公之旧典，采萧相之遗法。
现代文：孝敬足以奉承亲人，谨慎足以事奉君主，修订姬公的旧典，采用萧相的遣法。
English: Filial piety is enough to flatter relatives, prudence is enough to serve the monarch, revise Himegong's old book, and adopt Xiao Xiang's way of sending.

古文：然而援硃均以贰极，煽褒阎而偶震。
现代文：然而引用朱均以造成两极，褒姒得势而幽王可危。
English: However, the use of Zhu Jun to create a two-pole system, the reward is to gain momentum and the king is in danger.

古文：虽废兴有在，隆替靡常，稽之人事，乃二荀之力也。
现代文：虽然兴废客观存在，帝王替代没有规律，但从人事上考察，却是二位姓荀的功劳。
English: Although waste and waste exist objectively, and there is no rule for replacing the emperor, but from a personnel perspective, it is the merit of the two surnames.

古文：至于斗粟兴谣，逾里成咏，勖之阶祸，又已甚焉。
现代文：至于兄弟不和兴起谣言，超越其位引起讽咏，荀勖招致的祸害，实在太重了。
English: As for the rumor of the rise of brotherly discord, it is too serious to go beyond the mischief caused by ridicule and mockery.

古文：冯紞外骋戚施，内穷狙诈，毙攸安贾，交勖仇张，心滔楚费，过逾晋伍。
现代文：冯鱿刻意奉承，用尽狡诈，导致齐王司马攸死去，定了贾妃之位，结交荀勖仇视张华，心计胜过楚费，超出晋伍。
English: Feng Li deliberately flattered, exhausted cunning, led to the death of Qi Wang Sima You, determined the position of Jiafei, made friends with Zhang Hua, and outmaneuvered Chu Fei, exceeding the promotion.

古文：爰丝献寿，空取慰于仁心，紞之陈说，幸收哀于迷虑，投畀之罚无闻，《青蝇》之诗不作矣。
现代文：爰丝献寿，徒然以仁心取得安慰，冯鱿的说辞，侥幸使皇帝在迷茫忧虑中止住悲哀，把谄媚之人投喂豺虎的刑罚已经消失，《青蝇》那类诗也没人作了。
English: In vain did she sacrifice her life, in vain did she obtain consolation by her benevolence, in vain did Feng Xuan's words cause the emperor to suspend his sorrow in his perplexity and worry, in vain did the punishment of feeding a charming person to a tiger disappear, and in vain did anyone write a poem like "The Blue Fly."

古文：赞曰：处道文林，胡贰尔心？
现代文：赞曰：王沈有文才，为何对主人有二心?
English: Zang said: Wang Shen is a talented writer, why is he so jealous of his master?

古文：彭祖凶孽，自贻伊戚。
现代文：王浚凶暴，自招祸患。
English: Wang Jun is violent, self-inflicted disaster.

古文：临淮翼翼，孝形于色。
现代文：临淮侯荀频恭敬，孝心显世。
English: Linyi Huaihou is often respectful, and filial piety is manifested.

古文：安阳英英，匪懈其职。
现代文：安阳侯荀勖有英才，对职守不懈怠。
English: Anyang Houyao has great talent and never slacks in his duties.

古文：倾齐附鲁，是为蝥贼。
现代文：倾齐依鲁，是为乱臣贼子。
English: To be loyal to Ilu is to be a ruffian thief.

古文：紞之不臧，交乱罔极。
现代文：冯鱿不善，内乱无穷。
English: If Feng Xuan is not good, there will be endless civil unrest.

