古文：木夫子墓木五柞白银树合离树玉树豫樟荔枝木酒树娑罗绵树
现代文：木夫子墓木五柞白银树合离树玉树豫樟荔枝木酒树娑罗绵树
English: Woodcutter's Grave Wood Five Branches Silver Tree Conjoined Tree Separated Tree Jade Tree Yu Yu Litchi Tree Wine Tree Wisteria Tree

古文：刺桐黄漆树木兰树椰子树菩提树婆罗树独梪树波斯皂荚树
现代文：刺桐黄漆树木兰树椰子树菩提树婆罗树独梪树波斯皂荚树
English: Saffron trees Orchid trees Coconut trees Bodhi trees Borneo trees Eucalyptus trees Persian soap eucalyptus trees

古文：木龙树贝多树没树槃碧穑波树齐暾树通脱木山桂五鬣松
现代文：木龙树贝多树没树槃碧穑波树齐暾树通脱木山桂五鬣松
English: Mucus dragon tree Beto tree no tree Eucalyptus wave tree Qi eucalyptus tree through de-wooded mountain cinnamon five eucalyptus pine

古文：三鬣松鱼甲松合掌柏黄杨木青杨木俱那卫山茶夏州槐
现代文：三鬣松鱼甲松合掌柏黄杨木青杨木俱那卫山茶夏州槐
English: Chinese pines, box pines, box cypresses, box box box poplars, box box poplars, box poplars, box poplars, box poplars, box poplars, box poplars, box poplars, box poplars, box poplars, box poplars, box poplars, box poplars, box poplars, box poplars, box poplars

古文：赤白柽楷木楮
现代文：赤白柽楷木楮
English: Red-and-white spotted woodpecker

古文：文理木宗庙文木文木简古文柱三字薪天尊薪太平木天王槐色陵木
现代文：文理木宗庙文木文木简古文柱三字薪天尊薪太平木天王槐色陵木
English: Texture: wood, wood, wood, wood, wood, wood, wood, wood, wood, wood, wood, wood, wood, wood

古文：马文木
现代文：马文木
English: Ma Wengui

古文：木
现代文：木
English: Thu

古文：夫子墓木
现代文：夫子墓木
English: Fuzi's grave tree

古文：鲁曲阜孔子墓上，时多楷木。
现代文：鲁地曲阜的孔子墓上，生长的多半是刚直的楷树。
English: On the tomb of Confucius in Qufu, Ludi, most of the trees are straight trees.

古文：又曰：曲阜城有颜回墓，上石柟二株，可三四十围。
现代文：又说，曲阜城有颜回墓，上面生长着两裸石柟树，有三四十围粗。
English: He also said that Qufu City has a beautiful tomb, with two bare stone elm trees growing on it, which are thirty to forty times thicker.

古文：土人云，颜回手植之木。五柞
现代文：当地人说，这两棵树是颜回亲手栽的。五柞
English: Locals said that the two trees were planted by Yan Hui himself.

古文：汉五柞宫，有五柞树，皆连抱，上枝覆荫数十里。
现代文：汉代的五柞宫，有五棵柞树，都互相连接拥抱着，上面树枝连成一片，遮出数十里的树荫来。
English: The Five Banyan Tree Palace of the Han Dynasty has five banyan trees, all of which are connected to each other and embrace each other. The branches above are connected into one piece, covering dozens of miles of shade.

古文：宫西有青梧观。
现代文：宫西有个青梧观。
English: Miyanishi has a youthful outlook.

古文：观前有三梧桐树。
现代文：观前有三棵梧桐树。
English: There are three sycamore trees in front of the observatory.

古文：树下有石麒麟二枚，刊其肋为文字。
现代文：树下有两个石麒麟。石麒麟胸部两边刻有文字。
English: There are two stone giraffes under the tree. The stone giraffes have inscriptions on both sides of their chests.

古文：是秦始王骊山墓上物也。
现代文：这是秦始皇骊山墓上的东西。
English: This is what was found on the tomb of Emperor Qin Shi Huangshan.

古文：头高一丈三尺。
现代文：头高一丈三尺东边。
English: The east side of the moat is three feet above head height.

古文：东边左脚折，折处有赤如血。
现代文：东边的一只左脚折断，折断处有红色像血。
English: A left foot on the east side was broken, and there was red like blood where it was broken.

古文：父老谓有神。皆含血属筋焉。
现代文：当地父老说有神，都含着血连着筋。
English: The local patriarchs say that there are gods, and they all contain blood and sinew.

古文：白银树
现代文：白银树
English: The Silver Tree

古文：平原郡高苑城西，晋宁州刺史辟闾允墓，前有白银树二十株。
现代文：平原郡的高苑城西，晋朝宁州刺史辟闾允的墓前，有白银树二十棵。
English: In the west of Gaoyuan City, Pingyuan County, there are twenty silver trees in front of the tomb of the Jin Dynasty's Ningshu Emperor Jian Shi Pi Rong Yun.

古文：合离树
现代文：合离树
English: Merging Trees

古文：终南山多合离树。
现代文：终南山有许多合离树。
English: At the end of Nanshan, there are many juniper trees.

古文：叶似江离，而红绿相杂。茎皆紫色，气如罗勒。
现代文：叶子和江离相似，但颜色是红绿相杂的，茎全是紫色，气势像罗勒。
English: The leaves are similar to those of Jiangli, but the color is mixed red and green, the stems are all purple, and the momentum is like basil.

古文：其树直上，百尺无枝。
现代文：这种树的长势直上云天，百尺之内没有枝杈。
English: This tree grows straight up to the sky, with no branches within a hundred feet.

古文：上结藂条，状如车盖，一青一丹，斑驳如锦绣。
现代文：上边长满密密麻麻的枝条，总体形状就像车盖一样。青红相间，斑斑驳驳有如锦绣。
English: The upper side is covered with dense branches, the overall shape is like a car cover. Between blue and red, the mottled twigs are like brocade.

古文：长安谓之丹青树，亦云华盖树。
现代文：长安人叫它丹青树。也有叫华盖树的。
English: Chang'an people call it Danqing tree. There is also one called Huagai tree.

古文：亦生于熊耳山中。玉树
现代文：熊耳山中也有这样的树。玉树
English: There is also such a tree in the Bear's Ear Mountains.

古文：云阳县界，多汉离宫故地。
现代文：云阳县界内，有许多汉离宫的故地。
English: Within the borders of Yunyang County, there are many places where the Han Dynasty departed from.

古文：有树似槐而叶细，土人谓之玉树。
现代文：有一种树像槐而叶细小，当地人叫它玉树。
English: There is a kind of tree that looks like a dragonfly with small leaves. Locals call it the jade tree.

古文：杨子云《甘泉赋》云： 玉树菁葱。 后左思以为假称珍，盖未详也。
现代文：杨雄在《甘泉赋》中说 玉树菁葱 ，后左思以为假称珍，大概是对此树了解不详的原因。
English: Yang Xiong said in "The Fountain of Sweet Water" that the yamshu jinglian, thought to be rare, is probably the reason why this tree is not well known.

古文：豫樟
现代文：豫樟
English: 豫

古文：豫樟之为木也，生七年而后可知也。
现代文：要分辨豫樟是枕木还是樟木，要等它生长七年之后才能知道。
English: It takes seven years of growth before you can tell whether a yakitori is a sleeper or a rootstock.

古文：汉武宝鼎二年，立豫樟宫于昆明池中，作豫樟木殿。
现代文：汉武帝宝鼎二年，在昆明池中建起了豫樟宫，造了豫樟木殿。
English: In the second year of Emperor Baoding, Emperor Hanwu built the Yuanshan Palace and Yuanshan Mansion in Kunming Pool.

古文：荔枝木
现代文：荔枝木
English: Lychee tree

古文：南海郡多荔枝树。
现代文：南海郡荔枝树很多。
English: There are many litchi trees in Nanhai County.

古文：荔枝为名者，以其结实时，枝条弱而蒂牢，不可摘取，以刀斧劙取其枝，故以为名。
现代文：荔枝之所以叫荔枝，是因为它结果的时候，枝条柔弱而结蒂很牢，不能摘取，必须用刀斧把枝子割下来才行，所以就把这种特点当做它的名字了。
English: The reason why litchi is called litchi is because when it fruits, the branches are weak and the knots are very strong. They cannot be plucked, and the branches must be cut down with a knife and axe. Therefore, this characteristic is used as its name.

古文：凡什具以木制者，率皆荔枝。
现代文：凡是用木头制作的器具，一般都是荔枝木的。
English: All utensils made of wood are generally made of litchi wood.

古文：酒树
现代文：酒树
English: The Wine Tree

古文：顿逊国有酒树，如安石榴。华汁停杯中，数日成酒，美而醉人。
现代文：顿逊国有一种树叫酒树，就像石榴树，花汁装进杯子里，几天就能变成酒，味美而醉人。
English: There is a kind of tree in Dongsung called the wine tree. It is like a pomegranate tree. The juice of the flowers can be put into a cup and turned into wine in a few days. It is delicious and intoxicating.

古文：《博物志》： 酒树出典逊国，名榐酒。 
现代文：《博物志》： 酒树出典逊国，名榐酒。 
English: "Natural History": The wine tree comes from a lesser-known country, the source of the famous wine.

古文：娑罗绵树
现代文：娑罗绵树
English: Willow tree

古文：黎州通望县，有销樟院，在县西一百步。
现代文：黎州的通望县，有个销樟院，在县府西一百步处。
English: In Tongwang County, Lizhou, there is a Pin Ying Hospital, a hundred paces west of the county seat.

古文：内有天王堂。
现代文：院内有天王堂。
English: There is a Tenno-do Hall in the hospital.

古文：前古柏树。
现代文：堂前有古柏树。
English: There is an ancient cypress tree in front of the hall.

古文：下有大池。
现代文：树下有大池。
English: There is a large pond under the tree.

古文：池南有娑罗绵树，三四人连手合抱方匝。
现代文：池南有一棵娑罗绵树。三四个人扯起手来合抱才能把它围一圈。
English: In the south of the pond, there is a wisteria tree. It takes three or four people holding hands to make a circle around it.

古文：先生花而后生叶。
现代文：它先开花而后长叶。
English: It flowers first and leaves later.

古文：其花盛夏方开。
现代文：花要到盛夏才开。
English: The flowers don't open until midsummer.

古文：谢时不背而堕，宛转至地。
现代文：花谢时花瓣互相不离开就掉下来，经过一番旋转才落到地上。
English: When the flowers fade, the petals fall without leaving each other, and only after a bit of spinning do they fall to the ground.

古文：其花蕊有绵，谓之娑罗棉。
现代文：它的花蕊上有绵，叫做娑罗棉。
English: Its stamens are covered with a type of downy downy downy downy downy downy downy.

古文：善政郁茂，违时枯凋。
现代文：遇上善政它就繁茂，政令乖违它就枯凋。
English: If there is good governance, it will flourish; if there is government edict against it, it will wither.

古文：古老相传云：是肉齿和尚住持之灵迹也。
现代文：古老相传说，这是肉齿和尚住持的灵迹。
English: According to ancient legend, this is the spirit of the abbot of the Flesh Tooth Monastery.

古文：县界有和尚山和尚庙，皆肉齿也。
现代文：此县界内有和尚山和尚庙，都得名于肉齿和尚。
English: There are Monk Mountain and Monk Temple within the county, both named after the fleshy-toothed monk.

古文：刺桐
现代文：刺桐
English: Susumu

古文：苍桐不知所谓，盖南人以桐为苍梧，因以名郡。
现代文：苍桐不知指的是什么植物，大概南方人把桐当成苍梧了，于是就用它作了郡的名字。
English: I don't know what kind of plant the cedar tree refers to, but people in the south probably took the cedar tree to be a cedar tree, so they used it as the name of the county.

古文：刺桐，南海至福州皆有之，丛生繁茂，不如福建。
现代文：刺桐，从南海到福州都有，丛生。论繁茂各地都不如福建。
English: From the South China Sea to Fuzhou, there are clusters of sassafras trees. In terms of growth, all regions are not as prosperous as Fujian.

古文：梧州子城外，有三四株，憔悴不荣，未尝见花。
现代文：梧州子城外，有三四棵，干干巴巴的，很不茂盛，不曾见它开花。
English: Outside the city of Wuzhou, there are three or four trees, dry and crumbly, not very lush, and I have never seen it bloom.

古文：反用名郡，亦未喻也。
现代文：反而用它作郡名，也不能说明什么呀。
English: On the contrary, using it as the name of the county does not mean anything.

古文：黄漆树
现代文：黄漆树
English: Yellow sumac

古文：日济国西南海中，有三岛，各相去数十里。
现代文：日济国的西南海域中，有三个小岛，各相距几十里。
English: In the southwestern waters of Japan, there are three small islands, each separated by dozens of miles.

古文：其岛出黄漆，似中夏漆树。
现代文：那些岛上出产黄漆。黄漆就像中国的漆树。
English: Those islands produce yellow lacquer. Yellow lacquer is like Chinese sumac.

古文：彼土六月，破树腹，承取汁，以漆器物。
现代文：那地方到了六月，就把黄漆树的树身割破，收取树汁，用它来漆器物。
English: In June, they cut the body of the yellow lacquer tree, collect the sap, and use it to paint objects.

古文：若黄金，其光夺目。
现代文：漆出来的器物像黄金那样，金光闪闪，耀眼夺目。
English: The lacquered objects are like gold, glittering and dazzling.

古文：木兰树
现代文：木兰树
English: The magnolia tree

古文：七里洲中，有鲁斑刻木兰为舟。
现代文：七里洲中，有一条鲁班用木兰木做的船。
English: In Shichirizhou, there is a boat made of magnolia wood.

古文：舟至今在洲中。
现代文：船至今还在洲中。
English: The ship is still in the middle of the continent.

古文：诗家所云木兰舟，出于此也。
现代文：诗人们诗中的 木兰舟 ，就是从这儿来的。
English: The "Mulan Boat" in the poets' poems comes from here.

古文：木兰洲在浔阳江中，多木兰树。
现代文：木兰洲在浔阳江中，木兰树很多。
English: There are many magnolia trees on Magnolia Island in the middle of the Poyang River.

古文：昔吴王阖闾，植木兰于此，用构宫殿也。
现代文：过去吴王阖闾在这里栽了木兰，用来建造宫殿。
English: In the past, King Wu planted magnolias here and used them to build a palace.

古文：椰子树
现代文：椰子树
English: Coconut trees

古文：椰子树，亦类海棕。
现代文：椰子树，也像海棕树。
English: The coconut tree is also like the sea palm tree.

古文：实名椰子，大如瓯盂。
现代文：果实名叫椰子，大如小盆。
English: The fruit is called a coconut and is as big as a small pot.

古文：外有粗皮，如大腹子；次有硬壳，圆而且坚，厚二三分。
现代文：外边有一层粗皮，就像大腹皮。粗皮下是一层硬壳，光圆而坚硬，二三分厚。
English: On the outside there is a layer of rough skin, like the skin of a cow's abdomen. Underneath the rough skin is a hard shell, round and hard, two or three times thicker.

古文：有圆好者，即截开头，砂石摩之，去其皴皮，其烂斑锦文，以白金装之，以为水罐子，珍奇可爱。
现代文：有圆而好的，就把头部截开，用沙石磨擦，去掉皴皮，蹭出斑斓的花纹，再用白银装饰一下，当水罐子用，珍奇而又可爱。
English: If there is a round and good one, cut off the head, rub it with sand and stone, remove the mink, scoop out the colorful patterns, then decorate it with silver, use it as a water jar, rare and lovely.

古文：壳中有液数合，如乳，亦可饮之而动气。
现代文：壳中有液汁数盒，像乳汁，可以饮用，有提气的药效。
English: There are several boxes of liquid juice in the shell, like milk, which can be drunk and has the medicinal effect of raising qi.

古文：菩提树
现代文：菩提树
English: The Bodhi Tree

古文：菩提树，出摩伽陁国，在摩诃菩提树寺，盖释迦如来成道时树。
现代文：菩提树，出自摩伽陁国，在摩诃菩提树寺。大概是释迦牟尼如来成道之时的树。
English: A Bodhi tree, from the country of Mogadishu, at the Mogadishu Bodhi Tree Temple. It is probably the tree that Shakyamuni Buddha used to attain enlightenment.

古文：一名思惟树。
现代文：又名思惟树。
English: Also known as the thinking tree.

古文：茎干黄白，枝叶青翠，经冬不凋。
现代文：茎和干黄白色。枝叶青翠，四季常青，冬季也不凋落。
English: Stem and stem are yellow-white. Leaves and branches are green, evergreen in all seasons, and do not fall off in winter.

古文：至佛入灭日，变色凋落。
现代文：到了僧人死亡的日子，它就变色凋落。
English: On the day of the monk's death, it faded.

古文：过已还生。
现代文：过后再还生。
English: And then come back to life.

古文：此日国王人民，大小作佛事，收叶而归，以为瑞也。
现代文：这一天，从国王到百姓，大大小小都作佛事。然后拾取几枚菩提树叶回来，视为祥瑞之物。
English: On this day, from the king to the people, large and small are doing Buddhist activities. Then pick up a few leaves of the Bodhi tree and come back, as a thing of good luck.

古文：树高四百尺，下有银塔，周回绕之。
现代文：树高四百尺，树下有银塔围绕着。
English: The tree is four hundred feet tall and is surrounded by silver towers.

古文：彼国人四时常焚香散化，绕树下作礼。
现代文：这个国家的人民一年四季经常在此树下烧香散花，绕着大树举行仪式。
English: Throughout the year, the people of this country often burn incense and scattered flowers under this tree, and hold ceremonies around the tree.

古文：唐贞观中，频遣使往，于寺设供，并施袈裟。
现代文：唐贞观年间，频繁地派使臣前往，在寺中设供，并施舍袈裟。
English: During the reign of Emperor Zhengyuan of the Tang Dynasty, he frequently sent envoys, set up offerings in the temple, and gave alms.

古文：至高宗显庆五年，于寺立碑，以纪圣德。
现代文：到了高宗显庆五年，又在这寺里立了碑，用来记述圣德。
English: In the fifth year of the reign of Emperor Gao Zongxian, a monument was erected in the temple to commemorate the saint.

古文：此树有梵名二：一曰 宾拨梨婆力义 ，二曰 阿湿曷咃婆刀义 。
现代文：此树有两个梵语名称。一个是 宾拨梨婆力义 ；一个是 阿湿曷咃婆刀义 。
English: There are two Sanskrit names for this tree, one is Bhindranath Prabhu; the other is Ahimsa.

古文：《西域记》谓之 卑钵罗 。
现代文：《西域记》称它是 卑钵罗 。
English: The Book of Zohar describes it as Pheromone.

古文：以佛于其下成道，即以道为称，故号 菩提婆刀叉 。
现代文：因为佛在它下面成道，就把道作为它的称呼，所以它的号是 菩提婆刀义 。
English: Because the Buddha became enlightened under it, he called it the Way, so its name is Bodhidharma's Sword.

古文：汉翻为道树。
现代文：汉时翻译为 道树 。
English: Translated into Chinese as Tao Tree.

古文：昔中天无忧王翦伐之，令事大婆罗门，积薪焚焉，炽焰之中，忽生两树。
现代文：过去中天无忧王剪伐菩提树枝，命令寺中的大婆罗门架柴生火焚烧，结果火焰之中忽然生出两棵小树。
English: In the past, the King of the Middle Kingdom cut down the branches of the Bodhi tree and ordered the great Brahman in the temple to make firewood and burn it. As a result, two small trees suddenly grew out of the flames.

古文：无忧王因忏悔，号灰菩提树。
现代文：无忧王因此而忏悔，号之为 灰菩提树 ，又在周围砌起了石墙。
English: King Worry-Free repented, called it the Ash Bodhi Tree, and built a stone wall around it.

古文：遂周以石垣，至赏设迦王。复掘之，至泉，其根不绝。
现代文：到了赏设迦王，又挖此树，挖到黄泉，它的根也没断绝。
English: And when they came to Hoshea king of Gezer, they cut down the tree and uprooted it as far as the Valley of Hinnom, but the roots of the tree were not severed.

古文：坑火焚之，溉以甘蔗汁，欲其焦烂。
现代文：在坑中点火烧它，再浇上甘蔗的浆液，想要使它焦烂。
English: He lit a fire in the pit to burn it, and then poured sugar cane slurry over it, hoping to scorch it.

古文：后摩揭陁国满胄王，无忧之曾孙也，乃以千牛乳浇之。
现代文：后来的摩揭陁国满胄王，也就是无忧王的曾孙，就用一千头牛的奶浇灌它。
English: Later, the great-grandson of King Mianzhong, also known as King Sanshou, watered it with the milk of a thousand cows.

古文：信宿，树生如旧。
现代文：两夜之后，菩提树又焕然一新，葱茏如旧。
English: Two nights later, the Bodhi tree was brand new, and the green onions were still there.

古文：更增石垣，高二丈四尺。
现代文：又加高了石墙，高二丈四尺。
English: The stone wall was also raised, to a height of two and a quarter feet.

古文：玄奘至西域，见树出石垣上二丈余。
现代文：唐玄奘当年到达西域时，见菩提树高出石墙两丈多。
English: When Tang Xuanqi arrived in the western region that year, he saw the Bodhi tree towering more than two stories above the stone wall.

古文：婆罗树
现代文：婆罗树
English: The Borneo Tree

古文：巴陵有寺，僧房床下，忽生一木，随伐随长。
现代文：巴陵有一座寺庙，和尚寝房的床下，忽然长出一棵小树来，把它砍了它还长，随砍随长。
English: There is a temple in Baling. Under the bed of the monk's bedroom, a small tree suddenly grew up. It was cut down, but it still grew.

古文：外国僧见曰： 此婆罗也。 
现代文：一个外国和尚见了说： 这是婆罗树。 
English: A foreign monk saw it and said, "This is a borax tree."

古文：元嘉初，出一花如莲。
现代文：元嘉初年，婆罗树开出一朵花，像莲花。
English: In the first year of Yuan Jia, the borax tree bloomed a flower, like a lotus.

古文：唐天宝初，安西进婆罗枝。
现代文：唐天宝初年，安西贡进婆罗树枝。
English: In the first year of Tang Tianbao, An Xigong entered the branches of the Bora tree.

古文：状言： 臣所管四镇，有拔汗那，最为密近。
现代文：呈状说： 为臣所管四个镇子，有个叫拔汗那的人和为臣最为亲密。
English: The petition said: For the four townships under the control of the vassal, there is a person called Pahang that is the closest to the vassal.

古文：木有婆罗树，特为奇绝，不庇凡草，不止恶禽。
现代文：我们这里有一种树叫婆罗树，甚为奇绝。树下不生长凡草，树上不栖息恶鸟。
English: We have a tree here called the Bora Bora, which is very strange. No grass grows under the tree, and no evil birds live on the tree.

古文：耸干无惭于松栝，成阴不愧于桃李。
现代文：树干高耸不亚于松柏；给人的片片树荫不亚于桃李。
English: The trunk of the tree is as tall as that of the pine and cypress; the shade it provides is no less than that of the peach and plum.

古文：近差官拔汗那，使令采得前件树枝二百茎。
现代文：现在派拔汗那让他采得到了这种树的树枝二百根。
English: Now he swears that he has collected 200 branches of this tree.

古文：如得托根长乐，擢颖建章，布叶垂阴，邻月中之丹桂；连枝接影。对天上之白榆。 
现代文：如果这些树枝能在京城生根发芽，由小到大地成长下去，那就一定能够布叶垂荫，上邻月中的丹桂，连枝接影，遥对天上的白榆。 
English: If these branches can take root and sprout in the capital city and grow from small to large, then they will certainly be able to shade the leaves, stand next to the cinnamon in the middle of the moon, connect the branches, and face the egrets in the sky.

古文：独梪树
现代文：独梪树
English: German elm

古文：独梪树。
现代文：独梪树。
English: A single birch tree.

古文：顿丘南有应足山。
现代文：顿丘的南面有应足山。
English: To the south of Dongqiu is Yingzhu Mountain.

古文：山上有一树。
现代文：山上有一棵树。
English: There is a tree on the mountain.

古文：高十丈余。
现代文：树高十丈有余。
English: The tree is more than ten meters tall.

古文：皮青滑，似流碧。
现代文：树皮青色而光滑，像流动的碧玉。
English: The bark is blue and smooth, like flowing jasper.

古文：枝干上耸。
现代文：树干高耸向上。
English: The trunk of the tree is towering.

古文：子若五彩囊，叶如亡子镜。
现代文：果实象五彩的口袋。树叶像亡子镜。
English: The fruit is like a multi-coloured pocket. The leaves are like a funerary mirror.

古文：世名之 仙人独梪树 。
现代文：世人叫它仙人独梪树。
English: The world calls it the immortelle tree.

古文：波斯皂荚树
现代文：波斯皂荚树
English: Persian soap birch

古文：波斯皂荚，出波斯国，呼为忽野詹默。
现代文：波斯皂荚，出自波斯国，本国叫它 忽野詹默 。
English: Persian saponin, from the country of Persia, known in its home country as "Kuno Jammer."

古文：拂林呼为阿梨去伐。
现代文：拂林人叫它 阿梨去伐 。
English: The woodchopper told it to go and cut down the antelope.

古文：树长三四丈，围五六尺。
现代文：树高三四丈。树围五六尺。
English: The tree is three or four stories tall, with a circumference of five or six feet.

古文：叶似拘绿而短小，经寒不凋。
现代文：叶子像拘绿但是较短小，冬天也不落。
English: The leaves are green-like but shorter and do not fall in winter.

古文：不花而实。
现代文：此树不开花就结籽。
English: The tree produces seeds before it flowers.

古文：其荚长二尺，中有隔，隔内各有一子。
现代文：荚长二尺左右，中间有隔，每隔内有一籽。
English: The stalks are about two feet long, with a gap in the middle, and one seed in each gap.

古文：大如指，赤色，至坚硬。中黑如墨。甜如饴。可啖，亦宜药用。
现代文：籽大如手指，红色，极其坚硬，中间墨一样黑，吃起来甜如糖浆，可以食用，也可以药用。
English: The seeds are as big as a finger, red, extremely hard, black as ink in the middle, and sweet as syrup when eaten. They can be eaten or used medicinally.

古文：木龙树
现代文：木龙树
English: Wood Dragon Tree

古文：徐之高冢城南，有木龙寺。
现代文：徐之高墓城南，有一座木龙寺。
English: In the south of Xu's tomb city, there is a wooden dragon temple.

古文：寺有三层砖塔，高丈余。
现代文：寺中有一座三层的砖塔。塔高一丈多。
English: There is a three-story brick tower in the temple. The tower is more than a meter high.

古文：塔侧生一大树，萦绕至塔顶。
现代文：塔旁长出一棵大树，上下萦绕，直到塔顶。
English: Next to the tower, a large tree sprouted up, winding up and down until it reached the top of the tower.

古文：枝干交横，上平，容十余人坐。
现代文：树的枝干交横，上面平，可以坐下十几个人。
English: The branches of the tree are criss-crossed, the top is flat, and more than a dozen people can sit on it.

古文：枝杪四向下垂，如百子帐。
现代文：大枝小枝四面下垂，像百子帐。
English: Branches droop on all sides, like a ledger.

古文：莫有识此木者。
现代文：没有人认识它是什么树。
English: No one knows what kind of tree it is.

古文：僧呼为龙木。
现代文：和尚们叫它龙木。
English: The monks call it dragon wood.

古文：梁武曾遣人图写焉。
现代文：梁武帝曾经派人画过它。
English: Emperor Liangwu once sent someone to paint it.

古文：贝多树
现代文：贝多树
English: The Bedouin Tree

古文：贝多，出摩伽陀国，长六七丈经冬不凋。
现代文：贝多，出自摩伽陀国，高六七丈，四季常青，入冬不凋。
English: Bedo, from the country of Mogadishu, is 6'7" tall, is evergreen in all seasons, and never withers in winter.

古文：此树有三种：一者多罗婆力义多。二者多梨婆力义贝多，三者部婆力义多罗多梨。
现代文：此树有三种。一种是多罗婆力义多；一种是多梨婆力义贝多；一种是部婆力义多罗多梨。
English: There are three kinds of this tree. One is Dora baba lyiddo; one is Dora pear baba lyiddo; one is Dora pear baba lyiddo.

古文：并书其，部阇一色。取其皮书之。 贝多 是梵语，汉翻为 叶 。 贝多婆力义 者汉言 树叶 也。
现代文：寺中的和尚用这三种树的树皮写字，并且用树叶书写。 贝多 是梵语，译成汉语就是 叶 。 贝多婆力义 就是汉语的 树叶 。
English: The monks in the temple use the bark of these three trees to write, and write with the leaves. "bedo" is Sanskrit, translated into Chinese as "leaf." "bedo" is Chinese for "leaf."

古文：西域经书，用此三种皮叶。
现代文：西域的经书，都是用这三种树叶书写的。
English: Western scriptures are written with these three kinds of leaves.

古文：若能保护，亦得五六百年。
现代文：如果能好好保护，可以保存五六百年。
English: If it can be well protected, it can be preserved for five or six hundred years.

古文：《嵩山记》称贝多叶似枇杷，并谬。
现代文：《嵩山记》称贝多 叶似枇杷 ，这是错误的。
English: "Song of the Mountains" said that Bedo's leaves looked like reeds, which was wrong.

古文：交趾近出贝多枝，材中第一。
现代文：交趾附近出产贝多枝，质量是木材中最好的。
English: Bedouin twigs are produced near the junction, and the quality is the best in wood.

古文：没树
现代文：没树
English: No trees.

古文：没树，出波斯国。拂林呼为阿縒。
现代文：没树，出自波斯国，拂林人称之为 阿縒 。
English: Without a tree, from the Persian country, the forest-dwellers call it the antelope.

古文：长一丈许。
现代文：树高一丈左右。
English: The tree is about a meter tall.

古文：皮青白色，叶如槐而长，花似橘而大。
现代文：树皮青白色。树叶像槐叶而比槐叶长。花像桔树花而比桔花大。
English: The bark is bluish-white. The leaves are longer than the bracts, like the bracts. The flowers are larger than the bracts, like the orange blossom.

古文：子黑色，大如山茱萸，其味酸甜，可食。
现代文：种子是黑色的，大小就像山茱萸，味道酸甜，可以吃。
English: The seeds are black, about the size of a dogwood, sweet and sour, and edible.

古文：槃碧穑波树
现代文：槃碧穑波树
English: Cypress, poplar, birch

古文：槃碧穑波树，出波斯国，亦出拂林国。拂林呼为群汉。
现代文：槃碧穑波树，出自波斯、拂林等国。拂林人叫它是群汉树。
English: This tree comes from Persia, the Middle East, and other countries. The people of the Middle East call it "Gunhan tree."

古文：树长三丈，围四五尺。叶似细榕，经寒不凋。
现代文：树高三丈，树围五尺，叶子像细榕，入冬也不凋落。
English: The tree is three storeys high, with a circumference of five feet. Its leaves are like delicate reeds, and do not fall in winter.

古文：花似橘，白色。
现代文：花像桔子花，白色。
English: Flowers like orange blossom, white.

古文：子绿，大如酸枣，其味甜腻，可食。
现代文：树籽是绿的，大如酸枣，味道甘甜，口感细腻，可以食用。
English: The seeds are green, the size of a large jujube, with a sweet taste and delicate texture, and can be eaten.

古文：西域人压为油，以涂身，可出风痒。
现代文：西域人把它压成油，用来涂抹身体，可以驱除风痒。
English: Westerners press it into oil and use it to smear the body, which can drive away wind and itch.

古文：齐暾树
现代文：齐暾树
English: Alder tree

古文：齐暾树，出波斯国，亦出拂林，呼为齐匫。
现代文：齐暾树出自波斯、拂林等国家。拂林把它叫做 齐匫 。
English: The alder tree comes from Persia, the Middle East and other countries. The Middle East calls it alder.

古文：树长二三丈。
现代文：树高两三丈。
English: The tree is two or three stories tall.

古文：皮青白。
现代文：树皮青白色。
English: The bark is bluish-white.

古文：花似柚，极芳香。
现代文：花像柚花，极其芳香。
English: The flowers resemble yuzu blossoms and are extremely fragrant.

古文：子似杨桃，六月熟。
现代文：果实像杨桃，六月成熟。
English: The fruit looks like a poplar and ripens in June.

古文：西域人压为油，以煮饼果，如中国之巨胜也。
现代文：西域人把它压成油，用来炸饼果，犹如中国的胡麻。
English: Westerners crush it into oil and use it to fry biscuits, just like Chinese sesame seeds.

古文：通脱木
现代文：通脱木
English: Through the trees

古文：通脱木，如蜱麻。生山侧，花上粉主治恶疮。
现代文：通脱木，样子像蜱麻，生长在山地，花上粉可以治疗恶疮。
English: Tong degu, looks like a nettle, grows in the mountains, and can be used to treat boils.

古文：如空，中有瓤，轻白可爱，女工取以饰物。
现代文：通脱木好像是空的，里边有瓤，又轻又白，很是可爱，女人们常用它做装饰品。
English: The thong appears to be empty, with a gourd inside. It is light and white, very lovely, and is often used by women as an ornament.

古文：山桂
现代文：山桂
English: Mountain cinnamon

古文：山桂，叶如麻，细花紫色，黄叶簇生。与慎火草出丹阳山中。
现代文：山桂，叶子像麻叶，花细小，紫色，叶黄色，簇生，与慎火草都出自丹阳山中。
English: Mountain cinnamon, leaves like hemp leaves, flowers small, purple, leaves yellow, clustered, and fireweed all come from the mountains of Danyang.

古文：五鬣松
现代文：五鬣松
English: Wuhansong

古文：松凡言两粒五粒，粒当言鬣。
现代文：松树俗常都说 两粒 、 五粒 ，其实 粒 应该说成 鬣 。
English: Pine trees are commonly referred to as two-grain, five-grain, in fact, grain should be said to be.

古文：段成式修行里私第大堂前，有五鬣松两株，大才如碗。
现代文：段成式修行里私宅的大堂前，有两棵五鬣松，碗口那么粗。
English: In front of the lobby of the private house in the step-by-step practice, there are two five-leaf pines, so thick at the mouth of the bowl.

古文：结实，味与新罗者不别。
现代文：结果实，味道与新罗的没有区别。
English: As it turned out, the taste was no different from that of Shilla.

古文：五鬣松皮不鳞。
现代文：五鬣松树皮没有鳞。
English: Pinus cinerea bark is scale-free.

古文：唐中使仇士良水磑亭子，有两鬣皮不鳞者，又有七鬣者，不知自何而得。
现代文：唐朝中使仇士良的水磨亭子，有两鬣皮不长鳞的松树，还有七鬣的，不知从哪弄来的。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, there was a water mill pavilion built by Qiu Shiliang. There were two pine trees with thin bark and seven branches. I don't know where they came from.

古文：俗谓孔雀三鬣松也。
现代文：一般人叫它是孔雀三鬣松。
English: Common people call it Peacock Three-Branched Pine.

古文：松命根，下遇石则偃差，不必千年也。
现代文：松树，树根就是生命，地下遇石则树冠偃仰，不一定要等千年。
English: Pine trees, the roots are life, the underground meets the stone and the canopy rises, you don't have to wait a thousand years.

古文：三鬣松
现代文：三鬣松
English: Three Pine Trees

古文：唐卫公李德裕言，三鬣松与孔雀松别。
现代文：唐卫公李德裕讲，三鬣松和孔雀松是有区别的。
English: Tang Weigong Li Deyu said that there is a difference between three-leaved pines and peacock pines.

古文：又云，欲松不长，以石抵其直下根，便偃。不必千年方偃。
现代文：又说，要想使松树不长，用石头抵住它直住下伸的根就行，就能使树盖偃仰，不一定要千年才偃仰。
English: He also said that if you want to make a pine tree short, it is enough to use a stone to hold it upright to hold the downstretched roots, and you can make the tree cover rise, it does not have to be a thousand years before it rises.

古文：鱼甲松
现代文：鱼甲松
English: Fishbone pine

古文：洛中有鱼甲松。
现代文：洛水一带有鱼甲松。
English: Luoshui is dotted with fish scale pines.

古文：合掌柏
现代文：合掌柏
English: Chopsticks together

古文：唐太常博士崔石云，汝西有练溪，多异柏。
现代文：唐太常博士崔石讲，汝水之西有个地方叫练溪，那里异柏很多。
English: Dr. Cui Shi, the Tang Taizang, said that there is a place called Lianxi in the west of Ru Shui, where there are a lot of different cypresses.

古文：及暮秋，叶敛。俗呼合掌柏。
现代文：有一种柏树，到了晚秋叶子就收拢起来，一般人称 合掌柏 。
English: There is a kind of cypress tree whose leaves close up in late autumn. It is commonly known as Gassho cypress.

古文：黄杨木
现代文：黄杨木
English: Poplar trees

古文：黄杨木性难长。
现代文：黄杨木生性长得慢。
English: Poplar is a slow grower.

古文：世重黄杨，以无火。
现代文：世人以黄杨木为重，是因为它不易着火。
English: Poplars are prized because they don't catch fire easily.

古文：或曰，以水试之，沉则无火。
现代文：有人说，用水试一试，能沉到水里的就不易着火。
English: Some people say that if you try it with water, it is not easy to catch fire if it can sink into the water.

古文：取此木以阴晦，夜无一星，则伐之为枕不裂。
现代文：伐取此木应该选一个阴晦的天气。夜无一星的时候砍伐的黄杨木做枕头不裂。
English: This tree should be cut in a cloudy weather. The boxwood cut at night when there is no star does not crack when used as a pillow.

古文：青杨木
现代文：青杨木
English: Poplar trees

古文：青杨木，出峡中。
现代文：青杨木，出自峡谷之中。
English: Poplars, emerging from the canyon.

古文：为床，卧之无蚤。
现代文：用青杨木做成床，寝卧多久也不生跳蚤。
English: A bed made of poplar wood does not produce fleas no matter how long you lie in it.

古文：俱那卫
现代文：俱那卫
English: Club Navee

古文：俱那卫，叶如竹，三茎一层，茎端分条如贞桐，花小，类木槲。
现代文：俱那卫，叶子像竹叶，三根茎为一层，茎端分成条，像贞桐，花很小，类似木檞。
English: The leaves are like bamboo leaves, the three stems are one layer, and the stem ends are divided into strips, like a chrysanthemum, and the flowers are small, similar to hibiscus.

古文：出桂州。
现代文：此木出自桂州。
English: This tree comes from Guizhou.

古文：山茶
现代文：山茶
English: Mountain tea

古文：山茶似海石榴，出桂州。
现代文：山茶很像海石榴，出自桂州。
English: Mountain tea is very similar to sea pomegranate and comes from Guizhou.

古文：蜀地亦有。
现代文：蜀地也有。
English: It is also found in Shunde.

古文：夏州槐
现代文：夏州槐
English: Xiazhou, Jiangsu

古文：夏州唯一邮，有槐树数株。
现代文：夏州只有一个邮亭，亭前有几棵槐树。
English: There is only one post office in Xiazhou, and there are several eucalyptus trees in front of the post office.

古文：盐州或要叶，行牒求之。
现代文：盐州有人想要槐树叶，就以书信相求。
English: Some people in Yanzhou want eucalyptus leaves, so they ask for them by letter.

古文：赤白柽
现代文：赤白柽
English: Red-and-white partridge

古文：赤白柽出凉州，大者无，灰伤人。
现代文：赤白柽出在凉州，没有很大的，其灰可以伤人。
English: The red-and-white dragonfly is found in Liangzhou. It is not very large, and its ash can hurt people.

古文：灰汁煮铜，可以为银。
现代文：用其灰汁煮铜，可以变铜为银。
English: If you boil copper with its lye, you can turn it into silver.

古文：楷木
现代文：楷木
English: Kaiki

古文：蜀中有木类柞。
现代文：蜀地有一种树类似柞树。
English: There is a tree in Shu similar to the eucalyptus.

古文：众木荣时，如枯枿。
现代文：其它草木繁荣之时，它就像枯萎似的。
English: When other plants flourish, it seems to wither away.

古文：隆冬方荫芽布阴。
现代文：数九隆冬它倒发芽布荫。
English: In the dead of winter, it sprouts and grows.

古文：蜀人呼为楷木。
现代文：蜀人称它是楷木。
English: The Shu people call it cedar.

古文：楮
现代文：楮
English: 

古文：壳田久废，必生构。
现代文：板结的田地长期荒废，一定会长出构来。
English: If a boarded-up field is abandoned for a long period of time, it is bound to become overgrown.

古文：叶有瓣。
现代文：构的叶有瓣。
English: The leaves are crenate.

古文：大曰楮，小曰构。
现代文：大的叫楮，小的叫构。
English: Big calls, small calls.

古文：文理木
现代文：文理木
English: Bunriki

古文：宗庙文木
现代文：宗庙文木
English: So-ji Temple Bunki

古文：宗庙地中生赤木，人君礼各得其宜也。
现代文：宗庙的地中央长出红色树木来，这是人、君、礼各方面相宜的征兆。
English: Red trees grow in the center of the grounds of the ancestral temple, which is an auspicious sign for all aspects of people, government, and ritual.

古文：文木简
现代文：文木简
English: Bunki Jane

古文：齐建元初，延陵季子庙，旧有涌井，井北忽有金石声，掘深二丈，得沸泉。泉中得木简，长尺，广一寸二分。隐起字曰： 庐山道士张陵再拜谒。 
现代文：南齐建元初年，延陵季子庙里，本来有一口井，井北忽然间有金石之声，于是人们就对那里挖掘，挖到两丈深，挖出一眼沸泉，从泉中得到一束木简，长一尺，宽一寸二分，上面的字是： 庐山道士张陵再拜谒。 
English: In the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, there was originally a well in the Yanling Ji Zi Temple in South Qi. Suddenly, there was a sound of gold and stone to the north of the well, so people dug there, dug to a depth of two feet, dug out a boiling spring, and obtained a bunch of strips of wood from the spring, one foot long and one inch and two minutes wide. The words on the top were: 山道士张陵再拜.

古文：木坚而白，字色黄。
现代文：木简的木质坚硬而且白，字是黄色的。
English: The wood of the block is hard and white, and the letters are yellow.

古文：古文柱
现代文：古文柱
English: An ancient pillar

古文：齐建元二年夏，庐陵长溪水冲击山麓崩，长六七尺。
现代文：南齐建元二年夏，庐陵长溪水把山麓冲垮了一段，长六七尺。
English: In the summer of the second year of the Southern Qi Jianyuan, the water of the Fuling Long Creek washed down a section of the foot of the mountain, which was sixty-seven feet long.

古文：下得柱千余根，皆十围，长者一丈，短者八九尺。
现代文：从下面得到一千多根柱子，都是十围粗。长的一丈，短的八九尺。
English: From below, more than a thousand pillars were obtained, all of which were ten times thicker. The longest was one meter high, and the shortest was eighty-nine feet.

古文：头题古文，字不可识。
现代文：柱头上题写着古文，字不能认。
English: On the top of the post there is an inscription in an unrecognisable ancient script.

古文：江淹以问王俭。
现代文：江淹带着这一问题去请教王俭。
English: Jiang Duan took this problem to consult Wang Jian.

古文：俭云： 江东不闲隶书，秦汉时柱也。 
现代文：王俭说： 江东不熟悉隶书，这是秦汉时期的柱子。 
English: Wang Jian said: Jiangdong is not familiar with the script, which is the pillar of the Qin and Han dynasties.

古文：三字薪
现代文：三字薪
English: Three-character salary

古文：齐永明九年，秣陵安时寺，有古树，伐以为薪。
现代文：南齐永明九年，秣陵安时寺里的一棵古树，被砍倒做了烧柴。
English: In the ninth year of Yongming in Nanqi, an ancient tree in Anshi Temple in Fuling was chopped down to make firewood.

古文：木理自然有 法天德 三字。
现代文：人们发现这棵树的纹理自然形成了 法天德 三个字。
English: People found that the texture of the tree naturally formed the three characters of "Fatiande."

古文：天尊薪
现代文：天尊薪
English: Tensun salary

古文：唐都官员外陈修古言，西川一县，不记名，吏因换狱卒木为薪，有天尊形像存焉。太平木
现代文：唐都官员外陈修古讲，西川有一个县，不记得县名了，县吏因为换狱卒的木头当柴烧，发现木柴上有天尊的形象。太平木
English: Chen Xuguo, an official of the Tang capital, said that there was a county in West Sichuan, but he could not remember the name of the county. The county officials used the wood of the prison guard as firewood, and found the image of the heavenly god on the firewood. Taiping Wood

古文：异木。唐大历中，成都百姓郭远，因樵，获瑞木一茎。理成字曰： 天下太平 。
现代文：唐大历年间，成都百姓郭远，因为上山打柴，得到一根祥瑞的木头，那上面的纹理形成四个字： 天下太平 。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, the people of Chengdu, Guoyuan, because they went to the mountains to collect firewood, obtained a good-looking wood, and the texture above it formed four words: the world is peaceful.

古文：诏藏于秘阁。
现代文：皇帝下诏书把这根木头藏到秘阁里。
English: The emperor issued an edict to hide the piece of wood in a secret place.

古文：天王槐
现代文：天王槐
English: Tennozaki

古文：长安持国寺，寺门前有槐树数株。
现代文：长安持国寺的门前有几棵槐树。
English: There are a few eucalyptus trees in front of the door of Chang'an Jiguo Temple.

古文：金监买一株，令所使巧工解之。
现代文：金监买下一棵，让他手下的能工巧匠们分割它。
English: The gold inspector bought a tree and asked his skilled craftsmen to divide it.

古文：及入内回，工言木无他异。
现代文：等到割切到树身之内，工匠说这棵树和其它树没什么两样。
English: After cutting into the tree, the craftsman said that the tree was no different from any other tree.

古文：金大嗟惋，令胶之。曰： 此不堪矣。
现代文：金监很是惋惜，让工匠们把树胶合起来，说： 这样切割是不行了，仅是让你们见识见识我的功夫罢了。 
English: The gold inspector was very sorry and asked the craftsmen to glue the tree together, saying: "It's not possible to cut it like this, I just want you to see my hard work."

古文：但使尔知予工也。 及别理解之，每片一天王，塔戟成就焉。
现代文：等到他另外辨别纹理分割槐树，每片上都有一个天王像，塔和戟也都是木纹生就的。
English: When he separated the eucalyptus trees by distinguishing the texture, there was a heavenly king image on each piece, and the tower and beak were also made of wood grain.

古文：色陵木
现代文：色陵木
English: Shoryogi

古文：台山有色陵木，理如绫窠。百姓取为枕，呼为色陵枕。
现代文：台山有色陵木，纹理像绫子构成的巢穴，当地百姓把它做成枕头，称为 色陵枕 。
English: Taishan colored wood, texture like a nest made up of hazelnuts, the local people made it into a pillow, known as a colored pillow.

古文：凤翔知客郭璩，其父曾主作坊。
现代文：凤翔佛寺中主管接待客人的僧人郭璩，他父亲曾是一个作坊的主人。
English: Guo Jun, the monk in charge of receiving guests at Fengxiang Buddhist Temple, whose father was a workshop owner.

古文：将解一木，其间疑有铁石，锯不可入。遂以新锯，兼焚香祝之，其锯乃行。
现代文：有一回他分割一块木头，锯不进去。他怀疑木中有铁石。于是他换了一把新锯，又烧香祷告，锯才渐渐锯进去。
English: Once he split a piece of wood and the saw did not go in. He suspected that there was iron in the wood. So he replaced a new saw and burned incense and prayed, and the saw gradually sawed into it.

古文：及破，木文有二马形，一黑一赤，相啮，其口鼻鬃尾，蹄脚筋骨，与生无异。
现代文：等到锯开，见木纹生成两个马形图案，一黑一红，互相啮咬，它们的口、鼻、鬃、尾、蹄、脚、筋、骨，与活马没有不同。
English: Wait until the sawing, see the wood grain produce two horse-shaped patterns, one black and one red, bite each other, their mouth, nose, beak, tail, hoof, foot, sinew, bone, no different from the living horse.

