古文：秘书监虞世南以太宗颇好畋猎，上疏谏曰： 臣闻秋狝冬狩，盖惟恒典；射隼从禽，备乎前诰。
现代文：秘书监虞世南因为唐太宗喜欢打猎，就上疏说： 我听说秋冬两季打猎，是历来的传统，射杀猛兽，追遂飞禽，前人已有训诫。
English: Because Tang Taizong liked to hunt, his secretary, Guan Yu Shi Nan, said to Shang Shu, "I heard that hunting in autumn and winter is an age-old tradition. People have been admonished to shoot wild beasts and chase birds.

古文：伏惟陛下因听览之余辰，顺天道以杀伐，将欲摧班碎掌，亲御皮轩，穷猛兽之窟穴，尽逸材于林薮。
现代文：陛下在批阅奏章，临朝听政之余，亲自驾着打猎的车子，到凶禽猛兽出没的森林洞穴之中，猎杀凶残的动物，保卫黎民百姓，用动物的皮毛，制作兵器。
English: On the sidelines of approving the reading of the musical score and listening to the government, His Majesty personally drove a hunting car to the forest caves infested with birds and beasts, hunted and killed ferocious animals, protected the people of Li, and used animal fur to make weapons.

古文：夷凶剪暴，以卫黎元，收革擢羽，用充军器，举旗效获，式遵前古。
现代文：打猎成功后，让旗帜高高飘扬，以显示赫赫国威，这是在遵循古代先王们传下来的规矩。
English: After a successful hunt, let the flag fly high to show the prestige of the country, which is following the rules handed down by ancient kings.

古文：然黄屋之尊，金舆之贵，八方之所仰德，万国之所系心，清道而行，犹戒衔橛。斯盖重慎防微，为社稷也。
现代文：然而陛下乃天下最为尊贵的人，陛下出行打猎，百姓仰慕你的圣德，牵挂你的行踪，这怎不叫万民揪心，所以陛下应当谨慎行事，保重自己，为江山社稷着想啊！
English: However, your majesty is the most honorable person in the world. Your majesty travels to hunt, and the people admire your holiness and are concerned about your whereabouts. How can this not make the hearts of all the people tremble? Therefore, your majesty should be cautious, take care of yourself, and think about the country and society!

古文：是以马卿直谏于前，张昭变色于后，臣诚细微，敢忘斯义？
现代文：汉武帝好猎熊，司马相如上疏力谏，武帝于是打消了此念。吴主孙权好射虎，张昭晓以利害，吴主也接受了意见。
English: Emperor Hanwu was fond of bear hunting, and Sima Xiang was like Shang Shao Lijuan, so Emperor Wu dismissed this idea. Wu Lord Sun Quan was fond of shooting tigers, Zhang Zhaoxiao was interested, and Wu Lord also accepted the suggestion.

古文：且天弧星罼，所殪已多，颁禽赐获，皇恩亦溥。
现代文：我虽人微言轻，但也要尽到臣子之职。自然无情，死亡的禽兽已经很多了，陛下对狩猎进行嘉奖，浩大的皇恩也已为老百姓所知。
English: Although I am a soft-spoken person, I have to fulfill my duties as a courtier. Nature is merciless, there have been many dead animals, His Majesty has given awards for hunting, and the vast royal favor has been known to the common people.

古文：伏愿时息猎车，且韬长戟，不拒刍荛之请，降纳涓浍之流，袒裼徒搏，任之群下，则贻范百王，永光万代。 
现代文：臣只希望陛下存放好猎车和器具，采纳臣下的意见，把脱衣露体的事让臣子去做，那么就可以为王者之楷模，永载史册了。 
English: The vassal only hoped that His Majesty would store his hunting car and equipment well, accept the opinions of his vassals, and let the vassal do the undressed and naked thing, then he could be the model of the king and be recorded in history forever.

古文：太宗深嘉其言。
现代文：唐太宗听罢，对他的意见深表赞许。
English: Tang Taizong listened attentively and expressed deep appreciation for his opinion.

古文：谷那律为谏议大夫，尝从太宗出猎，在途遇雨，太宗问曰： 油衣若为得不漏？ 
现代文：谷那律担任谏议大夫的时候，曾跟随唐太宗外出打猎。途中遇上大雨，唐太宗问谷那律： 油衣该怎么做才不会漏雨呢？ 
English: When Gu Naru served as the chief adviser to Tang Taizong, he went out hunting with Tang Taizong. On the way, there was a heavy rain, and Tang Taizong asked Gu Naru: "How should the oil coat be made so that it doesn't leak?"

古文：对曰： 能以瓦为之，必不漏矣。 
现代文：谷那律回答说： 如果用瓦来做，肯定不会漏雨。 
English: Gu Naru replied, "If it is made of tiles, it will definitely not leak rain."

古文：意欲太宗弗数游猎，大被嘉纳。赐帛五十段，加以金带。
现代文：言下之意是希望太宗不要经常游猎。唐太宗对他的回答大为赞赏，赏给他帛五十段，外加一条金带。
English: The implication was that he hoped Taizong would not go hunting so often. Tang Taizong greatly appreciated his answer and rewarded him with 50 rupees and a gold belt.

古文：贞观十一年，太宗谓侍臣曰： 朕昨往怀州，有上封事者云： 何为恒差山东众丁于苑内营造？
现代文：贞观十一年，唐太宗对侍臣说： 我过去到怀州去，有人上书说： 为什么总是差遣山东的劳工到宫里修造苑囿呢？
English: In the eleventh year of Zhenguan, Tang Taizong said to his vassal: I went to Huizhou, and someone wrote: Why do you always send laborers from Shandong to the palace to build courtyards?

古文：即日徭役，似不下隋时。
现代文：当今劳役之重，已经和隋代不相上下了。
English: Today's labor service is as heavy as that of the Sui Dynasty.

古文：怀、洛以东，残人不堪其命，而田猎犹数，骄逸之主也。
现代文：怀州、洛水以东的百姓已经苦不堪言了，而皇上还时常到那里去打猎，真是一个骄奢的君王啊。
English: The people east of Waizhou and Luoshui are already in dire straits, and the emperor still often goes there to hunt. What a proud monarch.

古文：今者复来怀州田猎，忠谏不复至洛阳矣。 
现代文：今天皇上又到怀州来打猎，看来皇上是听不进忠言的。 
English: Today, the Emperor came to Waizhou again to go hunting. It seems that the Emperor did not listen to the advice.

古文：四时蒐田，既是帝王常礼，今日怀州，秋毫不干于百姓。
现代文：一年四季出行打猎，是古代帝王常有的礼数，今日我到怀州，对老百姓不会带来一丝一毫的干扰。
English: Traveling to hunt all year round is a common courtesy of ancient emperors. Today, when I go to Waizhou, I will not cause the slightest disturbance to the common people.

古文：凡上书谏正，自有常准，臣贵有词，主贵能改。
现代文：凡是上书提出意见的，一般我都采纳，臣子贵在能直谏，君王贵在能改正。
English: I generally accept the opinions of anyone who submits a letter. It is important for a vassal to be able to criticize, and it is important for a monarch to be able to correct.

古文：如斯诋毁，有似咒诅。 
现代文：但如今这样的诋毁，像是在诅咒我啊。 
English: But now this slander, it's like he's cursing me.

古文：侍中魏征奏称： 国家开直言之路，所以上封事者尤多。
现代文：侍中魏徵说： 朝廷广开言路，所以上书提意见的人众多。
English: Wei Zheng, an aide-de-camp, said: The imperial court has opened up a wide range of opinions, so there are many people who have put forward their opinions in writing.

古文：陛下亲自披阅，或冀臣言可取，所以侥幸之士得肆其丑。
现代文：陛下亲自批阅奏书，是希望采纳好的意见，侥幸大胆上书的人也因此得以把他们的一点浅见告知陛下。
English: His Majesty personally approved the reading of the report, in the hope of adopting good opinions, and those who dared to submit the report were thus able to inform His Majesty of their shallow opinions.

古文：臣谏其君，甚须折衷，从容讽谏。
现代文：臣子向国君提意见，必须言语委婉，措辞得体，借此以讽彼。
English: When a courtier offers his opinion to the sovereign, he must be tactful and use appropriate words to satirize him.

古文：汉元帝尝以酎祭宗庙，出便门，御楼船。
现代文：汉元帝曾到宗庙去祭祀，想从便门出去，再乘楼船到宗庙。
English: Emperor Hanyuan once went to the ancestral temple to make a sacrifice. He wanted to go out through the ticket gate and then take the boat to the ancestral temple.

古文：御史大夫薛广德当乘舆免冠曰： 宜从桥，陛下不听臣言，臣自刎，以颈血污车轮，陛下不入庙矣。 
现代文：御史大夫薛广德挡住去路，站在汉文帝乘坐的马车外，摘下官帽，说： 陛下应当从桥上经过，如果陛下不听臣的话，我就自尽，让我颈中的鲜血玷污你的车轮，使你进不了宗庙。 
English: Grand Historian Xue Guangde blocked the way, stood outside the carriage in which Emperor Hanwen was riding, took off his official cap and said: Your Majesty should pass through the bridge, if Your Majesty does not listen to me, I will commit suicide, let the blood in my neck stain your wheels, so that you cannot enter the ancestral temple.

古文：元帝不悦。
现代文：汉文帝很不高兴。
English: Emperor Hanwen was very unhappy.

古文：圣主不乘危，广德言可听。 
现代文：光禄卿张猛说： 我听说如果君王圣明，那么臣子就会忠直。乘船危险，过桥安全。
English: Zhang Meng said: I have heard that if the sovereign is saintly, then the vassals will be loyal. It is dangerous to take a boat, but it is safe to cross the bridge.

古文：元帝曰： 晓人不当如是耶！ 
现代文：圣明的君王不会冒无谓的危险，好的意见是可以采纳的。 
English: The wise king does not take unnecessary risks, and good advice can be taken.

古文：乃从桥。
现代文：汉文帝于是就从桥上经过。
English: So Emperor Hanwen passed by on the bridge.

古文：以此而言，张猛可谓直臣谏君也。 
现代文：从这点看，张猛真可算是一位敢于直谏的大臣啊。 
English: From this point of view, Zhang Meng can truly be considered a minister who dares to be forthright.

古文：太宗大悦。
现代文：唐太宗听后非常高兴。
English: Tang Taizong was very happy after listening.

古文：贞观十四年，太宗幸同州沙苑，亲格猛兽，复晨出夜还。
现代文：贞观十四年，唐太宗到同州的沙苑去打猎，他亲自射杀猛兽，披星戴月，早出晚归。
English: In the 14th year of Zhenguan, Tang Taizong went to Sha Yuan in the same state to go hunting. He personally shot the beast, wearing the star and the moon, leaving early and returning late.

古文：特进魏征奏言： 臣闻《书》美文王不敢盘于游田，《传》述《虞箴》称夷、羿以为戒。
现代文：特进魏徵上书说： 《尚书》上赞美周文王不沉溺于打猎，《左传》中载有虞人进谏，说夷、羿太喜欢打猎，应该深以为戒。
English: The special introduction to Wei Zheng said in the letter: "Shang Shu" praised King Zhou Wen for not indulging in hunting, and "Zhouzhuan" contained the statesman Jin Yao, saying that Yi and Yao were too fond of hunting, and should be deeply admonished.

古文：昔汉文临峻坂欲驰下，袁盎揽辔曰： 圣主不乘危，不侥幸，今陛下骋六飞，驰不测之山，如有马惊车败，陛下纵欲自轻，奈高庙何？ 
现代文：过去汉文帝骑马来到峻坂，想飞驰而下，大臣袁盎紧紧抓住汉文帝的马辔说： 圣明的君主不冒失、不侥幸，现在陛下骑着骏马，在情况不明的山坡上飞驰。如果马受惊吓，车子失灵怎么办？陛下纵然轻视自己的生命，但如何向列祖列宗交待？ 
English: In the past, Emperor Hanwen rode a horse to a steep slope and wanted to gallop down. Minister Yuan Ang held tightly to Emperor Hanwen's stirrup and said, "The enlightened monarch does not take risks or chance. Now, His Majesty is riding a steed and galloping on a hillside in an unknown situation. What if the horse is frightened and the car fails? Even though His Majesty despises his own life, how can he communicate with his ancestors?

古文：孝武好格猛兽，相如进谏： 力称乌获，捷言庆忌，人诚有之，兽亦宜然。
现代文：汉武帝也喜好猎杀猛兽，司马相如进谏说： 力气大如乌获，射箭快捷如庆忌这样的人的确有。
English: Emperor Hanwu also liked to hunt and kill ferocious beasts. Sima Xiangru Jintao said: There are indeed people with great strength like Wu Guo, and quick archery like Qingyi.

古文：猝遇逸材之兽，骇不存之地，虽乌获、逄蒙之伎不得用，而枯木朽株尽为难矣。虽万全而无患，然而本非天子所宜。 
现代文：可是同样的，凶残的野兽也不少。如果在险恶之境突然窜出猛兽，即使有乌获、逄蒙的本领也无计可施。皇上打猎虽然有很多人保护，但这种事情终非帝王所为。 
English: However, there are also many ferocious beasts. If a ferocious beast suddenly appears in a dangerous situation, there is nothing you can do, even if you have the ability to catch it. Although there are many people to protect the emperor's hunting, this kind of thing is not done by the emperor.

古文：孝元帝郊泰畤，因留射猎，薛广德称： 窃见关东困极，百姓离灾。
现代文：孝元帝到效祀之地打猎，意犹未尽，想留守在猎区继续狩猎，臣子薛广德说： 如今关东一带非常贫困，百姓流离失所的数不胜数。
English: Emperor Xiaoyuan went to the place of worship to hunt, but he was still not satisfied, and wanted to stay in the hunting area to continue hunting, said the vassal Xue Guangde: Nowadays, the Kanto area is very poor, and there are countless displaced people.

古文：今日撞亡秦之钟，歌郑、卫之乐，士卒暴露，从官劳倦，欲安宗庙社稷，何凭河暴虎，未之戒也 ？
现代文：这个时候陛下留在这里打猎，是在自撞使秦国覆没的丧钟，歌唱郑国、卫国的靡靡之音啊。这样做将使士兵疲于奔命，随行的官员劳顿不堪。要想江山永固，为什么要靠猎杀老虎来获得呢？望陛下三思。 
English: If His Majesty stays here to hunt at this time, he will be ringing the death knell of Qin, and singing the song of Zheng. This will make the soldiers run for their lives, and the accompanying officials will be exhausted. If you want the country to be eternal, why do you need to hunt tigers? Your Majesty should think twice.

古文：臣窃思此数帝，心岂木石，独不好驰骋之乐？
现代文：我提到的这几位帝王，他们都心非木石，难道就偏偏不喜欢骑马打猎的欢娱？
English: These emperors I have mentioned, all of whom had their hearts in the right place, didn't they just love the fun of riding horses and hunting?

古文：而割情屈己，从臣下之言者，志存为国，不为身也。
现代文：其实，他们只是能割舍私情，控制自己，听从臣下的意见，一心为国，不为己而已。
English: In fact, they are only able to give up their personal feelings, control themselves, listen to the opinions of their subjects, and work for the country, not for themselves.

古文：臣伏闻车驾近出，亲格猛兽，晨往夜还。
现代文：我听说陛下驾车出去，亲自捕杀猛兽，早出晚归。
English: I heard that His Majesty drives out, personally hunts down and kills wild beasts, and leaves early and returns late.

古文：以万乘之尊，暗行荒野，践深林，涉丰草，甚非万全之计。
现代文：陛下如此尊贵之躯，在荒野里跟踪野兽，深入森林，出没于茂草之中，恐怕非万全之策。
English: For such a dignified body as His Majesty's, stalking wild animals in the wilderness, going deep into the forest, and lurking in the undergrowth is probably not a foolproof strategy.

古文：愿陛下割私情之娱，罢格兽之乐，上为宗庙社稷，下慰群寮兆庶。 
现代文：我希望陛下舍弃娱乐的私情，上以国家江山为念，下以安慰臣子的担忧之心。 
English: I hope that His Majesty will give up the entertainment of his private life, focus on the country, and comfort the worries of his subjects.

古文：太宗曰： 昨日之事偶属尘昏，非故然也，自今深用为诫。 
现代文：唐太宗听后，面露愧色，说： 昨天打猎的事纯属偶然，不是有心那样做的，从今后我要牢记此事并以此为诫。 
English: After listening, Tang Taizong looked ashamed and said, "Yesterday's hunting was purely accidental, I didn't do it intentionally. I'll keep this in mind in the future and take it as a warning.

古文：贞观十四年，冬十月，太宗将幸栎阳游畋，县丞刘仁轨以收获未毕，非人君顺动之时，诣行所，上表切谏。太宗遂罢猎，擢拜仁轨新安令。
现代文：贞观十四年冬十月，唐太宗准备去栎阳游猎。栎阳县丞刘仁轨因为十月农村庄稼收割还未完毕，这个时候君主出游打猎不适宜，便赶紧前往太宗一行停驻的地方，呈上了一篇奏疏，言辞极为恳切，唐太宗被他的言语所打动，就此停止打猎，并提升刘仁轨为新安县令。
English: In October of the winter of the 14th year of Zhenguan, Tang Taizong was preparing to go on a hunting trip to Fenyang. Because the harvest of rural crops in Fenyang County was not yet completed in October, it was not appropriate for the monarch to go hunting at this time. He hurriedly went to the place where Taizong's party was stationed and presented a report. The words were very sincere. Tang Taizong was moved by his words and stopped hunting, and promoted Liu Renlu to the county magistrate of Xin'an.

