古文：顺帝顺皇帝讳准，字仲谋，小字智观，明帝第三子也。
现代文：顺帝号准，字仲谋，小字智观，明帝的第三个儿子。
English: Shun Di was the third son of Emperor Ming.

古文：泰始五年七月癸丑生。
现代文：泰始五年七月三日出生。
English: Taishi was born on July 3, 1955.

古文：七年，封安成王，食邑三千户。
现代文：七年，封为安成王，食邑三千户。
English: Seven years later, he was given the title of Prince of Ancheng, and served 3,000 households.

古文：仍拜抚军将军，置佐史。
现代文：又拜为抚军将军，配给佐史。
English: He also bowed to the general of the army of Fuzhou and distributed to Sashi.

古文：废帝即位，为扬州刺史。
现代文：废帝即位后，任扬州刺史。
English: After the enthronement of the former emperor, he was appointed Yangzhou chief historian.

古文：元徽二年，进号车骑将军、都督扬、南豫二州诸军事，给鼓吹一部，刺史如故。
现代文：元徽二年，晋升为车骑将军、都督扬南豫二州军事，赐给乐队一支，刺史照旧担任。
English: In the second year of the Yuan Dynasty, he was promoted to the general of chariot and cavalry and the military governor of the two states of Yangnan and Henan. He was given an orchestra, and he continued to serve as the chief conductor.

古文：四年，又进号骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司，班剑三十人，都督、刺史如故。
现代文：四年，又晋升为骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司，配给班剑三十人，都督、刺史照旧担任。
English: In four years, he was promoted to General of Cavalry, Kaifu Rites and Three Departments, and was assigned to a squadron of 30 people. He continued to serve as the governor and chief historian.

古文：元徽五年七月戊子夜，废帝殒，奉迎王入居朝堂。
现代文：元徽五年七月七日夜，废帝丧命，奉迎入朝。八日，即皇帝位。
English: On the night of July 7th in the 5th year of the Yuan Dynasty, the deposed emperor died and was ushered into the imperial court. On the 8th day, he became emperor.

古文：顷甸服未静，师旅连年，委蓄屡空，劳敝莫偃。
现代文：升明元年，改纪元，大赦天下，赐文臣武将爵二等。
English: In the first year of the Ming Dynasty, the era was changed, the world was amnestied, and Wencheng was given the title of second-class military commander.

古文：而丹雘之饰，糜耗难訾，宝赂之费，征赋靡计。
现代文：四日，镇军将军齐王出京城镇守东城，以宰相名义辅佐朝政。六日，下诏说： 先前天下不太平，战事连年不断，国库空虚，百姓疲敝。而用来奢侈享受的费用，难计其数。
English: On the 4th, the general of the town army, Qi Wang, went out of the town of Beijing to guard the East City, and assisted the government in the name of the prime minister. On the 6th, the next edict said: The world is not peaceful, the war continues year after year, the treasury is empty, and the people are tired. And the expenses used for luxury enjoyment are difficult to count.

古文：今车服仪制，实宜约损，使徽章有序，勿得侈溢。
现代文：今车辆服饰，都应简朴节约，制定标准，不得违犯。
English: Now vehicle clothing should be simple and economical, set standards, and must not be violated.

古文：可罢省御府二署。
现代文：撤宫中御府二署。
English: The second ward of Chugo Mifu was closed.

古文：凡工丽雕镌，伤风毁治，一皆禁断。
现代文：凡是雕梁画栋，有伤风化不利国家的，一律禁止。 
English: It is forbidden to carve beams and paint buildings in any country that is unfavourable to good manners.

古文：庶永昭宪则，弘兹始政。 征西大将军、荆州刺史沈攸之进号车骑大将军、开府仪同三司；尚书左仆射、中领军、镇军将军、南兗州刺史齐王为司空、录尚书事、骠骑大将军，刺史如故。中书令、卫将军、开府仪同三司、抚军将军刘秉为尚书令，加中军将军；镇西将军、郢州刺史晋熙王燮为抚军将军、扬州刺史；南阳王翙为郢州刺史。
现代文：征西大将军、荆州刺史沈攸之晋升为车骑大将军、开府仪同三司，任命尚书左仆射、中领军、领军将军、南兖州刺史齐王为司空、录尚书事、骠骑大将军，刺史照旧担任，中书令、卫将军、开府仪同三司、抚军将军刘秉为尚书令，并加封为中军将军，安西将军、郢州刺史晋熙王燮为抚军将军、扬州刺史、南阳王发羽为郢州刺史。
English: The general of the Western Conquest, Shen You of Jingzhou, was promoted to the general of the cavalry and cavalry, Kaifu Yi and the three divisions, and appointed Shang Shuxi Zuopuzha, the leader of the central army, the leader of the general army, Wang Qi of Nanxuzhou as the secretary of the sky, Shang Shuxi, the general of the cavalry and cavalry, and Zhang Shuxi as before, and the general of the central army, Liu Bing of the central army, and the general of the Chinese army, and the general of the Anxi army, Wang Xi of Zhangzhou, the general of the Jinxi army, Yangzhou Shux

古文：辛丑，尚书右仆射王僧虔为尚书仆射，右卫将军刘韫为中领军，金紫光禄大夫王琨为右光禄大夫。
现代文：十一日，任命尚书右仆射王僧虔为尚书左仆射，右卫将军刘韫为中领军，金紫光禄大夫王琨为右光禄大夫。
English: On the 11th day of the month, he appointed Shangshu's right-hand man Shaowang Xiangqian as Shangshu's left-hand man Shaowang, the right guard general Liu Wei as the middle leader, and the gold and purple light doctor Wang Wei as the right light doctor.

古文：给司空齐王钱五百万，布五千匹。
现代文：赏给司空齐王钱五百万，布五千匹。
English: Five million yuan and five thousand pieces of cloth were awarded to Siku Qi Wang.

古文：癸卯，车驾谒太庙。
现代文：十四日，皇上拜谒太庙。
English: On the 14th, the emperor paid his last respects to the Empress Dowager.

古文：丙午，以安西参军明庆符为青、冀二州刺史，武陵王赞为郢州刺史，新除郢州刺史南阳王翙为湘州刺史，司空、南兗州刺史齐王改领南徐州刺史，征虏将军李安民为南兗州刺史。
现代文：十七日，任命安西参军明庆符为青、冀二州刺史，武陵王赞为郢州刺史，新任郢州刺史南阳王翊为湘州刺史，司空、南兖州刺史齐王改任南徐州刺史，征虏将军李安民任南兖州刺史。
English: On the 17th, Anxi Mingqingfu was appointed as the military historian of Qing and Hebei two states, Wuling Wangzan was appointed as the military historian of Zhangzhou, the newly appointed military historian of Zhangzhou Nanyang Wang Rong was appointed as the military historian of Hunan, Sikuo and Qi Wang, the military historian of Southern Zhangzhou, were appointed as the military historian of Southern Xuzhou, and the conscript general Li Anmin was appointed as the military historian of Southern Zhangzhou.

古文：雍州大水，八月壬子，遣使赈恤，蠲除税调。
现代文：雍州发洪水，八月九日，派使臣赈济，免除赋税。
English: When floods hit Yongzhou, on August 9th, he sent envoys to help the victims and exempted them from paying taxes.

古文：以骠骑长史刘澄之为南豫州刺史。
现代文：任命骠骑长史刘澄之为南豫州刺史。
English: He appointed Liu Cheng, the chief of the imperial cavalry, as the governor of South Henan Province.

古文：山阳太守于天宝、新吴县子秦立有罪，下狱死。
现代文：山阳太守于天宝、新吴县子秦立犯罪，被投入监狱处死。
English: Sanyang Taishu committed crimes in Tianbao and Ziqinli in Xinwu County, and was thrown into prison and executed.

古文：癸亥，司空袁粲镇石头。
现代文：十一日，整改平淮署。十二日，司徒袁粲镇守石头城。
English: On the 11th day, the rectification and reform of the General Administration of the Peaceful Reunification of China was carried out. On the 12th day, the town of Szeto Yuanxuan guarded Stone Town.

古文：丁卯，原除元年以前逋调；复郡县禄田。
现代文：二十一日，免除升明元年以前的租税；恢复郡县官员的俸禄田。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, the tax before the first year of the year was exempted; the salary fields of county officials were restored.

古文：戊辰，崇拜帝所生陈昭华为皇太妃。
现代文：二十三日，尊生母陈昭华为皇太妃。
English: On the 23rd, His Imperial Highness's birth mother Chen Zhaohua became the Empress Dowager.

古文：庚午，司空长史谢朏、卫军长史江斅、中书侍郎褚炫、武陵王文学刘侯入直殿省，参侍文义。
现代文：二十四日，司空长史谢紻、卫军长史江敩、中书侍郎褚炫、武陵王文学士刘候进宫，供皇上咨询文艺。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, the Secretary of the Air Ministry, Shi Xiejun, the Chief of the Imperial Guard, Shi Jiangjun, the Chinese Literature Attendant, Lang Yu Xuan, and the King of Wuling Literature Scholar, Liu Huo, entered the palace to consult the emperor on literature and art.

古文：朕将亲览，甄其茂异。庶野无遗彦，永激遐芬。 己酉，庐陵王暠薨。
现代文：今可下令各州郡，搜寻人才，登记姓名向上推荐，我将亲自考核，甄别他们的品德才能。不要有所遗漏。 十九日，庐陵王詗去世。
English: I can now order all states and counties to search for talents, register names and recommend them to the top, I will personally examine and screen their moral qualities. Don't leave anything out. On the 19th, Fuling Wang Yao passed away.

古文：冬十一月己酉，倭国遣使献方物。
现代文：冬十一月十日，倭国派使者来进献特产。
English: On the 10th day of the 11th month in winter, Wakoku sent an envoy to bring in special products.

古文：丙午，员外散骑侍郎胡羡生行越州刺史，以交州刺史沈景德为广州刺史。
现代文：十二日，任命员外散骑侍郎胡羡生为行越州刺史。交州刺史沈景德为广州刺史。
English: On the 12th, Hu Qian Sheng, a non-local samurai, was appointed as the governor of Xingyuezhou, and Shen Jingde, the governor of Jiaozhou, was appointed as the governor of Guangzhou.

古文：十二月丁巳，以骁骑将军王广之为徐州刺史。
现代文：十二月二十日，任命骁骑将军王广之为徐州刺史。
English: On December 20th, General Wang Guang was appointed as the governor of Xuzhou.

古文：车骑大将军、荆州刺史沈攸之举兵反。
现代文：车骑大将军、荆州刺史沈攸之起兵造反。
English: The rebellion was led by the general of cavalry and cavalry, Jingzhou Jishi Shen Yu.

古文：丁卯，录公齐王入守朝堂，侍中萧嶷镇东府。
现代文：二十二日，录公齐王入守朝中，侍中萧嶷镇守东府。
English: On the 22nd, Rokkong Qi Wang entered the middle of the court, and the middle of the chamberlains, Xiao Yao Zhen, entered the eastern capital.

古文：戊辰，内外纂严。
现代文：二十四日，全国戒严。
English: On the 24th, martial law was declared throughout the country.

古文：己巳，以郢州刺史武陵王赞为安西将军、荆州刺史，征虏将军、雍州刺史张敬兒进号镇军将军。
现代文：二十三日，任命郢州刺史武陵王赞为安西将军、荆州刺史，雍州刺史张敬儿晋升为镇军将军。
English: On the 23rd, Wuling Wangzan, the governor of Bozhou, was appointed as the general of Anxi, the governor of Jingzhou, and the governor of Yongzhou, Zhang Jing'er, was promoted to the general of the town army.

古文：右卫将军黄回为平西将军、郢州刺史，督诸军前锋南讨。
现代文：任命右卫将军黄回为平西将军、郢州刺史，率领各军打前锋南讨。
English: He appointed the right guard general Huang Hui as the general of Pingxi and the general of Zhangzhou, and led all the armies to attack the vanguard southward.

古文：征虏将军吕安国为湘州刺史，都官尚书王宽加平西将军。
现代文：任命征虏将军吕安国为湘州刺史，都官尚书王宽加封为平西将军。
English: He appointed the conscript general Lü An Guo as the governor of Hunan Province, and the government official Shang Shou Wang Guang as the governor of Pingxi Province.

古文：庚午，新除左卫将军齐王世子奉新除抚军将军、扬州刺史晋熙王燮镇寻阳之盆城。
现代文：二十五日，新任左卫将军齐王长子奉新、新任抚军将军、扬州刺史晋熙王燮镇守寻阳的盆城。
English: On the 25th, the newly appointed left guard general Qi Wang's eldest son Feng Xin, the newly appointed general of the army of Fuxi, and the Yangzhou prince Jinxi Wang Xizhen guarded the basin city of Huanyang.

古文：壬申，以骁骑将军周盘龙为广州刺史。
现代文：二十六日，任命骁骑将军周盘龙为广州刺史。
English: On the 26th, Zhou Panlong, general of the imperial cavalry, was appointed as the new governor of Guangzhou.

古文：是日，司徒袁粲据石头反，尚书令刘秉、黄门侍郎刘述、冠军王蕴率众赴之。
现代文：同日，司徒袁粲占据石头城反叛，尚书令刘秉、黄门侍郎刘述、冠军王蕴率众投奔。
English: On the same day, Szu Yuanqi occupied Stone Town and rebelled. Shang Shuling Liu Bing, Huangmen waiter Liu Shu, and champion Wang Yun led the crowd to flee.

古文：黄回及辅国将军孙昙瓘、屯骑校尉王宜兴、辅国将军任候伯、左军将军彭文之密相响应。
现代文：黄回和辅国将军孙云灌、屯骑校尉王宜兴、辅国将军任候伯、左军将军彭文之暗中响应。
English: Huang Hui and Auxiliary General Sun Yungan, Cavalry Colonel Wang Yixing, Auxiliary General Ren Xubo, and Left Army General Peng Wenzhi secretly responded.

古文：中领军刘韫、直皞将军卜伯兴在殿内同谋。
现代文：中领军刘韫、直阁将军卜伯兴在宫中响应。
English: Liu Bei, the leader of the Central Military Commission, and General Bu Boxing, the commander of the Central Military Commission, responded in the palace.

古文：录公齐王诛韫等于省内。
现代文：录公齐王在宫内杀了刘韫等人。
English: Luo Gongqi Wang killed Liu Yao and others in the palace.

古文：军主苏烈、王天生、薛道渊、戴僧静等陷石头，斩粲于城内。
现代文：军主刘烈、王天生、薛道渊、戴静等攻破石头城，杀了粲，秉、述、蕴越墙逃跑，被追捕到，处死。
English: The military leaders Liu Lie, Wang Tian Sheng, Xue Daoyuan, Dai Jing and others broke through the stone city, killed Yao, and Bing, Su, and Yan fled across the wall, where they were hunted down and executed.

古文：秉、述、蕴跃城走，追擒之，并伏诛；其余无所问。豫州刺史刘怀珍、雍州刺史张敬兒、广州刺史陈显达并举义兵。
现代文：其他人没有追究。豫州刺史刘怀玲、雍州刺史张敬儿、广州刺史陈显达都起兵勒王。
English: The others were not investigated. Liu Huiling, the chief historian of Yuzhou, Zhang Jing'er, the chief historian of Yongzhou, and Chen Xandada, the chief historian of Guangzhou, were all soldiers of King Le.

古文：司州刺史姚道和、梁州刺史范柏年、湘州行事庾佩玉拥众怀贰。
现代文：司州刺史道和、梁州刺史范柏年、湘州行事庾佩玉聚众图谋叛逆。
English: Sizhou assassin Dowa, Liangzhou assassin Fan Paknian, and Hunan agent Pei Yu gathered together to plot rebellion.

古文：甲戌，大赦天下。
现代文：二十七日，大赦天下。
English: On the 27th, there was a general amnesty.

古文：乙亥，以尚书仆射王僧虔为尚书左仆射，新除中书令王延之为尚书右仆射。
现代文：二十八日，任命尚书仆射王僧虔为尚书左仆射，新任中书令王延之为尚书右仆射。
English: On the 28th, he appointed Wang Xiangqian, Shang Shuxu's servant, as Shang Shuxu's left-hand servant, and Wang Yanjiao, the newly appointed middle-ranking Shuxu's servant, as Shang Shuxu's right-hand servant.

古文：吴郡太守刘遐据郡反，辅国将军张环讨斩之。
现代文：吴郡太守刘遐造反，辅国将军张怀讨伐斩杀了他。
English: The governor of Wuxi County, Liu Bei, rebelled and was killed by the auxiliary general Zhang Huai.

古文：闰月辛巳，屯骑校尉王宜兴有罪伏诛。
现代文：闰十二月九日，屯骑校尉王宜兴犯罪被杀。
English: On the 9th day of the 12th lunar month, Wang Yixing, a cavalry officer, was killed in a crime.

古文：癸巳，沈攸之攻围郢城，前军长史柳世隆固守。攸之弟登之作乱于吴兴，吴兴太守沈文秀讨斩之。
现代文：十日，沈攸之围攻郢城，前军长史柳世隆坚守，修之弟登之在吴兴叛乱，吴兴太守沈文季讨伐斩杀了他。
English: On the 10th, Shen Yue's siege of Lucheng, the former army commander Shi Liu Shilong held out, and Shiu's brother Deng Zhi rebelled in Wu Xing, and Wu Xing's grand marshal Shen Wencai fought and killed him.

古文：己亥，内外戒严。假录公齐王黄钺。
现代文：十一日，全国戒严，皇上借给录公齐王黄钺。
English: On the 11th day of the month, martial law was imposed across the country, and the emperor lent Luo Gongqi Wang Huangqi.

古文：辛丑，宁朔将军、北秦州刺史武都王杨文度进号征西将军。
现代文：十二日，宁朔将军、北秦州刺史武都王扬文度晋升为征西将军。
English: On the 12th, Yang Wendu, General of Ningshuo and King of the Northern Qin State, was promoted to General of the Western Conquest.

古文：乙巳，录公齐王出顿新亭。
现代文：十五日，录公齐王出京城驻扎在新亭。
English: On the fifteenth day, Rokkong Qi Wang left the capital and was stationed at Xinting.

古文：二年春正月，沈攸之遣将公孙方平据西阳。辛酉，建宁太守张谟击破之。
现代文：升明二年正月，沈攸之派将领公孙方平据守西阳，三日，建宁太守张汉击败了他。
English: In the first month of the second year of the Ming Dynasty, Sun Fangping, the general of Shen Yu's faction, defended Xiyang. On the third day, Zhang Han, the governor of Jianning, defeated him.

古文：丁卯，沈攸之自郢城奔散。
现代文：七日，沈攸之自郢城逃走。
English: On the seventh day, Shen Youzhi fled from Lucheng.

古文：己巳，华容县民斩送之。
现代文：十一日，华容县百姓杀了他。
English: On the 11th day, the people of Huarong County killed him.

古文：左将军、豫州刺史刘怀珍进号平南将军。
现代文：左将军、豫州刺史刘怀玲晋升为平南将军。
English: General Zuo and Liu Huiling, the governor of Yuzhou, were promoted to the rank of General Pingnan.

古文：辛未，镇军将军、雍州刺史张敬兒克江陵，斩攸之子光琰，荆州平，同逆皆伏诛。
现代文：十三日，镇军将军、雍州刺史张敬儿攻克江陵，杀攸之的儿子光琰，平定荆州，同党都被处死。
English: On the 13th, the general of the township army, Zhang Jing'er, the leader of the Yongzhou Zhishi, conquered Jiangling, and Guangyao's son, Guangyao, pacified Jingzhou, and his party were all executed.

古文：丙子，解严。
现代文：十七日，解除戒严。
English: On the 17th, martial law was lifted.

古文：以新除侍中柳世隆为尚书右仆射。
现代文：任命新任侍中柳世隆为尚书右仆射。
English: He appointed the new chamberlain, Yanagi Shiro, as his right-hand man.

古文：是日，录公齐王旋镇东府。
现代文：同日，录公齐王旋即镇守东府。
English: On the same day, Luo Gongqi and Wang Zhen immediately took over the defense of the eastern capital.

古文：丁丑，以江州刺史邵陵王友为安南将军、豫州刺史。
现代文：二十一日，委任江州刺史邵陵王友为安南将军、南豫州刺史。
English: On the 21st, Shao Ling Wangyou, the governor of Jiangzhou, was appointed as the general of Annan and the governor of South Yuzhou.

古文：左卫将军齐王世子为江州刺史，侍中萧嶷为领军，镇军将军、雍州刺史张敬兒进号征西将军，平西将军、郢州刺史黄回进号镇西将军。
现代文：加封左卫将军齐王长子为江州刺史，侍中萧嶷为领军，镇军将军、雍州刺史张敬儿晋升为征西将军，平西将军、郢州刺史黄回晋升为镇西将军。
English: The eldest son of Qiwang, the general of the Left Division of the Garrison, was promoted to the general of Jiangzhou, Xiao Wei, the middle-ranking officer, was promoted to the leader of the army, Zhang Jing'er, the general of the town army and the general of Yongzhou, was promoted to the general of the Western Expedition, and Pingxi, the general of the Western Expedition and Huang Hui, the general of the Western Expedition, were promoted to the general of the Western Expedition.

古文：二月庚辰，以尚书左仆射王僧虔为尚书令，尚书右仆射王延之为尚书左仆射。
现代文：二月十日，任命尚书左仆射王僧虔为尚书令，尚书右仆射王延之为尚书左仆射。
English: On February 10, Shao Wang's left-hand servant, So Keng, was appointed as Shao's secretary, and Shao Wang's right-hand servant, Yan Gui, was appointed as Shao's left-hand servant.

古文：癸未，录公齐王加授太尉，卫将军褚渊为中书监、司空。
现代文：十二日，颁授录公齐王为太尉，卫将军褚渊为中书监、司空。
English: On the 12th day of the month, the award was presented to Record Officer Qi Wang for the rank of lieutenant, and General of the Guards Gong Yuan for the rank of middle school librarian and secretary.

古文：甲申，曲赦荆州。
现代文：十七日，赦免荆州。
English: On the 17th, Jingzhou was pardoned.

古文：丙戌，抚军将军、扬州刺史晋熙王燮进号中军将军、开府仪同三司。
现代文：十八日，抚军将军、扬州刺史晋熙王燮晋升为中军将军、开府仪同三司。
English: On the 18th, the general of the Fuzhou army, Yangzhou Zishi Jinxi Wang Qi, was promoted to the general of the Chinese army, and the opening ceremony was held with three divisions.

古文：戊子，蠲雍州缘沔居民前被水灾者租布三年。
现代文：二十日，免除雍州沔水沿岸遭水灾的百姓三年租调。
English: On the 20th, the people who were flooded along the coast of Yongzhou Surabaya were exempted from the three-year rent transfer.

古文：辛卯，郢州刺史、新除镇南将军黄回为镇北将军、南兗州刺史，南兗州刺史李安民为郢州刺史。
现代文：二十三日，任命郢州刺史、新任镇南将军黄回为镇北将军、南兖州刺史，调南兖州刺史李安民任郢州刺史。
English: On the 23rd, Zhenan General Huang Hui was appointed as Zhenbei General, and Zhenan General Li Anmin was appointed as Zhenbei General, and Zhenan General Li Anmin was appointed as Zhenbei General.

古文：癸巳，以山阴令傅琰为益州刺史。
现代文：二十五日，任命山阳县令傅琰为益州刺史。
English: On the 25th, he appointed Sanyang County Governor Fu Ye as the chief historian of Yizhou.

古文：丙申，左军将军彭文之有罪，下狱死。
现代文：二十七日，左军将军彭文之犯罪，被投进监狱处死。
English: On the 27th, General Peng Wen of the Left Army was thrown into prison and executed for his crimes.

古文：行湘州事任侯伯杀前湘州行事庾佩玉，传首京邑。
现代文：行湘州事任侯伯杀前湘州行事庾佩玉，把庾佩玉的首级送到京城示众。
English: Hou Bo, who was in charge of affairs in Hunan Province, killed Zou Peiyu, who was in charge of affairs in Hunan Province, and sent Zou Peiyu's head to the capital to show it to the public.

古文：三月庚戌，以广州刺史周盘龙为司州刺史，辅国将军刘悛为广州刺史。
现代文：三月二日，任命广州刺史周盘龙为司州刺史，辅国将军刘悛为广州刺史。
English: On March 2, Zhou Panlong, the chief historian of Guangzhou, was appointed the chief historian of Sizhou, and Liu Wei, the adjutant general of Guizhou, was appointed the chief historian of Guangzhou.

古文：丙子，给太尉齐王羽葆、鼓吹。
现代文：四日，配给太尉齐王仪仗队、乐队。
English: On the fourth day, Taifu Qi Wang's honor guard and band were assigned.

古文：夏四月己卯，以游击将军垣崇祖为兗州刺史。
现代文：夏四月八日，任命游击将军垣崇祖为兖州刺史。
English: On the 8th day of the 4th month of the summer, he appointed the guerrilla general, Qi Chongzu, as the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：辛卯，新除镇北将军、南兗州刺史黄回有罪赐死。
现代文：十日，新任镇北将军、南兖州刺史黄回犯罪被赐死。
English: On the 10th, the newly appointed Zhenbei General and Nanluozhou Zhi Shi Huang Hui were sentenced to death.

古文：甲午，辅国将军、淮南宣城二郡太守萧映行南兗州刺史。
现代文：十二日，委任辅国将军、淮南宣城二郡太守萧映为济南兖州刺史。
English: On the 12th, Xiao Ying, general of Fu Guo and governor of the two counties of Huainan Xuancheng, was appointed as the chief historian of Jingzhou, Jinan.

古文：五月戊午，倭国王武遣使献方物，以武为安东大将军。
现代文：五月三日，倭国王武派使者来进特产，任命倭国王武为安东大将军。
English: On May 3rd, the king of Wa sent an envoy to the special property and appointed the king of Wa as General Anton.

古文：辅国将军、行湘州事任侯伯有罪伏诛。
现代文：辅国将军、行湘州事任侯伯犯罪被杀。
English: General Fu Guo was killed for committing the crime of being in charge of Hunan Province.

古文：六月己丑，以前新会太守赵超民为交州刺史。
现代文：六月七日，任命前新会太守超民为交州刺史。
English: On June 7th, the former Xinhui Party member, Taishou Chaomin, was appointed as the secretary of Jiaozhou.

古文：丁酉，以辅国将军杨文弘为北秦州刺史、武都王。
现代文：十一日，加封辅国将军杨文弘为北秦州刺史、武都王。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Yang Wenhong, the general of Gafeng Auxiliary Province, became the crown prince of North Qin Province.

古文：八月辛卯，太尉齐王表断奇饰丽服，凡十有四条。
现代文：八月十二日，太尉齐王上表建议禁止穿华丽的服装，共十四条。
English: On August 12th, Lieutenant Qi Wang proposed a ban on wearing ornate clothing, a total of fourteen.

古文：乙未，以江州刺史齐王世子为领军将军、抚军将军。
现代文：十三日，任命江州刺史齐王长子为领军将军、抚军将军。
English: On the 13th, he appointed the eldest son of the king of Jiangsu Province, Shishi Qi, as the leading general and the general of the army.

古文：丙申，以领军萧嶷为江州刺史。
现代文：十四日，委任领军萧嶷为江州刺史。
English: On the 14th, the leader of the army, Xiao Jun, was appointed to write the history of Jiangzhou.

古文：九月乙巳朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：九月一日，出现日蚀。
English: On September 1st, a solar eclipse occurred.

古文：丙午，加太尉齐王黄钺、都督中外诸军事、太傅，领扬州牧，剑履上殿，入朝不趋，赞拜不名。
现代文：二日，赐给太尉齐王黄铖，并封为总揽中外军事、太傅，兼任扬州牧，佩剑上殿，上朝不必拜，参拜不必报姓名。
English: On the second day, it was given to the captain Qi Wang Huangqin, and he was named the general of Chinese and foreign military affairs and the grand steward, and also served as the Yangzhou pastor. He went to the palace with a sword, and he did not have to worship before the emperor, and he did not have to report his name when he went to worship.

古文：置左右长史、司马、从事中郎、掾、属各四人。
现代文：配给左右长史、司马、从事中郎、掾、属各四人。
English: There were four people assigned to the left and right, Nagashi, Sima, engaged in the middle, and Zou.

古文：中军将军、扬州刺史晋熙王燮为司徒。
现代文：中军将军、扬州刺史晋熙王燮升为司徒。
English: The general of the Chinese army, Yangzhou Jishi Jinshi Wang Xuan, was promoted to the position of disciple.

古文：戊申，行南兗州刺史萧映为南兗州刺史。
现代文：四日，行南兖州刺史萧映升为南兖州刺史。
English: On the fourth day, Xiao Ying, the leader of the Southern Luzhou stabbing case, was promoted to the Southern Luzhou stabbing case.

古文：甲寅，给太傅齐王三望车。
现代文：五日，赐给太傅齐王三望车。
English: On the fifth day, the chariot of Sanwang was given to King Qi.

古文：己未，芮芮国遣使献方物。
现代文：七日，芮芮国派使者来进献特产。
English: On the seventh day, the State of Min sent an envoy to present the special products.

古文：癸酉，武陵内史张澹有罪，下狱死。
现代文：十日，武陵内史张澹犯罪，被下狱处死。
English: On the 10th day of the month, Wuling Naishi Zhang Yao committed a crime and was sentenced to death.

古文：冬十月丁丑，宁朔将军、淮南宣城二郡太守萧晃为豫州刺史。
现代文：冬十月二十一日，宁朔将军、淮南宣城二郡太守萧晃任豫州刺史。
English: On October 21st, the winter, Ningshuo General and Huainan Xuancheng Second County Governor Xiao Jiao was appointed as the historian of Yuzhou.

古文：孙昙瓘先逃亡，己卯，擒获，伏诛。
现代文：孙云灌逃跑，二十三日，擒获被杀。
English: Sun Yungan ran away and was captured and killed on the 23rd.

古文：壬寅，立皇后谢氏，减死罪一等，五岁刑以下悉原。
现代文：二十五日，立谢氏为皇后，被判死刑的罪减一等，被判五年以下徒刑的释放。
English: On the 25th, Li Xie was crowned empress. The crime for which he was sentenced to death was reduced by one grade, and he was sentenced to five years of imprisonment.

古文：十一月壬子，立故武昌太守刘琨息颁为南丰县王。
现代文：十一月九日，立已过世的琥昌太守刘琨的儿子颁为南丰县王。
English: On November 9th, the son of Liu Ye, the deceased Empress Dowager of Amber Chang, was crowned the king of Nanfeng County.

古文：癸亥，临沣侯刘晃谋反，晃及党与皆伏诛。
现代文：十四日，临澧侯刘晃谋反，刘晃及其同党都被处死。
English: On the 14th, Linyi's lord Liu Xing plotted a rebellion, and Liu Xing and his fellow party members were all executed.

古文：甲子，改封南阳王翙为随郡王，改随阳郡。
现代文：十九日，改封南阳王为随郡王，改南阳为随阳郡。
English: On the 19th, Nanyang King was renamed Suiyang King, and Nanyang was renamed Suiyang County.

古文：十二月丙戌，皇后见于太庙。
现代文：十二月十五日，皇后拜太庙。
English: On December 15th, the empress prayed at the Great Temple.

古文：戊子，高丽国遣使献方物。
现代文：十七日，高丽国派使者来进献特产。
English: On the 17th, the Koryo Kingdom sent an envoy to present special products.

古文：三年春正月甲辰，以江州刺史萧嶷为镇西将军、荆州刺史，尚书左仆射王延之为安南将军、江州刺史。
现代文：升明三年正月二日，任命江州刺史萧嶷为镇西将军、荆州刺史，尚书左仆射王延之为安南将军、江州刺史。
English: On the 2nd day of the 1st month of the 3rd year of Xingming, he appointed Xiao Tong, the governor of Jiangzhou, as Zhenxi general and Jingzhou governor, and Shangshu's left-hand man, Sha Wang Yan, as Annan general and Jiangzhou governor.

古文：安西长史萧顺之为郢州刺史。
现代文：安西长史萧顺之为郢州刺史。
English: Anxi long history Xiao Shun It is the history of Zhangzhou.

古文：乙卯，太傅齐王表诸负官物质役者，悉原除。
现代文：七日，太傅齐王上表凡不是朝廷征收的物品、杂役，一律免除。
English: On the seventh day, King Taifu Qi issued a proclamation exempting all goods and miscellaneous services not levied by the imperial court.

古文：辛亥，以骁骑将军王玄邈为梁、南秦二州刺史。
现代文：八日，任命骁骑将军王玄邈为梁、南秦二州刺史。
English: On the 8th, he appointed the cavalry general Wang Xuanqian as the leader and the leader of the two states of Southern Qin.

古文：领军将军、抚军将军齐王世子加尚书仆射，进号中军大将军、开府仪同三司。
现代文：领军将军、抚军将军齐王长子加封为尚书仆射，晋升为中军大将军、开府仪同三司。
English: The eldest son of the leading general and general of the army, Qi Wang, was promoted to the general of the Chinese army, the keeper of the imperial residences and the three departments.

古文：丙辰，加太傅齐王前部羽葆、鼓吹。
现代文：十三日，拨给太傅齐王前部羽葆、乐队。
English: On the 13th, it was assigned to the Taifu Qi Wang front part of the orchestra.

古文：丁巳，诏太傅府依旧辟召。
现代文：二十日，下诏太傅府依照旧例招募官员。
English: On the 20th, Taifu Prefecture issued the following order to recruit officials in accordance with the old practice.

古文：以征西将军、雍州刺史张敬兒为护军将军，新除给事黄门侍郎萧讳为雍州刺史。
现代文：任命征西将军、雍州刺史张敬儿为护军将军，新任给事黄门侍郎萧长懋为雍州刺史。
English: Zhang Jing'er, the general of the Western Conquest and the Yangzhou chief historian, was appointed as the general of the escort, and Xiao Chang'an, the newly-appointed attendant of the Yellow Gate, was appointed as the Yongzhou chief historian.

古文：二月丙子，安南将军、南豫州刺史邵陵王友薨。
现代文：二月四日，安南将军、南豫州刺史邵陵王友去世。
English: On February 4, General Annan and Shao Ling Wangyou, Governor of South Henan Province, passed away.

古文：三月癸卯朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：三月一日，出现日蚀。
English: The first day of March is the New Year's Day, with a solar eclipse.

古文：甲辰，崇太傅为相国，总百揆，封十郡，为齐公，备九锡之礼，加玺绂远游冠，位在诸王上；加相国绿綟绶，其骠骑大将军、扬州牧、南徐州刺史如故。
现代文：三日，尊太傅为相国，总揽朝政，拨给十郡，封为齐公，享受九锡之礼，授给他玺绶远游冠，位在诸王以上，骠骑大将军、扬州牧、南徐州刺史照旧担任。
English: On the third day of the month, Emperor Taifu was awarded the title of "King of Qi" and "King of Qi," and he was given the title of "King of Qi" and "King of Qi." He was given the title of "King of Qi" and "King of Qi." He was given the title of "King of Qi" and "King of Qi." He was given the title of "King of Qi" and "King of Qi."

古文：丙午，以中军大将军萧讳为南豫州刺史、齐公世子，副贰相国，绿綟绶。
现代文：六日，任命中军大将军萧赜为南豫州刺史，齐公长子为副相国，也授给丝绶。
English: On the 6th, the general of the Chinese army, Xiao Tong, was appointed as the prefect of South Henan Province, and the eldest son of Qi Gong was appointed as the deputy minister of the country, and was also awarded to Si Tong.

古文：庚戌，临川王绰谋反，绰及党与皆伏诛。
现代文：十日，临川王绰谋反，绰及其同党都被处死。
English: On the 10th day, the king of Linchuan, Cao Cao, plotted a rebellion, and Cao Cao and his party were all executed.

古文：丁巳，以齐国初建，给钱五百万，布五千匹，绢千匹。
现代文：十二日，因为齐国初建，拨给五百万钱，五千匹布，千匹绢。
English: On the twelfth day, because it was the first day of construction in Qi Province, five million yuan, five thousand horses of cloth, and one thousand horses of straw were allocated.

古文：夏四月壬申，进齐公爵为齐王，增封十郡。
现代文：夏四月八日，晋齐公爵位为齐王，又封给他十郡。
English: On the 8th day of the 4th month of the summer, the Duke of Jinqi ascended the throne as the King of Qi, and ten counties were given to him.

古文：甲戌，安西将军武陵王赞薨。
现代文：十一日，安西将军武陵王赞去世。
English: On the 11th day, Anxi General Wuling Wangzan passed away.

古文：丙戌，命齐王冕十有二旒，建天子旌旗，出警入跸，乘金根车，驾六马，备五时副车，置旄头云罕，乐舞八佾，设钟虡宫县。
现代文：十三日，下令齐王冕带有十二旒，树天子旗，出入清道戒严，乘坐六匹马拉的金银车，配备五时副车，装饰旄头云罕，乐舞八佾。
English: On the thirteenth day, he ordered that the crown of Qi should carry twelve scepters, the tree should carry the flag of the son of heaven, the entrance and exit should be under the curfew, and the gold and silver carriage with six horses should be equipped with a five o'clock auxiliary carriage, decorated with a skull and crossbones, and the music and dance should be eight scepters.

古文：进世子为太子，王子、王女、王孙爵命之号，壹如旧仪。
现代文：齐公长子晋升为太子，王子、王女、王孙的爵号，按照旧时规章封给。
English: The eldest son of Prince Qi was promoted to crown prince, and the titles of prince, princess and grandson of the king were conferred in accordance with the old regulations.

古文：辛卯，天禄永终，禅位于齐，壬辰，帝逊位于东邸。
现代文：十六日，天命终结，禅位于齐。二十日，皇上在东彻退位。
English: On the 16th, the fate of heaven ended, and Zen was unified. On the 20th, the emperor abdicated in Dongche.

古文：既而迁居丹阳宫。
现代文：后迁到丹阳宫居住。
English: Later he moved to live in the Danyang Palace.

古文：齐王践阼，封帝为汝阴王，待以不臣之礼。
现代文：齐王称帝，封顺帝为汝阴王，不必行君臣之礼。
English: The king of Qi proclaimed himself emperor, and the emperor of Fengshun proclaimed himself the king of Ruyin. There was no need to perform the salute of a prince and a minister.

古文：行宋正朔，上书不为表，答表不为诏。
现代文：推行宋朝的纪年，上书不称为上表，答表不称为下诏。
English: For the implementation of the Song Dynasty's calendar, the letter is not called the upper table, and the answer sheet is not called the lower edict.

古文：建元元年五月己未，殂于丹阳宫，时年十三。
现代文：建元元年五月六日，顺帝在丹阳宫驾崩，时年十三岁。
English: On May 6th of the first year of the Jian Yuan Dynasty, Emperor Shun passed away in the Danyang Palace at the age of thirteen.

古文：谥曰顺帝。
现代文：谥号顺帝。
English: His posthumous name was Shundei.

古文：六月乙酉，葬于遂宁陵。
现代文：六月八日，葬在遂宁陵。
English: On June 8, he was buried in Suining Mausoleum.

古文：史臣曰：圣王膺录，自非接乱承微，则天历不至也。
现代文：史臣说：圣明的君主即位，自然不会承接衰微的政局，上天不会这样安排。
English: Shi Zhen said: When a saintly monarch ascends the throne, he will naturally not take over a declining political situation. Heaven will not arrange it this way.

古文：自三、五以来，受命之主，莫不乘沦亡之极，然后符乐推之运。
现代文：自三皇、五帝以来，受命之主，莫不是受命于危难之际，然后勉强支撑。
English: Since the time of the Three Emperors and the Five Emperors, there has never been a case of a leader receiving an order in a time of crisis and then reluctantly supporting it.

古文：水德迁谢，其来久矣。岂止于区区汝阴揖禅而已哉！
现代文：水德隐退，由来已久，哪是到了汝阴王才禅让呢！
English: Water virtue retreats, it's been around for a long time, what's the point of going to the king of yin and letting go of zen!

