古文：后王命冢宰，降德于众兆民。
现代文：天子命令家宰，对万民百姓降下教令。
English: The Son of Heaven ordered the head of the family to issue an edict to all the people.

古文：子事父母，鸡初鸣，咸盥漱，栉縰笄总，拂髦冠緌缨，端韠绅，搢笏。
现代文：儿子侍奉父母，应该在鸡叫头遍时就都洗手漱口，然后梳头，用淄帛束发作髻，插上发答，用一条丝带束住发根而垂其末于髻后，戴上假发作的刘海，戴上帽子，系好帽带，穿上玄端，系上蔽膝，系上大带，把笋插入带间。
English: A son should serve his parents by washing his hands and rinsing his mouth when the rooster crows. He should then comb his hair, plait it with a bunch of braids, put in a bun, tie the roots of his hair with a ribbon and hang the ends behind the braids, put on a wig with bangs, put on a hat, fasten the hat band, put on a cape, tie a knee cap, tie a large belt, and insert the cape between the belts.

古文：左右佩用，左佩纷帨、刀、砺、小觿、金燧，右佩玦、捍、管、遰、大觿、木燧，逼，屦着綦。
现代文：身上左右佩上常用之物。左边佩的是手帕、小刀、磨石、小胰和金隧。右边佩的是射箭用的决和捍，笔管和刀鞘，大稍和木隧。打好绑腿，穿好鞋子，系好鞋带。
English: On the left is a handkerchief, a knife, a grindstone, a small pancreas and a gold tunic. On the right is an archery crossbow, a pen and a scabbard, and a large wooden tunic. Tie the laces, put on the shoes and tie the laces.

古文：妇事舅姑，如事父母。
现代文：媳妇侍奉公婆，如同儿子侍奉父母一样。
English: Daughters-in-law serve their parents-in-law, just as sons serve their parents.

古文：鸡初鸣，咸盥漱，栉縰，笄总，衣绅。左佩纷帨、刀、砺、小觿、金燧，右佩箴、管、线、纩，施縏帙，大觿、木燧、衿缨，綦屦。
现代文：也是鸡叫头遍的时候，就都起床洗手洗脸漱口，然后梳头，用绪帛束发作髻，插上替子，用一条丝带束住头根而垂其末于髻后，穿上玄色绢衣，系上大带。身上左右佩带的东西，左边和男子一样，右边则佩带针、笔管、线、丝绵、大腻、木隧六样东西。
English: Also, when the rooster crows, they all get up, wash their hands, wash their faces and rinse their mouths, then comb their hair, use a bunch of yarn to make a bun, insert a substitute, tie a ribbon around the base of the head and hang it at the end of the bun, put on a black satin dress and tie a large belt. The left and right sides of the body wear the same things as men, and the right side wears needles, pencils, thread, silk, daikon radish, and wooden tunnels.

古文：以适父母舅姑之所，及所，下气怡声，问衣燠寒，疾痛苛痒，而敬抑搔之。
现代文：其中的针、笔管、线和丝绵都装在一个小袋子里。发上系条五彩丝绳，系好鞋带。
English: The needle, the tube, the thread and the silk are all packed in a small bag. A multicolored string is used to tie the shoelaces.

古文：出入，则或先或后，而敬扶持之。
现代文：作儿子的，作媳妇的，就应这样梳洗干净穿戴整齐地到父母或公婆那里去请安。
English: If you are a son or a daughter-in-law, you should wash your hair, dress neatly and go to your parents or parents-in-law to ask for their greetings.

古文：进盥，少者奉盘，长者奉水，请沃盥，盥卒授巾。
现代文：到了父母公婆的卧室，要柔声细气地问暖问寒；如果他们身上疼痛或疥癣作痒，就要恭敬按摩爬搔患处。
English: When you get to your parents' or in-laws' bedroom, you should gently ask them if they are warm or cold; if they have pain or itching, you should respectfully massage the affected area.

古文：问所欲而敬进之，柔色以温之，饘酏、酒醴、芼羹、菽麦、蕡稻、黍粱、秫唯所欲，枣、栗、饴、蜜以甘之，堇、荁、枌、榆免槁薧滫以滑之，脂膏以膏之，父母舅姑必尝之而后退。
现代文：他们出入走动时，有时要走在他们前边，有时要走在他们后边，并且恭敬地或拉住手，或搀住胳膊。请他们洗手时，年龄小点的捧着脸盆在下面接水，年龄大点地手执匡器从上方往他们手上浇水，洗过之后递给他们擦手巾。然后问他们想吃什么，恭恭敬敬地进上，和颜悦色的应承。
English: When they come in and out, sometimes they walk in front of them, sometimes they walk behind them, and they respectfully either hold their hands or cover their arms. When they ask them to wash their hands, the younger ones hold a basin to catch the water below, the older ones use a hand sanitizer to pour water on their hands from above, and after washing, they hand them a hand towel. Then ask them what they want to eat, respectfully enter, and the color is pleasant.

古文：男女未冠笄者，鸡初鸣，咸盥漱，栉縰，拂髦总角，衿缨，皆佩容臭，昧爽而朝，问何食饮矣。
现代文：厚粥、稀粥、酒、甜酒、菜肉羹、豆子、麦子、大麻子、稻、黍、粱、林，这些食品任其选择。
English: Thick gruel, thin gruel, wine, sweet wine, vegetable meat soup, beans, wheat, hemp seeds, rice, bean paste, bean paste, and forest, these foods are optional.

古文：若已食则退，若未食则佐长者视具。凡内外，鸡初鸣，咸盥漱，衣服，敛枕簟，洒扫室堂及庭，布席，各从其事。孺子蚤寝晏起，唯所欲，食无时。
现代文：在烹调的时候，还要加上枣子、栗子、糖稀、蜂蜜使其甘甜，用新鲜的或干燥的董、宣、白榆浸泡在粉芡汤里使其柔滑，用油脂拌和使其香美。
English: When cooking, also add dates, chestnuts, powdered sugar, and honey to make it sweet. Soak fresh or dried dong, xuan, and paddlefish in the vermicelli soup to make it silky smooth, and mix it with fat to make it fragrant.

古文：由命士以上，父子皆异宫。
现代文：一定要等到父母舅姑都品尝过以后才可告退。
English: You must wait until both your parents and aunts have tasted the wine before you can leave.

古文：昧爽而朝，慈以旨甘，日出而退，各从其事，日入而夕，慈以旨甘。
现代文：子女尚未成年者，在鸡叫头遍时，也都起床洗手漱口，然后梳头，用细帛束发作髻，戴上用假发做的刘海，把头发札成总角式样，身上都用带子系个香囊。
English: Children who are not yet adults, when the rooster crows, they also get up to wash their hands and rinse their mouths, then comb their hair, use a fine bunch of braids, put on a wig made of bangs, put their hair into a total corner style, and tie a sachet with a strap.

古文：父母舅姑将坐，奉席请何乡；将衽，长者奉席请何趾。
现代文：在天色微明时去向父母请安，问他们早点都吃了点什么，喝了点什么。
English: Go to your parents in the twilight to greet them, and ask them what they ate and drank earlier.

古文：少者执床与坐，御者举几，敛席与簟，县衾箧枕，敛簟而襡之。
现代文：如果父母已经用过早点，就可以告退；如果尚未用过，那就帮助哥嫂张罗安排。
English: If the parents have used it too early, they can withdraw; if they have not used it yet, then help brother and sister-in-law Zhang Luo to arrange.

古文：父母舅姑之衣衾簟席枕几不传，杖屦只敬之，勿敢近。
现代文：家中所有的人，不论男女上下，在鸡叫头遍的时候，都要起来洗手漱口，穿戴整齐，把枕席收起来，洒水扫地，室内、堂上、庭中都要打扫，铺设坐席，各人做自己分内的事。
English: When the rooster crows, everyone in the family, both men and women, should get up, wash their hands and rinse their mouths, dress neatly, put away the cushion, sprinkle water on the floor, clean the room, the hall and the garden, lay the seat, and each person should do their own thing.

古文：敦牟卮匜，非馂莫敢用；与恒食饮，非馂，莫之敢饮食。
现代文：还没有上学的小孩子可以早睡晚起，随他高兴，吃饭也没有固定的时间。
English: Children who are not yet in school can go to bed early and get up late, as he pleases, and there is no fixed time for eating.

古文：父母在，朝夕恒食，子妇佐馂，既食恒馂，父没母存，冢子御食，群子妇佐馂如初，旨甘柔滑，孺子馂。在父母舅姑之所，有命之，应唯敬对。
现代文：既吃就要吃净，不可再有剩余。如果是父亲去世而母亲健在，每天的早饭晚饭，就由长子在旁照料，而母亲吃剩下的，由弟弟和弟媳们来吃，也要同样吃净，不再剩余。美味可口和易于消化的食品，如果父母吃不完，由小孩子们把它吃掉。在父母公婆跟前，他们如果有事召唤，要先用 唯 答应，然后恭敬地回话。
English: If the father is dead and the mother is alive, the eldest son will take care of breakfast and dinner every day, and the mother will eat the rest, and the younger brothers and sisters-in-law will come to eat, and they must also eat clean, no more surplus. Delicious and easy-to-digest food, if the parents can't finish it, the children will eat it. In front of their parents-in-law, if they have something to summon, they must first use "promise" and then respectfully respond.

古文：进退周旋慎齐，升降出入揖游，不敢哕噫、嚏咳、欠伸、跛倚、睇视，不敢唾洟；寒不敢袭，痒不敢搔；不有敬事，不敢袒裼，不涉不撅，亵衣衾不见里。
现代文：在父母公婆跟前，进退拐弯都要态度庄重，升降堂阶和出入门户都要俯身而行。在父母公婆跟前，不敢打饱嗝，不敢打喷嚏、咳嗽，不敢打呵欠、伸懒腰，不敢东倒西歪左靠右倚，不敢斜视，不敢吐唾沫、摸鼻涕。在他们跟前，感到寒冷也不敢加衣，身上发痒也不敢抓挠。在他们跟前，不是为长者干重活，不敢脱衣露臂；不是涉水，不敢撩起衣服。
English: In front of your parents and in-laws, you should walk with a dignified attitude when entering and exiting corners, and you should bend over when ascending and descending steps and entering and exiting portals. In front of your parents and in-laws, you dare not sneeze, cough, yawn, stretch your waist, lean to the left and right, squint, spit, or touch your nose. In front of them, you dare not add clothes if you feel cold, and you dare not scratch if you feel itchy. In front of them, instead of doing heavy work for the elderly, you dare not strip naked; instead of wading in water, you dare not pick

古文：父母唾洟不见，冠带垢，和灰请漱；衣裳垢，和灰请浣；衣裳绽裂，纫箴请补缀。
现代文：发现父母脸上有口水和鼻涕，要及时帮助擦掉。他们的冠带脏了，就蘸着灰汁洗涤；他们的衣裳脏了，就蘸着灰汁洗灌；他们的衣裳有裂口，就穿针引线把它缝好补好。
English: If you find that your parents have saliva and snot on their face, you should help them wipe it off in time. If their crown is dirty, wash it with lye; if their clothes are dirty, wash them with lye; if their clothes have a tear, sew it with a needle and thread.

古文：五日，则燂汤请浴，三日具沐，其间面垢，燂潘请靧；足垢，燂汤请洗。
现代文：每隔五天就烧些热水让他们洗澡，每隔三天让他们洗一次头。这期间，如果脸脏了，就烧热淘米水让他们洗脸；如果脚脏了，就烧点热水让他们洗脚。
English: Every five days, boil some hot water for them to take a bath, and every three days, let them wash their hair. During this time, if their face is dirty, boil some hot water for them to wash their face; if their feet are dirty, boil some hot water for them to wash their feet.

古文：少事长，贱事贵，共帅时。
现代文：年少的侍奉年长的，卑贱者侍奉尊贵者，也要按照儿子媳妇侍奉父母公婆的礼节去做。
English: The young shall serve the old, the lowly shall serve the exalted, and the sons and daughters-in-law shall serve their fathers and mothers-in-law.

古文：男不言内，女不言外。
现代文：男子不讲应该由女人关心和从事的事，女子不讲应该由男人关心和力、理的事。
English: Men don't talk about the things that women should care about and do, and women don't talk about the things that men should care about and do.

古文：非祭非丧，不相授器。
现代文：如果不是举行祭祀和办理丧事，男女之间不能用手传递东西。
English: If it is not a religious service or a funeral, men and women are not allowed to pass things by hand.

古文：其相授，则女受以篚，其无篚则皆坐奠之而后取之。
现代文：如果必须传递东西，那么女方要用一个竹筐来承接。如果没有竹筐，就要由递东西的人坐下把东西放在地上，然后由接东西的人坐下把东西从地上取走。
English: If it is necessary to pass something, then the woman should use a bamboo basket to carry it. If there is no bamboo basket, the person who hands the thing should sit down and put the thing on the ground, and then the person who picks up the thing should sit down and remove the thing from the ground.

古文：外内不共井，不共湢浴，不通寝席，不通乞假，男女不通衣裳，内言不出，外言不入。
现代文：男女不在同一口井上汲水，不同用一间浴室洗澡，不互相通用一床寝席，不互相讨借东西，不能男女衣裳混着穿。闺门内讲的不可传之于外，闺门外讲的不可传之于内。
English: Men and women do not draw water from the same well, do not use the same bathroom for bathing, do not share the same bed, do not borrow things from each other, and cannot wear men's and women's clothes together.

古文：男子入内，不啸不指，夜行以烛，无烛则止。
现代文：男子进入内宅，不可以嘘声示意，也不可用手指指点点，免得使人感到鬼鬼祟祟。
English: When men enter the inner house, they must not whisper or point with their fingers, lest they make people feel like they are sneaking around.

古文：女子出门，必拥蔽其面，夜行以烛，无烛则止。
现代文：夜晚行路要点燃火把，没有火把就不要外出。女子出门，要以物遮面，如果是夜晚行路，也要点燃火把，否则便不外出，免得人们说三道四。
English: If you go out at night, you should light a torch. If you don't have a torch, you shouldn't go out. If you go out, you should cover your face with something. If you go out at night, you should also light a torch. Otherwise, you shouldn't go out, so that people don't gossip.

古文：道路：男子由右，女子由左。
现代文：走路，男人靠右边走，女人靠左边走。
English: When walking, men walk on the right and women on the left.

古文：子妇孝者、敬者，父母舅姑之命，勿逆勿怠。
现代文：做儿子做媳妇的，如果想要有个孝敬的美名，就必须对于父母公婆的旨意，一不要违背，二不要懈怠。
English: As a son or daughter-in-law, if you want to have a good name of filial piety, you must not violate the will of your parents and parents-in-law, and you must not slacken.

古文：若饮食之，虽不耆，必尝而待；加之衣服，虽不欲，必服而待；加之事，人待之，己虽弗欲，姑与之，而姑使之，而后复之。子妇有勤劳之事，虽甚爱之，姑纵之，而宁数休之。
现代文：父母公婆如果叫他们吃东西，虽然做儿子做媳妇的不喜欢吃，也要少尝一些，等到父母公婆察觉以后说声不爱吃也就算了，这才住口。父母公婆赐给他们衣服，虽不想穿也要暂时穿上，等到父母公婆发话说收起来吧，才能脱下。父母公婆交待他们要办的事，中途可能会叫他人代替来作，自己虽然不想让人代替，但也要姑且交给代替者来做，等到代替者把事情办糟之后，自己再心平气和地从头收拾。当儿子媳妇在辛勤劳作时，做父母公婆的很心疼他们，就一定要劝说他们别赶得那么紧，而且宁可让他们多休息几次。
English: If the parents and in-laws ask them to eat something, although the son and daughter-in-law do not like to eat, they should try to eat less. Wait until the parents and in-laws notice and say that they do not like to eat, then shut up. The parents and in-laws give them clothes, although they do not want to wear them, they should put them on temporarily, until the parents and in-laws say put them away, they can take them off. When the parents and in-laws tell them what to do, they may ask others to do it instead. Although they do not want to be replaced, they should let the substitute do it. Wait until

古文：子妇未孝未敬，勿庸疾怨，姑教之；若不可教，而后怒之；不可怒，子放妇出，而不表礼焉。
现代文：如果儿子和媳妇不孝敬公婆，也用不着生气埋怨，可以先教育他们。如果教育了也不管用，那就可以责罚他们；如果责罚还不管用，那就把儿子赶出家门，把媳妇休回娘家。即令如此，也不对人明言其过，免得家丑外扬。
English: If the son and daughter-in-law do not show filial piety to their parents-in-law, there is no need to be angry and complain. You can educate them first. If education does not work, then you can punish them; if punishment does not work, then throw the son out of the house and send the daughter-in-law back to her mother's house. Even if this is the case, do not say anything to others, so as not to embarrass the family.

古文：父母有过，下气怡色，柔声以谏。
现代文：父母有了过失，做儿子的要和颜悦色地劝谏。
English: If the parents have made a mistake, the son should kindly persuade them.

古文：谏若不入，起敬起孝，说则复谏；不说，与其得罪于乡党州闾，宁孰谏。
现代文：劝谏如果不起作用，做儿子的就应更加恭敬更加孝顺，等到他们高兴的时候再次劝谏。再次劝谏也可能招致父母的不高兴，但是与其让父母得罪于乡党州间宁可自己犯颜苦谏。
English: If persuasion does not work, sons should be more respectful and filial, and wait until they are happy to persuade again. Again, persuasion may also incur the displeasure of parents, but rather than let parents offend the township party and state, they would rather make themselves look bad.

古文：父母怒、不说，而挞之流血，不敢疾怨，起敬起孝。
现代文：如果犯颜苦谏招致父母大怒，把自己打得皮破血流，那也不敢生气埋怨，而是更加恭敬更加孝顺。
English: If you make your parents furious and beat yourself to a bloody pulp, then don't get angry and complain, but be more respectful and filial.

古文：父母有婢子若庶子、庶孙，甚爱之，虽父母没，没身敬之不衰。
现代文：父母有十分宠爱的贱妾及庶子、庶孙，即令父母去世，做儿子的也要终身敬重他们。
English: Even if the parents die, the sons should respect their beloved concubines, illegitimate children and grandchildren for the rest of their lives.

古文：子有二妾，父母爱一人焉，子爱一人焉，由衣服饮食，由执事，毋敢视父母所爱，虽父母没不衰。
现代文：儿子如果有两个妾，父母喜欢其中的一个，而儿子喜欢的则是另一个，那么，无论是在穿戴饮食方面，或是在干活方面，儿子喜欢的那一个都不敢攀比父母喜欢的那一个，即令是父母去世了也仍旧如此。
English: If a son has two concubines, and the parents like one of them, but the son likes the other, the one the son likes will not dare to surpass the one the parents like, whether in clothing, food, or work, even if the parents are dead.

古文：子甚宜其妻，父母不说，出；子不宜其妻，父母曰： 是善事我。 
现代文：儿子认为自己的妻子蛮好，但是父母看着不顺眼，那就应当休掉。儿子认为自己的妻子差劲，但是父母说： 这个媳妇很会侍候我们。 
English: The son thought his wife was good, but his parents didn't like her, so they should divorce her. The son thought his wife was bad, but his parents said, "This daughter-in-law will serve us well."

古文：子行夫妇之礼焉，没身不衰。
现代文：那么儿子就要以夫妇之礼相待，终身不变。
English: Then the son should treat each other with the courtesy of a husband and wife, unchanged for life.

古文：父母虽没，将为善，思贻父母令名，必果；将为不善，思贻父母羞辱，必不果。
现代文：父母虽然去世了，儿子将做好事，想到这会给父母带来美名，就一定果敢地去做；如果是将做坏事，想到这会使父母跟着丢人，那就一定敛手不敢去做。
English: Although his parents have passed away, the son will do good things, thinking that this will bring fame to his parents, he will definitely do it boldly; if he will do bad things, thinking that this will make his parents ashamed, then he must not dare to do it.

古文：舅没则姑老，冢妇所祭祀、宾客，每事必请于姑，介妇请于冢妇。
现代文：公公去世，婆婆就要把主持家务的事传给家妇。每逢祭祀或招待宾客，虽然婆婆此时已经放权，但家妇每事还要请示婆婆，不敢专断。而介妇遇事则要向家妇请示，不可直接请示婆婆。
English: After the death of the father-in-law, the mother-in-law should pass on the responsibility of managing the housework to the housewife. Every time there is a religious ceremony or guests are invited, although the mother-in-law has been released from her power at this time, the housewife should still ask her mother-in-law for guidance in every matter, and should not dare to arbitrate. In the case of a midwife, she should ask the housewife for guidance, and should not directly ask her mother-in-law.

古文：舅姑使冢妇，毋怠，不友无礼于介妇。
现代文：公婆使唤家妇，家妇不可懈怠，也不可自恃地位特殊而对介妇不友爱和无礼。
English: The in-laws call for the housewife, and the housewife must not slack off, nor should she arrogate to herself a special status and be unfriendly and rude to the midwife.

古文：舅姑若使介妇，毋敢敌耦于冢妇，不敢并行，不敢并命，不敢并坐。凡妇，不命适私室，不敢退。
现代文：公婆如果使唤介妇，介妇也不可忘乎所以，不敢和家妇攀比，不敢和家妇并肩而行、并肩而坐，不敢像家妇那样有权发号施令。
English: If the in-laws call the midwife, the midwife should not forget this, and dare not compete with the housewife, dare not walk side by side with the housewife, dare not sit side by side with the housewife, and dare not have the power to give orders like the housewife.

古文：妇将有事，大小必请于舅姑。子妇无私货，无私畜，无私器，不敢私假，不敢私与。
现代文：不管是家妇、介妇，如果公婆没有发话让他们回自己的住室，她们就得一直在左右侍候，不敢告退。
English: Whether they are housewives or maids, if their in-laws have not sent word for them to return to their own rooms, they have to wait around and do not dare to leave.

古文：妇或赐之饮食、衣服、布帛、佩帨、茝兰，则受而献诸舅姑，舅姑受之则喜，如新受赐，若反赐之则辞，不得命，如更受赐，藏以待乏。
现代文：媳妇们有事想办，不论大事小事都一定要先请示公婆。当儿子当媳妇的，不能有属于自己的财货、牲畜、器物，不敢私自借出东西，不敢私自给人东西。媳妇如果得到娘家亲友馈赠的饮食、衣服、布帛、佩巾、造兰，在接受了以后要献给公婆；公婆接受了，媳妇就感到高兴，女风同自己刚接受了亲友的馈赠一样，如果公婆把东西又转赐我自己，那就要推辞；实在推辞不了，就要像重新受到公婆赏赐那样地接受下来，收藏好，以备公婆缺乏时再献。
English: When daughters-in-law have something to do, no matter how big or small, they must first ask their in-laws. When a son is a daughter-in-law, he cannot have his own goods, livestock, and utensils, and dare not lend things privately, and dare not give things to others privately. If a daughter-in-law receives gifts of food, clothing, cloth, scarves, and orchids from relatives and friends of her family, she should donate them to her in-laws after accepting them; if her in-laws accept them, the daughter-in-law will feel happy, and her feminine style will be the same as if she had just received gifts from

古文：妇若有私亲兄弟将与之，则必复请其故，赐而后与之。
现代文：媳妇如果要向娘家亲友赠送什么东西，就要先向公婆察明原因，公婆拿出东西来赏赐自己，然后自己才可以送人。
English: If the daughter-in-law wants to give something to her daughter's relatives and friends, she must first find out the reason from the in-laws. The in-laws will come up with something to reward themselves, and then they can give it to others.

古文：适子庶子只事宗子宗妇，虽贵富，不敢以贵富入宗子之家，虽众车徒舍于外，以寡约入。
现代文：一家的嫡子、庶子应该敬重全族的宗子、宗妇。即令嫡子、庶子地位高贵富有钱财，也不敢以此进入宗子之家去炫耀。即令是车马随从众多，也必须把他们安顿在宗子家的大门之外，自己只带少量的随从进入。
English: The legitimate son and the illegitimate son of a family should respect the legitimate son and the legitimate wife of the whole family. Even if the legitimate son and the illegitimate son are noble and rich, they dare not enter the legitimate son's house to show off. Even if there are many chariots and horses, they must be placed outside the gate of the legitimate son's house, and only a small number of followers can enter.

古文：子弟犹归器衣服裘衾车马，则必献其上，而后敢服用其次也；若非所献，则不敢以入于宗子之门，不敢以贵富加于父兄宗族。
现代文：自己的子弟如果被赐与器物、衣服、裘袅、车马，那就要从中挑选上等的献给宗子，然后自己才敢服用那些次等的。如果所献之物超过了宗子的爵位级别，宗子不得享用，那就不敢把这类物品带进宗子之门，否则，岂不成了以自己的富贵凌驾于宗子之上了吗！
English: If one's children are given utensils, clothes, horses, chariots, and horses, one should select the best ones to offer to one's son-in-law, and only then should one dare to accept the inferior ones. If the offered items exceed the peerage level of one's son-in-law, and the son-in-law is not allowed to enjoy them, one should not dare to bring such items to the son-in-law's door. Otherwise, one would become superior to one's son-in-law with one's wealth!

古文：若富，则具二牲，献其贤者于宗子，夫妇皆齐而宗敬焉，终事而后敢私祭。
现代文：如果自己富裕，可以准备二只牺牲，挑选好的一只献给宗子，在宗子祭祖时，小宗夫妇都斋戒助祭于宗子之家，等到宗子祭祖完毕，然后才敢回家祭祀自己的父祖。
English: If you are rich, you can prepare two sacrifices and choose a good one to offer to the patriarch. When the patriarch is offering sacrifices to the patriarch, the Xiaozong couple all fast and assist in the sacrifice at the patriarch's home. They wait until the patriarch's sacrifice is complete before they dare to go home and offer sacrifices to their ancestors.

古文：饭：黍，稷，稻，粱，白黍，黄粱，稰，穛。
现代文：吃饭所用的谷物有六种：黍、翟、稻、粱、白黍、黄粱，每种还有熟获、生获的区别。
English: There are six kinds of cereals used for meals: millet, millet, rice, millet, white millet, yellow millet, and each kind has a difference between cooked and raw.

古文：膳：膷，臐，膮，醢，牛炙。
现代文：加撰时的膳食有：牛肉羹、羊肉羹、猪肉羹、烤牛肉，这四种分盛四豆，排成一行，放在最北边。
English: The meals at the time of addition were: beef soup, mutton soup, pork soup, and roast beef. These four kinds of four beans, lined up in a row, were placed on the northernmost side.

古文：醢，牛胾，醢，牛脍。羊炙，羊胾，醢，豕炙。醢，豕胾，芥酱，鱼脍。
现代文：接着往南的一行是肉酱、大块牛肉、肉酱、切细的牛肉，再接着往南的一行是烤羊肉、大块羊肉、肉酱、大块猪肉，再接着往南的一行是肉酱、大块猪肉、芥子酱、切细的鱼肉。以上四行，每行四豆，这是招待下大夫之礼。
English: The next line to the south is meat sauce, chunks of beef, meat sauce, and finely chopped beef. The next line to the south is roast lamb, chunks of lamb, meat sauce, and chunks of pork. The next line to the south is meat sauce, chunks of pork, mustard sauce, and finely chopped fish. The above four lines, each line of four beans, are a doctor's gift.

古文：雉，兔，鹑，鷃。饮：重醴，稻醴清糟，黍醴清糟，粱醴清糟，或以酏为醴，黍酏，浆，水，醷，滥。
现代文：如果再加上野鸡、兔子、鹤鹑、鹤雀这四种干肉，那就是招待上大夫之礼了。饮料有六种：一是重醋，即清糟兼有的甜酒。这种重醋，有用稻酿制的，有用黍酿制的，有用粱酿制的。二是稀粥，有时就以稀粥为醒，例如用黍煮的稀粥。三是浆，四是水，五是梅浆，六是凉粥。
English: If you add the four kinds of dried meat of pheasant, rabbit, crane, and crane finch, it is an invitation to the doctor. There are six kinds of drinks: First, heavy vinegar, that is, sweet wine that is both clear and bad. This heavy vinegar is brewed with rice, brewed with ginger, and brewed with ginger. Second, thin gruel, sometimes with thin gruel, such as thin gruel boiled with ginger. Third, pulp, fourth, water, fifth, plum pulp, and sixth, cold porridge.

古文：酒：清、白。
现代文：酒有两大类：清酒和白酒。
English: There are two main types of sake: sake and baijiu.

古文：羞：糗，饵，粉，酏。
现代文：羞篷中所盛的食物是：粮饵、粉誓。
English: The food contained in the tent of shame is: grain and pollen.

古文：食：蜗醢而菰食，雉羹；麦食，脯羹，鸡羹；析稌，犬羹，兔羹；和糁不蓼。
现代文：国君燕食的饭谱是：蚌蛤酱、雕胡米、野鸡羹这三种配合着吃，麦饭、肉羹、鸡羹这三样配合着吃，大米饭、犬羹、兔羹这三样配合着吃。
English: Guojun Yanjie's menu is as follows: dipping sauce, carved rice, and wild chicken soup are eaten together, wheat rice, meat soup, and chicken soup are eaten together, and rice, dog soup, and rabbit soup are eaten together.

古文：濡豚，包苦实蓼；濡鸡，醢酱实蓼；濡鱼，卵酱实蓼；濡鳖，醢酱实蓼。
现代文：上述诸羹都要加入用佐料和米屑调制的汤，但不加寥菜。在煮小猪的时候，用苦菜把它包起来，去其腥味，在猪腹里塞入寥菜。在煮鸡时，加入酿酱，一在鸡腹中塞入寥菜。在煮鱼时，要加入鱼子酱，在鱼腹中塞入寥菜。
English: All of the above-mentioned soups should be mixed with a soup made from seasonings and rice flakes, but no bean sprouts should be added. When cooking a piglet, wrap it in bitter greens to remove the smell and stuff the pork belly with bean sprouts. When cooking a chicken, add brewing sauce and stuff the chicken belly with bean sprouts. When cooking fish, add caviar and stuff the fish belly with bean sprouts.

古文：腶修，蚳醢，脯羹，兔醢，糜肤，鱼醢，鱼脍，芥酱，麋腥，醢，酱，桃诸，梅诸，卵盐。
现代文：在煮鳖时，要加入酿酱，在鳖腹中塞入寥菜。
English: When simmering clams, brewing sauce should be added, and cucumbers should be stuffed into the belly of the clams.

古文：凡食齐视春时，羹齐视夏时，酱齐视秋时，饮齐视冬时。
现代文：吃肉干时，配以蚁酱。吃肉羹时，配以兔肉酱。吃糜肉切片时，配以鱼肉酱。
English: When eating dried meat, it is served with ant sauce. When eating meat soup, it is served with rabbit sauce. When eating sliced meat, it is served with fish sauce.

古文：凡和，春多酸，夏多苦，秋多辛，冬多咸，调以滑甘。
现代文：吃鱼切片时，配以芥子酱。吃生糜肉时，配以酿酱。
English: If you want to harmonize the taste of food, spring should have more sourness, summer should have more bitterness, autumn should have more spiciness, and winter should have more seasoning, seasoning and foods that can make it silky and sweet.

古文：牛宜稌，羊宜黍，豕宜稷，犬宜粱，雁宜麦，鱼宜菰。
现代文：吃桃干、梅干时，配以大盐。调和食物的温热凉寒，要根据食物的种类来决定。
English: When eating dried peaches and dried plums, pair them with a large pinch of salt. The temperature of the food should be decided according to the type of food.

古文：春宜羔豚膳膏芗，夏宜腒鱐膳膏臊，秋宜犊麑膳膏腥，冬宜鲜羽膳膏膻。
现代文：凡是饭食一类，要像春天那样的温；凡是羹食一类，要像夏天那样的热；凡是酱类，要像秋天那样的凉；凡是饮料一类，要像冬天那样的寒。
English: All meals should be as warm as in spring; all soup should be as hot as in summer; all sauces should be as cool as in autumn; all drinks should be as cold as in winter.

古文：牛修，鹿脯，田豕脯，糜脯，麇脯，麋、鹿、田豕、麇，皆有轩，雉兔皆有芼。爵，鷃，蜩，范，芝栭，菱，椇，枣，栗，榛，柿，瓜，桃，李，梅，杏，楂，梨，姜，桂。
现代文：士的日常午饭、晚饭，可以有羹与裁，但只能有一份，不得重设。
English: The daily lunch and dinner of a scholar may have soup and rice, but there can only be one portion, and it may not be rescheduled.

古文：大夫燕食，有脍无脯，有脯无脍。士不贰羹胾，庶人耆老不徒食。
现代文：百姓中六十岁以上的老人，非肉不饱，所以他们的午饭、晚饭必须见肉。
English: Among the common people, the elderly over the age of sixty are not satisfied with meat, so their lunch and dinner must contain meat.

古文：脍：春用葱，秋用芥、豚；春用韭，秋用蓼。
现代文：调和细切的鱼肉，春季用葱，秋季用芥子酱。调和细切的大肉片，春季用韭菜，秋季用寥菜。
English: Seasoned finely sliced fish, spring with spring onion, autumn with mustard sauce. Seasoned finely sliced meat, spring with chives, autumn with chives.

古文：脂用葱，膏用薤，三牲用藙，和用酰，兽用梅。
现代文：凝固的脂肪用葱来调味，油用燕来调味。牛羊猪三牲要搀入食茱英，用醋来调味，其他动物用梅酱调味。
English: The solidified fat is seasoned with scallions, the oil is seasoned with swallow. Cattle, sheep and pigs should be marinated in jujube, seasoned with vinegar, and other animals are seasoned with plum sauce.

古文：鹑羹、鸡羹、鴽，酿之蓼。
现代文：鹑羹、鸡羹、蒸驾，都要用寥菜搀和。
English: Gourd soup, chicken soup, and steamed dumplings should all be made with yakitori.

古文：鲂鱮烝，雏烧，雉，芗无蓼。
现代文：纺药可以蒸吃，小鸟可以烧吃，野鸡可以或蒸或烧或作羹来吃，这三种动物的调味品只用萝，不用寥菜。
English: Spinach can be steamed, small birds can be roasted, and pheasants can be steamed, roasted, or made into soup. The condiments for these three animals only use radish, not vegetables.

古文：不食雏鳖，狼去肠，狗去肾，狸去正脊，兔去尻，狐去首，豚去脑，鱼去乙，鳖去丑。
现代文：不食幼鳖，吃狼肉要去掉它的肠子，吃狗肉要去掉狗肾，吃狸要去掉它的正脊，吃兔肉要去掉屁股，吃狐要扔掉狐头，吃鱼要扔掉肠子，吃鳖要去掉肛门。
English: If you don't eat cubs, eat wolf meat to get rid of its intestines, eat dog meat to get rid of the dog's kidney, eat wildebeest to get rid of its backbone, eat rabbit meat to get rid of the butt, eat fox to get rid of the fox's head, eat fish to get rid of the intestines, eat centipede to get rid of the anus.

古文：肉曰脱之，鱼曰作之，枣曰新之，栗曰撰之，桃曰胆之，柤梨曰攒之。
现代文：因为这些部位都对人体有害。
English: Because these parts are harmful to the human body.

古文：牛夜鸣则庮，羊泠毛而毳、膻，狗赤股而躁、臊，鸟麃色而沙鸣、郁，豕望视而交睫、腥，马黑脊而般臂、漏，雏尾不盈握弗食，舒雁翠，鹄鸮胖，舒凫翠，鸡肝，雁肾，鸨奥，鹿胃。肉腥细者为脍，大者为轩；或曰麋鹿鱼为菹，麇为辟鸡，野豕为轩，兔为宛脾，切葱若薤，实诸酰以柔之。羹食，自诸侯以下至于庶人无等。
现代文：吃肉要剔骨去筋，所以叫做 脱 。吃鱼要刮去鳞片，所以叫做 作 。
English: If you want to eat meat, you have to remove the bones and sinews, so it's called deboning. If you want to eat fish, you have to scrape off the scales, so it's called boning.

古文：大夫无秩膳，大夫七十而有阁，天子之阁。
现代文：枣子易沾尘土，吃时要擦净，所以叫做 新 。栗子好生虫，吃时要挑捡，所以叫做 选 。
English: Jujube is easy to get dusty, so it should be wiped clean when eating, so it is called new. Chestnuts are good for insects, so they should be picked up when eating, so it is called "selection."

古文：左达五，右达五，公侯伯于房中五，大夫于阁三，士于坫一。凡养老：有虞氏以燕礼，夏后氏以飨礼，殷人以食礼，周人修而兼用之。凡五十养于乡，六十养于国，七十养于学，达于诸侯。
现代文：五十岁以上的老人，可以不吃粗粮而吃细粮；六十岁以上的老人没有肉就吃不饱，所以要常备有肉；七十岁以上的老人饿得快，每顿饭要多做一份，以备零食；八十岁以上的老人，要常吃珍美的食品；九十岁以上的老人，其住室中经常存有食品，无论他走到哪里，随身都备有饮食。
English: Elderly people over the age of 50 can eat refined grains instead of coarse grains; elderly people over the age of 60 cannot eat enough without meat, so they should always have meat; elderly people over the age of 70 are hungry quickly, and they should make an extra portion of each meal to prepare snacks; elderly people over the age of 80 should often eat rare foods; elderly people over the age of 90 often have food in their living room, and no matter where they go, they have meals with them.

古文：八十拜君命，一坐再至，瞽亦如之，九十者使人受。五十异粻，六十宿肉，七十二膳，八十常珍，九十饮食不违寝，膳饮从于游可也。六十岁制，七十时制，八十月制，九十日修，唯绞紟衾冒，死而后制。
现代文：人到了六十岁，做子女的就要为其准备需要一年时间才能做好的丧葬用品；人到了七十岁，就要为其准备需要一季时间才能做好的丧葬用品；人到了八十岁，就要为其准备需要一个月时间才能做好的丧葬用品；人到了九十岁，就要为其准备需要一天时间才能做好的丧葬用品；只有绞、纷、袅、冒，这些东西做得快，所以死后再做也不迟。
English: When a person reaches the age of sixty, it takes one year to prepare funeral supplies for his or her children; when a person reaches the age of seventy, it takes one season to prepare funeral supplies; when a person reaches the age of eighty, it takes one month to prepare funeral supplies; when a person reaches the age of ninety, it takes one day to prepare funeral supplies; only wringing, tugging, picking, these things are done quickly, so it's not too late to do it after death.

古文：五十始衰，六十非肉不饱，七十非帛不暖，八十非人不暖，九十虽得人不暖矣。
现代文：人到了五十岁就开始衰老，到了六十岁饭没有肉就吃不饱，到了七十岁没有丝绵就会感到身上不暖，到了八十岁没有人暖被窝就睡不暖和，到了九十岁即令有人暖被也睡不暖和了。
English: At the age of fifty, people begin to age; at the age of sixty, they cannot eat enough without meat; at the age of seventy, they will not feel warm without silk; at the age of eighty, they will not sleep well without a warm bed; and at the age of ninety, they will not sleep well even if they have a warm quilt.

古文：五十杖于家，六十杖于乡，七十杖于国，八十杖于朝，九十者天子欲有问焉，则就其室以珍从。
现代文：五十岁以后可以拄杖于家，六十岁以后可以拄杖于乡，七十岁以后可以拄杖于国都，八十岁以后可以拄杖上朝，九十岁以后，天子若有事询问，就应派人到他家请教，还要带上好吃的。
English: After the age of fifty, you can walk with a cane at home. After the age of sixty, you can walk with a cane in the village. After the age of seventy, you can walk with a cane in the capital. After the age of eighty, you can walk with a cane to the capital. After the age of ninety, if you have any questions, you should send someone to his house to ask for advice. You should also bring some delicious food.

古文：七十不俟朝，八十月告存，九十日有秩。
现代文：大夫到了七十岁，就可以不在朝里侍候；八十以后，天子要每月派人前去问安；九十岁以后，天子每天要派人送去食品。
English: When a doctor reaches the age of seventy, he can no longer wait in the morning; after the age of eighty, the Son of Heaven will send someone to say hello every month; after the age of ninety, the Son of Heaven will send someone to deliver food every day.

古文：五十不从力政，六十不与服戎，七十不与宾客之事，八十齐丧之事弗及也。
现代文：平民到了五十岁就不服劳役，六十以后就不服兵役，七十以后就不再参与应酬宾客的活动，八十以后就连祭祀丧葬这类重要的事也不参与了。
English: At the age of fifty, civilians do not perform labor service, after sixty they do not perform military service, after seventy they no longer participate in entertainment activities, and after eighty they do not even participate in important events such as sacrifices and funerals.

古文：五十而爵，六十不亲学，七十致政；凡自七十以上，唯衰麻为丧。
现代文：五十以后得到封爵，六十以后不亲自向别人请教，七十以后就告老退休，遇到丧事只要身穿孝服就行，其他礼数全免。
English: After the age of fifty, he will be given a knighthood, after the age of sixty, he will not personally ask others for advice, and after the age of seventy, he will retire. In the event of a funeral, as long as he wears a filial piety, he will be exempt from all other formalities.

古文：凡三王养老皆引年，八十者一子不从政，九十者其家不从政；瞽亦如之。
现代文：夏、商、周三代的敬老宴，都要依据户籍来核实参加宴会老人的年龄。家有八十岁以上老人者，可以豁免家中一名成员的劳役；家有九十岁以上老人者，可以豁免全家成员的劳役。盲人的待遇同此。
English: For summer, business, and third-generation respect-for-the-elderly banquets, the age of the elderly attending the banquet should be verified based on the household registration. If there is an elderly person over the age of eighty in the family, one member of the family can be exempted from labor service; if there is an elderly person over the age of ninety in the family, the entire family can be exempted from labor service. The same applies to the treatment of the blind.

古文：有虞氏养国老于上庠，养庶老于下庠；夏后氏养国老于东序，养庶老于西序；殷人养国老于右学，养庶老于左学；周人养国老于东胶，养庶老于虞庠，虞庠在国之西郊。
现代文：只要父母健在，儿子年龄再大也只能立侍在旁，不敢坐下。有虞氏在上库设宴款待国老，在下库设宴款待庶老。夏后氏在东序设宴款待国老，在西序设宴款待庶老。殷人在右学设宴款待国老，在左学设宴款待庶老。周人在东郊设宴款待国老，在虞痒设宴款待庶老。虞库在王城的西郊。
English: As long as the parents are alive, no matter how old the son is, he can only stand by and does not dare to sit down. The Yu clan held a banquet in the upper storehouse to entertain the elders, and a banquet in the lower storehouse to entertain the second-elders. The Xia clan held a banquet in the east row to entertain the elders, and a banquet in the west row to entertain the second-elders. The Yin people held a banquet in the right school to entertain the elders, and a banquet in the left school to entertain the second-elders. The Zhou people held a banquet in the eastern suburb to entertain the elders, and a ban

古文：有虞氏皇而祭，深衣而养老；夏后氏收而祭，燕衣而养老；殷人冔而祭，缟衣而养老；周人冕而祭，玄衣而养老。
现代文：有虞氏的时代，祭祀时头戴叫做 皇 的冠，养老时穿深衣。夏代，祭祀时头戴叫做 收 的冠，养老时穿燕衣。殷人祭祀时头戴叫做 辱 的冠，养老时穿编衣。周人祭祀时戴冕，养老时穿玄衣。
English: In the era of the Yuezhi dynasty, people wore a crown called "Crown" when making a sacrifice, and a dark robe when giving a pension. In the summer, people wore a crown called "Crown" when making a sacrifice, and a swallow robe when giving a pension. The Yin people wore a crown called "Humiliation" when making a sacrifice, and a knitted robe when giving a pension. The Zhou people wore a crown when making a sacrifice, and a black robe when giving a pension.

古文：曾子曰： 孝子之养老也，乐其心不违其志，乐其耳目，安其寝处，以其饮食忠养之孝子之身终，终身也者，非终父母之身，终其身也；是故父母之所爱亦爱之，父母之所敬亦敬之，至于犬马尽然，而况于人乎！ 
现代文：曾子说： 孝子的养老，首先在于使父母内心快乐，不违背他们的旨意；其次才是言行循礼，使他们听起来高兴，看起来快乐，使他们起居安适，在饮食方面尽心侍候周到，直到孝子死而后已。所谓 终身 孝敬父母，不是说终父母的一生，而是终孝子自己的一生。所以，虽然父母已经去世，但他们生前所爱的，自己也要爱；他们生前所敬的，自己也要敬；就是对他们喜欢的犬马也都是如此对待，更何况对他们爱敬的人呢！ 
English: Zeng Zi said: "The care of a filial son, first of all, is to make the parents happy in their hearts, not to go against their will; secondly, it is to follow the words and deeds, make them sound happy, look happy, make them live comfortably, and serve them carefully in terms of eating and drinking, until the filial son dies. The so-called lifelong filial respect for parents does not mean the lifetime of the parents, but the lifetime of the filial son himself. Therefore, although the parents have passed away, what they loved before they died, they also have to love; what they respected before they died, they also have to respect; even the dogs and horses

古文：凡养老，五帝宪，三王有乞言。
现代文：凡举行养老之礼，五帝时着重于效法他们，以为榜样；三王时除了有效法的含义以外，还在养老典礼上请他们训话。
English: Whenever the ceremony for the elderly was held, the Five Emperors emphatically followed their example; the Three Emperors, in addition to the meaning of the effective law, also invited them to speak at the ceremony for the elderly.

古文：五帝宪，养气体而不乞言，有善则记之为惇史。
现代文：五帝时着重于效法他们，为了颐养他时的身心，就没有设下 乞言 这个节目，只是把他们的优良德行记载下来，成为敦厚之史。
English: The Five Emperors focused on emulating them, and in order to nurture their minds and bodies, they did not set up this program, but recorded their fine virtues and became the history of Dunhuang.

古文：三王亦宪，既养老而后乞言，亦微其礼，皆有惇史。
现代文：三王养老也效法老人们的德行，但在养老典礼临近结束时要请他们训话，留下宝贵意见，但这样做也不是硬性强迫，而是随老人们的自觉自愿。
English: The Three Kings' pension also follows the virtues of the pharaohs, but at the end of the pension ceremony, they should ask them for advice and leave valuable opinions, but this is not a hard compulsion, but a conscious voluntary act of the old people.

古文：淳熬：煎醢，加于陆稻上，沃之以膏曰淳熬。
现代文：三王也要把老人的善言厚德记录下来，成为敦厚之史。八珍之一的淳熬，其做法是用稻米做成核把，把煎过的肉酱摊在橄把上，再浇上油，这就是淳熬。
English: The three kings also wanted to record the old man's kind words and virtues to become the history of Dunhuang. Jun Boiling, one of the eight rarities, is done by using rice to make a core, spreading the fried meat sauce on the olive, and then pouring oil. This is Jun Boiling.

古文：淳毋煎醢，加于黍食上，沃之以膏曰淳毋。
现代文：八珍之二的淳母，其做法类似淳熬，只不过是用黍米粉作饼，把煎过的肉酱摊在饼上，再浇上油，就成了淳母。
English: Junmai, one of the eight rarities, is similar to junbo, except that it uses glutinous rice flour to make a cake, spreads the fried meat sauce on the cake, and then pours oil on it to become junmai.

古文：炮：取豚若将，刲之刳之，实枣于其腹中，编萑以苴之，涂之以谨涂，炮之，涂皆干，擘之，濯手以摩之，去其皽，为稻粉糔溲之以为酏，以付豚煎诸膏，膏必灭之，巨镬汤以小鼎芗脯于其中，使其汤毋灭鼎，三日三夜毋绝火，而后调之以酰醢。
现代文：八珍之三是炮豚，八珍之四是炮羊。炮的制作过程是，先取来小猪或母羊，宰杀后淘净内脏，把枣子塞进腹腔内，用芦苇编成的箔把它裹起来，外面再涂上一层搀有草桔的泥巴，然后放在火上烤，等到把泥巴烤干，将泥巴剥掉，然后把手洗净，把皮肉表面上的一层薄膜搓掉。然后再取来稻米粉，加水拌成稀粥，敷在小猪身上，放在小鼎中用油来煎，小鼎中的油一定要淹掉小猪。然后搞来大锅，烧开其中的水，将盛有小猪或羊脯的小鼎置于锅内，注意不要让水面超过小鼎的高度，以免进水。这样连续加热，三天三夜不停火，将肉取出时就非常之烂，吃的时候再用醋和肉酱来调味。
English: The third of the eight rarities is the cannon pig, and the fourth is the cannon sheep. The process of making the cannon is to first take a piglet or ewe, slaughter and clean the entrails, stuff the jujube into the abdominal cavity, wrap it in a foil made of reed, and then coat the outside with a layer of mud mixed with straw oranges, and then put it on the fire to roast. Wait until the mud is baked dry, peel off the mud, then wash your hands and peel off a layer of film on the surface of the skin. Then take rice flour, add water and mix into a gruel, put it on the piglet

古文：捣珍：取牛羊麋鹿麇之肉必脄，每物与牛若一捶，反侧之，去其饵，熟出之，去其饵，柔其肉。
现代文：捣珍是八珍之五，其做法是：以牛肉、羊肉、糜肉、鹿肉、璋肉作原料，一定要取其嫩美的里脊部分，牛肉一份，羊肉、糜肉、鹿肉、璋肉也各取同样的一等份，将它们搅拌在一起，反复捶打，去掉筋键，煮熟以后出锅，去掉肉膜，吃时再用醋和肉酱调味就行了。
English: Mash zhen is the fifth of eight delicacies. The method is as follows: beef, mutton, stewed meat, venison, and stewed meat are used as raw materials. Be sure to take the tender tender loin part, beef portion, mutton, stewed meat, venison, and stewed meat also take the same first-class portion. Stir them together, beat repeatedly, remove the sinew, boil, remove the meat film, and season with vinegar and meat sauce when eating.

古文：渍：取牛肉必新杀者，薄切之，必绝其理；湛诸美酒，期朝而食之以醢若酰醷。
现代文：渍是八珍之六，其做法是：一定要以新鲜牛肉作原料，切得薄薄的，切时一定要切断肉的纹理，然后浸泡到美酒里面，大约过上十二天就算成了，吃的时候再用醋、肉酱、梅浆来调味。
English: Tsukudani is the sixth of the eight rarities, and the procedure is as follows: fresh beef must be used as the raw material, thinly sliced, and when sliced, the texture of the meat must be cut, and then soaked in wine. After about twelve days, it is finished. When eating, it is then seasoned with vinegar, meat sauce, and plum syrup.

古文：为熬：捶之，去其皽，编萑布牛肉焉，屑桂与姜以洒诸上而盐之，干而食之。
现代文：熬是八珍之七，其作法是：先把牛肉捶捣一下，去掉薄膜和筋腿，然后取来编好的芦箔，把牛肉摊在上面，先洒上桂屑姜末，再洒上盐，然后用火烘干烤熟，就可以吃了。
English: Boiling is the seventh of the eight rarities. The procedure is as follows: First, the beef brisket is pounded, the film and sinew are removed, and then the prepared gourd foil is taken. The beef is spread on top, sprinkled with cinnamon crumbs, ginger powder, and salt, and then dried and roasted on the fire. It can then be eaten.

古文：施羊亦如之，施麋、施鹿、施麇皆如牛羊。
现代文：用羊肉或糜、鹿、璋肉也可以制熬，其方法和用牛肉制熬一样。
English: It can also be boiled with mutton or mink, deer, and stewed meat, and the method is the same as boiling with beef.

古文：欲濡肉则释而煎之以醢，欲干肉则捶而食之。糁：取牛羊豕之肉，三如一小切之，与稻米；稻米二肉一，合以为饵煎之。
现代文：肝菺是八珍之八，其做法是：取一副狗肝，用它的肠脂把肝包起来，再用肉酱拌和湿润，放在火上烤，等到脂肪烤焦，肝也就熟了，吃时可以不用寥菜。
English: Liver dumplings are one of the eight rare delicacies. The procedure is as follows: take a pair of dog livers, wrap the livers with their intestinal fat, mix and moisten them with meat sauce, and roast them on the fire. When the fat is charred, the livers will be ripe, and you can eat them without vegetables.

古文：肝菺：取狗肝一，幪之，以其菺濡炙之，举焦，其菺不蓼；取稻米举糔溲之，小切狼臅膏，以与稻米为酏。礼，始于谨夫妇，为宫室，辨外内。男子居外，女子居内，深宫固门，阍寺守之。
现代文：取稻米粉加水调和，再加入切碎的牛羊猪的胸间脂肪，一起制成厚粥。慎重地处理夫妇关系非常必要，因为它是所有礼的根本。建造宫室，要严格区别内外。男子居外，女子居内。宫殿深邃，宫门重重，门外有阁人把守，后宫有寺人掌管。
English: Take rice flour, add water and mix, then add chopped cow, sheep and pig chest fat to make a thick porridge. It is very necessary to carefully handle the relationship between husband and wife, because it is the foundation of all etiquette. In the construction of the palace, it is necessary to strictly distinguish between inside and outside. Men stay outside, women stay inside. The palace is deep, the palace gate is heavy, the gate is guarded by courtiers, and the harem is controlled by temple people.

古文：男不入，女不出。
现代文：男不入内，女不出外。
English: Men do not go inside, women do not go outside.

古文：男女不同椸枷，不敢悬于夫之楎椸，不敢藏于夫之箧笥，不敢共湢浴。
现代文：男女不使用共同的衣架。做妻子的不敢把自己的衣服挂在丈夫的衣架上，不敢把自己的衣服存放到丈夫的衣箱里，不敢和丈夫在同一间浴室洗澡。
English: Wives do not dare to hang their clothes on their husband's hangers, do not dare to store their clothes in their husband's wardrobe, and do not dare to take a shower in the same bathroom as their husband.

古文：夫不在，敛枕箧簟席、襡器而藏之。
现代文：丈夫若不在家，妻子就要把丈夫的枕头收到箱子里，覃席也收起来，丈夫的其他用器也都收藏妥当。
English: If the husband is not at home, the wife should put the husband's pillow in the box, put away the banquet, and collect the husband's other utensils.

古文：少事长，贱事贵，咸如之。
现代文：年少的侍奉年长的，卑贱者侍奉尊贵者，也都应如此。
English: So the young should serve the old, and the lowly should serve the noble.

古文：夫妇之礼，唯及七十，同藏无间。
现代文：按照夫妇之礼，只有夫妻到了七十岁，两口子才能不避嫌地一直同居共寝，否则就要与妾轮流侍夜。
English: According to the couple's ceremony, only when the husband and wife reach the age of seventy can the two of them live together and sleep together all the time, otherwise they have to take turns with the concubine.

古文：故妾虽老，年未满五十，必与五日之御。
现代文：所以妾即使年老，只要尚未年满五十，就必须每五天轮流一次侍夜。
English: Therefore, even if a concubine is old, as long as she has not yet reached the age of fifty, she must wait in turn every five days.

古文：将御者，齐，漱浣，慎衣服，栉縰笄，总角，拂髦，衿缨綦屦。
现代文：轮到哪一位侍夜，就要像臣之朝君那样，齐其心志，洁净内外，穿上合乎身份的礼服，梳好头发，系上香囊，穿好鞋子，毕恭毕敬地前去。
English: When it's someone's turn to serve, they should be like the vassals of the emperor, with the same heart and mind, clean inside and out, put on a dress befitting their status, comb their hair, tie a sachet of incense, put on shoes, and respectfully go forward.

古文：虽婢妾，衣服饮食必后长者。
现代文：即使是受到主人宠爱的埠妾，她的衣服和饮食也不敢恃宠乱来，以至于超过身份高于她的女人。
English: Even a concubine who was favored by her master did not dare to let her clothing and diet become so extravagant as to outshine a woman of higher status.

古文：妻不在，妾御莫敢当夕。妻将生子，及月辰，居侧室，夫使人日再问之，作而自问之，妻不敢见，使姆衣服而对，至于子生，夫复使人日再问之，夫齐则不入侧室之门。
现代文：不论是国君还是卿大夫士，如果正妻不在家，那么轮到正妻侍夜的那一夜，妾也不敢前往夫寝代替正妻侍夜，而必须把这一夜空下来，以严妻妾之别。妻将生产，到了临产的月份，就要由燕寝搬到侧室待产，这期间，丈夫要派人一天两次去问候。到了临产的时刻，丈夫要亲自前去问候。这时候妻子因为衣饰不整，不敢露面，就派贴身的女师穿戴整齐回答丈夫。孩子生下以后，丈夫还要一天两次地派人去问候。如果妻子生产时适逢丈夫斋戒，丈夫就不到侧室去间候。
English: Whether it is the sovereign or the noble doctor, if the lawful wife is not at home, then on the night when it is the lawful wife's turn to serve the night, the concubine will not dare to go to the husband to sleep instead of the lawful wife to serve the night, but must vacate this night, with strict wife and concubine separation. The wife will give birth, and in the month of childbirth, she will move from the bed to the side room to wait for delivery. During this period, the husband should send someone twice a day to greet. At the time of childbirth, the husband should personally go to greet. At this time, the wife, because she is not neatly dressed

古文：子生，男子设弧于门左，女子设帨于门右。
现代文：孩子生下以后，如果是男孩子，就在侧室门左挂一张木弓作为标志；如果是女孩子，就在侧室门右挂一条佩巾作为标志。
English: After a child is born, if it is a boy, a wooden bow is hung on the left of the side door as a sign; if it is a girl, a scarf is hung on the right of the side door as a sign.

古文：三日，始负子，男射女否。
现代文：到了第三天才抱新生儿出来。如果是男孩，就行射礼；如果是女孩，就免了。
English: On the third day, they come out holding the newborn. If it's a boy, they salute; if it's a girl, they don't.

古文：国君世子生，告于君，接以大牢，宰掌具。
现代文：国君的嫡长子出生，要报告国君，以太牢之礼迎接嫡长子的诞生，由膳宰之官负责安排。
English: When the eldest son of the sovereign is born, it should be reported to the sovereign that the ceremony to welcome the birth of the eldest son of the sovereign is to be arranged by the meal officer.

古文：三日，卜士负之，吉者宿齐朝服寝门外，诗负之，射人以桑弧蓬矢六。
现代文：第三天，卜选一位抱新生儿的士，被选中的士要在前一天就斋戒，穿上朝服，在路寝门外等候，把新生儿接过来抱着。
English: On the third day, Bu selects a taxi to carry the newborn. The selected taxi must fast on the previous day, put on the morning dress, wait outside the roadside gate, pick up the newborn and hold it.

古文：射天地四方，保受乃负之，宰醴负子，赐之束帛，卜士之妻、大夫之妾，使食子。
现代文：此后，射人用桑木之弓射出六支蓬草之箭，一箭射天，表示将来敬事夭神；一箭射地，表示将来敬事地抵；四箭分射东西南北，表示将来威服四方。然后保母把新生儿接过来抱着，膳宰便开始以一献之礼向抱子的士敬洒，并赐给他五匹帛作为酬谢。
English: After that, the archer shoots six fluffy grass arrows with a mulberry bow. One arrow shoots into the sky, indicating that he will respect the gods in the future; one arrow shoots into the ground, indicating that he will respectfully arrive in the future; four arrows shoot from the east to the west and from the north to the south, indicating that he will conquer the four directions in the future. Then the nanny picks up the newborn and holds it, and the meal begins with a tribute to the son-in-law, and gives him five donkeys as a reward.

古文：凡接子，择日，冢子则大牢，庶人特豚，士特豕，大夫少牢，国君世子大牢，其非冢子，则皆降一等。
现代文：还要从士之妻、大夫之妾当中卜选一个乳汁多的，让她来作新生儿的奶娘。凡举行迎接新生儿诞生的仪式，一定要在三天之内选个吉日。所用的牢具，天子的家子是太牢，庶人的家子是一只小猪，士的家子也是一只小猪，诸侯的家子也是太牢。如果不是家子，牢具的规格都要分别降低一等。
English: It is also necessary to choose from among the wives of priests and the concubines of doctors a cow with a lot of milk, and let her be the nanny of the newborn. For all ceremonies to welcome the birth of a newborn, it is necessary to choose a lucky day within three days. The cage used, the son of the son of heaven is too strong, the son of the son of a commoner is a piglet, the son of a priest is also a piglet, and the son of a prince is too strong. If it is not a son of a family, the specifications of the cage must be reduced by one grade.

古文：异为孺子室于宫中，择于诸母与可者，必求其宽裕慈惠、温良恭敬、慎而寡言者，使为子师，其次为慈母，其次为保母，皆居子室，他人无事不往。
现代文：幼儿出生后，要在宫中单独打扫一处房子供他居住。要从国君的众妾和傅母中，挑选出性情宽厚、慈惠、温良、恭敬、谨慎而不喜欢多嘴多舌的，做幼儿的老师，其次做幼儿的慈母，再其次做幼儿的保母，奶娘则光管喂奶而已，这些人统统和幼儿同居一室。他人无事，不得前往，以免惊动幼儿。
English: After the birth of a child, it is necessary to clean a separate room in the palace for the child to live in. From among the concubines and mothers-in-law of the sovereign, it is necessary to select those who are generous, benevolent, gentle, respectful, cautious and do not like to talk too much, to be the child's teacher, followed by the child's loving mother, followed by the child's nanny, and the nanny is only a light tube feeding. All of these people live in the same room with the child. Others have nothing to do and must not go, so as not to alarm the child.

古文：三月之末，择日剪发为鬌，男角女羁，否则男左女右。
现代文：幼儿出生的第三个月之末，要选择一个吉日为幼儿剪发。但按规矩不能把胎发全部剪掉，要留下一部分，男的留个 角 ，女的留个 羁 ，或者男的留左边，女的留右边。
English: At the end of the third month of a child's birth, it is necessary to choose an auspicious day to cut the child's hair. However, according to the rules, it is not possible to cut off all the fetal hair, it is necessary to leave a part, the man should leave a corner, the woman should leave a border, or the man should leave the left side, the woman should leave the right side.

古文：是日也，妻以子见于父，贵人则为衣服，由命士以下，皆漱浣，男女夙兴，沐浴衣服，具视朔食，夫入门，升自阼阶。
现代文：这一天，妻子要带着幼儿拜见幼儿之父。如果是大夫以上之家，夫妇都要另制新衣；自命士以下，虽不另制新衣，但也要把旧衣洗得干干净净再穿。男男女女都要一早起身，洗头洗澡，穿上礼服。为夫妇准备的膳食，比照每月初一的膳食规格。
English: On this day, the wife should take the toddler to meet the toddler's father. If it is a family with a doctor or higher, the couple should make new clothes separately; if it is a family with a self-made man or lower, although they do not make new clothes separately, they should also wash the old clothes cleanly. Both men and women should get up early in the morning, wash their hair, take a shower, and put on a dress. The meal prepared for the couple should be according to the meal specifications of the first day of the month.

古文：立于阼西乡，妻抱子出自房，当楣立东面。
现代文：丈夫进入正寝的门，从昨阶登堂，站在昨阶上，面向西；妻由侧室来到夫的正寝，升自北阶、抱着幼儿从东房出来，在西阶上当循而立，面向东。
English: The husband enters the door of the main bed, enters the hall from the last step, stands on the last step, facing west; the wife comes from the side room to the husband's main bed, rises from the north step, comes out of the east room with the baby in her arms, and stands on the west step, facing east.

古文：姆先，相曰： 母某敢用时日只见孺子。 
现代文：这时，女师站在妻侧稍前，帮助传话说： 儿的母亲某氏，今天将恭敬地携带小儿拜见其父。 
English: At this time, the female teacher stood slightly in front of his wife's side and helped to send a message saying: "The son's mother, Mr. So-and-so, will respectfully carry the child to meet his father today.

古文：夫对曰： 钦有帅。 
现代文：丈夫回答说： 你要教导小儿恭敬地遵循正道。 
English: The husband replied: "You should teach your children to respectfully follow the right path.

古文：父执子之右手，咳而名之。妻对曰： 记有成。 
现代文：父亲拉着小儿的右手，含着笑给小儿取了个名。
English: The father took the child's right hand and, with a smile, gave the child a name.

古文：遂左还，授师，子师辩告诸妇诸母名，妻遂适寝。
现代文：妻子回答说： 我会铭记此名的深刻含义，努力使儿将来有所成就。 
English: His wife replied, "I will bear in mind the profound meaning of this name and strive to make my child successful in the future."

古文：夫告宰名，宰辩告诸男名，书曰： 某年某月某日某生。 
现代文：说罢，就转身向左把小儿递给教师。教师将小儿之名遍告诸妇、诸母，命名仪式结束，妻子就走回丈夫的燕寝。
English: After saying this, he turned to the left and handed the child to the teacher. The teacher announced the child's name to all the women and mothers. The naming ceremony was over, and the wife went back to her husband's bed.

古文：而藏之，宰告闾史，闾史书为二，其一藏诸闾府，其一献诸州史；州史献诸州伯，州伯命藏诸州府。
现代文：丈夫把小儿的名告诉给宰，宰又转告给同姓的父兄子弟，同时在简策上写上 某年某月某日某生 ，然后收藏起来。宰又将小儿之名与生辰上报间史，间史登记为两份，一份存放到间府，另一份逐级上报，最后报告给州史。州史又报告给州长，州长则命令存放到州府。
English: The husband told the son's name to the steward, and the steward told it to his brothers and sisters with the same surname, and also wrote "a certain year, a certain month, a certain day, a certain life" on the schedule, and then collected it. The steward also reported the son's name and birthday to the prefect, and the inter-history was registered in two copies, one was stored in the prefectural government, the other was reported step by step, and finally reported to the state history. The state history was also reported to the governor, and the governor ordered it to be stored in the state capital.

古文：夫入食如养礼。
现代文：丈夫也返回燕寝，与妻子同食，如同平时夫妇供养的常礼一样。
English: The husband also returns to his bed and eats with his wife, as is customary for a married couple.

古文：世子生，则君沐浴朝服，夫人亦如之，皆立于阼阶西乡，世妇抱子升自西阶，君名之，乃降。
现代文：国君的太子出生，到了三月之末命名之日，国君要洗头洗澡，穿上朝服，夫人也一样，都立在昨阶上，面向西。幼儿由世妇抱着，升自西阶，立在西阶上，面向东。
English: When the crown prince is born and the day of naming arrives at the end of March, the sovereign must wash his hair, take a bath, and put on the imperial robes, as must his wife, all of whom must stand on the last step, facing west. The infant, held by the courtesan, rises from the west step and stands on the west step, facing east.

古文：适子庶子见于外寝，抚其首咳而名之，礼帅初，无辞。
现代文：等到国君为幼儿命名之后，世妇才抱着幼儿退下。如果是太子的同母弟出生，则由夫人抱着在正寝拜见国君，国君抚摸着幼儿的头，含着笑为他命名。
English: After waiting for the sovereign to name the child, the courtesan withdraws with the child in her arms. If the prince's younger half-brother is born, the lady holds him in her arms and greets the sovereign while he is sleeping. The sovereign touches the child's head and names him with a smile.

古文：凡名子，不以日月，不以国，不以隐疾；大夫、士之子，不敢与世子同名。
现代文：命名的礼节基本上与太子相同，只是没有国君和夫人的对答之辞。为儿子取名，不要用日月为名，不要以国名为名，不要以身上的暗疾为名。大夫和士的儿子取名，不敢与太子同名。
English: The naming etiquette is basically the same as that of the crown prince, except that there is no word of reply from the sovereign and his wife. When naming a son, do not use the name of the sun and moon, do not use the name of the country, and do not use the name of a hidden illness. Doctors and priests do not dare to name their sons the same name as the crown prince.

古文：妾将生子，及月辰，夫使人日一问之。
现代文：大夫、士的妾将要生子，到了临产的月份，丈夫要每天派人去问候一次。
English: The concubine of a doctor or a scholar is about to give birth. In the month before the birth, the husband should send someone to greet her once a day.

古文：子生三月之末，漱浣夙齐，见于内寝，礼之如始入室；君已食，彻焉，使之特馂，遂入御。
现代文：孩子生下以后，到了第三个月的末尾，也要选个吉日，大家都洗漱整洁，而且前一天就斋戒，妾抱幼儿与夫相见于内寝，丈夫用妾刚嫁来时的礼节对待她。丈夫吃过以后，把食物撤下，让她一个人吃剩下的食物，以示优待。
English: After the birth of a child, at the end of the third month, it is also necessary to choose a lucky day. Everyone should wash and tidy up, and fast the day before. The concubine should hold the baby and sleep with her husband, and the husband should treat her with the etiquette of the concubine when she was newly married. After the husband has eaten, remove the food and let her eat the rest of the food alone to show her good treatment.

古文：公庶子生，就侧室。
现代文：然后就由她来侍候丈夫过夜。国君的妾生子，要到侧室去生。
English: Then it was up to her to wait for her husband to spend the night. The son of the sovereign's concubine had to be born in a side room.

古文：三月之末，其母沐浴朝服见于君，摈者以其子见，君所有赐，君名之。
现代文：到了孩子生下满三个月的那天，幼儿的母亲要洗头洗澡，穿上礼服，由摈者抱着幼儿一道去拜见国君。
English: On the day the child turns three months old, the toddler's mother should wash her hair, take a shower, put on a gown, and carry the toddler in her arms to meet the sovereign.

古文：众子，则使有司名之。庶人无侧室者，及月辰，夫出居群室，其问之也，与子见父之礼，无以异也。
现代文：国君如果对此妾有所偏爱，就亲自为幼儿取名；如果是非所宠爱之妾所生之子，就由有关官员取名。老百姓的家中可能没有侧室作为产房，而是夫妻二人同寝，在这种情况下，妻子到了该分娩的时候，丈夫就要从寝室避开，随便找个房间住下。至于待产期间丈夫每天派人前去问候，以及满三个月后的抱子见父，其礼数都和士大夫一样。
English: If the sovereign has a preference for this concubine, he will personally name the child; if it is the son of the beloved concubine, it will be named by the relevant officials. In the homes of ordinary people, there may not be a side room as a delivery room, but the husband and wife sleep together. In this case, when the wife is about to give birth, the husband should avoid the bedroom and find a room to live in. As for the husband sending someone to greet the child every day during the waiting period, and the father holding the child after three months, the number of courtesies is the same as that of a scholar.

古文：凡父在，孙见于祖，祖亦名之，礼如子见父，无辞。
现代文：凡是幼儿的祖父健在，那么到了三月之末，要举行幼儿拜见祖父之礼，祖父也要给幼儿取名，拜见的礼节就和子见父一样，只是没有应对之辞罢了。
English: If the child's grandfather is still alive, then by the end of March, the child's visit to the grandfather is to be held, and the grandfather is to give the child a name. The etiquette of the visit is the same as the son's visit to the father, but there is no corresponding word.

古文：食子者，三年而出，见于公宫则劬。
现代文：为国君之子喂奶的士妻或大夫之妾，三年以后可以回家。回家之前，国君在公宫接见她们，并且有所赏赐以表慰劳。
English: The concubine of a doctor or the wife of a magistrate who breastfeeds the son of the sovereign can return home after three years. Before returning home, the sovereign receives them at the palace and gives them a reward in recognition of their hard work.

古文：大夫之子有食母，士之妻自养其子。
现代文：大夫之子有乳母喂养，士的妻地位卑贱，自己生的只能自己喂养。
English: The doctor's son is nursed by a wet nurse, the scholar's wife has a lowly status, and she can only nurse her own child.

古文：命士以上及大夫之子，旬而见。
现代文：由命士以上及大夫之子，通常是生下以后满三个月才父子相见，但也有的是生下十日以后即相见。
English: If it is the son of a family doctor or a doctor's son, it is usually three months after birth before the father and son see each other, but there are also cases where they see each other ten days after birth.

古文：冢子未食而见，必执其右手，适子庶子已食而见，必循其首。
现代文：幼儿如果是家子，那是正统，父子相见之礼就在夫妻未食之前相见，父亲还要拉住幼儿的右手；如果幼儿是嫡子、庶子，并非正统，父子相见之礼就在夫妻进食之后相见，见面时父亲只须抚摸幼儿的头。
English: If the toddler is a son or daughter of the family, it is orthodox. The father and son meet before the husband and wife have eaten, and the father must also hold the toddler's right hand. If the toddler is a legitimate son or son-in-law, it is not orthodox. The father and son meet after the husband and wife have eaten. When meeting, the father only needs to touch the toddler's head.

古文：子能食食，教以右手。
现代文：幼儿会自己吃饭了，就要教他使用右手。
English: When a toddler can eat by himself, it is necessary to teach him to use his right hand.

古文：能言，男唯女俞。男鞶革，女鞶丝。
现代文：幼儿会说话了，就要教他们学习答话，男孩用 唯 ，女孩用 俞 。
English: When toddlers can speak, it is necessary to teach them to learn how to answer questions. Boys use "wei" and girls use "wu."

古文：六年教之数与方名。七年男女不同席，不共食。八年出入门户及即席饮食，必后长者，始教之让。
现代文：到了六岁，要教他识数和辨认东南西北。到了七岁，开始教以男女有别，男孩和女孩，坐不同席，吃饭也不同席、到了八岁，出门进门，坐桌吃饭，一定要让长者在前，开始让他们懂得敬让长者的道理。
English: At the age of six, they should teach him to count and identify the southeast and northwest. At the age of seven, they should begin to teach him that men and women are different, boys and girls should sit in different seats, and eat in different seats. At the age of eight, when going out and coming in, and sitting at the table to eat, they must let the elders be in front, and begin to let them understand the principle of respecting the elders.

古文：九年教之数日。
现代文：到了九岁，要教他们知道朔望和会用干支记日。
English: At the age of nine, they should be taught to know the horoscope and how to count days using the zodiac.

古文：十年出就外傅，居宿于外，学书计，衣不帛襦裤，礼帅初，朝夕学幼仪，请肄简谅。
现代文：到了十岁，女孩就要留在家里，而男孩则要离开家跟着外边的老师学习，在外边的小学里住宿，学习识字和算术。这时候穿的衣裤都不用帛来做，以防止奢侈之心产生；此前所教的规矩，还要遵循勿怠。早晚学习洒扫进退的礼节，勤习简策，学习以诚待人。
English: At the age of ten, the girl has to stay at home, while the boy has to leave home to study with an outside teacher, stay at an outside primary school, learn literacy and arithmetic. At this time, the clothes and trousers worn do not have to be made with socks to prevent extravagance; the rules previously taught must also be followed. In the morning and evening, learn the etiquette of sweeping in and out, diligently study simple measures, and learn to treat people with sincerity.

古文：十有三年学乐，诵《诗》，舞《勺》，成童舞《象》，学射御。
现代文：到了十三岁，开始学习乐器，诵读诗歌，学习舞《勺》。到了十五岁，要学习舞《象》，学习射箭和驾车。
English: At the age of thirteen, he began to learn musical instruments, recite poetry, and learn the "Spoon" dance. At the age of fifteen, he had to learn the "Elephant" dance, learn archery and driving.

古文：二十而冠，始学礼，可以衣裘帛，舞《大夏》，惇行孝弟，博学不教，内而不出。
现代文：到了二十岁，举行加冠礼，表示已是成人了，就要开始学习五礼。这时候可以穿皮衣，穿帛制之衣，舞《大夏》之舞。要笃行孝涕，广泛地学习各种知识，但尚不足以教育他人，要努力地积累德行，但尚不足以为人师表。
English: At the age of twenty, when the crowning ceremony is held to show that you are an adult, you must begin to learn the five rites. At this time, you can wear leather clothes, wear a silk dress, and dance the "Big Summer" dance. You must practice filial piety, learn a wide range of knowledge, but it is not enough to educate others, and work hard to accumulate virtues, but it is not enough to be a teacher.

古文：三十而有室，始理男事，博学无方，孙友视志。
现代文：到了三十岁，娶妻成家，开始受田服役，要广泛讨教，学无常师，对朋友谦逊，其志尚远大者始与之交往。
English: At the age of thirty, he married a wife and started a family. He began to serve in the fields. He had to learn a lot. He had to learn from many teachers. He was humble to his friends. He only associated with those who had high aspirations.

古文：四十始仕，方物出谋发虑，道合则服从，不可则去。
现代文：到了四十岁，开始做官，出谋划策都要醉酌再三，如果君臣道合则就职任事，否则就离开。
English: At the age of forty, he began to work as an official, and he had to drink and drink again and again to come up with plans and suggestions. If the monarch and the subject were in agreement, he would take up the post, otherwise he would leave.

古文：五十命为大夫，服官政。
现代文：到了五十岁，受命为大夫，参与邦国大事。
English: At the age of fifty, he was appointed as a doctor to participate in national events.

古文：七十致事。
现代文：到了七十岁，年老体衰，就该告老退休。
English: At the age of seventy, old and weak, it is time to retire.

古文：凡男拜尚左手。
现代文：凡男子行拜礼，左手在上，右手在下。
English: Every man should pray with his left hand above and his right hand below.

古文：女子十年不出，姆教婉娩听从，执麻枲，治丝茧，织纴组紃，学女事以共衣服，观于祭祀，纳酒浆？笾豆、菹醢，礼相助奠。
现代文：女孩子长到十岁就不能像男孩子那样外出，必须呆在家里由女师教她们如何说话才算柔婉，如何打扮才算贞静，如何举动才算听从，还要教她们绩麻缥丝，织布织增，编织丝带等女红之事，以供制作衣服。还要让她们观摩祭祀活动，传递酒浆、篷豆、范酿等祭品祭器，按照礼节规定帮助长者安放祭品。
English: Until the age of ten, girls cannot go out like boys. They must stay at home and be taught by female teachers how to speak softly, how to dress chastely, and how to behave obediently. They must also be taught how to spin silk, weave cloth, and weave ribbons to make clothes. They must also be allowed to watch sacrificial activities, pass on sacrificial vessels such as wine, beans, and wine, and help the elders place the offerings according to the rules of etiquette.

古文：十有五年而笄，二十而嫁；有故，二十三年而嫁。
现代文：到了十五岁，举行笋礼，表示已进入成年。到了二十岁，可以出嫁；如有特殊原因，可推迟到二十三岁才嫁。
English: At the age of fifteen, a ceremony is held to show that they have entered adulthood. At the age of twenty, they can get married; if there are special reasons, they can postpone marriage until the age of twenty-three.

古文：聘则为妻，奔则为妾。凡女拜尚右手。
现代文：如果是明媒正娶，六礼齐备，那就是与丈夫平等的正妻；如果是无媒自通，六礼不备，那就是贱妾。凡是女子行拜礼，右手在上，左手在下。
English: If the matchmaker is married and has performed all six rites, then she is the lawful wife, equal to her husband; if the matchmaker is unmarried and has not performed all six rites, then she is a concubine.

