古文：衔枚氏掌司嚣。
现代文：衔枚氏负责禁止在朝廷喧哗吵闹。
English: Tsuchihira was in charge of prohibiting noise in the Imperial Court.

古文：国之大祭祀，令禁无嚣。
现代文：王国举行大祭祀，下令禁止喧哗。
English: The kingdom held a large religious service and ordered a ban on noise.

古文：军旅、田役，令衔枚、禁嚣呼叹呜于国中者，行歌哭于国中之道者。
现代文：出征、田猎，命令军士衔枚。禁止在都城中呼叫、叹息、呻吟，禁止在都城中的道路上边走边唱或边走边哭的人。
English: It is forbidden to call out, sigh, and moan in the capital city, and it is forbidden to sing or cry while walking on the roads in the capital city.

古文：伊耆氏掌国之大祭祀，共其杖咸。
现代文：伊耆氏负责在王国有大祭祀时供给收藏老臣们的杖所用的函。
English: The Iyo clan is responsible for providing the letter used to collect the canes of the elders when there is a great ritual in the kingdom.

古文：军旅，授有爵者杖，共王之齿杖。
现代文：军队出征，授给有爵位者杖。供给王赐予老人所需的杖。
English: The army goes out to fight, and a scepter is given to him who has a rank, and a scepter is provided for the king to give to the old man.

古文：大行人掌大宾之礼，及大客之仪，以亲诸侯。
现代文：大行人掌管有关大宾、大客的礼仪，用以与诸侯相亲睦。
English: The daikotobunin were in charge of the etiquette of important guests and dignitaries, and used it to make friends with the lords.

古文：春朝诸侯而图天下之事，秋觐以比邦国之功，夏宗以陈天下之谟，冬遇以协诸侯之虑。
现代文：春季诸侯朝见王而共同谋划一年的天下大事，秋季诸侯觐见王而排列各国功绩的高下，夏季诸侯宗见王而陈述各自的谋议，冬季诸侯遇见王而协调相互的谋虑，通过时会征伐不顺服的诸侯而向四方发布禁令，通过殷同而施行治理天下的政法。
English: In spring, the princes met the king and jointly planned the major events of the year. In autumn, the princes met the king and ranked the merits of various countries. In summer, the princes met the king and presented their own plans. In winter, the princes met the king and coordinated their mutual concerns. They issued a ban to the four sides by conquering the disobedient princes, and implemented the political laws to govern the world through the same.

古文：时会以发四方之禁，殷同以施天下之政，时聘以结诸侯之好，殷覜以除邦国之慝，闲问以谕诸侯之志，归脤以交诸侯之福，贺庆以赞诸侯之喜，致禬以补诸侯之灾。
现代文：时聘的时候对来聘的卿以礼相待以结好诸侯，殷规的时候通过命以政事和下达禁令以除去诸侯国的恶行。隔一年派使者慰问一次诸侯并把王的心志告诉诸侯，赠送祭肉给诸侯以向诸侯致福，诸侯有喜庆的事向他们表示庆贺以增添他们的喜悦，行禬礼赠送财物以弥补诸侯国受灾的损失。
English: At the time of appointment, he treated the appointed nobles with courtesy in order to make the lords happy, and at the time of banishment, he removed the evil deeds of the lords by ordering the government and issuing a ban. The following year, he sent an envoy to console the lords and tell the lords about the king's heart, gave sacrificial meat to the lords to bless the lords, congratulated the lords on festive occasions to increase their joy, and gave gifts of wealth to make up for the losses of the lords.

古文：以九仪辨诸侯之命，等诸臣爵，以同邦国之礼，而待其宾客。
现代文：用九种礼仪区别诸侯、诸臣的爵命等级，以统一各诸侯国的礼仪，而用以接待诸侯国的宾客。
English: Nine kinds of etiquette were used to distinguish the nobility rank of vassals and vassals, to unify the etiquette of each vassal state, and to receive guests from vassal states.

古文：上公之礼，执恒圭九寸，缫藉九寸，冕服九章，建常九斿，樊缨九就，贰车九乘，介九人，礼九牢。其朝位，宾主之间九十步，立当车轵，摈者五人，庙中将币三享，王礼再祼而酢。飨礼九献，食礼九举，出入五积，三问三劳。
现代文：上公的礼仪：手执九寸长的桓圭，配有彩绘的九寸长的圭垫，冕服上绘刺九种花纹图案，所树的旗帜旁饰有九存，装饰马的樊和缨都用五彩的扇绕饰九匝，副车有九乘，设九名介，款待公的大礼用九牢，公的朝位在大门外与主人之间距离九十步的地方，站在当车的右轴端旁，王迎接公设五名摈者，在庙中行聘礼把桓圭授给王，并三次进献方物；王向公行裸礼，两次向公进献郁鬯而后公酌郁鬯回敬王，王用飨礼款待公并向公行九次献酒礼，又用食礼款待公并向公行九次举牲肉劝饭礼，从来直到返国要五次供给粮草牲牢，王还要向公行三次问礼、三次劳礼。
English: The etiquette of the crown prince: holding a nine-inch-long rooster in his hand, a nine-inch-long rooster cushion with a painted rooster, nine patterns embroidered on the coronation robe, the flags of the trees are decorated with nine patterns, the decorative horse's mane and bridle are decorated with a multicolored fan, the sidecar has nine rides, nine attendants are set up, the grand ceremony for entertaining the prince uses nine dungeons, the prince's throne is outside the gate and the host is ninety paces away, standing next to the right axle end of the car, the king greets the five attendants

古文：诸侯之礼，执信圭七寸，缫藉七寸，冕服七章，建常七斿，樊缨七就，贰车七乘，介七人，礼七牢。朝位，宾主之间七十步，立当前疾，摈者四人，庙中将币三享，王礼壹祼而酢，飨礼七献，食礼七举，出入四积，再问，再劳。
现代文：诸侯的礼仪：手执七寸长的信圭，配有彩绘的七寸长的圭垫，冕服上绘刺七种花纹图案，所树的旗帜旁饰有七脖，装饰马的樊和缨都用五彩的厨绕饰七匝，副车有七乘，设七名介，款待诸侯的大礼用七牢，朝位在大门外与主人之间距离七十步的地方，站在当车前侯处的右边，王迎接诸侯设四名摈者，在庙中行聘礼把信圭授给王，并三次进献方物；王向诸侯行裸礼，向诸侯进献一次郁鬯而后诸侯酌郁鬯回敬王，王用飨礼款待诸侯并向诸侯行七次献酒礼，又用食礼款待诸侯并向诸侯行七次举牲肉劝饭礼，从来直到返国要四次供给粮草牲牢，王还要向诸侯行两次问礼，两次劳礼。
English: The etiquette of the princes: holding a seven-inch-long dogwood in hand, equipped with a seven-inch-long painted dogwood cushion, embroidering seven patterns on the coronation robe, the flags of the trees are decorated with seven necks, the decorative horse's mane and bridle are decorated with multicolored kitchens around the dogwood, the second car has seven passengers and seven attendants, the grand ceremony for entertaining the princes uses seven dungeons, the throne is outside the gate and the distance between the master and the host is seventy paces, standing on the right side of the front of the carriage, the king welcomes the princes, sets four

古文：诸伯执躬圭，其他皆如诸侯之礼。
现代文：诸伯手执躬圭，其他礼仪都同诸侯一样。
English: All the nobles bow their heads, and all other etiquette is the same as that of the lords.

古文：诸子执谷璧，五寸，缫藉五寸，冕服五章，建常五斿，樊缨五就，贰车五乘，介五人，礼五牢。朝位，宾主之间五十步，立当车衡，摈者三人，庙中将币三享，王礼壹祼不酢，飨礼五献，食礼五举，出入三积，壹问、壹劳。
现代文：诸子手执直径五寸的谷璧，配有彩绘的直径五寸的璧垫，冕服上绘刺五种花纹图案，所树的旗帜旁饰有五脖，装饰马的樊和缨都用五彩的扁绕饰五匝，副车有五乘，设五名介，款待诸子的大礼用五牢，朝位在大门外与主人之间距离五十步的地方，站在当车衡处的右边，王迎接诸子设三名摈者，在庙中行聘礼把谷璧授给王，并三次进献方物；王向诸子行裸礼，向诸子进献一次郁鬯而诸子不回敬王，王用飨礼款待诸子并向诸子行五次献酒礼，又用食礼款待诸子并向诸子行五次举牲肉劝饭礼，从来直到返国要三次供给粮草牲牢，王还要向诸子行一次问礼，一次劳礼。
English: Each son holds a five-inch-diameter wicker basket, equipped with a five-inch-diameter wicker basket cushion, five patterns are embroidered on the coronation robe, the flag of the tree is decorated with five necks, the horse's yoke and bridle are decorated with five-color flat-wrapped wicker baskets, the secondary car has five passengers, five attendants are set up, and the grand ceremony for entertaining the sons is held in five dungeons. The court sits outside the gate at a distance of fifty paces from the host, standing on the right side of the weighbridge. The king greets the sons with three attendants,

古文：诸男执蒲璧，其他皆如诸子之礼。
现代文：诸男手执蒲璧，其他礼仪都同诸子之礼一样。
English: The men hold the pu bi in their hands, and the rest of the etiquette is the same as that of the sons.

古文：凡大国之孤，执皮帛以继小国之君，出入三积，不问、壹劳，朝位当车前，不交摈，庙中无相，以酒礼之，其他皆眡小国之君。
现代文：凡大国的孤拿豹皮裹饰的束帛做见面礼，跟在小国之君的后面朝见王，从来直到返国要三次供给粮草牲牢，王对于孤不行问礼，行一次劳礼，朝位在大门外所乘车的前面，不行交摈传辞之礼，在庙中行授玉礼时不设相礼者，用醴礼敬孤，其他礼仪都比照小国之君。
English: All the lonely people of big countries take a leopard skin-wrapped bunch of egrets to make a meeting ceremony, follow behind the prince of a small country to see the king, and from then until returning to the country, they have to provide grain, grass and livestock three times. The king can not ask the lonely people for a gift, perform a labor ceremony, the imperial throne is in front of the car outside the gate, can not hand over the gift of eulogy, and do not set the couple when performing the jade ceremony in the temple, and use the gift of eulogy to honor the lonely people. Other etiquettes are compared to the kings of small countries.

古文：凡诸侯之卿，其礼各下其君二等。以下及其大夫士，皆如之。
现代文：甸服之外方五百里叫做男服，三年朝见王一次，他们的贡品是宗庙器物。
English: Men's clothing is called Dianfu five hundred miles away from Dianfu. They are allowed to see the king once every three years. Their tribute is the family temple's utensils.

古文：邦畿方千里，其外方五百里，谓之侯服，岁壹见，其贡祀物；又其外方五百里，谓之甸服，二岁壹见，其贡嫔物；又其外方五百里，谓之男服，三岁壹见，其贡器物；又其外方五百里，谓之采服，四岁壹见，其贡服物；又其外方五百里，谓之卫服，五岁壹见，其贡材物；又其外方五百里，谓之要服，六岁壹见，其贡货物；九州之外，谓之蕃国，世壹见，各以其所贵宝为挚。
现代文：男服之外方五百里是采服，四年朝见王一次，他们的贡品是缝制祭服的材料。采服之外方五百里是卫服，五年朝见王一次，他们的贡品是竹、木材。卫服之外方五百里是要服，六年朝见王一次，他们的贡品是珠玉龟贝等自然之物。
English: For men's clothing, 500 li away from the capital is mining clothing, and once every four years they visit the king, and their tribute is the material for sewing sacrificial clothing. For mining clothing, 500 li away from the capital is ceremonial clothing, once every five years they visit the king, and their tribute is bamboo and wood. For mining clothing, 500 li away from the capital is ceremonial clothing, once every four years they visit the king, and their tribute is the material for sewing sacrificial clothing. For mining clothing, 500 li away from the capital is protective clothing, once every five years they visit the king, and their tribute is bamboo and wood. For protective clothing, 500 li away from the capital is

古文：王之所以抚邦国诸侯者，岁遍存，三岁遍覜，五岁遍省，七岁属象胥，谕言语，协辞命；九岁属瞽史，谕书名，听声音；十有一岁，达瑞节，同度量，成牢礼，同数器，修法则；十有二岁王巡守殷国。
现代文：九州之外叫蕃国，一代新君即位来朝王一次，各用他们宝贵的物品作见面礼。王用以安抚各国诸侯的办法：一年派使者普遍慰问一次；三年派使者普遍看望一次；五年派使者普遍探视一次；七年聚集诸侯国的译官，告诉他们语言，协调他们的辞令；九年聚集诸侯国的乐师和史官，告诉他们文字，让他们听习声音；十一年颁发瑞节的样式，同一度量单位，平抑牢礼的僭越，统一度量单位，修治法则；十二年王巡守天下，或在附近的诸侯国接见众来朝的诸侯。
English: Outside of Kyushu is called Shikoku. A new generation of sovereigns ascends to the throne and comes to the emperor once, each using their precious items to make a meeting gift. The methods used by the king to appease the princes of various countries: send an envoy once a year for general condolences; send an envoy once every three years; send an envoy once every five years; gather the interpreters of the principalities in seven years, tell them the language, and coordinate their words; gather the musicians and historians of the principalities in nine years, tell them the words, and let them listen to the sounds; in eleven years, issue the style of the festival, the same unit of

古文：凡诸侯之王事，辨其位，正其等，协其礼，宾而见之。
现代文：凡诸侯因王事而来朝，辨别他们的朝位，规正他们的尊卑等级，协调他们的礼仪，由摈者相礼而朝见王。
English: All princes come to the court for the king's business, distinguish their court rank, regulate their rank of superiority and inferiority, coordinate their etiquette, and meet the king at court.

古文：若有大丧，则诏相诸侯之礼。
现代文：如果有大丧，就告教并协助诸侯行丧礼。
English: If there is a great mourning, they will inform the authorities and assist the provinces in conducting the funeral.

古文：若有四方之大事，则受其币，听其辞。
现代文：如果有四方的诸侯国因遭兵寇而前来告急的事，就接受他们的见面礼，听他们叙述情况而向王报告。
English: If any of the four principalities come to the king with an urgent matter because they have been invaded, he will receive their greeting, listen to their description of the situation and report to the king.

古文：凡诸侯之邦交，岁相问也，殷相聘也，世相朝也。
现代文：凡诸侯国之间的交往，每年使大夫相问一次，若干年使卿相聘一次，新君即位就相朝。
English: In all exchanges between principalities, once a year, a doctor is consulted, once a few years, an envoy is hired, and a new prince ascends to the throne.

古文：小行人掌邦国宾客之礼籍，以待四方之使者。
现代文：小行人掌管有关接待诸侯国宾客的礼籍，以接待四方的使者。
English: Xiao Xingren was in charge of the etiquette concerning the reception of guests from various provinces and received the envoys from all four directions.

古文：令诸侯春人贡，秋献功，王亲受之，各以其国之籍礼之。
现代文：命令诸侯国春季进贡，秋季呈报政绩，王亲自接受，各依照有关该国的礼籍接待他们。
English: He ordered the vassal states to pay tribute in the spring and report their performance in the autumn, which the king accepted in person, and each received them according to the etiquette of the country concerned.

古文：凡诸侯入王，则逆劳于畿，及郊劳、眡馆、将币，为承而摈。
现代文：凡诸侯来朝见王，就前往畿疆迎接并行劳礼。到行郊劳礼、为宾客安排馆舍以及诸侯在庙中向王授玉的时候，都担任承摈。
English: All the lords who came to see the king in the morning went to Kijiang to welcome the concurrent labor rite. When they went to perform the suburban labor rite, arrange the pavilion for the guests, and when the lords presented the king with the jade in the temple, they all served as shoen.

古文：凡四方之使者，大客则摈，小客则受其币而听其辞。
现代文：凡四方诸侯国的使者来朝，是大客就担任摈者引导他们见王，是小客就接受他们的见面礼，并听取他们言辞而转告王。
English: All the emissaries of the principalities in the four directions who came to the imperial court were invited guests who acted as couriers to guide them to the king, and minor guests who received their welcome gifts and listened to their words and relayed them to the king.

古文：使适四方，协九仪宾客之礼：朝、觐、宗、遇、会、同，君之礼也；存、覜、省、聘、问，臣之礼也。
现代文：奉使前往四方诸侯国，帮助他们演习并记录下九等礼仪中所当实行的礼仪。做宾客的礼包括：春季朝见王、秋季觐见王、夏季宗见王、冬季遇见王，以及参加王的会同，这是诸侯国君所行的礼；存问、看望、探视、大聘、小聘，这是王或诸侯派出的使臣所行的礼。
English: Envoys went to the four principalities to help them practice and record the nine etiquettes of etiquette. Being a guest includes: meeting the king in the spring, meeting the king in the autumn, meeting the king in the summer, meeting the king in the winter, and attending the king's meeting, which are the etiquette of the princes; asking questions, visiting, visiting, and inviting and inviting, which are the etiquette of the king or the envoys sent by the princes.

古文：达天下之六节：山国用虎节，土国用人节，泽国用龙节，皆以金为之；道路用旌节，门关用符节，都鄙用管节，皆以竹为之。
现代文：出使天下各国以颁给六种瑞节的样式：山区之国用虎节，平地之国用人节，泽地之国用龙节，都用铜铸造；通行道路用旌节，出入城门和关卡用符节，经过采邑用管节，都是用竹制造的。
English: Six types of auspicious festivals were issued by the countries around the world: the National Tiger Festival in mountainous areas, the National Human Festival in flat lands, and the National Dragon Festival in mountainous areas were all made of copper; the National Road Festival, the National Gate Festival, and the National Pipe Festival were all made of bamboo.

古文：成六瑞：王用瑱圭，公用桓圭，侯用信圭，伯用躬圭，子用谷璧，男用蒲璧。
现代文：统一六种瑞玉的样式：王用的镇圭，公用的桓圭，侯用的信圭，伯用的躬圭，子用的谷璧，男用的蒲璧。
English: Unify the six types of gems: the king's zhengui, the public's huanggui, the lord's xingui, the lord's miangui, the child's gubi, and the man's pubi.

古文：合六币：圭以马，璋以皮，璧以帛，琮以锦，琥以绣，璜以黼，此六物者，以和诸侯之好故。
现代文：六币的配合法：夏殷二王的后代进献给王的圭配以马，进献给王后的璋配以虎豹皮；五等诸侯进献给王的璧配以帛，进献给王后的琮配以锦；子男二等诸侯相互行聘礼进献给对方国君用琥配以绣，进献给国君夫人用璜配以黼。这六种币，用以和好诸侯。
English: The composition of the six coins: the descendants of the two kings of Xiayin presented to the king of Gui with a horse, presented to the queen of the queen with a tiger and leopard skin; the five princes presented to the king of Bi with a broom, presented to the queen of the broom with broom; the sons of the second princes made a betrothal gift to each other, presented to the other sovereign with amber with embroidery, presented to the sovereign's wife with a broom with a broom. These six coins were used to reconcile the princes.

古文：若国札丧，则令赙补之。若国凶荒，则令赒委之。若国师役，则令槁禬之。若国有福事，则令庆贺之。若国有祸灾，则令哀吊之。
现代文：如果某国因瘟疫而造成国人丧亡，就命令其他国家补助他们财物；如果某国遭受大饥荒，就命令其他国家救济他们粮食；如果某国遭受兵寇之灾而致使国穷民贫，就命令其他国家救助他们资财；如果某国有福庆的事，就命令其他国家为他们庆贺；如果某国遭受灾祸，就命令其他国家对他们哀悼慰问。
English: If a country loses its people to a plague, it orders other countries to subsidize their wealth; if a country suffers from a great famine, it orders other countries to provide them with food; if a country suffers from a military invasion that impoverishes the country, it orders other countries to help them with their wealth; if a country suffers from a disaster in Fukqing, it orders other countries to celebrate for them; if a country suffers from a disaster, it orders other countries to mourn for them.

古文：凡此五物者，治其事故，乃其万民之利害为一书，其礼俗政事教治刑禁之逆顺为一书，其悖逆暴乱作慝犹犯令者为一书，其札丧凶荒厄贫为一书，其康乐和亲安平为一书。
现代文：凡属以上五方面的事，依照有关法令力口以治理。将天下各国的自然形势对于民众有利和不利的情况记载为一书，各国的礼俗、政事、教化治理和刑法禁令能否遵守的情况记载为一书，将天下各国的反叛、暴乱、作恶和图谋违反禁令者的情况记载为一书，将天下各国的瘟疫丧亡、遭受大饥荒和民众困厄贫穷的情况记载为一书，将天下各国民众康乐、和睦相亲、安宁太平的情况记载为一书。
English: It shall be a book to record the favorable and unfavorable situations of the natural situation for the people of all countries in the world, the situation of whether the prohibitions of etiquette, politics, education and criminal law can be observed in all countries, the situation of rebellion, riot, evil-doers and those who conspire to violate the prohibitions in all countries in the world, the situation of plague, famine and poverty of the people in all countries in the world, and the situation of people's well-being, harmony, peace and tranquility in all countries in the world.

古文：凡此五物者，每国辨异之，以反命于王，以周知天下之故。
现代文：凡此五方面情况，每国按条目分别记载，以向王报告，以使王遍知天下的事。
English: All these five matters were recorded separately for each kingdom according to their divisions, to be reported to the king, so that he might have knowledge of all the kingdoms of the earth.

古文：司仪掌九仪之宾客、摈相之礼，以诏仪容、辞令、揖让之节。
现代文：司仪掌管迎接九等宾客的摈相之礼，以告王应有的仪容、辞令和揖让的节度。
English: The master of ceremonies presides over the ceremonial welcome of the ninth-class guests, in order to show the king's proper appearance, speech and etiquette.

古文：将合诸侯，则令为坛三成，宫旁一门，诏王仪，南乡见诸侯，土揖庶姓，时揖异姓，天揖同姓。
现代文：王将与诸侯会同，就命令筑坛高三层，坛周围筑矮墙以象宫，宫的四边每边开一门。告诉王会同的礼仪。王面朝南接见诸侯，向庶姓诸侯行土揖礼，向有婚姻关系的异姓诸侯行时揖礼，向同姓诸侯行天揖礼。
English: When the king met with the princes, he ordered a three-story altar to be built, and a low wall to be built around the altar to form an elephant palace, with a door on each side of the four sides of the palace. He told the king about the etiquette of meeting with the princes. The king faced south to meet the princes, and performed the soil bow to the princes with common surnames, the time bow to the princes with different surnames who were related by marriage, and the heavenly bow to the princes with the same surname.

古文：及其摈之，各以其礼：公于上等，侯伯于中等，子男于下等。
现代文：到设摈者召诸侯见王时，各依所应行的礼：摈上公时站在坛的上层，摈侯伯时站在坛的中层，摈子男时站在坛的下层。
English: When the host summons the princes to meet the king, each stands on the upper tier of the altar for the king, on the middle tier for the prince, and on the lower tier for the prince.

古文：其将币，亦如之。其礼，亦如之。
现代文：诸侯向王授玉和进献礼物时也这样。
English: This was also the case when the lords bestowed jewels and gifts on the king.

古文：王燕，则诸侯毛。
现代文：王向诸侯行裸礼进献郁鬯时也这样。
English: This was also the case when the king performed a naked salute to the lords and presented tulips.

古文：凡诸公相为宾，主国五积三问，皆三辞拜受，皆旅摈，再劳，三辞，三揖，登，拜受，拜送主君郊劳，交摈，三辞，车逆，拜辱，三揖，三辞，拜受，车送，三还，再拜。
现代文：王举行燕礼时，诸侯就依照年龄大小序尊卑排列座次。凡诸公相互为宾而行朝礼，宾从来直到返国主国要五次供给粮草牲牢，要对宾行三次问礼，宾对于主国所致的礼每次都要推辞三次而后行拜受礼接受，每次都要陈列介迎接前来行礼的使者；主国对宾行前两次劳礼时，每次宾都要推辞三次，然后宾与前来行劳礼的使者进入馆舍，行进中互行三次揖礼，登阶升堂，宾行拜受礼接受劳礼，使者行拜送礼。
English: When the king held the Yan Rite, the princes were ranked in order of seniority and inferiority according to their age. All princes performed the morning service for each other as guests. From the time the guests came to the host country until their return, they had to provide grain, grass and livestock five times, ask the guests three times to perform the service, the guests had to decline the service for the host country three times each time and then go to receive the service, and each time they had to present their representatives to welcome the envoys who came to perform the service; the host country had to decline the guests three times each time for the first two labor rites, and then the guests and the envoys

古文：致馆亦如之。致飧如致积之礼，及将币，交摈三辞，车逆拜辱，宾车进，答拜，三揖，三让，每门止一相。及庙，唯上相入，宾三揖三让，登，再拜授币，宾拜送币，每事如初。
现代文：第三次主君亲行郊劳礼，宾主交摈传辞，宾对主君亲行劳礼三次表达推辞之意，然后乘车出馆舍大门迎接主君，拜谢主君屈驾亲临，然后宾与主君进入馆舍，行进中宾主互行三次揖礼，来到堂阶前，宾要三次让由主君先升阶，主君推辞三次，然后登阶升堂，宾行拜受礼接受主君的劳礼。
English: For the third time, the master himself performed the suburban labor ceremony, the guest master delivered the eulogy, and the guest expressed his refusal to the master three times, and then took the car to meet the master at the gate of the guesthouse. The master bowed down and thanked him, and then the guest and the master entered the guesthouse. During the march, the guest master exchanged three times the eulogy, and came to the front of the hall. The guest had to be promoted by the master three times, the master refused three times, and then ascended the hall. The guest bowed down and accepted the master's eulogy.

古文：宾亦如之，及出，车送，三请，三进，再拜，宾三还三辞，告辟。致饔饩，还圭。飨食，致赠。郊送，皆如将币之仪。宾之拜礼，拜饔饩，拜飨食，宾继主君，皆如主国之礼。
现代文：行过朝礼之后，主国要向宾馈送饔饩，宾将返国时主君要把圭璋送还给宾，宾在主国居留期间主君要用飨礼、食礼款待宾，宾返国出了主国都城到达近郊时主君要赠送财物，并到近郊馆舍送行：以上几件事情的礼仪都同宾前去向主君授玉时的礼仪一样。宾返国前向主君行拜谢礼的有以下三件事：拜谢馈送饔饩，拜谢为己设飨礼、食礼。宾用宾礼接待到馆舍来的主君，礼仪都如同主国接待自己时一样。
English: After the morning ceremony, the host country should give gifts to the guests. When the guests return to the host country, the host country should give gifts back to the guests. While the guests are staying in the host country, the host country should entertain the guests with gifts and gifts. When the guests return from the capital city of the host country to the suburbs, the host country should give gifts to the guests and send them to the guest house in the suburbs. The etiquette of the above several things is the same as the etiquette when the guests go to present the jewels to the host country. There are the following three things for the guests to give thanks to the host country before returning to the host country

古文：诸侯、诸伯、诸子、诸男之相为宾也，各以其礼相待也，如诸公之仪。
现代文：诸侯、诸伯、诸子、诸男相互朝见而为宾，各自依照相应等级的礼数，而相互接待的仪节则同诸公相朝一样。
English: Princes, vassals, sons, and sons-in-law are guests at each other's court, each according to the number of courtesies of the corresponding rank, and the ceremony of receiving each other is the same as that of princes.

古文：诸公之臣相为国客，则三积，皆三辞拜受。
现代文：诸公的臣相互作为国客行聘礼，就三次供给粮草牲牢，客每次都要推辞三次然后行拜礼接受。
English: As the guests of the state, the high-ranking courtiers offered gifts to each other, and three times they offered grain, grass and livestock. Each time, the guests had to decline three times and then perform a prayer to accept.

古文：及大夫郊劳，旅摈三辞，拜辱，三让，登听命，下拜，登受，宾使者，如初之仪。
现代文：到主国的大夫前来行郊劳礼时，客陈列介迎接，并要推辞三次，然后拜谢大夫屈尊前来。
English: When a doctor from the host country comes to perform rural labor rites, the guest is greeted by the host, and must decline three times, and then thank the doctor for coming.

古文：及退，拜送，致馆，如初之仪。及将币，旅摈三辞，拜逆，客辟，三揖，每门止一相。及庙，唯君相入，三让，客登，拜，客三辟授币，下出，每事如初之仪。
现代文：客与大夫进入馆舍来到堂阶前，客要三次让由大夫先登阶上堂，而大夫三次推辞，然后客先登而大夫随之登阶上堂，客听大夫代表主君致郊劳辞，听毕下堂行拜礼，再上堂接受劳礼。客用宾礼接待使者也如同当初行劳礼的礼仪。
English: The guest and the doctor enter the hall and come to the front steps of the hall. The guest should let the doctor go up the stairs first three times, and the doctor should refuse three times. Then the guest goes up first and the doctor goes up the stairs. The guest listens to the doctor's resignation on behalf of the master, listens to the prayer after the hall, and then goes up to the hall to receive the prayer. The guest's reception of the envoy with the guest's prayer is also similar to the etiquette of performing the prayer.

古文：及礼，私面，私献，皆再拜稽首，君答拜，出及中门之外，问君，客再拜对，君拜，客辟而对。君问大夫，客对，君劳客，客再拜稽首，君答拜，客趋辟。
现代文：到大夫退去时，客行拜礼相送。
English: When the doctor left, the procession left with him.

古文：致饔饩，如劳之礼。
现代文：为客安排馆舍的礼仪也如同郊劳一样。
English: The etiquette of arranging accommodation for guests is also similar to that of the countryside.

古文：飨食，还圭，如将币之仪。君馆客，客辟，介受命，遂送，客従，拜辱于朝。明日，客拜礼赐，遂行，如入之积。凡侯、伯、子、男之臣，以其国之爵相为客而相礼，其仪亦如之。
现代文：到将行正聘礼向主国国君授玉时，主君陈列摈者迎接客，对于客来行聘礼三次表示推辞，然后拜迎客，客回避君的拜礼，接着客进入大门，以后每进一门主君都三次揖请客先入，而客三次推让，每经过一门都只由一名上相相礼，到了太祖庙门前，只有主君的相进入庙中。
English: When it was time to present the imperial regalia to the sovereign of the host country to bestow the imperial regalia, the lord who displayed the imperial regalia greeted the guests, declined the invitation to the guests to present the imperial regalia three times, then greeted the guests, the guests avoided the king's salute, and then the guests entered the gate. After that, every time the lord entered a gate, he invited the guests to enter first three times, and the guests were pushed back three times, and only one upper echelon echelon echelon echelon echelon echelon echelon echelon echelon echelon echelon echelon echelon

古文：凡四方之宾客，礼仪、辞命、饩牢、赐献以二等，従其爵而上下之。
现代文：进庙后主君与客行三揖三让之礼，然后客随主君登阶上堂。主君拜谢客的到来，客三次退避君的拜礼。客把玉授给主君，然后下堂，出庙。
English: After entering the temple, the master and the guest go through three bowing and three bowing ceremonies, and then the guest ascends the stairs with the master. The master thanks the guest for his arrival, and the guest withdraws from the king's worship three times. The guest gives the jade to the master, and then goes down the hall and leaves the temple.

古文：凡宾客，送逆同礼。
现代文：向主君进献礼物，或有国事要同主国交涉，每件事的礼仪都同当初一样。
English: The etiquette for presenting a gift to one's lord, or for dealing with the host country in a state of affairs, is the same as it was in the beginning.

古文：凡诸侯之交，各称其邦而为之币，以其币为之礼。
现代文：到主君向客献醴，客以个人名义拜见主君，以及以个人名义向主君进献礼物时，都要向主君行再拜稽首礼，君回拜礼。
English: When the host presents a bowl to a guest, when a guest visits the host in his or her own name, and when a guest presents a gift to the host in his or her own name, the host should be given a bow and a bow.

古文：凡行人之仪，不朝不夕，不正其主面，亦不背客。
现代文：客出庙走到中门外，主君询问客的国君的健康情况，客行再拜礼而后回答。主君回拜礼。
English: When the guest leaves the temple and walks outside the middle gate, the master inquires about the health of the guest's sovereign, and the guest bows and then answers. The master bows again.

