古文：蔡邕字伯喈，陈留圉人也。
现代文：◆蔡邕传，蔡邕字伯喈，陈留圉县人。
English: ◆Cai Yu Chuan, Cai Yu Zi Bo Yu, a native of Chen Liu Yu County.

古文：六世祖勋，好黄、老，平帝时为眉阝令。
现代文：六世祖蔡勋，好黄帝老子之术，平帝时为眉阝县令。
English: The sixth-generation ancestor Cai Xun, who loved the art of the Yellow Emperor Lao Zi, was the county magistrate of Meizhou County during the reign of Emperor Ping.

古文：王莽初，授以厌戎连率。
现代文：王莽篡位初年，任命他为厌戎连率。
English: In the first year of Wang Mang's usurpation, he appointed him as the commander of the army.

古文：勋对印绶仰天叹曰 吾策名汉室，死归其正。
现代文：蔡勋对着官印仰天叹息说 ：我是汉朝的官吏，死也不能失正道。
English: Cai Xun sighed to the official seal and said: I am an official of the Han Dynasty, and I cannot deviate from the right path even if I die.

古文：昔曾子不受季孙之赐，况可事二姓哉 遂携将家属，逃入深山，与鲍宣、卓茂等同不仕新室。
现代文：从前曾子不接受季孙送的东西，何况是奉侍二姓呢！ 于是带了家属，逃入深山之中，与鲍宣、卓茂等不做王莽的官。
English: In the past, Zeng Zi would not accept gifts from his grandchildren, not to mention serving two surnames! So he took his family members and fled into the mountains, along with Bao Xuan, Zhuo Mao and other officials who did not want to be reckless.

古文：父棱，亦有清白行，谥曰贞定公。
现代文：父亲蔡棱，也有清白的操行，死后称贞定公。
English: His father, Cai Ren, was also innocent, and after his death, he was called Zhending.

古文：邕性笃孝，母常滞病三年，邕自非寒暑节变，未尝解襟带，不寝寐者七旬。
现代文：蔡邕性至孝，母亲卧病三年，不论盛夏严冬、气候变化，没有解开过衣带，七十天没有睡过觉。
English: Cai Qian is a filial son, his mother has been bedridden for three years, regardless of the midsummer, winter, and climate change, he has not undone his belt, and he has not slept for seventy days.

古文：母卒，庐于冢侧，动静以礼。
现代文：母亲死了，墓旁盖一间房子住下守着，一动一静，都遵守礼制。
English: When my mother died, I built a house next to the grave, lived there and guarded it. I observed the rules of etiquette in everything I did.

古文：有菟驯扰其室傍，又木生连理，远近奇之，多往观焉。
现代文：一只兔子很驯顺地在他的住宅旁边跳跃，又有木生连理枝，远远近近的人都觉得奇怪，来看的人很多。
English: A rabbit hops very tamely next to his house, and there are trees and branches. People far and near find it strange, there are a lot of people to see.

古文：与叔父从弟同居，三世不分财，乡党高其义。
现代文：与叔父、叔伯兄弟同居，三代没有分家，乡里的人都称赞他品行好。
English: He lived with his uncle and cousins, and there was no family separation for three generations. People in the village praised him for his good character.

古文：少博学，师事太傅胡广。
现代文：少年时博学，从太傅胡广学习。
English: When he was a boy, he was very erudite and learned from the great Fu Hu Guang.

古文：好辞章、数术、天文，妙操音律。
现代文：喜欢文学、数术、天文，还擅长音乐。
English: He likes literature, mathematics, astronomy, and is also good at music.

古文：桓帝时，中常侍徐璜、左悺等五侯擅恣，闻邕善鼓琴，遂白天子，敕陈留太守督促发遣。
现代文：桓帝时，中常侍徐璜、左等五侯，擅权不法，听说蔡邕的琴鼓得好，告诉了皇帝，令陈留太守督促启程。
English: During the reign of Emperor Huan, the five princes, including the middle attendant Xu Xi and the left attendant Zuo, arrogated power and acted illegally. Hearing that Cai Xi was good at playing the harp, they told the emperor and ordered Chen Liu, the de facto ruler, to urge him to leave.

古文：邕不得已，行到偃师，称疾而归。
现代文：蔡邕不得已，走到偃师，假称病了，返回家中。
English: As a last resort, Cai Xuan walked to his teacher, pretended to be ill, and returned home.

古文：闲居玩古，不交当世。
现代文：无事，在家玩古董，不与时下一般人来往。
English: Nothing, at home playing with antiques, not with the current general public.

古文：感东方朔《客难》及杨雄、班固、崔骃之徒设疑以自通，乃斟酌群言，韪其是而矫其非，作《释诲》以戒厉云尔。
现代文：受东方朔《客难》及扬雄、班固、崔骃设疑自通的启发，于是汲取百家之言，肯定其正确的而纠正其不对的，作《释诲》以警惕与自勉。
English: Inspired by Dongfang Shuo's "Guest Trouble" and Yang Xiong, Ban Gu and Cui Xuan's "Setting Doubts and Solving Them," he drew on the words of hundreds of scholars, affirming what was correct and correcting what was wrong, and wrote "Explanation" with vigilance and self-control.

古文：有务世公子诲于华颠胡老曰 盖闻圣人之大宝曰位，故以仁守位，以财聚人。然则有位斯贵，有财斯富，行义达道，士之司也。
现代文：建宁三年，被征召去司徒桥玄府，桥玄对他很好。
English: Three years after Jianning was conscripted, he was sent to the Shitou Bridge Xuan prefecture. The bridge Xuan treated him very well.

古文：故伊挚有负鼎之衒，仲尼设执鞭之言，甯子有清商之歌，百里有豢牛之事。夫如是，则圣哲之通趣，古人之明志也。夫子生清穆之世，禀醇和之灵，覃思典籍，韫椟《六经》，安贫乐贱，与世无营，沈精重渊，抗志高冥，包括无外，综析无形，其已久矣。曾不能拔萃出群，扬芳飞文。
现代文：出补河平长。
English: Make up for Kawahira.

古文：登天庭，序彝伦，扫六合之秽慝，清宇庙之埃尘，连光芒于白日，属炎气于景云，时逝岁暮，默而无闻。小子惑焉，是以有云。
现代文：召拜郎中，校书东观。
English: In the middle of summoning worshipers, the school book is in the East View.

古文：方今圣上宽明，辅弼贤知，崇英逸伟，不坠于地，德弘者建宰相而裂土，才羡者荷荣禄而蒙赐。
现代文：升议郎。蔡邕认为经籍距圣人著述的时间久远，文字错误多，俗儒牵强附会，贻误学子，熹平四年，与五官中郎将堂奚谷典、光禄大夫杨赐、谏议大夫马日石单、议郎张驯、韩说、太史令单等，奏请正定《六经》文字。
English: Cai Wei believed that the scriptures were written a long time after the saint's writings, that there were many errors in the text, that the laymen were far-fetched, that the scholars were mistaken, and that the four years of Heping, together with the five officials, including the middle-ranking official, Don Shizutani, the doctor of Guanglu, Yang Qi, the doctor of Shengli, Ma Rishi Shan, the doctor of Shengli, Zhang Tame, Han Zhao, and Tai Shi Ling Shan, should be recorded as the correct text of the "Six Classics."

古文：盍亦回涂要至，俯仰取容，辑当世之利，定不拔之功，荣家宗于此时，遗不灭之令踪。
现代文：灵帝批准了，蔡邕用红笔亲自写在碑上，使工人刻好立于太学门外。于是后来的儒者学生，都以此为标准经文。碑新立时，来观看及摹写的，一天之内，车子就有一千多辆，街道也堵塞了。
English: Emperor Lingdi approved, and Cai Qi personally wrote on the monument with a red pen, so that the workers could carve it well and stand outside the gate of Taiyue. Therefore, later Confucian students all used it as a standard scripture. When the monument was newly erected, there were more than a thousand cars coming to watch and copy it, and the streets were blocked.

古文：夫独未之思邪，何为守彼而不通此 
现代文：起先，朝廷认为州郡勾结，人情结伙营私，下令婚姻之家和两州人士，不得互相担任监察官吏。
English: At first, the imperial court believed that the state and county were colluding and acting in concert, and ordered the marriage house and people from the two states not to serve as inspectors.

古文：胡老傲然而笑曰 若公子，所谓睹暧昧之利，而忘昭晢之害。
现代文：现在又有三互法，婚姻之家及两州人士不得交互为官。禁忌更加严密了。选用官吏，很不容易。
English: Now there are three reciprocal laws, and people from the same family and two states are not allowed to serve as officials. The taboo is even stricter. It is not easy to choose officials.

古文：专必成之功，而忽蹉跌之败者已 公子谡尔敛袂而兴曰 胡为其然也 胡老曰 居，吾将释汝。
现代文：幽、冀两州，缺职很久不得补充。蔡邕上疏说 ：幽、冀两地是兵马所出的地方，近年兵士饥饿，慢慢地空虚了。
English: Yu and Hebei Provinces, the vacancy will not be filled for a long time. Cai Xuanzhou said: Yu and Hebei Provinces are the places where soldiers and horses came from. In recent years, soldiers are starving, and they are slowly becoming empty.

古文：昔自太极，君臣始基，有羲皇之洪守，唐、虞之至时。三代之隆，亦有缉熙，五伯扶徽，勤而抚之。
现代文：现在百姓贫困，万里一片萧条。长时间无人负责，人民下吏延颈相望，而三府选举，几个月没有定下来。我对此常感奇怪，而有的人说 避三互 。
English: Now the people are impoverished and the country is in a depression. No one has been in charge for a long time, the people's subordinate officials have been looking at each other, and the three prefectural elections have not been decided for several months. I often feel strange about this, and some people say, "Avoid all three."

古文：于斯已降，天网纵，人纮，王涂坏，太极陁，君臣土崩，上下瓦解。
现代文：十一州有禁，只求解决幽、冀二州而已。又二州之士，有的又以时间为限，犹豫迟疑，因此失去了机会。
English: There is a ban on eleven states, and they are only seeking a solution for two states. And some people from the two states are hesitating because of the time limit, so they have lost the opportunity.

古文：于是智者聘诈，辩者驰说。
现代文：我以为三互之禁，是很轻微的。
English: I thought the three-strikes-and-you're-out policy was very light.

古文：武夫奋略，战士讲锐。
现代文：现在只要显示威权，阐明法纪，在职的人，谁不害怕呢。
English: Now, as long as they show authority and clarify the law and order, who is not afraid of those in office?

古文：电骇风驰，雾散云披，变诈乖诡，以合时宜。
现代文：为什么仅因三互设禁，自生隔阂呢。从前韩安国坐法抵罪，朱买臣出身贫贱，都因有才华，回到自己的原籍做官。
English: Why is it that just because of the three mutual bans, they are estranged from each other? In the past, Han An Guo was punished by the law, and Zhu Bai Sheng was born poor, but because of his talent, he returned to his hometown to work as an official.

古文：或画一策而绾万金，或谈崇朝而锡瑞珪。
现代文：又是个亡命之徒，升为冀州刺史。难道可以拘守三互，又以一些不重要的制度来束缚自己吗？
English: He is also an outlaw, promoted to the top of the history of Jizhou. Is it possible to adhere to the three mutuals and restrain himself with some unimportant system?

古文：连衡者六印磊落，合从者骈组流离。隆贵翕习，积富无崖，据巧蹈机，以忘其危。
现代文：三公明明知道二州的重要，应该赶快决定，打破禁区，选拔贤能之士，挽救当前的危局，而不采纳忠臣的意见，为细微末节的法令所限制，耽误了选用，失去了人才。
English: The Three Rulers clearly knew the importance of the two prefectures and should have made a quick decision to break through the forbidden zone, select capable people and save the current dangerous situation. However, instead of adopting the opinions of loyal subjects, they were restricted by petty laws and regulations, delayed the selection and lost talent.

古文：夫华离蔕而萎，条去干而枯，女冶容而淫，士背道而辜。人毁其满，神疾其邪，利端始萌，害渐亦牙。
现代文：臣愿皇上效法先帝，废除近禁，各州刺史应该更换的，不要拘于时间与三互，只要合适的就任用。 
English: It is the wish of the Emperor's subjects that the Emperor should follow the example of the former Emperor and abolish the ban on the use of the imperial seal, and that the state seal should be replaced, regardless of the time and the three states, as long as it is appropriate.

古文：速速方毂，夭夭是加，欲丰其屋，乃蔀其家。
现代文：奏上，没有采纳。起先，帝爱学习，自己作《皇羲篇》五十章，因此诸生会做文章的得到引用。
English: At first, the emperor loved to study and wrote fifty chapters of the "Imperial Decrees" by himself, so he was often quoted in articles.

古文：是故天地否闭，圣哲潜形，石门守晨，沮、溺耦耕，颜歜抱璞，蘧瑗保生，齐人归乐，孔子斯征，雍渠骖乘，逝而遗轻。
现代文：原来是按经学招来的，后来那些作尺牍及会写鸟篆的，都被引召，增加到数十人。侍中祭酒乐松、贾护，引来很多无操行趋炎附势的人，都待命鸿都门下，喜欢讲一些地方风俗、乡里小事，帝非常高兴，不按平常的次序提拔他们。又商贾小民，为宣陵孝子的几十人，都给以郎中、太子舍人之官。当时常有雷霆疾风，伤树拔木，地震、冰雹、蝗虫为害。
English: Originally, they were invited according to the study of scriptures. Later, those who made shakuhachi and could write bird calls were all invited, increasing to dozens of people. The middle attendants of the festival of wine and music, Jia Gu, attracted many people who did not have the power to act, who were under the command of Hongdu. They liked to talk about some local customs and small things in the countryside. The emperor was very happy and did not promote them according to the usual order. And the merchants of Jia Xiaomin, dozens of people who were filial sons of Xuanling, were given the position of Yilangzhong and the prince. At that time, there were often thunder

古文：夫岂傲主而背国乎。
现代文：又鲜卑侵犯边境，人民为劳役赋税所苦。
English: They also violated the border, and the people suffered from labor taxes.

古文：道不可以倾也。 且我闻之，日南至则黄钟应，融风动而鱼上冰，蕤宾统则微阴萌，蒹葭苍而白露凝。
现代文：六年七月，诏书认错，令群臣各说可行的治理国家大事的措施。蔡邕上密奏，说： 我敬读圣旨，虽周成王遇风灾，问诸史百官，周宣王遭旱灾，勤劳戒惧，都不过如此。
English: In July of the sixth year, the imperial edict admitted its error and ordered the ministers to each suggest feasible measures for the governance of national affairs. Cai Xuan played a secret recital and said: I respectfully read the sacred edict, although King Zhou Cheng met with disaster, and asked hundreds of historians, and King Zhou Xuan suffered from drought, and worked hard and refrained from fear, this was not the case.

古文：寒暑相推，阴阳代兴，运极则化，理乱相承。
现代文：我听说老天爷降灾害，是跟着某种现象的发生而来的。阳气屡发，大概是诛杀太多所致。
English: I've heard that disasters are caused by a certain phenomenon. Yang qi is often released, probably caused by too much fighting.

古文：今大汉绍陶唐之洪烈，荡四海之残灾，隆隐天之高，拆縆地之基。
现代文：风是老天爷的号令，用以教育人君的。只有正直光明侍奉上天，就自求多福；好好祭祀祖宗，则鬼神就显灵。
English: The wind is God's call, used to educate people. Only the honest and bright serve God, and ask for many blessings; if you sacrifice your ancestors well, then ghosts and spirits will appear.

古文：皇道惟融，帝猷显ぶ，汦々庶类，含甘吮滋。
现代文：国家大事，以祭祀为先，这是天子应当恭恭敬敬亲身作的。
English: National events, with sacrifices as the first, this is what the Son of Heaven should respectfully and reverently do.

古文：检六合之群品，济之乎雍熙，群僚恭己于职司，圣主垂拱乎两楹。君臣穆穆，守之以平，济济多士，端委缙綎，鸿渐盈阶，振鹭充庭。譬犹钟山之玉，泗滨之石，累珪璧不为之盈，采浮磬不为之索。
现代文：我先在宰府，后做祭官，迎祥和之气于五郊，而皇上很少参加，四时致敬，常常委托官吏，虽曾谢罪，终属疏忽缺废，所以皇天不高兴，显现这么多怪异来。《鸿范传》说： 政治腐败，道德不修，大风就会吹倒房屋，折断树木。 《坤》卦是地道，《易》称 安贞之吉，应地无疆 。
English: First I was in Zaifu, then I was a sacristan, welcoming the peaceful atmosphere in the five suburbs, while the emperor rarely participated, paying homage at four o'clock, often entrusting officials. Although he had thanked the sin, it was ultimately negligence and lack of waste, so the emperor was not happy and so many strange things appeared. "Hong Fan Biography" said: Political corruption, immorality, high winds will blow down houses and break trees. "Kun" Gua is the real way, "Yi" said that the good luck of Anzhen is boundless.

古文：曩者，洪源辟而四隩集，武功定而干戈戢，猃狁攘而吉甫宴，城濮捷而晋凯入。
现代文：阴气越积越多，本来应当安静的，反而会动起来，法为下叛。权柄不操在上面，冰雹就伤物；政治苛刻暴虐，则虎狼食人；贪利伤害百姓，而蝗虫损害庄稼。
English: If authority does not operate from above, hail will damage things; if politics is harsh and tyrannical, tigers and wolves will eat people; if greed harms the people, locusts will damage crops.

古文：故当其有事也，则蓑笠并载，擐甲扬锋，不给于务。
现代文：去年六月二十八日，太白星与月亮相迫，对兵事不利。鲜卑侵犯边境，自远地来，现在出师征讨，没有取得什么进展。上违反了天文，下不顺于人事。
English: On the 28th of June last year, the white star and the moon were too close to each other, which was not good for the military affairs. Xianbei violated the border, came from far away, and now sent out a team to solicit, but did not make any progress. It violated astronomy on the one hand, and disobeyed the personnel on the other.

古文：当其无事也。
现代文：真正应当看看大家的意见，采纳合适的。
English: We really should take a look at everyone's opinions and adopt the most appropriate one.

古文：则舒绅缓佩，鸣玉以步，绰有馀裕。
现代文：我对此不胜激动，谨上宜于施行的七事如下：第一件事：明堂月令。
English: I am very excited about this, and the seven things I would like to do are as follows: The first thing: Mingdang lunar calendar.

古文： 夫世臣、门子，暬御之族，天隆其祜，主丰其禄。
现代文：天子按立春、立夏、立秋、立冬及季夏之节，居明堂迎祭五帝于郊。为了导引神气，求福丰收。清庙祭祀，孝敬祖先，养老设教，告诉人守礼化俗，这些都是帝王的大业，祖宗恪守奉行的。
English: According to the birth of spring, summer, autumn, winter and midsummer festivals, Juming Hall welcomes the five emperors in the suburbs. In order to guide the spirit, pray for good luck and a good harvest. Qing temple sacrifices, filial piety to ancestors, old-age education, and telling people to observe etiquette and change customs, these are the great undertakings of emperors, and the ancestors abide by them.

古文：抱膺从容，爵位自从，摄须理髯，余官委贵。其取进也，顺倾转圆，不足以喻其便。
现代文：而有关部门常因蕃国有丧，宫内生育，以及吏卒病死，经常发生禁忌，缺而不行。
English: However, the relevant departments often have taboos due to the death of the state, intrauterine birth, and death of officials due to illness, and it is not possible to do without them.

古文：逡巡放屣，不足以况其易。
现代文：只看到南郊斋戒祭祀，没有废缺，至于它祀，每有不同的说法，难道南郊卑而它祀尊贵吗？
English: Just seeing Nanjiao's fasting and sacrifice, there is no shortage of waste. As for its worship, each has a different saying. Is Nanjiao inferior and its worship noble?

古文：夫夫有逸群之才，人人有优赡之智。
现代文：孝元皇帝诏令说 ：礼仪所敬，莫重于祭祀，所以全心全意亲自奉行，是为了表其肃敬之情。 
English: Emperor Xiaoyuan's edict said, "Rituals are to be respected, and there is nothing more important than sacrifice. Therefore, he wholeheartedly practiced it himself in order to show his reverence."

古文：童子不问疑于老成，瞳矇不稽谋于先生。
现代文：又章帝元和故事，再次申明议修群祀，以祈丰年，前后诏书，用心诚恳。
English: There is also a chapter on the emperor and the story, and it is once again affirmed that the discussion of the group worship, with the blessing of the auspicious year, the edict, and the sincerity.

古文：心恬淡于守高，意无为于持盈。
现代文：而最近以来，更换太史，忘了礼敬的大事，听任禁忌的书流行，拘信小故，亏废大典。
English: But recently, the replacement of the Great Historian, forgetting the important matter of courtesy, allowing the taboo book to become popular, sticking to petty reasons, and wasting the great book.

古文：粲乎煌煌，莫非华荣。
现代文：按《礼》，妻妾生子，斋戒，不入侧室之门，没有废掉祭祀的规定。
English: According to the "Rite," the wife, concubine and child, fasting, not entering the door of the side room, did not abolish the rules of sacrifice.

古文：明哲泊焉，不失所宁。狂淫振荡，乃乱其情。
现代文：至于说宫中有死丧的发生，三月不祭，是说普通老百姓只有几间房子，不少人住在一起，不便举行祭祀。
English: As for the occurrence of death and mourning in the palace, there is no sacrifice in March, which means that ordinary people only have a few houses, many people live together, and it is inconvenient to hold sacrifices.

古文：贪夫殉财，夸者死权。
现代文：难道说宫廷广大，臣妾众多也可以不祭祀吗？
English: Can it really be said that a vast court and numerous subjects and concubines can also be worshipped without sacrifice?

古文：瞻仰此事，体躁心烦。暗谦盈之效，迷损益之数。
现代文：从现在起，斋戒祭祀的制度，应该按照以前典章执行，才可以说对灾异的发生，作出了回答。第二件事：我听说国家将兴，常常听到好的建议。
English: From now on, the system of fasting and sacrifice should be implemented in accordance with the previous regulations, so that we can say that we have responded to the occurrence of disasters.Second thing: I have heard that the country will be prosperous, and I often hear good suggestions.

古文：骋驽骀于修路，慕骐骥而增驱，卑俯乎外戚之门，乞助乎近贵之誉。
现代文：内则可以知道自己的治理情况，外则可以了解老百姓的情绪。所以先帝虽然聪明圣哲，还是广泛征求意见，询问政治之所以得及其所以失的原因。
English: On the one hand, they could know their own governance situation, on the other hand, they could understand the sentiments of the common people. Therefore, although the former emperor was a wise sage, he still widely solicited opinions and inquired about the reasons for political gains and the reasons for losses.

古文：荣显未副，从而颠踣，下获薰胥之辜，高受灭家之诛。
现代文：又因为发生灾异，寻访那些隐居不仕的高士，重视贤良、方正、敦朴、有道的选举。直言敢谏，不绝于朝廷。
English: In addition, due to the occurrence of disasters and abnormalities, it is necessary to search for those high-ranking officials who live in seclusion and do not perform their duties, and attach importance to the election of virtuous, upright, unpretentious, and moral.

古文：前车已覆，袭轨而骛，曾不鉴祸，以知畏惧。予惟悼哉，害其若是。天高地厚，跼而蹐之。怨岂在明，患生不思。
现代文：皇上主政以来，连年发生灾异，没有听说下诏征召贤能，真正应当遵循过去一些好的措施，使忠心耿耿之臣，发挥敢想敢说的精神，使《易传》所说 政悖德隐 的话，不得流行。
English: Since the emperor has been in power, disasters have occurred year after year, and it has not been heard that the next imperial edict is to conscript talents. It is really necessary to follow some good measures in the past, so that loyal subjects can exert the spirit of daring to say what they want, so that the words "politics is contrary to morality" mentioned in "I Chuan" cannot become popular.

古文：战战兢兢，必慎厥尤。
现代文：第三件事：访求贤能的方法，不只一种。
English: Third, there is more than one way to seek virtue.

古文： 且用之则行，圣训也。
现代文：有的人因道德修养好而著名，有的人因直言敢谏而被人称道。
English: Some people are famous for their moral rectitude, while others are praised for their outspokenness.

古文：舍之则藏，至顺也。夫九河盈溢，非一凷所防。
现代文：近来，朝廷里面的人，没有因忠信受到赏赐的，反而常常因诽谤诬蔑而被杀害。因之群臣闭口，不敢说话。
English: In recent times, people in the imperial court, instead of being rewarded for their loyalty, have often been killed for slander, for which reason the courtiers have shut their mouths and dare not speak.

古文：带甲百万，非一勇所抗。
现代文：郎中张文，以前一人敢于直谏，皇上采纳，斥责了三司，群臣心悦诚服，平民百姓也高兴。
English: Zhang Wen, a vassal of the emperor, who had previously dared to make a direct attack, was adopted by the emperor and rebuked by the three emperors. The courtiers were sincerely pleased, and the common people were also happy.

古文：今子责匹夫以清宇宙，庸可以水旱而累尧、汤乎。
现代文：我认为应该提拔张文担任要职，用以奖忠贞之士，向海内宣传，广开贤明政治之路。第四件事：司隶校尉、各州刺史，它的职责是督察不法，检举坏人，分清是非。
English: In my opinion, Zhang Wen should be promoted to a high-ranking position to reward loyal people, promote propaganda at home, and open up a path of wise politics.Fourth thing: Lieutenant Colonel Sisli, the states of history, its duty is to inspect illegalities, report bad people, and distinguish right from wrong.

古文：惧烟炎之毁熸，何光芒之敢扬哉。
现代文：幽州刺史杨熹、益州刺史庞芝、凉州刺史刘虔，各有一片奉公守法、痛恶坏人坏事之心，杨熹等检举劾办的，效果最好。
English: Yuzhou's Yang Hui, Yizhou's Pang Zhi, and Liangzhou's Liu Qian each have a heart of law-abiding, abhorring bad people and bad things. Yang Hui's prosecution and impeachment work has the best effect.

古文：且夫地将震而枢星直，井无景则日阴食，元首宽则望舒朓，侯王肃则月侧匿。
现代文：其余有的不理不申，有的枉法曲断，都不称职。有的本人就有罪过或错误，与下面所应检举的相同。而法纪败坏，无人揭发，公府台阁也默不作声。五年诏令，议遣八使，又令三公采长史臧否考察人民疾苦，上奏皇上。
English: Of the rest, some were negligent, some perverted the law and were not up to the job. Some were personally guilty or made mistakes, which are the same as those that should be reported below. And the legal discipline was corrupt, no one exposed it, and the public administration was silent. The five-year imperial edict, discussing the dispatch of eight envoys, and ordering the three public officials to investigate the hardships of the people, was reported to the emperor.

古文：是以君子推微达著，寻端见绪，履霜知冰，路露知暑。
现代文：这时奉公守法的人，欣然得志，为非作歹的人忧恐失色，怕得要死。但是，不知道这件事为什么忽然停止了。
English: At this time, those who are law-abiding and law-abiding are delighted, and those who are evil-doers are worried, scared, and scared to death. However, I don't know why this thing suddenly stopped.

古文：时行则行，时止则止，消息盈冲，取诸天纪。
现代文：从前刘向上奏说 ：决策犹豫不决的人，为一般小人大开方便之门；养成了优柔寡断习惯的人，招来谄媚诽谤的坏家伙。 
English: Liu Xiangzhuo once said: A person who hesitates in making decisions opens a convenient door for ordinary villains; a person who has developed the habit of indecision attracts the bad guys of flattery and slander.

古文：利用遭泰，可与处否，乐天知命，持神任己。
现代文：现在刚刚听到一点善政，转眼之间就变了卦。
English: Now, I have just heard a bit about good governance, and my opinion has changed in the blink of an eye.

古文：群车方奔乎险路，安能与之齐轨。
现代文：又尚方工技，鸿都篇赋，可以暂时停一停。
English: In addition, Shangfang Engineering Technology, Hongdu Henfu, can temporarily stop.

古文：思危难而自豫，故在贱而不耻。
现代文：以示忧患在身。《诗》云 ：畏天之怒，不敢戏豫。 
English: "Poetry" cloud: fear of the wrath of heaven, do not hesitate to play.

古文：方将骋驰乎典籍之崇涂，休息乎仁义之渊薮，槃旋乎周、孔之庭宇，揖儒、墨而与为友。舒之足以光四表，收之则莫能知其所有。若乃丁千载之运，应神灵之符，闿阊阖，乘天衢，拥华盖而奉皇枢，纳玄策于圣德，宣太平于中区。计合谋从，已之图也。勋绩不立，予之辜也。龟凤山翳，雾露不除，踊跃草莱，只见其愚。不我知者，将谓之迂。修业思真，弃此焉如。静以俟命，不斁不渝。百岁之后，归乎其居。幸其获称，天所诱也。罕漫而已，非已咎也。
现代文：老天爷的警戒，是不能轻看的啊！
English: God's vigilance is not to be taken lightly!

古文：昔伯翳综声于鸟语，葛卢辩音于鸣牛，董父受氏于豢龙，奚仲供德于衡辀，倕氏兴政于巧工，造父登御于骅骝，非子享土于善圉，狼瞫取右于禽囚，弓父毕精于筋角，佽非明勇于赴流，寿王创基于格五，东方要幸于谈优，上官效力于执盖，弘羊据相于运筹。
现代文：宰府孝廉，要求是很高的。
English: Zaifu Takakado, the requirements are very high.

古文：仆不能参迹于若人，故抱璞而优游 
现代文：前不久因征召不慎，严厉斥责三公，而现在却都以小文超取选举，大开走后门之风，违背了国家的制度。
English: Not long ago, the three princes were severely reprimanded for careless recruitment, but now they are all using petty cash to win elections, breaking the national system.

古文：于是公子仰首降阶，忸怩而避。
现代文：大家不满意，只是不敢说而已。
English: Everyone is dissatisfied, but they are afraid to say so.

古文：胡老乃扬衡含笑，援琴而歌。
现代文：我望皇上下决心改变这种状况，所思万事，都为了报答老天的希望。
English: I admire the emperor's determination to change this situation, and everything I think about is to repay God's hope.

古文：歌曰 练余心兮浸太清，涤秽浊兮存正灵。
现代文：皇上既然自己约束自己，左右的近臣，也应该接受教育。人人抑损，堵塞灾怪。天道厌满，鬼神贵谦啊！我因愚憨，感激忘身。
English: Since the emperor has restrained himself, his close vassals on both sides should also receive education. Everyone should restrain and block disasters. Heaven is tired, and the gods are humble! I am overwhelmed with stupidity and gratitude.

古文：和液畅兮神气宁，情志泊兮心亭亭，嗜欲息兮无由生。
现代文：竟敢触犯忌讳，手书答对。君臣不亲密，君要警惕泄漏机密，臣就常有失身的危险。
English: Dare to break the taboo, handwriting answer is right. Monarch and vassal are not intimate, you should be wary of leaking secrets, vassal is often in danger of losing his life.

古文：踔宇宙而遗俗兮，眇翩翩而独征 
现代文：请把臣表好好收藏起来，不要使忠直的臣子，遭到坏人的怨恨。 奏上，帝看了叹息。
English: Please take good care of the vassal watch, and do not let the loyal vassal be resented by the villain. At the beginning of the performance, the emperor sighed.

古文：建宁三年，辟司徒桥玄府，玄甚敬待之。
现代文：因出去上厕所，曹节在后面偷看了，就全部向左右的人说，致使事情泄漏出来。
English: Because he went to the toilet, Cao Jie peeked behind him and told everyone around him, causing the matter to leak out.

古文：出补河平长。召拜郎中，校书东观。
现代文：被蔡邕所奏应该废黜的人，都恨了他，企图打击报复。
English: The people who should be dethroned by Cai Wei all hated him and tried to take revenge.

古文：迁议郎。邕以经籍去圣久远，文字多谬，俗儒穿凿，疑误后学，熹平四年，乃与五官中郎将堂谿典，光禄大夫杨赐，谏议大夫马日磾，议郎张驯、韩说，太史令单飏等，奏求正定《六经》文字。
现代文：以前，蔡邕与司徒刘不和，叔父卫尉蔡质，又与将作大匠阳球有意见，阳球就是中常侍程璜的女婿。程璜使人写匿名报告，诬告蔡邕、蔡质几次因私事请托于刘，刘没有答应他，于是蔡邕怀恨在心，等等。
English: In the past, Cai Qi was at odds with Liu, the tutor, and his uncle, the guard lieutenant Cai Jian, also had problems with the future master Yang Kuo, who was the son-in-law of the middle chamberlain Cheng Qi. Cheng Qi made people write anonymous reports, falsely accused Cai Qi and Cai Jian of entrusting Liu with private affairs several times, but Liu did not agree to him, so Cai Qi held a grudge, and so on.

古文：灵帝许之，邕乃自书丹于碑，使工镌刻立于太学门外。于是后儒晚学，咸取正焉。
现代文：决心陷害蔡邕。
English: Determined to frame Cai Qi.

古文：及碑始立，其观视及摹写者，车乘日千馀两，填塞街陌。
现代文：因此诏下尚书，召蔡邕质问。
English: Therefore, he issued an edict to summon Cai Qi for questioning.

古文：初，朝议以州郡相党，人情比周，乃制婚姻之家及两州人士不得对相监临。
现代文：蔡邕上书申诉说： 臣被召，问的是：大鸿胪刘前为济阴太守，我的属吏张宛长休百日；刘为司隶，又托河内郡吏李奇为州书佐；及营护前河南尹羊陟、侍御史胡母班，刘都未办使我怀恨等情况。我诚惶诚恐，肝胆涂地，死无葬身之所。
English: Cai Qian wrote a complaint: "The minister was summoned and asked: Da Hongzhao Liu was formerly the governor of Jiyin, and my subordinate officer Zhang Wanlong took a hundred days off; Liu was a subordinate officer, and he also appointed Li Qi, the official of Hanoi County, as the state secretary; and the former Henan Yin Yangjun, the attendant of Shi Hu's mother class, Liu did not do anything to make me hold a grudge. I am sincerely afraid, heartbroken, and there is no place to bury me.

古文：至是复有三互法，禁忌转密，选用艰难。
现代文：我想，事属张宛、李奇，与羊陟、胡母班无关。
English: I think that the matter belongs to Zhang Wan and Li Qi, and has nothing to do with Sheep and Goat.

古文：幽、冀二州，久缺不补。
现代文：大凡休假小吏，不是结恨的根本。
English: An ordinary vacationing minor official is not the root of hatred.

古文：邕上疏曰：
现代文：与羊陟是亲戚，难道敢于帮助私党？
English: He is a relative of Sheep and Goats, how can he dare to help a private party?

古文：伏见幽、冀旧壤，铠马所出，比年兵饑，渐至空耗。
现代文：如果我们父子想陷害他，应当告到台阁，详细写明我们恨他的原因。内无寸事，诽谤之书外发，我愿与刘当面对证。
English: If our father and son want to frame him, they should report to the cabinet, detailing the reasons why we hate him. There is nothing inside, the book of slander is outside, I am willing to testify with Liu.

古文：今者百姓虚县，万里萧条，阙职经时，吏人延属，而三府选举，逾月不定。
现代文：我因学问特蒙奖励。秘馆工作，皇上面前奔走，姓名状貌，皇上是心中有数的。
English: I was given a special award for my scholarship. I worked in a secret library, I ran in front of the emperor, I knew the emperor's name and face.

古文：臣经怪其事，而论者云避三互。
现代文：今年七月召诣金商门，问我灾异发生的原因。持诏申旨，再三启发。
English: In July of this year, I called on the Shijin merchants to ask me the reason for the disaster. I repeated the edict and repeatedly inspired them.

古文：十一州有禁，当取二州而已。
现代文：我实愚憨，只知尽忠，没有想到后害。
English: I'm really stupid, I only know how to be loyal, I didn't think about the consequences.

古文：又二州之士，或复限以岁月，狐疑迟淹，以失事会。
现代文：就讥刺公卿大臣和宠幸的臣子。我是想上对皇上所问，消除灾异，进而为皇上建太平盛世之计。皇上没有想到忠臣直言，应该保密。于是诬陷突来，致生疑怪。
English: I wanted to answer the emperor's question about eliminating disasters and creating a peaceful and prosperous world for the emperor. The emperor did not think that a loyal subject should speak his mind and keep it confidential. So the accusation came out of the blue, causing suspicion.

古文：愚以为三互之禁，禁之薄者，今但申以威灵，明其宪令，在任之人岂不戒惧，而当坐设三互，自生留阂邪。
现代文：尽心害人之吏，难道也可以容忍吗！
English: Can those who are bent on harming others be tolerated?

古文：昔韩安国起自徒中，朱买臣出于幽贱，并以才宜，还守本邦。
现代文：诏书下达，要求百官各上密奏，想改弦更张，除凶致吉。现在是进言的不但没有受到采纳的奖励，而转眼之间，诬陷来了。现在都闭口结舌，以我为戒。哪个还敢为皇上尽忠孝呢？
English: An imperial edict was issued, demanding that all the officials play a secret game. They wanted to change the chord, remove the evil, and bring good luck. Now, not only did they not receive the reward of acceptance, but in the blink of an eye, the frame-up came. Now they are all tongue-tied, with me as a warning. Who would dare to be loyal to the emperor?

古文：又张敞亡命，擢授剧州。
现代文：我的叔父蔡质，连连提拔，职位很高；我被深恩，几次见访。
English: My uncle, Cai Qian, has been promoted repeatedly and has a high position; I have been deeply grateful and have visited him several times.

古文：岂复顾循三互，继以末制乎。
现代文：写匿名报告的人，想以此诬陷我们父子，破坏我的门户，不是为了举发奸人，补益国家啊！
English: The person who wrote the anonymous report wanted to use it to frame our father and son and destroy my portal, not to expose the traitor, but to benefit the country!

古文：三公明知二州之要，所宜速定，当越禁取能，以救时敝。
现代文：我年四十有六，孤独一人，幸得名列忠臣，死有余荣。
English: At the age of forty-six, I was all alone. I was fortunate enough to be ranked as a loyal retainer, and I am very proud of it.

古文：臣之愚冗，职当咎患，但前者所对，质不及闻，而衰老白首，横见引逮，随臣摧设，并入坑埳，诚冤诚痛。
现代文：只怕皇上从此再也听不到忠言了！我愚陋无知，罪有应得。但以前的答对，我叔父蔡质是不知道的。白发苍苍，衰老余年，横遭逮捕，跟着我受罪，同遭坑害，冤哉！痛哉！
English: I'm afraid the emperor will never hear another word of advice from me! I'm stupid and ignorant, and I deserve it. But my uncle Cai Quan didn't know the answer before. He's white-haired, he's getting old, he's been arrested, he's been punished along with me, he's been harmed along with me. What a misfortune! What a pain!

古文：愿身当辜戮，丐质不并坐，则身死之日，更生之年也。
现代文：我一入狱，当为痛楚所迫，加以匿名报告催促，我的情状，皇上哪能再知道呢。死期快来了，鲁莽自诉，愿自己处死，乞蔡质不同罪。那么，我死的一天，就是我再生之年啊！
English: As soon as I went to prison, when I was forced by pain and urged to report anonymously, how could the emperor know my situation any more? Death is coming, reckless self-prosecution, willing to be executed, begging for a different crime. Then, the day of my death is the year of my rebirth!

古文：惟陛下加餐，为万姓自爱。
现代文：祝万岁健康！为百姓自爱。 
English: I wish you long life and good health! Love yourself for the people.

古文：于是下邕、质于洛阳狱，劾以仇怨奉公，议害大臣，大不敬，弃市。
现代文：于是送蔡邕、蔡质入洛阳狱，定为以仇怨奉公，谋害大臣，大不敬，弃市。
English: As a result, Cai Qi and Cai Jian were sent to Luoyang Prison, and were convicted of serving the public with malice, plotting to kill a minister, showing great disrespect, and abandoning the city.

古文：事奏，中常侍吕强愍邕无罪，请之，帝亦更思其章，有诏减死一等，与家属髡钳徙朔方，不得以赦令除。
现代文：事奏，中常侍吕强怜悯蔡邕无罪，请于皇上，帝也再想了想那个飞章所说，下诏减死罪，剃光头发，铁圈束着颈项，与家属迁徙朔方，不得因赦令免除。
English: According to the record of the case, Vice-Admiral Lü Qiang had mercy on Cai Xuan and found her not guilty. I would like to ask the emperor and the emperor to think again about what the banner said. The death penalty should be commuted, the hair should be shaved off, the neck should be tied with an iron collar, and the family members should move to Shanghai. They should not be exempted from the pardon order.

古文：阳球使客追路刺邕，客感其义，皆莫为用。
现代文：阳球打发刺客追赶刺杀蔡邕，刺客被蔡邕的正义感动了，都不为阳球所用。
English: Yangqiu sent assassins to chase and assassinate Cai Qi. The assassins were moved by Cai Qi's justice, and they were not used by Yangqiu.

古文：球又赂其部主使加毒害，所赂者反以其情戒邕，故每得免焉。
现代文：阳球又贿赂其部主毒害蔡邕，受赂的把消息反而告诉了蔡邕，要他提高警惕。
English: Yangqiu also bribed his subordinate to poison Cai Xuan. The bribe recipient told Cai Xuan the news instead, telling him to be more vigilant.

古文：居五原安阳县。
现代文：所以没有遭到杀害。居五原安阳县。
English: Therefore, he was not killed. He lived in Wuhuan Anyang County.

古文：邕前在东观，与卢植、韩说等撰补《后汉记》，会遭事流离，不及得成，因上书自陈，奏其所著十意，分别首目，连置章左。
现代文：蔡邕前在东观，与卢植、韩说等撰补《后汉记》，正遭流放，没有来得及写成。因此上书所著十意，分别首目，附在书尾。
English: Cai Xuan was in Dongguan, working with Lu Zhi and Han Xuan to supplement "Hou Han Ji" and was being exiled, but did not have time to write it. Therefore, the ten meanings of the book, respectively the first, are attached to the end of the book.

古文：帝嘉其才高，会明年大赦，乃宥邕还本郡。邕自徙及归，凡九月焉。
现代文：帝爱蔡邕才高，正好第二年国家大赦，于是宽免蔡邕罪，准许他返回原籍，蔡邕自放逐至回，共九个月。
English: The emperor loved Cai Qi so much that he pardoned Cai Qi's crime in the second year of the national amnesty, allowing him to return to his hometown. Cai Qi was exiled for a total of nine months.

古文：将就还路，五原太守王智饯之。
现代文：正准备启程回郡的时候，五原太守王智送行。
English: When he was preparing to return to the county, he was escorted by Wang Zhi, the 5th Dalai Lama.

古文：酒酣，智起舞属邕，邕不为报。
现代文：酒喝够了，王智起舞劝蔡邕，蔡邕不理他。
English: After drinking enough wine, Wang Zhi danced to persuade Cai Yao, but Cai Yao ignored him.

古文：智者，中常侍王甫弟也，素贵骄，惭于宾客，诟邕曰 徒敢轻我 邕拂衣而去。
现代文：王智是中常侍王甫的弟弟，本来很骄贵，失了面子，为宾客所笑，就破口骂蔡邕说 ：罪犯敢轻侮我！ 蔡邕振衣而去。
English: Wang Zhi, the younger brother of the middle-ranking waiter Wang Fu, was originally very proud, lost face, was laughed at by the guests, and cursed Cai Qi, saying, "Criminals dare to despise me!" Cai Qi shook his head and left.

古文：智衔之，密告邕怨于囚放，谤讪朝廷。
现代文：王智恨了他，密告蔡邕因囚放怀怨，诽谤朝廷。
English: Wang Zhi hated him and tipped off Cai Xuan to slander the imperial court.

古文：内宠恶之。
现代文：皇上宠幸的人也都恶了他。
English: The emperor's favorites also detested him.

古文：邕虑卒不免，乃亡命江海，远迹吴会。往来依太山羊氏，积十二年，在吴。
现代文：蔡邕考虑终不免于害死，於是逃命江海，远走吴会，往来依靠泰山羊氏，积十二年，在吴。
English: Cai Xuan considered that he would eventually be killed, so he fled to the sea, far away from the Wu Clan, and relied on the Tai Goat Clan for 12 years in Wu.

古文：吴人有烧桐以爨者，邕闻火烈之声，知其良木，因请而裁为琴，果有美音，而其尾犹焦，故时人名曰 僬尾琴 焉。
现代文：吴人有烧桐煮饭时，蔡邕听了火烧的声音，晓得桐是一种好木材，于是请制造成琴，果然声音好极了，但琴尾是焦的，时人名之为 焦尾琴 。
English: When the Wu people were cooking rice with burnt tung, Cai Qi heard the sound of the fire and knew that tung was a good wood, so he asked for a harp to be made. The sound was indeed excellent, but the tail of the harp was burnt, and it was then called the burnt tail harp.

古文：其邻人有以酒食召邕者，比往而酒以酣焉。
现代文：从前，蔡邕在陈留，邻人请蔡邕吃饭，及去而酒已经喝完了。
English: Once upon a time, Cai Ye stayed in Chen, the neighbors invited Cai Ye to dinner, and he went and drank all the wine.

古文：客有弹琴于屏，邕至门试潜听之，曰 憘。
现代文：屏风后面有客人在弹琴，蔡邕至门悄悄一听，说： 噢！
English: Behind the screen, a guest was playing the piano. Cai Ye quietly listened at the door and said, "Oh!

古文：以乐召我而有杀心，可也 遂反。
现代文：以乐叫我而有杀心，为什么呢？ 
English: Why does the world call me by my music but have a murderous heart?

古文：将命者告主人曰 蔡君向来，至门而去 邕素为邦乡所宗，主人遽自追而问其故，邕具以告，莫不怃然。弹琴者曰 我向鼓弦，见螳螂方向鸣蝉，蝉将去而未飞，螳螂为之一前一却。
现代文：就迳自回去了。蔡邕素为乡里所尊敬，主人立即追赶他，并问他是什么原因，蔡邕原原本本告诉了他，都为之奇怪。弹琴的人说： 我前鼓弦，见螳螂对着鸣蝉，蝉将去还没起飞，螳螂忽前忽退。
English: Cai Yuxu was respected by the villagers. The owner immediately chased after him and asked him what the reason was. Cai Yuxu had originally told him, but it was all very strange. The person playing the piano said: I am playing the drum, and I see the cockroach facing the cicada. The cicada has not taken off yet, and the cockroach is moving forward and back.

古文：吾心耸然，惟恐螳螂之失之也。
现代文：我心惊肉跳，惟恐螳螂捕捉不了蝉。
English: My heart skipped a beat, fearing that the cockroach would not be able to catch the cicada.

古文：此岂为杀心而形于声者乎 邕莞然而笑曰 此足以当之矣 
现代文：这难道就是所谓杀心形于声音吗？ 蔡邕笑着说 ：实在是这样啊。 
English: Is this the so-called murderous heart shaped by sound? Cai Ye said with a smile: It really is.

古文：中平六年，灵帝崩，董卓为司空，闻邕名高，辟之，称疾不就。
现代文：中平六年，灵帝去世，董卓为司空，闻说蔡邕名气大，征召他，蔡邕推说有病不能去。
English: In the sixth year of Zhongping, Lingdi died, and Dong Zhuo became the second-in-command. Hearing that Cai Ye was famous, he was called up. Cai Ye said that he was ill and could not go.

古文：卓大怒，詈曰 我力能族人，蔡邕遂偃蹇者，不旋踵矣 又切敕州郡举邕诣府，邕不得已，到，署祭酒，甚见敬重。
现代文：董卓大怒，骂说： 我有杀人之权，蔡邕纵骄傲，也是不过转足之间的事而已。 
English: Dong Zhuo was furious and scolded: "I have the right to kill, Cai Xuanlong is proud, it's just a matter of time."

古文：举高第，补侍御史，又转持书御史，迁尚书。
现代文：又急令州郡征召蔡邕到府。蔡邕不得已，到，代理祭酒，很受敬重，举高第，补侍御史，又转持书御史，升尚书。
English: He also urgently ordered the prefectural government to summon Cai Jie to the capital. Cai Jie had no choice but to come, he was the representative of the sacrificial wine, he was highly respected, he was promoted to the highest rank, he was appointed to the post of the imperial secretary, and he was transferred to the post of the imperial secretary of books, he was promoted to the post of the imperial secretary of books.

古文：三日之间，周历三台。
现代文：三天之内，遍历三台。
English: Within three days, I visited three stations.

古文：迁巴郡太守，复留为侍中。
现代文：升巴郡太守，又留为侍中。
English: He became the governor of Shengba County and remained as a chamberlain.

古文：初平元年，拜左中郎将，从献帝迁都长安，封高阳乡侯。
现代文：初平元年，拜左中郎将，从献帝迁都长安，封高阳乡侯。
English: In the first year of the Heian period, General Bai Zuozhong moved the capital to Chang'an from Xiandi, and Gaoyang Township was sealed off.

古文：董卓宾客部典议欲尊卓比太公，称尚父。
现代文：董卓的宾客部属想尊董卓比太公，称尚父。
English: Dong Zhuo's guests wanted to pay their respects to Dong Zhuo Bi Taigong and called him Father Shang.

古文：卓谋之于邕，邕曰 太公辅周，受命剪商，故特为其号。
现代文：董卓问蔡邕，蔡邕说： 太公辅周，奉命灭商，故特号为太公。
English: Dong Zhuo asked Cai Qi, Cai Qi said: Taigong Fu Zhou, ordered to exterminate merchants, so the special name is Taigong.

古文：今明公威德，诚为巍巍，然比之尚父，愚意以为未可宜须并东平定，车驾还反旧京，然后议之 卓从其言。
现代文：现在您的威德虽高，然比之尚父，我以为不可。等到关东平定，皇上返还旧京，然后再议。 董卓听了他的话。
English: Although your virtue is high now, compared to your father, I thought it was impossible. Wait until the Kanto region is pacified and the emperor returns the old capital, and then discuss it again. Dong Zhuo listened to his words.

古文：二年六月，地震，卓以问邕。
现代文：初平二年六月，地震，董卓问蔡邕。
English: In June of the second year of the Heian period, there was an earthquake, and Dong Zhuo asked Cai Qi again.

古文：邕对曰 地动者，阴盛侵阳，臣下逾制之所致也。
现代文：蔡邕对说 ：地动，阴盛侵阳，臣下不遵守国家制度引起的。
English: Cai Wei said: caused by the movement of the earth, the rise and fall of yin and yang, and the failure of the vassals to abide by the national system.

古文：前春郊天，公奉引车驾，乘金华青盖，爪画两轓，远近以为非宜 卓于是改乘皂盖车。
现代文：前春天郊祀，公奉车驾，乘金华青盖，爪画两箱，远近都认为不合适。 董卓于是改乘皂盖车。
English: Before the spring, it was considered inappropriate to worship in the suburbs, drive a public car, use Jinhua Qing cover, and draw two boxes. Dong Zhuo then changed to a soap cover car.

古文：卓重邕才学，厚相遇待，每集宴，辄令邕鼓琴赞事，邕亦每存匡益。
现代文：董卓看重蔡邕的才学，对他非常客气，一遇举行宴会，往往令蔡邕鼓琴助兴，蔡邕也有心出力。
English: Dong Zhuo valued Cai Xuan's talent and was very polite to him. When a banquet was held, Cai Xuan's drum and piano were often used to entertain the guests. Cai Xuan was also eager to contribute.

古文：然卓多自佷用，邕恨其言少从，谓从弟谷曰 董公性刚而遂非，终难济也，吾欲东奔兖州，若道远难达，且遁逃山东以待之，何如 谷曰 君状异恒人，每行观者盈集。
现代文：然董卓多刚愎自用，蔡邕恨自己的话很少为董卓采纳，对从弟蔡谷说： 董公性刚烈而易为非，终究不能成事。我想东奔兖州，但是道路太远，不易达到，暂时逃到山东看看，怎么样？ 蔡谷说： 你的容貌与普通人不同，在路上走，看的人云集，这样，想躲起来，难啊！ 
English: However, Dong Zhuo was too stubborn for his own use, and Cai Jun, who hated his own words, was rarely adopted by Dong Zhuo. To his younger brother Cai Gu, he said, "Dong Gong's nature is stubborn and easy to be wrong, after all, it can't accomplish anything. I want to go to Luzhou, but the road is too far and not easy to reach. How about temporarily escaping to Shandong to take a look?" Cai Gu said, "Your appearance is different from that of ordinary people. When you walk on the road, people gather to look at you. In this way, it's hard to hide!"

古文：以此自匿，不亦难乎 邕乃止。及卓被诛，邕在司徒王允坐，殊不意言之而叹，有动于色。
现代文：蔡邕乃打消了这个主意。董卓被诛，蔡邕在司徒王允家坐，不知不觉说起董卓来，并为之叹息，脸色都变了。
English: Cai Jun disposed of this idea. Dong Zhuo was arrested, Cai Jun was sitting in the house of Wang Yun, and unconsciously spoke of Dong Zhuo, and sighed for him, his face changed.

古文：允勃然叱之曰 董卓国之大贼，几倾汉室。君为王臣，所宜同忿，而怀其私遇，以忘大节。今天诛有罪，而反相伤痛，岂不共为逆哉 即收付廷尉治罪。
现代文：王允勃然大怒，骂蔡邕说： 董卓国家大贼，几乎把汉朝都覆灭了，你为臣子的，应与大家一样为之愤怒，只是因为他对你好，你竟然把大节也丢了，现在诛杀有罪，你反而悲伤哀痛，难道不是与他通同叛逆吗？ 就逮捕了他，交廷尉审讯。
English: Wang Yun flew into a rage and scolded Cai Qi, saying: "Dong Zhuo, the great national thief, has almost destroyed the Han Dynasty. As a courtier, you should be as angry as everyone else. Just because he was good to you, you even lost the Great Festival. Now you are guilty of murder. Instead, you are sad and sorrowful. Isn't it treason with him? He was arrested and interrogated by a court lieutenant.

古文：邕陈辞谢，乞黥首刖足，继成汉史。
现代文：蔡邕承认自己有罪，请求黥首断脚，饶一条命，使他能继续修成汉史。
English: Cai Xuan admitted his guilt and asked for a dagger to sever his foot and spare his life so that he could continue to make Chinese history.

古文：士大夫多矜救之，不能得。
现代文：不少士大夫怜悯他，援救他，无结果。
English: Many doctors and nurses took pity on him and tried to save him, but to no avail.

古文：太尉马日磾驰往谓允曰 伯喈旷世逸才，多识汉事，当续成后史，为一代大典。
现代文：太尉马日石单跑去对王允说： 伯喈有举世无双的才华，汉朝的事知道得多，可以使他继续写成后汉史，是一代重要的典籍。
English: Lieutenant Ma Rishi Shan ran to Wang Yun and said: Bo Xun has unparalleled talent. He knows much more about the Han Dynasty, which allows him to continue to write post-Han history, and is an important classic.

古文：且忠孝素著，而所坐无名，诛之无乃失人望乎 允曰 昔武帝不杀司马迁，使作谤书，流于后世。
现代文：他忠孝素著，以莫须有获罪，杀了他，恐怕失去了人心呢！ 王允说 ：从前汉武帝不杀司马迁，使他写谤书，流传后世。
English: He was loyal and filial, and killed him for no reason, fearing that he would lose the hearts of the people! Wang Yun said: Once upon a time, Emperor Wu of the Han Dynasty did not kill Sima Qian, but made him write a slanderous book, which was passed down to future generations.

古文：方今国祚中衰，神器不固，不可令佞臣执笔在幼主左右。
现代文：现在国家的命运中衰，皇位不稳固，不能让谄媚的人执笔在幼主左右。
English: At present, the fate of the country is in a state of decline, the imperial throne is not stable, and it is not possible for flattering people to write about the young master.

古文：既无益圣德，复使吾党蒙其讪议 日磾退而告人曰 王公其不长世乎。
现代文：对皇上没有好处，我们这般人也要受到他的攻击。 马日石单出来告诉别人说 ：王公的眼光太过于短浅了吧！
English: It's not good for the emperor, and people like us have to be attacked by him. Ma Rishi single-handedly came out to tell others: the prince's vision is too short-sighted!

古文：善人，国之纪也。制作，国之典也。
现代文：好人，国家的楷模，著作，国家的盛典。
English: A good man, a national role model, a work of literature, a national celebration.

古文：灭纪废典，其能久乎 邕遂死狱中。
现代文：灭纪废典，能够长久吗？ 蔡邕竟死在狱中。
English: Can the abolition of discipline last for long? Cai Yong actually died in prison.

古文：允悔，欲止而不及。
现代文：后来王允失悔，想不杀掉他，已经来不及了。
English: Later, Wang Yun lost all remorse and it was too late to think about killing him.

古文：时年六十一。
现代文：蔡邕死时六十一岁。
English: Cai Jun was 61 years old at the time of his death.

古文：搢绅诸儒莫不流涕。
现代文：士大夫和诸儒生没有不流泪的。
English: Scholars and scholars and all the Confucianists did not shed tears.

古文：北海郑玄闻而叹曰 汉世之事，谁与正之 兖州、陈留间皆画像而颂焉。
现代文：北海郑玄听说蔡邕死了，叹息说： 汉朝的事，谁来考定啊！ 兖州、陈留间都画着蔡邕的像纪念他。
English: When Beihai Zheng Xuan heard that Cai Xuan had died, he sighed and said, "Who will judge the affairs of the Han Dynasty? Cai Xuan's portrait is painted in memory of him in Bozhou and Chenlu.

古文：其撰集汉事，未见录以继后史。
现代文：他收集汉朝历史，没有看见写下来作后史。
English: He collected the history of the Han Dynasty, but did not see it written down as post-history.

古文：适作《灵纪》及十意，又补诸列传四十二篇，因李傕之乱，湮没多不存。
现代文：只有所作《灵纪》及十意，又补诸列传四十二篇，因李催作乱散失，大多没有保存下来。
English: Only the "Spiritual History" and the Ten Meanings, as well as the forty-two articles listed, were made by Li, and most of them have not been preserved due to Li's hasty creation and dispersal.

古文：所著诗、赋、碑、诔、铭、赞、连珠、箴、吊、论议、《独断》、《劝学》、《释诲》、《叙乐》、《女训》、《篆艺》、祝文、章表、书记，凡百四篇，传于世。
现代文：所著诗、赋、碑、诔、铭、赞，连珠、箴、吊、论议、《独断》、《劝学》、《释诲》、《叙乐》、《女训》、《篆执》，祝文、章表、书记，共百零四篇，传于世。
English: He wrote poems, fus, inscriptions, epitaphs, mottos, praises, couplets, proverbs, epitaphs, discussions, arbitrariness, persuasion, interpretation, music, women's discipline, discipline, congratulatory messages, chapter tables, and secretaries, a total of one hundred and four articles, which have been handed down to the world.

古文：论曰：意气之感，士所不能忘也。
现代文：史官评论说：人与人之间的意气感应，有学识，有道德修养的人，是不会忘记的。
English: The historian commented, "People with knowledge and moral cultivation will not forget the spiritual affinity between people.

古文：流极之运，有生所共深悲也。
现代文：流放的厄运，是人生极为悲痛的。
English: The misfortune of exile is a very sad part of life.

古文：当伯喈抱钳扭，徙幽裔，仰日月而不见照烛，临风尘而不得经过，其意岂及语平日幸全人哉。
现代文：当伯喈抱着罪架，贬谪边远地方时，抬头看不见日月的光明，走路不得避风尘，难道他想起过平日亲近的人吗？
English: When Bo Xun held a grudge and despised the remote places, he could not see the light of the sun and the moon when he looked up, and he could not avoid the wind and dust when he walked. Did he ever think of the people who were close to him on weekdays?

古文：及解刑衣，窜欧越，潜舟江壑，不知其远，捷步深林，尚苦不密，但愿北首旧丘，归骸先垄，又可得乎。
现代文：及得赦归本郡，又不得不远逃。
English: When he was pardoned and returned to his county, he had to flee far away.

古文：董卓一旦入朝，辟书先下，分明枉结，信宿三迁。
现代文：偷偷地在江里行舟，不管远近；在深林中飞跑，耽心树木不密。只想回到故乡，埋骨先人坟墓的旁边，也不可得；董卓一旦入朝，首先下令征召他，分清冤枉，三天内三次升迁。
English: He secretly went boating in the river, no matter how far or near; he flew in the deep forest, worrying that the trees were not close. If he just wanted to return to his hometown and bury his ancestors' bones next to the grave, he could not get it; once he entered the imperial court, Dong Zhuo first ordered him to be conscripted, clarified his wrongdoing, and promoted him three times in three days.

古文：匡导既申，狂僭屡革，资《同人》之先号，得北叟之后福。
现代文：辅佐有功，狂悖非的事，常常得到革除，真是《易同人卦》所说的 先号口兆而后笑 。
English: It is true that "Easy Tongren Gua" said that the first slogan is followed by a smile.

古文：屡其庆者，夫岂无怀。
现代文：塞翁失马，焉知非福？
English: If all else fails, how do you know it's not a blessing?

古文：君子断刑，尚或为之不举，况国宪仓卒，虑不先图，矜情变容，而罚同邪党。
现代文：他对有恩的人，哪能不想念呢！正直无私的人，处决一个罪犯，尚且还吃不下饭，何况国家的刑典，出于仓卒，事前没有想到，以至怜悯变容，哪能按奸邪同罪！
English: An honest and selfless man, who executes a criminal, yet cannot afford to eat, not to mention that the state's penal code, out of haste, was not thought of in advance, so much so that it was transformed into pity, how can adultery be equated with sin!

古文：执政乃追怨子长谤书流后，放此为戮，未或闻之典刑。
现代文：当政者竟然追怨司马迁谤书，流传后世，根据这个要把蔡邕杀掉，没有听见过这样执行刑法的。
English: The current government went so far as to pursue Sima Qian's slanderous book, which has been passed down from generation to generation, and according to this, they want to kill Cai Qian. I have never heard of such an execution of criminal law.

