古文：皋陶矢厥谟，禹成厥功，帝舜申之。
现代文：皋陶陈述他的谋略，禹陈述他的功绩，舜帝很重视他们的言论。
English: Zhaotao stated his strategy, Yu stated his achievements, and Emperor Zha attaches great importance to their words.

古文：作《大禹》、《皋陶谟》、《益稷》。
现代文：史官根据他们的议论写作了《大禹谟》、《皋陶谟》和《益稷》。
English: Based on their discussions, the historian wrote "Daiyumu," "Dangtaomu" and "Ipyeong."

古文：曰若稽古，大禹曰文命敷于四海，祗承于帝。
现代文：传说：若考古时候的大禹，又名文命，他的功德广布到了四海。
English: Legend: If the archaeology of the time of Dayu, also known as Wenming, his merits spread to the four seas.

古文：曰： 后克艰厥后，臣克艰厥臣，政乃乂，黎民敏德。 帝曰： 俞！
现代文：他曾经接受帝舜的征询，发表自己的见解道： 为君的能知道为君的艰难，为臣的能知道为臣的艰难，那么，政事就能治理好，人民也就会迅速修德了。 帝舜道： 这话不错。
English: He once received an inquiry from the emperor and expressed his own opinion: If you can know the hardships of being a prince, and if you can know the hardships of being a vassal, then the government will be able to govern well, and the people will quickly become virtuous.

古文：允若兹，嘉言罔攸伏，野无遗贤，万邦咸宁。
现代文：确实像这样，那么，好主意就不会被搁置不用，贤才就不会被遗弃在田野之间，万邦都会太平。
English: If it is like this, then good ideas will not be shelved, talents will not be abandoned in the fields, and the world will be peaceful.

古文：稽于众，舍己从人，不虐无告，不废困穷，惟帝时克。 
现代文：凡事都考察群众的意见，常常放弃自己不正确的意见，听从别人正确的意见；为政不虐待无告的穷人，用人不忽视卑贱的贤才，这只有帝尧的时候才能做到。 益插嘴道： 嗨！
English: He always considers the opinions of the masses, often discards his own incorrect opinions, and listens to the correct opinions of others; he does not abuse the poor without complaint for politics, and does not ignore the lowly sages, which can only be done when he is the emperor. Yi interjected: Hey!

古文：益曰： 都，帝德广运，乃圣乃神，乃武乃文。皇天眷命，奄有四海为天下君。 
现代文：帝尧的道德广大而又能运用，真是圣哲神明，能武能文，所以皇天特别照顾他，命他统治四海，为天下的大君。 
English: The emperor's morality is broad and can be applied. He is truly a sage and a god, capable of martial arts and literature. Therefore, the emperor took special care of him and ordered him to rule the four seas and be the ruler of the world.

古文：禹曰： 惠迪吉，从逆凶，惟影响。 益曰： 吁！
现代文：禹说： 凡是顺道从善的就得福，逆道从恶的就得祸，这真像影随形、响应声一样！ 益说： 咦！
English: Yu said, "Anyone who follows the path of good will be blessed, and anyone who goes against the path of evil will be cursed. It's really like a shadow following a shape and a voice responding to it!" Yi said, "Wow!

古文：戒哉！
现代文：可得警戒这一点啊！
English: You have to be wary of that!

古文：儆戒无虞，罔失法度。
现代文：只有时刻警戒自己，才能免于后忧。
English: Only by constantly alerting oneself can one be free from worries.

古文：罔游于逸，罔淫于乐。任贤勿贰，去邪勿疑。
现代文：不要破坏法规制度，不要优游流于放纵，不要过度玩乐；任用贤才不要三心二意，铲除邪恶不要犹豫不决，谋划尚有疑问就不要勉强施行。
English: Do not destroy the legal system, do not indulge in indulgence, do not play excessively; do not hesitate to appoint talents, do not hesitate to eradicate evil, and do not reluctantly implement the plan if there is any doubt.

古文：疑谋勿成，百志惟熙。
现代文：这样，你心中的一切思虑都会通明透亮了。
English: In this way, all the thoughts in your mind will be clear and transparent.

古文：罔违道以干百姓之誉，罔咈百姓以从己之欲。
现代文：不要违反正道去求取百姓的称誉，也不要不顾百姓的意见去满足自己的欲望。
English: Do not violate the right way to seek the praise of the people, and do not ignore the opinions of the people to satisfy their own desires.

古文：无怠无荒，四夷来王。 禹曰： 於！
现代文：思想不怠惰，政事不荒废，那么，四夷都会来归附你的。 禹说： 帝！
English: If your thoughts are not lazy, and if your government affairs are not wasteful, then all the barbarians will come to you.Yu said: God!

古文：帝念哉！
现代文：您要记住啊！
English: Xing Tao replied, "God!

古文：德惟善政，政在养民。
现代文：修德主要表现在搞好政事，而为政的中心在于养育人民。
English: Cultivating virtue is mainly manifested in doing a good job in politics, and the center of politics lies in nurturing the people.

古文：水、火、金、木、土、谷，惟修；正德、利用、厚生、惟和。
现代文：水火金木土谷这六府要修治好，端正人民品德、丰富人民财用、改善人民生活这三件事要互相配合。
English: The six prefectures of water, fire, metal, wood and soil must be repaired and improved, and the three things of rectifying people's moral character, enriching people's financial use and improving people's lives must cooperate with each other.

古文：九功惟叙，九叙惟歌。
现代文：这九个方面的功业都要安排得有秩序，有了秩序，人民自然欢欣鼓舞，歌功颂德了。
English: These nine aspects of the work must be arranged in an orderly manner. With order, the people will naturally rejoice and sing praises.

古文：戒之用休，董之用威，劝之以九歌俾勿坏。 帝曰： 俞！
现代文：对于勤劳的人，要用美好的前景去诱导他们；对于怠惰的人，要用刑罚去督责他们；而当人民受到德泽感到欢欣的时候，就要及时鼓励他们开展歌咏活动，使之乐而忘芳，干劲不衰。 帝舜道： 讲得对！
English: For the hard-working people, it is necessary to induce them with a good prospect; for the lazy people, it is necessary to punish them with punishment; and when the people feel happy by virtue, it is necessary to encourage them to carry out singing activities in time to make them happy and enthusiastic.

古文：地平天成，六府三事允治，万世永赖，时乃功。 帝曰： 格，汝禹！
现代文：现在水土治平，万物得以成长，六府三事确实治理得很有秩序，万世以后都要仰赖那时你的大功啊！ 帝舜道： 禹，你来！
English: Now, the land and water have been stabilized, all things can grow, and the three matters of the Six Prefectures have indeed been governed in an orderly manner. For all eternity, we will rely on your great contribution at that time! Emperor Xuan said: Yu, you come!

古文：朕宅帝位三十有三载，耄期倦于勤。
现代文：我居帝位已经三十三年了，如今已到老耄昏聩的时期，掌握这样烦忙的政事委实感到疲倦。
English: I have been on the throne for thirty-three years, and now I have reached a period of drowsiness, and I am really tired of managing such a busy political affairs committee.

古文：汝惟不怠，总朕师。 
现代文：你平日是从不懈怠的，今后要接替我总管众民啊！ 
English: You never slack off on weekdays, and in the future you will succeed me as the head of all the people!

古文：禹曰： 朕德罔克，民不依。皋陶迈种德，德乃降，黎民怀之。
现代文：禹连忙答道： 我的品德不能胜任，人民不会依从我的，不如皋陶勇往力行，积极种德，德泽普及下民，民众都怀念他。帝！
English: Yu Lian hastily replied: My moral character is not up to the task, the people will not follow me, it is better to work hard, actively cultivate moral character, spread virtue among the people, and the people will miss him. Emperor!

古文：帝念哉！
现代文：皋陶回答道： 帝！
English: Xing Tao replied, "God!

古文：期于予治，刑期于无刑，民协于中，时乃功，懋哉。 皋陶曰： 帝德罔愆，临下以简，御众以宽；罚弗及嗣，赏延于世。宥过无大，刑故无小；罪疑惟轻，功疑惟重；与其杀不辜，宁失不经；好生之德，洽于民心，兹用不犯于有司。 
现代文：您的德行毫无过差，对下边的要求简明扼要，治理民众非常宽大；刑罚不牵连子女，而奖赏却延及后世；对偶然的过失，再大也给以宥赦，对明知故犯的罪恶，再小也处以刑罚；罚罪有疑问就从轻发落，赏功有疑问却从重给奖；与其杀害无辜的人，宁可犯不执行常法的过失：这种好生的美德，已经融洽到人民心里，因此，人民都能守规矩，不犯官家的法纪。 
English: Your moral conduct is faultless, your requirements for subordinates are clear and concise, and your governance of the people is very lenient; the punishment does not involve children, but the reward extends to future generations; the accidental fault, no matter how big, is pardoned, and the crime committed knowingly, no matter how small, is punished; if there is a doubt about the punishment, it is given lightly, but if there is a doubt about the reward, it is given more heavily; rather than killing innocent people, it is better to commit the fault of not enforcing the common law: this virtuous life has been integrated into the hearts of the people, so the people can keep the rules and not violate

古文：帝曰： 俾予从欲以治，四方风动，惟乃之休。 
现代文：帝舜道： 使我能如愿以治理人民，四方都听从我的命令，好像草木随风而动，这都是你做的好事啊！ 
English: Emperor Gao said, "All these are good things you have done to enable me to govern the people as I wish, and to have all sides obey my orders, just as the plants and trees move with the wind.

古文：帝曰： 来，禹！
现代文：然后，舜又转回来对禹说： 来，禹！
English: Then he turned back to Yu and said, "Come on, Yu!

古文：降水儆予，成允成功，惟汝贤。克勤于邦，克俭于家，不自满假，惟汝贤。
现代文：当年天降洪水来警戒我，能够言行一致，既在治平水土中成就功业，又在民众中建立威信的，就数你最贤；既能勤劳为邦，又能节俭持家，不自满自大，这也数你最贤。
English: When the flood came down to warn me, if you can match your words with your deeds, if you can accomplish your work in stabilizing the land and water, and if you can establish your prestige among the people, then you are the most virtuous. If you can work hard for the state, and if you can be frugal in running your household, and if you are not complacent and arrogant, then you are the most virtuous.

古文：汝惟不矜，天下莫与汝争能。汝惟不伐，天下莫与汝争功。
现代文：你正因为不自逞能，所以天下没有一个人敢与你争能；你正因为不自居功，所以天下没有一个人敢与你争功。
English: It is precisely because you do not pride yourself on your ability that no one in the world dares to compete with you; it is precisely because you do not take credit for yourself that no one in the world dares to compete with you.

古文：予懋乃德，嘉乃丕绩，天之历数在汝躬，汝终陟元后。
现代文：我真诚赞美你的品德，嘉许你的大功。天命已经降落到你的身上，你终将升任大君。
English: I sincerely praise your virtues and commend you for your great achievements. The fate of heaven has fallen on you, and you will eventually be promoted to the position of emperor.

古文：人心惟危，道心惟微，惟精惟一，允执厥中。
现代文：人心是危险难安的，道心却微妙难明。惟有精心体察，专心守住，才能坚持一条不偏不倚的正确路线。
English: The human heart is dangerous and insecure, but the moral heart is subtle and difficult to understand. Only by carefully observing and concentrating on it can we adhere to an unbiased and correct course.

古文：无稽之言勿听，弗询之谋勿庸。
现代文：没有考核事实的言语不要听，没有征询群众意见的主意不要用。
English: Do not listen to words without assessing the facts, and do not use ideas without soliciting the opinions of the masses.

古文：可爱非君？可畏非民？
现代文：可爱的不是君而是民，可畏的不是民而是君失其道。
English: It is not you who are lovely, but the people, and it is not the people who are terrible, but you who have lost your way.

古文：众非元后，何戴？
现代文：民众没有大君他们又爱戴谁呢？
English: If the people have no overlord, whom do they love?

古文：后非众，罔与守邦？
现代文：大君没有民众就无人跟他守邦了。
English: If the ruler has no people, there is no one to defend the country with him.

古文：钦哉！
现代文：一定要谨慎啊！
English: Admiration!

古文：慎乃有位，敬修其可愿，四海困穷，天禄永终。
现代文：认真对待你所居的大位，切实做好你想要做的每件事。如果四海百姓都至于穷困不堪，那你做大君的天禄也就永远终结了。
English: Take your position seriously and do everything you want to do well. If the people all over the world are impoverished, then your days of being a great ruler will be over forever.

古文：惟口出好兴戎，朕言不再。 
现代文：只有这张嘴，最爱惹是生非，讲话可得慎重啊！我要讲的都已讲完，没有什么再要讲的了。 
English: It's just this mouth that likes to stir up trouble the most. You have to be careful when you speak! I've already said everything I want to say, and there's nothing more to say.

古文：禹曰： 枚卜功臣，惟吉之从。 帝曰： 禹！
现代文：禹还是谦让道： 那么，就一个个功臣来占卜，看谁的卜兆最吉就由谁来接位。 帝舜道： 禹！
English: Yu still humbly conceded, "Well, let's have each meritorious person do divination, and see whose divination sign is the most auspicious, and then see who will succeed them." Emperor Gao said, "Yu!

古文：官占惟先蔽志，昆命于元龟。
现代文：我们占卜公事，是先由于心有疑难掩蔽，然后才去请问大龟的。
English: In our business of divination, we do it first because we have doubts in our hearts that are difficult to hide, and only then do we ask the Great Turtle.

古文：朕志先定，询谋佥同，鬼神其依，龟筮协从，卜不习吉。 
现代文：现在我的意志早已先定了，并经征询众人的意见都一致赞同，相信鬼神必定依从，龟筮也必定是吉了。
English: Now my will has already been predetermined, and after soliciting the opinions of many people, they all unanimously agree that I believe that the ghosts and gods must obey, and the turtles must be lucky.

古文：禹拜稽首，固辞。
现代文：占卜是不会重复出现吉兆的，用不着再卜了。 
English: Divination does not repeat auspicious signs, so there is no need for further divination.

古文：帝曰： 毋！
现代文：但是，禹还是稽首拜辞。帝舜最后断然地说： 不！
English: However, Yu still bowed his head. The emperor finally said emphatically: No!

古文：惟汝谐。 
现代文：只有你合适。 
English: You're the only one that fits.

古文：正月朔旦，受命于神宗，率百官若帝之初。帝曰： 咨，禹！
现代文：正月初一日，禹在尧庙里接受了摄政的委命，率领百官行礼，像当年舜受命摄政时一样。然后，舜对禹说道： 禹！
English: On the first day of the first month of the year, Yu accepted the regent's commission in the Temple of Heaven and led the hundred officials to salute, just like when Yu was appointed regent. Then, Yu said to Yu: Yu!

古文：惟时有苗弗率，汝徂征。 
现代文：跟你商量一下，现时只有三苗不遵从我们的教令了，你去征伐他们。 
English: Let me consult with you. Currently, there are only three seedlings that are not following our orders. You should go and attack them.

古文：禹乃会群后，誓于师曰： 济济有众，咸听朕命。
现代文：禹于是大会各邦群后及其率领的人众，宣誓于众道： 整齐众多的勇士们！
English: Therefore, after the assembly of the states and the people led by him, he swore to the people: "Hold your numerous warriors in order!

古文：蠢兹有苗，昏迷不恭，侮慢自贤，反道败德，君子在野，小人在位，民弃不保，天降之咎，肆予以尔众士，奉辞伐罪。
现代文：都来听我的命令：这无知盲动的三苗，执迷不悟，傲慢自大，违反正道，败坏常德。致使君子被遗弃在野，而小人却窃居高位，把人民抛弃不顾，因此，上天降灾于他们。我今天是用你们群后众士之力，奉天命去罚他们的罪。
English: All of them came to listen to my order: These three ignorant and blindly moving seedlings are obstinate, arrogant, violate the right path, and corrupt common morality. As a result, the gentleman is abandoned in the field, while the villain steals the high position and abandons the people. Therefore, heaven has brought disaster to them. Today, I will use the power of your group of followers to punish them according to the mandate of heaven.

古文：尔尚一乃心力，其克有勋。 
现代文：你们还须齐心合力，才能成就功勋。 
English: You still need to work together in order to achieve great things.

古文：三旬，苗民逆命。
现代文：战事进行了三十天，苗民仍然负隅顽抗，不肯听命。
English: Thirty days into the war, the Miao people are still stubborn and refuse to obey orders.

古文：益赞于禹曰： 惟德动天，无远弗届。
现代文：益就向禹建议道： 只有道德的力量才能感动天地，再远的地方也能达到。
English: Yi suggested to Yu: Only the power of morality can move heaven and earth, and reach even the most distant places.

古文：满招损，谦受益，时乃天道。
现代文：满招损，谦受益，常常就是天道。
English: Full of damage, modest benefit, is often the way of heaven.

古文：帝初于历山，往于田，日号泣于旻天，于父母，负罪引慝。
现代文：帝舜早年受父母虐待，一个人在历山耕田，苦不堪言。但他日日号哭涕泣，仍然呼喊苍天，呼喊父母，总是诚心自责，把罪错全部承担，从不怨天怨父母。
English: In his early years, Dizhao was abused by his parents, and he had to plow the fields alone in Leshan, which was unbearable. However, he cried and cried day after day, still crying out to the heavens, crying out to his parents, always sincerely blaming himself, bearing all his sins, and never blaming God or his parents.

古文：祗载见瞽叟，夔夔斋栗，瞽亦允若。
现代文：有事去见瞽瞍的时候，总是端端正正，战战兢兢。
English: When I go to see Yao about something, he is always very straightforward and straight-forward, and he is very timid.

古文：至諴感神，矧兹有苗。 
现代文：在这种时候，连顽固的瞽瞍也真能通情达理了。常言至诚感神，何况有苗？ 
English: At a time like this, even a stubborn toad can really be reasonable. As the saying goes, sincerity is the soul of wit, and what about seedlings?

古文：禹拜昌言曰： 俞！ 
现代文：禹连忙下拜，接受了这个好意见，说： 讲得对！ 
English: Yu Lian hastily bowed down, accepted this good advice, and said: That's right!

古文：班师振旅。
现代文：立即停战，整队班师而归。
English: There was an immediate armistice, and the entire squadron returned home.

古文：帝乃诞敷文德，舞干羽于两阶，七旬有苗格。
现代文：从此，帝舜也接受了益和禹的建议，大布文德，在朝堂两阶之间举行大规模的舞蹈，人们举着战争中用的盾牌和雉尾，载歌载舞，表示偃武修文。
English: From then on, the emperor also accepted the suggestion of Yick Wo Yu, the Grand Bouvende, to hold a large-scale dance between the two tiers of the imperial court, with people holding shields and tails used in war, singing and dancing, and expressing martial arts.

