古文：张方
现代文：张方
English: Zhang Fang

古文：广陵下市庙，宋元嘉十八年，张方女道香送其夫婿北行，日暮，宿祠门下。
现代文：南朝刘宋元嘉十八年，广陵有个下市庙，张方的女儿道香送丈夫去北方。回来的途中天黑了，她就睡在庙门前。
English: In the 18th year of the Southern Dynasty of Liu Song and Yuan Jia, Guangling had a downtown temple. Zhang Fang's daughter, Daoxiang, sent her husband to the north. On the way back, it was dark, and she slept in front of the temple gate.

古文：夜有一物，假作其婿来云： 离情难遣，不能便去。 
现代文：夜间有一个东西装扮成她丈夫模样来说： 离别的愁绪难以排解，我不想马上离开。 
English: During the night, something dressed up as her husband said, "The sadness of parting is difficult to resolve, I don't want to leave right away.

古文：道香俄昏惑失常。
现代文：道香一会儿就被迷惑得失去常态。
English: In a moment, Daoxiang was so confused that he lost his normal state.

古文：时有王纂者能治邪，疑道香被魅，请治之。始下针，有一獭从女被内走入前港，道香疾便愈。
现代文：当时有个叫王纂的人能却除邪病，他怀疑道香被妖孽所迷惑，请求给她治病，刚下针，就有一只水獭从道香的被子里跑出来，一直跑到前面的水港里去了，道香的病也好了。
English: At that time, there was a man named Wang Zuo who was able to remove the evil disease. He suspected that the incense was bewitched by the devil and asked to cure her. As soon as the needle was inserted, a leech ran out of the incense quilt and ran all the way to the water port in front. The illness of the incense was also cured.

古文：钟道
现代文：钟道
English: Zhongdao

古文：宋永兴县吏钟道得重病初差，情欲倍常。
现代文：南北朝刘宋永兴县吏钟道得了重病刚好，情欲比平时倍增。
English: In the Northern and Southern Dynasties, the official Zhong Dao of Yongxing County of Liu Song Dynasty fell seriously ill, and his sexual desire increased more than usual.

古文：先乐白鹤墟中女子，至是犹存想焉。
现代文：他先前喜欢白鹤墟的一个女子，到这时就更想念她了。
English: He had previously liked a woman in the White Crane Park, but now he missed her even more.

古文：忽见此女子振衣而来，即与燕好。
现代文：有一天他忽然看见那个女子衣服飘动着走来了，就和她温存起来。
English: One day he suddenly saw the woman's clothes fluttering as she walked by, and he warmed to her.

古文：是后数至，道曰： 吾甚欲鸡舌香。 
现代文：从此以后，这个女子多次来同钟道相会。钟道对她说： 我很想弄点鸡舌香来。 
English: Since then, this woman has met with Zhongdao many times. Zhongdao said to her: I really want to make some chicken tongue fragrance.

古文：女曰： 何难？ 
现代文：女子说： 这有什么难的。 
English: The girl said, "What's so hard about that?"

古文：乃掬香满手，以授道。
现代文：于是两手捧着鸡舌香，送给钟道。
English: So he took the chicken tongue incense in both hands and gave it to Zhongdao.

古文：道邀女同含咀之，女曰： 我气素芳，不假此。 
现代文：钟道邀请女子同他一起含着鸡舌香并咀嚼。女子说： 我呼出的气息就有芳香味，不用借助这个东西。 
English: Zhongdao invited the woman to hold the chicken tongue incense and chew it with him. The woman said, "The breath I exhale has a fragrant smell. I don't need to use this thing."

古文：女子出户，狗忽见，随咋杀之，乃是老獭。
现代文：女子走出门外，一只狗忽然发现了她，扑上去将她咬死了，原来是一只老水獭，口香就是獭粪。
English: The woman went out of the door, a dog suddenly found her, jumped up and bit her to death. It turned out to be an old otter, and its breath was toad dung.

古文：口香即獭粪，顿觉臭秽。
现代文：钟道立刻觉得又臭又脏。
English: Zhongdao immediately felt smelly and dirty.

古文：晋安民
现代文：晋安民
English: Jin Anmin

古文：晋安郡民断溪取鱼，忽有一人著白帢，黄练单衣，来诣之，即同饮馔。
现代文：晋安郡有个平民截住溪水捉鱼，忽然有一个著白色便帽，穿黄色熟绢单衣的人走来会见他，两个人便一起喝酒吃饭。
English: In Jin'an County, a civilian was fishing in a stream. Suddenly, a man wearing a white cap and a yellow jacket came to meet him, and the two drank and ate together.

古文：馔毕，语之曰： 明日取鱼，当有大鱼甚异，最在前，慎勿杀。 
现代文：吃完饭，那个人对捉鱼人说： 明天捉鱼，会有一条大鱼很奇特，游在最前面，你千万不要杀了它。 
English: After the meal, the man said to the fisherman, "Tomorrow, when you catch fish, there will be a big, strange fish swimming in front of you. Don't kill it."

古文：明日，果有大鱼，长七八丈，径来冲网，其人即赖杀之。
现代文：第二天，果然有一条大鱼，长七八尺，径直游过来撞到网上。捉鱼人为了获利而杀了大鱼。
English: The next day, sure enough, a big fish, seven or eight feet long, swam straight over and hit the net. The fisherman killed the big fish in order to make a profit.

古文：破腹，见所食饭悉有。
现代文：他割开鱼的肚子，看见鱼胃里全是昨天吃的饭菜。
English: He cut open the stomach of the fish and saw that the fish's stomach was full of yesterday's meal.

古文：其人家死亡略尽。刘万年
现代文：事情过后，这个捉鱼人家里的人几乎全都死去。刘万年
English: After the incident, almost everyone in the fisherman's family died. Liu Wannian

古文：宋后废帝元徽三年，京口戍将刘万年夜巡于北固山西，见二男子，容止端丽，洁白如玉，遥呼万年谓曰： 君与今帝姓族近远？ 
现代文：南朝刘宋后废帝元徽第三年，守卫京口一带的将军刘万年夜里到北固山的西面巡查，看见两个男人，面貌举止端庄秀气，皮肤象玉石一样洁白，远远地招呼刘万年并对他说： 你和当今的皇上在姓氏和宗族上是近是远？ 
English: In the third year of Emperor Yuan Hui, who was deposed after the Southern Dynasty of Liu Song, the general Liu Wanyian, who was guarding the area around Jingkou, went on a night patrol to the west side of Beigu Mountain. He saw two men, their appearance and demeanor were dignified and handsome, and their skin was as white as jade. He greeted Liu Wanyian from a distance and said to him: Are you close or far from today's emperor in terms of surname and clan?

古文：万年曰： 望异姓同。 
现代文：刘万年说： 郡望不同而姓氏相同。 
English: Liu Wannian said, "The names of counties are different but the surnames are the same."

古文：一人曰： 汝虽族异，恐祸来及。 
现代文：一个人说： 你虽然郡望与皇上不同。
English: One person said, "You are different from the emperor.

古文：万年曰： 吾有何过？ 
现代文：恐怕仍会遭受灾祸。 刘万年说： 我有什么过错？ 
English: I'm afraid I'll still be plagued by misfortune.Liu Wannian said: What's my fault?

古文：答曰： 去位，祸即不及。 
现代文：回答说： 你辞去官职，就不会遭受灾祸了。 
English: He replied, "If you resign from your post, you will not be affected by the disaster."

古文：万年见二人所言，益异之。万年谓二人： 深谢预闻，何用见酬。 
现代文：刘万年听了两个人说的话，更加觉得很奇怪便对这两个人说： 深切感谢你们的预告，用什么来酬报你们呢？ 
English: Liu Wannian listened to what the two people said and felt even more strange, so he said to the two people: Thank you very much for your advance notice, what will you be rewarded with?

古文：万年欲请归镇，二人曰： 吾非世人，不食世物。 
现代文：刘万年想请两个人同他一起回到京口去。两个人说： 我们不是人类，不吃普通的食物。 
English: Liu Wannian wanted to invite two people to go back to Beijing with him. The two people said, "We are not human, we don't eat ordinary food."

古文：万年与语之次，化为鱼，飞入江去。
现代文：在刘万年和两个人继续说话的过程中，他们变成了鱼，飞进江里。
English: As Liu Wanling and the two men continued to talk, they turned into fish and flew into the river.

古文：万年翌日托疾，遂罢其位，后果如鱼所言。
现代文：刘万年第二天借口有病，于是被罢免了职务，后来事情果然象鱼说的一样。
English: On the second day of the year, Liu Wan was removed from his post on the pretext that he was ill. Later, things turned out to be just as the fish said.

古文：微生亮
现代文：微生亮
English: Micro-brightness

古文：明月峡中有二溪东西流，宋顺帝升平二年，溪人微生亮钓得一白鱼长三尺，投置舡中，以草覆之。
现代文：明月峡中有两条溪水，一向东流，一向西流。刘宋顺帝升平第二年，在溪边住的一个叫微生亮的人钓到一条三尺长的大白鱼，他把鱼扔到船舱里，用草覆盖上。
English: There are two streams in the Mingyue Gorge, one flowing east and the other west. In the second year after the enthronement of Emperor Liu Song Shun, a man named Weixing Liang, who lived by the stream, caught a three-foot-long big white fish. He threw the fish into the cabin and covered it with grass.

古文：及归取烹，见一美女在草下，洁白端丽，年可十六七。
现代文：等回到家里去拿鱼准备煮着吃的时候，只见一个美女躺在草的下面，皮肤洁白，端庄美丽，年龄大约十六七岁。
English: When I returned home to get fish to cook and eat, I saw a beautiful woman lying under the grass. Her skin was white, dignified and beautiful, and she was about sixteen or seventeen years old.

古文：自言： 高唐之女，偶化鱼游，为君所得。 
现代文：她自己说是云梦高唐观那里的姑娘，偶而出来变成鱼游玩，被你捉住了。
English: She herself said that she was a girl from Yunmeng Gao Tang Guan, who occasionally came out to play as a fish and was caught by you.

古文：亮间曰： 既为人，能为妻否？ 
现代文：微生亮问她说： 既然是人，能做我的妻子吗？ 
English: Wei Shengliang asked her, "Since you are a human, can you be my wife?"

古文：女曰： 冥契使然，何为不得。 
现代文：女子说： 冥冥中已定的姻缘，怎么不行呢？ 
English: The woman said, "Why can't I marry someone I've already met?

古文：其后三年为亮妻，忽曰： 数已足矣，请归高唐。 
现代文：从此这个女子做了三年微生亮的妻子。三年后，她忽然说： 天数的期限到了，请让我回高唐去吧。 
English: Since then, this woman has been his wife for three years. Three years later, she suddenly said: "The days are up, please let me go back to Gaotang."

古文：亮曰： 何时复来？ 
现代文：微生亮说： 什么时候再来。 
English: Wei Shengliang said, "When will you come again?"

古文：答曰： 情不可忘者，有思复至。 
现代文：回答说： 感情是不能忘记的，我思念你的时候一定会回来。 
English: He replied, "Emotions cannot be forgotten. When I miss you, I will definitely come back."

古文：其后一岁三四往来，不知所终。
现代文：从那以后她每年回来住三四次，后来不知道怎么样了。
English: After that, she came back three or four times a year, and then I don't know what happened.

古文：芦塘
现代文：芦塘
English: Loutang

古文：耒阳县东北有芦塘八九顷，其深不可测。
现代文：耒阳县东北有个八九顷的芦苇塘，不知道它究竟有多深。
English: There is an 89-hectare reed pond in the northeast of Fenyang County. I don't know how deep it is.

古文：中有大鱼，当至五日，一奋跃出水，大可三围，其状异常。
现代文：塘里有条大鱼，每月初五的这天，它都用力跳出水面。这时可以看到它大约有三围那么粗，样子很特殊。
English: There is a big fish in the pond. On the fifth day of the first month, it jumps out of the water. At this time, it can be seen that it is about three times as thick, and it looks very special.

古文：每出水，则小鱼奔迸，随水上岸，不可胜计。
现代文：它每次跃出水面的时候，那些小鱼也奔窜着随着波浪跳到岸上，多得数不过来。
English: Every time it jumps out of the water, those little fish also rush to follow the waves and jump onto the shore, too many to count.

古文：又云，此塘有鲛鱼，五日一化，或为美妇人，或为美男子，至于变乱尤多。
现代文：还有人说： 这个苇塘里有条人鱼，每隔五天就变化一次，有时变成美妇人，有时变成美男子，至于变化成其它的形象就更多了。
English: Someone else said, "There is a mermaid in this pond that changes every five days. Sometimes she turns into a beautiful woman, sometimes into a beautiful man, and as for changing into other images, there are even more.

古文：郡人相戒，故不敢有害心。后为雷电所击，此塘遂干。
现代文：当地的人们都互相提醒，不敢有伤害它的想法，后来人鱼被雷电击死，这个苇塘才平静下来。
English: The local people all reminded each other not to dare to think of harming it. Later, the mermaid was killed by lightning, and the Qutang calmed down.

古文：彭城男子
现代文：彭城男子
English: Pengcheng men's wrestling

古文：彭城有男子娶妇不悦之，在外宿月余日。
现代文：彭城有个男子娶了妻子却不喜欢她，在外面睡了一个多月。
English: A man in Pengcheng married his wife but did not like her and slept outside for more than a month.

古文：妇曰： 何故不复入？ 
现代文：妻子说： 什么原因使你不回家来住？ 
English: My wife said, "What's the reason why you don't come home and live here?"

古文：男曰： 汝夜辄出，我故不入。 
现代文：男子说： 你到了晚上就总出去，我所以才不回家。 
English: The man said: You always go out in the evening, that's why I don't go home.

古文：妇曰： 我初不出。 
现代文：妻子说： 我从来不出去。 
English: My wife said: I never go out.

古文：婿惊。
现代文：丈夫很吃惊。
English: My husband was very surprised.

古文：妇云： 君自有异志，当为他所惑耳。
现代文：妻子说： 你本来就想着别的女人，一定是被别人迷惑住了。
English: My wife said, "You were thinking about other women, so you must have been distracted by someone else."

古文：后有至者，君便抱留之，索火照视之，为何物？ 
现代文：以后有女人来到你这里，你就抱住她留宿，找来火照着看她是什么东西。 
English: In the future, if a woman comes to you, you will hold her and stay with her, find a fire and watch her to see what she is.

古文：后所愿还至，故作其妇，前却未入，有一人从后推令前，即上床，婿捉之曰： 夜夜出何为？ 
现代文：后来彭城男子所思念的人来了，装作是他的妻子，开始时没有马上进屋，有个人从后面推着她，让她上床。男子捉住她的手说： 你为什么天天晚上出去。 
English: Later, the person the Pengcheng man missed came, pretending to be his wife. At first, she didn't enter the house right away. Someone pushed her from behind and made her go to bed. The man grabbed her hand and said, "Why do you go out every night?"

古文：妇曰： 君与东舍女往来，而惊欲托鬼魅，以前约相掩耳。 
现代文：妻子说： 你和东面邻居家的女儿来往，却装着吃惊假托有鬼魅，用以前有约定来遮掩自己的行为。 
English: The wife said, "You have been dating the daughter of your neighbor to the east, but you pretended to be surprised, pretended to have a ghost, and used a previous agreement to cover up your actions.

古文：婿放之，与共卧，夜半心悟。
现代文：丈夫放了她，和她一起睡下。
English: Her husband let her go and slept with her.

古文：乃计曰： 魅迷人，非是我妇也。 
现代文：到了半夜男子醒悟过来，心里想：这是鬼魅在迷人，不是我的妻子。
English: In the middle of the night, the man came to his senses and thought, "It's the ghosts that are attractive, not my wife."

古文：乃向前揽捉，大呼求火，稍稍缩小，发而视之，得一鲤鱼长二尺。
现代文：于是上前去抱住她，大声喊叫，叫人取火照亮。那女人渐渐地缩小了，掀开被子一看，是一条二尺长的鲤鱼。
English: So he went up to her, hugged her, and called out loudly for someone to light a fire. The woman gradually shrank, and when he lifted the quilt, he saw it was a two-foot-long eel.

古文：朱法公
现代文：朱法公
English: Zhu Fa Gong

古文：山阴朱法公者，尝出行，憩于台城东桔树下。忽有女子，年可十六七，形甚端丽，薄晚，遣婢与法公相闻。
现代文：山阴县的朱法公路途中在台城东面的桔子树下休息，忽然遇到一个女子，年龄大约十六七岁，样子端庄美丽。傍晚的时候，这女子派女仆与朱法公搭话，约定天黑以后去朱法公那里住宿。
English: On the way of Zhufa Highway in Shanyin County, he was resting under an orange tree in the east of Taicheng when he suddenly met a woman, aged about sixteen or seventeen, with a dignified and beautiful appearance. In the evening, the woman sent her maid to talk to Zhufa and agreed to stay with Zhufa after dark.

古文：方夕，欲诣宿，至人定后，乃来，自称姓檀，住在城侧。因共眠寝，至晓而云： 明日复来。 
现代文：到了半夜，女子才来，她自称姓檀，住在城边。于是两人共同睡在一起，到天亮时离开时说： 第二天再来。 
English: In the middle of the night, a woman, who gave her name as Tan and who lived on the outskirts of the city, arrived, and the two of them slept together. When they left at dawn, she said, "Come back the next day."

古文：如此数夜。每晓去，婢辄来迎。
现代文：象这样一连过个好几个晚上，每天早晨离开的时候，女仆都来迎接她。
English: This went on for several nights in a row, and every morning when she left, the maid came to greet her.

古文：复有男子，可六七岁，端丽可爱，女云是其弟。
现代文：同女仆一块来的还有个孩子，约六七岁，长得很好看，女子说是她的弟弟。
English: There was also a child with the maid, about six or seven years old, very good-looking, and the woman said it was her brother.

古文：后晓去，女衣裙开，见龟尾及龟脚，法公方悟是魅，欲执之。
现代文：后来有一天早晨她离开的时候，裙子开了个口子。朱法公看见了里面有龟尾和龟脚，朱法公才醒悟她是妖魅，打算捉住她。
English: Then one morning, when she was leaving, the skirt opened up. Zhu Fa Gong saw a turtle tail and turtle feet inside. Zhu Fa Gong finally realized that she was a fairy and planned to catch her.

古文：向夕复来，即然火照觅，寻失所在。
现代文：到了晚上女子又来时，朱法公就点火照着寻找，不久就失去了踪迹。
English: In the evening, when the woman came again, Zhu Fagong lit a fire to look for her, and soon lost track of her.

古文：王奂
现代文：王奂
English: Wang Yao

古文：齐王奂自建业将之渚宫，至江州，泊舟于岸。
现代文：齐国的王奂从建业去江陵，走到江州，船停泊在岸边。
English: Wang Qian of Qi went from Jianye to Jiangling and then to Jiangzhou. The ship anchored at the shore.

古文：夜深，风生月莹。忽闻前洲上有十余人喧噪，皆女子之音。
现代文：夜深了，江风拂面，月色皎洁，他忽然听见前面水中的陆地上有十多人在乱七八糟地说话，全是女人的声音。
English: It was late at night, the river wind was blowing and the moon was shining brightly. Suddenly, he heard more than ten people talking on the land in front of him in the water, all women's voices.

古文：奂异之，谓诸人曰： 江渚中岂有是人也。 
现代文：王奂觉得很奇怪，对船上人说： 江中的陆地上难道会有人吗？ 
English: Wang Yao felt very strange and said to the people on the boat, "Can there really be people on the land in the middle of the river?"

古文：乃独棹小舟，取葭芦之阴，循洲北岸，而于藂苇中见十余女子，或衣绿，或衣青碧，半坐半立。
现代文：于是一个人划着小船，顺着葭芦旁的阴暗处，沿着水中那块陆地的北岸往前划船。在一处芦苇丛生的地方他看见了十多个女人，有的人穿着绿色衣服，有的人穿着青绿色的衣服。其中一半人坐着一半人站着。
English: Then a man rowing a skiff along the north shore of the land in the water, in the gloom by the reeds, saw in a place of reeds more than a dozen women, some dressed in green, some in turquoise, half of them sitting, half of them standing.

古文：坐者一女子泣而言曰： 我始与姊妹同居阴宅，长在江汉，不意诸娘，虚为上峡小儿所娶，乃至分离。 
现代文：坐着的一个女子哭着说： 我原先和姐妹们一起住在阴暗潮湿的地方，生长在江汉，想不到各位姑娘被上峡的那个小人所欺骗，嫁了过去，使我们姐妹分离。 
English: A woman who was sitting cried and said, "I used to live with my sisters in a dark and damp place, growing up in Jianghan. I can't imagine that you girls were deceived by that villain from Shangxia and married him, separating our sisters.

古文：立者一女子叹曰： 潮水有回，而我此去，应无返日。 
现代文：站着的一个女子叹着气说： 潮水退了还有涨潮的时候。
English: A woman who was standing there sighed and said, "When the tide goes out, it's still high tide.

古文：言未竟，北风微起。
现代文：可是我这次离开这里，就不会再回来了。 话没说完，北风轻轻地吹来。
English: But this time when I leave here, I won't be coming back. Before I finish speaking, the north wind blows gently.

古文：立者曰： 潮至矣，可以还家。 
现代文：站着的女子说： 潮水来了，可以回家了。 
English: The woman standing there said, "The tide is coming in, you can go home now."

古文：奂急从芦苇中出捕，悉化为龟，入水而去。
现代文：王奂急忙丛芦苇丛中跳出来去捕捉，那些女子都变成乌龟，走进水里离开了。
English: Wang Yao hurriedly jumped out of the reeds to catch them. The women all turned into turtles and went into the water.

古文：蔡兴
现代文：蔡兴
English: Cai Xing

古文：晋陵民蔡兴忽得狂疾，歌吟不恒，常空中与数人言笑。
现代文：晋陵的平民蔡兴忽然得了疯病，不停地又唱又说，常常地向着空中与几个人说笑。
English: Cai Xing, a commoner from Jinling, suddenly fell ill with a mental illness. She kept singing and talking, often joking with several people in the air.

古文：或云： 当再取谁女！ 
现代文：空中有个人说： 我应当再娶某某人的女儿。 
English: There was a man in the sky who said: I should marry so-and-so's daughter again.

古文：复一人云： 家已多。 
现代文：又一个说： 家里的妻子已经太多了。 
English: Another said: There are already too many wives in the family.

古文：后夜，忽闻十余人将物入里人刘余之家。
现代文：隔一天夜晚，忽然有十多个人拿着东西进入同乡之人刘余之的家里。
English: One night after another, more than ten people suddenly entered the home of Liu Yuzhi, a fellow villager, carrying things.

古文：余之拔刀出后户，见一人黑色，大骂曰： 我湖长，来诣汝，而欲杀我！ 
现代文：刘余之拔出刀从后门出来，看见了一个全身漆黑色的人。那个人大声骂道： 我是湖里的首领，来会见你，你却要杀我！ 
English: Liu Yuzhi pulled out his knife and came out of the back door to see a man who was completely black. The man cursed loudly: I am the leader of the lake, I came to meet you, but you want to kill me!

古文：即唤群伴： 何不助余耶？ 
现代文：刘余之招呼伙伴说： 为什么不来帮助我呢？ 
English: Liu Yu's greeting partner said: Why don't you come and help me?

古文：余之即奋刀乱砍，得一大鼍及狸。
现代文：然后用尽力气挥刀乱砍，砍死了一只大鼍和一只狸。
English: He then used all his strength to slash wildly with his knife, slashing to death a great egret and a civet cat.

古文：李增
现代文：李增
English: Li Zeng

古文：永阳人李增行经大溪，见二蛟浮于水上，发矢射之，一蛟中焉。
现代文：永阳人李增走路经过一条大河，看见二只蛟浮在水面上，他发箭射蛟，一只蛟被射中。
English: Yongyang resident Li Zeng was walking along a large river when he saw two dragonflies floating on the surface of the water. He fired an arrow at the dragonflies, and one dragonfly was hit.

古文：增归，因复出市，有女子，素服衔泪，捉所射箭。
现代文：李增就回家去了，过一会他到集市上去，有个穿着丧服的女子眼里含着泪，手里拿着李增射蛟时用的箭。
English: Li Zeng went home. A short while later, he went to the bazaar. There was a woman in mourning clothes with tears in her eyes, holding the arrow that Li Zeng used to shoot the crossbow.

古文：增怪而问焉，女答之： 何用问焉？
现代文：李增奇怪地询问那个女子。那女子回答他说： 你犯的暴行，还用问别人吗？ 
English: Li Zeng asked the woman in a strange way. The woman replied to him, "Do you need to ask others about the violence you committed?

古文：为暴若是！ 
现代文：就把这支箭还给李增就不见了。
English: He returned the arrow to Li Zeng and it was gone.

古文：便以相还，授矢而灭，增恶而骤走，未达家，暴死于路。
现代文：李增厌恶这件事急忙往家跑，还没到家，就突然死在半路上了。
English: Li Zeng was disgusted by this and ran home in a hurry. Before reaching home, he suddenly died on the way.

古文：萧腾
现代文：萧腾
English: Xiao Teng

古文：襄阳金城南门外道东，有参佐廨，旧传甚凶，住者不死必病。
现代文：襄阳郡金城县南门外的道路东面，有一所参佐的官署，历来传说那里很凶险，住在里面的人不死也一定得病。
English: On the east side of the road outside the south gate of Jincheng County, Yangyang County, there is a government office of a councillor. It has always been said that it is very dangerous there, and people who live in it will certainly get sick if they do not die.

古文：梁昭明太子临州，给府寮吕休茜。
现代文：梁国的昭明太子治理襄阳的时候，把这处地方送给了郡府里的官员吕休茜。
English: When Prince Zhaoming of Liang Province governed Xiangyang, he gave this place to Lu Xuxi, an official of the county government.

古文：休茜常在厅事北头眠，鬼牵休茜，休茜坠地。久之悟。俄而休茜有罪赐死。
现代文：有一次吕休茜在厅堂的北面睡觉，有鬼来拉扯吕休茜，吕休茜掉到地上，很长时间才苏醒过来，不久吕休茜有罪被处死。
English: Once, Lv Xuxi was sleeping on the north side of the hall. A ghost pulled Lv Xuxi. Lv Xuxi fell to the ground and took a long time to wake up. Lv Xuxi was soon found guilty and executed.

古文：后今肖腾初上，至羊口岸，忽有一丈夫著白纱高室帽，乌布裤，披袍造腾。
现代文：后来，萧腾来上任，走到羊口岸，忽然有一个男子头戴白纱高帽，穿着黑裤子，披着袍子来见萧腾。
English: Later, when Xiao Teng came to take office, he walked to the Yangkou Port, and suddenly a man wearing a white gauze cap, black trousers and a robe came to see Xiao Teng.

古文：疑其服异，拒之。
现代文：萧腾见他的服饰特殊，心中疑惑，拒绝同他见面。
English: Xiao Teng saw that his clothes were special and hesitated, refusing to meet with him.

古文：行数里复至，求寄载，腾转疑焉，如此数回，而腾有妓妾数人，举止所为，稍异常日，歌笑悲啼，无复恒节。
现代文：走了几里地，那个男子又来求见，并要求搭船，萧腾对他更加怀疑。象这样男子来了好几次，这时萧腾的几个妾出现异常，一举一动和平时不一样。唱歌大笑还悲伤地啼哭，毫无节制。
English: After walking for several miles, the man came to see him again and asked for a boat ride, and Xiao Teng became even more suspicious of him. Such men came several times, at which time several of Xiao Teng's concubines appeared abnormal, and their every move was different from usual. They sang, laughed, and cried sadly, without restraint.

古文：及腾至襄阳，此人亦经日一来，后累辰不去。
现代文：等到萧腾到了襄阳，那个怪人一天来一次，后来竟一连几天也不离开。
English: When Xiao Teng arrived in Yangyang, the strange man came once a day, and then he didn't leave for several days.

古文：好披袍缚裤，跨狗而行，或变易俄顷，咏诗歌谣，言笑自若，自称是周瑜，恒止腾舍。
现代文：他喜欢披着袍子，穿着白色的裤子，骑着狗走路。有时他一会改变一套装束，还吟诗唱歌，说笑自然得意。他说自己是周瑜，长久地住在萧腾家里。
English: He likes to wear a robe, white trousers, and ride a dog. Sometimes he changes his outfit at once, and he is naturally good at singing and laughing. He says he is Zhou Yu and has lived in Xiao Teng's home for a long time.

古文：腾备为禳遣之术，有时暂去，寻复来。
现代文：萧腾多次请人施行法术驱赶他，他有时暂时离开，不久又回来了。
English: Xiao Teng repeatedly asked people to cast spells to drive him away. Sometimes he would leave for a while, but would soon return.

古文：腾又领门生二十人，拔刀砍之，或跳上室梁，走入林中，来往迅速，竟不可得。
现代文：萧腾领着二十个自己的学生用刀砍他，他有时跳上房梁，有时进入树林，来往非常迅速，竟然砍不着他。
English: Xiao Teng led twenty of his students to cut him with a knife. Sometimes he jumped on the beam of the house, sometimes he went into the woods. They went back and forth so quickly that they couldn't cut him.

古文：乃入妾屏风里，作歌曰： 逢欢羊口岸，结爱桃林津。
现代文：他还进入萧腾妻子的屏风内，唱歌道： 唱着歌相逢在羊口岸边，结友情不忘桃林渡口。
English: He also entered Xiao Teng's wife's screen and sang: "Singing songs, we met on the shore of Sheep's Mouth, making friends and not forgetting the Taolin Ferry."

古文：胡桃掷去肉，讶汝不识人。 
现代文：吃胡桃竟抛掉桃仁，你为什么不认识我！ 
English: Why don't you know me? I eat walnuts and throw away peach kernels!

古文：顷之，有道士赵昙义为腾设坛，置醮行禁。
现代文：不久，有个叫赵昙义的道士来为萧腾设祭坛驱妖，安排祭祀仪式实行作法。
English: Soon, a Taoist named Zhao Xingyi came to set up an altar to drive away demons for Xiao Teng, and arranged a sacrificial ceremony to carry out the practice.

古文：自道士入门，诸妾并悲叫，若将远别。
现代文：道士一进门，萧腾所有的妻妾一起悲哀地哭叫，像是即将离别的样子。
English: As soon as the Taoist priest entered the door, all of Xiao Teng's wives and concubines cried mournfully together, as if they were about to part.

古文：俄而一龟径尺余，自到坛而死，诸妾亦差，腾妾声貌悉不多。
现代文：不一会，一只直径有一尺多长的乌龟自己走到坛前死去了。各位妻妾的病也好了，声音笑貌恢复了正常。
English: After a while, a turtle with a diameter of more than a foot walked to the altar and died. All the wives and concubines recovered from their illnesses, and their voices and smiles returned to normal.

古文：谘议参军韦言辩善戏谑，因宴而启云： 常闻世间人道 黠如鬼 ，今见鬼定是痴鬼，若黠，不应魅萧腾妓。
现代文：有个咨议参军叫韦言辩的很善于说笑话，他在一次宴会上说： 常常听说世上的人处事像鬼一样狡猾，现在看来这个鬼一定是个痴鬼。如果这个鬼狡猾，就不该去迷惑萧腾的妻妾。
English: There was a military adviser named Wei Yanbo, who was very good at telling jokes. He said at a banquet: "I have often heard that people in the world are as cunning as ghosts. Now it seems that this ghost must be an idiot. If this ghost is cunning, it should not go to confuse Xiao Teng's wife and concubine."

古文：以此而度，足验鬼痴。 
现代文：从这个鬼的行动来推论，足以说明它是个痴鬼。 
English: It is enough to deduce from this ghost's actions that it is a phantom.

古文：柳镇
现代文：柳镇
English: Willow Town

古文：河东柳镇字子元，少乐闲静，不慕荣贵。
现代文：河东人柳镇字子元，喜欢清闲安静，不羡慕荣华富贵。
English: The people of Liuzhen, Zhiziyuan, east of the river, like to be idle and quiet, and do not envy the rich.

古文：梁天监中，自司州游上元，便爱其风景，于钟山之西建业里，买地结茅，开泉种植，隐操如耕父者。
现代文：梁国天监年间他从司州到上元去游玩，爱上了那里的风景，就在钟山西面的建业里，买地盖了房子，引水种地，隐居耕种象个老农夫。
English: During his time as Liang Guo's celestial supervisor, he traveled from Sizhou to Shangyuan, fell in love with the scenery there, bought land and built a house in Jianye on the west side of Zhongshan, diverted water and cultivated land, and lived in seclusion like an old farmer.

古文：其左右居民，皆呼为柳父，所居临江水，尝曳策临眺，忽见前洲上有三四小儿，皆长一尺许，往来游戏，遥闻相呼求食声。镇异之。
现代文：附近的居民，全都叫他 柳父 。他住的地方靠近江边，有一次他拄着拐杖在江边眺望，忽然看见前面的江中陆地上有三四个小孩，都只有一尺多高，来往游戏，远远地听见他们互相呼叫着寻找吃的，柳镇觉得很奇怪。
English: He lives near the river. Once, he was on crutches, looking out over the river. Suddenly, he saw three or four children, all just over a foot tall, playing on the land in front of him in the middle of the river. From a distance, he could hear them calling to each other in search of food. Liu Zhen felt very strange.

古文：须臾，风涛汹涌，有大鱼惊跃，误坠洲上。
现代文：不一会，风起浪涌，有一条大鱼受惊跳了起来，不小心掉在小岛上。
English: A moment later, when the wind and waves began to swell, a large fish jumped in fright and accidentally fell onto the islet.

古文：群小儿争前食之。
现代文：这一群小孩争着跑去吃大鱼。
English: The group of children race to eat the large fish.

古文：又闻小儿传呼云： 虽食不尽，留与柳父。 
现代文：还听到小孩子们喊着互相告诉说： 我们吃不完，剩下的留给柳父吧。 
English: I also heard the children shouting and telling each other: "We can't finish eating, leave the rest to Father Willow."

古文：镇益惊骇，乃乘小舟，径捕之，未及岸，诸小儿悉化为獭，入水而去。
现代文：柳镇更加惊奇，就坐上小船，前去捕捉他们。还没到岸上，这群小孩全变成水獭，进到水里跑了，柳镇带回那条大鱼把它分给乡亲们吃。
English: Liu Zhen was even more surprised, so he got on a small boat and went to catch them. Before reaching the shore, the group of children all turned into otters and ran into the water. Liu Zhen brought back the big fish and shared it with the villagers.

古文：镇取巨鱼以分乡里，未几，北还洛阳，于所居书斋柱，题诗一首云： 江山不久计，要适暂时心。况念洛阳士，今来归旧林。 
现代文：不久，他回到洛阳，在他居住的书斋的柱子上，题了一首诗说： 江山不久计，要适暂时心，况念洛阳士，今来归旧林。 
English: Not long after, he returned to Luoyang. On the pillar of the study where he lived, he inscribed a poem saying: "The country is not far away, it is necessary to adapt to the times. Moreover, remember Luoyang people, now return to the old forest."

古文：是岁天监七年也。
现代文：这一年是天监七年。
English: This year is the seventh year of the heavenly prison.

古文：隋文帝
现代文：隋文帝
English: Sui Emperor Wen Zong

古文：隋文帝开皇中，掖庭宫每有人来挑宫人，司宫以闻，帝曰： 门卫甚严，人从何而入！
现代文：隋文帝开皇年间，经常有人入掖庭宫挑逗宫女。司宫把这件事报告给文帝，文帝说： 门卫把守得很严，人是从什么地方进来的？
English: During the reign of Emperor Wen of the Sui Dynasty, there were often people entering the imperial court to tease the concubines. The imperial court reported this to Emperor Wen. Emperor Wen said, "The gatekeepers are very strict. Where do people come from?"

古文：当妖精耳。 
现代文：一定是个妖精。 
English: It must be a fairy.

古文：因戒宫人曰： 若来，但砍之。 
现代文：接着又告诫宫女说： 如果那人再来，就用刀砍他。 
English: Then she warned the maidservant, saying, "If that man comes again, strike him down with your sword."

古文：其后夜来登床，宫人抽刀砍之，若中枯骨，其物走落，宫人逐之，因入池而没。
现代文：后来那个人晚上来到宫女的床上，宫女就抽出刀来砍他，象砍中枯骨一样。那个东西逃跑，宫女在后面追赶他，那个东西跳进池水中沉下去了。
English: Later that night, the man came to the lady's bed, and the lady drew her knife and cut him like a bone. The thing ran away, the lady chased after it, and the thing jumped into the water and sank.

古文：明日，帝令涸池，得一龟尺余，其上有刀痕，杀之遂绝。
现代文：第二天，文帝命令淘干水池，得到一只一尺长乌龟，背有刀痕，杀了它，就再也没有怪事发生了。
English: The next day, Emperor Wen ordered the pond to be drained, got a one-foot-long turtle with a knife mark on its back, killed it, and nothing strange happened again.

古文：大兴村
现代文：大兴村
English: Daxing Village

古文：隋开皇末，大兴城西南村民设佛会，一老翁皓首白裙襦，求食而去。
现代文：隋朝开皇末年，大兴村西南面的村民设斋饭举行佛教祭祀活动。一个满头白发穿一身白色衣裤的老头，要了一点饭吃就走了。
English: In the last years of the Sui Dynasty, villagers in the southwestern part of Daxing Village held a Buddhist sacrificial meal. An old man with a full head of white hair and wearing white trousers asked for some food and left.

古文：众莫识，追而观之。行二里许，遂不见。
现代文：大家都不认识他，就在后面跟随着看他住在哪里，走了二里多路，老头就不见了。
English: Everyone didn't know him, so they followed him to see where he lived. After walking more than two miles, the old man disappeared.

古文：但有一陂，水中有白鱼长丈余，小而从者无数，人争射之，或弓折弦断，后竟中之。割其腹，得秔米饭。
现代文：附近有一个池塘，水里有一条大白鱼有一丈多长，无数条小鱼跟着它，人们争着射大白鱼，有的人弓折了，有的人弦断了，后来有的人射中了大白鱼，剖开鱼的肚子，里面全是粳米饭。
English: There was a pond nearby. In the water, there was a big white fish as long as a crane, and countless small fish followed it. People fought to shoot the big white fish. Some people's bows broke, some people's strings broke, and later, some people shot the big white fish and cut open the fish's stomach, which was full of glutinous rice.

古文：后数日，漕梁暴溢，射者家皆溺死。
现代文：又过了几天，漕梁河突然发生大水，射死大白鱼的那个人的全家都淹死了。
English: A few days later, the Cao Liang River suddenly flooded, and the whole family of the person who shot the big white fish drowned.

古文：万顷陂
现代文：万顷陂
English: Ten thousand hectares

古文：唐齐州有万顷陂，鱼鳖水族，无所不有。
现代文：唐代的齐州有个方圆万顷的池塘，里面鱼鳖等各种水生动物全都有。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, there was a pond with a circumference of 10,000 hectares in Qizhou, which contained all kinds of aquatic animals such as fish hooks.

古文：咸亨中，忽一僧持钵乞食，村人长者施以蔬供，食讫而去。
现代文：咸亨年间，忽然有一个和尚拿着钵要饭吃，村子里年长的人把饭菜送给他吃。
English: During the reign of Emperor Xianheng, a monk suddenly asked for food with a shovel, and the village elders gave him the food to eat.

古文：于是渔人网得一鱼，长六七尺，缉鳞镂甲，锦质宝章，特异常鱼。欲赍赴州饷遗，至村而死，遂共剖而分之。
现代文：他吃完就走了。当时有个打鱼的人，网住了一条六七尺长的大鱼，精巧的鳞片闪闪发光，色彩鲜艳花纹美丽，与平常的鱼一点也不一样，他准备送给州衙请赏，可走到村子里的时候鱼死了。
English: After he finished eating, he left. At that time, there was a fisherman who caught a big fish with a length of six or seven feet. The delicate scales glittered, the color was bright and the pattern was beautiful, and it was completely different from the usual fish. He was going to give it to the prefectural government for a reward, but when he went to the village, the fish died.

古文：于腹中得长者所施蔬食，俨然并在。
现代文：于是大家一起动手把鱼割开分了，在鱼肚子里找到了村中长者施舍给和尚的饭菜。
English: So everyone worked together to cut the fish into pieces, and in the fish's stomach they found the meal that the village elder had given to the monk.

古文：村人遂于陂中设斋过度，自是陂中无水族，至今犹然绝。
现代文：村里人就在池塘边安排举行祭祀仪式超度鱼的亡灵。从这以后池塘里再也没有水生动物了，到现在也还是没有。
English: The villagers arranged for a sacrificial ceremony to be held on the edge of the pond for the dead fish. From then on, there were no aquatic animals in the pond, and there still aren't any now.

