古文：凡战，所谓饵者，非谓兵者置毒于饮食，但以利诱之，皆为饵兵也。
现代文：凡是作战中所说的 饵战 ，并不是说在敌方士兵的饮食中投放毒药，而是用各种 利 来诱使敌人上钩，这都叫做 饵兵 战法。
English: All the so-called "warfare" in combat does not mean to put poison in the diet of the enemy soldiers, but to use all kinds of benefits to entice the enemy to take the bait, which is called "warfare."

古文：如交锋之际，或弃牛马，或遗财物，或舍辎重，切不可取，取之必败。
现代文：比如，在敌我双方交战中，敌人或者利用牛马，或者委弃财物，或者舍置辎重，切记对此不可随意拾取，而一旦拾取时则敌人有机可乘，就会导致作战失败。
English: For example, in the war between the enemy and us, the enemy either uses horses and oxen, or abandons property, or abandons weights. Remember that this should not be picked up at will, and once it is picked up, the enemy can take advantage of it, which will lead to the failure of the battle.

古文：法曰： 饵兵勿食。 
现代文：诚如兵法所说： 对于敌人的设饵引诱，万不可贪利上钩。 
English: As stated in the Art of War: Do not take advantage of the enemy's bait.

古文：汉献帝建安五年，袁绍遣兵攻白马，操击破之，斩其将颜良。
现代文：东汉献帝建安五年，袁绍派兵进攻白马，曹操率军把他打败，并杀死他的大将颜良。
English: Five years after the Eastern Han Dynasty offered Jianan to the emperor, Yuan Shao sent troops to attack Baima. Cao Cao led the army to defeat him and killed his general Yan Liang.

古文：遂解白马之围，徙其民而西。
现代文：于是解除了白马被围困的局面，然后将当地居民沿着黄河向西转移。
English: As a result, the siege of Baima was lifted, and then the local residents were moved westward along the Yellow River.

古文：绍渡河追之，军至延津南。
现代文：袁绍这时率军渡过黄河追击曹操军，一直追到延津之南而扎营。
English: At this time, Yuan Shao and his army crossed the Yellow River to pursue Cao Cao's army, chasing it all the way to the south of Yanjin and setting up camp.

古文：操勒兵驻营南坡下，令骑解鞍放马。
现代文：曹操所率部队驻扎在南面的山坡下，他命令所属骑兵都卸下马鞍，放开战马。
English: The troops led by Cao Cao were stationed at the bottom of the hill to the south. He ordered his cavalry to dismount and let go of their horses.

古文：是时，白马辎重就道。
现代文：此时，白马方面的曹军运输车队正行进在路上。
English: At this time, the heavy materials seized from Hakuba were strewn all over the road.

古文：诸将以为敌骑多，不如还保营。
现代文：曹操的将领们认为敌人骑兵数量众多恐难以战胜，不如退还保卫部队营地为好。
English: The generals thought that there were too many enemy cavalry, and it would be better to retreat to a conservative camp.

古文：荀攸曰： 此所谓饵兵，如之何去之！ 
现代文：但谋士荀攸向大家解释说： 这正是我们所以能用饵兵诱敌上钩的好机会，怎么能撤走失去这样好的战机呢！ 
English: But the strategist Yu Yu explained to everyone: This is exactly why we can lure the enemy onto the hook with our soldiers, how can we withdraw without such a good fighter plane!

古文：绍骑将文丑与刘备将五六千骑前后至。
现代文：袁绍的骑将文丑与刘备此时率领五六千骑兵前后赶到这里。
English: Yuan Shao's cavalry generals Wen Gou and Liu Bei arrived successively with five or six thousand cavalry.

古文：诸将曰： 可上马。 
现代文：将领们又说： 现在可以上马迎战了。 
English: The generals also said: Now we can mount our horses and go into battle.

古文：操曰： 未也。 
现代文：曹操说： 此时还不可以上马迎战。 
English: Cao Cao said, "At this time, you can't mount a horse and go into battle."

古文：有顷，骑至稍多，或分趣辎重。操曰： 可矣。 
现代文：过了一会儿，袁绍的骑兵逐渐增多，有的已分散奔向曹操的运输车队。
English: After a while, Yuan Shao's cavalry gradually increased, and some had dispersed to Cao Cao's transport convoy.

古文：乃皆上马。
现代文：曹操这时下达命令说： 可以马上出击了。 
English: At this time, Cao Cao issued an order saying, "You may attack immediately."

古文：纵击，大破之，
现代文：于是骑兵都纷纷上马待战。
English: So the cavalry all got on their horses and prepared for battle.

