古文：起重光赤奋若，尽强圉协洽，凡七年。
现代文：起，止，一共七年
English: A total of seven years

古文：世宗孝武皇帝上之上建元元年
现代文：汉武帝建元元年
English: Emperor Hanwu in the first year of Jianyuan

古文：冬，十月，诏举贤良方正直言极谏之士，上亲策问以古今治道，对者百馀人。
现代文：冬季，十月，汉武帝下诏，令大臣举荐贤良方正直言极谏的人才，武帝亲自出题，围绕着古往今来治理天下的 道 ，进行考试。
English: In the winter, in October, Emperor Wu of Han issued an edict, ordering the minister to recommend virtuous, honest and talented people. Emperor Wu himself proposed questions, centering on the way of governing the world from ancient times to the present, to conduct the examination.

古文：广川董仲舒对曰： 道者，所繇适于治之路也，仁、义、礼、乐，皆其具也。
现代文：参加考试的有一百多人。广川人董仲舒在回答说： 所谓的 道 ，是指由此而达到天下大治的道路，仁、义、礼、乐都是推行 道 的具体方法。
English: More than a hundred people took the exam. Dong Zhongshu, a resident of Guangchuan, answered: The so-called "Dao" refers to the path that leads to the rule of the world, and benevolence, righteousness, courtesy, and joy are all concrete methods of promoting the "Dao."

古文：故圣王已没，而子孙长久，安宁数百岁，此皆礼乐教化之功也。
现代文：所以，古代圣明的君王去世之后，他的后代可以长期稳坐天下，国家几百年太平无事，这都是推行礼乐教化的功绩。
English: Therefore, after the death of the king of ancient Shenmingshan, his descendants can sit firmly in the world for a long time, and the country has been peaceful for hundreds of years. This is all the merit of promoting the education of ritual music.

古文：夫人君莫不欲安存，而政乱国危者甚众；所任者非其人而所繇者非其道，是以政日以仆灭也。
现代文：凡是君主，没有人不希望自已的国家能安宁长存，但是政治昏乱、国家危亡的却很多。用人不当，治理国家的方法不是正道，所以国家政治一天比一天接近灭亡。
English: There is no monarch who does not hope that his country will enjoy lasting peace and tranquility, but there are many countries that are in political turmoil and in danger of collapse. People are employed improperly, and the way of governing the country is not the right way, so the country's politics are getting closer to collapse day by day.

古文：夫周道衰于幽、厉，非道亡也，幽、厉不繇也。
现代文：周王朝有幽王、厉王时期出现衰败，并不是由于治国的道路不存在了，而是由于幽王、厉王不遵循治国之道。
English: The Tao of the Zhou Dynasty declined when it came to King Li of Zhou and King Yu of Zhou. It was not that the Tao died, but that King Li and King Yu did not follow the Tao.

古文：至于宣王，思昔先王之德，兴滞补敝，明文、武之功业，周道粲然复兴，此夙夜不懈行善之所致也。
现代文：到了周宣王在位时，他仰慕过去先王的德政，恢复被淡忘的先王善政，弥补残缺，发扬周文王、周武王的功业，周代的王道再次焕发出灿烂的光彩，这是日夜不懈地推行善政而取得的成效。
English: When King Zhou Xuan came to the throne, he admired the good governance of the previous king, restored the forgotten good governance of the previous king, made up for the shortcomings, carried forward the work of King Zhou Wen and King Zhou Wu, and the royal way of Zhou Dynasty once again shone with brilliant brilliance. This is the result of tirelessly promoting good governance day and night.

古文：孔子曰： 人能弘道，非道弘人。 
现代文： 孔子说： 人可以发扬光大道，而不是道弘扬人。 
English: Confucius said: It is not the man who promotes the Way, but the Way that promotes the man.

古文：故治乱废兴在于己，非天降命，不可得反；其所操持悖谬，失其统也。
现代文：所以，国家的治乱兴亡在于君主自己，只要不是天意要改朝换代，统治权就不会丧失；君主的作为悖理错误，就会丧失统治地位。
English: Therefore, the rise and fall of a country depends on the monarch himself. As long as it is not God's will to change the dynasty, the right to rule will not be lost; if the monarch acts unreasonably, he will lose his dominant position.

古文：为人君者，正心以正朝廷，正朝廷以正百官，正百官以正万民，正万民以正四方。
现代文：做君主的人，要端正自己的思想，整肃朝廷，整肃了朝廷才能用以整肃百官，整肃了百官才能用以整肃天下百姓，整肃了天下百姓才能用以整肃四方的夷狄各族。
English: Those who are monarchs should rectify their thoughts and purify the imperial court. Only by purifying the imperial court can they purify the hundreds of officials. Only by purifying the hundreds of officials can they purify the people of the world. Only by purifying the people of the world can they purify the various ethnic groups in the four directions.

古文：四方正，远近莫敢不壹于正，而亡有邪气奸其间者，是以阴阳调而风雨时，群生和而万民殖，诸福之物，可致之祥，莫不毕至，而王道终矣！
现代文：四方的夷狄各族都已整肃完毕，远近没有胆敢不统一于正道的，就没有邪气冲犯天地之间，因此阴阳谐和，风调雨顺，生物安和相处，百姓繁衍生息，所有象征辛福的东西和可以招致吉祥事，全都出现，这就是王道的最佳境界了！
English: All the tribes of the Yidi in the four directions have been purged. No one dares not to unite with the righteous path, and there is no evil spirit between heaven and earth. Therefore, the yin and yang are harmonious, the wind and rain are harmonious, the organisms are peaceful and get along well, and the people are prosperous. All the things that symbolize good fortune and can lead to auspicious events have all appeared. This is the best realm of the royal road!

古文：孔子曰： 凤鸟不至，河不出图，吾已矣夫！ 
现代文：孔子说： 凤凰不来，黄河也不出现图画，我算完了！ 
English: Confucius said: "If the phoenix bird does not come, and the river map does not appear, I am afraid I am finished!"

古文：自悲可致此物，而身卑贱不得致也。
现代文：他认为自己的德行本可招致这些祥瑞，但因为身分卑贱不能招致，而感到悲哀。
English: He was saddened by the fact that his virtuous deeds could attract these blessings, but he could not attract them because of his lowly status.

古文：今陛下贵为天子，富有四海，居得致之位，操可致之势，又有能致之资；行高而恩厚，知明而意美，爱民而好士，可谓谊主矣。
现代文：现在，陛下贵为天子，富有四海，身居得以招致祥端的尊位，手持可以招致祥瑞的权势，又有能够招致祥瑞的资质；品行高尚而恩德深厚，头脑聪明而心地善良，爱护百姓而尊重贤士，可称得上是仁义君主了。
English: Now, His Majesty is the precious son of heaven, rich in the four seas, living in the dignity of being able to attract auspiciousness, holding the power that can attract auspiciousness, and having the qualities that can attract auspiciousness; his behavior is noble and benevolent, his mind is clever and kind, he loves the people and respects the sages, and can be called a benevolent monarch.

古文：然而天地未应而美祥莫至者，何也？
现代文：但是，天地没有相应的表示，祥瑞没有出现，原因何在？
English: However, heaven and earth did not respond, and the beautiful auspiciousness did not come. What is the reason for this?

古文：凡以教化不立而万民不正也。
现代文：主要在于没有推行道德教化，百姓没有走上正路。
English: It is probably because enlightenment has not been established and the people have not been brought onto the right path.

古文：夫万民之从利也，如水之走下，不以教化堤防之，不能止也。
现代文：百姓追逐财利，就如同水流向低处一样，不用教化筑成堤，就不能阻止。
English: The pursuit of profit by all nations is like the downward flow of water, which cannot be stopped without turning education into their dike.

古文：古之王者明于此，故南面而治天下，莫不以教化为大务。
现代文：古代英明的君主深知此理，所以面南为王治理天下时，没有不把教化作为根本大事的。
English: The wise monarchs of ancient times were well aware of this principle, so when Mengnan was king and ruled the world, there was no reason not to take enlightenment as a fundamental matter.

古文：立太学以教于国，设痒序以化于邑，渐民以仁，摩民以谊，节民以礼，故其刑罚甚轻而禁不犯者，教化行而习俗美也。
现代文：建立太学，以便在都城兴起教化，兴办学府，以便在地方城邑中开导民众，当时的刑罚很轻而没有人触犯法禁，其原因在于推行了教化而社会风俗很好。
English: In the capital of the country, a university was set up for education, and in counties and townships, county schools and township schools were set up to carry out indoctrination. People were educated with benevolence, influenced with righteousness, and restrained with etiquette. Therefore, although the punishment was light, no one violated the ban. This was due to the implementation of indoctrination and the beauty of customs.

古文：圣王之继乱世也，扫除其迹而悉去之，复修教化而崇起之；教化已明，习俗已成，子孙循之，行五六百岁尚示败也。
现代文：圣明的君主继承乱世道，首先要把它的一切残余全部扫除，还要推行教化，提高教化；教化已见明效，好的社会风俗已经形成，子孙后代沿袭不变，实行五六百年也不会衰败。
English: The enlightened monarch inherits the evil ways of the world. First of all, he must sweep away all the remnants of it. He must also carry out enlightenment and improve enlightenment. Enlightenment has been effective, good social customs have been formed, and future generations will follow the same, and the implementation of five or six hundred years will not decay.

古文：秦灭先圣之道，为苟且之治，故立十四年而亡，其遗毒馀烈至今未灭，习俗薄恶，人民嚣顽，抵冒殊扞，熟烂如此之甚者也。
现代文：秦朝毁弃先代圣王的治国之道，实行不顾长远、只顾眼前的统治方法，所以立国仅有十四年就灭亡了。秦遗留下来的恶劣影响至今还没有清除，导致社会风俗浅薄恶劣，百姓不讲忠信德义，抵触冒犯，殊死反抗，风俗竟然败坏到如此程度。
English: The Qin Dynasty abandoned the previous holy king's way of governing the country and implemented a long-term, short-term and short-term control method, so it was only fourteen years since the founding of the country. The bad influence left by the Qin Dynasty has not yet been eliminated, leading to shallow and bad social customs, the people do not talk about loyalty and virtue, resist and offend, and resist to the death, and the customs have been corrupted to such an extent.

古文：窃譬之：琴瑟不调，甚者必解而更张之，乃可鼓也；为政而不行，甚者必变而更化之，乃可理也。
现代文：我私下做了这样一个比喻：琴瑟声音不和谐，严重时必须解下旧弦，更换新弦，才可以弹奏；实施统治遇到了阻碍，严重时一定要加以改变，才能治理好国家。
English: Privately, I made this analogy: the sound of the harp is not harmonious, in serious cases, the old strings must be removed and the new strings replaced before it can be played; the implementation of governance has encountered obstacles, and in serious cases, it must be changed in order to govern the country well.

古文：故汉得天下以来，常欲治而至今不可善治者，失之于当更化而不更化也。
现代文：所以，自从汉朝得到天下以来，一直想治理好国家，但至今没有治理得好，其原因就在于应当实行改革的时候而没有实行改革。
English: Therefore, since the Han Dynasty gained the world, it has always wanted to govern the country well, but so far it has not been well governed. The reason for this is that reforms were not implemented when they should have been.

古文： 臣闻圣王之治天下也，少则习之学，长则材诸位，爵禄以养其德，刑罚以威其恶，故民晓于礼谊而耻犯其上。
现代文： 我听说圣明的君主治理天下，臣子年幼时就学习知识，成年后就给他官位以磨砺他的才能，颁给爵位俸禄以培养他的品德，实施刑罚以威慑他的罪恶念头，所以，百姓才能通晓礼义，而以冲犯君主为耻。
English: The vassal heard that the wise king ruled the world, teaching the young to acquire the habit of learning, and appointing elders to supervise their talents, using their positions and salaries to cultivate their virtues, and using punishments to prohibit them from doing evil, so that the people all knew the etiquette and were ashamed to offend their superiors.

古文：武王行大谊，平残贼，周公作礼乐以文之；至于成、康之隆，囹圄空虚四十馀年。
现代文：周武王奉行天下大义，推翻了独夫民贼，周公制作了礼和乐来修饰周政；到了成王、康王的大治时期，没有人犯罪，监狱空虚长达四十多年。
English: King Zhou Wu pursued the great justice of the world, overthrew the autocrats and thieves, and Zhou Gong made rituals and music to embellish Zhou politics; during the reigns of King Cheng and King Kang, no one committed crimes, and the prison was empty for more than forty years.

古文：此亦教化之渐而仁谊之流，非独伤肌肤之效也。
现代文：这也是教化的浸润和仁义的流布，而不止是伤残皮肉的刑罚的成效。
English: This is also the infiltration of indoctrination and the dissemination of benevolence and righteousness, and not just the effect of the punishment of injuring the skin and flesh.

古文：至秦则不然，师申、商之法，行韩非之说，憎帝王之道，以贪狼为俗，诛名而不察实，为善者不必免而犯恶者未必刑也。
现代文：到秦代就不是这样了。秦尊奉申不害、商鞅的法令，实行韩非的学说，憎恶圣明帝王的治世之道，提倡贪求财利的风俗，只看虚名而不注重实际，做好事的人不一定能辛免受刑罚，而做坏事的人也不一定能受到惩罚。
English: However, this was not the case in the Qin Dynasty. The Qin worshipped the edicts of non-harming and deliberation, practiced the teachings of Han Fei, detested the way of ruling the world of Emperor Shengming, advocated the custom of greed for money, and only looked at the false name without paying attention to reality. People who did good deeds would not necessarily be able to avoid punishment, and people who did bad deeds would not necessarily be punished.

古文：是以百官皆饰虚辞而不顾实，外有事君之礼，内有背上之心，造伪饰诈，趋利无耻，是以刑者甚众，死者相望，而奸不息，俗化使然也。
现代文：因此，百官都粉饰虚名假誉而不注重实际政务，表面上有侍奉君主的礼仪，内心却有背叛君主的念头，弄虚作假，追逐财利，毫无廉耻；所以遭受刑罚的人很多，死人相连，但是犯罪却没被制止，是风俗的影响造成了这样的状况。
English: As a result, officials of all ranks embellish their false names and reputations without paying attention to actual government affairs. On the surface, they have the etiquette of serving the monarch, but in their hearts they have the idea of betraying the monarch, cheating, chasing money and profit, and are shameless. Therefore, there are many people who have been punished, and the dead are connected, but the crime has not been stopped. It is the influence of customs that has caused this situation.

古文：今陛下并有天下，莫不率服，而功不加于百姓者，殆王心未加焉。
现代文：现在陛下统治全国，天下没有不服从的，但是却没有给百姓带来功德，大概是由于您没有注意到这个问题吧。
English: Now that His Majesty rules the whole country, there is no disobedience in the world, but it has not brought merit to the people, probably because you have not noticed this problem.

古文：《曾子》曰： 尊其所闻，则高明矣；行其所知，则光大矣。
现代文：《曾子》一书说： 尊重所听到的道理，他就算是高明的了；实践所掌握的知识，他就算是光大的了。
English: The book "The Great-grandson" says: If you respect the truth you have heard, you will be wise; if you practice the knowledge you have mastered, you will be brilliant.

古文：高明光大，不在于它，在乎加之意而已。 
现代文：高明光大，不在于别的，就在于认真注意罢了。 
English: The brilliance lies not in anything else, but in paying attention to these.

古文：愿陛下因用所闻，设诚于内而致行之，则三王何异哉！
现代文：希望陛下能依据所听到的道理，真诚地信奉它并把它推行开来，那么，您与圣明的三王就没有什么不同了！
English: I hope that His Majesty will adopt the principles he has heard and sincerely follow those principles. Then, what is the difference with the three kings?

古文：夫不素养士而欲求贤，譬犹不琢玉而求文采也。
现代文： 平常不招徕和尊重士人，而想求得贤能之臣，就好像不雕琢玉石而想得到花纹美丽的玉器一样。
English: If you do not cultivate talent but want to seek sages, it is like not carving jade but requiring jade to be literary.

古文：故养士之大者，莫大虖太学；太学者，贤士之所关也，教化之本原也。
现代文：所以，招徕和尊重士人的方法，莫过于兴建太学；太学，是贤士的来源，是推行教化的根本。
English: Therefore, there is no better way to attract and respect scholars than to build a great school; a great school is the source of sages and the foundation for the implementation of enlightenment.

古文：今以一郡、一国之众对，亡应书者，是王道往往而绝也。
现代文：现在，让一郡、一国的所有民众都来回答，而没有一个符合诏书要求的人才，这说明上古圣王之道常常灭绝了。
English: Now, let all the people of a county or a country answer, but there is no one who meets the requirements of the edict, which shows that the way of the ancient holy king is often extinct.

古文：臣愿陛下兴太学，置明师，以养天下之士，数考问以尽其材，则英俊宜可得矣。
现代文：臣希望陛下兴建太学，设置学识渊博的老师，用来培养天下的士人，经常考试以便学生能全面表现自己的才能，就可以得到出类拔萃的人杰了。
English: The minister hoped that His Majesty would set up a university. If he hired skilled teachers to educate and train the world's scholars, and regularly examined them so that they could give full play to their talents, then handsome talents could be obtained.

古文：今之郡守、县令，民之师帅，所使承流而宣化也；故师帅不贤，则主德不宣，恩泽不流。
现代文：现在的郡守和县令，是百姓的表率，其职责就在于上承仁德而向下传播教化；所以，如果这些表率人物无德无才，就会君主仁德不能传播，恩泽不能流布。
English: The current county governors and county magistrates are the people's teachers and role models. They are appointed to inherit the monarch's grace and spread enlightenment. If the teacher is not virtuous, the monarch's benevolence will not be promoted, and the grace will not be spread below.

古文：今吏既亡教训于下，或不承用王上之法，暴虐百姓，与奸为市，贫穷孤弱，冤苦失职，甚不称陛下之意；是以阴阳错缪，氛气充塞，群生寡遂，黎民未济，皆长吏不明使至于此也！夫长吏多出于郎中、中郎、吏二千石子弟，选郎吏又以富訾，未必贤也。
现代文：现在的官吏都不能教化民众，有的还不遵守朝廷的法度，残酷地虐待百姓，与坏人勾结，贪求财利，百姓贫困孤弱，冤屈痛苦，无法维持生计，十分不合陛下的心这都是官吏不称职造成的后果！ 官吏大部分出自郎中，中郎、二千石官员的子弟，选任郎官又以家庭富于资财为条件，所选的人未必是贤能的人。
English: Today's officials are incapable of educating the people. Some of them do not abide by the laws of the imperial court, cruelly mistreat the people, collude with bad people, and are greedy for money and profit. The people are poor and weak, suffer grievances, and are unable to make a living. This is all the result of the incompetence of the officials! Most of the officials are the sons and sons of officials of 2,000 koku. The officials are chosen on the condition that their families are rich in resources. The people chosen are not necessarily capable people.

古文：且古所谓功者，以任官称职为差，非谓积日累久也；故小材虽累日，不离于小官，贤材虽未久，不害为辅佐，是以有司竭力尽知，务治其业而以赴功。
现代文：而且，古代所说的 功 ，是按照任官政绩的好坏来区分大小，并不是指任职的累积时间；所以，本事小的人，即使是任职时间很长，也仍做小官，贤能的栋梁之才，即使是任职时间很短，也不妨做辅政大臣，所以，官吏们都尽心竭力，一心做好本职工作而建功立业。
English: Moreover, in ancient times, the term "gong" was used to distinguish the size of officials according to the quality of their performance in office, and did not refer to the accumulated time in office. Therefore, people with little ability, even if they have been in office for a long time, are still minor officials, and people with great ability, even if they have been in office for a short time, may as well be assistant ministers of state. Therefore, officials are doing their best to do their job well and build a career.

古文：今则不然，累日以取贵，积久以致官，是以廉耻贸乱，贤不肖浑殽，未得其真。
现代文：现在就不是这样了。累积时日就可以猎取富贵，任期长久就可以升官晋职，因此，廉洁与耻辱相互转化搀杂，贤能和不肖混淆，不能判明真伪。
English: This is not the case now. Accumulated time can be used to hunt for wealth, and a long term of office can be used for promotion and promotion. Therefore, integrity and shame are mixed with each other, and virtue and dishonor are confused, and it is impossible to find out the truth.

古文：臣愚以为使诸列侯、郡守、二千石各择其吏民之贤者，岁贡各二人以给宿卫，且以观大臣之能；所贡贤者有赏，所贡不肖者有罚。
现代文：我认为应让列侯、郡守、二千石官秩的官员，各自从所管理的官吏、百姓中选择贤能的人，每年向朝廷选送二人，到宫中服务，而且可以用这种方法来观察大臣的才能高低；选送的人有贤德，就给以赏赐，选送的人不好，就给以惩罚。
English: The courtiers foolishly thought that it was up to the various lords, county governors, and 2,000-koku nobles to choose the officials under their jurisdiction and the wise men among the people, recommend two people each year, and use them as guards on duty in the imperial palace. Moreover, they could also use this matter to observe the ability of the minister. If the person recommended was wise, he would be rewarded; if the person recommended was not good, he would be punished.

古文：夫如是，诸吏二千石皆尽心于求贤，天下之士可得而官使也。
现代文：如果这样，所有二千石官员都会全力以赴地寻求贤人，天下的人杰都可以成为国家官员而为皇上效力了。
English: If this is the case, all officials of 2,000 koku will make every effort to seek sages, and the world's outstanding people can become national officials and serve the emperor.

古文：遍得天下之贤人，则三王之盛易为，而尧、舜之名可及也。
现代文：把天下的贤人都吸收到朝廷中来，那么，三代圣王的功业不难于造就，而且尧舜的美名也可以企及。
English: If all the sages of the world were absorbed into the imperial court, then it would not be difficult to create the work of three generations of holy kings, and a splendid reputation could also be achieved.

古文：毋以日月为功，实试贤能为上，量材而授官，录德而定位，则廉耻殊路，贤不肖异处矣！
现代文：不要用任职时间长短计算功劳，而以实际考察出来的贤能为上，根据各人才能大小给以不同的官职，核查品行的高低而确定不同的地位，就会使廉洁和耻辱、贤与不肖区别得很清楚了！
English: Don't use the length of time in office to calculate merit, but take the merit that is actually examined, give different official positions according to each person's ability, and check the level of conduct to determine different positions. It will make the difference between integrity and shame, and between virtuous and dishonest, very clear!

古文： 臣闻众少成多，积小致巨，故圣人莫不以暗致明，以微致显；是以尧发于诸侯，舜兴虖深山，非一日而显也，盖有渐以致之矣。
现代文： 我听说积少成多，积小成大，所以古代的圣人，没有一个不是由默默无闻而变成美名远扬，由卑徽而达到显赫；因此，尧起步于诸侯之位，舜兴起于深山之中，并不是一日之内突然显赫起来，应该说是逐渐达到的。
English: I have heard that less is more and small is great. Therefore, there is not a single saint in ancient times who did not rise from obscurity to fame, and from humble beginnings to prominence. Therefore, it is not that he rose to prominence in a single day, but that he rose to prominence gradually.

古文：言出于己，不可塞也；行发于身，不可掩也；言行，治之大者，君子之所以动天地也。
现代文：言语是由自己说出来的，不能阻塞；行为是由自身做出来的，无法掩饰；言语和行为，是治理天下的重要内容，君子正凭借着它而感动天地。
English: Words are spoken by oneself and cannot be blocked; deeds are done by oneself and cannot be concealed; words and deeds are important contents of governing the world, and a gentleman is moving the world by virtue of it.

古文：故尽小者大，慎微者著；积善在身，犹长日加益而人不知也；积恶在身，犹火销膏而人不见也；此唐、虞之所以得令名而桀、纣之可为悼惧者也。
现代文：所以，能做好一切小事的人，才能成就大业，能注意一切细徽的人，才能功德彰明。本身积累善德，就像人的身体长高时那样，每天都在增长自己却不知道；本身积累恶行，就像灯火消耗灯油一样，自己也没有察觉；这正是唐尧虞舜成就美名和夏桀商纣令人悲悼戎惧的原因。
English: Therefore, only those who can do all the little things well can achieve a great career, and only those who can pay attention to all the details can demonstrate their merits. They accumulate virtues, just as the human body grows taller, and they grow every day without knowing it; they accumulate evil deeds, just as a lamp consumes lamp oil, without noticing it; this is exactly the reason why the Tang Dynasty's Yuyao Dynasty achieved fame and the Xia Dynasty's Shang Dynasty was mourned and feared.

古文：夫乐而不乱，复而不厌者，谓之道。
现代文： 快乐而不淫乱，反复行善而不厌倦，这就是 道 。
English: To be happy and not immoral, to repeatedly do good and not get tired of it, this is the Way.

古文：道者，万世亡敝；敝者，道之失也。
现代文：遵循道行事，万世无弊害；只要有弊害产生，一定是因为没有按照道行事。
English: There is no harm in following the Way for all eternity; whenever there is harm, it must be because of not following the Way.

古文：先王之道，必有偏而不起之处，故政有眊而不行，举其偏者以补其敝而已矣。
现代文：一定是因为执行先王之道有所偏废，所以政治昏乱政令不行，补救的方法，就是运用王道中被偏废的部分去补救积弊罢崐了。
English: It must be because the implementation of the former king's way was biased, so political chaos and decrees were not possible. The remedy is to use the part of the king's way that was biased to remedy the accumulated defects.

古文：三王之道，所祖不同，非其相反，将以救溢扶衰，所遭之变然也。故孔子曰： 无为而治者其舜乎！ 
现代文：三代圣王的治国之道，侧重点各有不同，并不是它们相互矛盾，它们都是为了医治社会积弊，只是由于各自面对的社会情况不同，才形成了治国之道的不同。所以孔子说： 要说无为而治的人，应该是舜吧！ 
English: The way of governing the country of the three generations of holy kings has different emphases. It is not that they contradict each other, they are all for the purpose of healing the accumulated ills of society. It is only because of the different social situations that they each face that the way of governing the country is different. Therefore, Confucius said: To say that those who do nothing but govern should be shamed!

古文：改正朔，易服色，以顺天命而已；其馀尽循尧道，何更为哉！
现代文：舜改换历法，改变衣服颜色，只是顺应天意罢了。其余一切都遵循尧的治国之道，哪里改变过什么呢！
English: Changing the calendar, changing the color of clothes, is just following the will of heaven. Everything else follows's way of governing the country. What has changed?

古文：故王者有改制之名，亡变道之实。
现代文：所以，圣明的君主，有改变制度的名义，而没有改变治道的实际内容。
English: Therefore, changing the name of the system does not change the essence of the Tao.

古文：然夏上忠，殷上敬，周上文者，所继之救当用此也。
现代文：然而，夏代推崇忠直，商代推崇恭敬，周代推崇礼仪，形成这种不同的原因，是因为它们要各自拯救前朝的缺失，必须使用各自不同的方法。
English: However, the reason why the Xia Dynasty advocated loyalty, the Shang Dynasty advocated reverence, and the Zhou Dynasty advocated etiquette is that they had to use different methods to save the shortcomings of the previous dynasty.

古文：孔子曰： 殷因于夏礼，所损益可知也；周因于殷礼，所损益可知也；其或继周者，虽百世可知也。 
现代文：孔子说： 商代继承了夏代的制度，所废除的和增加的是可以知道的；周代继承了商代的制度，所废除的和增加的是可以知道的；若有人继承周代，就是过了一百代之后所实行的制度，也可以推测得出来。 
English: King Kong said: If the Yin Dynasty follows the Summer Rite system and increases or decreases it, it can be known as the Summer Rite; if the Tang Dynasty follows the Chisel Rite system and increases or decreases it, it can be known as the Yin Rite; if someone inherits the Zhou Rite system later, it can be known in a hundred years.

古文：此言百王之用，以此三者矣。
现代文：这是说百代君主所用的治国之道，也就是使用夏商周这三种了。
English: That is to say, the three things that the hundred kings use are loyalty, respect, and discipline.

古文：夏因于虞，而独不言所损益者，其道一而所上同也。
现代文：夏代是继承了有虞氏的制度，而孔子唯独没有说到两者之间的增减，是因为两者的治国之道一致，而且所推崇的原则相同。
English: The Xia dynasty inherited the system of the Yu dynasty, but Confucius did not mention the increase or decrease between the two, because the two had the same way of governing the country and the same principles.

古文：道之大原出于天，天不变，道亦不变，是以禹继舜，舜继尧，三圣相受而守一道，亡救敝之政也，故不言其所损益也。
现代文：道之所以精深博大，是因为它来源于天，只要天不变，道也就不会变；所以，夏禹继承虞舜，虞舜继承唐尧，三位圣王相互授受禅让天下，而遵循相同的治道，是因为其间不需要补救积弊，所以孔子不说他们之间的增减。
English: The reason why the Tao is so profound and profound is because it comes from Heaven, and as long as Heaven does not change, the Tao will not change; therefore, Xia Yu inherits Gu Xun, Gu Xun inherits Tang Xun, and the three holy kings mutually teach and receive Zen to the world, and follow the same way of governing, because there is no need to remedy the accumulated defects, so Confucius does not say the increase or decrease between them.

古文：繇是观之，继治世者其道同，继乱世者其道变。
现代文：由此看来，继承一个大治的朝代，继起者实行与原来相同的治国之道；继承一个政治昏乱的朝代，继起者一定要改变治国之道。
English: From this perspective, inheriting the reign of the world, their path is the same; inheriting the chaotic world, their path is to be changed.

古文： 今汉继大乱之后，若宜少损周之文，致用夏之忠者。
现代文： 现在汉朝是在大乱之后而建国的，似乎应该略为改变周代制度的过分强调礼仪，而提倡夏代的忠直之道。
English: Now that the Han Dynasty was founded after the Great Turmoil, it seems that the excessive emphasis on etiquette of the Zhou Dynasty should be slightly changed, and the loyalty of the Xia Dynasty should be promoted.

古文：夫古之天下，亦今之天下，共是天下，以古准今，壹何不相逮之远也！
现代文：古代的天下，也就是现在的天下，同是这一个天下，为什么古代与现在相比，却会有那么大的差距！
English: The ancient world, that is, the present world, is the same world. Why is there such a big gap between the ancient world and the present world?

古文：安所缪盭而陵夷若是？
现代文：为什么败坏到如此程度？
English: How did it get so bad?

古文：意者有所失于古之道与，有所诡于天之理与？夫天亦有所分予：予之齿者去其角，傅其翼者两其足，是所受大者不得取小也。
现代文：估计或许是因为没有遵循古代的治国之道吧，或许是因为违背了天理吧？ 天对万物也有一定的分配赐予：赐给利齿的动物不让它再长犄角，赐给双翅的鸟类只让它有两只脚，这是让已受大利的，不能再取得小利。
English: Perhaps it is because they did not follow the ancient way of governing the country, perhaps it is because they violated the principles of heaven? Heaven also has a certain distribution given to all things: the animals given sharp teeth are not allowed to grow horns, the birds given wings are only allowed to have two feet. This is something that has been given to us, and we can no longer get small profits.

古文：古之所予禄者，不食于力，不动于末，是亦受大者不得取小，与天同意者也。
现代文：古代那些接受俸禄的官员，不许靠气力谋食，不得经营工商末业，这也是既得大利就不能再取小利，与天的旨音是相同的。
English: In ancient times, those who received a salary did not rely on physical labor to eat, nor did they seek business profits. This is also the same as God's will.

古文：夫已受大，又取小，天不能足，而况人虖！
现代文：那些已得大利又要夺取小利的人，连天都不能满足其贪欲，更何况人呢！
English: Those who have gained a lot and want to take a small profit, even heaven cannot satisfy their greed, let alone people!

古文：此民之所以嚣嚣苦不足也。
现代文：这正是百姓纷纷怨叹困苦不足的原因。
English: This is the reason why the people are suffering from lack of food and clothing.

古文：身宠而载高位，家温而食厚禄，因乘富贵之资力以与民争利于下，民安能如之哉！
现代文：那些达官显贵，身受朝廷荣宠而居高位，家庭富裕又享受丰厚俸禄，于是凭借着既富又贵的资本和权势，在下面与平民百姓去争利，百姓比得上他们啊！
English: Those high-ranking officials and dignitaries, favored by the imperial court and holding high positions, their families are rich and enjoy plentiful salaries, so by virtue of both rich and expensive capital and power, they compete with the common people below. The common people are comparable to them!

古文：民日削月朘，浸以大穷。
现代文：百姓逐日逐月地被削弱，最后陷入穷困。
English: Day by day, month by month, the people are being weakened and eventually driven into destitution.

古文：富者奢侈羡溢，贫者穷急愁苦；民不乐生，安能避罪！
现代文：富袷的人奢侈成风挥金若土，穷困的人走投无路苦不聊生；百姓没有感觉到活着有什么乐趣，怎么能避免犯罪呢！
English: Wealthy people indulge in extravagant lifestyles and spend money like water, poor people have no choice but to live frugally; people do not feel any pleasure in living, so how can they avoid committing crimes!

古文：此刑罚之所以蕃而奸邪不可胜者也。
现代文：这正是刑罚繁多却不能制止犯罪的原因。
English: This is the reason why there are many punishments, but adultery cannot be prohibited.

古文：天子大夫者，下民之所视效，远方之所四面而内望也。近者视而放之，远者望而效之，岂可以居贤人之位而为庶人行哉！
现代文：天子的官员，是平民百姓观察仿效的对象，是远方各民族从四面八方向中央观察仿效的对象；远近的人都观察和仿效他们，怎么可以身居贤人的高位却去做平民百姓所做的事呢！
English: The officials of the Son of Heaven are the object of observation and imitation by the common people, and the object of observation and imitation by distant peoples from all directions to the center; people from far and near observe and imitate them, how can they be in the high position of sages but do what the common people do!

古文：夫皇皇求财利，常恐乏匮者，庶人之意也；皇皇求仁义，常恐不能化民者，大夫之意也。
现代文：急急忙忙地追求财利，经常害怕穷困，这是平民百姓的心理状态；急急忙忙地追求仁义，经常害怕不能用仁义去感化百姓，这是官员应有的意境。
English: The hurried pursuit of wealth and profit, often afraid of poverty, is the psychological state of the common people; the hurried pursuit of benevolence and righteousness, often afraid of not being able to influence the people with benevolence and righteousness, is the artistic mood that officials should have.

古文：《易》曰： 负且乘，致寇至。 
现代文：《易经》说： 既背负着东西又乘车，招来了强盗抢劫。 
English: "I Ching" says, "If you are negative and take advantage of others, you will attract thieves."

古文：乘车者，君子之位也；负担者，小人之事也。此言居君子之位而为庶人之行者，患祸必至也。
现代文：乘坐车辆，这是君子的位置；身背肩担，这是小人的事；《易经》的这句话，是说居于君子尊位而去做平民百姓的事，这样的人，一定会招来祸患。
English: To ride in a carriage is the position of a gentleman; to carry a burden on one's back and shoulders is the work of a ruffian; this sentence from the I Ching says that if a person lives in the position of a gentleman and does the work of a commoner, such a person is sure to invite disaster.

古文：若居君子之位，当君子之行，则舍公仪休之相鲁，无可为者矣。 《春秋》大一统者，天地之常经，古今之通谊也。
现代文：辅政的方法之外，就没有别的方法了。《春秋》推崇的天下一统，这是天地之间的永久原则，是古往今来的一致道义。
English: There is no other way except the method of supporting the government. "Spring and Autumn" advocates the unification of heaven and earth, which is a permanent principle between heaven and earth, and is a consistent morality from ancient times to the present.

古文：今师异道，人异论，百家殊方，指意不同，是以上无以持一统，法制数变，下不知所守。
现代文：现在，每个经师传授的道不同，每个人的论点各异，百家学说旨趣不同，因此，君主没有办法实现统一，法令制度多次变化，臣下不知应该遵守什么。
English: Nowadays, every scribe teaches a different way, everyone's arguments are different, and hundreds of doctrines have different purposes. Therefore, the monarch has no way to achieve unification, the legal system has changed many times, and the subjects do not know what should be observed.

古文：臣愚以为诸不在六艺之科、孔子之术者，皆绝其道，勿使并进，邪辟之说灭息，然后统纪可一而法度可明，民知所从矣！ 
现代文：我认为，方向不同，所有不属于儒家 六艺 范围之内，不符合孔子学说的学派，都禁绝其理论，不许它们与儒学并进，使邪恶不正的学说归于灭绝，这样做了就能政令统一，法度明确，臣民就知道该遵循什么了！ 
English: In my opinion, all schools that do not belong to the scope of Confucianism's six arts and do not conform to Confucius's theory should ban their theories and not allow them to go hand in hand with Confucianism, so that the evil and wrong doctrines can be exterminated. If this is done, the government will be unified and the laws will be clear, and the subjects will know what to follow!

古文：天子善其对，以仲舒为江都相。
现代文：武帝很赞赏董仲舒的对答，任命他做江都国的相。
English: Emperor Wu appreciated Dong Zhongshu's reply and appointed him as the Minister of Jiangdu Province.

古文：会稽庄助亦以贤良对策，天子擢为中大夫。
现代文：会稽人庄助也以贤良的身分参加了考试对答，武帝擢拔他担任中大夫。
English: The auditor of the association, Shosuke, also took part in the examination and answer as a virtuous person, and Emperor Wu promoted him to the position of junior doctor.

古文：丞相卫绾奏： 所举贤良，或治申、韩、苏、张之言乱国政者，请皆罢。 
现代文：丞相卫绾向武帝上奏： 举荐来的贤良，有研究申不害、韩非、苏秦、张仪的学说，扰乱国家政治的，请都予以遣返。 
English: Emperor Wu was informed by the Minister of the Middle Palace Guards: Please repatriate all the recommended scholars who have studied the doctrines of Shen Nihong, Han Fei, Su Qin, and Zhang Yi, and who disrupt national politics.

古文：奏可。
现代文：武帝批准了奏请。
English: The Emperor assents.

古文：董仲舒少治《春秋》，孝景时为博士，进退容止，非礼不行，学者皆师尊之。
现代文：董仲舒从小研究《春秋》。孝景帝时做了博士官，进退举止，不做任何不合乎礼法的事，学者们都用尊师的礼节尊敬他。
English: Dong Zhongshu has been studying "Spring and Autumn" since childhood. He was a doctoral officer at the time of Emperor Xiao Jing. He behaves in a dignified manner and does not do anything that is not in accordance with etiquette. Scholars respect him with the etiquette of a respected teacher.

古文：及为江都相，事易王。
现代文：等到董仲舒做了江都国的相，侍奉江都易王刘非。
English: Until Dong Zhongshu became the minister of Jiangdu, serving Liu Fei, the king of Jiangdu.

古文：易王，帝兄，素骄，好勇。
现代文：易王刘非，是武帝的哥哥，历来骄横，好逞勇力。
English: Yi Wang Liu Fei, the elder brother of Emperor Hanwu, was very arrogant and liked bravery.

古文：仲舒以礼匡正，王敬重焉。
现代文：董仲舒用礼义来辅佐纠正他，易王也很敬重董促舒。
English: Dong Zhongshu used etiquette to help correct him, and Yi Wang also respected Dong Doushu.

古文：春，二月，赦。
现代文：春季，二月，汉武帝颁布赦令。
English: In the spring, in February, Emperor Hanwu issued a pardon.

古文：行三铢钱。
现代文：朝廷发行三铢钱。
English: Issuance of three yuan coins.

古文：夏，六月，丞相卫绾免。丙寅，以魏其侯窦婴为丞相，武安侯田蚡为太尉。
现代文：夏季，六月，丞相卫绾被免职，丙寅，武帝任命魏其侯窦婴做丞相，任命武安侯田做太尉。
English: In the summer, in June, the chancellor Wei Wei was removed from office, and Emperor Wu appointed Wei Qihou Dou Yu as chancellor and Wu An Hou Tian as captain.

古文：上雅向儒术，婴、分俱好儒，推毂代赵绾为御史大夫，兰陵王臧为郎中令。
现代文：武帝一向看重儒求，窦婴、田都喜好儒求，极力推荐代地人赵绾担任御史大夫，推荐兰陵人王臧担任郎中令。
English: Emperor Wu always valued Confucianism. Dou Yu and Tian Du both liked Confucianism. They strongly recommended the local resident Zhao Jun to serve as the imperial historian, and recommended the Lanling resident Wang Jun to serve as the second-in-command.

古文：绾请立明堂以朝诸侯，且荐其师申公。
现代文：赵绾奏请兴建明堂以接受诸侯王的朝见，并且向武帝推荐了他的老师申公。
English: Zhao Bingxiao asked for the construction of the Ming Hall to receive the princes and princes, and recommended his teacher Shen Gong to Emperor Wu.

古文：秋，天子使使束帛加璧、安车驷马以迎申公。
现代文：秋季，武帝派出使者带着表示礼聘的帛和玉璧，驾着安车驷马去迎接申公入朝。
English: In the autumn, Emperor Wu sent an emissary to welcome Emperor Sheng to the imperial court in a horse-drawn carriage, carrying a scepter and a jade brooch, which signified a ceremonial appointment.

古文：既至，见天子。
现代文：申公到了京城，拜见武帝。
English: Shen Gong arrived in Beijing to visit Emperor Wu.

古文：天子问治乱之事，申公年八十馀。对曰： 为治者不至多言，顾力行何如耳。 
现代文：武帝询问关于国家治乱的事，申公已是八十多岁的高龄，回答说： 治理天下的人，不以说得多为完善，只看努力实干得怎样罢了。 
English: Emperor Wu inquired about the country's handling of the turmoil. Shen Gong, who is more than 80 years old, replied: People who govern the world are not perfected by how much they say, but only by how hard they work.

古文：是时，天子方好文词，见申公对，默然，然已招致，则以为太中大夫，舍鲁邸，议明堂、巡狩、改历、服色事。
现代文：这时，武帝正喜爱文辞，看到申公的对答，沉默不语；武帝虽然对申公的对答不满意，但既然已把他招来了，就任命他做了太中大夫，安顿他住大鲁王在京城的官邸中，商议有关兴建明堂、天子视察各地、改换历法和服色等事情。
English: At this time, Emperor Wu was fond of literature, and when he saw Shengong's reply, he was silent. Although Emperor Wu was not satisfied with Shengong's reply, since he had invited him, he appointed him to be the Grand Physician, and settled him in King Dalu's official residence in Beijing to discuss matters such as the construction of Myeongdong, the inspection of various regions by the heavenly son, and the change of calendar and clothing.

古文：是岁，内史宁成抵罪髡钳。
现代文：这一年，内史宁成犯罪，被判处髡钳刑。
English: This year, Neishi Ningcheng committed a crime and was sentenced to be beaten.

古文：世宗孝武皇帝上之上建元二年冬，十月，淮南王安来朝。
现代文：建元二年冬季，十月，淮南王刘安来朝见武帝。
English: In the winter of the second year of Jianyuan, in October, Liu An, King of Huainan, came to the imperial court to meet Emperor Wu.

古文：上以安属为诸父而材高，甚尊重之，每宴见谈语，昏暮然后罢。
现代文：武帝因为刘安从辈份说是叔父，而且有很高的才能，很尊重他，每当安闲无事时，召他来交谈，总到黄昏后才停止。
English: Emperor Wu respected Liu An because he was his uncle from generation to generation, and because he was very talented. Whenever there was nothing to do, he would call him in for a chat, which would last until after dusk.

古文：安雅善武安侯田蚡，其入朝，武安侯迎之霸上，与语曰： 上无太子，王亲高皇帝孙，行仁义，天下莫不闻。
现代文：刘安一直与武安侯田友好，他来京朝见时，武安侯到霸上迎接他，告诉他说： 皇上没有太子，大王是高皇帝的亲孙子，广行仁义，天下人没有不知道的。
English: Liu An had always been friendly with Wu'an Houda. When he came to Beijing to meet the emperor, Wu'an Houda went to meet him and told him: The emperor has no prince, the great king is the grandchild of Emperor Gao, and there is nothing in the world that people do not know.

古文：宫车一日晏驾，非王尚谁立者！ 
现代文：假若皇帝突然去世，除了大王之外还有谁能继承帝位呢！ 
English: Once the Emperor is dead, who will be left but you?

古文：安大喜，厚遗分金钱财物。
现代文：刘安闻言大喜，赠送给田丰厚的金钱财物。
English: Liu An was overjoyed and presented Tian with a generous amount of money and property.

古文：太皇窦太后好黄、老言，不悦儒术。
现代文：太皇窦太后喜好黄老学说，不喜欢儒家学说。
English: Emperor Dou and Empress Dowager Dou liked Huanglao's theory and disliked Confucianism.

古文：赵绾请毋奏事东宫。窦太后大怒曰： 此欲复为新垣平邪！ 
现代文：赵绾奏请，国家政务不要再向太后奏报，窦太后勃然大怒说： 他想做第二个新垣平吧！ 
English: Zhao Yu-so asked that the state affairs should not be reported to the empress dowager any longer. The empress dowager was furious and said, "He wants to be the second Niigakidaira!

古文：阴求得赵绾、王臧奸利事，以让上。上因废明堂事，诸所兴为皆废。
现代文：窦太后暗中搜集到赵绾、王臧贪赃的证据，以此责备景帝用人不当；景帝就废止了兴建明堂的事，赵绾等人主张的一切都被废止。
English: Empress Dowager Dou secretly collected evidence of corruption by Zhao Zhen and Wang Zhen, and used it to accuse Emperor Jing of employing people improperly; Emperor Jing then cancelled the construction of the Ming Hall, and everything advocated by Zhao Zhen and others was cancelled.

古文：下绾、臧吏，皆自杀。
现代文：赵绾、王臧被交付官吏处置，他们都自杀了。
English: Zhao Wei and Wang Wei were handed over to officials for disposition, and they both committed suicide.

古文：丞相婴、太尉分免，申公亦以疾免归。
现代文：丞相窦婴、太尉田被免职，申公也以有病为借口，被免职归家。
English: The chancellor, Dou Yu, and the vice-commander, Tai Ye Tian, were removed from their posts, and Shen Gong was also removed from his post and sent home on the pretext that he was ill.

古文：初，景帝以太子太傅石奋及四子皆二千石，乃集其门，号奋为 万石君 。
现代文：当初，汉景帝因为太子太傅石奋及其四个儿子，都有二千石的官秩，就总计他一门父子五人的官秩之和，称石奋为 万石君 。
English: At first, Emperor Han Jing called Shi Fen "Wan Shi Jun" because Prince Taifu Shi Fen and his four sons all had the official rank of 2,000 koku, which was the sum of the official ranks of his five sons and five sons.

古文：万石君无文学，而恭谨无与比。
现代文：万石君没有文才学问，但恭敬谨慎却没有人可以与他相比。
English: Manseikun has no literary talent, but he is respectful and cautious, but no one can compare with him.

古文：子孙为小吏，来归谒，万石君必朝服见之，不名。
现代文：子孙做小官，回来看望他，万石君必定身穿朝服以礼相见，不叫他们的名字。
English: His children and grandchildren are minor officials, and they come home to visit him. Banshikun must also wear a court dress to meet them, and not call them by their first names.

古文：子孙有过失，不责让，为便坐，对案不食；然后诸子相责，因长老肉袒谢罪，改之，乃许。
现代文：子孙有了过错，他不加以责备，而为此离开正室坐到厢屋中，对着桌子不吃饭；然后，儿子们互相批评，有过失的人通过长辈人来求情，并且袒露上身前来请罪，表示一定要改正，石奋才答应他的要求而进餐。
English: He did not reprimand his children and grandchildren when they made a mistake, so he left the main room to sit in the guest room and did not eat at the table. Then, the sons criticized each other, and the one who made the mistake asked for forgiveness through the elders, and came forward to plead guilty, saying that he must make amends. Only then did Shi Fen agree to his request and eat.

古文：子孙胜冠者在侧，虽燕居必冠。
现代文：已经成年的子孙在身边，石奋即使闲居无事，也必定衣冠整齐。
English: With his grown-up children and grandchildren around him, even if Shi Fen is idle and has nothing to do, he is sure to be neatly dressed.

古文：其执丧，哀戚甚悼。
现代文：他主持丧事，表情极为悲痛。
English: When he conducted the funeral, he was very sad and sorrowful.

古文：子孙遵教，皆以孝谨闻乎郡国。
现代文：子孙遵循他的教导，都以孝顺谨慎闻名于各地。
English: His children and grandchildren follow his teachings and are known for their filial piety and prudence.

古文：及赵绾、王臧以文学获罪，窦太后以为儒者文多质少，今万石君家不言而躬行，乃以其长子建为郎中令，少子庆为内史。
现代文：等到赵绾、王臧因有文采学问却犯了罪，窦太后就认为儒生富于文采却欠缺质朴，现在万石君一家人不多说话却能身体力行，就任命他的大儿子石建担任郎中令，任命他的小儿子石庆担任内史。
English: When Zhao Jian and Wang Jian committed a crime because they were literate and learned, Empress Dowager Dou thought that Confucianism was rich in literature but lacked simplicity. Now, Wan Shikun's family does not talk much but can do their best. He appointed his eldest son Shi Jian as the middle son, and appointed his youngest son Shi Qing as the internal history.

古文：建在上侧，事有可言，屏人恣言极切，至廷见，如不能言者；上以是亲之。
现代文：石建在武帝身边任职，发现了应该进谏的事，让人回避之后，他对武帝畅所欲言，十分尖锐。到了朝廷上与百官朝见武帝时，石建却像一个不善言谈的人。武帝因此很亲近他。
English: Shi Jian served at Emperor Wu's side, discovered something that should be investigated, and after being evaded, he spoke freely to Emperor Wu, very sharply. When he met Emperor Wu at the court with hundreds of officials, Shi Jian was like a person who was not good at talking. Emperor Wu was therefore very close to him.

古文：庆尝为太仆，御出，上问车中几马，庆以策数马毕，举手曰： 六马。 
现代文：石庆曾担任太仆，为武帝驾车外出，武帝问有几匹马拉车，石庆举起马鞭一一点数马匹后，举起手来回答： 有六匹马。 
English: Shi Qing once served as a eunuch, driving out for Emperor Wu. Emperor Wu asked how many horse-drawn carriages there were. Shi Qing raised his whip to count the horses, and then raised his hand to answer: There are six horses.

古文：庆于诸子中最为简易矣。
现代文：石庆在石奋的儿子中是最为随便的，做事还如此恭敬谨慎。
English: Among the sons of Shi Fen, Shi Qing is the most casual, and he is so respectful and cautious in doing things.

古文：窦婴、田蚡既免，以侯家居。
现代文：窦婴、田被罢免之后，以列侯的身份闲住在家中。
English: After Dou Ying and Tian were deposed, they lived idly at home as feudal lords.

古文：蚡虽不任职，以王太后故亲幸，数言事多效。士吏趋势利者，皆去婴而归蚡，分日益横。
现代文：田虽然不担任官职，但因有与王太后是同母弟的关系，仍得到皇帝的亲近宠幸，多次议论国事大多被采纳；趋炎附势的士人和官吏，都离开了窦婴而归附田，田一天比一天地骄横起来。
English: Although Tian did not hold an official position, he was still favored by the emperor due to his relationship with the empress dowager, who was his younger brother by the same mother. He discussed state affairs many times, and most of them were adopted. The influential officials and officials left Dou Ying and joined Tian, and Tian became more and more arrogant day by day.

古文：春，二月，丙戌朔，日有食之。
现代文：春季，二月，丙戌朔，出现日食。
English: Spring, February, spring equinox, solar eclipse.

古文：三月，乙未，以太常柏至侯许昌为丞相。
现代文：三月，乙未，武帝任命太常柏至侯许昌担任丞相。
English: In March of the same year, Emperor Wu appointed Taizhangbai and Hou Xuchang as chancellors.

古文：初，堂邑侯陈午尚帝姑馆陶公主嫖，帝之为太子，公主有力焉，以其女为太子妃，及即位，妃为皇后。
现代文：当初，武帝的姑姑馆陶公主刘嫖下嫁给堂邑侯陈午，武帝能得以立为太子，馆陶公主是发挥了很大作用的；公主把她的女儿嫁给太子做正妃，等到武帝即位称帝，妃就做了皇后。
English: At the beginning, Emperor Wu's aunt, Princess Liu of Guantao, married Prince Chen of Tongyi, and Emperor Wu was able to become crown prince. Princess Guantao played a great role; the princess married her daughter to the prince to become the princess, and when Emperor Wu ascended the throne, the princess became the empress.

古文：窦太主恃功，求请无厌，上患之。
现代文：窦太主即馆陶公主刘嫖，自恃授立武帝有功，无休无止地请求赏赐、干预国政，武帝对她很不满。
English: The Dowager Empress Dowager Dowager Dowager Dowager Dowager Dowager Dowager Dowager Dowager Dowager Dowager Dowager Dowager Dowager Dowager Dowager Dowager Dowager Dowager Dowager Dowager Dowager Dowager Dowager Dowager Dowager Dowager

古文：皇后骄妒，擅宠而无子，与医钱凡九千万，欲以求子，然卒无之。后宠浸衰。
现代文：陈皇后骄横嫉，独占君宠，却没有生育孩子，给医生的费用合计九千万，想求得生下儿子，但是终究没有生育；对陈皇后的宠爱渐渐衰退。
English: Empress Chen was arrogant and jealous. She monopolized the royal favor, but did not give birth to a child. She spent a total of 90 million yuan on doctors. She wanted to give birth to a son, but in the end she did not give birth. Her favor for Empress Chen gradually faded.

古文：皇太后谓上曰： 汝新即位，大臣未服，先为明堂，太皇太后已怒。今又忤长主，必重得罪。
现代文：皇太后对武帝说： 你刚刚做上皇帝，大臣还没有归附你，就先兴建明堂，太皇太后已经很恼怒了；现在又得罪窦太主，必定会受到重责。
English: The empress dowager said to Emperor Wu: You have just become emperor, and the ministers have not yet joined you, so you built the Ming Hall first. The great empress dowager was already very angry; now you have offended Dou Taishu, you will certainly be severely punished.

古文：妇人性易悦耳，宜深慎之！ 
现代文：妇人的性情是容易高兴的，你应该慎之又慎！ 
English: A woman's disposition is easily pleased, you should be cautious!

古文：上乃于长主、皇后复稍加恩礼。
现代文：武帝于是就对窦太主、陈皇后母女俩又稍稍以恩礼相待。
English: Emperor Wu then treated Emperor Dou and Empress Chen, mother and daughter, with a little courtesy.

古文：上祓霸上，还，过上姊平阳公主，悦讴者卫子夫。
现代文：武帝到霸上举行祓除仪式，返宫途中，去看望他的姐姐平阳公主，看中了平阳公主府中的歌女卫子夫。
English: Emperor Wu went to Bagan to hold an exorcism ceremony. On his way back to the palace, he went to visit his sister, Princess Pingyang, and fell in love with the court singer, the guardian of Princess Pingyang's palace.

古文：子夫母卫媪，平阳公主家僮也。主因奉送子夫入宫，恩宠日隆。
现代文：卫子夫的母亲卫媪，是平阳公主家的奴婢；平阳公主就把卫子夫送入宫中，卫子夫日益受到武帝的宠幸。
English: Wei Zifu, the mother of Wei Zifu, was a slave of the Pingyang princess family; Princess Pingyang sent Wei Zifu to the palace, and he was increasingly favored by Emperor Wu.

古文：陈皇后闻之，恚，几死者数矣。上愈怒。
现代文：陈皇后得知，极为恼怒，好几次几乎给气死；武帝对陈皇后更为恼怒。
English: When Empress Chen learned of this, she was extremely angry and on several occasions almost lost her temper; Emperor Wu was even more angry with Empress Chen.

古文：子夫同母弟卫青，其父郑季，本平阳县吏，给事侯家，与卫媪私通而生青，冒姓卫氏。
现代文：卫子夫的同母异父弟卫青的父亲郑季，本来是平阳县的县吏，去平阳侯家中供职当差，和卫媪私通而生了卫青，让他昌充姓卫。
English: Zheng Ji, the father of Wei Qing, the half-brother of Wei Zifu, was originally a county official in Pingyang County. He went to Pingyang Hou's home to work as a clerk. He had an affair with Wei Wei and gave birth to Wei Qing. He gave him the surname Wei.

古文：青长，为侯家骑奴。
现代文：卫青长大了，在平阳侯家中当骑奴。
English: When Wei Qing grew up, he worked as a cavalry slave in the Pingyang family.

古文：大长公主执囚青，欲杀之。其友骑郎公孙敖与壮士篡取之。
现代文：大长公主刘嫖抓住卫青囚禁起来，想杀了他；卫青的好友骑郎公孙敖和勇士把他给抢了回来。
English: The eldest princess, Liu Ye, seized Wei Qing and imprisoned him, intending to kill him; Wei Qing's good friend, the horseman, Gongsun Yao, and the warriors snatched him back.

古文：上闻，乃召青为建章监、侍中，赏赐数日间累千金。
现代文：武帝得知此事，就召见卫青并任命他为建章宫的宫监，还给他侍中的官衔，几天之内给卫青高达上千金的赏赐。
English: When Emperor Wu learned of this, he summoned Wei Qing and appointed him as the palace overseer for the construction of the Grand Palace. He also gave him the official title of chamberlain, and within a few days gave Wei Qing a reward of up to thousands of gold.

古文：既而以子夫为夫人，青为太中大夫。
现代文：不久，武帝立卫子夫为夫人，任命卫青为太中大夫。
English: Soon after, Emperor Wu made Wei Zifu his wife and appointed Wei Qing as the Grand Physician.

古文：夏，四月，有星如日，夜出。
现代文：夏季，四月，夜间出现了一颗光亮如同太阳的异星。
English: In the summer, in April, a strange star as bright as the sun appeared in the night.

古文：初置茂陵邑。
现代文：开始设立茂陵邑。
English: The establishment of Morye-eup began.

古文：时大臣议者多冤晁错之策，务摧抑诸侯王，数奏暴其过恶，吹毛求疵，笞服其臣，使证其君。诸侯王莫不悲怨。
现代文：当时，朝廷大臣的议论中多对晁错提出削藩之策被杀而表示冤枉，一心摧残和抑制诸侯王，经常弹劾揭露诸侯王的过失和罪恶，甚至达到吹毛求疵的程度，用笞刑罚威逼诸侯王的臣子屈服，迫使他们证明诸侯王有过失和罪恶；诸侯王没有一个不为此而悲愁怨恨。
English: At that time, in the discussions of the ministers of the imperial court, most of them expressed their grievances against those who mistakenly proposed the policy of reducing the domain and were killed, and they were bent on destroying and restraining the princes. They often impeached and exposed the faults and sins of the princes, and even reached the level of nitpicking. They used harsh punishment to force the princes' subjects to submit and force them to prove the princes' faults and sins. There was not a prince who did not feel sad and resentful for this.

古文：世宗孝武皇帝上之上建元三年
现代文：建元三年
English: Founded in the third year of the Yuan Dynasty

古文：冬，十月，代王登、长沙王发、中山王胜、济川王明来朝。
现代文：冬季，十月，代王刘登、长沙王刘发、中山王刘胜、济川王刘明来京朝见武帝。
English: In winter, in October, the acting kings Liu Deng, Changsha King Liu Fa, Zhongshan King Liu Sheng, and Jichuan King Liu Ming came to Beijing to see Emperor Wu.

古文：上置酒，胜闻乐声而泣。
现代文：武帝设酒宴款待，刘胜在席间听到音乐声就哭了起来。
English: Emperor Wu held a banquet, and Liu Sheng burst into tears when he heard the music.

古文：上问其故，对曰： 悲者不可为累欷，思者不可为叹息。
现代文：武帝问他为什么哭，刘胜回答： 悲伤的人听不得抽噎的声音，忧愁的人听不得叹息的声音。
English: Emperor Wu asked him why he was crying, and Liu Sheng replied: A sad person cannot hear the sound of convulsions, and a sad person cannot hear the sound of sighs.

古文：今臣心结日久，每闻幼眇之声，不知涕泣之横集也。
现代文：现在我心中积压了许多忧伤，每当听到幽妙精微的音乐，不知不觉地就会涕泪横流。
English: Now, the knot in my heart has been closed for a long time, and every time I hear the subtle twists and turns of the voice, I involuntarily weep and exchange.

古文：臣得蒙肺附为东籓，属又称兄。
现代文：我有幸得到朝廷重用，受封为东方的藩臣，从亲属关系说来，又是皇上的哥哥。
English: I am fortunate to have been used by the imperial court, to have been appointed as a vassal of the eastern domain, and to be the emperor's elder brother in terms of kinship.

古文：今群臣非有葭莩之亲、鸿毛之重，群居党议，朋友相为，使夫宗室摈却，骨肉冰释，臣窃伤之！ 
现代文：现在朝廷群臣与皇上之间没有血缘亲情，没有承担国家的任何重任，却结成朋友党发出偏私的议论，相互勾结，使宗室皇族受到打击和排斥，骨肉亲情冰雪般融化，我私下为此而悲伤！ 
English: Now there is no blood kinship between the imperial court and the emperor, and they do not undertake any important tasks for the country, but they have formed a party of friends to issue biased opinions and collude with each other, so that the royal family has been attacked and ostracized, and the flesh-and-blood kinship has melted like ice and snow. I am privately sad about this!

古文：具以吏所侵闻。
现代文：他就把官吏侵夺欺凌诸侯王的事，一一向武帝奏报。
English: This is talking about a vassal.

古文：于是上乃厚诸侯之礼，省有司所奏诸侯事，加亲亲之恩焉。
现代文：于是，武帝就增加诸侯的礼遇，废止了有关官吏检举诸侯王不法行为的文书，对诸侯王施行优侍亲属的恩惠。
English: He reported all the offenses committed by officials to the emperor, and the emperor rewarded the lords with a generous gift, reducing the number of cases that had to be reported to the lords, and increasing the favors given to close relatives.

古文：河水溢于平原。
现代文：黄河在平原郡泛滥成灾。
English: The Yellow River floods heavily in Pingyuan County.

古文：大饥，人相食。
现代文：发生了大饥荒，出现了人吃人的现象。
English: There was a great famine, and there was cannibalism.

古文：秋，七月，有星孛于西北。
现代文：秋季，七月，西北天空中出现了一颗异星。
English: In the autumn, in July, a strange star appeared in the northwest sky.

古文：济川王明坐杀中傅，废迁房陵。
现代文：济川王刘明因杀死中傅而犯罪，被废去王位，流放到房陵县。
English: Liu Ming, the king of Jichuan, was dethroned and exiled to Fangling County for the crime of killing Zhongfu.

古文：七国之败也，吴王子驹亡走闽越，怨东瓯杀其父，常劝闽越击东瓯。
现代文：七国叛乱失败时，吴王的儿子刘驹逃亡到闽越，怨恨东瓯诱杀了他的父亲，经常怂恿闽越进攻东瓯。
English: When the rebellion of the Seven Kingdoms failed, Liu Bei, the son of King Wu, fled to Yunnan and Yunnan. He resented Dongguan for luring his father and often attacked Yunnan and Yunnan.

古文：闽粤从之，发兵围东瓯，东瓯使人告急天子。
现代文：闽越王听从了刘驹的意见，发兵包围了东瓯都城，东瓯王派人向天子告急求援。
English: Heeding Liu Bei's advice, the King of Yueyue sent troops to encircle the capital city of Dongguan, and the King of Dongguan sent people to appeal to Heaven for help.

古文：天子问田分，分对曰： 越人相攻击，固其常；又数反覆，自秦时弃不属，不足以烦中国往救也。 
现代文：武帝征询田的意见，田回答说： 越人相互攻击，本来就是常有的事；又多次叛服不定，从秦朝时就被放弃，不属于中国，不值得烦劳中原朝廷去援救他们。 
English: Emperor Wu asked for Tian's opinion, and Tian replied: It is a common occurrence for the Yue people to attack each other; they have repeatedly disobeyed and vacillated, and have been abandoned since the Qin Dynasty. They do not belong to China, and it is not worth the trouble of the Central Plains Imperial Court to rescue them.

古文：庄助曰： 特患力不能救，德不能覆。诚能，何故弃之！
现代文：庄助说： 现在只怕力量小不能前去援救，朝廷德薄不能保护他们；假如能做到这些，为什么要抛弃他们呢！
English: Zhuang Zhou said, "Nowadays, it is only a small force that can't go to the rescue, and the Imperial Court is too weak to protect them. If you can do these things, why abandon them?"

古文：且秦举咸阳而弃之，何但越也！
现代文：况且，秦朝连整个都城咸阳都抛弃，何止是抛弃了越人呢！
English: Moreover, the Qin Dynasty even abandoned the entire capital city of Xianyang, let alone the Yue people!

古文：今小国以穷困来告急，天子不救，尚安所愬，又何以子万国乎！ 
现代文：现在东瓯这样的小国因走投无路来向朝廷告急，如果陛下不去救援，他们还能去何处求援告急呢；陛下又怎样能使天下万国臣服呢！ 
English: Now, a small country like Donglu is in a desperate situation, and has come to the imperial court for help. If Your Majesty does not come to their rescue, where else can they go for help? How can Your Majesty make all the nations of the world submit?

古文：上曰： 太尉不足与计。
现代文：武帝说： 太尉的见识，不值得我和他商议国家大事。
English: Emperor Wu said: The captain's insight is not worth me discussing national affairs with him.

古文：吾新即位，不欲出虎符发兵郡国。 
现代文：我刚即位，不想用虎符征发郡国的军队去打仗。 
English: I had just ascended the throne, and I didn't want to use the tiger emblem to conscript the county's army to go to war.

古文：乃遣助以节发兵会稽。
现代文：于是派庄助持皇帝的符节去征发会稽郡的军队。
English: So he sent the Zhuang to support the emperor's rune festival to recruit the army of the Development Association County.

古文：会稽守欲距法不为发，助乃斩一司马，谕意指，遂发兵浮海救东瓯。
现代文：会稽郡的郡守本想依据不见虎符不得发兵的法令，不给庄助征发军队，庄助杀了一位司马官，把武帝的意思告知郡守，于是发兵渡海前来援救东瓯。
English: The county governor of Huijian County originally wanted to refuse to send troops to Zhuangzu on the basis of the decree that no troops could be sent without a tiger emblem. Zhuangzu killed a Sima official and informed the county governor of Emperor Wu's intention, and then sent troops to cross the sea to rescue Donglu.

古文：未至，闽越引兵罢。
现代文：汉军尚未达到，闽越就领兵撤走了。
English: The Han army had not yet arrived, and the Xuan Yue withdrew after leading the troops.

古文：东瓯请举国内徙，乃悉举其众来，处于江、淮之间。
现代文：东瓯请求全国人内迁中原归顺朝廷，得到朝廷批准之后，东瓯王领着所有部众迁来，他们被安置在长江和淮河之间。
English: Donglu requested the whole country to move to the Central Plains to submit to the imperial court. After receiving the approval of the imperial court, the king of Donglu led all the people to move. They were placed between the Yangtze River and the Huai River.

古文：九月，丙子晦，日有食之。
现代文：九月，丙子晦，出现日食。
English: In September, on the eve of the lunar new year, a solar eclipse occurs.

古文：上自初即位，招选天下文学材智之士，待以不次之位。
现代文：武帝从刚即位开始，就在招徕选拔博学有才智的人，予以破格重用。
English: From the very beginning of his reign, Emperor Wu has been recruiting and selecting erudite and talented people to be used in an unprecedented way.

古文：四方士多上书言得失，自眩鬻者以千数。上简拔其俊异者宠用之。
现代文：天下士人很多人向朝廷上书议论国家政事的得失，自我标榜和自我推荐的人数以千计，武帝从中选拔杰出的人才给以宠信重用。
English: A lot of commoners wrote to the imperial court to discuss the gains and losses of national politics. The number of self-promotion and self-recommendation was in the thousands. Emperor Wu selected outstanding talents from among them to be favored and reused.

古文：庄助最先进，后又得吴人硃买臣、赵人吾丘寿王、蜀人司马相如、平原东方朔、吴要枚皋、济南终军等，并在左右，每令与大臣辨论，中外相应以义理之文，大臣数屈焉。
现代文：庄助第一个被提拔，以后又招致了吴人朱买臣、赵人吾丘寿王、蜀人司马相如、平原人东方朔、吴人枚皋、济南人终军等，都成了武帝的左右亲信，武帝经常命令他们与朝廷大臣辩论，中朝官与外朝官用义理文辞相互驳难，外朝大臣多次被驳得无法对答。
English: Zhuang Sui was the first to be promoted, and later the Wu people Zhu Bai Sheng, the Zhao people Wuchu Shou Wang, the Shu people Sima Xiangru, the Plains people Dongfang Shuo, the Wu people Hailuo, and the Jinan people Zhenjunjun, all became the right and left cronies of Emperor Wu. Emperor Wu often ordered them to debate with the imperial court ministers, and the Chinese and foreign imperial court officials used Giri words to refute each other. The foreign ministers were repeatedly refuted and unable to answer.

古文：然相如特以辞赋得幸；朔、皋不根持论，好诙谐，上以俳优畜之，虽数赏赐，终不任以事也。
现代文：但是，司马相如只是以擅长辞赋写作而得到武帝宠幸；东方朔、枚皋的论点没有根据，喜欢幽默嘲讽，武帝仅把他们视做演戏的艺人收养，虽然经常赏赐财物，终究不把国事朝政委托他们处理。
English: However, Sima Xiangru was favored by Emperor Wu simply because he was good at writing speeches; the arguments of Dongfang Shuo and Heshiyan were unfounded, and they liked humor and ridicule. Emperor Wu only adopted them as performing artists. Although he often rewarded them with wealth, he ultimately did not entrust them with handling state affairs and government.

古文：朔亦观上颜色，时时直谏，有所补益。
现代文：东方朔同样对武帝察颜观色，经常利用时机直言进谏，对朝政发挥了一定补益作用。
English: Dongfang Shuo also observed Emperor Wu's appearance, often using the opportunity to speak frankly, and played a certain complementary role in court politics.

古文：是岁，上始为微行，北至池阳，西至黄山，南猎长杨，东游宜春，与左右能骑射者期诸殿门。常以夜出，自称平阳侯；旦明，入南山下，射鹿、豕、狐、兔，驰骛禾稼之地，民皆号呼骂詈。
现代文：这一年，武帝开始改换装束暗中离宫外出，向北走到池阳县，向西走到黄山宫，向南到长杨宫打猎，向东去宜春宫游乐。武帝与能骑马射箭的左右亲随相约在殿门前集会，经常在夜时出宫，自称平阳侯；黎明时，到达终南山脚下，射杀鹿、野猪、狐狸、野兔等动物，策马践踏农田庄稼，百姓都大声怒骂。
English: In this year, Emperor Wu began to change his attire and secretly leave the palace. He went north to Chiyang County, west to Huangshan Palace, south to Changyang Palace for hunting, and east to Yichun Palace for recreation. Emperor Wu and his right and left relatives, who could ride horses and shoot arrows, met in front of the palace gate. He often went out of the palace at night, calling himself Pingyang Hou. At dawn, he reached the foot of the South Mountain, shot deer, wild boar, fox, hare and other animals, and trampled farmland crops with horses. The people all shouted angrily.

古文：鄂、杜令欲执之，示以乘舆物，乃得免。
现代文：县和杜县的县令想要收捕这批人，这批人拿了天子专用的物品为证，才得以脱身。
English: The prefectural and county magistrates of Du County wanted to arrest this group of people, but they were able to get away with the evidence of the special items used by Tianzi.

古文：又尝夜至伯谷，投逆旅宿，就逆旅主人求浆，主人翁曰： 无浆，正有溺耳！ 
现代文：又有一次，武帝等人曾在夜时到达柏谷，去旅店投宿，向旅店的主人要酒，主人说： 没有酒，只有尿！ 
English: On another occasion, Emperor Wu and others arrived in Kashiwa-dani at night, stayed at an inn, and asked the owner of the inn for wine. The owner said, "There is no wine, only urine!"

古文：且疑上为奸盗，聚少年欲攻之。主人妪睹上状貌而异之，止其翁曰： 客非常人也，且又有备，不可图也。 
现代文：而且，旅店的主人怀疑武帝一行人是强盗，召集了一些青年后生准备收拾他们；店主的妻子见到武帝的体态容貌，觉得不同寻常，就劝阻丈夫说： 来客不是普通人，而且他们已有准备，不能图谋收拾他们。 
English: Moreover, the owner of the inn suspected that Wu Di and his entourage were robbers and gathered some young descendants to prepare to clean them up; the owner's wife saw Wu Di's physique and appearance and thought it was unusual, so she dissuaded her husband saying: The visitors are not ordinary people, and they are already prepared, so they can't try to clean them up.

古文：翁不听，妪饮翁以酒，醉而缚之。
现代文：丈夫不听她的劝告，她就让丈夫喝酒，等他喝醉了之后就把他捆绑起来。
English: When her husband did not listen to her advice, she got him drunk and tied him up.

古文：少年皆散走，妪乃杀鸡为食以谢客。
现代文：召集来的青年后生都走了，店主的妻子就杀鸡做饭招待客人。
English: After the young people who had been summoned had all left, the owner's wife cooked chicken to entertain the guests.

古文：明日，上归，召妪，赐金千斤，拜其夫为羽林郎。
现代文：第二天，武帝返回宫中，召见那位妇人，赏赐千金，任命她的丈夫做羽林郎。
English: The next day, Emperor Wu returned to the palace, summoned the woman, rewarded her with thousands of gold, and appointed her husband to be the eagle.

古文：后乃私置更衣，从宣曲以南十二所，夜投宿长杨、五柞等诸宫。
现代文：后来，武帝就为处出巡游设立了秘密的更衣休息的地方，从宣曲宫向南共设了十二处，夜间投宿在长杨宫、五柞宫等宫殿。
English: Later, Emperor Wu set up secret changing places for the procession to rest. Twelve places were set up from the Xuanqu Palace to the south, and they stayed at night in palaces such as the Changyang Palace and the Wuzhong Palace.

古文：上以道远劳苦，又为百姓所患，乃使太中大夫吾丘寿王举籍阿城以南，盩厔以东，宜春以西，提封顷畮，及其贾直，欲除以为上林苑，属之南山。
现代文：武帝因为道路遥远身体劳苦，又给百姓带来祸患，就派太中大夫吾丘寿王把阿城以南、以东、宜春以西这一区域的土地及其价格，统计登记，准备把它修建成上林苑，连接到终南山。
English: Emperor Wu, because the road was far away, physically strenuous, and brought misfortune to the people, sent the Taizhong Doctor Wuqiu Shouwang to statistically register the land and its price in the area south of Acheng, east of Yichun, and west of Yichun, and prepare to build it into Shanglinyuan and connect it to the South Mountain.

古文：又诏中尉、左右内史表属县草田，欲以偿鄠、杜之民。
现代文：武帝又下诏命令中尉、左右内史，上报所属各县的荒田数量，准备给县和杜县的百姓作为补偿。
English: Emperor Wu also issued an edict ordering the lieutenant and the left and right internal historians to report the number of wasteland in each county to which they belonged, and to prepare to compensate the people of the county and Du County.

古文：寿王奏事，上大说称善。
现代文：吾丘寿王办理完毕回来报告，武帝很高兴连声称赞。
English: Wu Qiu Shou Wang came back with the report after processing, and Emperor Wu was very pleased to praise him.

古文：时东方朔在傍，进谏曰： 夫南山，天下之阻也。
现代文：当时，东方朔正在武帝身边，提出批评意见说： 终南山是国家的天然屏障。
English: At that time, Dongfangshuo was at the side of Emperor Wu and made a critical comment, saying: Nanshan is the natural barrier of the country.

古文：汉兴，去三河之地，止霸、浐以西，都泾、渭之南，此所谓天下陆海之地，秦之所以虏西戎、兼山东者也。
现代文：汉朝建国，离开了三河之地，在霸水、水之西，泾河、渭河之南建立都城，这就是所谓的天下像大海一般富饶的陆上之地，秦王朝凭借着它降服西戎，兼并崤山以东的地区。
English: When the Han Dynasty founded the country, it left the land of the three rivers and established the capital city in the west of the watershed, west of the watershed, and south of the Wei River and the Wei River. This is the so-called land-based land where the world is as rich as the sea. The Qin Dynasty used it to subjugate Xirong and annex the area east of Mount Lushan.

古文：其山出玉石、金、银、铜、铁、良材，百工所取给，万民所卬足也。
现代文：这一带山中出产玉、石、金、银、铜、铁、优质木材，各种手工业用它们做原料，百姓靠它们维持生活。
English: The mountains in this area produce jade, stone, gold, silver, copper, iron, and high-quality timber, which are used as raw materials for various handicrafts, and the people rely on them to sustain their lives.

古文：又有粳、稻、梨、栗、桑、麻、竹箭之饶，土宜姜、芋，水多蛙、鱼，贫者得以人给家足，无饥寒之忧；故酆、镐之间，号为土膏，其贾畮一金。
现代文：又盛产、稻、梨、栗、桑、麻、竹箭等物品，土地适宜于种植和芋头，水中有许多青蛙和鱼类，贫穷的人可以人人温饱家家富足，不必担忧受饥寒之苦；所以酆水与镐水之间，号称肥沃之地，每亩土地价值一斤黄金。
English: It is also rich in rice, pears, chestnuts, mulberry, hemp, bamboo and arrowroot, the land is suitable for planting and taro, there are many frogs and fish in the water, and poor people can have enough food for everyone, and do not have to worry about suffering from cold and hunger. Therefore, between Surabaya and Surabaya, known as a fertile land, each mu of land is worth one pound of gold.

古文：今规以为苑，绝陂池水泽之利而取民膏腴之地，上乏国家之用，下夺农桑之业，是其不可一也。
现代文：现在将这片土地划为上林苑，断绝了池沼湖泽的财利来源，夺取了百姓的肥沃土地，对上减少了国家财政费用的来源，对下破坏了农桑生产，这是不应该这样做的第一个理由。
English: The first reason why this should not be done is that the land is now classified as a Shanglin Court, which cuts off the source of financial profit from the pond and lake, seizes the fertile land of the people, reduces the source of national financial expenses on the one hand, and destroys agricultural mulberry production on the other hand.

古文：盛荆、棘之林，广狐、菟之苑，大虎、狼之虚，坏人冢墓，发人室庐，令幼弱怀土而思，耆老泣涕而悲，是其不可二也。
现代文：荆棘之林得以蔓延，扩大狐狸、野兔、虎、狼的活动范围，破坏百姓的坟墓，拆毁百姓的房屋，使幼童怀恋故土而忧愁，老人痛哭流涕而悲伤，这是不应该这样做的第二个理由。
English: The second reason why this should not be done is that the forest of thorns is allowed to spread, expanding the range of foxes, hares, tigers and wolves, destroying people's graves, demolishing people's houses, making young children nostalgic and sad, and old people crying and sad.

古文：斥而营之，垣而囿之，骑驰东西，车骛南北，有深沟大渠。
现代文：开拓并营建上林苑，周围筑墙以做为禁苑，策马东西奔驰，驱车南北追逐，其中有深沟大河。
English: Develop and build Shanglin Garden, build a wall around it to make it a forbidden garden, ride a horse from east to west, drive from north to south, including a deep ditch.

古文：夫一日之乐，不足以危无堤之舆，是其不可三也。
现代文：为追求一天射猎的乐趣，不值得尊贵无比的天子去涉险犯难，这是不应该这样做的第三个理由。
English: This is the third reason why it is not worthy of the Most Exalted One to go to great lengths in pursuit of the pleasure of a day's shooting.

古文：夫殷作九市之宫而诸侯畔，灵王起章华之台而楚民散，秦兴阿房之殿而天下乱。
现代文：当年商纣王兴建了内有九市的宫殿导致诸侯背叛，楚灵王筑起章华台而导致楚国百姓四散逃走，秦始皇兴造阿房宫而导致天下大乱。
English: King Yinqin built the Nine-City Palace, which caused the princes to rebel; King Chuling built Zhanghuatai, which caused the Chu people to disperse; Emperor Qin Shihuang built Afang Palace, which caused the world to be in turmoil.

古文：粪土愚臣，逆盛意，罪当万死！ 
现代文：我只是卑贱愚笨的臣仆，竟然冒犯陛下的旨意，真是罪该万死！ 
English: I'm just a lowly, stupid retainer, and it's a heinous crime to offend His Majesty's will!

古文：上乃拜朔为太中大夫、给事中，赐黄金百斤。
现代文：武帝就任命东方朔为太中大夫，并授以给事中的官衔，赐给他一百斤黄金以示奖励。
English: Emperor Wu appointed Dongfang Shuo as the Grand Physician, and conferred on him the official title in question, and gave him a hundred pounds of gold as a reward.

古文：然遂起上林苑，如寿王所奏。
现代文：但是，武帝仍然按照吾丘寿王所奏报的规模兴建了上林苑。
English: However, Emperor Wu still built Shanglinyuan according to the scale reported by King Wuqiu.

古文：上又好自击熊、豕，驰逐野兽。
现代文：武帝又喜欢亲自出击杀熊和野猪，策马追捕野兽。
English: Emperor Wu also liked to personally attack and kill bears and wild boars, and chase the beasts with horses.

古文：司马相如上疏谏曰： 臣闻物有同类而殊能者，故力称乌获，捷言庆忌，勇期贲、育，臣之愚，窃以为人诚有之，兽亦宜然。
现代文：司马相如上疏劝谏说： 我听说，有的东西类型相同而才能不同，所以力量大数得着乌获，行动敏捷要说庆忌，勇猛无敌应归于孟贲和夏育。依我的愚见，人确实有这样的情形，野兽也是这样。
English: Sima Xiangru said, "I have heard that some things have the same type but different abilities. Therefore, great strength should be gained, quick action should be celebrated, and invincibility should be attributed to Meng Xuan and Xia Yu. In my humble opinion, people do have such a situation, and so do beasts.

古文：今陛下好陵阻险，射猛兽，卒然遇逸材之兽，骇不存之地，犯属车之清尘，舆不及还辕，人不暇施巧，虽有乌获、逄蒙之技，不得用，枯木朽株，尽为难矣。
现代文：现在陛下喜爱攀登险要的地方，射杀猛兽，万一突然遇到力大凶猛的野兽，它在无路可逃的绝境，拼死冒犯陛下的随从车辆，陛下的车辆来不及调转方向，人来不及施展应变的巧计，即便是有乌获、逄蒙的超群技艺，也来不及使用，那么枯树朽木也会成为祸害了。
English: Now His Majesty likes to climb dangerous places and shoot fierce beasts. In the unlikely event that he suddenly encounters a powerful and ferocious beast, it will desperately offend His Majesty's escort vehicle in the inescapable desperate situation. His Majesty's vehicle has no time to change direction, people have no time to apply contingency strategies, and even if there is a great skill to get lost, it is too late to use, then dead trees will also become a scourge.

古文：是胡、越起于毂下而羌、夷接轸也，岂不殆哉！
现代文：这种情况，相当于胡人和越人突然出现在京城，而羌人和夷人接近了陛下的车辆，怎么能不危险万分呢！
English: This situation is equivalent to the Hu people and the Yue people suddenly appearing in Beijing, while the Xiong people and the Yi people approached His Majesty's vehicle, how can it not be extremely dangerous!

古文：虽万全而无患，然本非天子之所宜近也。
现代文：即便是万无一失而没有祸害，然而这种环境本来就不是陛下应该接近的啊。
English: Even if it is absolutely safe and no disaster occurs, however, this is not a place that should be approached by the Son of Heaven.

古文：宜夫清道而后行，中路而驰，犹时有衔橛之变，况乎涉丰草，骋丘虚，前有利兽之乐，而内无存变之意，其为害也不难矣。
现代文：更何况陛下入都要在清道戒严之后才出发，车辆要在道路的正中间奔驰，即便如此谨慎，还经常遇到控驭马匹的铁勒折断，或是车轮脱出等意外变故，更何况穿过茂密的荒草，驰过丘陵废墟，前面有即将捕获猎物的诱惑，而心中没有预防意外的准备，野兽要对陛下形成危害恐怕是不可避免的了。
English: What's more, His Majesty's entry must be after the martial law of the clear road, and the vehicle must be driven in the middle of the road. Even if it is so cautious, it often encounters accidents such as the breaking of the horse's tiller or the escape of the wheel. What's more, it is inevitable that the beast will harm His Majesty through the dense grass and the ruins of the hills. There is a temptation to catch the prey in front, but there is no preparation to prevent the accident.

古文：夫轻万乘之重不以为安，乐出万有一危之涂以为娱，臣窃为陛下不取。
现代文：看轻皇帝的万乘尊位，不注意自身的安全，反则乐于行进在潜伏着危险的道路上寻求刺激和娱乐，我私下觉得陛下不该如此。
English: I do not think your majesty would do well to underestimate the dignity of an emperor who does not take pleasure in peace, but delights in marching on a road that may be dangerous.

古文：盖明者远见于未萌，而知者避危于无形，祸固多藏于隐微而发于人之所忽者也。
现代文：大概聪明的人能预见到尚未萌芽的问题，有智慧的人能提前避开还没有完全形成的灾祸，灾祸本来大多隐藏在不易被察觉的细微之处，而发生在容易被人忽略的环节上。
English: Presumably, a discerning person can foresee things that have not yet sprouted, and a clever person can avoid disaster without a trace, and disasters are mostly hidden in places that are not easy to detect, and occur when people are negligent.

古文：故鄙谚曰： 家累千金，坐不垂堂。 
现代文：所以俗语说： 家中积累有千金的家产，就不能坐在堂屋的边缘。 
English: Therefore, as the saying goes: Accumulate a lot of money at home, do not sit under the eaves.

古文：此言虽小，可以谕大。 
现代文：这句话虽然说的是小事，却可以比喻大事。 
English: Although it is a small thing to make up words, it can be used as a metaphor for big things.

古文：上善之。
现代文：武帝认为他说得很好。
English: The emperor thought Sima Xiangru spoke very well.

古文：世宗孝武皇帝上之上建元四年夏，有风赤如血。六月，旱。
现代文：建元四年夏季，刮起了一场如同血红色的风。六月，出现旱灾。
English: In the summer of the fourth year of Jianyuan, a blood-red wind blew. In June, there was a drought.

古文：秋，九月，有星孛于东北。
现代文：秋季，九月，东北天空出现了异星。
English: In autumn, in September, a strange star appeared in the northeastern sky.

古文：是岁，南越王佗死，其孙文王胡立。
现代文：这一年，南越王赵佗死，他的孙子文王赵胡继承了王号。
English: In the same year, the king of South Vietnam, Zhao Xuan, died, and his grandson, King Wen, Zhao Hu, inherited the title of king.

古文：世宗孝武皇帝上之上建元五年春，罢三铢钱，行半两钱。
现代文：建元五年春季，朝廷宣布停止使用三铢钱，发行半两钱。
English: In the spring of the fifth year of the founding of the People's Republic of China, the imperial court announced that it would stop using the three-baht coin and issue a half-and-two-dollar coin.

古文：置五经博士。
现代文：朝廷设立五经博士。
English: The Imperial Court established the Five Classics Doctorate.

古文：夏，五月，大蝗。
现代文：夏季，五月，发生严重的蝗灾。
English: In the summer, in May, a serious plague of locusts occurred.

古文：世宗孝武皇帝上之上建元六年
现代文：秋季，八月，广川惠王刘越、清河哀王刘乘都死去，没有后代，他们的封国被废除。建元六年
English: In the autumn, in August, Guangchuan Hui Wang Liu Yue and Qinghe Lai Wang Liu Rong both died without descendants, and their fiefdoms were abolished.

古文：春，二月，乙未，辽东高庙灾。
现代文：春季，二月，乙未，辽东郡的高祖庙发生火灾。
English: In the spring, a fire broke out at Gao Zu Temple in Liaodong County in February.

古文：夏，四月，壬子，高园便殿火。上素服五日。
现代文：夏季，四月，壬子，高祖陵寝中的偏殿发生火灾；武帝因此穿戴了五天白色冠服，以示请罪。
English: In the summer, in April, a fire broke out in the hallway of Emperor Gao's mausoleum while he was sleeping. Emperor Wu wore a white robe for five days as a sign of repentance.

古文：五月，丁亥，太皇太后崩。
现代文：五月，丁亥，太皇太后驾崩。
English: In May, Dinghai, the Great Empress Dowager passed away.

古文：六月，癸巳，丞相昌免；武安侯田分为丞相。
现代文：六月，癸巳，丞相许昌被免职，武安侯田任丞相。
English: In June, Xu Chang, the chancellor, was removed from his post, and Wu An Hou Tian was appointed chancellor.

古文：分骄侈，治宅甲诸第，田园极膏腴；市买郡县物，相属于道；多受四方赂遗；其家金玉、妇女，狗马、声乐、玩好，不可胜数。
现代文：田骄横奢侈：修建的住宅比所有官员的住宅都豪华，占有的田园最肥沃；从各郡各县购买的物品，在道路上络绎不绝；大量接受各地的贿赂；他家的金玉、美女、狗马、歌妓舞女、古董器物，多得数不过来。
English: Tian Rongrong was extravagant: the houses he built were more luxurious than those of all officials, and the pastures he owned were the most fertile; the goods he bought from counties and counties were endless on the roads; he accepted a large number of bribes from all over the country; his family's gold, beautiful women, horses, prostitutes, and antiques were too numerous to count.

古文：每入奏事，坐语移日，所言皆听。荐人或起家至二千石，权移主上。上乃曰： 君除吏已尽未？
现代文：田每次进宫奏报政务，坐在那儿对着武帝一说就是大半天，所说的都被武帝所采纳；他推荐的人，有的从平民百姓直接做到了二千石的高官，侵夺了皇帝的权力。武帝不满地说： 您任命的官吏，任命完了没有？
English: Every time Tian went to the palace to report on government affairs, he sat there and told Emperor Wu that it would take half a day, and everything he said was accepted by Emperor Wu. The people he recommended, some of whom were high-ranking officials of 2,000 koku directly from the common people, usurped the power of the emperor. Emperor Wu said with dissatisfaction: Have you finished appointing the officials?

古文：吾亦欲除吏。 
现代文：我也想任命官吏。 
English: I would also like to appoint a few officials.

古文：尝请考工地益宅，上怒曰： 君何不遂取武库！ 
现代文：田曾经请求把考工官府的土地拨给他，以便扩建住宅，武帝愤怒地说： 您为什么不干脆要武库！ 
English: He once demanded that the land of the Civil Engineering Examiner's Office be used to expand his residence. The emperor angrily said: Why don't you also take away the weapons depot!

古文：是后乃稍退。
现代文：从此以后，他的气焰才稍收敛了一些。
English: Since then, his enthusiasm has cooled a little.

古文：秋，八月，有星孛于东方，长竟天。
现代文：秋季，八月，东方天空出现了异星，长尾横扫天空。
English: In autumn, in August, a strange star appeared in the eastern sky, with a long tail sweeping across the sky.

古文：闽越王郢兴兵击南越边邑，南越王守天子约，不敢擅兴兵，使人上书告天子。
现代文：闽越王郢发兵进攻南越国的边境城邑，南越王遵守武帝的约定，不敢擅自发兵，派人向武帝上书告急。
English: The king of South Vietnam sent troops to attack the border towns of South Vietnam. The king of South Vietnam followed Emperor Wu's agreement and did not dare to send troops without authorization. He sent a letter to Emperor Wu to express his concern.

古文：于是天子多南越义，大为发兵，遣大行王恢出豫章，大农令韩安国出会稽，击闽越。
现代文：因此，武帝很赞赏南越王的忠义，调集大批军队去援救南越，派大行王恢率军从豫章郡出发，派大农令韩安国率军从会稽郡出发，合力进攻闽越。
English: Therefore, Emperor Wu appreciated the loyalty of the King of South Vietnam very much, mobilized a large number of troops to rescue South Vietnam, sent a large number of troops led by Wang Hui from Yuzhang County, and sent a large number of troops led by Han An Guo from Huiqi County to jointly attack Xuan Yue.

古文：淮南王安上书谏曰： 陛下临天下，布德施惠，天下摄然，人安其生，自以没身不见兵革。
现代文：淮南王刘安上书劝阻说： 陛下统治天下，推行德政普施恩惠，天下太平，每个人都专心地从事自己的产业，自认为一生不会见到战争。
English: Liu An, the king of Huainan, wrote a letter to dissuade him, saying: "Your Majesty rules the world, promotes German politics, dispenses favors, the world is peaceful, everyone is devotedly engaged in their own industry, and believes that they will never see war.

古文：今闻有司举兵将以诛越，臣安窃为陛下重之。
现代文：现在听说有关官员将要率兵去进攻闽越，我刘安私下替陛下感到担扰。
English: Now that I have heard that the relevant officials are going to lead troops to attack Shengyue, I, Liu An, am privately worried for His Majesty.

古文：越，方外之地，剪发文身之民也，不可以冠带之国法度理也。
现代文： 越人生活在中原之外的土地上，是剪断头发、在身上刺刻花纹的野蛮人，不能用礼义之帮的法度进行治理。
English: The Yue people live in a land outside the Central Plains. They are barbarians who cut their hair and carve patterns on their bodies. They cannot be governed by the rules of propriety.

古文：自三代之盛，胡、越不与受正朔，非强勿强服，威弗能制也，以为不居之地，不牧之民，不足以烦中国也。
现代文：早在当年夏商周三代最强盛的时期，胡人和越人都不受中原的统治，并不是三代王朝的国势不能征服他们，也不是三代王朝的军威不能克制他们，而是因为三代王朝认为越人的土地无法居住，越人野蛮无法统治，不值得烦劳中原王朝。
English: As early as the most prosperous period of the third generation of Xia merchants, the Hu people and the Yue people were not subject to the rule of the Central Plains. It was not that the national situation of the three dynasties could not conquer them, nor could the military power of the three dynasties restrain them, but because the three dynasties believed that the land of the Yue people was uninhabitable, the Yue people were barbaric and could not rule, and the Central Plains Dynasty was not worth the trouble.

古文：自汉初定已来七十二年，越人相攻击者不可胜数，然天子未尝举兵而入其地也。
现代文：自从汉朝初定天下以来，七十二年间，越人自相攻击的事件，数都数不过来，但是天子从来没有发兵进入越人居住区域。
English: In the seventy-two years since the Han Dynasty was established, there have been countless incidents of the Viet people attacking each other, but the Son of Heaven has never sent troops into the Viet people's residential areas.

古文：臣闻越非有城郭邑里也，处谿谷之间，篁竹之中，习于水斗，便于用舟，地深昧而多水险，中国之人不知其势阻而入其地，虽百不当其一。
现代文：我听说越人没有城池村庄，而生活在山谷溪流之间，丛林密竹之中，习惯于水上战斗，擅长划船行舟，地形复杂，草木丛生而且有许多河流险阻；中原地区的人不了解当地的地势险阻而进入其境内，即使一百个人也抵不过一个越人。
English: I heard that the Yue people do not have towns and villages, but live between the valley streams, in the dense jungle, are accustomed to fighting on the water, are good at rowing and rowing, the terrain is complex, the vegetation is thick and there are many river obstacles; people in the Central Plains do not understand the local terrain and obstacles and enter their territory, even if a hundred people can not reach a Yue person.

古文：得其地，不可郡县也；攻之，不可暴取也。
现代文：占领了他们的土地，无法设置郡县进行统治，进攻他们，又不能迅速取胜。
English: Occupying their lands, unable to set up a county to govern, attacking them, and unable to win quickly.

古文：以地图察其山川要塞，相去不过寸数，而间独数百千里，险阻、林丛弗能尽著；视之若易，行之甚难。天下赖宗庙之灵，方内大宁，戴白之老不见兵革，民得夫妇相守，父子相保，陛下之德也。
现代文：从地图上看，越地的山川河流屯兵要塞相距也不过只有几寸的地方，而实际距离却有几百里千里。国家依赖祖宗神灵的保佑，全境安宁，白发苍苍的老人没有见过兵器甲仗，百姓得以夫妻相互厮守，父子相互保养，这都是陛下恩德。
English: Looking at the map, the mountains and rivers of Viet Nam and the garrison fortresses are only a few inches away from each other, but the actual distance is hundreds of thousands of miles. The country relies on the blessing of the ancestral gods, the whole territory is peaceful, the white-haired old man has never seen a war with weapons, and the people can keep their husbands and wives together, and the father and son maintain each other. These are His Majesty's blessings.

古文：越人名为籓臣，贡酎之奉不输大内，一卒之用不给上事；自相攻击，而陛下发兵救之，是反以中国而劳蛮夷也。
现代文：越人名义上是国家的藩属国，实际上不向朝廷缴纳任何贡品和酎金，不为朝廷负担一兵一卒的徭役；他们自相攻击，陛下却派兵援救，这是反过来为了野蛮人而使中原遭受疲劳困苦啊！
English: The Viets are nominally a vassal state of the state, but in fact they do not pay any tribute or tribute money to the imperial court, nor do they bear the service of a soldier for the imperial court; they attack each other, but His Majesty sends troops to rescue them, which in turn causes the Central Plains to suffer from fatigue and hardship for the sake of the barbarians!

古文：且越人愚戆轻薄，负约反覆，其不用天子之法度，非一日之积也。
现代文：况且越人遇笨鄙薄，违背盟约，反复无常，他们不遵守朝廷的法度，并不是一天一日如此，而是由来已久。
English: Moreover, the Yue people are clumsy and despicable, violate the covenant, capricious, they do not abide by the imperial law, it is not day by day, but it has been a long time.

古文：壹不奉诏，举兵诛之，臣恐后兵革无时得息也。
现代文：如果越人一不奉行皇帝诏令，就发兵进攻他们，我恐怕以后的战争没有停止的时候了。
English: If the Viets do not comply with the Emperor's edict, we will send troops to attack them, and I'm afraid there will be no time to stop the war.

古文：间者，数年岁比不登，民待卖爵、赘子以接衣食。
现代文： 最近，连续几年收成不好，百姓要靠出卖爵位、让儿子充当赘婿换回钱财维持生活。
English: Recently, for several years in a row, the harvest has been poor, and the people have to rely on selling their titles and letting their sons act as son-in-laws in exchange for money to maintain their lives.

古文：赖陛下德泽振救之，得毋转死沟壑。四年不登，五年复蝗，民生未复。
现代文：仰赖陛下的恩德救济百姓，百姓才得以不饿死在流亡途中；前年歉收，去年又闹蝗灾，百姓的生活没有恢复正常。
English: Relying on His Majesty's grace to relieve the people, the people were able not to starve to death on the way to exile; the previous year's poor harvest, last year's locust plague, the people's life did not return to normal.

古文：今发兵行数千里，资衣粮，入越地，舆轿而隃领，拕舟而入水，行数百千里，夹以深林丛竹，水道上下击石，林中多蝮蛇、猛兽，夏月暑时，欧泄霍乱之病相随属也；曾未施兵接刃，死伤者必众矣。
现代文：现在调兵远征数千里之外，应征的人，自带衣物粮食，进入越人居住地区，抬着轿子翻越山岭，拉着船在水中跋涉，远行数百里甚至上千里，河两岸是繁密的树林和丛生的乱竹，船在河中上下行走，经常撞在石头上；树林中有许多蝮蛇、猛兽，夏季炎热之时，上吐下泄以及霍乱等瘟疫接连不断，不必等到交战，死伤的人必定就很多了。
English: Now, soldiers are sent on expeditions thousands of miles away. Conscripts, bringing their own clothing and food, enter areas inhabited by Vietnamese, carry a palanquin over the mountains, pull a boat through the water, and travel hundreds or even thousands of miles. On both sides of the river are dense forests and clumps of bamboo. Boats walk up and down in the river, often bumping into stones. There are many pythons and ferocious beasts in the woods. When it is hot in the summer, vomiting and cholera and other plagues continue one after another. There is no need to wait until there is a war, and there will certainly be many dead and injured.

古文：前时南海王反，陛下先臣使将军间忌将兵击之，以其军降，处之上淦。
现代文：前些时期南海王反叛，陛下已去世的臣子、我的先父派遣将军间忌率军进攻他们，南海王率领他的军队归降，就把他们安置在上淦地区。
English: Some time ago, the Nanhai King rebelled, and His Majesty's deceased vassal, my father, sent a general to lead the army to attack them. The Nanhai King led his army to surrender, and they were placed in the Shangluo area.

古文：后复反，会天暑多雨，楼船卒水居击棹，未战而疾死者过半；亲老涕泣，孤子啼号，破家散业，迎尸千里之外，裹骸骨而归。
现代文：后来他们再次叛乱，正是暑热多雨季节，前来平叛的楼船水军将士长期居住在水面上，还要划桨行船，有一大半的人还没有交战就死于疾病；年迈的父母流泪，幼小的孤儿哭号，变卖所有家财产业，到千里之外，去接亲人的尸体，肉已不存，只好包裹骸骨返乡。
English: Later, they rebelled again. It was the hot and rainy season. The naval officers who came to fight against the rebellion lived on the water for a long time and had to paddle. Most of them died of disease before they fought. Elderly parents shed tears, young orphans cried, sold all their family property, and traveled thousands of miles to pick up the bodies of their relatives. There was no meat left, so they had to wrap up the skeletons and return home.

古文：悲哀之气，数年不息，长老至今以为记，曾未入其地而祸已至此矣。
现代文：那种悲痛哀伤的气氛，持续几年没有消失，老人们至今记忆犹新，当时还没有进入越人的居住地区，就造成了如此巨大的祸害。
English: That sad and sorrowful atmosphere, which lasted for several years, has not disappeared, and the old people still remember vividly. At that time, they had not yet entered the Yue people's residential area, causing such a huge disaster.

古文：陛下德配天地，明象日月，恩至禽兽，泽及草木，一人有饥寒，不终其天年而死者，为之忄妻怆于心。
现代文：陛下的仁德如同天地一样广大，英明如同日月高照，恩惠施加到禽兽和草木，如果有一个人身受饥寒没有安享天年而死，陛下就为此而心中惨悲伤。
English: His Majesty's benevolence is as vast as the heavens and the earth, his wisdom is as high as the sun and the moon, and he bestows favors on animals and plants. If a person dies of hunger and cold without enjoying the heavenly years, His Majesty will be saddened by this.

古文：今方内无狗吠之警，而使陛下甲卒死亡，暴露中原，霑渍山谷，边境之民为之早闭晏开，朝不及夕，臣安窃为陛下重之。
现代文：现在境内没有任何不安的现象，连犬吠的惊吓都没有，却使陛下的士兵丧生，尸身暴露原野，鲜血浸染山谷。边境的百姓因此在下午早早关闭城门，上午很晚才敢打开城门，这样每天早上还要为晚上能否平安无事而担忧，我刘安私下替陛下觉得此事应该三思而行。
English: At present, there is no sign of unrest in the country, not even the barking of a dog, but it has caused the death of His Majesty's soldiers, the corpses are exposed in the fields, and the valley is soaked with blood. Therefore, the people at the border close the gate early in the afternoon, and dare not open the gate until very late in the morning. As a result, every morning they have to worry about whether everything will be safe at night. I, Liu An, privately feel for His Majesty that this matter should be reconsidered.

古文：不习南方地形者，多以越为人众兵强，能难边城。
现代文： 不熟悉南方地形的人，大多认为越人由于人多兵强，所以能攻扰边境城邑。
English: Most people who are not familiar with the terrain of the south think that the Viets are able to attack the border towns because they are more numerous and stronger.

古文：淮南全国之时，多为边吏，臣窃闻之，与中国异。
现代文：当年淮南国领有它的全部封地的时候，大量任命边境的官吏，我私下听说，越人与中原人不同。
English: When Huainan took over all of its fiefs, it appointed a large number of border officials. I heard in private that the Yue people were different from the Central Plains people.

古文：限以高山，人迹绝，车道不通，天地所以隔外内也。
现代文：有高山为界，行人绝迹，车道不通，这是天地用来限隔中原和边外的自然屏障。
English: There are high mountains as the boundary, pedestrians are extinct, and traffic lanes are impassable. This is a natural barrier used by heaven and earth to separate the Central Plains and the outlying areas.

古文：其入中国，必下领水，领水之山峭峻，漂石破舟，不可以大船载食粮下也。
现代文：越人要进入中原地区，一定要沿着领水顺流而下，领水流经的地区山势险峻，水势湍急，能冲走巨石撞毁船只，不能用大船运载粮食顺流而下。
English: In order to enter the Central Plains region, the Viet people must go down the river along the territorial waters. The mountains in the area through which the territorial waters flow are steep and the water is rapid. It can wash away the boulders and destroy the ships, and it is not possible to carry grain down the river with large ships.

古文：越人欲为变，必先田馀干界中，积食粮，乃入，伐材治船。
现代文：越人要想图谋进犯，一定先要在余干县境内开垦土地，积蓄粮食，然后才进入境内，砍伐树木修造船只。
English: If the Viets want to plan an attack, they must first reclaim land in Yugang County and accumulate grain, and then enter the territory to cut down trees and build boats.

古文：边城守候诚谨，越人有入伐材者，辄收捕，焚其积聚，虽百越，奈边城何！
现代文：边境防守戎备如果很谨慎很警惕，畹牧甘常词褂幸话俑越族，又能对边境城邑构成什么威胁呢！
English: If the border defense troops are very cautious and vigilant, and the Yueyue people are kind and generous, what kind of threat can they pose to the border towns!

古文：且越人绵力薄材，不能陆战，又无车骑、弓弩之用，然而不可入者，以保地险，而中国之人不耐其水土也。
现代文：况且越人身单力薄，不能在陆地作战，又没有战车、骑兵、弓弩等军事装备。然而却不能进占其居住地，原因就在于越人据守险要的地势，而中原的将士又不服当地水土。
English: Moreover, the Viets were physically weak, unable to fight on land, and lacked military equipment such as chariots, cavalry, and crossbows. However, they were not able to occupy their residential areas, because the Viets were defending a dangerous terrain, while the soldiers of the Central Plains were not satisfied with the local soil and water.

古文：臣闻越甲卒不下数十万，所以入之，五倍乃足，輓车奉饷者不在其中。
现代文：我听说越人的士兵不少于数十万人，要想进占越地，必须有五倍的兵力才够，其中还不包括拉车运输粮饷的后勤部队。
English: I heard that the number of Viet soldiers was no less than several hundred thousand, and that in order to enter and occupy Viet territory, it was necessary to have five times the number of troops, which did not include the logistic troops that pulled carts to transport grain.

古文：南方暑湿，近夏瘅热，暴露水居，蝮蛇蠚生，疾疢多作，兵未血刃而病死者什二三，虽举越国而虏之，不足以偿所亡。
现代文：南方炎热潮湿，临近夏季容易流行瘟疫，出征的将士暴露在外，生活在水乡，蝮蛇繁衍为害，疾病频繁发作，兵器还没有见血，就会有十分之二三的将士死于疾病，这样，即便是把越国人全部俘虏了，也不足以补偿汉军所受的损失。
English: The south is hot and humid, it is prone to epidemics of plague near the summer, the soldiers who go to war are exposed, they live in water towns, boa constrictors proliferate and cause harm, diseases frequently occur, weapons have not yet seen blood, and two-thirds of the soldiers will die of disease. In this way, even if all the Yue people were captured, it would not be enough to compensate for the losses suffered by the Chinese army.

古文： 臣闻道路言：闽越王弟甲弑而杀之，甲以诛死，其民未有所属。
现代文： 我听到了这样的传言：闽越王的弟弟甲杀了闽越王，甲也因此被杀，越国部众没有首领统辖。
English: I heard a rumor that King He Yue's younger brother, Jia, killed King He Yue, and that Jia was killed as a result.

古文：陛下若欲来，内处之中国，使重臣临存，施德垂赏以招致之，此必携幼扶老以归圣德。
现代文：陛下如果想招越人归顺，把他们迁往中原安置，可以派重臣前去慰问，施加仁德，给予奖赏，以便招他们前来归顺，这些越人一定会扶老携幼来归顺圣明有德的天子。
English: If Your Majesty wants to recruit the Viets to submit and relocate them to the Central Plains, you can send senior ministers to offer condolences, impose benevolence, and give rewards in order to recruit them to submit. These Viets will surely help the elderly and their children to submit to the Holy and Righteous Son of God.

古文：若陛下无所用之，则继其绝世，存其亡国，建其王侯，以为畜越，此必委质为籓臣，世共贡职。
现代文：假若陛下没有什么地方用得着这些越人，就延续越人已断绝的世系，保存越人已灭亡的国家，封立越人的王侯，用这种方法畜养越人，这些越人一定会送来人质朝廷的藩属臣子，世世代代缴纳贡品和赋税。
English: If His Majesty had no place to use these Viets, he would continue the lineage that the Viets had broken off, preserve the country where the Viets had perished, enthrone the princes of the Viets, and raise the Viets in this way. These Viets would surely send hostages to the imperial court's vassals, and pay tribute and taxes for generations.

古文：陛下以方寸之印，丈二之组，填抚方外，不劳一卒，不顿一戟，而威德并行。
现代文：陛下仅用一寸见方的印章，一丈二尺长的印绶，就能镇抚境外地区，不出一兵一卒，不损坏一支长戟，而产生威德并行的效果。
English: With just a one-inch-square seal and a two-foot-long seal, His Majesty can pacify the overseas regions without losing a single soldier or damaging a single seal, and produce the effect of "parallel virtue."

古文：今以兵入其地，此必震恐，以有司为欲屠灭之也，必雉兔逃，入山林险阻。
现代文：现在用兵进占越地，越人一定震惊恐惧，以为将军们要把他们斩尽杀绝，必定会像野鸡野兔那样逃跑，进入山林险阻地区。
English: Now that troops are being used to occupy Viet land, the Viet people must be shocked and frightened, thinking that the generals are going to kill them all, and they will certainly run away like pheasants and hares into the mountainous and dangerous areas.

古文：背而去之，则复相群聚；留而守之，历岁经年，则士卒罢倦，食粮乏绝，民苦兵事，盗贼必起。
现代文：汉军如果撤走，越人就重新结集；汉军如果留守越地，长年累月，就会使将士们疲倦困苦，缺乏粮食，百姓因军事行动而受困苦，就一定会出现盗贼。
English: If the Chinese army withdraws, the Viet people will regroup; if the Chinese army stays in Viet, for many years and months, it will make the soldiers tired and poor, lack of food, and the people will suffer from military operations, and thieves will certainly appear.

古文：臣闻长老言：秦之时，尝使尉屠睢击越，又使监禄凿渠通道，越人逃入深山林丛，不可得攻；留军屯守空地，旷日引久，士卒劳倦；越出击之，秦兵大破，乃发缊戍以备之。
现代文：我听老人们说：秦朝统治时期，曾派郡都尉屠睢率兵进攻越人，又派一位名叫禄的监郡御史指挥开凿河渠，打通道路，越人逃入深山丛林之中，秦军无法进攻；留下军队驻守无人居住的空地，旷日持久，士兵困苦疲倦，越人出山袭击，秦军大败，这才调集罪犯和贱民充军用来防御越人。
English: I heard the old people say: During the reign of the Qin Dynasty, the county captain Tu Youjun was sent to attack the Yue people, and a supervising county official named Lu was sent to dig canals and open roads. The Yue people fled into the deep mountain jungle, and the Qin army could not attack. The army was left to guard the uninhabited open space for a long time. The soldiers were tired and exhausted. The Yue people attacked from the mountains, and the Qin army was defeated. This was the reason why the criminals and untouchables were mobilized to defend the Yue people.

古文：当此之时，外内骚动，皆不聊生，亡逃相从，群为盗贼，于是山东之难始兴。
现代文：在那个时候，境内外动荡不安，百姓都无法正常生活，结伴逃亡，聚集成了盗贼，于是崤山以东的大规模变乱开始出现。
English: At that time, there was turmoil both at home and abroad, people were unable to live normally, fled in groups, and gathered together to become thieves. As a result, large-scale upheavals east of Lushan began to appear.

古文：兵者凶事，一方有急，四面皆耸。
现代文：战争是凶险的事情，一方出现了危险局面，四面都会惊动。
English: War is a perilous business. If a dangerous situation arises on one side, all sides will be alarmed.

古文：臣恐变故之生，奸邪之作，由此始也。
现代文：我担心变乱的产生，奸邪的出现，都从进攻越人而开始。
English: I am afraid that the emergence of disorder, the emergence of treachery, all begin with the attack on Viet Nam.

古文： 臣闻天子之兵有征而无战，言莫敢校也。如使越人蒙徼幸以逆执事之颜行，厮舆之卒有一不备而归者，虽得越王之首，臣犹窃为大汉羞之。
现代文： 我听说天子的军队只有征伐而没有真正的战争，这是说没有人敢于较量，假若越人怀着侥幸心理迎战领兵将领的先锋部队，哪怕是只有一个砍柴驾车之类的卑贱士兵乘着不备逃走了，即便是汉军得到了越王的头颅，我还是要私下为大汉朝廷而感到羞耻。
English: I have heard that the army of the Son of Heaven only conquers and does not have a real war, which means that no one dares to compete. If the Yue people are lucky enough to meet the vanguard of the leading generals, even if only one lowly soldier such as chopping wood and driving a car escapes unprepared, even if the Chinese army gets the head of the king of Yue, I will still be privately ashamed of the great man's court.

古文：陛下以四海为境，生民之属，皆为臣妾。
现代文：陛下把四海之内广大区域做为疆域，所有生活在其中的百姓，都是陛下的男女奴仆。
English: His Majesty has made a vast area within the four seas as his territory, and all the people living in it are His Majesty's male and female servants.

古文：垂德惠以覆露之，使安生乐业，则泽被万世，传之子孙，施之无穷。天下之安，犹泰山而四维之也，夷狄之地，何足以为一日之闲，而烦汗马之劳乎！《诗》云： 王犹允塞，徐方既来。 
现代文：陛下降下德政恩惠，用来养育百姓，使他们安居乐业，就会使陛下的恩惠德泽普盖于万世，把它传给子孙后代，推行到永无终止的将来，国家的安宁，就如同泰山而又增加了四面维系的绳索一样稳定；野蛮人的土地，还不够天子用来做一天的游乐使用，怎么值得为它而兴师动众呢！《诗经》说： 大王仁德满天下，徐方部族自归顺。 
English: The benevolence of His Majesty's government, which is used to nurture the people and make them live and work in peace and contentment, will make His Majesty's benevolence permeate the world, pass it on to future generations, and promote it to a never-ending future. The peace of the country is as stable as Mount Tai and the addition of ropes to maintain it on all four sides. The land of the barbarians is not enough for the Son of Heaven to use for a day's amusement. How is it worth it to arouse the masses for it? "The Book of Songs" says: The great King is full of benevolence, and the Xu Fang tribe has surrendered

古文：言王道甚大而远方怀之也。
现代文：这是说王道光明正大，远方的部族都很仰慕。
English: This is to say that the royal way is above board and is admired by distant tribes.

古文：臣安窃恐将吏之以十万之师为一使之任也。 是时，汉兵遂出，未逾领，闽越王郢发兵距险。
现代文：我刘安私下认为，恐怕将官们的率军伐越，这时，汉军已经出发，尚未越过阳山岭，闽越王郢发兵据守险要进行抵御。
English: I, Liu An, privately thought that I was afraid that the generals would lead the army to cross the mountains. At that time, the Chinese army had already set out and had not yet crossed the Yangshan Mountains. The soldiers who had crossed the Wangye Mountains had to defend against the danger.

古文：其弟馀善乃与相、宗族谋曰： 王以擅发兵击南越不请，故天子兵来诛。
现代文：他的弟弟馀善就和相、宗族贵族商量说： 国王因为擅自发兵攻打南越，没有向天子请示，所以天子派军队来征伐问罪。
English: His younger brother, Yu Shan, discussed the matter with his father-in-law and the aristocrats of his family and said, "Since the king sent troops to attack South Vietnam without permission and did not ask the Son of Heaven for permission, the Son of Heaven sent an army to invade and punish him.

古文：汉兵众强，即幸胜之，兵来益多，终灭国而止。
现代文：汉军人多而且实力强大，即使一时侥幸战胜他们，后面来的军队会更多，直到我们的国家被灭亡才能罢休。
English: There are many Han soldiers and they are powerful. Even if they are defeated by a fluke for a moment, there will be more troops coming behind, and they will not stop until our country is destroyed.

古文：今杀王以谢天子，天子听，罢兵，固国完；不听，乃力战；不胜，即亡入海。 
现代文：现在我们杀了国王而向天子请罪，如果天子同意我们的要求则撤回汉军，自然会保全我们闽越全境；如果天子拒绝我们，我们就拼死与汉军作战；不能取胜，就逃亡到海上。 大家都说： 好！ 
English: Now we have killed the king and pleaded guilty to the Son of Heaven; if the Son of Heaven agrees to our request and withdraws the Chinese army, it will naturally protect us from crossing the entire territory; if the Son of Heaven rejects us, we will fight to the death with the Chinese army; if we cannot win, we will flee to the sea.

古文：皆曰： 善！ 即鏦杀王，使使奉其头致大行。
现代文：当即用短矛刺杀了闽越王，派使臣带着他的头颅送给了大行王恢。
English: He immediately stabbed King Gong Yue to death with a short spear, and sent an envoy with his head to King Da Xinghuai.

古文：大行曰： 所为来者，诛王。
现代文：大行王恢说： 汉军到来的目的，就是要杀闽越王。
English: Da Xing said: The purpose of our visit is to fight and kill the king of Guangdong.

古文：今王头至，谢罪；不战而殒，利莫大焉。 
现代文：现在你们送来了闽越王的头，又向朝廷请罪；不经过战争闽越王就死了，没有比这更好的事了！ 
English: Now you have brought the head of King Yue, and you are pleading guilty to the imperial court. King Yue will die without a war. There is nothing better than this!

古文：乃以便宜案兵，告大农军，而使使奉王头驰报天子。
现代文：王恢就随机应变，停止进兵，把此事告知大农令韩安国所率领的军队，并派使者带着闽越王的头颅迅速入京报告天子。
English: Wang Huai made a haphazard response, stopped the march of troops, informed the army led by Han Anguo, the great peasant commander, of the matter, and sent an emissary with the head of King Gong Yue to Beijing to report to the emperor.

古文：诏罢两将兵，曰： 郢等首恶，独无诸孙繇君丑不与谋焉。 
现代文：武帝下诏撤回两位将军统率的军队，诏书还说： 闽越王郢等人是罪魁，唯独无诸的孙子繇君丑没有参与阴谋。 
English: The emperor issued an edict ordering Wang Huai and the troops of Han'an to stop military operations, saying, "East Vietnam's Wang Hui and others were the first to commit evil, and only the great-great-grandson of Wang Hui did not participate in this conspiracy.

古文：乃使中郎将立丑为越繇王，奉闽越先祭祀。
现代文：武帝就派中郎将封立丑做越繇王，主持对闽越祖先的祭祀。
English: Emperor Wu sent Zhongro to make Huo Liushi the king of Yue Yue and preside over the worship of Yue Yue's ancestors.

古文：馀善已杀郢，威地于国，国民多属，窃自立为王，繇王不能制。
现代文：馀善杀了郢之后，在闽越国内很有威望，国中民众大多拥护他，他就自行称王，繇王丑无力制止他。
English: After Yu Shan killed Zhai, he had a lot of prestige in Zhai Yue. Most of the people in the country supported him, and he declared himself king. Zhai Wangqiu was powerless to stop him.

古文：上闻之，为馀善不足复兴师，曰： 馀善数与郢谋乱，而后首诛郢，师得不劳。 
现代文：武帝得知，认为为了馀善不值得再次出动大军，就说： 馀善多次和郢策划叛乱，但后来能带头杀了郢，使朝廷大军免受劳苦。 
English: When Emperor Wu learned that Yu Shan did not think it was worth sending out a large army again for the sake of Yu Shan, he said: Yu Shan plotted rebellion with Yao many times, but later he was able to take the lead in killing Yao, so that the imperial army would not have to work hard.

古文：因立馀善为东越王，与繇王并处。
现代文：于是，武帝就封馀善为东越王，与繇王并存。
English: As a result, Yu Xian was made the king of Dongyue, and he lived there at the same time as the king of Qi.

古文：上使庄助谕意南粤。
现代文：汉武帝派庄助向南越王说明朝廷的意旨。
English: Emperor Hanwu sent Zhuang Zi to explain the intentions of the imperial court to the king of South Vietnam.

古文：南粤王胡顿首曰： 天子乃为臣兴兵讨闽越，死无以报德！ 
现代文：南越王赵胡磕头说： 天子竟为了我而兴兵讨伐闽越，我纵然身死也无法报答朝廷的大恩大德！ 
English: The king of South Vietnam, Zhao Hu Shantou, said: "The Son of Heaven has raised an army to fight for me, and even if I die, I cannot repay the great kindness of the imperial court!"

古文：遣太子婴齐入宿卫，谓助曰： 国新被寇，使者行矣，胡方日夜装，入见天子。 
现代文：他就派遣太子婴齐入京充当皇帝的警卫，还对庄助说： 我的封国刚刚受到进犯，请使臣先行一步，我赵胡正日夜收拾行装，很快就入京朝见天子。 
English: He sent all the princes and princesses to Beijing to act as the emperor's guards. He also said to Zhuang Zi: My fiefdom has just been attacked. Please send your envoys one step ahead. I, Zhao Hu, am packing up day and night and will soon enter Beijing to meet the emperor.

古文：助还，过淮南，上又使助谕淮南王安以讨越事，嘉答其意，安谢不及。
现代文：庄助返京途中，路过淮南国，武帝又让庄助向淮南王刘安说明讨伐闽越的用意，赞许刘安上书朝廷的好意，刘安表示自己没有皇帝那样的远见，表示谢罪。
English: On his way back to Beijing, Zhuangzhu passed through Huainan Province. Emperor Wu also asked Zhuangzhu to explain to Liu An, the king of Huainan, his intention to fight against Yue Yue, and praised Liu An's goodwill to the imperial court. Liu An said that he did not have the same foresight as the emperor, and expressed his gratitude.

古文：助既去南越，南越大臣皆谏其王曰： 汉兴兵诛郢，亦行以惊动南越。
现代文：庄助离开南越之后，南越国的大臣们都劝止他们的国王说： 汉朝发兵远征，杀闽越王郢，也是以此震惊南越国。
English: After Zhuang Zuo left South Vietnam, the ministers of South Vietnam all persuaded their kings to say: The Han Dynasty sent an expedition to kill the King of Yueyue, which also shocked South Vietnam.

古文：且先王昔言： 事天子期无失礼。 
现代文：况且，先王当初说： 侍奉天子只求不失大礼就成了。 
English: Moreover, the former king originally said, "To serve the Son of Heaven, all you have to do is be polite."

古文：要之，不可以说好语入见，则不得复归，亡国之势也。 
现代文：总之，不能因为喜欢汉朝使臣的甜言蜜语，就进京去朝见天子，您真的去了，就不能返回来了，这是亡国的情势啊！ 
English: In short, you can't go to Beijing to see the emperor just because you like the sweet words of the Han dynasty envoys. If you really go, you can't come back. This is the situation of a ruined country!

古文：于是胡称病，竟不入见。
现代文：因此，赵胡就自称有病，终于没有来朝见武帝。
English: As a result, Zhao Hu pretended to be ill and ultimately did not enter the imperial court to worship the emperor.

古文：是岁，韩安国为御史大夫。
现代文：这一年，任命韩安国担任御史大夫。
English: In the same year, Han An Guo was appointed to the post of imperial historian.

古文：东海太守濮阳汲黯为主爵都尉。
现代文：东海太守阳县人汲黯担任主爵都尉。
English: He served as the governor of Yang County in the East China Sea.

古文：始，黯为谒者，以严见惮。
现代文：当初，汲黯担任谒者，因他为人威严而被大家敬畏。
English: At the beginning, Kuching served as the eunuch, and was feared by everyone because he was a dignified person.

古文：东越相攻，上使黯往视之；不至，至吴而还，报曰： 越人相攻，固其俗然，不足以辱天子之使。 
现代文：东越部族相互攻击，武帝派汲黯前去巡视；他没有达到东越，仅走到吴地就回来了，向武帝报告说： 越人自相攻击，本来他们的习俗就是如此，不值得为此折辱天子的使臣。 
English: The East Vietnamese tribes attacked each other, and Emperor Wu sent Ku Ku to inspect the situation; he did not reach East Vietnam, but only went as far as Wudi and returned, reporting to Emperor Wu: "The Viet people attack each other, which is their original custom, and it is not worth offending the envoys of the Son of Heaven for this.

古文：河内失火，延烧千馀家，上使黯往视之；还，报曰： 家人失火，屋比延烧，不足忧也。
现代文：河内郡失火，火势蔓延烧毁了一千多家民房，武帝派汲黯前去视察；返回之后，报告说： 平民百姓不慎失火，因为房屋毗连而蔓延燃烧起来，不值得陛下忧虑。
English: A fire broke out in Hanoi County, and the fire spread and burned down more than a thousand houses. Emperor Wu sent his emissaries to inspect the situation. After returning, they reported: The civilians accidentally started the fire, and because the houses are adjacent, the fire spread and burned. It is not worthy of His Majesty's concern.

古文：臣过河南，河南贫人伤水旱万馀家，或父子相食，臣谨以便宜，持节发河南仓粟以振贫民。
现代文：我经过河南郡见河南郡的贫民遭受洪水干旱灾害磨难的有一万多家，有的甚至于到了父子相食的悲惨境地，我谨借出使的机会，用陛下的符节，命令发放河南官仓积粮以救济贫民。
English: When I passed through Henan County, I saw the local poor people suffering from floods and droughts. There were more than ten thousand families affected by the disaster. Some of them were even cannibalizing each other. I took advantage of the tokens I held and ordered the distribution of grain from the government warehouse in Henan County to help the local victims.

古文：臣请归节，伏矫制之罪。 
现代文：我请求归还符节，甘愿领受假托天子命令的惩罚。 
English: Now I'm asking to pay back the money and bear the guilt of passing on a false gospel.

古文：上贤而释之。
现代文：武帝很赏识他，就赦免了他的罪。
English: Emperor Wu appreciated him very much and pardoned his sin.

古文：其在东海，治官理民，好清静，择丞、史任之，责大指而已，不苛小。
现代文：他在东海郡时，整肃官吏，治理百姓，喜好清静无为，谨慎地选择郡丞和各曹掾史，然后放手任用，他只关注大事，不苛求细枝末节。
English: When he was in Donghai County, he purged officials and governed the people, preferring peace and quiet and doing nothing. He carefully selected the county magistrate and various Cao Yu Shi, and then let go of the appointment. He only paid attention to major events, not demanding details.

古文：黯多病，卧闺阁内不出。岁馀，东海大治，称之。
现代文：汲黯身体多病，躺在内室中不出门；过了一年多，东海郡治理得很好，百姓交口称赞汲黯。
English: After more than a year, Donghai County has been well managed, and the people have praised the county.

古文：上闻，召为主爵都尉，列于九卿。
现代文：武帝听到了，召汲黯入朝，担任主爵都尉，地位与九卿相同。
English: When the emperor heard this, he called him to be a lord lieutenant, ranking him among the nine nobles.

古文：其治务在无为，引大体，不拘文法。
现代文：他处理政务，主张清静无为，从大的方向引导，不拘泥法令条文。
English: He dealt with government affairs, advocated calm and inaction, guided from a broad direction, and did not adhere to the provisions of laws and regulations.

古文：黯为人，性倨少礼，面折，不能容人之过。
现代文：汲黯为人，性情倨傲，缺少礼数，当面使人难勘，不能容忍别人的过失。
English: He is arrogant, lacks etiquette, is difficult to understand in person, and cannot tolerate the mistakes of others.

古文：时天子方招文学儒者，上曰： 吾欲云云。 
现代文：当时武帝正招揽文学之士和儒家学者，武帝说： 我想要怎样怎样。 
English: At that time, Emperor Wu was recruiting literati and Confucian scholars. Emperor Wu said, "I will do whatever I want."

古文：黯对曰： 陛下内多欲而外施仁义，奈何欲效唐、虞之治乎！ 
现代文：汲黯应声回答说： 陛下心中藏着许多欲望，而表面上却做出施行仁义的样子，怎么可能效法唐尧虞舜那样的治绩呢！ 
English: Ku Ying replied, "Your Majesty has many desires hidden in his heart, but on the surface he makes an appearance of carrying out benevolence and righteousness. How is it possible to emulate the performance management like that of Tang Xuan and Yu Xi?"

古文：上默然，怒，变色而罢朝，公卿皆为黯惧。
现代文：武帝沉默不语，接着勃然大怒，脸色很难看地宣布结束朝会，公卿大臣都替汲黯担忧。
English: Emperor Wu was silent, then he flew into a rage and announced the end of the imperial court meeting with a gloomy face. The nobles and ministers were worried.

古文：上退，谓左右曰： 甚矣汲黯之戆也！ 
现代文：武帝退朝回到内宫，对左右侍从说： 汲黯的愚笨刚直也太过分了！ 
English: Emperor Wu retreated back to the Inner Court and said to the attendants on his right and left, "Kyu Ying's stupid and rigid behavior is too much!

古文：群臣或数黯，黯曰： 天子置公卿辅弼之臣，宁令从谀承意，陷主于不义乎？
现代文：群臣中有人批评汲黯。汲黯说： 天子设立公卿等辅佐大臣，难道是让他们阿谀奉承，使君主陷入不仁不义的境地吗？
English: Some of the courtiers criticized Chu Qiu. Chu Qiu said: Did Heaven's Son set up the court nobles and other assistant ministers to make them flatter and make the monarch fall into an inhumane and unjust situation?

古文：且已在其位，纵爱身，奈辱朝廷何！ 
现代文：况且，我既然已经处在公卿的位置上，如果只想顾全自身性命，那就会使朝廷蒙受耻辱，那怎么得了！ 
English: Moreover, since I am already a noble, even though I take care of my body, what about harming the interests of the country!

古文：黯多病，病且满三月；上常赐告者数，终不愈。
现代文：汲黯身体多病，病假将要接近三个月的限期了，武帝多次特许延长他休病假的时间，还是没有痊愈。
English: He was very ill, and his sick leave was approaching the three-month limit. Emperor Wu repeatedly granted him special permission to extend his sick leave, but he still did not recover.

古文：最后病，庄助为请告。
现代文：最后病重时，庄助替他请假。
English: In the end, when he was seriously ill, Zhuang Sui took time off to care for him.

古文：上曰： 汲黯何如人哉？ 
现代文：武帝说： 汲黯这个人怎么样呢？ 
English: Emperor Wu said, "What about this person, Kuya?

古文：助曰： 使黯任职居官，无以逾人；然至其辅少主，守城深坚，招之不来，麾之不去，虽自谓贲、育，亦不能夺之矣。 
现代文：庄助说： 让汲黯任职当官，没有什么超越常人的才能；但要说到让他辅佐年幼的君主，会坚定不移地维护祖先基业，有人以利禄引诱他，他不会前去投靠，君主严辞苛责地驱赶他，他也不会离去，即使有人认为像孟贲、夏育那样勇猛无敌，也无法改变他的耿耿忠心！ 武帝说： 说得对。
English: Zhuang Zi said, "There is nothing beyond the ability of an ordinary person to let Qiu Qiu serve as an official; but when it comes to letting him assist the young monarch, he will unswervingly safeguard the ancestral heritage. If someone lures him with a lilo, he will not go to help. If the monarch drives him away with harsh words, he will not leave. Even if someone thinks that he is as brave and invincible as Meng Xuan and Xia Yu, he cannot change his loyalty! Emperor Wu said, "That's right."

古文：上曰： 然，古有社稷之臣，至如黯，近之矣。 
现代文：古时有所谓的社稷之臣，说到汲黯，就很接近了！ 
English: In ancient times, there were the so-called social vassals, but when it comes to gushing, they are very close!

古文：匈奴来请和亲，天子下其议。
现代文：匈奴前来请求和亲结好，武帝让群臣讨论。
English: The Xiongnu came to ask for a good relationship, and Emperor Wu let the ministers discuss it.

古文：大行王恢，燕人也，习胡事，议曰： 汉与匈奴和亲，率不过数岁，即复倍约；不如勿许，兴兵击之。 
现代文：大行王恢，是燕地人，熟悉匈奴情况，他提议说： 汉与匈奴和亲，大概不过几年，他们就又背弃盟约；不如不同意和亲的要求，发兵攻打匈奴。 
English: Da Xing Wang Wei, a native of Yan, who was familiar with the situation of the Huns, proposed: "Han and Huns are friendly, and it will probably only take a few years for them to renege on the treaty; it is better to disagree with the request of the friend and send troops to attack the Huns.

古文：韩安国曰： 匈奴迁徙鸟举，难得而制，自上古不属为人。今汉行数千里与之争利，则人马罢乏；虏以全制其敝，此危道也。
现代文：韩安国说： 匈奴经常迁徙；如同鸟飞一样，很难制服他们，自上古以来，都不把他们看做人类，现在如果汉军远征千里之外与匈奴争强斗胜，就会人马疲惫；敌人以逸待劳，这是很危险的。
English: Han An Guo said: The Xiongnu often migrate; like birds flying, it is difficult to subdue them. Since ancient times, they have not regarded them as human beings. Now, if the Chinese army goes on an expedition thousands of miles away to compete with the Xiongnu, it will be exhausted; the enemy will treat it as labor, which is very dangerous.

古文：不如和亲。 
现代文：不如与匈奴和亲。 
English: I'd rather be with my family.

古文：群臣议者多附安国。
现代文：群臣参加议论的，大多附和韩安国的意见。
English: Most of the ministers who took part in the discussion agreed with Han's opinion.

古文：于是上许和亲。
现代文：因此，武帝允许汉匈和亲。
English: Therefore, Emperor Wu allowed the Han-Hungarian reconciliation.

古文：世宗孝武皇帝上之上元光元年
现代文：元光元年
English: In the first year of Yuan Guang

古文：冬，十一月，初令郡国举孝廉各一人，从董仲舒之言也。
现代文：冬季，十一月，武帝首次命令各郡国各自察举孝廉一人，这是采纳了董娭偈娴慕ㄒ槎扇〉男卸
English: In the winter, in November, Emperor Wu for the first time ordered all counties and states to each investigate one filial son. This was the adoption of the principle of "one man, one family."

古文：卫尉李广为骁骑将军，屯云中；中尉程不识为车骑将军，屯雁门。
现代文：卫尉李广担任骁骑将军，驻守云中郡，中尉程不识担任车骑将军，驻守雁门郡。
English: Guardsman Li Guang served as a cavalry general, stationed in Yunnan County, and Lieutenant Cheng did not know served as a cavalry general, stationed in Ganmen County.

古文：六月，罢。
现代文：六月，朝廷罢免了他们二人的军事职务。
English: In June, the Imperial Court dismissed both of them from their military posts.

古文：广与不识俱以边太守将兵，有名当时。
现代文：李广和程不识都以边境郡守的身份指挥军队，当时很有名气。
English: Both Li Guang and Cheng unwittingly commanded the army as border county guards, which was very famous at the time.

古文：广行无部伍、行陈，就善水草舍止，人人自便，不击刁斗以自卫，莫府省约文书；然亦远斥候，未尝遇害。
现代文：李广指挥行军没有固定编制和行列阵势，选择水甜草肥的地方驻扎下来，人人自便，夜间也不派设巡更士兵敲打着刁斗警卫营盘，军中指挥部的文书简单便宜；但是，也远远地派出监视敌军的侦察哨兵，军营未曾遭到袭击。
English: Li Guang commanded the march without a fixed composition and line formation. He chose a place of water, sweet grass and manure to camp down. Everyone was at their own convenience. At night, patrol soldiers were not sent to beat the camp guard. The documents of the army headquarters were simple and cheap. However, reconnaissance sentries were also sent far away to monitor the enemy army. The military camp had not been attacked.

古文：程不识正部曲、行伍、营陈，击刁斗，士吏治军簿至明，军不得休息；然亦未尝遇害。
现代文：程不识则整肃军事编制，讲究队列和布阵安营，夜间敲刁斗巡逻，军中官佐处理军队文书一直忙到天明，军队不能随意休息；然而也没有遇到危险。
English: Without knowing it, the military establishment was purged, attention was paid to the queue and the setting up of the camp, the patrols were carried out at night, the lieutenant colonel was busy with the handling of military documents until dawn, and the army could not rest at will; however, there was no danger.

古文：不识曰： 李广军极简易，然虏卒犯之，无以禁也。而其士卒亦佚乐，咸乐为之死。
现代文：程不识说： 李广的军队很简单便宜，但是，如果敌人突然袭击它，就没有办法抵御；而李广的士兵也很自在，都心甘情愿地为他拼力死战。
English: Cheng did not know: Li Guang's army is simple and cheap, but if the enemy suddenly attacks it, there is no way to resist; and Li Guang's soldiers are also very comfortable, and they are willing to fight to the death for him.

古文：我军虽烦扰，然虏亦不得犯我。 
现代文：我的军队虽然军务烦扰，但敌人也不能侵犯我。 
English: Although my army is busy with military affairs, the enemy does not dare to invade me.

古文：然匈奴畏李广之略，士卒亦多乐从李广而苦程不识。
现代文：但是，匈奴人更害怕李广的谋略，汉军士兵也多数愿意跟随李广作战，而苦于跟随程不识。
English: However, the Huns were even more afraid of Li Guang's strategy, and most of the Han soldiers were willing to follow Li Guang in battle, but they suffered from not knowing how to follow.

古文：臣光曰：《易》曰： 师出以律，否臧凶。 
现代文：臣司马光曰：《易经》说： 军队一出动就要有严格的军纪，否则，不论胜败都是凶。 
English: Minister Sima Guang said: "The I Ching says: The army must have strict military discipline as soon as it is dispatched, otherwise, regardless of victory or defeat, it will be fierce.

古文：言治众而不用法，无不凶也。
现代文：这是说统领大军而不用法纪来控驭，没有不凶的。
English: This means that there is nothing sinister about leading a large army without using laws and regulations to control it.

古文：李广之将，使人人自便。
现代文：李广统领军队，使人人自便。
English: Li Guang led the army in an orderly manner, making everyone feel at ease.

古文：以广之材，如此焉可也；然不可以为法。
现代文：凭李广的奇才，这样是可以的，但是，不能把他的方法引为楷模来效法。
English: With Li Guang's genius, this is possible, but his method cannot be used as a model to follow.

古文：何则？
现代文：为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：其继者难也，况与之并时而为将乎！
现代文：谁要继续沿用这一方法却很难，更何况与李广同时做将领的人呢！
English: It would be difficult for anyone to continue using this method, let alone someone who was a general at the same time as Li Guang!

古文：夫小人之情，乐于安肆而昧于近祸，彼既以程不识为烦扰而乐于从广，且将仇其上而不服。
现代文：说到普通人的本来性情，都喜好安逸，而不知道接近祸害的危险，那些士兵们既然认为程不识治军严苛烦扰，而愿意跟随李广作战，势必将要仇视他们的长官而不服从指挥。
English: Speaking of the natural disposition of ordinary people, who all like to be at ease, but do not know the danger of approaching disaster, those soldiers who are willing to fight with Li Guang because they think that Cheng does not know how to govern the army and is harsh and annoying, are bound to hate their superiors and disobey commands.

古文：然则简易之害，非徒广军无以禁虏之仓卒而已也。故曰 兵事以严终 ，为将者，亦严而已矣。
现代文：这样说来，指挥军队简单便宜的危害，就不仅仅是李广的军队无法防御敌人突然袭击之一点了！所以说 军队的事情要始终严格 ，统领军队，也就是严格而已。
English: In this way, the harm of simple and cheap command of the army is not just one of the points that Li Guang's army cannot defend against the enemy's sudden attack! Therefore, the affairs of the army should always be strict, commanding the army, that is, strict.

古文：然则效程不识，虽无功，犹不败；效李广，鲜不覆亡哉！
现代文：如果这样的话，仿效程不识用兵，即便是打不了胜仗，还可以保证不失败；如果学习李广的方法，很少能避免全军覆灭的结局啊！
English: If this is the case, if we follow the example of Cheng, who does not know how to use soldiers, even if we cannot win the war, we can still ensure that we do not fail; if we learn the methods of Li Guang, we can rarely avoid the outcome of the destruction of the whole army!

古文：夏，四月，赦天下。
现代文：夏季，四月，武帝宣布大赦天下。
English: In the summer, in April, Emperor Wu declared a general amnesty.

古文：五月，诏举贤良、文学，上亲策之。
现代文：五月，下诏察举贤良、文学、武帝亲自出题考试。
English: In May, the next imperial edict was issued to promote virtue, literature, and Emperor Wu personally set up an examination.

古文：秋，七月，癸未，日有食之。
现代文：秋季，七月，癸未，出现日食。
English: In autumn, in July, in the evening, there is a solar eclipse.

