古文：高帝已封大功臣二十余人，其余日夜争功不决。
现代文：原文汉高祖刘邦即帝位以后，封赏了建立大功的臣子二十多人，还没有封赏的将领，为了争夺奖赏而争相表功，没完没了。
English: After Emperor Liu Bang, the forefather of the Han Dynasty, rewarded more than 20 courtiers who had made great contributions to the establishment of the dynasty. There is no end to the generals who have not yet been rewarded and compete for awards.

古文：上在洛阳南宫，望见诸将往往相与坐沙中偶语。以问留侯，对曰： 陛下起布衣。以此属取天下，今为天子。
现代文：汉高祖住在洛阳南宫的时候，看到将军们常常聚在一起窃窃私语，于是召见张良询问，张良说： 陛下由平民的身份而取得天下，如今已经贵为天子。
English: When Han Gaozu lived in the Southern Palace of Luoyang, he saw that the generals often gathered together to whisper, so he summoned Zhang Liang to inquire. Zhang Liang said: Your Majesty gained the world from the status of a commoner, and now has become a noble son of heaven.

古文：而所封皆故人，所诛皆仇怨，故相聚谋反耳。 
现代文：但是所分封的对象都是自己的旧友，而往日和陛下有仇怨的都遭到了诛杀，将军们担心自身的安危，因此聚在一起密谋造反。 
English: But the subjects of the appointments were all their old friends, and those who had been at enmity with him and his majesty had been slain. The generals, fearing for their own safety, gathered together and plotted to rebel.

古文：上忧之。曰： 奈何？ 
现代文：汉高祖感到十分不安，问张良： 应该怎么办呢？ 
English: Han Gaozu felt very uneasy and asked Zhang Liang: What should I do?

古文：留侯曰： 上生平所憎，群臣所共知，谁最甚者？ 
现代文：张良说： 陛下生平最讨厌的，而大臣也都知道的人，是谁？ 
English: Zhang Liang said, "Who is the most detestable person in Your Majesty's life who is known to the minister?

古文：上曰： 雍齿数窘我。 
现代文：汉高祖说： 雍齿曾经多次让我难堪，我一直想要杀他，但是他功劳颇多，因此不忍心。 
English: Han Gaozu said, "Yongjie embarrassed me many times. I always wanted to kill him, but he did a lot of work, so I couldn't bear it.

古文：留侯曰： 今急。先封雍齿，则群臣人人自坚矣。 
现代文：张良说： 现在情况紧急，臣认为陛下首先要封为侯的就是雍齿，那么其他大臣就不会再心存疑虑了。 
English: Zhang Liang said: Now the situation is urgent. The minister believes that the first thing that His Majesty should do is to appoint Yongjie as the prince, then other ministers will no longer have any doubts.

古文：乃封齿为什邡侯，群臣喜曰： 雍齿且侯。
现代文：于是汉高祖封雍齿为什邡侯，群臣高兴地说： 连雍齿都能封侯，我们还有什么可担心的呢？ 
English: As a result, Henkel's ancestors made Yongzha their vassal, and the vassals said happily: Even Yongzha can be vassal, what else do we have to worry about?

古文：吾属无患矣。 温公曰： 诸将所言，未必反也。果谋反，良亦何待问而后言邪？
现代文：司马温公说： 将军们所谈论的未必一定是有关谋反的事；他们如果真的有造反的意图，张良也不会等到高祖询问的时候才说。
English: Sima Wengong said: What the generals are talking about is not necessarily about plotting a rebellion; if they really have the intention of rebellion, Zhang Liang will not wait until Gaozu inquires.

古文：徒以帝初得天下，数用爱憎行诛赏。群臣往往有觖望自危之心。
现代文：张良只是因为高祖在即帝位的初期，便以个人的爱憎行赏论罪，造成诸臣的不安，因此才忠言劝谏，改变了高祖的作风。 
English: Zhang Liang only changed Gao Zu's style of work because Gao Zu, in the early days of the imperial throne, had caused unease among the courtiers with his personal likes and dislikes. Therefore, he only advised and persuaded Gao Zu.

古文：故良因事纳忠以变移帝意耳! 袁了凡曰： 子房为雍齿游说，使帝自是有疑功臣之心，致三大功臣相继屠戮，未必非一言之害也! 
现代文：袁了凡说： 张良替雍齿游说，导致高祖对功臣的不信任，致使日后三大功臣都遭到诛杀，未尝不是张良的一句话所种下的祸根。 
English: Yuan Lifan said: Zhang Liang lobbied for Yongzu, which led to Gao Zu's distrust of the heroes. As a result, all three heroes were killed in the future. This was the bane planted by Zhang Liang's words.

古文：由前言，良为忠谋；由后言，良为罪案。
现代文：从前者来看张良是个忠臣，从后者来看张良却是个祸首。
English: From the former point of view, Zhang Liang is a loyal subject, but from the latter point of view, Zhang Liang is a villain.

古文：要之布衣称帝，自汉创局，群臣皆比肩共事之人，若觖望自危，其势必反。
现代文：我认为刘邦以平民身份建立汉朝，所有的大臣都是当年并肩征战的伙伴，如果人心不安必定会产生谋反，高祖所忧虑的也是这些。
English: I think that Liu Bang established the Han Dynasty as a commoner, and all the ministers were partners who fought side by side. If the people are uneasy, there will inevitably be a rebellion, which is what Gao Zu is worried about.

古文：帝所虑亦止此一著，良乘机道破，所以其言易入，而诸将之浮议顿息，不可谓非奇谋也!
现代文：张良借高祖问话道破了高祖的心意，因此高祖能轻易接受张良的建议，平息群臣的疑虑，不能不说张良的计谋是非常高明的。
English: Zhang Liang broke Gao Zu's will by asking Gao Zu for advice. As a result, Gao Zu could easily accept Zhang Liang's suggestion and allay the doubts of his vassals. It must be said that Zhang Liang's strategy was very clever.

古文：若韩、彭俎醢，良亦何能逆料之哉!
现代文：至于说日后韩信、彭越等功臣的被诛杀，又岂是张良所能预料到的呢？
English: As for the fact that Han Xin, Peng Yue and other heroes were killed in the future, could Zhang Liang have predicted this?

