古文：◎选举二
现代文：选举二
English: Election Two

古文：科目者，沿唐、宋之旧，而稍变其试士之法，专取四子书及《易》、《书》、《诗》、《春秋》、《礼记》五经命题试士。
现代文：科目即科举考试的各种名目，沿袭厦、塞的旧规，而略微变更其考试士人的办法，专门取四子书纵及《易》、《书》、《诗》、《春秋》、《礼记》五经命题考试士子。
English: The subjects, that is, the various names of the imperial examinations, follow the old regulations of Xiamen and Xiamen, but slightly change their examination methods, and specially take the four books including "Easy," "Book," "Poem," "Spring and Autumn" and "Rituals" five propositions examination.

古文：盖太祖与刘基所定。
现代文：是太祖与刘基所定。
English: It was decided by the Great Ancestor and Liu Ji.

古文：其文略仿宋经义，然代古人语气为之，体用排偶，谓之八股，通谓之制义。
现代文：其文章大致仿效宋代的经义，但是要代替古人的语气作文，文体采用排偶，叫做八股，通称制义。
English: Its articles roughly imitate the Song Dynasty's sutras, but to replace the tone composition of the ancients, the style uses a pairing, called the eight strands, commonly known as the system.

古文：三年大比，以诸生试之直省，曰乡试。
现代文：三年大考，以诸生在直省考试，叫做乡试。
English: The three-year university entrance examination, in which all students take the provincial examination, is called the township examination.

古文：中式者为举人。
现代文：考试合格的便是举人。
English: The only way to qualify for the exam is to nominate someone.

古文：次年，以举人试之京师，曰会试。
现代文：第二年，以举人身份在京城考试，叫做会试。
English: In the second year, the exam was held in the capital city as a test of ability. It was called the union exam.

古文：中式者，天子亲策于廷，曰廷试，亦曰殿试。
现代文：考试合格的，天子在朝廷亲自策问，叫做廷试，亦叫殿试。
English: Those who pass the examination are personally questioned by the emperor in the imperial court, which is called the court examination, also known as the palace examination.

古文：分一、二、三甲以为名第之次。
现代文：分一、三甲作为名次的顺序。
English: Division 1 and 3A as the order of ranking.

古文：一甲止三人，曰状元、榜眼、探花，赐进士及第。
现代文：一甲只有三个人，叫做状元、榜眼、探花，赐予进士及第。
English: There are only three people in the first grade, called jogen, pangyo, and tanka, and they are given the title of shinshi and rank.

古文：二甲若干人，赐进士出身。
现代文：二甲若干人，赐予进士出身。
English: Several of them were awarded the rank of Jinshi.

古文：三甲若干人，赐同进士出身。
现代文：三甲若干人，赐予同进士出身。
English: Several members of the 3rd class were awarded the title of Tongjin Shi.

古文：状元、榜眼、探花之名，制所定也。
现代文：状元、榜眼、探花的名称，是皇帝规定的。
English: It was the emperor who prescribed the names of jogen, hitome, and tanshue.

古文：而士大夫又通以乡试第一为解元，会试第一为会元，二、三甲第一为传胪云。
现代文：而士大夫又通以乡试第一名为解元，会试第一名为会元，一、三甲第一名为传胪。
English: In addition, the township test was the first to be called the solution, the meeting test was the first to be called the meeting, and the first to be passed was the first to be passed.

古文：子、午、卯、酉年乡试，辰、戌、丑、未年会试。
现代文：子、午、卯、酉年举行乡试，辰、戌、丑、未年举行会试。
English: The township examinations are held in the years of Z, M, U, and Y, and the club examinations are held in the years of Z, M, U, and Y.

古文：乡试以八月，会试以二月，皆初九日为第一场，又三日为第二场，又三日为第三场。
现代文：乡试在八月，会试在二月，都是初九日为第一场，又过三日为第二场，又遇三日为第三场。
English: The township examination is held in August, and the municipal examination is held in February. The first session is held on the 9th day of the first month, the second session is held three days later, and the third session is held three days later.

古文：初设科举时，初场试经义二道，《四书》义一道；二场论一道；三场策一道。
现代文：最初设立科举时，初场考试经义二篇文章，《四书》义一篇文章；二场，论一篇；三场，策一篇。
English: When the examination was initially set up, the first examination consisted of two essays on the meaning of the sutras, one essay on the meaning of the Four Books; two essays, one essay; three essays, one essay.

古文：中式后十日，复以骑、射、书、算、律五事试之。
现代文：考试合格后十天，又用骑、射、书、算、律五件事进行考试。
English: Ten days after passing the exam, the five subjects of riding, shooting, writing, arithmetic and law were tested again.

古文：后颁科举定式，初场试《四书》义三道，经义四道。
现代文：后来颁发科举的固定格式，初场考试《四书》义三篇，经义四篇。
English: Later, the fixed format of the examination was issued, and the first examination "Four Books" consisted of three essays and four essays.

古文：《四书》主朱子《集注》，《易》主程《传》、朱子《本义》，《书》主蔡氏传及古注疏，《诗》主朱子《集传》，《春秋》主左氏、公羊、谷梁三传及胡安国、张洽传，《礼记》主古注疏。
现代文：《四书》以朱子《集注》为主，《易》以程颐传、朱子体义》为主，《书》以蔡氏传以及古注疏为主，《诗》以朱子《集传》为主，《春秋》以左氏、公羊、谷梁三传以及胡安国、张洽传为主，《礼记》以古注疏为主。
English: The "Four Books" is mainly Zhu Zi's "Collected Commentaries," "E" is mainly Cheng Zi's "Biography of Cheng Zi" and "Biography of Zhu Zi," "Book" is mainly Cai's "Biography of Cai" and "Ancient Commentary of Zhu Zi," "Poem" is mainly Zhu Zi's "Biography of Zhu Zi," "Spring and Autumn" is mainly Zuo's "Biography of Zuo Zi" and "Biography of Gu Liang" and "Biography of Huang Guo" and "Biography of Zhang Cai," and "Rituals" is mainly

古文：永乐间，颁《四书五经大全》，废注疏不用。
现代文：永乐年间，颁布《四书五经大全》，废弃注疏不用。
English: In the Yongle era, the "Four Books and Five Classics" was promulgated, and the annotation was abandoned.

古文：其后，《春秋》亦不用张洽传，礼记止用陈澔《集说》。
现代文：其后，《春秋》也不用张洽传，《礼记》只用陈潞《集说》。
English: After that, "Spring and Autumn" did not need to be transmitted, and "Rituals" only used Chen Xi's "Collection of Stories."

古文：二场试论一道，判五道，诏、诰、表、内科一道。
现代文：二场考试论一篇，判五篇，诏、诰、表、内科一篇。
English: In the two examinations, there was one paper on theory, five papers on judgment, and one paper on imperial edict, imperial edict, table, and internal medicine.

古文：三场试经史时务策五道。
现代文：三场考试经史时务策五篇。
English: The three exams are accompanied by five essays on historical and current affairs.

古文：廷试，以三月朔。
现代文：廷试，在三月初一。
English: The trial will begin on the first of March.

古文：乡试，直隶于京府，各省于布政司。
现代文：乡试，直隶在京城，各省则在布政司。
English: Township probation officers are directly subordinate to the mayor in the capital, while provincial probation officers are subordinate to the secretary of state.

古文：会试，于礼部。
现代文：会试，在礼部。
English: The entrance exam, in the ceremonial department.

古文：主考，乡、会试俱二人。
现代文：主考官，乡、会试都是二人。
English: There are two chief examiners, one for the township and one for the examination.

古文：同考，乡试四人，会试八人。
现代文：同考官，乡试四人，会试八人。
English: There are four examiners for the township examination and eight for the municipal examination.

古文：提调一人，在内京官，在外布政司官。
现代文：提调一人，在京城内焉京官担任，在京城外为布政司官担任。
English: One person will be transferred to serve as a Beijing official in the capital and as a secretary for political affairs outside the capital.

古文：会试，礼部官监试二人，在内御史，在外按察司官。
现代文：会试，礼部官监督考试二人，在京城内焉御史，在京城外为按察司官。
English: Two members of the Ministry of Rites and Ceremonies will supervise the examinations, one in the capital and one outside the capital.

古文：会试，御史供给收掌试卷；弥封、誊录、对读、受卷及巡绰监门，搜检怀挟，俱有定员，各执其事。
现代文：会试，御史供给收掌试卷；弥封、誊录、对读、受卷以及巡察警戒、监门，搜查挟带，都有固定人员，各自执行其事。
English: There are fixed personnel in charge of examinations, providing and receiving examination papers, sealing, transcribing, reading aloud, receiving examination papers, as well as patrolling, guarding, guarding, and searching.

古文：举子，则国子生及府、州、县学生员之学成者，儒士之未仕者，官之未入流者，皆由有司申举性资敦厚、文行可称者应之。
现代文：举子，便是国子生以及府、州、县学生员中的学成者，儒士中的没有作官者，官吏中的没有入流者，都由主管部门举荐本性资质敦厚、文章德行值得称道的人参加考试。
English: Candidates are recommended by the competent departments to take the examination if they are students of the country, prefectural, state or county students, if they are scholars, if they are non-officials among the Confucianists, and if they are non-officials among the government officials.

古文：其学校训导专教生徒，及罢闲官吏，倡优之家，与居父母丧者，俱不许入试。
现代文：学校的训导专门教授的生徒，以及罢官闲居的官吏，倡优乏家，为父母服丧的人，都不允许入场考试。
English: Pupils who are specially taught discipline at school, as well as officials who have been dismissed from their posts and are idle, those who advocate meritocracy, and those who are mourning for their parents, are not allowed to take the entrance examination.

古文：试卷之首，书三代姓名及其籍贯年甲，所习本经，所司印记。
现代文：试卷卷首，书写自家三代姓名及自己的籍贯年龄，所学的经书，所司的印记。
English: At the beginning of the examination paper, write the names of the three generations of your family and the age you came from, the scriptures you have studied, and the seal of your school.

古文：试日入场，讲问、代冒者有禁。
现代文：考试那天入场，说话讨论、代冒之人有禁令。
English: On the day of the exam, there is a ban on entering the venue, speaking, discussing, and substituting.

古文：晚未纳卷，给烛三枝。
现代文：天晚没有交卷，发给蜡烛三枝。
English: If the roll was not handed in by the end of the day, three candles were given out.

古文：文字中回避御名、庙号，及不许自序门第。
现代文：文字中要回避皇帝的名字和庙号，以及不允许自序家族门第。
English: In the text, the emperor's name and temple name should be avoided, and the self-ordering family lineage should not be allowed.

古文：弥封编号作三合字。
现代文：弥封编号作三合字。
English: The muffler number is a three-letter combination.

古文：考试者用墨，谓之墨卷。
现代文：考试的人用墨，叫做墨卷。
English: People who take exams use ink, which is called ink roll.

古文：誊录用朱，谓之朱卷。
现代文：誊录的人用朱，叫做朱卷。
English: The person who inscribes the scroll with red ink is called a red scroll.

古文：试士之所，谓之贡院。
现代文：考试的地方，叫做贡院。
English: The place where the exams are held is called the "Gongin."

古文：诸生席舍，谓之号房。
现代文：诸生的席舍，叫做号房。
English: The seat of all sentient beings is called the Great Hall.

古文：人一军守之，谓之号军。
现代文：一个人由一个士兵看守，叫做号军。
English: A person guarded by a soldier is called a bugler.

古文：试官入院，辄封钥内外门户。
现代文：考试官进入贡院，便封锁内外门户。
English: When the examiners entered the tribute hall, they blocked the inner and outer portals.

古文：在外提调、监试等谓之外帘官，在内主考、同考谓之内帘官。
现代文：在考场外面的提调、监考等，叫做外帘官，在考场内的主考官、同考官，叫做内帘官。
English: The examiners and supervisors outside the examination hall are called external examiners, and the main examiners and co-examiners inside the examination hall are called internal examiners.

古文：廷试用翰林及朝臣文学之优者，为读卷官。
现代文：廷试使用翰林以及朝臣中文学优秀的人做读卷官。
English: The imperial court used Hanlin and courtiers who excelled in literature as reading officials.

古文：共阅对策，拟定名次，候临轩。
现代文：共同阅读对策，拟定名次，等候皇帝驾临前殿。
English: They read the countermeasures together, draw up the rankings, and wait for the emperor to arrive at the front hall.

古文：或如所拟，或有所更定，传制唱第。
现代文：有的按照读卷官所拟名次，有的有所更改，传达皇帝的决定，宣唱考中进士的名次。
English: Some are in accordance with the order of precedence drawn up by the reciter, and some have been changed, conveying the emperor's decision, and proclaiming the order of precedence of the junior high school entrance examination.

古文：状元授修撰，榜眼、探花授编修，二、三甲考选庶吉士者，皆为翰林官。
现代文：状元授修撰官，榜眼、探花授编修官，一、三甲考选庶吉士的，都任翰林官。
English: Those who were awarded the title of honorable scholar and author, and those who were awarded the title of illustrious scholar and author, and those who were awarded the title of honorable scholar and author, and those who were awarded the title of honorable scholar and author, and those who were awarded the title of honorable scholar and author, and those who were awarded the title of honorable scholar and author, and those who were awarded the title of honorable scholar and author, and those who were awarded the title of honorable scholar and author, and those who were awarded the title of honorable scholar and author, and those who were awarded the title of honorable scholar and author, and those who were awarded the title of

古文：其他或授给事、御史、主事、中书、行人、评事、太常、国子博士，或授府推官、知州、知县等官。
现代文：其余的或授予给事、御史、主事、中书、行人、评事、太常、园子博士，或授予府推官、知州、知县等官。
English: The rest were awarded to officials in charge of administration, history, administration, Chinese classics, pedestrians, commentators, superintendents, and gardeners, or to prefectural, prefectural, and prefectural officials.

古文：举人、贡生不第、入监而选者，或授小京职，或授府佐及州县正官，或授教职。
现代文：举人、贡生没有考中、入国子监待选的，或授予小的京官，或授予府佐以及州县正官，或授予教授之职。
English: Those who have not passed the junior high school entrance examination or have entered the country and are waiting to be selected, may be awarded a minor Beijing official, a prefectural and county official, or a professor.

古文：此明一代取士之大略也。
现代文：造就是明朝取士的大概情况。
English: This is an approximate picture of the situation in the morning.

古文：终明之世，右文左武。
现代文：终结明朝，崇尚文士，看轻武人。
English: The end of the Ming Dynasty, advocating scribes and despising warriors.

古文：然亦尝设武科以收之，可得而附列也。
现代文：但是也曾经设立武科以收聚士人，可以附列。
English: However, the military academy was also once established in order to gather scholars, which can be added to the list.

古文：初，太祖起事，首罗贤才。
现代文：当初，太祖起兵，首先搜罗贤才。
English: In the beginning, the great ancestor raised an army, and first of all, he collected talents.

古文：吴元年设文武二科取士之令，使有司劝谕民间秀士及智勇之人，以时勉学，俟开举之岁，充贡京师。
现代文：昊元年设立文武二科选取才士的条令，派主管官吏鼓励告谕民间优秀人才以及有智谋有勇力的人，抓住时机，努力学习，等到开始科举考试的年份，到京城去做贡生。
English: In 1981, a regulation was established for the selection of talents in the two disciplines of literature and martial arts, and the competent officials were sent to encourage the outstanding talents of the people and the people with wisdom and courage to seize the opportunity, study hard, and wait until the year of the start of the imperial examination to go to Beijing to pay tribute.

古文：洪武三年，诏曰： 汉、唐及宋，取士各有定制，然但贵文学而不求德艺之全。
现代文：洪武三年，下诏说： 漠、唐至宋，选取才士各有一定的制度，但是只推重文学而不追求道德技艺的全面。
English: In the third year of Hongwu's reign, the following edict was issued: From the Western and Tang Dynasties to the Song Dynasty, there was a certain system for selecting talents, but it only emphasized literature and did not pursue a comprehensive system of moral skills.

古文：前元待士甚优，而权豪势要，每纳奔竞之人，夤缘阿附，辄窃仕禄。
现代文：前代元朝对待士人很优厚，但是权贵豪强、身居要职的人常常接纳奔竞钻营之人，攀绿阿附，擅自窃取官位俸禄。
English: The previous Yuan Dynasty treated scholars very generously, but the powerful and powerful, and people in important positions often accepted people who were competing in the drilling camp, climbing the green, and stealing the official salary without authorization.

古文：其怀材抱道者，耻与并进，甘隐山林而不出。
现代文：那些胸怀奇才，深有德行的人，以与之并进而感到羞耻，甘愿隐居山林而不出仕。
English: Those who have genius and virtue in their hearts are ashamed to be associated with them, and prefer to live in seclusion in the mountains and forests rather than serve.

古文：风俗之弊，一至于此。
现代文：风气的衰败，竟达到这样的地步。
English: The decay of the culture has reached such a level.

古文：自今年八月始，特设科举，务取经明行修、博通古今、名实相称者。
现代文：从今年八月开始，特意设直科举考试，务求选取经书明达、德行善美、博通古今、名实相副的人。
English: Starting from August this year, a direct examination will be specially set up in order to select people who are well-versed in scripture, virtuous, virtuous, well-versed in ancient and modern times, and who are worthy of the name.

古文：朕将亲策于廷，第其高下而任之以官。
现代文：我将亲自在朝廷策间，排列其高低等次而以官职授予他们。
English: I will personally rank them in order of seniority and juniority among the imperial strategists and award them with official positions.

古文：使中外文臣皆由科举而进，非科举者毋得与官。 
现代文：使朝内朝外文臣都由科举进身，不经过科举考试的人不得授官。 
English: So that all the civil servants in the imperial court and outside the imperial court are promoted through the imperial examination, and those who do not pass the imperial examination are not allowed to be promoted.

古文：于是京师行省各举乡试：直隶贡额百人，河南、山东、山西、陕西、北平、福建、江西、浙江、湖广皆四十人，广西、广东皆二十五人，才多或不及者，不拘额数。
现代文：于是京城和行省各自举行乡试，直隶贡生名额一百人，河南、山东、山西、陕西、北平、福建、江西、浙江、湖广都是四十人，广西、广东都是二十五人，人才多或不够数的，不拘限名额。
English: As a result, Beijing and the provinces held their own township examinations, with one hundred direct-affiliated students, and forty from Henan, Shandong, Shanxi, Shaanxi, Beiping, Fujian, Jiangxi, Zhejiang, and Hunan, and twenty-five from Guangxi and Guangdong. There is no limit on the number of talented people.

古文：高丽、安南、占城，诏许其国士子于本国乡试，贡赴京师。
现代文：高丽、安南、占城，下诏允许其国士子在本国参加乡试，贡举赴京城。
English: Goryeo, Annan, and Chamcheng issued the following edict to allow their countrymen to participate in the township examination in their own country and to go to the capital with a tribute.

古文：明年会试，取中一百二十名。
现代文：第二年参加会试，选取合格者一百二十名。
English: In the second year, one hundred and twenty successful candidates were selected to take part in the examination.

古文：帝亲制策问，试于奉天殿，擢吴伯宗第一。
现代文：皇帝亲自制定策问，在奉天殿殿试，选拔昊伯宗为第一。
English: The emperor personally formulated the strategy, and selected Hao Bozong as the first in the test of the Bongtian Temple.

古文：午门外张挂黄榜，奉天殿宣谕，赐宴中书省。
现代文：午门外张挂黄榜，在奉天殿宣唱训谕，在中书省赐宴。
English: At noon, a yellow banner hangs outside the gate, and the imperial edict is chanted at the Temple of Heaven, and a banquet is held at the Chinese Academy of Sciences.

古文：授伯宗为礼部员外郎，馀以次授官有差。
现代文：授予昊伯宗为礼部员外郎，其余的按不同等次授予不同官职。
English: Hao Bozong was awarded the title of Foreigner of the Ministry of Ceremonies, and the rest were awarded different official positions according to different ranks.

古文：时以天下初定，令各行省连试三年，且以官多缺员，举人俱免会试，赴京听选。
现代文：当时因天下刚刚安定，命令各行省连续考试三年，并且因为官职多缺员，举人都免于会试，赴京城听候选官。
English: At that time, because the world had just been stabilized, all provinces were ordered to conduct examinations for three consecutive years, and because there were many vacancies in official positions, everyone was exempted from the examination and went to Beijing to listen to candidates.

古文：又擢其年少俊异者张唯、王辉等为翰林院编修，萧韶为秘书监直长，令入禁中文华堂肄业，太子赞善大夫宋濂等为之师。
现代文：又提拔其中年少英俊特异的张唯、王辉等为翰林院编修，萧韶为秘书监直长，命令进入宫禁文华堂完成学业。太子赞善大夫宋濂等人作他们的老师。
English: He also promoted the young and handsome Zhang Wei and Wang Hui to the position of editor of the Hanlin Academy, and Xiao Yao to the position of secretary-supervisor, and ordered them to enter the Imperial Palace to complete their studies at the Wenhua Hall. Prince Zanzan Doctor Song Yao and others served as their teachers.

古文：帝听政之暇，辄幸堂中，评其文字优劣，日给光禄酒馔。
现代文：皇帝处理政务的闲暇时间，每每亲临堂中，评论他们的文章优劣。每天光禄寺供给他们酒饭。
English: During the Emperor's leisure time, when he was busy with government affairs, he would come to the hall every day to comment on the quality of their essays. Every day, Koroku-ji Temple would provide them with food and drink.

古文：每食，皇太子、亲王迭为之主，赐白金、弓矢、鞍马及冬夏衣，宠遇之甚厚。
现代文：每次吃饭，皇太子、亲王交替作宴宾的主人，赐给他们白银、弓箭、鞍马以及冬夏的衣服，优宠礼待十分丰厚。
English: At each meal, the crown prince and the prince alternated as the host of the guests, giving them silver, bows and arrows, saddle horses and winter and summer clothes. The favors were very rich.

古文：既而谓所取多后生少年，能以所学措诸行事者寡，乃但令有司察举贤才，而罢科举不用。
现代文：随后认为所选取的多是后生少年，能够以所学知识用在行政上的很少，便祇命令主管部门考察选拔贤才，而罢除科举不用。
English: Subsequently, it was considered that most of those selected were children of the future, and only a few were able to use the knowledge they had learned for administrative purposes. Therefore, the competent department was ordered to investigate and select talents, and there was no need to cancel the imperial examinations.

古文：至十五年，复设。
现代文：到洪武十五年，又设科举。
English: In the 15th year of Hongwu's reign, the imperial examinations were also established.

古文：十七年始定科举之式，命礼部颁行各省，后遂以为永制，而荐举渐轻，久且废不用矣。
现代文：洪武十七年纔规定科举的程序，命令礼部颁布施行于各省，后来便成为长久的制度，而荐举渐渐不受重视，久了便废弃不用。
English: In the seventeenth year of Hongwu, the procedures of the imperial examination were stipulated, and the Ministry of Ceremonies was ordered to promulgate and implement them in all provinces. Later, it became a long-term system, and the recommendation was gradually not taken seriously, and it was abandoned after a long time.

古文：十八年廷试，擢一甲进士丁显等为翰林院修撰，二甲马京等为编修，吴文为检讨。
现代文：洪武十八年，廷试，选拔一甲进士丁显等人任翰林院修撰，二甲马京等人任编修，昊文任检讨。
English: In the 18th year of Hongwu, a court trial was held, and one Jia Jin Shi Ding Xian and others were selected to be the authors of the Hanlin Academy, two Jia Ma Jing and others were appointed as editors, and Hao Wen was appointed as a reviewer.

古文：进士之入翰林，自此始也。
现代文：进士入翰林，从此时开始。
English: From this point on, the journey into the forest of dreams begins.

古文：使进士观政于诸司，其在翰林、承敕监等衙门者，曰庶吉士。
现代文：使进士在各政府部门参与政事，叫做观政，那些在翰林、承敕监等衙门的，叫做庶吉士。
English: It is called "watching politics" to let the insiders participate in political affairs in various government departments, and those who are in the gate of Hanlin, Chengyuan, etc. are called "junior cadres."

古文：进士之为庶吉士，亦自此始也。
现代文：进士为庶吉士，也从此时开始。
English: It was also from this time that Jinshi became Shobokichi.

古文：其在六部、都察院、通政司、大理寺等衙门者仍称进士，观政进士之名亦自此始也。
现代文：那些在六部、都察院通政司、大理寺等衙门的仍然称进士，观政进士的名称也从此时开始。
English: Those who passed the examination at the Roppongi, Tsuka-in, and Dali-ji temples were still referred to as Shinshi, and the title of Shinshi Shinshi also began at this time.

古文：其后试额有增减，条例有变更，考官有内外轻重，闱事有是非得失。
现代文：其后，考试选取数额有增减，条例有变更，考官有内外轻重，礼闱之事有是非得失。
English: Subsequently, the amount of examination selection has increased or decreased, the regulations have changed, the examiner has internal and external importance, and the matter of etiquette has its pros and cons.

古文：其细者勿论，其有关于国是者不可无述也。
现代文：其细小的不必谈论，其有关于国家大事的不能不记述。
English: It is not necessary to talk about the small things, but it is necessary to write about the national events.

古文：乡试之额，洪武十七年诏不拘额数，从实充贡。
现代文：乡试的名额，洪武十七年，下诏不拘限额数，根据实际充任贡举。
English: In the 17th year of Hongwu, the quota for the township examination was raised to the following amount, regardless of the quota limit, according to the actual appointment tribute.

古文：洪熙元年始有定额。
现代文：洪熙元年，开始有了定额。
English: In the first year of Hongxi, there was a quota.

古文：其后渐增。
现代文：其后渐渐增多。
English: After that, it gradually increased.

古文：至正统间，南北直隶定以百名，江西六十五名，他省又自五而杀，至云南二十名为最少。
现代文：到正统年间，南北直隶规定一百名，江西六十五名，别的省又五个五个地减少，至云南二十名为最少。
English: During the years of orthodoxy, the number of people directly subordinate to the north and south was stipulated to be one hundred, sixty-five in Jiangxi, and five and five in other provinces, and the minimum was twenty in Yunnan.

古文：嘉靖间，增至四十，而贵州亦二十名。
现代文：嘉靖年间增加到四十名，而贵州仍然是二十名。
English: During the Jiajing period, the number increased to forty, while Guizhou still had twenty.

古文：庆、历、启、祯间，两直隶益增至一百三十馀名，他省渐增，无出百名者。
现代文：隆庆、万历、天启、崇祯年间，两直隶增加到一百三十多名，别的省渐渐增加，但没有超出一百名的。
English: During the years of Longqing, Wanli, Tianqi and Chongzhen, the number of two-line counties increased to more than one hundred and thirty, and other provinces gradually increased, but did not exceed one hundred.

古文：交阯初开以十名为额，迨弃其地乃止。
现代文：交肚最初开科以十名为限额，直到放弃其地纔停止。
English: The handover initially started with a ten-name limit, until giving up its mantle stopped.

古文：会试之额，国初无定，少至三十二人，其多者，若洪武乙丑、永乐丙戌，至四百七十二人。
现代文：会试的数额，开国初期没有定额，少到三十二人，其多者，如洪武乙丑年、永乐丙戌年，多连四百七十二人。
English: In the early days of the founding of the People's Republic of China, there was no fixed quota for the number of people taking the civil service examination, which ranged from as few as thirty-two to as many as four hundred and seventy-two.

古文：其后或百名，或二百名，或二百五十名，或三百五十名，增损不一，皆临期奏请定夺。
现代文：其后有的一百名，有的二百名，有的二百五十名，有的三百五十名，增减数量不一致，都临期奏请决定。
English: After that, there were one hundred, two hundred, two hundred and fifty, and three hundred and fifty. The increase and decrease of the number was not consistent. Please make a decision at your earliest convenience.

古文：至成化乙未而后，率取三百名，有因题请及恩诏而广五十名或百名者，非恒制也。
现代文：到成化乙未年之后，大致选取三百名，有因为题请以及恩诏而扩大五十名或一百名的，不是恒定的制度。
English: After the year of Chenghua Biyi, roughly three hundred names were selected, and fifty or one hundred names were expanded because of the invitation and the edict, which is not a constant system.

古文：初制，礼闱取士，不分南北。
现代文：以前的制度，会试选取才士，不分南北。
English: Under the previous system, talented people were selected on a trial basis, regardless of whether they were from the north or the south.

古文：自洪武丁丑，考官刘三吾、白信蹈所取宋琮等五十二人，皆南士。
现代文：从洪武丁丑年，考官刘三吾、自信蹈所取宋琮等五十二人，都是南方之士。
English: From Hongwu Ding Chou, examiner Liu Sangu, self-confident Song Tao and other fifty-two people, they are all from the south.

古文：三月，廷试，擢陈安阝为第一。
现代文：三月，廷试，选拔陈郊为第一。
English: In March, the court trial, Chen Jiao was selected as the first.

古文：帝怒所取之偏，命侍读张信等十二人覆阅，安阝亦与焉。
现代文：皇帝因所取偏好发怒，命令侍读张信等十二人重新阅卷，陈郊也在被选中之列。
English: The emperor was angry because of the preference, and ordered twelve people, including Zhang Xin, to re-read the scroll. Chen Jiao was also among those selected.

古文：帝犹怒不已，悉诛信蹈及信、安阝等，戍三吾于边，亲自阅卷，取任伯安等六十一人。
现代文：皇帝还是愤怒不息，尽诛白信蹈以及张信、陈郊等人，刘三吾谪戍边地，皇帝亲自阅卷，选取任伯安等六十一人。
English: The emperor was still furious, and tried his best to persuade Zhang Xin, Chen Jiao and others, and Liu Sangu aside, the emperor personally read the scroll and selected Ren Bo'an and other sixty-one people.

古文：六月复廷试，以韩克忠为第一。
现代文：六月，重新廷试，以韩克忠为第一名。
English: In June, a retrial was held, with Han Kezhong coming out on top.

古文：皆北士也。
现代文：都是北方之士。
English: They are all from the north.

古文：然讫永乐间，未尝分地而取。
现代文：但是直到永乐年间，不曾分地选取。
English: However, until the Yongle era, they were not selected separately.

古文：洪熙元年，仁宗命杨士奇等定取士之额，南人十六，北人十四。
现代文：洪熙元年，仁宗命令杨士奇等人决定取士的名额，南方十六人，北方十四人。
English: In the first year of Hongxi, Renzong ordered Yang Shichi and others to decide on the number of soldiers to be selected, 16 from the south and 14 from the north.

古文：宣德、正统间，分为南、北、中卷，以百人为率，则南取五十五名，北取三十五名，中取十名。
现代文：宣德、正统年间，分为南、北、中卷，以一百人为标准，便南方取五十五名，北方取三十五名，中间取十名。
English: During the years of Xuan De and orthodoxy, it was divided into south, north and middle rolls, with one hundred people as the standard, then the south took fifty-five, the north took thirty-five, and the middle took ten.

古文：景泰初，诏书遵永乐间例。
现代文：景泰初年，诏令遵循永乐年间的规程。
English: In the first year of Jing Tai, the edict followed the rules of the Yongle years.

古文：二年辛未，礼部方奉行，而给事中李侃争之，言： 部臣欲专以文词，多取南人。 刑部侍郎罗绮亦助侃言。
现代文：景泰二年即辛未年，礼部正要奉行，但给事中李侃提出争议，说： 部臣想专以文词取士，多选取南方人 刑部侍郎罗绮也支持李侃之言。
English: In the second year of Jing Tai, that is, the year of Xin Wei, the Ministry of Ceremonies was about to be carried out, but during the matter, Li Kan raised a dispute, saying: The ministers wanted to use literary words exclusively to recruit soldiers, and more southerners should be selected. Luo Wei, the attendant of the Ministry of Justice, also supported Li Kan's words.

古文：事下礼部，覆奏： 臣等奉诏书，非私请也。 
现代文：事情下发礼部，回奏： 臣等奉诏书，不是为私事请求。 
English: Under the circumstances, the Ministry of Ceremonies was dispatched, and the reply was: "The request was made in accordance with the Imperial Rescript, not for private matters."

古文：景帝命遵诏书，不从侃议。
现代文：景帝命令遵照诏书办理，不听从李侃的建议。
English: Emperor Jing ordered that the matter be handled in accordance with the imperial edict, and did not listen to Li Qian's suggestion.

古文：未几，给事中徐廷章复请依正统间例。
现代文：不久，给事中徐廷章又请求依照正统年间的规程。
English: Not long after, Xu Tingzhang also requested that the matter be handled according to the rules of the orthodox years.

古文：五年甲戌，会试，礼部奏请裁定，于是复从廷章言，分南、北、中卷：南卷，应天及苏、松诸府，浙江、江西、福建、湖广、广东；北卷，顺天、山东、山西、河南、陕西；中卷，四川、广西、云南、贵州及凤阳、庐州二府，滁、徐、和三州也。
现代文：景泰五年即甲戌年，会试，礼部上奏请求皇帝裁定，于是又听从徐廷章的建言，分焉南、北、中卷。南卷，应天以及苏、松等府，浙江、江西、福建、湖广、广东；北卷，顺天、山东、山西、河南、陕西；中卷，四川、广西、云南、贵州以及凤阳、庐州二府，滁、徐、和三州。
English: In the fifth year of Jing-Tai, that is, the year of Jiajing, the examination was held, and the Ministry of Ceremonies appealed to the emperor for a ruling, and then heeded the advice of Xu Tingzhang to divide into south, north, and middle rolls. The south roll, Yingtian and Su, Song and other prefectures, Zhejiang, Jiangxi, Fujian, Hukang, and Guangdong; the north roll, Shuntian, Shandong, Shanxi, Henan, and Shaanxi; the middle roll, Sichuan, Guangxi, Yunnan, Guizhou and Fengyang, the two prefectures of Zhangzhou, Handan,

古文：成化二十二年，万安当国，周洪谟为礼部尚书，皆四川人，乃因布政使潘稹之请，南北各减二名，以益于中。
现代文：成化二十二年，万安执政，周洪谟焉礼部尚书，两人都是四川人，便趁布政使潘稹的请求，南、北各减少二名，以增加中卷录取名额。
English: In the 22nd year of Chenghua, when Wan'an was in power and Zhou Hongmu was the head of the Ministry of Rites and Decrees, both of whom were Sichuanese, they took advantage of the request of the cloth political envoy Pan Ye to reduce two people in the south and two in the north to increase the number of middle volume admissions.

古文：弘治二年，复从旧制。
现代文：弘治二年，又依从原有制度。
English: In the second year of Koji, the original system was followed again.

古文：嗣后相沿不改。
现代文：以后沿袭不改变。
English: There will be no change in the lineage.

古文：惟正德三年，给事中赵铎承刘瑾指，请广河南、陕西、山东、西乡试之额。
现代文：只是正德三年，给事中趟铎禀承刘瑾指使，请求扩大河南、陕西、山东、山西乡试的名额。
English: However, it was Zhengde who, three years later, requested the expansion of the number of candidates for the Henan, Shaanxi, Shandong and Shanxi township examinations.

古文：乃增陕西为百，河南为九十五，山东、西俱九十。
现代文：于是陕西增加焉一百名，河南为九十五名，山东、山西都是九十名。
English: As a result, Shaanxi increased by one hundred, Henan by ninety-five, and Shandong and Shanxi by ninety.

古文：而以会试分南、北、中卷为不均，乃增四川额十名，并入南卷，其馀并入北卷，南北均取一百五十名。
现代文：而认为会试分南、北、中卷不均衡，便增加四川名额十名，并入南卷，其余并入北卷，南、北都选取一百五十名。
English: Considering that the test scores of the south, north and middle rolls were not balanced, the number of candidates from Sichuan was increased by ten and merged into the south roll, while the rest were merged into the north roll. One hundred and fifty candidates were selected from both the south and the north.

古文：盖瑾陕西人，而阁臣焦芳河南人，票旨相附和，各徇其私。
现代文：原来刘瑾是陕西人，而阁臣焦芳是河南人，代皇帝批答奏章便相附和，各自谋求满足个人私心。
English: Originally, Liu Ye was from Shaanxi Province, while the courtier Jiao Fang was from Henan Province. They both sought to satisfy their personal selfishness.

古文：瑾、芳败，旋复其旧。
现代文：刘瑾、焦芳倒台之后，立即又恢复旧制。
English: After the fall of Liu Bei and Jiao Fang, the old system was immediately restored.

古文：初制，两京乡试，主考皆用翰林。
现代文：以前的制度，两京举行乡试，主考官都使用翰林。
English: Under the previous system, township examinations were held in the two capital cities, and the examiners all used Hanlin.

古文：而各省考官，先期于儒官、儒士内聘明经公正者为之，故有不在朝列累秉文衡者。
现代文：而各省的考官，原先是在儒官、儒士中聘任明经公正的人担任，所以有不在朝班之列而多次执掌考试权柄的。
English: However, the examiners in each province were originally appointed from the ranks of Confucian officials and Confucian scholars, so there are some who are not in the ranks of the imperial class and have held the power of examination for many times.

古文：景泰三年，令布、按二司同巡按御史，推举见任教官年五十以下、三十以上、文学廉谨者，聘充考官。
现代文：景泰三年，命令布、按二司会同巡按御史，推荐现任教官，年龄在五十岁以下、三十岁以上，文学廉洁谨慎的，聘任充当考官。
English: In the third year of Jing Tai, he ordered Bu and the Second Division of the Press Association to jointly inspect the history of the press, recommend the current instructor, under the age of fifty and over the age of thirty, literary and prudent, and hire him as an examiner.

古文：于是教官主试，遂为定例。
现代文：于是教官主持考试便成为规定的制度。
English: As a result, instructor-led examinations became the prescribed system.

古文：其后有司徇私，聘取或非其人，监临官又往往侵夺其职掌。
现代文：此后，主管部门谋求私利，聘请的人有时不是贤才，考试时的监临官又常常侵夺考官的职权。
English: Since then, the competent departments have pursued their own interests, the people they hire are sometimes not talented, and the proctors at the time of examinations often usurp the authority of the examiners.

古文：成化十五年，御史许进请各省俱视两京例，特命翰林主考。
现代文：成化十五年，御史许进请求各省都按照两京的规程，特别命令翰林主考。
English: In the fifteenth year of Chenghua, Mishi Xu Jin requested all provinces to follow the regulations of the two capitals, and specially ordered Hanlin to be the main examiner.

古文：帝谕礼部严饬私弊，而不从其请。
现代文：皇帝训论礼部严厉整饬徇私的弊端，而不听从许进的请求。
English: The emperor ordered the etiquette department to severely rectify the shortcomings of Xu Jin, but did not listen to Xu Jin's request.

古文：屡戒外帘官毋夺主考权，考官不当，则举主连坐。
现代文：多次戒禁外帘官不得侵夺主考官的权力，考官不适当，便连同举蔫的人一同治罪。
English: An external examiner who has been banned multiple times must not usurp the authority of the chief examiner. If the examiner is not appropriate, he or she will be punished together with the examiner.

古文：又令提学考定教官等第，以备聘取。
现代文：又命令提学考核确定教官的等次，以备聘任。
English: He also ordered the examination to determine the rank of the instructor to prepare for the appointment.

古文：然相沿既久，积习难移。
现代文：然丽相沿已久，积累的恶习难以改变。
English: However, it has been around for a long time, and the accumulated bad habits are difficult to change.

古文：弘治十四年，掌国子监谢铎言： 考官皆御史方面所辟召，职分即卑，听其指使，以外帘官预定去取，名为防闲，实则关节，而科举之法坏矣。
现代文：弘治十四年，执掌园子监谢铎上言： 考官都是御史方面所征召，职位名分已卑下，听凭他指挥使唤，外帘官预先确定取与不取，名义上是防备，实际上是暗中勾结，而科举的办法遭到破坏。
English: In the 14th year of the Hongzhi era, the head garden inspector Xie Zang said: Examiners are all recruited by the imperial history side, the position title has been degraded, and they are subject to his command and call, the external examiner determines in advance whether to take or not to take, in name it is prevention, in fact it is collusion, and the method of imperial examinations has been destroyed.

古文：乞敕两京大臣，各举部属等官素有文望者，每省差二员主考，庶几前弊可革。 
现代文：请求敕命两京的大臣，各自选举部属官中一向有文才声望的，每省派二人主考，或许先前的弊端可以革除。 
English: It is requested that the ministers of the two capitals, who have always been famous for their literary talents, send two examiners to each province. Perhaps the previous drawbacks can be eliminated.

古文：时未能从。
现代文：当时未能听从。
English: I didn't listen at the time.

古文：嘉靖七年，用兵部侍郎张璁言，各省主试皆遣京官或进士，每省二人驰往。
现代文：嘉靖七年，采用兵部侍郎张璁的建议，各省的主考官都选派京官或进士，每省二人赶往考场。
English: In the seventh year of the Jiajing Dynasty, the chief examiner of each province was selected to send a Beijing official or an enlisted man, and two people from each province rushed to the examination hall.

古文：初，两京房考亦皆取教职，至是命各加科部官一员，阅两科、两京房考，复罢科部勿遣，而各省主考亦不遣京官。
现代文：当初，两京房考也都选取教官，到此时，命令各加科部官员一人，查阅两科、两京房考，又罢除科部不再专门派遣官吏，而各省主考也不派遣京官。
English: At first, instructors were also selected for the Beijing and Beijing examinations. At this time, one official from each science department was ordered to examine the two subjects and the Beijing and Beijing examinations, and the science department was no longer specially dispatched officials, and the provincial examinations did not send Beijing officials.

古文：至万历十一年，诏定科场事宜。
现代文：到了万历十一年，下诏规定科场的有关事情。
English: In the 11th year of the 11th lunar month, the following edict stipulated the relevant matters of the science field.

古文：部议复举张璁之说，言： 彼时因主考与监临官礼节小嫌，故行止二科而罢，今宜仍遣廷臣。 
现代文：部议重新采用张璁的建议，称： 那个时候因为主考与监临官礼节上有小的嫌疑，所以施行仅仅两科便罢除了，现在应该仍旧派遣朝廷京官。 
English: The ministry proposed to re-adopt Zhang Xuan's suggestion, saying: At that time, because there was little suspicion about the proctor and the procurator's etiquette, the implementation of only two subjects was abolished, and now the imperial court official should still be dispatched.

古文：由是浙江、江西、福建、湖广皆用编修、检讨，他省用科部官，而同考亦多用甲科，教职仅取一二而已。
现代文：因此浙江、江西、福建、湖广都选用编修、检讨，别的省选用科部官吏，而同考官也多选用进士，教官只选取一二名而已。
English: As a result, Zhejiang, Jiangxi, Fujian, and Hubei have all selected the best for editing and reviewing, other provinces have selected science department officials, and the same examiners have also selected more junior scholars, and only one or two instructors have been selected.

古文：盖自嘉靖二十五年从给事中万虞恺言，各省乡试精聘教官，不足则聘外省推官、知县以益之。
现代文：因为从嘉靖二十五年听从给事中万虞恺建议，各省乡试精审地聘任教官，不够便聘请外省的推官、知县来补充考官。
English: Because from the 25th year of Jiajing, he listened to the suggestion of Wan Yuqi, who was in the middle of the matter, and each province and township tried to hire instructors, and it was not enough to hire foreign provincial supervisors and counties to supplement examiners.

古文：四十三年，又从南京御史奏，两京同考用京官进士，《易》、《诗》、《书》各二人，《春秋》、《礼记》各一人，其馀乃参用教官。
现代文：嘉靖四十三年，又听从南京御史上奏，两京同考官用京官进士，《易》、《诗》《书》各二人，《春秋》、《礼记》各一人，其余纔参用教官。
English: In the 43rd year of Jiajing, he also listened to the Nanjing imperial history recital, and the two cities used the same examiners as the Beijing officials to enter the cadets, two each of "Yi," "Poetry" and "Books," one each of "Spring and Autumn" and "Rituals," and the rest of the cadets used instructors.

古文：万历四年，复议两京同考、教官衰老者遣回，北京取足于观政进士、候补甲科，南京于附近知县、推官取用。
现代文：万历四年，又议两京同考官、教官衰老的遣返回去，北京在观政进士、候补甲科进士中取足，南京在附近知县、推官中取用。
English: In the past four years, the aging examiners and instructors of the two capitals have been sent back to Beijing. Beijing has gained a foothold in political observers and trainee A-level students, and Nanjing has gained a foothold in nearby counties and officials.

古文：至是教官益绌。
现代文：至此，教官更加受到排斥。
English: As a result, instructors are even more excluded.

古文：初制，会试同考八人，三人用翰林，五人用教职。
现代文：开初的制度，会试时，同考官八人，三人聘用翰林，五人聘用教官。
English: At the beginning of the system, eight examiners were employed, three were employed by Hanlin, and five were employed by instructors.

古文：景泰五年，从礼部尚书胡濙请，俱用翰林、部曹。
现代文：景泰五年，听从礼部尚书胡淡的请求，都用翰林、部曹官。
English: In the five years of Jing Tai, he listened to the request of the Ministry of Ceremonies, Shang Shuxu and Hu Tan, and used Hanlin and the Ministry of Officers.

古文：其后房考渐增。
现代文：此后，房考渐渐增加。
English: Since then, the number of house examinations has gradually increased.

古文：至正德六年，命用十七人，翰林十一人，科部各三人。分《诗经》房五，《易经》、《书经》各四，《春秋》、《礼记》各二。
现代文：到正德六年，命令用十七人，翰林十一人，科部各三人，分《诗经》房五人，《易经》、《书经》各四人，《春秋》、《礼记》各二人。
English: In the sixth year of Zhengde, the order was to use seventeen people, eleven people for Hanlin, three people for each science department, five people for the "Poetry" room, four people each for "I Ching" and "Scripture," and two people each for "Spring and Autumn" and "Rituals."

古文：嘉靖十一年，礼部尚书夏言论科场三事，其一言会试同考，例用讲读十一人，今讲读止十一人，当尽入场，方足供事。
现代文：嘉靖十一年，礼部尚书夏直议论科场三件事，其一说会试同考官，按例用讲读十一人，现在讲读只有十一人，应当全部入场，纔足够履行职责。
English: In the eleventh year of Jiajing, Shang Shuxia of the Ministry of Ceremonies directly discussed three things in the field of science. One said that he would try with the examiner, as usual, eleven people would read, and now only eleven people would read. All should enter, and it is enough to perform their duties.

古文：乞于部科再简三四人，以补翰林不足之数。
现代文：谪求在科部再选三四人，以补充翰林不足的数额。
English: He called for the re-election of three or four people in the science department to supplement the insufficient amount of money.

古文：世宗命如所请。
现代文：世宗命令按他的请求办。
English: The Sejong ordered that his request be carried out.

古文：然偶一行之，辄如其旧。
现代文：但是偶尔执行一次，便又按旧规。
English: But once in a while, it's back to business as usual.

古文：万历十一年，以《易》卷多，减《书》之一以增于《易》。
现代文：万历十一年，因《易经》卷多，减少《书经》的一人以增加到《易经》中。
English: In the eleventh year of Wanli, due to the large number of volumes of "I Ching," one person of "Book of the Book" was reduced to increase the number of "I Ching."

古文：十四年，《书》卷复多，乃增翰林一人，以补《书》之缺。
现代文：万历十四年，《书经》的卷敷又多，纔增加翰林一人，以补足《书经》的缺额。
English: In the 14th year of Wanli, there were more volumes of the "Book of Songs," and Hanlin was added to make up for the shortage of the "Book of Songs."

古文：至四十四年，用给事中余懋孳奏，《诗》、《易》各增一房，共为二十房，翰林十二人，科部各四人，至明末不变。
现代文：到万历四十四年，采用给事中余懋孳的上奏，《诗》、《易》各增加一房，共为二十房，翰林十二人，科部各四人，到明朝末年不变。
English: In the 44th year of the Wanli era, the use of the upbeat in the middle of the day, "Poetry" and "Easy" each increased by one room, for a total of twenty rooms, twelve people in the Hanlin, four people in the science department, and remained unchanged until the end of the Ming Dynasty.

古文：洪武初，赐诸进士宴于中书省。宣德五年，赐宴于中军都督府。
现代文：洪武初年，在中书省赏赐诸进士御宴。宣德五年，在中军都督府赏赐御宴。
English: In the first year of Hongwu, a banquet was held in the Chinese Province of Calligraphy, and in the fifth year of Xuan De, a banquet was held in the Chinese military governor's palace.

古文：八年，赐宴于礼部，自是遂著为令。
现代文：宣德八年，在礼部赏赐御宴，从此便定为固定的法令。
English: Eight years after the promulgation of the Constitution, a banquet was given at the Ministry of Ceremonies, and since then it has been set as a fixed decree.

古文：庶吉士之选，自洪武乙丑择进士为之，不专属于翰林也。
现代文：庶吉士的选拔，从洪武乙丑年，选择进士担任，不专归于翰林。
English: The selection of the second-in-line to the throne, from the year of Hongwu and the Year of the Ugly Goat, was chosen to serve as the next-in-line to the throne, and did not belong exclusively to Hanlin.

古文：永乐二年，既授一甲三人曾棨、周述、周孟简等官，复命于第二甲择文学优等杨相等五十人，及善书者汤流等十人，俱为翰林院庶吉士，庶吉士遂专属翰林矣。
现代文：永乐二年，已授予一甲三人曾柴、周述、周孟简等官职，又命令在第二甲中选择文学优等的杨相等五十人，以及善于书法的汤流等十人都为翰林院庶吉士，庶吉士便专归属于翰林了。
English: In the second year of Yongle, he had already conferred the official positions of Zeng Chai, Zhou Shu and Zhou Meng Jian on three people, and also ordered that fifty people such as Yang Zi, who was good at literature, and ten people such as Tang Liu, who was good at calligraphy, should be selected from the second group. All of them were deacons of Hanlin Academy, and the deacons belonged exclusively to Hanlin.

古文：复命学士解缙等选才资英敏者，就学文渊阁。
现代文：又命令学士解缙等人选择才能资质聪慧而见解卓越的人，到文渊开学习。
English: He also ordered the scholars to select the most talented, intelligent and insightful people to study in Wenyuan.

古文：缙等选修撰棨，编修述、孟简，庶吉士相等共二十八人，以应二十八宿之数。
现代文：解缙等选拔修撰曾柴，编修周述、周孟筒，庶吉士杨相等共二十八人，以对应二十八宿的数目。
English: A total of 28 people, including Zeng Chai, Zhou Shu, Zhou Meng Du, and Yang Zi, were selected to write the book, and Zhou Shu, Zhou Meng Du, and Yang Zi were selected to edit the book, corresponding to the number of 28 inns.

古文：庶吉士周忱自陈少年愿学。
现代文：庶吉士周忱自己陈述自己年少愿意学习。
English: Zhou Zhizhong said that he was willing to learn at a young age.

古文：帝喜而俞之，增忱为二十九人。
现代文：皇帝喜悦而答应了他，增加周忱，为二十九人。
English: The emperor was pleased and agreed, increasing the number to twenty-nine.

古文：司礼监月给笔墨纸，光禄给朝暮馔，礼部月给膏烛钞，人三锭，工部择近第宅居之。
现代文：司礼监每月供给笔墨纸，光禄寺供给早晚僎食，礼部每月供给膏烛钱，每人三锭银，工部选择就近的房屋让他们居住。
English: The Ceremonial Supervisor provides pens, ink and paper every month, the Koroku-ji Temple provides snacks in the morning and evening, the Ministry of Ceremonies provides money for candles, three silver coins per person every month, and the Ministry of Works selects nearby houses for them to live in.

古文：帝时至馆召试。
现代文：皇帝时而到馆中召见考试。
English: From time to time, the emperor was summoned to the hall for an examination.

古文：五日一休沐，必使内臣随行，且给校尉驺从。
现代文：五天一次休假，必定使内臣随行，并且供给校尉驾驭车马的侍从。
English: Five days off at a time, he would always have a vassal accompany him, and provide an attendant for the school captain to drive the horse and cart.

古文：是年所选王英、王直、段民、周忱、陈敬宗、李时勉等，名传后世者，不下十馀人。
现代文：这一年所选的王英、王直、段民、周忱、陈敬宗、李时勉等，名声流传后世的，不少于十多人。
English: Wang Ying, Wang Zhi, Duan Min, Zhou Zhen, Chen Jingzong, Li Shizhen, etc. were selected this year, and their fame has been passed down to future generations. There are no less than ten people.

古文：其后每科所选，多寡无定额。
现代文：其后，每科所选的人，多少没有固定的数额。
English: After that, there is no fixed amount of people selected for each subject.

古文：永乐十三年乙未选六十二人，而宣德二年丁未止邢恭一人，以其在翰林院习四夷译书久，他人俱不得与也。
现代文：永乐十三年即乙未年，选拔六十二人，而宣德二年即丁未年只有邢恭一人，因其在翰林院学习四夷译书年久，别的人都不能参与。
English: In the 13th year of Yongle, that is, the year of Biyi, 62 people were selected, while in the 2nd year of Xuande, that is, the year of Dingyi, there was only one person, Zhi Qiong, because he had been studying the translation of the Four Barbarians at Hanlin Academy for a long time. Other people could not participate.

古文：弘治四年，给事中涂旦以累科不选庶吉士，请循祖制行之。
现代文：弘治四年，给事中涂旦因多科不选庶吉士，请求遵循祖先制度实行。
English: In the fourth year of the Hongzhi era, in the middle of the matter, because of the many disciplines, Tu Dan did not choose a second cousin, and requested that the ancestor system be followed.

古文：大学士徐溥言： 自永乐二年以来，或间科一选，或连科屡选，或数科不选，或合三科同选，初无定限。
现代文：大学士徐溥说： 从永乐二年以来，有时隔一科选一次，有时连科屡次选拔，有时敷科不选拔，有时合三科一同选拔，全无固定程限。
English: "Since Yongle two years ago, sometimes one subject is selected at a time, sometimes multiple subjects are selected, sometimes no subjects are selected, sometimes three subjects are selected together, and there is no fixed course limit.

古文：或内阁自选，或礼部选送，或会礼部同选，或限年岁，或拘地方，或采誉望，或就廷试卷中查取，或别出题考试，亦无定制。
现代文：有时内阁自选，有时礼部选送，有时会合礼部共向选拔，有时限定年岁，有时拘限地方，有时采纳荣誉声望，有时在廷试卷中考查选取，有时另外出题考试，也没有固定的制度。
English: Sometimes the cabinet is self-selected, sometimes the Ministry of Ceremonies selects and sends, sometimes the Ministry of Ceremonies collectively selects, sometimes the age is limited, sometimes the place of detention is limited, sometimes honor and reputation are adopted, sometimes it is selected by examination in the court examination, sometimes there is another examination, and there is no fixed system.

古文：自古帝王储才馆阁以教养之。
现代文：自古以来帝王在馆阁储备人才，教育培养他们。
English: Since ancient times, emperors have stored talents in their pavilions and educated and trained them.

古文：本朝所以储养之者，自及第进士之外，止有庶吉士一途，而或选或否。
现代文：本朝储备人才供养他们的途径，从考中进士选出之外，只有庶吉士一条途径，而有时选取有时不选取。
English: In addition to selecting candidates from the middle school entrance examination, there is only one way for the reserve talent to support them, and sometimes it is selected and sometimes not selected.

古文：且有才者未必皆选，所选者未必皆才，若更拘地方、年岁，则是已成之才又多弃而不用也。
现代文：并且有才能的人未必都被选取，所选的未必都是人才，如果再拘限地方、年岁，那么，这些已成的人才又多抛弃而不用。
English: Moreover, talented people are not necessarily all selected, and those selected are not necessarily all talented people. If the selection is limited by region and age, then many of these talented people will be discarded and not used.

古文：请自今以后，立为定制，一次开科，一次选用。
现代文：请求从今以后，确立固定的制度，一次开科考试，一次选用。
English: From now on, establish a fixed system, one entrance examination, one selection.

古文：令新进士录平日所作论、策、诗、赋、序、记等文字，限十五篇以上，呈之礼部，送翰林考订。
现代文：让新进士录出乎日所作的论、策、诗、赋、序、记等文章，限定十五篇以上，呈交给礼部，送给翰林考订。
English: Let the new recruits record the theories, strategies, poems, plays, prefaces, records and other articles made on the day, limited to more than fifteen, submitted to the Ceremonial Department, and sent to Hanlin for examination.

古文：少年有新作五篇，亦许投试翰林院。
现代文：少年有新作五篇，也允许投试翰林院。
English: The boy has five new works, and he is also allowed to apply to the Hanlin Academy.

古文：择其词藻文理可取者，按号行取。
现代文：选择那些词藻文理可取的，按次序选取。
English: Choose those words that are morally and ethically preferable, and select them in order.

古文：礼部以糊名试卷，偕阁臣出题考试于东阁，试卷与所投之文相称，即收预选。
现代文：礼部用封盖名字的试卷，偕同合臣在束阁出题考试，试卷与所投呈的文章相当，便收为预选。
English: The etiquette department used the name-sealed test paper, and together with the courtiers, they took the exam in the storeroom. The test paper was equivalent to the article submitted, and it was accepted for preselection.

古文：每科所选不过二十人，每选所留不过三五辈，将来成就必有足赖者。 
现代文：每科所选不超过二十人，每次选取留下的不过三五人，将来必定有足以给百姓造益的成就。 
English: No more than twenty people are selected for each subject, and only three to five people are selected each time. In the future, they will surely have enough achievements to benefit the people.

古文：孝宗从其请，命内阁同吏、礼二部考选以为常。
现代文：孝宗听从他的请求，命令内阁会同吏、礼二部考试选拔，作为常规。
English: Xiaozong listened to his request and ordered that the selection of cabinet officials and the second part of the ceremony should be carried out as a rule.

古文：自嘉靖癸未至万历庚辰，中间有九科不选。
现代文：自从嘉靖癸未年至万历庚辰年，中间有九科没有选取。
English: From the year of Jiajing Zouwei to the year of Wanli Gengchen, there are nine subjects that have not been selected.

古文：神宗常命间科一选。
现代文：神宗曾命令间隔一科选取一次。
English: The Shinshu sect once ordered that one subject be chosen at a time.

古文：礼部侍郎吴道南持不可。
现代文：礼部侍郎昊道南坚持不同意。
English: Hao Dongnan, a chamberlain of the Ministry of Ceremonies, strongly disagreed.

古文：崇祯甲戌、丁丑，复不选，馀悉遵例。
现代文：崇祯甲戌、丁丑年，又不选取，其余遵照常规选取。
English: Chongqin Jiaxuan and Dingwuxian were not selected, and the rest were selected according to the rules.

古文：其与选者，谓之馆选。
现代文：那些选取的，叫做馆选。
English: Those that are selected are called museum selections.

古文：以翰、詹官高资深者一人课之，谓之教习。
现代文：以翰林、詹事官位高资历深的一人讲授与考核，叫做教习。
English: It is called "teaching and learning" to have a senior official such as Hanlin or Zhan give a lecture.

古文：三年学成，优者留翰林为编修、检讨，次者出为给事、御史，谓之散馆。
现代文：三年学业完成，优秀的留翰林院作编修、检讨，次一等的出翰林院任给事、御史，叫做散馆。
English: After completing three years of study, an outstanding member of the school is assigned to edit and review the school's works, and a second-rate member of the school is assigned to be in charge of the school's history, which is called "Sangakukan."

古文：与常调官待选者，体格殊异。
现代文：与常调官等待选举的人身份大不相同。
English: It is a very different position from that of a permanent secretary waiting to be elected.

古文：成祖初年，内阁七人，非翰林者居其半。翰林纂修，亦诸色参用。
现代文：成祖初年，内阁七人，不是翰林出身的占一半，翰林纂修，也各类人参杂使用。
English: In the first year of the founder, the cabinet consisted of seven people, half of whom were not from Hanlin, and Hanlin was also used by all kinds of people.

古文：自天顺二年，李贤奏定纂修专选进士。
现代文：从天顺二年，李贤上奏确定纂修专选进士。
English: In the second year of Tianshun, Li Xian made a speech to confirm that he had been specially selected to be a scholar.

古文：由是非进士不入翰林，非翰林不入内阁，南、北礼部尚书、侍郎及吏部右侍郎，非翰林不任。
现代文：从此，非进士不进入翰林，非翰林不入内阁，南、北礼部尚书、侍郎以及吏部右侍郎，不是翰林就不能任此官。
English: From now on, if you are not a scholar, you cannot enter the Hanlin; if you are not a Hanlin, you cannot enter the cabinet; if you are not a Hanlin, you cannot be a member of the cabinet; if you are not a Hanlin, you cannot be a member of the South or North Ceremonial Divisions; if you are not a chamberlain, you cannot be a chamberlain, and if you are not a chamberlain, you cannot be a right chamberlain.

古文：而庶吉士始进之时，已群目为储相。
现代文：而庶吉士开始选进的时候，已经被大家看作储相。
English: However, when Kishi Shoko was first elected, he was already seen as the prime minister in waiting.

古文：通计明一代宰辅一百七十馀人，由翰林者十九。
现代文：总计明代宰辅一百七十多人，从翰林任宰辅的有十分之九。
English: In total, there were more than one hundred and seventy vice-premiers in the Ming Dynasty, and nine out of ten were appointed vice-premiers from Hanlin.

古文：盖科举视前代为盛，翰林之盛，则前代所绝无也。
现代文：科举比前代为盛，而翰林之盛则是前代绝对没有的。
English: Compared to the previous generation, the Science Education Examination is more popular, while the popularity of Hanlin is absolutely nothing compared to the previous generation.

古文：辅臣子弟，国初少登第者。
现代文：宰辅子弟，开国之初很少有升登科第的。
English: At the beginning of the founding of the country, few sons of Zaisuke were promoted to Kedai.

古文：景泰七年，陈循、王文以其子北闱下第，力攻主考刘俨，台省哗然论其失。
现代文：景泰七年，陈循、王文因为自己的儿子在顺天参加乡试落榜，竭力攻击主考刘俨，台省哗然议论其事之失。
English: In the seventh year of Jing Tai, Chen Cui and Wang Wen, because their son failed the village test in Shuntian, tried their best to attack the main examiner Liu Wei, and Taiwan Province was in an uproar discussing the loss of the matter.

古文：帝勉徇二人意，命其子一体会试，而心薄之。
现代文：皇帝勉强依从二人之意，命他们的见子一同参加会试，而内心看不起他们。
English: The emperor reluctantly obeyed the will of the two and ordered their godson to take part in the audition together, but despised them in his heart.

古文：正德三年，焦芳子黄中会试中式，芳引嫌不读卷。
现代文：垂德三年，焦芳之子焦黄中会试合格，焦芳避嫌不阅卷。
English: After three years of hard work, Jiao Fang's son Jiao Huang passed the junior high school entrance examination, but Jiao Fang avoided reading the paper.

古文：而黄中居二甲之首，芳意犹不慊，至降调诸翰林以泄其忿。
现代文：而黄中居二甲之首位，焦芳心意还不满足，以至于降调众翰林以发泄自己的忿懑。
English: While Huangzhong is in the first place of the top two, Jiao Fang's mind is still not satisfied, so much so that he downshifts everyone to vent his anger.

古文：六年，杨廷和子慎廷试第一，廷和时亦引嫌不读卷。
现代文：正德六年，杨廷和之子杨慎廷试第一，廷和也避嫌不阅卷。
English: Zhengde six years, Yang Tinghe's son Yang Shenting tried first, and Tinghe also avoided reading the scroll.

古文：慎以高才及第，人无訾之者。
现代文：杨慎凭高才及第，人们没有谁指责非议。
English: Yang Shen won the first place by virtue of his high ability, and no one criticized him.

古文：嘉靖二十三年廷试，翟銮子汝俭、汝孝俱在试中。
现代文：嘉靖二十三年廷试，翟銮之子翟汝俭、翟汝孝都在应试行列。
English: In the 23rd year of Jiajing's imperial examination, Zou's sons, Zou Ru Jian and Zou Ru Xiao, were in the queue for the examination.

古文：世宗疑二人滥首甲，抑第一为第三，以第三置三甲。
现代文：世宗怀疑二人滥居殿试一等之首，压抑原列第一为第三，以第三放置于三甲。
English: Sejong suspected that the two had been living in the house without permission, and placed them at the top of the first class. Suppression was originally placed first in the third class, and was placed third in the third class.

古文：及拆卷，而所拟第三者，果汝孝也，帝大疑之。
现代文：等到拆卷，而所拟定的第三名，果然是汝孝，皇帝非常怀疑。
English: The emperor was very suspicious when he opened the scroll and saw that the third place was indeed for Ru Xiao.

古文：给事中王交、王尧日因劾会试考官少詹事江汝璧及诸房考朋私通贿，且追论顺天乡试考官秦鸣夏、浦应麒阿附銮罪，乃下汝璧等镇抚司狱。
现代文：给事中王交、王尧日于是弹劾会试考官少詹事江汝璧以及各房考官朋党偏私勾结受贿，并且追查顺天乡试考官秦只岛夏、浦应麒阿谀趋附翟銮之罪。于是将江汝璧等人投入镇抚司狱。
English: On the day of the incident, Wang Jia and Wang Xizhi impeached the examiners of the Examination Committee, Shozhan Jia and Jiang Rubei, as well as the examiners of the examination rooms and the party members for favoritism, collusion and bribery, and investigated the crime of the examiners of Shuntian Township, Qin Zhudao Xia and Pu Ying Yao Yao. Therefore, Jiang Rubei and others were put into the prison.

古文：狱具，诏杖汝璧、鸣夏、应麒，并革职闲住，而勒銮父子为民。
现代文：罪案已定，下诏杖击江汝璧、秦呜夏、浦应麒，并且革除官职，令其闲住，勒令翟銮父子为平民。
English: The crime has been determined, and Jiang Rubei, Qin Wuxia, and Pu Yingyao have been sentenced to death. They have also been removed from their official positions and ordered to live in idleness, and their father and son have been ordered to become civilians.

古文：神宗初，张居正当国。
现代文：神宗初年，张居正执政。
English: In the first year of the Shinshu sect, Zhang Ju was in power.

古文：二年甲戌，其子礼闱下第，居正不悦，遂不选庶吉士。
现代文：万历二年即甲戌年，其子会试落榜，张居正不高兴，于是不选庶吉士。
English: In the second year of Wanli, that is, the year of Jiajing, his son would try to fall off the list. Zhang Jizheng was not happy, so he did not choose the second son.

古文：至五年，其子嗣修遂以一甲第二人及第。
现代文：至万历五年，其子张嗣修便以一甲第二名进士及第。
English: In the fifth year of Wanli, his son, Zhang Zixiu, was promoted to the second place and the first place.

古文：至八年，其子懋修以一甲第一人及第。
现代文：至万历八年，其子张懋修以一甲第一名进士及第。
English: In the 8th year of Wanli, his son Zhang Yuxiu was promoted to the first place and the second place.

古文：而次辅吕调阳、张四维、申时行之子，亦皆先后成进士。
现代文：而次辅吕调阳、张四维、申时行之子，也都先后成进士。
English: And the sons of the second assistant, Lv Chunyang, Zhang Siwei, and Shin Shigong, also became scholars.

古文：御史魏允贞疏陈时弊，言辅臣子不宜中式。
现代文：御史魏允贞上疏陈说时弊，声言辅臣之子不应该在科举考试中被录取。
English: Goshi Wei Yunzhen said that it was a bad time, saying that the son of a vassal should not be admitted to the imperial examination.

古文：帝为谪允贞。
现代文：皇帝为此贬谪魏允贞。
English: For this, the emperor demeaned Wei Yunzhen.

古文：十六年，右庶子黄洪宪主顺天试，王锡爵子衡为榜首。
现代文：万历十六年，右庶子黄洪宪主考顺天乡试，王锡爵之子王衡为第一名。
English: In the 16th year of Wanli, Huang Hongxian's son, Wang Heng, the son of Wang Xizhe, won the first place in the Shun Tianxiang examination.

古文：礼部郎中高桂论劾举人李鸿等，并及衡，言： 自故相子一时并进，而大臣之子遂无见信于天下者。
现代文：礼部郎中高桂弹劾举人李鸿等人，并涉及王衡，声称： 自从故相之子同时一并进选，而大臣之子便没有被天下之人相信的。
English: Gao Gui, a member of the Ministry of Ceremonies, impeached Li Hong and others, and implicated Wang Heng, saying: Since the sons of the former emperors were elected at the same time, the sons of the ministers have not been believed by the world.

古文：今辅臣锡爵子衡，素号多才，青云不难自致，而人犹疑信相半，宜一体覆试，以明大臣之心迹。 
现代文：现在辅臣王锡爵之子王衡，一向号称多才，青云自致并不难，而人们还是疑与信参半，应该一律复试，以此表明大臣的心迹。 
English: Now, Wang Heng, the son of the assistant minister Wang Xizhe, has always been known to be multi-talented, and it is not difficult to be young, but people still doubt and believe. They should all retake the exam to show the minister's spirit.

古文：锡爵怒甚，具奏申辨，语过激。
现代文：王锡爵非常愤怒，详细上奏申辩，语言过分激烈。
English: Wang Xizhe was very angry. He made a detailed defense, and his language was excessively fierce.

古文：刑部主事饶伸复抗疏论之。
现代文：刑部主事饶伸又上书直言论劾此事。
English: The head of the Criminal Investigation Department, Rao Shin, also wrote a letter to denounce the matter.

古文：帝为谪桂于外，下伸狱，削其官。
现代文：皇帝为此贬谪高桂到京城外任官，饶伸下狱论罪，削除官职。
English: For this reason, the emperor demoted Gao Gui to a post outside the capital, sentenced Rao Jian to prison, and removed him from his official post.

古文：覆试所劾举人，仍以衡第一，且无一人黜者。
现代文：复试所弹劾检举的人，仍然以王衡为第一，并且没有一人被废黜。
English: Wang Heng is still the first to be impeached and indicted by the FPRI, and no one has been deposed.

古文：二十年会试，李鸿中式。
现代文：万历二十年会试，李鸿考中。
English: Li Hong passed the junior high school entrance examination in the 20th year of Wanli.

古文：鸿，大学士申时行婿也。
现代文：奎遭是大学士申时行的女婿。
English: Kuishan is the son-in-law of university professor Shin Shigyo.

古文：榜将发，房考给事中某持之，以为宰相之婿不当中。
现代文：榜将要发放，房考给事中某人坚持自己的意见，认焉宰相的女婿不应当选中。
English: The list will be issued, and the house examination will be given to someone who insists on his own opinion and believes that the prime minister's son-in-law should not be selected.

古文：主考官张位使十八房考公阅，皆言文字可取，而给事犹持不可。
现代文：主考官张位让十八房考官公开阅览，都说文章可取，而给事还是坚持认为不能录取。
English: Zhang Yi, the chief examiner, let the eighteen-room examiners read it openly, and they all said that the article was desirable, but they still insisted that it could not be admitted.

古文：位怒曰： 考试不凭文字，将何取衷？
现代文：张位发怒说： 考试不凭文章，将怎样取其中正？
English: Zhang Yi said angrily: If the exam is not based on the essay, how will it be graded?

古文：我请职其咎。 
现代文：我请求承担其过失。 
English: I plead guilty to the charge.

古文：鸿乃获收。
现代文：李鸿纔获得选录。
English: Li Hongyao was selected.

古文：王衡既被论，当锡爵在位，不复试礼闱。
现代文：至衡既被纠劾，当时王锡爵在相位，不再参加会试。
English: After being reprimanded, Wang Xizhe was no longer allowed to participate in the audition.

古文：二十九年乃以一甲第二人及第。
现代文：万历二十九年，纔以一甲第二人进士及第。
English: In the 29th year of the Manchurian calendar,  won the second place and the first place.

古文：自后辅臣当国，其子亦无登第者矣。
现代文：从此之后辅臣执政，其子也没有考中进士的了。
English: Since then, the vice-minister has been in power, and his son did not pass the junior high school entrance examination.

古文：科场弊窦既多，议论频数。
现代文：科场的弊端漏洞既多，社会议论也频频出现。
English: There are many drawbacks and loopholes in the scientific field, and social discussions also appear frequently.

古文：自太祖重罪刘三吾等，永、宣间大抵帖服。
现代文：自从太祖重重罪罚刘三吾等之后，永乐、宣德年间大致顺从规章，没有违法事情出现。
English: Since Liu Sanwu and others were severely punished by the Great Ancestor, Yongle and Xuande generally obeyed the rules and regulations, and no illegal things occurred.

古文：陈循、王文之齮刘俨也，高谷持之，俨亦无恙。
现代文：陈循、王文攻击考官刘俨，由于高谷坚持焉刘俨申辩，刘俨没有遭祸。
English: Chen Xun and Wang Wen attacked the examiner Liu Wei, but because of Takaya's insistence on Liu Wei's plea, Liu Wei did not suffer any misfortune.

古文：弘治十二年会试，大学士李东阳、少詹事程敏政为考官。
现代文：弘治十二年会试，大学士李束阳、少詹事程敏政作考官。
English: In the 12th year of the Hongzhi examination, Li Sokyang, a university scholar, and Shozhan Zhicheng Minzheng served as examiners.

古文：给事中华昶劾敏政鬻题与举人唐寅、徐泰，乃命东阳独阅文字。
现代文：给事中华呆弹劾程敏政卖题给举人唐寅、徐泰，便命令李柬阳单独阅卷。
English: For the purpose of selling the topic of the impeachment of Cheng Minzheng to the nominators Tang Yin and Xu Tai, Li Kamyang was ordered to read the document separately.

古文：给事中林廷玉复攻敏政可疑者六事。
现代文：给事中林廷禾又攻击程敏政可疑的六件事。
English: There are six suspicious events in which Lin Tinghe attacked Cheng Minzheng.

古文：敏政谪官，寅泰皆斥谴。
现代文：程敏政被贬官，唐寅、徐泰都被除名并受谴责。
English: Cheng Minzheng was demoted, and Tang Yin and Xu Tai were both expelled and condemned.

古文：寅，江左才士，戊午南闱第一，论者多惜之。
现代文：唐寅，是江左有才之士，戊午年应天府考试第一，论说这事的人多为他感到可惜。
English: Tang Yin is a talented person from Jiangzao. He ranked first in the Tianfu examination in the year of Wu Wu. Most people who discuss this matter feel sorry for him.

古文：嘉靖十六年，礼部尚书严嵩连摘应天、广东试录语，激世宗怒。
现代文：嘉靖十六年，礼部尚书严嵩连续摘取应天、广东考中举子文章中的话语，激起世宗发怒。
English: In the 16th year of the Jiajing Dynasty, the etiquette department's Shangshu Yan Song continuously extracted the words from the essays on raising children in the Yingtian and Guangdong exams, which aroused the anger of Shizong.

古文：应天主考及广东巡按御史俱逮问。
现代文：应天主考以及广东巡按御史都被逮捕问罪。
English: At the time of the examination and during the inspection tour of Guangdong, they were all arrested and questioned.

古文：二十二年，帝手批山东试录讥讪，逮御史叶经杖死阙下，布政以下皆远谪，亦嵩所中伤也。
现代文：嘉靖二十二年，皇帝亲自批阅的山东考中举子的文章中有讥讽讪谤之语，逮捕御史叶经，用杖刑打死于阙下，布政使以下官吏都远贬，也是严嵩中伤所致。
English: In the 22nd year of Jiajing, the emperor personally approved the article of raising a son in the Shandong examination, which contained sarcastic and slanderous words. The arrest of the official historian Ye Jing, the beating with a cane and death under the yoke, the dismissal of the officials following Bu Zhengzhi, were also caused by Yan Song's slander.

古文：四十年，应天主考中允无锡吴情取同邑十三人，被劾，与副考胡杰俱谪外。
现代文：嘉靖四十年，应天主考中允无锡昊情选取同邑士子十三人，被弹劾，与副考胡杰都贬谪外任。
English: In the 40th year of Jiajing, he was impeached for selecting 13 fellow townspeople at the request of Wuxi Hao, and both he and Hu Jie, the vice-examiner, were demoted to outside positions.

古文：南畿翰林遂不得典应天试矣。
现代文：南京翰林便不能主持应天的考试了。
English: Nanjing Hanlin will not be able to host tomorrow's exam.

古文：万历四年，顺天主考高汝愚中张居正子嗣修、懋修，及居正党吏部侍郎王篆子之衡、之鼎。
现代文：万历四年，顺天主考高汝愚选中张居正之子张嗣修、张懋修，以及张居正同党吏部侍郎王篆之子王之衡、王之鼎。
English: In the fourth year of the Wanli era, Zhang Jizheng's sons Zhang Zixiu and Zhang Zixiu, as well as Zhang Jizheng's sons Wang Zhihang and Wang Zhiding, who were the sons of the party secretary Wang Zixu, were chosen by God in the college entrance examination.

古文：居正既死，御史丁此吕追论其弊，且言： 汝愚以 舜亦以命禹 为试题，殆以禅受阿居正。 
现代文：张居正死后，御史丁此吕追议考试作弊之事，并且说： 高汝愚以 舜亦以命禹 为考试题，大概以禅受阿谀张居正。 
English: After Zhang Jizheng's death, his disciple Ding Cui Lv discussed the cheating in the exam, and said: Gao Ryou Gui (高汝愚) used  () and 命禹 (命禹) as the exam questions, and Zhang Jizheng was probably influenced by Zen.

古文：当国者恶此吕，谪于外，而议者多不直汝愚。三十八年会试，庶子汤宾尹为同考官，与各房互换闱卷，共十八人。
现代文：执政者憎恶丁此吕，把他贬谪到外地，而议论者多数人并不认为高汝愚正直万历三十八年会试，庶子汤宾尹作同考官，与各房互换考卷，共十八个人。
English: The rulers detested Ding Guoliu and banished him to a foreign land, while the majority of commentators did not believe that Gao Ru Guoliu was an honest examiner in the 38th year of Wanli, and that his son-in-law Tang Bin Yin was a fellow examiner, exchanging exam papers with each house, a total of eighteen people.

古文：明年，御史孙居相劾宾尹私韩敬，其互换皆以敬故。
现代文：第二年，御史孙居相弹劾汤宾尹偏私韩敬，其互换试卷都因韩敬的缘故。
English: In the second year, Grand Historian Sun Ju Sang impeached Tang Bin Yin for favoring Han Jing, and the exchange of examination papers was all due to Han Jing.

古文：时吏部方考察，尚书孙丕扬因置宾尹、敬于察典。
现代文：当时吏部正在考察官员，尚书孙丕扬就把汤宾尹、韩敬放在考察不合格应当贬斥的行列中。
English: At that time, the cadre department was inspecting officials, and Shangshu Sun Rongyang put Tang Binyin and Han Jing in the ranks of those who should be reprimanded for failing the inspection.

古文：敬颇有文名，众亦惜敬，而以其宣党，谓其宜斥也。
现代文：韩敬多有文名，众议也认为韩敬可惜，而因其为宣党，所以认为他应该被斥。
English: Han Jing mostly has a pen name, and the public opinion also thinks that Han Jing is a pity, and because he is a proclamation party, he should be rejected.

古文：四十四年会试，吴江沈同和第一，同里赵鸣阳第六。
现代文：菌历四十四年会试，昊江沈同和考取第一，同乡趟鸣阳第六名。
English: Haojiang Shen Tonghe won the first place in the examination of the 44th annual meeting of the Chinese Academy of Microbiology, and Mingyang, a fellow villager, won the sixth place.

古文：同和素不能文，文多出鸣阳手，事发觉，两人并谪戍。
现代文：沈同和一向不能作文，文章多出自赵鸣阳的手笔，事情被发觉，两人都遭到贬谪戍边的责罚。
English: Shen Tonghe has always been unable to write, and most of the articles were written by Zhao Mingyang. The matter was discovered, and both of them were punished.

古文：天启四年，山东、江西、湖广、福建考官，皆以策问讥刺，降谕切责。
现代文：天启四年，山东、江西、湖广、福建考官，都因为考生策问中有讥刺之语，发下训谕，严厉指责。
English: In the fourth year of the Apocalypse, examiners in Shandong, Jiangxi, Hubei, and Fujian all issued edicts and severely reprimanded because there were sarcastic words in the examination questions.

古文：初命贬调，既而褫革，江西主考丁乾学至下狱拟罪，盖触魏忠贤怒也。
现代文：起初命令贬谪他调，随后又命革职。江西主考丁干学以致于下狱拟定罪名，因为是触犯魏忠贤发怒。
English: At first, he was ordered to be demoted and transferred, and then he was ordered to resign. Jiangxi head Kaoding went to school and was sentenced to prison because he offended Wei Zhongxian.

古文：先是二年辛酉，中允钱谦益典试浙江，所取举人钱千秋卷七篇大结，迹涉关节。
现代文：在此之前二年即辛酉年考试，中允钱谦益主考浙江，所取举人钱千秋考卷第七篇八股文大结部分，语句涉及到暗通关节。
English: Prior to this, two years ago, that is, in the Hsinchu Year of the Rooster examination, Zhong Yun Qian Qian Yi was the main examiner in Zhejiang, and the seventh chapter of the eighth chapter of the seventh chapter of the seventh chapter of the seventh chapter of the seventh chapter of the seventh chapter of the seventh chapter of the seventh chapter of the seventh chapter of the seventh chapter of the seventh chapter of the seventh chapter of the seventh chapter of the seventh chapter of the seventh chapter of the seventh chapter of the seventh chapter of the seventh chapter of the seventh chapter of the seventh chapter of the seventh chapter of the seventh chapter of the seventh chapter of the seventh chapter of the seventh chapter of the seventh chapter of the

古文：榜后为人所讦，谦益自检举，千秋谪戍。
现代文：榜发后，被人攻击，钱谦益自我检举，钱千秋贬谪戍守边地。
English: After the release of the album, he was attacked by people, Qian Qianyi self-reported, Qian Qianyu defended the border.

古文：未几，赦还。
现代文：不久，遇赦返回。
English: He was soon pardoned and returned.

古文：崇祯二年会推阁臣，谦益以礼部侍郎与焉，而尚书温体仁不与。
现代文：崇祯二年，遇上推举阁臣，钱谦益以礼部侍郎被举荐。而尚书温体仁没有被推举。
English: In the second year of the reign of Emperor Chongzhen, Qian Qianyun was recommended to be promoted to the position of courtier, while Shang Shuan Tianzhen was not promoted.

古文：体仁摘千秋事，出疏攻谦益。
现代文：温体仁指摘钱千秋事，上疏攻击钱谦益。
English: Wen Tizhen pointed out Qian Qianqiu, Shang So attacked Qian Qianyun.

古文：谦益由此罢，遂终明世不复起。
现代文：钱谦益因此被罢职，于是到明朝终结不再被起用。
English: As a result, Qian Qianyun was dismissed from his post, and was no longer employed by the end of the morning.

古文：其他指摘科场事者，前后非一，往往北闱为甚，他省次之。
现代文：其它指摘科场舞弊事件的，前后不止一椿，往往顺天府考场更严重，别的省其次。
English: Other cases of alleged fraud in the field of science, more than one camellia at a time, are often more serious in Shun Tianfu, followed by other provinces.

古文：其贿买钻营、怀挟倩代、割卷传递、顶名冒籍，弊端百出，不可穷究，而关节为甚。
现代文：其贿赂钻营、挟带材料、请人代考、割卷传递、顶名冒籍等，弊端百出，不能穷尽，而暗中勾结最为严重。
English: Their bribery of drilling camp, bandaging materials, inviting people to examine on behalf of others, cutting rolls and passing them on, impersonating top names, and so on, are full of drawbacks and cannot be exhausted, while collusion is the most serious.

古文：事属暧昧，或快恩仇报复，盖亦有之。
现代文：有些事情暧昧，或因恩报答，或因仇报复，大概也有。
English: Some things are ambiguous, either to repay a favor, or to take revenge, probably.

古文：其他小小得失，无足道也。
现代文：其它微小的一得一失，不值得称说。
English: Other minor gains and losses are not worth mentioning.

古文：历科事迹稍异者：永乐初，兵革仓猝，元年癸未，始令各省乡试。
现代文：历科考试情况稍微不同的有：永乐初年，战争仓猝，元年癸未，纔下令各省举行乡试。
English: The situation of the history exam is slightly different: the first year of Yongle, the suddenness of the war, the first year of Yu Wei, Yu ordered the provinces to hold township examinations.

古文：二年甲申会试，以事变不循午未之旧。
现代文：二年甲申举行会试，因事变不按照午、未的旧例。
English: In the second year, Ka-shin held the entrance examination, but because of the incident, it was not held in the afternoon or in the morning as in the past.

古文：七年己丑会试，中陈燧等九十五人。
现代文：永乐七年己丑会试，选中陈燧等九十五人。
English: In Yongle's seventh year, he auditioned for the Ugly Duckling Club, and was chosen over ninety-five other actors, including Chen Yao.

古文：成祖方北征，皇太子令送国子监进学，俟车驾还京廷试。
现代文：明成祖正率兵北征，皇太子命令送进士入园子监学习，等待皇帝回京廷试。
English: Ming Cheng Zu was leading soldiers to the Northern Expedition, and the crown prince ordered that the soldiers be sent to the kindergarten to study and wait for the emperor to return to the Beijing court.

古文：九年辛卯，始擢萧时中第一。
现代文：到永乐九年辛卯，纔选拔萧时中为第一名。
English: In the ninth year of Yongle, Xinwu won the first place in the middle school.

古文：宣德五年庚戌，帝临轩发策毕，退御武英殿，谓翰林儒臣曰： 取士不尚虚文，有若刘蕡、苏辙辈直言抗论，朕当显庸之。 
现代文：宣德五年庚戌，皇帝驾临前殿颁发策题完毕之后，退居武英殷，对翰林儒臣说： 选取才士不崇尚空虚之文，有如刘黄、苏辙等人那样直言立论，我将显扬任用他。 
English: In the fifth year of the Xuande Five-Year Plan, after the emperor arrived at the front hall to issue the plan, he retreated to Wu Ying Yin and said to Hanlin Ju Chen: "I will choose a talented person who does not worship empty words, and who is as outspoken as Liu Huang, Su Rut and others. I will appoint him prominently."

古文：乃赋《策士歌》以示读卷官，顾所擢第一人林震，亦无所表见也。
现代文：便赋《策士歌》，并把它交给读卷官看，祇不过选拔的第一名林震，也没有什么突出表现。
English: He was then given "The Counsellor's Song" and handed it over to the reciter, only the first place of the selection, Lin Zhen, did not have any outstanding performance.

古文：八年癸丑，廷试第一人曹鼐，由江西泰和典史会试中式。
现代文：永乐八年癸丑，廷试第一名曹鼐，以江西泰和典史的身份会试合格。
English: Yongle was ugly for eight years, and Cao Yu, the first in the imperial examination, passed the examination with the identity of Jiangxi Taihe Classic History.

古文：正统七年壬戌，刑部吏南昱、公陵驿丞郑温亦皆中式。
现代文：玺统七年壬戌，刑部吏南昱、公陵驿丞郑温也都考试合格。
English: For the first time in seven years, Nanzhu, a criminal justice department official, and Zheng Wen, a public mausoleum official, also passed the examination.

古文：十年乙丑，会试、廷试第一皆商辂。
现代文：正统十年乙丑，会试、廷试第一名都是商辖。
English: In the past ten years, the first place in the official examination and the first place in the court examination was occupied by merchants.

古文：辂，淳安人，宣宗末年乙卯，浙榜第一人。
现代文：商辖，淳安人，宣宗末年乙卯，浙江乡试第一名。
English: Shangjia, Junan people, Xuan Zong late years, the first place in Zhejiang Township.

古文：三试皆第一，士子艳称为三元，明代惟辂一人而已。
现代文：三次考试都是第一名，士子美称为三元，明代只有商辖一人而已。
English: All three examinations were the first place. Shi Zi Mei was called San Yuan. In the Ming Dynasty, only Shang Yu was the first.

古文：廷试读卷尽用甲科，而是年兵部尚书徐晞、十三年户部侍郎余亨乃吏员，天顺元年丁丑读卷左都御史杨善乃译字生，时犹未甚拘流品也。
现代文：廷试板卷全部用进士，而这一年兵部尚书徐晞、正统十三年户部侍郎奈亨乃是吏员，天顺元年丁丑，阅卷左都御史杨善乃是从事翻译的人员，当时还没有太拘泥于出身和资格。
English: The imperial examination papers were all written by imperial courtiers, and in this year, the head of the military department, Shangshu Xu, and the head of the household department of the 13th year of orthodoxy, Na Heng, were clerks. In the first year of Tenshun, Ding Gou, and the reading of the left capital, Shi Yang Shan, were translators. At that time, there was not too much emphasis on birth and qualifications.

古文：迨后无杂流会试及为读卷官者矣。
现代文：到后来便没有杂流在会试中作阅卷官的了。
English: Later on, there were no strays to act as examiners in the board examinations.

古文：七年癸未试日，场屋火，死者九十馀人，俱赠进士出身，改期八月会试。
现代文：正统七年癸未考试之日，考场房屋发生火灾，死亡九十多人，都赠进士出身，改期于八月会试。
English: Exactly seven years ago, on the day before the exam, a fire broke out in a building at the examination hall, killing more than 90 people. All of them were gifted gifted students, and the exam was rescheduled for August.

古文：明年甲申三月，始廷试。
现代文：第二年甲申三月，纔举行廷试。
English: In March of the second year of Jiaxing, he held a court trial.

古文：时英宗已崩，宪宗以大丧未逾岁，御西角门策之。
现代文：当时英宗已死，宪宗因大丧没有过一年，驾临西角门廷试策对。
English: At that time, Emperor Yingzong had already died, and Emperor Gensong, who had been in mourning for less than a year, came to the West Point Men's Court to test his strategy.

古文：正德三年戊辰，太监刘瑾录五十人姓名以示主司，因广五十名之额。
现代文：正德三年戊辰，太监刘瑾录写五十人姓名交给主考官，于是扩大五十名的额数。
English: In the third year of Zhengde's reign, the eunuch Liu Ye wrote down the names of fifty people and handed them to the chief examiner, thus expanding the number of fifty people.

古文：十五年庚辰，武宗南巡，未及廷试。
现代文：正德十五年庚辰，武宗南巡，没有赶上廷试。
English: Zhengde 15 years Gengchen, Wuzong Southern Inspection, did not catch up with the court trial.

古文：次年，世宗即位，五月御西角门策之，擢杨维聪第一。
现代文：第二年，世宗即位，五月驾临西角门廷试策对，选拔杨维聪为第一名。
English: The following year, Sejong ascended to the throne, and in May, he came to the West Point to test the mentee, selecting Yang Weicong as the first.

古文：而张璁即是榜进士也，六七年间，当国用事，权侔人主矣。
现代文：而张璁便是此榜进士，六七年间，执政专权，权力与皇帝相当。
English: And Zhang Ye is a member of this list. For sixty-seven years, he had absolute power, equal to that of the emperor.

古文：嘉靖八年己丑，帝亲阅廷试卷，手批一甲罗洪先、杨名、欧阳德，二甲唐顺之、陈束、任瀚六人对策，各加评奖。
现代文：嘉靖八年己丑，皇帝亲自披阅廷试卷，亲手批定一甲罗洪先、杨名、欧阳德，二甲唐匠苎、陈束、任瀚六人对策，一一加以评论褒奖。
English: In the eighth year of Jiajing, the emperor personally read the examination papers of the court, and personally approved the countermeasures of Luo Hongxian, Yang Ming, Ouyang De, Tang Shuxuan, Chen Zu and Renhan, and commented and praised them one by one.

古文：大学士杨一清等遂选顺之、束、瀚及胡经等共二十人为庶吉士，疏其名上，请命官教习。
现代文：大学士杨一清等人便选唐顺之、陈束、任瀚以及胡经等共二十人为庶吉士，疏列其名呈上，请求命令官员教育。
English: Yang Yiching, a university scholar, and others chose Tang Shunzhi, Chen Zucu, Ren Hanlu and Hu Jing, a total of twenty people, to be posthumous congratulators, and listed their names on the petition to order the education of officials.

古文：忽降谕云：吉士之选，祖宗旧制诚善。
现代文：皇帝忽然降下训谕说： 吉士的选拔是祖宗旧有的制度，确实很好。
English: The emperor suddenly issued an edict, saying: "The selection of auspicious people is the old system of the ancestors, and it is really good.

古文：迩来大臣徇私选取，市恩立党，于国无益，自今不必选留。
现代文：近来大臣徇私选取，卖恩惠，立朋党，对国家没有益处，从今以后不必选留。
English: In recent years, ministers have been self-selecting, selling favors, and establishing crony parties, which is not beneficial to the country. From now on, there is no need to elect and retain ministers.

古文：唐顺之等一切除授，吏、礼二部及翰林院会议以闻。 
现代文：唐顺之等全部授官，吏、礼二部以及翰林院会聚商议上报。 
English: Tang Shun and all the officials, officials, two departments of etiquette, and Hanlin Academy gathered to discuss and report.

古文：尚书方献夫等遂阿旨谓顺之等不必留，并限翰林之额，侍读、侍讲、修撰各三员，编修、检讨各六员。
现代文：尚书方献夫等人便阿谀圣旨说唐顺之等人不必选留庶吉士，并且限定翰林的数额，侍读、侍讲、修撰各三人，编修、检讨各六人。
English: According to the imam's sacred edict, Tang Shun and his followers did not need to retain the non-devotees, and the number of scholars was limited to three each for reading, lecturing, and editing, and six each for editing and reviewing.

古文：著为令。
现代文：用文字写定为规制。
English: This article shall be construed as a ritsuryo.

古文：盖顺之等出张璁、霍韬门，而心以大礼之议为非，不肯趋附，璁心恶之。
现代文：原因是唐顺之等人虽出自强璁、霍韬的尸弓下，而内心认为张璁大礼之议是不对的，不肯趋附张璁，张璁内心憎恶他们。
English: The reason is that although Tang Shunzhi and others came from under the dead arrows of Qiang Zang and Huo Zang, they believed in their hearts that Zhang Zang's grand speech was wrong, they refused to follow Zhang Zang, and Zhang Zang hated them in his heart.

古文：璁又方欲中一清，故以立党之说进，而故事由此废。
现代文：张璁又正要中伤杨一清，所以用建立朋党之说进言，而旧有的规矩因此被废弃。
English: Zhang Ye was also about to slander Yang Yixing, so he used the argument of establishing a party of friends, and the old rules were therefore abandoned.

古文：迨十一年壬辰，已罢馆选，至九月复举行之。
现代文：到了嘉靖十一年壬辰，已罢除馆选，到九月，又举行。
English: By the eleventh year of Jiajing, the hall election had been canceled, and it was held again in September.

古文：十四年乙未，帝亲制策问，手自批阅，擢韩应龙第一。
现代文：嘉靖十四年乙未，皇帝亲自制定策问，亲手批阅，选拔韩应龙为第一名。
English: In the 14th year of the Jiajing Dynasty, the emperor personally formulated the strategy, personally approved it, and selected Han Yinglong as the first.

古文：降谕论一甲三人及二甲第一名次前后之由。
现代文：降下训谕论说一甲三人以及二甲第一名名次前后的原因。
English: The reason for the lowering of the precept is to discuss the first and third place and the second and first place.

古文：礼部因以圣谕列登科录之首，而十二人对策，俱以次刊刻。
现代文：礼部于是以圣谕列在登科录之首，而十二人对策，都按次第刊刻。
English: As a result, the rite section was listed first in the encyclopedia with the oracle, while the twelve countermeasures were all published and engraved in sequence.

古文：二十年辛丑，考选庶吉士题，文曰《原政》，诗曰《读大明律》，皆钦降也。
现代文：嘉靖二十年辛丑，考选庶吉士题，文题为《原政》，诗题为《读大明律》，都是钦定之后发布下来的。
English: Jiajing twenty years of pain and ugliness, the examination of miscellaneous auspicious topics, the article entitled "Original Politics," the poem entitled "Reading the Great Law," are all published after the approval.

古文：四十四年乙丑廷试，帝始不御殿。
现代文：嘉靖四十四年乙丑廷试，皇帝纔不再驾临前殿。
English: In the forty-fourth year of the Jiajing Dynasty, Emperor Yao no longer came to the front hall.

古文：神宗时，御殿益稀矣。
现代文：神宗时，驾临前殿策试次数更稀少了。
English: In the time of the Shinshu sect, the number of attempts to reach the front hall was even rarer.

古文：天启二年壬戌会试，命大学士何宗彦、朱国祚为主考。
现代文：天启二年壬戌会试，命令大学士何宗彦、朱国祚作主考官。
English: In the second year of the Jinyun Examination, he ordered the university scholars He Zongyan and Zhu Guozhen to be the chief examiners.

古文：故事，阁臣典试，翰、詹一人副之。
现代文：按照旧例，阁臣主考，翰林、詹事一人作副主考。
English: According to the old practice, the chief examiner was the minister of the cabinet, and Hanlin and Zhan Zhi were the deputy chief examiners.

古文：时已推礼部尚书顾秉谦，特旨命国祚。
现代文：当时已经推举礼部尚书顾秉谦，皇上下特旨命令用朱国祚。
English: At that time, Shang Shuxu Gu Bingqian of the Ministry of Ceremonies had been elected, and Zhu Guojun was used by special order of the emperor.

古文：国祚疏辞，帝曰： 今岁，朕首科，特用二辅臣以光重典，卿不必辞。 
现代文：朱国祚上疏推辞，皇帝说： 今年，我首科，特地用二辅臣作考官来光耀这件大事，您不必推辞。 
English: Zhu Guojun reluctantly declined, and the emperor said: "This year, I, as the head of the imperial examination, specially used two assistant ministers as examiners to highlight this great event. You don't have to decline.

古文：嗣后二辅臣典试以为常。
现代文：随后，二辅臣主持考试作为常规。
English: Subsequently, two vice-ministers presided over the examination as a rule.

古文：是年开宗科，朱慎成进士，从宗彦、国祚请，即授中书舍人。
现代文：这一年开设宗科，朱慎鏊成为进士，听从何宗彦、朱国祚的请求，便授为中书舍人。
English: In the same year, the Department of Chinese Studies was established, and Zhu Shanyu became a scholar. At the request of He Zongyan and Zhu Guozhen, he was awarded the title of Senior Lecturer in Chinese Studies.

古文：崇祯四年，朱统饰成进士，初选庶吉士。
现代文：崇祯四年，朱统钸成为进士，初选为庶吉士。
English: In the fourth year of Chongzhen, Zhu Tongzhen became a member, and the primary election was a member.

古文：吏部以统饰宗室，不宜官禁近，请改中书舍人。
现代文：吏部认为朱统钸是宗室，不适宜在宫禁附近作官，请求改任中书舍人。
English: The cadre department thought that Zhu Tonglu was the family's ancestral home, and it was not appropriate for him to work as an official near the imperial palace, and requested that he be reassigned to the position of a middle school teacher.

古文：统饰疏争，命仍授庶吉士。
现代文：朱统钸上疏抗争，命令仍然授庶吉士。
English: Zhu Dizhong resisted, but the order was still to bestow the title of Junshi.

古文：七年甲戌，知贡举礼部侍郎林钎言，举人颜茂猷文兼《五经》，作二十三义。
现代文：崇祯七年甲戌，知贡举礼部侍郎林钎上言，举人颜茂猷文章兼包《五经》，写了二十三篇经义文章。
English: In the seventh year of the reign of Emperor Chongzhen, he wrote twenty-three articles on the meaning of the Five Classics.

古文：帝念其该洽，许送内帘。
现代文：皇帝念其博洽，允许送内帘。
English: The emperor was so impressed that he allowed the inner curtain to be sent.

古文：茂猷中副榜，特赐进士，以其名另为一行，刻于试录第一名之前。
现代文：颜茂猷考中副榜，特别赐予进士，把他的名字另作一行，刻在试录第一名的前面。
English: Yan Maoxuan in the middle of the exam, a special award was given to the winner, and his name was engraved on a separate line in front of the first place in the test.

古文：《五经》中式者，自此接迹矣。
现代文：《五经》考试合格者，从此接连不断。
English: Those who passed the "Five Classics" examination have been rising in succession ever since.

古文：武科，自吴元年定。
现代文：武科，从昊元年确定开设。
English: Wuxi, confirmed to open in the first year of Hao.

古文：洪武二十年俞礼部请，立武学，用武举。
现代文：洪武二十年，同意礼部的请求，设立武学，选用武举。
English: In the 20th year of Hongwu, he agreed to the request of the Ministry of Ceremonies to set up martial arts and choose martial arts.

古文：武臣子弟于各直省应试。
现代文：武臣的子弟在各自行省应考。
English: The sons of samurai retainers had to take examinations in their respective provinces.

古文：天顺八年，令天下文武官举通晓兵法、谋勇出众者，各省抚、按、三司，直隶巡按御史考试。
现代文：天顺八年，命令天下文武官吏推举通晓兵法、智谋勇力出众的人，各智抚、按、三司，直隶巡按御史考试。
English: In the eighth year of Tianshun, he ordered the world's civil and military officials to nominate people who were well versed in military tactics, wisdom and courage, and each of the wisdom, press, three departments, and direct subordinates to pass the history exam.

古文：中式者，兵部同总兵官于帅府试策略，教场试弓马。
现代文：考试合格的，兵部会同总兵在帅府考试策论谋略，在教场考试弓马。
English: For those who pass the examination, the Ministry of Military Affairs will work with the general enlisted soldiers to discuss and strategize on the examination at the General Headquarters, and conduct the examination on bows and arrows in the classroom.

古文：答策二道，骑中四矢、步中二矢以上者为中式。
现代文：答策二篇，骑马射中四箭、徒步射中二箭以上的算合格。
English: There are two parts to the answer, riding a horse and shooting four arrows, and shooting more than two arrows on foot are qualified.

古文：骑、步所中半焉者次之。
现代文：骑、步射中半数的次一等。
English: The second-highest score in half of the riding and shooting events.

古文：成化十四年，从太监汪直请，设武科乡、会试，悉视文科例。
现代文：成化十四年，听从太监汪直的请求，设立武科乡试、会试，全部按文科的规程进行。
English: In the 14th year of Chenghua, at the request of the eunuch Wang Zhi, the Wuxi Township Examination and the Municipal Examination were established, all of which were conducted in accordance with the liberal arts regulations.

古文：弘治六年，定武举六岁一行，先策略，后弓马。
现代文：弘治六年，确定武举六年一次，先考策略，后考弓马。
English: Hongzhi six years, determine the martial arts six years once, first test the strategy, after the examination of the bow and arrow.

古文：策不中者不许骑射。
现代文：策对不合格的不允许考骑射。
English: Countermeasures are not allowed to pass the test of riding and shooting.

古文：十七年，改定三年一试，出榜赐宴。
现代文：弘治十七年，改定三年一次考试，发榜赐宴。
English: In the 17th year of Hongzhi, the triennial examination was revised, and the award ceremony was held.

古文：正德十四年定，初场试马上箭，以三十五步为则；二场试步下箭，以八十步为则；三场试策一道。
现代文：正德十四年规定，第一场考试骑马射箭，以三十五步为规则；第二场考试徒步射箭，以八十步为规则；第三场考试策对一篇。
English: In the 14th year of Zhengde, it was stipulated that the first test would be horse riding and archery, with thirty-five steps as the rule; the second test would be archery on foot, with eighty steps as the rule; and the third test would be one-on-one.

古文：子、午、卯、酉年乡试。
现代文：子、午、卯、酉年乡试。
English: Primary, junior high school, junior high school, and senior high school students take the exam.

古文：嘉靖初，定制，各省应武举者，巡按御史于十月考试，两京武学于兵部选取，俱送兵部。
现代文：嘉靖初年，确定制度，各省应考武举的，巡按御史在十月考试，两京武学在兵部选取，都送往兵部。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Jiajing, a system was established, in which the provinces were required to take the military examination, and the inspectors were sent to the military department for the examination in October, and the two capital martial arts were selected by the military department.

古文：次年四月会试，翰林二员为考试官，给事中、部曹四员为同考。
现代文：第二年四月会试，翰林二人作考试官，给事中、部曹四人作同考官。
English: The next year, in April, there were two examiners from Hanlin, and four examiners from the middle school and the department.

古文：乡、会场期俱于月之初九、十二、十五。
现代文：乡试和会试场期都在该月的初九、十二、十五。
English: The audition periods of the township audition and meeting are on the 9th, 12th and 15th of the month.

古文：起送考验监试张榜，大率仿文闱而减杀之。
现代文：起送考查验核，监试张榜，大抵仿照文科考试而减少程序。
English: The examination of the examination of the examination, the supervision of the examination, and the reduction of the procedure are mostly modeled on the liberal arts examination.

古文：其后倏罢倏复。
现代文：此后突然间罢除又突然间恢复。
English: Then, suddenly, the suspension was suddenly reinstated.

古文：又仿文闱南北卷例，分边方、腹里。
现代文：又仿照文科考试南北卷的规程，依照考生来源分。
English: In addition, according to the rules of the north and south volumes of the liberal arts examination, according to the source of candidates.

