古文：张乖崖守成都，兵火之余，人怀反侧。
现代文：原文宋朝的张咏戍守成都的时候，战乱刚刚平定，人常有反叛之心。
English: When Zhang Ye of the Song Dynasty was in charge of Chengdu, the war had just ended, and people often had a rebellious spirit.

古文：一日大阅，始出，众遂嵩呼者三。乖崖亦下马，东北望而三呼，复揽辔而行。
现代文：一天举行校阅，张咏刚刚出现，军士们立即大声鼓噪，再三呼叫万岁，张咏立即下马面向东北高呼三声 皇上万岁 ，然后上马继续校阅。
English: One day, a school reading was held. Zhang Ye had just appeared, and the sergeants immediately made a loud noise and repeatedly shouted "long live." Zhang Ye immediately dismounted and shouted "long live the emperor" three times facing the northeast, and then mounted his horse to continue the school reading.

古文：众不敢讙。
现代文：军士们见此举动，不敢再喧哗。
English: The sergeants saw this action and did not dare to make any more noise.

古文：上尝召徐中山王饮，迨夜，强之醉。
现代文：一次明太祖召徐达饮酒，喝到了夜晚还不停地灌徐达酒。
English: Once, Ming Taizu invited Xu Da to drink alcohol, and he kept pouring wine on Xu Da until the evening.

古文：醉甚，命内侍送旧内宿焉。
现代文：徐达喝得大醉，太祖命令内侍把徐达送到旧内休息。
English: Xu Da was very drunk. Grandfather ordered the chambermaid to take Xu Da to the old house to rest.

古文：旧内，上为吴王时所居也。中夜，王酒醒，问宿何地，内侍曰： 旧内也。 
现代文：旧内是太祖为吴王的时候所居住的宫殿，半夜徐达酒醒后，问内侍这是什么地方？内侍回答说： 是旧内。 
English: Old Nai is the palace where the great-grandfather lived when he was the king of Wu. After waking up in the middle of the night, he asked the chambermaid where it was. The chambermaid replied: "Old Nai."

古文：即起，趋丹陛下，北面再拜，三叩头乃出。
现代文：徐达立即起身，跪在台阶上朝北拜跪，三叩首之后才离开了。
English: Xu Da immediately got up, kneeled on the steps facing north, bowed his head three times, and then left.

古文：上闻之，大说。
现代文：太祖听说这件事情之后，十分高兴。
English: My grandfather was very happy when he heard about this.

古文：乖崖三呼，而军哗顿息；中山三叩头，而主信益坚。
现代文：张咏高呼三声万岁，平息了军士们急躁反叛的情绪；徐达三叩首，坚定了太祖对他的信任。
English: Zhang Qian shouted three times, "Long live," which calmed the impatient and rebellious mood of the sergeants; Xu Dasi bowed his head three times, which strengthened the great-grandfather's trust in him.

古文：仓卒间乃有许大主张，非特恪谨而已!
现代文：这两个人都在极短的时间之内做出了日后对自己影响甚大的决定。看这两个人的行为，难道仅仅是行事谨慎而已吗？
English: Both of them have made decisions in a very short time that will have a great impact on themselves in the future. Looking at the behavior of these two people, is it just prudence?

