古文：公明日召太子少傅白居易，太子宾容萧籍、李仍叔、刘禹锡，中书舍人郑居中等十五人合宴于舟中，自晨及暮，前水嬉而后妓乐，左笔砚而右壶觞，望之若仙，观者如堵。裴公首赋一章，四坐继和，乐天为十二韵以献，见于集中。
现代文：唐文宗开成二年三月三日，河南尹李待价将在洛水边修禊，前一天去信寄给河南留守裴令公度，裴度第二天招集太子少傅白居易，太子宾客萧籍、李仍叔、刘禹锡，中书舍人郑居中等十五人，在船上大开宴会。从早晨到晚上，玩水的玩水，奏乐的奏乐，赋诗的赋诗，饮酒的饮酒，远远看去，象神仙一般，观看的人山人海，裴公先赋诗一首，余人接着唱和，白居易作了十二韵诗，献给会上诸人，现存集中。
English: On the third day of March in the second year of Tang Wenzong's reign, Henan Yin Li, who was waiting for the price, was going to repair the pier at the water's edge of Luo. The day before, he sent a letter to Pei Ling Kung Du, who was staying in Henan. The next day, Pei Du summoned the young prince Fu Bai Juyi, and the prince's guests Xiao Qi, Li Yingsu, Liu Yuxi, and the middle-aged Chinese scholar Zheng Ju, fifteen people, and held a grand banquet on the boat. From morning to evening, playing water, playing water, playing music, playing poetry, drinking alcohol

古文：今人赋上已，鲜有用其事者。
现代文：现代人写上已诗，很少使用这个史实。
English: Modern people rarely use this historical fact when writing about poetry.

古文：予按《裴公传》，是年起节度河东，三年以病丐还东都。
现代文：我查《裴公传》，这年起复用为河东节度使。开成三年因病求回东都。
English: I checked "Biographies of Pei Gong" and since this year it has been reused as the Hedong Festival. It has been three years since I returned to Dongdu due to illness.

古文：文宗上已宴群臣曲江，度不赴，帝赐以诗，使者及门而度薨。
现代文：文宗上已日在曲江池大宴群臣，裴度没有赴会，文宗写诗赐给他，使者才到门口，裴度就死了。
English: On the day of Wenzong's death, a large banquet was held at Qujiangchi for his ministers. Pei Du did not attend the banquet. Wenzong wrote a poem and gave it to him. When the messenger arrived at the door, Pei Du died.

古文：与前事相去正一年。
现代文：和上次事相隔正好一年。
English: It's been exactly a year since the last incident.

古文：然乐天又有一篇，题云《奉和裴令公三月上已日游太原龙泉忆去岁禊洛之作》，是开成三年诗，则度以四年三月始薨。
现代文：但白乐天又有一篇，题为《奉和裴令公三月上已日游太原龙泉忆去岁禊洛之作》，是开成三年诗，那么裴度是开成四年三月才死的。
English: However, Bai Letian also has another poem, entitled "Bonghe Pei Lingong March Shangya Day Tour of Taiyuan Longquan Remembering Last Year's Victory," which is a poem written three years before, so Pei Du died in March of the fourth year.

古文：《新史》以为三年，误也。
现代文：《新唐书》以为是开成三年，那就错了。
English: "New Tang Dynasty Classics" was thought to have been published for three years, but that was a mistake.

古文：《宰相表》却载其三年十二月为中书令，四年三月薨。
现代文：《宰相表》却记载裴度开成三年十二月为中书令，四年三月病故。
English: However, the "Prime Minister's Table" records that Pei was appointed to the post in December of the same year, and died of illness in March of the following year.

古文：而帝纪全失书，独《旧史》纪、传为是。
现代文：然而《帝纪》全无记载，只有《旧唐书》纪和传记载的对。
English: However, there is no record in the "Imperial History" at all, only the pair recorded in the "Old Tang Book" and the biography.

