古文：厉王说荣夷公，芮良夫曰： 王室其将卑乎？
现代文：周厉王喜欢荣夷公，芮良夫说： 王室即将衰落了！
English: Zhou Li Wang likes Rong Yi Gong, Gong Liangfu said: The royal family is about to decline!

古文：夫荣夷公好专利而不知大难。
现代文：荣夷公只求独占财利而不知道大难将临。
English: Rong Yikong only sought to monopolize financial gain and did not know that the great tribulation was approaching.

古文：夫利，百物之所生也，天地之所载也，而或专之，其害多矣。
现代文：利是由万物中产生出来的，是由天地所养育而成的，如果想要独占它，所带来的的祸患会很多。
English: Profit is generated from all things, nurtured by heaven and earth. If you want to monopolize it, you will bring a lot of disasters.

古文：天地百物皆将取焉，胡可专也？
现代文：天地万物，人人皆可以取用，怎么可以独占呢？
English: All things in heaven and on earth can be used by everyone. How can they be monopolized?

古文：所怒甚多而不备大难，以是教王，王能久乎？
现代文：触怒的人太多而不防备大难，用这些来引导陛下，陛下能长治久安吗？
English: There are too many people who are enraged and not prepared for great difficulties. Use these to guide your majesty. Can your majesty maintain peace for a long time?

古文：夫王人者，将导利而布之上下者也。使神人百物无不得其极，犹日怵惕，惧怨之来也。
现代文：治理天下的人，应该开通利途而分配给上上下下的人，使天下百姓和世间万物都得到它应得的那一份，即使这样尚且天天担忧，害怕招来祸患。
English: Those who govern the world should open up a path of prosperity and distribute it to those above and below, so that the people of the world and all things in the world get the share they deserve. Even so, they still worry every day, afraid of bringing disaster.

古文：故《颂》曰： 思文后稷，克配彼天。
现代文：所以《颂》诗说： 文德郁盛的后稷啊，功堪比天；使百姓得以生存，无不受到恩惠。 
English: That is why the poem "Ode" says: "O virtuous Houyi, your achievements are as great as the heavens; you have enabled the people to survive, and you have been favored by all.

古文：立我蒸民，莫匪尔极。 
现代文：《大雅》说： 广泛地施德，奠定了周朝。 
English: "Daya" said: "Widely promoting virtue laid the foundation for the Zhou Dynasty."

古文：《大雅》曰： 陈锡载周。 
现代文：这不正是布施恩惠仍怀有戒惧之心吗？
English: Isn't that why we're still wary of doing favors?

古文：是不布利而惧难乎？
现代文：所以才能够开创王业并延续至今。
English: That's why we were able to start our business and continue it to this day.

古文：故能载周，以至于今。
现代文：现在陛下要效法独占财利，这是可以做的吗？
English: Now your majesty wants to follow the example of monopolizing financial interests. Can this be done?

古文：今王学专利，其可乎？匹夫专利，犹谓之盗，王而行之，其归鲜矣。荣公若用，周必败。 
现代文：普通人独占财利，尚且被称为盗贼，作为天子这样做的话，归附王室的人就会越来越少。荣夷公若被重用，周朝一定会衰败灭亡。 
English: Ordinary people monopolize wealth and profit, yet they are called thieves. If you do this as a son of heaven, there will be fewer and fewer people who belong to the royal family. If Rongyi Gong is reused, the Zhou Dynasty will surely decline and perish.

古文：既，荣公为卿士，诸侯不享，王流于彘。
现代文：不久，荣夷公当上了卿士，诸侯都不来朝见献享了，厉王被放逐到了彘地。
English: Soon after, Rong Yi Gong was made a noble, and all the lords came to the court to present their gifts. King Li was banished to the Shandong Province.

