古文：犀首、田盼欲得齐、魏之兵以伐赵，梁君与田侯不欲。
现代文：犀首和田盼想要率领齐、魏两国的军队去攻打赵国，魏王和齐王不想将军队交给他们。
English: Rhino-head and Tian-pan wanted to lead the armies of Qi and Wei to attack Zhao, but the Wei and Qi kings did not want to hand over the army to them.

古文：犀首曰： 请国出五万人，不过五月而赵破。 
现代文：犀首说： 请两国各出五万兵力，用不了五个月我就能让赵国灭亡。 
English: The head of the rhinoceros said, "I ask both countries to send fifty thousand troops each. It will take me less than five months to destroy Zhao."

古文：田盼曰： 夫轻用其兵者，其国易危；易用其计者，其身易穷。
现代文：田盼说： 轻易用兵的国家，容易遭遇灾祸；轻易使用计谋的人，也容易陷入困境。
English: Tian Ran said: A country that is easy to use soldiers is easy to encounter disasters; a person who is easy to use stratagems is also easy to get into trouble.

古文：公今言破赵大易，恐有后咎。 
现代文：您说的攻破赵国也太容易了，恐有后患。 
English: As you said, it is too easy to break into Zhao Province, and there may be consequences.

古文：犀首曰： 公之不慧也。
现代文：犀首说： 您太糊涂了。
English: The head of the rhinoceros said: You are too confused.

古文：夫二君者，固已不欲矣，今公又言有难以惧之，是赵不伐，而二士之谋困也。
现代文：那二位君主，本来就已经不想出兵。今天您又说出困难来吓唬他们，这样不但赵国不能攻打，而且我们两人的图谋也无法实现了。
English: Those two sovereigns did not want to send troops in the first place. Today, you are trying to scare them by talking about difficulties. As a result, not only can Zhao not attack, but neither of our plans can be realized.

古文：且公直言易，而事已去矣。
现代文：如果您干脆就说很容易，那么两国君王的顾虑就消除了。
English: If you simply say that it is easy, then the concerns of the two monarchs are eliminated.

古文：夫难构而兵结，田侯、梁君见其危，又安敢释卒不我予乎? 田盼曰： 善。 
现代文：等到双方交战，短兵相接，齐王和魏王看到他们所处的危险，又怎么敢放着军队不给我们用呢? 田盼说： 对。 
English: When the two sides were at war, and the short-ranged soldiers were close to each other, the King of Qi and the King of Wei saw the danger they were in, and how dare they let the army go and not use it for us? Tian Ran said: Yes.

古文：遂劝两君听犀首。
现代文：于是就合力劝说两国君主听从犀首的意见。
English: So they worked together to persuade the monarchs of the two countries to listen to the opinions of the head of the rhinoceros.

古文：犀首、田盼遂得齐、魏之兵。
现代文：犀首、田盼于是得到齐、魏两军的指挥权。
English: Rhinoceros and Tian Ran were then given the command of the Qi and Wei armies.

古文：兵未出境，梁君、田侯恐其至而战败也，悉起兵从之，大败赵氏。
现代文：军队还没有开出国境，魏王和齐王担心他们到了赵国要打败仗，就调集全部军队紧跟而来，结果彻底击败了赵国。
English: The army had not yet crossed the border. The Wei and Qi kings were worried that they would lose the war when they arrived in Zhao, so they mobilized all the troops to follow them. As a result, they completely defeated Zhao.

