古文：撒改宗宪习不失宗亨宗贤石土门忠习室思敬
现代文：撒改，是景祖的孙子，韩国公劾者的长子，即世祖的兄长的儿子。
English: Sakai is the grandson of King Sejong, the eldest son of the Korean public prosecutor, and the son of King Sejong's elder brother.

古文：撒改者，景祖孙，韩国公劾者之长子，世祖之兄子也。
现代文：劾者在同辈次序中年纪最大。景祖刚刚计划平定各部的时候，喜爱世祖勇敢、有才略。
English: The accuser is the oldest in the peer order. When Jing Zu had just planned to subdue the various departments, he liked the grandfather to be brave and resourceful.

古文：劾者于次最长。景祖方计定诸部，爱世祖胆勇材略。及诸子长，国俗当异宫居，而命劾者与世祖同邸，劾者专治家务，世祖主外事。
现代文：等到儿子们长大，按国中习俗应当分别居住在各个宫室，而景祖却命劾者和世祖同住一处，劾者专门管理家中事务，世祖主持外边事务。
English: When the sons grew up, according to the custom of the country, they should live separately in each palace room, but the King's father ordered the father-in-law and the father-in-law to live together. The father-in-law specially managed the affairs of the family, while the father-in-law presided over external affairs.

古文：世祖袭节度使，越劾孙而传肃宗、穆宗，皆景祖志也。
现代文：世祖承袭节度使，越过劾孙而把职位传给肃宗、穆宗，都是景祖的意志。
English: It was the will of King Gyeongjo that the founder of the dynasty should succeed to the post of the festival commissioner, and pass the post to Sojong and Mujong over the objections of the son.

古文：穆宗初袭位，念劾者长兄不得立，遂命撒改为国相。
现代文：穆宗刚即位的时候，想到劾者是长兄却没有立为国君，就任命撒改为国相。
English: When Mu Zong ascended the throne, he thought that the accuser was the eldest brother but was not appointed as the sovereign, so he appointed Zhao to be the minister of state.

古文：穆宗履藉父兄址业，锄除强梗不服己者，使撒改取马纪岭道攻阿疏，穆宗自将，期阿疏城下会军。
现代文：穆宗继承父兄的遗业，除掉强硬不服从自己的人，派撒改从马纪岭进军，去攻打阿疏，穆宗自己统领军队，约定在阿疏城下会合。
English: Mu Zong inherited the legacy of his father and brother, got rid of the people who were tough and disobeyed him, sent the reformers to march from Maji Ridge to attack Aso, Mu Zong himself led the army, and agreed to meet under the city of Aso.

古文：撒改行次阿不塞水，乌延部斜勒勃堇来谒，谓撒改曰： 闻国相将与太师会军阿疏城下，此为深入必取之策，宜先抚定潺蠢、星显之路，落其党附，夺其民人，然后合军未晚也。 
现代文：撒改走到阿不塞水，乌延部的斜勒勃堇来拜见，对撒改说： 听说国相要与太师在阿疏城下会合，这是深入敌方必定能取胜的计策，应该先扫平潺蠢、星显的道路，清除那里的附从党徒，夺取民众百姓，然后再会合军队也不晚。 
English: Sahakari walked to Abuseh water, and Shille Bogan from Uyan came to see him. He said to Sahakari, "I heard that the Minister of State is going to meet with the Grand Master at the foot of the city of Aso. This is a strategy of penetrating deep into the enemy's territory, which is sure to lead to victory. It is necessary to first sweep the roads of Zhou, Xingxing, and eliminate the followers of the Party there, and seize the people. Then it is not too late to meet the army.

古文：撒改从之，攻钝恩城，请济师，穆宗与之，撒改遂攻下钝恩城，而与穆宗来会阿疏城下。
现代文：撒改听从了他的话，攻打钝恩城，请求增援军队，穆宗给了他，撒改于是攻下钝恩城，再来与穆宗在阿疏城下会合。
English: Zakaari obeyed his words, attacked the city of Blunt En, asked for reinforcement of the army, Mu Zong gave it to him, Zakaari then captured the city of Blunt En, and then met with Mu Zong under the city of Aso.

古文：钝恩在南，阿疏在北，穆宗初遣撒改分道，即会攻阿疏。
现代文：钝恩在南，阿疏在北，穆宗起初派撒改分路行军，是要合攻阿疏。
English: With Blunt En in the south and Aso in the north, Mu Zong initially sent troops to change the route of the march in order to attack Aso together.

古文：闻其用斜勒计，先取钝恩城，与初议不合，颇不然之。
现代文：听到撒改采用斜勒的计策，先攻取钝恩城，穆宗本来跟他商议时意见不同，很不赞成。
English: When he heard that the reformers had adopted the stratagem of attacking the city of Bokun first, Mu Zong disagreed with him and did not approve of it.

古文：及辽使来止勿攻阿疏，然后深以先取钝恩城为功也。
现代文：等到辽国使臣前来阻止攻打阿疏，然后才认为首先攻取钝恩城有功。
English: Wait until the Liao envoys come to prevent the attack on Aso, and then think that the first to capture the Blunt Encheng has merit.

古文：及以国相都统讨留可、诈都、坞塔等军，而阿疏亡入于辽，终不敢归，留可、诈都、坞塔、钝恩皆降。
现代文：穆宗让国相统率征讨留可、诈都、坞塔等地的军队，阿疏逃进辽国，最终没敢回来，留可、诈都、坞塔、钝恩全部投降。
English: Mu Zong led the unification of the country to conscript the troops in the areas of Ruko, Zhudu and Dockyard Tower. Aso fled to Liao Province, but eventually did not dare to return. Ruko, Zhudu, Dockyard Tower and Blunt Tower all surrendered.

古文：康宗没，太祖称都勃极烈，与撒改分治诸部，匹脱水以北太祖统之，来流水人民撒改统之。
现代文：康宗逝世，太祖号称都勃极烈，与撒改分别治理各部落，匹脱水以北由太祖统治，来流水的人民由撒改统治。
English: After the death of Kangzong, Taizu was said to be extremely powerful, and he and Sakai governed the tribes separately. To the north of Pingdushui, Taizu ruled, and the people who came to Lingshui were ruled by Sakai.

古文：明年甲午，嗣节度命方至。
现代文：第二年甲午，撒改承袭节度使的命令才下达。
English: It was not until the afternoon of the second year that the order was issued for the reformation to succeed the imperial edict.

古文：辽主荒于游畋，政事怠废，太祖知辽可伐，遂起兵。
现代文：辽国君主迷醉于打猎游玩，荒废政事，太祖知道可以攻伐辽国，于是出兵。
English: The monarch of Liao was intoxicated with hunting and pleasure, and neglected political affairs. Taizu knew that he could attack Liao, so he sent troops.

古文：九月，与辽人战于界上，获谢十，太祖使告克于撒改，则以所获谢十乘马，撒改及将士皆欢呼曰： 义兵始至辽界，一战面是胜，灭辽必自此始矣。 
现代文：九月，和辽人在边界交战，捕获谢十，太祖派人把胜利的消息报告给撒改，并把得来的谢十所乘坐的马赐给他，撒改和将士们都欢呼道 ：义军刚到辽国边界打了一仗就得胜，灭辽国必然从此开始。 
English: In September, they fought with the Liao people on the border and captured Xie Zhi. Taizu sent someone to report the news of the victory to Sa Ke, and gave him the horse that Xie Zhi had ridden. Sa Ke and the soldiers all cheered: The rebels won a battle as soon as they reached the border of Liao, and the destruction of Liao must begin from here.

古文：遣子宗翰及完颜希尹来贺捷，因劝进，太祖未之从也。
现代文：撒改派儿子宗翰同完颜希尹一起来祝贺胜利，并劝太祖前进，太祖没有听从。
English: Sakai sent his son Zonghan to congratulate the victory together with Yan Xiyin, and advised the great-grandfather to advance, but the great-grandfather did not listen.

古文：十月，师克宁江州，破辽师十万于鸭子河，师还。
现代文：十月，攻下宁江州，在鸭子河打败十万辽军，军队返回。
English: In October, they captured Ningjiang Prefecture, defeated 100,000 Liao troops at Duck River, and the troops returned.

古文：十二月，太宗及撒改、辞不失率诸将复劝进。
现代文：十二月，太宗和撒改、辞不失率各将领又劝太祖进军。
English: In December, Emperor Taizong, Emperor Sako and other generals urged Emperor Taizu to march again.

古文：收国元年正月朔，太祖即位，撒改行国相如故。
现代文：收国元年正月初一，太祖即位，撒改仍旧任国相。
English: On the first day of the first month of the first year of the Republic of China, the great ancestor ascended to the throne, and Sakai was still the minister of state.

古文：伐辽之计决于迪古乃，赞成大计实自撒改启之。
现代文：攻伐辽国的计划由迪古乃决定，帮助成就计划其实从撒改开始。
English: The plan to invade Liaoning Province was decided by Digunet, but the plan to help achieve it actually began with Sako.

古文：撒改自以宗室近属，且长房，继肃宗为国相，既贵且重，故身任大计，赞成如此，诸人莫之或先也。
现代文：撒改本人是皇室近亲，而且是长房，自从肃宗时做国相，身份尊贵，地位重要，所以负责攻辽大计，帮助成功，其他人没有能比他更占先。
English: As a close relative of the imperial family and the head of the imperial household, and as the minister of state since the time of Emperor Sozong, he has a high status and an important position. Therefore, he is responsible for attacking vast plans and helping them succeed. No one else can take the lead better than him.

古文：太祖即位后，群臣奏事，撒改等前跪，上起，泣止之曰： 今日成功，皆诸君协辅之力，吾虽处大位，未易改旧俗也。 
现代文：太祖即位后，群臣禀奏政事，撒改等人上前跪下，皇上站起来，哭着阻止说： 今天的成功，都靠诸位协从辅助之力，我虽然身居高位，并未改变旧习俗。 
English: After the great-grandfather's accession to the throne, the group of ministers played politics, the reformers and others knelt forward, the emperor stood up, crying and said: Today's success depends on your cooperation and support. Although I am in a high position, I have not changed the old custom.

古文：撒改等感激，再拜谢。
现代文：撒改等人很感激，再次拜谢。
English: The reformers were very grateful and thanked him again.

古文：凡臣下宴集，太祖尝赴之，主人拜，上亦答拜。
现代文：凡是臣子摆宴席，太祖有时去赴宴，主人下拜，皇上也答谢下拜。
English: Whenever a courtier held a banquet, the great-grandfather would sometimes go to the banquet, the host would bow, and the emperor would bow in return.

古文：天辅后，始正君臣之礼焉。
现代文：天辅即位以后，才开始端正君臣的礼节。
English: It was only after the enthronement of Tianfu that the etiquette of princes and ministers began to be rectified.

古文：七月，太宗为谙版勃极烈，撒改国论勃极烈，辞不失阿买勃极烈，杲国论昊勃极烈。
现代文：七月，太宗做了谙版勃极烈，撒改成为国论勃极烈，辞不失为阿买勃极烈，杲为国论昊勃极烈。
English: In July, Emperor Taizong made a revised version of the statement, which was changed to the statement of the country, and the words were changed to the statement of the country, the words were changed to the statement of the country.

古文：勃极烈，女直之尊官也。
现代文：勃极烈，是女真的尊贵官职。
English: With a very strong erection, she is truly worthy of high office.

古文：太衣自正位号，凡半岁，未闻有封拜。
现代文：太祖自从指定王位封号，大约过了半年，没听到他封官拜职。
English: It's been about half a year since my great-grandfather designated the name of the throne, but I haven't heard of him being appointed to a post.

古文：太宗介弟优礼绝等，杲母弟之最幼者，撒改、辞不失以宗室，同封拜。
现代文：太祖的弟弟人品优秀至极，杲的同母弟弟中最年幼的一个，撒改、辞不失作为皇室宗亲，这些人同时封授职位。
English: The younger brother of the great-grandfather was an outstanding person, and the youngest of the brothers of the same mother, Zou, was a reformist and a devoted member of the royal family. These people were also awarded positions.

古文：九月，加国论胡鲁勃极烈。
现代文：九月，撒改被加封国论胡鲁勃极烈。
English: In September, Sa Kai-shek was awarded the title of a national hero.

古文：天辅五年，薨。
现代文：天辅五年，撒改去世。
English: In the fifth year of Tenshu, Sakai died.

古文：太祖往吊，乘白马，剺额哭之恸。
现代文：太祖前往凭吊，乘坐白马，划破额头，悲哀痛哭。
English: The great-grandfather went to the hanging, rode a white horse, scratched his forehead, and wept bitterly.

古文：及葬，复亲临之，赗以所御马。
现代文：到下葬时，太祖又亲自去，赠送自己所乘坐的马。
English: When it was time for the funeral, the great-grandfather went in person and gave away the horse he was riding.

古文：撒改为人，敦厚多智，长于用人，家居纯俭，好稼穑。
现代文：撒改为人敦厚，足智多谋，擅长用人，生活俭朴，喜好种田。
English: Sako was a strong-willed person, resourceful, good at employing people, lived a frugal life, and liked farming.

古文：自始为国相，能驯服诸部，讼狱得其情，当时有言： 不见国相，事何从决。 
现代文：自从做了国相，能够驯服各部落，查清案情为民平冤，当时有这样的话： 不见国相，事情何从解决？ 
English: Since he became the minister of state, he has been able to tame the tribes and clarify the case for the people. At that time, there was this saying: If you don't see the minister of state, how will things be resolved?

古文：及举兵伐辽，撒改每以宗臣为内外倚重，不以战多为其功也。
现代文：起兵攻伐辽国的时候，撒改总是以皇家臣子的身份负责内外事务，而不把多次作战作为自己的功劳。
English: When he raised an army to invade Liao, he always took responsibility for domestic and foreign affairs as a royal vassal, and did not take credit for the many battles he fought.

古文：天会十五年，追封燕国王。
现代文：天会十五年，撒改被追封为燕国王。
English: In the fifteenth year of the Heaven's Fair, Sakai was crowned the King of Yan.

古文：大定六年，薨，年五十九。
现代文：正隆元年被降封为陈国公。大定三年，被改赠金源郡王，纎祭于太祖庙廷，谥号 忠毅 。
English: In the first year of the year, Zhenglong was demoted to Chen Guogong. In the following three years, he was given the title of King of Jinyuan County, made a sacrificial offering at the ancestral temple, and given the title of Zhongyi.

古文：上辍朝，悼惜者久之，命百官致奠，赙银一千五百两、重彩五十端、绢五百匹。
现代文：大定十五年，皇帝诏令在衍庆宫绘制撒改的画像。撒改的儿子叫宗翰、宗宪。
English: In the fifteenth year of the Taisho era, the emperor issued an imperial edict ordering that a portrait of Sakai be painted in the Yanqing Palace. Sakai's sons were named Zonghan and Zongxian.

古文：习不失本作辞不失，后定为习不失，昭祖之孙，乌骨出之次子也。
现代文：习不失原来叫辞不失，后来确定叫习不失。他是昭祖的孙子，乌骨出的次子。
English: Originally, Xi Nuxu was called Jie Nuxu, but it was later determined to be Xi Nuxu. He was the grandson of Zhao Zu, the second son of the black bone.

古文：初，昭祖久无继嗣，与威顺皇后徒单氏祷于巫，而生景祖及乌骨出。
现代文：起初，昭祖很长时间没有继承子嗣，和威顺皇后徒单氏向巫医祈祷，就生下了景祖和乌骨出。
English: At first, Zhaozhu did not have an heir for a long time. He and the dignified Empress Tutan prayed to the witch doctor, and gave birth to Jingzu and Black Bone.

古文：乌骨出长而酗酒，屡悖其母。
现代文：乌骨出年长却酗酒，屡次违背母亲的意愿。
English: As he grew older, he drank heavily and repeatedly defied his mother's wishes.

古文：昭祖没，徒单氏与景祖谋而杀之。
现代文：昭祖过世后，徒单氏与景祖合谋杀死了乌骨出。
English: After the death of Zhao Zu, the Tutan clan conspired with Jing Zu to commit murder.

古文：部人怒，欲害景祖，徒单氏自以为事，而景祖乃得免。
现代文：部人发怒，要害景祖，徒单氏自己一个人招认杀乌骨出的事，景祖才得以幸免。
English: Enraged, his subordinates wanted to harm Jing Zu, but it took one of the Tushan clansmen to confess to the crime, and Jing Zu was spared.

古文：习不失健捷，能左右射。
现代文：习不失强健敏捷，左手右手都能射箭。
English: He is strong and agile, and can shoot arrows with his right hand as well as his left.

古文：世祖袭节度，肃宗与拒桓赧、散达，战于斡鲁绀出水，已再失利，世祖至军，吏士无人色。
现代文：世祖承袭节度的职位，肃宗与他一起抵抗桓赤皮、散达，在斡鲁绀出水开战，已经再次失利，世祖赶到军中时，官兵都面无人色。
English: The ancestor inherited the position of the festival, Su Zong together with him resisted Huan Chakpi and Sanda, and went to war in the waters of the Yangtze River, and lost again. When the ancestor arrived at the army, the officers and soldiers were unimpressed.

古文：世祖使习不失先阵于脱豁改原，而身出搏战，败其步军。
现代文：世祖派习不失先在脱豁改原摆下阵势，自己率兵出阵搏斗，打败敌方步兵。
English: The forefathers sent Xi Jinping to take the initiative in the reform and opening up, and he led his troops to fight and defeat the enemy infantry.

古文：习不失自阵后奋击之，败其骑军，所乘马中九矢，不能驰，遂步趋而出。
现代文：习不失从阵后奋力攻击，打败敌人骑兵，他乘坐的战马中了九箭，不能奔跑，他就徒步出战。
English: He attacked from the rear and defeated the enemy cavalry. The horse he was riding was hit by nine arrows. Unable to run, he set out on foot.

古文：方战，其外兄乌葛名善射，居敌骑中，将射，习不失熟视识之，呼曰： 此小儿，是汝一人之事乎，何为推锋居前如此。 
现代文：战斗刚开始，他的外兄乌葛名善于射箭，在敌方骑兵中正要放箭，习不失注目细看，认出他来，呼喊道 ：小子，这是你一个人的事吗？为什么冲锋这么靠前？ 
English: At the very beginning of the battle, his brother-in-law, Ugar, who was famous for his skill in archery, was about to shoot an arrow in the midst of the enemy cavalry. He did not fail to look carefully, recognize him, and shouted: "Kid, is this your business alone? Why is the charge so far ahead?

古文：以弓弰击马首而去。是役也，习不失之功居多。
现代文：用弓的末端打他的马头让他跑开，这场战斗，习不失的功劳最多。
English: The battle in which he gained the most credit was when he hit his horse on the head with the end of his bow to make it run away.

古文：桓赧、散达既败，习不失马弃阵中者亦自归。
现代文：桓赤皮、散达战败后，习不失丢弃在阵中的战马也自己跑回来了。
English: After the defeat of Kuan Chakpi and Sanda, Xi lost no time in abandoning the war horse in the battle and ran back himself.

古文：世祖尝疑术甲孛里笃或与乌春等为变，遣习不失单骑往观，孛里笃与忽鲁置酒楼上以饮之。
现代文：世祖曾经怀疑术甲孛里笃，可能与乌春等人叛变，他派习不失一人骑马去察看，术甲孛里笃和忽鲁在楼上摆酒同饮。
English: The ancestor had suspected that Zhi Jia Li Du and Wu Chun might have mutinied, so he sent a disciple on horseback to investigate. Zhi Jia Li Du and Khu Lu were drinking wine upstairs.

古文：习不失闻其私语昵昵，若将执己者，一跃下楼，傍出藩篱之外，弃马而归，其勇如此。
现代文：习不失听他们低声窃窃私语，似乎要抓自己，就从楼上一跃而下，沿篱笆跳出去，丢下马匹跑回来，他就是这样勇敢矫健。
English: He used to listen to them whispering, as if he wanted to catch himself, and he would jump down from the upper floor, jump out along the fence, leave the horses and run back, he was so brave and agile.

古文：杯乃约乌春举兵，世祖至苏素海甸与乌春遇，肃宗前战，斜列、习不失佐之，束缊纵火，烟焰蔽天，大败乌春，执杯乃以归。
现代文：杯乃与乌春相约起兵，世祖到苏素海甸与乌春遭遇，肃宗打前阵，斜列、习不失在旁辅佐，捆扎乱麻放火，烟焰遮天，大败乌春，抓住杯乃，军队返回。
English: Cup No. and Wuchun agreed to raise an army, the ancestor went to the Susu Sea and encountered Wuchun, Su Zong fought in the front line, oblique row, Xi Nuxi assisted, bundled and set fire, smoke covered the sky, defeated Wuchun, grabbed Cup No. and the army returned.

古文：太祖获麻产，献馘于辽，辽人赏功，穆宗、太祖、欢都、习不失皆为详隐焉。
现代文：太祖擒获麻产，割下其左耳献给辽国，辽人赏励军功，穆宗、太祖、欢都、习不失都被封为详稳。
English: The great-great-grandfather Yao won the hemp crop, cut off his left ear and dedicated it to Liao, and Liao people praised his military service. Mu Zong, the great-great-grandfather, Huan Du, and Xi Niu were all sealed as detailed and stable.

古文：后与阿里合懑、斡带俱佐撒改攻留可城，下之。
现代文：后来，习不失与阿里合懑、斡带共同辅助撒改进攻留可城，并攻克下来。
English: Later, Xi did not fail to join hands with Ali, and jointly assisted and improved the capture of Kecheng, and conquered it.

古文：太祖伐辽，使领兵千人，夹侍左右。
现代文：太祖征伐辽国，让习不失带领一千兵士，在两旁侍奉。
English: The great-great-grandfather conquered Liaoning Province, letting Xi Nuxiu lead a thousand soldiers and serve on both sides.

古文：出河店之役，惟习不失之策与太祖合，卒破十万之师，挫其军锋。
现代文：出河店一战中，只有习不失的计策与太祖相合，突袭击败十万敌军，挫伤了敌军的前锋。
English: In the First Battle of Dejieda, only the strategy of not losing the habit coincided with the great-grandfather. The surprise attack defeated 100,000 enemy troops and injured the enemy's vanguard.

古文：遂与太宗、撒改等劝进。
现代文：于是习不失和太宗、撒改等人劝说太祖继续前进。
English: As a result, Xi Nuxi, Taizong, Sakae and others persuaded Taizu to move on.

古文：收国元年七月，与太宗、撒改、杲俱为勃极烈，习不失为阿买勃极烈云。
现代文：收国元年七月，习不失与太宗、撒改、杲都成为勃极烈，习不失是阿买勃极烈。
English: In July of the first year of the Reunification of China, Xi Niuqiu and Taizong, Zagai, and Zou all became extremely violent. Xi Niuqiu is the beginning of Abai's extreme violence.

古文：天辅七年，太宗与习不失居守，郓王昂违纪律失众，法当死。
现代文：天辅七年，太宗和习不失驻守京城，郓王昂违犯纪律，失去民心，依法应当处死。
English: In the seventh year of Tianshu, Taizong and Xi Nuxiu were stationed in Beijing, and Wang Ang, who violated discipline and lost the hearts of the people, should be put to death according to law.

古文：于是，辽人以燕京降，宋人约岁币。
现代文：这时，辽人献出燕京来归降，宋人签订盟约交纳岁币。
English: At this time, the Liao people offered Yanjing to surrender, and the Song people signed a covenant to pay tribute.

古文：三月，世宗生。
现代文：三月，世宗出世。
English: In March, Sejong was born.

古文：习不失谓太宗曰： 兄弟骨肉，以恩掩义，宁屈法以全之。
现代文：习不失对太宗说： 对兄弟骨肉，要用恩德掩盖道义，宁可亏枉法律也要保全他。
English: Xi Nuxi said to Taizong: For brothers and sisters, we should use benevolence to cover up morality. It is better to harm the law than to protect it.

古文：今国家迭有大庆，可减昂以无死，若主上有责言，以我为说。 
现代文：现在国家不断有喜庆大事，您可以减免昂的罪行不予处死，如果皇上责备的话，就拿我是问吧。 
English: Now that the country is constantly having festive events, you can commute Aung's crime and not put him to death. If the emperor reproaches you, just ask me.

古文：太宗然之，遂杖昂以闻。
现代文：太宗同意他的话，就杖罚了昂并上报给太祖。
English: When Emperor Taizong agreed with him, he punished Aung with the cane and reported it to Emperor Taizu.

古文：太祖每伐辽，辄命习不失与太宗居守，虽无方面功，而倚任与撒改比侔矣。
现代文：太祖每次征伐辽国，就命习不失和太宗留守，习不失虽然没有一方的军事功绩，但是凭靠职位与撒改并肩而立。
English: Every time the great-grandfather conquered Liaoning Province, he ordered Xi Niu and Taizong to stay behind. Although Xi Niu did not have military achievements on either side, he stood side by side with the reformers by virtue of his position.

古文：是岁七月，薨会太祖班师道病，太宗奉迎谒见，恐太祖感动而疾转甚，不敢以薨告。
现代文：这年七月，习不失去世。适逢太祖在回兵的路上得病，太宗前来迎接进见，恐怕太祖激动感伤而病情加重，没敢告诉他习不失的死讯。
English: In July of that year, Emperor Xizong passed away. When Emperor Taizong became ill on his way back from the front, Emperor Taizong came to meet Emperor Xizong. I'm afraid Emperor Xizong's condition worsened as he was overcome with emotion. He didn't dare to tell Emperor Xizong about his death.

古文：太祖辄问曰： 阿买勃极烈安在？ 
现代文：太祖就问道 ：阿买勃极烈在哪儿？ 
English: The great-grandfather then asked: Where is Abai Bo Qirong?

古文：太宗绐对曰： 今即至矣。 
现代文：太宗谎言答道 ：现在快到了。 
English: Taizong Li replied, "It's almost time."

古文：正隆二年，赠开府仪同三司。追封曹国公。
现代文：正隆二年，习不失受赠开府仪同三司之职，并被追封为曹国公。
English: In the second year of Zhenglong, Xi Nuxiu was presented with the post of opening the government ceremony and the three departments, and was posthumously awarded the title of Cao Guogong.

古文：大定三年，进封金源郡王，配飨太祖庙廷，谥曰忠毅。
现代文：大定三年，他被进封为金源郡王，纎祭于太祖庙廷，谥号为 忠毅 。
English: In the third year of Dading, he was enthroned as the King of Jinyuan County, enshrined in the ancestral temple, and his nickname was "Zhongyi."

古文：子鹘沙虎，国初有功，天会间，为真定留守。
现代文：习不失的儿子鹘沙虎，在建国初期立有功绩，天会年间，他任真定留守。
English: Xi's worthy son, Bansha Hu, made great achievements in the early days of the founding of the People's Republic of China. During the Tianhui era, he decided to stay behind.

古文：子挞不也。
现代文：鹘沙虎的儿子叫挞不也。
English: The son of the sand tiger is called the sand tiger.

