古文：武帝下建德四年春正月戊辰，以柱国枹罕公辛威为宁州总管，太原公王康为襄州总管。
现代文：建德四年春季正月戊辰日，任命柱国袍罕公辛威为宁州总管，太原公王康为襄州总管。
English: In the spring of the fourth year of Jiande, on the first day of the first month of the month of Bo Chen, he appointed Zhang Guobao Han Gong Xinwei as the general manager of Ningzhou, and Taiyuan Prince Kang as the general manager of Xiangzhou.

古文：初置营军器监。
现代文：开始设置营军器监。
English: The establishment of battalion ordnance inspectors began.

古文：壬申，诏曰： 今阳和布气，品物资始，敬授民时，义兼敦劝。
现代文：壬申日，武帝下诏说： 现在春日散播暖气，万物因此开始生长，慎重地教导百姓依照时令从事生产，并加以谆谆劝导。
English: On the day of Jinshin, Emperor Wu issued an edict saying: Now that the spring day spreads warmth, all things begin to grow. He carefully taught the people to engage in production according to the season, and encouraged and persuaded them.

古文：诗不云乎： 弗躬弗亲，庶民弗信。 刺史守令，宜亲劝农,百司分番，躬自率导。
现代文：《诗经》不是说么： 如果不亲自去做，百姓就不信从，各地刺史郡守县令，应当亲自勉励农耕，百官轮流参加农耕，亲自以身作则引导人民。
English: Doesn't the "Book of Songs" say: If you don't do it yourself, the people won't believe you. All regions should follow the historical county government and county government orders, and should encourage farming in person. Officials should take turns to participate in farming, and personally lead the people by example.

古文：事非机要，并停至秋。
现代文：如果不是至关重要的事情，都暂停到秋天。
English: If it's not critical, it's on hold until the fall.

古文：鳏寡孤独不能自存者，所在量加赈恤。
现代文：对于无法生存的鳏夫寡妇孤儿老人，当地要酌情加以赈济抚恤。
English: For widows, widowers, orphans and the elderly who are unable to survive, the local government should provide assistance and support as appropriate.

古文：逋租悬调，兵役残功，并宜蠲免。 癸酉，行幸同州。
现代文：拖欠预支的租调，兵役及未完的工程，都应当免除。 癸酉曰，武帝前往同州。
English: The arrears of advance payment of rent transfer, military service and unfinished projects should all be exempted.On the same day, Emperor Wu went to Tongzhou.

古文：二月丙戌朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：二月丙戌初一，发生日食。
English: On the first day of the second lunar month, a solar eclipse occurred.

古文：辛卯，改置宿卫官员。
现代文：辛卯日，改设宿卫官员。
English: On the day of Xinwu's death, he was reassigned as a night watchman.

古文：己酉，柱国、广德公李意有罪免。
现代文：己酉日，柱国、广德公李意有罪被免除了官爵。
English: On the same day, Zhu Guo and Guang De Gong Li Yi were exonerated from the official title.

古文：三月丙辰，遣小司寇淮南公元、纳言伊娄谦使于齐。
现代文：三月丙辰日，派小司寇淮南公元伟、纳言伊娄谜出使韭变。
English: On the first day of the third month of the year, he sent Xiao Si Kou, Huainan, Daming Wei, and Nagan Yijie as envoys to transform the country.

古文：郡县各省主簿一人。
现代文：郡县各裁减主簿一人。
English: Each county will cut one person from the master list.

古文：丙寅，至自同州。
现代文：丙寅日，亘适从回业返回。
English: On the third day of the third month, Wangsu returned from his return to work.

古文：甲戌，以柱国、赵王招为雍州牧。
现代文：甲戌曰，任命柱国、趟王宇文招为雍州牧。
English: He said that he had appointed Zhu Guo and Wai Wang Yuwen Zhao as Yongzhou pastors.

古文：夏四月甲午，柱国、燕国公于寔有罪免。
现代文：夏季四月甲午日，柱国、燕国公于塞有罪被免除官爵。
English: On the afternoon of the first day of April in the summer, Zhu Guo and Yan Guo Guo were exonerated from the title of nobility.

古文：丁酉，初令上书者并为表，于皇太子以下称启。
现代文：丁酉，开始下令上书的都称为表，在皇太子以下的称为启。
English: At the beginning of Ding Xuan's reign, the book was called the table, and after the crown prince, it was called the opening.

古文：六月，诏东南道四总管内，自去年以来新附之户，给复三年。
现代文：六月，下令东南道四总管辖区，从去年以后新迁来的人家，免除赋税三年。
English: In June, the Fourth General Jurisdiction of Southeast Dao issued an order to exempt the tax for three years from the new residents who moved in after last year.

古文：秋七月丙辰，行幸云阳宫。
现代文：秋季七月丙辰曰，武帝前往云阳宫。
English: In the autumn of July, Emperor Wu went to the Yunyang Palace.

古文：己未，禁五行大布钱不得出入关，布泉钱听入而不听出。
现代文：己末日，禁止五行大布钱出入潼关，布泉钱允许流入而不准流出。
English: At the end of the day, the five major banks of cloth money were banned from entering and leaving Shaoguan, and cloth spring money was allowed to flow in but not allowed to flow out.

古文：丁卯，至自云阳宫。
现代文：丁卯日，武帝从云阳宫返回。
English: On the day of Dingwu, Emperor Wu returned from Yunyang Palace.

古文：甲戌，陈遣使来聘。
现代文：甲戌曰，陈国派使者前来通问修好。
English: Armour said that Chen Guo sent an envoy to come and ask for a truce.

古文：丙子，召大将军以上于大德殿，帝曰： 太祖神武膺运，创造王基，兵威所临，有征无战。
现代文：丙子日，在大德殿召集大将军以上的官员，武帝说： 太祖神明威武顺应天运，开创建立了帝王的基业。兵威到达的地方，都不经过战斗就平定了。
English: On the third day of the third month, officials above the rank of general were called together in the Great Hall of the Emperor, and Emperor Wu said: "Great-great-grandfather Shen Mingwu, in accordance with the heavenly fortune, created and established the foundation of the emperor. Wherever the military power arrived, it was settled without a battle.

古文：唯彼伪齐，犹怀跋扈。
现代文：祇有伪齐，仍然骄横强暴。
English: There is only a false equality, but still arrogance and violence.

古文：虽复戎车屡驾，而大勋未集。
现代文：虽然我们多次征讨，但大功并没有建立。
English: Although we have raised funds many times, we have not been able to establish a large-scale foundation.

古文：朕以寡昧，纂承鸿绪，往以政出权宰，无所措怀。
现代文：我以寡德昏昧之身，继承大业，从前因为权臣执政，无法留意施行。
English: I am a widow and a man of dubious morals, and I have inherited a great cause. In the past, because powerful officials were in power, I was unable to pay attention to its implementation.

古文：自亲览万机，便图东讨。
现代文：自从我亲自总理朝政后，我就考虑束出讨伐。
English: Ever since I personally became prime minister, I have considered launching a crusade.

古文：恶衣菲食，缮甲治兵，数年已来，战备稍足。
现代文：穿粗衣吃薄食，修理锁甲整治兵器，几年来，军备逐渐充足。
English: Wearing coarse clothes, eating thin food, repairing locking armor and repairing weapons, over the past few years, armaments have gradually become sufficient.

古文：而伪主昏虐，恣行无道，伐暴除乱，斯实其时。
现代文：而伪齐的君主昏庸暴虐，恣意横行无道，讨伐残暴铲除祸乱，正在此时。
English: At this time, the monarchs of the pseudo-Chi dynasty are being stupid and tyrannical, arbitrarily running amok, and fighting brutality to eradicate the scourge.

古文：今欲数道出兵，水陆兼进，北拒太行之路，东扼黎阳之险。
现代文：现在我打算从几路出兵，水陆同时推进，在北面阻住太行的道路，在束面扼守住黎阳的险要。
English: Now I intend to send troops from several directions, advance by land and sea simultaneously, block the road of Taihang in the north, and hold the key to Liyang in the north.

古文：若攻拔河阴，兖、豫则驰檄可定。
现代文：如果攻下了河阴，那么兖州、豫州衹需发出一道檄文就可以平定。
English: If Hebei is conquered, then Ganzhou and Yuzhou can be pacified by issuing a proclamation.

古文：然后养锐享士，以待其至。
现代文：然后养精蓄锐，等待齐军的到来。
English: After that, they had to keep their spirits up and wait for the arrival of the Qi army.

古文：但得一战，则破之必矣。
现代文：衹需要一次战斗，就一定会打败齐军。
English: If you need one battle, you will surely defeat the Qi army.

古文：王公以为何如？ 群臣咸称善。
现代文：各位王公认为怎样? 群臣都说好。
English: What do the princes think? The courtiers are all in favour.

古文：丁丑，诏曰：
现代文：丁丑日，武帝下诏说：
English: On the day of Dingushi, Emperor Wu issued the following edict:

古文：高氏因时放命，据有汾、漳，擅假名器，历年永久。
现代文：高氏藉助时世混乱违背天命，占据了汾、漳一带，擅自假藉礼器，已有多年。
English: With the help of the chaos of the times, Gao violated the fate of heaven, occupied the areas of Handan and Handan, and has been using ceremonial objects without authorization for many years.

古文：朕以亭毒为心，遵养时晦，遂敦聘好，务息黎元。
现代文：我以化育为怀，退隐忍让以等待时机，于是谨守通问修好，致力于安宁百姓。
English: I take chemical education as my heart, retreating from patience to wait for the opportunity, so I keep asking and repairing, and am committed to the tranquility of the people.

古文：而彼怀恶不悛，寻事侵轶，背言负信，窃邑藏奸。
现代文：但是他却心怀邪恶不加悔改，寻找事端发动侵犯，背弃诺言违背信义，篡夺国家政权包藏奸心。
English: However, he did not repent of the evil in his heart, looking for an excuse to launch an invasion, reneging on his promise, violating the principle of good faith, usurping state power, and harboring a treacherous heart.

古文：往者军下宜阳，衅由彼始；兵兴汾曲，事非我先。
现代文：先前他出兵攻下宜阳，祸乱由此开始；在汾曲兴兵作战，此事不是我们先引起的。
English: Previously, he sent troops to capture Yiyang, and the calamity began from this; in the battle of Hequ, the matter was not caused by us first.

古文：此获俘囚，礼送相继；彼所拘执，曾无一反。
现代文：我们捕获到他们的俘虏，不断地以礼相送；他们捉住了我们的人，没有一个送回来的。
English: We took their prisoners and kept sending them back with honours; they took our men and didn't send any of them back.

古文：加以淫刑妄逞，毒赋繁兴，齐、鲁轸殄悴之哀，幽、并启来苏之望。
现代文：加上他滥用刑罚，征收繁杂的赋税，齐、鲁之地充满了痛苦的哀伤，幽州、并州的人民期望在疾苦中重生。
English: In addition to his abuse of criminal punishment and the collection of complex taxes, the land of Qi and Lu was full of pain and sorrow, and the people of Yuzhou and Hezhou expected to be reborn in suffering.

古文：既祸盈恶稔，众叛亲离，不有一戎，何以大定。
现代文：高氏已经是祸恶满盈，众叛亲离，如果不经过一次战斗，又怎能彻底平定。
English: The Gao clan is already full of evil, the rebels and relatives have left, if it does not go through a battle, how can it be completely defeated.

古文：今白藏在辰，凉风戒节，厉兵诘暴，时事惟宜。
现代文：现在已是秋天，凉风告诫秋季来临，磨利兵器讨伐残暴，在时间上最为适宜。
English: Now it is autumn, the cool wind warns of the coming of autumn, and sharpening weapons to fight brutality is most appropriate at the right time.

古文：朕当亲御六师，龚行天罚。
现代文：我当亲自统率六军，恭敬地替天讨伐。
English: I should personally lead the Six Armies and respectfully fight for Heaven.

古文：庶凭祖宗之灵，潜资将士之力，风驰九有，电扫八纮。
现代文：仰仗祖宗的神灵，凭藉将士们的力量，风驰九州，电扫八极。
English: Relying on the spirits of our ancestors, with the power of our generals, the wind sweeps across Kyushu, sweeping to the eight poles.

古文：可分命众军，指期进发。
现代文：可以分别命令各路兵马，立即进发。
English: You can order the soldiers and horses of each road separately, and march in immediately.

古文：以柱国陈王纯为前一军总管，荥阳公司马消难为前二军总管，郑国公达奚震为前三军总管，越王盛为后一军总管，周昌公侯莫陈琼为后二军总管，赵王招为后三军总管，齐王宪率众二万趣黎阳，随国公杨坚、广宁侯薛回舟师三万自渭入河，柱国梁国公侯莫陈芮率众一万守太行道，申国公李穆帅众三万守河阳道，常山公于翼帅众二万出陈、汝。
现代文：任命柱国陈王宇文纯为前一军总管，荣阳公司马消难为前二军总管，塑玺公达圣雳为前三军总管，越王宇文盛为后一军总管，周昌公侯莫陈琼为后二军总管，趟王宇文招为后三军总管，齐王宇文宪率军二万向黎阳进发，随国公杨坚、广宁侯薛迥率水军三万由渭水进入黄河，柱国梁国公侯莫陈芮率军一万据守太行道，申国公李穆率军三万据守河阳道，常山公于翼率军二万出兵陈州、汝州。
English: He appointed Zhu Guo Chen Wang Yu Wenjun as the commander-in-chief of the former First Army, Rongyang Company Ma Qian Nan as the commander-in-chief of the former Second Army, Shida Gong Da Sheng as the commander-in-chief of the former Third Army, Yue Wang Yu Wensheng as the commander-in-chief of the latter First Army, Zhou Chang Prince Mo Chen Qiong as the commander-in-chief of the latter Second Army, Wai Wang Yu Wenshu as the commander-in-chief of the latter Third Army, Qi Wang Yu Wensheng led an army of twenty thousand to Li Yang, followed by Guo Guo Yang

古文：壬午，上亲率六军，众六万，直指河阴。
现代文：壬午曰，武帝亲自率领六军，军队六万人，径直向河阴进发。
English: On the morning of the third day of the third month, Emperor Wu personally led the six armies, an army of sixty thousand people, straight to the river.

古文：八月癸卯，入于齐境。
现代文：八月癸卯曰，进入北齐境内。
English: In August, it entered the territory of North Qi Province.

古文：禁伐树践苗稼，犯者以军法从事。
现代文：禁止砍伐树木、践踏禾苗庄稼，违反的人按军法处置。
English: It is forbidden to cut down trees and trample on grain seedlings and crops. Violators will be dealt with according to military law.

古文：丁未，上亲率诸军攻河阴大城，拔之。
现代文：丁未，武帝亲自率领各军进攻河阴大城，攻克了它。
English: Ding Wei, Emperor Wu personally led the army to attack the great city of Heyin and conquered it.

古文：进攻子城，未克。
现代文：接着进攻子城，没有攻下来。
English: Then they attacked Zicheng, but failed to take it.

古文：上有疾。
现代文：武帝生病。
English: Emperor Wu is ill.

古文：九月辛酉夜，班师，水军焚舟而退。
现代文：九月辛酉日夜晚，周军班师。水军烧掉战船撤退。
English: In the evening of a bitter September day, Zhou's naval squadron burned its warships and retreated.

古文：齐王宪及于翼、李穆等所在克捷，降拔三十余城，皆弃而不守。
现代文：齐王宇文宪以及于翼、李穆等那裹取得胜利，降伏攻陷了三十多座城，都放弃掉不据守。
English: The king of Qi, Yuwen Xian, as well as Yu Ying, Li Mu and others, achieved victory, surrendered and captured more than thirty cities, all of which were abandoned and not defended.

古文：唯以王药城要害，令仪同三司韩正守之。
现代文：衹是因为王药城地势重要，命仪同三司韩正据守那裹。
English: This is because Wang Yecheng's location is important, and the imperial edict and the Three Han Seals are kept there.

古文：正寻以城降齐。
现代文：韩正不久献城投降了北齐。
English: Han Zheng soon surrendered the city to Bei Qi.

古文：戊寅，至自东伐。
现代文：戊寅，从东伐返回。
English: Wu Yin, returning from the Eastern Expedition.

古文：己卯，以华州刺史、毕王贤为荆州总管。
现代文：己卯，任命华州刺史、毕王宇文贤为荆州总管。
English: At the same time, he appointed Huazhou Zhishi and Bi Wang Yu Wenxian as the general managers of Jingzhou.

古文：冬十月戊子，初置上柱国、上大将军官，改开府仪同三司为开府仪同大将军，仪同三司为仪同大将军，又置上开府、上仪同官。
现代文：冬季十月戊子，开始设置上柱国、上大将军官，将开府仪同三司改为开府仪同大将军，仪同三司改为仪同大将军，又设置上开府、上仪同官。
English: In the winter of October, officials of Shangzhu and Shangdai generals were set up, and the Kaifu ceremony and the three departments were changed to the Kaifu ceremony and the general, and the ceremony and the three departments were changed to the ceremony and the general, and the Kaifu and Shangdai officials were set up.

古文：甲午，行幸同州。
现代文：甲午曰，武帝前往同州。
English: On the afternoon of the first day, Emperor Wu went to Tongzhou.

古文：闰月，齐将尉相贵寇大宁，延州总管王庆击走之。
现代文：闰十月，北齐将领尉相贵侵犯大宁，延州总管兰庆击退了他。
English: In leap October, Northern Qi general and lieutenant Xiang Gui invaded Danying, and Lan Qing, the governor of Yanzhou, repulsed him.

古文：以柱国齐王宪、蜀国公尉迟迥为上柱国，柱国代王达为益州总管，大司寇荥阳公司马消难为梁州总管。
现代文：任命柱国齐王宇文宪、蜀国公尉迟迥为上柱国，柱国代王宇文达为益州总管，大司寇茔屋公司马消难为銮业总管。
English: Wang Yuwen Xian of the State of Qi and Lai Jian, a public officer of the State of Shu, were appointed as the upper pillar states, Wang Yuwenda, the deputy of the pillar state, was appointed as the general manager of Yizhou, and Ma Qianan, the chief director of the Kofun Company, was appointed as the general manager of the silk industry.

古文：诏诸畿郡各举贤良。
现代文：下诏命各畿郡各自荐举贤良。
English: The following edict ordered each of the Kansai districts to nominate a virtuous person.

古文：十一月己亥，改置司内官员。
现代文：十一月己亥日，改设司内官员。
English: In November, on Ji Hai Day, officials within the department were reassigned.

古文：十二月辛亥朔，日有食之。
现代文：十二月辛亥初一，发生日食。
English: A solar eclipse occurred on the first day of the Chinese New Year in December.

古文：庚午，至自同州。
现代文：庚午曰，武帝从酗返回。
English: In the afternoon of the 7th day of the 7th month, Emperor Wu returned from his trip.

古文：丙子，陈遣使来聘。
现代文：丙子曰，陈国派使者前来通问修好。
English: Cun Zi said that Chen Guo sent an envoy to come and ask for a truce.

古文：是岁，岐、宁二州民饥，开仓赈给。
现代文：这一年，些、空二州百姓饥荒，开仓赈给灾民。
English: In this year, the people in the two empty prefectures suffered from famine, and the warehouses were opened for the victims.

古文：五年春正月癸未，行幸同州。
现代文：建檀五年春季正月癸未，武帝前往同州。
English: In the first month of the spring of the fifth year of Jiantan, Emperor Wu went to the same state.

古文：辛卯，行幸河东涑川，集关中、河东诸军校猎。
现代文：辛卯，前往回束速川，召集阗中、回柬各军校猎。
English: Xinwu, went to Huizhou Hechuan, to convene the middle and back to Cambodia military schools to hunt.

古文：甲午，还同州。
现代文：甲午曰，返回且州。
English: In the afternoon of the first day, I returned to my home state.

古文：丁酉，诏曰： 朕克己思治，而风化未弘。
现代文：丁酉，亘瞳下诏说： 朕约束自己想使国家治理好，但教化没有得到弘扬。
English: Ding Xi, Wai Hitomi issued a decree saying: I restrain myself to want to make the country well governed, but enlightenment has not been promoted.

古文：永言前古，载怀夕惕。
现代文：歌颂先古，心怀戒慎恐惧。
English: Singing the praises of the ancients, with caution and fear in mind.

古文：可分遣大使，周省四方，察讼听谣，问民恤隐。
现代文：可以分别派遣大使，巡视四方，察看讼狱，倾听民谣，访问百姓抚恤穷困。
English: It is possible to send ambassadors separately, inspect the four directions, inspect prisons, listen to folk songs, and visit the people to alleviate poverty.

古文：其狱犴无章，侵渔黎庶，随事究验，条录以闻。
现代文：对于牢狱没有章法，欺凌百姓的事情，根据事实加以推究验证，逐条记录上报。
English: For the things that the prison has no rules and regulations and bullies the people, it will be investigated and verified according to the facts, and the records will be reported one by one.

古文：若政绩有施，治纲克举；及行宣圭荜，道着丘园：并须捡审，依名腾奏。
现代文：如果政绩得到施行，政治纲要能够抓住；以及行为美好，品德卓著的，都要加以考察审核，按照名声大小驿递上奏。
English: If the political achievements are implemented, the political outline can be grasped; and if the behavior is good and the moral character is outstanding, it must be examined and audited, and it will be submitted according to the size of the reputation.

古文：其鳏寡孤独，寔可哀矜，亦宜赈给，务使周赡。 废布泉钱。
现代文：那些鳏寡孤独的人，确实值得怜悯的，也应当赈给，一定要使他们充足。 废除布泉钱。
English: Those who are widowed and lonely, indeed deserving of pity, should also be given, be sure to make them sufficient.

古文：戊申，初令铸钱者绞，其从者远配为民。
现代文：戊申，开始下令私自铸钱的处以绞刑，协从的流配到远方为平民。
English: Wushin, began to order the execution by hanging of those who minted money without authorization, and the banishment of those who cooperated to distant places as civilians.

古文：二月辛酉，遣皇太子赟巡抚西土，仍讨吐谷浑，戎事节度，并宜随机专决。
现代文：二月辛酉，派皇太子宇文赍巡视西部疆土，顺便讨伐吐谷浑，军事调度，都应由他根据情况独自决断。
English: At the end of February, he sent Crown Prince Uwenwen to inspect the western territory, and in the process, to fight against Tugu Hun. The military dispatch should be decided by him independently according to the situation.

古文：三月庚子，月犯东井第一星。
现代文：三月庚子日，月亮侵犯束井第一星。
English: In March, on the day of Geng Zi, the moon encroached on the first star of Sakui.

古文：壬寅，至自同州。
现代文：壬寅日，武帝从同州返回。
English: On the day of Ren Yin, Emperor Wu returned from the same state.

古文：文宣皇后服再期，戊申，祥。
现代文：开始为文宣皇后服第二个丧期，戊申，祥祭。
English: The second period of mourning for Empress Wenzhong, the Spring Festival, began.

古文：夏四月乙卯，行幸同州。
现代文：夏季四月乙卯曰，武帝前往同州。
English: In the summer of April, Emperor Wu went to Tongzhou.

古文：开府、清河公宇文神举攻拔齐陆浑等五城。
现代文：开府、清河公宇文神举攻陷北齐陆浑等五座城市。
English: Five cities, including Kaifu, Kiyokawa, and Kitakyushu, were taken by Umenshin.

古文：五月壬辰，至自同州。
现代文：五月壬辰曰，武帝从同州返回长安。
English: In May, Emperor Wu returned to Chang'an from the same prefecture.

古文：六月戊申朔，日有食之。
现代文：六月戊申初一，发生日食。
English: On the first day of June, the sun and moon are new, and there is a solar eclipse.

古文：辛亥，祠太庙。
现代文：辛亥日，祭祀太庙。
English: On the day of the Chinese New Year, a ritual is held at the Imperial Temple.

古文：丙辰，利州总管、纪王康有罪，赐死。
现代文：丙辰曰，利州总管、纪王宇文康犯罪，被赐死。
English: Xing Chen said that the chief administrator of Lizhou, Ji Wang Yuwenkang, committed a crime and was sentenced to death.

古文：丁巳，行幸云阳宫。
现代文：丁巳曰，武帝前往云阳宫。
English: Ding Si said that Emperor Wu went to Yunyang Palace.

古文：月掩心后星。
现代文：月亮遮住心宿后星。
English: The moon hides behind the background star.

古文：庚午，荧惑入舆鬼。
现代文：庚午曰，火星侵入舆鬼。
English: On the morning of the 7th day of the 7th month, Mars invaded the spirit world.

古文：秋七月乙未，京师旱。
现代文：秋季七月乙末日，京师天旱。
English: On the second last day of autumn in July, there was a drought in Kyoto.

古文：八月戊申，皇太子伐吐谷浑，至伏俟城而还。
现代文：八月戊申，皇太子讨伐吐谷浑，抵达伏俟球后返回。
English: In August, the crown prince went on a crusade against the Tukuhun and returned after arriving in Fushun.

古文：乙卯，至自云阳宫。
现代文：乙卯，武帝从云阳宫返回。
English: Meanwhile, Emperor Wu returned from Yunyang Palace.

古文：乙丑，陈遣使来聘。
现代文：乙丑日，陈国派使者前来通问修好。
English: On the 2nd day of the 2nd lunar month, Chen Guo sent an envoy to ask for a truce.

古文：九月丁丑，大醮于正武殿，以祈东伐。
现代文：九月丁丑曰，在正武殿举行大规模祭祀，以祈祷束伐。
English: In September, according to Dingushi, a large-scale ritual was held at the Zhengwu Palace to pray for a successful felling.

古文：冬十月，帝谓群臣曰： 朕去岁属有疹疾，遂不得克平逋寇。
现代文：冬季十月，武帝对群臣说： 去年东伐我正巧生病，因此没有能够平定贼寇。
English: In the winter of October, Emperor Wu said to his courtiers: I happened to fall ill during the Eastern Expedition last year, so I wasn't able to quell the bandits.

古文：前入贼境，备见敌情，观彼行师，殆同儿戏。
现代文：上次进入贼寇境内，详细地看到了敌人的内情，看到他们的军事行动，简直是如同儿童游戏。
English: The last time I entered the territory of the bandits, I saw in detail the inner workings of the enemy, and their military operations were like child's play.

古文：又闻其朝政昏乱，政由群小，百姓嗷然，朝不谋夕。
现代文：又得知他们的朝政昏庸无道，政令由一群卑劣的小人把持，百姓嗷嗷哀号，早上不知道是否能活到晚上。
English: They also learned that their imperial government was chaotic and senseless, that government decrees were controlled by a group of despicable villains, and that the people wailed and cried in the morning, not knowing whether they would be able to survive until the evening.

古文：天与不取，恐贻后悔。
现代文：上天的赐与而不接受，恐怕将来会后悔。
English: If you do not accept God's gift, I am afraid you will regret it in the future.

古文：若复同往年，出军河外，直为抚背，未扼其喉。
现代文：如果还是和去年一样，出兵到河外，祇不过是攻击敌人的背后，没有扼住敌人的咽喉。
English: If it is the same as last year, sending troops to the other side of the river is just attacking the enemy's back, not strangling the enemy's throat.

古文：然晋州本高欢所起之地，镇摄要重，今往攻之，彼必来援，吾严军以待，击之必克。
现代文：然而晋州本是高欢兴起的地方，是他们的军事重镇，这次如果我们前去进攻晋州，他们必定会来增援，我们严阵以待，攻击他们就定会取胜。
English: However, Jinzhou was originally the place where Gaohuan arose, and it is their military stronghold. This time, if we go to attack Jinzhou, they will certainly come to reinforce us. We are waiting in the wings, and if we attack them, we will surely win.

古文：然后乘破竹之势，鼓行而东，足以穷其窟穴，混同文轨。 诸将多不愿行。
现代文：然后乘破竹之势，擂起战鼓向东进军，完全可以一直追到他们的巢穴，统一天下。 将领们大多不愿出发。
English: Then, taking advantage of the situation, the generals marched eastward with drums of war, and it was entirely possible to chase them all the way to their lair and unify the country.

古文：帝曰：
现代文：武帝说：
English: Emperor Wu said:

古文： 几者事之微，不可失矣。
现代文： 时机是事情成败的精微，不可以丧失。
English: Timing is of the essence in the success or failure of a matter and should not be lost.

古文：若有沮吾军者，朕当以军法裁之。 
现代文：如果有人阻挠我的军事计划，我会以军法惩处他。 
English: If anyone interferes with my military plans, I will have him court-martialed.

古文：己酉，帝总戎东伐。
现代文：己酉日，武帝统领军队束伐北齐。
English: On the day of Jiwu, Emperor Wu led the army to the north of Qi.

古文：以越王盛为右一军总管，杞国公亮为右二军总管，随国公杨坚为右三军总管，谯王俭为左一军总管，大将军窦为左二军总管，广化公丘崇为左三军总管，齐王宪、陈王纯为前军。
现代文：任命越王字文盛为右一军总管，杞国公宇文亮为右二军总管，随国公杨坚为右三军总管，谯王宇文俭为左一军总管，大将军宝恭为左二军总管，广化公丘崇为左三军总管，齐王宇文宪、陈王宇文纯为前锋。
English: He appointed Yue Wang (Wen Sheng) as the commander-in-chief of the First Army of the Right, Wu Guogong (Wu Wenliang) as the commander-in-chief of the Second Army of the Right, Su Guogong (Yang Jian) as the commander-in-chief of the Third Army of the Right, Wu Wang (Wu Wen Jian) as the commander-in-chief of the First Army of the Left, General Bao Qiong as the commander-in-chief of the Second Army of the Left, Guanghua Guogong (Wu Qiu) as the commander-in-chief of the Third Army of the Left,

古文：庚戌，荧惑犯太微上将。
现代文：庚戌曰，火星侵犯太微垣上将星。
English: Geng Yao said that Mars encroached too close to the general star.

古文：戊午，岁星犯太陵。
现代文：戊午曰，岁星侵犯太陵。
English: In the afternoon of the third day, the New Year's Star invaded the Great Mausoleum.

古文：癸亥，帝至晋州，遣齐王宪率精骑二万守雀鼠谷，陈王纯步骑二万守千里径，郑国公达奚震步骑一万守统军川，大将军韩明步骑五千守齐子岭，氏公尹升步骑五千守鼓镇，凉城公辛韶步骑五千守蒲津关，柱国、赵王招步骑一万自华谷攻齐汾州诸城，柱国宇文盛步骑一万守汾水关。
现代文：癸亥日，武帝抵达晋州，派齐王宇文宪率精锐骑兵二万据守雀鼠谷，陈王宇文纯率二万步兵骑兵据守千里径，郑国公达奚震率步骑兵一万据守统军川，大将军韩明率步骑兵五千据守齐子岭，乌氏公尹升率步骑五千据守鼓钟镇，凉城公辛韶率步骑兵五千据守蒲津关，柱国、趟王宇文招率步骑兵一万从华谷北上进攻北齐汾州各城，柱国宇文盛率步骑兵一万据守汾水关。
English: On Boxing Day, Emperor Wu arrived in Jinzhou. He sent Qi King Yuwen Zhen with 20,000 elite cavalry to guard the Sparrow Mouse Valley, Chen King Yuwen Zhen with 20,000 infantry and cavalry to guard the Thousand-Mile Trail, Zheng Guo Gong Dada Zhen with 10,000 infantry and cavalry to guard the United Army River, General Han Ming with 5,000 infantry and cavalry to guard the Qi Ziling, Wu Zhi Gong Yin Sheng with 5,000 infantry and cavalry to guard the Drum Bell Town, Liangcheng Gong Xin Zhen with 5,000 infantry and cavalry to guard the Puding Pass, Zhu Guo and Wai Wang Yuwen with 10,000 infantry and cavalry

古文：遣内史王谊监六军，攻晋州城。
现代文：派内史王谊监督六军，进攻晋州城。
English: The six armies under the supervision of King Neishi attacked Jinzhou City.

古文：帝屯于汾曲。
现代文：武帝屯驻在汾曲。
English: Emperor Wu resided in Xingqu.

古文：齐王宪攻洪洞、永安二城，并拔之。
现代文：齐王宇文宪攻打洪洞、永安二城，都攻下来了。
English: King Uwen Xian of Qi attacked Hongdong and Yongan Second City, and both were conquered.

古文：是夜，虹见于晋州城上，首向南，尾入紫微宫，长十余丈。
现代文：当天夜裹，在晋州城上出现彩虹，头部向南，尾部进入了紫微宫，长十多丈。
English: In the evening of the same day, a rainbow appeared on the city of Jinzhou, with the head facing south and the tail entering the Purple Palace. It was more than ten meters long.

古文：帝每日自汾曲赴城下，亲督战，城中惶窘。
现代文：武帝每天从汾曲来到晋州城下，亲自督战，城中守军惶恐窘困。
English: Emperor Wu came to the castle town of Jinzhou from Xingqu every day, personally supervising the battle, and the defenders in the city were terrified and in distress.

古文：庚午，齐行台左丞侯子钦出降。
现代文：庚午，北齐行台左丞侯子钦出城投降。
English: In the afternoon of the 7th day of the 7th month, Hou Ziqin, the Northern Qi marched out of the city and surrendered.

古文：壬申，齐晋州刺史崔景嵩守城北面，夜密遣使送款，上开府王轨率众应之。
现代文：壬申曰，北齐晋州刺史崔景嵩镇守城的北面，在夜里秘密派使者前来投降，上开府王轨率军接应。
English: Jinshin said that the north side of the garrison town of Cui Jingsong in North Qi, Jinzhou, secretly sent an envoy to surrender at night, and the army led by Wang Lu of Shangkaifu responded.

古文：未明，登城鼓噪，齐众溃，遂克晋州，擒其城主特进、开府、海昌王尉相贵，俘甲士八千人，送关中。
现代文：天还没有亮，周军登上城墙擂鼓呐喊，北齐军崩溃，于是攻克了晋州，擒获了晋州城主特进、开府、海昌王尉相贵，俘虏披甲士卒八千人，将他们送到关中。
English: It was not yet dawn when the Zhou army climbed the city wall to the sound of drums and shouts, and the Northern Qi army collapsed. They then conquered Jinzhou, captured the lord of Jinzhou, Tejin, Kaifu, and the captain of Haichang, Wang Zanggui, and captured eight thousand armored soldiers and sent them to Guanzhong.

古文：甲戌，以上开府梁士彦为晋州刺史，加授大将军，留精兵一万以镇之。
现代文：甲戌曰，任命上开府梁士彦为晋州刺史，加授大将军，留下一万精兵镇守晋州。
English: Gao Pi said that he appointed Shangkaifu Liang Shihang as the history of Jinzhou and awarded him the title of general, leaving 10,000 elite soldiers to defend Jinzhou.

古文：又遣诸军徇齐诸城镇，并相次降款。
现代文：又派各军攻掠北齐的各城镇，都相继投降。
English: He also sent various armies to attack and plunder various towns in North Qi, and they all surrendered one after another.

古文：十一月己卯，齐主自并州率众来援。
现代文：十一月己卯曰，齐主从并州率军前来支援。
English: In November, the lord of Qi led the troops from Anhui Province to provide support.

古文：帝以其兵新集，且避之，乃诏诸军班师，遣齐王宪为后拒。
现代文：武帝因为北齐兵力新近集结，暂且避开齐军，就下韶命令各军撤退，派齐王宇文宪作为后卫。
English: Emperor Wu, because the North Qi forces had recently gathered, temporarily avoided the Qi army, and ordered the troops to retreat, sending Qi Wang Yuwen Xian as a guard.

古文：是日，齐主至晋州，宪不与战，引军度汾。
现代文：当天，齐主抵达晋州，宇文宪不和他交战，率军渡过汾水。
English: On the same day, Qi Lord arrived in Jinzhou, Yu Wenxian did not fight with him, and led the army across Surabaya.

古文：齐主遂围晋州，昼夜攻之。
现代文：齐主就围攻晋州，日夜攻打。
English: Qi Lord besieged Jinzhou, attacking day and night.

古文：齐王宪屯诸军于涑水，为晋州声援。
现代文：齐王宇文宪将各军屯驻在涑水，作为晋州的声援。
English: King Uwen Xian of Qi stationed his armies in Surabaya as a show of support for Jinzhou.

古文：河东地震。
现代文：河束发生地震。
English: An earthquake occurred in the river.

古文：癸巳，至自东伐。
现代文：癸巳，武帝从束伐之地返回长安。
English: Soon after, Emperor Wu returned to Chang'an from the place of felling.

古文：献俘于太庙。
现代文：在太庙举行献俘仪式。甲午曰，武帝下诏说：
English: A dedication ceremony was held at the Imperial Temple. On the afternoon of the 1st, Emperor Wu issued the following edict:

古文：甲午，诏曰： 伪齐违信背约，恶稔祸盈，是以亲总六师，问罪汾、晋。
现代文： 伪齐违背信义和约，祸乱邪恶满盈，所以我亲自率领六军，到汾、晋问罪。
English: Pseudo-Qi violated the trust and the peace treaty, and there was a lot of calamity and evil, so I personally led six armies to Shun and Jin to ask for punishment.

古文：兵威所及，莫不摧殄，贼众危惶，乌栖自固。
现代文：兵威所到之处，没有不被摧灭的，贼军惶恐，像乌鸦栖息在巢穴中那样自守。
English: Wherever the military might goes, there is nothing that cannot be destroyed. The robber army is terrified and defends itself like a crow in its nest.

古文：暨元戎反旆，方来聚结，游魂境首，尚敢趑趄。
现代文：等到我大军凯旋后，齐军这才聚结起来，在边境游荡，徘徊不前。
English: It was only after the triumphant return of my army that the Qi army gathered, wandered along the border, and lingered.

古文：朕今更率诸军，应机除剪。 丙申，放齐诸城镇降人还。
现代文：我现在再率各军，随机剪除他们。 丙申日，将北齐各城镇投降的人释放回国。
English: I will now lead all the troops again and randomly cut them off. On the next day, I will release the people who surrendered in the towns of North Qi to return to the country.

古文：丁酉，帝发京师。
现代文：丁酉曰，武帝从长安出发。
English: Ding Yao said that Emperor Wu started from Chang'an.

古文：壬寅，度河，与诸军合。
现代文：壬寅日，渡过黄河，和各军会合。
English: He crossed the Yellow River on Ren Yin Day and rallied with the other armies.

古文：十二月戊申，次于晋州。
现代文：十二月戊申曰，武帝停驻在晋州。
English: In December, Wushin said that Emperor Wu was stationed in Jinzhou.

古文：初，齐攻晋州，恐王师卒至，于城南穿堑，自乔山属于汾水。
现代文：当初，北齐军攻打晋州，恐怕北周军队突然抵达，就在城南挖深沟，从乔山连接到汾水。
English: At the beginning, the North Qi Army attacked Jinzhou. I am afraid that the North Zhou Army suddenly arrived and dug a deep ditch in the south of the city, connecting Qiaoshan to Surabaya.

古文：庚戌，帝帅诸军八万人，置阵东西二十余里。
现代文：庚戌日，武帝率领各军八万人，从束到西布置了二十多里长的战阵。
English: On the day of the Geng Zi, Emperor Wu led 80,000 people from each army and set up a battle line more than 20 miles long from Sokou to the west.

古文：帝乘常御马，从数人巡阵处分，所至辄呼主帅姓名以慰勉之。
现代文：武帝骑着一匹他平常骑的马，带着几个随从到阵地巡视指挥，所到之处就马上叫出主帅的名字加以安慰勉励。
English: Emperor Wu rode a horse that he usually rode, and took several attendants to inspect the command post. Wherever he went, he immediately called out the name of the commander to comfort and encourage him.

古文：将士感见知之恩，各思自厉。
现代文：将士们感激被知遇的恩情，人人都想奋勇效命。
English: The soldiers were grateful for the kindness shown to them, and everyone wanted to fight to the death.

古文：将战，有司请换马。
现代文：将要交战时，主管官员请求武帝换马。
English: When war was imminent, the officials in charge asked Emperor Wu to change horses.

古文：帝曰： 朕独乘良马何所之？ 齐主亦于堑北列阵。
现代文：武帝说： 我一个人骑着良马跑到哪裹去? 齐主也在深沟的北面陈列军阵。
English: Emperor Wu said, "I alone rode a good horse and ran to where? The lord of Qi also displayed his army in the north of the deep ditch.

古文：申后，齐人填堑南引。
现代文：申时过后，齐军填平壕沟南下。
English: After the time of Shen, the Qi army went south to fill the trench.

古文：帝大喜，勒诸军击之，齐人便退。
现代文：武帝大喜，指挥各军进攻，齐军便后退。
English: Emperor Wu was overjoyed and ordered his armies to attack, but the Qi army retreated.

古文：齐主与其麾下数十骑走还并州。
现代文：齐主和他的部下几十名骑兵逃回并州。
English: Lord Qi and dozens of his cavalrymen fled back to Hezhen.

古文：齐众大溃，军资甲仗，数百里间，委弃山积。
现代文：北齐军队彻底崩溃，丢弃的军资武器，在数百里之间，堆积如山。
English: The Beiqi army completely collapsed, and the abandoned military equipment and weapons piled up like a mountain for hundreds of miles.

古文：辛亥，帝幸晋州，仍率诸军追齐主。
现代文：辛亥日，武帝前往晋州，随后又率各军追赶齐主。
English: On the day of Xinhai, Emperor Wu went to Jinzhou, and then led the army to chase the Qi.

古文：诸将固请还师，帝曰： 纵敌患生。
现代文：将领们一再请求回师，武帝说： 放纵敌人会产生后患。
English: The generals repeatedly asked for the division to be sent back, and Emperor Wu said, "To indulge the enemy will bring about subsequent troubles."

古文：卿等若疑，朕将独往。 诸将不敢言。
现代文：你们如果有所怀疑，我将单独一人前往。 将领们才不敢反对。
English: If you have any doubts, I'll go alone, and the generals won't dare to object.

古文：甲寅，齐主遣其丞相高阿那肱守高壁。
现代文：甲寅日，齐主派丞相高阿那肱据守高壁。
English: On the day of Jia Yin, the Lord of Qi sent the chancellor Gao Anan to guard the high wall.

古文：帝麾军直进，那肱望风退散。
现代文：武帝指挥军队直逼高壁，高阿那肱望风而逃。
English: Emperor Wu commanded the army to push straight against the high wall, and Gao An'na fled at the sight of the wind.

古文：丙辰，师次介休，齐将韩建业举城降，以为上柱国，封郇国公。
现代文：丙辰，北周军停驻介休，北齐守将韩建业献城投降，武帝任命他为上柱国，封他为郇国公。
English: Hsin-Chen, the Northern Zhou army halted to mediate, the Northern Qi commander surrendered Han Jianye to surrender, Emperor Wu appointed him as the pillar state, and made him the prince of Shandong.

古文：丁巳，大军次并州，齐主留其从兄安德王延宗守并州，自将轻骑走邺。
现代文：丁巳曰，大军停驻并州，齐主留下他的堂兄安德王高延宗据守并州，他自己率轻装骑兵逃往邺。
English: Ding Si said that the great army stopped in Bianzhou, and the leader of Qi left his cousin, And Wang Gao Yan Zong, to guard Bianzhou. He himself led the light cavalry to escape to Lu.

古文：是日，诏曰：人寄喉唇之重。栋梁骨鲠，翦为仇雠；狐、赵绪余，降成皁隶。
现代文：对于正直的栋梁之臣，像仇敌一样加以剪除；狐、赵的后裔，被降贬为奴仆。
English: Honest vassals were eliminated like enemies; descendants of Fox and Zhao were reduced to servitude.

古文：民不见德，唯虐是闻。
现代文：人民看不见仁德，听到的衹是暴虐。
English: The people do not see benevolence, but hear the sound of tyranny.

古文：朕怀兹漏网，置之度外，正欲各静封疆，共纾民瘼故也。
现代文：我之所以宽大法网，将他们置之度外，是因为我正想使疆界平静，共同解除百姓痛苦的缘故。
English: The reason why I am being lenient and leaving them out of the loop is because I am trying to calm the border and relieve the suffering of the people.

古文：尔之主相，曾不是思，欲构厉阶，反贻其梗。
现代文：伪齐的君主丞相，没有想到这些，想制造祸端，反而留下祸患。
English: The pseudo-chivalrous monarch and prime minister did not think of these things and wanted to create a calamity, but instead left a disaster.

古文：我之率土，咸求倳刃，帷幄献兼弱之谋，爪牙奋干戈之勇，赢粮坐甲，若赴私雠。
现代文：我们全国的人，都请求诛灭他们，谋臣进献兼并弱国的计策，武士鼓起战斗的勇气，担负粮草披甲待敌，就好像是去报自己的私仇一样。
English: People all over our country are asking for their annihilation. Advisers are proposing strategies for annexing weak countries. Warriors are mustering the courage to fight. They are carrying grain and straw, wearing armor, and waiting for the enemy, as if they were going to avenge their own personal vendettas.

古文：是以一鼓而定晋州，再举而摧逋丑。
现代文：所以一次战斗就平定了晋州，再战就摧毁了逃寇。
English: Therefore, Jinzhou was pacified in one battle, and the fleeing bandits were destroyed in the second battle.

古文：伪丞相高阿那肱驱逼余烬，窃据高壁；伪定南王韩建业作守介休，规相抗拟。
现代文：伪齐丞相高阿那肱驱使残余的贼寇，占据高壁；伪齐的定南王韩建业据守介休，企图抗拒。
English: The pseudo-Qi chancellor Gao Ananyuan drove the remaining bandits to occupy the high wall; the pseudo-Qi Dingnan king Han Jianye tried to resist.

古文：聊示兵威，应时崩溃，那肱则单马宵遁，建业则面缚军和，尔之逃卒，所知见也。
现代文：我军衹不过稍稍显示了一下兵威，他们马上就崩溃了，高阿那肱单骑连夜逃走，韩建业贝反绑自己投降，你们逃亡的士卒，对这些都是知道并看见的。
English: Our soldiers only showed a little bit of military prowess, they immediately collapsed, Gao Antao rode away alone overnight, Han Jianyebei tied himself up and surrendered, your fleeing soldiers know and see all of this.

古文：若其怀远以德，则尔难以德绥；处邻以义，则尔难以义服。
现代文：如果我以德安抚远方的人，则你们就难以用德来安抚；如果我们以义来对待邻近的人，则你们又难以用义来降服。
English: If I with righteousness appease him that is far off, it is hard for you to be appeased with righteousness; and if I with righteousness appease him that is near, it is hard for you to be appeased with righteousness.

古文：且天与不取，道家所忌，攻昧侮亡，兵之上术。
现代文：况且上天赐与了而不接受，这是道家所忌讳的，进攻昏昧的国家欺凌即将灭亡的政权，这是兵家的上策。
English: Moreover, it is forbidden for Taoists to attack a dim-witted country or bully a regime that is on the verge of collapse. This is the soldiers' best strategy.

古文：朕今亲驭群雄，长驱宇内，六军舒旆，万队启行。
现代文：我现在亲自统率群雄，驰骋天下，六军舒展旌旗、万队开始出发。
English: I am now personally leading a group of heroes, galloping around the world, the six armies stretch the banner, and the ten thousand teams begin to set off.

古文：势与雷电争威，气逐风云齐举。
现代文：声势与雷电争威，气概与风云并举。
English: The power of the voice competes with the thunder and lightning, and the spirit and the storm go hand in hand.

古文：王师所次，已达近郊，望岁之民，室家相庆，来苏之后，思副厥诚。
现代文：王师停驻的地方，已经抵达了你们的近郊，盼望丰收的百姓，家家户户相互庆贺，拯民于水火的君主，旨在满足百姓的心愿。
English: The place where Wang Shi is stationed has already arrived in your suburbs. The people are looking forward to a good harvest, and every family is celebrating with each other. The monarch who saves the people from fire and water aims to satisfy the wishes of the people.

古文：伪主若妙尽人谋，深达天命，牵羊道左，衔璧辕门，当惠以焚榇之恩，待以列侯之礼。
现代文：伪主如果能穷尽人间神妙的计谋，通晓天命，在路边肉袒牵羊，在辕门口含玉璧，我当施予他不杀之恩，以列侯的礼节对待他。
English: If the false lord can exhaust the wondrous stratagems of the human world, know the fate of heaven, lead the sheep by the roadside, and contain the gems at the gate of the castle, I should grant him the grace of not killing, and treat him with the etiquette of a feudal lord.

古文：伪将相王公已下，衣冠士民之族，如有深识事宜，建功立效，官荣爵赏，各有加隆。
现代文：伪齐将相王公以下的官员，官绅士民世家，如果有深知时务，建立功绩的，无论官职爵位，都会提升。
English: Officials below the rank of crown prince, officials and gentlemen of the people's family, if they are well aware of the current affairs and have established merits, they will be promoted regardless of their official titles and ranks.

古文：若下愚不移，守迷莫改，则委之执宪，以正刑书。
现代文：如果愚劣不改，执迷不悟，就将他们交给执法的人，以正刑法。
English: If the stupid and inferior do not change, and if they persist, they will be handed over to the law enforcers to be punished according to the law.

古文：嗟尔庶士，胡宁自弃。
现代文：奉劝你们这些士民，不要自弃。
English: My advice to you, my fellow citizens, is not to give up.

古文：或我之将卒，逃彼逆朝，无问贵贱，皆从荡涤。
现代文：如果有我方的将士，逃：齐，无论贵贱，一律既往不咎。
English: If there are any soldiers from our side who have fled, no matter how high or low they are, they will not be held responsible.

古文：善求多福，无贻后悔。
现代文：好好地祈求福祉，不要留下悔恨。
English: Pray earnestly for well-being, and leave no regrets.

古文：玺书所至，咸使闻知。
现代文：诏书所到之处，都要使大家知道。
English: Wherever the edict goes, it should be made known to everyone.

古文：自是齐之将帅，降者相继。
现代文：自此北齐的将帅，相继投降。
English: Since then, the generals of the Northern Qi have surrendered one after another.

古文：封其特进、开府贺拔伏恩为郜国公，其余官爵各有差。
现代文：封北齐特进、开府贺拔伏恩为郜国公，其余的官爵大小不等。
English: Fongbei Zitejin, Kaifu He Ba Fuen were the princes of the State of Qi, and the rest of the officials ranged in rank.

古文：戊午，高延宗僭即伪位，改年德昌。
现代文：戊午曰，高延宗妄自称帝，改年号为德昌。
English: In the afternoon, Gao Yan Zongrui claimed to be the emperor and changed his name to Dezhang.

古文：己未，军次并州。
现代文：己末日，北周军停驻并州。
English: At the end of the day, the Northern Zhou army was stationed in Zengzhou.

古文：庚申，延宗拥兵四万出城抗拒，帝率诸军合战，齐人退，帝乘胜逐北，率千余骑入东门，诏诸军绕城置阵。
现代文：庚申日，高延宗率兵四万出城抗拒，武帝率各军合力作战，齐兵后退，武帝乘胜追击，率一千多名骑兵攻入束门，下令各军环绕城墙布置军阵。
English: On Goshun's Day, Gao Yanzong led 40,000 soldiers out of the city to resist, Emperor Wu led all the armies to fight together, the soldiers retreated in unison, Emperor Wu took advantage of the victory to pursue, led more than a thousand cavalry to break into the Shoumen, and ordered the armies to surround the city wall and set up military lines.

古文：至夜，延宗率其众排阵而前，城中军却，人相蹂践，大为延宗所败，死伤略尽。
现代文：到夜裹，高延宗率军列阵前进，进入城中的周军退却，相互践踏，被高延宗打得大败，死伤殆尽。
English: By nightfall, Gao Yan Zong led the army to advance in a line, and the Zhou army that entered the city retreated, trampled each other, and was defeated by Gao Yan Zong, with all the dead and wounded.

古文：齐人欲闭门，以阍下积尸，扉不得阖。
现代文：齐人想关闭城门，因为门下堆满了尸体，城门无法关上。
English: Qi people wanted to close the gate, because the door was full of dead bodies, and the gate could not be closed.

古文：帝从数骑，崎岖危险，仅得出门。
现代文：武帝率领几名骑兵，沿着曲折危险的街巷，才得以逃出城门。
English: Emperor Wu led several cavalrymen along the tortuous and dangerous streets before he was able to escape from the city gate.

古文：至明，率诸军更战，大破之，擒延宗，并州平。
现代文：到天明时，武帝率各军再战，大败齐军，擒获了高延宗，并州平定。
English: By dawn, Emperor Wu led the armies to fight again, defeated the Qi army, captured Gaoyanzong, and pacified the state.

古文：壬戌，诏曰：
现代文：壬戌日，武帝下诏说：
English: On the following day, Emperor Wu issued the following edict:

古文：昔天厌水运，龙战于野，两京圮隔，四纪于兹。
现代文：从前上天厌弃北魏，群雄混战，东西两京阻隔，至今已四十多年了。
English: It has been more than forty years since Heaven abhorred the Northern Wei Dynasty, and the two capitals were separated by the East and the West.

古文：朕垂拱岩廊，君临宇县，相邠民于海内，混楚弓于天下，一物失所，有若推沟。
现代文：我在朝堂无为而治，君临天下，在海内视察邵民，使普天下对得失都能泰然处之，一种事物失当，就好像是自己被推入深渊。
English: In the imperial court, I do nothing but rule. When the king comes to the world, I inspect the people at sea, so that the whole world can calmly deal with the gains and losses. If one thing goes wrong, it's as if you've been pushed into the abyss.

古文：方欲德绥未服，义征不譓。
现代文：我正想以仁德来安抚没有顺服的人，以道义来征讨敢于违逆的人。
English: I just want to use benevolence to appease those who do not obey, and morality to persuade those who dare to disobey.

古文：伪主高纬，放命燕齐，怠慢典刑，俶扰天纪，加以背惠怒邻，弃信忘义。
现代文：伪主高纬，在燕齐违背天命，怠慢典刑，开始扰乱天道纲纪，加上他背叛恩惠激怒邻邦，抛弃信用忘记仁义。
English: In Yanqi, the false lord Gao Wei violated the fate of heaven, neglected the punishment, and began to disrupt the discipline of heaven. In addition, he betrayed the grace and angered the neighbors, abandoned the trust and forgot the benevolence.

古文：朕应天从物，伐罪吊民，一鼓而荡平阳，再举而摧勍敌。
现代文：我顺应天命依从人心，征伐有罪抚慰百姓，一战而荡平平阳，再战而摧毁劲敌。
English: I obeyed the destiny of heaven and obeyed the people's will, conquered the guilty and comforted the people, leveled the world in one battle, and destroyed the strong enemy in another battle.

古文：伪署王公，相继道左。
现代文：伪齐任命的王公，相继投降。
English: The princes appointed by the pseudo-Qi surrendered one after another.

古文：高纬智穷数屈，逃窜草间。
现代文：高纬无计可施，逃窜到草野。
English: There was nothing he could do about the altitude, so he fled to the meadow.

古文：伪安德王高延宗扰攘之间，遂窃名号，与伪齐昌王莫多娄敬显等，收合余烬，背城抗敌。
现代文：伪安壁王高延宗趁混乱之际，窃取了名号，和伪齐昌王莫多娄敬显等人，收拾残兵，负隅抵抗。
English: The pseudo-Anbi King Gao Yanzong took advantage of the chaos to steal the name, and the pseudo-Qichang King Modo Yan Jingxian and others gathered the remnants and resisted.

古文：王威既振，鱼溃鸟离，破竹更难，建瓴非易，延宗众散，解甲军门。
现代文：王威振作后，他们像鱼乌一样崩溃离析，势如破竹不难，高屋建瓴更加容易，高延宗军队溃散，解甲投降。
English: After Wang Wei's encouragement, they collapsed and separated like fishworms. It was not difficult to break through, and it was easier to build high-rises. Gao Yanzong's army was dispersed and disarmed and surrendered.

古文：根本既倾，枝叶自霣，幽青海岱，折简而来，冀北河南，传檄可定。
现代文：北齐的根本既然已经倾覆，它的枝叶自当坠落，因此幽青海岱等地，都送来降书，冀北河南一带，衹需传去檄文就可以平定。
English: Since the foundation of North Qi has been overturned, its branches and leaves have fallen by themselves. Therefore, the Qinghai-Tibetan Railway and other places have all sent letters of surrender. In the area of North Hebei and South Henan, it is only necessary to pass the letter of surrender to be pacified.

古文：八纮共贯，六合同风，方当偃伯灵台，休牛桃塞，无疆之庆，非独在余。
现代文：八极统一，六方同俗，现在正是止戈灵台，休战桃塞的时候，无限的欢庆，并不衹是我一人。
English: The eight poles are unified, the six parties are the same, and now it is the time to stop Goling, the time to end the war, and the infinite celebration, and I am not the only one.

古文：汉皇约法，除其苛政，姬王轻典，刑彼新邦。
现代文：汉高祖约法三章，废除了苛刻的政令，周文王使用轻法，治理新建的邦国。
English: The founder of the Han Dynasty Gao Zu wrote three chapters of laws and abolished harsh decrees. King Zhou Wen used light laws to govern the newly established state.

古文：思覃惠泽，被之率土，新旧臣民，皆从荡涤。
现代文：我想广施恩泽，遍及全国，无论新旧臣民，都予以宽免。
English: I would like to extend my grace to the whole country, and grant pardon to both old and new subjects.

古文：可大赦天下。
现代文：可大赦天下。
English: Convicted criminals across the country can have their sentences commuted or pardoned.

古文：高纬及王公以下，若释然归顺，咸许自新。
现代文：高纬及王公以下的人，如果消除疑虑前来归顺，都允许他们改过自新。
English: People of high rank and below the prince, if they eliminate their doubts and come to submit, will allow them to reform.

古文：诸亡入伪朝，亦从宽宥。
现代文：那些从我朝逃入北齐的人，也都加以宽赦。
English: Those who fled from my reign into Northern Qi were also pardoned.

古文：官荣次序，依例无失。
现代文：官爵次序，全部照旧。
English: The order of knighthood remains the same.

古文：其齐伪制令，即宜削除。
现代文：北齐的制度法令，应当立即削除。
English: Beiqi's system decree should be deleted immediately.

古文：邹鲁缙绅，幽并骑士，一介可称，并宜铨录。
现代文：邹鲁的官绅、幽并的骑士，衹要有丝毫可以称道的地方，都应当录用。
English: If there is anything worthy of praise, the officials and gentry of Jilu and the knights of Yucheng should be hired.

古文：百年去杀，虽或难希，期月有成，庶几可勉。
现代文：要使百年槟弃杀伐，虽然有些很难做到，但在短期有所成就，也许是可以努力实现的。
English: To make the hundred-year-old Penang abandon logging, although it is somewhat difficult to achieve, it may be possible to achieve something in the short term.

古文：丙寅，出齐宫中金银宝器珠翠丽服及宫女二千人，班赐将士。
现代文：丙寅曰，拿出北齐宫中的金银宝器珍珠翡翠和华丽的服装以及二千名宫女，赏赐给将士们。
English: Cui Yin said that he would take out the gold and silver treasures, pearls and jade, gorgeous clothing, and two thousand maids of honor from the Beiqi Palace to reward the soldiers.

古文：以柱国赵王招、陈王纯、越王盛、杞国公亮、梁国公侯莫陈芮、庸国公王谦、北平公寇绍、郑国公达奚震并为上柱国。
现代文：任命柱国赵王宇文招、陈王宇文纯、越王宇文盛、杞国公宇文亮、梁国公侯莫陈芮、庸国公王谦、北平公寇绍、郑国公达奚震一同为上柱国。
English: The pillar countries Zhao Wang Yuwenzhu, Chen Wang Yuwenjun, Yue Wang Yuwensheng, Zangguo Gongwu Wenliang, Liangguo Gongwu Mo Chenqi, Yongguo Gongwu Wangqian, Beiping Gongwu Kossao and Zhengguo Gongwu Dazhen were appointed as the upper pillar countries.

古文：封齐王宪子安城郡公质为河间王，大将军广化公丘崇为潞国公，神水公姬愿为原国公，广业公尉迟运为卢国公。
现代文：封齐王宇文宪的儿子安城郡公宇文质为河间王，大将军广化公丘崇为潞国公，神水公姬愿为原国公，广业公尉迟运为卢国公。
English: The son of King Uwen Hsien of Ancheng County, King Uwen Chung, was crowned King of Hebei Province, General Guanghua Gongqiu was honored as King of Shandong Province, Shenshui Gongji was honored as King of Yuan Province, and Guangye Gongye was honored as King of Lu Province.

古文：诸有功者，封授各有差。
现代文：各位有功的人，封官授爵各有不等。
English: All of you meritorious people, the bestowal of titles and knighthoods varies.

古文：癸酉，帝率六军趣邺。
现代文：癸酉曰，武帝率领六军向邺进发。
English: On the same day, Emperor Wu led the Six Armies to march towards Handan.

古文：以上柱国、陈王纯为并州总管。
现代文：任命上柱国、陈王宇文纯为并州总管。
English: Chen Wang Yu Wenzhong was appointed as the governor of Shangzhu Province.

古文：六年春正月乙亥，齐主传位于其太子恒，改年承光，自号为太上皇。
现代文：建德六年春季正月乙亥日，齐主高纬传位给他的太子高恒，改年号为承光，自号为太上皇。
English: On the 1st day of the 1st month of the 2nd year of the 6th year of Jian De's reign, Prince Gao Heng, the lord of Qi and Gao Li, passed the throne to his son, Prince Gao Heng. He changed his era name to "Cheng Guang" and his self-title to "Grand Emperor."

古文：壬辰，帝至邺。
现代文：壬辰曰，武帝抵达邺。
English: According to Imjin, Emperor Wu arrived in Shandong.

古文：齐主先于城外掘堑竖栅。
现代文：齐主先在城外挖壕沟竖立栅栏。
English: They first dug a trench outside the city and erected a fence.

古文：癸巳，帝率诸军围之，齐人拒守，诸军奋击，大破之，遂平邺。
现代文：癸巳曰，武帝率各军包围了邺城，齐人拒守，各军奋勇出击，大败齐军，于是平定了邺。
English: He said that Emperor Wu led all the armies to encircle the city of Handan, Qi people refused to defend it, all the armies made a valiant attack, defeated the Qi army, and then leveled Handan.

古文：齐主先送其母并妻子于青州，及城陷，乃率数十骑走青州。
现代文：齐主先已将他的母亲和妻子儿女送到了青州，等到城池失陷后，他就率领几十名骑兵逃往青州。
English: Lord Qi had already sent his mother, wife and children to Qingzhou. After the fall of the city, he led dozens of cavalry to flee to Qingzhou.

古文：遣大将军尉迟勤率二千骑追之。
现代文：武帝派大将军尉迟勤率二千名骑兵追赶他。
English: Emperor Wu sent two thousand cavalrymen to chase him.

古文：是战也，于阵获其齐昌王莫多娄敬显。
现代文：在邺城之战中，周军在阵前抓获了北齐的齐昌王莫多娄敬显。
English: In the Battle of Lucheng, the Zhou army captured the Qichang king of North Qi, Moduo Jingxian, before the battle.

古文：帝责之曰： 汝有死罪者三：前从并走邺，携妾弃母，是不孝；外为伪主戮力，内实通启于朕，是不忠；送款之后，犹持两端，是不信。
现代文：武帝斥责他说： 你有三项死罪：先前你从并州逃亡邺时，带着小妾却抛下了母亲，这是不孝；你表面上为齐主效力，却暗中给我通信，这是不忠；投降之后，仍怀二心，这是不讲信用。
English: Emperor Wu rebuked him, saying, "You have committed three capital offenses: when you fled from Bozhou earlier, you took your concubine with you but left your mother behind, which is unfilial; when you ostensibly worked for Qi but secretly sent me correspondence, which is disloyal; and after you surrendered, you still harbored double-mindedness, which is not trustworthy.

古文：如此用怀，不死何待。 遂斩之。
现代文：如此心肠，不死还等什么。 于是斩杀了他。
English: With such a heart, what was he waiting for, to not die, so he killed him.

古文：是日，西方有声如雷者一。
现代文：当天，在西方有一声像雷鸣一样的巨响。
English: On the same day, there was a thunderous roar in the west.

古文：甲午，帝入邺城。
现代文：甲午，武帝进入邺城。
English: In the afternoon of the 1st, Emperor Wu entered Shicheng.

古文：齐任城王湝先在冀州，齐主至河，遣其侍中斛律孝卿送传国玺禅位于湝。
现代文：北齐任城王高浩事先在冀州，齐主抵达黄河，派侍中斛律孝卿送去传国的玉玺禅位给高浩。
English: Gao Hao, the city king of the Northern Qi Dynasty, was in Jizhou before the arrival of the Qi Emperor in the Yellow River. He sent his attendant, Zou Lixiaoqing, to send Gao Hao the imperial jade jade jade jade jade jade jade.

古文：孝卿未达，被执送邺。
现代文：斛律孝卿没有到达，被抓住送到了邺城。
English: Gong Ruling Xiaoqing did not arrive and was caught and sent to Lucheng.

古文：诏去年大赦班宣未及之处，皆从赦例。
现代文：武帝下诏令在去年大赦没有颁布到的地方，也依照大赦令实行。
English: The imperial edict issued by Emperor Wu is also implemented in accordance with the amnesty decree in places where the amnesty was not issued last year.

古文：封齐开府、洛州刺史独孤永业为应国公。
现代文：封北齐开府、洛州刺史独孤永业为应国公。
English: Fong Beibei, Qi Kaifu, and Luozhou are the only ones to have been crowned as the prince of the country.

古文：丙申，以上柱国、越王盛为相州总管。
现代文：丙申，任命上柱国、越王宇文盛为相州总管。
English: Bishin, appointed Shangzhu Guo and Yue Wang Yu Wensheng as the general manager of Xiangzhou.

古文：己亥，诏曰： 自晋州大阵至于平邺，身殒战场者，其子即授父本官。 尉迟勤擒齐主及其太子恒于青州。
现代文：己亥曰，武帝下诏说： 从晋州大战到平定邺城，在战场上身亡的，他们的儿子要授予父亲原来的官职。 尉迟勤在青州擒获了齐主高纬及其太子高恒。
English: Ji Hai said that Emperor Wu issued an edict saying: From the Jinzhou War to the pacification of Lucheng, those who died on the battlefield, their sons should award their fathers the original official position.

古文：庚子，诏曰： 伪齐之末，奸佞擅权，滥罚淫刑，动挂罗网，伪右丞相、咸阳王故斛律明月，伪侍中、特进、开府故崔季舒等七人，或功高获罪，或直言见诛。
现代文：庚子，武帝下诏说： 伪齐末年，奸佞的人独揽政权，滥用刑罚，动不动就施用法纲，伪右丞相、故咸阳王斛律明月，伪侍中、特进、故开府崔季舒等七人，有的是因为功高而获罪，有的是因为直言而被杀。
English: Geng Zi, Emperor Wu issued the following edict: In the last years of the False Qi Dynasty, the traitors and scoundrels monopolized the political power, abused the punishment, and applied the legal system at every turn. The seven people, including the false minister of justice, the late Xianyang Wang Shilu Mingyue, the false attendant, the special envoy, and the late Kaifu Cui Jishu, were either punished for their merits or killed for their outspokenness.

古文：朕兵以义动，翦除凶暴，表闾封墓，事切下车。
现代文：我出动义兵，剪除凶暴，表彰他们的间里，在他们的墓上增添封土，为他们制作丧车。
English: I sent out volunteers, weeded out the violent, honored their graves, added soil to their tombs, and made funeral cars for them.

古文：宜追赠谥，并窆措。
现代文：应当给他们追赠谧号，并另行安葬。
English: They should be given posthumous posthumous names and buried separately.

古文：其见存子孙，各随荫叙录。
现代文：他们仍活着的子孙，各按照门荫分派官职。
English: And their children, who are yet alive, have taken their offices according to their fathers' houses.

古文：家口田宅没官者，并还之。 
现代文：他们被没入官府的家人和田宅，一律发还。 
English: Their families and farmhouses, which had been confiscated by the government, were all returned.

古文：辛丑，诏曰： 伪齐叛涣，窃有漳滨，世纵淫风，事穷雕饰。
现代文：辛丑，武帝下诏说： 伪齐骄横跋扈窃据漳水之滨，放纵淫荡的世风，穷尽奢华之事。
English: The Emperor Wu decreed: "Fake Qizhi arrogantly plundered the coast of Sui Shui, indulged in the lascivious world style, and exhausted the luxury.

古文：或穿池运石，为山学海；或层台累构，概日凌云。
现代文：或挖池运行，建造海；或修筑层层楼台，高耸入云。
English: Or digging a pool and running, building a sea; or building floor after floor, soaring into the clouds.

古文：以暴乱之心，极奢侈之事，有一于此，未或弗亡。
现代文：以暴乱之心，极尽奢侈之事，凡是像这样做的，没有不灭亡的。
English: He that walketh in a riotous spirit, and worketh great luxury, shall not be established.

古文：朕菲食薄衣，以弘风教，追念生民之费，尚想力役之劳。
现代文：我穿薄衣吃粗食，以弘扬教化，挂念人民的耗费，牵怀力役的辛劳。
English: I wear thin clothes, eat coarse food, carry forward enlightenment, be concerned about the people's consumption, and be concerned about the toil of the laborers.

古文：方当易兹弊俗，率归节俭。
现代文：应当改变北齐的这种弊俗，使人们归向节俭。
English: It is necessary to change this evil custom in Beiqi, so that people can return to frugality.

古文：其东山、南园及三台可并毁撤。
现代文：北齐的东山、南园以及三台全部拆除。
English: North Qi's Dongshan, South Park and all three were demolished.

古文：瓦木诸物，凡入用者，尽赐下民。
现代文：砖瓦木材等物，凡是仍可以使用的，全都赏赐给百姓。
English: Bricks, wood and other things that can still be used were all given to the people.

古文：山园之田，各还本主。 
现代文：山园林，都各自归还旧主。 
English: The mountains and gardens were all returned to their former owners.

古文：二月丙午，论定诸军功勋，置酒于齐太极殿，会军士以上，班赐有差。
现代文：二月丙午，议论评定各军的功勋，武帝在北齐皇宫太极殿安排酒宴，会集军士以上将士，颁发的赏赐多少不等。
English: On the afternoon of February 3rd, Emperor Wu arranged a wine banquet in the Taiji Hall of the Northern Qi Imperial Palace to discuss how to evaluate the merits of each army. The banquet would gather soldiers above the rank of sergeant, and the number of awards would vary.

古文：丁未，齐主至，帝降自阼阶，以宾主之礼相见。
现代文：丁未日，齐主高纬被押送到邺城，武帝从台阶上亲自走下来，以宾主的礼节和他相见。
English: On the day before yesterday, Qizhong Gaowai was escorted to Handan. Emperor Wu personally came down from the steps to meet him with the etiquette of a guest.

古文：高湝在冀州拥兵未下，遣上柱国、齐王宪与柱国、随公杨坚率军讨平之。
现代文：高涫在冀州拥兵不降，武帝派上柱国、齐王宇文宪和柱国、随公杨坚率军讨伐平定了他。
English: Gao Gan did not surrender his troops in Jizhou, and Emperor Wu sent Shang Zhuang, Qi Wang Yuwen Xian and Zhuang Guo, as well as Xing Gong Yang Jian and his army to fight and subdue him.

古文：齐定州刺史、范阳王高绍义叛入突厥。
现代文：北齐定州刺史、范阳王高绍义叛逃到突厥。
English: Northern Qi Dingzhou stabbed history, Fan Yang Wang Gao Shao Yi defected to Turkey.

古文：齐诸行台州镇悉降，关东平。
现代文：北齐的各行台州镇全部投降，关东平定。
English: All the Taizhou towns in northern Qi surrendered, and Guandong was pacified.

古文：合州五十五，郡一百六十二，县三百八十五，户三百三十万二千五百二十八，口二千万六千百八十六。
现代文：共计有五十五个州，一百六十二个郡，三百八十五个县，三百三十万二千五百二十八户，二千万六千八百八十六人。
English: In total, there are fifty-five states, one hundred and sixty-two counties, three hundred and eighty-five counties, three million three hundred twenty-two thousand five hundred and twenty-eight households, and twenty million six thousand eight hundred and eighty-six people.

古文：乃于河阳、幽、青、南兖、豫、徐、北朔、定并置总管府，相、并二总管各置宫及六府官。
现代文：于是在河阳、幽州、青州、南兖州、豫州、徐州、北朔、定州都设置总管府，在相、并二总管各设置宫和六府官。
English: Therefore, the General Administrations were set up in Hebei, Yuzhou, Qingzhou, Nanluozhou, Yuzhou, Xuzhou, Beishuo, and Dingzhou, and the Imperial Palaces and six prefectural offices were set up in each province.

古文：癸丑，诏曰： 无侮茕独，事显前书；哀彼矜人，惠流往训。
现代文：癸丑曰，武帝下诏说： 不欺侮孤独的人，这在以前的史书中记载得很清楚；哀怜贫病的人，这是过去典训流传下来的恩惠。
English: Zou Yuxi said that Emperor Wu issued an edict saying: "Do not bully lonely people, which is clearly recorded in previous history books; pity the poor and the sick, this is a grace passed down from the past.

古文：伪齐末政，昏虐寔繁，灾甚滔天，毒流比屋。
现代文：伪齐末期，昏昧暴虐繁多，灾祸满天，流毒遍地。
English: At the end of the pseudo-Qi era, there were many opaque and brutal practices, disasters were rampant, and poison spread everywhere.

古文：无罪无辜，系虏三军之手；不饮不食，僵仆九逵之门。
现代文：无罪无辜的人，被三军掳掠；没吃没喝的人，僵卧在大道上。
English: The innocent and blameless were carried off by three armies; those who had nothing to eat or drink lay dead in the streets.

古文：朕为民父母，职养黎人，念甚泣辜，诚深罪己。
现代文：我作为百姓的父母，职责就是养育人民，十分哀怜这些无辜的人，深深地引咎自责。
English: As a parent of the people, my duty is to nurture the people. I feel very sorry for these innocent people and deeply blame myself.

古文：除其苛政，事属改张，宜加宽宥，兼行赈恤。
现代文：废除北齐苛刻的政令，事当改革，应该加以宽赦，并实行赈济。
English: The harsh decrees of the Northern Qi should be abolished, reforms should be carried out, pardons should be given, and relief measures should be implemented.

古文：自伪武平三年以来，河南诸州之民，伪齐被掠为奴婢者，不问官私，并宜放免。
现代文：自伪齐武平三年以来，河南各州的百姓，被伪齐掳掠为奴婢的，不论是官府和私家，都应当予以释放。
English: Since the third year of the pseudo Qi Wuping, the people in all the states of Henan, who were abducted and plundered as slaves by pseudo Qi, both government and private, should be released.

古文：其住在淮南者，亦即听还，愿淮北者，可随便安置。
现代文：住在淮南的，也允许他们返回，愿意留住在淮北的，可以随宜安置。
English: Those who live in Huainan are also allowed to return, and those who are willing to stay in Huaibei can be resettled at will.

古文：其有癃残孤老，饥馁绝食，不能自存者，仰刺史守令及亲民长司，躬自检校。
现代文：有老弱病残孤独无靠，忍饥挨饿粮食断绝，不能自己生存的，希望刺史守令以及亲民长司，亲自查检核实。
English: The old, the weak, the sick, the disabled, the lonely and the helpless, the starving, the food-starved, and those who cannot survive on their own, hope to personally inspect and verify the inspection and verification.

古文：无亲属者，所在给其衣食，务使存济。 
现代文：没有亲属酌，有关官员要供给他们衣服粮食，务必让他们能存活。 
English: If there are no relatives, the relevant officials should provide them with clothes and food, so that they can survive.

古文：乙卯，帝自邺还京。
现代文：乙卯，武帝从邺城返回京师。
English: At the same time, Emperor Wu returned to Beijing from Shicheng.

古文：丙辰，以柱国、随公杨坚为定州总管。
现代文：丙辰，任命柱国、随公杨坚为定州总管。
English: He appointed Zhu Guo and Su Gong Yang Jian as the chief administrators of Dingzhou.

古文：三月壬午，诏山东诸州，各举明经干治者二人。
现代文：三月壬午，下令山东各州，都要推荐明经干治的人各两名。
English: In the afternoon of March, it was ordered that each of Shandong's prefectures should recommend two people from the Ming and Qing dynasties.

古文：若奇才异术，卓尔不群者，弗拘多少。
现代文：如果是有奇才异术，行为卓越不同常人的，不限多少。
English: If there is a miraculous talent, the behavior is outstandingly different from that of ordinary people, no matter how much.

古文：夏四月乙巳，至自东伐。
现代文：夏季四月乙巳，武帝从束征之地回到长塞。
English: At the end of the summer in April, Emperor Wu returned to Changse from the place where he had been exiled.

古文：列齐主于前，其王公等并从，车轝旗帜及器物以次陈于其后。大驾布六军，备凯乐，献俘于太庙。
现代文：将变主直纬放在队伍前面，韭变的王公等都紧随其后，接着是依次排列的车轿旗帜以及器物。基童的大驾排列六军，高奏凯歌，在太庙呈献俘虏。
English: The changing lord was placed at the front of the procession, followed by the changing kings and queens, followed by the flags of the chariots and carriages and the utensils. The six armies were lined up in front of Kidong's chariot, high-pitched songs were played, and the captives were presented at the Great Temple.

古文：京邑观者皆称万岁。
现代文：京师观看的人都高呼万岁。
English: People watching the performance in Beijing shouted "Long live Mao!"

古文：戊申，封齐主为温国公。
现代文：戊申，封查主直纬为温国公。
English: Wushen, the chief of the blockade was Weng Guogong.

古文：庚戌，大会群臣及诸蕃客于露寝。
现代文：庚戌，在露寝大会群臣和各位番客。
English: Geng Yao, the ministers and the guests at the bed-hopping convention.

古文：乙卯，废蒲、陕、泾、宁四州总管。
现代文：乙卯日，撤销蒲、陕、泾、宁四州总管。
English: On the second day of the month, the head offices of the four prefectures of Pu, Shaanxi, Fujian and Ningxia were revoked.

古文：己巳，祠太庙。
现代文：己巳曰，祭祀太庙。
English: It's time to make a sacrifice to the Imperial Temple.

古文：诏曰： 东夏既平，王道初被，齐氏弊政，余风未殄。
现代文：下诏说： 东方已经平定，王道刚刚覆盖到那裹，齐氏的弊政，残留的影响尚未清除。
English: The next edict said: The East has been pacified, the royal road has just covered there, and the residual influence of Qi's maladministration has not yet been eliminated.

古文：朕劬劳万机，念存康济。
现代文：我勤劳地处理各种要务，心中想着安民济众。
English: I diligently handle all kinds of important tasks, thinking about the safety of the people and the welfare of the people.

古文：恐清净之志，未形四海，下民疾苦，不能上达，寝兴轸虑，用切于怀。
现代文：恐怕安定百姓的心愿，未能表现于天下，下民的疾苦，无法传达上来，我日夜忧虑，心中切切挂念。
English: I am afraid that the desire of the people for stability has not been able to manifest itself in the world, and the suffering of the people cannot be conveyed. I am worried day and night, and my heart is anxious.

古文：宜分遣使人，巡方抚慰，观风省俗，宣扬治道。
现代文：应当分派使者，到各地巡枧抚慰，观察风俗，宣扬致治之道。
English: Envoys should be dispatched to all parts of the country to offer consolation, observe customs, and propagate the path of good governance.

古文：有司明立条科，务在弘益。 
现代文：主管官员要明确地制定条文，一定要广泛宣传。 
English: The competent officials should clearly formulate the provisions, and must be widely publicized.

古文：五月丁丑，以柱国、谯王俭为大冢宰。
现代文：五月丁丑曰，任命柱国，谯王宇文俭为大冢宰。
English: In May, Ding Qiu said that he would appoint the pillar country, Wang Yuwenjian, as the grand viceroy.

古文：庚辰，以上柱国杞国公亮为大司徒，郑国公达奚震为大宗伯，梁国公侯莫陈芮为大司马，柱国应国公独孤永业为大司寇，郧国公韦孝宽为大司空。
现代文：庚辰曰，任命上柱国杞国公宇文亮为大司徒，郑国公达奚震为大宗伯，梁国公侯莫陈芮为大司马，柱国应国公独孤永业为大司寇，郧国公韦孝宽为大司空。
English: Geng Chen said that he had appointed the upper pillar of the State Council of the State Council of the State Council of the State Council of the State Council of the State Council of the State Council of the State Council of the State Council of the State Council of the State Council of the State Council of the State Council of the State Council of the State Council of the State Council of the State Council of the State Council of the State Council.

古文：辛巳，大醮于正武殿，以报功也。
现代文：辛巳日，在正武殿举行大规模祭祀，以酬报有功的人。
English: On Shinshi Day, a large-scale ritual is held at Shobu-den to reward those who have performed meritorious deeds.

古文：己丑，祠方丘。
现代文：己丑曰，祭祀方丘。
English: According to the Ugly One, it is time to sacrifice Fangqiu.

古文：诏曰： 朕钦承丕绪，寝兴寅畏，恶衣菲食，贵昭俭约。
现代文：下诏说： 我恭敬地继承大业，日夜小心谨慎，粗衣薄食，重视显扬俭朴节约。
English: The following edict said: I respectfully inherit the great cause, I am careful day and night, I wear coarse clothes and eat sparingly, and I attach importance to showing frugality, simplicity and economy.

古文：上栋下宇，土阶茅屋，犹恐居之者逸，作之者劳，讵可广厦高堂，肆其嗜欲。
现代文：上栋下宇，都是土阶茅屋，仍恐怕居住在裹面的人放纵，修建它的人辛劳，怎能住大厦高堂，放纵自己的嗜好欲望。
English: The upper building and lower building are all earth-step huts. I am afraid that the people who live in the shroud are still indulgent, and the people who built it are hard-working. How can they live in a high-rise building and indulge their hobbies and desires?

古文：往者，冢臣专任，制度有违，正殿别寝，事穷壮丽。
现代文：从前，冢宰专权，违背制度，正殿别寝，穷尽雄壮华丽。
English: Once upon a time, the power of the emperor was absolute, the system was violated, the main hall did not sleep, and everything was magnificent and gorgeous.

古文：非直雕墙峻宇，深戒前王，而缔构弘敞，有踰清庙。
现代文：不仅仅是雕饰的墙壁高大的房屋，为先王所戒除，而且兴建的宫殿弘大宽敞，超过了用于祭祀的庙宇。
English: It was not only the tall houses with carved walls that were forbidden by the former king, but also the vast and spacious palaces that were built, which exceeded the temples used for worship.

古文：不轨不物，何以示后。
现代文：超越常轨不合法度，用什么来告示后人。
English: What will be used to warn future generations of the illegality of going beyond the norm?

古文：兼东夏初平，民未见德，率先海内，宜自朕始。
现代文：并且束部刚刚平定，人民还没有见到仁德，作天下的表率，应当先从我开始。
English: Moreover, Sokube has just been pacified, and the people have yet to see benevolence. To set an example for the rest of the world, I should start with myself.

古文：其露寝、会义、崇信、含仁、云和、思齐诸殿等，农隙之时，悉可毁撤。雕斲之物，并赐贫民。
现代文：露寝、会义、崇信、含仁、云和、思齐等殿，在农闲的时候，全部都可以拆除，拆下来的雕饰物品，都赏赐给贫苦的百姓。
English: During the off-peak season, all of the pavilions, including the Dew Sleeping Pavilion, the Hall of Righteousness, the Hall of Worship, the Hall of Benevolence, the Hall of Clouds, and the Hall of Longing, can be dismantled, and the sculptures and ornaments that are removed are given to the poor people.

古文：缮造之宜，务从卑朴。 癸巳，行幸云阳宫。
现代文：以后建造修缮，一定要朴实简单。 癸巳曰，武帝前往云阳宫。
English: In the future, construction and renovation must be simple and unpretentious. It is said that Emperor Wu went to the Yunyang Palace.

古文：戊戌，诏曰： 京师宫殿，已从撤毁。
现代文：戊戌日，武帝下诏说： 京师的宫殿，已经拆除了。
English: On the day of Wu Xi, Emperor Wu issued an edict saying: The palace of the Beijing division has been demolished.

古文：并、邺二所，华侈过度，诚复作之非我，岂容因而弗革。
现代文：基州、莹啦二地的宫殿，华丽奢侈过度，虽然确实不是我修建的，但怎能容忍因循而不加改革。
English: The palaces in Kizhou and Yingla, with their over-the-top opulence, were not built by me, but how could I tolerate them without reforming them?

古文：诸堂殿壮丽，并宜除荡，甍宇杂物，分赐穷民。
现代文：各座雄壮华丽的堂殿，都应当拆除。殿舍杂物，分赐给穷苦的百姓。
English: All the magnificent and ornate temples should be demolished, and the temple buildings and their contents distributed to the poor people.

古文：三农之隙，别渐营构，止蔽风雨，务在卑狭。 庚子，陈遣使来聘。
现代文：在农闲的时候，再另外慢慢地营建，衹要能遮蔽风雨就可以，一定要狭小简单。 庚子日，陈国派使者前来通问修好。
English: During the idle time of the farmers, they would slowly build another one. If the straw can shield the wind and rain, it can be done, but it must be small and simple. On the day of Geng Zi, Chen Guo sent an envoy to come and inquire about the repair.

古文：是月，青城门无故自崩。
现代文：在这个月，青城门无故自己倒塌。
English: In this month, the Qingcheng Gate collapsed on its own for no reason.

古文：六月丁未，至自云阳宫。
现代文：六月丁末日，武帝从云阳宫返回。
English: At the end of June, Emperor Wu returned from Yunyang Palace.

古文：辛亥，御正武殿录囚徒。
现代文：辛亥曰，武帝亲自到正武殿省察囚徒。
English: Xinhai said that Emperor Wu personally went to the Zhengwu Palace to inspect the prisoners.

古文：癸亥，于河州鸡鸣防置旭州，甘松防置芳州，广州防置弘州。
现代文：癸亥日。在河州垦堕堕设置担业，在苴垄困设置董丛，在尘川堕设置弘州。
English: On the day of the Chinese New Year, in Hechuo, Dong Cong was set up, and in Ducheng, Hongzhou was set up.

古文：甲子，帝东巡。
现代文：甲子曰，武帝到东方巡视。
English: Kozi said that Emperor Wu went to the East for inspection.

古文：丁卯，诏曰： 同姓百世，婚姻不通，盖惟重别，周道然也。
现代文：丁卯日，武查下诏说： 同姓百代，不通婚姻，大概是为了区别婚姻，周朝的制度是这样的。
English: On the tenth day of the month of Ding, Wu Chao issued an edict saying, "Hundred generations with the same surname cannot get married, probably to differentiate between marriages. This is the system of the Zhou Dynasty.

古文：而娶妻买妾，有纳母氏之族，虽曰异宗，犹为混杂。
现代文：而娶妻买妾，有聘纳母亲家族的，虽然说是不同宗，但仍然混杂。
English: And those who marry a wife and buy a concubine, and those who hire a mother's family, although they say they are from different clans, are still mixed.

古文：自今以后，悉不得娶母同姓，以为妾。
现代文：从今以后，一律不准娶和母亲同姓的人作为妻妾。
English: From now on, no one is allowed to marry a person with the same surname as his mother as a wife and concubine.

古文：其已定未成者，即令改聘。 
现代文：那些已经订了婚而没有纳娶的，立即下令改聘。 
English: Those who had been engaged but not married were immediately ordered to change jobs.

古文：秋七月己卯，封齐王宪第四子广都公负为莒国公，绍莒庄公洛生后。
现代文：秋季七月己卯日，封齐王宇文宪的第四个儿子卢翅公室塞鱼为苴厘公，作为承继苴蓝公室塞洛生的后嗣。
English: On the last day of July in autumn, the fourth son of King Yuwen Xian, Lu Ying Xie, was named Gu Li Gong, as the heir to succeed the son of Selo of the Indigo Office.

古文：癸未，应州献芝草。
现代文：癸未，应州进献灵芝草。
English: In recent years, Lingzhi grass has been introduced to Yingzhou.

古文：丙戌，行幸洛州。
现代文：丙戌，亘生查前往盗丛。
English: So, he went to the thieving bushes to investigate.

古文：己丑，诏山东诸州举有才者，上县六人，中县五人，下县四人，赴行在所，共论治政得失。
现代文：己丑，下令山东各州推荐有才干的人，上县推举六人，中县推举五人，下县推举四人，前往武帝所在之地，共同讨论政治上的得失。
English: He ordered the states of Shandong to recommend talented people, and the upper counties to nominate six people, the middle counties to nominate five people, and the lower counties to nominate four people. They went to the place where Emperor Wu was located to discuss political gains and losses.

古文：戊戌，以上柱国、庸公王谦为益州总管。
现代文：戊戌，任命上柱国，庸公王谦为益蛆总管。
English: Wuzhong, appointed Shangzhuo, Yonggong Wang Qian as the general manager of Yixing.

古文：八月壬寅，议定权衡度量，颁于天下。
现代文：八月壬寅曰，商定度量权衡制度，颁布于全国。
English: In August, Jinyin said that the agreed-upon measurement and trade-off system was finalized and promulgated nationwide.

古文：其不依新式者，悉追停。
现代文：那些不符合新制度的，一律追缴停止使用。
English: Those that do not comply with the new system will be subject to a fine and their use will be suspended.

古文：诏曰： 以刑止刑，世轻世重。
现代文：亘逊下诏说： 用刑法来制止刑罚，刑典时轻时重。
English: Watanabe said in his edict: Use the criminal law to stop the punishment, the criminal law is sometimes light and sometimes heavy.

古文：罪不及嗣，皆有定科。
现代文：处罚罪人不涉及到他们的后代，自古就有明文规定。
English: Since ancient times, it has been explicitly stipulated that the punishment of criminals does not involve their descendants.

古文：杂役之徒，独异常宪，一从罪配，百世不免。
现代文：奴隶出身的民众，惟独不同于常典，他们一旦犯罪受到处罚，子孙百代都不能宽免。
English: The people of slave origin, however, differ from the canon. Once they are punished for a crime, their descendants cannot be pardoned for hundreds of generations.

古文：罚既无穷，刑何以措。
现代文：刑罚既然没有止境，法律就难以公平地施行。
English: Since there is no limit to the punishment, it is difficult to enforce the law fairly.

古文：道有沿革，宜从宽典。
现代文：法制有因循沿革，应当使用宽大的刑典。
English: The legal system has a consistent history, and a lenient criminal code should be used.

古文：凡诸杂户，悉放为民。
现代文：凡是奴仆杂役，一律释放为平民。
English: All slaves and servants were to be released as civilians.

古文：配杂之科，因之永削。 甲子，郑州献九尾狐，皮肉销尽，骨体犹具。
现代文：处罚奴仆的条文法令，也因此而永远削除。 甲子，郑州进献九尾狐，九尾狐的皮肉已经全部没有了，衹是骨骼仍在。
English: As a result, the regulations and decrees that punished slaves were also removed forever. A son, Zhengzhou presented a nine-tailed fox. The skin of the nine-tailed fox was completely gone, but the skeleton was still there.

古文：帝曰： 瑞应之来，必昭有德。
现代文：逮壶说： 祥瑞降临，必定是昭示有德。
English: Fang Jian said, "The arrival of Xiang Rui must be a sign of virtue.

古文：若使五品时叙，四海和平，家识孝慈，人知礼让，乃能致此。
现代文：如果使人伦关系有序，天下和睦平安，各家各户都懂得孝顺慈爱，人人都知道礼让，才能招来祥瑞。
English: If human relations are orderly, the world is peaceful and harmonious, every family knows filial piety and mercy, and everyone knows politeness, only then can we attract auspiciousness.

古文：今无其时，恐非实录。 乃命焚之。
现代文：现在还不是这个时候，恐怕不是真正的祥瑞。 于是下令将它焚毁。
English: Now is not the time, I'm afraid it's not the real Xiang Rui, so he ordered it to be burned.

古文：九月壬申，以柱国邓国公窦炽、申国公李穆并为上柱国。戊寅，初令民庶已上，唯听衣绸、绵绸、丝布、圆绫、纱、绢、绡、葛、布等九种，余悉停断。
现代文：戊寅曰，开始下令平民以上的人，衹准他们穿绸、绵绸、丝布、圆绫、纱、绢、绡、葛、布等九种材料制成的衣服，其他材料的衣服，一律禁止。
English: Wu Yin said that he began to order people above the civilian population to allow them to wear clothes made of nine kinds of materials such as silk, silk, silk cloth, round satin, yarn, satin, satin, georgette, cloth, etc. Clothes made of other materials are prohibited.

古文：朝祭之服，不拘此例。
现代文：朝会和祭祀时穿的衣服。不限于此例。
English: Clothing worn at morning meetings and religious services, not limited to this example.

古文：甲申，绛州献白雀。
现代文：甲申，绛州进献白雀。
English: Jiaxing, Zhangzhou presented white finches.

古文：壬辰，诏东土诸州儒生，明一经已上，并举送，州郡以礼发遣。
现代文：壬辰。韶令东部各州的儒生，通晓一经以上的，全部推举送到朝廷，各州郡要以礼送遣。
English: According to the imperial edict, all the Confucian students in the eastern states who are familiar with the above should be sent to the imperial court, and all the states and counties should send them with a gift.

古文：癸卯，封上大将军、上黄公王轨为郯国公。
现代文：癸卯日，封上大将军、匕黄公王轨为垫厘公。
English: On the same day, he was given the title of grand general, and the Huangguang Prince became the Matan Liguo.

古文：吐谷浑遣使献方物。
现代文：吐釜运派使者前来贡献土特产。
English: Tukamun sent an envoy to contribute local products.

古文：冬十月戊申，行幸邺宫，戊午，改葬德皇帝于冀州。
现代文：冬季十月戊申，武帝前往邺宫，戊午，将擅皇童改葬在冀业。
English: In the winter of October in Wushin, Emperor Wu went to the Summer Palace, and in the afternoon, he reburied Emperor Xuan in Jiye.

古文：帝服缌，哭于太极殿，百官素服哭。
现代文：亘墟身穿粗麻丧服，在太极殿哭祭，百官身穿素色丧服哭祭。
English: Wang Hui is dressed in coarse linen mourning clothes, in the Taiji Hall is a wailing ritual, and the officials are dressed in plain mourning clothes.

古文：是月，诛温国公高纬。
现代文：在这个月裹，诛杀了温国公高纬。
English: In this month, the dragon killed Weng Guogong Gao Liang.

古文：十一月庚午，百济遣使献方物。
现代文：十一月庚午日，百济派使者前来贡献土特产。
English: On the afternoon of the second day of November, Baekje sent an envoy to contribute local products.

古文：壬申，封皇子充为道王，兑为蔡王。
现代文：壬申日，封皇子宇文充为道王，宇文兑为蔡王。
English: On the day of Jinshin, the crown prince Uwentsu became the king of Tao, and Uwentsu became the king of Cai.

古文：癸酉，陈将吴明彻侵吕梁，徐州总管梁士彦出军与战，不利，退守徐州。
现代文：癸酉日，陈国将领吴明彻侵犯吕梁，徐州总管梁士彦出兵同他作战，失利，退守徐州。
English: On the third day of the third month, Wu Mingche, the general of Chen Guo, invaded Luliang, and Liang Shihyan, the head of Xuzhou, sent troops to fight against him, but was defeated and retreated to Xuzhou.

古文：遣上大将军、郯国公王轨率师讨之。
现代文：武帝派上大将军、郯国公王轨率军讨伐。
English: Emperor Wu sent a great general, the Duke of Shandong, to lead the army in the crusade.

古文：是月，稽胡反，遣齐王宪率军讨平之。
现代文：在这个月，稽胡反叛，武帝派齐王宇文宪讨伐平定了稽胡。
English: In this month, Qi Hu rebelled, and Emperor Wu sent Qi Wang Yuwen to fight and subdue Qi Hu.

古文：诏自永熙三年七月已来，去年十月已前，东土之民，被抄略在化内为奴婢者；及平江陵之后，良人没为奴婢者：并宜放免。
现代文：武帝下韶命令从永熙三年七月以来，到去年十月以前，束部的平民被掳掠在原周地充当奴婢的人，以及在平定江陵之后被没收为奴婢的平民，应当一律释放。
English: Emperor Wu issued an order that from July of the third year of Yongxi to October of the previous year, the civilians of Sokube who were abducted to serve as slaves in the original Zhou, as well as the civilians who were confiscated as slaves after the pacification of Gangneung, should all be released.

古文：所在附籍，一同民伍。
现代文：让他们在当地附籍，全部同平民一样。
English: Let them be registered locally, all the same as civilians.

古文：若旧主人犹须共居，听留为部曲及客女。
现代文：如果原来的主人仍需要他们一起居住的，允许将他们留下来作为部曲和客女。
English: If the original owner still needs them to live with, they are allowed to stay as a pet and a guest.

古文：诏曰： 正位于中，有圣通典。
现代文：武帝下诏说： 在宫中端正嫔妃的名位，是圣明君主通行的法典。
English: Emperor Wu issued an edict saying: It is the code of the Ming Dynasty that the title of empress dowager should be held in the palace.

古文：质文相革，损益不同。
现代文：内容和形式不断变革，增减改动也不相同。
English: The content and form are constantly changing, and the increase and decrease changes are also different.

古文：五帝则四星之象，三王制六宫之数。
现代文：五帝效法四星之象，三王制订六宫之数。
English: The five emperors followed the four-star pattern, and the three kings established the number of six palaces.

古文：刘、曹已降，等列弥繁，选择遍于生民，命秩方于庶职。
现代文：汉、魏以来，嫔妃的等级越来越繁多，选择嫔妃遍及于人民，嫔妃的职位品级和宫外的官职一样多。
English: Since the Han Dynasty and the Wei Dynasty, the ranks of concubines have become more and more diverse. The choice of concubines has spread to the people, and there are as many ranks of concubines as there are official positions outside the palace.

古文：椒房丹地，有众如云。
现代文：后妃的宫殿，多如云烟。
English: The palaces of the queens are as numerous as the clouds of smoke.

古文：本由嗜欲之情，非关风化之义。
现代文：这本来是出自于人的嗜好欲望，并不涉及风俗教化。
English: This is originally from people's hobbies and desires, and does not involve the education of customs.

古文：朕运当浇季，思复古始，无容广集子女，屯聚宫掖。
现代文：我身处世风浮薄的末世，想恢复远古时的风气，不能容忍广泛地采集女子，屯聚在宫中。
English: I am living in the end of the world, and I want to restore the customs of ancient times. I cannot tolerate the widespread collection of women and their gathering in the palace.

古文：弘赞后庭，事从约简。
现代文：大力引导后宫，简约从事。
English: Vigorously guide the harem, engaged in a simple way.

古文：可置妃二人，世妇三人，御妻三人，自兹以外，悉宜减省。 
现代文：在后宫衹设置妃二人，世妇三人，御妻三人，除此以外，一律裁减。 
English: In the harem, two concubines, three concubines, and three wives are set up, except for this, they are all reduced.

古文：己亥晦，日有蚀之。
现代文：己亥月末，发生日食。
English: At the end of Ji Hai, a solar eclipse occurred.

古文：初行刑书要制。
现代文：开始施行《刑书要制》。
English: The "Important Criminal Record System" came into effect.

古文：持杖群强盗一匹以上，不持杖群强盗五匹以上，监临主掌自盗二十匹以上，小盗及诈伪请官物三十匹以上，正长隐五户及十丁以上、隐地三顷以上者，至死。
现代文：手持武器结伙抢劫一匹布以上，不拿武器结伙抢劫五匹布以上，监守自盗二十匹布以上，小盗及诈骗公物三十匹布以上，各级行政官员隐瞒五户及十个丁男以上，隐瞒土地三顷以上的，处以死刑。
English: Hand-held weapons gang robbery of more than one cloth, without weapons gang robbery of more than five cloths, guarding self-theft of more than twenty cloths, petty theft and defrauding public property of more than thirty cloths, administrative officials at all levels concealing more than five households and ten men, concealing more than three hectares of land, shall be sentenced to death.

古文：刑书所不载者，自依律科。
现代文：《刑书要制》上没有记载的，依照相关法令条文处置。
English: If it is not recorded in the Criminal Law Records System, it shall be dealt with in accordance with the provisions of relevant laws and regulations.

古文：十二月戊午，吐谷浑遣使献方物。
现代文：十二月戊午，吐蕃浑派使者前来贡献土特产。
English: On the afternoon of December 3rd, Tuyuhun sent an envoy to contribute local special products.

古文：己未，东寿阳土人反，率众五千袭并州城，刺史东平公宇文神举破平之。
现代文：己未，束寿阳的土人造反，率众五千人袭击并州城，并州刺史东平公宇文神举打败并平定了他们。
English: Not long after, the natives of Soksoyang rebelled and led a crowd of five thousand to attack and capture the provincial capital, and the provincial governor, Dongping Gong Yuwen, defeated and pacified them.

古文：庚申，行幸并州宫。
现代文：庚申，武帝前往并州宫。
English: Goshun, Emperor Wu went to the State Palace.

古文：移并州军人四万户于关中。
现代文：将并州四万户军民迁移到关中。
English: Forty thousand military and civilian households in the annexed prefecture were relocated to Guanzhong.

古文：丙寅，以柱国、滕王逌为河阳总管。
现代文：丙寅曰，任命柱国、滕王宇文迪为河阳总管。
English: Cui Yin said that he had appointed pillar country and Teng Wang Yu Wendi as the chief administrator of Hebei.

古文：丁卯，以柱国、随国公杨坚为南兖州总管，上柱国、申国公李穆为并州总管。
现代文：丁卯曰，任命柱国、随国公杨坚为南兖州总管，上柱国、申国公李穆为并州总管。
English: Dingwu said that Yang Jian, the head of the pillar state and the follower state, was appointed as the general manager of South Luzon, and Li Mu, the head of the pillar state and the follower state, was appointed as the general manager of the merged state.

古文：戊辰，废并州宫及六府。
现代文：戊辰曰，撤销并州宫以及那裹的六府。
English: Boshin said that the merger of the state palace and the six prefectures around it had been revoked.

古文：是月，北营州刺史高宝宁据州反。
现代文：当月，北营州刺史高宝宁占据州城反叛。
English: In the same month, Beiying prefectural governor Gao Bao Ning led a rebellion to occupy the prefectural capital.

古文：宣政元年春正月癸酉，吐谷浑伪赵王他娄屯来降。
现代文：宣政元年春季正月癸酉日，吐谷浑伪赵王他娄屯前来投降。
English: On the third day of the first month of the spring of the first year of the Xuan Zheng, the fake King Zhao of Tuyun came to Tuyun to surrender.

古文：壬午，行幸邺宫。
现代文：壬午日，武帝前往邺宫。
English: On the morning of the third day of the third lunar month, Emperor Wu went to the Summer Palace.

古文：分相州广平郡置洺州，清河郡置贝州，黎阳郡置黎州，汲郡置卫州；分定州常山郡置恒州；分并州上党郡置潞州。
现代文：从相州划分出广平郡设置沼州，划分出清河郡设置贝州，划分出黎阳郡设置黎州，划分出汲郡设置卫州；从定州划分出常山郡设置恒州；从并州划分出上党郡设置潞州。
English: Guangping County was divided from Xiangzhou to set up Nuzhou, Qinghe County was divided to set up Beizhou, Liyang County was divided to set up Lizhou, and Gu County was divided to set up Weizhou; Changshan County was divided from Dingzhou to set up Hengzhou; Shangdang County was divided from Hengzhou to set up Zhangzhou.

古文：辛卯，行幸怀州。
现代文：辛卯，武帝前往怀州。
English: Soon after, Emperor Wu went to Huizhou.

古文：癸巳，幸洛州。
现代文：癸巳日，前往洛州。
English: On the following day, he left for Lozhou.

古文：诏于怀州置宫。
现代文：下令在怀州设置宫殿。
English: He ordered to set up a palace in Waizhou.

古文：二月甲辰，柱国、大冢宰谯王俭薨。
现代文：二月甲辰曰，柱国、大冢宰谯王宇文俭去世。
English: In February, Jia Chen, the pillar of the country, the great leader Wang Yuwenjian passed away.

古文：丁巳，帝至自东巡。
现代文：丁巳曰，武帝从东巡返回长安。
English: Ding said that Emperor Wu returned to Chang'an from his eastern inspection tour.

古文：乙丑，以上柱国越王盛为大冢宰，陈王纯为雍州牧。
现代文：乙丑，任命上柱国越王宇文盛为大冢宰。陈王宇文纯为雍州牧。
English: Second, he appointed Wang Uwen Sheng of Shangzhu to be the grand steward of Yue, and Chen Wang Uwenjun to be the herdsman of Yongzhou.

古文：三月戊辰，于蒲州置宫。
现代文：三月戊辰，在蒲州设置行宫。
English: At the end of March, the imperial court was established in Puzhou.

古文：废同州及长春二宫。
现代文：撤除同州及长春两处行宫。
English: the removal of the two imperial palaces in Tongzhou and Changchun.

古文：壬申，突厥遣使献方物。
现代文：壬申曰，突厥派使者前来进献土特产。
English: According to Jinshin, the Turks sent emissaries to present local specialties.

古文：甲戌，初服常冠。
现代文：甲戌曰，武帝开始戴新款休闲帽。
English: Armour said that Emperor Wu began to wear a new type of casual cap.

古文：以皁纱为之，加簪而不施缨导，其制若今之折角巾也。
现代文：用黑纱做成，帽上加簪扎住头发而不用缨带，它的式样就像现在的折角巾。
English: It was made of black yarn, and the hat was tied at the top with hair instead of a ribbon. Its design was similar to today's kerchief.

古文：上大将军、郯国公王轨破陈师于吕梁，擒其将吴明彻等，俘斩三万余人。
现代文：上大将军、郯国公王轨在吕梁打败了陈国军队，擒获了陈国将领吴明彻等人，俘虏斩杀三万多人。
English: In Luliang, Shangtao general and Duke Wanglu of the State of Qi defeated the army of the State of Chen, captured the general of the State of Chen, Wu Mingche and others, and killed more than 30,000 captives.

古文：丁亥，诏： 柱国故豆卢宁征江南武陵、南平等郡，所有民庶为人奴婢者，悉依江陵放免。 壬辰，改元。
现代文：丁亥日，武帝下诏说： 柱国故豆卢宁征讨江南的武陵、南平等郡，所俘获的平民成为奴婢的，一律依照江陵加以释放。 壬辰日，更改年号。
English: On Dinghai Day, Emperor Wu issued the following edict: Zhu's ancestral capital, Lunin, had begun the conquest of Wuling and Nanping County in the south of the Yangtze River, and all the captured civilians who had become slaves were to be released in accordance with the Yangtze River.

古文：夏四月壬子，初令遭父母丧者，听终制。
现代文：夏季四月壬子日，开始下令父母逝世的，允许为父母服满三年的丧期。
English: In the summer of April, on Minsi Day, it began to be ordered that parents who died were allowed to serve a three-year mourning period for their parents.

古文：庚申，突厥入寇幽州，杀掠吏民。
现代文：庚申日，突厥侵犯幽州，斩杀掳掠官吏平民。
English: On Goshun's Day, the Turks invaded Yuzhou, killed and plundered officials and civilians.

古文：议将讨之。
现代文：朝议将要讨伐突厥。
English: The Imperial Court is going to fight the Turks.

古文：五月己丑，帝总戎北伐。
现代文：五月己丑日，武帝统率大军北伐。
English: On May Fool's Day, Emperor Wu led the Northern Expedition.

古文：遣柱国原公姬愿、东平公宇文神举等率军，五道俱入。
现代文：派柱国原公姬愿、束平公宇文神举等人率军分成五路同时攻入突厥。
English: He sent Kunihara no Kimi, Sukehira no Kimi, Umenokuni no Mikoto and others to divide the army into five groups and invade Turkey at the same time.

古文：发关中公私驴马，悉从军。
现代文：征调关中公家私人的驴马，全部从军。
English: All the donkeys and horses, both public and private, in the requisition and transfer stations were from the army.

古文：癸巳，帝不豫，止于云阳宫。
现代文：癸巳曰，武帝身体不适，停留在云阳宫。
English: Emperor Wu was unwell and stayed at the Yunyang Palace.

古文：丙申，诏停诸军事。
现代文：丙申曰，下令停止一切军事。
English: He said he had ordered a halt to all military activities.

古文：六月丁酉，帝疾甚，还京。
现代文：六月丁酉日，武帝病重，返回京师。
English: On the day of Dinghui in June, Emperor Wu fell seriously ill and returned to Beijing.

古文：其夜，崩于乘舆。
现代文：当天夜晚，武帝死于车驾上。
English: In the evening of the same day, Emperor Wu died while driving.

古文：时年三十六。
现代文：当时他三十六岁。
English: He was thirty-six years old.

古文：遗诏曰：
现代文：他的遣韶说：
English: His epitaph reads:

古文：人肖形天地，禀质五常，修短之期，莫非命也。
现代文：人生长在天地之间，禀受五行的资质，寿命的长短，没有不是命中注定的。
English: Human beings grow up between heaven and earth. They are endowed with the five elements, and the length of their lives is not predetermined by fate.

古文：朕君临宇县，十有九年，未能使百姓安乐，刑措罔用，所以昧旦求衣，分宵忘寝。
现代文：我君临天下，有十九年，不能使百姓安乐，刑法不用，所以我日夜辛劳，废寝忘食。
English: I have reigned over the world for nineteen years. I have not been able to make the people happy, and there is no need for criminal law. Therefore, I have toiled day and night, losing sleep and forgetting to eat.

古文：昔魏室将季，海内分崩，太祖扶危翼倾，肇开王业。
现代文：从前北魏将要灭亡，天下分崩离析，太祖扶持将要倾覆的政权，开创了帝王大业。
English: Once upon a time, the Northern Wei Dynasty was about to perish, the world was falling apart, the Great Ancestor supported the regime that was about to be overthrown, and initiated the great cause of emperors.

古文：燕赵榛芜，久窃名号。
现代文：燕趟之地的污秽之人，长久地窃取了帝王名号。
English: The filthy people of the land of swallows have long stolen the emperor's name.

古文：朕上述先志，下顺民心，遂与王公将帅，共平东夏。
现代文：我在上表达先人的志愿，在下顺应民心，于是和王公将帅们一起，共同平定丁东夏。
English: On the top, I expressed the wishes of my ancestors, and on the bottom, I complied with the people's will. So, together with Wang Gong's generals, we jointly pacified Ding Dongxia.

古文：虽复妖氛荡定，而民劳未康。
现代文：虽然扫平祸乱，但百姓并未安康。
English: Although the scourge has been wiped out, the people are still not well.

古文：每一念此，如临冰谷。
现代文：我每当想到这些，就好像自己身处在冰川山谷之中。
English: When I think about it, it's like I'm in a glacial valley.

古文：将欲包举六合，混同文轨。
现代文：我正想囊括天下，统一国家。
English: I'm trying to take over the world and unify the country.

古文：今遘疾大渐，气力稍微，有志不申，以此叹息。
现代文：但现在病情加剧，气力逐渐衰微，志向无法伸张，因此叹息。
English: But now his condition has worsened, his strength has gradually weakened, and his ambition cannot be extended, so he sighs.

古文：天下事重，万机不易。
现代文：天下的事情繁重，纷杂的政务不容易处理。
English: The affairs of the world are onerous, and complicated government affairs are not easy to deal with.

古文：王公以下，爰及庶僚，宜辅导太子，副朕遗意。
现代文：王公以下，以及百官，应当辅佐引导太子，以帮助完成我的遣愿。
English: Princes and their subordinates, as well as officials, should assist and guide the crown prince to help fulfill my mission.

古文：令上不负太祖，下无失为臣。
现代文：使上不辜负太祖，下不丧失为臣之道。
English: To live up to the great-grandfather, not to lose the way of being a vassal.

古文：朕虽瞑目九泉，无所复恨。
现代文：我虽瞑目在九泉之下，也再没有什么遗憾的。
English: Even though I've been through hell and back, I have no regrets.

古文：朕平生居处，每存菲薄，非直以训子孙，亦乃本心所好。
现代文：我平生居住生活，常常很节俭，并不衹是为了以此来训诫子孙，这也是我心中本来的喜好。
English: I've always lived frugally, and I'm not ashamed to use this as a way to teach my children and grandchildren, which is also my heart's original preference.

古文：丧事资用，须使俭而合礼，墓而不坟，自古通典。
现代文：丧事用度，一定要节俭而符合礼制，造墓而不起坟，是自古以来通行的典制。
English: Funeral expenses, must be frugal and in line with etiquette, tombs without graves, has been the prevailing etiquette since ancient times.

古文：随吉即葬，葬讫公除。
现代文：遇上吉就马上下葬，下葬完就因公除服。
English: In the event of good luck, they will be buried immediately, and after the burial, they will be dismissed from work.

古文：四方士庶，各三日哭。
现代文：四方的士民，各哭丧三天。
English: The people of the four quarters wept and mourned for three days.

古文：妃嫔以下无子者，悉放还家。
现代文：嫔妃以下没有子女的，都散放回家。
English: Those with no children below the rank of concubine were sent home.

古文：谥曰武皇帝，庙称高祖。
现代文：谧号为武皇帝，庙号称高祖。
English: His posthumous name was Emperor Wu, and his temple name was Gaozu.

古文：己未，葬于孝陵。
现代文：己末日。安葬在孝陵。
English: He died and was buried in the Xiaoling Mausoleum.

古文：帝沉毅有智谋。
现代文：武帝深沉刚毅有智谋。
English: Emperor Wu is a man of profound fortitude and cunning.

古文：初以晋公护专权，常自晦迹，人莫测其深浅。
现代文：当初置公室晋公独揽朝政，他常隐藏自己的心思，别人无法猜测到他的深浅。
English: At the beginning of his reign, Emperor Jingu was the sole ruler of the court. He often hid his thoughts, and others could not guess his thoughts.

古文：及诛护之后，始亲万机。
现代文：到诛杀了宇文护之后，他才开始亲自处理政务。
English: It was only after he had killed Umenosuke that he began to personally handle government affairs.

古文：克己励精，听览不怠。
现代文：约束自己勉励心志，治理朝政从不懈怠。
English: Constrain oneself, encourage one's aspiration, and never slacken in the administration of state affairs.

古文：用法严整，多所罪杀。
现代文：用法严峻，有很多人因犯罪而被诛杀。
English: The usage is severe, and many people have been beaten to death for committing crimes.

古文：号令恳恻，唯属意于政。
现代文：号令诚恳痛切，衹是将心思用在政治上。
English: The rallying cry is earnest and heartfelt, but it's all about putting your heart and soul into politics.

古文：群下畏服，莫不肃然。
现代文：大臣们敬畏顺服，没有谁不恭敬的。
English: Ministers fear obedience, there is no one who does not respect.

古文：性既明察，少于恩惠。
现代文：他明察事理，缺少恩惠。
English: He is prudent and lacks favor.

古文：凡布怀立行，皆欲踰越古人。
现代文：所作所为，都想超越古人。
English: They want to surpass the ancients in everything they do.

古文：身衣布袍，寝布被，无金宝之饰，诸宫殿华绮者，皆撤毁之，改为土阶数尺，不施栌栱。
现代文：他身穿布袍，盖的是布被，没有金银珠宝的装饰，凡是华丽的宫殿，都拆毁掉，改为几尺高的土阶，不加斗拱。
English: He was dressed in a cloth robe, covered with a cloth quilt, without gold and silver jewelry. All the magnificent palaces were demolished and replaced with steps several feet high, without buttresses.

古文：其雕文刻镂，锦绣纂组，一皆禁断。
现代文：雕刻的纹饰，彩色的锦绣精美的织物，一律禁止。
English: Engraved patterns, colorful brocades and exquisite fabrics are all prohibited.

古文：后宫嫔御，不过十余人。
现代文：后宫的嫔妃，不超过十余人。
English: There are no more than ten concubines in the harem.

古文：劳谦接下，自强不息。
现代文：勤谨谦虚地对待臣下，自强不息。
English: He treated his vassals with diligence and modesty, and never tired of self-improvement.

古文：以海内未康，锐情教习。
现代文：因为天下没有康宁，所以专心一意地教习。
English: Because there is no Kangning in the world, I concentrate on teaching.

古文：至于校兵阅武，步行山谷，履涉勤苦，皆人所不堪。
现代文：至于检阅军队，行走山谷，辛勤跋涉，都是一般的人所不能忍受的。
English: As for reviewing the troops, walking in the valley, and trudging along, all of these are intolerable to the common people.

古文：平齐之役，见军士有跣行者，帝亲脱靴以赐之。
现代文：在平定北齐之战中，武帝见到有赤足行走的军士，他就亲自脱下自己的靴子赏赐给他们。
English: In the war to pacify Northern Qi, Emperor Wu saw soldiers walking barefoot, and he personally took off his boots to reward them.

古文：每宴会将士，必自执杯劝酒，或手付赐物。
现代文：每次召集将士宴饮时，他一定会亲自拿着杯子劝酒，或者亲手赏赐财物。
English: Every time he summoned his generals for a banquet, he would be sure to personally take the cup to persuade them to drink, or personally reward them with money.

古文：至于征伐之处，躬在行阵。
现代文：至于出兵征伐时，他也亲自行走在队伍中。
English: As for when he went out to fight, he also walked in the ranks on his own.

古文：性又果决，能断大事。
现代文：他的性情又果断坚决，能决断大事。
English: His disposition is resolute and decisive, and he can decide on major issues.

古文：故能得士卒死力，以弱制强。
现代文：所以能使士卒为其效命，以弱制强。
English: Therefore, he can make his subordinates work for him, and use weakness to control strength.

古文：破齐之后，遂欲穷兵极武，平突厥，定江南，一二年间，必使天下一统，此其志也。
现代文：打败北齐后，他又准备大动干戈，打败突厥，平定江南，在一二年的时间衷，一定要统一天下，造就是他的志向。
English: After defeating the Northern Qi, he was ready to make a big move, defeat the Turks, and pacify the South of the Yangtze River. In a year or two, he must unify the country, which is his ambition.

古文：史臣曰：自东西否隔，二国争强，戎马生郊，干戈日用，兵连祸结，力敌势均，疆埸之事，一彼一此。
现代文：史臣曰：自从东西阻隔后，周齐二国争斗，战马长期生长在郊外，兵器每天都要使用，战祸接连不断，双方势均力敌，边境战事，此起彼伏。
English: Shichen said: Since the separation of East and West, Zhou Qi and the two countries have been fighting, war horses have been growing in the suburbs for a long time, weapons have to be used every day, war disasters have continued, both sides are evenly matched, and border wars have occurred one after another.

古文：高祖缵业，未亲万机，虑远谋深，以蒙养正。
现代文：高祖继承帝业，没有亲理政事时，深谋远虑，蒙昧隐默自养正道。
English: Gao Zu inherited the imperial inheritance, and when he was not personally in charge of government affairs, he was far-sighted and prudent.

古文：及英威电发，朝政惟新，内难既除，外略方始。
现代文：等到他威武的气概像闪电一样发出后，朝廷的政治焕然一新，内忧既已解除，他就开始平定外患。
English: After his military prowess shone like lightning, the politics of the imperial court took on a new look. Once internal worries had been resolved, he began to quell external troubles.

古文：乃苦心焦思，克己励精，劳役为士卒之先，居处同匹夫之俭。
现代文：他苦心焦虑，约束自己勉励心志，辛勤劳作在士卒的前面，衣食居行和百姓一样俭朴。
English: He was painstakingly anxious, restrained himself to encourage his spirit, worked hard in front of the soldiers, and lived as frugally as the common people.

古文：修富民之政，务强兵之术，乘雠人之有衅，顺大道而推亡。
现代文：实施富民的政治，致力于强兵之术，利用敌人的可乘之机，顺应大道而将其灭亡。
English: Implement the policy of enriching the people, devote ourselves to strong-arm tactics, take advantage of the enemy's opportunities, follow the road and destroy it.

古文：五年之间，大勋斯集。
现代文：在五年的时间里，大功全部完成。
English: In five years' time, all the great work has been completed.

古文：摅祖宗之宿愤，拯东夏之阽危，盛矣哉，其有成功者也。
现代文：抒发祖宗的宿愿，拯救东夏的危亡，他所成就的功业，是多么盛大啊。
English: To express the ancestor's long-cherished wish, to save Dongxia from peril, what a grand achievement he has made.

古文：若使翌日之瘳无爽，经营之志获申，黩武穷兵，虽见讥于良史，雄图远略，足方驾于前王者欤。
现代文：如果使他后来身体痊愈，经营天下的志向得以伸展，穷兵黩武，虽然受到良史的非议，但他非凡的志向和谋略，是完全可以和先王相比拟的啊。
English: If he later recovers his health, his ambition to run the world can be expanded, and although he has been criticized by history, his extraordinary ambition and strategy can be completely compared to the former king.

