古文：刘钟崔二王刘幽求，冀州武强人。
现代文：刘幽求，冀州武强人。
English: Liu Yucu, Jizhou military strongman.

古文：圣历中，举制科中第。
现代文：圣历年间，参加科试得中。
English: During the lunar year, it was not possible to take part in the exams.

古文：调阆中尉，刺史不礼，弃官去。
现代文：任官阆中县尉，刺史对他不礼貌，他弃官而去。
English: He was appointed to the post of county lieutenant of Yunnan Province, but Zushi was rude to him, so he resigned and left.

古文：久之，授朝邑尉。
现代文：很久以后，委任他为朝邑县尉。
English: After a long time, he was appointed as the Asaichi County Lieutenant.

古文：桓彦范等诛张易之、昌宗，而不杀武三思，幽求谓彦范曰： 公等无葬地矣。不早计，后且噬脐。 不从。
现代文：桓彦范等人诛杀张易之、张昌宗，而不杀武三思，刘幽求对桓彦范说 ：公等将会死无葬身之地的，不早做打算，将来后悔都来不及的。 
English: Kuan Yan Fan and others killed Zhang Yizhi and Zhang Changzong, but did not think twice about killing Wu. Liu Yuxu said to Kuan Yan Fan, "Kong et al. will die without a burial place. If you do not make plans early, you will not regret it in the future."

古文：既，五王皆为三思构死。
现代文：桓彦范不以为然。
English: Kanehiko Fan was not impressed.

古文：临淄王入诛韦庶人，预参大策，是夜号令诏敕一出其手。
现代文：后来，桓彦范、张柬之、崔玄日韦、袁恕己、敬晖等五王都被武三思诬陷致死。临淄王入宫诛杀韦后的事，从参与计划到那晚的号令诏敕一百多道，全都出于刘幽求之手。
English: Later, five kings, including Kuan Yan Fan, Zhang Kham Zi, Cui Xuan Rong Wei, Yuan Shou Ji, and Jing Yi, were all framed to death by Wu San Si. The matter of Linyi Wang entering the palace to kill Wei Guo, from participation in the plan to that night's call to action, was all from the hand of Liu Yuzhu.

古文：以功授中书舍人，参知机务，爵中山县男，实封二百户，授二子五品官，二代俱赠刺史。
现代文：论功任刘幽求为中书舍人，参知国家政务。封爵中山县男，实封二百户，给两个儿子五品官，父、祖两代均追赠刺史。
English: On the merits, Liu Yucui was a scholar of Chinese literature and a leader in the political affairs of the country. The man from Zhongshan County was given a knighthood, two hundred households were sealed, five official ranks were given to his two sons, and his father and ancestor were both posthumously awarded the title of sashimi.

古文：睿宗立，进尚书右丞、徐国公，增封户至五百，赐物千段、奴婢二十人、第一区、良田千亩、金银杂物称是。
现代文：睿宗立，升任尚书右丞、徐国公，增加实封户到五百，赐物千段、奴婢二十人、住宅一区、良田千亩、金银杂物甚多。
English: Rui Zongli, promoted to Shang Shujing and Xu Guogong, increased the number of households to five hundred, a thousand gifts, twenty slaves, a residential area, a thousand mu of good fields, and a lot of gold and silver.

古文：景云二年，以户部尚书罢政事。
现代文：景云二年，以户部尚书身份罢知政事。
English: In the second year of the Jingyun era, he entered politics as the head of the household.

古文：不旬月，迁吏部，拜侍中。
现代文：不到一个月，转为吏部尚书，升任侍中。
English: Less than a month later, he was transferred to the cadre department and promoted to chamberlain.

古文：玺诏曰： 顷王室不造，中宗厌代，戚孽专乱，将陨社稷，朕与王公皆几于难。
现代文：皇帝下玺诏给他 ：日前王室不幸，中宗驾崩，外戚专权作乱，社稷几乎倾覆，我与王公们几乎蒙难。
English: The emperor issued an edict to him: "Recently, the royal family suffered misfortune, Chuzong passed away, the maternal relatives made a riot, the social order was almost overturned, and I and the princes were almost in trouble.

古文：幽求处危思奋，翊赞圣储，协和义士，震殄元恶。
现代文：幽求能处危不乱，奋力帮助太子，激励义士，诛灭元凶。
English: You can seek help in times of danger, strive to help the prince, encourage the righteous, and eliminate the culprit.

古文：国家之复存，系幽求是赖，厥庸茂焉，朕用嘉之。
现代文：我国家的复安，实有赖于幽求。幽求之功甚大，我衷心嘉许。
English: The restoration of our country's security really depends on your prayers. Your prayers have done great work, and I sincerely commend you for it.

古文：虽胙以土宇，而赋入未广。
现代文：现虽以封土报答之，但实际赋入并不多。
English: Now, although they are rewarded with fiefs, they are not actually given much.

古文：昔西汉行封，更择多户；东京定赏，复增大邑。
现代文：以前西汉封赏，都择多户之地；东京定赏，也增加大邑。
English: In the past, when the Western Han Dynasty awarded prizes, they all chose places with many households; when Tokyo awarded prizes, they also added large towns.

古文：宜加赐实封二百户，子子孙孙传国无绝，特免十死，铭诸铁券，以传其功。 
现代文：现宜加赐实封二百户，子子孙孙均可承袭不断；特免十死，铭刻于铁券，以传其功。 
English: It is now appropriate to add that 200 households will be given a real seal, so that their children and grandchildren can inherit continuously; ten deaths will be exempted, engraved on iron coupons, to pass on their merits.

古文：先天元年，为尚书右仆射、同中书门下三品，监修国史。
现代文：先天元年，任尚书右仆射、同中书门下三品，监修国史。
English: The day before yesterday, in the first year of the year, he was appointed as the right-hand man of Shang Shu, and the third grade of the same middle school, supervising the national history.

古文：幽求自谓有劳于国，在诸臣右，意望未满，而窦怀贞为左仆射，崔湜为中书令，殊不平，见於言面。
现代文：刘幽求自认为有功于国，虽已位于诸臣之上，但尚有不满足之意。当窦怀贞任左仆射，崔任中书令时，心中格外不平，常常形之于脸色及言语。
English: Liu Youkui considered himself to be a credit to the country, and although he was placed above all other ministers, he was still dissatisfied. When Dou Huai Zhen was appointed as Zuo Shuai and Cui as Zhong Shuling, he was particularly unhappy in his heart, which was often reflected in his face and words.

古文：已而湜等附太平公主，有逆计。
现代文：后来崔等人依附太平公主，图谋叛逆。
English: Later, Cui and others attached themselves to the Taiping Princess and plotted a rebellion.

古文：幽求与右羽林将军张定计，使说玄宗曰： 湜等皆太平党与，日夜阴计，若不早图，且产大害，太上不得高枕矣。
现代文：刘幽求与右羽林将军张日韦商量，让张日韦去劝说玄宗： 崔等人都是太平公主的党羽，正在日夜策划，假若不及早处理，将会发生大祸，太上皇不能高枕而卧了。
English: Liu Yucu consulted with Zhang Rihwei, the general of the Right Feather Forest, and asked Zhang Rihwei to persuade Xuanzong: Cui and the others are the party feathers of Princess Taiping, and they are plotting day and night. If they are not dealt with early, there will be a big disaster. The Emperor cannot sleep with his head held high.

古文：臣请督羽林兵除之。 
现代文：臣请求督促羽林兵除掉他们。 
English: The vassal requested to urge the Ulin soldiers to get rid of them.

古文：帝许之。
现代文：皇帝允许。
English: Emperor Daowu agreed.

古文：未发也，而漏言於侍御史邓光宾，帝惧，即列其状。
现代文：还没动手，张日韦将这计划泄露给侍御史邓光宾。皇帝害怕有不利，即刻让御史台揭发他们。
English: Before he could act, Zhang Ilwei leaked the plan to the imperial secretary Deng Guangbin. The emperor, fearing a disadvantage, immediately ordered the imperial secretary to expose them.

古文：睿宗以幽求等属吏，劾奏以疏间亲，罪应死。
现代文：睿宗以刘幽求等人策划用计离间皇室骨肉，罪该死。
English: Ruizong schemed with Liu Yucuo and others to split the royal family, a crime worthy of death.

古文：帝密申右之，乃流幽求於封州、於峰州、光宾於绣州。
现代文：玄宗秘密为他要求宽宥，于是刘幽求流放封州，张日韦流放峰州，邓光宾流放绣州。
English: Xuanzong secretly asked for his pardon, so Liu Yu was exiled to Fuzhou, Zhang Ribei was exiled to Fengzhou, and Deng Guangbin was exiled to Shuxiuzhou.

古文：明年，太平公主诛，即日召复旧官，知军国事，还封户，赐锦衣一袭。
现代文：第二年，太平公主被诛，当即召回他们，恢复旧职，执掌军国大事，发还封户，又赐锦衣一袭。
English: The following year, when Princess Taiping was arrested, she immediately recalled them, restored their former positions, took charge of military affairs, returned their fiefs, and gave them brocade clothes.

古文：开元初，进尚书左丞相，兼黄门监，俄以太子少保罢。
现代文：开元初年，刘幽求任尚书左丞相，兼黄门监，不久，任太子少保，罢去政职。
English: In the first year of the year of the founding of the People's Republic of China, Liu Yuqiu was appointed as the minister of the left of Shangshu and the inspector of the Yellow Gate, and soon after, he was appointed as the prince's junior bodyguard and left the government.

古文：姚崇素忌之，奏幽求郁怏散职，有怨言。
现代文：宰相姚崇一向妒嫉他，于是向皇帝奏言说刘幽求终日郁郁，怠慢职守，且时有怨言。
English: Prime Minister Yao Chong had always been jealous of him, so he reported to the emperor that Liu Yuzhu was depressed all day, neglected his duties, and sometimes complained.

古文：诏有司鞫治，宰相卢怀慎等奏言： 幽求轻肆不恭，失大臣礼，乖崖分之节。 
现代文：皇帝令有司审查，宰相卢怀慎等人上奏 ：刘幽求行为轻慢不恭，有失大臣之礼，有违职分之节。 
English: The emperor ordered a department to investigate, and the prime minister, Lu Huaixin, and others made a report: Liu Yucuo's behavior was insolent and disrespectful, he failed to show proper courtesy to the minister, and there was a breach of duty.

古文：翌日，贬睦州刺史，削实封户六百。
现代文：第二天，贬刘幽求为睦州刺史，削减实封户六百。
English: The next day, Liu Yucui was relegated to the annals of history in Mutsu Province, and the number of sealed households was reduced by 600.

古文：迁杭、郴二州，恚愤卒于道，年六十一。
现代文：后调杭州、郴州，幽求心中忧愤，死于途中，终年六十一岁。
English: Later moved to Hangzhou and Zhangzhou, pining for sorrow and anger in his heart, he died on the way, at the age of 61.

古文：赠礼部尚书，谥曰文献。
现代文：追赠礼部尚书，赐谥为 文献 。
English: After the gift, the Ministry of Ceremonies presented a book, and the imperial edict became a document.

古文：六年，诏与苏环配享睿宗庙廷。
现代文：开元六年，诏赐与苏耡一同配享睿宗庙廷。
English: In the sixth year of the Heian period, Emperor Taizong and Emperor Su Shi were assigned to the Ruizong Temple together.

古文：建中中，追赠司徒。
现代文：建中年间，追赠司徒。
English: During his junior high school years, he was posthumously awarded a scholarship.

古文：钟绍京，虔州赣人。
现代文：崔日用，是滑州灵昌人，参加科试考中进士，任芮城尉。
English: Cui Rinyi, a resident of Lingshang, Nanzhou, participated in the science examination and was promoted to the rank of lieutenant.

古文：建中中，追赠太子太傅。崔日用，滑州灵昌人。擢进士第，为芮城尉。大足元年，武后幸长安，陕州刺史宗楚客委以顿峙，馈献丰甘，称过宾使者。楚客叹其能，亟荐之，擢为新丰尉，迁监宗御史。
现代文：大足元年，武后临幸长安，路过陕州，陕州刺史宗楚客将供应膳食之事交给崔日用，崔日用供应极为丰厚，且说奉宗楚客之命，遍馈随从。宗楚客知道后大加赞赏，极力荐举他，得以提升为新丰尉，不久，又升为监察御史。
English: In the first year of the Taishu era, Emperor Wu was passing through Chang'an and Shaanxi, and the Shaanxi governor Zong Chu handed over the provision of meals to Cui Rinyi. Cui Rinyi provided an extremely rich supply, and said that he would follow the orders of Zong Chu. Zong Chu greatly appreciated and highly recommended him after he knew, and was promoted to Xinfengfei, and soon he was promoted to inspector general.

古文：阴附安乐公主，得稍迁。
现代文：暗中依附安乐公主，得到迁升。
English: Secretly clinging to Princess Anle, he was promoted.

古文：神龙中，郑普思纳女后宫，日用劾奏，中宗初不省，廷争切至，普思由是得罪。
现代文：神龙年间，秘书监郑普思将女儿送进后宫，崔日用揭发他送女的阴谋。中宗起初不相信，崔日用在廷上恳切争辩，郑普思终究被判罪。
English: During the reign of the divine dragon, the secretary supervisor Zheng Pu Si sent his daughter to the harem, and Cui Rong used to expose his plot to send his daughter. Zhong Zong did not believe at first, Cui Rong used to argue earnestly in court, and Zheng Pu Si was eventually convicted.

古文：时诸武若三思、延秀及楚客等权宠交煽，日用多所结纳，骤拜兵部侍郎。
现代文：当时武家人如武三思、武延秀及宗楚客互相勾结，权宠极盛，崔日用也对他们讨好巴结，很快就升任兵部侍郎。
English: At that time, samurai families such as Wu Sansi, Wu Yanxiu and Zong Chu were colluding with each other, and power was extremely popular. Cui Rinyi also pandered to them, and was soon promoted to the position of Hyobu waiter.

古文：宴内殿，酒酣，起为《回波舞》，求学士，即诏兼脩文馆学士。
现代文：一次在内殿参与宴饮，饮到兴浓时，崔日用起身跳《回波舞》佐酒。舞后向皇帝求任学士职，当即得诏书兼修文馆学士。
English: Once, while attending a banquet in the inner hall and drinking until she was drunk, Cui Riji got up and danced the "Echo Dance" with sake. After the dance, she asked the emperor for a bachelor's degree, and immediately received an imperial edict and a bachelor's degree.

古文：帝崩，韦后专制，畏祸及，更因僧普润、道士王晔私谒临淄王以自托，且密赞大计。
现代文：皇帝驾崩，韦后专政。崔日用害怕祸患会牵连到自己头上，就借僧人普润、道士王晔的引见，私下去谒见临淄王投靠，且参与商议大事。
English: After the emperor's death and the dictatorship of Empress Dowager Wei, Cui Rih, fearing that the calamity would be traced back to himself, borrowed the introduction of the monk Purun and the Taoist Wang Yao, and went to see King Linyi in private, and participated in the discussion of important matters.

古文：王曰： 谋非计身，直纾亲难尔。 
现代文：临淄王说 ：如今打算举大事，不是为我自己，而是为了解除我亲人的灾祸。 
English: The king of Linyi said, "Now I am planning to do something big, not for myself, but to get rid of the disaster of my relatives."

古文：日用曰： 至孝动天，举无不克。
现代文：崔日用说 ：此举您的孝心感动天地，一定能成功。
English: Cui Rinyi said, "This act of your filial piety has moved heaven and earth, and it will surely succeed."

古文：然利先发，不则有后忧。 
现代文：望能出其不意，先发制人，否则，可能生变。 
English: Hope can surprise, pre-empt, otherwise, it may change.

古文：及韦氏平，夜诏权雍州长史，以功授黄门侍郎，参知机务，封齐国公，赐实户二百。
现代文：及至讨平了韦氏，当天晚上就使崔日用暂时主持雍州长史的事。后来论功授官银青光禄大夫、黄门侍郎，参与研究军国大事，封爵齐国公，赐实封户二百。
English: On the evening of the same day, he made Cui Rinyi temporarily preside over the history of the governor of Yong. Later, he was awarded the title of silver Qingguanglu doctor, Huangmen waiter, participated in the study of military affairs, was knighted as Qi Guogong, and was given 200 households.

古文：坐与薛稷相忿竞，罢政事，为婺州长史。
现代文：后来，与中书侍郎薛稷相互争吵，停止他参政，出任婺州长史。
English: Later, he quarreled with the secretary of the Central Committee, Xue Qi, stopped him from participating in politics, and became the governor of Shandong Province.

古文：历扬、汴、允三州刺史。
现代文：后来，历任扬州、汴州、兖州刺史。
English: Later, the successors of Yangzhou, Zhangzhou and Zhangzhou made history.

古文：由荆州长史入奏计，因言： 太平公主逆节有萌，陛下往以宫府讨有罪，臣、子势须谋与力，今据大位，一下制书定矣。 
现代文：又任荆州长史，入奏献计： 太平公主阴谋叛逆，已露出迹象。陛下以往在东宫府时，想要声讨有罪，还是身为子、为臣，需要与有力者合计。现在已经据有大位，只要下一道制书，就能定大事了。 
English: He was also appointed as the governor of Jing Province, and there are already signs of rebellion. In the past, when His Majesty was in the East Palace, if he wanted to denounce the guilty, he still needed to work with the powerful as a son and a vassal. Now that he has a high position, as long as the next book is made, he will be able to determine the matter.

古文：帝曰： 畏惊太上皇，奈何？ 
现代文：皇帝说： 事实虽然如此，但怕惊动太上皇，怎么办？ 
English: The emperor said, "Although this is the case, what should we do if we are afraid of alarming the emperor?"

古文：日用曰： 庶人之孝，承顺颜色；天子之孝，惟安国家，定社稷。
现代文：崔日用说： 臣听说天子之孝与百姓之孝是不同的。百姓的孝，只要恭顺地听命父母；天子之孝，那就在于安定国家，发展社稷。
English: Cui Rinyi said: "Ministers have heard that the filial piety of the heavenly son is different from the filial piety of the people. The filial piety of the people is as long as they obediently obey the orders of their parents; the filial piety of the heavenly son is to stabilize the country and develop the society."

古文：若令奸宄窃发，以亡大业，可为孝乎？
现代文：假若听任奸邪之人发难而使大业亡弃，还能实行天子之孝吗？
English: If we were to allow the evil-doers to cause trouble and cause our great cause to fail, would we still be able to practice filial piety to the Son of Heaven?

古文：请先安北军而后捕逆党，於太上皇固无所惊。 
现代文：恳请先安定北军，然后收捕逆党。这样就不会惊动太上皇。 
English: I implore you to first stabilize the Northern Army, and then arrest the rebels. In this way, you will not alarm the Emperor.

古文：帝纳之。
现代文：皇帝听从了他的建议。
English: The emperor took him at his word.

古文：及讨逆，诏权检校雍州长史，以功益封二百户，进吏部尚书。
现代文：到讨伐逆贼时，诏令崔日用暂任检校雍州长史。后因功加封二百户，升任吏部尚书。
English: When it came to suppressing the traitors, he ordered Cui Rijie to use the temporary position of inspecting the school of Yong Guo Shi. Later, he was awarded two hundred households for his efforts and was promoted to the position of librarian.

古文：会帝诞日，日用采《诗》《大》、《小雅》二十篇及司马相如《封禅书》献之，借以讽谕，且劝告成事。
现代文：皇帝过生日，崔日用选择《毛诗·大雅·小雅》二十篇，及司马相如的《封禅书》献给皇帝，借这些诗文表达自己劝告之心。
English: On the emperor's birthday, Cui Rih chose twenty pieces of "Mao Shi, Daya, Xiao Ya" and "Fu Zen Book," which is similar to Sima, and dedicated them to the emperor, using these poems to express his heart of advice.

古文：有诏赐衣一副、物五十段，以示无言不酬之义。
现代文：皇帝下诏书并赐衣裳一副，物五十段，以表示答谢。
English: The emperor issued an imperial edict and gave him a pair of clothes and fifty articles of clothing as a token of his gratitude.

古文：久之，坐兄累，出为常州刺史。
现代文：后来，因哥哥犯罪而受连累，出任常州刺史。
English: Later, he was implicated in his brother's crime, and served as the Changzhou chief historian.

古文：后以例减封户三百，徙汝州。
现代文：按例减削实封三百户，转任汝州刺史。
English: As usual, he reduced the number of sealed envelopes to 300 and was transferred to the post of Ruzhou chief historian.

古文：开元七年，诏曰： 唐元之际，日用实赞大谋，功多不宜减封，复食二百户。 
现代文：开元七年，有诏令： 唐复国之时，崔日用参与了大事，功劳很大，不宜减封。恢复原实封二百户。 
English: In the seventh year of the first century, there was a decree: When Tang was restored to China, Cui Rinyi participated in major events, and his contribution was great. It was not appropriate to reduce the seal. Two hundred households were restored to the original seal.

古文：徙并州长史，卒年五十。
现代文：调任并州长史。不久死去，终年五十岁。
English: He was transferred to the governor's office and died soon after, at the age of fifty.

古文：并人怀其惠，吏民数百皆缟服送丧。
现代文：并州人怀念他的恩惠，官吏百姓几百人都穿素服送丧。
English: And the people of the prefecture remembered his kindness. Hundreds of officials and citizens wore plain clothes to the funeral.

古文：赠吏部尚书，谥曰昭。
现代文：追赠吏部尚书，赐谥为 昭 。
English: He bestowed posthumous awards on officials, and bestowed posthumous awards on scholars.

古文：再赠荆州大都督。
现代文：再次追赠荆州大都督。
English: He was once again posthumously awarded the title of Grand Governor of Jingzhou.

古文：日用才辩绝人，而敏于事，能乘机反祸取富贵。
现代文：崔日用思维敏捷，口才超群。对于政事极为敏感，能把握时机，避祸取富贵。
English: Cui Rih is quick-thinking and eloquent. She is extremely sensitive to political affairs, able to grasp opportunities, avoid misfortune and get rich.

古文：先天后，求复相，然亦不获也。
现代文：先天年后，又要求入朝为相，但未能成功。
English: A year and a half later, he again asked to be admitted to the imperial court, but was unsuccessful.

古文：日知俄授太常卿。自以处朝廷久，每入谒，必与尚书齿，时谓 尚书里行 。
现代文：他曾对别人说： 我一生行事，都根据形势随时变动，不一定守住最初的想法。不过每次反思，都像芒刺在背一样地不安。 儿子崔宗子，承袭封爵，也好学，为人宽厚严谨，有风致。
English: He once said to others: I have been acting all my life, changing at any time according to the situation, not necessarily keeping the original idea. However, every time I reflect, I am as uneasy as a thorn in the back. His son Cui Zongzi, heir to the knighthood, is also eager to learn, is generous and rigorous, and has style.

古文：终潞州长史，谥曰襄。王琚，怀州河内人。
现代文：与李白、杜甫等人以文章交友。王琚，怀州河内人。
English: He made friends with Li Bai, Du Fu and others through articles. Wang Xi, a native of Ha Noi, Waizhou.

古文：少孤，敏悟有才略，明天文象纬。
现代文：小时就没了父亲，聪明有才略，精通天文。
English: He lost his father in an hour. He was clever and talented, and was well versed in astronomy.

古文：以从父隐客尝为凤阁侍郎，故数与贵近交。
现代文：因为伯父王隐客曾经任风阁侍郎，所以多次与豪贵及近臣交往。
English: Because his uncle, Wang Yingke, had once served as an attendant of the Fengge, he had many dealings with nobles and courtiers.

古文：时年甫冠，见驸马都尉王同皎，同皎器之。
现代文：二十岁时，去见驸马都尉王同皎，王同皎很器重他。
English: When he was twenty years old, he went to see the horse captain Wang Tongyao. Wang Tongyao respected him very much.

古文：会谋刺武三思，琚义其为，即与周璟、张仲之等共计。
现代文：那时正谋划诛杀武三思，王琚认为他们的行动是义举，就与周瞡、张仲之等人共同商讨计策。
English: At that time, they were thinking about how to kill Wu, but Wang Yao thought that their action was a good deed, so he discussed the strategy with Zhou Qi, Zhang Zhongzhi and others.

古文：事泄亡命，自佣於扬州富商家，识非庸人，以女嫁之，厚给以赀，琚亦赖以济。
现代文：事情败露后逃走，到扬州一个富商家当佣人，主人看出他不是庸俗之辈，就把女儿嫁给他，并给他很多资金，王琚靠此生活。
English: After the affair was exposed, he ran away to work as a servant for a wealthy merchant in Yangzhou. When the master saw that he was not a vulgar person, he married his daughter to him and gave him a lot of money. Wang Yao lived on this.

古文：睿宗立，琚自言本末，主人厚赍使还长安。
现代文：睿宗立，王琚向主人谈了自己的经历，主人给他很多财物，让他回长安。
English: Ruizong Li, Wang Yao talked to his master about his experience, the master gave him a lot of wealth, let him return to Chang'an.

古文：玄宗为太子，间游猎韦、杜间，怠休树下，琚以儒服见，且请过家，太子许之。
现代文：那时，临淄王身为太子，一天闲游狩猎在韦、杜之间，王琚身穿儒生的衣服来见太子，且请太子到他家里去。太子同意了。
English: At that time, Linyi Wang, as the prince, spent a day hunting between Wei and Du. Wang Yao, dressed in Confucian clothes, came to see the prince and invited the prince to his home. The prince agreed.

古文：至所庐，乃萧然窭陋。坐久，杀牛进酒殊丰厚，太子骇异。
现代文：到了住所，原来是个非常简陋穷困的房子，坐了很久后，居然杀牛进酒，酒菜十分丰盛，使太子非常惊讶。
English: When he arrived at the residence, it turned out to be a very simple and poor house. After sitting for a long time, he actually killed a cow and drank wine. The wine and vegetables were very rich, which surprised the prince.

古文：自是每到韦、杜，辄止其庐。
现代文：从此，太子每到韦、杜，一定到王琚家去。
English: From then on, whenever the prince came to Wei and Du, he would definitely go to Wang Xuan's house.

古文：初，太子在潞州，襄城张为铜鞮令，性豪殖，喜宾客弋猎事，厚奉太子，数集其家。
现代文：以前，太子在潞州，襄城的张日韦其时任铜令，他生性豪爽耿直，喜欢宾客满堂，喜欢郊游打猎，对太子极好，太子多次到他家去。
English: In the past, Prince Zhang in Zhangzhou, Xiangcheng, Zhang Rongwei, who was then a copper, he was born with a strong character, liked to have a full house of guests, liked to go hunting, and was very good to the prince. The prince went to his home many times.

古文：山东倡人赵元礼有女，善歌舞，得幸太子，止第，其后生子瑛者也。
现代文：山东一个戏子赵元礼有个女儿擅长歌舞，得到太子的宠幸，就留在张日韦家里。
English: Zhao Yuanli, an actor in Shandong Province, had a daughter who was good at singing and dancing. She was favored by the prince and stayed at Zhang Rongwei's home.

古文：太子已平内难，召，拜宫门郎，与姜皎、崔涤、李令问、王守一、薛伯阳等并侍左右。
现代文：那个赵氏女，就是生李瑛的那个女人。太子平定内难之后，招张日韦入京，让他任宫门郎，与姜蛟、崔涤、李令问、王守一、薛伯阳等人一同在太子左右侍候。
English: That Zhao's daughter is the woman who gave birth to Li Ying. After the crown prince calmed down the internal difficulties, he invited Zhang Ribei to enter Beijing and appointed him as the gatekeeper of the palace. Together with Jiang Qi, Cui Yao, Li Lingyao, Wang Shouyi, Xue Boyang and others, they waited around the prince.

古文：令问累擢殿中少监，守一太仆少卿。
现代文：李令问多次升官，直至殿中少监，王守一后来也升任太仆少卿。
English: Li Lingta was promoted many times, until he became the junior inspector of the palace, and Wang Shouyi was later promoted to the position of the servant of the young lord.

古文：此数人以东宫皆势重天下。
现代文：这几个人都因为与太子李隆基的关系好而后来权势极盛。
English: All of these people became extremely powerful because of their good relationship with Prince Li Longji.

古文：琚是时方补诸暨县主簿，过谢东宫，至廷中，徐行高视，侍卫何止曰： 太子在！ 
现代文：王琚这时刚刚任诸暨县的主簿，来长安东宫见太子，到了东宫廷中，他大摇大摆，傲视一切，旁若无人。侍卫拦住他，呵叱道： 放肆，太子在此！ 
English: At that time, Wang Yao, who had just been appointed as the chief registrar of Zhuji County, came to the East Palace of Chang'an to see the crown prince. When he arrived at the East Palace, he swaggered, looked down on everything, as if there was no one around. The guards stopped him and scolded him: Don't be presumptuous, the prince is here!

古文：琚怒曰： 在外惟闻太平公主，不闻有太子。
现代文：王琚也故意怒气冲冲地说： 什么太子，我们在外面只听说有太平公主，从没听说过有什么太子。
English: Wang Yao also deliberately said angrily: What prince, we only heard about Princess Taiping outside, and have never heard of any prince.

古文：太子本有功於社稷，孝於君亲，安得此声？ 
现代文：王琚说： 韦氏亲手杀害中宗皇帝，天下都动荡不安。
English: Wang Yao said: The Wei clan killed Emperor Zhongzong with their own hands, and the whole world is in turmoil.

古文：太子遽召见，琚曰： 韦氏躬行弑逆，天下动摇，人思李氏，故殿下取之易也。今天下已定，太平专思立功，左右大臣多为其用，天子以元妹，能忍其过，臣窃为殿下寒心。 
现代文：人民思念李家王朝，所以殿下要取回天下是十分容易的。现在天下已安定了，然而太平公主专想建立功业，天子左右的大臣大多数都听她指挥，天子因她是自己的妹妹，所以一直容忍她。若长此以往，臣私下为殿下的将来担心。 
English: The people miss the Lee dynasty, so it is very easy for His Imperial Highness to take back the country. Now the country is stable, but Princess Taiping is intent on building a career. Most of the ministers around the emperor listen to her command. The emperor has been tolerating her because she is his sister. If this continues, I am privately worried about the future of His Imperial Highness.

古文：太子命坐，且泣曰： 计将安便？ 
现代文：王琚的话触动太子的心事，于是命他坐下，流着泪说 ：怎么办才好呢？ 
English: Wang Yao's words touched the prince's heart, so he ordered him to sit down and said with tears: What should I do?

古文：琚曰： 昔汉盖主供养昭帝，其后与上官桀谋杀霍光，不及天子，而帝犹以大义去之。
现代文：王琚说 ：以前西汉时，盖长公主贵为昭帝的姐姐，一直照料昭帝，后来与上官桀一同谋杀霍光，扰乱社稷。昭帝立足大义，也下令除去。
English: Wang Yao said: In the Western Han Dynasty, Princess Gaichang Gui was the sister of Emperor Zhao, and she had been taking care of Emperor Zhao. Later, together with Shangguan Yao, she murdered Huo Guang and disturbed the social order. Emperor Zhao, who stood on the side of justice, also ordered the removal.

古文：今太子功定天下，公主乃敢妄图，大臣树党，有废立意。
现代文：如今太子有定天下之功，公主竟敢有异谋，在大臣中树立党羽，有废除天子自立之意。
English: Nowadays, the prince has the power to determine the fate of the world, and the princess dares to conspire, establish a faction among the ministers, and has the intention to abolish the independence of the prince.

古文：太子诚召张说、刘幽求、郭元振等计之，忧可纾也。 
现代文：太子召请张说、刘幽求、郭元振等人商议，一定能找到解忧的办法的。 
English: The crown prince called Zhang, Liu Yucu, Guo Yuanzhen and others to discuss, and they will surely find a way to solve the problem.

古文：太子曰： 先生何以自隐而日与寡人游？ 
现代文：太子说 ：先生为什么隐居在野而又与我交游呢？ 
English: The prince said: "Why does my master live in seclusion and yet travel with me?

古文：琚曰： 臣善丹沙，且工谐隐，愿比优人。 
现代文：王琚说： 臣善炼丹沙，且擅长诙谐，愿意做一个喜剧演员。 
English: Wang Yao said: He is good at dancing, and good at wit, and is willing to be a comedian.

古文：太子喜，恨相知晚。
现代文：太子很高兴，与王琚有相见恨晚之感。
English: The crown prince was very happy and felt a sense of longing to meet Wang Yao.

古文：翌日授詹事府司直、内供奉，兼崇文学士。
现代文：第二天，任王琚为詹事府司直、内供奉，兼崇文学士。
English: The next day, Wang Qi was appointed as the secretary of Zhanjifu, and he was also awarded the title of scholar of literature.

古文：日以诸王及姜皎等入侍，独琚常豫秘谋。
现代文：以后，每日与诸王及姜皎等人入侍太子，只有王琚常参与密谋。
English: After that, he served the crown prince every day with other kings and Jiang Chen. Only Wang Chen often took part in conspiracies.

古文：不逾月，迁太子舍人，兼谏议大夫。
现代文：不到一个月，升任太子舍人，兼谏议大夫。
English: Less than a month later, he was promoted to the post of Prince's Privy Counsellor, and concurrently to the post of Chief Advisor.

古文：太子受内禅，擢中书侍郎。
现代文：到太子接受睿宗的内禅后，升王琚为中书侍郎。
English: After the crown prince accepted the inner meditation of Ruizong, Shengwangye became the attendant of the middle school.

古文：公主谋益甚，幽求、谋先事诛之，侍御史邓光宾漏谋，不克，皆得罪。
现代文：太平公主的阴谋越来越明白紧迫了。刘幽求、张日韦打算先下手诛杀太平公主，侍御史邓光宾泄露了机密，事情未能成功，两人都被判有罪。
English: The plot of Princess Taiping became more and more clear and urgent. Liu Yucu and Zhang Rongwei planned to kill Princess Taiping first, and the chamberlain Deng Guangbin leaked the secret. The matter did not succeed, and both were found guilty.

古文：久之，琚见事迫，请帝决策。
现代文：后来，王琚见事情急迫，就请皇帝最后下决断。
English: Later, when Wang Xi saw the urgency of the situation, he asked the emperor to make the final decision.

古文：先天二年七月，乃与岐王、薛王、姜皎、李令问、王毛仲、王守一以铁骑至承天门。
现代文：先天二年七月，玄宗与岐王李范、薛王李业，还有姜皎、李令问、王毛仲、王守一带领骑兵来到承天门。
English: In July of the year before yesterday, Xuanzong, together with Qi Wang Li Fan, Xue Wang Liye, as well as Jiang Yu, Li Lingtao, Wang Maozhong, and Wang Shouyi, led the cavalry to the Gate of Heaven.

古文：太上皇闻外哗噪，召郭元振升承天楼，闭关以拒，俄而侍御史任知古召募数百人於朝堂，不得入。
现代文：太上皇听见外面喧哗声，召来郭元振，登上承天门楼，关闭城门。不一会儿，侍御史任知古召募了几百人到朝堂，但不得入内。
English: Hearing the noise outside, the emperor summoned Guo Yuan Zhen, climbed onto the Cheng Tian Gate Tower, and closed the city gate. Soon, the attendant Shi Ren Zhi Gu summoned several hundred people to the court, but they were not allowed to enter.

古文：少选，琚从帝至楼下，诛萧至忠、岑义、窦怀贞，斩常元楷李慈北阙下、贾膺福李猷於内客省。
现代文：又过了一会儿，王琚跟随皇帝来到楼下，诛杀了萧至忠、岑羲、窦怀贞，又在北阙下斩杀了常元楷、李慈，在内客省斩杀了贾膺福、李猷。
English: After a while, Wang Yao followed the emperor downstairs and killed Xiao Zhizhong, Zou and Dou Huai Zhen. He also killed Changyuan Kai and Li Ci in Beibei Province, and Jia Yufu and Li Yao in Neige Province.

古文：事平，琚进户部尚书、封赵国公，皎工部尚书、楚国公，毛仲辅国大将军、霍国公，守一太常卿、晋国公，各食实户五百；令问殿中监、宋国公，实户三百。
现代文：事情很快就结束了，升王琚为户部尚书，封爵赵国公；升姜皎为工部尚书，封爵楚国公；升王毛仲为辅国大将军，封爵霍国公；升王守一为太常卿，封爵晋国公；以上各人赐实封户五百；升李令问为殿中监，封爵宋国公，赐实封户三百。
English: The matter was soon over. Wang Shao was promoted to Household Secretary and given the title of Zhao Guogong; Jiang Shao was promoted to Ministry of Industry and given the title of Chu Guogong; Wang Maozhong was promoted to Vice-Major General and given the title of Hu Guogong; Wang Shouyi was promoted to Tai Changqing and given the title of Jin Guogong; the above-mentioned people were each given five hundred households; Li Lingtao was promoted to palace middle superintendent and given the title of Song Guogong and was given three hundred households.

古文：琚、皎、令问辞不就，以旧官增户二百。
现代文：王琚、姜蛟、李令问均辞谢不受，于是就以原官职增加实封二百户。
English: Wang Qian, Jiang Qian and Li Lingqian all refused to accept the resignation, so they increased the number of official posts by two hundred.

古文：於是帝召燕内殿，赐金银杂皿皆一床、帛二千、第一区。
现代文：皇帝在内殿召众人宴饮，赐每人金银各色器皿一床，帛两千段，住宅一区。
English: The emperor invited everyone to a banquet in the inner hall, and gave each person a bed of gold and silver utensils of all colors, two thousand baht, and a residential area.

古文：帝於琚眷委特异，豫大政事，时号 内宰相 。
现代文：皇帝对于王琚特别信任，每有大事，都召他来商议，时人称王琚为 内宰相 。
English: The emperor had special trust in Wang Qian and summoned him to discuss every major event. At that time, Wang Qian was known as the Minister of the Interior.

古文：每见閤中，视日薄乃得出。
现代文：每次与皇帝在阁中相见，不到太阳落山是不会出来的。
English: Every time he met the emperor in the pavilion, he would not come out until the sun had set.

古文：遇休日，使者至第召之，而皇后亦使尚宫劳琚母，赐赉接足，群臣不能无望。
现代文：遇到休假日，也往往派使者到王琚家里去把他召来。皇后也常派尚宫去慰问王琚的母亲，赏赐礼遇，群臣不能不产生看法。
English: On holidays, he often sent an envoy to Wang Yao's home to summon him. The queen also often sent Shang Gong to console Wang Yao's mother and reward her with courtesies. The courtiers couldn't help but have an opinion.

古文：或说帝曰： 王琚、麻嗣宗皆谲诡纵横，可与履危，不可与共安。
现代文：有人对皇帝说 ：王琚、麻嗣宗等一些人眼光锐利、能言善辩，可以与他们共患难，但不能和他们谋安定。
English: Someone said to the emperor: Wang Qian, Ma Shizong and other people have sharp eyesight and can speak eloquently. You can share the hardships with them, but you cannot seek stability with them.

古文：方天下已定，宜益求纯朴经术士以自辅。 
现代文：现在天下已经太平，应该另求纯朴忠诚的经学士来辅助治国。 
English: Now that the world is at peace, we should look for another pure and loyal scholar to assist in governing the country.

古文：帝悟，稍疏之。
现代文：皇帝听后，有所觉悟，渐渐地疏远王琚了。
English: After listening to the emperor, he realized something and gradually distanced himself from Wang Yao.

古文：俄拜御史大夫，持节巡天兵以北诸军。
现代文：不久，任王琚为御史大夫，持符节去巡视天兵以北的各军。
English: Soon after, Wang Xuan was appointed as the imperial historian, and he went to inspect the armies north of Tianhe with the festival of symbols.

古文：改紫微侍郎，道未至，拜泽州刺史，削封户百。
现代文：后来改任紫微侍郎。回京途中，得到任他为泽州刺史的命令，削减实封一百户。
English: On his way back to Kyoto, he received an order to reduce the number of households to one hundred.

古文：历九刺史，复封户。
现代文：以后，王琚历任九刺史，恢复实封户。
English: After that, Wang Qi held nine posts in succession, and resumed the practice of sealing households.

古文：又改六州、二郡。
现代文：后又改为六州、二郡。
English: Later it was changed to six prefectures and two counties.

古文：琚自以立勋，至天宝时为旧臣，性豪侈，其处方面，去故就新，受馈遗至数百万，侍儿数十，宝帐备具，阖门三百口。
现代文：王琚自认为自己有大功勋，到天宝时已是旧臣，追求奢侈豪华，好去旧换新，接受馈赠多达几百万。家中侍儿都有几十人，珍宝帐幔，样样具备，全家上下有三百来口人。
English: Wang Yao considered himself to have great merits. By the time he arrived at Tianbao, he was already an old minister. He pursued luxury and luxury in order to replace the old with the new, accepting gifts of up to several million. There are dozens of attendants in the family, precious curtains, and everything is ready. The whole family has three hundred guests.

古文：既失志，稍自放，不能遵法度。
现代文：被疏远以后，渐渐自律放松，不能严遵法度。
English: After being alienated, they gradually relax their self-discipline and are unable to strictly abide by the law.

古文：在州与官属小史酋豪饮谑、摴博、藏钩为乐。
现代文：在州里与官府下属小吏酋纵酒玩乐，或投骰，或藏钩。
English: In the prefecture, they drink and have fun with the petty officials under the government, and throw or hide hooks.

古文：每徙官，车马数里不绝。
现代文：每次调官，车马连绵几里路不断。
English: Every time there is a change of guard, the horses and carriages continue for several miles.

古文：从宾客女伎驰弋，凡四十年。
现代文：四十年来，常与宾客女伎驰马射箭取乐。
English: For the past forty years, he has often enjoyed archery with female guests on horseback.

古文：李邕故与琚善，皆华首外迁，书疏往复，以谴谪留落为慊。
现代文：李邕以前与王琚很要好，都是老了外调。两人书信来往，都以被谴谪流落他乡为憾事。
English: Li Yao used to be very friendly with Wang Yao, but both of them were transferred abroad when they got old. Both of them wrote letters to each other, regretting that they had been banished to other villages.

古文：右相李林甫恨琚恃功使气，欲除之，使人劾发琚宿赃，削封阶，贬江华员外司马。
现代文：右相李林甫恨王琚恃功使性子，想除掉他。就派人揭发王琚以前受赃的事，结果削减了王琚的封阶，贬为江华员外司马。
English: The Right Minister Li Linfu hated Wang Qigong and wanted to get rid of him. He sent someone to expose Wang Qigong's previous arrest. As a result, Wang Qigong's rank was reduced and he was demoted to the rank of Jianghua member.

古文：又使罗希奭深按其罪，琚惧，仰药，未及死，希奭缢之。
现代文：李林甫又派法曹罗希穷追其罪。王琚害怕了，自服毒药，没有死，罗希将他缢死。
English: Li Linfu also sent the legal officer Luo Xi to pursue his crime. Wang Yao was scared and took poison. He did not die, but Luo Xi strangled him to death.

古文：时人哀其无罪。
现代文：当时人都为他无罪而被诛感到难过。
English: At the time, everyone felt sorry for him because he was found not guilty.

古文：始，琚为中书侍郎，母居洛阳，来京师，让琚曰： 尔家上世皆州县职，今汝无攻城野战劳，以诌佞取容，海内切齿，吾恐汝家坟墓无人复扫除也。 
现代文：当初，王琚任中书侍郎，他的母亲住在洛阳，王琚将她接来京师。他的母亲曾责备他 ：你家的上辈子都只任州县的小官，如今你并没有战场上攻城杀敌的功劳，只靠谄媚讨好当权，会遭海内人的怨恨的。我担心你王家的坟墓以后没人再来祭扫的了。 
English: At the beginning, Wang Xuan was the secretary of the Central Government. His mother lived in Luoyang, and Wang Xuan brought her to Beijing. His mother once scolded him: "In your family's previous life, you were only a minor official of a prefecture. Today, you do not have the merit of attacking and killing the enemy on the battlefield. You can only please the authorities by being charming. You will be resented by the inland people. I am afraid that no one will come to sweep the graves of your royal family.

古文：琚卒不免。
现代文：王琚终于被母亲说中了。
English: Wang Yao was finally chosen by his mother.

古文：宝应元年，赠太子少保。
现代文：宝应元年，追赠太子少保。
English: In the first year of the Heian period, he was posthumously awarded the title of Crown Prince and Junior Protector.

古文：太平之诛，张召还为大理卿，封邓国公，实封户三百，进京兆尹，入侍宴乐，出主京邑，时人以为宠，然自以干治称。
现代文：太平公主诛杀后，张日韦召回来任大理卿，封为邓国公，实封二百户，后晋升为京兆尹，入宫侍奉宴乐，出宫主持京邑之事。时人以为他很得宠幸，不过他自己却要以办事干练自律。
English: After the murder of Princess Taiping, Zhang Rongwei was summoned back to serve as the Grand Duke of Dali, was given the title of the Prince of Deng Guo, and was given the title of the Prince of 200 households. Later, he was promoted to the title of the Prince of Jing Zhaoyun. When he entered the palace, he served the banquet music, and when he left the palace, he presided over the affairs of the capital. At that time, people thought that he was very lucky, but he had to be able to work hard and be self-disciplined.

古文：累迁太子詹事，判尚书左右丞，再为羽林大将军，三至左金吾大将军，以年高加特进。
现代文：逐步升迁至太子詹事，判尚书左右丞，再为羽林大将军，第三次又任左金吾大将军，又因年高加封特进。
English: He was gradually promoted to Prince Zhan Zhi, was awarded the title of Shang Shu Zuo Rong Rong, and then became General Ulin. For the third time, he was appointed General Zuo Kingu, and because of his age, he was given a special promotion.

古文：子履冰、季良，弟晤，仕皆清近。
现代文：他的儿子张履冰、张季良，他的弟弟张晤等人都任清贵之官。
English: His sons, Zhang Rubei, Zhang Jiliang, and his brother, Zhang Ximing, all served as officials of the Qing Dynasty.

古文：尝还乡上冢，帝赐诗及锦袍缯彩。乘驿就道，子弟车马联咽。
现代文：张日韦曾回乡筑墓，皇帝赐诗及锦袍缯彩，乘驿马上路，子弟的车马相连。
English: Zhang Rongwei once returned to his hometown to build a tomb. The emperor gave him a poem and a brocade robe, and he rode on a horse-drawn carriage. His son's chariot and horse were connected.

古文：使者赐赉，敕州县供拟，居处尊显。
现代文：一路上使者有赏赐，敕令州县供应所需，居处要尊显。
English: Envoys will be rewarded along the way, and their residences should be conspicuous.

古文：天宝五载卒，年九十，赠开府仪同三司。
现代文：天宝五年死，终年九十岁。追赠开府仪同三司。
English: Tianbao died five years later, at the age of ninety. He was posthumously awarded the Kaifu ceremony and the three offices.

古文：履冰，历金吾将军，季良，殿中监，俱列棨戟。
现代文：张履冰，历任金吾将军，张季良任殿中监，都有蓕戟为出入前列。
English: Zhang Lubei, the successive generals of Kingo, and Zhang Qiliang, who was appointed as the superintendent of the palace, were the first to enter and leave.

古文：王毛仲，高丽人。
现代文：王毛仲，高丽人。
English: Wang Maozhong, a Korean.

古文：父坐事，没为官奴，生毛仲，故长事临淄王。
现代文：父亲因犯事被收为官奴，生了毛仲，所以毛仲长久以来就侍奉临淄王。
English: Because of his father's crime, he was taken in as an official slave and gave birth to Maozhong, so Maozhong has been serving the Linyi King for a long time.

古文：王出潞州，有李守德者，为人奴，善骑射，王市得之，并侍左右，而毛仲为明悟。
现代文：临淄王去潞州时，有一个叫李守德的奴隶，擅长骑马射箭，临淄王把李守德买过来，让他与王毛仲一同在左右侍候。
English: When the king of Linyi went to Zhangzhou, there was a slave named Li Shoude, who was good at riding horses and archery. The king of Linyi bought Li Shoude and had him wait on the left and right with Wang Maozhong.

古文：景龙中，王还长安，二人常负房以从。
现代文：王毛仲比李守德更聪明伶俐些。景龙年间，临淄王回到长安，王、李二人常背着弓箭跟随在临淄王左右。
English: Wang Maozhong was wiser and cleverer than Li Shoude. During the reign of King Jinglong, King Linyi returned to Chang'an. Wang and Li often followed King Linyi around with bows and arrows on their backs.

古文：王数引万骑帅长及豪俊，赐饮食金帛，得其欢心。
现代文：临淄王多次邀集万骑的将帅们及一些豪杰俊士一道饮酒，并送他们财物，以此结纳他们。
English: The King of Linyi repeatedly invited the generals and some heroic young men to drink together, and gave them money to reward them.

古文：毛仲晓旨，亦布诚结纳，王嘉之。
现代文：王毛仲领会临淄王的心思，也诚恳地与他们结交。临淄王很赏识他的机灵。
English: Wang Maozhong understood the thoughts of Linyi Wang and sincerely made friends with them. Linyi Wang appreciated his cleverness.

古文：韦后称制，令韦播、高嵩为羽林将军，押万骑，以苛峭树威。
现代文：韦后临朝称制，令韦播、高嵩为羽林将军，统辖万骑。他们以高压政策树立威信。
English: Wei Po was appointed to the imperial court, and Wei Bo and Gao Song were appointed to be the generals of Hulin and to govern Manchuria. They established their prestige with a high-pressure policy.

古文：果毅葛福顺、陈玄礼诉於王，王方与刘幽求、薛宗简及利仁府折冲麻嗣宗谋举大计，幽求讽之，皆愿效死，遂入讨韦氏。
现代文：果毅葛福顺、陈玄礼向临淄王诉苦。那时，临淄王正与刘幽求、薛崇简及利仁府折冲麻嗣宗商议举大事。刘幽求暗暗劝说，葛、陈两人都愿为临淄王效力，于是入宫讨伐韦氏。
English: As a result, Ge Fushun and Chen Xuanli complained to the King of Linyi. At that time, the King of Linyi was discussing important matters with Liu Yucuo, Xue Chongjian and Li Renfu Erchong Masizong. Liu Yucuo secretly persuaded that both Ge and Chen were willing to work for the King of Linyi, so they entered the palace to fight the Wei clan.

古文：守德从帝止苑中，而毛仲匿不出，事定数日，乃还，不之责，例擢将军。
现代文：李守德跟随皇帝留在宫苑，而王毛仲却躲着不出来。事情了结后几天，王毛仲才回来。皇帝没有责备他，按例提升为将军。
English: Li Shoude followed the emperor to stay in the palace, but Wang Maozhong could not escape. A few days after the matter was over, Wang Maozhong returned. The emperor did not blame him and promoted him to general as usual.

古文：王为皇太子，以毛仲知东宫马驼鹰狗等坊。不旬岁，至大将军，阶三品。
现代文：临淄王当了皇太子，因为王毛仲曾在东宫管理马、驼、鹰、狗等坊，不到一年，升官到大将军，官阶三品。
English: Linyi Wang became the crown prince, because Wang Maozhong used to manage horses, camels, eagles, dogs, etc. in the East Palace. In less than a year, he was promoted to general, with three official ranks.

古文：与诛萧至忠等，以功进辅国大将军，检校内外闲厩，知监牧使，进封霍国公，实封户五百。
现代文：后来王毛仲参与了诛杀萧至忠等人的事，以其功劳升任辅国大将军，检校宫内外闲厩，让他主管监牧使，封爵霍国公，赐实封五百户。
English: Later, Wang Maozhong took part in the assassination of Xiao Zhizhong and other people, and was promoted to the vice-general of the country for his merits, inspected the idle stables inside and outside the palace, put him in charge of the overseer, knighted Huo Guogong, and granted 500 households.

古文：与诸王及姜皎等侍禁中，至连榻而坐。
现代文：与诸王及姜皎等人一同在禁中侍候。王毛仲与皇帝甚至连榻而坐。
English: He served in the Forbidden City together with kings and emperors such as Jiang Chen. Wang Maozhong and the emperor even stayed and sat together.

古文：帝暂不见，惘惘若有失，见则释然。
现代文：皇帝一时看不见，他就惘惘然若有所失，见到了，就开怀高兴。
English: The emperor could not see it for a moment, and he felt as if he had lost something. When he saw it, he was overjoyed.

古文：开元九年，诏持节为朔方道防御讨击大使，与左领军大总管王晙、天兵军节度使张说、幽州节度使裴伷先等数计事。
现代文：开元九年，诏令王毛仲持节为朔方道防御讨击大使，与左领军大总管王蛟、天兵军节度使张说、幽州节度使裴亻由先等人多次商量大事。
English: In the ninth year of the first century, the emperor ordered Wang Maozhong to hold the festival as the ambassador for the defense and counterattack of Shuofangdao, and repeatedly discussed major events with the general manager of the left-wing army, Wang Qian, the commander of the Heavenly Army, Zhang Xian, the commander of the Yuzhou Festival, Pei Yuxian and others.

古文：毛仲始见饰擢，颇持法，不避权贵为可喜事。
现代文：王毛仲刚开始得到奖掖提拔，颇能持法行事，不避权贵。
English: Wang Mao Zhong had just begun to receive awards and promotions. He was quite capable of upholding the law and did not shy away from the powerful.

古文：两营万骑及闲厩官吏惮之无敢犯，虽官田草莱，樵敛不敢欺。
现代文：两营万骑及闲厩官吏都怕他，没一个敢马虎犯事的，虽然只管理田草牧场，但砍柴割草的都不敢不按规定办事。
English: The officials of the two battalions and the idle stables were all afraid of him. No one dared to do anything carelessly. Although they only managed the fields and pastures, those who cut wood and grass did not dare to act in violation of regulations.

古文：于牧事尤力，娩息不訾。
现代文：王毛仲对牧养牲畜尤为卖力，繁殖了不少。
English: Wang Maozhong has made special efforts to herd livestock and has bred a lot.

古文：初监马二十四万，后乃至四十三万，牛羊皆数倍。
现代文：刚开始监马为二十四万，后来达到四十三万，牛羊也都增加了好几倍。
English: At the beginning, the number of horses was 240,000, later it reached 430,000, and the number of cattle and sheep also increased several times.

古文：莳茼麦、苜蓿千九百顷以御冬。
现代文：他还种植茼麦、苜蓿一千九百顷，以备牲畜过冬。
English: He also planted 1,900 hectares of buckwheat and alfalfa to prepare livestock for the winter.

古文：市死畜，售绢八万。
现代文：他将死牲畜卖掉，得钱买了绢八万段。
English: He sold the dead cattle and used the money to buy 80,000 rupees.

古文：募严道僰僮千口为牧圉。
现代文：他还招募严道的棘僮一千人做牧童。
English: He also recruited 1,000 tough-as-nails herdsmen to work as herd boys.

古文：检勒刍菽无漏隐，岁赢数万石。
现代文：收检整理牧草饲料，不让有一点浪费或隐瞒，一年下来节省下几万石。
English: Inspection and sorting of pasture fodder, do not allow a little waste or concealment, save tens of thousands of stones a year.

古文：从帝东封，取牧马数万匹，每色一队，相间如锦绣，天子才之。
现代文：皇帝东封泰山，王毛仲跟从也去，拿出几万匹牧马，每一队一种毛色马，相间而行，如同锦绣。天子非常赏识他的才能。
English: Emperor Dongfeng sent Taishan, and Wang Maozhong followed suit, bringing out tens of thousands of herdsmen, each team of a kind of fur-colored horse, walking together, like brocade. Tianzi was very appreciative of his talent.

古文：还，加开府仪同三司，自开元后，唯王仁皎、姚崇、宋璟及毛仲得之。
现代文：封禅归来，升他开府仪同三司，这个官阶，开元以后，只有王仁皎、姚崇、宋瞡及王毛仲得此殊荣。
English: After the return of Feng Zhen, he was promoted to the same three divisions as the founding ceremony. After the founding of the People's Republic of China, only Wang Rensheng, Yao Chong, Song Jun and Wang Maozhong received this honor.

古文：然资小人，志既满，不能无骄，遂求为兵部尚书，帝不悦，毛仲鞅鞅。
现代文：然而，王毛仲本性是个小人，志得意满以后，就骄傲起来了，曾向皇帝要求任兵部尚书，皇帝不高兴了，王毛仲也郁郁不乐。
English: However, Wang Maozhong was a villain by nature. After he was satisfied with his ambition, he became proud. He once asked the emperor to appoint him as a military official. The emperor was not happy, and Wang Maozhong was also depressed.

古文：及与葛福顺为姻家，而守德及左监门将军卢龙子唐地文、左右威卫将军王景耀高广济数十人与毛仲相倚杖为奸。
现代文：后来，与葛福顺成了姻亲，李守德及左监门将军卢龙子、唐地文，左右威卫将军王景耀、高广济等几十人与王毛仲互相倚仗为非作歹。
English: Later, he and Gefu Shun became in-laws, and Li Shoude and the left guard generals Lu Longzi and Tang Diwen, the left and right Weiwei generals Wang Jingyao and Gao Guangji, and dozens of others supported each other against Wang Maozhong.

古文：毛仲恃旧，最不法。
现代文：王毛仲仗着他是皇帝的旧人，最不守法规。
English: Wang Maozhong insisted that he was the emperor's old man and did not abide by the law.

古文：中使至其家称诏，毛仲不甚恭，位卑者，或踞见，迕意即侮谇，以气凌之，直出其上。
现代文：中使到他家里来宣谕诏令，王毛仲总是不十分恭敬，若中使的地位比他低，甚至踞坐着见中使。如果冒犯了他的意思，当即辱骂，以盛气凌压对方。
English: Wang Maozhong was always not very respectful to the middle envoy who came to his house to announce the edict. If the middle envoy's status was lower than his, he would even sit cross-legged to see the middle envoy. If he was offended, he would immediately abuse and oppress the other party.

古文：高力士、杨思勖等衔之。
现代文：高力士、杨思曰助等中人十分恨他。
English: Gao Lixi, Yang Sijiaosuke and other middle school students hated him very much.

古文：毛仲有两妻，其一上所赐，皆有国色。
现代文：王毛仲有两个妻子，其中一个是皇帝所赐，两人都极漂亮。
English: Wang Maozhong had two wives, one of whom was given to him by the emperor, and both of them were extremely beautiful.

古文：尝生子，帝命力士就赐，仍授子五品官，还，问曰： 毛仲喜乎？ 
现代文：曾有一人生了儿子，皇帝命高力士去赐物贺喜，并授那孩子五品官。高力士回来后，皇帝问： 毛仲得到赏赐高兴吗？ 
English: Once upon a time, there was a man who had a son, and the emperor ordered Colossus to go and give congratulations to the child, and to bestow upon the child the title of the Fifth Rank. After Colossus returned, the emperor asked: "Was Maozhong happy to receive this reward?"

古文：力士奏： 毛仲熟视臣曰： 是子亦何辱三品官？  
现代文：高力士说： 毛仲盯着臣说 ：这个孩子难道不能当个三品官吗？  
English: Kaorishi said, "Mao Zhong stared at me and said, 'Can't this child be a third-grade official?'

古文：帝怒曰： 前毛仲负我，未尝为意，今以婴儿顾云云。 
现代文：皇帝听了很生气，说 ：以前讨韦氏之乱，毛仲就有负于我，我未尝在意。如今为一个区区婴儿，竟然说这样的话。 
English: The emperor was very angry when he heard this and said, "In the past, when the Wei Rebellion broke out, Mao Zhong was responsible for me, but I didn't care. Now, he's such a baby that he would even say such a thing."

古文：力士等知帝怒，它日，从容曰： 北门奴官皆毛仲所与，不除之，必起大患。 
现代文：高力士等人知道皇帝生气了，过了几天，高力士从容地说： 北门的奴官，都是王毛仲的私党，若不早除，定生大患。 
English: Gao Lixi and others knew that the emperor was angry. A few days later, Gao Lixi calmly said: The slave officials of the North Gate are all Wang Maozhong's private party. If they are not removed early, they will be in big trouble.

古文：后毛仲移书太原索甲仗，少尹严挺之以闻，帝恐毛仲遂乱，匿其状。
现代文：后来，王毛仲发文书到太原，索要兵器。太原少尹严挺之把此事报告皇帝。皇帝怕王毛仲突发叛乱，把事情压了下来。
English: Later, Wang Mao Zhong sent a document to Taiyuan, requesting weapons. Taiyuan Shosho Yin Yan Tingzhi reported the matter to the emperor. The emperor was afraid of Wang Mao Zhong's sudden rebellion and suppressed the matter.

古文：十九年，有诏贬瀼州，福顺壁州，守德严州，卢龙子唐地文振州，王景耀党州，高广济道州，并为别驾员外置。
现代文：开元十九年，下诏贬王毛仲到氵襄州，贬葛福顺到壁州，贬李守德到严州，贬卢龙子、唐地文到振州，贬王景耀到党州，贬高广济到道州，都任别驾，员外置官。
English: In the 19th year of the year of the founding of the People's Republic of China, the following decrees were issued: Wang Maozhong was demoted to Quanzhou, Ge Fushun was demoted to Bishu, Li Shude was demoted to Yanzhou, Lu Longzi and Tang Diwen were demoted to Zhengzhou, Wang Jingyao was demoted to Dangzhou, and Guanzhi was demoted to Daozhou.

古文：帝嘉其志，擢为郎将。
现代文：王毛仲的四个儿子的官职一律剥夺，贬到荒漠处。为此事而受牵连的人有几十个。
English: All four of Wang Maozhong's sons were stripped of their official posts and banished to the desert. Dozens of people were implicated in this matter.

古文：陈玄礼宿卫宫禁，以淳笃自检。
现代文：后来，又有诏令将王毛仲在灵陵缢死。陈玄礼在宫禁宿卫，以朴质敦厚为自律要求。
English: Later, there was another imperial edict ordering Wang Maozhong to be stabbed to death in the mausoleum. Chen Xuanli was banned from being a palace guard, and was required to be simple and unassuming.

古文：帝尝欲幸虢国夫人第，谏曰： 未宣敕，不可轻去就。 
现代文：皇帝曾想到虢国夫人家里去，陈玄礼劝谏： 没有宣谕敕令，不可轻率地去。 
English: The emperor once thought of going to the home of Lady Zeng Guo, but Chen Xuanli advised him not to go without a proclamation.

古文：帝为止。
现代文：皇帝乃作罢。
English: Let the emperor do it.

古文：后在华清宫，正月望夜，帝将出游，复谏曰： 宫外旷野无备豫，陛下必出游，愿归城阙。 
现代文：后来在华清宫，正月十五夜，皇帝准备去游玩，陈玄礼又劝谏： 宫外旷野，毫无准备。陛下如果一定要出宫去玩，希望能在京都市内。 
English: Later, at Huaqing Palace, on the fifteenth night of the first month, the emperor was getting ready to go out to play, and Chen Xuanli advised him: "Outside the palace, there is no preparation. If Your Majesty must go out to play, I hope it will be in Kyoto City."

古文：帝不能夺。
现代文：皇帝也无法改变他的观点。
English: The emperor could not change his mind.

古文：安禄山反，谋诛杨国忠阙下，不克，至马嵬，卒诛之。
现代文：安禄山造反，陈玄礼原打算在京阙就诛杀杨国忠，没有成功。到马嵬，终于杀了杨国忠。
English: During the Anlu rebellion, Chen Xuanli originally planned to kill Yang Guozhong in Beijing, but was unsuccessful. He finally killed Yang Guozhong in Malang.

古文：从入蜀。
现代文：随从皇帝入蜀。
English: He followed the emperor into Shu.

古文：还，封祭国公。
现代文：回京后，封爵蔡国公。
English: After returning to Kyoto, Cai Guogong was knighted.

古文：及李辅国迁帝西内，玄礼以老卒。
现代文：到李辅国把玄宗皇帝逼迁到西内时，陈玄礼老死。
English: When Emperor Xuanzong was forced to move to the west by the State of Li Yu, Chen Xuanli died of old age.

