古文：房玄龄不空三藏一行无畏三藏玉龙子狄惟谦子朗
现代文：房玄龄不空三藏一行无畏三藏玉龙子狄惟谦子朗
English: Fang Xuanling is not empty, Sanzang one line, Dauntless, Sanzang, Jade Dragon, Diwei, Qian Zi Lang

古文：风秦始皇王莽贾谧张华刘曜刘裔徐羡之柳世隆崔惠景许世宗徐妃李密
现代文：风秦始皇王莽贾谧张华刘曜刘裔徐羡之柳世隆崔惠景许世宗徐妃李密
English: The wind of the First Emperor of the Qin Dynasty, the reckless Jiajing, Zhanghua, Liuyang, Liu Zi, Xu Enzhi, Liu Shilong, Cui Huijing, Xu Shizong, Xu Fei, Li Mi

古文：虹夏世隆陈济妻薛愿刘义庆首阳山韦皋雨
现代文：虹夏世隆陈济妻薛愿刘义庆首阳山韦皋雨
English: Hongxia Shilong, Chen Ji's wife Xue Zhen, Liu Yiqing's head, Yangshan Wei, and the rain

古文：房玄龄
现代文：房玄龄
English: Fang Xuanling

古文：唐贞观末，房玄龄避位归第。
现代文：唐太宗贞观末年，房玄龄辞官回家。
English: At the end of Tang Taizong Zhenguan's life, Fang Xuanling returned home.

古文：时天旱，太宗将幸芙蓉园，观风俗。
现代文：时值大旱，太宗皇帝要去芙蓉园，借机观察当地的民俗。
English: At the time of the drought, Emperor Taizong went to the Hibiscus Garden to observe the local folk customs.

古文：玄龄闻之，戒其子曰： 銮舆必当见幸，亟使洒扫，兼备馔具。 
现代文：玄龄听到这件事后，告诫他的儿子道： 銮驾一定会来我家，赶紧让人打扫卫生，并且备齐餐具。 
English: After hearing this, Xuangling admonished his son: "You must come to my house, have someone clean it up, and prepare the tableware.

古文：有顷，太宗果先幸其第，便载入宫。
现代文：时间不大，太宗果然首先到了他的府第，并顺便用车载着他进入皇宫。
English: There wasn't much time, so Taizong arrived at his capital first and took him by car to the Imperial Palace.

古文：其夕大雨，咸以为优贤之应。
现代文：当天夜里下了大雨，人们都以为这是对天子优待贤人的报应。
English: It rained heavily that night, and people thought that this was retribution for Heaven's special treatment of the sages.

古文：不空三藏
现代文：不空三藏
English: The Three Kingdoms

古文：唐梵僧不空，得总持门，能役百神，玄宗礼之。
现代文：唐代有个佛门僧人叫不空，得任总持门，能够役使百神，玄宗皇帝对他以礼相待。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, there was a Buddhist monk who was not idle. He was appointed chief gatekeeper and was able to serve hundreds of gods. Emperor Xuanzong treated him with courtesy.

古文：岁旱，命祈雨。不空言可过某日，今祈之必暴。
现代文：有一年天旱，玄宗命他祈雨，不空说要过了这一天才行，现在祈雨必然下得又猛又急。
English: There was a year of drought, and Hyunjong ordered him to pray for rain. He said that he would not stop praying until the drought was over. Now, his prayers for rain inevitably come thick and fast.

古文：上乃命金刚三藏，设坛请雨。果连淋注不止，坊市有漂溺者，遽召不空止之。
现代文：皇帝便命金刚三藏设坛请雨，果然连降大雨不止，大街上有被水漂流和淹死的。
English: The emperor then ordered King Kong of the Three Kingdoms to set up an altar to invite rain. As it turned out, the heavy rain continued to fall, and there were people in the streets who were swept away by the water and drowned.

古文：遂於寺庭，建泥龙五六。
现代文：于是急忙召唤不空要他把雨止住。
English: So he hurriedly called out for him to stop the rain.

古文：乃溜水，胡言詈之。良久，复置之大笑。有顷雨霁。
现代文：不空就在寺庙的院子里，用泥土建造了五六条龙，往龙身上泼水，并胡言乱语地骂它，过了许久，又对着它们大笑，不一会儿雨停天晴。
English: In no time, he built five or six dragons out of mud in the courtyard of the temple, splashed water on the dragons, and cursed them in nonsense. After a long time, he laughed at them again, and soon the rain stopped.

古文：玄宗又尝诏术士罗公远与不空祈雨，互陈其效。
现代文：玄宗还曾诏命术士罗公远与不空祈雨，他俩互相陈述自己求雨的效果。
English: Xuanzong had also ordered the sorcerer Luo Gongyuan and Fuxue to pray for rain, and they both told each other the effects of their prayers for rain.

古文：俱召问之，不空曰： 臣昨焚白檀香龙。 
现代文：玄宗把他俩叫来询问，不空说： 昨天求雨时，烧的是白檀香龙。 
English: Xuanzong called them both in for questioning, and they said, "Yesterday, when we prayed for rain, it was the sandalwood dragon that was burned.

古文：上命左右掬庭水嗅之，果有檀香气。
现代文：玄家让近侍用手捧起院子里的雨水嗅了嗅，果然有檀香气味。
English: Genka asked a courtier to hold up the rainwater in the courtyard with his hand and sniff it, and sure enough, it smelled like sandalwood.

古文：每祈雨，无他轨则，但设数绣座，手旋数寸木神，念咒掷之，自立于座上。
现代文：不空每次祈雨时，没有其他规则，只是摆几个漂亮的座位，用手旋转数寸长的木制神像，念着咒语把神像抛起来，它就会自行站立在座位上。
English: Every time when praying for rain, there are no other rules, just set up a few beautiful seats, rotate the inch-long wooden statue by hand, cast a spell to throw the statue up, and it will stand on its own on the seat.

古文：伺木神口角牙出，目瞚，雨辄至。
现代文：等到神像口角间冒出牙齿，眼睛直眨巴，雨就降临了。
English: Wait until the teeth emerge from the corners of the mouth of the gods, the eyes blink, and the rain falls.

古文：一行
现代文：一行
English: One line

古文：僧一行，开元中尝旱，玄宗令祈雨。曰： 当得一器，上有龙状者，方可致之。 
现代文：有个僧人叫一行，唐玄宗开元年间曾经大旱，玄宗命他祈雨，他说： 需要弄一件器物，器物上有龙的形象，才可以求来雨。 
English: There was a line of monks. There was a great drought during the first year of Emperor Xuanzong of Tang. Emperor Xuanzong ordered him to pray for rain. He said, "It is necessary to make a vessel with the image of a dragon on it in order to pray for rain."

古文：命如内府遍视，皆言不类。
现代文：皇帝让他在宫内四处察看，各样东西他都说不象。
English: The emperor asked him to look around the palace, but he couldn't tell him anything.

古文：后指一镜鼻盘龙，喜曰： 此真龙矣。 
现代文：后来指着一面镜子的盘龙镜鼻高兴地说： 这是真龙啊！ 
English: Later, pointing to a mirror, he said happily: "This is a real dragon!"

古文：持入道场，一夕而雨。
现代文：便把这件东西拿着进了祈雨的道场，时间不大就下起雨来。
English: So he took this thing into the dojo to pray for rain, and soon it started to rain.

古文：或云，是扬州新进。
现代文：有人说： 此物是扬州进献的。
English: Some people said: This object was donated by Yangzhou.

古文：初范模时，有异人至，请闭户入室。
现代文：当初制作铸造模子时，有个异人来到跟前，要求进入内室关闭门户。
English: When the casting moulds were initially being made, a stranger approached and asked to enter the inner room to close the portal.

古文：数日开户，模成，其人已失。
现代文：几天之后打开房门，模子便做成了，而那个人却不见了。
English: A few days later, the door is opened, the mould is made, and the man is gone.

古文：有图并传，见行于世。
现代文：现有图纸与文字说明，流传于世间。
English: The existing drawings and text descriptions have been passed down to the world.

古文：此镜。五月五日于杨子江心铸之。
现代文：这面镜子是五月五日在扬子江江心铸成的。 
English: The mirror was cast on May 5 in the heart of the Yangtze River.

古文：无畏三藏
现代文：无畏三藏
English: The Fearless Three Tibetans

古文：玄宗尝幸东都，大旱。
现代文：唐玄宗曾经驾临东都洛阳，正值那里大旱。
English: Emperor Xuanzong of the Tang Dynasty once visited the eastern capital Luoyang at a time when there was a severe drought.

古文：圣善寺竺乾国三藏僧无畏善召龙致雨术，上遣力士疾召请雨。
现代文：圣善寺的竺乾国大和尚无畏，长于召龙致雨的法术，玄宗皇帝派遣高力士急速召他进宫求雨。
English: Emperor Xuanzong sent Gao Lixi to summon him to the palace to pray for rain. Gao Qian, the Grand Monk of Sheng Zhen Temple, was fearless and good at the magic of calling dragons to bring rain.

古文：奏云： 今旱数当然，召龙必兴烈风雷雨，适足暴物，不可为之。 
现代文：无畏回奏道： 现在的干旱是理应出现的，如果召龙必然引来暴风和雷雨，恰好要造成很大的破坏，所以不能这样做。 
English: Dauntless echoed, "The current drought is a natural occurrence. If summoning dragons would inevitably bring storms and thunderstorms, it would just cause a lot of damage, so we can't do that.

古文：上强之曰： 人苦暑病久矣，虽暴风疾雷，亦足快意。 
现代文：玄宗固执地说： 百姓苦于酷暑已经很久了，虽然是暴风疾雷，也是令人痛快的。 
English: Xuanzong said stubbornly: The people have been suffering from the intense heat for a long time. Although it is a storm, it is also painful.

古文：不得已，乃奉诏。
现代文：无畏出于不得已，便接受了玄宗的旨意。
English: Dauntless, out of necessity, he accepted the will of Emperor Xuanzong.

古文：有司陈请雨之具，幡幢像设甚备。
现代文：有关人员摆好请雨所用的器具，旗幡经幢以及神像之类全都备齐。
English: Relevant personnel have set up the equipment used to invite rain, and the flags, statues and statues are all ready.

古文：笑曰： 斯不足以致雨。 
现代文：无畏笑着说： 这些东西不能把雨请来。 
English: Dauntless smiled and said, "These things can't bring rain.

古文：悉命撤之，独盛一钵水，以小刀子搅旋之，胡言数百祝之。
现代文：让他们全部撤了下去。他只盛了一钵水，用小刀旋转搅动，随便说了好多话祝祷着。
English: He just filled a jug with water, swirled it around with a knife, said a lot of random words and prayed.

古文：须臾有龙，状类其大指，赤色。首撤水上，俄复没于钵中。
现代文：不一会儿有一条龙出现，形状象他的大拇指，红色，头贴在水面上，接着又沉没在钵子的水中。
English: Soon a dragon appeared, shaped like his thumb, red, with its head sticking out of the water, then sinking back into the murky water.

古文：复以刀搅咒之三，顷之，白气自钵中兴，如炉烟，径上数尺，稍稍引出讲堂外。
现代文：他又用刀搅动着念了三遍咒语。不大一会儿，有白气从钵子里升起，好象炉子里冒出的烟，径直向上数尺之高，慢慢地飘出讲堂之外。
English: He churned the incantation three more times, and before long, white gas rose from the crucible, like smoke from a furnace, straight up several feet high and slowly drifted out of the lecture hall.

古文：谓力士曰： 亟去，雨至矣。 
现代文：他对力士说： 赶快离开，雨到了！ 
English: He said to the wrestlers: Hurry up and leave, it's raining!

古文：力士绝驰去，还顾白气，旋绕亘空，若一匹素。
现代文：力士骑马跑出很远，回头看看白气，已经旋绕连绵到天空，象一匹白色丝绢。
English: The wrestler rode out very far and looked back at the whiteness, which had swirled endlessly into the sky, like a white silken horse.

古文：既而昏霾大风，震雷而雨。
现代文：接着便是乌云遮天大风呼啸，雷声隆隆大雨倾盆。
English: Then came dark clouds, blustery winds, thunder and torrential rain.

古文：力士才及天津之南，风雨亦随马而至，天衢大树多拔。
现代文：力士刚赶到天津桥南面，风雨也跟着他的奔马来到这里，大街上的高大树木大都连根拔起。
English: The strongman has just arrived at the south side of Tianjin Bridge, the wind and rain have also followed his galloping horse to come here, and most of the tall trees on the street have been uprooted.

古文：力士比复奏，衣尽沾湿。
现代文：等到力士上朝回禀时，衣服全被浇湿了。
English: By the time the wrestlers returned to the ring in the morning, their clothes were all wet.

古文：玉龙子
现代文：玉龙子
English: Gyokuro

古文：唐玄宗至渭水，侍者得玉龙子进。上皇曰： 吾为婴儿时，天后召诸孙，坐於殿上，观其嬉戏。
现代文：唐玄宗来到渭水，侍者得到一枚玉龙子进献给他，玄宗皇帝说： 在我是小孩子时，则天皇后召集各个皇孙进官，她自己坐在殿上观看他们游戏玩耍。
English: When Emperor Xuanzong of Tang Dynasty came to Surabaya, the waiter received a jade dragon to present to him. Emperor Xuanzong said, "When I was a child, the empress would gather all the imperial grandchildren to be promoted to officials, and she herself would sit in the palace and watch them play.

古文：因出西国所贡玉环兼杯盘，罗列殿上，纵令争取，以观其志。
现代文：于是拿出西方国家进贡的玉环和杯盘等物摆在殿上，怂恿他们随意拿取，借以察看他们每人的志向。
English: Therefore, he took out the jade rings and cups and plates that the Western countries had paid tribute to, and placed them on the hall. He encouraged them to take them at will, so that he could see the aspirations of each of them.

古文：莫不奔竞，厚有所得。
现代文：皇孙们一个个争先恐后，都拿到许多东西。
English: The grandchildren of emperors scrambled one after another, and they all got a lot of things.

古文：时吾在其中独坐，略不为动。
现代文：当时只有我坐在他们中间没有动手，丝毫也不被这些东西动心。
English: At the time, I was the only one sitting among them who didn't do anything, and I wasn't moved by these things at all.

古文：后抚吾背曰： 此儿当为太平天子。 
现代文：天后抚摸着我的后背说： 这个孩子能成为太平天子。 
English: Tianhou stroked my back and said: This child can become a Taiping Tianzi.

古文：因取玉龙子赐吾。
现代文：于是拿出玉龙子赐给了我。
English: So he took out the dragon egg and gave it to me.

古文：本太宗於晋阳宫得之，文德皇后尝置之衣中。
现代文：这玉龙子本是太宗在晋阳宫得到的，文德皇后常常把它放在衣服里面。
English: Emperor Taizong obtained this jade dragon egg at Jinyang Palace, and Empress Wende often put it in her clothes.

古文：及大帝载诞日，后以珠络衣褓并玉龙子赐焉，其后尝藏于内府。
现代文：等到大帝周岁生日时，皇后将珠子窜儿、衣服、婴儿被子等物，与玉龙子一起赐给了他。这以后，玉龙子就时常珍藏在皇宫的内室里。
English: On the emperor's first birthday, the empress gave him beads, clothes, a baby quilt, and other items, along with the dragon egg. Since then, the dragon egg has often been treasured in the inner room of the imperial palace.

古文：虽广不数寸，而温润精巧，非人间所有，以为国瑞，帝帝相传。
现代文：此物虽然不过有几寸大，但模样儿温和润泽十分精巧，并非人工所能制造，所以成为国家的珍宝和祥物，由皇帝们一代代传授下来。 
English: Although this object is only a few inches in size, it has a delicate appearance and gentle luster. It cannot be made by hand, so it has become a national treasure and mascot, passed down from generation to generation by emperors.

古文：乃密投于南内龙池。俄而云物暴起，风雨随作。
现代文：玄宗即位初期，每当京城一带缺雨就向它祈祷，必有充足的雨水降下，当靠近玉龙子密看时，见它好象在奋力抖动鳞甲。
English: In the early days of Emperor Xuanzong's accession to the throne, whenever there was a lack of rain in the Beijing area, he prayed to it that there would be sufficient rain. When he looked closely at the Jade Dragon, it seemed to be struggling to shake its scales.

古文：及上皇幸西蜀，车驾回次渭水，将渡，驻跸于水滨。
现代文：开元中年，京城附近的三辅境内大旱，玄宗又向它祈祷，然而过了十天仍没有反应，于是悄悄把它扔进了宫内南边的龙池里，不一会儿便突然出现了云彩，风雨也相随着来临。
English: In the middle of the first century, there was a great drought in the Sanfu area near the capital. Xuanzong prayed to it again, but after ten days there was still no response, so he quietly threw it into the dragon pond on the south side of the palace. Soon, clouds suddenly appeared, and the wind and rain also came.

古文：左右侍者，因临流濯弄，沙中得之。
现代文：等玄宗巡视西蜀，车驾返回到渭水，过河之前停在河边暂时休息，身边的侍者乘机来到河旁洗濯戏耍，在沙子里面捡到一枚玉龙子。
English: After the inspection of Xishu by Xuanzong, the car drove back to Surabaya. Before crossing the river, it stopped at the river for a temporary rest. The waiter took the opportunity to come to the river to wash and play, and found a dragon egg in the sand.

古文：自后夜中必有光彩，辉焕一室。
现代文：从此之后，每到夜半更深它就发出光彩，照得满屋子通亮。
English: From then on, every time it got later and later into the night, it glowed and lit up the whole house.

古文：上皇还京，为小黄门私窃，以遗李辅国，常致柜中。
现代文：玄宗回到京城后，此物为宫内的小太监悄悄偷去，拿去送给了李林甫相国，经常放在柜子里。
English: After Xuanzong returned to Beijing, this item was quietly stolen by a minor eunuch in the palace and given to Li Linfu's country. It is often kept in a cabinet.

古文：辅国将败，夜闻柜中如有声，开而视之，已亡所在。
现代文：李相国将要死时，夜间听到柜子里好象有响声，打开柜子去看，在原来放它的地方已经不见了。
English: When Li Xianguo was about to die, he heard what sounded like a noise in the cupboard at night, opened the cupboard and saw that it had disappeared from the place where it was originally placed.

古文：人有诗曰： 圣运潜符瑞玉龙，自兴云雨更无纵。
现代文：有人写诗道： 圣运潜符瑞玉龙，自兴云雨更无纵。
English: Someone wrote a poem: "The hidden symbol of the Holy Year, the Jade Dragon, is more powerful than the clouds and rain.

古文：不如渭水沙中得，争保銮舆复九重。 
现代文：不如渭水沙中得，争保銮舆复九重。 
English: It's better to be safe than sorry.

古文：狄惟谦
现代文：狄惟谦
English: Di Weiqian

古文：唐会昌中，北都晋阳令狄惟谦，仁杰之后。守官清恪，不畏强御。
现代文：唐武宗会昌年间，北都晋阳县令狄惟谦，是狄仁杰的后代，为官清廉，忠于职守，不畏强暴。
English: During the reign of Emperor Wuzong of Tang Dynasty, Di Weiqian, a descendant of Di Renjie, the ruler of Jinyang County, the northern capital, was a clean official, loyal to his duties, and not afraid of violence.

古文：属邑境亢阳，自春徂夏，数百里田，皆耗璪。祷于晋祠，略无其应。
现代文：所辖境内，从春到夏烈日炎炎，出现了旱灾，数百里农田的庄稼全部干枯坏死，到晋祠里祈祷请雨又毫无反应。
English: In the territory under its jurisdiction, from spring to summer, the sun was scorching hot, droughts occurred, and the crops of hundreds of miles of farmland all withered and died, and there was no response to prayers for rain in the Jin ancestral shrine.

古文：时有郭天师，暨并州女巫，少攻符术，多行厌胜。
现代文：当时有个郭天师，就是并州的一个女巫。她自小攻习符箓之术，经常用符咒制胜。
English: At that time, there was a Guo Tianshi, a witch from Bianzhou, who had been studying the art of charms since childhood, and often used charms and spells to win.

古文：监军使携至京国，因缘中贵，出入宫掖，遂赐天师号。
现代文：监军使把她带到京城后。由于攀结官中的权贵，时时出没于皇宫，便被赐给了 天师 的称号。
English: After the military inspector brought her to the capital, she was given the title of heavenly teacher because of her frequent visits to the imperial palace, where she courted high-ranking officials.

古文：旋归本土。
现代文：不久又回到了并州老家。
English: He soon returned to his hometown of Nianzhou.

古文：佥曰： 若得天师一至晋祠，则不足忧矣。 
现代文：众人都说： 如能请天师来一趟晋祠，那就不愁求不下雨来了！ 
English: Many people said, "If we can invite the heavenly teacher to come to the Jin Temple, then we don't have to worry about rain!"

古文：惟谦请于主帅，初甚难之。既而敦请，主帅遂亲往迓焉。
现代文：狄惟谦请求北都府主帅出面去请，开始他很为难，惟谦又一再诚恳请求，主帅便亲自前去迎接。
English: Di Weiqian asked the coach of Beidufu to come forward and invite him. At first, he was in a difficult situation. However, Di Weiqian repeatedly made a sincere request, and the coach went to meet him in person.

古文：巫者唯唯。乃具车舆，列幡盖，惟谦躬为控马。
现代文：女巫连声应诺，便准备车马，排列旌旗伞盖之类仪仗，由惟谦亲自为她驾马。
English: The witch readily agreed, so she prepared a chariot and horses, lined up banners and umbrella covers and other ceremonial items, and Woqian himself drove the horses for her.

古文：既至祠所，盛设供帐，磬折庭中。
现代文：接到晋祠后，隆重地摆设祭礼用的供品与帐幔等物，惟谦等人则在院子里弯腰致敬，恭恭敬敬地侍候。
English: After receiving the Jin ancestral shrine, they solemnly set up offerings and curtains for the ritual, while Wei Qian and others bowed down in the courtyard and waited respectfully.

古文：翌日，语惟谦曰： 我为尔飞符上界请雨，已奉天地命，必在至诚，三日雨当足矣。 
现代文：第二天，女巫对惟谦说： 我为你飞一道符到天上去请雨，现已接到天帝的旨意，你们必须心意至诚。三天之后就会降下足够的雨来的。 
English: The next day, the witch said to Wei Xian, "I will fly a trumpet for you to the sky to ask for rain. Now that I have received the will of the Heavenly Emperor, you must be sincere. In three days, enough rain will fall."

古文：繇是四郊士庶云集，期满无征。
现代文：于是，四面八方的士官与百姓都聚集到这里。三天期满了，毫无降雨的迹象。
English: As a result, officers and people from all over gathered here. The three-day period was over, and there was no sign of rain.

古文：又曰： 灾沴所兴，良由县令无德。
现代文：女巫又说： 因阴阳之气不知而产生的灾害，实因县令无德所致。
English: The sorceress also said: The disasters caused by the ignorance of yin and yang are actually caused by the lack of virtue in county ordinances.

古文：我为尔再告天，七日方合有雨。 
现代文：我为你再一次禀告天帝，七天之后才应当有雨。 
English: Once again, I'll tell the heavens for you, it's supposed to rain in seven days.

古文：惟谦引罪，奉之愈谨，竟无其效。
现代文：惟谦感到内疚，对她供奉得更加恭谨。七天之后，竟然还是没有生效。
English: But feeling guilty, he was more respectful to her, and after seven days, it still hadn't taken effect.

古文：乃骤欲入州，复拜留曰： 天师已为万姓来，更乞至心祈请。 
现代文：女巫便突然要回并州。惟谦再三挽留道： 天师既然为了万民百姓已经来到这里，那就再次求您尽心尽力祈雨。 
English: The witch suddenly wanted to return to annex the state. However, Qian repeatedly said: Since the heavenly teacher has come here for the sake of all the people, then I again ask you to do your best to pray for rain.

古文：悖然而詈曰： 庸琐官人，不知天道。
现代文：女巫勃然大怒，骂道： 好个平庸无知的官人，根本不知道上天的道理。
English: The witch flew into a rage and scolded him, "What a mediocre and ignorant official, he doesn't know the truth about heaven at all.

古文：天时未肯下雨，留我将复奚为。 
现代文：天时气候不肯下雨，还要留我在此干什么？ 
English: When the weather refuses to rain, what is the point of keeping me here?

古文：乃谢曰： 非敢更烦天师？俟明相饯耳。 
现代文：惟谦拜射道： 并非还要麻烦天师，只是要您等明天，以便为您饯行而已。 
English: However, I humbly said, "It's not that I want to trouble the heavenly teacher, I just want you to wait until tomorrow so that I can perform for you."

古文：于是宿戒左右： 我为巫者所辱，岂可复言为官耶？
现代文：于是，惟谦在当晚就告诫手下人道： 我为女巫所羞辱，怎能再提当官的事呢？
English: So, that night, Wen warned his subordinates: "I have been humiliated by the witch, how can I mention the matter of being an official again?"

古文：诘旦有所指挥，汝等咸须相禀。
现代文：明天早上我有所安排，你们都必须服从。
English: Tomorrow morning, I have an appointment you must all keep.

古文：是非好恶，予自当之。 
现代文：是对是错，是好是坏，由我自己承担。 
English: Whether it's right or wrong, good or bad, it's up to me.

古文：迨晓，时门未开，郭已严饰归骑，而狄酒肴供设，一无所施。
现代文：等到天亮，门还没打开时，郭天师已把回并州的马备好了，而狄惟谦却酒饭菜肴一样也没给她送来。
English: By dawn, when the door had not yet opened, Guo Tianshi had already prepared the horse for the annexation, but Di Weiqian did not bring her any food or drink.

古文：郭乃坐堂中，大恣诃责。
现代文：郭天师便坐在堂屋里大肆呵斥责备。
English: Guo Tianshi then sat in the hall and loudly rebuked and reproached.

古文：惟谦遂曰： 左道女巫，妖惑日久，当须毙在此日，焉敢言归？ 
现代文：惟谦便说： 好个邪道女巫！你妖言感众多日，理当死在今天，怎么敢说要回去！ 
English: But she humbly said, "What a wicked witch! You have been feeling like a demon for many days. You should have died today. How dare you say you want to go back!"

古文：叱左右，于神前鞭背二十，投于漂水。
现代文：他喝令手下人在神像前抽打其后背二十鞭子，然后扔到河流中。
English: He ordered his men to beat the back of the statue with twenty lashes in front of it, and then throw it into the river.

古文：祠后有山，高可十丈。
现代文：祠庙后面有座山，有十丈高。
English: There is a mountain behind the ancestral temple, which is ten meters high.

古文：遽命设席焚香，从吏悉皆放还，簪笏立其上。
现代文：他即刻令人设供烧香，又将跟随他的吏卒全部打发回家，自己穿上官服手持笏板站立在山上。
English: He immediately ordered incense to be set up, and sent all the officials who had followed him home. He put on his official uniform and stood on the mountain holding a chopping board.

古文：于是阖城骇愕，云邑长杖杀天师，驰走纷纭，观者如堵。
现代文：于是全城人为之震惊，都说县令用棍子打死了天师，奔走相告，纷纷来看，围观群众挤到一起象一堵大墙。
English: As a result, the whole city was shocked. Everyone said that the county magistrate had killed the heavenly teacher with a stick. People ran to tell each other, came to see one after another, and the crowd of onlookers crowded together like a big wall.

古文：时砂石流烁，忽起片云，大如车盖，先覆惟谦立所，四郊云物会之。
现代文：此时砂石飞滚，大风呼啸，一片乌云突然升起，大小犹如车蓬。这片乌云先遮在惟谦独立的上方，四面的云彩又汇合到一起。
English: At this time, the sand and gravel are flying, the wind is howling, and a dark cloud suddenly rises, the size of which is like a car canopy. This dark cloud first hides above the only independent, and the clouds on all sides come together again.

古文：雷震数声，甘雨大澍，原野无不滂流。
现代文：几声雷响之后，渴望已久的雨便倾倒下来，原野到处大水涌流。
English: After a few thunderclaps, the long-awaited rain fell and the fields were awash.

古文：士庶数千，自山拥惟谦而下。
现代文：几千名官绅百姓从山上簇拥着惟谦走了下来。
English: Several thousand officials, gentry and commoners came down from the mountain, clutching their horses.

古文：州将以杀巫者，初亦怒之，既而精诚感应，深加叹异。
现代文：州府将领因为惟谦杀死女巫，开始也很恼怒，后来为他的精诚所感动，又大加赞赏，就将这件事上表陈述给朝廷。
English: At first, the prefect of the prefecture was very angry because Kohen had killed the witch. Later, he was moved by Kohen's sincerity and greatly appreciated, so he reported the matter to the imperial court.

古文：表列其事，诏书褒异云： 惟谦剧邑良才，忠臣华胄。
现代文：皇帝颁布诏书褒奖这件奇异之举道： 狄惟廉是治理县邑的良才，忠臣贵族的后代。
English: The emperor issued an edict to commend this strange deed: Di Weiliang was a talented person who governed counties and towns, and was the descendant of a loyal nobleman.

古文：睹兹天厉，将瘅下民，当请祷于晋祠，类投巫于邺县。
现代文：眼见如此严重的天灾即将残害百姓，理当去晋祠祈祷求雨；他又效法西门豹在邺县投巫于水中之举，将女巫投在河里。
English: Seeing that such a serious natural disaster was about to devastate the people, he should have gone to Jin Ancestral Temple to pray for rain; he also threw the witch into the river, following the example of the leopard in Lixian County, who threw the witch into the water.

古文：曝山椒之畏景，事等焚躯。起天际之油云，情同剪爪。
现代文：他站在山顶忍受烈日之曝晒，这事等于火中焚身；这种举动唤来了天边的浮云为之降雨，就象商汤剪爪求雨而感动上天一样。
English: He stood on the top of the mountain and endured the exposure of the hot sun, which was tantamount to burning himself in the fire; this action evoked the floating clouds at the edge of the sky to rain, just as Shang Tang cut his claws for rain and moved the sky.

古文：遂使旱风潜息，甘泽旋流。
现代文：于是，致使干旱的热风潜踪平息，润泽万物的甘霖顿时流下。
English: As a result, the hot wind that caused the drought subsided, and the moisture of all things flowed down.

古文：昊天犹监克诚，予意岂忘褒善。
现代文：苍天犹能体察他的精减，我怎能忘记褒奖他的善举。
English: How can I forget to praise him for his good deed.

古文：特颁朱绂，俾耀铜章。
现代文：特发大红官服，以增添其铜质官印的光彩。
English: A special large red official uniform was issued to add the brilliance of its bronze official seal.

古文：勿替令名，更昭殊绩。 
现代文：不许革除其县令的名份，更要表彰其非凡的业绩。 
English: He should not be stripped of his title of county magistrate, but should be commended for his extraordinary performance.

古文：乃赐钱五十万。
现代文：于是赐给他五十万钱。
English: So they gave him half a million dollars.

古文：子郎
现代文：子郎
English: Child grows up

古文：伪蜀王氏，梁州天旱，祈祷无验。
现代文：王氏在西蜀自立为王时，梁州大旱，祈祷求雨也不应验。
English: When the Wang clan established itself as king in West Shuxu, Liangzhou was in a severe drought, and prayers for rain did not come true.

古文：僧子郎诣州，云能致雨。
现代文：有个叫子朗的和尚来到州府，自称能够招来雨。
English: A monk named Zi Lang came to the state capital, claiming to be able to bring rain.

古文：乃具十石瓮贮水，僧坐其中，水灭于顶者，凡三日，雨足。
现代文：梁州守将王宗俦大为惊异，对他以礼相待，各处施主也如云涌般赶了来。
English: Liangzhou Governor Wang Zonglian was greatly surprised and treated him with courtesy. Donors from all over the country came in droves.

古文：州将王宗俦异礼之，檀越云集，后莫知所适。僧令蔼，他日于兴州见之，因问其术。曰： 此闭气耳，习之一月就。
现代文：以后不知他到什么地方去了。有个叫令蔼的和尚后来在兴州见到了他，便问他求雨的法术，他说： 这是极简单的闭气功而己，修习一月即成。
English: After that, I don't know where he went. A monk named Ling Ling later saw him in Xingzhou and asked him about the magic of asking for rain. He said, "This is a very simple self-enclosed qigong, and it can be practiced in one month."

古文：本法于湫潭中作观，与龙相系。龙为定力所制，必致惊动，因而致雨。
现代文：这个法术是在很深的水池中施行，与龙相系在一起，龙因被固定的力量所制约，必然会惊动，于是就引来了雨。
English: The spell was cast in a deep pool of water and connected to a dragon, which, constrained by a fixed force, was bound to startle and bring rain.

古文：然不如瓮中为之，保无他害。 
现代文：但是不如在缸里施行，这样可以保证没有其他危害。
English: But it's better to do it in a jar to make sure there's no other damage.

古文：风
现代文：风
English: The wind howls

古文：秦始皇
现代文：秦始皇
English: Emperor Qin Shi Huang

古文：秦始皇二十八年，渡淮至衡山，浮江至湘，遇大风。
现代文：秦始皇二十八年，他渡过淮河到了衡山，又乘船从江上到湖南，遇上了大风。
English: In the twenty-eighth year of Qin Shi Huang, he crossed the Huai River to Hengshan, and took a boat from the river to Hunan, and encountered a strong wind.

古文：博士云： 尧女舜妻葬于此。 
现代文：一个博士官说： 尧帝的女儿、舜帝的妻子就葬在这个地方。 
English: A doctorate official said: "The daughter of Emperor Gong and the wife of Emperor Gong are buried in this place.

古文：始皇怒，使刑徒三千人，伐湘山树。
现代文：秦始皇大怒，命令服刑的囚徒三千人把湘山上的树都砍伐了。
English: Enraged, Qin Shihuang ordered 3,000 prisoners to cut down all the trees on Xiangshan Mountain.

古文：王莽
现代文：王莽
English: Wang Mang

古文：王莽地皇四年，大风，毁路堂。
现代文：王莽地皇四年，发生一场风灾，大风摧毁了道路与房屋。
English: In the fourth year of Wang Mangdi's reign, a wind disaster occurred, and the high winds destroyed roads and houses.

古文：其年，司徒王寻、司空王邑守昆阳，光武起兵南阳，至昆阳，败之。
现代文：这一年，司徒王寻和司空王邑驻守昆阳，光武帝从南阳起兵到了昆阳，打败了王寻与王邑。
English: In the same year, Wang Xun and Wang Yup were stationed in Kunyang. Emperor Guangwu sent troops from Nanyang to Kunyang and defeated Wang Xun and Wang Yup.

古文：风雷屋瓦皆飞，雨下如注，滍川盛溢。
现代文：当时，大风与雷电将屋瓦刮得到处乱飞，大雨倾盆，池塘与河流里的水因暴涨而流了出来。
English: At that time, high winds and lightning caused roof tiles to fly everywhere, heavy rain poured down, and water in ponds and rivers flowed out due to the sudden rise.

古文：寻、邑乘死人而渡，王寻见杀，军人皆散走。
现代文：王寻与王邑踏着死者的尸体过了河，王寻被杀，士兵全部逃散。
English: Wang Huan and Wang Yip crossed the river on the bodies of the dead. Wang Huan was killed and all the soldiers fled.

古文：王邑还长安，莽败，俱被诛。
现代文：王邑逃回了长安，王莽失败，他们都被杀死了。
English: Wang Yip fled back to Chang'an, Wang Mang failed, and they were all killed.

古文：贾谧
现代文：贾谧
English: Jia Wei

古文：西晋八年六月，飘风吹贾谧朝衣，飞数百丈。
现代文：西晋八年六月，大风吹走贾谧的官服，飞出几百丈远。
English: In June of the eighth year of the Western Jin Dynasty, a strong wind blew away Jia Wei's official uniform, and it flew hundreds of meters away.

古文：明年，谧诛。
现代文：第二年贾谧就被杀死。
English: The following year, Jia Jun was killed.

古文：其年十一月，京都大风，发屋折木。
现代文：这年十一月京都刮大风，揭走了房顶刮折了树木。
English: In November of that year, a strong wind blew through Kyoto, ripping off roofs and snapping trees.

古文：十二月，愍怀太子幽废，死于许昌。
现代文：到了十二月，愍怀太子便被囚禁、免职，死在许昌。
English: By December, Prince Yan Huai was imprisoned, dismissed, and died in Xuchang.

古文：三子幽于金墉，杀太子母谢氏，丧还洛，又大风雷电，帷盖风裂。
现代文：三子被囚禁在金墉，太子母家谢氏也被杀害，安葬在洛阳。丧葬之日又出现了大风雷电，帷帐伞差都被风撕破了。
English: The three sons were imprisoned in Jinlu, and the prince's mother, Jia Ruan Xie, was also killed and buried in Luoyang. On the day of the funeral, there was a strong wind and lightning, and the curtains and umbrellas were torn by the wind.

古文：张华
现代文：张华
English: Zhang Hua

古文：西晋永康元年，大风，飞石沙折木。
现代文：西晋永康元年，起了大风，石沙飞起，树木折断。
English: In the first year of Western Jin Yongkang, a strong wind blew, the stone sand flew up, and the trees broke.

古文：其年四月，张华舍，风飘起折木，飞缯轴六七枚。
现代文：这年四月，张华住的房子被大风刮折了梁木，飘散在四处，还有六七轴丝绸也被刮飞了。
English: In April of this year, the house where Zhang Hua lived was blown down by a strong wind, and the beams and beams were broken and scattered everywhere. Sixty-seven spools of silk were also blown away.

古文：是月，赵王伦矫制废贾后，害张华、裴頠等。
现代文：就在这个月内，赵王司马伦假传圣旨废了贾后，杀死了张华、裴顾等人。
English: In this very month, Zhao Wang Simarun abolished Jia Hou and killed Zhang Hua, Pei Gu and others.

古文：刘曜
现代文：刘曜
English: Liu You

古文：前赵刘曜，葬父母，费用亿计。发掘古冢。暴骸骨原野，哭声盈衢。
现代文：前赵刘曜，在安葬他父母时，花的钱以亿计算，还把墓地上的一些古坟掘开，将里面的尸骨扔在原野上，弄得大街上到处都有哭声。
English: When the former Zhao Liuyang buried his parents, he spent hundreds of millions of yuan. He also dug up some ancient graves in the cemetery and threw the bones inside on the plain, causing cries everywhere on the street.

古文：大霖雨。震曜父墓门屋，大风飘散，发父寝堂于外垣五十余步。
现代文：一狂风暴雨袭来，雷电劈碎了刘曜父亲坟墓的门屋，被大风刮得四处飘散，还把其为的寝堂掘出来扔到墙外五十余步。
English: A violent storm hit, and the lightning cracked the gatehouse of Liu You's father's tomb. The strong wind blew it apart and scattered it everywhere. It also dug out his bedroom and threw it more than fifty paces outside the wall.

古文：松柏植已成林，至是悉枯死。
现代文：墓地上栽种的松柏树本已成林，到这时也都枯死了。
English: The pine and cypress trees planted on the cemetery, which had already grown into a forest, had also withered by this time.

古文：曜竟为石勒所擒。
现代文：刘曜后来也终于被石勒擒获。
English: Later, Liu You was also finally captured by Shi Le.

古文：刘裔
现代文：刘裔
English: Liu Zong

古文：东晋成帝时，刘裔镇守浔阳。
现代文：东晋成帝时，刘裔镇守浔阳。
English: When the Eastern Jin Dynasty became emperor, the Liu family was in charge of Fenyang.

古文：有回风从东来，入裔船中，状如匹练，长五六丈。
现代文：一天，从东面刮来一股旋风，进入刘裔所乘坐的船中。这旋风的形状就象一匹白色的丝绢，有五六丈长。
English: One day, a whirlwind came from the east and entered the boat that Liu Zhecong was on. The shape of the whirlwind was like a white silken horse, five or six feet long.

古文：术人戴洋曰： 有刀兵死丧之乱。 
现代文：术士戴洋曰： 要有刀兵死丧之类祸乱出现。 
English: The sorcerer Dai Yang said: There must be a disaster such as the death of a sword soldier.

古文：顷为郭默所杀。
现代文：过了不长时间，刘裔便被郭默杀死了。
English: Not long after, Liu Zi was killed by Guo Mei.

古文：徐羡之
现代文：徐羡之
English: Xu Enzhi

古文：宋徐羡之，文帝初，任扬州。
现代文：南朝宋代有个人叫徐羡之，文帝初年，他在扬州任职。
English: In the Song Dynasty of the Southern Dynasty, there was a man named Xu Enzhi. In the first year of Emperor Wen, he served in Yangzhou.

古文：有飘风起自西门，须臾合，直至厅事，绕帽及席，迳造西际。
现代文：一天，有一股旋风从西门刮起，不一会儿便合拢在一起，一直刮到厅堂上，绕着徐羡之的帽子与座席转了一圈，直奔西边去了。
English: One day, a whirlwind blew up from the west gate, and in a short time they closed together. It blew all the way to the hall, circled around Xu Enzhi's hat and seat, and went straight to the west.

古文：寻而羡之为文帝所诛。
现代文：事过不久，羡之便被文帝杀死了。
English: Not long after the incident, Enshi was killed by Emperor Wen.

古文：柳世隆
现代文：柳世隆
English: Ryu Seiryo

古文：宋孝武时，柳太尉世隆，乘车行还。於庭中洗车，有大风从门而入，直来冲车有声，车盖覆向天。
现代文：南朝宋代孝武帝时，太尉柳世隆一次乘车外出回来，在院子里洗刷车子时，有一阵大风从门口刮进来，一直冲到车上并发出声响，车上的伞盖也被刮翻朝了天。
English: When Emperor Xiaowu of the Southern Song Dynasty, Lieutenant Liu Shilong was returning from a trip in a car. While he was washing the car in the yard, a strong wind blew in from the door, rushing all the way to the car and making noise. The umbrella cover on the car was also blown up into the sky.

古文：是年，明帝立，合门被杀。
现代文：就在这一年，明帝登位，柳世隆满门被杀。
English: In the same year, Emperor Ming ascended to the throne, and Liu Shihongmanmeng was killed.

古文：崔惠景
现代文：崔惠景
English: Cui Huijing

古文：宋崔惠景围台城，有五色幡，风吹，飞在云中，半日乃下。
现代文：南朝宋代崔惠景率兵围攻台城，军中有一面五色旗幡，被风吹到了天空，过了半天才落下来。
English: In the Southern Song Dynasty, Cui Huijing led an army to besiege Taicheng. Among the army, there was a five-colored flag, which was blown into the sky by the wind and only fell down half a day later.

古文：众见惊异，相谓曰： 幡者事当翻覆。 
现代文：众人见了大为惊异，互相说： 幡者翻也，这件事预示着战事要失败。 
English: Everyone was very surprised to see it and said to each other, "This is a sign that the war is going to fail."

古文：数日而惠景败。
现代文：几天之后，崔惠景就被打败了。
English: A few days later, Cui Huijing was defeated.

古文：许世宗
现代文：许世宗
English: Xu Shizong sings

古文：北齐北海王许世宗，时转为录尚书，拜命。
现代文：北齐时北海王许世宗，迁调为录尚书，谢恩受命。
English: At the time of the Northern Qi Dynasty, the Northern Sea King Xu Shizong was transferred to the post of record book, and Xie En was ordered.

古文：其夜暴风震雷，拔庭中桐树六十围者，倒立本处。
现代文：当天夜里暴风震雷，把庭院中有六十围粗的大桐树拔出来倒立在原来的地方。
English: On the night of the same day, a thunderstorm uprooted a 60-metre-tall giant Paulownia tree in the courtyard and left it upside down in its original place.

古文：识者知其不终。
现代文：懂得的人知道他不得善终。
English: A man of understanding knows that he must die well.

古文：竟为高肇所谮。旬日处死。
现代文：后来许世宗终于被高肇进谗言所害，十天后被处死。
English: Later, Xu Shizong was finally victimized by Gao Zhaojin's slander and was executed ten days later.

古文：徐妃
现代文：徐妃
English: Xu Fei

古文：梁元帝妃徐妃，初嫁夕，车至西州，而疾风大起，发屋折木。
现代文：梁元帝有个妃子徐妃，当初出嫁的那天，车走到西州，突然起了大风，刮倒了房子摧折了树木。
English: Emperor Liang Yuan had a concubine named Xu Fei. On the day they were married, the car went to Xizhou, and suddenly a strong wind blew, knocking down houses and breaking trees.

古文：无何，雪霰交下，帷帘皆白。
现代文：不大一会儿又一并下起了雪霰，车上的帘幕全成了白色。
English: A short while later, the sleigh started moving again, and the curtains on the car turned completely white.

古文：及长还之日，又大雷电，西州厅事，两柱俱碎。
现代文：等到回家探亲的那天，又有大雷电，西州厅堂的两根柱子都被雷击碎了。
English: On the day I went home to visit my relatives, there was another big thunder and lightning, and both pillars of the Seishu Hall were shattered by lightning.

古文：帝以为不祥。
现代文：元帝认为这都是不祥之兆。
English: Emperor Yuan believed that this was an ominous sign.

古文：妃竟以淫秽自杀。不中之应。
现代文：徐妃后来因淫荡失德而自杀，是不应为妃的应验。
English: Xu Fei later committed suicide because of her debauchery and immorality. She should not have been crowned as empress.

古文：李密
现代文：李密
English: Li Mi

古文：隋大业十三年二月，李密于巩县南设坛，刑白马祭天，称魏公，置僚佐。
现代文：隋朝大业十三年二月，李密于巩县县城南面摆设祭坛，杀白马祭天，自称魏公，并任命了官僚将佐。
English: In February of the thirteenth year of the Sui Dynasty, Li Mi set up an altar in the southern part of Gong County, killed a white horse to sacrifice to heaven, called himself Wei Gong, and appointed a bureaucratic general.

古文：改元升坛时，黑风从西北暴至，吹密衣冠及左右僚属，皆倒于坛下。
现代文：在改变纪元年号登坛拜天时，一股黑风突然从西北刮来，直吹李密的衣服帽子和两边的官僚部属，把他们全都刮倒在坛下。
English: While he was worshiping at the altar with the date of the change of the era, a black wind suddenly blew from the northwest, blowing Li Mi's clothes and hat and the bureaucrats on both sides, and knocking them all down under the altar.

古文：沙尘暗天，咫尺不相见，良久乃息。
现代文：风沙尘土遮暗了天空，咫尺之近都看不见，过了好长时间才停息。
English: The wind, sand and dust darkened the sky, making it impossible to see anything even a few feet away, and it took a long time for it to subside.

古文：贼军恶之，俄而密败。
现代文：贼军预感到不好，李密很快就失败了。
English: The Kleptocrats had a bad premonition, and Li Mi soon failed.

古文：虹夏世隆
现代文：虹夏世隆
English: Hongxia Shilong

古文：故越王无诸旧宫上，有大杉树，空中，可坐十余人。
现代文：已故越王无诸的旧宫殿上有一棵大杉树，中间是空的，可以坐十多个人。
English: There is a big cedar tree on the old palace of the late Yue Wang Muzhu. It is empty in the middle and can seat more than ten people.

古文：越人夏世隆，高尚不仕，常之故宫。
现代文：越人夏世隆，道德品质崇高不愿作官，经常到旧宫殿来。
English: Xia Shilong, a Yue man of high moral character who did not want to be an official, often came to the old palace.

古文：因雨霁欲暮，断虹饮于宫池，渐渐缩小，化为男子，著黄赤紫之间衣而入树，良久不出。
现代文：有一次雨过天晴日将落山时，他看半截彩虹伸向宫池饮水，并逐渐缩小，最后变成一个男子，穿黄红紫色之间的衣服进入树内，很久不出来。
English: Once, when the rain had passed and the sun was about to set, he saw a half-cut rainbow stretching to the palace pool to drink water, and gradually shrinking, finally turning into a man, wearing yellow-red-purple clothes, entering the tree and not coming out for a long time.

古文：世隆怪异，乃召邻之年少十数人，往视之，见男子为大赤蛇盘绕。
现代文：世隆感到很奇异，就召唤十几个邻居的小孩，一起去看。见那个男子被一条大红蛇缠绕住。
English: Seirong felt very strange, so he summoned a dozen children from the neighborhood to come and watch. They saw the man being entangled by a big red snake.

古文：众惧不敢逼，而少年遥掷瓦砾。
现代文：众人害怕不敢靠近，小孩远远的向那投掷瓦砾。
English: People were afraid to go near it, and children threw rubble at it from a distance.

古文：闻树中有声极异，如妇人之哭。
现代文：听见树中发出像妇人哭一样的奇怪声音。
English: He heard a strange sound in the trees, like a woman crying.

古文：须臾，云雾不相见，又闻隐隐如远雷之响。俄有一彩龙，与赤鹄飞去。
现代文：不一会儿，出现了云雾使大家互相看不见，又隐隐约约听到好象在远处打雷的声音，时间不大有一条彩龙和一只红色的天鹅一起飞走了。
English: In a little while, a cloud appeared, so that they could not see each other, and a faint sound was heard, as of distant thunder. In a little while, a dragon and a red swan flew away together.

古文：及晓，世隆往观之。见树中紫蛇皮及五色蛟皮，欲取以归，有火生树中，树焚荡尽。
现代文：到天明，世隆前去察看，见树中有一张紫蛇皮和一张五色蛟龙皮，想要把它们拿回去。突然树中起了火，把树烧得干干净净。
English: At dawn, Shilong went to investigate and saw a purple snake skin and a five-colored dragon skin in the tree and wanted to take them back. Suddenly, a fire broke out in the tree and burned the tree clean.

古文：吴景帝永安三年七月也。
现代文：这件事发生在吴景帝永安三年七月。
English: The incident happened in July of the third year of Wu Jingdi's reign.

古文：陈济妻
现代文：陈济妻
English: Chen Jizhong

古文：庐陵巴丘人陈济，为州吏。
现代文：陈济是庐陵巴丘人，做州吏。
English: Chen Ji is from Baqiu, Fuling, and works as a state official.

古文：其妇秦在家，一丈夫长大端正，著绛碧袍，衫色炫耀，来从之。
现代文：其妻秦氏在家时，一个长得高大端正、穿色彩耀眼大红线绿两色袍子的男人来追求她。
English: While his wife, Qin, was at home, a tall, well-groomed man in a dazzling red-and-green robe came after her.

古文：后常相期于一山涧，至于寝处，不觉有人道相感接。
现代文：以后经常在一个山涧中相会，一起睡觉时，没有男女交合的感觉。
English: After that, they often met in a hammock, and when they slept together, there was no feeling of sexual intercourse between men and women.

古文：如是积年。
现代文：象这样过了一年多。
English: It's been like this for more than a year.

古文：村人观其所至，辄有虹见。
现代文：村里人看他们所到的地方，总是有虹出现。
English: People in the village always see rainbows wherever they go.

古文：秦至水侧，丈夫有金瓶，引水共饮，后遂有身。
现代文：秦氏来到水边，那男人有一个金瓶，取来水一起喝，以后就有了身孕。
English: Mr. Qin came to the water's edge, the man had a gold bottle, fetched water to drink together, and later became pregnant.

古文：生儿如人，多肉。
现代文：生的小孩象人一样，长的挺胖。
English: Born children are like people, they grow up to be quite fat.

古文：济假还，秦惧见之，内于盆中。
现代文：后来陈济回家，秦氏害怕让他看见，就把小孩藏在室内盆中。
English: Later, when Chen Ji returned home, the Qin family was afraid to let him see, so they hid the child in an indoor basin.

古文：丈夫云： 儿小，未可得我去。 
现代文：那个男人说： 这孩子太小，怎么跟我去呢？ 
English: The man said, "This child is too young, how can he come with me?"

古文：自衣，即以绛囊盛。
现代文：亲自给他穿上衣服，装进一个大红色的口袋中。
English: Dressed him myself and put him in a big red bag.

古文：时出与乳之时，辄风雨，邻人见虹下其庭。
现代文：秦氏给他喂奶时，总是要起风雨，邻人就看见有虹下到他家院子里。
English: When Mr. Qin was breastfeeding him, there was always a storm, and the neighbors saw a rainbow in his yard.

古文：丈夫复少时来，将儿去，人见二虹出其家。
现代文：过了不长时间，那男人又来，把小孩带走，有人看见有两条虹从他家出来。
English: A short time later, the man returned and took the child away. Two rainbows were seen coming out of his house.

古文：数年而来省母。
现代文：数年以后回来探望母亲。
English: The son came back to visit his mother once every few years.

古文：后秦适田，见二虹于涧，畏之。
现代文：以后秦氏到田地里去，见两条虹在山涧，很害怕。
English: Later, one time, Mr. Qin went to the fields and saw two neon lights in the hawthorn. He was scared.

古文：须臾，见丈夫云： 是我，无所畏。 
现代文：不一会儿，看见那男人说： 是我，没有什么可怕的！ 
English: After a while, he saw the man and said, "It's me, there's nothing to be afraid of!"

古文：从此乃绝。
现代文：从此以后就断绝了来往。
English: Since then, they have cut off contact.

古文：薛愿
现代文：薛愿
English: Xue Zhen

古文：东晋义熙初，晋陵薛愿，有虹饮其釜鬲，噏响便竭。
现代文：东晋义熙初年，晋陵有个叫薛愿的人，有一次一条虹伸到他家的锅里饮水，发出一阵吸水的声音就把水吸干了。
English: In the first year of the Eastern Jin Dynasty, there was a man named Xue Zhen in Jinling. Once, a rainbow reached into his family's pot to drink water. It made a sucking sound and sucked the water dry.

古文：愿辇酒灌之，随投随竭，乃吐金满器，於是日益隆富。
现代文：薛愿又拿来酒倒进里面，结果也是边倒边吸干，并吐出黄金装满了锅。于是薛愿一天天地富裕起来。
English: Xue Zhen poured more wine into the pot, and as a result, the pot was drained and filled with gold. As a result, Xue Zhen became rich day by day.

古文：刘义庆
现代文：刘义庆
English: Liu Yiking

古文：宋长沙王道邻子义庆，在广陵卧疾。
现代文：南朝宋代长沙王刘道邻的儿子义庆，病卧在广陵。
English: The Southern Song Dynasty's Changsha King Liu Daojin's son, Yiqing, lies ill in Guangling.

古文：食粥次，忽有白虹入室，就饮其粥。义庆掷器于阶，遂作风雨声，振于庭户，良久不见。
现代文：在他吃粥的时候，忽然有一条白虹进入他的房间，去喝他的粥，义庆就把盛粥的碗扔到台阶下，于是便发出风雨声震动门窗，过了很长时间那虹就不见了。
English: While he was eating his porridge, a white rainbow suddenly entered his room and went to drink his porridge. Yixing threw the bowl of porridge down the stairs, and the sound of wind and rain shook the doors and windows. After a long time, the rainbow disappeared.

古文：首阳山
现代文：首阳山
English: Shouyang Mountain

古文：后魏明帝正光二年，夏六月，首阳山中，有晚虹下饮于溪泉。
现代文：后魏明帝正光二年复六月，在首阳山中，傍晚有一虹伸入一个溪泉中。
English: After the reign of Emperor Ming of the Wei Dynasty, there was a rainbow stretching into a stream spring in the evening of the second lunar month in Shouyang Mountain.

古文：有樵人阳万，于岭下见之。
现代文：有个砍柴人叫阳万在岭下看见了。
English: A woodcutter named Yang Wan saw it under the ridge.

古文：良久，化为女子，年如十六七。异之，问不言。
现代文：过了很长时间，虹变为一个女子，年龄有十六七岁，觉得很奇怪，问她，也不说话。
English: After a long time, the rainbow turned into a woman, aged sixteen or seventeen. It felt very strange to ask her, and she didn't speak.

古文：乃告蒲津戍将宇文显，取之以闻。明帝召入宫，见其容貌姝美。问云： 我天女也，暂降人间。 
现代文：于是人们把这件事告诉给蒲津守将宇文显，他把这女子带回并报告给明帝，明帝把她召入宫中。见她容貌娇美，就问她，回答说： 我是天女，暂时来到人间。 
English: So the matter was reported to the governor of Bautzen, U-Wen-Hsien. He brought the woman back and reported to Emperor Ming. Emperor Ming summoned her to the palace. Seeing her lovely appearance, he asked her, and she replied, "I am a celestial maiden who has temporarily come to earth."

古文：帝欲逼幸，而色甚难。
现代文：明帝想要和她亲近，她面露难色。
English: Mingdi wants to get close to her, and she looks puzzled.

古文：复令左右拥抱，声如钟磬，化为虹而上天。
现代文：明帝又让手下的人拥抱她，她发出钟磬一样的响声就化为一条虹升上了天空。
English: Emperor Ming also had his men embrace her, and when she emitted a bell-like sound, she turned into a rainbow and rose into the sky.

古文：韦皋
现代文：韦皋
English: Wei Xuan

古文：唐宰相韦皋，镇蜀。尝与宾客从事十余人，宴郡西亭。
现代文：唐宰相韦皋，在他镇守四川时，曾经和宾客随从十多个人在郡西亭设宴。
English: Tang prime minister Wei Wei, when he was in charge of Sichuan, once held a banquet with more than ten guests at Gu Xiting.

古文：暴风雨，俄顷而霁。
现代文：来了暴风雨，不一会儿又雨过天晴。
English: The storm came, and soon it was raining again.

古文：方就食，忽虹霓自空而下，直入庭，垂首于筵。
现代文：就在吃饭的时候，忽然虹霓从空中落了下来，直入庭堂，把头垂向筵席。
English: While they were eating, the rainbow trout suddenly fell from the sky, went straight into the courtyard, and hung its head over the table.

古文：韦与宾偕悸而退，吸其食饮且尽。
现代文：韦皋和宾客都害怕地向后退，而虹霓却把酒席吸的干干净净。
English: Wei Wei and the guests all retreated in fear, but the rainbow dragonfly sucked the table clean.

古文：首似驴，霏然若晴霞状，红碧相霭。虚空五色，四视左右，久而方去。
现代文：它的头象驴，飘然好似红绿相间的云霞，五光十色，不停地向四周环顾，很长时间才离去。
English: Its head is like a donkey, floating like a red and green cloud, multicolored, constantly looking around, it takes a long time to leave.

古文：公惧且恶之，遂罢宴。
现代文：韦皋又怕又厌恶，于是停止了酒宴。
English: Fearful and disgusted, Wei Wei stopped the drinking party.

古文：亦列坐。因起曰： 公何为色忧乎？ 
现代文：当时过去在河南任少尹现客居四川的豆卢署也在坐，他站起来说： 您为什么脸色忧郁啊？ 
English: At that time, the Department of Doulu, who used to be in Henan and is now a guest in Sichuan, was also sitting. He stood up and said: Why do you look melancholy?

古文：曰： 吾闻虹霓者，妖沴之气。
现代文：回答说： 我听说虹霓是妖邪之气。
English: He answered, "I have heard that the rainbow is an evil spirit.

古文：今宴方酣而沴气止吾筵，岂非怪之甚者乎？
现代文：今天我们正喝得酣畅的时候而这妖邪之气来到宴筵上，难道不是十分奇怪吗？
English: Isn't it very strange that this evil spirit should come to the feast today, when we are all drinking well?

古文：吾窃惧此。 署曰： 真天下祥符也，固不为人之怪耳。
现代文：我心里对这个感到恐惧， 豆卢署回答说： 这是天下真正的吉祥之兆啊，本来不应该让人感到奇怪。
English: I was afraid of this in my heart, the Doulu officer replied: This is a real auspicious sign in the world, it should not have been strange.

古文：夫虹霓天使也，降于邪则为戾，降于正则为祥。
现代文：虹霓本来是天使，降临到邪恶的人那里就是怪戾，降临到正直人那就是吉祥的征兆。
English: The rainbow trout is originally an angel. When it falls on an evil person, it is a monster trout. When it falls on an honest person, it is an auspicious sign.

古文：理宜然矣。
现代文：道理就是这样。
English: That's how it is.

古文：公正人也，是宜为庆为祥。
现代文：您是正直的人，应该为这个吉祥庆贺。 
English: You are an honest person and should celebrate this auspicious occasion.

古文：敢以前贺。 于是具以帛书其语而献，公览而喜。
现代文：于是准备了帛在上面书写了他说的话献给了韦皋，韦皋看后很高兴。
English: So he prepared and wrote his words on it and dedicated it to Wei Wei. Wei Wei was very happy after reading it.

古文：后旬余，有诏就拜中书令。
现代文：过了十几天，皇帝有诏书下，任命韦皋为中书令。
English: A dozen days later, the emperor issued an imperial edict, appointing Wei Wei to the position of chancellor.

