古文：子列子穷，貌有饥色。
现代文：原文春秋时，列子家很贫困，常常面有饥饿之色。
English: In the Spring and Autumn Period, the Reishi family was very poor and often looked hungry.

古文：客有言之于郑子阳者，曰： 列御寇，有道之士也。居君之国而穷，君毋乃不好士乎？ 
现代文：一位客人对郑子阳说： 列御寇是位有道之士，住在您的国中却很穷，君王恐怕有些不爱士人吧？ 
English: A guest said to Zheng Ziyang: "Lie Miko is a man of virtue, but he lives in your country and is very poor. I'm afraid some kings don't like men of virtue, do they?"

古文：郑子阳令官遗之粟数十秉。
现代文：郑子阳于是命令手下的官吏送给列子许多谷子。
English: Zheng Ziyang then ordered the officials under his command to send a lot of grain to the envoys.

古文：子列子出见使者，再拜而辞。
现代文：列子见到使者后，很有礼貌地对他拜了几拜，但却谢绝了粮谷。
English: After seeing the messenger, Letson very politely bowed to him for a few moments, but declined the grain.

古文：子列子笑而谓之曰： 君非自知我也，以人之言而遗我粟也。夫以人言而粟我，至其罪我也，亦且以人言，此吾所以不受也。 
现代文：使者离开后，列子进屋，他的妻子望着他，手按心窝说： 我听说有道义的人，妻子儿女都能得到安逸快乐，如今妻子老少都在挨饿，君王送你粮食你又不接受，难道我的命就该这样苦吗？ 列子笑着回答： 他并不是真正了解我，如果因别人的一番话而给我粮食，将来定我的罪也可听凭别人的谗言，所以我不能接受。 
English: After the messenger left, Reiko entered the house. His wife looked at him and put her hand on her heart and said, "I have heard that a moral person, his wife and children can be comfortable and happy. Now my wife and children are starving. The king sent you food and you did not accept it. Should my life be so hard?" Reiko replied with a smile, "He does not really understand me. If I am given food because of someone else's words, I can be condemned in the future by someone else's criticism, so I cannot accept it."

古文：其后民果作难，杀子阳。
现代文：后来，百姓果然起来作乱，杀死郑子阳。
English: Later, the people did indeed riot and kill Zheng Ziyang.

古文：受人之养而不死其难，不义；死其难，则死无道也。
现代文：接受人的赏赐，却不为救他的灾祸拼死，是不仗义的；但是为这种人的灾祸去拼死，那么死了也不合道德。
English: To accept a man's bounty and not fight to the death to save him from his woes is unjust; but to fight to the death to save him from his woes is immoral.

古文：死无道，逆也。子列子除不义去逆也，岂不远哉！
现代文：不合于道德便是叛逆的行为，列子能避开不义行为又能避开叛逆，他的本领不是很高吗？
English: If it is not in accordance with morality, it is a rebellious act. If a disciple can avoid unrighteous acts, he can also avoid rebellion. Isn't his ability very high?

古文：魏相公叔痤病且死，谓惠王曰： 公孙鞅年少有奇才，愿王举国而听之。即不听，必杀之，勿令出境。 
现代文：评译魏相公叔痤病危时对梁惠王说： 公孙鞅年轻而且有奇才，希望举国上下都能听他的话，如果您不采纳这意见，就请杀掉他，千万不能让他出境到别国去。 
English: Commenting on the translation, Wei Xianggong's uncle Liang Huiwang said to Liang Huiwang when he was critically ill: Gongsun Liang is young and has great talent. I hope that the whole country can listen to him. If you do not accept this opinion, please kill him. Do not let him leave the country to go to other countries.

古文：王许诺而去。
现代文：惠王答应了。
English: Wei Wang agreed to his request and left.

古文：公叔召鞅谢曰： 吾先君而后臣，故先为君谋，后以告子，子必速行矣！ 
现代文：接着公叔召公孙鞅道歉说： 我做事要先君后臣，因此先为君主谋虑，然后，再告诉你怎样做。
English: Then the uncle called the grandson to apologize and said, "I have to do things for the prince first, so I have to think about the prince first, and then I will tell you what to do."

古文：鞅曰： 君不能用子之言任臣，又安能用子之言杀臣乎？ 
现代文：现在你要尽快逃跑。 公孙鞅回答： 国君不因你的推荐任用我，又怎会因你的话杀掉我呢？ 
English: Now you must run away as quickly as possible. Gongsun Yao replied: If the sovereign did not appoint me because of your recommendation, how could he kill me because of your words?

古文：卒不去。
现代文：公孙鞅终于没有离开。
English: Finally, he did not leave Wei.

古文：鞅语正堪与列子语对照。
现代文：公孙鞅的话正好与列子的话形成对照。
English: Gongsun Yao's words exactly contrasted with those of Lei Zi.

