古文：魏惠王死，葬有日矣。
现代文：魏惠王死，举行葬礼的日子已经定下来了。
English: Wei Hui Wang died, the day of the funeral has been set.

古文：天大雨雪，至于牛目，坏城郭，且为栈道而葬。
现代文：但是当天下起了大雪，积雪深得几乎能没到牛的眼睛，城郭的路也无法通行，太子准备用木板构筑栈道去送葬。
English: However, heavy snow fell that day. The snow was so deep that it could barely reach the cows' eyes, and the roads in the castle were impassable. The prince planned to use wooden planks to build a path to the funeral.

古文：群臣多谏太子者，曰； 雪甚如此而丧行，民必甚病之。
现代文：群臣都去谏阻太子，说： 雪下得这么大还要送殡，百姓一定会感到痛苦。
English: The courtiers all tried to dissuade the crown prince, saying, "It's snowing so heavily that even funerals have to be held. The people must be feeling miserable."

古文：官费又恐不给，请驰期更日。 
现代文：国家开支又恐怕不够，请暂缓时间，改日安葬。 
English: I am afraid that the state expenditure is not enough. Please postpone the time and bury him another day.

古文：太子曰： 为人子，而以民劳与官费用之故，而不行先生之丧，不义也。
现代文：太子说： 做儿子的因为人民辛苦和国家开支不够的缘故，就不按期举行先王的丧礼，这不合礼法。
English: The prince said: "It is not in accordance with the etiquette and law for a son to not hold the funeral of the former king on schedule because of the hard work of the people and the lack of state expenditure.

古文：子勿复言。 
现代文：你们就不要再说了。 
English: Just stop talking.

古文：群臣皆不敢言，而以告犀首。犀首曰： 吾未有以言之也，是其唯惠公乎！请告惠公。 
现代文：大臣们都不敢再去劝说，就把这件事告诉了犀首，犀首说： 我也没法劝说他，这事只有惠公能够办到，让我去告诉惠子。 
English: The ministers didn't dare to try to persuade him again, so they told him the whole story. The leader said, "I can't convince him either. This is something that only Huigong can do. Let me go and tell Keiko."

古文：惠公曰： 诺。 
现代文：听了犀首的话，惠公说： 好吧。 
English: After listening to the head of the rhinoceros, Huigong said: Okay.

古文：驾而见太子曰： 葬有日矣。 太子曰： 然。 
现代文：就驾着车去见太子，说： 举行葬礼的日期已经定下来了吗？ 太子说： 是的。 
English: I drove to see him and said, 'Has a date been set for the funeral?' And he said, 'Yes.'

古文：惠公曰： 昔王季历葬于楚山之尾，灓水啮其墓，见棺之前和。
现代文：惠子说： 过去周王季历埋葬在终南山脚下，地下渗漏出来的水侵蚀了他的坟墓，露出棺材前面的横木。
English: Keiko said: In the past, Zhou Wang Jili was buried at the foot of the South Mountain. Water seeping from the ground eroded his grave, exposing the crossbeam in front of the coffin.

古文：文王曰：嘻!先君必欲一见群臣百姓也夫，故使灓水见之。 
现代文：周文王说： 啊，先王一定是想再看一看各位大臣和百姓吧，所以才让渗漏的水把棺木露出来。
English: Zhou Wenwang said: Ah, the former king must have wanted to take another look at the ministers and people, so he let the leaking water expose the coffin.

古文：于是出而为之张于朝，百姓皆见之，三日而后更葬。
现代文：于是就把棺木挖出来，给它搭起灵棚，百姓都来朝见，三天以后才改葬。
English: So they dug out the coffin and set up a hearse for it. The people all came to see it in the morning, and it was reburied three days later.

古文：此文王之义也。
现代文：这是文王的义举啊。
English: This is King Wen's act of charity.

古文：今葬有日矣，而雪甚，及牛目，难以行，太子为及日之故，得毋嫌于欲亟葬乎?
现代文：现在葬期虽然已经定下来了，但是雪下得太大，甚至没到牛的眼睛，灵车难以前行，太子为了能按期下葬就不顾困难，这是不是有些急于将先王安葬了事的嫌疑啊？
English: Although the funeral date has now been set, the snow has fallen so heavily that it has not even reached the ox's eye, the hearse is having difficulty moving forward, and the crown prince is ignoring the difficulties in order to be able to hold the funeral on schedule. Is this not a suspicion of some eagerness to bury the former king peacefully?

古文：愿太子更日。
现代文：希望太子能够更改日期。
English: It is hoped that the prince will be able to change the date.

古文：先王必欲少留而扶社稷、安黔首也，故使雪甚。
现代文：先王一定是想要再停留一下，再来扶护一下国家，安顿人民，所以才让雪下得这么大。
English: The previous king must have wanted to stay a little longer, protect the country a little longer, and settle the people, which is why it snowed so much.

古文：因驰期而更为日，此文王之义也。
现代文：据此推迟葬期而另择吉日，这不正是文王般的大义吗？
English: To postpone the funeral and choose another auspicious day, isn't this a great act of justice like King Wen?

古文：若此而弗为，意者羞法文王乎? 
现代文：像这样的情况还不改日安葬，想来大概是把效法文王当作羞耻了吧？ 
English: In a situation like this, they don't change the day of the funeral, so it's probably a shame to follow the example of the French king, right?

古文：太子曰： 甚善。敬驰期，更择日。 
现代文：太子说： 你说得太对了，那就延期安葬，另择吉日。 
English: The prince said, "You are so right. Then postpone the burial and choose a better day."

古文：惠子非徒行其说也，又令魏太子未葬其先王而因又说文王之义。
现代文：惠公不仅仅是实践了自己的主张，并且还让魏太子不匆忙安葬先王，而借此机会宣扬了周文王的义举。
English: Huigong not only put his own ideas into practice, but also asked Wei Taishi not to hurry to bury the former king, and took this opportunity to promote Zhou Wenwang's act of righteousness.

古文：说文王之义以示天下，岂小功也哉!
现代文：将周文王的仁仪昭示于天下，这难道是很小的功劳吗？
English: Is it a small achievement to bring the benevolence of King Zhou Wen to the world?

