古文：夫能扶天下之危者，则据天下之安；能除天下之忧者，则享天下之乐；能救天下之祸者，则获天下之福；故泽及于民，则贤人归之；泽及昆虫，则圣人归之。
现代文：能够拯救天下倾危的，就能得到天下的安宁；能够解除天下忧患的，就能够享受天下的快乐；能够解救国家灾祸的，就能够得到天下的幸福。所以，恩泽遍及于百姓，贤人就会归附他；恩泽遍及于万物，圣人就会归附他。
English: He who can save the world from peril can obtain the peace of the world; he who can relieve the sorrow of the world can enjoy the happiness of the world; he who can relieve the national calamity can obtain the happiness of the world. Therefore, if grace pervades the people, the wise will adhere to him; if grace pervades everything, the saints will adhere to him.

古文：贤人所归，则其国强；圣人所归，则六合同。
现代文：贤人归附的，国家就能强盛；圣人归附的，天下就能统一。
English: If the wise people adhere to it, the country can prosper; if the saints adhere to it, the world can be unified.

古文：求贤以德，致圣以道。
现代文：使贤人归附要用 德 ，使圣人归附要用 道 。
English: It is necessary to use virtue to make the wise wise, and it is necessary to use the way to make the saints.

古文：贤去，则国微；圣去，则国乖。
现代文：贤人离去，国家就要衰弱了；圣人离去，国家就要混乱了。
English: If the wise men leave, the country will weaken; if the sages leave, the country will be in chaos.

古文：微者危之阶，乖者亡之征。
现代文：衰弱是通向危险的阶梯，混乱是即将灭亡的征兆。
English: Weakness is the ladder to danger, and confusion the portent of impending doom.

古文：贤人之政，降人以体；圣人之政，降人以心。
现代文：贤人执政，能使人从行动上服从；圣人执政，能使人从内心里顺从。
English: The rule of a wise man makes men obedient in their actions; the rule of a saint makes men obedient in their hearts.

古文：体降可以图始，心降可以保终。
现代文：从行动上服从，便可以开始创业了；从内心里顺从，才可以善始善终。
English: From the action of obedience, you can start a business; from the heart of obedience, you can start well.

古文：降体以礼，降心以乐。
现代文：使人从行动上服从靠的是礼教，使人从内心里顺从靠的是乐教。
English: What makes people obey from action depends on etiquette, and what makes people obey from the heart depends on music.

古文：所谓乐者，非金石丝竹也；谓人乐其家，谓人乐其族，谓人乐其业，谓人乐其都邑，谓人乐其政令，谓人乐其道德。
现代文：所谓的乐教，并非指金、石、丝、竹，而是使人们喜爱自己的家庭，喜爱自己的宗族，喜爱自己的职业，喜爱自己的城邑，喜爱国家的政令，喜爱社会的伦理道德。
English: The so-called music education does not refer to gold, stone, silk, and bamboo, but to make people love their families, love their clans, love their occupations, love their towns, love the country's government decrees, and love social ethics.

古文：如此，君人者乃作乐以节之，使不失其和。
现代文：这样治理民众，然后再制作音乐来陶冶人们的情操，使社会不失和谐。
English: In this way, the people are governed, and then music is made to cultivate people's sentiments and make the society harmonious.

古文：故有德之君，以乐乐人；无德之君，以乐乐身。
现代文：所以有道德的君主，是用音乐来使天下快乐；没有道德的君主，是用音乐来使自己快乐。
English: Therefore, a moral monarch uses music to make the world happy; a monarch without morals uses music to make himself happy.

古文：乐人者，久而长；乐身者，不久而亡。
现代文：使天下快乐的，国家便会长治久安；使自己快乐的，不久便会亡国。
English: If you make the whole world happy, the country will enjoy long-term peace and stability; if you make yourself happy, the country will soon perish.

古文：释近谋远者，劳而无功；释远谋近者，佚而有终。
现代文：不修内政而向外扩张的，劳而无功；不事扩张而修明内政的，逸而有成。
English: Those who expand abroad without repairing their internal affairs, labor in vain; those who expand without repairing their internal affairs, succeed in vain.

古文：佚政多忠臣，劳政多怨民。故曰，务广地者荒，务广德者强，能有其有者安，贪人之有者残。
现代文：实行与民生息的政策，民众渴望报答君主，国家就会出现许多忠义之臣；实行劳民伤财的政策，民众心中抱怨君主，国家就会出现许多怨恨之民。所以说，热衷于扩张领土的，内政必然荒废；尽力于扩充德行的，国家就会强盛。能保全自己本来所有的。国家就会平安；一味垂涎别人所有的，国家就会残破。
English: If you implement a policy that benefits the people, and the people are eager to repay the monarch, the country will have many loyal subjects; if you implement a policy that hurts the people and hurts the wealth, and the people complain about the monarch in their hearts, the country will have many resentful people. Therefore, if you are keen on expanding the territory, the internal affairs will inevitably be wasted; if you try to expand the virtues, the country will be strong. If you can preserve what you have, the country will be safe; if you covet what others have, the country will be destroyed.

古文：残灭之政，累世受患；造作过制，虽成必败。
现代文：统治残酷暴虐，世世代代都要受害。事情超过了限度，即使一时成功，最终也难免失败。
English: The rule of cruelty and tyranny will be suffered for generations to come. Things have gone beyond the limit, and even if they succeed for a while, they will eventually fail.

古文：舍己而教人者逆，正己而化人者顺；逆者乱之招，顺者治之要。
现代文：不正己而正人者其势拂逆，先正己而后正人才顺乎常理。行为拂逆是招致祸乱的根源，顺乎常理是国家安定的关键。
English: Those who are dishonest but honest will gain the upper hand, and those who are honest first will gain the upper hand, and those who are honest will follow common sense. Acting dishonestly is the root cause of disasters, and following common sense is the key to national stability.

古文：道、德、仁、义、礼，五者一体也。
现代文：道、德、仁、义、礼，五者是一个整体。
English: Tao, virtue, benevolence, righteousness and propriety, the five are a whole.

古文：道者人之所蹈，德者人之所得，仁者人之所亲，义者人之所宜，礼者人之所体；不可无一焉。
现代文：道是人们所应遵循的，德是人们从道中所得到的，仁是人们所亲近的，义是人们所应做的，礼是人们的行为规范。这五条缺一不可。
English: Tao is what people should follow, virtue is what people get from Tao, benevolence is what people are close to, righteousness is what people should do, and etiquette is people's code of conduct. These five are indispensable.

古文：故夙兴夜寐，礼之制也；讨贼报仇，义之决也；恻隐之心，仁之发也；得己得人，德之路也；使人均平，不失其所，道之化也。
现代文：所以，起居有节，是礼的约束；讨贼报仇，是义的决断；怜悯之心，是仁的发端；修己安人，是德的途径；使人均平，各得其所，是道的教化。
English: Therefore, to live a virtuous life is the constraint of etiquette; to seek revenge against thieves is the determination of righteousness; to have a compassionate heart is the beginning of benevolence; to cultivate oneself and be at peace with others is the path of virtue; to make people equal and let everyone have their own place is the enlightenment of the Tao.

古文：出君下臣，名曰命；施于竹帛，名曰令；奉而行之，名曰政。夫命失，则令不行；令不行，则政不正；政不正，则道不通；道不通，则邪臣胜；邪臣胜，则主威伤。
现代文：君主下达给臣下的指示叫 命 ，书写在竹帛上叫 令 ，执行命令叫 政 。 命 有失误， 令 就不能推行。 令 不推行， 政 便出现偏差。 政 有偏差，治国之 道 便不能通畅。 道 不通畅，奸邪之臣便会得势。
English: The monarch's instructions to his subjects are called "decrees," the writing on the bamboo pole is called "orders," and the execution of orders is called "government." If there is a mistake in the order, the order cannot be implemented. If the order is not implemented, the government will deviate. If there is a deviation in the government, the way of governing the country cannot be smooth. If the way is not smooth, the treacherous minister will gain power.

古文：千里迎贤，其路远；致不肖，其路近。
现代文：奸邪之臣得势，君主的威信就要受到损害。千里之外去聘请贤人，路途十分遥远；招引不肖之徒，路途却十分近便。
English: If a treacherous vassal gains power, the prestige of the monarch will be damaged. It is a long way to hire a wise man from a thousand miles away; it is a short way to attract a scoundrel.

古文：是以明王舍近而取远，故能全功尚人，而下尽力。
现代文：所以，英明的君主总是舍弃身边的不肖之徒，不远千里寻求贤人。因此，能够保全功业，尊崇贤人，臣下也能尽心竭力。
English: Therefore, a wise monarch always abandons the unsavory people around him and seeks sages thousands of miles away. Therefore, if he can preserve his merits and respect sages, his subjects can also do their best.

古文：废一善，则众善衰。赏一恶，则众恶归。
现代文：弃置一个贤人，众多的贤人便会引退了；奖赏一个恶人，众多的恶人便会蜂拥而至。
English: Abandon a wise man, and many wise men will retire; reward a wicked man, and many wicked men will flock to him.

古文：善者得其祐，恶者受其诛，则国安而众善至。
现代文：贤人得到保护，恶人受到惩罚，就会国家安定，群贤毕至。
English: If the wise are protected and the wicked punished, the country will be stable and the wise will prevail.

古文：众疑，无定国；众惑，无治民。
现代文：民众都对政令怀有疑虑，国家就不会得到安定；民众都对政令困惑不解，社会就不会得到治理。
English: If the people have doubts about the decree, the country will not be stable; if the people are confused about the decree, the society will not be governed.

古文：疑定惑还，国乃可安。
现代文：疑虑消失，困惑解除，国家才会安宁。
English: When doubts disappear and confusion is removed, the country will be at peace.

古文：一令逆，则百令失；一恶施，则百恶结。
现代文：一项政令违背民意，其他政令也就无法推行；一项恶政得到实施，无数恶果也就从此结下。
English: If one decree is contrary to public opinion, other decrees cannot be implemented; if a bad policy is implemented, countless bad results will come from this.

古文：故善施于顺民，恶加于凶民，则令行而无怨。
现代文：所以，对顺民要实施仁政，对刁民要严加惩治，这样，政令就会畅通无阻，人无怨言了。
English: Therefore, benevolent policies should be implemented for the benevolent people, and harsh punishments should be imposed on the wicked people. In this way, the government order will be unimpeded and there will be no complaints.

古文：使怨治怨，是谓逆天；使仇治仇，其祸不救。
现代文：用民众所怨恨的政令去治理怀有怨气的民众，叫做违背天道；用民众所仇恨的政令去治理怀有仇恨的民众，灾祸将无法挽救。
English: To govern a resentful people with a hated decree is to defy heaven; to govern a hateful people with a hated decree is to court disaster.

古文：治民使平，致平以清，则民得其所，而天下宁。
现代文：治理民众要依靠贫富均平，贫富均平要依靠政治清明。这样，民众便会各得其所，天下也就安宁了。
English: The governance of the people should rely on the equality of the rich and the poor, and the equality of the rich and the poor should rely on political clarity. In this way, the people will get their own place, and the world will be peaceful.

古文：犯上者尊，贪鄙者富，虽有圣王，不能致其治。
现代文：犯上的人反而更加高贵，贪鄙的人反而更加富有，虽然有圣明的君王，也无法把国家治理好。
English: On the contrary, those who commit crimes are more noble, those who are greedy are richer, and although there are holy kings, they cannot govern the country well.

古文：犯上者诛，贪鄙者拘，则化行而众恶消。
现代文：犯上的受到惩处，贪鄙的受到拘禁，这样教化才能得到推行，各种邪恶也就自然销匿。
English: The guilty will be punished, the greedy will be detained, so that enlightenment can be carried out, and all kinds of evils will naturally disappear.

古文：清白之士，不可以爵禄得；节义之士，不可以威刑胁。
现代文：品德高尚的人，是无法用爵禄收买的；讲究节操的人，是无法用威刑屈服的。
English: A man of high moral character cannot be bought with jewels; a man of integrity cannot be bullied into submission.

古文：故明君求贤，必观其所以而致焉。
现代文：所以圣明的君主征求贤人，必须根据他们的志趣来罗致。
English: That is why the holy monarchs, in their search for wise men, must select them according to their inclinations.

古文：致清白之士，修其礼；致节义之士，修其道。
现代文：罗致品德高尚的人，要讲究礼节；罗致崇尚节操的人，要依靠道义。
English: People with high moral character should pay attention to etiquette; people with high moral character should rely on morality.

古文：而后士可致，而名可保。
现代文：这样，贤士便可以聘到，君主的英名也可以保全了。
English: In this way, sages can be hired, and the monarch's reputation can be preserved.

古文：夫圣人君子，明盛衰之源，通成败之端，审治乱之机，知去就之节。
现代文：圣人君子能够明察兴衰的根源，通晓成败的端倪，洞悉治乱的关键，懂得去就的时节。
English: A sage and gentleman can clearly observe the root causes of prosperity and decline, know the signs of success and failure, understand the key to managing chaos, and know the time to go.

古文：虽穷，不处亡国之位；虽贫，不食乱邦之禄。
现代文：虽然穷困，也不会贪图将亡之国的高位：虽然贫苦，也不会苟取衰乱之邦的厚禄。
English: Though poor, he will not covet the exalted place of a dying nation; though poor, he will not covet the riches of a decaying kingdom.

古文：潜名抱道者，时至而动，则极人臣之位；德合于己，则建殊绝之功。故其道高，而名扬于后世。
现代文：隐姓埋名、胸怀经邦治国之道的人，时机到来后一旦行动，便可以位极人臣。君主的志向一旦与自己相投，便可以建立绝世的功勋，所以，他的道术高明，美名流芳千古。
English: A person who hides his name and conceals his name, and who has the way of governing the country in his heart, can be an extremely dignified minister once he takes action when the time comes. Once the monarch's ambition coincides with his own, he can establish an extraordinary merit. Therefore, he is highly skilled in the way of doing things, and his reputation has been passed down for thousands of years.

古文：圣王之用兵，非乐之也，将以诛暴讨乱也。
现代文：圣明的君主进行战争，并不是出于喜好，而是用来诛灭残暴，讨伐叛乱。
English: The saintly prince does not wage war for the sake of pleasure, but in order to put an end to cruelty and to crush rebellion.

古文：夫以义诛不义，若决江河而溉爝火，临不测而挤欲堕，其克必矣。
现代文：用正义讨伐不义，就像决开江河之水去淹灭小小的火炬一样，就好像在无底的深渊旁边去推下一个摇摇欲坠的人一样，其胜利是必然的。
English: To fight injustice with justice is like cutting through a river to drown a small torch. It is like pushing down a tottering man beside a bottomless abyss. Its victory is inevitable.

古文：所以优游恬淡而不进者，重伤人物也。
现代文：圣明的君主之所以安静从容而不急于进兵，是不愿造成过多的人员和物质损耗。
English: The reason why the saintly monarch marched calmly and unhurriedly, rather than rushing to join the army, was that he did not want to cause excessive personnel and material losses.

古文：夫兵者，不祥之器，天道恶之，不得已而用之，是天道也。
现代文：战争是不吉祥的东西，天道是厌恶战争的。只有在迫不得已时进行战争，才是顺乎天道的。
English: War is inauspicious, and heaven abhors war. Only when war is unavoidable does it follow heaven's way.

古文：夫人之在道，若鱼之在水；得水而生，失水而死。
现代文：人和天道的关系，就像鱼与水一样。鱼得到水便可以生存，失去水肯定要死亡。
English: The relationship between people and the heavenly way is like that between fish and water. If a fish gets water, it can survive, but if it loses water, it will definitely die.

古文：故君子者常畏惧而不敢失道。
现代文：所以，君子们常常是心存敬畏，一刻也不敢背离天道。
English: Therefore, gentlemen are often in awe and do not dare to deviate from the heavenly way for a moment.

古文：豪杰秉职，国威乃弱；杀生在豪杰，国势乃竭；豪杰低首，国乃可久。
现代文：专权跋扈的大臣执政，国君的威望就会受到伤害。生杀大权操于其手，国君的权势也就衰竭了。专权跋扈之臣俯首从命，国家才能长久。
English: The prestige of the sovereign is harmed when an autocratic minister comes to power. The power of life and death is in his hands, and the power of the sovereign is exhausted. When an autocratic minister bows his head and obeys, the country can last a long time.

古文：杀生在君，国乃可安；四民用灵，国乃无储；四民用足，国乃安乐。
现代文：生杀之权操于国君，国家才能安定。百姓穷困，国家就没有储备。百姓富足，国家才会安乐。
English: The power of life and death is in the hands of the sovereign, the country can only be stable. If the people are poor, the country has no reserves. If the people are rich, the country will be happy.

古文：贤臣内，则邪臣外；邪臣内，则贤臣毙。
现代文：重用贤臣，奸臣就会被排斥在外了。重用奸臣，贤臣就会被置于死地了。
English: If you make heavy use of wise men, treacherous men will be excluded. If you make heavy use of treacherous men, wise men will be put to death.

古文：内外失宜，祸乱传世。
现代文：亲疏不当，祸乱就会延传到后世了。
English: If the estrangement is improper, the calamity will be passed on to future generations.

古文：大臣疑主，众奸集聚；臣当君尊，上下乃昏，君当臣处，上下失序。
现代文：大臣自比君主，众奸就会乘机聚集。人臣享有君主那样的尊贵，君臣名分就会昏昧不明。
English: If a minister compares himself to the monarch, many traitors will take advantage of the opportunity to gather. If people and ministers enjoy the same dignity as the monarch, the title of monarch and minister will be vague and unclear.

古文：伤贤者，殃及三世；蔽贤者，身受其害；嫉贤者，其名不全。
现代文：君主沦为臣子那样的地位，上下秩序就会颠倒混乱。伤害贤人的，祸患会殃及子孙三代。埋没贤人的，自身就会遭到报应。妒忌贤人的，名誉就不会保全。
English: If a ruler is reduced to the status of a vassal, the order of the upper and lower ranks will be reversed and chaos will ensue. If a wise man is harmed, the calamity will affect his descendants for three generations. If a wise man is buried, he himself will suffer retribution. If a wise man is envied, his honor will not be preserved.

古文：进贤者，福流子孙，故君子急于进贤，而美名彰焉。
现代文：举荐贤人的，子孙后代都会受惠于他的善行。所以君子总是热心于推荐贤人，因而美名显扬。
English: When a wise man is recommended, future generations will benefit from his good deeds. Therefore, a gentleman is always eager to recommend a wise man, and thus his good name is well known.

古文：利一害百，民去城郭；利一害万，国乃思散。
现代文：对一个人有好处，对一百个人有害处，民众就会离开城邑。对一个人有好处，对一万个人有害处，全国就会人心离散。
English: What is good for one will be bad for a hundred, and the people will leave the city; what is good for one will be bad for ten thousand, and the country will be divided.

古文：去一利百，人乃慕泽；去一利万，政乃不乱。
现代文：除掉一个人而有利于一百个人，人们就会感慕他的恩泽。除掉一个人而有利于一万个人，政治就不会发生混乱了。
English: Remove one man for the benefit of a hundred, and people will admire his benevolence; remove one man for the benefit of ten thousand, and there will be no chaos in politics.

