古文：凡与敌战，若陷在危亡之地，当激励将士决死而战，不可怀生，则胜。
现代文：凡是对敌作战，如果部队陷入危亡的境地时，应当激励全军将士抱定必死的决心，奋勇杀敌，不可怀有贪生侥幸心理。
English: Whenever fighting against the enemy, if the troops fall into a perilous situation, the whole army should be encouraged to hold a death-defying determination, bravely kill the enemy, and should not have the mentality of greed for life and luck.

古文：法曰： 兵士甚陷，则不惧。 
现代文：只有这样，才能转危为安，取得胜利。诚如兵法所说： 部队深陷危险境地，个人就不再存有恐惧了。 
English: Only in this way can we turn the corner and achieve victory. As the art of war says: When the troops are deeply in danger, individuals no longer have fear.

古文：后汉将吴汉讨公孙述，进入犍为界。诸县皆城守。
现代文：后汉大将吴汉攻打隗嚣将公孙述，率军进入犍为界，那里的县城，到处都有部队防守。
English: After the Han Dynasty, the general Wu Han attacked and defeated Gongsun Shu, and led the army into the territory of Xing, where the county town was defended by troops everywhere.

古文：汉攻广都，拔之。遣轻骑烧成都市桥，武阳以东诸小城皆降。
现代文：吴汉攻克广都以后，占领它；并又派骑兵烧毁了成都附近的市桥，接着武阳以东地区小城都投降了。
English: After Wu Han conquered Guangdu, he occupied it; he also sent cavalry to burn the city bridge near Chengdu, and then the small cities in the east of Wuyang surrendered.

古文：帝戒汉曰： 成都十余万众，不可轻也。但坚据广都，待其来攻，勿与争锋。
现代文：刘秀向吴汉告诫说： 成都有余万敌兵，不要轻视，可以坚守广都，等待敌人来攻，也不要马上分出胜负。
English: Liu Xiu cautioned Wu Han that: Chengdu has more than ten thousand enemy soldiers, do not despise them, you can hold fast to the capital, wait for the enemy to attack, and do not immediately distinguish between victory and defeat.

古文：若不敢来，公须转营迫之，须其力疲，乃可击也。 
现代文：假若敌人不敢出来，你要调遣部队逼他出战，必须使他疲惫不堪，那时才能大举进攻。 
English: If the enemy does not dare to come out, you must dispatch troops to force him to fight, you must exhaust him, and then you can launch a large-scale attack.

古文：汉不听，乘利遂自将步骑二万余人进逼成都，去城十余里，阻江北为营，作浮桥，使别将刘尚将万余人屯于江南，相去二十余里。
现代文：吴汉并未听从光武帝的谆谆告戒，竟乘胜自率步骑兵二万余人进逼成都。当进至距成都十余里处，于江水北岸扎营，并于江上架设浮桥，派副将刘尚率兵万余人屯驻于江水南岸，南北两营地相距二十余里。
English: Wu Han did not listen to Emperor Guangwu's warning, and actually took advantage of the victory to enter and force Chengdu with more than 20,000 infantry and cavalry. When he entered more than ten miles from Chengdu, he camped on the north bank of the river, and erected a pontoon bridge on the river. He sent Vice Admiral Liu Shang and more than 10,000 soldiers to camp on the south bank of the river. The north and south camps are more than 20 miles apart.

古文：帝大惊，责汉曰： 比敕公千条万端，何意临事悖乱？
现代文：光武帝得悉吴汉的进攻举动后，大为吃惊，责备吴汉说： 我曾千叮咛万嘱咐地告诫你，为什么事到临头却违背乱来？
English: After Emperor Guangwu learned of Wu Han's offensive move, he was greatly surprised and rebuked Wu Han, saying, "I warned you with a thousand exhortations. Why did you disobey when the time came?

古文：既轻敌深入，又与尚别营，事有缓急，不复相及。
现代文：你既已轻敌贸然深入，却又与刘尚分立两营。事情是有缓急之别的，而一旦遇到危急情况，就无法相互支援了。
English: If things are urgent, it will be too late.

古文：贼若出兵缀公，以大众攻尚，尚破，公即败矣。
现代文：敌人如果出兵牵制你，而以主力进攻刘尚，刘尚若被攻破，那么，你也就失败了。
English: If a thief sends troops to hold you back, but attacks Liu Shang with soldiers, Liu Shang will be broken, and the public will be defeated.

古文：幸无他者，急率兵还广都。 
现代文：幸好现在没发生意外情况，你要立即率兵返回广都坚守待敌。 
English: Fortunately, there is no unexpected situation now. You should immediately lead your troops back to Guangdu and stick to waiting for the enemy.

古文：诏书未到，述果遣其将谢丰、袁吉将众十余万出攻汉；使别将将万余人劫刘尚，令不得相救。
现代文：但光武帝给吴汉的诏书还未送到的时候，公孙述果然已经派遣其部将谢丰、袁吉率兵十余万人来攻吴汉；又派另外将领率兵万金人袭劫刘尚营寨，企图致汉军两营之间无法相互救援的被动局面。
English: However, when Emperor Guangwu's edict to Wuhan had not yet been delivered, Gongsun Zuo sent his subordinate generals Xie Feng and Yuan Ji with more than 100,000 soldiers to attack Wuhan; he also sent another general with 10,000 soldiers to attack and rob Liu Shangyingzhai, in an attempt to create a passive situation between the two battalions of the Chinese army that could not rescue each other.

古文：汉与大战一日，兵败走入壁，丰围之。
现代文：吴汉率军与敌大战一天，遭到失败而退回营垒，敌将谢丰乘势挥军包围了吴汉军。
English: Wu Han led the army to fight with the enemy for one day, but was defeated and retreated to the camp. The enemy took advantage of Xie Feng to surround the Wu Han army.

古文：汉召诸将厉之曰： 吾与诸将逾越险阻，转战千里，所在斩获，遂深入敌地，今至城下，而与尚二处受围，势既不接，其祸难量。
现代文：吴汉召集众将激励他们说： 我和诸位将军共同越过艰难险阻，转战千里之遥，所向斩获甚多，才得以深入敌人腹地。现今进至敌人都城之下，而我们与刘尚两处竟都遭敌人包围，形成互相不能救援之势，此种局面的危害性是难以估量的。
English: Wu Han rallied the crowd and urged them: "I and all the generals have overcome hardships and dangers together, traveled thousands of miles to fight, and made a lot of gains to be able to penetrate deep into the enemy's heartland. Now the enemy is under the city, and we and Liu Shang are both surrounded by the enemy, forming a situation where we can not rescue each other. The harmfulness of this situation is difficult to estimate.

古文：欲潜师就尚于江南御之。
现代文：因此，我打算秘密转移兵力到江南与刘尚合兵一处，共同抗御敌人。
English: Therefore, I plan to secretly transfer troops to the south of the Yangtze River to join forces with Liu Shang to jointly resist the enemy.

古文：若能同心协力，人自为战，大功可立，如其不然，败必无余。
现代文：如果大家能够同心协力，人人奋勇作战，大功就可建立；倘若不这样，失败必然而无其它余地。
English: If everyone can work together and fight bravely, great achievements can be made; if not, there is no room for failure.

古文：成败之机，在此一举。 
现代文：现在成败的关键，就在这次行动了。 
English: The key to success or failure now lies in this action.

古文：诸将皆曰： 诺。 
现代文：诸位将领听后齐声说道： 是！ 
English: After listening, the generals said in unison: Yes!

古文：于是，飨士秣马，闭营三日不出，乃多立幡旗，使烟火不绝，夜衔枚引兵与尚合军。
现代文：于是，吴汉以酒食款待将士，用草料喂饱战马，关闭营门三天不出战；又在军营中插立很多旗帜，保持烟火缭绕不断，以此迷惑敌人。
English: As a result, Wu Han entertained his soldiers with food and wine, fed his horses with grass, closed the camp gate and did not fight for three days; he also planted a lot of flags in the camp and kept the fireworks going on and on in order to confuse the enemy.

古文：丰等不觉，明日，乃分兵拒江北，自将攻江南。
现代文：三天过后的晚上，吴汉悄悄过江与刘尚合兵一处。敌将谢丰等竟然没有发觉，第二天，谢丰仍分兵一部抵御江北汉军，自率主力进攻江南汉军。
English: Unnoticed by Xie Feng and others, the next day, he divided his troops to resist the north of the river and led his own army to attack the south of the river.

古文：汉悉兵迎战，自旦至哺，遂大败之，斩谢丰、袁吉。
现代文：吴汉亲自指挥全部兵力迎战敌军，从清晨交战直到黄昏时候，终于大败敌军，击斩了敌将谢丰、袁吉。
English: Wu Han personally commanded all the troops to fight against the enemy. From the early morning until dusk, he finally defeated the enemy and defeated the enemy generals Xie Feng and Yuan Ji.

古文：于是，率兵还广都，留刘尚拒述，具以状闻，而深自谴责。
现代文：于是，吴汉乘胜率军还守广都，留下刘尚所部继续抵御公孙述，并把有关战况写成奏状上报光武帝，而且深切痛责自己的过失。
English: As a result, Wu Han Rong led the victorious army to defend Guangdu, leaving Liu Shang Shobu to continue to resist Gongsun Shu, and reported the relevant war situation to Emperor Guangwu in a report, and deeply blamed himself for his mistakes.

古文：帝报曰： 公还广都，甚得其宜，述必不敢略尚而击公。
现代文：光武帝阅后批复道： 你率兵还守广都，是很得要领的行动。公孙述此后必定不敢丢开刘尚而直接来进攻你。
English: After reading it, Emperor Guangwu replied, "It was a very important action for you to lead your soldiers to defend Guangdu. After that, Gongsun must not dare to leave Liu Shang and directly attack you."

古文：若先攻尚，公从广都五十里悉步骑赴之，适当值其危困，破之必矣。 
现代文：如果他先进攻刘尚，你从广都率领全部步骑兵行军五十里而赴援到那里时，正是公孙述处于危险困疲的时候，因此打败他将是势所必然之事。 
English: If he attacks Liu Shang first, and you lead all the infantry and cavalry from Guangdu to march fifty miles to come to his aid, it will be exactly when Gongsun said he was in danger and exhausted, so defeating him will be a matter of necessity.

古文：于是，汉与述战于广都、成都之间，八战八克，遂军于郭中。
现代文：此后，吴汉率军同公孙述军交战于广都至成都之间，前后八战八捷，并进驻于成都外城。
English: After that, the army led by Wu Han and the army led by Gongsun Sui fought in the area between Guangdong and Chengdu, with eight battles and eight victories, and stationed in the outer city of Chengdu.

古文：述自将数万人出城大战，汉使护军高午、唐邯将锐卒数万击之。
现代文：公孙述亲率数万人出城与吴汉军大战，吴汉派遣护军高午、唐邯率领数万精锐部队迎击公孙述。
English: Gongsun Su's relatives led tens of thousands of people out of the city to fight against the Wu Han army. Wu Han dispatched escort troops at high noon, and Tang Jun led tens of thousands of elite troops to fight against Gongsun Su.

古文：述兵败走，高午奔阵刺述，杀之。
现代文：公孙述兵败溃逃，高午冲到敌阵中将公孙述刺死。
English: Gongsun Su's soldiers were routed and fled. At high noon, he rushed to the enemy's front and stabbed Gongsun Su to death.

古文：旦日城降，斩述首传送洛阳。
现代文：第二天，成都被迫投降，吴汉把公孙述的首级，传送到京都洛阳。
English: The next day, Chengdu was forced to surrender, and Wu Han sent the head of Gongsun Shu to Kyoto Luoyang.

古文：蜀遂平。
现代文：从此蜀地被平定。
English: Since then, Shu has been pacified.

