古文：石家奴，蒲察部人，世居案出虎水。
现代文：石家奴，蒲察部的人，世代居住在案出虎水这个地方。
English: The people of Shijiazhuang and Putuo have lived in this place for generations.

古文：祖斛鲁短，世祖外孙。
现代文：他的祖父斛鲁短，是金世祖的外孙。
English: His grandfather, Jang Rukang, was the grandson of Kim Il Sung.

古文：桓赧、散达之乱，昭肃皇后父母兄弟皆在敌境，斛鲁短以计迎还之。
现代文：桓赤皮、散达叛乱时，昭肃皇后父母兄弟都在敌人境内，斛鲁短使用计策迎回了他们。
English: At the time of the rebellions of Kuan Chakpi and Sanda, the parents and brothers of the Empress of Zhao and Su were in the enemy territory, and Lu Qian used strategies to welcome them back.

古文：石家奴自幼时抚养于太祖家，及长，太祖以女妻之。
现代文：石家奴自幼时起被太祖家抚养，到长大以后，太祖把自己的女儿许配给他为妻。
English: Shi Jia Nong was raised by his great-grandfather's family since he was a child. When he grew up, his great-grandfather promised his daughter to him as his wife.

古文：年十五，从攻宁江州，败辽主亲军，攻临潢府皆有功，袭谋克。
现代文：石家奴十五岁的时候，随从太祖攻打宁江州，打败了辽国君主的亲军，攻打临潢府都立了战功，承袭谋克之职。
English: When Shijiazhuang was fifteen years old, he followed his great-grandfather to attack Ningjiang Province, defeated the pro-army of the Liao monarch, and attacked Linyi Prefecture. He made great achievements in the war and inherited the post of strategist.

古文：其后，自山西护齐国王谋良虎之丧归上京，道由兴中。
现代文：在此之后，自山西护卫齐国王谋良虎的灵柩回归上京，途经兴中。
English: After this, the coffin of King Mu Lianghu, who was escorted from Shanxi, returned to Beijing, passing through Xingzhong.

古文：是时，方攻兴中未下，石家奴置柩于驿，率其所领猛安兵助王师，遂破其城。
现代文：当时，正攻打兴中还未攻下，石家奴把谋良虎的灵柩安置在驿站，率领他的猛安兵协助国家军队，攻破了兴中城。
English: At that time, when the attack on Xingzhong was still in progress, Shijiazhuang placed the coffin of Molianghu in the post, led his troops to assist the national army, and broke through Xingzhong City.

古文：从宗望讨张觉。再从宗翰伐宋。
现代文：石家奴跟随宗望讨伐张觉，又跟随宗翰攻伐宋国。
English: Shijian followed Zongwang to fight against Zhang Jue, and also followed Zonghan to attack Song.

古文：宗翰闻宗望军已围汴，遣石家奴计事，抵平定军遇敌兵数万，败之，遂见宗望。
现代文：宗翰听说宗望军队已经包围汴京，派遣石家奴去议事，在抵达平定军时和敌数万人遭遇，打败了敌军，才去见宗望。
English: Zonghan heard that Zongfang's army had encircled Beijing and sent Shijiazhuang slaves to negotiate. When he arrived at the besieging army, he encountered tens of thousands of enemies and defeated the enemy army before he went to see Zongfang.

古文：已还报，宗翰闻其平定之战，甚嘉之。
现代文：当石家奴返回汇报的时候，宗翰听说他的平定之战，很嘉奖他。
English: When Shijiazhuang returned to report, Zonghan heard about his peaceful battle and praised him.

古文：明年，复伐宋，石家奴隶娄室军。
现代文：第二年，又攻伐宋国，石家奴隶属娄室的军队。
English: In the second year, they attacked Song, and the slaves of Shijia belonged to the army of Yuxiu.

古文：娄室讨陕西未下，石家奴领所部兵援之。
现代文：娄室征讨陕西攻不下，石家奴率领所属部队去援助他。
English: He was unable to conquer Shaanxi, so Shijiazhuang led his troops to help him.

古文：既而，以本部屯戍西京，会契丹大石出奔，以余睹为元帅，石家奴为副，袭诸部族以还。
现代文：接着，以本部驻扎戍守西京，正碰上契丹的大石出击，让余睹做元帅，石家奴做副元帅，袭击各个部族后而归来。
English: Then, with the headquarters stationed to defend West Beijing, they were facing the great stone attack of the Khitan, and they made Yu Sheng the marshal and Shi Jia Nong the deputy marshal, attacked various tribes, and then returned.

古文：未几，有疾，退居乡里。
现代文：不久，石家奴因生病退居乡里。
English: Soon after, Shijian retreated to the countryside due to illness.

古文：天眷间，授侍中、驸马都尉。
现代文：天眷年间，石家奴被授予侍中、驸马都尉。
English: During the years of heaven's favor, Shijian was awarded the title of chamberlain and captain of the cavalry.

古文：再以都统定边部，熙宗赐御书嘉奖之。
现代文：再以都统的身份抚定边疆各部，熙宗赐御书嘉奖他。
English: Then, as a member of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China (CPC), he governed all parts of the frontiers, and Emperor Xizong gave him a letter of commendation.

古文：封兰陵郡王。
现代文：被封为兰陵郡王。
English: He was named the king of Lanling County.

古文：承安四年，拜绛阳军节度使。
现代文：出任东京留守，因病辞去官职。石家奴逝世时，享年六十三岁，加赠郧王。
English: He left his post in Tokyo and resigned due to illness. At the time of his death at the age of sixty-three, he was awarded the title of "King of Kite."

古文：卒。
现代文：正隆夺王爵，封他为鲁国公。
English: To die.

古文：乌古论元忠，本名讹里也，其先上京独拔古人。
现代文：乌古论元忠本名叫讹里也，他的祖先是上京独拔古人。
English: The original name of Ugudon Mototada was Uriya, and his ancestors were the ancient people of Shangjing.

古文：父讹论，尚太祖女毕国公主。
现代文：他的父亲叫讹论，娶的是金太祖的女儿毕国公主。
English: His father's name was Zhaotong, and he married Princess Bi Guo, the daughter of King Taizu.

古文：元忠幼秀异，世宗在潜邸以长女妻之，后封鲁国大长公主。
现代文：元忠幼年时候秀美出众，世宗即位前在自己的府邸把长女许配给元忠为妻，后来世宗的长女被封为鲁国大长公主。
English: When she was a child, Mototada was outstandingly beautiful. Before Sejong ascended the throne, he betrothed his eldest daughter to Mototada as his wife in his mansion. Later, Sejong's eldest daughter was named the first princess of the State of Lu.

古文：正隆末，从海陵南伐。
现代文：正隆末年，元忠跟随海陵王完颜亮向南征伐。
English: At the end of Zhenglong's reign, Yuan Zhong followed Hailing Wang Guan Yanliang to the south.

古文：世宗即位辽阳，时太保昂为海陵左领军大都督，遣元忠朝于行在，遂授定远大将军，擢符宝郎。谕之曰： 朕初即位，亲密无如汝者，侍从宿卫，宜戒不虞。 
现代文：世宗在辽阳即位，当时太保叫昂的是海陵的左领军大都督，派遣元忠到皇帝行宫去朝见皇上，皇上于是授予他定远大将军之职，提升为符宝郎，并告诉他说 ：朕刚刚即位，亲密的人没有再像你这样的了，对侍从、宿卫应当戒备，不要发生失误。 
English: Sejong ascended to the throne in Liaoyang. At that time, the Taipo called Ang, who was the left leader of the left army of Hailing, and sent Yuan Zhong to the emperor to go to the palace to meet the emperor. The emperor then awarded him the post of Dingyuan General and promoted him to the treasure hunter, and told him: I have just ascended to the throne. There are no more close people like you. You should be wary of the attendants and guards, and do not make mistakes.

古文：大定二年，加驸马都尉，除近侍局使，迁殿前左卫将军。
现代文：大定二年，对元忠加授驸马都尉，任近侍局使，并且迁升殿前左卫将军。
English: In the second year of Dading, Yuan Zhong was additionally awarded the title of Lieutenant of the Horse Guards, appointed as an envoy of the Imperial Household Agency, and promoted to the rank of General of the Left Division.

古文：从世宗猎，上欲射虎，元忠谏止之。
现代文：元忠跟随世宗打猎，皇上想射杀老虎，元忠极力劝止了皇上这样做。
English: The emperor wanted to shoot a tiger, and Mototada tried his best to dissuade the emperor from doing so.

古文：进殿前右副都点检，为贺宋正旦使，还，转左副都点检。
现代文：又晋升殿前右副都点检，出任贺宋正旦使。出使归来，转任左副都点检。
English: In addition, he was promoted to the former right vice-president of the Imperial Court, and served as the envoy of He Song Zhengdan. When the envoy returned, he was transferred to the left vice-president of the Imperial Court.

古文：坐家奴结揽民税，免官。
现代文：因为元忠的家奴结伙撮取民税，所以他被免职。
English: He was removed from his post because a gang of Mototada's henchmen were skimming people's taxes.

古文：十一年，复旧职。
现代文：十一年，元忠官复旧职。
English: Eleven years later, the former loyal officer resumed his former position.

古文：明年，升都点检。
现代文：第二年，升为都点检。
English: In the second year, it was upgraded to an all-points inspection.

古文：十五年，北边淮献，命元忠往受之，及还，诏谕曰： 朕每遇卿直宿，其寝必安。
现代文：十五年，北部边疆各部族向朝廷进献，皇上命令元忠去受礼，等到完成使命回朝，皇上诏告他说： 朕每逢卿夜间值勤，那一夜睡觉一定安稳。
English: In the fifteenth year, the tribes of the northern frontier presented gifts to the imperial court. The emperor ordered Yuan Zhong to receive the gifts. When he completed his mission and returned to the imperial court, the emperor told him: "Whenever I am on duty at night, I will sleep safely that night.

古文：今夏幸景明宫，卿去久，朕甚思之。 
现代文：今年夏天朕到景明宫，卿离开时间长了，朕很是想念你。 
English: This summer I went to Jingming Palace. It's been a long time since you left. I really miss you.

古文：会大兴府守臣阙，遂以元忠知府事。
现代文：正当大兴府守臣缺少，于是皇上命元忠知府事。
English: When there was a shortage of daheungfu shoshin, the emperor appointed Tadamoto as prefectural governor.

古文：有僧犯法，吏甫得置狱，皇姑梁国大长公主属使释之，元忠不听，主奏其事，世宗召谓曰： 卿不徇情，甚可嘉也，治京如此，朕复何忧。 
现代文：当时有一个和尚犯法，衙吏逮捕了他关在监狱中，皇姑梁国大长公主叮嘱放了他，元忠不听，并向上禀奏了这件事，世宗召见他并对他说： 卿不徇私情，很是可嘉啊！像这样治理京城，朕还有什么忧虑呢？ 
English: At that time, there was a monk who broke the law. The magistrates arrested him and put him in prison. The Empress Dowager Liang, the eldest princess of the country, ordered him to be released. Yuan Zhong did not listen and reported the matter to the emperor. Shizong summoned him and said to him, "Sir, it is very commendable that you do not indulge in personal feelings! What worries do I have about governing the capital city like this?

古文：秩满，授吏部尚书。
现代文：任期满后元忠又被授予吏部尚书。
English: After the expiration of his term of office, Mototada was awarded the title of Secretary of the Ministry of Civil Affairs.

古文：以其子谊尚显宗长女薛国公主。
现代文：他的儿子谊与显宗的长女薛国公主相配结婚。
English: His son-in-law married the eldest daughter of Emperor Xuanzong, Princess Xue Guo.

古文：十八年，擢御史大夫，授撒巴山世袭谋克。
现代文：大定十八年，元忠被提升为御史大夫，并被授撒巴山世袭谋克。
English: In the 18th year of Dading, Mototada was promoted to the position of Imperial Historian, and was awarded the Saba Mountain Hereditary Medal.

古文：世宗问左丞相纥石烈良弼孰可相者，良弼以元忠对，乃拜平章政事，封任国公，进尚书右丞相。
现代文：世宗问左丞相纥石烈良弼谁可以做丞相，良弼回答元忠，于是拜元忠为平章政事，封为任国公，出任尚书右丞相。
English: When Sejong asked the Left Minister of the Joseon Dynasty, Seokryong Ryonghye, who could be the prime minister, Ryonghye answered Mototada. Therefore, Bae Mototada was given the title of Heungjang Seongji (平章政事), was appointed as the governor-general, and became the Minister of the Right of the Joseon Dynasty, Shoshu.

古文：策论进士之科设，元忠赞成之。
现代文：策划讨论进士科第的设置，元忠持赞成态度。
English: They planned and discussed the setting up of the entrance examination for cadets, and Yuan Zhong was in favor of it.

古文：世宗将幸会宁，元忠进谏不听，出知真定府，寻复诏为右丞相。
现代文：世宗将要启驾到会宁，元忠劝谏世宗不听，让元忠出知真定府，不久又下诏任命元忠为右丞相。
English: Sejong was about to depart for Hoeryong, and Mototada advised him not to listen, and to let Mototada leave Chishinju, and soon issued an imperial edict appointing Mototada as the minister of the right.

古文：世宗欲甓上京城，元忠曰： 此邦遭正隆军兴，百姓凋弊，陛下休养二十余年，尚未完复。
现代文：世宗打算用砖砌城墙保护上京，元忠说 ：我国家曾经遭逢正隆兴兵，百姓受到损伤而疲困，陛下治理国家休养生息二十多年，还未完全恢复。
English: Sejong planned to use bricks to build a city wall to protect Kyoto, and Mototada said, "Our country was once attacked by the Zhenglong Rebellion, the people were injured and exhausted, His Majesty has been governing the country for more than 20 years, and has not fully recovered.

古文：况土性疏恶，甓之恐难经久，风雨摧坏，岁岁缮完，民将益因矣。 
现代文：况且上京土质疏松恶劣，用砖砌城恐怕难以坚固经久，如果风雨摧坏，年年修缮，人民将愈来愈贫困了。 
English: What's more, the soil in Shangjing is poor and loose. A city built with bricks is unlikely to be strong and durable. If it is destroyed by wind and rain and repaired year after year, the people will become more and more impoverished.

古文：驾东幸久之未还，元忠奏曰： 鸾舆驻此已阅岁，仓储日少，市买渐贵，禁卫暨诸局署多逃者，有司捕置诸法恐伤陛下仁爱。 
现代文：圣驾向东巡幸长时间不回京，元忠禀奏说： 鸾舆在这里常驻已有一年，仓中储存的食物用品一天比一天少，到市上去买价钱越来越贵，禁卫及各局署有不少人逃跑了，有司追捕他们按法律制裁又恐怕有损陛下的仁爱之德。 
English: The saint's caravan is heading east, and fortunately will not return to Beijing for a long time, Yuan Zhongxiao said: "I have been living here for a year, the food supplies stored in the warehouse are getting less and less every day, the price to go to the market is getting more and more expensive, many people have escaped from the guards and various bureaus, and there is a division to pursue them according to legal sanctions, and I am afraid that it will damage His Majesty's benevolence.

古文：世宗嘉纳之。
现代文：世宗赞许并采纳了这些意见。
English: The Sejong approved and adopted these opinions.

古文：寻出为北京留守，责谕之曰： 汝强悍自用，颛权而结近密。
现代文：不久，元忠出任北京留守，皇上责怪他说 ：你强悍自用，专权而且结交亲近密友。
English: Not long after, Yuan Zhong left for Beijing, and the emperor reproached him, saying, "You are strong-willed and self-serving, you have exclusive power, and you have made close friends.

古文：汝心叵测，其速之官。 
现代文：你心怀叵测，是为了快快升官。 
English: You're just trying to get a promotion.

古文：后左丞张汝弼奏事，世宗恶其阿顺，谓左右曰： 卿等每事依违苟避，不肯尽言，高爵厚禄何以胜任。
现代文：后来左丞相张汝弼禀奏事情，世宗厌恶他阿谀顺从，对左右大臣说： 卿等每遇事或依从或违背，或苟且赞成或暂时逃避，不肯完全表白自己的意见，你们这样做，与高爵厚禄怎么能相称？
English: Later, Zhang Rong, the minister of the left, recounted the incident, and the world detested his obeisance to the emperor. He said to the ministers of the left and right: Sirs, whenever you encounter a situation, whether you obey or disobey, whether you approve or temporarily evade, and are unwilling to fully express your own opinion, how can you do this and be worthy of high rank and rich reward?

古文：如乌古论元忠为相，刚直敢言，义不顾身，诚可尚也。 
现代文：如果乌古论元忠做丞相，刚直取言，义不顾身，实在是应该推崇的！ 
English: If Ugu is talking about Mototada as prime minister, he should be respected for his straightforward speech and selflessness!

古文：于是，改知真定府事，移知河间。
现代文：于是，诏令元忠改知真定府事，迁移知河间。
English: As a result, the imperial edict ordered Mototada to change his residence to Chishindo and move to Chikawa.

古文：明昌二年，知广宁府。
现代文：明昌二年，元忠任广宁知府。
English: In the second year of the Ming Dynasty, Yuan Zhong was appointed governor of Guangning.

古文：以河间修筑球场扰民，会赦下，除顺义军节度使。
现代文：因为在河间修建场侵犯骚扰了百姓，正遇大赦天下而免罪，任顺义军节度使。
English: Because he violated and harassed the people at the construction site in Hema, he was pardoned by the general amnesty and was appointed as a delegate to the Shun Rebellion.

古文：乞致仕不许，特加开府仪同三司、北京留守。
现代文：元忠请求辞官未获准，反被加职任开府仪同三司、北京留守。
English: Yuan Zhong's request to resign from his post was not approved. Instead, he was given the additional post of Kaifu Yi and stayed in Beijing with the three departments.

古文：徙知济南府，过阙，令预宴，班平章政事之上。
现代文：又调任济南知府，超过阙令预宴，班平章政事之上。
English: He was also transferred to Jinan Prefecture, where he oversaw the imperial banquet and was in charge of government affairs.

古文：承安二年，移守南京，寻改知彰德府，卒。
现代文：承安二年，调去守南京，不久改知彰德府。
English: In the second year of Cheng'an, he was transferred to guard Nanjing, and soon became known as Changdefu.

古文：金之徒单、拿懒、唐括、蒲察、裴满、纥石烈、仆散皆贵族也，天子娶后必于是，公主下嫁必于是，与周之齐、纪无异，此昏礼之最得宜者，盛于汉、唐矣。徒单四喜，哀宗皇后之弟也。
现代文：在任上逝世。讣告传来，皇上派遣宣徽使白琬烧饭，赠给办丧事的财物很厚重。元忠素来地位高贵，性格粗犷豪放而内心深处常怀嫉妒，世宗曾经斥责他。他所到之处不能管束奴仆，当世之人拿这一点对他毁谤非议。徒单四喜，是哀宗皇后的弟弟。
English: He died in office. An obituary reported that the emperor sent the imperial seal to the egret to cook rice, and the wealth given to the funeral director was very heavy. Yuan Zhong had always been noble, with a rough and bold personality, but deep inside he was always jealous. Shizong had rebuked him. Everywhere he went, he couldn't control the slaves, and the people of that time slandered and criticized him for this. Tutan Shixi was the younger brother of Empress Paizong.

古文：天兴二年正月辛酉夜，四喜、内侍马福惠至自归德，时河朔已失利，京城犹未知，二人被旨迎两宫，遂托以报捷，执小黄旗以入，至则奏两宫以奉迎之意。
现代文：天兴二年正月十八日的夜晚，四喜和内侍马福惠从归德来到京城。
English: On the evening of the 18th day of the first month of the second year of Tianxing, Sisi and the maid of honor Ma Fuhui came to Beijing from Gui De.

古文：是日，召二相入议，二相及乌古孙奴申谏不可行。
现代文：那时，河朔已经失利，而京城里还不知道。两人奉圣旨迎接两宫皇太后，就假传捷报，手执小黄旗进城，到了宫中向二位皇太后奏明奉旨迎接之意。
English: At that time, Heshaku had already lost, and the capital did not know about it. The two men received the imperial edict to greet the two empress dowager empresses, so they falsely reported their victory and entered the city holding a small yellow flag. When they arrived at the palace, they sent the imperial edict to the two empress dowager empresses to greet them.

古文：四喜作色曰： 我奉制旨迎两宫，有敢言不行者，当以别敕从事矣。 
现代文：当天，太后召见两位丞相入宫商议，两位丞相和乌古孙奴申都劝谏太后不可出行。四喜面做怒色道： 我是奉皇上的旨意迎接两宫太后，如果有谁胆敢说不走的话，该当按另一诏书处置。 
English: On the same day, the empress dowager summoned the two chancellors to enter the palace for discussion. Both the two chancellors and Ugu Sun Nushin advised the empress dowager not to travel. Shixi Mian said angrily: I am following the emperor's will to welcome the empress dowager of the two palaces. If anyone dares to say no, they should be dealt with according to another edict.

古文：二相不复敢言，行议遂决。
现代文：两丞相不敢再说什么，行程这才决定下来。
English: The two prime ministers did not dare to say anything else, and only then was the itinerary decided.

古文：制旨所取两宫、柔妃裴满氏及令人张秀蕊、都辖、承御、汤药、皇乳母巩国夫人等十余人外，皆放遣之。
现代文：除了圣旨上命令接取的两宫皇太后、柔妃裴满氏以及令人张秀蕊、都辖、承御、汤药、皇乳母巩国夫人等十多个人以外，其他人都被遣放。
English: With the exception of more than ten people, including the Empress Dowager Ninomiya, Princess Joffrey Pei Man, Empress Dowager Zhang Xiu Rui, Empress Dowager Duji, Empress Dowager Zeng You, Empress Dowager Tang Yao, and Empress Dowager Gong Guo's wet nurse, who were ordered to be received according to the imperial edict, everyone else was deported.

古文：又取宫中宝物，马蹄金四百杖、大珠如栗黄者七千杖、生金山一、龙脑板二及信瑞御玺，仍许赐忠孝军以两宫随行物之半。
现代文：又取了宫中的一些宝物，有马蹄金四百枚、大如栗黄的珍珠七千枚、生金山一座、龙脑板两块以及信瑞御玺。圣旨上还准许把皇太后随行所带物品的半数赐给忠孝军。
English: They also took some treasures from the palace, including four hundred horseshoe-shaped gold coins, seven thousand pearls as big as chestnuts, a raw gold coin, two dragon's head plates, and the Imperial Regalia of the Emperor and Empress. In the imperial edict, it was also permitted to give half of the items that the Empress Dowager had brought with her to the loyal retainers.

古文：壬寅，太后御仁安殿，出锭金及七宝金洗分赐忠孝军。
现代文：壬寅日，太后驾临仁安殿，拿出金锭和七宝金洗分赏忠孝军。
English: On the day of Ren Yin, the empress dowager drove to the Ren An Palace and brought out gold ingots and seven treasures to reward the loyal and filial soldiers.

古文：是夜，两宫骑而出，至陈留，见城外二三处火起，疑有兵，迟回间，奴申初不欲行，即承太后旨驰还。
现代文：当夜，两宫太后骑马出城，到达陈留，看见城外有两三处火起，怀疑有敌兵，于是迟疑不决。奴申原本就不愿走，这时便奉了太后的命令驰马返回。
English: That night, the Empress Dowager of the Two Palaces rode out of the city and arrived at Chenliu. She saw two or three fires outside the city and suspected that there were enemy soldiers, so she hesitated. Nuxin originally did not want to go, but then he was ordered by the Empress Dowager to return on horseback.

古文：癸卯，入京顿四喜家，少顷，还宫。
现代文：癸卯日，太后进京停住在四喜家中，过了些时间才返回宫里。
English: On the day of her arrival in Kyoto, the Empress Dowager stayed at Shiki's home and returned to the Imperial Palace after some time.

古文：复议以是夜再往，太后惫于鞍马不能动，遂止。
现代文：四喜又商议当晚再走，但太后鞍马劳累，疲惫得不能行动，于是只好仍然留下。
English: The four gladiators discussed leaving again that night, but the Empress Dowager was too tired to move, so she had to stay.

古文：明日，崔立变。
现代文：第二天，崔立发动兵变。
English: The next day, Cui Li launched a mutiny.

古文：四喜、术甲塔失不及塔失不之父咬住、四喜妻完颜氏，以忠孝卒九十七骑夺曹门而出，将往归德，不得出，转陈州门，亦为门卒所止。
现代文：四喜、术甲塔失不，连同塔失不的父亲咬住、四喜的妻子完颜氏，带着九十七个忠孝骑兵从曹门夺路而出，打算到归德去，但没冲出去，又转而到陈州门，也被守门兵士挡住。
English: Si Xi and his wife, Guan Yan, with ninety-seven loyal and filial cavalrymen, took the road from Cao Men, intending to return to Germany, but did not rush out, and turned to Chenzhou Gate, which was also blocked by the soldiers guarding the gate.

古文：门帅裕州防御使阿不罕斜合已遁去，经历官完颜合住权帅职，麾门卒放塔失不等去，且曰： 罪在我，非汝等之过。 
现代文：守门将帅裕州防御使阿不罕斜合已经逃走，经历官完颜合住暂且担当门帅之职。他指挥守门兵士把塔失不等人放出城去，并且说： 罪责在我，不是你们的过错。 
English: Yuzhou's defense has caused Abuhan Xizhe to run away, and he has temporarily assumed the position of the gatekeeper after the officials have settled down. He commanded the gate soldiers to leave the city without waiting for the tower to be lost, and said: The blame is on me, not your fault.

古文：明日，立以数十骑召合住，合住自分必死，易衣冠而往。
现代文：次日，崔立派骑兵数十名来召见合住，合住料想自己必死无疑，便换了衣帽前往。
English: The next day, dozens of Cui Rongli's cavalrymen were summoned to see Hachizumi. Thinking that he would surely die, Hachizumi changed his clothes and headed for home.

古文：立左右扼腕欲加刃。立遥见，问： 汝是放忠孝军出门者耶？ 
现代文：崔立的侍从举刀就要杀他，崔立远远地看见了就问 ：你是那个把忠孝军放出城门的人吗？ 
English: Cui Li's attendant raised his sword to kill him. Cui Li saw him from a distance and asked, "Are you the one who let the loyal and filial soldiers out of the city gate?"

古文：合住曰： 然。
现代文：合住说 ：是的。
English: Atsumi said, "Yes."

古文：天子使命，某实放之，罪在某。 
现代文：天子的使者有令，我确实把人放走了，罪过在我。 
English: The messenger of the Son of God gave the order, and I did let the man go. The fault is mine.

古文：立忽若有所省，顾群卒言： 此官人我识之，前筑里城时与我同事。
现代文：崔立忽然间仿佛有所省悟，看着众兵士说： 这位官人我认识，从前修筑内城的时候他曾和我共过事。
English: All of a sudden, Cui Li looked at the soldiers and said, "I know this official, he used to work with me when we were building the inner city.

古文：我所部十余卒盗官木罪当死，此官人不之问，但笞数十而已。
现代文：我部下十几个兵士偷盗官府的木材，应当治死罪，而这位官人却并不追究，只是责罚了几十军棍而已。
English: A dozen soldiers of my subordinates stole timber from a government office and should be sentenced to death, but the official did not pursue them, but only punished them with dozens of truncheons.

古文：此家能杀人，能救人。 
现代文：他能杀人，也能救人。 
English: He can kill and he can save.

古文：因好谓合住曰： 业已放出，吾不汝罪也。 
现代文：于是崔立和颜悦色地对合住说道 ：既然人已经放走，我就不治你的罪了。 
English: So Cui Li said pleasantly to Aizu: Since you have been released, I will not punish you.

古文：四喜等至归德，上惊问两宫何如，二人奏京城军变不及入宫。
现代文：四喜等人来到归德，皇上吃惊地问两宫太后怎样了，二人奏明由于京城发生兵变，来不及进宫去。
English: When Shiki and the others returned to Germany, the Emperor was surprised and asked the Empress Dowager of the Two Palaces what had happened. The two of them explained that due to the mutiny in the capital, they did not have time to go to the palace.

古文：上曰： 汝父汝妻独得出耶。 
现代文：皇上怒道： 唯独你父亲和你妻子倒逃出来了。 
English: The emperor fumed, "Only your father and your wife escaped.

古文：下之狱，皆斩于市。
现代文：随后把他们打下监狱，全部押在街中斩首。
English: Then they threw them in jail and beheaded them all in the streets.

古文：赞曰：四喜奉迎两宫，而值崔立之变，智者居此，与两宫周旋兵间，以俟事变之定而徐图之。
现代文：著者评论：四喜奉旨来迎接两宫皇太后，却正遇上崔立兵变，聪明人在这时应该和两宫太后一起周旋于两方军队之间，以等待事情平静的时候再慢慢图谋对策。
English: Author's comment: The Four Blessings were ordered to meet the Empress Dowager of the Two Palaces, but they were facing the Cui Li mutiny. At this time, a wise person should work with the Empress Dowager of the Two Palaces to mediate between the two armies, and wait for things to calm down before slowly devising countermeasures.

古文：万一不然，以一死徇之耳，他无策也。
现代文：万一不行，便以死殉职，而别无其他计策。
English: If that failed, he would die in office, and there was no other way.

古文：四喜奉其私亲以归，而望人主贷其死，岂非愚乎！
现代文：四喜只把他的私人亲眷带了回来，而希望皇帝饶他一死，这难道不是太愚蠢了吗？
English: Isn't it too stupid for Si Xi to bring back only his personal relatives and hope that the emperor will spare his life?

