古文：公父文伯退朝，朝其母，其母方绩。
现代文：公父文伯退朝回家，向母亲请安，母亲敬姜正在纺麻。
English: Father-in-law Wen Bo retreated to his home and greeted his mother. His mother, Jing Jiang, was spinning hemp.

古文：文伯曰： 以歜之家而主犹绩，惧忓季孙之怒也，其以歜为不能事主乎！ 
现代文：公父文伯说： 像我们这样的家庭，主人还要纺麻，恐怕会惹季康子不满意，他会以为我公父文伯没有侍奉好母亲呢！ 
English: Father-in-law Wenbo said, "In a family like ours, where the master still has to spin hemp, I'm afraid Ji Yanzi will be displeased. He'll think my father-in-law Wenbo didn't serve my mother well!

古文：其母叹曰： 鲁其亡乎！
现代文：他的母亲叹息说： 鲁国可能是要亡国了吧！
English: His mother sighed and said, "Perhaps the country of Lu is about to be destroyed!"

古文：使僮子备官而未之闻耶？
现代文：让你如此不懂事的人在朝中做事，却没有将做官的道理告你吗？坐下来，我来告诉你。
English: Did you let such an unscrupulous person do things in the government without telling you the truth about being an official? Sit down, I'll tell you.

古文：居，吾语女。昔圣王之处民也，择瘠土而处之，劳其民而用之，故长王天下。
现代文：过去圣王治理百姓，总是挑选贫瘠的土地来安置他们，使百姓辛勤劳动，把土地耕种好，所以能长久地统治天下。
English: In the past, holy kings governed the people, always choosing barren land to settle them, making the people work hard and cultivate the land well, so they could rule the world for a long time.

古文：夫民劳则思，思则善心生；逸则淫，淫则忘善，忘善之恶心生。
现代文：百姓勤劳就会想到节俭，想到节俭就会产生善良的心；安逸则会放荡，放荡就会忘记善良，忘记善良就会产生坏心。
English: If the people are industrious, they will think of thrift; if they think of thrift, they will have a good heart; if they are comfortable, they will be dissolute; if they are dissolute, they will forget goodness; if they forget goodness, they will have a bad heart.

古文：沃土之民不材，逸也；瘠土之民莫不向义，劳也。
现代文：生活在肥沃土地上的百姓不能成材，就是因为太安逸了；生活在贫瘠土地上的百姓无不向往仁义，这是因为勤劳的缘故。
English: The people who live on fertile land can't make it because they are too comfortable; the people who live on barren land all yearn for benevolence and righteousness because of their hard work.

古文：是故天子大采朝日，与三公、九卿祖识地德；日中考政，与百官之政事，师尹维旅、牧、相宣序民事；少采夕月，与大史、司载纠虔天刑；日入监九御，使洁奉禘、郊之粢盛，而后即安。
现代文：因此天子在每年春分时穿起五彩的礼服朝拜日神，和三公九卿一起熟习和认识五谷的生长情况；中午要考查朝政的得失和百官政事的勤怠，大夫官和各地方长官辅佐天子按次序全面地处理百姓的事务；每年秋分时天子穿起三彩的礼服祭祀月神，和太史、司载恭敬地观察上天显示的征兆；日落以后监督内宫女官的工作，让她们把禘祭和郊祭的祭品整洁地准备好，这以后才能安寝。
English: Therefore, at the spring equinox every year, the heavenly son wears a colorful dress to worship the sun god, and together with the three kings and nine lords, he familiarizes himself with and understands the growth of the grain; at noon, he should examine the gains and losses of the imperial government and the attendance of the government affairs of the hundred officials, and the doctor and the local governors assist the heavenly son to deal with the affairs of the people in an orderly and comprehensive manner; at the autumn equinox every year, the heavenly son wears a colorful dress to sacrifice the moon god, and the great historian and the secretary respectfully observe the signs shown by heaven; after sunset, supervise the work of the inner palace

古文：诸侯朝修天子之业命，昼考其国职，夕省其典刑，夜儆百工，使无慆淫，而后即安。
现代文：诸侯在早上要办理天子交给的任务和命令，白天考察自己封国的事务，晚上检查法令的执行情况，夜间还要监督百官，使他们不敢怠慢，这以后才能安寝。
English: In the morning, the princes had to carry out the tasks and orders given to them by the Son of Heaven. During the day, they had to inspect the affairs of their vassal states. In the evening, they had to check the implementation of the decrees. At night, they had to supervise hundreds of officials so that they would not dare to neglect their duties. Only then could they sleep peacefully.

古文：卿大夫朝考其职，昼讲其庶政，夕序其业，夜庀其家事，而后即安。
现代文：卿大夫在早上要研究自己的本职工作，白天讲习一般例行公事，晚上检查自己经办的事务，夜间处理家内杂事，这以后才能安寝。
English: In the morning, the noble doctor should study his own work. During the day, he should study the general routine. In the evening, he should check the affairs he has handled. At night, he should deal with the household chores. Only then can he sleep peacefully.

古文：士朝受业，昼而讲贯，夕而习复，夜而计过无憾，而后即安。
现代文：士人在早上要接受朝廷交办的任务，白天讲习政事，晚上复习，夜间检查自己一天的言行有没有过失，这以后才能安寝。
English: In the morning, judges should accept the tasks assigned by the imperial court, study government affairs during the day, review in the evening, and check their words and deeds of the day for faults at night. Only then can they sleep peacefully.

古文：自庶人以下，明而动，晦而休，无日以怠。
现代文：自一般百姓以下，天亮就劳动，天黑了才能休息，没有一天可以怠惰。
English: From the common people on down, you have to work at dawn, and you can only rest when it's dark, and you can't be lazy for a single day.

古文： 王后亲织玄紞，公侯之夫人加之以纮、綖，卿之内子为大带，命妇成祭服，列士之妻加之以朝服，自庶士以下，皆衣其夫。
现代文： 王后要亲自编织王冠两旁悬挂玉瑱的黑色丝绳，公侯的夫人除此之外还要再加上编织系王冠的带子，卿的妻子要亲自编织束身用的黑色腰带，大夫的妻子要亲自做祭祀用的礼服，列士的妻子除此之外还要给丈夫做朝服，自下士以下的妻子都要给丈夫做衣服穿。
English: The queen herself had to weave the black silk cords from which the crown hangs, and the duke's wife had to add to this the ribbon from which the crown is made. The lord's wife had to weave the black sash for the corset herself. The doctor's wife had to make the ceremonial dress herself. In addition, the sergeant's wife had to make the court dress for her husband. The wives of corporals and below had to dress their husbands.

古文：社而赋事，蒸而献功，男女效绩，愆则有辟，古之制也。
现代文：春祭时要分配农桑的事务，冬祭时要献上收获的果实，男女都各尽其力，有了差错就要治罪，这是自古以来的制度。
English: At the spring festival, the affairs of the farmers must be distributed, and at the winter festival, the fruits of the harvest must be presented. Both men and women must do their best, and if there is a mistake, it must be punished. This has been the system since ancient times.

古文：君子劳心，小人劳力，先王之训也。
现代文：君子用心力操劳，小人用体力操劳，这是先王的训诫。
English: A gentleman works hard with his heart, while a ruffian works hard with his body. This was the admonition of the former king.

古文：自上以下，谁敢淫心舍力？
现代文：从上到下，谁敢使自己放纵而不用力气？
English: From top to bottom, who dares to indulge without effort?

古文：今我，寡也，尔又在下位，朝夕处事，犹恐忘先人之业。况有怠惰，其何以避辟！
现代文：如今我是个寡妇，你也只是个大夫，从早到晚兢兢业业地工作，还生怕败坏了祖先的成业，如存怠惰之念，又怎么躲避罪责呢？
English: Now I am a widow, and you are just a doctor, working diligently from dawn to dusk, and you are afraid of spoiling the achievements of your ancestors. How can you avoid the guilt of laziness?

古文：吾冀而朝夕修我曰： 必无废先人。 
现代文：我希望你每天早晚都提醒我说： 一定不要毁败先人的成业。 
English: I would like you to remind me every morning and evening: Don't destroy the achievements of our predecessors.

古文：尔今曰： 胡不自安。 
现代文：你刚才却说： 为什么不自求安逸？ 
English: But you just said: Why not seek your own comfort?

古文：以是承君之宫，余惧穆伯之绝嗣也。 
现代文：用这样怠惰的态度来担任国君赋予你的官职，我真担心你父亲穆伯要断绝后代啊！ 
English: With such a lackadaisical attitude to the office entrusted to you by the sovereign, I really fear that your father, Mubo, is going to cut off future generations!

古文：仲尼闻之曰： 弟子志之，季氏之妇不淫矣。 
现代文：孔子听到敬姜这番话，说： 学生们要记住，季氏家的妇人可算是一个不贪图安逸的人了。 
English: When Confucius heard Jing Jiang's words, he said, "Students should remember that the woman of the Ji family is a person who does not crave comfort.

