古文：◎食货四
现代文：食货四
English: Groceries 4

古文：○盐法茶法
现代文：盐法茶法
English: salt method tea method

古文：煮海之利，历代皆官领之。
现代文：煮海制盐的财利，历代都是官府掌管。
English: Throughout the ages, the government has controlled the financial interests of salt made from boiled sea water.

古文：太祖初起，即立盐法，置局设官，令商人贩鬻，二十取一，以资军饷。
现代文：太祖开初起兵，便设立盐法，置局设官，命令商人贩卖，取利二十分之一，以资助军队粮饷。
English: At the beginning of the war, the great-grandfather established the salt law, set up a bureau and officials, ordered merchants to sell and take one-twentieth of the profit to fund the army's food rations.

古文：既而倍征之，用胡深言，复初制。
现代文：随后加倍征收，采用胡深的意见，恢复开初的制度。
English: Subsequently, the levy was doubled, and the original system was restored in accordance with Hu Sheng's opinion.

古文：丙午岁，始置两淮盐官。
现代文：丙午年，开始设置两淮盐官。
English: In the year of the Heian period, the establishment of two Huaihai salt officials began.

古文：吴元年置两浙。
现代文：昊元年设置两浙盐官。
English: In 1981, two Zhejiang salt officials were set up.

古文：洪武初，诸产盐地次第设官。
现代文：洪武初年，各产盐之地相继设官。
English: In the first year of Hongwu, each salt-producing area successively set up officials.

古文：都转运盐使司六：曰两淮，曰两浙，曰长芦，曰山东，曰福建，曰河东。
现代文：都转运盐使司六个：一是两淮，一是两浙，一是长芦，一是山东，一是福建，一是河东。
English: There are six departments for the transfer of salt: one is two Huai, one is two Zhejiang, one is Changlu, one is Shandong, one is Fujian, and one is Hedong.

古文：盐课提举司七：曰广东，曰海北，曰四川，曰云南；云南提举司凡四，曰黑盐井，白盐井，安宁盐井，五井。
现代文：盐课提举司七个：一是广东，一是海北，一是四川，一是云南；云南提举司共有四个，称焉黑盐井，白盐井，安宁盐井，五井。
English: There are seven salt-class promotion offices: one in Guangdong, one in Hebei, one in Sichuan, and one in Yunnan. There are four promotion offices in Yunnan, which are called Black Salt Well, White Salt Well, Anning Salt Well, and Goi.

古文：又陕西灵州盐课司一。
现代文：又有陕酉重州盐课司一。
English: There is also the Shaanxi-Hebei-Chongzhou Salt Division.

古文：两淮所辖分司三，曰泰州，曰淮安，曰通州；批验所二，曰仪真，曰淮安；盐场三十，各盐课司一。
现代文：两淮所辖分司有三个，一是泰州，一是淮安，一是通州；有批验所二侗，一是仪真，一是淮安；有盐场三十个，各盐课司一个。
English: There are three sub-divisions under the jurisdiction of the two Huai'an Institutes, one is Taizhou, one is Huai'an, and one is Tongzhou; there are two batch inspection institutes, one is Yizhen, and one is Huai'an; there are thirty salt farms, and each salt division has one.

古文：洪武时，岁办大引盐三十五万二千馀引。
现代文：洪武时期，每年办大引盐三十五万二千余引。
English: During the Hongwu period, more than 352,000 salt-pulling operations were conducted every year.

古文：弘治时，改办小引盐，倍之。
现代文：弘治时期，改办小引盐，数量加倍。
English: During the Kōji period, the name was changed to Oda Kobiki salt, and the quantity was doubled.

古文：万历时同。
现代文：万历时期相同。
English: It was the same in the Wanli period.

古文：盐行直隶之应天、宁国、太平、扬州、凤阳，庐州、安庆、池州、淮安九府，滁、和二州，江西、湖广二布政司，河南之河南、汝宁、南阳三府及陈州。
现代文：盐流通于直隶的应天、宁国、太平、扬州、凤阳、庐州、安庆、池州、淮安九府，滁、和二州，江西、湖广二布政司，河南之河南、汝宁、南阳三府以及陈州。
English: Salt is distributed in the nine prefectures of Yingtian, Ningguo, Taiping, Yangzhou, Fengyang, Bozhou, Anqing, Chizhou, and Huai'an directly under the Central Government, and the two prefectures of Min and He, the two prefectures of Jiangxi and Hukang, and the three prefectures of Henan, Runing, and Nanyang in Henan Province, as well as Chenzhou.

古文：正统中，贵州亦食淮盐。
现代文：正统年间，贵州也食用淮盐。
English: During the orthodox years, Guizhou also consumed salted cucumbers.

古文：成化十八年，湖广衡州、永州改行海北盐。
现代文：成化十八年，湖广衡州、永州改为流通海北盐。
English: In the 18th year of Chenghua, Hunan, Guangxi, Hengzhou, and Yongzhou were changed to Haibei salt.

古文：正德二年，江西赣州、南安、吉安改行广东盐。
现代文：正德二年，江西赣州、南安、吉安改为流通广东盐。
English: In the second year of Zhengde, Jiangxi Bozhou, Nan'an and Ji'an were changed to the distribution of Guangdong salt.

古文：所输边，甘肃、延绥、宁夏、宣府、大同、辽东、固原、山西神池诸堡。
现代文：运送边防，甘肃、延绥、宁夏、宣府、大同、辽东、固原、山西神池等堡。
English: Transportation of border defense, Gansu, Yancheng, Ningxia, Xuanfu, Datong, Liaodong, Guyuan, Shanxi Shenchi and other forts.

古文：上供光禄寺、神宫监、内官监。
现代文：上供光禄寺、神宫监、内官监。
English: It was offered to Koroku-ji Temple, the supervisor of the Imperial Court, and the supervisor of the Ministry of the Interior.

古文：岁入太仓馀盐银六十万两。
现代文：每年纳入太仓余盐银六十万两。
English: Every year, up to 600,000 taels of salt and silver are brought into Taicang.

古文：两浙所辖分司四，曰嘉兴，曰松江，曰宁绍、曰温台；批验所四，曰杭州，曰绍兴，曰嘉兴，曰温州；盐场三十五，各盐课司一。
现代文：两浙所管辖分司四个，一是嘉兴，一是松江，一是宁绍，一是温台；批验所四个，一是杭州，一是绍兴，一是嘉兴，一是温州；盐场三十五个，各盐课司一个。
English: There are four subdivisions under the jurisdiction of the two Zhejiang Institutes, one in Jiaxing, one in Songjiang, one in Ningshao, and one in Wutai; four approval institutes, one in Hangzhou, one in Shaoxing, one in Jiaxing, and one in Wenzhou; thirty-five salt farms, and one salt class division each.

古文：洪武时，岁办大引盐二十二万四百馀引。
现代文：洪武时期，每年办大引盐二十二万零四百余引。
English: During the Hongwu period, there were more than 220,400 large-scale salt withdrawals every year.

古文：弘治时，改办小引盐，倍之。
现代文：弘治时期，改办小引盐，数量加倍。
English: During the Kōji period, the name was changed to Oda Kobiki salt, and the quantity was doubled.

古文：万历时同。
现代文：万历时期相同。
English: It was the same in the Wanli period.

古文：盐行浙江，直隶之松江、苏州、常州、镇江、微州五府及广德州，江西之广信府。
现代文：盥流通于浙江，直隶的松江、苏州、常州、镇江、徽州五府和庭德州，江西的广信府。
English: It is distributed in Zhejiang, directly affiliated with the five prefectures of Songjiang, Suzhou, Changzhou, Zhenjiang, and Huizhou, as well as Tingde Prefecture and Guangxin Prefecture in Jiangxi.

古文：所输边，甘肃、延绥、宁夏、固原、山西神池诸堡。
现代文：输送边防，是甘肃、延绥、宁夏、固原、山西神池等堡。
English: The transport border defense, is Gansu, Yancheng, Ningxia, Guyuan, Shanxi Shenchi and other fortresses.

古文：岁入太仓馀盐银十四万两。
现代文：每年纳入太仓余盐银十四万雨。
English: Taicang's surplus salt, silver and 140,000 tons of rain are included every year.

古文：明初，置北平河间盐运司，后改称河间长芦。
现代文：明朝初年，设置北平河问盐运司，后来改称河间长芦盐运司。
English: In the first year of the Ming Dynasty, the Beipingheyan Salt Transportation Division was set up, and later it was renamed the Hejin Changlu Salt Transportation Division.

古文：所辖分司二，曰沧州，曰青州；批验所二，曰长芦，曰小直沽；盐场二十四，各盐课司一。
现代文：所管辖有分司二个，一是沧州，一是青州；有批验所二个，一是长芦，一是小直沽；盐场二十四个，各盐课司一个。
English: There are two sub-divisions under its jurisdiction, one is Cangzhou, the other is Qingzhou; there are two approval laboratories, one is Changlu, the other is Xiao Zhiyao; there are twenty-four salt farms, and each salt class has one department.

古文：洪武时，岁办大引盐六万三干一百馀引。
现代文：洪武时期，每年办大引盐六万三千一百余引。
English: During the Hongwu period, more than 63,100 large-scale salt-purchasing campaigns were conducted every year.

古文：弘治时，改办小引盐十八万八百馀引。
现代文：弘治时期，改换办小引盐十八万零八百余引。
English: During the Koji period, the number of small-scale salt mines increased by 180,800.

古文：万历时同。
现代文：万历时期相同。
English: It was the same in the Wanli period.

古文：盐行北直隶，河南之彰德、卫辉二府。所输边，宣府、大同、蓟州。
现代文：盐流通于北直隶，河南的彰德、卫辉二府，输送边防，是宣府、大同、蓟州。
English: The salt is distributed in Beizhili, Changde and Weihui in Henan Province, and transported across the border to Xuanfu, Datong and Zhangzhou.

古文：上供郊庙百神祭祀、内府羞膳及给百官有司。
现代文：上供郊庙百神祭祀、内府的饮食和供给百官有司。
English: It was offered to the suburban temples for the worship of a hundred deities, and the food and supplies of the inner prefectures were managed by a hundred officials.

古文：岁入太仓馀盐银十二万两。
现代文：每年纳入太仓余盐银十二万两。
English: A total of 120,000 taels of salt and silver are brought into Taicang every year.

古文：山东所辖分司二，曰胶莱，曰滨乐；批验所一，曰泺口；盐场十九，各盐课司一。
现代文：山东所管辖的分司有二个，一是胶莱，一是滨乐；批验所一个，口做滦口；盐场十九个，各盐课司一个。
English: There are two sub-departments under the jurisdiction of Shandong, one is Jiaolai and the other is Binle; one is an approval institute, and the mouth is a mouth; nineteen are salt farms, and one is a salt class department.

古文：洪武时，岁办大引盐十四万三千三百馀引。
现代文：洪武时期，每年办大引盐十四万三千三百余引。
English: During the Hongwu period, there were more than 143,300 salt-pulling events held every year.

古文：弘治时，改办小引盐，倍之。
现代文：弘治时期，改换办小引盐，数量加倍。
English: During the Kōji period, the name was changed to Oda Kobiki salt, and the quantity was doubled.

古文：万历时，九万六千一百馀引。
现代文：万历时期，九万六千一百余引。
English: During the Wanli period, there were more than ninety-six thousand one hundred cases.

古文：盐行山东，直隶徐、邳、宿三州，河南开封府，后开封改食河东盐。
现代文：盐流通于山东，直隶徐、邳、宿三州，河南开封府，后来开封改为食用河东盐。
English: The salt was distributed in Shandong, directly to Xu, Handan and Sanzhou, and to Kaifeng in Henan. Later, Kaifeng changed to edible salt from Hedong.

古文：所输边，辽东及山西神池诸堡。
现代文：输送边防，是辽东和山西神池等堡。
English: The transportation border defense is the Liaodong and Shanxi Shenchi and other forts.

古文：岁入太仓馀盐银五万两。
现代文：每年纳入太仓余盐银五万两。
English: Up to 50,000 taels of salt and silver are brought into Taicang every year.

古文：福建所辖盐场七，各盐课司一。
现代文：福建所管辖的盐场有七个，各盐课司一个。
English: There are seven salt farms under the jurisdiction of Fujian Province, one for each salt division.

古文：洪武时，岁办大引盐十万四千五百馀引。
现代文：洪武时期，每年办大引盐十万四千五百余引。
English: During the Hongwu period, there were more than 104,500 salt-pulling events held annually.

古文：弘治时，增七百馀引。
现代文：弘治时期，增加七百余引。
English: During the Koji period, more than seven hundred shrines were added.

古文：万历时，减千引。
现代文：万历时期，减少一千引。
English: During the Wanli period, it will be reduced by one thousand.

古文：其引曰依山，曰附海。
现代文：其引称依山，称附海。
English: It is referred to as Yishan, and called Fenghai.

古文：依山纳折色。
现代文：依山引交纳货币税。
English: Yishan introduced a currency tax.

古文：附海行本色，神宗时亦改折色。
现代文：附海引施行粮食实物税，神宗时期也改交货币税。
English: With the annexation of the sea, a physical grain tax was imposed, and during the Shinto period, a monetary tax was also imposed.

古文：盐行境内。
现代文：盐流通于境内。
English: Salt does not circulate within the country.

古文：岁入太仓银二万二千馀两。
现代文：每年交纳太仓银二万二千多两。
English: The annual contribution of Taicang silver is more than 22,000 taels.

古文：河东所辖解盐，初设东场分司於安邑，成祖时，增设西场於解州，寻复并於东。
现代文：河东所管辖的解盐，开初在安邑设束场分司，成祖时期，在解州增设西场分司，不久又归并于柬场。
English: In the beginning, the branch office of Desalting, which was under the jurisdiction of Hedong, was set up in Anyi. During the founder's time, the branch office of Westing was set up in Dezhou, and soon it was returned to Cambodia.

古文：正统六年复置西场分司。
现代文：正统六年又设置西场分司。
English: Six years later, the West Division was established.

古文：弘治二年增置中场分司。
现代文：弘治二年增设中场分司。
English: A midfield subdivision was added in the second year of Koji.

古文：洪武时，岁办小引盐三十万四千引。
现代文：洪武时期，每年办小引盐三十万四千引。
English: During the Hongwu period, there were as many as 304,000 small salt withdrawals every year.

古文：弘治时，增入万引。
现代文：弘治时期，增加八万引。
English: During the Kōji period, there was an increase of eighty thousand.

古文：万历中，又增二十万引。
现代文：万历年间，又增加二十万引。
English: During the Wanli era, another 200,000 were added.

古文：盐行陕西之西安、汉中、延安、凤翔四府，河南之归德、怀庆、河南、汝宁、南阳五府及汝州，山西之平阳、潞安二府，泽、沁、辽三州。
现代文：盐流通于陕西的西安、汉中、延安、凤翔四府，河南的归德、怀庆、河南、汝宁、南阳五府以及汝州，山西的平阳、潞安二府，泽、沁、辽三州。
English: Salt is distributed in the four prefectures of Xi'an, Hanzhong, Yan'an, and Fengxiang in Shaanxi, the five prefectures of Guide, Huaiqing, Henan, Runnin, and Nanyang in Henan, and Ruzhou in Henan, and the two prefectures of Pingyang and Huan'an in Shanxi, and the three prefectures of Ze, Min, and Liao in Shanxi.

古文：地有两见者，盐得兼行。
现代文：地方有两处出现的，盐可以同时流通。
English: There are two places where salt can circulate simultaneously.

古文：隆庆中，延安改食灵州池盐。
现代文：隆庆年间，延安改为食用灵州池盐。
English: During the Longqing period, Yan'an changed to eating Lingzhou pond salt.

古文：崇祯中，凤翔、汉中二府亦改食灵州盐。
现代文：崇祯年间，凤翔、汉中二府也改为食用灵州盐。
English: During the reign of Emperor Chongzhen, Fengxiang and the two prefectures of Hanzhong were also changed to Lingzhou salt.

古文：岁入太仓银四千馀两，给宣府镇及大同代府禄粮，抵补山西民粮银，共十九万两有奇。
现代文：每年交纳太仓银四千余两，供给宣府镇和大同代府官员的俸禄粮，抵补山西人民的粮银，一共十九万两有余。
English: Every year, Taicang pays more than 4,000 taels of silver, provides salary grain to Xuanfu Town and Datong, and compensates the people of Shanxi for grain and silver, a total of more than 190,000 taels.

古文：陕西灵州有大小盐池，又有漳县盐井、西和盐井。
现代文：陕西灵州有大小盐池，又有漳县盐井、西和盐井。
English: There are large and small salt ponds in Lingshou, Shaanxi Province, as well as salt wells and salt wells in Xihe, Handan County.

古文：洪武时，岁办盐，西和十三万一千五百斤有奇，漳县五十一万五千六百斤有奇，灵州二百八十六万七千四百斤有奇。
现代文：洪武时期，每年办盐，西和十三万一千五百斤有余，漳县五十一万五千六百斤有余，灵州二百八十六万七千四百斤有余。
English: During the Hongwu period, the annual output of salt in Xihe County was more than 131,500 catties, that of Jixian County was more than 515,600 catties, and that of Lingzhou County was more than 286,700 catties.

古文：弘治时同。
现代文：弘治晴期相同。
English: The same is true for the Koji sunny period.

古文：万历时，三处共办千二百五十三万七千六百馀斤。
现代文：万历时期，三处共办盐一千二百五十三万七千六百余斤。
English: During the Wanli period, a total of more than 12,533,000 kg of salt was handled at the three sites.

古文：盐行陕西之巩昌、临洮二府及河州。
现代文：盐流通于陕西的巩昌、临洮二府以及河州。
English: Salt is distributed in Gongchang, Linyi and Hezhou in Shaanxi.

古文：岁解宁夏、延绥、固原饷银三万六千馀两。
现代文：每年解运宁夏、延绥、固原饷银三万六千多两。
English: Every year, more than 36,000 taels of Ningxia, Yancheng, and Guyuan are transported.

古文：广东所辖盐场十四，海北所辖盐场十五，各盐课司一。
现代文：广东所管辖盐场十四个，海北所管辖盐场十五个，各有盐课司一个。
English: There are fourteen salt farms under the jurisdiction of Guangdong and fifteen salt farms under the jurisdiction of Hainan, each with a salt division.

古文：洪武时，岁办大引盐，广东四万六千八百馀引，海北二万七千馀引。
现代文：洪武时期，每年办大引盐，广东四万六千八百余引，海北二万七千余引。
English: During the Hongwu period, large-scale salt withdrawals were held every year, with Guangdong receiving more than 46,800 salt withdrawals and North China receiving more than 27,000 salt withdrawals.

古文：弘治时，广东如旧，海北万九千四百馀引。
现代文：弘治时期，广东如同旧时，海北一万九千四百余引。
English: During the Hongzhi period, Guangdong was the same as in the old days, and there were more than 19,400 tracts in Hebei Province.

古文：万历时，广东小引生盐三万二百馀引，小引熟盐三万四千六百馀引；海北小引正耗盐一万二千四百馀引。
现代文：万历时期，广东小引生盐三万零二百余引，小引熟盐三万四千六百余引；海北小引正耗盐一万二千四百余引。
English: During the Wanli period, Guangdong's small-scale introduction of raw salt was more than 30,200 units, small-scale introduction of cooked salt was more than 34,600 units, and North China's small-scale introduction of salt was more than 12,400 units.

古文：盐有生有熟，熟贵生贱。
现代文：盐有生有熟，熟盐价格高，生盐价格低。
English: There are raw and cooked salt, the price of cooked salt is high, and the price of raw salt is low.

古文：广东盐行广州、肇庆、惠州、韶州、南雄、潮州六府。
现代文：广东盐流通于广州、肇庆、惠州、韶州、南雄、潮州六府。
English: Guangdong salt is distributed in Guangzhou, Zhaoqing, Huizhou, Zhangzhou, Nanxiong and Chaozhou.

古文：海北盐行广东之雷州、高州、廉州、琼州四府，湖广之桂阳、郴二州，广西之桂林、柳州、梧州、浔州、庆远、南宁、平乐、太平、思明、镇安十府，田、龙、泗城、奉议、利五州。
现代文：海北盐流通于广东的雷州、高州、廉州、琼州四府，湖广的桂阳、郴二州，广西的桂林、柳州、梧州、浔州、庆远、南宁、平乐、太平、思明、镇安十府，田、龙、泗城、奉议、型五州。
English: Hebei salt is distributed in the four prefectures of Leizhou, Gaozhou, Lianzhou and Qiongzhou in Guangdong, Guiyang and Luzhou in Hubei, Guilin, Liuzhou, Wuzhou, Ganzhou, Qingyuan, Nanning, Pingle, Taiping, Siming and Zhen'an in Guangxi, and Tian, Long, Shicheng, Miancheng, Bongye and Jiaxing in Tianjin.

古文：岁入太仓盐课银万一千馀两。
现代文：每年交纳太仓盐税银一万一千余两。
English: The annual amount of Taicang salt tax and silver tax is more than 11,000 taels.

古文：四川盐井辖盐课司十七。
现代文：四川盐井管辖盐课司十七个。
English: There are 17 departments in charge of salt in Sichuan's salt mines.

古文：洪武时，岁办盐一千一十二万七千馀斤。
现代文：洪武时期，每年办盐一千零一十二万七千余斤。
English: During the Hongwu period, more than 101,127 thousand catties of salt were handled every year.

古文：弘治时，办二千一十七万六千馀斤。
现代文：弘治时期，办盐二千零一十七万六千余斤。
English: During the Koji period, the amount of salt handled rose to more than 2,011,766,000 jin.

古文：万历中，九百八十六万一千馀斤。
现代文：万历年间，办盐九百八十六万一千余斤。
English: During the Wanli years, salt production reached more than 9.861 million catties.

古文：盐行四川之成都、叙州、顺庆、保宁、夔州五府，潼川、嘉定、广安、雅、广元五州县。
现代文：盥流通于四川的成都、叙州、顺庆、保宁、夔州五府，潼川、嘉定、广安、雅、广元五州县。
English: It is distributed in the five prefectures of Chengdu, Xuzhou, Shunqing, Boryeong and Ganzhou in Sichuan, and the five counties of Luchuan, Jiading, Guang'an, Ya and Guangyuan.

古文：岁解陕西镇盐课银七万一千余两。
现代文：每年解运陕西镇盐课银七万一千余两。
English: Every year, more than 71,000 taels of salt and silver are transported from Shaanxi Town.

古文：云南黑盐井辖盐课司三，白盐井、安宁盐井各辖盐课司一，五井辖盐课司七。
现代文：云南黑盐井管辖盐课司三个，白盐井、安宁盟井各管辖盐课司一个，五井管辖盐课司七个。
English: In Yunnan Province, there are three salt departments under the jurisdiction of Hei Yanjing, one salt department under the jurisdiction of Bai Yanjing and one salt department under the jurisdiction of Anning Mengjing, and seven salt departments under the jurisdiction of Goi.

古文：洪武时，岁办大引盐万七千八百馀引。
现代文：洪武时期，每年办大引盛一万七千八百余引。
English: During the Hongwu period, there were more than 17,800 lottery draws every year.

古文：弘治时，各井多寡不一。
现代文：弘治时期，各井多少不一。
English: During the Koji period, the growth of each well was somewhat different.

古文：万历时与洪武同。
现代文：万历时期与洪武相同。
English: The Wanli period is the same as the Hongwu period.

古文：盐行境内。
现代文：盐流通于境内。
English: Salt does not circulate within the country.

古文：岁入太仓盐课银三万五千余两。
现代文：每年纳入太仓盐课银三万五千多两。
English: More than 35,000 taels of silver are included in the Taicang salt classification every year.

古文：成祖时，尝设交阯提举司，其后交阯失，乃罢。
现代文：成祖时期，曾经设置交陆提举司，此后交肚失去，便罢除。
English: During the time of Cheng Zu, there used to be an official responsible for awarding land, but after that, the position was lost and he was dismissed.

古文：辽东盐场不设官，军馀煎办，召商易粟以给军。
现代文：辽东盐场不设官府，由未取得正式军籍的军人办理煮盐，招来商人换取粮食以供军用。
English: There is no government office in the Liaodong salt field, and soldiers who have not obtained official military status handle the boiled salt, and merchants are invited to exchange grain for military supplies.

古文：凡大引四百斤，小引二百斤。
现代文：凡是大引四百斤，小引二百斤。
English: In general, the big pull is four hundred catties and the small pull is two hundred catties.

古文：洪武三年，山西行省言： 大同粮储，自陵县运至太和岭，路远费烦。
现代文：洪武三年，山西行省建议： 大同的粮食储备，从陵县运到太和横，道路远费用多。
English: In the third year of Hongwu, Shanxi Province suggested: Datong's grain reserves are transported from Ling County to Taiheiyang, and the road is far more expensive.

古文：请令商人於大同仓入米一石，太原仓入米一石三斗，给淮盐一小引。
现代文：请求让商人向大同仓交纳米一石，太原仓交纳米一石三斗，给予淮盐一小引。
English: The request is for the merchant to hand over nano one stone to Datong warehouse, nano one stone and three buckets to Taiyuan warehouse, and give a small deduction to Huaiyan.

古文：商人鬻毕，即以原给引目赴所在官司缴之。
现代文：商人卖完，便以原来给予的货单到所在的政府主管部门缴纳。
English: When the merchant has sold out, he will use the original bill of lading to pay to the competent government department.

古文：如此则转运费省而边储充。 
现代文：如此转运费便节省下来而边防储备充足。 
English: In this way, transit costs are saved and border reserves are sufficient.

古文：帝从之。
现代文：皇帝听从其议。
English: The emperor obeyed.

古文：召商输粮而与之盐，谓之开中。
现代文：招来商人输入粮食而给予盐，造就叫做开中。
English: Inviting merchants to import grain and giving them salt is called kaizhong.

古文：其后各行省边境，多召商中盐以为军储。
现代文：此后各行省边境，多招商输粮换盐作为军队储备。
English: After that, more merchants were invited to transport grain across provincial borders to exchange for salt to be used as army reserves.

古文：盐法边计，相辅而行。
现代文：施行盐法与谋划边防，相辅而行。
English: The implementation of the Salt Law and the planning of border defense complement each other.

古文：四年定中盐例，输米临濠、开封、陈桥、襄阳、安陆、荆州、归州、大同、太原、孟津、北平、河南府、陈州、北通州诸仓，计道里近远，自五石至一石有差。
现代文：四年，制定开中盐的条例，输送米到临濠、开封、陈桥、襄阳、安陆、剂州、归州、大同、太原、孟津、北平、河南府、陈州、北通州等粮仓，计算道路远近，从五石到一石有差等。
English: In four years, the regulations for salt in Kaizhong were formulated, and rice was transported to grain silos in Linyi, Kaifeng, Chenqiao, Xiangyang, Anlu, Jiaozhou, Guizhou, Datong, Taiyuan, Mengjin, Beiping, Henan, Chenzhou, and Beitongzhou. The distance between the roads was calculated, and there was a difference from five stone to one stone.

古文：先后增减，则例不一，率视时缓急，米直高下，中纳者利否。
现代文：先后增减，则规定不一，大都根据时局缓急，米价高低，中纳者有利与否。
English: There are different rules for the successive increase and decrease, most of which are based on the current situation, the high and low rice prices, and whether it is advantageous or not for the middle-income earners.

古文：道远地险，则减而轻之。
现代文：道路远地方险，便减少而使其轻。
English: The road is far from dangerous, so it is reduced and made lighter.

古文：编置勘合及底簿，发各布政司及都司、卫所。
现代文：编制验对的符契和存底的簿册，发布给各布政司和都司、卫所。
English: Compile a book of matching certificates and records, and publish it to all political bureaus, city bureaus, and public health bureaus.

古文：商纳粮毕，书所纳粮及应支盐数，赍赴各转运提举司照数支盐。
现代文：商人交纳完粮食，书写所交纳的粮食和应该支付的盐数，带着凭据到各转运提举司照数目支领盐。
English: After the merchant has paid for the grain, he writes down the amount of grain paid and the amount of salt to be paid, and takes the documents to each transporter to pick up the salt according to the amount.

古文：转运诸司亦有底簿比照，勘合相符，则如数给与。
现代文：转运诸司也有存底的簿册与之比照，验对凭据相符，便按数目给舆盐。
English: The forwarding companies also have a book of records to compare with, and if the verification documents match, the salt will be given according to the number.

古文：鬻盐有定所，刊诸铜版，犯私盐者罪至死，伪造引者如之，盐与引离，即以私盐论。
现代文：商人卖盐有一定的地方，刊刻在铜版上，卖私盐的犯罪至死，伪造盐引的如同其罪，盐与盐刊分离，便按私盐论处。
English: Merchants selling salt have a certain place, which is engraved on the copper plate. The crime of selling illegal salt is punishable by death. Counterfeiting salt is treated as a crime. If salt is separated from salt, it will be dealt with according to illegal salt.

古文：成祖即位，以北京诸卫粮乏，悉停天下中盐，专於京卫开中。
现代文：明成祖即位，因北京等卫粮食缺乏，全部停止天下输粮换盐，专门在京卫交纳米以换盐专卖。
English: When Ming Chengzu ascended the throne, due to the shortage of grain in Beijing and other cities, all grain exports to the rest of the world were stopped in exchange for salt, which was sold exclusively in Beijing and other cities.

古文：惟云南金齿卫、楚雄府，四川盐井卫，陕西甘州卫，开中如故。
现代文：祇有云南金齿卫、楚雄府，四川盐井卫，陕西甘州卫，如同旧时交粮换盐出售。
English: Only Jinzuwei and Chuxiongfu in Yunnan, Yanjingwei in Sichuan, and Ganzhouwei in Shaanxi are selling grain for salt as in the old days.

古文：不数年，京卫粮米充羡，而大军征安南多费，甘肃军粮不敷，百姓疲转运。
现代文：没有几年，京卫的粮米充足有余，而大军征伐安南多费用，甘肃的军粮不够用，百姓疲于转运。
English: In just a few years, grain and rice in Jingwei were more than sufficient, while the large army's conquest of Annan was more expensive, the military grain in Gansu was not enough, and the people were tired of transshipment.

古文：迨安南新附，饷益难继，於是诸所复召商中盐，他边地复以次及矣。
现代文：到安南新来归附，粮饷更加难以为继，于是各所又招来商人轮粮以换盐，别的边地又依次实行。
English: When Annan was newly annexed, grain rationing was even more difficult to sustain, so merchants were invited from various places to exchange grain for salt, and other border areas were implemented in turn.

古文：仁宗立，以钞法不通，议所以敛之之道。
现代文：仁宗即位，因钞法不流通，商量收敛的办法。
English: When Emperor Nenzong ascended to the throne, due to the fact that the banknote law was not in circulation, they discussed ways to converge.

古文：户部尚书夏原吉请令有钞之家中盐，遂定各盐司中盐则例，沧州引三百贯，河东、山东半之，福建、广东百贯。
现代文：户部尚书夏原吉请求命令有钞的人家纳钞换盐出售，便制定了各盐司纳钞换盐的绦令规则，沧州盐一引三百贯，河东、山东碱半，福建、广束一百贯。
English: At the request of the head of the household department, Shangshu Xia Yuanji, who ordered people with banknotes to exchange banknotes for salt and sell it, he formulated the imperial order rules for each salt office to exchange banknotes for salt. Cangzhou's salt is one hundred and three hundred yuan, Hedong's and Shandong's is half a yuan, and Fujian's and Guangzhu's is one hundred yuan.

古文：宣德元年停中钞例。
现代文：宣德元年，停止纳钞换盐的规定。
English: In the first year of Xuande, the requirement to exchange salt for banknotes was abolished.

古文：三年，原吉以北京官吏、军、匠粮饷不支，条上预备策，言： 中盐旧则太重，商贾少至，请更定之。 
现代文：三年，夏原吉因北京官吏、军队、工匣的粮饷不能支付，分条上呈预备策，说： 以粮换盐的旧有规则太重，商人很少来换盐，请求重新制定。 
English: In the third year, because Xia Yuanji could not pay the grain rations of Beijing officials, the army, and the workshop, he presented a preparatory measure on the article, saying: The old rule of exchanging grain for salt is too heavy, merchants rarely come to exchange salt and request a new formulation.

古文：乃定每引自二斗五升至一斗五升有差，召商纳米北京。
现代文：于是制定每引从二斗五升至一斗五升各有差等，招来商人输送米于北京。
English: As a result, it was decided to raise the import quota from 2 to 5 doos to 1 to 5 doos, each with a difference, which attracted merchants to transport rice to Beijing.

古文：户部尚书郭敦言： 中盐则例已减，而商来者少，请以十分为率，六分支与纳米京仓者，四分支与辽东、永平、山海、甘肃、大同、宣府、万全已纳米者。
现代文：户部尚书郭敦说： 以粮换盐的条令规则已经减轻，而商人前来换盐的很少，请求以十分作为标准，六分支付给输送米到京城粮仓的人，四分支付给辽东、永平、山海、甘肃、大同、宣府、万全已输送米的人。
English: Shangshu Guodong, head of the Household Department, said: The regulation rule of exchanging grain for salt has been relaxed, but few merchants come to exchange salt. The request is based on the standard of ten points, six points are paid to those who transport rice to the grain silos in Beijing, and four points are paid to those who have transported rice in Liaodong, Yongping, Shanhai, Gansu, Datong, Xuanfu and Wanquan.

古文：他处中纳悉停之。 
现代文：别处输粮换盐全部停止。 
English: Elsewhere, all transfers of grain for salt have been stopped.

古文：又言： 洪武中，中盐客商年久物故，代支者多虚冒，请按引给钞十锭。 
现代文：又说： 洪武年间，交粮换盐销售的客商因时间久远而死亡，代替支取的人多虚假冒充，请求按照盥引给与钞十锭。 
English: He also said: During the Hongwu era, the merchants who sold salt in exchange for grain died because of the passage of time, and many of the people who replaced them were false impersonators, requesting to be given ten-baht banknotes in accordance with the law.

古文：帝皆从之，而命倍给其钞。
现代文：皇帝都听从其请，而命令加倍供给其钞。
English: The emperors obeyed his request, and the order doubled the supply of banknotes.

古文：甘肃、宁夏、大同、宣府、独石、永平道险远，趋中者少，许寓居官员及军馀有粮之家纳米豆中盐。
现代文：甘肃、宁夏、大同、宣府、独石、永平道路险阻适远，到那里交粮换盐的人很少，允许寄居在那里的官员和没有取得正式军籍的军人有粮食的家庭输纳米、豆以换盐。
English: The roads in Gansu, Ningxia, Datong, Xuanfu, Dokdo, and Yongping are far from dangerous, and there are few people who go there to exchange grain for salt. Officials who live there and soldiers who have not obtained official military registration are allowed to send nan and beans to families who have grain to exchange for salt.

古文：正统三年，宁夏总兵官史昭以边军缺马，而延庆、平凉官吏军民多养马，乃奏请纳马中盐。
现代文：正统三年，宁夏总兵官史昭因边防军队缺马，而延庆、平凉的官吏军民多养马，便上奏请求交纳马匹以换盐。
English: In the third year of orthodoxy, the Ningxia general officer Shi Zhao, due to the shortage of horses in the border defense army, and the officials and soldiers in Yanqing and Pingliang raised more horses, requested to pay horses in exchange for salt.

古文：上马一匹与盐百引，次马八十引。
现代文：上等马一匹给与盐一百引，次等马一匹换盐八十引。
English: A first-class horse is given 100 salt, and a second-class horse is given 80 salt.

古文：既而定边诸卫递增二十引。
现代文：随后定边各卫递增二十引。
English: Subsequently, each side of the fixed edge increased by 20 points.

古文：其后河州中纳者，上马二十五引，中减五引；松潘中纳者，上马三十五引，中减五引。
现代文：此后河州交纳马以换盐的，上等马换盐二十五引，中等马减少五引；松潘交纳马换盐的，上等马换盐三十五引，中等马减少五引。
English: Since then, in Hezhou, if a horse is given in exchange for salt, the highest-ranking horse is given in exchange for salt 25 times, and the middle-ranking horse is reduced by 5 times; in Songpan, if a horse is given in exchange for salt, the highest-ranking horse is given in exchange for salt 35 times, and the middle-ranking horse is reduced by 5 times.

古文：久之，复如初制。
现代文：后来，又如同开初的制度。
English: Later, the same system was used as in the beginning.

古文：中马之始，验马乃掣盐，既而纳银於官以市马，银入布政司，宗禄、屯粮、修边、振济展转支销，银尽而马不至，而边储亦自此告匮矣。
现代文：交马换盐开始的时候，验马便掣盐。后来交纳银给官府用以买马，银纳入布政司，宗禄、屯粮、修边、赈济辗转开支，银用光而马不到，边防储备也从此匮乏。
English: At the beginning of the exchange of horses for salt, the inspection of horses was marked with salt. Later, silver was paid to the government to buy horses, and the silver was included in the expenses of the political secretary, zonglu, grain, border repair, and aid. The silver was used up but the horses were not, and the border defense reserve was also scarce from then on.

古文：於是召商中淮、浙、长庐盐以纳之，令甘肃中盐者，淮盐十七，浙盐十三。
现代文：于是招来商人换取淮、浙、长芦的盐以交纳粮食，命令甘肃交粮换盐的人，淮盐占十分之七，浙盐占十分之三。
English: As a result, merchants were invited to exchange salt from Huai, Zhejiang and Changlu to pay grain, and those who ordered Gansu to pay grain for salt, Huai salt accounted for seven out of ten, and Zhejiang salt accounted for three out of ten.

古文：淮盐惟纳米麦，浙盐兼收豌豆、青稞。
现代文：淮盐只交纳米麦，浙盐兼收豌豆、青稞。
English: Huai salt only delivers nanomeat, while Zhejiang salt also receives peas and green onions.

古文：因淮盐直贵，商多趋之，故令淮、浙兼中也。
现代文：因为淮盐价值贵，商人多趋往，所以命令淮、淅盐兼换。
English: Because Hoai salt is valuable and merchants tend to buy more of it, they ordered that both Hoai salt and molybdenum salt be exchanged.

古文：明初仍宋、元旧制，所以优恤灶户者甚厚，给草场以供樵采，堪耕者许开垦，仍免其杂役，又给工本米，引一石。
现代文：明朝初年依照宋、元旧有制度，所以优待照顾灶卢很丰厚，给予草场以供应打柴采摘，可以耕种的土地允许开垦，仍免除其繁杂的徭役，又供给工本米，每引盐一石。
English: In the first year of the Ming Dynasty, in accordance with the Song and Yuan dynasties, the preferential treatment and care of Zhao Lu was very rich. The grassland was provided with firewood, and the land that could be cultivated was allowed to be reclaimed, but it was still exempted from the complicated plowing work. In addition, labor-intensive rice was provided, and one stone of salt was provided for each salting.

古文：置仓於场，岁拨附近州县仓储及兑军馀米以待给，兼支钱钞，以米价为准。
现代文：设置仓库于盐场，每年调拨附近州县粮仓储备以及军队兑运余米来供给，同时支付钱钞，以米价为标准。
English: Set up a warehouse in the salt field, allocate grain reserves from nearby state and county granaries and surplus rice from the army to supply every year, and pay bills at the same time, with rice price as the standard.

古文：寻定钞数，淮、浙引二贯五百文，河间、广东、海北、山东、福建、四川引二贯。
现代文：不久规定钱钞数目，淮、浙盐每引二贯五百文，河间、广东、海北、山东、福建、四川盐每引二贯。
English: Soon, the number of banknotes was specified, with Huai and Zhejiang salt each drawing two hundred and five hundred, and Hema, Guangdong, Hebei, Shandong, Fujian and Sichuan salt each drawing two hundred.

古文：灶户杂犯死罪以上止予杖，计日煎盐以赎。
现代文：灶户杂犯死罪以上的只予以杖击，计算时日煎熬盐来赎罪。
English: Only those who have committed more than capital crimes will be caned, and the time and salt of torture will be calculated to atone for their sins.

古文：后设总催，多朘削灶户。
现代文：后来设立总催，多搜刮剥削灶户。
English: Later, a general investigation was set up to investigate the exploitation of kitchen households.

古文：至正统时，灶户贫困，逋逃者多，松江所负课六十馀万。
现代文：到正统时期，灶户贫困，逃亡的人很多，松江所欠税收六十余万。
English: By the orthodox period, Zawado was impoverished, many people had fled, and Matsue owed more than 600,000 yuan in taxes.

古文：民诉於朝，命直隶巡抚周忱兼理盐课。
现代文：人民向朝廷控诉，命令直隶巡抚周忱兼管盐税。
English: The people complained to the imperial court and ordered the directly subordinate governor Zhou Zhen to take charge of the salt tax.

古文：忱条上铸铁釜、恤卤丁、选总催、严私贩四事，且请於每年正课外，带徵逋课。
现代文：周忱分条上呈铸造铁釜、体恤盐丁、选好总催、严禁私贩四件事，并且请求在每年的正常赋税之外，带征欠税。
English: Zhou Zhen's article was divided into four parts, namely, cast iron kettle, considerate salt, choose a good general organizer, and strictly prohibit private traders, and requested that the tax arrears should be levied in addition to the normal annual tax.

古文：帝从其请。命分逋课为六，以六载毕徵。
现代文：皇帝听从了他的建议，命令分欠税为六份，按六年征收完。
English: The emperor listened to his suggestion and ordered that the tax arrears be divided into six parts and collected over a period of six years.

古文：当是时，商人有自永乐中候支盐，祖孙相代不得者。
现代文：当时，商人有从永乐年间等候支取盐，祖孙代代相传不能得盐的。
English: At that time, merchants had to wait for salt to be drawn from the Yongle years, and it was passed down from generation to generation that salt could not be obtained.

古文：乃议仿洪武中例，而加钞锭以偿之，愿守支者听。
现代文：于是讨论仿效洪武年间的办法，而加钞锭来偿还，希望守候支付的人听便。
English: So they discussed the idea of following the methods of the Hongwu years, and adding banknotes to repay, hoping that people waiting for payment would be more convenient.

古文：又以商人守支年久，虽减轻开中，少有上纳者，议他盐司如旧制，而淮、浙、长芦以十分为率，八分给守支商，曰常股，二分收贮於官，曰存积，遇边警，始召商中纳。
现代文：又因商人等候支盐年代很久，虽然减轻交粮换盐的数量，却很少有交纳的，商议决定别的盐司按照旧有制度办理，而淮、浙、长芦以十分为标准，八分给予守候支付的商人，叫做常股，二分收缴贮藏于官府，叫做存积，遇到边防有警报，纔招来商人输纳粮食以换盐。
English: In addition, because merchants have been waiting for salt for a long time, although the amount of grain to be exchanged for salt has been reduced, but few have been paid, it was decided in consultation that other salt companies will follow the old system, while Huai, Zhejiang and Changlu will use ten as the standard, eight points will be given to merchants waiting for payment, called regular shares, two points will be collected and stored in government offices, called storage, and if there is an alarm at the border, merchants will be invited to import grain to exchange for salt.

古文：常股、存积之名由此始。
现代文：常股、存积的名称从这时开始。
English: The names of ordinary shares and depository shares began at this time.

古文：凡中常股者价轻，中存积者价重，然人甚苦守支，争趋存积，而常股壅矣。
现代文：凡是换取常股的价格低，换取存积的价格高，但是人们非常苦于守候支盐，争着趋向存积，而常股壅塞不畅。
English: In general, the price of ordinary shares is low and the price of inventory is high, but people are very hard to wait for salt, and strive to accumulate, while ordinary shares are not smooth.

古文：景帝时，边圉多故，存积增至六分。
现代文：景帝时期，边防多变故，存积增加到六分。
English: During the reign of Emperor Jing, due to the changeable border, the stock increased to six points.

古文：中纳边粮，兼纳谷草、秋青草，秋青草三当谷草二。
现代文：输送粮食到边防以换盐，兼输纳谷草、秋青草，秋青草当谷草的三分之二。
English: Grain is transported to the border to be exchanged for salt, and is also delivered to Nagoya, Akiyamakusa, and two-thirds of Akiyamakusa to Nagoya.

古文：广东之盐，例不出境，商人率市守关吏，越市广西。
现代文：广东出产的盥按例不出其境，商人大都买通守关官吏，越境到广西出售。
English: As usual, tungsten produced in Guangdong does not go abroad. Merchants mostly bribe customs officials to sell it across the border to Guangxi.

古文：巡抚叶盛以为任之则废法，禁之则病商，请令入米饷边，乃许出境，公私交利焉。
现代文：巡抚叶盛认为听任这样做便是废除法令，禁止这样做便是伤害商人，于是请求交纳米作为边防军饷，便允许出境，公家和私人都获得利益。
English: Ye Sheng, the governor, thought that to allow this would be to repeal the law, and to forbid it would be to harm the merchants, so he asked for nano to be used as border troops, and then allowed them to leave the country, and both the public and private sectors would benefit.

古文：成化初，岁洊灾，京储不足，召商於淮、徐、德州水次仓中盐。
现代文：成化初年，连年遭受灾害，京城储备不足，召来商人在进、徐、德州水边粮仓交纳粮食以换盐贩卖。
English: In the first year of Chenghua, the city suffered from disasters year after year, the capital reserves were insufficient, and merchants were summoned to pay grain to the grain silos in Jin, Xu and Dezhou to exchange for salt.

古文：旧例中盐，户部出榜召商，无径奏者。
现代文：旧有规定交粮换盐贩卖，户部出告示折商，没有径直上奏的。
English: In the old days, there was a rule that grain had to be given in exchange for salt, and the household department had to issue a notice to the dealer, but there was no direct transfer.

古文：富人吕铭等托势要奏中两淮存积盐，中旨允之。
现代文：富人吕铭等依托权势上奏请求换取两淮的存积盐，内宫传旨允许其请。
English: Rich people such as Luming, relying on their power to make a request for the exchange of the two Huai's stored salt, were allowed by the Inner Court to request it.

古文：户部尚书马昂不能执正，盐法之坏自此始。
现代文：户部尚书马昂不能坚持正令，盐法的败坏从此开始。
English: The head of the household, Shang Shumaang, could not stick to the correct order, and the corruption of the salt law began.

古文：势豪多搀中，商人既失利，江南、北军民因造遮洋大船，列械贩盐。
现代文：权势豪强多抢先纳粮换盐，商人失去利益，江南、江北军民于是造遮洋大船，排列器械贩运私盐。
English: The powerful and powerful mostly took the grain first in exchange for salt, and the merchants lost their profits. Therefore, the soldiers and civilians in the south and north of the Yangtze River built large ships to cover the ocean, and arranged the equipment to traffic the illegal salt.

古文：乃为重法，私贩、窝隐俱论死，家属徙边卫，夹带越境者充军。
现代文：朝廷便制定严厉的法律，私自贩盐、窝藏隐匿者都判处死罪，家属迁徙到边防卫所；夹带盐越境的充军。
English: Strict laws were enacted by the imperial court. Those who illegally sold salt or hid salt were sentenced to death. Their families were moved to border guard stations. Those who smuggled salt across the border were conscripted into the army.

古文：然不能遏止也。
现代文：然而仍不能遏止。
English: However, it still cannot be stopped.

古文：十九年颇减存积之数，常股七分，而存积三分。
现代文：十九年，减少很多存积的数额，常股占七分，而存积占三分。
English: In 2019, the amount of reserves was greatly reduced, with ordinary shares accounting for seven points and reserves accounting for three points.

古文：然商人乐有见盐，报中存积者争至，遂仍增至六分。
现代文：但是商人乐于有现盐，前往换取存积盐的人争着到来，便仍然增加到六分。
English: But the merchants were glad to have the existing salt, and the number of people who came to exchange it for the stored salt increased to six.

古文：淮、浙盐犹不能给，乃配支长庐、山东以给之。
现代文：淮、浙盐还是不能满足供应，便分配支付长芦、山东的盐供给商人。
English: Huai, Zhejiang salt still can not meet the supply, it will be allocated to pay Changlu, Shandong salt supply merchants.

古文：一人兼支数处，道远不及亲赴，边商辄贸引於近地富人。
现代文：一人兼支付多处，道路遥远不能亲自前往，边地商人便向近地的商人买卖盐引。
English: One person pays for multiple places, the road is far away and cannot be visited in person. Merchants in outlying areas buy and sell salt to merchants in nearby areas.

古文：自是有边商、内商之分。
现代文：从此有边商、内商的分别。
English: Since then, there has been a distinction between foreign traders and domestic traders.

古文：内商之盐不能速获，边商之引又不贱售，报中寝怠，存积之滞遂与常股等。
现代文：内商的盐不能迅速获得，边商的盐又不低贱出售，前往换盐渐渐懈怠，存积的滞留与常股相同。
English: The salt of domestic traders cannot be obtained quickly, and the salt of foreign traders is not sold at a low price. They gradually slacken off when they go to change salt, and the retention of stocks is the same as that of ordinary stocks.

古文：宪宗末年，阉宦窃势，奏讨淮、浙盐无算，两淮积欠至五百馀万引，商引壅滞。
现代文：宪宗末年，宦官窃取权势，上奏讨要淮、浙盐无数，两淮积欠盐达到五百多万引，商引被壅塞滞留。
English: In the last years of the Jianzong Dynasty, the eunuchs stole power, and there were countless requests for salt from Zhuhai and Zhejiang, and the accumulated salt deficit reached more than five million, and the merchants were detained.

古文：至孝宗时，而买补馀盐之议兴矣。
现代文：到孝宗时期，购买补余盐的提议兴起。
English: By the time of Emperor Xiaozong, the idea of purchasing surplus salt was on the rise.

古文：馀盐者，灶户正课外所馀之盐也。
现代文：余盐，是灶户正征之外所余的盐。
English: Residual salt is the salt that is left over after cooking.

古文：洪武初制，商支盐有定场，毋许越场买补；勤灶有馀盐送场司，二百斤为一引，给米一石。
现代文：洪武初年的制度，商人支取盐有规定的盐场，不允许超越固定盐场买补盐；勤灶有剩余的盐便送交场司，二百斤为一引，换给米一石。
English: The system of the first year of Hongwu, merchants withdraw salt from the specified salt farm, and are not allowed to exceed the fixed salt farm to buy supplemental salt; if there is surplus salt in the kitchen, it will be sent to the foreman, two hundred catties will be a deduction, and rice will be exchanged for one stone.

古文：其盐召商开中，不拘资次给与。
现代文：这些盐招来商人交纳粮食以换取，不拘泥纳资次秩供给。
English: These salts attracted merchants to pay grain in exchange, regardless of rank.

古文：成化后，令商收买，而劝借米麦以振贫灶。
现代文：成化以后，命令商人收买，而鼓励借米麦以赈济贫灶。
English: After it was formed, merchants were ordered to buy it, and encouraged to borrow rice and wheat to feed the poor.

古文：至是清理两淮盐法，侍郎李嗣请令商人买余盐补官引，而免其劝借，且停各边开中，俟逋课完日，官为卖盐，三分价直，二充边储，而留其一以补商人未交盐价。
现代文：到这时清理两淮盐法，侍郎李嗣请求命令商人买余盐以补足官引，而免去劝借，并且停止各边防纳粮换盐，等待拖欠征收完成之日，官府为此卖盐，三分作为盐的价值，二分充作边防储备，留下一分用以补偿商人未交的盐价。
English: At this time, the two-huai salt law was cleared up, and the steward Li Xi requested that the merchant be ordered to buy surplus salt to make up for the official lead, and be exempted from persuasion, and to stop the border defense to exchange grain for salt, waiting for the date of completion of the collection of arrears. The government sold salt for this purpose, three points as the value of salt, two points as a border defense reserve, leaving one point to compensate the merchant for the unpaid salt price.

古文：由是以馀盐补充正课，而盐法一小变。
现代文：从此以余盐补充正常征收，而盐法发生了一次小的改变。
English: Since then, the normal collection has been supplemented with surplus salt, and the salt method has undergone a small change.

古文：明初，各边开中商人，招民垦种，筑台堡自相保聚，边方菽粟无甚贵之时。
现代文：明朝初年，各边防纳粮换盐贩卖的商人，招集人民垦荒耕种，修筑台堡自相保护聚居，边地的粮食没有特别昂贵的时候。
English: In the first year of the Ming Dynasty, merchants from various border regions began to collect grain in exchange for salt. They called on the people to plow and cultivate, build forts to protect themselves, and live together. This was a time when grain in the border regions was not particularly expensive.

古文：成化间，始有折纳银者，然未尝著为令也。
现代文：成化年间，开始有折合交纳银的，然而不曾定着成法令。
English: During the Chenghua era, there was a beginning of the exchange of silver for cash, but it was never codified into law.

古文：弘治五年，商人困守支，户部尚书叶淇请召商纳银运司，类解太仓，分给各边。
现代文：弘治五年，商人被守候支付盐所困挠，卢部尚书墓邀请求招来商人交纳银于运司，类似于解送太仓，分别供给各边防。
English: In the fifth year of Hongzhi, merchants were pestered by waiting for payment of salt. Lu Bu Shangshu tomb invited and requested to invite merchants to pay silver to the transportation department, similar to the delivery of Taicang, and supply each border separately.

古文：每引输银三四钱有差，视国初中米直加倍，而商无守支之苦，一时太仓银累至百馀万。
现代文：每引盐输纳银三四钱不等，比照开国之初中筹米价加倍，而商人没有守候支盐的苦恼，一时之间太仓的储银增加到一百多葛。
English: Every time salt was brought in, the amount of silver received varied from three to four yuan, which was double the price of rice at the time of the founding of the People's Republic of China. However, merchants did not have to wait for the salt to be brought in, and the amount of silver stored in Taicang increased to more than one hundred ge.

古文：然赴边开中之法废，商屯撤业，菠粟翔贵，边储日虚矣。
现代文：然而输送粮食到边地换取盐的办法被废弃，商人屯种撤除其业，粮食昂贵，边防储粮一天天空虚。
English: However, the method of transporting grain to outlying areas in exchange for salt was abandoned, merchants withdrew their businesses from the area, grain was expensive, and grain reserves along the border became empty.

古文：武宗之初，以盐法日坏，令大臣王琼、张宪等分道清理，而庆云侯周寿、寿宁侯张鹤各令家人奏买长芦、两淮盐引。
现代文：武宗初年，因为盐法一天天败坏，便命令大臣王琼、张宪等人分道清理，而庆云侯周寿、寿奎堡张鹤龄各自命令家人上奏买长芦、两淮的盐引。
English: In the first year of the Wuzong Dynasty, because the salt method was deteriorating day by day, he ordered the minister Wang Qiong, Zhang Xian and others to go their separate ways to clean up, while Qingyun Hou Zhou Shou and Shou Kui Fort Zhang He Ling each ordered their families to go to Shangxiao to buy salt from Changlu and Duahuai.

古文：户部尚书韩文执不可，中旨许之。
现代文：户部尚书韩文坚持不同意，皇帝在内宫传旨同意。
English: The head of the household, Shangshu Hanwen, insisted that he did not agree, and the emperor sent a message to the inner palace to agree.

古文：织造太监崔杲又奏乞长芦盐一万二千引，户部以半予之。
现代文：织造太监崔杲又上奏请求买长芦盐一万二干引，户部按一半给予他。
English: The weaving eunuch Cui Yao also made a request to buy ten thousand and two-thirds of the long reed salt, and the household department gave him half of it.

古文：帝欲全予，大学士刘健等力争，李东阳语尤切。
现代文：皇帝想全部给予，大学士刘健等人竭力谏争，李柬阳的话尤其激切。
English: The emperor wanted to give everything, Liu Jian, a university scholar, and others tried their best to compete, and Li Kamyang's words were particularly fierce.

古文：帝不悦。
现代文：皇帝不高兴。
English: Gao Di was not happy to hear this.

古文：健等复疏争，乃从部议。
现代文：刘健等人又上疏谏争，纔听从户部的决定。
English: Liu Jian and others also went to the village to listen to the decision of the household department.

古文：权要开中既多，又许买馀盐，一引有用至十馀年者。
现代文：权势要人纳粮换盐已多，又允许买余盐，一引有用到十多年的。
English: Influential dignitaries have been given more grain in exchange for salt, and they are allowed to buy surplus salt, which can be used for more than ten years.

古文：正德二年始申截旧引角之令，立限追缴，而每引增纳纸价及振济米麦。
现代文：正德二年纔申明截旧引角的法令，确立限期追缴，而每引盐增加交纳纸价和赈济米麦。
English: Zhengde two years ago issued a decree to clarify the old lead angle, establish a deadline for recovery, and increase the payment of paper price and rice and wheat for each salt.

古文：引价重而课壅如故矣。
现代文：盐引价贵而赋税征收壅塞如故。
English: The price of salt is too high and the tax collection is too slow.

古文：先是成化初，都御史韩雍於肇庆、梧州、清远、南雄立抽盐厂，官盐一引，抽银五分，许带馀盐四引，引抽银一钱。
现代文：在此之前，成化初年，都御史韩雍在肇庆、梧州、清远、南雄设立抽盐厂，官盐一引，抽银五分，允许带余盐四引，每引抽银一钱。
English: Prior to this, in the first year of Chenghua, the prefectural governor Han Yong set up salt extraction plants in Zhaoqing, Wuzhou, Qingyuan, and Nanxiong. The official salt was deducted once, the silver was deducted five points, the excess salt was allowed to be deducted four times, and the silver was deducted one money for each deduction.

古文：都御史秦纮许增带馀盐六引，抽银六钱。
现代文：都御史秦弦允许增带余盐六引，抽银六钱。
English: The governor of the capital, Qin Zhen, allowed the remaining salt to be brought in six times and the silver to be taken out six times.

古文：及是增至九钱，而不复抽官引。
现代文：到这时增加到九钱，而不再抽官引盐银。
English: By this time, it had increased to nine coins, and no longer drew salt and silver from officials.

古文：引目积滞，私盐通行，乃用户部郎中丁致祥请，复纮旧法。
现代文：获准销售的货物凭单积压停滞，私贩之盐通行，便采用户部郎中丁致祥的请求，恢复秦弦旧有办法。
English: The backlog of goods vouchers approved for sale stagnated, and the salt of private traders was allowed to pass. At the request of Ding Zhixiang, a member of the user department, there was a way to restore Qin Zhen.

古文：而他处商人夹带馀盐，掣割纳价，惟多至三百斤者始罪之。
现代文：而别处商人夹带余盐，掣割纳价，祇有多达三百斤的纔治罪。
English: Elsewhere, however, merchants are only guilty of smuggling up to three hundred kilos of salt and undercutting the price.

古文：淮、浙、长芦引盐，常股四分，以给各边主兵及工役振济之需；存积六分，非国家大事，边境有警，未尝妄开。开必边臣奏讨，经部覆允，未有商人擅请及专请淮盐者。
现代文：淮、浙、长芦的引盐，常股四分，用来供给各边防筹建的军队和土木工程赈济的需要；存积六分，如果不是国家大事，边境有警报，便不曾妄自输粮换盐，要输粮换盐必须边防大臣上奏请求，经过户部复核允许，没有商人擅自请求和专门请求淮盥的。
English: The salt brought from Huai, Zhejiang and Changlu is usually divided into four parts, which is used to supply the military and civil engineering needs of each border defense preparation; the storage is divided into six parts. If it is not a national event and there is an alarm at the border, it will not have been transferred from grain to salt. To transfer grain to salt, the Minister of Border Defense must submit a request. After the review of the household department, there is no unauthorized request or special request from the merchant.

古文：弘治间，存积盐甚多。
现代文：弘治年间，存积盐很多。
English: During the Koji era, a lot of salt was accumulated.

古文：正德时，权幸遂奏开残盐，改存积、常股皆为正课，且皆折银。
现代文：正德时期，权要亲近之人便上奏开残盐，把存积、常股盐都改成正式赋税，并且都折合成银。
English: During the Zhengde period, those who were close to power played the role of opening the residual salt, changing the deposit and the common salt into formal taxes, and all were converted into silver.

古文：边臣缓急无备，而势要占中卖窝，价增数倍。
现代文：边防大臣紧急时没有准备，而权势要人占中卖窝，盐价增加数倍。
English: The Minister of Border Defense was unprepared in an emergency, while influential people occupied the middle selling nest, and the price of salt increased several times.

古文：商人引纳银八钱，无所获利，多不愿中，课日耗绌。
现代文：商人的盐引交纳银八钱，无法获取利润，多不愿意换盐贩卖，赋税一天天消耗短缺。
English: Merchants' salt imports cost eight times as much, they can't make a profit, many are unwilling to exchange salt for sales, and taxes are in short supply day by day.

古文：奸黠者夹带影射，弊端百出。
现代文：奸猾狡黠之人夹带蒙混，弊端百出。
English: Treacherous and cunning people are involved in the cover-up, and there are a lot of drawbacks.

古文：盐臣承中珰风旨，复列零盐、所盐诸目以假之。
现代文：盐官禀承宦官的意图，又开列霉盐、所盐等名目来给予他们。
English: The salt officials followed the intention of the eunuchs, and listed the names of moldy salt, salt, etc. to give them.

古文：世宗登极诏，首命裁革。
现代文：世宗登上皇位时下诏，首先命令裁除。
English: When Sejong ascended the throne, he issued an imperial edict, first ordering the abolition of the shogunate.

古文：未几，商人逯俊等夤缘近幸，以增价为名，奏买残馀等盐。
现代文：不久，商人逯俊等攀附皇帝身边亲近宠幸之人，以增加盐价为名，上奏购买残、余等盐。
English: Before long, merchants such as Gong Jun, who were close to and favored by the emperor, began to purchase surplus salt in the name of increasing the price of salt.

古文：户部尚书秦金执不允，帝特令中两淮额盐三十万引於宣府。
现代文：户部尚书秦金坚持不同意，皇帝特别命令在宣府输粮换取雨淮额定盐三十万引。
English: The head of the household, Shangshu Qin Jin, insisted on disagreeing, and the emperor issued a special order to transfer grain to Xuanfu in exchange for 300,000 yuan worth of salt.

古文：金言： 奸人占中淮盐，卖窝罔利，使山东、长芦等盐别无搭配，积之无用。
现代文：秦金说： 奸猾之人占有换取的淮盐，卖窝牟取暴利，使山东、长芦等地的盐别无搭配，积压无用。
English: Qin Jin said: Treacherous people have taken possession of the Huai salt that was exchanged and sold it to make huge profits, so that the salt from Shandong, Changlu and other places has no match and the backlog is useless.

古文：亏国用，误边储，莫此为甚。 
现代文：亏损国家用度，贻误边防储备，没有什么比这更严重的。 
English: There is nothing more serious than the loss of national consumption and the shortage of border defense reserves.

古文：御史高世魁亦争之。
现代文：御史高世魁也为此而谏争。
English: The head of the Imperial History High School also argued for this.

古文：诏减淮引十万，分两浙、长芦盐给之。
现代文：下诏减少淮盐十万引，分别以两浙、长芦盐给与他。
English: The following edict reduced Huai salt by 100,000, and gave him two Zhejiang and long reed salt respectively.

古文：金复言： 宣、大俱重镇，不宜令奸商自择便利，但中宣府。 
现代文：秦金又说： 宣、大都是军事要地，不适宜让奸猾的商人自己选择便利，只换宣府盐贩卖。 
English: Qin Jin also said: Xuanwu is mostly a military important place, it is not appropriate to let cunning merchants choose their own convenience, only to sell Xuanwu salt.

古文：帝可之。
现代文：皇帝同意其请求。
English: The emperor agreed to his request.

古文：已而俊等请以十六人中宣府，十一人中大同，竟从其请。
现代文：随后逯俊等人请求以十六人换宣府盐贩卖，十一人换大同盥贩卖，最终听从了他的请求。
English: Subsequently, Gong Jun and others requested that 16 people be exchanged for the sale of salt in Xuanwu, and 11 people for the sale of rice in Datong, and finally heeded his request.

古文：嘉靖五年从给事中管律奏，乃复常股存积四六分之制。
现代文：嘉靖五年，听从给事中管律的奏请，纔恢复常股、存积四六分的制度。
English: In the fifth year of Jiajing, he heeded the request to restore the system of regular shares and accumulation of four or six points.

古文：然是时馀盐盛行，正盐守支日久，愿中者少；馀盐第领勘合，即时支卖，愿中者多。
现代文：然而这时，余盥盛行，正盐守候支取时间久，愿意输纳粮食换盐的很少；余盐只需领取凭据验证，便立即支取贩卖，愿意纳粮换盐的人多。
English: However, at this time, surplus salt is prevalent, it takes a long time to wait for salt to be withdrawn, and few people are willing to accept grain for salt; surplus salt only needs to receive proof of verification, it will be immediately withdrawn and sold, and there are many people willing to accept grain for salt.

古文：自弘治时以馀盐补正课，初以偿逋课，后令商人纳价输部济边。
现代文：自从弘治时期用余盐补偿正式赋税，开初用来偿还拖欠的赋税，后来命令商人交纳盐价输送户部救济边防。
English: Since the Hongzhi period, the use of surplus salt to compensate for formal taxation, initially used to repay tax arrears, and later ordered merchants to pay the price of salt to transport household relief to the border.

古文：至嘉靖时，延绥用兵，辽左缺饷，尽发两淮馀盐七万九千馀引於二边开中。自是馀盐行。
现代文：到嘉靖时期，延绥发生战争，辽左缺乏军饷，全部调发两淮余盐七万九千多引到二处边防输纳粮食换盐贩卖。
English: By the Jiajing period, war broke out in Yancheng, Liao Zuo was short of military supplies, and all the surplus salt from the two provinces, more than 79,000 tons, was transferred to two border defense posts to be sold as grain in exchange for salt.

古文：其始尚无定额，未几，两淮增引一百四十馀万，每引增馀盐二百六十五斤。
现代文：从此余盐流行。开始的时候还没有固定额敷，不久，两淮增加盐引一百四十多万，每引增加余盐二百六十五斤。
English: From then on, surplus salt became popular. At the beginning, there was no fixed quota. Soon, the two provinces added more than 1.4 million tons of surplus salt, with each province adding 265 pounds of surplus salt.

古文：引价，淮南纳银一两九钱，淮北一两五钱，又设处置、科罚名色，以苛敛商财。
现代文：盐引价，淮南交纳银一两九钱，淮北交纳银一两五钱。又设置处置、科罚的名目，用来残酷搜刮商人的钱财。
English: In the salt auction, Huainan paid 1.29 yuan, and Huaibei paid 1.25 yuan, and set up the name of disposition and disciplinary punishment, which was used to cruelly extort money from merchants.

古文：於是正盐未派，先估馀盐，商灶俱困。
现代文：于是正征盐尚未换出，而先买余盐，商人和灶丁都很困顿。
English: As a result, the registered salt has not yet been exchanged, but the surplus salt has been bought first, and both the merchant and the cook are in trouble.

古文：奸黠者藉口官买馀盐，夹贩私煎。
现代文：奸猾狡黠的人借口官府买余盐，夹带贩卖，私自熬盐。
English: Devious and cunning people use the excuse that the government buys surplus salt, sells it on the side, and makes salt themselves.

古文：法禁无所施，盐法大坏。
现代文：法律禁令无处可施，盐法大败坏。
English: Legal prohibitions are nowhere to be found, and the salt law has been seriously corrupted.

古文：十三年，给事中管怀理言： 盐法之坏，其弊有六。
现代文：十三年，给事中管怀理说： 盐法的败坏，它的弊端有六点。
English: In the thirteenth year, the person in charge of the matter said: The corruption of the salt law has six drawbacks.

古文：开中不时，米价腾贵，召籴之难也。
现代文：输纳粮食换盐贩卖没有固定的时间，米价猛涨时，招来棹米困难。
English: There is no fixed time for the sale of salt in exchange for grain. When the price of rice soars, it will be difficult to sell glutinous rice.

古文：势豪大家，专擅利权，报中之难也。
现代文：权势豪强大家族，专门占有利益权力，粮盐报中困难。
English: Powerful powerful families, special interest power, grain and salt report difficulties.

古文：官司科罚，吏胥侵索，输纳之难也。
现代文：官吏科征处罚，小吏侵吞勒索，输送交纳粗食困难。
English: Government officials were punished by levying taxes, petty officials were extorted by extortion, and it was difficult to transport and pay for coarse food.

古文：下场挨掣，动以数年，守支之难也。
现代文：下场挨时拖延，动不动达敷年，守候支取困难。
English: The end of the game is delayed, and it is difficult to wait and withdraw.

古文：定价太昂，息不偿本，取赢之难也。
现代文：定价太昂贵，利息不能偿还本金，取得赢利困难。
English: The pricing is too expensive, the interest cannot repay the principal, and it is difficult to make a profit.

古文：私盐四出，官盐不行，市易之难也。
现代文：私盐贩卖遍地都是，官盐不能流通，市场交易困难。
English: Private salt is sold everywhere, official salt cannot circulate, and market transactions are difficult.

古文：有此六难，正课壅矣，而司计者因设馀盐以佐之。
现代文：有这六样困难，正式的赋税便壅塞了，而司计之人于是设余盐来佐助。
English: With these six difficulties, the formal taxation was postponed, and the accountant then set up surplus salt to help.

古文：馀盐利厚，商固乐从，然不以开边而以解部，虽岁入距万，无益军需。
现代文：余盐利润丰厚，商人本来乐于从业，然而不是用来输送边防而是解送户部，虽然每年累万，却无益于军队所需。
English: Residual salt is highly profitable. Merchants would have been happy to engage in it, but instead of being used to transport border defense, it was sent to the Ministry of Household Affairs. Although it is tens of thousands of dollars a year, it is not beneficial to the needs of the army.

古文：尝考祖宗时，商人中盐纳价甚轻，而灶户煎盐工本甚厚，今盐价十倍於前，而工本不能十一，何以禁私盐使不行也？
现代文：曾经考察祖宗之时，商人输送粮食换盐交纳盐价很低，而灶户熬盐的工本费很贵；现在盐价比以前高出十倍，而熬盐的工本费不到十分之一，用什么办法来禁止私盐使不流行呢？
English: Once upon a time, when the ancestors were examined, the price of salt paid by merchants transporting grain for salt was very low, while the cost of boiling salt by cooks was very expensive; now the price of salt is ten times higher than before, while the cost of boiling salt is less than one-tenth of the cost. What should be done to prohibit the smuggling of salt and make it unpopular?

古文：故欲通盐法，必先处馀盐，欲处馀盐，必多减正价。
现代文：所以想要疏通盐法，必须首先处理余盐，想要处理余盐，必须大量减少正盐价。
English: Therefore, if you want to dredge the salt method, you must first deal with the surplus salt. If you want to deal with the surplus salt, you must significantly reduce the positive salt price.

古文：大抵正盐贱，则私贩自息。
现代文：大致说来正盐价低，那么私自贩盐自然止息。
English: Generally speaking, if the price of salt is low, then I will naturally stop selling salt.

古文：今宜定价，每引正盐银五钱，馀盐二钱五分，不必解赴太仓，俱令开中关支，馀盐以尽收为度。
现代文：现在应该确定盐价，每引正盐银五钱，余盐二钱五分，不必解送到太仓，都命令输纳粮食便领取盐引，余盐以尽收为尺度。
English: It is time to fix the price of salt. For each delivery of salt, the amount of silver and salt is five yuan, and the remaining salt is two yuan and five cents. There is no need to send the salt to Taicang. If the grain is ordered to be delivered, the salt will be collected. The remaining salt will be collected when the grain is exhausted.

古文：正盐价轻，既利於商；馀盐收尽，又利於灶。
现代文：正盐价低，既有利于商人；余盐收尽，又有利于熬盐的灶丁。
English: The low price of normal salt is not only beneficial to merchants, but it is also beneficial for salt cookers to collect the remaining salt.

古文：未有商灶俱利，而国课不充者也。 
现代文：没有商人和灶丁都获利，而国家的赋税不充足的。 
English: There are no businessmen and cooks who make a profit, and the state's taxes are insufficient.

古文：事下所司，户部覆，以为馀盐银仍解部如故，而边饷益虚矣。
现代文：事情下发主管部门，户部回复，认为余盐银仍然如过去一样解送户部，而边防军饷更加空虚。
English: The competent department in charge of the matter, the Household Department, replied that the remaining salt and silver were still sent to the Household Department as in the past, and the border troops were more empty.

古文：至二十年，帝以变乱盐法由馀盐，敕罢之。
现代文：到二十年，皇帝认为变乱盐法是由余盐引起，下敕命罢除。
English: By the 20th century, the emperor believed that the salt method was caused by excess salt, and ordered that it be abolished.

古文：淮、浙、长芦悉复旧法，夹带者割没入官，应变卖者以时估为准。
现代文：淮、浙、长芦全部恢复旧法，夹带的没收交给官府，应变卖的以当时价格为准。
English: Huai, Zhejiang and Changlu all restored the old law, the confiscation of the entourage was handed over to the government, and the contingency sale was subject to the price at that time.

古文：御史吴琼又请各边中盐者皆输本色。
现代文：御史昊琼又请求各边防换盐的都输纳粮食。
English: Ms. Shi Haoqiong also requested that all border guards exchange salt for grain.

古文：然令甫下，吏部尚书许讃即请复开余盐以足边用。
现代文：然而命令刚刚下发，吏部尚书许赞便请求重新开输余盐以充足边防用度。
English: However, as soon as the order was issued, the Ministry of Civil Affairs requested the re-opening of the remaining salt to ensure sufficient border protection.

古文：户部覆从之，馀盐复行矣。
现代文：户部又听从其请，余盐又流行开了。
English: The head of the household also obeyed his request, and surplus salt became popular again.

古文：先是，十六年令两浙僻邑，官商不行之处，山商每百斤纳银八分，给票行盐。
现代文：在此之前，十六年，命令两浙偏僻之地，官商不能到达之处，山商每一百斤盐交纳银八分，给票发盐。
English: Prior to this, in the 16th year, it was ordered that in the two remote areas of Zhejiang, where government officials and merchants could not reach, mountain merchants should pay silver and eight cents for every hundred pounds of salt, and give salt to the ticket.

古文：其后多侵夺正引，官商课缺，引壅二百万，候掣必五六载。
现代文：此后多侵夺正式盐引，官商赋税缺乏，盐引壅塞二百万，等候支取拖延五六年。
English: Since then, there have been many encroachments on official salt withdrawals, official and commercial taxes are lacking, salt withdrawals have been delayed by two million, and waiting for withdrawals has been delayed for five or six years.

古文：於是有预徵、执抵、季掣之法。
现代文：于是有预征、执抵、季掣的办法。
English: As a result, there is a method of pre-registration, enforcement of arrival, and quartering.

古文：预徵者，先期输课，不得私为去留。
现代文：预征，是先期输缴赋税，不能私自去留。
English: Pre-collection is the advance transfer and payment of taxes, and I can't go and stay by myself.

古文：执抵者，执现在运盐水程，复持一引以抵一引。
现代文：执抵，是执现在运盐的水道路程，复持一引以抵一引。
English: Enforcement is the enforcement of the current waterway route for transporting salt, and the holding of one lead to the arrival of one lead.

古文：季掣，则以纳课先后为序，春不得迟於夏，夏不得超於春也。
现代文：季掣，则是以交纳赋税先后为序，春季不能迟于夏季，夏季不能超过春季。
English: For the fourth quarter, the order of tax payment is as follows: the spring cannot be later than the summer, and the summer cannot exceed the spring.

古文：然票商纳税即掣卖，预徵诸法徒厉引商而已。
现代文：然而票商交纳赋税便掣卖，预征等法只是鼓励引商而已。
English: However, ticket vendors sell tickets without paying taxes, and pre-collection and other methods only encourage the introduction of vendors.

古文：灵州盐池，自史昭中马之议行，边饷亏缺，甘肃米直石银五两，户部因奏停中马，召商纳米中盐。
现代文：灵州的盐池，从史昭输送马匹换取盐引之议施行，边防军饷缺乏，甘肃的米价一石值银五两，户部于是奏请停止以马换盐，招来商人输纳米以换盐。
English: In the salt pond of Lingzhou, the proposal to transport horses from Shizhao in exchange for salt was implemented, the border troops were lacking, and the price of rice in Gansu was worth five times the price of silver. Therefore, the household department requested to stop using horses to exchange salt, and invited merchants to import nano to exchange salt.

古文：二十七年令开中者止纳本色粮草。
现代文：二十七年，命令输粮换盐的只交纳粮草。
English: In the 27th year, it was ordered that only grain and grass should be paid in exchange for salt.

古文：三十二年令河东以六十二万引为额，合正馀盐为一，而革馀盐名。
现代文：三十二年，命令河东以六十二万引作为额定数，合正盐、余盐为一，而革除余盐之名。
English: In 32 years, he ordered that the nominal value of salt in Hedong should be raised to 620,000 yuan, and that the name of surplus salt should be removed, while the name of normal salt and surplus salt should be unified.

古文：时都御史王绅、御史黄国用议：两淮灶户馀盐，每引官给银二钱，以充工本，增收三十五万引，名为工本盐。
现代文：当时都御史王绅、御史黄国用提议：雨淮灶户的余盐，每引官府给予银二钱，以充熬盐工本，增收三十五万引，称为工本盐。
English: At that time, the governor of the capital, Wang Sheng, and the governor of the capital, Huang Guorong, made a proposal: the government would give two silver coins for every quart of salt left in the kitchen of a household in the rainy season, and increase the revenue by three hundred and fifty thousand quarts of salt, which was called labor-based salt.

古文：令商人中额盐二引，带中工本盐一引，抵主兵年例十七万六千两有奇。
现代文：令商人交纳粮食换额定盐二引，带换工本盐一引，抵当地筹建的军队历年常规所需的十七万六千两有余。
English: Merchants were ordered to pay two units of salt for the grain and one unit of salt for the labor, and the number of troops sent to the region to prepare for the war was more than the normal 176,000 needed in any year.

古文：从其请。
现代文：朝廷听从了他们的请求。
English: The court complied with their request.

古文：初，淮盐岁课七十万五千引，开边报中为正盐，后益馀盐纳银解部。
现代文：当初，淮盐每年征收七十万五千引，交粮于边防以换盐作为正盐，后来增加余盐交纳银解送户部。
English: At first, Huaiyan salt was levied at a maximum of 750,000 yuan per year, and the grain was handed over to the border guard to be exchanged for salt as the positive salt. Later, the surplus salt was added and handed over to the silver solution to the household department.

古文：至是通前额凡一百五万引，额增三之一。
现代文：到这时，总计先前的额数一共一百零五万引，额数增加三分之一。
English: By this time, the total amount of the previous amount has reached 1.05 million, and the amount has increased by one-third.

古文：行之数年，积滞无所售，盐法壅不行。
现代文：施行了几年，积压滞留无所销售，盐法壅塞不能畅行。
English: After a few years of implementation, there was no sale of the backlog, and the salt method could not be carried out smoothly.

古文：言事者屡陈工本为盐赘疣。
现代文：议论政事的人屡次陈说工本是盐法的累赘。
English: Political commentators have repeatedly said that labor costs are a burden on the salt law.

古文：户部以国用方绌，年例无所出，因之不变。
现代文：户部因为国家的经济正短缺，历年常规经费无处拿出，因袭而不改变。
English: Because of the country's economic shortage, the Ministry of Households has nowhere to take out the regular funds over the years, and it does not change.

古文：江西故行淮盐三十九万引，后南安、赣州、吉安改行广盐，惟南昌诸府行淮盐二十七万引。
现代文：江西原先流通淮盐三十九万引，后来南安、赣州、吉安改为流通广盐，只有南昌等府流通淮盐二十七万引。
English: In Jiangxi Province, there were originally 3.9 million pieces of Huai salt in circulation. Later, the provinces of Nan'an, Zhangzhou and Ji'an were changed to wide circulation of Huai salt. Only Nanchang and other prefectures had 270,000 pieces of Huai salt in circulation.

古文：既而私贩盛行，袁州、临江、瑞州则私食广盐，抚州、建昌私食福盐。
现代文：后来私自贩卖盐盛行，袁州、临江、瑞州便私自食用广盐，抚州、建昌私自食用福盐。
English: Later, the sale of salt from private sellers became popular. Yuanzhou, Linjiang and Ruizhou sold salt from private sellers, and Fuzhou and Jianchang sold salt from private sellers.

古文：於是淮盐仅行十六万引。
现代文：于是淮盥只流通十六万引。
English: As a result, only 160,000 copies of Huaiyu were in circulation.

古文：数年之间，国计大绌。
现代文：几年之间，国家经济非常短缺。
English: For several years, the country's economy has been in a very short supply.

古文：巡抚马森疏其害，请於峡江县建桥设关，扼闽、广要津，尽复淮盐额，稍增至四十七万引。
现代文：巡抚马森上疏陈说其危害，请求在峡江县建筑桥梁设立关卡，扼制闽、广的要道，全部恢复淮盐的额数，渐渐增加到四十七万引。
English: The inspector, Ma Sen Shang Shou Chen, said that it was harmful, and requested that checkpoints be set up in bridges and bridges in Xiaojiang County, and that the important roads of Yan and Guang should be restricted, and the amount of Huai salt should be fully restored, and gradually increased to 470,000.

古文：未久桥毁，增额二十万引复除矣。
现代文：不久桥被毁，增加的数额二十万引又除去了。
English: Soon after, the bridge was destroyed, and the additional amount of 200,000 yuan was deducted and removed.

古文：三十九年，帝欲整盐法，乃命副都御史鄢懋卿总理淮、浙、山东、长芦盐法。
现代文：三十九年，皇帝想要整顿盐法，便命令副都御史鄢懋卿总管淮、浙、山东、长芦的盐法。
English: In the 39th year, the emperor wanted to rectify the salt law, so he ordered the vice-governor of the capital, Shi Junqing, to supervise the salt law of Huai, Zhejiang, Shandong and Changlu.

古文：懋卿，严嵩党也，苞苴无虚日。
现代文：鄢懋卿，是严嵩的同党，送礼贿赂没有空过一天。
English: Gongqing is a party comrade of Yan Song. He never misses a day to give gifts and bribes.

古文：两淮额盐银六十一万有奇，自设工本盐，增九十万，懋卿复增之，遂满百万。半年一解。
现代文：两淮额定盐银六十一万有余，自设工本盐，增加九十万，鄢懋卿又增加，便凄满一百万，半年解送一次。
English: Two Huai rated salt and silver were more than 6.11 million, and the self-designated labor cost of salt increased by 900,000, and the Xingqing also increased, so it was more than one million, and it was sent once every six months.

古文：又搜括四司残盐，共得银几二百万，一时诩为奇功。
现代文：又搜刮四司的残盐，一共得银将近二百万，一时自夸为奇特的功劳。
English: He also scavenged the leftover salt from four companies, earning a total of nearly two million silver. At the time, he boasted of this as a special achievement.

古文：乃立克限法，每卒一人，季限获私盐有定数；不及数，辄削其雇役钱。
现代文：于是设立克限法，每卒一人，季限获取私盐有确定的数额，不够数额，便削除其雇用役工的钱。
English: As a result, the Limitation Act was established, each person has a quarterly limit to obtain a certain amount of private salt, and if the amount is not enough, the money for their employment will be removed.

古文：逻卒经岁有不得支一钱者，乃共为私贩，以矣大利，甚至劫估舶，诬以盐盗而执之，流毒遍海滨矣。
现代文：巡逻兵有整年不能支取一钱的，于是共同贩卖私盐，以牟取大利，甚至抢劫客商的船，诬告说他们是盐盗而拘孰，祸害遍及海滨。
English: The patrols, some of whom had not been able to withdraw a single coin for the entire year, sold salt together to make a profit, and even robbed merchant ships, falsely accusing them of stealing salt and arresting them. The scourge spread along the coast.

古文：嵩失势，巡盐御史徐爌言： 两淮盐法，曰常股，曰存积，曰水乡，共七十万引有奇。
现代文：严嵩失去权势，巡盥御史徐烦说： 两淮的盐法，叫做常股，叫做存积，叫做水乡，一共七十万引有余。
English: Yan Song lost power, and the patrol commander, Shi Xu Biao, said: The salt method of the two Huai, called the stock, called the deposit, called the water town, a total of more than 700 thousand.

古文：引二百斤，纳银八分。
现代文：每引二百斤，交纳银八分。
English: For every two hundred catties withdrawn, eight silver cents will be paid.

古文：永乐以后，引纳粟二斗五升，下场关支，四散发卖，商人之利亦什五焉。
现代文：永乐以后，每引盐交纳粟米二斗五升，下场开支，四处分散发卖，商人的利润也十分之五。
English: After Yongle, every salt delivery brought in two-dozen-five liters of corn, which was distributed and sold in various places, incurring expenses at the end of the market. The merchant's profit was also five-tenths.

古文：近年，正盐之外，加以馀盐；馀盐之外，又加工本；工本不足，乃有添单；添单不足，又加添引。
现代文：近年来，正盐以外，加上余盐；余盐之外，又加工本；工本不够，便有添单；添单不够，又加添引。
English: In recent years, in addition to the normal salt, the surplus salt has been added; in addition to the surplus salt, the processed salt has been added; if the workbook is not enough, there will be an additional order; if the additional order is not enough, an additional quotation will be added.

古文：懋卿趋利目前，不顾其后，是误国乱政之尤者。
现代文：鄢懋卿追求利益于眼前，不顾及产生的后果，这是贻误国家扰乱政治特别严重的。
English: It is particularly serious that Gongqing pursues immediate interests without regard to the consequences, which disturbs the country and disturbs politics.

古文：方今灾荒叠告，盐场淹没，若欲取盈百万，必至逃亡。
现代文：当今灾害饥荒频频报告，盐场被淹没，如果要取满一百万，必定要导致逃亡。
English: Today, there are frequent reports of disaster and famine, and the salt pans have been flooded. If we want to take in the full one million, it will inevitably lead to people fleeing.

古文：弦急欲绝，不棘於此。 
现代文：弓弦太紧便要断绝，对此能不急迫吗？ 
English: If the bowstring is too tight, it will break. Can we not be urgent about this?

古文：於是悉罢懋卿所增者。
现代文：于是全部罢除鄢懋卿所增加的盐。
English: As a result, all the salt added by Lord Zou was removed.

古文：四十四年，巡盐御史朱炳如奏罢两淮工本盐。
现代文：四十四年，巡盐御史朱炳如上奏罢除两淮的工本盐。
English: In the 44th year, the salt inspector Zhu Xun, as mentioned above, removed two tons of industrial salt.

古文：自叶淇变法，边储多缺。
现代文：自从叶淇变法，边防储备多缺乏。
English: Since the amendment of the Criminal Law, the border defense reserve is mostly lacking.

古文：嘉靖八年以后，稍复开中，边商中引，内商守支。
现代文：嘉靖八年以后，稍稍恢复输纳粮食换盐，边地商人交粮获得盐引，内地商人守候支领盐。
English: After the eighth year of the Jiajing Dynasty, there was a slight recovery in the exchange of salt for grain. Merchants in the outlying regions received salt in exchange for grain, while merchants in the inland regions received salt in exchange for grain.

古文：末年，工本盐行，内商有数年不得掣者，於是不乐买引，而边商困，因营求告掣河盐。
现代文：嘉靖末年，工本盐流行，内地商人有几年不能支取现盐的，于是不乐意购买盐引，而边地商人困窘，于是谋求申请支取河盐。
English: In the last years of the Jiajing Dynasty, industrial salt became popular. For several years, inland merchants were unable to obtain actual salt, so they were not willing to purchase salt. Meanwhile, merchants in outlying areas were embarrassed, so they sought to apply to obtain river salt.

古文：河盐者，不上廪囷，在河径自超掣，易支而获利捷。
现代文：河盐，是不存入仓库，在河边直接提前支取，容易支取而获利快捷。
English: River salt is not stored in a warehouse, it is directly withdrawn in advance by the river, it is easy to withdraw and quick to make a profit.

古文：河盐行，则守支存积者愈久，而内商亦困，引价弥贱。
现代文：河盐流行，守候支取存积盐的人等待更久，而内地商人也困窘，盐引的价格更低。
English: River salt is popular, and people waiting to withdraw stored salt wait longer, while mainland merchants are also embarrassed, and the price of salt withdrawal is lower.

古文：於是奸人专以收买边引为事，名曰囤户，告掣河盐，坐规厚利。
现代文：于是奸猾之人专门从事收买边引盐，名叫囤户，申请支取河盐，坐着收取厚利。
English: As a result, a cunning person called Seto, who specializes in bribing people to bring in salt, applied to withdraw river salt and collected hefty profits.

古文：时复议於正盐外附带馀盐，以抵工本之数，囤户因得贱卖馀盐而贵售之，边商与内商愈困矣。
现代文：当时又议论在正盐之外附带余盐，以抵工本盐的数目，囤户于是得以低价收买余盐而高价出售，边地商人与内地商人更加困窘了。
English: At that time, there was also talk of adding surplus salt to the normal salt to offset the amount of salt required for the work. As a result, the tenant was able to buy surplus salt at a low price and sell it at a high price. Merchants from outlying areas and inland merchants were even more embarrassed.

古文：隆庆二年，屯盐都御史庞尚鹏疏言： 边商报中，内商守支，事本相须。
现代文：隆庆二年，屯盐都御史庞尚鹏上疏说： 边地商人报中，内地商人守支，事情本来互相补充。
English: In the second year of the Longqing era, Pang Shangpeng, the governor of the Dungan salt city, said: "In the newspaper, the merchants from the border areas and the merchants from the inland areas are complementary to each other.

古文：但内商安坐，边商远输，劳逸不均，故掣河盐者以惠边商也。
现代文：但是内地商人安然坐收利益，边地商人速途运送，辛劳和逸乐不平均，所以支取河盐以使边地商人获益。
English: However, the inland merchants collected the profits safely, while the outlying merchants transported them quickly. The toil and pleasure were not equal, so the river salt was extracted to benefit the outlying merchants.

古文：然河盐既行，淮盐必滞，内商无所得利，则边商之引不售。
现代文：然而河盐流行以后，淮盐必定滞塞，内地商人没有地方获利，那么边地商人的盐引卖不出去。
English: However, after the river salt became popular, the Huai salt must have stagnated, and the inland merchants had no place to make a profit, so the salt of the border merchants could not be sold.

古文：今宜停掣河盐，但别边商引价，自见引及起纸关引到司勘合，别为三等，定银若干。
现代文：现在应该停止支取河盐，祇是区别边地商人盐引价格，从现引和起纸关引到盐司验证，分别为三等，规定银若干。
English: Now it is time to stop the withdrawal of river salt. The only difference is that the price of salt quoted by merchants in outlying areas is higher. From the current quotation and the paper quotation to the verification of the salt department, they are of the third class, and the amount of silver is specified.

古文：边商仓钞已到，内商不得留难。
现代文：边地商人的仓钞已到，内地商人不能扣留为难。
English: The warehouse bills of the outlying merchants have arrived, and the inland merchants cannot detain them.

古文：盖河盐停则淮盐速行，引价定则开中自多，边商内商各得其愿矣。 
现代文：大致河盥停止淮盐便迅速流行，盐引价格规定下来，纳粮换盐便自然多起来，边地商人和内地商人便各自适合他们的心愿了。 
English: When the Huai salt trade was stopped, salt became rapidly popular, the price of salt was fixed, the exchange of salt for grain naturally increased, and the merchants from the border areas and the mainland were each suited to their own wishes.

古文：帝从之。
现代文：皇帝听从其议。
English: The emperor obeyed.

古文：四年，御史李学诗议罢官买馀盐。
现代文：四年。御史李学诗奏议罢除官买余盐。
English: In the fourth year, Goshi Li Xue Poem Recital was held to remove officials who bought excess salt.

古文：报可。
现代文：回报同意。
English: Reimbursement agreed.

古文：是时广西古田平，巡抚都御史殷正茂请官出资本买广东盐，至桂林发卖，七万馀包可获利二万二千有奇。
现代文：这时，广西古田平定，巡抚都御史殷正茂请官府出钱买广东盐，运到桂林出卖，七万多包盐可以获取利润二万二千有余。
English: At this time, Guangxi Gutian was pacified, and the governor of the capital, Gu Shi Yin Zhengmao, asked the government to pay money to buy Guangdong salt and transport it to Guilin for sale. More than 70,000 packages of salt could earn a profit of more than 22,000.

古文：从之。
现代文：朝廷听从其请。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：自嘉靖初，复常股四分，存积六分之制。
现代文：从嘉靖初年，恢复常股四分，存积六分的制度。
English: From the first year of Jiajing, the system of four points for ordinary shares and six points for accumulation was restored.

古文：后因各边多故，常股、存积并开，淮额岁课七十万五千馀引，又增各边新引岁二十万。
现代文：后来因为各边防多战事，常股、存积一并开启，淮盐额敷每年收赋税七十万五千多引，又增加各边防新的盐引每年二十万。
English: Later, because there were many wars at each border, the regular shares and deposits were opened at the same time, and Huaiyan imposed an annual tax of more than seven hundred and fifty thousand, and increased the new salt tax at each border by two hundred thousand per year.

古文：万历时，以大工搜远年违没废引六十馀万，胥出课额之外，无正盐，止令商买补馀盐。
现代文：万历时期，因大工搜速年违役废盐引六十多万，都超出赋税额敷之外，没有正式税盐，只命令商人购买补余盥。
English: During the Wanli period, due to the fact that more than 600,000 tons of illegal waste salt were brought in by carpenters searching for speed, all of which exceeded the tax amount. There was no official tax salt, and merchants were only ordered to purchase surplus salt.

古文：馀盐久尽，惟计引重科，加煎飞派而已。
现代文：余盐长久耗尽，只是计算盐加重科征，增加熬盥飞派而已。
English: The remaining salt has been depleted for a long time, but the calculation of salt has increased the severity of symptoms, and the number of fly-away flies has increased.

古文：时两淮引价馀银百二十馀万增至百四十五万，新引日益，正引日壅。
现代文：当时两淮盐引价余银一百二十多万增加到一百四十五万，新的盐引一天天增多，正征盐引一天天壅塞。
English: At that time, the quotation price of the two Huai salts increased by more than 1.2 million yuan to 1.45 million yuan. The new salt quotations increased day by day, and the positive salt quotations were delayed day by day.

古文：千户尹英请配卖没官盐，可得银六万两。
现代文：千户尹英请求配卖汝入官府的盐，可以得到银六万两。
English: A thousand households of Yin Ying requested to sell salt to the government, and could get up to 60,000 taels of silver.

古文：大学士张位等争之。
现代文：大学士张位等劝谏。
English: Zhang Yi, a college graduate, and others urged him to quit.

古文：二十六年，以鸿胪寺主簿田应璧奏，命中官鲁保鬻两淮没官馀盐。
现代文：二十六年，因鸿胪寺主簿田应璧上奏，命令中官鲁保出卖两淮汝入官府的余盐。
English: In the 26th year, due to the fact that the main book of Hongyu Temple, Tian Ying Bi, was played, Lieutenant General Lubo was ordered to sell the remaining salt of the two Huai Ru into the government office.

古文：给事中包见捷极陈利害。
现代文：给事中包见捷竭力陈说利害。
English: He tried his best to put across his point of view.

古文：不听。
现代文：不听从。
English: The emperor does not allow it.

古文：保既视事，遂议开存积盐。
现代文：鲁保既已处理此事，便提议开换存积盐。
English: Rubo has already dealt with the matter and has proposed to replace the stored salt.

古文：户部尚书杨俊民言： 明旨核没官盐，而存积非没官也。
现代文：户部尚书杨俊民说： 皇上明确下旨核查役入官府之盐，而存积盐不是汝入的官盐。
English: The head of the household, Yang Junmin, said: "The emperor clearly issued an order to inspect the salt entering the government, and the stored salt is not the official salt you enter.

古文：额外加增，必亏正课。
现代文：额敷之外加增，必定亏损正式赋税。
English: If there is an increase in addition to the allowance, there must be a loss of official tax.

古文：保奏不可从。 
现代文：鲁保的奏言不可听从。 
English: Rubo's speech should not be listened to.

古文：御史马从骋亦争之。
现代文：御史马从骋也提出争议。
English: Goshima Congyu also raised a dispute.

古文：俱不听。
现代文：皇帝都不听从。
English: The emperor did not listen.

古文：保乃开存积八万引，引重五百七十斤，越次超掣，压正盐不行。
现代文：鲁保便开换存积盐八万引，每引重五百七十斤，越过轮次提前支取，压下正式盐不通行。
English: Lu Bao then opened the exchange of stored salt up to eighty thousand pulls, each pull weight five hundred and seventy pounds, over the rounds of advance withdrawal, under the pressure of formal salt impassable.

古文：商民大扰，而奸人蜂起。
现代文：商人和平民大受扰乱，而奸人蜂拥而起。
English: Merchants and common people were greatly disturbed, and the ruffians swarmed about.

古文：董琏、吴应麒等争言盐利。
现代文：董理、昊应麒等争相陈说盐利。
English: Director Li, Hao Yingtao and others are competing to be the first to say "salt."

古文：山西、福建诸税监皆领盐课矣。
现代文：山西、福建等税监都管理盐税了。
English: Shanxi, Fujian and other tax inspectorates have begun to administer the salt tax.

古文：百户高时夏奏浙、闽馀盐岁可变价三十万两，巡抚金学会勘奏皆罔。
现代文：百户高时夏上奏说浙、闽余盐每年可以变价三十万两，巡抚金学曾勘察上奏说都是虚妄的。
English: At the height of the summer, hundreds of households said that the price of salt in Zhejiang and Fujian could change by 300,000 taels every year. The inspector of the Ministry of Finance once investigated and said that the above statement was false.

古文：疏入不省。
现代文：奏疏呈入，皇帝不省察。
English: The Emperor did not think twice about the lackluster performance.

古文：於是福建解银万三千两有奇，浙江解三万七千两有奇，借名苛敛，商困引壅。
现代文：于是福建解送银一万三干两有余，浙江解送银三万七千两有余，藉名义滥征赋税，商人困窘盐引壅塞。
English: As a result, Fujian's remittance of silver was more than 13,000 yuan, and Zhejiang's remittance of silver was more than 37,000 yuan. By means of nominal indiscriminate taxation, merchants were embarrassed and led to procrastination.

古文：户部尚书赵世卿指其害由保，因言： 额外多取一分，则正课少一分，而国计愈绌，请悉罢无名浮课。 
现代文：户部尚书趟世卿指出其祸害起自鲁保，于是上奏说： 额数之外多取一分，那么正式赋税就少一分，而国家的经济越来越短缺，请求全部罢免没有名目的临时赋税。 
English: The head of the household, Shosho Watanabe, pointed out that the scourge originated from Rubo, so he made a report saying: If one more point is taken in addition to the amount, then the official tax will be one point less, and the country's economy is becoming more and more deficient, requesting that all temporary taxes without a name be removed.

古文：不报。
现代文：不回复。
English: It didn't make the papers.

古文：三十四年夏至明年春，正额逋百馀万，保亦惶惧，请罢存积引盐。
现代文：三十四年夏到第二年春，正式额数欠一百多万，鲁保也惶恐畏惧，请求罢除存积引盐。
English: From the summer of 1934 to the spring of the following year, the official amount owed was more than one million, and Rubo was also afraid and afraid, requesting the removal of the accumulated salt.

古文：保寻死。
现代文：鲁保不久死去。
English: Rubo died soon after.

古文：有旨罢之，而引斤不能减矣。
现代文：有圣旨罢除，而每引的斤数不能减少了。
English: There is a decree of cancellation, and the number of catties per draught cannot be reduced.

古文：李太后薨，帝用遗诰蠲各运司浮课，商困稍苏，而旧引壅滞。
现代文：李太后薨，皇帝采用太后遣留的诰命免除各盐运司临时征收的赋税，商人的困窘稍稍苏解，而旧有盐引壅塞停滞。
English: After the death of Empress Dowager Li, the Emperor used the Queen's last-ditch effort to exempt the temporary tax levied by the salt transportation departments. The plight of the merchants was slightly alleviated, while the old salt-pulling system stagnated.

古文：户部上盐法十议，正行见引，附销积引，以疏通之。
现代文：户部上呈盥法十条提议，正式流通现引，附带销售积引，用以疏通。
English: The ten-article proposal of the law was submitted to the Ministry of Households, and the official circulation is now quoted, with sales accrual, to clear up.

古文：巡盐御史龙遇奇立盐政纲法，以旧引附见引行，淮南编为十纲，淮北编为十四纲，计十馀年，则旧引尽行。
现代文：巡盐御史龙遇奇设立髋政纲法，用旧盐引附现引来流通，淮南编成十纲，淮北编为十四纲，推算十余年，旧盐引便会全部流通出去。
English: Surveying the salt, Gu Shilong found it strange to set up the Zou Political Program Law, and used the old salt to bring in the current one to circulate. The south of Huainan was compiled into ten programs, and the north of Huainan was compiled into fourteen programs. It is estimated that more than ten years will pass, and all the old salt will be circulated.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇帝听从他的办法。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：天启时，言利者恣搜括，务增引超掣。
现代文：天启时期，言利之人任意搜刮，务求增加盐引提前抽支。
English: At the time of the apocalypse, those who claimed to be rich were raking in money at will, in order to increase the supply of salt and draw out money ahead of schedule.

古文：魏忠贤党郭兴治、崔呈秀等，巧立名目以取之，所入无算。
现代文：魏忠贤党郭兴治、崔呈秀等人，巧立名目索取，收入多得无法计算。
English: Guo Xingzhi, Cui Zhenxiu and others of Wei Zhongxian's party cleverly solicited money under false pretenses, and their income was too much to calculate.

古文：论者比之绝流而渔。
现代文：评论的人把这比作断绝水流而捕鱼。
English: Commentators likened it to fishing against the current.

古文：崇祯中，给事中黄承昊条上盐政，颇欲有所厘革。
现代文：崇祯年间，给事中黄承昊分条上呈盐政，多想有所改正。
English: During the reign of Emperor Chongzhen, Huang Chenghao, who was in charge at the time, introduced the salt policy, but he wanted to make some corrections.

古文：是时兵饷方大绌，不能行也。
现代文：这时军饷正非常短缺，不能施行。
English: At this time, the military pay is very short and cannot be enforced.

古文：初，诸王府则就近地支盐，官民户口食盐皆计口纳钞，自行关支。
现代文：当初，各王府就近处支取盐，官吏人民的食用盐都计算人口交纳银钞，自行支取。
English: At the beginning, each royal palace drew salt from its vicinity, and the government officials and the people all counted the edible salt, paid silver bills, and drew it themselves.

古文：而官吏食盐多冒增口数，有一官支二千馀斤，一吏支五百馀斤者。
现代文：而官吏的食用盐多假冒增加人口数目，有一官支取二千多斤，一吏支取五百多斤的情况。
English: On the other hand, the amount of salt consumed by government officials was mostly counterfeited to increase the population. One government official took more than two thousand pounds, while another official took more than five hundred pounds.

古文：乃限吏典不得过十口，文武官不过三十口；大口钞十二贯支盐十二斤，小口半之。
现代文：便限制吏典不能超过十口，文武官员不得超过三十口；大口银钞十二贯支取盐十二斤，小口减半。
English: Therefore, officials were limited to no more than ten pieces of money, and civil and military officials were limited to no more than thirty pieces of money; large silver bills were limited to twelve kilos of salt, and small ones were reduced by half.

古文：景泰三年始以盐折给官吏俸粮，以百四十斤当米一石。
现代文：景泰三年，开始以盐折合供给官吏俸禄粮，以一百四十斤折合米一石。
English: In the third year of King Tae's reign, he began to supply government officials with salt-equivalent stipend grain, with one hundred and forty pounds of rice equivalent to one stone.

古文：京官岁遣吏下场，恣为奸利。
现代文：京城官每年派吏到盐场，任意非法牟取利益。
English: Beijing officials send officials to the salt field every year to arbitrarily and illegally make profits.

古文：锦衣吏益暴，率联巨舰私贩，有司不能诘。
现代文：锦衣卫更加凶暴，大都联合巨船私下贩盥，主管部门不敢诘问。
English: The brocade guards are even more ferocious. Most of them work together with the giant ships to smuggle stolen goods, and the authorities do not dare to question them.

古文：巡盐御史乃定百司食盐数，攟束以给吏，禁毋下场。
现代文：巡盐御史于是制定各部门食盐的数目，收聚起来一起给予官吏，禁止各司不准下盐场。
English: The salt inspectors then determined the amount of salt to be collected from each department, gathered it together and gave it to the officials, and forbade each department from leaving the salt pans.

古文：纳钞、僦輓，费无所出，吏多亡。
现代文：交纳银钞、运送食盐，费用没有地方拿出，吏多逃亡。
English: There was no place to take out the fees for paying silver bills and transporting salt, and many officials fled.

古文：嘉靖中，吏部郎中陆光祖言於尚书严讷，疏请革之。
现代文：嘉靖年板，吏部郎中陆光祖向尚书严讷进言，上疏请求革除。
English: Jiajing Nianban, the official's son, Lu Guangzu, spoke sternly to Shang Shuxu, and Shang Shu requested that he be dismissed.

古文：自后百司停支食盐，惟户部及十三道御史岁支如故。
现代文：从此之后各部门停止支付食盐，只有户部和十三道御史每年支付如故。
English: Since then, all departments have stopped paying for salt, with only the Household Ministry and the Thirteen Imperial Dynasties paying annually as before.

古文：军民计口纳钞者，浙江月纳米三升，卖盐一斤，而商贾持盐赴官，官为敛散，追徵之急过於租赋。
现代文：军队百姓计算人口交纳银钞的，浙江每月交纳米三升，买盛一升，而商人送盐到官府，官府为此买进卖出，追催征收的急迫程度超过租税。
English: When the army counts the number of people paying silver bills, Zhejiang pays three liters of nano per month and buys one liter, while merchants send salt to the government, and the government buys and sells it for this purpose. The urgency of pursuing the collection exceeds the tax.

古文：正统时，从给事中鲍辉言，令民自买食盐於商，罢纳米令，且鬻十斤以下者勿以私盐论，而盐钞不除。
现代文：正统时期，采纳给事中鲍辉的建议，让人民自己向商人购买食盐，罢除交纳米的命令，并且买卖十斤以下的不要按私自贩盐论处，而盐钞不除。
English: In the orthodox period, Bao Hui's suggestion to let the people themselves buy salt from merchants was adopted, the order to pay nano was cancelled, and the sale and purchase of less than ten kilos of salt should not be dealt with according to the private sale of salt, but salt banknotes should not be removed.

古文：后条鞭法行，遂编入正赋。
现代文：后来一条鞭法推行，便编入正式赋税。
English: Later, when the one whip law was implemented, it was incorporated into the official tax.

古文：巡盐之官，洪、永时，尝一再命御史视盐课。
现代文：巡察盐的官，洪武、永乐时期，曾经一再命令御史管理盐税。
English: During the Hongwu and Yongle Dynasties, the salt inspector repeatedly ordered the imperial historian to administer the salt tax.

古文：正统元年始命侍郎何文渊、王佐，副都御史朱与言提督两淮、长芦、两浙盐课，命中官御史同往。
现代文：正绕元年开始命令侍郎何文渊、王佐，副都御史朱与言提调监督两淮、长芦、两浙盐税，命令中官御史一同前往。
English: Around the first year of the year, he ordered his attendants He Wenyuan and Wang Zuo, and his vice-governor Zhu Shizhi to supervise the two Huai, Changlu and two Zhejiang salt taxes, and ordered his vice-governor Shizhi to go with him.

古文：未几，以盐法已清，下敕召还。
现代文：不久，因盐法已清理，下敕令召回。
English: Soon after, because the salt method had been cleaned up, the government ordered a recall.

古文：后遂令御史视鹾，依巡按例，岁更代以为常。
现代文：以后便命令御史管理盐务，依照巡按之例，每年更换作为常规。
English: From then on, he ordered the Imperial Historian to manage the salt business, and in accordance with the example of the inspection, it was customary to change it every year.

古文：十一年以山东诸盐场隶长芦巡盐御史。
现代文：十一年，把山东众盐场隶属长芦巡盐御史。
English: In the eleventh year, the Shandong People's Salt Farm was subordinated to the Changlu Salt Patrol.

古文：十四年命副都御史耿九畴清理两淮盐法。
现代文：十四年，命令副都御史耿九畴清理两淮的盐法。
English: Fourteen years ago, he ordered the vice-governor of the capital, Geng Jiuzhong, to clean up the salt method of the two Huai.

古文：成化中，特遣中官王允中、佥都御史高明整治两淮盐法。
现代文：成化年间，特别派遣中官王允中、愈都御史高明整顿治理两淮盐法。
English: During the Chenghua era, Vice Admiral Wang Yunzhong and Governor Gao Ming of Yudu were specially dispatched to rectify the governance of the two Huai salt methods.

古文：明请增设副使一人，判官二人。
现代文：高明请求增设副使一人，判官二人。
English: Gao Ming requested the addition of one deputy envoy and two judges.

古文：孝宗初，盐法坏，户部尚书李敏请简风宪大臣清理，乃命户部侍郎李嗣於两淮，刑部侍郎彭韶於两浙，俱兼都御史，赐敕遣之。
现代文：孝宗初年，盐法败坏，户部尚书李敏请求选拔监察执行法纪的大臣清理盐法，便命令户部侍郎李嗣到两淮，刑部侍郎彭韶到两浙，都兼都御史，赐给敕命派遣前往。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Xiaozong, the salt law was corrupted, and the head of the household, Shangshu Li Min, requested the selection of a minister to supervise the implementation of the law and discipline to clean up the salt law. He ordered the head of the household, Li Zi, to the two Huai, and the head of the criminal department, Peng Yao, to the two Zhejiang, both the capital and the capital, and gave him the order to send him there.

古文：弘治十四年，佥都御史王璟督理两淮盐法。
现代文：弘治十四年，愈都御史王璟提督管理两淮盐法。
English: In the 14th year of the Hongzhi era, Admiral Wang Qian, the Governor of Yudong, came to administer the two salt laws.

古文：正德二年，两淮则佥都御史王琼，闽、浙则佥都御史张宪。
现代文：正德二年，提督管理盐法的，两淮便是愈都御史王琼，闽、浙便是愈都御史张宪。
English: In the second year of Zhengde, the admiral administered the salt law, and the two Huai were the governor of Yudong, Wang Qiong, and the governor of Shandong and Zhejiang were the governor of Yudong, Zhang Xian.

古文：后惟两淮赋重，时遣大臣。
现代文：后来只有两淮赋税重，时时派遣大臣。
English: Later, only two provinces were taxed heavily, and ministers were dispatched from time to time.

古文：十年，则刑部侍郎蓝章。
现代文：十年，便是刑部侍郎蓝章。
English: Ten years later, he was awarded the Blue Badge of the Ministry of Justice.

古文：嘉靖七年，则副都御史黄臣。
现代文：嘉靖七年，便是副都御史黄臣。
English: In the seventh year of Jiajing, it was the vice-governor of the capital, Huang Sheng.

古文：三十二年，则副都御史王绅。
现代文：三十二年，便是副都御史王绅。
English: Thirty-two years later, he became vice-governor of the capital.

古文：至三十九年，特命副都御史鄢懋卿总理四运司，事权尤重。
现代文：到三十九年，特别命令副都御史鄢懋卿总督管理四运司，权力尤其重大。
English: In 1939, a special order was given to the vice-governor of the capital, Lord Shih, to manage the four transport bureaus, which had particularly significant powers.

古文：自隆庆二年，副都御史庞尚鹏总理两淮、长芦、山东三运司后，遂无特遣大臣之事。
现代文：自从隆庆二年，副都御史庞尚鹏总督管理两淮、长芦、山东三运司之后，便没有特别派遣大臣的事情。
English: Since the second year of Longqing, when the vice-governor of the capital, Pang Shangpeng, took over the management of the two Huai, Changlu and Shandong three transportation departments, there has been no special dispatch of ministers.

古文：番人嗜乳酪，不得茶，则困以病。
现代文：番人喜欢吃奶酪，没有茶，便会受到病的困扰。
English: The guards like to eat cheese, and if they don't have tea, they will be plagued by illness.

古文：故唐、宋以来，行以茶易马法，用制羌、戎，而明制尤密。
现代文：所以唐、宋以来，推行用茶换马的办法，用以控制羌、戎，而明代制度尤其细密。
English: Therefore, since the Tang and Song dynasties, the method of using tea to change horses has been implemented to control badger and egret, and the Ming Dynasty system is particularly detailed.

古文：有官茶，有商茶，皆贮边易马。
现代文：有官茶，有商茶，都贮藏于边防交换马匹。
English: There is official tea, there is commercial tea, all stored in the border exchange horses.

古文：官茶间徵课钞，商茶输课略如盐制。
现代文：官茶间或征收钞，商茶收税大致如同盐法。
English: Government tea rooms may levy bills, while commercial tea houses collect taxes in much the same way as the salt method.

古文：初，太祖令商人於产茶地买茶，纳钱请引。
现代文：开始，太祖命令商人在产茶之地购买茶叶，交纳钱请求茶引。
English: At first, the great-grandfather ordered merchants to buy tea leaves in tea-producing areas, pay money and ask for tea lead.

古文：引茶百斤，输钱二百，不及引曰畸零，别置由帖给之。
现代文：每引茶一百斤，交纳钱二百，不够一引的称畸零，另外置由帖供给。
English: For every 100 catties of tea, 200 coins are paid. If one cattie is not enough, it is said to be zero. In addition, it is provided by the post.

古文：无由、引及茶引相离者，人得告捕。
现代文：没有由帖、茶引以及茶与引相分离的，人们可以告发逮捕。
English: People can denounce the arrest of those who do not separate the tea from the tea, and the tea from the tea.

古文：置茶局批验所，称较茶引不相当，即为私茶。
现代文：设置茶局批验所，检查出茶与引不相符，便是私茶。
English: Set up a tea inspection office to check whether the tea is consistent with the lead, it is my tea.

古文：凡犯私茶者，与私盐同罪。
现代文：凡是违法贩私茶的，与贩私盐同一罪罚。
English: Anyone who illegally traffics in smuggled tea will be subject to the same punishment as smuggled salt.

古文：私茶出境，与关隘不讥者，并论死。
现代文：私茶出境，与关卡不盘问稽察的，一同判死刑。
English: If a private citizen leaves the country, he or she will be sentenced to death together with those who do not submit to cross-examination and inspection at checkpoints.

古文：后又定茶引一道，输钱千，照茶百斤；茶由一道，输钱六百，照茶六十斤。
现代文：后来又制定茶引一道，交纳钱一千，凭照给茶一百斤；茶由一道，交纳钱六百，凭照给茶六十斤。
English: Later, it was established that for a cup of tea, one thousand yuan would be paid and one hundred jin of tea would be given; for a cup of tea, six hundred yuan would be paid and sixty jin of tea would be given.

古文：既，又令纳钞，每引由一道，纳钞一贯。
现代文：随后，又命令交纳钞，每引由一道，交钞一贯。
English: Subsequently, he also ordered the payment of banknotes, one at a time.

古文：洪武初，定令：凡卖茶之地，令宣课司三十取一。
现代文：洪武初年，制定法令：凡是卖茶的地方，命令宣课司收取三十分之一。
English: In the first year of Hongwu, a decree was issued: wherever tea was sold, the announcement department was ordered to collect one-thirtieth.

古文：四年，户部言： 陕西汉中、金州、石泉、汉阴、平利、西乡诸县，茶园四十五顷，茶八十六万馀株。
现代文：四年，户部上奏说： 陕西汉中、金州、石泉、汉阴、平利、西乡等县，茶园四十五顷，茶树八十六莴多株。
English: In the fourth year, the head of the household reported: In Hanzhong, Jinzhou, Shiquan, Hanyin, Pingli, Xixiang and other counties in Shaanxi Province, there are 45 hectares of tea gardens and 86 varieties of tea trees.

古文：四川巴茶三百十五户，茶二百三十八万馀株。
现代文：四川巴茶三百一十五户，茶树二百三八万多株。
English: Sichuan Bacha has 315 households and more than 2.38 million tea plants.

古文：宜定令每十株官取其一。
现代文：应该制定法令，每十株，官取其一。
English: A law should be enacted to require the government to take one share for every ten shares.

古文：无主茶园，令军士薅采，十取其八，以易番马。 
现代文：无主茶园，命令军士采摘，取十分之八，用来交换番马。 
English: There was no owner of the tea garden, and the sergeant was ordered to pick eight-tenths of the tea leaves, which were to be exchanged for horses.

古文：从之。
现代文：依从他的奏言。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：於是诸产茶地设茶课司，定税额，陕西二万六千斤有奇，四川一百万斤。
现代文：于是各产茶地设立茶课司，制定税额，陕西二万六千斤有余，四川一百万斤。
English: As a result, each tea-producing area set up a tea tax bureau to determine the amount of tax, which was more than 26,000 kg in Shaanxi and one million kg in Sichuan.

古文：设茶马司於秦、洮、河、雅渚州，自碉门、黎、雅抵朵甘、乌思藏，行茶之地五千馀里。
现代文：在秦、洮、河、雅等州设置茶马司，从碉门、黎、雅抵达朵甘、乌思藏，流通茶叶的地方达五千多里。
English: Tea factories were set up in Qin, Min, He, Ya and other prefectures, and tea was transported more than 5,000 miles from Qimen, Lijiang and Ya to Dokan and Wuxi.

古文：山后归德诸州，西方诸部落，无不以马售者。
现代文：山后归德等州，西方各部落，无不以马交换。
English: After returning to Germany and other states from the mountains, the western tribes all exchanged horses.

古文：碉门、永宁、筠、连所产茶，名曰剪刀粗叶，惟西番用之，而商贩未尝出境。
现代文：碉门、永宁、筠、连所生产的茶，名叫剪刀麄叶，只有西番食用，而商贩不曾出境。
English: The tea produced in Qimen, Yongning, Handan and Lianyang is called "scissor leaf tea," which is only consumed in Xifan, and the traders never leave the country.

古文：四川茶盐都转运使言： 宜别立茶局，徵其税，易红缨、毡衫、米、布、椒、蜡以资国用。
现代文：四川茶盐都转运使说： 应该另立茶局，征收赋税，交换红缨、毡衫、米、布、椒、蜡以资助国家使用。
English: Sichuan Tea and Salt Transportation Company said: It is necessary to set up a separate tea bureau, collect taxes, exchange red bean paste, bean paste shirt, rice, cloth, pepper and wax to fund national use.

古文：而居民所收之茶，依江南给引贩卖法，公私两便。 
现代文：而居民所收的茶，依照江南给引以贩卖的办法，公家和私人两方都得便利。 
English: And the tea received by residents, according to the method of selling introduced by Jiangnan, is convenient for both public and private parties.

古文：於是永宁、成都、筠、连皆设茶局矣。
现代文：于是永宁、成都、筠、连都设置了茶局。
English: As a result, tea houses were set up in Yongning, Chengdu, Handan and Lianyungang.

古文：川人故以茶易毛布、毛缨诸物以偿茶课。
现代文：四川人原来以茶交换毛布、毛缨等物以偿还茶税。
English: Originally, people in Sichuan exchanged tea for blankets, woolen coats and other items to repay the tea tax.

古文：自定课额，立仓收贮，专用以市马，民不敢私采，课额每亏，民多赔纳。
现代文：自从确定赋税额数，设立仓库收取贮藏，专门以布买马，人民不敢私采，赋税额数常常亏缺，人民多赔赏交纳。
English: Since the determination of the amount of tax, the establishment of warehouses to collect and store, and the special use of cloth to buy horses, the people do not dare to mine, the amount of tax is often lacking, and the people pay more compensation.

古文：四川布政司以为言，乃听民采摘，与番易货。
现代文：四川布政司以此上言，便听凭人民采摘，与番人交换货物。
English: The chief secretary of the Sichuan Provincial People's Government said this, and he listened to the people's plucking and exchanged goods with the guards.

古文：又诏天全六番司民，免其徭役，专令蒸乌茶易马。
现代文：又诏令天全六番司人民，免除他们的徭役，专门命令蒸治乌茶交换马匹。
English: He also decreed that the people of Tianquan Sixth Division should be exempted from the duty of ploughing, and specifically ordered the steaming of black tea and the exchange of horses.

古文：初制，长河西等番商以马入雅州易茶，由四川严州卫入黎州始达。
现代文：当初制度，长河西等番商带马进入雅州交换茶，从四川岩州卫进入黎州纔到达。
English: At the beginning of the system, merchants from the west of the Yangtze River and other areas brought horses into Yazhou to exchange tea, and from Iwazhouwei in Sichuan to Lizhou.

古文：茶马司定价，马一匹，茶千八百斤，於碉门茶课司给之。
现代文：茶马司定价，马一匹，茶一千八百斤，在碉门茶课司给与。
English: The tea and horse department set the price. One horse and 1800 kg of tea were given to the tea and horse department in Xiamen.

古文：番商往复迂远，而给茶太多。
现代文：番商往来迂回遥远，而供给茶太多。
English: Trade routes are far away, and there is too much tea supply.

古文：严州卫以为言，请置茶马司於严州，而改贮碉门茶於其地，且验马高下以为茶数。
现代文：岩州卫以此上言，请求在岩州设置茶马司，而在其地改贮藏碉门茶。并且检验马的好壤作为换茶的数目。
English: Iwashu-Wei used this as a pretext to request that a tea stables be set up in Iwashu, and that Kamon tea be stored there instead, and that the quality of the horse's soil be tested as the number of times the tea should be changed.

古文：诏茶马司仍旧，而定上马一匹，给茶百二十斤，中七十斤，驹五十斤。
现代文：下韶令茶马司仍旧，而制定上等马一匹，给茶一百二十斤，中等马七十斤，马驹五十斤。
English: The lower echelon ordered the tea horses to remain the same, while the establishment of a first-class horse gave the tea one hundred and twenty catties, the middle-class horse seventy catties, and the stallion fifty catties.

古文：三十年改设秦州茶马司於西宁，敕右军都督曰： 近者私茶出境，互市者少，马日贵而茶日贱，启番人玩侮之心。
现代文：三十年，在西宁改设秦州茶马司，敕令右军都督说： 近来私茶出境，互相贸易者少，马一天天价贵而茶一天天价贱，开启番人玩忽轻侮之心。
English: Thirty years ago, Qinzhou Tea and Horse Breeding Company was set up in Xining, and the commander of the right-wing troops said: Recently, tea has been smuggled out of the country, mutual traders are few, horses are becoming more and more expensive, and tea is becoming more and more expensive, which has opened the guards' negligent and contemptuous hearts.

古文：檄秦、蜀二府，发都司官军於松潘、碉门、黎、雅、河州、临洮及入西番关口外，巡禁私茶之出境者。 
现代文：传檄秦、蜀二府，调发都司官军在松潘、碉门、黎、雅、河州、临洮以及造入西番的关口外，巡逻查禁出境的私茶。 
English: It was rumored that the prefectural governors of Qin and Shu were dispatched to patrol Songpan, Qimen, Lijiang, Ya, Hezhou, Linyi, and the gate into the West Bank to check the illegal tea.

古文：又遣驸马都尉谢达谕蜀王椿曰： 国家榷茶，本资易马。
现代文：又派遣驸马都尉谢达告谕蜀王朱椿说： 国家专营茶，本来是用以换马。
English: He also dispatched the horse-drawn carriage captain Xie Da to tell the Shu King Zhu Qin that: The state monopoly on tea was originally used to change horses.

古文：边吏失讥，私贩出境，惟易红缨杂物。
现代文：边地官吏失察，私贩出境，只是交换红缨杂物。
English: Border officials lost sight of the situation, and the smugglers left the country, only exchanging the red snapper and other goods.

古文：使番人坐收其利，而马入中国者少，岂所以制戎狄哉！
现代文：使得番人坐收其利益，而马进入中国的少，哪裹是用来控制戎狄的办法呢！
English: What is the use of controlling the army if the watchman collects his profits and the horses do not enter China?

古文：尔其谕布政司、都司，严为防禁，毋致失利。 
现代文：希望你告谕布政司、都司，严加防范禁止，不要导致失利。 
English: I hope that you will tell the Secretary of State for the Civil Service and the Governor of Tokyo to strictly prevent and prohibit it, so as not to lead to failure.

古文：当是时，帝绸缪边防，用茶易马，固番人心，且以强中国。
现代文：当这个时候，皇帝谋划边防，用茶换马，稳固番人之心，并且用以使中国强盛。
English: At this time, the emperor planned the border defense, used tea to change horses, strengthened the guards' hearts, and used it to make China strong.

古文：尝谓户部尚书郁新： 用陕西汉中茶三百万斤，可得马三万匹，四川松、茂茶如之。
现代文：曾经对户部尚书郁新说： 用陕西汉中茶三百万斤，可以获得马三万匹，四川松、茂的茶也如此。
English: Shangshu Yuxin once said to the head of his household: "With three million catties of Shaanxi Hanzhong tea, you can get thirty thousand horses, and the same is true of Sichuan pine and Mao tea.

古文：贩鬻之禁，不可不严。 
现代文：贩卖的禁令，不能不严格。 
English: The ban on trafficking cannot be less strict.

古文：以故遣佥都御史邓文铿等察川、陕私茶；驸马都尉欧阳伦以私茶坐死。
现代文：因此派遣食都御史邓文铿等按察川、陕私茶；驸马都尉欧阳伦因私茶被判处死罪。
English: Therefore, the food capital goshi, Deng Wenyi, and others were dispatched to Chachuan and Shaanxi to steal tea; the horse captain, Ouyang Lun, was sentenced to death for stealing tea.

古文：又制金牌信符，命曹国公李景隆赍入番，与诸番要约，篆文上曰 皇帝圣旨 ，左曰 合当差发 ，右曰 不信者斩 。
现代文：又制造金牌信符，命令曹国公李景隆带入番地，与各番结约，用篆文在上方刻着 皇帝圣旨 ，左方刻着 合当差发 ，右方刻着 不信者斩 。
English: He also made gold badges, and ordered Li Jinglong, the Prince of Cao, to bring the cranes into the village and conclude a contract with each crane, engraving the Emperor's Will in the upper part, the right side of the crane, the left side of the crane, and the right side of the crane.

古文：凡四十一面：洮州火把藏思囊日等族，牌四面，纳马三千五十匹；河州必里卫西番二十九族，牌二十一面，纳马七千七百五匹；西宁曲先、阿端、罕东、安定四卫，巴哇、申中、申藏等族，牌十六面，纳马三千五十匹。
现代文：一共四十一面金牌信符：洮州火把藏思囊日等族，金牌四面，交纳马三干零五十匹；河州必里卫西番二十九族，金牌二十一面，交纳马七千七百零五匹；西宁曲先、阿端、罕东、安定四卫，巴哇、申中、申藏等族，金牌十六面，交纳马三千零五十匹。
English: A total of forty-one gold medal tokens: Zhangzhou torch holder Shizuchin and other ethnic groups, gold medals on four sides, paid 3,050 horses; Hezhou Biliwei West Bank 29 ethnic groups, gold medals on twenty-one sides, paid 7,705 horses; Xining Quxian, Aduan, Handong, Stable 4 Wei, Bawa, Shenzhong, Shenzang and other ethnic groups, gold medals on sixteen sides, paid 3,050 horses.

古文：下号金牌降诸番，上号藏内府以为契，三岁一遣官合符。
现代文：下号金牌降服诸番，上号金牌藏在内府作为契约，三年派遣官员一次前往合符验证。
English: The next-highest gold medal is given to the next-highest number, and the previous-highest gold medal is kept in Neifu as a contract, and officials are dispatched once every three years to verify that it matches.

古文：其通道有二，一出河州，一出碉门，运茶五十馀万斤，获马万三千八百匹。
现代文：其通道有二：一出河州，一出碉门，运茶五十多万斤，获得马一万三千八百匹。
English: There are two passages: one out of Hezhou and one out of Shimen, transporting more than half a million catties of tea and obtaining 13,800 horses.

古文：太祖之驭番如此。
现代文：太祖驾驭番人就像这样。
English: The great-grandfather controls the guards like this.

古文：永乐中，帝怀柔远人，递增茶斤。
现代文：永乐年间，皇帝怀柔远方之人，递增茶的斤数。
English: During the Yongle era, the emperor Huairou encouraged people from far away to increase the number of jins of tea.

古文：由是市马者多，而茶不足。
现代文：这样交换马的人多，而茶供应不够。
English: There are many people who exchange horses in this way, but the supply of tea is not enough.

古文：茶禁亦稍驰，多私出境。
现代文：茶的禁令也稍稍松弛，多有私茶出境。
English: The ban on tea has also been slightly relaxed, with more illegal tea leaving the country.

古文：碉门茶马司至用茶八万馀斤，仅易马七十匹，又多瘦损。
现代文：碉门茶马司以至用茶八万多斤，只交换马七十匹，又是多瘦损的马。
English: The Qimen tea and horse department even used more than 80,000 catties of tea, but only exchanged 70 horses, which were very thin horses.

古文：乃申严茶禁，设洮州茶马司，又设甘肃茶马司於陕西行都司地。
现代文：于是申明严格茶禁，设洮州茶马司，又在陕西行都司地上设立甘肃茶马司。
English: As a result, he declared a strict ban on tea, set up the Bozhou Tea Horse Division, and also set up the Gansu Tea Horse Division in the capital of Shaanxi Province.

古文：十三年特遣三御史巡督陕西茶马。
现代文：十三年，特别派遣三御史巡察提督陕西茶马。
English: In the thirteenth year, the three superintendents of history were specially dispatched to inspect the admiral Shaanxi Tea Horse.

古文：太祖之禁私茶也，自三月至九月，月遣行人四员，巡视河州、临洮、碉门、黎、雅。
现代文：太祖禁止私茶，从三月到九月，每月派行人官四人，巡察河州、临洮、硐门、黎、雅。
English: From March to September, four officers were sent to inspect Hezhou, Linyi, Shimen, Lijiang and Ya every month.

古文：半年以内，遣二十四员，往来旁午。
现代文：半年以内，派二十四人，往来纷繁。
English: Within half a year, twenty-four people were sent, and the contacts were numerous.

古文：宣德十年，乃定三月一遣。
现代文：宣德十年，纔规定三个月派遣一次。
English: Xuande has been in existence for ten years, and the regulations stipulate that it is dispatched once every three months.

古文：自永乐时停止金牌信符，至是复给。
现代文：自从永乐时期停止金牌信符，到这时又给予。
English: Since the Yongle period, the gold medal badge has been discontinued, and it is given again at this time.

古文：未几，番人为北狄所侵掠，徙居内地，金牌散失。
现代文：不久，番人被北狄侵犯掠夺，迁居内地，金牌散失。
English: Soon, the guards were invaded and plundered by the Northern Di, moved inland, and the gold medals were lost.

古文：而茶司亦以茶少，止以汉中茶易马，且不给金牌，听其以马入贡而已。
现代文：而茶司也因为茶少，祇用汉中茶换马，并且不给予金牌，听凭他们用马进贡而已。
English: However, because of the shortage of tea, the tea masters only exchanged Hanzhong tea for horses, and did not give gold medals, but only allowed them to pay tribute with horses.

古文：先是，洪武末，置成都、重庆、保宁、播州茶仓四所，令商人纳米中茶。
现代文：在此之前，洪武末年，设置成都、重庆、保宁、播州茶仓四所，命令商人交纳米以换茶。
English: Prior to this, at the end of Hongwu's life, four tea warehouses were set up in Chengdu, Chongqing, Boryeong and Banzhou, and merchants were ordered to pay nano to exchange tea.

古文：宣德中，定官茶百斤，加耗什一。
现代文：宣德年间，规定官茶一百斤，加损耗十分之一。
English: During the Xuande era, it was stipulated that the official tea should be one hundred catties, plus one-tenth of the loss.

古文：中茶者，自遣人赴甘州、西宁，而支盐於淮、浙以偿费。
现代文：输粮换茶的人，自己派人到甘州、西宁，而在淮、浙支取盐以偿还费用。
English: Those who transported grain to exchange for tea sent their own people to Ganzhou and Xining, while in Huai and Zhejiang they collected salt to reimburse the costs.

古文：商人恃文凭恣私贩，官课数年不完。
现代文：商人依恃凭单任意私自贩运，官府赋税数年不缴纳。
English: Merchants rely on the voucher to arbitrarily smuggle, and do not pay the government tax for several years.

古文：正统初，都御史罗亨信言其弊，乃罢运茶支盐例，令官运如故，以京官总理之。
现代文：正统初年，都御史罗亨信评说其弊端，纔罢除运输茶支取盐的规定，命令如过去官府运茶，用京城官总督管理。
English: In the first year of orthodoxy, the governor of the capital, Luo Hengxin, commented on its drawbacks, saying that the regulations for transporting tea and obtaining salt should be abolished, and the tea should be transported by the government office and managed by the governor of the capital.

古文：景泰中，罢遣行人。
现代文：景泰年间，罢除派遣外交官。
English: During the reign of King Gyeongtae, the dispatch of diplomats was abolished.

古文：成化三年命御史巡茶陕西。
现代文：成化三年命令御史到陕西巡视茶业。
English: In the third year of Chenghua, Gu Shi was ordered to inspect the tea industry in Shaanxi.

古文：番人不乐御史，马至日少。
现代文：番人不喜欢御史，送马到内地的一天天减少。
English: The guards don't like Mishi, and the number of horses sent to the mainland is decreasing day by day.

古文：乃取回御史，仍遣行人，且令按察司巡察。
现代文：便召回御史，仍然派遣外交官，并且命令按察司巡察。
English: He recalled Imperial Historian, still sent diplomats, and ordered the inspector general to inspect.

古文：已而巡察不专，兵部言其害，乃复遣御史，岁一更，著为令。
现代文：以后，巡察不专主何官，兵部议论其害处，便又派遣御史，每年更换一次，定着成律令。
English: After that, the inspection did not specify the number of officials, and the military department discussed the harm, and then sent the official history, which was changed once a year and established as a regulation.

古文：又以岁饥待振，复令商纳粟中茶，且令茶百斤折银五钱。
现代文：又因粮食收成不好等待赈救，又命令商人交纳粮食换茶，并且命令一百斤茶折合银五钱。
English: He also waited for relief due to poor grain harvest, ordered merchants to pay grain in exchange for tea, and ordered one hundred pounds of tea to be converted into five silver coins.

古文：商课折色自此始。
现代文：商人交纳赋税用钱钞从这时开始。
English: Merchants began to pay taxes with banknotes at this time.

古文：弘治三年，御史李鸾言： 茶马司所积渐少，各边马耗，而陕西诸郡岁稔，无事易粟。
现代文：弘治三年，御史李鸾奏言： 茶马司积储渐渐减少，各边防马匹消耗，而陕西诸郡粮食丰收，没有交换粮食。
English: In the third year of the Hongzhi era, the Grand Historian Li Yan made a speech: The tea and horse reserves gradually decreased, the horses of the border guards were consumed, while the counties of Shaanxi had a bumper grain harvest, and there was no exchange of grain.

古文：请於西宁、河西、洮州三茶马司召商中茶，每引不过百斤，每商不过三十引，官收其十之四，馀者始令货卖，可得茶四十万斤，易马四千匹，数足而止。 
现代文：请求在西宁、河西、洮州三茶马司招来商人换茶，每引不超过一百斤，每个商人不超过三十引，官府收取十分之四，其余的纔让其买卖，可以得到茶四十万斤，交换马四千匹，数额满足而停止。 
English: The request was to invite merchants from the three tea and horse factories in Xining, Hexi, and Zhangzhou to exchange tea. Each withdrawal would not exceed one hundred catties, and each merchant would not exceed thirty withdrawals. The government would collect four-tenths of the amount, and let them buy and sell the remaining catties. They could get four hundred thousand catties of tea and exchange four thousand horses. Once the amount was met, they would stop.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇帝听从他的请求。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：十二年，御史王宪又言： 自中茶禁开，遂令私茶莫遏，而易马不利。
现代文：十二年，御史王宪又说： 自从换茶的禁令放开，便使得私茶无法遏止，而于换马不利。
English: In the twelfth year, Wang Xian also said: Since the ban on changing tea was released, it has made it impossible to stop illegal tea, and it is not conducive to changing horses.

古文：请停粮茶之例。
现代文：请求停止粮茶的规定。
English: Request to stop the grain and tea regulations.

古文：异时或兵荒，乃更图之。 
现代文：以后，或遇上兵灾荒灾，再重新图谋。 
English: In the future, or in the event of a military disaster or a natural disaster, they will try again.

古文：部覆从其请。
现代文：户部批覆听从他的请求。
English: The head office complied with his request.

古文：四川茶课司旧徵数十万斤易马。
现代文：四川茶课司旧时征收茶数十万斤以交换马。
English: In the old days, the Sichuan Tea Bureau collected hundreds of thousands of catties of tea in exchange for horses.

古文：永乐以后，番马悉由陕西道，川茶多浥烂。
现代文：永乐以后，番马全部经由陕西道，四川的茶多潮湿霉烂。
English: After Yongle, Banma all passed through Shaanxi Province, and the tea in Sichuan was damp and moldy.

古文：乃令以三分为率，一分收本色，二分折银，粮茶停二年。
现代文：便命令以三分焉标准，一分收茶，二分折合成银，粮茶停止二年。
English: He then ordered that tea should be collected at one point, silver should be synthesized at two points, and grain tea should be stopped for two years.

古文：延绥饥，复召商纳粮草，中四百万斤。
现代文：延绥发坐饥荒，又招来商人交纳粮草，换取茶四百万斤。
English: Yancheng suffered from famine, and merchants were invited to pay grain and grass in exchange for four million catties of tea.

古文：寻以御史王绍言，复禁止，并罢正额外召商开中之例。
现代文：随即因御史王绍进言，又禁止，并且罢除正式额数之外招来商人纳粮换茶的规定。
English: Subsequently, due to the suggestion of Wang Shao, the imperial historian, it was prohibited, and the regulation of inviting merchants to pay grain for tea in addition to the official amount was removed.

古文：十六年取回御史，以督理马政都御史杨一清兼理之。
现代文：十六年，朝廷取回御史，以督理马政都御史杨一清兼管。
English: Sixteen years later, the Imperial Court retrieved Mishi and put Yang Iqing, the governor of Mazheng, in charge.

古文：一清复议开中，言： 召商买茶，官贸其三之一，每岁茶五六十万斤，可得马万匹。 
现代文：杨一清又提议开放交粮换茶，说： 招来商人买茶，官府贸易三分之一，每年的茶五六十万斤，可以得到马一万匹。 
English: Yang Yixing also proposed to open up the exchange of grain for tea, saying: Inviting merchants to buy tea, the government trade is one-third, the annual tea is five or six hundred thousand catties, and you can get ten thousand horses.

古文：帝从所请。
现代文：皇帝听从他的请求。
English: The emperor acceded to his request.

古文：正德元年，一清又建议，商人不愿领价者，以半与商，令自卖。
现代文：正德元年，杨一清又建议，商人不愿意领价的，以一半给商人，让他们自己贩卖。
English: In the first year of Zhengde, Yang Yixing also suggested that if the merchants were unwilling to accept the price, they should give half to the merchants and let them sell themselves.

古文：遂著为例永行焉。
现代文：便定着成法规永远施行。
English: It was then codified into law to be enforced forever.

古文：一清又言金牌信符之制当复，且请复设巡茶御史兼理马政。
现代文：杨一清又说金牌信符的制度应当恢复，并且请求恢复设置巡茶御史兼管马政。
English: Yang Yixing also said that the system of gold-plate letters should be restored, and requested the restoration of the establishment of the inspection of tea history and management of horse politics.

古文：乃复遣御史，而金牌以久废。卒不能复。
现代文：于是又派遣御史，而金牌制度因长久废弃，短时间内不能恢复。
English: As a result, history was set back, and the gold medal system was abandoned for a long time and could not be restored in a short time.

古文：后武宗宠番僧，许西域人例外带私茶。
现代文：后来武宗宠幸番僧，允许西域之人例外带私茶。
English: Later, Emperor Wuzong favored the lucky monk and allowed people in the western region to bring their own tea as an exception.

古文：自是茶法遂坏。
现代文：从此茶法便败坏。
English: Since then, the tea ceremony has been corrupted.

古文：番人之市马也，不能辩权衡，止订篦中马。
现代文：番人贸易马，不能分辨轻重，祇是订竹筐换马。
English: A watchman trading horses cannot tell the difference between heavy and light, it is only a matter of changing horses by tying bamboo baskets.

古文：篦大，则官亏其直；小，则商病其繁。
现代文：筐大，官府便亏损其价值；筐小，商人便嫌其繁琐。
English: If the basket is large, the government will lose its value; if the basket is small, the merchant will find it cumbersome.

古文：十年巡茶御史王汝舟酌为中制，每千斤为三百三十篦。
现代文：十年，巡茶御史王汝舟酌情制定交换办法，每一千斤为三百三十筐。
English: Ten years later, the tea inspector Wang Ruzhou set up an exchange method at his own discretion, with 330 baskets for every thousand catties.

古文：嘉靖三年，御史陈讲以商茶低伪，悉徵黑茶，地产有限，乃第茶为上中二品，印烙篦上，书商名而考之。
现代文：嘉靖三年，御史陈讲因商茶质量低劣冒伪，全部征收黑茶，地方出产有限，便分茶焉上中二品，打印在茶筐上，写下商人名字而考察。
English: In the third year of the Jiajing Dynasty, the historian Chen said that because the quality of commercial tea was inferior and counterfeit, all black tea was levied, local production was limited, and the tea was divided into two products, printed on the tea basket, and the name of the merchant was written down for inspection.

古文：旋定四川茶引五万道，二万六千道为腹引，二万四千道为边引。
现代文：随即定四川茶引五万道，二万六千道焉腹引，二万四千道为边引。
English: It was then decided that Sichuan tea would be brewed in 50,000 ways, with 26,000 ways brewed in the stomach and 24,000 ways brewed on the side.

古文：芽茶引三钱，叶茶引二钱。
现代文：芽茶每引三钱，叶茶每引二钱。
English: Bud tea is charged 3 yuan each, leaf tea is charged 2 yuan each.

古文：中茶至八十万斤而止，不得太滥。
现代文：换茶到八十万斤而停止，不能太滥。
English: Change tea to 800,000 jin and stop, can't be too shabby.

古文：十五年，御史刘良卿言： 律例： 私茶出境与关隘失察者，并凌迟处死。 
现代文：十五年，御史刘良卿说： 按照律例： 私茶出境与关隘失察的，一并凌迟处死。
English: In the fifteenth year, Liu Liangqing, the imperial historian, said: According to the law: Those who leave the country illegally and those who fail to observe the border will be sentenced to death.

古文：盖西陲藩篱，莫切於诸番。
现代文：西部边防，没有什么比诸番更急切。
English: At the western border, nothing is more urgent than the arrival of the troops.

古文：番人恃茶以生，故严法以禁之，易马以酬之，以制番人之死命，壮中国之藩篱，断匈奴之右臂，非可以常法论也。
现代文：番人依赖茶而生存，所以用严厉的法律来禁止，交换马匹来酬报，以控制番人的生死，加强中国的边防，截断匈奴的右臂，不可按常法来评论。
English: Guards depend on tea to survive, so strict laws are used to ban it, exchange horses for reward, to control the life and death of guards, strengthen China's border defense, cut off the right arm of the Xiongnu, and cannot be commented on according to the usual law.

古文：洪武初例，民间蓄茶不得过一月之用。
现代文：洪武初年的制度，民间储备茶不能超过一个月的用度。
English: According to the first year of Hongwu's system, the private reserve of tea cannot exceed one month's consumption.

古文：弘治中，召商中茶，或以备振，或以储边，然未尝禁内地之民使不得食茶也。
现代文：弘治年间，招来商人换茶，或用以准备救灾，或用来储备边防，但是不曾禁止内地的人民使他们不能食用茶。
English: During the Hongzhi era, merchants were invited to exchange tea, or to prepare for disaster relief, or to reserve border defense, but they did not prohibit the people of the mainland from eating tea.

古文：今减通番之罪，止於充军。禁内地之茶，使不得食，又使商私课茶，悉聚於三茶马司。
现代文：现在减轻通番之罪，仅只是充军，禁止内地之茶，使他们不能食用，又使商人私自征收茶，全部聚集在三个茶马司。
English: Now, to lessen the guilt of the general, it is just to join the army, ban the tea from the mainland, so that they can not eat, and let the merchants collect tea from themselves, all gathered in three tea stables.

古文：夫茶司与番为邻，私贩易通，而禁复严於内郡，是驱民为私贩而授之资也。
现代文：茶司与番邻近，私白贩运容易流通，而禁令又比内郡严厉，这是驱赶人民作私贩而给予他物资。
English: The tea house is close to Fan, and it is easy for illegal trafficking to circulate, while the ban is stricter than that of Nei County, which is to drive people to be smugglers and give him materials.

古文：以故大奸阑出而漏网，小民负升斗而罹法。
现代文：因此大奸人无凭据擅自出边关而漏脱法网，小民背负一升一斗而遭受法律制裁。
English: As a result, the great traitor escaped the net of the law by going out of the border gate without any evidence, and the common people were burdened with legal sanctions.

古文：今计三茶马司所贮，洮河足三年，西宁足二年，而商、私、课茶又日益增，积久腐烂而无所用。
现代文：现在总计三茶马司所贮藏的茶，洮河足够三年，西宁足够二年，而商茶、私茶、赋税茶又一天天增多，贮积时久腐烂而没有用处。
English: At present, the total amount of tea stored by Sancha Ma's is enough for three years in Luohe and two years in Xining, while commercial tea, private tea and tax tea are increasing day by day, and the storage time is long and rotten and useless.

古文：茶法之弊如此。
现代文：茶法的弊端像这样严重。
English: The drawbacks of the tea ceremony are as serious as this.

古文：番地多马而无所市，吾茶有禁而不得通，其势必相求，而制之之机在我。
现代文：番地多马而无法交换，我们的茶有禁令而不能流通，其形势必定要求助于我，而控制他的关键在我方。
English: The situation of our tea, which is banned and cannot circulate, must call for my help, and the key to controlling it lies with us.

古文：今茶司居民，窃易番马以待商贩，岁无虚日，及官易时，而马反耗矣。
现代文：现在茶司、居民，私下交换番马以等待商贩，每年没有空过一天，到官府交易时，而马反而损耗了。
English: Now, tea masters and residents privately exchange horses to wait for merchants, and there is not a day off every year. When they go to the government office to trade, the horses are worn out.

古文：请敕三茶马司，止留二年之用，每年易马当发若干。
现代文：请求敕命三茶马司，只留下二年的用度，每年交换马应当调发若干。
English: The request for the death of three tea horses, leaving only two years of use, should be exchanged for a number of horses each year.

古文：正茶之外，分毫毋得夹带。
现代文：正式茶赋之外，分毫不准夹带。
English: In addition to the formal tea ceremony, it is not allowed to bring anything.

古文：令茶价踊贵，番人受制，良马将不可胜用。
现代文：让茶价上涨变贵，番人受到控制，良马将用也用不完。
English: Let the price of tea rise and become more expensive, the guards are under control, and the good horses will not be used up.

古文：且多开商茶，通行内地，官榷其半以备军饷，而河、兰、阶、岷诸近番地，禁卖如故，更重通番之刑如律例。
现代文：并且多开放商茶，通行于内地，官府专卖一半以储备军饷，而河、兰、阶、岷等近番之地，禁止卖茶如故，再加重通番的刑罚如律令。
English: In addition, more commercial teas were opened and circulated in the mainland, with the government monopolizing half of the sales in order to reserve military pay, while the rivers, orchids, steps, and reeds, which were close to the ban, were prohibited from selling tea as before, and the penalty for passing the ban was further increased, as in the ritsuryo.

古文：洮、岷、河责边备道，临洮、兰州责陇右分巡，西宁责兵备，各选官防守。
现代文：洮、岷、河责令边备道，临洮、兰州责令陇右分巡，西宁责令兵备，各自选择官吏防守。
English: Handan, Handan and He ordered the border to prepare the road, Linyi and Lanzhou ordered the right division patrol, Xining ordered the troops to prepare, and each chose officials to defend.

古文：失察者以罢软论。 
现代文：失察的人以疲软论处。 
English: Weakness is the watchword of the imprudent.

古文：奏上，报可。
现代文：奏书呈上，回报同意。
English: The report was submitted, and the return was approved.

古文：於是茶法稍饬矣。
现代文：于是茶法稍稍得到整顿。
English: As a result, the tea ceremony has been slightly streamlined.

古文：御史刘仑、总督尚书王以旂等，请复给诸番金牌信符。
现代文：御史刘仑、总督尚书王以旃等人，请求恢复给予诸番金牌信符。
English: Governor Liu Lun, Governor Shang Shu Wang Yixuan and others requested the restoration of the gold medal letter.

古文：兵部议，番族变诈不常，北狄抄掠无已，金牌亟给亟失，殊损国体。
现代文：兵部议论，番族变化狡诈无常，北狄抢劫不止，金牌屡给屡失，特别有损国家尊严。
English: The discussion of the military department, the cunning and capricious changes of the tribunes, the robberies of the Northern Dynasties, and the repeated loss of gold medals are particularly detrimental to the dignity of the country.

古文：番人纳马，意在得茶，严私贩之禁，则番人自顺，虽不给金牌，马可集也。
现代文：番人交纳马，意在得到茶，严格私贩的禁令，那么番人自然顺服，即使不给予金牌，马也可以聚集。
English: The keeper gives the horse to the horse, the intention is to get tea, strictly prohibit the smugglers, then the keeper naturally obeys, even if the gold medal is not given, the horse can also gather.

古文：若私贩盛行，吾无以系其心、制其命，虽给金牌，马亦不至。
现代文：如果私贩盛行，我方没有用来拴系他的心控制他的命脉的东西，即使给予金牌，马也不会到来。
English: If the private trader prevails, we have nothing to tie his heart and control his lifeblood. Even if we give a gold medal, the horse will not come.

古文：乃定议发勘合予之。
现代文：便决定发给勘检的凭证给予他。
English: decided to give him a certificate of inspection.

古文：其后陕西岁饥，茶户无所资，颇逋课额。
现代文：此后，陕西发生饥荒，茶户没有资财，多欠赋税额数。
English: After that, famine occurred in Shaanxi, tea households had no assets, and they owed more taxes.

古文：三十六年，户部以全陕灾震，边饷告急，国用大绌，上言： 先时，正额茶易马之外，多开中以佐公家，有至五百万斤者。
现代文：三十六年，户部因为整个陕西发生灾震，边防军饷请求救助，国家的财用非常缺乏，上奏说： 原先，在正式赋税茶交换马匹之外，多交粮换茶以佐助公家，有达到五百万斤的。
English: In 1936, because of the earthquake that struck the whole of Shaanxi Province, the border troops and peasants requested assistance, and the state's financial resources were very scarce. The report said: Originally, in addition to the official tax tea exchange horses, more grain was exchanged for tea to assist the public, reaching five million catties.

古文：近者御史刘良卿亦开百万，后止开正额八十万斤，并课茶、私茶通计仅九十馀万。
现代文：近来御史刘良卿也纳粮换茶一百万斤，后来只换正式额数八十万斤，合并赋税茶、私茶总计仅九十余万。
English: Recently, the imperial historian Liu Liangqing also exchanged one million catties of grain for tea. Later, only the official amount of 800,000 catties was exchanged, and the combined tax tea and private tea totaled only more than 900,000.

古文：宜下巡茶御史议，召商多中。 
现代文：应该下发巡茶御史商议，招来商人多交粮换茶。 
English: It is necessary to issue a tour of tea history for discussion, and invite merchants to pay more grain for tea.

古文：御史杨美益言： 岁祲民贫，即正额尚多亏损，安有赢羡。
现代文：御史杨美益说： 年岁遭灾，人民贫困，即使正式额敷尚且多缺损，哪里有嬴余？
English: Gu Shi Yang Meiyi said: Years of suffering from disasters, people are poor, even if the formal forehead is still flawed, where is there room for improvement?

古文：今第宜守每年九十万斤招番易马之规。
现代文：现在只应遵守每年九十万斤招来番人交换马匹的条规。
English: Now, they only have to follow the rules of the 900,000-cubic-meter-a-year horse exchange.

古文：凡通内地以息私贩，增开中以备振荒，悉从停罢，毋使与马分利。 
现代文：凡是流通内地似止息私下贩卖，增加纳粮换茶以备赈救灾荒，全部停止罢除，不要让别的法与马分利。 
English: All private sales in the circulation of the Mainland should be stopped, and the payment of grain in exchange for tea should be increased to prepare for and relieve the disaster, and all should be stopped and eliminated, and no other method should be allowed to profit from the horse.

古文：户部以帑藏方匮，请如弘治六年例，易马外仍开百万斤，召纳边镇以备军饷。
现代文：户部以库藏财物匮乏，请求按照弘治六年的条例，交换马匹之外仍然纳粮换茶一百万斤，招来商人交纳粮食供给边防重镇以储备军饷。
English: Due to the shortage of stored wealth, the Household Department requested that, in accordance with the regulations of the six years of Hongzhi, in addition to exchanging horses, it would also exchange one million catties of grain for tea, and invite merchants to pay grain to supply the border defense towns to reserve military funds.

古文：诏从之。
现代文：下诏听从户部之请。
English: He complied.

古文：末年，御史潘一桂言： 增中商茶颇壅滞，宜裁减十四五。 
现代文：嘉靖末年，御史潘一桂说： 增加纳粮换茶的商茶，多壅塞滞留，应该裁减十分之四五。 
English: In the last years of the Jiajing Dynasty, the Grand Historian Pan Yigui said: "Increasing the amount of grain given in exchange for tea should be reduced by four-fifths.

古文：又言： 松潘与洮、河近，私茶往往阑出，宜停松潘引目，申严入番之禁。 
现代文：又说： 松潘与洮、河相近，私茶往往无凭据而出关卡，应该停止松潘的准销货单，申明严格入番的禁令。 
English: He also said: Songpan is similar to gourd and river, and illegal tea is often exported without certificates. Songpan's sales permit should be suspended, and the ban on strictly entering the number should be affirmed.

古文：皆报可。
现代文：都回复同意。
English: All replied in the affirmative.

古文：四川茶引之分边腹也，边茶少而易行，腹茶多而常滞。
现代文：四川的茶引分边、腹，边茶少而易于流通，腹茶多而常常滞留。
English: Sichuan tea is divided into side tea and belly tea. Side tea is rare and easy to circulate, while belly tea is common and often left behind.

古文：隆庆三年裁引万二千，以三万引属黎、雅，四千引属松潘诸边，四千引留内地，税银共万四千余两，解部济边以为常。
现代文：隆庆三年裁除茶引一万二千引，用三万引归属黎、雅，四千引归属松潘诸边防，四千引留内地，税银共一万四千多两，解送户部援助边防以为常规。
English: In the third year of the Longqing era, 12,000 tea levies were abolished, 30,000 levies were transferred to Li and Ya, 4,000 levies were transferred to Songpan and other border guards, 4,000 levies were transferred to the mainland, and a total of more than 14,000 levies were transferred to the tax and banking departments. It was considered normal for the household department to provide assistance to border guards.

古文：五年令甘州仿洮、河、西宁事例，岁以六月开中，两月内中马八百匹。
现代文：五年，命令甘州仿照洮河、西宁的事例，每年在六月开始换茶，两月之内换马八百匹。
English: In the fifth year, he ordered Ganzhou to follow the example of Luohe and Xining, and change the tea every year in June, and change up to eight hundred horses within two months.

古文：立赏罚例，商引一二年销完者赏有差，逾三年者罪之，没其附带茶。
现代文：设立常罚条例，商引一、二年销售完的赏赐多少不等，超过三年的处以罪罚，没收他们的附带茶。
English: The Ordinance on Fixed Penalty was established. The reward for the first or second year of sales of the commercial inducement varies, and the punishment for more than three years is to confiscate their accompanying tea.

古文：万历五年，俺答款塞，请开茶市。
现代文：万历五年，俺答前来通好，请求开放茶市。
English: After five long years, I received a favorable reply, requesting the opening of the tea market.

古文：御史李时成言： 番以茶为命，北狄若得，藉以制番，番必从狄，贻患匪细。
现代文：御史李时成说： 番人以茶为生命的依托，北狄如果得到，藉以控制番人，番人必定跟从狄，贻留祸患不小。
English: Historian Li Shicheng said: "The watchman relies on tea for his life. If Bei Di gains control over the watchman, the watchman will surely follow Di. Staying behind is not a small disaster."

古文：部议给百馀篦，而勿许其市易。
现代文：户部商议给予一百余筐，而不允许交易。
English: The household department deliberated to give more than one hundred baskets, and did not allow trading.

古文：自刘良卿驰内地之禁，杨美益以为非，其后复禁止。
现代文：自从刘长卿放松内地的禁令，杨美益认为不对，此后又禁止。
English: Since Liu Changqing relaxed the ban on the mainland, Yang Meiyi thought it was wrong, and then banned it.

古文：十三年，以西安、凤翔、汉中不与番邻，开其禁，招商给引，抽十三入官，馀听自卖。
现代文：十三年，因西安、凤翔、汉中不与番相邻，开放禁令，招来商人给予茶引，抽十分之三纳入官府，其余的听凭商人自己出售。
English: In the thirteenth year, because Xi'an, Fengxiang, and Hanzhong were not adjacent to Ban, the opening ban was imposed, merchants were invited to give tea lead, three-tenths were taken into the government, and the rest were sold by the merchants themselves.

古文：御史钟化民以私茶之阑出多也，请分任责成。
现代文：御史锺化民因私茶无凭据出关卡的很多，请求分责任责成处理。
English: There are a lot of people who do not have a pass card due to their tea drinking, so the request should be handled responsibly.

古文：陕之汉中，关南道督之，府佐一人专驻鱼渡坝；川之保宁，川北道督之，府佐一人专驻鸡猴坝。
现代文：陕西的漠中，由关南道督察，府佐一人专门驻扎鱼渡垠；四川的保宁，由川北道督察，府佐一人专门驻扎鸡猴垠。
English: In the deserts of Shaanxi Province, an inspector from Guannan Province and one person from Fuzao specially stationed fish ferries; in Boryeong, Sichuan Province, an inspector from North Sichuan Province and one person from Fuzao specially stationed chicken ferries.

古文：率州、县官兵防守。 
现代文：率领州、县官兵防守。 
English: He led the state and county officers and soldiers in the defense.

古文：从之。
现代文：听从他的意见。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：中茶易马，惟汉中、保宁，而湖南产茶，其直贱，商人率越境私贩，中汉中、保宁者，仅一二十引。
现代文：以茶换马，祇有汉中、保宁，而湖南产茶，其价值低贱，商人大多越境私自贩运，换漠中、保宁茶的，只有一二十引。
English: When exchanging tea for horses, only Hanzhong and Boryeong are preferred, while tea produced in Hunan is of low value, and most merchants smuggle it across the border. When exchanging tea for Boryeong and Boryeong, only one or two are preferred.

古文：茶户欲办本课，辄私贩出边，番族利私茶之贱，因不肯纳马。
现代文：茶户要办本身的赋税，便私自贩运出边防，番族以私茶价低贱为有利，于是不肯缴纳马匹。
English: Tea households wanted to pay their own taxes, so they smuggled horses out of the border. The Bans took advantage of the low price of their tea and refused to pay for the horses.

古文：二十三年，御史李楠请禁湖茶，言： 湖茶行，茶法、马政两弊，宜令巡茶御史召商给引，愿报汉、兴、保、夔者，准中。
现代文：二十三年，御史李楠请求禁止湖茶，说： 湖茶通行，给茶法、马政两者都带来弊端。应该命令巡茶御史招来商人给予茶引，愿意报漠、兴、保、夔的，准予交换。
English: In 233, Grand Historian Li Nan requested a ban on lake tea, saying: "The circulation of lake tea has brought drawbacks to both the tea ceremony and horse politics. It is necessary to order the Grand Historian to invite merchants to give tea lead, and if they are willing to report desert, prosperity, security, and peace, they should be allowed to exchange.

古文：越境下湖南者，禁止。
现代文：越境下湖南的，禁止交换。
English: If you cross the border into Hunan, the exchange is prohibited.

古文：且湖南多假茶，食之刺口破腹，番人亦受其害。 
现代文：并且湖南多假茶，吃了湖南茶刺激口破坏肠胃，番人也受其危害。 
English: Moreover, there are many fake teas in Hunan. If you eat Hunan tea, it will irritate your mouth and damage your stomach. The guards will also be harmed by it.

古文：既而御史徐侨言： 汉、川茶少而直高，湖南茶多而直下。
现代文：随后御史徐侨说： 漠、川茶少而价值高，湖南茶多而价值低。
English: Then, Grand Historian Xu Xiao said, "Mao and Sichuan teas are rare but valuable, while Hunan teas are more abundant but less valuable.

古文：湖茶之行，无妨汉中。
现代文：湖茶流通，不妨害汉中。
English: The circulation of lake tea may not harm the Han dynasty.

古文：汉茶味甘而薄，湖茶味苦，於酥酪为宜，亦利番也。
现代文：汉茶味道甘甜而淡薄，湖茶味道苦，对于酥酪适宜，也对番人有利。
English: The taste of Chinese tea is sweet and light, while the taste of lake tea is bitter. It is suitable for cheese, and is also beneficial for watchmen.

古文：但宜立法严核，以遏假茶。 
现代文：但是应该设立法度严格检验，以遏止假茶。 
English: But there should be stricter checks to stop fake tea.

古文：户部折衷其议，以汉茶为主，湖茶佐之。
现代文：户部折衷二人的议论，以汉茶为主，湖茶佐助。
English: The discussion between the two eclectic members of the household is dominated by Chinese tea, with lake tea as a supplement.

古文：各商中引，先给汉、川毕，乃给湖南。
现代文：各个商人交换茶引，先给予汉、川茶完毕，纔给湖南茶。
English: Each merchant exchanges tea leads, giving Han and Sichuan tea first, and then giving Hunan tea.

古文：如汉引不足，则补以湖引。
现代文：如果汉中茶引不够，便用湖引补足。
English: If Hanzhong tea lead is not enough, it is supplemented with lake lead.

古文：报可。
现代文：回报同意。
English: Reimbursement agreed.

古文：二十九年，陕西巡按御史毕三才言： 课茶徵输，岁有定额。
现代文：二十九年，陕西巡按御史毕三才说： 征收茶赋税交纳国家，每年有固定额数。
English: In 1929, the Shaanxi Inspector-General of Customs and Excise said: There is a fixed amount of tea tax to be collected and paid to the state each year.

古文：先因茶多馀积，园户解纳艰难，以此改折。
现代文：先前因为茶多积余，园户解送交纳艰难，因此改为货币布帛。
English: Previously, because of the surplus of tea, it was difficult for gardeners to pay for delivery, so it was changed to money cloth.

古文：今商人绝迹，五司茶空。
现代文：现在商人绝迹，五司的茶空虚。
English: Now that the merchants have disappeared, the five tea estates are empty.

古文：请令汉中五州县仍输本色，每岁招商中五百引，可得马万一千九百馀匹。 
现代文：请求命令汉中五州县仍然交纳茶，每年招来商人换茶五百引，可以得到马一万一千九百多匹。 
English: The request ordered that Wuzhou County in Hanzhong still pay tea, and invite merchants to exchange tea for 500 yuan each year, which can get more than 11,900 horses.

古文：部议，西宁、河、洮、岷、甘、庄浪六茶司共易马九千六百匹，著为令。
现代文：户部商议，西宁、河、洮、岷、甘、庄浪六茶司共交换马九千六百匹，定着为法令。
English: The household department deliberated, and the six tea estates of Xining, He, Handan, Handan, Gan and Zhuanglang exchanged a total of 9,600 horses, which was established as a law.

古文：天启时，增中马二千四百匹。
现代文：天启时期，增加换马二千四百匹。
English: At the time of the apocalypse, the number of horses was increased by 2,400.

古文：明初严禁私贩，久而奸弊日生。
现代文：明朝初年严格禁止私自贩茶，时久之后奸猾的弊端一天天产生。
English: In the first year of the Ming Dynasty, it was strictly forbidden to sell tea illegally. After a long time, the evil of cunning emerged day by day.

古文：洎乎末造，商人正引之外，多给赏由票，使得私行。
现代文：到了末世，商人在正式茶引之外，多给赏由票，使之得以私自流行。
English: Towards the end of the last century, in addition to the formal tea ceremony, merchants gave more rewards to the tea ceremony, so that it could be popular privately.

古文：番人上驷尽入奸商，茶司所市者乃其中下也。
现代文：番人的上等马全部归入奸商，茶司所换的乃是中下等。
English: The guard's high-class horses were all classified as profiteers, while the tea master's horses were of medium and low class.

古文：番得茶，叛服自由；而将吏又以私马窜番马，冒支上茶。
现代文：番人得茶，背叛和归服自由，而将吏又把私骂窜入番马，冒充支取上等茶。
English: The watchman gets the tea, and is free to betray or submit, while the steward puts a curse on the watchman and pretends to take the first-class tea.

古文：茶法、马政、边防於是俱坏矣。
现代文：茶法、马政、边防于是都败坏了。
English: As a result, the tea ceremony, horse politics, and border defense were all corrupted.

古文：其他产茶之地，南直隶常、卢、池、徽，浙江湖、严、衢、绍，江西南昌、饶州、南康、九江、吉安，湖广武昌、荆州、长沙、宝庆，四川成都、重庆、嘉定、夔、泸，商人中引则於应天、宜兴、杭州三批验所，徵茶课则於应天之江东瓜埠。
现代文：其它产茶的地区，南直隶常、庐、池、徽，浙江湖、严、衢、绍，江西南昌、饶州、南康、九江、吉安，湖广武昌、剂州、长沙、宝庆，四川成都、重庆、嘉定、夔、泸，商人交粮换茶引便在应天、宜兴、杭州三处批验所，征收茶税便在应天的江束瓜埠。
English: Other tea-producing regions include Nan Zhi Ruchang, Handan, Chi, Hui, Zhejiang Lake, Yan, Handan, Shao, Jiangxi Nanchang, Raozhou, Nankang, Jiujiang, Ji'an, Hukang Wuchang, Ganzhou, Changsha, Baoqing, Sichuan Chengdu, Chongqing, Jiading, Handan, Handan. Merchants exchange grain for tea at three inspection stations in Yingtian, Yixing, and Hangzhou, and collect tea tax at Yingtian Jiangzhuagubo.

古文：自苏、常、镇、徽、广德及浙江、河南、广西、贵州皆徵钞，云南则徵银。
现代文：从苏、常、镇、徽、广德以及浙江、河南、广西、贵州都征收钱钞，云南则征收银。
English: Banknotes were collected from Su, Chang, Zhen, Hebei, Guangde, Zhejiang, Henan, Guangxi and Guizhou, while silver was collected from Yunnan.

古文：其上供茶，天下贡额四千有奇，福建建宁所贡最为上品，有探春、先春、次春、紫笋及荐新等号。
现代文：那些上贡茶，天下上贡的数额四千有余，福建建宁所贡茶最为上品，有探春、先春、次春、紫笋以及荐新等号。
English: There are more than 4,000 tributes to those teas around the world, and the tribute tea from Fujian Jianning is the most exquisite, with names such as Tangchun, Xianchun, Qichun, Zijuan and Xianxin.

古文：旧皆采而碾之，压以银板，为大小龙团。
现代文：旧时都是采摘而碾之，以银板压盖，成大小龙团。
English: In the old days, it was all picked and milled, covered with a silver plate, into large and small clusters.

古文：太祖以其劳民，罢造，惟令采茶芽以进，复上供户五百家。
现代文：太祖因为这样制使民劳顿，罢除其制造，只命令采摘茶芽进贡，免除上供户五百家赋役。
English: Because of this, the great-great-grandfather made the people work hard, abolished its production, and only ordered the tea buds to be picked for tribute, exempting the five hundred suppliers from the tax.

古文：凡贡茶，第按额以供，不具载。
现代文：凡是贡茶，祇是按额数供给，不详细记载了。
English: In general, the tea tax is only provided on a per-unit basis and is not recorded in detail.

