古文：萧惠萧迂鲁萧图玉耶律铎轸萧惠，字伯仁，小字脱古思，淳钦皇后弟阿古只五世孙。
现代文：萧惠，字伯仁，乳名脱古思，淳钦皇后弟阿古只五世孙。
English: Xiao Hui, also known as Bo Ren, Niu Naingtu Gu Si, and A Gu, the younger brother of Empress Junqin, are only the fifth generation of grandchildren.

古文：初以中宫亲，为国舅详稳。
现代文：初时因为是中宫亲眷，为大国舅帐下详稳。
English: At the beginning, because he was a relative of the Middle Court, he was a stable member of the Great Uncle's household.

古文：从伯父排押征高丽，至奴古达北岭，高丽阻险以拒，惠力战，破之。
现代文：随同伯父排押征讨高丽，至奴古达北岭，高丽依靠险阻拒守，萧惠力战，破之。
English: Accompanied by his uncle, he went to the North Ridge of Nougou to push for the conquest of Gorye. Gorye refused to defend itself by relying on dangerous obstacles, and Xiao Hui fought hard to break it.

古文：及攻开京，以军律整肃闻，授契丹行宫都部署。
现代文：待到进攻开京，以军纪严整闻名，授职为契丹行宫都部署。
English: Until the attack on Beijing, it was known for its strict military discipline, and all appointments were made at the palace of Khitan.

古文：开泰二年，改南京统军使。
现代文：开泰二年，改授南京统军使。
English: In the second year of the reign of Emperor Taizong, he was awarded the title of Nanjing United Military Envoy.

古文：未几，为右夷离毕，加同中书门下平章事。
现代文：不久，为右夷离毕，加同中书门下平章事。
English: Soon after, he left for Yuyi, and he was added to Zhongshumen Shimo Pingzhang.

古文：朝议以辽东重地，非勋戚不能镇抚，乃命惠知东京留守事。
现代文：朝议认为辽东乃是军事重地，非勋臣国戚不能镇守，圣宗便命萧惠知东京留守事。
English: The imperial court considered Liaodong to be a military stronghold, and non-vassals were not allowed to defend the town, so Seongjong ordered Xiao Huichi to remain in Tokyo.

古文：改西北路招讨使，封魏国公。
现代文：改为西北路招讨使，封魏国公。
English: It was changed to the Northwest Road to invite envoys and seal Wei Guogong.

古文：太平六年，讨回鹘阿萨兰部，征兵诸路，独阻卜酋长直剌后期，立斩以徇。
现代文：太平六年，萧惠征讨回鹘阿萨兰部，自各路征兵，只有阻卜酋长直剌后到，萧惠便将他立即斩首示众。
English: In the sixth year of the Taiping era, Xiao Hui recruited soldiers from all over the country to fight against the Qianlong and Asalan forces. However, when the head of the Qianlong army arrived, Xiao Hui immediately beheaded him in public.

古文：进至甘州，攻围三日，不克而还。
现代文：进军至甘州，围城攻之三日，不克而回。
English: They marched to Ganzhou, besieged the city for three days, and then retreated.

古文：时直剌之子聚兵来袭，阻卜酋长乌八密以告，惠未之信。
现代文：当时直剌之子纠集人马前来袭击，阻卜酋长乌八暗地将情况告知萧惠，萧惠不肯相信。
English: At that time, Naosuke's son gathered people and horses to attack, and Chief Ubachi secretly informed Xiao Hui of the situation. Xiao Hui refused to believe it.

古文：会西阻卜叛，袭三克军，都监涅鲁古、突举部节度使谐理、阿不吕等将兵三千来救，遇敌于可敦城西南。
现代文：适逢西阻卜反叛，袭击三克统军官军，都监涅鲁古、突举部节度使谐理、阿不吕等率兵三千来相救，遇敌于可敦城西。
English: At the time of the West Blocking Rebellion, the officers of the Three Kingdoms attacked the army of officers, and the three thousand soldiers led by the governor of the capital, Nehru Gu, the head of the emergency department, the governor of the emergency department, and Abulu came to the rescue, and met the enemy in the west of the city of Koton.

古文：谐理、阿不吕战殁，士卒溃散。
现代文：谐里、阿不吕战死，士卒溃散。
English: Hari-ri and Aburu were killed in the battle, and the soldiers scattered.

古文：惠仓卒列阵，敌出不意攻我营。
现代文：萧惠仓猝间列阵迎敌，敌人出其不意地进攻我军。
English: Xiao Huicang suddenly lined up to meet the enemy, and the enemy attacked our army unexpectedly.

古文：众请乘时奋击，惠以我军疲敝，未可用，弗听。
现代文：众人请示乘机挥兵迎击，萧惠认为我军疲敝，战斗力不强，不听众人建议。
English: The crowd asked Xiao Hui to take advantage of the opportunity to wave troops to meet the attack. Xiao Hui thought that our army was tired and its combat effectiveness was not strong, and did not listen to the suggestions of the crowd.

古文：乌八请以夜斫营，惠又不许。
现代文：乌八请求于夜里去劫敌营，萧惠仍不准。
English: Wuhachi requested to raid the enemy's camp at night, but Xiao Hui still refused.

古文：阻卜归，惠乃设伏兵击之。
现代文：直到阻卜兵撤军回师时，萧惠才预设伏兵攻击之。
English: It was not until the obstructionists withdrew back to their division that Xiao Hui pre-planned the ambush attack.

古文：前锋始交，敌败走。
现代文：前锋刚与敌交锋，敌人便败走了。
English: No sooner had the forwards engaged the enemy, than the enemy had fled.

古文：惠为招讨累年，屡遭侵掠，士马疲困。
现代文：萧惠担任招讨多年，屡次遭到侵犯掠夺，人马均疲惫困顿不堪。
English: Xiao Hui has served as a solicitor for many years, has been repeatedly violated and plundered, and everyone is exhausted and distressed.

古文：七年，左迁南京侍卫亲军马步军都指挥使，寻迁南京统军使。
现代文：七年，谪迁为南京侍卫亲军马步军都指挥使，不久迁官为南京统军使。
English: In the seventh year, he was transferred to Nanjing as the commanding envoy of the Ma Bu army, and soon he was transferred to Nanjing as the leading envoy of the unified army.

古文：兴宗即位，知兴中府，历顺义军节度使、东京留守、西南面招讨使，加开府仪同三司、检校太师，兼侍中，封郑王，赐推诚协谋竭节功臣。
现代文：兴宗即位，萧惠知兴中府，历任顺义军节度使、东京留守、西南面招讨使，加开府仪同三司、检校太师，兼侍中，封郑王，赐号推诚协谋竭节功臣。
English: Emperor Xingzong ascended to the throne, Xiao Huizhi ascended to the central government, and successive emissaries of the Shunyi Army were dispatched to attend the festival, stay in Tokyo, and visit the southwestern part of the country to solicit envoys, in addition to the three divisions of the Kaifu ceremony, the inspector of the school, the attendant, and King Zheng, who was awarded the title of the meritorious contributor to the festival.

古文：重熙六年，复为契丹行宫都部署，加守太师，徙王赵。
现代文：重熙六年，又任契丹行宫都部署，加守太师，徙为赵王。
English: In the sixth year of the reign of King Chongxi, he was assigned to the palace of Emperor Qidan, and became the King of Zhao.

古文：拜南院枢密使，更王齐。
现代文：拜南院枢密使，改封齐王。
English: He was appointed the privy envoy of the Southern Yuan Dynasty and changed his title to Qi Wang.

古文：是时帝欲一天下，谋取三关，集群臣议。
现代文：当时皇上想要混一天下，谋划夺取三关，会集群臣计议。
English: At that time, the emperor wanted to mix with everyone, planned to seize the three passes, and gathered a group of courtiers to discuss.

古文：惠曰： 两国强弱，圣虑所悉。
现代文：萧惠说： 两国的强弱情势，皇上心中自然尽知。
English: Xiao Hui said: The situation of strength and weakness of the two countries is naturally well known to the emperor.

古文：宋人西征有年，师老民疲，陛下亲率六军临之，其胜必矣。 
现代文：宋人西征已有数年，军队劳困，百姓疲乏，陛下亲率六军前往，获胜是势所必然。 
English: The Song people have been marching westward for several years. The army is exhausted, the people are tired, and His Majesty's relatives are leading six armies. Victory is inevitable.

古文：萧孝穆曰： 我先朝与宋和好，无罪伐之，其曲在我；况胜败未可逆料。
现代文：萧孝穆说 ：我国前朝与宋和好，现在对方无罪而我国前去攻讨，是其过错在我；况且胜负尚不可逆料。
English: Xiao Xiaomu said, "Our country's former dynasty made peace with the Song Dynasty, but now the other side is not guilty, and our country is going to attack them. It is their fault and mine; moreover, the outcome is still irreversible.

古文：愿陛下熟察。 
现代文：希望陛下能审慎地考虑此事。 
English: I hope His Majesty will consider this matter carefully.

古文：帝从惠言，乃遣使索宋十城，会诸军于燕。
现代文：皇上听从了萧惠的话，派使者向宋索取十城，集合诸军于燕地。
English: The emperor listened to Xiao Hui's words and sent an envoy to Song to ask for ten cities, gathering the armies in Yan Di.

古文：惠与太弟帅师压宋境，宋人重失十城，增岁币请和。
现代文：萧惠与皇太弟率军逼近宋境，宋人不愿失去十座城池，增加岁币求和。
English: As Xiao Hui and the emperor's brother-in-law's army approached the Song territory, the Song people did not want to lose ten cities and asked for more money.

古文：惠以首事功，进王韩。
现代文：萧惠因为首倡用兵之功，进封为韩王。
English: Xiao Hui was crowned King of Han because he was the first to use soldiers.

古文：十二年，兼北府宰相，同知元帅府事，又为北枢密使。
现代文：十二年，兼北府宰相，同知元帅府事，又任北枢密使。
English: In 1912, he was also the chancellor of Beifu, the same as the marshal of the prefecture, and also served as the north central envoy.

古文：十三年，夏国李元昊诱山南党项诸部，帝亲征。
现代文：十三年，夏国李元昊引诱山南党项诸部叛附于夏，皇上亲征。
English: In the thirteenth year of Xia, Li Yuanhao of Xia lured various departments of the Shannan Party to defect to Xia, and the emperor personally led the expedition.

古文：元昊惧，请降。
现代文：元昊害怕，请求投降。
English: Yuan Hao was scared and asked to surrender.

古文：惠曰： 元昊忘奕世恩，萌奸计，车驾亲临，不尽归所掠。
现代文：萧惠说： 元昊忘弃我朝累世之恩，心生奸计，皇上御驾亲征到此，他仍不全数归还所掠之物。
English: Xiao Hui said: Yuan Hao has forgotten the grace of my dynasty and all his life, and has plotted treachery. The emperor has summoned his relatives here, but he still hasn't returned all the stolen goods.

古文：天诱其衷，使彼来迎。
现代文：上天诱惑其心，使他前来迎接陛下。
English: Heaven tempted his heart to come and greet His Majesty.

古文：天与不图，后悔何及？ 
现代文：天与不取，后悔何及？ 
English: Heaven forfend, how far can regret go?

古文：帝从之。
现代文：皇上从其言。
English: The emperor obeyed.

古文：诘旦，进军。
现代文：次日晨，全军进发。
English: The next morning, the whole army set out.

古文：夏人列拒马于河西，蔽盾以立，惠击败之。
现代文：夏人列马阵拒战于河西，以盾蔽身而立，萧惠击败之。
English: Xia Ren led the cavalry to resist the battle in Hexi, covered himself with a shield, and defeated Xiao Hui.

古文：元昊走，惠麾先锋及右翼邀之。
现代文：元昊逃走，萧惠指挥先锋及右翼军邀击之。
English: Yuan Hao fled, and Xiao Hui commanded the vanguard and the right wing troops to attack him.

古文：夏人千余溃围出，我师逆击。
现代文：夏人千余从包围圈中溃败而出，遭到我军迎击。
English: More than a thousand summer people emerged from the encirclement defeated and were met by our army.

古文：大风忽起，飞沙眯目，军乱，夏人乘之，蹂践而死者不可胜计。
现代文：就在此时，忽地刮起一阵大风，飞沙迷住双眼，军队阵形大乱，夏人乘机反击，我军被践踏而死的不可胜数。
English: Just at this time, a gale suddenly blew up, flying sand captivated our eyes, the army formation was in chaos, the Xia people took the opportunity to counterattack, and our army was trampled and died in countless numbers.

古文：诏班师。
现代文：诏令班师。
English: It's time for the class division.

古文：十七年，尚帝姊秦晋国长公主，拜驸马都尉。
现代文：十七年，娶帝姊秦晋国长公主，拜为驸马都尉。
English: In the seventeenth year, he married the emperor's sister, Qin Jin, the first princess of the country, and became the commander of the imperial horse.

古文：明年，帝复征夏国。
现代文：次年，皇上再次征讨夏国。
English: The following year, the emperor once again invaded Xia.

古文：惠自河南进，战舰粮船绵亘数百里。
现代文：萧惠自河南进军，战船粮船绵延数百里。
English: Xiao Hui marched from the south of Henan, and the warships and grain ships stretched for hundreds of miles.

古文：既入敌境，侦候不远，铠甲载于车，军士不得乘马。
现代文：进入敌境之后，侦察到敌人在不远处行动，便将铠甲载于车上，士兵不得乘马。
English: After entering the enemy territory and detecting the enemy's actions not far away, the armor was loaded onto the vehicle, and the soldiers were not allowed to ride horses.

古文：诸将咸请备不虞，惠曰： 谅祚必自迎车驾，何暇及我？
现代文：诸将都请求防备不测，萧惠说： 李谅祚必定会亲自去迎接车驾，哪有工夫顾及我们？
English: All the generals have asked to be prepared for any eventuality, Xiao Hui said: Li Pengyao will certainly go to meet the driver in person. Is there any time to take care of us?

古文：无故设备，徒自弊耳。 
现代文：无缘无故地设防，只不过自缚手脚罢了。 
English: They have fortified themselves for no reason, but they have only tied their own hands and feet.

古文：数日，我军未营。
现代文：一连数天，我军都没有立营垒。
English: For several days in a row, our army did not set up camp.

古文：候者报夏师至，惠方诘妄言罪，谅祚军从阪而下。惠与麾下不及甲而走。
现代文：直到探子报告夏国军队已到，萧惠这才自责称罪，谅祚军从山坡上冲下，萧惠与部人来不及穿上铠甲便四散奔逃。
English: It wasn't until the scouts reported that Xia's army had arrived that Xia Hui blamed herself for letting the troops rush down the hillside. Xia Hui and her subordinates had no time to put on armor before they scattered and fled.

古文：追者射惠，几不免，军士死伤尤众。
现代文：追杀者用箭射击萧惠，萧惠因之几乎未能免死，军士死伤尤其惨重。
English: The pursuer shot Xiao Hui with an arrow. Xiao Hui almost died as a result, and the death and injury of the sergeant were particularly serious.

古文：师还，以惠子慈氏奴殁于阵，诏释其罪。
现代文：军队回国后，因萧惠之子慈氏奴阵亡，皇上下诏释免其罪。
English: After the troops returned to China, the Emperor issued an imperial edict absolving Xiao Hui's son, Cixin, for his death in battle.

古文：十九年，请老，诏赐肩舆入朝，策杖上殿。
现代文：十九年，因年老请求辞官，诏令恩赐坐肩舆入朝，可扶杖上殿。
English: In the 19th year, due to old age, he requested to be given the title of Dictator, and the imperial edict granted him the right to enter the imperial palace on his shoulders, and to go up to the palace on his cane.

古文：辞章再上，乃许之，封魏国王。
现代文：萧惠再次递上奏章，皇上便允准其辞职，封他为魏国王。
English: Xiao Hui once again submitted his report, and the emperor allowed him to resign and made him the king of Wei.

古文：诏冬夏赴行在，参决疑议。
现代文：诏令冬夏都要赴行宫所在，参与决断疑难事务。
English: The imperial edict ordered that they should all go to the palace in winter and summer to participate in the decision-making of difficult matters.

古文：既归，遣赐汤药及他锡赉不绝。每生日，辄赐诗以示尊宠。
现代文：他回乡以后，皇上接连不断地派人赐给他汤药及其他赏赐。每逢生日，则赐诗以示尊宠。
English: After he returned to his hometown, the emperor continuously sent people to give him soup and medicine and other rewards. Every birthday, he would give a poem to show his respect.

古文：清宁二年薨，年七十四，遗命家人薄葬。
现代文：清宁二年去世，时年七十四岁，遗命家人薄葬。
English: Qingning died two years later, at the age of seventy-four, and his family buried him in a shallow grave.

古文：讣闻，辍朝三日。
现代文：讣告传出，道宗皇上因此而停止上朝三天以示哀悼。
English: When the obituary was announced, Emperor Daozong stopped his visits to Japan for three days to express his condolences.

古文：惠性宽厚，自奉俭薄。
现代文：萧惠生性宽厚，自己生活节俭。
English: Xiao Huisheng has a generous nature and lives a frugal life.

古文：兴宗使惠恣取珍物，惠曰： 臣以戚属据要地，禄足养廉，奴婢千余，不为阙乏。陛下犹有所赐，贫于臣者何以待之。 
现代文：兴宗让萧惠任意取用珍宝，萧惠说： 我以亲属之故占据要职，俸禄足以养我不贪之廉心，奴婢千余人，家财毫不匮乏，陛下还要加赐，比我穷的人您怎么待他呢？ 
English: Xingzong allowed Xiao Hui to use the precious treasure at will. Xiao Hui said, "I occupy an important position because of my relatives. My salary is enough to support my greedy and incorruptible heart. I have more than a thousand slaves and maids. My family is not short of money. Your Majesty should give me more. How do you treat someone who is poorer than me?

古文：帝以为然。
现代文：皇上觉得他说得对。
English: Emperor Wu believed Dongfang Shuo's explanation.

古文：夏人扼险以拒，慈氏奴中流矢卒，年五十一，赠中书门下平章事。
现代文：所以作为将领，尽管多次损兵折将，皇上并不归罪于他。弟萧虚列，武定军节度使。有二子：慈氏奴，兀古匿。
English: Therefore, as a general, the emperor did not blame him, despite his many losses. His younger brother, Xiao Hulie, was the military commander of the Wuding Army. He had two sons: Cixi Niu and Gong Gu Nian.

古文：萧迂鲁，字胡突堇，五院部人。
现代文：兀古匿官至北府宰相。萧迂鲁，字胡突堇，五院部人。
English: Gong Guanqian became the minister of the northern prefecture. Xiao Deru, also known as Hu Tujuan, was a member of the Fifth Division.

古文：父约质，历官节度使。
现代文：父萧约质，曾任节度使等职。
English: His father, Xiao Yingjie, was once a ceremonial officer.

古文：迂鲁重熙间为牌印郎君。
现代文：迂鲁在重熙年间任牌印郎君。
English: During the Heian period, Dhru was appointed as a card-carrying priest.

古文：清宁九年，国家既平重元之乱，其党郭九等亡，诏迂鲁追捕，获之，迁护卫太保。
现代文：清宁九年，国家已经平定重元之乱，其党人郭九等人逃亡，诏令迂鲁追捕，擒获之，迁护卫太保。
English: In the ninth year of the Qing Dynasty, the country had already quelled the Chongyuan Rebellion, and its party members Guo Jiu and others had fled. Duolu was ordered to hunt them down, capture them, and relocate the guards.

古文：咸雍元年，使宋议边事，称旨，知殿前副点检事。
现代文：咸雍元年，出使宋商议边事，很合道宗心意，因此而升任知殿前副点检事。
English: In the first year of the Xian and Yong dynasties, Song sent an envoy to negotiate side issues, which was very much in line with the spirit of the Taoist Sect. As a result, he was promoted to the position of deputy inspector in front of the palace.

古文：五年，阻卜叛，为行军都监，击败之，俘获甚众。
现代文：五年，阻卜反叛，迂鲁担任行军都监，击败之，俘虏缴获很多。
English: For five years, he thwarted the rebellion, and Dhru served as the marshal of the capital, defeating it and capturing many prisoners.

古文：初，军出止给五月粮，过期粮乏，士卒往往叛归。
现代文：军队刚出发时，只支给了五个月的军粮，过了五个月，粮食短缺，士兵每每反叛逃回。
English: When the army first set out, it was only given five months of rations. After five months, there was a shortage of food, and soldiers repeatedly defected.

古文：迂鲁坐失计，免官，降戍西北部。
现代文：迂鲁因为失策获罪，免去官职，降为西北部戍官。
English: Due to his missteps, Dhru was found guilty, removed from office, and demoted to the position of eunuch in the northwest.

古文：未行，会北部兵起，迂鲁将乌古敌烈兵击败之，每战以身先，由是释前罪，命总知乌古敌烈部。
现代文：未赴任，适逢北部战事起，迂鲁率乌古敌烈兵马击败敌军，每当交战之时，迂鲁总是身先士卒，因此皇上释免其前罪，命他总知乌古敌烈部。
English: Before he took office, the war in the north broke out, and he led the Ugu enemy soldiers and horses to defeat the enemy army. Whenever there was a war, he was always at the forefront, so the emperor absolved him of his previous crime and ordered him to always know the Ugu enemy soldiers.

古文：九年，敌烈叛，都监耶律独迭以兵少不战，屯胪朐河。
现代文：九年，敌烈反叛，都监耶律独迭因为兵少没有出战，屯驻于胪朐河。
English: In the ninth year, when the enemy rebelled violently, the prefectural governor, Ye Lu, because of the small number of soldiers, did not go to war, and was stationed in Luohe.

古文：敌烈合边人掠居民，迂鲁率精骑四百力战，败之，尽获其辎重。
现代文：敌烈联合边兵掳掠居民，迂鲁率精骑四百全力作战，击败敌人，全数获得其辎重。
English: The enemy's combined border soldiers abducted and plundered residents, and Dulu led four hundred horsemen to fight with all their strength, defeated the enemy, and all of them gained their weight.

古文：继闻酋长合术三千余骑掠附近部落，纵兵蹑其后，连战二日，斩数千级，尽得被掠人畜而还。
现代文：既而又得知敌烈酋长合术率三千余骑兵掳掠附近部落，迂鲁统兵尾随其后，接连交战两天，斩首数千级，尽数获得被掳掠的居民牲畜而回。
English: As soon as it was learned that more than three thousand cavalrymen of the enemy chieftain had captured and plundered the nearby tribes, the Khmer Rouge soldiers followed them, fought for two days in a row, beheaded thousands of people, and did their best to get the captured residents and livestock back.

古文：值敌烈党五百余骑劫捕鹰户，逆击走之，俘斩甚众，自是敌烈势沮。
现代文：恰逢敌烈党人五百余骑劫掠捉拿鹰户，迂鲁迎击并逼迫敌人逃走，俘虏斩首甚多，从此敌烈势力渐衰。
English: At the same time, more than five hundred enemy rebels rode out to seize and capture the eagle's house, attacked and forced the enemy to flee, and many prisoners were beheaded. Since then, the enemy forces have gradually declined.

古文：时敌烈方为边患，而阻卜相继寇掠，边人以故疲弊。
现代文：这时，敌烈正成为边境患害，而阻卜也紧跟着前来抢劫，边民因此困苦穷乏。
English: At this time, the enemy is becoming a border disaster, and the obstacles are also followed by robberies, so the borderers are poor and needy.

古文：朝廷以地远，不能时益援军，而使疆圉帖然者，皆迂鲁力也。
现代文：朝廷因为其地遥远，不能按时增补援军，但边境仍然安宁，这都是迂鲁的功劳。
English: Due to the remoteness of the area, the imperial court was unable to replenish reinforcements on time, but the border remained peaceful, all thanks to Dhru.

古文：帝嘉其功，拜左皮室详稳。
现代文：皇上表彰其功勋，拜他为左皮室详稳。
English: The emperor commended his merits and worshiped him as the left ventricle is stable.

古文：会宋求天池之地，诏迂鲁兼统两皮室军屯太牢古山以备之。
现代文：适逢宋求要天池一带土地，诏令迂鲁兼统两皮室军屯驻于太牢古山以防备宋军。
English: When the Song Dynasty demanded land in the Tianchi area, the imperial edict ordered the two-skinned Muromachi army to be stationed in Taikoo Ancient Mountain in preparation for the Song Army.

古文：大康初，阻卜叛，迁西北招讨都监，从都统耶律赵三征讨有功，改南京统军都监、黄皮室详稳。
现代文：大康初，阻卜反叛，迂鲁被迁任西北招讨都监，随从都统耶律赵三征讨立有战功，改任南京统军都监、黄皮室详稳。
English: At the beginning of the Great Prosperity Period, Du Lu was transferred to the position of the Northwest Invitation and Conscription Supervisor. He followed the Yelu Zhao and the Three Expeditionary Commands, and was appointed as the Nanjing United Army Supervisor. Huang Bishu was appointed to the position of the Yellow Leather Office Supervisor.

古文：未几，迁东北路统军都监，卒。
现代文：不久，迁任东北路统军都监，去世。
English: Soon after, he was transferred to the post of the inspector of the Northeast Road Union Army and passed away.

古文：弟铎卢斡。
现代文：弟铎卢斡。
English: His younger brother, Lu Yu, was born.

古文：铎卢斡，字撒板。
现代文：铎卢斡，字撒板。
English: The words are scattered.

古文：幼警悟异常儿。
现代文：幼时机敏聪慧，不同于一般的孩子。
English: At a young age, they are sensitive and intelligent, different from ordinary children.

古文：三岁失母，哭尽哀，见者伤之。
现代文：三岁丧母，哭泣竭尽哀思，见到的人都很感伤。
English: She lost her mother when she was three years old. She cried her heart out, and everyone she met was very sad.

古文：及长，魁伟沉毅，好学，善属文，有才干。
现代文：成年之后，身材魁梧，沉着坚毅，好读书，擅长做文，有才干。
English: After he became an adult, he was burly, calm and resolute, good at reading, good at writing, and talented.

古文：年三十始仕，为朝野推重，给事北院知圣旨事。
现代文：三十岁才出来做官，为朝野所推许尊重，任给事北院知圣旨事。
English: He did not become an official until he was thirty years old. He was highly respected by the court and was appointed to attend to the sacred affairs of the Northern Court.

古文：大康二年，乙辛再入枢府，铎卢斡素与萧岩寿善，诬以罪，谪戍西北部。
现代文：大康二年，乙辛再一次入枢密府，铎卢斡一向与萧岩寿交好，乙辛给他罗织罪名，他因此被谪迁戍守西北部。
English: In the second year of the Taikang era, Yixin once again entered the Privy Council, and Xiao Yanshou had always been a good friend of Gong Lu. Yixin fabricated charges against him, so he was transferred to the northwest.

古文：坐皇太子事，特恩减死，仍锢终身。
现代文：又因皇太子之事获罪，皇上特地赐恩减死论处，仍禁锢终身不得为官。
English: He was also found guilty for the matter of the Crown Prince, and the Emperor specially granted him a pardon and commuted his death sentence, but he was still banned from holding public office for life.

古文：在戍十余年，太子事稍直，始得归乡里，屏居谢人事。
现代文：在戍所十余年，太子冤稍得昭明，才得以回到乡里，从此闭门独居谢绝与人交往。
English: After more than ten years in the detention center, the prince's grievances became clear, and he was able to return to the countryside. From then on, he lived alone and refused to socialize with others.

古文：一日临流，闻雉鸣，三复孔子 时哉 语，作古诗三章见志。
现代文：有一天，面对流水，听到雉鸟的叫声，心有所感，三次重复孔子 时哉 之语，做古诗三章以寄托心志。
English: One day, facing the flowing water and hearing the cries of the ostriches, I felt something in my heart. I repeated the words of Confucius three times and composed three chapters of an ancient poem to inspire my heart.

古文：当时名士称其高情雅韵，不减古人。
现代文：当时名士称赞他脱俗的情调、高雅的韵致，不减古人。
English: At that time, celebrities praised his unorthodox mood, elegant rhyme, and did not reduce the ancients.

古文：寿隆六年卒，年六十一。
现代文：寿隆六年去世，年六十一岁。
English: Shulong died six years later, at the age of 61.

古文：乾统初，赠彰义军节度使。
现代文：乾统初，追赠为彰义军节度使。
English: At the beginning of the reign of Emperor Qian, he was posthumously awarded the title of the Zhangyi Army's festival envoy.

古文：萧图玉，字兀衍，北府宰相海璃之子。
现代文：萧图玉，字兀衍，北府宰相海王黎之子。
English: Xiao TuYu, the son of BeiFu chancellor HaiWang Li.

古文：统和初，皇太后称制，以戚属入侍。
现代文：统和初，皇太后临朝称制，图玉因系皇亲得以入宫侍卫。
English: At the beginning of the unification, the Empress Dowager Lin was proclaimed emperor, and Tu Yu was able to enter the palace as an attendant because he was a relative of the emperor.

古文：寻为乌古部都监。
现代文：不久担任乌古部都监。
English: He soon assumed the post of district inspector of the Department of Antiquities.

古文：讨速母缕等部有功，迁乌古部节度使。
现代文：讨伐速母缕等部立有战功，迁为乌古部节度使。
English: He was transferred to the Ugubo section of the Imperial Palace as the chief of the Imperial Household Agency.

古文：十九年，总领西北路军事。
现代文：十九年，总领西北路军事。
English: In 1919, he became the commander of the Northwest Military Road.

古文：后以本路兵伐甘州，降其酋长牙懒。
现代文：后来统率本路兵马讨伐甘州，收降其酋长牙懒。
English: Later, he led the troops and horses along this road to fight against Gansu Province, and subdued its chieftain, Fang Lazy.

古文：既而牙懒复叛，命讨之，克肃州，尽迁其民于土隗口故城。
现代文：不久牙懒又反叛，圣宗皇上命图玉征讨之。克服肃州，将当地百姓全部迁至土隗口旧城。
English: Not long after, the lazy people rebelled again, and Emperor Shengzong issued an order to conquer Suizhou and relocate all the local people to the old city of Tuyukou.

古文：师还，诏尚金乡公主，拜驸马都尉，加同政事令门下平章事。
现代文：军队回京，诏令图玉娶金乡公主，拜为驸马都尉，加同政事门下平章事。
English: When the army returned to Beijing, the emperor ordered Tu Yu to marry the princess of Jinxiang, to serve as the captain of the imperial horse, and to take part in political affairs.

古文：上言曰： 阻卜今已服化，宜各分部，治以节度使。 
现代文：图玉上奏说 ：阻卜现在已经顺服归化，应当将它们各自分列为部，派节度使治理。 
English: He said in his speech at the top of the chart: The hindrances have now been naturalized, and they should each be classified as their own department, and governance should be done by faction.

古文：上从之。
现代文：皇上听从了他的建议。
English: Emperor Dezong accepted his suggestion.

古文：自后节度使往往非材，部民怨而思叛。
现代文：此后，由于节度使往往用非其人，部民们怨恨而思量反叛。
English: After that, because the emperor often used unqualified people, his subordinates were resentful and considered rebelling.

古文：开泰元年十一月，石烈太师阿里底杀其节度使，西奔窝鲁朵城，盖古所谓龙庭单于城也。
现代文：开泰元年十一月，石烈太师阿里底杀害其节度使，向西逃奔窝鲁朵城，也就是古时所说的龙庭单于城。
English: In November of the first year of the reign of Emperor Taizong, Shi Li Daishi Alidi killed his envoy to the festival and fled westward to the city of Wo Rudo, also known in ancient times as Longting Shan Yu City.

古文：已而阻卜复叛，围图玉于可敦城，势甚张。
现代文：不久，阻卜又反叛，将图玉包围在可敦城，气焰十分嚣张。
English: Soon, the blockers rebelled again and encircled the jade ball in the city of Kedong. They were very arrogant.

古文：图玉使诸军齐射却之，屯于窝鲁朵城。
现代文：图玉派各路军一齐射退敌军，屯驻于窝鲁朵城。
English: Tu Yu dispatched troops from all directions to drive back the enemy forces and stationed them in the city of Woludong.

古文：明年，北院枢密使耶律化哥引兵来救，图玉遣人诱诸部皆降。
现代文：次年，北院枢密使耶律化哥领兵前来救援，图玉派人劝诱诸部一齐投降。
English: The following year, the Privy Council of the Northern Yuan Dynasty sent Yelu Huagang to lead the troops to come to the rescue, and Tu Yu sent someone to persuade all the troops to surrender together.

古文：帝以图玉始虽失计，后得人心，释之，仍领诸部。
现代文：皇上因为图玉初时虽然失策，后来却得人心，释免了他，让他仍旧统领诸部。
English: Although the emperor made a mistake at the beginning because of Tu Yu, he later won the hearts of the people, released him, and let him still lead the ministries.

古文：请益军，诏让之曰： 叛者既服，兵安用益？
现代文：图玉请求增加兵员，皇上下诏责备他说： 反叛的人既已归服，兵马何必再行增加？
English: Tu Yu requested an increase in the number of soldiers, and the emperor scolded him with an imperial edict: "Since the rebels have already surrendered, why do we need to increase the number of soldiers and horses?

古文：且前日之役，死伤甚众，若从汝谋，边事何时而息？ 
现代文：况且前次作战，死伤甚多，如果听你的谋划，边境战事何时才会平息？ 
English: Moreover, in the previous battle, there were many deaths and injuries. If you listen to your plan, when will the border war calm down?

古文：遂止。
现代文：图玉于是作罢。
English: So he stopped short of killing him.

古文：会公主坐杀家婢，降封郡主，图玉罢使相。
现代文：适逢公主因为杀死家婢获罪，降封为郡主，图玉也被削夺使相之职。
English: When the princess was found guilty of killing her maidservant, she was demoted to the rank of princess, and Tutu was also stripped of his position as consort.

古文：寻起为乌古敌烈部详稳。
现代文：不久起用为乌古敌烈部详稳。
English: It was soon used as a stronghold of the ancient enemy.

古文：以老代还，卒。
现代文：因为年老让人代任，回京便去世了。
English: Because the old man had someone take his place, he returned to Kyoto and died.

古文：子双古，南京统军使。
现代文：子双古，南京统军使。
English: Zi Shuanggu, envoy to the Nanjing Unification Army.

古文：孙讹笃斡，尚三韩郡王合鲁之女骨浴公主，终乌古敌烈部统军使，以善战名于世。
现代文：孙讹笃斡，娶三韩郡王合鲁之女骨浴公主，终官乌古敌烈部统军使，以善于作战闻名于世。
English: Sun Yat-sen, married to Bone Bath Princess, the daughter of King He Lu of Samhan County, was the final envoy of the united forces of the ancient enemy, and was famous for being good at fighting.

古文：耶律铎轸，字敌辇，积庆宫人。
现代文：耶律铎轸，字敌辇，积庆宫人。
English: Yeludong, Zhaojun, Jieqing Gongren.

古文：仕统和间。
现代文：出仕于统和年间。
English: Served during the unification of Korea.

古文：性疏简，不顾小节，人初以是短之。
现代文：生性散漫随便，不拘小节，人们初时因此而指责他。
English: At first, people accused him of being a loose cannon with an unconventional approach.

古文：后侵宋，分总羸师以从。
现代文：后来进犯宋境，铎轸分管病弱士卒随征。
English: Later, he invaded Song, and the sick and weak soldiers under his command were conscripted.

古文：及战，取绯帛被介胄以自标显，驰突出入敌阵，格杀甚众。
现代文：待到交战时，他身披红色绢帛，穿戴铠甲和头盔以自我炫示，飞马冲入敌人阵营，杀死了很多人。
English: At the time of the battle, he was dressed in a red cape, wearing armor and a helmet to show off, and Pegasus rushed into the enemy camp and killed many people.

古文：太后望见喜，召谓之曰： 卿戮力如此，何患不济！ 
现代文：太后望见很高兴，召见他，并说： 有你如此尽力，我们何愁不能取胜！ 
English: The Empress Dowager was delighted to see him, summoned him, and said: "With you doing your best, we can't help but win!"

古文：厚赏之。
现代文：给他以重赏。
English: Give him a big reward.

古文：由是多以军事属任。
现代文：从此太后经常将军事托付给他。
English: From then on, the empress dowager often entrusted military matters to him.

古文：俄授东北详稳。
现代文：不久授任东北详稳。
English: Soon after, he was assigned to Tohoku Chosetsu.

古文：开泰二年，进讨阻卜，克之。
现代文：开泰二年，进军讨伐阻卜，战胜之。
English: In the second year of the reign of Emperor Keitai, he marched to fight against the obstructionists and defeated them.

古文：重熙间，历东北路统军使、天德军节度使。
现代文：重熙年间，历任东北路统军使、天德军节度使。
English: During the reign of Chongxi, successive envoys of the Northeast Road Union Army and the Tiande Army were sent to the Qing Dynasty.

古文：十七年，城西边，命铎轸相地及造战舰，因成楼船百三十艘。
现代文：十七年，在西部边境筑城，命令铎轸观察地势地貌以及建造战船，于是制成楼船一百三十艘。
English: In the seventeenth year, he built a city on the western border, ordered his soldiers to observe the terrain and build warships, and thus made one hundred and thirty ships.

古文：上置兵，下立马，规制坚壮，称旨。
现代文：上面装载士兵，下层放置战马，规模形制坚固高大，很令兴宗皇上满意。
English: The soldiers were loaded on the top, and the war horses were placed on the bottom, and the scale was solid and tall, which made Emperor Xingzong very satisfied.

古文：及西征，诏铎轸率兵由别道进，会于河滨。
现代文：及至西征，诏令铎轸率兵由岔路进发，会师于黄河之滨。
English: As far as the Western Expedition, he ordered his soldiers to march from Kushiro to join his army on the banks of the Yellow River.

古文：敌兵阻河而阵，帝御战舰绝河击之，大捷而归，亲赐卮酒。
现代文：敌兵依仗黄河之险结阵，皇上率领战舰横断黄河攻击敌军，大获全胜而回，皇上亲赐卮酒给铎轸。
English: The enemy soldiers relied on the perils of the Yellow River to form a line, and the emperor led a warship across the Yellow River to attack the enemy army. They returned with a complete victory, and the emperor himself gave them wine.

古文：仍问所欲，铎轸对曰： 臣幸被圣恩，得效驽力，万死不能报国，又将何求！ 
现代文：又问他想要什么，铎轸回答说： 臣有幸沐浴圣恩，得效驽马之劳，虽万死不能报效国家，哪里还有什么要求呢？ 
English: He also asked him what he wanted, and the donkey answered: "A vassal has the privilege of bathing in the grace of the gods, to serve the labor of the donkey and the horse, although he cannot serve the country even if he dies, what more could he ask for?

古文：帝愈重之，手书铎轸衣裙曰： 勤国忠君，举世无双。 
现代文：皇上更加看重他，亲手在铎轸的衣袍上写道： 勤国忠君，举世无双。 
English: The emperor thought more highly of him, and wrote with his own hand on his shabby robe: "There is no equal in the world for loyalty to the country."

古文：卒于官，年七十。
现代文：后死于任上，终年七十岁。
English: He later died in office at the age of 70.

古文：子低烈，历观察、节度使。
现代文：子耶律低烈，历任观察、节度使。
English: His son, Ye Lu, was a low-ranking official, and successively served as an observer and official of the festival.

