古文：黄帝问于岐伯曰：余闻针道于夫子，众多毕悉矣。
现代文：黄帝问岐伯说：我从先生这里听到了针刺治疗的道理，许多内容都已理解了。
English: Huang Di asked Qi Bo and said: I have heard the principle of acupuncture treatment from my teacher, and I have understood many contents.

古文：夫子之道，应若失而据未有坚然者也。夫子之问学熟乎？
现代文：先生讲的道理与实际情况相符得如箭之中的，但根据却是不固定的，先生的学问是继承谁的呢？
English: What Mr. Li said is perfectly consistent with the actual situation, but the basis is not fixed. Who will inherit Mr. Li's knowledge?

古文：将审察于物而心生之乎？
现代文：还是经过仔细观察事物而后心中思考琢磨出来的呢？
English: Or is it something that has been carefully observed and then thought about in your heart?

古文：岐伯曰：圣人之为道者，上合于天，下合于地，中合于人事，必有明法以起度数，法式检押，乃后可传焉。
现代文：岐伯说：圣人创立的理论，上合于天，下合于地，中与人事相符，一定要有明确的法规，来确立度量标准、模式规矩，然后才能传于后世。
English: Qibo said: The theory created by the sage, the upper fits the sky, the lower fits the earth, and the middle matches the personnel. There must be clear regulations to establish measurement standards, model rules, and then it can be passed on to future generations.

古文：故匠人不能释尺寸而意短长，废绳墨而起平水也，工人不能置规而为圆，去矩而为方。
现代文：所以，工匠不能丢掉尺寸而随意定长短，不能放弃绳墨而求平直，不能不用圆规而画圆，也不能抛开矩尺而画方形。
English: Therefore, craftsmen can not lose the size and arbitrarily set the length, can not give up rope ink and seek straightness, can not draw a circle without a compass, nor can they abandon the ruler and draw a square.

古文：知用此者，固自然之物，易用之教，逆顺之常也。
现代文：知道运用这些法则，就可以顺应自然，用简单易懂的方法，掌握顺逆的常规。
English: If you know how to apply these rules, you will be able to adapt to nature and use simple, easy-to-understand methods to master the rules of thumb.

古文：黄帝曰：愿闻自然奈何？
现代文：黄帝说：我想知道顺应自然是怎样的。
English: Huang Di said: I want to know what it is like to follow nature.

古文：岐伯曰：临深决水，不用功力，而水可竭也。
现代文：岐伯说：从深处决堤放水，不用很大的气力就能把水放尽。
English: Qi Bo said, "When releasing water from a deep embankment, it doesn't take much force to release all the water.

古文：循拙决冲，而经可通也。
现代文：循着地下的孔洞挖地道，就可以开通地下通路。
English: An underground passage can be opened by digging a tunnel through an underground hole.

古文：此言气之滑涩，血水清浊，行之逆顺也。
现代文：同样对于人体来说，气有滑涩的不同，血有清浊的区别，经脉运行有逆顺的变化，所以应当掌握其特点，因势利导地治疗。
English: Similarly, for the human body, the qi has different smoothness and astringency, the blood has a difference between clear and turbid, and the meridians run counterclockwise and clockwise, so its characteristics should be mastered, and the treatment should be guided by snobbery.

古文：黄帝曰：愿闻人之白黑、肥瘦、小长，各有数乎？
现代文：黄帝说：我想知道人有皮肤黑白、形体胖瘦、年龄长幼的不同，那在针刺的深浅和次数方面有一定的标准吗？
English: Huang Di said: I want to know if people have different skin color, body fat and thin, age and youth, is there a certain standard in terms of the depth and frequency of acupuncture?

古文：岐伯曰：年质壮大，血气充盈，肤革坚固，因加以邪，刺此者，深而留之，此肥人也。
现代文：岐伯说：身体强壮的壮年人，气血充盛，皮肤坚固，感受外邪时，应采取深刺的方法，而且留针时间要长，这个方法也适宜于肥壮的人。
English: Qi Bo said: physically strong adults, full of qi and blood, with firm skin, should take a deep stabbing method when feeling external evil, and the needle should be left for a long time. This method is also suitable for obese people.

古文：广肩腋项，肉薄厚皮而黑色，唇临临然，其血黑以浊，其气涩以迟。其为人也，贪于取与，刺此者，深而留之，多益其数也。
现代文：如果是宽肩、腋下厚实、粗项、肉薄皮厚且肤色发黑、嘴唇厚大的人，他们的血液发黑而稠浊，气行滞涩缓慢，性格争强好胜，针刺时应当刺得更深而留针时间更长，并增加针刺的次数。
English: If it is a person with broad shoulders, thick underarms, thick neck, thick thin skin and dark skin, and thick lips, their blood is dark and thick, their qi circulation is slow, and their personality is competitive. When needling, they should prick deeper and keep the needle longer, and increase the number of needles.

古文：黄帝曰：刺瘦人奈何？
现代文：黄帝说：针刺瘦人的方法又是怎样的呢？
English: Huang Di said: What is the method of needling thin people?

古文：岐伯曰：瘦人者，皮薄色少，肉廉廉然，薄唇轻言，其血清气滑，易脱于气，易损于血，刺此者，浅而疾之。
现代文：岐伯说：瘦人的皮肤薄，血色浅淡，肌肉消瘦，口唇薄，说话声音小，这种人血液清稀而气行滑利，气容易散失，血容易消耗，针刺的方法应是浅刺而出针快。
English: Qi Bo said: The thin person's skin is thin, the blood color is light, the muscles are thin, the lips are thin, and the speaking voice is small. This kind of person's blood is thin and the qi is smooth, the qi is easy to dissipate, and the blood is easy to consume. The method of acupuncture should be shallow and quick.

古文：黄帝曰：刺常人奈何？
现代文：黄帝说：针刺不胖不瘦的平常人其方法是怎样的呢？
English: Huang Di said, "What is the method of acupuncture for ordinary people who are neither fat nor thin?

古文：岐伯曰：视其白黑，各为调之。
现代文：岐伯说：这要辨别他肤色的黑白，并据此分别进行调治。
English: Qibo said: It is necessary to distinguish the black and white of his skin color and adjust the treatment accordingly.

古文：其端正敦厚者，其血气和调，刺此者，无失常数也。
现代文：对于端正敦厚的人，因血气调和，针刺时的方法不要违背一般常规的刺法。
English: For people who are neat and thick, due to blood and gas, the method of acupuncture should not violate the general routine of acupuncture.

古文：黄帝曰：刺壮士真骨者奈何？
现代文：黄帝说：针刺身体强壮、骨骼坚硬的人是怎样的呢？
English: The Yellow Emperor said, "How is it to prick someone with a strong body and hard bones?"

古文：岐伯曰：刺壮士真骨，坚肉缓节监监然。
现代文：岐伯说：身体强壮的人、骨骼坚硬，肌肉结实，关节运转自如有力。
English: Qi Bo said: people with strong bodies, hard bones, strong muscles, and strong joints.

古文：此人，重则气涩血浊，刺此者，深而留之，多益其数；劲则气滑血清，刺此者，浅而疾之。
现代文：这样的人，如果是稳重不好动的，多属气行滞涩而血液稠浊，针刺的方法应当深刺而留针时间长，并增加针刺的次数；如果是轻劲好动的，气行滑利而血液清稀，针刺的方法应当浅刺而迅速出针。
English: For such people, if they are sedentary and do not move well, their qi and qi are mostly stagnant and the blood is thick, the method of acupuncture should be deep and the needle should be left for a long time, and the number of needles should be increased; if they are light and active, the qi and qi are smooth and the blood is thin, the method of acupuncture should be shallow and the needle should be quickly released.

古文：黄帝曰：刺婴儿奈何？
现代文：黄帝说：针刺婴儿是怎样的呢？
English: Huang Di said: How is the acupuncture baby?

古文：岐伯曰：婴儿者，其肉脆、血少、气弱，刺此者，以毫针浅刺而疾发针，日再可也。
现代文：岐伯说：婴儿的肌肉脆薄而血少气弱，针刺的方法，应当选用毫针浅刺而且快速进针，一天可以针刺两次。
English: Qi Bo said: the baby's muscles are brittle and thin, and the blood is thin and weak. The method of acupuncture should be to use a shallow needle and a quick needle, and the needle can be used twice a day.

古文：黄帝曰：临深决水奈何？
现代文：黄帝说：前面所比喻的 临深决水 情况，在针刺上应当怎么处置呢？
English: Huang Di said, "What should be done in the case of acupuncture in the situation of rinshen dew point, which was compared above?

古文：岐伯曰：血清气浊，疾泻之则气竭焉。
现代文：岐伯说：血液清稀而气行滑利的人，如果采用疾泻法，就会使其真气耗竭。
English: Qi Bo said: People whose blood is thin and whose qi is slippery, if they use the method of diarrhea, will cause their true qi to be exhausted.

古文：黄帝曰：循掘决冲奈何？
现代文：黄帝说：前面所比喻的 循掘决冲 情况，又应当怎么处置呢？
English: Huang Di said: What should be done about the situation of "pushing through the excavation" as compared with the previous situation?

古文：岐伯曰：血浊气涩，疾泻之，则经可通也。
现代文：岐伯说：血液稠浊而气行迟涩的人，采用疾泻法，经脉可通。
English: Qi Bo said: People whose blood is thick and whose qi is sluggish can use the method of diarrhea, and the meridians can be passed.

古文：黄帝曰：脉行之逆顺，奈何？
现代文：黄帝说：经脉循行的逆顺是怎样的呢？
English: The Yellow Emperor said, "How is it that the meridians run in opposite directions?"

古文：岐伯曰：手之三阴，从臓走手；手之三阳，从手走头；足之三阳，从头走足；足之三阴，从足走腹。
现代文：岐伯说：手三阴经都是从胸部经上肢走向手指；手三阳经都是从手指向上经肩部走向头部；足三阳经都是从头部经躯干和下肢走向足部；足三阴经都是从足部经下肢走向腹部。
English: Qi Bo said: the three yin-yang meridians of the hand are from the chest through the upper limbs to the fingers; the three yang-yang meridians of the hand are from the fingers up through the shoulders to the head; the three yang-yang meridians of the foot are from the head through the torso and lower limbs to the foot; the three yin-yang meridians of the foot are from the foot through the lower limbs to the abdomen.

古文：黄帝曰：少阴之脉独下行，何也？
现代文：黄帝说：足三阴经都是上行到腹的，为什么惟独足少阴经向下行呢？
English: The Yellow Emperor said, "All the three Yin lineages are ascending to the abdomen. Why is it that only the lesser Yin lineage is descending?

古文：岐伯曰：不然。
现代文：岐伯说：不像您说的那样，那不是足少阴经而是冲脉。
English: Qibo said, "Unlike what you said, it's not the meridian of the feet, but the pulse.

古文：夫冲脉者，五脏六腑之海也，五脏六腑皆禀焉。
现代文：冲脉是五脏六腑经脉所汇聚的地方，五脏六腑都禀受冲脉气血的濡养。
English: The artery is the place where the meridians of the five viscera and six bowels converge. The five viscera and six bowels are nourished by the blood and qi of the artery.

古文：其上者，出于颃颡，渗诸阳，灌诸精。
现代文：冲脉上行的部分，在咽部上面的后鼻道附近出于体表，然后渗入阳经，向其灌注精气。
English: The ascending part of the pulse emerges from the body surface near the posterior nasal passage above the pharynx, and then penetrates into the anus, perfusing the essence into it.

古文：其下者，注少阴之大络，出于气街，循阴股内廉入腘中，伏行骭骨内，下至内踝之后，属而别。其下者，并于少阴之经，渗三阴；其前者，伏行出跗属，下循跗入大趾间，渗诸络而温肌肉。
现代文：冲脉下行的部分，注入足少阴肾经的大络，在气街出于体表，沿着大腿内侧下行，进入膝腘窝中，伏行于胫骨之内，再向下行到内踝后的跟骨上缘而分为两支：向下行的分支，与足少阴经相并行，同时将精气灌注于三阴经；其前行的分支，从内踝后的深部出于跟骨结节上缘，向下沿着足背进入足大趾间，将精气渗注到络脉中而温养肌肉。
English: The descending part of the pulse, the great network of the foot-less-than-yin-kidney meridian, enters the qi street from the surface of the body, descends along the inner thigh, enters the armpit of the knee, descends inside the tibia, and then descends to the upper edge of the heel bone behind the inner ankle and is divided into two branches: the descending branch, parallel to the foot-less-than-yin-kidney meridian, while infusing the essence into the three yin meridian; its forward branch, from the depth behind the inner ankle from the upper edge of the heel bone nodule, descends

古文：故别络结则跗上不动，不动则厥，厥则寒矣。
现代文：所以，当冲脉下行支脉瘀结不通时，足背上的冲阳脉搏动就会消失，冲阳脉搏动消失就会导致卫气不行而成厥逆，出现厥逆就会感到下肢寒冷。
English: Therefore, when the branch of the descending branch of the pulse is not connected, the pulse of the sun pulse on the instep will disappear, and the disappearance of the pulse of the sun pulse will cause the qi to fail and become retrograde, and if the retrograde occurs, the lower limbs will feel cold.

古文：黄帝曰：何以明之？
现代文：黄帝说：怎样查明经脉气血的顺逆呢？
English: The Yellow Emperor said, "How can I find out the cause and effect of the flow of qi and blood through the meridians?"

古文：岐伯曰：以言导之，切而验之，其非必动，然后仍可明逆顺之行也。
现代文：岐伯说：在给病人检查的时候，首先要用言语问清症状，然后切按脉搏查验脉动情况。如果脉动正常就不是经气厥逆，这样就可以明确经脉气血循行逆顺的情况了。
English: Qi Bo said: When examining a patient, the first thing to do is to clarify the symptoms with words, and then check the pulsation according to the pulse. If the pulsation is normal, it is not reversed by the qi, so it is possible to clarify the situation of the qi and blood following the meridian.

古文：黄帝曰：窘乎哉！
现代文：黄帝说：这些问题真难解答啊！
English: Huang Di said: These questions are really difficult to answer!

古文：圣人之为道也。
现代文：圣人所归纳的这些道理真是重要。
English: These are really important points that the saint makes.

古文：明于日月，微于毫厘，其非夫子，孰能道之也。
现代文：这些道理，比日月的光辉还明亮，比毫厘之物还细微，若不是先生，谁能阐明清楚这些道理呢。
English: These principles are brighter than the brightness of the sun and moon, and more subtle than a milliliter of matter. If it were not for you, who would be able to clarify these principles?

