古文：宋艺祖推戴之初，陈桥守门者拒而不纳，遂如封丘门，抱关吏望风启钥。
现代文：原文宋太祖赵匡胤刚刚黄袍加身的时候，陈桥门的守门官员拒绝让他进城。太祖无奈只好转到封丘门，封丘门守关吏见形势如此，老远就大开城门迎太祖进城。
English: When the Song Emperor Zhao Kuangyin had just been crowned emperor, the gatekeeper of Chenqiao Gate refused to let him enter the city. The emperor had no choice but to go to Fenyu Gate. Seeing the situation, the gatekeeper of Fenyu Gate opened the gate to welcome the emperor into the city.

古文：及即位，斩封丘吏而官陈桥者，以旌其忠。
现代文：太祖即帝位以后，立即处死封丘门的官吏，而给陈桥门的守门官员加官晋爵，以表彰他的忠义。
English: After Emperor Taizu ascended the throne, he immediately executed the officials of Fuchu Gate, and promoted the gatekeeper of Chenqiao Gate in recognition of his loyalty.

古文：宋太祖至正间，广东王成、陈仲玉作乱。
现代文：元顺帝至正年间，广东人王成和陈仲玉起兵谋反。
English: In the years between Yuan Shun and Zheng He, the Cantonese Wang Cheng and Chen Zhongyu started a rebellion.

古文：东莞人何真请于行省，举义兵，擒仲玉以献。
现代文：东莞人何真当时任广东行省右丞，向行省请命，自己组建了义兵，抓住了陈仲玉，并将其献给了朝廷。
English: At that time, He Zhen, a Dongguan native, was the right-hand man of Guangdong Province. He asked the province for his life, formed a volunteer army, captured Chen Zhongyu, and presented it to the imperial court.

古文：成筑砦自守，围之，久不下。
现代文：而王成却在险要之处建寨自守，何真围攻了很久都没有攻破。
English: Wang Cheng, on the other hand, built a self-defence fortress in a critical place, which was besieged for a long time and never breached.

古文：真募人能缚成者，予钱十千，于是成奴缚之以出，真笑谓成曰： 公奈何养虎为害？ 
现代文：于是，何真悬赏一万钱捉拿王成，王成的家奴贪图小利，将主人绑来求赏，何真笑着对王成说： 你怎么养虎为患啊？ 
English: As a result, He Zhen offered a reward of ten thousand money to capture Wang Cheng. Wang Cheng's family slave was greedy for small profits and tied up his master to ask for the reward. He Zhen smiled and said to Wang Cheng: How do you raise a tiger?

古文：成惭谢。
现代文：王成为此感到很羞愧。
English: The king was ashamed.

古文：奴求赏，真如数与之。使人具汤镬，驾诸转轮车上。
现代文：王成的家奴请求赏钱，何真如数给了他，又派人准备汤锅，并把汤锅架在转轮车上。
English: Wang Cheng's manservant asked for the reward money, and He Zhen gave him the exact amount. He also sent someone to prepare the soup pot and put it on the cart.

古文：成惧，谓将烹己。
现代文：王成很恐慌，以为是何真要烹杀自己。
English: Wang Cheng panicked, thinking that he really wanted to kill himself.

古文：真乃缚奴于上。促烹之；使数人鸣鼓推车，号于众曰： 四境有奴缚主者，视此! 
现代文：但没想到何真却把那家奴绑起来放在汤锅上，下令让手下将他煮了；又叫几个人敲鼓推车在大街上游行，当中宣布： 境内有家奴敢捆绑出卖主人的，以后都按照这种方法处理！ 
English: However, unexpectedly, He Zhen tied up the slave and put him on a soup pot, and ordered his subordinates to boil him. He also ordered several people to march on the street with drums and carts, and announced: "If there is a slave in the territory who dares to tie up and sell his master, he will be dealt with according to this method in the future!"

古文：人服其赏罚有章，岭表悉归心焉。
现代文：大家佩服他赏罚分明，岭南地区的人于是开始从内心里归顺朝廷。
English: Everyone admired his clear distinction between reward and punishment, and people in the Lingnan region began to follow the imperial court from the bottom of their hearts.

古文：高祖戮丁公而封项伯，赏罚为不均矣；光武封苍头子密为不义侯，尤不可训。
现代文：汉高祖刘邦杀死对项羽非常忠心的丁公，而封赏保护自己却愧对项羽的项伯，赏罚真的是不公平；汉光武帝封奴仆之子为不义侯，这种做法很死不可取。
English: Liu Bang, the ancestor of Han Gao, killed Ding Gong, who was very loyal to Xiang Yu, but awarded and protected himself, but he was ashamed of Xiang Yu's Xiang Bo, and the reward and punishment was really unfair; Emperor Guangwu of the Han Dynasty awarded the son of a slave as an illegitimate prince, and this practice was very undesirable.

古文：当以何真为正。
现代文：何真的做法才是最值得称道的啊。
English: What a real approach is the most commendable.

