古文：马文升，字负图，钧州人。
现代文：马文升，字负图，钧州人。
English: Ma Wensheng, character negative map, Zhangzhou people.

古文：貌瑰奇多力。
现代文：相貌奇异很有气力。
English: The strange-looking crows are very powerful.

古文：登景泰二年进士，授御史。
现代文：景泰二年，考中进士，授御史职。
English: In the second year of Jingtai, he was promoted to a scholar in the middle school entrance examination, and was awarded the post of historian.

古文：历按山西、湖广，风裁甚著。
现代文：历任山西、湖广巡按。业绩显著。
English: Successive heads of Shanxi and Hukang inspection. Outstanding performance.

古文：还领诸道章奏。
现代文：返回京师负责各道的奏章。
English: After returning to Beijing, he was put in charge of composing music for each of the schools.

古文：母丧除，超迁福建按察使。
现代文：母丧期满后越级升为福建按察使。
English: After the expiration of his mother's mourning period, Yue was promoted to Fujian A-level inspector.

古文：成化初，召为南京大理卿，以父丧归。
现代文：成化初年，被召为南京大理卿，后因父丧返乡。
English: In the first year of Chenghua, he was called to Nanjing Daliqing, and then returned home due to his father's death.

古文：满四之乱，陕西巡抚陈价下吏，即家起文升右副都御史代价。
现代文：满四之乱，陕西巡抚陈价被捕受审，朝廷起用在家服丧的马文升为右副都御史代替陈价。
English: During the Manchurian Revolt, Chen Rong, the governor of Shaanxi Province, was arrested and put on trial. The imperial court appointed Ma Wen Sheng, who was in mourning at home, as the right vice-governor to replace Chen Rong.

古文：驰至军，与总督项忠讨平之。
现代文：他急驰到军中，与总督项忠平定满四叛乱。
English: He rushed to the army and, together with the governor Xiang Zhong, put down the rebellion.

古文：事具忠传。
现代文：事迹记载在《项忠传》里。
English: His deeds are recorded in "The Legend of Xiang Zhong."

古文：录功进左副都御史，巡抚如故。
现代文：按功升为左副都御史，依旧巡抚陕西。
English: He was promoted to the left vice-governor of the capital according to his merits, and he is still the governor of Shaanxi.

古文：文升数条奏便宜，务选将练兵，修安边营至铁鞭城烽堠，剪除剧贼。
现代文：文升多次上奏条列对国家有益之事，致力于选将练兵，在从安边营到铁鞭城修筑烽火台，铲除强贼。
English: Wen Sheng repeatedly listed the things that were beneficial to the country, and was committed to selecting and training soldiers, building campfires from Anbian Camp to Tiehuicheng, and eradicating strong thieves.

古文：西固番族不即命者悉灭之。
现代文：对西固不服从命令的番族全消灭之。
English: Any tribunes who disobey orders in Xigu will be exterminated.

古文：修茶政，易番马八千有奇，以给士卒。
现代文：治理茶政，换番马八千多匹，以供应士兵使用。
English: He administered the tea ceremony, changing more than eight thousand horses to supply soldiers.

古文：文升请驻兵韦州，而设伏诸堡待之。
现代文：救济巩昌、临洮饥民，安抚流民，业绩突出。
English: The relief of the starving people in Gongchang and Linyi, and the pacification of the displaced people are outstanding achievements.

古文：遂败寇黑水口，擒其平章迭烈孙，又败之汤羊岭，斩首二百，名其岭曰： 得胜坡 ，勒石纪之而还。
现代文：当时，孛罗忽、满都鲁、加思兰年年侵犯边境。文升在韦州驻兵，而在诸堡设下埋伏，终于在黑水口打败入侵之寇，斩首二百，为其岭取名为 得胜坡 ，刻石记功而还。
English: At that time, Luohu, Manchuria, and Qaslan invaded the border every year. Wen Sheng stationed troops in Weizhou, and set up an ambush under the fortresses. Finally, he defeated the invaders in Heishikou, beheaded two hundred, named his ridge as the Victory Slope, and carved a stone to record his achievements.

古文：文升军功甚盛，奏捷不为夸张，中亦无主之者，以是赏薄。
现代文：文升立了很多军功，向朝廷上奏报捷却从不夸张，朝中亦无人为其直言叙论。
English: Wen Sheng made a lot of military achievements, but he never exaggerated when reporting his successes to the imperial court, and no one in the imperial court spoke frankly about him.

古文：至九年冬，总制王越以大捷奏，文升亦遣子琇报功。
现代文：因此得到赏赐不多。到九年冬，总制王越因为大捷向朝廷奏报，文升也派儿子马报功。
English: As a result, he received few rewards. By the winter of the ninth year, the general Wang Yue sent a report to the imperial court because of his great victory, and Wen Sheng also sent his son Ma to report his achievement.

古文：廷臣勘奏不实，坐停俸三月。
现代文：廷臣经调查核准马文升奏报不真实，罚文升停发三个月的俸禄。
English: After investigation, the courtiers approved that the report of Ma Wen's promotion was not true, and the punishment was to suspend the salary for three months.

古文：十一年春，代越总制三边军务，寻入为兵部右侍郎。
现代文：十一年春，马文升代替王越总制三边军务，不久任兵部右侍郎职。
English: In the spring of the eleventh year, Ma Wensheng replaced Wang Yue's general system of trilateral military affairs, and soon served as the right hand man of the military department.

古文：明年八月，整饬辽东军务。
现代文：第二年八月，整顿辽东军务。
English: In August of the following year, the Liaodong military affairs were reorganized.

古文：巡抚陈钺贪而狡，将士小过辄罚马，马价腾踊。
现代文：巡抚陈钺贪婪凶暴，将士稍有小过总是罚其交纳马匹，由此马价猛涨。
English: The steward Chen Qi was greedy and violent, and he always punished soldiers who were a little smaller than him by forcing them to hand over their horses. As a result, horse prices skyrocketed.

古文：文升上边计十五事，因请禁之，钺由是嗛文升。
现代文：文升上奏安定边防十五件事，因而请禁止罚马，陈钺为此对文升怀恨在心。
English: Wen Sheng reported 15 matters concerning the stabilization of the border defense, and therefore asked for a ban on punishing horses. Chen Xi harbored a grudge against Wen Sheng for this.

古文：文升还部转左。
现代文：文升回到兵部转左侍郎。
English: Wen Sheng returned to the military and became a left-hand man.

古文：十四年春，钺以掩杀冒功激变，中官汪直欲自往定之。
现代文：十四年春，陈钺由于滥杀、冒功引起激变，宦官汪直想自己去平定之。
English: In the spring of the 14th year of the Heian period, the eunuch Wang Zhizhong wanted to quell the upheaval caused by Chen Yao's indiscriminate killing and abuse of power.

古文：帝令司礼太监怀恩等七人诣内阁会兵部议。
现代文：宪宗命令司礼太监怀恩等七人到内阁会同兵部商议。
English: Kenzong ordered seven people, including the ceremonial eunuch Huai'en, to go to the cabinet and discuss with the military department.

古文：恩欲遣大臣往抚，以沮直行。
现代文：怀恩想派大臣前去安抚，以阻止汪直前往。
English: Wynne wanted to send a minister to placate Lu to stop Wang from going.

古文：文升疾应曰： 善。 
现代文：文升立刻答应道 ：好。 
English: Wen Sheng immediately agreed and said, "Good."

古文：恩入白，帝即命文升往。
现代文：怀恩回复宪宗，宪宗即命文升前往。
English: Wynn replied to Kenzong, and Kenzong immediately ordered Wen Sheng to go.

古文：直不悦，欲令其私人王英与俱，文升谢绝之。
现代文：汪直不高兴，要自己的家臣王英一起去，文升谢绝了。
English: Unhappy, Wang Zhi asked his vassal Wang Ying to go with him, but Wen Sheng refused.

古文：疾驰至镇，宣玺书抚慰，无不听抚者。
现代文：疾驰到镇，宣读圣谕抚慰众人，无人不听安抚。
English: He hurried to the town and comforted the people by reading the oracle. No one refused to be comforted.

古文：又请前以也先乱失授官玺书者十余人，得袭官。
现代文：又请求对以前因平定也先之乱失去授官、玺书的十几人，授以官职。
English: He also requested that more than a dozen people who had previously lost their posts and posts due to the suppression of the previous turmoil be granted official positions.

古文：事定，直欲攘其功，请于帝，挟王英驰至开原，再下令招抚。
现代文：事情平定后，汪直想夺其功劳，向宪宗请求后带王英驰至开原，再下令招抚。
English: After the matter was settled, Wang Zhizhong wanted to take credit for it, so he asked Xianzong to take Wang Yingchi to Kaiyuan, and then ordered him to be cajoled.

古文：文升乃推功与直，然直内惭。
现代文：文升就把功劳归于汪直，然而汪直内心有愧。
English: Wen Sheng attributed the credit to Wang Zhi, but Wang Zhi felt guilty.

古文：文升又与直抗礼，奴视其左右，直益不喜。
现代文：文升又与汪直行对等之礼，视其左右为奴，汪直更加不高兴。
English: Wen Sheng also reciprocated with Wang Zhizhong, regarding him as a slave, and Wang Zhizhong was even more unhappy.

古文：而陈钺益谄事直，得直欢。日夜谮文升，思中之未有以发也。
现代文：而陈钺更加巴结汪直，得到汪直欢心，日夜诬陷文升，意欲打击中伤文升而找不到机会发作。
English: But Chen Yao was more eager to curry favor with Wang Zhi, get Wang Zhi's favor, frame up Wensheng day and night, and want to slander Wensheng, but couldn't find a chance to attack.

古文：文升还，赐牢醴。
现代文：文升回来，赐牛羊猪三牲。
English: When Wen Sheng returned, he gave three animals, a cow, a sheep and a pig.

古文：明年春，以辽东屡失事，遣直偕定西侯蒋琬、尚书林聪等按之。
现代文：第二年春，因为辽东屡次失事，宪宗派汪直同定西侯蒋琬、尚书林聪等去巡视。
English: In the spring of the second year, because Liaodong was repeatedly wrecked, the constitutional sect Wang Zhi dong, the western lord Jiang Wei, Shang Shulin Cong and others went to inspect.

古文：会余子俊劾钺，钺疑出文升意，倾之益急。
现代文：时逢余子俊弹劾陈钺，陈钺怀疑是马文升的意图，更加紧排挤文升。
English: When Yu Zijun impeached Chen Qi, Chen Qi suspected that it was the intention of Ma Wensheng, and more tightly squeezed Wensheng.

古文：直因奏文升行事乖方，禁边人市农器，致怨叛。
现代文：汪直奏告文升行事乖僻，禁止边人买卖农具，致使边人叛乱。
English: Wang Nao issued a proclamation, forbidding the peasants to buy and sell agricultural tools, which caused the peasants to revolt.

古文：乃下文升诏狱，谪戍重庆卫。
现代文：宪宗就将文升捕入诏狱，贬去戍守重庆卫。
English: Emperor Xianzong then arrested Wen Sheng and sent him to the imperial prison, and demoted the governor Chongqing Wei.

古文：直既倾文升，则与钺大发兵激功，钺以是骤迁至尚书。
现代文：汪直已经排挤掉马文升，则与陈钺大肆发兵冒取战功，陈钺由此骤升至尚书。
English: Wang Zhi had already ousted Ma Wensheng, but he and Chen Xi sent troops to win the war, and Chen Xi suddenly rose to the top.

古文：十九年，直败，文升复官。
现代文：十九年，汪直垮台，马文升恢复官职。
English: In 1919, after the fall of Wang Zhi, Ma Wensheng resumed his official position.

古文：明年起为左副都御史巡抚辽东。
现代文：第二年被起用为左副都御史巡抚辽东。
English: The following year, he was appointed as the Left Vice-Governor of Liaodong Province.

古文：文升凡三至辽，军民闻其来皆鼓舞。
现代文：文升是第三次到辽东，辽东军民听说他要来了都欢欣鼓舞。
English: This is the third time that Wen Sheng has come to Liaodong. The military and people of Liaodong are very excited to hear that he is coming.

古文：益禁抑中官、总兵，使不得朘削，众益大喜。
现代文：文升来后进一步约束宦官，总兵不得随意克扣，人们更加高兴。
English: After the rise of the eunuchs, the eunuchs were further constrained, and the soldiers were not allowed to make any arbitrary deductions, and people were even happier.

古文：二十一年进右都御史，总督漕运。
现代文：二十一年，马文升晋职为右都御史，总督漕运。
English: In the 21st year, Ma Wen was promoted to the post of the Right Capital Imperial Historian, and the governor was promoted.

古文：淮、徐、和饥，移江南粮十万石、盐价银五万两振之。
现代文：淮安、徐州、和州发生饥荒，文升从江南调去十万石粮食、盐价银五万两救济。
English: When famine occurred in Huai'an, Xuzhou, and Hezhou, Wensheng transferred 100,000 kilos of grain and 50,000 taels of salt and silver from the south of the Yangtze River as relief.

古文：是年冬，召为兵部尚书。
现代文：这年冬天，召为兵部尚书。
English: In the winter of that year, he was called up to be a military chaplain.

古文：明年，以李孜省谮，调南京。
现代文：第二年，被李孜省诬陷，调到南京。
English: The following year, he was framed by Rizhe Province and transferred to Nanjing.

古文：孝宗即位，召拜左都御史。
现代文：孝宗即位，授马文升左都御史职。
English: Xiaozong ascended the throne, and Ma Wen was promoted to the post of Left Capital Historian.

古文：弘治元年上言： 宪宗朝，岳镇海渎诸庙，用方士言置石函，周以符篆，贮金书道经、金银钱、宝石及五谷为厌胜具，宜毁。 
现代文：弘治元年，上言道： 宪宗朝，岳镇、海渎诸神庙，采用方士的话放置石匣子，周围环绕符，贮存金书道经、金银钱、宝石以及五谷作为压邪物，应该销毁。 
English: In the first year of the Hongzhi era, the Shang Dynasty said: the temples of the Xianzong Dynasty, Yue Zhen, Hai Zhe and other deities should be destroyed by using the words of the magicians to place a stone box, surrounded by characters, to store the golden book of Taoism, gold and silver money, precious stones and grain as embossed objects.

古文：从之。
现代文：意见被接纳。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：又上言十五事，悉议行。
现代文：他又上言十五件事，经过讨论后全都付诸实行。
English: He also proposed 15 things, all of which were put into practice after discussion.

古文：帝耕藉田，教坊以杂戏进。
现代文：孝宗仿古天子亲耕籍田，教坊进献杂剧。
English: Xiaozong imitated the ancient heavenly son and personally cultivated the family farm, and donated miscellaneous plays to the school.

古文：文升正色曰： 新天子当使知稼穑艰难，此何为者？ 
现代文：文升严肃地说： 新任天子应当知道农事的艰难，演戏是什么意思？ 
English: Wen Sheng said seriously: The new godson should know the hardships of farming. What does acting mean?

古文：即斥去。
现代文：孝宗立即赶走教坊人员。
English: Xiaozong immediately drove away the teaching staff.

古文：御史徐瑁、贺霖失承旨下狱。
现代文：御史徐瑁、贺霖因没顺从皇帝的旨意被下狱。
English: Emperor Shi, Emperor Xu and Emperor Horin were sent to prison for disobeying the emperor's order.

古文：文升言初政不宜辄罪言官，遂得释。
现代文：文升说天子初政不宜立即惩罚言官，徐、贺被释放。
English: Wen Sheng said that it was not appropriate to immediately punish the spokesman, and Xu and He were released.

古文：寻命提督十二团营。
现代文：不久孝宗命文升提督十二团营。
English: Soon after, Takamune ordered Admiral Bunsen to lead the 12th battalion.

古文：明年，代余子俊为兵部尚书，督团营如故。
现代文：第二年，代余子俊为兵部尚书，仍督团营。
English: In the second year, the deputy Yu Zijun was the secretary of the military department, and he was still in charge of the regimental camp.

古文：承平既久，兵政废弛，西北部落时伺塞下。
现代文：当时天下持久太平、兵政荒废松弛、西北部落少数民族时时伺机入侵。
English: At that time, the country was in a state of long-lasting peace, the military and political situation was slack, and the ethnic minorities in the northwest were always waiting for an opportunity to invade.

古文：文升严核诸将校，黜贪懦者三十余人。奸人大怨，夜持弓矢伺其门，或作谤书射入东长安门内。
现代文：文升严格考查将校，贬退三十余个贪婪懦弱的军官，奸人对他十分怨恨，夜间持弓伺其门旁，有的写谤书射入东长安门内。
English: Wen Sheng strictly examined the officers and demoted more than thirty greedy and cowardly officers. The traitors were very resentful of him. At night, they held a bow and waited by his door. Some slanderous books were shot into the Dongchang'an Gate.

古文：帝闻，诏锦衣缉捕，给骑士十二，卫文升出入。
现代文：孝宗知道了，诏锦衣卫缉捕，给文升二十二个骑士，保卫他进出。
English: When Xiaozong learned of this, he ordered the arrest of the guards and gave Wen Sheng twenty-two knights to guard his entrance and exit.

古文：文升乞休，优诏不许。
现代文：文升请求退休，孝宗下诏慰留不许。
English: Wen Sheng requested to retire, and Xiaozong issued an edict forbidding him to stay.

古文：小王子以数万骑牧大同塞下，势汹汹。
现代文：小王子率数万骑兵在大同塞下游牧，气势汹汹。
English: The Little Prince led tens of thousands of cavalrymen to roam the countryside of Datong.

古文：文升以疾在告，帝使中官挟医视，因就问计。
现代文：文升因病休假，孝宗派宦官带太医去探视，借此问计。
English: Wen Sheng was on leave due to illness, and the eunuchs of the Xiaozong sect took the great doctor to visit, taking advantage of this to make a plan.

古文：文升谓 彼方败于他部，无能为。请密为备，而扬声逼之，必徙去。 
现代文：文升说小王子被别的部落才打败不久，没有什么作为，请暗地做些防备，而在外则虚张声势地威慑之，那么小王子必定会离去。
English: Wen Sheng said that it was not long before the little prince was defeated by another tribe, and there was nothing to be done. Please make some precautions secretly, and bluff and intimidate him outside, then the little prince will surely leave.

古文：已而果然。
现代文：按计实行，果然如此。
English: Afterward, it really was like that.

古文：遭继母忧，诏起复，再疏辞，不许。
现代文：文升的继母去世，孝宗下诏起用他，文升二次上疏推辞，都得不到允准。
English: When Wen Sheng's stepmother passed away, Xiaozong issued an edict to use him, but Wen Sheng's second resignation was not allowed.

古文：西北别部野乜克力，其长曰亦剌思王，曰满哥王，曰亦剌因王，各遣使款肃州塞，乞贡且互市。
现代文：西北别部野乜克力的首领分别称为亦刺思王、满哥王、亦刺因王，他们各遣使到肃州边界，请求进贡并且开互市贸易。
English: The leaders of the barbarians in the northwestern part of the country were respectively known as Yizanshi Wang, Mango Wang, and Yizain Wang. They each sent envoys to the border of Suizhou to request tribute and open trade between the two cities.

古文：巡抚许进、总兵官刘宁为请，文升言互市可许，入贡不可许，乃却之。
现代文：巡抚许进、总兵刘宁代其请求，文升说互市可以，入贡不行。入贡之请就推辞了。
English: The governor, Xu Jin, and the general soldier, Liu Ning, came on behalf of his request. Wen Sheng said that the exchange of markets was acceptable, but the payment of tribute was not. The request to pay tribute was rejected.

古文：土鲁番既袭执陕巴，而令牙兰据守哈密，僣称可汗，侵沙州，迫罕东诸部附己。
现代文：吐鲁番袭击占领了陕巴，而命令牙兰据守哈密，僭称可汗，入侵沙州，迫使罕东诸部依附自己。
English: Turpan attacked and occupied Shaanxi and Ba, and ordered Galan to hold Hami, nicknamed Khan, to invade Shazhou, forcing the eastern provinces of Khandong to adhere to him.

古文：文升议，此寇桀骜，不大创终不知畏，宜用汉陈汤故事袭斩之。
现代文：马文升说此寇凶暴乖戾，不给他重创就不知道害怕，宜用汉代陈汤旧例袭斩之。
English: Ma Wensheng said that this robber was vicious and mischievous, and he would not know to be afraid without giving him a heavy blow. It is appropriate to attack and kill him with the old example of Han Dynasty Chen Tang.

古文：察指挥杨翥熟番情，召询以方略。
现代文：了解到指挥杨翥熟悉番情，召杨询问对付的办法。
English: Knowing that the conductor Yang Wei was familiar with the situation, he called Yang to inquire about how to deal with it.

古文：翥备陈罕东至哈密道路，请调罕东兵三千为前锋，汉兵三千继之，持数日粮，间道兼程进，可得志。
现代文：杨翥详细地陈述从罕东到哈密的道路，要求调罕东的三千兵为前锋，三千汉兵随后，带上数日的口粮，从小路兼程急进，则可以获胜。
English: Yang Hui gave a detailed account of the road from Handong to Hami, and demanded that the three thousand soldiers from Handong should be transferred to the front, and the three thousand Han soldiers should then take a few days of rations and make a rapid advance from the side road, and then they could win.

古文：文升喜，遂请于帝，敕发罕东、赤斤、哈密兵，令副总兵彭清将之，隶巡抚许进往讨，果克之，语详《进传》。
现代文：文升大喜，于是向孝宗汇报，孝宗下诏调罕东、赤斤、哈密的军队，命令副总兵彭清率领，隶属于巡抚许进前去进讨，果然打败牙兰，详情载于《许进传》。
English: Wen Sheng was overjoyed, so he reported to Xiaozong. Xiaozong ordered the troops of Handong, Chakjin, and Hami to march forward, and ordered the vice-chief soldier Peng Qing, who was subordinate to the governor Xu, to march forward and defeat Fang Lan. The details are recorded in "The Legend of Xu Jin."

古文：团营军不足，请于锦衣及腾骧四卫中选补。
现代文：团营军士不足，请求从锦衣卫及腾骧四卫中选补。
English: There is a shortage of regimental sergeants, and it is requested that replacements be selected from the ranks of brocade guards and ruffled guards.

古文：已得请矣，中官宁瑾阻之。
现代文：已获批准，宦官宁瑾从中阻挠。
English: It was approved, but the eunuch Ning Xi blocked it.

古文：文升及兵科蔚春等言诏旨宜信，不纳。
现代文：文升及兵科蔚春等说诏旨应讲信用，意见没被接纳。
English: Wen Sheng and Wei Chun of the People's Commissariat of Military Science and Technology said that the edict should be trustworthy, but their opinions were not accepted.

古文：陕西地大震。文升言： 此外寇侵凌之兆。
现代文：陕西发生大地震，文升道 ：这是外寇入侵的征兆。
English: A major earthquake occurred in Shaanxi, Wen Shengdao: This is a sign of foreign invasion.

古文：今火筛方跳梁，而海内民困财竭，将懦兵弱。
现代文：现在火筛正强横，而国内民困财竭，将懦兵弱。
English: Now the fire is raging, and the domestic people are poor and exhausted, and the soldiers are weak.

古文：宜行仁政以养民，讲武备以固圉。
现代文：宜实行仁政来养活人民，研究武备用以巩固边防。
English: It is advisable to implement benevolent policies to feed the people, and to study military equipment to consolidate border defense.

古文：节财用，停斋醮，止传奉冗员，禁奏乞闲地。日视二朝，以勤庶政。
现代文：节省开支，停办斋醮，消除传奉冗员，禁止奏求闲地，每天视朝两次，勤于政务。
English: Save expenses, stop holding fasts, eliminate redundant personnel, prohibit seeking idle land, visit North Korea twice a day, and be diligent in government affairs.

古文：且撤还陕西织造内臣，振恤被灾者家。 
现代文：并且撤回陕西织造内臣，救济抚恤受灾人家。 
English: And withdraw Shaanxi Weaving Naishin, relief and compensation for disaster victims.

古文：帝纳其言，内臣立召还。
现代文：孝宗接纳他的建议，立即召回内臣。
English: Takamune accepted his suggestion and immediately recalled his vassal.

古文：文升为兵部十三年，尽心戎务，于屯田、马政、边备、守御，数条上便宜。
现代文：文升在兵部任职十三年，尽心军务，他多次向上条陈关于屯田、马政、边备、守御等应办的事。
English: During the thirteen years that Wen Sheng served in the Ministry of Military Affairs, he devoted himself to military affairs. He repeatedly reported to his superiors on matters that needed to be dealt with, such as military garrisons, horse politics, border preparations, and defense.

古文：国家事当言者，即非职守，亦言无不尽。尝以太子年及四龄，当早谕教。
现代文：只要是对国家有利的，即使并非他本职守，也言无不尽，曾经因为太子年已四岁，应该及早进行教育。
English: As long as it is beneficial to the country, even if it is not his duty, it is inexhaustible. Once, because the prince was four years old, he should be educated early.

古文：请择醇谨老成知书史如卫圣杨夫人者，保抱扶持，凡言语动止悉导之以正。
现代文：文升请求挑选淳朴严谨、老成又熟悉历史的人，如卫圣、杨地等人，由他们教育扶持太子，对太子言语举止都要引导。
English: Wen Sheng requested that people who are simple and rigorous, experienced and familiar with history, such as Wei Sheng and Yang Di, be selected to educate and support the prince, and to guide the prince's speech and behavior.

古文：若内庭曲宴，钟鼓司承应，元宵鳌山，端午竞渡诸戏，皆勿令见。
现代文：像内廷举办的宫宴、钟鼓司的活动，元宵放花灯、端午划船等游乐活动都勿让太子见到。
English: Do not let the prince see the palace banquets held by the Inner Court, the activities of the bell and drum players, the lanterns on the Lantern Festival, the rowing at the Dragon Boat Festival and other recreational activities.

古文：至于佛、老之教，尤宜屏绝，恐惑眩心志。
现代文：至于佛老之教，尤其应当摒绝，以防惑乱太子心志。
English: As for the Buddha's teachings, they should especially be abandoned in order to prevent the prince's mind from being confused.

古文：山东久旱，浙江及南畿水灾，文升请命所司振恤，练士卒以备不虞。
现代文：山东久旱无雨，浙江以及南畿发生水灾，马文升奏请命有关部门救济抚恤，操练士卒以备不测。
English: Shandong has been dry for a long time without rain, floods have occurred in Zhejiang and Nanki, and Ma Wen Sheng Song has requested the relevant departments to provide relief and pensions. Drill sergeants should be prepared for any eventuality.

古文：帝皆深纳之。
现代文：奏言都为孝宗接纳。
English: All the speeches were accepted by Takamune.

古文：民困赋役，文升极陈其害，谓： 今民田十税四五，其输边塞者粮一石费银一两以上，丰年用粮八九石方易一两。若丝绵布帛之输京师者，交纳之费过于所输，南方转漕通州至有三四石致一石者。
现代文：百姓为赋役所苦，文升全面地陈述赋役过重的弊害，他说 ：现在民田收十分之四五的税，百姓运粮到边塞一石花费一两以上的银子，丰年八九石粮换一两银子，像丝绵布帛运到京师的，沿途费用超过所运物的价格，南方通过水路运粮到通州，要花三、四石才能送到一石。
English: Wen Sheng comprehensively described the evils of over-taxation. He said, "Nowadays, people's fields are taxed at 45/10, and people spend more than one or two kilos of silver to transport grain to the frontier. In the good year of 1989, grain was exchanged for one or two kilos of silver. When grain was transported to Beijing, the cost along the way exceeded the price of the transported goods. In the south, grain was transported to Tongzhou by waterway, and it cost three or four kilos to transport one kilo.

古文：中州岁役五六万人治河，山东、河南修塞决口夫不下二十万，苏、松治水亦如之。
现代文：中州每年役使五六万人治理黄河，山东、河南修堵决口不下二十万人，苏州府、松江府治水也如此。
English: Every year, 50,000 to 60,000 people from Zhongzhou work to control the Yellow River, and 200,000 people from Shandong and Henan work to fix blockages, and the same is true for water control in Suzhou and Songjiang.

古文：湖广建吉、兴、岐、雍四王府，江西益、寿二府，山东衡府，通计役夫不下百万。诸王之国役夫供应亦四十万。
现代文：湖广建吉、兴、岐、雍四王府，江西益、寿二府，山东衡府共计役夫不下百万，诸王封地供应的役夫也有四十万。
English: The four royal capitals of Hubei, Guangxi, Jianji, Xing, Qi and Yong, Jiangxi, Yixing, Shouji and Shandong Heng have a total of no less than one million servants, and there are also 400,000 servants supplied by the fiefdoms of the kings.

古文：加以湖广征蛮，山、陕防边，供馈饷给军旅者又不知凡几。
现代文：加以湖广征讨蛮族，山西、陕西边防，给军队供应粮饷的又不知有多少。
English: With the addition of the Lake Guangzheng Campaign to fight barbarians, Shanxi and Shaanxi border defense, I don't know how many people supply grain to the army.

古文：赋重役繁，未有甚于此时者也。
现代文：赋税重差役繁多，没有比此时再厉害的了。
English: There are many tax inspectors, and none is more powerful than this one.

古文：宜严敕内外诸司，省烦费，宽力役，毋擅有科率，王府之工宜速竣。庶令困敝少苏。
现代文：宜严令内外各部门，免去多余的花费，减少力役，毋擅自摊派。王府的工程应该迅速完工，就可能使困难局面得到缓和。
English: It is advisable to strictly order all departments at home and abroad to eliminate unnecessary expenses, reduce manpower, and allocate without authorization. The project of the royal palace should be completed quickly, which may alleviate the difficult situation.

古文：更乞崇正学，抑邪术，以清圣心；节财用，省工作，以培邦本。 
现代文：请求崇尚儒学，抑制邪术，以便清静圣心；节省花费，减少土木营造工程，以培植国家的根本。 
English: The request is to advocate Confucianism, suppress magic, so as to calm the sacred heart; save costs, reduce civil engineering projects, and cultivate the foundation of the country.

古文：诏下所司详议。
现代文：孝宗命将他的奏章下到有关部门详细讨论。
English: Takamune ordered that his report be sent to the relevant departments for detailed discussion.

古文：他所论奏者甚众。
现代文：马文升发表议论最多。
English: Ma Wensheng made the most comments.

古文：在班列中最为耆硕，帝亦推心任之。
现代文：他在班列中年高又有德望，孝宗也十分信任他。
English: He was a senior in his class and had a good reputation, and Takamune trusted him very much.

古文：自太子太保屡加至少保兼太子太傅，岁时赐赉，诸大臣莫敢望也。
现代文：从太子太保屡加至少保兼太子太傅，经常给他赏赐，诸大臣无人敢有怨言。
English: From Prince Taibo to at least concurrently Prince Taifu, he was often rewarded, and none of the ministers dared to complain.

古文：吏部尚书屠滽罢，廷推文升。
现代文：吏部尚书屠氵庸被罢免，廷议推举文升代替。
English: The head of the personnel department, Shangshu Tu Rongyong, was removed from his post, and the court recommended that he be replaced by Wen Sheng.

古文：御史魏英等言兵部非文升不可，帝亦以为然。
现代文：而御史魏英等说兵部非文升不可，孝宗也这样认为。
English: However, Goshi Wei Ying and others said that promotion to the military department was not possible without promotion to the civil service, and Takamune also thought so.

古文：乃命倪岳代滽，而加文升少傅以慰之。
现代文：就命倪岳任吏部尚书，而加封文升少傅来安慰他。
English: He ordered Ni Yue to be appointed as the official of the Ministry of Letters, and he was comforted by Gaofen Wen Sheng Shao Fu.

古文：岳卒，以文升代。
现代文：倪岳去世，由马文升代替倪岳任吏部尚书。
English: After Ni Yue's death, Ma Wensheng took over Ni Yue's position as Secretary of the General Staff.

古文：南京、凤阳大风雨坏屋拔木，文升请帝减膳撤乐，修德省愆，御经筵，绝游宴；停不急务，止额外织造；振饥民，捕盗贼。
现代文：南京、凤阳发生大风雨，房屋被毁坏，树木被风拔起来，马文升请求孝宗减食撤乐，修德反省过失，开御前讲席，断绝游玩和宴饮，停办非急务之事，停止额外织造，赈济灾民，捕捉盗贼。
English: A heavy storm occurred in Nanjing and Fengyang. Houses were destroyed and trees were uprooted by the wind. Ma Wensheng asked Xiaozong to cut down on food and entertainment, reflect on his faults, open a lecture hall before the imperial court, cut off travel and banqueting, stop non-urgent matters, stop extra weaving, help the victims, and catch thieves.

古文：已，又上吏部职掌十事。
现代文：事后，文升又奏陈吏部主管的十件事。
English: After the fact, Wen Sheng also played the ten things of the head of the Chen Li Department.

古文：帝悉褒纳。
现代文：孝宗全都表示赞赏并接纳之。
English: All the members of the filial piety expressed their appreciation and accepted it.

古文：一品九载满，加少师兼太子太师。
现代文：文升任一品官满了九年，加封为少师兼太子太师。
English: It has been nine years since Wen was promoted to first-class official, and he has been awarded the title of junior teacher and prince's teacher.

古文：帝以将考察，特召文升及都御史戴珊、史琳至暖阁，谕以秉公黜陟。
现代文：由于要对将官进行考察，孝宗特召文升及都御史戴珊、史琳到暖阁，告诫大家秉公升降。
English: As he wanted to inspect the generals, Xiaozong specially called Wen Sheng, and the governors of the capital, Shi Daishan and Shilin, to Nengge, and admonished everyone to uphold justice in promotion and demotion.

古文：又以文升年高重听，再呼告之，命左右掖之下阶。
现代文：因为文升年老听力减退，又再次高声告诉他，命左右搀扶文升下台阶。
English: Because Wen Sheng's old age hearing loss, he once again loudly told him that he had to help Wen Sheng down the steps.

古文：始文升为都御史，王恕在吏部，两人皆以正直任天下事。
现代文：起初文升为都御史，王恕在吏部，两人都处事刚直不阿。
English: At first, Wen Sheng was in charge of the capital's history, and Wang Shou was in charge of the personnel department. Both of them were very straightforward.

古文：疏出，天下传诵。
现代文：他们起草的疏一发出，天下传诵。
English: The report was issued and read and recited all over the world.

古文：恕去，人望皆归文升。
现代文：王恕离开后，声望都集中于马文升。
English: After Wang Shu left, all the credit went to Ma Wensheng.

古文：迨为吏部，年已八十。
现代文：到他在吏部任职时，已经八十岁。
English: By the time he took up his post in the Personnel Department, he was already eighty years old.

古文：修髯长眉，遇事侃侃不少衰。
现代文：长须修眉，遇事侃侃而论不减当年。
English: Long beards, trimmed eyebrows, and the ability to be outspoken in the face of adversity.

古文：孝宗崩，文升承遗诏请汰传奉官七百六十三人，命留太仆卿李纶等十七人，余尽汰之。
现代文：孝宗去世，马文升奉遗诏向武宗请求淘汰传奉官七百六十三人，武宗下令除留太仆卿李纶等十七人外，其余的全部淘汰。
English: After the death of Emperor Xiaozong, Ma Wensheng sent his last will and testament to Emperor Wu Zong to request the elimination of 763 missionaries. Emperor Wu ordered the elimination of all of the remaining missionaries except for 17 who were retained, including the eunuch Li Xi.

古文：正德元年，御用监中官王瑞复请用新汰者七人，文升不奉诏。
现代文：正德元年，御用监宦官王瑞要求任用新近被淘汰的七人，文升不接武宗下的诏书。
English: In the first year of the Zhengde era, Wang Rui, the imperial eunuch, demanded the appointment of seven newly eliminated people, and Wen Sheng did not accept the edict of Emperor Wu.

古文：给事中安奎刺得瑞纳贿状，劾之。
现代文：给事中安奎探听到王瑞受贿，弹劾王瑞。
English: During the case, Ankui investigators heard that Wang Rui accepted bribes and impeached Wang Rui.

古文：瑞恚，诬文升抗旨，更下廷议，皆是文升，帝终不听。文升因乞归，不许。
现代文：王瑞十分怀恨，诬告文升违抗圣旨，再下廷议，皆以文升之言为是，武宗终究不听，文升因此请求返乡，未得允准。
English: Wang Rui held a grudge and falsely accused Wensheng of defying the holy will. After the court deliberated, they all agreed that Wensheng's words were true. However, Emperor Wu did not listen. Wensheng therefore requested to return home, but was not allowed to do so.

古文：是时，朝政已移于中官，文升老，日怀去志。
现代文：这时，朝政已转移到宦官手里，文升年老，天天怀着离去的念头。
English: At this time, the imperial government had been transferred to the hands of eunuchs, and Wen Sheng was old, and every day he harbored the thought of leaving.

古文：会两广缺总督，文升推兵部侍郎熊绣。
现代文：时逢两广缺总督，文升推举兵部侍郎熊绣。
English: When the two provinces were short of a governor, Wen Sheng chose to promote the military servant Xiong Xiu.

古文：绣怏怏不欲出，其乡人御史何天衢遂劾文升徇私欺罔。
现代文：熊绣心中不愿意出任，熊的同乡御史何天衢就弹劾文升为徇私欺骗蒙蔽。
English: Xiongxiu did not want to take up the post in his heart, and Xiong's fellow townsman, Gishi Ho Tianyao, impeached Wensheng for being a selfish deceiver.

古文：文升连疏求去，许之。
现代文：文升接连上疏要求离开，武宗答应了。
English: Wen Sheng successively asked Shang Shou to leave, and Wu Zong agreed.

古文：赐玺书、乘传，月廪岁隶有加。
现代文：赐他玺书、马车，增加月粮和每年役奴。
English: He gave him a scribe, a carriage, an increase in monthly rations, and an annual stipend.

古文：家居，非事未尝入州城。
现代文：文升在家居住时，无事不去州府。
English: When Wen Sheng lived at home, there was no need to go to the state capital.

古文：语及时事，辄颦蹙不答。
现代文：外人谈及时事，他总是皱着眉头不回答。
English: When asked about current affairs by outsiders, he always frowns and does not answer.

古文：居三年，刘瑾乱政，坐文升前用雍泰为朋党，除其名。
现代文：在家住了三年，刘瑾乱政，说文升以前用雍泰为朋党，除去文升官籍。
English: After living at home for three years, Liu Bei threw the government into chaos, saying that Wen Sheng had previously used Yongtai as a friend, and removed Wen Sheng's official status.

古文：五年六月卒，年八十五。
现代文：五年六月去世，终年八十五岁。
English: He passed away in June 2005, at the age of 85.

古文：瑾诛，复官，赠特进光禄大夫、太傅，谥端肃。
现代文：刘瑾被诛杀，恢复文升官衔，追赠特进、光禄大夫、太傅，谥号端肃。
English: Liu Xuan was killed, and his title of "Wen Sheng" was restored, and he was posthumously given the titles of "Special Promotion," "Doctor Guanglu" and "Grand Master," and his posthumous name was changed to "Dang Su."

古文：文升有文武才，长于应变，朝端大议往往待之决。
现代文：文升文武双全，擅长应付事变，朝中大事往往由他决断。
English: He is good at coping with events, and he often makes decisions on important matters between the two Koreas.

古文：功在边镇，外国皆闻其名。尤重气节，厉廉隅，直道而行。虽遭谗诟，屡起屡仆，迄不少贬。
现代文：建功在边镇，国外都知道他，文升尤其注重气节，品行端方不苟，一生走正直之道，虽然遭到诬陷，几起几落，正气终究不减。
English: He has made great achievements in the border town and is well-known abroad. Wen Sheng pays special attention to his temperament, his behavior is punctilious, and he follows the path of honesty throughout his life. Although he has been framed, there have been several ups and downs, and his integrity has not diminished.

古文：子璁，以乡贡士待选吏部，文升使请外，曰： 必大臣子而京秩，谁当外者？ 
现代文：儿子马璁，以乡贡士等待吏部选拔，文升要其子请求在京城以外任职，文升说： 大臣的儿子都在京为官，哪个应该任地方官？ 
English: His son, Ma Jun, is waiting for the selection of the cadre department with the township gongs. Wen Sheng asked his son to request a post outside Beijing. Wen Sheng said: The sons of the minister are all in Beijing, which one should be the local official?

古文：卒后逾年，大盗赵鐩等剽河南，至钧州，以文升家在，舍之去。
现代文：他去世一年后，大盗赵钅遂等抢劫河南，到了钧州，因为马文升的家在此地，即舍之而去。
English: A year after his death, the great robber Zhao Shuxu and others robbed Henan and went to Zhangzhou, because the home of Ma Wensheng was in this place.

古文：攻泌阳，毁焦芳家，束草若芳像裂之。
现代文：进攻泌阳，放火烧了焦芳的家，用草扎成焦芳像碎裂之。
English: The attack seeped into the sun, set fire to Jiao Fang's home, and used grass to make Jiao Fang look like a splinter.

古文：嘉靖初，加赠文升左柱国、太师。
现代文：嘉靖初年，加赠文升左柱国、太师。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Jiajing, he was also awarded the title of "Wen Sheng Zuozhu Guo" and "Taishi."

古文：刘大夏，字时雍，华容人。
现代文：刘大夏，字时雍，湖南华容人。
English: Liu Daxia, the character Shi Yong, Hunan Huarong people.

古文：父仁宅，由乡举知瑞昌县。
现代文：父亲刘仁宅由乡试举人任职为瑞昌知县。
English: His father, Liu Renzhai, was appointed by the township as a candidate for Ruichang County.

古文：流民千余家匿山中，逻者索赂不得，诬民反。众议加兵。仁宅单骑招之，民争出诉，遂罢兵，擢广西副使。
现代文：一千多家流民匿藏在山中，巡逻兵士索取不到财物，就诬告流民谋反，朝官商议增加军队，刘仁宅单人骑马前去招抚，流民争着出山诉说实情，最后停止出兵，刘仁宅被提升为广西副使。
English: More than a thousand refugees were hiding in the mountains. When the patrolling soldiers couldn't get their belongings, they falsely accused the refugees of plotting a rebellion. The North Korean officials discussed increasing the number of troops. Liu Renzhao rode alone to meet them. The refugees fought to get out of the mountains to tell the truth, and finally stopped sending troops. Liu Renzhao was promoted to deputy envoy to Guangxi.

古文：大夏年二十举乡试第一。
现代文：刘大夏二十岁以乡试第一名中举。
English: At the age of twenty, Liu Daxia won the first place in the village test.

古文：登天顺八年进士，改庶吉士。
现代文：天顺八年，考中进士，选为庶吉士。
English: In the eighth year of Tianshun, he passed the junior high school entrance examination and was selected as an associate member.

古文：成化初，馆试当留，自请试吏。乃除职方主事，再迁郎中。明习兵事，曹中宿弊尽革。
现代文：成化初年，翰林院拟请留职，他自己要求出任吏职，于是就任命他为职方主事，又调升郎中，通晓兵事，宫署里的积弊全都革除。
English: In the first year of Chenghua, Hanlin Academy planned to ask him to stay on the post, and he himself asked to serve as an official, so he appointed him as the head of the official party, and promoted him to junior middle, knowledgeable about military affairs, and eliminated all the accumulated defects in the Imperial Household Agency.

古文：所奏覆多当上意，尚书倚之若左右手。
现代文：他所奏复的大多很合皇帝的旨意，尚书把他当作左右手。
English: Most of his replies were in line with the emperor's wishes, and Shangshu regarded him as his right and left hand.

古文：汪直好边功，以安南黎灏败于老挝，欲乘间取之。
现代文：汪直好邀边功，安南黎灏被老挝打败，汪直想趁机攻取黎灏。
English: Wang Ziying invited Bian Gong, Annan and Lê Th were defeated by Laos, and Wang Ziying wanted to seize the opportunity to capture Lê Th.

古文：言于帝，索永乐间讨安南故牍。
现代文：他对宪宗说了，就索取永乐年间讨伐安南的文书。
English: When he said this to Kenzong, he asked for the documents of the Annamese campaign during the Yongle Dynasty.

古文：大夏匿弗予，密告尚书余子俊曰： 兵衅一开，西南立糜烂矣。 
现代文：刘大夏藏着不给，并秘密地向尚书余子俊说： 兵祸一开，西南立刻就完了。 
English: Liu Daxia did not give in, and secretly said to Shangshu Yu Zijun: Once the war breaks out, the Southwest will be over immediately.

古文：子俊悟，事得寝。
现代文：子俊醒悟，这事情遂得停止。
English: Zojun came to his senses, and the incident had to be stopped.

古文：朝鲜贡道故由鸦鹘关，至是请改由鸭绿江。
现代文：朝鲜以前入贡都是从鸦鹘关进来，这时要求改从鸭绿江进入。
English: Previously, North Korea's tribute came from the Ogre Pass, but at this time it was requested to enter from the Yalu River.

古文：尚书将许之，大夏曰： 鸭绿道径，祖宗朝岂不知，顾纡回数大镇，此殆有微意。
现代文：尚书准备答应其请求，大夏说： 鸭绿江的通道，祖宗朝岂有不知的，而从鸦鹘关开道迂回几个大镇，这恐怕另有深意。
English: Shangshu was ready to agree to his request. Daxia said, "Our ancestors must have known about the passage of the Yalu River, but the opening of the road from Oulong Pass to bypass several large towns may have another meaning.

古文：不可许。 
现代文：不能批准。 
English: It can't be approved.

古文：乃止。
现代文：此请未获明政府同意。
English: He dismissed the idea.

古文：中官阿九者，其兄任京卫经历，以罪为大夏所笞。
现代文：宦官阿九的哥哥任京卫经历，因犯罪被大夏处以笞刑。
English: The eunuch Ah Jiu's older brother, Ren Jingwei, was punished by Daxia with whipping for a crime.

古文：宪宗入其谮，捕系诏狱，令东厂侦之无所得。
现代文：阿九怀恨在心，宪宗听信了其对大夏的诬陷之言，将大夏抓起来下到诏狱，经东厂侦察无所得。
English: Ah Jiu harbored hatred in his heart, and Gensong believed his words of framing Daxia, arrested Daxia and sent him to the imperial prison, but there was no result from the East Factory's reconnaissance.

古文：会怀恩力救，乃杖二十而释之。
现代文：赶上怀恩极力相救，被判杖二十而释放。
English: He caught up with Wynn and tried his best to save him, but was sentenced to 20 strokes of the cane and released.

古文：十九年，迁福建右参政，以政绩闻。
现代文：十九年，调升福建右参政，以政绩突出而闻名。
English: In 1919, he was promoted to Fujian right-wing politician, and was known for his outstanding political achievements.

古文：闻父讣，一宿即行。
现代文：大夏听说父亲去世，一宿就动身奔丧。
English: When Daxia heard that his father had passed away, he went to his father's funeral.

古文：弘治二年服阕，迁广东右布政使。
现代文：弘治二年，大夏服满，调升广东右布政使。
English: In the second year of Hongzhi, after the summer vacation, he was promoted to Guangdong Ubu political envoy.

古文：田州、泗城不靖，大夏往谕，遂顺命。
现代文：田州、泗城不安定，大夏前往告诫，事情很顺利地解决了。
English: Tianzhou and Handan were unstable, and Daxia went to warn them, and the matter was resolved very smoothly.

古文：后山贼起，承檄讨之。
现代文：后山贼起，大夏奉檄文讨伐。
English: After the mountain bandits began to attack, Daxia Feng Rongwen led a crusade.

古文：令获贼必生致，验实乃坐，得生者过半。
现代文：他令部下只许活捉，验明为贼才杀，有一半人获得生还。
English: He ordered his subordinates only to capture them alive and kill them only after verifying that they were thieves. Half of them survived.

古文：改左，移浙江。
现代文：改为左布政使，调往浙江。
English: He was transferred to Zhejiang Province.

古文：六年春，河决张秋，诏博选才臣往治。
现代文：六年春，黄河在张秋堤防决口，皇帝下诏博选才臣前往治理。
English: In the spring of the sixth year, the Yellow River was at the Zhangqiu dike breach, and the emperor ordered Bo Xingcai to go to the governance.

古文：吏部尚书王恕等以大夏荐，擢右副都御史以行。
现代文：吏部尚书王恕等推荐刘大夏，提升大夏为右副都御史前往。
English: Liu Daxia was recommended by Shangshu Wangshu and others in the Personnel Department, and promoted to the post of Right Vice-Governor of the Capital.

古文：乃自黄陵冈浚贾鲁河，复浚孙家渡、四府营上流，以分水势。
现代文：到职后，在黄陵冈疏通贾鲁河，又疏通孙家渡和四府营上游，以分水势。
English: After taking office, he dredged the Jalu River in Huanglinggang, and also dredged the upper reaches of Sunjiadu and Shifuying to divide the water.

古文：而筑长堤，起胙城历东明、长垣抵徐州，亘三百六十里。
现代文：从胙城经过东明、长垣到徐州修筑长堤，共三百六十里长。
English: A long embankment was built from Shicheng through Dongming and Nagagaki to Xuzhou, with a total length of 360 miles.

古文：水大治，更名张秋镇曰 安平镇 。
现代文：水灾得到根治，张秋镇改名为 安平镇 。
English: The floods have been completely cured, and Zhangqiu Town has been renamed Anping Town.

古文：孝宗嘉之，赐玺书褒美，语详《河渠志》。
现代文：孝宗嘉奖大夏，赐玺书褒奖他，详载《河渠志》。
English: Xiaozong commended Daxia and gave him a book to praise him, the details of which are recorded in the "History of Rivers and Canals."

古文：召为左副都御史，历户部左侍郎。
现代文：召他为左副都御史，任职户部左侍郎。
English: He was appointed as the Left Vice-Governor of the Capital, and served as the Left Attendant of the Household.

古文：十年命兼左佥都御史，往理宣府兵饷。
现代文：十年大夏受命兼佥都御史，前往宣府处理兵饷。
English: In the summer of the tenth year, he was ordered to be the governor of the capital and went to Xuanwu to deal with the soldiers.

古文：尚书周经谓曰： 塞上势家子以市籴为私利，公毋以刚贾祸。 
现代文：尚书周经对他说： 塞上有权势家族的子弟以买卖粮食谋取私利，你不要因刚直招祸。 
English: Shangshu Zhoujing said to him, "Don't invite misfortune because you are the son of a powerful family by trading grain for personal gain.

古文：大夏曰： 处天下事，以理不以势，俟至彼图之。 
现代文：大夏说： 处理天下事，以理不以势，待我到后解决。 
English: Daxia said, "In dealing with world affairs, it is best to deal with the situation rationally, and wait until I arrive to resolve it."

古文：初，塞上籴买必粟千石、刍万束乃得告纳，以故，中官、武臣家得操利权。
现代文：当初，塞上必须粟千石方能买入、草万束才得收进。由此宦官、武臣得以操纵市场，获取厚利。
English: At first, it was necessary to buy a thousand koku of millet before putting it on the market, and a thousand bunches of grass before receiving it. Thus, eunuchs and vassals were able to manipulate the market and gain hefty profits.

古文：大夏令有刍粟者，自百束十石以上皆许，势家欲牟利无所得。
现代文：大夏下令有粮草的，草百束、粟十石以上都准许买卖，权势之家想牟利也落了空。
English: Daxia ordered that if there was grain and grass, more than 100 bunches of grass and more than 10 kilos of millet were allowed to be traded, and the powerful family's attempt to make a profit also failed.

古文：不两月储积弃羡，边人蒙其利。
现代文：不到两个月府仓储积有余，边人蒙受其利。
English: In less than two months, the prefectural government has more than enough storage capacity, and people on the periphery have benefited.

古文：明年秋，三疏移疾归，筑草堂东山下，读书其中。
现代文：第二年秋，大夏连上三疏称病辞官，归乡后在东山下筑草堂，在堂中读书。
English: In the autumn of the following year, Daxialian was appointed as a medical officer in Shangzang, and after returning to his hometown, he built a grass hall under the East Mountain and read in the hall.

古文：越二年，廷臣交荐，起右都御史，总制两广军务。
现代文：过了二年，廷臣纷纷举荐大夏，起任右都御史，统管两广军务。
English: After two years, the courtiers recommended Daxia one after another, and he was appointed as the governor of the right capital, in charge of the military affairs of the two provinces.

古文：敕使及门，携二僮行。
现代文：奉旨使者上门，大夏带二僮仆起程。
English: The envoy came to the door by order, and Daxia set off with two servants.

古文：广人故思大夏，鼓舞称庆。
现代文：两广人故来思念大夏，得知他即来任职都欢欣鼓舞。
English: Both of them had been thinking about Daxia for a long time, and they were very excited to learn that he would be taking up the post.

古文：大夏为清吏治，捐供亿，禁内外镇守官私役军士，盗贼为之衰止。
现代文：大夏到任后，清理吏治，减免官费供应，禁止镇守官私自役使军士，盗贼因此逐渐减少。
English: After Daxia took office, he cleaned up the administration of officials, reduced and exempted the supply of official fees, and prohibited town guards from serving as soldiers. As a result, the number of thieves gradually decreased.

古文：十五年拜兵部尚书，屡辞乃拜命。
现代文：十五年刘大夏任兵部尚书，屡次推辞不掉才接受。
English: For fifteen years, Liu Daxia was a member of the military, but he repeatedly refused to resign before accepting.

古文：既召见，帝曰： 朕数用卿，数引疾何也？ 
现代文：不久，孝宗召见他，孝宗说： 朕数次任用你，你数次称病而去是为什么？ 
English: Soon after, Xiaozong summoned him and said, "I have appointed you several times. Why did you call in sick several times and leave?

古文：大夏顿首言： 臣老且病，窃见天下民穷财尽，脱有不虞，责在兵部，自度力不办，故辞耳。 
现代文：大夏磕头说 ：臣年老又有病，看见国家民穷财尽，倘若有所不测，责任在兵部，自己估量力不从心，因此而辞。 
English: Daxia Shantou said: The minister is old and sick, he sees the country's people running out of money, if something happens, the responsibility lies with the military department, he can't measure his own strength, so he resigned.

古文：帝默然。
现代文：孝宗听了沉默不语。
English: The emperor was silent.

古文：南京、凤阳大风拔木，河南、湖广大水，京师苦雨沈阴。
现代文：南京、凤阳大风将树拔起，河南、湖广发生水灾，京师久雨成灾。
English: In Nanjing and Fengyang, high winds uprooted trees, flooding occurred in Henan and Hubei, and heavy rain in Beijing.

古文：大夏请凡事非祖宗旧而害军民者，悉条上厘革。
现代文：大夏奏请凡属非祖宗留下的旧制而危害军民的，一一列举呈上革除。
English: Daxiaso asked all those who belong to the old system left by non-ancestors and endanger the military and the people to list them one by one.

古文：十七年二月又言之。
现代文：十七年二月，又奏请。
English: In February, 1917, another request was made.

古文：帝命事当兴革者，所司具实以闻，乃会廷臣条上十六事，皆权幸所不便者，相与力尼之。帝不能决，下再议。
现代文：孝宗命有关部门呈报所应实行与该革除的事例，有关部门全都按实奏报，时逢廷臣奏陈十六件事，都是对权贵所不利的，因此权贵们极力阻止，孝宗拿不定主意，下廷议再讨论。
English: Xiaozong ordered the relevant departments to report the cases that should be implemented with the expulsion, and the relevant departments all reported in accordance with the facts. When the courtiers reported the 16th incident, it was unfavorable to the nobility. Therefore, the nobility tried their best to prevent it, and Xiaozong was undecided, and the lower court discussed it again.

古文：大夏等言： 事属外廷，悉蒙允行。
现代文：大夏等说： 事属朝廷外官，全都批准。
English: Daxia et al. said: The matter belongs to the Foreign Minister of the Imperial Court, all approved.

古文：稍涉权贵，复令察核。
现代文：稍稍涉及权贵，又令讨论核实。
English: A little bit of power involved, and let the discussion to verify.

古文：臣等至愚，莫知所以。 
现代文：臣等很愚蠢，不知为什么？ 
English: Ministers are stupid, I don't know why?

古文：久之，乃得旨： 传奉官疏名以请；幼匠、厨役减月米三斗；增设中官，司礼监核奏；四卫勇士，御马监具数以闻。
现代文：许久，才得旨 ：将传奉官的姓名奏疏上报，幼匠、厨役月每减米三斗；增设宦官、司礼监核实奏告；四卫勇士，御马监将名册报来。
English: It took a long time before the order was issued: the names of the mission officers were to be recorded and reported, the young craftsmen and cooks were to be reduced by three barrels of rice per month; additional eunuchs and ceremonial supervisors were to be verified and reported; the four guardsmen and horse inspectors were to report their names.

古文：余悉如议。 
现代文：其余全照前次所议办理。 
English: The rest will be handled in accordance with the previous resolution.

古文：织造、斋醮皆停罢，光禄省浮费巨万计，而勇士虚冒之弊亦大减。
现代文：织造、斋醮都停办，仅俸禄就节省很大数目，而勇士虚报冒领之弊也大为减少。
English: Weaving and horse-drawn carriages were discontinued, saving a great deal of money in salaries alone, and the drawbacks of warriors falsely claiming benefits were also greatly reduced.

古文：制下，举朝欢悦。
现代文：皇帝的命令一下，举朝欢悦。
English: At the Emperor's command, the whole country rejoiced.

古文：先是，外戚、近幸多干恩泽，帝深知其害政，奋然欲振之。
现代文：先前，外戚、近幸都不是以功受爵，而是出于皇帝的私恩，孝宗深知这样于政有害，发奋振作朝纲。
English: Previously, relatives and relatives were not knighted for merit, but out of the emperor's favor. Xiaozong was well aware that this was harmful to politics, and he worked hard to strengthen the imperial system.

古文：因时多灾异，复宣谕群臣，令各陈缺失。
现代文：因灾异多次出现，又告谕群臣，令各陈朝政的过失。
English: Due to disasters, he appeared many times, and he also announced to the courtiers the faults of the Chen dynasty.

古文：大夏乃复上数事。
现代文：大夏又奏陈数事。
English: Daxia also mentioned several things.

古文：其年六月再陈兵政十害，且乞归。
现代文：这年六月大夏第二次奏陈兵政的十害，并且要求辞官回乡。
English: In June of this year, Daxia reported the ten harms of Chen Heijie for the second time, and asked the official to return to his hometown.

古文：帝不许，令弊端宜革者更祥具以闻。于是，大夏举南北军转漕番上之苦，及边军困敝、边将侵克之状极言之。
现代文：孝宗不答应，要他将各应该革除的弊端更详细地全部奏闻，于是，大夏举出南北军队陆路水路轮流值班运粮的劳苦，以及边军困倦疲惫、边将克扣的情况全都奏报。
English: Xiaozong did not agree, and asked him to report all the drawbacks that should be eliminated in more detail. Therefore, Daxia cited the toil of the North and South armies taking turns on duty to transport grain by land and water, as well as the tiredness and exhaustion of the border troops and the neglect of the border generals.

古文：帝乃召见大夏于便殿，问曰： 卿前言天下民穷财尽。
现代文：孝宗于是在便殿召见大夏，问道： 卿先前说天下民穷财尽。
English: Therefore, Takamune summoned Daxia in the hall and asked: Sir, you said earlier that the people of the world are running out of money.

古文：祖宗以来征敛有常，何今日至此？ 
现代文：祖宗以来征收有常法，为什么现在这样？ 
English: It has been customary to levy taxes since ancient times. Why is this happening now?

古文：对曰： 正谓不尽有常耳。
现代文：大夏回答 ：就是说没有按常法征取。
English: Daxia replied: That is to say, it was not collected according to the ordinary law.

古文：如广西岁取铎木，广东取香药，费固以万计，他可知矣。 
现代文：如向广西每年取铎木，从广东取香、药，花费以万来计算，其他就可想而知了。 
English: If you take eucalyptus from Guangxi every year, and incense and medicine from Guangdong, the cost will be calculated in tens of thousands, and the rest can be imagined.

古文：又问军，对曰： 穷与民等。 
现代文：孝宗又问到军队，他回答： 与百姓一样穷。 
English: When asked about the military, he replied, "We are as poor as the people."

古文：帝曰： 居有月粮，出有行粮，何故穷？ 
现代文：孝宗说： 居有月粮，出有行粮，什么缘故会穷？ 
English: Xiaozong said, "If you have food for a month when you live, and food for a month when you go out, why are you poor?"

古文：对曰： 其帅侵克过半，安得不穷。 
现代文：大夏答道： 其帅克扣超过一半，怎会不穷？ 
English: Daxia replied, "How can it be that more than half of his money has been deducted?

古文：帝太息曰： 朕临御久，乃不知天下军民困，何以为人主！ 
现代文：孝宗叹息道： 朕执政这久，还不知天下军民贫困，怎样做人君！ 
English: Xiaozong sighed, "I've been in power for so long, yet I don't know how to be a leader when the country's military and people are so poor!

古文：遂下诏严禁。
现代文：于是下诏严禁。
English: As a result, it is strictly forbidden to do so.

古文：当是时，帝方锐意太平，而刘健为首辅，马文升以师臣长六卿，一时正人充布列位。
现代文：当时，孝宗正锐意太平，而以刘健为首辅，马文升以兵部尚书领导六卿，一时正人君子占据各个部门。
English: At that time, Xiaozong Zheng was determined to maintain peace, and with Liu Jian as the first assistant, and Ma Wensheng as the leader of the six nobles with the leadership of the military department, the righteous gentlemen occupied all departments for a while.

古文：帝察知大夏方严，且练事，尤亲信。
现代文：孝宗察知大夏正直严谨，并且办事熟练，尤其信任他。
English: Knowing that Daxia is honest and rigorous, and that he is skilled in his work, Xiaozong trusts him in particular.

古文：数召见决事，大夏亦随事纳忠。
现代文：数次召见他判别事情，大夏也在各事上为皇帝尽力。
English: He was summoned several times to adjudicate on matters, and Daxia also did his best for the emperor in all matters.

古文：大同小警，帝用中官苗逵言，将出师。
现代文：大同发生小的战事，孝宗听信宦官苗逵的话，准备出兵。
English: A small war broke out in Datong, and Xiaozong listened to the words of the eunuch Miao Jun and prepared to send troops.

古文：内阁刘健等力谏，帝犹疑之，召问大夏曰： 卿在广，知苗逵延绥捣巢功乎？ 
现代文：内阁刘健等竭力劝阻，孝宗仍犹豫不决，召大夏问道 ：卿在两广，知道苗逵捣毁延绥巢穴的功劳吗？ 
English: Liu Jian and others in the cabinet tried their best to dissuade him, but Xiaozong still hesitated and summoned Daxia to ask: "Sir, you are in Shiguang, do you know the merit of Miao Wei in destroying Yan Xuan's lair?"

古文：对曰： 臣闻之，所俘妇稚十数耳。赖朝廷威德，全师以归。
现代文：大夏答道： 臣听说，俘虏十几个妇女儿童而已，托朝廷威德，全师返回。
English: Daxia replied: The minister heard that only a dozen or so women and children were taken prisoner, and that they were sent to the Imperial Palace, but the whole division returned.

古文：不然，未可知也。 
现代文：不这样的话，后果就难说了。 
English: Otherwise, the consequences are hard to say.

古文：帝默然良久，问曰： 太宗频出塞，今何不可？ 
现代文：孝宗沉默好久，问道： 太宗频频出塞，现在为什么不行？ 
English: Xiaozong was silent for a long time and asked: Why can't Taizong do it now?

古文：对曰： 陛下神武固不后太宗，而将领士马远不逮。
现代文：大夏回答 ：陛下的才干固然不比太宗差，而将领士马远不及太宗时期。
English: Daxia replied, "Your Majesty's talent is certainly no worse than Taizong's, but Shema, the general, is nowhere near Taizong's.

古文：且淇国公小违节制，举数十万众委沙漠，奈何易言之。
现代文：如果淇国公稍许违背节制，将数十万兵众委之于沙漠，怎么能说是容易之事。
English: How can it be said to be an easy matter if the king of the country, in a slight violation of restraint, commits hundreds of thousands of soldiers to the desert?

古文：度今上策惟守耳。 
现代文：臣揣度现在上策只有防守而已。 
English: According to the minister, the best strategy now is only defense.

古文：都御史戴珊亦从旁赞决，帝遽曰： 微卿曹，朕几误。 
现代文：都御史戴珊也从旁边表示赞同，孝宗醒悟地说： 要不是你们劝说朕几乎误了大事。 
English: Metropolitan Daishan also expressed his approval from the side, and Takamune said soberly: If it wasn't for your persuasion, I almost missed the big event.

古文：由是，师不果出。
现代文：于是果然没再出兵。
English: As a result, no more troops were sent.

古文：庄浪土帅鲁麟为甘肃副将，求大将不得，恃其部众强，径归庄浪。
现代文：庄浪土著首领鲁麟任甘肃副将，求升大将不成，恃其部众强，擅自回到庄浪。
English: Zhuanglang aboriginal leader Lu Lin was appointed vice-general of Gansu Province, but he could not be promoted to general, so he went back to Zhuanglang without permission.

古文：廷臣惧生变，欲授以大帅印，又欲召还京，处之散地。
现代文：廷臣担心其生变想授鲁麟大帅印，又想召他回京师，安置在不紧要的地方。
English: The courtiers were worried about his change of life and wanted to bestow the great seal of nobility on Lu Lin. They also wanted to call him back to Beijing and place him in a less important place.

古文：大夏请奖其先世忠顺，而听麟就闲。
现代文：大夏请求奖励其先世忠顺，而听任鲁麟闲居。
English: Daxia asked for a reward for his loyalty to the previous generation, but allowed Lu Lin to stay idle.

古文：麟素贪虐失众心，兵柄已去无能为，竟怏怏病死。
现代文：鲁麟向来凶狠残暴失去众人之心，没有兵权无法有所作为，最后闷闷不乐而病死。
English: Lu Lin has always lost the hearts of the people with his ferocity and brutality. Without military power, he could not make a difference. Finally, he died of illness, depressed and unhappy.

古文：帝欲宿兵近地为左右辅。大夏言： 保定设都司统五卫，祖宗意当亦如此。
现代文：孝宗要在京城附近驻兵作为左右辅佐，大夏说： 保定设都司统率五卫，祖宗之意也是如此。
English: Daxia said that Xiaozong wanted to station soldiers near the capital as left and right assistants. Baoding was set up as the capital, with the general leading the five guards. This was also the meaning of the ancestor.

古文：请遣还操军万人为西卫，纳京东兵密云、蓟州为东卫。 
现代文：请遣还操练军士，一万人作为西卫，将驻扎在密云、蓟州的军队作为东卫。 
English: Please send back the drill sergeants. Ten thousand people will serve as the West Guard, and the troops stationed in Miyun and Zhangzhou will serve as the East Guard.

古文：帝报可。
现代文：孝宗批准了。
English: The great-grandfather consented to the instruction.

古文：中官监京营者恚失兵，揭飞语宫门。
现代文：监督京营的宦官怨恨失去兵权，在宫门上贴小字报。
English: The eunuch who oversaw the Beijing encampment resented the loss of military power and posted a small-character poster on the palace gate.

古文：帝以示大夏曰： 宫门岂外人能至？必此曹不利失兵耳。 
现代文：孝宗以此给大夏看，并说： 宫门外人岂能进来，必定是某些不愿失去兵权的人所为。 
English: Takamune showed this to Daxia and said, "If outsiders are allowed to enter the palace, it must have been done by someone who did not want to lose military power."

古文：由是，间不得行。
现代文：由此，阴谋未得逞。
English: As a result, the plot failed.

古文：帝尝谕大夏曰： 临事辄思召卿，虑越职而止。
现代文：孝宗曾经对大夏说 ：遇到事情总想召卿来商量，又担心超越卿职权范围而作罢。
English: Takamune once said to Daxia: When things come up, I always want to call my lord to discuss, and I'm worried about going beyond my lord's scope of authority.

古文：后有当行罢者，具揭帖以进。 
现代文：以后有事情的实行或罢止，卿用揭帖呈上来。 
English: If there is any implementation or suspension of the matter in the future, the minister will present it with a notice.

古文：大夏顿首曰： 事之可否，外付府部，内咨阁臣可矣。
现代文：大夏磕头说 ：对事情的决定，外边的交付政府部门，内部的向阁臣咨询就行了。
English: Daxia Shantou said: the decision on the matter, the external delivery to the government department, the internal consultation with the cabinet minister is enough.

古文：揭帖滋弊，不可为后世法。 
现代文：揭帖易滋长弊病，不可作为后世效法。 
English: It is not acceptable for future generations to follow the example of exposing the maladies that are easily propagated.

古文：帝称善。
现代文：孝宗称好。
English: Wen Di thought it was right.

古文：又尝问： 天下何时太平？ 
现代文：又曾问 ：天下何时太平？ 
English: He also asked: When will the world be at peace?

古文：对曰： 求治亦难太急。但用人行政悉与大臣面议，当而后行，久之天下自治。 
现代文：大夏答道 ：求治不能太性急，不过用人行政全都与大臣面议，恰当的再实行，时间长了天下自然太平。 
English: Daxia replied, "We mustn't be too hasty in seeking a solution, but all of the employment administration should be discussed with the minister, and then properly implemented. If the time is long, the world will naturally be peaceful."

古文：尝乘间言四方镇守中官之害。
现代文：大夏曾经趁机提到四方镇守宦官的危害。
English: Daxia once took the opportunity to mention the harm of the four-sided town guard eunuchs.

古文：帝问状，对曰： 臣在两广见诸文武大吏供亿不能敌一镇守，其烦费可知。 
现代文：孝宗询问详情，大夏答道： 臣在两广见到诸文武官的供应比不上一个镇守，其耗费可知。 
English: Xiaozong asked for more details, and Daxia replied, "I have seen that the supply of military attachés in the two provinces is less than that of a town guard, and I know how much it costs.

古文：帝曰： 然祖宗来设此久，安能遽革？
现代文：孝宗说： 祖宗设置这些已很久，怎能一下子革除。
English: Takamune said, "Our ancestors have set this up for a long time, how can it be done away with all of a sudden?"

古文：第自今必廉如邓原、麦秀者而后用，不然则已之。 
现代文：不过从现在开始必须像郑原、麦秀那样廉洁的才能任用，不然则罢免之。 
English: However, from now on, they must be as honest as Zheng Yuan and Mai Xiu to be appointed, otherwise they will be dismissed.

古文：大夏顿首称善。
现代文：大夏磕头称好。
English: Daxia steamed buns are said to be good.

古文：大夏每被召，跪御榻前。帝左右顾，近侍辄引避。
现代文：大夏每次被召见，跪在御床前，孝宗往左右一看，近侍都退避走了。
English: Every time Daxia was summoned, she knelt in front of the imperial bed. Xiaozong glanced to the left and right, and the attendants all retreated.

古文：尝对久，惫不能兴，呼司礼太监李荣掖之出。
现代文：大夏曾有时回答问题时间长了，疲惫得起不来，孝宗就喊司礼太监李荣扶他出去。
English: Daxia sometimes took a long time to answer questions, and when he was too tired to come, Xiaozong called the eunuch Li Rong to help him out.

古文：一日早朝，大夏固在班，帝偶未见，明日谕曰： 卿昨失朝耶？
现代文：一天早朝，大夏本该当班，孝宗碰巧没见到他，第二天告诫大夏说： 卿昨天未上朝吗？
English: Early one morning, Daxia was supposed to be on duty. By chance, Xiaozong did not see him. The next day, he admonished Daxia, saying, "Didn't you go to work yesterday morning?

古文：恐御史纠，不果召卿。 
现代文：担心御史纠察，没有立即召见您。 
English: I didn't call you immediately because I was worried about your picket.

古文：其受眷深如此。
现代文：其受孝宗宠爱如此深。
English: This is why he was so deeply loved by the Takamune.

古文：特赐玉带、麒麟服，所赉金币、上尊，岁时不绝。
现代文：特别赐他玉带、麒麟服，送金币、上等醇酒，岁时不断。
English: He was specially given a jade belt, a unicorn robe, and sent gold coins and high-grade alcohol, which continued to increase with age.

古文：未几，孝宗崩，武宗嗣位，承诏请撤四方镇守中官非额设者。帝止撤均州齐元。
现代文：不久，孝宗去世，武宗即位，大夏奉遗诏请求撤去非定额内的四方镇守宦官。武宗只撤去均州齐元。
English: Soon after, Takamune died, and Takemune ascended to the throne. At the behest of Takamune, Daxia ordered the removal of the non-mandated number of Shifang eunuchs. Takemune only removed the Junzhou eunuchs.

古文：大夏复议上应撤者二十四人，又奏减皇城、京城守视中官，皆不纳。
现代文：大夏又主张应撤去镇守宦官二十四人，又奏减皇城、京城守卫宦官，都未被接受。
English: Daxia also advocated the removal of twenty-four town guard eunuchs and the reduction of imperial city and capital city guard eunuchs, but these were not accepted.

古文：顷之，列上传奉武臣当汰者六百八十三人，报可。
现代文：不久，大夏列举应当淘汰的传奉武臣六百八十三名，被批准。
English: Soon, Daxia enumerated the 683 vassals who should be eliminated, which was approved.

古文：大汉将军薛福敬等四十八人亦当夺官，福敬等故不入侍以激帝怒。
现代文：大汉将军薛福敬等四十八人也该削去官职，薛福敬等故意不入宫侍奉来激怒武宗。
English: Forty-eight people, such as the great Han general Xue Fu Jing, should also be removed from their official positions. Xue Fu Jing and others deliberately did not enter the palace to serve, provoking the anger of Emperor Wu.

古文：帝遽命复之，而责兵部对状，欲加罪。
现代文：武宗立即命恢复薛等官职，而要求兵部回答详情，意欲加罪。
English: Wu Zong immediately ordered the reinstatement of Xue and other officials, and demanded that the military department answer in detail, intending to add to the crime.

古文：中官宁瑾顿首曰： 此先帝遗命，陛下列之登极诏书，不宜罪。 
现代文：宦官宁瑾磕头说： 这些是先帝遗命，陛下列入登基诏书，不宜问罪。 
English: The eunuch Ning Shantou said: These are the last orders of the former emperor, which were included in the imperial edict of enthronement, and it is not appropriate to ask for punishment.

古文：帝意乃解。
现代文：武宗才放弃追查此事。
English: It was only then that Mingzong put his heart into it.

古文：中官韦兴者，成化末得罪久废，至是夤缘守均州。
现代文：宦官韦兴在成化末年因有罪被长期罢官，这时靠巴结得以镇守均州。
English: Wei Xing, a eunuch, was banished for a long time at the end of the Chenghua Dynasty for his crime. At that time, he was able to defend the town of Junzhou by means of patronage.

古文：言官交谏，大夏等再三争，皆不听。
现代文：言官纷纷谏阻，大夏等再三争辩，武宗都不理。
English: The court officials put up resistance one after another, Daxia and others argued repeatedly, but Takemune ignored them.

古文：正德元年春，又言： 镇守中官，如江西董让、蓟州刘琅、陕西刘云、山东朱云贪残尤甚，乞按治。 
现代文：正德元年春，大夏又奏道： 镇守宦官，如江西董让、蓟州刘琅、陕西刘云、山东朱云贪婪残暴尤其厉害，请求审查惩处。 
English: In the spring of the first year of Zhengde, Daxia also said: The eunuchs of the town guards, such as Jiangxi Dongzhan, Zhangzhou Liuye, Shaanxi Liuyun, and Shandong Zhuyun, were particularly greedy and cruel, and requested a review and punishment.

古文：帝不悦。
现代文：武宗不高兴。
English: Gao Di was not happy to hear this.

古文：大夏自知言不见用，数上章乞骸骨。
现代文：大夏知道自己意见不被采纳，数次上奏章请求辞官。
English: Knowing that his opinion would not be accepted, Daxia wrote several times to request a resignation.

古文：其年五月，诏加太子太保，赐敕驰驿归，给廪隶如制。
现代文：这年五月，武宗下诏加封他太子太保，同意他返乡赐敕书、车马返回，按旧制供应粮食和役仆。
English: In May of that year, Emperor Wuzong issued an edict to crown him Crown Prince Taibo, and agreed to allow him to return to his hometown, give him an imperial edict, return his carriage and horse, and supply him with grain and servants according to the old system.

古文：给事中王翊、张襘请留之，吏部亦请如翊、襘言，不报。
现代文：给事中王翊、张衤会请求留住大夏，吏部也要求留大夏，武宗不理。
English: During the incident, Wang Qian and Zhang Qian would request to keep Daxia, and the officials also requested to keep Daxia, but Wu Zong ignored them.

古文：大夏忠诚恳笃，遇知孝宗，忘身徇国，于权幸多所裁抑。
现代文：大夏忠实诚恳，为孝宗所信任，忘我报国，对权贵近幸多行抑止。
English: Daxia was loyal and sincere, and was trusted by the Emperor Xiaozong. He served his country selflessly, and acted as a deterrent to those with power and wealth.

古文：尝请严核勇士，为刘瑾所恶。
现代文：曾经要求严格考核勇士，为刘瑾所恨。
English: He once demanded a strict assessment of warriors, which was hated by Liu Bei.

古文：刘宇亦憾大夏，遂与焦芳谮于瑾曰： 籍大夏家，可当边费十二。 
现代文：刘宇也恨大夏，就与焦芳一起在刘瑾面前进谗言道 ：抄刘大夏的家，可得边费的十分之二。 
English: Liu Yu also hated Daxia, so he and Jiao Fang made a speech in front of Liu Yao, saying, "If you copy Liu Daxia's home, you can get two-tenths of the expenses."

古文：三年九月，假田州岑猛事，逮系诏狱。
现代文：三年九月，借田州岑猛的事，将大夏逮捕下到诏狱。
English: In September of the third year, because of Tianzhou's violent actions, Daxia was arrested and sent to the imperial prison.

古文：瑾欲坐以激变律死，都御史屠滽持不可，瑾谩骂曰： 即不死，可无戍耶？ 
现代文：刘瑾要以激变罪判大夏死刑，都御史屠氵庸不同意，刘瑾谩骂道： 即使不死，可以不去戍边吗？ 
English: Liu Wei wanted to sentence Daxia to death for the crime of radical change, but the governor Tu Youyong disagreed. Liu Wei scolded: Even if you don't die, can you not go to Lai Bian?

古文：李东阳为婉解，且瑾诇大夏家实贫，乃坐戍极边。
现代文：李东阳从中调解，刘瑾探知刘大夏家贫穷，就判其到最偏僻的边境戍边。
English: Li Dongyang mediated between the two sides, and Liu Tong, detecting the poverty of Liu Daxia's family, sentenced him to the most remote border.

古文：初拟广西，芳曰： 是送若归也 ，遂改肃州。
现代文：起初拟戍广西，焦芳说： 是送他回去吗？ 于是改戍肃州。
English: At first he wanted to go to Guangxi, but Jiao Fang said, "Should we send him back?" So he changed his mind and went to Suzhou.

古文：大夏年已七十三，布衣徒步过大明门下，叩首而去。
现代文：大夏已有七十三岁，穿着布衣徒步经过大明门磕头而去。
English: Seventy-three-year-old Daxia, wearing a cloth robe, walked on foot past the Great Gate of Shantou.

古文：观者叹息泣下，父老携筐送食，所至为罢市、焚香祝刘尚书生还。
现代文：观者都叹息流泪，父老百姓携筐送吃的，大夏所到之处，人们为之罢市、烧香祝刘尚书生还。
English: Onlookers all sighed and shed tears, and the common people brought baskets of food. Wherever Daxia went, people went on strike and burned incense to wish Liu Shangshu a speedy recovery.

古文：比至戍所，诸司惮瑾，绝馈问，儒学生徒传食之。
现代文：等到了戍所，各部门怕得罪刘瑾，不送食品不来慰问，儒学生徒送吃食给他。
English: When he arrived at the detention center, the various departments were afraid of offending Liu Wei, and would not send food or offer condolences. The Confucian students sent him food and drink.

古文：遇团操，辄荷戈就伍。
现代文：一到操练，大夏总是扛戈站进队伍。
English: As soon as he arrives at the drill, Daxia always carries the goal into the team.

古文：所司固辞，大夏曰： 军，固当役也。 
现代文：主管人再三推辞，大夏说： 军人本来就该服役的。 
English: The person in charge repeatedly declined, and Daxia said, "A soldier should have served in the first place.

古文：所携止一仆。
现代文：他只带来一个仆人。
English: He brought only one servant.

古文：或问何不挈子姓，曰： 吾宦时，不为子孙乞恩泽。
现代文：有人问他为什么不带子孙，他说： 我为官时，不为子孙捞好处。
English: When someone asked him why he didn't bring his children and grandchildren, he said: "When I was an official, I didn't seek benefits for my children and grandchildren.

古文：今垂老得罪，忍令同死戍所耶？ 
现代文：现在年老被罚，怎忍心令他们同我一起死在戍所呢？ 
English: How can I let them die with me in prison, now that I am being punished for my old age?

古文：大夏既遣戍，瑾犹摭他事罚米输塞上者再。
现代文：大夏已经遣去戍边，刘瑾还借其他事二次罚他送米塞上。
English: Daxia had already sent Lai Bian away, and Liu Ye also used other things to punish him for the second time by sending him to the rice plug.

古文：五年夏，赦归。
现代文：五年夏，大夏被赦免返乡。
English: In the summer of the fifth year, Daxia was pardoned and returned home.

古文：瑾诛，复官，致仕。
现代文：刘瑾被诛杀，恢复他官职，后退休。
English: After Liu Wei was beaten to death, Liu Jian resumed his official duties and then retired.

古文：清军御史王相请复廪隶，录其子孙。
现代文：清军御史王相请求恢复大夏月粮和年役，录用其子孙。
English: Wang Xiang, an envoy of the Qing Dynasty, requested the restoration of summer rations and annual service, and the appointment of his children and grandchildren.

古文：中官用事者终嗛之，不许。
现代文：主事的宦官始终恨他，不答应。
English: The eunuch in charge always hated him and wouldn't agree.

古文：大夏归，教子孙力田谋食。
现代文：大夏回家后，教子孙种田谋生。
English: After returning home in the summer, he taught his children and grandchildren to farm to earn a living.

古文：稍赢，散之故旧宗族。
现代文：稍有盈余，就分送给故旧宗族。
English: If there is a little surplus, it is given to the former clan.

古文：预自为圹志，曰： 无使人饰美，俾怀愧地下也。 
现代文：预先自作墓志铭，并说 ：不要让人用饰美之词，让我怀愧于地下也。 
English: He wrote his own epitaph in advance and said: "Don't let people use flattering words. Let me be ashamed of being underground."

古文：十一年五月卒，年八十一。
现代文：十一年五月去世，享年八十一岁。
English: He passed away on May 11th, at the age of 81.

古文：赠太保，谥忠宣。
现代文：追赠太保，谥号忠宣。
English: He was posthumously awarded the title of Taibao and given the posthumous name of Tadanobu.

古文：大夏尝言： 居官以正己为先。
现代文：大夏曾说 ：做官以正己为先。
English: Daxia once said, "To be an official, you must be true to yourself first."

古文：不独当戒利，亦当远名。 
现代文：不仅应当戒绝货利，也当远离浮名。 
English: We should not only stop profiting from goods, but also stay away from fake names.

古文：又言： 人生盖棺论定，一日未死，即一日忧责未已。 
现代文：又说： 人生盖棺定论，一天未死，就一天不能停止为国分忧。 
English: He also said: Life is like a coffin, one day before death, one day can not stop worrying about the country.

古文：其被逮也，方锄菜园中，入室携数百钱，跨小驴就道。
现代文：他被逮捕时正在园中锄菜，进房拿了数百钱，坐上小驴就走。
English: At the time of his arrest, he was picking vegetables in the garden. He came into the house, took hundreds of dollars, got on a donkey and left.

古文：赦归，有门下生为巡抚者，枉百里谒之。道遇扶犁者，问孰为尚书家，引之登堂，即大夏也。
现代文：赦免回来，有个门生做了巡抚，弯曲百里路去看大夏，路上遇到扶犁的人，就问哪是尚书家，扶犁的人引巡抚进屋，原来扶犁者就是刘大夏。
English: After he was pardoned, one of his protégés became an inspector. He bent the hundred-mile road to see Daxia. On the way, when he met the attendant, he asked who was Shang Shuxia. The attendant led the inspector into the house. The attendant was Liu Daxia.

古文：朝鲜使者在鸿胪寺馆遇大夏邑子张生，因问起居曰： 吾国闻刘东山名久矣。 
现代文：朝鲜使者在鸿胪寺馆遇到大夏同邑的读书人张生，就问起大夏说 ：我国久闻刘东山大名啊！ 
English: When the North Korean envoy met Zhang Sheng, a reader from Daxia's hometown, at Hongye Temple, he asked about Daxia and said, "Our country has long heard of Liu Dongshan's fame!

古文：安南使者入贡曰： 闻刘尚书戍边，今安否？ 
现代文：安南使者进贡时说： 听说刘尚书戍边，现在平安吗？ 
English: When paying tribute, Annan's emissary said, "I heard that Liu Shangshu Lai Bian, is it safe now?

古文：其为外国所重如此。
现代文：大夏是如此为外国所看重。
English: Daxia is so valued by foreign countries.

