古文：秦围赵邯郸，诸侯莫敢先救。
现代文：原文秦兵围攻赵国的都城邯郸，诸侯都不敢先出兵救赵。
English: The Qin soldiers besieged the capital city of Zhao, and the princes did not dare to send troops to rescue Zhao.

古文：魏王使客将军辛垣衍间入邯郸，欲与赵尊秦为帝。
现代文：魏王派客将军辛垣衍从小道进入邯郸城中，想要和赵王相约一起尊秦王为帝，以此解邯郸之围。
English: The king of Wei sent a guest, General Xin Qian, to enter the city from a side street. He wanted to make an appointment with King Zhao to honor King Qin as the emperor, and thus break the siege.

古文：鲁仲连适在赵，闻之，见平原君胜。
现代文：鲁仲连当时恰好在赵国，听说了这件事后，就去拜见平原君赵胜。
English: Lu Zhonglian happened to be in Zhao Province at the time. After hearing about the incident, he went to visit the Plain Prince Zhao Sheng.

古文：胜为介绍，而见之于辛垣衍。鲁连见辛垣衍而无言。
现代文：平原君把鲁仲连介绍给辛垣衍，让二人见面。鲁仲连见到辛垣衍后，竟然一言不发。
English: Mr. Hirahara introduced Lu Zhonglian to Xin Yanyan, and the two met. After Lu Zhonglian saw Xin Yanyan, he didn't say a word.

古文：辛垣衍曰： 吾视居此围城之中者，皆有求于平原君者也，今观先生之玉貌，非有求于平原君者，曷为久居此围城之中而不去也？ 
现代文：辛垣衍说： 我观察凡是围困在邯郸的人，都是有求于平原君才来的，但是我仔细观察先生的外貌，并非有求于平原君的样子，不知先生为什么待在围城中不走呢？ 
English: Xinqi Yan said: I observed that all the people who were besieged in Handan came only to seek the Plain Prince, but I carefully observed the appearance of the gentleman, not the appearance of seeking the Plain Prince. I don't know why the gentleman stayed in the besieged city and didn't leave.

古文：鲁连曰： 秦弃礼义、上首功之国也，权使其士，虏使其民，彼肆然而为帝，则连有赴东海而死耳，不忍为之民也。
现代文：鲁仲连说： 秦国是个背弃礼义、只知崇尚武力、用权术操纵士大夫、把百姓当奴隶般使唤的国家。秦王如果真的称帝，那我宁可投东海而死，也不愿意做秦王的臣民。
English: Lu Zhonglian said: "Qin is a country that abandons propriety and righteousness, only knows how to advocate force, use power to manipulate scholars, and use the people as slaves. If King Qin really claims to be emperor, then I would rather die in the East Sea than be a subject of King Qin.

古文：所为见将军者，欲以助赵也。 
现代文：今天我来见将军的原因，就是想要救助赵国。 
English: The reason I came to see the general today is to help Zhao Guo.

古文：辛垣衍曰： 助之奈何？ 
现代文：辛垣衍说： 请问先生要如何帮助赵国呢？ 
English: Xingaki Yan said: How would you like to help Zhao Guo?

古文：鲁连曰： 吾将使梁及燕助之，齐、楚固助之矣。 
现代文：鲁仲连说： 我准备去说服魏、燕两个国家援助赵国，而齐、楚两国已答应了。 
English: Lu Zhonglian said: I am going to persuade Wei and Yan to help Zhao, and Qi and Chu have already agreed.

古文：辛垣衍曰： 燕吾不知；若梁，则吾乃梁人也。先生恶能使梁助之耶？ 
现代文：辛垣衍说： 燕国我不知道，至于魏国，我是魏国人，不知先生如何使魏援赵呢？ 
English: Xin Qianyan said: I don't know about Yan Guo, but as for Wei Guo, I am a Wei Guo, I don't know how to make Wei aid Zhao?

古文：鲁连曰： 梁未睹秦称帝之害故也，使睹秦称帝之害，则必助赵矣。 
现代文：鲁仲连说： 这是因为魏国还没有看到秦国称帝的害处，假使能清楚害处，魏王一定会发兵救赵的。 
English: Lu Zhonglian said: This is because Wei has not yet seen the harm of Qin's imperial claim. If the harm can be made clear, Wei will definitely send troops to rescue Zhao.

古文：辛垣衍曰： 秦称帝之害奈何？ 
现代文：辛垣衍说： 那秦王称帝的害处到底在哪里呢？ 
English: Xingaki Yan said, "So where exactly is the harm in Emperor Qin's claim to be emperor?

古文：鲁连曰： 昔齐威王尝为仁义矣，率天下诸侯而朝周。
现代文：鲁仲连说： 以前齐威王推行仁政，率领天下诸侯朝拜周天子。
English: Lu Zhonglian said: In the past, King Qi Wei promoted benevolent politics and led the world's lords to worship Zhou Tianzi.

古文：周贫且微，诸侯莫朝，而齐独朝之。
现代文：当时的周王室贫穷弱小，天下诸侯都不肯去朝贡，只有齐国肯称臣进贡。
English: At that time, Zhou Tianzi was poor and weak, and none of the princes were willing to go to worship, only Qi Guo went to worship.

古文：居岁余，周烈王崩，诸侯皆到，齐后往，周怒，赴于齐曰： 天崩地坼，天子下席，东藩之臣田婴齐后至，则斩之! 
现代文：但是过了一年多，周威烈王驾崩，诸侯都前去吊丧，可齐国却是最后到达的，周王大怒，派使臣警告齐王说： 天子驾崩，新即位的天子服丧，而东藩之臣齐国的田婴奔丧竟然敢迟来，按照法令当斩! 
English: However, after more than a year, King Zhou Weili passed away, and all the princes went to pay their respects, but Qi Province was the last to arrive. King Zhou was furious and sent an envoy to warn Qi Province, saying: "The heavenly son has passed away, the newly enthroned heavenly son is in mourning, and the son of the Eastern Han, the son of Qi Province, dares to be late, and should be beheaded according to the law!"

古文：威王勃然怒曰： 叱嗟，而母婢也！ 
现代文：齐威王听说后，生气地说： 周王只不过是一个低下的婢女所生的奴才罢了! 
English: After hearing this, King Qi Wei said angrily, "King Zhou is just a slave born from a lowly servant girl!"

古文：卒为天下笑。
现代文：这个事成为一个大笑话。
English: In the end, King Qi Wei was ridiculed by the world.

古文：故生则朝周，死则叱之，诚不忍其求也。
现代文：在周天子生前齐国去朝拜他，在他死后却是如此的辱骂他，这实在是因为做不到周天子所要求的诸侯义务。
English: That's why King Qiwei went to see the emperor when Zhou Tianzi was still alive, and when he died, he cursed loudly, because he really couldn't bear Zhou Tianzi's demands.

古文：彼天子固然，其无足怪。 辛垣衍曰： 先生独未见夫仆乎？十人而从一人者，宁力不胜，智不若耶？
现代文：对真正的天子尚且如此，你认为将秦尊奉为天子不会发生类似这样的笑话吗？ 辛垣衍说： 先生难道没有见过仆人吗，十个人服侍一个人，并不是因为力气和智慧不如主人，而是由于对主人的畏惧。 
English: Even though this is the case with the true heavenly son, do you think that a similar joke would not occur with the worship of Qin as a heavenly son? Xin Yanyan said: Hasn't the master seen servants? Ten people serve one person, not because their strength and wisdom are not as good as the master, but because of their fear of the master.

古文：畏之也! 鲁连曰： 梁之比于秦若仆耶？ 辛垣衍曰： 然。 
现代文：鲁仲连说： 那么魏国和秦国的关系，就好像主和仆一样吗？ 辛垣衍说： 是的。 鲁仲连说： 好。
English: Lu Zhonglian said, "So the relationship between Wei and Qin is like that of master and servant?" Xin Qian said, "Yes." Lu Zhonglian said, "Good."

古文：鲁连曰： 然则吾将使秦王烹醢梁王。 
现代文：那我就可以有办法让秦王杀魏王，把魏王剁成肉酱。 
English: Then I can have a way to let the Qin King kill the Wei King and turn the Wei King into meat sauce.

古文：辛垣衍怏然不悦，曰： 嘻，亦太甚矣，先生又恶能使秦王烹醢梁王？ 
现代文：辛垣衍非常不高兴地说： 先生也未免太夸大了吧，你又怎么能让秦王杀魏王呢？ 
English: Xinqi Yan said with great displeasure, "You are exaggerating. How could you let the Qin King kill the Wei King?

古文：鲁连曰： 固也，待吾言之。
现代文：鲁仲连说： 我当然能做到，请将军听听我的解释。
English: Lu Zhonglian said: Of course I can do it, please listen to my explanation.

古文：昔者鬼侯、鄂侯、文王，纣之三公也。
现代文：当年鬼侯、鄂侯、文王，是殷纣王的三公。
English: At that time, Ghost Lord, E Lord, and King Wen were the three princes of King Yin.

古文：鬼侯有子而好，故入之于纣，纣以为恶，醢鬼侯；鄂侯争之急，辩之疾，并脯鄂侯；文王闻而叹息，拘于羑里之库百日，而欲令之死。
现代文：鬼侯有个长得非常漂亮的女儿，将她献给了纣王，可纣王却一点也不喜欢她，结果纣王把鬼侯杀了，剁成了肉酱；鄂侯为此事向纣王进谏、辩论，结果纣王又把鄂侯杀死，晒成了肉干；文王听说这两件残忍的事情之后，忍不住长叹息了一声，结果被纣王知道后，竟被囚禁在羑里的仓库中一百天，想要困死他。
English: The ghost lord had a very beautiful daughter and offered her to the dragon king, but the dragon king didn't like her at all. As a result, the dragon king killed the ghost lord and turned him into meat sauce. The ghost lord went to the dragon king and argued with him about this matter. As a result, the dragon king killed the ghost lord and turned him into dried meat. After the dragon king heard about these two cruel things, he couldn't help but sigh a long time. As a result, after the dragon king knew about it, he was imprisoned in a warehouse in Yili for a hundred days and tried to kill him.

古文：曷为与人俱称帝王，卒就脯醢之地也？
现代文：这难道不正是拥护他人为帝王，结果自己反倒招来杀身之祸，剁成肉酱、晒成肉干的往事吗？
English: Isn't this exactly what happened in the past, when people supported others as emperors, but ended up inviting the disaster of suicide, being turned into mincemeat and dried meat?

古文：齐湣王将之鲁，夷维子执策而从，谓鲁人曰： 子将何以待吾君？ 
现代文：齐湣王要去鲁国的时候，夷维子驾车，他对鲁国人说： 你们准备如何接待我的国君呢？ 
English: When King Qizong was going to Lu, Yivizi was driving. He said to the Lu people, "How are you preparing to receive my sovereign?"

古文：鲁人曰： 吾将以十太牢待子之君。 
现代文：鲁国人说： 我们将用十头牛的最高礼仪接待你的国君。 
English: Lu officials said: "We plan to receive your king with the most solemn of ceremonies.

古文：夷维子曰： 吾君，天子也。天子巡狩，诸侯避舍，纳管键，摄衽抱几，视膳于堂下，天子已食，退而听朝也。 
现代文：夷维子说： 我们的国君是天子，天子到各地巡游狩猎的时候，诸侯都要从王宫中搬出去住在外面，将国库的钥匙交出，并且撩起衣裳，亲自端着桌子在殿堂下侍候天子进餐，天子吃完之后，诸侯才可以退下。 
English: Yiwu Zi said: Our sovereign is the Son of Heaven. When the Son of Heaven goes on a hunting tour to various places, the princes must move out of the royal palace to live outside, hand over the keys to the treasury, and pick up their clothes and personally carry the table under the hall to wait for the Son of Heaven to dine. After the Son of Heaven has finished eating, the princes can withdraw.

古文：鲁人投其钥，不果纳。将之薛，假途于邹。
现代文：鲁国人一听，就不再让齐湣王入境，以至于齐王只能改从邹国前往薛国了。
English: As soon as the Lu people heard of this, they no longer allowed King Qi to enter the country, so that King Qi could only travel from the State of Qi to the State of Xue.

古文：当是时，邹君死，湣王欲入吊，夷维子谓邹之孤曰： 天子吊，主人必将倍殡柩，设北面于南方，然后天子南面吊也。 
现代文：恰巧碰到邹君逝世，齐湣王要去吊唁，夷维子对邹君的手下说： 天子来吊丧的时候，丧家应该将灵柩坐北朝南摆放，然后请天子立在南方来祭吊。 
English: It just so happened that King Qi of Qin died, and he wanted to offer his condolences. Yiwu Zi said to the subordinates of King Qi: When the heavenly son comes to hang the deceased, the bereaved family should place the coffin facing north and south, and then invite the heavenly son to stand in the south and offer the coffin.

古文：邹之群臣曰： 必若此，吾将伏剑而死。 
现代文：邹国的臣子说： 如果一定让我们这样做，我们宁可伏剑而死。 
English: The ministers said: "We must do this, we would rather kill ourselves with our swords."

古文：故不敢入于邹。
现代文：因此齐湣王君臣也没有敢进入邹国。
English: As a result, Qizhi kings and princes did not dare to enter the country.

古文：邹、鲁之臣。生则不能事养，死则不得饭含，然且欲行天子之礼于邹、鲁之臣，不果纳。
现代文：邹、鲁两个国家的臣子，虽然迫于齐国的淫威，当君主在世的时候不得奉养，君主死了不得含殓，但是要让他们行朝拜天子的大礼，他们仍然不肯让齐湣王进入自己的国家。
English: Although the courtiers of the two countries of Qi and Lu were forced by the arrogance of the Qi kingdom, and were not allowed to serve the monarch while he was alive, and were not allowed to hold the imperial scepter after his death, they still refused to allow the king of Qi to enter their country, even though they wanted them to perform the grand ritual of worshiping the heavenly son.

古文：今秦万乘之国，梁亦万乘之国，交有称王之名，睹其一战而胜，欲从而帝之，是使三晋之大臣，未如邹、鲁之仆妾也。
现代文：现在的秦国是拥有万辆兵车的大国，魏国也是拥有万辆兵车的大国，两个国家互相称帝称王。但是看到秦国打胜了一场仗，就想尊奉秦王为帝，看来三晋的文武大臣们还远远不如邹、鲁这两个小国的臣民有气节。
English: Now Qin is a big country with ten thousand chariots, and Wei is also a big country with ten thousand chariots, and the two countries call each other emperor and king. But when they saw that Qin had won a war, they wanted to honor Qin as emperor. It seems that the civil and military ministers of the Three Dynasties were far less virtuous than the subjects of the two small countries, Shu and Lu.

古文：且秦无已而帝，则且变易诸侯之大臣，彼将夺其所谓不肖，而予其所谓贤，夺其所憎，而予其所爱，彼又将使其子女谗妾为诸侯妃姬，处梁之宫，梁王安得晏然而已乎？而将军又何以得故宠乎？ 
现代文：再说秦王称帝之后，必定会更换诸侯大臣，罢黜那些他所谓的不肖臣子，把官位赐给他心目中的贤良臣子，夺取他所憎恶的人的官职，任命那些他所喜欢的人，同时也一定会让他的女儿们做诸侯的妃子，住在魏宫中，魏王又怎么还能耳根清净，而将军又怎么还能够享受荣宠呢？ 
English: Moreover, King Qin, after proclaiming himself emperor, would certainly replace the princes' ministers, dismiss those he called unworthy courtiers, bestow official positions on the virtuous courtiers in his mind, seize the official posts of those he hated, appoint those he liked, and at the same time he would certainly let his daughters be princes' concubines and live in the Wei Palace. How could the Wei king still have a clean ear, and how could the general still enjoy the favor?

古文：于是辛垣衍起，再拜谢曰： 吾乃今知先生为天下之士也，吾请去，不敢复言帝秦矣。 
现代文：辛垣衍听了鲁仲连的这番话后，立即起身拜谢说： 我一直认为先生只是个平凡之人，现在才明白先生真是个天下奇人，我现在就回去，不敢再说尊秦王为帝了。 
English: After listening to Lu Zhonglian's words, Xinqi Yan immediately got up and said, "I always thought that you were just an ordinary person, but now I understand that you are really a wonder of the world. I'll go back now, and I don't dare to say that I respect King Qin any more."

古文：秦将闻之，为却军五十里。
现代文：秦国将军听说这件事之后，下令秦军向后退五十里。
English: After the Qin general heard about this, he ordered the Qin army to retreat fifty miles.

古文：苏轼曰： 仲连辩过仪、秦，气凌髡、衍，排难解纷，功成而逃，实战国一人而已。 
现代文：苏轼说，鲁仲连的辩才超过了张仪、苏秦，气势凌驾于淳于髡、公孙衍，解除了国境上的危难，完成使命却又不居功邀赏，在战国的谋士之中才智操守没有人能比得上他。
English: Su Wei said that Lu Zhonglian's ability to argue surpassed that of Zhang Yi and Su Qin, and his power was superior to that of Jun Yuxuan and Gong Sunyan. He relieved the danger on the border, but he did not receive any reward for accomplishing his mission. Among the strategists of the warring states, no one could match his intelligence and integrity.

古文：穆文熙曰： 仲连挫帝秦之说，而秦将为之却军，此《淮南》之所谓 庙战 也。 
现代文：穆文熙说，鲁仲连将不能尊秦为帝的理由说得淋漓尽致，使得秦将退却五十里，这就是《淮南子》中所说的 庙战 了。
English: Mu Wenxi said that Lu Zhonglian's reasons for not honoring Qin as emperor were so convincing that Qin retreated fifty miles, which was the "temple war" mentioned in "Huainanzi."

