古文：丙子十月十七日鸡鸣起饭，再鸣而行。
现代文：丙子年十月十七日鸡叫头遍时起床吃饭，叫第二遍时出发。
English: On October 17th, the year of the rooster, the chicken got up to eat when it was called the first time, and set out when it was called the second time.

古文：五里，蒋莲铺，月色皎甚。
现代文：走五里，到蒋莲铺，月色特别皎洁。
English: Five miles away, at Jianglianpu, the moon is particularly beautiful.

古文：转而南行，山势复簇，始有村居。
现代文：折向南行，山峦又簇拥在周围，开始出现村庄。
English: Turning to the south, the hawthorns are again clustered around, and villages begin to appear.

古文：又五里，白石湾，晓日甫升。
现代文：又走五里，到白石湾，太阳才升起。
English: After another five-mile walk, the sun was just rising in Shiroishi Bay.

古文：又五里，白石铺。
现代文：又走五里，到白石铺。
English: Walk another five miles to the white stone shop.

古文：仍转西行，又七里，草萍公馆，昔有驿，今已革革除矣。
现代文：仍转向西行，又走了七里，到草萍公馆，这里是常山、玉山两县交界处，以前设有释站，如今已经撤销。
English: He still turned westbound and walked another seven miles to Caoping Mansion. This is the junction of Changshan and Yushan counties. There used to be a release station, but it has now been removed.

古文：又西三里，即南龙北度之脊也。
现代文：又往西三里，就是南面的主山脉往北越的山脊。
English: Another three miles to the west is the ridge of the main mountains in the south to the north of Vietnam.

古文：其脉南自江山县二十七都之小筸岭，西转江西永丰东界，迤逦至此。
现代文：这条山脉从南边江山县二十七都的小覃岭，转往西到江西永丰县东界，再曲折绵延到此处。
English: This mountain range stretches from Xiaobuling, the 27th capital of Jiangshan County in the south, westward to the eastern border of Yongfeng County in Jiangxi Province, and then meandering to here.

古文：南北俱圆峙一峰，而度处伏而不高，亦束而不阔。
现代文：山脊的南北部都耸立着一座圆形的山峰，但山脊低伏而不高，并且也狭窄而不宽阔。
English: There is a rounded peak to the north and south of the ridge, but the ridge is low and not high, and it is narrow and not wide.

古文：脊西即有一涧南流，下流已入鄱阳矣。
现代文：山脊西面就有一条山沟水向南流，下游一直流入都阳湖。
English: On the west side of the ridge, there is a gully with water flowing southward, and downstream it flows all the way into Duyang Lake.

古文：洞西累石为门，南北俱属于山，是为东西分界。
现代文：山沟西面用石头累砌成门，门的南北两边都连着山，是东西的分界线。
English: On the western side of the ravine, stones are piled up to form a gate. The north and south sides of the gate are connected to the mountain, which is the dividing line between east and west.

古文：又十里为古城铺，转而南行，渐出山矣。
现代文：又走十里为古城铺，然后折往南，逐渐出了山。
English: Walked another ten miles to the ancient city, and then turned south, gradually out of the mountains.

古文：又五里，为金鸡洞岭。
现代文：又走五里，为金鸡洞岭。
English: Another five miles and it was Jinji Dongling.

古文：仍转而西，又五里，山塘铺，山遂大豁。
现代文：仍旧转向西，又走五里，到山塘铺，山势便大为开阔。
English: He still turned to the west and walked another five miles to Shantangpu, where the mountains were much more open.

古文：又十里，东津桥，石梁高跨溪上。
现代文：又走十里，到东津桥，一座石桥高高横架在溪流上。
English: Walk another ten miles to Dongjin Bridge, a stone bridge high above the stream.

古文：其水自北南流，其山高耸若负扆，然在玉山县北三十里外。
现代文：桥下的水自北流往南，桥后的山高高耸立，像是在后面立起一道倚天屏障，然而那山远在玉山县北面三十里外。
English: The water under the bridge flows from north to south, and the mountain behind the bridge stands tall, like a sky-scraping barrier behind it, but that mountain is thirty miles away in the north of Yushan County.

古文：盖自草萍北度，即西峙此山，一名大岭，一名三清山。山之阴即为饶之德兴，东北即为徽之婺ù源，东即为衢之开化、常山，盖浙、直、豫章三面之水，俱于此分焉。
现代文：大约山脉从草萍往北越过后，便在西面耸起为此山，山的北面就是饶州府的德兴县，东北面就是徽州府的姿源县，东面就是衡州府的开化县和常山县，浙江、南直隶、江西三面的水，都是从此山分流的。
English: After crossing the mountain range from Caoping to the north, it rises as a mountain in the west. The north side of the mountain is Dexing County of Raozhou Prefecture, the northeast side is Zhiyuan County of Huizhou Prefecture, the east side is Kaifu County and Changshan County of Hengzhou Prefecture, and the water on the three sides of Zhejiang, South Zhili and Jiangxi is diverted from this mountain.

古文：余昔从堨è埠山裘里，乃取道其东南谷中者也。
现代文：我从前从竭埠到裘里，就是取道它的东南山谷中。
English: I used to travel from the port to Chouri, which is in the south-eastern valley.

古文：渡桥西五里，由玉山东门入，里许，出西门。
现代文：越过桥向西走五里，由东门进入玉山县城，一里左右，出了西门。
English: Cross the bridge and walk west for five miles. Enter the Yushan County seat through the east gate. Walk about one mile and exit through the west gate.

古文：城中荒落殊甚，而西，城外市肆聚焉，以下水之埠在也。
现代文：城中荒凉衰败得很，而西城外的市集店铺聚集，因为船舶的下水码头在那里。
English: The town is desolate and run-down, while the market stalls cluster outside the west town, where the ship docks.

古文：东津桥之水，绕城南而西，至此胜舟。
现代文：东津桥来的水，绕过城南往西流，到此处便能够行船。
English: The water from the Higashitsubashi Bridge flows around the south of the city to the west, and it is possible to sail here.

古文：时已下午，水涸无长舟可附，得小舟至府，遂倩之行。
现代文：当时已下午，河水干枯没有大船可搭乘，找到一只到府城去的小船，便请求船夫开船。
English: At that time it was already afternoon, the river was dry and there were no big boats to take, so they found a small boat to go to the capital and asked the boatman to start the boat.

古文：二十里而暮，舟人乘月鼓棹夜行。
现代文：行二十里天黑下来，船夫乘月荡浆夜航。
English: After a twenty-mile journey, it got dark, and the boatman set off on a moonlit night voyage.

古文：三十里，过沙溪。
现代文：行三十里，经过沙溪。
English: It is a thirty-mile walk, passing through Shaxi.

古文：广信西二十里有名桥濒溪，下流又有九股松，一本九分，参霄竞秀，俱不及登。
现代文：又行五十里，停泊在广信县城南门外，这时才三更。沙溪的集市店铺很繁盛，停泊在河中的小船有一百多艘，河两岸水雄的声响此伏彼起，然而听说这地方盗贼多，月色中见有人挽起衣裳渡过溪流，所以不能无防备之心。
English: They traveled another fifty miles and anchored outside the south gate of the city in Guangxin County, when they were only three kilometers away. The market shops in Shaxi were very prosperous, there were more than a hundred boats anchored in the river, and the sound of water on both sides of the river arose. However, they heard that there were many thieves in this place, and in the moonlight they saw someone fold up their clothes and cross the stream, so they could not be defenseless.

古文：十八日早起，仍觅其舟至铅山之河口。
现代文：十八日早晨起来，仍然找到昨天乘的那只船坐到铅山县的河口。
English: On the morning of the 18th, I got up and still found the boat I took yesterday to the mouth of the river in Lead Mountain County.

古文：余初拟由广信北游灵山，且闻其地北山寺丛林甚盛，欲往一观。
现代文：我原打算从广信向北游览灵山，并且听说灵山北山寺庙宇兴盛，想前往一观。
English: I originally planned to visit Lingshan from Guangxin to the north, and I heard that the temples of Lingshan Beishan were flourishing, so I wanted to go and have a look.

古文：因骤发脓疮，行动俱妨，以其为河口舟，遂倩之行，两过广信俱不及停也。
现代文：因骤然生脓疮，一切行动都受妨碍，而这船是到河口去的，于是请求船夫开船，这样就两次经过广信都没能停留。
English: All movement was hampered by a sudden attack of scabies, and the boat, which had set out for the mouth of the river, asked the boatman to set sail, so that it was unable to stop twice past Guangxin.

古文：郡城横带溪北，雉堞不甚雄峻，而城外居市遥控，亦山城之大聚落也。
现代文：广信府城呈带状横向坐落在溪流北岸，城墙上排列如齿的矮墙不很雄峻，城外的房舍集市与它遥相控扼，也是山城中的一个大村落。
English: Guangxinfucheng is located on the north bank of the stream in a band shape. The low walls lined up like teeth on the city wall are not very majestic. The housing market outside the city is closely linked to it. It is also a large village in the mountain city.

古文：城东有灵溪，则灵山之水所泄；城西有永丰溪，则永丰之流所注。
现代文：城东有条灵溪，是灵山的水泄流的河道；城西有条永丰溪，永丰县的水流注其中。
English: In the east of the city, there is a Lingshi Creek, which is the channel for the water discharge of Lingshan; in the west of the city, there is a Yongfeng Creek, into which the water flow of Yongfeng County is poured.

古文：西南下三十里，有峰圆亘，色赭崖盘，名曰仙来山。
现代文：往西南下航三十里，有座山峰呈圆状横亘，颜色赤褐，崖壁盘曲，名叫仙来山。
English: Thirty miles to the southwest, there is a round peak, reddish-brown in color, with steep cliffs, called Mount Xianlai.

古文：初过其下，犹卧未起，及过二十里潭，至马鞍山之下，回望见之，已不及登矣。
现代文：起初船经过山下时，我仍躺着没有起来，等过了二十里潭，到马鞍山下，回头望见，已经来不及去攀登了。
English: At first, when the boat passed under the mountain, I was still lying down and did not get up. After waiting for the twenty-mile lake, when I got to the bottom of Ma'an Mountain, I looked back and it was too late to climb.

古文：自仙来至雷打石，二十里之内，石山界溪左右，俱如覆釜伏牛，或断或续，至山断沙回处，霜痕枫色，映村庐而出，石隙若经一番点缀者。
现代文：从仙来山到雷打石，二十里内，石山分立在溪流左右两岸，一座座都像翻盖着的锅，卧伏的牛，或断开或相连，不仅形态独特空灵，并且表面平滑无褶皱，以至丝毫泥土和极短小的树草茎杆都没有。到了石山断开有泥沙的地方，霜的痕印和枫叶的颜色掩映村舍，呈现在眼前，石头的缝隙间像是经过了一番点缀。
English: From Xianlaishan to Ledaishi, within twenty miles, Shishan stands on the left and right banks of the stream. Each one is like a covered pot, a crouching cow, or disconnected or connected. Not only is the shape unique and ethereal, but the surface is smooth and wrinkle-free, so that there is no trace of soil or very short stems of grasses. When Shishan is broken with mud and sand, the traces of frost and the color of maple leaves cover the village house, appearing in front of the eyes, and the gaps between the stones seem to have been embellished.

古文：又二十里，过旁罗，南望鹅峰，峭削天际，此昔余假道分水关而趋幔亭之处，转盼已二十年矣。
现代文：又行二十里，经过旁罗，向南眺望鹅峰，尖峭陡直地耸立在天际，这里就是以前我经过分水关前往慢亭的出发地，转眼已经二十年了。
English: After another twenty miles, I passed by Nairo and looked southward at Geese Peak, which rises steeply in the sky. This is where I used to leave for the pavilion after passing through the watershed. It's been twenty years.

古文：人寿几何，江山如昨，能不令人有秉烛之思耶！又二十里抵铅山河口，日已下舂，因流平风逆也。
现代文：岁月流逝，江山依旧，怎能不令人产生秉烛思旧的念头呢卫又行二十里，到达铅山县河口，太阳已经下山，因为水流平缓风又逆向所以才这样慢。
English: The years have passed, the country is still the same, how can people not have the idea of holding a candle and thinking about the old days? The water has traveled twenty miles and reached the estuary of Lead Mountain County, the sun has gone down, because the water flow is gentle and the wind is in the opposite direction, so it is so slow.

古文：河口有水自东南分水关发源，经铅山县，至此入大溪，市肆甚众，在大溪之左，盖两溪合而始胜重舟也。
现代文：河口有条水从东南的分水关发源，流经铅山县城，到此处汇入大溪。县城里买卖店铺很多，排列在大溪的左岸，这是因为两溪汇合在此可以航行载重量大的船只的缘敌。
English: The estuary has a strip of water from the source of the southeastern watershed, flowing through the county seat of Lead Mountain, where it flows into the creek. There are many shops and stores in the county seat, lined up on the left bank of the creek, because the two streams converge here and can sail heavy-duty ships.

古文：十九日晨餐后，觅贵溪舡。
现代文：十九日早餐后，找到去贵溪县的船，船舱很窄。
English: After breakfast on the 19th, I found a boat to Guixi County. The cabin was very narrow.

古文：甚隘，待附舟者，久而后行。
现代文：因等候其他乘客，许久后才出发。
English: Due to waiting for other passengers, we left after a long time.

古文：是早密云四布，时有零雨。
现代文：这天早上天空布满云彩，不时飘落零星小雨。
English: On this morning, the sky was covered with clouds, and sporadic light rain fell from time to time.

古文：三十里，西至叫岩。
现代文：行三十里，往西到达叫岩。
English: Go thirty miles west and you'll come to a rock.

古文：濒溪石崖盘突，下插深潭，澄碧如靛，上开横窦，回亘峰腰，崖上悬书 渔翁隐次 四大字，崖右即有石磴吸波指石级紧贴水面而向上延伸。
现代文：濒临溪流的石崖盘曲突兀，下插深潭，潭水清澈碧绿如靛，崖间有横向的孔穴，曲折横贯在山峰半腰，孔穴穿透岩石通到里面，如同走廊阁道，门窗都依稀可辨。崖上写着 渔翁隐次 四个大字，崖的右侧就有石瞪映照出溪中流波。我急忙叫船夫停下船来，攀援而上。
English: The rocky cliff on the edge of the stream is jagged and jagged, with a deep pool below. The water of the pool is clear and green like a dragonfly. There are transverse holes between the cliffs. Twists and turns run halfway across the mountain. Holes penetrate the rock to the inside, like a corridor, and doors and windows are faintly distinguishable. On the cliff is written "漁翁隐次" four large characters, and on the right side of the cliff there is a stone gazebo reflecting the waves in the stream. I hurriedly called the boatman to stop the boat and climb up.

古文：急呼舟子停舟而上。列石纵横，穿一隙而绕其后，见一径成蹊，遂溯源入壑。
现代文：石头纵横排列着，穿过一条石缝绕到后面，看到一条山路，于是沿山路往上进入深谷中。
English: The stones are arranged vertically and horizontally, passing through a stone slit to the back, seeing a mountain road, and then following the mountain road up into the deep valley.

古文：其后众峰环亘，积翠交加，心知已误，更欲穷源。
现代文：深谷后面众多山峰连绵环绕，树草丛密交错，我心里明白走错了路，却更加想探寻到山路尽头。
English: Behind the valley, there are many peaks in a row, and the bushes are densely intertwined. I know in my heart that I took the wrong path, but I still want to explore to the end of the mountain road.

古文：壑转峰回，居人多截坞为池种鱼。
现代文：沟壑曲折山峰盘绕，许多居民切断山坞砌起池塘养鱼。
English: Many residents cut off the docks to build ponds to raise fish.

古文：绕麓一山家，庐云巢翠，恍有幽趣。
现代文：坐落在山脚的一户山村人家，房屋在山间云霞和树木翠色中，隐约间显出幽趣。
English: Nestled at the foot of the mountain is a mountain village home. Amidst the mountain clouds and the green of the trees, the house vaguely exudes a quiet charm.

古文：亟投而问之，则其地已属兴安。
现代文：赶忙过去打探，则那里已属于兴安县。
English: If you hurry to investigate, you will find that it already belongs to Xing'an County.

古文：其前对之山圆亘而起者，曰团鸡石岭，是为铅山之西界。
现代文：房屋前面对着的呈圆形横亘而耸起的山，叫团鸡石岭，它是铅山县的西界。
English: In front of the house, there is a round, wide and towering mountain, called Tuanqiu Shiling, which is the western border of Lead Mountain County.

古文：团鸡之西即叫岩寺也。
现代文：团鸡石岭的西面就是叫岩寺。
English: The west side of the Tuanji stone ridge is called the rock temple.

古文：叫岩前临大溪，渔隐崖突于左，又一崖对突于右。
现代文：叫岩前面濒临大溪，渔隐崖高耸在左边，又有一座山崖与它对着，高耸在右边。
English: In front of the cliff, there is a large stream, the Yuyin cliff is towering on the left, and there is a mountain cliff opposite it, towering on the right.

古文：右崖之前，一圆峰兀立溪中，正如扬子之金、焦，浔阳之小孤，而此更圆整，所称印山也。
现代文：右边山崖的前面，有一座圆形山峰直立在溪中，正如扬子江中的金山、焦山和得阳江中的小孤山，但此峰更为浑圆齐整，它就是所称的印山。
English: In front of the cliff on the right, there is a round peak standing upright in the stream, just like the Jinshan in the Yangtze River, the Jiaoshan and the small lonely mountain in the Deyang River, but this peak is more rounded and neat, it is the so-called Indian Mountain.

古文：寺后岩石中虚，两旁回突，庋以一轩，即为叫岩。
现代文：叫岩寺后面的岩石中间是空的，两旁回环突兀，岩间架着一轩，这就是叫岩。
English: The middle of the rock behind the so-called rock temple is empty, the two sides of the ring are abrupt, and there is an embankment between the rocks. This is the so-called rock.

古文：岩为寺蔽，景之佳旷，在渔隐不在此也。
现代文：叫岩被叫岩寺掩蔽着，美好空阔的景致在渔隐崖而不在这里。
English: The so-called rock is covered by the so-called rock temple, and the beautiful and spacious scenery is in the hidden cliff, not here.

古文：叫岩西十里为弋阳界，又有山方峙溪右，若列屏而整，上有梵宇，不知其名，以棹急不及登，盖亦奇境也。
现代文：叫岩往西十里为弋阳县界，那里又有座方形的山屹立在溪流右岸，如同列置着一道齐整的屏风，山上有佛宇，但不知名称，因为船急于向前航行来不及攀登，大概也是一个神奇的地方。
English: Ten miles west of the rock is the boundary of Poyang County, where there is another square mountain standing on the right bank of the stream, like a neatly arranged screen. There are Buddhas on the mountain, but I don't know the name, because the ship is too anxious to sail forward to climb. It is probably also a magical place.

古文：又三十里，日已下舂，西南渐霁，遥望一峰孤插天际，询之知为龟岩，在弋阳南十五里。
现代文：又行三十里，太阳已落山，西南方云雾逐渐散尽，远远望去，一座孤峰高插天际，询问后知道是龟岩，它在弋阳县南边十五里。
English: Another thirty miles, the sun has set, the southwestern clouds have gradually dispersed, far away, a lone peak high in the sky, after inquiry, it is known to be turtle rock, it is fifteen miles south of Poyang County.

古文：余心艳之，而舟已觅贵溪者，不能中止。
现代文：我心中艳羡龟岩，但已找了到贵溪县去的船，不能中途停止。
English: In my heart, I envy the turtle rock, but I have found a boat to go to Guixi County, and I can't stop halfway.

古文：又十里至弋阳东关，遂以行李托静闻随舟去，余与顾仆留东关外逆旅，为明日龟岩之行。
现代文：又行十里到弋阳县东关，于是把行李交托给静闻随船先去，我和顾仆停留在东关外旅店中，为的是明日到龟岩去游览。
English: Another ten miles to Dongguan, Poyang County, so I entrusted my luggage to Jingwen and went ahead with the boat. I and my servant stayed in a hotel outside Dongguan in order to visit Kameiwa tomorrow.

古文：夜半风吼雨作。
现代文：半夜时狂风怒吼，下起了雨。
English: In the middle of the night, the wind howled and it began to rain.

古文：二十日早起，雨不止。
现代文：二十日早晨起来，雨下个不停。
English: On the morning of the 20th, I got up and it rained incessantly.

古文：平明持盖草编雨具行，人弋阳东门。
现代文：天大亮时打着雨伞出了旅店，进入弋阳县城东门内。
English: When it was broad daylight, he went out of the hotel with an umbrella and entered the east gate of Shenyang County.

古文：其城南临溪上，溪至此稍逊而南，濒城乃复浚支流为濠，下流复与溪合。
现代文：县城南临溪流，溪流到这里稍微折向南，于是濒临城墙又开挖了一条支流作为城壕，它的下游又与溪流汇合。
English: The county seat is south of the stream, and the stream turns slightly to the south here, so a tributary was dug on the edge of the city wall as a trench, and its downstream converged with the stream.

古文：雨中过县前，又西至西南门，遇一龟岩人舒姓者欲归，遂随之出城。
现代文：雨中经过县衙前，又往西到西南门，遇到一个姓舒的龟岩人打算回家，便跟随他出了城。
English: Passing in front of the county gate in the rain, and going west to the southwest gate, he met a turtle rock man named Shu who was planning to go home, so he followed him out of the city.

古文：过濠梁，三里，渡大溪。
现代文：越过护城河上的桥，走三里，渡过大溪。
English: Cross the bridge over the moat, walk three miles, cross the creek.

古文：溪南有塔，乃弋阳之水口也。
现代文：溪南岸有座塔，这里是弋阳县的水口。
English: There is a tower on the south bank of the creek. This is the mouth of the creek in Poyang County.

古文：自是俱从山冈行，陀石高下，俱成块而无纹，纤土不受也。
现代文：从这里起都是在山冈间走，石头高高低低，都是整块整块的，没有花纹，没有丝毫的泥土。
English: From here, it's all uphill and downhill, the stones are all the same size, there are no patterns, there is no dirt.

古文：时雨愈甚，淋漓雨中，望龟峰杳不可睹。
现代文：这时雨下得更大，从淋漓的雨幕中眺望龟峰，杳不可见。
English: At this time, the rain became heavier. Looking out at Kame Peak through the drenching rain curtain, I couldn't see the cormorants.

古文：忽睹路口一峰，具体而小，疑即夜来插天诱余者，询之知为羊角峤，其去龟峰尚五里也。
现代文：忽然看见路口有座山峰，形状如同龟峰，只是小一些，我怀疑它就是昨晚所见的那高插在天际诱我心动的山峰，询间后知道它是羊角娇，离龟峰还有五里远。
English: Suddenly I saw a mountain at the junction, shaped like a turtle peak, only smaller. I suspected that it was the mountain I had seen last night, high in the sky, which had captured my heart. After some investigation, I learned that it was Sheep's Horn, still five miles away from the turtle peak.

古文：比至，遥望一峰中剖如门。
现代文：等到了山峰前，远远望去，一座山峰中间破裂开，如一道门。
English: I waited until I was in front of a mountain peak. Looking off into the distance, I saw a mountain peak split open in the middle, like a door.

古文：已而，门之南忽岐出片石如圭，即天柱峰也。
现代文：随后见石门的南面忽然岔出一片石块，如同圭玉，那里就是天柱峰。
English: Then, on the south side of the stone gate, a piece of stone suddenly appeared, like a key stone, and there was Tianzhu Peak.

古文：及抵其处，路忽南去。
现代文：等到了那片石块处，路忽然折向南去。
English: When we reached the rock, the road suddenly turned south.

古文：转而东入，先过一堰，堰南汇水一池，即放生池也。
现代文：我转往东进去，先经过一座拦水坝，坝南面汇积了一池水，它就是放生池。
English: I turned to the east and went in, first passing a dam. A pool of water had accumulated on the south side of the dam. It was a petting pond.

古文：池水两浸崖足。循崖左凿石成栈，上危壁而下澄潭，潭尽，竹树扶疏，掩映一壑，两崖飞瀑交注，如玉龙乱舞，皆雨师山灵合而竞幻者也。
现代文：池水浸没了两边的崖脚，沿着山崖的左边，有一条凿开石壁筑成的栈道，这里就是展旗峰。上面是高耸的崖壁，下面是清澈的水潭，潭的尽头，竹子树木枝叶茂盛，疏密有致，掩映满整个山谷，山谷两边崖壁上飞瀑交注，如同玉龙乱舞，这些都是雨师山灵一起显示的奇幻景象。
English: The water of the pond has submerged the foot of the cliff on both sides. Along the left side of the cliff, there is a boardwalk built by chiseling the stone wall. Here is the banner peak. Above is the towering cliff wall, below is the clear water pool. At the end of the pool, the bamboo trees have lush branches and dense leaves, covering the entire valley. The cliff walls on both sides of the valley are interspersed with flying waterfalls, like a jade dragon dance. These are the fantastic scenery shown together by the rain master and the mountain spirit.

古文：既入，忽见南崖最高处，一窍通明，若耳之附颅，疑为白云所凝，最近而知其为石隙。
现代文：进入山谷，忽然看见南边山崖的最高处，有个通着光亮的孔穴，就像耳朵依附在头颅上，我先疑心它是凝滞的一片白云，走到最近处才知道是一条石缝。
English: Entering the valley, I suddenly saw the highest point of the cliff on the south side of the mountain, there was a hole through the light, like an ear attached to the head. I first suspected it was a stagnant white cloud, and when I got to the nearest place, I knew it was a stone slit.

古文：及抵方丈，则庭中人立而起者不一，为云气氤氲，隐现不定。
现代文：等抵达寺中方丈，见庭院中有人站立，有人起身，因为云气氮氯，人影忽隐忽现。
English: When I arrived at the temple's main gate, I saw people standing and getting up in the courtyard. Because of the clouds of nitrogen and chlorine, people's shadows were appearing and disappearing.

古文：时雨势弥甚，衣履沾透，贯心上人急解衣代更，爇就炙，心知众峰之奇，不能拔云驱雾矣。
现代文：这时雨势更大，我的衣服鞋子都湿透了，贯心上人急忙脱下他的衣服给我换上，烧着火让我们烘烤。我深知这里众峰很奇异，然而不能拨开云朵驱散雾气看个究竟啊！
English: At this time, the rain was more intense, my clothes and shoes were soaked, and my beloved hurriedly took off his clothes and put them on for me, and let us bake on the fire. I know very well that the peaks here are very strange, but I can't open the clouds to disperse the fog and see what's going on!

古文：是日竞日夜雨，为作《五缘诗》。
现代文：这一天雨从早到晚一直下着，为此我作了一首《五缘诗》。
English: On this day, it rained from morning until night, so I wrote a poem called "Five Poems."

古文：晚卧于振衣台下之静室中。
现代文：晚上睡在振衣台下的静室中。
English: At night, they sleep in a quiet room under a drying table.

