古文：孙子曰：合军聚众，务在激气，复徙合军，务在治兵利气。
现代文：孙膑说：集结军兵准备打仗之前，一定要先激发军中将士的士气。
English: Sun Yat-sen said: Before assembling soldiers to prepare for war, we must first stimulate the morale of lieutenant generals.

古文：临境近敌，务在厉气。
现代文：再次集合军队拔营进军的时候，一定要先整治军中制度，增强士兵的锐气。
English: When the army gathers again to march into battle, it must first rectify the military system and strengthen the soldiers' spirit.

古文：战日有期，务在断气。
现代文：当军队临近敌军阵地时，务必要注意在战前激励士气。
English: When the army is close to the enemy's position, it is necessary to pay attention to stimulating morale before the war.

古文：今日将战，务在延气。
现代文：决战日期确定之后，务必让全军将士激发出决一死战的士气。
English: After the date of the decisive battle is determined, it is imperative for the entire army to inspire the morale of the decisive battle.

古文：以威三军之士，所以激气也。
现代文：在即将交战的当天，务必要让作战的将士保持高昂的士气。用来为三军将士壮威，从而激发士气。
English: On the day of the upcoming battle, it is important to keep the morale of the combat soldiers high. It is used to inspire the morale of the soldiers of the three armies.

古文：将军令其令，所以利气也。
现代文：是借以提高士气。将领下令这个命令，是为了鼓舞将士们的斗志。
English: The general gave the order in order to boost the morale of his soldiers.

古文：将军乃短衣絜裘，以劝士志，所以厉气也。
现代文：将领下令，命令全军将士每人只带三天口粮，全国百姓每家每户这是为了坚定将士们决一死战的决心。
English: The general issued an order, ordering the entire army to bring only three days of rations per person, and the people of the whole country to bring only three days of rations per household. This was to strengthen the determination of the soldiers to fight a war to the death.

古文：将军令，令军人人为三日粮，国人家为所以断气也。
现代文：将领召见将担任后卫的将士们告诫说：为了保持高昂的士气。士兵多而又善战，敌军就必定失败。
English: Summoning the soldiers who would serve as guards, the general cautioned that in order to maintain high morale, the enemy army must fail if it has many soldiers and is good at fighting.

古文：将军召将卫人者而告之曰：饮食毋所以延气也。
现代文：将士们士气不高，行动就会迟缓，行动迟缓就去贻误战机，那就必然导致失利，不能救治，出现将士阵亡，而且家庭残破的情况。将领就要派使者去慰问，
English: If the morale of the generals is not high, the action will be slow, and if the action is slow to delay the fighter, it will inevitably lead to failure, can not be cured, there will be soldiers killed in battle, and the family will be broken. The generals will send an envoy to console,

