古文：许敬宗，杭州新城人，隋礼部侍郎善心子也。
现代文：许敬宗，杭州新城人，是隋代礼部侍郎许善心的儿子。
English: Xu Jingzong, a resident of Hangzhou Xincheng, was the son of Xu Zenshin, a waiter of the ceremonial department in the Sui Dynasty.

古文：其先自高阳南渡，世仕江左。
现代文：他的先祖从高阳南渡，世代在江左为官。
English: His ancestors migrated from Gaoyang to Nandu and served as officials in Jiangzao for generations.

古文：敬宗幼善属文，举秀才，授淮阳郡司法书佐，俄直谒者台，奏通事舍人事。
现代文：敬宗年幼时擅长写文章，被荐举为秀才，朝廷授任敬宗为淮阳郡司法书佐，不久在谒台值班，奏通事舍人事。
English: When he was young, Jingzong was good at writing articles. He was recommended as an outstanding talent. The imperial court appointed Jingzong as a judicial assistant of Huaiyang County. Soon he was on duty in Xingtai, reporting on the affairs of the palace.

古文：江都之难，善心为宇文化及所害。敬宗流转，投于李密，密以为元帅府记室，与魏徵同为管记。
现代文：宇文化及在江都反叛杀君，敬宗的父亲善心被宇文化及杀害，敬宗流落辗转投奔了李密，李密任命敬宗为元帅府记室，与魏征一起掌管文书。
English: U Bunka and rebels in Jiangdu killed him. Keizong's father, Zenshin, was killed by U Bunka and Keizong fled to Li Mi. Li Mi appointed Keizong to the marshal's office, and together with Wei Zheng, he was in charge of paperwork.

古文：武德初，赤牒拟涟州别驾。
现代文：武德初年，授官文书委任他为涟州别驾。
English: In the first year of Wu De, the awarding document appointed him as the leader of Zhangzhou.

古文：太宗闻其名，召补秦府学士。
现代文：太宗听到他的名声，把敬宗召补秦王府学士。
English: When Emperor Taizong heard of his reputation, he summoned Jingzong to supplement the Qin Academy.

古文：贞观八年，累除著作郎，兼修国史，迁中书舍人。
现代文：贞观八年，历授著作郎，兼修国史，升迁为中书舍人。
English: In the eighth year of Zhenguan, he was promoted to the position of junior high school teacher.

古文：十年，文德皇后崩，百官缞绖。率更令欧阳询状貌丑异，众或指之，敬宗见而大笑，为御史所劾，左授洪州都督府司马。
现代文：贞观十年，文德皇后去世，百官披麻戴孝，率更令欧阳询状貌丑陋异常，众官中有人用手指点他，敬宗见到他的样子大笑，被御史揭发，于是降职为洪州都督府司马。
English: In the 10th year of Zhenguan, Empress Wende passed away, and hundreds of officials were dressed as Ma Dai Xiao, which made Ouyang Zhen's appearance even more ugly and abnormal. Some of the officials pointed at him with their fingers, and Jingzong laughed when he saw him. He was exposed by the imperial historian, and was demoted to the post of Hongzhou prefectural governor.

古文：累迁给事中，兼修国史。
现代文：接着迁任给事中，兼修撰国史。
English: He was then transferred to the Ministry of Justice, where he also studied national history.

古文：十七年，以修《武德》、《贞观实录》成，封高阳县男，赐物八百段，权检校黄门侍郎。
现代文：贞观十七年，因为修成《武德、贞观实录》，朝廷封敬宗为高阳县男，赐物八百段，代理检校黄门侍郎。
English: In the seventeenth year of Zhenguan, because of the completion of "Martial Arts, Zhenguan Record," the imperial court named Jingzong as the man of Gaoyang County, bestowed eight hundred dan, and acted as the attendant of Huangmen.

古文：高宗在春宫，迁太子右庶子。
现代文：高宗住在东宫，敬宗迁任太子右庶子。
English: Gao Zong lived in the East Palace, and Keizong was transferred to be the Prince's second son.

古文：十九年，太宗亲伐高丽，皇太子定州监国，敬宗与高士廉等共知机要。
现代文：贞观十九年，太宗亲自出征攻打高丽，皇太子留守定州处理国政，敬宗与高士廉等一起执掌机密的要政。
English: In the 19th year of Zhenguan, Emperor Taizong personally went on an expedition to attack Goryeo, the crown prince stayed in Dingzhou to deal with national affairs, and Emperor Keizong and Gao Shiliang jointly held confidential important politics.

古文：中书令岑文本卒于行所，令敬宗以本官检校中书侍郎。
现代文：中书令岑文本死在行所，朝廷令敬宗凭借本官的身份检校中书侍郎。
English: The original copy of the imperial edict died in the office, and the imperial edict named Keizong the junior secretary of the imperial edict by virtue of his official identity.

古文：太宗大破辽贼于驻跸山，敬宗立于马前受旨草诏书，词彩甚丽，深见嗟赏。
现代文：太宗在驻跸山下摧毁了辽贼，敬宗站在太宗马前接受圣旨起草诏书，词藻文采非常华丽，深受太宗的赞赏。
English: Emperor Taizong destroyed the Liao bandits at the foot of Mount Lushan. Emperor Keizong stood in front of Emperor Taizong's horse to receive the imperial edict and draft the imperial edict. Emperor Taizong's words and writings were very magnificent and deeply appreciated by Emperor Taizong.

古文：先是，庶人承乾废黜，宫僚多被除削，久未收叙。
现代文：这以前，太子承乾与侯君集、汉王李元昌一起谋图魏王李泰，事情败露，诏令废承乾为庶人，朝中官僚大多被削职，很久都没有按等级次第来进职或奖功。
English: Prior to this, Prince Cheng Kan, together with Hou Junji and Han King Li Yuanchang, plotted to overthrow Wei King Li Tai. However, the plot failed, and the edict was issued abolishing Cheng Kan as a commoner. Most of the bureaucrats in the court and the government were demoted, and for a long time they were not promoted or awarded according to their rank.

古文：敬宗上表曰： 臣闻先王慎罚，务在于恤刑，往哲宽仁，义在于宥过。
现代文：敬宗上表说： 我听说先王小心刑罚，是致力于慎用刑法；先哲宽厚仁慈，义在于宽赦过失。
English: "I heard that the former king was careful with punishments and devoted himself to the prudent use of criminal law; the former philosopher was kind and merciful, and righteousness consisted in forgiving faults," said Emperor Jingzong.

古文：圣人之道，莫尚于兹。
现代文：圣人的道理，没有不崇尚这个道理的。
English: There is no reason not to venerate the wisdom of the sages.

古文：窃见废官，五品以上，除名弃斥，颇历岁时。
现代文：我私下看到废除的官僚，五品以上，除去名籍废弃驱逐，很经历了一些年。
English: I have seen in private that the bureaucrats who have been abolished, those with more than five grades, those who have had their names and surnames removed, those who have been disposed of and expelled, have gone through quite a few years.

古文：但庶人畴昔之年，身处不疑之地，苞藏悖逆，阴结宰臣，所预奸谋，多连宗戚。
现代文：然而庶人在从前的岁月里，身处在不疑之地，包藏违乱逆反之心，暗地勾结官吏，所参与的奸诈阴谋，多牵连宗族亲属。
English: However, in previous years, commoners were in a safe place, harboring rebellious and rebellious hearts, secretly colluding with officials, and participating in treacherous conspiracies, mostly involving clan relatives.

古文：祸生虑表，非可防萌，宫内官僚，迥无关预。
现代文：祸患发生在意料之外，不能防患于开始，宫内官僚，远没有涉及参与。
English: The calamity happened unexpectedly, could not be prevented at the beginning, the palace bureaucracy was far from being involved.

古文：今乃投鼠及器，孰谓无冤？
现代文：现在却是投鼠忌器，除恶牵连到有关的人，谁说不会有冤屈？
English: Now, however, it is a rodent repellent, eliminating the evil and implicating the relevant people. Who says there will be no grievances?

古文：焚山毁玉，稍同迁怒。
现代文：焚山毁玉，接近等同于迁怒。
English: Burning mountains to destroy jade is close to the same as anger.

古文：伏寻先典，例有可原。
现代文：俯首重温祖先的制度，旧例有可以赦免的。
English: Let's bow our heads and revisit the system of our ancestors. Some of the old cases can be pardoned.

古文：昔吴国陪臣，则爰丝不坐于刘濞；昌邑中尉，则王吉免缘于海昏。
现代文：从前吴国的诸侯大夫爰丝不因为刘氵鼻谋反而受牵连；昌邑中尉王吉因忠直劝谏才得免死罪。
English: The former vassal doctor of the state of Wu, Yan Si, was implicated not because of Liu Xun's machinations, but on the contrary; the lieutenant of Changyi, Wang Ji, was exempted from the death penalty because of his loyal persuasion of Yan.

古文：譬诸栾布，乃策名于彭越；比乎田叔，亦委质于张敖。
现代文：譬如栾布，就是因为哭祭彭越而做官；比方田叔，跟随张敖而赴死如归。
English: For example, Zou Bu became an official because of the crying festival of Peng Yue; for example, Uncle Fang Tian followed Zhang Ye to his death.

古文：主以凶逆，陷其诛夷；臣以贤良，荷彼收擢。
现代文：君主因为凶暴忤逆，使他陷入诛灭绝境；臣子因为贤良，使他蒙受取用提拔。
English: The monarch, because he was violent and rebellious, plunged him into the realm of extinction; the vassal, because he was virtuous, caused him to be promoted.

古文：历观往代，此类尤多。近者有隋，又遵斯义。
现代文：一一地观察从前的朝代，这一类情况特别多；近的有隋，又遵从这个道理。
English: Observe the previous dynasties one by one, this kind of situation is particularly abundant; the recent Sui Dynasty also follows this principle.

古文：杨勇之废，罪止加于佞人，李纲之徒，皆不预于刑网。
现代文：杨勇被废黜，罪过仅仅加给善于花言巧语阿谀奉承的人，李纲的党徒，都不干涉刑法纲纪。
English: Yang Yong was deposed, the crime was only added to those who were good at flattery and flattery, and the party members of Li Gang did not interfere with the criminal law discipline.

古文：古今裁其折衷，史籍称为美谈。
现代文：古今裁断量度使它折衷，史籍称为美谈。
English: The old-fashioned and new-fashioned measurement makes it a compromise, and the historical record is called a fairy tale.

古文：而今张玄素、令狐德棻、赵弘智、裴宣机、萧钧等，并砥节励操，有雅望于当朝；经明行修，播令名于天下。
现代文：而现在张玄素、令狐德、赵弘智、裴宣机、肖钧等人，一起磨砺道德情操，在当朝有美好的声望；经义明白清楚品行美好，传播美名于天下。
English: Now, Zhang Xuansu, Ling Xude, Zhao Hongzhi, Pei Xuanqi, Xiao Qi and others are working together to sharpen moral sentiments. They had a good reputation in the past; they understood the meaning, behaved well, and spread their good name to the world.

古文：或以直言而遭箠扑，或以忤意而见猜嫌，一概雷同，并罹天宪，恐于王道，伤在未弘。 
现代文：有的因为直言而遭受杖刑，有的因为意见相抵触而被猜疑，现在只因他们同是废太子的僚属，便不加区分地与奸佞之徒一起遭到朝廷法令的处罚，恐怕有伤于王道的弘扬。 
English: Some were caned because of their outspokenness, others were suspected because of conflicting opinions, and now, just because they are both colleagues of the former crown prince, they are indiscriminately punished by the imperial decree together with the traitors. I am afraid that it will hurt the promotion of the royal way.

古文：由是玄素等稍得叙用。
现代文：因此张玄素等逐渐得到朝廷分级进用。
English: Therefore, Zhang Xuan Su and others were gradually graded and used by the imperial court.

古文：二十一年，加银青光禄大夫。
现代文：贞观二十一年，敬宗加封为银青光禄大夫。
English: In the 21st year of Zhenguan, Keizong was awarded the title of Silver Qingguanglu Doctor.

古文：高宗嗣位，代于志宁为礼部尚书。
现代文：高宗即位后，敬宗代于志宁为礼部尚书。
English: After the enthronement of Emperor Gao Zong, Emperor Keizong appointed Yu Shining as the head of the etiquette department.

古文：敬宗嫁女与蛮酋冯盎之子，多纳金宝，为有司所劾，左授郑州刺史。
现代文：敬宗把女儿嫁给少数民族部族之长冯盎的儿子，收纳了很多金银珠宝，被有司揭发，降任郑州刺史。
English: Jingzong married his daughter to the son of the head of the ethnic minority tribe, Feng Ang, and collected a lot of gold and silver jewelry. He was exposed by the authorities and demoted to the post of Zhengzhou chief historian.

古文：永徽三年，入为卫尉卿，加弘文馆学士，兼修国史。
现代文：永徽三年，入京任卫尉卿，担任弘文馆学士，兼修国史。
English: In the third year of Yonghui, he entered Beijing as a lieutenant, served as a scholar of the Hongwen Museum, and also studied national history.

古文：六年，复拜礼部尚书，高宗将废皇后王氏而立武昭仪，敬宗特赞成其计。
现代文：永徽六年，重新拜为礼部尚书。高宗准备废掉王皇后，而册立武昭仪，敬宗特别赞成这个主张。
English: In the sixth year of Yonghui, Shang Shu, the ceremonial department, was revived. Gao Zong was ready to abolish Wang Quen and establish Wu Zhaoyi. Keizong especially approved of this idea.

古文：长孙无忌、褚遂良、韩瑗等并直言忤旨，敬宗与李义府潜加诬构，并流死于岭外。
现代文：长孙无忌、褚遂良、韩瑗等一起直言进谏，触犯了高宗的旨意，敬宗与李义府暗中设计加以陷害，使长孙无忌、褚遂良、韩瑗一起流放到岭外，直至处死。
English: The eldest grandson Mujie, Zou Suiliang, Han Zheng, and others went into exile together, violating Gao Zong's will, and Keizong and Li Yifu secretly plotted to frame them, so that the eldest grandson Mujie, Zou Suiliang, and Han Zheng were exiled together outside of Ling, until they were executed.

古文：显庆元年，加太子宾客，寻册拜侍中，监修国史。
现代文：显庆元年，敬宗担任太子宾客，不久册授侍中，监修国史。
English: In the first year of the Emperor's enthronement, Keizong served as a guest of the Crown Prince, and was soon appointed as an attendant, supervising the study of national history.

古文：三年，进封郡公，寻赠其父善心为冀州刺史。
现代文：显庆三年，晋封为郡公，不久朝廷追赠他父亲许善心为冀州刺史。
English: In the third year of Xianqing, he was promoted to county magistrate. Soon after, the court posthumously awarded his father, Xu Zenshin, the title of Jizhou prefect.

古文：高宗因于古长安城游览，问侍臣曰： 朕观故城旧基，宫室似与百姓杂居，自秦、汉已来，几代都此？ 
现代文：高宗因在古长安城游览，问侍臣说： 朕看故城旧基，宫室像是与百姓杂居在一起，从秦、汉以来，几代都是这样的吗？ 
English: Gao Zong, who was on a tour of the ancient Chang'an City, asked the courtier: "I see the old foundation of the old city, the palace seems to be mixed with the people. Since the Qin and Han dynasties, how many generations have been like this?

古文：敬宗对曰： 秦都咸阳，郭邑连跨渭水，故云 渭水贯都，以象天河。 
现代文：敬宗回答说 ：秦代都城咸阳，城郭相连横跨渭水，所以说 渭水贯穿都城，而像是天河 。
English: Keizong replied, "In Qin Dynasty, the capital city was Xianyang, and the city walls were connected across Surabaya. Therefore, Surabaya runs through the capital city, and it looks like the Tianhe River.

古文：至汉惠帝始筑此城，其后苻坚、姚苌、后周并都之。 
现代文：到汉惠帝时才筑这个城，那以后苻坚、姚苌、后周都把这里做都城。 
English: It was not until the Han Dynasty that Emperor Hui built this city, after which Emperor Qianjian, Emperor Yao and Emperor Hou Zhou all made it the capital city.

古文：帝又问： 昆明池是汉武帝何年中开凿？ 
现代文：皇帝又问 ：昆明池是汉武帝什么年间开凿？ 
English: The emperor also asked: Kunming Pond was dug by Emperor Hanwu in what year?

古文：敬宗对曰： 武帝遣使通西南夷，而为昆明滇池所闭，欲伐昆明国，故因镐之旧泽，以穿此池，用习水战，元狩三年事也。 
现代文：敬宗回答说： 武帝派使者与西南少数民族友好交往，而被昆明滇池阻绝，当时想攻打昆明国，因此借镐池的旧泽，凭它通过滇池，用来练习水战，这是汉武帝元狩三年的事。 
English: Jingzong replied: Emperor Wu sent an envoy to have friendly exchanges with the ethnic minorities of Southwest China, but was thwarted by Kunming Dianchi. At that time, he wanted to attack Kunming. Therefore, he borrowed the old name of Dianchi and used it to pass through Dianchi to practice water warfare. This was a matter of three years of hunting for Emperor Wu of Han.

古文：帝因令敬宗与弘文馆学士具检秦、汉已来历代宫室处所以奏。
现代文：高宗因此命令敬宗与弘文馆学士一一考查秦汉以来历代宫室处所，上奏朝廷。
English: Gaozong therefore ordered Keizong and the scholars of the Hongwen Academy to investigate the location of the palace rooms of all the dynasties since the Qin and Han dynasties, and report to the imperial court.

古文：其年，代李义府为中书令，任遇之重，当朝莫比。
现代文：当年敬宗又代理李义府任中书令，受朝廷的信任恩遇之厚，在当朝没有人可以相比。
English: At that time, Keizong also acted as Li Yifu's envoy, and was trusted and favored by the imperial court. There was no one comparable in that era.

古文：龙朔二年，从新令改为右相，加光禄大夫。
现代文：龙朔二年，敬宗依照新的法令改为右相，担任光禄大夫。
English: In the second year of Long Shuo, Keizong was changed to the right minister in accordance with the new decree and served as the doctor of Guanglu.

古文：三年，册拜太子少师、同东西台三品，并依旧监修国史。
现代文：龙朔三年，册封为太子少师、同东西台三品，并依旧监修国史。
English: In less than three years, he was awarded the title of Prince's Junior Teacher, and was awarded the Three Diplomas of East and West, and continued to supervise the study of national history.

古文：乾封初，以敬宗年老，不能行步，特令与司空李勣，每朝日各乘小马入禁门至内省。
现代文：乾封初年，由于敬宗年老，不能步行，朝廷特令敬宗与司空李责力每次入朝晋见那天各乘小马进禁门到内省。
English: In the first year of Qianfeng, because Keizong was old and could not walk, the imperial court ordered Keizong and Siku Li to take a pony to enter the forbidden gate to introspect every time they entered the court.

古文：敬宗自掌知国史，记事阿曲。
现代文：敬宗自从掌管国史，记事曲从迎合、曲直不正。
English: Since Keizong has been in charge of the national history, the chronicle music has become more accommodating and the melody has become more irregular.

古文：初，虞世基与敬宗父善心同为宇文化及所害，封德彝时为内史舍人，备见其事，因谓人曰： 世基被诛，世南匍匐而请代；善心之死，敬宗舞蹈以求生。 
现代文：当初，虞世基与敬宗的父亲许善心一起被宇文化及杀害，封德彝当时为内史舍人，完全看到了当时的情况，因此对人说： 虞世基被诛杀，世南伏地而行请求替兄受死，善心被处死，敬宗手舞足蹈用来求生。 
English: At the beginning, Yu Shiji and Keizong's father, Xu Zenshin, were abducted and killed by the Yu Culture. Feng Dejun was a historian at the time, and he fully saw the situation at the time, so he told people: Yu Shiji was killed, the world went to the south to ask for death for his brother, Zenshin was executed, and Keizong danced to survive.

古文：人以为口实，敬宗深衔之，及为德彝立传，盛加其罪恶。
现代文：人们以此为话柄，敬宗非常怨恨这件事，到了为德彝立传的时候，大肆强加他的罪恶。
English: People used this as a pretext, and Jingzong was very resentful of this, and when it was time to establish a reputation for virtue, he imposed his evil on a large scale.

古文：敬宗嫁女与左监门大将军钱九陇，本皇家隶人，敬宗贪财与婚，乃为九陇曲叙门阀，妄加功绩，并升与刘文静、长孙顺德同卷。
现代文：敬宗女儿嫁给左监门大将军钱九陇，其人本来是皇家的奴隶，敬宗贪图财物与他联姻，于是为九陇曲意陈述他的门阀，给他妄加功绩，并把他提升到与刘文静、长孙顺德同卷。
English: When Jingzong's daughter married Qian Jiuyuan, the left-wing gatekeeper general, who was originally a slave of the royal family, Jingzong, who was greedy for wealth, married him. Therefore, he stated his gate valve for Jiuyuan's deviousness, gave him extravagant merits, and promoted him to the same volume as Liu Wenzhing and his eldest grandson Shunde.

古文：敬宗为子娶尉迟宝琳孙女为妻，多得赂遗，及作宝琳父敬德传，悉为隐诸过咎。
现代文：敬宗为儿子娶尉迟宝琳的孙女为妻，得到很多贿赂的财物，到做宝琳的父亲尉迟敬德的传时，完全为他隐去各种过失罪过。
English: Keizong married Pauline's granddaughter for his son, received a lot of bribe money, and when he became Pauline's father, he completely hid all kinds of mistakes and sins from him.

古文：太宗作《威凤赋》以赐长孙无忌，敬宗改云赐敬德。
现代文：太宗做《威凤赋》用来赐给长孙无忌，敬宗做传时却改写是赐给尉迟敬德。
English: Taizong made "Wei Feng Fu" to be given to the eldest grandson, but when Keizong made it, it was rewritten to be given to Fuxi Jingde.

古文：白州人庞孝泰，蛮酋凡品，率兵从征高丽，贼知其懦，袭破之。
现代文：白州人庞孝泰，是少数民族部落首领中的平庸之辈，率兵跟随出征高丽，高丽知道他懦弱，袭败了庞孝泰。
English: Pang Hsiao-tai, a native of Baizhou, was a mediocre leader among the leaders of ethnic minority tribes. He led an army to accompany Goryeo on a military expedition. Goryeo knew he was a coward and defeated Pang Hsiao-tai.

古文：敬宗又纳其宝货，称孝泰频破贼徒，斩获数万。汉将骁健者，唯苏定方与庞孝泰耳，曹继叔、刘伯英皆出其下。
现代文：敬宗又收纳了他的珍贵物品，做传时说他屡次打败贼众，斩杀俘获敌贼数万人，汉将中骁勇强健的，只有苏定方与庞孝泰了，曹继叔、高伯英都在他们之下。
English: Jingzong also collected his precious items. When he made the legend, he said that he repeatedly defeated the thieves, killed and captured tens of thousands of enemy thieves. Among the Han generals, only Suding Fang and Pang Xiaotai were brave and strong. Cao Jishu and Gao Boying were below them.

古文：虚美隐恶如此！
现代文：虚假美化与隐匿丑恶到了这个程度。
English: This is the extent of the false beautification and hidden ugliness.

古文：初，高祖、太宗两朝实录，其敬播所修者，颇多详直，敬宗又辄以己爱憎曲事删改，论者尤之。
现代文：起初，高祖、太宗两朝的实录，其中由敬宗所撰写的，很多都是详细、真实的，敬宗又总是以自己的爱憎曲意进行删改，评论群言尤其是这样。
English: At first, many of the historical records of the two dynasties of Gaozu and Taizong, which were written by Keizong, were detailed and true. However, Keizong always edited and revised them according to his own likes and dislikes. This was especially true of the commentaries on Qunyan.

古文：然自贞观已来，朝廷所修《五代史》及《晋书》、《东殿新书》、《西域图志》、《文思博要》、《文馆词林》、《累璧》、《瑶山玉彩》《姓氏录》、《新礼》，皆总知其事，前后赏赉，不可胜纪。
现代文：然而从贞观以来，朝廷所撰修的《五代史》及《晋书》、《东殿新书》、《西域图志》、《文思博要》、《文馆词林》、《累壁》、《瑶山玉彩》、《姓氏录》、《新礼》，敬宗都总揽其事，前后所得赏赐，多得记也记不清。
English: However, since Zhenguan, the "History of the Five Dynasties" and "Jinshu," "Eastern Palace New Book," "Western Atlas," "Wen Si Bo You," "Library Thesaurus," "Lepu," "Lushan Yucai," "Surname Records" and "New Rites" written by the imperial court have all been in the hands of Keizong, and the rewards received before and after are too numerous to remember.

古文：敬宗好色无度。
现代文：敬宗好色无度。
English: Keizong is insatiably horny.

古文：其长子昂颇有才藻，历位太子舍人。母裴氏早卒。
现代文：他的长子许昂很有文才，历任太子舍人的职务，许昂的母亲裴氏很早就去世了。
English: His eldest son, Xu Aung, was a very talented writer. Successive princelings relinquished their posts. Xu Aung's mother, Pei, passed away a long time ago.

古文：裴侍婢有姿色，敬宗嬖之，以为继室，假姓虞氏。
现代文：裴氏的婢女有姿色，敬宗宠爱她，让她做继室，假姓虞氏。
English: Pei's handmaid is attractive, Keizong favors her, makes her his second wife, and gives her a false surname, Yu.

古文：昂素与通，烝之不绝，敬宗怒黜虞氏，加昂以不孝，奏请流于岭外。
现代文：许昂平素与她私通，以下淫上一直通奸。敬宗发怒废黜了虞氏，加给许昂以不孝的罪名，上奏朝廷请求把许昂流放到岭外。
English: Xu Angping had been unfaithful with her, and the adultery continued after the adultery. Keizong angrily dethroned the Yu clan, charged Xu Ang with being unfilial, and petitioned the court to banish Xu Ang outside of Ling.

古文：显庆中，表乞昂还，除虔化令，寻卒。
现代文：显庆年间，上表请求朝廷让许昂回来，任虔化县令，不久就去世了。
English: During the Xianqing period, the above table requested the court to let Xu Ang return, and Ren Qianhua, the county magistrate, died soon after.

古文：咸亨元年，抗表乞骸骨，诏听致仕，仍加特进，俸禄如旧。
现代文：咸亨元年，敬宗上表请求辞官退休，皇帝的诏令听任他退休，依旧担任特进，俸禄照旧。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Xianheng, Emperor Jingzong requested retirement from his post, and the Emperor's edict allowed him to retire. He still served as a special envoy, and his salary remained the same.

古文：三年薨，年八十一。
现代文：咸亨三年，敬宗去世，终年八十一岁。
English: Three years after Xianheng, Keizong died at the age of 81.

古文：高宗为之举哀，废朝三日，诏文武百官就第赴哭，册赠开府仪同三司、扬州大都督，陪葬昭陵。
现代文：高宗为他举哀，三天停止上朝，诏令文武百官到敬宗的府第去哭丧，册封追赠为开府仪同三司、扬州大都督，准许他陪葬在昭陵。
English: Gaozong held a memorial service for him, suspended the imperial court for three days, and issued an edict ordering hundreds of civil and military officials to go to the capital to mourn for him. He was posthumously awarded the title of Kaifu Yi Tong San Si, Yangzhou Grand Governor, and allowed to be buried with him in Shoryo.

古文：文集八十卷。
现代文：敬宗有文集八十卷。
English: Keizong has a collection of eighty volumes.

古文：太常将定谥，博士袁思古议曰： 敬宗位以才升，历居清级，然弃长子于荒徼，嫁少女于夷落。
现代文：太常准备给敬宗定谥号，博士袁思古建议说： 敬宗的地位凭借才能上升，历来处于清的等第，然而他让长子离弃到荒郊远地，把女儿嫁给蛮夷的部落。
English: Dr. Yuan Shigu, who had been preparing to give the name of the emperor to Emperor Keizong for a long time, suggested: Emperor Keizong's status has risen by virtue of his talent, and he has always been in the first rank of the Qing Dynasty. However, he abandoned his eldest son to the remote countryside, and married his daughter to a barbarian tribe.

古文：闻《诗》学《礼》，事绝于趋庭；纳采问名，唯闻于黩货。
现代文：闻《诗》学《礼》，行事却断绝在子承父教；纳采问名，只闻名于贪污纳贿。
English: He heard "poetry" and learned "ceremony," but he did not act according to his father's teachings; he was only famous for corruption and bribery.

古文：白圭斯玷，有累清尘，易名之典，须凭实行。
现代文：白玉就此玷污，有碍于清净无为的境界，为死者立谥的制度，应当依据事实赐予。
English: The system of erecting a coffin for the deceased, which tarnishes the White Jade and hinders the realm of purity and inaction, should be based on facts.

古文：按谥法 名与实爽曰缪 ，请谥为 缪 。 
现代文：按照谥法 名与实不合叫作缪 ，请赐敬宗谥号为缪。 
English: In accordance with the principle that the name of the law does not match the reality, please give the name of Reverend Sun Myung Moon.

古文：敬宗孙、太子舍人彦伯不胜其耻，与思古大相忿竞，又称思古与许氏先有嫌隙，请改谥官。
现代文：敬宗的孙子太子舍人许彦伯受不了这种羞辱，与袁思古产生很大的忿恨争执，又声称思古与许氏家族从前有猜忌仇怨，请求更换谥官。
English: Prince Xu Yanbo, the grandson of Emperor Jingzong, could not bear the humiliation and had a bitter quarrel with Yuan Shigu. He also claimed that Shigu and the Xu family had a grudge against each other in the past and requested that the eunuch be replaced.

古文：太常博士王福畤议曰： 谥者，饰终之称也，得失一朝，荣辱千载。
现代文：太常博士王福评论是非说： 谥号，是给死者以尊荣之礼的称号，得失谥号在一朝，荣辱却流传千载。
English: Commenting on the pros and cons, Dr. Wang Fu said: "The honorary title is a title of honor given to the deceased. It is gained and lost in one morning, but the honor and disgrace are passed down for thousands of years.

古文：若使嫌隙是实，即合据法推绳；如其不亏直道，义不可夺，官不可侵。二三其德，何以言礼？
现代文：假如谥官与许氏有仇怨是事实，那么应当依据法度推究衡量；如果定谥没有亏损正直之道，道理是不能迫使改变的，他人的职守是不可越犯的，反复无常不专一，用什么来宣说礼法？
English: If it is a fact that the eunuch and Xu have a grudge, then it should be investigated and measured according to the law; if the eunuch has no loss of honesty, the principle cannot be forced to change, the duties of others cannot be transgressed, and it is capricious and not specific, what should be used to proclaim the etiquette?

古文：福畤忝当官守，匪躬之故。
现代文：福愧居官位，不是自身的缘故。
English: It is not for one's own sake that one is fortunate enough to hold an official position.

古文：若顺风阿意，背直从曲，更是甲令虚设，将谓礼院无人，何以激扬雅道，顾视同列！
现代文：如果顺从气势迎合心意，背弃正直之道，趋向偏邪，更是使朝廷颁发的法令空设，人们将说礼院无人，用什么激励发扬正道，回视同在朝班的同事！
English: If one follows the trend of the times, panders to the will of the heart, abandons the path of honesty, and tends toward perversion, and even causes the decrees issued by the imperial court to be vacated, people will say that there is no one in the House of Rites, and what incentive will they use to promote the righteous path, looking back at their colleagues in the court!

古文：请依思古谥议为定。 
现代文：请依照思古对谥号的意见来决定。 
English: Please make your decision in accordance with Shigu's opinion on the nickname.

古文：户部尚书戴至德谓福畤曰： 高阳公任遇如此，何以定谥为 缪 ？ 
现代文：户部尚书戴至德对福说 ：高阳公受朝廷这样的信任和恩遇，为什么定谥号为缪？ 
English: The head of the household, Shang Shudei Zhi De, said to Fu: "Gao Yang Gong received such trust and favor from the imperial court, why did you decide to change your surname?"

古文：答曰： 昔晋司空何曾薨，太常博士秦秀谥为缪丑公。
现代文：福回答说 ：从前晋朝司空何曾去世，太常博士给他定谥号为缪丑公。
English: Fu replied, "Once upon a time, during the Jin Dynasty, Siku He passed away, and Dr. Taijō gave him the posthumous title of Miao Ugong.

古文：何曾既忠且孝，徒以日食万钱，所以贬为缪丑。
现代文：何曾既忠心又孝道，仅仅因为日食万钱，所以贬为缪丑。
English: What once was both loyal and filial, has been reduced to ugliness just because of the solar eclipse.

古文：况敬宗忠孝不逮于曾，饮食男女之累，有逾于何氏，而谥之为 缪 ，无负于许氏矣。 
现代文：况且敬宗忠孝都不及何曾，食欲性欲上的过失，超过了何氏，而谥他为缪，不负于许氏。 
English: Moreover, the loyalty and filial piety of Keizong were not as high as ever, and the faults in appetite and sexual desire exceeded those of He, while the acts of his followers were not inferior to those of Xu.

古文：时有诏令尚书省五品已上重议，礼部尚书袁思敬议称： 按谥法 既过能改曰恭 ，请谥曰 恭 。 
现代文：当时朝廷又诏令尚书省五品以上重新评议，礼部尚书杨思敬建议说： 按照谥法 已经有过失能够改叫作恭，请定谥为恭。 
English: At that time, the imperial court also ordered the Ministry of Ceremonies to re-evaluate more than five items, and the Ministry of Ceremonies Yang Sijing suggested that: According to the law, if there has been a mistake, it can be changed to Gong Gong, please set Gong Gong Gong.

古文：诏从其议。
现代文：朝廷下诏依从了他的建议。
English: After all, Emperor Taizong issued an edict approving this motion.

古文：彦伯，昂之子，起家著作郎。
现代文：许彦伯，是许昂的儿子，始任著作郎。
English: Xu Yanbo, the son of Xu Ang, was the first writer.

古文：敬宗末年文笔，多令彦伯代作。
现代文：敬宗晚年的文笔，多让彦伯代做。
English: In the late years of Keizong's life, most of his writings were written on behalf of Yanbo.

古文：又纳婢妾谗言，奏流于岭表，后遇赦得还，除太子舍人。早卒，有集十卷。
现代文：又听信婢妾的谗言，奏请朝廷把彦伯流放到岭外，后遇到赦免回家，任太子舍人，彦伯早逝，有文集十卷。
English: He also listened to the reproach of his mistress and asked the imperial court to exile Yan Bo outside the ridge, and when he was pardoned and returned home, he was appointed as the prince's concubine. Yan Bo died early and had a collection of ten volumes.

