古文：张四维，字子维，蒲州人。
现代文：张四维，字子维，蒲州人。
English: Zhang Siwei, Zi Ziwei, Puzhou people.

古文：嘉靖三十二年进士。
现代文：嘉靖三十二年的进士。
English: He became a priest in 32nd year of Jiajing.

古文：改庶吉士，授编修。
现代文：改任庶吉士，授职为编修。
English: He was reappointed to the position of deputy kishi, and the post of editor was no longer conferred.

古文：隆庆初，进右中允，直经筵，寻迁左谕德。
现代文：隆庆初年，晋升为右中允，负责经筵，不久调任为左谕德。
English: In the first year of Longqing, he was promoted to the right middle assistant, responsible for the administration, and soon transferred to the left assistant.

古文：四维倜傥有才智，明习时事。
现代文：张四维风流倜傥而富有才智，明了时事。
English: Zhang Siwei is elegant and intelligent, and understands current affairs.

古文：杨博、王崇古久历边陲，善谈兵。
现代文：杨博、王崇古长期在边陲任职，擅长谈论兵事。
English: Yang Bo and Wang Chonggu have been working at the border post for a long time and are good at talking about military affairs.

古文：四维，博同里而崇古姊子也，以故亦习知边务。
现代文：张四维是杨博的同乡且为王崇古的外甥，所以学习并知晓边防事务。
English: Zhang Siwei is a fellow villager of Yang Bo and a nephew of Wang Chonggu, so he has studied and knows a lot about border affairs.

古文：高拱深器之。
现代文：高拱很器重他。
English: Gao Gong thinks highly of him.

古文：拱掌吏部，超擢翰林学士。
现代文：高拱掌管吏部，破格提拔他为翰林学士。
English: Gao Gong was in charge of the cadre department, and he was promoted to the rank of Hanlin Scholar.

古文：甫两月，拜吏部右侍郎。
现代文：才两个月，任命为吏部右侍郎。
English: He was only two months old when he was appointed as the Right Hand Man of the Administration Department.

古文：俺答封贡议起，朝右持不决。
现代文：俺答封贡的议论兴起，朝廷首辅大臣相持不决。
English: The discussion of whether or not to pay tribute arose, and the First Vice-Minister of the Imperial Court remained undecided.

古文：四维为交关于拱，款事遂成。
现代文：张四维与高拱勾结，通贡事成。
English: Zhang Siwei colluded with Gao Gong, and the payment of tribute was made.

古文：拱益才四维，四维亦干进不已，朝士颇有疾之者。
现代文：高拱更加认为张四维有才干，张四维也被不断提拔，朝廷士人中颇有憎恨他的人。
English: Gao Gong even more believed that Zhang Siwei was talented, Zhang Siwei was constantly promoted, and there were quite a few people who hated him among the courtiers.

古文：御史郜永春视盐河东，言盐法之坏由势要横行，大商专利，指四维、崇古为势要，四维父、崇古弟为大商。
现代文：御史郜永春巡视河东的盐事，称盐法的毁坏由于官宦横行，大商谋取专利，指责张四维、王崇古为官僚，张四维的父亲、王崇古的弟弟为大商人。
English: Goshi Yongchun inspected the salt business in Hedong, saying that the destruction of the salt law was due to rampant officialdom and big businessmen seeking patents, accusing Zhang Siwei and Wang Chongu of being bureaucrats, and Zhang Siwei's father and Wang Chongu's brother of being big businessmen.

古文：四维奏辨，因乞去。
现代文：张四维上奏辩解，请求离去。
English: Zhang Siwei played a defense and asked to leave.

古文：拱力护之，温诏慰留焉。
现代文：高拱极力庇护他，皇帝下诏抚慰、挽留他。
English: Gao Gong tried his best to protect him, and the emperor issued an edict to comfort and retain him.

古文：初，赵贞吉去位，拱欲援四维入阁，而殷士儋夤缘得之，诸人遂相构。
现代文：起初，赵贞吉离去，高拱想引四维进入内阁，而殷士儋攀附得职，诸位大臣便打击、陷害他。
English: At first, Zhao Zhengyi left, Gao Gong wanted to bring Siwei into the cabinet, but Yin Shijuan clung to the post, and the ministers attacked and framed him.

古文：及御史赵应龙劾士儋，士儋未去，言路复有劾四维者。
现代文：等到御史赵应龙弹劾殷士儋，殷士儋没有离去，舆论中又有弹劾张四维的。
English: When the imperial historian Zhao Yinglong impeached Yin Shijun, Yin Shijun did not leave, and Zhang Siwei was also impeached in public opinion.

古文：四维已进左侍郎，不得已引去，无何士儋亦去。
现代文：张四维已经晋升为左侍郎，不得已而辞职，不久殷士儋也辞职。
English: Zhang Siwei, who had been promoted to the position of left attendant, had no choice but to resign. Soon after, Yin Shixuan also resigned.

古文：东宫出阁，召四维充侍班官。
现代文：东宫太子出后宫，召见张四维担任侍班官。
English: The crown prince of the Eastern Palace came out of the harem and summoned Zhang Siwei to serve as an attendant.

古文：给事中曹大埜言四维贿拱得召，四维驰疏辨，求罢。
现代文：给事中曹大聎称张四维是贿赂了高拱，张四维急忙上奏辩解，请求罢免官职。
English: Cao Daxuan said that Zhang Siwei had bribed Gao Gong, and Zhang Siwei hurriedly made a defense and requested to be removed from office.

古文：帝不许，趣入朝。
现代文：皇帝不同意，催他入朝。
English: The emperor did not agree and urged him to enter the imperial court.

古文：未至而穆宗崩，拱罢政，张居正当国，复移疾归。
现代文：他还没有到来而穆宗逝世了，高拱被罢免，张居正掌权，他又称病回乡。
English: Before he arrived, Mu Zong died, Gao Gong was deposed, Zhang Ju was in power, and he returned to his hometown claiming to be ill.

古文：四维家素封，岁时馈问居正不绝。
现代文：张四维的家庭很富有，岁时年节不断地向张居正馈赠礼物。
English: Zhang Siwei's family is very wealthy, and they constantly give gifts to Zhang Juzheng during the New Year.

古文：武清伯李伟，慈圣太后父也，故籍山西，四维结为援。
现代文：武清伯李伟是慈圣太后的父亲，原籍山西，张四维结交为内援。
English: Wu Qingbo Li Wei is the father of Empress Dowager Cixian, originally from Shanxi, Zhang Siwei made friends for internal support.

古文：万历二年，复召掌詹事府。
现代文：万历二年，他又被召去负责詹事府。
English: Two years later, he was called to be in charge of the Zhanzhi Prefecture.

古文：明年三月，居正请增置阁臣，引荐四维，冯保亦与善，遂以礼部尚书兼东阁大学士入赞机务。
现代文：第二年三月，张居正奏请增设内阁大臣，引荐张四维，冯保也与他友好，于是以礼部尚书兼东阁大学士入内阁，参与机要事务。
English: In March of the following year, Zhang Juzheng requested the creation of an additional cabinet minister, introducing Zhang Siwei. Feng Bao was also friendly with him, so he joined the cabinet as a member of the Ministry of Ceremonies and Donggak University to participate in important affairs.

古文：当是时，政事一决居正。
现代文：当时政事由张居正一人决定。
English: At that time, political affairs were decided by Zhang Jizheng alone.

古文：居正无所推让，视同列蔑如也。
现代文：张居正也不做推让，对同僚视若无人。
English: Zhang Juzheng did not make any concessions and treated his colleagues as if they were nobody.

古文：四维由居正进，谨事之，不敢相可否，随其后，拜赐进官而已。
现代文：张四维由张居正提拔，谨慎地侍从他，不敢轻率答复可否，追随在他的身后，以图拜官晋爵。
English: Zhang Siwei was promoted by Zhang Juzheng, cautiously served him, did not dare to answer whether he could or not, and followed behind him to become an officer and a peer.

古文：居正卒，四维始当国。
现代文：张居正去世后，张四维才执政。
English: After the death of Zhang Juzheng, Zhang Siwei came to power.

古文：累加至少师、吏部尚书、中极殿大学士。
现代文：加封为少师、吏部尚书、中极殿大学士。
English: He was also awarded the titles of Junior Teacher, Officer of the Ministry of Education, and Academician of the Middle Temple.

古文：初，四维曲事居正，积不能堪，拟旨不尽如居正意，居正亦渐恶之。
现代文：起初，张四维曲意侍奉张居正，很不堪忍受，所草拟的旨令不完全合于张居正的心意，张居正也渐渐厌恶他。
English: At first, Zhang Siwei's intention to serve Zhang Jizheng was unbearable. The order he drafted was not entirely consistent with Zhang Jizheng's intention, and Zhang Jizheng gradually detested him.

古文：既得政，知中外积苦居正，欲大收人心。
现代文：既然当权，知道朝廷内外颇受张居正的苦，想大肆收买人心。
English: Now that he is in power, he knows that both inside and outside the imperial court are suffering from Zhang Jizheng, and he wants to bribe people.

古文：会皇子生，颁诏天下，疏言： 今法纪修明，海宇宁谧，足称治平。
现代文：遇上皇子出生，皇帝向全国颁布诏书，他上奏称： 现在法纪修明，海宇宁谧，堪称政治安平。
English: When the prince was born, the emperor issued an imperial edict to the whole country, in which he said, "Now the laws and regulations have been revised, and the country is peaceful and politically stable."

古文：而文武诸臣，不达朝廷励精本意，务为促急烦碎，致征敛无艺，政令乖舛，中外嚣然，丧其乐生之心。
现代文：而文武诸位大臣，不知道朝廷励精图治的本意，着力于敦促急烦、琐碎的事务，致使征赋敛税无度，政令彼此违背，朝廷内外哗然，丧失了扶植生灵之心。
English: On the other hand, the ministers of literature and military affairs, not knowing the intention of the imperial court to strive for perfection, focused on pressing urgent and trivial matters, resulting in excessive tax collection, contradictory decrees, uproar inside and outside the imperial court, and lost the heart of supporting the living.

古文：诚宜及此大庆，荡涤烦苛，弘敷惠泽，俾四海烝黎，咸戴帝德，此固人心培国脉之要术也。 
现代文：确实应该在此大庆之机，荡涤烦事苛政，弘扬皇帝的惠泽，使四海的百姓都感戴皇帝的圣德，这是稳定人心培养国脉的重要方法。 
English: Indeed, it should be an opportunity for this great celebration to sweep away troublesome and harsh politics, promote the emperor's benefits, and make the people of the four seas feel the emperor's sanctity. This is an important method of stabilizing the hearts of the people and cultivating national ties.

古文：帝嘉纳之。
现代文：皇帝对此给予褒奖和采纳。
English: The emperor appreciated and adopted his opinion.

古文：自是，朝政稍变，言路亦发舒，诋居正时事。
现代文：从此，朝政稍稍改变，舆论也宽松了，诋毁张居正时所为之事。
English: Since then, the imperial government has changed slightly, and public opinion has relaxed, denigrating what Zhang Jizheng did.

古文：于是居正党大惧。
现代文：因此，张居正的党羽很惊恐。
English: As a result, Zhang Juzheng's followers were very alarmed.

古文：王篆、曾省吾辈，厚结申时行以为助。
现代文：王篆、曾省吾之流，与申时行紧密勾结以为援助。
English: Wang Xuan and Zeng Shouwu were among those who worked closely with Shen Shiguang to provide assistance.

古文：而冯保欲因两宫徽号封己为伯，恶四维持之。
现代文：而冯保想借两宫的徽号册封自己为伯，憎恨张四维的阻挠。
English: But Feng Bao wanted to use the emblem of the two palaces to make himself a prince, and he hated the obstruction of Zhang Siwei.

古文：篆、省吾知之，厚贿保，数短四维；而使所善御史曹一夔劾吏部尚书王国光媚四维，拔其中表弟王谦为吏部主事。
现代文：王篆、曾省吾得知此事，大肆贿赂冯保，多次陷害张四维；而且指使交好的御史曹一夔弹劾吏部尚书王国光向张四维谄媚，提拔他的表弟王谦任吏部主事。
English: When Wang Qian and Zeng Shouwu learned of this, they bribed Feng Bao, and repeatedly framed Zhang Siwei; moreover, they ordered their friend, the Grand Historian Cao Yi, to impeach the official, Shang Shu Wang Guoguang, for flattering Zhang Siwei, and to promote his cousin, Wang Qian, to be in charge of the official.

古文：时行遂拟旨罢国光，并谪谦。
现代文：于是申时行拟旨要罢免王国光，并且贬责王谦。
English: Therefore, the petition was drafted to dismiss Wang Guoguang, and Wang Qian was reprimanded.

古文：四维以帝慰留，复起视事。
现代文：张四维因为皇帝的抚慰、挽留，又负责政务。
English: Zhang Siwei, because of the emperor's consolation and retention, was also responsible for government affairs.

古文：命甫下，御史张问达复劾四维。
现代文：命令才下达，御史张问达又弹劾张四维。
English: Only after the order was issued, the governor Zhang Qida also impeached Zhang Siwei.

古文：四维窘，求保心腹徐爵、张大受贿保，保意稍解。
现代文：张四维窘迫，求冯保的心腹徐爵、张大受贿赂冯保，冯保的怨意稍稍缓解。
English: Zhang Siwei was in a predicament, he asked Feng Bao's confidant Xu Jie, Zhang Da accepted Feng Bao's bribe, and Feng Bao's grudge eased slightly.

古文：时行乃谪问达于外，以安四维。
现代文：申时行便将张问达贬出京城，以安抚张四维。
English: At the time of the petition, Zhang Yunda was banished from Beijing to appease Zhang Siwei.

古文：四维以时行与谋也，卒衔之。
现代文：张四维因为申时行参与了阴谋，最终怀恨他。
English: Zhang Siwei took part in the conspiracy because of Shin Shihong, and eventually held a grudge against him.

古文：已而中官张诚谮保，保眷大衰，四维乃授意门生李植辈发保奸状。
现代文：不久，宦官张诚诬陷冯保，冯保的势力大为衰败，张四维便授意自己的门生李植之流揭发冯保的奸行。
English: Soon, eunuch Zhang Cheng framed Feng Bao, Feng Bao's power fell into decline, and Zhang Siwei ordered his protégé Li Shizhong to expose Feng Bao's treachery.

古文：保及篆、省吾皆逐，朝事一大变。
现代文：冯保、王篆、曾省吾都被驱逐，朝廷的政事大变。
English: Feng Bao, Wang Xi, and Zeng Shugu were all expelled, and there was a major change of government in the imperial court.

古文：于是四维稍汲引海内正人为居正所沉抑者。
现代文：因此张四维渐渐吸收了一些被张居正压抑的海内的正直之人。
English: As a result, Zhang Siwei gradually absorbed some honest people from overseas who were being suppressed by Zhang Ju.

古文：虽未即尽登用，然力反前事，时望颇属焉。
现代文：虽然没有马上全部任用，然而力反前任的作为，当时他很富名望。
English: Although he did not immediately appoint all of them, he was highly respected at the time for his efforts to reverse the actions of his predecessor.

古文：子泰徵、甲徵皆四维柄政时举进士。
现代文：云南的贡金误期，皇帝想将守土官治罪，又下诏提取云南以前贮存的矿银二十万两，都因为张四维劝谏才停止。
English: Yunnan's tribute was overdue, the emperor wanted to punish the local officials, and issued an edict to extract 200,000 taels of silver previously stored in Yunnan, all of which were only stopped because of Zhang Siwei's persuasion.

古文：泰徵累官湖广参政，甲徵工部郎中。
现代文：不久，他因父亲去世而归乡。丧期将满，他却死了。
English: Soon after, he returned home because his father had died. The mourning period was coming to an end, but he died.

古文：马自强，字体乾，同州人。
现代文：赠封太师，谥号文毅。马自强，字体乾，同州人。
English: He was awarded the title of Grand Master, and his posthumous name was Wenyi. Ma Ziqiang was a native of Tongzhou.

古文：嘉靖三十二年进士。
现代文：嘉靖三十二年的进士。
English: He became a priest in 32nd year of Jiajing.

古文：改庶吉士，授检讨。
现代文：改任庶吉士，授职为检讨。
English: He was reappointed to the position of deputy kishi, and the review of the awarding of the position is now over.

古文：隆庆中，历洗马，直经筵。
现代文：隆庆年间，历任洗马，负责经筵。
English: During the Longqing period, successive officials washed horses and were responsible for the economic growth.

古文：迁国子祭酒，振饬学政，请寄不行。
现代文：晋升为国子祭酒，整治学政，拒绝请托。
English: Promoted to Kuniko Matsuri sake, rectified the school administration, and refused to ask for permission.

古文：迁少詹事兼侍读学士，掌翰林院。
现代文：提拔为少詹事兼侍读学士，负责翰林院。
English: He was promoted to Shao Zhanji and attendant bachelor, in charge of the Hanlin Academy.

古文：神宗为皇太子出阁，充讲官。敷陈明切，遂受眷。
现代文：神宗做皇太子时出后宫，他担任讲官，陈述明白、深切，于是受到皇上器重。
English: When Shinso was crown prince, he went out to the harem. He acted as a lecturer, making clear and profound statements, and was therefore held in high esteem by the emperor.

古文：及即位，自强已迁詹事，教习庶吉士，乃擢礼部右侍郎，为日讲官。
现代文：等到神宗登基，马自强已经调任詹事，教导庶吉士，又提升为礼部右侍郎，担当日讲官。
English: By the time Shinso ascended to the throne, Ma Ziqiang had been transferred to the post of Zhanji, teaching the offsprings of auspiciousness, and promoted to the right hand man of the ceremonial department, in charge of the Japanese lecturer.

古文：寻以左侍郎掌詹事府，直讲如故。
现代文：不久，以左侍郎身份负责詹事府，像以前一样负责讲授。
English: Soon, he was put in charge of Zhanji Prefecture as the left-hand waiter, and was in charge of lecturing as before.

古文：丁继母忧归。
现代文：遭逢继母去世而归乡。
English: He returned to his hometown after his stepmother passed away.

古文：服阕，诏以故官协理詹事府。
现代文：服丧期满，诏令他任原职协助负责詹事府。
English: At the end of the mourning period, the Emperor ordered him to return to his original post to assist and be in charge of the Zhanzhi Prefecture.

古文：至则迁吏部左侍郎，仍直经筵。
现代文：他到任后被升任吏部左侍郎，仍然负责经筵。
English: After he took office, he was promoted to the left hand man of the administrative department, and was still in charge of the financial department.

古文：甫两月，迁推礼部尚书。
现代文：才两个月，朝廷推举他任礼部尚书。
English: Just two months later, the imperial court appointed him to the Ministry of Ceremonies.

古文：帝遣使询居正尚书得兼讲官否，居正言事繁不得兼。
现代文：皇帝派遣使者询问张居正尚书是否可以兼任讲官，张居正回答，事务繁多不得兼任。
English: The emperor sent an envoy to inquire whether Zhang Jizheng could also serve as a lecturer. Zhang Jizheng replied that he could not serve concurrently due to his many responsibilities.

古文：乃用为尚书，罢日讲，充经筵讲官。
现代文：于是任用他为尚书，罢除日讲，担当经筵讲官。
English: As a result, he was appointed as Shangshu (尚書) and removed from the position of Nichigaku (日講) to become Keizai (经) Lecturer.

古文：礼官所掌，宗藩事最多，先后条例，自相牴牾，黠吏得恣为奸利。
现代文：礼官所负责的事，皇族宗藩的事情最多，先后的条例自相矛盾，狡黠的官吏得以恣意为奸。
English: The matters for which the etiquette officers were responsible were mostly those of the imperial family and the clan. Successive regulations contradicted each other, and cunning officials were able to act as spies at will.

古文：自强择其当者俾僚吏遵守，诸不可用者悉屏之。
现代文：马自强选择恰当的条例命僚吏遵守，诸项不适宜于执行的条例都予以摒弃。
English: Ma Ziqiang chose the appropriate regulations and ordered officials to abide by them, and all the regulations that were not suitable for implementation were abandoned.

古文：每藩府疏至，应时裁决，榜之部门，明示行止，吏无所牟利。
现代文：每当藩府的奏疏送到，他都及时裁决，在礼部门上张榜告示，公开表明可行与禁止，官吏无法牟利。
English: Whenever the report of the domain government was delivered, he ruled in a timely manner, posted a notice on the etiquette department, and publicly stated that it was possible and prohibited, and officials could not make a profit.

古文：龙虎山正一真人，隆庆时已降为提点，夺印敕。
现代文：龙虎山正一真人，在隆庆年间就被降为提点，剥夺了盖有御印的诏书。
English: Longhu Mountain Zheng Yi Zhenren was reduced to a citation during the Longqing period and deprived of the imperial decree with the imperial seal.

古文：至是，张国祥求复故号。自强寝其奏。
现代文：到此时，张国祥请求恢复他原来的封号，马自强扣压了他的奏章。
English: At this time, Zhang Guoxiang requested to restore his original seal number, Ma Ziqiang withheld his record.

古文：国祥乃重贿冯保固求复，自强力持不可，卒以中旨许之。
现代文：张国祥就大肆贿赂冯保，坚持请求恢复封号，马自强极力主张不可以，最终还是因为御旨准许了。
English: Zhang Guoxiang bribed Feng Bao on a large scale, insisted on requesting the restoration of the seal, Ma Ziqiang insisted that it was not allowed, and finally it was allowed because of the imperial order.

古文：初，俺答通贡市，赏有定额，后边臣徇其求，额渐溢。
现代文：起初，俺答通贡互市，对他们有定额的赏赐，后来边关大臣答应他们的请求，赏额逐渐增加。
English: At first, I agreed to pay tribute to each other, and there was a fixed reward for them. Later, the border minister agreed to their request, and the reward amount gradually increased.

古文：自强请申故约，滥乞者勿与，岁省费不赀。
现代文：马自强奏请申明旧约，乱自请求的数额不给，每年节省的费用不可估量。
English: Ma Ziqiang, please confirm the Old Testament, the amount requested will not be given, and the annual cost savings are immeasurable.

古文：《世宗实录》成，加太子少保。
现代文：《世宗实录》修撰成，他被加封太子少保。
English: "Sejong Shitsuroku" was compiled, and he was given the title of Crown Prince Junior Protector.

古文：六年三月，居正将归葬父。
现代文：万历六年三月，张居正准备回乡安葬父亲。
English: In March of the sixth year of Wanli, Zhang Ju was preparing to return to his hometown to bury his father.

古文：念阁臣在乡里者，高拱与己有深隙，殷士儋多奥援，或乘间以出，惟徐阶老易与，拟荐之自代。
现代文：思虑在乡里休息的内阁大臣，高拱与自己有很深的嫌隙，殷士儋有内援，有可能乘隙复出，只有徐阶年老容易结交，打算举荐他代替自己。
English: Gao Gong, the cabinet minister, who is thoughtfully resting in the countryside, has a deep rift with himself. Yin Shizhen has internal support and may use the gap to make a comeback. Only Xu Jia, who is old and easy to make friends with, intends to recommend him to replace himself.

古文：已遣使报阶，既念阶前辈，已还，当位其下，乃请增置阁臣。
现代文：已经派遣使者报告了徐阶，又思虑徐阶为前辈，自己还朝，应位居其下，于是奏请增设内阁大臣。
English: An envoy had already been sent to report on Xu Zhifu, and he thought that as Xu Zhifu was his predecessor and he was still the emperor, he should be placed below him, so he requested the appointment of an additional cabinet minister.

古文：帝即令居正推择，遂以人望荐自强及所厚申时行。
现代文：皇帝当即指令张居正推举，于是根据人望推荐马自强以及所厚爱的申时行。
English: The emperor immediately ordered Zhang Juzheng to be promoted, so he recommended Ma Ziqiang and the much-loved Shen Shijing according to popular opinion.

古文：诏加自强太子太保兼文渊阁大学士，与时行并参机务。
现代文：诏令加封马自强为太子太保兼任文渊阁大学士，与申时行一起参与机要事务。
English: The imperial edict added the title of Ma Ziqiang to the title of Crown Prince and concurrently held the post of Wenyuan Pavilion University Scholar, and participated in important affairs together with Shen Shigang.

古文：自强初以救吴中行、赵用贤忤居正，自分不敢望，及制下，人更以是多居正。
现代文：马自强起初因为救助吴中行、赵用贤与张居正相抵触，自认不敢奢望，等到皇帝的命令下达，人们更加由此称赞张居正。
English: At first, Ma Ziqiang did not dare to hope for the help of Wu Zhongxing, Zhao Yixian and Zhang Jizheng because of the conflict. When the emperor's order was issued, people praised Zhang Jizheng even more.

古文：时吕调阳、张四维先在阁。
现代文：当时吕调阳、张四维先入内阁。
English: At that time, Lu Chunyang and Zhang Siwei were the first to enter the cabinet.

古文：调阳衰，数寝疾不出，小事四维代拟旨，大事则驰报居正于江陵，听其裁决。
现代文：吕调阳身体衰弱，多次卧病不出门，小事由张四维代替他拟旨，大事则派快马到江陵报告张居正，听从他的裁决。
English: Lv Damingyang was physically weak, he was bedridden many times and did not go out. For minor matters, Zhang Siwei drafted the edict instead of him. For major matters, he sent a fast horse to Gangneung to report to Zhang Juzheng and obeyed his ruling.

古文：自强虽持正，亦不能有为，守位而已。
现代文：马自强虽然正直，也不能有所作为，驻守职位罢了。
English: Although Ma Ziqiang is honest, he can't make a difference, he just holds the position.

古文：已，居正还朝，调阳谢政，自强亦得疾卒。
现代文：此后，张居正返回朝廷，吕调阳推辞政务，马自强也患病去世。
English: After that, Zhang Juzheng returned to the imperial court, Lü Tingyang resigned from the government, and Ma Ziqiang also died of illness.

古文：诏赠少保，谥文庄，遣行人护丧还。
现代文：诏令赠封他为少保，谥号文庄，派遣行人护送他的灵柩回乡。
English: The imperial edict granted him the title of Shao Bao and the posthumous name of Wenzhuang, and sent pedestrians to escort his coffin back to his hometown.

古文：子怡，举人，终参议；慥，进士，尚宝卿。关中人入阁者，自自强始。
现代文：关中人进内阁，从马自强开始。
English: Guan Zhongren entered the cabinet, starting from Ma Ziqiang.

古文：其后薛国观继之。
现代文：此后薛国观继之入阁。
English: After that, Xue Guokun succeeded him in the cabinet.

古文：终明世，惟二人。
现代文：整个明代终了，关中只此两人入阁。
English: The entire Ming Dynasty ended, and only these two people from Guanzhong entered the cabinet.

古文：许国，字维桢，歙县人。
现代文：许国，字维桢，歙县人。
English: Xu Guo, a native of Weixuan County.

古文：举乡试第一，登嘉靖四十四年进士。
现代文：考取乡试第一名，成为嘉靖四十四年的进士。
English: He won the first place in the township examination and became a graduate of Jiajing for 44 years.

古文：改庶吉士，授检讨。
现代文：改任庶吉士，授职为检讨。
English: He was reappointed to the position of deputy kishi, and the review of the awarding of the position is now over.

古文：神宗为太子出阁，兼校书。
现代文：神宗做太子出宫学习，他兼任校书。
English: Shenzong did the prince out of the palace to study, he also served as a school book.

古文：及即位，进右赞善，充日讲官。
现代文：等到神宗即位，他晋升为右赞善，担任日讲官。
English: When Shinshu ascended to the throne, he was promoted to Uzunzen, and served as Nichiren chancellor.

古文：历礼部左、右侍郎，改吏部，掌詹事府。
现代文：历任礼部左、右侍郎，改任吏部职，负责詹事府。
English: Successive attendants to the left and right of the ceremonial department were reassigned to the position of clerk, responsible for Zhan Shifu.

古文：十一年四月，以礼部尚书兼东阁大学士入参机务。
现代文：万历十一年四月，任礼部尚书兼东阁大学士进入内阁，参与机要事务。
English: In April of the eleventh year of the lunar calendar, he entered the cabinet as a member of the Ministry of Ceremonies and a scholar of Donggak University to participate in important affairs.

古文：国与首辅申时行善。
现代文：许国与首辅申时行交好。
English: Xu Guo and Shuefuxin are on friendly terms.

古文：以丁此吕事与言者相攻，语侵吴中行、赵用贤，由是物议沸然。
现代文：因为丁此吕的事与谏言者互相攻击，话语触犯了吴中行、赵用贤，因此众议鼎沸。
English: Because Ding Guoliu's words offended Wu Zhongxing and Zhao Yixian, the matter became a hot topic of discussion.

古文：已而御史陈性学复摭前事劾国，时行右国，请薄罚性学。
现代文：不久，御史陈性学又重提以前的事情弹劾许国，申时行看重许国，奏请皇帝轻轻责罚陈性学。
English: Not long after, the imperial historian Chensheng Xue again brought up the previous matter to impeach Xu Guo, and petitioned the emperor to lightly punish Chensheng Xue.

古文：国再疏求去，力攻言者。
现代文：许国一再上奏请求离去，极力攻击议论的人。
English: Xu Guo repeatedly played a request to leave, and vigorously attacked the speaker.

古文：帝命鸿胪宣谕，始起视事。
现代文：皇帝命令鸿胪寺宣布圣谕后，他才着手处理事务。
English: After the emperor ordered the Hongye Temple to announce the edict, he began to deal with the matter.

古文：南京给事中伍可受复劾国，帝为谪可受官。
现代文：南京给事中伍可受又弹劾许国，皇帝为此降了伍可受的官职。
English: In the middle of the matter, Nanjing gave Xu Guo a reprimand and impeachment, for which the emperor reduced Xu Guo's official position.

古文：国复三疏乞休，语愤激，帝不允。
现代文：许国再三上奏请求离去，语言很激愤，皇帝不同意。
English: Xu Guo repeatedly appealed to leave, the language was very angry, the emperor did not agree.

古文：性学旋出为广东佥事。
现代文：陈性学不久出京担任了广东佥事。
English: Chen Shougu soon went to Beijing to serve as the Guangdong anecdote.

古文：先是，帝考卜寿宫，加国太子太保，改文渊阁，以云南功进太子太傅。
现代文：在此之前，皇帝为寿宫占卜，加封许国为太子太保，改任文渊阁的职务，因为云南的功绩晋升为太子太傅。
English: Prior to this, the emperor divined for the Imperial Palace, and appointed Xu Guo as the prince's bodyguard, and he was transferred to the post of Wenyuan Pavilion. Because of Yunnan's achievements, he was promoted to the prince's bodyguard.

古文：国以父母未葬，乞归襄事。
现代文：许国因为父母没有安葬，请求回乡办成此事。
English: Because his parents were not buried, Xu Guo requested to return to his hometown to carry out the matter.

古文：帝不允，命其子代。
现代文：皇帝不同意，命令他的儿子代理。
English: The emperor disagreed, ordering his son to act as deputy.

古文：御史马象乾以劾中官张鲸获罪，国恳救。帝为霁威受之。
现代文：御史马象乾因为弹劾宦官张鲸，被治罪，许国诚恳地救助，皇帝因此息怒接受了他的请求。
English: Emperor Shima Xiangqian was punished for impeaching the eunuch Zhang Jiali, and Xu Guo sincerely helped him. The emperor accepted his request out of anger.

古文：十七年，进士薛敷教劾吴时来，南京御史王麟趾、黄仁荣疏论台规，辞皆侵国。
现代文：万历十七年，进士薛敷教弹劾吴时来，南京御史王麟趾、黄仁荣上奏论说御史台的规章，言辞都侵犯了许国。
English: In the seventeenth year of the Wanli era, the scholar Xue Zhijie taught the impeachment of Wu Shilai, and the governor of Nanjing Wang Linzi and Huang Renrong made a report on the regulations of the governor's office, and the words violated Xu Guo.

古文：国愤，连疏力诋，并及主事饶伸。
现代文：许国愤怒，数次上疏驳斥涉及到主事饶伸。
English: Xu Guo was enraged, and several times refuted the rumor involving the subject matter.

古文：伸方攻大学士王锡爵，公议益不直国。国性木强，遇事辄发。数与言者为难，无大臣度，以故士论不附。
现代文：饶伸正攻击大学士王锡爵，公众议论也对许国不利，许国性格倔犟，遇事容易发脾气，数次与言论者较劲，没有大臣的度量，所以士人对他的舆论并不好。
English: Rao Shin Zheng attacked the university judge Wang Xizhe, and the public discussion was also unfavorable to Xu Guo. Xu Guo was a shy person, prone to losing his temper in times of trouble, and several times fought with the speaker. He did not have the measure of the minister, so the judges did not have a good opinion of him.

古文：明年秋，火落赤犯临洮、巩昌，西陲震动，帝召对辅臣暖阁。
现代文：第二年秋季，火落赤侵犯临洮、巩昌，西部边疆为之震动，皇帝在暖阁召见辅佐大臣当面回答问题。
English: In the autumn of the following year, when the Red Army invaded Linyi and Gongchang and the western frontier was shaken, the emperor summoned the assistant minister to answer questions in person at Nengge.

古文：时行言款贡足恃，国谓渝盟犯顺，桀骜已极，宜一大创之，不可复羁縻。
现代文：申时行称可以依赖通贡互市；许国说背弃盟约，公然叛逆凶恶、傲慢已达极点，应该对他们重创一次，不可以再怀柔软控。
English: Shen Xingxing said that they could rely on the mutual exchange of tribute; Xu Guoqin said that they had reneged on the covenant, openly rebelled, vicious, and arrogance had reached the extreme, they should be hit hard once, and they should no longer have soft control.

古文：帝心然国言，而时行为政，不能夺。
现代文：皇帝心中赞许许国的意见，而申时行执政意见不能改夺。
English: In his heart, the emperor approved of Xu Guo's opinion, while the ruling opinion of the Jin Dynasty could not be changed.

古文：无何，给事中任让论国庸鄙。
现代文：不久，给事中任让疏论许国庸俗、鄙陋。
English: Soon, in the course of the discussion, the subject of concession became vulgar and despicable.

古文：国疏辨，帝夺让俸。
现代文：许国上奏辩驳，皇帝剥夺了任让的俸禄。
English: When Xu Guo made a rebuttal, the emperor deprived him of his salary.

古文：国、时行初无嫌，而时行适为国门生万国钦所论，让则时行门生也，故为其师报复云。
现代文：许国、申时行起初没有隔阂。而申时行刚巧被许国的门生万国钦议论，任让则是申时行的门生，所以替他的老师报复。
English: At first, there was no rift between Xu Guo and Shin Shih-hsiung. However, it just so happened that Xu Guo's protégé, Shen Shih-hsiung, was admired by all nations, while Ren Zheng was the protégé of Shin Shih-hsiung, so he took revenge for his teacher.

古文：福建守臣报日本结琉球入寇，国因言： 今四裔交犯，而中外小臣争务攻击，致大臣纷纷求去，谁复为国家任事者？
现代文：福建的守臣报告日本勾结琉球人入侵，许国就说： 现在四边交相被侵扰，而朝廷内外的小臣争相彼此攻击，致使大臣纷纷请求离去，谁还能为国家办事呢？
English: When a Fujianese retainer reported that Japan was colluding with the Ryukyuan invasion, Xu Guo said, "Nowadays, relations between the four sides have been disturbed, and ministers inside and outside the imperial court are competing to attack each other, causing ministers to ask to leave one after another. Who else can do things for the country?"

古文：请申谕诸臣，各修职业，毋恣胸臆。 
现代文：请求向诸位臣下申明、晓谕，让他们各自干好自己的职业，不要恣意行事。 
English: I would like to ask you to clarify and instruct your subordinates to do their jobs well and not to act arbitrarily.

古文：帝遂下诏严禁。
现代文：皇帝于是下诏令严加禁止。
English: The emperor then issued a decree strictly prohibiting it.

古文：国始终忿疾言者如此。
现代文：许国对言路的人始终都是这样忿恨、厌恶。
English: Xu Guo has always been so angry and disgusted with those who speak out.

古文：廷臣争请册立，得旨二十年春举行。
现代文：朝廷大臣争相奏请册立的事，皇帝下圣旨打算在万历二十年举行。
English: The ministers of the Imperial Court were clamoring for the registration of the event, and the emperor intended to hold it in the 20th year of the Wanli era.

古文：十九年秋，工部郎张有德以仪注请，帝怒夺俸。
现代文：万历十九年秋天，工部郎张有德奏请议礼规制，皇帝恼怒，剥夺了他的俸禄。
English: In the autumn of the 19th year of the Wanli era, Zhang Youde, the Minister of the Ministry of Industry, made a formal request for regulation. The emperor was angry and deprived him of his salary.

古文：时行适在告，国与王有屏虑事中变，欲因而就之，引前旨力请。
现代文：申时行恰恰在休假，许国与王家屏顾虑此时中途变故，想趁此举行典礼，引用先前的圣旨极力请求。
English: At the time of the petition, the line was on vacation. Xu Guo and Wang Jia Ping were worried that something would happen at this time, and wanted to take advantage of this to hold a ceremony, citing the previous edict as a strong request.

古文：帝果不悦，责大臣不当与小臣比。
现代文：皇帝果然不高兴，责备大臣不应当与小臣相勾结。
English: The emperor was indeed displeased and scolded the minister not to collude with the vassal.

古文：国不自安，遂求去。
现代文：许国自感不安，于是请求离去。
English: Xu Guo felt uneasy, so he asked to leave.

古文：疏五上，乃赐敕驰传归。
现代文：五次上奏，皇帝才赐予他乘驿车回乡。
English: After five performances, the emperor gave him a carriage ride back to his hometown.

古文：逾一日，时行亦罢，而册立竟停。
现代文：过了一天，申时行也罢职，而册立的事最终停了。
English: A day later, Shin Shigyo also resigned, and the registration finally stopped.

古文：人谓时行以论劾去，国以争执去，为二相优劣焉。
现代文：人们称申时行因为上疏劾论而离去，许国因为争执而离去，这是两位相臣的优劣所在。
English: People said that Shin Shih-kwan left because of the Shang-Shu impeachment theory, and Xu Guo left because of the dispute. This is where the merits and demerits of the two ministers lie.

古文：国在阁九年，谦慎自守，故累遭攻击，不能被以污名。
现代文：许国在内阁任职九年，自守清廉、谨慎，所以虽屡遭攻击，也不能蒙受污秽的罪名。
English: Xu Guo has served in the cabinet for nine years, and he has kept himself clean and prudent, so although he has been attacked many times, he cannot be accused of being dirty.

古文：卒，赠太保，谥文穆。
现代文：他去世后，被赠封为太保，谥号文穆。
English: After his death, he was bestowed with the title of Taibo, also known as Wenmu.

古文：赵志皋，字汝迈，兰溪人。
现代文：赵志皋，字汝迈，兰溪人。
English: Zhao Zhixuan, also known as Rumai, is from Lanxi.

古文：隆庆二年进士及第，授编修。
现代文：隆庆二年进士及第，授职为编修。
English: In the second year of Longqing, he became a scholar and the first to be awarded the post of editor.

古文：万历初，进侍读。
现代文：万历初年，晋升为侍读。
English: In the first year of Wanli, he was promoted to attendant.

古文：张居正夺情，将廷杖吴中行、赵用贤。
现代文：张居正服丧期限未满夺情入仕，准备对吴中行、赵用贤施行廷杖。
English: Zhang Juzheng entered the service before the expiration of the mourning period, and prepared to use the imperial scepter on Wu Zhongxing and Zhao Yixian.

古文：志皋偕张位、习孔教等疏救，格不上，则请以中行等疏宜付史馆，居正恚。
现代文：赵志皋与张位、习孔教等人上奏相救，被阻挡不能呈上，他们请求将吴中行等人的奏疏交给史官，张居正很恼怒。
English: Zhao Zhixuan and Zhang Yi, Xi Kong Jiao and others played the music to save themselves, but they were blocked from presenting it. They requested that the music of Wu Zhong Xing and others be handed over to the historian, and Zhang Jiu Zheng was very angry.

古文：会星变，考察京朝官，遂出志皋为广东副使。
现代文：遇上星变而考察京官和朝廷官吏，将赵志皋逐出京都出任广东副使。
English: When the situation changed, he inspected the officials in Beijing and the officials of the imperial court, and expelled Zhao Zhixuan from Kyoto to serve as deputy envoy to Guangdong.

古文：居三年，再以京察谪其官。
现代文：过了三年，又借官绩考核，将他贬职。
English: Three years later, he was demoted again in a performance review.

古文：居正殁，言者交荐，起解州同知。
现代文：张居正死后，进谏的人交相举荐他，启用他为解州同知。
English: After Zhang Jizheng's death, people in Jinshan recommended him to each other and appointed him as a Jieshou confidant.

古文：旋改南京太仆丞，历国子监司业、祭酒，再迁吏部右侍郎，并在南京。
现代文：不久改任南京的太仆丞，历任国子监司业、祭酒，再升任吏部右侍郎，均在南京。
English: He was soon promoted to the position of Nanjing's grand chamberlain, and successively held the positions of provincial overseer of industry and sacrificial wine, before being promoted to the position of the right hand man of the cadre, all of which were in Nanjing.

古文：寻召为吏部左侍郎。
现代文：不久担任吏部左侍郎。
English: He soon became the left-hand man of the head clerk.

古文：十九年秋，申时行谢政，荐志皋及张位自代。
现代文：万历十九年秋天，申时行离职，举荐赵志皋和张位代替自己。
English: In the autumn of the 19th year of the Wanli calendar, Shen Jixing left his post, recommending Zhao Zhixuan and Zhang Yi to replace him.

古文：遂进礼部尚书兼东阁大学士，入参机务。
现代文：于是晋升为礼部尚书兼东阁大学士，入阁参与机要事务。
English: As a result, he was promoted to be a member of the Ministry of Ceremonies and East Palace University, and entered the palace to participate in important affairs.

古文：明年春，王家屏罢，王锡爵召未到，志皋暂居首辅。会宁夏变起，兵事多所咨决。
现代文：第二年春天，王家屏被罢免，王锡爵受召见还没有到京，赵志皋暂任首辅遇上宁夏发生变故，军事大都由他商议决定。
English: In the spring of the following year, Wang Jiaping was deposed, Wang Xizhe was summoned and had not yet arrived in Beijing, and Zhao Zhixuan, the interim chief aide, encountered a change in Ningxia, and most of the military decisions were made by him.

古文：主事岳元声疏论锡爵，中言当事者变乱倾危，为主事诸寿贤、给事中许弘纲所驳。
现代文：主事岳元声上奏劾论王锡爵，其中称主政者扰乱国家，被主事褚寿贤、给事中许弘纲驳斥。
English: The leader, Yue Yuanxuan, made a report on the impeachment of Wang Xizhe, in which he said that the leader was disturbing the country, which was refuted by the leader, Zou Shouxian, and the person in charge, Xu Honggang.

古文：志皋再辨，帝皆不问。
现代文：赵志皋两次上疏辩解，皇帝都不追问。
English: Zhao Zhixuan twice made excuses, but the emperor did not pursue the matter.

古文：二十一年，锡爵还朝，明年五月遂归，志皋始当国。
现代文：万历二十一年，王锡爵返回朝廷，第二年五月就回乡了，赵志皋才开始执政。
English: In the 21st year of Wanli, Wang Xizhe returned to the imperial court. In May of the following year, he returned to his hometown, and Zhao Zhisheng began to govern.

古文：辽东失事，诏褫巡抚韩取善职，逮副使冯时泰诏狱，而总兵官杨绍勋止下御史问。
现代文：辽东兵事失利，诏令解除巡抚韩取善的官职，将副使冯时泰逮捕，投入诏狱，而总兵官杨绍勋只下交御史考察。
English: The Liaodong campaign was a failure, and Han Torizan, the military governor, was relieved of his post by imperial edict. Feng Shitai, the deputy envoy, was arrested and imprisoned by imperial edict, while Yang Shao Xun, the commander-in-chief of the military, was only handed over to imperial inspection.

古文：给事中吴文梓等论其失平，志皋亦言： 封疆被寇，武臣罪也。
现代文：给事中吴文梓等人疏论此事不公平，赵志皋也称 ：边疆遭侵犯，是武臣的罪责。
English: During the incident, Wu Wenzi and others carelessly talked about the unfairness of the matter, and Zhao Zhiya also said: the border was violated, and it was the responsibility of the samurai.

古文：今宽绍勋而深罪文吏，武臣益恣，文吏益丧气。 
现代文：现在宽大杨绍勋而将文官从重治罪，武臣更加放纵，文官更加丧失气概。 
English: Now, Yang Shao Xun is more lenient, and civil servants are no longer punished severely. The samurai are more indulgent, and the civil servants are more demoralized.

古文：帝不从，时泰竟谪戍。
现代文：皇帝不依从，冯时泰竟然被贬责去戍边。
English: The emperor did not comply, and Feng Shitai was even reprimanded to leave the court.

古文：皇太后诞辰，帝受贺毕，召见辅臣暖阁，志皋论宥御史彭应参。
现代文：皇太后的诞辰，皇帝接受朝贺完毕，在暖阁召见辅佐大臣，赵志皋主张宽恕御史彭应参。
English: On the birthday of the empress dowager, after the emperor had received the morning greetings, he summoned the assistant minister in the warm pavilion. Zhao Zhixuan advocated forgiving the gospodar.

古文：言官乞减织造，志皋等因合词请。
现代文：言官请求减少织造，赵志皋等人联合奏请。
English: The speech officer requested to reduce the weaving, and Zhao Zhixuan and others jointly made a request.

古文：寻极论章奏留中之弊，请尽付诸曹议行。
现代文：不久又极力论述奏章滞留在宫中的弊端，请求全部交给各部门商议行事。
English: Soon, he also vigorously discussed the drawbacks of the musical score remaining in the palace, and requested that all of them be submitted to the various departments for consultation.

古文：帝恶中官张诚党霍文炳，以言官不举发，贬黜者三十余人。
现代文：皇帝厌恶宦官张诚与霍文炳结党，因为言官不检举揭发，将二十多人贬官、罢职。
English: The emperor disliked eunuchs Zhang Cheng and Huo Wen for their partisanship. Because the eunuchs did not report and expose, more than twenty people were demoted and dismissed.

古文：志皋等连疏谏，皆不纳。
现代文：赵志皋等人接连上奏劝谏，皇帝都不接纳。
English: Zhao Zhixuan and others successively appealed to the emperor, but the emperor did not accept the appeal.

古文：累进少傅，加太子太傅，改建极殿。
现代文：他晋升为少傅，加封为太子太傅，改任建极殿的官职。
English: He was promoted to Shao Fu, given the additional title of Prince Taifu, and was appointed to the official position of the leader of the construction of the Great Hall.

古文：时两宫灾，彗星见，日食九分有奇，三殿又灾，连岁间变异迭出。
现代文：当时两宫遭灾，彗星出现，日食有九分多，三座宫殿又遭灾，连年变异迭出。
English: At that time, the two palaces suffered a disaster, a comet appeared, there was a solar eclipse of more than nine minutes, three palaces suffered a disaster again, and mutations emerged year after year.

古文：志皋请下罪己诏，因累疏陈时政缺失。
现代文：赵志皋请求皇帝下诏治他的罪，于是接连奏陈时政的失误。
English: Zhao Zhixuan asked the emperor to issue an edict to punish him for his crime, so Chen Shizheng's mistakes were played one after another.

古文：而其大者定国本、罢矿税诸事，凡十一条。
现代文：其中最大的事是确定国家的根本、罢除矿税等事，共二十一条。
English: The most important of these are the determination of the country's fundamental principles, the abolition of the mineral tax and other matters, a total of 21 articles.

古文：优诏报闻而已。
现代文：皇帝下优诏答复知道了。
English: Emperor Xiao Yu's reply became known.

古文：皇长子年十六时，志皋尝请举冠婚礼。
现代文：皇长子十六岁时，赵志皋曾奏请举行弱冠、完婚的礼仪。
English: When the eldest son of the emperor was sixteen years old, Zhao Zhixuan asked him to perform the ceremony of weak crown and marriage.

古文：帝命礼官具仪。
现代文：皇帝下令礼官准备仪式。
English: The emperor ordered the etiquette officials to prepare for the ceremony.

古文：及仪上，不果行。
现代文：等到仪式方案呈上，皇帝没有立即施行。
English: When the ceremony plan was presented, the emperor did not immediately implement it.

古文：二十六年三月，志皋等复以为言，终不允。
现代文：万历二十六年三月，赵志皋等又以此劝谏，皇帝最终不同意。
English: In March of the 26th year of Wanli, Zhao Zhixuan and others tried to persuade him again, but the emperor ultimately did not agree.

古文：张居正柄国，权震主。
现代文：张居正执政，权势震主。
English: Zhang Ju is in power, and his power is tremendously strong.

古文：申时行继之，势犹盛。
现代文：申时行继他之后，气势更加强盛。
English: Shin Shigyo succeeded him and became even more powerful.

古文：王锡爵性刚负气，人亦畏之。
现代文：王锡爵性格刚强、有气势，人们也畏惧他。
English: Wang Xizhe has a strong and powerful personality, and people are afraid of him.

古文：志皋为首辅，年七十余，耄矣，柔而懦，为朝士所轻，诟谇四起。
现代文：赵志皋任首辅，年岁七十多，年老了，性格柔和而懦弱，被朝廷士人所轻视，责骂之声四起。
English: Zhao Zhixuan was the first assistant, more than seventy years old, old, gentle and weak, despised by the imperial officials, scolded by all sides.

古文：其始为首辅也，值西华门灾，御史赵文炳论之。无何，南京御史柳佐、给事中章守诚言，吏部郎顾宪成等空司而逐志皋，实激帝怒。
现代文：他开始担任首辅时，正值西华门受灾，御史赵文炳抨击他，吏部郎顾宪成等人以全体辞职来驱逐赵志皋，实际目的是要激起皇帝的恼怒。
English: When he began to serve as the first assistant, it was at the time of the disaster at the West China Gate. The governor Zhao Wenxuan criticized him, and the officials, such as Lang Gu Xiancheng, resigned en masse to expel Zhao Zhixuan. The actual purpose was to arouse the emperor's anger.

古文：已而给事中张涛、杨洵，御史冀体、况上进，南京评事龙起雷相继披诋。
现代文：此后给事中张涛、杨洵，御史冀礼、况上进，南京评事龙起雷相继发表诋毁之意。
English: Since then, Zhang Tao, Yang Wei, Gu Shi Jirei, and Jin Shangjin have been involved in the matter, and Nanjing commentator Long Qi Lei has successively published the intention to defame.

古文：而巡按御史吴崇礼劾其子两淮运副凤威，凤威坐停俸。
现代文：而巡按御史吴崇礼弹劾他的儿子两淮的副运使赵凤威，赵凤威被停止俸禄。
English: However, Wu Chongli, the inspecting magistrate, impeached his son Zhao Fengwei, the deputy commander of the two Huai, and Zhao Fengwei's salary was suspended.

古文：未几，工部郎中岳元声极言志皋宜放，给事中刘道亨诋尤力。
现代文：不久，工部郎中岳元声极力陈述应该将赵志皋驱逐。给事中刘道亨进行诋毁最为积极。
English: Soon after, the vice-minister of the Ministry of Industry, Yue Yuanxuan, strongly stated that Zhao Zhisheng should be expelled. Liu Daoheng was the most active in slandering him.

古文：志皋愤言： 同一阁臣也，往日势重而权有所归，则相率附之以媒进。
现代文：赵志皋很愤怒，称： 同是内阁大臣，往日有权有势，则争相趋附他以图晋升官职。
English: Zhao Zhixuan was very angry, saying: He is also a cabinet minister, and in the past, the powerful and influential were vying to follow him in order to be promoted.

古文：今日势轻而权有所分，则相率击之以博名。 
现代文：现在权势削弱分散，就争相攻击他以图声名。 
English: Now that power is weakened and dispersed, they are scrambling to attack him to make a name for themselves.

古文：因求退益切。
现代文：因此请求退休的心情更急切。
English: So the pleas for him to retire are all the more urgent.

古文：帝慰谕之。
现代文：皇帝下谕令抚慰他。
English: The emperor issued an edict to soothe him.

古文：初，日本封贡议起，石星力主之。
现代文：开始，日本封贡的议论兴起，石星极力支持。
English: At the beginning, the discussion of Japanese tribute arose, and Shi Xing strongly supported it.

古文：志皋亦冀无事，相与应和。
现代文：赵志皋也希望无事，与他彼此应和。
English: Zhao Zhixuan also hoped that nothing would happen, and they made peace with each other.

古文：及封事败，议者蜂起，凡劾星者必及志皋。
现代文：等到封贡的事情失败，抨击者蜂起，凡是弹劾石星必然提及赵志皋。
English: When the matter of the tribute failed and the critics rose up, whenever Shi Xing was impeached, Zhao Zhisheng would inevitably be mentioned.

古文：志皋每被言，辄疏辨求退，帝悉勉留。
现代文：赵志皋每次被抨击，就上奏请求退休，皇帝总是勉励、挽留他。
English: Every time Zhao Zhixuan was criticized, he would appeal for retirement. The emperor always encouraged and retained him.

古文：先尝谴言者以谢之，后言者益众，则多寝不下，而留志皋益坚。
现代文：先曾谴责抨击的人来告慰他，后来抨击的人更加多了，就大都将奏章扣压而不下发，而且对赵志皋的挽留更坚决。
English: People who had previously condemned the attack came to comfort him, and later there were more people who criticized him. Most of them held back the report and did not release it, and they were more determined to retain Zhao Zhixuan.

古文：迨封事大坏，星坐欺罔下狱论死，位亦以杨镐故褫官，而志皋终不问。
现代文：等到封贡的事情完全失败，石星被判欺君之罪而投入监狱等候处死，张位也因为杨镐的原因被剥夺官职，而赵志皋始终没有被审查。
English: By the time the matter of the tribute had completely failed, Shi Xing had been convicted of defrauding the king and sent to prison to await execution, Zhang Yi had also been deprived of his official position because of Yang Hui, and Zhao Zhixuan had never been censored.

古文：然志皋已病不能视事，乞休疏累上，御史于永清、给事中桂有根复疏论之。
现代文：然而赵志皋已经病得不能处理政务，多次上奏请求退休，御史于永清、给事中桂有根又上奏抨击他。
English: However, Zhao Zhixuan was already too ill to handle government affairs. He repeatedly appealed for retirement, and the imperial historian in Yongqing and Gui Yugang criticized him.

古文：志皋身在床褥，于罢矿、建储诸大政，数力疾草疏争，帝岁时恩赐亦如故。
现代文：赵志皋身在病榻，对于罢除矿税、建立皇储等人事，屡次尽力草拟奏疏争辩，皇帝在年节时候对他恩赐如前。
English: Zhao Zhisheng was on his sickbed, and he repeatedly tried his best to draft arguments for the abolition of the mineral tax, the establishment of the imperial treasury and other personnel, and the emperor gave him gifts at the time of the New Year as before.

古文：志皋疾转笃。
现代文：赵志皋的病情加重。
English: Zhao Zhisheng's condition has worsened.

古文：在告四年，疏八十余上。
现代文：在家休假四年，上奏八十多次。
English: Four years of home leave, more than eighty performances.

古文：二十九年秋，卒于邸舍。
现代文：万历二十九年秋天死于家中。
English: He died at home in the autumn of 1929.

古文：赠太傅，谥文懿。
现代文：被赠封为太傅，谥号文懿。
English: He was awarded the title of Taifu, and his posthumous name was Wenjun.

古文：张位，字明成，新建人。
现代文：张位，字明成，新建人。
English: Zhang bit, word clear into, newly-built people.

古文：隆庆二年进士。
现代文：隆庆二年的进士。
English: Longqing two-year starter.

古文：改庶吉士。
现代文：改任庶吉士。
English: I'm so glad I changed jobs.

古文：授编修，预修《世宗实录》。
现代文：授职为编修，参与编撰《世宗实录》。
English: He was appointed as an editor and participated in compiling the "Sejong Record."

古文：万历元年，位以前代皆有起居注，而本朝独无，疏言： 臣备员纂修，窃见先朝政事，自非出于诏令，形诸章疏，悉湮没无考。
现代文：万历元年，张位认为前代都有起居注，而唯独本朝没有，上奏称 ：我作为纂修的辅助者，窥知先朝的政事，不是出于诏令，载于奏疏的事情，都埋没无从考察。
English: In the first year of the Wanli era, Zhang Yi believed that the previous generation all had the right of abode, but only this dynasty did not. In his report, he said: I, as an assistant to the compilation and revision, know the political affairs of the previous dynasty, not because of the imperial edict, and the things contained in the report are all buried and cannot be investigated.

古文：鸿猷茂烈，郁而未章，徒使野史流传，用伪乱真。
现代文：盛大的事业，却郁积不明，徒然使野史流传，以伪乱真。
English: A grand undertaking, but the accumulation is unclear, in vain to make wild stories spread, with false and true.

古文：今史官充位，无以自效。
现代文：现在史官排列于位，却无能效力。
English: Now the historians are in place, but they are powerless.

古文：宜日分数人入直，凡诏旨起居，朝端政务，皆据见闻书之，待内阁裁定，为他年实录之助。 
现代文：应该每天分派数人到衙门办公处，所有诏旨的草拟与颁布，朝廷的政务，都根据史官的见闻做记载，等待内阁取裁确定，作为日后撰写实录的辅助。 
English: Several people should be assigned to the gate office every day, and all the drafting and promulgation of the imperial edict, as well as the government affairs of the imperial court, should be recorded according to the historian's knowledge, waiting for the cabinet to make a decision, as an aid to writing a record in the future.

古文：张居正善其议，奏行焉。
现代文：张居正肯定了他的奏议，上奏皇帝着手实施。
English: Zhang Juzheng affirmed his proposal, and the emperor proceeded to implement it.

古文：后以救吴中行、赵用贤忤居正意。
现代文：他后来因为救助吴中行、赵用贤违背了张居正的意愿。
English: He later violated Zhang Jizheng's will by helping Wu Zhongxing and Zhao Yixian.

古文：时已迁侍讲，抑授南京司业。
现代文：当时他已经升任侍讲，将其裁抑授职为南京司业。
English: At that time, he had already been promoted to the post of assistant lecturer, and his post was reduced to the post of Nanjing Division.

古文：未行，复以京察，谪徐州同知。
现代文：还没动身，又因为京官的政绩考核，降职为徐州同知。
English: He had not yet set off, and because of the Beijing official's performance appraisal, he was demoted to Xuzhou Tongzhi.

古文：居正卒之明年，用给事中冯景隆、御史孙维城荐，擢南京尚宝丞。
现代文：张居正死后的第二年，因为给事中冯景隆、御史孙维城的推荐，晋升为南京尚宝丞。
English: In the second year after Zhang Jizheng's death, he was promoted to Nanjing Shang Bao Rong because he was recommended by Feng Jinglong and Sun Wicheng, who was a senior official at the time.

古文：俄召为左中允，管司业事，进祭酒。
现代文：不久，被召任为左中允，掌管司业的事务，晋升为祭酒。
English: Soon, he was appointed as Zuozhongyong, in charge of the affairs of the administration, and promoted to the position of the sacrificial wine.

古文：疏陈六事，多议行。
现代文：他上奏陈述六件事，大都经廷议施行。
English: He put forward six cases, most of which were implemented after court deliberation.

古文：以礼部右侍郎。教习庶吉士，引疾归。
现代文：担任礼部右侍郎，教导庶吉士，后称病回乡。
English: He served as the Right Attendant of the Ceremonial Department, teaching the second-born children, and later claimed to be ill and returned to his hometown.

古文：诏起故官，协理詹事府，辞不赴。
现代文：诏令他就任原职，协助负责詹事府，他推辞不赴任。
English: The Emperor ordered him to take up his original post, to assist in the management of Zhan's office, but he declined to take up the post.

古文：久之，以申时行荐，拜吏部左侍郎兼东阁大学士，与赵志皋并命。
现代文：此后很久，因为申时行的推荐，就任吏部左侍郎兼东阁大学士，与赵志皋一起被启用。
English: Long after that, because of the recommendation of Shin Shigyo, he was appointed as the left attendant of the personnel department and a scholar of Donggak University, and was put into use together with Zhao Zhixuan.

古文：王锡爵还朝，帝适降谕三王并封，以待嫡为辞。
现代文：王锡爵返回朝廷，恰逢皇帝下谕准备一起分封三王，以等待嫡子为托辞。
English: When Wang Xizhe returned to the imperial court, it coincided with the emperor's decree to prepare to divide the three kings together, using the excuse of waiting for his legitimate son.

古文：而志皋、位遽请帝笃修交泰，早兆高禖，议者窃哂之。
现代文：而赵志皋、张位就请求皇帝诚敬地融合阴阳之气，以早日孕育帝子，议论的人暗暗讥笑他们。
English: However, Zhao Zhixuan and Zhang Yi asked the emperor to earnestly integrate the yin and yang, so as to conceive the emperor's son as soon as possible. The people who discussed this secretly mocked them.

古文：赵南星以考察事褫官，朝士诋锡爵者多及位。
现代文：赵南星因为考察的事被剥夺官职，朝中士人诋毁王锡爵，大都牵涉到张位。
English: Zhao Nansing was deprived of his official position because of the investigation, and the sergeants of the DPRK slandered Wang Xizhe, most of which involved Zhang Yi.

古文：锡爵去，志皋为首辅。
现代文：王锡爵离去，赵志皋任首辅。
English: Wang Xizhe left, and Zhao Zhixuan was appointed chief assistant.

古文：位与志皋相厚善。
现代文：张位与赵志皋彼此很友好。
English: Zhang Yi and Zhao Zhixuan are very friendly to each other.

古文：志皋衰，位精悍敢任，政事多所裁决。
现代文：赵志皋衰弱，张位精悍且敢于做事，政事大都由他裁决。
English: Zhao Zhixuan is weak, but he is brave and dares to do things. Most of the political affairs are decided by him.

古文：时黜陟权尽还吏部，政府不得侵挠。
现代文：当时的罢免权全部收归吏部，政府不得侵犯、阻挠。
English: The power of recall at that time was all transferred to the Ministry of Public Administration, and the government may not infringe or obstruct it.

古文：位深憾之，事多掣其肘。
现代文：张位对此很不满意，很多事情都加以掣肘。
English: Zhang Yi is very dissatisfied with this, and many things are constrained.

古文：以故孙鑨、陈有年、孙丕扬、蔡国珍皆不安其位而去。
现代文：所以孙钅龙、陈有年、丕扬、蔡国珍都难安于职位，先后离去。
English: Therefore, Sun Yulong, Chen Younian, Hao Yang and Cai Guozhen all found it difficult to be satisfied with their positions and left one after another.

古文：二十四年，两宫灾，矿税议起，位等不能沮。
现代文：万历二十四年，两宫遭灾，搜刮矿税的议论兴起，张位等人不能阻止。
English: In the 24th year of Wanli, the two palaces suffered a disaster, and the discussion of mining tax was raised, and Zhang Yi and others could not stop it.

古文：及奸人请税煤炭，开临清皇店，位与沈一贯乃执奏不可，不报。
现代文：等到奸人请求对煤炭征税，在临清开设皇室店铺，张位与沈一贯才执意上奏不可行，皇帝没有答复。
English: The emperor did not reply until the impostor requested to tax coal and open a royal store in Linqing. Zhang and Shen persisted in insisting that it was not feasible.

古文：明年春，偕一贯陈经理朝鲜事宜。
现代文：第二年春天，与沈一贯一道陈述如何处理朝鲜的事宜。
English: In the spring of the following year, he and Shen made a joint statement on how to deal with North Korea.

古文：请于开城、平壤建置重镇，练兵屯田，通商惠工，省中国输挽。
现代文：奏请在开城、平壤建立重镇，训练兵马，开垦屯田，实行通商，优待工匠，节省中国的输出。
English: He requested the establishment of important towns in Kaesong and Pyongyang, the training of soldiers and horses, the reclamation of military camps, the implementation of trade, the preferential treatment of craftsmen, and the saving of China's output.

古文：且择人为长帅，分署朝鲜八道，为持久计。
现代文：并且选择人担任长帅，分别负责朝鲜的八道，是持久之计。
English: And the selection of a person to serve as commander-in-chief, responsible for the eight provinces of North Korea, is a long-term solution.

古文：事下朝鲜议。
现代文：此事下达给朝鲜商议。
English: The matter was referred to North Korea for consultation.

古文：其国君臣虑中国遂并其土，疏陈非便，乃寝。
现代文：此国的君臣顾虑中国兼并他们的国土，上奏陈述不便利，于是就沉寂了。
English: The country's monarchs and courtiers, concerned about China's annexation of their land and the inconvenience of making a statement, fell silent.

古文：顷之，日本封事坏，位力荐参政杨镐才，请付以朝鲜军务。
现代文：此后不久，日本封贡的事情失败，张位极力推举参政杨镐的才干，请把朝鲜的军务交付给他。
English: Soon after that, the Japanese tribute failed, and Zhang Yi tried his best to promote the ability of Yang Jie to participate in politics. Please entrust the military affairs of North Korea to him.

古文：镐遭父丧，又请夺情视事，且荐邢玠为总督。
现代文：杨镐遇上父亲的丧事，他又奏请让杨镐未满丧期就出仕，负责事务，并且推荐邢王介任总督。
English: When Yang Hui met his father's funeral, he requested Yang Hui to serve before the period of mourning was over, to be responsible for affairs, and to recommend Shao Wang Jie as governor.

古文：帝皆从之。
现代文：皇帝都予以同意。
English: Taizong all adopted it.

古文：位已进礼部尚书，改文渊阁，以甘肃破贼叙功，加太子太保，复以延镇功，进少保、吏部尚书，改武英殿。
现代文：张位已经晋升为礼部尚书，改任文渊阁，因为甘肃方面破敌而得功，加封为太子太保，又因为延镇的功绩，晋升为少保、吏部尚书，改任武英殿。
English: Zhang Yi has been promoted to the Ministry of Ceremonies, and has been appointed to the Ministry of Literature, and has been awarded the title of Crown Prince, and has been promoted to the Ministry of Public Security, and has been appointed to the Ministry of Civil Service, and has been appointed to the Ministry of Education, and has been appointed to the Ministry of Education, and has been promoted to the Ministry of Culture, and has been appointed to the Ministry of Education, and has been promoted to the Ministry of Culture, and has been appointed to the Ministry of Education, and has been promoted to the Ministry of Culture.

古文：三殿灾，志皋适在告，位偕同列请面慰，不许。
现代文：三座宫遭灾，赵志皋恰巧在休假，张位与同僚奏请向皇帝当面慰问，皇帝不同意。
English: Three palaces were affected by the disaster, and Zhao Zhixuan happened to be on vacation. Zhang Yi and his colleagues asked the emperor to express their condolences in person, but the emperor did not agree.

古文：乃请帝引咎颁赦，勤朝讲，发章奏，躬郊庙，建皇储，录废弃，容狂直，寡细过，补缺官，减织造，停矿使，彻税监，释系囚。
现代文：于是奏请皇帝引咎颁发赦令，勤于上朝和出席讲筵，下发奏章，亲自到郊庙祭祀，建立皇储，录用废弃的人，包容狂妄的与耿直的人，宽恕小的过失，补充空缺的官职，减少织造，停止矿使，撤除税监，释放囚犯。
English: So he petitioned the emperor to issue a pardon, to be diligent in attending the imperial court and attending lectures, to issue music chapters, to personally go to suburban temples for sacrifices, to establish a crown prince, to hire abandoned people, to tolerate arrogant and upright people, to forgive minor faults, to fill vacant official positions, to reduce weaving, to stop miners, to remove tax inspectors, and to release prisoners.

古文：帝优诏报之，不能尽行。
现代文：皇帝下优诏答复他，但不能尽数施行。
English: The emperor issued an edict in reply, but it could not be enforced.

古文：位又言： 臣等请停矿税，非遽停之也，盖欲责成抚按，使上不亏国，下不累民耳。 
现代文：张位又劝谏 ：我们奏请停征矿税，不是即刻就停止它们，大约是想责成抚按大臣，使其对上不亏损国家，对下不劳累百姓罢了。 
English: Zhang also advised: "We are not asking for an immediate end to the mining tax. Rather, we want to instruct the finance minister to ensure that the country does not lose money on the upside and the people are not overburdened on the downside.

古文：于是给事中张正学劾位逢迎迁就，宜斥。
现代文：因此给事中张正学弹劾张位逢迎迁就，应该贬斥他。
English: Therefore, the impeachment of Zhang Zhengxue in the case of Zhang Zhengxue is a welcome move, and he should be denounced.

古文：帝亦不省。
现代文：皇帝也不作理会。
English: The emperor did not do any self-reflection.

古文：位初官翰林，声望甚重，朝士冀其大用。
现代文：张位初任翰林，声望很高，朝廷人士希望他有大的作为。
English: Hanlin, Zhang's first-in-command, had a high reputation, and people in the imperial court hoped that he would do great things.

古文：及入政府，招权示威，素望渐衰。
现代文：等到他进入政府，招揽权力显示威风，一向享有的声望便渐渐跌落。
English: By the time he got into government, his power-grabbing was showing its teeth, and the prestige he had always enjoyed was slipping away.

古文：给事中刘道亨劾位奸贪数十事。
现代文：给事中刘道亨弹劾张位的数十件奸贪的事情。
English: In this case, Liu Daoheng impeached Zhang for dozens of treacherous and greedy things.

古文：位愤，力辨，遂落道享三官。
现代文：张位很愤怒，极力辩解，于是将刘道亨降了三级。
English: Zhang Yi was very angry and tried his best to defend himself, so he downgraded Liu Daoheng by three levels.

古文：吕坤、张养蒙与孙丕扬交好，而沈思孝、徐作、刘应秋、刘楚先、戴士衡、杨廷兰则与位善，各有所左右。
现代文：吕坤、张养蒙与孙丕扬相好，而沈思孝、徐作、刘应秋、刘楚先、戴士衡、杨廷兰则与张位友善，各有左右手。
English: Lyu Kun and Zhang Yimeng are friendly with Sun Yuyang, while Shen Sihong, Xu Zuo, Liu Yingqiu, Liu Chuxian, Dai Shiheng and Yang Tinglan are friendly with Zhang Yi, and each has his right and left hands.

古文：丕扬尝劾位，指道亨为其党。
现代文：孙丕扬曾经弹劾张位，指责刘道亨是他的党羽。
English: Sun Yat-sen once impeached Zhang Di, accusing Liu Daoheng of being his henchman.

古文：道亨耻之，劾位以自解。
现代文：刘道亨以此为耻辱，弹劾张位以做自我解释。
English: Liu Daoheng took this as a disgrace and impeached Zhang for self-explanation.

古文：已而赞画主事丁应泰劾杨镐丧师，言位与镐密书往来，朋党欺罔，镐拔擢由贿位得之。
现代文：不久赞画主事丁应泰弹劾杨镐丧失兵马，称张位与杨镐有密信往来，相互勾结欺君罔上，杨镐的提升是由于贿赂了张位的结果。
English: Not long after, Ding Yingtao, the director of the painting, praised the impeachment of Yang Jie for the loss of soldiers and horses, saying that Zhang Yi had secret correspondence with Yang Jie and colluded with each other to cheat the emperor. Yang Yi's promotion was the result of bribing Zhang Yi.

古文：帝怒，下廷议。
现代文：皇帝恼怒，将它下交朝廷议论。
English: The emperor was outraged and submitted it to the imperial court for discussion.

古文：位惶恐奏辨，帝犹慰留。
现代文：张位感到惶恐，上奏辩解，皇帝还是抚慰、挽留他。
English: Zhang Yi felt panicked and began to plead his case, but the emperor still comforted and held him back.

古文：给事中赵完璧、徐观澜复交章论。
现代文：给事中赵完璧、黎观澜又接连上奏疏论。
English: Zhao Guanzhong and Lai Guanlan repeatedly raised the issue of slackness.

古文：位窘，亟奏： 群言交攻，孤忠可悯。
现代文：张位窘迫，赶紧上奏称： 众言官交相攻击，我孤忠可悯。
English: Embarrassed, Zhang Yi hurriedly made a report, saying, "All the government officials are attacking each other, and I alone can be pitied.

古文：臣心无纤毫愧，惟上矜察。 
现代文：我心中没有丝毫惭愧，希望皇帝明察。 
English: I'm not the least bit ashamed, and I hope the emperor can see that.

古文：帝怒曰： 镐由卿密揭屡荐，故夺哀授任。
现代文：皇帝发怒道 ：杨镐是你在密奏中屡屡推荐的，所以允许他服丧不满期就出任官职。
English: The emperor said angrily, "You repeatedly recommended Yang Xuan in your secret recital, so you allowed him to take up his official post during his period of mourning.

古文：今乃朋欺隐慝，辱国损威，犹云无愧。 
现代文：现在却相互勾结欺骗隐匿奸情，使国家受辱，威望受损，还称无愧。 
English: Now, however, they are colluding with each other, deceiving, concealing and betraying each other, humiliating the country, damaging its prestige, and saying that they are not ashamed.

古文：遂夺职闲住。
现代文：于是剥夺他的官职，令他闲居。
English: He was stripped of his official position and forced to live in idleness.

古文：无何，有获妖书名《忧危竑议》者，御史赵之翰言位实主谋。
现代文：不久，查获妖书《忧危议》，御史赵之翰称张位实为主谋。
English: Not long after, the occult book "The Fearful and Dangerous Discussion" was discovered, in which the historian Zhao Zhikhan claimed that Zhang Isin was the mastermind.

古文：帝亦疑位怨望有他志，诏除名为民，遇赦不宥。
现代文：皇帝也怀疑张位怀有别的企图，下诏将他从官籍中除名，贬为平民，如有大赦也不宽恕。
English: The emperor also suspected that Zhang Yiming harbored other intentions, and issued an edict to expel him from the official register and reduce him to a commoner, and would not pardon him if there was an amnesty.

古文：其亲故右都御史徐作、侍郎刘楚先、祭酒刘应秋、给事中杨廷兰、主事万建昆皆贬黜有差。
现代文：他的亲朋故友右都御史徐作、侍郎刘楚先、祭酒刘庆秋，给事中杨廷兰、主事万建昆都遭不同程度的贬责。
English: His relatives, friends, and late friends, including the governor of the capital, Xu Zuo, the steward Liu Chuxian, and the sacrificial wine Liu Qingqiu, as well as Yang Tinglan and the chief steward Wan Jiankun, were all disparaged to varying degrees.

古文：位有才，果于自用，任气好矜。
现代文：张位有才干，刚愎自用，任性、矜持。
English: Zhang is talented, stubborn, self-serving, headstrong, and reserved.

古文：其败也，廷臣莫之救。
现代文：他衰落时，朝廷大臣没人救他。
English: When he fell, no minister of the court came to his rescue.

古文：既卒，亦无湔雪之者。
现代文：即使去世了，也没有人替他洗刷罪名。
English: Even if he died, no one could clear his name.

古文：天启中，复官，赠太保，谥文庄。
现代文：天启年间，被恢复官籍，赠封为太保，谥号文庄。
English: In the year of the Apocalypse, he was reinstated as an official citizen, granted the title of Taiho, and given the posthumous name of Wenzhuang.

古文：朱赓，字少钦，浙江山阴人。
现代文：朱赓，字少钦，浙江山阴人。
English: Zhu Xi, Zhaoxiaoqin, Zhejiang Shanyin people.

古文：父公节，泰州知州。
现代文：父亲朱公节，任泰州知州。
English: His father, Zhu Gongjie, was from Taizhou and Chizhou.

古文：兄应，刑部主事。
现代文：兄长朱应，为刑部主事。
English: His elder brother, Zhu Ying, is the head of the criminal investigation department.

古文：赓登隆庆二年进士，改庶吉士，授编修。
现代文：朱赓成为隆庆二年的进士，改任庶吉士，授职为编修。
English: Zhu Xi became a member of Longqing for two years, and was reappointed as an associate member of Longqing, and was awarded the post of editor.

古文：万历六年，以侍读为日讲官。
现代文：万历六年，以侍读身份充当日讲官。
English: After six long years, he is now serving as a lecturer on the day as an attendant.

古文：宫中方兴土木，治苑囿。
现代文：宫中正兴土木，修花苑园囿。
English: In the palace, civil engineering is being built, and the flower garden is being renovated.

古文：赓因讲宋史，极言 花石纲 之害，帝为悚然。
现代文：于是朱赓讲授宋史，极力陈说 花石纲 的祸害，皇帝为此悚然。
English: So Zhu Xi lectured on the history of the Song Dynasty and tried his best to expose the evil of the Han Shi Gang. The emperor was horrified.

古文：历礼部左、右侍郎。
现代文：他历任礼部左、右侍郎。
English: He was successively the Left and Right Attendant of the Ministry of Ceremonies.

古文：帝营寿宫于大峪山，命赓往视。
现代文：皇帝在大峪山营造死后享用的寝宫，命令朱赓前往视察。
English: The emperor ordered Zhu Xi to go and inspect the sleeping palace that he had built on Mount Dafu to enjoy after his death.

古文：中官示帝意欲仿永陵制，赓言： 昭陵在望，制过之，非所安。 
现代文：太监提示他皇帝想仿效永陵的规格，朱赓上奏称： 昭陵可以了，规格超过了它，不安逸。 
English: The eunuch pointed out to him that the emperor wanted to emulate Yongling's specifications, and Zhu Xi said: Zhaoling can do it, the specifications exceed it, and he is uneasy.

古文：疏入，久不下。
现代文：奏疏呈入皇宫，他就任礼部尚书，遇上继母的丧事而离职。
English: He entered the imperial palace with little fanfare, assumed the post of ceremonial secretary, and left his post after the death of his stepmother.

古文：已，竟如其言。累官礼部尚书，遭继母丧去。二十九年秋，赵志皋卒，沈一贯独当国，请增置阁臣。
现代文：万历二十九年秋天，赵志皋去世，沈一贯单独执政，奏请增设内阁大臣。
English: In the autumn of the 29th year of Wanli, Zhao Zhisheng died, and Shen, who had always ruled alone, requested the appointment of an additional cabinet minister.

古文：帝素虑大臣植党，欲用林居及久废者。
现代文：皇帝一向顾虑大臣培植党羽，想任用隐居山野以及被废置很久的人。
English: The emperor has always been wary of ministers cultivating the party, and wants to appoint people who live in seclusion in the mountains and who have been abandoned for a long time.

古文：诏赓以故官兼东阁大学士，参预机务，遣行人召之。
现代文：诏令朱赓就任原职并兼东阁大学士参与机要事务，派遣行人召唤他。
English: The emperor ordered Zhu Xi to take up his original post and concurrently participate in important matters as a Dongge University scholar, dispatching pedestrians to summon him.

古文：再辞，不允。
现代文：他再三推辞，皇帝不答应。
English: He repeatedly declined, and the emperor did not agree.

古文：明年四月诣阙，即捐一岁俸助殿工。
现代文：第二年四月到朝廷，就捐献了一年的俸禄来资助宫殿的营造。
English: In April of the following year, he went to the Imperial Court and donated one year's salary to finance the construction of the palace.

古文：其秋极陈矿税之害，帝不能用。
现代文：当年秋天他极力陈说矿税的祸害，皇帝不能采用。
English: In the autumn of that year, he tried his best to expose the evil of the mining tax, saying that the emperor could not adopt it.

古文：既而与一贯及沈鲤共献守成、遣使、权宜三论，大指为矿税发，赓手笔也。
现代文：接着与沈一贯和沈鲤一起向皇帝呈送有关守成遣使权宜三论，深刻揭发矿税对国家社会的危害，都出自朱赓的手笔。
English: Then, together with Shen Xianzong and Shen Yu, he presented to the emperor three theories about the expediency of sending envoys to Shoucheng, and profoundly exposed the harm of mineral taxes to the national society, all of which were written by Zhu Xi.

古文：赓于已邸门获妖书，而书辞诬赓动摇国本，大惧。
现代文：朱赓在自己的府邸门前得到妖书，而书中诬蔑朱赓动摇国家的根本，他大为惊惧。
English: Zhu Xi was greatly alarmed when he received a demonic book in front of his residence. The book slandered Zhu Xi and shook the foundation of the country.

古文：立以疏闻，乞避位。
现代文：马上上奏皇帝，请求回避。
English: Immediately report to the emperor and ask to be excused.

古文：帝慰谕有加。
现代文：皇帝下谕对他大加抚慰。
English: The emperor issued an edict to soothe him.

古文：一贯倡群小穷治不已，赓在告，再贻书一贯，请速具狱，无株连，事乃得解。
现代文：沈一贯借此奸邪小人穷追其事。朱赓在休假，一再致函沈一贯，请他迅速结案不要株连，事情才得化解。
English: Zhu Xi, who was on vacation, repeatedly sent a letter to Shen Zonglian, asking him to quickly close the case and not to make a joint venture, so that the matter could be resolved.

古文：三十三，年大计京官。
现代文：万历三十三年，全面考察京官。
English: Thirty-three years later, a comprehensive survey of Beijing officials is underway.

古文：帝留被察者钱梦皋辈，及南京察疏上，亦欲有所留。
现代文：皇帝挽留钱梦皋等被查处的人，等到南京的考核结果呈送到京，皇帝又想作挽留。
English: The emperor retained Qianmengtao and other people who were investigated and punished. When the assessment results from Nanjing were submitted to Beijing, the emperor wanted to retain them again.

古文：赓力陈不可，曰： 北察之留，旨从中出，人犹咎臣等。
现代文：朱赓极力陈述不能行，他说： 北京被查处者受挽留，旨令由宫中发出，人们还责备我们。
English: Zhu Rong tried his best to explain that it was not possible, he said: Beijing's victims were detained, the order was issued by the palace, and people also blamed us.

古文：今若出自票拟，则二百余年大典，自臣坏之，死不敢奉诏。 
现代文：现在如果出自内阁票拟，则两百多年的大典，从我手中毁坏，至死不敢奉诏行事。 
English: Now, if it comes from a cabinet vote, the two-hundred-plus-year-old edict will be destroyed in my hands, and I will never dare to act according to the edict.

古文：言官劾温纯及鲤，中使传帝意欲去纯。
现代文：言官弹劾温纯和沈鲤，宦官传达皇帝想驱除温纯的意思。
English: The eunuch conveys the meaning that the emperor wants to drive away the warm and pure.

古文：赓言大臣去国必采公论，岂可于劾疏报允。
现代文：朱赓称大臣的离去必须采纳公众的评议，怎么可以在弹劾的奏疏中答复。
English: Zhu Rong said that the departure of the minister must be subject to public comment, how can it be answered in the impeachment report.

古文：帝下南察疏，而纯竟去。
现代文：皇帝下发了南京的考核结果，而温纯最终离职。
English: The emperor issued the assessment results of Nanjing, and Wenjun finally left the post.

古文：其冬，工部请营三殿。
现代文：当年冬天，工部请求营造三座殿堂。
English: In the winter of that year, the Ministry of Works requested the construction of three halls.

古文：时方浚河、缮城，赓力请俟之异日。
现代文：当时正值疏浚河道、修缮城防，朱赓极力请求将营造的事推至他日。
English: At that time, it was time to dredge the river and repair the city defenses, and Zhu Xi strongly requested that the construction be postponed to another day.

古文：帝皆纳之，不果行。
现代文：皇帝都采纳了，果然没有施行。
English: The emperor adopted all of them, but they were not implemented.

古文：三十四年，一贯、鲤去位，赓独当国，年七十有二矣。
现代文：万历三十四年，沈一贯、沈鲤离去，朱赓单独执政，年纪达七十二岁。
English: In the 34th year of Wanli, Shen Cong and Shen Yao left, and Zhu Xi ruled alone, at the age of 72.

古文：朝政日弛，中外解体。
现代文：朝政一天天松弛，朝廷内外隔膜。
English: Day by day, the imperial government is weakening, and the inner and outer walls of the imperial court are cracking.

古文：赓疏揭月数上，十不能一下。
现代文：朱赓每月数次上奏，下发的奏章还不及十分之一。
English: Zhu Xi plays the first movement several times a month, and the second movement is less than one-tenth.

古文：御史宋寿首讽切赓，给事中汪若霖继之。
现代文：御史宋焘首先讽刺朱赓，给事中汪若霖继续讥讽。
English: The imperial historian Song Tao first satirized Zhu Xi, while Wang Ruolin continued the ridicule.

古文：赓缘二人言，力请帝更新庶政，于增阁臣、补大僚、充言路三事语尤切。
现代文：朱赓根据他们两人的奏疏，极力请求皇帝更新庶政，对增加内阁大臣、补充大僚、扩充言路三件事情他的话语最为恳切。
English: According to the report of the two of them, Zhu Xi strongly requested the emperor to renew the general policy, and his words were most earnest about three things: increasing the number of cabinet ministers, supplementing senior officials, and expanding the way of speech.

古文：帝优诏答之而不行。
现代文：皇帝下优诏答复他却不采纳。
English: The emperor sent him a reply, which he did not accept.

古文：赓乃素服诣文华门恳请，终不得命。
现代文：于是朱赓穿上白色平民衣服到文华门恳求，最终仍得不到诏令。
English: So Zhu Xi put on white civilian clothes and went to the Wenhua Gate to plead, but in the end he still did not get the edict.

古文：赓以老，屡引疾，阁中空无人。
现代文：朱赓因为年老，屡次称病，内阁中空无一人。
English: Due to his old age, Zhu Rong repeatedly claimed to be ill, leaving the cabinet empty.

古文：帝谕简阁臣，而廷臣虑帝出中旨如往年赵志皋、张位故事。
现代文：皇帝下谕选择内阁大臣，而朝廷大臣顾虑皇帝像往年赵志皋、张位的事情一般颁出中旨。
English: The emperor chose the cabinet ministers by decree, while the ministers of the imperial court generally issued the middle order as the emperor was concerned about the things like Zhao Zhisheng and Zhang Yi in previous years.

古文：赓力疾请付廷推，乃用于慎行、李廷机、叶向高，而召王锡爵于家，以为首辅。
现代文：朱赓赶紧极力请求交付给朝廷大臣推举，于是任用了于慎行、李廷机、叶向高，而到家中征召王锡爵，让他任首辅。
English: Zhu Xi hurriedly and strenuously requested that the nomination be submitted to the Minister of the Imperial Court, so he appointed Yu Shengxing, Li Tingji and Ye Xianggao, and went home to recruit Wang Xizhe to serve as chief aide.

古文：给事中王元翰、胡忻以廷机之用，赓实主之，疏诋廷机，并侵赓。
现代文：给事中王元翰、胡忻以为李廷机受任用，实际上由朱赓的举荐，上奏诋毁李廷机并触及朱赓。
English: In the matter, Wang Yuanhan and Hu Yao thought that Li Tingji was appointed, but in fact it was recommended by Zhu Xi, and the report slandered Li Tingji and touched Zhu Xi.

古文：赓疏辞，帝为切责言者。
现代文：朱赓上奏辞官，皇帝为他痛责议论的人。
English: Zhu Xi played the role of a speech writer, and the emperor scolded him for being a controversialist.

古文：既而姜士昌及焘被谪，言路谓出赓意，益不平。
现代文：不久姜士昌和宋焘被贬职，舆论称此是出于朱赓的意思，更加不平。
English: Not long after, Jiang Shichang and Song Tao were demoted, and the public opinion said that this was due to Zhu Tao's intention, which was even more unfair.

古文：礼部主事郑振先遂劾赓十二大罪，且言赓与一贯、锡爵为过去、见在、未来三身。
现代文：礼部主事郑振先便弹劾朱赓的十二大罪状，并且称朱赓与沈一贯、王锡爵是过去、现在、未来的三个化身。
English: Zheng Zhenxian, the head of the ritual department, impeached Zhu Xi for the twelve major crimes, and said that Zhu Xi was consistent with Shen, and Wang Xizhe was the past, present, and future of the three incarnations.

古文：帝怒，贬振先三秩。
现代文：皇帝恼怒，将郑振先降官三级。
English: Enraged, the emperor demoted Zheng Zhenxian to the third grade.

古文：俄以言官论救，再贬二秩。
现代文：不久，因为言官救助，才降了两级。
English: Shortly after, it was downgraded by two notches due to the intervention of the spokesman.

古文：先，考选科道，吏部拟上七十八人。
现代文：此前，科道考选，吏部打算推举七十八人。
English: Previously, for the science and technology entrance examination, the cadre department planned to nominate seventy-eight people.

古文：候命逾年，不下，赓连疏趣之。
现代文：等候了一年的诏令，也没下达，朱赓接连上奏催促。
English: After waiting for a year for the imperial edict, it was not issued, and Zhu Xi successively urged the emperor to act.

古文：三十六年秋，命始下。
现代文：万历三十八年秋天，皇帝才下达诏令。
English: It was not until the autumn of 38 B.C. that the emperor issued an imperial edict.

古文：诸人列言路，方欲见风采，而给事中若霖先尝忤赓，及是见黜，适当赓病起入直时。
现代文：诸人排列在言路，刚想展示风采，而给事中汪若霖先曾与朱赓抵触，等到此时又被罢免官职，又适逢朱赓病愈入阁理事的时候。
English: People lined up to speak, just wanting to show their style, and in the middle of it all, Wang Ruolin, who had previously clashed with Zhu Rong, was removed from office at this time, which also coincided with the time when Zhu Rong recovered from his illness and became a cabinet director.

古文：众谓赓修郤，攻讦四起，先后疏论至五十余人。
现代文：众人称朱赓泄私愤，对他的攻击之声四起，先后有五十多人上奏弹劾他。
English: Everyone said that Zhu Rong was venting his personal anger, and there were four voices of attack against him, and more than fifty people successively came forward to impeach him.

古文：给事中喻安性者，赓里人，为赓上疏言： 今日政权不由内阁，尽移于司礼。 
现代文：给事中喻安性是朱赓的同乡，替朱赓上奏称： 现在政权不在内阁，而全部转到了司礼。 
English: In the matter, Yu Anxiong, a fellow villager of Zhu Xi, made a report on behalf of Zhu Xi, saying: Now the power is not in the cabinet, but has all been transferred to the priest.

古文：言者遂交章劾安性，复侵赓。
现代文：抨击者便上奏弹劾喻安性，又触犯朱赓。
English: The critics then played up the impeachment metaphor, which also offended Zhu Rong.

古文：是时赓已寝疾，乞休疏二十余上。
现代文：当时朱赓已经病卧在床，上奏二十多次请求退休。
English: At that time, Zhu Rong was already ill in bed, and he made more than 20 requests to retire.

古文：言者虑其复起，攻不已，而赓以十一月卒于官。
现代文：抨击者顾虑他再度康复，不断地进行抨击，朱赓在十一月死于任上。
English: Detractors, fearing he had relapsed, kept up the attacks, and Mr. Zhu died in office in November.

古文：遗疏陈时政，语极悲切。
现代文：遗留的奏章，陈述时政，话语很悲切。
English: The legacy of the score, the statement of current affairs, the words are very sad.

古文：赓先加少保兼太子太保，进吏部尚书、文华殿大学士。
现代文：朱赓先被加封为少保兼太子太保，晋升为吏部尚书、文华殿大学士。
English: Zhu Xi was first awarded the title of Junior Bodyguard and Prince's Bodyguard, and was promoted to the post of Secretary of the Ministry of Personnel and the post of Professor of the University of the Palace of Literature.

古文：及卒，赠太保，谥文懿。
现代文：等到去世后，被赠封为太保，谥号文懿。
English: After his death, he was bestowed the title of Taibao and the posthumous title of Wenjun.

古文：御史鼓端吾复疏诋赓，给事中胡忻请停其赠谥，帝不听。
现代文：御史彭端吾又上奏诋毁朱赓，给事中胡忻奏请停止他的赠称与谥号，皇帝不听。
English: The emperor did not listen to Emperor Spen's request to slander Zhu Rong, and asked Hu Rong to stop calling him by his posthumous name and nickname.

古文：赓醇谨无大过，与沈一贯同乡相比，昵给事中陈治则、姚文蔚等，以故蒙诟病云。
现代文：朱赓醇厚、谨慎，没有大的过错，与沈一贯是同乡，亲近给事中陈治则、姚文蔚等人，因此蒙受责骂。
English: Zhu Xi is mellow, prudent, and has no major faults. He has always been a fellow villager with Shen, and is close to Chen Zhizhe, Yao Wenwei and others, so he was scolded.

古文：赞曰：四维等当轴处中，颇滋物议。
现代文：总评：张四维等人当枢轴中，颇遭众议。
English: General comment: Zhang Siwei and others as the pivot, has been widely discussed.

古文：其时言路势张，恣为抨击。
现代文：当时，言路的气势嚣张，恣意抨击。
English: At that time, words and deeds were full of arrogance and arbitrary criticism.

古文：是非瞀乱，贤否混淆，群相敌仇，罔顾国是。
现代文：是非紊乱，贤愚混淆，群相彼此视为仇敌，无人顾及国家大计。
English: Law and order is in disarray, the wise and the foolish are confused, the masses see each other as enemies, and no one is paying attention to the national plan.

古文：诟谇日积，又乌足为定论乎。
现代文：责骂之志一天天积累，又怎么有公允的定论呢？
English: How can there be a fair conclusion when the desire to scold accumulates day by day?

古文：然谓光明磊落有大臣之节，则斯人亦不能无愧辞焉。
现代文：然而就光明磊落，有大臣的气节而论，则这班人也不能没有惭愧的话。
English: However, as far as being above reproach and having the temperament of a minister is concerned, this group of people should be ashamed of themselves.

