古文：郦琼李成孔彦舟徐文施宜生张中孚张中彦宇文虚中王伦郦琼，字国宝，相州临漳人。
现代文：郦琼字国宝，相州临漳人。
English: Zou Qiong, a national treasure, was born in Linyi, Xiangzhou.

古文：补州学生。
现代文：补州学生。
English: A student from Fuzhou.

古文：宋宣和间，盗贼起，琼乃更学击刺挽强，试弓马，隶宗泽军，驻于磁州。
现代文：宋朝宣和年间，出现盗贼，郦琼于是改学击剑，拉硬弓，练习骑马，属于宗泽军中一员，驻在磁州。
English: During the Song and Xuanwu dynasties, a thief appeared, and Zou Qiong changed to fencing, drew a hard bow, and practiced riding a horse. She was a member of Soze's army and was stationed in Magneto.

古文：未几告归，括集义军七百人，复从泽，泽署琼为七百人长。
现代文：不多久，郦琼回归故里，收聚了义军七百人，然后又回到宗泽的军队中，宗泽任命他为七百人的首领。
English: Not long after, Gong Qiong returned to his hometown, gathered seven hundred rebels, and then returned to the army of Soze, who appointed him as the leader of the seven hundred.

古文：泽死，调戍滑州。
现代文：宗泽死后，郦琼调往滑州戍边。
English: After Sozawa's death, Gong Qiong was transferred to Slanzhou.

古文：时宗望伐宋，将渡河。
现代文：当时完颜宗望攻打宋朝，正准备渡黄河。
English: At that time, after Yan Zongwang attacked the Song Dynasty, he was preparing to cross the Yellow River.

古文：戍军乱，杀其统制赵世彦，而推琼为主。
现代文：宋朝戍边军队闻讯大乱，杀了统制赵世彦，然后推郦琼做首领。
English: When the Song Dynasty's Lijiang troops heard of the turmoil, they killed the regent Zhao Shihang, and then promoted Qiong as their leader.

古文：琼因诱众，号为勤王，行且收兵。比渡淮，有众万余。
现代文：郦琼因此引导着众人，打出勤王的旗号，一边走一边招收士兵，等到渡过淮河，已有一万多人。
English: Therefore, Gong Qiong led the crowd, called out the banner of the king, and recruited soldiers as he walked. By the time he crossed the Huaihe River, there were more than 10,000 people.

古文：康王以为楚州安抚使、淮南东路兵马钤辖，累迁武泰军承宣使。
现代文：宋朝康王赵构任命他为楚州安抚使、淮南东路兵马钤辖，后再升为武泰军承宣使。
English: Zhao Jie, the Kang King of the Song Dynasty, appointed him as the pacifying envoy of Chuzhou and the commander of the East Huainan Road Terracotta Warriors and Horses, and later he was promoted to the military envoy of the Wu Tai Army.

古文：未几，率所领步骑十余万附于齐，授静难军节度使，知拱州。
现代文：没过多久，郦琼率领步骑兵十万多人归附到齐国，被授为静难军节度使、知拱州。
English: Not long after, Zou Qiong led more than 100,000 infantry and cavalry to be annexed to Qi, and was awarded the title of the military envoy to the Qing Dynasty and the title of Zhigong Prefecture.

古文：齐国废，以为博州防御使。
现代文：后来齐国被废除，郦琼被任为博州防御使。
English: Later, the State of Qi was abolished, and Zou Qiong was appointed as the Boshou Defense Envoy.

古文：用廉，迁骠骑上将军。
现代文：由于他正直廉洁，提升为骠骑上将军。
English: Because of his honesty and integrity, he was promoted to the rank of lieutenant general.

古文：宗弼复河南，以琼为山东路弩手千户，知亳州事。
现代文：完颜宗弼收复河南，让郦琼担任山东路弩手千户、知亳州事。
English: After Yan Zongxuan recovered Henan, he put Yan Qiong in charge of the affairs of Shandong, Handen and Zhisheng.

古文：丁母忧，去官。
现代文：郦琼母亲去世，他辞官服丧。
English: Zou Qiong's mother died, and he resigned from his post.

古文：宗弼再伐江南，以琼素知南方山川险易，召至军与计事。
现代文：完颜宗弼二次攻打江南，因为郦琼了解南方的山川地理情况，而把他召到军中计谋大事。
English: Yan Zongqi attacked the south of the Yangtze River for the second time. Because Yan Qiong understood the geographical situation of the mountains and rivers in the south, he was called to the army to plan big things.

古文：从容语同列曰： 琼尝从大军南伐，每见元帅国王亲临阵督战，矢石交集，而王免胄，指麾三军，意气自若，用兵制胜，皆与孙、吴合，可谓命世雄材矣。
现代文：郦琼从容地说 ：在我曾经跟随大军攻打南方的时候，常常看到我军元帅国王亲临前线督战，在箭林中不戴战盔，亲自指挥大军作战，其神情自若，用兵制胜，都与孙子、吴起相像，真算得上是命世雄才。
English: Gong Qiong said calmly: When I once followed the army to attack the south, I often saw our army's marshal, the king, personally supervise the frontline, do not wear a helmet in the arrow forest, and personally command the army to fight. His self-confidence and victory with soldiers are similar to his grandson, Wu Qi. He is truly a great talent.

古文：至于亲冒锋镝，进不避难，将士视之，孰敢爱死乎。
现代文：至于亲自冒着锋利的箭矢前进而不躲避，将士看到后，谁还怕死。
English: As for personally braving the sharp arrows and advancing without hiding, who would be afraid of death after seeing the soldiers.

古文：宜其所向无前，日辟国千里也。
现代文：军队所向披靡，每天就可开辟千里国土。
English: The army is invincible and can open up thousands of miles of land every day.

古文：江南诸帅，才能不及中人。
现代文：而江南的统帅们，才能不及一般人。
English: However, the commanders of the south of the Yangtze River are less talented than ordinary people.

古文：每当出兵，必身居数百里外，谓之持重。
现代文：每当出兵时，一定要距战场几百里远，叫作所谓保持重要。
English: Whenever troops are sent out, they must be several hundred miles away from the battlefield, known as the so-called "maintaining importance."

古文：或督召军旅，易置将校，仅以一介之士持虚文谕之，谓之调发。
现代文：有的监督召集军队、更换将校官，仅用一士兵拿着命令去宣谕。
English: Some supervisors called up troops, changed officers, and used only one soldier to give orders.

古文：制敌决胜委之偏裨，是以智者解体，愚者丧师。
现代文：制敌决胜竟然委托偏将副职，所以聪明的就被打散了，愚笨的就全军覆没。
English: In order to win a decisive victory over the enemy, the commander-in-chief was even entrusted with the deputy post, so the clever ones were scattered, and the stupid ones were wiped out by the whole army.

古文：幸一小捷，则露布飞驰，增加俘级以为己功，敛怨将士。
现代文：偶尔有幸打了一次小胜仗，则捷报频传，并增加俘虏作为自己的功劳，还约束将士的怨恨。
English: Occasionally he was fortunate enough to win a small battle, and the news of his success spread far and wide, and he took credit for the increase in the number of captives and restrained the resentment of his soldiers.

古文：纵或亲临，亦必先遁。
现代文：纵然有的将帅亲临战场，然而势头不对，也一定会首先逃跑。
English: Even if some generals come to the battlefield in person, if the momentum is not right, they will certainly run away first.

古文：而又国政不纲，才有微功，已加厚赏，或有大罪，乃置而不诛。
现代文：而且江南国政没有纲领，仅仅有微小的功劳，就重重奖赏，有的犯有大罪，却搁置不杀。
English: Moreover, Jiangnan politics has no program, only a small merit is rewarded heavily, and some are guilty of serious crimes, but they are not killed.

古文：不即覆亡，已为天幸，何能振起耶？ 
现代文：江南没有立即灭亡，已是天幸，它怎么能振奋起来呢。 
English: It is a blessing that Jiangnan did not perish immediately. How can it be invigorated?

古文：众以为确论。
现代文：众人认为郦琼说得很对。
English: Many people thought that Gong Qiong was right.

古文：元帅，谓宗弼也。
现代文：此时，完颜宗弼是元帅。
English: At this time, Kanyan Zonglu was a marshal.

古文：及宗弼问琼以江南成败，谁敢相拒者。琼曰： 江南军势怯弱，皆败亡之余，又无良帅，何以御我。
现代文：等到完颜宗弼问郦琼攻打江南的成败，谁敢抵抗时，郦琼说： 江南军力怯弱，都是打败逃跑的人，而且又没有好统帅，它凭什么抵御我。
English: When Yan Zongqi finished asking Zou Qiong about the success or failure of the attack on the south of the Yangtze River and who would dare to resist, Zou Qiong said: The south of the Yangtze River has a weak military force. It is all about defeating those who run away, and it does not have a good commander. How can it resist me?

古文：颇闻秦桧当国用事。
现代文：听说江南秦桧执掌国政。
English: I heard that Jiangnan Qin Hui is in charge of state affairs.

古文：桧，老儒，所谓亡国之大夫，兢兢自守，惟颠覆是惧。
现代文：秦桧，是个文人，就是所说的亡国之大夫，他兢兢自守，就怕被颠覆。
English: Qin Hui was a man of letters, the so-called "doctor of the ruined country." He guarded himself carefully, fearing that he would be overthrown.

古文：吾以大军临之，彼之君臣，方且心破胆裂，将哀鸣不暇，盖伤弓之鸟可以虚弦下也。 
现代文：我们用大军兵临江南，他们君臣一定是心破胆裂，将帅悲哀也没有时间了，即是说受弓伤的鸟空弓就可射下它。 
English: We are approaching the south of the Yangtze River with a large number of soldiers. Their lords and ministers must be heartbroken. There is no time to mourn the death of the commander-in-chief. In other words, a wounded bird's hollow bow can shoot it down.

古文：既而江南果称臣，宗弼喜琼为知言。
现代文：不久，江南果然向金朝称臣，完颜宗弼很喜欢郦琼并结为知己。
English: Before long, Jiangnan was indeed a vassal to the Kim dynasty, and Yan Zongxuan was very fond of Zou Qiong and became his confidant.

古文：初，琼去亳未几，宋兵陷之而不守，复弃去，乃以州人宋超守之。
现代文：始初，郦琼离开亳州不久，宋朝兵攻陷亳州却不守，弃之而去，却让亳州人宋超守卫它。
English: At the beginning, shortly after Gong Qiong left Ganzhou, the Song Dynasty soldiers invaded Ganzhou but did not defend it, abandoned it, but let the Ganzhou people, Song Chao, guard it.

古文：及大军至，超复以州事委其钤辖卫经而遁去。
现代文：等到金朝大军到达，宋超把亳州委托给钤辖卫经而自己却逃走。
English: By the time the great army of the Kim dynasty arrived, Song Chao entrusted Bozhou to Gongji Weijing, but he himself fled.

古文：帅府使人招经，经不下。
现代文：完颜宗弼帅府派人招安卫经，卫经没有去。
English: After Yan Zong's death, Shuai Prefecture sent someone to recruit An Weijing, but Wei Jing did not go.

古文：及城溃，百姓惶惧待命，琼请于元帅曰： 城所不下者，凶竖劫之也。
现代文：等到城被攻下，老百姓惶恐害怕被杀，郦琼向元帅完颜宗弼请求说 ：城攻不下的原因是小人逼迫众人守卫它。
English: When the city was taken, the people panicked and were afraid of being killed. Zou Qiong pleaded with the marshal, Guan Yan Zongqi, saying, "The reason why the city cannot be taken is that villains are forcing everyone to guard it."

古文：民何罪，愿慰安之。 
现代文：老百姓没有什么罪，我愿去抚慰他们。 
English: Ordinary people are not guilty of anything, and I am willing to go and comfort them.

古文：元帅以琼先尝守亳，因止戮经而释其州人，复命琼守亳。
现代文：元帅完颜宗弼认为郦琼先前曾经守卫过亳州，因而没有杀卫经，而且释放了亳州的百姓，然后又命令郦琼守卫亳州。
English: Marshal Ganyan Zonglu thought that Gong Qiong had previously guarded Ganzhou, so he did not kill Wei Jing, and released the people of Ganzhou, and then ordered Gong Qiong to guard Ganzhou.

古文：凡六年，亳人德之。
现代文：在守亳州六年中，当地人民都很戴德郦琼。
English: In the six years of guarding Luzhou, the local people are very proud of her.

古文：迁武宁军节度使。
现代文：后郦琼升为武宁军节度使。
English: Later, Zou Qiong was promoted to the military commander of the Wu Ning Army.

古文：八年，为泰宁军节度使。
现代文：皇统八年，郦琼做泰宁军节度使。
English: In the eighth year of imperial unification, Zou Qiong served as the Taining Army's envoy to the Qing Dynasty.

古文：吁！宇文虚中，字叔通，蜀人。初仕宋，累官资政殿大学士。
现代文：皇统九年，郦琼升为归德尹。贞元元年，加升金紫光禄大夫，最后郦琼死在官位上，终年五十岁。
English: In the ninth year of imperial rule, Zou Qiong was promoted to Qui De Yin. In the first year of Zhen Yuan, he was promoted to Jin Zi Guanglu Doctor. Finally, Zou Qiong died in office, at the age of fifty.

古文：天会四年，宋少帝已结盟，宗望班师至孟阳，宋姚平仲乘夜来袭，明日复进兵围汴。
现代文：宇文虚中字叔通，蜀国人。始初在宋朝做官，官到资政殿大学士。天会四年，宋朝少帝宋钦宗同金朝结盟，金朝人完颜宗望班师到孟阳，宋朝人姚平仲乘夜色偷袭完颜宗望军，第二天又进军围攻汴京。
English: Yu Wenqiu, a native of Shu. He was an official in the Song Dynasty at the beginning, and became a scholar at the Academy of Finance and Administration. In the 4th year of Tian He, the young emperor of the Song Dynasty, Song Qinzong, allied with the Kim Dynasty, the Kim Dynasty people went to Mengyang to escort Yan Zong, the Song Dynasty people Yao Pingzhong attacked Yan Zong's army at night, and the next day went to besiege Beijing.

古文：少帝使虚中诣宗望军，告以袭兵皆将帅自为之，复请和议如初，且视康王安否。
现代文：宋少帝派遣宇文虚中到宗望军中，告诉宗望袭击他军队的事都是将帅自己做主干的，再请求像原来那样议和，并且让宇文虚中拜视康王赵构是否安好。
English: Emperor Song sent Uwen Huizhong to Zongwang's army and told him that Zongwang's attack on his army was the work of the general himself. He then requested that peace be negotiated as before, and asked Uwen Huizhong to visit Kang Wang Zhaojie to see if he was alright.

古文：顷之，台谏以和议归罪虚中，罢为青州，复下迁祠职。
现代文：不久，台谏因和议之事归罪宇文虚中，罢免他到青州，尔后又降为祠职。
English: Not long after, Taibei blamed Wu Wenqiu for the peace talks, sent him to Qingzhou, and then reduced him to the position of a priest.

古文：建炎元年，贬韶州。
现代文：南宋建炎元年，宇文虚中被贬到韶州。
English: In the first year of the Southern Song Dynasty, Yu Wenyi was banished to Zhangzhou.

古文：二年，康王求可为奉使者，虚中自贬中应诏，复资政殿大学士，为祈请使。
现代文：建炎二年，南宋康王赵构寻找可以作为使者的人，宇文虚中在降职中应诏，恢复了他的资政殿大学士，他也请求出使金朝。
English: In the second year of Jianyan, the Southern Song Kang Wang Zhaozhe began to look for someone who could serve as an envoy. Uwen Huizhong responded to the demotion and restored his status as a scholar of the Imperial Palace. He also requested to send an envoy to the Kim dynasty.

古文：是时，兴兵伐宋，已留王伦、朱弁不遣，虚中亦被留，实天会六年也。
现代文：这时，金朝兴兵攻打南宋，并扣留了王伦、朱弁不让他们回国，宇文虚中也被扣留下，这时是金朝天会六年。
English: At this time, the Kim dynasty's Xing soldiers attacked the Southern Song Dynasty, and detained Wang Lun and Zhu Ben to prevent them from returning to the country, and also detained Uwen Huizhong. At this time, it was six years since the Kim dynasty's meeting with Heaven.

古文：朝廷方议礼制度，颇爱虚中有才艺，加以官爵，虚中即受之，与韩昉辈俱掌词命。
现代文：金朝正在议论礼仪制度，他们很赏识宇文虚中的才能，给他加以官爵，宇文虚中接受了，他与韩窻等人共同执笔起草礼仪制度。
English: The Kim dynasty was discussing the etiquette system. They were very appreciative of the talent of Yu Wenyu and gave him an official title. Yu Wenyu accepted, and he co-wrote and drafted the etiquette system with Han Yu and others.

古文：明年，洪皓至上京，见虚中，甚鄙之。
现代文：第二年，宋朝洪皓到金朝上京，见到宇文虚中后很看不起他。
English: In the second year, Song Dynasty's Emperor Hongwu went to Beijing during the Jin Dynasty. When he saw Wu Wenqiu in middle school, he looked down on him.

古文：天会十三年，熙宗即位。
现代文：天会十三年，金熙宗即皇帝位。
English: In the thirteenth year of the Heavenly Reunion, Kim Hee-song became emperor.

古文：宗翰为太保领三省事，封晋国王，乞致仕。
现代文：完颜宗翰任太保领三省事，封为晋国王，请求退休。
English: After Yan Zonghan was appointed as the third provincial governor, he was named the king of Jin and asked to retire.

古文：批答不允，其词虚中作也。
现代文：皇上批复不允许，批复词是宇文虚中写的。
English: The Emperor's reply was not allowed, and the reply was written in a fictitious script.

古文：天眷间，累官翰林学士知制诰兼太常卿，封河内郡开国公。
现代文：天眷年间，宇文虚中官职直至翰林学士知制诰兼太常卿，封为河内郡开国公。
English: As fate would have it, Uwen Hu served as a middle-ranking official until he was promoted to Hanlin Baccalaureate and appointed as the Grand Duke of Hanoi.

古文：书《太祖睿德神功碑》，进阶金紫光禄大夫。
现代文：宇文虚中还著有《太祖睿德神功碑》，由此进升金紫光禄大夫。
English: He also wrote "Taizurui De Sheng Gongbei" in Yuwenhu, which led to his promotion to Jin Zi Guanglu Doctor.

古文：皇统二年，宋人请和，其誓表曰： 自来流移在南之人，经官陈说，愿自归者，更不禁止。
现代文：皇统二年，宋朝人向金朝请求和解，其盟约写道： 以前流落移居到南方的北方人，经过官府陈述说明，愿意自己回去的，不加禁止。
English: In the second year of imperial unification, the people of the Song Dynasty requested reconciliation from the Kim Dynasty, and their covenant wrote: The northerners who had previously emigrated to the south were not prohibited from returning if they wished to do so after the government had made a statement.

古文：上国之于弊邑，亦乞并用此约。 
现代文：贵国对于我们以前的地方，也请求施行这种原则。 
English: Your country has called for the same principle to be applied to our former territories.

古文：于是，诏尚书省移文宋国，理索张中孚、张中彦、郑亿年、杜充、张孝纯、宇文虚中、王进家属，发遣李正民、毕良史还宋，惟孟庾去留听其所欲。
现代文：于是，金朝熙宗皇帝下诏尚书省，送公文给宋朝，按盟约原则索要张中孚、张中彦、郑亿年、杜充、张孝纯、宇文虚中、王进的家属，同时送遣李正民、毕良史回到宋朝，只有孟庾去留听便。
English: As a result, Emperor Heizong of the Kim Dynasty issued an edict to the Shang Dynasty, sent official documents to the Song Dynasty, and in accordance with the principles of the covenant, requested the families of Zhang Zhongfu, Zhang Zhongyan, Zheng Eren, Du Chong, Zhang Xiaochun, Uwen Huizhong, and Wang Jin, and sent Li Zhengmin and Bi Liangshi back to the Song Dynasty. Only Meng Xi stayed to listen.

古文：时虚中子师瑗仕宋，至转运判官，携家北来。
现代文：当时宇文虚中的儿子宇文师瑗在宋朝做官，官至转运判官，根据盟约他携家北到金朝。
English: At that time, Uwen Shijun, the son of Uwen Huizhong, served as an official in the Song Dynasty and later as a transportation judge. According to the treaty, he took his family north to the Jin Dynasty.

古文：四年，转承旨，加特进。
现代文：皇统四年，宇文虚中为转承旨，加为特进。
English: In the fourth year of imperial rule, Uwen Huizhong became the successor of the imperial edict and was promoted to the special promotion.

古文：迁礼部尚书，承旨如故。
现代文：后升为礼部尚书，承旨如旧。
English: Later, it was elevated to the Ministry of Rites and Ceremonies, but the mission remains the same.

古文：虚中恃才轻肆，好讥讪，凡见女直人辄以矿卤目之，贵人达官往往积不能平。
现代文：宇文虚中恃才恣肆，爱讥讽诋毁人，凡是女真的人动不动就用愚钝的眼光看他们，对此，达官贵人忿忿不平。
English: High-ranking officials were indignant at the fact that in the Yuwenhu, the high-ranking officials were reckless, mocking and slandering people, and all the real women looked at them with dull eyes.

古文：虚中尝撰宫殿榜署，本皆嘉美之名，恶虚中者擿其字以为谤讪朝廷，由是媒糵以成其罪矣。六年二月，唐括酬斡家奴杜天佛留告虚中谋反，诏有司鞫治无状，乃罗织虚中家图书为反具，虚中曰： 死自吾分。
现代文：宇文虚中曾经写过宫殿榜署，本来都是溢美之词，而讨厌宇文虚中的人则断章取义说他讥讽毁谤朝廷，因此把他定成有罪，皇统六年二月，唐括酬斡的家奴杜天佛留告发宇文虚中谋反，皇帝诏令有司审查，又没发现谋反迹象，于是就把宇文虚中家中图书罗列成谋反证据，宇文虚中说 ：死，我不分辩。
English: In February of the sixth year of the Emperor's reign, Du Tianfo, a house slave of Tang Biaooyu, reported that Uwen Hui was plotting a rebellion. The Emperor issued a decree to have a judge examine the matter, but no signs of a rebellion were found. Therefore, he listed the books in Uwen Hui's home as evidence of a rebellion. Uwen Hui said, "Death, I don't care."

古文：至于图籍，南来士大夫家家有之，高士谈图书尤多于我家，岂亦反耶？ 
现代文：至于说图书，从南方来的士大夫家家都有，高士谈的图书比我的还多，难道他也要谋反？ 
English: As for books, every family has a scholar from the south. Gao Shi talks about more books than I do. Is he also plotting a rebellion?

古文：有司承顺风旨并杀士谈，至今冤之。
现代文：有司承旨把高士谈一块儿杀了，这至今是一冤案。
English: A magistrate killed Gao Zhenshi together with him, which is still a case of injustice.

古文：士谈字季默，高琼之后。
现代文：高士谈字季默，高琼的后代。
English: Gao Shi is a descendant of Gao Qiong.

古文：宣和末，为忻州户曹参军。
现代文：宋朝宣和末年，任忻州户曹参军。
English: In the last years of the Song Dynasty, Xuan He was appointed as the governor of Zhangzhou and joined the army.

古文：入朝，官至翰林直学士。
现代文：后入金朝做官，官至翰林直学士。
English: Later, he became an official in the Kim dynasty, and was promoted to the rank of Hanlin Zhi Bao.

古文：虚中、士谈俱有文集行于世。
现代文：宇文虚中、高士谈都有文集流行于世。
English: In Yuwen Qiu Middle School and Gao Shidan Middle School, there are popular collections in the world.

古文：王伦，字正道，故宋宰相王旦弟王勉玄孙。
现代文：王伦字正道，是宋朝宰相王旦的弟弟王勉的玄孙。
English: Wang Lun Zi Zheng Dao is the great-great-grandson of Wang Tsun, the younger brother of Wang Dan, the prime minister of the Song Dynasty.

古文：侠邪无赖，年四十余尚与市井恶少群游汴中。
现代文：他侠邪无赖，四十多岁时还同市井恶少在汴京中游逛。
English: In his forties, he was still wandering around with Ichii Kisho in Shibuya.

古文：天会五年，宋人以伦为假刑部侍郎，与阁门舍人朱弁充通问使。
现代文：天会五年，宋朝让王伦做假刑部侍郎，同阁门舍人朱弁为充通问使。
English: In the fifth year of the Heaven's Fair, the Song Dynasty made Wang Lun a false criminal police sergeant, and Zhu Ben, a member of the same court, an envoy.

古文：是时，方议伐宋，凡宋使者如伦及宇文虚中、魏行可、顾纵、张邵等，皆留之不遣。
现代文：这时，金朝正在讨论攻打宋朝，凡宋朝的使者像王伦、宇文虚中、魏行可、顾纵、张邵等人，都被金朝扣下不让回宋朝。
English: At this time, the Kim dynasty was discussing attacking the Song dynasty. All the emissaries of the Song dynasty, such as Wang Lun, Uwen Huizhong, Wei Xingke, Gu Zong and Zhang Shao, were detained by the Kim dynasty and were not allowed to return to the Song dynasty.

古文：居数年，伦久困，乃唱为和议求归。
现代文：王伦困在金朝住了几年，于是就唱和议歌以求回到宋朝。
English: Wang Lun lived in the Kim dynasty for several years, so he sang songs of reconciliation in order to return to the Song dynasty.

古文：元帅府使人谓之曰： 此非江南情实，特汝自为此言耳。 
现代文：元帅府派人对王伦说： 这里并非江南，你为何口出此言？ 
English: A person sent by the marshal's office said to Wang Lun: This is not the south of the Yangtze River. Why did you say this?

古文：伦曰： 使事有指，不然何为来哉。
现代文：王伦说 ：我出使负有使命，不然我不会来到你们这里。
English: Wang Lun said, "I am an envoy with a mission, otherwise I would not have come to you."

古文：惟元帅察之。 
现代文：只有元帅清楚这件事。 
English: Only the marshal knows for sure.

古文：天会十年，刘豫连岁出师皆无功，挞懒为元帅左监军经略南边，密主和议，乃遣伦归。
现代文：天会十年，刘豫连年出兵打仗都没有功绩，完颜挞懒做元帅左监军巡视南部边界，秘密主张议和，于是派王伦回宋朝。
English: Ten years after the Heaven's Fair, Liu Yulian sent troops to fight in the war every year without any achievements. He became a lazy marshal of the Left Supervision Army to patrol the southern border and secretly advocate peace, so he sent Wang Lun back to the Song Dynasty.

古文：先此，宋已遣使乞和，朝廷未之许也。
现代文：在此之前，宋朝已派人求和，金朝未同意。
English: Prior to this, the Song Dynasty had sent someone to sue for peace, but the Kim Dynasty did not agree.

古文：伦见康王言和议事，康王大喜，迁伦官，并官其子弟。
现代文：王伦拜见宋朝康王赵构说议和事，康王很高兴，提拔王伦做官，并提拔他的儿子、弟弟做官。
English: Wang Lun met with Kang Wang Zhao of the Song Dynasty to discuss peace. Kang Wang was very pleased and promoted Wang Lun to be an official, and promoted his son and brother to be an official.

古文：宋方与齐用兵，未可和。
现代文：此时宋朝正对齐国用兵，不同意讲和。
English: At this time, the Song Dynasty was aligning the country with the military, and did not agree to talk about peace.

古文：天会十五年，康王闻天水郡王已薨，以伦假直学士来请其丧，使伦请挞懒曰： 河南之地，上国既不自有，与其封刘豫，曷若归之赵氏？ 
现代文：天会十五年，宋朝康王赵构听说天水郡王死了，以王伦为假直学士赴丧，并命令王伦请求拜见完颜挞懒说： 河南之地，贵国既不自己占有，与其封给刘豫，不如归还赵氏。 
English: In the fifteenth year of Tian He, Song Dynasty Kang Wang Zhao Jie heard that the king of Tianshui County had died, and went to the funeral with Wang Lun as a pseudo-straight scholar, and ordered Wang Lun to ask to see Guan Yin Lazy, saying: Henan land, your country does not own, rather than giving it to Liu Yu, it is better to return it to the Zhao clan.

古文：是岁，刘豫受封已八年，不能自立其国，尚勤屯戍，朝廷厌其无能为也，乃废刘豫。
现代文：时年，刘豫受封已经八年，他不仅不能自己建设他的齐国，尚且还勤力于驻扎守边，金朝讨厌他无能，于是废除了他。
English: At that time, Liu Yu had been crowned for eight years. Not only was he unable to build his Qi state on his own, but he was also diligent in garrisoning the border. The Kim dynasty hated his incompetence and abolished him.

古文：挞懒以左副元帅守汴京，于是伦适至。
现代文：完颜挞懒任左副元帅守汴京，于是王伦到了汴京。
English: After his retirement, he was appointed as the left deputy marshal to guard Beijing, so Wang Lun came to Beijing.

古文：挞懒，太祖从父兄弟，于熙宗为祖行。
现代文：完颜挞懒是金太祖的叔伯兄弟，所以是金熙宗的祖辈。
English: Guan Yin Lazy was the uncle and brother of Kim Tae Zu, so he was the ancestor of Kim Xizong.

古文：太宗长子宗磐以太师领三省事，位在宗干上。
现代文：金太宗的长子完颜宗磐任太师领三省事，位在完颜宗干之上。
English: The eldest son of King Taizong, King Yanzong Ban, was appointed Grand Master to lead the three provinces, and was placed above King Yanzong.

古文：宗翰薨已久，宗干不能与宗磐独抗。
现代文：完颜宗翰死了很久，完颜宗干不能与完颜宗磐单独抗衡。
English: Kanyan Zonghan has been dead for a long time, and Kanyan Zong Gan cannot compete with Kanyan Zong Pan alone.

古文：明年，天眷元年，挞懒与东京留守宗隽俱入朝，熙宗以宗隽为左丞相。
现代文：第二年，天眷元年，完颜挞懒与东京留守完颜宗隽都进京朝拜，金熙宗皇帝任完颜宗隽为左丞相。
English: In the second year, the first year of the Tengan era, Yan Zonglu entered Beijing to pay homage after Yan Zonglu had finished being lazy and staying in Tokyo. Emperor Kim Il Sung appointed Yan Zonglu as the Minister of the Left.

古文：宗隽，太祖子也。
现代文：完颜宗隽是金太祖的儿子。
English: Guanyan Zonglu was the son of King Taizu.

古文：挞懒、宗磐、宗隽三人皆跋扈嗜利，阴有异图，遂合议以齐地与宋，自宗干以下争之不能得。
现代文：完颜挞懒、完颜宗磐、完颜宗隽三个人都跋扈嗜利，暗中有不同的计划，于是合议用齐国地盘给宋朝。完颜宗干直至以下的人没有争过他们三人的。
English: Kanyan Zongkan, Kanyan Zongban, and Kanyan Zongqin were all greedy for profit, and secretly had different plans, so they jointly used the Qi territory to give to the Song Dynasty. Kanyan Zongkan and the following people did not compete with the three of them.

古文：以侍郎张通古为诏谕江南使，遣伦先归。
现代文：金朝用张通古做诏谕江南使，派王伦先回宋朝。
English: The Kim dynasty used Zhang Tonggu as the envoy to the south of the Yangtze River and sent Wang Lun back to the Song dynasty.

古文：明年，宋以伦为端明殿学士，签书枢密院事，进金器千两、银器万两，复来请天水郡王丧柩，及请母韦氏兄弟宗族等。
现代文：第二年，宋朝任命王伦为端明殿学士、签书枢密院事，进献金器千两、银器万两，再去请回天水郡王的灵柩，和宋高宗的母亲韦氏及其兄弟宗族等。
English: In the second year, the Song Dynasty appointed Wang Lun as a scholar of the Duanming Palace, signed a letter to the Privy Council, donated a thousand taels of gold and ten thousand taels of silver, and then invited back the coffin of the King of Tianshui County, and Song Gaozong's mother Wei and his brothers and their families.

古文：保信军节度使蓝公佐副之。
现代文：保信军节度使蓝公佐为他的副手。
English: The Guozhong Army's military discipline made Lan Guanzhong his deputy.

古文：是岁，宗磐、宗隽、挞懒皆以谋反属吏，熙宗诛宗磐、宗隽，以挞懒属尊，赦其死，以为行台尚书省事左丞相，夺其兵权。
现代文：这一年，完颜宗磐、完颜宗隽、完颜挞懒都因为谋反被交给官府治罪，金熙宗杀了完颜宗磐、完颜宗隽，因为完颜挞懒地位高，赦免他的死刑，改任他为行台尚书省事左丞相，剥夺他的兵权。
English: In this year, Ganyan Zongban, Ganyan Zonglu, and Ganyan Zonglu were all handed over to the government to be punished for plotting a rebellion. Kim Xizong killed Ganyan Zongban and Ganyan Zonglu, and because Ganyan Zonglu had a high status, he pardoned his death sentence, and appointed him as Minister of the Left and deprived him of military power.

古文：右副元帅宗弼奏曰： 挞懒、宗磐阴与宋人交通，遂以河南、陕西地与宋人。 
现代文：右副元帅完颜宗弼上奏说： 完颜挞懒、完颜宗磐暗中与宋朝人交往，于是把河南、陕西两地给宋朝。 
English: Right Vice-Marshal Guan Yan Zong wrote in his eulogy: Guan Yan was lazy, and Guan Yan Zong had dealings with the Song Dynasty in the dark, so he gave Henan and Shaanxi to the Song Dynasty.

古文：会挞懒复谋反，捕而杀之于祁州。
现代文：此时刚好完颜挞懒再次谋反，金朝逮捕了他，并在祁州杀了他。
English: At this time, just after he was too lazy to rebel again, the Kim dynasty arrested him and killed him in Ganzhou.

古文：伦至上京，有司详读康王表文，不书年，阅进奉状，称礼物不言职贡，上使宰相责问伦曰： 汝但知有元帅，岂知有上国耶。 
现代文：王伦到金国上京，金朝有司详读了宋朝康王的奏章文书，文书上没写金朝年号，进贡的单子上，把贡品称礼物，金朝皇帝派宰相责问王伦： 你只知道有元帅，却不知道有皇帝。 
English: Wang Lun went to Beijing in the State of Jin. The secretary of the Jin Dynasty, You You, read in detail the Song Dynasty's King Kang's report. The year of the Jin Dynasty was not written on the document. On the list of tribute, the tribute was called a gift. The Emperor of the Jin Dynasty sent the prime minister to ask Wang Lun: You only know that there is a marshal, but you don't know that there is an emperor.

古文：遂留不遣，遣其副蓝公佐归。
现代文：于是扣下王伦不让他回宋朝，而只让他的副手蓝公佐回去。
English: Therefore, he detained Wang Lun and did not allow him to return to the Song Dynasty, but only allowed his deputy, Lan Gongzuo, to return.

古文：三年五月，宗弼复取河南、陕西地，遂伐江南，已渡淮。
现代文：三年五月，完颜宗弼再次夺取河南、陕西，然后进攻江南，很快渡过淮河。
English: In May of the third year, Yan Zonglu once again captured Henan and Shaanxi, and then attacked the south of the Yangtze River, quickly crossing the Huai River.

古文：皇统元年，宋人请和。
现代文：皇统元年宋朝向金朝请求和盟。
English: In the first year of imperial unification, the Song Dynasty asked the Kim Dynasty for a peace alliance.

古文：二年二月，宋端明殿学士何铸、容州观察使曹勋进誓表。
现代文：皇统二年二月，宋朝端明殿学士何铸、容州观察使曹勋进誓表。
English: In February of the second year of imperial unification, the Song Dynasty and the Ming Dynasty scholars He Shou and Yongzhou observation sent Cao Xun into the oath.

古文：三月，遣左副点检赛里、山东西路都转运使刘祹送天水郡王丧柩，及宋帝母韦氏还江南。
现代文：三月，金朝派左副点检完颜赛里、山东西路都转运使刘衶送天水郡王的灵柩，和宋朝皇帝高宗赵构的母亲韦氏回归江南。
English: In March, after the inspection of the left and right points, the Kim dynasty sent Liu Bei to transport the coffin of the king of Tianshui County to Yan Xaili and the east and west of the mountain, and the Wei clan, the mother of the Song Dynasty Emperor Gaozong Zhao Jie, returned to the south of the Yangtze River.

古文：五月，李正明、毕良史南归。
现代文：五月，李正民、毕良史回到江南宋朝。
English: In May, Li Zhengmin and Bi Liangshi returned to the Southern Jiangsu Song Dynasty.

古文：七月，朱弁、张邵、洪皓南归。
现代文：七月，朱弁、张邵、洪皓回到江南宋朝。
English: In July, Zhu Ben, Zhang Shao and Hong Qi returned to the Song Dynasty in the south of the Yangtze River.

古文：四年，以伦为平州路转运使，伦已受命，复辞逊，上曰： 此反复之人也。 
现代文：皇统四年，金朝任命王伦做平州路转运使，王伦接受了任命后又辞去了，金朝皇帝熙宗说： 王伦是个反反复复的人。 
English: In the fourth year of imperial unification, the Kim dynasty appointed Wang Lun to be the Pingzhou Road Transfer Envoy. Wang Lun accepted the appointment and then resigned. The Kim dynasty emperor Xizong said: Wang Lun is a person who repeats himself.

古文：遂杀之于上京，年六十一。
现代文：于是在上京杀死了他，时年六十一岁。
English: So he killed him in Kamigyo, at the age of sixty-one.

