古文：《诗》、《书》之言女德尚矣。
现代文：《诗经》《尚书》论述妇女品德由来已久了。
English: It has been a long time since the "Song of Songs" and "Song of Songs" discussed women's moral character.

古文：若夫贤妃助国君之政，哲妇隆家人之道，高士弘清淳之风，贞女亮明白之节，则其徽美未殊也，而世典咸漏焉。
现代文：至于贤惠的后妃帮助国君处理政事，聪明的妇女兴隆治家之道，高洁之士弘扬清廉淳厚的风气，贞洁的妇女彰明清白的操守，那么他们的美德没什么不同，然而历代的典籍都遗漏这方面的记载。
English: As for the virtuous concubines helping the sovereign to deal with political affairs, the clever women prospering in the management of the family, the noblemen promoting a clean and honest culture, and the chaste women demonstrating clean conduct, then their virtues are no different, but the classics of all ages have omitted records in this regard.

古文：故自中兴以后，综其成事，述为《列女篇》。
现代文：所以自中兴以来，妇女们的现成事迹综合到一起，撰成《列女篇》。
English: Therefore, since ZTE, the ready-made deeds of women have been synthesized and compiled into "Women's column."

古文：如马、邓、梁后，别见前纪；梁媳、李姬，各附家传。若斯之类，并不兼书。
现代文：像马皇后、邓皇后、梁皇后另外记载在前面的《皇后记》，梁媳、李姬各自附在家传中，像这种情况一并不再叙述。
English: Like Empress Ma, Empress Deng and Empress Liang, who are also recorded in the previous "Queen's Chronicle," Liang's daughter-in-law and Li Ji are each attached to the family legend, and this situation is no longer described.

古文：余但搜次才行尤高秀者，不必专在一操而已。
现代文：其他人仅搜求排比其中文才品行尤其出类拔萃的人，不一定着眼于操守一方面而已。
English: Others only seek to rank those whose literary talent and conduct are particularly outstanding, not necessarily with an eye to ethics.

古文：勃海鲍宣妻者，桓氏之女也，字少君。
现代文：鲍宣妻传，勃海鲍宣之妻，桓氏的女儿，字少君。
English: Bao Xuan's wife biography, Bo Hai Bao Xuan's wife, Huan's daughter, character Shao Jun.

古文：宣尝就少君父学，父奇其清苦，故以女妻之，装送资贿甚盛。
现代文：鲍宣曾经在少君的父亲那里学习，父亲认为他清苦，所以把女儿嫁给他，嫁妆及资财很多。
English: Bao Xuan once studied under the young prince's father, who considered him to be a virtuous man, so he married his daughter to him, receiving a large dowry and a lot of wealth.

古文：宣不悦，谓妻曰： 少君生富骄，习美饰，而吾实贫贱，不敢当礼。 
现代文：鲍宣不高兴，对妻说： 少君生于富家，有骄气，习惯于美丽的打扮，可我实在贫贱，不敢当这样的礼物。 
English: Unhappy, Bao Xuan said to his wife: "The young prince was born into a rich family, he is proud, and he is used to dressing beautifully, but I am really poor and dare not accept such a gift.

古文：妻曰： 大人以先生修德守约，故使贱妾侍执巾栉。
现代文：妻说： 我家大人认为先生修德守约，所以使贱妾侍执巾栉。
English: My wife said, "The adults in my family think that my husband is a moral person who keeps his promises, so they have made their concubine wait on him."

古文：即奉承君子，唯命是从。 宣笑曰： 能如是，是吾志也。 
现代文：既然嫁给了你，那就一切听从你的安排。 鲍宣笑道： 能这样，这是我的志向。 
English: Now that I'm married to you, I'll do everything according to your arrangements. Bao Xuan laughed and said, "It can be done, this is my aspiration."

古文：妻乃悉归侍御服饰，更着短布裳，与宣共挽鹿车归乡里。
现代文：妻便全部归还侍御服饰，换穿短布衣裳，与鲍宣一起挽鹿车回到乡里。
English: His wife then returned all the attendant's clothing, changed into a short cloth dress, and together with Bao Xuan drove back to the countryside.

古文：拜姑礼毕，提甕出汲，修行妇道，乡邦称之。
现代文：行拜姑之礼毕，提着瓮子打水。修行妇道，乡邦之人称赞她。
English: After performing the prostrations of a nun and carrying a ladle to draw water, she practiced the way of a woman, and the people of her hometown praised her.

古文：宣，哀帝时官至司隶校尉。
现代文：鲍宣，哀帝时官做到司隶校尉。
English: Bao Xuan, the governor at the time of the emperor's death, became a lieutenant.

古文：子永，中兴初为鲁郡太守。
现代文：儿子鲍永，中兴初年做鲁郡太守。
English: His son, Bao Yong, became the governor of Lu County in the first year of ZTE.

古文：永子昱从容问少君曰： 太夫人宁复识挽鹿车时不？ 
现代文：鲍永的儿子鲍昱从容问少君道 ：太夫人还记得挽鹿车时的情况吗？ 
English: Bao Yong's son, Bao Tong, calmly asked Shao Jundao: Does the great lady still remember the situation at the time of the deer drive?

古文：对曰： 先姑有言： 存不忘亡，安不忘危。 
现代文：答道： 先姑有句话： 存不忘亡，安不忘危。 
English: Answer: My great-aunt had a saying: "Don't forget the dead, and don't forget the dangerous."

古文：吾焉敢忘乎！ 
现代文：我怎敢忘呢？ 
English: How dare I forget?

古文：永、昱已见前传。
现代文：鲍永、鲍昱已见前传。
English: Bao Yong and Bao Tong have already seen the prequel.

古文：太原王霸妻者，不知何氏之女也。
现代文：王霸妻传，太原王霸之妻，不知是哪家的女子。
English: According to the legend of Wang Baha's wife, the wife of King Baha of Taiyuan was a woman from an unknown family.

古文：霸少立高节，光武时连征，不仕。
现代文：王霸少时立高节，光武时，连续召他不出来做官。
English: When Wang Ba was young, he set up a high school, and when Guangwu was young, he continuously called him not to come out to be an official.

古文：霸已见《逸人传》。
现代文：霸的事迹已见《逸民传》。
English: The story of Baha has been recorded in the "Heritage of the People."

古文：妻亦美志行。
现代文：妻子也有美好的志行。
English: My wife also had a wonderful volunteer trip.

古文：初，霸与同郡令狐子伯为友，后子伯为楚相，而其子为郡功曹。
现代文：起初，王霸与同郡令狐子伯做朋友，后来子伯做了楚相，而他的儿子做了功曹。
English: At first, Wang Ba was friends with the same county magistrate Jixibao. Later, Jixibao became the chuxiang, and his son became the gongcao.

古文：子伯乃令子奉书于霸，车马服从，雍容如也。
现代文：子伯就使儿子送信给王霸，车马服饰仆从雍容华贵的样子。
English: The uncle sent his son to the king, and the carriage and horse costumes made the servants look elegant.

古文：霸子时方耕于野，闻宾至，投耒而归，见令狐子，沮怍不能仰视。
现代文：霸的儿子这时在田野耕种，听说客人来了，丢下耒就回来，见了令狐之子，沮丧惭愧不敢抬头看人。
English: At that time, Baba's son was working in the fields. When he heard that guests were coming, he dropped his plough and came back. When he saw the fox's son, he was so depressed and ashamed that he did not dare to look up at anyone.

古文：霸目之，有愧容，客去而久卧不起。
现代文：王霸见了，有愧色，客人离开而久卧不起床。
English: When Wang Ba saw this, he felt ashamed. The guests had left and he had not been able to get up for a long time.

古文：妻怪问其故，始不肯告，妻请罪，而后言曰： 吾与子伯素不相若，向见其子容服甚光，举措有适，而我兒曹蓬发历齿，未知礼则，见客而有惭色。
现代文：妻子感到奇怪，问为什么。开始不肯说，妻请罪，尔后说道 ：我和子伯素来不一般，刚才看见他的儿子容貌服饰很有光彩，举止行动很合适，可我的儿子蓬发厉齿，不懂礼节规则，见客时有惭愧之色。
English: My wife felt strange and asked why. At first, she refused to say, my wife pleaded guilty, and later said: My son and I have never been ordinary. I just saw his son's appearance, clothing, and behavior, but my son has sharp teeth, does not know the rules of etiquette, and is ashamed when meeting guests.

古文：父子恩深，不觉自失耳。 
现代文：父子之恩情太深，不觉自己有些丢人。 
English: The father and son are so grateful that they don't feel ashamed.

古文：妻曰： 君少修清节，不顾荣禄。
现代文：妻说： 你少修清高气节，不顾荣誉俸禄。
English: My wife said, "You should cultivate less and have a high qi, regardless of your honor and salary."

古文：今子伯之贵孰与君之高？
现代文：现在子伯的贵气哪比得上你的清高？
English: Now, how does your uncle's nobility compare to your cleanness?

古文：奈何忘宿志而惭兒女子乎！ 
现代文：怎么忘了你的宿志而为儿子惭愧呢？ 
English: How can you forget your dream and be ashamed of your son?

古文：霸屈起而笑曰： 有是哉！ 
现代文：王霸屈起而笑道 ：有这种事吗？ 
English: Wangba bent over and laughed, "Is there such a thing?"

古文：遂共终身隐遁。
现代文：于是就一道终身隐居不出。
English: As a result, they cannot live in seclusion together for life.

古文：广汉姜诗妻者，同郡庞盛之女也。
现代文：姜诗妻传，广汉姜诗之妻，同郡庞盛之女。
English: Jiang Shi's wife biography, wife of Guanghan Jiang Shi, daughter of the same county's Pang Sheng.

古文：诗事母至孝，妻奉顺尤笃。
现代文：姜诗事母极孝顺，妻子奉顺更厚。
English: Jiang Shi's mother is very filial, and his wife is even more obedient.

古文：母好饮江水，水去舍六七里，妻常溯流而汲。
现代文：母亲喜欢饮江水，水离家六七里，妻常逆流而去汲水。
English: My mother likes to drink river water. The water is six or seven miles away from home, and my wife often goes against the current to draw water.

古文：后值风，不时得还，母渴，诗责而遣之。
现代文：后来遇到风，不能按时回家，母亲口渴，姜诗责备妻子而遣她还家。
English: Later, when the wind blew and she couldn't get home on time, and her mother was thirsty, Jiang Shi scolded his wife and sent her back home.

古文：妻乃寄止邻舍，昼夜纺绩，市珍羞，使邻母以意自遗其姑。
现代文：妻便寄居在邻家，昼夜纺绩，买些好菜，使邻母以意自送给婆婆。
English: The wife then stayed at a neighbor's house, worked day and night, and bought some good vegetables so that the neighbor's mother could give them to her mother-in-law.

古文：如是者久之，姑怪问邻母，邻母具对。
现代文：像这样做了好久，婆婆感到奇怪便问邻母，邻母如实相告。
English: After doing this for a long time, the mother-in-law felt strange and asked her neighbor, who told her the truth.

古文：姑感惭呼还，恩养愈谨。
现代文：婆婆感到惭愧将她叫回来，恩养更加勤谨。
English: Her mother-in-law felt ashamed to call her back, and was even more diligent.

古文：其子后因远汲溺死，妻恐姑哀伤，不敢言，而托以行学不在。
现代文：她的儿子后来因为到远处汲水淹死，妻怕婆婆哀伤，不敢讲，而假称上学去了不在家。
English: Her son later drowned because he went to fetch water from a distance. The wife, afraid of her mother-in-law's grief, did not dare to speak, but pretended to go to school when she was not at home.

古文：姑嗜鱼会，又不能独食，夫妇常力作供会，呼邻母共之。舍侧忽有涌泉，味如江水，每旦辄出双鲤鱼，常以供二母之膳。
现代文：婆婆喜吃鱼鱼会，又不能单独吃，夫妇常努力劳作以供鱼鱼会，喊邻母共吃，房舍旁边忽有涌泉，味与江水相同，每天早上就出现一双鲤鱼，常用来供两个婆婆吃。
English: My mother-in-law likes to eat fish and shellfish, but she can't eat it alone. The couple often work hard to provide fish and shellfish, and invite the neighbors to eat together. There is a spring next to the house, which tastes the same as river water. Every morning, a pair of eels appear, which are often used to feed the two mothers-in-law.

古文：赤眉散贼经诗里，弛兵而过，曰 惊大孝必触鬼神。 
现代文：赤眉军的散兵经过姜诗的乡里，说道： 惊动大孝之人一定触犯鬼神。 
English: A skirmisher from the Red Eyebrows Army passed through Jiang Shi's village and said, "Anyone who alarms a great filial son is sure to offend the gods and spirits."

古文：时岁荒，贼乃遗诗米肉，受而埋之，比落蒙其安全。
现代文：当时年岁饥荒，贼就送一些米肉给姜诗，姜诗受而埋起来，近藩也保了安全。
English: At that time, the year-old famine, the thief sent some rice meat to Jiang Shi, Jiang Shi was buried, and the nearby clan was also safe.

古文：永平三年，察孝廉，显宗诏曰： 大孝入朝，凡诸举者一听平之。 
现代文：永平三年，察孝廉，显宗下诏说 ：大孝之人入朝，所有举报者一概听他平定。 
English: In the third year of Yongping, Emperor Gaozong issued an edict saying, "If a person of great filial piety enters the imperial court, all informants will be subdued by him."

古文：由是皆拜郎中。
现代文：从此都拜为郎中。
English: Since then, they have all been his children.

古文：诗寻除江阳令，卒于官。
现代文：姜诗不久授职江阴令，死在官位。
English: Jiang Shi was soon appointed to the post of Jiangyin governor and died in office.

古文：所居治，乡人为立祀。
现代文：所居之地，乡人替他立祭祀。
English: In the place where he lived, the villagers held a religious service for him.

古文：沛郡周郁妻者，同郡赵孝之女也，字阿。
现代文：周郁妻传，沛郡周郁之妻，同郡赵孝之女，字阿。
English: Zhou Yu's wife biography, wife of Zhou Yu of Pei County, daughter of Zhao Xiao of the same county, character Ah.

古文：少习仪训，闲于妇道，而郁骄淫轻躁，多行无礼。
现代文：少年时学习礼仪古训，习于妇女之道，可周郁骄傲懒惰轻躁，多做无礼之事。
English: When he was a boy, he learned the ancient teachings of etiquette and the ways of women, but he was proud, lazy and frivolous, and often did things that were disrespectful.

古文：郁父伟谓阿曰： 新妇贤者女，当以道匡夫。
现代文：周郁之父周伟对赵阿说 ：新妇是贤者之女，当用正道纠正丈夫。
English: Zhou Yu's father, Zhou Wei, said to Zhao Ah, "A bride is the daughter of a wise man. She should correct her husband in the right way."

古文：郁之不改，新妇过也。 
现代文：周郁不改过，是新妇之过。 
English: Zhou Yu did not change, it was the bride's fault.

古文：阿拜而受命，退谓左右曰： 我无樊、卫二姬之行，故君以责我。我言而不用，君必谓我不奉教令，则罪在我矣。
现代文：赵阿拜而受命，退下对左右的人说： 我没有楚国的樊姬、齐国之卫姬的品行，所以公公责备我，我说了而他不听，公公必说我不奉教令，那么罪在我了。
English: Zhao Abai was ordered to retreat and said to the people around him: I don't have the character of Chu's Shunji and Qi's Weiji, so my father-in-law rebuked me. I spoke and he didn't listen. My father-in-law must have said that I didn't follow orders, so the fault is mine.

古文：若言而见用，是为子违父而从妇，则罪在彼矣。
现代文：如果说了而管用，这就是儿子违背父亲而听从妇人，那么罪在他了。
English: If what is said is true, that the son has disobeyed his father and listened to the woman, then he is guilty.

古文：生如此，亦何聊哉！ 
现代文：人生如此，有什么意思！ 
English: Life is like that, what's the point!

古文：乃自杀。
现代文：于是自杀。
English: He killed himself.

古文：莫不伤之。
现代文：当时的人没有不同情她。
English: People at the time didn't feel sorry for her.

古文：扶风曹世叔妻者，同郡班彪之女也，名昭，字惠班，一名姬。博学高才。
现代文：曹世叔妻传，扶风曹世叔的妻子，是同郡班彪的女儿。名叫昭，字惠班，又名姬，学问广博，很有才干。
English: Cao Shizun's wife, Fu Feng Cao Shizun's wife, is the daughter of Ban Biao of the same county. Her name is Zhao, also known as Huiban, also known as Ji, she is well-educated and very talented.

古文：世叔早卒，有节行法度。
现代文：世叔死得早，班昭气节品行很好，举动很合礼法。
English: Shishu died early, Ban Zhaoxi had a good moral character, and his behavior was in accordance with etiquette.

古文：兄固著《汉书》，其八表及《天文志》未及竟而卒，和帝诏昭就东观臧书阁踵而成之。
现代文：哥哥班固，著有《汉书》，只是八表和《天文志》没写完就死了，和帝命令班昭到东观藏书阁接着写成它。
English: His elder brother, Ban Gu, author of "The Book of Han," died before he finished writing "The Eight Tables" and "The Astronomy." Emperor He ordered Ban Zhao to go to the Dongguan Library and then write it.

古文：帝数召入宫，令皇后诸贵人师事焉，号曰大家。每有贡献异物，辄诏大家作赋颂。
现代文：皇帝多次召昭进宫，让皇后诸贵人拜班昭为老师，叫做 大家 ，每逢各地贡献珍贵物品，就叫 大家 写赋赞扬。
English: The emperor summoned Zhao into the palace many times, and let the queen and other dignitaries worship Ban Zhao as a teacher, called everyone. Whenever precious items were contributed from all over the country, everyone was asked to write and praise.

古文：及邓太后临朝，与闻政事。
现代文：到了邓太后临朝听政时，让班昭参与政事的处理。
English: When it came time for Deng Taigo to listen to the government, he allowed Ban Zhao to participate in the handling of government affairs.

古文：以出入之勤，特封子成关内侯，官至齐相。
现代文：认为班昭很勤勉，特地破例封班昭的儿子曹成为关内侯，官做到齐国的宰相。
English: Believing that Ban Zhao was very diligent, he made an exception and made Cao, Ban Zhao's son, the governor of Guanai and the prime minister of Qi.

古文：时《汉书》始出，多未能通者，同郡马融伏于阁下，从昭受读，后又诏融兄续继昭成之。
现代文：当时《汉书》才出来，许多人读不懂，同郡马融拜伏在阁下，向班昭学习读《汉书》；后来皇帝又下诏书叫马融的哥哥马续接着班昭把书写完。
English: At that time, "Hanshu" had just come out, and many people couldn't read it. Ma Rong, the county magistrate, bowed down to him and learned to read "Hanshu" from Ban Zhao. Later, the emperor also issued an edict to ask Ma Rong's brother Ma Lian to follow Ban Zhao and finish writing the book.

古文：永初中，太后兄大将军邓骘以母忧，上书乞身，太后不欲许，以问昭。昭因上疏曰：伏惟皇太后陛下，躬盛德之美，隆唐、虞之政，辟四门而开四聪，采狂夫之瞽言，纳刍荛之谋虑。
现代文：永初年间，太后的哥哥大将军邓骘因为母亲去世请求退休，太后不打算批准，征问班昭，班昭就上疏道 ：臣下认为皇太后陛下，自身品德很完美，隆行唐、虞般的朝政，广开言路，听狂夫、瞽叟之方，纳山野村夫之见。
English: At the beginning of the 17th century, the empress dowager's brother, General Deng Yu, requested to retire because of his mother's death. The empress dowager did not intend to approve, and asked Ban Zhao. Ban Zhao came up with a solution: The vassals thought that the empress dowager, Her Majesty, had a perfect moral character, had a high rank in the Tang Dynasty, and governed the court like a goose, spoke freely, and listened to the opinions of the madmen, the scoundrels, and Nasan Nomura.

古文：妾昭得以愚朽，身当盛明，敢不披露肝胆，以效万一！
现代文：臣妾以愚昧之才，处在圣明的时代，敢不把肝胆之言，报效皇恩于万一。
English: Vassals and concubines, with the talent of ignorance, in the era of holiness, dare not say the words of the heart, repaying the favor of the emperor in the unlikely event.

古文：妾闻谦让之风，德莫大焉，故典坟述美，神祇降福。
现代文：我听说自古谦让之风是很高的品德。所以古书记载，神明降福。
English: I have heard that since ancient times, humility is a very high virtue. Therefore, the ancient scriptures record that the gods bestow blessings.

古文：昔夷、齐去国，天下服其廉高；太伯违邠，孔子称为三让。
现代文：从前伯夷、叔齐兄弟让国，天下佩服他们风格很高；太伯让位给弟弟，孔子再三称赞。
English: Once upon a time, Bo Yi and Uncle Qi brothers gave up the country, and the world admired their high style; Tai Bo gave way to his brother, and Confucius repeatedly praised them.

古文：所以光昭令德，扬名于后世者也。
现代文：这就是品德高尚，扬名后世的缘故。
English: This is the reason for the high moral character and the fame of posterity.

古文：《论语》曰： 能以礼让为国，于从政乎何有！ 
现代文：《论语》上说： 能用礼让治国，对从政有什么难呢？ 
English: "Analects" said: If you can govern the country with courtesy, what is so difficult about being in politics?

古文：由是言之，推让之诚，其致远矣。
现代文：这样看来，推让之风，意义十分深远。
English: From this perspective, the significance of the trend of concessions is very far-reaching.

古文：今四舅深执忠孝，引身自退，而以方垂未静，拒而不许；如后有毫毛加于今日，诚恐推让之名不可再得。
现代文：现在四舅大将军坚行忠孝之道，要求引退，而陛下考虑边陲还不安靖，拒不同意，如果以后因为些小错误，掩盖了今天的美德，只怕推让的名声就再也难得了。
English: Now the fourth uncle general insists on the way of loyalty and filial piety, asks for retirement, and his majesty considers the border guard still uneasy, but disagrees. If in the future, because of some small mistakes, the virtues of today are covered up, it will be difficult to get the reputation of concession.

古文：缘见逮及，故敢昧死竭其愚情。
现代文：这是小人之见，敢冒着危险表述出来。
English: This is the opinion of a small man, who dares to express it at risk.

古文：自知言不足采，以示虫蚁之赤心。
现代文：自知言不足取，只是表示虫蚁的一颗红心罢了。 
English: Self-knowledge is not enough, it is just a red heart of the insect.

古文：太后从而许之。于是骘等各还里第焉。
现代文：太后同意，于是邓骘等人告老还乡了。
English: The empress dowager agreed, so Deng Wei and the others returned to their hometown.

古文：作《女诫》七篇，有助内训。
现代文：班昭作《女诫》七篇，对宫内妇女的教育很有帮助。
English: Ban Zhao wrote seven "Women's Commandments," which is very helpful for the education of women in the imperial court.

古文：其辞曰：鄙人愚暗，受性不敏，蒙先君之余宠，赖母师之典训。
现代文：七篇就是：卑弱第一，夫妇第二，敬慎第三，妇行第四，专心第五，曲从第六，和叔妹第七。
English: The seven chapters are: Humility First, Husband and Wife Second, Prudence Third, Womanhood Fourth, Concentration Fifth, Song From Sixth, and Aunt and Sister Seventh.

古文：年十有四，执箕帚于曹氏，于今四十余载矣。
现代文：马融读后认为很好，让自己的妻子、女儿学习。班昭丈夫曹世叔之妹曹丰生，也有才惠，对《七诫》不同意，写书反驳，文辞也很可观。
English: After reading it, Ma Rong thought it was a good idea to let his wife and daughter study it. Cao Fengsheng, the younger sister of Ban Zhao's husband, Cao Shishun, was also talented. She disagreed with the "Seven Commandments" and wrote a book to refute it. Her writing was also impressive.

古文：战战兢兢，常惧绌辱，以增父母之羞，以益中外之累。
现代文：班昭七十多岁才死，皇太后素服表示哀悼，派使者监办班昭的丧事。
English: Ban Zhao died in his seventies, and the empress dowager expressed her condolences and sent an envoy to oversee Ban Zhao's funeral.

古文：夙夜劬心，勤不告劳，而今而后，乃知免耳。吾性疏顽，教道无素，恒恐子穀负辱清朝。
现代文：班昭写的赋、颂、铭、诔、问、注、哀辞、书、论、上疏、遗令等共十六篇。她的儿媳丁氏替她搜集在一起，又写《大家讠赞》歌颂她。乐羊子妻传，河南乐羊子的妻子，不知是哪家的女子。
English: There are a total of sixteen fus, odes, epitaphs, poems, questions, notes, eulogies, books, essays, sermons, and last rites written by Ban Zhao. Her daughter-in-law Ding collected them together for her, and also wrote "Everyone's Praise" to sing her praises. The story of the wife of Le Yang Zi, the wife of Henan Le Yang Zi, I don't know who she is.

古文：圣恩横加，猥赐金紫，实非鄙人庶几所望也。
现代文：羊子曾在外面旅行，拾得别人丢失的一块金子，回来交给妻子。
English: Yangzi had traveled abroad, found a piece of gold that someone else had lost, and returned it to his wife.

古文：男能自谋矣，吾不复以为忧也。但伤诸女方当适人，而不渐训诲，不闻妇礼，惧失容它门，取耻宗族。
现代文：妻子说： 我听说有志之士不喝盗泉之水，廉洁的人不吃别人轻蔑施舍的食物，何况是捡到别人的金子来糟蹋自己的名声呢？ 
English: The wife said, "I have heard that a man of good will does not drink water from a stolen spring, and that a man of integrity does not eat food that others despise and give as alms, and what is more, how can he ruin his reputation by picking up other people's gold?

古文：吾今疾在沈滞，性命无常，念汝曹如此，每用惆怅。
现代文：羊子听了十分惭愧，于是把金子丢在野外，而到远方去找老师学习。学习一年回来，妻子跪着问其缘故。羊子说： 出去久了，想家呗，没有别的缘故。 
English: After hearing this, Yang Zi felt very ashamed, so he left the gold in the open and went to a faraway place to find a teacher to study. After a year of studying, his wife knelt down and asked him why. Yang Zi said, "I have been away for a long time, I miss home, there is no other reason."

古文：间作《女诫》七章，愿诸女各写一通，庶有补益，裨助汝身。
现代文：妻子便拿着小刀走向织机前，说道： 这些织物来自蚕茧，用梭子织成，一丝一丝加起来，便成为一寸，一寸一寸加起来，就成一丈一匹。
English: So the wife took a knife and went to the loom and said, "These fabrics are made from silkworm cocoons and woven with a shuttle. Add the threads together and you get one inch. Add the inches together and you get one horse."

古文：去矣，其勖勉之！
现代文：如果割断了这些织物，就会前功尽弃，浪费时间。
English: If you cut these fabrics, you will lose all your progress and waste time.

古文：卑弱第一。古者生女三日，卧之床下，弄之瓦砖，而斋告焉。
现代文：你在外学习，应该每天学习一些过去不知道的知识，来成就美德。如果半途回来，和割断这些织物有什么不同？ 
English: If you study outside, you should learn something new every day to achieve virtue. If you come back halfway, how is it different from cutting the fabric?

古文：卧之床下，明其卑弱，主下人也。
现代文：羊子听了深受感动，回去把学业修完，竟然七年没有回家。
English: After hearing this, Yang Zi was deeply moved. He went back to complete his studies and did not return home for seven years.

古文：弄之瓦砖，明其习劳，主执勤也。
现代文：妻子常常勤勉地奉养婆婆，还送些东西给远离家乡的羊子。
English: The wife often diligently takes care of her mother-in-law, and also sends some things to the shepherd who is far away from home.

古文：斋告先君，明当主继祭祀也。
现代文：有一次，别家的鸡误入自己的园子，婆婆偷偷地把鸡杀了做菜吃，妻子面对鸡肉不吃而流眼泪。
English: Once, another family's chicken strayed into their garden. My mother-in-law secretly killed the chicken to cook and eat. My wife shed tears when she couldn't eat the chicken.

古文：三者盖女人之常道，礼法之典教矣。
现代文：婆婆问什么缘故，妻说： 我叹惜家里太穷，让您吃人家的鸡肉。 
English: When my mother-in-law asked why, my wife said, "I'm sorry our family is so poor that you have to eat other people's chicken."

古文：谦让恭敬，先人后己，有善莫名，有恶莫辞，忍辱含垢，常若畏惧，是谓卑弱下人也。
现代文：婆婆听了便把鸡肉倒掉了。后来，强盗想侮辱羊子妻，便先劫持她婆婆，羊子妻知道了，拿着刀走出来。强盗说： 把刀放下，服从我的可保全性命，不服从我，就杀掉你婆婆。 
English: When the mother-in-law heard this, she threw the chicken away. Later, the robber wanted to insult the shepherd's wife, so he first kidnapped her mother-in-law. When the shepherd's wife found out, she came out with a knife. The robber said: Put down the knife, obey me to save your life, disobey me and I will kill your mother-in-law.

古文：晚寝早作，勿惮夙夜，执务私事，不辞剧易，所作必成，手迹整理，是谓执勤也。
现代文：羊子妻抬头向天长叹，举刀割颈而死，强盗也没有杀她的婆婆。太守听说此事，立刻捕杀强盗，而赏赐羊子妻一些绸布，用礼节埋葬她，并号称 贞义 。
English: The shepherd's wife raised her head and sighed to the heavens, raised her sword and cut her neck to death. The robber did not kill her mother-in-law. When the governor heard about this, he immediately caught and killed the robber, and rewarded the shepherd's wife with some silk cloth, buried her with etiquette, and claimed to be chaste.

古文：正色端操，以事夫主，清静自守，无好戏笑，洁齐酒食，以供祖宗，是谓继祭祀也。三者苟备，而患名称之不闻，黜辱之在身，未之见也。
现代文：程文矩妻传，汉中程文矩之妻，同郡李法之姊。
English: Cheng Wen-Ju's wife, the wife of Cheng Wen-Ju in the Han Dynasty, and the sister of Li Fa in the same county.

古文：三者苟失之，何名称之可闻，黜辱之可远哉！
现代文：字穆姜。有二个儿子，而前妻有四个儿子。
English: He has two sons, while his ex-wife has four sons.

古文：夫妇第二。
现代文：文矩做安众令，死在官位。
English: Wen Rong did the public order, died in office.

古文：夫妇之道，参配阴阳，通达神明，信天地之弘义，人伦之大节也。
现代文：四个儿子认为母亲是后母，恨毁之心日积，可是穆姜慈爱温和，抚养更加尽心，衣食资财供给都比亲生儿子加倍。有人对母说： 四个孩子不孝得很，为什么不叫他们另外居住来疏远他们一些？ 
English: The four sons thought that their mother was a stepmother, and their hatred was growing day by day. However, Mu Jiang was kind and gentle, and she raised them more diligently. She provided them with twice as much food, clothing, and money as she did with her own sons. Someone said to their mother, "The four children are very unfilial, why don't you have them live separately to distance them a little?"

古文：是以《礼》贵男女之际，《诗》著《关睢》之义。
现代文：答道 ：我正用义来引导，让他们自己变好哩。 
English: He replied: I am guiding them with righteousness so that they may become better.

古文：由斯言之，不可不重也。
现代文：后来前妻的大儿子程兴生病很厉害，后母内心不安，亲自调理药和膳食，恩情极厚。
English: Later, his ex-wife's eldest son, Cheng Xing, became very ill, and his stepmother was worried. She personally adjusted the medicine and meals, and was very grateful.

古文：夫不贤，则无以御妇；妇不贤，则无以事夫。
现代文：程兴病了许久才好，于是把三个弟弟叫来说道： 继母慈祥仁爱，出自本能天授。我们兄弟不知道孝顺，是禽兽心肠。
English: Cheng Xing had been ill for a long time before he got better, so he called his three younger brothers and said: Stepmother's kindness and benevolence come from instinct. Our brothers don't know filial piety, they have the hearts of beasts.

古文：夫不御妇，则威仪废缺；妇不事夫，则义理堕阙。方斯二事，其用一也。
现代文：虽然母爱更厚，我们的过恶也很深了。 于是将三个弟弟送进南郑牢狱，说明母之恩德，也诉述自己的过失，请求处以刑罚。
English: Although my mother's love is stronger, our wrongdoing is also deeper. Therefore, I sent my three younger brothers to Nan Zheng Prison to explain my mother's kindness, and also to tell of my own fault and request that I be punished.

古文：察今之君子，徒知妻妇之不可不御，威仪之不可不整，故训其男，检以书传。
现代文：县官报告郡守，郡守表彰其母，免去他家的差役，遣散四个儿子回家，准许他们改过自新，从此以后训导更加明白，都成为良士。
English: The county official reported to the county magistrate, the county magistrate commended his mother, exempted his family from dispatch duty, sent his four sons home, and allowed them to reform. From then on, the training was more clear, and they all became good soldiers.

古文：殊不知夫主之不可不事，礼义之不可不存也。
现代文：穆姜年八十多岁死去。临终交代几个儿子道： 我的弟弟伯度，智慧通达之士。他所说的薄葬，其意义很深。
English: Mu Jiang died in his eighties. On his deathbed, he told several of his sons: My brother Baidu, a man of great wisdom. The meaning of his shallow burial is very deep.

古文：但教男而不教女，不亦蔽于彼此之数乎！
现代文：又有前朝一些临死前的遗令，都是圣贤的法令，叫你们遵守，不要与流俗相同，增加我的负担。 
English: There are also some last orders of the former emperor before his death, all of which are the decrees of saints and sages, telling you to abide by them, and not to be like the common people and increase my burden.

古文：《礼》，八岁始教之书，十五而至于学矣。
现代文：几个儿子都照办。孝女曹娥传，孝女曹娥，会稽上虞人。
English: Several sons have done the same. Xiao Ye Cao Chuan, Xiao Ye Cao E, is a certified member of the elite.

古文：独不可依此以为则哉！
现代文：父亲曹盱，能拉弦唱歌，做过巫祝。
English: His father, Cao Wei, could pull strings and sing, and had performed a witch's blessing.

古文：敬慎第三。阴阳殊性，男女异行。
现代文：汉安二年五月五日，于县江逆流水婆娑起舞迎神，溺水而死，找不到尸体。
English: On May 5th, Han'an Year 2, a water goddess danced to welcome the gods in the backwaters of the county river. She drowned and her body was never found.

古文：阳以刚为德，阴以柔为用，男以强为贵，女以弱为美。
现代文：曹娥年刚十四岁，便沿江号哭，昼夜不断声，十七天后，便投江而死。
English: When Cao E was just fourteen years old, she cried along the river, crying day and night. Seventeen days later, she drowned herself in the river.

古文：故鄙谚有云： 生男如狼，犹恐其尪；生女如鼠，犹恐其虎。 
现代文：至元嘉元年，县长度尚改葬曹娥于江南道旁，替她立了碑以资纪念。吴许升妻传，吴许升之妻，吕氏之女，字荣。吴许升年轻时好赌博，不理操行，吕荣常亲自勤操家务，来奉养婆婆。
English: In the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, the length of the county was still changed to bury Cao E on the side of Jiangnan Road, and a monument was erected to commemorate her. Wu Xuesheng's wife biography, Wu Xuesheng's wife, Lu's daughter, Zhi Rong. Wu Xuesheng was good at gambling when he was young, and did not care about his behavior. Lu Rong often did housework himself to support his mother-in-law.

古文：然则修身莫若敬，避强莫若顺。
现代文：数次劝丈夫读书，每有不好之处，就流着泪规劝。
English: She advised her husband to study several times, and every time he did something wrong, she would tearfully reprimand him.

古文：故曰敬顺之道，妇人之大礼也。
现代文：吕荣之父恨女婿不争气，便叫女儿改嫁他人。吕荣叹道： 命该如此，不该离异。 
English: Lu Rong's father hated that his son-in-law did not compete with him, so he asked his daughter to marry someone else. Lu Rong sighed: It should be like this, there should be no divorce.

古文：夫敬非它，持久之谓也；夫顺非它，宽裕之谓也。
现代文：始终不肯回家。吴许升感激自励，于是远去找老师学习，后来成了名。不久被本州征召，走到寿春，路上被强盗所害。
English: He always refused to go home. Wu Xuesheng was grateful for the encouragement, so he went far away to find a teacher to study, and later became famous. Soon he was conscripted by the state, went to Shuchun, and was attacked by robbers on the road.

古文：持久者，知止足也；宽裕者，尚恭下也。
现代文：刺史尹耀捕盗找到了下落。吕荣迎丧在路，听到消息后便到州里，请求见那仇人才甘心。尹耀同意了。
English: After hearing the news that Lu Rong passed away on the road, he went to Zhuli and asked to meet the enemy. Yin Yao agreed.

古文：夫妇之好，终身不离。
现代文：吕荣于是亲手断其头，以祭丈夫之灵。
English: Lu Rong then cut off his head with her own hands to sacrifice her husband's spirit.

古文：房室周旋，遂生媟黩。
现代文：后来郡遭寇贼，贼人想侵犯她，吕荣跳墙逃跑，贼子拔刀追她。
English: Later, the county was attacked by robbers. The robbers wanted to assault her. Lv Rong jumped over the wall to escape. The robbers drew their knives and chased her.

古文：媟黩既生，语言过矣。
现代文：贼子说： 服从我就能活命，不服我就死路一条。 
English: The thief said, "If you obey me, you will live, but if you disobey me, you will die."

古文：语言既过，纵恣必作。
现代文：吕荣说 ：我决不受强盗的侮辱。 
English: Lu Rong said: I will never be insulted by robbers.

古文：纵恣既作，则侮夫之心生矣。此由于不知止足者也。
现代文：于是贼子就将她杀了。这一天疾风暴雨，雷电黑天，贼子惶恐叩头请罪，于是殡葬了吕荣。袁隗妻传，汝南袁隗之妻，扶风马融之女，字伦。
English: Therefore, the thief killed her. On this day, there was a violent storm, thunder and lightning, and the sky was dark. The thief was afraid and bowed his head to ask for forgiveness, so he buried Lu Rong. Yuan Yu's wife, Runan Yuan Yu's wife, Fu Feng Ma Rong's daughter, Zhulun.

古文：夫事有曲直，言有是非。
现代文：袁隗的事迹已见前传。马伦少有辩才。
English: The story of Yuan Shao has already seen a prequel. Malen has little ability to argue.

古文：直者不能不争，曲者不能不讼。
现代文：马融家世富豪，陪嫁物资很多。
English: Ma Rong comes from a wealthy family and has a lot of wedding materials.

古文：讼争既施，则有忿怒之事矣。
现代文：等到初成婚礼，袁隗问她说： 妇人奉箕帚就算了，何必过于珍丽打扮呢？ 
English: When it came to Hatsusei's wedding, Yuan Qi asked her, "Even if a woman is a maid of honor, why does she have to dress up so elaborately?

古文：此由于不尚恭下者也。
现代文：答道： 慈亲垂爱于我，我不敢违背亲命。
English: He replied, "Dearly beloved, I dare not disobey my dearly beloved.

古文：侮夫不节，谴呵从之；忿怒不止，楚挞从之。
现代文：你如果想慕鲍宣、梁鸿的高尚品德，妾也请从少君、孟光之事了。 
English: If you want to admire the high moral character of Baoxuan and Lianghong, please also take the concubine from Shao Jun and Meng Guang.

古文：夫为夫妇者，义以和亲，恩以好合，楚挞既行，何义之存？
现代文：袁隗又说： 弟先兄举行婚礼，世人以为笑话。今你的姐姐尚未出嫁，你先出嫁可以吗？ 答道： 我的姐姐品德高尚，容貌特殊，没有遇到好配偶，不像一些鄙薄之人，随便找个人罢了。 
English: Yuan Qi also said, "The world thought it was a joke when my brother held a wedding. Now your sister hasn't married yet, can you get married first?" He replied, "My sister is of high moral character and has a special appearance. She hasn't met a good spouse. Unlike some despicable people, she's just looking for someone.

古文：谴呵既宣，何恩之有？恩义俱废，夫妇离矣。
现代文：又问道： 你父亲做南郡太守，学问深奥，文章成为一代辞宗，而所在之职，常因货财为损，为什么呢？ 
English: He also asked: Your father was the governor of Nan County, with profound knowledge, and the article became a generation of diction, but the position he held was often damaged by goods and money. Why?

古文：妇行第四。女有四行，一曰妇德，二曰妇言，三曰妇容，四曰妇功。
现代文：答道： 孔子大圣人，不免被叔孙武叔所毁；子路是大圣人，还有公伯寮的控诉。我父亲得到这种情况，本是应该的啊。 
English: Answer: Confucius was a great sage, but he was inevitably destroyed by his uncle Sun Wuzhu; Zilu was a great sage, and there was a complaint from his uncle. My father got this situation, it was supposed to be.

古文：夫云妇德，不必才明绝异也；妇言，不必辩口利辞也；妇容，不必颜色美丽也；妇功，不必工巧过人也。清闲贞静，守节整齐，行己有耻，动静有法，是谓妇德。
现代文：袁隗默不作声，不能使妻子理屈，帐外听的人感到惭愧。袁隗既宠贵在当时，马伦也有名气。
English: Yuan Shun was silent, unable to reason with his wife, and those who listened outside felt ashamed. Yuan Shun was a favorite at the time, and Mulan was also famous.

古文：择辞而说，不道恶语，时然后言，不厌于人，是谓妇言。
现代文：年六十多才死。
English: He died in his sixties.

古文：盥浣尘秽，服饰鲜洁，沐浴以时，身不垢辱，是谓妇容。
现代文：马伦之妹马芝，也有才义。少时丧亲，长而追感于心，便作《申情赋》。
English: Maren's sister, Ma Zhi, also has talent. When she was young, she lost a relative, and after a long time, she felt it in her heart and made "Shen Jiao Fu."

古文：专心纺绩，不好戏笑，洁齐酒食，以奉宾客，是谓妇功。此四者，女人之大德，而不可乏之者也。
现代文：庞淯母传酒泉庞淯之母，赵姓之女。
English: Pang Jun's mother passed down from the mother of Sake Spring Pang Jun, the daughter of Zhao.

古文：然为之甚易，唯在存心耳。古人有言： 仁远乎哉？我欲仁，而仁斯至矣。 
现代文：字娥。父被同县人所杀，而赵娥兄弟三人，当时都病死了，仇人于是喜而自贺，以为不会有人报仇了。
English: Zhao's father was killed by people from the same county, and Zhao's three brothers all died of illness at that time. The enemy then rejoiced and congratulated themselves, thinking that there would be no one to take revenge.

古文：此之谓也。专心第五。
现代文：赵娥暗地极为愤慨，于是偷偷地准备刀兵，常常坐帷车以等候仇家。
English: Zhao E was secretly very indignant, so she secretly prepared swords and soldiers, and often rode in a carriage to wait for the enemy.

古文：《礼》，夫有再娶之义，妇无二适之文，故曰夫者天也。
现代文：十多年不能下手。
English: I haven't been able to get started for more than ten years.

古文：天固不可逃，夫固不可离也。
现代文：后来相遇在都亭，便刺杀了仇人。
English: Later, when they met in Doting, they assassinated their enemy.

古文：行违神祇，天则罚之；礼义有愆，夫则薄之。
现代文：于是到县里自首。口中说： 父仇已报，请求刑戮。 
English: So he went to the county and turned himself in, saying, "My father's revenge has been avenged, and I ask for the death penalty."

古文：故《女宪》曰： 得意一人，是谓永毕；失意一人，是谓永讫。 
现代文：禄长尹嘉认为赵娥很有义气，便解下印绶想和她一起逃走。赵娥不肯离去，说道： 怨恨塞心，以致身死，是妾之名分；结罪审理案件，是你的常理。怎敢苟且偷生，来枉公法。 
English: The governor of Lukang, Yin Jia, thought that Zhao E was very righteous, so he untied the seal and wanted to escape with her. Zhao E refused to leave, saying: Holding a grudge so that you die is the name of a concubine; finding a crime and trying a case is your common sense. How dare you steal a living and pervert the course of justice.

古文：由斯言之，夫不可不求其心。
现代文：后来遇赦得免于死罪。州郡表彰她所在的闾里。
English: She was later pardoned and spared the death penalty. The state and county commended her hometown of Bali.

古文：然所求者，亦非谓佞媚苟亲也，固莫若专心正色。礼义居洁，耳无涂听，目无邪视，出无冶容，入无废饰，无聚会群辈，无看视门户，此则谓专心正色矣。
现代文：太常张奂嘉奖叹息，用束帛之礼待她。刘长卿妻传，沛县刘长卿之妻，同郡桓鸾之女。生一个男孩，刚五岁，而长卿死去，妻子防远嫌疑，不肯回娘家。
English: According to the legend of Liu Changqing's wife, the wife of Liu Changqing of Pei County, the daughter of Huanqian of the same county, gave birth to a boy, just five years old, and Changqing died, his wife was suspicious and refused to return to her daughter's home.

古文：若夫动静轻脱，视听陕输，入则乱发坏形，出则窈窕作态，说所不当道，观所不当视，此谓不能专心正色矣。
现代文：儿子到十五岁，又夭折了。妻考虑不免要再嫁，于是预先刑其耳以示决心。同宗妇女都同情她，都说： 你家没有别的意思，假使有，还可通过姑妹来表白诚心，何必贵义轻身这般厉害呢！ 
English: When her son reached the age of fifteen, he died prematurely. His wife thought that she would have to remarry, so she pricked her ears in advance to show her determination. The women of the same family all sympathized with her and said: Your family has no other intention. If there were, they could have expressed their sincerity through a younger sister. Why should you be so proud and light-hearted?

古文：曲从第六。
现代文：答道： 从前我先君五更，学问为儒者所宗，尊贵到了做了帝师。
English: He replied, "In the past, I was the first of five emperors. Confucianism was the school of learning, and I was honored to become the emperor's teacher.

古文：夫 得意一人，是谓永华；失意一人，是谓永讫 ，欲人定志专心之言也。
现代文：五更以来，历代不废，男的因忠孝显著，女的因贞顺著称。《诗经》说： 无忝尔祖，聿厥德。 
English: Since the Five Dynasties, all ages have not been wasted, and men are famous for their loyalty and filial piety, while women are famous for their chastity.

古文：舅姑之心，岂当可失哉？
现代文：因此预先自己刑翦，来表明我的心情。 
English: Therefore, I pre-sentence myself to show my mood.

古文：物有以恩自离者，亦有以义自破者也。
现代文：沛相王吉上奏她的高尚品行，显耀她的门闾，号称 行义桓厘 ，县邑有祭祀一定给她送去祭余之肉。
English: Wang Ji, the minister of Paisang, praised her noble conduct and showed off her door bolt, known as "Gongyi Huanli," and there was a sacrifice in the county that would surely send her the meat left over from the sacrifice.

古文：夫虽云爱，舅姑云非，此所谓以义自破者也。
现代文：皇甫规妻传，安定皇甫规的妻子，不知是哪姓的女子。
English: According to the legend of Emperor Fu Zi's wife, the wife of Emperor Fu Zi was a woman of an unknown surname.

古文：然则舅姑之心奈何？
现代文：皇甫规第一个妻子死后，再娶了她。
English: After the death of his first wife, Emperor Fu Zi remarried her.

古文：固莫尚于曲从矣。姑云不尔而是，固宜从令；姑云尔而非，犹宜顺命。
现代文：妻子会写文章，能写草书，经常替皇甫规当书记，众人惊讶她的才能。
English: His wife could write articles, write cursive, and often worked as a secretary for the emperor. People were surprised by her talent.

古文：勿得违戾是非，争分曲直。此则所谓曲从矣。
现代文：到皇甫规死后，妻子年纪还轻而容貌很美。
English: After the death of Emperor Fuhe, his wife was still young and beautiful.

古文：故《女宪》曰： 妇如影响，焉不可赏！ 
现代文：后来董卓做了宰相，听说规妻的貌美，便用一百辆彩车、二十匹马，还有许多奴婢钱财作聘礼娶她。
English: Later, when Dong Zhuo became the prime minister, he heard that his wife was beautiful, so he used a hundred floats, twenty horses, and many slaves' money as a betrothal gift to marry her.

古文：和叔妹第七。妇人之得意于夫主，由舅姑之爱已也；舅姑之爱已，由叔妹之誉已也。
现代文：规妻便穿着便衣到董卓那里，跪下来陈述自己的苦衷，言语十分哀痛。董卓命令奴仆都拔出钢刀包围起来，并且说道： 我的威教，将使天下人降服，难道在你一个妇人身上就行不通吗？ 规妻知道不能免于一死，于是站起来破口大骂道： 你本是野杂种，害了不少天下人，还不够吗？
English: His wife, dressed in plain clothes, went to Dong Zhuo, knelt down and stated her grievances, her words were very sorrowful. Dong Zhuo ordered the servants to draw their steel knives and surround them, and said: My intimidation will make the world submit, will it not work on you, a woman? Knowing that she could not avoid death, his wife stood up and cursed loudly: You are a wild bastard, you have harmed a lot of people in the world, isn't that enough?

古文：由此言之，我臧否誉毁，一由叔妹，叔妹之心，复不可失也。
现代文：我的先辈的清德，举世知道。我丈夫皇甫氏文武全才，是汉代忠臣，你过去还不是他的趋使走卒吗？
English: The world knows about the virtuousness of my forefathers. My husband, the Emperor Fu, was a man of letters and military prowess, a loyal subject of the Han Dynasty. Weren't you his errand boy in the past?

古文：皆莫知叔妹之不可失，而不能和之以求亲，其蔽也哉！自非圣人，鲜能无过！故颜子贵于能改，仲尼嘉其不贰，而况妇人者也！
现代文：竟敢在你君夫人面前干出非礼的勾当？ 董卓于是把车子推到庭中，将女人的头悬在车轭上面，让奴仆们用鞭子棍棒使劲地打。皇甫规妻对拿棒棍的人说 ：怎么不重重下手打呢？死得越快越好。 
English: How dare he do something indecent in front of your wife? So Dong Zhuo pushed the cart into the courtyard, hung the woman's head over the top of the cart, and let the servants beat her with whips and sticks. The emperor's wife said to the man with the stick: "Why don't you beat her again and again? The sooner you die, the better."

古文：虽以贤女之行，聪哲之性，其能备乎！
现代文：于是被打死在车下。后人把她的形象画出来，题了 礼宗 二字。阴瑜妻传，南阳阴瑜之妻，颍川荀爽之女。名采，字女荀，聪敏有才艺。
English: As a result, she was beaten to death under a car. Her image was drawn by later generations, with the theme of "Riezong" (ritualism). Yin Yu's wife, wife of Nanyang Yin Yu, daughter of Lu Chuan. Famous, beautiful, intelligent and talented.

古文：是故室人和则谤掩，外内离则恶扬。
现代文：十七岁，嫁到阴家。十九岁生一女，而阴瑜死了。
English: At the age of seventeen, she married into the Yin family. At the age of nineteen, she gave birth to a daughter, and Yin Yu died.

古文：此必然之势也。《易》曰： 二人同心，其利断金。
现代文：荀采当时还年轻，常常担心被家人逼她改嫁，自己防御甚坚决。
English: At that time, Yan Cai was still young and often worried that her family would force her to remarry. She was very determined to defend herself.

古文：同心之言，其臭如兰。 
现代文：后来同郡人郭奕死了妻子，荀爽把采许给他，于是诈称自己病很严重，召采回家。
English: The meaning of "same heart" is that the two people are sincerely united, have the same mind, and their smell is congenial. It is like the fragrance of orchids.

古文：此之谓也。
现代文：荀采不得已回家，怀着刀子自誓决心。
English: This is exactly what is happening.

古文：夫嫂妹者，体敌而尊，恩疏而义亲。
现代文：荀爽命令傅婢抢去她的刀子，扶抱她上车，还担心她愤激，防卫很严。
English: Hao Shuang ordered Fu Rong to snatch her knife, hold her up and get on the bus. He was also worried that she would be angry, so he was very defensive.

古文：若淑媛谦顺之人，则能依义以笃好，崇恩以结援，使徽美显章，而瑕过隐塞，舅姑矜善，而夫主嘉美，声誉曜于邑邻，休光延于父母。
现代文：女已到郭家，便假装高兴的样子，对左右的人说： 我本立志要和丈夫阴瑜同穴而死，而不免被家中逼迫，才到这里来，素情不能遂意，怎么办？ 于是命使女建四灯，盛装打扮，郭奕进来相见，共谈，言辞不止。
English: When the woman arrived at Guo's house, she pretended to be happy and said to the people around her: I originally decided to die with my husband, but I was forced by my family to come here. I can't fulfill my original intention, what should I do? So I ordered the woman to build four lamps, dress up, and Guo Yi came in to meet, talk, and talk.

古文：若夫蠢愚之人，于嫂则托名以自高，于妹则因宠以骄盈。骄盈既施，何和之有！
现代文：郭奕敬畏她，便不敢逼她成亲，到天明才出来。荀采于是敕令左右备浴。进浴室后关上门，权令侍人躲开，用粉写在扉上道： 尸还阴。  阴 字没有写成，怕有人来，便用衣带自缢而死。
English: Guo Yi was in awe of her, so he did not dare to force her to get married, and did not come out until the break of dawn. Therefore, he ordered her to prepare a bath. After entering the bathroom, he closed the door, ordered the attendant to hide, and wrote on the door with powder: 尸还阴. The yin character was not written, and for fear that someone would come, he used his clothes to strangle himself to death.

古文：恩义既乖，何誉之臻！
现代文：左右的人没有放在心上，等到发现，已经断气，当时人很同情她。
English: People around her didn't think much of it, but when they found out that she had passed away, they felt very sorry for her.

古文：是以美隐而过宣，姑忿而夫愠，毁訾布于中外，耻辱集于厥身，进增父母之羞，退益君子之累。
现代文：盛道妻传，犍为盛道之妻，同郡赵氏之女。
English: According to the legend of the wife of Sheng Dao, she was the wife of Sheng Dao and the daughter of the Zhao clan in the same county.

古文：斯乃荣辱之本，而显否之基也。
现代文：字媛姜。建安五年，益州部乱，盛道聚众起兵，事情未成，夫妻被捕，当处死刑。
English: Five years of Jian'an, the Yizhou Rebellion, Shengdao gathered troops, things did not work out, the husband and wife were arrested and immediately sentenced to death.

古文：可不慎哉！然则求叔妹之心，固莫尚于谦顺矣。
现代文：媛姜晚中告盛道说 ：法律有一定的刑律，一定无活的希望，你可赶快逃走，建立门户，我留在狱中，代你承担罪责。 
English: In the middle of the night, Yuan Jiang told Sheng Dao: The law has a certain criminal law, a certain lifeless hope. You can quickly escape and establish a portal. I will stay in prison and take the blame on your behalf.

古文：谦则德之柄，顺则妇之行。
现代文：盛道没有打定主意，媛姜便解除盛道的枷锁，替他办些粮货。
English: Sheng Dao did not make up his mind, so Huan Jiang released Sheng Dao from the shackles and arranged some grain and goods for him.

古文：凡斯二者，足以和矣。
现代文：儿子盛翔当时五岁，使盛道带着他逃走。
English: His son, five-year-old Sheng Xiang, made Sheng Dao run away with him.

古文：《诗》云： 在彼无恶，在此无射。 
现代文：媛姜代替丈夫持夜，应对不失。估计盛道已经走远了，于是以实情告诉狱吏，到了时候便被杀了。
English: In place of her husband, Yuan Jiang stayed up all night to cope with the situation. She thought that Sheng Dao had already gone too far, so she told the prison guards the truth, and was killed when the time came.

古文：其斯之谓也。
现代文：盛道父子碰上大赦回家。
English: Morimichi and his son return home after the amnesty.

古文：马融善之，令妻女习焉。
现代文：盛道感激她的义气，终身不再娶妻。孝女叔先雄传，孝女叔先雄，犍为人。
English: Sheng Dao was so grateful for her loyalty that he never married again. A filial uncle is passed down from father to son, and a filial uncle is passed down from father to son.

古文：昭女妹曹丰生，亦有才惠，为书以难之，辞有可观。
现代文：父亲叔泥和，永建初年做县功曹。县长派泥和拜檄文谒见巴郡太守，乘船坠入湍水淹死，尸丧没有回家。
English: His father, Uncle Muhe, was a county meritorious person in the first year of Yongjian. The county governor sent Muhe and Baiyun Wenjun to see the governor of Ba County. He fell into the water and drowned, and his body did not return home.

古文：昭年七十余卒，皇太后素服举哀，使者监护丧事。
现代文：叔先雄感念怨恨悲痛，昼夜号哭，心不想活，常有投水自沉的念头。
English: Uncle Xianxiong feels resentment and grief, cries day and night, does not want to live, and often has the idea of drowning.

古文：所著赋、颂、铭、诔、问、注、哀辞、书、论、上疏、遗令，凡十六篇。子妇丁氏为撰集之，又作《大家赞》焉。
现代文：所生男女两个，都有几岁，雄便各作一个袋子，盛着珠子系在小儿身上，数次说了诀别的话，家人每防止她，经过百多天稍为松懈，雄便乘坐小船，在父亲堕水的地方恸哭，便自己投水而死。弟弟叔贤，那天晚上梦见姐姐告诉他道： 退后六天，当与父亲同时现出水面。 到时等待，果然与父一起，浮于江上。郡县表彰，替雄立碑，画出其像貌。
English: The male and female cormorants were both a few years old, so the male made a bag with beads and tied it to the child. He said goodbye several times, and the family members prevented her from doing so. After more than a hundred days, the male got on a small boat and cried at the place where his father fell into the water, and then threw himself into the water and died. His younger brother, Shuxian, dreamed of his sister that night and told him: Stand back for six days, when you and your father emerge from the water at the same time. Wait until the time comes, and you will surely float on the river with your father. The county commended and erected a monument for

古文：河南乐羊子之妻者，不知何氏之女也。
现代文：董祀妻传，陈留董祀的妻子，是同郡蔡邕的女儿，名琰，字文姬。
English: According to the biography of Dong Zhi's wife, Chen Liu, the wife of Dong Zhi, was the daughter of the same county's Cai Qi, a famous woman, known as Wen Ji.

古文：羊子尝行路，得遗金一饼，还以与妻，妻曰： 妾闻志士不饮盗泉之水，廉者不受嗟来之食，况拾遗求利，以污其行乎！ 
现代文：学问广博，有才华，能言善辩。
English: He is well-educated, talented and eloquent.

古文：羊子大惭，乃捐金于野，而远寻师学。
现代文：又懂得音律。先嫁给河东卫仲道，丈夫死了，没有儿子，回到娘家。兴平年间，天下大乱。
English: She also knew musical notation. She was first married to Hedong Weizhong, but her husband died and she returned to her mother's home without a son. During the Xingping era, the country was in turmoil.

古文：一年来归，妻跪问其故。
现代文：文姬被胡骑掳去，嫁给南匈奴左贤王。
English: Wen Ji was taken captive by Hu Jia and married to the Southern Xiongnu Zuoxian Wang.

古文：羊子曰： 久行怀思，无它异也。 
现代文：在匈奴十二年，生了两个儿子。曹操以前与蔡邕是好朋友，同情蔡邕后嗣无人，于是派使者拿着金璧把文姬赎回来，再嫁给董祀。
English: In the twelfth year of Xiongnu, she gave birth to two sons. Cao Cao had previously been good friends with Cai Xuan, and felt sorry that Cai Xuan had no heirs, so he sent an envoy with gold to redeem Wenji and then marry Dong Rui.

古文：妻乃引刀趋机而言曰： 此织生自蚕茧，成于机杼，一而累，以至于寸，累寸不己，遂成丈匹。今若断斯织也，则捐失成功，稽废时日。
现代文：董祀做过屯田都尉，犯了死罪，文姬到曹操那里请求赦免。当时一些朝廷大官和远方使节都在座。曹操对众宾客说 ：蔡伯喈的女儿在门外，现在我给大家介绍一下。 等到文姬进来，蓬头赤脚，叩头请罪，说话时口齿清晰，意思很是悲恸。
English: At that time, some high-ranking officials of the imperial court and distant envoys were present. Cao Cao said to all the guests: Cai Boqi's daughter is outside the door, now I will introduce her to you. Wait until Cai Boqi comes in, barefoot, bowing to ask for forgiveness, speaking with a clear mouth, meaning very sad.

古文：夫子积学，当日知其所亡，以就懿德。
现代文：大家听了都变了颜色。曹操说 ：情况的确可怜，但是命令已经下达了，怎么办？ 
English: Cao Cao said, "The situation is indeed pitiful, but the order has already been given. What should we do?"

古文：若中道而归，何异断斯织乎？ 
现代文：文姬说 ：您老人家马厩里马匹上万数，将士多如树林，何不赶快派一匹快马，追回文件，救救垂死的性命呢？ 
English: Wen Ji said, "There are tens of thousands of horses in your old man's stables, and there are as many generals as there are trees. Why don't you quickly send a fast horse to recover the documents and save the dying man's life?"

古文：羊子感其言，复还终业，遂七年不反。
现代文：曹操很受感动，便收回成命，免了董祀的死罪。
English: Cao Cao was very moved, so he revoked the death sentence and pardoned Dong Rui's capital crime.

古文：妻常躬勤养姑，又远馈羊子。
现代文：当时天气正冷，便赐给文姬头巾鞋袜等物。
English: It was cold at the time, so they gave her a headscarf, shoes and socks.

古文：尝有它舍鸡谬入园中，姑盗杀而食之，妻对鸡不餐而泣。
现代文：曹操乘便问蔡文姬道： 听说你家，从前藏有不少古书，还能记得一些吗？ 
English: Cao Cao then asked Cai Wenji: I heard that your family once had many ancient books, can you still remember some of them?

古文：姑怪问其故。妻曰： 自伤居贫，使食有它肉。 
现代文：文姬说 ：从前我父亲赐给我古书四千多卷，因流离逃难，生民涂炭，没有留下一点。
English: Wen Ji said: My father once gave me more than four thousand volumes of ancient books. Due to displacement and hardship, the people were charred and did not leave a bit.

古文：姑竟弃之。
现代文：现在我能背诵下来的只有四百余篇了。 
English: Now I can only recite more than four hundred articles.

古文：后盗欲有犯妻者，乃先劫其姑。
现代文：曹操说 ：我现在派十名书吏到你家去抄下来。 
English: Cao Cao said, "I will now send ten librarians to your home to copy it down."

古文：妻闻，操刀而出。
现代文：文姬道 ：我听说男女的界限很严，按礼节不能亲相传授。
English: Wen Ji Dao: I heard that the boundaries between men and women are very strict, and according to etiquette, they cannot be taught to each other.

古文：盗人曰： 释汝刀从我者可全，不从我者，则杀汝姑。 
现代文：请您给我一些纸笔，正楷草书都行。 于是抄书送给曹操，文字没有遗漏。
English: Please give me some paper and pens, any type of cursive writing is fine, so I sent a copy of the book to Cao Cao, and there was no missing text.

古文：妻仰天而叹，举刀刎颈而死。
现代文：后来文姬对乱离的遭遇十分伤感，追述往事，作《悲愤》诗二首，第一首是这样：
English: Later, Wen Ji was very sad about the separation and wrote two poems about the past, the first of which is as follows:

古文：盗亦不杀其姑。
现代文：汉室政权旁落，董卓破坏天常。
English: The Han regime falls by the wayside, and Dong Zhuo wreaks havoc.

古文：太守闻之，即捕杀贼盗，而赐妻缣帛，以礼葬之，号曰 贞义 。
现代文：图谋篡夺王位，先行杀害忠良。逼迫献帝迁都，假传圣旨长安。
English: They plotted to usurp the throne, killed Tadayoshi first, forced the emperor to move the capital, and falsely preached the holy will of Chang'an.

古文：汉中程文矩妻者，同郡李法之姊也，字穆姜。
现代文：海内到处兴兵，都想讨伐不祥。董卓带兵东下，金甲闪闪发光。
English: Dong Zhuo led his soldiers eastward, his golden armor glittering.

古文：有二男，而前妻四子。
现代文：中原士兵懦弱，部队多属胡羌。
English: The Central Plains soldiers were cowardly, and most of the troops were liars.

古文：文矩为安众令，丧于官。
现代文：胡兵占领城邑，所向无有抵挡。
English: Hu's soldiers occupied the cities and towns and encountered no resistance.

古文：四子以母非所生，憎毁日积，而穆姜慈爱温仁，抚字益隆，衣食资供，皆兼倍所生。或谓母曰： 四子不孝甚矣，何不别居以远之？ 对曰： 吾方以义相导，使其自迁善也。 
现代文：杀人不眨魔眼，尸骸遍布路旁。
English: Homicide is rampant, with bodies strewn along the roadside.

古文：及前妻长子兴遇疾困笃，母恻隐自然，亲调药膳，恩情笃密。
现代文：马边挂着男头，马后拖着女郎。长驱向西入关，哪管道路远长。回首旧都已远，肝脾已经腐烂。
English: A man's head hangs on the horse's side, a girl is dragged behind the horse. Long drive to the west into the pass, no matter how long the road is. It is too far to look back, the liver and spleen have rotted.

古文：兴疾久乃瘳，于是呼三弟谓曰： 继母慈仁，出自天受。
现代文：掳掠成千上万，父母妻子离散。有的骨肉被俘，相见不敢声张。
English: Tens of thousands of people were abducted and plundered, and their parents and wives were separated. Some of their relatives were captured, and they did not dare to speak out.

古文：吾兄弟不识恩养，禽兽其心。虽母道益隆，我曹过恶亦已深矣！ 
现代文：稍有违背胡意，必然严惩不贷。刀柄握在我手，随时要你脑袋。
English: Any slight violation of Hu's will is sure to be severely punished. The hilt of the sword is in my hand, and I want your head at any time.

古文：遂将三弟诣南郑狱，陈母之德，状己之过，乞就刑辟。
现代文：谁敢爱惜性命，只是不堪打骂。有时鞭挞交加，毒痛催人泪下。
English: Anyone who dares to value his life is just too weak to take the abuse. Sometimes the beatings are so severe that they bring people to tears.

古文：县言之于郡，郡守表异其母，蠲除家徭，遣散四子，许以修革。
现代文：早晨边走边号，晚上痛哭悲泣。真是求死不得，想活谈何容易。
English: In the morning, he would whistle as he walked, and in the evening he would weep bitterly and mournfully. He really wanted to die, but it was too easy to talk about it.

古文：自后训导愈明，并为良士。
现代文：老天爷呀何罪，我竟遭此大祸。
English: My God, what a crime, I have suffered such a great misfortune.

古文：穆姜年八十余卒。
现代文：边陲与华不同，野窑不知文理。
English: Bentham, unlike China, did not know the arts and sciences.

古文：临终敕诸子曰： 吾弟伯度，智达士也。
现代文：天寒霜雪满天，春夜北风又起。大风吹我衣裳，呼呼钻入耳际。
English: The sky was covered with cold frost and snow, and the north wind rose again in the spring evening. The wind blew my clothes and whistled into my ears.

古文：所论薄葬，其义至矣。
现代文：起想父母亲人，唉声叹气不已。
English: I think of my parents and relatives, and I can't stop sighing.

古文：又临亡遗令，贤圣法也。
现代文：听到有客外来，心中十分欢喜。
English: When I heard that there were guests from outside, I was very happy.

古文：令汝曹遵承，勿与俗同，增吾之累。 
现代文：连忙打听消息，可惜不同乡里。忽然喜从天降，骨肉亲来迎己。
English: I hurried to inquire about the news, but unfortunately it was not in my hometown. Suddenly, joy fell from the sky, and relatives came to greet me.

古文：诸子奉行焉。
现代文：欣喜自己脱身，可惜抛弃儿子。
English: He was glad to be rid of her, but he regretted abandoning his son.

古文：孝女曹娥者，会稽上虞人也。
现代文：亲生骨肉心肝，永别再无会期。存亡从此永隔，不忍母子分离。
English: Parents and children, never again will there be a meeting period. From now on, life and death are forever separated. It is unbearable to separate mother and child.

古文：父盱，能弦歌，为巫祝。
现代文：儿子挽住我颈，追问母亲哪去。
English: My son grabbed me by the scruff of the neck and demanded to know where my mother was.

古文：汉安二年五月五日，于县江溯涛婆娑迎神，溺死，不得尸骸。
现代文：别人说母将走，何时再能相聚。母亲平日爱我，今日为何不慈？我们尚未成年，母亲何不三思？见此情景心伤，恍惚如狂如痴。
English: Others say that my mother will leave, when can we meet again. My mother loves me on weekdays, why is she not merciful today? We are not yet adults, why doesn't my mother think twice? Seeing this scene is heartbreaking, and I feel like I'm in a trance.

古文：娥年十四，乃沿江号哭，昼夜不绝声，旬有七日，遂投江而死。
现代文：边哭边用手摸，临行忽又迟疑。看我同行伙伴，前来与我告别。
English: While weeping, I touched it with my hand. As I walked, I suddenly hesitated. Look at my companion, come and say goodbye to me.

古文：至元嘉元年，县长度尚改葬娥于江南道傍，为立碑焉。
现代文：慕我独得生还，哭声令人胆裂。马儿站着不行，车轮忘记转辙。
English: I'm the only one left alive, the cries are gut-wrenching. The horses can't stand still, the wheels have forgotten how to turn.

古文：吴许升妻者，吕氏之女也，字荣。
现代文：观者不尽欷，路人也在呜咽。抛开骨肉情怀，狠心挥动马鞭。
English: The onlookers are stunned, and passers-by are also sobbing. Putting aside feelings of flesh and blood, they viciously swing the horse whip.

古文：升少为博徒，不理操行，荣尝躬勤家业，以奉养其姑。
现代文：悠悠道路三千，何日才能相见？想我亲生姣儿，心中好似油煎。到家亲人全无，又无亲戚在外。
English: Three thousand miles of road, how many days to see each other? I think of my own children, my heart is like fried oil. I have no relatives at home, and no relatives outside.

古文：数劝升修学，每有不善，辄流涕进规。
现代文：城郭变为山林，庭宇遍生荆艾。白骨不知是谁，无人去为掩盖。
English: The castle was turned into a mountain forest, and the garden was overgrown with wisteria. No one knew who the white bones were, and no one went to cover them up.

古文：荣父积忿疾升，乃呼荣欲改嫁之。
现代文：出门不听人声，豺狼狂呼乱吠。茕茕顾影自怜，伤心痛彻肝肺。
English: If you go out without listening to the human voice, the jackals will howl wildly. If you don't pay attention to the shadow, you will feel sorry for yourself.

古文：荣叹曰： 命之所遭，义无离贰！ 
现代文：登高遥望远方，魂魄忽飞天外。好像寿命已完，旁人替我宽慰。
English: Climbing high and far into the distance, my soul suddenly flew out of the sky. It was as if my life was over, and others were consoling me.

古文：终不肯归。
现代文：勉强缓过气来，虽生有何聊赖。
English: He always refused to go back.

古文：升感激自厉，乃寻师远学，遂以成名。
现代文：再嫁给我董郎，内心有所依傍。我是命苦贱人，担心再被抛弃。
English: If you marry me again, Dong Lang, I'll have someone to lean on. I'm a miser, and I'm afraid of being abandoned again.

古文：寻被本州辟命，行至寿春，道为盗所害。
现代文：人生曾几何时，终年不免忧虑。第二首：可怜福薄遭灾难，宗族灭绝门户单。
English: Once upon a time, life was fraught with worries all year round. The second song: Poor, blessed, poor, suffering from disaster, the gateway to the extinction of the clan.

古文：刺史尹耀捕盗得之。
现代文：身被俘虏去匈奴，历尽艰险到羌蛮。
English: He went to the Huns as a prisoner and went through all the hardships and dangers to become a barbarian.

古文：荣迎丧于路，闻而诣州，请甘心仇人。
现代文：路途遥远山谷多，向东回首心悲叹。晚上睡觉不安宁，饥当进食不能餐。
English: There are many distant valleys along the way, and I look back to the east with a sigh. I can't sleep peacefully at night, and I can't eat when I'm hungry.

古文：耀听之。
现代文：常常啼哭泪难干。
English: Often crying and struggling to shed tears.

古文：荣乃手断其头，以祭升灵。
现代文：缺乏志节想死难，即使活着无形颜。
English: If you lack ambition, it is difficult to die. Even if you are alive, you are invisible.

古文：后郡遭寇贼，贼欲犯之，荣逾垣走，贼拔刀追之。
现代文：到了远方天气寒，北风呼呼雪花飞。沙漠成堆天色暗，草木无处能生长。
English: In the distance, the weather is cold, the north wind is blowing snowflakes. The desert is piled up, the sky is dark, and there is nowhere for plants to grow.

古文：贼曰： 从我则生，不从我则死。 
现代文：人似禽鸟吃臭腥，说起话来听不明。天寒岁暮我远征，晚上紧紧关上门。
English: I stink like a bird, and I can't hear myself talk. I go on expeditions when it's cold, and I close the door tightly at night.

古文：荣曰： 义不以身受辱寇虏也！ 
现代文：不能入睡心常惊，登上胡殿到广庭。
English: Unable to fall asleep and often startled, he climbed up to the courtyard.

古文：遂杀之。
现代文：黑云压城遮星月，北风号呼响泠泠。
English: The man then killed Yasuko.

古文：是日疾风暴雨，雷电晦冥，贼惶惧叩头谢罪，乃殡葬之。
现代文：胡笳呜呜边马吵，孤雁声音更凄清。乐人有兴弹琴筝，和声听来悲且清。
English: The hoofbeats are hoarse while the horses are brawling, and the sound of the lonely geese is even more wretched. Musicians are fond of playing the kite, and the harmonies are sad and clear.

古文：汝南袁隗妻者，扶风马融之女也，字伦。
现代文：心中苦闷无处诉，想说又怕惊他人。含看眼泪往肚吞。
English: There is no place to complain about the anguish in my heart, I want to say and I am afraid of shocking others. I swallow my tears.

古文：隗已见前传。
现代文：家中来人接归宁，只得抛开小姣生。
English: When someone from the family came to live in Kukening, I had to give up my little twin.

古文：处所多霜雪，胡风春夏起。
现代文：儿哭母声母心摧，掩着耳朵不敢听。
English: A mother's heart breaks as her child cries, and she covers her ears, afraid to listen.

古文：翩翩吹我衣，肃肃入我耳。
现代文：孤身一人转回程，对镜已不似人形。
English: Turning back alone, he no longer looks like a puppet in the mirror.

古文：感时念父母，哀叹无穷已。
现代文：回想自己太绝情，心中忧愁死复生。无尽的哀叹。
English: Recall that you are too despondent, and the sadness in your heart is revived. Endless lamentation.

古文：有客从外来，闻之常欢喜。
现代文：听说有外地来的客人，心裹总是感到欢喜。
English: I always feel happy when I hear that there are guests from out of town.

古文：迎问其消息，辄复非乡里，邂逅徼时愿，骨肉来迎己。
现代文：迎着客人打听消息，可总不是家乡的人。不期自己的心愿意外得以实现，亲人前来迎接自己。
English: When greeting guests and asking for news, it's always someone who isn't from your hometown. Unexpectedly, your heart's desire comes to fruition, and relatives come to greet you.

古文：己得自解免，当复弃兒子。
现代文：自己得以脱离苦难，可又要抛下自己的儿子。
English: He was able to free himself from suffering, but he had to leave his son behind.

古文：天属缀人心，念别无会期。
现代文：天然的亲人心相系联，想到分别就再无会期。
English: Naturally, relatives and friends are connected, and there is no longer a session period when they think of each other.

古文：存亡永乖隔，不忍与之辞。
现代文：生死永远地相隔，心中不忍与儿子告别。
English: Separated forever in life and death, he could not bear to say goodbye to his son.

古文：兒前抱我颈，问母欲何之。 人言母当去，岂复有还时。
现代文：儿子上前抱住我的脖颈，询问母亲要到哪裹去？ 听人说母亲就要离去，难道还有回来的时候？
English: My son came forward and hugged my neck, asking where my mother was going? I heard that my mother was leaving, was there a time when she would return?

古文：阿母常仁恻，今何更不慈？
现代文：母亲平时非常仁慈，现在怎么不仁慈了？
English: Mother is usually very kind, why is she not kind now?

古文：我尚未成人，奈何不顾思！ 
现代文：我现在还没有长大成人，母亲为什么不好好考虑！ 
English: I'm not an adult yet, why doesn't my mother think about that!

古文：见此崩五内，恍惚生狂痴。
现代文：见此情景五内俱焚，精神恍惚陕要发疯。
English: Seeing this scene, all five of them were on fire, and they were in a trance and about to go crazy.

古文：号泣手抚摩，当发复回疑。
现代文：一边哭一边抚摸着儿子，将要上路又生迟疑。
English: Crying and stroking his son, he hesitates about going on the road.

古文：兼有同时辈，相送告离别。
现代文：加上同时来的人，前来告别相送。
English: In addition to those who came at the same time, they came to say goodbye to each other.

古文：慕我独得归，哀叫声摧裂。
现代文：他们羡慕我独自得归，悲哀的叫声令人心碎。
English: They long for me to be left alone, and their cries of anguish are heartbreaking.

古文：马为立踟蹰，车为不转辙。
现代文：马被感动得踟蹰不前，车轮也因此停止了转动。
English: The horse was so moved that it halted and the wheels stopped turning.

古文：观者皆嘘唏，行路亦鸣咽。去去割情恋，遄征日遐迈。
现代文：观看的人都悲泣抽噎，路上的行人也低声哭泣，越走越远割断恋情，行程疾速益走远。
English: The people watching are crying and convulsing, the pedestrians on the road are also crying in a low voice, the farther they go, the more they cut off their love affair, and the journey is rapidly getting further and further away.

古文：悠悠三千里，何时复交会？
现代文：悠悠三千里，何时再相会？
English: Three thousand miles away, when will we meet again?

古文：念我出腹子，匈臆为摧败。
现代文：想到亲生的儿子，胸中悲痛欲绝。
English: When I think of my own son, my heart is overwhelmed with grief.

古文：既至家人尽，又复无中外。
现代文：到家后方知家人死尽，又没有中表近亲。
English: After arriving home, Fang Zhi's family members died, and there was no middle cousin or close relative.

古文：城郭为山林，庭宇生荆艾。
现代文：城郭变成了山林，庭院裹长出荆棘和艾草。
English: The castle became a mountain forest, and thorns and weeds grew up around the courtyard.

古文：白骨不知谁，从横莫覆盖。
现代文：到处是不知谁人的白骨，横躺竖卧全都没有掩埋覆盖。
English: The white bones of an unknown number of people were everywhere, lying side by side and lying vertically, all of which were not covered.

古文：出门无人声，豺狼号且吠。
现代文：出门听不到人的声息，衹听到豺狼的嚎叫。
English: When I go out, I can't hear people's voices, but I can hear the howling of wolves.

古文：茕茕对孤景，怛咤糜肝肺。
现代文：对着孤影荧焭孑立，震惊悲痛心碎欲裂。
English: Standing in front of the lonely shadow, shocked, heartbroken and heartbroken.

古文：登高远眺望，魂神忽飞逝。
现代文：站在高处向远方眺望，魂灵飘忽离开躯体飞逝。
English: Standing high and looking into the distance, the soul wanders away from the body and flies away.

古文：奄若寿命尽，旁人相宽大。
现代文：似乎生命走到尽头，旁人劝慰自己放宽胸怀。
English: It seems that life has come to an end, and others are trying to persuade you to relax.

古文：为复强视息，虽生何聊赖！
现代文：为此再次勉强活命，虽然活着又有什么意思！
English: For this reason, I again barely survived, although what is the point of being alive!

古文：托命于新人，竭心自勖厉。
现代文：将自己托付给新嫁的丈夫，尽心竭力勉励自己。
English: Entrusting herself to her new husband, she tried her best to cheer herself up.

古文：流离成鄙贱，常恐复捐废。
现代文：经过流离已成卑贱之人，时常害怕再被新人抛弃。
English: After being displaced, people who have become lowly are often afraid of being abandoned by newcomers.

古文：人生几何时，怀忧终年岁！
现代文：人的一生有多少时间，竞心怀忧惧度完一生！
English: How much time is there in a person's life, to spend the whole life with anxiety!

古文：其二章曰：
现代文：第二首写道：
English: The second one reads:

古文：嗟薄祐兮遭世患，宗族殄兮门户单。
现代文：感叹命薄啊遭遇时难，宗族遭杀戮啊一个不剩。
English: Lamenting that one's life is short, that one's time is short, that one's clan has been slaughtered, that there is no one left.

古文：身执略兮入西关，历险阻兮之羌蛮。
现代文：身被掳掠啊向西入关，历尽艰险啊来到羌蛮。
English: After being captured and plundered, he entered the west and went through all the hardships and dangers to come to Yanbaru.

古文：山谷眇兮路曼曼，眷东顾兮但悲叹。
现代文：山谷遥远啊路漫漫，回首束望恋恋不舍啊惟有悲叹。
English: The valley is far away and the road is long. Looking back, I can only lament.

古文：冥当寝兮不能安，饥当食兮不能餐，常流涕兮眦不干，薄志节兮念死难，虽苟活兮无形颜。
现代文：曰暮应当就寝啊无法安睡，腹中饥饿应该吃饭啊不能就餐。总在流泪啊眼不曾干，志节不是啊想死畏难，虽然勉强存活啊已无人形。
English: Saying that you should go to bed at night, but you can't sleep well, that you should eat when you're hungry, but you can't eat. Always in tears, but your eyes aren't dry, that you don't have a strong will, but you're scared to death, and although you're barely alive, you're already a nobody.

古文：惟彼方兮远阳精，阴气凝兮雪夏零。
现代文：那地方啊远离太阳，寒气凝聚啊盛夏落雪。
English: That place, away from the sun, cold condensation, midsummer snowfall.

古文：沙漠壅兮尘冥冥，有草木兮春不荣。
现代文：沙漠覆盖啊尘土昏暗，虽有草木啊春不开花。
English: The desert is covered with dark dust, and although there are plants and trees, they do not bloom in spring.

古文：人似禽兮食臭腥，言兜离兮状窈停。
现代文：人同禽兽啊吃腥臭的食物，说话听不明白啊长得深目高鼻。
English: People are like animals, they eat foul-smelling food, they can't understand what they hear, and they have deep-set eyes and a high nose.

古文：岁聿幕兮时迈征，夜悠长兮禁门扃。
现代文：一年结束啊时光飞速远逝，黑夜漫长啊门户紧闭。
English: The year is over, the time flies by, the night is long, the door is closed.

古文：不能寐兮起屏菅，登胡殿兮临广庭。
现代文：没法入睡啊起惶恐，登上胡人的宫殿啊立于宽广的庭院。
English: I couldn't sleep, I panicked, I climbed up to the Hu palace, which stood in a wide courtyard.

古文：玄云合兮翳月星，北风厉兮肃泠泠。
现代文：黑云会合啊遮蔽了月亮星辰，北风凄厉啊肃杀清冷。
English: The black clouds meet and cover the moon and stars. The north wind is fierce and chills the air.

古文：胡笳动兮边马鸣，孤雁归兮声嘤嘤。
现代文：胡笳吹起啊边马嘶鸣，孤雁归去啊其声嘤嘤。
English: The whistles blow and the horses neigh, and the lone geese return to their flocks.

古文：乐人兴兮弹琴筝，音相和兮悲且清。
现代文：乐工兴起啊奏响了琴筝，音声相和啊悲哀而又凄凉。
English: Musicians rise and play the kite, and the harmony of sounds is sad and desolate.

古文：心吐思兮匈愤盈，欲舒气兮恐彼惊，含哀咽兮涕沾颈。
现代文：心中思潮奔涌啊胸中积愤，想抒发情绪啊害怕惊动乐工，心含悲哀啊泪湿脖颈。
English: My mind is racing, my chest is full of anger, I want to express my emotions, I'm afraid of alarming the musicians, my heart is sad, my neck is wet with tears.

古文：家既迎兮当归宁，临长路兮捐所生。
现代文：家中已来迎接啊就要回归故乡，遥望漫长的道路啊丢下亲生骨肉。
English: Home has come to meet ah will return to hometown, long road ahead ah leave behind their own flesh and blood.

古文：兒呼母兮号失声，我掩耳兮不忍听。
现代文：儿子呼喊母亲啊哭不出声，我掩住两耳啊不忍听见。
English: My son called out for my mother, but I couldn't cry out loud. I covered my ears, but I couldn't bear to hear.

古文：追持我兮走茕茕，顿复起兮毁颜形。
现代文：儿追赶我啊孤单单地追赶，摔倒后爬起来啊形容憔悴。
English: Chasing me, all alone, chasing me, falling down and getting back up, it's hard to describe.

古文：还顾之兮破人情，心怛绝兮死复生。
现代文：回头望见此景啊感情为之破碎，心中悲绝啊死去活来。
English: Looking back at this scene, my emotions are shattered, my heart is sad, and I am alive.

古文：赞曰：端操有踪，幽闲有容。
现代文：赞曰：操守端正有踪迹可寻，文静娴雅有风采可睹。
English: Praise says: There are traces of proper conduct to be found, and the tranquility, elegance and style can be seen.

古文：区明风烈，昭我管彤。
现代文：区分彰明其遣风余烈，光大我史笔所记。
English: The distinction clearly shows that the winds of change are still strong, as recorded by the great writers of history.

