古文：窦武何进窦武字游平，扶风平陵人，安丰戴侯融之玄孙也。
现代文：◆窦武传，窦武字游平，扶风郡平陵县人，安丰戴侯融的玄孙。
English: ◆ Douwu Chuan, Douwu Zi Youping, a native of Pingling County, Fufeng County, is the great-great-grandson of Anfeng Dai Hou Rong.

古文：父奉，定襄太守。
现代文：父亲窦奉，定襄太守。
English: His father Dou Feng was Ding Xiang's regent.

古文：武少以经行著称，常教授于大泽中，不交时事，名显关西。
现代文：窦武年轻时以经术德行而著名，曾经教授大泽中，不涉及时政，名声显著关西一带。
English: When he was young, Dou Wu was famous for his skill in calligraphy. He once taught at Osawa Junior High School. He was not involved in politics at the time, and his reputation was prominent in the Kansai region.

古文：延熹八年，长女选入掖庭，桓帝以为贵人，拜武郎中。
现代文：延熹八年，长女被选进宫中，桓帝命为贵人，任窦武为郎中。
English: In the eighth year of Yancheng, the eldest daughter was chosen to enter the palace, with Emperor Kan as a noble and Dou Wu as a junior vassal.

古文：其冬，贵人立为皇后，武迁越骑校尉，封槐里侯，五千户。
现代文：这年冬天，贵人立为皇后，窦武升任越骑校尉，封槐里侯，五千户。
English: In the winter of that year, Guijin was made empress, Douwu was promoted to the rank of cavalry captain, and he was given the title of prince of the five thousand households.

古文：明年冬，拜城门校尉。
现代文：第二年冬天，授城门校尉。
English: In the winter of the following year, he was promoted to captain of the castle gate.

古文：在位多辟名士，清身疾恶，礼赂不通，妻子衣食裁充足而已。
现代文：任职期间，征召名士，廉洁奉公，深恶坏人坏事，不接受送礼贿赂，妻子衣食仅仅够吃够穿而已。
English: During his tenure, he conscripted celebrities, served the public with integrity, abhorred bad people and bad deeds, did not accept gifts and bribes, and his wife only had enough food and clothing to eat and wear.

古文：是时，羌蛮寇难，岁俭民饥，武得两宫赏赐，悉散与太学诸生，及载肴粮于路，丐施贫民。
现代文：这时羌蛮作乱，粮食歉收，人民饥饿，窦武将所得两宫的赏赐，全部分给太学诸生，又用车载粮食饭菜，在道路施给贫民。
English: At this time, there was violent turmoil, poor grain harvest, people were starving, and Dou Wu would give all the rewards of the two palaces to the students, and use truck-mounted grain meals to give to the poor on the road.

古文：兄子绍，为虎贲中郎将，性疏简奢侈。
现代文：窦武哥哥的儿子窦绍，任虎贲中郎将，性情疏懒奢侈。
English: Dou Shuo, the son of Dou Wu's elder brother Dou Shuo, was appointed as the vice-commander of Tigress. He was lazy and extravagant.

古文：武每数切厉相戒，犹不觉悟，乃上书求退绍位，又自责不能训导，当先受罪。
现代文：窦武经常很严厉地训诫他，还不觉悟，于是上书请求把窦绍撤职，又自己责备不能训导好窦绍，应当首先受罪。
English: Dou Wu often severely admonished him, but he did not realize it, so he wrote a letter requesting that Dou Shao be removed from his post, and he blamed himself for not being able to discipline Dou Shao well, and should be the first to suffer.

古文：由是绍更遵节，大小莫敢违犯。
现代文：从此窦绍便遵守节制，不论大小，凡是非法的，都不敢违犯。
English: Since then, Dou Shao has adhered to the principle of moderation. No matter how big or small, he does not dare to violate anything that is illegal.

古文：时，国政多失，内官专宠，李膺、杜密等为党事考逮。
现代文：当时国家的政治失误很多，宦官专权，李膺、杜密等人因党事被逮捕审讯。
English: At that time, the country made a lot of political mistakes, eunuchs had absolute power, and Li Xi, Du Mi and others were arrested and interrogated for party affairs.

古文：永康元年，上疏谏曰：臣闻明主不讳讥刺之言，以探幽暗之实；忠臣不恤谏争之患，以暢万端之事。
现代文：永康元年，窦武上疏说： 我听说英明的皇帝，不怕人说讥刺的话，为的是了解一些黑暗的事实；忠臣不担心因谏诤皇上而招到祸害，为的是使国家万事顺畅。
English: In the first year of Yongkang, Douwujangso said: I have heard that a wise emperor is not afraid to say sarcastic words, in order to understand some dark facts; loyal subjects are not afraid of inviting disaster by defying the emperor, in order to make everything smooth for the country.

古文：是以君臣并熙，名奋百世。
现代文：所以君臣和洽，名扬百世。
English: That is why the relationship between monarchs and their subjects is famous throughout the ages.

古文：臣幸得遭盛明之世，逢文、武之化，岂敢怀禄逃罪，不竭其诚！
现代文：我有幸遇上盛明时代，逢文武的教化，难道敢于保禄位以逃罪，对皇上不竭诚尽智？
English: I had the good fortune to encounter the Shengming era, when the enlightenment of literature and martial arts was at its peak. Would I dare to use the title of Paul to escape punishment and not be sincere and wise to the emperor?

古文：陛下初从籓国，爰登圣祚，天下逸豫，谓当中兴。
现代文：皇上最初是在藩国，后来才登上帝位的，天下欢欣，认为是国家中兴。
English: The emperor was originally in the domain, and later ascended to the throne. The whole world rejoiced, believing that it was the rejuvenation of the country.

古文：自即位以来，未闻善政。
现代文：但是，即位以来，没有看见好的政治措施。
English: However, since his accession to the throne, there have been no good political measures.

古文：梁、孙、寇、邓虽或诛灭，而常侍黄门续为祸虐，欺罔陛下，竞行谲诈，自造制度，妄爵非人，朝政日衰，奸臣日强，伏寻西京放恣王氏，佞臣执政，终丧天下。
现代文：梁冀、孙寿、寇荣、邓万代，虽然诛灭，而常侍宦官继续为祸，欺侮陛下，争行诡诈，他们擅自创立制度，随便给坏人官爵，朝廷政治一天一天坏下去，奸臣一天一天强起来。窃思西汉放纵王氏，谄媚的臣子执政，终于丧失了天下。
English: Although Liang Jie, Sun Shou, Kou Rong, and Deng Bandai were annihilated, the regular eunuchs continued to wreak havoc, bully his majesty, and engage in treachery. They arbitrarily created a system and arbitrarily gave knighthoods to bad people. The imperial politics deteriorated day by day, and the treacherous vassals became stronger day by day. The Western Han Dynasty indulged the Wang clan, and the obsequious vassals ruled, and finally lost the world.

古文：今不虑前事之失，复循覆车之轨，臣恐二世之难，必将复及，赵高之变，不朝则夕。
现代文：现在不考虑前事失败的教训，再走覆车的轨道；我恐怕秦朝二世胡亥的祸难一定要再现，赵高的变乱，不是早上就是晚上要到来了。
English: Now, without considering the lessons of previous failures, we are once again on the wrong track; I am afraid that the calamity of Hu Hai, the second emperor of the Qin Dynasty, will definitely reappear, and the turmoil of Zhao Gao will come either in the morning or in the evening.

古文：近者奸臣牢脩，造设党议，遂收前司隶校尉李膺、太仆杜密、御史中丞陈翔、太尉掾范滂等逮考，连及数百人，旷年拘录，事无效验。
现代文：最近奸臣牢，制造党议，将前司隶校尉李膺、太仆杜密、御史中丞陈翔、太尉掾范滂等人逮捕审讯，牵连几百人，整年拘审，无事实根据。
English: Recently, a treacherous vassal jailed, fabricated a party meeting, arrested and interrogated the former officer Li Jun, the eunuch Du Mi, the official Chen Xiang, the eunuch Yan Fan, and others, implicated hundreds of people, and detained and interrogated them for a whole year, without any factual basis.

古文：臣惟膺等建忠抗节，志经王室，此诚陛下稷？伊、吕之佐，而虚为奸臣贼子之所诬枉，天下寒心，海内失望。
现代文：我想李膺等人立忠秉节，志在王室，这真是皇上稷、癇、伊、吕的辅佐，而反为奸臣贼子所诬陷，天下的人都为此感到寒心，全国人民为之失望。
English: I think that Li Yu and others set up the Loyalty and Integrity Festival and aspired to the royal family. This is really the emperor's support, but it is framed by traitors. People all over the world are chilled by this, and the whole country is disappointed.

古文：惟陛下留神澄省，时见理出，以厌人鬼喁喁之心。
现代文：请陛下留心省察，即时处理，以满足人鬼的期望。
English: I would like to ask His Majesty to think carefully and act promptly to meet the expectations of people and ghosts.

古文：臣闻古之明君，必须贤佐，以成政道。
现代文：我听说古时候的明主，一定要有贤明的辅佐，使政治清明。
English: I have heard that in ancient times, a clear master must have a wise assistant to make politics clear.

古文：今台阁近臣，尚书令陈蕃，仆射胡广，尚书朱、荀绲、刘祐、魏朗、刘矩、尹勋等，皆国之贞士，朝之良佐。
现代文：现在朝里亲近的臣子，尚书令陈蕃、仆射胡广、尚书朱寓、荀绲、刘、魏朗、刘矩、尹勋等，都是国家可靠的人才，朝廷的好助手。
English: The courtiers who are now close to the imperial court, such as Shang Shuling Chen Jun, Fu Sha Hu Guang, Shang Shuling Zhu Rong, Zou, Liu, Wei Lang, Liu Rui, and Yin Xun, are all reliable talents of the country and good assistants of the imperial court.

古文：尚书郎张陵、妫皓、苑康、杨乔、边韶、戴恢等，文质彬彬，明达国典。
现代文：尚书郎张陵、妫皓、苑康、杨乔、边韶、戴恢等，文质彬彬，熟悉国家的典章制度。
English: Shang Shulang, Zhang Ling, Zou, Yuan Kang, Yang Qiao, Benxi, Dai Huai, etc. are well-educated and familiar with the country's award system.

古文：内外之职，群才并列。
现代文：朝廷内外的事，各种人才都在，随陛下任用。
English: In and out of the Imperial Court, all kinds of talents are at work, appointed by His Majesty.

古文：而陛下委任近习，专树饕餮，外典州郡，内干心膂。
现代文：但是，陛下却委任接近一班小人，专门树立饕餮贪残的坏人，使他们在外任州郡大官，在朝廷内充当心腹。
English: However, his majesty appointed a group of villains close to him, who specialized in setting up greedy and cruel villains, and made them serve as provincial officials and confidants in the imperial court.

古文：宜以次贬黜，案罪纠罚，抑夺宦官欺国之封，案其无状诬罔之罪，信任忠良，平决臧否，使邪正毁誉，各得其所，宝爱天官，唯善是授。
现代文：应当依次把他们贬谪罢去，按罪行大小惩处，剥夺宦官欺国的封爵，治他们非法欺君的罪，任用忠良，分清好坏，使邪正毁誉，各符其实，爱惜官位，只授予善人。
English: They should be dethroned one by one, punished according to the degree of their crimes, deprived of the title of eunuchs who cheat the country, punished for the crime of illegally cheating the king, appointed loyal and good, distinguished good and bad, and discredited the evil, each according to the truth, cherished the official position, and only awarded to good people.

古文：如此，咎征可消，天应可待。
现代文：这样，灾异可以消除，上天的感应可以立至。
English: In this way, disasters and abnormalities can be eliminated, and the inspiration of heaven can be established.

古文：间者有嘉禾、芝草、黄龙之见。
现代文：近来有嘉禾、芝草、黄龙出现。
English: Recently, Jiahe, Zhigusa and Huanglong have appeared.

古文：夫瑞生必于嘉士，福至实由善人，在德为瑞，无德为灾。
现代文：那些祥瑞是应嘉士而生，福来是由好人，在德为瑞，无德为灾。
English: Those Xiang Rui are born in response to Jiashi, and good fortune comes from good people. In virtue, they are Rui, and without virtue, they are disaster.

古文：陛下所行，不合天意，不宜称庆。
现代文：陛下做的，不合天意，不应称庆。 
English: What your majesty has done is not in accordance with God's will and should not be celebrated.

古文：书奏，因以病上还城门校尉、槐里侯印绶。
现代文：疏送上去，以病上还城门校尉、槐里侯印绶。
English: He was sent to the hospital, but returned home sick as the captain of the castle gate and the lord of Baili.

古文：帝不许，有诏原李膺、杜密等，自黄门北寺、若卢、都内诸狱，系囚罪轻者皆出之。
现代文：帝不许，有诏原宥李膺、杜密等，自黄门北寺、若虚、都内诸狱，罪轻的犯人都释放出来了。
English: The emperor did not allow it, and there were prisoners such as Li Yan, Du Mi, and others who were released from Huangmen North Temple, Ruohe, and prisons in the capital. All the criminals with minor crimes were released.

古文：其冬，帝崩，无嗣。
现代文：这年冬天，桓帝逝世，没有儿子。
English: That winter, Emperor Kantei died without a son.

古文：武召侍御史河间刘，参问其国中王子侯之贤者，称解渎亭侯宏。
现代文：窦武召侍御史河间刘鲦，问他国中王子侯中的好的，刘鲦说解渎亭侯刘宏好。
English: Dou Wu summoned the governor of the history of the river, Liu Wei, and asked him what was good in the prince of the country, Liu Wei said that the prince of the country, Liu Honglu, was good.

古文：武入白太后，遂征立之，是为灵帝。
现代文：窦武入宫中报告太后，于是征召刘宏立为皇帝，是为灵帝。
English: Dou Wu entered the palace to report to the empress dowager, and then summoned Liu Hongli to be the emperor, for Lingdi.

古文：拜武为大将军，常居禁中。
现代文：任窦武为大将军，常居宫中。
English: Dou Wu was appointed as the grand general and often stayed in the palace.

古文：帝既立，论定策功，更封武为闻喜侯；子机渭阳侯拜侍中；兄子绍鄠侯，迁步兵校尉；绍弟靖西乡侯，为侍中，监羽林左骑。
现代文：灵帝即位后，论定功劳，更封窦武为闻喜侯；子窦机，渭阳侯，任侍中；兄子窦绍为雩侯，升步兵校尉；窦绍的弟弟窦靖为西乡侯，为侍中，监羽林左骑。
English: After the enthronement of Emperor Lingdi, Douwu was awarded the title of "Wen Ji Hou" for his meritorious service; his son Douji was named "Wang Yang Hou" and became an aide-de-camp; his brother Dou Shao was named "Wang Hou" and was promoted to infantry captain; and Dou Shao's brother Dou Jing was named "Xi Xiang Hou" and became an aide-de-camp, and he rode on the left side of Gu Yu Lin.

古文：武既辅朝政，常有诛剪宦官之意，太傅陈蕃亦素有谋。
现代文：窦武辅朝以后，经常有诛杀宦官的想法，太尉陈蕃也久有此谋。
English: After Dou Wu Fu's reign, there was often the idea of assassinating eunuchs, and the eunuch Chen Xi also had this plan for a long time.

古文：时共会朝堂，蕃私谓武曰： 中常侍曹节、王甫等，自先帝时操弄国权，浊乱海内，百姓匈匈，归咎于此。
现代文：他们在朝堂会议时，陈蕃悄悄地对窦武说： 中常侍曹节、王甫等，在先帝时就操弄国家权柄，把天下搞得乌烟瘴气，百姓纷扰，罪祸就是他们。
English: During their meeting in the imperial hall, Chen Zhen quietly said to Dou Wu: Zhong Chang's attendants Cao Jie, Wang Fu, etc. manipulated the power of the state during the time of the former emperor, causing the world to be darkened, the people to be disturbed, and the crime is them.

古文：今不诛节等，后必难图。 
现代文：现在不诛杀曹节等人，以后就难办。 
English: If we don't kill Cao Cao and others now, it will be difficult to do in the future.

古文：武深然之。蕃大喜，以手推席而起。
现代文：窦武非常同意，陈蕃大喜，用手推开座席而起。
English: Dou Wu agreed wholeheartedly. Chen Yao was overjoyed and pushed away the seat with his hand.

古文：武于是引同志尹勋为尚书令，刘瑜为侍中，冯述为屯骑校尉；又征天下名士废黜者前司隶李膺、宗正刘猛、太仆杜密、庐江太守朱等，列于朝廷，请前越巂太守荀翌为从事中郎，辟颍川陈寔为属：共定计策。
现代文：窦武于是招引同志尹勋为尚书令，刘瑜为侍中，冯述为屯骑校尉；又征召被废黜的天下名士前司隶校尉李膺、宗正刘猛、太仆杜密、庐江太守朱寓等，齐集朝廷，请前越太守荀翌为从事中郎，征召颍川陈萛为属，共同商定计策。
English: Dou Wu then invited his comrade Yin Xun to be Shang Shuling, Liu Yu to be a chamberlain, and Feng Shu to be a cavalry lieutenant; he also summoned the deposed world famous personages such as the former Sifu lieutenant Li Qian, Zong Zheng Liu Meng, the eunuch Du Mi, and the Shijiang governor Zhu Yue, etc. to gather in the imperial court, invited the former Yue Taizhong to be engaged as a middle-ranking official, and conscripted Shichuan Chen Qi as a subordinate, and jointly agreed on a strategy.

古文：于是天下雄俊，知其风旨，莫不延颈企踵，思奋其智力。
现代文：于是天下雄才俊杰，知道了形势所趋，没有不抬着脑袋，踮起脚跟，想贡献自己的才智的。
English: As a result, the world's great talents, knowing the trend of the situation, have not lifted their heads and stomped their heels, wanting to contribute their talents.

古文：会五月日食，蕃复说武曰： 昔萧望之困一石显，近者李、杜诸公祸及妻子，况今石显数十辈乎！
现代文：正逢五月日食，陈蕃再说窦武： 从前萧望之被一石显所害，近来李膺、杜密诸公祸害及于妻室儿女，何况今天石显有数十人呢！
English: At the time of the May solar eclipse, Chen Zhe said to Dou Wu: In the past, Xiao Wangzhi was harmed by a stone phenomenon. Recently, Li Zhe and Du Mei have harmed their wives and children. What's more, there are dozens of stone phenomena today!

古文：蕃以八十之年，欲为将军除害。今可且因日食，斥罢宦官，以塞天变。
现代文：我已八十高龄的老人，想助将军除害，现在可以借日食为由，斥退罢黜宦官，以抵天变。
English: As an eighty-year-old man, I want to help the general eliminate the harm, and now I can use the solar eclipse as a reason to repel the eunuch and change the world.

古文：又赵夫人及女尚书，旦夕乱太后，急宜退绝。
现代文：又赵夫人和女尚书，从早到晚乱太后，应当赶快除掉她们。
English: In addition, Lady Zhao and Lady Shangshu, from morning to night, are the chaotic empresses, and they should be quickly eliminated.

古文：惟将军虑焉。 
现代文：希望将军好好考虑啊！ 
English: I hope the general will think about it!

古文：武乃白太后曰： 故事，黄门、常侍但当给事省内，典门户，主近署财物耳。
现代文：窦武于是告诉太后说： 老规矩，黄门、常侍，但当供事宫中，守门户，掌管宫中钱物而已。
English: Dou Wu then told the empress dowager, "The old rules, the yellow gate, the regular attendants, but when serving the palace, guarding the gate, controlling the money and goods in the palace.

古文：今乃使与政事而任权重，子弟布列，专为贪暴。
现代文：现在竟使他们参与政事，任要职，到处有他们的子弟，专干贪污横暴的事。
English: Now they have made them participate in politics, hold important positions, and their children are everywhere, specializing in corruption and violence.

古文：天下匈匈，正以此故。
现代文：天下纷扰，就是这个缘故。
English: This is why the world is in turmoil.

古文：宜悉诛废，以清朝廷。 
现代文：应当全部诛杀，扫清朝廷。 
English: They should all be killed, and the imperial court should be swept away.

古文：太后曰： 汉来故事世有，但当诛其有罪，岂可尽废邪？ 
现代文：太后说： 汉以来的老规矩，世代相传，只应当诛杀有罪恶的，难道可以全部废掉吗？ 
English: The empress dowager said, "The old rule since the Han Dynasty, passed down from generation to generation, that only the guilty should be killed, can it all be abolished?

古文：时，中常侍管霸颇有才略，专制省内。
现代文：当时中常侍管霸有才略，专制宫中事。
English: At that time, the vice-regal attendant was a tyrant, and things in the palace were despotic.

古文：武先白诛霸及中常侍苏康等，竟死。武复数白诛曹节等，太后豫未忍，故事久不发。
现代文：窦武先请诛杀管霸及中常侍苏康等，处死之后，窦武再次请诛杀曹节等，太后犹豫不忍，因此事情久拖未决。
English: Dou Wu first requested the execution of Guanbao and Su Kang, the middle attendant. After the execution, Dou Wu again requested the execution of Cao Jie. The empress dowager hesitated, so the matter has been pending for a long time.

古文：至八月，太白出西方。
现代文：至八月，太白星出现在西方。
English: By August, Taibai Star appeared in the west.

古文：刘瑜素善天官，恶之，上书皇太后曰： 太白犯房左骖，上将星入太微，其占宫门当闭，将相不利，奸人在主傍。
现代文：刘瑜平常懂得天文，认为不祥，上书皇太后说 ：太白星犯房星左骖，上将星入太微星，占卜的结果：应当关闭宫门，对将相不利，奸人在人主的旁边。
English: Liu Yu usually understood astronomy and thought it was ominous. She sent a letter to the empress dowager saying, "The star of the house is too white, the star of the house is too small, and the star of the general is too small. The result of the divination: the palace gate should be closed, it is unfavorable for the general, and the traitor is next to the master."

古文：愿急防之。 
现代文：请赶快防避。 
English: Please take evasive action immediately.

古文：又与武、蕃书，以星辰错缪，不利大臣，宜速断大计。
现代文：又与窦武、陈蕃书，认为星辰错位，不利大臣，应该赶快决定大计。
English: He also agreed with Dou Wu and Chen Yinshu that the stars were misaligned and the minister was unfavorable, and that the general plan should be decided quickly.

古文：武、蕃得书将发，于是以朱为司隶校尉，刘祐为河南尹，虞祁为洛阳令。
现代文：窦武、陈蕃接到刘瑜的信，准备发动诛杀宦官，于是以朱寓为司隶校尉，刘为河南尹，虞祁为洛阳令。
English: Dou Wu and Chen Qi received Liu Yu's letter and prepared to launch an attack to kill the eunuch, so they took Zhu Yue as the captain of Sili, Liu as Henan Yin, and Yu Qi as Luoyang.

古文：武乃奏免黄门令魏彪，以所亲小黄门山冰代之。
现代文：窦武奏请免去魏彪的黄门令，用他所亲信的小黄门山冰代替。
English: Dou Wuso, please remove Wei Biao's Yellow Gate Order and replace it with his trusted Little Yellow Gate Mountain Ice.

古文：使冰奏素狡猾尤无状者长乐尚书郑，送北寺狱。
现代文：使山冰奏请把一贯狡猾特别无行的长乐尚书郑飒，送北寺狱。
English: To make mountain ice play, please send Changle Shangshu Zheng, who has always been cunning and particularly ineffectual, to the North Temple.

古文：蕃谓武曰： 此曹子便当收杀，何复考为！ 
现代文：陈蕃对窦武说： 这些家伙就应当立即收杀，还要审讯干啥！ 
English: Chen Yao said to Dou Wu: These guys should be killed immediately, why do they need to be interrogated!

古文：武不从，令冰与尹勋、侍御史祝瑨杂考，辞连及曹节、王甫。
现代文：窦武不听他的意见，命令山冰与尹勋、侍御史祝王晋杂乱地审问郑飒，飒的供词牵及曹节、王甫。
English: Dou Wu did not listen to his advice and ordered Shan Bing, Yin Xun and the attendant historian Zhu Wangjin to interrogate Zheng Qi in a chaotic manner. Zhou's confession implicated Cao Jie and Wang Fu.

古文：勋、冰即奏收节等，使刘瑜内奏。
现代文：尹勋、山冰就奏请收捕曹节等人，使刘瑜报告皇太后。
English: Yin Xun and Shan Bing requested that Cao Jie and others be arrested so that Liu Yu could report to the empress dowager.

古文：时，武出宿归府，典中书者先以告长乐五官史朱瑀。
现代文：这时窦武出宿归府，管理中书的先把他告到长乐五官史朱王禹。
English: At this time, Dou Wu returned to the capital from his lodging, and the management of the book first reported him to Zhu Wangyu, the chief of the five departments of Changle.

古文：瑀盗发武奏，骂曰： 中官放纵者，自可诛耳。
现代文：朱王禹偷了窦武的奏书看了，骂道： 宦官放纵非法的当然可以杀嘛。
English: Zhu Wangyu stole Dou Wu's record book and read it, and scolded: Of course, eunuchs can be killed for illegal indulgence.

古文：我曹何罪，而当尽见族灭！ 
现代文：我们这些人有什么罪呢，何以应该一起族灭？ 
English: What are we guilty of, why should we be exterminated together?

古文：因大呼曰： 陈蕃、窦武奏白太后废帝，为大逆！ 
现代文：因此大呼喊道： 陈蕃、窦武奏请太后废帝，这是大逆不道！ 
English: Therefore, they shouted loudly: Chen Zhen, Dou Wusong, please ask the Empress Dowager to depose the emperor, this is an act of high treason!

古文：乃夜召素所亲壮健者长乐从官史共普、张亮等十七人，血共盟诛武等。
现代文：于是晚上召集他的亲信强壮有力的长乐从官史共普、张亮等十七人，口含牲畜血共同立盟发誓要诛灭窦武等人。
English: So, in the evening, he gathered seventeen of his close confidants, such as the strong and powerful Changle, the official Shi Zongpu, and Zhang Liang, and swore to destroy Dou Wu and others.

古文：曹节闻之，惊起，白帝曰： 外间切切，请出御德阳前殿。 
现代文：曹节听了，惊惶地告帝说： 外间非常紧张，请出御德阳前殿。 
English: Cao Zi listened and, alarmed, told the emperor: "It's very tense outside, please leave the front hall of the Imperial Palace."

古文：令帝拔剑踊跃，使乳母赵娆等拥卫左右，取信，闭诸禁门。
现代文：使皇上拔剑踊跃，让乳母赵娆等拥护保卫左右，收取入门的证件，把各禁门统统关闭。
English: The emperor was so excited that he drew his sword, let the nanny Zhao Jun and others support and protect the left and right, collect the entrance certificates, and close all the forbidden doors.

古文：召尚书官属，胁以白刃，使作诏板。
现代文：召集尚书官佐，用刀胁迫，使他们作诏板。
English: Summoned Shangshu's aides, threatened them with a sword, and forced them to make an oracle board.

古文：拜王甫为黄门令，持节至北寺狱，收尹勋、山冰。
现代文：任王甫为黄门令，持皇帝的命令至北寺狱逮捕尹勋、山冰。
English: Ren Wangfu was the Yellow Door, and he went to the North Temple Prison with the emperor's order to arrest Yin Xun and Shan Bing.

古文：冰疑，不受诏，甫格杀之。
现代文：山冰怀疑，不接受诏令，王甫就把他杀了。
English: Suspecting that Shanbing did not accept the edict, Wang Fu killed him.

古文：遂害勋，出送。
现代文：于是杀尹勋，把郑飒放了出来。
English: So they killed Yin Xun and released Zheng Yao.

古文：还共劫太后，夺玺书。
现代文：返回来共同劫持太后，夺了玺书。
English: Returning, they jointly kidnapped the empress dowager and seized the imperial edict.

古文：令中谒者守南宫，闭门，绝复道。
现代文：命令中竭者守南宫，闭门，断绝复道。
English: Those who disobeyed the order were ordered to guard the South Palace, lock the doors, and refuse to return.

古文：使郑等持节，及侍御使、谒者捕收武等。
现代文：使郑飒等持皇帝命令，和侍御史、谒者收捕窦武等人。
English: He ordered Zheng Xuan and others to carry out the emperor's orders, and the attendants of the imperial historian and the eunuch arrested Dou Wu and others.

古文：武不受诏，驰入步兵营，与绍共射杀使者。
现代文：窦武不接受诏令，跑进步兵营，与窦绍共射杀使者。
English: Dou Wu did not accept the edict, ran to the Progressive Barracks, and together with Dou Shao shot and killed the messenger.

古文：召会北军五校士数千人屯都亭下，令军士曰： 黄门常待反，尽力者封侯重赏。 
现代文：召集北军五校士数千人驻都亭下，命令军士说： 黄门宦官反叛，尽力诛杀的封侯重赏。 
English: He called up thousands of five-year-old cadets of the Northern Army stationed under the Capital Pavilion, and ordered the cadets to say: The Yellow Gate eunuchs rebelled, and those who tried their best to fight and kill them were rewarded with the title of lord.

古文：诏以少府周靖行车骑将军，加节，与护匈奴中郎将张奂率五营士讨武。
现代文：诏令少府周靖行车骑将军，加节，与护匈奴中郎将张奂率五营士讨伐窦武。
English: He ordered the minor prefect Zhou Jing, the cavalry general, Ga Jie, and the guard Xiong Nong Zhong Lang to lead five battalions to fight Dou Wu.

古文：夜漏尽，王甫将虎贲、羽林、厩驺、都候、剑戟士，合千余人，出屯朱雀掖门，与奂等合。
现代文：深夜，王甫率领虎贲、羽林、厩马刍、都侯、剑卓戈士，共一千多人，出屯朱雀掖门，与张奂等的部队会合。
English: In the middle of the night, Wang Fu led more than a thousand people, including tigers, eagles, stallions, dukes, and knights, to leave the camp and meet with Zhang Xuan's troops.

古文：明旦悉军阙下，与武对阵。
现代文：第二天清晨，全军驻宫门下，与窦武的部队对阵。
English: The next morning, the entire army was stationed under the palace gate, facing Dou Wu's troops.

古文：甫兵渐盛，使其士大呼武军曰： 窦武反，汝皆禁兵，当宿卫宫省，何故随反者乎？
现代文：王甫的兵慢慢增多了，命令战士大呼窦武军道： 窦武反，你们都是禁兵，应当保卫宫省，为什么跟着反叛的人呢？
English: The number of Wang Fu's soldiers slowly increased, and he ordered the soldiers to shout, Douwu, military style: Douwu, rebel, you are forbidden soldiers, you should defend the palace and the province, why are you following the rebels?

古文：先降有赏！ 
现代文：先投降的有赏！ 
English: There is a reward for surrendering first!

古文：营府素畏服中官，于是武军稍稍归甫。
现代文：营府平日畏服宦官，于是窦武的军队稍稍归王甫。
English: Yingfu was normally afraid of eunuchs, so Dou Wu's army turned slightly to Wang Fu.

古文：自旦至食时，兵降略尽。
现代文：自早晨到食中午饭时，窦武的部队投降得差不多完了。
English: From morning until lunch time, Dou Wu's troops had almost completely surrendered.

古文：武、绍走，诸军追围之，皆自杀，枭首洛阳都亭。
现代文：窦武、窦绍逃跑，被王甫的军队追捕包围，都自杀，示首洛阳都亭。
English: Dou Wu and Dou Shao fled and were chased and surrounded by Wang Fu's army. They both committed suicide and headed for Luoyang Du Ting.

古文：收捕宗亲、宾客、姻属，悉诛之，及刘瑜、冯述，皆夷其族。
现代文：收捕他们的宗亲、宾客、姻属，全部诛杀，刘瑜、冯述，都夷灭宗族。
English: They arrested their relatives, guests, and in-laws, and killed them all. Liu Yu and Feng Shu exterminated their families.

古文：徒徙家属日南，迁太后于云台。
现代文：把窦武的家属徙到日南，迁太后于云台。
English: He moved Dou Wu's family to Nichinan, and moved the empress dowager to Yuntai.

古文：当是时，凶竖得志，士大夫皆丧其气矣。
现代文：这时，凶恶的宦官得志，正直的人都丧气不敢吭声。
English: At this time, the evil eunuchs were emboldened, and the honest people were discouraged and dared not speak out.

古文：武府掾桂阳胡腾，少师事武，独殡敛行丧，坐以禁锢。
现代文：窦武的府掾桂阳胡腾，年轻时从窦武学习，一个人为窦武收尸埋葬，因此被禁锢，不得为官。
English: Douwu's prefect, Guiyang Huteng, learned from Douwu when he was young. He was one of the people who collected and buried Douwu's body. As a result, he was imprisoned and was not allowed to become an official.

古文：武孙辅，时年二岁，逃窜得全。
现代文：窦武的孙子窦辅，当时仅两岁，因为逃避，没有受害。
English: Dou Wu's grandson Dou Fu, who was only two years old at the time, escaped and was not harmed.

古文：事觉，节等捕之急。
现代文：后来被发觉了，曹节等人收捕紧急。
English: It was later discovered, and Cao Jie and others were urgently arrested.

古文：胡腾及令史南阳张敞共逃辅于零陵界，诈云已死，腾以为己子，而使聘娶焉。
现代文：胡腾和令史南阳张敞一起帮助窦辅逃到零陵境里，假称已经死了。胡腾认为自己的儿子，并且为他娶了妻子。
English: Hu Teng and his subordinate, Shi Nanyang Zhang Zhang, together helped Dou Fu to escape to the land of zero tombs, pretending to be dead. Hu Teng thought he was his son and married a wife for him.

古文：后举桂阳孝廉。
现代文：后来被举为桂阳孝廉。
English: Later, he was promoted to Guiyang filial piety.

古文：至建安中，荆州牧刘表闻而辟焉，以为从事，使还窦姓，以事列上。会表卒，曹操定荆州，辅与宗人徙居于鄴，辟丞相府。从征马超，为流矢所中死。
现代文：建安中，荆州牧刘表听说了，征召为从事，使他复为窦姓，以他的事实上报朝廷，遇刘表逝世，曹操平定荆州，窦辅与他的族人徙居于邺，征召入丞相府，从征马超，被流矢所中而死。
English: In Jianan Middle School, Jingzhou herdsman Liu Bo heard about it. He was conscripted to work, so he changed his surname to Dou, and reported his fact to the imperial court. When Liu Bo died, Cao Cao pacified Jingzhou, and Dou Fu and his people migrated to Min. He was conscripted to the Prime Minister's Office, and was transferred to the Horse Chao. He was killed by a stray arrow.

古文：初，武母产武而并产一蛇，送之林中。
现代文：起先，窦武的母亲生窦武的同时生下一条蛇，把蛇送入山林中。
English: At first, Douwu's mother gave birth to a snake at the same time that Douwu was born, and sent the snake into the forest.

古文：后母卒，及葬未窆，有大蛇自榛草而出，径至丧所，以头击柩，涕血皆流，俯仰蛣屈，若哀泣之容，有顷而去。
现代文：后来窦武的母亲死了，埋葬时还未下棺，有条大蛇自林中出来，直到丧地，用头击柩，涕血双流，俯仰盘屈，似哀泣的样子，好一会儿才离去。
English: Later, Douwu's mother died, and when she was buried, before the coffin was lowered, a big snake came out of the forest until she was dead. It struck the ground with its head, bled profusely, and bent over, looking like it was crying, before it left for a while.

古文：时人知为窦氏之祥。
现代文：当时人知道是窦氏的祥瑞。
English: At that time, it was known that he was Xiang Rui of the Dou clan.

古文：腾字子升，初，桓帝巡狩南阳，以腾为护驾从事。
现代文：胡腾字子升。起先，桓帝出巡南阳，用胡腾为护驾从事。
English: In the beginning, Emperor Huan went on a tour of Nanyang, using the huteng as a chariot.

古文：公卿贵戚车骑万计，征求费役，不可胜极。
现代文：公卿贵戚随从人员以万计，征求钱财劳役，没有止境。
English: Court nobles, their relatives, and their attendants will do anything to solicit money, wealth, and labor.

古文：腾上言： 天子无外，乘舆所幸，即为京师。
现代文：胡腾上书说 ：天子没有内外，乘舆所到的地方，就是京师。
English: Hu Teng wrote: "There is no inside or outside of the Son of Heaven, and the place to which I have come is the capital."

古文：臣请以荆州刺史比司隶校尉，臣自同都官从事。 
现代文：我请以荆州刺史比司隶校尉，我自己则是同都官从事。 
English: I asked Lieutenant Jingzhou Zhishibisili to do it, and I myself engaged in it with the city officials.

古文：帝从之。
现代文：皇帝依了他的。
English: The emperor obeyed.

古文：自是肃然，莫敢妄有干欲，腾以此显名。
现代文：自是以后，随从不敢擅自有所求了，胡腾以此著了名。
English: Since then, he has never dared to ask for anything without permission, and Huteng has become famous for this.

古文：党锢解，官至尚书。
现代文：党禁解除以后，官至尚书。
English: After the lifting of the party ban, officials were reluctant to write.

古文：张敞者，太尉温之弟也。何进字遂高，南阳宛人也。
现代文：◆何进传、何进字遂高，南阳宛县人。
English: ◆Nanyang Wuan County residents have a high rate of success in reading and writing.

古文：异母女弟选入掖庭为贵人，有宠于灵帝，拜进郎中，再迁虎贲中郎将，出为颍川太守。
现代文：异母弟女选入宫中为贵人，灵帝喜欢她，任命何进为郎中，再升虎贲中郎将，出作颍川太守。
English: Her half-brother and half-sister were selected as nobles to enter the imperial court. Emperor Ling liked her and appointed He Jin as a vassal, and then he was promoted to vice-vassal of Tigress and became the governor of Shichuan.

古文：光和三年，贵人立为皇后，征进入，拜侍中、将作大匠、河南尹。
现代文：光和三年贵人立为皇后，征召何进入京，任侍中、将作大匠、河南尹。
English: In the third year of the Guanghe era, a noblewoman was appointed empress, and Ho was summoned to enter Beijing, where he served as an attendant, a master craftsman, and a Henan Yin.

古文：中平元年，黄巾贼张角等起，以进为大将军，率左右羽林五营士屯都亭，修理器械，以镇京师。
现代文：中平元年，黄巾贼张角等起，以何进为大将军，率领左右羽林五营驻都亭，修理器械，保卫京师。
English: In the first year of the Middle Ages, the Yellow Turban Thief Zhang Qiao and others began to march, with He Jin as the general, leading the five battalions of left and right Ulin stationed in the capital pavilion, repairing equipment, and defending the capital division.

古文：张角别党马元义谋起洛阳，进发其奸，以功封慎侯。
现代文：张角别党马元义阴谋起兵洛阳，何进发现了他的奸计，因功封慎侯。
English: Zhang Jiao and other party members conspired with Ma Yuanyi to raise an army in Luoyang. He Jin discovered his treachery and was punished for his actions.

古文：四年，荥阳贼数千人群起，攻烧郡县，杀中牟县令，诏使进弟河南尹苗出击之。苗攻破群贼，平定而还。
现代文：四年，荥阳贼几千人暴动，攻打焚烧郡县，杀中牟县长，诏命何进的弟弟河南尹何苗抗击，何苗击败群贼，平息暴乱还京师。
English: In four years, thousands of Shenyang thieves rioted, attacked and burned counties and counties, killed the head of Zhongmou County, and ordered He Jin's brother, Henan Yin He Miao, to fight back. He Miao defeated the group of thieves, quelled the riot and returned to Beijing.

古文：诏遣使者迎于成皋，拜苗为车骑将军，封济阳侯。
现代文：诏派使者至成皋欢迎，授命何苗为车骑将军，封济阳侯。
English: Emperor Zhao sent an envoy to Chengdu to welcome, and ordered He Miao to be the general of chariots and cavalry, and the fief of Jiyang.

古文：五年，天下滋乱，望气者以为京师当有大兵，两宫流血，大将军司马许凉、假司马伍宕说进曰： 《太公六韬》有天子将兵事，可以威厌四方 。
现代文：五年，天下更加乱了，望气的人认为京师会有大兵，两宫流血。大将军许凉、假司马伍宕说何进： 《太公六韬》有天子将兵事，可以威镇四方。 
English: In the fifth year, the world was even more chaotic, and hopeful people thought that the Beijing division would have a great army and the two palaces would bleed. The great general Xu Liang and the fake Sima Wu Tang said what to do: "Tai Gong Liuxuan" has a heavenly son to lead the army, and can dominate the four directions.

古文：进以为然，入言之于帝。
现代文：何进认为对，入朝廷对皇帝说了。
English: He Jin thought it was right and went to the imperial court to tell the emperor.

古文：于是乃诏进大发四方兵，讲武于平乐观下。
现代文：于是就诏令何进大发四方兵，讲武平乐观下。
English: As a result, he issued an edict ordering Ho Jin Daifa to dispatch soldiers to the four directions, and spoke optimistically about martial law.

古文：起大坛，上建十二重五采华盖，高十丈，坛东北为小坛，复建九重华盖，高九丈，列步兵、骑士数万人，结营为阵，天子亲出临军，驻大华盖下，进驻小华盖。
现代文：盖了一大坛，上面建十二层五彩华盖，十丈高，坛的东北建小坛，再建九层华盖，九丈高，横列步兵，骑士几万人，结营为阵。天子亲自出来检阅，驻大华盖下，何进驻小华盖下。
English: A large altar was built, on top of which a twelve-story multicolored flower cover was built, ten meters high, a small altar was built northeast of the altar, a nine-story flower cover was rebuilt, nine meters high, tens of thousands of infantrymen and knights lined up and camped. The heavenly son himself came out to inspect, stationed under the large flower cover, and stationed under the small flower cover.

古文：礼毕，帝躬擐甲介马，称 无上将军 ，行陈三匝而还。
现代文：礼毕，灵帝身披甲介马，称 无上将军 ，绕阵三圈而还。
English: After bowing, Ling Di dressed in armor, called Supreme General, circled around three times and returned.

古文：诏使进悉领兵屯于观下。
现代文：诏令何进率领全军驻观下。
English: The emperor ordered He Jin to lead the whole army to stay and watch.

古文：是时，置西园八校尉，以小黄门蹇硕为上军校尉，虎贲中郎将袁绍为中军校尉，屯骑都尉鲍鸿为下军校尉，议郎曹操为典军校尉，赵融为助军校尉，淳于琼为佐军校尉，又有左右校尉。
现代文：这时设置西园八校尉，以小黄门蹇硕为上军校尉，虎贲中郎将袁绍为中军校尉，屯骑都尉鲍鸿为下军校尉，议郎曹操为典军校尉，赵融为助军校尉，淳于琼为佐军校尉，又有左右校尉。
English: At this time, the eight lieutenants of the West Park were set up, with Xiao Huangmen Shushuo as the captain of the upper army, the vice-chamberlain of the Tigress Yuan Shao as the captain of the middle army, the captain of the cavalry Baohong as the captain of the lower army, the councillor Cao Cao as the captain of the first army, Zhao Rong as the assistant captain, Jun Yujiong as the captain of the second army, and the left and right lieutenants.

古文：帝以蹇硕壮健而有武略，特亲任之，以为元帅，督司隶校尉以下，虽大将军亦领属焉。
现代文：灵帝认为蹇硕壮健而有武略，特别亲信他任用他，以为元帅，督率司隶校尉以下，虽大将军也归他领导。
English: Ling Di thought that he was strong and vigorous and had a military strategy, especially his close confidants appointed him, thought that he was a marshal, the commander-in-chief was under the rank of lieutenant colonel, although the general was also under his leadership.

古文：硕虽擅兵于中，而犹畏忌于进，乃与诸常侍共说帝遣进西击边章、韩遂。
现代文：蹇硕虽然在朝廷专掌兵权，但还有些害怕忌妒何进，于是与各常侍共说灵帝，要他派何进西击边章、韩遂。
English: Although Zeng Shuo was in charge of the military power in the imperial court, he was still a little afraid of jealousy, so he and all the attendants talked to Lingdi and asked him to send He Jin Xi to attack Bianzhang and Han Sui.

古文：帝从之，赐兵车百乘，虎贲斧钺。
现代文：灵帝听了他们的，赏赐何进兵车百辆，虎贲斧钺。
English: Lingdi listened to them, and rewarded He with a hundred chariots and chariots.

古文：进阴知其谋，乃上遣袁绍东击徐、兗二州兵，须绍还，即戎事，以稽行期。
现代文：何进暗中知道这是阴谋。于是上奏请派袁诏东击徐、兖二州兵，要等袁绍返回来，就出兵，借此拖延时间。
English: He Jin secretly knew that this was a conspiracy. Therefore, he requested the emperor to send Yuan Zhaodong to attack Xu and Shun and the soldiers of the two states, and to wait for Yuan Shao to return, so as to delay the time.

古文：初，何皇后生皇子辩，王贵人生皇子协。
现代文：起先，何皇后生皇子辩，王贵人生皇子协。
English: At first, Empress He argued about the birth of the prince, while Wang Gui agreed.

古文：群臣请立太子，帝以辩轻佻无威仪，不可为人主，然皇后有宠，且进又居重权，故久不决。
现代文：群臣请立太子，灵帝认为辩轻薄无威仪，不可以作人君，然而皇后得到灵帝的宠爱，何进又掌握重权，所以迟迟不决。
English: The group of courtiers requested the establishment of a crown prince. Emperor Ling thought that it was frivolous and undignified to argue, and that it was not possible to be a prince. However, the empress was favored by Emperor Ling, and she held great power, so she was hesitant.

古文：六年，帝疾笃，属协于蹇硕。
现代文：六年，灵帝病重，托蹇硕辅佐刘协。
English: In the sixth year, Ling Di was seriously ill, and he was assisted by Liu Xie.

古文：硕既受遣诏，且素轻忌于进兄弟，及帝崩，硕时在内，欲先诛进而立协。
现代文：蹇硕既受遗诏，并且一向看不起、忌妒何进、何苗兄弟。灵帝逝世时，蹇硕在宫内，想先杀何进立协为帝。
English: When Emperor Lingdi passed away, Zeng Shuo was in the palace, and he wanted to kill He Jin and establish Xie as emperor first.

古文：及进从外入，硕司马潘隐与进早旧。迎而目之。进惊，驰从道归营，引兵入屯百郡邸，因称疾不入。
现代文：及何进从外入，蹇硕司马潘隐与何进很早以前就相好，欢迎何进而用眼睛示意，何进惊恐骑马从近道归营，带兵入驻百郡邸，因此托病不进去。
English: And He Jin entered from the outside, and Ma Panyin, the grand secretary of the Party, and He Jin had been friends for a long time, and they welcomed each other with their eyes, and He Jin rode back to the camp from the shortcut in fear, and led the soldiers into the residence of Baigun, so he did not go in because of illness.

古文：硕谋不行，皇子辩乃即位，何太后临朝，进与太傅袁隗辅政，录尚书事。
现代文：蹇硕的阴谋没有实现，皇子辩于是即皇帝位。何太后临朝听政，何进与太傅袁隗辅政，兼领尚书事。
English: The conspiracy did not come to fruition, and the prince disputed the imperial throne. Emperor Ho listened to the government, and Emperor Ho and Emperor Yuan supported the government, and also took charge of official correspondence.

古文：进素知中官天下所疾，兼忿蹇硕图己，及秉朝政，阴规诛之。
现代文：何进久知宦官为天下所共疾恶，加以痛恨蹇硕阴谋害他，及掌握朝廷大权，就暗中布置诛灭宦官。
English: He Jin knew for a long time that eunuchs were a common evil in the world, hated them, plotted to harm them, and seized the power of the imperial court, and secretly arranged to destroy eunuchs.

古文：袁绍亦素有谋，因进亲客张津劝之曰： 黄门常侍权重日久，又与长乐太后专通奸利，将军宜更清选贤良，整齐天下，为国家除患。 
现代文：袁绍也久有谋划，使何进亲客张津劝何进说： 黄门常侍权重已很久了，又与长乐太后专通奸利，将军应当选拔贤良的人才，整顿天下，为国家除害。 
English: Yuan Shao also had a plan for a long time to make He Jin's relative guest Zhang Jin persuade He Jin to say: Huangmen has long been the weight of the standing attendant, and it has been adulterous with the Changle Empress Dowager. The general should select virtuous talents, rectify the world, and eliminate harm to the country.

古文：进然其言。
现代文：何进认为说得对。
English: He Jin thought it was right.

古文：又以袁氏累世宠贵，海内所归，而绍素善养士，能得豪杰用，其从弟虑贲中郎将术亦尚气侠，故并厚待之。
现代文：又袁氏累世宠贵，得到海内的人拥护。袁诏善于养士，豪杰之士愿为他所用。他的从弟虎贲中郎将袁术也喜气侠，所以都厚相结纳。
English: In addition, the Yuan family has been favored throughout the ages and has been supported by the people at sea. Yuan Zhao is good at raising soldiers, and the heroes are willing to be used by him. His younger brother, the middle brother of Tigress, Yuan Shu is also a cheerful man, so they are well connected.

古文：因复博征智谋之士逄纪、何颙、荀攸等，与同腹心。
现代文：因此更广泛地征聘智谋之士逢纪、何、荀攸等，与他们结为心腹。
English: Therefore, it is necessary to recruit more widely the wise men of discipline, discipline, discipline, and discipline, and become confidants with them.

古文：蹇硕疑不自安，与中常侍赵忠等书曰： 大将军兄弟秉国专朝，今与天下党人谋诛先帝左右，埽灭我曹。但以硕典禁兵，故且沈吟。
现代文：蹇硕怀疑不安，与中常侍赵忠等写信说 ：大将军兄弟执政专权，现在与天下党人谋划诛杀先帝左右亲近的，消灭我们这些人，只因为我统领禁兵，所以暂时犹豫不决。
English: Suspicious and uneasy, Zou Shuo wrote a letter to Zhao Zhong and others, saying: "The brothers of the great generals, the ruling dictatorship, are now plotting with the world's party members to kill those close to the former emperor and eliminate us. It is only because I am in command of the forbidden soldiers that I am temporarily hesitant.

古文：今宜共闭上阁，急捕诛之。 
现代文：现在应当共同把上阁关闭，急捕杀之。 
English: Now we should work together to shut down the cabinet and kill it quickly.

古文：中常侍郭胜，进同郡人也。
现代文：中常侍郭胜，何进同郡人。
English: Guo Sheng, a vice-minister of the CPC Central Committee, was from Hejin County.

古文：太后及进之贵幸，胜有力焉。
现代文：太后和何进的贵幸，郭胜出了力，帮了忙。
English: The empress dowager and He Jin were fortunate enough to have Guo Sheng lend a helping hand.

古文：故胜亲信何氏，遂共赵忠等议，不从硕计，而以其书示进。
现代文：所以郭胜亲信何氏，于是与赵忠等商议，不依蹇硕的计策，并且把蹇硕的信交给了何进。
English: Therefore, Guo Sheng trusted He, so he discussed with Zhao Zhong and others, did not rely on He Shuo's strategy, and handed over He Shuo's letter to He Jin.

古文：进乃使黄门令收硕，诛之，因领其屯兵。
现代文：何进使黄门令逮捕蹇硕，杀了，自己统率其驻兵。
English: He Jin ordered Huang Men to arrest and kill Zeng Shuo, and he himself led his garrison.

古文：袁绍复说进曰： 前窦武欲诛内宠而反为所害者，以其言语漏泄，而五营百官服畏中人故也。
现代文：袁绍又劝说何进 ：从前窦武想诛杀内宠而反为所害，是因为他说的话漏泄出去了，五营百官服从宦官，害怕宦官。
English: Yuan Shao also persuaded He Jin: In the past, Dou Wu Rong wanted to kill his favorite, but he was harmed because his words leaked out. The five battalions and hundreds of officials obeyed the eunuchs and feared the eunuchs.

古文：今将军既有元舅之重，而兄弟并领劲兵，部曲将吏皆英俊名士，乐尽力命，事在掌握，此天赞之时也。
现代文：现在将军有大舅这样的重要地位，兄弟同统率劲兵，部下将吏又都是英俊名士，乐于尽力报命，事情在于掌握，这是天助的时机啊。
English: Now the general has such an important position as the great-uncle, the brothers lead the strong soldiers together, and the subordinate generals are all handsome celebrities, willing to do their best to report the death, the matter is in control, this is the time for God's help.

古文：将军宜一为天下除患，名垂后世。
现代文：将军应当为天下除害，名垂后世。
English: A general should eliminate harm for the whole world, and his name will be famous for generations to come.

古文：虽周之申伯，何足道哉！
现代文：虽周朝的申伯，也不算什么！
English: Although the Zhou Dynasty's Shen Bo, it is nothing!

古文：今大行在前殿，将军受诏领禁兵，不宜轻出入宫省。 
现代文：现在人主的灵柩在前殿，将军受诏统率禁兵，不应该随便出入宫省。 
English: Now, the coffin of the deceased is in the front hall, and the general has been banned from entering and leaving the Imperial Household Ministry.

古文：进甚然之，乃称疾不入陪丧，又不送山陵。
现代文：何进深以为是，于是托病不入陪丧，又不送葬。
English: He thought it was, so he feigned illness and did not attend the funeral, nor did he attend the burial.

古文：遂与绍定筹策，而以其计白太后。
现代文：即与袁绍定计策，并把所定计策告诉了太后。
English: That is, he and Yuan Shao decided on a strategy and told the empress dowager about the decision.

古文：太后不听，曰： 中官统领禁省，自古及今，汉家故事，不可废也。
现代文：太后不听，说： 宦官统领禁省，自古到今，汉家老规矩，不可废。
English: The empress dowager did not listen and said, "From ancient times to the present, the eunuchs have been in charge of the provinces, and the old rules of the Han family must not be abandoned.

古文：且先帝新弃天下，我奈何楚楚与士人对共事乎？ 
现代文：且先帝刚逝世，我怎么堂而皇之与士人共事呢？ 
English: Moreover, the former emperor had just passed away, how could I work with the nobles in a dignified manner?

古文：进难违太后意，且欲诛其放纵者。
现代文：何进不能违反太后意旨，且想诛杀那些为首的。
English: He couldn't go against the empress dowager's wishes and wanted to kill those at the top.

古文：绍以为中官亲近至尊，出入号令，今不悉废，后必为患。
现代文：袁绍认为宦官亲近皇上，出入号令，现在如果不全部消灭，以后一定要为害。
English: Yuan Shao believed that eunuchs were close to the emperor, and if they did not eliminate them all now, they would certainly do harm in the future.

古文：而太后母舞阳君及苗数受诸宦官赂遗，知进欲诛之，数白太后，为其障蔽。
现代文：太后的母亲舞阳君及何苗多次接受各宦官的贿赂，晓得何进要杀害他们，多次告诉太后，要太后庇护他们。
English: The empress dowager's mother, Muyangjun, and Ho Miao repeatedly accepted bribes from various eunuchs. Knowing Ho Jin wanted to kill them, they repeatedly told the empress dowager to protect them.

古文：又言： 大将军专杀左右，擅权以弱社稷。 
现代文：又说： 大将军擅杀左右亲信，专权以弱皇上。 
English: He also said: The great generals killed their cronies at will, and the weak emperor had absolute power.

古文：太后疑以为然。
现代文：太后怀疑认为是这样的。
English: The Empress suspected that this was the case.

古文：中官在省闼者或数十年，封侯贵宠，胶固内外。
现代文：宦官在皇上左右者有的已几十年，封侯贵宠，内外勾结极为巩固。
English: Some eunuchs have been around the emperor for decades. They are favored by the prince, and the internal and external collusion is extremely consolidated.

古文：进新当重任，素敬惮之，虽外收大名而内不能断，故事久不决。
现代文：何进新当重任，平常也害怕他们，虽外有大名，而心中不能决断，所以事情久不能定下来。
English: No matter how many newcomers are given important tasks, they are usually afraid of them. Although there are big names outside, they can't decide in their hearts, so things can't be settled for a long time.

古文：绍等又为画策，多召四方猛将及诸豪杰，使并引兵向京城，以胁太后。
现代文：袁绍等又为何进谋划，多召集四方猛将及大批豪杰，使他们都引兵向京城，威胁太后。
English: Why did Yuan Shao and others plan ahead, summoning more than four fierce generals and a large number of heroes, so that they all led troops to the capital, threatening the empress dowager.

古文：进然之。
现代文：何进同意。
English: Ho Jin agreed.

古文：主簿陈琳入谏曰： 《易》称 即鹿无虞 ，谚有 掩目捕雀 。
现代文：主簿陈琳劝谏说 ：《易》称 鹿放走了，就不可捕得了。 俗话说 ：蒙着眼睛捕雀。 
English: Chen Lin, the head librarian, advised him: "Yi" says that if you let the deer go, you can't catch it. As the saying goes, you can't catch a bird with your eyes closed.

古文：夫微物尚不可欺以得志，况国之大事，其可以诈立乎？
现代文：微小的东西，尚且不能用得志来欺骗它，何况国家大事，岂可用诈来取得呢。
English: Those little things can not bully them to satisfy themselves, let alone the big things of the country, is it possible to succeed by fraud?

古文：今将军总皇威，握兵要，龙骧虎步，高下在心，此犹鼓洪炉燎毛发耳。
现代文：现在将军总皇威，掌握兵权，龙骧虎步，或高或下，全在您的心中。这好比烧着火炉子燎毛发，有什么为难？
English: Now that the general is supreme, in command of the army, and the dragon and the tiger are marching, up or down, it's all in your heart. It's like stoking the furnace, what's the problem?

古文：夫违经合道，无人所顺，而反委释利器，更征外助。
现代文：合于道，违于经，为天人所顺。反抛弃利器，寻找外援。
English: Conform to the Tao, go against the sutras, be obedient to the heavenly beings. Instead of abandoning the sharp weapons, look for foreign aid.

古文：大兵聚会，强者为雄，所谓倒持干戈，授人以柄，功必不成，秖为乱阶。 
现代文：大兵集合起来，强的为雄，这是所说的干戈倒拿，把柄给别人，功决不成，徒徒地成为乱恶的台阶。 
English: When soldiers are gathered together, the strongest will prevail. This is the so-called "taking sides" and "giving the upper hand" to others, which will never lead to success, but will only lead to chaos and evil.

古文：进不听。
现代文：何进不听。
English: I don't listen to anything.

古文：遂西召前将军董卓屯关中上林苑，又使府掾太山王匡东发其郡强弩，并召东郡太守桥瑁屯城皋，使武猛都尉丁原烧孟津，火照城中，皆以诛宦官为言。
现代文：西召前将军董卓驻关中上林苑，又使府掾太山王匡发动他所在郡的强弩手，召东郡太守桥瑁驻城皋，使武猛都尉丁原烧孟津，火光照得城里通红，都说要诛杀宦官。
English: West summoned the former general Dong Zhuo to reside in Guanzhong Shanglinyuan, and also ordered the prefectural governor Taishan Wang Kuang to mobilize the strong warriors of his county, called the east county governor Qiao Wei to reside in the city, and ordered the fierce captain Ding Yuan to burn Mengjin, and the firelight shone red in the city. They all said that they would fight and kill the eunuch.

古文：太后犹不从。
现代文：太后还是不同意。
English: The Empress Dowager still did not agree.

古文：苗谓进曰： 始共从南阳来，俱以贫贱，依省内以致贵富。
现代文：何苗对何进说 ：开始我们一路从南阳来，都因贫贱，依靠宫中获得贵富。
English: He Miao said to He Jin: At the beginning, we came all the way from Nanyang, because we were poor, and relied on the palace to gain wealth.

古文：国家之事，亦何容易！
现代文：国家的事，也不容易！
English: Affairs of state are not easy!

古文：覆水不可收。宜深思之，且与省内和也。 
现代文：倒了的水不可收回的，应当好好考虑，应与宫中保持和好。 
English: If the poured water cannot be retrieved, it should be well considered, and it should be reconciled with the palace.

古文：进意更狐疑。
现代文：何进的思想更加狐疑了。
English: He Jin's thoughts became even more suspicious.

古文：绍惧进变计，乃胁之曰： 交构已成，形势已露，事留变生，将军复欲何待，而不早决之乎？ 
现代文：袁绍担心何进改变主意，于是威胁他说： 互相结合的形势已经露出来了，事情不办，就要发生变故，将军还等待什么，为什么不早决定呢？ 
English: Yuan Shao was worried that He Jin would change his mind, so he threatened him, saying: The situation of mutual integration has been revealed, if things are not done, there will be changes, what is the general waiting for, why not decide early?

古文：进于是以绍为司隶校尉，假节，专命击断；从事中郎王允为河南尹。
现代文：何进于是用袁绍为司隶校尉，持符节，专命击断；从事中郎王允为河南尹。
English: He Jin then used Yuan Shao as the captain of the Sili school, holding the sign section, and ordered him to break it off; Wang Yun, who was engaged in the middle, was Henan Yin.

古文：绍使洛阳方略武吏司察宦者，而促董卓等使驰驿上，欲进兵平乐观。
现代文：袁绍派洛阳方略武吏监视宦官，使董卓等驰驱驿上，准备进兵平乐观。
English: Yuan Shao sent military officers from Luoyang to monitor the eunuchs, and made Dong Zhuo and others gallop on the raft, ready to enter the army.

古文：太后乃恐，悉罢中常侍小黄门，使还里舍，唯留进素所私人，以守省中。
现代文：太后害怕起来，罢退全体小黄门，使还里舍，只留何进平素亲近的人，守卫省中。
English: The empress dowager became afraid and withdrew all the little yellow doors, forcing them to return to their homes, leaving only those who were close to her to guard the palace.

古文：诸常侍小黄门皆诣进谢罪，唯所措置。
现代文：诸常侍小黄门都去何进那里请罪，听何进怎么处置。
English: All the attendants of the small yellow door went to where to enter to plead guilty, listen to what to do.

古文：进谓曰： 天下匈匈，正患诸君耳。
现代文：何进对他们说： 天下纷纷扰扰，正是诸君为害啊！
English: He said to them: Disturbances are occurring all over the world, and it is you who are to blame!

古文：今董卓垂至，诸君何不早各就国？ 
现代文：现在董卓很快就要到了，诸君为什么不早日各就国呢？ 
English: Now that Dong Zhuo will be arriving soon, why don't you all go back to your own countries as soon as possible?

古文：袁绍劝进便于此决之，至于再三。进不许。
现代文：袁绍劝何进就在这时处决他们，一而再，再而三，何进不许。
English: Yuan Shao advised that no matter how many people entered, they should execute them at that time, and no matter how many people entered, they should not be allowed to enter again and again.

古文：绍又为书告诸州郡，诈宣进意，使捕案中官亲属。
现代文：袁绍又写信告各州郡，假传何进的意旨，使逮捕宦官亲属。
English: Yuan Shao also wrote a letter to all prefectures and counties, falsely announcing Ho Jin's intention to arrest the eunuch's relatives.

古文：进谋积日，颇泄，中官惧而思变。
现代文：何进筹谋太久，事情泄漏，宦官害怕想变。
English: No advance planning for too long, things leak, eunuchs are afraid to change.

古文：张让子妇，太后之妹也。让向子妇叩头曰： 老臣得罪，当与新妇俱归私门。
现代文：张让子妇，太后的妹妹，张让向子妇叩头说： 老臣得罪，应该与新妇都归私门。
English: Zhang Zhan's daughter-in-law, the empress dowager's younger sister, Zhang Zhan kowtowed to her daughter-in-law and said, "The old minister has committed a sin, and he and his new wife should both go into seclusion."

古文：惟受恩累世，今当远离宫殿，情怀恋恋，愿复一入直，得暂奉望太后、陛下颜色，然后退就沟壑，死不恨矣。 
现代文：思累世受恩，现在要远离宫殿，恋恋难舍，请再一次进宫，能够暂时看望太后、皇上颜色，然后回去，死也无遗憾了。 
English: Thinking of the grace of the world, now I want to stay away from the palace, I am in love with the palace, please enter the palace again, I can temporarily visit the empress dowager and the emperor, and then go back, I have no regrets about dying.

古文：子妇言于舞阳君，入白太后，乃诏诸常侍皆复入直。
现代文：子妇对舞阳君说，舞阳君告诉了太后，于是诏命各常侍都复进宫。
English: The maiden said to Muyangjun, Muyangjun told the empress dowager, so the emperor ordered all the regular attendants to return to the palace.

古文：八月，进入长乐白太后，请尽诛诸常侍以下，选三署郎入守宦官庐。
现代文：八月，何进入长乐告诉太后，请尽诛杀诸常侍以下，选三署郎进宫守宦宫的住房。
English: In August, he entered Changle and told the empress dowager, "Please do your best to kill all the regular attendants and below, and select three attendants to enter the palace and guard the palace's housing."

古文：诸宦官相谓曰： 大将军称疾不临丧，不送葬，今郯入省，此意何为？
现代文：诸宦官互相说 ：大将军托病不居丧，不送葬，现在忽然到宫中来，想干什么呢？
English: The eunuchs said to one another, "What does the great general mean by coming to the palace all of a sudden, when he has begged to be spared from death and burial?

古文：窦氏事竟复起邪？ 
现代文：从前窦氏事竟再起吗？ 
English: Is the former Dou clan making a comeback?

古文：又张让等使人潜听，具闻其语，乃率常侍段珪、毕岚等数十人，持兵窃自侧闼入，伏省中，及进出，因诈以太后诏召进。
现代文：又张让等人派人窃听，完全听了他所说的话，于是带领常侍段王圭，毕岚等几十人，拿着兵器悄悄地自侧门进，埋伏宫中。等到何进出来，便假称太后诏召进。
English: Zhang Zhan and others also sent someone to eavesdrop, and they completely listened to what he said, so he led the regular attendants Wang Gui, Bi Yao and dozens of others to quietly enter the side door with weapons and ambush the palace. When they came out, they pretended to be summoned by the Empress Dowager.

古文：入坐省闼，让等诘进曰： 天下愦愦，亦非独我曹罪也。
现代文：何进入坐宫中，张让等责问何进说： 天下大乱，也不仅仅是我辈的罪。
English: When He entered the palace, Zhang Zhan and others asked and scolded He Jin, saying: The chaos in the world is not only the sin of our generation.

古文：先帝尝与太后不快，几至成败，我曹涕泣救解，各出家财千万为礼，和悦上意，但欲托卿门户耳。
现代文：先帝曾经与太后不和，几乎把太后废了，我们哭泣解救，各人拿出家财千万作为礼物，和悦皇上之意，只想依托您何氏的门户而已。
English: The former emperor was once at odds with the empress dowager, and almost abandoned her. We cried for help, and each of us offered tens of millions of family wealth as a gift, and with the Emperor's blessing, we just want to rely on you, Mr. Ho.

古文：今乃欲灭我曹种族，不亦太甚乎？
现代文：现在居然要杀灭我们的种族，有点过分吧？
English: Is it too much to ask that our race be exterminated now?

古文：卿言省内秽浊，公卿以下忠清者为谁？ 
现代文：您说宫中污秽肮脏，公卿以下忠诚廉洁的是谁呢？ 
English: You say that the palace is dirty and filthy. Who is loyal and incorruptible after the nobles?

古文：于是尚方监渠穆拔剑斩进于嘉德殿前。
现代文：于是尚方监渠穆拔剑斩何进于嘉德殿前。
English: As a result, Shangfang Guanqiu had to draw his sword and cut his way into the front of the Jiade Palace.

古文：让、珪等为诏，以故太尉樊陵为司隶校尉，少府许相为河南尹。
现代文：张让、段王圭等下诏，用故太尉樊陵为司隶校附，少府许相为河南尹。
English: Zhang Zhan, Duan Wang Gui and others issued the following edict, using the tomb of the late Taifu Gong as the sibling, and Shofu Xu Xiang as Henan Yin.

古文：尚书得诏板，疑之，曰： 请大将军出共议。 
现代文：尚书得诏板、怀疑有假，说 ：请大将军出来共同商议。 
English: Shang Shuxin said, "Please invite the general to come out and have a discussion."

古文：中黄门以进头掷与尚书，曰： 何进谋反，已伏诛矣。 
现代文：中黄门把何进的脑袋掷给尚书，说： 何进谋反，已经杀掉了。 
English: Zhonghuangmen threw He Jin's head to Shangshu and said, "He who plotted rebellion has been killed."

古文：进部曲将吴匡、张璋，素所亲幸，在外闻进被害，欲将兵入宫，宫阁闭。
现代文：何进的部属将吴匡、张璋，是何进的亲信，在外面听说何进被杀害，想带兵入宫，宫阁关闭，不得入。
English: He Jin's subordinates, including Wu Kuang and Zhang Ye, were close friends of He Jin. When they heard outside that He Jin had been killed, they wanted to bring soldiers into the palace. The palace was closed and they were not allowed to enter.

古文：袁术与匡共斫攻之。中黄门持兵守阁。
现代文：袁术与吴匡合力砍斫进攻，中黄门持武器守阁。
English: Yuan Shuxu and Wu Kuang jointly attacked with machetes, while Zhonghuangmen guarded the pavilion with weapons.

古文：会日暮，术因烧南宫九龙门及东西宫，欲以胁出让等。
现代文：正值日暮，袁术因放火烧南宫九龙门及东西宫，想威胁张让等出来。
English: It was dusk when Yuan Shu, who had set fire to the South Palace's Kowloon Gate and the East and West Palaces, tried to threaten Zhang Zhen and others.

古文：让等入白太后，言大将军兵反，烧宫，攻尚书闼，因将太后、天子及陈留王，又劫省内官属，从复道走北宫。
现代文：张让等人进去告诉太后，说大将军兵反，烧宫，攻尚书门，因此劫持太后，天子及陈留王，又劫宫中官属，从复道走北宫。
English: Zhang Zhan and others went in and told the empress dowager that the general's soldiers had rebelled, burned the palace, and attacked Shang Shumen. As a result, they kidnapped the empress dowager, the emperor and Chen Liu Wang, and also kidnapped the palace officials, and went to the North Palace from Fudao.

古文：尚书卢植执戈于阁道窗下，仰数段珪。
现代文：尚书卢植拿着戈在阁道窗下，抬头骂段王圭。
English: Shangshu Lu Zhi was holding a sword under the attic window, looking up and cursing Duan Wang Gui.

古文：段珪等惧，乃释太后。
现代文：段王圭害怕了，就释放了太后。
English: Duan Wang Gui was afraid and released the empress dowager.

古文：太后投阁得免。
现代文：太后跳阁得以未劫去。
English: The Empress Dowager managed to escape unharmed.

古文：袁绍与叔父隗矫诏召樊陵、许相、斩之。
现代文：袁绍与叔父袁隗假称皇帝诏召樊陵、许相杀了。
English: Yuan Shao and his uncle Yuan Shao killed each other under the pretense that the emperor had summoned them to the imperial mausoleum.

古文：苗、绍乃引兵屯朱雀阙下，捕得赵忠等，斩之。
现代文：何苗、袁绍于是带兵驻朱雀阙下，逮捕了赵忠等人杀了。
English: As a result, He Miao and Yuan Shao stationed soldiers under the command of Zhu Yao, arrested and killed Zhao Zhong and others.

古文：吴匡等素怨苗不与进同心，而又疑其与宦官同谋，乃令军中曰： 杀大将军者即车骑也，土吏能为报仇乎？ 
现代文：吴匡等久就抱怨何苗不与何进同心，又怀疑他与宦官同谋，于是命令军中说： 杀大将军的就是车骑，你们能够为大将军报仇吗？ 
English: Wu Kuang waited for a long time to complain that He Miao did not have the same heart as He Jinjun, and suspected that he was complicit with the eunuch, so he said to the commanding army: The killing of the general is a ride. Can you avenge the general?

古文：进素有仁恩，士卒皆流涕曰： 愿致死！ 
现代文：何进对部属本有仁恩，士卒都流泪说 ：愿以死相报！ 
English: He had been kind to his subordinates, and his soldiers all shed tears and said, "I will repay you with my death!"

古文：匡遂引兵与董卓弟奉车都尉旻攻杀苗，弃其尸于苑中。
现代文：吴匡就带兵与董卓的弟弟奉车都尉董攻杀何苗，把尸体抛在苑中。
English: Wu Kuang led his soldiers and Dong Zhuo's younger brother, Feng Che Duan Dong, to attack and kill He Miao, and left his body in the courtyard.

古文：绍遂闭北宫门，勒兵捕宦者，无少长皆杀之。
现代文：袁绍就关闭北宫门，指挥兵吏捕捉宦官。无分大小，统统杀掉。
English: Yuan Shao closed the gate of the Northern Palace and commanded the soldiers to capture the eunuchs. No matter how big or small, they were all killed.

古文：或有无须而误死者，至自发露然后得免。
现代文：有的无须被错认为是宦官杀死，有的自己发露身体然后才得免遭杀死。
English: Some were killed without being mistaken for eunuchs, others had to expose themselves to avoid being killed.

古文：死者二千余人。
现代文：死了二千多人。
English: More than two thousand people died.

古文：绍因进兵排宫，或上端门屋，以攻省内。
现代文：袁绍因进兵排宫，有的上端门屋进攻宫中。
English: Yuan Shao marched into the palace, and some of the upper gatehouses attacked the palace.

古文：张让、段珪等困迫，遂将帝与陈留王数十人步出穀门，奔小平津。
现代文：张让、段王圭等人围困不得出，于是劫持皇上与陈留王几十人步出门，逃奔小平津。
English: Zhang Zhan, Duan Wang Gui and others were besieged and couldn't get out, so dozens of people who had kidnapped the emperor and Chen Liu Wang walked out the door and fled to Xiaopingjin.

古文：公卿并出平乐观，无得从者，唯尚书卢植夜驰河上，王允遣河南中部掾闵贡随植后。
现代文：公卿都从平乐观出来，没有跟着他们跑的，只有尚书卢植晚上骑马奔驰河上，王允派河南中部掾闵贡跟在卢植后面。
English: The court nobles were all optimistic and did not run with them. Only Shangshu Lu Zhi rode a horse on the Benzi River at night. Wang Yun sent the central Henan Province to pay tribute to Lu Zhi.

古文：贡至，手剑斩数人，余皆投河而死。
现代文：闵贡到，拿剑斩了几个人，其余的都跳河而死。
English: When the tributes arrived, he took a sword and beheaded several people, while the rest jumped into the river to their deaths.

古文：明日，公卿百官乃奉迎天子还宫，以贡为郎中，封都亭侯。
现代文：第二天，公卿百官奉迎天子还宫，用闵贡为郎中，封都亭侯。
English: The next day, hundreds of court nobles and officials returned to the palace to welcome the emperor, and used the tribute money to become his vassals and fief princes.

古文：董卓遂废帝，又迫杀太后，杀舞阳君，何氏遂亡，而汉室亦自此败乱。
现代文：董卓于是废了灵帝，迫杀太后，杀舞阳君，何氏亡了，而汉室也自此败乱。
English: Therefore, Dong Zhuo dethroned the Emperor Ling, forced the Empress Dowager to be killed, killed the Emperor Dangyang, killed the Emperor He, and the Han Dynasty was defeated.

古文：论曰：窦武、何进借元舅之资，据辅政之权，内倚太后临朝之威，外迎群英乘风之势，卒而事败阉竖，身死功颓，为世所悲，岂智不足而权有余乎？
现代文：史官评论曰：窦武、何进以大舅的身份，掌握辅政的大权，宫内依靠太后临朝听政的威势，外面迎来群英乘风的有利条件，终于为宦官所败，身死功坠，为世人所悲，难道智力不足而权位有余吗？
English: The historian commented: Douwu, He Jin as the elder brother, grasped the great power of the auxiliary government, the palace relied on the power of the Empress Dowager to listen to the government, and the outside welcomed the favorable conditions for the group of emperors to ride the wind. Finally, they were defeated by the eunuchs, died of merit, and the world was saddened. Is the intelligence insufficient and the power is more than enough?

古文：《传》曰： 天之废商久矣，君将兴之。 
现代文：《左传》说： 天之废商久矣，君将兴之。 
English: "Zo Zhuan" said: The day's waste merchant is long gone, you will be happy.

古文：斯宋襄公所以败于泓也。
现代文：这就是宋襄公败于泓的原因啊！
English: This is the reason why Song Xiangong lost to Gong!

