古文：杨幺为寇。
现代文：原文南宋时期的杨幺盘踞在洞庭湖作乱。
English: Originally written in the Southern Song Dynasty, Yang Xuanpan led a rebellion in Dongting Lake.

古文：岳飞所部皆西北人，不习水战。
现代文：岳飞所属的部队多半是西北人，不习惯水上作战。
English: Yuefei's troops were mostly from the northwest and were not used to fighting on the water.

古文：飞曰： 兵何常，顾用之何如耳! 
现代文：岳飞说： 用兵没有一定之规，用得怎么样了! 
English: Yue Fei said: There is no definite rule for the use of soldiers, how is it used!

古文：先遣使招谕之，贼党黄佐曰： 岳节使号令如山，若与之敌，万无生理，不如往降，必善遇我。 
现代文：先派人招降，贼人党羽黄佐说： 岳节使号令如山，如果和岳节使为敌，最后必定会丧命，还不如投顺岳节使，他必定能善待重用我。 
English: Huang Zuo, a member of the Thieves' Party, who was the first to call for surrender, said: "Yue Jiechi's orders are like a mountain. If you make an enemy of Yue Jiechi, you will surely die in the end. It would be better to throw in your lot with Yue Jiechi. He will surely be able to treat me well and make good use of me."

古文：遂降。
现代文：于是就答应归降。
English: So he agreed to surrender.

古文：飞单骑按其部，拊佐背曰： 子知逆顺者，果能立功，封侯岂足道，欲复遣子至湖中，视其可乘者擒之，可劝者招之，如何？ 
现代文：岳飞只身一人骑马来到黄佐的营地探视他，并轻抚着他的肩膀说： 你能是个识时务的人，必定能立下大功，日后何止是封侯拜爵而已啊，本帅想派你再回到洞庭湖，所有的贼众头目，如果有机会就活捉，或劝他们归降，怎么样？ 
English: Yue Fei rode alone to Huang Zuo's camp to visit him, and stroked his shoulder and said: Can you be a person who understands the current affairs, you must be able to make great contributions, in the future you will be nothing more than a marquess, this marshal wants to send you back to Dongting Lake, all the leaders of the thieves, if there is a chance to catch them alive, or persuade them to surrender, how about it?

古文：佐感泣，誓以死报。
现代文：黄佐被岳飞的信任和重用感动得痛哭流涕，发誓要以死相报。
English: Huang Zuo was moved to tears by Yue Fei's trust and loyalty, and vowed to repay him in death.

古文：时张浚以都督军事至潭，参政席益与浚语，疑飞玩寇。
现代文：这时张浚以都督军事来到潭州，参政席益对张浚说他认为岳飞有轻敌之心。
English: At this time, Zhang Jun came to Tanzhou as the military governor, and the political councilor said to Zhang Jun that he thought that Yuefei had a light heart.

古文：欲以闻。浚曰： 岳侯忠孝人也。兵有深机，何可易言？ 
现代文：张浚说： 岳侯为人忠信诚正，再说军事机密，怎么可以轻易泄露呢？ 
English: Zhang Jun said: "His father-in-law is a loyal and honest person. Besides, how can military secrets be easily leaked?

古文：益惭而止。
现代文：席益听后，不禁为自己的鲁莽感到惭愧。
English: After listening to Shi Yi, he couldn't help but feel ashamed for his recklessness.

古文：黄佐袭周伦砦，杀伦，擒其统制陈贵等。
现代文：另一方面，黄佐袭击贼寇周伦营寨，杀死了周伦，擒获了统制陈贵等人。
English: On the other hand, Huang Zuo attacked the encampment of the bandit Zhou Lun, killed Zhou Lun, and captured the leader Chen Gui and others.

古文：会召浚还防秋。
现代文：这时，皇帝下召让张浚回朝商议防秋。
English: At this time, the emperor summoned Zhang Jun to return to the imperial court for consultations.

古文：飞袖小图示浚，浚欲待来年议之。
现代文：临行之前，岳飞从袖中取出战略图给张浚看，想和他商议讨平杨幺的计划。
English: Before leaving, Yuefei took out the strategy map from his sleeve to show it to Zhang Jun, and wanted to discuss with him the plan to level Yang Kun.

古文：飞曰： 王四厢以王师攻水寇，则难；飞以水寇攻水寇，则易。
现代文：张浚认为不妨等到明年再讨贼，岳飞说： 王四厢是用正规军打水寇，因此难打；末将是利用水寇来打水寇，就会容易多了。
English: Zhang Jun thought it would be a good idea to wait until next year to catch the thieves, Yue Fei said: Wang Sifeng used regular troops to fight water pirates, so it was difficult to fight; in the end, it would be much easier to use water pirates to fight water pirates.

古文：水战，我短彼长，以所短攻所长，所以难；若因敌将用敌兵，夺其手足之助，离其腹心之托，使孤立，而后以王师乘之，八日之内，当俘诸酋。 
现代文：打水仗不是我军的长项，用我军的弱势水战和水寇的长项对打，当然很容易失败；如果利用杨幺身边的大将，借助他们攻打贼兵，然后官兵再进行围剿，八天之内一定能够擒获诸贼头目。 
English: Fighting a water battle is not our army's forte. Using our army's weak water battle and the water pirates' forte to fight, of course, is easy to fail. If you use the generals around Yang Xuan, use them to attack the bandits, and then the officers and soldiers to carry out the siege, you will definitely be able to capture the leaders of the bandits within eight days.

古文：浚许之。
现代文：张浚于是同意岳飞出兵。
English: Zhang Jun then agreed with Yue Fei to send troops.

古文：飞遂如鼎州。
现代文：岳飞到鼎州以后，黄佐已经说服杨钦归降。
English: After Yuefei flew to Dingzhou, Huang Zuo had already persuaded Yang Qin to surrender.

古文：黄佐招杨钦来降，飞喜曰： 杨钦骁悍，既降。
现代文：岳飞高兴地说： 杨钦骁勇强悍，现在投降，贼寇众叛亲离了! 
English: Yue Fei said happily: "Yang Ching-kuo is brave and strong, now he surrenders, the bandits have left!

古文：贼腹心溃矣! 
现代文：于是上表请求授予杨钦武义大夫的官职，对他非常礼遇。
English: As a result, the above table requested that Dr. Yang Qinwuyi be granted an official position, and he was treated very politely.

古文：表授钦武义大夫，礼遇甚厚，乃复遣归湖中。两日，钦说全琮、刘锐等降。
现代文：同样又让杨钦回到洞庭湖做内应。两天之后，杨钦说服全琮、刘锐等人归降。
English: Similarly, Yang Qin was sent back to Dongting Lake to do internal affairs. Two days later, Yang Qin convinced Quanzhang, Liu Rui and others to surrender.

古文：飞诡骂曰： 贼不尽降，何来也？ 
现代文：岳飞看到他们，故意骂道： 贼人没有全部投降，你们来这里做什么呢？ 
English: When Yue Fei saw them, he cursed them on purpose: "The thieves didn't all surrender. What are you doing here?

古文：杖之，复令入湖。
现代文：让人鞭打他们，又让他们再次回到洞庭湖。
English: They were whipped and sent back to Dongting Lake.

古文：是夜掩敌营，降其众数万。
现代文：这天晚上岳飞率领士兵偷袭贼营，俘虏了好几万名贼兵。
English: That evening, Yuefei led the soldiers to raid the bandit camp and captured tens of thousands of bandits.

古文：幺负固不服，方浮舟湖中，以轮激水，其行如飞；旁置撞竿，官舟迎之，辄碎。
现代文：杨幺虽然败了但很不服气，他乘船从湖上逃跑了。由于杨幺所搭乘的战船装有转轮，因此船行的速度如同飞一般；又因为他的船边装置有撞竿，因此只要官船一靠近，就会被撞竿撞得粉碎。
English: Although he was defeated, Yang Hui was not satisfied, and he fled by boat from the lake. Since the warship Yang Hui was on was equipped with a rotating wheel, the speed of the ship was as fast as flying; and because his ship's side device had a ram, as soon as the official ship approached, it would be smashed by the ram.

古文：飞伐君山木为巨筏，塞诸港汊，又以腐木乱草，浮上流而下。择水浅处，遣善骂者挑之，且行且骂。
现代文：岳飞让人砍伐巨大的树木做成木筏堵在港口；又让人从上游抛置了大量的腐木杂草，让它们顺流而下；又挑选一些善于骂阵的士兵，在杨幺的船行进到水浅的航道时，让他们一边走一边骂，结果杨幺怒气冲天，顾不上水浅就下令船只追击。
English: Yuefei had people cut down huge trees to make rafts to block the port; he also had people throw a large amount of rotten weeds from the upstream and let them float down the river; he also selected some soldiers who were good at swearing, and let them swear as they walked when Yang Xuan's ship traveled to the shallow water channel. As a result, Yang Xuan was furious and ordered the ships to chase after him regardless of the shallow water.

古文：贼怒来追，则草壅积，舟轮碍不行，飞亟遣兵击之，贼奔港中，为筏所拒，官军乘筏，张牛革以蔽矢石，举巨木撞其舟，尽坏。
现代文：结果他们的船只被上游流放的杂草所阻碍，动弹不得，岳飞立即下令官兵攻击，贼兵纷纷窜逃入港，又受到港口的木筏的阻碍；官兵在木筏上架起牛皮，防备贼人用箭石攻击，一面用大木桩撞击贼船，把它们撞坏了。
English: As a result, their ships were hindered by the weeds upstream and could not move. Yuefei immediately ordered the officers and soldiers to attack. The thieves and soldiers fled into the port in droves and were hindered by the wooden rafts in the port. The officers and soldiers erected cowhides on the rafts to prevent the thieves from attacking with arrow stones, while they hit the thieves' ships with large wooden stakes and broke them.

古文：幺投水中，牛皋擒斩。
现代文：杨幺见大势已去便想投水，结果被牛皋擒获斩首。
English: When Yang Xuan saw that the tide had gone out, he wanted to throw water, but he was beheaded by the bull.

古文：飞入贼垒，余酋惊曰： 何神也？ 
现代文：岳飞进入到贼营中，残余的贼兵头目惊呼： 怎么这样神奇？ 
English: Yue Fei entered the bandit camp, and the remaining bandit leaders exclaimed: How is this so amazing?

古文：俱降，飞亲行诸砦慰抚之。纵老弱归籍，少壮为军，果八日而贼平。
现代文：全都投降了，岳飞亲自来到各个营寨中安抚众人，释放那些老弱的贼兵回家，而将那些年轻力壮的贼兵编入了正式部队，果然如他所说，八天之内平服了贼人。
English: They all surrendered, and Yue Fei himself came to each camp to pacify everyone, release those old and weak thieves to go home, and integrate those young and strong thieves into the official troops. As he said, he defeated the thieves within eight days.

古文：浚叹曰： 岳侯神算也! 
现代文：张浚叹服地说： 岳侯真是神算啊。 
English: Zhang Jun sighed and said: Yue Hou is really a genius.

古文：杨幺据洞庭，陆耕水战，楼船十余丈，官军徒仰视，不得近。
现代文：杨幺盘踞在洞庭湖，在陆地上耕种，在水上作战，楼船高达十多丈，官军们眼睁睁地看着杨幺横行，靠近不得。
English: Poplars are rampant in Dongting Lake. They cultivate on land and fight on water. The buildings and ships are more than ten meters high. The government troops watch the rampant poplars with open eyes. They must not get close.

古文：岳飞谋亦欲造大舟，湖南运判薛弼谓岳曰： 若是，非岁月不胜。
现代文：岳飞本来想建造大船征讨杨幺，但是湖南运判薛弼却劝阻岳飞说： 如果要建造大船，肯定要耗费一年半载的时间；即使将船造好了，水战仍然是杨幺所擅长的。
English: Yue Fei originally wanted to build a big ship to recruit Yang Hui, but the Hunan transportation judge Xue Hui dissuaded Yue Fei, saying: If you want to build a big ship, it will definitely take a year and a half; even if the ship is built, water warfare is still what Yang Hui is good at.

古文：且彼之所长，可避而不可斗也。
现代文：因此，我军只能避开敌人，不和他们正面交锋。
English: Therefore, our army can only avoid the enemy, not confront them head-on.

古文：今大旱，河水落洪，若重购舟首，勿与战，遂筏断江路。藁其上流，使彼之长坐废。
现代文：现在正是天旱水枯的时候，阻断了江面，重金收买贼人各船首领，不要和贼人正面冲突，再从上游流放大量杂草阻挡船只，使得贼人没有办法发挥水战的优势，一面派遣精锐骑兵直攻贼营，贼人必败。 
English: Now is the time of drought and drought, blocking the surface of the river, paying heavy money to bribe the leaders of each ship of the thieves, not to confront the thieves, and then expelling a large number of weeds from the upstream to block the ships, making the thieves unable to play the advantage of water warfare, while sending elite cavalry to directly attack the thieves' camp, the thieves will be defeated.

古文：而精骑直捣其垒，则彼坏在目前矣。 岳从之，遂平幺。人知岳侯神算，平幺于八日之间，而不知计出薛弼。
现代文：岳飞听从薛弼的建议，果然平定了杨幺，一般人都以为岳飞事如神，在八天之内将杨幺平定，却不知道是出于薛弼的计谋。
English: Yue Fei listened to Xue Yao's suggestion and successfully subdued Yang Hui. The general public thought that Yue Fei was a god and subdued Yang Hui within eight days, but they did not know that it was because of Xue Yao's strategy.

古文：从来名将名相，未有不资人以成功者。
现代文：自古以来的名将名相，没有不借助他人而获得成功的。
English: Since ancient times, famous players and celebrities have never achieved success without the help of others.

古文：凡有所举，尽召诸统制与谋，谋定而后战。故有战无败，猝遇敌，不动，敌人为之语曰： 撼山易，撼岳家军难! 
现代文：岳飞擅长以寡敌众。曾经在南薰门以八百人打败贼人王善五十万人，也曾经在桂岭以八千士兵打败曹成的十万大军。以上所说的这些战役，事前岳飞都曾和统兵的将领商议，经过细密的计划才和贼人交战，因此能够战无不胜，即使是遭到贼人的突击，也都不会自乱阵脚。敌人曾经叹服说： 撼山易，撼岳家军难。 
English: Yue Fei is good at dealing with a small number of enemies. He once defeated the bandit Wang Shan's 500,000 people with 800 people in Nanhuangmen, and defeated Cao Cheng's 100,000-strong army with 8,000 soldiers in Guiling. In all of the above-mentioned battles, Yue Fei had consulted with the generals of the army in advance, and only engaged the bandits after careful planning. Therefore, he can fight invincibly, and even if he is attacked by the bandits, he will not be disorganized. The enemy once sighed and said: It is easy to shake the mountain, but it is difficult to shake the Yue family army.

古文：其御军严而有恩，卒有取民麻一缕以束刍者，立斩以徇。
现代文：岳飞带兵虽然军令森严，却能以诚待兵。有一名士兵曾经因为偷了民家的一束麻，按照军令而被处死。
English: Although Yuefei led soldiers with strict military orders, he was able to treat soldiers with sincerity. One soldier was once executed in accordance with military orders for stealing a bundle of hemp from a private house.

古文：卒夜宿，民开门愿纳，无敢入者。
现代文：之后夜晚行军，虽然民家开着大门邀请军士入屋住宿，也没有士兵敢接受民家的邀请。
English: After that, they marched at night, and although private homes opened their doors to invite the sergeants to stay in their houses, no soldier dared to accept the invitation from a private home.

古文：军虽冻死不拆屋，饿死不卤掠。
现代文：宁可冻死，也不强占民宅，宁可饿死，也不抢夺民粮。
English: It is better to freeze to death than to occupy people's homes. It is better to starve to death than to rob people of food.

古文：卒有疾，则亲为调药；诸将远戍，则遣妻问劳其家；死事者，哭之而育其孤，或以子婚其女；凡有颁赏，分给军吏，秋毫不私；每有功，必归之将士。
现代文：士兵生病了，岳飞都会亲自调和药物；如果诸将去远地戍守，岳飞定会让妻子慰问他们的家人生活起居；凡是作战牺牲的人，岳飞不但伤心流泪，并会抚育他们的孤儿，或者让自己的儿子和他们的女儿结婚；有赏赐，就分给将士；一丝一毫也不放入私囊；每当建立战功的时候，都会将其归功于所有的将士。
English: When soldiers are sick, Yuefei will personally adjust the medicine; if they are going to stay far away, Yuefei will definitely let their wives comfort their families to live and live; for those who are victims of war, Yuefei will not only shed tears, but will also bring up their orphans, or let their sons and daughters marry; if there is a reward, it will be distributed to the soldiers; do not put anything into the pocket; whenever the war is established, it will be attributed to all the soldiers.

古文：吁!此则其制胜之本也。
现代文：唉，这就是岳飞之所以取胜的原因。
English: Alas, this is the reason why Yuefei won.

古文：近日将官事事与忠武反，欲功成，得乎？
现代文：现在的将官，所言所行都和岳飞背道而驰，还想要获得胜利，又怎么能够做到呢？
English: The current generals, whose words and deeds are contrary to Yuefei, still want to win, but how can they do it?

