古文：十年春，卫侯之弟黑背帅师侵郑。
现代文：十年春季，卫侯的弟弟黑背率领军队攻打郑国。
English: In the spring of the tenth year, Wei Hou's younger brother Heihe led the army to attack Zheng.

古文：夏四月，五卜郊，不从，乃不郊。
现代文：夏季四月，鲁国五次占卜祭祀天地的日子，都不吉利，没有免除祭祀用的牛。
English: In the summer of April, the five days of divination and sacrifice for heaven and earth in Lu were all unlucky, and there was no exemption for the cattle used for sacrifice.

古文：五月，公会晋侯、齐侯、宋公、卫侯、曹伯伐郑。
现代文：五月，成公与晋侯、齐侯、宋公、卫侯、曹伯一起联合攻打郑国。
English: In May, Chengong, Jin, Qi, Song, Wei and Cao jointly attacked Zheng.

古文：齐人来媵。
现代文：齐国人来鲁国送陪嫁的女子。
English: People from Qi come to Lu Province to see off a woman who is to be married.

古文：丙午，晋侯獳卒。
现代文：丙午日，晋景公去世。
English: On the afternoon of the third day, Prince Jingu passed away.

古文：秋七月，公如晋。
现代文：秋季七月，成公去晋国。
English: In the autumn of July, Chenggong went to Jin.

古文：冬十月。
现代文：冬季十月，无事。
English: Winter, October, nothing.

古文：十年春，晋侯使籴茷如楚，报大宰子商之使也。
现代文：十年春季，晋景公派遣籴茷去楚国，这是回报太宰子商的出使。
English: In the spring of the tenth year, Emperor Jinjing sent Zou to Chu, which was in return for the dispatch of Dazai's merchants.

古文：卫子叔黑背侵郑，晋命也。
现代文：卫国子叔黑背侵袭郑国，这是执行晋国的命令。
English: Emperor Wu's uncle, Emperor Heihe, invaded Zheng, which was the execution of Jin's order.

古文：郑公子班闻叔申之谋。
现代文：郑国的公子班听到了叔申的策划。
English: Zheng's noble class heard about Uncle Shen's plan.

古文：三月，子如立公子繻。
现代文：三月，公子班立公子繻为国君。
English: In March, the court nobles established the court nobles as the sovereign.

古文：夏四月，郑人杀繻，立髠顽。子如奔许。
现代文：夏季四月，郑国人杀了公子繻，立了髡顽，公子班逃亡到许国。
English: In the summer of April, the people of Zheng killed Gongzi Yao, set up Gongyi Yu, and Gongzi Ban fled to Xu Province.

古文：栾武子曰： 郑人立君，我执一人焉，何益？
现代文：栾武子说： 郑国人立了国君，我们抓的就是一个普通人，有什么好处？
English: Zhenwu Zi said: Zheng Guozhong people set up a sovereign, what we caught is an ordinary person, what is the benefit?

古文：不如伐郑，而归其君以求成焉。 
现代文：不如进攻郑国，把他们的国君送回国，以此求和。 
English: It would be better to attack Zheng and send their sovereign back to their country in order to sue for peace.

古文：晋侯有疾。五月，晋立大子州蒲以为君，而会诸侯伐郑。
现代文：晋景公有病，五月，晋国立太子州蒲为国君，会合诸侯进攻郑国。
English: Jin Jing Gong was ill, and in May, Jin Prince Zhou Pu became the ruler of the country, and the princes gathered to attack Zheng.

古文：郑子罕赂以襄钟，子然盟于修泽，子驷为质，辛巳，郑伯归。
现代文：郑国的子罕把襄公宗庙中的钟赠送给晋国，子然和诸侯在脩泽结盟，子驷作为人质。十一日，郑成公回国。
English: Zheng's son Han presented the bell from Xiang Gong's ancestral temple to Jin. Ziran and the princes made an alliance in Heze, and Zihang was taken as a hostage. On the 11th day, Zheng Chenggong returned to China.

古文：晋侯梦大厉，被发及地，搏膺而踊曰： 杀余孙，不义。
现代文：晋景公梦见一个厉鬼，披的长发拖到地上，捶胸跳跃，说： 你杀了我的子孙，这是不义。
English: Jinjing Gong dreamed of a fierce ghost, dragging his long hair to the ground, beating his chest and jumping, saying: "You killed my grandchildren, this is injustice.

古文：余得请于帝矣！ 
现代文：我请求为子孙复仇，已经得到上天的允许了！ 
English: I have asked for vengeance for my children and grandchildren, and I have received Heaven's permission!

古文：坏大门及寝门而入。
现代文：厉鬼毁掉宫门、寝门走了进来。
English: A fierce demon destroyed the palace gate and entered through the sleeping gate.

古文：公惧，入于室。又坏户。
现代文：晋景公害怕，躲进内室，厉鬼又毁掉内室的门。
English: Jin Jing Gong was afraid and hid in the inner room. The fierce ghost destroyed the door of the inner room.

古文：公觉，召桑田巫。
现代文：晋景公醒来，召见桑田的巫人。
English: When Lord Jinjing woke up, he summoned the sorcerer of Kuwata.

古文：巫言如梦。
现代文：巫人所说的和晋景公梦见的情况一样。
English: What the sorcerer said was the same as what Jin Jinggong had dreamed about.

古文：公曰： 何如？ 
现代文：晋景公说： 怎么样？ 
English: Jin Jing Gong said: How about it?

古文：曰： 不食新矣。 
现代文：巫人说： 君王吃不到新收的麦子了！ 
English: The sorcerer said, "The king can't eat the newly harvested wheat!"

古文：公疾病，求医于秦。
现代文：晋景公病重，到秦国请医生。
English: Jin Jing Gong was seriously ill and went to Qin to ask for a doctor.

古文：秦伯使医缓为之。
现代文：秦桓公派医缓给晋景公诊病。
English: Qin Huankong sent doctors to treat Jinjing's illness.

古文：未至，公梦疾为二竖子，曰： 彼良医也。惧伤我，焉逃之？ 
现代文：医缓还没有到达，晋景公又梦见疾病变成两个小儿童，一个说： 他是个好医生，恐怕会伤害我们，往哪儿逃好？ 
English: Before the doctor arrived, Jin Jinggong had another dream in which the illness turned into two small children. One said, "He is a good doctor. I'm afraid he will hurt us. Where can we escape to?"

古文：其一曰： 居肓之上，膏之下，若我何？ 
现代文：另一个说： 我们待在肓的上边，膏的下边，拿我们怎么办？ 
English: And another said, What shall we do? we are the upper part of the stalk, but the lower part of the tail.

古文：医至，曰： 疾不可为也。在肓之上，膏之下，攻之不可，达之不及，药不至焉，不可为也。 
现代文：医生来了，说： 病不能治了，病在肓的上边，膏的下边，灸不能用，针达不到，药物的力量也达不到了，不能治了。 
English: The doctor came and said, "The disease cannot be cured. The disease is on the upper side of the mole and on the lower side of the ointment. Moxibustion cannot be used. The needle cannot reach it. The power of the medicine cannot reach it. It cannot be cured."

古文：公曰： 良医也。 
现代文：晋景公说： 真是好医生啊。 
English: Jin Jing Gong said: What a good doctor.

古文：厚为之礼而归之。
现代文：于是馈送给他丰厚的礼物让他回去。
English: So they gave him a generous gift to get him to go back.

古文：六月丙午，晋侯欲麦，使甸人献麦，馈人为之。
现代文：六月初六日，晋景公想吃新麦子，让管食物的人献麦，厨师烹煮。
English: On the 6th day of the 6th month, Jin Jing Gong wanted to eat fresh wheat, so he asked the person in charge of food to donate wheat, and the chef cooked it.

古文：召桑田巫，示而杀之。
现代文：景公召见桑田巫人来，把煮好的新麦给他看，然后杀了他。
English: King Jing summoned the sorcerer from Kuwata, showed him the freshly boiled barley, and then killed him.

古文：将食，张，如厕，陷而卒。
现代文：景公将要进食，突然肚子发胀，上厕所，跌进厕所里死去。
English: Jing Gong is about to eat, suddenly his stomach swells, he goes to the toilet, falls into the toilet and dies.

古文：小臣有晨梦负公以登天，及日中，负晋侯出诸厕。遂以为殉。
现代文：有一个宦官早晨梦见背着晋景公登天，等到中午，他背着晋景公从厕所出来，于是就以他为景公殉葬了。
English: There was a eunuch who dreamt of ascending to heaven with King Jinjing on his back in the morning. At noon, he came out of the toilet with King Jinjing on his back, so he was buried with King Jinjing.

古文：郑伯讨立君者，戊申，杀叔申、叔禽。
现代文：郑成公讨伐立国君的人，六月初八日，杀了叔申、叔禽。
English: On the 8th day of the 6th month of the year, Zheng Chenggong killed Uncle Shen and Uncle Poultry.

古文：君子曰： 忠为令德，非其人犹不可，况不令乎？ 
现代文：君子说： 忠诚是美德，所忠的人不合式尚且不可以，何况本人又不好呢？ 
English: The gentleman said, "Loyalty is a virtue. It is not permissible for a loyal person to act improperly, and what's more, I am not good at it myself.

古文：秋，公如晋。
现代文：秋季，鲁成公到晋国。
English: In autumn, Lu Chenggong went to Jin Province.

古文：晋人止公，使送葬。
现代文：晋国人留下成公，让他送葬。
English: The people of Jin Province left Chenggong to be buried.

古文：于是籴茷未反。
现代文：当时籴茷还没有回来。
English: At that time, Zou had not yet returned.

古文：冬，葬晋景公。
现代文：冬季，安葬晋景公。
English: In winter, Jinjinggong was buried.

古文：公送葬，诸侯莫在。
现代文：鲁成公送葬，诸侯都不在场。
English: The princes were not present at the funeral of Lu Chenggong.

古文：鲁人辱之，故不书，讳之也。
现代文：鲁国人认为这是耻辱，所以《春秋》不加记载，这是隐讳国耻。
English: The people of Lu believed that this was a disgrace, so "Spring and Autumn" was not recorded, which was a hidden national shame.

