古文：四年春，王三月己酉，陈侯午卒。
现代文：十年春季，周历三月己酉日，陈成公去世。
English: In the spring of the tenth year, on the third day of the third month of the lunar calendar, Chen Chenggong passed away.

古文：夏，叔孙豹如晋。
现代文：夏季，叔孙豹去晋国。
English: In summer, uncle and grandson leopards go to Jin Province.

古文：秋七月戊子，夫人姒氏薨。
现代文：秋季七月戊子日，夫人姒氏去世。
English: In the autumn of July, on the day of the birth of her second child, Mrs. Zou passed away.

古文：葬陈成公。
现代文：安葬陈成公。
English: Chen Chenggong was buried peacefully.

古文：八月辛亥，葬我小君定姒。
现代文：八月辛亥日，安葬我国小君定姒。
English: In August, on the day of Xinhai, Xiaojun Dingya was buried.

古文：冬，公如晋。
现代文：冬季，襄公去到晋国。
English: In winter, Lu Wen Gong went to Jin Province.

古文：陈人围顿。
现代文：陈国人包围顿地。
English: The Chen people immediately surrounded the place.

古文：四年春，楚师为陈叛故，犹在繁阳。
现代文：四年春季，楚军由于陈国背叛的缘故，仍旧驻扎在繁阳。
English: In the spring of the fourth year, the Chu army was still stationed in the bustling sun due to the betrayal of Chen Guo.

古文：韩献子患之，言于朝曰： 文王帅殷之叛国以事纣，唯知时也。
现代文：韩献子担心这件事，在朝廷上说： 周文王率领背叛商朝的国家去事奉纣，这是由于知道时机未到。
English: Han Xianzi was worried about this matter and said in the court: Zhou Wenwang led the country that betrayed the Shang Dynasty to serve the Emperor. This was because he knew that the time was not right.

古文：今我易之，难哉！ 
现代文：现在我们反了过来，想要称霸，难哪！ 
English: Now we've turned the tables and want to dominate, tough!

古文：三月，陈成公卒。
现代文：三月，陈成公死。
English: In March, Chen Chenggong died.

古文：楚人将伐陈，闻丧乃止。
现代文：楚国人正准备进攻陈国，听到陈国有丧事，就停止进攻。
English: The people of Chu were preparing to attack Chen, but when they heard of Chen's death, they stopped the attack.

古文：陈人不听命。臧武仲闻之，曰： 陈不服于楚，必亡。
现代文：陈国不听从楚国的命令，臧武仲听说这种情况，说： 陈国不服从楚国，一定灭亡。
English: Chen Guo disobeyed the order of Chu Guo, and Zou Wuzhong heard about this situation and said: Chen Guo disobeyed the order of Chu Guo, he will definitely perish.

古文：大国行礼焉而不服，在大犹有咎，而况小乎？ 
现代文：大国实行礼仪而不去顺服，对大国来说尚且有灾难，何况是小国呢？ 
English: For a great nation to observe propriety, and not to obey, is a calamity to a great nation; how much more to a small one?

古文：夏，楚彭名侵陈，陈无礼故也。
现代文：夏季，楚国的彭名攻打陈国，这是由于陈国缺乏礼节的缘故。
English: In the summer, Peng Na of Chu attacked Chen Guo, which was due to Chen Guo's lack of etiquette.

古文：穆叔如晋，报知武子之聘也，晋侯享之。
现代文：穆叔去到晋国，回报知武子的聘问。晋悼公设享礼招待他。
English: Mu Xiu went to Jin Province to reciprocate Tomoko's offer of employment. Jin mourned and held a public ceremony to invite him.

古文：金奏《肆夏》之三，不拜。
现代文：乐器演奏《肆夏》的三章，穆叔没有答拜。
English: Musical instruments play the three chapters of Wu Xia, but Mu Xiu did not answer.

古文：工歌《文王》之三，又不拜。
现代文：乐工歌唱《文王》三曲，又没有答拜。
English: The musicians sang three songs from "Wen Wang," but there was no response.

古文：歌《鹿鸣》之三，三拜。
现代文：歌唱《鹿鸣》三曲，三次答拜。
English: Sing "Deer Song" three times, and bow three times.

古文：韩献子使行人《子员》问之，曰： 子以君命，辱于敝邑。先君之礼，藉之以乐，以辱吾子。
现代文：韩献子派行人子员去问他，说： 您奉着君王的命令光临敝邑，敝邑按先君之礼并用音乐来招待大夫。
English: Han Xianzi sent a footman to ask him, saying, "You have come to Xiangyi by the order of the king. Xiangyi has invited the doctor with music according to the gift of the late king.

古文：吾子舍其大，而重拜其细，敢问何礼也？ 
现代文：大夫舍弃重大的而三拜细小的，请问这是什么礼仪？ 
English: What kind of etiquette is it, I wonder, for a doctor to dispense with the important and pay homage to the trivial?

古文：对曰： 三《夏》，天子所以享元侯也，使臣弗敢与闻。
现代文：穆叔回答说： 《三夏》，是天子用来招待诸侯领袖的，使臣不敢听到。
English: Mu Xiu replied: "The "Three Summers" was used by the Son of Heaven to invite the leaders of the princes, and the envoys did not dare to hear it.

古文：《文王》，两君相见之乐也，臣不敢及。
现代文：《文王》，是两国国君相见的音乐，使臣不敢参预。
English: "Wen Wang" is the music of the meeting between the two sovereigns, and the envoys dare not participate in advance.

古文：《鹿鸣》，君所以嘉寡君也，敢不拜嘉。
现代文：《鹿鸣》，是君王用来嘉奖寡君的，岂敢不拜谢这种嘉奖？
English: "Deersong" is used by the king to reward the nobles, how dare they not thank this award?

古文：《四牡》，君所以劳使臣也，敢不重拜。
现代文：《四牡》，是君王用来慰劳使臣的，岂敢不再拜？
English: The Four Musketeers, used by kings to comfort their envoys, dare not be worshipped any longer?

古文：《皇皇者华》，君教使臣曰： 必谘于周。 
现代文：《皇皇者华》，君王告诫使臣说： 一定要向忠信的人咨询。 
English: In the Emperor's New Clothes, the monarch admonishes his vassal: "Be sure to consult a trustworthy person."

古文：臣闻之，访问于善为咨，咨亲为询，咨礼为度，咨事为諏，咨难为谋。
现代文：使臣听说： 向善人访求询问就是咨，咨询亲戚就是询，咨询礼仪就是度，咨询事情就是诹，咨询困难就是谋。 
English: The envoy heard that: to visit and inquire from a good person is to inquire, to consult relatives is to inquire, to consult etiquette is to measure, to consult matters is to advise, and to consult difficulties is to plan.

古文：臣获五善，敢不重拜。 
现代文：臣得到这五善，岂敢不再三拜谢？ 
English: If a vassal obtains these five virtues, will he not dare to offer thanks three times?

古文：秋，定姒薨。
现代文：秋季，定姒去世。
English: In the autumn, Ding Xi passed away.

古文：不殡于庙，无榇，不虞。
现代文：没有在祖庙内停放棺木，没有用内棺，没有举行虞祭。
English: The coffin was not parked in the ancestral temple, the inner coffin was not used, and the Yu Festival was not held.

古文：匠庆谓季文子曰： 子为正卿，而小君之丧不成，不终君也。
现代文：匠庆对季文子说： 您做正卿，但是小君的丧礼没有完成，这是让国君不能为他生母送终。
English: Shouqing said to Ji Wenzi, "You are Zhengqing, but Xiaojun's funeral has not been completed. This is to prevent Guojun from seeing his birth mother die.

古文：君长，谁受其咎？ 
现代文：国君长大后，谁将会受到责备？ 
English: Who will be blamed when the prince grows up?

古文：初，季孙为己树六槚于蒲圃东门之外。匠庆请木，季孙曰： 略。 
现代文：起初，季孙为自己在蒲圃的东门外边种植六棵檟木，匠庆请求用它做定姒的棺椁木料，季孙说： 简单点吧。 
English: At first, Qisun planted six elm trees for himself outside the east gate of the flower bed. Shouqing asked him to use it to make coffin wood for the coffin. Qisun said, "Let's keep it simple."

古文：匠庆用蒲圃之槚，季孙不御。
现代文：匠庆还是使用了蒲圃的檟木，季孙也没有阻止。
English: Shouqing still used the birch tree from the flower bed, and Qisun didn't stop him.

古文：君子曰： 《志》所谓 多行无礼，必自及也 ，其是之谓乎。 
现代文：君子说： 《志》所说的 多做不合礼仪的事，祸患一定会来到自己身上 ，说的就是这个吧！ 
English: The gentleman said, "According to "Zhi," if you do more things that are not in line with etiquette, misfortune will surely come to you. That's what I'm talking about!"

古文：冬，公如晋听政，晋侯享公。
现代文：冬季，鲁襄公去到晋国听取晋国的要求。
English: In winter, Prince Lu Xiang went to Jin to listen to Jin's request.

古文：公请属鄫，晋侯不许。
现代文：晋悼公设享礼招待襄公，襄公请求把鄫国作为鲁国的附庸，晋悼公不答应。
English: Emperor Jinmu invited Emperor Xiangguo to a state banquet. Emperor Xiangguo asked Emperor Jinmu not to accept Emperor Jinmu's request to make Shandong a vassal state of Lu.

古文：孟献子曰： 以寡君之密迩于仇雠，而愿固事君，无失官命。
现代文：孟献子说： 由于寡君紧挨着仇敌，还是愿意坚决事奉君王，没有耽误君王的命令。
English: Meng Xianzi said, "Since the prince was in close proximity to the enemy, he was still willing to resolutely serve the king and did not delay the king's order.

古文：鄫无赋于司马。为执事朝夕之命敝邑，敝邑褊小，阙而为罪，寡君是以愿借助焉！ 晋侯许之。
现代文：鄫国并没有向晋国的司马交纳贡赋，而君王的左右却经常对我国有所命令，我国褊窄狭小，无法满足要求就是罪过，寡君因此希望得到鄫国作为帮助。 晋悼公允许了。
English: Shan State did not pay tribute to Jin State's Sima Qiao, but the monarch's right and left often have orders for our country. Our country is narrow and small, and it is a sin to be unable to meet the requirements. Therefore, the oligarch hopes to receive Shan State as help. Jin Weigong allowed.

古文：楚人使顿间陈而侵伐之，故陈人围顿。
现代文：楚国人让顿国乘陈国的空子而进攻陈国，所以陈国人包围了顿国。
English: The Chu people let the Dong attack the Chen by taking advantage of the loophole of the Chen, so the Chen surrounded the Dong.

古文：无终子嘉父使孟乐如晋，因魏庄子纳虎豹之皮，以请和诸戎。
现代文：无终子嘉父派遣孟乐去到晋国，依靠魏庄子的关系，奉献了虎豹的皮革，以请求晋国和各部戎人讲和。
English: Meng Le was sent to Jin Province by his father, who had no son, and, relying on the relationship with Wei Zhuangzi, offered the skin of a tiger and leopard to request that Jin Province and the Eunuchs of various ministries make peace.

古文：晋侯曰： 戎狄无亲而贪，不如伐之。 
现代文：晋悼公说： 戎狄没有什么亲近的人而且贪婪，不如进攻他们。 
English: Jin Weikong said, "Uncle Di doesn't have anyone close to him and is greedy. It's better to attack them."

古文：魏绛曰： 诸侯新服，陈新来和，将观于我，我德则睦，否则携贰。
现代文：魏庄子说： 诸侯新近顺服，陈国最近前来讲和，都将观察我们的行动。我们有德，就亲近我们；不这样，就背离我们。
English: Wei Zhuangzi said: The princes have recently obeyed, Chen Guo has recently spoken and will observe our actions. If we have virtue, we will be close to us; otherwise, we will depart from us.

古文：劳师于戎，而楚伐陈，必弗能救，是弃陈也，诸华必叛。
现代文：在戎人那里去用兵，楚国进攻陈国，一定不能去救援，这就是丢弃陈国了。中原诸国一定背叛我们。
English: If Chu attacked Chen, it would not be able to come to the rescue, which would mean abandoning Chen. The Central Plains countries would certainly betray us.

古文：戎，禽兽也，获戎失华，无乃不可乎？
现代文：戎人，不过是禽兽。得到戎人而失去中原，恐怕不可以吧！
English: The eunuchs are nothing but beasts. I'm afraid it's not right to gain eunuchs and lose the Central Plains!

古文：《夏训》有之曰： 有穷后羿。  公曰： 后羿何如？ 
现代文：《夏训》有这样的话 有穷的后羿一一  晋悼公说： 后羿怎么样？ 
English: In "Summer Training," there is a story about poor Hou Yi, and Jin Miao Gong said, "What about Hou Yi?

古文：对曰： 昔有夏之方衰也，后羿自鉏迁于穷石，因夏民以代夏政。
现代文：魏庄子回答说： 从前夏朝刚刚衰落的时候，后羿从鉏地迁到穷石，依靠夏朝的百姓取代了夏朝政权。
English: Wei Zhuangzi replied: From the time when the former Xia Dynasty was just in decline, Houyi moved from Shantian to Poor Rock, relying on the people of the Xia Dynasty to replace the Xia Dynasty regime.

古文：恃其射也，不修民事而淫于原兽。弃武罗、伯因、熊髡、尨圉而用寒浞。
现代文：后羿仗着他的射箭技术，不致力于治理百姓而沉溺于打猎，抛弃了武罗、伯因、熊髡、尨圉等贤臣而任用寒浞。
English: Hou Yi, relying on his archery skills, did not devote himself to governing the people and indulged in hunting. He abandoned the wise men such as Wu Luo, Bo Yin, Xiong Yao, and Yao and appointed Han Yu.

古文：寒浞，伯明氏之谗子弟也。
现代文：寒浞，是伯明氏的坏子弟，伯明后寒丢弃了他。
English: He was a bad son of the Boming clan. After Boming, Han abandoned him.

古文：伯明后寒弃之，夷羿收之，信而使之，以为己相。
现代文：后羿收养了他，信任并且使用他，作为自己的辅助。
English: Hou Yi adopted him, trusted him and used him as his assistant.

古文：浞行媚于内而施赂于外，愚弄其民而虞羿于田，树之诈慝以取其国家，外内咸服。
现代文：寒浞在里边对女人献媚，在外边广施财物，愚弄百姓而使后羿专以打猎为乐。扶植了奸诈邪恶，用这个取得了后羿的国和家，外部和内部都顺从归服。
English: He flattered the woman on the inside, lavished wealth on the outside, and fooled the people into thinking that Houyi enjoyed hunting. He supported treachery and evil, and used this to obtain Houyi's country and home, and both the outside and the inside were submissive.

古文：羿犹不悛，将归自田，家众杀而亨之，以食其子。其子不忍食诸，死于穷门。
现代文：后羿还是不肯改悔，准备从打猎的地方回来，他的手下人把他杀了煮熟，让他的儿子吃，他的儿子不忍心吃，又被杀死在穷国的城门口。
English: Hou Yi still refused to repent and prepared to return from the hunting ground. His men killed him cooked and let his son eat it. His son could not bear to eat it and was killed again at the gate of the poor country.

古文：靡奔有鬲氏。
现代文：靡逃亡到有鬲氏。
English: He fled to the Arisaki clan.

古文：浞因羿室，生浇及豷，恃其谗慝诈伪而不德于民。使浇用师，灭斟灌及斟寻氏。
现代文：寒浞和后羿的妻妾生了浇和豷，仗着他的奸诈邪恶，对百姓不施恩德，派浇带兵，灭了斟灌和斟寻氏。
English: The wife and concubine of Hanzhong He and Houyi gave birth to Ge and Zhou, and took advantage of his treachery and evil to do no favors to the people, and sent Ge and his soldiers to exterminate Qiu Guan and Qiu Xuan.

古文：处浇于过，外豷于戈。
现代文：让浇住在过地，让豷住在戈地。
English: Let the egret live in the meadow, and the lynx live in the pasture.

古文：靡自有鬲氏，收二国之烬，以灭浞而立少康。
现代文：靡从有鬲氏那里收集两国的遗民，用以灭亡了寒浞而立了少康。
English: He collected the remnants of the people of the two countries from the Youyi clan, and used them to destroy the cold war and establish a healthy society.

古文：少康灭浇于过，后杼灭豷于戈。有穷由是遂亡，失人故也。
现代文：少康在过地灭掉了浇，后杼在戈地灭掉了豷，有穷从此就灭亡了，这是由于失去贤人的缘故。
English: In the past, Shokang wiped out the Ge, in the present, Houyi wiped out the Jiao, and in the future, Gochi wiped out the Yao. Since then, the poor have perished. This is due to the loss of sages.

古文：昔周辛甲之为大史也，命百官，官箴王阙。
现代文：从前周朝的辛甲做太史的时候，命令百官，每人都劝诫天子的过失。
English: When the former Zhou Dynasty's Xin Jia was made Grand Historian, he ordered hundreds of officials to each admonish Tian Zi's faults.

古文：于《虞人之箴》曰： 芒芒禹迹，画为九州。
现代文：在《虞人之箴》里说： 辽远的夏禹遗迹，分为九州，开通了许多大道。
English: In the "Confidant's Saying," it is said: The faraway Xia Yu relic, divided into Kyushu, opened up many avenues.

古文：经启九道，民有寝庙，兽有茂草，各有攸处，德用不扰。
现代文：百姓有屋有庙，野兽有丰茂的青草；各得其所，他们因此互不干扰。
English: The people have houses and temples, the beasts have lush green grass; each has its place, so they do not interfere with each other.

古文：在帝夷羿，冒于原兽，忘其国恤，而思其麀牡。
现代文：后羿身居帝位，贪恋着打猎，忘记了国家的忧患，想到的只是飞鸟走兽。
English: Hou Yi was on the imperial throne, obsessed with hunting, forgot the country's troubles, and thought only of birds and beasts.

古文：武不可重，用不恢于夏家。
现代文：武事不能太多，太多就不能扩大夏后氏的国家。
English: There can't be too much martial arts, and there can't be too much expansion of Xia Hou's country.

古文：兽臣司原，敢告仆夫。 
现代文：主管禽兽的臣，谨以此报告君王左右的人。 
English: Minister in charge of animals, I hereby report to the people around the king.

古文：《虞箴》如是，可不惩乎？ 
现代文：《虞箴》是这样，难道能不警戒吗？ 
English: "Guzhen" is like this, can we not be vigilant?

古文：于是晋侯好田，故魏绛及之。
现代文：当时晋悼公喜欢打猎，所以魏庄子提到这件事。
English: At that time, Emperor Jinmu liked to hunt, so Wei Zhuangzi mentioned this matter.

古文：公曰： 然则莫如和戎乎？ 
现代文：晋悼公说： 然而再好的办法也莫过于跟戎人讲和吗？ 
English: Jin Weikong said: However, is there no better way than to make peace with the soldiers?

古文：对曰： 和戎有五利焉：戎狄荐居，贵华易土，土可贾焉，一也。
现代文：魏庄子回答说： 跟戎人讲和有五种利益：戎狄逐水草而居，重财货而轻土地，他们的土地可以收买，这是一。
English: Wei Zhuangzi replied: There are five kinds of benefits in talking to the soldiers: the soldiers live by water and grass, they value wealth and goods more than land, and their land can be bought, this is one.

古文：边鄙不耸，民狎其野，穑人成功，二也。
现代文：边境不再有所警惧，百姓安心在田野里耕作，农田管理的人可以完成任务，这是二。
English: There is no longer any fear of the border, the people can work in the fields with peace of mind, and those who manage farmland can complete their tasks.

古文：戎狄事晋，四邻振动，诸侯威怀，三也。
现代文：戎狄事奉晋国，四边的邻国震动，诸侯因为我们的威严而慑服，这是三。
English: This is the third time that the troops have served the state of Jin, the neighbors on all sides have been shaken, and the lords have been deterred by our majesty.

古文：以德绥戎，师徒不勤，甲兵不顿，四也。
现代文：用德行安抚戎人，将士不辛劳，武器不损坏，这是四。
English: To pacify the soldiers with virtue, soldiers do not toil, weapons are not damaged, this is the fourth.

古文：鉴于后羿，而用德度，远至迩安，五也。
现代文：有鉴于后羿的教训，而利用道德法度，远国前来而邻国安心，这是五。
English: In view of the lessons learned from the past, using the moral law to come to a distant country while the neighboring countries are at ease, this is the fifth.

古文：君其图之！ 
现代文：君王还是慎重谋划吧！ 
English: I hope you will give it some thought.

古文：公说，使魏绛盟诸戎，修民事，田以时。
现代文：晋悼公听了很高兴，派遣魏庄子与各部戎人讲和。又致力于治理百姓，按照时令去打猎。
English: Jin Muigong was very pleased to hear this and sent Wei Zhuangzi to make peace with the various Eunuchs. He also devoted himself to governing the people and went hunting according to the season.

