古文：◎世祖一世祖圣德神功文武皇帝，讳忽必烈，睿宗皇帝第四子。
现代文：世祖谥号圣德神功文武皇帝，名忽必烈，是睿宗皇帝的第四个儿子。
English: The fourth son of Emperor Ruizong, He Zuo, also known as Emperor Shunde Shengong Wenwu, was named Kublai.

古文：母庄圣太后，怯烈氏。
现代文：母亲为庄圣太后，姓怯烈氏。
English: His mother was Empress Dowager Zhuang Sheng, surnamed Qiu Rong.

古文：以乙亥岁八月乙卯生。
现代文：世祖生于乙亥年八月二十八日。
English: Zezu was born on August 28th in the year of the boar.

古文：及长，仁明英睿，事太后至孝，尤善抚下。
现代文：长大以后，仁厚、聪慧、英明、敏锐，对太后十分孝顺，尤其善于安抚下属。
English: When he grew up, he was benevolent, intelligent, wise, and keen. He was very filial to the empress dowager, and was especially good at placating subordinates.

古文：纳弘吉剌氏为妃。
现代文：娶弘吉剌氏为王妃。
English: She married Prince Hirokichi Takauji and became his wife.

古文：岁甲辰，帝在潜邸，思大有为于天下，延藩府旧臣及四方文学之士，问以治道。
现代文：甲辰年，世祖还是藩王时，就考虑到对国家要有大的作为，邀请藩王府内的旧臣以及各地精通儒学的人，向他们请教治理国家的办法。
English: In the year of Ji Chen, when the founder of the dynasty was still the king of the domain, he considered that he should do something great for the country, and invited the former ministers in the palace of the king of the domain and people who were proficient in Confucianism from all over the country to ask them for advice on how to govern the country.

古文：岁辛亥，六月，宪宗即位，同母弟惟帝最长且贤，故宪宗尽属以漠南汉地军国庶事，遂南驻瓜忽都之地。
现代文：辛亥年六月，宪宗即皇帝位，他同母的弟弟中，只有世祖最年长也最有才干，因此宪宗就把大漠以南汉族地区的各种军国事务全部交给他处理。
English: In June, Xinhai year, Xianzong was the emperor, and among his younger brothers of the same mother, only Shizu was the oldest and most talented. Therefore, Xianzong entrusted all kinds of military affairs in the Han region south of the Great Desert to him.

古文：邢州有两答剌罕言于帝曰： 邢吾分地也，受封之初，民万余户，今日减月削，才五七百户耳，宜选良吏抚循之。 
现代文：于是，世祖南下驻于爪忽都地方。
English: As a result, Shizu went south and settled in the area of Jawaku-to.

古文：帝从其言，承制以脱兀脱及张耕为邢州安抚使，刘肃为商榷使，邢乃大治。
现代文：壬子年夏，六月，世祖在曲先恼儿地方觐见宪宗，奉命率军征伐云南。癸丑年，十二月十二日，军队逼近大理城。
English: In the summer of the year of the fox, in June, the ancestor met with the founder of the Jurchen sect in the place where the Jurchen leader was upset, and was ordered to lead the army to conquer Yunnan. In the year of the ox, on December 12, the army approached Dali City.

古文：岁壬子，帝驻桓、抚间。
现代文：当初大理国君段氏权势微弱，国事都由高祥、高和兄弟决定。
English: At the beginning, the power of the Darikuni-Kudan clan was weak, and the affairs of state were decided by the Takasho and Takakazu brothers.

古文：癸亥，获高祥，斩于姚州。
现代文：十九日，俘获高祥，在姚州将他斩首。
English: On the 19th, Gao Xiang was captured and beheaded in Yaozhou.

古文：留大将兀良合带戍守，以刘时中为宣抚使，与段氏同安辑大理，遂班师。
现代文：留下大将兀良合带戍守大理城，任命刘时中为宣抚使，和段氏共同安抚大理，随后世祖就带兵回去了。
English: He appointed Liu Shizhong as the envoy, and together with Duan he pacified Dali, after which the patriarch returned with his army.

古文：冬十二月，入觐于也可迭烈孙之地，议分道攻宋，以明年为期。
现代文：丁巳年冬，十二月，世祖在也可迭烈孙地方觐见宪宗，商议分路进攻宋朝的事，进军的时间定于次年。
English: In the winter and December of the year of Ding Si, Shizhu met with Xianzong in the place of Can Dui Retsun to discuss the attack on the Song Dynasty. The time of the march was scheduled for the following year.

古文：岁戊午，冬十一月戊申，祃牙于开平东北，是日启行。
现代文：戊午年冬，十一月初三，在开平东北面祭牙旗，即于当天出发。
English: On the third day of the first month of November, in the winter of the year of Bo, the sacred tooth flag was raised on the northeast side of Kaiping, and it set off on the same day.

古文：八月丙戌，渡淮。
现代文：己未年八月十五日，渡过淮河。
English: He crossed the Huai River on August 15 last year.

古文：辛卯，入大胜关，宋戍兵皆遁。
现代文：二十日，进入大胜关，宋朝的守军都逃跑了。
English: On the 20th, entering the great victory pass, the defenders of the Song Dynasty all fled.

古文：帝察其包藏祸心，所集兵皆纵之，人心大悦。是冬，驻燕京近郊。
现代文：闰十一月初一，世祖回驻青山矶。初二，宋朝的贾似道派宋京前来求和，世祖派赵璧等人对宋京说： 你们为了生灵的缘故前来求和，意图很好，但我是奉命征伐南方，又怎么能停止呢？
English: On the first day of the eleventh month, the ancestor returned to Qingshan. On the second day of the eleventh month, the Jiaxing Dao of the Song Dynasty sent Song Jing to sue for peace, and the ancestor sent Zhao Bi and others to say to Song Jing: You have come to sue for peace for the sake of the living. Your intention is good, but I have been ordered to conquer the south. How can I stop it?

古文：中统元年春三月戊辰朔，车驾至开平。
现代文：如果你们真有事奉大国的心意，就应当向朝廷请求。 这一天，大军返回北方。世祖中统元年春，三月初一，世祖的车驾到达开平。
English: If you really want to serve a great country, you should ask the imperial court.On this day, the great army returned to the north.In the spring of the first year of the Middle Kingdom, on the first day of March, the ancestor's car arrived at Kaiping.

古文：亲王合丹、阿只吉率西道诸王，塔察儿、也先哥、忽剌忽儿、爪都率东道诸王，皆来会，与诸大臣劝进。
现代文：亲王合丹、阿只吉率领西路的诸侯王，塔察儿、也先哥、忽剌忽儿、爪都率领东路的诸侯王，都来相会，与大臣们一起奉劝世祖登帝位。
English: The princes of the west, led by Prince Hodan and Aduji, and the princes of the east, led by Tachara, Yasuchika, Kuko, and Tsuma, all came to meet and, together with the ministers, advised the patriarch to ascend to the throne.

古文：帝三让，诸王大臣固请。
现代文：世祖再三逊让，而诸侯王和大臣们坚持请求。
English: The patriarch repeatedly made concessions, but the princes and ministers insisted on their demands.

古文：辛卯，帝即皇帝位，以祃祃、赵璧、董文炳为燕京路宣慰使。
现代文：二十四日，世祖即皇帝位，任命、赵璧、董文炳为燕京路宣慰使。
English: On the 24th, the founder of the dynasty, the emperor, appointed, Zhao Bi, and Dong Wenyi as the Yanjing Road consolation envoys.

古文：陕西宣抚使廉希宪言： 高丽国王尝遣其世子倎入觐，会宪宗将兵攻宋，倎留三年不遣。
现代文：陕西宣慰使廉希宪说 ：高丽国王曾经派遣他的世子王亻典入朝觐见，把他拘留了三年没让他回去。
English: Shaanxi's proclamation caused Lian Xixian to say: The King of Korea once sent his heir, Wang Xian, to the imperial court, and detained him for three years without letting him go back.

古文：今闻其父已死，若立倎，遣归国，彼必怀德于我，是不烦兵而得一国也。 
现代文：现在听说他的父亲已经死去，如果立王亻典为国王，送他回国，他一定会怀念我们的恩德，这就等于不费兵卒而得了一个国家。 
English: Now I hear that his father has died. If we make Wang Xuanpeng king and send him back to China, he will surely miss our kindness, which is tantamount to gaining a country without any effort.

古文：帝是其言，改馆倎，以兵卫送之，仍赦其境内。
现代文：皇上认为他的话很对，让王亻典改住在客馆中，派兵侍卫，送他回去，并赦免了他国内的人。
English: The emperor thought his words were very right, let Wang Xuancheng live in a guest house, sent soldiers to escort him back, and pardoned people in his country.

古文：夏四月戊戌朔，立中书省，以王文统为平章政事，张文谦为左丞。以八春、廉希宪、商挺为陕西四川等路宣抚使，赵良弼参议司事，粘合南合、张启元为西京等处宣抚使。
现代文：夏，四月初一，建立中书省。任命八春、廉希宪、商挺为陕西、四川等路的宣抚使，赵良弼为参议司事，粘合南合、张启元为西京等地方的宣抚使。
English: In the summer, on the first day of April, the Central Book Ministry was established, and Hachun, Lian Xixian, and Shang Ting were appointed as envoys to Shaanxi, Sichuan, and other provinces; Zhao Liangyao was appointed as the secretary of the Council of Elders; and Guixing Nanghe and Zhang Qiyuan were appointed as envoys to West Beijing and other provinces.

古文：己亥，诏谕高丽国王王倎，仍归所俘民及其逃户，禁边将勿擅掠。
现代文：初二，皇上下诏，晓谕高丽国王王亻典，仍然把所掳掠的百姓以及逃亡在外的人户归还给他，禁止边将随意抢掠。
English: On the second day of the first month, the emperor issued an imperial edict, instructing the king of Goryeo, Wang Bingde, to return the people who had been captured and the people who had fled abroad to him, prohibiting the border guard from looting at will.

古文：辛丑，以即位诏天下。
现代文：初四，向全国下诏，宣布即皇帝位。诏书说：
English: On the fourth day of the first month, he issued an imperial edict to the whole country, proclaiming himself emperor. The imperial edict said:

古文：诏曰：朕惟祖宗肇造区宇，奄有四方，武功迭兴，文治多缺，五十余年于此矣。盖时有先后，事有缓急，天下大业，非一圣一朝所能兼备也。
现代文： 我凭着祖宗开创的疆域，据有四方，武功屡获建树，文治却颇见欠缺，到现在已经五十多年了，大凡时间有先有后，事情有缓有急，天下的大事业，不是一个圣王一朝天子所能够各方面全都顾到的。
English: According to the territory that my ancestors created, there are four directions, military exploits have been repeatedly built, but civil administration has been rather lacking. It has been more than fifty years now. Time has come and gone, things have been delayed and hurried, and the great cause of the world is not a holy king who can take care of all aspects.

古文：先皇帝即位之初，风飞雷厉，将大有为。
现代文：先皇帝刚即位的时候办事雷厉风行，准备大干一番。
English: When the former emperor first ascended the throne, he was very energetic and prepared to do a great deal.

古文：忧国爱民之心虽切于己，尊贤使能之道未得其人。
现代文：从自己方面说，忧国忧民之心虽然十分迫切，但在尊重贤能、使用人才方面却未能找到合适的人选。
English: From my own point of view, although it is very urgent to care for the country and the people, I have not been able to find a suitable candidate in terms of respecting talents and using talents.

古文：方董夔门之师，遽遗鼎湖之泣。岂期遗恨，竟勿克终。
现代文：正当我督率师旅进军夔门的时候，却突然传来先皇帝升天的噩耗。哪能预料到出师未捷的遗恨，竟然不能够终止呢！
English: Just as I was leading the division into the capital, the bad news of the former emperor's ascension to heaven suddenly came. Who could have predicted that the hatred of the deceased emperor would not end!

古文：肆予冲人，渡江之后，盖将深入焉，乃闻国中重以佥军之扰，黎民惊骇，若不能一朝居者。
现代文： 年纪尚轻的我，渡过长江之后正准备深入敌境，却听到京师发生了严重的征民为军的扰害。百姓们惊慌恐惧，好像一天都无法度过似的。
English: As a young man, after crossing the Yangtze River, I was preparing to go deep into the enemy territory, but I heard that the Beijing Division had a serious disturbance of recruiting people as soldiers. The people panicked and feared, as if they could not get through the day.

古文：予为此惧，驿骑驰归。
现代文：我为此而感到惶惧，乘着驿车赶回来。
English: I was alarmed by this and rushed back in a tuk-tuk.

古文：目前之急虽纾，境外之兵未戢。
现代文：眼前的急难虽然缓解了，而境外的战事还没有结束。
English: Although the immediate emergency has eased, the war outside the country has not ended.

古文：乃会群议，以集良规。
现代文：于是召集大家商议，以征集好的办法。
English: So they called everyone together to discuss and come up with a good solution.

古文：不意宗盟，辄先推戴。
现代文：没想到宗亲们竟会盟，先行推戴我为国君。
English: I didn't expect that my ancestors would actually ally with me and promote me as the country's ruler.

古文：左右万里，名王巨臣，不召而来者有之，不谋而同者皆是，咸谓国家之大统不可久旷，神人之重寄不可暂虚。
现代文：东西虽然相隔万里之遥，名公巨卿们有的却不蒙召而来到，人们不谋而合，都说国家的大统不能够长久空缺，神人的厚托一刻也不能落空。
English: Although the East and the West are separated by thousands of miles, some great nobles and great lords came without being summoned, and people coincided, all saying that the country's great leader could not be vacant for a long time, and the godman's patronage could not fail for a moment.

古文：求之今日，太祖嫡孙之中，先皇母弟之列，以贤以长，止予一人。
现代文：谋求于当今，在太祖嫡亲的孙儿中，已故宪宗皇帝的同母弟弟，无论从德才还是从长幼看，只有我一个人最为合适。
English: Seeking today, among the grandchildren of the great-grandfather's direct relatives, the late Emperor Xianzong's half-brother, whether from the perspective of virtue or from the perspective of the eldest child, I am the only one who is most suitable.

古文：虽在征伐之间，每存仁爱之念，博施济众，实可为天下主。
现代文：我虽然处于征战之中，却总是保留着仁爱的心肠，广泛地施予、救济着人们，确实可以做天下的主宰。
English: Although I am in the midst of a war, I always retain a heart of benevolence, giving and relieving people extensively. I can indeed be the ruler of the world.

古文：天骣道助顺，人谟与能。
现代文：皇天扶助顺应天命的人，人为的谋略是不能与天命相比的。
English: The Emperor Heaven supports those who comply with the Mandate of Heaven. Man-made strategies cannot be compared with the Mandate of Heaven.

古文：祖训传国大典，于是乎在，孰敢不从。
现代文：按祖训继承国祚的大法现在依然存在，谁又敢不依从。
English: The great law of inheriting the state scepter according to the ancestral teachings still exists, and who would dare to disobey it.

古文：朕峻辞固让，至于再三，祈恳益坚，誓以死请。
现代文：我郑重而又坚决地推让，以至于一而再，再而三。而诸侯王和百官的祈求恳请更加坚决，发誓要以死来请愿。
English: I solemnly and firmly yielded, so that I yielded again and again, while the princes and centurions entreated more earnestly, vowing to petition for death.

古文：于是俯徇舆情，勉登大宝。
现代文：在这样的情况下，我只好俯顺舆情，勉强登上帝位。
English: Under such circumstances, I had no choice but to bow to public opinion and reluctantly ascend to the throne.

古文：自惟寡昧，属时多艰，若涉渊冰，罔知攸济。
现代文：我自思寡德暗昧，所生的时代艰难很多，就像涉足于深渊上的薄冰一样，不知道如何补救。
English: I am self-absorbed and dark, and the times I was born into were very difficult, like stepping on thin ice on the abyss, and I don't know how to remedy it.

古文：爰当临御之始，宜新弘远之规。
现代文：正当开始临朝执政的时候，应该重新制定弘大长远的规划。
English: It is time to reformulate Hongdae's long-term plan when it comes to governing the country.

古文：祖述变通，正在今日。
现代文：既效法前代，又灵活运用，这正是当前要做的。
English: Following the example of the previous generation, and using it flexibly, this is exactly what we need to do now.

古文：务施实德，不尚虚文。
现代文：务必施行实在的恩德，不提倡虚应的文字。
English: It is imperative to practice real benevolence and not to advocate the use of artificial words.

古文：虽承平未易遽臻，而饥渴所当先务。
现代文：虽然太平时代不容易立即实现，而吃喝却是必须先行解决的。
English: Although the Taiping era is not easy to achieve immediately, eating and drinking must be solved first.

古文：呜呼！历数攸归，钦应上天之命；勋亲斯托，敢忘烈祖之规？
现代文：唉，继承大统的运数既然轮到了我，只得恭敬地顺应上天赋予的使命，既是勋旧宗亲所托付，我又怎敢忘记祖宗的规矩呢？
English: Alas, since it is my turn to inherit the great fortune, I have to respectfully comply with the mission given by heaven. Since it was entrusted to me by my ancestors, how can I dare to forget the rules of my ancestors?

古文：建极体元，与民更始。
现代文：建立皇极，开创元始，使百姓们有一个新的开始。
English: The establishment of the imperial capital, the founding of the beginning, so that the people have a new beginning.

古文：朕所不逮，更赖我远近宗族、中外文武，同心协力，献可替否之助也。
现代文：我所做不到的，更将依靠我远近的宗族，朝里朝外的文武官员，同心协力，呈献无可更替和否定的助益。
English: What I cannot do, I will rely on my distant and close family members, and the military and civilian officials in and out of the DPRK, to make concerted efforts to provide irreplaceable and negative assistance.

古文：诞告多方，体予至意！
现代文：特此广泛地告知各方的百姓，体察我恳切的用心。 
English: I hereby widely inform the people of all sides and appreciate my earnest intentions.

古文：丁未，以翰林侍读学士郝经为国信使，翰林待制何源、礼部郎中刘人杰副之，使于宋。
现代文：初十，任命翰林侍读学士郝经为国信使，以翰林待制何源、礼部郎中刘人杰做他的副手，出使宋朝。
English: On the tenth day of the first month of the year, Hanlin was appointed as the national messenger, with Hanlin's assistant He Yuan and Liu Renjie as his deputy, and sent to the Song Dynasty.

古文：丙辰，收辑中外官吏宣札牌面。
现代文：十九日，收集朝廷内外官吏的公文牌牒。
English: On the 19th, the official documents of the officials inside and outside the Imperial Court were collected.

古文：遣帖木儿、李舜钦等行部，考课各路诸色工匠。
现代文：派遣帖木儿、李舜钦等巡行各部，考察各地各类工匠。
English: He sent Timur, Li Yuqin and other officials to inspect various craftsmen in various regions.

古文：置急递铺。
现代文：设置紧急驿站。
English: Set up an emergency station.

古文：乙丑，征诸道兵六千五百人赴京师宿卫。
现代文：二十八日，征召各道兵员六千五百人前往京师担任宿卫的任务。
English: On the 28th, 6,500 soldiers from each province were called up to go to the capital to serve as guards.

古文：置互市于涟水军，禁私商不得越境，犯者死。
现代文：在涟水军设立贸易市场，下禁令，私商不许偷越国境，违犯禁令者处以死刑。
English: The establishment of a trade market in Surabaya is prohibited. Private traders are not allowed to cross the border illegally. Violators of the ban are subject to the death penalty.

古文：是月，阿里不哥僣号于和林城西按坦河。
现代文：当月，阿里不哥在和林城西面的按坦河私立伪号。
English: In the same month, Ali's brother launched a fake business under the name of "Tanhe Private" on the west side of He Lincheng.

古文：召贾居贞、张儆、王焕、完颜愈乘传赴阙。
现代文：征召贾居贞、张儆、王焕、完颜愈乘驿车前来宫阙。
English: Jia Ju Zhen, Zhang Ye, Wang Huan and Gan Yan Yue were called up to come to the imperial palace by carriage.

古文：五月戊辰朔，诏燕贴木儿、忙古带节度黄河以西诸军。
现代文：五月初一，诏令燕帖木儿、忙古带统率黄河以西的各部人马。
English: On the first day of May, Emperor Zhao ordered Yan Tiemu'er and He Guobing to lead all departments west of the Yellow River.

古文：丙戌，建元中统，诏曰：
现代文：十九日，建年号为中统，诏书说：
English: On the 19th, the founding year was Zhongtong, and the imperial edict said:

古文：祖宗以神武定四方，淳德御群下。
现代文： 祖宗凭借神授的武勇平定了天下，以淳厚的德行统御着黎民。
English: The ancestors, by virtue of their divinely-given bravery, pacified the world, and ruled over the Li people with benevolent virtue.

古文：朝廷草创，未遑润色之文；政事变通，渐有纲维之目。
现代文：皇朝建立不久，来不及以文治来增添润饰；政事经过改造变通逐渐有了规章条理。
English: The imperial dynasty was not established for a long time, and it was too late to add embellishments by means of literature; political affairs gradually became regulated after being reformed and adapted.

古文：朕获缵旧服，载扩丕图，稽列圣之洪规，讲前代之定制。
现代文：我得以继承祖业，扩充疆土，并考察祖宗的大法，研究前代的制度。
English: I was able to inherit the ancestral lineage, expand the territory, and examine the great law of the ancestors and study the system of the previous generation.

古文：建元表岁，示人君万世之传；纪时书王，见天下一家之义。
现代文：建立年号是为了表示岁时，显示帝王要万代相承袭，纪录时间，记载王业，以看出天下统一的要义。
English: The establishment of the year number is to indicate the year, show that the emperor wants to inherit from all generations, record the time, record the king's career, and see the essence of the unification of the world.

古文：法《春秋》之正始，体大《易》之乾元。
现代文：效法《春秋》做万世的轨范，体现《易经》为万物的开端。
English: Following the example of "Spring and Autumn" as a model for all ages, it embodies "I Ching" as the beginning of all things.

古文：炳焕皇猷，权舆治道。
现代文：显耀恢宏有谋略，开启安定太平的王道。
English: Shine magnificently, have a strategy, and open the royal road of stability and peace.

古文：可自庚申年五月十九日，建元为中统元年。
现代文：可从庚申年五月十九日开始，建立年号为中统元年。
English: It can start from May 19th of the Year of the Goat, and the year of establishment will be the first year of the unification.

古文：惟即位体元之始，必立经陈纪为先。
现代文：从我即帝位建立年号开始，就必须把建立法度、秩序摆在优先的地位。
English: From the beginning of my reign, the year of the establishment of the imperial throne, it is necessary to put the establishment of law and order in a priority position.

古文：故内立都省，以总宏纲；外设总司，以平庶政。
现代文：因此朝廷内设立都省，以总摄宏观的纲纪法制，朝廷外则设立总司，以处理具体政务。
English: Therefore, within the imperial court, the capital province was established, with the overall macroscopic legal system of discipline, and outside the imperial court, the general department was established to deal with specific government affairs.

古文：仍以兴利除害之事、补偏救弊之方，随诏以颂。
现代文：继续把发展利益剔除危害的措施，补救偏颇救助弊病的办法，随诏书而颁行天下。
English: The measures to continue to eliminate the harm of development interests, and the measures to remedy the maladies of biased assistance, will be promulgated to the world with the edict.

古文：於戏！秉箓握枢，必因时而建号；施仁发政，期与物以更新。
现代文：唉，我手执政柄，把握枢要，必得顺应时势而建立年号；施行仁义，颁发政令，以期盼与万物共同发展、更新。
English: Alas, I hold the reins of power, grasp the key points, must conform to the trend of the times and establish the era; implement benevolence and righteousness, issue decrees, with a view to hope for common development and renewal with all things.

古文：敷宣恳恻之辞，表著忧劳之意。
现代文：发布恳切的文告，表明忧虑的情怀。
English: issued an impassioned statement expressing concern.

古文：凡在臣庶，体予至怀！
现代文：所有的臣僚百姓，都应当体察我极深的用心！ 
English: All ministers and people should understand my deep intentions!

古文：诏安抚寿春府军民。
现代文：发布诏令安抚寿春府的军民。
English: A decree was issued to pacify the military and civilians in Shuchunfu.

古文：甲午，以阿里不哥反，诏赦天下。
现代文：二十七日，因为阿里木哥反叛而下诏大赦天下。
English: On the 27th, because Arimiko rebelled, he was pardoned by the emperor.

古文：乙未，立十路宣抚司：以赛典赤、李德辉为燕京路宣抚使，徐世隆副之；宋子贞为益都济南等路宣抚使，王磐副之；河南路经略使史天泽为河南宣抚使；杨果为北京等路宣抚使，赵昞副之；张德辉为平阳太原路宣抚使，谢瑄副之；孛鲁海牙、刘肃并为真定路宣抚使；姚枢为东平路宣抚使，张肃副之；中书左丞张文谦为大名彰德等路宣抚使，游显副之；粘合南合为西京路宣抚使，崔巨济副之；廉希宪为京兆等路宣抚使。
现代文：二十八日，设立十个路的宣抚司官署：任命赛典赤、李德辉为燕京路宣抚使，徐世隆担任副职；任命宋子贞为益都、济南等路宣抚使，王磐担任副职；任命河南路经略使史天泽为湖南宣抚使；任命杨果为北京等路宣抚使，赵炳担任副职；任命张德辉为平阳、太原路宣抚使，谢王宣担任副职；任命孛鲁海牙、刘肃共同担任真定路宣抚使；任命姚枢为东平路宣抚使，张肃担任副职；任命中书左丞张文谦为大名、彰德等路宣抚使，游显担任副职；任命粘合南合为西京路宣抚使，崔巨济担任副职；任命廉希宪为京兆等路宣抚使。
English: On the 28th, the Publicity Secretary's Office of ten provinces was established: Sai Dianchi and Li Dehui were appointed as the Publicity Secretary of Yanjing Province, and Xu Shilong held the deputy post; Song Zizhen was appointed as the Publicity Secretary of Yidu Province and Jinan Province, and Wang Pan held the deputy post; Shi Tianze, the Vice-Minister of Henan Province, was appointed as the Publicity Secretary of Hunan Province; Yang Guo was appointed as the Publicity Secretary of Beijing Province and Zhao Jun held the deputy post; Zhang Dehui was appointed as the Publicity Secretary of Pingyang Province and Taiyuan Province, and Xie Wangx

古文：以汪惟正为巩昌等处便宜都总帅，虎阑箕为巩昌路元帅。
现代文：任命汪惟正担任巩昌等处便宜行事都总帅，任命虎阑箕担任巩昌元帅。
English: He appointed Wang Weizheng as the commander-in-chief of Gongchang and other places, and appointed Tigress as the marshal of Gongchang.

古文：诏谕成都路侍郎张威安抚元、忠、绵、资、邛、彭等州，西川、潼川、隆庆、顺庆等府及各处山寨归附官吏，皆给宣命、金符有差。
现代文：颁发诏令，任命成都路侍郎张威担任元州、忠州、绵州、资州、邛州、彭州等地的安抚使。西川、潼川、隆庆、顺庆等府以及各处山寨投降的官吏，都给予正式的任命，授予不同等级的钦命符节。
English: Issued a decree to appoint Zhang Wei, a servant of Chengdu Road, as a pacifying envoy to Wenzhou, Chungju, Mianzhou, Zhizhou, Shanzhou, Pengzhou and other places. The officials of Xichuan, Shichuan, Longqing, Shunqing and other prefectures, as well as the officials who surrendered everywhere, were given formal appointments and awarded different levels of Qinmeifu Festival.

古文：诏平阳、京兆两路宣抚司佥兵七千人，于延安等处守隘，以万户郑鼎、昔剌忙古带领之，贫不能应役者，官为资给。
现代文：诏令平阳、京兆两路宣抚司签征的士兵七千人，到延安等地防守关隘，并任命万夫长郑鼎、昔剌忙古带统率他们。生活贫困而不能应召服役的，由官府给予补助。
English: He ordered 7,000 soldiers from the Pingyang and Beijing-Zhao provinces to go to Yan'an and other places to defend Guanzhou, and appointed Zheng Ding, the commander-in-chief, to lead them. Those who live in poverty and cannot be called up for service will be subsidized by the government.

古文：征诸路兵三万驻燕京近地，命诸路市马万匹送开平府。
现代文：征召各地兵员三万人驻扎在燕京附近地区。命令各地官府购置一万匹马送往开平府。
English: Conscripted 30,000 soldiers from all over the country to be stationed in the area near Yanjing. Ordered local government offices to purchase 10,000 horses and send them to Kaiping.

古文：以总帅汪良臣统陕西汉军于沿河守隘。
现代文：任命总帅汪良臣统领陕西的汉族军队，沿黄河一线防守险要之处。
English: Commander-in-Chief Wang Liangchen was appointed to lead the Han troops in Shaanxi to defend the critical areas along the Yellow River.

古文：立望云驿，非军事毋得辄入。
现代文：建立望云驿，与军旅之事无关不得随意进入。
English: It has nothing to do with the military expedition to build the Wangyun Pagoda, and you are not allowed to enter it at will.

古文：荧惑入南斗，留五十余日。
现代文：荧惑星进入斗宿南面的天宇，一共停留了五十多天。
English: The fluorescent planet entered the sky south of Dooshu and stayed for more than 50 days.

古文：六月戊戌，诏燕京、西京、北京三路宣抚司运米十万石，输开平府及抚州、沙井、净州、鱼儿泺，以备军储。
现代文：六月初二，诏令燕京、西京、北京三路的宣抚司运米十万石到开平府以及抚州、沙井、净州、鱼儿泊，以作为军粮储备。
English: On the 2nd day of the 6th month of the lunar calendar, the Generalissimo ordered the Fusiliers of Yanjing, Xijing and Beijing 3rd Road to transport 100,000 koku of rice to Kaiping, Fuzhou, Shajing, Jingzhou and Fushun to be used as military grain reserves.

古文：以李璮为江淮大都督。
现代文：任命李王为江淮大都督。
English: He appointed Li Wang as the grand governor of Jianghuai.

古文：刘太平等谋反，事觉伏诛，并诛乞带不花于东川，明里火者于西川。
现代文：刘太平等策划叛变，事情暴露以后被处死，同时在东川处死乞带不花，在西川处死明里火者。浑都海叛变。
English: Liu Taiping plotted a mutiny, and after the affair was exposed, he was executed. At the same time, he was put to death in Dongchuan for being a beggar, and he was put to death in Xichuan for being a traitor. Hunduhai mutiny.

古文：浑都海反。乙巳，李璮言： 获宋谍者，言贾似道调兵，声言攻涟州，遣人觇之，见许浦江口及射阳湖兵船二千艘，宜缮理城堑以备。 
现代文：初九，李王说： 捕获的宋朝间谍说贾似道正在调动军队，扬言要进攻涟州。派人去察看，见许浦江口和射阳湖的兵船有二千艘之多，应当修缮城壕进行防备。 
English: On the 9th day of the first month, Li Wang said: The captured Song Dynasty spy said that Jia Lian Dao was mobilizing troops and threatening to attack Zhangzhou. He sent someone to inspect, and saw that there were as many as two thousand warships at the mouth of Xu Pujiang River and Sheyang Lake, and the trenches should be repaired for defense.

古文：罢阿蓝带儿所签解盐户军百人。
现代文：遣散阿蓝带儿所签押的解州盐户兵一百名。
English: One hundred soldiers of the Leshou Salt Family signed by the Alang Children's Home were demobilized.

古文：壬子，诏陕西四川宣抚司八春节制诸军。
现代文：十六日，诏令陕西、四川宣抚司八春统辖各路军队。
English: On the 16th, the Shaanxi and Sichuan Provincial Department of Propaganda and Reassurance issued an edict to have the military forces of all provinces under the jurisdiction of Hachun.

古文：乙卯，诏东平路万户严忠济等发精兵一万五千人赴开平。
现代文：十九日，诏令东平路万户严忠济等调遣精兵一万五千人前往开平。
English: On the 19th, Emperor Taizong ordered Wangu Yanzhongji of Dongping Road to dispatch 15,000 elite soldiers to Kaiping.

古文：乙丑，以石长不为大理国总管，佩虎符。
现代文：二十九日，任命石长不担任大理国总管，身佩虎符。
English: On the 29th, Shi Chang was appointed as the chief administrator of Dali Province, wearing a tiger emblem.

古文：诏十路宣抚司造战袄、裘、帽，各以万计，输开平。
现代文：诏令十个路的宣抚司制造战袄、皮裘和帽子，各类的数目都要求上万件，运往开平。
English: The emperor ordered the ten provinces to manufacture war helmets, fur coats and hats. The number of each category required tens of thousands of pieces, which were shipped to Kaiping.

古文：是月，召真定刘郁，邢州郝子明，彰德胡祗遹，燕京冯渭、王光益、杨恕、李彦通、赵和之，东平韩文献、张昉等，乘传赴阙。
现代文：当月，征召真定的刘郁，邢州的郝子明，彰德的胡祗，燕京的玛渭、王光益、杨恕、李彦通、赵和之，东平的韩文献、张日方等人乘驿车前来朝廷。
English: That month, Liu Yu of Zhenzhen, Zang Zi Ming of Zhangzhou, Hu Rong of Zhangde, Ma Jun, Wang Guangyik, Yang Zhou, Li Yantong, Zhao Hezhi of Yanjing, Han Biao and Zhang Yifang of Dongping, and others came to the imperial court by carriage.

古文：高丽国王王倎遣其子永安公僖、判司宰事韩即来贺即位，以国王封册、王印及虎符赐之。
现代文：高丽国王王亻典派他的儿子永安公王僖、判司宰事韩即前来恭贺世祖即皇帝位，世祖把国王受封的册命诏书、国王的印信以及虎符颁赐给高丽国王。
English: The King of Korea, King Goryeo, sent his son, Prince Yongan, to congratulate his ancestor, Emperor Han, on his accession to the throne. The ancestor presented the King of Korea with the imperial edict, the King's seal, and the tiger emblem.

古文：秋七月戊辰，敕燕京、北京、西京、真定、平阳、大名、东平、益都等路宣抚司，造羊裘、皮帽、裤、靴，皆以万计，输开平。
现代文：秋，七月初二，敕令燕京、北京、西京、真定、平阳、大名、东平、益都等路的宣抚司制造羊皮袄、皮帽、皮裤、皮靴，要求都数以万计，运至开平。
English: In the autumn, on the second day of the first month of July, the Emperor ordered the Fufu Department of Yanjing, Beijing, Xijing, Jinding, Pingyang, Daming, Dongping and Yidu to manufacture sheepskin coats, leather hats, leather trousers and leather shoes, with tens of thousands of requests, and ship them to Kaiping.

古文：己巳，以万户史天泽扈从先帝有功，赐银万五千两。
现代文：初三，因万户史天泽随行护卫已故皇帝有功，赏赐白银一万五千两。
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, the late emperor was awarded 15,000 taels of silver for his contribution to the escorting of the late emperor.

古文：遣灵州种田民还京兆。
现代文：遣散灵州种田的百姓返回京兆府。
English: The people who had been dispersed from the farmlands in Lingshou returned to Jingzhao Prefecture.

古文：庚午，赐山东行省大都督李璮金符二十、银符五，俾给所部有功将士。
现代文：初四，赐给山东行省大都督李王金符牌二十面，银符牌五面，让他奖给部下有功的将士。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, he gave the governor of Shandong Province, Li Wang, twenty gold and five silver medals, and asked him to give awards to his subordinates.

古文：癸酉，以燕京路宣慰使祃祃行中书省事，燕京路宣慰使赵璧平章政事，张启元参知政事，王鹗翰林学士承旨兼修国史，河南路宣抚使史天泽兼江淮诸翼军马经略使。
现代文：初七，任命燕京路宣慰使主持中书政务，任命燕京路宣慰使为平章政事，张启元为参知政事，任命王鹗为翰林学士承旨兼修撰国史，任命河南路宣抚使史天泽兼任江淮各路军马经略使。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, he appointed Yanjing Road Xuancheng Envoy to preside over China's book and government affairs, appointed Yanjing Road Xuancheng Envoy to be Pingzhang's political affairs, Zhang Qiyuan to be Sangzhi's political affairs, appointed Wang Qian as Hanlin's bachelor to carry out the mission and write the national history, and appointed Henan Road Xuancheng Envoy Shi Tianze to also serve as the military and economic envoy of all roads in Jianghuai.

古文：丙子，诏中书省给诸王塔察儿益都、平州封邑岁赋、金帛，并以诸王白虎、袭剌门所属民户、人匠、岁赋给之。
现代文：初十，诏令中书省把益都、平州封邑的赋税、钱帛赐给诸侯王塔察儿，并把诸侯王白虎、袭剌门所属的民户、工匠和赋税赐给他。
English: On the 10th day of the first month, the central government issued an edict ordering the Ministry of Education and Literature to give the taxes and money of the Yidu and Pingzhou Fiefdoms to the vassal prince Tachara, and to give the vassal prince Baihu, the households and craftsmen belonging to Heiyuanmen, and the taxes to him.

古文：诏造中统元宝交钞。
现代文：诏令制造中统元宝和交钞纸币。
English: The Imperial Edict ordered the production of Zhongtong Yuanbao and Zhouping banknotes.

古文：立互市于颍州、涟水、光化军。
现代文：在颍州、涟水、光化军设立贸易市场。
English: Trade markets will be set up in Zhangzhou, Surabaya and Gwanghwamun.

古文：北京路都元帅阿海乞免所部军士征徭，从之。
现代文：北京路都元帅阿海请求免除部下士兵应征的徭役，世祖同意。
English: Beijing Road Marshal Ahai requested that his soldiers be exempted from conscription, and Shizu agreed.

古文：宋兵攻边城，诏遣太尹、怯列、忙古带率所部，合兵击之。
现代文：宋军攻打边境城市，世祖下诏派遣太丑、怯列、忙古带率领各自的部队，合兵对宋军进行攻击。
English: The Song army attacked the border city, and the emperor sent the ugly, cowardly, and busy old men to lead their respective troops and attack the Song army.

古文：下诏褒赏行省大都督李璮。
现代文：世祖下诏褒奖行省大都督李王。
English: The provincial governor Li Wang presented the award to the ancestor.

古文：帝自将讨阿里不哥。
现代文：皇上亲自统兵征讨阿里不哥。
English: The emperor personally led an army to fight against Ali.

古文：敕刘天麟规措中都析津驿传马。
现代文：敕令刘天麟规划筹措中都析津驿站传邮的马匹。
English: Liu Tianlin was ordered by the emperor to analyze the horses sent by mail from Tsuyu Station in the planning of the capital.

古文：八月丙午，授中书左丞、行大名等路宣抚使张文谦虎符。
现代文：八月十一日，授予中书省左丞、代理大名等路宣抚使张文谦虎符。
English: On August 11th, Zhang Wenxian tiger emblem was awarded to Zhang Wenxian, the Left Wing of the General Office of the General Office of the Central People's Government of the People's Republic of China and acting daimyo.

古文：丁未，诏都元帅纽璘所过毋擅捶掠官吏。
现代文：十二日，诏令都元帅纽王所到之处不得随意拷打官吏。
English: On the 12th, the Emperor issued an edict ordering the Grand Marshal New Wang not to torture officials at will wherever he went.

古文：己酉，立秦蜀行中书省，以京兆等路宣抚使廉希宪为中书省右丞，行省事。
现代文：十四日，设置秦蜀行中书省，任命京兆等路宣抚使廉希宪为中书省右丞相，暂代行省事务。
English: On the 14th, the People's Republic of China established the People's Republic of Qin and Shu as the People's Republic of China's People's Republic of China's People's Republic of China's People's Republic of China's People's Republic of China's People's Republic of China's People's Republic of China's People's Republic of China's People's Republic of China's People's Republic of China's People's Republic of China.

古文：宋兵临涟州，李璮乞诸道援兵。
现代文：宋军兵临涟州境，李王请求各路派遣援军。
English: The Song soldiers were on the border of Bozhou, and Li Wang requested that reinforcements be sent from all directions.

古文：癸丑，赐必庠赤塔剌浑银二千五百两。
现代文：十八日，赐予中书省掾吏塔剌浑二千五百两白银。
English: On the 18th day of the month, 2,500 taels of silver were given to the officials of the Provincial Government of the People's Republic of China.

古文：李璮乞遣将益兵，渡淮攻宋，以方遣使修好，不从。
现代文：李王请求派战将，增加士卒，渡过淮河去进攻宋朝，以利于派遣使臣前去议和修好，皇上未予同意。
English: King Li requested to send generals and additional soldiers to cross the Huai River to attack the Song Dynasty in order to facilitate the dispatch of envoys to negotiate and make peace, but the emperor did not agree.

古文：癸亥，泽州、潞州旱，民饥，敕赈之。
现代文：二十八日，泽州、潞州发生旱灾，百姓饥饿，皇上敕命赈济他们。
English: On the 28th, droughts occurred in Zezhou and Zhangzhou, and the people were starving. The emperor went to great lengths to help them.

古文：九月丁卯，帝在转都儿哥之地，以阿里不哥遗命，下诏谕中外。
现代文：九月初二，皇上在转都儿哥之地把阿里不哥违抗圣命的事情下诏令让国内外知晓。
English: On the second day of the first month of September, in the place where the capital was transferred to his brother, the emperor issued a decree to let the world know that Ali did not disobey the holy command.

古文：乙亥，李璮复请攻宋，复谕止之。
现代文：初十，李王再次请求进攻宋朝，皇上再次下令制止他。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, King Li once again requested to attack the Song Dynasty, and the emperor once again ordered to stop him.

古文：壬午，初置拱卫仪仗。
现代文：十七日，开始建立拱卫圣驾的仪仗队伍。
English: On the 17th, the construction of the ceremonial team of the archers began.

古文：是月，阿蓝答儿率兵至西凉府，与浑都海军合，诏诸王合丹、合必赤与总帅汪良臣等率师讨之。
现代文：当月，阿蓝答儿领兵到达西凉府，与浑都海的部队会合，皇上诏令诸侯王合丹、合必赤和总帅汪良臣等率军讨伐他们。
English: In the same month, Alangdara led the troops to arrive at Xiliangfu and met with the troops of the Hundu Sea. The emperor ordered the princes Wang Hetan, Hebei Chia and the general Wang Liangchen to lead the troops to fight them.

古文：丙戌，大败其军于姑臧，斩阿蓝答儿及浑都海，西土悉平。
现代文：二十七日，在姑臧大败叛军，杀死阿蓝答儿及浑都海，西边的国土便平定了。
English: On the 27th, after defeating the rebels in Guzheng and killing Alandar and Hundu Hai, the land in the west was leveled.

古文：冬十月丁未，李璮言宋兵复军于涟州。
现代文：冬，十月十三日，李王说宋军又在涟州驻军。
English: In the winter, on October 13, Li Wang said that the Song Army was stationed in Zhangzhou again.

古文：癸丑，初行中统宝钞。
现代文：十九日，开始流通中统的钱钞。
English: On the 19th, Zhongtong banknotes began to circulate.

古文：戊午，车驾驻昔光之地，命给官钱，雇在京橐驼，运米万石，输行在所。
现代文：二十四日，皇上的车驾驻跸在昔光地方，敕命付给官钱雇用京师的骆驼，运米粮一万石来皇上的驻地。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, the emperor's chariot driver stationed in the place of the past light, paid the government money to hire the camel of the Beijing division, and transported ten thousand koku of rice grain to the emperor's residence.

古文：十一月戊子，发常平仓赈益都、济南、滨棣饥民。
现代文：十一月二十五日，打开常平仓救济益都、济南、滨棣的饥民。
English: On November 25th, relief warehouses were opened to help the starving people in Yidu, Jinan, and Binzhou.

古文：十二月丙申，以礼部郎中孟甲、礼部员外郎李文俊使安南、大理。
现代文：十二月初三，任命礼部郎中孟甲、礼部员外郎李文俊出使云南、大理。
English: On the third day of December, Meng Jia, a member of the Ministry of Ceremonies, and Li Wenjun, a member of the Ministry of Ceremonies, were appointed as envoys to Yunnan and Dali.

古文：乙巳，李璮上将士功，命璮以益都官银赏之。帝至自和林，驻跸燕京近郊。
现代文：十二日，李王上报所部战士的功劳，皇上从和林来到，驻跸在燕京的近郊。
English: On the twelfth day, King Li reported the merits of the soldiers of the headquarters. The emperor came from Warim and stationed in the suburbs of Yanjing.

古文：始制祭享太庙祭器、法服。
现代文：开始制造祭祀太庙的祭器、礼服。
English: Began manufacturing ceremonial objects and ceremonial dress for the temple.

古文：以梵僧八合思八为帝师，授以玉印，统释教。立仙音院，复改为玉宸院，括乐工。
现代文：任命佛教僧人八合思巴为帝师，授予他玉印，统管佛教事务，设立仙音院，又改为玉宸院，罗致乐工。
English: He appointed the Buddhist monk Eight-Headed Siba as the imperial teacher, awarded him the Jade Seal, took over the management of Buddhist affairs, established the Xianyin Academy, which was changed to the Jade Jade Academy, and appointed Luo Zhilong as the composer.

古文：立仪凤司，又立符宝局及御酒库、群牧所。
现代文：设立仪凤司，又设立符宝局及御酒库、群牧所。
English: The Office of Ceremonies and Phoenixes was established, as well as the Office of Treasures, the Imperial Liquor Store, and the Herdsmen's House.

古文：升卫辉为总管府。
现代文：升格卫辉县为总管府。
English: Weihui County was upgraded to the General Administration Office.

古文：赐亲王穆哥银二千五百两；诸王按只带、忽剌忽儿、合丹、忽剌出、胜纳合儿银各五千两，文绮帛各三百匹，金素半之；诸王塔察、阿术鲁钞各五十九锭有奇，绵五千九十八斤，绢五千九十八匹，文绮三百匹，金素半之；海都银八百三十三两，文绮五十匹，金素半之；睹儿赤、也不干银八百五十两；兀鲁忽带银五千两，文绮三百匹，金素半之；只必帖木儿银八百三十三两；爪都、伯木儿银五千两，文绮三百匹，金素半之；都鲁、牙忽银八百三十三两，特赐绵五十斤；阿只吉银五千两，文绮三百，金素半之；先朝皇后怗古伦银二千五百两，罗绒等折宝钞二十三锭有奇；皇后斡者思银二千五百两；兀鲁忽乃妃子银五千两。
现代文：赐给亲王穆哥二千五百两白银，赐给诸侯王按只带、忽剌忽儿、合丹、忽剌出、胜纳合儿各五千两白银，带花纹的绸缎各三百匹，金色、素色的各一半；赐给诸侯王塔察、阿米鲁钱钞各五十九锭多，绵五千零九十八斤，绢五千零九十八匹，带花纹的绸缎各三百匹，金色的、素色的各一半；赐给海都八百三十三两白银，带花纹的绸缎各五十匹，金色的、素色的各一半；赐给睹儿赤、也不干八百五十两白银；赐给兀鲁忽带五千两白银，带花纹的绸缎三百匹，金色的、素色的各半；赐给只必帖木儿八百三十三两白银；赐给爪都、伯木儿五千两白银，带花纹的绸缎三百匹，金色的、素色的各半；赐给都鲁、牙忽八百三十三两白银，特地赐绵五十斤；赐给阿只吉五千两白银，带花纹的绸缎三百匹，金色的、素色的各半；赐给先朝皇后忄占古伦二千五百两白银，罗绒等折合钱钞二十三锭多；赐给皇后斡者思二千五百两白银；赐给妃子兀鲁忽五千两白银。
English: To Prince Mugo, twenty-five hundred and two pieces of silver; to the princes, five thousand and two pieces of silver to each of the princes, to each of the princes, to each of the princes, to each of the princes, to each of the princes, to each of the princes, to each of the princes, to each of the princes, to each of the princes, to each of the princes, to each of the princes, to each of the princes, to each of the princes, to each of the princes, to each of the princes, to each of the princes, to each of the princes, to each of the princes, to each of the princes, to each of the princes, to each

古文：自是岁以为常。
现代文：从此以后每年成为常例。
English: Since then, the situation has been normal.

古文：二年春正月辛未夜，东北赤气照人，大如席。
现代文：世祖中统二年春，正月初九夜间，东北方有一赤色气团，光亮照人，大如一床席子。
English: On the night of the ninth day of the first month of the second year of King Sejong's reign, there was a red aura in the northeast, shining brightly, as big as a bed mat.

古文：乙酉，宋兵围涟州。
现代文：二十三日，宋军围困涟州。
English: On the 23rd, the Song army besieged Ganzhou.

古文：己丑，李璮率将士迎战，败之，赐诏奖谕，给金银符以赏将士。
现代文：二十七日，李王率领将士迎战，击败宋军。皇上下诏给予奖赏，赐给李王金银牌符，用以奖赏将士。
English: On the 27th, King Li led his generals into battle, defeating the Song army. The emperor gave a reward and presented King Li with a gold and silver medal to reward his generals.

古文：庚寅，璮擅发兵修益都城堑。
现代文：二十八日，李王擅自派兵修建益都城外的壕堑。
English: On the 28th, King Li sent troops without authorization to build trenches outside Yidu.

古文：二月丁酉，太阴掩昴。
现代文：二月初五，月亮遮住昴星。
English: On the 5th day of the 2nd month, the moon covered the bright star.

古文：己亥，宋兵攻涟水，命阿术等帅兵赴之。
现代文：初七，宋军进攻涟水，皇上令阿术等率军前往涟水。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, the Song army attacked Surabaya, and the emperor ordered Ah Shu to lead the army to Surabaya.

古文：丙午，车驾幸开平。
现代文：十四日，皇上的车驾抵达开平。
English: On the 14th, the emperor's carriage arrived at Kaiping.

古文：诏减免民间差发，罢守隘诸军。
现代文：下诏减少或免除民间的科差征发。撤除防守隘口的士兵。
English: The next edict reduced or exempted the civilian Keshi conscription. Remove the soldiers from the defense gap.

古文：秦蜀行省借民钱给军，以今年税赋偿之。
现代文：秦蜀行省借贷百姓的钱财供给军用，用今年的赋税银子以补偿。
English: Qinhuangdao Province borrowed money from the people and supplied it to the military, using this year's tax money to compensate.

古文：免平阳、太原军站户重科租税。
现代文：免除平阳、太原军户交纳租税中沉重的条款。
English: exempt the military households in Pingyang and Taiyuan from paying heavy taxes.

古文：丁未，诏行中书省平章祃祃及王文统等率各路宣抚使赴阙。
现代文：十五日，诏令代行中书省事务的平章及王文统等人率领各路宣抚使前往朝廷。
English: On the 15th, Ping Zhang and Wang Wenzhong, who were acting on behalf of the affairs of the Ministry of Literature, led all the envoys to the imperial court.

古文：丁巳，李璮破宋兵于沙湖堰。
现代文：二十五日，李王在沙湖堰击败宋军。
English: On the 25th, King Li defeated the Song army at Shahu Weir.

古文：三月壬戌朔，日有食之。
现代文：三月初一，又发生日食。
English: On the first day of March, another solar eclipse occurred.

古文：夏四月丙午，诏军中所俘儒士听赎为民。
现代文：夏，四月十五日，诏令军中所俘虏的儒士，听任他们赎身为民。
English: In the summer, on April 15th, the emperor ordered the captive Confucianists in the army to let them redeem themselves for the people.

古文：辛亥，遣弓工往教鄯阐人为弓。
现代文：二十日，派遣制造弓箭的工匠去教鄯阐人制造弓箭。
English: On the 20th, the craftsmen who made the bows and arrows were sent to teach the people of Suwa to make bows and arrows.

古文：乙卯，诏十路宣抚使量免民间课程。
现代文：二十四日，诏令十个路的宣抚使酌量减免民间赋税。
English: On the 24th, the imperial edict announced the discretionary reduction and exemption of non-governmental taxes in ten ways.

古文：命宣抚司官劝农桑，抑游惰，礼高年，问民疾苦，举文学才识可以从政及茂才异等，列名上闻，以听擢用；其职官污滥及民不孝悌者，量轻重议罚。
现代文：敕命宣抚司的官员鼓励农桑，抑制浪游懒惰，尊敬老年人，慰问民生疾苦，举荐有学问有才能又可以从事政务以及品德高尚的人，列出名单上报，以等待提拔任用；那些贪官污吏以及不孝顺长辈的人，应当量其轻重给以处罚。
English: The officials of the Department of Publicity and Guidance should encourage farmers, discourage wandering and laziness, respect the elderly, sympathize with the hardships of the people's livelihood, recommend people with learning and talent who can engage in government affairs and have high moral character, and submit a list to the newspaper to await promotion and appointment; those corrupt officials and those who are not filial to elders should be punished according to their weight.

古文：辛酉，诏太康弩军二千八百人戍蔡州。
现代文：三十日，诏令太康二千八百名弓箭手前往戍守蔡州。
English: On the 30th, Taikang sent 2,800 archers to defend Caizhou.

古文：以礼部郎中刘芳使大理等国。
现代文：命令礼部郎中刘芳出使大理等国。
English: He ordered Liu Fang, a member of the Ministry of Ceremonies, to send envoys to Dali and other countries.

古文：五月乙丑，禁使臣毋入民家，令止顿析津驿。
现代文：五月初四，禁止使臣到百姓家中去，命令他们只住在析津驿。
English: On the fourth day of the fifth lunar month, the envoys were forbidden to go to people's homes and were ordered to live only in Seijin.

古文：遣崔明道、李全义为详问官，诣宋淮东制司，访问国信使郝经等所在，仍以稽留信使、侵扰疆场诘之。
现代文：派遣崔明道、李全义为详问官，到宋朝境内淮东制置使司去访求本朝的信使郝经等人在什么地方，仍然以扣留信使、侵扰边境的罪名质问对方。
English: He dispatched Cui Mingdao and Li Quanyi as detailed interrogators to the Song Dynasty's Huaidong Stationing Division to inquire about the whereabouts of this dynasty's courier Xu Jing and others, and still questioned the other side on the charges of detaining the courier and invading the border.

古文：庚辰，敕使臣及军士所过城邑，官给廪饩，毋扰于民。
现代文：十八日，敕令外国使臣及军兵所经过的城镇，一概由官府供给饮食，不得侵扰百姓。
English: On the 18th, the emperor ordered that all towns that foreign envoys and soldiers passed through should be provided with food and drink by the government, and they should not disturb the people.

古文：丁亥，申严沿边军民越境私商之禁。
现代文：二十五日，严格申令边境左近地区的军民，不得超过边界进行个人商贸。
English: On the 25th, the military and civilians in areas close to the border were strictly ordered not to cross the border for personal trade.

古文：唐庆子政臣入见，诏复其家。
现代文：唐庆的儿子唐政臣入朝觐见皇上，皇上下令免除他的赋税徭役。
English: When Tang Qing's son, Tang Zhengchen, entered the imperial court to meet the emperor, the emperor ordered that he be exempted from paying taxes.

古文：弛诸路山泽之禁。
现代文：放宽对于各处山泽的禁令。
English: Relaxation of the ban on all mountain torrents.

古文：禁私杀马牛。
现代文：禁止私自宰杀马牛。
English: It is forbidden to slaughter horse cattle without permission.

古文：申严越境私商，贩马匹者罪死。
现代文：严格申令越境的商人，私自贩卖马匹的处以死刑。
English: Traders who cross the border illegally to sell horses will be punished with the death penalty.

古文：以河南经略宣抚使史天泽为中书右丞相，河南军民并听节制。
现代文：任命河南经略宣抚使史天泽为中书右丞相，河南路的军民全部听从他的节制。
English: The Henan Provincial Committee of the CPC appointed Shi Tianze as the Vice-Minister of the CPC Central Committee, and all the soldiers and civilians in Henan Road obeyed his restraint.

古文：诏成都路置惠民药局。
现代文：诏令成都路设置施惠于百姓的药局。
English: He ordered the establishment of a pharmacy on Chengdu Road to benefit the people.

古文：遣王祐于西川等路采访医、儒、僧、道。
现代文：派遣王在西川等路寻访医生、儒士、僧侣、道人。
English: Wang was sent to search for doctors, Confucianists, monks and Taoists in the West River and other areas.

古文：六月癸巳，括漏籍老幼等户，协济编户赋税。
现代文：六月初三，登记遗漏于册籍的老年人和儿童户口，以增加编户百姓的赋税。
English: On the third day of the sixth month, the elderly and children who have been omitted from the household register will be registered to increase the tax paid by the people who make up the household.

古文：丙申，赐新附人王显忠、王谊等衣物有差。
现代文：初六，赐给新归顺的王显忠、王谊等人数量不等的衣物。
English: On the 6th day of the first month, the newly converted Wang Xianzhong, Wang Youyi, and others were given varying amounts of clothing.

古文：李璮遣人献涟水捷。
现代文：李王派人献上涟水之战中的战利品。
English: King Li sent someone to present the spoils of war from the Battle of Surabaya.

古文：罢诸路拘收孛兰奚。
现代文：制止各路拘留无人认领的农奴。
English: Stop detaining unclaimed serfs at every turn.

古文：禁诸王擅遣使招民及征私钱。
现代文：禁止诸侯王擅自派人罗致百姓及征收百姓的私钱。
English: Princes and lords were forbidden to send people to the people without authorization and to collect the people's private money.

古文：戊戌，太阴犯角。
现代文：初八，太阴星干犯角宿。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, it is too cloudy and the stars are too far away.

古文：诏谕十路宣抚司并管民官，定盐酒税课等法。
现代文：诏令十个路的宣抚司和管民官制定盐酒税收的法规。
English: The edict ordered the propaganda departments and people's administrators of the ten provinces to formulate regulations on the taxation of salt wine.

古文：癸卯，以严忠范为东平路行军万户兼管民总管，仍谕东平路达鲁花赤等官并听节制。
现代文：十三日，任命严忠范为东平路行军万户并兼任管民总管，仍晓谕东平路总管等官员全部听从他节制。
English: On the 13th, Yan Zhongfan was appointed as the leader of the Dongping Road march of 10,000 households and concurrently served as the chief administrator of the people, and still instructed the Dongping Road chief administrator and other officials to obey his restraint.

古文：诏定中外官所乘马数各有差。
现代文：下诏规定朝廷内外官员乘马的数额，各有差别。
English: The following edict stipulates that the amount of officials from both inside and outside the imperial court riding horses is different.

古文：乙巳，赈火少里驿户之乏食者。
现代文：十五日，赈济缺少食物的火少里驿户。
English: On the fifteenth day of the month, Setouchi, a small town in the foothills of Mt.

古文：赏钦察所部将校有功者银二千五百两及币帛有差。
现代文：赏赐钦察部下有功的军官二千五百两白银及数量不同的钱币和绢帛。
English: He rewarded the meritorious officers under the supervision of Qin with 2,500 taels of silver and various amounts of coins and ingots.

古文：己酉，命窦默仍翰林侍讲学士。
现代文：十九日，命窦默继续担任翰林侍讲学士。
English: On the 19th, Meitou Miao continued to serve as Hanlin's assistant lecturer.

古文：默与王鹗面论王文统不宜在相位，荐许衡代之，帝不怿而罢。
现代文：窦默和王鹗当面提出王文统不适合居于宰相之位，推荐许衡代替他，皇上很不高兴，就作罢了。
English: Dou Miao and Wang Qian personally proposed that Wang Wuntong was not suitable to be the prime minister and recommended that Xu Heng replace him. The emperor was very unhappy, so they stopped doing it.

古文：辛亥，转懿州米万石赈亲王塔察儿所部饥民。
现代文：二十一日，把一万石米转运到懿州赈济亲王塔察儿部的饥民。
English: On the 21st, ten thousand koku of rice were transported to starving people in the Prince Tacha Children's Home in Ganzhou.

古文：赐亲王合丹所部军币帛九百匹、布千九百匹。
现代文：赐给亲王合丹所属的军队绢帛九百匹，布一千九百匹。
English: He gave 900 camels and 1,900 horses to the army of Prince Hattan.

古文：乙卯，敕平阳路安邑县蒲萄酒自今毋贡。
现代文：二十五日，敕令平阳路安邑县从现在起无需进贡葡萄酒。
English: On the 25th day of the month, the magistrate ordered that from now on, Pingyang Road, Anyi County would not need to pay tribute wine.

古文：诏： 宣圣庙及管内书院，有司岁时致祭，月朔释奠，禁诸官员使臣军马，毋得侵扰亵渎，违者加罪。 
现代文：诏令说 ：宣圣公孔子庙及其管辖下的书院，官府应按年月时令祭祀；禁止官员、使臣的侍卫和马匹入内，一概不许侵害、扰乱、亵渎，违犯者从严治罪。 
English: The imperial edict said: the Confucius Temple and the colleges under its jurisdiction should be sanctified, and the government should hold religious services according to the lunar calendar; officials, envoys' bodyguards and horses are prohibited from entering, and no one is allowed to infringe, disturb or blaspheme, and violators will be severely punished.

古文：丙辰，以汪良臣同签巩昌路便宜都总帅，凡军民官并听良臣节制。
现代文：二十六日，任命汪良臣同署巩昌路便宜行事都总帅，所有军队及地方官员全部听从汪良臣节制。
English: On the 26th, Wang Liangcheng was appointed the commander-in-chief of Gongchang Road, and all the military and local officials all obeyed Wang Liangcheng's restraint.

古文：丁巳，敕诸路造人马甲及铁装具万二千，输开平。
现代文：二十七日，敕令各路府制造人马衣甲及铁装器具一万二千套运至开平。
English: On the 27th, the government ordered the manufacturers of men's and women's clothing, armor and ironware to transport 12,000 sets to Kaiping.

古文：戊午，诏毋收卫辉、怀孟赋税，以偿其所借刍粟。
现代文：二十八日，训令不得征收卫辉、怀孟两地的赋税，以补偿从该地所借的粮草。
English: On the 28th, it was ordered not to collect taxes from Weihui and Huai Meng to compensate for the grain and grass borrowed from this place.

古文：庚申，宋泸州安抚使刘整举城降，以整行夔府路中书省兼安抚使，佩虎符。
现代文：三十日，宋将、泸州安抚使刘整以泸州城投降，任命刘整掌管夔府路中书省政务并兼任安抚使，授予虎符。
English: On the 30th, Song general and Bozhou pacifier Liu Zhengyi made Liu Zhengyi surrender Bozhou City, appointed Liu Zhengyi to be in charge of the government affairs of Bozhou Road, Zhongshu Province, and concurrently served as a pacifier, and awarded him the Tiger Emblem.

古文：仍谕都元帅纽璘等使存恤其民。
现代文：仍旧谕令都元帅纽王等，使其慰问、安抚当地百姓。
English: He still ordered the Marshal of the Capital, New Wang, to send his condolences and pacify the local people.

古文：赐故金翰林修撰魏璠谥靖肃。
现代文：赐给已故金朝翰林修撰魏谥号靖肃。
English: It was bestowed upon the late Kim Choson Han Lin Xiu to compose the Wei-Yi number Jingsu.

古文：秦蜀行省言青居山都元帅钦察等所部将校有功，诏降虎符一、金符五、银符五十七，令行省铨定职名给之。
现代文：秦蜀行中书省上报说，青居山都元帅钦察等部下的军官有功，诏令颁发虎符一面、金符五面、银符五十七面，令行省官署核定职务名分授予他们。
English: According to the report submitted by the Ministry of Education and Culture in Qinhuangdao, Qingju Mountain Capital Marshal Qincha and other subordinate officers have made great contributions. The imperial decree issued one tiger, five gold and fifty-seven silver charms, and awarded them with the official positions approved by the provincial government.

古文：城临洮。
现代文：修筑临洮城。
English: Construction of Linyi City.

古文：升真定鼓城县为晋州，以鼓城、安平、武强、饶阳隶焉。
现代文：将真定鼓城县升格为晋州，以鼓城、安平、武强、饶阳隶属于它。
English: Jinding Gucheng County will be upgraded to Jinzhou, with Gucheng, Anping, Wuqiang and Raoyang attached to it.

古文：赐僧子聪怀孟、邢州田各五十顷。
现代文：将怀孟、邢州的田地各五十顷赐予僧人子聪。
English: He gave 50 hectares of farmland each in Huai Meng and Zhangzhou to the monk Zi Cong.

古文：罢金、银、铜、铁、丹粉、锡碌坑冶所役民夫及河南舞阳姜户、藤花户，还之州县。
现代文：遣散金、银、铜、铁、丹粉、锡石等矿坑所役使的民工，以及河南路舞阳县种姜、种藤花的民户，让他们返回各自的州县。
English: The relocation of the gold, silver, copper, iron, camphor, cassiterite and other mines' migrant workers, as well as the ginger and wisteria growers in Maiyang County, Henan Road, let them return to their respective states and counties.

古文：赐大理国主段实虎符，优诏抚谕之。
现代文：授予大理国国王段实虎符，特下优诏抚慰。
English: Awarded the King of Dali with a real tiger emblem, and received a special commendation.

古文：命李璮领益都路盐课。
现代文：命李王管理益都路的盐税。
English: Li Wang was ordered to administer the salt tax of Yidu Road.

古文：出工局绣女，听其婚嫁。
现代文：遣回工局的刺绣女工，任凭他们婚嫁。
English: Embroidered female workers repatriated to the Labor Bureau were allowed to marry.

古文：怀孟广济渠提举王允中、大使杨端仁凿沁河渠成，溉田四百六十余所。
现代文：怀孟广济渠提举王允中、大使杨端仁开凿沁河渠成功，灌溉田亩四百六十多处。
English: Wang Yunzhong and Ambassador Yang Duanren, who were promoted by Huai Meng Guangji Canal, succeeded in digging the canal, and more than 460 mu of irrigated fields were created.

古文：高丽国王倎更名禃，遣其世子愖奉表来朝，命宿卫将军孛里察、礼部郎中高逸民持诏往谕，仍以玉带赐之。
现代文：高丽国王王亻典改名为王礻直，派遣他的世子王忄甚敬奉表章前来朝见，皇上命宿卫将军孛里察、礼部郎中高逸民持诏书前往宣谕，仍依旧例赏赐玉带给他。
English: The King of Goryeo, Wang Sonen, changed his name to Wang Son Chung, and sent his heir, Wang Son Jikun, to come to the Imperial Court to receive the insignia. The Emperor's General of the Life Guards, Son Ri Cha, and the Minister of Ceremonies, Gao Yimin, carried the imperial edict to the court. He was still given a jade belt as a reward.

古文：以不花为中书右丞相，耶律铸为中书左丞相，张启元为中书右丞。
现代文：任命不花为中书右丞相，耶律铸为中书左丞相，张启元为中书右丞。
English: Appointed Fuxian as the Minister of the Right of the Middle Book, Ye Li as the Minister of the Left of the Middle Book, and Zhang Qiyuan as the Minister of the Right of the Middle Book.

古文：授管领崇庆府、黎、雅、威、茂、邛、灌七处军民小太尉虎符。
现代文：将虎符授予管辖崇庆府、黎州、雅州、威州、茂州、邛州、灌州七处地方军民的小太尉。
English: The tiger emblem will be awarded to the junior lieutenant in charge of the military and civilians of seven localities in Chongqing Prefecture, Lizhou, Yazhou, Weizhou, Maozhou, Ganzhou and Guanzhou.

古文：秋七月辛酉朔，立军储都转运使司，以马月合乃为使，周锴为副使。
现代文：秋，七月初一，设置军储都转运使司，任命马月合乃为转运使，周锴为转运副使。
English: In autumn, on the first day of July, the Department of Military Reserves and Transportation was set up, and Ma Yuegano was appointed as the transfer envoy, and Zhou Qi as the deputy transfer envoy.

古文：癸亥，初立翰林国史院。
现代文：初三，开始建立翰林国史院。
English: In his junior year, he began to establish the Hanlin Institute of National History.

古文：王鹗请修辽、金二史，又言： 唐太宗置弘文馆，宋太宗设内外学士院。
现代文：王鹗提请修撰辽、金两朝的历史，又说 ：唐太宗建立弘文馆，宋太宗设置内外学士院。
English: Wang Hui requested that the history of the Liao and Jin Dynasties be written down, and also said that Tang Taizong established the Hongwen Museum, and Song Taizong set up the Inner and Outer Academy.

古文：今宜除拜学士院官，作养人才。
现代文：当前应当任命学士院的官员以培养人才。
English: Officials of the academy should be appointed now to nurture talent.

古文：乞以右丞相史天泽监修国史，左丞相耶律铸、平章政事王文统监修《辽》、《金史》，仍采访遗事。 
现代文：希望任命右丞相史天泽监修国朝历史，左丞相耶律铸、平章政事王文统监修《辽史》、《金史》，多多搜集、访求轶闻遗事。 
English: It is hoped that the Minister of the Right, Tian Ze, will be appointed to supervise the history of the country and the dynasty, and the Minister of the Left, Ye Li, and the Minister of the Left, Wang Wen, will supervise the "Liao History" and "Gold History," and collect and visit many gossip relics.

古文：并从之。
现代文：皇上完全采纳了他们的建议。
English: The late emperor agreed.

古文：赈和林饥民。赏巩昌路总帅汪惟正将校斩浑都海功银二千五百两、马价银四千九百两。
现代文：赈济和林的饥民，赏赐巩昌路总帅汪惟正部下斩浑都海有功的军官二千五百两白银、四千九百两马价银。
English: To help the starving people of Fuxi and Lin, the Gongchang Road commander Wang Weizheng rewarded the meritorious officers of his subordinates with 2,500 silver and 4,900 taels of silver.

古文：诸王昌童招河南漏籍户五百，命付之有司。
现代文：诸侯王昌童招得河南漏载户籍册的民户五百户，命令把他们交给官府。
English: Prince Wang Changdong invited 500 households in Henan with missing household registration books and ordered them to hand them over to the government.

古文：命总管王青制神臂弓、柱子弓。
现代文：命令总管王青制造神臂弓、柱子弓。
English: He ordered the chief steward Wang Qing to make a divine arm bow and a pillar bow.

古文：谕河南管军官于近城地量存牧场，余听民耕。
现代文：谕令河南管领军队的官员在靠近城市的地方丈量土地，保存牧场，其余的田地听任百姓耕种。
English: The decree ordered the officials in charge of the army in Henan to measure the land near the city, preserve the pastures, and leave the rest of the fields to be cultivated by the people.

古文：巴思答儿乞于高丽鸭绿江西立互市，从之。
现代文：巴思答儿请求在高丽鸭绿江西侧建立贸易市场。
English: Baath replied by requesting the establishment of a trade market on the west side of the Yalu River in Korea.

古文：乙丑，遣使持香币祀岳渎。
现代文：皇上同意这一建议。初五，派使者携带香烛费祭祀山川。
English: The Emperor agreed to this suggestion. On the fifth day of the first month, an emissary was sent to bring incense to the mountain and river.

古文：丁丑，渡江新附民留屯蔡州者，徙居怀孟，贷其种食。
现代文：十七日，渡过长江新近来归附、留住在蔡州的百姓迁居到怀孟，将粮种借贷给他们食用。
English: On the 17th, the newly annexed people who had crossed the Yangtze River and stayed in Caizhou moved to Huai Meng, and the grain seeds were lent to them for consumption.

古文：以万家奴为安抚高丽军民达鲁花赤，赐虎符。
现代文：任命万家奴为安抚高丽军民的监印官，赐给他虎符。
English: He appointed Wan Jia Nong as the censor to pacify the Korean army and people, and gave him the Tiger Emblem.

古文：庚辰，西京、宣德陨霜杀稼。
现代文：二十日，西京、宣德因降严霜而冻死庄稼。
English: On the 20th, crops froze to death in Xijing and Xuande due to severe frost.

古文：辛巳，诏许衡即其家教怀孟生徒。
现代文：二十一日，诏令许衡就在他的家中教授学生。
English: On the 21st, Xu Heng came to his home to teach his students.

古文：命西京宣抚司造船备西夏漕运。
现代文：命令西京宣抚司制造船只以备办西夏的漕运。
English: He ordered the Xijing Xuan Fu Division to build ships to prepare for the transportation of Western Xia.

古文：壬午，遣纳速剌丁、孟甲等使安南。
现代文：二十二日，派遣纳速剌丁、孟甲等人出使安南。
English: On the 22nd, Nahao Ding, Meng Jia and others were dispatched to Annan.

古文：乙酉，以牛驿雨雪，道途泥泞，改立水驿。
现代文：二十五日，因为天降雨雪，用牛车驿传道路泥泞难行，改用水路驿传。
English: On the 25th, because of the rain and snow, it was difficult to pass through the muddy road with the ox cart, so it was passed through the waterway.

古文：己丑，命炼师王道妇于真定筑道观，赐名玉华。
现代文：二十九日，命令道士王道妇在真定修建道观，赐名为玉华观。
English: On the 29th, he ordered the Taoist priest Wang Daowu to build a Taoist monastery in Zhending, which was given the name of Yuhua Monastery.

古文：谕将士举兵攻宋，诏曰： 朕即位之后，深以戢兵为念，故年前遣使于宋以通和好。
现代文：传谕将士们起兵进攻宋朝，诏令说 ：我即位之后，常常考虑要消除兵戎战事。因而去年派使臣到宋朝去沟通友好关系。
English: The imperial edict ordered the generals to attack the Song Dynasty. The imperial edict said, "After I ascended the throne, I often thought about eliminating military conflicts. Therefore, I sent an envoy to the Song Dynasty last year to communicate friendly relations.

古文：宋人不务远图，伺我小隙，反启边衅，东剽西掠，曾无宁日。
现代文：然而宋人不做长远打算，乘我这里有小小的空子可钻，反倒挑起边境事端，东边抢，西边掠，竟没有安宁的日子。
English: However, the Song people did not make long-term plans, taking advantage of a small loophole here, but provoked a border incident, robbing the east and robbing the west, and there was no peace.

古文：朕今春还宫，诸大臣皆以举兵南伐为请，朕重以两国生灵之故，犹待信使还归，庶有悛心，以成和议，留而不至者，今又半载矣。
现代文：今年春天我回到宫里，大臣们都请求出兵征讨南方，我主要为两国生灵着想，仍然等待着使臣回来。希望宋人有悔改之心，使双方能达成和议。然而使臣被扣留在那边不能返回，到现在又有半年了。
English: When I returned to the Imperial Palace this spring, the ministers all requested that troops be sent to the south for conscription. Mainly for the sake of the lives of the two countries, I am still waiting for the envoys to return. I hope that the Song people have a heart of repentance, so that the two sides can reach a peace agreement. However, the envoys have been detained there and cannot return, and now it has been half a year.

古文：往来之礼遽绝，侵扰之暴不已。
现代文：彼此往来的礼节于是断绝，侵犯骚扰的暴行也就不能停止。
English: As a result, the etiquette of interacting with each other was severed, and the violence of harassment could not be stopped.

古文：彼尝以衣冠礼乐之国自居，理当如是乎？
现代文：他们曾经以文明教化的国度自居，难道就应该这样么？
English: They used to present themselves as a civilized country. Is that how it should be?

古文：曲直之分，灼然可见。
现代文：谁对谁错的界限，是可以看得清清楚楚的。
English: The boundaries of who is right and who is wrong can be clearly seen.

古文：今遣王道贞往谕。
现代文：如今又派了王道贞前去晓谕他们。
English: Now the king has sent Douzhen to speak to them.

古文：卿等当整尔士卒，砺尔戈矛，矫尔弓矢，约会诸将，秋高马肥，水陆分道而进，以为问罪之举。
现代文：你们应当整顿你们的士卒，磨快你们的武器，矫正你们的弓箭，会同各位将军，趁秋高气爽、马草正肥的时候，水陆两路分道前进，作为问罪的举措。
English: You should rectify your soldiers, sharpen your weapons, straighten your bows and arrows, and, together with the generals, take advantage of the autumn when the air is high and the horse grass is fat, to separate the water and land roads, as a measure to investigate the crime.

古文：尚赖宗庙社稷之灵，其克有勋。
现代文：何况还依靠着宗庙社稷的神灵护佑，一定能建树功勋。
English: Moreover, relying on the protection of the deities of the ancestral temples and shrines, they will surely be able to build a meritorious achievement.

古文：卿等当宣布朕心，明谕将士，各当自勉，毋替朕命。 
现代文：你们应当宣示、传布我的意思，明确地告诉将士们，应当各自努力，不要违背了我的命令。
English: You should declare and spread My will, clearly tell the soldiers, and work hard individually, and do not go against My order.

古文：鄂州青山矶、浒黄洲所招新民迁至江北者，设官领之。
现代文：鄂州青山矶、浒黄州所招致的、新近归附迁徙到长江以北的百姓，设置官署管辖他们。
English: A government office will be set up to govern the newly-repatriated people who have migrated north of the Yangtze River, attracted by the Qingshan Mountains in Ezhou and Huangzhou in Shandong.

古文：敕怀孟牧地听民耕垦。
现代文：敕令怀孟县，放牧之地听凭百姓们耕种垦植。 
English: According to the decree of the State Council, the grazing land in Waimeng County should be cultivated and planted by the people.

古文：八月壬辰，赐故金补阙李大节谥贞肃。
现代文：八月初二，赐予已故的金朝补阙李大节谥号贞肃。
English: On the 2nd day of the 8th month of the lunar calendar, the late Kim Il Sung was given the honorary title of Zenshu.

古文：丁酉，命开平守臣释奠于宣圣庙。
现代文：初七，命令开平的守官在宣圣孔庙祭奠先师孔子。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, the governor of Kaiping was ordered to pay tribute to Confucius at the Confucius Temple Festival.

古文：戊戌，以燕京等路宣抚使赛典赤为平章政事，敕以贺天爵为金齿等国安抚使，忽林伯副之，仍招谕使安其民。
现代文：初八，任命燕京等路宣抚使赛典赤为平章政事。敕命贺天爵为金齿等国的安抚使，忽林伯任副使，仍旧令他们招抚、晓谕并安定那里的百姓。
English: On the 8th day of the first month of the year, he appointed Yanjing and other envoys to announce the arrival of Sai Dianchi as the political affairs of Pingzhang. He Tianjie was appointed as the pacification envoy of Jinzu and other countries, and Ku Linbo as the deputy envoy, and still ordered them to appease, tell and stabilize the people there.

古文：己亥，谕武卫军都指挥使李伯祐汰本军疲老者，选精锐代之，给海青银符一，有奏，驰驿以闻。
现代文：初九，谕令武卫军都指挥使李伯淘汰本军疲弱年老的士卒，另选精锐的顶替，给予海东青银符一面，如有上奏之事，令驿传飞马报闻。
English: On the ninth day of the first month, Li Bo was ordered by the commander of the Wuwei Army to eliminate the weak and old soldiers from the army, select another elite replacement, and give one side of the East China Sea Youth Silver Medal. If there was a report, he would pass the news to Fei Ma.

古文：辛丑，以宣抚使粘合南合为中书右丞，阔阔为中书左丞，贾文备为开元女直水达达等处宣抚使，赐虎符。
现代文：十一日，任命宣抚使粘合南合为中书右丞，阔阔为中书左丞，贾文备为开元、女直、水达达等地的宣抚使，赐给虎符。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Xuanfu envoys were appointed to Guhe Nanghe as Chushu Yuanzhao, Kuo Kuo as Chushu Zuanzhao, Jia Wenbi as Kaigen, Mianzhong, and Shuidada, and tiger charms were given.

古文：以宋降将王青为总管，教武卫军习射。
现代文：任命宋朝的降将王青为总管，教授武卫军练习射艺。
English: Wang Qing, a descendant of the Song Dynasty, was appointed as the general manager and taught the military guards to practice shooting.

古文：乙巳，禁以俘掠妇女为娼。
现代文：十五日，禁止把掳掠来的妇女作为娼妓。
English: On the 15th, the use of abducted women as prostitutes was prohibited.

古文：丙午，太白犯岁星。
现代文：十六日，太白星干犯岁星。
English: On the 16th, Taibai Xing committed a crime.

古文：以许衡为国子祭酒。
现代文：任命许衡为国子祭酒。
English: Appointed Xu Heng as the national son festival wine.

古文：丁未，以姚枢为大司农，窦默仍翰林侍讲学士。
现代文：十七日，任命姚枢为大司农，窦默仍旧担任翰林侍讲学士。
English: On the 17th, Yao Zu was appointed as the chief secretary of agriculture, while Dou Mo still served as the assistant lecturer of Hanlin.

古文：先是，以枢为太子太师，衡为太子太傅，默为太子太保，枢等以不敢当师傅礼，皆辞不拜，故复有是命。
现代文：先前曾经任命姚枢为太子太师，许衡为太子太傅，窦默为太子太保，但姚枢等人以不敢承当师傅的礼遇为由，都推辞而不受命，因此才又有这一次的任命。
English: Previously, Yao Zu had been appointed as the Prince's Grand Master, Xu Heng as the Prince's Grand Master, and Dou Miao as the Prince's Grand Master, but Yao Zu and others refused to accept the order on the grounds that they did not dare to accept the courtesy of being a master, so this appointment was made again.

古文：初立劝农司，以陈邃、崔斌、成仲宽、粘合从中为滨棣、平阳、济南、河间劝农使，李士勉、陈天锡、陈膺武、忙古带为邢洺、河南、东平、涿州劝农使。
现代文：开始设置劝农司，任命陈邃、崔斌、成仲宽、粘合从中为槟棣、平阳、济南、河间劝农使，李士勉、陈天锡、陈膺武、忙古带为邢氵名、河南、东平、涿州劝农使。
English: He began to set up the Agricultural Advising Division, and appointed Chen Zhen, Cui Bin, Cheng Zhong Kuan, and Binding to be the Agricultural Advising Envoys for Penang, Pingyang, Jinan, and Hebei, and Li Shizhen, Chen Tianxi, Chen Zhenwu, and He Guotai to be the Agricultural Advising Envoys for Xiamen, Henan, Dongping, and Zhangzhou.

古文：己酉，命大名等路宣抚使岁给翰林侍讲学士窦默、太医副使王安仁衣粮，赐田以为永业。
现代文：十九日，命令大名等路宣抚使每年供给翰林侍讲学士窦默、太医副使王安仁衣服粮食，赐给田地作为永久性产业。
English: On the 19th, he ordered the daimyo and other officials to annually provide Hanlin's attendant, the lecturer, the bachelor Dou Miao, and the deputy doctor Wang Anren with clothes and grain, and to give the fields as a permanent industry.

古文：甲寅，赏董文炳所将渡江及北征有功者二十二人，银各五十两。
现代文：二十四日，奖赏董文炳所率领，渡过长江及北征有功的二十二人各五十两白银。
English: On the 24th, the 22 people who crossed the Yangtze River and made meritorious contributions to the Northern Expedition led by Dong Wenjun were awarded fifty-two pieces of silver each.

古文：封顺天等路万户张柔为安肃公，济南路万户张荣为济南公。
现代文：封顺天等路的万户张柔为安肃公，济南路万户张荣为济南公。
English: The million-household Zhang Rong in Jinan Road is Jinan Gong, and the million-household Zhang Rong in Fengshuntian Road is Anzu Gong.

古文：陕西四川行省乞就决边方重刑，不允。
现代文：陕西、四川行省请求立即处死边远地区的重刑犯人。
English: The provinces of Shaanxi and Sichuan have requested that felons in remote areas be immediately put to death.

古文：诏陕西四川行省存恤归附军民。
现代文：皇上不准。下诏，令陕西、四川行省慰问、安抚归顺的军民。
English: The emperor did not allow it. He issued a decree ordering the provinces of Shaanxi and Sichuan to send condolences and pacify the soldiers and civilians who had surrendered.

古文：诏： 自今使臣有矫称上命者，有司不得听受。
现代文：诏书说： 从现在起，朝廷的使臣如假借皇命，当地的官府不得听从和接受。
English: The imperial edict said: From now on, if an envoy of the imperial court pretends to take orders from the emperor, the local government office must not obey and accept.

古文：诸王、后妃、公主、驸马非闻奏，不许擅取官物。 
现代文：诸侯王、后妃、公主、驸马，没有向朝廷奏报，不许擅自取用官中之物。 
English: Princes, queens, princesses, and equerries who have not reported to the imperial court are not allowed to use official property without permission.

古文：赐庆寿寺、海云寺陆地五百顷。
现代文：赐予庆寿寺、海云寺旱地五百顷。
English: Five hundred hectares of dry land were given to Keiju-ji Temple and Kaiun-ji Temple.

古文：敕西京运粮于沙井，北京运粮于鱼儿泊。
现代文：敕命西京运粮食到沙井，北京运粮食到鱼儿泊。
English: West Beijing transports grain to Shajing, and Beijing transports grain to Yu'erpoh.

古文：立檀州驿。
现代文：建立檀州驿。
English: The Danzhou Railway is established.

古文：颁斗斛权衡。
现代文：公布斗、斛等权衡器具。
English: Weighing instruments such as buckets and hoops shall be displayed.

古文：赈桓州饥民。
现代文：赈济桓州的饥民。
English: The starving people of Kanshu.

古文：赐诸王塔察儿金千两、银五千两、币三百匹。
现代文：赐予诸侯王塔察儿贡黄金一千两、白银五千两、绢帛三百匹。
English: He gave the vassal prince Tachara a tribute of one thousand taels of gold, five thousand taels of silver, and three hundred yakitori.

古文：给阿石寒甲价银千二百两。
现代文：给予阿石寒宅地价银一千二百两。
English: The land price of Ahishikhan's residence was raised to twelve hundred taels of silver.

古文：核实新增户口，措置诸路转输法。
现代文：核实新增加的户口。安排各地互相转运的办法。
English: Verification of newly added hukou. Arrangements for mutual transfer between regions.

古文：命刘整招怀夔府、嘉定等处民户。
现代文：命令刘整对夔府、嘉定等处的百姓进行招抚、怀柔。
English: Liu Zhengyi was ordered to appease and conciliate the people in Shifu, Jiading and other places.

古文：宋私商七十五人入宿州，议置于法，诏宥之，还其货，听榷场贸易。
现代文：宋朝的七十五名私商进入宿州，州府议定处以刑罚，皇上下诏宽恕了他们，并把货物发还给他们。允许他们到官办的榷场贸易。
English: Seventy-five private traders from the Song Dynasty entered Suzhou. The prefectural government agreed to impose a penalty, but the emperor pardoned them and returned the goods to them. They were allowed to trade in government-run markets.

古文：仍檄宋边将还北人之留南者。
现代文：仍然传檄给宋朝边将，要他们送还被拘留在南方的北方人。
English: He still sent a message to the Song Dynasty border generals, asking them to return the northerners detained in the south.

古文：九月庚申朔，诏以忽突花宅为中书省署。
现代文：九月初一，诏令把忽突花的府第作为中书省衙署。
English: On the first day of September, the edict designated the prefecture as the provincial capital of Chinese calligraphy.

古文：奉迁祖宗神主于圣安寺。
现代文：敬迁祖宗的神位到圣安寺。
English: Relocation of the ancestor's shrine to Shoan-ji Temple.

古文：癸亥，邢州安抚使张耕告老，诏以其子鹏翼代之。
现代文：初四，邢州安抚使张耕告老退休，诏令以他的儿子张鹏翼顶替他。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, Zhang Gao, the pacifier of Zhangzhou, announced his retirement and ordered his son, Zhang Pengyi, to replace him.

古文：武卫亲军都指挥使李伯祐、董文炳言： 武卫军疲老者，乞补换，仍存恤其家。 
现代文：武卫亲军都指挥使李伯、董文炳进言： 请求补充、替换武卫军年老体弱的士兵，依旧例慰问、抚恤他们的家庭。 
English: Li Bo and Dong Wenyi, commanding officers of the pro-Army People's Armed Forces, made the following speech: Request to supplement and replace the old and infirm soldiers of the People's Armed Forces, and continue to offer condolences and support to their families.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇上同意这建议。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：丙寅，诏以粘合南合行中兴府中书省。
现代文：初七，诏令：任用粘合南合主管中兴府行中书省事务。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, the imperial decree was issued: the director of Nankai Bonding was appointed to Zhongxing Prefecture to handle the affairs of the Ministry of Education and Culture.

古文：戊辰，大司农姚枢请以儒人杨庸教孔、颜、孟三氏子孙，东平府详议官王镛兼充礼乐提举。
现代文：初九，大司农姚枢请求任用儒士杨庸教导孔、颜、孟三姓子孙，东平府详议官王镛兼任礼乐提举之职。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, the chief secretary, Nong Yao Zu, requested the appointment of the Confucianist Yang Yong to teach the children and grandchildren of Kong, Yan and Meng San, and the Dongping prefectural detailed discussion official, Wang Qi, also served as the ceremonial music promotion post.

古文：诏以庸为教授，以镛特兼太常少卿。
现代文：诏令：任命杨庸为教授，任命王镛兼任太常寺少卿。
English: Imperial edict: Yang Yong was appointed as a professor, and Wang Xi was appointed as the concurrent junior secretary of the Taiji Temple.

古文：辛未，以清、沧盐课银偿往岁所贷民钱给公费者。置和籴所于开平，以户部郎中宋绍祖为提举和籴官。
现代文：十二日，用清州、沧州的盐税银偿还往年为补充官费而向百姓借的钱，在开平建立和籴所，任命户部郎中宋绍祖为提举和籴官。
English: On the 12th, he used the salt tax money from Qingzhou and Cangzhou to repay the money borrowed from the people in previous years to supplement the official fees, established a peace office in Kaiping, and appointed the head of the household, Song Shao Zu, as the promotion and eunuch.

古文：丙子，谕诸王、驸马，凡民间词讼无得私自断决，皆听朝廷处置。
现代文：十七日，下谕旨给诸侯王、驸马，凡是民间的官司不得私自做出裁定，均须听由朝廷处理。
English: On the 17th, an edict was issued to the princes and emperors that all civil lawsuits should not be decided privately, but should be handled by the imperial court.

古文：河南民王四妻靳氏一产三男，命有司量给赡养。
现代文：河南府百姓王四的妻子靳氏一胎生下三子，命令官府酌量给予赡养。
English: The wife of Wang Si, a citizen of Henan Province, gave birth to three sons, and ordered the government to provide support according to its discretion.

古文：敕今岁田租输沿河近仓，官为转漕，不可劳民。
现代文：敕令：今年的田租运往水路附近的粮仓，再由官府实行转运，不可使百姓劳乏。
English: Royal decree: This year's field rent will be transported to a granary near the waterway, and then transferred by the government, so as not to make the people tired.

古文：癸未，以甘肃等处新罹兵革，民务农安业者为戍兵所扰，遣阿沙、焦端义往抚治之。
现代文：二十四日，因为甘肃等处新近遭受战乱，从事农耕，本来安居乐业的百姓被戍守的士兵所滋扰，便派遣阿沙、焦端义前往安抚处置。
English: On the 24th, because Gansu and other places had recently suffered from war and were engaged in farming, the people who were originally living and working peacefully were disturbed by the soldiers who were guarding them, so they sent Asha and Jiao Duanyi to pacify them.

古文：以海青银符二、金符十给中书省，量军国事情缓急，付乘驿者佩之。
现代文：以海东青银符两面、金符十面给予中书省，衡量军情国情事态的轻重缓急，授予乘坐驿车的官员佩戴。
English: The two sides of the East China Sea Qing silver and ten sides of the gold were given to the Ministry of Literature and Literature to measure the military situation and the state of affairs, and were awarded to the officials riding in the carriage to wear.

古文：以开元路隶北京宣抚司。
现代文：把开元路隶属于北京宣抚司管辖。
English: Tachiaiyuan Road is under the jurisdiction of the Beijing Publicity Department.

古文：真定路官民所贷官钱，贫不能偿，诏免之。
现代文：真定路百姓所借贷的官钱，因贫穷而无力偿还的，诏令免于偿还。
English: If the people of Zhending Road borrowed government money and were unable to repay it due to poverty, they were exempted from repayment by the edict.

古文：王鹗请于各路选委博学老儒一人，提举本路学校，特诏立诸路提举学校官，以王万庆、敬铉等三十人充之。
现代文：王鹗请求从各路挑选、委任博学的老儒生一人，掌管本路的学校，皇上特地颁发诏令设置各路提举学校官，任命王万庆、敬铉等三十人充任。
English: Wang Hui requested that a learned old Confucian scholar be selected and appointed from each line to be in charge of the school in this line. The emperor specifically issued a decree to set up a school official to be nominated by each line, and appointed Wang Wanqing, Jingyao and other 30 people to fill the position.

古文：敕燕京、顺天等路续制人甲五千、马甲及铁装具各二千。
现代文：敕令燕京、顺天等路继续制造人甲五千副，马甲及铁装器具各二千副。
English: Yanjing and Shuntian continued to manufacture 5,000 pairs of man armor, 2,000 pairs of horse armor and 2,000 pairs of ironware.

古文：冬十月庚寅朔，诏凤翔府种田户隶平阳兵籍，毋令出征，务耕屯以给军饷。
现代文：冬，十月初一，诏令把凤翔府种田的民户隶属于平阳的军户，但不得派他们出征，只让他们从事耕种屯田以供给军粮。
English: In the winter, on the first day of October, the imperial edict subordinated the farming households of Fengxiangfu to the military households of Pingyang, but they were not allowed to go to war. They were only allowed to engage in cultivating farmlands to supply military grain.

古文：辛卯，陕西四川行省上言： 军务急速，若待奏报，恐失事机。 
现代文：初二，陕西、四川行省报告说 ：军情紧急，如果等待奏报，恐怕延误时机。 
English: On the second day of the first semester, the Shaanxi and Sichuan provinces reported: "The military situation is urgent. If you wait for the report, I'm afraid it will delay the timing."

古文：诏与都元帅纽璘会议行之。
现代文：诏令他们与都元帅纽王共同商议处置。
English: He ordered them to discuss the matter with the capital's marshal, New Wang.

古文：遣道士訾洞春代祀东海广德王庙。
现代文：皇上派道士訾洞春代为祭祀东海广德王庙。
English: In the Spring Dynasty, the emperor sent Taoist priests to Shandong to worship the East China Sea Guangde King Temple.

古文：壬辰，敕火儿赤、奴怀率所部略地淮西。
现代文：初三，敕令火儿赤、奴怀率领部属占领淮西一带。
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, the Zhaoling Fuerer Aka and the Nuhuai led the subordinates to occupy the west of Huai.

古文：丁酉，敕爱亦伯等及陕西宣抚司校核不鲁欢、阿蓝塔儿所贷官银。
现代文：初八，敕令爱亦伯等以及陕西宣抚司，查核不鲁欢、阿蓝塔儿所借贷的官银。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, she ordered Ai Yibo and others, as well as the Shaanxi Publicity Department, to check the official bank loaned by Bu Lu Huan and Alanta Rong.

古文：庚子，以右丞张启元行中书省于平阳、太原等路。
现代文：十一日，派右丞张启元巡视直辖于中书省的平阳、太原等路。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Zhang Qiyuan was sent to inspect Pingyang, Taiyuan and other roads directly under the jurisdiction of the Central Book Province.

古文：括西京两路官民，有壮马皆从军，令宣德州杨庭训统之，有力者自备甲仗，无力者官与供给。
现代文：统计、登记西京两路的百姓人数，凡有壮马的全部从军，命宣德州的杨庭训统辖，身强力壮的，自己准备衣甲武器，体弱无力的由官府供给。
English: Statistics and registration of the number of people in the two roads of West Beijing, all the soldiers who have strong horses, are under the command of Yang Tingxun of Xuanzhou, the strong ones prepare their own clothing and armor weapons, and the weak ones are supplied by the government.

古文：两路奥鲁官并在家军人，凡有马者并付新军刘总管统领。
现代文：两路的军人家属以及居家的军人，凡属有马的全部交付新军刘总管统辖。
English: The families of soldiers on both sides and the soldiers at home, all of whom belong to Arima, will be under the jurisdiction of the New Army Liu General Administration.

古文：昂吉所管西夏军，并丰州、荨麻林、夏水阿剌浑皆备鞍马甲仗，及孛鲁欢所管兵，凡徒行者市马给之，并令从军，违者以失误军期论。
现代文：昂吉所管辖的西夏军，包括丰州、荨麻林、夏水阿剌浑都自备鞍马、衣甲、武器。孛鲁欢所管辖的士兵，凡是无马步行的都买马给他，令他们全部参军，违抗者按照失误军期论处。
English: The Western Xia Army under the jurisdiction of Anji, including Fongzhou, Nettle Forest, and Xia Shui Agongun, all had saddled horses, coats of armor, and weapons. The soldiers under the jurisdiction of Jilu Huan, who had no horses, bought horses for him and made them all join the army. Those who disobeyed were punished according to the error of the military period.

古文：修燕京旧城。
现代文：修缮燕京的旧城。
English: Renovation of the old city of Yanjing.

古文：命平章政事赵璧、左三部尚书怯烈门率蒙古、汉军驻燕京近郊、太行一带，东至平滦，西控关陕，应有险阻，于附近民内选谙武事者，修立堡寨守御。
现代文：命令平章政事赵璧、左三部尚书怯烈门率领蒙古族、汉族的军队驻扎在燕京的近郊、太行山一带，东边可到达平滦，西边可控制关陕；所有的险阻之处，就在附近的百姓中挑选熟悉军事的人，修建堡垒栅寨守卫。
English: He ordered the Mongolian and Han armies led by Zhao Bi, the political secretary of Pingzhang, and Shang Shushi, the cowardly martyr of the left third, to be stationed in the suburbs of Yanjing, around Taihang Mountain. The east side can reach Pingyao, and the west side can control Guanshan. In all dangerous obstacles, people who are familiar with military affairs should be selected from the nearby people to build fortresses and guard them.

古文：以河南屯田万户史权为江汉大都督，依旧戍守。
现代文：任命河南屯田万户史权为江汉大都督，按照旧规防守。
English: Appointed the Henan Tun Tian Wanyu Shiquan as the governor of the Han Dynasty, and defended in accordance with the old rules.

古文：又选锐卒三千付史枢管领，于燕京近郊屯驻。
现代文：又挑选三千名精锐的士兵交给史枢统领，驻扎在燕京的近郊。
English: He also selected three thousand elite soldiers and handed them over to the commander of the Shizhu, who stationed them in the suburbs of Yanjing.

古文：壬寅，命亳州张柔、归德邸浃、睢州王文干、水军解成、张荣实、东平严忠嗣、济南张宏七万户，以所部兵来会。
现代文：十三日，命令亳州的张柔、归德的邸浃、睢州的王文干、水军的解成、张荣实、东平的严忠嗣、济南的张宏等七名万户率领各自的部下前来会集。
English: On the 13th, he ordered Zhang Rong of Bozhou, Gui De's residence, Wang Wengan of Bozhou, the dissolution of the navy, Zhang Rongshi, Yan Zhongzhi of Dongping, Zhang Hong of Jinan and other seven million households to lead their subordinates to come to the meeting.

古文：罢东平会计前任官侵用财赋。
现代文：停止东平府审核前任官员侵吞钱赋的事。
English: To stop Dongping Prefecture from investigating the embezzlement of money by former officials.

古文：甲辰，宋兵攻泸州，刘整击败之。
现代文：十五日，宋军进攻泸州。刘整击败宋军。
English: On the 15th, the Song Army attacked Zhangzhou. Liu Jie defeated the Song Army.

古文：诏赏整银五千两，币帛二千匹。
现代文：诏令奖赏刘整五千两白银、二千匹绢帛。
English: The imperial edict rewarded Liu with 5,000 taels of silver and 2,000 horses.

古文：失里答、刘元振守御有功，各赏银五百两，将士银万两、币帛千匹。
现代文：失里答、刘元振防守有功，各奖给五百两白银，奖给将士们一万两白银、一千匹绢帛。
English: In response to the loss, Liu Yuan Zhen was awarded five hundred and two pieces of silver, and the soldiers were awarded ten thousand two pieces of silver and one thousand horses.

古文：乙巳，诏指挥副使郑江将千人赴开平，指挥使董文炳率善射者千人由鱼儿泊赴行在所，指挥使李伯祐率余兵屯潮河川。
现代文：十六日，诏令指挥副使郑江率领一千人前往开平，指挥使董文炳率领善射的弓手一千名从鱼儿泊前来皇上驻地，指挥使李伯率领其余的兵卒屯驻在潮河川。
English: On the 16th, the commander ordered the deputy envoy Zheng Jiang to lead a thousand people to Kaiping, the commander ordered Dong Wenjun to lead a thousand good archers from Yu'erbo to the emperor's residence, and the commander ordered Li Bo to lead the remaining soldiers to stay in Chaohe River.

古文：壬子，诏霍木海、乞带等自得胜口至中都预备粮饷刍粟。
现代文：二十三日，诏令霍木海、乞带等从得胜口到中都来预备粮饷草料。
English: On the twenty-third day, the emperor ordered Huo Mu Hai, Beggar Belt, etc. to come from Tehshengkou to Zhongdu to prepare grain and weeds.

古文：丙辰，诏平章政事塔察儿率军士万人，由古北口西便道赴行在所。
现代文：二十七日，诏令平章政事塔察儿率领士兵一万名从古北口以西的近路前来皇上驻地。
English: On the 27th, Pingzang Zhengji Tachar led 10,000 soldiers from the short road west of the Old North Gate to the emperor's residence.

古文：十一月壬戌，大兵与阿里不哥遇于昔木土脑儿之地，诸王合丹等斩其将合丹火儿赤及其兵三千人，塔察儿与合必赤等复分兵奋击，大破之，追北五十余里。
现代文：十一月初四，大军与阿里不哥部在昔木土脑儿地方遭遇，诸侯王合丹等杀死他的部将合丹火儿赤及其兵卒三千人，塔察儿和合必赤等又分兵奋力攻击，将他打得大败，追赶了五十多里。
English: On the 4th day of the 11th month, the great army and Ali's army encountered each other in the old wood and soil area. The princes Wang Hetan and others killed his commander Hetan Fiery Red and his three thousand soldiers, and Tachar and Hebei Red and others attacked him, defeated him, and chased him for more than fifty miles.

古文：帝亲率诸军以蹑其后，其部将阿脱等降，阿里不哥北遁。
现代文：皇上亲自统率各军在他后面追赶，其部将阿脱等投降，阿里不哥向北逃走。
English: The emperor himself led the troops to chase after him. His subordinates, such as Atta, surrendered, and Ali Beg fled north.

古文：庚午，太阴犯昴。
现代文：十二日，太阴星干犯昴宿。
English: On the twelfth day, the sun and the moon committed the crime of sleeping together.

古文：壬申，诏免今年赋税。
现代文：十四日，诏令免除今年的赋税。
English: On the 14th, the imperial decree exempted this year's tax.

古文：癸酉，驻跸帖买和来之地。
现代文：十五日，皇上驻跸于帖买和来地方。
English: On the fifteenth day, the emperor stayed in Thetmai and came to the place.

古文：以尚书怯烈门、平章赵璧兼大都督，率诸军从塔察儿北上。
现代文：任命尚书怯烈门、平章赵璧兼任大都督，率领各军从塔察儿北上。
English: He appointed Shang Shuxiu Qiu Rimen and Ping Zhang Zhao Bi to concurrently serve as grand captains, leading the armies from Tachar to the north.

古文：分蒙古军为二，怯烈门从麦肖出居庸口，驻宣德德兴府；讷怀从阿忽带出古北口，驻兴州。
现代文：将蒙古军分成两路：一部由怯烈门率领，从麦肖出居庸口，驻扎在宣德德兴府；一路由纳怀率领，从阿忽带出古北口，驻扎在兴州。
English: The Mongolian army was divided into two routes: one led by Cui Remei, from Maishao to Yangtze River estuary, stationed in Xuande Dexingfu; one led by Nahua, from Ahvut to Gubeikou, stationed in Xingzhou.

古文：帝亲将诸万户汉军及武卫军，由檀、顺州驻潮河川。
现代文：皇上亲自率领汉军及武卫军的万户们，经由檀州、顺州驻扎在潮河川。
English: The emperor himself led the Han army and the military guards of Wanyu, who were stationed in Chaohe River via Danzhou and Shunzhou.

古文：敕官给刍粮，毋扰居民。
现代文：敕令 ：由官府供给粮草，不得滋扰居民。
English: Imperial edict: Grain and grass are supplied by the government, and residents must not be disturbed.

古文：罢十路宣抚司，止存开元路。
现代文：撤销十路宣抚司，只保留开元路宣抚司。
English: The Ten-Road Relief Division was abolished, and only the Kaigen-Road Relief Division was retained.

古文：命诸路市马二万五千余匹，授蒙古军之无马者。
现代文：命令各路购置战马二万五千多匹交给蒙古军中无马的士兵。
English: He ordered all sides to purchase more than twenty-five thousand horses and give them to the horseless soldiers in the Mongol army.

古文：丁丑，征诸路宣抚司官赴中都。
现代文：十九日，征召各路宣抚司官员前来中都。 
English: On the 19th, officials from various departments of the Publicity Department were summoned to come to the capital.

古文：移跸于速木合打之地。
现代文：皇上移驻于速木合打地方。
English: The emperor moved to a place called Hayaki-gatame.

古文：诏汉军屯怀来、缙山。
现代文：诏令汉军屯驻在怀来、缙山。
English: The imperial edict ordered the Han troops to be stationed in Huailai and Shaoshan.

古文：鹰坊阿里沙及阿散兄弟二人以擅离扈从伏诛。
现代文：鹰坊的阿里沙及阿散兄弟二人因为擅自离开宿卫的队伍而被处死。
English: Two brothers, Arisha and Asan, from Yingfang, were executed for leaving the team of guards without permission.

古文：十二月庚寅，诏封皇子真金为燕王，领中书省事。
现代文：十二月初二，诏令晋封皇子真金为燕王，管理中书省事务。
English: On the 2nd day of the 12th month of the year, the Emperor issued a decree that Jinfeng's son, Zhengjin, would become the King of Yan and manage the affairs of the Ministry of Literature.

古文：辛卯，荧惑犯房。
现代文：初三，荧惑星干犯房宿。
English: On the third day of junior high school, a fluorescent planet trespassed on the dormitory.

古文：壬辰，荧惑犯钩钤。
现代文：初四，荧惑星干犯钩、钤二星。
English: On the 4th day of the first month, the fluorescent planet is the culprit, and the dragonfly is the second star.

古文：癸巳，以昌、抚、盖利泊等处荐罹兵革，免今岁租赋。
现代文：初五，因昌州、抚州、盖利泊等处连遭兵乱，免除今年租税。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, due to the fact that Changzhou, Fuzhou, Geylipo and other places were hit by military riots, this year's tax was exempted.

古文：甲午，师还，诏撤所在戍兵，放民间新签军。
现代文：初六，部队返回，诏令撤去居所的守军，放还民间新征集的签押士兵。
English: On the sixth day of the first month of the year, the troops returned, the defenders of the residence were ordered to withdraw, and the newly recruited soldiers were released.

古文：命太常少卿王镛教习大乐。
现代文：命令太常少卿王镛教练演习大乐。
English: He ordered Coach Wang Yao to have great fun with the drills.

古文：壬寅，以隆寒命诸王合必赤所部军士无行帐者，听舍民居。
现代文：十四日，因天气严寒，命令诸侯王合必赤部下没有行军帐幕的士兵，可以听任其住入民房。
English: On the 14th, due to the severe cold weather, the princes ordered the soldiers who did not have a marching tent to live in a private house.

古文：命陕蜀行中书省给绥德州等处屯田牛、种、农具。
现代文：命令陕蜀行中书省供给绥德州等处的屯田军队耕牛、谷种、农具。
English: He ordered the Ministry of Education and Culture in Shaanxi Province to supply the military garrisons in Shunde and other places in Shandong Province with cattle, grain and agricultural tools.

古文：初立宫殿府，秩正四品，专职营缮。
现代文：开始建立宫殿府，俸禄为正四品，专管营造、修缮的事务。
English: Began the establishment of the Imperial Household Agency. Received a salary of Shoshihon and was in charge of construction and repairs.

古文：立尚食局、尚药局。
现代文：建立尚食局、尚药局。
English: The Food and Drug Administration will be established.

古文：初设控鹤五百四人，以刘德为军使领之。
现代文：初设宿卫近侍五百零四人，任命刘德为军使统辖他们。
English: Initially, there were 5004 close attendants of the guards, and Liu De was appointed as the military envoy to supervise them.

古文：立异样局达鲁花赤，掌御用织造，秩正三品，给银印。
现代文：建立异样局总管，掌管宫廷御用纺织品的制造，俸禄为正三品，授予银印。
English: The head of the Bureau of Unusual Patterns was established, in charge of the production of textiles for the imperial court, with a salary of three times the normal wage and a silver seal.

古文：赐诸王金银币帛如岁例。
现代文：赏赐给诸侯王的金银绢帛同于往年旧例。
English: The gold and silver ingots given to princes are the same as in previous years.

古文：是岁，天下户一百四十一万八千四百九十有九，断死罪四十六人。
现代文：这一年，全国有民户一百四十一万八千四百九十九户，处以死刑的四十六人。
English: In that year, there were 1,418,499 private households across the country, and 46 people were sentenced to death.

