古文：李典字曼成，山阳钜野人也。
现代文：李典字曼成，山阳县钜野人。
English: Li Dianzi Mancheng, Sanyang County's wild man.

古文：典从父乾，有雄气，合宾客数千家在乘氏。
现代文：他的叔父李乾，有雄伟的气概，在乘氏县召集了几千家宾客。
English: His uncle Li Qian, a man of great courage, gathered thousands of guests in Jingshi County.

古文：初平中，以众随太祖，破黄巾於寿张，又从击袁术，征徐州。
现代文：初平年间，李乾带众人跟随太祖，在寿张攻破黄巾军，又跟随太祖进攻袁术，征讨徐州。
English: At the beginning of the Heian period, Li Qian led many people to follow his great-grandfather and defeated the Yellow Turban Army in Shou Zhang. He also followed his great-grandfather to attack Yuan Shu and conquer Xuzhou.

古文：吕布之乱，太祖遣乾还乘氏，慰劳诸县。
现代文：吕布叛乱之时，太祖派李乾回到乘氏，慰劳周围各县。
English: At the time of the Lvbu Rebellion, the great-grandfather sent Li Qian back to the Jiao clan to comfort the surrounding counties.

古文：布别驾薛兰、治中李封招乾，欲俱叛，乾不听，遂杀乾。
现代文：吕布的别驾薛兰、治中李封招揽李乾，想拉拢他一同叛变，李乾没有同意，于是将李乾杀了。
English: Lv Bu's second-in-command, Xue Lan, and Li Feng, who was in charge of the government, tried to recruit Li Qian to join the rebellion. Li Qian did not agree, so Li Qian was killed.

古文：太祖使乾子整将乾兵，与诸将击兰、封。兰、封破，从平兖州诸县有功，稍迁青州刺史。
现代文：太祖派李乾的儿子李整统领李乾的部队，并和将领们一同进攻薛兰、李封，击溃了他们，又因为跟随太祖平定衮州各县立下功劳，渐渐被提升为青州刺史。
English: The great-grandfather sent Li Jianzhong, the son of Li Qian, to lead Li Qian's troops, and together with the generals attacked Xuelan and Li Feng, defeated them, and because he followed the great-grandfather in the conquest of the counties of Zhangzhou, he was gradually promoted to the history of Qingzhou.

古文：整卒，典徙颍阴令，为中郎将，将整军，迁离狐太守。
现代文：李整去世后，李典调任颍阴县令，担任中郎将，统领李整的部队，又转任离狐郡太守。
English: After Li Zhei's death, Li Dian was transferred to be the governor of Shuyin County, acting as the middle-ranking general, commanding Li Zhei's troops, and was also transferred to be the governor of Lixing County.

古文：时太祖与袁绍相拒官渡，典率宗族及部曲输谷帛供军。
现代文：当时太祖和袁绍在官渡对峙，李典率领族中众人和部下运输物资以供应军队。
English: At that time, Emperor Taizu and Yuan Shao were in confrontation in Guandu, and Li Dian led many people and subordinates to transport materials to supply the army.

古文：绍破，以典为裨将军，屯安民。
现代文：袁绍被攻破后，太祖任命李典为裨将军，在安民城驻守。
English: After Yuan Shao was defeated, Emperor Taizu appointed Li Jian as a general to guard Anmin City.

古文：太祖击谭、尚於黎阳，使典与程昱等以船运军粮。
现代文：太祖在黎阳攻打袁谭、袁尚，派李典与程昱用船输送军粮。
English: Emperor Taizu attacked Yuan Tan and Yuan Shang in Liyang and sent Li Dian and Cheng Yao to transport military grain by ship.

古文：会尚遣魏郡太守高蕃将兵屯河上，绝水道，太祖敕典、昱： 若船不得过，下从陆道。 
现代文：适逢袁尚派魏郡太守高蕃率军驻扎在河的上游，阻隔水路，太祖敕令李典、程昱说： 如果船只不能通行，就从陆路通过。 
English: At the right time, Yuan Shang sent Gao Jun, the governor of Wei County, with an army stationed in the upper reaches of the river to block the waterway. Li Dian and Cheng Jun were ordered by the great ancestor to say: If the ships cannot pass, they will pass by land.

古文：典与诸将议曰： 蕃军少甲而恃水，有懈怠之心，击之必克。
现代文：李典和将领们商议说： 高蕃的军队缺少兵器但倚仗着自己在上游，怀着懈怠的刑罚，我们进攻他们一定能胜利。
English: Li Dian and the generals deliberated and said: Gaozhang's army lacks weapons but relies on itself in the upstream, with the penalty of slackness, we can attack them and win.

古文：军不内御；苟利国家，专之可也，宜亟击之。 
现代文：军队不应由朝廷中人驾驭；如果对国家有利，那现在自己决断也是可以的，应该迅速攻打他们。 
English: The army should not be driven by people in the court; if it is good for the country, it is now possible to decide for oneself, and they should be attacked quickly.

古文：昱亦以为然。
现代文：程昱也这样认为。
English: Cheng Jun also thinks so.

古文：遂北渡河，攻蕃，破之，水道得通。
现代文：于是李典率军往北渡河，攻打高蕃，攻破了敌军，水路也因此畅通。
English: As a result, Li Dian led the army to cross the river to the north, attacked Gaocheng, defeated the enemy army, and the waterway was thus unblocked.

古文：刘表使刘备北侵，至叶，太祖遣典从夏侯惇拒之。
现代文：刘表派刘备到北方侵扰，到页县时，太祖派李典跟随夏侯惇抗击刘备。
English: Liu He sent Liu Bei to the north to invade, and when Liu Bei arrived at Jie County, Emperor Taizong sent Li Dian to follow Xia Houyi to fight against Liu Bei.

古文：备一旦烧屯去，惇率诸军追击之，典曰： 贼无故退，疑必有伏。
现代文：刘备有一天早上烧毁了军营退走，夏侯惇率军各军追击，李典说： 贼人无故撤退，我怀疑一定会有埋伏。
English: Liu Bei burned down the military camp one morning and retreated. Xia Houyi led the army in pursuit. Li Dian said, "Thieves retreat without reason. I suspect there will be an ambush."

古文：南道狭窄，草木深，不可追也。 
现代文：南边道路狭窄，草木又高又深，不应该追击。 
English: The road is narrow on the south side, and the grass is tall and deep, so you shouldn't chase it.

古文：惇不听，与于禁追之，典留守。
现代文：夏侯惇不听，和于禁追击，让李典留守。
English: Xia Houyao didn't listen, and Yuxin chased after him, leaving Li Dian behind.

古文：惇等果入贼伏里，战不利，典往救，备望见救至，乃散退。
现代文：夏侯惇等人果然进入敌军的埋伏圈，两军交战，夏侯惇失利，李典前往救援，刘备望见援军来到，才率军撤退。
English: Xia Houyao and others successfully entered the ambush circle of the enemy army, the two armies fought, Xia Houyao lost, Li Dian went to the rescue, Liu Bei saw the reinforcements coming, and then led the army to retreat.

古文：从围邺，邺定，与乐进围高幹於壶关，击管承於长广，皆破之。
现代文：李典随同太祖围攻邺城，邺城平定后，又和乐进在壶关围攻高幹，在长广郡攻打管承，都大获全胜。
English: Li Dian followed his great-grandfather in besieging Lucheng. After Lucheng was pacified, he and Lejin besieged Gao Gan in Kuguan and attacked Guanzheng in Changguang County, both of which were complete victories.

古文：迁捕虏将军，封都亭侯。
现代文：被提升为捕虏将军，封为都亭侯。
English: He was promoted to general of captives and given the title of duke.

古文：典宗族部曲三千馀家，居乘氏，自请愿徙诣魏郡。
现代文：李典的族人部下有三千多家，都居住在乘氏，他们自己请求希望能迁移到魏郡。
English: There are more than 3,000 members of Li Dian's tribe, all of whom live in the Jiao clan, and they hope to move to Wei County at their own request.

古文：太祖笑曰： 卿欲慕耿纯邪？ 
现代文：太祖笑着说： 您要学习耿纯吗？ 
English: The great-grandfather smiled and said, "Do you want to study Geng Chun?"

古文：典谢曰： 典驽怯功微，而爵宠过厚，诚宜举宗陈力；加以征伐未息，宜实郊遂之内，以制四方，非慕纯也。 
现代文：李典谢罪说： 我驽下怯弱，功劳微小，但爵位和恩宠都太过厚重，实在应在倾尽全族心力来报答；再加上朝中征讨之事还没有结束，应该充实京城之内的人口，以控制天下，不是因为仰慕耿纯。 
English: Li Qian Xie Sin said: My subordinates are weak and my merits are small, but the titles and favors are too heavy, so I really should devote all my efforts to repay them; coupled with the fact that the negotiations between the DPRK and China have not yet ended, I should enrich the population within Beijing to control the world, not because I admire Geng Chun.

古文：遂徙部曲宗族万三千馀口居邺。
现代文：于是就带领部下和族人一共一万三千多人迁到邺城居住。
English: As a result, he led his subordinates and tribesmen to move a total of more than 13,000 people to live in Lucheng.

古文：太祖嘉之，迁破虏将军。
现代文：太祖赞赏他，提升他为破虏将军。
English: His great-grandfather praised him and promoted him to general of the army.

古文：与张辽、乐进屯合肥，孙权率众围之，辽欲奉教出战。
现代文：李典和张辽、乐进在合肥驻守，孙权率军包围他们，张辽想要奉诏令出去迎战。
English: Li Dian, Zhang Liao, and Lejin were stationed in Hefei. Sun Quan led an army to surround them. Zhang Liao wanted to go out to fight by imperial order.

古文：进、典、辽皆素不睦，辽恐其不从，典慨然曰： 此国家大事，顾君计何如耳，吾可以私憾而忘公义乎！ 
现代文：乐进、李典和张辽向来都关系不好，张辽担心他们不顺从，李典感叹说： 这是国家的大事，只是看您的计策怎么样，我们怎么可以因为私人恩怨而忘记公家大义呢！ 
English: Lejin, Li Dian and Zhang Liao have always had a bad relationship. Zhang Liao was worried that they would not obey. Li Dian sighed and said, "This is an important matter for the country. It just depends on your strategy. How can we forget the public interest because of personal grudges?"

古文：乃率众与辽破走权。
现代文：李典就率军和张辽一起击溃孙权并使他撤退。
English: Li Dian led the army and Zhang Liao together to defeat Sun Quan and make him retreat.

古文：增邑百户，并前三百户。
现代文：朝廷给李典增加一百户食邑，加上之前的一共三百户。
English: The imperial court gave Li Dian an additional hundred households, adding to the previous total of three hundred.

古文：典好学问，贵儒雅，不与诸将争功。
现代文：李典爱好学问，注重儒雅的风度，不和将领们争夺功劳。
English: Li Dian is fond of learning, attaches importance to a refined demeanor, and does not compete with generals for credit.

古文：敬贤士大夫，恂恂若不及，军中称其长者。
现代文：尊敬贤能的士大夫，态度恭顺就好像比不上他们，郡中将士都称他为长者。
English: Respectful of the virtuous magistrates, his deferential attitude seems to be no match for them, and the county generals all call him an elder.

古文：年三十六薨，子祯嗣。
现代文：李典三十六岁的时候去世，他的儿子李祯继承爵位。
English: When Li Dian died at the age of thirty-six, his son, Li Yong, inherited the title.

古文：文帝践阼，追念合肥之功，增祯邑百户，赐典一子爵关内侯，邑百户；谥典曰愍侯。
现代文：文帝登基后，追念合肥战役中的功劳，给李祯增加一百户食邑，并赐封李典的一个儿子为关内侯，食邑一百户；并追封李典的谥号为愍侯。
English: After Emperor Wendi ascended to the throne, in memory of his service in the Battle of Hefei, he added one hundred food villages to Li Qiye's territory, and granted one of Li Qiye's sons the title of Guan Nei Hou and one hundred food villages; he also posthumously awarded Li Qiye's posthumous title of Zhou Hou.

古文：李通字文达，江夏平春人也。
现代文：李通字文达，江夏郡平春人。
English: Li Tongzhi Wenda, from Pingchun, Jiangxia County.

古文：以侠闻於江、汝之间。
现代文：因为侠气而在降汝之间闻名。
English: He is famous among the fallen for his chivalry.

古文：与其郡人陈恭共起兵於朗陵，众多归之。
现代文：他和同郡人陈恭一同在朗陵起兵，很多人归附他。
English: He and a fellow county resident, Chen Qiong, raised an army in Langling together, and many people joined him.

古文：时有周直者，众二千馀家，与恭、通外和内违。
现代文：当时有个叫周直的人，部下有两千多户人家，与陈恭、李通外表和睦实际上相互怨恨。
English: At that time, there was a man named Zhou Zhi, whose subordinates were more than two thousand households. He was outwardly in harmony with Chen Gong and Li Tong, but actually resented each other.

古文：通欲图杀直而恭难之。
现代文：李通想要密谋杀掉周直，但陈恭认为很难。
English: Li Tong wanted to conspire to kill Zhou Zhi, but Chen Qiong thought it would be difficult.

古文：通知恭无断，乃独定策，与直克会，酒酣杀直。
现代文：李通知道陈恭没有决断，就自己制定计策，和周直相约，趁他酒醉时将他杀了。
English: Knowing that Chen Qiong was indecisive, Li Tong made his own plan, made an appointment with Zhou Zhizhi, and killed him when he was drunk.

古文：众人大扰，通率恭诛其党帅，尽并其营。
现代文：军中发生骚动，李通带着陈恭诛杀了周直的党羽，将他的部队都收编了。
English: Riots broke out in the army, and Li Tong, together with Chen Gongyao, killed Zhou Zhi's followers and gathered his troops together.

古文：后恭妻弟陈郃，杀恭而据其众。
现代文：后来陈恭妻子的弟弟陈郃杀了陈恭并吞并了他的队伍。
English: Later, Chen Jing's wife's younger brother, Chen Xi, killed Chen Jing and annexed his team.

古文：通攻破郃军，斩郃首以祭恭墓。
现代文：李通攻破陈郃部队，斩杀了陈郃，将首级放在陈恭墓前祭奠。
English: Li Tong defeated Chen Xuan's troops, killed Chen Xuan, and laid his head in front of Chen Gong's tomb.

古文：又生禽黄巾大帅吴霸而降其属。
现代文：李通又生擒黄巾军的统率吴霸并降服了他的部下。
English: Li Tong also captured Wu Ba, the leader of the Yellow Turban Army, and subdued his subordinates.

古文：遭岁大饥，通倾家振施，与士分糟糠，皆争为用，由是盗贼不敢犯。
现代文：适逢那一年发生大饥荒，李通倾尽家财赈济百姓，和儒士平分糟糠，大家都争着为他所用，因此贼寇不敢前来侵扰。
English: In the year of the great famine, Li Tong devoted all his wealth to help the people and shared the spoils equally with the Confucian scholars. Everyone was competing for his use, so the bandits did not dare to come and intrude.

古文：建安初，通举众诣太祖於许。
现代文：建安初年，李通带领部众到许昌归顺太祖。
English: In the first year of Jian'an, Li Tong led the people to Xu Chang to return to Shun Taizu.

古文：拜通振威中郎将，屯汝南西界。
现代文：太祖让他担任振威中郎将，驻守在汝南郡西面。
English: The great-grandfather made him serve as the Zhenwei middle-ranking general, stationed in the west of Runan County.

古文：太祖讨张绣，刘表遣兵以助绣，太祖军不利。
现代文：太祖征讨张绣，刘表派兵协助张绣，太祖军失利。
English: Emperor Taizong enlisted Zhang Xiu, Liu Bei sent soldiers to assist Zhang Xiu, and Emperor Taizong's army was defeated.

古文：通将兵夜诣太祖，太祖得以复战，通为先登，大破绣军。
现代文：李通连夜率兵赶到太祖那里，太祖才得以有兵力重新交战，李通率先登上城墙，击溃了张绣军队。
English: Li Tonglian led the troops to the Emperor Taizu at night. It was only then that the Emperor Taizu was able to re-engage in battle. Li Tonglian took the lead in climbing the city wall and defeated Zhang Xiu's army.

古文：拜裨将军，封建功侯。
现代文：被太祖任命为裨将军，封为建功侯。
English: He was appointed by the great-great-grandfather as a general and given the title of a meritorious citizen.

古文：分汝南二县，以通为阳安都尉。
现代文：太祖将汝南分为两个县，让李通担任阳安都尉。
English: The great-grandfather divided Runan into two counties and made Li Tong the Yang'an governor.

古文：通妻伯父犯法，朗陵长赵俨收治，致之大辟。
现代文：李通妻子的伯父犯法，朗陵县长赵俨将他收捕法办，判处死刑。
English: When the uncle of Li Tong's wife broke the law, the head of Langling County, Zhao Wei, arrested him and sentenced him to death.

古文：是时杀生之柄，决於牧守，通妻子号泣以请其命。
现代文：当时生杀大权掌握在州牧太守的手中，李通的妻子痛哭着请他保全伯父姓名。
English: At that time, the power of life and death was in the hands of the head of the state, Li Tong's wife cried and asked him to preserve his uncle's name.

古文：通曰： 方与曹公戮力，义不以私废公。 
现代文：李通说： 我刚刚和曹公通力合作，按道义不应该因为私情而损害公家利益。 
English: Li Tong said: I have just cooperated with Cao Gong to the best of my ability. According to morality, I should not harm the interests of the public because of my personal feelings.

古文：嘉俨执宪不阿，与为亲交。
现代文：便奖励赵俨执法不徇私情，和他成为了知己。
English: He then rewarded Zhao Wei for his law-enforcement selflessness, and became his confidant.

古文：太祖与袁绍相拒於官渡。绍遣使拜通征南将军，刘表亦阴招之，通皆拒焉。
现代文：太祖和袁绍在官渡对峙，袁绍派使者前来任命李通为征南将军，刘表也暗中招揽他，李通都拒绝了。
English: The great-grandfather and Yuan Shao confronted each other in Guandu. Yuan Shao sent an envoy to appoint Li Tong as a general to conquer the south. Liu Biao also secretly invited him, but Li Tong refused.

古文：通亲戚部曲流涕曰： 今孤危独守，以失大援，亡可立而待也，不如亟从绍。 
现代文：李通的亲戚属下都流着泪说： 现在我们孤立无援，独自守卫，被攻破是迟早的事，不如迅速投靠袁绍。 
English: Li Tong's relatives and subordinates were all in tears and said: Now we are alone without help, guarding alone, it is a matter of time before we are defeated, it is better to quickly rely on Yuan Shao.

古文：通按剑以叱之曰： 曹公明哲，必定天下。
现代文：李通拿着剑柄叱责他们说： 曹公明智通达，一定能平定天下。
English: Li Tong took the hilt of his sword and scolded them, saying, "Cao Gong is wise and knowledgeable, and he will surely be able to pacify the world."

古文：绍虽强盛，而任使无方，终为之虏耳。
现代文：袁绍虽然强盛，但放纵士兵没有军纪，一定会被太祖俘虏。
English: Although Yuan Shao was powerful, he indulged soldiers without military discipline, and he would certainly be captured by his great-grandfather.

古文：吾以死不贰。 
现代文：我宁死也不怀有二心。 
English: I'd rather die than have second thoughts.

古文：即斩绍使，送印绶诣太祖。
现代文：随即斩杀了袁绍的使者，将征南将军的印信绶带送到太祖那里。
English: He then killed Yuan Shao's messenger and sent the seal of the Southern Expeditionary General to Taizu.

古文：又击郡贼瞿恭、江宫、沈成等，皆破残其众，送其首，遂定淮、汝之地。
现代文：又攻打郡中的贼寇瞿恭、江宫、沈成等，都大败他们，将首领送到太祖那里，于是平定了淮河、汝水地区。
English: He also attacked the bandits in the county, such as Kogyeonggong, Jianggong, and Shencheng, and defeated them all. He sent their leaders to Taizu, and thus pacified the Huaihe River and Rushui areas.

古文：改封都亭侯，拜汝南太守。
现代文：太祖改封他为都亭侯，让他担任汝南太守。
English: His great-grandfather changed his title to Prince of Du, and made him the first governor of Yunnan Province.

古文：时贼张赤等五千馀家聚桃山，通攻破之。
现代文：当时贼人张赤在桃山集聚了五千多家党羽，李通击溃了他们。
English: At that time, the thief Zhang Chak gathered more than five thousand party members in Momoyama, and Li Tong defeated them.

古文：刘备与周瑜围曹仁於江陵，别遣关羽绝北道。
现代文：刘备和周瑜在江陵围攻曹仁，又另外派关羽断绝北边粮道。
English: Liu Bei and Zhou Yu besieged Cao Ren in Jiangling, and sent Guan Yu to cut off the northern grain route.

古文：通率众击之，下马拔鹿角入围，且战且前，以迎仁军，勇冠诸将。
现代文：李通率军进攻，下马拔除鹿角冲进敌围，一边战斗一边前进，接应曹仁的军队，他的勇猛在军中没有第二个。
English: Li Tong led the army to attack, dismounted, plucked the antlers and rushed into the enemy encirclement. While fighting, he advanced to meet Cao Ren's army. His bravery was second to none in the army.

古文：通道得病薨，时年四十二。
现代文：李通在路上得病去世，当时四十二岁。
English: Li Tong fell ill on the way and died at the age of 42.

古文：追增邑二百户，并前四百户。
现代文：朝廷给他追加食邑两百户，加上以前的一共四百户。
English: The imperial court gave him an additional two hundred households, adding to the previous total of four hundred households.

古文：文帝践阼，谥曰刚侯。
现代文：文帝登基后，追封李通谥号为刚侯。
English: After Emperor Wendi ascended to the throne, he posthumously named Li Tongyu as the Prince of Gansu.

古文：诏曰： 昔袁绍之难，自许、蔡以南，人怀异心。
现代文：诏令说： 过去袁绍发难，从许昌、蔡县以南，众人都怀有二心。
English: The edict said: In the past, when Yuan Shao was in trouble, from Xu Chang and south of Cai County, everyone was of two minds.

古文：通秉义不顾，使携贰率服，朕甚嘉之。
现代文：李通秉持正义，不顾自身，让怀有二心的人都服从于他，朕非常赞赏。
English: I very much appreciate that Li Tong upholds justice, regardless of himself, and allows people with double-mindedness to obey him.

古文：不幸早薨，子基虽已袭爵，未足酬其庸勋。
现代文：但他不幸早逝，他的儿子李基虽然已经继承爵位，但也不足以报答他的功勋。
English: But unfortunately he died early, and although his son Liki has inherited the title, it is not enough to repay his services.

古文：基兄绪，前屯樊城，又有功，世笃其劳，其以基为奉义中郎将，绪平虏中郎将，以宠异焉。 
现代文：李基的兄长李绪，之前在樊城驻守，又有功劳，世人都认为他的功劳很大，现在下令封李基为奉义中郎将，李绪为平虏中郎将，以表示特殊的优待。 
English: Liji's elder brother, Lixu, had been stationed in Lucheng before and had made great contributions. People all over the world believed that his contributions were great. Now, he ordered that Liji should be awarded the title of Lieutenant-General of Fengyi and Lixu should be awarded the title of Lieutenant-General of Pingru, in order to show special preferential treatment.

古文：臧霸字宣高，泰山华人也。
现代文：臧霸字宣高，泰山郡华县人。
English: Xuan Ba Zi Xuan Gao, from Huaxian County, Taishan County.

古文：父戒，为县狱掾，据法不听太守欲所私杀。
现代文：父亲名叫臧戒，是县中的狱掾，秉公执法，没有允许太守杀掉因私怨而想杀害的人。
English: His father's name was Zou Jing, and he was the county jailer. He enforced the law impartially and did not allow the governor to kill people who wanted to kill because of personal grudges.

古文：太守大怒，令收戒诣府，时送者百馀人。
现代文：太守大怒，下令将臧戒收押送到府中，当时押送的有一百多人。
English: The daimyō was furious and ordered that Shōkai be taken to the capital, where more than a hundred people were being escorted.

古文：霸年十八，将客数十人径於费西山中要夺之，送者莫敢动，因与父俱亡命东海，由是以勇壮闻。
现代文：臧霸那是侯十八岁，率领几十个孟轲径直到费县的西山上拦截要夺回臧戒，押送的人都不敢轻举妄动，臧霸就和父亲一起逃亡东海，因此以勇猛刚强闻名。
English: Zou Ba was 18 years old at the time. He led dozens of men and women to the West Mountain of Fei County to intercept and recapture Zou Yao. Those who escorted him did not dare to act rashly. Zou Ba fled to the East Sea with his father. Therefore, he was famous for his bravery and strength.

古文：黄巾起，霸从陶谦击破之，拜骑都尉。
现代文：黄巾军起兵，臧霸跟随陶谦攻破他们，被任命为骑都尉。
English: The Yellow Turban Army raised an army, and Yan Ba followed Tao Qian to defeat them, and was appointed as a cavalry captain.

古文：遂收兵於徐州，与孙观、吴敦、尹礼等并聚众，霸为帅，屯於开阳。
现代文：于是到徐州招募士兵，和孙观、吴敦、尹礼等人聚集队伍，臧霸为统帅，在开阳郡驻守。
English: Therefore, he went to Xuzhou to recruit soldiers, and gathered a team with Sun Guan, Wu Dun, Yin Li and others. Yan Ba was the commander and stationed in Luoyang County.

古文：太祖之讨吕布也，霸等将兵助布。
现代文：太祖征讨吕布，臧霸等率军协助吕布。
English: Taizu led an army to conquer Lvbu, and Yanba led an army to assist Lvbu.

古文：既禽布，霸自匿。
现代文：太祖生擒吕布受，臧霸自己躲藏了起来。
English: The great-great-grandfather was killed, and the tyrant himself went into hiding.

古文：太祖募索得霸，见而悦之，使霸招吴敦、尹礼、孙观、观兄康等，皆诣太祖。
现代文：太祖一路搜寻抓到了臧霸，见到他就很高兴，让他召集吴敦、尹礼、孙观、孙观的哥哥孙康等人，都来见太祖。
English: Taizu searched all the way and caught Zouba. He was very happy to see him. He asked him to call Wu Tun, Yin Li, Sun Guan, Sun Guan's brother Sun Kang and others to come to see Taizu.

古文：太祖以霸为琅邪相，敦利城、礼东莞、观北海、康城阳太守，割青、徐二州，委之於霸。
现代文：太祖让臧霸担任琅邪相，当时，吴敦为利城郡太守，尹礼为东莞郡太守，孙观为北海郡太守，孙康为城阳郡太守。将青州、徐州两个州郡委托给臧霸治理。
English: At that time, Wu Dun was the governor of Licheng County, Yin Li was the governor of Dongguan County, Sun Guan was the governor of Beihai County, and Sun Kang was the governor of Chengyang County. He entrusted the governance of Qingzhou and Xuzhou two counties to Zouba.

古文：太祖之在兖州，以徐翕、毛晖为将。
现代文：太祖在衮州时，以徐翕、毛晖为将军。
English: When the great-grandfather was in Zhangzhou, his generals were Xu Jun and Mao Jun.

古文：兖州乱，翕、晖皆叛。
现代文：衮州动乱，徐翕、毛晖都反叛。
English: There was unrest in Zhangzhou, and Xu Wei and Mao Wei both rebelled.

古文：后兖州定，翕、晖亡命投霸。
现代文：后来衮州被平定，徐翕、毛晖都逃命投保臧霸。
English: Later, Zhangzhou was subdued, and Xu Yao and Mao Yao both fled for their lives to join the Bao Bao.

古文：太祖语刘备，令语霸送二人首。
现代文：太祖告诉刘备，让他转达给臧霸说将二人的首级送来。
English: The great-grandfather told Liu Bei to tell Yan Ba to bring the severed heads of the two men.

古文：霸谓备曰： 霸所以能自立者，以不为此也。
现代文：臧霸对刘备说： 我之所以能自己站稳脚跟，就是因为不做这样的事。
English: Zouba said to Liu Bei: The reason why I can stand on my own feet is because I don't do such things.

古文：霸受公生全之恩，不敢违命。
现代文：臧霸蒙受曹公不杀之恩，不敢违抗命令。
English: The tyrant did not dare to disobey Cao Cao's order not to kill him.

古文：然王霸之君可以义告，愿将军为之辞。 
现代文：但要成就霸业的君主可以凭借道义打动他，希望将军为我转达。 
English: But to achieve hegemony, the monarch can impress him with morality, and I hope the general will convey it to me.

古文：备以霸言白太祖，太祖叹息，谓霸曰： 此古人之事而君能行之，孤之愿也。 
现代文：刘备将臧霸的话告诉太祖，太祖感叹着对臧霸说： 这是古人的坚守而您能坚持，我也希望能这样做。 
English: Liu Bei told Yaoba's words to the Grandfather. The Grandfather sighed and said to Yaoba, "This is the ancient people's adherence, and if you can stick to it, I hope I can do the same."

古文：乃皆以翕、晖为郡守。
现代文：就将徐翕、毛晖都任命为郡守。
English: He appointed both Xu Jun and Mao Jun as county governors.

古文：时太祖方与袁绍相拒，而霸数以精兵入青州，故太祖得专事绍，不以东方为念。
现代文：当时太祖和袁绍正在对峙，而臧霸多次率领精兵进入荆州，所以太祖得以专心对抗袁绍，不需要顾虑东边的事。
English: At that time, Emperor Taizu and Yuan Shao were in confrontation, and Yan He repeatedly led elite soldiers into Jingzhou, so Emperor Taizu could concentrate on fighting against Yuan Shao and did not need to worry about the east.

古文：太祖破袁谭於南皮，霸等会贺。
现代文：太祖在南皮攻破袁绍，臧霸等人聚会庆祝。
English: Taizu defeated Yuan Shao in Nanpi, and Yanba and others gathered to celebrate.

古文：霸因求遣子弟及诸将父兄家属诣邺，太祖曰： 诸君忠孝，岂复在是！
现代文：臧霸趁机请求派子弟和家中亲属到邺城，太祖说： 众位的忠孝两全，还需要表现在这种地方吗！
English: Zou Ba took the opportunity to request that his sons and relatives be sent to Zoucheng. The great-grandfather said, "All of you are loyal and filial, do you still need to show it in a place like this?"

古文：昔萧何遣子弟入侍，而高祖不拒，耿纯焚室舆榇以从，而光武不逆，吾将何以易之哉！ 
现代文：过去萧何派子弟入朝侍奉，而汉高祖没有拒绝，耿纯烧毁居所，带着棺材随从光武帝，光武帝没有阻拦，我要凭借什么改变他们的想法呢！ 
English: In the past, Xiao He sent his sons to serve in the imperial court, but Han Gaozu did not refuse, Geng Chun burned down his residence and followed Emperor Guangwu with a coffin. Emperor Guangwu did not stop them, so what can I do to change their minds?

古文：东州扰攘，霸等执义征暴，清定海岱，功莫大焉，皆封列侯。
现代文：东州纷乱，臧霸等人秉持正义平定暴乱，肃清平定了海滨和泰山地区，功劳很大，都被封为列侯。
English: Dongzhou was in turmoil, and Yan Ba and others upheld justice to quell the riots, and cleared the seashore and Mount Taishan area, which was a great achievement. All of them were made vassals.

古文：霸为都亭侯，加威虏将军。
现代文：臧霸被封为都亭侯，加封威虏将军。
English: Yan He was made the governor of the capital, and he was also given the title of general.

古文：又与于禁讨昌豨，与夏侯渊讨黄巾馀贼徐和等，有功，迁徐州刺史。
现代文：有和于禁讨伐昌豨，和夏侯渊征讨黄巾军的余党徐和等人，建立军功，被提升为徐州刺史。
English: He and others such as Yu Dang Xu He, who fought against the Yellow Turban Army, and Xia Houyuan, who fought against the Siege of Chang'an, established military exploits and were promoted to the history of Xuzhou.

古文：沛国武周为下邳令，霸敬异周，身诣令舍。
现代文：沛国人武周是下邳县令，臧霸特别敬重武周，亲自到他的馆舍中。
English: Wu Zhou, a native of Pei Province, was the governor of Jiaozuo County. Yan Ba paid special respect to Wu Zhou and went to his mansion in person.

古文：部从事总詷不法，周得其罪，便收考竟，霸益以善周。
现代文：州中的从事总詷违法，武周得到他的犯罪证据，就将他收捕拷问，最后判决，臧霸因此更加厚待武周。
English: In the state, it was illegal to engage in general robbery, and when Wu Zhou obtained evidence of his crime, he was arrested and tortured, and the final judgment was made. As a result, the bully treated Wu Zhou more generously.

古文：从讨孙权，先登，再入巢湖，攻居巢，破之。
现代文：臧霸跟随太祖征讨孙权，率先登城，再进入巢湖，攻打居巢，击溃敌军。
English: Yan Ba followed the great ancestor to conquer Sun Quan, took the lead in climbing the city, then entered the lake, attacked the nest, and defeated the enemy army.

古文：张辽之讨陈兰，霸别遣至皖，讨吴将韩当，使权不得救兰。
现代文：张辽征讨陈兰时，臧霸另外率军来到皖城，讨伐吴国将领韩当，迫使孙权不能救援陈兰。
English: When Zhang Liao led an expedition to subjugate Chen Lan, Yaoba led another army to Lucheng to subjugate Han Dang, the general of the State of Wu, forcing Sun Quan to be unable to rescue Chen Lan.

古文：当遣兵逆霸，霸与战於逢龙，当复遣兵邀霸於夹石，与战破之，还屯舒。
现代文：韩当派兵迎击臧霸，臧霸和他们在逢龙交战，韩当又派兵在夹石口抵御臧霸，臧霸和他们交战，获得胜利，返回舒城驻守。
English: Han Dang sent troops to meet the Bulgars, and the Bulgars fought with them at Fenglong. Han Dang also sent troops to resist the Bulgars at Jiefangkou, and the Bulgars fought with them, won the victory, and returned to Shucheng to garrison.

古文：权遣数万人乘船屯舒口，分兵救兰，闻霸军在舒，遁还。
现代文：孙权派几万人乘船而来在舒口驻守，分兵救援陈兰，得知臧霸部队在舒城，就率军撤退。
English: Sun Quan sent tens of thousands of people by boat to garrison Shukou, and a detachment of soldiers to rescue Chen Lan. When he learned that the Yanba troops were in Shucheng, he led the army to retreat.

古文：霸夜追之，比明，行百馀里，邀贼前后击之。
现代文：臧霸连夜追击，到天明的时候，已经行进了一百多里，前后夹击敌军。
English: Yan Ba chased the enemy all night long. By dawn, he had traveled more than a hundred miles and attacked the enemy forces back and forth.

古文：贼窘急，不得上船，赴水者甚众。
现代文：敌军困窘又急迫，无法登船，奔往水中的人很多。
English: Embarrassed and in a hurry, the enemy troops were unable to board the ship, and many people rushed to the water.

古文：由是贼不得救兰，辽遂破之。
现代文：因此敌军无法救援陈兰，张辽得以击溃他。
English: As a result, the enemy was unable to rescue Chen Lan, and Zhang Liao was able to defeat him.

古文：霸从讨孙权於濡须口，与张辽为前锋，行遇霖雨，大军先及，水遂长，贼船稍进，将士皆不安。
现代文：臧霸跟随太祖在濡须口征讨孙权，他和张辽作为部队前锋，路上遇到大雨不止，大军先到，水位随后上涨，敌军船只渐渐逼近，军中将士都很不安。
English: He and Zhang Liao, as the vanguard of the troops, encountered more and more heavy rain on the road. The large army arrived first, the water level rose later, the enemy ships gradually approached, and the lieutenant generals were very uneasy.

古文：辽欲去，霸止之曰： 公明於利钝，宁肯捐吾等邪？ 
现代文：张辽想要撤退，臧霸阻止他说： 曹公对事情的顺利与困难很清楚，难道会舍弃我们吗？ 
English: Zhang Liao wanted to retreat, but Yan Ba stopped him and said: Cao Gong is very clear about the smoothness and difficulty of things, will he abandon us?

古文：明日果有令。
现代文：第二天果然收到太祖诏令。
English: The next day, the Emperor's edict was received.

古文：辽至，以语太祖。
现代文：张辽来到，将这件事告诉太祖。
English: Zhang Liao came and told the Emperor about this.

古文：太祖善之，拜扬威将军，假节。
现代文：太祖很是赞赏，任命臧霸为扬威将军，并授予符节。
English: The great-great-grandfather was very appreciative, appointing Yanba as Yangwei general, and awarding Fu Jie.

古文：后权乞降，太祖还，留霸与夏侯惇等屯居巢。
现代文：后来孙权请求投降，太祖返回，留下臧霸和夏侯惇等人在居巢驻守。
English: Later, Sun Quan asked for surrender, and the great-grandfather returned, leaving Yao Ba and Xia Hou Yao and others to stay in the nest.

古文：文帝即王位，迁镇东将军，进爵武安乡侯，都督青州诸军事。
现代文：文帝继位为魏王，臧霸被提升为镇东将军，进封爵位为武安乡侯，督领青州各项军事事务。
English: Emperor Wen succeeded to the throne as the Wei king, and Yan Ba was promoted to the general of Zhendong, was knighted as the governor of Wu'an Township, and was in charge of various military affairs in Qingzhou.

古文：及践阼，进封开阳侯，徙封良成侯。
现代文：等到文帝登基，进封他为开阳侯，又转封为良成后。
English: When Emperor Wen ascended to the throne, he was given the title of Kaiyang, and then changed it to Liangcheng.

古文：与曹休讨吴贼，破吕范於洞浦，徵为执金吾，位特进。
现代文：臧霸和曹休征讨吴国军队，在洞浦击溃吕范，文帝征召他为执金吾，赐位特进。
English: Zhaoba and Cao Xiu defeated the army of the State of Wu and defeated Lü Fan in Dongpu. Emperor Wen conscripted him as the leader of Jinwu and gave him a special promotion.

古文：每有军事，帝常咨访焉。
现代文：每次朝廷有军事，文帝经常向他咨询。
English: Whenever the imperial court had military affairs, Emperor Wen often consulted him.

古文：明帝即位，增邑五百，并前三千五百户。
现代文：明帝登基后，给他增加食邑五百户，加上之前的一共三千五百户。
English: After Emperor Ming ascended to the throne, he was given an additional 500 households, adding to the previous total of 3,500 households.

古文：薨，谥曰威侯。
现代文：臧霸去世，谥号为威侯。
English: Yan He passed away, and his posthumous name was Wei Hou.

古文：子艾嗣。
现代文：他的儿子臧艾继承爵位。
English: His son, Zou Ai, will inherit the title.

古文：艾官至青州刺史、少府。
现代文：臧艾做官到青州刺史、少府。
English: Zou Ai worked as an official in Qingzhou, Shishi and Shofu.

古文：艾薨，谥曰恭侯。
现代文：臧艾去世后，谥号为恭侯。
English: After Zou Ai's death, his posthumous name was Gong Hou.

古文：子权嗣。
现代文：他的儿子臧权继承爵位。
English: His son 权 succeeded to the peerage.

古文：霸前后有功，封子三人列侯，赐一人爵关内侯。
现代文：因为臧霸先后立下很多功绩，朝廷赐封他三个儿子为列侯，赐封其中一个的爵位为关内侯。
English: Because of his many achievements, the imperial court granted three of his sons the title of vassal lord, and one of them the title of vassal lord of Guanai.

古文：而孙观亦至青州刺史，假节，从太祖讨孙权，战被创，薨。
现代文：而他的孙子臧观也做官到青州刺史，被授予符节，跟随太祖征讨孙权，因在战场上受伤而去世。
English: And his grandson, Gongguan, also served as an official in Qingzhou, was awarded the Rune Festival, followed the great-grandfather to conquer the grandson's rights, and died due to injuries on the battlefield.

古文：子毓嗣，亦至青州刺史。
现代文：他的儿子臧毓继承爵位，也官拜青州刺史。
English: His son, Zou, inherited the title of nobility, and also became an official of the Qingzhou Shishi.

古文：文聘字仲业，南阳宛人也，为刘表大将，使御北方。
现代文：文聘字仲业，南阳郡宛县人，是刘表部下大将，刘表派他抵御北方敌寇。
English: Wen Hei Zi Zhongye, a native of Wan County, Nanyang County, was Liu Biao's subordinate general. Liu Biao sent him to resist the northern enemy.

古文：表死，其子琮立。
现代文：刘表去世后，他的儿子刘琮继位。
English: After Liu Biao's death, his son Liu Xizong succeeded to the throne.

古文：太祖征荆州，琮举州降，呼聘欲与俱，聘曰： 聘不能全州，当待罪而已。 太祖济汉，聘乃诣太祖，太祖问曰： 来何迟邪？ 
现代文：太祖征讨荆州，刘琮献州投降，叫文聘和他一起前往，文聘说： 我不能保全荆州，只应该等待判罪。 太祖渡过汉水，文聘才去拜见太祖，太祖问说： 怎么来得这么迟？ 
English: The great-great-grandfather conquered Jingzhou and Liu Bei surrendered Jingzhou, and asked Wenbei to go with him. Wenbei said, "I can't save Jingzhou, I just have to wait for the verdict." The great-great-grandfather crossed the Han River, and it took Wenbei to visit the great-grandfather. The great-grandfather asked, "How come you are so late?"

古文：聘曰： 先日不能辅弼刘荆州以奉国家，荆州虽没，常愿据守汉川，保全土境，生不负於孤弱，死无愧於地下，而计不得已，以至於此。
现代文：文聘说： 之前不能辅佐刘表以侍奉国家，荆州虽然陷没，但我常希望能依据汉川驻守，保全荆州土地，活着不辜负刘氏孤苦无依的人，死后也不愧对地下先主，只是计划无法实行，才到了现在这个地步。
English: Wenyi said, "Before, I couldn't help Liu Biao to serve the country. Although Jingzhou was trapped, I always hoped to stay in accordance with Hanchuan, preserve the land of Jingzhou, and live up to Liu's lonely and destitute people. After death, I was also worthy of the underground master, but the plan couldn't be implemented, and it has come to this point now.

古文：实怀悲惭，无颜早见耳。 
现代文：实在是心中悲伤惭愧，没有脸面早日来见您。 
English: I'm really sad and ashamed that I didn't have the face to come and see you sooner.

古文：遂欷歔流涕。
现代文：随后感叹着流泪。
English: She then broke down in tears.

古文：太祖为之怆然，曰： 仲业，卿真忠臣也。 
现代文：太祖也因为他的话而感叹，说： 仲业啊，您真是忠臣啊。 
English: The great-grandfather also sighed because of his words and said, "Zhongye, you are really a loyal subject.

古文：厚礼待之。
现代文：就以很高的礼节对待他。
English: treated him with great courtesy.

古文：授聘兵，使与曹纯追讨刘备於长阪。
现代文：太祖授予文聘兵马，让他和曹纯到长坂追讨刘备。
English: The great-grandfather granted Wen to hire soldiers and let him and Cao Chun go to Nagasaka to pursue Liu Bei.

古文：太祖先定荆州，江夏与吴接，民心不安，乃以聘为江夏太守，使典北兵，委以边事，赐爵关内侯。
现代文：太祖先平定了荆州，江夏郡和吴国相接，百姓心中不安，太祖就让文聘担任江夏太守，让他统率北方的部队，将边境事务交托给他，赐封爵位为关内侯。
English: His great-great-grandfather had pacified Jingzhou, and Jiangxia County was adjacent to the State of Wu. The people were uneasy. His great-great-grandfather made Wenbei the governor of Jiangxia, let him lead the troops in the north, entrusted the border affairs to him, and gave him the title of Guan Nei Hou.

古文：与乐进讨关羽於寻口，有功，进封延寿亭侯，加讨逆将军。
现代文：文聘和乐进在寻口征讨关羽，立下战功，被进封为延寿亭侯，加封讨逆将军。
English: Wenyi and Lejin fought bravely in the Battle of Hukou against Guan Yu, and were awarded the title of Enju Tinghou, and the title of Anti-General.

古文：又攻羽辎重於汉津，烧其船於荆城。
现代文：又在汉津攻打关羽运输物资的部队，在荆城烧毁关羽的船只。
English: They also attacked Guan Yu's troops transporting supplies in Hanzhong and burned Guan Yu's ships in Jingcheng.

古文：文帝践阼，进爵长安乡侯，假节。
现代文：文帝登基后，进封爵位为长安乡侯，并授予符节。
English: After Emperor Wendi ascended to the throne, he was conferred the title of nobility as the lord of Chang'an Township, and was awarded the Fu Festival.

古文：与夏侯尚围江陵，使聘别屯沔口，止石梵，自当一队，御贼有功，迁后将军，封新野侯。
现代文：他和夏侯尚围攻江陵，文帝让文聘另外率军驻守沔口，他在石梵停下，自己率领一队人马抵抗敌军，立下战功，被提升为后将军，封为新野侯。
English: He and Xia Hou Shang besieged Jiangling. Emperor Wen asked Wen Rong to lead another army to garrison Hekou. He stopped at Shifang and led a group of men and women to resist the enemy army. He was promoted to Rear General and given the title of New Field Marshal.

古文：孙权以五万众自围聘於石阳，甚急，聘坚守不动，权住二十馀日乃解去。
现代文：孙权率领五万人马在石阳城包围了文聘，情况相当紧急，但文聘坚守不动，孙权围困了二十多天，才率军撤走。
English: Sun Quan led 50,000 men and horses to encircle Wenyi in Shiyang City. The situation was quite urgent, but Wenyi held fast. Sun Quan besieged the city for more than 20 days before withdrawing with his army.

古文：聘追击破之。
现代文：文聘在后追击，大获全胜。
English: Wen Rong chased after him and won a complete victory.

古文：增邑五百户，并前千九百户。
现代文：文帝给他增加五百户食邑，加上以前的一共一千九百户。
English: Emperor Wen gave him an additional five hundred households, adding to the previous total of nineteen hundred households.

古文：聘在江夏数十年，有威恩，名震敌国，贼不敢侵。
现代文：文聘在江夏郡几十年，有威望恩德，声名传到敌国，贼人不敢进犯。
English: Wenbei has been in Jiangxia County for decades, with prestige and prestige, and the reputation has spread to the enemy country. Thieves dare not attack.

古文：分聘户邑封聘子岱为列侯，又赐聘从子厚爵关内侯。
现代文：文帝将文聘的食邑分出来封他儿子文岱为列侯，又赐封他的侄子文厚为关内侯。
English: Emperor Wen divided the food villages of Wenyi and made his son, Wenyi, a vassal lord, and his nephew, Wenyu, a vassal lord.

古文：聘薨，谥曰壮侯。
现代文：文聘去世后，谥号为壮侯。
English: After the death of Wen Hei, his nickname was Zhuang Hou.

古文：岱又先亡，聘养子休嗣。
现代文：文岱又先他去世，就由文聘的养子文休继承爵位。
English: After the death of Wenyi, his adopted son Wenyu inherited the title.

古文：卒，子武嗣。
现代文：文休去世后，由他的儿子文武袭爵。
English: After the death of Wenju, his son Wenwu succeeded to the title.

古文：嘉平中，谯郡桓禺为江夏太守，清俭有威惠，名亚於聘。
现代文：嘉平年间，谯郡的桓禺担任江夏太守，清廉简朴有威名恩惠，名望仅次于文聘。
English: During the period of Jiaping, Huanqian of Zhishun County served as the governor of Jiangxia, and his reputation was second only to that of Wenhui.

古文：吕虔字子恪，任城人也。
现代文：吕虔字子恪，任城人。
English: Lv Qian, the son of Lv Qian, became a citizen of the city.

古文：太祖在兖州，闻虔有胆策，以为从事，将家兵守湖陆。
现代文：太祖在衮州，听闻吕虔有胆识谋略，就让他担任从事，率家中兵丁守卫湖陆城。
English: When his great-grandfather in Zhangzhou heard that Lu Qian had the courage to devise a strategy, he put him in charge and led his soldiers to guard Huluncheng.

古文：襄贲校尉杜松部民炅母等作乱，与昌豨通。
现代文：襄贲校尉杜松部下平民炅母等人作乱，和昌豨暗中来往。
English: The civilians under the command of Captain Zhongsong Jun Song, including his mother, started a riot, and secretly made contact with Chang Xuan.

古文：太祖以虔代松。
现代文：太祖让吕虔替代杜松。
English: The great-grandfather let Lv Qian replace the juniper.

古文：虔到，招诱炅母渠率及同恶数十人，赐酒食。
现代文：吕虔到当地，招引炅母和他的首领还有几十个同党，赐给他们酒食。
English: Lv Qian went to the area, lured Zhenmao and his leader, as well as dozens of other party members, and gave them food and drink.

古文：简壮士伏其侧，虔察炅母等皆醉，使伏兵尽格杀之。
现代文：挑选士兵埋伏在他旁边，吕虔发现炅母等人都酒醉了，就派伏兵将他们都杀了。
English: Selecting soldiers to lie in ambush next to him, Lv Qian found that Yan's mother and others were drunk, and sent an ambush to kill them all.

古文：抚其馀众，群贼乃平。
现代文：然后安抚他的部众，贼人才平定下来。
English: He then pacified his men and the bandits calmed down.

古文：太祖以虔领泰山太守。
现代文：太祖让吕虔兼任泰山太守。
English: The great-grandfather let Lv Qian concurrently serve as the governor of Mount Tai.

古文：郡接山海，世乱，闻民人多藏窜。
现代文：泰山郡和山海相连，当地混乱，听说百姓大多逃窜或躲藏起来。
English: Taishan County, which is connected to the mountains and the sea, is in chaos. It is said that most of the people have fled or gone into hiding.

古文：袁绍所置中郎将郭祖、公孙犊等数十辈，保山为寇，百姓苦之。
现代文：袁绍所设置的中郎将郭祖、公孙犊等几十人，占据高山沦为寇匪，百姓很是艰苦。
English: The middlemen set up by Yuan Shao reduced Guo Zu, Gong Sun Qi and dozens of others to occupy the high mountains and become bandits. The people were very hard-pressed.

古文：虔将家兵到郡，开恩信，祖等党属皆降服，诸山中亡匿者尽出安土业。
现代文：吕虔派家中兵丁到郡中，广布恩德信义，郭祖等人都投降了，各山中那些逃往藏匿的人都出来安居乐业。
English: Lü Qian sent soldiers from his family to Guanzhong, Guang Buende, Xinyi, Guo Zu and others all surrendered, and those who fled to hide in the mountains came out to live and work in peace.

古文：简其强者补战士，泰山由是遂有精兵，冠名州郡。
现代文：吕虔挑选其中强壮的人作为展示，泰山郡因此有了精锐部队，名声在州郡中是最大的。
English: Lv Qian selected the strongest among them as a demonstration, and Taishan County thus had an elite force, the reputation of which was the greatest in the county.

古文：济南黄巾徐和等，所在劫长吏，攻城邑。
现代文：济南郡的黄巾军徐和等人，所到的地方，挟持长吏，攻打城邑。
English: Xu He and others of the Yellow Turban Army of Jinan County, wherever they went, seized the officials and attacked the towns.

古文：虔引兵与夏侯渊会击之，前后数十战，斩首获生数千人。
现代文：吕虔率兵和夏侯渊联合攻打他们，前后交战几十次，斩杀或者俘虏的有几千人。
English: Lv Qian led his soldiers and Xia Houyuan jointly attacked them, fighting dozens of times back and forth, killing or capturing several thousand people.

古文：太祖使督青州诸郡兵以讨东莱群贼李条等，有功。
现代文：太祖派他督领青州各郡的兵马以征讨东莱地区的李条等众多贼寇，建立功劳。
English: The great-grandfather sent him to lead the soldiers and horses of the counties in Qingzhou to fight against many bandits such as Li Jie in the Donglai region, and to establish merit.

古文：太祖令曰： 夫有其志，必成其事，盖烈士之所徇也。
现代文：太祖下令说： 有了志向，一定要成就大事，这是有抱负的人所追求的。
English: The great-grandfather ordered: "If you have ambition, you must achieve great things. This is what ambitious people pursue.

古文：卿在郡以来，禽奸讨暴，百姓获安，躬蹈矢石，所征辄克。
现代文：您在泰山郡任官以来，擒获奸小铲除暴行，百姓得到安宁。打仗时亲自冒着箭矢石头奋勇当先，所征讨的都能攻克。
English: Since you were appointed as an official in Taishan County, you have been able to root out violence, and the people have been pacified. During the war, you personally braved the arrows and stones to be the first, and you can conquer what you have conquered.

古文：昔寇恂立名於汝、颍，耿弇建策於青、兖，古今一也。 
现代文：过去寇恂在汝水、颍水之间立下威名，耿弇青州、兖州建言献策，古往今来都是一样的。 
English: In the past, Guo Jian established a prestigious name between Ruishui and Shishui, and Geng Yao advised Qingzhou and Zhangzhou, and it has been the same since ancient times.

古文：举茂才，加骑都尉，典郡如故。
现代文：吕虔被举荐为茂才，加封骑都尉，仍然担任泰山太守。
English: Lv Qian was recommended as Maozai, Jafeng cavalry captain, and still served as the governor of Mount Tai.

古文：虔在泰山十数年，甚有威惠。
现代文：吕虔在泰山十几年，很有声威恩泽。
English: Lv Qian has been in Mount Taishan for more than ten years, and is a very vocal benefactor.

古文：文帝即王位，加裨将军，封益寿亭侯，迁徐州刺史，加威虏将军。
现代文：文帝继位魏王，加封他为裨将军，封为益寿亭侯，升任徐州刺史，又加封威虏将军。
English: Emperor Wen succeeded to the throne of the Wei Dynasty, and he was awarded the title of General Bai, the title of Prince Yizhou, the title of Prince Xuzhou, and the title of General Wairu.

古文：请琅邪王祥为别驾，民事一以委之，世多其能任贤。
现代文：吕虔请琅邪人王祥担任别驾，百姓的事务都交托给他，世人都说他能任用贤人。
English: Lu Qian asked Wang Xiang, an evil man, to be his second-in-command. The affairs of the people were entrusted to him, and the world said that he could appoint wise men.

古文：讨利城叛贼，斩获有功。
现代文：吕虔讨伐利城叛军，斩杀俘虏敌军立了功。
English: Lv Qian fought against the rebels in the city of Varley, and made great achievements in killing and capturing the enemy troops.

古文：明帝即位，徙封万年亭侯，增邑二百，并前六百户。
现代文：明帝登基后，转封他为万年亭侯，增加两百户封邑，加上之前的一共六百户。
English: After Emperor Ming ascended to the throne, he changed his title to Prince of Ten Thousand Years, adding two hundred fiefs, in addition to the previous total of six hundred.

古文：虔薨，子翻嗣。
现代文：吕虔去世，他儿子吕翻继承爵位。
English: When Lv Qian died, his son Lv Tuo inherited the title.

古文：翻薨，子桂嗣。
现代文：吕翻去世，儿子吕桂继承爵位。
English: Lu Fu passed away, and his son Lu Gui succeeded to the title.

古文：许褚字仲康，谯国谯人也。
现代文：许褚字仲康，谯郡谯县人。
English: Xu Zhaozhe, surnamed Zhong Kang, from Zhaozhe County, Shandong Province.

古文：长八尺馀，腰大十围，容貌雄毅，勇力绝人。
现代文：身高八尺多，腰身有十围，样貌勇武刚毅，勇气力量超过常人。
English: He is more than eight feet tall, his waist is ten times as wide, his appearance is brave and courageous, and his courage exceeds that of an ordinary person.

古文：汉末，聚少年及宗族数千家，共坚壁以御寇。
现代文：汉朝末年，许褚召集少年和自己族中几千家人口一起坚壁清野以抵御敌寇。
English: At the end of the Han Dynasty, Xu Yao gathered young people and several thousand people from his own family to build a wall to defend against enemy raiders.

古文：时汝南葛陂贼万馀人攻褚壁，褚众少不敌，力战疲极。
现代文：当时汝南、葛陂有一万多贼寇进攻许褚的壁垒，许褚一方人少，无法抵御，士兵奋力作战非常疲倦。
English: At that time, there were more than ten thousand bandits attacking the walls of Xu Bei in the south of Runan and Gezheng. Xu Bei's side was too few to resist, and the soldiers were very tired from fighting hard.

古文：兵矢尽，乃令壁中男女，聚治石如杅斗者置四隅。
现代文：士兵的箭矢用光，许褚就让壁垒中的男女百姓把石头堆成盂斗的形状放在壁垒四角上。
English: When the soldiers ran out of arrows, Xu Yao asked the men and women in the barrier to pile the stones into the shape of a bucket and place them on the four corners of the barrier.

古文：褚飞石掷之，所值皆摧碎。
现代文：许褚用石头投掷敌人，石头到的地方，敌军的阵型都被打乱了。
English: Xu Yao threw stones at the enemy, and wherever the stones landed, the enemy's formation was disrupted.

古文：贼不敢进。
现代文：贼军不敢前进。
English: The bandits did not dare to advance.

古文：粮乏，伪与贼和，以牛与贼易食，贼来取牛，牛辄奔还。
现代文：城中缺乏粮食，许褚假装和贼人和谈，用牛和敌军交换粮食，敌军来取牛的时候，牛只都狂奔回来。
English: There was a shortage of grain in the city, so Xu Yao pretended to negotiate with the thieves, and exchanged grain with the enemy army for cattle. When the enemy army came to take the cattle, the cattle all ran back.

古文：褚乃出陈前，一手逆曳牛尾，行百馀步。
现代文：许褚才出到阵前，一只手到拽着牛尾巴，往前走了一百多步。
English: Xu Yao just stepped forward, holding the cow's tail with one hand, and walked more than a hundred steps forward.

古文：贼众惊，遂不敢取牛而走。
现代文：贼寇都震惊，就不敢再取牛转而逃走了。
English: The thieves were shocked and did not dare to take any more cattle and fled.

古文：由是淮、汝、陈、梁间，闻皆畏惮之。
现代文：因此淮河、汝水、陈国、梁国地区，听闻这件事的人都畏惧忌惮他。
English: Therefore, people in Huaihe, Rushui, Chen Guo and Liang Guo regions who heard about this incident were afraid of him.

古文：太祖徇淮、汝，褚以众归太祖。
现代文：太祖到淮水、汝水地区巡视，许褚带着部众归附太祖。
English: The great ancestor went on a tour to Huai Shui and Ru Shui regions, and Xu Xi took his followers to join the great ancestor.

古文：太祖见而壮之曰： 此吾樊哙也。 
现代文：太祖看到他，为他的勇气感动，说： 这就是我的樊哙啊。 
English: When the great-grandfather saw him, he was moved by his courage and said, "This is my donkey."

古文：即日拜都尉，引入宿卫。
现代文：当天就让他担任都尉，引入营帐中做为守卫。
English: On the same day, he was made a captain and brought into the camp as a guard.

古文：诸从褚侠客，皆以为虎士。
现代文：那些跟随许褚的下课，太祖都把他们当做虎士。
English: Those who followed Xu Yao after class, the great-grandfather regarded them as tigers.

古文：从征张绣，先登，斩首万计，迁校尉。
现代文：许褚跟随太祖征讨张绣，率先登上城楼，斩杀了人数以万计，被提升为校尉。
English: Xu Yao followed the great ancestor to conquer Zhangxiu, took the lead in climbing the city tower, killed tens of thousands of people, and was promoted to lieutenant.

古文：从讨袁绍於官渡。
现代文：随同太祖在官渡征讨袁绍。
English: Accompanied Emperor Taizu to conquer Yuan Shao in Guandu.

古文：时常从士徐他等谋为逆，以褚常侍左右，惮之不敢发。
现代文：当时经常跟随太祖的谋士徐他等人密谋造反，因为许褚经常在太祖身旁，因忌惮他而不敢有所行动。
English: At that time, Xu and others, who often followed the great-grandfather's advisers, plotted to rebel, because Xu Yao was often at the great-grandfather's side and did not dare to act because he was afraid of him.

古文：伺褚休下日，他等怀刀入。
现代文：等到许褚休息的那一天，徐他等人藏着刀进入太祖的营帐。
English: On the day of Xu Yao's rest, Xu and the others hid their swords and entered Taizu's camp.

古文：褚至下舍心动，即还侍。
现代文：许褚回到家中，心中感到不对，立即回去侍奉太祖。
English: When Xu Yao returned home, he felt wrong in his heart and immediately went back to serve his grandfather.

古文：他等不知，入帐见褚，大惊愕。
现代文：徐他等人不知情，进到营帐中见到许褚，都很震惊。
English: Unbeknownst to Xu and the others, when they entered the tent, they were shocked to see Xu Yao.

古文：他色变，褚觉之，即击杀他等。
现代文：徐他变了脸色，被许褚发觉，立即斩杀了徐他等人。
English: Xu He turned pale and was discovered by Xu Yao, who immediately killed Xu He and the others.

古文：太祖益亲信之，出入同行，不离左右。
现代文：太祖更加亲近信赖他，出入都和他一起，不离开身旁。
English: The great-grandfather is closer to him, trusts him, goes in and out with him, and never leaves his side.

古文：从围邺，力战有功，赐爵关内侯。
现代文：许褚跟随太祖围攻邺城，因奋力作战立了功劳，被赐封爵位为关内侯。
English: Xu Rong followed his great-grandfather in the siege of Lucheng, and was awarded the title of Guan Nei Hou (the lord of Guan Nei) for his efforts in the battle.

古文：从讨韩遂、马超於潼关。
现代文：随同太祖到潼关征讨韩遂、马超。
English: Accompanied the great ancestor to Shaoguan to fight against Han Sui and Ma Chao.

古文：太祖将北渡，临济河，先渡兵，独与褚及虎士百馀人留南岸断后。
现代文：太祖率军往北渡河，靠近济河时，先将士兵过去，他自己和许褚还有一百多虎士留在南岸断后。
English: Taizu led the army to the north to cross the river, and when approaching the Ji River, he first passed the soldiers, and he himself and Xu Yao and more than a hundred tigers left behind on the south bank.

古文：超将步骑万馀人，来奔太祖军，矢下如雨。褚白太祖，贼来多，今兵渡已尽，宜去，乃扶太祖上船。
现代文：马超带着一万多步兵骑兵来追击太祖，箭矢像雨一样射来、许褚告诉太祖，敌军来的人很多，现在我军士兵已经渡江完毕，应该迅速离去，就扶着太祖上船。
English: Ma Chao came with more than ten thousand infantry and cavalry to pursue Taizu, and arrows came like rain. Xu Yao told Taizu that there were many people from the enemy army, and now our soldiers had finished crossing the river, they should leave quickly, so he helped Taizu onto the boat.

古文：贼战急，军争济，船重欲没。
现代文：贼军攻势猛烈，曹军争抢着渡河，船只超重几乎要沉没。
English: The invaders' offensive was fierce, Cao's army scrambled to cross the river, and the ships were so heavy that they almost sank.

古文：褚斩攀船者，左手举马鞍蔽太祖。
现代文：许褚斩杀了抢着登船的人，左手举着马鞍保护太祖。
English: Xu Yao killed the man who tried to board the ship, and held up his saddle in his left hand to protect Taizu.

古文：船工为流矢所中死，褚右手并溯船，仅乃得渡。
现代文：船上的工人被流箭射中身亡，许褚右手撑船，仅能勉强渡河。
English: The worker on the boat was shot and killed by a stray arrow, and Xu Yao was only able to cross the river with difficulty.

古文：是日，微褚几危。
现代文：当天，如果没有许褚，太祖就危险了。
English: On that day, if there had been no warning, Taizu would have been in danger.

古文：其后太祖与遂、超等单马会语，左右皆不得从，唯将褚。
现代文：这之后和韩遂、马超等人只身骑马会面商议，身边的人都不能跟从，只带了许褚。
English: After that, Han Sui, Ma Chao and others met on horseback to discuss the matter. The people around them could not follow, they only brought Xu Yao.

古文：超负其力，阴欲前突太祖，素闻褚勇，疑从骑是褚。
现代文：马超仗着自己的力气，暗中想要往前偷袭太祖，但一直听说许褚勇武，怀疑跟来的就是他。
English: Ma Chao, relying on his own strength, secretly wanted to sneak up on Taizu, but he had always heard about Xu Yao's bravery, and suspected that he was the one.

古文：乃问太祖曰： 公有虎侯者安在？ 
现代文：就问太祖说： 曹公的虎侯在哪里？ 
English: He asked the great ancestor, "Where is Cao Gong's tigress?"

古文：太祖顾指褚，褚瞋目盼之。
现代文：太祖回过头指着许褚，许褚瞪着眼睛盯着马超。
English: Taizu looked back and pointed at Xu Yao. Xu Yao stared at Ma Chao with his eyes wide open.

古文：超不敢动，乃各罢。
现代文：马超不敢行动，就各自返回军营。
English: Ma Chao did not dare to act, so they all returned to the military camp.

古文：后数日会战，大破超等，褚身斩首级，迁武卫中郎将。
现代文：后来过了几天会战，大败马超，许褚杀死了许多敌人，升任为武卫中郎将。
English: Later, after several days of battle, he defeated Ma Chao, killed many enemies, and was promoted to the rank of Wuwei Zhong Lang.

古文：武卫之号，自此始也。
现代文：武卫的名号，就是从这里开始的。
English: The name "Wuwei" originated here.

古文：军中以褚力如虎而痴，故号曰虎痴；是以超问虎侯，至今天下称焉，皆谓其姓名也。
现代文：军中将士因为许褚力大如虎却不机敏，都称他为虎痴；因为马超问到虎侯，到现在大家还这样称呼他，都以为这是他的姓名。
English: The lieutenant generals of the army all called him "tiger idiot" because he was as strong as a tiger but not as quick-witted; because Ma Chao asked about "tiger lord," everyone still calls him this way, and they all think that this is his name.

古文：褚性谨慎奉法，质重少言。
现代文：许褚生性谨慎，奉公守法，诚朴敦厚，沉默少言。
English: Xu Hao is prudent in nature, law-abiding, honest and straightforward, and silent.

古文：曹仁自荆州来朝谒，太祖未出，入与褚相见於殿外。
现代文：曹仁从荆州来拜见太祖，太祖没有出来，曹仁就到殿外和许褚见面。
English: Cao Ren came from Jingzhou to visit the great-grandfather. When the great-grandfather did not come out, Cao Ren went outside the palace to meet with Xu Xi.

古文：仁呼褚入便坐语，褚曰： 王将出。 
现代文：曹仁叫许褚进来坐着交谈，许褚说： 魏王就要出来了。 
English: Cao Ren asked Xu Yao to come in and sit down for a chat. Xu Yao said: "The Wei King is about to come out.

古文：便还入殿，仁意恨之。
现代文：就转身进入殿中，曹仁心中怀恨。
English: Cao Ren turned around and entered the hall, harboring hatred in his heart.

古文：或以责褚曰： 征南宗室重臣，降意呼君，君何故辞？ 
现代文：有人责备许褚说： 征南将军是宗室重臣，降低身份来招呼你，您为什么要推辞呢？ 
English: Someone reproached Xu Zheng and said, "The general of the Southern Expedition is the senior vassal of the family, and he lowered his status to greet you. Why did you refuse?"

古文：褚曰： 彼虽亲重，外藩也。
现代文：许褚说： 他虽然被亲近器重，但也是外藩。
English: Xu Yao said: Although he is close to the clan, he is also from outside the clan.

古文：褚备内臣，众谈足矣，入室何私乎？ 
现代文：许褚身为内臣，在众人面前交谈就够了，进到殿中难道是有什么私事吗？ 
English: As a vassal, it's enough to have a conversation in front of everyone. Is it a private matter to enter the palace?

古文：太祖闻，愈爱待之，迁中坚将军。
现代文：太祖得知后，更加厚待他，提升他为中坚将军。
English: After learning of this, the great-grandfather treated him more generously and promoted him to general.

古文：太祖崩，褚号泣欧血。
现代文：太祖去世，许褚痛哭以至于吐血。
English: When the great-grandfather passed away, Xu Yao cried so hard that she vomited blood.

古文：文帝践阼，进封万岁亭侯，迁武卫将军，都督中军宿卫禁兵，甚亲近焉。
现代文：文帝登基后，进封许褚的爵位为万岁亭侯，升任武卫将军，督领中军宿卫禁兵，对他非常亲近信赖。
English: After Emperor Wen ascended to the throne, Emperor Xu's title was "Vanzhei Pavilion Lord," and he was promoted to "Buwei General" and "Superintendent of the Chinese Army's Life Guards," and he was very close to and trusted by Emperor Wen.

古文：初，褚所将为虎士者从征伐，太祖以为皆壮士也，同日拜为将，其后以功为将军封侯者数十人，都尉、校尉百馀人，皆剑客也。
现代文：当初，许褚率领虎士随同太祖征讨，太祖认为他们都是壮士，在同一天将他们都封为将军，这之后因为立功而被提升为将军或者封侯的有几十人，都尉、校尉都一百多人，这些人都是剑客。
English: At the beginning, Xu Rong led the tigers to fight alongside the great-grandfather. The great-grandfather thought that they were all strong men and made them all generals on the same day. After that, there were dozens of people who were promoted to generals or feudal lords because of their meritorious deeds. There were more than a hundred captains and lieutenants. These people were all swordsmen.

古文：明帝即位，进封牟乡侯，邑七百户，赐子爵一人关内侯。
现代文：明帝登基后，进封许褚为牟乡侯，封邑七百户，赐封他一个儿子的爵位为关内侯。
English: After Emperor Ming ascended to the throne, Xu Xi was given the title of Muxiang Hou (牟乡侯) and the fiefdoms of seven hundred households, and one of his sons was given the title of Guanai Hou (关内侯).

古文：褚薨，谥曰壮侯。
现代文：许褚去世，谥号为壮侯。
English: Xu Yao passed away, and his posthumous name was Zhuang Hou.

古文：子仪嗣。
现代文：他的儿子许仪继承爵位。
English: His son Xu Yi succeeded to the title.

古文：褚兄定，亦以军功为振威将军，都督徼道虎贲。
现代文：许褚的哥哥许定也因为军功被封为振威将军，统率徼道虎贲卫士。
English: Xu Yao's brother Xu Ding was also awarded the title of General Zhenwei for his military exploits, and he was the leader of the defenders of Xingdao and Hucheng.

古文：太和中，帝思褚忠孝，下诏褒赞，复赐褚子孙二人爵关内侯。
现代文：太和年间，明帝感念许褚忠孝两全，颁发诏令褒扬他，又赐封他的两个子孙为关内侯。
English: During the reign of Empress Dowager Cixi, Emperor Ming was so moved by Xu Xi's loyalty and filial piety that he issued an edict praising him and bestowed the title of Guan Nei Hou on two of his grandchildren.

古文：仪为锺会所杀。
现代文：许仪被钟会杀害。
English: Xu Yi was killed by the Bell Association.

古文：泰始初，子综嗣。
现代文：泰始初年，许仪的儿子许综承袭爵位。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Taizhi, Emperor Xu's son, Emperor Xu Zong, inherited the title of nobility.

古文：典韦，陈留己吾人也。
现代文：典韦，陈留郡己吾人。
English: Deng Wei, Chen Liu County is my hometown.

古文：形貌魁梧，旅力过人，有志节任侠。
现代文：身材魁梧，体力超过常人，有志向节操，以及豪侠之气。
English: He is large in stature, has physical strength exceeding that of an ordinary person, has the aspiration of self-restraint, and the spirit of a hero.

古文：襄邑刘氏与睢阳李永为雠，韦为报之。
现代文：襄邑的刘氏和睢阳的李永是仇敌，典韦为刘氏报了仇。
English: Mr. Liu from Yangyuan and Li Yong from Fenyang were enemies. Dian Wei took revenge for Mr. Liu.

古文：永故富春长，备卫甚谨。
现代文：李永本来是富春县长，防备得很是严谨。
English: Li Yong was originally the head of Fuchun County, and he was very rigorous in his preparations.

古文：韦乘车载鸡酒，伪为候者，门开，怀匕首入杀永，并杀其妻，徐出，取车上刀戟，步去。
现代文：典韦乘着车载着鸡和就，假装是巡查的人，等到大门打开，就藏着匕首进入将李永杀了，连带他的妻子，然后慢慢出来，拿上车上的刀和戟就步行离开了。
English: Dian Wei took a car with chickens and ducks, pretending to be an inspector. When the gate opened, he hid a dagger and entered to kill Li Yong, together with his wife, and then slowly came out, took the knife and shovel on the car and left on foot.

古文：永居近巿，一巿尽骇。
现代文：李永住的地方离集市近，整个集市都震惊了。
English: Li Yong lived near the market, and the whole market was shocked.

古文：追者数百，莫敢近。
现代文：前去追赶典韦的有几百人，但没有人敢靠近。
English: There were hundreds of people chasing Dunwei, but no one dared to get close.

古文：行四五里，遇其伴，转战得脱。
现代文：典韦走了四五里地，遇上他的同伴，辗转才得以逃脱。
English: Deng Wei walked four or five miles, met his companion, and managed to escape.

古文：由是为豪杰所识。
现代文：因此被豪杰认得。
English: Therefore, it was recognized by the hero.

古文：初平中，张邈举义兵，韦为士，属司马赵宠。
现代文：初平年间，张邈兴起义兵，典韦做为队伍的士，隶属与司马赵宠。
English: In the early years of the Heian period, Zhang Xuan raised volunteer soldiers, and Dian Wei served as a team taxi, affiliated with Sima Zhao Zhao.

古文：牙门旗长大，人莫能胜，韦一手建之，宠异其才力。
现代文：军营中牙门旗又高又大，没有人能举起来，典韦一只手就能把它立起来，赵宠对他的力气感到震惊。
English: The flag of Zhongya Gate of the military camp is so tall and big that no one can hold it up. Deng Wei can hold it up with one hand. Zhao Zhaozhong was shocked by his strength.

古文：后属夏侯惇，数斩首有功，拜司马。
现代文：后来典韦又隶属与夏侯惇，多次在战斗中斩杀敌军立了功劳，担任军中司马。
English: Later, Dianwei was also subordinate to Xia Houyi, and he repeatedly killed the enemy in battle, and served as the leader of the army.

古文：太祖讨吕布於濮阳。
现代文：太祖在濮阳征讨吕布。
English: The great-grandfather fought against Lvbu in Shenyang.

古文：布有别屯在濮阳西四五十里，太祖夜袭，比明破之。
现代文：吕布另外有部队驻扎在濮阳西面四五十里的地方，太祖率队趁夜偷袭，等到天亮时就攻破了敌军。
English: Lvbu also had troops stationed in a place forty or fifty miles west of Fenyang. Taizu and his team took advantage of the night to make a surprise attack, and broke through the enemy army at dawn.

古文：未及还，会布救兵至，三面掉战。
现代文：还没等到撤军返回，就赶上吕布的援军来到，三面轮流围攻太祖部队。
English: Even before the retreating troops returned, they caught up with Lvbu's reinforcements and took turns besieging Taizu's troops from three sides.

古文：时布身自搏战，自旦至日昳数十合，相持急。
现代文：当时吕布亲自在场上作战，从天刚亮到中午，几十个回合，对峙的情况很紧急。
English: At that time, Lü Bu himself fought on the field, from dawn to noon, dozens of rounds, the confrontation was very urgent.

古文：太祖募陷陈，韦先占，将应募者数十人，皆重衣两铠，弃楯，但持长矛撩戟。
现代文：太祖招募士兵冲出重围，典韦首先被选中，率领响应的几十名士兵，都穿着两层铠甲，舍弃盾牌，只拿着长矛撩戟。
English: Taizu recruited soldiers to break out of the encirclement. Dian Wei was the first to be selected, leading dozens of soldiers who responded, all wearing two layers of armor, abandoning shields, and only holding spears.

古文：时西面又急，韦进当之，贼弓弩乱发，矢至如雨，韦不视，谓等人曰： 虏来十步，乃白之。 
现代文：当时西面情况又紧急，典韦上前抵御，贼军乱箭齐发，箭矢像雨一样射来，典韦没有看，只对众人说： 等到贼人离我十步远的时候再告诉我。 
English: At that time, the situation in the west was also urgent. Dian Wei stepped forward to defend himself. The thief army launched a flurry of arrows. The arrows came like rain. Dian Wei did not look, but said to the crowd: Wait until the thief is ten steps away from me and then tell me.

古文：等人曰： 十步矣。 
现代文：部下说： 只有十步了。 
English: His subordinates said, "There are only ten steps left."

古文：又曰： 五步乃白 等人惧，疾言 虏至矣 ！
现代文：典韦又说： 只有五步的时候再说。 众人都很畏惧，迅速说 贼人到了 ！
English: Denway also said, "Let's talk again when there are only five steps." Everyone was very afraid and quickly said, "The thief has arrived!"

古文：韦手持十馀戟，大呼起，所抵无不应手倒者。
现代文：典韦手中拿着十几支戟，大喊着起身，上前抵挡他的人没有不应势倒地的。
English: With more than a dozen shovels in his hands, Dian Wei stood up and shouted. No one who came forward to resist him fell to the ground.

古文：布众退。
现代文：吕布队伍撤退。
English: The Lübu team withdrew.

古文：会日暮，太祖乃得引去。
现代文：适逢天色昏暗，太祖才得以率军离去。
English: It was not until dusk that the great-grandfather was able to lead his army away.

古文：拜韦都尉，引置左右，将亲兵数百人，常绕大帐。
现代文：随后让典韦担任都尉，让他跟在自己身边，典韦带领几百亲兵，经常绕着太祖营帐巡逻。
English: Subsequently, he made Dunwei a captain and let him follow him around. Dunwei led several hundred soldiers and often patrolled around the grandfather's tent.

古文：韦既壮武，其所将皆选卒，每战斗，常先登陷陈。
现代文：典韦强壮勇猛，他所率领的士兵都是挑选出来的，每次作战，都是先冲锋陷阵。
English: Dian Wei is strong and brave. The soldiers he leads are handpicked, and every time they fight, they are the first to charge into battle.

古文：迁为校尉。
现代文：后来典韦被提升为校尉。
English: He was later promoted to the rank of lieutenant.

古文：性忠至谨重，常昼立侍终日，夜宿帐左右，稀归私寝。
现代文：典韦性情忠诚至极又严谨慎重，经常白天在太祖身旁侍奉一整天，晚上还睡在营帐旁边，很少回自己营帐中休息。
English: Dian Wei is extremely loyal and cautious. He often serves the whole day beside his grandfather during the day, and sleeps next to the camp at night. He rarely goes back to his own camp to rest.

古文：好酒食，饮啖兼人，每赐食於前，大饮长歠，左右相属，数人益乃供，太祖壮之。
现代文：他喜好酒食，喝酒吃肉都是两个人的分量，每次太祖赏赐他饮食，他都开怀畅饮，身边的人都在劝酒，要几个人才能赶得上他的速度，太祖也认为他很豪壮。
English: He likes to eat and drink, and the amount of alcohol and meat he consumes is equal to that of two people. Every time his great-grandfather rewards him with food and drink, he drinks heartily. People around him are encouraging him to drink, and it takes several people to catch up with his speed. His great-grandfather also thinks he is very strong.

古文：韦好持大双戟与长刀等，军中为之语曰： 帐下壮士有典君，提一双戟八十斤。 
现代文：典韦喜欢拿大双戟与长刀等兵器，军中将士都说他： 帐下壮士有典韦，提一双戟八十斤。 
English: Dianwei liked to carry weapons such as large double crossbows and long swords. The lieutenant generals all said of him: "There is a strong man named Dianwei who can lift a pair of crossbows weighing 80 kilos.

古文：太祖征荆州，至宛，张绣迎降。
现代文：太祖征讨荆州，到了宛城时，张绣出来迎接并投降。
English: Emperor Taizu conquered Jingzhou, and when he arrived at Wancheng, Zhang Xiu came out to meet him and surrendered.

古文：太祖甚悦，延绣及其将帅，置酒高会。
现代文：太祖很是高兴，延请张绣和他的部将，备办酒席大办宴会。
English: The great-grandfather was very happy and invited Zhang Xiu and his subordinates to prepare a banquet.

古文：太祖行酒，韦持大斧立后，刃径尺，太祖所至之前，韦辄举斧目之。
现代文：太祖劝酒，典韦手拿大斧站在太祖身后，斧刃长一尺，太祖举酒到一个人的前面，典韦就举起大斧盯着那个人。
English: The great-grandfather urged him to drink, and Denway stood behind the great-grandfather with a large axe in his hand. The axe blade was a foot long. The great-grandfather raised the wine in front of a person, and Denway raised the large axe and stared at that person.

古文：竟酒，绣及其将帅莫敢仰视。
现代文：一直到宴会结束，张绣和他的将领都不敢抬头看。
English: Until the end of the banquet, Zhang Xiu and his generals did not dare to look up.

古文：后十馀日，绣反，袭太祖营，太祖出战不利，轻骑引去。
现代文：过了十几天，张绣反叛，袭击太祖营帐，太祖出阵迎战，失利而回，只身骑马离开。
English: After a dozen days, Zhang Xiu rebelled and attacked the grandfather's tent. The grandfather went out to fight, but returned defeated and left alone on horseback.

古文：韦战於门中，贼不得入。
现代文：典韦在军营门口奋战，贼人不能攻入。
English: Denwei fought hard at the gate of the military camp, and the thieves could not break in.

古文：兵遂散从他门并入。
现代文：张绣的士兵就分散从其他营门进入。
English: Zhang Xiu's soldiers then dispersed to enter from other camp gates.

古文：时韦校尚有十馀人，皆殊死战，无不一当十。
现代文：当时典韦身边的校尉还有十几个人，都拼死奋战，没有不是以一当十的。
English: At that time, there were more than a dozen people around the captain of Dianwei, all of whom were fighting hard, and no one was better than the other.

古文：贼前后至稍多，韦以长戟左右击之，一叉入，辄十馀矛摧。
现代文：贼人先后涌来的越来越多，典韦就拿着长戟左右攻击，一叉过去，就有十几支矛被击断。
English: More and more thieves came one after another, and Denwei attacked them with a long pole, and more than a dozen spears were broken at a single blow.

古文：左右死伤者略尽。韦被数十创，短兵接战，贼前搏之。韦双挟两贼击杀之，馀贼不敢前。
现代文：典韦身边的人或死或伤，典韦自己也受了十几处伤，用短兵器战斗，贼人上前搏斗，典韦用双臂挟住两人打死，剩下的敌军都不敢上前。
English: The people around Wei Dian were either killed or injured, and Wei Dian himself was also injured more than a dozen times. They fought with short weapons, the thieves fought forward, Wei Dian killed two people with his arms, and the remaining enemy troops did not dare to advance.

古文：韦复前突贼，杀数人，创重发，瞋目大骂而死。
现代文：典韦又冲向前攻击敌人，杀了几个人，伤重发作，瞪着眼睛大骂，最后战死。
English: Dian Wei rushed forward to attack the enemy again, killed several people, was seriously injured, stared and cursed, and finally died in battle.

古文：贼乃敢前，取其头，传观之，覆军就视其躯。
现代文：贼人才敢上前，斩下他的首级，传着观看，又返回来看他的躯体。
English: The thief only dared to go forward, cut off his head, passed on watching, and returned to see his body.

古文：太祖退住舞阴，闻韦死，为流涕，募间取其丧，亲自临哭之，遣归葬襄邑，拜子满为郎中。
现代文：太祖退到舞阴驻守，得知典韦死讯，为他流泪，招募间谍取回他的尸首，亲自到跟前哭泣，然后派人送回襄邑安葬。任命他的儿子典满为郎中。
English: The great-grandfather retreated to the Muyin garrison, learned of Deng Wei's death, shed tears for him, recruited spies to retrieve his body, wept in front of him, and then sent someone back to Xiangyuan for burial. Appointed his son Tuanman as a vassal.

古文：车驾每过，常祠以中牢。
现代文：每次太祖经过他的墓地，经常用猪羊的祭品来祭祀典韦。
English: Every time the great-grandfather passed by his grave, he would often sacrifice a pig or a sheep to worship Deng Wei.

古文：太祖思韦，拜满为司马，引自近。
现代文：太祖追思典韦，就升任典满为司马，并将他安排在自己身边。
English: After thinking about Dian Wei, the great-grandfather promoted Dian Man to the position of Sima, and placed him by his side.

古文：文帝即王位，以满为都尉，赐爵关内侯。
现代文：文帝继位魏王，任命典满为都尉，赐封他为关内侯。
English: Emperor Wen succeeded to the throne of Wei, appointed Dianman as the captain, and granted him the title of Guan Nei Hou.

古文：庞德字令明，南安狟道人也。
现代文：庞德字令明，南安郡狟道县人。
English: Pound Zi Lingming, Nan'an County, Shandong County.

古文：少为郡吏州从事。
现代文：年少时做过郡吏和州从事。
English: As a young man, he worked as a county official and state senator.

古文：初平中，从马腾击反羌叛氐。数有功，稍迁至校尉。
现代文：初平年中，庞德跟随马腾攻打反叛的羌人、氐人，多次立下功劳，渐渐被提升为校尉。
English: In the first half of the year, Pound followed Ma Teng to attack the rebellious Xingren and Xingren, and made many contributions, and was gradually promoted to lieutenant.

古文：建安中，太祖讨袁谭、尚於黎阳，谭遣郭援、高幹等略取河东，太祖使锺繇率关中诸将讨之。
现代文：建安年间，太祖到黎阳征讨袁谭、袁尚，袁谭派郭援、高干等人在河东郡劫掠，太祖派钟繇带领关中地区的将领们前去征讨。
English: During the Jian'an period, Taizu went to Liyang to recruit Yuan Tan, Yuan Shang, Yuan Tan sent Guo Yuan, Gao Gan and others to loot in Hedong County, and Taizu sent Zhong Qi to lead the generals in the Guanzhong area to recruit.

古文：德随腾子超拒援、幹於平阳，德为军锋，进攻援、幹，大破之，亲斩援首。
现代文：庞德跟随马腾的儿子马超在平阳抗击郭援、高幹，庞德担任先锋，攻打郭援、高幹，大破敌军，庞德亲自斩下了郭援的首级。
English: Pound followed Ma Chao, the son of Ma Teng, to fight against Guo Yuan and Gao Gan in Pingyang. Pound took the vanguard, attacked Guo Yuan and Gao Gan, and defeated the enemy army. Pound personally cut off Guo Yuan's head.

古文：拜中郎将，封都亭侯。
现代文：后来担任中郎将，封为都亭侯。
English: Later, he served as churo shogun and was given the title of Totei no Tsuruko.

古文：后张白骑叛於弘农，德复随腾征之，破白骑於两殽间。
现代文：后来张白骑在弘农郡反叛，庞德又随同马腾征讨，在两座崤山之间击溃敌军。
English: Later, Zhang Baikai rebelled in Hongnong County, and Pound accompanied Ma Teng to conquer and defeat the enemy army between the two mountains.

古文：每战，常陷陈卻敌，勇冠腾军。
现代文：每次作战，庞德都在前冲锋，攻陷敌军，他的勇武在马腾军中是最突出的。
English: In every battle, Pound charged forward and captured the enemy army. His bravery was the most prominent in the Ma Teng army.

古文：后腾徵为卫尉，德留属超。
现代文：后来马腾被征召为卫尉，庞德就留在军中隶属与马超。
English: Later, Ma Teng was conscripted as a guard lieutenant, Pound remained in the army and was subordinate to Ma Chao.

古文：太祖破超於渭南，德随超亡入汉阳，保冀城。
现代文：太祖在渭南击溃马超，庞德跟随马超逃往进入汉阳，据守冀城。
English: Taizu defeated Ma Chao in Hunan, Pound followed Ma Chao and fled to Hanyang, where he defended Jicheng.

古文：后复随超奔汉中，从张鲁。
现代文：后来又随同马超逃奔汉中，依附张鲁。
English: Later, he ran away with Ma Chao to Hanzhong and attached himself to Zhang Lu.

古文：太祖定汉中，德随众降。
现代文：太祖平定汉中，庞德也随同众人投降。
English: Pound also surrendered along with everyone else in the pacification of Han.

古文：太祖素闻其骁勇，拜立义将军，封关门亭侯，邑三百户。
现代文：太祖向来听说庞德骁勇善战，就征召他为立义将军，封他为关门亭侯，食邑三百户。
English: The great-grandfather had always heard that Pound was brave and good at war, so he conscripted him as a general of righteousness, and made him the lord of the castle, with three hundred households.

古文：侯音、卫开等以宛叛，德将所领与曹仁共攻拔宛，斩音、开，遂南屯樊，讨关羽。
现代文：侯音、卫开等人依据宛城反叛，庞德和所带领的部队和曹仁一起攻克了宛城，斩杀了侯音、卫开随后往南在樊城驻守，征讨关羽。
English: Hou Yin, Wei Kai and others rebelled based on Wancheng, and Pound and the troops he led together with Cao Ren conquered Wancheng, killed Hou Yin and Wei Kai, and then went south to garrison in Fucheng to fight Guan Yu.

古文：樊下诸将以德兄在汉中，颇疑之。
现代文：樊城的将领因为庞德的兄长在汉中，都对他心存疑虑。
English: Because Pound's brother was in Hanzhong, the generals in Handan were suspicious of him.

古文：德常曰： 我受国恩，义在效死。
现代文：庞德经常说： 我蒙受国家恩典，按道义应该献出生命。
English: "I am at the mercy of the state," Pound often said, "and I am morally obliged to give my life."

古文：我欲身自击羽。
现代文：我打算亲自进攻关羽。
English: I plan to personally attack Guan Yu.

古文：今年我不杀羽，羽当杀我。 
现代文：今年我不杀关羽，就是关羽杀了我。 
English: If I don't kill Guan Yu this year, then Guan Yu will kill me.

古文：后亲与羽交战，射羽中额。
现代文：后来庞德亲自和关羽交战，射箭击中关羽前额。
English: Later, Pound personally fought with Guan Yu, and shot Guan Yu in the forehead with an arrow.

古文：时德常乘白马，羽军谓之白马将军，皆惮之。
现代文：当时庞德经常骑白马，关羽军队都称他为白马将军，都很忌惮他。
English: At that time, Pound often rode a white horse, and Guan Yu's army called him the White Horse General, and they were all afraid of him.

古文：仁使德屯樊北十里，会天霖雨十馀日，汉水暴溢，樊下平地五六丈，德与诸将避水上堤。
现代文：曹仁派让的在距离樊城北边十里的地方驻守，适逢连续下了十几天大雨，汉水水位疾速上涨，樊城平地水深有五六丈，庞德和将领们到堤坝上避水。
English: Cao Ren sent his troops to garrison a place ten miles north of Lucheng, which coincided with a dozen days of continuous heavy rain, the Han River water level rose rapidly, the water depth of the Lucheng plain was five or six meters, and Pound and the generals went to the dike to avoid water.

古文：羽乘船攻之，以大船四面射堤上。
现代文：关羽乘船攻打他们，凭借大船将他们四面包围起来，然后让堤坝上射箭。
English: Guan Yu attacked them by boat, surrounded them on all sides with the help of a large boat, and then had them shoot arrows over the dike.

古文：德被甲持弓，箭不虚发。
现代文：庞德披着铠甲手持弓箭，每一箭都没有射空的。
English: Pound, clad in armour and holding a bow and arrow, did not miss a single arrow.

古文：将军董衡、部曲将董超等欲降，德皆收斩之。
现代文：将军董衡、部属将领董超等人想投降，庞德将他们抓起来斩了。
English: General Dong Heng, subordinate general Dong Chao and others wanted to surrender, but Pound caught them and beheaded them.

古文：自平旦力战至日过中，羽攻益急，矢尽，短兵接战。
现代文：两军从天亮交战到中午，关羽的攻势更加猛烈，箭矢用完了，就拿着短兵器交战。
English: The two armies fought from dawn to noon, Guan Yu's offensive was more violent, and when they ran out of arrows and arrows, they fought with short weapons.

古文：德谓督将成何曰： 吾闻良将不怯死以苟免，烈士不毁节以求生，今日，我死日也。 
现代文：庞德对督将成何说： 我听说良将不怕死，不苟且偷生，忠烈之士不损毁节操以求活命，今天就是我的死期了。 
English: "I have heard it said that a good general does not fear death, a scrupulous general lives, and a brave general does not break his spirit in order to live. Today is my day to die."

古文：战益怒，气愈壮，而水浸盛，吏士皆降。
现代文：然后作战更加勇猛，胆气越来越壮烈，但水位越来越高，将士们都投降了。
English: Then they fought more bravely and courageously, but as the water rose higher and higher, the soldiers surrendered.

古文：德与麾下将一人，五伯二人，弯弓傅矢，乘小船欲还仁营。
现代文：庞德和一名部将，两名伍长弯弓搭箭，乘小船要回曹仁营中。
English: Pound, a captain, and two company commanders made their way back to Cao Ren's camp in a small boat, carrying bows and arrows.

古文：水盛船覆，失弓矢，独抱船覆水中，为羽所得，立而不跪。
现代文：但水流太急导致船只倾覆，失掉了弓箭，庞德一个人抱着船沉到水中，被关羽擒获，但他站立着不肯下跪。
English: But the current was so strong that the boat capsized, the bow and arrow were lost, and Pound sank into the water holding the boat. He was caught by Guan Yu, but he stood up and refused to kneel down.

古文：羽谓曰： 卿兄在汉中，我欲以卿为将，不早降何为？ 
现代文：关羽对他说： 你的兄长在汉中，我想要任命你为将领，你不投降还要做什么呢？ 
English: Guan Yu said to him, "Your brother is in Hanzhong, I want to appoint you as a general. If you don't surrender, what else can you do?

古文：德骂羽曰： 竖子，何谓降也！
现代文：庞德怒骂关羽说： 小子，说什么投降！
English: Pound scolded Guan Yu and said, "Kid, talk about surrender!

古文：魏王带甲百万，威振天下。
现代文：魏王有百万雄兵，声威震动天下。
English: The Wei king had a million soldiers, and his prestige shook the world.

古文：汝刘备庸才耳，岂能敌邪！
现代文：你的主君刘备只是个庸才罢了，怎么会是魏王的敌手！
English: Your master Liu Bei is just a mediocrity, how can he be the enemy of the Wei king!

古文：我宁为国家鬼，不为贼将也。 
现代文：我宁肯成为国家的亡魂，也不做敌军的将领。 
English: I would rather be the ghost of my country than the general of the enemy.

古文：遂为羽所杀。
现代文：于是庞德被关羽杀了。
English: As a result, Pound was killed by Guan Yu.

古文：太祖闻而悲之，为之流涕，封其二子为列侯。
现代文：太祖得知后非常悲痛，为他痛哭流涕，封他两个儿子为列侯。
English: After learning of this, the great-grandfather was very sad, wept bitterly for him, and made his two sons vassals.

古文：文帝即王位，乃遣使就德墓赐谥，策曰： 昔先轸丧元，王蠋绝脰，陨身徇节，前代美之。
现代文：文帝继位魏王，就派使者到庞德墓前赐封谥号，诏令说： 过去先轸为国捐躯，王雛绝食而死，以生命坚守道义，都被前代人称赞。
English: Emperor Wen, who succeeded to the throne of the Wei Dynasty, sent an envoy to the front of the Pound Tomb to bestow the imperial seal, and the imperial decree said: In the past, the first empress died for the country, the empress dowager died of starvation, and adhered to morality with her life, all of which were praised by the previous generation.

古文：惟侯式昭果毅，蹈难成名，声溢当时，义高在昔，寡人愍焉，谥曰壮侯 又赐子会等四人爵关内侯，邑各百户。
现代文：庞德果敢刚毅，奔赴国难，立身成名，声名在当时就已经流传，被人赞美，我为他感到痛惜，赠他壮侯的谥号。 又赐封他的儿子庞会等四人为关内侯，食邑各一百户。
English: I felt sorry for him, bestowed on him the title of grand vassal, and named his son, Pang Hui, and four others as the vassals of Guanai, with one hundred households each.

古文：会勇烈有父风，官至中尉将军，封列侯。
现代文：庞会英勇忠烈有他父亲的风范，做官到中尉将军，被封为列侯。
English: Heroic and loyal, Pang would follow in his father's footsteps, rising to the rank of lieutenant general and being made a vassal.

古文：庞淯字子异，酒泉表氏人也。
现代文：庞淯字子异，酒泉郡表氏人。
English: He is a member of the Jiuquan County Table clan.

古文：初以凉州从事守破羌长，会武威太守张猛反，杀刺史邯郸商，猛令曰： 敢有临商丧，死不赦。 
现代文：刚开始以凉州从事的身份作为防守羌的长官，适逢武威太守张猛反叛，杀死了凉州刺史邯郸商，并下令说： 有胆敢为邯郸商吊唁的，一律处死不宽赦。 
English: At the beginning, he was engaged in Liangzhou as the commander of the defense of the Yangtze River, when Wuwei Taishou Zhang rebelled violently, killed Liangzhou Zhishi Yangtze River merchants, and ordered: Anyone who dares to offer condolences to the Yangtze River merchants will be executed without mercy.

古文：淯闻之，弃官，昼夜奔走，号哭丧所讫，诣猛门，衷匕首，欲因见以杀猛。
现代文：庞淯听说后，弃官离开，接连赶路，到邯郸商遇难的地方痛哭致哀，然后来到张猛门口，怀里藏着匕首，想要趁着和他见面的时候将他杀了。
English: After hearing the news, Pang Yao left his post and hurried to the place where the merchant was killed, weeping and mourning. Then he came to Zhang Meng's door, hiding a knife in his arms, and wanted to kill him while meeting him.

古文：猛知其义士，敕遣不杀，由是以忠烈闻。
现代文：张猛知道他是义士，下令将他送走不杀他，因此庞淯因为忠烈而闻名。
English: Zhang Meng knew that he was a righteous man and ordered him to be sent away without killing him. Therefore, Pang Xuan was famous for his loyalty.

古文：太守徐揖请为主簿。
现代文：太守徐揖延请他担任主簿。
English: Governor Xu Jianyan asked him to be the chief accountant.

古文：后郡人黄昂反，围城。
现代文：后来郡人黄昂反叛，将城池包围起来。
English: Later, county resident Huang Ang rebelled and encircled the city.

古文：淯弃妻子，夜逾城出围，告急於张掖、敦煌二郡。
现代文：庞淯丢下妻子孩子，趁着夜色翻城墙逃出包围，向张掖、敦煌两个郡报告紧急情况。
English: Leaving his wife and child behind, Pang Jun took advantage of the darkness to climb over the city wall to escape the siege and report the emergency to Zhangye and Dunhuang counties.

古文：初疑未肯发兵，淯欲伏剑，二郡感其义，遂为兴兵。
现代文：刚开始这两个郡还犹疑不肯出兵，庞淯想要用剑自刎，两郡太守有感于他的忠义，就为他起兵前去援救。
English: At first, the two counties hesitated and refused to send troops. Pang Yi wanted to kill himself with a sword, but the two county governors felt his loyalty and sent troops to rescue him.

古文：军未至而郡城邑已陷，揖死。
现代文：援军还没有到而郡城已经被攻占，徐揖也死了。
English: Reinforcements had not yet arrived, but the county seat had already been captured, and Xu Xi also died.

古文：淯乃收敛揖丧，送还本郡，行服三年乃还。
现代文：庞淯就收敛了徐揖的遗体，将他送回本郡，为了服了三年丧。
English: Pang Yao collected Xu Yao's body and sent him back to his county to serve a three-year mourning period.

古文：太祖闻之，辟为掾属。
现代文：太祖得知后，征召他为掾属。
English: When the great-grandfather learned of this, he conscripted him into his clan.

古文：文帝践阼，拜驸马都尉，迁西海太守，赐爵关内侯。
现代文：文帝登基后，任命他为驸马都尉，提升为西海太守，赐封爵位为关内侯。
English: After Emperor Wendi ascended to the throne, he appointed him as the captain of the imperial horse, promoted him to the governor of the West Sea, and gave him the title of the lord of Guanai.

古文：后徵拜中散大夫，薨，子曾嗣。
现代文：后来朝廷征召任命为中散大夫，去世后，他的儿子庞曾继承爵位。
English: Later, he was conscripted by the imperial court and appointed as Zhongshan doctor. After his death, his son Pang Zeng inherited the title.

古文：初，淯外祖父赵安为同县李寿所杀，淯舅兄弟三人同时病死，寿家喜。
现代文：当初，庞淯的外祖父赵安赵安被同县的李寿杀害，庞淯的三个舅舅同时病死，李寿家很高兴。
English: At first, Pang Yao's maternal grandfather Zhao An Zhao An was killed by Li Shou from the same county. Pang Yao's three uncles died of illness at the same time, which made the Li Shou family very happy.

古文：淯母娥自伤父雠不报，乃帏车袖剑，白日刺寿於都亭前，讫，徐诣县，颜色不变，曰： 父雠己报，请受戮。 禄福长尹嘉解印绶纵娥，娥不肯去，遂强载还家。
现代文：庞淯的母亲赵娥感伤不能为父亲报仇，就乘着帏车，袖中藏着短剑，白天在都亭前刺死了李寿。随后慢慢走到官署中，脸色也没有改变，说： 父亲的仇已经报了，请处死我吧。 禄福县长尹嘉解下印绶要让她离开，赵娥不肯，县令就强迫用车把她载回家。
English: Pang Yao's mother, Zhao E, was saddened that she could not avenge her father, so she took a rickshaw with a short sword hidden in her sleeve and stabbed Li Shou to death in front of the capital pavilion during the day. Then she walked slowly to the government office, her face did not change, saying: My father's revenge has already been reported, please execute me. When the head of Lufu County, Yin Jia, released the seal to let her leave, Zhao E refused, and the county order forced her to take her home by car.

古文：会赦得免，州郡叹贵，刊石表闾。
现代文：适逢有朝廷宽赦，得以免罪，州郡的百姓都敬重赞美她，将她的事迹刊刻在石碑上以昭告乡里。
English: When she was pardoned by the imperial court and exonerated, the people of the prefecture and county all respected and praised her, and her deeds were engraved on a stone monument to inform the township.

古文：阎温字伯俭，天水西城人也。
现代文：阎温字伯俭，天水郡西城人。
English: Yan Wen, also known as Bo Jian, is from Xicheng, Tianshui County.

古文：以凉州别驾守上邽令。
现代文：以凉州别驾的身份做为防守上絡的长官。
English: With the status of Liangzhou's other driver as the commander of the defense.

古文：马超走奔上邽，郡人任养等举众迎之。
现代文：马超逃往来到上絡，郡中任养等人率众迎接。
English: Ma Chao fled to Shangluo and was greeted by Guozhong Ren'ao and others.

古文：温止之，不能禁，乃驰还州。
现代文：阎温阻止他们，但没有用，他就骑马奔回城里。
English: Yan Wen tried to stop them, but it was no use, so he rode back to the city.

古文：超复围州所治冀城甚急，州乃遣温密出，告急於夏侯渊。
现代文：马超又包围了凉州所管辖的冀城，情况紧急，州中就派阎温暗中出城，将紧急情况告知夏侯渊。
English: Ma Chao also encircled Jicheng, which was under the jurisdiction of Liangzhou. The situation was urgent, and Yan Wen was secretly sent out of the city to inform Xia Houyuan of the emergency.

古文：贼围数重，温夜从水中潜出。
现代文：贼军将城邑包围了好几层，阎温晚上从水中潜出城。
English: The bandits encircled the city several times, and Yan Wen sneaked out of the city at night.

古文：明日，贼见其迹，遣人追遮之，於显亲界得温，执还诣超。
现代文：第二天，贼人发现阎温的踪迹，派人追踪拦截，在显亲界内抓获了阎温，将他待会来见马超。
English: The next day, the thieves found Yan Wen's trail and sent someone to track and intercept him. They caught Yan Wen within the bounds of his relatives and brought him to meet Ma Chao.

古文：超解其缚，谓曰： 今成败可见，足下为孤城请救而执於人手，义何所施？
现代文：马超解开他的捆绑，对他说： 现在的局势，成败已经能看到了，足下为孤守的城邑求援，但却被人抓住，您的道义怎么施展呢？
English: Ma Chao unbound him and said to him, "The current situation, the success or failure can already be seen. You are begging for help for the besieged city, but you are caught. How can you display your morality?"

古文：若从吾言，反谓城中，东方无救，此转祸为福之计也。
现代文：如果听我的话，回去告诉城中的人，东面是不会有援军的，这才是将祸事转为福气的方法。
English: If you listen to me, go back and tell the people in the city that there will be no reinforcements in the east, this is the way to turn misfortune into blessing.

古文：不然，今为戮矣。 
现代文：不然，现在就会被杀掉。 
English: Otherwise, they would have been killed by now.

古文：温伪许之，超乃载温诣城下。
现代文：阎温假装答应他，马超就载着阎温来到城下。
English: Yan Wen pretended to agree with him, and Ma Chao carried Yan Wen to the outskirts of the city.

古文：温向城大呼曰： 大军不过三日至，勉之！ 
现代文：阎温向城中大喊： 大军还有不到三天就到了，大家努力啊！ 
English: Yan Wen shouted to the city: The army will arrive in less than three days, everyone should work hard!

古文：城中皆泣，称万岁。
现代文：城中将士都为他哭泣，祝他长命万岁。
English: All the soldiers in the city wept for him and wished him a long life.

古文：超怒数之曰： 足下不为命计邪？ 
现代文：马超愤怒地质问他： 足下不为你的命考虑吗？ 
English: Ma Chao asked him angrily: Don't you care about your life?

古文：温不应。
现代文：阎温没有回答。
English: Yan Wen did not answer.

古文：时超攻城久不下，故徐诱温，冀其改意。
现代文：当时马超攻城，很久都没有攻克，所以慢慢引诱阎温，希望能改变他的想法。
English: At that time, Ma Chao attacked the city and did not conquer it for a long time, so he slowly seduced Yan Wen, hoping to change his mind.

古文：复谓温曰： 城中故人，有欲与吾同者不？ 
现代文：又对阎温说： 你城中的故交，有想要跟我合作的吗？ 
English: He also said to Yan Wen: Do your old friends in the city want to cooperate with me?

古文：温又不应。
现代文：阎温又没有回答。
English: Yan Wen did not answer.

古文：遂切责之，温曰： 夫事君有死无贰，而卿乃欲令长者出不义之言，吾岂苟生者乎？ 
现代文：于是马超严厉地责问他，阎温说： 侍奉君主，只有效死，没有怀有二心的，而您想要让长者说出不义的话，我怎么使苟且偷生的人？ 
English: So Ma Chao severely reprimanded him, and Yan Wen said: "To serve the monarch, one must be willing to die, and not harbor any ambivalence. If you want the elders to speak out against injustice, how can I force them to do so?

古文：超遂杀之。
现代文：马超就将他杀了。
English: Ma Chao killed him.

古文：先是，河右扰乱，隔绝不通，敦煌太守马艾卒官，府又无丞。
现代文：在那之前，河右地区动乱，与外界断绝了道路，敦煌太守马艾在任职上去世，太守府里又没有郡丞。
English: Prior to that, the unrest in the Heyu region had cut off the road to the outside world. Ma Ai, the governor of Dunhuang, died in office, and there was no county commissioner in the governor's office.

古文：功曹张恭素有学行，郡人推行长史事，恩信甚著，乃遣子就东诣太祖，请太守。
现代文：功曹张恭向来有学问品行，郡中百姓推举他管理长史的事，他的恩德信义都很好，又派儿子张就往东去拜见太祖，请求委派新太守。
English: Gong Cao Zhang Qiong had always been learned and virtuous. The people of the county elected him to manage the affairs of Changshi. His benevolence, loyalty and righteousness were all very good. He also sent his son Zhang to the east to meet the grandfather and request the appointment of a new governor.

古文：时酒泉黄华、张掖张进各据其郡，欲与恭并势。
现代文：当时酒泉郡的黄华、张掖郡的张进各自占据本郡，想要和张恭并驾齐驱。
English: At that time, Huang Hua of Jiuquan County and Zhang Jin of Zhangye County each occupied their own county and wanted to keep pace with Zhang Qiong.

古文：就至酒泉，为华所拘执，劫以白刃。
现代文：张就到了酒泉，被黄华扣押，还用刀来威胁。
English: Zhang went to Jiuquan and was detained by Huang Hua, who also threatened him with a knife.

古文：就终不回，私与恭疏曰： 大人率厉敦煌，忠义显然，岂以就在困厄之中而替之哉？
现代文：张就最终也没有服从，暗中写信给张恭说： 大人率领敦煌，忠诚道义都很明显，难道因为张就处在危难之中就用忠义来替换吗？
English: Zhang did not obey in the end, and secretly wrote a letter to Zhang Yiming, saying: Dunhuang is led by an adult, and loyalty and morality are very obvious. Is it because Zhang is in danger that he is replaced by loyalty?

古文：昔乐羊食子，李通覆家，经国之臣，宁怀妻孥邪？
现代文：过去乐羊吃了他儿子的肉作成的羹，李通全家人都被王莽杀害，治理国家的大臣难道能只考虑妻子孩子吗？
English: In the past, Le Yang ate soup made from his son's meat, Li Tong's entire family was killed by Wang Mang, can the minister who governs the country only consider his wife and children?

古文：今大军垂至，但当促兵以掎之耳；愿不以下流之爱，使就有恨於黄壤也。 
现代文：现在大军就要到了，只应该督促士兵以牵制敌军；希望不要因为世俗的感情而让我在黄泉之下也怀有遗憾。 
English: Now that the great army is about to arrive, it is only necessary to urge the soldiers to hold back the enemy army; I hope that I will not have any regrets under hell because of worldly feelings.

古文：恭即遣从弟华攻酒泉沙头、乾齐二县。
现代文：张恭立即派堂弟张华率军进攻酒泉郡沙头、乾齐两县。
English: Zhang Qiong immediately sent his cousin Zhang Hua to lead an army to attack Shatou and Qianqi in Jiuquan County.

古文：恭又连兵寻继华后，以为首尾之援。
现代文：张恭又接连派兵跟随在张华之后，作为前后的支援。
English: Zhang Gong also sent troops one after another to follow Zhang Hua, as a back-and-forth support.

古文：别遣铁骑二百，迎吏官属，东缘酒泉北塞，径出张掖北河，逢迎太守尹奉。
现代文：又另外派出两百铁骑迎接新来的官吏家属，往东沿着酒泉郡的北部边塞，直接出张掖郡的北河，迎接新任太守尹奉。
English: In addition, another 200 cavalrymen were sent to welcome the newly arrived officials and their families. They went east along the northern border fortress of Jiuquan County and directly out of the Beihe River of Zhangye County to welcome the new governor Yin Bong.

古文：於是张进须黄华之助；华欲救进，西顾恭兵，恐急击其后，遂诣金城太守苏则降。
现代文：于是，张进需要黄华的协助；黄华想要援救张进，但又鼓励西面张恭的军队，担心他们迅速进军攻打自己的后方，就到金城太守苏则那里投降。
English: As a result, Zhang Jin needed the assistance of Huang Hua; Huang Hua wanted to rescue Zhang Jin, but he also encouraged the army of Zhang Gong in the west, fearing that they would quickly march to attack their own rear, so he surrendered to Su Ze, the governor of Jincheng.

古文：就竟平安。
现代文：张就最后得以平安。
English: Zhang was finally safe.

古文：奉得之官。
现代文：尹奉也能顺利上任。
English: Yin Feng will also be able to take office smoothly.

古文：黄初二年，下诏褒扬，赐恭爵关内侯，拜西域戊己校尉。
现代文：黄初二年，朝廷下诏赞扬张恭，赐封他的爵位为关内侯，任命他为西城戊己校尉。
English: In the second year of the Yellow Emperor's reign, the imperial court issued an edict praising Zhang Qiong, bestowing upon him the title of Guanai Marquis and appointing him as the captain of Xicheng Wuji.

古文：数岁徵还，将授以侍臣之位，而以子就代焉。
现代文：几年之后，朝廷又征召他回朝，要授予他侍臣的职位，他让儿子张就代替自己。
English: A few years later, the imperial court summoned him back to the imperial court to grant him the position of courtier, and he asked his son Zhang to replace him.

古文：恭至敦煌，固辞疾笃。
现代文：张恭到了敦煌，称自己病重，坚决推辞了朝廷的征召。
English: When Zhang Gong arrived in Dunhuang, he said he was seriously ill and resolutely refused to be conscripted by the imperial court.

古文：太和中卒，赠执金吾。
现代文：他在太和年间去世，朝廷追赠他为执金吾。
English: He died in the Taiwa era, and the Imperial Court posthumously awarded him the title of "Imperial Prince."

古文：就后为金城太守，父子著称於西州。
现代文：张就后来担任金城太守，父子在西州都很有名。
English: Zhang later served as the governor of Jincheng. Both father and son are famous in Xizhou.

古文：评曰：李典贵尚儒雅，义忘私隙，美矣。
现代文：评曰：李典崇尚儒雅，坚守大义，忘记私仇，是很好的。
English: The review said: "It is good that Li Dian advocates elegance, adheres to the greater good, and forgets personal vendettas.

古文：李通、臧霸、文聘、吕虔镇卫州郡，并著威惠。
现代文：李通、臧霸、文聘、吕虔镇守护卫州郡，威德恩惠都很出名。
English: Li Tong, Zouba, Wenbei, Lue Qian, the guardian of Weizhou County, and Weide Enhui are all famous.

古文：许褚、典韦折冲左右，抑亦汉之樊哙也。
现代文：许褚、典韦跟随太祖左右克敌制胜，差不多就是汉朝的樊哙。
English: Xu Rong and Dian Wei followed their great-grandfather to defeat their enemies and win, which is almost the same as the Han Dynasty.

古文：庞德授命叱敌，有周苛之节。
现代文：庞德献出生命叱责敌人，有周苛的节操。
English: Pound devoted his life to scolding his enemies, and he was a meticulous disciplinarian.

古文：庞淯不惮伏剑，而诚感邻国。
现代文：庞淯不害怕拔剑自刎，忠诚感动了邻国。
English: Pang Xuan was not afraid to draw his sword and kill himself. His loyalty moved the neighboring countries.

古文：阎温向城大呼，齐解、路之烈焉。
现代文：阎温向城中呼喊，就像晋国解杨、齐国路中大夫一样刚烈。
English: Yan Wen shouted to the city, just like Jin Guo Jie Yang and Qi Guo Lu Zhong Dafu.

