古文：崔澹皮日休薛能周顗任毂王徽山东人张登朱泽徐彦若冯涓张浚伶人封舜卿姚洎李台瑕织锦人李主簿陈癞子患目鼻人伛人田媪
现代文：崔澹皮日休薛能周顗任毂王徽山东人张登朱泽徐彦若冯涓张浚伶人封舜卿姚洎李台瑕织锦人李主簿陈癞子患目鼻人伛人田媪
English: Cui Qianqian, Xue Neng, Zhou Qian, Wang Hui, Shandong people, Zhang Deng, Zhu Ze, Xu Yan, if Feng Qianqian, Zhang Jianqian, Feng Qianqian, Yao Qianqian, Li Tai, Guo Guo, Guo Jianqian, Guo Jianqian, Chen Zizi, diseased eyes, nose, people, Tian Qianqian,

古文：崔澹
现代文：崔澹
English: Choi Min-soo

古文：唐崔澹，试以《至仁伐至不仁赋》。时黄巢方炽，因为无名子嘲曰：主司何事厌吾皇，解把黄巢比武王。
现代文：唐代人崔澹主持铨选考试，他出的题目是至仁伐至不仁赋，当时正逢黄巢起义的兴旺时期，因而被一位无名氏嘲笑道：主考官为什么这样厌恶我朝皇上，在试题中把黄巢比作了周武王。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, Cui Yao presided over the entrance examination. The question he proposed was "From the most benevolent to the least benevolent." At that time, the Yellow Nest Uprising was in full swing. As a result, he was ridiculed by an anonymous person: "Why does the examiner dislike me so much, Emperor? In the exam question, he compared the Yellow Nest to King Zhouwu."

古文：皮日休
现代文：皮日休
English: Skin day off

古文：唐皮日休尝谒归仁绍，数往而不得见。皮既心有所慊，而动形于言，因作咏龟诗：硬骨残形知几秋，尸骸终不是风流。
现代文：唐朝时，皮日休曾去拜见过归仁绍，几次前往都不会见，皮日休心里很不满，因而流露于言表，并写了一首《咏龟》诗：已经是破甲残骨了还能活几年，既已一堆尸骨了怎么也算不上风流吧？
English: During the Tang Dynasty, Pi Rixiu once went to pay homage to Quirinshao, but after several visits, he would not see him. Pi Rixiu was very dissatisfied, so he revealed it in his speech, and wrote a "Turtle" poem: It is already broken armor and bones, but it can still live for several years. Since it is already a pile of bones, how can it not be a whirlwind?

古文：顽皮死后鑽须遍，都为平生不出头。
现代文：那厚脸皮死了以后还到处乱钻。都是因为活了一辈子也不曾出头。
English: After that cheeky bastard died, he was still messing around. All because he had lived his whole life without ever showing his face.

古文：时仁绍亦有诸子佾、系，与日休同在场中，随即闻之。
现代文：在他写这首诗的时候，正好归仁绍的儿子归佾、归系也在当场，归仁绍当然立即就会知道此事。
English: When he was writing this poem, Qu Renshau's son Qu Rong and his family were also present. Of course, Qu Renshau would have known about it immediately.

古文：因伺其复至，乃于刺字皮姓之中，题诗授之曰：八片尖裁浪作球，火中爆了水中揉。
现代文：因而等他再来的时候，便在他名片的皮字下，题了一首诗送给他：把你裁成八片作成了个球，扔到火中就爆裂扔到水里好搓揉。
English: So when he came back, she wrote a poem for him on the back of his business card: "Cut you into eight pieces and made you into a ball. Throw it into the fire and it will burst. Throw it into the water and knead it."

古文：一包闲气如长在，惹踢招拳卒未休。
现代文：只要一包子闲气能一直装在里面，就会招惹人家拳打脚踢直到死也不会罢休。
English: As long as a pack of idle energy can be kept inside, it will attract people to punch and kick until they die.

古文：时人以为日休虽轻俳，而仁绍亦浮薄矣。
现代文：当时人们都认为，皮日休虽很轻佻滑稽，而归仁绍也够轻浮刻薄的了。
English: At that time, people thought that although Pi Rikyu was very light-hearted and funny, Guirinshao was also quite frivolous and mean.

古文：薛能
现代文：薛能
English: Xue Neng

古文：唐赵璘仪质琐陋，成名后为婿，薛能为傧相。
现代文：唐朝人赵璘相貌猥琐丑陋，成名以后才当了女婿，婚礼上薛能为傧相，他写诗对赵璘进行了嘲讽戏弄。
English: Zhao Yao, a Tang Dynasty person, was ugly and filthy-looking. He only became the son-in-law after he became famous. At the wedding, Xue Jian was the best man. He wrote a poem mocking Zhao Yao.

古文：乃为诗嘲谑，其略曰：巡关每傍樗蒲局，望月还登乞巧楼。第一莫教娇太过，缘人衣带上人头。
现代文：诗中写道：巡关每傍樗蒲局，望月还登乞巧楼，第一莫教娇太过，缘人衣带上人头。
English: He wrote in the poem: patrols every side of the Shabu Bureau, Mochizuki also climbed the Beggar's House, the first thing to do is not to teach Jiao too much, to wear clothes with people's heads.

古文：又曰：不知元在鞍轿里，将为空驮席帽归。
现代文：又写道：不知元在鞍桥里，将为空驮席帽归。
English: He also wrote: I don't know if the original is in Kurabashi, but it will be empty.

古文：又曰：火炉床上平身立，便与夫人作镜台。
现代文：又写道：火炉床上平身立，便与夫人作镜台。
English: He also wrote: I stood up straight on the hearth and made a mirror stand with my wife.

古文：周顗
现代文：周顗
English: Zhou Ying

古文：唐处士周顗洪儒奥学，偶不中第，旅浙西。
现代文：唐朝有个隐士周顗，学识渊博，曾去应试却没有考中，旅居浙西。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, there was a hermit named Zhou Qi, who was very learned. He once went to take an exam, but did not pass it. He lived in western Zhejiang.

古文：与从事欢饮，而昧于令章，筵中皆戏之。
现代文：与随从的人欢聚畅饮，常掩藏起自己的身份，宴席上都相互戏耍。
English: They drink with their entourage, often hiding their identity, and play with each other at banquets.

古文：有宾从赠诗曰：龙津掉尾十年劳，声价当时斗月高。
现代文：有一次一个宾客赠诗道：你现在是不求功名了，可是你为了入朝做官却花费十年的心血，那时你中第的呼声真如星月一样高。
English: Once, a guest gave a poem: "You don't seek fame now, but you spent ten years of hard work in order to enter the court and become an official. At that time, your voice was as high as the stars and the moon."

古文：唯有红妆回舞手，似持双刃向猿猱。
现代文：唯有那妙龄女郎飞旋舞动的双手去招引，就象手持双刀驱赶猴子一样，才能把你拉回来。
English: Only the twirling hands of the young woman, beckoning as if she were driving away a monkey with a pair of knives, can pull you back.

古文：周答曰：十载文场敢惮劳，宋都回鶃为风高。
现代文：周顗答诗道：十年苦读书如大病一场，今日象鶃鸟一样盘旋在这里，是因为这的风高气爽。
English: Zhou Wei replied with a poem: Ten years of hard study is like a serious illness, today I am hovering here like an ostrich, because this wind is high and fresh.

古文：今朝甘被花枝笑，任道樽前爱缚猱。
现代文：今天甘愿被妙龄女郎们嘲笑了，在这酒樽面前任凭你们捆绑吧。
English: Today, I am willing to be ridiculed by the young women, and let you tie me up in front of this wine barrel.

古文：任毂
现代文：任毂
English: 任

古文：唐任毂有经学，居怀谷，望征命而蒲轮不至，自入京中访问知己。
现代文：唐代人任毂很懂得儒家学问，他住在怀谷，一直盼望有皇上召他入朝的诏书，却没有等到，于是就亲自到京城去向朋友们打听。
English: He lived in Huai Valley and had been hoping for an imperial edict summoning him to the imperial court. However, he did not wait, so he went to Beijing in person to ask his friends.

古文：有朝士戏赠诗曰：云林应讶鹤书迟，自入京来探事宜。
现代文：有一个朝官赠诗戏弄他说：云彩树林都该惊讶这只迟迟飞来的鹤鸟了吧，自己无故跑到京都来探听皇上对他有没有诏命。
English: A court official presented him with a poem, teasing him: "The clouds and trees should all be surprised by this late-flying crane bird. I ran to Kyoto for no reason to find out if the emperor had given him an imperial command."

古文：从此见山须合眼，被山相赚已多时。
现代文：从此你再见了大山就闭上眼睛吧，看来你是被山蒙骗多时了。
English: From now on, when you see the mountains again, close your eyes. It seems that you have been deceived by the mountains for a long time.

古文：后至补衮。
现代文：后来他当了补官。
English: Later he became a second lieutenant.

古文：王徽
现代文：王徽
English: Wang Hui

古文：唐广明岁，薛能失律于许昌，都将周岌代之。
现代文：唐朝广明年间，薛能在许昌任职时触犯法律，他的职务由都将周岌代替。
English: In the middle of the Guangya year of the Tang Dynasty, Xue Neng violated the law when he served in Xu Chang, and his post was replaced by Zhou Du.

古文：明年，宰相王徽过许，谓岌曰：昔闻贵藩有部将周撞子，得非司空耶？何致此号？
现代文：第二年，宰相王徽路经许昌。问周岌：过去听说贵藩镇有位部将叫周撞子的，是个不可多得人物，他怎么得到这么个称号呢？
English: In the second year, Prime Minister Wang Hui passed by Xu Chang. He asked Zhou Rui: I heard that in the past, there was a minister of Guizhou called Zhou Qianzi. He was a rare person. How did he get such a title?

古文：岌愧郝良久，答曰：岌出身走卒，实蕴壮心，每有征行，不避锋刃，左冲右捽，屡立微功，所以军中有此名号。
现代文：周岌羞愧很久，才回答说：岌的出身不过是个小卒子，但心怀壮志，因此每次出征，都不要刀枪，左冲右掠，屡立微功，所以军中有了这个名号。
English: Zhou Di was ashamed for a long time before he answered: "Zhou Di's origin is just a small pawn, but he is ambitious, so every time he goes to war, he doesn't need a knife and gun, he rushes from left to right, and repeatedly achieves little, so he has this name in the army.

古文：王笑，复谓岌曰：当时扑落涡河里，可是撞不著耶！
现代文：王徽很高兴，又对周岌说道：假如那时掉进涡河，可就撞不着喽！
English: Wang Hui was very happy and said to Zhou Rui, "If you fall into the turbulent river at that time, you will not hit the reed!"

古文：岌顷总许卒，征徐方，为贼所败，溺于涡水，或拯之仅免。
现代文：周岌不久前，曾率领许昌的军队去征讨徐力，被徐力打败，掉进涡河里，多亏有人搭救才免于一死。
English: Not long ago, Zhou Rui led Xu Chang's army to fight Xu Li. He was defeated by Xu Li and fell into the turbulent river. Thanks to someone's rescue, he was saved from death.

古文：主人即戏云：闻山东人煮车毂汁下食，为有榆气。答曰：闻京师人煮驴轴下食，虚实？
现代文：所以才有了这个话柄。山东人有一个山东人来到京城，主人每次给他做菜，他都觉着味道不美，就自己去做。主人戏言道：听说山东人喜欢煮车毂汁下饭，为的是那股子榆气？山东人道：听说京城人爱煮驴轴就饭吃，是真是假？
English: That's why there's this saying. A Shandong man had a Shandong donkey that came to Beijing. Every time his host cooked for him, he felt the taste was not beautiful, so he did it himself. The host joked: I heard that Shandong people like to boil donkey soup for dinner, is it because of the donkey's breath? Shandong Humane: I heard that Beijing people like to boil donkey shafts for dinner, is it true or false?

古文：主人问云：此有何意？
现代文：主人问：这是什么意思？
English: The master asked, "What does that mean?"

古文：云：为有苜蓿气。
现代文：山东人道：为了那股子苜蓿气。
English: Shandong Humane Society: For the sake of that son of a bitch.

古文：主人大惭。
现代文：主人深感羞赧。
English: The master was deeply ashamed.

古文：张登
现代文：张登
English: Zhang Deng

古文：唐南阳张登制举登科。
现代文：唐代南阳人张登应制举中选。
English: Zhang Deng, a native of Nanyang in the Tang Dynasty, was selected in the nomination process.

古文：形貌枯瘦，气高傲物。
现代文：此人形貌很瘦，但气势傲慢。
English: The figure is thin but arrogant.

古文：裴枢与为师友。枢为司勋员外，举公群至投文，枢才诋诃瑕谪。登自知江陵盐铁院会计到城，直入司勋厅，冷笑曰：裴三十六，大有可笑事。
现代文：裴枢与他是师友关系，裴枢任司勋员外，查看各处送来的文状，他刚刚对某些欠缺诋毁斥责一番，张登便从江陵盐铁院的会计到京城来，于是便闯进司勋厅，冷笑道：裴三十六，大有可笑的事！
English: Baizhu had a mentor-friend relationship with him. In addition to Baizhu's appointment as an Officer of the Order, he checked the letters sent from all over the place. He had just denigrated and rebuked some shortcomings. Zhang Deng came to Beijing from the accountant of the Jiangling Salt Iron Institute. So he broke into the Officer of the Order hall and sneered: "Pei Thirty-Six, what a ridiculous thing!"

古文：枢因问登可笑之由，登曰：笑公驴牙郎，搏马价。
现代文：裴枢问他可笑的缘由，张登说：我笑公驴牙郎卖了个马价钱！
English: Baizhu asked him the ridiculous reason, Zhang Deng said: "I laughed when Donkey Fang Lang sold a horse for money!

古文：此成笑耳。
现代文：此事成为笑话。
English: The whole thing became a joke.

古文：朱泽
现代文：朱泽
English: Zhu Ze

古文：唐王轩少为诗，颇有才思。
现代文：唐代人王轩少年时就能作诗，很有才气。
English: Wang Xuan, who lived in the Tang Dynasty, could write poetry when he was a boy. He was very talented.

古文：游西小江，泊舟苎萝川，题西施石曰：岭上千峰秀，江边细草春。
现代文：有一次他去游西小江，船停在苎萝川，在西施石上题诗道：岭上千峰秀，江边细草春。
English: Once he went on a trip to the West Xiaojiang River, the boat stopped at the Diao Luo River, and he wrote a poem on the stone in the West Shishi River: "Thousand peaks on the ridge, spring grass along the river."

古文：今逢浣沙石，不见浣沙人。
现代文：今逢浣纱石，不见浣纱人。
English: Now, there is no one to weave the cloth.

古文：俄见一女子，振璚珰，扶石笋，低回而谢曰：妾自吴宫还越国，素衣千载无人识。
现代文：少顷看见有一个女子，身上的佩玉晃动着，扶着石笋，低声地吟道：妾自吴宫还越国，素衣千载无人识。
English: He soon saw a woman, her pajama dangling from her body, leaning on a stone pillar, and muttering in a low voice: "Concubines have been in Yue since the Wu Dynasty, and no one has seen them in plain clothes for thousands of years."

古文：当时心比金石坚，今日与君坚不得。
现代文：当时心比金石坚，今日与君坚不得。
English: At that time, my heart was as firm as a rock. Today, I am as firm as a rock.

古文：既欢会，复有恨别之辞。
现代文：二人欢愉之后，那女子还依依难舍地说了些惜别的话。
English: After the two of them had enjoyed themselves, the woman reluctantly said a few parting words.

古文：后萧山郭凝素，闻王轩之遇，每过浣沙溪，日夕长吟，屡题歌诗于石，寂尔无人，乃郁怏而返。
现代文：后来，萧山的郭凝素听说了王轩的艳遇，每次路经浣沙溪，都要在那里长时间地逗留吟咏，多次题诗于浣纱石上，可从来是空寂无人，只好怏怏不快地返回来。
English: Later, Guo Jingsu of Xiaoshan heard about Wang Xuan's amorous encounter. Every time he passed through Lingsha Creek, he had to stay there for a long time to sing and recite poetry. He wrote poems on the gauze stone many times, but it was never empty and there was no one, so he had to return unhappily.

古文：进士朱泽嘲之，闻之莫不嗤笑。
现代文：进士朱泽曾写诗嘲笑他，听说的人没有不讥笑的。
English: Comrade Zhu Ze once wrote a poem mocking him, and no one who heard it did not laugh.

古文：凝素内耻，无复斯游。
现代文：郭凝素心里感到羞耻，便再也不去了。
English: Guo Jingsu felt ashamed in his heart and never went there again.

古文：诗云：三春桃李本无言，苦被残阳鸟雀喧。
现代文：那诗写道：三春桃李本无言，苦被残阳鸟雀喧。
English: The poem reads: "The peach trees in the spring are speechless, and the birds and sparrows in the late afternoon are making a racket."

古文：借问东邻效西子，何如郭素拟。
现代文：借问东邻效西子，何如郭素拟王轩。
English: By the way, what is Guo Su like compared to Wang Xuan?

古文：王轩。徐彦若
现代文：徐彦若
English: Xu Yanruo

古文：唐乾宁中，荆南成汭曾为僧，盗据渚宫，寻即贡命。
现代文：唐朝乾宁年中期，荆南人成汭窃据了渚宫，随即便向朝廷进贡并表示听命。
English: In the middle of the Qianling year of the Tang Dynasty, the Jingnan people stole the Nagisa Palace, and then paid tribute to the imperial court and obeyed orders.

古文：末年，每事聘辩。
现代文：到乾宁末，每每有事都要与朝廷争辩。
English: By the end of the Qian and Ning Dynasties, everything had to be argued with the imperial court.

古文：初以澧、朗在巡属，为土豪雷满所据，奏请割隶。宰相徐彦若在中书，不为处置，由是衔之。
现代文：最初是因为澧朗这地方虽在自己属地，却被土豪雷满所霸占，因而奏朝廷割给自己管辖，当时宰相徐彦若正在中书省当政，没有按其要求处置这件事，因而他怀恨在心。
English: At first, it was because although this place in Hulang belonged to him, it was occupied by the Tuo Lai Man, so he appealed to the imperial court to give himself jurisdiction. At that time, Prime Minister Xu Yanru, who was in power in Zhongshu, did not handle the matter according to his request, so he held a grudge.

古文：及彦若出镇番禺，路由渚宫，汭虽加接延，而常怏怏。
现代文：等到徐彦若去镇守番禺，路经渚宫时，成汭虽然也加以迎接，但心中常常是怏怏不快。
English: When Xu Yanru went to the town of Panyu and passed through the Nagisa Palace, although Chengyu also greeted him, he was often unhappy.

古文：馔后，更席而坐，诡辩锋起。
现代文：吃过饭后，换了席位坐下，争辩又起。
English: After eating, they changed seats and sat down, and the argument began again.

古文：徐曰：令公位尊方面，自比桓、文。雷满，偏州一火草贼尔，令公不能加兵，而怨朝廷乎？
现代文：徐彦若道：令公在地位方面，常与桓文公相比，雷满不过是偏辟之地的草寇而已，令公难道不能派兵，还要怨恨朝廷？
English: Xu Yanruo said: In terms of status, Ling Gong is often compared to Huan Wen Gong. Lei Man is nothing more than a grasshopper in a remote place. Can Ling Gong not send troops, but still resent the imperial court?

古文：成赧焉而屈。
现代文：成汭赧颜而屈服。
English: He caved in the face of ridicule.

古文：徐文雅高赡，听之亹亹，成虽甚敬惮，犹以岭外黄茅瘴，患者发落，而戏曰：黄茅瘴，望相公保重。
现代文：徐彦若文雅而又高瞻远瞩。所以他的话都令人听而不倦。成汭虽然也很敬畏，但还是以岭南的一种地方病名子黄茅瘴来戏弄他，这种病得上就会掉头发，他说道：岭南可是要得黄茅瘴的，望相公多加保重。
English: Xu Yan is elegant and far-sighted, so his words are not tiring to listen to. Although Cheng Yao is also very awe-inspiring, he still teased him with the name of a local disease in Lingnan, Huang Maotai, which causes hair loss. He said: "But in Lingnan, if you want to get Huang Maotai, you should take more care of Wang Xianggong."

古文：徐曰：南海黄茅瘴，不死成和尚。
现代文：徐彦若道：是啊，南海黄茅瘴，不死成和尚。
English: Xu Yanru said, "Yes, Nanhai Huangmao Jiu, I will become a monk."

古文：盖讥成公曾为僧也，终席惭耻之。
现代文：这是讥讽成汭曾当过和尚。直到席终都使他很羞愧。
English: It was a mockery of the fact that he had once been a monk, and he was ashamed of it until the end of the meal.

古文：冯涓
现代文：冯涓
English: Feng Xuan

古文：冯涓，旧唐名士，雄才奥学。
现代文：冯涓，是前唐朝的名流。学识渊博，曾考中进士，官至高位。
English: Feng Xuan was a famous person in the former Tang Dynasty. He was well-educated, and he was promoted to a high-ranking official.

古文：登进士第，履厉已高。
现代文：有一回，唐朝皇帝去梁洋，冯涓随驾同行。
English: Once, when the Tang Dynasty emperor went to Liangyang, Feng Yu drove with him.

古文：唐帝幸梁、洋，涓扈跸焉。
现代文：到了汉中，皇上下诏任命他为眉州刺史。
English: In the middle of the Han Dynasty, the Emperor issued an imperial edict appointing him as the chief historian of Meizhou.

古文：至汉中，诏除眉州刺史。赴任，至蜀阻兵，王氏强縻于幕中。
现代文：他去赶任，进了蜀地却遇上蜀主的军队而被俘，蜀主王氏将他强留于幕府中。
English: He rushed to take up the post, but when he entered Shu, he met the army of the Lord of Shu and was captured. The Lord of Shu, the Wang clan, forced him to remain in the shogunate.

古文：性耿概不屈，恃才傲物，甚不洽于伪蜀主。
现代文：冯涓的性格耿直不屈，恃才傲物，不肯与蜀主和好。
English: Feng Qi's character is unyielding, arrogant, and unwilling to make peace with Shu.

古文：知王氏有异图，辄不相许。
现代文：他知道蜀主别有图谋，因此什么事也不肯答应。
English: He knew that Lord Shu had other plans, so he would not agree to anything.

古文：或赠缯帛，必锁柜中，题云贼物，蜀主虽知，怜其文艺，每强容之。
现代文：有人来赠送锦帛绸缎，他都锁在柜子里，上面写上贼物。蜀主虽然知道，但爱其学问才艺，每次都极力忍受了。
English: Someone came to give him brocade and satin brocades, which he locked in a cupboard with the word "thief" written on them. Although his master knew about it, he loved his learning and talent, and every time he tried his best to put up with it.

古文：时或不可，数揖出院。欲挝杀之，略无惧色。
现代文：有时也难以容忍，曾数次将他以礼请出院，想抓而杀之，但他丝毫没有惧色。
English: Sometimes it was hard to tolerate. I had to politely ask him to leave the hospital several times, and I wanted to catch him and kill him, but he was not afraid at all.

古文：后朱梁遣使致书于蜀，命诸从事韦庄辈，具草呈之，皆不惬意。
现代文：后来朱梁朝派遣使者送信给蜀主，命令韦庄等人，草拟回信呈上，都不甚满意。
English: Later, Zhu Liang sent an envoy to Shu and ordered Wei Zhuang and others to draft a reply, but they were not satisfied.

古文：左右曰：何妨命前察判为之？
现代文：左右道：不妨叫前朝察判去办这件事。
English: Left and right: It might be a good idea to have the previous morning's inspection and adjudication committee handle this matter.

古文：蜀主又有惭色。
现代文：蜀主又觉得有愧色。
English: Lord Shu also felt ashamed.

古文：梁使将复命，不获已，遂请复职。便亟修回复，涓一笔而成，大称旨。
现代文：梁朝的使者将要回去禀告，不得已，蜀主只好请冯涓来办，当时亟需写一答书，冯涓提笔一气呵成。
English: The emissary of the Liang Dynasty was about to return to deliver an obituary. As a last resort, the emperor had no choice but to ask Feng Li to do it. At that time, it was urgent to write a reply, and Feng Li took out his pen and wrote it in one go.

古文：于是却复前欢。
现代文：蜀主看了很是称心如意，于是恢复从前的欢悦。
English: Lord Shu was very pleased with what he saw and restored his former joy.

古文：因召诸厅同宴，饮次，涓敛衽曰：偶记一话，欲对大王说，可乎？
现代文：因而召各厅的人一起来参加宴会。在喝酒的中间，冯涓整整衣襟恭敬地道：偶然想起一段佳话，想对大王讲讲，可以吗？
English: In the middle of drinking, Feng Xuan straightened his clothes and respectfully said, "I happened to think of a good story, and I want to tell it to the great king. Is that okay?"

古文：主许之。曰：涓少年，多游谒诸侯，每行，即必广赍书策，驴亦驮之，马亦驮之。
现代文：蜀主允许了他，于是他便讲道：我年轻的时候，多次到各地去拜访诸侯。每次出去，都要带上许多赠送人的书简，驴也得驮，马也得驮。
English: Lord Shu allowed him, so he preached: "When I was young, I often went to various places to visit princes. Every time I went out, I had to take a lot of pamphlets given to me by people. Donkeys had to be muzzled, horses had to be muzzled.

古文：初戒途，驴咆哮跳踯，与马争路而先，莫之能制。行半日后，抵一坡，力疲足惫，遍体汗流，回顾马曰：马兄马兄，吾去不得也，可为弟搭取书，马兄诺之，遂併在马上。
现代文：刚上路时，驴子又叫又跳地撒欢，跟马抢路跑在前面，不能制止它，走了半天后，遇到上坡，力竭而蹄软，遍体流汗，回头对马说：马兄啊马兄，我走不动了，可以替老弟驮上这些书吗？马兄答应了它，于是把书全放在马背上。
English: When they had just set out on the road, the donkey called and danced, and ran ahead of the horse, unable to stop it. After walking for half a day, they encountered an uphill slope. Exhausted, their hooves were soft, and they were sweating profusely. They turned to the horse and said, "Brother horse, I can't walk anymore. Can you put these books on for my brother?" The brother horse agreed, and put all the books on the horse's back.

古文：马却回顾谓驴曰：驴弟，我为你有多少伎俩，毕竟还搭在老兄身上？
现代文：马也回头对驴子说道：驴弟，我还以为你有多少伎俩呢，毕竟还都压在老兄身上了吧？
English: The horse also turned to the donkey and said, "Brother donkey, I thought you had a lot of tricks up your sleeve. After all, aren't you still crushing on your brother?

古文：蜀主大笑。
现代文：蜀主大笑。
English: Emperor Shu laughed loudly.

古文：同幕皆遭凌虐。
现代文：同僚们都遭到他的戏虐。
English: Colleagues were subjected to his playful abuse.

古文：及伪蜀开国，终不肯居宰辅。
现代文：到蜀主建国之后，冯涓到底也没肯做宰相。
English: After the founding of Shu, Feng Xuan refused to be the prime minister.

古文：张浚伶人
现代文：张浚伶人
English: Zhang Jianyun

古文：唐宰相张浚，常与朝士于万寿寺阅牡丹而饮。
现代文：唐朝有个宰相张浚，常与朝官们到万寿寺去一边观赏牡丹一边饮酒作乐。
English: Zhang Jun, a prime minister of the Tang Dynasty, often went to Wanzhou Temple with court officials to watch peonies and drink alcohol.

古文：俄有雨降，抵暮不息，群公饮酣未阑。
现代文：有一次，忽然下起雨来，直到天黑雨也未停，众公卿虽已酒酣但尚未尽兴。
English: On one occasion, it suddenly began to rain and continued to do so until dark. Although the nobles had drunk their wine, they were not yet fully merry.

古文：左右伶人皆御前供奉第一部者，恃宠肆狂，无所畏惮。
现代文：陪他们来的表演歌舞的人都是专为皇帝表演的御前供奉第一部的人，依仗皇上的宠爱而狂妄，无所畏惧。
English: The singers and dancers who accompanied them were from the first troupe, who performed for the emperor. They were arrogant and fearless, relying on the emperor's favor.

古文：其间一辈曰张隐，忽跃出，扬声引词曰：位乖燮理致伤残，四面墙匡不忍看。
现代文：其中一个叫张隐的忽然跳出来，大声地念了一首歌词：位乖燮理致伤残，四面墙匡不忍看。
English: One of them, named Zhang Ying, suddenly jumped out and read aloud a song lyric: "A bit of bad manners leads to injury, the four walls are unbearable to look at."

古文：正是花时堪下泪，相公何必更追欢。
现代文：正是花时堪下泪，相公何必更追欢。
English: It is the time of flowers that can bring tears, so why should the couple pursue love?

古文：告讫遂去。
现代文：说完竟扬长而去。
English: After saying that, he actually left.

古文：阖席愕然，相眄失色，一时俱散。
现代文：所有宴席上的人都愕然，相互斜视而失色，很快便散去。
English: Everyone at the banquet was stunned, looked askance at each other, lost their composure, and quickly dispersed.

古文：张但惭恨而已。
现代文：张濬也只是惭愧怀恨罢了。
English: Zhang Ye is just ashamed and holds a grudge.

古文：封舜卿
现代文：封舜卿
English: Lord High Admiral

古文：朱梁封舜卿文词特异，才地兼优，恃其聪俊。
现代文：朱梁朝时封舜卿文词独特，才华和所处的地位都很高。
English: Zhu Liang's court, during the time of Emperor Qianlong, was famous for its unique literary works, and his talent and status were very high.

古文：率多轻薄。
现代文：依仗自己聪明而有才智，一向很轻佻不庄重。
English: Relying on his own cleverness and intelligence, he has always been very frivolous and undignified.

古文：梁祖使聘于蜀，时岐、梁眦睚，关路不通，遂溯汉江而上，路出全州，土人全宗朝为帅。封至州，宗朝致筵于公署。
现代文：梁太祖朱温派他出使蜀番，当时岐梁有些不睦，关路不能畅通，只好逆汉水而上。路经全州，当地人全宗朝为一州之帅，封舜卿到来之后，全宗朝在公署设宴接待他。
English: Liang's great-great-grandfather Zhu Wen sent him as an envoy to Shuban. At that time, there was some disharmony in Jiliang, and the road could not be smoothed, so he had to go up against Han Shui. Passing through Quanzhou, the local people of Quanzhong Dynasty were the best in the state. After the arrival of Fong Yuqing, Quanzhong Dynasty held a banquet at the public office to receive him.

古文：封素轻其山州，多有傲睨，全之人莫敢不奉之。
现代文：封舜卿向来轻视山荒之州，他在这里表现出很傲慢的样子，全州的人没有敢不奉迎他的。
English: Lord Feng Rong had always despised the mountainous and barren state. He showed a very arrogant appearance here, and the people of the whole state did not dare not to welcome him.

古文：及执斝索令，曰：《麦秀两歧》。
现代文：等到举杯饮酒点节目时，封舜卿点道：请演奏《麦秀两歧》！
English: When it came time to raise a glass of wine to mark the end of the program, Fong Yuqing said, "Please play "The Two Differences of Mai Xiu"!"

古文：伶人愕然相顾：未尝闻之，且以他曲相同者代之。
现代文：乐手们愕然相顾，他们谁也没有听说过这个曲子，就以其他类似的曲子代替。
English: The musicians looked at each other in amazement. None of them had heard of this piece, so they substituted other similar pieces.

古文：封摆头曰：不可。
现代文：封舜卿摇摇头：不对！
English: Fong Yao shook his head and said, "That's not right!"

古文：又曰：《麦秀两歧》。复无以措手。
现代文：又喊道：《麦秀两歧》乐手们又无措手足。
English: He also shouted: "The musicians of "The Two Differences of Mai Xiu" are once again at a loss.

古文：主人耻而复恶，杖其乐将。
现代文：主人由羞愧而生怒，于是杖责了乐手的领班。
English: Embarrassed and angry, the host scolded the leader of the musicians.

古文：停盏移时，逡巡，盏在手，又曰：《麦秀两歧》。
现代文：宴会不得不暂停，乐手们也都转来转去不知如何是好，等再端酒杯时，封舜卿仍喊道：《麦秀两歧》！
English: The banquet had to be suspended, and the musicians were milling around, not knowing what to do. When the wine glasses were brought out again, Fong Yuqing still shouted: "Makishu two differences!"

古文：既不获之，呼伶人前曰：汝虽是山民，亦合闻大朝音律乎！
现代文：既然听不到这支曲子，他便把乐手们叫到跟前斥道：你们虽然是山民，可也该听说过大梁朝的音乐吧？
English: Since he couldn't hear the piece, he called the musicians forward and rebuked them: Although you are mountain people, you should have heard the music of the Dalian Dynasty, right?

古文：全人大以为耻。
现代文：全州人都觉得很羞耻。
English: People all over the state feel very ashamed.

古文：次至汉中，伶人已知全州事，忧之。
现代文：接着封舜卿来到汉中。这里的乐手们已经知道全州发生的事，都很担忧。
English: Then Fong Yuqing came to Hanzhong. The musicians here already knew what had happened in the whole province, and they were very worried.

古文：及饮会，又曰：《麦秀两歧》，亦如全之筵，三呼不能应。
现代文：到了宴会，封舜卿又点道：《麦秀两歧》！这次也象在全州的宴席上，喊了三次没有动静。
English: When it came to the banquet, Fong Yuqing called out again: "Makixiu two differences!" This time, just like at the state banquet, he called out three times, but there was no movement.

古文：有乐将王新殿前曰：略乞侍郎唱一遍。
现代文：此时有个乐手领班叫王新的走到殿前道：请求侍郎能不能大概地给我们唱一遍？
English: At this time, a musician foreman called Wang Xin to walk to the front of the hall: Can you ask the waiter to sing it to us roughly?

古文：洎封至蜀，置设。
现代文：封舜卿一遍还没唱完，乐手们就已经可以演奏了。
English: The musicians were already able to play before Lord Fong Yao had finished singing once more.

古文：弄参军后，长吹《麦秀两歧》于殿前，施芟麦之具，引数十辈贫儿，褴缕衣裳，携男抱女，挈筐笼而拾麦，仍合声唱，其词凄楚，及其贫苦之意，不喜人闻。
现代文：因而人们大喜，他们一直演奏这支曲子，到宴席终了也没更换。乐手们对长官道：这是大梁朝的新曲子，西蜀之地也未尝有之，请求把曲谱抄录一本，尽快传送给他们为好。等封舜卿来到蜀地，一切都以布置好，先演过参军戏后，长时间地在殿前演奏起《麦秀两歧》。并设置了割麦的道具，领来数十名贫困百姓，身着破旧衣裳，携男抱女，提着筐篓而拾麦，并随着乐曲合声歌唱，那歌词很凄楚，表达出极为贫苦之意，让人听到看到心里十分酸楚。
English: As a result, the people were overjoyed. They played this piece all the time and did not change it until the end of the banquet. The musicians told the officials: This is a new piece from the Dayang Dynasty, which has not been tried in West Shuxi, and asked for a copy of the score to be sent to them as soon as possible. When Lord Fengyu came to Shuxi, everything was arranged. After performing the military play, he played "Wheat Show Differences" in front of the palace for a long time. He also set up wheat-cutting tools and brought dozens of poor people, dressed in old clothes, carrying men and women, carrying baskets to collect wheat, and

古文：封顾之，面如土色，卒无一词。
现代文：封舜卿观看时，面如土色，自始至终没有一句话，愧憾而返。
English: When Fong Yuqing watched, his face was as white as mud, and he did not say a word from beginning to end. He regretted it.

古文：惭恨而返，乃复命。历梁、汉、安、康等道，不敢更言两歧字。
现代文：后来他回梁朝复命，路经梁、汉、安、康等地，不敢再说两歧的字样。
English: Later, he went back to Liang Dynasty to answer for his life, passing through Liang, Han, An, Kang and other places, and dared not say the words of the two differences.

古文：蜀人嗤之。
现代文：蜀人都讥笑他。
English: The people of Shu ridiculed him.

古文：姚洎
现代文：姚洎
English: Yao Wei

古文：唐裴廷裕字庸余，乾宁中，在内庭，文书敏捷，号为下水船。
现代文：唐朝末年人裴廷裕，字庸余，乾宁年中期在内庭为官，他文思敏捷，绰号下水船。
English: Pei Tingyu, who lived at the end of the Tang Dynasty, was nicknamed "Yong Yu." In the middle of the Qian Ning Dynasty, he was an official in the Inner Court. He was a quick thinker and was nicknamed "Sewer Boat."

古文：梁太祖受禅，姚洎为学士，尝从容。上问及廷裕行止，洎对曰：顷岁左迁，今闻旅寄衡永。
现代文：梁太祖受禅接替皇位时，当时作为学士的姚洎曾怂恿鼓动过，当太祖问到裴廷裕的近况时，姚洎答道：近年被降职，如今听说寄住衡阳、永州一带。
English: When Liang Taizu accepted Zen to succeed the throne, Yao Zengqi, who was a bachelor at the time, encouraged him. When Taizu asked about Pei Tingyu's recent situation, Yao Zengqi replied: He was demoted in recent years, and now he is said to be living in Hengyang and Yongzhou.

古文：上曰：颇闻其人才思甚捷。
现代文：太祖又问道：听说这个人才思非常敏捷？
English: Grandfather also asked: I heard that this man is very quick-witted?

古文：洎对曰：向在翰林，号为 下水船 。
现代文：姚洎道：他一向在翰林院，绰号叫 下水船 。
English: Yao Wei said: He has always been in the Hanlin Academy, nicknamed the Sewer Boat.

古文：太祖应声谓洎曰：卿便是 上水船 也。
现代文：太祖随即对姚洎说道：这么说来你便是 上水船 了？
English: The great-grandfather immediately said to Yao Yao: So you are a ship on the water?

古文：洎微笑，深有惭色。
现代文：姚洎虽在微笑，实际上深带愧色。
English: Although Yao Yao was smiling, he was actually deeply ashamed.

古文：议者以洎为急滩头上水船也。
现代文：后来议论的人都把姚洎称作急滩头上水船。
English: Later commentators referred to the Yao Jie as a boat on the head of a steep beach.

古文：李台瑕
现代文：李台瑕
English: Lee Taikhoe

古文：伪蜀韩昭仕王氏为礼部尚书，丽文殿大学士。
现代文：伪蜀国的韩昭，做了王氏朝廷的礼部尚书，丽文殿大学士。
English: Han Zhao of the pseudo-Shu Kingdom wrote the etiquette book of the Wang Dynasty, and became a scholar of the Liwen Temple.

古文：粗有文章，至于琴棋书算射法，悉皆涉猎，以此承恩于后主。
现代文：他也能粗略地写几篇文章，至于琴棋书算射法等，也都有所涉猎，也正是以此受到后主的恩惠。
English: He can also write a few articles roughly, and as for the piano, chess, calligraphy, archery, etc., they are also involved in hunting, and it is precisely in this way that he is favored by his heirs.

古文：朝士李台瑕曰：韩八座之艺，如拆袜线，无一条长。
现代文：朝士李台瑕道：韩八座的技艺，就象拆下的破袜子线，没有一条是长的。
English: Li Taike, a member of the morning staff, said, "The skills of Han Bazaar are like a torn sock thread, none of which is long.

古文：时人韪之。
现代文：当时人们都觉得说的很对。
English: At the time, people felt it was the right thing to say.

古文：织锦人
现代文：织锦人
English: The brocade man is rising

古文：唐卢氏子不中第，徒步及都城门东。其日风寒甚，且投逆旅。
现代文：唐朝时，有个姓卢的人应试未中，便徒步到了都城，在都城的门东，正赶上大风寒冷天气，只好去投宿住店。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, there was a man surnamed Lu who, after failing his exams, went on foot to the capital city. In the eastern part of the capital city, he was caught in a strong wind and cold weather, so he had to stay in a hotel.

古文：俄有一人续至，附火良久，忽吟诗曰：学织缭绫功未多，乱投机杼错抛梭。
现代文：不一会儿，又有一人到来，那人烤了一会儿火，忽然吟起诗来：学织缭绫功未多，乱投机杼错抛梭。
English: After a short while, another person arrived. That person made a fire for a while, and suddenly began to sing a poem: There is not much effort in learning to weave, and there is a lot of speculation.

古文：莫教宫锦行家见，把此文章笑杀他。
现代文：莫教宫锦行家见，把此文章笑杀他。
English: Don't show this article to a palace painting connoisseur and make him laugh.

古文：又云：如今不重文章事，莫把文章夸向人。
现代文：又吟道：如今不重文章事，莫把文章夸向人。
English: He also said, "Nowadays, there are not many important things to write about, so don't boast about your writing to others."

古文：卢愕然，忆是白居易诗，因问姓名。
现代文：卢很惊讶，记忆中好象是白居易的诗，于是就问他的姓名。
English: Lu was surprised that his memory seemed to recall Bai Juyi's poem, so he asked his name.

古文：曰：姓李，世织绫锦。
现代文：那人道：我姓李，世代织绫锦。
English: That person: My surname is Li, I have been weaving brocade for generations.

古文：离乱前，属东都官锦坊织宫锦巧儿，以薄艺投本行。
现代文：遭乱之前，属于洛阳东都官锦坊织宫锦的手艺人。我是以浅薄的技艺来干这行的。
English: Before the turmoil, I belonged to the craftsmen of Luoyang Dongdu Guanjinfang Weaving Palace Brocade. I do this with shallow skills.

古文：皆云： 如今花样，与前不同。
现代文：人们都说：如今的花样，与从前不同了。
English: People say: Today's patterns are different from before.

古文：不谓伎俩儿以文綵求售者，不重于世，且东归去。
现代文：不讲技能而只以色彩艳丽向外兜售，已不被世间看重了。而后又向东归去。
English: It is no longer valued by the world when it is sold to the outside world with bright colors, regardless of its skills, and then returns to the East.

古文：李主簿
现代文：李主簿
English: Li Zhanbo

古文：唐方千姿态山野，且又兔缺，然性好凌侮人。
现代文：唐代人方千，长相很粗野，还是个豁嘴，可是很喜好羞辱人。
English: Fang Qian, who lived in the Tang Dynasty, was a rough-looking man. He still had a sharp tongue, but he liked to humiliate people.

古文：有龙丘李主簿者，不知何许人也，偶于知闻处见千，而与之传杯。
现代文：有个人主簿叫李龙丘的，不知道是什么地方的人，偶然在一个相识的人家与方千相见认识，并在那里喝酒游戏。
English: Li Longqiu, a person with a personal address book, who did not know where he was, happened to meet Fang Qian at an acquaintance's home, where they had a drinking game.

古文：龙丘目有翳，千改令以讥之曰：千改令，诸人象令主。
现代文：李龙丘眼睛有毛病，方千便想以改令的方式讽刺他，他说：我先出令，每个人必须改令主的句子。
English: Li Longqiu has a problem with his eyes, so Fang Qian wanted to make fun of him by changing the order. He said: I give the order first, everyone must change the sentence.

古文：措大吃酒点盐军将吃酒点酱，只见门外著篱，未见眼中安障。
现代文：措大吃酒点盐，军将吃酒点酱，只见门外著篱，未见眼中安障。
English: Csoda eats wine and salt, generals eat wine and sauce. They only see the fence outside the door, but do not see the obstacle in front of their eyes.

古文：龙丘答曰：措大吃酒点盐，下人吃酒点鲊，只见半臂著襕，未见口唇开跨。
现代文：李龙丘对道：措大吃酒点盐，下人吃酒点鲊，只见半臂著襕，未见口唇开跨。
English: Li Longqiu said the opposite: Cang Da ate wine with salt, while his subordinates ate wine with salt. He only had half of his arm in a sling, and his lips were not open.

古文：一座大笑。
现代文：在座的人全都大笑。
English: Everyone in the room burst out laughing.

古文：陈癞子
现代文：陈癞子
English: Chen Yanzi

古文：唐营丘有豪民姓陈，藏镪钜万，染大风疾，众目之为陈癞子。
现代文：唐朝时营丘有一个姓陈的豪富，家中藏钱万万贯。但头上生了一种叫大风的癞疮，人们都叫他陈癞子。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, there was a wealthy man surnamed Chen in Yingqiu, who hid a great deal of money in his home. However, he developed a kind of acne on his head called the Great Wind, and people called him Chen Zizi.

古文：自奉之道，则不薄矣，然切讳癞字。
现代文：自己的生活享用，是很优裕的，但是切忌一个癞字。
English: Enjoying one's own life is very affluent, but one must not be lazy.

古文：家人妻孥，或误言者，则必遭怒，或至笞棰。
现代文：家人妻小如有人失言者，一定会遭到怒斥，有人甚至遭到鞭打。
English: If someone makes a slip of the tongue, he or she is sure to be scolded, and some are even whipped.

古文：宾客或言所苦减退，则酒食延待，优丰甚至。
现代文：宾客中如有人说他所苦恼的地方在减退，便以酒饭款待，酒肴丰盛。
English: If one of the guests says that his affliction is abating, he will be entertained with food and wine, and the food and wine are plentiful.

古文：言增添，则白眼相顾耳。
现代文：如言增添了，则以白眼相看。
English: If words are added, then look at each other with blank eyes.

古文：有游客，心利所霑，而不能禁其口，遂谒之。
现代文：有一位游客，由于利欲熏心，便去拜访他，但是又不能严格地管住自己的嘴。
English: One tourist, lured by the lure of profit, paid him a visit, but couldn't keep his mouth shut.

古文：初谓曰：足下之疾，近日尤减。
现代文：一开始他对陈说：你的疮，近来有减。
English: At the beginning, he said to Chen, "Your sores have decreased recently.

古文：陈亦欣然，命酒馔延接，乃赍五缗。
现代文：陈十分高兴，命人以美酒佳肴盛待，并送钱五千。
English: Chen was very happy. He ordered people to treat him to delicious food and wine, and gave him 5,000 yuan.

古文：客将起，又问之曰：某疾果退否？
现代文：后来这位客人要走了，陈又问他道：我的疮果然减退了吗？
English: Later, when the guest was about to leave, Chen asked him again, "Has my sore really subsided?"

古文：客曰：此亦添减病。
现代文：那客人道：这也叫添减病。
English: The guest said, "This is also called adding and subtracting diseases."

古文：曰：何谓也？
现代文：陈又问道：是何原因呢？
English: Chen also asked: What is the reason?

古文：客曰：添者面上添肉渤沤子，减者减却鼻孔。
现代文：客人道：添，就是脸上添肉渤沤子疮；减，有一天会减去鼻子。
English: Guest: "Tian" means to add flesh to the face from lice sores; "Minus" means to subtract the nose one day.

古文：长揖而去。
现代文：说完拱手长揖而去。
English: After saying this, he walked away in a huff.

古文：数日不怿。
现代文：陈听后好长时间心中不悦。
English: Chen did not feel happy for a long time after listening to it.

古文：又每年五月，值生辰，颇有破费。
现代文：还有每年的五月，遇到他的生日时，也有很大破费。
English: And every May, when it's his birthday, there's a big blowout.

古文：召僧道启斋筵。伶伦百戏毕备。
现代文：要请僧道来吃启斋筵，歌舞百戏都要齐备。
English: If you want to invite a monk to come and eat qi sao gong, you must prepare a hundred songs and dances.

古文：斋罢，伶伦赠钱数万。
现代文：开斋之后，赠送表演的伶人们数万钱。
English: After the break, the performers won tens of thousands of dollars.

古文：时有顐者何岸，高不敏见，既去复入，谓曰：蒙君厚惠，感荷奚言，然某偶忆短李相公诗，落句一联，深叶主人盛德也。
现代文：当时有一个爱开玩笑的大个子伶人，看上去很厚道，出去后又返回来，说道：承蒙你的厚惠，感激之情难以言表，我偶然想起李相公一首诗，那落句的一联是， 深叶主人励德也 。
English: At that time, there was a joking, big-bodied man, who looked very kind. After going out, he came back and said, "Thanks to your generosity, I can't express my gratitude. I happened to think of a poem by Li Xianggong. The last line of the poem is, "Fukaba's master Li Deya."

古文：陈曰：试诵之。
现代文：陈接着道：我试着背背看， 时陈君处于中堂 。
English: Chen continued, "I tried to look back and see when Chen Jun was in the middle of the hall.

古文：时陈君处于中堂，坐碧纱帏中，左右侍立，执轻篓白帚者数辈。
现代文：于是他便坐于碧纱围帐之中，左右侍立于两旁，几个人举着个轻篓白帚。
English: So he sat in the middle of the gauze curtain, with attendants standing to his right and left on either side, several of them holding up a feather duster.

古文：伶伦曰：诗云： 三十年来陈癞子，如今始得碧纱幪。遭大诟而去。
现代文：这时那个伶人说：听我赠你一首诗：三十年来陈癞子，如今始得碧纱幪他遭到大骂后离去。
English: At this time, the eunuch said, "Listen, I'll give you a poem: Thirty years have passed since Chen Zizi was born, but now he's beginning to show his age.

古文：患目鼻人
现代文：患目鼻人
English: People with runny noses

古文：一人患眼侧睛及翳，一人患齆鼻，俱以《千字文》作诗相咏。
现代文：一个人患有眼病，眼珠向一侧眼角斜而被遮住；一个人患有鼻塞病。俩人以《千字文》体作诗相互嘲戏对方。
English: One has an eye disease, his eyes tilt to one side and are covered; one has a nasal congestion disease. The two mock each other with poems in the style of "Thousand Characters."

古文：齆鼻人先咏侧眼人云：眼能日月盈，为有陈根委。
现代文：塞鼻人先咏斜眼人道：眼能像日月那么满，因为是有旧根在。
English: The snub-nosed person squints first: the eyes can be as full as the sun and moon, because there are old roots.

古文：傍人咏之曰：柱杖欲似乃，播笏便似及；逆风荡雨行，面干顶额湿；著衣床上坐，肚缓脊皮急；城门尔许高，故自匍匐入。
现代文：斜眼人续下句道：不能像一朵兰花，都因为它是紫色的雁门。伛人有一个人患了腰弯伛偻病，因而走路时常常是低着头。有人便编成歌谣咏道：拄着拐杖象个 乃 字，插上笏便象个 及 字。顶风荡雨走路，脸干而额顶湿。穿着衣裳在床上坐，肚子松但后脊梁皮紧。城门如此之高，还要匍匐而走。
English: The slant-eyed person continued with the next sentence: It can't be like an orchid, because it's a purple wild goose. The lazy person had a person who suffered from scoliosis, so he often walked with his head bowed. Someone made up a ballad: Wearing a cane is like a no, inserting a cane is like a y. Walking in the rain, with a dry face and a wet forehead. Sitting on the bed in clothes, with a loose stomach but a tight back. The gate is so high, you have to stagger away.

古文：田媪
现代文：田媪
English: Tianluo

古文：唐京城中，有妇人姓田，年老，口无齿。与男娶同坊人张氏女。
现代文：唐朝时，京城里有个妇人姓田，年岁已老，口中没了牙，她给儿子娶了临近一家张氏的女儿作媳妇。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, there was a woman in Beijing named Tian Rong, who was old and had no teeth in her mouth. She married her son to a daughter-in-law from a nearby Zhang family.

古文：张因节日盛馔，召田母饮啖，及相送出，主人母云：惭愧，无所啖嚼，遣亲家母空口来，空口去。
现代文：张氏因节日做好吃的，便把田老太太找来饮酒吃饭。等到送她回去的时候，张氏道：真不好意思呀，也没有什么好吃的，让亲家母空口来空口去。
English: When it was time to send her back, Mr. Zhang said, "I'm really sorry, but I don't have anything good to eat, so I let my mother come and go empty-handed."

古文：如此者数矣，田终不悟。
现代文：这样的话已经说过好几次了，田老太太始终没有醒悟过来。
English: This has been said several times, but Mrs. Tian still hasn't woken up.

古文：归语夫曰：张家母唤我，大有饮食，临别即云： 惭愧，亲家母空口来，空口去。不知何也？
现代文：有一次回来后对丈夫说：张老太太把我叫过去，本来准备的吃喝又好又多，可是临别就说，不好意思呀，让亲家母空口来空口去，不知是啥意思？
English: Once, after returning, she said to her husband: "Old Mrs. Zhang called me over. The food and drink I had prepared was good and plentiful, but at the end of the meal, she said, 'I'm sorry, I let my mother come and go empty-handed. I don't know what that means.

古文：夫曰：此是弄君无齿。
现代文：丈夫说：这是戏弄你无齿。
English: The husband said, "It's a trick to make fun of your toothlessness."

古文：张家母面上有疮瘢，眼下皮急，极沾眂，若更有此语，可报云： 只是眼下急。
现代文：张老太太脸上有疮疤，眼下皮急，极沾眂。若是再有那样的话，你可报复她说， 只是眼下急 。
English: Old Mrs. Zhang has scars on her face. She is anxious under her eyes, and is very depressed. If that happens again, you can take revenge on her by saying, "It's just that I'm anxious now."

古文：田私记之。
现代文：田老太太默默记下。
English: Old Mrs. Tian silently wrote it down.

古文：居数日，张复召田，临起复云：惭愧，空口来，空口去。
现代文：又过了几天，张氏又叫田老太太过去吃饭，临走时又说：不好意思呀，又让你空口来空口去了。
English: A few days later, Mr. Zhang again asked Ms. Tian to come over for dinner. As she was about to leave, she said, "I'm sorry, I let you talk to me again."

古文：田母乃熟视主人母眼，良久忘却眼下急。直云：是眼皮沾眂。
现代文：田老太太盯着张氏的眼睛，过了好长时间，竟忘了眼下急，脱口而出：是眼皮沾眂。
English: Old Mrs. Tian stared at Mr. Zhang's eyes. After a long time, she forgot the urgency of the moment and blurted out: "It's the eyelids that are sticky."

古文：合家大笑。
现代文：全家人都大笑。
English: The whole family burst out laughing.

