古文：◎世祖七十五年春正月辛卯，阿老瓦丁将兵戍斡端，给米三千石、钞三十锭。
现代文：至元十五年春，正月初七，阿老瓦丁率军戍守斡端，赐给其粮米三千石、钱钞三十锭。
English: In the spring of the 15th year of the Yuan Dynasty, on the 7th day of the 1st month of the year, A Lao Vadin led the army to keep the good offices, and gave him 3,000 kilos of grain and rice and 30 yuan of banknotes.

古文：以千户郑寻阝有战功，升万户，佩虎符。
现代文：因为千户郑寻阝立下战功，提拔为万户，佩戴虎符。
English: Because of Zheng Xuanqian's war exploits, thousands of households were promoted to ten thousand households, wearing tiger symbols.

古文：癸巳，西京饥，发粟一万石赈之，仍谕阿合马广贮积，以备阙乏。
现代文：初九，西京发生饥荒，调发一万石粮食赈济西京，并谕令阿合马广泛贮存粮食，以备缺食时使用。
English: At the beginning of the ninth month, a famine occurred in Xijing. Ten thousand koku of grain was allocated to help feed Xijing, and Ahama was ordered to store grain extensively in preparation for use in the event of a food shortage.

古文：顺德府总管张文焕、太原府达鲁花赤太不花，以按察司发其奸赃，遣人诣省自首，反以罪诬按察司。
现代文：顺德府总管张文焕、太原府镇守官太不花，因为按察司揭发他们贪污，派人到中书省自陈，反而诬告按察司有罪。
English: Zhang Wenhuan, the general manager of Shunde Prefecture, and Taiyuan Prefecture's town marshal, because the Investigation Division had exposed their corruption, sent people to the Ministry of Education and Culture to confess, but instead falsely accused the Investigation Division of guilt.

古文：御史台臣奏： 按察司设果有罪，不应因事而告，宜待文焕等事决，方听其诉。 
现代文：御史台大臣上奏说 ：按察司如果确实有罪，不应借这件事去告发，应该等张文焕等人的事情决断以后，再听由他们陈诉。 
English: The Minister of State for History said in his report: If the inspector general is indeed guilty, he should not use this incident to report it. He should wait until the matter of Zhang Wenhuan and others is decided, and then listen to their report.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇上允从。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：己亥，收括阑遗官也先、阔阔带等坐易官马、阑遗人畜，免其罪，以诸路州县管民官兼领其事。
现代文：十五日，收聚流落无主的汉奴的官员也先、阔阔带等人犯下买卖官马、无主汉奴牲畜的罪行，免去他们的罪罚，以各路、州、县的管民官兼管他们的职司。
English: On the 15th, the officials who gathered the ownerless Han slaves who were living in the countryside were also the first to commit the crime of buying and selling government horses and ownerless Han slave livestock. They were exempted from punishment, and the people's administrators of each road, state, and county were also in charge of their duties.

古文：官吏隐匿及擅易马匹、私配妇人者，没其家。
现代文：官吏有隐瞒以及随意买卖马匹、私下把妇女配人的，没收其家财。
English: If a government official has a hidden motive, trades horses at will, or secretly matches women with men, his family assets will be confiscated.

古文：禁官吏军民卖所娶江南良家子女及为娼者，卖、买者两罪之，官没其直，人复为良。
现代文：禁止官吏、士兵和百姓把娶得的江南良家女子卖为娼妓，卖者和买者双方都治罪，官府没收买卖的钱款，被卖为娼的恢复为良家女子身份。
English: Officials, soldiers and common people were prohibited from selling married women from good families in the south of the Yangtze River as prostitutes. Both the seller and the buyer were punished, the government confiscated the money from the sale, and the women who were sold as prostitutes were restored to their status as good women.

古文：赐湖州长兴县金沙泉名为瑞应泉。
现代文：把湖州长兴县的金沙泉赐名为瑞应泉。
English: The Jinsha Spring in the county of Changxing in Hubei Province was given the name Ruiying Spring.

古文：金沙泉不常出，唐时用此水造紫笋茶进贡，有司具牲币祭之，始得水，事讫辄涸。
现代文：金沙泉不经常冒出泉水。唐朝时用这里的水制紫盫茶向朝廷进贡，官府用牲礼和绢帛对它进行了祭祀，才有水出来，祭祀一完就干涸了。
English: Jinsha Spring does not often have spring water. During the Tang Dynasty, the emperor paid tribute to the imperial court with purple camphor tea made from the water here, and the government made a sacrifice to it with offerings and incense. Only then did the water come out, and it dried up as soon as the sacrifice was over.

古文：宋末屡加浚治，泉迄不出。
现代文：亡宋末年屡次加以疏浚、治理，泉水至今不流出来。
English: At the end of the late Song Dynasty, it was repeatedly dredged and treated, and the spring water still does not flow out.

古文：至是中书省遣官致祭，一夕水溢，可溉田千亩。
现代文：这时候中书省又派遣官员进行祭祀，一个夜晚溢出的水，可以灌溉田地一千亩。
English: At this time, the Ministry of Education and Culture also dispatched officials to perform sacrifices. The water spilled in one night can irrigate a thousand mu of fields.

古文：安抚司以事闻，故赐今名。
现代文：安抚司把这件事奏闻皇上，所以皇上才赐给了现在这个名字。
English: The pacification department reported the matter to the emperor, so the emperor gave the current name.

古文：封磁州神崔府君为齐圣广佑王。
现代文：封磁州神崔府君为 齐圣广佑王 。
English: The god of the magnetic state, Cui Fookun, is Qi Sheng Guangyou Wang.

古文：壬寅，弛女直、水达达酒禁。
现代文：十八日，放宽女真族、水达达族不许饮酒的禁令。
English: On the 18th, the ban on drinking alcohol for the Jianzhen and Shuidada tribes was relaxed.

古文：丙午，安西王相府言： 万户秃满答儿、郝札剌不花等攻克泸州，斩其主将王世昌、李都统。 
现代文：二十二日，安西王相府上奏说： 万户秃满答儿、郝札剌不花等攻占泸州，杀死泸州主将王世昌、李都统。 
English: On the 22nd, the Anxi Wang Xiangfu made a report to the emperor, saying, "All the bald-headed and bald-headed men, all the warriors, and all the warriors, etc. conquered Zhangzhou, and killed Wang Shichang and Li Du Tong, the leaders of Zhangzhou.

古文：戊申，从阿合马请，自今御史台非白于省，毋擅召仓库吏，亦毋究钱谷数，及集议中书不至者罪之。
现代文：二十四日，依从阿合马的请求，从今以后御史台没有向中书省报告，不得擅自召见仓库的官吏，也不得探询钱粮的数目，集中议论时如果中书省的官员不到，处以罪罚。
English: On the 24th, in accordance with the request of Ahma, from now on, the History Department did not report to the Central Book Ministry, it was not allowed to summon officials to the warehouse without authorization, nor was it allowed to inquire about the amount of money and grain, and if the officials of the Central Book Ministry did not arrive during the discussion, they would be punished.

古文：授宋福王赵与芮金紫光禄大夫、检校大司农、平原郡公。
现代文：授予亡宋的福王赵与芮金紫光禄大夫、检校大司农、平原郡公的官职和封号。
English: Fu Wang Zhao and Hao Jin Ziguanglu, who died in the Song Dynasty, were awarded the titles of doctor, chief inspector of schools, and official posts and titles in Pingyuan County.

古文：庚戌，东川副都元帅张德润大败涪州兵，斩州将王明及其子忠训、总辖韩文广、张遇春。
现代文：二十六日，东川副都元帅张德润把涪州兵打得大败，杀死涪州守将王明和他的儿子王忠训、总辖韩文广、张遇春。
English: On the 26th, the Dongchuan Vice-Capital Marshal Zhang Derun defeated the Bozhou soldiers, killing the Bozhou garrison commander Wang Ming and his son Wang Zhongxun, the commander-in-chief Han Wenguang and Zhang Yuchun.

古文：诏军官不能抚治军士及役扰致逃亡者，没其家赀之半。
现代文：下诏：军官无法安抚、整治士兵，以及用劳役扰害士兵，以致士兵逃亡的，没收其家财的一半。
English: The following edict was issued: If officers are unable to pacify and rectify soldiers, and use forced labor to disturb soldiers, causing soldiers to flee, confiscate half of their family wealth.

古文：以阿你哥为大司徒，兼领将作院。
现代文：任命阿你哥为大司徒，兼管将作院。
English: Appointing your elder brother as the grand steward, who will also be in charge of the hospital.

古文：二月戊午，祀先农。
现代文：二月初五，祭祀农神。
English: On the fifth day of the second month of the year, the worship of the farmer gods ended.

古文：蒙古胄子代耕藉田。
现代文：由蒙古贵族子弟代行耕种官府籍田的仪式。
English: The children of Mongolian aristocrats carry out the ceremony of cultivating the government-owned fields.

古文：癸亥，咸淳府等郡及大良平民户饥，以钞千锭赈之。
现代文：初十，咸淳府等州郡以及大良平的民户饥饿乏食，给予一千锭钱钞赈济他们。
English: On the 10th day of the first month of the year, households in Xianchun Prefecture and other prefectures and counties, as well as in Daliangping, were starving and short of food, and were given 1,000 baht banknotes to help them.

古文：命平章政事阿塔海、阿里选择江南廉能之官，去其冗员与不胜任者。
现代文：命令平章政事阿塔海、阿里选拔江南廉洁而有才能的官员，免去多余的冗员和不能胜任的人。
English: He ordered Pingzhang's political advisors, Atahai and Ali, to select honest and talented officials from the south of the Yangtze River, and to get rid of redundant and incompetent people.

古文：复立河中府万泉县。
现代文：重新设置河中府的万泉县。
English: Wanquan County in Henan Province was re-established.

古文：辛未，以川蜀地多岚瘴，弛酒禁。
现代文：十八日，因为川蜀一带山林中有很多瘴气，放宽有关饮酒的禁令。
English: On the 18th, because there is a lot of radon gas in the mountains and forests around Sichuan and Shuxu, the ban on drinking alcohol was relaxed.

古文：丁丑，荧惑犯天街。
现代文：二十四日，荧惑星干犯毕宿天街星。
English: On the 24th, the fluorescent planet interfered with the Tianjie star.

古文：庚辰，征别十八里军士，免其徭役。
现代文：二十七日，免除征伐别十八里士兵的徭役。
English: On the 27th, exempted the soldiers of the 18th-mile expedition from the forced labor.

古文：壬午，参知政事、福建路宣慰使唆都率师攻潮州，破之。
现代文：二十九日，参知政事、福建路宣慰使唆都领兵进攻潮州，攻占了该城。
English: On the 29th, the political advisor to the governor, Fujian Road Xuancheng, urged the capital to lead the troops to attack Chaozhou and captured the city.

古文：置太史院，命太子赞善王恂掌院事，工部郎中郭守敬副之，集贤大学士兼国子祭酒许衡领焉。
现代文：设置太史院，命令太子赞善王恂掌管院中事务，工部郎中郭守敬担任他的副职，由集贤殿大学士兼国子祭酒许衡主管。
English: He set up the Institute of History, and ordered the prince Zanzan Wang Yao to be in charge of the affairs of the institute. Guo Shoujing, the vice-minister of the Ministry of Industry and Commerce, served as his deputy, and Xu Heng, a scholar of Jixian Palace University and the director of the National Children's Festival, was in charge.

古文：改华亭县为松江府。
现代文：把华亭县改为松江府。
English: Change the name of Huating County to Songjiang Prefecture.

古文：遣使代祀岳渎。
现代文：派遣使臣代表皇帝祭祀五岳、四渎。
English: Envoys were dispatched on behalf of the emperor to offer sacrifices to the Five Sacred Mountains and the Four Sacred Mountains.

古文：以参知政事夏贵、范文虎、陈岩并为中书左丞，黄州路宣慰使唐兀带、史弼并参知政事。
现代文：任命参知政事夏贵、范文虎、陈岩均担任中书左丞，黄州路宣慰使唐兀带、史弼均任参知政事。
English: Xia Gui, Fan Wenhu, and Chen Yan were all appointed to the posts of vice-governors and vice-governors, and Huangzhou Lu Xuan comforted Tang Xizhe and Shi Yan were appointed to the posts of vice-governors and vice-governors.

古文：三月乙酉，诏蒙古带、唆都、蒲寿庚行中书省事于福州，镇抚濒海诸郡。
现代文：三月初二，诏令蒙古带、唆都、蒲寿庚在福州执掌中书省事务，以镇抚濒临海滨的各州郡。
English: On the second day of March, the Mongolian belt, the subdued capital, and Pu Shougen in Fuzhou were ordered to take charge of the affairs of the People's Republic of China and the People's Republic of China, and to take charge of the counties along the coast.

古文：以沿海经略副使合剌带领舟师南征，升经略使兼左副都元帅，佩虎符。
现代文：任命沿海经略副使合剌带率领水军征伐南方，提升为经略使并兼任左副都元帅，佩戴虎符。
English: He was appointed Deputy Coastal Economic Delegate and led the naval forces to conquer the south, promoted to Deputy Coastal Economic Delegate and concurrently served as Left Vice-Marshal of the Capital, wearing the tiger emblem.

古文：丁亥，太阴犯太白。
现代文：初四，太阴星干犯太白金星。
English: On the fourth day of the new year, the star of the yin is too dark and the star of the white too bright.

古文：戊子，太阴犯荧惑。
现代文：初五，太阴星干犯荧惑星。
English: On the fifth day of the first lunar month, a too-dark star interferes with a fluorescent planet.

古文：己丑，行中书省请考核行御史台文卷，不从。
现代文：初六，行中书省请求考核行御史台的文卷，皇上不同意。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the school year, the Ministry of Education and Culture requested the examination of the documents of the Imperial History Museum, but the emperor did not agree.

古文：甲午，西川行枢密院招降西蜀、重庆等处，得府三、州六、军一、监一、县二十、栅四十、蛮夷一。
现代文：十一日，西川行枢密院招降西蜀、重庆等地的州郡，共取得三个府、六个州、一个军州、一个监州、二十个县、四十个栅寨、一个蛮夷部落。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the Privy Council of Xichuan Province promoted and demoted Xishu, Chongqing and other provinces and counties, and obtained a total of three prefectures, six provinces, one military province, one supervising province, twenty counties, forty stockades, and one barbarian tribe.

古文：乙未，宋广王昺遣倪坚以表来上，令俟命大都。
现代文：十二日，亡宋的广王赵籨派倪坚来奉上降表，令他在大都等待命令。
English: On the twelfth day, the late Song Dynasty's Guang Wang Zhao Jun sent Ni Jian to present a surrender form, ordering him to wait for orders.

古文：命扬州行省选铁木儿不花所部兵助隆兴进讨。
现代文：命令扬州行中书省挑选铁木儿不花部下的士兵协助隆兴进军征讨。
English: Ordered Yangzhou line of the Ministry of Education and Culture to select soldiers under the Ministry of Education and Culture to assist Longxing to enter the army.

古文：丁酉，命塔海毁夔府城壁。
现代文：十四日，命令塔海拆毁夔府城墙上的堡垒。
English: On the 14th, he ordered Taha to demolish the fortress on the city wall of Ye Prefecture.

古文：戊戌，刘宗纯据德庆府，梧州万户朱国宝攻之，焚其寨栅，遂拔德庆。
现代文：十五日，刘宗纯据守德庆府，梧州万户朱国宝向他进攻，焚毁他的寨栅，于是攻下了德庆。
English: On the 15th, Liu Zongchun was defending Deqing Prefecture, and Wuzhou Wanyu Zhu Guobao attacked him, burned his stockade, and then captured Deqing.

古文：诏中书左丞吕文焕遣官招宋生、熟券军，堪为军者，月给钱粮；不堪者，给牛屯田。
现代文：下诏命中书左丞吕文焕派遣官员去征招亡宋生券军、熟券军。能够当兵打仗的人，每月发给钱粮；不能当兵打仗的，供给耕牛让他们屯田。
English: The next imperial edict ordered the chancellor, Lü Wenhuan, to send officials to recruit the defeated Song, Sheng, and Zhuang troops. Those who could fight as soldiers were given money and grain every month; those who could not fight as soldiers were provided with oxen so that they could work the fields.

古文：庚子，汉军都元帅李庭自愿将兵击张世杰，从之。
现代文：十七日，汉军都元帅李庭自愿领兵前去进攻张世杰，皇上允从。
English: On the 17th, the Han general Li Ting volunteered to lead the troops to attack Zhang Shijie, and the emperor agreed.

古文：西川行枢密院招宜胜、土恢等城及石榴寨，相继来降。
现代文：西川行枢密院招降宜胜、土恢等城以及石榴寨，这些地方相继前来投降。
English: The Nishikawa line of the Privy Council called for the surrender of Yisheng, Tsuchihai and other cities, as well as Pomegranate Village. These places came to surrender one after another.

古文：壬寅，以诸路岁比不登，免今年田租、丝银。
现代文：十九日，因为各路近年没有获得丰收，免征今年的田租和丝税银。
English: On the 19th, because all the roads have not had a good harvest in recent years, this year's field rent and silk tax and silver are exempted.

古文：癸卯，都元帅杨文安遣兵攻克绍庆，执其郡守鲜龙，命斩之。
现代文：二十日，都元帅杨文安派兵攻占绍庆，俘获了该城的郡守鲜龙，命令将他处斩。
English: On the 20th, the capital marshal Yang Wen'an sent troops to conquer Shaqing, captured the county governor of the city, Xianlong, and ordered him to be beheaded.

古文：乙巳，广南西道宣慰司遣管军总管崔永、千户刘潭、王德用招降雷、化、高三州，即以永等镇守之。
现代文：二十二日，广南西道宣慰司派遣管军总管崔永、千户刘潭、王德用去招降雷州、化州、高州三州，就命崔永等人镇守这几处地方。
English: On the 22nd, the Xuanliao Division of Guangnan West Road dispatched the general managers of the army, Cui Yong, Qianhu Liu Tan, and Wang Deyi, to recruit and surrender the three states of Leizhou, Huazhou, and Gaozhou, and ordered Cui Yong and others to guard these places.

古文：宋张世杰、苏刘义挟广王昺奔碙洲。
现代文：亡宋的张世杰、苏刘义挟持广王赵籨投奔州。
English: Zhang Shijie and Su Liu Yi of the late Song Dynasty took Guan Wang Zhao Yao hostage and took him to Panzhou.

古文：参知政事密立忽辛、张守智并行大司农司事。
现代文：命令参知政事密立忽辛、张守智共同执掌大司农司的事务。
English: He ordered Ku Xin and Zhang Shou Zhi, both of whom are close to the governor, to jointly take charge of the affairs of the Department of Agriculture.

古文：夏四月乙卯，命元帅刘国杰将万人北征，赐将士钞二万六百七十一锭。
现代文：夏季，四月初二，命令元帅刘国杰率领一万名士卒征伐北方，赐给将士们钱钞二万零六百七十一锭。
English: In the summer, on the second day of April, he ordered Marshal Liu Guojie to lead ten thousand soldiers to conquer the north, and gave the soldiers 20,671 yuan in banknotes.

古文：修会川县盘古王祠，祀之。
现代文：修建会川县的盘古王祠，进行了祭祀。
English: The Pan Guo Wang Ancestral Shrine in Huichuan County was rebuilt, and a religious service was held.

古文：丙辰，诏以云南境土旷远，未降者多，签军万人进讨。
现代文：初三，诏令：因为云南的区域广大遥远，没有归降的地方很多，签征一万名士兵进军征讨。
English: On the third day of the first month, the imperial decree was issued: because the region of Yunnan is vast and far away, and there are many places that have not surrendered, 10,000 soldiers were conscripted to march to collect.

古文：戊午，以江南土寇窃发，人心未安，命行中书省左丞夏贵等，分道抚治军民，检核钱谷；察郡县被旱灾甚者、吏廉能者，举以闻；其贪残不胜任者，劾罢之。
现代文：初五，因为江南的草寇暗中起事，人心不安定，皇上命行中书省左丞夏贵等分道安抚、治理军民，检查核实钱粮；考察遭受旱灾严重的郡县、廉洁能干的官员，列举名单上报，那些贪婪残忍不能胜任的，弹劾之后免职。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, because of the grasshoppers in the south of the Yangtze River secretly rising up and the instability of the people's hearts, the emperor ordered to carry out the separate ways of pacifying and governing the military and the people, such as Zhoushu Zojo Xia Gui, checking and verifying the money and grain; inspecting the counties and counties suffering from severe droughts, and listing and reporting the list of corrupt and competent officials. Those who are greedy and cruel and incompetent will be removed from office after impeachment.

古文：甲子，命不花留镇西川，汪惟正率获功蒙古、汉军官及降臣入觐，大都巡军之戍西川者遣还。
现代文：十一日，命令不花留下来镇守西川，汪惟正率领立下战功的蒙古军、汉军官员及降臣入朝觐见皇上，戍守西川的大都巡军被遣送回来。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the order was given to stay behind to guard the West River. Wang Wei Zheng led the Mongol army, the Chinese army officials and the surrendered subjects who had distinguished themselves in the war to the Imperial Palace to meet the emperor. Most of the capital patrols that had been guarding the West River were sent back.

古文：立云南、湖南二转运司。
现代文：设立云南、湖南的两个转运司。
English: Set up two transshipment departments in Yunnan and Hunan.

古文：以时雨沾足，稍弛酒禁，民之衰疾饮药者，官为酝酿量给之。
现代文：因为适时的雨水比较充足，禁止饮酒的命令略加松弛，百姓中有因衰弱疾病而需要饮用药酒的，由官府为他们酿酒按量供给他们。
English: Because the timely rainwater is relatively abundant, the order to prohibit drinking alcohol is slightly relaxed. If there are people who need to drink medicinal liquor due to debilitating diseases, the government will brew liquor for them and supply them in accordance with the amount.

古文：辛未，置光禄寺，以同知宣徽院事秃剌铁木儿为光禄卿。
现代文：十八日，设置光禄寺，任命宣徽院同知秃剌铁木儿为光禄卿。
English: On the 18th, he established the Guanglu Temple and appointed a fellow scholar of Xuan Hui Academy, Zongzi Tiemu'er, as the Guanglu Emperor.

古文：广州张镇孙叛，犯广州，守将张雄飞弃城走，出兵临之，镇孙乞降，命遣镇孙及其妻赴京师。
现代文：广州张镇孙叛变，进犯广州府，守将梁雄飞弃城逃走，朝廷出兵临近广州，张镇孙请求投降，命遣送张镇孙和他的妻子前来京师。
English: Zhang Zhensun of Guangzhou rebelled and attacked the Guangzhou government. Liang Xiong abandoned the city and fled. The imperial court sent troops near Guangzhou. Zhang Zhensun asked for surrender and was ordered to send Zhang Zhensun and his wife to Beijing.

古文：丁丑，云南行省招降临安、白衣、和泥分地城寨一百九所，威楚、金齿、落落分地城寨军民三万二千二百，秃老蛮、高州、筠连州等城寨十九所。
现代文：二十四日，云南行中书省招降临安、白衣、和泥所辖地区的一百零九个城寨，威楚、金齿、落落所辖地区的城寨军民共三万二千二百人，秃老蛮、高州、筠连州等地的城寨共十九处。
English: On the 24th, a total of 109 townships in the areas under the jurisdiction of An, Baiyi, and Mud were recruited in Yunnan Province. A total of 32,200 soldiers and civilians from the townships in the areas under the jurisdiction of Weichu, Jintao, and Zhouzhuang, and a total of 19 townships in the areas under the jurisdiction of Bald Old Man, Gaozhou, and Qilian.

古文：庚辰，以许衡言，遣使至杭州等处取在官书籍版刻至京师。
现代文：二十七日，按照许衡的意见，派遣使者到杭州等地收取藏在官中的书籍版刻前来京师。
English: On the 27th, in accordance with Xu Heng's opinion, an emissary was sent to Hangzhou and other places to collect the book plates hidden in the officials and come to Beijing.

古文：壬午，立行中书省于建康府。
现代文：二十九日，在建康府建立行中书省。
English: On the 29th, the Ministry of Education and Culture was established in Jiankangfu.

古文：中书左丞崔斌言： 比以江南官冗，委任非人，命阿里等沙汰之，而阿合马溺于私爱，一门子弟，立为要官。 
现代文：中书左丞崔斌上奏说 ：近来因为江南官员太多，委任的人选不恰当，命令阿里等人去淘汰冗官，而阿合马却沉溺在私情之爱中，满门的子弟都担任着要职。 
English: Cui Bin, the left-hand man of the Central Committee, said in his report, "Recently, because there are too many officials from the south of the Yangtze River, the candidates appointed are not appropriate, and Ali and others have been ordered to eliminate redundant officials, while Ahma is indulging in love affairs, and the children of the whole family are holding important positions.

古文：诏并黜之。
现代文：皇上下诏全部予以罢免。
English: The Emperor decreed that all of them should be dismissed.

古文：又言： 阿老瓦丁，台臣劾其侵欺官钱，事犹未竟，今复授江淮参政，不可。 
现代文：崔斌又说： 阿老瓦丁，御史台大臣参劾他侵夺欺占官中的钱财，事情还没有完，现在又重新授予他江淮参政，这是不可以的。 
English: Cui Bin also said: Ah Lao Vadin, the Minister of the History Department participated in the impeachment of him for embezzling money from officials, the matter is not over, and now he has been re-granted Jianghuai to participate in politics. This is unacceptable.

古文：诏止其行。
现代文：皇上下诏取消这个任命。
English: The Emperor issued an imperial edict cancelling the appointment.

古文：敕自今罢免之官，宰执为宣慰，宣慰为路官，路官为州官。
现代文：敕令从今以后，凡是免职的官员，宰执大臣只能担任宣慰官，宣慰官只能担任各路的官，各路的官只能担任州官。
English: From now on, all officials who are removed from office, the vice-minister can only serve as a consolation officer, the consolation officer can only serve as an official of each road, and the official of each road can only serve as a state official.

古文：淮、浙盐课直隶行省，宣慰司官勿预。
现代文：淮、浙地区的盐税直接隶属于行省管辖，宣慰司的官员不得干预。
English: The salt tax in Huai and Zhejiang regions is directly under the jurisdiction of the provinces, and the officials of the Ministry of Public Security shall not interfere.

古文：改北京行省为宣慰司。
现代文：把北京行中书省改为宣慰司。
English: The Ministry of Literature was changed to the Ministry of Consolation during the Beijing trip.

古文：追江南工匠官虎符。
现代文：追夺江南工匠官的虎符。
English: The tiger emblem of the pursuit of Jiangnan craftsmen.

古文：五月癸未朔，诏谕翰林学士和礼霍孙，今后进用宰执及主兵重臣，其与儒臣老者同议。
现代文：五月初一，下诏晓谕翰林学士和礼霍孙，今后进用宰执大臣和主管军事的重臣，希望和年老的儒臣共同商议。
English: On the first day of May, it was announced that Hanlin and Li Huosun would be promoted to vice-ministers and senior ministers in charge of military affairs in the future, and it was hoped that they would discuss with the old Confucian scholars.

古文：乙酉，行中书言： 近讨邵武、建昌、吉、抚等岩洞山寨，获聂大老、戴巽子，余党皆下。
现代文：初三，行中书省进言： 最近征讨邵武、建昌、吉州、抚州等地的岩洞和山寨，俘获了聂大老、戴巽子等人，他们的余党也都投降了。
English: On the third day of the junior high school, the line of the Ministry of Education and Culture said: Recently, the caves and cottages in Shaowu, Jianchang, Jizhou, Fuzhou and other places have been captured, and people such as Zou Dadao and Dai Zizi have been captured. The rest of their party have also surrendered.

古文：独张世杰据碙洲，攻傍郡，未易平，拟遣宣慰使史格进讨。 
现代文：唯独张世杰占据着州，进攻附近的州郡，不容易平定，准备派遣宣慰使史格进兵讨伐。 
English: However, Zhang Shijie alone occupied the prefecture and attacked the nearby prefectures and counties, which was not easy to pacify. He was ready to send a consolation to make Shi Gu march into the crusade.

古文：诏以也速海牙总制之。
现代文：下诏命也速海牙统领节制他。
English: The emperor also ordered the leader of the Hague to restrain him.

古文：敕： 主兵官若已擢授，其旧职宜别授有功者，勿复以子孙承袭。 
现代文：敕令 ：主管军队的官员如果已经提拔官职，他原来的旧职应该另授予有功的人，不再由子孙承袭。 
English: Royal Decree: If the officer in charge of the army has been promoted, his former post should be awarded to another meritorious person, and will no longer be inherited by his descendants.

古文：申严无籍军虏掠及佣奴代军之禁。
现代文：申令严格禁止不在籍的士兵进行掳掠以及由奴仆代替主子从军。
English: The decree strictly forbids soldiers who are not registered to carry out kidnapping and the use of slaves to replace masters in the army.

古文：甲午，诸职官犯罪，受宣者闻奏，受敕者从行台处之，受省札者按察司治之。
现代文：十二日，各任职的官员犯罪，受到皇帝传见的向皇帝奏闻，接到皇帝敕令的由行御史台查处，接到中书省公文的由按察司处治。
English: On the twelfth day, the officials in charge of each post committed a crime, which was reported to the emperor by the emperor's hearsay, investigated and dealt with by the Executive Bureau of History after receiving the emperor's edict, and investigated and dealt with by the Inspection Division after receiving the official document of the Ministry of Education and Culture.

古文：其宣慰司官吏，奸邪非违及文移案牍，从本道提刑按察司磨刷。
现代文：宣慰司的官吏，所犯的奸邪如果违犯公文案卷上所规定的律令，由本道的提刑按察司勘问究治。
English: If an official of the Propaganda and Consolation Department commits treachery in violation of the laws and regulations stipulated in the official document file, the punishment will be investigated and dealt with according to the investigation and investigation of the Investigation Department.

古文：应有死罪，有司勘问明白，提刑按察司审覆无冤，依例结案。类奏待命。
现代文：所有的死罪，官府查究审问明白，再由提刑按察司复审，没有冤情，按常例结案，分类奏报以等待圣命发落。
English: For all capital crimes, the investigation and interrogation by the government office are clear, and then the sentence is reviewed by the prosecutor. There is no grievance, the case is closed as usual, and the case is classified and reported to wait for the death sentence.

古文：自行中书以下应行公务，小事限七日，中事十五日，大事三十日。
现代文：自行中书省以下应当处理的公务，小事限七日之内完成，中事十五日之内完成，大事三十日之内完成。
English: For official business that should be handled by the Ministry of Education and Culture and below, minor matters should be completed within seven days, minor matters within 15 days, and major matters within 30 days.

古文：选江南锐军为侍卫亲军。
现代文：挑选江南精兵担任侍卫亲军。
English: The elite soldiers from the south of the Yangtze River were selected to serve as bodyguards for the troops.

古文：乙未，以乌蒙路隶云南行省，仍诏谕乌蒙路总管阿牟，置立站驿，修治道路，其一应事务并听行省平章赛典赤节制。
现代文：十三日，把乌蒙路隶属于云南行中书省，并下诏晓谕乌蒙路总管阿牟，设置驿站，整修道路，所有的事务全部听由行中书省平章政事赛典赤节制。
English: On the 13th, he subordinated Umong Road to Yunnan Province, and ordered the general manager of Umong Road, Amu, to set up stations, repair roads, and delegate all affairs to Pingzhang, the governor of Yunnan Province.

古文：立川蜀水驿，自叙州达荆南府。
现代文：建立川蜀水上驿站，从叙州直达荆南府。
English: The Sichuan-Shuishui Railway Station will be built, with a direct line from Suzhou to Jingnan.

古文：己亥，江东道按察使阿八赤求江东宣慰使吕文焕金银器皿及宅舍子女不获，诬其私匿兵仗。
现代文：十七日，江东道按察使阿八赤向江东道宣慰使吕文焕讨取金银器皿和房舍、男女奴仆，没有得到，便诬告吕文焕私藏兵器甲仗。
English: On the seventeenth day of the month, the inspector general of Jiangxi Province sent the ambassador Ahacheng to the governor of Jiangxi Province to solicit Lu Wenhuan to obtain gold and silverware and houses, male and female slaves, and when he did not get them, he falsely accused Lu Wenhuan of hiding weapons.

古文：诏行台大夫相威诘之，事白，免阿八赤官。
现代文：皇上诏令行御史台大夫相威追查这件事，事情的真相大白，阿八赤被罢官。
English: The emperor issued an imperial edict ordering the historian to investigate the matter. The truth of the matter became clear, and Abacha was removed from office.

古文：辛亥，制授张留孙江南诸路道教都提点。
现代文：二十五日，决定授予张留孙江南路道教都提点之职。
English: On the 25th, it was decided to award Zhang Ruzun the post of Taoist Prelate of Jiangnan Road.

古文：赐拱卫司官及其所部四百五十人钞二千六十锭。
现代文：赐给拱卫司官员及该部的四百五十人二千零六十锭钱钞。
English: He gave 2,060 baht in banknotes to the officials of the Arch Guards and the 450 members of the department.

古文：六月乙卯，改西蕃李唐城为李唐州。
现代文：六月初三，把西蕃的李唐城改为李唐州。
English: On the third day of June, the name of Li Tangcheng in Xidi was changed to Li Tangzhou.

古文：庚申，敕博儿赤、答剌赤及司粮、司币等官并勿授符，已授者收之。
现代文：初八，敕令： 负责皇上烹饪的官员、答剌赤，以及管理粮食、管理钱钞等官均不得授予符信，已经授予的收回。 
English: On the eighth day of the first month, the imperial edict was issued: the officials in charge of the emperor's cooking, the officials in charge of answering enquiries, and the officials in charge of grain and banknotes were not allowed to award certificates, and those that had already been awarded were withdrawn.

古文：壬戌，赐泸州降臣薛旺等钞有差。
现代文：初十，赐给泸州降臣薛旺等不同数额的钱钞。
English: On the tenth day of the first month of the year, different amounts of banknotes were given to Zhangzhou's surrendered vassal, Xue Wang.

古文：丙寅，以江南防拓关隘一十三所设官太冗，选军民官廉能者各一人分领。升济南府为济南路，降西凉府为西凉州。
现代文：十四日，因为江南防守关口的十三处地方所设官员太多，挑选廉洁而有才能的管军官、管民官各一人分管各事，把济南府升格为济南路，把西凉府降格为西凉州。
English: On the 14th, because there were too many officials set up in the 13 localities along the defense pass of the southern part of the Yangtze River, a clean and talented administrative officer and a civil affairs officer were selected to be in charge of each matter, and Jinan Prefecture was upgraded to Jinan Road, and Xiliang Prefecture was downgraded to Xiliangzhou.

古文：丁卯，置甘州和籴提举司，以备给军饷、赈贫民。
现代文：十五日，设置甘州和籴提举司，以备供应军粮、赈济贫民之用。
English: On the fifteenth day of the month, the Gansu and Shandong Provincial Military Commissions were set up to prepare for the supply of military grain and aid to the poor.

古文：甲戌，诏汰江南冗官。
现代文：二十二日，下诏淘汰江南的冗官。
English: On the 22nd, Jiangnan's redundant officials were eliminated.

古文：江南元设淮东、湖南、隆兴、福建四省，以隆兴并入福建，其宣慰司十一道，除额设员数外，余并罢去，仍削去各官旧带相衔。
现代文：江南原来所设的淮东、湖南、隆兴、福建四个行省，把隆兴合并到福建。十一道宣慰司，除了定额设置的官员数目之外，其余的全部免职。削去各官员原先所带的宰相衔级。
English: The four provinces of Huaidong, Hunan, Longxing and Fujian originally set up by Jiangnan were merged into Fujian. In addition to the number of officials set by the quota, all the remaining officials of the Eleven-District Propaganda and Consolation Department were dismissed. The title of prime minister originally carried by each official was removed.

古文：罢茶运司及营田司，以其事隶本道宣慰司。
现代文：撤销茶运司和营田司，把它们的事务隶属于本道的宣慰司。
English: Revoke the Tea Campaign Division and the Ying Tian Division, and subordinate their affairs to the True Way's Consolation Division.

古文：罢漕运司，以其事隶行中书省。
现代文：撤销漕运司，把它的事务隶属于行中书省。
English: The Department of Rowing Transport was abolished and its affairs subordinated to the Ministry of Railways.

古文：各路总管府依验户数多寡，以上中下三等设官。
现代文：各路总管府根据核实后的户数多少，按照上中下三等设置官员。
English: According to the number of households after verification, the headquarters of each road will set up officials according to the upper, middle and lower third.

古文：宋故官应入仕者，付吏部录用。
现代文：亡宋原来的官员应当任官职的，交给吏部录用。
English: In the late Song Dynasty, officials who should have held official posts were transferred to the Personnel Department for recruitment.

古文：以史塔剌浑、唐兀带骤升执政，忙古带任无为军达鲁花赤，复遥领黄州宣慰使，并罢之。
现代文：因为史塔剌浑、唐兀带一下子升任执政大臣，忙古带担任无为军镇守官又遥兼黄州宣慰使，均免去职务。
English: Because of the sudden promotion to the post of minister of the government of the State Council and the Tang Dynasty, and because of the fact that He Guotai served as the military town warden and the Huangzhou consolation envoy, they were all removed from their posts.

古文：时淮西宣慰使昂吉儿入觐，言江南官吏太冗，故有是命。
现代文：当时淮西宣慰使昂吉儿入朝觐见皇上，说江南官吏太冗杂，因此才有这项敕命。
English: At that time, Huaxi Xuancheng made Angier enter the imperial court to see the emperor, saying that the officials in the south of the Yangtze River were too complicated, which is why he had to die.

古文：帝谕昂吉儿曰： 宰相明天道、察地理、尽人事，能兼此三者，乃为称职。
现代文：皇上对昂吉儿说 ：宰相懂得天道，详察地理，尽到人力，能兼有这三者，才算是称职。
English: The emperor said to Angier, "A prime minister is only qualified if he knows the way of heaven, has a detailed knowledge of geography, and has enough manpower to do all three."

古文：尔纵有功，宰相非可觊者。
现代文：你即使有功劳，宰相不是你能担任的。
English: Even if you have merit, you cannot be the prime minister.

古文：回回人中阿合马才任宰相，阿里年少亦精敏，南人如吕文焕、范文虎率众来归，或可以相位处之。 
现代文：回回人中阿合马的才能可以任宰相；阿里年轻，也很精明敏锐；南方人像吕文焕范文虎率领部下前来归降，或许可以居宰相之位。 
English: Among the returnees, the talent of Ahma can be appointed as prime minister; Ali is young, very shrewd and keen; the southerners, like Lu Wenhuan and Fan Wenhu, who led their subordinates to surrender, may be able to occupy the position of prime minister.

古文：又顾谓左右曰： 汝可谕姚枢等，江南官吏太冗，此卿辈所知，而皆未尝言，昂吉儿乃为朕言之。 
现代文：又回头对左右的人说： 你们可以对姚枢等人说，江南的官吏太冗杂。这是你们所知道的，竟都没有说起，昂吉儿却对我说了这情况。 
English: He also turned to the people around him and said, "You can tell Yao Zu and the others that the officials in the south of the Yangtze River are too complicated. This is something you all know, but you haven't mentioned it. However, Angier told me about this situation.

古文：近侍刘铁木儿因言： 阿里海牙属吏张鼎，今亦参知政事。 
现代文：近侍刘铁木儿趁机说道 ：阿里海牙的属吏张鼎，现在也担任着参知政事。 
English: Liu Tiemu'er, a close aide, took the opportunity to say: Zhang Ding, a subordinate official of Ali Hague, is now also in charge of political affairs.

古文：诏即罢去。
现代文：皇上下诏立即撤销他的这项职务。
English: The Emperor's edict immediately revoked his position.

古文：遂命平章政事哈伯等谕中书省、枢密院、御史台： 翰林院及诸南儒今为宰相、宣慰，及各路达鲁花赤佩虎符者，俱多谬滥，其议所以减汰之者。
现代文：于是命平章政事哈伯等宣谕中书省、枢密院、御史台 ：翰林院以及南方的儒士们现在担任宰相、宣慰使，以及各路镇守官并佩戴虎符的，大多很荒谬混乱，这就是决定减少、淘汰他们的原因。
English: As a result, most of the Confucianists from the Hanlin Academy and the south who are currently serving as prime ministers, propaganda ministers, as well as town guards and wearing tiger charms, are absurdly confused, which is the reason for the decision to reduce and eliminate them.

古文：凡小大政事，顺民之心所欲者行之，所不欲者罢之。 
现代文：所有大大小小的政事，合乎民心的需要的就执行，民心所不需要的就撤销。 
English: All political affairs, large and small, that meet the needs of the people shall be implemented, and those that do not meet the needs of the people shall be cancelled.

古文：乙亥，敕省、院、台诸司应闻奏事，必由起居注。
现代文：二十三日，敕令： 中书省、枢密院、御史台所属各司所有奏闻的事情，必须记入起居注。 
English: On the 23rd, the royal decree: all matters reported by the departments under the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology, the Privy Council, and the General History Channel must be recorded in the living notes.

古文：丁丑，太庙殿柱朽腐，命太常少卿伯麻思告于太室，乃易之。
现代文：二十五日，太庙的殿柱朽烂，命太常少卿伯麻思告知太室，才换了下来。
English: On the 25th day of the month, the pillars of the Imperial Temple were rotten, and it was only after the death of Shōkō Shōkyō Bōmasu was brought to the attention of the Imperial Household that they were replaced.

古文：戊寅，全州西延溪洞徭蛮二十所内附。
现代文：二十六日，全州西延溪洞的二十处徭蛮归顺朝廷。
English: On the twenty-sixth day, twenty fiefs of Xiyanxi Cave in Quanzhou were returned to the imperial court.

古文：己卯，发蒙古军千人从江东宣慰使张弘范由海道讨宋余众。
现代文：二十七日，调发一千名蒙古军士兵跟随江东宣慰使张弘范经由海路讨伐亡宋的余部。
English: On the 27th, a thousand Mongolian soldiers were dispatched to follow Jiangdong Xuancheng to make Zhang Hongfan go by sea to fight the rest of the dead Song Dynasty.

古文：参知政事蒙古带请颁诏招宋广王昺及张世杰等，不从。
现代文：参知政事蒙古带请求颁发诏书招降亡宋的广王赵踕以及张世杰等，皇上不准。
English: The emperor did not approve of the request of the Mongolian political advisor to issue an imperial edict to recruit the late Guang Wang Zhao Jun and Zhang Shijie from the Song Dynasty.

古文：庚辰，处州张三八、章焱、季文龙等为乱，行省遣宣慰使谒只里率兵讨之。
现代文：二十八日，处州的张三八、章焱、季文龙等作乱，行中书省派遣宣慰使谒只里率军讨伐。
English: On the 28th, Zhang 38th, Zhang Ye, Ji Wenlong and others in Wenzhou started a riot, and the Ministry of Education and Culture sent a consoling message to Zou Jiali to lead the army to fight.

古文：辛巳，达实都收括中兴等路阑遗。
现代文：二十九日，达实都收罗中兴等路离散的驱口。
English: On the 29th, Dashidu closed the discrete exits of Luo, Zhongxing and other roads.

古文：安南国王陈光昞遣使奉表来贡。
现代文：安南国王陈光日丙派遣使臣奉上表章前来进贡。
English: Annan King Chen Guang Rong sent envoys to pay tribute with the above medals.

古文：秋七月壬午朔，湖南制置张烈良、提刑刘应龙与周隆、贺十二起兵，行省调兵往讨，获周隆、贺十二，斩之。
现代文：秋，七月初一，湖南制置使张烈良、提刑使刘应隆和周隆、贺十二起兵反叛，行中书省调兵前往征讨，俘获周隆、贺十二斩首。
English: In the autumn, on the first day of July, Zhang Liliang, the Minister of the Hunan Province, Liu Yinglong, Zhou Long, and He XII, the Minister of the Hunan Province, and Zhou Long, and He XII, the Minister of the Hunan Province, rebelled, and the troops of the Hunan Province were dispatched to subjugate them. Zhou Long and He XII were captured and beheaded.

古文：烈良等举家及余兵奔思州乌罗洞，为官军所袭，二人皆战死。
现代文：张烈良等带领全家和残余的士卒投奔思州乌罗洞，遭到官军袭击，两人都战死。
English: Zhang Leliang led his entire family and the remaining soldiers into Uluo Cave in Pengsizhou. They were attacked by government troops and both died in battle.

古文：甲申，赐亲王爱牙赤所部建都戍军贫乏者钞千二百七十七锭。
现代文：初三，赐给亲王爱牙赤部下戍守建都贫困的兵卒钱钞一千二百七十七锭。
English: On the third day of the first month, Prince Aiga gave 1,277 monies to the impoverished soldiers under his command who guarded the construction of the capital.

古文：行御史台增设监察御史四员。
现代文：行御史台增设监察御史四员。
English: An additional four inspectors have been added to the Historical Commission.

古文：江南湖北道、岭南广西道、福建广东道并增设提刑按察司。
现代文：江南的湖北道、岭南的广西道、福建的广东道均增设提刑按察司。
English: Hubei Province in Jiangnan Province, Guangxi Province in Lingnan Province, and Guangdong Province in Fujian Province have all set up additional criminal investigation departments.

古文：乙酉，改江南诸路总管府为散府者七、为州者一，散府为州者二。
现代文：初四，江南诸路总管府改为散府的七个，改为州的一个，散府改为州的两个。
English: On the 4th day of the first month of the year, the Jiangnan Zhuji Road Administration Headquarters was changed to seven scattered prefectures, one prefecture and two prefectures.

古文：丙戌，以江南事繁，行省官未有知书者，恐于吏治非便，分命崔斌至扬州行省，张守智至潭州行省。
现代文：初五，因为江南的事务繁杂，各行省的长官没有识字的，恐怕对吏治不利，分别命令崔斌到扬州行省任职，张守智到潭州行省任职。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, because of the complicated affairs in the south of the Yangtze River, if the governors of the provinces were not literate, it would be unfavorable for the officials to govern, so they ordered Cui Bin to serve in Yangzhou Province and Zhang Shou Zhi to serve in Tanzhou Province.

古文：丁亥，诏虎符旧用畏吾字，今易以国字。
现代文：初六，诏令 ：虎符原来用畏吾儿文字的，现在换成蒙古文字。 
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, the imperial edict decreed that the tiger emblem, which had originally been written in Mongolian script, would now be written in Mongolian script.

古文：癸巳，以塔海征夔军旅之还戍者，及扬州、江西舟师，悉付水军万户张荣实将之，守御江口。
现代文：十二日，把塔海征讨夔府后回防的军队，和扬州、江西的水军全部交给水军万户张荣实统率，以守御长江口。
English: On the 12th, Zhang Rongshi, commander of the naval forces of all households, handed over all the naval forces of Yangzhou and Jiangxi to the naval forces that had returned to defend the Yangtze River estuary after the Tahai Conquest.

古文：丙申，以右丞塔出、左丞吕师夔、参知政事贾居贞行中书省事于赣州，福建、江西、广东皆隶焉。
现代文：十五日，派右丞塔出、左丞吕师夔、参知政事贾居贞在赣州处置中书省事务，福建、江西、广东都属于这里管辖。
English: On the fifteenth day, he sent Yu Zhengtao, Zuo Zhengtao, Lu Shijun, and Jia Juzhen, the political secretary of the party secretary, to handle the affairs of the Ministry of Education and Culture in Zhangzhou. Fujian, Jiangxi and Guangdong all belong to this jurisdiction.

古文：丁酉，赐江西军与张世杰力战者三十人，各银五十两。
现代文：十六日，赐给江西军队中和张世杰奋力作战的三十人每人五十两白银。
English: On the 16th, fifty-two pieces of silver were given to each of the thirty people in the Jiangxi army who fought against Zhang Shijie.

古文：以江西参知政事李恒为都元帅，将蒙古、汉军征广。
现代文：任命江西参知政事李恒为都元帅，率领蒙古军、汉军征伐广州。
English: He appointed Li Heng, the Vice-Governor of Jiangxi Province, as the Marshal of the Capital and led the Mongolian and Chinese armies to conquer Guangzhou.

古文：命扬州行中书省分军三千付李恒。
现代文：命令扬州行中书省分拨三千名士兵交付给李恒。
English: He ordered the Yangzhou-based People's Commissariat of Foreign Affairs to assign 3,000 soldiers to Li Heng.

古文：复上都守城军二千人为民。
现代文：把上都的守城军二千人复员为百姓。
English: He demobilized two thousand of Shangdu's garrison as commoners.

古文：壬寅，改铸高丽王王愖驸马印。
现代文：二十一日，改铸高丽国王王忄甚驸马的印信。
English: On the twenty-first day, the seal of the King of Goryeo, Wang Jinshunma, was recast.

古文：丙午，改开元宣抚司为宣慰司，太仓为御廪，资成库为尚用监，皮货局入总管府。
现代文：二十五日，把开元宣抚司改为宣慰司，把太仓改为御廪，把资成库改为尚用监，把皮货局并入总管府。
English: On the 25th, the Kaigen-no-Kenpo-shi was changed to the Kenpo-no-Kenpo-shi, the Taicang was changed to the Miho, the Jucho-ko was changed to the Shanyo-ken, and the Fur and Goods Bureau was merged into the General Administration Office.

古文：定江南俸禄职田。
现代文：确定江南按官员的俸禄所给予的职分田。
English: Determine the official allotment of land given by Jiangnan according to the official's salary.

古文：戊申，濮州蝗。
现代文：二十七日，濮州发生蝗灾。
English: On the 27th, a locust plague occurred in Zhangzhou.

古文：己酉，禁使人经行纳怜驿。
现代文：二十八日，禁止使臣经过纳怜驿。
English: On the 28th, it was forbidden for envoys to pass through Narei.

古文：辛亥，改京兆府为安西府。
现代文：三十日，把京兆府改为安西府。
English: On the 30th, Keicho-fu was changed to Ansei-fu.

古文：诏江南、浙西等处毋非理征科扰民。
现代文：诏令江南、浙西等处，不得非法征收捐税滋扰百姓。
English: The edict ordered the southern part of the Yangtze River, the western part of Zhejiang and other places not to illegally collect taxes and disturb the people.

古文：建汉祖天师正一祠于京城。
现代文：在京城修建 汉祖天师 正一祠。
English: Han Zu Tian Shi Zheng Yi Ancestral Temple was built in Beijing.

古文：以参知政事李恒为蒙古、汉军都元帅，忙古带为福建路宣慰使，张荣实、张鼎并为湖北道宣慰使，也的迷失为招讨使。
现代文：任命参知政事李恒为蒙古军、汉军都元帅，任命忙古带为福建路宣慰使，张荣实、张鼎均任湖北道宣慰使，也的迷失任招讨使。
English: He appointed Li Heng, the political secretary of the prefectural governor, as the marshal of the Mongolian army and the Chinese army, appointed He Guotai as the Fujian Road propaganda envoy, Zhang Rongshi and Zhang Ding as the Hubei Road propaganda envoys, and also the lost as the recruiting envoys.

古文：八月壬子朔，追毁宋故官所受告身。
现代文：八月初一，追夺并毁弃亡宋的旧官原来所接受的委任状。
English: On the first day of August, they seized and destroyed the letter of appointment originally accepted by the old officials of the late Song Dynasty.

古文：以嘉定、重庆、夔府既平，还侍卫亲军归本司。
现代文：因为嘉定、重庆、夔府已经平定，令侍卫亲军回归本司。
English: Because Jiading, Chongqing and Yefu have been pacified, the bodyguards have been ordered to return to their units.

古文：遣礼部尚书柴椿等使安南国，诏切责之，仍俾其来朝。
现代文：派遣礼部尚书柴椿等出使安南国，下诏严厉谴责安南国王并命其前来朝见。
English: The Ministry of Ceremonies dispatched Shang Shuxi, Chai Tsun and other envoys to Annan, and issued a decree severely condemning King Annan and ordering him to come to the imperial court.

古文：丁巳，沿海经略司、行左副都元帅刘深言： 福州安抚使王积翁既已降附，复通谋于张世杰。 
现代文：初六，沿海经略司使、暂署左副都元帅刘深上奏说 ：福州安抚使王积翁已经投降之后，又重新和张世杰来往。 
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, the envoy of the Coastal Economic Strategy Division and the temporary left deputy of the Capital Marshal Liu Sheng reported: After the Fuzhou pacification envoy Wang Jiong had surrendered, he again visited Zhang Shijie.

古文：积翁上言： 兵力单弱，若不暂从，恐为阖郡生灵之患。 
现代文：王积翁上奏说 ：本地兵力单弱，如果不暂时依从他，恐怕成为全郡生灵的灾难。 
English: Wang Zhiweng said in his report, "The local military force is extremely weak. If we do not obey him for the time being, I am afraid it will be a disaster for all the county's people."

古文：诏原其罪。
现代文：皇上下诏原谅了他的罪责。
English: He was pardoned by the imperial court.

古文：壬戌，有首高兴匿宋金者，诏置勿问。
现代文：十一日，有人告发高兴隐藏亡宋的金子，皇子诏令搁置不必追究。
English: On the 11th day, someone reported that he was happy to hide the gold of the late Song Dynasty, and there was no need to investigate.

古文：两淮运粮五万石赈泉州军民。
现代文：两淮运送五万石粮食赈济泉州的军民。
English: Two Huai delivered 50,000 koku of grain to help the military and civilians in Quanzhou.

古文：乙丑，济南总管张宏以代输民赋，尝贷阿里、阿答赤等银五百五十锭，不能偿，诏依例停征。
现代文：十四日，济南总管张宏因为代替百姓交纳赋税，曾经向阿里、阿答赤等借贷钱款五百五十锭，无法偿还。皇上下诏依常例停止收取。
English: On the 14th, Zhang Hong, the governor of Jinan, was unable to repay the 550 baht he had borrowed from Ali, Atachek and others because he was paying taxes on behalf of the people. The imperial edict stopped the collection as usual.

古文：辛未，复给漳州安抚使沈世隆家赀。
现代文：二十日，把漳州安抚使沈世隆的家财重新归还给他。
English: On the 20th, he returned Shen Shilong's family wealth to him.

古文：世隆前守建宁府，有郭赞者受张世杰檄，诱世隆，世隆执赞斩之。
现代文：沈世隆先前戍守建宁府，有一名叫郭赞的人接受了张世杰的命令前来诱降沈世隆，沈世隆把郭赞抓起来杀了。
English: Shen Shilong previously held Jianningfu. A man named Guo Zan accepted Zhang Shijie's order to come and entice Shen Shilong. Shen Shilong arrested Guo Zan and killed him.

古文：蒙古带以世隆擅杀，籍其家。
现代文：蒙古带认为沈世隆擅自杀人，没收了他的家产。
English: The Mongolian authorities considered Shen Shilong to have committed suicide and confiscated his family's property.

古文：帝曰： 世隆何罪，其还之。 
现代文：皇帝说 ：沈世隆有什么罪呀，把家产还给他吧。 
English: The emperor said, "What is Shen Shilong's crime? Give him back his family property."

古文：仍授本路管民总管。
现代文：并授予他本路管民事的总管之职。
English: and awarded him the post of chief of the civil affairs department of the highway administration.

古文：中书省臣言： 近有旨追诸路管民官所授金虎符，其江南路臣宜仍所授。 
现代文：中书省大臣上奏说 ：最近有圣旨追回授予各管民官的金虎符，那些江南降臣还是应该授予。 
English: The Minister of the People's Republic of China's Ministry of Literature and Calligraphy said in his report, "Recently, there has been a sacred will to recover the Golden Tiger, which was awarded to the officials in charge of the people, but those who surrendered south of the Yangtze River should still be awarded.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇上允从。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：制封泉州神女号护国明著灵惠协正善庆显济天妃。
现代文：决定赐封泉州神女 护国明著灵惠协正善庆显济天妃 的尊号。
English: It was decided to bestow upon the Quanzhou Goddess, the Protector of the Country, the honorary title of the Divine Princess.

古文：甲戌，安西王相府言： 川蜀悉平，城邑山寨洞穴凡八十三，其渠州礼义城等处凡三十三所，宜以兵镇守，余悉彻毁。 
现代文：二十三日，安西王相府上奏说： 川蜀全部平定，城邑、山寨、洞穴共八十三个，其中渠州的礼义城等一共三十三处应该派兵镇守，其余的城寨全部拆毁。 
English: On the 23rd, Wang Xiang of Anxi made a report to the prefectural government: "All of Sichuan and Shandong has been pacified. There are a total of 83 towns, villages, and caves. Of these, a total of 33 places, including Liyi City in Quzhou, should be guarded by soldiers, and all the remaining townships should be demolished."

古文：从之。
现代文：皇上允从。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：己卯，复立提刑按察司于畏吾儿分地。庚辰，以四川平，劳赏军士钞二万一千三百三十九锭。
现代文：二十八日，开始在畏吾儿地方设立提刑按察司。二十九日，因为四川平定，犒劳奖赏士卒钱钞二万一千三百三十九锭。
English: On the 29th, because of the pacification of Sichuan, the reward money was 21,339 baht.

古文：辛巳，升洺磁为广平府路。
现代文：三十日，把氵名磁升格为广平府路。
English: On the 30th, it was upgraded to Guangpingfu Road.

古文：监察御史韩昺劾同知大都路总管府事舍里甫丁殴部民至死，诏杖之，免其官，仍籍没家赀十之二。
现代文：监察御史韩籨弹劾大都路总管府同知舍里甫丁殴打部属百姓致死，诏命处以杖刑，罢免其官职，并没收其十分之二的家财。
English: The inspector of imperial history, Han Zheng, impeached Sherifudin, a comrade-in-arms of the General Administration of Datu Road, for beating a civilian to death, and ordered him to be punished with a cane, dismissed from his official post, and confiscated two-tenths of his family wealth.

古文：诏行中书省唆都、蒲寿庚等曰： 诸蕃国列居东南岛寨者，皆有慕义之心，可因蕃舶诸人宣布朕意，诚能来朝，朕将宠礼之。
现代文：下诏给行中书省唆都、蒲寿庚等人说： 各个列居于东南沿海岛屿上的藩国，都有仰慕礼义之心，可以通过藩国船上的商人宣布我的意思。如果能够前来朝见，我将给予他们恩宠礼遇。
English: The following edict was sent to the acting Shosho, Suetsu, Pu Shugang and others: All the feudal lords living on the islands along the southeast coast have a heart of admiration, courtesy and righteousness, and they can announce my intention through the merchants on the ships of the feudal lords. If they can come to see me in the morning, I will give them grace and courtesy.

古文：其往来互市，各从所欲。 
现代文：其间往来贸易，各遵从他们的要求。 
English: They trade among themselves, and everyone does as they please.

古文：诏谕军前及行省以下官吏，抚治百姓，务农乐业，军民官毋得占据民产，抑良为奴。
现代文：下诏，谕令军前及行省的官吏，好好抚慰管理百姓，使他们从事农耕，安居乐业，管军管民官均不得占据百姓的财产，强迫良民为奴。
English: In the following edict, the pre-war and provincial officials were ordered to soothe and manage the people, so that they could engage in farming and live in peace and contentment. The officials in charge of the military and the people were not allowed to occupy the property of the people and force the good people to be slaves.

古文：以中书左丞董文炳签书枢密院事，参知政事唆都、蒲寿庚并为中书左丞。
现代文：任命中书左丞董文炳为枢密院佥事，参知政事唆都、蒲寿庚均任中书左丞。
English: Appointed the Second Secretary of the Left, Dong Wenyi, to the Privy Council, and appointed the Second Secretary of the Left, Sang Chih, the Second Secretary of the Central Government, and Pu Shugang to the Second Secretary of the Left.

古文：九月壬午朔，敕以总管张子良所签军二千二百人为侍卫军，俾张亨、陈瑾领之。
现代文：九月初一，敕令以总管张子良所签征的二千二百名士卒为侍卫军，由张亨、陈瑾统领他们。
English: On the first day of September, the imperial order was issued to conscript 2,200 noblemen and women as bodyguards, led by Zhang Heng and Chen Qi.

古文：癸未，省东西川行枢密院，其成都、潼川、重庆、利州四处皆设宣慰司。
现代文：初二，撤销东川、西川的行枢密院，其中成都、潼川、重庆、利州四地均设宣慰司。
English: On the second day of the freshman year, the Dongchuan and Xichuan line of the Privy Council was revoked, and the four regions of Chengdu, Luochuan, Chongqing, and Lizhou all set up the Consolation Division.

古文：诏分拣诸路所括军，验事力乏绝者为民，其恃权豪避役者复为兵。
现代文：诏令分选各路所招聚的军队，经查验缺乏体力不能任事的恢复为民，那些依仗权势逃避兵役的重新从军。
English: The edict sorted out the troops gathered from all directions, and those who were found to lack physical strength and unable to perform their duties were reinstated as citizens, while those who relied on power to evade military service re-joined the army.

古文：所遣分拣官及本府州县官，能核正无枉者，升爵一级。
现代文：所派去的分选官和本府的州县官，能够核正实情不出差错的，升爵一级。
English: The sorting officers sent and the prefectural and county officials of this prefecture, who can verify the facts without error, will be promoted to the first level.

古文：又减至元九年所括三万军半以为民，其商户余丁军并除之。
现代文：又把至元九年所征召的三万名士兵，减少一半复员为民，其中商户子和各户的余丁，军中全部除名。
English: He also reduced by half the thirty thousand soldiers conscripted in 1891, demobilizing them into the civilian population. Of these, the merchant households and the remaining children of each household were all removed from the army.

古文：戊子，以征东元帅府治东京。
现代文：初七，命征东元帅辖治东京。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, the Eastern Field Marshal was appointed to govern Tokyo.

古文：庚寅，昭信达鲁花赤李海剌孙言，愿同张弘略取宋二王，调汉军、水军俾将之。
现代文：初九，昭信镇守官李海剌孙上奏说他愿意和张弘略一起攻取亡宋的二王，调汉军、水军让他统领。
English: On the 9th day of the first month, Li Haisheng, the governor of Zhaoxin Town, announced that he was willing to conquer the two kings of the late Song Dynasty together with Zhang Hongliu, and transferred the Han army and navy to him.

古文：以中书左丞、行江东道宣慰吕文焕为中书右丞。
现代文：任命中书左丞、署理江东道宣慰使吕文焕为中书右丞。
English: The appointment of Chushuzojo, and the acting president Jiang Doudou's proclamation of Lu Wenhuan as Chushuzojo.

古文：冬十月己未，享于太庙，常设牢醴外，益以羊、鹿、豕、蒲萄酒。
现代文：冬，十月初九，向太庙敬献牲礼，除了通常设置的牺牲和甜酒外，增加了羊、鹿、猪、葡萄酒。
English: In winter, on the 9th day of the 10th month, offerings were made to the imperial temple. In addition to the usual offerings and sweet wine, sheep, deer, pigs and wine were added.

古文：庚申，车驾至自上都。
现代文：初十，皇上的车驾从上都来到京师。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, the emperor's car drove from the capital to the capital.

古文：辛酉，赈别十八里、日忽思等饥民钞二千五百锭。
现代文：十一日，赈济别十八里、日忽思等地的饥民钱钞二千五百锭。
English: On the 11th day of the month, 2,500 baht in banknotes were donated to the starving people in 18 villages in Xibei and Zhiguxi.

古文：分夔府汉军二千、新军一千付塔海将之。赐合答乞带军士马价币帛二千匹，其军士力战者赏赍有差。
现代文：把夔府的汉军二千名、新军一千名交付给塔海统领，赐给合答乞带部下的士兵马价钱二千匹绢帛，奋力作战的给以不同数额的赏赐。
English: Two thousand Han soldiers and one thousand New Army soldiers from Shifu were handed over to the commander of Takai, and two thousand horses were given to the soldiers who were begging. Those who fought hard were given different amounts of rewards.

古文：乙丑，正一祠成，诏张留孙居之。
现代文：十五日，正一祠建成，下诏：令张留孙住在这里。
English: On the fifteenth day, Zhengyi Ancestral Hall was built, and the following edict was issued: Zhang Liusun was ordered to live here.

古文：丁卯，弛山场樵采之禁。
现代文：十七日，放宽在山场上砍柴的禁令。
English: On the 17th, the ban on cutting firewood on the mountain was relaxed.

古文：己巳，趣行省造海船付乌马儿、张弘范，增兵四千俾将之。
现代文：十九日，敦促行中书省建造海船交付给乌马儿、张弘范，增兵四千人由他们统率。
English: On the 19th, he urged the People's Commissariat for Foreign Affairs to build a ship and deliver it to Umar and Zhang Hongfan, and to increase the number of soldiers by 4,000 under their command.

古文：庚午，敕御史台，凡军官私役军士者，视数多寡定其罪。
现代文：二十日，敕命御史台，凡是军官私自役使士兵的，视人数的多少判定其罪罚。
English: On the 20th, the death penalty was abolished, and all officers who served as soldiers for personal gain were sentenced according to the number of people.

古文：诏： 河西、西京、南京、西川、北京等处宣慰司案牍，宜依江南近例，令按察司磨照。 
现代文：诏令说 ：河西、西京、南京、西川、北京等地宣慰司的案卷公文，应当依据江南的近例，令按察司勘问明白。 
English: The edict said that the official documents of the case files of the Xuanliao Division in Hexi, Xijing, Nanjing, Xichuan, Beijing and other places should be based on the recent cases in the south of the Yangtze River and should be made clear according to the investigation of the Investigation Division.

古文：移河南河北道提刑按察司治南京。
现代文：把河南河北道提刑按察司的治所迁移到南京。
English: Relocate the Henan and Hebei Provincial Criminal Investigation Bureau to Nanjing.

古文：御史台臣言： 失里伯之弟阿剌与王权府等俘掠良民，失里伯纵弗问。
现代文：御史台大臣进言 ：失里伯的弟弟阿剌和王权府等人一起抢掠善良的百姓，失里伯纵容他们，不予过问。
English: Goshidaijin chimed in: Shuribo's younger brother, Ajimaru, plundered the good people together with the royal court, and Shuribo indulged them without question.

古文：及遣御史掾诘问，不伏。 
现代文：直到派御史台的掾吏去讯问他们，还不伏罪。 
English: They did not confess until the magistrate of the imperial court was sent to interrogate them.

古文：诏执而鞫之。
现代文：诏令逮捕审问。
English: An arrest warrant has been issued for questioning.

古文：十一月庚辰朔，枣阳万户府言： 李均收抚大洪山寨为宋朱统制所害。 
现代文：十一月初一，枣阳万户府上奏说： 李均收抚大洪山寨时被亡宋的朱统制杀害。 
English: On the first day of the first month of November, Zaoyang Wanyu prefectural governor said: Li Jun was killed by Zhu Tongsai of the late Song Dynasty when he took over Dahong Mountain Village.

古文：命赐银千两赒其家。
现代文：敕命赐给白银一千两优抚他的家属。
English: He gave a thousand taels of silver to his family.

古文：丁亥，以辰、沅、靖、镇远等郡与蛮獠接壤，民不安业，命塔海、程鹏飞并为荆湖北道宣慰使，置司常德路，余官属留荆南府，供给粮食军需。
现代文：初八，因为辰州、沅州、靖州、镇远等州郡和蛮夷接壤，百姓们不能安居乐业，命令塔海、程鹏飞共同任荆湖北道宣慰使，把官署设在常德路，其余的官属留在荆南府，以供给粮食和军需物品。
English: On the 8th day of the first month of the year, because Chenzhou, Zhangzhou, Jingzhou, Zhenyuan and other prefectures and counties bordered the barbarians, the people could not live and work in peace, and ordered Tahai and Cheng Pengfei to jointly serve as the propaganda and consolation envoy of North Jinghu Province, and set up the government office on Changde Road, while the rest of the government officials stayed in Jingnan Prefecture to supply grain and military supplies.

古文：壬辰，江东道宣慰使囊加带言： 江南既平，兵民宜各置官属，蒙古军宜分屯大河南北，以余丁编立部伍，绝其虏掠之患。
现代文：十三日，江东道宣慰使囊加带上奏说： 江南既然已经平定，军队和百姓应该各设官职。蒙古军队应该分别屯驻在黄河南北，用各户的余丁编成队伍，断绝军队掳掠百姓的祸患。
English: On the 13th day of the month, the governor of the Yangtze River issued a proclamation, saying: Since the south of the Yangtze River has been pacified, the army and the people should each set up an official post. The Mongolian army should be stationed separately in the north and south of the Yellow River, using the surplus ding of each household to form a team, and break the scourge of the army kidnapping and plundering the people.

古文：分拣官僚，本以革阿合马滥设之弊。
现代文：分拣官员本来是用来革除阿合马滥设冗官的弊端。
English: Sorting officers were originally used to eliminate the drawbacks of the Ahamadra's abuse of redundancy.

古文：其将校立功者，例行沙汰，何以劝后？
现代文：那些立下功劳的军官，如果也按常例进行淘汰，又怎能勉励后人呢？
English: If those officers who have rendered meritorious service are also eliminated according to the usual practice, how can they encourage future generations?

古文：新附军士，宜令行省赐其衣粮，无使阙乏。 
现代文：新归附的士兵，应当由行中书省赐给他们衣粮，不要使他们缺吃少穿。 
English: The newly returned soldiers should be given food and clothing by the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology, so that they do not go short of food and clothing.

古文：帝嘉纳之。
现代文：皇帝嘉许、采纳了这个意见。
English: The emperor appreciated and adopted his opinion.

古文：征宋相马廷鸾、章鉴赴阙。
现代文：征召亡宋的宰相马廷鸾、章鉴前来朝廷。
English: The prime ministers of the late Song Dynasty, Ma Tingtao and Zhang Jian, were summoned to the imperial court.

古文：甲午，开酒禁。
现代文：十五日，放开酒禁。
English: On the 15th, the ban on alcohol was lifted.

古文：复阿合马子忽辛、阿散先等官。
现代文：恢复阿合马的儿子忽辛、阿散和先前相等的官品。
English: To restore the official ranks of Ahma's sons, Khusin and Asan, to their previous levels.

古文：始，忽辛等以崔斌论列而免，至是以张惠请，故复之。
现代文：当初忽辛等人由于崔斌的陈奏而被免职，这时是因为张惠的请求，故而恢复了原官。
English: At first, Hu Xin and others were removed from their posts due to Choi Bin's insubordination, but at this time, because of Zhang Hui's request, they were reinstated.

古文：惠又请复其子麻速忽及其侄别都鲁丁、苫思丁前职，帝疑惠，不从。
现代文：张惠又请求恢复他儿子麻速忽以及他侄儿别都鲁丁、苫思丁先前的职务，皇帝对张惠产生了怀疑，没有答应。
English: Zhang Hui also requested the reinstatement of his son Ma Sokhu and his nephews Bedu Rudin and Juxiding to their previous positions. The emperor became suspicious of Zhang Hui and did not agree.

古文：敕已除官僚不之任者，除名为农。
现代文：敕令：已经授官而不去赴任的，除去名籍务农。
English: Royal edict: Those who have been awarded an official post and do not go to the post should remove their names from the agricultural register.

古文：丁酉，召陈岩入觐。
现代文：十八日，征召陈岩入朝觐见。
English: On the 18th, Chen Yanru was summoned to the imperial court.

古文：己亥，贷侍卫军屯田者钞二千锭市牛具。
现代文：二十日，贷款二千锭钱钞给屯田的侍卫军以购买耕牛农具。
English: On the 20th, the loan of two thousand baht banknotes to the guards of Tonden to purchase cattle farming tools.

古文：辛丑，建宁政和县人黄华，集盐夫，联络建宁、括苍及纁民妇自称许夫人为乱，诏调兵讨之。
现代文：二十二日，建宁路政和县人黄华，聚集制盐工人，联络建宁、括苍及自称许夫人的畲族民妇作乱。诏令调兵前去讨伐。
English: On the 22nd, Jianning's road administrator and Huang Hua, a county resident, gathered salt workers to contact Jianning, Guo Cang, and a Yi woman who called herself Mrs. Xu to start a riot. They ordered the deployment of troops to fight.

古文：丁未，行中书省自扬州移治杭州，立淮东宣慰司于扬州，以阿剌罕为宣慰使。
现代文：二十八日，行中书省把治所从扬州迁移到杭州。在扬州设立淮东宣慰司，任命阿剌罕为宣慰使。
English: On the 28th, the Central Administration of the People's Republic of China moved the office from Yangzhou to Hangzhou, set up the Huadong Consolation Division in Yangzhou, and appointed Ayhan as the consolation envoy.

古文：诏谕沿海官司通日本国人市舶。
现代文：下诏，令沿海的官府和日本的商船进行贸易。
English: He issued an edict ordering the government offices along the coast to stop trading with Japanese merchant ships.

古文：以参知政事程鹏飞行荆湖北道宣慰使。
现代文：任命参知政事程鹏飞署理荆湖北道宣慰使。
English: Appointed to the Political Affairs Department of Pengfei Administration of Jinghong Hubei Province as a consolation envoy.

古文：闰月庚戌朔，罗氏鬼国主阿榨、西南蕃主韦昌盛并内附，诏阿榨、韦昌盛各为其地安抚使，佩虎符。
现代文：闰十一月初一，罗氏鬼国国王阿榨、西南蕃国王韦昌盛均归附朝廷。皇上诏令阿榨、韦昌盛各任当地的安抚使，佩戴虎符。
English: On the first day of the eleventh month of the leap year, the king of Luo's ghost country, Ajou, and the king of Southwest Han, Wei Changsheng, were both annexed to the imperial court. The emperor ordered Ajou and Wei Changsheng to be the local pacifying envoys and wear tiger charms.

古文：辛亥，太白、荧惑、填星聚于房。
现代文：初二，太白星、荧惑星、土星聚于房宿天区。
English: On the second day of the first month, the great white star, the fluorescent planet, and Saturn gather in the innermost celestial region.

古文：甲寅，幸光禄寺。
现代文：初五，皇上临幸光禄寺。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, the Emperor visited Koroku-ji Temple.

古文：丙辰，诏秃鲁赤同潭州行省官一员，察戍还病军所过州县不加顾恤者按之。
现代文：初七，诏令秃鲁赤同潭州行中书省的一名官员，巡察因患病而返回原地的戍军，所经过的州县如果对他们不加照顾、抚恤的，即进行审讯查处。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, an official from the Ministry of Education and Culture, who was on a trip to Chungtan Prefecture, was ordered by the emperor to inspect the soldiers who had returned to their original places due to illness. If the counties they passed through did not take care of them, they would be interrogated and investigated.

古文：甲子，发蒙古、汉军都元帅张弘范攻漳州，得山寨百五十、户百万一。
现代文：十五日，调派蒙古军、汉军都元帅张弘范进攻漳州，获取山寨一百五十处，人户一百万。
English: On the 15th, the Mongolian army and the Chinese army were dispatched by Marshal Zhang Hongfan to attack Zhangzhou, acquiring one hundred and fifty cottages and one million households.

古文：是日，谍报文天祥见屯潮阳港，亟遣先锋张弘正、总管囊加带率轻骑五百人，追及于五坡岭麓中，大败之，斩首七千余，执文天祥及其将校四人赴都。
现代文：过一天，间谍报告文天祥正屯驻在潮阳港，急忙派先锋张弘正、总管囊加带率领轻骑兵五百人前去追赶，在五坡岭的山麓中追到，把宋军打得大败，杀死敌人七千多人，俘获文天祥和他部下的四名军官，押赴京师。
English: A day later, spies reported that Wen Tianxiang Zheng was stationed in Chaoyang Port, and quickly sent the vanguard Zhang Hongzheng, the head of the bag plus the leader of the light cavalry five hundred people to chase, and chased them in the foothills of the Wuholing Mountains, defeated the Song Army, killed more than seven thousand enemies, captured Wen Tianxiang and four officers of his subordinates, and sent them to the Beijing Division.

古文：十二月己卯，签书西川行枢密院昝顺招诱都掌蛮夷及其属百一十人内附，以其长阿永为西南番蛮安抚使，得兰纽为都掌蛮安抚使，赐虎符，余授宣敕、金银符有差。
现代文：十二月初一，西川行枢密院佥院昝顺招诱都掌蛮夷及其部属一百一十人归降朝廷，任命其酋长阿永为西南番蛮安抚使，任命得兰纽为都掌蛮安抚使，赐给虎符，其余的人授予品阶不等的金符银符。
English: On the first day of December, the Privy Council of the Western Sichuan Province, the Imperial Court of the Western Sichuan Province, and the Western Sichuan Provincial People's Court of the Western Sichuan Province sent a delegation to the Western Sichuan Provincial People's Court of the Western Sichuan Provincial People's Court of the Western Sichuan Provincial People's Court of the Western Sichuan Provincial People's Court of the Western Sichuan Provincial People's Court of the Western Sichuan Provincial People's Court of the Western Sichuan Provincial People's Court of the Western Sichuan Provincial People's Court.

古文：庚辰，思州安抚使田景贤、播州安抚使杨邦宪请归宋旧借镇远、黄平二城，仍撤戍卒，不允。
现代文：初二，思州安抚使田景贤、播州安抚使杨邦宪请求归还亡宋原来借去的镇远、黄平二城，并撤退守军，皇上不允。
English: On the second day of the first month of the year, Tian Jingxian, the pacifying envoy of Shizhou, and Yang Bangxian, the pacifying envoy of Banzhou, requested the return of Zhenyuan and Huangping, two cities originally borrowed by the late Song Dynasty, and the withdrawal of the defenders. The emperor did not agree.

古文：景贤等请降诏禁戍卒毋扰思、播之民，从之。
现代文：田景贤等请求颁发诏令，禁止守军骚扰思州、播州的百姓，皇上允从。
English: Tian Jingxian and others requested the issuance of a decree prohibiting the defenders from harassing the people of Shizhou and Banzhou, and the emperor complied.

古文：鸭池等处招讨使钦察所领南征新军，不能自赡者千人，命屯田于京兆。
现代文：鸭池等处招讨使钦察所率领征伐南方的新军，有上千人不能供养自己，命他们在京兆屯田。
English: Ducks and ponds and other places invited the new army led by Qin Zha to conquer the south. There were thousands of people who could not support themselves, and they were ordered to settle in the capital.

古文：乙酉，伯颜以渡江收抚沙阳、新城、阳罗堡、闽、浙等郡获功军士及降臣姓名来上，诏授虎符者入觐，千户以下并从行省授官。
现代文：初七，伯颜把渡过长江攻取沙阳、新城、阳逻堡、闽州、两浙等郡立功的军士以及降臣的名单报上。诏命授予虎符的人入朝觐见，千户以下的均由行中书省授予官职。
English: On his seventh day of junior high school, Bo Yan published a list of military officers who had crossed the Yangtze River to conquer Shayang, Xincheng, Yangluo Fort, Zhangzhou, and the two Zhejiang counties, as well as the names of those who had surrendered. Those who were ordered by the emperor to award tiger charms were allowed to enter the imperial court, and those with less than a thousand households were awarded official positions by the Ministry of Education.

古文：丙戌，扬州行省上将校军功凡百三十四人，授官有差。
现代文：初八，扬州行中书省报上立有军功的军官共一百三十四人，授予他们不同的官职。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, a total of one hundred and thirty-four officers with military merit were awarded different official positions in Yangzhou.

古文：丙申，从播州安抚杨邦宪请，以鼎山仍隶播州。
现代文：十八日，按照播州安抚使杨邦宪的请求，把鼎山依旧隶属于播州。
English: On the 18th, in accordance with the request of Yang Bangxian, the pacifier of Banzhou, Dingshan was still subordinated to Banzhou.

古文：庚子，敕长春宫修金箓大醮七昼夜。
现代文：二十二日，敕令长春宫举行七天七夜的金大醮。
English: On the 22nd, the emperor ordered the Changchun Palace to hold a seven-day and seven-night grand banquet.

古文：丙午，禁玉泉山樵采渔弋。
现代文：二十八日，禁止在玉泉山砍柴、射鸟、打猎。
English: On the 28th, it was forbidden to cut firewood, shoot birds, and hunt in Yuquan Mountain.

古文：戊申，以叙州等处秃老蛮杀使臣撒里蛮，命发兵讨之。
现代文：三十日，因为叙州等地的秃老蛮杀害使臣撒里蛮，命令派兵前去讨伐。
English: On the 30th, because of the murder of the envoy Saribaru by Bald Old Barbarians in Shuzhou and other places, he ordered to send troops to fight.

古文：封伯夷为昭义清惠公，叔齐为崇让仁惠公。
现代文：封伯夷为 昭义清惠公 ，叔齐为 崇让仁惠公 。
English: He was given the title of Shouyi Qinghui Gong (昭義清惠公) and the title of Chongzhen Renhui Gong (崇让仁惠公).

古文：以十六年历日赐高丽。
现代文：把至元十六年的历书赐给高丽。
English: Goryeo was given the 16th year of the Yuan calendar.

古文：海州赣榆县雹伤稼，免今年田租。
现代文：海州赣榆县降下冰雹伤害庄稼，免征今年的田租。
English: Haizhou Ying County, where hailstorms damaged crops, was exempted from this year's field rent.

古文：南宁、吉阳、万安三郡内附。
现代文：南宁、吉阳、万安三郡归附朝廷。
English: Nanning, Jiyang and Wan'an counties were annexed to the imperial court.

古文：开成路置屯田总管府，广安县隶之。
现代文：开成路设置屯田总管府，广安县隶属于它。
English: The Tonden General Administration Office was set up on Kaisei Road, and Guang'an County was subordinated to it.

古文：临淄、临朐、清河复为县。
现代文：临淄、临朐、清河重新设立县治。
English: Linyi, Linyi, Qinghe re-established county government.

古文：导肥河入于酅，淤陂尽为良田。
现代文：把肥河导入阝河，淤塞的池沼全部成为良田。
English: The Fertile River was diverted into the Min River, and all the silted ponds and marshes became good fields.

古文：会诸王于大都，以平宋所俘宝玉器币分赐之。
现代文：在大都聚集诸侯王，把平定宋朝所获取的宝物、玉器、钱财分别赏赐给他们。
English: Princes and lords gathered in the capital, and the treasures, jade and money obtained from the suppression of the Song Dynasty were given to them.

古文：赐诸王等金、银、币、帛如岁例。
现代文：按每年的常例把黄金、白银、钱钞、绢帛赏赐给诸侯王。
English: According to the annual tradition, gold, silver, banknotes and medals were given to the princes.

古文：是岁，西京奉圣州及彰德等处水旱民饥，赈米八万八百九十石、粟三万六千四十石、钞二万四千八百八十锭有奇。
现代文：这一年西京路奉圣州和彰德等处发生水灾旱灾，百姓饥饿，赈济大米八万零八百九十石、小米三万六千零四十石、钱钞二万四千八百八十多锭。
English: In this year, floods and droughts occurred in Feng Shengzhou and Zhangde in Xijing Road and other places, and the people were hungry. The rice was 80,890 koku, the millet was 36,040 koku, and the banknotes were 24,880 baht.

古文：断死罪五十二人。
现代文：全年判处死刑的罪犯共五十二人。
English: A total of 52 criminals were sentenced to death throughout the year.

古文：十六年春正月己酉朔，高丽国王王愖遣其签议中赞金方庆来贺，兼奉岁币。
现代文：至元十六年春，正月初一，高丽国王王忄甚派他的佥议中赞金方庆前来恭贺新年，兼奉上年礼钞币。
English: In the spring of the 16th year of the Yuan Dynasty, on the first day of the first month of the year, the King of Goryeo, Wang Ye, sent his envoy, Jin Fangqing, to congratulate the New Year, and also received last year's gift banknotes.

古文：壬子，罢五翼探马赤重役军。
现代文：初四，遣散五营探马赤重役军。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, five battalions of the Red Guards were dismissed.

古文：癸丑，汪良臣言： 西川军官父死子继，勤劳四十年，乞显加爵秩。 
现代文：初五，汪良臣上奏说 ：西川的军官父亲死了儿子继承，勤苦辛劳四十年，请授予显赫的官爵俸禄。 
English: On the fifth day of the first month, Wang Liangchen made a report, saying, "Nishikawa's father, an officer, died, and his son succeeded him. He worked hard for forty years. Please grant him the salary of a distinguished officer."

古文：诏从其请。
现代文：下诏依从他的请求。
English: The Emperor's edict granted his request.

古文：诏以海南、琼崖、儋、万诸郡俱平，令阿里海牙入觐。
现代文：诏令：因为海南、琼崖、儋州、万州各郡均已平定，令阿里海牙入朝觐见。
English: Imperial edict: Because the counties of Hainan, Qiongyao, Zhangzhou and Wanzhou have all been pacified, Ali Hague is allowed to enter the imperial court.

古文：泸州降臣赵金、吴大才、袁禹绳等从征重庆，其家属为叛者所杀，诏赐钞有差，仍以叛者妻孥付金等。
现代文：泸州的降臣赵金、吴大才、袁禹绳等随从大军征伐重庆，他们的家属被叛逆者杀害，诏令赐给他们数量不等的钱钞，并把叛逆者的妻儿交给赵金等人。
English: Zhao Jin, Wu Dacai, Yuan Yuzhen and other subordinate vassals of Ganzhou followed the army to conquer Chongqing. Their families were killed by the rebels, and the edict gave them varying amounts of money, and handed over the wives and children of the rebels to Zhao Jin and others.

古文：敕高丽国置大灰艾州、东京、柳石、孛落四驿。
现代文：敕令高丽国设置大灰艾州、东京、柳石、孛落四处驿站。
English: Goryeo was ordered by the Emperor to set up stations in Daegu, Gyeongju, Tokyo, Ryukyu, and Jeju.

古文：甲寅，无籍军侵掠平民，而诸王只必帖木儿所部为暴尤甚，命捕为首者置之法。
现代文：初六，没有入籍的军人侵扰抢劫平民，而诸侯王只必帖木儿部下的暴行尤为严重，命令逮捕为首的绳之以法。
English: On the sixth day of the first month of the year, soldiers without naturalization harassed and robbed civilians, and the violence of the princes' subordinates was particularly serious, ordering the arrest of the leaders and bringing them to justice.

古文：敕移赣州行省还隆兴。
现代文：敕令把赣州行中书省迁回隆兴。
English: The imperial edict moved the capital of the Song dynasty, Song Province, back to Longxing.

古文：高丽国来献方物。
现代文：高丽国前来进献地方特产。
English: The Republic of Korea came to present local special products.

古文：辛酉，合州安抚使王立以城降。
现代文：十三日，合州安抚使王立献城投降。
English: On the 13th, the pacification of Hezhou forced Wang Licheng to surrender.

古文：先是，立遣间使降安西王相李德辉，东川行院与德辉争功，德辉单舸至城下，呼立出降，川蜀以平。
现代文：在此之前，王立派密使去投降安西王的丞相李德辉，东川行枢密院和李德辉争功，李德辉单独乘一只船来到合州城下，叫喊王立出城投降，川蜀便平定了。
English: Prior to this, Wang Liwei sent his envoy to Li Dehui, the chancellor of King Anxi, to surrender. The Privy Council went to the East River to compete with Li Dehui. Li Dehui alone took a boat to the foot of Hezhou Castle, shouted Wang Li out of the city to surrender, and the Sichuan Shu was leveled.

古文：东川行院遂言，立久抗王师，尝指斥宪宗，宜杀之。
现代文：东川行枢密院则说，王立长期抗拒王师，曾经指责斥骂宪宗皇帝，应该将他处死。
English: The Privy Council said that Wang Li had resisted Wang Shi for a long time and had accused him of cursing Emperor Xianzong, and that he should be put to death.

古文：枢密院以其事闻，而降臣李谅亦讼立前杀其妻子，有其财物，遂诏杀立，籍其家赀偿谅。
现代文：枢密院把这事奏闻皇上，而降臣李谅也控告王立先前曾经杀害他的妻儿子女占有他的财产。于是下诏将王立处死，没收他的家产用来赔偿李谅。
English: The Privy Council reported the matter to the emperor, and Li Peng, the surrendered vassal, also accused Wang Li of having previously killed his wife and son to take possession of his property. Therefore, Wang Li was sentenced to death and his family property was confiscated to compensate Li Peng.

古文：既而安西王具立降附本末来上，且言东川院臣愤李德辉受降之故，诬奏诛立。
现代文：接着安西王把王立归降的前因后果具文呈上，并且说由于东川行枢密院臣愤恨李德辉受降的缘故，诬告杀害王立。
English: Then, King Anxi wrote down the reasons and consequences of Wang Li's surrender, and said that because of Dongchuan Xing's resentment of Li Dehui's surrender, he falsely accused him of killing Wang Li.

古文：枢密院臣亦以前奏为非。
现代文：枢密院大臣也认为先前所奏是错误的。
English: The Privy Councillor also thought the previous play was wrong.

古文：帝怒曰： 卿视人命若戏耶！
现代文：皇上发怒说： 你们把人看得如同儿戏一般么？
English: The emperor was furious and said: "Do you treat people like child's play?

古文：前遣使计杀立久矣，今追悔何及。
现代文：先前派使臣去，估计杀王立已经好久了，如今追悔又怎么来得及？
English: They sent envoys ahead of time, estimating that it had been a long time since Wang Li was killed. How could they have time to repent now?

古文：卿等妄杀人，其归待罪。 
现代文：你们随便杀人，都回去等着问罪吧。 
English: All of you who killed someone, go back and wait for your trial.

古文：斥出之。
现代文：把大臣们斥出宫去。
English: Expel him with a reprimand.

古文：会安西王使再至，言未杀立。
现代文：正好安西王的信使再次来到，说还没有处死王立。
English: Just then the messenger of King Anxi came again, saying that Wang Li had not yet been executed.

古文：即召立入觐，命为潼川路安抚使，知合州事。
现代文：皇上立即征召王立入朝觐见，任命他为潼川路安抚使，掌管合川事务。
English: The emperor immediately summoned Wang Lijun to the imperial court and appointed him as the pacification envoy of the Xingchuan Road, in charge of the affairs of the Xingchuan River.

古文：壬戌，分川蜀为四道：以成都等路为四川西道，广元等路为四川北道，重庆等路为四川南道，顺庆等路为四川东道，并立宣慰司。
现代文：十四日，把川蜀分为四道：以成都等路为四川西道，广元等路为四川北道，重庆等路为四川南道，顺庆等路为四川东道，四道均建立宣慰司。
English: On the 14th, Sichuan Shu was divided into four provinces: Chengdu and other provinces were designated as Sichuan West Province, Guangyuan and other provinces were designated as Sichuan North Province, Chongqing and other provinces were designated as Sichuan South Province, and Shunqing and other provinces were designated as Sichuan Host Province.

古文：赏重庆等处从征蒙古、汉军钞三万九千九百五十一锭。
现代文：赏给重庆等地随从征伐的蒙古军、汉军钱钞三万九千九百五十一锭。
English: Thirty-nine thousand nine hundred and fifty-one monies were awarded to the Mongolian and Chinese troops who accompanied the conquest in Chongqing and other places.

古文：改播州鼎山县为播川县。
现代文：把播州的鼎山县改为播川县。
English: Change the name of Dingshan County in Banzhou to Benguechuan County.

古文：丁卯，赐参知政事昝顺田民百八十户于江津县。
现代文：十九日，赐给参知政事昝顺江津县的农户一百八十户。
English: On the 19th, one hundred and eighty farming households in Shunjiangjin County were given the title of "Senior Vice-Governor."

古文：戊辰，立河西屯田，给畊具，遣官领之。
现代文：二十日，在河西建立屯田，供给农具，派遣官员管辖。
English: On the 20th, it set up farmlands in Hexi, supplied agricultural tools, and dispatched officials to supervise.

古文：甲戌，张弘范将兵追宋二王至崖山寨，张世杰来拒战，败之，世杰遁去，广王昺偕其官属俱赴海死，获其金宝以献。
现代文：二十六日，张弘范率军追赶亡宋的二王，直至崖山寨，张世杰前来抵抗，被击败，张世杰逃走，广王赵籨和他属下的官员一起，都跳海而死，张弘范获取了他们的金银财宝献给皇上。
English: On the 26th, Zhang Hongfan led the army to chase the two kings of the late Song Dynasty, until the cliff village, Zhang Shijie came to resist, was defeated, Zhang Shijie fled, Guang Wang Zhao Wei and his subordinate officials all jumped into the sea and died, Zhang Hongfan obtained their gold and silver treasures to present to the emperor.

古文：丙子，诏谕又巴、散毛等四洞番蛮酋长使降。
现代文：二十八日，下诏给又巴、散毛等四个溪洞的番蛮酋长，令他们投降。
English: On the 28th, he issued an edict to the chiefs of the four caves, including Mataba and Sanmao, ordering them to surrender.

古文：以中书左丞别乞里迷失同知枢密院事。
现代文：任命中书右丞别乞里迷失为枢密院同知。
English: The appointment of Zhongshu Rongcheng as a privy councillor.

古文：禁中书省文册奏检用畏吾字书。
现代文：禁止中书省的公文、册命、奏章、法规用畏吾儿文字书写。
English: It is forbidden to write official documents, proclamations, reports, and laws and regulations of the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology in the abominable characters.

古文：赐异样等局官吏工匠银二千两。
现代文：赐给异样等局的官吏工匠银二千两。
English: He gave 2,000 taels of silver to the officials and artisans of the Bureau of Unusual and Other Affairs.

古文：赐皇子奥鲁赤及诸王拜答罕下军士与思州田师贤所部军衣服及钞有差。
现代文：赐给皇子奥鲁赤及诸侯王拜罕部下的士兵和思州田景贤的部下不同数量的衣服和钱钞。
English: He gave different amounts of clothes and banknotes to the soldiers under the prince Oluk and the vassal king Baikhan and the subordinates of Shizhou Tian Jingxian.

古文：二月戊寅朔，祭先农于籍田。
现代文：二月初一，在官府的籍田中祭祀农神。
English: On the first day of February, the worship of the farmer gods ceased at Shizen junior high school.

古文：壬午，升溧州为路。
现代文：初五，把溧州升格为路。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, Zhangzhou was upgraded to a highway.

古文：遣使访求通皇极数番阳祝泌子孙，其甥傅立持泌书来上，拨民万户隶明里淘金。
现代文：派遣使臣访求通晓皇权施政根本的番阳人祝泌的子孙，他的外甥傅立拿着祝泌的书来献上。拨平民一万户给明里淘金。
English: He dispatched envoys to visit the descendants of Zhu Xiu, the Panyang people who knew the fundamentals of imperial power and government, and his nephew Fu Li held the book of Zhu Xiu to present. Ten thousand households were allocated to Mingli for gold panning.

古文：以江南漕运旧米赈军民之饥者。
现代文：把江南漕运来的旧粮用以赈济饥饿的军民。
English: The old grain from the south of the Yangtze River was used to feed the starving soldiers and civilians.

古文：癸未，增置五卫指挥司。
现代文：初六，增设五卫指挥司。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the new year, the Five Guards Commanding Division was established.

古文：诏遣塔黑麻合儿、撒儿答带括中兴户。
现代文：下诏派遣塔黑麻合儿、撒儿答带统计中兴路的民户。
English: The following edict dispatched the Tower of Black Hemp and Children and Children's Response Belt to count the households on Zhongxing Road.

古文：太史令王恂等言： 建司天台于大都，仪象圭表皆铜为之，宜增铜表高至四十尺，则景长而真。
现代文：太史令王恂等上奏说： 在大都建立司天台，仪象圭表都用铜制成，应当增建一个高四十尺的铜制华表，这样影像才长而逼真。
English: The Grand Historian Wang Xi and others made a report, saying, "In most cities, a main roof should be built, and the instruments should be made of copper. An additional forty-foot-tall copper chronometer should be built, so that the image would be long and realistic.

古文：又请上都、洛阳等五处分置仪表，各选监候官。 
现代文：又请上都、洛阳等五处分别安置仪表，并各选监候官掌管。 
English: In addition, Shangdu, Luoyang and other five places were asked to place instruments separately, and each elected supervisors were in charge.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇上允从。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：甲申，平章阿里伯乞行中书省检核行御史台文案，且请行台呈行省，比御史呈中书省例，从之。
现代文：初七，平章政事阿里伯请求行中书省检查核实行御史台的文案，并请行御史台呈报行中书省，按照御史台呈报中书省的成例。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, Pingzhang Zhengji Ali Bo requested the Ministry of Education and Culture to check and verify the text of the implementation of the History Channel, and requested the Ministry of Education and Culture to submit the report to the Ministry of Education and Culture, in accordance with the precedent of the Ministry of Education and Culture submitting the report to the Ministry of Education and Culture.

古文：以征日本，敕扬州、湖南、赣州、泉州四省造战船六百艘。
现代文：皇上允从。因为征伐日本国，敕令扬州、湖南、赣州、泉州四个行省建造战船六百艘。
English: The emperor complied. Because of the conquest of Japan, the emperor ordered the four provinces of Yangzhou, Hunan, Ganzhou and Quanzhou to build 600 warships.

古文：移绍兴宣慰司于处州。
现代文：把绍兴宣慰司迁移到处州。
English: Relocate the Shaoxing Publicity and Consolation Department to Zhouzhou.

古文：己丑，调潭州行省军五千戍沿海州郡。
现代文：十二日，从潭州行中书省调遣五千名士卒去戍守沿海州郡。
English: On the 12th, five thousand soldiers were dispatched from Tanzhou and Shuzhou to defend the coastal counties.

古文：庚寅，张弘范以降臣陈懿兄弟破贼有功，且出战船百艘从征宋二王，请授懿招讨使兼潮州路军民总管，及其弟忠、义、勇三人为管军总管，千夫长塔剌海获文天祥有功，请授总管军千户，佩符，并从之。
现代文：十三日，由于亡宋的降臣陈懿兄弟击败贼军有功，又派出战船一百艘随军征伐亡宋的二王，张弘范请求授予陈懿招讨使之职并兼任潮州路军民总管，封陈懿之弟陈忠、陈义、陈勇三人为管军总管；十夫长塔剌海俘获文天祥有功，请求授予管军千户之职，佩戴金符。
English: On the 13th, due to the deceased Song Dynasty's vassal Chen Rong's brothers' success in defeating the bandits, and the dispatch of a hundred warships to accompany the army to conquer the deceased Song Dynasty's two kings, Zhang Hongfan requested that Chen Rong be granted the post of commander-in-chief of the army and people of Chaozhou Road, and Chen Rong's brothers, Chen Zhong, Chen Yi, and Chen Yong, were appointed as commander-in-chief of the army; the commander-in-chief of the army, Tang Hai, was awarded the post of commander-in-chief of the thousand households and wore a gold badge.

古文：壬辰，诏谕宗师张留孙悉主淮东、淮西、荆襄等处道教。
现代文：皇上均予允从。十五日，下诏，令道教宗师张留孙全面主管淮东、淮西、荆襄等处的道教。
English: On the 15th, the emperor issued an edict, ordering the Taoist master Zhang Liusun to be in overall charge of Taoism in Huaidong, Huaixi, Jingxiang and other places.

古文：乙未，玉速帖木儿言： 行台文卷令行省检核，于事不便。 
现代文：十八日，玉速帖木儿进言 ：行御史台文卷令行中书省检查，行事有所不便。 
English: On the 18th, Tamaseki Timur said, "It is inconvenient to have to carry out the inspection of historical documents ordered by the Ministry of Education.

古文：诏改之，其运司文卷听御史台检核。
现代文：诏令予以更改。漕运司的文卷听由御史台检查。
English: The imperial edict was amended, and the documents of the Rowing Division were no longer subject to inspection by the Imperial History Channel.

古文：饶州路达鲁花赤玉古伦擅用羡余粮四千四百石，杖之，仍没其家。
现代文：饶州路镇守官玉古伦擅自挪用羡余粮四千四百石，对他处以杖刑，并没收他的家产。
English: Raozhou Road Town Guard Officer Yu Gulun illegally appropriated 4,400 kilos of surplus grain, sentenced him to caning, and confiscated his family property.

古文：诏湖南行省于戍军还途，每四五十里立安乐堂，疾者医之，饥者廪之，死者藁葬之，官给其需。
现代文：诏令湖南行中书省，在戍边军队返回的途中，每四五十里设立一个安乐堂，有病的为他们治病，饥饿的供给他们粮食，死亡的安葬他们，由官府供应需要的物品。
English: The emperor ordered to go to Hunan and Zhongshu Province, and on the way back from the Lijiang troops, to set up a relief hall every forty or fifty miles, to cure the sick, to provide food for the hungry, to bury the dead, and to supply the necessary goods by the government.

古文：遣官核实益都、淄莱、济南逃亡荒地之为行营牧地者。
现代文：派遣官员核实益都、淄莱、济南逃亡百姓被军营占为牧场的土地。
English: Officials have been dispatched to verify whether the land occupied by the military encampment as pastureland belongs to the people who fled the capital, Bailai, and Jinan.

古文：禁诸奥鲁及汉人持弓矢，其出征之所持兵仗，即输之官库。
现代文：禁止各辎重营士兵及汉人挟持弓箭，他们出征时所携带的武器甲仗，返回后立即上交给官府的仓库。
English: The soldiers of each heavy battalion and the Han Chinese were prohibited from carrying bows and arrows. The weapons they carried when they went to war were immediately handed over to the government warehouse upon their return.

古文：壬寅，赐太史院银一千七十八两。
现代文：二十五日，赐给太史院一千零七十八两银子。
English: On the 25th, the Taishi-in was given 1,0782 silver coins.

古文：癸卯，发嘉定新附军千人屯田脱里北之地。
现代文：二十六日，调发嘉定新归附的士兵一千人到脱里北地方屯田。
English: On the 26th, a thousand soldiers from newly annexed Jiading were transferred to Tonden, north of Tuli.

古文：甲辰，升大都兵马都指挥使司秩四品。
现代文：二十七日，把大都兵马都指挥使司的俸禄提升为四品。
English: On the 27th, the salary of the envoy who commanded most of the troops and horses was raised to four products.

古文：诏大都、河间、山东管盐运司并兼管酒、醋、商税等课程。
现代文：诏令大都、河间、山东管盐运司均兼管酒、醋、商务等方面的赋税。
English: The edict ordered the Salt Transportation Departments of Dadu, Hebei and Shandong to supervise the taxation of liquor, vinegar and commerce.

古文：中书省臣请以真定路达鲁花赤蒙古带为保定路达鲁花赤，帝曰： 此正人也，朕将别以大事付之。 
现代文：中书省大臣请求任命真定路镇守官蒙古带为保定路镇守官，皇帝说： 这是个正才呀，我将把别的大事交给他。 
English: The Minister of the Chinese Ministry of Literature and Calligraphy requested the appointment of the Jinding Road Town Warden of the Mongol Belt as the Baoding Road Town Warden. The emperor said: This is a real talent, I will give him other important matters.

古文：赏汪良臣所部蒙古、汉军收附四川功钞五万锭。
现代文：因汪良臣部下蒙古军、汉军收降四川的功劳，奖赏他们钱钞五万锭。
English: Wang Liangchen's subordinates, the Mongolian army and the Chinese army, were rewarded with 50,000 baht in banknotes for their services in bringing about the surrender of Sichuan.

古文：命嘉定以西新郑州郡及田、杨二家诸贵官子，俱充质子入侍。
现代文：命令嘉定以西新归附的州郡以及田、杨两家各达官贵人的子弟，都充作人质入朝侍奉。
English: He ordered the newly annexed prefectures west of Jiading, as well as the sons of high-ranking officials from the Tian and Yang families, to serve the imperial court as hostages.

古文：车驾幸上都。
现代文：皇上的车驾临幸上都。
English: The emperor's car drove to Shangdu.

古文：乙巳，命同知太史院事郭守敬访求精天文历数者。
现代文：二十八日，命太史院同知郭守敬访求精通天文历法阴阳的人。
English: On the 28th, Guo Shou, a fellow scholar of the History Academy, came to pay a courtesy visit to a person who was seeking proficiency in the astronomical calendar.

古文：西蜀四川道立提刑按察司。
现代文：西蜀四川道建立提刑按察司。
English: West Shuxi Sichuan Province set up a criminal investigation department.

古文：丙午，遣使代祀岳渎后土。
现代文：二十九日，派遣使臣代表皇帝祭祀五岳、四渎和后土神。
English: On the 29th, envoys were dispatched on behalf of the emperor to offer sacrifices to the five mountains, the four mountains, and the deities of the hinterland.

古文：诏河南、西京、北京等路课程，令各道宣慰司领之。
现代文：诏令：河南、西京、北京等路的赋税，令各道的宣慰司掌管。
English: Imperial edict: The taxation of Henan, Xijing, Beijing and other provinces was placed under the control of the Propaganda and Consolation Departments of each province.

古文：赏西川新附军钞三千八百五十锭。
现代文：赏赐西川新归附的军队钱钞三千八百五十锭。
English: Saikawa was awarded 3,850 monies in newly appropriated army money.

古文：以斡端境内蒙古军耗乏，并汉军、新附军等，赐马牛羊及马驴价钞、衣服、弓矢、鞍勒各有差。
现代文：因为斡端境内的蒙古军财用困窘，赐给蒙古军连同汉军、新附军等马、牛、羊，以及马驴价钱钞、衣服、弓箭、马鞍、鞍勒等，数额各不相同。
English: Because of the financial difficulties of the Mongolian army in the territory of the Mongol Empire, the Mongolian army, together with the Chinese army and the newly annexed army, was given horses, cattle, sheep, as well as horse and donkey bills, clothes, bows and arrows, saddles, saddles, etc. The amount varies.

古文：三月戊申朔，诏禁归德、亳、寿、临淮等处畋猎。
现代文：三月初一，诏令禁止归德、亳州、寿州、临淮等处狩猎。
English: On the first day of March, the edict prohibited hunting in Guide, Zhangzhou, Shoushou, Linhuai and other places.

古文：庚戌，敕郭守敬繇上都、大都，历河南府抵南海，测验晷景。
现代文：初三，敕令郭守敬从上都、大都出发，经由河南府抵达南海，以测量日影。
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, he ordered Guo Shoujing to set out from Shangdu and Datu and arrive at Nanhai via Henan to measure the sun's shadow.

古文：壬子，囊加带括两淮造回回炮新附军匠六百，及蒙古、回回、汉人、新附人能造炮者，俱至京师。
现代文：初五，囊加带聚集两淮地区制造回回火炮的新归附军工匠六百人，以及蒙古人、回回人、汉人，新归附的人中能够造炮的，令他们全部前往京师。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, six hundred newly-annexed military artisans from the two Huai regions gathered to make Huai artillery, as well as Mongolians, Huai people, Han people, and newly-annexed people who could make artillery, so that they all went to Beijing Division.

古文：庚申，给千户马乃部下拔突军及土浑川军屯田牛具。
现代文：十三日，赐给千户马乃部下勇士营以及土浑川营屯田的士兵耕牛农具。
English: On the 13th, the warrior battalion of Chiharu Mano's subordinates and the soldiers of the Tutuncheon battalion were given farming tools for cattle farming.

古文：丙寅，敕中书省，凡掾史文移稽缓一日二日者杖，三日者死。
现代文：十九日，敕命中书省，凡是掾史，耽延了公文一天两天的处以杖刑，耽延了三天的处死。
English: On the 19th day of the month, the death sentence of the Ministry of Education was delayed by one day and two days, and the death sentence was delayed by three days.

古文：甲戌，潭州行省遣两淮招讨司经历刘继昌招下西南诸番，以龙方零等为小龙蕃等处安抚使，仍以兵三千戍之。
现代文：二十七日，潭州行中书省派遣两淮招讨司经历刘继昌招降西南各番夷少数民族，任命龙方零等为小龙蕃等处的安抚使，并派兵三千名戍守。
English: On the 27th, the Ministry of Education and Culture sent two high-ranking recruiting officers to Tanzhou to recruit ethnic minorities in the southwestern part of the country, appointed Long Fang and others as pacification envoys to Xiaolongyao and other places, and sent 3,000 soldiers to defend it.

古文：中书省下太常寺讲究州郡社稷制度，礼官折衷前代，参酌《仪礼》，定拟祭祀仪式及坛壝祭器制度，图写成书，名曰《至元州县社稷通礼》，上之。
现代文：中书省下令太常寺研究州郡祭祀社稷的制度，由礼官取法于前代，参考、斟酌《仪礼》，拟定祭祀的仪式以及祭坛祭器的体制规格，画成图样，编写成书，称为《至元州县社稷通礼》呈献给皇上。
English: The Chinese Ministry of Culture and Literature ordered Taizho-ji Temple to study the system of Shuzhou County's sacrificial rites, and the etiquette officer took the method in the previous generation, referenced and considered the "Rite," worked out the sacrificial rites and the system specifications of the altar altar, drew a pattern, compiled a book, called "To the Shuzhou County's Sacrificial Rites" and presented it to the emperor.

古文：以保定路旱，减是岁租三千一百二十石。
现代文：因为保定路发生旱灾，减免这年的田租三千一百二十石。
English: Because of the drought in Baoding Road, the land rent for this year was reduced and exempted by 3,120 koku.

古文：夏四月己卯，立江西榷茶运司及诸路转运盐使司、宣课提举司。
现代文：夏季，四月初三，建立江西榷茶转运司，以及各路转运盐使司、宣课提举司。
English: In the summer, on the third day of April, the Department of Transportation of Jiangxi Ginger Tea was established, as well as the Department of Transportation of Salt and the Department of Class Announcement.

古文：癸巳，以给事中兼起居注，掌随朝诸司奏闻事。
现代文：十七日，令给事中兼管起居注事务，掌管随朝各司向皇帝奏闻的事务。
English: On the seventeenth day, the order was given to the emperor to concurrently manage the settlement note affairs and manage the affairs reported to the emperor by the departments of the imperial court.

古文：戊戌，以池州路达鲁花赤阿塔赤战功升招讨使，兼本军万户。
现代文：二十二日，池州路镇守官阿塔赤因为立下战功而升任招讨使，兼任本军的万户。
English: On the 22nd, Ataka, the keeper of Chizhou Road Town, was promoted to the post of recruiting officer because of his war service, and also served as the leader of the army.

古文：癸卯，填星犯键闭。
现代文：二十七日，土星干犯键闭星。
English: On the 27th, Saturn will be retrograde.

古文：乙巳，汪良臣言： 昔昝顺兵犯成都，掠其民以归。
现代文：二十九日，汪良臣上奏说： 从前昝顺的军队进犯成都，掠取成都的人口回去。
English: On the 29th, Wang Liangchen made a report, saying: Formerly, the army of Lushun invaded Chengdu and plundered the population of Chengdu.

古文：今嘉定既降，宜还其民成都。 
现代文：现在嘉定既然已经投降了，应当让这些百姓返回成都。 
English: Now that Jiading has surrendered, these people should be allowed to return to Chengdu.

古文：制曰 可。 
现代文：皇上批示说： 可以。 
English: The Emperor gave the order and said, "Yes."

古文：敕以上都军四千卫都城，凡他所来戍者皆遣归。
现代文：敕命：派上都的四千名士兵守卫都城，凡是其他地方前来戍守的都遣送他们回去。
English: Deadly: Four thousand soldiers have been sent to defend the capital, and anyone who comes from elsewhere to defend it will be sent back.

古文：从唆都请，令泉州僧依宋例输税，以给军饷。
现代文：按照唆都的请求，令泉州的僧侣按照亡宋的先例交纳赋税，以供给军饷。
English: According to the request of the abbot of the capital, the monks of Quanzhou were ordered to pay taxes in accordance with the precedent of the late Song Dynasty to provide military pay.

古文：诏谕扬州行中书省，选南军精锐者二万人充侍卫军，并发其家赴京师，仍给行费钞万六千锭。
现代文：下诏：令扬州行中书省挑选精锐的南军士兵二万人充当侍卫军，令他们的家属一起出发前往京师，并发给路费一万六千锭钱钞。
English: The following edict was issued: Twenty thousand elite soldiers of the Southern Army were to be selected from Yangzhou and Shuzhou to serve as bodyguards, and their families were to leave for Beijing together, and 16,000 baht in travel expenses were to be paid.

古文：大都等十六路蝗。
现代文：大都等十六路发生蝗灾。
English: Locust plagues occurred in 16 provinces, including the capital.

古文：五月己酉，中书省请复授宣慰司官虎符，不允。
现代文：五月初三，中书省请求重新授予宣慰司官员虎符，皇上未予允准。
English: On the third day of the fifth lunar month, the People's Republic of China's Ministry of Literature and Calligraphy requested to re-award a tiger emblem to the official of the Ministry of Consolation, but the emperor did not grant permission.

古文：又请各路设提举、同提举、副提举各一员，专领课程，从之。
现代文：又请求在路设置提举、同提举、副提举各一人，专管赋税方面的事务，皇上允从。
English: He also requested that one person be appointed to be in charge of taxation, and the emperor agreed.

古文：辛亥，蒲寿庚请下诏招海外诸蕃，不允。
现代文：初五，蒲寿庚请求颁发诏书招降海外各藩国，皇上不允。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, the Emperor did not approve of Pu Shougen's request to issue an imperial edict inviting the overseas domains to surrender.

古文：诏谕漳、泉、汀、邵武等处暨八十四畬官吏军民，若能举众来降，官吏例加迁赏，军民按堵如故。
现代文：下诏给漳州、泉州、汀州、邵武等地以及八十四个畲族部落的官吏和军民，如果能够率众前来归降，官吏照例给予升迁奖赏，军民像原来一样安居乐业。
English: The following edict is issued to the government officials and soldiers and civilians of Quzhou, Quanzhou, Tingzhou, Shaowu and other places, as well as the eighty-four Yi tribes, if they can lead the people to surrender, the government officials will give promotion rewards as usual, and the soldiers and civilians will live and work in peace as before.

古文：以泉州经张世杰兵，减今年租赋之半。
现代文：因为泉州遭受了张世杰的兵乱，减免今年田租的一半。
English: Because Quanzhou suffered from Zhang Shijie's military rebellion, half of this year's field rent will be reduced.

古文：丙辰，以五台僧多匿逃奴及逋赋之民，敕西京宣慰司、按察司搜索之。
现代文：初十，因为五台山的僧人藏匿了许多逃奴和拖欠赋税的百姓，敕令西京宣慰司、按察司对他们进行搜查。
English: On the tenth day of the first month of the year, because the monks of Mount Wutai had hidden many people who had escaped slavery and were in arrears with their taxes, he ordered the Xijing Xuanjiao Division and the Anchors Division to search for them.

古文：命畏吾界内计亩输税。
现代文：命令畏吾儿族境内统计田亩，按数交纳租税。
English: Ordered to count the number of mu of land in the territory of the Daigo children and pay tax according to the number.

古文：以各道按察司地广事繁，并劝农官入按察司，增副使、佥事各壹员，兼职劝农水利事。
现代文：因为各道按察司所管辖的地域广大，事务繁杂，将劝农官并入按察司，增设副使、佥事各一人，兼掌劝农和水利方面的事务。
English: Because the area under the jurisdiction of the provincial inspector general is vast and the affairs are complicated, the agricultural inspector will be merged into the inspector general, and one deputy and one ancillary official will be added, who will also be in charge of advising on agricultural and water conservancy affairs.

古文：甲子，御史台臣言： 先是省臣阿里伯言，有罪者与台臣相威同问，有旨从之。
现代文：十八日，御史台大臣进言： 原先中书省大臣阿里伯曾经上奏，有罪的人由中书省臣和御史台大臣相威共同勘问，有圣旨表示同意。
English: On the 18th, the Minister of the History Department made the following statement: Formerly, the Minister of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the History Department of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry

古文：臣等谓行省断罪以意出入，行台何由举正。
现代文：臣等认为行中书省判罪凭主观看法决定量刑的轻重，行御史台又凭什么理由进行核正呢？
English: The ministers and others believe that the sentencing authority decides the severity of the sentence based on the subjective opinion, and what is the reason for the verification by the executive history station?

古文：宜从行省问讫，然后体察为宜。 制曰： 可。 
现代文：应当根据行中书省勘问的结果，然后再进行审查比较合适。 皇上批示： 可以。 
English: It should be based on the results of the book survey during the trip, and then it is more appropriate to conduct a review.Emperor's instruction: Yes.

古文：高兴侵用宋二王金三万一千一百两有奇、银二十五万六百两，诏遣使追理。
现代文：高兴侵吞挪用亡宋二王的黄金三万一千一百多两，白银二十五万零六百两，皇上下诏派使臣追查处理。
English: Gao Xingxing embezzled and misappropriated more than 31,100 taels of gold and 250,600 taels of silver from the late King Song II. The emperor sent envoys to investigate and deal with the matter.

古文：诏涟、海等州募民屯田，置总管府及提举司领之。
现代文：诏令涟州、海州等地募集百姓屯田，设置总管府和提举府管辖他们。
English: The edict ordered that people in Bozhou, Haizhou and other places should be recruited to set up their own farms, and set up a head office and a sub-office to supervise them.

古文：乙丑，敕江陵等路拔突户一万，凡千户置达鲁花赤一员，直隶省部。
现代文：十九日，敕令江陵路等路的一万户拔突户，每一千户设置一名监印官，直接隶属于行省统率。
English: On the 19th, one censor was set up for every thousand households of the ten thousand households in the streets such as Jiangling Road, which was directly subordinated to the provincial leadership.

古文：丙寅，敕江南僧司文移，毋辄入递。
现代文：二十日，敕令江南的僧司移送公文时，不得立即入递。
English: On the 20th, he ordered the monks in the south of the Yangtze River not to hand in the official documents immediately.

古文：临洮、巩昌、通安等十驿，非有海青符，不听乘传。
现代文：临洮、巩昌、通安等十处驿站，没有佩戴海东青符牌的人，不得听任其乘坐驿传。
English: In ten stations including Linfen, Gongchang and Tong'an, people who do not wear the East China Sea Youth badge may not be allowed to take the train.

古文：丁卯，改云南宝山、莨渠二县为州。
现代文：二十一日，把云南的宝山、緉渠二县改为州。
English: On the 21st, the Baoshan and Fenqiu counties of Yunnan were upgraded to prefectures.

古文：己巳，诏沿路驿店民家，凡往来使臣不当乘传者，毋给人畜饮食刍料。
现代文：二十三日，诏令沿路的驿户民家，所有往来的使臣，凡是不应当乘坐驿传交通工具的，均不必供给人畜的饮食和草料。
English: On the 23rd, it was decreed that all the households along the road and all the envoys who should not travel by Xuanchuan vehicles would not have to provide food and fodder for people and animals.

古文：完都、河南七驿民贫乏，给其马牛羊价钞千八百锭。
现代文：完都、河南七处驿户生活贫困，赐给他们马、牛、羊价钱钞一千八百锭。
English: Tenants in the capital and seven other places in Henan live in poverty. They were given horses, cattle and sheep worth 1,800 baht.

古文：庚午，赐乃蛮带战功及攻围重庆将士及宣慰使刘继昌等钞、衣服各有差。
现代文：二十四日，因为乃蛮带立下战功及将士们进攻、围困重庆，赐给他们和宣慰使刘继昌等数量不等的钱钞和衣服。
English: On the 24th, because of the military exploits and the soldiers who attacked and besieged Chongqing, he gave them and comforted Liu Jichang with varying amounts of money and clothes.

古文：壬申，以吕虎来归，授顺庆府总管，佩虎符，仍赐钞五十锭。
现代文：二十六日，因为吕虎前来归降，授予他顺庆府总管之职，佩戴虎符，并赐予钱钞五十锭。
English: On the 26th, because Lü Hu came to surrender, he was awarded the post of Shunqing prefectural governor, wore a tiger emblem, and was given 50 yuan in banknotes.

古文：徙丁子峪所驻侍卫军万人，屯田昌平。
现代文：把丁子峪所驻守的一万名侍卫军迁移到昌平去屯田。
English: The ten thousand bodyguards stationed at Ding Zi's residence were moved to Changping and then to Tonden.

古文：癸酉，兀里养合带言： 赋北京、西京车牛俱至，可运军粮。 
现代文：二十七日，兀里养合带上奏说： 征调北京、西京的车和牛都到了，可以用来运输军粮。 
English: On the 27th day of the month, the commander of the Yili Rearing and Combining Band made a report, saying, "The wagons and cattle requisitioned from Beijing and Xijing have all arrived and can be used to transport grain for the army.

古文：帝曰： 民之艰苦汝等不问，但知役民。
现代文：皇帝说 ：老百姓的艰苦你们不过问，只知道役使百姓。
English: The emperor said: You don't care about the hardships of the people, you only know how to serve the people.

古文：使今年尽取之，来岁禾稼何由得种。其止之。 
现代文：如果今年把他们拿尽了，明年的庄稼他们用什么种，应该立即停止征调。 
English: If they are exhausted this year, what kind of seeds will they use for next year's crops? The requisition should be stopped immediately.

古文：甲戌，给要束合所领工匠牛二千，就令运米二千石供军。
现代文：二十八日，给要束合所率领的工匠二千头牛，令他们立即运送粮米二千石供给军用。
English: On the 28th, he gave 2,000 head of cattle to the artisans who were to be led by Sokage, and ordered them to immediately transport 2,000 koku of grain and rice to supply the military.

古文：诏谕脱儿赤等管甘州路宣课，诸人毋或沮扰。
现代文：下诏令脱儿赤等掌管甘州路课税，诸人不得有所阻挠。
English: He issued a decree to remove the Red Guards and others in charge of levying taxes on Ganzhou Road, and all people must not obstruct it.

古文：潭州行省上言： 琼州宣慰马旺已招降海外四州，寻有土寇黄威远等四人为乱，今已擒获。 
现代文：潭州行中书省上奏说 ：琼州宣慰使马旺已经招降了海外的四州，不久就有土寇黄远威等四人作乱，现在已经抓获。 
English: According to the report of the Ministry of Education and Culture on the visit to Tanzhou, Ma Wang had already invited four overseas provinces to offer consolation to Qiongzhou, and soon there were four people, including the Turk Huang Yuanwei, who caused a disturbance and have now been arrested.

古文：诏置之极刑。
现代文：皇上下诏将他们处以极刑。
English: The Emperor decreed that they should all be executed.

古文：丙子，进封桑乾河洪济公为显应洪济公。
现代文：三十日，进封桑干河洪济公为 显应洪济公 。
English: On the 30th, Hong Jigong of Sanggan River was enthroned as "Han Ying Hong Jigong."

古文：命宗师张留孙即行宫作醮事，奏赤章于天，凡五昼夜。
现代文：命令道教宗师张留孙就在皇帝的行宫内做醮事，向天空烧化红色的符，共五天五夜。
English: He ordered the Taoist master Zhang Liusun to do something in the emperor's palace and burn red symbols into the sky for five days and five nights.

古文：赐皇子奥鲁赤、拨里答等及千户伯牙兀带所部军及和州站户羊马钞各有差。
现代文：赐给皇子奥鲁赤、拨里答等，以及千户伯牙兀带所率的士兵和和州驿户羊马价钱钞，数额各不相同。
English: There are different amounts of money given to the prince, such as the Oruka, Zarira, and so on, as well as the soldiers of the thousand households of the Boka ribbon ribbon and the sheep and horse price money of the state Seto.

古文：六月丁丑朔，阿合马言： 常州路达鲁花赤马恕告签浙西按察司事高源不法四十事，源亦劾恕。 
现代文：六月初一，阿合马上奏说： 常州路镇守官马恕控告浙西按察司佥事高源的不法行为四十条，高源也弹劾马恕。 
English: On the first day of June, Ah Ag immediately made a report: Changzhou Road Town Warden Ma Shou accused Gao Yuan of forty illegal acts, and Gao Yuan also impeached Ma Shou.

古文：事闻，诏令廷辩。
现代文：皇上听说这事之后，下诏令他们当廷辩论。
English: When the Emperor heard about this, he ordered them to debate it in court.

古文：诏发新附军五百人、蒙古军百人、汉军四百人戍碉门、鱼通、黎、雅。
现代文：诏令：派遣新附军五百人，蒙古军一百人，汉军四百人戍守碉门、鱼通、黎州、雅州。
English: Imperial edict: dispatch 500 members of the New Annexed Army, 100 members of the Mongolian Army, and 400 members of the Chinese Army to defend Shimen, Yutong, Lishu, and Yashu.

古文：诏谕王相府及四川行中书省，四道宣慰司抚治播川、务川西南诸蛮夷，官吏军民各从其俗，无失常业。
现代文：下诏令给亲王的相府及四川行中书省，由川蜀四道宣慰司镇抚、治理播川、务川西南的各少数民族，官吏军民分别遵从当地习俗，不要使他们丧失了惯常的生业。
English: He issued an imperial edict to the prince's prefectural capital and the Sichuan Province of the People's Republic of China as well as the Sichuan Province of the People's Republic of China and the Sichuan Province of the People's Republic of China, and the Sichuan Province of the People's Republic of China as well as the Sichuan Province of the People's Republic of China as well as the Sichuan Province of the People's Republic of China as well as the Sichuan Province of the People's Republic of China and the Sichuan Province of the People's Republic of China.

古文：壬午，以浙东宣慰使陈祐没王事，命其子夔为管军总管，佩虎符。
现代文：初六，因为浙东宣慰使陈死于王事，命他的儿子陈夔担任管军总管，佩戴虎符。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, because the Zhedong Xuancheng made Chen die in a royal matter, he ordered his son Chen Qi to serve as the commander-in-chief of the army and wear the tiger emblem.

古文：甲申，宋张世杰所部将校百五十八人，诣琼、雷等州来降。
现代文：初八，亡宋将领张世杰所部的军官一百五十八人，前来琼州、雷州等地投降。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, 158 officers from the headquarters of the late Song general Zhang Shijie came to surrender in Qiongzhou, Leizhou and other places.

古文：敕造战船征日本，以高丽材用所出，即其地制之，令高丽王议其便以闻。
现代文：敕令建造战船征伐日本，因为高丽是造船所用木材的出产地，就在当地建造。令高丽国王商讨事情的有利方面奏闻朝廷。
English: He ordered the construction of warships to invade Japan, and since Korea was the source of the timber used in the shipyards, they were built there. He asked the king of Korea to discuss the favorable aspects of the matter and report to the court.

古文：乙酉，榆林、洪赞、刁窝，每驿益马百五十、车二百，牛如车数给之。
现代文：初九，榆林、洪赞、刁窝，每处驿站增加一百五十匹驿马、二百辆驿车，牛按照车辆数目拨给。
English: In early September, each station in Yulin, Hongzan and Xiangwu will receive an additional 150 horses and 200 carts. Cattle will be allocated according to the number of vehicles.

古文：丙戌，左右卫屯田蝗蝻生。
现代文：初十，左右卫的屯田出现蝗虫。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, locusts appeared in the left and right garrisons.

古文：庚寅，升济宁府为路。
现代文：十四日，把济宁府升格为路。
English: On the 14th, Jining Prefecture was upgraded to a highway.

古文：壬辰，以参知政事、行河南等路宣慰使忽辛为中书左丞，行中书省事。
现代文：十六日，任命参知政事、署理河南等路宣慰使忽辛为中书左丞，掌管中书省事务。
English: On the 16th, Xu Xin was appointed as the Vice-Chairman of the CPC Central Committee, and was in charge of the affairs of the CPC Central Committee.

古文：癸巳，以新附军二万分隶六卫屯田。
现代文：十七日，把二万名新附军分别归属于六处卫所屯田。
English: On the 17th, the 20,000 newly attached troops were assigned to six garrisons.

古文：彻里帖木儿言其部军多为盗劫掠赀财，有司不即理断，乞遣官诘治，诏兀鲁带往治之。
现代文：彻里帖木儿上奏说他部下的士兵有许多成为盗贼抢劫钱财，官府不依法制判决，请求派遣官员来追究处理。下诏命兀鲁带前往处置。
English: Cheri Timur reported that many soldiers under his command had become thieves and robbed money and property. The government did not issue judgments in accordance with the law, and he requested that officials be sent to investigate and deal with the matter. The next edict ordered Jang Lu to go and deal with the matter.

古文：以不花行西川枢密院事，总兵入川，平宋诸城之未下者。
现代文：任命不花掌管西川行枢密院事务，统兵入川，平定还没有攻占的亡宋各城邑。
English: He was appointed to take charge of the affairs of the Privy Council in Xichuan, lead the army into Xichuan, and pacify the cities and towns of the late Song Dynasty that had not yet been conquered.

古文：仍令东川行枢密院调兵守钓鱼山寨。
现代文：仍旧命令东川行枢密院调兵前去戍守钓鱼山寨。
English: He still ordered the Privy Council to dispatch troops to Dongchuan to guard the fishing village.

古文：西川既平，复立屯田，其军官第功升擢，凡授宣敕、金银符者百六十一人。
现代文：西川平定之后，恢复设立屯田，军官们按照功劳的大小升迁提拔，授予委任状和金银符牌的共一百六十人。
English: After the pacification of the West River, the establishment of military camps was resumed, and the officers were promoted according to their merits, and a total of one hundred and sixty people were awarded letters of appointment and gold and silver medals.

古文：诏以高州、筠连州腾川县新附户于溆州等处治道立驿。
现代文：诏令派高州和筠连州的腾川县新归附的民户在溆州等地整治道路，建立驿站。
English: The imperial edict ordered the newly-annexed households in Gaozhou and Tengchuan County of Qilian Province to repair roads and build post stations in Ganzhou and other places.

古文：云南都元帅爱鲁、纳速剌丁招降西南诸国。
现代文：云南都元帅爱鲁、纳速剌丁招降西部各藩国。
English: Yunnan's marshals Ailu and Naso Ding were recruited from the western provinces.

古文：爱鲁将兵分定亦乞不薛，纳速剌丁将大理军抵金齿、蒲骠、曲蜡、缅国界内，招忙木、巨木秃等寨三百，籍户十一万二百。
现代文：爱鲁率军平定亦乞不薛。纳速剌丁率领大理军抵达金齿、蒲骠、曲蜡、缅国境界之内，招降忙木、巨木秃等三百个山寨，登记入册的民户十一万零二百户。
English: Nakhon Ratchasima's army led by Nakhon Ratchasima's army led by Nakhon Ratchasima's army led by Nakhon Ratchasima's army led by Nakhon Ratchasima's army led by Nakhon Ratchasima's army led by Nakhon Ratchasima's army led by Nakhon Ratchasima's army led by Nakhon Ratchasima's army led by Nakhon Ratchasima's army led by Nakhon Ratchasima's army led by

古文：诏定赋租，立站递，设卫送军。
现代文：皇上下诏决定收取赋税，建立驿站，设置卫所，以派送军队。
English: The imperial edict decided to collect taxes, establish post stations, and set up sanitariums to dispatch troops.

古文：军还，献驯象十二。
现代文：大军返回时，向皇帝献上十二头驯象。
English: When the army returned, they presented the emperor with twelve tamed elephants.

古文：戊戌，改宣德府龙门镇复为县。
现代文：二十二日，把宣德府的龙门镇重新恢复为县。
English: On the 22nd, Longmen Town of Xuande Prefecture was reinstated as a county.

古文：庚子，拘括河西、西番阑遗户。
现代文：二十四日，聚集河西、西番失籍无主的汉奴。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, the Han slaves who had lost their nationality and had no master gathered in Hexi and Xi.

古文：辛丑，以通州水路浅，舟运甚难，命枢密院发军五千，仍令食禄诸官雇役千人开浚，以五十日讫工。
现代文：二十五日，因为通州水道太浅，舟船运输十分艰难，命令枢密院派遣五千名士兵，并命令享有俸禄的官员们雇用民工一千人疏浚河道，用五十天完工。
English: On the 25th, because the Tongzhou waterway was too shallow and boat transportation was very difficult, he ordered the Privy Council to send five thousand soldiers, and ordered salaried officials to hire one thousand migrant workers to dredge the river, which took fifty days to complete.

古文：癸卯，以临洮、巩昌、通安等十驿岁饥，供役繁重，有质卖子女以供役者，命选官抚治之。
现代文：二十七日，临洮、巩昌、通安等十处驿站因为年岁饥荒，供奉的差役繁重，有典卖子女以供奉差役的，命选派官员前去安抚他们。
English: On the 27th, due to years of famine, there were a lot of forced laborers in ten stations including Linyi, Gongchang and Tong'an. Officials were sent to pacify those who had sold their children as forced laborers.

古文：甲辰，以襄阳屯田户四百代军当驿役。
现代文：二十八日，命襄阳的四百个屯田户代替军户充当驿站的差役。
English: On the 28th, it was ordered that the four hundred military households in Xiangyang replace the military households to act as dispatchers of the station.

古文：赐征北诸郡蒙古军阔阔八都等力战有功者银五十两，战殁者家给银百两，从行伍者钞一锭，其余衣物有差。
现代文：赐给征服北方各郡的蒙古军阔阔八都等奋力作战有功的人白银五十两，战死者的家属赐给白银一百两，跟随行军的赐给钱钞一锭，其余衣物等数额各不相等。
English: The Mongolian army, which conquered the northern counties, was given fifty taels of silver for those who fought hard and fought well, such as the Kuokaku eight taels, the families of those who died in battle were given one hundred taels of silver, those who followed the march were given one kopeck of money, and the remaining clothing and other amounts were not equal.

古文：禁伯颜察儿诸峪寨捕猎。
现代文：禁止在伯颜察儿各峪口、山寨捕猎。
English: It is prohibited to hunt in any of the Baoyanchara's hunting areas or cottages.

古文：诏免四川差税。
现代文：下诏免征四川的差役赋税。
English: The following edict exempts Sichuan from the tax on laborers.

古文：以参知政事、行中书省事别都鲁丁为河南等路宣慰使。
现代文：任命参知政事、署理中书省事务别都鲁丁为河南等路宣慰使。
English: He appointed Beidou Rudin, the vice-governor for political affairs and acting vice-governor for the affairs of the People's Republic of China and the People's Republic of China, as the special envoy to Henan and other provinces.

古文：以阿合马子忽辛为潭州行省左丞，忽失海牙等并复旧职。
现代文：任命阿合马的儿子忽辛为潭州行省左丞，忽失海牙等均恢复原职。
English: Appointed Ahma's son, Qu Xin, as Tan Zhou's acting provincial commissar of the left, and Qu lost the Hague, etc. have all resumed their original posts.

古文：占城、马八儿诸国遣使以珍物及象犀各一来献。
现代文：占城、马八儿等国派遣使臣以珍品和驯象犀牛各一头前来敬献。
English: Envoys from countries such as Zhancheng and Malatya came to pay their respects with a rare treasure and a rhinoceros.

古文：赐诸王所部银钞、衣服、币帛、鞍勒、弓矢及羊马价钞等各有差。
现代文：赐给诸侯王的部下们钱钞、衣服、币帛、马鞍、嚼勒、弓箭以及羊马价钱钞等，数额不等。
English: The vassals of the princes were given money, clothes, money bags, saddles, bridles, bows and arrows, as well as bills for the price of a sheep or a horse, in varying amounts.

古文：五台山作佛事。
现代文：五台山举行佛事。
English: Buddhist ceremony held on Mount Wutai.

古文：秋七月戊申，宁国路新附军百户詹福谋叛，福论死，授告者何士青总把、银符，仍赐钞十锭。
现代文：秋，七月初三，宁国路新附军百户詹福谋反，詹福被处以死刑，授予告发者何士青总把之职，佩戴银符，并赐给钱钞十锭。
English: In the autumn, on the third day of the first month of July, a hundred households of the newly-annexed troops on Ningguo Road conspired to rebel against Zhanfu. Zhanfu was sentenced to death, and the whistleblower was awarded the post of general manager, wore silver badges, and was given ten yuan in banknotes.

古文：罢西川行省。
现代文：撤销四川行中书省。
English: Cancel the Sichuan trip to the Ministry of Education.

古文：庚戌，禁脱脱和孙搜取乘传者私物。
现代文：初五，禁止驿卒搜取乘坐驿传的人的私人财物。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, it is forbidden for police officers to search the personal belongings of those who travel on the train.

古文：乙卯，应昌府依例设官。
现代文：初十，应昌府按照常例设置官员。
English: On the 10th day of the first month, Yingchang Prefecture set up officials in accordance with the usual practice.

古文：置东宫侍卫军。
现代文：设立东宫侍卫军。
English: The Eastern Palace Guard Corps was established.

古文：定江南上、中路置达鲁花赤二员，下路一员。
现代文：确定江南地区的上、中路各设置镇守官二人，下路设置一人。
English: Two town guards will be assigned to each of the upper and middle roads in the south of the Yangtze River, and one will be assigned to the lower road.

古文：敕发西川蒙古军七千、新附军三千，付皇子安西王。
现代文：敕令：调遣西川的蒙古军七千人、新附军三千人交付给皇子安西王统领。
English: Imperial decree: 7,000 Mongol troops from the West River and 3,000 newly added troops were dispatched and handed over to the prince Anxi Wang Ruo as commander.

古文：丁巳，交趾国遣使来贡驯象。
现代文：十二日，交趾国派遣使臣来进贡驯象。
English: On the twelfth day, the Koji countries sent envoys to bring tribute elephants.

古文：己未，以朵哥麻思地之算木多城为镇西府。
现代文：十四日，把朵哥麻思地方的算木多城改为镇西府。
English: On the 14th, the name of the town in the region of Doko Masi was changed to Zhenxi Prefecture.

古文：敕以蒙古军二千、益都军二千、诸路军一千、新附军五千，合万人，令李庭将之。
现代文：敕令把二千名蒙古军士兵、二千名益都军士兵、一千名各路军士兵、五千名新附军士兵，合起来共一万人，交由李庭芝统率。
English: The imperial edict put 2,000 soldiers from the Mongolian army, 2,000 soldiers from the Yidu army, 1,000 soldiers from the various armies, and 5,000 soldiers from the newly annexed army, a total of 10,000 people, under the command of Li Tingzhi.

古文：壬戌，赏瓮吉剌所部力战军人银五十两，死事者人百两，给其家。
现代文：十七日，赏赐给瓮吉剌部下奋力作战的士兵，每人白银五十两，战死者每人白银一百两，给予他们的家属。
English: On the seventeenth day, soldiers who fought hard under the command of Gong Jizhe were rewarded with fifty taels of silver each, and those who died in battle received one hundred taels of silver each, which was given to their families.

古文：阿里海牙入觐，献金三千五百八十两、银五万三千一百两。
现代文：阿里海牙入朝觐见，献上黄金三千五百八十两，白银五万三千一百两。
English: When Ali Haig entered the imperial court, he presented the emperor with thirty-five thousand eight hundred and two ounces of gold and fifty-three thousand one hundred and two ounces of silver.

古文：罢潭州行省造征日本及交趾战船。
现代文：潭州行中书省停止建造征伐日本和安南的战船。
English: During the Tanzhou trip, the Ministry of Education and Culture stopped the construction of warships for the conquest of Japan and Annan.

古文：丙寅，填星犯键闭。
现代文：二十一日，土星干犯键闭星。
English: On the twenty-first day, Saturn closed the star.

古文：癸酉，西南八番、罗氏等国来附，洞寨凡千六百二十有六，户凡十万一千一百六十有八。
现代文：二十八日，西南方的八番、罗氏国前来归附，共有一千六百二十六个洞寨，十万零一千一百六十八户。
English: On the 28th, the southwestern provinces of Yappan and Luo came to accede, with a total of 1,666 cave villages and 101,168 households.

古文：诏遣牙纳术、崔彧至江南访求艺术之人。
现代文：下诏派遣牙纳术、崔成到江南访求有技艺、懂得阴阳占卜的人。
English: He issued an edict to send the conjurers and Cui Cheng to the south of the Yangtze River to look for people with skills and knowledge of yin and yang divination.

古文：以中书左丞、行四川行中书省事汪良臣为安西王相。
现代文：任命中书左丞、执掌四川行中书省事务汪良臣为安西王丞相。
English: He appointed Wang Liangcheng as the Vice-Minister of Foreign Affairs and Wang Liangcheng as the Vice-Minister of Foreign Affairs and Wang Liangcheng as the Vice-Minister of Foreign Affairs.

古文：赐诸王纳里忽所部有功将校银钞、衣装、币帛、羊马有差。
现代文：赐给诸侯王纳里忽部下有功的军官钱钞、衣服、绢帛、羊马，数量各有差别。
English: To the meritorious officers of his subordinates, Prince Narihutu gave money, clothes, donkeys, and sheep and horses, in varying amounts.

古文：以赵州等处水旱，减今年租三千一百八十一石。
现代文：因为赵州等地发生水旱灾害，减免今年的田租三千一百八十一石。
English: Because of the flood and drought disasters in Zhaozhou and other places, the reduction and exemption of this year's field rent is 3,181 koku.

古文：命散都修佛事十有五日。
现代文：命散都举行佛事十五天。
English: Buddhist services will be held for 15 days after the death of the deceased.

古文：八月丁丑，车驾至自上都。
现代文：八月初二，皇上车驾从上都抵达京师。
English: On the second day of August, the emperor drove from Shangdu to Beijing.

古文：庚辰，太阴犯房距星。
现代文：初五，太阴星干犯房宿星座的距星。
English: On the 5th day of the first month, the great dark star is the furthest star from the constellation.

古文：戊子，范文虎言： 臣奉诏征讨日本，比遣周福、栾忠与日本僧赍诏往谕其国，期以来年四月还报，待其从否，始宜进兵。 
现代文：十三日，范文虎上奏说： 臣奉命征伐日本，但最近朝廷派遣周福、栾忠和日本僧人一起带着诏书前去招降该国，约定明年四月为答复的日期，等他答复是不是归顺，才适于进军。 
English: On the 13th, Fan Wenhu reported: "I have been ordered to invade Japan, but recently the imperial court sent Zhou Fu, Zhaozhong and Japanese monks with an imperial edict to invite the country to surrender, and agreed on next April as the date of reply. It is only appropriate to march in until he replies whether he will surrender or not."

古文：又请简阅旧战船以充用。
现代文：又请求挑选旧战船以备使用。
English: It also requested that old warships be selected for use.

古文：皆从之。
现代文：皇上均予允从。
English: The emperor obeyed.

古文：海贼贺文达率众来归文虎，文虎以所得银三千两来献。
现代文：海盗贺文达率领部众前来归降范文虎，范文虎把所得的三千两银子送来献给皇上。
English: The pirate He Wenda led the crowd to come and surrender to Fan Wenhu, and Fan Wenhu sent the three thousand two silver coins he earned to the emperor.

古文：有旨释其前罪，官其徒四十八人，就以银赐文虎。
现代文：皇上颁旨赦免贺文达先前的罪行，并授给他部下四十八人官职，即以银子赐给范文虎。
English: The emperor issued a decree to pardon He Wenda's previous crimes, and granted forty-eight of his subordinates official positions, that is, he gave Fan Wenhu with silver.

古文：己丑，宋降臣王虎臣陈便宜十七事，令张易等议，可者行之。
现代文：十四日，亡宋的降臣王虎臣陈奏有利的事情十七项，皇上令张易等商议，可行者就实行。
English: On the 14th, the late Song Dynasty's vassal Wang Huchen listed seventeen favorable things, and the emperor ordered Zhang Yi and others to discuss, and implement those that were feasible.

古文：庚寅，敕沅州路蒙古军总管乞答合征取桐木笼、犵狫、伯洞诸蛮未附者。调江南新附军五千驻太原，五千驻大名，五千驻卫州。
现代文：十五日，敕令沅州路的蒙古军总管乞答台攻取桐木笼、仡佬、伯洞尚未归顺的各个蛮洞，调遣江南的新附军五千名驻守太原，五千名驻守大名，五千名驻守卫州。
English: On the fifteenth day of the month, the Mongolian army commander-in-chief on Luzhou Road ordered the commander-in-chief to capture all the barren caves that had not yet surrendered, such as the Tong Mugu Cage, the Ying Niang, and the Bo Cave, and dispatched five thousand new attached troops from the south of the Yangtze River to garrison Taiyuan, five thousand to garrison Daimyo, and five thousand to garrison Weizhou.

古文：以每岁圣诞节及元辰日，礼仪费用皆敛之民，诏天下罢之。
现代文：因为每年皇帝寿诞佳节以及大年初一的日子，礼仪费用都是从百姓处征收的，诏令全国停止征收。
English: Because every year on the Emperor's Birthday and the first day of the New Year, ceremonial expenses are levied from the people, the Emperor ordered the country to stop the collection.

古文：丁酉，以江南所获玉爵及坫凡四十九事，纳于太庙。
现代文：二十二日，把在江南所获得的玉爵和坫一共四十九件敬献于太庙。
English: On the 22nd, he dedicated a total of forty-nine pieces of jade and jade obtained in the south of the Yangtze River to the Imperial Temple.

古文：己亥，海贼金通精死，获其从子温，有司欲论如法，帝曰： 通精已死，温何预焉？ 
现代文：二十四日，海盗金通精死去，捕获了他的侄儿金温，官府打算依法判罪，皇帝说： 金通精已经死了，金温有什么相干呢！ 
English: On the twenty-fourth day, the pirate Jintong Jing died and his nephew Jinwen was captured. The government planned to convict him according to law. The emperor said: Jintong Jing is dead, what does Jinwen have to do with it!

古文：特赦其罪。
现代文：颁诏特赦了他的罪过。
English: An amnesty was declared for his crimes.

古文：庚子，岁星犯轩辕大星。
现代文：二十五日，木星干犯轩辕大星。
English: On the 29th, Jupiter trespassed on the great star of Virgo.

古文：甲辰，诏汉军出征逃者罪死，且没其家。
现代文：二十九日，诏令：汉军出征，逃亡者处死罪，并没收其家产。
English: On the 29th, the imperial edict was issued: the Chinese army was dispatched, the fugitive was sentenced to death, and his family property was confiscated.

古文：置大护国仁王寺总管府，以散紥儿为达鲁花赤，李光祖为总管。
现代文：设置大护国仁王寺总管府，任命散扎儿为监印官，李光祖为总管。
English: He set up the Office of the Grand Protector of the State and the General Manager of the Nio-ji Temple, and appointed Sanzar as the Censor and Li Guangzu as the General Manager.

古文：赐范文虎僚属二十一人金纹绫及西锦衣。
现代文：赐给范文虎的二十一名僚属金纹绫及西锦衣。
English: Twenty-one of Fan Wenhu's colleagues were given gold-embroidered coats and brocade jackets.

古文：赏征重庆将校币帛有差。
现代文：赏赐征伐重庆的军官不同数量的绢帛。
English: The officers who conquered Chongqing were awarded varying amounts of medals.

古文：赐诸王阿只吉粮五千石、马六百匹、羊万口。
现代文：赐给诸侯王阿只吉粮食五千石、马六百匹、羊一万头。
English: He gave the vassal king, Ajukichi, five thousand koku of grain, six hundred horses, and ten thousand sheep.

古文：九月乙巳朔，范文虎荐可为守令者三十人。
现代文：九月初一，范文虎荐举可以担任守令的三十人。
English: On the first day of September, Fan Wenhu recommended thirty people who could serve as guards.

古文：诏： 今后所荐，朕自择之。
现代文：皇上下诏说 ：今后所荐举的人由我亲自挑选。
English: The Emperor issued an edict saying, "In the future, the person recommended for promotion will be selected by me personally."

古文：凡有官守不勤于职者，勿问汉人、回回皆论诛之，且没其家。 
现代文：凡是不勤于职守的官员，不论他是汉人还是回回人都处以死刑，并且没收他的家产。 
English: Any official who is not diligent in his duties, whether he is a Han Chinese or a returnee, will be sentenced to death and his family assets will be confiscated.

古文：女直、水达达军不出征者，令隶民籍输赋。
现代文：女真、水达达不出征的军人，令把他们隶属于民籍，交纳赋税。
English: On the other hand, soldiers who are not subject to military conscription are ordered to be assigned to civilian status and pay taxes.

古文：己酉，罢金州守船军千人，量留监守，余皆遣还。
现代文：初五，撤走金州守船的士卒一千人，酌量留下一部分监守，其余的全部遣送回籍。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, one thousand officers and men who guarded the ship in Jinzhou were withdrawn, leaving a part of the guards as a discretionary measure, and the rest were all sent home.

古文：庚戌，诏行中书省左丞忽辛兼领杭州等路诸色人匠，以杭州税课所入，岁造缯段十万以进。
现代文：初六，诏令行中书省左丞忽辛兼管杭州等路的各类工匠；把杭州所收入的赋税，每年织造十万匹绸缎献上。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, the emperor issued an edict to the various craftsmen in the provinces of Zhoushu, Zuoxing, Wuxing, and Hangzhou, to donate 100,000 silk cocoons woven each year from the taxes collected in Hangzhou.

古文：杭、苏、嘉兴三路办课官吏，额外多取分例，今后月给食钱，或数外多取者罪之。
现代文：杭州、苏州、嘉兴三路办理赋税事务的官吏，额外多取分例钱，今后每月供给伙食钱，有人在数额以外多取则判罪。
English: Officials in charge of tax affairs in Hangzhou, Suzhou and Jiaxing have been fined for taking more than the prescribed amount of money, and will be provided with food money every month in the future. Some people have been convicted for taking more than the prescribed amount.

古文：阿合马言： 王相府官赵炳云，陕西课程岁办万九千锭，所司若果尽心措办，可得四万锭。 
现代文：阿合马上奏说： 亲王相府的官员赵炳说，陕西的赋税每年收取钱钞一万九千锭，有关部门如果用心尽力措办，可取得四万锭。 
English: Zhao Wei, an official from the Prime Minister's Office, said that the taxation of Shaanxi collects 19,000 baht of money and banknotes every year, and the relevant departments can obtain 40,000 baht if they make every effort to do so.

古文：即命炳总之。同知扬州总管府事董仲威坐赃罪，行台方按其事，仲威反诬行台官以他事。
现代文：皇上便命赵炳总管这件事，扬州总管府同知董仲威犯了贪污罪，行御史台正要审理这件事，董仲威反而用别的事诬告行御史台的官员。
English: The emperor then ordered Zhao Wei to be in charge of this matter. Yangzhou's head of the General Administration Office, Dong Zhongwei, committed the crime of corruption. The Executive History Office was about to try this matter, but Dong Zhongwei falsely accused the officials of the Executive History Office of other matters.

古文：诏免仲威官，仍没其产十之二。
现代文：皇上下诏罢免董仲威的官职，并没收他十分之二的家产。
English: The imperial edict dismissed Dong Zhongwei from his official post and confiscated two-tenths of his family property.

古文：戊午，王相府言： 四川宣慰司有籍无军虚受赏者一万七千三百八人。 
现代文：十四日，亲王相府上奏说： 四川宣慰司册籍上有人而实无其人，空受奖赏的达一万七千三百零八人。 
English: On the 14th, the Minister of the Crown Prince made a report to the prefectural government, saying: There are some people on the register of the Sichuan Consolation Division, but there is no one, and the number of people who have received awards amounts to 17,308.

古文：命诘治之。
现代文：皇上命追究处理此事。
English: The Emperor has ordered that the matter be investigated.

古文：议罢汉人之为达鲁花赤者。
现代文：决定撤销由汉人担任的镇守官。
English: It was decided to revoke the post of town guard, which was held by a Han Chinese.

古文：御史台臣言： 江南三路管课官，于分例外支用钞一千九百锭。 
现代文：御史台大臣上奏说 ：江南三个路掌管赋税的官员，在应得的分例钱之外支用钱钞达一千九百锭。 
English: The Minister of State for History said in his report: The officials in charge of taxation in the three provinces south of the Yangtze River spent money and banknotes amounting to nineteen hundred baht in addition to the allocated money.

古文：命尽征之。
现代文：皇上命全部收取上来。
English: All of the Emperor's orders have been received.

古文：诏遣使招谕西南诸蛮部族酋长，能率所部归附者，官不失职，民不失业。
现代文：下诏派使臣去招降西南各蛮族的部落酋长，凡是能率领自己的部落来归附的，官员不失去原职，百姓不丧失生计。
English: The emperor sent envoys to recruit tribal chiefs from the barbarian tribes in the southwest. Anyone who could lead his tribe to annexation, the officials would not lose their original posts, and the people would not lose their livelihood.

古文：乙丑，以忽必来、别速台为都元帅，将蒙古军二千人、河西军一千人，戍斡端城。
现代文：二十一日，任命忽必来、别速台为都元帅，率领二千名蒙古军士卒、一千名河西军士卒戍守斡端城。
English: On the twenty-first day, he appointed Kublai and Bekhodai as the marshals of the capital, and led two thousand Mongolian soldiers and one thousand soldiers from Hexi to guard the city.

古文：己巳，枢密院臣言： 有唐兀带者冒禁引军千余人，于辰溪、沅州等处劫掠新附人千余口及牛马、金银、币帛等，而麻阳县达鲁花赤武伯不花为之乡导。 
现代文：二十五日，枢密院大臣上奏说 ：有一个叫唐兀带的人违犯禁令，带着一千多士兵在辰溪、沅州等地抢劫新归附的人口一千多人，以及牛马、金银、绢帛等，而麻阳县的镇守官武伯不花竟做他们的向导。 
English: On the 25th, the Minister of the Privy Council reported, "A man named Tang Xizhe violated the ban and took more than a thousand soldiers to rob more than a thousand newly annexed people, as well as cattle, horses, gold and silver, donkeys, etc. in Chenxi, Zhangzhou and other places, and the town guard officer of Mayang County, Wu Bo, did not even spend money to be their guide.

古文：敕斩唐兀带、武伯不花，余减死论，以所掠者还其民。
现代文：皇上敕令将唐兀带、武伯不花斩首，其余的人减去死刑判罪，把所抢得的人口财物还给百姓。
English: The emperor issued an order to behead Tang Xizhe and Wu Bo, and the rest of the people were sentenced to death, and the people and property they had robbed were returned to the people.

古文：给河西行省钞万锭，以备支用。
现代文：拨给河西行中书省钱钞一万锭，以备支用。
English: Allocated 10,000 baht of money-saving banknotes to be used for the trip to Hexi.

古文：冬十月己卯，享于太庙。
现代文：冬，十月初五，向太庙敬献祭品。
English: In winter, on October 14th, a grand ritual was held at Taimiao.

古文：辛巳，叙州、夔府至江陵界立水驿。
现代文：初七，在叙州夔府至江陵界设立水路驿站。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, a waterway station was set up from Shufu to Gangneung in Suzhou.

古文：乙酉，帝御香阁。命大乐署令完颜椿等肄文武乐。
现代文：十一日，皇帝驾临香阁，命大乐署令完颜椿等人研习文武乐。
English: On the 11th day, the emperor arrived at Shang Ge, and ordered the Great Music Office to order Yanqin and others to study literature and martial arts.

古文：戊子，张融诉西京军户和买和雇，有司匿所给价钞计万八千余锭；官吏坐罪，以融为侍卫军总把。
现代文：十四日，张融控告西京的军户征收民赋和征雇人夫，而官府却隐瞒他们所付给的价钱，总计一万八千多锭；官吏被判定有罪，任命张融担任侍卫军总把。
English: On the 14th, Zhang Rong accused the military households in West Beijing of levying people's money and recruiting men, but the government concealed the price they paid, totaling more than 18,000 baht. The officials were found guilty and Zhang Rong was appointed as the chief of the bodyguard.

古文：千户脱略、总把忽带擅引军入婺州永康县界，杀掠吏民，事觉，自陈扈从先帝出征有功，乞贷死。
现代文：千户脱略、总把忽带擅自带兵到婺州永康县境杀害、掠夺官吏和百姓。事情被察觉之后，他们自陈曾经跟随先帝出征有功，请求免去死罪。
English: Thousands of families escaped and took soldiers to the border of Yongkang County in Zhangzhou without permission. They killed and plundered officials and people. After the incident was discovered, they requested to be exempted from the death penalty since Chen had served in the army with the former emperor.

古文：敕没入其家赀之半，杖遣之。
现代文：皇上敕命，没收他们一半家产，处以杖刑。
English: The emperor was furious, confiscated half of their family's property, and punished them with the cane.

古文：辛卯，赈和州贫民钞。
现代文：十七日，以钱钞赈济和州的平民。
English: On the 17th, money and banknotes were used to provide relief to civilians in Hezhou.

古文：乙未，纳碧玉爵于太庙。丙申，太阴犯太微西垣上将。
现代文：二十一日，向太庙呈献碧玉爵。二十二日，太阴星干犯太微垣西上将星官。
English: On the twenty-first day, the temple was presented with a jasper and jade earring. On the twenty-second day, Tai Yin Xing committed a crime against Tai Weigaki West Admiral Xingran.

古文：辛丑，以月直元辰，命五祖真人李居寿作醮事，奏赤章，凡五昼夜。
现代文：二十七日，因为时间正当吉日，命五祖真人李居寿做醮事，焚烧赤色符共持续五昼夜。
English: On the 27th, because the time was right and the day was auspicious, the five ancestors ordered the real person Li Jiu Shou to do something, and the burning of the red charms lasted for five days and nights.

古文：毕事，居寿请间言： 皇太子春秋鼎盛，宜预国政。 
现代文：醮事完毕，李居寿请求屏去左右说 ：皇太子年富力强，应当参与国家政务了。 
English: After the anecdote, Li Jiushou asked the screen to go around and said: the crown prince is rich and powerful, and should participate in national government affairs.

古文：帝喜曰： 寻将及之。 
现代文：皇帝高兴地说 ：不久就会让他这样做了。 
English: The emperor said happily, "He will soon be allowed to do so."

古文：明日，下诏皇太子燕王参决朝政，凡中书省、枢密院、御史台及百司之事，皆先启后闻。
现代文：第二天，皇帝下诏：皇太子燕王参加决定朝政，凡是中书省、枢密院、御史台以及各府衙的事，皇太子均可以先启封审阅再奏闻皇帝。
English: The next day, the emperor issued an edict: the crown prince, Yan Wang, would participate in the decision-making of the imperial government, and the crown prince could open the seal and read it before reporting to the emperor on all matters concerning the Chinese Ministry of Education, the Privy Council, the Imperial Historian's Office, and the prefectural governments.

古文：甲辰，赐高丽国王至元十七年历日。
现代文：三十日，赐给高丽国王至元十七年历书。
English: On the 30th, the 17th year of the Heian period calendar was given to King Goryeo.

古文：十一月戊申，敕诸路所捕盗，初犯赃多者死，再犯赃少者从轻罪论。
现代文：十一月初四，敕命各路所捕获的盗贼，初犯的，赃物多者处死刑；再犯的，赃物少的从轻判罪。
English: On the 4th day of the 11th month, the thieves who were caught by all means were sentenced to death for first-time offenders with a large amount of stolen goods. Repeat offenders with a small amount of stolen goods were given a lighter sentence.

古文：阿合马言： 有盗以旧钞易官库新钞百四十锭者，议者谓罪不应死，且盗者之父执役臣家，不论如法，宁不自畏。 
现代文：阿合马上奏说 ：有个用旧钞币换取官库中一百四十锭新钞币的盗贼，有人发表意见说不应当判处死刑，但这盗贼的父亲在我家里服役当差，如果不依法判决，难道我自己不害怕么？ 
English: Ahagon immediately said: There is a thief who exchanged old banknotes for one hundred and forty thousand new banknotes in the treasury. Some people have expressed the opinion that the death penalty should not be imposed, but the father of this thief served in my family as a messenger. If I am not sentenced according to the law, am I not afraid?

古文：诏处死。
现代文：下诏将这盗贼处死。
English: I hereby sentence this thief to death.

古文：壬子，遣礼部尚书柴椿偕安南国使村中赞赍诏往谕安南国世子陈日烜，责其来朝。
现代文：初八，派礼部尚书柴椿和安南国使臣杜中赞一起带着诏书前往晓谕安南国的世子陈日火亘，要求他前来朝见。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, he sent the ceremonial secretary, Shangshu Chaiqin, and the envoy of Annan, Du Zhongzan, together with an edict to go to the heir of Annan, Chen Rihwa, and ask him to come to the court.

古文：癸丑，太阴犯荧惑。
现代文：初九，太阴星干犯火星。
English: On the 9th day of the 9th month, the planet Mars will collide with the planet Venus.

古文：乙卯，罢太原、平阳、西京、延安路新签军还籍。
现代文：十一日，免除太原、平阳、西京、延安路新签征的士兵服役，令其返回原籍。
English: On the 11th, the newly conscripted soldiers from Taiyuan, Pingyang, Xijing and Yan'an Road were exempted from military service and ordered to return to their hometowns.

古文：罢招讨使刘万奴所管无籍军愿从大军征讨者。
现代文：免征招讨使刘万奴所管辖自愿跟随大军征讨的无军籍士兵。
English: Draft-exempt non-commissioned soldiers under the jurisdiction of Liu Wannu volunteered to follow the army to fight.

古文：赵炳言陕西运司郭同知、王相府郎中令郭叔云盗用官钱，敕尚书秃速忽、侍御史郭祐检核之。
现代文：赵炳上奏说陕西转运司的郭同知、亲王相府的郎中令郭叔云盗用官钱，敕令由尚书秃速忽、侍御史郭查究、核实此事。
English: Zhao Ying reported that Guo Tongzhi of the Shaanxi Transportation Department and Guo Shuyun, a henchman of the Prince's Council of Ministers, embezzled government money, and ordered Shangshu Gao and Shi Guo to investigate and verify the matter.

古文：戊辰，命湖北道宣慰使刘深教练鄂州、汉阳新附水军。
现代文：二十四日，命湖北道宣慰使训练鄂州、汉阳新归附的水军。
English: On the 24th, it ordered the Hubei Provincial Propaganda and Consolation Commission to train the newly-annexed naval forces of Ezhou and Hanyang.

古文：诏谕四川宣慰司括军民户数。
现代文：诏令四川宣慰司调查统计军民的户数。
English: He ordered the Sichuan Propaganda and Consolation Department to investigate and count the number of military and civilian households.

古文：己巳，以梧州妖民吴法受扇惑藤州、德庆府泷水徭蛮为乱，获其父，诛之。
现代文：二十五日，因为梧州的妖民吴法受的煽动蒙骗，藤州、德庆府泷水的徭族作乱，抓获了吴法受的父亲处以死刑。
English: On the 25th, because of the instigation and deception of Wu Fazhu, the demon of Wuzhou, the Yi people of Fujian and Ershui of Deqing Prefecture rioted, arrested Wu Fazhu's father and sentenced him to death.

古文：并教坊司入拱卫司。
现代文：把教坊司合并到拱卫司。
English: Merging the Department of Education into the Department of National Defense.

古文：十二月戊寅，发粟钞赈盐司灶户之贫者。
现代文：十二月初五，调拨粮食、钱钞赈济盐司贫困的煮盐灶户。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of December, the Ministry of Salt allocated grain and money to help poor salt cookers.

古文：括甘州户。
现代文：登记甘州的民户。
English: Registered private households in Gansu.

古文：庚辰，安南国贡药材。
现代文：初七，安南国进贡药材。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, Annan pays tribute to medicinal herbs.

古文：甲申，祀太阳。
现代文：十一日，祭祀太阳。
English: On the eleventh day, the sun was sacrificed.

古文：丙申，敕枢密、翰林院官，就中书省与唆都议招收海外诸番事。
现代文：二十三日，敕令枢密院、翰林院的官员随同中书省，和唆都一起商议招降海外各藩国的事务。
English: On the 23rd, the officials of the Privy Council and the Hanlin Academy, accompanied by the Chinese Ministry of Literature and the Imperial Household Agency, discussed the recruitment and demotion of overseas domains.

古文：丁酉，八里灰贡海青。
现代文：二十四日，八里灰进贡海东青。
English: On the 24th, the eight-mile ash entered the East Qing Tribute Sea.

古文：回回等所过供食，羊非自杀者不食，百姓苦之。
现代文：回回等族人所经地方供给的饮食，不是自己亲手宰杀的羊不吃，百姓为这件事很苦。
English: Back then, people did not eat sheep that were not slaughtered with their own hands, and the people suffered a lot because of this.

古文：帝曰： 彼吾奴也，饮食敢不随我朝乎？ 
现代文：皇帝说 ：他们是我的奴才，饮食能不随顺我朝的习惯么？ 
English: The emperor said, "They are my servants. Can they not eat according to the custom of my dynasty?"

古文：诏禁之。
现代文：下诏禁止他们这样做。
English: The following edict prohibited them from doing so.

古文：诏谕海内海外诸番国主。
现代文：下诏招降海内海外各藩国的国王。
English: The king of all the domains at home and abroad is hereby invited to abdicate.

古文：赐右丞张惠银五千四百两。
现代文：赏赐右丞张惠五千四百两银子。
English: Zhang Hui was awarded 5,400 taels of silver.

古文：敕自明年正月朔日，建醮于长春宫，凡七日，岁以为例。
现代文：敕令：从明年正月初一开始，在长春宫建立醮坛，一共七天，每年均作为常例。
English: Imperial edict: From the beginning of the first month of the next year, the imperial altar will be set up in the Changchun Palace for a total of seven days, as is customary every year.

古文：命李居寿告祭新岁。
现代文：命李居寿祝告、祭祀新年。
English: Li Jiu's birthday is celebrated, and the New Year is celebrated.

古文：诏谕占城国主，使亲自来朝。
现代文：下诏晓谕占城国国王，令他亲自前来朝见。
English: He issued the following edict to the king of the city-state, ordering him to come to the court in person.

古文：唆都所遣阇婆国使臣治中赵玉还。
现代文：唆都所送来的婆国使臣治中赵玉返回。
English: Zhao Yu, one of the envoys of the motherland sent to the capital, returned.

古文：改单州、兖州隶济宁路；复置万泉县，隶河中府；改垣曲县隶绛州；降归州路为州；升沔阳、安陆各为府；改京兆为安西路；改惠州、建宁、梧州、柳州、象州、邕州、庆远、宾州、横州、容州、浔州并为路。
现代文：把单州、兖州改属于济宁路。重新设置万泉县，隶属于河中府。把垣曲县改属于绛州。把归州路降格为州。把沔阳、安陆分别升格为府。把京兆路改为安西路。把惠州、建宁、梧州、柳州、象州、邕州、庆远、宾州、横州、容州、浔州均改为路。
English: Change Shanzhou and Ganzhou to Jining Road, re-establish Wanquan County as part of Henan Province, change Qigong County to Ganzhou, downgrade Guizhou Road to a prefecture, upgrade Shenyang and Anlu to prefectures, change Jingzhao Road to Anxi Road, and change Huizhou, Jianning, Wuzhou, Liuzhou, Xiangzhou, Ganzhou, Qingyuan, Binzhou, Hengzhou, Yongzhou and Ganzhou to roads.

古文：建圣寿万安寺于京城。帝师亦怜吉卒。
现代文：在京城建造圣寿万安寺。帝师亦怜真去世。
English: Shoshu Banan-ji Temple was built in Kyoto. Teishi also passed away.

古文：敕诸国教师禅师百有八人，即大都万安寺设斋圆戒，赐衣。
现代文：敕令佛教国师、僧侣一百零八人在大都万安寺设立斋坛举行圆戒仪式，赐给法衣。
English: The emperor ordered 108 Buddhist scholars and monks to set up a Buddhist altar in the main temple of Wan'an Temple, hold a round of vows ceremony, and bestow Buddhist robes on the monks.

古文：是岁，断死罪百三十二人。
现代文：这一年，判处死刑的囚徒一百三十二人。
English: One hundred and thirty-two prisoners were sentenced to death that year.

古文：保定等二十余路水旱风雹害稼。
现代文：保定二十余路发生水灾、旱灾、风灾、雹灾，伤害了庄稼。
English: Floods, droughts, windstorms and hailstorms occurred in more than 20 counties in Baoding, causing damage to crops.

