古文：宋世景，广平人，河南尹翻之第三弟也。
现代文：宋世景，广平人，河南尹宋翻的第三个弟弟。
English: Song Shijing, from Guangping, was the third brother of Henan's Yin Songtuo.

古文：少自修立，事亲以孝闻。
现代文：少小即有良好的道德修养，侍奉父母很是孝顺。
English: Children of all ages have a good moral upbringing and are very dutiful when serving their parents.

古文：与弟道玙下帷诵读，博览群言，尤精经义。
现代文：世景与弟弟宋道闭门读书，广泛涉猎，各种书都读，尤其精于经书大义。
English: Shijing and his younger brother, Song Dao, read behind closed doors. They hunted extensively and read all kinds of books. They were especially proficient in the scriptures.

古文：族兄弁甚重之。
现代文：同族兄宋弁十分器重他。
English: He is ten times more important than his brother Song Ben.

古文：举秀才，对策上第，拜国子助教，迁彭城王勰开府法曹行参军。
现代文：他被州中推举为秀才，对策登第，朝廷拜授他为国子助教，迁任彭城王元勰的开府法曹参军。
English: He was selected as an outstanding talent by the middle school of the prefecture, ranked first in countermeasures, and was awarded the title of assistant professor by the imperial court. He was transferred to the army as the Kefu law officer of Pengcheng Wangyuan.

古文：勰爱其才学，雅相器敬。
现代文：元勰爱他的才学，十分器重、礼敬他。
English: Yuan Zang loved his talent, and held him in high esteem.

古文：高祖亦嘉之。
现代文：高祖也赞许他的才学。
English: Gaozu also praised his talent.

古文：迁司徒法曹行参军。
现代文：又迁任司徒法曹行参军。
English: He was also transferred to the position of Sito Legal Officer to join the army.

古文：世景明刑理，著律令，裁决疑狱，剖判如流。
现代文：宋世景深明刑理，通晓律令，裁决疑难刑案，剖析断决，快如行云流水。
English: Song Shijing is well-versed in criminal law, familiar with judicial decrees, adjudicates difficult criminal cases, analyzes and decides, and is as fast as a cloud.

古文：转尚书祠部郎。
现代文：转任尚书祠部郎。
English: He was transferred to the post of Shoshu Shokiburo.

古文：彭城王勰每称之曰： 宋世景精识，尚书仆射才也。 
现代文：彭城王元勰经常称赞说： 宋世景精于断识，是尚书仆射的材料。 
English: Pengcheng Wang Yuanzhang often praised: Song Shijing is good at judgment, and is the material of Shang Shuping.

古文：台中疑事，右仆射高肇常以委之。
现代文：台狱之中疑难案子，右仆高肇常常把它交给宋世景办理。
English: When there was a difficult case in the Taiwanese prison, Gao Zhao, the right-hand man, often gave it to Song Shijing to handle.

古文：世景既才长从政，加之夙勤不怠，兼领数曹，深著称绩。
现代文：宋世景长于政务，加上他一贯勤勤恳恳、认认真真，兼任数部之职，全都政绩昭然。
English: Song Shijing's long experience in government affairs, coupled with his consistent diligence, earnestness, and conscientiousness, as well as his concurrent positions in several ministries, all demonstrate his outstanding political achievements.

古文：频为左仆射源怀引为行台郎。
现代文：他频频被左仆射源怀引荐为行台郎。
English: He was frequently recommended by his left-hand man, Shogenkai, as a go-between.

古文：巡察州镇十有余所，黜陟赏罚莫不咸允。
现代文：巡察州镇十几个地方，黜退提升、赏罚官吏，无不十分公允。
English: He inspected more than a dozen places in Zhouzhen, and promoted, rewarded and punished officials, all of which were fair.

古文：迁徒七镇，别置诸戍，明设亭候，以备北虏。
现代文：所任的七个城镇，他都另处设置了关戍，还设传递烽火消息的亭候，以防备北方敌人进攻。
English: In each of the seven towns he was in charge of, he set up checkpoints elsewhere, and also set up kiosks to pass on news of bonfires, in order to prevent the northern enemy from attacking.

古文：怀大相委重。
现代文：源怀大相器重。
English: The weight of the camera is heavy.

古文：还而荐之于世宗曰： 宋世景文武才略，当今寡俦，清平忠直，亦少其比。
现代文：还都之后，源怀立即在世宗面前推荐他说： 宋世景的文武才略，当今极少有人能与他匹敌，他清平忠直，这也很少有人能比。
English: After returning to the capital, Yuan Huai immediately recommended him in front of Shizong: Song Shijing's talent in literature and martial arts, today very few people can match him, he is clean and honest, which few people can match.

古文：陛下若任之以机要，终不减李冲也。 
现代文：陛下如果能委他以重任，他绝不会比当年李冲差。 
English: If His Majesty can entrust him with an important task, he will never be worse than Li Chong.

古文：世宗曰： 朕亦闻之。 
现代文：世宗说： 朕也听说了。 
English: Sejong said, "I heard about it, too."

古文：尚书令、广阳王嘉，右仆射高肇，吏部尚书、中山王英共荐世景为国子博士，寻荐为尚书右丞。
现代文：尚书令、广阳王元嘉，右仆射高肇，吏部尚书、中山王元英一起推荐世景为国子博士，不久又荐为尚书右丞。
English: Shang Shuling, Guanyang Wang Yuanjia, his right-hand man Shigao Zhao, and the officials Shang Shuling and Zhongshan Wang Yuanying jointly recommended Shijing as a Kuniko doctor, and soon recommended him as Shang Shuling's right-hand man.

古文：王显与宋弁有隙，毁之于世宗，故事寝不报。
现代文：王显与宋弁之间有矛盾，在世宗面前诋毁宋世景，所以推荐世景事被隐而不报。
English: There was a conflict between Wang Xian and Song Ben, who slandered Song Shijing in front of Shizong, so the recommendation was concealed and not reported.

古文：寻加伏波将军。行荥阳太守。
现代文：不久，朝廷授他为伏波将军，代理荥阳太守。
English: Soon after, the imperial court awarded him the title of General of Fubao, acting governor of Shenyang.

古文：郑氏豪横，号为难治。
现代文：州中有郑氏，此人横行乡里，号称难治。
English: There is a Zheng clan in the state. This person is rampant in the countryside and is known to be difficult to control.

古文：济州刺史郑尚弟远庆先为苑陵令，多所受纳，百姓患之。
现代文：济州刺史郑尚的弟弟远庆先任苑陵县令，贪污受贿，积赃巨大，百姓深以为患。
English: Yuanqing, the younger brother of Jeju's assassin Zheng Shang, was the first to be appointed as the governor of Yuanling County. He was guilty of corruption and bribery and accumulated huge debts. The people were deeply concerned.

古文：世景下车，召而谓之曰： 与卿亲，宜假借。
现代文：世景到州上任之后，召请郑远庆到州治，对他说： 我与你亲近，但我们应相互理解。
English: After Shijing took office in the prefecture, he invited Zheng Yuanqing to govern the prefecture and said to him: I am close to you, but we should understand each other.

古文：吾未至之前，一不相问，今日之后，终不相舍。 
现代文：我没来之前，我绝不问询你的事情，但今日以后，我就与你相合不离了。 
English: Before I came here, I would never ask you about anything, but after today, I can't be separated from you.

古文：而远庆行意自若。
现代文：听了这话，郑远庆只当耳边风，依旧我行我素。
English: After listening to this, Zheng Yuanqing only listened to the wind and continued to act as usual.

古文：世景绳之以法，远庆惧，弃官亡走。
现代文：宋世景把他绳之以法，远庆害怕了，弃官逃亡了。
English: Song Shijing brought him to justice, Yuanqing got scared, resigned and fled.

古文：于是僚属畏威，莫不改肃。
现代文：从此以后，下属官员害怕宋世景的威严，端正态度，谁也不敢乱来。
English: From then on, subordinate officials were afraid of Song Shijing's dignity and upright attitude, and no one dared to mess up.

古文：终日坐于事，未尝寝息。
现代文：宋世景每天从早到晚坐在衙门大厅内，没有停歇的时候。
English: Song Shijing sits in the main hall of the gate every day from morning to night, without a break.

古文：县史、三正及诸细民，至即见之，无早晚之节。
现代文：县史、三正以及一般百姓，到了衙门即能见到他，没有早晚的分别。
English: The county historian, the three presidents and the general public can see him when they arrive at the gate, there is no difference between the morning and the evening.

古文：来者无不尽其情抱，皆假之恩颜，屏人密语。
现代文：来者无不受到真诚接待，都能见到他的和颜悦色，世景摈退旁人，来者尽可直陈其事。
English: All visitors are sincerely received, and can see his gentle face and pleasant color. The world is far away from others, and visitors can tell their own stories.

古文：民间之事，巨细必知，发奸摘伏，有若神明。
现代文：民间的事情，不问大小，他都知道，捉拿奸贼，挖掘隐敌，就好像他有神机妙算。
English: He knows everything about people's affairs, no matter how big or small. Catching traitors and digging up hidden enemies, it's as if he has a secret plan.

古文：尝有一吏，休满还郡，食人鸡豚；又有一干，受人一帽，又食二鸡。
现代文：曾经有一名官吏，休假期满返回郡所，吃了百姓的鸡；又有一名办事人员，接受了别人一顶帽子，又吃了别人两只鸡。
English: Once upon a time, there was an official who returned to the county seat after his vacation and ate the people's chicken; there was also an office worker who accepted another person's hat and ate another person's two chickens.

古文：世景叱之曰：汝何敢食甲乙鸡豚，取丙丁之帽！
现代文：宋世景叱斥他们说： 你们怎么竟敢吃张三鸡猪，取李四之帽！ 
English: Song Shijing scolded them, saying: "How dare you eat Zhang San chicken pig and take Li Si's hat!

古文：吏干叩头伏罪。
现代文：吏卒、办事人员磕头认罪。
English: The officials, clerks and office staff all pleaded guilty.

古文：于是上下震悚，莫敢犯禁。
现代文：从此以后，州中从上到下震动整肃起来，没有再敢犯禁的了。
English: Since then, the state has been shaken up from top to bottom, and no one dares to violate the ban.

古文：坐弟道玙事除名。
现代文：后宋世景因他弟弟道王与的事情被除去官职。
English: Later, Song Shijing was removed from his post because of his brother Daowang's affair.

古文：世景友于之性，过绝于人，及道玙死。哭之哀切，酸感行路，形容毁悴，见者莫不叹愍。
现代文：宋世景友悌之性，远远超过常人，道王与死了，他哭声哀切，行路的人都为他的样子酸楚不已。
English: Song Shijing Youyou's eagerness is far beyond that of ordinary people. Tao Wang is not dead. He cries mournfully. People on the road are saddened by his appearance.

古文：岁余，母丧，遂不胜哀而卒。
现代文：由于伤心太过，以至于他面容枯槁，看见的人无不叹惜怜悯。
English: For his grief was so great that his countenance was withered, and all who saw him were moved with pity.

古文：世景尝撰《晋书》，竟未得就。
现代文：一年多后，母亲去世，于是宋世景不胜哀痛，也死了。宋世景曾经撰写《晋书》，竟然因此而没有完成。
English: More than a year later, his mother passed away, and Song Shijing, who had written "Jin Shu," did not complete it.

古文：子季儒，遗腹生。
现代文：子季儒，是遗腹子。
English: His son, Ji Ju, was a posthumous child.

古文：弱冠，太守崔楷辟为功曹，起家太学博士、明威将军。
现代文：二十岁时，太守崔楷征他为功曹，起之于家而任太学博士、明威将军。
English: At the age of twenty, Cui Kai Zheng, the eunuch, was named a meritorious scholar, and he was appointed to the post of Doctor of Theology and Mingwei General.

古文：曾至谯宋之间，为文吊嵇康，甚有理致。
现代文：曾经至谯、宋之间，写文章凭吊嵇康，文章写得很是理顺。
English: Once upon a time, between the Heian and Song dynasties, articles were written based on condolences, and articles were written in a very rational manner.

古文：后夜寝，室坏压殒，年二十五，时人咸伤惜之。
现代文：后来在晚上睡觉，房屋突然倒塌把他压死了，年仅二十五岁。当时人无不为他叹惜。
English: Later, when he was sleeping at night, the sudden collapse of the house crushed him to death, only twenty-five years old. At that time, everyone felt sorry for him.

