古文：穆宗穆宗睿圣文惠孝皇帝讳恒，宪宗第三子，母曰懿安皇后郭氏。
现代文：穆宗，谥号睿圣文惠孝皇帝，名叫李恒，是宪宗第三子，母亲为懿安皇后郭氏。
English: Emperor Mu Zong, surnamed Rui Sheng Wen Hui Xiao, named Li Heng, was the third son of Emperor Xianzong, and his mother was Queen Guo of An.

古文：贞元十一年七月，生于大明宫之别殿。
现代文：穆宗于贞元十一年七月生于大明宫的偏殿。
English: Mu Zong was born in July of the 11th year of the reign of Empress Dowager Cixi in the hall of the Daming Palace.

古文：初名宥，元和元年八月，进封遂王。
现代文：最初名李宥，封为建安郡王。元和元年八月，晋封为遂王。
English: His original name was Li Yu, and he was given the title of King of Jian'an County. In August of the year 1200, he was promoted to King Sui.

古文：五年三月，领彰义军节度大使。
现代文：元和五年三月，担任彰义军节度大使。
English: In March of the 5th year of the Yuan Dynasty, he served as the ambassador of the Spring Festival of the Zhangyi Army.

古文：七年十月，册为皇太了，改今讳。
现代文：元和七年十月被册立为皇太子，改为现在的名字。
English: Yuan He was registered as the crown prince in October of the seventh year, and changed his name to the current one.

古文：十五年正月庚子，宪宗崩。
现代文：元和十五年正月二十七日，宪宗去世。
English: On the 27th day of the first month of the 15th year of the Yuan Dynasty, Kenzong passed away.

古文：丙午，即皇帝位于太极殿东序。
现代文：闰正月初三，皇太子在太极殿的东厢即皇帝位。
English: On the third day of the first month of the leap year, the crown prince ascended the throne in the east wing of the Taiji Hall.

古文：是日，召翰林学士段文昌杜元颖沈传师李肇、侍读薛放丁公著对于思政殿，并赐金紫。
现代文：这一天，皇帝召见翰林学士段文昌、杜元颖、沈传师、李肇，侍读学士薛放、丁公著，在思政殿谈话，均赐以金紫光禄大夫。
English: On this day, the emperor summoned Hanlin Baccalaureate Duan Wenchang, Du Yuanying, Shen Chuanshi, Li Zhao, and attendant Baccalaureate Xue Fang and Ding Gong to talk at Shizheng Hall, and all of them were awarded the gold and purple doctor.

古文：丁未，集群臣班于月华门外。
现代文：闰正月初四，召集群臣列班于月华门外。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the leap year, he summoned a group of courtiers to march outside the Yuehua Gate.

古文：贬门下侍郎、平章事皇甫镈为崖州司户。
现代文：将门下侍郎、同平章事皇甫钅甫寸贬为崖州司户。
English: He demoted the under-waiter of the gate, Tongping Zhangjiu Wangfujing Fuxun, to the secretary of Yanshou.

古文：戊申，上见宰臣于紫宸门外。
现代文：闰正月初五，皇上在紫宸门外召见宰臣。
English: On the 5th day of the 1st month of the leap year, the emperor summoned Zaisei outside the Shishomon gate.

古文：辛亥，以朝议郎、守御史中丞、飞骑尉、袭徐国公、赐绯鱼袋萧俛为朝散大夫、守中书；舍人、翰林学士、武骑尉、赐紫金鱼段文昌为中书侍郎：同平章事。
现代文：闰正月初八，任命朝议郎、代理御史中丞、飞骑尉、袭任徐国公、赐绯鱼袋萧亻免担任朝散大夫、代理中书侍郎；任命中书舍人、翰林学士、武骑尉、赐紫金鱼袋段文昌为中书侍郎、同平章事。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the leap year, he appointed Chaozheiro, acting Goshi Chujo, Fei Jiao, and succeeded to the post of Xu Guogong, and gave the fish bag to Xiao Yimeng to serve as the doctor of the morning sun, acting as the secretary of the middle school; appointed the book keeper of the middle school, Hanlin bachelor, Wu Jiao, and gave the purple gold fish bag to Duan Wenchang as the secretary of the middle school, and the same chapter.

古文：上始御延英对宰臣。
现代文：皇上开始驾临延英殿与宰臣谈话。
English: The Emperor began to arrive at Nobuhide's palace to talk with the Vice-Minister.

古文：诏曰： 山人柳泌轻怀左道。上惑先朝。
现代文：诏令说： 山人柳泌，轻浮地怀着邪道，从前迷惑了先朝皇帝。
English: The imperial edict said: The mountain man Liu Xuan, frivolously harboring evil thoughts, once confused the emperor of the previous dynasty.

古文：固求牧人，贵欲疑众，自知虚诞，仍更遁逃。
现代文：一心只想谋求官职，富贵之后还想迷惑众人，连自己也知道荒诞无稽，因而变更姓名逃跑。
English: He only wanted to run for public office. After he became rich, he wanted to deceive people. Even he knew that it was absurd, so he changed his name and ran away.

古文：僧大通医方不精，药术皆妄。
现代文：僧人大通的医道不精，药方都是假的。
English: The medical way of Monk Zhen Datong is not refined, and the prescriptions are all fake.

古文：既延祸衅，俱是奸邪。
现代文：他们既然带来了祸患，都是奸邪之徒。
English: Since they brought about the calamity, they are all evil-doers.

古文：邦国固有常刑，人神所宜共弃，付京兆府决杖处死。 
现代文：国家向来都有一定的刑律，这两人是人神应当共弃的，把他们交给京兆府以杖刑处死。 
English: The country has always had a certain code of punishment. These two people should be abandoned by both humans and gods. They should be handed over to the Beijing Municipal Government to be sentenced to death with a cane.

古文：金吾将军李道古贬循州司马。
现代文：金吾将军李道古被贬为循州司马。
English: Kingu's general, Li Daogu, was demoted to the rank of chuzhou sima.

古文：宪宗未年，锐于服饵，皇甫镈与李道古荐术人柳泌、僧大通待诏翰林。
现代文：宪宗末年时，执意于服药之事，皇甫钅甫寸与李道古举荐方术之士柳泌、和尚大通为翰林院待诏。
English: At the end of the Kenzong's life, when he insisted on taking medicine, the Emperor Fusang Fusun and Li Daogu recommended the practitioners Liu Xiu and Monk Datong for the Hanlin Institute.

古文：泌于台州为上鍊神丹，上服之，日加躁渴，遽弃万国。
现代文：柳泌在台州为皇上炼神丹，宪宗皇帝服下之后，一天比一天烦躁、干渴，突然离弃了万乘之国而逝世。
English: Liu Xiu was in Taizhou to refine God's earth for the emperor. After serving the emperor Xianzong, he became more and more irritable and thirsty day by day. He suddenly left the country of Wanxiang and passed away.

古文：甲寅，二王后介国公宇文仲达卒，有司与旧典葬祭之。
现代文：闰正月十一日，二王的后代介国公宇文仲达去世，官府按照旧典安葬祭奠他。
English: On the eleventh day of the first month of the leap year, the descendant of the two kings, Shiguo Gongwu Wenzhongda, passed away, and the government paid tribute to him in accordance with the old tradition.

古文：以监察御史李德裕、右拾遗李绅、礼部员外郎庾敬休并守本官，充翰林学士。
现代文：命监察御史李德裕、右拾遗李绅、礼部员外郎庾敬休均暂署本职，充任翰林学士。
English: Li Deyu, overseer of the imperial history department, Li Sheng, overseer of the imperial heritage department, and Wai Lang Yu Keijie, member of the etiquette department, all temporarily assumed their duties and served as scholars of Hanlin.

古文：丁巳，以剑南东川节度使李逢吉为襄州刺史，充山南东道节度使；以吏部侍郎王涯检校礼部尚书、梓州刺史，充剑南东川节度使。
现代文：闰正月十四日，任命剑南、东川节度使李逢吉为襄州刺史，充任山南东道节度使；任命吏部侍郎王涯为检校礼部尚书、梓州刺史，充任剑南、东川节度使。
English: On the 14th day of the first month of the leap year, Jiannan and Dongchuan appointed Li Fengji as the Xiangzhou festival secretary and served as the Shannan host festival secretary; appointed Wang Lai, the attendant of the personnel department, as the school inspection ceremony department, and appointed Zizhou as the Jiannan and Dongchuan festival secretary and served as the Jiannan and Dongchuan festival secretary.

古文：己未，改恆岳为镇岳，恆州来镇州，定州恆阳县为曲阳县。
现代文：闰正月十六日，把恒岳改为镇岳，恒州改为镇州，定州的恒阳县改为曲阳县。
English: On the 16th day of the leap month, Hengyue was changed to Zhenyue, Hengzhou was changed to Zhenzhou, and Hengyang County in Dingzhou was changed to Quyang County.

古文：恆王房子孙改为泜王房。
现代文：把恒王一房的子孙改为氵氐王一房。
English: The descendants of King Heng's one-room house were changed to King Gong's one-room house.

古文：丙寅，以右神策大将军张维清为单于大都护，充振武麟胜节度使。
现代文：闰正月二十三日，任命右神策大将军张维清为单于大都护，充任振武、麟胜节度使。
English: On the 23rd day of the first month of the leap year, Zhang Weiqing, the general of the Right Divine Policy, was appointed as the single guardian of the capital, serving as the Zhenwu and Lin Sheng Festival envoy.

古文：丁卯，上及群臣皆释服从吉。
现代文：闰正月二十四日，皇帝和大臣们都除下丧服改穿吉服。
English: On the 24th day of the leap month, the emperor and his ministers took off their mourning clothes and put on auspicious ones.

古文：戊辰，群臣始朝于宣政衙。
现代文：闰正月二十五日，大臣们开始在宣政衙朝见皇帝。
English: On the 25th day of the first month of the leap year, the ministers began to make proclamations and visit the emperor.

古文：是夜地震。
现代文：当夜发生地震。
English: An earthquake occurred that night.

古文：庚午，册大行皇帝贵妃郭氏为皇太后。
现代文：闰正月二十七日，册封已故先皇帝的贵妃郭氏为皇太后。
English: On the 27th day of the leap month, Guo, the late emperor's noble consort, was proclaimed empress dowager.

古文：贬谏议大夫李景俭为建州刺史。
现代文：把谏议大夫李景俭贬职为建州刺史。
English: Li Jingjian, the doctor who was in charge of the negotiations, was demoted to the position of secretary of state.

古文：二月癸酉朔。
现代文：二月初一为癸酉日。
English: The first day of February is New Year's Day, the first day of the month.

古文：丁丑，御丹凤楼，大赦天下。
现代文：二月初五，皇帝驾临丹凤楼，下诏大赦天下。
English: On the fifth day of the second month of the year, the emperor arrived at the Danfeng Building and issued an edict of amnesty to the world.

古文：宣制毕，陈俳优百戏于丹凤门内，上纵观之。
现代文：宣读敕命完毕之后，在丹凤门内演出优伶表演的杂技，皇上尽情地观看了演出。
English: After the reading of the imperial edict was completed, an excellent acrobatic performance was performed inside the Danfeng Gate, and the emperor watched the performance with pleasure.

古文：丁亥，幸左神策军观角抵及杂戏，日昃而罢。
现代文：二月十五日，皇帝临幸左神策军观看角抵戏和杂剧。太阳西斜才停止。
English: On February 15th, Emperor Linxing and Zuo Shenshu's army watched the battle of the horns and a variety show. The sun's westward tilt only stopped.

古文：癸巳，罢邕管经略使，所管州县隶邕府。
现代文：二月二十一日，撤销邕管经略使，其所管辖的州县隶属于邕府。
English: On February 21st, the Deputy Governor of Gansu was revoked, and the prefectures and counties under his jurisdiction were subordinated to Gansu.

古文：甲午，以桂管观察使裴行立为安南都护，充本管经略使。
现代文：二月二十二日，任命桂管观察使裴行立为安南都护，充任本管区域的经略使。
English: On February 22, Pei Xingli, the Guizhou observation envoy, was appointed as the guardian of Annan, and served as the economic envoy of the region.

古文：乙未，以太仆卿杜式方为桂州刺史，充桂管观察使。
现代文：二月二十三日，任命太仆寺卿杜式方为桂州刺史，充任桂管观察使。
English: On February 23rd, Du Shikifang, Taipo Jiaqing, was appointed as the official historian of Guizhou, and served as the Guizhou Guan Observation Envoy.

古文：丙申，丹王逾薨。
现代文：二月二十四日，丹王李逾去世。
English: On the 24th, the king of the Dan Dynasty, Li You, passed away.

古文：丁酉。敕入回纥使宜与私觌正员官十三员，入吐蕃使与八员。
现代文：二月二十五日，敕令进入回纥的使臣应当与私交的十三名正员官一起前往，进入吐蕃的使臣与八名官员一起前往。
English: On February 25th, the Emperor ordered that the envoys entering Huizhou should go together with thirteen officials who were personal friends, and the envoys entering Tubo should go together with eight officials.

古文：庚子，太子宾客吕元膺卒。
现代文：二月二十八日，太子宾客吕元膺去世。
English: On February 28th, the prince's guest Lü Yuanxuan passed away.

古文：辛丑，以户部侍郎杨于陵为户部尚书。
现代文：二月二十九日，任命户部侍郎杨於陵为户部尚书。
English: On the 29th of February, he appointed Yang Yu Ling, the steward of the household, as the secretary of the household.

古文：壬寅，敕举贤良方正、直言极谏等科目人，宜令中书门下尚书省四品已上于尚书省同试。
现代文：二月三十日，敕令荐举贤良方正、直言极谏等科目的人才，应当令中书省、门下省、尚书省秩禄为四品以上的官员在尚书省共同考试。
English: On February 30th, the imperial edict recommended that talent in subjects such as virtuous and upright, and outspoken should be promoted, and that officials with a rank of four or more from the Central Literature Department, the Minority Literature Department, and the Minority Literature Department should take a common examination in the Minority Literature Department.

古文：三月癸卯朔，赠皇太后父郭暧太傅，母虢国大长公主赠齐国大长公主。
现代文：三月初一，追赠皇太后的父亲郭暧为太傅，皇太后的母亲虢国大长公主追赠为齐国大长公主。
English: On the first day of March, the father of the empress dowager, Guo Jun, was posthumously awarded the title of Taifu, and the mother of the empress dowager, the Grand Duchess of Qi, was posthumously awarded the title of Grand Duchess of Qi.

古文：壬子，召侍讲学士韦处厚、路随于太液亭讲《毛诗关雎》、《尚书洪范》等篇。
现代文：三月初十，征召侍讲学士韦处厚、路随在太液亭讲解《毛诗·关雎》、《尚书·洪范》等篇章。
English: On the 10th day of the 3rd month of the year, assistant lecturers Wei Shuanghou and Lu Zui were summoned to lecture on the chapters of "Mao Shi, Guanzhang" and "Shang Shu, Hong Fan" at Taiyue Pavilion.

古文：既罢，并赐绯鱼袋。
现代文：讲完之后，均授予他们绯鱼袋。
English: After the speech, they were all given carp bags.

古文：左右军中尉马进潭、梁守谦、魏弘简等请立门戟，从之。
现代文：左右军中尉马进潭、梁守谦、魏弘简等请求在宫门设立木戟，皇帝允从。
English: The left and right army lieutenants Ma Jintan, Liang Shouqian, Wei Hongjian and others requested to set up a raft at the palace gate, and the emperor agreed.

古文：以太子詹事分司东都韦贯之为河南尹。
现代文：任命太子詹事，分掌东都的韦贯之为河南尹。
English: Prince Zhan Zhi was appointed, and Wei Quanzhong, who was in charge of the eastern capital, was named Henan Yin.

古文：丁巳，御史中丞崔植奏： 元和十二年敕，御史台三院御史据除拜上日为先后，未上日不得计月数。
现代文：三月十五日，御史中丞崔植上奏说 ：元和十二年的敕令说，御史台三院的御史根据拜官上任的时间作为先后，还没有上任的日子不得计入月数。
English: On March 15th, Goshi Chujo Cui Zhi Shangso said: The imperial edict of the 12th year of the Yuan Dynasty said that the Goshi of the Goshidai Sanin was based on the time when the officials took office, and the days not yet taken office should not be counted in the number of months.

古文：又准其年九月十七日敕，逾一个月不在此限，行立班次，即宜以敕内先后为定。
现代文：又按照当年九月十七日的敕令，超过了拜官日一个月上任的不在此限。上朝排列站立的班次，就应当以拜官敕文的先后作为定准。
English: Also, according to the royal decree of September 17 of that year, it is not limited to those who have been in office for more than a month after the day of worship. The order of standing in the morning should be based on the order of worship.

古文：臣观此后敕未便事宜，请自今后三院御史职事行立，一切依敕文先后为定，除拜上日便为月数。 
现代文：臣看这后一道敕令不便于行事。希望从今以后，三院御史职官的排列班次就以拜官敕文时间的先后为定，拜官敕文的日期就计入月数。 
English: It is my hope that from now on, the chronological order of the officials in charge of the history of the Three Great Houses will be determined by the time of the ceremony, and the date of the ceremony will be included in the number of months.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇上允从。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：戊午，吏部尚书赵宗儒奏： 先奉敕，先朝所放制科举人，令与中书门下四品已上官同于尚书省就试者。
现代文：三月十六日，吏部尚书赵宗儒上奏说： 先前接奉敕令，先朝放榜录取的制科举人，令他们与中书省、门下省四品以上的官员一起在尚书省参加考试。
English: On March 16th, Zhao Zongru, the head of the Ministry of Education and Culture, said in his report: "Previously, I received an order from the emperor to let the people who were admitted to the list of the system of subjects take the exam in the Ministry of Education and Culture, together with the officials of the Ministry of Education and Culture and the subordinate provinces with more than four grades.

古文：臣伏以制科所设，本在亲临，南省策试，亦非旧典。
现代文：臣以为制科考试的设置，本意在于皇上亲临参加，尚书省的策试也不是旧制。
English: The vassal thought that the setting of the examination system was originally intended for the emperor to attend in person, and that the book-oriented examination was not the old system.

古文：今覃恩既毕，庶政惟新，况山陵日近，公务繁迫，待问之士，就试非多。
现代文：如今陛下既已广布恩泽，一切的政务都是新的，更何况先帝下葬的日子一天天临近。公务繁忙紧迫，准备问津而参加应试的并不多。
English: Now that His Majesty has been widely favored, all government affairs are new, not to mention that the day of the former emperor's burial is approaching day by day. Official duties are busy and urgent, and there are not many people who are ready to participate in the exam.

古文：臣等商量，恐须停罢。 
现代文：臣等商量，恐怕必须停止、取消这次考试。 
English: I'm afraid we'll have to stop and cancel this exam after consulting with our ministers and others.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇帝允从。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：罢申州岁贡茶。
现代文：取消申州每年进贡茶叶。
English: Cancel the annual tea tax in Shenzhou.

古文：乙丑，以皇太后兄司农卿郭钊为刑部尚书兼司农卿，右金吾卫大将军郭鏦检校工部尚书。
现代文：三月二十三日，任命皇太后的哥哥司农卿郭钊为刑部尚书兼司农卿，右金吾卫大将军郭钅从为检校工部尚书。
English: On March 23rd, the empress dowager's brother Guo Jun, the Secretary of Agriculture, was appointed as the Minister of Justice and the Secretary of Agriculture, and Guo Jun, the General of the Right Wing of the Chinese People's Liberation Army, was appointed as the Minister of Inspection.

古文：丁卯，贬太子宾客留司东都孟简为吉州员外司马。
现代文：三月二十五日，将太子宾客留司东都的孟简贬为吉州员外司马。
English: On March 25th, Meng Jian, who stayed in Dongdu as a guest of the crown prince, was demoted to a member of the Jizhou Provincial Party Committee.

古文：戊辰夜，大风雹。
现代文：三月二十六日夜间，刮大风，降下冰雹。
English: On the night of March 26th, a strong wind blew and hail fell.

古文：夏四月壬申朔。
现代文：夏季，四月初一为壬申日。
English: In summer, the first day of April is Jinshin Day.

古文：丁丑，澧王薨。
现代文：四月初六，澧王李宽去世。
English: On the 6th day of the 4th month of the lunar calendar, the Dragon King Li Kuan passed away.

古文：乙酉，三恪酅国公杨造卒。
现代文：四月十四日，三恪餋国公杨造去世。
English: On April 14th, Yang Zou, the third-highest-ranking official in the country, passed away.

古文：丁亥，敕： 内侍省见管高品官白身，都四千六百一十八人，除官员一千六百九十六人外，其余单贫，无屋室居止，宜每人加衣粮半分。 
现代文：四月十六日，敕令： 内侍省现在掌管的没有功名的高品官吏，总共四千六百一十八人，除了一千六百九十六名官员之外，其余的都很孤苦贫困，没有房屋居住，应当每人增加衣粮半分。 
English: April 16th, edict: The number of meritorious and meritorious high-ranking officials currently in charge of the Ministry of the Interior totals 4,618. With the exception of 1,696 officials, the rest are destitute and have no houses to live in. Each of them should increase their food and clothing by half.

古文：五月壬寅朔。
现代文：五月初一为壬寅日。
English: The first day of May is Jinsin Day.

古文：癸卯，诏： 以国用不足，应天下两税、盐利、榷酒、税茶及户部阙官、除陌等钱，兼诸道杂榷税等，应合送上都及留州、留使、诸道支用、诸司使职掌人课料等钱，并每贯除旧垫陌外，量抽五十文。
现代文：五月初二，诏令说 ：因为国家的经费不足，所有全国春秋两税、盐税、酒税、茶税以及户部缺额官员的俸钱、除陌钱等，加上诸道各种专利杂税等，都应当送往京师，并留下部分作为本州、本使、诸道支取使用及各司使的职司人员津贴钱等，并且每贯钱除了原来抽取的除陌钱之外，再酌量抽取五十文。
English: On the second day of the fifth month, the imperial edict said: "Because of the shortage of state funds, all the national spring and autumn taxes, salt tax, liquor tax, tea tax, as well as the salaries of the missing officials of the household department, except for strange money, etc., plus all kinds of patent miscellaneous taxes, etc., should be sent to Beijing Division, and part should be left for the use of the state, the principal envoy, the various departments, and the allowance money for the functionaries of each division, etc., and in addition to the originally extracted except for strange money, a discretionary amount of fifty mon should be extracted from each money.

古文：仍委本道、本司、本使据数逐季收计。
现代文：仍旧委派本道、本司、本使按数目逐季收取结算。
English: This road, this division, and this envoy are still assigned to collect and settle on a quarterly basis.

古文：其诸道钱便差纲部送付度支收管，待国用稍充，即依旧制。
现代文：各道的钱款即派纲部送交度支司收管，待国家的经费逐渐充裕以后，即按照旧制实行。
English: The money of each province will be sent by the Ministry of Education and Culture to the Department of Education and Culture for collection, and will be implemented in accordance with the old system after the state's funds are gradually sufficient.

古文：其京百司俸料，文官已抽修国学，不可重有抽取；武官所给校薄，亦不在抽取之限。 
现代文：京师百官的职俸津贴钱，文官的已经抽出来用作修国子学，不可再重复抽取；武官的津贴钱，所给的本来就比较微薄，也不在抽取的范围之内。 
English: The salary allowance money of the Beijing teachers and officials has been extracted from the civil servants to be used for national education, and cannot be extracted again; the allowance money of the military attaché, which was originally given is relatively meager, and is not within the scope of extraction.

古文：壬子，诏： 入景陵玄宫合供千味食，鱼肉肥鲜，恐致薰秽，宜令尚药局以香药代食。 
现代文：五月十一日，诏令： 葬入景陵的先帝灵柩应当供奉各种美味的饮食，但鱼肉之类的肥鲜之物，恐怕会引致秽臭之气，应当令尚药局用香药来代替食物。 
English: On May 11th, the imperial edict was issued: the coffin of Emperor Shintoku, who was buried in Jingling Mausoleum, should be offered a variety of delicious foods, but fatty foods such as fish and meat are likely to cause foul odors, and Shang Pharmacy should be ordered to use incense instead of food.

古文：庚申，葬宪宗于景陵。
现代文：五月十九日，把宪宗安葬在景陵。
English: On May 19th, Emperor Gensong was buried in the Jingling Mausoleum.

古文：六月辛未朔，丁丑，以司徒、兼中书令韩弘为河中尹，充河中晋绛慈隰等州节度使。
现代文：六月初一为辛未日。六月初七，任命司徒、兼署中书令韩弘为河中尹，充任河中、晋州、绛州、慈州、隰州等州节度使。
English: On the 7th day of the 6th month of the 1st month of the 6th month of the year, he appointed Sito and Han Hong, who was also a signatory to the Chinese edict, as the "Kechu Yin" and served as the state festival envoys of Kechu, Jinzhou, Luzhou, Cizhou and Luzhou.

古文：安南都护桂仲武奏诛贼首杨清，收复安南府戊寅，以金吾将军李祐检校左散骑常侍，兼夏州刺史，充夏绥银宥节度使，代李听。以听为灵州大都督府长史，充朔方灵盐节度使。
现代文：安南都护桂仲武奏称诛杀贼首杨清，收复安南府。六月初八，任命金吾将军李佑为检校左散骑常侍，兼任夏州刺史，充任夏州、绥州、银州、宥州节度使，以代替李听；任命李听为灵州大都督府长史，充任朔方灵武节度使。
English: On the 8th day of the 6th month of the year, Kingu General Li You was appointed as the left cavalryman of the inspection of the school, and also served as the secretary of the history of Xiazhou, and served as the secretary of the festivals of Xiazhou, Zhangzhou, Yinzhou and Yuzhou to replace Li He; Li He was appointed as the governor of the governor of Lingzhou, and served as the secretary of the festival of the Spring Festival.

古文：以中书舍人王仲舒为洪州刺史、御史中丞，充江西观察使。
现代文：任命中书舍人王仲舒为洪州刺史、御史中丞，充任江西观察使。
English: Appointed Wang Zhongshu, a middle school teacher, as the Hongzhou chief historian and chief historian, and served as the Jiangxi observation envoy.

古文：己卯，放京兆府今年夏青苗钱八万三千五百六十贯，宜委令狐楚，以楚山陵用不尽绫绢，准实估付京兆府，代所放青苗钱。
现代文：六月初九，发放京兆府今年夏季的青苗钱八万三千五百六十贯，事情委派令狐楚办理；因为令狐楚任山陵使，有用不尽的绫绢，可以按照实际估算的价值付给京兆府，代替所发放的青苗钱。
English: On the 9th day of the 6th month of the year, the total amount of the young seedlings money distributed by Jingzhao Prefecture this summer was 83,560 yuan, and the matter was assigned to Lingfuchu to handle; because Lingfuchu served as a mountain messenger, the inexhaustible amount of money could be paid to Jingzhao Prefecture according to the actual estimated value, replacing the young seedlings money distributed.

古文：庚辰，加邠、宁、庆节度使李光颜特进，以城盐州之功也。
现代文：六月初十，加授州宁州庆州节度使李光颜特进的职衔，这是因为他修筑盐州城垣的功劳。
English: On the 10th day of the 6th month of the year, Li Guangyan was awarded the title of "special promotion" during the Ningzhou-Gyeongju Festival. This was for his contribution to the construction of the Yanshou city wall.

古文：以考功员外郎、史馆修撰李翱为朗州刺史，坐与李景俭相善故也。
现代文：任命考功员外郎、史馆修撰李翱为朗州刺史，这是因为他与李景俭相友善的缘故。
English: It was because of his friendship with Li Jingjian that he appointed Gaorang, an examiner, and Li Xuan, a historian at the History Museum, to write the history of Lanzhou.

古文：癸未，并兗州莱芜县入乾封县。
现代文：六月十三日，把兖州的莱芜县并入乾封县。
English: On June 13, Laiwu County of Luzhou was merged into Qianfeng County.

古文：己丑，工部尚书归登卒。
现代文：六月十九日，工部尚书归登去世。
English: On June 19th, the head of the engineering department, Shang Shu, passed away.

古文：壬辰，诏： 帝王所重者国体，所切者人情。
现代文：六月二十二日，诏令 ：帝王所重视的是国家的体统，关切的是人情。
English: On June 22nd, the Emperor issued the following edict: The Emperor attaches importance to the image of the country and is concerned about the human condition.

古文：苟得其体，必臻于大和；如失其情，是由于小利。
现代文：如果得了体统，必然会达到太平；如果失去了人情，必定是因为贪图小利而引起。
English: If dignity is gained, peace will inevitably be achieved; if humanity is lost, it must be caused by greed for small profits.

古文：况设官求理，颁禄责功，教既有常，宁宜就减。
现代文：何况设置官员是为了求得治理，颁发俸禄是要求取得功效，政教既有一定的纲常，就应当减少征敛。
English: Moreover, officials are set up in order to obtain governance, the issuance of salaries is a requirement to obtain effectiveness, and since politics and religion have a certain standard, it is necessary to reduce collection.

古文：近以每岁经费，量入数少，外官俸料，据数收贯。
现代文：近时因为每年经费收入的数额太少，外地官员的职俸津贴钱，均根据钱数从每贯中抽取一部分。
English: Recently, because the amount of annual fund income is too small, the salary and allowance money of field officials are all deducted from each cadre according to the amount of money.

古文：朕再三思度，终所未安。
现代文：我再三考虑此事，心里终觉不安。
English: I thought about it and thought about it, and I felt uneasy.

古文：今则岁属丰登，兵方偃息，自宜克己以足用，何得剥下以为谋。
现代文：今年收成虽属于丰登之年，但战乱刚刚平息，当然应当克制自己而满足于现有用费，怎能想方设法地盘剥下面的人呢！
English: Although this year's harvest is a bumper year, the war has just subsided. Of course, we should restrain ourselves and be satisfied with the current expenses. How can we find ways to exploit the people below?

古文：临轩载怀，实所增愧。
现代文：上朝时面对着大臣们，充满在我心中的，是增加了许多惭愧。
English: When I faced the ministers at the last cabinet meeting, I was filled with a lot of shame.

古文：其今年五月敕应给用钱每贯抽五十文，都计一百五十万贯，宜并停抽。 
现代文：今年五月的敕令中说，所有用于职俸津贴的钱从每贯税钱中抽取五十文，总计抽取一百五十万贯，应当全部停止抽取。 
English: According to the royal decree in May this year, all the money used for the salary allowance will be deducted from the per capita tax of 50 yuan, totaling 1.5 million yuan, and the deduction should be completely stopped.

古文：仍出内库钱三十七万五千贯，付度支给用。
现代文：仍旧拿出内库钱三十七万五千贯交付给度支司支取使用。
English: It still took out 375,000 yuan of treasury money and delivered it to the Department of Finance for withdrawal and use.

古文：初，宪宗用兵，擢皇甫镈为相，苛敛剥下，人皆咎之，以至谴逐。
现代文：当初，宪宗起兵作战，提拔皇甫钅甫寸为宰相，苛刻聚敛，盘剥下级，人人都怪罪他，以至落得被遣被逐。
English: At first, Emperor Kenzong raised an army to fight, promoted Emperor Fusang Fusang to the post of prime minister, collected people harshly, and bullied his subordinates. Everyone blamed him, and he ended up being exiled.

古文：至是宰臣创抽贯之利，制下，人情不悦，故罢之。
现代文：从此宰相开创了从每贯钱中抽取小利的做法，制命一下达，人心都不舒畅，故而停止这项措施。
English: Since then, the Prime Minister has pioneered the practice of extracting a small profit from every penny. As soon as the order was given, people were not comfortable, so they stopped this measure.

古文：癸巳，皇太后移居兴庆宫，皇帝与六宫侍从大合宴于南内，回幸右军，颁赐中尉等有差。
现代文：六月二十三日，皇太后移居到兴庆宫，皇帝与六宫的宫人侍从皇后，在南内举行盛大宴会，返回皇宫时临幸神策护卫右军，颁赐奖赏宦官们，数额各不相等。
English: On June 23rd, the empress dowager moved to the Xingqing Palace. The emperor and the courtiers of the Sixth Court, who served the empress, held a grand banquet in Nanning. When they returned to the palace, they were blessed by the gods to protect the right-hand army and award prizes to the eunuchs. The amounts were not equal.

古文：自是凡三日一幸左右军及御宸晖、九仙等门，观角抵、杂戏。
现代文：从此，皇帝三日临幸一次神策左、右军并来到宸晖门、九仙门等处，观看角抵戏、杂戏。
English: From then on, on the third day of the imperial visit, the left and right armies came to the Shimen Gate, the Nine Immortals Gate and other places to watch the battle of angles and miscellaneous plays.

古文：秋七月辛朔。
现代文：秋季，七月初一为辛丑日。
English: In autumn, the first day of July is always a bad day.

古文：壬寅，以河中、晋、绛观察使李绛为兵部尚书。
现代文：七月初二，任命河中晋绛观察使李绛为兵部尚书。
English: On the 2nd day of the 7th month of the year, he appointed Jinshun Li to be the inspector general of the military department.

古文：甲辰，以大理卿孔戢为潭州刺史、湖南观察使。
现代文：七月初四，任命大理寺卿孔戢为潭州刺史、湖南观察使。
English: On the 4th day of the 7th month of the lunar calendar, Kong Qian, the chief priest of Dali Temple, was appointed as the prefect of Tanzhou and the observer of Hunan.

古文：乙巳，诏： 皇太后就安长乐，朝夕承颜，慈训所加，庆感兼极。
现代文：七月初五，诏令： 皇太后安居在长乐宫，我朝夕奉承她的慈颜，她给予我慈爱的教导，令我庆幸、感动达到了极点。
English: On the 5th day of the 7th month, the imperial edict stated: The Empress Dowager is now living peacefully in Changle Palace. I flatter her loving face morning and evening, and she gives me loving teachings, which makes me extremely happy and moved.

古文：今月六日是朕载诞之辰，奉迎皇太后于宫中上寿。
现代文：本月六日是我诞辰圣寿日，准备把皇太后奉迎到宫中，向她敬酒。
English: The 6th of this month is the anniversary of my birth. I am preparing to welcome the Empress Dowager to the palace and toast her.

古文：朕既深欢慰，欲与臣下同之。
现代文：我既深感欢欣、慰藉，想要和臣下们共同庆贺。
English: I feel a deep sense of joy and consolation, and I want to celebrate with my subjects.

古文：其日，百僚、命妇宜于光顺门进名参贺，朕于光顺门内殿与百僚相见，永为常式。 
现代文：这一天，百官、命妇应当在光顺门投递名帖表示祝贺，我在光顺门的内殿与百官们相见，成为永久的规矩。 
English: On this day, dignitaries and empresses are supposed to post postcards at the Guangshun Gate to express their congratulations. I meet with dignitaries in the inner hall of the Guangshun Gate, which has become a permanent rule.

古文：非典也。
现代文：这是不合典章的。
English: It's against the rules.

古文：郓曹濮等州节度赐号天平军，从马总奏也。
现代文：郓州、曹州、濮州等州的节度使辖区赐号为 天平军 ，这是依从了马总的奏章。
English: The festival of Bozhou, Caozhou, Bozhou and other provinces gave the name of Tianping Army to the jurisdiction area, which was in accordance with Ma Zong's play.

古文：丙午，敕：乙巳诏书载诞受贺仪宜停。
现代文：七月初六，敕令：七月初五的诏书所说诞辰接受朝贺的仪礼应当停止。
English: On the 6th day of the 7th month, the imperial edict stated that the ceremony of receiving morning greetings on birthdays should be stopped.

古文：先是，左丞韦绶奏行之，宰臣以古无降诞受贺之礼，奏罢之。
现代文：在这之前，中书左丞韦绶上奏，准备实行；宰臣认为古代没有皇帝诞辰接受朝贺的礼仪，上奏之后予以取消。
English: Prior to this, the Chinese calligraphy Zu Rong Wei Xuan was performed and prepared to be implemented; Zaisen believed that in ancient times there was no etiquette for receiving morning greetings on the emperor's birthday, and it was canceled after the performance.

古文：丁未，苑内假山毁。压死役者七人。
现代文：七月初七御苑内假山倒塌，压死工匠七人。
English: At the beginning of July, the rockery in Shichigyoen collapsed, crushing seven craftsmen to death.

古文：自五月五雨，至此月壬子始雨。
现代文：从五月开始就未下雨，到本月十二日才下雨。
English: It hasn't rained since May, and it didn't rain until the 12th of this month.

古文：甲寅，御新成永安殿观百戏，极欢而罢。
现代文：七月十四日，皇帝驾临新修成的永安殿观看杂技，欢乐到极点才停止。
English: On July 14th, the emperor arrived at the newly built Yongan Hall to watch the acrobatics, and his joy reached its peak.

古文：乙卯，敕自今后新除节度、观察使到任日，具见在钱帛、斛斗、器械数目分析以闻。
现代文：七月十五日，敕令从今以后新授予的节度使、观察使到任的日子，把现有的钱帛、粮米、攻守器械的数目，分门别类地列具奏闻朝廷。
English: On July 15th, the imperial edict ordered that from now on, the newly-awarded festival envoys and observation envoys should report to the imperial court the number of existing money bags, grain and rice, and offensive and defensive equipment by category.

古文：安南都护行立卒。
现代文：安南都护裴行立去世。
English: Kofi Annan passed away.

古文：是日，上幸安国寺观盂兰盆。
现代文：这一天，皇上临幸安国寺观看盂兰盆会。
English: On this day, the Emperor watched the Bon Festival at Ankoku-ji Temple.

古文：邕管经略使杨旻卒。
现代文：邕管经略使杨去世。
English: Fistula surgery caused Yang's death.

古文：平卢军新加押新罗、渤海两蕃使，赐印一面，许置巡官一人。
现代文：平卢军新加监督新罗、渤海的两蕃使，赐予印信一方，允许设置巡官一人。
English: The Pinglu Army newly added two envoys to supervise Silla and the Bohai Sea, granted the printing side, and allowed to set up one inspector.

古文：新作宝庆殿。
现代文：新建成宝庆殿。
English: The newly built Baoqing Hall.

古文：庚申夜，荧惑入羽林。
现代文：七月二十日夜间，荧惑星进入羽林星域。
English: On the night of July 20th, the fluorescent planet entered the feather forest star region.

古文：壬戌，盛饰安国、慈恩、千福、开业、章敬等寺，纵吐蕃使者观之。
现代文：七月二十二日，对于安国寺、慈恩寺、千福寺、开业寺、章敬寺等寺庙进行华美的装饰，让吐蕃使者进行参观。
English: On July 22nd, the magnificent decorations of temples such as Ankoku-ji Temple, Jion-ji Temple, Senpuku-ji Temple, Kaiei-ji Temple, and Zhangkei-ji Temple were carried out, and the emissaries from Tibet were allowed to visit.

古文：丙寅，以新成永安殿，与中宫贵主密宴以乐之，嫔妃皆预。
现代文：七月二十六日，因为新建成永安殿，皇帝和皇后、公主举行私宴以行乐，妃嫔们都参加了。
English: On July 26th, because of the newly built Yongan Hall, the emperor and queen and princess held a private banquet to have fun, and the concubines all attended.

古文：丁卯，以门下待郎、平章事令狐楚为宣州刺史、兼御史大夫，充宣、歙、池观察使。
现代文：七月二十七日，任命门下侍郎、平章政事令狐楚为宣州刺史，兼任御史大夫，充任宣州歙州池州观察使。
English: On the 27th of July, he appointed his servant, Taira no Shosho (平章政事令) to be the chief historian of Xuanzhou, concurrently serving as the chief historian and acting as the observer of Xuanzhou and Chizhou.

古文：楚为山陵使，纵吏于翚刻下，不给工徒价钱，积留钱十五万贯，为羡余以献，故及于贬。
现代文：令孤楚为山陵使，纵容吏员于羽军刻薄地对待下属，不付给亻夫役工钱，积留下的钱达到十五万贯，作为羡余钱献给朝廷，因而落得被贬职。
English: He treated his subordinates harshly, did not pay the woodcutter's wages, and left a sum of money amounting to one hundred and fifty thousand yuan to be given to the imperial court as surplus money. As a result, he was demoted.

古文：八月庚午朔。
现代文：八月初一为庚午日。
English: The first day of August is Geng Wu Day.

古文：辛未，兵部尚书杨于陵总百僚钱货轻重之议，取天下两税、榷酒、盐利等，悉以布帛任土所产物充税，并不徵见钱，则物渐重，钱渐轻，农人见免贱卖匹段。
现代文：八月初二，兵部尚书杨於陵总结了百官有关钱货轻重的议论后建议，收取天下的春秋两税、酒税、盐税时，全部以布帛等土地所出产的物品充作赋税，并不征收现钱，这样实物逐渐贵重，钱款则逐渐轻贱，农民则免于贱卖布帛等物。
English: On the second day of August, Yang Yuling, the secretary of the Ministry of Military Affairs, summed up the discussion about the importance of money and goods and suggested that when collecting the spring and autumn taxes, liquor taxes, and salt taxes, all goods produced by land such as cloth bags should be used as taxes, and cash should not be collected. In this way, physical goods gradually become more expensive, money gradually becomes cheaper, and farmers are exempted from selling cloth bags and other goods at a low price.

古文：请中书门下、御史台诸官长重议施行。
现代文：请中书省、门下省、御史台各司署的官员慎重讨论施行。
English: I would like to ask officials from the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology, the subordinate ministries, and the various departments of the State Administration of History to carefully discuss and implement it.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇帝允从。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：癸酉，太子少傅致仕李鄘卒。
现代文：八月初四，离任退休的太子少傅李庸阝去世。
English: On the 4th day of the 8th month of the lunar calendar, the retired young crown prince Fu Li Yongzhen passed away.

古文：甲戌，安南都护桂仲武斩叛将杨清首以献，收复安南府。
现代文：八月初五，安南都护桂仲武斩下叛将杨清的首级献上，收复了安南府。
English: On the 5th day of the 8th month of the year, Annam's governor, Gui Zhongwu, cut off the head of the traitor Yang Qing and presented it to the emperor, thus recovering Annam Prefecture.

古文：乙亥，赐教坊钱五千贯，充息利本钱。
现代文：八月初六，赐给教坊五千贯钱，以充作收取利息的本钱。
English: On the 6th day of the 8th month, he gave the church 5,000 crowns, which was used to pay the interest.

古文：御勤政楼，问人疾苦。
现代文：皇帝临幸勤政楼，询问人们的疾苦。
English: The emperor Lin Xingxing went to the palace to inquire about people's ailments.

古文：前江西观察使裴次元卒。
现代文：前江西观察使裴次元去世。
English: The previous Jiangxi observation caused the death of Pei Dimen.

古文：己卯，月掩牵牛。
现代文：八月初十，月亮遮蔽牵牛星。
English: On the 10th day of the 8th month, the moon occluded the Morning Star.

古文：同州雨雪，害秋稼。
现代文：同州降雨雪损害秋季的庄稼。
English: The state's rain and snow hurt fall crops.

古文：京兆府户曹参军韦正牧专知景陵工作，刻削厨料充私用，计赃八千七百贯文；石作专知官奉仙县令于翚刻削，计赃一万三千贯，并宜决重杖处死。
现代文：京兆府的户曹参军韦正牧专门掌管景陵的工程，克扣剥削伙房的用料充作私用，赃款总数为八千七百贯钱；专管石料制作的官员奉仙县令于克扣剥削，总计得赃款一万三千贯钱，均判处以重杖刑罚处死。
English: Cao Sangjun Wei Zhengmu, a resident of Jingzha Prefecture, was in charge of the construction of Jingling Tomb. He embezzled the materials used to build the tomb for personal use, and the total amount of stolen money was 8,700 yuan. The officials in charge of stone production were ordered by Xian County to embezzle the money, and the total amount of stolen money was 13,000 yuan. All of them were sentenced to death with a heavy cane.

古文：壬辰，幸鱼藻池，发神策军二千人浚鱼藻池。
现代文：八月二十三日，皇上临幸鱼藻池，调遣二千名神策军侍卫疏浚鱼藻地。
English: On August 23rd, the Emperor Rinchen Dorjee Rinpoche went to the algae pond and dispatched two thousand guards from the Divine Providence Army to dredge the algae.

古文：戊戌，以朝议郎、守御史中丞、武骑尉、赐紫金鱼袋崔植为朝散大夫、守中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：八月二十九日，任命朝议郎、暂署御史中丞、武骑尉、赐紫金鱼袋崔植为朝散大夫、代理中书侍郎、中书门下省同平章事。
English: On August 29th, he appointed Chaozhe Rong, temporarily appointed Mi Shi Zhong Rong, Wu Jia Rong, and awarded a purple gold fish bag to Cui Zhe as the morning sun doctor, acting Chushu waiter, and Chushu disciple of the provincial and provincial level.

古文：己亥，宣歙观察使令狐楚再贬衡州刺史。
现代文：八月三十日，宣歙观察使令狐楚再贬为衡州刺史。
English: On August 30, Xuanzang's observation caused Lingfuchu to be relegated to Hengzhou's history.

古文：九月庚子朔，改河北税盐使为榷盐使。
现代文：九月初一，把河北税盐使改为榷盐使。
English: On the first day of September, the name of Hebei Tax and Salt Commission was changed to Salt Commission.

古文：辛丑，大合乐于鱼藻宫，观竞渡。
现代文：九月初二，皇帝在鱼藻宫观赏大型音乐会并观看舟船竞渡。
English: On the second day of the first month of September, the emperor attended a large-scale concert and watched a boat race in the Aquatic Palace.

古文：又召李醖、李光颜入朝，欲于重阳日宴群臣。
现代文：又征召李朔心、李光颜入朝，想在重阳节那天宴会群臣。
English: He also conscripted Li Shuo Xin and Li Guangyan into the imperial court, and wanted to hold a banquet for the courtiers on the day of the Chung Yeung Festival.

古文：拾遗李珏等上疏谏云： 元朔未改，园陵尚新。
现代文：拾遗李珏等人上疏劝谏说 ：年号还没有改，先皇的陵园还是新的。
English: Li Yao, who collected the remains, and others went up to persuade Yao, saying, "The year has not been changed, and the former emperor's cemetery is still new.

古文：虽易月之期，俯从人欲；而三年之制，犹服心丧。
现代文：即使月份的时间改换了，想要服从个人的欲望；而按照三年守孝的规矩，还要保持心中的悼念。
English: Even if the time of the month is changed, I want to obey my personal desires; but according to the rules of three years of filial piety, I still have to keep the mourning in my heart.

古文：夫遏密弛禁，盖为齐人；合乐内庭，事将未可。 
现代文：皇帝归天后停止举乐，延迟开禁的时间，都是为了整治人心，在内廷演奏音乐，事情恐怕是不可行的。 
English: After the emperor's return to China, he stopped playing music and delayed the start of the ban, all in order to rectify the hearts of the people and play music in the inner court. I am afraid it is not feasible.

古文：不听。
现代文：皇帝不听取劝谏。
English: The emperor does not allow it.

古文：乙巳，以驾部郎中、知制诰李宗闵为中书舍人。
现代文：九月初六，任命驾部郎中、知制诰李宗闵为中书舍人。
English: On the 6th day of the 9th month of the year, Li Zongya, the second-in-command of the cavalry and the third-in-command of the imperial troops, was appointed as the secretary of the Chinese Academy of Letters.

古文：宋州大水，损田六千顷。
现代文：宋州发生大水灾，冲毁农田六千顷。
English: A major flood occurred in Songzhou, destroying six thousand hectares of farmland.

古文：戊申，以重阳节曲宴郭钊兄弟、贵戚、主婿等于宣和殿。
现代文：九月初九，因为是重阳节，在宣和殿举行小宴招待郭钊兄弟、贵戚、驸马等。
English: On the 9th day of the 9th month, because it was the Double Ninth Festival, a small banquet was held at the Xuanhe Hall to invite Guo Zheng's brothers, relatives, horses and so on.

古文：己酉，大酺三日，至是雨雪，树木无风而摧仆者十五六。
现代文：九月初十，先连下了三日大雨，到这天下起雪来，没有刮风而树木的十之五六都倒在地上。
English: At the beginning of the tenth of September, after three days of heavy rain, it snowed. There was no wind and fifty-six percent of the trees fell to the ground.

古文：以吏部侍郎崔群为御史大夫。
现代文：任命吏部侍郎崔群为御史大夫。
English: He appointed Choi Qun, a chamberlain of the cadre department, as a goshi taifu.

古文：沧、景水，损田。
现代文：沧州、景州发生水灾，淹没农田。
English: Floods occurred in Cangzhou and Jingzhou, inundating farmland.

古文：戊午，加河东节度使、金紫光录大夫、检校尚书右仆射、兼门下侍郎、同平章事、太原尹、北都留守、上柱国、晋国公、食邑三千户裴度守司空、门下侍郎、同平章事。
现代文：九月十九日，加授河东节度使、金紫光禄大夫、检校尚书右仆射、兼门下侍郎、同平章事、太原尹、北都留守、上柱国、晋国公、食邑三千户裴度为署理司空、门下侍郎、同平章事。
English: On September 19th, he was awarded the title of the Hedong Festival Delegate, the title of the Jin Zi Guanglu Doctor, the title of the Inspector of Schools, the title of the Right Footman, the title of the Attendant, the title of the Subordinate Servant, the title of the Subordinate Servant, the title of the Subordinate Servant, the title of the Subordinate Servant, the title of the Subordinate Servant, the title of the Subordinate Servant, the title of the Subordinate Servant, the title of the Subordinate Servant, the title of the Subordinate Servant, the title of the Subordin

古文：以邠宁节度使、检校司空、邠州刺史、上柱国、武威郡开国公、食邑二千户李光颜并同中书门下平章事。
现代文：任命宁节度使、检校司空、州刺史、上柱国、武威郡开国公、食邑二千户李光颜并任中书省门下省同平章事。
English: Li Guangyan was appointed as the Ning Festival Commissioner, the School Inspection Officer, the State Chief Historian, the Founder of Shangzhuang Province and Wuwei County, and the Governor of 2,000 households in Shueyi County, and also served as the Provincial Co-equal Secretary of the Ministry of Education.

古文：又武宁军节度使、徐泗濠等州观察等使、检校尚书左仆射、徐州刺史、上柱国、凉国公、食邑三千户李醖为同中书门下平章事、潞州大都督府长史，充昭义军节度、泽潞磁邢洺观察处置等使。
现代文：又任命武宁军节度使、徐州、泗州、濠州观察使、检校尚书左仆射、徐州刺史、上柱国、凉国公、食邑三千户李朔心为中书省门下省同平章事、潞州大都督府长史，充任昭义军节度使、泽州、潞州、磁州、邢州、氵名州观察使等。
English: He also appointed Wu Ning Jun's envoy to the festival, Xuzhou, Zhangzhou and Zhangzhou observation envoys, Shangshu Zuopu Xie, Xuzhou Zhishi, Shangzhuang Guo, Liang Guo Guo and Li Shuo Xin to be the provincial subordinate of Zhongshu, and the governor of Zhangzhou to be the festival envoy of Zhao Yi Jun, and the observation envoys of Zhezhou, Zhangzhou, Zhengzhou, Zhangzhou, Zhangzhou and Yiming.

古文：夏州奏移宥州于长泽县置。
现代文：夏州奏请把宥州的治所迁移到长泽县。
English: Please relocate Yuzhou's justice center to Nagasawa County.

古文：辛酉，宴李光颜、李醖于麟德殿，颁赐优厚。
现代文：九月二十二日，皇上在麟德殿宴请李光颜、李朔心，赏赐很优厚。
English: On September 22nd, the emperor invited Li Guangyan and Li Shuo Xin to a banquet at the Lin De Palace, and the rewards were very generous.

古文：以袁州刺史韩愈为朝散大夫、守国子祭酒，复赐金紫。
现代文：任命袁州刺史韩愈为朝散大夫、署理国子祭酒，又赐给金章紫绶。
English: He appointed Han Yu, a scholar from Yuzhou, as the doctor of morning decoction and the deputy of the national son's sacrificial wine, and gave him the gold medal and purple ribbon.

古文：丙寅，以御史大夫崔群检校兵部尚书、徐州刺史，充武宁军节度、徐泗宿濠观察等使；以将作监崔能为广州刺史，充岭南节度使。
现代文：九月二十七日，任命御史大夫崔群为检校兵部尚书、徐州刺史，充任武宁军节度使、徐州、泗州、宿州、濠州观察使；任命将作监崔能为广州刺史，充任岭南节度使。
English: On September 27th, Cui Qun, the superintendent of history, was appointed as the inspector of the military inspection department of Shangshu and Xuzhou, and served as the festival envoy of the Wu Ning Army and the observation envoy of Xuzhou, Zhangzhou, Suzhou and Zhangzhou; Cui Qun, the superintendent of history, was appointed as the inspector of Guangzhou and served as the festival envoy of Lingnan.

古文：丁卯以兵部尚书李绛为御史大夫。
现代文：九月二十八日，任命兵部尚书李绛为御史大夫。
English: On September 28th, the head of the Ministry of Military Affairs, Shangshu Li Jie, was appointed to the post of Imperial Historian.

古文：戊辰，以前岭南节度使孔戣为吏部侍郎。
现代文：九月二十九日，任命前岭南节度使孔癸戈为吏部侍郎。
English: On September 29th, the former Lingnan governor appointed Kong Rongge as the attendant of the personnel department.

古文：冬十月庚午朔，阇婆国遣使朝贡。
现代文：冬季，十月初一，婆国派遣使臣前来朝贡。
English: In winter, on the first day of October, the mother country sent envoys to pay tribute.

古文：庚辰，宰相与吐蕃使于中书议事。
现代文：十月十一日，宰相与吐蕃的使臣在中书省议事。
English: On October 11th, the Prime Minister and the envoy from Tubo had a discussion at the Chinese Literature Ministry.

古文：京百司共赐钱一万贯，仰御史台据司额大小、公事闲剧均之。
现代文：总共赐钱一万贯给在京的各司署，依靠御史台根据各司署人员的多少、公务的闲忙，公平地予以分配。
English: He gave a total of ten thousand yuan to the various departments in Beijing, and relied on the Imperial History Bureau to distribute it fairly according to the number of personnel in each department and the idleness of official duties.

古文：成德军节度使王承宗卒，其弟承元上表请朝廷命帅，遣起居舍人柏耆宣慰之。
现代文：成德军节度使王承宗去世。他的弟弟王承元上表章请求朝廷任命元帅。皇帝派起居舍人柏耆对他表示慰问。
English: Wang Chengzong died during the German military festival. His younger brother Wang Chengyuan requested the imperial court to appoint him as a marshal. The emperor sent his son-in-law, Baodi, to express his condolences.

古文：辛巳，金公亮修成指南车、记里鼓车。
现代文：十月十二日，金公亮造成指南车、记里鼓车。
English: On October 12th, Jin Gongliang created the compass car and the drum car.

古文：壬午，吐蕃寇泾州，命中尉梁守谦将神策军四千人及八镇兵赴援。
现代文：十月十三日，吐蕃进犯泾州，命令中尉梁守谦率领四千名神策军士兵，以及八处节镇的镇兵前去应援。
English: On October 13th, Tubo invaded Bozhou and ordered Lieutenant Liang Shouqian to lead 4,000 soldiers of the Shenzhao Army, as well as the townspeople of eight towns, to come to the rescue.

古文：乙酉，以魏博等州节度观察等使、光禄大夫、检校司徒、兼侍中、魏博大都督府长史、上柱国、沂国公、食邑三千户、实封三百户田弘正可检校司徒、兼中书令、镇州大都督府长史、成德军节度、镇冀深赵等州观察处置等使。
现代文：十月十六日，任命魏博等州节度使、观察使、光禄大夫、检校司徒，兼任侍中、魏博大都督府长史、上柱国、沂国公、食邑三千户、实封三百户田弘正为检校司徒，兼中书令、镇州大都督府长史、成德军节度使、镇州、冀州、深州、赵州等州观察处置使。
English: On October 16th, he appointed Wei Bo and other states as the festival envoy, observation envoy, Guanglu doctor, and school inspector, and concurrently served as the chamberlain, Wei Bo governor, Shangzhuang Province, Shandong Province, 3,000 households in food villages, and 300 households in real estate, and Tian Hongzheng as the school inspector, and concurrently served as the middle secretary, Zhenzhou governor, Chengde Army festival envoy, Zhenzhou, Jizhou, Shenzhou, Zhaozhou and other states observation and disposition envoy.

古文：以镇冀深赵等观察度支使、朝议郎、试金吾左卫胄曹参军兼监察御史王承元可银青光禄大夫、检校工部尚书、使持节滑州诸军事、守滑州刺史、御史大夫，充义成军节度、郑滑等州观察等使。
现代文：任命镇州、冀州、深州、赵州等州观察度支使、朝议郎、试任金吾左卫胄曹参军、兼监察御史王承元为银青光禄大夫、检校工部尚书，使其持节掌滑州诸军事、署理滑州刺史、御史大夫，充任义成军节度使、郑州、滑州等州观察使。
English: Appointed Zhenzhou, Jizhou, Shenzhou, Zhaozhou and other states as observation level envoys, councilors, trial appointment of King Wuzao to join the army, and supervision of Wang Chengyuan as Yin Qingguanglu doctor, inspector of the school inspection department, and made him hold the position of the military of Luzhou, acting as the military historian of Luzhou and the military historian of Zhaozhou, and acting as the military observer of Yicheng Army, Zhengzhou, Luzhou and other states.

古文：以昭义节度使、检校尚书左仆射、同中书门下平章事李醖可本官，为魏州大都督府长史，充魏博等州节度、观察等使。
现代文：任命昭义军节度使、检校尚书左仆射、中书门下省同平章事李朔心以本官任魏州大都督府长史，充任魏博等州节度使、观察使等。
English: He appointed Zhaoyijun as the festival envoy, Shangshu Zuopuchai as the inspector of schools, and Li Shuoxin as the governor of Wei Province, and served as the festival envoy and observation envoy of Wei Bo and other provinces.

古文：以义成军节度使刘悟依前检校右仆射、兼潞州大都督府长史，充昭义节度、泽潞邢洺磁等州观察等使。
现代文：任命义成军节度使刘悟仍旧担任检校右仆射，兼任潞州大都督府长史，充任昭义军节度使、泽州、潞州、邢州、氵名州、磁州等州观察使等。
English: The appointment of the Yicheng Army Festival made Liu Wuxu still serve as the right-hand man of the school inspection, concurrently served as the governor of the prefecture of Zhangzhou, and served as the festival envoy of the Shouyi Army, and the state observation envoy of Zhezhou, Zhangzhou, Zhangzhou, Shennai, and Magnetic.

古文：以左金吾将军田布为检校左散骑常侍、兼怀州刺史、御史大夫，充河阳三城怀孟节度使。
现代文：任命左金吾将军田布为检校左散骑常侍，兼任怀州刺史、御史大夫，充任河阳三城、怀孟节度使。
English: He appointed Tian Bu, the left Kingu general, as the regular attendant of the left sanzhijiao of the inspection of the school, and also served as the scribe of Waizhou and the master of history, and served as the festival envoy of the three cities of Heyang and Meng.

古文：乙酉，泾州奏吐蕃退去。
现代文：泾州上奏说吐蕃已经退兵。
English: Zhangzhou Shangsuo said that Tubo had retired.

古文：时夏州节度使田缙贪猥，侵刻党项羌，羌引西蕃入寇，赖郝玼、李光颜奋命拒之，方退。
现代文：当时夏州节度使田缙贪婪鄙贱，侵害党项羌族，羌人引导西蕃人入侵，幸亏郝繣、李光颜拚命抵抗，西蕃人才退去。
English: At that time, the Xiazhou Festival made Tian Xuan greedy and despicable, infringing on the party and the Yao people, and the Yao people led the West Yao people to invade. Fortunately, Yao and Li Guangyan resisted with their lives, and the West Yao people retreated.

古文：丁亥，西川奏吐蕃侵雅州，令发兵镇守。
现代文：十月十八日，西川上奏说吐蕃侵犯雅州，朝廷命派兵前去镇守。
English: On October 18th, Saikawa reported that Tubo had invaded Yashu, and the imperial court ordered soldiers to defend the town.

古文：东川节度使王涯陈破吐蕃策，言以厚赂北蕃，俾入西蕃，据地得人多少赏之。
现代文：东川节度使王涯陈奏击败吐蕃的策略，说用厚赂给予北蕃，令其进入西蕃，根据占有土地获得人口的多少来奖赏他。
English: The Dongchuan Festival made Wang Lai Chen play the strategy of defeating Tubo, saying that he would use a heavy bribe to give North Tubo to enter West Tubo and reward him according to how much land he occupied and how many people he gained.

古文：十一月乙亥朔。
现代文：十一月初一为己亥日。
English: The first day of the first month of November is the day of the boar.

古文：癸卯，制： 朕闻帝王丕宅四海，子育群生，如天无不覆，如日无不烛。
现代文：十一月初五，诏书说： 我听说帝王把四海看成一所巨大的宅院，像儿子一样地养育着百姓们，就像天无处不能覆盖，又像太阳无处不能照耀一样。
English: On the fifth day of the eleventh month, the imperial edict said: I have heard that the emperor regards the four seas as a huge mansion, and raises the people like sons, just as the sky can cover nowhere, and just as the sun can shine nowhere.

古文：乃睠冀方，初丧戎帅，念乎三军之事，洎于四州之人。
现代文：却看到那冀州地方，刚刚失去了元帅，想到了三军的事务，推及于四个州的百姓。
English: But when he saw the region of Nagi Prefecture, which had just lost its marshal, he thought of the affairs of the three armies, which affected the people of the four prefectures.

古文：或怀忠积诚，而思用莫展；或灾荒兵役，而望恤何阶。
现代文：有的心怀忠心，积累着诚信，而才能不得施展；有的处于灾荒兵役之中，盼望抚恤，路径又在何方？
English: Some people are loyal and have accumulated good faith, but they are unable to use their talents; some are in the midst of military service in the midst of a natural disaster, hoping for a pension, and where is the path?

古文：今则昌运一开，诚节咸著。
现代文：如今昌明的运数一开，诚信节操都得到了表现。
English: Now that the operation of Changming has begun, the integrity and efficiency have been fully demonstrated.

古文：王承元首陈章疏，愿赴阙庭。
现代文：王承元首先陈奏了表章，希望前来朝廷。
English: Wang Chengyuan first played the watch chapter, hoping to come to the imperial court.

古文：永念父兄之忠，克固君臣之义，已加殊奖，别委重籓。
现代文：他长久地怀念着父兄的忠诚，能固守君臣的大义，已经对他加以特殊的奖励，另行委任他重要的藩镇。
English: He has long remembered the loyalty of his father and brother, and has been able to adhere to the great justice of the monarchs and ministers. He has given him a special reward and appointed him as an important hanzhen.

古文：又念成德军将士等，叶谋向义，丹款载申，咸欲效其器能，各宜列之爵秩。
现代文：又想到成德军的将士们，协力谋划，心向大义；赤心款曲得以充分表达，都想以他们的器识才能效力于朝廷，都应当列名于王爵。
English: I also thought of the soldiers of the German army, who worked together to plan, and their hearts were for the greater good; they were able to fully express the song of the heart, and they all wanted to use their abilities to serve the imperial court, and they should all be listed in the peerage.

古文：大将史重归、牛元翼已超授宠荣，今更都加厚赐。
现代文：大将史重归、牛元翼已经破格授予宠幸荣耀的职位，如今更都给予厚赏。
English: General history has returned, and Niu Yuan Ying has been exceptionally awarded the position of favorite glory, and now he is given a rich reward.

古文：宜令谏议大夫郑覃往镇州宣慰，赐钱一百万贯。
现代文：应当派谏议大夫郑覃前往镇州表示慰问之意，赐钱一百万贯。
English: Dr. Zheng Rong should be sent to Zhenzhou to express condolences and give a million yuan.

古文：王泽所洽，天纲方恢，宥过释冤，与人休泰。
现代文：帝王的恩泽普遍流布，天网宽大无边，原谅罪过，消除冤情，帮助人们得到快乐和太平。
English: The emperor's benevolence is widespread, the sky net is wide and boundless, forgiving sins, eliminating grievances, and helping people to be happy and peaceful.

古文：其管内见禁囚徒，罪无轻重，并宜释放。
现代文：管区之内监禁着的囚徒，无论罪轻罪重，都应当一律释放。
English: Prisoners incarcerated within the jurisdiction, regardless of the severity of the crime, should all be released.

古文：朕以武俊之勋劳，光于彝鼎；士真之恭恪，继被节旄。
现代文：我认为王武俊的功勋劳绩，比彝器宝鼎还要光辉；王士真的谦虚谨慎，继承先人被授予节旄。
English: I think that Wang Wujun's merits and achievements are even more brilliant than the eunuch Baoding; the prince is really modest and prudent, and the successors of the predecessors are awarded the eunuch.

古文：承宗感恩，亦克立效。
现代文：王承宗感恩戴德，也能建立功劳。
English: Wang Chengzong is grateful and grateful, and can also establish merit.

古文：永言十代之宥，俾赐一门之荣。
现代文：歌颂十代的宽赦，赐予一门的荣耀。
English: To sing the praises of ten generations of forgiveness, to bestow glory on one family.

古文：承宗兄弟已授官爵，其承宗葬事亦差官监视，务令周厚。 
现代文：王承宗兄弟已经授予官爵，王承宗下葬的事宜也差遣官员监督、看顾，务令事情安排得周到、优厚。 
English: Wang Chengzong's brothers have been awarded the title of nobility, and officials have been dispatched to supervise and take care of Wang Chengzong's burial, ensuring that the arrangements are thoughtful and generous.

古文：丁未，封王承宗祖母李氏为晋国太夫人。
现代文：十一月初九，封王承宗的祖母李氏为晋国太夫人。
English: On the 9th day of the 11th month, Wang Chengzong's grandmother, Li, was named the First Lady of Jin.

古文：辛亥，田弘正奏王承元以今月九日领兵二千人赴镇滑州。
现代文：十一月十三日，田弘正上奏说王承元于本月九日率领三千名士兵前往滑州镇守。
English: On November 13th, Tian Hongzheng reported that Wang Chengyuan led three thousand soldiers to the defense of the town of Slanting on the 9th of this month.

古文：成德军徵赏钱颇急，乃命柏耆先往谕之。
现代文：成德军索取赏钱很急，便命令柏耆先去抚慰他们。
English: The German soldiers were in a hurry to claim the reward money, so they ordered Bao Tong to go and comfort them first.

古文：以华州刺史卫中行为陕州长史，充陕虢观察使；以宗正卿李翱为华州刺史、潼关防御、镇国军使。
现代文：任命华州刺史卫中行为陕州长史，充任陕州、虢州观察使；任命宗正卿李翱为华州刺史、潼关防御使、镇国军使。
English: He appointed Huazhou Zhishi Wei Zhong as the governor of Shaanxi Province, and served as the observation envoy of Shaanxi Province and Zhangzhou Province; appointed Zong Zhengqing Li Yu as the governor of Huazhou Province, the defense envoy of Shaoguan Province, and the envoy of Zhenguo Province.

古文：乙卯，上幸金吾将军郭鏦城南庄，鏦以庄为献。
现代文：十一月十七日，皇上临幸金吾将军郭钅从在城南的庄园，郭钅从把庄园献给皇上。
English: On November 17th, Emperor Linxiang took General Guo Qi away from the manor in the south of the city. Guo Qi dedicated the manor to the Emperor.

古文：戊午，诏曰： 朕来日暂往华清宫，至暮却还。 
现代文：十一月二十日，下诏说： 我明日暂时前往华清宫，到天黑再回来。 
English: On November 20th, he issued the following edict: I will go to Huaqing Palace for a while tomorrow, and come back after dark.

古文：御史大夫李绛、常侍崔元略已下伏延英门切谏。
现代文：御史大夫李绛、常侍崔元略以下的官员匍伏在延英门恳切地劝谏。
English: Officials such as the chief historian Li Xi and the regular attendant Cui Yuanliu stayed at Yan Yingmen to earnestly persuade him to leave.

古文：上曰： 朕已成行，不烦章疏。 
现代文：皇上说 ：我已经出发了，不麻烦你们再呈递奏疏了。 
English: The Emperor said, "I have already set off, so please do not bother to present your report.

古文：谏官再三论列。
现代文：谏官们再三地陈述。
English: The eunuchs stated again and again.

古文：是日，田弘正奏今月十六日入镇州讫。
现代文：这一天，田弘正上奏说，本月十六日他已经进入镇州。
English: On this day, Tian Hongzheng reported that he had entered Zhenzhou on the 16th of this month.

古文：己未，上由复道出城幸华清宫，左右中尉擗仗，六军诸使、诸王、驸马千余人从，至晚还宫。
现代文：十一月二十一日，皇上从复道出城临幸华清宫，左、右卫中尉分掌仪仗，六军诸军使、诸侯王、驸马等一千多人随从，到晚上回到宫中。
English: On November 21st, the emperor went out of the city from Fudao to the palace of King Huazhong. The left and right guard lieutenants were in charge of the ceremonial battle, and more than a thousand people, including the envoys of the six armies, princes, and horses, followed. They returned to the palace in the evening.

古文：癸亥，检校司徒、兼太子少少师郑余庆卒。
现代文：十一月二十五日，检校司徒、兼太子少师郑余庆去世。
English: On November 25th, Zheng Yuqing, the inspector of the school and the young teacher of the prince, passed away.

古文：以渭州刺史、泾原行营兵马使、保定郡王郝玼为庆州刺史。
现代文：任命渭州刺史、泾原行营兵马使、保定郡王郝王比为庆州刺史。
English: He appointed the governor of Gyeongju, the governor of Gyeongwon, and the governor of Baoding as the governor of Gyeongju.

古文：将，深入吐蕃接战，朝廷恐失勇将，故移之内地。
现代文：郝王比是一员勇将，深入吐蕃地区作战，朝廷深恐损失了勇将，因而把他调往内地。
English: Zhai Wangbi was a brave general who fought deep into the Tubo region. The imperial court was deeply afraid of losing the brave general, so he was transferred to the mainland.

古文：十二月己巳朔。
现代文：十二月初一是己巳日。
English: The first day of December is a national holiday.

古文：戊寅，召故女学士宋若华妹若昭入宫掌文奏。
现代文：十二月十日，征召已故女学士宋若华的妹妹宋若昭入宫掌管文案奏章。
English: On December 10, Song Ruo Zhao, the sister of the late female scholar Song Ruohua, was summoned to the palace to take charge of the manuscript.

古文：壬午，幸右军击鞠，遂畋于城西。
现代文：十二月十四日，皇上到神策右军击鞠，便在城西狩猎。
English: On December 14th, the emperor went to Shinsaku to play a game of bowls with the right army, and then went hunting in the west of the city.

古文：丙戌，前昭义军节度使辛秘卒。
现代文：十二月十八日，前昭义军节度使辛秘去世。
English: On December 18th, the former Shao Yi Jun died.

古文：己丑，以库部郎中、知制诰牛僧孺为御史中丞。
现代文：十二月二十一日，任命库部郎中、知制诰牛僧孺为御史中丞。
English: On December 21, he appointed Kube no roju and Chisei yakitori no sojo as goshi chujo.

古文：岭南奏崖州司户参军皇甫镈卒。
现代文：岭南上奏说崖州司户参军皇甫钅甫寸去世。
English: Lingnan Shangxu said that Yazhou Sifu joined the army after the death of Emperor Fuxun.

古文：丙申，以司门员外郎白居易为主客郎中、知制诰。
现代文：十二月二十八日，任命司门员外郎白居易为主客郎中、知制诰。
English: On December 28th, he appointed the gatekeeper, Wairo, Bai Juyi, as the chief guest, and Chisei,.

古文：是岁，计户帐，户总二百三十七万五千四百，口总一千五百七十六万。
现代文：这一年，统计户籍的账目，总共二百三十七万五千四百户，人口总共一千五百七十六万。
English: In that year, the total number of households reached 2,375,400, with a total population of 15,760,000.

古文：定、盐、夏、剑南东西川、岭南、黔中、邕管、容管、安南合九十七州不申户帐。
现代文：定州、盐州、夏州、剑南、东川、西川、岭南、黔中、邕管、容管、安南共九十七州没有申报户籍的账目。
English: A total of ninety-seven prefectures, including Dingzhou, Yanzhou, Xiazhou, Jiannan, Dongchuan, Xichuan, Lingnan, Yuzhong, Shigang, Yangtze, and Annan, did not declare their household registration accounts.

古文：长庆元年正月己亥朔，上亲荐献太清宫、太庙。
现代文：长庆元年正月初一，皇上亲自向太清宫、太庙敬献贡品。
English: On the first day of the first month of the first month of the first year of Changqing, the emperor personally presented tributes to the Taiqing Palace and the Imperial Temple.

古文：是日，法驾赴南郊。
现代文：这一天，皇上的法驾前往南郊。
English: On this day, the emperor's carriage drove to the southern suburbs.

古文：日抱珥，宰臣贺于前。
现代文：太阳的两边围拥着光晕，宰相到皇上面前来致贺。
English: A halo of light surrounded the sun on both sides, and the prime minister came to congratulate the emperor.

古文：辛丑，祀昊天上帝于圆丘，即日还宫，御丹凤楼，大赦天下。
现代文：正月初三，皇上在圆丘祭祀昊天上帝，当天返回皇宫，驾临丹凤楼，大赦天下。
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, the emperor sacrificed to Haotian God in the round mound. On the same day, he returned to the imperial palace, arrived at the Danfeng Building, and pardoned the world.

古文：改元长庆。
现代文：改年号为长庆。
English: The new year's name is Changqing.

古文：内外文武及致仕官三品已上赐爵一及，四品已下加一阶，陪位白身人赐勋两转，应缘大礼移仗宿卫御楼兵仗将士，普恩之外，赐勋爵有差。
现代文：朝内外的文武大臣以及离任退休的官员，三品以上的赐爵位一级，四品以下的加官品一级，没有功名职位的家臣赐予勋官两级，承担大礼的仪仗和侍卫御楼的兵卒将士，除了享有一般的恩泽之外，有区别地赐给勋官爵禄。
English: The ministers of culture and armed forces at home and abroad, as well as retired officials, are awarded a first-class knighthood if they have three or more prizes, a second-class knighthood if they have four or fewer prizes, two-class knighthood if they are a vassal without a meritorious position, and a distinguished knighthood if they are a soldier who undertakes ceremonial battles and guards the Imperial Palace, in addition to enjoying the general grace.

古文：仍准旧例，赐钱物二十万四千九百六十端匹。
现代文：依然遵循旧例，赐给钱物合二十万零四千九百六十匹。
English: Still following the old practice, he gave them money and goods amounting to two hundred and forty-nine thousand and sixty horses.

古文：礼毕，群臣于楼前称贺。
现代文：仪式结束之后，群臣在楼前向皇上道贺。
English: After the ceremony, the courtiers congratulated the Emperor in front of the palace.

古文：仗退，上朝太后于兴庆宫。
现代文：仪仗退下之后，皇上在兴庆宫朝见皇太后。
English: After the ceremonial retreat, the Emperor met the Empress Dowager in the morning at the Xingqing Palace.

古文：壬寅，夏州节度使奏浙东、湖南等道防秋兵不习边事，请留其兵甲，归其人。
现代文：正月初四，夏州节度使上奏说 ：浙东道、湖南道等地的边防军不熟悉戍边的军务，请留下他们的武器甲杖，而把人调回。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, the Xiazhou festival envoy said: the border guards in Zhejiang, Hunan and other places are not familiar with the military affairs of the border, please leave their weapons and swords, and send people back.

古文：灵武节度使李听奏请于淮南、忠武、武宁等道防秋兵中取三千人衣赐月粮，赐当道自募一千五百人马骁勇者以备边。
现代文：灵武节度使李听上奏，请求在淮南道、忠武道、武宁道等地的边防军中抽取三千人，按月赐给衣服粮食，令各道自行招募一千五百名骁勇的人马以备边防。
English: The Lingwu Festival made Li listen to the recital, and he requested that 3,000 people be selected from the border guards in Huainan, Zhongwu and Wu Ning provinces, and that they be given clothes and grain on a monthly basis, and that each province recruit 1,500 brave men and women to prepare for border defense.

古文：仍令五十人为一社，每一马死，社人共补之，马永无阙。
现代文：并令五十人组成一社，每个士兵的马死了，由同社的人共同补充，这样就永远不会缺少马匹了。
English: And he made a company of fifty men, and every soldier's horse died and was replaced by another from the same company, so that there would never be a shortage of horses.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇上允从。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：癸卯，以河阳、怀节度使。田布为泾州刺史，充四镇北庭行营、泾原节度使；以刑部尚书兼司农卿郭钊检校户部尚书、怀州刺史，充河阳三城、怀节度使。以泾原节度使王潜检校兵部尚书、江陵尹，充荆南节度使。
现代文：正月初五，任命河阳怀州节度使田布为泾州刺史，充任四镇北庭行营使、泾原节度使；任命刑部尚书兼司农卿郭钊为检校户部尚书、怀州刺史，充任河阳三城怀州节度使；任命泾原节度使王潜为检校兵部尚书、江陵尹，充任荆南节度使。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, the festival committee of Huaizhou, Heyang was appointed to appoint Tianbu as the inspector of Hanzhou, and he served as the inspector of the four towns of Beiting, and the inspector of the Hanzhongyuan festival; the inspector of the criminal department and the secretary of the Minister of Agriculture, Guo Wei, was appointed as the inspector of the Huzhong school, and he served as the inspector of the Huaizhou school, and he served as the inspector of the three cities of Heyang and the Huzhong school; the inspector of the Huzhong school was appointed

古文：乙巳，鄜坊节度使韩璀改名充。
现代文：正月初七，坊节度使韩璀改名为韩充。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, the emperor changed the name of Hancheng to Hancheng.

古文：己酉，以前检校大理少卿、驸马都尉刘士泾为太仆卿。
现代文：正月十一日，任命前检校大理寺少卿、驸马都尉刘士泾为太仆卿。
English: On the 11th day of the first month of the year, he appointed Liu Shizhen, who was a junior secretary of Dali Temple before the inspection of the school, and Liu Shizhen, who was a lieutenant of the imperial horse, as the chief servant.

古文：给事中韦弘景、薛存庆封还诏书，上谕之曰： 士泾父昌有边功，久为少列十余年，又以尚云安公主，朕欲加恩，制官敕下。 
现代文：给事中韦弘景、薛存庆加上封泥退回诏书，皇上对他们说 ：刘士泾的父亲刘昌在边庭立下战功，刘士泾久任副职有十多年，又因为他娶了云安公主，我想对他施以恩泽，才下了这道任命的敕令。 
English: The imperial edict was returned to Wei Hongjing and Xue Cunqing sealed with mud. The emperor said to them, "Liu Shijun's father, Liu Chang, distinguished himself in the war. Liu Shijun has served as vice-premier for more than ten years, and because he married Princess Yun'an, I wanted to show him favor, so I issued this appointment order."

古文：制命始行。
现代文：制命才得以执行。
English: Only then can the order be carried out.

古文：翰林学士、司勋员外郎李德裕上疏曰： 臣见国朝故事，驸马国之亲密，不合与朝廷要官往来，开元中止尤切。
现代文：翰林学士、司勋员外郎李德裕呈上奏疏说 ：我看本朝的旧例，驸马乃是帝王亲近密切的人，不应当和朝廷的重要官员来往，开元年间对此禁止得尤其严格。
English: Li Deyu, the son-in-law of Hanlin Scholar and Officer of the Order of the Companions of Honour, said in his report: I see the old example of this dynasty, Xima is a person who is close to the emperor and should not have dealings with important officials of the imperial court. This was especially strictly prohibited during the first year of the year.

古文：近日驸马多至宰相及要官宅，此辈无他才可以延接，唯是漏泄禁密、交通中外。
现代文：近来驸马经常到宰相和朝廷要员的私宅中去，这类人没有什么别的才能让人延请接待，只是泄漏宫禁中的机密、结交朝内外的官员而已。
English: Lately, Gongma often goes to the private homes of the prime minister and important members of the imperial court. Such people have no other talent to delay the reception, but only leak secrets from the palace, and make friends with officials inside and outside the DPRK.

古文：伏望宣示驸马等，今后有事任至中书见宰臣，此外不得至宰臣及台省官私第。 
现代文：希望皇上告诫驸马等人，今后有事情可以随意到中书省见宰相，除了中书省之外，不得到宰相和台省官员的私宅中去。 
English: It is hoped that the emperor will admonish Xingma and others that in the future, they are free to go to the Ministry of Chinese Literature to see the prime minister. In addition to the Ministry of Chinese Literature, they are not allowed to go to the private homes of the prime minister and officials of Taiwan Province.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇上允从。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：戊午夜，星孛于翼。
现代文：正月二十日夜间，彗星出现在翼宿天区。
English: On the night of the 20th day of the first month, the comet appeared in the Pleiades.

古文：壬戌，制朝议大夫、守门下侍郎、同中书门下平章事徐国公萧俯为尚书右仆射，累表乞罢政事故也。
现代文：正月二十四日，决定朝议大夫、署理门下侍郎、中书门下省同平章事徐国公萧亻免为尚书右仆射，这是因为他多次上表请求免去政务的缘故。
English: On the 24th day of the first month of the year, it was decided that Xu Guogong Xiaoqi, the doctor of the Council of State, the attendant of the deputy door, and the provincial Tongping chapter under the door of the book, would be exempted from being the right-hand man of the book. This was because he had repeatedly requested to be exempted from government affairs.

古文：癸亥，以左散骑常侍崔元略为黔州刺史，充黔中观察使。
现代文：正月二十五日，任命左散骑常侍崔元略为黔州刺史，充任黔中观察使。
English: On the 25th day of the first month of the year, Cui Yuanli, the left rider's attendant, was appointed as the official historian of Zhangzhou and served as the observation envoy of Zhangzhou.

古文：丁卯，星孛于长辰，近太微西垣南第一星。
现代文：正月二十九日，彗星出现在心宿天区，靠近太微西垣南面第一星。
English: On the 29th day of the first month, the comet appeared in the middle of the night sky, near the first star south of Taiyuan Xigaki.

古文：二月戊辰朔。
现代文：二月初一为戊辰日。
English: The first day of February is the first day of spring.

古文：癸酉，以尚书右仆射萧俯为吏部尚。
现代文：二月初六，任命尚书右仆射萧亻免为吏部尚书。
English: On the 6th day of the 2nd month, Shangshu's right-hand man, Zhao Xiaoqi, was appointed as Shangshu's official.

古文：甲戌，以检校右仆射兼吏部尚书韩皋守右仆射。
现代文：二月初七，任命检校右仆射兼吏部尚书韩皋代理右仆射。
English: On the 7th day of the 2nd month of the year, the school inspector appointed the right-hand man of the shooting and the deputy right-hand man of the shooting.

古文：乙亥夜，太白犯昴。
现代文：二月初八夜间，太白金星干犯昴宿天区。
English: On the night of the 8th day of the 2nd month of the year, the too-white Venus committed a crime in the mansion of heaven.

古文：丙子，上观杂伎乐于麟德殿，欢甚，顾谓给事中丁公著曰： 比闻外间公卿士庶时为欢宴，盖时和民安，甚慰予心。 
现代文：二月初九，皇上在麟德殿观看各种伎艺乐舞，极其高兴，回头对给事中丁公著说 ：近来听说外面的公卿巨族和普通百姓时常举行欢宴，大体上时世太平，百姓安宁，我的心里感到十分宽慰。 
English: On the 9th day of the 2nd month of the year, the emperor was extremely happy to watch all kinds of arts and dances at the Lin De Hall. He looked back and said to Ding Gongzhu: "Recently, I have heard that the great nobles and common people outside often hold banquets. Generally, the world is peaceful and the people are peaceful. I feel very relieved.

古文：公著对曰： 诚有此事。
现代文：丁公著回答说： 确实有这样的事。
English: Ding Gongzhu replied, "This is indeed the case.

古文：然臣之愚见，风俗如此，亦不足嘉。
现代文：不过依臣的愚见，这样的风气，也不值得嘉许。
English: However, such a culture of following the foolish opinions of ministers is not worthy of praise.

古文：百司庶务，渐恐劳烦圣虑。 上曰： 何至于是？ 
现代文：各司署的各种事务，恐怕会逐渐让皇上的心中忧愁、烦恼。 皇上说： 哪里会到这个地步？ 
English: I am afraid that the various affairs of the various departments will gradually make the emperor's heart sad and troubled.The emperor said: Where will it get to this point?

古文：对曰： 夫宾宴之礼，务达诚敬，不继以淫。
现代文：丁公著回答说 ：宾客宴饮的礼节，务求达到诚恳恭敬的目的，而不能延续得过分。
English: Ding Gong replied: The etiquette of guests' banqueting is to achieve the purpose of sincerity and respect, and cannot be extended excessively.

古文：故诗人美 乐且有仪 。讥其屡舞。
现代文：因此诗人赞美 快乐而有礼仪 ，讥诮那些不停地跳舞取乐的人。
English: So the poet praises the happy and the polite, and sneers at those who dance ceaselessly for pleasure.

古文：前代名士良辰宴聚，或清谈赋诗，投壶雅歌，以杯酌献酬，不至于乱。
现代文：前代的名士们，在美好的日子宴饮欢聚，有的清谈赋诗，有的投壶为戏，引吭雅歌，只以杯酌献酒酬答，不会有悖乱的行为。
English: The celebrities of the previous generation, in the beautiful days of feasting and gathering, some talk about poetry, some throw pots as a play, lead elegant songs, and only reward with a glass of wine, there will be no disorderly behavior.

古文：国家自天宝已后，风俗奢靡，宴席以喧哗沉湎为乐。
现代文：国家自从天宝年以后，风气奢侈淫靡，在宴席上以大声喧哗，沉湎于以酒为乐。
English: Since the Tianbao year, the country has been in the mood of luxury and debauchery, with loud noises at banquets and indulging in wine for fun.

古文：而居重位、秉大权者，优杂倨肆于公吏之间，曾无愧耻。
现代文：而身居要职，手握大权的人，傲慢地把优伶杂技人罗列在官员们中间，竟然没有惭愧羞耻之心。
English: But those who hold important positions and wield great power arrogantly list the excellent acrobats among the officials, and they have no sense of shame.

古文：公私相效，渐以成俗。则是物务多废。
现代文：公开或私下里都互相仿效，逐渐成为一种风气，由此而把事务多荒废了。
English: Imitating each other, both publicly and privately, gradually became a way of life, and as a result, a lot of business went to waste.

古文：独圣心求理，安得不劳宸虑乎！
现代文：惟独皇上心中寻求事理，怎能不使圣虑忧劳呢！
English: But how can the Emperor, who seeks the truth in his heart, not be troubled by the Holy Anxiety?

古文：陛下宜颁训令，禁其过差，则天下幸甚。 
现代文：陛下应当颁布训令，禁止那些过头、错误的行为，则天下的百姓就万幸了。 
English: His Majesty should issue an edict prohibiting those excessive and wrong actions, then the people of the world will be very lucky.

古文：时上荒于酒乐，公著因对讽之，颇深嘉纳。
现代文：当时皇上沉迷在饮酒作乐之中，丁公著借奏对的机会对他进行劝谏，皇上对他十分赞许。
English: At that time, the emperor was addicted to drinking and making music. Ding Gong took the opportunity to persuade him, and the emperor highly praised him.

古文：己卯，幽州节度使刘总奏请去位落发为僧。
现代文：二月十二日，幽州节度使刘总上奏，请求离职剃发，出家为僧。
English: On February 12th, the Yuzhou Festival made Liu the chief guest, requesting him to shave his head and become a monk.

古文：又请分割幽州所管郡县为三道，请支三军赏设钱一百万贯。
现代文：又请求把幽州所管辖的郡县分割为三道，筹划一百万贯赏钱支付给三军。
English: He also requested that the counties under the jurisdiction of Yuzhou be divided into three, and that one million yuan of reward money be paid to the three armies.

古文：壬申，以中书侍郎、平章事段文昌检校刑部尚书、同平章事、成都尹，充剑南西川节度等使，以朝散大夫、尚书户部侍郎、知制诰、翰林学士、上柱国、建安县开国男杜元颖守本官、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：二月初五，任命中书侍郎、平章政事段文昌为检校刑部尚书、同平章事、成都尹，充任剑南西川节度使。任命朝散大夫、尚书户部侍郎、知制诰、翰林学士、上柱国、建安县开国男杜元颖暂署本职、中书门下同平章事。
English: On the fifth day of the second month of the year, Wenchang, the attendant of Zhongshu, and Pingzhang, the political affairs section, were appointed as Shangshu, Tongping, and Chengdu Yin of the inspection department of the school, and served as the secretary of the Jianan West River Festival. Asan doctor, Shangshu, the attendant of the household department, Zhizhu, Hanlin bachelor, Shangzhu country, and Du Yuanying, the founding father of Jian'an County, were appointed to temporarily sign this post, and Tongping, the disciple of Zhongshu, was appointed.

古文：以剑南西川节度使王播为刑部尚书，充盐铁转运使。
现代文：任命剑南西川节度使王播为刑部尚书，充任盐铁转运使。
English: The Jian'nan-Nishikawa Festival appointed Wang Huan as the secretary of the Penal Department, and he served as the envoy of salt and iron transportation.

古文：乙酉，天平军节度使马总奏： 当道见管军士三万三千五百人，从去年正月巳后，情愿居农者放，逃户者不捕。 
现代文：二月十八日，天平军节度使马总上奏说 ：本道现在掌管的士兵为三万三千五百人，自从去年正月以后，情愿居家务农的放其回去，逃亡的人不进行追捕。 
English: On February 18th, the commander of the Tianping Army, Ma Zongzheng, made a report, saying: The soldiers currently in charge of this province are thirty-three thousand five hundred. Since the first month of last year, those who prefer to stay at home and work in agriculture have been allowed to return. Those who have fled will not be pursued.

古文：先是，平定河南，及王承元去镇州，宰臣萧俯等不顾远图，乃献销兵之议，请密诏天下军镇，每年限百人内破八人逃死，故总有是奏。
现代文：在此之前，平定了河南，待到王承元离开镇州，宰臣萧亻免等人不顾及长远的打算，竟呈奏销毁武器的建议，请求秘密下诏给天下各军镇，每年限定一百人之内允许八个人逃走，因此马总才有这道奏章。
English: Prior to this, Henan had been pacified, but when Wang Chengyuan left Zhenzhou, the Vice-Minister Xiao Yimeng and others, regardless of long-term plans, actually presented a proposal for the destruction of weapons, requesting a secret decree to be issued to all military towns in the world, allowing eight people to escape within a limit of one hundred people each year, so Ma always had this song.

古文：丁亥夜，月犯岁星，在尾十三度。
现代文：二月二十日，月亮干犯木星，在尾宿天区十三度。
English: On February 20th, the moon collided with Jupiter, making thirteen degrees in the trailing quarter.

古文：辛卯，寒食节，宴群臣于麟德殿，颁赐有差。
现代文：二月二十四日，当天为寒食节，皇上在麟德殿与群臣宴饮，赐予不同数量的奖赏。
English: On February 24th, the day of the Cold Food Festival, the Emperor held a banquet with a group of courtiers at the Lindt Palace and awarded them different amounts of rewards.

古文：壬辰，刑部侍郎李建卒。
现代文：二月二十五日，刑部侍郎李建去世。
English: On February 25, Li Jian, the head of the Criminal Investigation Department, passed away.

古文：癸巳，九姓回纥毗伽保义可汗卒。
现代文：二月二十六日，九姓回纥的毗伽保义可汗去世。
English: On February 26th, Vijay Bhoyi Khan, who had nine surnames, passed away.

古文：三月丁酉朔，浙东奏移明州于鄮县置。
现代文：三月初一，浙东奏请把明州的治所迁到贸阝县。
English: On the first day of March, the East China Morning Post requested that the Mingzhou government office be moved to Mogao County.

古文：刘总进马一万五千匹。
现代文：刘总进献马一万五千匹。
English: Liu Chongjin donated 15,000 horses.

古文：甲辰，郑滑节度使王承元祖母晋国太夫人李氏来朝，既见上，令朝太后于南内。
现代文：三月初八，郑滑节度使王承元的祖母晋国太夫人李氏来到朝廷，朝见皇上之后，被命在南内朝见皇太后。
English: On the eighth day of the third month of the lunar calendar, the Zhengde Festival brought Wang Chengyuan's grandmother, the Empress Dowager of Jin, to the imperial court. After the imperial court met the emperor, she was ordered to meet the empress dowager of Nanning.

古文：丁未，宗正寺奏： 准贞元二十一年敕，宗子陪位，放五百七十人出身。
现代文：三月十一日，宗正寺上奏说： 按照贞元二十一年的敕令，嫡长子的家臣，放五百七十人出府为官。
English: On March 11th, the chief priest of Sojo-ji Temple said, "According to the imperial edict of the 21st year of Sadamoto, the vassals of the eldest son of the eldest son were released from the government and became officials.

古文：准今年敕放三百人。
现代文：而按照今年的敕令只放出三百人。
English: According to this year's royal decree, only 300 people will be released.

古文：伏缘人数至多，不沾恩泽，乞降特恩，更放二百人出身。 
现代文：因为没有得到皇上恩泽的人数极多，请皇上颁降特别的恩惠，再放二百人出府为官。 
English: Because the number of people who did not receive the emperor's favor was extremely large, he asked the emperor to grant special favors and let another two hundred people leave the government to become officials.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇上允从。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：平卢薛平奏：海贼掠卖新罗人口于缘海郡县，请严加禁绝，俾异俗怀恩。
现代文：平卢的薛平上奏说：海盗掳掠新罗的人口到沿海的郡县来贩卖，请严加禁绝，使得远方的人怀念皇上的恩泽。
English: Pinglu's Xue Pingjiao said: "Pirates kidnap the people of Silla and sell them to the coastal counties. Please strictly prohibit this, so that people in far away places will miss the emperor's grace."

古文：从之。
现代文：皇上允从。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：戊申，罢京西、京北和籴使，扰人故也。
现代文：三月十二日，撤销京西、京兆的和籴使，因为他们骚扰百姓之故。
English: On March 12, the conciliatory envoys to Beijing, Xi'an, and Beijing-Shanghai were revoked because they had harassed the people.

古文：罢河北榷盐法，许维计课利都数付榷盐院。
现代文：罢黜河北的榷盐法，准许大略地计算税利以总数交付给榷盐院。
English: The cancellation of Hebei's salt tax law allows for a rough calculation of taxes and interests, with the total amount to be delivered to the salt institute.

古文：庚戌，以左丞韦绶为礼部尚书。
现代文：三月十四日，任命左丞韦绶为礼部尚书。
English: On March 14th, he appointed the left-hand senator Wei Wei to the Ministry of Ceremonies.

古文：是夜，太白近五车。
现代文：当天夜间，太白金星靠近五车星。
English: On the night of the same day, Taibai Venus was close to the five-chariot star.

古文：辛亥，命给事中韦弘庆充幽州宣慰使，左拾遣狄兼谟副之。
现代文：三月十五日，命给事中韦弘庆充任幽州宣慰使，左拾遗狄兼谟任宣慰副使。
English: On March 15th, Wei Hongqing was appointed as Yuzhou Consolation Envoy, and Zuo Zhi Di and Moo as Vice Consolation Envoy.

古文：盐铁使王播奏江淮盐估每斗加五十文，兼旧三百文。
现代文：盐铁使王播奏说，江淮的盐价每斗加五十文，加上原价每斗为三百文。
English: Wang Wangxiao, a salt iron worker, said that the price of salt in Jianghuai is 50 yuan per bucket, and the original price is 300 yuan per bucket.

古文：癸丑，以幽州卢龙军节度副大使、知节度事、押奚、契丹两蕃经略等使、检校司空、同中书门下平章事、楚国公刘总可检校司徒、兼侍中、天平军节度、郓曹濮等州观察等使。
现代文：三月十七日，任命幽州卢龙军节度副大使、掌节度使事、押奚契丹两藩经略使、检校司空、中书门下省同平章事、楚国公刘总担任检校司徒、兼侍中、天平军节度使、郓曹濮等州观察使等。
English: On March 17th, he appointed Yuzhou Lulong Army Deputy Ambassador of the Festival, the Ambassador of the Festival, the Deputy Envoys of the Two Domains of Oshiqian Qidan, the Deputy Envoys of the Two Domains of the Festival, the Inspector General of the School, the Inspector General of the Provincial Government of the People's Republic of China, the General Liu of the State of Chu as the Inspector General of the School, the Assistant to the Attendant, the Inspector General of the Festival of the Tianping Army, and the State Observation Envoys such as Zou Caoqi.

古文：以宣武军节度使。检校右仆射、同平章事张弘靖为检校司空、同平章事、兼幽州大都督府长史，充幽州卢龙军节度使。
现代文：任命宣武军节度使、检校右仆射、同平章事张弘靖为检校司空、同平章事，兼任幽州大都督府长史，充任幽州卢龙军节度使。
English: Zhang Hongjing was appointed as the Xuanwu Army's festival envoy, the inspection of the school's right-hand shooters, and the same-level official Zhang Hongjing was appointed as the inspection of the school's right-hand shooters, the same-level official, and also served as the governor of Yuzhou, the governor of Yuzhou, and the festival envoy of the Yuzhou Lulong Army.

古文：从刘总所奏故也。
现代文：这是依据刘总的所奏而任命的。
English: This appointment is based on Liu Zong's performance.

古文：以凤翔节度使李愿检校司空、汴州刺史，充宣武军节度使；以邠宁节度使李光颜为凤翔尹，依前检校司空、平章事，充凤翔陇右节度使。以右卫大将军高霞寓检校工部尚书、邠州刺史、充邠宁节度使。
现代文：任命凤翔节度使李愿为检校司空、汴州刺史，充任宣武军节度使；任命宁节度使李光颜为凤翔尹，依旧担任检校司空、平章政事，充任凤翔陇右节度使；任命右卫大将军高霞寓为检校工部尚书、州刺史，充任宁节度使。
English: The appointment of Feng Xiang as the chief of the festival made Li Yan as the chief of the inspection of the school, the chief of the inspection of the state and the chief of the inspection of the army; the appointment of Ning as the chief of the festival made Li Guangyan as the chief of the inspection of the school, the chief of the inspection of the school, the chief of the inspection of the state and the chief of the inspection of the army; the appointment of Ning as the chief of the festival made Li Guangyan as the chief of the inspection of the school, the chief of the inspection of the school, the chief of the inspection of the school, the chief of the inspection of the school, the chief of

古文：谏官上疏论霞寓败军左谪，未宜拜方镇。不从。
现代文：谏官上疏说高霞寓曾因打败仗遭到贬谪，不应当拜授方镇节度使的职务，皇上没有依从。
English: The eunuch-in-chief said that Gao Xiaye had been demoted because of the defeat in the war, and should not be given the post of Fangzhen's festival envoy, but the emperor did not comply.

古文：乙卯，以权知京兆尹卢士玫为瀛州刺史，充瀛莫等州团练观察使。从刘总奏析置也。
现代文：三月十九日，任命暂署京兆尹卢士玫为瀛州刺史，充任瀛莫等州都团练观察使，这是依刘总的奏折而安排的。
English: On March 19th, the provisional appointment of Jing Zhaoyun Lu Shimei as the chief historian of Zhangzhou, acting as the observation envoy for the group training of Zhangmo and other state capitals, was arranged according to the report of General Liu.

古文：丁巳，制： 刘总已极上台，仍移重镇，兄弟子侄，各授官荣，大将宾僚，亦宜超擢。
现代文：三月二十一日，制命说： 刘总的官品已经达到上台的顶点，仍然移任重要的节镇，兄弟和子侄，均各授予官职，大将和幕僚，也都应该破格提拔。
English: On March 21, the system order said: General Liu's official rank has reached the peak of his rise to power, and he is still transferred to an important town, brothers and nephews are all awarded official positions, and generals and staff officers should also be exceptionally promoted.

古文：幽州百姓给复一年，赐三军赏设钱一百万贯。
现代文：幽州的百姓免除徭役一年，赐给三军赏钱一百万贯。
English: The people of Yuzhou were exempted from corvee service for one year, and the three armies were given a reward of one million yuan.

古文：令宣慰使薛存庆与弘靖计会支给。 
现代文：命宣慰使薛存庆和张弘靖一起算清支付给他。 
English: The pronouncement of death made Xue Cunqing and Zhang Hongjing together calculate and pay him.

古文：戊午，封皇弟憬为鄜王，悦为琼王，恂为沔王，怿为婺王，愔为茂王，怡为光王，协为淄王，憺为衢王，忄充为澶王；皇子湛为景王，涵为江王，凑为漳王，溶为安王，为颍王。
现代文：三月二十二日，封皇弟李憬为王，李悦为琼王，李恂为沔王，李怿为婺王，李忄音为茂王，李怡为光王，李协为淄王，李忄詹为衢王，李忄充为澶王；封皇子李湛为景王，李涵为江王，李凑为漳王，李溶为安王，李鏶为颍王。
English: On March 22nd, Emperor Fong's younger brother Li Jing became king, Li Yue became King Qiong, Li Jie became King Shun, Li Jian became King Shun, Li Shunyin became King Mao, Li Yi became King Guang, Li Xie became King Shun, Li Shizhan became King Shun, Li Shizhong became King Shun; Emperor Fong's son Li Zhan became King Jing, Li Han became King Jiang, Li Bin became King Shun, Li Rong became King An, Li Jie became King Shun.

古文：以兵部侍郎柳公绰为京兆尹、兼御史大夫。
现代文：任命兵部侍郎柳公绰为京兆尹，兼御史大夫。
English: He appointed the attendant of the Ministry of Military Affairs, Yanukovych, as the Keizhoin, and also as the goshi daifu.

古文：己未，以屯田员外郎李德裕为考功郎中，左补阙李绅为司勋员外郎，并依前知制诰、翰林学士。
现代文：三月二十三日，任命屯田员外郎李德裕为考功郎中，左补阙李绅为司勋员外郎，并照旧担任知制诰、翰林学士。
English: On March 23rd, Li Deyu, the son of a Tunden official, was appointed as a meritorious student, and Li Sheng, the son of a Left Assistant Minister, was appointed as the son of an officer of the Order, and continued to serve as a scholar of wisdom and scholar of Hanlin.

古文：敕今年钱徽下进士及第郑朗等一十四人，宜令中书舍人王起、主客郎中知制诰白居易等重试以闻。
现代文：敕令今年在钱徽主试下进士及第的郑朗等十四人，应当令中书舍人王起、主客郎中知制诰白居易等对他们重试后奏闻皇上。
English: The imperial edict ordered that fourteen people, including Zheng Lang, who was the first and second-ranked candidate in the main examination of Qianhui this year, should be re-examined and reported to the emperor, including Wang Qi, the second-ranked student, and Zou Bai Juyi, the second-ranked student.

古文：甲子，刘总请以私第为佛寺，乃遣中使赐寺额曰 报恩 。
现代文：三月二十八日，刘总请求把私宅作为佛寺，皇上便派中使去赐给佛寺的匾额为 报恩 。
English: On March 28, General Liu requested that his private residence be turned into a Buddhist temple, and the emperor sent an envoy to reward the favor by bestowing a stipend on the Buddhist temple.

古文：幽州奏刘总坚请为僧，又赐以僧衣，赐号大觉。
现代文：幽州上奏说刘总坚决请求削发为僧，皇上又赐给他僧衣，赐法号为 大觉 。
English: Yuzhou Shangso said that Liu Zong firmly requested to be ordained as a monk, and the emperor gave him a monk's robe and gave him the legal name of Da Jue.

古文：总是夜遁去，幽州人不知所之。
现代文：刘总当夜就离去了，幽州人不知道他的去向。
English: Liu Zong left that night, and the people of Yuzhou did not know where he was going.

古文：乙丑，以漳州刺史韩泰为郴州刺史，汀州刺史韩晔为永州刺史，循州刺史陈谏为道州刺史，量移也。
现代文：三月二十九日，任命漳州刺史韩泰为郴州刺史，汀州刺史韩晔为永州刺史，循州刺史陈谏为道州刺史，这是把因罪贬到远处的官员，借大赦而调到较近的州郡。
English: On March 29th, Han Tai, the governor of Zhangzhou, was appointed governor of Zhangzhou, Han Yao, the governor of Dingzhou, was appointed governor of Yongzhou, and Chen Yao, the governor of Xuzhou, was appointed governor of Daozhou. This was a case of officials who had been demoted to a distant place due to their crimes being transferred to a closer county through amnesty.

古文：夏四月丙寅朔，授刘总弟约及总男等一十一人官，内五人为刺史，余朝班环卫。
现代文：夏季，四月初一，授予刘总的弟弟刘约以及刘总的儿子等十一人官职，其中五人担任刺史，其余的为朝廷拱卫宫禁的官职。
English: In the summer, on the first day of April, eleven officials, including General Liu's brother Liu You and General Liu's son, were awarded official positions. Five of them served as chief historian, and the rest were official positions prohibited by the Imperial Palace.

古文：庚午，易定奏刘总已为僧，三月二十七日卒于当道界，赠太尉。
现代文：四月初五，易定上奏说刘总已经削发为僧，三月二十七日在本道境内逝世，追赠他为太尉。
English: On the 5th day of the 4th month, Yi Ding reported that Liu Zong had been ordained as a monk, and passed away on the 27th day of the 3rd month. He was posthumously promoted to the rank of lieutenant.

古文：甲戌，秘书监蒋乂卒。
现代文：四月初九，秘书监蒋去世。
English: On the 9th day of the 4th month, the secretary Jian Jiang passed away.

古文：丙子，以前天平军节度使马总复为天平节度使。
现代文：四月十一日，任命前天平军节度使马总重新担任天平军节度使。
English: On April 11, General Ma was reappointed as the envoy of the Tianping Army Festival after being appointed as the envoy of the previous Tianping Army Festival.

古文：丁丑，诏： 国家设文学之科，本求才实，苟容侥幸，则异至公。
现代文：四月十二日，诏令说： 国家设置文学的制科，本意在于寻求具有真才实学的人，如果容许侥幸登科，则与至公精神不能相合。
English: On April 12, the imperial edict said: The state set up a system of literature, the original intention is to seek people with real talent and real learning, if allowed to enter the university by chance, it can not be compatible with the public spirit.

古文：访闻近日浮薄之徒，扇为朋党，谓之关节，干扰主司，每岁策名，无不先定。
现代文：经查访而听说，近来有些轻浮浅薄的人，互相鼓动结为一党，称之为人情关节，干扰主管官员，每年录取的名字，没有不是事先确定的。
English: After a visit, I heard that recently some frivolous and shallow people have been encouraging each other to form a party, calling it a human joint, interfering with the competent officials, and there are no names admitted each year that are not determined in advance.

古文：永言败俗，深用兴怀。
现代文：长期这样就会败坏风气，深深地影响到人们的心怀。
English: In the long run, this will corrupt the culture and deeply affect people's minds.

古文：郑朗等昨令重试，意在精覆艺能，不于异常之中，固求深僻题目，贵令所试成就，以观学艺浅深。
现代文：郑朗等人，昨日令他们重试，目的在于仔细地审查他们的造诣、才能，并不在考试超乎平常的内容，搜求高深冷僻的题目，而是贵在从他们考试的成绩中，观察他们学识、造诣的深浅。
English: Zheng Lang and others were retested yesterday, the purpose of which was to carefully examine their attainments and talents, not to search for high-pitched questions in the examination beyond the usual content, but to observe the depth of their knowledge and attainments from their examination results.

古文：孤竹管是祭天之乐，出于《周礼》正经，阅其呈试之文，都不知其本事。辞律鄙浅，芜累何多。
现代文：孤竹管是一种祭天的乐器，出自于《周礼》一书的正文中，阅读他们呈上来的应试文章，都不知道这件东西的出处，辞章鄙陋浅薄，芜杂累赘的话何其多呀！
English: The lone bamboo pipe is a sacred musical instrument. It comes from the main text of the book "Zhou Li," and when reading the essay they submitted, they do not know the source of this thing. The words are despicable and shallow, and there are so many complicated words!

古文：亦令宣示钱徵，庶其深自怀愧。
现代文：也应当把这情况告诉钱徽，令其深深地自怀惭愧之心。
English: Qian Hui should also be told about this, so that he would feel deeply ashamed.

古文：诚宜尽弃，以警将来。
现代文：按理说确实应当对他们全部除名，以警戒将来。
English: By rights, all of them should indeed be removed from the list as a warning for the future.

古文：但以四海无虞，人心方泰，用弘宽假，式示殊恩。
现代文：但因为现在四海没有忧患，人心方才安定，故而弘扬宽厚的精神，以示特殊的恩宠。
English: But because there is no sorrow in the four seas now, and people's hearts are stable, so they promote a generous spirit to show a special grace.

古文：孔温业、赵存约、窦洵直所试粗通，与及第；卢公亮等十一人可落下。
现代文：孔温业、赵存约、窦洵直的重试大体上通过，授予进士及第；卢公亮等十一人则落下名籍。
English: Kong Wenye, Zhao Cunyou and Dou Yanzhong generally passed the re-examination and were awarded the title of academician and first; Lu Gongliang and eleven others were demoted.

古文：自今后礼部举人，宜准开元二十五年敕，及第人所试杂文并策，送中书门下详覆。 
现代文：从今以后礼部荐举人才，应当按照开元二十五年的敕令，把进士及第的人所考的杂学和策论送交中书门下省详细审察。 
English: From now on, those who are recommended by the Ministry of Rites and Ceremonies should submit the miscellaneous knowledge and theories of the candidates to the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology for detailed examination in accordance with the Royal Decree of the 25th anniversary of the founding of the People's Republic of China.

古文：贬礼部侍郎钱徽为江州刺史，中书舍人李宗闵为剑州刺史，右补阙杨汝士为开州开江令。
现代文：把礼部侍郎钱徽贬职为江州刺史，中书舍人李宗闵贬为剑州刺史，右补阙杨汝士贬为开州府开江县令。
English: He demoted Qian Hui, the attendant of the Ministry of Ceremonies, to the position of Jiangzhou county magistrate, Li Zongya, the head of the Chinese school, to the position of Jianzhou county magistrate, and Yang Rushi, the right assistant magistrate, to the position of Kailiang county magistrate.

古文：戊寅，宰臣崔植、杜元颖奏请，坐日所有群臣献替，事关礼体，便随日撰录，号为《圣政纪》，岁终付史馆。
现代文：四月十三日，宰臣崔植、杜元颖上奏请求，皇上坐朝的日子，所有的臣下劝谏君王的内容，事情关系到礼仪体制的，便应当按日期撰写记录下来，取名为《圣政纪》，年终的时候交付给史馆。
English: On April 13th, the vice-ministers Cui Zhi and Du Yuan Ying made a request that when the emperor was in office, all the subjects should advise the king on the content, and if the matter was related to the etiquette system, it should be written down according to the date, named "Sheng Zheng Ji," and delivered to the history museum at the end of the year.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇上允从。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：事亦不行。
现代文：但事情也并没有实行。
English: But it has not been implemented.

古文：丙戌，正衙命使册九姓回纥为登罗羽录没密施句主录毗伽可汗。
现代文：四月二十一日，朝廷的正衙派遣使臣册封九姓回纥为 登罗羽录没密施句主录毗伽可汗 。
English: On April 21, the emperor of the imperial court dispatched an envoy to seal the nine surnames of Hui Khan as "Deng Luo Yu Luo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo" and "Deng Luo Yu Luo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo" respectively.

古文：辛卯，以衡州刺史令狐楚为郢州刺史，吉州司马孟简为睦州刺史。
现代文：四月二十六日，任命衡州刺史令狐楚为郢州刺史，任命吉州司马孟简为睦州刺史。
English: On April 26th, Hengzhou chief historian Ling Fuchu was appointed chief historian of Zhangzhou, and Jizhou chief historian Sima Mengjian was appointed chief historian of Mengzhou.

古文：壬辰，诏百辟卿士宜各徇公，勿为朋党。
现代文：四月二十七日，诏令百官公卿们都应当秉公办事，不得结为朋党。
English: On the 27th of April, the Emperor issued an edict that all officials and nobles should act impartially and should not form crony parties.

古文：甲午，以张弘靖入幽州，受朝贺。
现代文：四月二十九日，因为张弘靖进入了幽州，皇上接受百官朝贺。
English: On April 29, because Zhang Hongjing entered Yuzhou, the emperor received the morning greetings of hundreds of officials.

古文：中书门下奏燕、蓟八州平，准礼宜告陵庙，从之。
现代文：中书门下省上奏说燕州、蓟州等八州被平定，按照礼制应当祭告先皇陵寝和太庙，皇上允从。
English: According to the imperial rescript, it was reported that eight provinces, including Yanzhou and Zhangzhou, had been subdued. According to the ritual system, the imperial mausoleum and the imperial temple should be announced first, and the emperor agreed.

古文：五月丙申朔。
现代文：五月初一为丙申日。
English: The first day of the month of May is xinren day.

古文：戊戌，以刑狱淹滞，立程：凡大事，大理寺三十五日详断讫，申刑部，三十日闻奏；中事，大理寺三十日，刑部二十五日；小事，大理寺二十五日，刑部二十日。
现代文：五月初三，因为刑事案件的审理积压、阻滞，立下章程：凡属于大案，限定由大理寺三十五日以内详细审理完毕，申报刑部，刑部三十日之内奏闻皇帝；中案，则限定大理寺三十日内审完，刑部二十五日以内申奏；小案则限定大理寺二十五日审完，刑部二十日以内申奏。
English: On the third day of the fifth month, because of the backlog and delay in the trial of criminal cases, the following regulations were established: for major cases, it is limited to Dali Temple to complete the detailed trial within 35 days, declare the criminal department, and report to the emperor within 30 days; for medium cases, it is limited to Dali Temple to complete the trial within 30 days, and report to the criminal department within 25 days; for small cases, it is limited to Dali Temple to complete the trial within 25 days, and report to the criminal department within 20 days.

古文：所断罪二十件已上为大，十件已上为中，十件已下为小。
现代文：所断的罪案二十件以上为大事，十件以上为中事，十件以下为小事。
English: More than 20 of the cases are major crimes, more than 10 are medium crimes, and less than 10 are minor crimes.

古文：刑部四覆官、大理六丞每月常须二十日入省寺，其厨料令户部加给。
现代文：刑部四名负责审查的官员、大理寺六名丞官每月必须有二十日进入大理寺察看。其饮食的津贴令户部供给。
English: The four officials of the Criminal Investigation Department and the six officials of the Dali Temple must enter the Dali Temple on the 20th day of each month to inspect it. The allowance for their meals is provided by the Household Department.

古文：从中丞牛僧孺奏也。
现代文：这是依照中丞牛僧孺的奏章而拟定的。
English: It was composed in accordance with the music of the middle-ranked Niu Zengqi.

古文：己亥，贬考功员外郎李渤为虔州刺史，以前书宰相考辞太过，宰相杜元颖等奏贬之。
现代文：五月初四，把考功员外郎李渤降职为虔州刺史，因为先前所写的对宰相进行考核的言辞太过分了，宰相杜元颖等上奏将他贬职。
English: On the fourth day of the fifth month of the year, he demoted the examiner Gaorang Li Jian to the position of Qianzhou stabbing history, because the previously written words of assessing the prime minister were too excessive, and the prime minister Du Yuanying and other officials demoted him.

古文：癸卯，幽州大将李参已下十八人并为刺史及诸卫将军。
现代文：五月初八，幽州大将李参以下的十八人均任刺史及诸卫将军。
English: On the eighth day of the fifth month of the year, the eighteen generals from Yuzhou General Li San on down were appointed to the posts of General of the Army and General of the Air Force.

古文：己酉，右散骑常侍致仕柳登卒。
现代文：五月十四日，告老退休的右散骑常侍柳登去世。
English: On May 14th, Liu Deng, a retired right-hand rider, passed away.

古文：辛亥，造百尺楼于宫中。
现代文：五月十六日，在皇宫中建造百尺楼。
English: On the 16th of May, the construction of the Hundred Foot Tower began in the Imperial Palace.

古文：壬子，加茶榷，旧额百文，更加五十文，从王播奏。
现代文：五月十七日，增加茶的专利税，原来为一百文，再加五十文，这是按照王播所奏决定的。
English: On May 17th, the patent tax on tea was increased from 100 yuan to 50 yuan. This was decided in accordance with Wang Bo's report.

古文：拾遗李珏上参论其不可，疏奏不报。
现代文：拾遗李珏上奏疏说明不可以加税。皇上对奏疏没有答复。
English: The emperor did not reply to the imperial edict stating that taxes could not be raised.

古文：丙辰，建王审薨。
现代文：五月二十一日，建王李审去世。
English: On May 21, Jian Wang Lisi passed away.

古文：丁巳，沧州先置景州于弓高县，置归化县于福城草市，并宜停废。
现代文：五月二十二日，沧州原先把景州的治所设在弓高县，德州把归化县的治所设在福城的集市上，都应当废除。
English: On May 22nd, Cangzhou originally set up the administrative office of Jingzhou in Yu Gao County, and Texas set up the administrative office of the naturalization county in the market of Fucheng. Both should be abolished.

古文：壬戌，幽州宣慰使给事中薛存庆卒于镇州。
现代文：五月二十七日，幽州宣慰使给事中薛存庆在镇州去世。
English: On May 27th, Xue Cunqing passed away in Zhenzhou.

古文：癸亥，敕先置溵州于郾城，宜废；其郾城上蔡、西平、遂平两县复隶蔡州。
现代文：五月二十八日，敕令原先氵殷州在郾城设置的治所应当废除；郾城的上蔡、西平、遂平三县重新隶属于蔡州。
English: On May 28th, the imperial edict ordered that the government office originally set up by Yan Yin Prefecture in Lucheng should be abolished; the three counties of Shangcai, Xiping and Suiping in Lucheng were re-subordinated to Caizhou.

古文：皇妹太和公主出降回纥登罗骨没施合毗伽可汗。
现代文：皇妹太和公主下嫁给回纥的登罗骨没施合毗伽可汗。
English: Empress Dowager Cixi and Princess Dowager Deng Luo's marriage to Hui Xuan did not involve Shihapivi Gak Khan.

古文：甲子，命金吾大将军胡证充送公主入回纥使，兼册可汗。又以太府卿李锐为入回纥婚礼使。
现代文：五月二十九日，命令金吾大将军胡证充任护送公主入回纥使，并对可汗进行册封；又任命太府卿李锐为入回纥婚礼使。
English: On May 29th, he ordered Kingu's General Hu Sheng to act as the envoy to escort the princess to the Imperial Palace, and to have the khan canonized; he also appointed the Grand Mufti Li Rui as the envoy to the imperial wedding.

古文：六月乙丑朔。
现代文：六月初一为乙丑日。
English: The first day of June is the second day of the Ox.

古文：辛未，吐蕃犯青塞堡。
现代文：六月初七，吐蕃进犯青塞堡。
English: On the 7th day of the 6th month of the year, the Tuoba invaded the Castle of Xinsai.

古文：甲申，赐御史中丞牛僧孺金紫。
现代文：六月二十日，赐给御史中丞牛僧孺金章紫绶。
English: On June 20th, the Gold Medal with Purple Ribbon was bestowed on Gishi Chujo Niu Soong.

古文：秋七月乙未朔。
现代文：秋季，七月初一是乙未日。
English: In autumn, the first day of July is the eve of the new year.

古文：壬寅，月掩房次相。
现代文：七月初八，月亮掩蔽房宿的次相星。
English: On the eighth day of the seventh month, the moon covered the second phase star of the lodging.

古文：壬子，群臣上尊号曰文武孝德皇帝。
现代文：七月十八日，群臣向皇帝敬献尊号 文武孝德皇帝 。
English: On the 18th, the courtiers gave Mu Zong the honorary title of Emperor Wenwu Xiaode.

古文：是日，上受册于宣政殿，礼毕，御丹凤楼，大赦天下。
现代文：当天，皇上在宣政殿接受册书，礼仪结束之后，皇上驾临丹凤楼，大赦天下。
English: On the same day, the Emperor received the register at the Palace of Proclamation. After the end of the ceremony, the Emperor drove to the Danfeng Building to grant a general amnesty to the world.

古文：甲寅，幽州监军使奏： 今月十日军乱，囚节度使张弘靖别馆。害判官韦雍、张宗元、崔仲卿、郑埙。
现代文：七月二十日，幽州监军使上奏说： 本月十日军人作乱，把节度使张弘靖囚禁在别馆，杀害判官韦雍、张宗元、崔仲卿、郑埙。
English: On July 20, the envoy of the Yuzhou Supervisor of the Military said: On the 10th day of this month, the soldiers made a riot, imprisoned Zhang Hongjing in another hall, and killed judges Wei Yong, Zhang Zongyuan, Cui Zhongqing, and Zheng Qi.

古文：军人取硃滔子洄为留后。 
现代文：军人们把朱滔的儿子朱洄立为幽州留后。 
English: The soldiers left Zhu Tao's son, Zhu Xizhi, behind in Yuzhou.

古文：丁巳，贬张弘靖为太子宾客分司。
现代文：七月二十三日，把张弘靖贬为太子宾客分司。
English: On July 23rd, Zhang Hongjing was demoted to the Prince's Guest Division.

古文：己未，再贬弘靖为吉州刺史。
现代文：七月二十五日，再把张弘靖贬为吉州刺史。
English: On July 25, Zhang Hongjing was relegated to a footnote in the history of Jizhou.

古文：硃洄自以年老，令军人立其子无融为留后。
现代文：朱洄自己因为年老，令军人们立他的儿子朱克融为幽州留后。
English: Zhu Xi himself, because of his old age, ordered the soldiers to appoint his son Zhu Ke Rong as Yuzhou's heir.

古文：初，刘总归朝，籍其军中素难制者送归阙庭，克融在籍中。
现代文：当初刘总回朝的时候，把军中一向难以控制的人登记在名册上送回朝廷，朱克融就在名册中。
English: When Liu Zongguo returned to the imperial court, he sent back to the imperial court a list of people in the army who had always been difficult to control. Zhu Ke Rong was on the list.

古文：宰相崔植、杜元颖素不知兵，心无远虑，谓两河无虞，不复祸乱矣，遂奏刘总所籍大将并勒还幽州，故克融为乱，复失河北矣。
现代文：宰相崔植、杜元颖向来不懂得军事，心中没有长远的考虑，认为两河地区不值得忧虑，再不会有祸乱了，便奏请皇上，把刘总所登记在册的大将全部勒令返回幽州，故朱克融作乱，朝廷重新失去了河北。
English: The prime ministers, Cui Zhi and Du Yuanying, did not understand military affairs and did not have long-term considerations in mind. They thought that the Liuhe region was not worth worrying about and that there would be no more disasters. So they asked the emperor to order all the generals registered at the Liu General Headquarters to return to Yuzhou. As a result, Zhu Ke Rong caused chaos and the imperial court lost Hebei again.

古文：庚申，以昭义军节度使刘悟检校司空，兼幽州大都督府长史，充幽州卢龙军节度副大使、知节度事。
现代文：七月二十六日，任命昭义军节度使刘悟为检校司空，兼任幽州大都督府长史，充任幽州卢龙军节度副大使，掌管节度使事。
English: On July 26th, the appointment of the Shouyi Army Festival made Liu Weng the inspector of the school, and also served as the governor of Yuzhou, and served as the deputy ambassador of the Yuzhou Lulong Army Festival, in charge of the festival.

古文：以国子祭酒韩愈为兵部侍郎。
现代文：任命国子祭酒韩愈为兵部侍郎。
English: Han Yu was appointed as the attendant of the Hyobusho, the national son's festival.

古文：辛酉，太和长色主发赴回纥，上以半仗御通化门临送，群臣班于章敬寺前。
现代文：七月二十七日，太和长公主出发前往回纥，皇上以半副仪仗驾临通化门送行，群臣在章敬寺前列班恭送。
English: On July 27th, the empress dowager and the eldest princess set off for Huiyang. The emperor drove to the Tonghua Gate to see them off in a semi-ceremonial procession. A group of courtiers accompanied them in the front row of Zhangjing Temple.

古文：八月甲子朔。
现代文：八月初一为甲子日。
English: The first day of August is Koshi Day.

古文：己巳，镇州监军宋惟澄奏：七月二十八日夜军乱，节度使田弘正并家属将佐三百余口并遇害。
现代文：八月初六，镇州监军宋惟澄上奏说：七月二十八日夜，军人作乱，节度使田弘正以及家属将佐，一共三百余人都被杀害。
English: On the 6th day of the 8th month, Song Weizhen, the inspector of the Zhenzhou army, reported: On the night of July 28th, soldiers rioted, and the commander of the festival, Tian Hiromasa, and his family members were killed. A total of more than three hundred people were killed.

古文：军人推衙将王廷凑为留后。
现代文：军人们推举衙将王廷凑为镇州留后。
English: The soldiers voted to retain Wang Ting as a township.

古文：辛未，以左金吾将军杨元卿为泾州刺史，充四镇北庭行军、泾原节度使。
现代文：八月初八，任命左金吾将军杨元卿为泾州刺史，充任四镇北庭行军使、泾原节度使。
English: On the 8th day of the 8th month of the 8th month, he appointed General Yang Yuanqing of the Left Kingu as the scribe of Zhangzhou, and served as the envoy of the march of the four towns of Beiting and the envoy of the festival of Zhangyuan.

古文：敕公卿大臣至中书议幽、镇讨伐之谋。
现代文：敕令公卿大臣到中书省商议讨伐幽州、镇州的谋略。
English: The imperial edict ordered the minister of the court nobles to go to Zhongshu to discuss the strategy of fighting Yuzhou and Zhenzhou.

古文：癸酉，王廷凑遣盗杀冀州刺史王进岌，据其郡。
现代文：八月初十，王廷凑派盗贼杀害冀州刺史王进岌，占据他的州郡。
English: At the beginning of August 10th, Wang Ting sent thieves to kill Jizhou assassin Wang Jinlu and occupy his county.

古文：乙亥，以前泾原节度使田布起复检校工部尚书，兼魏州大都督府长史，充魏博节度使。
现代文：八月十二日，把前泾原节度使田布起复，再任检校工部尚书，兼魏州大都督府长史，充任魏博节度使。
English: On August 12th, Tian Bu was reinstated as the former governor of Yuyuan, and was reappointed as the inspector of the school inspection department, as well as the governor of the governor of Weizhou, and served as the governor of Weibo.

古文：己卯，以深州刺史、本州团练使牛元翼充深冀节度使。
现代文：八月十六日，任命深州刺史、本州团练使牛元翼充任深冀节度使。
English: On August 16th, Niu Yuan Ying was appointed as the envoy of the Shenzhen Provincial Party Committee and the Shenzhen Provincial Party Committee.

古文：辛巳夜，太白近轩辕左角。
现代文：八月十八日夜间，太白金星靠近轩辕座左角。
English: On the night of August 18th, the too-white Venus is close to the left corner of the constellation Regulus.

古文：冀州刺史吴暐潜为幽州兵所逐。
现代文：冀州刺史吴日韦潜被幽州的士兵所驱逐。
English: Jizhou assassin Wu Rongwei was ousted by Yuzhou soldiers.

古文：瀛州兵乱，囚观察使卢士玫。
现代文：瀛州的士兵作乱，囚禁瀛州观察使卢士玫。
English: The soldiers of Zhangzhou rioted, and Lu Shimei, an observer from Zhangzhou, was imprisoned.

古文：瀛州寻为幽州兵所据。
现代文：接着瀛州就被幽州的军士所占据。
English: Next, Ganzhou was occupied by the soldiers from Yuzhou.

古文：乙丑，以河东节度裴度充幽、镇两道招抚使。
现代文：八月二日，任命河东节度使裴度充任幽州、镇州两道招抚使。
English: On August 2, he appointed Pei Du, the chief of the Henan Provincial Party Committee, as the chief of the Yuzhou and Zhenzhou Provincial Party Committee.

古文：庚寅，以建州刺史李景俭为谏议大夫。
现代文：八月二十七日，任命建州刺史李景俭为谏议大夫。
English: On August 27th, Li Jingjian, the chief historian of Jianzhou, was appointed as the doctor of consultation.

古文：壬辰夜，太白近太微西垣。
现代文：八月二十九日夜间，太白金星靠近太微西垣。
English: On the night of August 29th, Taibai Venus passed near Taibai West Wall.

古文：癸巳，镇州出兵围深州。
现代文：八月三十日，镇州出兵包围深州。
English: On August 30, Zhenzhou sent troops to encircle Shenzhou.

古文：九月甲午朔。
现代文：九月初一为甲午日。
English: The first day of September is the first day of the week.

古文：丁酉，废兴州鸣水县。
现代文：九月初四，废除兴州的鸣水县。
English: On the 4th day of the 9th month, Mingshui County in Xingzhou was abolished.

古文：戊戌夜，太白近太微右执法。
现代文：九月初五夜间，太白金星靠近太微西垣右执法星。
English: On the night of the 5th day of the 9th month, the too-white Venus is close to the too-faint West Side Right Law Enforcement Star.

古文：壬寅，大雨震霆。
现代文：九月初九，天降大雨，巨雷震响。
English: On the 9th day of the 9th month, it rained heavily and thunder rumbled.

古文：乙巳，相州兵乱，杀刺史邢楚。
现代文：九月十二日，相州军队作乱，杀死刺史邢楚。
English: On September 12th, the Xiangzhou army rioted and killed Zhi Shi Xuan Chu.

古文：丙午，令内常侍段文政监领郑滑、河东、许三道兵，救援深州。
现代文：九月十三日，皇上令内府常侍段文政监督、掌管郑滑、河东、许州三道的军兵，前去救援深州。
English: On September 13th, the emperor ordered the Naifu standing attendant, Duan Wencheng, to supervise and control the soldiers of Zhenglu, Hedong and Huzhou, and go to the rescue of Shenzhou.

古文：吐蕃请盟，许之。
现代文：吐蕃请求结盟，皇上允许。
English: Tubo requested an alliance, and the emperor gave his permission.

古文：辛亥夜，月近天关。
现代文：九月十八日夜间，月亮靠近天关星。
English: On the night of September 18th, the moon was close to the celestial body.

古文：壬子，幽州贼掠易州涞水、遂城、满城。
现代文：九月十九日，幽州的贼兵劫掠易州的涞水、遂城、满城。
English: On September 19th, the Yuzhou bandits looted the cities of Surabaya, Suicheng and Mancheng in Yizhou.

古文：癸丑，以前魏博节度使李醖为太子少保。
现代文：九月二十日，任命前魏博节度使李朔心为太子少保。
English: On September 20th, the appointment of the former Wei Bo Festival made Li Shuo Xin the youngest prince.

古文：癸酉，魏博节度使田布奏，出师五千赴贝州行营。
现代文：九月三十日，魏博节度使田布上奏说，已发兵五千人前往贝州行营。
English: On September 30th, Wei Bo sent Tian Bu to report that he had sent five thousand soldiers to camp in Bechu.

古文：冬十月甲子朔。
现代文：冬季，十月初一为甲子日。
English: In winter, the first day of October is the first day of spring.

古文：丙寅，太中大夫、守刑部尚书、骑都尉王播可中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事，依前充盐铁转运使。
现代文：十月初三，太中大夫、署理刑部尚书、骑都尉王播任中书侍郎、中书门下省同平章事，仍旧充任盐铁转运使。
English: At the beginning of October 3rd, Taizhong Doctor, Acting Director of the Criminal Investigation Department, Shang Shu, and Cavalry Captain Wang Bo were appointed as the attendants of Chushu, and the provincial Tongping chapter under the leadership of Chushu, and still served as the salt and iron transport envoy.

古文：以河东节度使裴度充镇州四面行营都招讨使。以左领军卫大将军杜叔良充深、冀诸道行营节度使。
现代文：任命河东节度使裴度充任镇州四面行营都招讨使；任命左领军卫大将军杜叔良充任深冀诸道行营节度使。
English: He appointed Hedong Jiedu to make Pei Jiedu serve as the envoy to invite people from all over the country to the camp; he appointed Du Shuliang, the general of the Left Division, to serve as the envoy to the Jiedu Jiedu camp.

古文：戊辰，以深、冀节度使牛元翼为镇州大都督府长史，充成德军节度、镇冀深赵等州节度使。
现代文：十月初五，任命深冀节度使牛元翼为镇州大都督府长史，充任成德军节度使、镇冀深赵等州节度使。
English: On the 5th day of the first month of October, Niu Yuanyi was appointed as the chief historian of the Shenzhen-Hebei Festival and the governor of the township of Shenzhen-Hebei. He was also appointed as the chief historian of the Chengdu-German Army Festival and the Shenzhen-Hebei-Zhao and other state festivals.

古文：辛未，以中书舍人、知贡举王起为礼部侍郎，兵部郎中杨嗣复为库部郎中、知制诰。
现代文：十月初八，任命中书舍人、知贡举王起为礼部侍郎，兵部郎中杨嗣复为库部郎中、知制诰。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of October, Wang Qi, a scholar and scholar of the Middle Kingdom, was appointed as the attendant of the Ministry of Ceremonies, and Yang Sifu, a scholar of the Ministry of War, was appointed as a scholar and scholar of the Ministry of Treasury.

古文：壬申，以东都留守郑絪为吏部尚书。以吏部尚书李绛检校右仆射，判东都尚书省事、东都留守、都畿防御使。
现代文：十月初九，任命东都留守郑纟因为吏部尚书；任命吏部尚书李绛为检校右仆射，执掌东都尚书省事务、东都留守、都畿防御使。
English: At the beginning of October 9th, Zheng Qian, who was left in charge of the Eastern Capital, was appointed as the Secretary of the General Staff; Li Jun, who was left in charge of the General Staff, was appointed as the right-hand man for the inspection of the school, and was in charge of the Provincial Affairs of the Eastern Capital, and the Defense of the Eastern Capital, and the Defense of the Gyeonggi Province.

古文：以工部尚书丁公著检校左散骑常侍，兼越州刺史、御史中丞，充浙东观察使。
现代文：任命尚书丁公著为检校左散骑常侍，兼越州刺史、御史中丞，充任浙东观察使。
English: Appointed Shang Shuting Gongzhu as the left rider of the inspection of the school, as well as the vice-president of Yuezhou and the vice-president of Yuezhou, and served as the observer of East Zhejiang.

古文：乙亥，沂州刺史王智兴为武宁军节度副使。
现代文：十月十二日，任命沂州刺史王智兴为武宁军节度副使。
English: On October 12th, Wang Zhixing, the governor of Zhangzhou, was appointed as the deputy envoy of the Wu Ning Army.

古文：丁丑，裴度奏，自将兵取故关路进讨。
现代文：十月十四日，裴度上奏说：亲自率军从原来关塞的路途征讨贼军。
English: On October 14th, Pei Du said in his report that he would personally lead the army from the original Kansai route to fight against the bandits.

古文：硃克融兵寇蔚州。
现代文：朱克融的军队进犯蔚州。
English: Zhu Ke Rong's army invaded Ulsan.

古文：戊寅，王廷凑兵寇贝州。
现代文：十月十五日，王廷凑的军队进犯贝州。
English: On October 15th, Wang Tingpiao's army marched into Bozhou.

古文：易州刺史柳公济奏于白石岭破燕军三千。
现代文：易州刺史柳公济上奏说：在白石岭击败燕州的三千人马。
English: Liukong Ji, the chief of Yizhou, said, "The three thousand horses of Yanzhou were defeated in Baishiling.

古文：沧州乌重胤奏，于饶阳破贼。
现代文：沧州的乌重胤上奏说：在饶阳击败贼军。
English: Wu Chung-yin of Cangzhou said in his report: Defeat the bandits in Raoyang.

古文：工部尚书韦贯之卒。
现代文：工部尚书韦贯之去世。
English: The head of the engineering department, Shang Shuwei, passed away.

古文：壬午，以尚书主客郎中、知制诰白居易为中书舍人。
现代文：十月十九日，任命尚书主客郎中、知制诰白居易为中书舍人。
English: On October 19th, Chisei Shobai Juyi, a middle-ranking retainer of Shoshu's master, was appointed as a retainer of Shoshu.

古文：河东节度使裴度三上章，论翰林学士元稹与中官知枢密魏弘简交通，倾乱朝政。
现代文：河东节度使裴度三次奉上表章，说翰林学士元稹和执掌枢密院的太监魏弘简勾结，败乱朝政。
English: The Hedong Festival made Pei Du receive the Order of the Badge of Honor three times, saying that the Hanlin Scholar Yuan Xuan and the eunuch Wei Hongjian, who was in charge of the Privy Council, had colluded to overthrow the government.

古文：以稹为工部侍郎，罢学士。弘简为弓箭库使。
现代文：任命元稹为工部侍郎，罢免翰林学士之职，魏弘简任弓箭库使。
English: He appointed Yuan Xuan as the chamberlain of the engineering department, dismissed Hanlin as the scholar, and appointed Wei Hongjian as the bow and arrow warehouse clerk.

古文：甲申，以京兆尹、御史大夫柳公绰为吏部侍郎。
现代文：十月二十一日，任命京兆尹、御史大夫柳公绰为吏部侍郎。
English: On October 21st, he appointed Jing Zhaoyun and goshi taifu Liu Gongpo as attendants of the cadre department.

古文：丙戌，以深冀行营节度使杜叔良为沧州刺史、横海军节度使，以代乌重胤；授重胤检校司徒、兴元尹，充山南西道节度使。
现代文：十月二十三日，任命深冀行营节度使杜叔良为沧州刺史、横海军节度使，以代替乌重胤；授予乌重胤检校司徒、兴元尹之职，充任山南西道节度使。
English: On October 23rd, Du Shuliang, the commander of the Shenzhen-Hebei Campaign, was appointed as the commander of the Cangzhou Campaign and the Yangtze River Naval Campaign to replace Wu Shigetian; Wu Shigetian was awarded the post of inspector of schools and Xingyuan Yin was appointed as the commander of the Shannan West Road Campaign.

古文：时上急于诛贼，杜叔良出征日面辞，奏云： 臣必旦夕破贼。 
现代文：当时皇上急于剿灭贼寇，杜叔良出征那天当面向皇上辞行，上奏说： 我一定在旦夕之间就击败贼军。 
English: At that time, the emperor was in a hurry to exterminate the Kleptocracy. On the day of his departure, Du Shuliang resigned in front of the emperor and said, "I will surely defeat the Kleptocracy between dusk and dawn."

古文：重胤善将知兵，以贼势未可卒平，用兵稍缓，故有是拜。
现代文：乌重胤善于带兵，懂得军事，认为贼军的势力不可能很快平定。他用兵稍为平稳一些，因此才有这项任命。
English: Wu Chung-yin is good at leading troops, understands military affairs, and believes that the power of the Kleptocracy cannot be pacified quickly. He is a little more stable in his use of troops, which is why he was appointed.

古文：丁亥，前浙东观察使薛戎卒。
现代文：十月二十四日，前浙东观察使薛戎去世。
English: On October 24th, Xue Rong, former East Zhejiang Supervisor, passed away.

古文：戊子，魏博田布奏，自率全师进讨。
现代文：十月二十五日，魏博节度使田布上奏说，亲自率领全军征讨贼兵。
English: On October 25th, Wei Bo sent Tian Bu to report that he personally led the whole army to recruit thieves.

古文：太子少保李醖卒。
现代文：太子少保李朔心去世。
English: Prince's younger brother Li Shuoxin passed away.

古文：己丑，以户部侍郎、判度支崔为工部尚书、判度支。以山南西道节度使崔从为尚书左丞；以秘书监许季同为华州刺史，充潼关防御、镇国军使。
现代文：十月二十六日，任命户部侍郎、署理度支使崔統为工部尚书、署理度支使；任命山南西道节度使崔从为尚书左丞；任命秘书监许季同为华州刺史，充任潼关防御使、镇国军使。
English: On October 26th, he appointed Choi Tong, the head of the Household Department and the acting provincial governor, as the acting provincial governor of the Ministry of Industry and Commerce; appointed Choi Cong, the governor of the Shannan West Road Festival, as the acting provincial governor; appointed Secretary Xie Ji Tong as the governor of Huazhou, and served as the defense minister of Shaoguan and the military envoy of Zhenguo.

古文：辛卯，昭义刘悟奏，自将兵次临城。
现代文：十月二十八日，昭义军节度使刘悟上奏说：亲自率军进驻临城。
English: On October 28th, the Shouyi Army Festival made Liu Wucheng report that he personally led the army into Lincheng.

古文：十一月甲午朔，裴度奏破贼于会星镇。
现代文：十一月初一，裴度上奏说在会星镇击败贼军。
English: On the first day of the first month of November, Pei made a report to the emperor, saying that he had defeated the bandits in Heixing Town.

古文：硃克融兵大寇定州，节度使陈楚出师拒战，破贼二万。
现代文：朱克融的军队大举进犯定州，节度使陈楚出兵抵抗，击败二万贼军。
English: Zhu Keren's army made a large-scale attack on Dingzhou, and Chen Chu sent troops to resist, defeating twenty thousand thieves.

古文：乙巳，徐州崔群奏，遣节度副使王智兴率师赴行营。
现代文：十一月十二日，徐州的崔群上奏说，已经派节度副使王智兴率军前往出征的军营。
English: On November 12th, Cui Qun of Xuzhou reported that he had sent Deputy Minister Wang Zhixing to lead the troops to the military camp.

古文：戊申，以司农卿裴武为镇州行营供军使。
现代文：十一月十五日，任命司农卿裴武为镇州行营供军使。
English: On November 15th, Pei Wu, the Minister of Agriculture, was appointed as the military envoy to Zhenzhou.

古文：戊午，上御宣政殿，试制科举人。
现代文：十一月二十五日，皇上驾临宣政殿，考试制科的举人。
English: On November 25th, the emperor arrived at the Xuancheng Palace to hold a lecture on the examination system.

古文：辛酉，淄青牙将马延崟谋逆，节度使薛平觉其谋而诛之。
现代文：十一月二十八日，淄青的牙将马延山金谋反，节度使薛平觉察了他的阴谋而将他处死。
English: On November 28th, Bitumen Tooth plotted to overthrow Ma Yan Shan Jin, but Xue Ping discovered his plot and put him to death.

古文：诏中书舍人白居易、缮部郎中陈岵、考功员外郎贾餗同考制策。
现代文：诏令中书舍人白居易、缮部郎中陈岵、考功员外郎贾饣束共同主持制科策论的考试。
English: According to the edict, Bai Juyi, the book keeper, Chen Yao, the vice-minister of education, and Jia Yanzhong, the examiner, jointly presided over the examination of the system of science policy.

古文：十二月甲子朔。
现代文：十二月初一为甲子日。
English: The first day of December is "Koshi Day."

古文：丙寅，以前容管经略使留后严公素为容州刺史、容管经略使。
现代文：十二月初三，任命前容管经略使留后严公素为容州刺史、容管经略使。
English: On the third day of the first month of December, before the appointment of Yang Guan, Yang Guan, Yang Guan, Yang Guan, Yang Guan, Yang Guan, Yang Guan, Yang Guan.

古文：丁卯，贬谏议大夫李景俭为楚州刺史。
现代文：十二月初四，把谏议大夫李景俭贬职为楚州刺史。
English: On the 4th day of the 12th month of the year, he demoted the doctor Li Jing Jian to the position of the historian of Chuzhou.

古文：庚午，杜叔良之军与贼战于博野，为贼所败，七千人陷贼，叔良仅免。
现代文：十二月初七，杜叔良的军队与贼军在博野作战，被贼军击败，七千人被贼军俘获，仅杜叔良只身逃脱。
English: On the 7th day of the 12th month, Du Shuliang's army fought against the bandits in Bono. They were defeated by the bandits. Seven thousand people were captured by the bandits. Only Du Shuliang escaped.

古文：乙亥，敕诸道除上供外，留州留使钱内每贯割二百文以助军用，贼平后仍旧。
现代文：十二月十二日，敕令各道，除交纳给朝廷的钱款之外，留给州府和使署的钱，每贯分出二百文资助军用，待贼军平定之后再还原。
English: On December 12th, in addition to the money paid to the imperial court, each province and prefecture was ordered to allocate 200 mon to the state capital and the legation to support the military, to be restored after the guerrillas were subdued.

古文：定州陈楚破硃克融贼二万于望都。
现代文：定州节度使陈楚在望都击败朱克融的两万贼军。
English: The Dingzhou Festival enabled Chen Chu to defeat Zhu Ke Rong's 20,000 invaders in Wangdu.

古文：戊寅，以凤翔节度使李光颜为忠武军节度使，代李逊，仍兼深、冀行营节度。以李逊为凤翔节度使。贬员外郎独孤朗韶州刺史，起居舍人温造朗州刺史，司勋员外郎李肇澧州刺史，刑部员外郎王镒郢州刺史，坐与李景俭于史馆同饮，景俭乘醉见宰相谩骂故也。
现代文：十二月十五日，任命凤翔节度使李光颜为忠武军节度使，以代替李逊，仍旧兼任深冀行营节度使；任命李逊为凤翔节度使；将员外郎独孤朗贬职为韶州刺史，起居舍人温造贬为朗州刺史，司勋员外郎李肇贬为澧州刺史，刑部员外郎王镒贬为郢州刺史，这是因为他们与李景俭在史馆一起饮酒，李景俭乘着酒醉见宰相谩骂而受株连获罪。
English: On December 15th, the Fengxiang Festival appointed Li Guangyan as the Loyalist Army Festival envoy to replace Li Xun, still concurrently serving as the Shenji Campaign Festival envoy; appointed Li Xun as the Fengxiang Festival envoy; demoted the member of the Foreign Minister Dukuolang to the Zhangzhou Sashih, the living lodger Wenzhu to the Zhangzhou Sashih, the officer of the State Council Li Zhaozhong to the Zhangzhou Sashih, and the criminal department member of the Foreign Minister Wang Yao to the Zhangzhou Sashih, because they drank with Li Jingjian in the history museum, and Li Jingjian was

古文：兵部郎中知制诰冯宿、库部郎中知制诰杨嗣复各罚一季俸料，亦坐与景俭同饮，然先起，不贬官。
现代文：兵部郎中、知制诰冯宿，库部郎中、知制诰杨嗣复各罚一个季度的职俸津贴钱，也是因为和李景俭一起饮酒而获罪，但因为先离去，没有贬官。
English: Feng Shuk, the vice-minister of the Ministry of Military Affairs and Intellectual Property, and Yang Shifu, the vice-minister of the Ministry of Finance and Intellectual Property, were each fined one quarter's salary allowance. They were also found guilty of drinking alcohol with Li Jingjian, but because they left first, they were not demoted.

古文：辛巳，李光颜赴镇，百僚饯于章敬寺。
现代文：十二月十八日，李光颜前往忠武军节镇上任，百官在章敬寺为他饯行。
English: On December 18th, Li Guangyan went to the town of Zhongwu to take office. Hundreds of officials lined up for him at Zhangjing Temple.

古文：上御通化门临送，赐玉带名马。
现代文：皇上驾临通化门送行，赐给玉带名马。
English: The emperor drove to Tonghua Gate to see him off and gave him a famous horse with a jade belt.

古文：仍敕神策副使杨承和充深、冀行营都监押。
现代文：又敕令神策军副使杨承和充任深冀行营都监押。
English: He also ordered the deputy envoy of the Divine Providence Army, Yang Chenghe, and the acting commander of the Shenji Campaign, both to be detained.

古文：壬午，出内库钱五万贯以助军。
现代文：十二月十九日，拨出内库钱五万贯以资助军饷。
English: On December 19th, 50,000 yuan of treasury money was allocated to subsidize military salaries.

古文：乙酉，以幽州都知兵马使硃克融检校左散骑常侍，充幽州卢龙军节度使，其拘囚张弘靖、杀害府僚之罪，一切释放。
现代文：十二月二十二日，任命幽州都知兵马使朱克融为检校右散骑常侍，充任幽州卢龙军节度使，其拘禁张弘靖、杀害府中官员的罪行，一概不予追究。
English: On December 22, Zhu Ke Rong, the envoy of Yuzhou Tochi Terracotta Warriors and Horses, was appointed as the attendant of the right cavalry of the inspection of the school, and served as the envoy of the Yuzhou Lulong Army Festival. His crimes of detaining Zhang Hongjing and killing the officials of the central government will not be investigated.

古文：时朝议以克融能保全弘靖，王廷凑杀害弘正，可赦燕而诛赵，故有是诏。
现代文：当时朝臣们议论，认为朱克融能够保全张弘靖的性命，而王廷凑却杀害了田弘正，可以赦免朱克融而诛杀王廷凑，因而颁发了这道诏书。
English: At that time, the courtiers argued that Zhu Ke Rong could save Zhang Hongjing's life, while Wang Tingpai killed Tian Hong Zheng, and that Zhu Ke Rong could be pardoned for killing Wang Tingpai, thus issuing this edict.

古文：是岁，天下户计二百三十七万五千八百五，口一千五百七十六万二千四百三十二，元不进户军州不在此内。
现代文：这一年，全国总计二百三十七万五千八百零五户，一千五百七十六万二千四百三十二人，原来没有上报民户的军州不在其内。
English: In that year, a total of 2,375,805 households and 1,576,642,432 people were registered in the whole country. Military regions that had not previously reported their residents were not included.

古文：二年春正月癸巳朔，以用兵罢元会。
现代文：长庆二年正月初一，因为正在打仗而取消元旦的朝会。
English: On the first day of the first month of the second year of Changqing, the New Year's Day imperial meeting was cancelled because of the war.

古文：乙未，以夔州刺史王承弁为安南都护、本管经略招讨使。
现代文：正月初三，任命夔州刺史王承弁为安南都护、本管区经略招讨使。
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, Zhangzhou Zishi Wang Chengben was appointed as the guardian of Annan and the economic envoy of the region.

古文：丁酉，硃克融陷沧州弓高县，贼攻下博，兼邀饷道车六百乘而去。
现代文：正月初五，朱克融攻陷沧州弓高县，贼军进攻下博，并拦劫六百辆军粮车而去。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, Zhu Ke Rong invaded Yugang County, Cangzhou, and the bandits attacked Shibo, and robbed six hundred military food trucks.

古文：庚子，魏博兵自溃于南宫县。
现代文：正月初八，魏博的军队在南宫县自己溃散。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, Wei Bo's army collapsed on its own in Nangong County.

古文：戊申，魏博牙将史宪诚夺师，田布伏剑而卒。
现代文：正月十六日，魏博的牙将史宪成夺取军队，田布拔剑自刎而死。
English: On the 16th day of the first month of the year, Wei Bo's tusk captured the army of Shi Xiancheng, and Tian Bu drew his sword and died.

古文：己酉，以魏博中军先锋兵马使史宪诚检校工部尚书，兼魏州大都督府长史魏博节度使。
现代文：正月十七日，任命魏博中军先锋兵马使史宪诚为检校工部尚书，兼任魏州大都督府长史，充任魏博节度使。
English: On the 17th day of the first month of the year, Shi Xiancheng, the vanguard soldier and horse envoy of the Wei Bo Central Army, was appointed as the inspector of the school inspection department, and concurrently served as the governor of the capital of Wei Zhou, and served as the Wei Bo festival envoy.

古文：是日，大风霾。
现代文：这一天，刮大风，扬起尘土。
English: On this day, the wind was blowing hard and the dust was flying.

古文：庚戌，以德州刺史王日简为沧州刺史，充横海军节度、沧德棣观察等使，以代叔良。
现代文：正月十八日，任命德州刺史王日简为沧州刺史，充任横海军节度使、沧德棣观察使，以代替杜叔良。
English: On the 18th day of the first month of the year, he appointed the Texian historian Wang Rijan as the historian of Cangzhou, acting as the envoy of the Heng navy and the observer of the Cang army, to replace Du Shuliang.

古文：壬子，贬叔良为归州刺史，以献计诛幽镇无功，而兵败丧所持旌节也。
现代文：正月二十日，将杜叔良贬职为归州刺史，因为他呈献消灭幽州、镇州贼军的策略没有成效，而他自己兵败又失去了将帅持有的旌节。
English: On the 20th day of the first month of the year, Du Shuliang was demoted to the status of a returnee, because his strategy of eliminating the Yuzhou and Zhenzhou thief army was not effective, and his own defeat lost the prestige held by the general.

古文：甲寅，以工部尚书、判度支崔倰检校礼部尚书，兼凤翔尹，充凤翔陇节度使。
现代文：正月二十二日，任命工部尚书、署理度支使崔統为检校礼部尚书，兼任凤翔尹，充任凤翔陇州节度使。
English: On the 22nd day of the first month of the year, Cui Tong, the vice-minister of the Ministry of Industry and Commerce and the acting vice-minister of education, was appointed as the vice-minister of school inspection, concurrently serving as Feng Xiangyin, and acting as the vice-minister of education of Feng Xiang Bozhou.

古文：以鸿胪卿、兼御史大夫张平叔判度支。
现代文：命鸿胪卿、兼御史大夫张平叔掌管度支。
English: Hongwu Sir, also known as Grand Historian Zhang Pingxu, is in charge of the branch.

古文：复以弓高县为景州。
现代文：重新把弓高县恢复为景州。
English: We will restore Yugang County to Jingzhou.

古文：青州奏海冻二百里。
现代文：青州上奏说海中有二百里浮冰。
English: Qingzhou Shangsuo said that there are two hundred miles of floating ice in the sea.

古文：乙卯，以前凤翔节度使李逊为刑部尚书。
现代文：正月二十三日，任命前凤翔节度使李逊为刑部尚书。
English: On the 23rd day of the first month of the year, the former Fengxiang Festival was appointed to make Li Xun a member of the Penal Department.

古文：己未，刑部尚书李逊卒。
现代文：正月二十七日，刑部尚书李逊去世。
English: On the 27th day of the first month of the year, the head of the Criminal Investigation Department, Shangshu Li Xun, passed away.

古文：庚子，以兗、沂、密观察使曹华为节度使；以天德军防御使李进诚兼灵州刺史，充朔方、灵、盐定远城等州节度使；以晋州刺史李岵为丰州刺史，充天德军、丰州、东西受降城都防御使。
现代文：正月初八，任命兖州、沂州、密州观察使曹华为节度使；任命天德军防御使李进诚兼任灵州刺史，充任朔方灵盐定远城等州节度使；任命晋州刺史李岵为丰州刺史，充任天德军丰州东西受降城都防御使。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, Cao Hua, the observation envoy of Luzhou, Luzhou, and Mizhou, was appointed as the festival envoy; Li Jincheng, the defense envoy of the German army, was appointed as the festival envoy of Lingzhou, and was appointed as the festival envoy of Shuo, Fangling, Yanjing, and other states; Li Yao, the history envoy of Jinzhou, was appointed as the history envoy of Fuzhou, and was appointed as the defense envoy of the German army in Fuzhou.

古文：内出缯帛八万匹以助军。
现代文：由内库拨出八万匹缯帛以资助军用。
English: Eighty thousand mules were allocated from the treasury to finance the military.

古文：权停岭南、黔中今年选补。
现代文：暂时停止岭南、黔中铨选候补官员。
English: Lingnan and Shizhong will temporarily suspend the election of alternate officials.

古文：二月癸亥朔。
现代文：二月初一为癸亥日。
English: The first day of February is the day of the boar.

古文：甲子，诏雪王廷凑，仍授镇州大都督府长史、御史大夫，充成德军节度、镇冀深赵等州观察等使。
现代文：二月初二，下诏为王廷凑昭雪，并授予他镇州大都督府长史、御史大夫，充任成德军节度使、镇州、冀州、深州、赵州等州观察使。
English: On the 2nd day of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2

古文：三军将士，待之如初。
现代文：三军的将士，对待他们如当初一样。
English: The soldiers of the three armies, treat them as they were in the beginning.

古文：仍令兵部侍郎韩愈往彼宣谕。
现代文：并派遣兵部侍郎韩愈前往当地宣读圣谕。
English: He also dispatched Han Yu, the attendant of the military department, to the local area to read out the sacred edict.

古文：以前吉州刺史张弘靖为抚州刺史。
现代文：任命前吉州刺史张弘靖为抚州刺史。
English: He appointed Zhang Hongjing, the former governor of Jizhou, as the governor of Fuzhou.

古文：弘靖初贬官，尚在幽州，拘留半岁，克融授节，始得还，故有是命。
现代文：张弘靖当初被贬官时，还在幽州，被拘禁了半年，朱克融被授予节度使之职，才得返回朝廷，因而有了这道任命。
English: When Zhang Hongjing was initially demoted, he was still in Yuzhou and was detained for half a year. Zhu Ke Rong was given the power to make him return to the imperial court, which led to this appointment.

古文：丙寅，以前成德军节度使牛元翼检校工部尚书、襄州刺史，充山南东道节度观察、临汉监牧等使。
现代文：二月初四，任命前成德军节度使牛元翼为检校工部尚书、襄州刺史，充任山南东道节度使、观察使、临汉监牧使。
English: On the 4th day of the 2nd month of the year, Niu Yuanyi was appointed as the inspector of the inspection of the inspection of the inspection of the inspection of the inspection of the inspection of the inspection of the inspection of the inspection of the inspection of the inspection of the inspection of the inspection of the inspection of the inspection of the inspection of the inspection of the inspection of the inspection of the inspection of the inspection of the inspection of the inspection of the inspection of the inspection of the inspection of the inspection of the inspection of the inspection of the inspection of the inspection of the inspection of the inspection of the inspection of the inspection of the inspection of the inspection of the inspection

古文：丁卯，以考功郎中、知制诰李德裕为书舍人，依前翰林学士。
现代文：二月初五，任命考功郎中、知制诰李德裕为中书舍人，仍旧担任翰林学士。
English: On the fifth day of the second month of the year, Li Deyu, a meritorious junior high school student and a scholar, was appointed as a Chinese scholar, and still served as a scholar of Hanlin.

古文：甲戌夜，火、木星相近。
现代文：二月十一日，任命坊节度使韩充为义成军节度使。二月十二日夜间，火星、木星相近。
English: On February 11th, Han Chong was appointed as the Yicheng Army's festival envoy. On the night of February 12th, Mars and Jupiter were close to each other.

古文：沧州节度使王日简赐姓名李全略。
现代文：赐予沧州节度使王日简姓名李全略。
English: The granting of the Cangzhou Festival made Wang Rijian change his name to Li Quanliao.

古文：辛巳，以正议大夫、守中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事、武骑尉、赐紫金鱼袋崔植为刑部尚书，罢知政事。以工部侍郎元稹守本官、同平章事。
现代文：二月十九日，任命正议大夫、暂署中书侍郎、中书门下同平章事、武骑尉、赐紫金鱼袋崔植为刑部尚书，免去知政事；任命工部侍郎元稹暂署本职、同平章事。
English: On February 19th, he appointed Zheng Rong Daofu, temporarily appointed Chusho Jiro, Chusho's disciple Tongping Zhangji, Wu Jiao, awarded the Purple Gold Fish Bag to Cui Zhi as the Penal Department's Shangshu, and removed the Governor; appointed the Work Department's Jiro Geng temporarily assigned to this post, Tongping Zhangji.

古文：以翰林学士、中书舍人李德裕为御史中丞。司勋员外郎、知制诰李绅为中书舍人，依前翰林学士。
现代文：任命翰林学士、中书舍人李德裕为御史中丞；任命司勋员外郎、知制诰李绅为中书舍人，仍旧任翰林学士。
English: He appointed Li Deyu, a scholar of Hanlin and a scholar of Chinese literature, as the vice-chancellor of the history department; he appointed Wei Lang, an officer of the department, and Li Sheng, a scholar of Chinese literature, as a scholar of Chinese literature, and he still served as a scholar of Hanlin.

古文：右庶子王仲周以奉使缓命，贬台州刺史。
现代文：右庶子王仲周因接受任命后延迟赴任，被贬为台州刺史。
English: His son-in-law, Wang Zhong Zhou, was relegated to a footnote in Taizhou history because he delayed taking up his post after accepting the appointment.

古文：癸未，以深、冀行营诸军节度、忠武军节度使李光颜为沧州刺史、横海军节度使，兼忠武军节度、深冀行营并如故；以横海军节度使李全略为德州刺史、德棣等州节度。
现代文：二月二十一日，任命深冀行营诸军节度使、忠武军节度使李光颜为沧州刺史、横海军节度使，仍旧兼任忠武军节度使、深冀行营诸军节度使；任命横海军节度使李全略为德州刺史，德州、棣州等州节度使。
English: On February 21, Li Guangyan was appointed as the military festival envoy to the Shenzhen-Hebei campaign, the loyal military festival envoy to the Cangzhou campaign, and the horizontal naval festival envoy, and still concurrently served as the loyal military festival envoy to the Shenzhen-Hebei campaign; the horizontal naval festival envoy to the Texas campaign, and the Texas and Zhangzhou state festival envoys.

古文：丙戌，以兵部郎中、知制诰冯宿检校左庶子，充山南道节度副使，权知襄州军府事，以牛元翼在深州重围故也。
现代文：二月二十四日，任命兵部郎中、知制诰冯宿为检校左庶子，充任山南东道节度副使，暂时掌管襄州军府事务，因为牛元翼尚在深州重围中的缘故。
English: On February 24th, he appointed Feng Shuk, the son-in-law of the Minister of Military Affairs and the son-in-law of the Minister of Intellectual Property, as the second son-in-law of the inspector of schools, and appointed him as the vice-envoy of the Shannan Host Festival, temporarily in charge of the affairs of the Xiangzhou Military Government, because Niuyuan Ying was still under heavy siege in Shenzhou.

古文：丁亥，以河东节度使、司空、兼门下侍郎、平章事裴度守司徒、平章事，充东都留守，判东都尚书省事、都畿汝防御使、太微宫等使；以前灵武节度使李听为太原尹、北都留守、河东节度使。
现代文：二月二十五日，任命河东节度使、司空、兼门下侍郎、平章政事裴度暂署司徒、平章政事，充任东都留守，执掌东都尚书省事务、都畿汝州防御使、太微宫使等；任命前灵武节度使李听为太原尹、北都留守、河东节度使。
English: On February 25th, he appointed the Hedong Sectional Delegate, Jiu Ku, and his attendant, Pingzhang Zhengji Pei Du, to be the temporary deputy secretary, and Pingzhang Zhengji Pei Du to serve as the Dongdu Remnant, to be in charge of the affairs of Dongdu Shangshu Province, the defense envoy of Donggui Ruzhou, the palace envoy of Taibai, and so on; appointed the former Lingwu Sectional Delegate Li He to be the Taiyuan Yin, the Beidou Remnant, and the Hedong Sectional Delegate.

古文：三月壬辰朔，诏曰： 武班之中，淹滞颇久。
现代文：三月初一，诏令说： 武职的官员，长久没有得到迁升。
English: On the first day of March, the edict said: Military officials have not been promoted for a long time.

古文：又诸荐送大将，或随节度使归朝。
现代文：又加之各被荐举的大将，有的已经随节度使回归朝廷。
English: In addition, some generals who were recommended for promotion have already returned to the imperial court.

古文：自今已后，宜令神策六军军使及南衙常参武官，各具历任送中书门下，素立大功及有才器者，量加奖擢。常参官依月限改转，诸道军府带监察已上官者，限三周年即与改转。
现代文：从今以后，应当令神策六军的军使以及南衙台省的常参武官，各把资历列出报送到中书门下省，对那些一向立有大功，以及有才干器识的，酌情给予奖励提拔，常参武官按照月限进行调动，各道军府凡带有监察以上职衔的官员，以三周年为限给予改任调动。
English: From now on, the envoys of the Six Armies of the Divine Defense Force and the military attachés of the South Xingtai Province should be required to report their qualifications to the lower provinces of the People's Republic of China, and those who have always made great contributions and have talents should be rewarded and promoted as appropriate. The military attachés of the Six Armies of the Divine Defense Force should be transferred according to the monthly limit, and the officials with the title of inspector or above in each military headquarters should be transferred to the third anniversary.

古文：军士死王事者，三周年内不得停衣粮。
现代文：为国事而死的军士，三周年之内不得停发他们的衣粮。
English: The soldiers who died for the cause of the country should not stop receiving their clothing allowance within the third anniversary.

古文：先于留州留使钱内每贯割二百文助军，今后不用抽取。 
现代文：原先在州、使留用的钱款中每贯分出二百文资助军饷，今后不再抽取。 
English: In the future, there will no longer be a deduction from the 200 mon to subsidize military pensions that was originally allocated for each ton of money retained in the state budget.

古文：上于驭军之道，未得其要，常云宜姑息其臣。
现代文：皇上对于驾驭军队的办法，没有掌握要领。常常说对于武将应当姑息迁就。
English: The emperor did not grasp the essentials of how to control the army. It was often said that generals should be tolerated.

古文：故即位之初，倾府库颁赏之，长行所获，人至巨万，非时赐与，不可胜纪。
现代文：因此皇上即位的初期，拿出府库中的全部资财对他们颁行奖赏，他们在长时间中所得到的，每个人都达到巨万钱财。不恰当的赏赐已无法记清其次数。
English: Therefore, in the early days of the emperor's accession to the throne, all the funds in the treasury were taken out to reward them. Over a long period of time, each of them received huge amounts of money. It is impossible to count the number of inappropriate rewards.

古文：故军旅益骄，法令益弛，战则不克，国祚日危。
现代文：因此军队更加骄横，法令日益废弛，打仗不能取胜，国运一天天危急。
English: As a result, the army is becoming more arrogant, decrees are becoming more and more useless, wars cannot be won, and national prosperity is becoming more and more precarious.

古文：洎颁此诏，方镇多以大将文符鬻之富贾，曲为论奏，以取朝秩者，叠委于中书矣。
现代文：待颁发了这道诏书，各节镇大多把大将的符命文书卖给有钱的大商人，曲意向朝廷上奏陈说以获取朝中职俸的，在中书省已经层层相迭了。
English: Before the imperial edict was issued, most of the towns sold the generals' mission documents to wealthy merchants, and those who wanted to present them to the imperial court in order to obtain the middle-level salary had already overlapped in the middle-level book department.

古文：名臣扼腕，无如之何，癸巳，以兵部尚书萧俛为太子少保，以前山南东道节度使李逢吉为兵部尚书。
现代文：名臣们扼腕痛恨，却无可奈何。三月初二，任命兵部尚书萧亻免为太子少保，任命前山南东道节度使李逢吉为兵部尚书。
English: On the 2nd day of the 3rd month of the year, Xiao Xiamen, the secretary of the military department, was appointed as the prince minor protector, and Li Fengji, the former host of the Shannan Festival, was appointed as the secretary of the military department.

古文：壬寅，左骁卫上将军张奉国卒。
现代文：三月十一日，左骁卫上将军张奉国去世。
English: On March 11, Zhang Bongguo, General of the Left Division of the National Guard, passed away.

古文：以鸿胪卿、判度支张平叔为户部侍郎唷职。
现代文：以鸿胪卿、掌度支钱粮张平叔充任户部侍郎。
English: He appointed Hong Jieqing and Zhang Pingxiu, who was in charge of spending money and grain, as household attendants.

古文：平叔以曲承恩顾，上疏请官自卖盐，可以富国强兵，陈利害十八条。
现代文：张平叔便曲意奉承皇上的恩宠惠顾，上疏请求担任贩盐的官职，可以富国强兵，陈奏了十八条利害关系。
English: Zhang Pingxu flattered the emperor's favor and patronized him, and Shangsuo asked him to serve as a salt salesman, so that he could enrich the country and strengthen the army, and played eighteen interests.

古文：诏下其疏，令公卿详议。
现代文：皇上下诏把他的奏疏发下去，令公卿大臣们详细讨论。
English: The emperor sent his imperial edict down to the nobles and ministers to discuss it in detail.

古文：中书舍人韦处厚随条诘难，固言不可，事遂不行。
现代文：中书舍人韦处厚逐条进行驳诘，坚持认为不可以，事情便没有实行。
English: China's State Administration of Press, Publication, Radio, Film and Television (SASPRF) refuted Wei's claim one by one, insisting that it was not possible, and the matter was not implemented.

古文：硃克融、王廷凑合兵攻深州，不解。
现代文：朱克融、王廷凑合兵进攻深州，无法解围。
English: Zhu Ke Rong and Wang Ting combined their forces to attack Shenzhou, but were unable to relieve the siege.

古文：裴度与书谕之，克融还镇，廷凑攻城亦缓，乃并加检校工部尚书。
现代文：裴度写信晓谕他们，朱克融返回本节镇，王廷凑攻城也缓慢下来，皇上便对他们均加授检校工部尚书之职。
English: Pei Du wrote a letter to them, telling them that Zhu Ke Rong had returned to this section of the town, and that Wang Ting's attack on the city had slowed down. The emperor then assigned them the duties of inspecting the school's engineering department.

古文：戊申，裴度来朝，对于麟德殿，伏奏龙墀，因叙河北用兵，呜咽流涕，上改容慰劳之。
现代文：三月十七日，裴度来到朝廷，在麟德殿和皇帝谈话，裴度伏在殿阶上陈奏，讲到河北的战事时，呜咽着流下了眼泪，皇上感动地慰问了他。
English: On March 17th, Pei Du came to the imperial court and had a conversation with the emperor in the Lin De Hall. Pei Du prostrated himself on the steps of the hall and played the piano. When he talked about the war in Hebei, he sobbed and shed tears. The emperor was moved to console him.

古文：壬子，以新授东都留守裴度为扬州大都督府长史，充淮南节度使。
现代文：三月二十一日，任命新授东都留守裴度为扬州大都督府长史，充任淮南节度使。
English: On March 21, Pei Du, the newly-appointed governor of the Eastern Capital, was appointed governor of Yangzhou, and served as the delegate to the Huainan Festival.

古文：癸丑，徐州节度使崔群为其副使王智兴所逐，智兴自专军务。
现代文：三月二十二日，徐州节度使崔群被他的节度副使王智兴驱逐，王智兴自己独揽军务。
English: On March 22, Wang Zhixing, the deputy military governor of Xuzhou, expelled Cui Qun, leaving Wang Zhixing in charge of military affairs.

古文：甲寅，以右仆射韩皋为左仆射，以前淮南节度使李夷简为右仆射。
现代文：三月二十三日，任命右仆射韩皋为左仆射，任命前淮南节度使李夷简为右仆射。
English: On March 23rd, he appointed his right-hand man Han Zheng as his left-hand man, and appointed the former Huainan governor Li Yijian as his right-hand man.

古文：前东都留守李绛复拜旧官。
现代文：前东都留守李绛重新担任旧职。
English: Former Dongdu left Li Yao to resume his old position.

古文：丙辰，守司徒裴度正衙受册讫，谒太庙，赴尚书省上，宰臣百僚皆送。
现代文：三月二十五日，署理司徒裴度在正衙接受册命完毕，拜谒太庙。前往尚书省上任，宰臣百官都来送行。
English: On March 25th, the acting governor, Szeto Pei Du, after receiving the official certificate of appointment in Zhengzhou, paid a visit to the Grand Emperor's Temple. He went to Shangshu Province to take office, and all the vice-ministers and officials came to see him off.

古文：丁己，以左丞崔从检校礼部尚书、鄜州刺史、鄜坊节度使，以代王承元。以承元为凤翔、陇节度使。
现代文：三月二十六日，任命中书左丞崔从为检校礼部尚书、州刺史、坊节度使，以代替王承元；任命王承元为凤翔陇州节度使。
English: On March 26th, Cui Cong, the left-hand man of the Chinese school, was appointed as the inspector of the school inspection, the inspector of the school inspection, the inspector of the school inspection, the inspector of the school inspection, and the inspector of the school inspection, to replace Wang Chengyuan; Wang Chengyuan was appointed as the inspector of the school inspection.

古文：戊午，司徒裴度复入中书知政事。
现代文：三月二十七日，司徒裴度重新入中书省掌管政务。
English: On March 27th, Szu Pei Du returned to the Ministry of Education to take charge of government affairs.

古文：以中书侍郎、平章事王播检校右仆射，兼扬州大都督府长史，充淮南节度使，依前兼诸道盐铁转运使。以凤翔节茺使崔俛为河南尹。
现代文：任命中书侍郎、平章政事王播为检校右仆射，兼任扬州大都督府长史，充任淮南节度使，仍旧兼任诸道盐铁转运使；任命凤翔节度使崔統为河南尹。
English: He appointed Wang Bo, the chancellor's secretary and Pingzhang's political officer, as his right-hand man for the inspection of the school, concurrently serving as the governor of Yangzhou, serving as the Huainan Festival envoy, and still serving as the salt and iron transportation envoy to all provinces; he appointed Fengxiang Festival envoy Cui Tong as the Henan Yin.

古文：牛元翼率十余骑突围出深州来朝，深州大将臧平等一百八十人皆为王廷凑所杀。
现代文：牛元翼率领十余名骑兵突围出深州前来朝廷，深州大将臧平等一百八十人都被王廷凑所杀害。
English: Niu Yuan Ying led more than ten cavalrymen to break out of Shenzhou and come to the imperial court. Shenzhou's general Zou Ping and 180 people were killed by the imperial court.

古文：以德、棣节度使李全略复为沧州节度使，仍合沧、景、德、棣为一镇。
现代文：三月二十八日，任命武宁军节度副使王智兴为检校工部尚书，兼徐州刺史，充任武宁军节度使；任命德棣节度使李全略重新担任沧州节度使。并把沧州、景州、德州、棣州合为一个节镇。
English: On March 28, Wang Zhixing, deputy envoy of the Wu Ning Army for the festival, was appointed as the inspector of the school inspection department and the historian of Xuzhou, and served as the envoy of the Wu Ning Army for the festival; Li Quanliu was reappointed as the envoy of the Cangzhou Festival by the appointment of the Deyang Festival; and Cangzhou, Jingzhou, Dezhou and Zhangzhou were combined into one festival town.

古文：李光颜还镇许州。
现代文：李光颜回到许州担任节度使。
English: Li Guangyan returned to Huzhou to serve as the chief delegate.

古文：夏四月辛酉朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：夏季，四月初一，发生日蚀。
English: In summer, on the first day of April, a solar eclipse occurs.

古文：甲子，左仆射韩皋赴省上，中使赐酒馔，宰臣百僚送，一如近式。
现代文：四月初四，左仆射韩皋赴台省任职，皇上命中使赐给酒宴，宰臣和百官送行，完全和近日的规矩一样。
English: On the 4th day of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4

古文：云阳县角抵力人张莅负羽林官骑康宪钱。宪往徵之。
现代文：云阳县善于角抵的大力士张莅输了钱给羽林军骑士康宪，康宪前去索取。
English: Zhang Qian, a great wrestler from Yunyang County, lost money to Kang Xian, a knight from the Ulin Army. Kang Xian went to collect the money.

古文：莅乘醉打宪将殒，宪男买德年十四，持木钟击莅首破，三日而卒。
现代文：张莅乘着酒醉打得康宪快死了，康宪的儿子康买德年方十四岁，持木钟打破了张莅的头，三天以后死了。
English: Zhang Ye got drunk and beat Kang Xian almost to death. Kang Xian's son, Kang Baide, who was 14 years old, broke Zhang Ye's head with a wooden bell and died three days later.

古文：刑部奏覆，敕曰： 买德尚在童年，能知子道。虽杀人当死，为父可哀。
现代文：刑部以案卷上奏，皇上敕令说： 康买德尚在童年，能够懂得人子之道，即使杀人应当偿命，但他为了父亲的心是值得同情的。
English: The criminal investigation department reported on the case file, and the emperor's edict said: Kangbei De is still in his childhood, and can understand the way of the son of man. Even if killing should pay for his life, but his heart for his father is worthy of sympathy.

古文：若从沉命之科，恐失原情之意。
现代文：如果按处死的条款处置，恐怕会丧失宽仁赦免的用意。
English: If he is dealt with according to the terms of execution, I am afraid he will lose his willingness to grant clemency.

古文：可减死罪一等。 
现代文：可减免死罪进行判处。 
English: The death penalty can be commuted.

古文：忻州刺史李寰守博野，王廷凑玫之不下。
现代文：忻州刺史李寰镇守博野。王廷凑进攻他，没有攻下。
English: In the history of Zhangzhou, Lijun Town guarded Bono. Wang Ting attacked him, but failed to capture him.

古文：其李寰所领兵宜割属右神策，以寰为军使，仍以忻州军为名。
现代文：李寰所率领的军队应当划属于右神策军统辖，任命李寰为军使，仍旧保存忻州军的名称。
English: The army led by Li Xuan should be assigned to the jurisdiction of the Right Divine Providence Army, Li Xuan should be appointed as the military envoy, and the name of the Zhangzhou Army should still be preserved.

古文：庚辰，桂管观察使杜式方卒。
现代文：四月二十日，桂管观察使杜式方去世。
English: On April 20, Du Shikifang passed away.

古文：癸未，以武宁军节度使崔群为秘书监，分司东都。
现代文：四月二十三日，任命武宁军节度使崔群为秘书监，分管东都。
English: On April 23rd, the Wu Ning Army Festival appointed Cui Qun as secretary-supervisor, in charge of the Eastern Capital.

古文：翰林侍讲学士韦处厚、路随进所撰《六经法言》二十卷，赐锦彩二百匹、银器二百事，处厚改中书舍人，随改谏议大夫，并赐金紫。
现代文：翰林侍讲学士韦处厚、路随进呈他们所撰写的《六经法言》二十卷，皇上赐给锦彩二百匹、银器二百件，韦处厚改任中书舍人，路随改任谏议大夫，均赐给金章紫绶。
English: Hanlin's attendants and lecturers, the scholars Wei Shituo and Lu Xun, presented 20 volumes of the "Six Classics of the Law" they had written. The emperor gave them 200 horses and 200 pieces of silverware. Wei Shituo was appointed as the keeper of the middle school library, and Lu Xun was appointed as the doctor of debate. They were both awarded the gold medal and purple ribbon.

古文：丁亥，以秘书监严誉为桂管观察使。
现代文：四月二十七日，任命秘书监严誉为桂管观察使。
English: On April 27th, the Secretary Supervisor Yan Rong was appointed as the Guizhou Observation Envoy.

古文：是夜，东北有流星，光彩烛地，殷殷有声，击天市垣，至郎位灭。
现代文：当夜，东北方有流星，光芒照亮地面，发出殷殷的声音，出天市垣，至郎位消失。
English: That night, there was a meteor in the northeast. The light lit up the ground, emitting a wailing sound. It went out of the sky and disappeared.

古文：五月辛卯朔。以德州刺史李景俭为谏议大夫。
现代文：五月初一，任命德州刺史李景俭为谏议大夫。
English: On the first day of May, Li Jingjian, a Texas barber, was appointed as a doctor of consultation.

古文：癸丑，太子少傅严绶卒。
现代文：五月二十三日，太子少傅严绶去世。
English: On May 23rd, Crown Prince Young Fu Yanjun passed away.

古文：戊午，幽州硃克融上表进马万匹、羊十万口，先请其价赏军。
现代文：五月二十八日，幽州朱克融奉上表章，进献马一万匹，羊十万头，先请朝廷用这批马羊的价钱犒赏他的军队。
English: On May 28th, Yuzhou Zhu Ke Rong was awarded the medal and offered ten thousand horses and one hundred thousand sheep. He first asked the court to reward his army with the price of this batch of horses and sheep.

古文：陇山有异兽如猴，腰尾皆长，色青赤而猛鸷，见蕃人则跃而食之，遇汉人则否。
现代文：陇山出现了一只像猴子的怪兽，腰和尾都很长，颜色黑红而很凶猛，见了番人就跳起来把他吃掉，遇到汉人则不这样。
English: A monster resembling a monkey appeared in Lushan. It had a long waist and tail, was black and red in color, and very ferocious. When the guards saw it, they jumped up and ate it, but not when they encountered Han people.

古文：六月庚申朔。
现代文：六月初一为庚申日。
English: The first day of the first month of June is Geng Sheng Day.

古文：甲子，司徒、平章事裴度守尚书右仆射，工部侍郎、平章事元稹为同州刺史史。
现代文：六月初五，司徒、平章政事裴度暂署尚书右仆射，工部侍郎、平章政事元稹任同州刺史。
English: On the 5th day of the 6th month of the year, Sito and Taira no Shoji Pei temporarily signed the document as the right-hand man of Sho, and the chamberlain of the engineering department and Taira no Shoji Motonaga were appointed as the governor of the same province.

古文：以正议大夫、守兵部尚书、轻车都尉李逢吉为门下侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：任命正议大夫、暂署兵部尚书、轻车都尉李逢吉为门下侍郎、中书门下同平章事。
English: Appointed as the doctor of the general discussion, the temporary signing of the military department's official report, and the light vehicle captain Li Fengji as the servant of the disciple, and the peerage of the disciple of the middle school.

古文：乙丑，大风震电，坠太庙鸱吻，霹御史台树。
现代文：六月初六，刮大风，雷鸣电闪，太庙屋顶的的鸱嘴坠落，巨雷劈倒御史台的大树。
English: On the 6th day of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6

古文：丁卯，以易州刺史柳公济为定州刺史、义武节度使。
现代文：六月初八，任命易州刺史柳公济为定州刺史、义武军节度使。
English: On the 8th day of the 6th month of the year, Liu Gongji, the military governor of Yizhou Province, was appointed as the military governor of Dingzhou Province and the military governor of the People's Liberation Army.

古文：壬申，谏官论责裴度太重，元稹太轻，乃追稹制书，削长春宫使。
现代文：六月十三日，谏官认为处分裴度太重，而元稹太轻，于是追回元稹的委任书，削职为长春宫使。
English: On June 13th, the eunuchs thought that the punishment of Baidu was too heavy, while that of Yuancheng was too light, so they recovered Yuancheng's letter of appointment and demoted him to the position of Changchun palace envoy.

古文：戊寅，以前右仆射李夷简为太子少保，分司东都。
现代文：五月十九日，任命前右仆射李夷简为太子少保，分管东都。
English: On May 19, he appointed his former right-hand man, Li Yijian, as the prince's junior bodyguard in charge of Dongdu.

古文：戊子，复置邕管，以安南副使崔结为邕管经略使。
现代文：五月二十九日，重新设置邕管道，任命安南副使崔结为邕管经略使。
English: On May 29, the Sino-North Korean pipeline was re-established, and Annan's deputy envoy, Cui Jie, was appointed as the Sino-North Korean pipeline deputy envoy.

古文：秋七月己丑朔。
现代文：秋季，七月初一为己丑日。
English: In autumn, the first day of July is the Ugly Day.

古文：丙申，宋王结薨，废朝。
现代文：七月初八，宋王李结去世。皇上停止上朝。
English: On the eighth day of the seventh month, King Li Jie of the Song Dynasty passed away.

古文：戊戌，汴州军乱，逐节度使李愿，立牙将李翙为留后。
现代文：七月初十，汴州的军队作乱，驱逐节度使李愿，拥立牙将李宀介为汴州节度留后。
English: On the 10th day of the 7th month, the troops of Zhangzhou rioted and drove out Li Zhen, leaving Li Jiankui as the head of the Zhangzhou Festival.

古文：好畤县山水漂溺居人三百家。
现代文：好县的山洪冲毁、淹没居民三百户。
English: Flash floods in Okayama destroyed and inundated 300 homes.

古文：陈、许、蔡等州水。
现代文：陈州、许州、蔡州发生水灾。
English: Floods occurred in Chenzhou, Xuzhou and Caizhou.

古文：壬寅，出中书舍人白居易为杭州刺史。
现代文：七月十四日，以中书舍人白居易出京任杭州刺史。
English: On July 14th, Bai Juyi, a scholar of Chinese calligraphy, left Beijing for Hangzhou.

古文：乙巳，诏南北省五品已上官议讨李翙。
现代文：七月十七日，下诏令南北台省五品以上的官员商议讨伐李宀介之事。
English: On July 17th, officials of more than five provinces in North and South Taiwan Province were ordered to discuss the matter of fighting against Li Xunkai.

古文：丙午，贬李愿为随州刺史。
现代文：七月十八日，将李愿贬职为随州刺史。
English: On July 18th, Li Jian was demoted to the position of Suizhou magistrate.

古文：以郑、滑节度使韩充为汴州刺史、宣武军节蓄使、汴宋亳颍观察等使，郑、滑如故；以宣武军节度押衙李为右金吾卫将军。
现代文：任命郑滑节度使韩充为汴州刺史、宣武军节度使、汴州宋州亳州颍州观察等使，仍旧担任郑滑节度使；任命宣武军节度押衙李宀介为右金吾卫将军。
English: Han Chong was appointed as the chief historian of Bozhou by Zhengde Festival, the chief historian of Xuanwu Army, the chief historian of Bozhou by Songzhou, the chief historian of Bozhou by Bozhou, the chief historian of Bozhou by Songzhou, the chief historian of Bozhou by Bozhou, the chief historian of Bozhou by Bozhou, the chief historian of Bozhou by Bozhou, the chief historian of Bozhou by Bozhou, the chief historian of Bozhou by Bozhou, the chief historian of Bozhou by Bozhou, the chief historian of Bozhou by Bozhou, the chief

古文：丁未，内出绫绢五十万匹付度支，以供军用。
现代文：七月十九日，从内库拨出绫绢五十万匹交付给度支司，以供军用。
English: On July 19, 500,000 horses were allocated from the treasury and delivered to the provincial branch for military use.

古文：陈、许水灾，赈粟五万石。
现代文：陈州、许州发生水灾，赈济灾民五万石粮食。
English: Floods occurred in Chenzhou and Huzhou, and 50,000 kilos of grain were donated to the victims.

古文：己酉，中使杨瑞昌使镇州。
现代文：七月二十一日，宦官杨再昌出使镇州。
English: On July 21st, the eunuch Yang Zechang sent an envoy to Zhenzhou.

古文：王廷凑奏： 奉诏取牛元翼家族，请至秋末发遣。
现代文：王廷凑上奏说 ：奉诏接取牛元翼的家人亲族，请允许到秋末时发送。
English: Wang Ting approached and said, "I have been given the authority to receive Niu Yuan Ying's family and relatives. Please allow me to send them to you by the end of autumn."

古文：其田弘正骸骨，寻访不知所在。 
现代文：至于田弘正的骸骨，经寻访，不知道在什么地方。 
English: As for Tian Hongzheng's skeleton, after searching, it is not known where it is.

古文：辛亥，以赠司徒、忠烈公李忄妻子源为谏议大夫，赐绯鱼袋。
现代文：七月二十三日，任命追赠为司徒、忠烈公李忄登的儿子李源为谏议大夫，赐予绯鱼袋。
English: On July 23rd, Li Yuan, the son of Li Yuden, who was posthumously awarded the title of "Stu" and "Faithful Hero," was appointed as the doctor of consultation, and was given a carp bag.

古文：乙卯，敕： 员外郎知刺诰二年后转郎中，又二年后转前行郎中，又一年即正除；谏议大夫知同前郎中；给事中并翰林学士别宣知者，不在此限。 
现代文：七月二十七日，敕令： 员外郎执掌朝廷制书诰命文书两年以后转任郎中，又二年以后转任前行郎中，又一年以后即正式授官；谏议大夫执掌案牍与前述郎中相同；给事中及翰林学士另行任命掌管之事，不在此限。 
English: On July 27th, the imperial edict was issued: "After two years, the person in charge of the imperial record-keeping system will be promoted to the position of vice-minister, and after two years, he will be promoted to the position of vice-minister, and after two years, he will be promoted to the position of vice-minister, and after one year, he will be promoted to the position of vice-minister. The position of vice-minister will be the same as that of the above-mentioned vice-minister, except that the vice-minister and the scholar of Hanlin will be separately appointed to be in charge of the matter.

古文：以前义武军节度使陈楚为东都留守、判尚书省事、东畿汝防御使。
现代文：任命前义武军节度使陈楚为东都留守、署理尚书省事务、东畿汝州防御使。
English: Appointed Chen Chu, the former military governor of the Ryukyu Kingdom, as the acting governor of Dongdu, the acting governor of Shangshu, and the acting governor of Donggi Ruzhou.

古文：本朝故事，东都留守罕用武臣，今用楚，以李翙扰汴、宋故也。
现代文：按照本朝的旧例，东都留守很少任用武臣，现在任命陈楚担任，是因为李宀介骚扰汴州、宋州的缘故。
English: According to the old practice of this dynasty, Dongdu rarely appointed a military officer while he was away. Chen Chu was appointed to the post now because of Li Xunkai's harassment of Bozhou and Songzhou.

古文：八月己未朔，以绛州刺史崔弘礼为河南尹，兼东畿防御副使。
现代文：八月初一，任命绛州刺史崔弘礼为河南尹，兼任东畿防御副使。
English: On the first day of August, Cui Hongli, the governor of Zhangzhou, was appointed as the Henan Yin, and concurrently as the deputy defense envoy of Donggi.

古文：给事中韦颖以弘礼望轻，封还诏书，上遣中使谕之，乃下。
现代文：给事中韦颖认为崔弘礼资望太轻，加封泥将诏书退回，皇上派遣中使谕示圣意，才将诏书下达。
English: In the middle of the matter, Wei Ying thought that Cui Hongli's request was too light, and sent back the imperial edict after sealing it with mud. The imperial edict was only issued after the emperor sent an envoy to show his sacred will.

古文：诏陈、许李光颜将兵收汴州。
现代文：诏令陈许节度使李光颜率军收复汴州。
English: Li Guangyan led the army to recapture Zhangzhou.

古文：戊辰，以左仆射韩皋为东都留守、判尚书省事、东畿汝防御使。
现代文：八月初十，任命左仆射韩皋为东都留守、执掌尚书省事、东畿汝州防御使。
English: On the 10th day of the 8th month, he appointed his left-hand man, Han Zheng, to stay in Dongdu, to be in charge of the provincial affairs of Shangshu, and to be the defense envoy of Dongguizhou.

古文：以东都留守陈楚为河阳怀节度使。
现代文：任命东都留守陈楚为河阳怀州节度使。
English: Chen Chu, who stayed in Dongdu, was appointed as the festival envoy of Heyang and Huizhou.

古文：癸酉，韩充奏今月六日发军入汴州界，营于千塔。
现代文：八月十五日，韩充上奏说本月六日派军队进入汴州界内，在千塔扎营。
English: On August 15, Han Zong reported that on the sixth day of this month, he sent troops to enter the border of Zhangzhou and set up camp in Senta.

古文：丙子，汴州监军姚文寿与兵马使李质同谋斩李翙及其党薛志忠、秦邻等。
现代文：八月十八日，汴州监军姚文寿与兵马使李质共同谋划杀死了李宀介及其党羽薛志忠、秦邻等。
English: On August 18th, Yao Wenshou, the military inspector of Zhangzhou, and Li Jia, the commander of the army and cavalry, jointly plotted to kill Li Yingjie and his followers Xue Zhizhong and Qin Niang.

古文：丁丑，韩充入汴州。
现代文：八月十九日，韩充进入汴州。
English: On August 19th, Han Chong entered Zhangzhou.

古文：以前东都留守李绛为华州刺史，充潼关防御、镇国军等使。
现代文：任命前东都留守李绛为华州刺史，充任潼关防御使、镇国军使等。
English: Former Dongdu left-behind Li Qian was appointed as the historian of Huazhou, serving as the defense envoy of Shaoguan and the military envoy of Zhenguo.

古文：浙东处州大水，溺居民。
现代文：浙东处州发大水，溺死居民。
English: Residents of Zhouzhou, in eastern Zhejiang Province, were drowned when floodwaters rose.

古文：以兗、海沂密节度使曹华为滑州刺史，充义成军节度、郑滑颍等州观察等使；以宋州刺史高承简为兗州刺史、兗海沂密等州节度使；以汴州防城兵马使李质为右金吾卫将军。颍州棣郑、滑观察使。
现代文：任命兖州、海州、沂州、密州节度使曹华为滑州刺史，充任义成军节度使，郑州、滑州、颍州等州观察使；任命宋州刺史高承简为兖州刺史，兖州、海州、沂州、密州节度使；任命汴州防城兵马使李质为右金吾卫将军，颖州、棣州、郑州、滑州观察使。
English: Songzhou, Haizhou, Zhangzhou, and Mizhou appointed Cao Huai as the festival secretary of Zhangzhou, Yicheng as the festival secretary of Yicheng, and Zhengzhou, Zhangzhou, and Mizhou as the state observation envoy; Songzhou appointed Gaocheng Jian as the festival secretary of Zhangzhou, and Zhangzhou, Haizhou, Zhangzhou, and Mizhou as the state observation envoy; Zhangzhou, Zhangzhou, Zhangzhou, Zhangzhou, Zhangzhou, and Mizhou as the city defense envoy; Zhangzhou, Zhangzhou, Zhangzhou, Zhengzhou, and Mizhou as the city defense envoy; Zhangzhou

古文：盐铁转运使王播进《开颍口图》。
现代文：盐铁转运使王播进呈《开颍口图》。
English: The transfer of salt and iron caused Wang Huanjin to present the "cracking map."

古文：九月戊子朔，浙西大将王国清谋叛，观察使窦易直讨平之，同恶二百余人并诛之。
现代文：九月初一，浙西大将王国清谋反，观察使窦易直将其讨伐平定，将共同作恶的二百余人一起处死。
English: On the first day of September, the Western General of Zhejiang Province Wang Guoqing conspired to rebel, and Dou Yizhi was ordered to put down the rebellion, and more than 200 people who committed evil together were executed.

古文：韩充送李翙男道源、道枢、道瀹等三人，斩于西市；翙妻马氏、小男道本、女汴娘配于掖庭。
现代文：韩充将李宀介的儿子李道源、李道枢、李道瀹等三人送回朝廷，在西市一同斩首；李宀介的妻子马氏、幼子李道本、女儿李汴娘遣发到掖庭为奴。
English: Hanchong sent three of Li Xizhe's sons, Li Daoyuan, Li Daozhu, and Li Daozhu, back to the imperial court and beheaded them together in Xi Shi; Li Xizhe's wife, Ms. Ma, his infant son, Li Daobeng, and his daughter, Li Xizhe's daughter, were sent to Xingting as slaves.

古文：壬子，太子少师李夷简卒赠太子太保。
现代文：九月二十五日，太子少师李夷简去世，追赠为太子太保。
English: On September 25, Li Yijian, the prince's apprentice, passed away and was posthumously named the prince's bodyguard.

古文：癸卯，以前河阳节度使郭钊为河中尹，兼河中、绛、隰等州节度使。
现代文：九月十六日，任命前河阳节度使郭钊为河中尹，兼河中绛隰等州节度使。
English: On September 16th, Guo Wei, the former Kheyang Festival Delegate, was appointed as the Khezhong Yin and Khezhong He and other state festival delegates.

古文：御使中丞李德裕为润州刺史、兼御史大夫、浙江西道都团练观察处置等使，以代窦易直。以易直为吏部会议郎。
现代文：任命御史中丞李德裕为润州刺史、兼御史大夫、浙江西道都团练观察处置等使，以代替窦易直；任命窦易直为吏部侍郎。
English: To replace Dou Yizhi, Li Deyu, the Vice-Minister of History, was appointed as the Vice-Minister of History of Rongzhou and the Vice-Minister of History, and the Vice-Minister of History of West Zhejiang Province was appointed as the envoy to observe and deal with the group training. Dou Yizhi was appointed as the attendant of the personnel department.

古文：加晋州刺史李寰为晋、慈等州都团练观察使。
现代文：加授晋州刺史李寰为晋州、慈州等州都团练观察使。
English: He was also awarded the Jinzhou Award for Outstanding Contribution to the People's Republic of China (PRC) and the Jinzhou Award for Outstanding Contribution to the People's Republic of China.

古文：乙巳，敕团练防御州置判官一员，其副使推巡并停。
现代文：九月十八日，敕命各州团练防御使设置判官一名，其副使、推官、巡官均予撤销。
English: On September 18, an adjudicator was appointed for the defense drill of each state, and his deputy, adjudicator, and inspector were all revoked.

古文：辛亥，以吏部侍郎柳公绰为御史大夫。
现代文：九月二十四日，任命吏部侍郎柳公绰为御史大夫。
English: On September 24th, he appointed the attendant of the cadre department, Liu Gongqiao, as the goshi taifu.

古文：先有诏广芙蓉苑南面，居人庐舍坟墓并移之，群情骇扰。
现代文：原先下诏，命扩大芙蓉苑的南面，所在的居民、房舍、坟墓全部迁往别处，群情惊骇扰嚷。
English: Originally, an edict was issued to expand the southern side of Hibiscus Garden, and the residents, buildings, and graves were all moved to other places. The crowd was shocked and disturbed.

古文：癸丑，降敕罢之。
现代文：九月二十六日，下诏撤销诏令。
English: On September 26th, the imperial edict was revoked.

古文：德州军乱，害剌史王稷，尽剽其家财奴仆。
现代文：德州军人作乱，杀害刺史王稷，将其家财奴仆抢夺殆尽。
English: Texas soldiers rioted, killing the assassin, Wang Yao, and robbing his family of their servants.

古文：丁巳，以万州刺史李元喜为安南都护。
现代文：九月三十日，任命万州刺史李元喜为安南都护。
English: On September 30th, Li Yuanxi, a prominent scholar from Wanzhou, was appointed as the guardian of the capital of Annan.

古文：阴山府沙陀突厥兵马使硃耶执宜来朝贡，赐官诰、锦彩、银器。
现代文：阴山府沙陀突厥兵马使朱耶执宜前来朝贡，赐给官职的诰命文书、锦彩、银器。
English: The Shado Turk soldiers and horses of Yinshan Prefecture sent tributes to Zhuye Xiyi, and gave him the official documents, decorations, and silverware.

古文：冬十月戊午朔。
现代文：冬季，十月初一为戊午日。
English: In winter, the first day of October is the first day of spring.

古文：壬戌，前河中晋、绛、慈、隰等州节度使、开府仪同三司、守司徒、中书令、河中尹、上柱国、许国公韩弘可守司徒、兼中书令。
现代文：十月初五，前河中晋绛慈隰等州节度使、开府仪同三司、署理司徒、中书令、河中尹、上柱国、许国公韩弘署理司徒、兼中书令。
English: On the 5th day of October, the former Kawanaka Jinnai Jisheng and other state festival envoys, the three departments of the Kaifu Rites and Ceremonies, the acting chief clerk, the chief clerk, the acting chief clerk, the deputy chief clerk, the chief clerk, the chief clerk, the chief clerk, the chief clerk, the chief clerk, the chief clerk, the chief clerk, the chief clerk, the chief clerk, the chief clerk, the chief clerk, the chief clerk, the chief clerk, the chief clerk, the chief clerk, the chief clerk, the chief clerk

古文：甲子夜，月掩牵牛中星。
现代文：十月初七夜间，月亮掩蔽牵牛座中星。
English: On the night of the seventh day of the first month of October, the moon covers the star in the constellation of Taurus.

古文：戊辰，兴元节度使以色列重胤来朝，移授天平军节度使。
现代文：十月十一日，兴元节度使乌重胤前来朝见，被转调为天平军节度使。
English: On October 11, the Xingyuan Festival envoy Wu Shigetian came to see the emperor, and was transferred to be the Tianping Army Festival envoy.

古文：己卯，以工部侍郎郑权为工部尚书，以前华州刺史许季同为工部侍郎。
现代文：十月二十二日，任命工部侍郎郑权为工部尚书，任命前华州刺史许季同为工部侍郎。
English: On October 22nd, Zheng Quan, the secretary of the Ministry of Industry, was appointed as the secretary of the Ministry of Industry, and Xu Ji, the former secretary of the Ministry of Industry, was appointed as the secretary of the Ministry of Industry.

古文：是日，上由复道幸咸阳，止于善因佛寺，施僧钱百万，咸阳令绢百匹。
现代文：当天，皇上经由复道临幸咸阳，驻跸于善因佛寺，施舍给寺僧一百万钱，赐予洛阳县令一百匹绢。
English: On the same day, the emperor, via Fudao Linxing Xianyang, stopped at Zhenyin Buddhist Temple, gave alms to the monks of the temple one million money, and gave Luoyang County one hundred horses.

古文：闰十月戊子朔，入回纥使金吾大将军胡证、副使光禄卿李宪、婚礼使卫尉卿李锐、副使宗正少卿李子鸿等，送太和公主自蕃中回。
现代文：闰十月初一，进入回纥的使臣，金吾大将军胡证、副使光禄卿李宪、婚礼使卫尉卿李锐、副使宗正少卿李子鸿等，护送太和公主从蕃国返回。
English: On the first day of the leap October, the envoys who entered Hui Province, including King Wu's general Hu Sheng, vice-envoy Guang Luqing Li Xian, wedding envoy Wei Weiqing Li Rui, and vice-envoy Zong Zheng Shaoqing Li Zihong, escorted the Empress Dowager and the princess back from Wu Province.

古文：庚寅，以吏部尚书郑絪为太子少傅；以太常卿赵宗儒为吏部尚书；韦绶为兴元尹，充山南西道节度使。
现代文：闰十月初三，任命吏部尚书郑纟因为太子少傅；任命太常卿赵宗儒为吏部尚书；韦绶任兴元尹，充任山南西道节度使。
English: On the third day of leap October, Zheng Qi was appointed as the secretary of the administrative department; Zhao Zongru was appointed as the secretary of the administrative department; Wei Wei was appointed as Xingyuan Yin, and served as the festival envoy of Shannan West Road.

古文：壬辰，右骁卫大将军韩公武卒，废朝。
现代文：闰十月初五，右骁卫大将军韩公武去世，停止上朝。
English: On the 5th day of the 10th month of the leap year, Han Gongwu, General of the Right Division of the National Guard, passed away, ending his service to the Emperor.

古文：以户部尚书杨于陵为太常卿。
现代文：任命户部尚书杨於陵为太常卿。
English: He appointed the head of the household, Yang Yuling, as the Grand Duke.

古文：丙申，回纥可汗遣使献国信四床、女口六人、葛禄口四人。
现代文：闰十月初九，回纥可汗派遣使臣献上国家的信物四床、女子六名、葛禄国人四名。
English: On the 9th day of the 10th month of the leap year, the Hui Khan sent an envoy to present four beds, six women, and four people from Gulu to the country.

古文：己亥，敕翰林侍讲学士谏议大夫路随、中书舍人韦处厚，兼充史馆修撰《宪宗实录》，仍更日入史馆。
现代文：闰十月十二日，敕令翰林侍讲学士谏议大夫路随、中书舍人韦处厚，兼充史馆修撰，编修《宪宗实录》，并更番入史馆修撰。
English: On the 12th day of the 10th month of the leap year, Zi Ling Hanlin, the attendant lecturer of the bachelor's degree, discussed with Dr. Lu Sui, the Chinese scholar, and the person in charge of Wei, and also compiled the history hall, compiled the "Constitutional Law Record," and then entered the history hall to compile.

古文：《实录》未成，且许不入内署，仍放朝参。
现代文：《实录》未成之时，允许不入内署供差，并免于朝见皇上。
English: When the "true record" was not completed, it was allowed not to enter the office of supply, and was exempted from seeing the emperor.

古文：甲寅，诏： 江淮诸州旱损多，所在米价不免踊贵，眷言疲困，须议优矜。
现代文：闰十月二十七日，诏令： 江淮各州郡因旱灾造成的损害颇多，各地的米价不免腾贵，怀想百姓的疲劳困顿，必须商议优恤哀怜他们的事。
English: On the 27th day of leap October, he issued the following edict: The damage caused by the drought in various prefectures and counties in the Jianghuai region is considerable, the price of rice in various regions is inevitably high, the fatigue and hardship of the people are deeply felt, and it is necessary to discuss the matter of compassion and pity for them.

古文：宜委淮南、浙西东、宣歙、江西、福建等道观察使，各于当道有水旱处，取常平义仓斛斗，据时估减半价出粜，以惠贫民。 
现代文：应当委命淮南、浙西、浙东、宣歙、江西、福建等道的观察使，各在本道发生了水旱灾害的地方，取用常平义仓的粮食，依据常价减半出售，以照顾贫穷的百姓。 
English: The observation envoys of Huainan, West Zhejiang, East Zhejiang, Xuanwu, Jiangxi, Fujian and other provinces should be appointed to take the grain from the Changping warehouse and sell it at half the normal price in the places where floods and droughts have occurred in their provinces, so as to take care of the poor people.

古文：丙辰，以太子宾客令狐楚为陕、虢观察使。
现代文：闰十月二十九日，任命太子宾客令狐楚为陕虢观察使。
English: On the 29th of October, the prince guest appointed the fox as the Shaanxi and Fujian observation envoy.

古文：十一月丁巳朔。
现代文：十一月初一为丁巳日。
English: The first day of the first month of November is Ding Si Day.

古文：丁卯，尚书左丞庾承宣为陕、虢观察使。
现代文：十一月十一日，尚书左丞庾承宣担任陕虢观察使。
English: On November 11th, Shangshu Zuozheng and Zheng Xuan took up the post of Shaanxi and Fujian Observer.

古文：令狐楚复为太子宾客，分司东都。
现代文：令狐楚重新担任太子宾客，分管东都。
English: Let Fox Chu serve as the prince's guest again, in charge of Dongdu.

古文：楚已至陕州视事一日，追改之。
现代文：令狐楚已经到达陕州任职一日，追回成命而改授原职。
English: Ling Xuchu has arrived in Shaanxi to serve for one day, regained his life and was awarded his original position.

古文：庚午，命景王率禁军五百骑，侍从皇太后幸华清宫，又幸石甕寺。
现代文：十一月十四日，命景王率领禁军的五百名骑兵，侍奉皇太后临幸华清宫，又临幸石瓮寺。
English: On November 14th, the 500 horsemen of the Forbidden Army led by King Myeonggyeong, served the Empress Dowager Linhwa Ching Palace and Linhwa Seokguk Temple.

古文：辛未，以前安南都护桂仲武为邕管经略使。
现代文：十一月十五日，任命前安南都护为邕管经略使。
English: On November 15th, the former Annan Du Guo was appointed as the Vice-Minister of Finance.

古文：癸酉，上幸华清宫迎太后，巡狩于骊山下，即日驰还，太后翌日方还。
现代文：十一月十七日，皇上临幸华清宫迎接太后，在骊山下巡视，当天驰马回宫，太后第二天才返回。
English: On November 17th, the emperor Lin Yuk Wah Qing Palace welcomed the empress dowager, and he inspected under Lushan Mountain. On the same day, he rode back to the palace, and the empress dowager returned the next day.

古文：丙子，集王缃薨。
现代文：十一月二十日，集王李缃去世。
English: On the 20th, Ji Wang Lijun passed away.

古文：庚辰，上与内官击鞠禁中，有内官欻然坠马，如物所击。
现代文：十一月二十四日，皇上和宦官们在皇宫时击鞠游戏，有一名宦官突然从马上坠落，就像被什么东西击中了一样。
English: On November 24th, when the Emperor and the eunuchs were playing a game of bowls in the Imperial Palace, one of the eunuchs suddenly fell from his horse as if he had been hit by something.

古文：上恐，罢鞠升殿，足不能履地，风眩就床。
现代文：皇上恐惧，停止击鞠登上殿阶，脚骤然间不能落地，晕眩地躺在床上。
English: The emperor was terrified. He stopped bowing and stepped onto the palace steps. His feet suddenly couldn't land, and he lay in bed in a daze.

古文：自是外不闻上起居者三日。
现代文：从此宫外三天没有听到关于皇上作息的情况。
English: Since then, no one outside the palace has heard anything about the emperor's schedule for the past three days.

古文：是夜，月近房。
现代文：这天夜间，月亮靠近房宿。
English: On this night, the moon was close to the room.

古文：十二月丁亥朔，诏五坊鹰隼并解放，猎具皆毁之。
现代文：十二月初一，诏令把五坊的鹰隼全部放走，打猎的用具也全部毁掉。
English: On the first day of December, the imperial edict ordered the release of all eagle pigeons in Wufang and the destruction of all hunting equipment.

古文：庚寅，宰臣李逢吉率百僚至延英门请见，上不许。
现代文：十二月初四，宰臣李逢吉率领百官到延英门请求朝见皇上，皇上不许。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of December, the vice-minister Li Fengji led a hundred officials to Yan Yingmen to request a meeting with the emperor, but the emperor would not allow it.

古文：中外与度等三上疏，请立皇太子。
现代文：朝内外的官员和裴度等人一起，三次呈上奏疏，请求册立皇太子。
English: Officials inside and outside the DPRK, together with Pei Du and others, submitted a petition three times, requesting the crown prince to be appointed.

古文：是夜，司徒、中书令韩弘卒。
现代文：当夜，司徒、中书令韩弘去世。
English: That night, Sito and Chushiro Hanhiro passed away.

古文：辛卯，上于紫宸殿御大绳床见百官，李逢吉奏景王成长，请立为皇太子，左仆射裴度又极言之。
现代文：十二月初五，皇上在紫宸殿躺在大绳床上接见百官，李逢吉上奏说景王已经长大，请求册立景王为皇太子，左仆射裴度又极力讲这件事。
English: On the 5th day of the 12th month, the emperor was lying on the big rope bed in the Purple Pagoda to receive the officials. Li Fengji said that King Jing had grown up and requested that King Jing be made the crown prince. His left-hand man, Sha Pei Du, also tried his best to talk about this matter.

古文：癸已，诏景王为皇太子。
现代文：十二月初七，下诏立景王为皇太子。
English: On the seventh day of the twelfth month of the twelfth month, King Jing became crown prince.

古文：淮南奏和州饥，乌江百姓杀县令以取官米。
现代文：淮南奏称和州发生饥荒，乌江的百姓杀死县令以强取官仓的粮米。
English: Huainan reported that a famine occurred in Hezhou, and the people of Wujiang killed the county magistrate to forcibly take grain and rice from the official warehouse.

古文：甲午，内出绢二百匹，赈两市癃残穷者。
现代文：十二月初八，由内库拨出二百匹绢，以赈济东西两市贫穷的残疾人。
English: On the eighth day of the twelfth month of December, two hundred horses were allocated from the treasury to help the poor disabled people in the eastern and western cities.

古文：己未，两军容内司公主戚属之家，并以上疾痊平，诸寺为僧斋。
现代文：十二月十三日，两处宦官内府和公主戚属的家庭，都因为皇上的疾病痊愈，在各寺庙供奉僧人的斋饭。
English: On December 13th, because the emperor had recovered from his illness, the two eunuchs in the palace and the families of the princess's relatives offered a meal to the monks at various temples.

古文：仍敕在京诸司疏放系囚。
现代文：敕令在京各司衙释放被关押的犯人。
English: The imperial edict ordered all priests in Beijing to release the prisoners.

古文：丙午，上御宣政殿册皇太子。
现代文：十二月二十日，皇上驾临宣政殿册封皇太子。
English: On December 20th, the Emperor arrived at the Palace of Proclamation to be crowned Crown Prince.

古文：受册毕，百僚谒太子于东宫，太子举帘，执笏答拜，宫僚拜则受之。
现代文：皇太子受册封完毕，百官在东宫拜谒皇太子，太子举起竹帘，执手板答拜百官，宫内官员参拜则领受拜礼。
English: After the crown prince's investiture ceremony, the dignitaries paid homage to the crown prince in the East Palace. The prince held up a bamboo curtain and bowed to the dignitaries, while the palace officials paid homage and received prayers.

古文：丁未，判度支、户部侍郎张平叔贬通州刺史。
现代文：十二月二十一日，署理度支使、户部侍郎张平叔贬职为通州刺史。
English: On December 21, Zhang Pingxu, the acting provincial governor and household attendant, was demoted to the post of Tongzhou magistrate.

古文：是夜，月掩左角。
现代文：当夜，月亮掩蔽角宿左星。
English: On that night, the moon occulted the star of Kakunodate.

古文：己酉，以前天平军节度使马总检校左仆射、守户部尚书。
现代文：十二月二十三日，任命前天平军节度使马总为检校左仆射、暂署户部尚书。
English: On December 23rd, before the Tianping Army Festival, General Ma was appointed as the left-hand archer of the inspection of the school, and temporarily signed the household book.

古文：庚戌，以吏部侍郎窦易直为户部侍郎、判度支。
现代文：十二月二十四日，任命吏部侍郎窦易直为户部侍郎，掌管度支。
English: On December 24th, Dou Yizhi, the secretary of the personnel department, was appointed as the secretary of the household department, in charge of the branch.

古文：癸丑，以太子册礼毕，宣制赦囚徒。
现代文：十二月二十七日，因为册封皇太子的典礼结束，宣布赦免囚徒的敕令。
English: On 27 December, as the investiture ceremony for the crown prince came to an end, a royal decree pardoning the prisoners was announced.

古文：以前黔中观察使崔元略为鄂、岳、蕲、黄、安等州观察使。
现代文：任命前黔中观察使崔元略为鄂州、岳州、蕲州、黄州、安州等州观察使。
English: Prior to his appointment, Cui Yuanli was appointed as the provincial observer of Ezhou, Yuezhou, Zhangzhou, Huangzhou and Anzhou.

古文：太子宾客孟简卒。
现代文：太子宾客孟简去世。
English: The prince's guest Meng Jian passed away.

古文：乙卯，以前陕虢观察使卫中行为尚书右丞。
现代文：十二月二十九日，任命前陕虢观察使卫中行为尚书右丞。
English: On December 29th, the appointment of the former Shaanxi and Fujian observation made the behavior of the middle school in the middle of the year.

古文：是冬十月频雪，其后恆燠，水不冰冻，草木萌发，如正二月之后。
现代文：这年冬天频频下雪，之后又长时间回暖，水不结冰，草木发芽，就像正月二月之后一样。
English: It snowed frequently this winter, and then it warmed up for a long time, the water did not freeze, and the plants sprouted, just like after the first month of February.

古文：三年正月丁已朔，上以疾不受朝贺。
现代文：长庆三年正月初一，皇上因为患病而不接受朝贺。
English: On the first day of the first month of the third year of Changqing, the emperor did not accept morning greetings because of illness.

古文：是日大风，昏翳竟日。
现代文：这一天刮大风，整天昏暗阴沉。
English: It was a blustery day, dark and gloomy all day.

古文：嗣郢王佐宜于崖州安置，坐妄传禁中语也。
现代文：嗣郢王李佐被安置到崖州去，因为随便传播宫禁中的话而获罪。
English: The heir to the throne, Li Zuo, was placed in Yazhou and was found guilty of casually spreading rumours while under house arrest.

古文：敕不得买新罗人为奴婢，已在中国者即放归其国。
现代文：敕令不许买新罗人为奴婢，已经在中国的新罗奴婢立即放他们回归本国。
English: The imperial edict forbade the purchase of Silla slaves, and the Silla slaves already in China were immediately allowed to return to their home country.

古文：礼部侍郎王起奏：当司所试贡举人，试讫申送中书，候覆讫下当司，然后大字放榜。
现代文：礼部侍郎王起上奏说 ：本司所考核的贡试举人，考试完毕之后即申报到中书省，待审察完毕将名单下达本司，然后用大字张榜公布。 
English: Wang Qi, an attendant of the Ministry of Ceremonies, said at the beginning of the speech, "The candidates for the tributary examination examined by this department will be declared to the Ministry of Culture and Literature immediately after the examination is completed. After the examination is completed, the list will be submitted to this department, and then published in large letters.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇上允从。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：二月，天平军监军奏：节度使乌重胤病，牙将王贽割股肉以疗，河阳节度使陈楚奏：移使府于三城，未有门戟，欲移怀州门戟于河阳。
现代文：二月，天平军监军上奏说：节度使乌重胤患病，部下的牙将王贽割下自己的股肉为他治病。河阳节度使陈楚上奏说：把节度使的府衙迁到三城，府衙门口没有门戟，打算把怀州府衙的门戟迁到河阳来。
English: In February, the Tianping military inspector reported to the commander-in-chief of the army, saying: the festival made Wu Chungyan sick, and his subordinates cut off Wang Yao's crotch with their teeth to cure him. The Kheyang festival made Chen Chu report to the commander-in-chief of the army, saying: the festival's capital was moved to Sancheng, there was no gate at the gate of the capital, and it was planned to move the gate of the Waizhou capital to Kheyang.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇上允从。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：广东省议大夫殷侑奏礼部贡举请置《三传》、《三史》科，从之。
现代文：谏议大夫殷侑上奏说礼部贡试举人请求设置《三传三史》科，皇上允从。
English: On the advice of the doctor Yin, the Emperor agreed to the request to set up the "Three Traditions and Three Histories" department, according to the report of the Ministry of Ceremonies.

古文：户部尚书。崔倰卒。
现代文：户部尚书崔統去世。
English: The head of the household, Choi Tong, passed away.

古文：三月丁已，宰臣百僚赐宴于曲江亭。
现代文：三月初二，皇上在曲江亭向宰臣百官赐宴。
English: On the second day of March, the emperor gave a banquet to a hundred officials of the imperial court at Qujiang Pavilion.

古文：敕应御服及器用在淮南、两浙、宣歙等道合供进者，并端午诞节常例进献者，一切权停。
现代文：敕令：由淮南、两浙、宣歙等道共同进奉的一应御服及器具、用品，以及端午节、皇上寿诞按常例进献的物品，一切暂时停止。
English: The imperial edict: the ceremonial clothing and utensils and supplies jointly offered by Huainan, the two Zhejiang Provinces, Xuanfan and other provinces, as well as the items traditionally offered for the Dragon Boat Festival and the Emperor's Birthday, will all be temporarily suspended.

古文：其鹰犬之类，除备蒐狩外，并令解放。
现代文：那些鹰犬之类，除了用于狩猎的之外，都把它们放走。
English: The falcons and the like, except for hunting, let them go.

古文：以牛僧孺同中书门下平章事。
现代文：任命牛僧孺为中书门下省同平章事。
English: The appointment of Niu Xiangyong as the provincial Tongping chapter of the Chinese Academy of Letters.

古文：日晡晚后，有贼入通化门，斗死者一人，伤者六人。
现代文：日落天黑之后，有贼人进入通化门，格斗中死一人，伤六人。
English: After sunset and darkness, a thief entered the Tonghua Gate. One person died and six people were injured in the fight.

古文：赐宣徽院从奉官钱一百二十贯文已下有差。
现代文：赐给在宣徽院任职的官员官钱，自一百二十贯以下，各不相同。
English: The amount of government money given to officials serving in the State Great Hall of the People varies from one hundred to twenty times less.

古文：五月，山南西道奏移成州于宝井堡。
现代文：五月，山南西道奏称，把成州的治所迁到宝井堡。
English: In May, Shannan Xi Dao reported that it would relocate the Chengzhou government office to Baojing Fort.

古文：山南东道节度使牛元翼卒。
现代文：山南东道节度使牛元翼去世。
English: The host of the festival in Shannan caused the death of Niu Yuanyi.

古文：秘书少监李随奏请造当司图书印一面，从之。
现代文：秘书少监李随上奏请求制本司的图书印章一枚，皇上允从。
English: The secretary, Junior Warden Li, submitted a request to make a book seal for this division, and the emperor agreed.

古文：六月，宰相监修图史杜元颖奏：史官沈传师除镇湖南，其本分修史，便令将赴本任修撰。
现代文：六月，宰相监修国史杜元颖上奏说：史官沈传师授命镇守湖南，而他的本职是修撰史书，应令其前往本职任上修撰史书。
English: In June, the Vice-Premier and Supervisor of the State Historian Du Yuanying said in his report: the historian Shen Chuanshi was ordered to guard Hunan, and his duty was to write history books, and he should be ordered to go to his duty to write history books.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇上允从。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：敕京兆尹、御史大夫韩愈宜放台参，后不得为例。
现代文：敕令京兆尹、御史大夫韩愈免于入御台参见台省长官，但以后不得作为先例。
English: The imperial edict exempted Jing Zhaoyun and Goshi Taifu Han Yu from entering the Imperial Palace, but it must not be used as a precedent in the future.

古文：七月，国子祭酒韦乾庆卒。
现代文：七月，国子祭酒韦乾庆去世。
English: In July, Wei Jianqing, the founder of the Kuniko Festival, passed away.

古文：八月，郑、滑节度使曹华卒。
现代文：八月，郑滑节度使曹华去世。
English: In August, the Zhenglu Festival brought Cao Hua's death.

古文：检校尚书右仆射、户部尚书马总卒。
现代文：检校尚书右仆射、户部尚书马总去世。
English: The school inspector, Shang Shumas right-hand man, was shot, and the head of the household, Shang Shumas, died.

古文：兴元节度使韦绶卒。
现代文：兴元节度使韦绶去世。
English: The Xingyuan Festival caused the death of Wei Xuan.

古文：上由复道幸兴庆宫，至通化门，赐持盂僧绢二百匹。因幸五方，赐从官金银铤有差。
现代文：皇上经由复道临幸兴庆宫，至通化门，赐给化缘的托钵僧二百匹绢，借此临幸各地，赏赐随从的官员不同数量的金锭、银锭。
English: The emperor traveled via Fudao to Lincheng Xingqing Palace and then to Tonghua Gate, where he bestowed two hundred horses and mules to the mendicant monks of Huajian. Using this opportunity, he traveled to various parts of Lincheng to reward the accompanying officials with varying amounts of gold and silver ingots.

古文：九月，泽潞节度使刘悟进位平章事。
现代文：九月，泽潞节度使刘悟晋升平章政事。
English: In September, the Zeyu Festival promoted Liu Wugu to Pingzhang government affairs.

古文：赐宰臣百僚重九宴于曲江亭。
现代文：在曲江亭赐给宰臣百官重阳节的宴饮。
English: The banquet for the Chung Yeung Festival given to the Vice-Minister and hundreds of officials at Qujiang Pavilion.

古文：南诏王丘佺进金碧文丝十有六品。
现代文：南诏王丘亻全进贡金碧纹丝织品十六件。
English: Nanzhao Wang Qiu Rongquan paid tribute to 16 pieces of silk fabrics with gold and blue patterns.

古文：十月，以京兆尹韩愈为兵部侍郎，以御史中丞李绅为江西观察使。
现代文：十月，任命京兆尹韩愈为兵部侍郎，任命御史中丞李绅为江西观察使。
English: In October, he appointed Jing Zhao Yin Han Yu as the attendant of the military department, and appointed the imperial historian Li Sheng as the Jiangxi observation envoy.

古文：宰相李逢吉与李绅不协，绅有时望，恐用为相。
现代文：宰相李逢吉与李绅关系不融洽，李绅当时深得众望，李逢吉担心他被任用为宰相。
English: The relationship between Prime Minister Li Fengji and Li Sheng was not harmonious. At that time, Li Sheng was highly regarded, and Li Fengji was worried that he would be appointed as Prime Minister.

古文：及绅为中丞，乃除韩愈为京兆尹、兼御史大夫，仍放台参。
现代文：待到李绅担任御史中丞，便授予韩愈京兆尹、兼任御史大夫，仍免见台官。
English: When Li Sheng assumed the post of Vice-Minister of History, Han Yu was awarded the post of Vice-Minister of Foreign Affairs and concurrently the post of Vice-Minister of History. He was still exempted from becoming a Taiwanese official.

古文：绅性峭直，屡上疏论其事，遂与愈辞理往复，逢吉乃两罢之。然绅出而愈留。
现代文：李绅的性情严峻刚直，屡次上疏议论这件事，便与韩愈以文辞论辩，来往应答，李逢吉便令双方同时免官，然而李绅出京任职而韩愈留京。
English: Li Sheng's character was stern and upright, and he repeatedly discussed the matter with Han Yu. He argued with Han Yu in words and exchanged answers. Li Fengji then dismissed both sides at the same time. However, Li Sheng left Beijing to serve while Han Yu remained in Beijing.

古文：宰相杜元颖罢知政事，除成都尹、剑南西川节度使。
现代文：宰相杜元颖罢免知政事，授职为成都尹、剑南西川节度使。
English: Prime Minister Du Yuanying dismissed the political secretary and appointed Chengdu Yin and Jianan Nishikawa as the chief envoys.

古文：龙武统军陈楚卒。
现代文：龙武统军陈楚去世。
English: Long Wu's general Chen Chu passed away.

古文：以兵部侍郎韩愈为吏部侍郎，新除江西观察使李绅为户部侍郎。
现代文：任命兵部侍郎韩愈为吏部侍郎，新授职的江西观察使李绅任户部侍郎。
English: Han Yu, the attendant of the military department, was appointed as the attendant of the personnel department, and the newly appointed Jiangxi observation envoy Li Sheng was appointed as the attendant of the household department.

古文：绅既罢除江西，上令中使就第赐玉带，绅因除叙泣而请留，中使具奏，故与愈俱改官。
现代文：李绅罢职授任江西观察使之后，皇上命宦官就在他的府第中赐予玉带，李绅因免京职授外任而流泪请求留京任职，宦官详细奏闻皇上，因而与韩愈均改授官职。
English: After Li Sheng was demoted and appointed as the Jiangxi observation envoy, the eunuch ordered by the emperor gave the eunuch a jade belt in his capital. Li Sheng requested to stay in Beijing to serve because he was exempted from the Beijing post. The eunuch reported to the emperor in detail, so both he and Han Yu were reassigned to official positions.

古文：召翰林学士庞严对，因赐金紫。
现代文：征召翰林学士庞严谈话，继而赐予金章紫绶。
English: Hanlin was summoned for a stern talk and awarded the Purple and Gold Star.

古文：赐内园使公廨本钱一万贯，军器使三千贯。
现代文：赐予内园使公署本钱一万贯，赐予军器使三千贯。
English: The public office's capital of 10,000 yuan was given to the inner garden, and the military equipment was given 3,000 yuan.

古文：杜元颖赴镇蜀，上御安福门饯，因赐皇城留守及金吾卫率等帛有差。
现代文：杜元颖前往蜀州镇守，皇上临幸安福门为他饯行，从而赐给皇城留守及金吾卫元帅等人绢帛，数量各不相等。
English: Du Yuanying went to the Shuzhou town guard, and the emperor Lin Xuan Anfu Men accompanied him, thus giving the imperial city guards and Marshal Jin Wuwei and others, the number of which are not equal.

古文：十一月，上御通化门，观作毗沙门神，因赐绢五百匹。
现代文：十一月，皇上驾临通化门，观看制作毗沙门神，继而赐绢五百匹。
English: In November, the emperor came to Tonghua Gate to watch the making of the Vishamen deity, and then bestowed five hundred yakitori.

古文：停浙东贡甜菜、海蚶。
现代文：停止浙东贡奉甜菜、海蚶。
English: Stop Zhejiang Donggong from hoarding sugar beet and sea lettuce.

古文：十二月，浙西观察使李德裕奏去管内淫祠一千一十五所。
现代文：十二月，浙西观察使李德裕奏称废除辖区内不在祀典内的祠庙一千零一十五所。
English: In December, the Western Zhejiang Observer asked Li Deyu to announce the abolition of 1,015 ancestral temples in the jurisdiction that were not included in the ceremony.

古文：四年正月辛亥朔，上御殿受朝如常仪。
现代文：长庆四年正月初一，皇上临幸正殿接受朝贺，和通常的礼仪一样。
English: On the first day of the first month of the fourth year of the Chōkei era, the Emperor received morning greetings at the Imperial Palace, as is the usual etiquette.

古文：上饵金石之药，处士张皋上疏切谏，上悦，召之，求皋不获。
现代文：皇上服用金石一类药物，隐居不仕的人张皋上疏恳切地劝谏，皇上很高兴，征召他，寻找张皋没有找到。
English: The emperor took drugs such as gold and stone. Zhang Xuan, a recluse, earnestly advised him. The emperor was very pleased and conscripted him. He searched for Zhang Xuan but did not find him.

古文：泽、潞判官贾直言新授谏议大夫，刘悟上表乞留，从之。
现代文：泽潞判官贾直言新授职为谏议大夫，刘悟奉上表章请求留任他，皇上允从。
English: Judge Jia Zhizhong was newly appointed to the post of judge. Liu Wugu was asked by the emperor to remain in his post, and the emperor agreed.

古文：礼部尚书致仕孔戣卒。
现代文：原礼部尚书退休离任的孔癸戈去世。
English: Kong Rongge, the retired head of the former Ministry of Ceremonies, has passed away.

古文：辛未，上大渐，诏皇太子监国。
现代文：正月二十一日，皇上病势沉重，下诏由皇太子监国。
English: On the 21st day of the first month of the year, the Emperor was gravely ill, and it was decreed that the Crown Prince would oversee the affairs of state.

古文：壬申，上崩于寝殿，时年三十。
现代文：正月二十二日，皇上在寝殿驾崩，时年三十岁。
English: On the 22nd day of the first month, the Emperor passed away in his bed, at the age of thirty.

古文：群臣上谥曰睿圣文惠孝皇帝，庙号穆宗。
现代文：群臣敬献谥号为睿圣文惠孝皇帝，庙号穆宗。
English: The courtiers paid their respects to Emperor Rui Shengwen Hui Xiao with the posthumous name of Rui Shengwen Hui Xiao and the temple name Mu Zong.

古文：十一月庚申，葬于光陵。
现代文：十一月十五日安葬在光陵。
English: He was buried on November 15 in the Guangling Mausoleum.

