古文：王者制事立法，物度轨则，壹禀于六律，六律为万事根本焉。
现代文：帝王管理各种事物，建立法度，确定万物的度数和准则，一切都遵照六律，六律是所有事物的根本。
English: The emperor manages all kinds of things, establishes laws, and determines the degree and standard of all things. Everything follows the six laws, and the six laws are the foundation of all things.

古文：其于兵械尤所重，故云 望敌知吉凶，闻声效胜负 ，百王不易之道也。
现代文：六律对于战争尤其重要，所以说 观察敌人的动向就能知道吉凶，闻听对方的声音就能决定胜负 ，这是百代不变的法则。
English: The six laws are especially important for war, so it is said that observing the enemy's movement can determine the fate, and listening to the other side's voice can determine the outcome, which is a law that has not changed for hundreds of generations.

古文：武王伐纣，吹律听声，推孟春以至于季冬，杀气相并，而音尚宫。
现代文：武王伐纣时，吹律管听声音而占卜吉凶，从早春一直推算到深冬，都有杀气并声而出，而武王的军声与宫音相合。
English: When King Wu was felling oaks, he would listen to the sound of the trumpet and foretell good and evil. From early spring to late winter, the sound of the trumpet and the sound of the palace coincided.

古文：同声相从，物之自然，何足怪哉？
现代文：同声的事物相互依从，这是事物自然的道理，有什么值得奇怪的呢？
English: It is the nature of things that things in unison follow each other, so what is there to wonder about?

古文：兵者，圣人所以讨强暴，平乱世，夷险阻，救危殆。
现代文：战争，是圣人用来讨伐强横暴戾，平定乱世，夷除险阻，挽救危殆局面的工具。
English: War is a tool used by sages to fight tyranny, pacify the chaotic world, remove obstacles, and save the critical situation.

古文：自含齿戴角之兽见犯则校，而况于人怀好恶喜怒之气？
现代文：含齿戴角的兽类，遇到外物的侵犯，尚且要与它角力反抗，何况是怀有好恶之心，喜怒之情的人了？
English: When an animal with teeth and horns is encroached upon by a foreign object, it still has to struggle against it. What is more, it is a person with likes and dislikes, feelings of joy and anger?

古文：喜则爱心生，怒则毒螫加，情性之理也。
现代文：欢喜就会产生爱心，愤怒就会以毒螫相加，这是人性情的必然道理。
English: Joy will produce love, anger will be added with poison, this is the inevitable truth of human nature.

古文：昔黄帝有涿鹿之战，以定火灾；颛顼有共工之陈，以平水害；成汤有南巢之伐，以殄夏乱。
现代文：以往黄帝时有过涿鹿地区的战斗，以平定炎帝造成的灾害；颛顼有与共工氏的对阵，以平定少昊氏造成的灾害；成汤有伐桀到南巢的战斗，以殄灭夏朝的祸乱。
English: In the past, during the reign of the Yellow Emperor, there were battles in the Elk region to pacify the disasters caused by the Emperor Yan; there was a confrontation with the Gongong clan to pacify the disasters caused by the Shao Hao clan; and there was a battle in Chengdu to the South Nest to extinguish the calamity of the Xia Dynasty.

古文：递兴递废，胜者用事，所受于天也。
现代文：一代又一代，兴盛与荒废相交替，胜利的人得以统治天下，那是受命于天的原因。
English: From generation to generation, prosperity alternates with desolation, and those who are victorious are able to rule the world, which is the reason for being ordered by heaven.

古文：自是之后，名士迭兴，晋用咎犯，而齐用王子，吴用孙武，申明军约，赏罚必信，卒伯诸侯，兼列邦土，虽不及三代之诰誓，然身宠君尊，当世显扬，可不谓荣焉？
现代文：从此之后，名士相继出现，晋国任用咎犯，而齐国任用王子成父，吴国任用孙武，他们都申明军纪，赏罚一定让众人信服，终于成为诸侯霸主，兼并别国土地，虽然比不上三代时受诰誓封赏的荣耀，然而同样是自身宠荣，君主尊显，当世显名扬声，能说不是荣耀吗？
English: Since then, celebrities have appeared one after another. Jin Province appointed the culprit, while Qi Province appointed the prince as the father, and Wu Province appointed Sun Wu. They all affirmed the military discipline, and the reward and punishment must convince everyone. Finally, they became the overlord of the princes, and annexed the land of other countries. Although it is not comparable to the glory of being sworn and rewarded in three generations, it is also their own favor, the monarch is respected, and the world is famous. Can it be said that it is not glory?

古文：岂与世儒暗于大较，不权轻重，猥云德化，不当用兵，大至君辱失守，小乃侵犯削弱，遂执不移等哉！
现代文：怎能与那些不明大势，不权轻重，终日啰嗦要以德化世，不该用兵，结果重者君亲受辱，国土失守，轻者遭人侵犯，国家削弱，终至于不可挽救的世儒相提并论呢！
English: How can it be compared with those who do not know the general trend, do not have the weight of power, and are always trying to make the world better with virtue, and should not use soldiers, as a result, the heavy ones are humiliated, the land is lost, the light ones are violated, the country is weakened, and finally, the irreparable world jesters!

古文：故教笞不可废于家，刑罚不可捐于国，诛伐不可偃于天下，用之有巧拙，行之有逆顺耳。
现代文：所以家庭中不能没有教导子孙的鞭笞，国家不可没有刑罚，天下不可没有诛杀和征伐，只不过是在动用武力的时候有巧有拙，施行的时候有顺有逆罢了。
English: Therefore, the family cannot do without the whip to teach their children and grandchildren, the state cannot do without punishment, and the world cannot do without battles and conquests. It is just a matter of being skillful when using force, and being obedient when implementing it.

古文：夏桀、殷纣手搏豺狼，足追四马，勇非微也；百战克胜，诸侯慑服，权非轻也。
现代文：夏桀、殷纣王能赤手空拳与豺狼搏斗，奔跑起来能追得上四匹马拉的车子，其勇力是不小的；他们曾百战百胜，诸侯对他们恐惧服从，权力也不算轻。
English: King Xia Yao and King Yin Yao could fight jackals with their bare hands and chase a four-horse chariot. Their courage was not small. They had many victories in battle. The princes were afraid of them and obeyed them. Their power was not light.

古文：秦二世宿军无用之地，连兵于边陲，力非弱也；结怨匈奴，祸于越，势非寡也。
现代文：秦二世屯军于四郊，连兵于边陲，力量是不弱的；北与匈奴结怨，南在诸越招惹祸端，势力不算寡弱，等到他们的威风使尽，势力盛极，闾巷中的平民也成了敌国。
English: Qin II garrisoned troops in the four suburbs, the company of soldiers in the borderlands, the strength is not weak; the north has a grudge with the Xiongnu, the south provokes trouble in Zhu Yue, the strength is not weak, until their prestige is exhausted, the strength is extremely strong, and the civilians in the streets have become an enemy country.

古文：及其威尽势极，闾巷之人为敌国，咎生穷武之不知足，甘得之心不息也。高祖有天下，三边外畔；大国之王虽称蕃辅，臣节未尽。
现代文：错就在于他们穷兵黩武而不知满足，心怀贪婪没有止境。高祖统一天下后，三方边境叛乱于外，国内大国诸侯王名虽称为天子的屏藩辅佐，但并没有尽到做臣子的礼节。
English: The fault lies in the fact that they do not know how to be satisfied, and their greed knows no bounds. After the unification of Korea, the three-party border rebellion outside the country, although the domestic great powers, princes and kings were called Tianzi's assistant in Pinghan, they did not do enough to be courteous.

古文：会高祖厌苦军事，亦有萧、张之谋，故偃武一休息，羁縻不备。
现代文：赶上高祖厌烦再有战事，也是由于有萧何、张良的计谋，所以一时得以停止武事，与民休养生息，对他们只稍加约束，不严加防备。
English: It was also due to the cunning of Xiao He and Zhang Liang that there were no more wars after the weariness of Gao Zu, so they were able to stop the martial arts for a while, rest and recuperate with the people, only slightly restrict them, and not strictly prevent them.

古文：历至孝文即位，将军陈武等议曰： 南越、朝鲜自全秦时内属为臣子，后且拥兵阻阸，选蠕观望。
现代文：直到孝文帝即位，将军陈武等建议说： 南越、朝鲜自从秦朝统一时就内属中原为臣子，后来才拥兵据守险要之地，蠢蠢欲动并观望中原形势。
English: Until the enthronement of Emperor Xiaowen, General Chen Wu and others suggested that: South Vietnam and North Korea had belonged to the Central Plains as vassals since the unification of the Qin Dynasty, and only later did they have soldiers to defend the critical places, move around and watch the situation in the Central Plains.

古文：高祖时天下新定，人民小安，未可复兴兵。
现代文：高祖时天下初定，人民刚刚得到一点安宁，不可再次用兵。
English: At the time of Gaozu, it was initially decided that the people had just gained a little peace and could not use the army again.

古文：今陛下仁惠抚百姓，恩泽加海内，宜及士民乐用，征讨逆党，以一封疆。 
现代文：如今陛下以仁德、惠爱抚治百姓，四海以内都受恩泽，应该乘此时士民乐为陛下所用的机会，讨伐叛逆的党徒，来统一国家疆土。 
English: Today, His Majesty governs the people with benevolence and benevolence, and is favored all over the world. He should take this opportunity to fight the rebellious party members and unify the national territory.

古文：孝文曰： 朕能任衣冠，念不到此。
现代文：孝文帝说： 朕成年以后，从来没有想到这些。
English: Xiaowen Di said: After I became an adult, I never thought about these things.

古文：会吕氏之乱，功臣宗室共不羞耻，误居正位，常战战栗栗，恐事之不终。
现代文：赶上吕氏之乱，功臣和宗室都不以我的微贱出身为耻，阴差阳错使我得了皇帝的大位，我常战战兢兢，唯恐政事有始无终。
English: At the time of the Lv's Rebellion, the meritorious vassals and the family were not ashamed of my humble birth. I was elevated to the emperor's throne by a combination of good and bad luck. I was always wary, fearing that political affairs had no beginning and no end.

古文：且兵凶器，虽克所愿，动亦秏病，谓百姓远方何？
现代文：况且兵是凶器，纵然能达到目的，发动起来也必有耗损和弊病，又怎能避免得了百姓抛家离业远方征讨？
English: Moreover, soldiers are deadly weapons. Even if they can achieve their goals, they will be worn out and ill-equipped when they are mobilized. How can we prevent the people from leaving their homes and businesses to fight?

古文：又先帝知劳民不可烦，故不以为意。朕岂自谓能？
现代文：先帝知道劳乏的百姓不可再加使用，所以不把南越、朝鲜等事放在心上。朕岂能自以为有能耐？
English: The previous emperor knew that the exhausted people could not be used any more, so he did not take South Vietnam, North Korea and other things to heart. Can I really think that I am capable?

古文：今匈奴内侵，军吏无功，边民父子荷兵日久，朕常为动心伤痛，无日忘之。
现代文：如今匈奴入侵内地，军吏御敌无功，边地百姓父死子继，服兵役的日子已经很久，朕时常为此不安和伤痛，没有一天能够忘记。
English: Nowadays, the Huns have invaded the inland, the military officials have done nothing to resist the enemy, and the people of the border areas have been serving in the military for a long time. I am often uneasy and hurt because of this, and I can't forget a single day.

古文：今未能销距，愿且坚边设侯，结和通使，休宁北陲，为功多矣。
现代文：如今既不能销毁兵器，长守安定，但愿暂且坚守边防，远设斥候，派遣使者，缔盟结好，使北部边陲得到休息安宁，功劳就算大得很了。
English: At present, it is not possible to destroy weapons and maintain stability for a long time. However, it would be a great achievement to maintain the border defense for the time being, send spies, dispatch envoys, conclude alliances, and bring rest and tranquility to the northern border.

古文：且无议军。 
现代文：且不可再议兴兵的事了 。
English: And there can be no more talk of raising an army.

古文：故百姓无内外之繇，得息肩于田亩，天下殷富，粟至十余钱，鸣鸡吠狗，烟火万里，可谓和乐者乎！
现代文：因此百姓内外都无徭役，得到休息以致力于农事，致使天下殷实富足，粮食每斗降至十余文钱，国内鸡鸣狗吠相闻，烟火万里不惊，可说是够和平安乐的了。
English: As a result, the people both inside and outside the country had no work to do, and were able to rest and devote themselves to farming. As a result, the world was prosperous, grain was reduced to more than ten yuan per barrel, domestic chickens chirped and dogs barked, and fireworks were not surprising. It can be said that it was enough peace and happiness.

古文：太史公曰：文帝时，会天下新去汤火，人民乐业，因其欲然，能不扰乱，故百姓遂安。
现代文：太史公说：文帝在位的时候，赶上天下刚从水火中解脱出来，人民安居乐业，顺着他们的意愿，能够不受官府的干扰，所以百姓安乐不思乱。
English: Taishikong said: When Emperor Wen was on the throne, the world had just been liberated from the turmoil, and the people lived and worked peacefully, following their wishes, and could not be disturbed by the government, so the people did not think about peace and tranquility.

古文：自年六七十翁亦未尝至市井，游敖嬉戏如小儿状。
现代文：就连六七十岁的老翁也未曾到过集市之中，终日守在乡里敖游玩耍，象个孩子一样。
English: Even an old man in his sixties or seventies has never been to a bazaar, and spends his days wandering around the countryside, playing like a child.

古文：孔子所称有德君子者邪！
现代文：这岂不就是孔子称道的有德君子！
English: Isn't this the virtuous gentleman praised by Confucius?

古文：《书》曰 七正 ，二十八舍。律历，天所以通五行八正之气，天所以成孰万物也。
现代文：书中记载，七正二十八舍和律历，是天用来勾通五行八正之气的，是天用来产生和养育万物的。
English: It is recorded in the book that the seven positive and twenty-eight negative realms and the lunar calendar are used by heaven to entice the five elements and the eight positive energies, and are used by heaven to produce and nurture all things.

古文：舍者，日月所舍。
现代文：舍的意思就是日月止宿的地方。
English: "She" means the place where the sun and moon stop.

古文：舍者，舒气也。
现代文：舍就是休息一下缓口气的意思。
English: To rest is to take a breather.

古文：不周风居西北，主杀生。
现代文：不周风来自西北，主管杀生之事。
English: The bad wind comes from the northwest and is responsible for the killing.

古文：东壁居不周风东，主辟生气而东之。至于营室。
现代文：二十八宿中的东壁在不周风的东方，主持开辟生发之气使往东行，一直到达营室。
English: The east wall of the twenty-eight lodgings is in the east of the windless wind, presiding over the opening of the wind of life and making it go eastward until it reaches the camp room.

古文：营室者，主营胎阳气而产之。
现代文：营室，主管胎育阳气并把它产生出来。
English: In the camp room, the supervisor nurtures the yang qi and produces it.

古文：东至于危。
现代文：再向东到达危宿。
English: Further east, you'll arrive at Keishuku.

古文：危，垝也。言阳气之垝，故曰危。
现代文：危，就是垝的意思，是说阳气的垝，所以称为危。
English: "Jie" means "danger" and refers to the yang qi, which is why it is called "Jie."

古文：十月也，律中应钟。
现代文：以上星宿与十月相对应，十二律与应钟相对应。
English: The above constellations correspond to October, and the zodiac corresponds to the chiming of the clock.

古文：应钟者，阳气之应，不用事也。
现代文：应钟，就是阳气的反应，表示阳气还没有发挥作用。
English: Answering the bell, that is, the reaction of yang qi, indicates that yang qi has not yet played a role.

古文：其于十二子为亥。
现代文：它在十二子与亥相对应。
English: It corresponds to the twelve sons and the boar.

古文：亥者，该也。
现代文：亥，就是隐藏的意思。
English: Hai means hidden.

古文：言阳气藏于下，故该也。
现代文：是说阳气藏在它下面，所以是隐藏。
English: It is said that the yang qi is hidden under it, so it is hidden.

古文：广莫风居北方。
现代文：广莫风在北方。
English: There is no wind in the north.

古文：广莫者，言阳气在下，阴莫阳广大也，故曰广莫。
现代文：广莫，是说阳气在下，阴气没有阳气广大，所以说是广莫。
English: Guangmo, is to say that the yang is at the bottom, the yin has no yang, so it is Guangmo.

古文：东至于虚。
现代文：广莫风向东到虚宿。
English: There is no wind to the east of the village.

古文：虚者，能实能虚，言阳气冬则宛藏于虚，日冬至则一阴下藏，一阳上舒，故曰虚。
现代文：虚的意思，是指能实能虚，是说阳气冬季则蕴藏于空虚之中，到冬至日就会有一部分阴气向下隐藏起来，一部分阳气向上舒张出来，所以称虚。
English: The meaning of "virtual" refers to the ability to be able to be virtual, which means that the yang in winter is hidden in emptiness, and by the winter solstice, part of the yin will be hidden downwards, and part of the yang will stretch upwards, so it is called virtual.

古文：东至于须女。
现代文：再向东到达须女宿。
English: Further east to Susume-juku.

古文：言万物变动其所，阴阳气未相离，尚相胥如也，故曰须女。
现代文：须女，是说万物的位置发生变动，阴阳二气还没有分离，尚且互相等待的意思，所以称为须女。
English: Susume means that the position of all things has changed, yin and yang have not yet separated, but still wait for each other, so it is called Susume.

古文：十一月也，律中黄钟。
现代文：月份与十一月相对应，律与黄钟相对应。
English: The month corresponds to November, and the law corresponds to the yellow bell.

古文：黄钟者，阳气踵黄泉而出也。
现代文：黄钟的意思是阳气跟随黄泉涌出之律。
English: The meaning of the yellow bell is that the yang qi follows the law of the gushing of the yellow spring.

古文：其于十二子为子。
现代文：它在十二子与子相对应。
English: It corresponds to the number twelve.

古文：子者，滋也；滋者，言万物滋于下也。
现代文：子就是滋长的滋字；滋，是说万物滋长于地下。
English: "Ko" is the Japanese word for "growth." "Shi" means that everything grows underground.

古文：其于十母为壬癸。
现代文：它在十母与壬癸相对应。
English: It corresponds to the ten mothers and the nine sisters.

古文：壬之为言任也，言阳气任养万物于下也。
现代文：壬就是妊，是说阳气负担着在地下孕育万物的重任。
English: Ren means "pregnancy," which means that the yang carries the heavy responsibility of nurturing all things underground.

古文：癸之为言揆也，言万物可揆度，故曰癸。
现代文：癸就是揆，说万物都可以测度，所以称为癸。
English: is, saying that everything can be measured, so it is called.

古文：东至牵牛。
现代文：向东到牵牛宿。
English: Head east to Tsugyu-juku.

古文：牵牛者，言阳气牵引万物出之也。
现代文：牵牛的意思是说阳气牵引万物由地下生发而出。
English: "Cowherd" means that the yang draws all things from the underground.

古文：牛者，冒也，言地虽冻，能冒而生也。
现代文：牛就是冒，是说地即使被封冻，仍能冒出地面生长出来。
English: The cow is to rise, that is to say, even if it is frozen, it can still rise out of the ground.

古文：牛者，耕植种万物也。
现代文：牛又指耕耘种植万物的意思。
English: Cow also refers to the meaning of cultivating and planting everything.

古文：东至于建星。
现代文：再向东到建星。
English: Then head east to Jianxing.

古文：建星者，建诸生也。
现代文：建星，就是建立起诸有生命之物的意思。
English: To build a star means to build up all living things.

古文：十二月也，律中大吕。
现代文：与十二月相对应，十二律与大吕相对应。
English: Corresponds to December, and the Twelve Precepts corresponds to the Great Lu.

古文：大吕者。
现代文：大吕的意思是。
English: The meaning of Dairu is "to grow."

古文：其于十二子为丑。
现代文：十二子与丑相对应。
English: Twelfth son corresponds to Ugly.

古文：条风居东北，主出万物。
现代文：条风来自东北，主管万物的产生和出现。
English: The wind comes from the northeast and is responsible for the creation and appearance of all things.

古文：条之言条治万物而出之，故曰条风。
现代文：条风意思是说条治万物而使它们产生出来，所以称为条风。
English: "Strip wind" means to rule all things and make them come into being, so it is called "strip wind."

古文：南至于箕。
现代文：条风向南到箕宿。
English: The wind blows south to Shuku.

古文：箕者，言万物根棋，故曰箕。
现代文：箕就是万物的根基，所以称为箕。
English: The Tao is the foundation of all things, so it is called the Tao.

古文：正月也，律中泰蔟。
现代文：与正月对应，以上星宿的音律与太蔟相合。
English: Corresponding to the first month of the year, the rhythm of the above constellations coincides with the lunar new year.

古文：泰蔟者，言万物蔟生也，故曰泰蔟。
现代文：太蔟，是说万物蔟拥而生的意思，所以称为太蔟。
English: Taixuan means that all things are born from embracing, so it is called Taixuan.

古文：其于十二子为寅。
现代文：于十二子与寅相对应。
English: Yu the twelfth son corresponds to the crane.

古文：寅言万物始生蚓然也，故曰寅。
现代文：寅是说万物初生如蚯螾之行螾然弯曲的样子，所以称为寅。
English: Tora means that all things are born crooked, so they are called tora.

古文：南至于尾，言万物始生如尾也。
现代文：向南到达尾宿，尾是说万物初生像尾巴一样弯曲。
English: Head south to the tail of the lodge. The tail means that everything is curved like a tail when it is first born.

古文：南至于心，言万物始生有华心也。
现代文：向南到达心宿，心是说万物初生都有类似花朵的芯蕊。
English: Southward to the heart, the heart is said to be the flower-like pistil of all things in their first birth.

古文：南至于房。
现代文：再向南到达房宿。
English: Continue south to your accommodation.

古文：房者，言万物门户也，至于门则出矣。
现代文：房，是指为万物的门户，到门前就要出来了。
English: The house is the gateway to all things. When you get to the door, you have to go out.

古文：明庶风居东方。
现代文：明庶风来自东方。
English: The Meiji style came from the East.

古文：明庶者，明众物尽出也。
现代文：明庶的意思是，表明众物全都出土萌发出来了。
English: Akasho means that all the things have been unearthed and have sprouted.

古文：二月也，律中夹钟。
现代文：与二月相应，他的音律与夹钟相对应。
English: Corresponding to February, his melody corresponds to the chime of the clock.

古文：夹钟者，言阴阳相夹厕也。
现代文：夹钟，是说阴阳相夹，厕身于中的意思。
English: The meaning of "squeezing the bell" is that yin and yang are squeezed, and the toilet is in the middle.

古文：其于十二子为卯。
现代文：十二子与卯相对应。
English: The twelfth son corresponds to U.

古文：卯之为言茂也，言万物茂也。
现代文：卯就是茂盛，是说万物生长茂盛。
English: "Wu" means flourishing, which means that all things are flourishing.

古文：其于十母为甲乙。
现代文：于十母与甲乙相对应。
English: Yu ten mu corresponds to A and B respectively.

古文：甲者，言万物剖符甲而出也；乙者，言万物生轧轧也。
现代文：甲，是说万物冲破符甲萌发出来；乙，是说万物生长时艰难而顽强的样子。
English: A means that all things break through the conch shell and germinate; B means that all things grow in a difficult and tenacious manner.

古文：南至于氐。
现代文：向南到达氐宿。
English: Go south to arrive at Oshuku.

古文：氐者，言万物皆至也。
现代文：氐的意思是说万物都已抵达、来到的意思。
English: The meaning of  is to say that all things have arrived.

古文：南至于亢。
现代文：向南到达亢宿。
English: Go south to arrive at Oshuku.

古文：亢者，言万物亢见也。
现代文：亢的意思，是说万物渐渐长高了。
English: The meaning of  is that everything is gradually growing taller.

古文：南至于角。
现代文：再向南到角宿。
English: Then head south to Tsunomiya.

古文：角者，言万物皆有枝格如角也。
现代文：角的意思是说万物都有了如同犄角一样的枝杈。
English: The meaning of the horn is that everything has branches like the horn of a cucumber.

古文：三月也，律中姑洗。
现代文：十二月中与三月相对应，律中与姑洗相对应。
English: The middle of December corresponds to March, and the middle of the rite corresponds to the purification rite.

古文：姑洗者，言万物洗生。
现代文：姑洗的意思是说万物初生，颜色光鲜如洗。
English: The meaning of "washing" is that everything is new-born, and the color is as bright as if washed.

古文：其于十二子为辰。
现代文：于十二子与辰相对应。
English: Yu corresponds to the 12th son and Chen to the 13th son.

古文：辰者，言万物之蜄è也。
现代文：辰，是说万物已经蠕动起来。
English: It means that all things have begun to creep.

古文：清明风居东南维，主风吹万物而西之。
现代文：清明风来自东南之交，主管吹动万物向西发展。
English: The clear and bright wind comes from the southeastern intersection, and the supervisor blows everything to the west.

古文：至于轸。
现代文：先到达轸宿。
English: Arrive at Oshuku first.

古文：轸者，言万物益大而轸轸然。
现代文：轸，是说万物生长得壮大旺盛。
English: , is to say that all things grow vigorously.

古文：西至于翼。
现代文：向西到达翼宿。
English: Go west to Tsubasa.

古文：翼者，言万物皆有羽翼也。
现代文：翼，是说万物都已长大，如同有了羽翼。
English: wings, that is to say, all things have grown, as if they had wings.

古文：四月也，律中中吕。
现代文：以上两宿为四月宿，于律为中吕。
English: The above two lodgings are April lodgings, and Yurutsu is Zhonglu.

古文：中吕者，言万物尽旅而西行也。
现代文：中吕的意思是说万物全都向西旅行。
English: Zhonglu means that all things travel westward.

古文：其于十二子为巳。
现代文：于十二子为巳。
English: On the twelfth day of the month, a snake appeared.

古文：巳者，言阳气之已尽也。
现代文：巳的意思是说阳气已尽了。
English: The meaning of the snake is to say that the yang has been exhausted.

古文：西至于七星。
现代文：向西到达七星。
English: Westward to the Seven Stars.

古文：七星者，阳数成于七，故曰七星。
现代文：七星，是由于阳数成于七，所以称为七星。
English: The seven stars are so called because the number of the sun is seven.

古文：西至于张。
现代文：向西到张宿。
English: Head west to Zhangjuku.

古文：张者，言万物皆张也。
现代文：张，是说万物都已张大。
English: Zhang means that everything has been expanded.

古文：西至于注。
现代文：再向西到注宿。
English: Then head west to Shushuku.

古文：注者，言万物之始衰，阳气下注，故曰注。
现代文：注，是说万物开始衰落，阳气下注，所以称为注。
English: Note, is to say that all things began to decline, yang qi, so called note.

古文：五月也，律中蕤宾。
现代文：以上三宿为五月宿，于律为蕤宾。
English: The above three lodgings are May lodgings, and Yurutsu is a guest house.

古文：蕤宾者，言阴气幼少，故曰蕤；痿阳不用事，故曰宾。
现代文：蕤宾的意思，是说阴气幼小，所以称为蕤；衰落的阳气已不主事，所以称为宾。
English: The meaning of 宾 is that the yin qi is small, so it is called ; the declining yang qi is no longer the main thing, so it is called 宾.

古文：景风居南方。
现代文：景风来自南方。
English: The prevailing wind is from the south.

古文：景者，言阳气道竟，故曰景风。
现代文：景，是说阳气之道已步入尽头，所以称为景风。
English: Jing, is to say that the path of yang has come to an end, so it is called Jingfeng.

古文：其于十二子为午。
现代文：于十二子为午。
English: In the afternoon of the 12th.

古文：午者，阴阳交，故曰午。
现代文：午，就是阴阳相交的意思，所以称为午。
English: "Noon" means the intersection of yin and yang, which is why it is called "noon."

古文：其于十母为丙丁。
现代文：于十天干中为丙丁。
English: On the 10th day of the dry season, it turned out to be Hingting.

古文：丙者，言阳道着明，故曰丙；丁者，言万物之丁壮也，故曰丁。
现代文：丙，是说阳道彪炳明著，所以称丙；丁，是说万物已成年并强壮，所以称丁。
English: C is to say that Yang Dao Biao is clear, so it is called C; Ding is to say that everything has come of age and is strong, so it is called Ding.

古文：西至于弧。
现代文：向西到弧宿。
English: Go west to Arc Inn.

古文：弧者，言万物之吴落且就死也。
现代文：弧的意思，是说万物凋落，很快就要死亡了。
English: The meaning of arc is that all things are fading and will soon die.

古文：西至于狼。
现代文：向西到狼宿。
English: Head west to Wolf Lodge.

古文：狼者，言万物可度量，断万物，故曰狼。
现代文：狼，是说万物都可度量，量断万物，所以称狼。
English: The wolf means that everything can be measured and everything can be measured, so it is called the wolf.

古文：凉风居西南维，主地。
现代文：凉风在西南方，主宰地。
English: The cool breeze is in the southwest, dominating.

古文：地者，沉夺万物气也。
现代文：地，就是沉夺万物之气的意思。
English: "Earth" means to absorb the energy of all things.

古文：六月也，律中林钟。
现代文：与六月相应，它的音律属与林钟相合。
English: Corresponding to the month of June, its rhythm is in tune with the forest bell.

古文：林钟者，言万物就死气林林然。
现代文：林钟，是说万物走向死亡的气象懔然恐惧的样子。
English: Lin Zhong said that all things are heading towards death with a look of horror.

古文：其于十二子为未。
现代文：于十二地支中属未。
English: It belongs to the twelve local branches.

古文：未者，言万物皆成，有滋味也。
现代文：未与味同音，是说万物都已长成，具有滋味了。
English: 未 and味 have the same pronunciation, which means that all things have matured and have a taste.

古文：北至于罚。
现代文：向北是罚宿。
English: If you go north, you will be fined.

古文：罚者，言万物气夺可伐也。
现代文：罚，是说万物气势已夺，可以砍伐了。
English: The punishment means that all things have lost their momentum and can be cut down.

古文：北至于参。
现代文：向北是参宿。
English: To the north is Sangjuku.

古文：参言万物可参也，故曰参。
现代文：参是说万物都可参验，所以称参。
English: Sam means that everything can be tested, so it is called Sam.

古文：七月也，律中夷则。
现代文：以上两宿属七月，律属夷则。
English: The above two lodgings belong to Jiugetsu, while Ritsuryo belongs to Izu.

古文：夷则，言阴气之贼万物也。
现代文：夷则，是说阴气侵害万物的意思。
English: 夷则, is the meaning of yin qi infringing on all things.

古文：其于十二子为申。
现代文：于十二地支中属申。
English: It is one of the twelve local branches.

古文：申者，言阴用事，申贼万物，故曰申。
现代文：申，是说阴气主事，一再侵害万物，所以名为申。
English: "Shen" means that yin and qi are in charge, and they repeatedly encroach on all things, hence the name "Shen."

古文：北至于浊。
现代文：向北是浊宿。
English: To the north is Oshuku.

古文：浊者，触也，言万物皆触死也，故曰浊。
现代文：浊，与触音相近，是说万物都触阴气而死，所以名为浊。
English: , which is similar to the sound of touch, means that all things are touched by the yin and die, hence the name.

古文：北至于留。
现代文：向北是留宿。
English: To the north is a lodge.

古文：留者，言阳气之稽留也，故曰留。
现代文：留，是说阳气停留没有去尽，所以名为留。
English: Stay, is to say that the yang qi stay has not been exhausted, so the name is stay.

古文：八月也，律中南吕。
现代文：以上两宿为八月宿，音律与南吕相合。
English: The above two lodgings are August lodgings, the melody coincides with South Lvg.

古文：南吕者，言阳气之旅入藏也。
现代文：南吕，是说阳气的旅程进入隐藏的状态。
English: Nanlu means the journey of yang into a hidden state.

古文：其于十二子为酉。
现代文：于十二地支中属酉。
English: In the twelve local branches, it belongs to.

古文：酉者，万物之老也，故曰酉。
现代文：酉，就是万物已经成熟，所以名为酉。
English: , that is, everything has matured, so it is called.

古文：阊阖风居西方。
现代文：阊阖风来自西方。
English: The wind comes from the west.

古文：阊者，倡也；阖者，藏也。
现代文：阊，就是倡导的意思；阖，就是隐藏。
English: , means to advocate;, means to conceal.

古文：言阳气道万物，阖黄泉也。
现代文：是说阳气引导万物，隐藏到黄泉中去。
English: It is said that the yang qi guides all things and hides them in the underworld.

古文：其于十母为庚辛。
现代文：于十天干中属庚辛。
English: On the 10th day of the dry season, Geng Xin is born.

古文：庚者，言阴气庚万物，故曰庚；辛者，言万物之辛生，故曰辛。
现代文：庚，是说阴气变更万物，所以称为庚；辛，是说万物生存艰辛，所以称为辛。
English: Geng means that yin changes all things, so it is called Geng; Xin means that all things are difficult to survive, so it is called Xin.

古文：北至于胃。
现代文：向北是胃宿。
English: To the north is the Stomach Inn.

古文：胃者，言阳气就藏，皆胃胃也。
现代文：胃，是说阳气被收藏，都缩聚起来。
English: Stomach, it means that the yang qi is collected, and it is all concentrated.

古文：北至于娄。
现代文：向北是娄宿。
English: To the north is Oshuku.

古文：娄者，呼万物且内之也。
现代文：娄，就是呼唤万物并将其收纳的意思。
English: , which means to call all things and contain them.

古文：北至于奎。
现代文：向北是奎宿。
English: To the north is Kui-juku.

古文：奎者，主毒螫杀万物也，奎而藏之。
现代文：奎，主管以毒螫杀万物，并包容地加以收藏。
English: Kui, the supervisor, kills everything with a poison dart, and tolerantly collects it.

古文：九月也，律中无射。
现代文：以上三宿为九月宿，它的音律与无射相合。
English: The above three lodgings are September lodgings, and their melody is consistent with no-shooting.

古文：无射者，阴气盛用事，阳气无余也，故曰无射。
现代文：无射，是说阴气强盛并发挥作用的意思，阳气隐藏无所余，所以称为无射。
English: There is no projection, which means that the yin is strong and plays a role, and the yang is hidden, so it is called no projection.

古文：其于十二子为戌。
现代文：于十二地支中属戌。
English: In the twelve local branches, it belongs to.

古文：戌者，言万物尽灭，故曰戌。
现代文：戌，是说万物全都灭亡了，所以称为戌。
English: It means that all things have perished, and that is why it is called the Dragon's Roar.

古文：律数：九九八十一以为宫。三分去一，五十四以为征。
现代文：律数：五声之间的比例关系，以九九八十一作为宫的大小，将八十一分为三分，除去一分，余二分得五十四就是徵。
English: Law number: the proportional relationship between the five tones, with nine ninety-eight one as the size of the palace, dividing eighty-one into three points, removing one point, and the remaining two points are fifty-four.

古文：三分益一，七十二以为商。
现代文：将五十四分为三分，加上一分，得四分，为七十二，就是商。
English: Divide fifty-four into three, add one, and you get four, which is seventy-two, which is the merchant.

古文：三分去一，四十八以为羽。
现代文：把七十二分为三分，除去一分，余二分为四十八就是羽。
English: Dividing seventy-two into three, removing one, and dividing the remaining two into forty-eight is a feather.

古文：三分益一，六十四以为角。
现代文：将四十八分为三分，加上一分，得四分为六十四就是角。
English: Divide forty-eight into three, add one point, and get four divided into sixty-four is a corner.

古文：黄钟长八寸十分一，宫。
现代文：黄钟的长度为八寸十分寸之一，其声为宫。
English: The yellow bell is one-tenth of an inch long, and its sound is like a palace.

古文：大吕长七寸五分三分二。
现代文：大吕的长是七寸五又三分之二分。
English: The Great Lynx is seven inches five and two-thirds long.

古文：太蔟长七寸十分二，角。
现代文：太蔟长为七寸二分，为角声。
English: The bridge is seven and a half inches long and has a horn sound.

古文：夹钟长六寸七分三分一。
现代文：夹钟长六寸七又三分之一分。
English: The clock is six inches, seven and one-third minutes long.

古文：姑洗长六寸十分四，羽。
现代文：姑洗长六寸四分，为羽声。
English: Gouchi is six inches and four minutes long and is a feather.

古文：仲吕长五寸九分三分二，征。
现代文：仲吕长五寸九又三分之二分，为徵声。
English: Zhong Lyu is five inches nine and two-thirds long, which is a voice call.

古文：蕤宾长五寸六分三分二。
现代文：蕤宾长五寸六又三分之二分。
English: Hao Bin is 5'6" and 2/3" tall.

古文：林钟长五寸十分四，角。
现代文：林钟长五寸四分，为角声。
English: Lin Zhong is five inches and four minutes long, with a horn sound.

古文：夷则长五寸三分二，商。
现代文：夷则长五寸零三分之二分。
English: The eagle is five inches and two-thirds long.

古文：南吕长四寸十分八，征。
现代文：为商声。南吕长为四寸八分，为徵声。
English: South Luchang is four centimeters and eight points, and is a voice.

古文：无射长四寸四分三分二。
现代文：无射长四寸四又三分之二分。
English: No projectile length four inches four and two-thirds.

古文：应钟长四寸二分三分二，羽。
现代文：应钟长四寸二又三分之二分，为羽声。
English: The bell should be four inches two and two-thirds long, with a feather sound.

古文：生钟分：子一分。
现代文：生成钟律比例的方法：子代表黄钟，设定为一分。
English: Method of generating the bell ratio: the child represents the yellow bell, set to one minute.

古文：丑三分二。
现代文：丑代表林钟，是子的三分之二。
English: The ugly one is Lin Zhong, who is two-thirds of the way there.

古文：寅九分八。
现代文：寅代表太蔟，是子的九分之八。
English: Tama represents Taiko, eight-ninths of Koreko.

古文：卯二十七分十六。
现代文：卯代表南吕，是子的二十七分之十六。
English: U stands for South Lv, which is 16/27 of the son.

古文：辰八十一分六十四。
现代文：辰代表姑洗，是子的八十一分之六十四。
English: 辰 stands for 姑 baptism, which is sixty-four-eighty-oneths of the child.

古文：巳二百四十三分一百二十八。
现代文：巳代表应钟，是子的二百四十三分之一百二十八。
English: The snake represents the bell, which is one hundred and twenty-eight hundred and forty-threeths of the son.

古文：午七百二十九分五百一十二。
现代文：午代表蕤宾，是子的七百二十九分之五百一十二。
English: In the afternoon, there were 512 out of 729 guests.

古文：未二千一百八十七分一千二十四。
现代文：未代表大吕，是子的二千一百八十七分之一千零二十四。
English: He did not represent Dairu, but was 1,024th out of 2,187 children.

古文：申六千五百六十一分四千九十六。
现代文：申代表夷则，是子的六千五百六十一分之四千零九十六。
English: Shin stands for Emishi, which is 4,096 out of 6,561.

古文：酉一万九千六百八十三分八千一百九十二。
现代文：酉代表夹钟，是子的一万九千六百八十三分之八千一百九十二。
English: represents a clamped bell, which is 8192/19683.

古文：戌五万九千四十九分三万二千七百六十八。
现代文：戌代表无射，是子的五万九千零四十九分之三万二千七百六十八。
English: stands for no shot, which is 32,768/59,049.

古文：亥十七万七千一百四十七分六万五千五百三十六。
现代文：亥代表仲吕，是子的十七万七千一百四十七分之六万五千五百三十六。
English: The boar, represented by Zhonglu, is the sixty-fifth thousand, five hundred and thirty-sixth child out of a hundred and seventy-seven thousand one hundred forty-seven.

古文：生黄钟术曰：以下生者，倍其实，三其法。
现代文：由黄钟生成十二律的方法：使用去掉三分之一的下生法，是先将律管的长度加倍，然后再除以三。
English: The method of generating the twelve laws from the yellow bell: using the descending method of removing one third, is to first double the length of the law tube, and then divide by three.

古文：以上生者，四其实，三其法。
现代文：使用增加三分之一的上生法，是先将律管的长度乘以四，然后再除以三。
English: Using the one-third increment method, the length of the tuning fork is multiplied by four and then divided by three.

古文：上九，商八，羽七，角六，宫五，征九。
现代文：数字里最大的是九，商声为八，羽声为七，角声为六，宫声为五，徵声为九。
English: The largest number is nine, the merchant's voice is eight, the feather's voice is seven, the horn's voice is six, the palace's voice is five, and the soliciting voice is nine.

古文：置一而九三之以为法。
现代文：设置黄钟的长度比例为一并依次乘以三作为除数。
English: Set the ratio of the length of the yellow bell to one and multiply it by three as a divisor.

古文：实如法，得长一寸。凡得九寸，命曰 黄钟之宫 。
现代文：用以上得出的黄钟长度比例数作为被除数，首先得到的以寸为长度的数是一。以此类推，直到得出九寸，就命名为 黄钟之宫 。
English: Using the proportion of the length of the yellow bell obtained above as the divisor, the first number obtained with an inch as the length is one. And so on, until nine inches are obtained, it is named the Palace of the Yellow Bell.

古文：故曰音始于宫，穷于角；数始于一，终于十，成于三；气始于冬至，周而复生。
现代文：所以说音律开始于宫声，终结于角声；数开始于一，终结于十，万物生成于三；万物的生气开始于冬至，以年为周期循环往复。
English: Therefore, it is said that the melody begins with the sound of the palace and ends with the sound of the horn; the number begins with one and ends with ten, and all things are created in three; the life of all things begins with the winter solstice, and the cycle of the year goes back and forth.

古文：神生于无，形成于有，形然后数，形而成声，故曰神使气，气就形。
现代文：精神产生于虚无的状态，最终形成客观存在之物，有了形体然后就有天数，形成并产生音律乐声，所以说精神支配生气，生气依附形体。
English: The spirit arises from a state of nothingness, eventually forming an objectively existing thing, having a body and then a number of days, forming and producing rhythmic music, so it is said that the spirit dominates the anger, the anger is attached to the body.

古文：形理如类有可类。
现代文：形体的条理如果能分类就分类。
English: The structure of the body is classified if it can be classified.

古文：或未形而未类，或同形而同类，类而可班，类而可识。
现代文：有些还没有成形的就不能分类，有些形状相同就划分为同一类，有了分类就可以分辨，有了分类就可以识别。
English: Some of them can't be classified if they haven't been formed yet, and some of them are divided into the same category if they have the same shape. With classification, they can be distinguished, and with classification, they can be recognized.

古文：圣人知天地识之别，故从有以至未有，以得细若气，微若声。
现代文：圣人了解天地间万物而辨识它们的区别，所以从有形的物体能够推演出无形的状态，因此得到了如同气息的轻细之征，如同声音的微小之象。
English: The sage understands all things in heaven and earth and recognizes their differences, so he can deduce the invisible state from the tangible object, thus obtaining the subtle signs like breath, like the tiny image of sound.

古文：然圣人因神而存之，虽妙必效情，核其华道者明矣。
现代文：然而圣人根据精神保存它，即使很玄妙也必定能效验实情，最终核算出华美之道的就很英明了。
English: However, the sage preserves it according to the spirit, even if it is very mysterious, it must be able to effectively test the truth, and it is very wise to finally calculate the way of beauty.

古文：非有圣心以乘聪明，孰能存天地之神而成形之情哉？
现代文：不是具有圣明之心来驾驭自己的耳目感官，哪个又保存天地精华并产生有形之物的实情呢？
English: Is it not the case that one who possesses the Sacred Heart controls one's senses of sight and hearing, which in turn preserves the essence of heaven and earth and produces tangible things?

古文：神者，物受之而不能知其去来，故圣人畏而欲存之。
现代文：精神，万物接受它却不知道它去来的情况，所以圣人畏惧并打算保存它。
English: The spirit, which all things receive, does not know how it came to be, so the sage fears it and wants to preserve it.

古文：唯欲存之，神之亦存。
现代文：只有打算保存它，精神才能继续存在。
English: A spirit can only continue to exist if there is an intention to preserve it.

古文：其欲存之者，故莫贵焉。
现代文：那些打算将精神保存下来的，所以显得无比宝贵。
English: For those who want to preserve the spirit, it is invaluable.

古文：太史公曰：在旋玑玉衡以齐七政，即天地、二十八宿、十母、十二子，钟律调自上古，建律运历造日度，可据而度也。
现代文：太史公说：根据北斗七星整顿七种政事，就能确定天地、二十八宿、十天干、十二地支，十二律的调和起源于上古时代，创建乐律，运算历法，测定太阳运行的度数，可以依据它们进行度量。
English: Tai Shigong said: According to the Big Dipper and the Seven Stars and the rectification of the seven kinds of government affairs, it is possible to determine the heavens and the earth, the 28 mansions, the 10 heavenly stems, the 12 branches of the earth, and the harmonization of the 12 laws originated in ancient times, creating musical laws, calculating calendars, and measuring the degree of the sun's movement, and can be measured according to them.

古文：合符节，信道德，即从斯之谓也。
现代文：合验符节，通晓道理，说的就是这些事情。
English: It is these things that are spoken of in the syllogism of the syllogism of reason.

