古文：贞观初，太宗与黄门侍郎王珪宴语，时有美人侍侧，本庐江王瑗之姬也，瑗败，籍没入宫。
现代文：贞观初年，唐太宗与黄门侍郎王珪在宴会上交谈，当时有个美人在旁边侍候。她本是庐江王李瑗的爱姬，李瑗败事后，被籍没入宫。
English: In the first year of Zhenguan, Tang Taizong had a conversation with the Yellow Gate waiter Wang Jun at a banquet. At that time, there was a beautiful woman waiting next to him. She was originally the beloved of Li Jun, King of the Li River. After Li Jun's defeat, she was not allowed to enter the palace.

古文：太宗指示珪曰： 庐江不道，贼杀其夫而纳其室，暴虐之甚，何有不亡者乎！ 
现代文：太宗指着她对王珪说： 庐江王荒淫无道，杀害了她原先的丈夫而把她占为己有。暴虐到极点，怎会不灭亡呢？ 
English: Pointing at her, Taizong said to Wang Yao: "The King of the Li River is a wanton womanizer. He killed her former husband and took her for his own. He is extremely tyrannical. How can he not perish?"

古文：珪避席曰： 陛下以庐江取之为是邪，为非邪？ 
现代文：王离座说： 陛下认为庐江王夺取她是对了呢，还是不对？ 
English: The king left the throne and said, "Your Majesty, do you think it was right or wrong for the king of the Li River to seize her?"

古文：太宗曰： 安有杀人而取其妻，卿乃问朕是非，何也？ 
现代文：太宗说： 哪有杀人而夺取其妻的道理，你却问我对不对，这是什么意思？ 
English: Emperor Taizong said, "There is no reason to kill someone and take his wife, but you ask me if I am right. What does this mean?

古文：珪对曰： 臣闻于《管子》曰：齐桓公之郭国，问其父老曰： 郭何故亡？ 
现代文：王回答说： 我见到《管子》书里说：齐桓公到了郭国，问那里的父老： 郭国为什么会灭亡？ 
English: The king replied, "I saw in the book "The Pipe" that it said: Prince Qi Huan arrived in Guo Province and asked the elders there, "Why did Guo Province perish?"

古文：父老曰： 以其善善而恶恶也。 
现代文：父老说： 因为郭君喜欢好人而厌恶坏人。 
English: Father Lao said: Because Guo Jun likes good people and loathes bad people.

古文：桓公曰： 若子之言，乃贤君也，何至于亡？ 
现代文：齐桓公说： 照你所说，他是个贤君啊，怎会灭亡呢？ 
English: Prince Qi Kuan said: According to you, he is a wise ruler, so how could he die?

古文：父老曰： 不然。郭君善善而不能用，恶恶而不能去，所以亡也。 
现代文：父老说： 不是这样，郭君喜欢好人却不能任用，厌恶坏人却不能摒弃，所以灭亡。 
English: The old man said, "That's not true. Guo Jun likes good people, but he can't appoint them. He dislikes bad people, but he can't reject them. That's why he perished."

古文：今此妇人尚在左右，臣窃以为圣心是之。陛下若以为非，所谓知恶而不去也。 
现代文：如今这个妇人还在陛下左右，所以我猜测陛下的心意认为这样做是对的，陛下如果认为不对，那就是所谓知道邪恶而不能摒弃了。 
English: Now this woman is still around His Majesty, so I guess His Majesty's mind thinks that this is the right thing to do, and if His Majesty thinks it is wrong, it is called knowing evil and not being able to abandon it.

古文：太宗大悦，称为至善，遽令以美人还其亲族。
现代文：太宗听罢大为欣喜，夸他讲得好极了，马上命令把这个美人送还给她的亲族。
English: Taizong was overjoyed to hear this, praised him for speaking so well, and immediately ordered the beauty to be returned to her relatives.

古文：贞观四年，诏发卒修洛阳之乾元殿以备巡狩。
现代文：贞观四年，唐太宗下诏在洛阳修建乾元殿，以供天子巡游四方的时候下榻居住。
English: In the fourth year of Zhenguan, Emperor Taizong of Tang Dynasty issued an edict to build the Qianyuan Hall in Luoyang, so that the emperor could stay and live there when he was on tour.

古文：给事中张玄素上书谏曰：
现代文：给事中张玄素上书劝谏说：
English: During the case, Zhang Xuansu sent a letter to persuade Zou to say:

古文：陛下智周万物，囊括四海，令之所行，何往不应？
现代文：陛下您智虑周全，可谓无所不及。您下令要做的事，有哪一件不成功呢？
English: Your Majesty, you are so wise that you can do anything. What have you ordered to be done that has not been successful?

古文：志之所欲，何事不从？
现代文：您立志想要得到的东西，有哪一件不是依从你的意思去办呢？
English: Is there anything you set out to do that you haven't been able to do?

古文：微臣窃思秦始皇之为君也，藉周室之余，因六国之盛，将贻之万叶。
现代文：我认为秦始皇刚开始做皇帝的时候，一直想倚仗灭掉周室的余威，凭借平定六国的气势，将基业千秋万代地传下去。
English: I think that when Qin Shihuang was just beginning to be emperor, he always wanted to rely on others to eliminate the remaining power of the Zhou dynasty, and by virtue of the momentum of pacifying the Six Kingdoms, he would pass down the foundation for thousands of generations.

古文：及其子而亡，谅由逞嗜奔欲，逆天害人者也。
现代文：可是到了他儿子掌权的时候国家就灭亡了，我们认真分析它灭亡的原因，是他们父子随心所欲地放纵自己的贪欲，违背上天的旨意，残害百姓等因素造成的。
English: However, by the time his son came to power, the country had perished. We carefully analyzed the reasons for its demise, which were caused by factors such as their father and son freely indulging their greed, violating the will of heaven, and destroying the people.

古文：是知天下不可以力胜，神祇不可以亲恃。
现代文：从这里可以看出，统治天下不能仅仅凭借武力，一味信奉神灵也不能保障他的江山固若金汤。
English: From this it can be seen that it is not possible to rule the world by force alone, nor can one's belief in the gods guarantee the stability of his country.

古文：惟当弘俭约，薄赋敛，慎终始，可以永固。
现代文：只有大力提倡节俭，减轻赋税，自始至终兢兢业业，才可以永保江山安泰。
English: Only by vigorously advocating frugality, reducing taxes, and working hard from beginning to end can we keep the country safe and secure.

古文：方今承百王之末，属凋弊之余，必欲节之以礼制，陛下宜以身为先。
现代文：我们刚刚统一了天下，还没有从战争所造成的影响中恢复过来，民生凋敝。这个时候应该提倡节俭，以礼治国，陛下您更应该以身作则。
English: We have just unified the world, have not yet recovered from the impact of the war, and people's livelihoods have withered. At this time, we should promote frugality and govern the country with propriety. Your Majesty should lead by example.

古文：东都未有幸期，即令补葺；诸王今并出藩，又须营构。兴发数多，岂疲人之所望？其不可一也。
现代文：东都洛阳没有行宫，就下令修缮，各位大臣出京镇守边关，也都需要修建官邸，工事太多，恐怕会劳民伤财，这是第一点不可修建的原因。
English: Luoyang, the eastern capital, did not go to the palace, and ordered repairs. The ministers went to Beijing to guard the border, and they also needed to build official residences. There are too many constructions, and I am afraid that it will cost the people a lot of money. This is the first reason why it cannot be built.

古文：陛下初平东都之始，层楼广殿，皆令撤毁，天下翕然，同心欣仰。
现代文：陛下你当初平定东都洛阳，看见那些豪华奢侈的宫殿，下令全部拆毁，此举让天下人惊叹佩服。
English: Your Majesty, when you initially pacified the eastern capital Luoyang, you saw those luxurious palaces and ordered them all to be demolished. This move made the world marvel and admire.

古文：岂有初则恶其侈靡，今乃袭其雕丽？
现代文：岂有开始憎恶隋代的奢华，现在又步其后尘的道理呢？
English: Is there a reason why we began to detest the luxury of the Sui Dynasty and are now following in their footsteps?

古文：其不可二也。
现代文：这是陛下不可为的理由之二。
English: Zhang Liang said: This is the second reason why the descendants of the six countries cannot be divided.

古文：每承音旨，未即巡幸，此乃事不急之务，成虚费之劳。
现代文：一听到下面有呈报，就去巡视，然而事情并不紧急，这样做岂不是白白消耗国家的财产。
English: As soon as they hear that there is a report, they go to inspect, but the matter is not urgent, and doing so would not be a waste of the state's property.

古文：国无兼年之积，何用两都之好？
现代文：现在国家建立不久，国库还不充盈，哪用得着修建两个都城？
English: Now that the country has just been established and the treasury is not yet full, why build two capital cities?

古文：劳役过度，怨讟将起。其不可三也。
现代文：老百姓的劳役过重，就会产生怨恨，这是陛下不可为的理由之三。
English: If the labor service of the common people is too heavy, resentment will arise, which is one of the three reasons why His Majesty should not do it.

古文：百姓承乱离之后，财力凋尽，天恩含育，粗见存立，饥寒犹切，生计未安，三五年间，未能复旧。
现代文：如今百姓遭受天下大乱之后，生活非常贫困。老天有眼，让百姓的生活稍稍有了点好转，但是仍然存在忍饥挨饿的生计之忧，这种情况三五年之内也不可能解除。
English: Today, after the people have been subjected to the world's turmoil, their lives are very poor. God has an eye, so that the people's lives have slightly improved, but there is still the fear of starvation, and this situation cannot be resolved within three or five years.

古文：奈何营未幸之都，而夺疲人之力？其不可四也。
现代文：如果这个时候让老百姓去营建东都，岂不是勉为其难，这是陛下不可为的理由之四。
English: If the common people were allowed to build the eastern capital at this time, would it not be difficult? This is one of the four reasons why His Majesty should not do it.

古文：昔汉高祖将都洛阳，娄敬一言，即日西驾。岂不知地惟土中，贡赋所均，但以形胜不如关内也。
现代文：汉代的时候，汉高祖刘邦要在洛阳建都，大臣娄敬进言说这样做不可行，他劝说汉高祖在秦朝的故都建都，汉高祖接受了他的建议，当日就往西行，定都长安。
English: During the Han Dynasty, Liu Bang, the progenitor of the Han Dynasty, wanted to build the capital in Luoyang, but the minister Shujing Jin said that this was not feasible. He persuaded the progenitor of the Han Dynasty to build the capital in the Qin Dynasty. The progenitor of the Han Dynasty accepted his suggestion and went west on the same day to establish the capital in Chang'an.

古文：伏惟陛下化凋弊之人，革浇漓之俗，为日尚浅，未甚淳和，斟酌事宜，讵可东幸？
现代文：现在只希望陛下你体察百姓之苦，革除日渐沦丧的世俗风气。你治理国家的时间还很短，国家的各种社会风气还不淳厚，凡事都应该三思而后行，现在怎么可以在洛阳大兴土木，难道连古人都不如吗？
English: Now, I only hope that Your Majesty will feel the suffering of the people and eliminate the increasingly degenerate secular culture. Your time to govern the country is still very short, and the various social customs of the country are still not pure and profound. Everything should be thought out and followed. How can you build a large-scale civil engineering project in Luoyang now? Are even the ancients not good enough?

古文：其不可五也。臣尝见隋室初造此殿，楹栋宏壮，大木非近道所有，多自豫章采来，二千人拽一柱，其下施毂，皆以生铁为之，中间若用木轮，动即火出。
现代文：宫殿所用的木材都不是附近产的，大多都是从遥远的豫章郡运来的。一根柱子就要用两千人来拉，下边滑动用的轮子必须用生铁铸成，中间如果用木头做轮子，一滑动起来就会起火。
English: None of the wood used in the palace was produced nearby, and most of it was transported from the distant county of Yuanzhang. It took two thousand people to pull one pillar, and the wheels used for sliding on the underside had to be cast from pig iron. If the wheels in the middle were made of wood, they would catch fire as soon as they slid.

古文：略计一柱，已用数十万，则余费又过倍于此。
现代文：粗略算来，一根柱子的运送就要耗费数十万两银子，而其他的费用更是难以估量。
English: Roughly speaking, the transportation of a pillar costs several hundred thousand taels of silver, and other costs are even more difficult to estimate.

古文：臣闻阿房成，秦人散；章华就，楚众离；乾元毕工，隋人解体。
现代文：我听说一座阿房宫建成了，就使得秦国人心离散；章华宫修成了，就造成楚国民心散乱；乾元宫修完了，隋朝也就随之灭亡了。
English: I heard that when the Afang Palace was completed, the hearts of the Qin people were scattered; when the Zhanghua Palace was completed, the hearts of the Chu people were scattered; when the Qianyuan Palace was completed, the Sui Dynasty also perished.

古文：且以陛下今时功力，何如隋日？
现代文：况且凭借国家目前的政治状况，比起隋朝来说又如何呢？
English: Moreover, with the current political situation of the country, how does it compare to the Sui Dynasty?

古文：承凋残之后，役疮痍之人，费亿万之功，袭百王之弊，以此言之，恐甚于炀帝远矣。
现代文：国家从萧条中建立起来，这个时候再役使苦难的百姓，劳民伤财，就会重蹈历代王朝灭亡的覆辙，步其后尘，从这点来说，我们恐怕比隋炀帝还要昏庸啊。
English: Once the country is built up from the depression, at this time, if we continue to make use of the suffering people, the laborers and the people to hurt the wealth, we will repeat the same mistakes of the past dynasties and follow in their footsteps. From this point of view, I am afraid that we are even dumber than the Sui Dynasty.

古文：深愿陛下思之，无为由余所笑，则天下幸甚矣。
现代文：我恳切地希望陛下能认真考虑这件事，不要让我们的行为被后人所耻笑，那便是国家的大幸了。
English: I earnestly hope that Your Majesty will seriously consider this matter and not allow our actions to be ridiculed by future generations. That would be a great blessing for the country.

古文：太宗谓玄素曰： 卿以我不如炀帝，何如桀、纣？ 
现代文：太宗对张玄素说： 你认为我连隋炀帝都不如，那跟桀、纣相比呢？ 
English: Taizong said to Zhang Xuansu: "You think I am not even as good as the Sui and Qian emperors. How does that compare to the Qian and Qian emperors?

古文：对曰： 若此殿卒兴，所谓同归于乱。 
现代文：玄素回答说： 如果这座宫殿修好了，可以说与他们殊途同归，没什么两样。 
English: Xuan Su replied: "If this palace is repaired, it can be said that it will go the same way as them, it is no different.

古文：太宗叹曰： 我不思量，遂至于此。 
现代文：太宗猛然醒悟，叹息着说： 我没有认真考虑过这件事，所以导致了这么严重的后果。 
English: Taizong suddenly woke up and said with a sigh, "I didn't seriously consider this matter, which led to such serious consequences."

古文：顾谓房玄龄曰： 今玄素上表，洛阳实亦未宜修造，后必事理须行，露坐亦复何苦？
现代文：说罢，他又转过头来对房玄龄说道： 看看玄素的奏表，洛阳的宫殿实在不应该修建，以后做事必须按事理行事，即使露天休息又如何呢？
English: Having said that, he turned his head to Fang Xuanling and said, "Look at Xuan Zi's report card. The palace in Luoyang really shouldn't have been built. In the future, we must do things according to reason. What about resting in the open air?

古文：所有作役，宜即停之。
现代文：凡是因此产生的赋役，都应该马上停止。
English: Any enslavement that results from this should stop immediately.

古文：然以卑干尊，古来不易，非其忠直，安能如此？
现代文：要地位低的人干预地位高的人，历来都不容易做到。要不是玄素忠心正直，心地无私，又怎能做得到呢？
English: It has never been easy for a low-ranking person to interfere with a high-ranking person. If it were not for the essence of loyalty, honesty, and selflessness, how could it be done?

古文：且众人之唯唯，不如一士之谔谔。
现代文：一般人唯唯诺诺，哪里抵得上一个人惊世骇俗的言论对人的启发大呢？
English: The average person is only too willing to help, but how can a person's shocking speech inspire people?

古文：可赐绢二百匹。 
现代文：我要赏赐玄素绢二百匹。 
English: I will give you two hundred basilisks.

古文：魏征叹曰： 张公遂有回天之力，可谓仁人之言，其利博哉！ 
现代文：针对这件事，魏徵感叹地说： 张公的话真有力量呀，可谓是仁义之人，它所产生的积极影响和对国家百姓的好处真是不可限量呀！ 
English: In response to this matter, Wei Zheng said with a sigh: Zhang Gongwu's words are really powerful, he is a benevolent and righteous person, and the positive impact it has made and the benefits to the people of the country are truly limitless!

古文：太宗有一骏马，特爱之，恒于宫中养饲，无病而暴死。
现代文：唐太宗有一匹好马，特别喜爱它，常在宫里饲养，有一天这匹马没有生病却突然死掉了。
English: Tang Taizong had a good horse. He loved it very much and often kept it in the palace. One day, the horse did not get sick, but suddenly died.

古文：太宗怒养马宫人，将杀之。
现代文：太宗对养马的宫人很生气，要杀掉他。
English: Emperor Taizong was very angry with the palace official who kept the horse and wanted to kill him.

古文：皇后谏曰： 昔齐景公以马死杀人，晏子请数其罪云： 尔养马而死，尔罪一也。
现代文：长孙皇后劝谏说： 从前齐景公因为马死了要杀人，晏子请求数说养马人的罪状： 你养的马死了，这是你第一条罪。
English: The eldest grandchild of the empress advised the mule saying, "Once upon a time, Lord Qi Jing wanted to kill a man because his horse died. The mule asked the mule to count the charges against the man who kept the horse: Your horse died. This is your first crime.

古文：使公以马杀人，百姓闻之，必怨吾君，尔罪二也。
现代文：让国君因马杀人，百姓知道了，必定怨恨我们国君，这是你第二条罪。
English: If you let the sovereign kill people because of a horse, and the people find out about it, they will surely resent our sovereign. This is your second crime.

古文：诸侯闻之，必轻吾国，尔罪三也。 
现代文：诸侯知道了，必定轻视我们齐国，这是你第三条罪。 
English: If the lords knew, they must have despised us, Qi Guo. This is your third crime.

古文：公乃释罪。
现代文：齐景公听后便赦免了养马人的罪。
English: After hearing this, Qi Jing Gong pardoned the horse breeder's crime.

古文：陛下尝读书见此事，岂忘之邪？ 
现代文：陛下曾经读书读到过这件事情，难道忘记了吗？ 
English: Your Majesty once read about this in a book. Have you forgotten?

古文：太宗意乃解。
现代文：太宗听了这话才平下气来。
English: Taizong only calmed down after hearing this.

古文：又谓房玄龄曰： 皇后庶事相启沃，极有利益尔。 
现代文：他又对房玄龄说： 皇后在很多事情上启发帮助我，对我很有好处。 
English: He also said to Fang Xuanling: The empress has inspired and helped me in many things, which is very good for me.

古文：贞观七年，太宗将幸九成宫，散骑常侍姚思廉进谏曰： 陛下高居紫极，宁济苍生，应须以欲从人，不可以人从欲。
现代文：贞观七年，太宗要巡幸九成宫，散骑常侍姚思廉进谏道： 陛下身处高位，如果要以救济天下百姓为己任，那么就应该让自己的欲望顺从于天下百姓的需要，而不能要求天下人都来顺从你一个人的需要。
English: In the seventh year of Zhenguan, Emperor Taizong wanted to make a tour of the Jiu Chenggong Palace. He rode around the palace with his attendant Yao Siliang. He said: Your Majesty is in a high position. If you want to relieve the people of the world as your duty, then you should let your desires follow the needs of the people of the world, but you cannot ask the people of the world to follow your needs alone.

古文：然而离宫游幸，此秦皇、汉武之事，故非尧、舜、禹、汤之所为也。 
现代文：然而，整日想远离皇宫到处游玩，这是秦始皇、汉武帝他们经常做的事，不是尧、舜、禹、汤这些明君所为。 
English: However, wanting to spend the whole day wandering around far away from the imperial palace is something that Qin Shi Huang and Emperor Han Wu often did, and not something that Ming Jun (,,禹,汤) did.

古文：言甚切至。
现代文：话语间，言辞诚恳激切。
English: Between the words, the rhetoric is sincere and passionate.

古文：太宗谕之曰： 朕有气疾，热便顿剧，故非情好游幸，甚嘉卿意。 
现代文：太宗开导他说： 我患有与气候相关的毛病，天气热了，病痛就要加剧。
English: "I suffer from a weather-related disease, and when it's hot, the pain gets worse," Taizong said.

古文：因赐帛五十段。贞观三年，李大亮为凉州都督，尝有台使至州境，见有名鹰，讽大亮献之。
现代文：所以并不是我的本性喜欢到处巡游，但是，我还是十分感谢你的好意。 因此赏赐给姚恩廉五十匹丝帛。贞观三年，李大亮担任凉州都督，有一位台使来到凉州，看见此地有一种很稀有名贵的大鹰，台使就叫李大亮把鹰进献给唐太宗。
English: Therefore, it is not my nature to like to cruise around everywhere, but I am still very grateful for your kindness. Therefore, fifty silk cocoons were awarded to Yao Enlian. Zhenguan for three years, Li Dailiang served as the governor of Liangzhou. An envoy came to Liangzhou and saw a very rare and valuable big eagle here. The envoy asked Li Dailiang to donate the eagle to Tang Taizong.

古文：大亮密表曰： 陛下久绝畋猎，而使者求鹰。
现代文：李大亮私下上疏给唐太宗： 陛下下令禁止打猎，现在却派使者前来索要大鹰。
English: Li Dayang privately sent a message to Tang Taizong: His Majesty had ordered a ban on hunting, but now he sent an envoy to ask for the eagle.

古文：若是陛下之意，深乖昔旨；如其自擅，便是使非其人。 
现代文：如果这是陛下的意思，那就是陛下违背了过去的圣旨；如果是台使擅自主张，那他就是一个冒名的使者。 
English: If this is His Majesty's intention, it means that His Majesty has violated the sacred will of the past; if it is the envoy's self-promotion, then he is an impostor.

古文：太宗下书曰： 以卿兼资文武，志怀贞确，故委藩牧，当兹重寄。
现代文：唐太宗看完李大亮的奏折，回复道： 你既是个文武双全的人才，又对国家忠肝义胆，所以派你镇守边关，委以重任。
English: After reading Li Dayang's report, Tang Taizong replied: You are both a man of letters and a man of arms, and you are loyal to the country. Therefore, he sent you to guard the border and entrusted you with an important task.

古文：比在州镇，声绩远彰，念此忠勤，岂忘寤寐？
现代文：你这些年为国尽职尽忠，在边关声名远扬。
English: You have been dutiful and loyal to the country for all these years, and have made a name for yourself on the border.

古文：使遣献鹰，遂不曲顺，论今引古，远献直言。
现代文：我派使者来索要大鹰，你并不是趋炎附势地迎合我的旨意，而是借古鉴今，在那么遥远的地方还进献忠言，可谓披肝沥胆，诚愚之至。
English: I sent an envoy to ask for the eagle. You are not rushing to meet my will, but drawing on the lessons of the past and present to offer loyal advice in such a distant place. It can be said that you put your heart and soul into it, and you are sincere to the point of stupidity.

古文：披露腹心，非常恳到，览用嘉叹，不能已已，有臣若此，朕复何忧！
现代文：任何赞许都不能表达我的心意，有你这样的臣子，我还担忧什么呢？
English: No praise can express my heart. With a vassal like you, what do I have to worry about?

古文：宜守此诚，终始若一。
现代文：希望你能够保持这份赤诚之心，始终如一。
English: I hope you can keep this sincere heart, and be consistent.

古文：《诗》云： 靖共尔位，好是正直。
现代文：《诗经》上有句话叫： 尽忠职守，忠诚正直。
English: There is a saying in the Book of Songs: "Be devoted to duty, be loyal and honest."

古文：神之听之，介尔景福。 
现代文：神灵得知，赐予洪福。 
English: If the gods are informed, they will bestow bountiful blessings.

古文：古人称一言之重，侔于千金，卿之所言，深足贵矣。
现代文：古人也说过这么有分量的话，它的价值胜过千两黄金。你的一番话，真是可贵呀。
English: The ancients also said that words of such weight are worth more than a thousand ounces of gold. Your words are truly precious.

古文：今赐卿金壶瓶、金碗各一枚，虽无千镒之重，是联自用之物。
现代文：现在我赐给你金壶瓶、金碗各一只，虽然不是价值千金，但这是我平时自己所用的东西。
English: Now I am giving you a pot of gold and a bowl of gold. Although they are not worth a lot of money, they are things I use myself.

古文：卿立志方直，竭节至公，处职当官，每副所委，方大任使，以申重寄。公事之闲，宜观典籍。
现代文：你性情方正平直，一心为公，我委托的事情你还上疏进行核实。你在处理公务之余，可以看一看古代的典籍。
English: Your disposition is upright, you are dedicated to the public, and you are diligent in verifying the matters I entrust to you. In addition to handling your official duties, you can take a look at ancient classics.

古文：兼赐卿荀悦《汉纪》一部，此书叙致简要，论议深博，极为政之体，尽君臣之义，今以赐卿，宜加寻阅。 
现代文：我再赐给你一部荀悦写的《汉纪》，这本书叙述简要，议论深刻，对如何治国、如何尽到君臣的职责说得非常透彻，现在我把它赐给你，希望你回去认真地阅读。 
English: I will also give you a copy of "Han Ji" written by Meiyue. This book is concise, profound, and very thorough about how to govern the country and how to fulfill the duties of a monarch. Now I give it to you, I hope you go back and read it carefully.

古文：贞观八年，陕县丞皇甫德参上书忤旨，太宗以为讪谤。
现代文：贞观八年，陕县丞皇甫德参上书触怒了唐太宗，太宗认为这是毁谤。
English: In the eighth year of Zhenguan, Emperor Fu De, the chancellor of Shaanxi County, angered Emperor Taizong of Tang Dynasty by submitting a letter. Emperor Taizong thought it was a slander.

古文：侍中魏征进言曰： 昔贾谊当汉文帝上书云云 可为痛哭者一，可为长叹息者六。 
现代文：侍中魏徵进言道： 从前贾谊在汉文帝时上书，曾说到 可以为帝王痛哭的事有一件，可以为帝王长叹息的事有六件 。
English: The courtier Wei Zheng said, "Once upon a time, Jia Yi wrote a letter to Emperor Hanwen. He said that there was one thing that could make the emperor cry, and six things that could make the emperor sigh.

古文：自古上书，率多激切。若不激切，则不能起人主之心。
现代文：从古以来上书奏事，往往言辞很激切，如果不激切，就不能打动人主的心。
English: Since ancient times, when a matter is reported in writing, the words are often very passionate. If they are not passionate, they cannot touch the heart of the owner.

古文：激切即似讪谤，惟陛下详其可否。 
现代文：言辞激切就近似毁谤，希望陛下仔细详察我的话对不对。 
English: I hope that Your Majesty will carefully scrutinize my words.

古文：太宗曰： 非公无能道此者。 
现代文：太宗说： 只有你能讲这样中肯的话。 
English: Emperor Taizong said, "Only you can say such pertinent words."

古文：令赐德参帛二十段。
现代文：于是下令赏赐给皇甫德参帛二十段。
English: Therefore, he ordered to award twenty dan to Emperor Fu De.

古文：贞观十五年，遣使诣西域立叶护可汗，未还，又令人多赍金帛，历诸国市马。
现代文：贞观十五年，太宗派遣使者到西域封立叶护可汗，使者还没有回来，太宗又令人携带大量金帛到西域各国去买马。
English: In the 15th year of Zhenguan, Emperor Taizong sent an envoy to the Western Regions to establish the Yegu Khanate. The envoy has not yet returned, and Emperor Taizong has sent a large number of gold ingots to various countries in the Western Regions to buy horses.

古文：魏征谏曰： 今发使以立可汗为名，可汗未定立，即诣诸国市马，彼必以为意在市马，不为专立可汗。
现代文：魏徵劝谏说： 现在派遣的使者是以封立可汗为名义的，可汗尚未封立，就到各国去买马。突厥人一定认为我们的目的是买马，而不是专程去封立可汗。
English: Wei Zhengxuan said: The envoys sent now are in the name of sealing the khan. The khan has not yet been sealed, so they will go to various countries to buy horses. The Turks must think that our purpose is to buy horses, not to make a special trip to seal the khan.

古文：可汗得立，则不甚怀恩，不得立，则生深怨。
现代文：这样，可汗虽然被封立了，他也不会对陛下感恩；立不成的话，就会产生很深的怨恨。
English: In this way, although the khan was enthroned, he would not be grateful to His Majesty; if he could not be enthroned, there would be a deep resentment.

古文：诸蕃闻之，且不重中国。
现代文：西域各国听说这件事，也会看不起中国。
English: When Western countries hear about this, they will also look down on China.

古文：但使彼国安宁，则诸国之马，不求自至。
现代文：只要能使西域各国安定，那么各国的好马用不着去买，就会自动送上门来。
English: As long as it is possible to stabilize the countries in the western region, then the good horses of the countries do not need to be bought, they will be automatically sent to the door.

古文：昔汉文帝有献千里马者，曰： 吾吉行日三十，凶行日五十，鸾舆在前，属车在后，吾独乘千里马，将安之乎？ 
现代文：从前汉文帝时，有人献千里马。文帝说： 我巡幸时每天行进三十里，打仗时每天行进五十里，仪仗走在我的前面，副车跟在我的后面，我单独骑一匹千里马，能走到哪里去呢？ 
English: Once upon a time, during the reign of Emperor Wen of the Han Dynasty, someone offered a thousand-mile horse. Emperor Wen said, "I travel thirty miles a day when I am on a pilgrimage, and fifty miles a day when I am at war. The battle of honor goes before me, the second carriage follows behind me, and I ride a thousand-mile horse alone. Where can I go?

古文：乃偿其道里所费而返之。
现代文：于是给了献马人一些路费，让他回去了。
English: So he gave the donator some money for the journey and let him go back.

古文：又光武有献千里马及宝剑者，马以驾鼓车，剑以赐骑士。
现代文：汉光武帝时，有人献千里马和宝剑，光武帝让千里马拉装载战鼓的车，宝剑赐给手下的骑士。
English: When Han Guangwu was emperor, someone offered him a thousand-mile horse and a sword. Guangwu let the thousand-mile horse be loaded with a war drum, and the sword was given to his knights.

古文：今陛下凡所施为，皆邈过三王之上，奈何至此欲为孝文、光武之下乎？
现代文：今天陛下的所作所为，远远超过夏禹、商汤和周文王武王，怎么在这件事情上的见识，还不如汉文帝、汉光武帝呢？
English: Your Majesty's actions today far exceed those of Xia Yu, Shang Tang, and Zhou Wen Wang Wu. How is it that your insight into this matter is not as good as that of Emperor Hanwen and Emperor Han Guangwu?

古文：又魏文帝求市西域大珠，苏则曰： 若陛下惠及四海，则不求自至，求而得之，不足贵也 陛下纵不能慕汉文之高行，可不畏苏则之正言耶？ 
现代文：魏文帝曾打算买西域的大珍珠，苏则劝谏说： 如果陛下的恩惠遍布四海，这些东西不用追求，自然会到来。能买得到的东西，就不足珍贵了。 陛下纵使不仰慕汉文帝的崇高德行，难道也不畏惧苏则的正直议论吗？ 
English: Emperor Wei had planned to buy the great pearls of the Western Regions, but Su Zetang advised him: "If Your Majesty's favor is spread throughout the four seas, these things do not need to be pursued, they will naturally come. What can be bought is not precious enough. Even if Your Majesty does not admire the lofty virtues of Emperor Hanwen, are you not afraid of Su Zetang's honest talk?

古文：太宗遽令止之。
现代文：于是，太宗立即下令停止买马。
English: As a result, Taizong immediately ordered to stop buying horses.

古文：贞观十七年，太子右庶子高季辅上疏陈得失。
现代文：贞观十七年，太子右庶子高季辅上书评论朝政得失。
English: In the seventeenth year of Zhenguan, Gao Jifu, the prince's illegitimate son, wrote a commentary on the gains and losses of the imperial government.

古文：特赐钟乳一剂，谓曰： 卿进药石之言，故以药石相报。 
现代文：太宗特意赐给他钟乳石剂，对他说： 你向我进献药石一样的谏言，所以我也拿药石来报答你。 
English: Emperor Taizong specially gave him a stalactite remedy and said to him, "You gave me a curse like a medicine stone, so I will give you a medicine stone in return."

古文：贞观十八年，太宗谓长孙无忌等曰： 夫人臣之对帝王，多顺从而不逆，甘言以取容。
现代文：贞观十八年，唐太宗对长孙无忌等人说： 臣子对帝王，多是顺从而不违背，用甜言美语来讨人欢心。
English: In the 18th year of Zhenguan, Tang Taizong said to his eldest grandson Muji and others: Most of the courtiers are obedient to the emperor, so they do not disobey, and use sweet words to please people.

古文：朕今发问，不得有隐，宜以次言朕过失。 
现代文：我现在提出问题，你们不准隐讳，要一一说出我的过失来。 
English: I'm asking you now, don't hold back, tell me all my faults.

古文：长孙无忌、唐俭等皆曰： 陛下圣化道致太平，以臣观之，不见其失。 
现代文：长孙无忌、唐俭等人都说： 陛下圣德教化，导致天下太平，据我们看来，看不出有什么过失。 
English: The eldest grandson Mubi, Tang Jian and others all said: Your Majesty's sanctification of morality has led to world peace. In our opinion, we can't see any fault.

古文：黄门侍郎刘洎对曰： 陛下拨乱创业，实功高万古，诚如无忌等言。
现代文：黄门侍郎刘洎对答说： 陛下拨乱创业，确实功高万古，如无忌等人所说。
English: Huangmen waiter Liu Wei said in reply: Your Majesty's efforts to resolve the chaos and start a business have indeed been of great benefit throughout the ages, as Muyi and others have said.

古文：然顷有人上书，辞理不称者，或对面穷诘，无不惭退。
现代文：但不久前有人上书，遇到言辞内容不合陛下心意的，有时就当面追根盘问，弄得上书言事的人无不羞惭而退。
English: However, not long ago, when someone wrote a letter and the content of the words was not to His Majesty's liking, they were sometimes cross-examined face-to-face, causing everyone who wrote the letter to retreat in shame.

古文：恐非奖进言者。 
现代文：这恐怕不是在奖励进言者吧。 
English: I'm afraid it's not about rewarding the talker.

古文：太宗曰： 此言是也，当为卿改之。 
现代文：太宗说： 这话讲对了，我一定接受你的意见改正错误。 
English: Emperor Taizong said: This is correct, I will definitely accept your opinion and correct the mistake.

古文：太宗尝怒苑西监穆裕，命于朝堂斩之。
现代文：太宗对苑西监穆裕大为恼火，下令将他在朝堂上斩首。
English: Taizong was very angry with Mu Yu, the western overseer of the imperial court, and ordered him to be beheaded in the imperial hall.

古文：时高宗为皇太子，遽犯颜进谏，太宗意乃解。
现代文：当时高宗为皇太子，不惜冒犯太宗，前去求情，太宗的怒气才消退。
English: At that time, Gaozong was the crown prince, and he did not hesitate to offend Taizong and went to intercede. Only then did Taizong's anger subside.

古文：司徒长孙无忌曰： 自古太子之谏，或乘间从容而言。今陛下发天威之怒，太子申犯颜之谏，诚古今未有。 
现代文：司徒长孙无忌说： 自古以来，太子进谏总是找适当的机会说，今天陛下大发天威，太子却能犯颜进谏，这是古今没有的。 
English: "Since ancient times, the crown prince has always looked for the right opportunity to say, 'Today, Your Majesty has been very powerful, but the crown prince has been able to make a blunder. This has never happened before or since.

古文：太宗曰： 夫人久相与处，自然染习。
现代文：太宗说： 人在一起相处，自然会相互染上一种习气。
English: Taizong said: When people get along with each other, they will naturally acquire a habit.

古文：自朕御天下，虚心正直，即有魏征朝夕进谏。
现代文：自从我统治天下以来，虚心接纳正直的意见，就有魏徵不分早晚随时进谏。
English: Since I have been ruling the world, I have humbly accepted honest opinions, and there have been Wei Zheng at any time, sooner or later.

古文：自征云亡，刘洎、岑文本、马周、褚遂良等继之。
现代文：自从魏徵死后，又有刘洎、岑文本、马周、褚遂良等继续进谏。
English: Since Wei Zheng's death, Liu Zheng, Zeng Wenwen, Ma Zhou, Zou Suiliang and others have continued to enter the imperial court.

古文：皇太子幼在朕膝前，每见朕心说谏者，因染以成性，故有今日之谏。 
现代文：皇太子小时候在我面前，常见我听到进谏心情很愉悦，因此养成喜欢纳谏、进谏的习性，所以才有今天的进谏。 
English: When the crown prince was in front of me when I was a child, I often heard that he was in a very happy mood, so I developed a habit of liking reading and reading, which is why I have today's reading.

