古文：安禄山成敬奇陈少游裴延龄薛盈珍画雕冯道明杜宣猷李德裕韩全诲
现代文：安禄山成敬奇陈少游裴延龄薛盈珍画雕冯道明杜宣猷李德裕韩全诲
English: Anlu, Shan, Cheng, Jingqi, Chen, Shao, Yu, Pei, Yanling, Xue, Ying, Zhen, Feng, Daoming, Du, Xuan, Zhou, Li, Deyu, Han, Quan

古文：苏循苏楷乐朋龟孔谦
现代文：苏循苏楷乐朋龟孔谦
English: Su Xuan, Su Kai, Le Peng, Turtle, Kong Qian

古文：安禄山
现代文：安禄山
English: Anlu Mountain

古文：玄宗命皇太子与安禄山相见，安禄不拜。
现代文：唐玄宗让皇太子与安禄山相见。安禄山见到皇太子后不下拜参见。
English: Emperor Tang Xuan Zong allowed the crown prince to meet with Anlu Shan. Anlu Shan did not bow down after seeing the crown prince.

古文：因奏曰：臣胡人，不闲国法，不知太子是何官？
现代文：问他为什么不拜见太子？安禄山启奏玄宗皇帝说：我是个胡人，不熟悉国法。不知道太子是什么官职？
English: Asking him why he didn't visit the crown prince, An Lushan quoted Emperor Xuanzong as saying: "I am a barbarian, I am not familiar with the laws of the country. Don't you know what the official position of the crown prince is?

古文：玄宗曰：是储君。
现代文：玄宗皇帝告诉他：太子就是储君。
English: Emperor Xuanzong told him: the crown prince is the crown prince.

古文：朕万岁后，代朕君汝者。
现代文：侍我去逝之后，太子代替我作你的国君。
English: After my death, the crown prince will take my place as your sovereign.

古文：安禄曰：臣愚，比者只知有陛下，不知有太子。
现代文：安禄山回答说：我这个人很愚昧，亲近的人只知道有皇上您，不知道有太子。
English: An Lushan replied, "I am very ignorant. People who are close to me only know that you are the emperor, but they don't know that there is a crown prince.

古文：左右令拜，安禄乃拜。
现代文：左右的都让他向太子下拜，安禄山这才下拜参见太子。
English: Everyone around him bowed down to the crown prince, but it was An Lushan who bowed down to the crown prince.

古文：玄宗嘉其志诚，尤怜之。
现代文：玄宗皇帝嘉许安禄山心地诚恳，更加怜爱他了。
English: Emperor Xuanzong appreciated An Lushan's sincerity and loved him even more.

古文：成敬奇
现代文：成敬奇
English: Cheng Jingqi

古文：成敬奇有俊才，文章立而可就。为大理正，与姚崇有姻亲。
现代文：成敬奇才智卓越过人，写文章立等可取，官任大理寺正卿，跟宰相姚崇有姻亲的关系。
English: Cheng Jing was a man of extraordinary talent and intellect. He was an excellent writer. He was appointed to the post of the head priest of Dali Temple. He was related to the Prime Minister Yao Chonglu by marriage.

古文：崇尝寝疾，敬奇造宅省焉。
现代文：一次，姚崇有病卧床，成敬奇特意到相府拜访探问病情。
English: On one occasion, Yao Chong You was ill in bed, and Cheng Jingqi specially went to visit him to inquire about his condition.

古文：对崇涕泣，怀中置生雀数枚，一一持出，请崇手执而后放之。
现代文：他来到姚崇卧室，面对姚崇泪流满面，从怀中取出几只活雀，一一放在姚崇手中，让他拿一会儿再放生。
English: He came to Yao Chong's bedroom, tears streaming down his face in front of Yao Chong, took out several live birds from his arms, placed them one by one in Yao Chong's hands, and asked him to hold them for a while before releasing them.

古文：祝云：愿令公速愈。
现代文：并祝福说：希望姚令早早病体痊愈！
English: He also said, "I hope that Yao Ling will recover from his illness as soon as possible!"

古文：崇勉强从之。
现代文：姚崇勉强忍让他这样做。
English: Yao Chong reluctantly let him do so.

古文：敬奇既去，崇恶其谀媚。谓其子弟曰：此泪从何而来。
现代文：待成敬奇告辞离去后，姚崇方露出来讨厌他这种故作阿谀谄媚的神情，对他的子弟们说：我真不知道他的眼泪是从哪里流出来的？
English: After Cheng Jingqi's farewell and departure, Yao Chongfang revealed that he hated his pretentious and flattering look, and said to his children: I really don't know where his tears came from?

古文：自兹不复接遇。
现代文：从此以后，姚崇再也不待见成敬奇啦。
English: From then on, Yao Chong was never the same again.

古文：陈少游
现代文：陈少游
English: Chen Shaoyou

古文：唐陈少游检校职方员外郎，充回纥使。
现代文：唐朝陈少游官任检校员外郎，担任出使回纥的使节。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, Chen Shaoyou was appointed as the school inspector's younger brother, and served as an envoy sent back to the capital.

古文：检校官自少游始也。
现代文：检校，原本是个没有什么具体职务的散官。
English: The school inspector was originally a non-commissioned officer with no specific duties.

古文：而少游为理，长于权变，时推干济。
现代文：唐朝设置检校官，是从陈少游这儿开始的。陈少游的本性擅长权变，时人都推崇他办事干练有才干。
English: The establishment of the procuratorate in the Tang Dynasty began with Chen Shaoyou. Chen Shaoyou's nature was good at power changes, and people at the time respected him for his ability and talent.

古文：然厚敛财物，交结权右。
现代文：然而他却贪得无厌，无休止地搜刮民财，同时还攀高结交权贵。
English: However, he was insatiably greedy, endlessly scrounging people's money, while also climbing high to make friends with the powerful.

古文：寻除管桂观察使。
现代文：陈少游不多久又被授任管桂观察使。
English: Not long after, Chen Shaoyou was also awarded the post of Guan Gui observation envoy.

古文：时中官董秀用事，少游乃宿于里。候下直际，独谒之。
现代文：这时，宫内宦官董秀管事。陈少游乃住宿在里间，等候董秀在宫中值完班回来的途中，单独拜见他。
English: At this time, the eunuch of the palace, Dong Xiu, was in charge. Chen Shaoyou stayed in the inner room and waited for Dong Xiu to finish his shift at the palace. On his way back, he visited him alone.

古文：从容曰：七郎家中人数几何，每日所费几何？
现代文：陈少游神情从容不迫地问董秀：七郎家有多少口人啊？每天得需要多少钱开销日常用度啊？
English: Chen Shaoyou calmly asked Dong Xiu: How many people does Shichiro's family have? How much money do they need every day for daily expenses?

古文：秀曰：久忝近职，累重。又属时物腾贵，一月须千余贯。
现代文：董秀说：我忝到这个职务有好久了，又赶上物价飞涨，一个月大概得需要一千多贯钱吧。
English: Dong Xiu said: I have been in this position for a long time, and I have to catch up with the soaring prices. I probably need more than a thousand yuan a month.

古文：少游曰：据此所费，俸钱不能足其数。
现代文：陈少游说：根据你家的这种消费，你的俸禄钱肯定是不够用的。
English: Chen Shao Lobbied: According to your family's consumption, your salary money is definitely not enough.

古文：此外常须求于人，方可取济。
现代文：除了俸禄外，大概七郎需要经常向人求助，才能过得去啊。
English: In addition to the salary, probably Shichiro needs to constantly ask for help from people in order to get by.

古文：倘有输诚供应者，但留心庇护之，固易为力耳。
现代文：倘若有人愿意向您献纳忠心，按时供给你一笔钱补贴你家的生活用度。你稍为留心庇护他，原来是很容易办到的。
English: If someone is willing to be loyal to you, to provide you with a sum of money on time to subsidize your family's living expenses, and you are a little careful to protect him, it is easy to do.

古文：少游虽不才，请以一身独备七郎之费用。
现代文：我陈少游虽然没什么才干，但是恳请让我一个人全部担当下七郎家中所需的费用。
English: Although I, Chen Shaoyou, have no talent, please let me be responsible for all the expenses of the Lower Shichiro family.

古文：每岁愿送钱五万贯，今见有大半，请即收受。
现代文：每年我可以送给你五万贯钱，现在我这就有一大半，请你当即收下。
English: Every year I can give you fifty thousand yuan, and now I have more than half of it. Please accept it immediately.

古文：余到官续送，免费心劳虑，不亦可乎！
现代文：董秀看到所得到的钱，大大地超过自己想往的数目，非常欢欣喜悦。
English: Dong Xiu was overjoyed when he saw that the money he got was much more than he wanted.

古文：秀既逾于所望，忻悦颇甚，因与之相厚。
现代文：因此，对待陈少游异常亲密。陈少游说完这席话，又流着眼泪说：当今朝廷任我为管桂观察使，南方荒蛮多瘴疠之地。
English: Therefore, he treated Chen Shaoyou very closely. After Chen Shaoyou finished his speech, he also said with tears: Today, the imperial court has appointed me as a Guan Gui observation envoy, and the south is a wild and turbulent place.

古文：少游言讫，泣曰：南方毒痒深僻，但恐不得生还，再睹颜色。透遽曰：中丞美才，不当远官。
现代文：此去恐怕难以活着回来，再看见七郎的颜面啦！董秀立即说：向中丞你这样赋有才干的人，不应当充任边远荒僻地方的官员。
English: I'm afraid it will be difficult for me to come back alive and see Shichiro's face again! Dong Xiu immediately said: To Chujo, a talented person like you should not serve as an official in a remote and desolate place.

古文：从容旬曰，冀竭蹇分。
现代文：你先等待十天，朝廷看你还没有上任，也许慢慢会有所转圜的。
English: If you wait ten days first, the court will see that you have not yet taken office, and perhaps things will slowly change.

古文：时少游已纳贿于元载子仲武矣。
现代文：当时，陈少游已经为这件事情向宰相元载的儿子元仲武送纳了贿赂。
English: At that time, Chen Shaoyou had already paid a bribe to the son of the Prime Minister, Yuan Zhongwu, for this matter.

古文：秀、载内外引荐。
现代文：董秀、元载，一内一外，不断地引荐斡旋。
English: Dong Xiu and Yuan Zai, one inside and one outside, are constantly introducing and mediating.

古文：数日，拜宣歙观察使，改浙东观察使，迁淮南节度使。
现代文：几天后，改派陈少游为宣歙观察使，旋而又改任浙东观察史，又改任淮南节度使。
English: A few days later, Chen Shaoyou was reassigned as the Xuanwu observation envoy, then he was reassigned as the East Zhejiang observation envoy, and then he was reassigned as the Huainan festival envoy.

古文：十余年间，三总大藩。
现代文：十多年间，陈少游任过三处重郡的节度使。
English: In more than ten years, Chen Shaoyou has served as the chief envoy of three important counties.

古文：征求货易，且无虚日，敛积财宝，累巨万亿。
现代文：在这期间，他没有一天不四处征收钱赋，搞买卖交易，聚敛积集钱财珠宝，多达万亿。
English: During this period, he did not go a day without collecting money everywhere, doing business, and accumulating money and jewelry, up to a trillion.

古文：视文雅清流之士，蔑如也。
现代文：他对高尚文雅负有名望的人士，非常蔑视。
English: He had a great disdain for the high and the mighty.

古文：初结元载，每岁馈十万贯。
现代文：陈少游刚攀结宰相元载时，每年馈送元家十万贯钱。
English: When Chen Shaoyou was just a few months into his tenure as prime minister, he sent 100,000 yuan to the Yuan family every year.

古文：后以载渐见忌，少游亦稍疏之。
现代文：后来，元载渐渐有所顾忌，陈少游才有所疏远。
English: Later, Yuan Zai gradually became cautious, and Chen Shaoyou became estranged.

古文：及载子伯和，贬官扬州，少游外与之深交，而阴使人伺其过，密以上闻。
现代文：待到元载的儿子元伯和被贬谪到扬州。陈少游表面上与元伯和交往特别密切，暗中却指使人搜集他的过失，密报皇上。
English: It wasn't long before Yuan Zai's son, Yuan Bohe, was exiled to Yangzhou. On the surface, Chen Shao You had a particularly close relationship with Yuan Bohe, but secretly ordered people to collect his faults and report them to the emperor.

古文：代宗以为忠，待之益厚。
现代文：唐代宗以为陈少游对他忠诚，因此更加重用厚待他。
English: The Tang Dynasty Emperor believed that Chen Shaoyou was loyal to him, so he treated him more generously.

古文：关播尝为少游宾客，卢杞早年，与之同在仆固怀恩幙府，故骤加其官。
现代文：关播曾经作过陈少游的宾客，卢枢早年也跟陈一同在仆固怀思幕府为同事。
English: Guan Bao was once a guest of Chen Shaoyou, and Lu Zu was also a colleague with Chen in the early years at the Dugu Huai Si Shogunate.

古文：德宗幸奉天后，遂夺包佶财物八百万贯。
现代文：因此，都尽快地提升他的官职。唐德宗移驾奉天后，陈少游趁机夺取包佶的家产共计八百万贯。
English: Therefore, they all promoted his official position as soon as possible. After Tang Dezong was transferred to serve as empress, Chen Shaoyou took the opportunity to seize Baojun's family assets totaling eight million yuan.

古文：复使参谋温述，送款于李希烈曰：濠、舒、庐等州，已令罢垒，韬戈卷甲，伫候指挥。
现代文：同时，他又派参谋温述携巨款去汴州联络叛军李希烈，说：濠、舒、庐等州，已经命令他们停止修筑城垒，将戈矛等武器收起来，将铠甲脱下卷起来，等待着你去指挥。
English: At the same time, he also sent staff officer Wenshu with a huge amount of money to Luzhou to contact the rebel Li Xilai, saying: Luzhou, Shuxi, Handan and other provinces have ordered them to stop building fortresses, put away weapons such as spears, take off and roll up armor, and are waiting for you to command.

古文：后銮舆归京，包佶入朝，具奏财赋事状。
现代文：后来，德宗銮驾回到京城后，包佶入朝，向皇上奏告陈少游夺取他家财产一事。
English: Later, after he returned to the capital, Dezong Zang drove into the imperial court and reported to the emperor that Chen Shaoyou had seized his family's property.

古文：少游上表，以所取财，皆是供军费用，今请据数却纳。
现代文：陈少游进上一表，说他取走的包家财产都充作军费用了，现在请包佶按照被抄没时的数目再取回去。
English: Chen Shaoyu entered the previous table, saying that the property of the Bao family that he took away was used for military expenses. Now, please take back the Bao family property according to the number when it was confiscated.

古文：乃重征管内百姓以进。
现代文：于是，他加重征收所辖区内百姓的赋税，用这笔钱来抵偿全家的财产。
English: As a result, he increased the tax levied on the people in his jurisdiction and used the money to pay off the entire family's property.

古文：后刘洽牧汴州，得希烈起居注：某月日，陈少游上表归顺。
现代文：后来，刘洽从李希烈手中收回汴州时，得到一份李希烈的起居注，上面记载着：某月日陈少游上表归顺。
English: Later, when Liu Cai recovered Zhangzhou from Li Xili, he got a copy of Li Xili's living note, which recorded: On a certain day of a certain month, Chen Shaoyu submitted to the table.

古文：少游闻之，惭愧而卒。
现代文：陈少游听说这件事后，羞愧成疾而死。
English: After Chen Shaoyou heard about this, he died of shame.

古文：裴延龄
现代文：裴延龄
English: Pei Yanling

古文：唐裴延龄累转司农少卿，寻以本官权判度支。
现代文：唐德宗李适在位期间，连续任司农少卿的裴延龄，随即又以司农少卿兼户部尚书，暑理国家的财政开支。
English: During the reign of the Tang Dezong Li Si, Pei Yanling, who was successively the Sino-Minor Secretary of Agriculture, immediately became the Sino-Minor Secretary of Agriculture and also the head of the Household Department, and was in charge of the country's financial expenditure.

古文：自揣不通食货之物，乃设钩距，召度支老吏与谋，以求恩顾。
现代文：裴延龄自度自己不懂得财政工作，于是设置调查咨询的机构，召请来掌管过财政的退职老年官吏，帮助他出谋划策，来求得皇上对他的信任。
English: Pei Yanling himself did not understand financial work, so he set up an investigation and consultation agency and invited retired senior officials who had been in charge of finance to help him come up with a plan to gain the emperor's trust.

古文：乃奏言：天下出入钱物，新陈相因，而常不减六七千万贯，唯在一库。差殊散失，莫可知之。
现代文：这之后，他上奏德宗皇帝说：整个国家钱物的收与支，新旧相连接，通常情况下，库存都不少于六七千万贯，只存放在一座库房时，出现差错散失，没办法知道。
English: After that, he reported to Emperor Dezong that: the income and expenditure of money and goods of the whole country are connected with the old and the new. Under normal circumstances, the inventory is no less than sixty or seventy million yuan. If it is stored in only one warehouse, there will be errors and losses, and there is no way to know.

古文：请于左藏库中分置，别建欠、负、耗、债等库。及季库月给，纳诸色钱物。
现代文：既按月发放俸禄，每到一个季度结束时，将剩余的各种钱物储存在季库中。德宗批准了他的这些建议。
English: Even though the salary was paid monthly, at the end of each quarter, the remaining money and goods were stored in a seasonal bank. Emperor Dezong approved his suggestions.

古文：德宗从之。但贵欲张名目，以惑上听。
现代文：其实，这些设置都是裴延龄故意搞的名堂，想用这些来迷惑皇上，以达到他邀恩纳宠的目的。
English: In fact, Pei Yanling deliberately set up all of these settings as a hall of fame, intending to use them to confuse the emperor in order to achieve his goal of inviting favor.

古文：其实钱物更无增加，唯虚费簿书人吏。
现代文：实际上，这样设置钱物一点也不能增加，只是白白耗费帐簿人力而已。
English: In fact, such an arrangement does not increase the money supply at all, but merely wastes accounting manpower.

古文：又奏请，令京兆府两税青苗钱，市草百万团，送苑中。
现代文：裴延龄又上奏德宗，让京城地区用两税和青苗钱，来购买饲草一百万团，送到皇家御苑中。
English: Pei Yanling also appealed to Dezong, asking the Beijing area to use two taxes and seedling money to purchase one million bales of fodder grass and send them to the Royal Garden.

古文：宰臣议：以为若市草百万团，则一方百姓，自冬历夏，搬运不了，又妨夺农务。
现代文：宰相们议论：如果买饲草一百万团，那么京城地区的百姓，从冬到夏都搬运不完，又妨碍占用农业生产的时间。
English: The prime ministers discussed: if one million bales of fodder grass were bought, then the people in the capital region would not be able to carry them all from winter to summer, and it would interfere with the time spent on agricultural production.

古文：其事得止。
现代文：这件事情得上奏皇上，制止他这样做。
English: This matter must be reported to the emperor to stop him from doing this.

古文：京西有污池卑湿处，芦苇丛生焉，不过数亩。
现代文：京城长安西郊有一片低洼潮湿的污泥池墉，上面丛生着芦苇，不过几亩地。
English: On the western outskirts of the capital city of Chang'an, there is a low-lying, damp sludge pond, with reeds clustering on top, but only a few acres.

古文：延龄忽奏云：厩马冬月合在槽枥秣饲，夏中即须有牧放处。
现代文：裴延龄忽然上奏德宗皇帝，说：御苑马厩里的马冬天应当在槽中饲养，到了夏天就应该在野外放牧。
English: Pei Yanling suddenly appealed to Emperor Dezong, saying, "The horses in the stables of the Imperial Palace should be kept in troughs in winter, and should be grazed in the open in summer.

古文：臣近寻访得长安咸阳两县界，有陂地百顷，请以为内厩牧马之地。且去京城十数里。
现代文：我近日寻访到长安、咸阳两县交界处，有一片临水的低洼湿地，约有一百顷，请皇上批准这块地方做为御马放牧的地方，况且这片湿地离京城只有十几里路。
English: I recently visited the junction of Chang'an and Xianyang counties. There is a low-lying wetland adjacent to the water, about one hundred hectares. I asked the emperor to approve this place as a place for horse grazing. Moreover, this wetland is only a dozen miles away from Beijing.

古文：德宗信之，言于宰臣。
现代文：德宗相信了裴延龄的奏请，对宰相们说及此事。
English: Dezong believed Pei Yanling's request and told the prime ministers about it.

古文：宰臣坚执云：恐必无此。
现代文：宰相们坚持说：恐怕没有这么大的牧马地方。
English: The prime ministers insisted: "I'm afraid there is no such thing as a large pasture for horses."

古文：及差官阅视，悉皆虚妄。
现代文：等到派出官员去察看，根本没有这么大的一片湿地。
English: When officials were sent to investigate, there was no such large wetland.

古文：延龄既惭且怒，又因对敭。
现代文：宰相们当着裴延龄的面，如实回报德宗，他既羞愧又恼怒。因为是面君对奏，又不好发作。
English: The prime ministers told the truth to Dezong in front of Pei Yanling, who was both ashamed and angry, because it was a face-to-face confrontation, and it was not good.

古文：德宗曰：朕所居浴堂殿院一栿。以年多故致损坏，而未能换。
现代文：一天，德宗召见裴延龄说：我的住处浴室殿院有一根屋梁，因年久失修损坏了，到现在还没有更换。
English: One day, Dezong summoned Pei Yanling and said, "There is a roof beam in my residence, the bathroom courtyard, which has been damaged due to years of disrepair and has not been replaced yet.

古文：延龄曰：宗庙事重，殿栿事轻。
现代文：裴延龄回答说：社稷宗庙事重，殿梁事轻。
English: Pei Yanling replied: the temple of the Shuangzong is more important than the palace.

古文：陛下自有本分钱物。
现代文：皇上自有本分钱物。
English: The emperor has to pay his own share.

古文：德宗惊曰：本分钱何名也？
现代文：德宗惊异地问：本分钱是什么钱啊？
English: Surprised, Dezong asked, "What is the principal amount?"

古文：曰：此是纥义。
现代文：裴延龄回答说：这是经书上讲的义理。
English: Pei Yanling replied, "This is what the scripture says.

古文：愚儒常才，不足与言。
现代文：愚蠢的腐儒、平常的庸才，没法跟他们讲。
English: You can't talk to them, they're stupid, they're rotten, they're mediocre.

古文：陛下正合问臣，臣能知之。
现代文：皇上问我正合适，我知道是怎么一回事。
English: It was only right for the Emperor to ask me. I know what is going on.

古文：准礼经云：天下赋税，分为三分。
现代文：准礼经上说：普天下的赋税，分为三份。
English: According to the Book of Common Prayer, the taxes of the whole world are divided into three parts.

古文：一分充干豆；一分充宾客，一分充君之庖厨，干豆供宗庙也。
现代文：一份用来置办干肉、祭器；一份用来宴请国宾；一份用来置办皇上御厨里的用品。干肉、祭器是供宗庙祭祀的用品。
English: One part was used to purchase dried meat and sacrificial vessels; one part was used to host state guests; one part was used to purchase items for the emperor's kitchen. The dried meat and sacrificial vessels were for the rituals of the ancestral temple.

古文：今陛下奉宗庙，虽至严至丰至厚，亦不能用一分财赋也。
现代文：现今皇上祭奉宗庙，虽然特别庄严、特别丰盛、特别优厚，也用不了一分财赋啊。
English: Nowadays, although the temple dedicated to the emperor is very solemn, very rich, and very fine, it does not need a single penny of wealth.

古文：只如鸿胪礼宾，诸国番客，至于回纥马价，用一分钱物，尚有赢羡甚多。
现代文：至于朝贺庆典以及接待各国使臣宾客，及付给回纥的买马钱，也只需一分财赋而已，还有很多盈余呢。
English: As for the morning greeting celebration and the reception of guests from foreign envoys, as well as the horse-buying money paid to the Hui Xuan, it only costs one point of wealth, and there is still a lot of surplus.

古文：况陛下御善宫厨，皆极简俭，所用外，以赐百官充俸料餐钱等，犹未能尽。
现代文：况且，皇上的御膳、宫中的饮食，都极节俭。这以外，赏赐给文武百官为俸禄吃饭钱等，就没有用尽。
English: Moreover, the emperor's meals and the diet in the palace were extremely frugal. In addition, the reward money given to the civil and military officials for their salaries, such as meal money, was not exhausted.

古文：据此而言，庖厨之用，其数尚少，皆陛下本分也。
现代文：根据我的推算，宫中饮食用度所用的钱物还比这少。所有剩余下来的，都是皇上的本分钱啊！
English: According to my calculations, the amount of money spent on food and drink in the palace is even less than this. All that is left over is the emperor's share of the money!

古文：用修十殿，亦不合疑，何况一栿。
现代文：用来修建十座殿堂，也不应当怀疑。何况一梁乎？
English: It should not be doubted that it was used to build the ten halls of fame.

古文：上曰：经义如此，人未曾言，颔之而已。
现代文：德宗皇上说：经书上的这种义理，别人没有说过，我只好点头称是而已。
English: Emperor Dezong said, "Since no one else has said this kind of truth in the scriptures, I just have to nod my head and say yes."

古文：后因计料造神龙寺，须用长七十尺松木。
现代文：后来，计算建造神龙寺的用料，必须用长七十尺的松木。
English: Later, when calculating the materials to be used in the construction of Shennong Temple, pine trees with a length of seventy feet had to be used.

古文：延龄奏曰：臣近于同州，检得一谷，有数千株，皆长七八十尺。
现代文：裴延龄上奏说：我近日在同州，检看得一座山谷，有松树好几千株，都长七八十尺。
English: Pei Yanling said: I recently went to Tongzhou and inspected a valley with several thousand pine trees, all of which are 70 to 80 feet long.

古文：德宗曰：人云，开元天宝中，近处求觅五六丈木，尚未易得，皆须于岚胜州来采造。
现代文：德宗说：听人说，开元天宝年间，在京城附近寻找长五六丈的木材，尚且不容昂找到，都须在岚胜州采伐。
English: Dezong said: I have heard people say that during the Tianbao period in the first year of the founding of the People's Republic of China, they were looking for lumber that was five or six meters long near the capital, but it was too expensive to find, so they had to cut it in Jinshengzhou.

古文：如今何为近处便有此木？
现代文：如今为什么近处就有这么长的松木？
English: Now why is there such a long pine tree nearby?

古文：延龄对曰：贤者珍宝异物，皆处处有之，但遇圣君即出。
现代文：裴延龄回答说：对于圣贤的人来说，珍宝异物，都处处有，现在圣君已经出现了。
English: Pei Yanling replied, "For sages, treasures and foreign objects are everywhere, and now a saint has appeared.

古文：今此木生自关辅，盖为圣君，岂开元天宝合得有也。
现代文：这种长木在今天生长在京城附近，都是因为圣君已经出现了。怎么开元、天宝就必须有呢？
English: This kind of long tree grows near the capital today, all because the saint has appeared. How can it be that at the beginning of the year, the heavenly treasure must be there?

古文：延龄既锐情于苛刻，剥下附上为功。
现代文：裴延龄言词锋利苛刻，以盘剥下属依附皇上为能事。
English: Pei Yanling's words were sharp and harsh, and he was able to get rid of subordinates who were dependent on the emperor.

古文：奏对之际，皆恣骋诡怪虚妄，他人莫敢言者，延龄言之不疑，亦人之所未尝闻。
现代文：跟皇上奏对时，他完全随意进行诡辩，说些虚妄怪异不着边际的话，别人都不敢这样说。他却一点儿也不怀疑自己说得不对，他人又不曾听到过。
English: When he disagreed with the emperor, he was completely free to engage in sophistry, saying things that were untrue, bizarre and out of bounds, which others would not dare to say. However, he did not doubt at all that he was wrong, and others had never heard of it.

古文：上颇欲知外事，故特优遇之。
现代文：德宗皇上很想知道外界的一些事情，因此特别优待他。
English: Emperor Dezong was very curious about some things in the outside world, so he gave him special treatment.

古文：薛盈珍
现代文：薛盈珍
English: Xue Yizhen

古文：姚南仲为郑滑节度使。
现代文：唐德宗在位期间，姚南仲任郑滑节度使。
English: During the reign of Tang Dezong, Yao Nanzhong served as the envoy of the Zhengde Festival.

古文：时监军薛盈珍估势，干夺军政。
现代文：当时，在郑滑任监军的薛盈珍求取权势，屡屡干预、夺取军政大权。
English: At that time, Xue Yingzhen, who was in charge of supervising the army in Zhengslip, sought to gain power and repeatedly intervened to seize military and political power.

古文：南仲不从，数为盈珍构谗于上，上颇疑之。
现代文：姚南仲不听从他的这种越权行为，多次被薛盈珍罗织罪名上告德宗皇帝，使得唐德宗很是怀疑姚南仲。
English: Yao Nanzhong did not obey this act of exceeding his authority, and was repeatedly accused by Xue Yingzhen of fabricating charges against Emperor Dezong, which made Tang Dezong very suspicious of Yao Nanzhong.

古文：后盈珍遣小使程务盈，驰表奏南仲不法，谗构颇甚。
现代文：后来，薛盈珍得寸进尺，暗中派遣心腹小使程务盈，带着他写好的上奏姚南仲不法的表章，到京城上告姚南仲。
English: Later, Xue Yingzhen gained a foothold and secretly dispatched his henchman, Cheng Mu Ying, to Beijing to sue Yao Nanzhong, taking with him the illegal seal he had written for Yao Nanzhong.

古文：南仲裨将曹文洽，时奏事赴京师。
现代文：表章上写的尽是无中生有的诬陷之词。
English: The words written on the front cover are nothing but fabricated false accusations.

古文：窃知盈珍表中语，文洽私怀怒。
现代文：当时，正赶上姚南仲的副将曹文洽进京奏报军务要事，暗中得知薛盈珍上奏的表章中诬陷姚南仲的话。
English: At that time, Vice Admiral Cao Wencai, who was catching up with Yao Nanzhong, entered Beijing to deliver a report on military affairs. He secretly learned that Yao Nanzhong had been framed in the report delivered by Xue Yizhen.

古文：遂晨夜兼道追务盈，至长乐驿，及之，与同舍宿。
现代文：曹文洽心中异常恼怒，于是昼夜兼程追赶程务盈，到长乐驿站终于赶上了他，与他同时住在驿站里。
English: Cao Wencai was extremely angry in his heart, so he chased after Cheng Muying day and night, and finally caught up with him at Changle Railway Station, and lived in the station at the same time.

古文：中夜杀务盈。沉盈珍表于厕中。乃自杀。
现代文：到了半夜，曹文洽起身杀死了程务盈，将薛昌珍带给程务盈上告诬陷姚南仲的表章扔到厕所中，之后自杀身死。
English: In the middle of the night, Cao Wenzhong got up and killed Cheng Shuying, threw the watch badge that Xue Changzhen brought to Cheng Shuying to sue and frame Yao Nanzhong into the toilet, and then committed suicide.

古文：日旴，驿吏开门，见流血满地。
现代文：第二天早晨，驿站的负责人找开曹、程住的房间一看，只见血流满地，两个人都死在屋中。
English: The next morning, the person in charge of the station went to the room where Ca Cao and Cheng were staying and saw blood all over the floor. Both of them were dead in the room.

古文：旁得文洽二缄，一缄告盈珍罪；一缄表理南仲冤，且陈谢杀务盈。
现代文：曹文洽身旁放着两封信。一封信上写着薛盈珍擅权、诬陷姚南仲的种种罪状；一封信上写着的是为姚南仲辩护伸冤，并且陈述自己杀死程务盈的经过和请求谢罪道歉。
English: Cao Wencai had two letters lying next to him. One letter was about Xue Yingzhen abusing her power and framing Yao Nanzhong for various crimes; the other letter was about defending Yao Nanzhong, explaining how she killed Cheng Mu Ying and asking for an apology.

古文：德宗闻其事，颇骇动。
现代文：唐德宗听到这件事情后，很受震动，惊骇异常。
English: After hearing this, Tang Dezong was very shocked and shocked.

古文：南仲虑衅深，遂入朝。初至，上曰：盈珍扰卿甚也。
现代文：姚南仲考虑继续在郑滑呆下去跟薛盈珍的怨恨越结越深，于是返回京城，辞去了节度使的职务。
English: Yao Nanzhong considered continuing to stay in Zhengslide and his resentment of Xue Yizhen became deeper and deeper, so he returned to Beijing and resigned from his post as a festival envoy.

古文：南仲曰：盈珍不扰臣，自隋陛下法耳。
现代文：姚南仲刚刚回到京城后，德宗皇帝召见他说：薛盈珍干扰你的军政要务很厉害吧。
English: After Yao Nanzhong had just returned to Beijing, Emperor Dezong summoned him and said, "Xue Yizhen is interfering with your military and political affairs.

古文：如盈珍辈所在，虽羊杜复生，抚百姓，御三军，必不成恺悌父母之政，师律善阵之制矣。
现代文：姚南仲回答说：薛盈珍一点也没有干扰我的军政要务。是我自己不遵守朝廷的法纪啊。如果皇上都用薛盈珍这样的人，纵然是晋朝的羊祜、杜预这些名臣死而复生，在安抚百姓、统率三军方面，也一定不能成就薛盈珍这样的使百姓和乐安康的政绩，也一定不能象薛盈珍这样善于治军与征战啊。
English: Yao Nanzhong replied: "Xue Yizhen did not interfere with my military and political important tasks at all. It was I who did not abide by the imperial court's laws and regulations. If the emperor used people like Xue Yizhen, even if the Jin Dynasty's Yang Zhao and Du You, these famous courtiers, were resurrected from the dead, in terms of pacifying the people and leading the three armies, they would not be able to achieve the political achievements of making the people happy and healthy like Xue Yizhen, and they would not be able to be as good as Xue Yizhen in governing the army and going to war.

古文：德宗默然久之。
现代文：德宗皇帝听了这番话，久久的沉默无语。
English: Emperor Dezong was speechless after a long silence.

古文：画雕
现代文：画雕
English: Paintings and sculptures

古文：裴延龄恃恩轻躁，同列惧之，唯顾少连不避。
现代文：一次，裴延龄画一只雕，群鸟见了后都聒噪着惊恐地飞去。
English: Once, Pei Yanling painted an eagle, and the birds flew away in fright after seeing it.

古文：延龄尝画一雕，群鸟噪之。
现代文：裴延龄将这幅画进献给德宗皇上。
English: Pei Yanling dedicated this painting to Emperor Dezong.

古文：以献，德宗知众怒，益信之。
现代文：德宗原先就知道朝中诸官都怨恨惧怕裴延龄，见到这幅画雕后，更加相信了。
English: Originally, Desong knew that all officials in the dynasty resented and feared Pei Yanling. After seeing this painting, he became even more convinced.

古文：冯道明
现代文：冯道明
English: Feng Daoming

古文：雍陶，蜀人也，以进士登第。
现代文：雍陶，蜀郡人，在科举中考中进士。
English: Yong Tao, a resident of Shu County, was promoted to a junior high school student in the middle school entrance examination.

古文：后稍薄于亲党，其舅云安刘敬之罢举，归山坡，素事篇章。
现代文：之后，他对亲友有些冷淡、疏远。雍陶的舅舅，云安的刘敬之，不参加科举考试，回到三峡家中，平素作诗写文章。
English: After that, he was somewhat cold and distant to his relatives and friends. Yong Tao's uncle, Liu Jingzhi of Yun'an, did not participate in the imperial examinations, and returned to his home in the Three Gorges to write poems and articles.

古文：让陶不寄书曰：山近衡阳虽少雁，水连巴蜀岂无鱼。
现代文：他为了让雍陶不给他写信，给雍陶寄写一首诗，其中两句的大意是：诗中雁与鱼，暗指鸿雁与鱼书，也就是书信。
English: In order to prevent Yong Tao from writing to him, he sent a poem to Yong Tao, in which two sentences were to the effect of: In the poem, the goose and the fish, alluding to the wild goose and the fish book, which is the letter.

古文：陶得诗愧赧，方有孤首之思。
现代文：雍陶得到舅父的这首诗后，想到自己以前对亲友的冷淡，很是羞愧，这才有狐死首立的思乡念友之感。
English: After Yong Tao got this poem from his uncle, he was ashamed to think that he had been cold to his relatives and friends before. This gave him a strong feeling of homesickness and missing his friends.

古文：后为简州牧，自比谢宣城柳吴兴也。
现代文：有宾客来拜访则轻慢折磨人家，他家的守门人也怠慢宾客。
English: If a guest comes to visit, he treats them with contempt and torments them. The gatekeeper of his house also neglects his guests.

古文：宾至则折挫之，阍者亦怠，投贽者稀得见。
现代文：带着自己的诗文或礼物请求拜见雍陶的人，很少有人受到接见或款待。
English: Those who bring their own poems or gifts to ask to see Yong Tao are rarely received or entertained.

古文：忽有冯道明下第请谒云：与员外故旧。
现代文：忽然有一天，有个叫冯道明的落第文人请求拜见雍陶，说：我跟雍员外是旧相识，请给通报一下。
English: Suddenly one day, a writer from Loudi named Feng Daoming asked to see Yong Tao, saying, "I've known Yong Jianye for a long time. Please let me know."

古文：阍者以道明之言启之，及引进，陶呵曰：与君昧平生，何方相识？
现代文：守门人将这话通报给雍陶。待到引领冯道明拜见雍陶后，雍陶大声呵斥说：我与你素昧平生，你在哪里认识我的？
English: The gatekeeper reported this to Yung Tao. After the guide Feng Daoming visited Yung Tao, Yung Tao shouted: "I have never known you in my life, where did you know me?

古文：道明曰：诵员外诗，仰员外德，诗集中日得见。何乃隔平生也！
现代文：冯道明回答说：我每天都诵读你的诗，敬仰你的德行。我在诗集中天天和你相见，怎么能说我们是素昧平生呢？
English: Feng Daoming replied, "I read your poems every day and admire your virtues. I see you every day in the poetry collection. How can I say that we have never met?

古文：遂吟曰：立当青草人先见，行近白莲鱼未知。
现代文：说完随口吟出雍陶的两句诗：立当青草人先见，行近白莲鱼未知。
English: After he finished speaking, he recited two poems of Yongtao: Stand up, grasshopper, foresight, approach the white lotus, fish unknown.

古文：又曰：江声秋入寺，雨气夜侵楼。
现代文：接着，又连续吟出另外几首诗中的佳句：江声秋入寺，雨气夜侵楼。
English: Then, he recited several other poems in succession: Jiang Sheng enters the temple in autumn, and the rainstorm invades the building at night.

古文：又曰：闭门客到常疑病，满院花开不似贫。
现代文：闭门客到常疑病，满院花开不似贫。
English: Closed-door guests are often suspected of illness, and the flowers blooming all over the hospital do not look like poverty.

古文：陶闻吟欣然，待道明如曩昔之交。
现代文：雍陶听了冯道明的吟诵后，非常高兴，立即将冯道明象相交多年的老朋友一样看待。
English: After listening to Feng Daoming's recitation, Yong Tao was very happy and immediately regarded Feng Daoming as an old friend who had been with him for many years.

古文：君子以雍君矜持而好媚，冯子匪艺而求知，其两违之。
现代文：有德尚的人认为：雍陶为人恃才傲物而又喜欢别人讨好他，冯道明无才而又渴求知识。两个人正好相反。
English: The virtuous people think that: Yong Tao is a talented and proud person and likes to be flattered by others, while Feng Daoming is talentless and thirsts for knowledge. The two people are just the opposite.

古文：杜宣猷
现代文：杜宣猷
English: Du Xuanqian

古文：杜宣猷大夫自闽中除宣城，中官之力也。
现代文：杜宣猷大夫自闽中出任宣城为官，是借助期中宦官的作用啊。
English: Dr. Du Xuanqian took the post of Xuancheng official in the middle of the period, which is the role of the eunuch in the middle of the period.

古文：诸道每岁进阉人，所谓私白者，闽为首焉。
现代文：唐朝时全国划分为十道。在十道中，每年向宫中进献的阉人，也叫私白，闽进献的最多。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, the whole country was divided into ten provinces. Among the ten provinces, the annual contribution to the palace was the largest.

古文：且多任用。
现代文：而且，多数都被皇宫留用。
English: Moreover, most of them have been retained by the Imperial Palace.

古文：以故大阉以下桑梓，多系于闽。
现代文：因此，在宫中颇有权势的大宦官，他们的家乡多数都在闽中。
English: Therefore, most of the powerful grand eunuchs in the palace have their hometowns in Shanzhong.

古文：时以为中官薮泽。
现代文：当时人都说闽中是出宦官的地方。
English: At that time, people said that the middle of the eunuch was the place for the eunuch.

古文：宣猷既至，每寒食节，辄散遣将吏，荷挈食物，祭于诸阉冢墓。
现代文：杜宣猷到宣城上任后，每到清明寒食鬼节，都派出许多将士、官吏，带着祭祀用的食品，给埋在闽中的各个宦官的坟墓设祭，即扫墓。
English: After Du Xuanwu took office in Xuancheng, whenever the Qingming Cold Food Ghost Festival came, he sent many soldiers and officials with sacrificial food to offer sacrifices to the graves of the eunuchs buried in the coffin, that is, to sweep the graves.

古文：所谓洒扫者也，故时号为敕使看墓。
现代文：因为这个缘故，当时人称杜宣猷为皇上任命的守墓人。
English: For this reason, Du Xuanqian was known as the tomb guard appointed by the emperor.

古文：李德裕
现代文：李德裕
English: Li Deyu

古文：李德裕镇扬州，监军使杨钦义追入，必为枢近。
现代文：李德裕镇守扬州，监军使杨钦义紧跟着也来到扬州，一定要参与军政要务。
English: Li Deyu was in charge of Yangzhou, and Yang Qin Yi, the supervising envoy, also came to Yangzhou. They must participate in military and political affairs.

古文：而德裕致礼，皆不越寻常，钦义心衔之。
现代文：但是，李德裕以礼相待，一点也不超出常规，杨钦义暗暗怀恨在心。
English: However, Li Deyu treated each other with courtesy, nothing out of the ordinary, and Yang Qin Yi secretly harbored a grudge.

古文：一日，中堂设宴，更无他宾。
现代文：一天，李德裕在家中正室设宴宴请杨钦义，此外没有再请其他客人。
English: One day, Li Deyu invited Yang Qinyi to a banquet at his home. He did not invite any other guests.

古文：而陈设宝器图画数床，皆殊绝。
现代文：并在好几张床上摆满了各种宝器、图画，都是极罕见的珍品。
English: And several beds are filled with all kinds of treasures and pictures, all of which are extremely rare treasures.

古文：一席祗奉，亦竭情礼。
现代文：整个宴席期间，李德裕始终恭恭敬敬地对待杨钦义。
English: Throughout the banquet, Li Deyu always treated Yang Qinyi with respect.

古文：宴罢，皆以赠之。
现代文：宴席结束时，将几张床上摆着的宝物、图画，全都赠送给杨钦义。
English: At the end of the banquet, all the treasures and pictures on several beds were presented to Yang Qin Yi.

古文：钦义大喜过望。
现代文：杨钦义非常高兴，这是他始未料到的。
English: Yang Qin Yi was very happy, which he had not expected.

古文：旬日，西行至汴州，有诏却令监淮南。
现代文：过了十多天，杨钦义往西去汴州，朝廷下诏书让他改任淮南监军使。
English: After more than ten days, Yang Ching-yi went west to Bozhou, and the Imperial Court issued an edict to change his post to Huainan Supervisor of the Military.

古文：钦义即至，具以前时所赠归之。
现代文：杨钦义回到扬州后，将前些日子李德裕送给他的宝器书画全都归还给李德裕。
English: After Yang Qin Yi returned to Yangzhou, he returned to Li Deyu all the precious calligraphy and paintings that Li Deyu had given him a few days before.

古文：德裕笑曰：此无所直，奈何拒焉？
现代文：李德裕笑着说：这些东西值不几个钱，监军使为什么拒绝收取它们呢？
English: Li Deyu said with a smile: "These things are worth only a few dollars. Why did the supervisor refuse to collect them?

古文：悉却与之。
现代文：又都归还给杨钦义。
English: They were all returned to Yang Ching-yi.

古文：钦义心感数倍。
现代文：杨钦义心中加倍感谢李德裕。
English: Yang Qinyi was doubly grateful to Li Deyu in his heart.

古文：后竟做枢密使，唐武宗一朝之柄，皆钦义所致也。
现代文：杨钦义后来竟然官任枢密使。唐武宗一朝的大权，都掌握在杨钦义的手中啊！
English: Later, Yang Ching-yi was even appointed as a Privy Councilor. The power of the first dynasty of Tang Wuzong was in the hands of Yang Ching-yi!

古文：韩全诲
现代文：韩全诲
English: Han Quanzhong

古文：唐昭宗以宦官怙权，骄恣难制，常有诛剪之意。
现代文：唐昭宗因为宦官专权，骄横跋扈难以驾御，常常怀有诛灭剪除他们的想法。
English: Because of the exclusive power of eunuchs, Tang Zhaozong's arrogance was difficult to control, and he often harbored the idea of annihilating and eliminating them.

古文：宰相崔胤嫉忌尤甚。
现代文：宰相崔胤更是忌恨这些专权的宦官。
English: Prime Minister Choi In hated these authoritarian eunuchs even more.

古文：上敕胤，凡有密奏，当进囊封，勿于便殿面奏。
现代文：唐昭宗让崔胤，凡是机密的奏章，一定装入囊袋中并且密封好，呈送给他。一定不要在便殿面奏。
English: When Emperor Zhaozong of Tang Dynasty asked Choi Yin to play a piece of music, he must put it in a sealed bag and present it to him. He must not play it in front of the toilet.

古文：以是宦官不能知。
现代文：用这种方法不让宦官们知道内中的情由。
English: In this way, the eunuchs were kept in the dark.

古文：韩全诲等乃访京城美女数十以进，密求宫中阴事。
现代文：宦官韩全诲等得知这一事情后，在京城访求到几十个美女进献给昭宗皇上，通过这些美女暗中掌握皇上密谋的事情。
English: After eunuch Han Quanzhang learned of this incident, he visited Beijing to solicit dozens of beautiful women to present to Emperor Zhaozong, and through these beautiful women he secretly grasped the emperor's conspiracy.

古文：天子不之悟，胤谋渐泄。
现代文：昭宗皇帝没有觉察韩全诲等人的阴谋，使得他与宰相私下商议剪除宦官的事情渐渐泄露出来。
English: Emperor Zhaozong did not notice the plot of Han Zhengyi and others, so that he and the prime minister privately discussed the removal of eunuchs, which gradually leaked out.

古文：中官以重赂甘言，请藩臣为城社，视崔胤眥裂。
现代文：韩全诲等宦官，用重金与甜言蜜语贿赂在朝外的藩镇节度使们作为自己的靠山，视宰相崔胤为眼中钉，恨不得吃了他。
English: Eunuchs such as Han Quanzhong used heavy money and sweet words to bribe the envoys of the festival in the hanzhong outside the imperial court as their backers. They regarded Prime Minister Cui Yan as a thorn in their side and were eager to eat him.

古文：时因伏腊宴聚，则相向流涕，辞旨谄谀。
现代文：当时正值伏腊祭祀聚宴，崔胤同昭宗皇上痛哭流涕，言辞谄谀。
English: At that time, it was the time of the Fula sacrificial feast, and Emperor Choi In Tong Shojong was crying bitterly and his speech was slurred.

古文：会汴人寇同华知崔胤之谋，于是韩全诲引禁军，陈兵伏，逼帝幸凤翔。
现代文：恰巧汴人寇同华得知崔胤的谋划，并密告给韩全诲。于是韩全诲调动宫中禁军，摆开阵势，逼迫昭宗皇帝移驾凤翔。
English: Coincidentally, Guo Tonghua learned of Cui Yin's plan and tipped off Han Quanzhang. Therefore, Han Quanzhang mobilized the palace troops and forced Emperor Zhaozong to move to Fengxiang.

古文：他日崔胤与梁祖协谋，以诛阉官。未久，祸亦及之，致族绝灭。
现代文：这之后，宰相崔胤与梁祖协密谋想诛灭宦官，不久，就招来了祸患，至使全族人被杀。
English: After that, Prime Minister Cui Yin and Liang Zu Xie conspired to exterminate the eunuchs, and soon brought about a calamity that led to the entire family being killed.

古文：识者归罪于崔胤。
现代文：有见识的人认为：这是崔胤自己招至来的罪祸。
English: Those with insight believe that this is a crime that Choi In himself has brought about.

古文：先是其季父安潜常谓所亲曰：灭吾族者，必缁儿也。
现代文：起初，是崔胤的叔父崔安潜曾对亲属说过：使我们崔家获灭族之罪的，一定是缁儿啊。
English: At first, it was Cui Yan's uncle, Cui Anqian, who said to his relatives: "The one who brought the crime of genocide to our Cui family must have been Xie Er."

古文：缁儿即胤小字。
现代文：缁儿，即是崔胤的小名。
English: Hao Er, that is, Choi In's nickname.

古文：河东晋王李克用闻胤所为，谓宾佐曰：助贼为虐者，其崔胤乎。
现代文：河东晋王李克用听到崔胤的所做所为，对宾客、幕僚们说：帮助宦官逆贼施行虐政的人，就是他崔胤啊！
English: Li Ke, the king of the Eastern Jin Dynasty, said to his guests and staff after hearing what Cui Ying had done: "The person who helped the eunuch traitor carry out tyranny was Cui Ying!"

古文：破国亡家，必在此人也。
现代文：国破家亡，一定都出在这个人身上。
English: The destruction of the country and the death of his family must have all come from this man.

古文：苏循
现代文：苏循
English: Su Xuan

古文：唐末，尚书苏循谄媚苟且，梁太祖鄙之。
现代文：唐朝末年，尚书苏循为人阿谀谄媚、行事苟且，后来成为梁太祖的朱温非常鄙视他。
English: At the end of the Tang Dynasty, Shang Shuxushu was a flatterer and a hard worker. Zhu Wenlu, who later became Liang Taizu, despised him very much.

古文：他日至并州，谒晋王。
现代文：后来，苏循到并州，拜见晋王李克用。
English: Later, Su Xun went to Anhui Province to meet the Jin King Li Kejun.

古文：时张承业方以匡复为意。
现代文：当时，张承业正以恢复大唐盛业为自己的志向。
English: At that time, Zhang Chengye was aspiring to restore the prosperity of the Great Tang Dynasty.

古文：而循忽献晋王画敕笔一对，承业愈鄙之。
现代文：然而，苏循忽然进献给晋王李克用皇上赐予的笔一对，张承业听说这件事情后，更加鄙视他了。
English: However, Su Xuan suddenly presented a pair of pens given by the emperor to the Jin king, Li Ke, and Zhang Chengye despised him even more after hearing about this.

古文：苏楷
现代文：苏楷
English: Sukai

古文：昭宗先谥圣穆景文孝皇帝，庙号昭宗。
现代文：唐昭宗最初称为圣穆景文孝皇帝，庙号昭宗。
English: Tang Zhaozong was originally called Emperor Shengmujingwenxiao, and his temple name was Zhaozong.

古文：起居郎苏楷等驳议，请改为恭灵庄闵皇帝，庙号襄宗。
现代文：起居郎苏楷等人反驳议就的这个称号，请昭宗改称为恭灵庄闵皇帝，庙号襄宗。
English: This title, which was refuted by Kojiro Sukai and others, asked Akimune to change his name to Emperor Junling Zhuangzhu, and his temple name to Emperor Xiangzong.

古文：苏楷者，礼部尚书苏循之子，乾宁二年应进士。
现代文：苏楷，是礼部尚书苏循的儿子，唐昭宗乾宁二年参加进士考试。
English: Su Kai, is the son of the etiquette department Shang Shuxu Su Cun, Tang Zhaozong Qian Ning two years to participate in the examination.

古文：楷人才寝陋，兼无德行。
现代文：苏楷人才丑陋，又没有良好的品德。
English: Su Kai talent is ugly, and has no good character.

古文：昭宗恶其滥进，率先黜落。
现代文：唐昭宗厌恶他信口胡乱进谏称号，将他第一个免职。
English: Tang Zhaozong was disgusted by his unscrupulous claim to the title and was the first to dismiss him.

古文：由是怨望，专幸邦国之灾。
现代文：由于这个原因，苏楷对朝廷满怀怨恨，国家一有什么灾难他就兴灾乐祸。
English: For this reason, Sukai was full of resentment towards the imperial court, and he took pleasure in any misfortune that befell the country.

古文：其父循，奸邪附会，无誉于时。
现代文：苏楷的父亲苏循，奸恶邪险，依附权贵，在当时一点声望威信也没有。
English: Su Kai's father Su Su, treacherous, evil and dangerous, clinging to the powerful, did not have any prestige at that time.

古文：故希旨苟进。
现代文：因此，专靠迎合皇上的意旨来求得高位。
English: Therefore, they sought high positions by catering to the emperor's will.

古文：梁祖识其险坡，滋不悦，大为敬翔、李振所鄙。
现代文：梁太祖朱温认识到他为人奸险邪僻，更加不喜欢他。而且，敬翔，李振也都非常鄙视他。
English: Liang's great-grandfather Zhu Wen realized that he was treacherous, dangerous and perverse, and disliked him even more. Moreover, both Jingxiang and Li Zhen also despised him.

古文：梁祖建号，诏曰：苏楷、高贻休、萧闻礼，皆人才寝陋，不可尘污班行。并停见任，放归田里。
现代文：朱温建国号为梁，下诏书说：苏楷、高贻休、萧闻礼，都人才丑陋，不可以让他们玷污朝臣的行列，一律免去他们现任的官职，放归田里。
English: Zhu Wen, the founding father of the country, said in the next imperial edict: Su Kai-Maru, Gao Shuxiu, and Xiao Wen-Li are all ugly people. They should not be allowed to tarnish the ranks of courtiers. They should all be removed from their current official positions and sent back to the fields.

古文：苏循可令致士。
现代文：苏循可以让他还担任官职。
English: Su Guan can let him also hold an official post.

古文：河朔士人，目苏楷为衣冠枭獍。
现代文：河黄以北的人，都将苏楷看成衣冠禽兽。
English: People north of the Yellow River all regard the marmot as a top-hatted animal.

古文：乐朋龟
现代文：乐朋龟
English: Happy Tortoise

古文：旧例，士子不与内官交游。
现代文：依照旧时的规定，士大夫等朝官不允许跟宫中的宦官交往。
English: According to the old regulations, court officials such as the shidafu were not allowed to interact with eunuchs in the palace.

古文：十军军容田令孜擅回天之力。
现代文：十军观军容史宦官田令孜独揽大权，并能左右皇上意旨。
English: The Ten Generals' View of the Military and the History of the Military and the Government's Order of the Ten Generals monopolized power and were able to influence the emperor's will.

古文：唐僖皇播迁，行至洋源，百官未集，缺人掌诰。
现代文：黄巢军攻陷京城长安前，田令孜劝说唐僖宗撤离京城西迁巴蜀成都。行到洋源时，由于出走仓惶，文武百官还未赶到，皇上缺少一个代拟诏书的人。
English: Before the Huang Chao army captured the capital Chang'an, Tian Lingzi persuaded Tang Xizong to evacuate the capital to the west and move to Bachu Chengdu. When he went to Yangyuan, due to the panic of departure, hundreds of civil and military officials had not arrived, and the emperor lacked a person to draft the imperial edict.

古文：乐朋龟侍郎，亦及行在。因谒中尉，仍请中外。
现代文：侍郎乐朋龟当时也伴驾随行，听说这件事后，拜见田令孜，里外疏通。
English: His valet, Le Bokge, was also driving with him at the time. After hearing about the incident, he visited Tian Lingzi and smoothed things over.

古文：由是荐之，充翰林学士。
现代文：于是，经田令孜推荐，将他提升为翰林学士，掌管诏书。
English: As a result, upon the recommendation of Tian Lingzi, he was promoted to Hanlin Scholar, in charge of the imperial edict.

古文：张濬相自处士除起居郎，亦出令孜之门，皆申中外之敬。
现代文：宰相张濬，起自河间的一个普通的读书人，也是凭借田令孜才得以官为宰相的。
English: Prime Minister Zhang Ye, who started out as an ordinary reader in Kawama, was also able to become prime minister thanks to Tian Ling Ze.

古文：洎车驾到蜀，朝士毕集。
现代文：因此，他对宫内宦官，朝中大臣，都得时时表示敬重。
English: Therefore, he always showed respect to the eunuchs in the imperial court and the ministers of the two Koreas.

古文：一日，中尉为宰相开筵，学士洎张起居同预焉。
现代文：他也一同伴驾来到蜀地成都。文武百官陆续都来到成都后，一天，身居统领护驾禁军中尉要职的田令孜，特为宰相张濬摆设宴席，宴请百官，翰林学士乐朋龟也被邀请赴宴。
English: He also accompanied him to Chengdu, Shunde. After hundreds of civil and military officials came to Chengdu one after another, one day, Tian Lingzi, who held the important position of lieutenant of the imperial guard, held a banquet especially for Prime Minister Zhang Ye, inviting hundreds of officials. Hanlin bachelor Le Pengke was also invited to the banquet.

古文：张公耻于对众设拜，乃先谒中尉。
现代文：宰相张濬感到当着百官面前拜谢田令孜有失他的面脸。
English: Prime Minister Zhang Ye felt that he had lost face by bowing to Tian Xie in front of hundreds of officials.

古文：使施谢酒之敬，中尉讶之。
现代文：于是，在开宴之前先行拜见田令孜感谢他特为自己摆设酒宴。田令孜非常惊讶。
English: Therefore, before the banquet started, he met with Tian Lingzi to thank him for holding the banquet for him. Tian Lingzi was very surprised.

古文：俄而宾至，即席坐定。
现代文：过了一会儿，赴宴的百官全到齐了，依次入座。
English: After a while, all the officials who had come to the banquet arrived and took their seats in turn.

古文：中慰白诸官曰：某与起居，清浊异流。
现代文：田令孜对百官们说：我与张宰相原本是泾清、渭浊两种不同的人。
English: Tian Lingze said to the hundred officials: I and Prime Minister Zhang were originally two different people.

古文：曾蒙中外。
现代文：张宰相曾经蒙受朝廷内外的赏识，才有今天。
English: Prime Minister Zhang was once appreciated inside and outside the imperial court, but only today.

古文：既虑玷辱，何惮改更？
现代文：既然考虑跟我田某人玷污声名，为什么又惧怕更改呢？
English: If you're going to tarnish your reputation with someone like me, why be afraid to change it?

古文：今日暗地谢酒，即不可。
现代文：向今天这样私下向我表示感谢为你置办宴席，是不可以的。
English: You can't thank me in private like that today for buying you a banquet.

古文：张公惭惧交集。
现代文：宰相张濬听了这席话后，又是羞愧又是恐惧。
English: After listening to this speech, Prime Minister Zhang Ye felt both shame and fear.

古文：自此甚为群彦所薄。
现代文：从这之后，朝中的英才俊杰更加轻视他了。
English: From then on, the talented Junjie in the imperial court despised him even more.

古文：乐公举进士，初陈启事，谒李昭待郎，自媒云：别于九经书史及老庄八都赋外，著八百卷书。请垂比试。
现代文：乐明龟考中进士后，初次上表述事，拜见侍郎李昭，毛遂自荐地说：在九经书史老庄八都赋之外，我撰写过八百卷书，请您随便出题比试高低。
English: After entering the middle school examination of Le Ming Kame, for the first time, he met Li Zhao, a waiter, and said: In addition to the Nine Classics and Eight Classics, I have written eight hundred books. Please feel free to ask questions about the test.

古文：诚有学问也，然于制诰不甚简当。
现代文：乐朋龟确实是很有学问的，然而在撰写诏书上，却不那么文笔洗练、简洁。
English: Le Pengke is indeed very learned, however, in writing the edict, he is not as polished and concise.

古文：时人或未之可也。
现代文：当时朝中的其他官员，有的人尚未认为他胜任这个职务啊！
English: At that time, other officials in the central government, some people, did not yet think he was qualified for this post!

古文：孔谦
现代文：孔谦
English: Kong Qian

古文：后唐明宗即位之初，诛租廉使孔谦、归德军节度使元行钦、邓州节度温韬、太子少保段疑、汴州曲务辛廷蔚、李继宣等。
现代文：后唐明宗李亶刚刚继承皇位时，下诏处死了租庸使孔谦、归德军节度使元行钦，邓州节度使温韬、太子少保段凝、汴州曲务辛廷蔚、李继宣等六人。
English: After the Tang and Ming Dynasties, when Li Qiye had just succeeded to the throne, the following edict was issued to execute six people: Zenyong, Kong Qian; Gui Jun Jun, Yuan Xingqin; Dengzhou, Wen Qian; Taizi, Shao Bao Dan Jie; Zhangzhou, Qu Wuxin, Ting Wei; Li Jixuan.

古文：孔谦魏州孔目吏，庄宗图霸，以供馈军食。
现代文：孔谦，原是魏州掌管狱讼、帐目、遣发等事务的高级办事员。
English: Kong Qian, formerly a senior clerk in charge of prison litigation, accounts, dispatch and other affairs in Weizhou.

古文：谦有力焉，既为租庸使。
现代文：庄宗李存勖图谋霸业时，孔谦在供给军粮给养方面出过力，随即授予他租庸史。
English: When Zhuangzong Li Cunxu plotted to dominate the industry, Kong Qian made great efforts in the supply of military grain supply, and then awarded him the history of rent.

古文：曲事嬖幸，夺宰相权。专以取敛为意，剥削万端，以犯众怒伏诛。
现代文：孔谦用曲意逢迎的方法获得庄宗的宠幸，夺取了宰相的权力，专心于巧取豪夺积攒钱财，想方设法盘剥百姓。因此，触犯了众怒而被处死。
English: Kong Qian won the favor of Zhuangzong by means of pleasing him, seized the power of the prime minister, concentrated on cleverly taking advantage of the rich and accumulating money, and tried his best to exploit the people. Therefore, he violated the anger of the people and was executed.

古文：元行钦为庄宗爱将，出入宫禁，曾无间隔。
现代文：元行钦原来是庄宗李存勖的得力将领，曾经一度随意出入宫中禁苑，跟庄宗没有一点隔阂。
English: Originally, Yuan Xingqin was a powerful general of Zhuangzong Li Cunxu. He once entered and left the palace's Forbidden Garden at will, and there was no separation between him and Zhuangzong.

古文：害明宗之子从景，以是伏诛。
现代文：他是因为杀害了明宗皇帝的儿子，才被处死的。
English: He was executed for killing the son of Emperor Mingzong.

古文：段凝事梁，以奸佞进身。
现代文：段凝，在后梁任职期间，是以奸诈谄佞受到重用的。
English: During Hou Liang's term of office, Duan Jian was heavily used as a means of treachery.

古文：至节将，末年绾军权，束手归朝。
现代文：在后梁末年，他掌管兵权，一仗未打，拱手归降后唐。
English: In the last years of Hou Liang's reign, he was in charge of the military. He did not fight a single battle and surrendered to Hou Tang.

古文：温韬凶恶，发掘西京陵寝。
现代文：温韬为人凶恶，他曾率人掘盗过西京长安的皇家陵墓。
English: Wen Xuan was a ferocious man. He once led an expedition to rob the imperial mausoleum in Chang'an, West Beijing.

古文：庄宗中兴，不证其罪，厚赂伶官阉人，与段凝皆赐国姓，或拥旄钺。
现代文：庄宗口中说中兴李唐王朝，但却不依法治他毁坏皇陵的罪行，反而听任他用重金贿赂乐官和太监，并且跟段凝一块儿，都赐给他们跟皇族一个姓氏，还让他执掌兵权。
English: According to Zhuangzong, he was instrumental in the founding of the Li and Tang dynasties, but he did not follow the rule of law in his crime of destroying the imperial tombs. Instead, he allowed him to bribe music officials and eunuchs with heavy money, and together with Duan Rong, he gave them and the imperial family a surname, and also let him hold military power.

古文：明宗采众议而诛之。
现代文：明宗皇帝采纳大家的意见才处死了他。
English: Emperor Mingzong accepted everyone's opinion and executed him.

古文：辛廷蔚开封尹王瓒之牙将也，朱友贞时，廷蔚依瓒势曲法乱政，汴人恶之。
现代文：辛廷蔚原是开封府尹王瓒的副将。朱友贞时，辛廷蔚依仗王瓒的势力违法乱政，胡作非为，汴州人都非常厌恶他。
English: Hsinting Uyehara was the vice-commander of Yin Wangtao, the governor of Kaifeng. When Zhu Youzhen was in power, Hsinting Uyeh relied on Wangtao's power to break the law, disrupt the government, and commit illegal acts. The people of Zhangzhou were very disgusted with him.

古文：李继宣汴将孟审澄之子，亡命归庄宗，刘皇后畜为子。
现代文：李继宣是汴州将领孟审澄的儿子，后来铤而走险，归降庄宗，刘皇后收养他为义子。
English: Li Jixuan was the son of the Zhangzhou general Meng Xuncheng. Later, he risked his life and surrendered to Zhuangzong. Empress Liu adopted him as her son-in-law.

古文：时宫掖之间，秽声流闻。
现代文：当时，他与刘皇后之间有许多淫乱的秽闻从宫里流传出来。
English: At that time, a lot of lewd gossip between him and Empress Liu was circulating in the palace.

古文：此四凶，帝在藩邸时，恶其为人，故皆诛之。
现代文：这四个凶恶的人，明宗还是藩王时就非常厌恶他们的为人。因此，刚一登极继位就处死了他们。
English: When Mingzong was still the king of the domain, he detested these four evil men so much that he had them executed as soon as he ascended the throne.

古文：庄宗皇帝为唐雪耻，号为中兴。
现代文：庄宗皇帝声言要为李唐王朝雪除耻辱，中兴李唐王朝。
English: Emperor Zhuangzong claimed that he wanted to remove the shame of the Li Tang Dynasty and rejuvenate the Li Tang Dynasty.

古文：而温韬毁发诸帝陵寝，宜加大辟。
现代文：但是温韬毁坏盗掘先皇陵墓，是罪当斩首的，却赐予他宗室李姓，应他执掌兵权。
English: However, although it was a crime punishable by beheading to destroy or dig up the mausoleum of the first emperor, Wen Jiabao gave him the surname of his ancestral family, Li, and allowed him to hold military power.

古文：而赐国姓，付节旄，由是知中兴之说谬矣。
现代文：由此可知，庄宗志在中兴李唐王朝的说法是靠不住的啊！
English: From this, it can be seen that Zhuang Zongzhi's assertion that ZTE belongs to the Li Tang Dynasty is not reliable!

