古文：王晏，字士彦，琅邪临沂人也。
现代文：王晏，字士彦，是琅邪临沂人。
English: Wang Yao, also known as Shi Yan, is a member of the Linyi clan.

古文：祖弘之，通直常侍。
现代文：祖父王弘之，官通直常侍。
English: His grandfather, Wang Hiroyuki, was a courtier and a regular attendant.

古文：父普曜，秘书监。
现代文：父亲王普曜，官秘书监。
English: His father, Wang Puyou, was the superintendent of government secretaries.

古文：宋大明末，晏起家临贺王国常侍，员外郎，巴陵王征北板参军，安成王抚军板刑狱，随府转车骑。
现代文：王晏，在宋大明末年开始做临贺王国常侍，员外郎，巴陵王征北时板授参军，安成王抚军时板授刑狱，随着安成王府转任车骑。
English: Wang Qian, at the end of the Song Dynasty, began to serve as a constant attendant of the Linhe Kingdom, a member of the Foreign Affairs Office, when the Baling King conquered the north, he was awarded the army, and when the Ancheng King led the army, he was awarded the prison, and with the Ancheng King's Palace, he was transferred to the chariot.

古文：晋熙王燮为郢州，晏为安西主簿。
现代文：晋熙王刘燮任郢州时，王晏为安西主簿。
English: When the king of Jin Dynasty, Liu Xuan, was in charge of Ganzhou, Wang Xuan was the chief of Anxi Province.

古文：世祖为长史，与晏相遇。
现代文：世祖为长史，和王晏相投合。
English: The world's first ancestor is Changshi, and he fits in well with Wang Yao.

古文：府转镇西，板晏记室谘议。
现代文：王府转官镇西，板授王晏记室谘议。
English: Wangfu transferred to the west of the town, and the board awarded the king's office for consultation.

古文：沈攸之事难，镇西职僚皆随世祖镇盆城。上时权势虽重，而众情犹有疑惑，晏便专心奉事，军旅书翰皆委焉。
现代文：沈攸之发难时，镇西府的群僚都跟随世祖守在盆城，世祖当时虽然权势很大，但大家还是心存疑虑，王晏却已经专心事奉，世祖把军旅书信的大事都委托给他。
English: At the time of Shen You's calamity, all the members of the Zhenxi Prefecture followed Shizuo to stay in Boncheng. Although Shizuo was very powerful at that time, everyone still had doubts, but Wang Yao had already devoted himself to his service. Shizuo entrusted him with the important matter of military correspondence.

古文：性甚便僻，渐见亲侍。
现代文：由于性情乖巧善于取宠，渐渐得到世祖的信任。
English: He gradually gained the confidence of the patriarch due to his good-natured disposition and ability to win favors.

古文：乃留为上征虏抚军府板谘议，领记室。
现代文：就留下做了世祖的征虏抚军府板授谘议，领记室。
English: He left behind the Fuzhou Military Government, which was the forefather of the conscription movement, to set up a consultation and registration office.

古文：从还都，迁领军司马，中军从事中郎。
现代文：跟从世祖回到都城，迁领军司马，中军从事中郎。
English: Returning to the capital from the ancestor, he moved to lead the army of Sima, and the Chinese army was engaged in the middle.

古文：常在上府，参议机密。
现代文：常常在世祖府中，参议机密大事。
English: In the ancestral palace, there are often confidential matters for the senate.

古文：建元初，转太子中庶子。
现代文：建元初，转任太子中庶子。
English: At the beginning of the 19th century, he was transferred to the position of Prince's junior illegitimate son.

古文：世祖在东宫，专断朝事，多不闻启，晏虑及罪，称疾自疏。
现代文：世祖在束宫，专以己意独断朝廷大事，多数都不禀告皇上，王晏害怕连累到自己，假称有病疏远了世祖。
English: At Sokgong, King Sejong exclusively used his own will to arbitrate the major events of the imperial court. Most of them did not denounce the emperor. Wang Yao was afraid of implicating himself and distanced himself from King Sejong by pretending to be ill.

古文：寻领射声校尉，不拜。
现代文：不久被任命为领射声校尉，他没有接受。
English: He was soon appointed captain of the gunnery, which he did not accept.

古文：世祖即位，转长兼侍中，意任如旧。
现代文：世担即位以后，转任长兼侍中，像过去一样地信任他。
English: After the sekan ascended the throne, he was transferred to the post of chieftain and chamberlain, and trusted him as he had in the past.

古文：永明元年，领步兵校尉，迁侍中祭酒，校尉如故。
现代文：永明元年，领步兵校尉，迁任侍中祭酒，校尉的职位如故。
English: In the first year of the Yongming era, he led the infantry as a captain and was transferred to the position of a chamberlain of the sacrificial wine. The position of the captain remains unchanged.

古文：遭母丧，起为辅国将军、司徒左长史。
现代文：遭逢母亲去世，守丧期满后，起用为辅国将军、司徒左长史。
English: When his mother passed away, after the mourning period was over, he was appointed as a general of the auxiliary state, and named as Sittuzo Nagashi.

古文：晏父普曜藉晏势宦，多历通官。
现代文：王晏的父亲普曜藉着王晏的势力，屡次做了显官。
English: Wang Yao's father, Pu You, repeatedly became a high-ranking official through Wang Yao's influence.

古文：晏寻迁左卫将军，加给事中，未拜，而普曜卒，居丧有称。
现代文：王晏不久迁左卫将军，加给事中。没有拜受，父亲普曜死了，居丧期间有很好的名声。
English: Wang Yao was soon transferred to the General of the Left Division of the Guards, and was added to the cause. He did not receive any worship, and his father died on a Saturday. He had a good reputation during the mourning period.

古文：起冠军将军、司徒左长史、济阳太守，未拜，迁卫尉，将军如故。
现代文：重新任为冠军将军、司徒左长史、济阳太守，没有拜受，迁任卫尉，将军的职衔依旧。
English: He was reappointed as Champion General, Stuzo Long History, Jiyang Governor-General, but he did not receive any obeisance, he was transferred to the position of Lieutenant of the Guards, but his title of General remained the same.

古文：四年，转太子詹事，加散骑常侍。
现代文：四年，转太子詹事，加任散骑常侍。
English: In four years, Zhan Zhi, the crown prince, was promoted to the post of straggler.

古文：六年，转丹阳尹，常侍如故。
现代文：六年，转任丹阳尹，常侍如故。
English: Six years later, he was transferred to the post of Danyang Yin, and remained a regular attendant.

古文：晏位任亲重，朝夕进见，言论朝事，自豫章王嶷、尚书令王俭皆降意以接之，而晏每以疏漏被上呵责，连称疾久之。
现代文：王晏位高任重，早晚进见皇上，谈论国家大事，连豫章王萧嶷、尚书令王俭也要屈意逢迎他，但他每次因为疏忽遗漏之咎受到皇上的斥责，接连很久称病不上朝。
English: Wang Xuan, who held a high-ranking position, visited the emperor in the morning and evening to discuss national affairs. Even Yu Zhang, Wang Xiaojun, and Shang Shuling, Wang Jian, were willing to meet him, but he was reprimanded by the emperor for his negligence and omission every time, and for a long time he said that he would not go to the imperial court.

古文：上以晏须禄养，七年，转为江州刺史。晏固辞不愿出外，见许，留为吏部尚书，领太子右卫率。
现代文：皇上以为他是索要俸禄，七年，转为江州刺史，他坚决拒绝不愿出外任官，得到允许，留下做吏部尚书，领太子右卫率。
English: The emperor thought that he was asking for a salary. After seven years, he was transferred to the Jiangzhou imperial court. He resolutely refused to go abroad to serve as an official, and was allowed to remain as a clerk and head of the prince's right guard.

古文：终以旧恩见宠。
现代文：最终因从前的恩情得到宠信。
English: In the end, he was favored because of his previous kindness.

古文：时王俭虽贵而疏，晏既领选，权行台阁，与俭颇不平。
现代文：当时尚书令王俭虽然地位显贵但和皇上比较疏远，王晏既已获主持选举百官事务的重权，便行于台阁，对王俭很有些不服气。
English: At that time, it was written that although Wang Jian held a prominent position, he was relatively distant from the emperor. Wang Yao, who had already been given the important power of presiding over the election of officials, went to Taigak, and was somewhat dissatisfied with Wang Jian.

古文：俭卒，礼官议谥，上欲依王导谥为 文献 ，晏启上曰： 导乃得此谥，但宋以来，不加素族。 
现代文：王俭死后，礼官讨论加给他的谧号，皇上想照王导的例子谧为文献，王晏上奏说： 王导才能够得到这种谧号，而且从宋以后，从不加给寒族。 
English: After Wang Jian's death, the etiquette officials discussed the nickname to be given to him. The emperor wanted to follow Wang Dao's example and give the nickname to the document. Wang Dao said: Wang Dao was able to get this nickname, and since the Song Dynasty, it has never been given to the Han people.

古文：出谓亲人曰： 平头宪事已行矣。 
现代文：出朝以后对亲近的人说： 那个乎头的执事总算是走了。 
English: After his departure, he said to those close to him: That headstrong deacon is finally gone.

古文：八年，改领右卫将军，陈疾自解。
现代文：八年，改领右卫将军，奏陈有病辞解此职。
English: Eight years later, he was reassigned to the post of General of the Right Division, but he resigned from this post due to illness.

古文：上欲以高宗代晏领选，手敕问之。
现代文：皇上想让高宗代替王晏总领选举官吏事务，用手写敕书询问他的意见。
English: The emperor wanted Gaozong to take over the election of officials from the commander-in-chief Wang Xi, and asked him for his opinion in a handwritten letter.

古文：晏启曰： 鸾清干有余，然不谙百氏，恐不可居此职。 
现代文：王晏说： 萧鸾精明干练有余，但是不熟悉百官事务，恐怕不能担当这个职务。 
English: Wang Yao said: Xiao Yao is more than shrewd and capable, but he is not familiar with the affairs of a hundred officials, and I am afraid he cannot take on this position.

古文：上乃止。
现代文：皇上就打消了这个想法。
English: The Emperor finally stopped.

古文：明年，迁侍中，领太子詹事，本州中正，又以疾辞。
现代文：第二年，迁侍中，领太子詹事，本州中正，又以生病推辞掉。
English: In the second year, in the middle of the relocation, the crown prince Zhan Zhi, the head of the state, also resigned due to illness.

古文：十年，改授散骑常侍、金紫光禄大夫，给亲信二十人，中正如故。
现代文：十年，改授散骑常侍、金紫光禄大夫，赐给亲信二十人，中正依旧。
English: Ten years later, he was awarded the title of Sanzhi (free-riding) attendant and Jinziguanglu (gold, purple, and light) doctor, and 20 of his close friends were given the same title, but Zhongzheng remained the same.

古文：十一年，迁右仆射，领太孙右卫率。
现代文：十一年，迁右仆射，领太孙右卫率。
English: In the eleventh year of his reign, he was succeeded by his second-in-command Sun Yue.

古文：世祖崩，遗旨以尚书事付晏及徐孝嗣，令久于其职。
现代文：世祖去世，遣下的圣旨说把尚书事托付给王昙和徐孝嗣，让他们始终保有这个职位。
English: After the death of the founder of the dynasty, it was said that the emperor's sacred edict entrusted Shang Shuji to Wang Qi and Xu Xiaozhi, so that they would always hold this position.

古文：郁林即位，转左仆射，中正如故。
现代文：郁林王即位，王晏转任左仆射，中正的职位依旧。
English: King Yulin ascended to the throne, and Wang Qian was transferred to the position of Left Footman, but the position of the center remained the same.

古文：隆昌元年，加侍中。
现代文：隆昌元年，加封侍中。
English: In the first year of the Longchang era, he was given the title of Junior Chamberlain.

古文：高宗谋废立，晏便响应推奉。
现代文：高宗圃谋废郁林王自立，王晏就积极响应推举可用之人。
English: Gao Zongpu sought to abolish Yu Lin Wang's independence, and Wang Yao actively responded to the election of a suitable person.

古文：延兴元年，转尚书令，加后将军，侍中、中正如故。
现代文：延兴元年，转为尚书令，加后将军，侍中、中正的职位如故。
English: In the first year of Yanxing, it was changed to Shang Shuling, Gao Zhen, and the positions of chamberlains and chancellors remained unchanged.

古文：封曲江县侯，邑千户。
现代文：封为曲辽题堡，享受千产的采邑。
English: He was awarded the title of Qu Liaoqi Fort, and enjoyed the harvest of thousands of crops.

古文：给鼓吹一部，甲仗五十人入殿。
现代文：赐鼓吹一部，镜甲仪仗五十人上殿。
English: It was given to a group of preachers, who marched up to the main hall leading fifty men dressed in armor.

古文：高宗与晏宴于东府，语及时事，晏抵掌曰： 公常言晏怯，今定何如？ 
现代文：高宗在束府设宴款待王晏，谈到当时的国家大事，王晏击掌说： 您常说我胆怯，现在到底觉得如何? 
English: Gao Zong hosted a banquet for Wang Hui in Sokfu, and when talking about the national events at that time, Wang Hui clapped his hands and said: You often say that I am timid, how do you feel now?

古文：建武元年，进号骠骑大将军，给班剑二十人，侍中、令、中正如故。
现代文：建武元年，进号骠骑大将军，赐给班剑仪仗二十人，侍中、令、中正的职位如故。
English: In the first year of the Jianwu era, he was given the title of "Grand General of the Horse" and twenty people were given the honorary title of "Panjian," and the positions of attendant, commander, and vice-commander remained the same.

古文：又加兵百人，领太子少傅，进爵为公，增邑为二千户。
现代文：又赐给一百名兵卒，领太子少傅，进为公爵，采邑增加到二千户。
English: He also bestowed one hundred soldiers with the title of prince, and promoted a young peasant to duke, and increased the number of counties to two thousand.

古文：以虏动，给兵千人。
现代文：因为边防有警报，赐给一千军卒。
English: Because of the alert at the border, a thousand soldiers were sent.

古文：晏为人笃于亲旧，为世祖所称。
现代文：王晏为人很看重亲友旧情，受到世祖的称赏。
English: Wang Yao is a person who attaches great importance to the old feelings of relatives and friends, and has been praised by the ancestors.

古文：至是自谓佐命惟新，言论常非薄世祖故事，众始怪之。
现代文：到这时候自认为是辅佐新王，言语中常菲薄世祖过去的事，大家开始都感到奇怪。
English: At this time, everyone began to feel strange about the fact that they thought they were assisting the new king, and the words were often about the past.

古文：高宗虽以事际须晏，而心相疑斥，料简世祖中诏，得与晏手敕三百余纸，皆是论国家事，以此愈猜薄之。
现代文：高宗虽然处理政事要依靠王晏，心裹却对他有疑虑和排斥之意，在整理世祖的韶书简章时，看到了给王晏的三百多份亲笔诏书，都是谈论国家大事的，因此更加猜忌鄙薄王晏。
English: Although Gaozong had to rely on Wang Yao to handle political affairs, he harbored suspicions and feelings of rejection towards him. When he was sorting out the inscriptions of Wang Yao's imperial edicts, he saw more than three hundred autographed imperial edicts for Wang Yao, all of which talked about national events. Therefore, he was even more suspicious of Wang Yao.

古文：初即位，始安王遥光便劝诛晏，帝曰： 晏于我有勋，且未有罪。 
现代文：刚即位时，始安王萧遥光就劝他杀掉王晏，皇上说： 王晏为我立过功，而且又没有什么罪过。 
English: As soon as he ascended to the throne, the King of Shi'an, Xiao Yaoguang, advised him to kill Wang Yao. The emperor said, "Wang Yao did a great service for me, and there is nothing wrong with him."

古文：遥光曰： 晏尚不能为武帝，安能为陛下。 
现代文：萧遥光说： 王晏对武帝都不能忠诚，又怎么能忠于陛下呢? 
English: Xiao Yaoguang said: Wang Yao can't be loyal to Emperor Wu, how can he be loyal to His Majesty?

古文：帝默然变色。
现代文：皇上默然变了脸色。
English: Ming Di silently changed his face.

古文：时帝常遣心腹左右陈世范等出涂巷采听异言，由是以晏为事。
现代文：当时皇上常派遣心腹陈世范等到里巷中听取不同的意见，从此特别关注王晏。
English: At that time, the emperor often sent his confidant Chen Shifan to the streets to listen to different opinions, and since then he has paid special attention to Wang Xi.

古文：晏轻浅无防虑，望开府，数呼相工自视，云当大贵。
现代文：王晏掉以轻心没有防范，想开建府署，辟置群僚，屡次叫相士来给自己看相，相士说一定会大大地显贵。
English: Wang Yao was careless and did not take precautions. He wanted to build a government office and replace his colleagues. He repeatedly called the fortune-teller to see his face. The fortune-teller said that he would be greatly distinguished.

古文：与宾客语，好屏人请间，上闻之，疑晏欲反，遂有诛晏之意。
现代文：同宾客聚谈的时候，喜欢背着人清静悠闲地谈话，皇上知道了，怀疑他要谋反，于是有了要杀掉他的念头。
English: When meeting with guests, he liked to talk quietly and leisurely behind people's backs. When the emperor found out, he suspected him of plotting a rebellion, and had the idea of killing him.

古文：伧人鲜于文粲与晏子德元往来，密探朝旨，告晏有异志。
现代文：北人鲜于文粲和王晏的儿子德元有交往，秘密地探听到朝廷的旨意，就告发说王晏有叛逆之心。
English: The northerners had recently had dealings with Wenyu and Wang Xi's son De Yuan, and after secretly listening to the will of the imperial court, they reported that Wang Xi had a rebellious heart.

古文：世范等又启上云： 晏谋因四年南郊，与世祖故旧主帅于道中窃发。 
现代文：陈世范等人又启奏皇上说： 王晏策划藉着四年南郊祭祀，与世祖过去的主帅在路上发动政变。 
English: Chen Shifan and others also quoted the emperor as saying: Wang Xi planned to use the four-year Southern Suburbs Festival to launch a coup on the road with the former coach of the ancestor.

古文：会虎犯郊坛，帝愈惧。
现代文：正赶上当年有老虎出现在南郊祭坛处，皇上更加害怕了。
English: Just in time, a tiger appeared at the southern suburb altar, and the emperor was even more afraid.

古文：未郊一日，敕停行。
现代文：祭祀不到一天，就下令停止。
English: Less than a day into the ritual, the order was given to stop.

古文：元会毕，乃召晏于华林省诛之。
现代文：元旦朝会结束后，就把王晏召到华林省杀了。
English: After the New Year's Day meeting ended, he summoned Wang Yao to Hualin Province and killed him.

古文：下诏曰： 晏闾阎凡伍，少无特操，阶缘人乏，班齿官途。
现代文：颁发诏书说：王晏出身微贱，从小就没有节操，因为缺少人才，才跻身官员当中。
English: The imperial edict issued said: Wang Xi was born in a lowly family and had no self-restraint since he was a child. It was only because of a lack of talent that he rose to become an official.

古文：世祖在蕃，搜扬擢用，弃略疵瑕，遂升要重。
现代文：世祖在野时，搜求人才加以选拔任用，不计较他的毛病，所以得居高位。
English: When the ancestor was in the field, he searched for talents to be selected and appointed, regardless of his problems, so he had to occupy a high position.

古文：而轻跳险锐，在贵弥著，猜忌反覆，触情多端。
现代文：但他为人轻佻奸诈难测，显贵以后毛病更重，猜忌他人反覆无常，触犯众情的地方有多方面。
English: However, he is a person who is unpredictable and treacherous, his faults are more serious after he became a dignitary, he is suspicious of others' capriciousness, and there are many aspects of offending public sentiment.

古文：故以两宫所弗容，十手所共指。
现代文：所以为两宫不能容忍，为众人所指责。
English: Therefore, it is intolerable for the two palaces to be criticized by many people.

古文：既内愧于心，外惧宪牍，掩迹陈痾，多历年载。
现代文：他既内心有愧，外又恐惧国法的惩治，遮掩着他的旧毛病，这样过了很多年。
English: For many years, he hid his old faults, feeling guilty inside and fearing punishment from the law.

古文：频授蕃任，辄辞请不行，事似谦虚，情实诡伏。
现代文：屡次授予他外任之职，都推辞着不去，事情好像是表现他的谦虚，其实是心裹怀藏阴谋诡计。
English: When he was repeatedly offered a position outside the ministry, he refused to accept it. It seemed to be a sign of his modesty, but it was actually a ploy.

古文：隆昌以来，运集艰难，匡赞之功，颇有心力。
现代文：从隆昌以来，国运很是艰难，王晏匡扶皇室的功劳，确是费了他一番心力。
English: Since Longchang, the National Games have been very difficult. It really took a lot of effort for Wang Qiankuang to support the royal family.

古文：乃爵冠通侯，位登元辅，绸缪恩寄，朝莫均焉。
现代文：于是爵赏达到了通侯的地位，一跃成为国家元老，皇恩之优厚，满朝没有他人能比。
English: As a result, the peerage reached the status of a vassalage, and he became a national elder. His royal grace was so generous that no one else in the Manchu Dynasty could match it.

古文：溪壑可盈，无厌将及。
现代文：溪壑尚且可以填平，但他的欲望却没有满足的时候。
English: The creek bed can still be filled, but his desire has not been satisfied.

古文：视天画地，遂怀异图。
现代文：勘察天地，想谋划叛逆之事。
English: to spy out the land, to plot treachery.

古文：广求卜相，取信巫觋。
现代文：广泛征求卜相之人，信任巫术的预言。
English: People who widely consult diviners and believe in the prophecies of witchcraft.

古文：论荐党附，遍满台府。
现代文：讨论举荐他的党徒，使之充斥于国家官属。
English: Discussions about nominating his running mate have been rife among state officials.

古文：令大息德元渊薮亡命，同恶相济，剑客成群。
现代文：又让长子德元聚集一些亡命之徒，众恶相资，剑客成群。
English: He also allowed his eldest son, De Yuan, to gather together a number of outlaws, partners in crime, and swordsmen.

古文：弟诩凶愚，远相唇齿，信驿往来，密通要契。
现代文：他的弟弟王翔凶残愚蠢，在远方和他接应，常有信函往来，秘密地共同策划此事。
English: His younger brother, Wang Xiang, was ferocious and stupid. He corresponded with him from afar, often exchanged letters, and secretly plotted the matter together.

古文：去岁之初，奉朝请鲜于文粲备告奸谋。
现代文：去年年初，奉朝请鲜于文粲告发了他们的阴谋。
English: At the beginning of last year, Fong Chao asked Xian to inform Wen Zhuo of their plot.

古文：朕以信必由中，义无与贰，推诚委任，觊能悛改。
现代文：我以为信任是发自内心，他不应违背道义有不忠之心，诚心诚意对他委以重任，暗自希望他能够改悔。
English: I thought that trust comes from the heart, that he should not be unfaithful in violation of morality, and sincerely entrust him with important tasks, secretly hoping that he can repent.

古文：而长恶易流，构扇弥大，与北中郎司马萧毅、台队主刘明达等克期窃发。
现代文：但是长久的恶习容易流布，联结煽动越发严重，和北中郎司马萧毅、台队主刘明达等人筹划日期发动政变。
English: However, long-term bad habits are easy to spread, and the connection and incitement are becoming more and more serious. He and the North Korean Vice Premier Ma Xiaoyi and the team leader Liu Mingda planned the date to launch a coup.

古文：以河东王铉识用微弱，可为其主，得志之日，当守以虚器。
现代文：认为河东王萧铉没有什么见识和才干，可以让他为君主，计谋得逞的那天，就使用僭越身份的器物。
English: He thought that Xiao Yu, the king of Hedong, did not have enough insight and talent to make him a monarch, and on the day that his scheme succeeded, he used the objects that exceeded his status.

古文：明达诸辞列，炳然具存。
现代文：刘明达详言以告，罪证确凿历历在日。
English: Liu Mingda made a detailed complaint, and the criminal evidence is conclusive.

古文：昔汉后以反唇致讨，魏臣以虬须为戮，况无君之心既彰，陵上之迹斯著！此而可容，谁寘刑辟！
现代文：过去漠后因为反言相讥遭到讨伐，魏臣因为有龙须而被杀，何况他无视君主的心思已经如此明显，欺凌皇上的行迹这样明白，如果对此还加以容忍，谁还把国家刑罚放在眼裹呢。
English: In the past, the Empress Dowager was attacked for speaking against the emperor, and Wei Chen was killed for having dragon whiskers. What's more, his disregard for the monarch was so obvious, and his bullying of the emperor was so clear, that if this was tolerated, no one would pay attention to the state punishment.

古文：并可收付廷尉，肃明国典。 
现代文：故此准许交给廷尉法办，以使国家典制得以整肃。
English: Therefore, this permission was given to the Imperial Household Agency, so that the national award system could be rectified.

古文：晏未败数日，于北山庙答赛，夜还，晏既醉，部伍人亦饮酒。羽仪错乱，前后十余里中，不复相禁制。识者云 此势不复久也 。
现代文：王晏还没有倒台的前些天，在北山庙答谢迎神赛会，夜间回府，王晏喝醉了，手下人也都喝了酒，仪仗乱糟糟的，前后逶迤十多里，不能互相整顿制约，有见识的人说： 遣气势长不了。 
English: A few days before the fall of Wang Hui, Wang Hui was drunk at the Beishan Temple's "Acknowledgement and Welcome to God" competition, and returned to the capital at night. Wang Hui and his subordinates also drank wine. The ceremony was chaotic, and there were more than ten li in front and behind, and they could not rectify and control each other. People with insight said: "It is impossible to keep up the momentum."

古文：晏子德元，有意尚。
现代文：王晏的儿子德元，颇有志向。
English: Wang Yao's son, De Yuan, is quite ambitious.

古文：至车骑长史。
现代文：官至车骑长史。
English: There is a long history of government officials riding bicycles.

古文：德元初名湛，世祖谓晏曰： 刘湛、江湛，并不善终，此非佳名也。 
现代文：他本名湛，世祖对王晏说： 刘湛、江湛，都没有好下场，这不是个吉利的名字。 
English: His real name is Zhan. The ancestor said to Wang Yao: Liu Zhan and Jiang Zhan did not have a good ending. This is not a lucky name.

古文：晏乃改之。
现代文：卫星就替他改了名。
English: The satellite was renamed after him.

古文：至是与弟晋安王友德和俱被诛。
现代文：这时和他的弟弟任晋安王友的德和一起被杀。
English: At this time, he and his younger brother, Ren Jinan Wang You, were killed together.

古文：晏弟诩，永明中为少府卿。
现代文：王晏的弟弟王翔，永明年间是少府卿。
English: Wang Yao's younger brother, Wang Xiang, would become Shofuqing for the rest of his life.

古文：六年，敕位未登黄门郎，不得畜女妓。
现代文：六年，皇上下令不够黄门郎之职位的，不准蓄养妓女。
English: In the sixth year, the emperor decreed that those who were not qualified for the position of Huangmenlang were not allowed to keep prostitutes.

古文：诩与射声校尉阴玄智坐畜妓免官，禁锢十年。
现代文：王翔和射声校尉阴玄智因属私自养妓被罢官，禁止入仕达十年。
English: Wang Xiang and Captain Yin Xuan Zhi were expelled from the military for being self-employed prostitutes and banned from entering the military for ten years.

古文：敕特原诩禁锢。
现代文：韶令特别免去王翔禁锢。
English: The edict specifically exempted Wang Xiang from imprisonment.

古文：后出为辅国将军、始兴内史。广州刺史刘缵为奴所杀，诩率郡兵讨之。
现代文：后来出任辅国将军、始兴内史广州刺史刘缜被奴仆杀死，王翔率领郡兵去讨伐。
English: Later, Liu Ye, who served as a general of the Auxiliary Province and the first governor of Guangzhou, was killed by a slave, and Wang Xiang led the county soldiers to fight.

古文：延兴元年，授诩持节广州刺史。
现代文：延兴元年，授予他持节庐姐刺史。
English: In the first year of Yanxing, he was awarded the title of "Hanging Sister of the Spring Festival."

古文：诩亦笃旧。
现代文：王翅也看重故旧之情。
English: Wang Yao is also a close friend.

古文：晏诛，上又遣南中郎司马萧季敞袭诩杀之。
现代文：王星死后，皇上又派南中郎司马萧季敞袭击王翊把他杀了。
English: After Wang Xing's death, the emperor sent Nanzhong Lang Si Ma Xiao Ji Chang to attack Wang Qian and killed him.

古文：萧谌，字彦孚，南兰陵兰陵人也。
现代文：萧谌字彦孚，南兰陵郡兰陵县人。
English: Xiao Junzhi Yanfu, a native of Lanling County, South Lanling County.

古文：祖道清，员外郎。
现代文：祖父道清，做到员外郎。
English: His grandfather, Michikiyo, was a member of the outer circle.

古文：父仙伯，桂阳王参军。
现代文：父亲仙伯，官至桂阳王参军。
English: His father, Xian Bo, was an officer in the Guiyang army.

古文：谌初为州从事，晋熙国侍郎，左常侍。
现代文：萧谌最开始是州从事，晋熙园侍郎，左常侍。
English: Xiao Wei was initially engaged in the state, the attendant of Jin Xi Yuan, and the left attendant.

古文：谌于太祖为绝服族子，元徽末，世祖在郢州，欲知京邑消息，太祖遣谌就世祖宣传谋计，留为腹心。
现代文：他是太祖的远房族人，元徽末年，世祖在郢州，想要探知京都的消息，太祖派萧谌去世祖那裹宣传谋划，留下作为心腹之士。
English: He was a member of his great-grandfather's distant clan. At the end of the Yuan Dynasty, his great-grandfather was in Zhangzhou and wanted to find out about Kyoto. The great-grandfather sent Xiao Yu to propagandize and plan for his deceased grandfather, leaving him as a confidant.

古文：升明中，为世祖中军刑狱参军，东莞太守。
现代文：升明年间，为世担中军刑狱参军，塞差太守。
English: In the middle of the following year, he joined the army as a member of the World War I penal battalion, and became the commander of the Sicha detachment.

古文：以勋勤封安复县男，三百户。
现代文：因为勤勉有功被封为塞复县男爵，食邑三百户。
English: He was awarded the title of Baron of Seifo County for his diligent and meritorious work, and he managed to feed 300 households.

古文：建元初，为武陵王冠军、临川王前军参军，除尚书都官郎，建威将军，临川王镇西中兵。
现代文：建元初年，为武陵王冠军、临川王前军参军，任尚书都官郎，建威将军，临川王镇西中兵。
English: In the first year of Jianyuan, he joined the army as the champion of King Wuling and the former army of King Linchuan, and was appointed as the official of Shangshudu, General Jianwei, and the West Middle Soldier of King Linchuan Town.

古文：世祖在东宫，谌领宿卫。
现代文：世祖在东宫为太子时，萧谌负责宿防守卫。
English: When the founder of the dynasty was crown prince in the East Palace, Xiao Wei was in charge of the palace guards.

古文：太祖杀张景真，世祖令谌口启乞景真命，太祖不悦，谌惧而退。
现代文：世祖要杀张景真，世祖让盖谌日头为张景真求饶，世祖很不高兴，萧谌心裹害怕退了下来。
English: The ancestor wanted to kill Zhang Jingzhen, the ancestor let Gai Xunlong plead for Zhang Jingzhen. The ancestor was very unhappy, and Xiao Yan retreated with fear in his heart.

古文：世祖即位，出谌为大末令，未之县，除步兵校尉，领射阳令，转带南濮阳太守，领御仗主。
现代文：世祖即位，派遣萧谌出任大玉瑟令，没有到任上，又授任步兵校尉，领射阳历令，兼任代理南濮阳太守，领御仗主。
English: When the founder ascended the throne, he sent Xiao Yu to serve as the Grand Jade Emperor, but when he did not arrive at the post, he was also awarded the rank of infantry lieutenant, led the Shayang Calendar, and also served as the acting governor of South Shinyang and the leader of the war.

古文：永明二年，为南兰陵太守，建威将军如故。
现代文：永明二年，为南兰陵太守，仍是建威将军。
English: In the second year of Yongming, he was still General Jian Wei as the governor of South Lanling.

古文：复除步兵校尉，太守如故。
现代文：再次任步兵校尉，太守职务如故。
English: He was reappointed as an infantry captain and remained in the position of Taishou.

古文：世祖斋内兵仗悉付之，心膂密事，皆使参掌。
现代文：世祖把府中的兵器仪仗都托付给他管理，机密大事，都和他一道商议。
English: The patriarch entrusted him with the management of all the weapons and ceremonial weapons in the palace, and discussed all confidential matters with him.

古文：除正员郎，转左中郎将，后军将军，太守如故。
现代文：任正员郎，转左中郎将，徒军将军，太守职务如故。
English: He was appointed to the post of Shokan-ro, then to the post of Sochujo-ro, then to the post of Chujo-gun, and finally to the post of Taishu as before.

古文：世祖卧疾延昌殿，敕谌在左右宿直。
现代文：世祖因病在延昌殿休养，命令萧谌在左右宿直守卫。
English: The ancestor was recuperating at the Yanchang Hall due to illness, and ordered Xiao Yao to stay on the right and left to guard.

古文：上崩，遗敕谌领殿内事如旧。
现代文：皇上驾崩，遣命让萧谌总管殿内的事务一如往旧。
English: After the Emperor's death, he ordered Xiao Yu to be in charge of the affairs of the palace as before.

古文：郁林即位，深委信谌，谌每请急出宿，帝通夕不得寐，谌还乃安。
现代文：郁林王即位，对萧谌深抱信任，每次萧谌请假出殿去住，皇上都整夜不能入睡，等他回来才得安心。
English: When King Yulin ascended to the throne, he had deep trust in Xiao Yao. Every time Xiao Yao took a leave of absence to go and live in the palace, the emperor couldn't fall asleep all night. It was only when he returned that he felt at ease.

古文：转卫军司马，兼卫尉，加辅国将军。
现代文：转卫军司马，兼卫尉，加辅国将军。
English: Zengwei Army Sima, concurrently Lieutenant, General of Qayuo Province.

古文：丁母忧，敕还复本任，守卫尉。
现代文：羞谌为母亲守丧，皇上诏令依然回任本职，守卫尉。
English: Shizuka mourned for her mother, but the Emperor's edict still returned her to her duties as a guard lieutenant.

古文：高宗辅政，有所匡谏，帝既在后宫不出，唯遣谌及萧坦之遥进，乃得闻达。
现代文：辅佐政事的时候，有时提出规谏，皇上呆在后宫裹不出来，衹派萧谌和萧坦之来听命，再传达给皇上。
English: When he was assisting the government, he sometimes proposed a rule that the emperor could not stay in the harem, so he sent Xiao Yao and Xiao Tanzhi to follow his orders and then convey them to the emperor.

古文：谌回附高宗，劝行废立，密召诸王典签约语之，不许诸王外接人物。
现代文：萧谌依附高宗，劝他废掉郁述王自立，秘密召集诸位王的典签官约定，不许诸王交结其他人物。
English: Xiao Yu followed Gao Zong and advised him to abolish the self-reliance of the king of the storytellers and secretly convene the signature officers of the kings to make an agreement not to allow the kings to associate with other people.

古文：谌亲要日久，众皆惮而从之。
现代文：萧谌长久以来位居显要得皇上信任，众人不敢不听从他。
English: For a long time, Xiao Yao has been favored by everyone, so everyone is afraid of him, and no one disobeys him.

古文：郁林被废日，初闻外有变，犹密为手敕呼谌，其见信如此。
现代文：郁林王被废的那天，开始听说外面有变故，还秘密地写手令传唤羞谌，可见他多么受信任。
English: On the day that King Yulin was dethroned, he began to hear that there had been a change in the outside world, and he secretly wrote a handwritten summons to Shiyan, which shows how much he was trusted.

古文：谌性险进无计略，及废帝日，领兵先入后宫，斋内仗身素隶服谌，莫有动者。
现代文：萧谌性好冒险做事没有计谋，在废除皇帝那天，率领军兵先进入后宫，宫内的兵士向来都服从萧谌指挥，没有一个人反抗。
English: On the day of the abolition of the emperor, he led the soldiers into the harem first. The soldiers in the palace always obeyed Xiao Yu's command, and no one resisted.

古文：海陵立，转中领军，进爵为公，二千户。
现代文：海陵王即位，转任为中领军，进爵位为公，食邑二千户。
English: King Hailing ascended to the throne, was appointed as the leader of the middle army, was promoted to the peerage, and became the ruler of two thousand households.

古文：甲仗五十人。
现代文：赐甲仗随从五十人。
English: He gave armor to fifty men who followed him.

古文：入直殿内，月十日还府。
现代文：在殿中宿值，每月十天回一次本府。
English: They stay in the main hall and return to the main building once a month for ten days.

古文：建武元年，转领军将军，左将军，南徐州刺史，给扶，进爵衡阳郡公，食邑三千户。
现代文：建武元年，转领军将军，左将军，南徐州刺史，给予左右扶侍之人，进爵为堕阳郡公，食邑三千户。
English: In the first year of Jianwu, the general who led the army, the left general, the south Xuzhou stabbing history, and the person who gave the left and right attendants were knighted as the public of Foyang County, with 3,000 households.

古文：高宗初许事克用谌为扬州，及有此授，谌恚曰： 见炊饭熟，推以与人。 
现代文：高宗当初答应事情成功以后用他为扬州刺史，等到任他为南徐州刺史，萧谌就埋怨说： 看见把饭做熟了，却转让给了别人。 
English: At first, Gao Zong promised to use him as Yangzhou chief historian after the success of the matter, but when he was appointed as South Xuzhou chief historian, Xiao Wei complained, "I saw that the rice was cooked, but it was transferred to others."

古文：王晏闻之曰： 谁复为萧谌作瓯箸者。 
现代文：王晏听见这话说： 谁还会再替萧谌准备碗筷呢。 
English: Hearing this, Wang Yao said, "Who would prepare bowls and chopsticks for Xiao Yao again?"

古文：谌恃勋重，干豫朝政，诸有选用，辄命议尚书使为申论。
现代文：萧谌仰仗自己功劳卓著，就干涉朝政，凡是有选拔任用人才的事，就命令尚书台为他申述议论。
English: Relying on his outstanding merits, Xiao Jun interfered in the court politics. Whenever there was a matter of selecting and appointing talents, he ordered Shang Shudi to make a statement for him.

古文：上新即位，遣左右要人于外听察，具知谌言，深相疑阻。
现代文：皇上刚刚即位，派遣左右手下心腹在外面询查，把萧谌说的话打听得很清楚，心裹很怀疑他。
English: The emperor had just ascended to the throne, and he sent his right and left subordinates to inquire outside. They listened to Xiao Yao's words very clearly, and they were very suspicious of him.

古文：二年六月，上幸华林园，宴谌及尚书令王晏等数人尽欢。
现代文：二年六月，皇上行幸华挂园，和萧谌及尚书令王晏等人欢宴。
English: In June of the second year, the emperor went to Yunhua Hanging Garden, and had a banquet with Xiao Jun and Shang Shuling Wang Jun and others.

古文：坐罢，留谌晚出，至华林阁，仗身执还入省，上遣左右莫智明数谌曰： 隆昌之际，非卿无有今日。
现代文：散后，把萧谌留下来，走到华林合，命令甲仗兵把他押回尚书省去，皇上让身边随从莫智明责备他说： 隆昌年间，没有你就没有今天。
English: After dispersing, he left Xiao Yao behind and went to Waringhe. He ordered the soldiers of the Armored Division to send him back to Shangshu Province. The emperor asked his attendant Mo Zhiming to reproach him, saying, "During the Longchang era, without you, there would be no today."

古文：今一门二州，兄弟三封，朝廷相报，政可极此。
现代文：现在你一家有两位刺史，兄弟三个都得到封赏，朝廷对你所做的报答，也算到了极点了。
English: Now, two members of your family have a criminal record, three of your brothers have received awards, and the rewards given to you by the imperial court have reached an all-time low.

古文：卿恒怀怨望，乃云炊饭已熟，合甑与人邪？
现代文：你还是心怀不满暗自怨恨，居然说炊饭已熟，合甑与人的话吗?
English: Are you still harboring dissatisfaction and secretly harboring resentment when you say that the rice is cooked and ready to eat?

古文：今赐卿死。 
现代文：现在赐你死。 
English: Now I sentence you to death.

古文：谌谓智明曰： 天去人亦复不远，我与至尊杀高、武诸王，是君传语来去。
现代文：萧谌对莫智明说： 上天距离人间并不算远，我和当今皇上谋杀高、武诸王，是你在中间传递消息。
English: Xiao Yao said to Mo Zhiming, "Heaven is not far from the human world. I and the current emperor murdered Gao and Wu kings, and it was you who passed on the news in the middle.

古文：我今死，还取卿。 
现代文：我现在死了，回头要取你的性命。 
English: I'm dead now, and turning back will cost you your life.

古文：于省杀之。至秋而智明死，见谌为祟。
现代文：就在尚书省把他杀了，到秋天莫智明也死去了，可见是萧谌的鬼魂作祟。
English: He was killed in Shangshu Province, and by the autumn Mo Zhiming had also died. It can be seen that Xiao Yao's ghost was the culprit.

古文：诏曰： 萧谌擢自凡庸，识用轻险，因藉幸会，早预驱驰。
现代文：韶令说： 萧谌从凡庸之辈中被提拔出来，心机险诈，因为藉着侥幸，得以被皇室任用。
English: The imperial edict said: Xiao Yao was promoted from a mediocre generation, and his heart was treacherous, because he was able to be appointed by the royal family by chance.

古文：永明之季，曲颁恩纪。
现代文：永明末年，曲意奉承得到恩典。
English: In the last years of the Yongming Dynasty, the flattery of the song got grace.

古文：郁林昏悖，颇立诚效。
现代文：郁林王昏聩悖理，他却诚心效命。
English: Yu Lin Wang is delusional and irrational, but he is sincere in serving his life.

古文：宠灵优渥，期遇兼隆，内总戎柄，外畅蕃威，兄弟荣贵，震灼朝野。
现代文：深蒙宠信丰厚优裕，极受重用地位贵盛，在朝廷总领兵权，在边邑也威名震慑，兄弟都荣耀显贵，在朝廷内外声势赫赫。
English: He was favored with great wealth and status. He was highly respected and held a prominent position. He had the right to lead the army in the imperial court, and he was also respected and feared in the border towns. His brothers were all honorable and distinguished, and they enjoyed a high reputation both inside and outside the imperial court.

古文：曾不感佩殊荷，少答万一，自以勋高伊、霍，事均难赏，才冠当时，耻居物后。
现代文：却不能够感念皇室的盛恩，稍稍回报以万恩之一。自以为自己功劳盖过伊尹、霍光，功劳重大难以称赏，才干超世，不屑于甘居人后。
English: However, he was not able to appreciate the great grace of the imperial family and return a little with one of the great graces. He thought that he had done more than Yi Yin and Huo Guang, and it was difficult to appreciate his great achievements. He was a man of extraordinary talent and did not disdain to be a queen.

古文：矫制王权，与夺由己。空怀疑惧，坐构嫌猜。
现代文：于是假托朝命窃取王权，举拔人才罢黜官员都专由己意凭白无故心怀疑惧，闲常间猜忌纷纷。
English: As a result, imperial power was stolen under the pretense of entrusting it to the imperial court, and officials were promoted and dismissed solely on the basis of their own free will and groundless suspicions, and suspicions abounded among idlers.

古文：觇候宫掖，希觊非望。
现代文：令巫觋觇视府第，想要图谋帝位。
English: Letting the sorceresses see the palace, they want to conspire for the throne.

古文：蔽上罔下之心，诬君不臣之迹，固以彰暴民听，喧聒遐迩。
现代文：欺瞒皇上哄骗下僚的心思，诬蠛君主菲薄群臣的行径，本早已暴露在百姓眼前，远近传说纷纭。
English: The actions of deceiving the emperor, coaxing the minds of his subordinates, and falsely accusing the monarch and his ministers have long been exposed to the eyes of the people, and there are many legends.

古文：遂潜散金帛，招集不逞，交结禁卫，互为唇齿，密契戚邸，将肆奸逆。
现代文：他便偷偷地散发金钱财帛，招徕不驯之徒，结交禁中卫士，互相依傍，秘密约定聚会之所，将要施行篡逆之事。
English: He then secretly distributed money and wealth, recruited rebels, befriended the guards of the Forbidden City, befriended each other, secretly agreed on a meeting place, and was about to commit treason.

古文：朕以其任寄既重，爵列河山，每加弥缝，弘以大信，庶能怀音，翻然悛改。
现代文：我因为他负有国家重任，爵位高显，每每替他遮掩，用大道信义之辞开导他，希望他能够听取劝告，翻然悔改。
English: I, because he bears the heavy responsibility of the country and the high rank, always cover up for him, enlighten him with the words of sincerity, and hope that he can listen to advice and repent.

古文：而豺狼其性，凶谋滋甚。
现代文：但是他的本性像豺狼一样凶狠，衹是更加紧他的阴谋。
English: But his nature is as ferocious as a jackal's, and the jackal is the tighter of his machinations.

古文：夫无将必戮，《阳秋》明义，况衅积祸盈，若斯之大。
现代文：臣子不得叛乱，否则必被处死，这是《春秋》中的明义，何况他罪孽如此深重，积累到这么大。
English: A courtier must not rebel, otherwise he will be executed, which is the clear meaning of "Spring and Autumn," not to mention that his sins are so deep and have accumulated to such a large extent.

古文：可收付廷尉，速正刑书。
现代文：正该收监交付给廷尉，赶紧处置使刑法得以肃正。
English: It was time to hand over the prison to the imperial lieutenant, so that the criminal law could be straightened out.

古文：罪止元恶，余无所问。 
现代文：罪过祇涉及到元凶一人，其他人不加追究。 
English: The crime involved only one perpetrator, and no one else was prosecuted.

古文：谌好左道，吴兴沈文猷相谌云： 相不减高帝。 
现代文：萧谌喜好旁门左道，吴兴沈文猷为他相面说： 面相不差于高帝。 
English: Xiao Yao prefers the side door to the left, Wu Xing Shen Wenyu said for his face: The face is no different from that of Gao Di.

古文：谌喜曰： 感卿意，无为人言也。 
现代文：萧谌欣喜地说： 谢谢你的好意，不要跟别人说。 
English: Xiao Yao said with joy: Thank you for your kindness, don't tell others.

古文：至是文猷伏诛。
现代文：到这时沈文猷也被杀了。
English: By this time, Shen Wenyu had also been killed.

古文：谌兄诞，字彦伟，初为殿中将军。
现代文：萧谌的哥哥萧诞，字彦伟，开始做殿中将军。
English: Xiao Yao's brother, Xiao Jie, a.k.a. Yan Wei, began to work as a palace general.

古文：永明中为建康令，与秣陵令司马迪之同乘行，车前导四卒，左丞沈昭略奏： 凡有卤簿官，共乘不得兼列驺寺。
现代文：永明年间为建康令，和秣陵令司马迪之同车而行，车前有四个军卒作前导，左丞沈昭略上奏疏说： 所有的卤簿官，同乘一车时都不应该排列掌管车马的仆隶。
English: In order to carry out Jiankang's order, Yongzheng and Fuling's order Sima Di rode in the same car. There were four soldiers in front of the car to act as a guide, and the left-hand man, Shen Zhaoxu, said in a brief speech: All the officials in charge of books and records should not arrange the servants in charge of horses and chariots when riding in the same car.

古文：请免诞等官。 
现代文：请朝廷免去萧诞等人的官职。 
English: Please ask the Imperial Court to relieve Shosetsu and others of their official posts.

古文：诏赎论。
现代文：诏令可用财物抵消此过。
English: The imperial edict allowed him to offset this loss with financial assets.

古文：延兴元年，自辅国徐州为持节督司州刺史，将军如故。
现代文：延典元年，自辅国徐州为持节督司州刺史，将军职衔如故。
English: In the first year of the Yan Dynasty, Xuzhou, a self-supporting country, was appointed as the commander-in-chief of Xuzhou, and the military rank remained unchanged.

古文：明帝立，封安德侯，五百户。
现代文：明帝即位，封为安复侯，食邑五百户。
English: Emperor Ming ascended to the throne, and he was given the title of Anfu Hou, with 500 households in the food village.

古文：进号冠军。
现代文：进号冠军将军。
English: Enter the champion general.

古文：建武二年春，虏攻司州，诞尽力拒守，虏退，增封四百户。
现代文：建武二年春，北方虏族攻打司州，萧诞竭力拒守，敌兵退走。增封采邑四百户。
English: In the spring of the second year of the Jianwu era, the northern Krup people attacked Shizhou, Xiao Zi tried his best to resist, and the enemy soldiers retreated.

古文：征左卫将军。
现代文：征左卫将军。
English: General Seizawe is back.

古文：上欲杀谌，以诞在边镇拒虏，故未及行。
现代文：皇上想杀萧谌，因为萧诞在边防抗击敌军，所以没有执行。
English: The emperor wanted to kill Xiao Yao, but it was not carried out because Xiao Yao was fighting against the enemy at the border.

古文：虏退六旬，谌诛，遣黄门郎梁王为司州别驾，使诛诞，束身受戮，家口系尚方。
现代文：敌兵退走后六十天，萧谌被杀，另派遣黄门郎梁王为司州别驾，命他杀掉萧诞，萧诞被捆绑处死，家中人都押到尚方署。
English: Sixty days after the retreat of the enemy soldiers, Xiao Yao was killed. In addition, Huangmen Lang Liang Wang was dispatched as the special envoy of the State Council, and he was ordered to kill Xiao Zheng. Xiao Zheng was tied up and executed, and his family members were all pushed to Shangfang Station.

古文：谌弟诔，与谌同豫废立，为宁朔将军、东莞太守，转西中郎司马。
现代文：萧谌的弟弟萧诔，和萧谌一道参预了废除旧王另立新帝的事，为宁朔将军、东莞太守，转任西中郎司马。
English: Xiao Yao's younger brother Xiao Yao, together with Xiao Yao, took part in the abolition of the old king and the establishment of a new emperor. He was the general of Ningshuo and the governor of Dongguan, and was transferred to the post of West Zhong Lang Sima.

古文：建武初，封西昌侯，千户。
现代文：建武初年，封为西昌侯，食邑一千户。
English: In the first year of Jianwu, he was given the title of Xichang Hou, with a thousand households in the food village.

古文：转太子左率。
现代文：转太子左率。
English: Zhou Panlong was promoted to crown prince.

古文：领军解司州围还，同伏诛。
现代文：率军解除了司州的围困，回来后，一同被杀。
English: He led the army to lift the siege of Sizhou, and after returning, they were killed together.

古文：谌伯父仙民，官至太中大夫，卒。
现代文：萧谌的伯父萧仙民，官至太中大夫，去世。
English: Xiao Yao's uncle, Xiao Xianmin, a high-ranking official, passed away.

古文：萧坦之，南兰陵兰陵人也。
现代文：萧坦之，是南兰陵郡兰陵县人。
English: Xiao Tan Zhi is from Lanling County, South Lanling County.

古文：祖道济，太中大夫。
现代文：祖父萧道济，官至太中大夫。
English: His grandfather, Xiao Daoji, rose through the ranks to become a middle-ranking official.

古文：父欣祖，有勋于世祖，至武进令。
现代文：父亲萧欣祖，为世祖立过功，官至武进县令。
English: His father, Xiao Xinzu, was a meritorious man, and was the highest-ranking official in Wujin County.

古文：坦之与萧谌同族。
现代文：萧坦之和萧谌同族。
English: Xiao Tan Zhi and Xiao Yao are from the same family.

古文：初为殿中将军，累至世祖中军板刑狱参军。
现代文：开始时做殿中将军，累官至世祖中军板授刑狱参军。
English: At the beginning, he was a general in the palace, and he rose through the ranks to join the army after being sentenced to prison by the military board.

古文：以宗族见驱使。
现代文：因为是皇室同宗被任用。
English: He was appointed because he is from the same family as the imperial family.

古文：除竟陵王镇北征北参军，东宫直阁，以勤直为世祖所知。
现代文：任竟陵王镇北征北参军，束宫直合，因为勤勉正直，受到世宗的赏识。
English: Ren Jingwangzhen went to the north to join the army, and Sokong went to the north to join the army. Because of his diligence and honesty, he was appreciated by the world.

古文：除给事中，淮陵令，又除兰陵令，给事中如故。
现代文：任给事中，淮陵县令，又任兰陵县令，给事中职位如故。
English: During the appointment, he was appointed as the Huairing County magistrate, and he was also appointed as the Lanling County magistrate, and his position during the appointment remains unchanged.

古文：尚书起部郎，司徒中兵参军。
现代文：尚书起部郎，司徒中兵参军。
English: Shangshu Kiburo and Sito Chubei join the army.

古文：世祖崩，坦之随太孙文武度上台，除射声校尉，令如故。
现代文：世祖去世，萧坦之跟随太孙文武百官升至台官，任射声校尉，令如故。
English: After the death of the founder, Xiao Tanzhi followed the great-grandson of Emperor Wenwu and rose to the rank of Taiwanese officer, and was appointed as the captain of the firing squad. The order remains the same.

古文：未拜，除正员郎、南鲁郡太守。
现代文：没有拜任，任正员郎、南鲁郡太守。
English: He did not accept the position, but was appointed to the post of vice-governor and governor of Nanlu County.

古文：少帝以坦之世祖旧人，亲信不离，得入内见皇后。
现代文：少帝因为他是世宗的旧官，对他很是信任没有隔阂，可以入后宫见皇后。
English: The young emperor, because he was an old official of the dynasty, trusted him very much and there was no estrangement, and he could enter the harem to see the empress.

古文：帝于宫中及出后堂杂戏狡狯，坦之皆得在侧。
现代文：皇上在宫裹或出后堂游玩嬉戏，萧坦之都跟随在身旁。
English: The emperor is playing in the palace or out of the back hall, and Xiao Tan follows him.

古文：或值醉后裸袒，坦之辄扶持谏喻。
现代文：有时碰到皇上喝醉酒裸露出身体，萧坦之就上前扶持并加劝谏。
English: Sometimes, when he encountered the emperor who was drunk and naked, Xiao Tanzhi would come forward to support and advise him.

古文：见帝不可奉，乃改计附高宗，密为耳目。
现代文：看到少帝不能君临天下，就改变主意依附高宗，秘密地做高宗的耳目。
English: Seeing that the young emperor could not rule the world, he changed his mind and attached himself to Gaozong, secretly becoming Gaozong's eyes and ears.

古文：除晋安王征北谘议。
现代文：任晋安王征北谘议。
English: He was appointed as an advisor to Jinan Wang Zhengbei.

古文：隆昌元年，追录坦之父勋，封临汝县男，食邑三百户。
现代文：隆昌元年，追封萧坦之父亲的功勋，封为临汝县男，食邑三百户。
English: In the first year of the Longchang era, Xiao Tan's father was posthumously awarded the title of Linwu County Man, with 300 households in the county.

古文：徙征南谘议。
现代文：徙任征南谘议。
English: Consultation on relocation and conscription to the south.

古文：高宗谋废少帝，既与萧谌及坦之定谋。
现代文：高宗谋划废掉少帝，已经和萧谌、萧坦之商量好了。
English: Gao Zong planned to abolish the young emperor, and had already discussed it with Xiao Yu and Xiao Tan.

古文：帝腹心直阁将军曹道刚疑外间有异，密有处分，谌未能发。
现代文：皇上的心腹直合将军曹道刚怀疑朝廷外有不寻常的事，秘密地有所准备，萧谌不能发难。
English: The emperor's confidant, General Cao Daogang, suspected that something unusual was going on outside the imperial court, and secretly made preparations so that Xiao Yu would not get into trouble.

古文：始兴内史萧季敞、南阳太守萧颖基迁都尉并应还都，谌欲待二萧至，藉其势力以举事。
现代文：始兴内史萧季敞、南阳太守萧颖基都奉命回到都城，萧谌想等他们两人来到以后，藉着他们的势力发动事变。
English: Shi Xing Nai Shi Xiao Jichang and Nanyang Governor Xiao Yingji were ordered to return to the capital. Xiao Yao wanted to wait for them to arrive and use their power to start a revolution.

古文：高宗虑事变，以告坦之，坦之驰谓谌曰： 废天子古来大事。
现代文：高宗担心事情舍有变故，告诉了萧坦之，萧坦之骑着马去跟萧谌说： 废除天子自古以来就是了不得的事。
English: Gaozong was worried that things would change, so he told Xiao Tianzhong. Xiao Tianzhong rode to Xiao Yao and said, "The abolition of Tianzi has been an unthinkable thing since ancient times.

古文：比闻曹道刚、朱隆之等转已猜疑。
现代文：最近听说曹道刚、朱隆之等人已经有所怀疑。
English: Recently, I heard that Cao Daogang, Zhu Longzhi and others have become suspicious.

古文：卫尉明日若不就事，无所复及。
现代文：卫尉明天如果不起事，就要来不及了。
English: If things don't work out tomorrow, it'll be too late for the captain.

古文：弟有百岁母，岂能坐听祸败，政应作余计耳！ 
现代文：我有一百岁的老母亲需要奉养，怎么能坐视大祸临头，正应该为余生打算啊! 
English: I have a hundred-year-old mother to support. How can I sit back and watch a catastrophe unfold? I should be planning for the rest of my life!

古文：谌遑遽，明日遂废帝，坦之力也。
现代文：萧谌感到惊恐不安，第二天就废掉了少帝。是坦之的功劳。
English: Xiao Yao felt alarmed and uneasy, and the next day abolished the young emperor. It was Tan Zhi's merit.

古文：海陵即位，除黄门郎、兼卫尉卿，进爵伯，增邑为六百户。
现代文：海陵王即位，任黄门郎、兼卫尉卿，进爵号为伯，增加采邑至六百户。
English: King Hailing ascended to the throne, and was appointed as Huangmen Lang, concurrently as Wei Weiqing, and was given the title of Bao, and the number of counties was increased to six hundred.

古文：建武元年，迁散骑常侍，右卫将军，进爵侯，增邑为千五百户。
现代文：建武元年，迁散骑常侍，右卫将军，进爵号为侯，增加采邑到一千五百户。
English: In the first year of the Jianwu era, the cavalry general, the right guard general, the knightly title of marquis, and the number of counties increased to 1,500.

古文：明年，虏动，假坦之节，督徐州征讨军事。
现代文：第二年，北方民族发动战事，赐萧坦之节，督徐州征讨军事。
English: In the second year, the northern peoples launched a war, giving Xiaotan Festival, the governor of Xuzhou to solicit military.

古文：虏围钟离，春断淮洲，坦之击破之。
现代文：敌军围困钟离，春季截断淮洲，萧坦之率军打败敌兵。
English: The enemy besieged Zhongli, cut off Huai Zhou in the spring, and Xiao Tan led the army to defeat the enemy soldiers.

古文：还加领太子中庶子，未拜，迁领军将军。
现代文：回朝后加领太子中庶子，没有拜任，迁任领军将军。
English: After returning to the imperial court, the prince's younger illegitimate son, who was not given a position, was transferred to the position of army leader.

古文：永泰元年，为侍中、领军。
现代文：永泰元年，为侍中、领军。
English: In the first year of Yongtai, he became a samurai and a leader.

古文：东昏立，为侍中、领军将军。
现代文：东昏侯即位，为侍中、领军将军。
English: Prince Dongguang ascended to the throne, and became a chamberlain and a leading general.

古文：永元元年，遭母丧，起复职，加右将军，置府。
现代文：永元元年，为母亲守丧，丧期未满官复原职，加右将军，建置府属。
English: In the first year of the Yongyuan era, he held a funeral for his mother, and before the period of mourning was over, he was reinstated as an official, promoted to General of the Right, and established a subordinate office.

古文：江祏兄弟欲立始安王遥光，密谓坦之，坦之曰： 明帝取天下，已非次第，天下人至今不服。
现代文：江柘兄弟想立始安王遥光，秘密地对萧坦之说，萧坦之答道： 明帝取得帝位，已经是违背了长幼之序，天下众人至今还不甚心服。
English: Jiang Chen's brothers secretly told Xiao Tianzhi that they wanted to make Shi An Wang Yao Guang emperor. Xiao Tianzhi replied, "Ming Emperor's accession to the throne has already violated the order of the eldest son and the youngest son. People around the world are still not very convinced.

古文：今若复作此事，恐四海瓦解。我其不敢言。 
现代文：现在如果又做这样的事，恐怕四海之内统治将要瓦解我不敢说什么。 
English: Now, if we do something like this again, I'm afraid that the rule of the four seas will collapse. I don't dare to say anything.

古文：持丧还宅。
现代文：因守丧回到家裹。
English: He returned home in a state of mourning.

古文：宅在东府城东，遥光起事，遣人夜掩取坦之，坦之科头著裈逾墙走，从东冶僦渡南渡，间道还台，假节督众军讨遥光，屯湘宫寺。
现代文：他的宅第在东府城的束边，遥光发动政变，派人趁着夜色去抓萧坦之，萧坦之光着头穿着裤子翻墙逃跑，从束冶急急忙忙向南渡河，走小道回到尚书台，假藉符节督促众军来讨伐遥光，屯兵湘宫寺。
English: His residence was on the edge of Shokou in Dongfu Town. Yuan Guang staged a coup and sent people to seize the night to catch Xiao Tan Zhi. Shao Tan Zi fled bareheaded and wearing trousers over the wall. From Shokou Ye, he hurriedly crossed the river to the south, took the path back to Shang Shudai, and urged the army to fight Yuan Guang, and sent soldiers to Xiang Gong Temple.

古文：事平，迁尚书右仆射，丹阳尹，右将军如故。
现代文：事情平定以后，迁任尚书右仆射，丹阳尹，右将军职衔如故。
English: After the matter was settled, Shangshu was transferred to the position of the right-hand man of Sha, and Danyang was transferred to the position of the right-hand man of Yin.

古文：进爵公，增邑千户。
现代文：进爵号为公，增加采邑到一千户。
English: The title of nobility is public, and the number of counties is increased to one thousand.

古文：坦之肥黑无须，语声嘶，时人号为 萧痖 。
现代文：萧坦之肥硕面黑没有胡须，语声嘶哑，当时的人把他叫做 萧哑 。
English: Xiao Tan's fat face was black, he had no beard, and his voice was hoarse. People at the time called him Xiao Dum.

古文：刚狠专执，群小畏而憎之。
现代文：刚烈残忍固执己见，群僚都害怕和憎恨他。
English: Stubborn, cruel and opinionated, he is feared and loathed by his colleagues.

古文：遥光事平二十余日，帝遣延明主帅黄文济领兵围坦之宅，杀之。
现代文：遥光政变的事平定后二十多天，皇帝派延明主帅黄文济领兵围攻萧坦之的住所，把他杀了。
English: More than twenty days after the Yangtze Revolution was put down, the emperor sent Yanming's commander Huang Wenzhi to besiege Xiao Tanzhi's residence and kill him.

古文：子赏，秘书郎，亦伏诛。
现代文：他的儿子萧赏，官为秘书郎，也被杀掉。
English: His son, Xiao Yun, a secretary, was also killed.

古文：坦之从兄翼宗为海陵郡，将发。
现代文：萧坦之的堂兄萧翼宗，是海陵郡守，将要发事。
English: Xiao Tan Zhi's cousin Xiao Ying Zong, the governor of Hailing County, is about to cause trouble.

古文：坦之谓文济曰： 从兄海陵宅故应无他？ 
现代文：萧坦之对黄文济说： 我的堂兄海陵的宅第裹没有什么事吧? 
English: Xiao Tanzhi said to Huang Wenzhi, "Is there anything wrong with my cousin Hailing's house?

古文：文济曰： 海陵宅在何处？ 
现代文：黄文济问： 海陵的宅地在什么地方? 
English: Huang Wenzhi asked: Where is his residence?

古文：坦之告之，文济曰： 应得罪。 
现代文：萧坦之告诉丫他。黄文济说： 也要论罪。 
English: Xiao Tianzhi told him. Huang Wenzhi said, "You should also be condemned."

古文：仍遣收之。
现代文：并派人去抓他们。
English: and sent someone to catch them.

古文：检家赤贫，唯有质钱贴子数百，还以启帝，原死，系尚方。
现代文：抄检家财一无所有，衹有数百张典当帖子，回来启奏皇上，免去其死罪，囚禁在尚方署。
English: He came back with hundreds of pawned postcards, but he had nothing to show for his family's wealth. He was pardoned from the death penalty and imprisoned in the Shangfang Detention Center.

古文：和帝中兴元年，追赠坦之中军将军、开府仪同三司。
现代文：和帝中兴元年，追赠萧坦之为中军将军、开府仪同三司。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Zhongxing, Xiao Tan was posthumously awarded the title of General of the Chinese Army, the title of Kaifu, and the title of Sanji.

古文：江祏，字弘业，济阳考城人也。
现代文：江祏，字弘业，是济阳考城人。
English: Jiang Yu, also known as Hongye, is a native of Jiyang Kaocheng.

古文：祖遵，宁朔参军。
现代文：祖父汪遵，做到宁朔参军。
English: His grandfather, Wang Zun, managed to join the army in Ningshuo.

古文：父德邻，司徒右长史。
现代文：父亲德邂，官至司徒右长史。
English: His father, De Xuan, was a high-ranking official.

古文：祏姑为景皇后，少为高宗所亲，恩如兄弟。
现代文：江祏的姑母是基皇后，小时候就得到高宗的亲近，恩情有似兄弟。
English: Jiang Chen's aunt was Empress Ji. When he was a child, he was close to Gao Zong, and they were like brothers.

古文：宋末解褐晋熙国常侍，太祖徐州西曹，员外郎，高宗冠军参军，带滠阳令，竟陵王征北参军，尚书水部郎。
现代文：宋末，进入仕途为晋熙国常侍，高宗途业西曹，员外郎，高宗冠军参军，带摄阳县令，竟陵王征北参军，尚书水部郎。
English: At the end of the Song Dynasty, he entered the service as the Jinxi State's regular attendant, Gao Zong's second-in-command, Gao Zong's champion, Gao Zong's champion in the army, with the order of Yangyang County, with the order of King Ling in the army, and with the order of the Ministry of Water Resources.

古文：高宗为吴兴，以祏为郡丞，加宣威将军。庐陵王中军功曹记室，安陆王左军谘议，领录事，带京兆太守。
现代文：高宗治县垒时，任命辽面为郡丞，加宣威将军，庐陵王中军功曹记室，安陆王左军谐议，领录事，带京兆太守。
English: When Gao Zongzhi was in charge of the county, he appointed Liao Mian as county magistrate, Ga Xuan Wei as general, Gongling Wangzhongjun as record office, Anlu Wangzaojun as harmonious discussion, led and recorded affairs, and took Jingzhao as governor.

古文：除通直郎，补南徐州别驾。
现代文：任通直郎，补南徐州别驾。
English: Ren Tong Naorong, fill in the south of Xuzhou, do not drive.

古文：高宗辅政，委以心腹。
现代文：高宗辅佐政事时，把他看作心腹。
English: When Gao Zongfu was a political aide, he regarded him as a confidant.

古文：隆昌元年，自正员郎补丹阳丞，中书郎。
现代文：隆昌元年，自正员郎补丹阳丞，中书郎。
English: In the first year of the Longchang era, Danyang Rong, a self-appointed official, became Chushuro.

古文：高宗为骠骑，镇东府，以祏为谘议参军，领南平昌太守，与萧诔对直东府省内。
现代文：高宗为骠骑将军，镇守东府，任命江柘为谘议参军，领南平昌太守，和萧诛共同在东府省内宿值守卫。
English: Gao Zong was the commander-in-chief of the cavalry, guarding Dongfu, appointed Jiang Zang as an advisory member of the army, led Nan Pyeongchang to be the de facto governor, and together with Xiao Zang to guard duty in Dongfu Province.

古文：时新立海陵，人情未服，高宗胛上有赤志，常秘不传，祏劝帝出以示人。
现代文：当时新立了海陵王，人们心中不服，高宗肩胛骨上有一颗红痣，以往秘藏不让人知道，江柘劝他显出来给人看。
English: At that time, Hailing King was newly established, and people were not convinced. Gao Zong had a red mole on his shoulder blade, which had been kept secret in the past. Jiang Zang advised him to show it to people.

古文：晋寿太守王洪范罢任还，上袒示之，曰： 人皆谓此是日月相。
现代文：晋寿太守王洪范罢任回朝，皇上袒露肩膀给他看，说： 大家都说造是曰月之相。
English: When Wang Hongfan, the governor of Jinju, returned to the imperial court after his resignation, the emperor showed him his bare shoulders and said, "Everyone says it was caused by the phases of the moon.

古文：卿幸无泄言。 
现代文：你切切不要泄露出去。 
English: You mustn't let it out.

古文：洪范曰： 公日月之相在躯，如何可隐。
现代文：王洪范说： 您既然身上有日月之相，怎么能隐避呢?
English: Wang Hongfan said: Since you have the sun and moon on your body, how can you avoid it?

古文：转当言之公卿。 
现代文：回头我要告知朝廷公卿百官。 
English: In return, I will inform the Imperial Court nobles and officials.

古文：上大悦。
现代文：高宗很高兴。
English: Emperor Xuanzong was very happy.

古文：会直后张伯、尹瓒等屡谋窃发，祏、诔忧虞无计，每夕辄托事外出。
现代文：正碰上直后张伯、尹瓒等人屡次谋划要私下起事，江柘和萧诛忧虑而没有办法，每犬晚上都推托有事外出。
English: Right after the encounter, Zhang Bo, Yin Qi and others repeatedly plotted to secretly start a riot. Jiang Qi and Xiao Qi were worried and had no choice. Every dog had something to go out in the evening.

古文：及入纂议定，加祏宁朔将军。
现代文：等商量计划议定了，加江柘为宁朔将军。
English: After the discussion plan was agreed upon, Jia Jiangjun took the role of General Ningshuo.

古文：高宗为宣城王，太史密奏图纬云 一号当得十四年 。
现代文：高宗做宜城王。太史秘密地献上谶图纬书说 一旦号令可以拥有十四年 。
English: Gao Zong became the king of Yicheng. Taishi secretly presented a map and a book saying that once he issued an order, he could have it for fourteen years.

古文：祏入，帝喜以示祏曰： 得此复何所望。 
现代文：江柘入朝，高宗高兴地把它拿给江柘看： 能这样还有什么别的念头呢。 
English: When Jiang Rong entered the court, Gao Zong happily showed it to Jiang Rong and said, "What other idea could there be for doing this?"

古文：及即位，迁守卫尉，将军如故。
现代文：高宗即位之后，江拓迁任守卫尉，将军如故。
English: After Emperor Gao Zong ascended the throne, Jiang Tuoqin was transferred to the position of guard lieutenant, and remained a general.

古文：封安陆县侯，邑千户。
现代文：封为安陆县侯，食邑一千户。
English: He was named the lord of Anlu County, with a thousand households in the county.

古文：祏祖遵，以后父赠金紫光禄大夫；父德邻，以帝舅亦赠光禄大夫。
现代文：江柘的祖父江遵，因是皇后的父亲赠金紫光禄大夫；父亲江德邻，作为皇帝的内舅赠光禄大夫。
English: Jiang Zheng's grandfather, Jiang Zun, because he was the father of the empress, gave Dr. Jin Zi Guanglu; his father, Jiang Dezhong, as the emperor's uncle-in-law, gave Dr. Guanglu.

古文：建武二年，迁右卫将军，掌甲仗廉察。
现代文：建武二年，迁任右卫将军，掌管甲仗廉察。
English: In the second year of the Jianwu era, he was transferred to the post of General of the Right Division, and was in charge of the Armored Cavalry Inspection.

古文：四年，转太子詹事。
现代文：四年，转任太子詹事。
English: Four years later, he was transferred to Crown Prince Zhan Zhi.

古文：祏以外戚亲要，势冠当时，远致饷遗，或取诸王第名书好物。
现代文：江柘因为是皇室外戚受到亲信位居显要，权势盛极一时，很远的地方都向他馈赠礼物，有时还索取诸王府第中的名书和巧奇之物。
English: Because he was a distant relative of the emperor, Jiang Yu was favored by his relatives to occupy a prominent position. When he was at the peak of his power, he was given gifts from far away places. Sometimes he also requested famous books and wonderful things from the royal palaces.

古文：然家行甚睦，待子侄有恩意。
现代文：但是家庭很和睦，对待子侄辈很和善。
English: But the family is very harmonious and treats their children and grandchildren very kindly.

古文：上寝疾，永泰元年，转祏为侍中、中书令，出入殿省。
现代文：皇上卧病在床，永泰元年，转任江柘为侍中、中书令，可以随意出入宫殿和尚书省。
English: The emperor was ill in bed, and in the first year of the Yongtai era, he was transferred to Jiangxi Province as an attendant and Chinese calligrapher, and could freely enter and leave the palace and the Ministry of Calligraphy.

古文：上崩，遗诏转右仆射，祏弟卫尉祀为侍中，敬皇后弟刘暄为卫尉。
现代文：皇上驾崩，遣令中把他转任为右仆射，他的弟弟卫尉逊巳为侍中，邀皇后的弟弟型堕为衡尉。
English: After the Emperor's death, he was transferred to the post of Right Footman, and his younger brother, Lieutenant of the Imperial Guards, became an attendant, while the younger brother of the Empress was promoted to Lieutenant of the Imperial Guards.

古文：东昏即位，参掌选事。
现代文：塞昼堡即位，参预掌管选拔官员之事。
English: After the enthronement of Xie Rongbao, the prefects were in charge of selecting officials.

古文：高宗虽顾命群公，而意寄多在祏兄弟。
现代文：高宗虽然也在遣命中提到了众大臣，但主要寄希望于江柘兄弟。
English: Although Gao Zong also mentioned the ministers in the dispatch, he mainly pinned his hopes on the Jiang Chen brothers.

古文：至是更直殿内，动止关谘。
现代文：到此时更常在殿中值宿，公卿进言都要打通他的关节。
English: By this time, he was more often on duty in the palace, and the nobles had to speak through his joints.

古文：永元元年，领太子詹事。
现代文：永元元年，领太子詹事。
English: In the first year of the Yongyuan era, the crown prince Zhan Zhi was crowned.

古文：刘暄迁散骑常侍，右卫将军。
现代文：刘暄迁散骑常侍，右卫将军。
English: Liu Xuanqian rode a horse and was a general of the Right Division.

古文：祏兄弟与暄及始安王遥光、尚书令徐孝嗣、领军萧坦之六人，更日帖敕，时呼为 六贵 。
现代文：江柘兄弟和刘暄及始安王萧遥光、尚书令徐孝嗣、领军萧坦之六个人，轮流签发奏章以代敕命，当时把他们叫做 六贵 。
English: The six people, Jiang Yu brothers, Liu Yu, Xiao Yaoguang, the King of Shi'an, Xu Xiaoji, the commander of the army, and Xiao Tan, the leader of the army, took turns to issue the music chapter on behalf of the general. At that time, they were called the six nobles.

古文：帝稍欲行意，孝嗣不能夺，坦之虽时有异同，而祏坚意执制，帝深忿之。
现代文：皇上逐渐想按自己的意见去办事，徐孝嗣不敢违背，萧坦之有时同意有时否决，衹有江柘执意制止，使皇帝非常气忿。
English: The emperor gradually wanted to do things according to his own opinion. Xu Xiaozhi did not dare to disobey, Xiao Tanzhi sometimes agreed and sometimes vetoed, and Jiang Xi insisted on stopping, which made the emperor very angry.

古文：帝失德既彰，祏议欲立江夏王宝玄。
现代文：皇上没有德行已经表现得很明显了，江柘计划要立江夏王萧实玄。
English: The emperor's lack of virtue has been clearly demonstrated, and Jiangxi plans to establish Jiangxia King Xiao Shixuan.

古文：刘暄初为宝玄郢州行事，执事过刻。
现代文：刘暄当初做过萧实玄的郢州行事，处理事情太过苛刻。
English: At the beginning, Liu Wei did the same thing as Xiao Shixuan in Zhangzhou, and was too harsh in handling things.

古文：有人献马，宝玄欲看之，暄曰： 马何用看。 
现代文：有人献上一匹马，萧宝玄想看一看，刘暄说： 马有 什么好看的。 
English: Someone presented a horse, Xiao Baoxuan wanted to take a look at it, Liu Ye said: What's so good about a horse?

古文：妃索煮肫，帐下谘暄，暄曰： 旦已煮鹅，不烦复此。 
现代文：王妃索要煮好的禽肫，派帐下侍从询问刘喧，他说： 早上已经煮了鹅，不耐烦再做这个。 
English: The princess asked for the cooked chicken giblets, and sent a servant to inquire about Liu Dian. He said, "I already cooked the goose in the morning, and I can't wait to make this again."

古文：宝玄恚曰： 舅殊无《渭阳》之情。 
现代文：萧宝玄埋怨说： 这个作舅舅的太没有甥舅之情了。 
English: Xiao Baoxuan complained, "This uncle has no feelings for his nephew.

古文：暄闻之亦不悦。
现代文：刘暄听见遣话也很不高兴。
English: Liu Ye was also not happy to hear this.

古文：至是不同祏议，欲立建安王宝夤，密谋于遥光。
现代文：这时就不同意江柘的意见，想立建安王萧实夤，秘密地和萧遥光策划。
English: At this time, he did not agree with Jiang Chen's opinion and wanted to establish Jianan Wang Xiao Shizhen and secretly planned with Xiao Yaoguang.

古文：遥光自以年长，属当鼎命，微旨劝祏。
现代文：萧遥光觉得自己年纪大，按理应该承当天命，就用含蓄的话劝说江柘。
English: Xiao Yaoguang felt that he was too old and should have accepted the same fate, so he used subtle words to persuade Jiang Chen.

古文：祏弟祀以少主难保，劝祏立遥光。
现代文：江柘的弟弟江祀因为少年君主很难辅佐，劝江柘立萧遥光。
English: Because it is difficult for the boy monarch to assist, Jiang Chen's younger brother, Jiang Shi, advised Jiang Chen to stand up to Xiao Yaoguang.

古文：暄以遥光若立，己失元舅之望，不肯同。
现代文：刘暄以为如果立遥光为帝，自己就失去了国舅的资格，不肯赞同。
English: Liu Bei thought that if he made Yao Guang the emperor, he would lose his status as the uncle of the country, and refused to agree.

古文：故祏迟疑久不决。
现代文：所以江柘迟疑不定。
English: So Jiang Chen hesitated.

古文：遥光大怒，遣左右黄昙庆于清溪桥道中刺杀暄，昙庆见暄部伍人多，不敢发。
现代文：萧遥光非常愤怒，派遣手下人黄昙庆到清溪桥路上刺杀刘暄，黄昙庆看见刘暄的队伍人数众多，不敢下手。
English: Xiao Yaoguang was very angry and sent his subordinate Huang Yuqing to the Qingxi Bridge Road to assassinate Liu Yu. Huang Yuqing saw the large number of Liu Yu's team and did not dare to attack.

古文：事觉，暄告祏谋，帝处分收祏兄弟。
现代文：事情败露以后，刘暄告发了江柘的阴谋，皇上决定逮捕江柘兄弟。
English: After the affair was exposed, Liu Bei denounced Jiang Chen's plot, and the emperor decided to arrest Jiang Chen's brothers.

古文：祀时直在内殿，疑有异，遣信报祏曰： 刘暄似有异谋，今作何计？ 
现代文：江祀当时在内殿值宿，怀疑情形不对，派人给江柘报信说： 刘暄好像有别的打算，现在该怎么办呢? 
English: At that time, Jiang Rong was on duty in the inner hall, suspected that the situation was not right, and sent someone to report to Jiang Rong and said: Liu Rong seems to have other plans, what should we do now?

古文：祏曰： 政当静以镇之耳。 
现代文：江柘说： 正应该镇静从容地打败他。 
English: Jiang Wei said: It is necessary to calmly defeat him.

古文：俄而召祏入见，停中书省。
现代文：不久召令江柘去见皇上，拘禁在中书省。
English: He was soon summoned to see the emperor and detained in the Chinese Literature Department.

古文：初，直斋袁文旷以王敬则勋当封，祏执不与。
现代文：早先，直斋袁文旷因为王鱼幽事有功应该封赏，坯却执意不肯。
English: Earlier, Yuan Wenkui, a member of the Zhizhai faction, should have been awarded a prize for his contribution to the Kingfish Incident, but he refused to do so.

古文：帝使文旷取祏，以刀环筑其心曰： 复能夺我封否？ 
现代文：皇上让塞文旷去抓江柘，用刀柄上的铁环敲打他的心口说： 还能夺去我的封赐吗? 
English: The emperor told Severin to go and capture Jiang Chen, and struck him in the heart with the iron ring on the hilt of his sword, saying, "Can you still take away my title?"

古文：祏、祀同日见杀。
现代文：江柘、江祀在同一天被杀。
English: Jiang Wei and Jiang Xi were both killed on the same day.

古文：祀字景昌，初为南郡王国常侍，历高祖骠骑东阁祭酒，秘书丞，晋安王镇北长史，南东海太守，行府、州事。
现代文：江祀字景昌，开始做过南郡王国常侍，历高祖骠骑东合祭酒，秘书丞，晋安王镇北长史，南东海太守，行府州事。
English: Jiang Shishi wrote the name of Jingchang, and began to serve as the attendant of the Nanshun Kingdom, the ancestor of Liguo and the rider of the Donghe Festival wine, the secretary, the north governor of Jinan, the governor of the South East China Sea, and the governor of the state affairs.

古文：治下有宣尼庙，久废不脩，祀更开扫构立。
现代文：治理的地方有座宣尼庙，废弃了很久未经修缮，江祀重新修建打扫使它兴盛起来。
English: There is a Xuan Ni temple in the place of governance, abandoned for a long time without repair, Jiang Zi rebuilt and cleaned it to make it flourish.

古文：祀弟禧，居丧早卒。有子廞，字伟卿，年十二，闻收至，谓家人曰： 伯既如此，无心独存。 赴井死。
现代文：江祀的弟弟江禧，在父母丧期就已经死掉了有一个儿子江厂，字伟卿，十二岁，听说拘捕的人来了，就对家裹人说： 伯父既已如此。我也没有一个人活下去的心思。 跳井死去。
English: Jiang Shi's younger brother, Jiang Xi, had already died by the time his parents passed away. There was a son of Jiang Factory, Zi Weiqing, twelve years old. When he heard that the arresting officers had come, he said to his family, "My uncle is already like this. I don't have the heart to let anyone else live. I'll jump into a well and die."

古文：后帝于后堂骑马致适，顾谓左右曰： 江祏若在，我当复能骑此不？ 
现代文：后来皇帝在后堂骑马散心，对左右侍从说： 如果江柘在的话，我哪还能在这儿骑马啊? 
English: Later, the emperor rode a horse in the back hall to take his mind off things and said to the attendants on his right and left, "If Jiang Chen is here, how can I ride a horse here?"

古文：暄字士穆，出身南阳国常侍。
现代文：刘暄字士穆，进入仕途时做南阳国常侍。
English: Liu Xuan, also known as Shimu, became a Nanyang attendant when he entered the service.

古文：遥光起事，以讨暄为名。
现代文：萧遥光发动政变，是以征讨刘暄为藉口的。
English: Xiao Yaoguang launched a coup under the pretext of recruiting Liu Bei.

古文：事平，暄迁领军将军，封平都县侯，千户。
现代文：事情平息以后，刘暄迁领军将军，封乎都县侯，食邑一千户。
English: After the situation calmed down, Liu Bei relocated the general leading the army, sealed off all the county towns, and closed a thousand households in the food villages.

古文：其年，又见杀。
现代文：这年，又被杀了。
English: This year, he was killed again.

古文：和帝中兴元年，赠祏卫将军，暄散骑常侍、抚军将军，并开府仪同三司，祀散骑常侍、太常卿。
现代文：和帝中兴元年，赠江柘卫将军，刘暄散骑常侍、抚军将军，都为开府仪同三司，江祀为散骑常侍、太常卿。
English: In the first year of Emperor Zhongxing's reign, General Jiang Xingwei, Liu Xing's equestrian attendant, and the general of the army were presented to him. They were all appointed to the three offices of Kaifu Yi Tong, and Jiang Shi was the equestrian attendant and Tai Changqing.

古文：史臣曰：士死知己，盖有生所共情，虽愚智之品有二，而逢迎之运唯一。
现代文：史臣曰：士子为知己牺牲生命，大概是有生命者共同的情感，虽然或愚蠢或明智二者不同，但是一心逢迎上级则是同样的命运。
English: Shichen said, "A scholar sacrificing his life for his friend is probably a common feeling among those who are alive. Although the two are different, stupid or wise, it is the same fate when one's heart meets a superior."

古文：夫怀可知之才，受知人之眄，无惭外物，此固天理，其犹藏在中心，衔恩念报。
现代文：那些人怀藏着期待知遇的才能，领受知己者的青睐，不必对外界感到羞惭，这本来就是自然的道理，他还会在心中记挂，想着报答恩情。
English: Those people have the ability to look forward to opportunities, receive the favor of their friends, and do not have to feel ashamed to the outside world. This is a natural reason. He will also remember in his heart and think about repaying the favor.

古文：况乎义早蕃僚，道同遇合，逾越胜己，顾迈先流，弃子如遗，曾微旧德。使狗之喻，人致前讥，惭包疚心，我无其事。呜呼！
现代文：何况早年还是同朝奉职，志同道合，却一下子超过了自己也超越了前辈，抛弃孩子如同丢失一件东西，毫不顾念旧日的恩德，被比作受役使的猎狗，是别人对此的讥刺，羞惭地怀着愧疚之心，在我却没有这样的事。呜呼!
English: What's more, in my early years, I served the same government and had the same ideals, but suddenly I surpassed myself and my predecessors. I abandoned my children as if I had lost something. I had no regard for the kindnesses of the past. I was compared to a hound that had been forced into service. Others ridiculed me for this, feeling ashamed and guilty, but I felt no such thing. Alas!

古文：陆机所以赋《豪士》也。
现代文：造就是陆机为什么作《豪士》赋的原因。
English: This is the reason why the land machine made "Hao Shi" fu.

古文：赞曰：王萧提契，世祖基之。
现代文：赞曰：王晏、萧谌的扶持辅助，是世祖立业的基础。
English: Zang said: Wang Xi and Xiao Xi's support and assistance is the foundation for the founding of the founder.

古文：乐羊食子，里克无辞。
现代文：乐羊忍痛饮下用儿子烹成的汤，里克无言以对。
English: Rick is speechless as he patiently drinks the soup his son has made.

古文：江、刘后戚，明嗣是维。
现代文：江柘、刘暄身为外戚，皇室明嗣靠着他们得以维续。
English: Jiang Hui and Liu Bei were maternal relatives, and the imperial family relied on them to continue.

古文：废兴异论，终用乖疑。
现代文：废立皇帝各自执有不同的政见，最后都遭到猜疑。
English: Each of the deposed emperors held different political views, and in the end they were all suspected.

