古文：起旃蒙大渊献，尽柔兆困敦，凡二年。高宗明皇帝中建武二年
现代文：起，止，一共两年。齐明帝建武二年
English: two years in total. In the second year of the reign of Emperor Jianwu

古文：春，正月，壬申，遣镇南将军王广之督司州、右卫将军萧坦之督徐州、尚书右仆射沈文季督豫州诸军以拒魏。
现代文：春季，正月壬申，南齐派遣镇南将军王广之、右卫将军萧坦之、尚书右仆射沈文季分别督率司州、徐州、豫州三地的军队，抵抗北魏的入侵。
English: In the spring, in the first month of Jinshin, Nanqi dispatched Zhennan General Wang Guangzhi, Right Guard General Xiao Tanzhi, and Shangshu Right Servant Shen Wenzhi to lead the armies of Sizhou, Xuzhou, and Yuzhou respectively, to resist the invasion of the Northern Wei Dynasty.

古文：癸酉，魏诏： 淮北之人不得侵掠，犯者以大辟论。 
现代文：癸酉，北魏孝文帝颁发诏令： 不得抢劫掠夺淮河以北的居民，违犯者处以死刑。 
English: At that time, Emperor Xiaowen of the Northern Wei Dynasty issued a decree: It is forbidden to rob and plunder the residents north of the Huai River, and violators will be sentenced to death.

古文：乙未，拓跋衍攻钟离，徐州刺史萧惠休乘城拒守，间出袭击魏兵，破之。
现代文：乙未，北魏拓跋衍率部进攻钟离，南齐徐州刺史萧惠休据城抗守，并且不时地派兵出城袭击北魏军队，终于将其击败。
English: In the second half of the 19th century, the Northern Wei Dynasty led by Tuoba Yan attacked Zhongliang, and the Southern Qi led by Xuzhou and Xiao Huiyu defended the city, and from time to time sent troops out of the city to attack the Northern Wei Army, and finally defeated it.

古文：惠休，惠明之弟也。
现代文：萧惠休是萧惠明的弟弟。
English: Xiao Huixiu is the younger brother of Xiao Huiming.

古文：刘昶、王肃攻义阳，司州刺史萧诞拒之。
现代文：北魏刘昶、王肃率军进攻义阳，遇到司州刺史萧诞的抵抗。
English: The Northern Wei Liu Wei and Wang Su led the army to attack Yiyang, and encountered the resistance of Sizhou Zhishi.

古文：肃屡破诞兵，招降万馀人。魏以肃为豫州刺史。
现代文：王肃多次击败萧诞的军队，招纳降兵一万余人，因此北魏任命王肃为豫州刺史。
English: Wang Su repeatedly defeated the defeated army and recruited more than ten thousand soldiers. Therefore, the Northern Wei Dynasty appointed Wang Su as the leader of the history of Yuzhou.

古文：刘昶性褊躁，御军严暴，人莫敢言。
现代文：刘昶性格暴躁，刚愎自用，对待下属官兵非常严酷残暴，部下都敢怒而不敢言。
English: Liu Yao was a hot-tempered, self-serving tyrant who treated subordinate officers and soldiers very harshly and brutally. His subordinates dared not speak out in anger.

古文：法曹行参军北平阳固苦谏；昶怒，欲斩之，使当攻道。
现代文：法曹行参军北平人阳固多次恳切地规劝刘昶，刘昶大怒，想杀掉阳固，便命令阳固做攻城先锋。
English: Yang Gu, a law officer who joined the Peiping army, repeatedly and earnestly advised Liu Bei. Liu Bei was furious and wanted to kill Yang Gu, so he ordered Yang Gu to be the vanguard of the siege.

古文：固志意闲雅，临敌勇决，昶始奇之。
现代文：阳固这个人平时性格优雅，风度悠闲，谁知临阵遇敌却表现的十分勇猛果敢，使刘昶感到非常惊奇。
English: Yanggu, who usually has an elegant personality and a laid-back demeanor, showed great bravery and courage in the face of the enemy, which made Liu Yao very surprised.

古文：丁酉，中外纂严。
现代文：丁酉，南齐举国上下戒备森严，严防以待。
English: Dingyao, Nanchi and the whole country are on high alert and on high alert.

古文：以太尉陈显达为使持节、都督西北诸军事，往来新亭、白下以张声势。
现代文：又派遣太尉陈显达为使持节、都督西北讨诸军事，来往巡视于新亭、白下一带，以壮大声势。
English: He also dispatched Lieutenant Chen Xianda to be the envoy for the festival and the governor of Northwest China to discuss military affairs, and he made rounds in Xinting and Baijiagou to strengthen the momentum.

古文：己亥，魏主济淮；二月，至寿阳，众号三十万，铁骑弥望。
现代文：已亥，北魏孝文帝率大军渡过淮河；二月，抵达寿阳，三十万大军浩浩荡荡，铁甲骑兵多的一眼望不到头。
English: Emperor Xiaowen of the Northern Wei Dynasty led an army across the Huai River in the winter of the year of the boar; in February, he arrived in Shouyang with 300,000 soldiers, many of whom could not be seen at a glance.

古文：甲辰，魏主登八公山，赋诗。
现代文：甲辰，孝文帝登上八公山，乘兴而作诗。
English: In the 12th century, Emperor Xiaowen climbed Mount Hakong and wrote poems for fun.

古文：道遇甚雨，命去盖；见军士病者，亲抚慰之。
现代文：途中突然遇上倾盆大雨，孝文帝便命令去掉自己的伞盖，与兵士一起淋雨共苦。
English: On the way, he suddenly encountered a downpour, and Emperor Xiaowen ordered him to remove his umbrella cover, so that he could share the rain with the soldiers.

古文：魏主遣使呼城中人，丰城公遥昌使参军崔庆远出应之。
现代文：他看到军队中有生病的士兵，还亲自去安抚慰问。北魏孝文帝派人去传唤寿阳城中的南齐官员出来对话，丰城公萧遥昌便派崔庆远前去应对。
English: He saw sick soldiers in the army and went to comfort and console them in person. Emperor Xiaowen of the Northern Wei Dynasty sent someone to summon the officials of Nanqi in Shouyang City for a dialogue, and Fengcheng Gong Xiao Yaochang sent Cui Qingyuan to respond.

古文：庆远问师故，魏主曰： 固当有故！
现代文：见面，崔庆远先质问北魏出师来犯的理由，孝文帝回答说： 当然有原因。
English: When they met, Cui Qingyuan first questioned the reason why the Northern Wei Dynasty sent a teacher to commit the crime, and Emperor Xiaowen replied: Of course there is a reason.

古文：卿欲我斥言之乎，欲我含垢依违乎？ 
现代文：你想让我直接数落你们的罪过呢？还是顾及情面而含含糊糊地说呢？ 
English: Do you want me to enumerate your sins directly, or do you want me to be evasive for the sake of appearances?

古文：庆远曰： 未承来命，无所含垢。 
现代文：崔庆远说： 我实在不明白你们的来意，所以还是直截了当地说吧！ 
English: Cui Qingyuan said, "I really don't understand what you're trying to say, so let's get it straight!

古文：魏主曰： 齐主何故废立？ 
现代文：孝文帝便问道： 你们君主为什么要连续废去两个皇帝而自立为君呢？ 
English: Emperor Xiaowen then asked: Why did your monarchs have to depose two emperors in succession and become sovereigns?

古文：庆远曰： 废昏立明，古今非一，未审何疑？ 
现代文：崔庆远答道： 废去昏君，另立明主，这种事情古今常见，并非只有我朝最近发生的这么一桩，所以不知道你对此又有何不理解之处呢？ 
English: Cui Qingyuan replied: Abolishing a weak ruler and setting up a strong one is a common practice from ancient times to the present. This is not the only case that has recently occurred in my dynasty, so I don't know what you don't understand about this.

古文：魏主曰： 武帝子孙，今皆安在？ 
现代文：孝文帝再反问道： 武帝的子孙们，现在都在哪儿？ 
English: Emperor Xiaowen then asked: Where are the descendants of Emperor Wu?

古文：庆远曰： 七王同恶，已伏管、蔡之诛；其馀二十馀王，或内列清要，或外典方牧。 
现代文：崔庆远接着答道： 七位藩王乱国同罪，已经和周朝的管叔鲜和蔡叔度一样被杀掉了，其余的二十多位藩王，有的在朝廷中担任清要职位，有的在外面担任州郡长官。 
English: Cui Qingyuan went on to answer: Seven lords of the domain have been killed for the same crime of ruining the country, just like Guan Shuxiang and Cai Shudu of the Zhou Dynasty. The remaining twenty-odd lords of the domain, some of whom held important positions in the imperial court, and some of whom served as prefectures and counties outside.

古文：魏主曰： 卿主若不忘忠义，何以不立近亲，如周公之辅成王，而自取之乎？ 
现代文：孝文帝又问道： 你们现在的君主萧鸾如果没有忘掉忠义之德，为什么不从前帝近亲中选择一人立为新帝，如当年周公辅佐成王那样，而要自取皇位呢？ 
English: Emperor Xiaowen also asked: If your current monarch Xiao Yu has not forgotten the virtue of loyalty, why not choose one of the former emperor's close relatives to become the new emperor, as Zhou Gongfu assisted King Cheng that year, and take the throne himself?

古文：庆远曰： 成王有亚圣之德，故周公得而相之。
现代文：崔庆远回答： 周成王有亚圣的品德，所以周公立他为君而自己辅佐之。
English: Cui Qingyuan replied: Zhou Cheng Wang has the moral character of a saint, so Zhou Guozhong supported him on his own.

古文：今近亲皆非成王之比，故不可立。
现代文：可是，如今本朝前帝近亲中没有能比得上周成王这样的人物，所以不能嗣立。
English: However, there is currently no one in the immediate family of the former emperor who can match the stature of last week's crown prince, so he cannot succeed to the throne.

古文：且霍光亦舍武帝近亲而立宣帝，唯其贤也。 
现代文：况且，汉代霍光也曾经舍弃汉武帝的近亲而崐立汉宣帝刘询，只是因为他贤德呀。 
English: Moreover, Ho Guang of the Han Dynasty also once abandoned the close relatives of Emperor Wu of Han and set up Emperor Liu of Han Xuan, just because of his virtue.

古文：魏主曰： 霍光何以不自立？ 
现代文：孝文帝再逼问道： 那么，霍光为什么不自己登上皇位呢？ 
English: Emperor Xiaowen then forcefully asked: So, why didn't Huo Guang ascend the throne himself?

古文：庆远曰： 非其类也。
现代文：崔庆远再次答道： 因为霍光是外姓，不是皇族。
English: Cui Qingyuan answered again: Because Huo Guang is a foreign surname, not a member of the imperial family.

古文：主上正可比宣帝，安得比霍光！
现代文：本朝当今皇上正可比做汉宣帝刘询，怎么能拿他与霍光比呢？
English: This morning, today's emperor is comparable to the Han Emperor Liu En, how can he be compared to Huo Guang?

古文：若尔，武王伐纣，不立微子而辅之，亦为苟贪天下乎？ 
现代文：如果按照你说的那样，那么当年武王伐纣，没有立纣王庶兄微子为君而自己辅佐之，也就是贪求天下了吧？ 
English: If it's as you say, then King Wuchang of that year didn't appoint his half-brother, King Wuchang, to assist him, that is, he was greedy for the world, right?

古文：魏主大笑曰： 朕来问罪。
现代文：孝文帝大笑着说道： 联前来本是问罪于你们，但是听了你刚才所讲的那些，心里也就明白了。 
English: Emperor Xiaowen laughed loudly and said, "I came here to punish you, but after listening to what you just said, I understood it in my heart.

古文：如卿之言，便可释然。 庆远曰：  见可而进，知难而退 ，圣人之师也。 
现代文：崔庆远说：  见可而进，知难而退 ，这样就是圣人之师。 孝文帝又问道： 您希望与我和睦友好呢？
English: Cui Qingyuan said, "You can advance when you see an opportunity, but retreat when you encounter a difficulty, such is the teacher of a saint." Emperor Xiaowen also asked, "Do you hope to be on friendly terms with me?"

古文：魏主曰： 卿欲吾和亲，为不欲乎？ 
现代文：还是不希望？ 崔庆远回答说： 相睦友好则两国互相庆贺，人民大众承受好处。
English: Cui Qingyuan replied, "When the two countries are in harmony and friendship, the two countries will celebrate each other, and the people will enjoy the benefits.

古文：庆远曰： 和亲则二国交欢，生民蒙福；否则二国交恶，生民涂炭。
现代文：否则的话，两国关系恶化，互相交战，致使生灵涂炭，流离失所。能否和睦友好，完全由您来决定。 
English: Otherwise, the relations between the two countries will deteriorate, and they will fight each other, resulting in the loss of lives and displacement of people. It is entirely up to you to decide whether there can be harmony and friendship.

古文：和亲与否，裁自圣衷。 
现代文：孝文帝赐赏崔庆远酒菜和衣服，送他回寿阳城。
English: Emperor Xiaowen rewarded Cui Qingyuan with food, wine and clothes and sent him back to Shouyang City.

古文：魏主赐庆远酒殽、衣服而遣之。戊申，魏主循淮而东，民皆安堵，租运属路。
现代文：戊申，北魏孝文帝放弃攻打寿阳城沿着淮河而东下，所到之处，百姓安居，无有扰犯，前来纳供粮草的民众络绎不绝，挤满道路。
English: In the Northern Wei Dynasty, Emperor Xiaowen gave up attacking Shouyang City and went east along the Huai River. Wherever he went, the people lived peacefully, there were no disturbances, and the people who came to provide grain and grass were incessant and crowded the roads.

古文：丙辰，至钟离。
现代文：丙辰孝文帝到了钟离。
English: Emperor Bình Cình and Emperor Wùnn reached Zhongli.

古文：上遣左卫将军崔慧景、宁朔将军裴叔业救钟离。
现代文：南齐明帝派遣左卫将军崔慧景、宁朔将军裴叔业去援救钟离。
English: Emperor Ming of the Southern Qi Dynasty sent the left guard general Cui Huijing and the Ningshuo general Pei Shuhe to rescue Zhong Li.

古文：刘昶、王肃众号二十万，堑栅三重，并力攻义阳，城中负楯而立。
现代文：刘昶、王肃二人率领二十万大军。安营驻扎，在营盘周围挖掘树立三层堑沟栅栏，合力攻打义阳城，箭石齐发，使守城的南齐兵士不得不以盾牌来蔽身。
English: Liu Bei and Wang Su led a 200,000-strong army. They camped, dug trenches around the camp, erected a three-layer fence, and jointly attacked Yiyang City. The soldiers had to cover themselves with shields.

古文：王广之引兵救义阳，去城百馀里，畏魏强，不敢进。
现代文：王广之引兵来援救义阳，但是到了离义阳城百余里的地方，因畏惧北魏兵力之强，就不敢再向前开进了。
English: Wang Guangzhi led an army to rescue Yiyang, but when he reached a place more than a hundred miles away from Yiyang City, he was afraid of the strength of the Northern Wei army and did not dare to drive forward.

古文：城中益急，黄门侍郎萧衍请先进，广之分麾下精兵配之。
现代文：城中频频告急，黄门侍郎萧衍请求先去增援，王广之把自己麾下的精兵分给他一部分，由他率领前去。
English: There were frequent emergencies in the city. Huangmen waiter Xiao Yan asked Maru to go first for reinforcement. Wang Guangzhi gave him a part of his elite soldiers and let him lead the way.

古文：衍间道夜发，与太子率萧诔等径上贤首山，去魏军数里。
现代文：萧衍抄小道连夜出发，与太子右率萧诔等人，径直登上贤首山，来到距北魏军队仅数里的地方。
English: Xiao Yan copied the trail overnight, and together with the prince's right-hand man Xiao Yao and others, they went straight up the Xianshou Mountain and came to a place only a few miles away from the Northern Wei army.

古文：魏人出不意，未测多少，不敢逼。
现代文：北魏军队没有料到这点，不知道萧衍一共有多少兵力，不敢逼近。
English: The Northern Wei army did not expect this, did not know how many troops Xiao Yan had in total, and did not dare to approach.

古文：黎明，城中望见援军至，萧诞遣长史王伯瑜出攻魏栅，因风纵火，衍等众军自外击之，魏不能支，解围去。
现代文：黎明时分，义阳城中的守军望见援兵到了，士气大增。萧诞派遣长史王伯瑜出城攻进北魏阵营，借大风放火焚烧了周围的栅栏，而萧衍等率领的士兵则从外围合击之，北魏军队不能抵抗，只好撤退。
English: At dawn, the defenders in Yiyang City could see the arrival of reinforcements, and their morale increased greatly. Xiao Zetian sent the commander Shi Wang Boyu out of the city to attack the Northern Wei camp, and took advantage of the strong wind to set fire to the surrounding fence, while the soldiers led by Xiao Yan and others attacked from the periphery. The Northern Wei army could not resist and had no choice but to retreat.

古文：己未，诞等追击，破之。
现代文：己未，萧诞等率兵追击北魏军队，破敌获胜。
English: In the meantime, Xiao Xie and other soldiers chased the Northern Wei army and defeated the enemy.

古文：诔，谌之弟也。
现代文：萧诔是萧谌的弟弟。
English: Xiao Yao is Xiao Yao's younger brother.

古文：先是，上以义阳危急，诏都督青、冀二州诸军事张冲出军攻魏以分其兵势。
现代文：早先，因为义阳情况危急，明帝特诏令都督青、冀两州诸军事张冲出兵攻打北魏本国，从而分散其兵力。
English: Earlier, because of the critical situation in Yiyang, the Ming Dynasty issued a special edict ordering the military of the two states of Qing and Hebei to rush out to attack the Northern Wei homeland, thus dispersing their forces.

古文：冲遣军主桑系祖攻魏建陵、驿马、厚丘三城，又遣军主僧护攻魏虎阬、冯时、即丘三城，皆拔之。
现代文：张冲派遣军主桑系祖去攻打北魏的建陵、驿马、厚丘三城，又派遣军主杜僧护去攻打北魏的虎勣、冯时、即丘三城，都攻破占领了。
English: Zhang Chong dispatched the warlord Kuang Jiezu to attack the three Northern Wei cities of Jianling, Longma and Houqiu, and also dispatched the warlord Du Xianggu to attack the three Northern Wei cities of Tigris, Fengshi and Qiuqiu, all of which were defeated and occupied.

古文：青、冀二州刺史王洪范遣军主崔延袭魏纪城，据之。
现代文：青州和冀州刺史王洪范派遣军主崔延袭击北魏的纪城，也占领了。
English: Qingzhou and Jizhou prince Wang Hongfan dispatched the army commander Cui Yan to attack the Northern Wei's Jicheng, and also occupied it.

古文：魏主欲南临江水，辛酉，发钟离。司徒长乐元懿公冯诞病，不能从，魏主与之泣诀，行五十里，闻诞卒。时崔慧景等军去魏主营不过百里，魏主轻将数千人夜还钟离，拊尸而哭，达旦，声泪不绝。
现代文：北魏孝文帝要南去观看长江，辛酉，从钟离出发，司徒长乐元懿公冯诞因重病在身，不能随驾前往，孝文帝特意去看他，流泪与他诀别，出发后走了约五十里，传来冯诞的死讯，这时崔慧景等路兵马离孝文帝的营地不过百里，孝文帝轻装率领数千人马连夜赶回钟离。见到冯诞的尸体之后，孝文帝拊尸嚎啕大哭，一直哭到天亮，还声泪不绝，悲痛万分。
English: Emperor Xiaowen of the Northern Wei Dynasty wanted to go south to see the Yangtze River. Xin Rong set off from Zhongli. Emperor Xiaowen specifically went to see Feng Guo, who was seriously ill and could not accompany him. He said goodbye to him with tears. After setting off, he walked about fifty miles and received the news of Feng Guo's death. At that time, Cui Huijing and other soldiers were only a hundred miles away from Emperor Xiaowen's camp. Emperor Xiaowen, lightly dressed, led thousands of people to rush back to Zhongli overnight. After seeing Feng Guo's body, Emperor Xiaowen wept loudly, crying until dawn

古文：壬戌，敕诸军罢临江之行，葬诞依晋齐献王故事。
现代文：壬戌，孝文帝命令各路兵马停止长江之行，依照晋代安葬齐献王的礼仪安葬了冯诞。
English: In response, Emperor Xiaowen ordered all the soldiers and horses to stop marching along the Yangtze River, and buried Feng Guo in accordance with the Jin Dynasty ritual of burying and dedicating the king.

古文：诞与帝同年，幼同砚席，尚帝妹乐安长公主。虽无学术，而资性淳笃，故特有宠。
现代文：冯诞与孝文帝同年而生，小时候两人在一起读书，娶孝文帝的妹妹乐安长公主为妻，他虽然没有多少学术才干，但是品性忠厚质朴，所以特别受到孝文帝的宠爱。
English: Feng Xizang was born in the same year as Emperor Xiaowen. The two of them studied together when they were children, and he married Emperor Xiaowen's sister, the eldest princess Le'an. Although he did not have much academic ability, his character was loyal and simple, so he was especially loved by Emperor Xiaowen.

古文：丁卯，魏主遣使临江，数上罪恶。
现代文：丁卯，孝文帝派遣使节到达江边，向南齐守将数说了明帝废帝自立、杀戮诸王的罪恶。
English: Dingwu, Emperor Xiaowen sent envoys to the riverside, and told the governor of Nanqi about the evils of Emperor Ming's self-reliance and killing of kings.

古文：魏久攻钟离不克，士卒多死。
现代文：北魏军队久攻钟离而不能取胜，军中兵卒伤亡惨重。
English: The Northern Wei army was unable to win after attacking for a long time. The soldiers suffered heavy casualties.

古文：三月，戊寅，魏主如邵阳，筑城于洲上，栅断水路，夹筑二城。萧坦之遣军主裴叔业攻二城，拔之。
现代文：三月戊寅，北魏孝文帝到达邵阳，在淮河中的洲岛上修筑城堡，又在南北两岸修筑了城堡，并且在河水中树立栅栏，以断绝南齐援兵之路。萧坦之派遣军主裴叔业攻打北魏新筑建的这两座城垒，都攻破摧毁。
English: In March, the Northern Wei Emperor Xiaowen arrived in Shaoyang, built a castle on the island in the Huai River, built a castle on both sides of the north and south, and erected a fence in the river to cut off the road of reinforcements from southern Qi. Xiaotan dispatched the army commander Pei Shuhe to attack the two newly built fortresses in the Northern Wei, and both were broken and destroyed.

古文：魏主欲筑城置戍于淮南，以抚新附之民。
现代文：北魏孝文帝又想在淮河南边修筑城堡，置兵戍守，以便安抚新近归顺北魏的该地百姓。
English: Emperor Xiaowen of the Northern Wei Dynasty also wanted to build a castle on the south side of the Huai River and keep troops there in order to appease the local people who had recently surrendered to the Northern Wei Dynasty.

古文：赐相州刺史高闾玺书，具论其状。
现代文：为此，孝文帝特意赐赏相州刺史高闾一封盖有玉玺印记的信，信中详细地讲述了自己对此事的看法。
English: To this end, Emperor Xiaowen specially rewarded Sanzhou Sisi Gaoqi with a letter stamped with a jade seal, in which he detailed his views on the matter.

古文：闾上表，以为： 《兵法》： 十则围之，五则攻之。 
现代文：高闾看过孝文帝的信之后，也上表谈了自己的观点，其中说道： 《孙子兵法》中讲： 如果有十倍于敌人的兵力就可以包围他，如果有五倍于敌人的兵力就可以进攻他。 
English: After Gao Jun read the letter from Emperor Xiaowen, he also talked about his views on the table, saying: "Sun Tzu's "Law of War" says: If you have ten times the enemy's strength, you can surround him, and if you have five times the enemy's strength, you can attack him.

古文：何者国家止为受隆之计，发兵不多，东西辽阔，难以成功；今又欲置戍淮南，招抚新附。
现代文：起初朝廷仅仅从接受曹虎投降这一点来计划安排，所以出兵数量不多，然而东西战线拉得很长，故难以取得成功。如今，您又想在淮河南边筑城置守，以便招抚新归顺的百姓。
English: At first, the imperial court only planned and arranged from the point of accepting Cao Hu's surrender, so the number of troops dispatched was small, but the East-West front was very long, so it was difficult to achieve success. Now, you also want to build a city on the south side of the Huai River in order to appease the newly converted people.

古文：昔世祖以回山倒海之威，步骑数十万，南临瓜步；诸郡尽降，而盱眙小城，攻之不克。
现代文：过去，世祖皇帝以排山倒海之威势，率领步、骑兵数十万，南下瓜步，各州郡全都投降，然而唯有盱眙这个小城，却久攻不下。
English: In the past, the ancestor emperor led hundreds of thousands of cavalry and marched with the might of the mountains and the sea, and all the states and counties surrendered. However, only the small city of Handan could not be conquered for a long time.

古文：班师之日，兵不戍一城，土不辟一廛。夫岂无人？
现代文：最后班师回朝，没有留下兵马守护任何一座城市，也没有开辟一亩土地，难道是没有人力吗？不是！
English: When the last division returned to the North, they did not leave soldiers and horses to guard any city, nor did they open up a single mu of land. Was it because they did not have the manpower? No!

古文：以为大镇未平，不可守小故也。
现代文：只是因为那些重镇要地还没有夺取到手，所以不急于镇守那些不重要的小地方。
English: It's just that because the important places haven't been captured yet, there's no rush to defend the unimportant places.

古文：夫壅水者先塞其原，伐木者先断其本；本原尚在而攻其末流，终无益也。
现代文：堵水要先塞住水源，伐木要先断其根本，如果本源尚在而只攻其末流，到底也不会有什么成效的。
English: If you want to block water, you must first block the water source, and if you want to cut down trees, you must first cut off their roots. If the roots are still there and you only attack the end stream, you won't get any results at all.

古文：寿阳、盱眙、淮阴，淮南之本原也；三镇不克其一，而留守孤城，其不能自全明矣。
现代文：寿阳、盱眙、淮阴三个地方，是淮河之南的重镇要地，如果不攻克其中之一处，而要留守别的孤城，这很明显是不可能保全的事情。
English: Shouyang, Handan and Huaiyin are the three important towns in the south of the Huaihe River. If we do not conquer one of them, but keep other isolated towns, it is obviously impossible to preserve.

古文：敌之大镇逼其外，长淮隔其内；少置兵则不足以自固，多置兵则粮运难通。大军既还，士心孤怯；夏水盛涨，救援甚难。以新击旧，以劳御逸，若果如此，必为敌擒，虽忠勇奋发，终何益哉！
现代文：而且，夏天河水盛涨，救援起来是非常难的。这样，齐朝一定会派兵攻打的，我方久守该城，齐朝发兵攻取，这就是以新击旧；我方以孤军守孤城，劳于防御，齐朝派兵轮番来攻，士气强盛，这就是以劳御逸。如果情况真的如此的话，那么最后的结果一定会是城被攻破，守兵被擒捉，就是将士们忠勇奋发，拼死而一战，也免不了城破身亡的结局，这是无益于国事的。
English: Moreover, in the summer, the river is swollen, and it is very difficult to rescue. In this way, the Qing Dynasty will definitely send troops to attack. We have been guarding the city for a long time, and the Qing Dynasty sent troops to capture it. This is a new attack on the old; we are guarding a lone city with a lone army, and we are working on defense. The Qing Dynasty sent troops to attack in turns, and morale is strong. This is a waste of effort. If this is really the case, then the final result will definitely be that the city will be breached, and the guards will be captured. That is, the soldiers will fight bravely

古文：且安土恋本，人之常情。
现代文：况且，安土恋本乃是人之常情。
English: Moreover, it is human nature to fall in love with the land of Ando.

古文：昔彭城之役，既克大镇，城戍已定，而不服思叛者犹逾数万。
现代文：过去，彭城之战我方获胜，夺得了这座重镇之城，并且也得以稳固地戌守住了，可是后来淮北那些不乐意归附我朝而思念归属江南的民众还竞有数万人之多。
English: In the past, we won the battle of Pengcheng, captured this important city, and were able to hold it firmly, but later, there were still tens of thousands of people in Huaibei who were not willing to join our dynasty and wanted to belong to the south of the Yangtze River.

古文：角城蕞尔，处在淮北，去淮阳十八里。
现代文：角城不过弹丸之地，况且还处于淮北，离淮阳不过十八里远近。
English: Jiaocheng is just a place of bullets, moreover, it is still in Huaibei, but it is 18 miles away from Huaiyang.

古文：五固之役，攻围历时，卒不能克。
现代文：可是五固之战，我们围攻了那么长时间，最终仍不能攻克。
English: However, in the Battle of Wugu, we besieged it for such a long time that we could not finally conquer it.

古文：以今准昔，事兼数倍。
现代文：今昔对比一下，现在要在淮南筑城戍守，其难度要超出过去好几倍？
English: Comparing the past with the present, how many times more difficult is it to build a castle in Huainan?

古文：天时尚热，雨水方降，愿陛下踵世祖之成规，旋辕返旆，经营洛邑，蓄力观衅，布德行化，中国既和，远人自服矣。 
现代文：现在天气才开始转暖雨季正要到来，盼望陛下象过去世祖皇帝做的那样，调转车辕，班师回朝，先经营好都城洛阳，蓄积力量，静观机会，广布仁德，施行教化，国内安定平和了，国外的人自然会信服而归附的。 
English: Now the weather is just beginning to warm up and the rainy season is about to arrive. I hope that Your Majesty will, as the ancestral emperors did in the past, turn the wheel, return to the North, first manage the capital Luoyang, accumulate strength, watch opportunities, spread benevolence, carry out enlightenment, domestic stability and peace, and people abroad will naturally be convinced and attached.

古文：尚书令陆睿上表，以为： 长江浩荡，彼之巨防。
现代文：尚书令陆睿也上表孝文帝，指出： 长江奔腾浩荡，天险要堑，是齐朝的防守要地。
English: Shang Shuling Lu Rui also wrote to Emperor Xiaowen, pointing out: The Yangtze River is rushing and turbulent, natural hazards are imminent, and it is an important place for the defense of the Qi Dynasty.

古文：又南土昏备，暑气郁蒸。师人经夏，必多疾病。
现代文：同时，江南之地淫雨多雾，暑气郁盛，蒸热如笼，我们的军队在此过夏，一定会发生疾病。
English: At the same time, the south of the Yangtze River is rainy and foggy, hot and humid, and our troops spend the summer here, and diseases are bound to occur.

古文：而迁鼎草创，庶事甫尔。台省无论政之馆，府寺靡听治之所。百僚居止，事等行路，沉雨炎阳，自成疠疫。
现代文：而且，我们又刚刚迁都不久，尚处于草创阶段，营建之事刚刚开始，朝廷中枢机构还没有议事之处，下面的部门也没有办公场所，文武百官虽说已经住下来了，但实际情况与行路露宿没有什么区别，雨淋日晒，时间久了，难免发生瘟疫。
English: Moreover, we have only just moved in, we are still in the pioneering stage, construction has just begun, the central body of the imperial court still has no place for deliberation, and the departments below have no office space. Although hundreds of civil and military officials have already settled down, the actual situation is no different from traveling and sleeping rough. It has been raining and sunny for a long time, and it is inevitable that a plague will occur.

古文：且兵徭并举，圣王所难。今介胄之士，外攻寇仇，羸弱之夫，内勤土木，运给之费，日损千金。
现代文：再者，既要出兵打仗，又要招募民夫营造洛阳新都，如此兵徭并举，就是圣王也难以两者兼顾。如今，军队在外面攻敌作战，羸弱的民夫们在洛阳劳辛于土木之建，在外军队的后勤给养，每日耗损千金以上。
English: Furthermore, it was necessary to both send troops to fight and recruit civilians to build the new capital of Luoyang, and it was difficult for even the holy king to do both at the same time. Nowadays, the army is fighting against the enemy outside, the weak civilians are working on civil engineering in Luoyang, and the logistics of the foreign army consumes more than a thousand dollars a day.

古文：驱罢弊之兵，讨坚城之虏，将何以取胜乎！
现代文：如此，驱使疲惫之兵，攻打据守着坚城的敌人，将以什么来取胜呢？
English: So, what will drive the weary soldiers to attack the enemy, who is defending a fortified city, to win?

古文：陛下去冬之举，正欲曜武江、汉耳；今自春几夏，理宜释甲。
现代文：陛下去年冬天的那次行动，正是想要炫耀武力于江、汉之地，今年从春到崐夏这段时间，就理应罢兵休整一下。
English: Your Majesty's action last winter was precisely to show off force in the land of Jiang and Han. This year, from spring to midsummer, it is time to take a break.

古文：愿早还洛邑，使根本深固，圣怀无内顾之忧，兆民休斤板之役，然后命将出师，何忧不服！ 
现代文：所以，希望能早日撤兵返回洛阳，先把基础打好，做到本强根固，使圣上心中没有内顾之忧，亦等待百姓完成了筑建洛阳城的劳役，然后再遣兵调将，出师征伐，所到之处，何愁不能征服呢？ 
English: Therefore, it is hoped that the soldiers will be withdrawn back to Luoyang as soon as possible, and the foundation will be laid first, so that the roots will be strong and firm, so that there will be no worries in the heart of the saint, and also wait for the people to complete the labor service of building Luoyang City, and then send the soldiers to be transferred, and go out to fight. Wherever you go, what worries can not be conquered?

古文：魏主纳其言。
现代文：孝文帝采纳了他们两人的建议。
English: Emperor Xiaowen accepted both of their suggestions.

古文：崔慧景以魏人城邵阳，患之。
现代文：南齐的崔慧景见北魏修筑邵阳城，心中非常忧虑。
English: When Cui Huijing from Nanqi saw the Northern Wei Dynasty building Shaoyang City, she was very worried.

古文：张欣泰曰： 彼有去志，所以筑城者，外自夸大，惧我蹑其后耳。
现代文：张欣泰告诉他说： 北魏实际上有撤退的想法，之所以还修筑邵阳城，只不过是在外表上夸大其强罢了，目的是害怕我们随后追击他们。
English: Zhang Xintai told him: The Northern Wei actually had the idea of retreating, and the reason why they also built Shaoyang City was just to exaggerate their strength on the outside, in order to be afraid of us chasing them afterwards.

古文：今若说之以两愿罢兵，彼无不听矣。 
现代文：现在如果派人去游说，提出两厢情愿罢兵休战的建议，他们不会不听从的。 
English: Now, if someone were to be sent to lobby, to put forward a proposal for a truce between the two sides, they would not disobey.

古文：慧景从之，使欣泰诣城下语魏人，魏主乃还。
现代文：崔慧景听从了这一主意，派遣张欣泰到邵阳城下与北魏交涉谈判，建议双方休兵，取得了一致协议，于是孝文帝撤兵返回本国。
English: Cui Huijing listened to this idea, sent Zhang Xintai to Shaoyang to negotiate with the Northern Wei Dynasty, proposed a truce between the two sides, and obtained a consensus agreement, so Emperor Xiaowen withdrew his troops and returned to his home country.

古文：济淮，馀五将未济，齐人据渚邀断津路。
现代文：北魏撤退途中渡淮河之时，还有五个将领没有渡过河，南齐军队突然占据了河中之洲，断绝了水路，使得余下的北魏兵将无法渡河。
English: When the Northern Wei retreated across the Huai River, there were still five generals who did not cross the river. The Nanqi army suddenly occupied the continent in the river, cut off the waterway, making the remaining Northern Wei soldiers unable to cross the river.

古文：魏主募能破中渚兵者以为直阁将军，军主代人奚康生应募，缚筏积柴，因风纵火，烧齐船舰，依烟直进，飞刀乱斫，中渚兵遂溃。
现代文：北魏孝文帝发令谁能击败河洲上的南齐兵，就封谁为直将军，担任军主的代京人奚康生应募而出，他缚扎一些木筏子，上面堆满柴草，顺风纵火，一起烧向南齐的船舰，后面紧跟而进的兵士们借烟火掩护，挥刀乱砍，拼命杀向敌人，河洲上的南齐兵抵抗不住，遂纷纷溃逃。
English: Emperor Xiaowen of the Northern Wei Dynasty issued an order that whoever could defeat the Nanqi soldiers on the riverbank would be named General Zhi Ying, and the military commander, the representative of Beijing, Yan Kangsheng, was recruited. He tied up some wooden rafts, piled firewood on them, set them on fire with the wind, and together they burned the ships heading to Nanqi. The soldiers who followed closely behind used fireworks for cover, swung their swords randomly, and desperately killed the enemy. The Nanqi soldiers on the riverbank could not resist, and they fled in droves.

古文：魏主假康生直阁将军。
现代文：孝文帝给奚康生直将军的名号。
English: Emperor Xiaowen gave him the title of General Kangsheng Naosuke.

古文：魏主使前将军杨播将步卒三千、骑五百为殿。
现代文：北魏孝文帝命令前将军杨播率领步兵三千、骑兵五百殿后。
English: The Northern Wei Emperor Xiaowen ordered the former general Yang Boan to lead 3,000 infantry and 500 cavalry behind the palace.

古文：时春水方长，齐兵大至，战舰塞川。
现代文：当时，正是春水方涨之际，南齐军队大批赶来，战船密布，挤塞河中。
English: At that time, just as the spring water was rising, a large number of Nanqi troops arrived, and warships were densely packed and jammed in the river.

古文：播结陈于南岸以御之，诸军尽济。
现代文：杨播在淮河南岸布下阵势抵抗南齐军队，终于使没有渡河的北魏军队全部渡了过去。
English: On the south bank of the Huai River, Yang Bo laid out a position to resist the Nanqi army, and finally made the Northern Wei army, which had not crossed the river, all cross the river.

古文：齐兵四集围播，播为圆阵以御之，身自搏战，所杀甚众。
现代文：南齐军队从四面把杨播团团围住，杨播布出圆阵与之展开搏斗，他自己亲自搏战，所杀敌兵众多难计。
English: The Nanqi army surrounded Yang Bo's troops from all sides. Yang Bo spread out a circle and fought with them. He fought personally and killed many enemy soldiers.

古文：相拒再宿，军中食尽，围兵愈急。
现代文：一直抵抗到第三天，军中的食物已经吃光，而南齐围兵攻打得更厉害了。
English: They resisted until the third day, when the army ran out of food and the Nanqi besiegers attacked even harder.

古文：魏主在北岸望之，以水盛不能救，既而水稍减，播引精骑三百历齐舰大呼曰： 我今欲渡，能战者来！ 
现代文：孝文帝站在淮河北岸观望，但是由于河水太急而不能派兵去相救。过一会儿，水势稍稍减弱，杨播带领精骑三百登上南齐停在河中的战船，对南齐围兵大声呼喊道： 我现在要渡河，有敢斗能战者请上来。 
English: Emperor Xiaowen stood on the north bank of the Huai River to watch, but because the river was too fast, he could not send troops to rescue. After a while, the water level slightly weakened, Yang Bo led 300 horsemen to board the warship of Nanqi, which was parked in the river, and shouted loudly to the Nanqi besiegers: I want to cross the river now. If you have the courage to fight, please come up.

古文：遂拥众而济。
现代文：于是率领众兵渡过淮河。
English: He then led the soldiers across the Huai River.

古文：播，椿之兄也。
现代文：杨播是杨椿的哥哥。
English: Yang Bi is the elder brother of Yang Tsubaki.

古文：魏军既退，邵阳洲上馀兵万人，求输马五百匹，假道以归。
现代文：北魏军队撤退之后，在邵阳洲上还余留有一万兵马，他们向南齐崔慧景请求给五百匹马，并且要求借道返归。
English: After the retreat of the Northern Wei army, there were still ten thousand soldiers and horses left on Shaoyangzhou. They requested five hundred horses from Nanqi Cuihuijing and asked to return by another route.

古文：崔慧景欲断路攻之，张欣泰曰： 归师勿遏，古人畏之，兵在死地，不可轻也。
现代文：崔慧景想断其归路而攻打这些北魏余兵，但是张欣泰不同意，他说： 不要阻挡往回撤的军队，这一点古人也非常忌讳，因为那些将士们置身于死地，如果去追击，他们一定要以死相拼的，所以不可以轻视。
English: Cui Huijing wanted to cut off his way back and attack these Northern Wei leftover soldiers, but Zhang Xintai disagreed. He said, "Don't block the retreating army. This is also a taboo for the ancients, because those soldiers put themselves to death. If they pursue, they must fight to the death, so they must not be despised."

古文：今胜之不足为武，不胜徒丧前功；不如许之。 
现代文：现在，我们去追击他们，即使取胜了也不足以说明我们善战；万一不能获胜，则白白地丧失了前面的功劳。所以，不如答应他们，让他们撤回去。 
English: Now, if we go after them, even if we win, it won't be enough to show that we fought well; if we don't win, we'll have lost the previous effort in vain. Therefore, it's better to agree with them and let them withdraw.

古文：慧景从之。
现代文：崔慧景听从了张欣泰的建议。
English: Cui Huijing followed Zhang Xintai's suggestion.

古文：萧坦之还，言于上曰： 邵阳洲有死贼万人，慧景、欣泰纵而不取。 
现代文：萧坦之回朝以后，告诉明帝说： 邵阳洲有被困的敌兵一万人，但是崔慧景和张欣泰二人听任他们逃走而不去追击。 
English: After Xiao Tan's return to the imperial court, he told Emperor Ming that: There were ten thousand enemy soldiers trapped in Shaoyangzhou, but Cui Huijing and Zhang Xintai let them escape and did not pursue them.

古文：由是皆不加赏。
现代文：因此，崔、张二人都没有得到朝廷的赏赐。
English: As a result, neither Cui nor Zhang received any rewards from the imperial court.

古文：甲申，解严。
现代文：甲申，由于北魏军队已经撤退，所以南齐解除戒严。
English: As the Northern Wei army had already retreated, martial law was lifted in Nanqi.

古文：初，上闻魏主欲饮马于江，惧，敕广陵太守行南兗州事萧颖胄移居民入城。民惊恐，欲席卷南渡。
现代文：原先，明帝听说北魏孝文帝要一直攻打到长江边上，饮马于长江，非常害怕，特命令主管南兖州事务的广陵太守萧颖胄把居民都移入城内，居民们因此惊恐万分，纷纷打算收拾家产渡江南逃。
English: Originally, Emperor Ming heard that Emperor Xiaowen of the Northern Wei Dynasty wanted to attack all the way to the edge of the Yangtze River and drink horses in the Yangtze River. He was very afraid, and ordered the Guangling governor Xiao Yingyao, who was in charge of the affairs of South Luzhou, to move the residents into the city. The residents were so terrified that they were planning to pack up their household goods and flee to the south of the river.

古文：颖胄以魏寇尚远，不即施行；魏兵竟不至。
现代文：萧颖胄认为北魏军队离得还很远，就没有立即执行齐明帝的旨令，后来北魏军队没有到达那里。
English: Xiao Yingqi thought that the Northern Wei army was still far away, so he did not immediately implement the order of Emperor Qiming. Later, the Northern Wei army did not arrive there.

古文：颖胄，太祖之从子也。
现代文：萧颖胄是高帝的侄子。
English: Xiao Yingyao was Gao Di's nephew.

古文：上遣尚书右仆射沈文季助丰城公遥昌守奉阳。
现代文：明帝派遣尚书左仆射沈文季去帮助丰城公萧遥昌防守寿阳城。
English: Emperor Ming dispatched Shang Shuxu's left-hand man Shen Wenji to help Fengcheng Gong Xiao Yuchang defend Shouyang City.

古文：文季入城，止游兵不听出，洞开城门，严加守备。魏兵寻退。
现代文：沈文季到达寿阳城之后，禁止游兵随便出城，洞开城门，严加守备，北魏军队很快就撤退了。
English: After Shen Wenzhi arrived at Shouyang City, he forbade the guerrillas to leave the city at will, opened the city gate, and guarded it strictly. The Northern Wei army soon retreated.

古文：魏之入寇也，卢昶等犹在建康，齐人恨之，饲以蒸豆。
现代文：北魏入侵南齐时，派去祝贺海陵王即位的使节卢昶等人还在南齐的建康，南齐人非常仇恨他们，因此就象喂牛马一样地把豆子蒸熟让他们吃。
English: When the Northern Wei Dynasty invaded Nanqi, the envoy Lu Wei and others who were sent to congratulate the enthronement of King Hailing were still in Nanqi. Nanqi people hated them very much, so they steamed the beans and let them eat them like feeding cattle and horses.

古文：昶怖惧，食之，泪汗交横。
现代文：卢昶十分恐惧，就吃了，由于害怕和受辱，所以汗泪交流。
English: Lu Yao was very scared and ate it. Because of the fear and humiliation, they exchanged tears and sweat.

古文：谒者张思宁辞气不屈，死于馆下。
现代文：但是，谒者张思宁却义正辞严地加以拒绝，宁死而不受屈辱，最后死在所住的客馆之中。
English: However, the victim, Zhang Sining, refused to do so, saying that he would rather die than be humiliated. He eventually died in the guesthouse where he was staying.

古文：及还，魏主让昶曰： 人谁不死，何至自同牛马，屈身辱国！
现代文：回到北魏之后，孝文帝责备卢昶说： 人谁没有一死？为何如此贪生怕死到了把自己等同于牛马的地步？
English: After returning to the Northern Wei Dynasty, Emperor Xiaowen reproached Lu Yao and said: "Who has not died at least once? Why is he so greedy for life and afraid of death that he equates himself with a cow and a horse?

古文：纵不远惭苏武，独不近愧思宁乎！ 
现代文：你屈身辱国，即使不远愧于当年曾出使匈奴十九年而不屈节的苏武，难道同眼前的张思宁比较一下还不感到自羞吗？ 
English: You humiliated the country, even if you are not far from being ashamed of Su Wu, who had dispatched the Huns for nineteen years without yielding, don't you feel ashamed when you compare yourself with Zhang Sining?

古文：乃黜为民。
现代文：于是，革除了卢昶的官职，贬为平民。
English: As a result, Lu Wei was stripped of his official position and reduced to a commoner.

古文：戊子，魏太师京兆武公冯熙卒于平城。
现代文：戊子，北魏太师京兆武公冯熙在平城去世。
English: Wu Zi, Northern Wei Grand Master Jing Zhaogong Feng Xi passed away in Pingcheng.

古文：乙未，魏主如下邳；夏，四月，庚子，如彭城；辛丑，为冯熙举哀。
现代文：乙未，北魏孝文帝到达下邳；夏季，四月庚子，到达彭城；辛丑，为冯熙举行哀悼仪式。
English: In February, the Northern Wei Emperor Xiaowen arrived in Jiaozuo; in summer, in April, Geng Zi arrived in Pengcheng; in September, a mourning ceremony was held for Feng Xi.

古文：太傅、录尚书事平阳公丕不乐南迁，与陆睿表请魏主还临熙葬。
现代文：由于太傅、录尚书事平阳公拓跋丕不乐意南迁洛阳，所以与陆睿一起上表请求孝文帝返回平城参加冯熙的葬礼。
English: Since Taifu and Lu Rui were not willing to move south to Luoyang, they petitioned Emperor Xiaowen to return to Pingcheng to attend Feng Xi's funeral.

古文：帝曰： 开辟以来，安有天子远奔舅丧者乎！
现代文：孝文帝不同意，对他们说： 自从开天辟地以来，那里有天子老远地赶去给舅舅送葬的事呢？
English: Emperor Xiaowen disagreed and said to them, "Since the heavens and the earth were created, has there ever been a case of the Son of Heaven rushing to his uncle's funeral from afar?

古文：今经始洛邑，岂宜妾相诱引，陷君不义！
现代文：如今刚刚开始营建洛阳，你们岂可以妄自以此事诱引朕，陷朕于不义呢？
English: Now that the construction of Luoyang has just begun, can you presume to lure me with this and trap me in injustice?

古文：令、仆以下，可付法官贬之。 
现代文：凡是平城留守令、仆以下的官员，统统交付御史贬斥。 
English: All the officials who were ordered to stay in Heijo and those who were lower than servants were denounced by the Emperor.

古文：仍诏迎熙及博陵长公主之柩，南葬洛阳，礼如晋安平献王故事。
现代文：孝文帝没有采纳拓跋丕和陆睿的建议，仍然发出诏令，迎接冯熙以及博陵长公主的灵柩南下，安葬于洛阳，葬礼依照晋代安葬安平献王司马孚的礼仪而进行。
English: Emperor Xiaowen did not accept the suggestions of Tuobao and Lu Rui, but still issued a royal decree to welcome the casket of Feng Xi and the Boling Chang Princess to the south and to be buried in Luoyang. The funeral was carried out in accordance with the etiquette of the Jin Dynasty to bury Anping and present Wang Sima Fu.

古文：魏主之在钟离也，仇池镇都大将、梁州刺史拓跋英请以州兵会刘藻击汉中，魏主许之。
现代文：北魏孝文帝在钟离之时，仇池镇都大将、梁州刺史拓跋英请求率领州兵会同刘藻一起去袭击汉中，孝文帝准许了他的请求。
English: At the time of Emperor Xiaowen of the Northern Wei Dynasty's departure from the capital, the general of Qiuchi Town, Liangzhou Zhishi Tuoba Ying, requested to lead the National Guard Association to attack Hanzhong with Liu Mo, and Emperor Xiaowen granted his request.

古文：梁州刺史萧懿遣部将尹绍祖、梁季群等将兵二万，据险，立五栅以拒之。
现代文：南齐梁州刺史萧懿派遣部下将领尹绍祖、梁季群等率领两万兵马，占据险要之处，构筑了五座营栅，来抵抗北魏军队的进犯。
English: Xiao Wei, the governor of Liang Prefecture in Southern Qi, dispatched his subordinate generals Yin Shao Zu and Liang Ji Qun, leading 20,000 soldiers and horses, to occupy critical areas and build five camp fences to resist the invasion of the Northern Wei army.

古文：英曰： 彼帅贱，莫相统壹。我选精卒并攻一营，彼必不相救；若克一营，四营皆走矣。 
现代文：拓跋英对部下说： 他们的主帅出身低贱，不能统一协调作战，我如果挑选精兵集中力量攻打他们的一个营垒，其他的一定不会来援救。如果攻克一个营垒，其余四个就都会不战而逃。 
English: Tuoba Ying said to his subordinates, "Their commander is from a low-ranking family, and they can't fight in a unified and coordinated manner. If I select elite soldiers and concentrate my forces to attack one of their camps, the others will certainly not come to the rescue. If I conquer one camp, the remaining four will all flee without a fight."

古文：乃引兵急攻一营，拔之，四营俱溃，生擒梁季群，斩三千馀级，俘七百馀人，乘胜长驱，进逼南郑。
现代文：于是，率领强悍之兵对一个营垒发起了急攻，一举而攻克，其他四营见状，纷纷溃逃，结果北魏军队生擒了梁季群，斩敌三千余名，俘虏七百余人，乘胜追击，长驱直入，逼近南郑。
English: As a result, the leader of the strong soldiers launched a surprise attack on a camp and defeated it in one fell swoop. The other four battalions saw the situation and fled one after another. As a result, the Northern Wei army captured Liang Jiqun alive, killed more than three thousand enemies, captured more than seven hundred people, took advantage of the victory to pursue, drove straight in, and approached Nan Zheng.

古文：懿又遣其将姜修击英，英掩击，尽获之。
现代文：萧懿又派遣部将姜修去抗击拓跋英，拓跋英以伏兵攻其不意，结果把姜修及其部属全部擒获。
English: Xiao Yu also sent Jiang Xiu to fight Tuoba Ying. Tuoba Ying surprised him with an ambush and captured Jiang Xiu and all his subordinates.

古文：将还，懿别军继至；将士皆已疲，不意其至，大惧，欲走。
现代文：拓跋英率部返回之时，萧懿手下的其他军队相继赶到，由于拓跋英部下的将士已经十分疲惫，根本没有料到萧懿的人马会追逼上来，所以非常惧怕，就准备逃跑。
English: When the troops led by Tuoba Ying returned, other troops under Xiao Yao arrived one after another. Since the soldiers under Tuoba Ying were already very tired, they did not expect Xiao Yao's men to chase them, so they were very afraid and prepared to flee.

古文：英故缓辔徐行，神色自若，登高望敌，东西指麾，状若处分，然后整列而前。
现代文：但是，拓跋英却不为所惧，他神色不慌，镇定自若，故意骑马缓行，登上高处了望敌情，东指指，西划划，做出一副指挥部署的样子，然后整理好部队，列队前行。
English: However, Tuoba Ying was not afraid. He did not look panicked, was calm and self-possessed, deliberately rode slowly, climbed to a high place to look at the enemy situation, pointed east and west, made a command and deployment appearance, and then organized the troops and marched in line.

古文：懿军疑有伏兵，迁延引退，英追击，破之，遂围南郑。
现代文：萧懿的军队见此情形，怀疑拓跋英设有伏兵，犹豫不进，并且掉头回撤，拓跋英见敌方中计，马上下令追击，破敌获胜，于是围困了南崐郑。
English: Seeing this, Xiao Yan's army suspected that Tuoba Ying had set up an ambush, hesitated to advance, and turned back. Seeing the enemy's plan, Tuoba Ying immediately ordered a pursuit, defeated the enemy, and then besieged Nanlu Zheng.

古文：禁将士毋得侵暴，远近悦附，争供租运。
现代文：拓跋英禁令部下将士不得侵犯、掠夺当地百姓，所以周围的老百姓纷纷投附，争着纳供粮草。
English: Tuobao forbade his subordinates not to encroach on or plunder the local people, so the surrounding people flocked to him, vying to provide grain and grass.

古文：懿婴城自守，军主范絜先将三千馀人在外，还救南郑。英掩击，尽获之。
现代文：萧懿据城固守。这时，萧懿属下的军主范絜先正率领三千多兵马在外面，赶回来援救南郑，被拓跋英以伏兵截击，全部被擒俘。
English: At this time, Fan Yuxian, the commander of Xiao Yu's subordinate troops, was leading more than three thousand soldiers and horses outside, rushed back to rescue Nan Zheng, was intercepted by Tuoba Ying with an ambush, and all were captured.

古文：围城数十日，城中恟惧。
现代文：南郑城被围困数十日，城中一片慌恐。
English: Nan Zhengcheng was besieged for dozens of days, and the city was in a panic.

古文：录事参军新野庾域封题空仓数十，指示将士曰： 此中粟皆满，足支二年，但努力坚守！ 
现代文：录事参军新野人庚域把已经空了的数十个粮仓贴上封条，并且指给将士们看，对他们说： 这些仓中都装满了粮食，足够支用两年，只管努力固守。 
English: "These silos are full of grain, enough to last for two years. Just try to hold on to them," said Geng Wei, a new wild man who had joined the army. He sealed dozens of empty grain silos and pointed them out to the soldiers.

古文：众心乃安。
现代文：这样，军心才得到安定。
English: In this way, military morale was stabilized.

古文：会魏主召英还，英使老弱先行，自将精兵为后拒，遣使与懿告别。
现代文：这时，北魏孝文帝却命令拓跋英撤兵返回，拓跋英安排军中老弱病伤先头而行，自己率领精壮兵力殿后，以便抵挡南齐追兵，并且派使者去向萧懿告别。
English: At this time, the Northern Wei Emperor Xiaowen ordered Tuoba Ying to withdraw his troops back. Tuoba Ying arranged for the old and weak in the army to go ahead of the sick and wounded, and he led the elite troops behind the palace in order to resist Nanqi's pursuit, and sent an envoy to bid farewell to Xiao Wei.

古文：懿以为诈，英去一日，犹不开门；二月，乃遣将追之。
现代文：萧懿以为拓跋英在使诡诈之计，所以拓跋英撤走一天了，他还不敢打开城门。
English: Xiao Yao thought that Tuoba Ying was playing a trick on him, so he did not dare to open the gate even though it had been a day since Tuoba Ying had left.

古文：英与士卒下马交战，懿兵不敢逼，行四日四夜，懿兵乃返。
现代文：到了第二天，萧懿才派遣部将去追击，拓跋英与将士们一起下马交战，吓得萧懿的追兵不敢逼近，就这样尾随了拓跋英四天四夜，才不得不返撤。
English: On the second day, Xiao Yao sent the general to pursue. Tuoba Ying dismounted from his horse and fought with the soldiers. Xiao Yao's pursuers were so scared that they did not dare to approach. They followed Tuoba Ying for four days and four nights before they had to retreat.

古文：英入斜谷，会天大雨，士卒截竹贮米，执炬火于马上炊之。
现代文：拓跋英率领部队进入斜谷，恰遇天降大雨，将士们斩截竹子，把米装在竹筒之中，骑在马上手拿着火把烧烤竹筒，做成米饭。
English: Tuoba Ying led the troops into the valley, just in case of heavy rain, the soldiers cut off the bamboo, put the rice in the bamboo tube, and rode on horseback holding torches to grill the bamboo tube to make rice.

古文：先是，懿遣人诱说仇池诸氐，使起兵断英运道及归路。
现代文：这以前，萧懿派人去诱说仇池的各支氐族部落，让他们起兵截断拓跋英运送粮草的道路和后撤时所经之道。
English: Prior to this, Xiao Yao sent people to entice the various branches of the Yao tribes in Qiu Chi to raise an army to cut off the roads used by Tuobao Ying to transport grain and grass, as well as the route he took when retreating.

古文：英勒兵奋击，且战且前，矢中英颊，卒全军还仇池，讨叛氐，平之。
现代文：由于归路被氐人所堵，拓跋英统率部下奋力反击，边战边进，氐人发箭射中了拓跋英的面颊，但是他带伤指挥，终于率领全军回到仇池，并且讨伐平定了反叛的氐族部落。
English: As the way back was blocked by the Xiongnu, Tuoba Ying and his subordinates fought back, advancing side by side. The Xiongnu shot an arrow into Tuoba Ying's cheek, but he was wounded and finally led the whole army back to Qiu Chi, and the crusade leveled the rebellious Yao tribe.

古文：英，桢之子；懿，衍之兄也。
现代文：拓跋英是拓跋祯的儿子，萧懿是萧衍的哥哥。
English: Tuoba Ying is the son of Tuoba Yao, and Xiao Yao is the elder brother of Xiao Yan.

古文：英之攻南郑也，魏主诏雍、泾、岐三州发兵六千人戍南郑，俟克城则遣之。
现代文：拓跋英攻打南郑之时，北魏孝文帝诏令雍、泾、岐三州发兵六千人准备去戍守南郑，等待拓跋英攻下南郑就派他们出发前去。
English: When Tuoba Ying attacked Nan Zheng, the Northern Wei Emperor Xiaowen issued an order to dispatch six thousand soldiers from the three states of Yong, Lu, and Qi to prepare to defend Nan Zheng, and wait for Tuoba Ying to conquer Nan Zheng and then send them on their way.

古文：侍中兼左仆射李冲表谏曰： 秦川险厄，地接羌、夷。
现代文：但是，侍中兼左仆射李冲上表孝文帝，劝谏说： 秦川一带地理形势险恶，并且和羌、夷部族接境。
English: However, the second-in-command and left-hand servant, Li Xie, rushed up to Emperor Xiaowen and persuaded him, saying: The geographical situation around the Qin River is perilous, and it borders with the Yao and Yi tribes.

古文：自西师出后，饷援连续，加氐、胡叛逆，所在奔命，运粮擐甲，迄兹未已。
现代文：自从拓跋英所率西征之军出发之后，连接不断地给其部运送军饷，十分不易，再加上氐、胡部落反叛，所以左右受敌，疲于奔命，形势非常严峻，而后方为他们运送粮草的武装士兵，至今还忙个不停。
English: Since the departure of the Western Expeditionary Army led by Tuoba Ying, it has been very difficult to connect and continuously transport military pay to his department. Coupled with the rebellion of the Yao and Hu tribes, the situation is very grim, and the rear is still busy with armed soldiers transporting grain and grass for them.

古文：今复豫差戍卒，悬拟山外，虽加优复，恐犹惊骇。
现代文：如今，又准备差派戍守南郑的兵卒，预先设想秦岭山那边的情况，虽然到时对他们加以优厚待遇，但恐怕他们还是要担惊受怕的。
English: Now, they are preparing to send soldiers to guard Nan Zheng again, anticipating the situation on the other side of Qinling Mountain. Although they will be treated well at the time, I am afraid they still have to be afraid.

古文：脱终攻不克，徒动民情，连胡结夷，事或难测。
现代文：万一最终不能攻克南郑，那么就会使当地民情产生动摇，使他们与胡、夷部族连结起来，串通一气，这样的话事情就难以预测了。
English: In the unlikely event that Nan Zheng could not be defeated in the end, the local people's sentiment would be shaken, and they would link up with the Hu and Yi tribes and collude with them. In such a case, things would be difficult to predict.

古文：辄依旨密下刺史，待军克郑城，然后差遣。如臣愚见，犹谓未足。
现代文：所以，即使依照圣旨秘密命令这三州的刺史，等待我军攻克南郑城之后，再派遣戍守人员出发，但是依我之愚见，这样也不见得妥当。
English: Therefore, even if, in accordance with the sacred will, I secretly ordered the scribes of the three states to wait for our army to conquer South Zhengcheng and then dispatch the guards, in my foolish opinion, this would not be appropriate.

古文：何者？
现代文：何以见得呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：西道险厄，单径千里，今欲深戍绝界之外，孤据群贼之中，敌攻不可猝援，食尽不可运粮。
现代文：因为西边的道路险恶万分，只能单车行走的路就有千里之遥，如今想要深入敌境，周围没有援助力量，陷于群敌包围之中，而孤据独守一座南郑城，敌人发起进攻我们不可以马上增援，粮食吃尽了不可以立即补给。
English: Because the road to the west is extremely treacherous, and the road that can only be walked by bicycle is thousands of miles away. Nowadays, if you want to go deep into the enemy territory, there is no support force around, you are surrounded by a group of enemies, and you are the only one to defend a South Zhengcheng. If the enemy launches an attack, we cannot immediately reinforce, and if the grain is exhausted, it cannot be immediately replenished.

古文：古人有言， 虽鞭之长，不及马腹。 
现代文：古人说： 鞭子虽然长，但抽不到马肚子上去。 
English: The ancients said: Although the whip is long, it cannot be drawn up to the horse's belly.

古文：南郑于国，实为马腹也。
现代文：南郑对于我们而言，恰恰就是马肚子呀。
English: For us, Nan Zheng is just like a horse's stomach.

古文：且魏境所掩，九州过八；民人所臣，十分而九；所未民者，唯漠北之与江外耳。
现代文：况且，我们魏国所占的疆域，天下九州已超过了八个；已经臣服于我们的民众，达到了十分之九，还没有归顺于我朝的百姓，仅仅剩下大漠之北的柔然国和长江以南的齐国了，而且很快就可以征服的，所以又何必性急地现在就要占取南郑呢？
English: Moreover, there are more than eight Kyushu's under heaven in the territory occupied by our State of Wei; it has already surrendered to our people, reaching nine-tenths, and has not yet surrendered to the people of my dynasty. Only the Juran Kingdom in the north of the desert and the Qi Kingdom in the south of the Yangtze River are left, and they can be conquered soon, so why should we be anxious to occupy Nan Zheng now?

古文：羁之在近，岂汲汲于今日也！宜待疆宇既广，粮食既足，然后置邦树将，为吞并之举。
现代文：应该等待我们的疆域拓展得更广，粮食准备得更加充足了，然后再遣兵派将，举而吞并之。
English: We should wait for our territory to expand more widely and for grain to be more plentiful before sending troops to annex it.

古文：今钟离、寿阳，密迩未拔；赭城、新野，跬步弗降。
现代文：如今，寿阳、钟离两地离得很近却还没有夺取过来，赭城、新野两地也不过半步之近却也没有占取。
English: Today, Shouyang and Zhongli are very close to the two places, but they have not yet been captured, and Shicheng and Nino are not more than half a step away, but they have not been occupied.

古文：东道既未可以近力守，西籓宁可以远兵固！
现代文：东边淮、汉一带离得近但还不能完全守得住，西边南郑隔得那么远又怎么可能派兵固守得住呢？
English: The Huai and Han regions in the east are close but cannot be completely defended, while the Nan Zheng region in the west is so far away, how is it possible to send troops to defend it?

古文：若果欲置者，臣恐终以资敌也。
现代文：如果一定要置兵戌守南郑，我认为最终会被敌方所破，戍兵尽俘，这岂不成了资助敌人吗？
English: If it is necessary to set up troops to guard Nan Zheng, I think that it will eventually be broken by the enemy, and the soldiers will be captured. Will this not become the financing of the enemy?

古文：又，建都土中，地接寇壤，方须大将死士，平荡江会，若轻遣单寡，弃令陷没，恐后举之日，众以留守致惧，求其死效，未易可获。
现代文：再者，我们迁都洛阳，而洛阳又与齐朝接壤靠近，正应该大量招募敢死勇士，以平荡齐朝都会建康，如果现在轻率地派遣孤单的一支人马去戍守南郑，致使城陷之后全部覆没，恐怕以后再派人去戍守之时，众人要心存畏惧，担心留守不住，而朝廷要求他们以死相效，恐怕不能轻易办到了。
English: Furthermore, we moved the capital to Luoyang, and Luoyang is also close to the border with Qi Dynasty. We should recruit a large number of death-defying warriors to pacify Qi Dynasty and build a healthy city. If we now rashly send a lone team to guard Nan Zheng, resulting in the complete destruction of the city after the fall, I am afraid that when we send people to guard it in the future, everyone will be afraid and worried that they will not be able to stay. And if the court requires them to die, I am afraid that it will not be easy to do.

古文：推此而论，不戍为上。 
现代文：根据上述种种情况，我认为不派兵戍守南郑为上策。 
English: According to the above-mentioned circumstances, I believe that the best policy is not to send soldiers to guard South Zheng.

古文：魏主从之。
现代文：孝文帝采纳了李冲的建议。
English: Tuobao adopted Cui Hao's opinion.

古文：癸丑，魏主如小沛；己未，如瑕丘；庚申，如鲁城，亲祠孔子；辛酉，拜孔氏四人、颜氏二人官，作选诸孔宗子一人封崇圣侯，奉孔子祀，命兗州修孔子墓，更建碑铭。
现代文：癸丑，北魏孝文帝到达小沛；已未，到达瑕丘；庚申，到达鲁城，并且亲自去孔子庙祭祀；辛酉，封孔子后代四人、颜渊后代两人官职，并且选择孔子的嫡系后代长子一人封为崇圣侯，奉掌祭祀孔子之务，又命令兖州修缮孔子的墓，重建碑铭。
English: Gongxiu, Northern Wei Emperor Xiaowen, arrived at Xiaopei; Yawei, arrived at Kejiu; Goshun, arrived at Lucheng, and personally went to the Confucius Temple to offer sacrifices; Xinqiu, appointed four descendants of Confucius and two descendants of Yan Yuan to official positions, and selected one eldest son of the legitimate descendants of Confucius to be named Chong Sheng Hou, and was given the duty of offering sacrifices to Confucius. He also ordered Zhangzhou to repair Confucius's tomb and rebuild the inscription.

古文：戊辰，魏主如碻磝，命谒者仆射成淹具舟楫，欲自泗入河，溯流还洛。
现代文：戊辰，北魏孝文帝到达碻磝，命令谒者仆射成淹准备舟船，想乘船从泗水进入黄河，溯流而上，返回洛阳。
English: Wu Chen, the Northern Wei Emperor Xiaowen arrived in Luoyang and ordered his servants to prepare a boat. He wanted to take a boat from Luoyang to enter the Yellow River, travel upstream, and return to Luoyang.

古文：淹谏，以为 河流悍猛，非万乘所宜乘。 
现代文：成淹劝谏孝文帝不要从水路返洛阳，说： 黄河水流湍急，容易出险，万乘之君不宜乘船通行。 
English: Cheng Dun advised Emperor Gao Xiaowen not to return to Luoyang by water, saying: The Yellow River is fast-flowing, and it is easy to get into danger. It is not suitable for the Prince of Manchuria to travel by boat.

古文：帝曰： 我以平城无漕运之路，故京邑民贫。
现代文：孝文帝坚持己见，说： 我以为平城没有大河，漕运之路不通，所以京城的百姓贫穷。
English: Emperor Xiaowen persisted in his opinion, saying: I thought that there was no big river in Pingcheng, and the rowing road was impassable, so the people in Beijing were poor.

古文：今迁都洛阳，欲通四方之运，而民犹惮河流之险；故朕有此行，所以开百姓之心也。 
现代文：如今迁都洛阳，准备开通四方水路运输，但是百姓们犹害怕黄河水流之险。所以，朕才准备有溯黄河而上返回洛阳之行，以此打消百姓心中的种种顾虑。 
English: Now the capital has been moved to Luoyang, and preparations are being made for the opening of water transport in all directions, but the people are still afraid of the danger of the Yellow River. Therefore, I am preparing to travel up the Yellow River and return to Luoyang, in order to dispel all kinds of concerns in the hearts of the people.

古文：魏城阳王鸾等攻赭阳，诸将不相统壹，围守百馀日，诸将欲案甲不战以疲之。
现代文：北魏城阳王拓跋鸾等人进攻赭阳，各位将领之间不能统一行动，已经围攻了一百多日，但是还不能攻下，诸将领就准备不再攻城，而采取久围长困的办法使城内无法坚持下去而屈服。
English: In the Northern Wei Dynasty, King Tuoba and others attacked Fenyang. The generals could not act in unison. They had been besieging for more than a hundred days, but they could not capture it. The generals were prepared not to attack the city again, but to take the long siege method to make the city unable to hold out and give in.

古文：李佐独昼夜攻击，士卒死者甚众，帝遣太子右卫率垣历生救之。诸将以众寡不敌，欲退，佐独帅骑二千逆战而败。
现代文：只有李佐独自率部昼夜攻城，将士死伤非常多。明帝派遣太子右卫率垣历生前去援救，北魏将领以为势寡不能胜敌，想要撤退，李佐独自率领二千骑兵迎战垣历生，大败。
English: Only Li Zuo alone led his division to attack the city day and night, and many soldiers were killed and injured. The Ming Emperor sent the Prince of the Right Guards, led by Gu Lisheng, to the rescue. The Northern Wei generals thought that they could not defeat the enemy, and wanted to retreat. Li Zuo alone led two thousand cavalry against Gu Lisheng, and was defeated.

古文：卢渊等引去，历生追击，大破之。
现代文：卢渊等人逃遁，垣历生乘胜追击，大获全胜。
English: Lu Yuan and the others fled, but were chased down by Gaki Lisheng, who won a complete victory.

古文：历生，荣祖之从弟也。
现代文：垣历生是垣荣祖的堂弟。
English: Kaki Rensho was a cousin of Kaki Renzo.

古文：南阳太守房伯玉等又败薛真度于沙堨。
现代文：南阳太守房伯玉等人又在沙打败了薛真度。
English: Nanyang Daju Fang Bo Yu and others defeated Xue Zhendu in the sand.

古文：鸾等见魏主于瑕丘。魏主责之曰： 卿等沮辱威灵，罪当大辟；朕以新迁洛邑，特从宽典。 
现代文：拓跋鸾等人在瑕丘晋见孝文帝，孝文帝指责他们说： 你们畏敌败逃，辱我军威，罪该处死。但是，朕因新迁都洛阳之故，特宽恕你们不死。 
English: Emperor Xiaowen met with Tuobao and others at Kejiuchu Jin. Emperor Xiaowen rebuked them, saying, "You ran away in fear of the enemy and humiliated our military power. You should be put to death. However, because of the new capital being moved to Luoyang, I especially forgive you for not dying."

古文：五月，己巳，降封鸾为定襄县王，削户五百；卢渊、李佐、韦珍皆削官爵为民，佐仍徙瀛州。
现代文：五月己巳，孝文帝降封拓跋鸾为定襄县王，削夺禄户五百户，卢渊、李佐、韦珍等人皆被削去官职，贬黜为民，并且迁徙李佐到瀛州。
English: In May, Emperor Xiaowen demoted Tuobao to be the king of Dingxiang County, and cut off five hundred families from the lucrative households. Lu Yuan, Li Zuo, Wei Zhen and others were all removed from their official positions, demoted to commoners, and Li Zuo moved to Zhangzhou.

古文：以薛真度与其从兄安都有开徐方之功，听存其爵及荆州刺史，馀皆削夺，曰： 进足明功，退足彰罪矣。 
现代文：又因薛真度与他的堂兄薛安都有献彭城而投降北魏之功，保留他的爵位和荆州刺史之职，其余官职皆罢免，孝文帝就此而特作说明： 如此处理，进则足以表明他的功劳，退则足以彰示他的过罪。 
English: In addition, because Xue Zhendu and his cousin Xue An both had the merit of surrendering to the Northern Wei Dynasty by sacrificing Pengcheng, retaining his title and the post of Jingzhou stabbing history, and all other official posts were dismissed, Emperor Xiaowen made a special explanation: In this way, advancement is enough to show his merit, and retreat is enough to show his fault.

古文：魏广川刚王谐卒。
现代文：北魏广川刚王拓跋谐去世。
English: Northern Wei Guangchuan Emperor Gao Wang passed away peacefully.

古文：谐，略之子也。
现代文：拓跋谐是拓跋略的儿子。
English: Tuoba Jing is the son of Tuoba Liu.

古文：魏主曰： 古者，大臣之丧有三临之礼；魏、晋以来，王公之丧，哭于东堂。
现代文：孝文帝说： 古时候，大臣去世，君主有亲临三次之礼，魏、晋以来，王公去世，国君哭于东堂。
English: Emperor Xiaowen said: In ancient times, when a minister died, the monarch had to come in person three times. Since the Wei and Jin dynasties, when a prince died, the sovereign cried in the East Hall.

古文：自今诸王之丧，期亲三临；大功再临；小功、缌麻一临；罢东堂之哭。
现代文：从今以后，凡诸王去世，凡按礼朕应服丧一年的亲属，朕均要三次亲临；应服九个月丧的亲临两次；应服五个月或三个月丧的亲临一次，停止哭于东堂的礼节。
English: From now on, for the death of all kings, and for the death of all relatives who should be mourned for one year according to the ritual, I will come in person three times; for the death of nine months, I will come in person twice; for the death of five months or three months, I will come in person once, and stop crying in the East Hall.

古文：广川王于朕，大功也。 
现代文：广川王去世，朕应服期限为九个月丧的大功之礼。 
English: When King Hirokawa passed away, I had to serve a nine-month mourning period.

古文：将大敛，素服、深衣往哭之。
现代文：在将要为广川王举行大敛之礼时，孝文帝着素服、深衣前去哭吊。
English: When it was time to hold a great purification ceremony for King Hirokawa, Emperor Kobun went to the front in his plain clothes and dark clothes to weep and mourn.

古文：甲戌，魏主如滑台；丙子，舍于石济。
现代文：甲戌，北魏孝文帝到达滑台；丙子，下榻于石济。
English: Armor-plated, Northern Wei Emperor Xiaowen arrived at the slide; Bongzi, stayed in Shijie.

古文：庚辰，太子出迎于平桃城。
现代文：庚申，太子出迎孝文帝于平桃城。
English: Goshun, the crown prince, comes out to greet Emperor Xiaowen in Pingtao City.

古文：赵郡王幹在洛阳，贪淫不法，御史中尉李彪私戒之，且曰： 殿下不悛，不敢不以闻。 
现代文：北魏赵郡王拓跋干在洛阳贪婪乱，不守法令，御史中尉李彪私下劝诫他，并且对他说： 殿下不思悔改，所以我不敢不向上报告。 
English: In the Northern Wei Dynasty, King Tuoba of Zhao County was greedy and disorderly in Luoyang, and did not abide by the law. The imperial lieutenant Li Biao privately admonished him, and said to him: Your highness does not want to repent, so I dare not report to you.

古文：幹悠然不以为意。
现代文：可是拓跋干一副悠然自得的样子，根本不把此放在心上。
English: However, Tuoba, with a relaxed and self-satisfied look, did not care about this at all.

古文：彪表弹之。魏主诏幹与北海王详俱从太子诣行在。
现代文：李彪上表弹劾拓跋干，孝文帝诏令拓跋干和北海王拓跋详随同太子一起来他的行宫。
English: Li Biao impeached Tuobao on the table, and Emperor Xiaowen ordered Tuobao and the North Sea King Tuobao to accompany the prince to his palace.

古文：既至，见详而不见幹，阴使左右察其意色，知无忧悔，乃亲数其罪，杖之一百，免官还第。
现代文：他们到了之后，孝文帝只召见了拓跋详而没有召见拓跋干，并且暗中派遣身边的人去察看拓跋干反映如何，得知他既无担忧之心，又无悔改之意，于是把他叫来，亲自数落了一番他的罪行，打了他一百杖，罢免了他的官职，令崐他回家去了。
English: After they arrived, Emperor Xiaowen only summoned Tuoba for a meeting, but did not summon Tuoba Gan, and secretly sent people around to see how Tuoba Gan reacted, and learned that he was neither worried nor repentant, so he called him, personally counted his crimes, beat him with a hundred canes, dismissed him from his post, and ordered him to go home.

古文：癸未，魏主还洛阳，告于太庙。
现代文：癸未，北魏孝文帝驾还洛阳，在太庙中向祖先报告。
English: Before long, the Northern Wei Emperor Xiaowen returned to Luoyang and reported to his ancestors in the Great Temple.

古文：甲申，减冗官之禄以助军国之用。
现代文：甲申，孝文帝诏令减去散官的俸禄，以便资助军队开支。
English: Emperor Gaoshen and Emperor Xiaowen decreed to reduce the salary of non-commissioned officers in order to finance military expenses.

古文：乙酉，行饮至之礼。
现代文：乙酉，孝文帝在太庙举行饮酒仪式，对南伐有功之人论功而行赏。
English: At the same time, Emperor Xiaowen held a drinking ceremony in Taimiao to reward those who had distinguished themselves in the Southern Expedition.

古文：班赏有差。甲午，魏太子冠于庙。
现代文：甲午，北魏皇太子在太庙举行了加冠之礼。
English: In the afternoon of the first day, the crown prince of the Northern Wei Dynasty held a crowning ceremony in the Great Temple.

古文：魏主欲变北俗，引见群臣，谓曰： 卿等欲朕远追商、周，为欲不及汉、晋邪？ 
现代文：孝文帝想要改变北方风俗，为此而特意召见文武群臣，问他们： 各位爱臣希望朕远追商、周呢？还是想让朕连汉、晋都比不上呢？ 
English: Emperor Xiaowen wanted to change the customs of the north, and for this purpose, he specially summoned the ministers of literature and military affairs and asked them: "Dear ministers, do you want me to pursue merchants and Zhou? Or do you want me to be inferior to Han and Jin?"

古文：咸阳王禧对曰： 群臣愿陛下度越前王耳。 
现代文：咸阳王拓跋禧回答说： 群臣们都盼愿陛下能超过前王。 
English: King Tuoba Xi of Xianyang replied: The courtiers all hope that Your Majesty can surpass the former king.

古文：帝曰： 然则当变风易俗，当因循守故邪？ 
现代文：孝文帝接着又问道： 那么应当改变风俗习惯呢？还是因循守旧呢？ 
English: Emperor Xiaowen then asked: So, should we change our customs and habits? Or should we stick to the old ways?

古文：对曰： 愿圣政日新。 
现代文：拔跋禧再回答： 愿意移风易俗，圣政日新。 
English: Bapchak replied again: I am willing to change customs and mores, and the holy government will be renewed day by day.

古文：帝曰： 为止于一身，为欲传之子孙邪？ 
现代文：又问： 只是愿意自身实行呢？还是希望传之于子孙后代呢？ 
English: He also asked: Are you only willing to practice it yourself, or do you hope to pass it on to future generations?

古文：对曰： 愿传之百世！ 
现代文：回答说： 愿意传之于百世万年。 
English: He answered: I would like to pass it on for a thousand generations.

古文：帝曰： 然则必当改作，卿等不得违也。 
现代文：于是，孝文帝说道： 那么，朕一定下令开始进行，你们一定不得有违。 
English: Therefore, Emperor Xiaowen said, "Well, I will definitely give the order to begin, and you must not go against it."

古文：对曰： 上令下从，其谁敢违！ 
现代文：拓跋禧回答： 上令而下从，有谁敢违抗呢？ 
English: Tuoba Xi replied: I obey orders, who would dare to disobey?

古文：帝曰： 夫 名不正，言不顺，则礼乐不可兴。 
现代文：孝文帝又说：  名不正，言不顺，则礼乐不能兴。 
English: Emperor Xiaowen also said: If the name is not correct and the words are not proper, then the ritual music cannot be performed.

古文：今欲断诸北语，一从正音。
现代文：现今朕想要禁止使用鲜卑语，全部改用汉语。
English: Now I want to ban the use of Xianbei and use Chinese instead.

古文：其年三十已上，习性已久，容不可猝革。
现代文：年龄在三十岁以上的人，由于习性已久，可以宽容他们不能一下子就改换过来。
English: People over the age of thirty, because of their long-standing habits, can tolerate that they cannot be changed all at once.

古文：三十已下，见在朝廷之人，语音不听仍旧；若有故为，当加降黜。
现代文：但是，年龄在三十岁以下的人，凡在朝廷中任职者，不能允许他们仍然还讲过去的语言，如果有谁故意不改，就一定要降免其官职。
English: However, anyone under the age of thirty who holds a post in the imperial court cannot be allowed to continue to speak the language of the past, and anyone who deliberately does not change must be demoted.

古文：各宜深戒！
现代文：所以，各位应当严加自戒。
English: Therefore, everyone should be on their guard.

古文：王公卿士以为然不？ 
现代文：对此，各位王公卿士同意不同意呢？ 
English: In this regard, do you agree or disagree?

古文：对曰： 实如圣旨。 
现代文：拓跋禧回答： 无不遵从圣旨。 
English: Tuoba Xi replied: There is no failure to comply with the Holy Will.

古文：帝曰： 朕尝与李冲论此，冲曰： 四方之语，竟知谁是；帝者言之，即为正矣。 
现代文：孝文帝接着讲道： 朕曾经与李冲谈过这件事，李冲说： 四方之人，言语不同，故不知应该以谁的为是；做皇帝的人说的，就是标准。 
English: Emperor Xiaowen went on to say, "I once talked to Li Chong about this matter. Li Chong said, "People from the four directions have different languages, so I don't know who to believe; what the emperor says is the standard.

古文：冲之此言，其罪当死！ 
现代文：李冲此话，其罪行应当处死。 
English: Li Chong said this, his crime should be put to death.

古文：因顾冲曰； 卿负社稷，当令御史牵下！ 
现代文：因此看着李冲又说道： 你有负于社稷，应当命令御史把你牵下去。 
English: Therefore, he looked at Li Chong and said, "You have failed the society, you should order your history to take you down."

古文：冲免冠顿首谢。
现代文：李冲摘下帽子磕头谢罪。
English: Li Chong took off his hat and bowed his head in thanks.

古文：又责留守之官曰： 昨望见女犹服夹领小袖，卿等何为不遵前诏！ 
现代文：孝文帝又指责出巡时留守洛阳的官员们： 昨天，朕望见妇女们还穿着夹领小袖衣服，你们为什么不遵行朕前头的诏令呢？ 
English: Emperor Xiaowen also criticized the officials who stayed in Luoyang during the inspection: Yesterday, I saw women still wearing short-sleeved clothes with a collar. Why didn't you follow my previous edict?

古文：皆谢罪。
现代文：这些官员们都磕头谢罪不已。
English: These officials have been apologizing profusely.

古文：帝曰： 朕言非是，卿等当庭争。如何入则顺旨，退则不从乎！ 
现代文：孝文帝继续讲道： 如果朕讲的不对，你们可以当庭争辩，为什么上朝则顺从朕旨，退朝后就不听从呢？ 
English: Emperor Xiaowen continued his sermon: If what I said is not right, you can argue in court. Why did the last emperor obey my will, but not the emperor after his abdication?

古文：六月，己亥，下诏： 不得为北俗之语于朝廷。违者免所居官！ 
现代文：六月己亥，孝文帝下令： 在朝廷中不得讲鲜卑语，违背者免去所任官职。 
English: In June of the same year, Emperor Xiaowen issued an order: In the imperial court, it is not allowed to speak the Xingbei language, and those who violate this order will be removed from their posts.

古文：癸卯，魏主使太子如平城赴太师熙之丧。
现代文：癸卯，北魏孝文帝派遣太子到平城参加太师冯熙的丧礼。
English: At the same time, Emperor Xiaowen of the Northern Wei Dynasty sent the prince to Pingcheng to attend the funeral of Grand Master Feng Xi.

古文：癸丑，魏诏求遗书，秘阁所无，有益时用者，加以优赏。
现代文：癸丑，北魏孝文帝发布诏令，搜求民间藏书，凡是朝廷秘阁中所无而又有益于时用的书，献者加以赏赐。
English: At that time, Emperor Xiaowen of the Northern Wei Dynasty issued a decree to search for folk books, and to reward those who donated books that were not in the imperial cabinet but were useful.

古文：魏有司奏： 广川王妃葬于代都，未审以新尊从旧卑，以旧卑就新尊？ 
现代文：北魏有关官吏上奏： 广川王的妃子埋葬在平城，而广川王今已去世，不知道是广川王随他的妻子回葬于平城呢？
English: The relevant officials of the Northern Wei issued a report: The concubine of King Guangchuan was buried in Pingcheng, and King Guangchuan has now passed away. Is it not known that King Guangchuan and his wife were reburied in Pingcheng?

古文：魏主曰： 代人迁洛者，宜悉葬邙山。
现代文：还是他妻子随广川王移葬于洛阳呢？ 孝文帝说： 凡是代京人迁移来洛阳的，死后应该全部埋葬在邙山。
English: Or did his wife move to Luoyang to be buried with King Hirokawa? Emperor Xiaowen said, "All those who migrated to Luoyang from Kyoto should be buried in Shaoshan after death.

古文：其先有夫死于代者，听妻还葬；夫死于洛者，不得还代就妻。
现代文：如果丈夫先死在代京，那么妻子死后可以送回代京安葬；如果丈夫死在洛阳，不可以送回代京随他的妻子安葬。
English: If the husband died in Daikyo first, then the wife could be sent back to Daikyo for burial after death; if the husband died in Luoyang, he could not be sent back to Daikyo to be buried with his wife.

古文：其馀州之人，自听从便。 
现代文：其他州的人，听从自便。 
English: People from other states, you're on your own.

古文：丙辰，诏： 迁洛之民死，葬河南，不得还北。 
现代文：丙辰，孝文帝诏令： 迁移到洛阳的人死后，葬于河南，不得送回北边安葬。 
English: Emperor Xiancheng and Emperor Xiaowen decreed that after the death of a person who migrated to Luoyang, he should be buried in Henan, and should not be sent back to the north for burial.

古文：于是代人南迁者悉为河南洛阳人。
现代文：于是，从代京迁居到洛阳的人全部成为河南洛阳人。
English: As a result, all the people who moved from Daikyo to Luoyang became Luoyang people in Henan Province.

古文：戊午，魏改用长尺、大斗，其法依《汉志》为之。
现代文：戊午，北魏改用长尺、大斗，其度量法度依照《汉书》中的记载制定。
English: At the beginning of the 17th century, the Northern Wei Dynasty changed to the use of the long ruler and the big bucket, and its measurement method was formulated in accordance with the records in the "Chinese Book."

古文：上之废郁林王也，许萧谌以扬州；既而除领军将军、南徐州刺史。
现代文：南齐明帝废除郁林王时，曾许诺萧谌为扬州刺史，但是事后却任命他为领军将军、南徐州刺史。
English: When Emperor Ming of the Southern Qi abolished King Yulin, he had promised Xiao Yu to become Yangzhou's crown prince, but later appointed him as the leading general, the crown prince of Southern Xuzhou.

古文：谌恚曰： 见炊饭，推以与人。 
现代文：萧谌心怀不满，怨恨说： 饭做熟了，却推给别人吃了。 
English: Disgruntled and resentful, Xiao Yan said, "The rice is cooked, but I pushed it to others to eat.

古文：谌恃功，颇干预朝政，所欲选用，辄命尚书使为申论。
现代文：萧谌恃功自傲，颇有些干预朝政事务，他想选用谁了，就命令尚书为其说话。
English: Xiao Yan Gong was proud of his achievements and interfered quite a bit in the affairs of the imperial court. When he wanted to choose someone, he ordered Shang Shu to speak for him.

古文：上闻而忌之，以萧诞、萧诔方将兵拒魏，隐忍不发。
现代文：明帝知道之后非常有意见，因为萧诞、萧诔正率兵抵抗北魏，所以隐藏在心头而不表示出来。
English: After the Emperor Ming knew, he was very concerned, because Xiao Zhao and Xiao Yu were leading soldiers to resist the Northern Wei Dynasty, so he hid it in his heart and did not express it.

古文：壬戌，上游华林园，与谌及尚书令王晏等数人宴，尽欢；坐罢，留谌晚出，至华林阁，仗身执还入省。
现代文：壬戌，明帝游赏华林园，与萧谌以及尚书令王晏等几个人一起宴饮，喝得非常尽兴。宴席结束之时，明帝留下萧谌，让他最后离开，当他达到华林阁时，被皇帝身边的武装卫士拘捕，押至官署。
English: At the end of the banquet, Emperor Ming left Xiao Yao to leave for the last time, and when he reached the Waring Pavilion, he was arrested by the armed guards around the emperor and taken to the government office.

古文：上遣左右莫智明数谌曰： 隆昌之际，非卿无有今日。
现代文：明帝派手下人莫智明去数说了萧谌的罪行，讲道： 隆昌之时，如果没有你，我不会有今天。
English: Emperor Ming sent his subordinate Mo Zhiming to count Xiao Yao's crimes, preaching: At the time of Longchang, if it weren't for you, I wouldn't be here today.

古文：今一门二州、兄弟三封，朝廷相报，止可极此。
现代文：现在你们兄弟三人都被封上爵位，有两人担任了州刺史，朝廷报答你，已经是到了极点。
English: Now that all three of your brothers have been knighted, and two of them have served as state prefect, the court has rewarded you to the utmost.

古文：卿恆怀怨望，乃云炊饭已熟，合甑与人邪！
现代文：可是，你还是不满足，总是心怀怨恨，说什么饭作熟了，连锅送给别人去吃了。
English: However, you are still not satisfied, always harboring resentment, saying that the meal is cooked, and even giving the pot to others to eat.

古文：今赐卿死！ 
现代文：现在朝廷特赐你死。 
English: Now the court has given you a death sentence.

古文：遂杀之，并其弟诔；以黄门郎萧衍为司州别驾，往执诞，杀之。
现代文：于是，杀死了萧谌，他的弟弟萧诔也被杀。明帝又派遣黄门郎萧衍为司州别驾，去司州拘捕萧诞，并杀害了他。
English: As a result, Xiao Yao was killed, and his brother Xiao Yao was also killed. Emperor Ming also sent Huangmen Lang Xiao Yan as a special envoy to Sizhou to arrest Xiao Xi, and killed him.

古文：谌好术数，吴兴沈文猷常语之曰： 君相不减高帝。 
现代文：萧谌爱好术数，吴兴人沈文猷经常对他说： 您的命相不亚于高帝。 
English: Xiao Yao was fond of acrobatics, and Wu Xingren Shen Wenyu often said to him: Your life is no less than that of Gao Di.

古文：谌死，文猷亦伏诛。
现代文：萧谌死后，沈文猷也被诛死。
English: After Xiao Yao's death, Shen Wenzhong was also killed.

古文：谌死之日，上又杀西阳王子明、南海王子罕、邵陵王子贞。
现代文：萧谌被杀害的那天，明帝又杀害了西阳王萧子明、南海王萧子罕、邵陵王萧子贞。
English: On the day that Xiao Yao was killed, Emperor Ming also killed Xiyang King Xiao Ziming, Nanhai King Xiao Zihan, and Shaoling King Xiao Zizhen.

古文：乙丑，以右卫将军萧坦之为领军将军。
现代文：乙丑，南齐任命右卫将军萧坦之为领军将军。
English: In the second ugly, Nanzhi appointed the right guard general Xiao Tan as the leading general.

古文：魏高闾上言： 鄴城密皇后庙颓圮，请更葺治；若谓已配飨太庙，即宜罢毁。 
现代文：北魏高闾上书孝文帝说： 邺城供奉密皇后神位的庙已经倒塌，请求重新加以修缮。如果认为她已经享祭于太庙了，不必再单供神位，那么就应当把庙毁掉。 
English: Emperor Xiaowen, who was enthroned in the Northern Wei Dynasty, said, "The temple in Lucheng dedicated to the divine throne of Empress Dowager Mi has collapsed, and it is requested that it be repaired. If it is considered that she has already been enshrined in the Great Temple, and it is no longer necessary to offer the divine throne alone, then the temple should be destroyed."

古文：诏罢之。
现代文：孝文帝诏令毁掉其庙。
English: He was dismissed from his post by imperial edict.

古文：魏拓跋英之寇汉中也，沮水氐杨馥之为齐击武兴氐杨集始，破之。
现代文：北魏拓跋英侵犯汉中之时，沮水的氐族部落杨馥之帮助南齐，为南齐攻打武兴的氐族首领杨集始，打败了他。
English: When the Northern Wei Tuobao invaded Hanzhong, Yang Xizhi of the disheartened Yi tribe helped Nanqi and fought for Nanqi against Yang Jishi, the leader of the Yi tribe in Wuxing, and defeated him.

古文：秋，七月，辛卯，以馥之为北秦州刺史、仇池公。
现代文：秋季，七月辛卯，南齐任命杨馥之为北秦州刺史，并封他为仇池公。
English: In the autumn, in July Xinwu, Nanqi appointed Yang Xizhi as the governor of North Qin Province, and appointed him as the governor of Quchi.

古文：八月，乙巳，魏选武勇之士十五万人为羽林、虎贲以充宿卫。
现代文：八月乙巳，北魏选拔勇猛的武士十五万人担任羽林、虎贲，以充实皇宫宿卫。
English: In August of the same year, the Northern Wei Dynasty selected 150,000 brave warriors to serve as eagles and tigers to enrich the palace guards.

古文：魏金墉宫成，立国子、太学、四门小学于洛阳。
现代文：北魏的金墉宫修建完毕，并且在洛阳设立国子、太学、四门小学。
English: The construction of the Northern Wei Dynasty's Jinlun Palace was completed, and Guozi, Taigaku, and Shimen elementary schools were established in Luoyang.

古文：魏高祖游华林园，观故景阳山，黄门侍郎郭祚曰： 山水者，仁智之所乐，宜复修之。 
现代文：北魏高祖孝文帝游赏华林园，观览过去曹魏明帝所筑的景阳山，黄门侍郎郭祚说道： 山水是仁者、智者所喜爱的，应该重新加以修复。 
English: Emperor Xiaowen, the founder of the Northern Wei Dynasty, toured the Hualing Garden and viewed the Jingyang Mountain built by Cao Wei and Ming Dynasties in the past. Guo Wei, the Yellow Gate attendant, said: The landscape is loved by the benevolent and the wise, and should be restored again.

古文：帝曰： 魏明帝以奢失之于前，朕岂可袭之于后乎！ 
现代文：孝文帝回答说： 魏明帝以奢侈失之于前，朕怎么可以步其后尘呢？ 
English: Emperor Xiaowen replied, "Wei Mingdi lost his way with extravagance, how can I follow in his footsteps?

古文：帝好读书，手不释卷，在舆、据鞍，不忘讲道。
现代文：孝文帝爱好读书，经常手不释卷，外出时在车中或者在马鞍之上仍不忘讲学论道。
English: Emperor Xiaowen was fond of reading, and would often hold a book in his hand. When he was out in the car or on horseback, he would not forget to give lectures on Taoism.

古文：善属文，多于马上口占，既成，不更一字；自太和十年以后，诏策皆自为之。
现代文：他又擅长吟诗作文，常常骑在马上口头作诗，作完之后，不用更改一个字，自从太和十年之后，各种诏令、策书都是自己撰写。
English: He was also good at composing poetry. He often rode on horseback and composed poems orally. After he finished, he didn't have to change a single word. Since Tae Wo's death ten years later, he has written all kinds of edicts and policy documents by himself.

古文：好贤乐善，情如饥渴，所与游接，常寄以布素之意，如李冲、李彪、高闾、王萧、郭祚、宋弁、刘芳、崔光、邢峦之徒，皆以文雅见亲，贵显用事；制礼作乐，郁然可观，有太平之风焉。
现代文：他还爱好贤才、善士，求贤心切，如崐饥似渴。凡是与他交往接近的，他总是对他们寄以普通人的情意而不以帝王自居。比如李冲、李彪、高闾、王肃、郭祚、宋弁、刘芳、崔光、邢峦等人，都因资质文雅而得到他的亲近，并且担任了重要职位，因此而显贵。李冲等人为朝廷制礼作乐，成绩裴然，郁郁可观，有太平淳古之风。
English: He also loved the wise and virtuous, and was eager to find them. He was as hungry as he was thirsty. Whenever he came into contact with those who were close to him, he always treated them as ordinary people, rather than as emperors. For example, Li Chong, Li Biao, Gao Wei, Wang Su, Guo Wei, Song Ben, Liu Fang, Cui Guang, Zou and others were all close to him because of their refined qualities, and they held important positions, so they were distinguished. Li Chong and others made music for the imperial court, and their achievements were impressive and impressive, with the style of Taiping and Chun Gu.

古文：治书侍御史薛聪，辨之曾孙也，弹劾不避强御，帝或欲宽贷者，聪辄争之。帝每曰： 朕见薛聪，不能不惮，何况诸人也！ 
现代文：北魏治书侍御史薛聪是薛辩的曾孙，他弹劾人不畏避强横之人，孝文帝有时想要宽容被弹劾者，薛聪就总是和他争辩，以致孝文帝经常说： 朕见了薛聪，也不能不害怕，何况其他人呢？ 
English: The Northern Wei governor Shi Xuecong was the great-grandson of Xuefen. He was not afraid to impeach people and shunned those who were domineering. Emperor Xiaowen sometimes wanted to tolerate those who were impeached. Xuecong always argued with him, so that Emperor Xiaowen often said: "When I see Xuecong, I can't help but be afraid. What about others?

古文：自是贵戚敛手。
现代文：因此，那些贵戚们不得不有所收敛。
English: From then on, the power of the aristocrats and their families began to wane.

古文：累迁直阁将军，兼给事黄门侍郎、散骑常侍，帝外以德器遇之，内心以膂为寄，亲卫禁兵，悉聪管领，故终太和之世，恒带直阁将军。
现代文：薛聪升至直将军，并兼给事黄门侍郎、散骑常侍，孝文帝对外表明是重用他的德行才气，而在内心则把他视为心腹，皇宫中的卫士禁兵，全部交给他来统管，所以直到孝文帝去世，他一直担任直将军。
English: Xue Cong rose to the rank of General Naosuke, and was also given the posts of Yellow Gate Attendant and Free Rider. Emperor Xiaowen showed to the outside world that he was reusing his virtues and talents, but in his heart he regarded him as a confidant, a guard in the imperial palace, and all were handed over to him to manage. So until the death of Emperor Xiaowen, he had been serving as General Naosuke.

古文：群臣罢朝之后，聪桓陪侍帷幄，言兼昼夜，时政得失，动辄匡谏，事多听允；而重厚沉密，外莫窥其际。
现代文：每次上朝，群臣百官退朝之后，薛聪总是留下来陪侍孝文帝，两人在帷幕后面议论政事，有时能整整说上一昼夜，对于时事政治方面的得失利弊，薛聪动辄加以匡正劝谏，所见大多被采纳。然而，薛聪为人做事厚重而谨慎，所以外界并不能窥见他的内心边际。
English: Every time the emperor ascended to the throne, after the retiring of hundreds of officials, Xue Cong always stayed behind to accompany Emperor Xiaowen. The two discussed political affairs behind the curtain, and sometimes they could talk for a whole day and night. As for the political advantages and disadvantages of current affairs, Xue Cong corrected and advised at every turn, and most of what he saw was adopted. However, Xue Cong was a serious and cautious person, so the outside world could not see his inner margin.

古文：帝欲进以名位，辄苦让不受。
现代文：孝文帝想要升进薛聪的名分地位，可是他总是苦苦辞让，不愿领受。
English: Emperor Xiaowen wanted to give him a promotion, but he firmly refused to accept it.

古文：帝亦雅相体悉，谓之曰： 卿天爵自高，固非人爵之所能荣也。 
现代文：孝文帝也能对他的态度体贴理解，对他说道： 您内禀仁义忠信之质，天爵自高，固然不必再以公卿大夫这些所谓人爵而荣身了。 
English: Emperor Xiaowen could also understand his considerate attitude, and said to him, "Your innate qualities of benevolence, loyalty, and self-exaltation make you a prince. Of course, it is no longer necessary to glorify yourself with the so-called peerage of nobles and doctors.

古文：九月，庚午，魏六宫、文武悉还于洛阳。
现代文：九月，庚午，北魏皇帝的后妃、夫人、嫔御等以及内外文武百官全部迁于洛阳。
English: In September, at noon, the Northern Wei Emperor's concubines, wives, empresses, and hundreds of domestic and foreign civil and military officials all moved to Luoyang.

古文：丙戌，魏主如鄴，屡至相州刺史高闾之馆，美其治效，赏赐甚厚。
现代文：丙戌，北魏孝文帝到达邺地。孝文帝多次来到相州刺史高闾的官舍，赞美他治理本州的成绩，并且给予特别丰厚的赏赐。
English: Emperor Xiaowen of the Northern Wei Dynasty arrived in Handan at the same time. Emperor Xiaowen repeatedly came to the official residence of Sanzhou Sisi Gaoqi, praised his achievements in governing the state, and gave him a particularly rich reward.

古文：闾数请本州，诏曰： 闾以悬车之年，方求衣锦，知进忘退，有尘谦德；可降号平北将军。
现代文：高闾数次请求孝文帝让他回到本土幽州去做官，孝文帝因此而发布诏令： 高闾以该告老退休的年龄，方才要求衣锦还乡，他这样只知进而不知退，实在有损于谦德，所以降其封号为平北将军。
English: Gao Jiong repeatedly asked Emperor Xiaowen to let him return to his native Yuzhou to become an official. As a result, Emperor Xiaowen issued a decree: Gao Jiong was old enough to retire, so he asked for the brocade to return to his hometown. He only knew how to advance without retreating, which was really detrimental to his modesty. Therefore, his title was reduced to General of the North.

古文：朝之老成，宜遂情愿，徙授幽州刺史，令存劝两修，恩法并举。 
现代文：他是朝廷中年龄和资历都相当老的大臣，应当顺遂他的心愿，所以调任他为幽州刺史。这样做可以既满足了他的请求，以示朝廷之恩，又起到劝善存法的作用。 
English: He was an old minister in the imperial court, both in age and seniority, and his wishes should be complied with, so he was transferred to write history for Yuzhou. This could not only satisfy his request, to show the grace of the imperial court, but also play a role in persuading the good preservation of the law.

古文：以高阳王雍为相州刺史，戒之曰： 作牧亦易亦难： 其身正，不令而行。所以易； 其身不正，虽令不从， 所以难。 
现代文：孝文帝又任命高阳王拓跋雍为相州刺史，并且告戒他说： 作一州之长也容易，也难。 自己言行端正，不用法令别人也会遵从 ，如此就容易； 自己立身不正，即使以法令强迫别人也不会听从 ，所以说难。 
English: Emperor Xiaowen also appointed Gaoyang Wang Tuobaoyong as the governor of Xiangzhou, and warned him: "It is both easy and difficult to be the governor of a province; if you say and do the right things, others will follow you without any laws, so it is easy; if you do not stand up for yourself, even if you force others with laws, they will not obey you, so it is difficult."

古文：己丑，徙南平王宝攸为郡陵王，蜀郡王子文为西阳王，广汉王子峻为衡阳王，临海王昭季为巴陵王，永嘉王昭粲为桂阳王。
现代文：己丑，南齐调迁南平王萧宝攸为邵陵王、蜀郡王萧子文为西阳王、广汉王萧子峻为衡阳王、临海王萧昭秀为巴陵王、永嘉王萧昭粲为桂阳王。
English: In addition, Nanqi transferred Nanping King Xiao Baoyu to Shao Ling King, Shu County King Xiao Ziwen to Xiyang King, Guanghan King Xiao Zijun to Hengyang King, Linhai King Xiao Zhaoxiu to Baling King, Yongjia King Xiao Zhaojun to Guiyang King.

古文：乙未，魏主自鄴还；冬，十月，丙辰，至洛阳。
现代文：乙未，北魏孝文帝从邺返还洛阳，冬季，十月，丙辰，到达洛阳。
English: Emperor Xiaowen of the Northern Wei Dynasty returned to Luoyang from Yunnan in the 2nd year of the Wei Dynasty, and arrived in Luoyang in the winter, in October, and in the 4th year of the Yin Dynasty.

古文：壬戌，魏诏： 诸州牧精品属官，考其得失为三等以闻。 
现代文：壬戌，北魏孝文帝诏令： 各州认真考察官员们的政绩，根据得失，分为三等，上报朝廷。 
English: Emperor Xiaowen of the Northern Wei Dynasty decreed that all states should carefully examine the political achievements of officials, divide them into three classes according to their gains and losses, and report the results to the imperial court.

古文：又诏： 徐、兗、光、南青、荆、洛六州，严纂戎备，应须赴集。 
现代文：又诏令： 徐、兖、光、南青、荆、洛六州，应当加强战备，随时待命，一旦令下，应立即赴召。 
English: He also decreed that the six prefectures of Xu, Min, Guang, Nanqing, Jing and Luo should strengthen their combat readiness and be on standby at any time. Once the order is issued, they should be called up immediately.

古文：十一月，丁卯，诏罢世宗东田，毁兴光楼。
现代文：十一月丁卯，南齐明帝诏令罢除文惠太子修治的东田，并拆毁兴光楼。
English: In November, Emperor Ming of the Southern Qi Dynasty issued an edict to remove Prince Wen Hui from the East Field and demolish the Xingguang Building.

古文：己卯，纳太子妃褚氏，大赦。
现代文：已卯，为太子纳妃子褚氏，大赦天下。
English: Now, the crown prince, Na-hiko Ito, has been pardoned by the emperor.

古文：妃，澄之女也。
现代文：太子的妃子是褚澄的女儿。
English: The prince's concubine is Shizumi's daughter.

古文：庚午，魏主如委粟山，定圜丘。
现代文：庚午，北魏孝文帝到达委粟山，测定祭天的圜丘。
English: In the afternoon of the 7th day of the 7th month, Emperor Xiaowen of the Northern Wei Dynasty arrived at Maoshan of the CPC Central Committee to inspect the sacred mountain.

古文：己卯，帝引诸儒议圜丘礼。秘书令李彪建言： 鲁人将有事于上帝，必先有事于泮宫。请前一日告庙。 
现代文：已卯，孝文帝召集群儒商议祭天之礼，秘书令李彪建议说： 古代鲁国人如果有事要祈告上天，必定先在学宫中祈祷，所以请提前一日祭告于太庙。 
English: Emperor Xiaowen convened a group of Confucian scholars to discuss the ritual, and the secretary ordered Li Biao to propose: If the ancient Lu people have something to pray to heaven, they must first pray in the palace, so please announce it one day in advance at the Imperial Temple.

古文：从之。
现代文：孝文帝采纳了他的建议。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：甲申，魏主祀圜丘；丙戌，大赦。
现代文：甲申，孝文帝祭天于圜丘，大赦天下。
English: Jiaxun, Emperor Xiaowen's festival is held in Shaoshan, and it is widely celebrated.

古文：十二月，乙未朔，魏主见群臣于光极堂，宣下品令，为大选之始。
现代文：十二月乙未朔，北魏孝文帝在光极堂接见群臣，宣布在官员中实行九品之制，即将开始大选群臣。
English: In December, Emperor Xiaowen of the Northern Wei Dynasty met with his ministers in Guangji Hall and announced the implementation of the nine-grade system among officials, and the general election of ministers was about to begin.

古文：光禄勋于烈子登引例求迁官，烈上表曰： 方今圣明之理，朝应廉让，而臣子登引人求进；是臣素无教训，乞行黜落！ 
现代文：光禄勋于烈的儿子于登依照旧例请求升官，于烈上表孝文帝说： 如今正值圣明之朝，做臣子的理应清廉谦让，但是我儿子于登却援引旧例而要求晋升，这是我平素对他教训不严的结果，所以乞求朝廷罢黜我的官职。 
English: Yu Deng, the son of Guanglu Xun Yu Lai, requested a promotion in accordance with the old practice, and Yu Deng went to see Emperor Xiaowen. He said, "Nowadays, it is the morning of the sacred day, and a courtier should be honest and humble. However, my son Yu Deng invoked the old practice and asked for a promotion. This was the result of my laxity in teaching him, so I begged the court to dismiss me from my official post."

古文：魏主曰： 此乃有识之言，不谓烈能办此！ 
现代文：孝文帝说： 这是有识之言，没有料到于烈能做到这样。 
English: Xiaowen Di said: This is a wise saying, I did not expect Yu Lie to be able to do this.

古文：乃引见登，谓曰： 朕将流化天下，以卿父有谦逊之美、直士之风，故进卿为太子翊军校尉。 
现代文：于是召见了于登，对他说： 朕将要广施教化于天下，因为你父亲有谦逊之美德、正直之品格，所以特晋升你为太子翊军校尉。 
English: Therefore, he summoned Yu Deng and said to him: "I will spread the teachings throughout the world, because your father has the virtue of modesty and the character of honesty. Therefore, I specially promoted you to the rank of the prince's lieutenant."

古文：又加烈散骑常侍，封聊城县子。
现代文：并且加任于烈为散骑常侍，封为聊城县子。
English: In addition, Yu Lie was awarded the title of straggler, Viscount of Liaocheng County.

古文：魏主谓群臣曰： 国家从来有一事可叹：臣下莫肯公言得失是也。
现代文：北魏孝文帝对群臣们说： 一个国家从来都有一件事情让人感到可叹，就是臣子们不肯公开地谈论得失是非。
English: Emperor Xiaowen of the Northern Wei Dynasty said to his courtiers: A country has always had one thing to be lamented, that is, the courtiers are unwilling to openly discuss the rights and wrongs.

古文：夫人君患不能纳谏，人臣患不能尽忠。
现代文：作为一国之君，患在不能采纳劝谏；作为臣子，患在不能尽忠竭力。
English: As the sovereign of a country, the trouble is that he cannot accept advice; as a vassal, the trouble is that he cannot be loyal.

古文：自今朕举一人，如有不可，卿等直言其失；若有才能而朕所不识，卿等亦当举之。
现代文：从今以后朕推举一人，如有不妥之处，你们可以直言其失；如果有才能之士而朕不能发现，你们也应当加以举荐。
English: From now on, I will nominate a person. If there is something wrong, you can say so. If there is a talented person and I can't find him, you should also recommend him.

古文：如是，得人者有赏，不言者有罪，卿等当知之。 
现代文：这样，能举荐人才者有赏，知而不言者有罪，你们应当明白这一点。 
English: In this way, those who can recommend talent are rewarded, and those who know and do not speak are guilty. You should understand this.

古文：丁酉，诏修晋帝诸陵，增置守卫。
现代文：丁酉，明帝诏令修缮晋代诸位皇帝的陵墓，并且增置了守护陵墓的卫士。
English: Ding Xi, the Ming Emperor issued an edict to repair the mausoleums of the emperors of the Jin Dynasty, and added guards to guard the mausoleums.

古文：甲子，魏主引见群臣于光极堂，颁赐冠服。
现代文：甲子，北魏孝文帝在光极堂召见群臣百官，给他们颁赐冠服，以易去胡服。
English: Emperor Xiaowen of the Northern Wei Dynasty summoned a group of ministers and officials in Guangji Hall and presented them with ceremonial robes, which were easy to remove.

古文：先是，魏人未尝用钱，魏主始命铸太和五铢。
现代文：早先北魏人不使用钱币，从孝文帝开始才命令铸造太和五铢钱。
English: Earlier, the Northern Wei Dynasty did not use coins. It was Emperor Xiaowen who ordered the minting of the Taihe five-baht coins.

古文：是岁，鼓铸粗备，诏公私用之。
现代文：到本年，已经铸造得大体齐备，因此孝文帝诏令公私方面一律开始使用钱币。
English: By this year, the minting was almost complete, so Emperor Xiaowen issued an edict to start using coins for both public and private purposes.

古文：魏以光城蛮帅田益光为南司州刺史，所统守宰，听其铨置。
现代文：北魏任命光城的蛮人首领田益光为南司州刺史，所属的郡守县令，听任他自己设置、诠选。
English: The Northern Wei Dynasty appointed Tian Yiguang, the leader of the barbarians in Guangcheng, as the governor of Nanshi County, which he set up and interpreted.

古文：后更于新蔡立东豫州，以益光为刺史。
现代文：后来又在新蔡设立东豫州，任命田益光为刺史。
English: Later, Dongyuzhou was set up in Xincai, and Tian Yiguang was appointed as the chief historian.

古文：氐王杨炅卒。
现代文：氐族首领杨炅去世。
English: The leader of the Shan ethnic group, Yang Hui, has died.

古文：高宗明皇帝中建武三年
现代文：建武三年
English: The third year of Jianwu

古文：春，正月，丁卯，以杨炅子崇祖为沙州刺史，封阴平王。
现代文：春季，正月丁卯，南齐任命杨炅的儿子杨崇祖为沙州刺史，封他为阴平王。
English: In the spring, in the first month of Dingwu, Nanqi appointed Yang Yong's son Yang Chongzu as the governor of Shazhou and named him the king of Yinping.

古文：魏主下诏，以为： 北人谓土为拓，后为跋。
现代文：北魏孝文帝发布诏令，认为： 北方人称 土 为 拓 ，称 后 为 跋 。
English: Emperor Xiaowen of the Northern Wei Dynasty issued a decree, saying: People in the north call soil "taku" and soil "waza."

古文：魏之先出于黄帝，以土德王，故为拓跋氏。
现代文：魏朝的祖先是黄帝的后代，以土德而称帝，所以姓拓跋。
English: The ancestors of the Wei Dynasty were the descendants of the Yellow Emperor, who was known as the Emperor of the Germanic people, hence the surname Tuoba.

古文：夫土者，黄中之色，万物之元也；宜改姓元氏。
现代文：土，乃黄中之色，万物之元，所以应该改姓为 元 。
English: Earth is the color of yellow, the origin of all things, so it should change its name to Yuan.

古文：诸功臣旧族自代来者，姓或重复，皆改之。 
现代文：诸位功臣旧族中凡从代京迁来的，其姓氏有的重复，要一律改变。 
English: All meritorious members of the old clan who have moved from Daikyo and whose surnames are duplicates must change them.

古文：于是始改拔拔氏为长孙氏，达奚氏为奚氏，乙旃氏为叔孙氏，丘穆陵氏为穆氏，步六孤氏为陆氏，贺赖氏为贺氏，独孤氏为刘氏，贺楼氏为楼氏，勿忸于氏为于氏，尉迟氏为尉氏；其馀所改，不可胜纪。
现代文：于是，开始改拔拔氏为长孙氏、达奚氏为奚氏、乙旃氏为叔孙氏、丘穆陵氏为穆氏、步六孤氏为陆氏、贺赖氏为贺氏、独孤氏为刘氏、贺楼氏为楼氏、勿忸于氏为于氏、尉迟氏为尉氏，其余所改姓氏，不可胜数。
English: As a result, the renaming of the Ba clan to the Chosun clan, the Daju clan to the Shun clan, the Aceto clan to the Unshun clan, the Qumuling clan to the Mu clan, the Bu Ruko clan to the Lu clan, the Horai clan to the He clan, the Doku Ruko clan to the Liu clan, the Helou clan to the Lou clan, the Beshiyu clan to the Yu clan, the Yejiji clan to the Yeji clan, and the remaining name changes are countless.

古文：魏主雅重门族，以范阳卢敏、清河崔宗伯、荥阳郑羲、太原王琼四姓，衣冠所推，咸纳其女以充后宫。
现代文：北魏孝文帝一向看重名门望族，由于范阳人卢敏、清河人崔宗伯、荧阳人郑义、太原人王琼四姓门族，在士大夫中最受推重，所以特意选他们的女儿进入后宫。
English: Emperor Xiaowen of the Northern Wei Dynasty always valued famous and prestigious families. Since Lu Min of Fanyang, Cui Zombo of Qinghe, Zheng Yi of Fuyang, and Wang Qiong of Taiyuan were the four families of families, they were the most important among scholars, so their daughters were specially selected to enter the harem.

古文：陇西李冲以才识见任，当朝贵重，所结姻姻，莫非清望；帝亦以其女为夫人。
现代文：陇西人李冲以才识受到任用，成为朝中显贵，他所结的姻亲，都是具有清白名望而为时人所敬重的高门，孝文帝也以他的女儿为夫人。
English: Li Chong, a native of Shaanxi Province, was appointed with great talent and became a prominent member of the imperial court. His in-laws were all high-ranking nobles who were respected by the people of the time. Emperor Xiaowen also took his daughter as his wife.

古文：诏黄门郎、司徒左长史宋弁定诸州士族，多所升降。
现代文：孝文帝诏令黄门郎、司徒左长史宋弁审定各州的士族，地位多有升降。
English: Emperor Xiaowen decreed that Huangmen Lang and Sittu Zuochangshi Song Ben should examine the warrior clans in each prefecture, and their positions were mostly promoted or demoted.

古文：又诏以 代人先无姓族，虽功贤之胤，无异寒贱；故宦达者位极公卿，其功、衰亲仍居猥任。
现代文：孝文帝又诏令： 代京人早先没有姓族，虽然是功勋、贤士的后代，也与那些寒贱出身者没有什么区别。所以，一些宦途通达者虽然位极公卿，但他们的亲族却依然担任着地位卑下的官职。
English: Emperor Xiaowen also issued a decree: The deputies to the capital did not have surnames and families in the past, and although they were the descendants of meritorious and wise men, they were no different from those who came from humble backgrounds. Therefore, although some of those who had made their way were extremely noble, their relatives still held low-ranking official positions.

古文：其穆、陆、贺、刘、楼、于、嵇、尉八姓，自太祖已降，勋著当世，位尽王公，灼然可知者，且下司州、吏部，勿充猥宫，一同四姓。
现代文：其中之穆、陆、贺、刘、楼、嵇、尉八姓，从太祖皇帝以来，功勋卓越，著称于世，位至王公，无人不知，通知司州和吏部，不要让他们充任卑微官职，而应当同卢、崔、郑、王四姓一样对待。
English: Among them, the eight surnames of Mu, Lu, He, Liu, Lou, Zheng and Li, who have made outstanding contributions since the time of the great-grandfather emperor, are famous in the world, and have been elevated to kings, and no one knows, inform the prefectural government and the Ministry of Civil Affairs that they should not be allowed to serve as low-ranking officials, but should be treated the same as the four surnames of Lu, Cui, Zheng and Wang.

古文：自此以外，应班士流者，寻续别敕。
现代文：除这些大族之外，其他还应该班列士族之列者，不久就继续由朝廷下令加以确认。
English: In addition to these great clans, others who should also be counted among the Banules were soon to be confirmed by order of the imperial court.

古文：其旧为部落大人，而皇始已来三世官在给事已上及品登王公者为姓；若本非大人，而皇始已来三世官在尚书已上及品登王公者亦为姓。
现代文：那些过去为部落头人，而从道武帝皇始年间以来三代官职在给事以上，以及爵位上至王公的确定其姓；如果不是头人，而自皇始年间以来三代官职在尚书以上以及爵位上至王公的也确定其姓。
English: Those who used to be tribal chiefs, but since the reign of Emperor Daowu, the three generations of officials have been above the rank of official, and the title of prince has been determined; if they are not chiefs, but since the reign of Emperor Daowu, the three generations of officials have been above the rank of official, and the title of prince has been determined.

古文：其大人之后而官不显亦为族；若本非大人而官显者说为族。
现代文：属头人之后代，但是官职不显要的确定其族，或者本非头人而官职显要的也确定其族。
English: Descendants of the headman, but whose official position is not important, determine their tribe, or those who are not headmen but whose official position is important also determine their tribe.

古文：凡此姓族，皆应审核，勿容伪冒。
现代文：凡此姓与族，都应该加以审核，不允许其中有伪冒者。
English: All such surnames and clans should be checked and no impostors should be allowed.

古文：令司空穆亮、尚书陆琇等详定，务令平允。 
现代文：命令司空穆亮、尚书陆琇等人详加审定，务必要做到公正合理。 
English: He ordered Siku Mu Liang, Shang Shu Lu Yao and others to carry out detailed verification, and it is imperative to be fair and reasonable.

古文：琇，馛之子也。
现代文：陆琇是陆琇的儿子。
English: Lu Yao is the son of Lu Yao.

古文：魏旧制：王国舍人皆应娶八族及清修之门。
现代文：北魏过去的制度：各藩王的妃嫔都应选娶八大姓及有清望的门第人家之女。
English: The system of the Northern Wei Dynasty in the past: the concubines of the kings of each domain should choose to marry the daughters of the eight major surnames and the families with clear expectations.

古文：威阳王禧娶隶户为之，帝深责之，因下诏为六弟聘室： 前都所纳，可为妾媵。
现代文：咸阳王拓跋禧娶隶户人家之女为妃嫔，孝文帝严厉地责备了他，因此下诏令为六个弟弟重新聘娶妻室，说： 以前所纳娶的，可以改做为小妾。
English: Emperor Xiaowen severely reprimanded Tuobaoxi, the king of Xianyang, for marrying the daughter of a member of a family as his concubine. Therefore, he issued a decree to re-hire wives for his six younger brothers, saying: Those who were previously married can be changed to concubines.

古文：咸阳王禧，可聘故颍川太守陇西李辅女；河南王幹，可聘故中散大夫代郡穆明乐女；广陵王羽，可聘骠骑咨议参军荥阳郑平城女；颍川王雍，可聘故中书博士范阳卢神宝女；始平王勰，可聘廷尉卿陇西李冲女；北海王详，可聘吏部郎中荥阳郑懿女。 
现代文：咸阳王元禧，可以聘娶颍川太守陇西人李辅的女儿；河南王元干，可以聘娶已故中散大夫代郡人穆明乐的女儿；广陵王元羽，可以聘娶骠骑谘议参军荥阳人郑平城的女儿；颍川王元雍，可以聘娶中书博士范阳人卢神宝的女儿；始平王元勰，可以聘娶廷尉卿陇西人李冲的女儿；北海王元详，可以聘娶吏部郎中荥阳人郑懿的女儿。 
English: King Yuan Xi of Hamyang could marry the daughter of Li Yu, the daughter of Li Su, the daughter of the governor of Lukawa and a native of Shaanxi; King Yuan Gan of Henan could marry the daughter of Mu Mingle, the daughter of the late Dr. Sunan, who was the acting governor of the county; King Yuan Yu of Guangling could marry the daughter of Zheng Pingcheng, a native of Lukawa and a member of the army; King Yuan Yong of Lukawa could marry the daughter of Lu Shenbao, a native of Fanyang and a doctor of Chinese classics; King Yuan Yu of Shihping could marry the daughter of Li Chong, a native of Sha

古文：懿，羲之子也。
现代文：郑懿是郑羲的儿子。
English: Zheng Yao is the son of Zheng Yao.

古文：时赵郡诸李，人物尤多，各盛家风，故世之言高华者，以五姓为首。
现代文：当时，赵郡李姓诸门中，人物尤其多，都能发扬家风，所以世人谈论门第高贵，均推卢、崔、郑、王、李五姓为首。
English: At that time, among the families with the surname of Li in Zhao County, there were especially many people who could carry forward the family style, so the world talked about the nobility of the family, all pushing Lu, Cui, Zheng, Wang and Li as the first five surnames.

古文：众议以薛氏为河东茂族。帝曰： 薛氏，蜀也，岂可入郡姓！ 
现代文：众人议论以薛氏为河东的望族，孝文帝则不同意，说： 薛氏是蜀人，怎么可以成为一郡之大姓呢？ 
English: Everyone was discussing the Xue clan as the most prestigious family in the east of the river, but Emperor Xiaowen disagreed, saying, "The Xue clan is from Shu, so how can it become the biggest family name in a county?

古文：直阁薛宗起执戟在殿下，出次对曰： 臣之先人，汉末仕蜀，二世复归河东，今六世相袭，非蜀人也。
现代文：当时直薛宗起正执戟站在殿下，他站出来对孝文帝问道： 我的祖先于汉代末期在蜀地做官，两代之后又回到河东，如今已经六代相沿袭，所以不应该算作蜀人。
English: At that time, Zhi Ying Xue Zongqi was holding the scepter in the presence of His Imperial Highness. He stood up and asked Emperor Xiaowen: My ancestor was an official in Shu at the end of the Han Dynasty. Two generations later, he returned to Hedong. Now, six generations have followed him, so he should not be counted as a Shu person.

古文：伏以陛下黄帝之胤，受封北土，岂可亦谓之胡邪！
现代文：我斗胆问一句，陛下是黄帝后代，而受封北方，难道也可以说是胡人吗？
English: I dare to ask, Your Majesty is a descendant of the Yellow Emperor, and you were given the title of the North, can you really be called a Wu person?

古文：今不预郡姓，何以生为！ 
现代文：现今不认我们为郡中大姓，还有何脸面活下去呢？ 
English: Now that they don't recognize us as the county's top family name, how can we go on living?

古文：乃碎戟于地。
现代文：于是，把手中之戟摔碎于地。
English: As a result, he smashed the pickaxe in his hands to the ground.

古文：帝徐曰： 然则朕甲、卿乙乎？ 
现代文：孝文帝慢悠悠地说道： 那么，朕为甲，你为乙吗？ 
English: Emperor Xiaowen slowly said: So, I am A, and you are B?

古文：乃入郡姓，仍曰： 卿非 宗起 ，乃 起宗 也！ 
现代文：于是，同意列薛姓为郡之大姓，并同薛宗起戏言道： 你不是 宗起 ，而是 起宗 呀！ 
English: As a result, he agreed that the surname Le Xue should be the county's family name, and jokingly said with Xue Zongqi: You are not Zongqi, but Zizong!

古文：帝与群臣论选调曰： 近世高卑出身，各有常分；此果如何？ 
现代文：孝文帝与群臣们议论选拔调派官员之事，他问道： 近世以来，出身高卑贵贱，各有一定，这样划分如何呢？ 
English: Emperor Xiaowen and his courtiers were discussing the selection and transfer of officials. He asked: Since the modern era, there have been a certain number of people of high, low and noble birth, so how should they be divided?

古文：李冲对曰： 未审上古已来，张官列位，为膏梁子弟乎，为致治乎？ 
现代文：李冲反问道： 不知道上古以来，分官列位，其目的是为了那些膏梁子弟们呢？还是为了治理国家呢？ 
English: Li Chong asked back: I don't know, since ancient times, the purpose of ranking officials is for those anointed ones? Or is it for governing the country?

古文：帝曰： 欲为治耳。 
现代文：孝文帝回答： 当然是为了治理天下。 
English: Emperor Xiaowen replied: Of course, in order to rule the world.

古文：冲曰： 然则陛下今日何为专取门品，不拔才能乎？ 
现代文：李冲又顺势反问： 那么陛下为什么专门选取门第出身，而不注重才能方面的选拔呢？ 
English: Li Chong also asked a counter-question: Then why did His Majesty specifically choose the lineage, rather than focusing on the selection of talent?

古文：帝曰： 苟有过人之才，不患不知。
现代文：孝文帝辩解说： 如果其人有过人的才能，不怕不为人所知。
English: Emperor Xiaowen explained, "If someone has superior talent, he is not afraid of not being known by others.

古文：然君子之门，借使无当世之用，要自德行纯笃，朕故用之。 
现代文：然而，君子门第出身，即使没有为当世所用之才能，但终归在德行方面要纯洁笃实一些，朕所以选用他们。 
English: However, coming from a noble family, even if they do not have the talent to be used in the world, they should be pure and solid in terms of virtue, so I choose them.

古文：冲曰： 傅说、吕望，岂可以门地得之！ 
现代文：李冲再反问道： 难道傅说、吕望可以凭门第出身得到吗？ 
English: Li Chong then asked back: Did Fu say that Lvang could be obtained by virtue of his lineage?

古文：帝曰： 非常之人，旷世乃有一二耳。 
现代文：孝文帝再回答： 这种不平常的人才，旷世才有一二。 
English: Emperor Xiaowen answered again: This kind of unusual talent is rare.

古文：秘书令李彪曰： 陛下若专取门地，不审鲁之三卿，孰若四科？ 
现代文：这时，秘书令李彪也说道： 陛下如果专以门第取士，那么对于鲁国的三卿季孙、孟孙、叔孙氏与孔门四科人才，是选择前者呢？
English: At this time, the secretary, Li Biao, also said: "Your Majesty, if you only select the best from your family, then for the three emperors of Lu, Qisun, Mengsun, and Uncle Sun, and the four great scholars of Confucianism, do you choose the former?

古文：著作佐郎韩显宗曰： 陛下岂可以贵袭贵，以贱袭贱！ 
现代文：还是选择后者呢？ 著作佐郎韩显宗也说道： 陛下岂能使贵者世袭为贵，贱者永远为贱呢？ 
English: Or do you choose the latter? The writings of Saro Han Xianzong also say: Can your majesty make the noble hereditary noble, and the lowly forever lowly?

古文：帝曰： 必有高明卓然、出类拔萃者，朕亦不拘此制。 
现代文：孝文帝回答： 如果遇有才识高明、卓然不凡，出类而拔萃者，朕也不拘泥于这一制度。 
English: Emperor Xiaowen replied: If there is someone who is highly talented, extraordinary, and outstanding, I will not stick to this system.

古文：顷之，刘昶入朝，帝谓昶曰： 或言唯能是寄，不必拘门；朕以为不尔。
现代文：一会儿，刘昶来到朝中，孝文帝对他说： 有人说选拔官员要唯才能是重，不必拘于门第出身，朕则以为不然。
English: After a while, Liu Ye came to the center of the imperial court, and Emperor Xiaowen said to him: Some people say that the selection of officials should be based on talent alone, and not necessarily on the family background, but I think otherwise.

古文：何者？
现代文：为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：清浊同流，混齐一等，君子小人，名品无别，此殊为不可。
现代文：因为这样则会清浊同流，混淆为一，以致名器不分，使君子小人没有区别，这无论如何是不可以的。
English: Because in this way, it will be clear that they are in the same stream and confused into one, so that the famous instruments are not distinguished, so that there is no difference between the gentleman and the villain, which is unacceptable in any case.

古文：我今八族以上士人，品第有九，九品之外，小人之官复有七等。
现代文：我们现在八族以上的士人，品第分为九个级别。九品之外，出身低贱而做官者又分为七等。
English: We now have eight ethnic groups or more, and the grade is divided into nine levels. In addition to the nine grades, those who are low-born and become officials are divided into seven grades.

古文：若有其人，可起家为三公。
现代文：如果世有贤才，可以升为三公。
English: If there is a genius in the world, he can be promoted to San Gong.

古文：正恐贤才难得，不可止为一人浑我典制也。 
现代文：朕正担心贤才难得，但是也不可以仅为一个人而搞乱了我的典章制度。 
English: I'm worried about the scarcity of talent, but I can't let just one person mess up my award system.

古文：臣光曰： 选举之法，先门地而后贤才，此魏、晋之深弊，而历代相因，莫之能改也。
现代文：司马光说：选拔举荐人才的制度，先门第而后贤才这是魏、晋时期的一大弊端，然而历代相因袭，莫能改变。
English: Sima Guang said: The system of selecting and recommending talents, first the students and then the scholars, was a major drawback during the Wei and Jin dynasties. However, it was influenced by the past generations and could not be changed.

古文：夫君子、小人，不在于世禄与侧微。以今日视之，愚智所同知也。当是之时，虽魏孝文之贤，犹不免斯蔽。
现代文：君子与小人之别，不在于出身世禄之家与布衣贫贱之别，以今天的眼光来看，这是愚者和智者都能认识到的，然而，在当时，虽然以北魏孝文帝之贤，犹不能免于这一偏见。
English: The difference between a gentleman and a villain is not the difference between being born in a noble family and being poor. From today's perspective, this is something that both fools and wise men can recognize. However, at that time, although Emperor Xiaowen of the Northern Wei Dynasty was a wise man, he was still not free from this prejudice.

古文：故夫明辨是非而不惑于世俗者，诚鲜矣！
现代文：所以，能明辩是非而不受世俗之见影响人的实在是稀少啊！
English: Therefore, it is rare to find a person who can clearly argue right and wrong without being influenced by worldly views!

古文：壬辰，魏徙始平王勰为彭城王，复定襄县王鸾为城阳王。
现代文：壬辰，北魏调迁始平王元勰为彭城王，恢复定襄县王元鸾为城阳王。
English: In Imjin, the Northern Wei Dynasty transferred Shi Ping Wang Yuanqi to Pengcheng King and restored Dingxiang County King Yuanqi to Chengyang King.

古文：二月，壬寅，魏诏： 君臣自非金革，听终三年丧。 
现代文：二月壬寅，北魏孝文帝诏令： 群臣中如果不是武将，要实行守丧三年的制度。 
English: In February, Emperor Jinyin of the Northern Wei Dynasty and Emperor Xiaowen of the Northern Wei Dynasty issued a decree: If a vassal is not a military commander, a three-year mourning system should be implemented.

古文：丙午，魏诏： 畿内七十已上，暮春赴京师行养老之礼。 
现代文：丙午，北魏孝文帝诏令： 国都附近七十岁以上者，于暮春之时到京师举行养老之礼。 
English: In the afternoon of the 3rd day of the 4th month, Emperor Xiaowen of the Northern Wei Dynasty issued a decree: Those who are over 70 years old in the vicinity of the capital should come to Beijing at the end of spring to hold a pension ceremony.

古文：三月，丙寅，宴群臣及国老、庶老于华林园。 诏： 国老，黄耇已上，假中散大夫、郡守；耆年已上，假给事中、县令。
现代文：三月丙寅，孝文帝在华林园宴请群臣以及贵族中退休的老年人和士中的老者，诏令： 贵族退休的老年人，黄发高寿以上者，给予中散大夫、郡守的名誉职位；年龄在六十岁以上者，给予给事中、县令的名誉职位。
English: In March, Emperor Xiaowen held a banquet in the Waring Garden for a group of ministers, as well as the elderly who had retired from the aristocracy and the elderly who had retired from the clergy, and issued a decree: The elderly who had retired from the aristocracy and were over the age of sixty were given the honorary positions of Zhongshan doctor and county magistrate; those who were over the age of sixty were given the honorary positions of Zhongzheng and county magistrate.

古文：庶老，直假郡、县，各赐鸠杖、衣裳。 
现代文：士中的老者，直接给予郡、县的虚职，分别赏赐以鸠鸟为饰的玉仗和衣裳。 
English: The elders of the cadres directly gave the county and the county's honorary posts, respectively, and rewarded the cadres with ostriches and clothes.

古文：丁丑，魏诏： 诸州中正各举其乡民望，年五十已上守素衡门者，授以令、长。 
现代文：丁丑，北魏孝文帝诏令： 各州的中正各自举荐本乡之有德行而为乡人所尊重者，年龄在五十岁以上而家境贫寒的，授以令、长之职。 
English: Emperor Xiaowen of the Northern Wei Dynasty issued an edict: The Chinese emperors in each province were to nominate a person of virtue who was respected by the people in his hometown. If the person was over fifty years old and from a poor family, he was to be given a title and a high post.

古文：壬午，诏： 乘舆有金银饰校者，皆剔除之。 
现代文：壬午，明帝诏令： 乘坐的车子上面有金银装饰的，全部去掉。 
English: In Renwu, the Ming Emperor issued an edict: If the car you are riding in is decorated with gold and silver, remove all of it.

古文：上志慕节俭。太官尝进裹蒸，上曰： 我食此不尽，可四破之，馀充晚食。 
现代文：南齐明帝一心要做到节俭朴素，负责膳食的太官一次给他进献一种名叫裹蒸的食品，他对太官说： 我一次吃不完这么一个，可以把它分成四块，剩下的晚上再吃。 
English: Nanqi Mingdi was determined to be frugal and simple. The eunuch in charge of the meal once presented him with a kind of food called steamed food. He said to the eunuch: I can't finish eating this one at a time, I can divide it into four pieces and eat the rest in the evening.

古文：又尝用皁荚，以馀泺授左右曰： 此可更用。 
现代文：还有一次，明帝使用皂荚洗浴，指着用过的皂荚水对身边近侍说： 这个还可以使用。 
English: On another occasion, Emperor Ming used soap to bathe, pointing to the used soapy water and saying to the attendants around him: "This can still be used."

古文：太官元日上寿，有银酒鎗，上欲坏之；王晏等咸称盛德，卫尉萧颖胄曰： 朝廷盛礼，莫若三元。此一器既是旧物，不足为侈。 
现代文：太官在正月初一给明帝上寿，温酒时使用了一个用银子制作的酒铛，明帝要把它毁掉，王晏等人都称颂他品德高尚，卫尉萧颖胄却说： 朝廷中最隆重的节日，莫若正月初一，这个银制酒铛是旧物了，所以不足为奢侈。 
English: The eunuch celebrated Emperor Ming's birthday on the first day of the first month of the year, and used a silver wine goblet to serve warm wine. Emperor Ming wanted to destroy it. Wang Yao and others praised his noble character, but the guard Xiao Yingyao said: The most solemn festival in the imperial court is the first day of the first month of the year. This silver wine goblet is an old thing, so it is not a luxury.

古文：上不悦。
现代文：明帝听了心中很不高兴。
English: Wenzong was not happy with Chen Yigang's words.

古文：后预曲宴，银器满席。颖胄曰： 陛下前欲坏酒钅仓，恐宜移在此器。 
现代文：后来明帝又在宫中设宴，席上有许多银制器皿，萧颖胄又对明帝说道： 陛下前次要毁掉酒铛，恐怕应该毁坏的是眼前这些银器呀。 
English: Later, Emperor Ming also held a banquet in the palace, and there were many silver utensils on the table. Xiao Yingyao said to Emperor Ming: Your Majesty wanted to destroy the wine jars last time, but I'm afraid it's these silverware that should be destroyed.

古文：上甚惭。
现代文：说得明帝满面愧色。
English: To put it bluntly, the emperor was mortified.

古文：上躬亲细务，纲目亦密，于是郡县及六署、九府常行职事，莫不启闻，取决诏敕。
现代文：明帝事无巨细，必须躬亲，要求很烦琐，因此连下面各郡县以及朝中六署、九府的日常事务，也必须全部向他报告，取得他的旨令才能办理。
English: Emperor Ming did not care about details, he had to be close to his subjects, and his demands were very burdensome. Therefore, even the daily affairs of the counties and counties below, as well as the six offices and nine prefectures of the Imperial Court, had to be reported to him in full, and his orders had to be obtained before they could be handled.

古文：文武勋旧，皆不归选部，亲近凭势，户相通进，人群之务过繁密。
现代文：文武官员中功臣和旧臣的选拔、使用等，都不归于吏部管理，而是凭借亲戚关系互相提拔，以致使明帝陷于事务之中，负担过于繁重。
English: The selection and use of meritorious officers and former officers among civil and military officials are not attributed to the management of the cadre department, but to mutual promotion by virtue of kinship, so that the Ming emperor is caught in affairs and the burden is too heavy.

古文：南康王侍郎颍川钟嵘上书言： 古者，明君揆才颁政，量能授职，三公坐而论道，九卿作而成务，天子唯恭己南面而已。 
现代文：南康王侍郎颍川人钟嵘上书明帝，指出： 古时候，圣明的国君根据下属的才干分派事情，量其能力授以官职，三公坐而论道，九卿具体分工执行，而天子则只是高高在上，无为而治。 
English: Nankang Wang's attendant, Zengchuan Man, wrote a letter to Emperor Ming at the top of the bell, pointing out: In ancient times, the sovereign of Shengming assigned matters according to the talents of subordinates and awarded official positions according to their abilities. The three princes sat and discussed the way, and the nine nobles carried out the specific division of labor, while the heavenly son was only superior and ruled without doing anything.

古文：书奏，上不怿，谓太中大夫顾暠曰： 钟嵘何人，欲断朕机务！卿识之不？ 
现代文：钟嵘的上书被奏上，明帝阅过之后心中不悦，问太中大夫顾暠： 钟嵘何许人也？想干涉朕的事务，你认识不认识他？ 
English: Zhong Xi's petition was read aloud, and Emperor Ming was displeased after reading it. He asked the Grand Vizier Gu Xi: "Who is Zhong Xi? He wants to interfere in my affairs. Do you know him?

古文：对曰： 嵘虽位末名卑，而所言或有可采。
现代文：顾暠回答说： 钟嵘虽然地位卑微，没有名气，但是他所讲的或许有可采纳之处。
English: Gu Yao replied: Although Zhong Yao's position is lowly and he is not famous, what he said may be acceptable.

古文：且繁碎职事，各有司存；今人主总而亲之，是人主愈劳而人臣愈逸，所谓 代疱人宰而为大匠斫 也。 
现代文：确实，那些繁重琐碎的事务，都分别有职能部门来办理，现在陛下您全部包揽过来，亲自处理，结果弄得陛下越是劳累，臣子们则越是清闲，正所谓 代替庖人宰割，代替大匠斫削 。 
English: Indeed, those burdensome and trivial affairs were all handled separately by functional departments. Now, Your Majesty, you have taken care of everything and dealt with it personally. As a result, the more tired Your Majesty is, the more idle the courtiers are. It is the so-called "cutting in place of the cutter" and "milling in place of the master."

古文：上不顾而言他。
现代文：但是，明帝不理睬顾暠所说，而另改换别的话题。
English: However, Emperor Ming ignored what Gu Xi said and changed the topic to something else.

古文：夏，四月，甲辰，魏广州刺史薛法护来降。
现代文：夏季四月，甲辰，北魏广州刺史薛法护向南齐请求投降。
English: In the summer of April, Jia Chen, the Northern Wei governor of Guangzhou, Zhang Shi Xue Fa Guo, went to Nanqi to request surrender.

古文：魏寇司州，栎城戍主魏僧珉拒破之。
现代文：北魏侵犯司州，南齐戍守栎城的首领魏僧珉率兵抵抗，击败了来犯的军队。
English: The Northern Wei invaded Sizhou, and the leader of the Southern Qi, Wei Sengqi, led the resistance and defeated the invading army.

古文：五月，丙戌，魏营方泽于河阴。
现代文：五月丙戍，北魏在河阴掘筑夏至日祭地的方泽。
English: In May, the Northern Wei Dynasty excavated the summer solstice festival site of Fangze in Heyin.

古文：又诏汉、魏、晋诸帝陵，百步内禁樵苏。
现代文：孝文帝诏令禁止在汉、魏、晋各代皇帝陵百步之内打柴割草。
English: Emperor Xiaowen issued an edict forbidding the cutting of firewood and grass within a hundred paces of the imperial tombs of the Han, Wei, and Jin dynasties.

古文：丁亥，魏主有事于方泽。
现代文：丁亥，孝文帝在方泽祭地。
English: Emperor Dinghai and Emperor Xiaowen at the Fangze Festival Grounds.

古文：秋，七月，魏废皇后冯氏。
现代文：秋季七月，北魏废皇后冯氏。
English: In the autumn of July, the Northern Wei Dynasty's former Empress Feng died.

古文：初，文明太后欲其家贵重，简冯熙二女入掖庭，其一早卒，其一得幸于魏主，未几，有疾，还家为尼。
现代文：起初，文明太后想让他的家族富贵显赫，选择冯熙的两个女儿进宫做妃嫔，其中一个早早去世，另一个得到孝文帝的亲近，但是时间不久，身染疾病，只好回到家中削发为尼。
English: At first, the Empress Dowager of Civilization wanted to make his family rich and prominent, and chose two daughters of Feng Xi to enter the palace as concubines. One of them died early, and the other got close to Emperor Xiaowen, but soon, she contracted an illness and had to return home to shave her hair.

古文：及太后殂，帝立熙少女为皇后。
现代文：等到文明太后死后，孝文帝又立冯熙的小女儿为皇后。
English: After the death of Empress Dowager Wenming, Emperor Xiaowen made Feng Xi's youngest daughter the empress.

古文：既而其姊疾愈，帝思之，复迎入宫，拜左昭仪；后宠浸衰。
现代文：不久，皇后的姐姐病好，孝文帝非常思念她，就又把她迎进宫中，拜为左昭仪，从此皇后渐渐失去了孝文帝的宠爱。
English: Soon after, the empress's sister fell ill, and Emperor Xiaowen missed her very much, so he welcomed her back into the palace and worshipped her as Zuo Zhaoyi. From then on, the empress gradually lost Emperor Xiaowen's favor.

古文：昭仪自以年长，且先入宫，不率妾礼。
现代文：左昭仪自认为年长于皇后，并且比她先入宫，所以不对皇后实行妾礼。
English: Zuo Zhaoyi thought that she was older than the empress and entered the palace before her, so she did not perform the concubine rite for the empress.

古文：后颇愧恨，归仪因谮而废之。
现代文：皇后对此很愧恨，左昭仪于是诬陷中伤她，使她被废掉。
English: The empress was very sorry about this, so Zuo Zhaoyi slandered her and caused her to be abolished.

古文：后素有德操，遂居瑶光寺为练行尼。
现代文：皇后素来有德操，被废之后就居住在瑶光寺中为尼，修练戒行。
English: The empress has always been virtuous. After she was deposed, she lived as a nun in the Luguang Temple and practiced asceticism.

古文：魏主以久旱，自癸未不食至于乙酉，群臣皆诣中书省请见。
现代文：北魏孝文帝因为久旱无雨，自癸未，至乙酉停止进食，群臣们都来到中书省请见。
English: Emperor Xiaowen of the Northern Wei Dynasty, because of the long drought and no rain, stopped eating from the middle of the month to the middle of the month, and his courtiers all came to Zhongshuo to see him.

古文：帝在崇虎楼，遣舍人辞焉，且问来故。
现代文：孝文帝在崇虚楼，派遣中书舍人去推辞不见，并且让问清前来请见的缘故。
English: Emperor Xiaowen was in Chonghuanglou, and he sent a Chinese scholar to apologize for not being able to see him, and asked Qian Qian to come and see him.

古文：豫州刺史王肃对曰： 今四效雨已沾洽，独京城微少。
现代文：豫州刺史王肃说： 现在郊外四周已经大雨连绵了，惟独京城之内下得很小。
English: Wang Su, a historian from Yuzhou, said: "There has been continuous heavy rain in the suburbs, but it has only rained a little in Beijing.

古文：庶民未乏一餐而陛下辍膳三日，臣下惶惶，无复情地。 
现代文：为此，平民百姓们都没有少吃一餐，而陛下却绝食三天了，臣下们对此惶惶不安，无可自处。 
English: For this reason, the common people have not missed a meal, but His Majesty has been on a hunger strike for three days. His subjects are alarmed and have no place to go.

古文：帝使舍人应之曰： 朕不食数日，犹无所感。
现代文：中书舍人回去报告了孝文帝，孝文帝又派他去回答说： 朕几天不吃饭，上天还是没有什么感应。
English: The Chinese scribe went back and reported to Emperor Xiaowen. Emperor Xiaowen sent him to reply: "I have not eaten for several days, but there is still no response from Heaven.

古文：比来中外贵贱，皆言四郊有雨，朕疑其欲相宽勉，未必有实。
现代文：近来朝廷内外无论贵贱之人，都说郊外四面有雨了，朕怀疑他们之所以这样讲，为的是宽慰朕心，情况未必属实。
English: Recently, people both inside and outside the imperial court, both high-ranking and low-ranking, have been saying that it is raining in the suburbs. I suspect that they are saying this to comfort me, but it may not be true.

古文：方将遣使视之，果如所言，即当进膳；如其不然，朕何以生为！
现代文：现在准备派人去查看，如果与所说的相合，就立即用膳；如果不然，朕还有何理由继续活下去呢？
English: Now I'm going to send someone to check it out, and if it's consistent with what was said, I'll eat immediately; if not, what reason do I have to continue living?

古文：当以身为万民塞咎耳！ 是夕，大雨。
现代文：就用自己的身体替万民百姓承担老天爷的责咎。 这天晚上，天降大雨。
English: He used his own body to take the blame for all the people. That night, it rained heavily.

古文：魏太子恂不好学，体素肥大，苦河南地热，常思北归。
现代文：北魏太子元恂不喜欢学习，长得身肥体胖，熬受不了河南夏天的炎热，经常思念回到北方去。
English: The Northern Wei prince Yuan Xuan did not like to study. He grew fat and could not stand the summer heat in Henan Province. He often missed going back to the north.

古文：魏主赐之衣冠，徇常私著胡服。
现代文：孝文帝赐予元恂衣服帽子，他却常常私下里穿着胡服。
English: Emperor Xiaowen gave Yuan Shao clothes and a hat, but he often wore the Hu clothing in private.

古文：中庶子辽东高道悦数切谏，恂恶之。
现代文：中庶子辽东人高道悦多次恳切地劝谏元恂，元恂非常厌恶他。
English: Gao Daoyue, the illegitimate son of a man from eastern Liaodong Province, repeatedly and earnestly tried to persuade Yan Yuanqi, but Yuanqi detested him very much.

古文：八月，戊戌，帝如嵩高，恂与左右密谋，召牧马轻骑奔平城，手刃道悦于禁中。
现代文：八月戊戌，孝文帝到达嵩高，元恂与心腹密谋策划，叫来马匹骑上直奔平城，亲手把高道悦杀死在宫殿之中。
English: In August, Emperor Xiaowen arrived in Songgao. Yuan Shun and his confidant plotted and called for horses to ride straight to Pingcheng, and killed Gao Daoyue in the palace with his own hands.

古文：领军无俨勒门防遏，入夜乃定。
现代文：中领军元俨严守门禁，以防遏事态扩大，到了夜间才平定下来。
English: The central and leading army, Yuan Xuan, strictly guarded the gate to prevent the situation from expanding, and only calmed down at night.

古文：诘旦，尚书陆琇驰以启帝，帝大骇，秘其事，仍至汴口而还。
现代文：次日天刚亮，尚书陆琇急忙骑马去向孝文帝汇报，孝文帝一听大吃一惊，但没有声张其事，仍然到了汴口，然后返回。
English: The next day, just after dawn, Shang Shulun hurriedly rode to report to Emperor Xiaowen. Emperor Xiaowen was taken aback, but did not say anything. He still arrived at the gate and then returned.

古文：甲寅，入宫，引见恂，数其罪，亲与咸阳王禧等更代杖之百馀下，扶曳出外，囚于城西；月馀乃能起。
现代文：甲寅，孝文帝回宫，召见元恂，数说了他的罪过，并且亲自与咸阳王元禧轮番把元恂打了一百多棒，然后命人把他扶着拽出去，囚禁在城西，一个多月之后，元恂方崐才可以起床。
English: Emperor Jia Yin and Emperor Xiaowen returned to the palace, summoned Yuan Xuan, told him the number of his sins, and personally and Xianyang King Yuan Xiu took turns to beat Yuan Xuan with more than a hundred sticks, and then ordered someone to drag him out and imprison him in the west of the city. After more than a month, Yuan Xuan could not get up.

古文：丁巳，魏相州刺史南安惠王桢卒。
现代文：丁巳，北魏相州刺史南安惠王元桢去世。
English: At the same time, Wang Yuanjun, the leading scholar of the Northern Wei Dynasty, passed away.

古文：九月，戊辰，魏主讲武于小平津；癸酉，还宫。
现代文：九月戊辰，北魏孝文帝在小平津讲武。癸酉，孝文帝还宫。
English: In September, Emperor Xiaowen of the Northern Wei Dynasty gave a military speech in Xiaopingjin. Soon after, Emperor Xiaowen returned to the palace.

古文：冬，十月，戊戌，魏诏： 军士自代来者，皆以为羽林、虎贲。
现代文：冬季，十月戊戌，北魏孝文帝诏令： 军士凡从代京迁来者，一律成为羽林、虎贲。
English: In the winter, in October, in the Northern Wei Dynasty, Emperor Xiaowen issued an edict: All soldiers who moved from Daikyo should become "feathered forest" and "tiger's den."

古文：司州民十二夫调一，吏以供公私力役。
现代文：司州民夫，十二个之中抽调一个，编为吏员，作为公家或私家的差役。 
English: Of the twelve civil servants in the prefecture, one was selected to be a clerk, either for the public or private sector.

古文：魏吐京胡反，诏朔州刺史元彬行汾州事，帅并、肆之众以讨之。
现代文：北魏吐京胡反叛，孝文帝诏令朔州刺史元彬代管汾州事务，让他统领并州、肆州的人马去讨伐叛贼。
English: When the Northern Wei Dynasty rebelled against Beijing, Emperor Xiaowen ordered the governor of Shuozhou Province, Zi Shi Yuanbin, to take charge of the affairs of Shuozhou, and ordered him to lead the people and horses of Anhui Province and Zhouzhou Province to fight the rebels.

古文：彬，桢之子也。
现代文：元彬是元桢的儿子。
English: Yuan Bin is the son of Yuan Shao.

古文：彬遣统军奚康生击叛胡，破之，追至车突谷，又破之，俘杂畜以万数。
现代文：元彬派遣统军奚康生攻打反叛的胡人，打败了他们，又追击至车突谷，两次获胜，俘获各种牲畜上万头。
English: Yuan Bin dispatched the United Army of Yan Kangsheng to attack the rebellious Hu people, defeated them, and chased them to Chetu Valley, won twice, and captured tens of thousands of livestock.

古文：诏以彬为汾州刺史。胡去居等六百馀人保险不服，彬请兵二万以讨之，有司奏许之，魏主大怒曰： 小寇何有发兵之理！
现代文：孝文帝诏令元彬为汾州刺史，胡人去居等六百多人据险而不服，元彬请求朝廷拨兵两万去讨伐，有关部门上奏孝文帝请示批准，孝文帝勃然大怒，说： 小小的一股寇贼，那有朝廷发兵去讨伐的道理呢？
English: Emperor Xiaowen decreed that more than six hundred people, including Yuan Bin, should be sent to live in Shanzhou. However, Yuan Bin was not satisfied. He asked the court to send twenty thousand soldiers to the crusade. The relevant departments appealed to Emperor Xiaowen for approval. Emperor Xiaowen was furious and said, "A small band of bandits. Is there any reason for the court to send troops to the crusade?"

古文：可随宜讨治。
现代文：可以自己根据实际情况而安排讨伐。
English: You can arrange the crusade according to the actual situation.

古文：若不能克，必须大兵者，则先斩刺史，然后发兵！ 
现代文：如果不能攻克，必须大兵去讨伐，那就先斩了刺史，然后再发兵！ 
English: If you can't conquer, you must send soldiers to fight, then first cut the thorny history, and then send troops!

古文：彬大惧，督帅州兵，身先将士，讨去居，平之。
现代文：元彬非常害怕，亲自督率州兵，身先士卒，去讨伐去居，终于获胜。
English: Yuan Bin was very scared. He personally supervised and led the National Guard, leading the troops, went to fight, and finally won.

古文：魏主引见群臣于清徽堂，议废太子恂。
现代文：北魏孝文帝在清徽堂召见群臣百官，商议废去太子元恂之事。
English: Emperor Xiaowen of the Northern Wei Dynasty summoned a group of ministers and officials to Qinghui Hall to discuss the abolition of Prince Yuan.

古文：太子太傅穆亮、少保李冲免冠顿首谢。帝曰： 卿所谢者私也，我所议者国也！ 大义灭亲 ，古人所贵。
现代文：太子太傅穆亮、少保李冲摘去帽子，伏地磕头谢罪，请求宽宥太子，孝文帝说： 你们谢罪，请求宽宥，是出于私情，而我在这里所要商议的却是国家大事。 大义灭亲 ，为古人所看重。
English: Prince Daifu Mu Liang and Minor Protector Li Chong took off their hats, bowed their heads in thanksgiving and asked for forgiveness. Prince and Emperor Xiaowen said, "You are thanking for your sins and asking for forgiveness out of personal feelings, but what I want to discuss here is a matter of national importance.

古文：今恂欲违父逃叛，跨据恒、朔，天下之恶孰大焉！
现代文：如今，元恂想要违抗父命而私自逃叛，跨据恒、朔两州，天底下还有比这更大的罪恶吗？
English: Nowadays, if Yuan Xuan wants to defy his father's order and secretly escape from the rebellion, across the two states of Hengyang and Shuo, is there a greater evil under the heavens?

古文：若不去之，乃社稷之忧也。 
现代文：如果不把他废掉，就会成为社稷的一大忧患。 
English: If it is not abolished, it will become a big worry for society.

古文：闰月，丙寅，废恂为庶人，置于河阳无鼻城，以兵守之，服食所供，粗免饥寒而已。
现代文：闰十二月丙寅，北魏废太子元恂为庶人，安置于河阳无鼻城，派兵看守，对其衣服饮食供应，仅仅免于饥寒罢了。
English: In December, the Northern Wei dynasty's former crown prince, Yuan Shao, became a commoner and was placed in the city of Heyang without a nose. Soldiers were sent to guard him, his clothes and food were provided, and he was only spared from hunger and cold.

古文：戊辰，魏置常平仓。
现代文：戊辰，北魏设置常平仓。
English: In the Northern Wei Dynasty, the Northern Wei Dynasty set up the Changping Cang.

古文：戊寅，太子宝卷冠。
现代文：戊寅，南齐太子萧宝卷加冠。
English: Wu Yin, Nanzhi Prince Xiao Bao roll crowned.

古文：初，魏文明太后欲废魏主，穆泰切谏而止，由是有宠。
现代文：原先，北魏文明太后想要废去孝文帝，穆泰苦苦劝谏才得以中止，于是穆泰得到孝文帝的宠信。
English: Originally, the Empress Dowager of the Northern Wei Dynasty wanted to depose Emperor Xiaowen, but Mu Tai was able to persuade her to stop, so Mu Tai received the favor of Emperor Xiaowen.

古文：及帝南迁洛阳，所亲任者多中州儒士，宗室及代人往往不乐。
现代文：到了孝文帝南迁洛阳，其所亲近信任的大多是些中州的儒士，所以皇族内部以及代京人往往对此感到不高兴。
English: When Emperor Xiaowen moved to Luoyang in the south, most of the people he trusted and was close to were Confucianists from Chuzhou, so the imperial family and people in Kyoto were often unhappy about this.

古文：泰自尚书右仆射出为定州刺史，自陈久病，土温则甚，乞为恒州；帝为之徙恒州刺史陆睿为定州，以泰代之。
现代文：穆泰从尚书右仆射出任定州刺史，但是他不愿去上任，自陈长期有病，在气候暖湿的地方则更加严重，因此请求到恒州去，于是孝文帝调恒州刺史陆睿为定州刺史，另任穆泰为恒州刺史。
English: Mu Tai took the post of Dingzhou chief historian from Shang Shu's right-hand man, but he did not want to take up the post. Since Chen was ill for a long time, it was more serious in warm and humid places, so he requested to go to Hengzhou. Therefore, Emperor Xiaowen transferred the post of Hengzhou chief historian to Lu Rui as the post of Dingzhou chief historian, and appointed Mu Tai as the post of Hengzhou chief historian.

古文：泰至，睿未发，遂相与谋作乱，阴结镇北大将军乐陵王思誉、安乐侯隆、抚冥镇将鲁郡侯业、骁骑将军超等，共推朔州刺史阳平王熙为主。
现代文：穆泰到达恒州之后，陆睿还没有前去定州，于是就与他一起密谋反叛作乱，并且秘密勾结镇北大将军乐东陵王元思誉、安乐侯元隆、抚冥守将崐鲁郡侯元业、骁骑将军元超等人，共同推举朔州刺史阳平王元颐为主。
English: After Mu Tai arrived in Hengzhou, Lu Rui had not yet gone to Dingzhou, so he conspired with him to rebel and cause turmoil, and secretly colluded with the town of Beidai General Le Dongling Wang Yuan Siyou, An Le Hou Yuan Long, Fuxi Governor of Jilu County Hou Yuan Ye, and the general of the Horse Cavalry Yuan Chao, and others, to jointly promote the Shaoshi Yangping Wang Yuan Jie as the main.

古文：思誉，天赐之子；业，丕之弟；隆、超，皆丕之子也。
现代文：元思誉是元天赐的儿子，元业是元丕的弟弟，元隆和元超俱为元丕的儿子。
English: Yuan Shifu was the son of Yuan Tianfu, Yuan Ye was the younger brother of Yuan Shao, and Yuan Long and Yuan Chaozhou were the sons of Yuan Shao.

古文：睿以为洛阳休明，劝泰缓之，泰由是未发。
现代文：陆睿认为孝文帝是仁德之君，劝说穆泰迟缓进行，因此穆泰暂时没有叛乱。
English: Lu Rui believed that Emperor Xiaowen was a benevolent ruler, and persuaded Mu Tai to proceed slowly, so Mu Tai did not rebel for the time being.

古文：颐伪许泰等以安其意，而密以状闻。
现代文：元颐假装同意穆泰等人，以便稳住他们，而秘密地把情况写成奏状上报朝廷。
English: The Yuan Shao pretended to agree with Mutai and others in order to stabilize them, and secretly reported the situation to the court in the form of a report.

古文：行吏部尚书任城王澄有疾，帝召见于凝闲堂，谓之曰： 穆泰谋为不轨，扇诱宗室。
现代文：行吏部尚书任城王元澄有病在身，孝文帝召见他于凝闲堂，对他说： 穆泰图谋不轨，煽动诱说宗室，策动叛乱。
English: The city's king, Yuancheng, was ill, and Emperor Xiaowen summoned him to the palace and said to him, "Mutai is plotting, inciting and tempting the royal family, and instigating a rebellion.

古文：脱或必然，今迁都甫尔，北人恋旧，南北纷扰，朕洛阳不立也。
现代文：如果就是这样，如今迁都伊始，北方人恋旧，南北事务纷扰，朕在洛阳不能成功。
English: If this is the case, now that the relocation of the capital has begun, northerners are nostalgic for the past, and affairs between the north and south are in turmoil, I cannot succeed in Luoyang.

古文：此国家大事，非卿不能办。
现代文：这是国家大事，非您不能办理。
English: This is a matter of national importance, and you are the only one who can handle it.

古文：卿虽疾，强为我北行，审观其势。
现代文：所以，您虽然有病在身，但是还得勉强为我北行一次，解决此事。
English: Therefore, although you are ill, you still have to go north for me once to resolve this matter.

古文：傥其微弱，直往擒之；若已强盛可承制发并、肆兵击之。 
现代文：您去后审观形势，假若穆泰的势力还不太强的话，就直接把他擒拿了；如果他的势力已经强盛，您就秉承我的旨意发并、肆两州之兵讨伐他们。 
English: After your visit, you will review the situation. If Mutai's power is not yet strong, you will directly capture him. If his power is already strong, you will, in accordance with my will, send troops from the two states to fight them.

古文：对曰： 秦等愚惑，正由恋旧，为此计耳，非有深谋远虑；臣虽驽怯，足以制之，愿陛下勿忧。
现代文：元澄回答说： 穆泰等人愚蠢至极，正是由于恋旧使然，他们叛乱完全是为了这个，并非有什么深谋远虑。我虽然无能胆怯，但对付他们还是行的，完全可以制伏，希望陛下不要忧虑。
English: Motosumi replied, "Mutai and others are extremely stupid, and it is because of their love for the old days. Their rebellion is entirely for this reason, without any forethought. Although I am powerless and timid, I can still deal with them, and I can completely subdue them. I hope Your Majesty will not worry."

古文：虽有犬马之疾，何敢辞也！ 
现代文：我虽然患病，但怎么敢推辞呢？ 
English: Even though I am ill, how dare I refuse?

古文：帝笑曰： 任城肯行，朕复何忧！ 
现代文：孝文帝笑着说到： 任城王愿意北行，朕还有什么忧愁的呢？ 
English: Emperor Xiaowen said with a smile: If the king of the city is willing to go north, why should I be sad?

古文：遂授澄节、铅虎、竹使符、御仗左右，仍行恒州事。
现代文：于是，授予元澄节旄、铜虎、竹使符以及身边的卫兵，使其代理恒州事务。
English: As a result, he awarded Yuancheng with a ceremonial scepter, a bronze tiger, a bamboo messenger and the guards around him to act as agents for the affairs of Hengzhou.

古文：行至雁门，雁门太守夜告云： 泰已引兵西就阳平。 
现代文：元澄到达雁门时，雁门太守夜间来报告说： 穆泰已经带兵往西边投靠阳平王去了。 
English: When Motosumi arrived at the Wild Goose Gate, the guardian of the Wild Goose Gate came in the night to report: Mutai had already led his troops to the west to support Yang Ping Wang.

古文：澄遽令进发。右丞孟斌曰： 事未可量，宜依敕召并、肆兵，然后徐进。 
现代文：元澄立即命令出发，右丞孟斌对他说： 事情还难以估量，应该奉圣旨召集并州、肆州的兵力，然后再慢慢进发。 
English: Yuancheng immediately gave the order to set out, and the right-hand man, Meng Bin, said to him: "The situation is still difficult to estimate. According to the sacred will, we should gather the troops from both states, and then slowly advance.

古文：澄曰： 泰既谋乱，应据坚城；而更迎阳平，度其所为，当似势弱。
现代文：元澄说： 穆泰既然策谋叛乱，理应据守坚城，然而却去投靠阳平王，思量他的行为，好象是势力不强。
English: Motosumi said, "Since Mutai was plotting a rebellion, he should have defended the fortified city. However, he went to support King Yangpyeong, considering his actions, as if his power was not strong.

古文：泰既不相拒，无故发兵，非宜也。
现代文：穆泰既然不与我们抗拒，那么无故发兵就不太合适了。
English: Since Mutai does not resist us, it is not appropriate to send troops without reason.

古文：但速往镇之，民心自定。 
现代文：所以，只须迅速前去镇压，民心自然会能安定。 
English: Therefore, it is only necessary to move quickly to suppress, and the people's minds will naturally be able to stabilize.

古文：遂倍道兼行。
现代文：于是，加快速度，日夜兼行，前往阳平。
English: As a result, we speeded up and traveled both day and night to Yangping.

古文：先遣治书侍御史李焕单骑入代，出其不意，晓谕泰党，示以祸福，皆莫为之用。
现代文：元澄首先派遣治书侍御史李焕单人匹马进入平城，使穆泰感到非常意外。李焕告谕穆泰的同伙，对他们讲明利害得失，结果这些人都不接受穆泰的指挥。
English: To Mutai's great surprise, Yuancheng first sent his aide-de-camp, Li Huan, to enter Pingcheng single-handedly. Li Huan told Mutai's companions, explaining to them the pros and cons, and as a result, these people did not accept Mutai's command.

古文：泰计无所出，帅麾下数百人攻焕，不克，走出城西；追擒之。
现代文：穆泰无计可施，只得带领部下几百人攻打李焕，不能取胜，就从城西逃跑，李焕追上擒获了他。
English: Mu Tai had no choice but to lead several hundred of his men to attack Li Huan. Unable to win, he fled from the west of the city. Li Huan caught up with him and captured him.

古文：澄亦寻至，穷治党与，收陆睿等百馀人，皆系狱，民间贴然。
现代文：很快元澄也到了，接着肃清了参于叛乱的同党，拘捕了陆睿等一百多人，全部投入监狱，而民间安定无事。
English: Soon, Motosumi also arrived, and then he purged his fellow party members who had participated in the rebellion, arrested Lu Rui and more than a hundred others, and all of them were put in prison, while there was no civil unrest.

古文：澄具状表闻，帝喜，召公卿，以表示之曰： 任城可谓社稷臣也。
现代文：元澄把穆泰等人的罪行一项项地列出，上表奏告孝文帝，孝文帝阅后非常高兴，召集公卿大夫们到一起，把元澄的上表出示给他们看，并且说道： 任城王可以说是社稷功臣啊！
English: Motosumi listed the crimes of Mutai and others one by one, and reported the report to Emperor Xiaowen. Emperor Xiaowen was very happy after reading the report. He called the noble doctors together, showed them Motosumi's report, and said: Ren Shiwang can be said to be a social hero!

古文：观其狱辞，正复皋陶何以过之！ 
现代文：看他写的这些判决之辞，除了古时候的皋陶氏，谁能超过他呢？ 
English: Looking at these words of judgment he wrote, who can surpass him except the ancient Sheduo clan?

古文：顾谓咸阳王禧等曰： 汝曹当此，不能办也。 
现代文：又看着咸阳王元禧等人继续说道： 如果让你们担当此事，一定办不到这样的。 
English: Looking at Xianyang Wang Yuanxi and others, he continued: If you are in charge of this matter, you will not be able to do this.

古文：魏主谋入寇，引见公卿于清徽堂，曰： 朕卜宅土中，纲条粗举；唯南冠未平，安能效近世天子下惟于深宫之中乎！
现代文：北魏孝文帝策划入侵南齐，召集公卿到清徽堂，对他们说： 朕择地迁都中原，现在各方面基本就绪，唯有南方之寇没有平定，如何能仿效近世以来的天子们安于深宫帷幕之中呢？
English: Emperor Xiaowen of the Northern Wei Dynasty planned to invade South Qi, summoned the nobles to Qinghui Hall, and said to them: I have chosen a place to relocate the capital to the Central Plains, and now all aspects are basically ready. However, the southern invaders have not been pacified. How can we follow the example of the sons of heaven since the modern era and settle in the deep palace curtain?

古文：朕今南征决矣，但未知早晚之期。
现代文：现在朕南征的决策是不会改变的了，只是不知道时机的迟早。
English: Now my decision to march south will not change, but sooner or later, I don't know when.

古文：比来术者皆云，今往必克。此国之大事，宜君臣各尽所见，勿以朕先言而依违于前，同异于后也。 
现代文：近来，方术之士们都说，当下就前往征伐，一定能够取胜，然而这是国家之大事，应该使君臣各抒已见，你们不要因为朕先说了，在朕前就模棱两可，下去以后又不同意。 
English: Recently, the strategists have all said that if we go to war now, we will definitely win. However, this is a matter of national importance, and we should make the princes and ministers see it. Don't be ambiguous in front of me because I said it first, and then disagree later.

古文：李冲对曰： 凡用兵之法，宜先论人事，后察天道。
现代文：李冲说： 凡是用兵之法，应该先论人事，然后再察验天道。
English: Li Chong said: In all cases of military tactics, personnel should be discussed first, and then the heavenly way should be examined.

古文：今卜筮虽吉而人事未备，迁都尚新，秋谷不稔，未可以兴师旅。
现代文：现在占卜所得虽然为大吉，但是人事准备没有妥当，刚迁都不久，秋谷没有收成，所以不可以兴师动旅，出外征战。
English: Now, although the fortune-telling income is great, the personnel preparation is not appropriate, the relocation is not long, and there is no harvest in Akitani, so it is not possible to encourage teachers to travel and go abroad to fight.

古文：如臣所见，宜俟来秋。 
现代文：依我之见，应该等到来年秋天再行南征。 
English: In my opinion, the Southern Expedition should wait until the autumn of next year.

古文：帝曰： 去十七年，朕拥兵二十万，此人事之盛也，而天时不利。
现代文：孝文帝说： 去年，朕拥兵二十万，这可以说是人事昌盛了，然而天时不利。
English: Emperor Xiaowen said: Last year, I had 200,000 soldiers, which can be said to be a flourishing of personnel, but the weather was unfavorable.

古文：今天时既从，复去人事未备，如仆射之言，是终无征伐之期也。
现代文：如今既然天时有利于我们，又说人事未备。那么，照仆射所说，该是永远没有征伐的时候了。
English: Now that the weather is in our favour, and since we are short of manpower, then, as Puducherry has said, it is time never to go to war.

古文：寇戎咫尺，异日将为社稷之忧，朕何敢自安！
现代文：南寇近在我们咫尺，它日终将是社稷江山的一大忧患，朕怎么敢自安呢？
English: Nanko is so close to us, it will eventually be a big worry for the society. How can I dare to be at ease?

古文：若秋行不捷，诸君当尽付司寇，不可不尽怀也。 
现代文：如果明年秋天南征不能获捷取胜，就要把诸位全送到司寇那里治罪，所以你们不可不尽心尽力。 
English: If the Southern Expedition fails to win a victory next autumn, you will all be sent to the Scouts to be punished, so you must do your best.

古文：魏主以有罪徙边者多逋亡，乃制一人逋亡，阖门充役。
现代文：北魏孝文帝因为流放到边远地方的罪犯多有逃亡，就制定法令，规定凡一人逃亡，全家充当劳役。
English: Emperor Xiaowen of the Northern Wei Dynasty, because most of the criminals exiled to remote places had escaped, issued a decree stipulating that every person should escape and the whole family should serve as laborers.

古文：光州刺史博陵崔挺上书谏曰： 天下善人少，恶人多。
现代文：光州刺史博陵人崔挺上书，劝谏说： 天底下善良之人少，恶人多。
English: Cui Ting, a person from Gwangju who visited the Boling Tomb, wrote a letter to persuade him, saying, "There are few good people under heaven, but many evil people.

古文：若一人有罪，延及阖门，则司马牛受桓魋之罚，柳下惠婴盗跖之诛，岂不哀哉！ 
现代文：如果一人有罪而株连全家，那么司马牛就要因其兄桓魋而受到惩处，柳下惠也因其弟盗跖而牵连被杀。如此，岂不悲哀吗！ 
English: If one person is guilty and the whole family is implicated, then Sima Niu will be punished for his brother, Huan Yao, and Liu Shimo Hui will also be implicated and killed for his brother's theft. Isn't that sad!

古文：帝善之，遂除其制。
现代文：孝文帝同意他的意见，于是废除了这一株连制度。
English: Emperor Xiaowen agreed with him and abolished the joint-stock company system.

