古文：宋苍梧王当七夕夜，令杨玉夫伺织女渡河，曰： 见，当报我；不见，当杀汝。 
现代文：南朝宋苍梧王在七月初七夜里，命令杨玉夫等候织女过河，说： 看到了就告诉我；看不到，我就杀了你。 
English: On the seventh night of early July, King Song of the Southern Dynasty ordered Yang Yufu to wait for the weaver to cross the river, saying, "If you see her, tell me; if you don't see her, I'll kill you."

古文：钱希白《洞微志》载： 苏德哥为徐肇祀其先人，曰： 当夜半可已。 
现代文：钱希白《洞微志》记载： 苏德哥替徐肇祭祀他的祖先，说： 到夜半就可以祭祀。 
English: Qian Xibai's "Dong Wei Zhi" recorded: Su De Ge sacrificed his ancestors for Xu Zhao, saying: You can sacrifice at midnight.

古文：盖俟鬼宿渡河之后。 
现代文：这是等鬼星过河以后。 
English: This is after waiting for the ghost star to cross the river.

古文：翟公巽作《祭仪》十卷，云： 或祭于昏，或祭于旦，皆非是，当以鬼宿渡河为候，而鬼宿渡河，常在中夜，必使人仰占以俟之。 
现代文：翟公龚著《祭仪》十卷，说： 有的在黄昏祭祀，有的在早晨祭祀，都不对。应当以鬼星过河为准，而鬼星过河，常在半夜，一定要派人仰面观察细心等待。 
English: Zang Gong rummaged through the ten volumes of "Sacrifices" and said, "It is not right to have some sacrifices at dusk and others in the morning. Ghosts and stars should cross the river, and ghosts and stars cross the river, often in the middle of the night, so be sure to send someone to watch and wait carefully.

古文：叶少蕴云： 公巽博学多闻，援证皆有据，不肯碌碌同众，所见必过人。 
现代文：叶少蕴说： 翟公巽闻多识广，引证都有根据，不愿平平淡淡和众人一般，他的见解一定超过别人。 
English: Ye Shaojun said: "He is well-informed, his quotations are well-founded, he does not want to be bland and ordinary, and his opinions must exceed others.

古文：予按天上经星终古不动，鬼宿随天西行，春昏见于南，夏晨见于东，秋夜半见于东，冬昏见于东，安有所谓渡河及常在中夜之理？
现代文：我们为天上星宿，万年不动，兔星跟随天体向西运行。春天的黄昏，出现在东南方，夏天的早晨出现在东方，秋天的半夜出现在东方，冬天的黄昏，出现在东方，哪有所说的过河和常在半夜的道理？
English: We are the stars in the sky, never move, the rabbit star follows the celestial body to the west. The spring dusk appears in the southeast, the summer morning appears in the east, the autumn midnight appears in the east, the winter dusk appears in the east, what is the reason for crossing the river and always in the middle of the night?

古文：织女昏晨与鬼宿正相反，其理则同。
现代文：织女星晚上、早晨，正好与鬼星相反，道理都一样。
English: The star Vega rises in the evening and in the morning, just the opposite of the ghost star, for the same reason.

古文：苍梧王荒悖小儿，不足笑，钱、翟、叶三公皆名儒硕学，亦不深考如此。
现代文：苍梧王是荒唐背理的小儿，值不得一笑。钱、刘、叶三人，都是有名的儒者和饱学之士，竞亦这样不加深考。
English: Cangwu Wang is a child of absurdity and absurdity, not worth a smile. Qian, Liu and Ye are three famous Confucians and well-educated people, and the competition is not deepened.

古文：杜诗云： 牛女漫愁思，秋期犹渡河 ， 牛女年年渡，何曾风浪生？ 
现代文：社甫的诗说： 牛郎织女不要忧心如醉，一到秋期，还能过河相会  牛郎织女年年过河，何曾遇上大风扬波？ 
English: The abbot's poem says: Cowherd and Weaver Woman, don't be so anxious as if you were drunk. Once the autumn comes, you can still meet each other across the river. Cowherd and Weaver Woman cross the river every year. Why have you ever encountered high winds and waves?

古文：梁刘孝仪诗云： 欲待黄昏至，含娇浅渡河。 
现代文：梁刘孝仪的诗说： 想等到黄昏后，含着娇羞去过河。 
English: Liang Liu Xiaoyi's poem says: I want to wait until after dusk, and go to the river with shame.

古文：唐人七夕诗皆有此说，此自是牵俗遣词之过，故杜老又有诗云： 牵牛出河西，织女处其东。万古永相望，七夕谁见同。神光竟难候，此事终蒙胧。 
现代文：唐人的七夕诗，都有这样说法，这都是自然迁就世俗作诗的过错。所以老杜又有诗说： 牛郎在河西，织女在河东，始终相望不相会未相从，神的光辉不可靠，此事终于难说清。 
English: The Tang people's Tanabata poems all have this saying, which is the fault of naturally adapting to secular poetry. Therefore, Lao Du also has a poem saying: The cowherd is in the west of the river, the weaver is in the east of the river, always looking at each other, not meeting each other, not following each other, the glory of God is not reliable, this matter is finally difficult to clarify.

古文：盖自洞晓其实，非他人比也。
现代文：老杜自然清楚地了解事实，不是别人可比的。
English: Lao Du naturally has a clear understanding of the facts, which is unmatched by others.

