古文：初九日令顾仆觅米具炊。
现代文：初九日让顾仆去找米准备早饭。
English: On the ninth day of the first month, he asked his servant to find rice to prepare breakfast.

古文：余散步村北，遥晰细看，辨析此坞。
现代文：我散步到村北，从远处观看此坞。
English: I took a walk to the north of the village and watched the dock from a distance.

古文：东北自牧养北梁王山西支分界，东界虽大脊，而山不甚高；西界虽环支，而西北有石崖山最雄峻。
现代文：东北从牧养河北面梁王山西支分界，东部虽然是主峰山脉，但山不太高，西部虽然是支脉环绕，而西北有座石崖山最雄伟峻峭。
English: The north-east is delimited by the western branch of Liangwang Mountain, which faces the north of Hebei Province. Although the east is the main peak of the mountain range, the mountain is not very high. Although the west is surrounded by tributaries, the northwest has the most majestic rocky cliff mountain.

古文：又南为沙朗西山，又南为天生桥，而南属于陡坡东峡之山。
现代文：又南是沙朗西山，又南是天生桥，然后往南和陡坡东峡谷的山相连。
English: To the south is Mount Saranxi, and to the south is Tianshengqiao, and then to the south is connected to the steep slope of the East Gorge.

古文：其山东西两界既夹成大坞，而南北亦环转连属。
现代文：其东西两边的山夹成大坞后，南北两端也环转连接。
English: After the mountains on both sides of the east and west have formed a large dock, the north and south ends are also connected by a loop.

古文：其中水亦发源于龙潭，合南北峡而成溪，西注于富民螳螂，然不能竟达也；从坞西南入峡，捣入山洞，其洞深黑莫测，穿山西出，与陡坡之涧合。
现代文：坞中的水也发源于龙潭，汇合南北峡谷的水而形成溪流，往西注入富民县的蝗螂川，然而不能直达，只能从山坞西南边流入峡谷，钻入山洞。其洞漆黑、深不可测，溪流穿过大山往西流出，和陡坡的沟涧汇合。
English: The water in the dock also originates from Longtan, merging with the water of the north-south canyon to form a stream that flows west into the Locust River in Fumin County. However, it cannot be reached directly, but can only flow into the canyon from the southwest side of the dock and enter the cave. Its hole is dark and unfathomable, the stream flows west through the mountains and merges with the steep ravine.

古文：洞上之山，间道从之，所谓 天生桥 也。
现代文：洞上面的山，小路从上面通过，就是所说的 天生桥 。
English: The mountain above the cave, and the path passing through it, is the so-called Tensho Bridge.

古文：然人从其上行，不知下有洞，亦不知洞之西透，山之中空而为桥；惟沙朗人耕牧于此，故有斯名。
现代文：然而人从路上走过，却不知道下面有洞，也不知道洞通到西边，山中间是空的而成为桥；只有沙朗人在这里耕种、放牧，所以才有这样的名称。
English: However, people walking along the road did not know that there was a cave below, nor did they know that the cave led to the west, and the middle of the mountain was empty and became a bridge; only the Sarang people farmed and grazed here, hence the name.

古文：然亦皆谓洞不可入，有虎狼，有妖祟，劝余由村后逾山西上，不必向水洞迂折。
现代文：然而他们也都说不能进洞，洞里有虎狼，有妖怪作祟，劝我从村后翻山往西上，不必从水洞去绕路。
English: However, they all said that they could not go into the cave. There were tigers and wolves in the cave, and there were monsters to haunt it. They advised me to go over the mountain to the west after the village, and there was no need to go around from the water cave.

古文：余不从。
现代文：我不听从。
English: I'm not listening.

古文：既饭，乃南循坡麓行。
现代文：吃过饭后，我就往南顺着坡脚走。
English: After eating, I walked south along the foot of the slope.

古文：一里半，与溪遇，遂同入西峡。
现代文：一里半，和溪流相遇，于是和溪流一道进入西边的峡谷。
English: A mile and a half later, it met the stream and went with it into the canyon on the west side.

古文：其峡南北山壁夹而成，路由溪北沿北山之麓入，一里，仰见北崖之上，石壁盘突，其间骈列多门，而东一门高悬危瞰，势独雄豁，而磴迹甚微，棘翳崖崩，莫可著足。
现代文：其峡谷由南北两边的山壁对夹而成，道路从溪流北岸顺着北山山麓进去，一里，抬头看到北崖上面，石壁盘环突立，壁间并列着很多道门，而东边的一道门高悬在空中、正正俯视峡谷，气势特别雄伟开阔，但石阶的痕迹十分细微，荆棘遮盖、石崖崩塌，几乎没有落脚的地方。
English: The canyon is formed by the mountain walls on both sides of the north and south. The road enters from the north bank of the stream along the foot of the North Mountain. For one mile, you can look up and see the top of the North Cliff. The stone walls are protruding, and there are many doors between the walls. And a door on the east side hangs high in the air, overlooking the canyon. It is particularly majestic and open, but the traces of the stone steps are very subtle. The thorns cover it, the cliff collapses, and there is almost no place to land.

古文：乃令顾仆并行李俟于下。余独攀跃而上。
现代文：于是我让顾仆以及行李在下面等候，独自一人攀爬、跳跃而上。
English: So I let my servant and luggage wait below, and climbed and jumped up alone.

古文：久之，跻洞东，又见一门侧进，余以为必中通大洞，遂从其侧倒悬入大洞门。
现代文：很久，登上洞门东边，又看见一道门从旁边裂开，我认为这道门内一定通着大洞。于是就从侧边倒挂着进入大洞门。
English: For a long time, I climbed the east side of the cave door, and saw a door crack open from the side, I thought that there must be a big hole in this door. So I hung upside down from the side to enter the big cave door.

古文：其门南向甚穹，洞内层累北上，深十余丈，而阔半之，然内无旁窦，即前外见侧迸之门，亦不中达也。
现代文：洞门朝南，是典型的弯形，洞里台阶层层累着朝北延伸，有十多丈深，而宽是深度的一半，但洞内两旁没有孔，就是先前在外面看见的侧裂之门，其中也不和大洞相通。
English: The door of the cave faces south, it is a typical curved shape. The platform layer in the cave stretches northward, it is more than ten feet deep, and the width is half of the depth, but there are no holes on both sides of the cave, that is, the side-split door previously seen outside, which is also not connected to the big hole.

古文：出洞，欲东上侧门；念西洞尚多，既下，欲再探西洞；望水洞更异，遂直从洞下，西趋水洞。
现代文：从洞中出来，想往东边上到侧门，又想着西边的洞还多，下去之后，打算还要探索西洞；远远看到水洞更为奇特，于是直直地从洞口下去，往西朝水洞走去。
English: Coming out of the cave, I wanted to go up to the east side to the side gate, and thought that there were more caves on the west side. After going down, I planned to explore the west cave; I saw that the water cave was more peculiar from far away, so I went straight down from the cave mouth and walked west towards the water cave.

古文：又半里，西峡既尽，山环于上，洞辟于下，水从东来逼南崖，捣西洞入，路从其北坠冈下。
现代文：又半里，走到峡谷西边尽头，山冈环绕在上面，山洞开辟在下面，水从东边流来紧靠南崖，冲人西洞中，道路从其北面坠下山冈。
English: Another half-mile, walk to the end of the canyon on the west side, the mountain range surrounds the top, the cave opens up below, the water flows from the east close to the south cliff, rushes into the west cave, the road falls down the mountain from its north side.

古文：余令肩夫守行李于冈上，与顾仆入洞。
现代文：我让挑夫在冈上守着行李，我和顾仆进入水洞。
English: I asked the porter to guard the luggage on the hill, and I went into the cave with my servant.

古文：洞门东向，高十余丈，而阔半之。
现代文：洞门朝东，有十几丈高，而宽是高度的一半。
English: The east-facing door of the cave is more than a dozen high, and the width is half the height.

古文：始涉水从其南崖入，水漱北崖而环之。
现代文：开始涉水顺洞南边的崖壁进去，水冲刷北边的崖壁而环流。
English: I began to wade along the cliff wall on the south side of the cave, and the water washed the cliff wall on the north side and circulated.

古文：入五六丈，水环北崖，路环南崖，俱西转。
现代文：进去五六丈后，水绕北边的崖壁，路绕南边的崖壁，一齐都往西转。
English: After entering five or six heights, the water goes around the cliff wall on the north side, the road goes around the cliff wall on the south side, and they all turn to the west.

古文：仰见南崖之上，层覆叠出，突为危台，结为虚楼，皆在数丈之上，氤氲阖辟，与云气同为吞吐。
现代文：抬头看见南崖上面，石头分层覆盖、重叠浮出，突立为高处的平台，连结成空中楼阁，都在几丈高的地方，雾气弥漫，时合时开，和云气一起飘来飘去。
English: Looking up, I saw the top of the south cliff, the stone layered cover, overlapping surfaced, protruding as a high platform, connected into a castle in the air, all at several heights, foggy, sometimes open, floating with the clouds.

古文：从其下循之西入，北崖尚明，水漱之；南崖渐暗，路随之。
现代文：从南崖下面顺路往西进，北崖还亮，水流冲刷着；南崖渐渐黑暗，道路顺着进去。
English: From the bottom of the south cliff, follow the road to the west, the north cliff is still bright, the water is washing away; the south cliff is gradually dark, and the road goes along it.

古文：西五六丈，南崖西尽，水从北崖直捣西崖下，西崖遂下嵌成潭，水呜呜其中，作冲激声，遂循西崖北折去。
现代文：往西五六丈，走到南崖西部尽头，水顺着北崖直直冲向西崖下面，西崖于是往下陷落成深潭，水在潭中哗哗地响，发出冲激之声，然后顺着西崖向北转去。
English: Five or six meters to the west, walked to the western end of the south cliff, the water rushed straight down the north cliff to the bottom of the west cliff, the west cliff then fell down into a deep pool, the water rattled in the pool, emitted a rushing sound, and then turned north along the west cliff.

古文：路乃涉水循东崖，北向随之。
现代文：道路于是涉过水后顺着东崖，往北随水流走。
English: The road then waded through the water and followed the east cliff, moving north with the current.

古文：洞转而北，高穹愈甚，延纳余朗，若昧若明。
现代文：洞转向北，弯形顶更加高峻，引入一点余光，若暗若明。
English: The cave turns to the north, the curved top is steeper, and a little extra light is introduced, so it looks dark and bright.

古文：又五六丈，水漱北崖复西转，余亦复涉西涯。
现代文：又走进五六丈，水冲刷着北崖又往西转，我也再涉水到西岸。
English: I walked into the hills again, the water washed the north cliff and turned west, and I also waded to the west coast.

古文：于是水再环北崖，路再环南崖，竟昏黑不可辨，但闻水声潺潺。
现代文：于是水再次环绕北崖流，道路再次环绕南崖走，洞里终于黑暗得无法看清什么，只听到水流潺潺的声音。
English: So the water went around the north cliff again, the road went around the south cliff again, and finally it was too dark to see anything in the cave, only the sound of rushing water could be heard.

古文：又五六丈，复西遇水，其水渐深，既上不可见，而下又不可测，乃出。
现代文：又走了五六丈，再次在西崖遇水，这里的水渐渐深了，既然上面无法看清，而下面又无法测量，于是出洞。
English: I walked another five or six meters, and again encountered water on the west cliff. The water here gradually deepened, and since I couldn't see above and couldn't measure below, I went out of the cave.

古文：出复四渡水而上冈。
现代文：出洞，又四次渡水然后上冈。
English: Out of the hole, across the water four more times and then up the hill.

古文：闻冈上有人声，则沙朗人之耕陇者。
现代文：听到冈上有人声，是耕地的沙朗人。
English: If you hear someone's voice on the hill, it's the Sarang people tilling the soil.

古文：见余入洞，与负行李人耦语相对私语待之。为余言，水之西出，即陡坡北峡；山之上度，即天生桥间道所从，如前之所标记者。
现代文：他看见我进洞，便和挑夫说着话等我。他对我说： 水从洞里往西流出，就是陡坡北边的峡谷；从山上过去，是天生桥小路所经过的地方，和先前的标记相同。 
English: He saw me enter the cave and waited for me, talking to the porter. He said to me: The water flows from the cave to the west, which is the canyon on the north side of the steep slope; from the mountain, it is the place where the Tiansheng Bridge path passes, the same as the previous mark.

古文：始恨不携炬，竟西从洞中出也。
现代文：我于是遗憾没有携带火把，否则可以直接顺山洞从西边出去。
English: I then regretted not bringing torches, otherwise I could have gone directly along the cave from the west.

古文：其人又为余言，富民有老虎洞，在大溪之上，不可失。
现代文：这个人还对我说： 富民县有个老虎洞，在大溪边，不能错过。 
English: This person also said to me: There is a tiger cave in Fumin County, next to the big stream, you can't miss it.

古文：余谢之。
现代文：我向他道谢。
English: I thanked him.

古文：乃西上蹑岭，一里半，登其脊，是为天生桥。
现代文：于是往西攀登山岭，一里半，登上山梁，这是天生桥。
English: So I climbed the mountain ridge to the west, a mile and a half, and ascended the mountain beam, which is Tiansheng Bridge.

古文：脊南石峰嶙峋，高耸而出，其脉自陟坡东，度脊而北，间道循其东陲，陡坡之涧，界其西麓；至此又跨洞北，属于沙朗后西山，水从其下穿腹西出，路从其上度脊西行。
现代文：山梁南边石峰层叠峻峭，高高耸出，其山脉从陡坡东面越过山梁往北延伸，小路顺着山脉东面走，陡坡的沟涧以山脉西麓为界；山脉延伸到这里又跨越水洞而向北延伸，和沙朗背后的西山相连，水从其下穿过山腹往西流出，道路从其上越过山梁往西行。
English: On the south side of the mountain, the stone peaks are stacked and towering, and the mountains extend from the east side of the steep slope across the mountain beam to the north. The path follows the east side of the mountains, and the gully of the steep slope is bounded by the western foot of the mountains. The mountains extend here and extend northward across the water hole, and are connected to the west mountain behind the Sarang. Water flows westward through the mountainside, and the road goes westward across the mountain beam.

古文：脊西瞰，即陡坡涧水，直走而北，至此西折，脊上之路，亦盘壑西坠。
现代文：俯视山梁西边，则陡坡沟涧之水，直直地往北流，到这里转向西边，山梁上的路，也绕着沟壑往西下。
English: Looking down on the western side of the mountain, the water of the steep gully flows straight north, turning west here. The road on the mountain also goes west around the gully.

古文：益信出水之洞，即在其下，心悬悬欲一探之。
现代文：我更加相信出水洞口就在这山梁下面，心里念念不舍地想下去探索一下。
English: I am even more convinced that the mouth of the outlet cave is right under this mountain beam, and I can't wait to go down and explore it.

古文：西行山半者一里，见有岐直下峡底，遂令顾奴同负襄者由大道直前，余乃独下趋峡中。
现代文：往西顺山腰走了一里，看见有岔路直下到峡谷底部，于是让顾仆和挑夫从大路一直往前走，我则独自下峡谷。
English: After walking west along the mountainside for a mile, I saw a path leading straight down to the bottom of the canyon, so I let the servant and the porter walk all the way from the main road, and I went down the canyon alone.

古文：半里，抵峡底，遂溯水东行。
现代文：半里，到峡谷底部，子是溯流往东行。
English: Half a mile to the bottom of the canyon, the stream follows east.

古文：一里，折而南，则后洞庞然西向，其高阔亦如前洞，水从其中踊跃而出，西与南来之涧合而北去。余溯流入洞，二丈后，仰睇洞顶，上层复裂通于门外，门之上，若桥之横于前，其上复流光内映，第高穹之极，下层石影氤氲，若浮云之上承明旭太阳光也。
现代文：一里，转向南，就看到山洞后门朝西大开，门的高度、宽度也和前门相同，水从洞中滔滔不绝地涌流出来，往西与南来的涧水汇合后往北流去，我溯流进洞，二丈后抬头看洞顶，洞壁上层又裂开通到洞门外，洞门上面，像桥梁横跨在前方，其上又有流动的光线映入洞内，称得上高拱之极观，下层石影如同烟雾迷漫，仿佛漂动的云彩上托着明亮的太阳。
English: After one mile, turning south, I saw that the back door of the cave was wide open to the west. The height and width of the door were the same as the front door. Water gushed out of the cave incessantly. After merging with the rushing water coming from the south to the west, it flowed to the north. I followed the flow into the cave. After the second height, I looked up at the top of the cave. The upper layer of the cave wall was cracked and opened to the outside of the cave door. The top of the cave door, like a bridge, spanned in front. On top of it, flowing light reflected into the cave. It was called the

古文：洞中流，初平散而不深，随之深入数丈，忽有突石中踞，浮于水面，其内则渊然深汇，磅礴崖根，不能溯入矣。
现代文：洞中的水流，开初平缓、分散而不深，顺着进到数丈深的地方，洞中忽然耸起石头，浮出水面，洞内的水流汇聚得很深，气势磅礴地冲击洞壁底部，不能再溯流而进了。
English: The water flow in the cave was gentle at the beginning, dispersed but not deep, and went along to a depth of several feet. Suddenly, stones rose up in the cave and floated to the surface. The water flow in the cave converged very deep, striking the bottom of the cave wall with great force, and could no longer flow backwards.

古文：洞顶亦有石倒骞，以高甚，反不觉其夭矫。
现代文：洞顶也有石头倒悬，因为太高，反而不觉得有伸屈自如之美。
English: There are also stones hanging upside down at the top of the cave, but because they are too high, they do not have the beauty of being able to bend over.

古文：其门直而迥，故深入而犹朗朗，且以上层倒射之光，直彻于内也。
现代文：洞笔直而深远，所以进去很深仍然明亮，而且因为有上层倒射的光线，光一直透到里面。
English: The hole is straight and deep, so it is still bright deep inside, and because of the light reflected from the upper layer, the light penetrates all the way inside.

古文：出洞，还顾洞门上，其左悬崖甚峭，上复辟成一门，当即内透之隙。
现代文：从洞里出来，返回去看洞门上面，其左边的悬崖非常陡峭，悬崖上又开成一道门，应当就是透光进洞的裂隙。
English: Come out of the cave, return to see the cave door above, the cliff on the left is very steep, and a door opens on the cliff, which should be the crack through which light enters the hole.

古文：乃涉涧之西，遥审崖间层叠之痕，孰可著足，孰可倒攀，孰可以宛转达，孰可以腾跃上。
现代文：于是越到沟涧的西边，远远地审视崖壁上层层叠叠的痕迹，什么地方可以落脚，什么地方可以倒攀，什么地方可以曲折到终，什么地方可以腾跃而上。
English: So I went over to the west side of the gully, and from a distance examined the traces of cranes stacked on top of the cliff, where I could land, where I could climb backwards, where I could zigzag to the end, and where I could leap up.

古文：乃复涉涧抵崖，一依所审法试之。
现代文：然后再退到沟涧抵达崖壁，按着审视到的走法一一试着走。
English: Then retreat to the gully and reach the cliff wall, and try to walk one by one according to the examined way.

古文：半晌，遂及上层外，门更廓然高穹也。
现代文：好半天，才到达上一层的洞外，洞门更加开阔高拱。
English: It took a good half a day to reach the outside of the cave on the upper level, the cave door is more open and high arched.

古文：入其内，为龛为窝，为台为榭，俱浮空内向。
现代文：进入洞内，如有阁楼、有窝巢，有平台、有亭屋，都浮在空中，往里蔓延。
English: Entering the cave, if there is a loft, a nest, a platform, a pavilion, they all float in the air and spread inward.

古文：内俯洞底，波涛破峡，如玉龙负舟，与洞顶之垂幄悬帔，昔仰望之而隐隐者，兹如缨络随身，幢幡覆影矣，与蹑云驾鹤，又何异乎？
现代文：从洞内俯视洞底，景色如波涛穿破峡谷，飞瀑载舟，而先前抬头望上去隐隐约约的，如从洞顶上垂挂下去的慢帐、裙衫，现在又像随身飘逸的缨络，覆盖身影的幢蟠，这和腾云骑鹤的仙境，又有什么区别呢？
English: Looking down from the inside of the cave, the scenery is like waves breaking through the canyon, waterfalls carrying boats, while previously looking up vaguely, such as hanging from the top of the cave hanging down slowly, skirts, now like a floating net, covering the shadow of the figure, what is the difference between this and the wonderland of clouds and cranes?

古文：坐久之，听洞底波声，忽如宏钟，忽如细响，令我神移志易。
现代文：坐在洞内很久，听着洞底的波涛声，一会如同大钟鸣响，一会如同丝竹袅袅，让我神往心动、舒畅愉快。
English: Sitting in the cave for a long time, listening to the sound of the waves at the bottom of the cave, one moment like a big bell ringing, one moment like a silk bamboo shoots, let me be inspired, comfortable and happy.

古文：及下，层崖悬级，一时不得腠理，攀挂甚久。
现代文：到下山时，层层崖壁上悬有石阶，只是一时找不出条理，攀爬了很久。
English: When we reached the bottom of the mountain, there were stone steps hanging on the cliff wall in layers. We just couldn't find the right order and climbed for a long time.

古文：忽有男妇十余人，自陡坡来，隔涧停睇，迨余下，问何所事。
现代文：忽然有十多名男女从陡坡走过来，隔着沟涧停在那里张望。到我下来，间我有什么事。
English: Suddenly, more than a dozen men and women came walking down the steep slope and stopped across the gully to stare at me. When I came down, I didn't know what to do.

古文：余告以游山。
现代文：我告诉他们游览山上。
English: I told them to take a trip to the mountains.

古文：两男子亦儒者，问其上何有。
现代文：其中两个男子也是读书人，间山上有些什么。
English: Two of the men are also readers, and there is something about the mountains.

古文：余告以景不可言尽。
现代文：我告诉他们美景一言难尽。
English: I told them that the beauty of the scenery is indescribable.

古文：恐前行者渐远，不复与言，遂随水少北转而西行峡中。
现代文：我担心走在前面的顾仆等人走远，就不再和这些人说什么，跟着水流稍微转北而向西从峡谷中走去。
English: I stopped talking to the people ahead of me, fearing that they would be too far away, and followed the current as it turned slightly north and west out of the canyon.

古文：一里，渐上北坡。
现代文：一里，逐渐登上北面的山坡。
English: One mile, gradually ascending the hillside to the north.

古文：缘坡西行，三里，峡坞渐开。
现代文：顺着山坡往西走，三里，峡谷中的山坞逐渐开阔。
English: Walking west along the hillside for three miles, the dock in the canyon gradually widens.

古文：又四里，坞愈开。
现代文：又走四里，山坞更加开阔。
English: Another four miles and the dock is even more open.

古文：其北崖逾山南下者，即沙朗后山所来道；其南坡有聚落倚南山者，是为头村。
现代文：那条从北崖翻过去往南下的路，是沙朗后山所穿过来的路，那南坡上傍靠南山而居的村子、名头村。
English: The road that climbs over the north cliff to the south is the road through the mountains behind Sarang, the village that lives on the south slope next to the south mountain, Naotou village.

古文：路至此始由坞渡溪。
现代文：路到这里才顺山坞渡过溪流。
English: On the way here, we had to cross a stream through a mountain dock.

古文：溪上横木为桥，其水即陡坡并天生桥洞中所出，西流而注于螳螂川者也。
现代文：溪流上横着木桥，溪水就是从陡坡以及天生桥洞中流来，往西流入蝗螂川。
English: There is a wooden bridge across the stream, and the stream water flows from the steep slope and Tianshengqiao Cave and flows west into the Locust River.

古文：从溪南随流行一里，过头村之西。
现代文：从南岸顺溪流走一里，经过头村西边。
English: Walk one mile along the stream from the south bank, passing the west side of Tou village.

古文：沿流一里半，复上坡西行。
现代文：顺着溪流走一里半，又上坡往西走。
English: Follow the stream for a mile and a half, then walk uphill to the west.

古文：二里，再下坞中。
现代文：二里，再卞到坞中。
English: Two leagues, then to the middle of the dock.

古文：半里，路旁有卖浆草舍倚南坡，则顾仆与行李俱在焉。
现代文：半里，路旁靠南坡有间卖浆的草房，而顾仆和行李都在这里。
English: Half a mile down the road, on the southern slope, there is a grass hut selling milk, and here are the servants and the luggage.

古文：遂入饭。
现代文：于是进去吃饭。
English: So they went in to eat.

古文：又西盘南山之嘴，一里余，为二村。
现代文：又往西绕着南山嘴走，一里多，到二村。
English: Then I walked west around Nanshanzui, more than a mile, to the second village.

古文：村之西有坞北出，横涉而过之。
现代文：村子西边有山坞往北延伸，横穿其坞。
English: On the west side of the village, there is a dock extending northwards, cutting across the dock.

古文：半里，复上坡，随南山而西，上倚危崖，下逼奔湍急流。
现代文：半里，又上坡，顺着南山往西走，道路左上方靠陡峭的山崖，右下方临奔腾的急流。
English: After half a mile, we went uphill again, following the Nanshan Mountain to the west. The upper left side of the road was next to a steep cliff, and the lower right side was next to a rushing rapids.

古文：五里，有村在溪北，是为三村。
现代文：五里，有村子在溪流北岸，这是三村。
English: Wuli, there is a village on the north bank of the stream, this is Sancun.

古文：至是南界山横突而北，北界山环三村之西，又突而南，坞口始西窒焉。
现代文：到这里南部山横列耸起往北延伸，北部山绕过三村西边，又耸起往南延伸，山坞口才被从西面阻塞。
English: Up to here, the southern mountains rise horizontally and extend to the north, the northern mountains bypass the western side of the three villages, and rise and extend to the south, and the mouth of the mountain is blocked from the west.

古文：路由溪南跻北突之坡而上，一里半。抵峰头。
现代文：我顺路从溪流南岸攀越往北耸延的山坡而上，一里半，抵达峰顶。
English: I followed the path from the south bank of the stream and climbed the north-facing slope for a mile and a half to reach the summit.

古文：其峰北瞰三村溪而下，溪由三村西横啮北峰之麓，破峡西出。
现代文：其峰北面俯视着三村的溪水往下流，溪水从三村西边横流，紧逼山峰北麓，冲破峡谷往西流出。
English: The north face of its peak overlooks the stream of Samcun flowing down. The stream flows across the west side of Samcun, pressing against the northern foot of the mountain, breaking through the canyon and flowing out to the west.

古文：峡深嵌逼束，止容水不容人，故路逾其巅而过，是为罗鬼岭，东西分富民、昆明之界焉。
现代文：峡谷深陷狭窄，只容水流而不容人过，所以道路越其顶而过，这峰叫罗鬼岭，是富民县与昆明县之间的东西分界。
English: The canyon is deep and narrow, only allowing water to flow but not allowing people to pass, so the road goes over the top. This peak is called Rogiering, which is the east-west boundary between Fumin County and Kunming County.

古文：过岭西下四里，连过上下罗鬼两村，则三村之流，已破峡西出。
现代文：翻过罗鬼岭往西下四里，接连经过上罗鬼、下罗鬼两个村子，这时，三村的溪流，已经穿过峡谷往西流出。
English: After crossing the Rogier Ridge four miles to the west, we passed through the two villages of Upper Rogier and Lower Rogier. At this time, the streams of the three villages had already flowed through the canyon to the west.

古文：界两村之中而西，又有一溪自北坞来，与三村溪合并西去。
现代文：两个村子之间的分界处西边，又有一股溪水从北边的山坞流来，与三村的溪水汇合后往西流去。
English: On the west side of the border between the two villages, another stream flows from the dock on the north side, merging with the streams of the three villages and flowing to the west.

古文：路随之，行溪南二里，抵西崖下，其水稍曲而南，横木梁渡之。
现代文：道路顺着溪水走，沿着溪水南岸走二里，抵达西边山崖下，溪水逐渐曲折向南，木桥横跨在溪上，过桥。
English: The road went along the stream, walked along the south bank of the stream for two miles, arrived at the west side of the cliff, the stream gradually meandered south, and the wooden bridge spanned the stream and crossed the bridge.

古文：有村倚北山而聚，是为阿夷冲。
现代文：有村子傍靠北山而居，这是阿夷冲。
English: There is a village next to the North Mountain, which is Ai Chong.

古文：又从其西一里半，逾一波。
现代文：又从阿夷冲往西走一里半，越过一座坡。
English: From Ai, he rushed west for a mile and a half, crossing a slope.

古文：又一里半，昏黑中得一村，亦倚北山，是为大哨。
现代文：又走一里半，昏暗中来到一个村子，这村也背靠北山，名大哨。
English: I walked another mile and a half, and in the dark I came to a village. This village also backs on to Kitayama, and is known as the Great Sentinel.

古文：觅宿肆不得，心甚急。
现代文：找不到旅店住宿，心里很着急。
English: I couldn't find a hotel to stay in, and I was very anxious.

古文：又半里，乃从西村得之，遂宿其家。
现代文：又走半里，在西村找到住处，就住在村民家中。
English: After walking another half-mile, he found a place to live in Nishimura and stayed in a villager's home.

古文：初十日鸡鸣起饭，出门犹不辨色。
现代文：初十日鸡叫时起床吃饭，出门时还分辨不清天色。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, I got up to eat when the rooster crowed. When I went out, I couldn't tell what color the sky was.

古文：西南行塍中，一里半，南过一石桥，即阿夷冲溪所出也。
现代文：往西南从田埂上行走，一里半，往南经过一道石桥，桥下就是阿夷冲流出的水。
English: Walking southwest from the rice paddies, one and a half miles, southward through a stone bridge, under the bridge is the water flowing out of the Aizhong.

古文：溪向西北流，路度桥南去。
现代文：溪水往西北流，道路过桥后往南走。
English: The stream flows to the northwest, and the road crosses the bridge and heads south.

古文：半里，又一水自东南峡中来，较小于阿夷冲溪，即《志》所云洞溪之流也。
现代文：半里，又有一股水从东南边峡谷中流来，比阿夷冲的溪水小，就是志书上记载的洞溪水。
English: Half a mile away, another stream of water flowed from the middle of the southeastern canyon, smaller than the stream of Ai Yichong, that is, the water of Dongxi recorded in the book.

古文：二流各西入螳螂川。
现代文：两股水分别往西注入蝗螂川。
English: Two streams of water separately flowed westward into the Locust River.

古文：度木桥一里余，得大溪汤汤大水奔流，即螳螂川也；自南峡中出，东北直抵大哨西，乃转北去而入金沙江。
现代文：过木桥后走一里多，看到大河浩荡，是蝗螂川；蝗螂川从南边峡谷中流出，往东北一直流到大哨西边，于是转向北流入金沙江。
English: After crossing the wooden bridge, I walked for more than a mile and saw a huge river, the Locust River. The Locust River flows out of the southern canyon and flows northeast to the west of the Great Sentinel, and then turns north into the Jinsha River.

古文：有巨石梁跨川上，其下分五巩，上有亭。
现代文：有座大石桥横跨蝗螂川上，桥下分为五拱，桥上有亭子。
English: There is a large stone bridge across the Locust River, the bridge is divided into five arches, and there is a pavilion on the bridge.

古文：其东西两崖，各有聚落成衢，是为桥头。
现代文：桥东西两边的山崖下，都有村落、街市，这是桥头。
English: Under the cliffs on both the east and west sides of the bridge, there are villages and markets. This is the bridgehead.

古文：过桥，西北一里，即富民县治。
现代文：过桥后，往西北走一里，就是富民县治。
English: After crossing the bridge, walk one mile to the northwest, which is Fumin County.

古文：由桥西溯川南行七里，为河上洞。
现代文：从桥西逆着蝗螂川往南行七里，是河上洞。
English: From the west of the bridge, seven miles south of the Locust River, there is a cave on the river.

古文：先是有老僧居此洞中，人以老和尚洞呼之，故沙朗村人误呼为老虎洞。
现代文：早先有位老僧人居住在此洞，人们于是称为老和尚洞，因而沙朗村人误称为老虎洞。
English: Earlier, an old monk lived in this cave, so people called it the old monk's cave, so the villagers of Sarang mistakenly called it the tiger's cave.

古文：余至此，土人犹以为老和尚也。
现代文：我来到这里，当地人还是称它为老和尚洞。
English: When I came here, the locals still called it Old Monk's Cave.

古文：及抵洞，见有刻为河上洞者，盖前任县君以洞临溪流，取河上公之义而易之。
现代文：等抵达洞口，看见刻着河上洞三字，大概是前任县官认为这个洞面对溪流，取河上公的含义而改名。
English: When they arrived at the mouth of the cave and saw the three characters "河上洞" engraved, it was probably the former county official who thought that this cave faced the stream and changed the name to take the meaning of "河上公."

古文：甫过桥，余问得其道，而顾仆与负囊者已先向县治。
现代文：才过桥，我便问到了去河上洞的路，因为顾仆和挑夫已经先去富民县治。
English: Just after crossing the bridge, I asked the way to the river cave, because the servants and porters had already gone to Fumin County.

古文：余听听任其前，独沿川岸溯流去。
现代文：我听任他们朝前去，独自一人沿着蝗螂川岸逆行。
English: I let them go ahead of me and walked back alone along the bank of the Locust River.

古文：一里，西南入峡。
现代文：一里，往西南进入峡谷。
English: One mile southwest into the canyon.

古文：又三里，随峡转而南，皆濒川岸行。
现代文：又三里，顺着峡谷转向南，都是在幢螂川边走。
English: Another three miles, along the canyon to the south, are on the edge of the Dojo River.

古文：又二里，见路直蹑山西上，余疑之，而路甚大，姑从之。
现代文：又二里，看见道路一直登山往西上，我心里怀疑，但路很宽大，暂且顺着走。
English: After another two miles, I saw that the road kept climbing westward. I had my doubts, but the road was very wide, so I followed it for the time being.

古文：一里，遇樵者，始知上山为胡家山道，乃土寨也，乃复下，濒川而南。
现代文：一里，遇到砍柴的人，才知道上山是去胡家山的路，胡家山是本地村寨，于是又下山，沿着蝗螂川往南走。
English: After a mile, I met a woodcutter who told me that the way up the mountain was to Hu Jia Shan, which is a local village, so I went down the mountain and walked south along the Locust River.

古文：一里，其路又南上山，余觇其旁路皆翳，复随之。蹑山南上，愈上愈峻，一里，直登岭脊，而不见洞。
现代文：一里，道路又往南上山，我看到其旁边的路全被遮盖，又顺着路走，登山往南上，愈往上愈陡峻，一里，一直登上岭脊，却看不到洞。
English: One mile, the road went south up the mountain, I saw the road next to it was completely covered, and walked along the road, climbing southward, getting steeper and steeper, one mile, all the way up the ridge, but I couldn't see the hole.

古文：其脊自西峰最高处横突而东，与东峰壁夹川流，只通一线者也。
现代文：其脊从西边山峰最高处横列过来往东耸立，和东边的山峰从两边夹住蝗螂川流，只留有一线天。
English: Its ridge rises from the highest point of the western mountain peak to the east, and the locust river flows from both sides of the eastern mountain peak, leaving only a skyline.

古文：盖西岸之山，南自安宁圣泉西龙山分支传送而来，至此耸为危峰，屏压川流，又东北坠为此脊，以横扼之；东岸之山，东自牛圈哨岭分支传送而来，至此亦耸为危嶂，屏压川流，又西与此脊对而挟持之。
现代文：原来川流西岸的山脉，南部起自安宁州圣泉西边的龙山，是从其分支延伸而来，到这里耸立为陡峭的屏嶂，像屏风一样逼向川流，又往东北延伸下去形成此脊，从而横扼川流；川流东岸的山脉，东部起自牛圈哨岭，是从其分支延伸而来，到这里也耸立为陡峭的屏障，也像屏风一样逼向川流，又与西岸的山脊对峙并挟持川流。
English: The mountain range on the west coast of the original river flow, the Longshan from the south to the west of the Sacred Spring in Anning Prefecture, extends from its branch, and here it stands as a steep screen, forcing the river flow like a screen, and extending to the northeast to form this ridge, thereby strangling the river flow; the mountain range on the east coast of the river flow, from the east to the Cowshed Sentinel Ridge, extends from its branch, and here it also stands as a steep barrier, also forcing the river flow like a screen, and confronting the ridge on the west coast and holding the river flow.

古文：登此脊而见脊南山势崩坠，夹川如线，川自南来，下嵌其底，不得自由，惟有冲跃。
现代文：登上此脊就看到脊南面山势崩陷，川流被峡谷夹成一条线，从南边流来，陷落谷底，无法自由流淌，只能冲击、腾跃。
English: When you climb this ridge, you can see the mountain collapse on the south side of the ridge. The river flow is caught in a line by the canyon. It flows from the south, falls to the bottom of the valley, cannot flow freely, and can only rush and leap.

古文：脊南之路，复坠渊而下，以为此下必无通衢，而坠路若此，必因洞而辟。
现代文：脊南面的路，又往深渊坠下去，我认为这里下去一定不会有大路，但道路却如此下坠，必定是因为有洞而开辟的。
English: The road on the south side of the ridge plunged into the abyss. I thought that there would be no major road down here, but the road fell so much that it must have been opened because of a hole.

古文：复经折随之下，则树影偃密，石崖亏蔽，悄非人境。
现代文：又顺着路转折下去，只见树木倒卧而丛密，石崖毁坏而隐蔽，是静悄悄的无人之境。
English: Turning along the road, I saw trees lying upside down and densely packed, rock cliffs destroyed and hidden, a silent no-man's-land.

古文：下坠一里，路直逼西南高峰下，其峰崩削如压，危影兀兀欲坠。
现代文：下坠了一里，道路直逼西南边的高峰下，其峰崩塌得像被劈开似的要倒下来，陡峻的山岭光秃秃的，摇摇欲坠。
English: A mile down, the road plunges to the south-west, beneath a peak that crumbles as if it were about to fall, a sheer mountain range, bare and crumbling.

古文：路转其夹坳间，石削不容趾，凿孔悬之，影倒奔湍间，犹窅ｙｏ深远然九渊比喻其水很深也。
现代文：路转到其狭窄的山坳间，石峰陡峭不能落脚，上面凿有石孔攀登，其影倒映在奔腾的急流之间，犹如落入深远的潭底。
English: The road turns into its narrow ridge, the stone peak is too steep to land, there are stone holes to climb on it, and its shadow is reflected between the rushing rapids, as if falling into the deep bottom of the lake.

古文：至是余知去路甚远，已非洞之所丽，而爱其险峭，徘徊不忍去。
现代文：到此时，我知道距离路太远，已经不是去河上洞所应遇到的环境，但我喜爱其险峻，徘徊着不愿离开。
English: By this time, I knew that the distance was too far and it was no longer the environment that I should encounter when going to the river cave, but I loved its precipitousness and lingered unwilling to leave.

古文：忽闻上有咳声，如落自九天。
现代文：忽然听到上面有咳嗽声，好像从天上传下来一样。
English: Suddenly, I heard a coughing sound from above, as if it was coming from the sky.

古文：已而一人下，见余愕然，问何以独踞此。
现代文：不久有一个人下来，他看见我时很吃惊，问我为什么会独自蹲在这里。
English: Soon a man came down, he was surprised to see me and asked me why I was sitting here alone.

古文：余告以寻洞，曰： 洞在隔岭之北，何以逾此？ 
现代文：我告诉他因为寻找河上洞，他说： 河上洞在隔开的山岭北面，怎么会翻越到这里？ 
English: I told him it was because I was looking for a river cave, and he said, "The river cave is on the north side of a separate mountain range. How did it get over here?"

古文：余问： 此路何往？ 
现代文：我问： 这条路通到哪里？ 
English: I asked: Where does this road lead to?

古文：曰： 沿溪蹑峭，四十里而抵罗墓。 
现代文：他说， 顺着溪流攀登峭壁，走四十里就到达罗墓。 
English: He said, "Follow the stream, climb the cliff, and walk forty miles to reach Luo Tomb."

古文：则此路之幽阒，更非他径所拟矣。
现代文：则此路的幽静，绝不是其它小路所够比的。
English: However, the quietness of this path is by no means comparable to that of other paths.

古文：虽不得洞，而觇此奇峭，亦一快也。
现代文：我虽然没有找到洞，但目睹这罕见的峻峭，也是一次愉快的经历。
English: Although I didn't find a hole, it was a pleasant experience to witness this rare steep climb.

古文：返跻一里，复北上脊。见脊之东有洞南向，然去川甚远，余知非河上洞，而高揽南山，凭临绝壑，亦超然有云外想，遂披棘攀崖入之。
现代文：往回攀登一里，又从北面登上山脊，看到脊东边有个朝南的山洞，然而距离蝗螂川很远，我知道那不是河上洞，这洞高高在上，可纵揽南山，傍靠濒临深壑，也让人感到置身在云天之外，于是披开荆棘、攀爬山崖进入此洞。
English: I climbed back one mile and ascended the ridge from the north, and saw a south-facing cave on the east side of the ridge. However, it was far away from the Locust River. I knew that it was not a river cave. This cave is high up, can span the Nanshan, and is close to the deep ravine. It also makes people feel like they are outside the clouds. So I opened the thorns and climbed the cliff to enter this cave.

古文：其洞虽不甚深，而上覆下平，倒插青冥苍天，呼吸日月，此为最矣。
现代文：其洞虽然不太深，但上面覆盖，下面平坦，大有倒立苍天，呼吸日月之势。
English: Although the hole is not very deep, it is covered on the top and flat on the bottom, with a large upside-down sky, breathing the sun and moon.

古文：凭憩久之，仍逾脊北下。
现代文：靠着休息了很久，仍然越过山脊往北下。
English: After resting against it for a long time, it still climbed over the ridge and headed north.

古文：一里抵麓，得前所见翳路，瞰川崖而南，半里，即横脊之东垂也。
现代文：一里抵达山脚，到了先前所看到的被遮盖住的路，盯着蝗螂川边的山崖往南走，半里，就到了横扼川流山脊的东面。
English: One mile to the foot of the mountain, to the previously seen covered road, staring south at the cliffs along the Locust River, half a mile to the east of the ridge of the Yokozukugawa River.

古文：前误入南洞，在脊南绝顶，此洞在脊北穷峡。
现代文：刚才误入的朝南的山洞，在脊南最高峰，河上洞在脊北峡谷尽头。
English: The south-facing cave just entered is at the highest peak in the south of the ridge, and the river cave is at the end of the north ridge canyon.

古文：洞门东向，与东峰夹束螳川，深嵌峡底，洞前惟当午一露日光，洞内之幽阻可知也。
现代文：洞口朝东，和东边的山峰相对，约束住蝗螂川，洞深陷在峡谷底，洞前只有中午时才能见到一线阳光，洞中的幽暗、险阻可想而知。
English: The mouth of the cave faces east, opposite the mountain peak on the east, restraining the Locust River. The cave is deeply sunk in the bottom of the canyon. A ray of sunlight can only be seen in front of the cave at noon. The darkness and danger in the cave can be imagined.

古文：洞内南半穹然内空，北半偃石外突；偃石之上，与洞顶或缀或离；其前又竖石一枝，从地内涌起，踞洞之前，若涌塔然。
现代文：洞中南半部拱起，很空旷，北半部卧倒着的石头往外突出；卧石上面，有的地方和洞顶相连缀，有的地方和洞顶相分离；卧石前端又立着一根石柱，从地底下涌起，正位于洞的前部，像地下涌出的塔一样。
English: The southern half of the cave is arched, very empty, and the stone lying upside down in the northern half protrudes outward; above the bedrock, some places are connected to the top of the cave, and some places are separated from the top of the cave; at the front of the bedrock, there is a stone pillar that rises from under the ground and is located in the front of the cave, like a tower emerging from the ground.

古文：此洞左之概也。
现代文：这是洞中左边的概貌。
English: This is a general view of the left side of the cave.

古文：穹入之内，崆峒窈窕，顶高五六丈，多翱翔卷舒之势。
现代文：从拱形的地方往里进，山洞幽深，顶部高达五六丈，大有回旋舒展的气势。
English: Entering from the arch-shaped place, the cave is deep, the top is as high as five or six feet, and there is a great momentum of swinging and stretching.

古文：五丈之内，右转南入，又五丈而窅然西穹，阒黑莫辨矣。
现代文：从洞内五丈深之处往右转进入南部，又进入五丈后，洞就往西拱起，很深，寂静、黑暗，什么也分辨不清了。
English: From the five-story depth of the cave, turn right to enter the south, and after entering the five-story depth, the cave arches to the west. It is very deep, quiet, dark, and nothing can be distinguished.

古文：此洞右之概也。
现代文：这是洞中右边的概貌。
English: This is the general view from the right side of the cave.

古文：余虽未穷其奥，已觉幽奇莫过，次第滇中诸洞，当与清华、清溪二洞相为伯仲。
现代文：我虽然没能穷尽佩中的奥妙，但已经感到没有哪一个洞的幽深和神奇能超过此洞，如果在云南各洞中排列名次：河上洞应当和清华洞、清溪洞不相上下。
English: Although I have not been able to exhaust the mystery of admiration, I have already felt that no hole is deeper and more magical than this hole. If you rank the holes in Yunnan: He Shangdong should be comparable to Tsinghua Cave and Qingxi Cave.

古文：而惜乎远既莫闻，近复荒翳，桃花流水，不出人间，云影苔痕，自成岁月而已！
现代文：只可惜偏远而不被人闻知，近旁又荒凉、隐蔽，桃花流水，如世外桃园，白云飘过，青苔留痕，自成岁月罢了！
English: It's just a pity that it's remote and not known by anyone, and nearby it's desolate and hidden, with peach blossoms flowing like an exotic peach orchard, white clouds drifting by, and traces of green moss, it's just a matter of time!

古文：出洞，遂随川西岸遵故道七里，至桥头。
现代文：从河上洞出来，就顺蝗螂川西岸沿着来的路走了七里，抵达桥头。
English: Coming out of the river cave, I walked seven miles along the west bank of the Locust River to reach the bridgehead.

古文：又北一里余，入富民县南门，出北门；无城堞，惟土墙环堵而已。
现代文：又往北走一里多，从南门进入富民县城，从北门出去，没有城墙，只有土墙环绕城门而已。
English: Walk north for more than a mile, enter the county seat of Fumin from the south gate, and leave from the north gate. There is no city wall, only an earthen wall surrounding the gate.

古文：盖川流北向，辟为大坞，县治当西坡之下，其北有余支掉臂而东，以障下流，武定之路，则从此臂逾坳北去，川流则湾此臂而东北下焉。
现代文：原来蟆螂川往北流，辟出很大的山坞，富民县治位于坞西坡下，其北面有分支山脉转向东延伸，从而阻碍了蝗螂川往下流。去武定府的路，就顺着分支山脉越过山坳往北走，川流则绕着分支山脉往东北流去。
English: Originally, the Mantis River flowed northward, creating a large dock. The county seat of Fumin is located on the west slope of the dock. On its north side, there is a branching mountain range extending eastward, thus hindering the downstream flow of the Mantis River. The road to Wudingfu follows the branching mountain range across the mountains to the north, while the river flows around the branching mountain range to the northeast.

古文：时顾仆及行李不知待何所，余踉跄而前，又二里，及之坳臂之下，遂同上峡中，平逾其坳。
现代文：这时顾仆和行李不知道等在什么地方，我跟踉跄跄地往前走，又二里，来到分支山脉下的山坳，于是顺着进入峡谷中，平平地越过山坳。
English: At this time, Gu Min and the luggage did not know where they were waiting. I walked with the donkey for another two miles to the foothills under the branching mountains, and then followed into the canyon and crossed the foothills smoothly.

古文：三里，有溪自西南山峡出，其势甚遥，乃河上洞西高峰之后，夹持而至，东注螳川者。
现代文：三里，有溪流从西南山的峡谷中流出，水势来源很远，是从河上洞西边的高峰背后，夹持在山谷中流来，往东注入蝗螂川。
English: Three miles away, a stream flows out of a canyon in the southwest mountains. The source of the water is very far away. It flows from behind the peak on the west side of the river cave, held in the middle of the valley, and flows east into the Locust River.

古文：其流颇大，有梁南北跨之。
现代文：这条溪流比较大，桥梁横跨南北两岸。
English: This stream is relatively large, with bridges spanning the north and south banks.

古文：北上坡，又五里，饭于石关哨。
现代文：往北上坡，又走五里，在石关哨吃饭。
English: Headed north uphill, walked another five miles, and ate at Shiguan Sentinel.

古文：逾坳北下，日色甚丽，照耀林壑。
现代文：越过山坳往北下，阳光十分明亮，照耀着山林沟壑。
English: The sun shines brightly across the mountains to the north, illuminating the mountains, forests and ravines.

古文：西有大山曰白泥塘，其山南北横耸，如屏插天。
现代文：西边有座大山名白泥塘，此山横贯南北，高高耸立，如同屏障插入云天。
English: To the west, there is a large mountain called Baidutang. This mountain runs from north to south, towering high, like a barrier into the clouds.

古文：土人言，东下极削而西颇夷，其上水池一泓，可耕可庐也。
现代文：当地人说，往东下极其陡峭，而往西下山则比较平坦，山上有一池水，可以耕作，可以居住。
English: Locals say that the descent to the east is extremely steep, while the descent to the west is relatively flat. There is a pool of water on the mountain, which can be cultivated and lived in.

古文：山东之水，即由石关哨北麓而东去。
现代文：山东边的水，就顺着石关哨北麓向东流去。
English: The water on the eastern side of the mountain flows eastward along the northern foot of Shiguan Sentinel.

古文：共二里，涉之，即缘东支迤逦北上。
现代文：一共走二里，渡过这股水，就沿着白泥塘东支山脉曲曲折折往北上。
English: We walked a total of two miles, crossed this stream of water, and then zigzagged northwards along the eastern branch of the Baidutang Mountains.

古文：其支从白泥东北环而南下者，其腋内水亦随之南下，合于石关北麓。
现代文：支脉顺着白泥塘东北绕着往南延伸，其里侧的水流也跟着山脉走向往南流，和石关哨北麓的水汇合。
English: The tributary follows the northeast of the white mud pond and extends to the south, and the water flow on its inner side also follows the mountains and flows to the south, and merges with the water at the northern foot of Shiguan Sentinel.

古文：路溯之北，八里，又逾其坳。
现代文：道路顺着水流往北逆行，八里，又穿过其山坳。
English: The road runs north along the water flow, eight miles, and passes through its mountains.

古文：坳不甚峻，田塍叠叠环其上，村居亦夹峙，是为二十里铺。
现代文：山坳不很陡，一块块田地绕着山坳往上层叠，村舍也夹在两边，这是二十里铺。
English: The ridge is not very steep. Fields are stacked up around the ridge, and the village houses are also sandwiched on both sides. This is a twenty-mile hike.

古文：又四里为没官庄，又三里为者墕关。
现代文：再走四里名没官庄，再走三里是者幼关。
English: If you walk another four miles, you won't find a government village. If you walk another three miles, you'll find a juvenile detention center.

古文：其处坞径旁达，聚三流焉。
现代文：这里的山坞小路通往四面八方，汇聚了三股水流。
English: The dock path here leads in all directions, bringing together three streams of water.

古文：一出自西南峡中者，最大，即白泥塘山后之流也，有石梁跨其上，梁南居庐，即者墕关也。
现代文：一股来源于西南边的峡谷中，水最大，是白泥塘山背后的水流，有座石桥横跨上面，桥南有住户，就是者幼关。
English: One stream originates from the southwest side of the canyon, the largest water is the water flow behind the Baidutang Mountain, there is a stone bridge across it, and there are residents south of the bridge, that is, Zhashuguan.

古文：越梁西北上一里，复过一村庐，又一小水自西峡来，又一水自西北峡来，二水合于村庐东北，稍东，复与石梁下西南峡水合而东北去，当亦入富民东北螳川下流者。
现代文：过桥往西北上一里，又经过一个村子，另外一股小水从西边峡谷流来，还有一股水从西韭边峡谷流来，二股水在村子东北面会合，逐渐往东流，再与石桥下面西南峡谷中的水汇合，然后往东北流去，应当也是流入富民县东北蝗螂川下游。
English: After crossing the bridge one mile to the northwest, it passed through another village. Another small stream of water flowed from the west side of the canyon, and another stream of water flowed from the west side of the canyon. The two streams of water met on the northeast side of the village, gradually flowed eastward, and then merged with the water in the southwest canyon below the stone bridge, and then flowed to the northeast. It should also flow into the downstream of the Northeast Locust River in Fumin County.

古文：过村庐之西北，有平桥跨西峡所出溪上，度其北，遂西北上岭。
现代文：经过村子西北，有座平桥横跨在西边峡谷流来的溪水上，过桥到溪水北岸，就往西北上岭。
English: Passing through the northwest of the village, there is a flat bridge across the stream water flowing from the west canyon, crossing the bridge to the north bank of the stream, to the northwest of Shangling.

古文：其岭盖中悬于西北两涧之中，乃富民、武定之界也。
现代文：因为山岭正好耸立在西边和北边的两道沟涧当中，就成了富民县与武定府的分界。
English: Because the mountain range rises right in the middle of the two gullies on the west and north, it became the boundary between Fumin County and Wuding Prefecture.

古文：盘曲而上者三里，有佛宇三楹，木坊跨道，曰 滇西锁钥 ，乃武定所建，以为入境之防者。
现代文：曲折盘旋着往上走了三里，有三间佛寺，木牌坊跨越道路两旁，上面写着 滇西锁钥 是武定府修建的，作为进入武定府境的边防。
English: There are three Buddhist temples, a wooden arch spanning both sides of the road, and a sign that reads "Shaanxi Lock and Key" was built by Wuding Prefecture as a border defense to enter Wuding Prefecture.

古文：又西上一里余，当山之顶有堡焉，其居庐亦盛，是为小甸堡。
现代文：又往西上一里多，山顶上有堡、其居家住户也很多，这是小甸堡。
English: More than a mile to the west, there is a castle on the top of the mountain, and there are many households living in it. This is Xiaodian Castle.

古文：有歇肆在西隘门外，遂投之而宿。
现代文：西隘门外有住宿的店铺，于是到那里投宿。
English: There was an accommodation shop outside the West Narrows Gate, so we stayed there.

古文：十一日自小甸堡至武定府歇。
现代文：十一日从小甸堡到武定府，在武定府住宿。
English: On the 11th, they went from Xiaoding Fort to Wuding Prefecture, and stayed in Wuding Prefecture.

