古文：容貌者，骨之余，常佐骨之不足。
现代文：一个人的容貌是其骨骼状态的余韵，常常能够弥补骨骼的缺陷。
English: A person's appearance is an aftertaste of their skeletal state, and can often compensate for skeletal defects.

古文：情态者，神之余，常佐神之不足。
现代文：情态是精神的流韵，常常能够弥补精神的不足。
English: Morality is the rhythm of the spirit, often able to make up for the lack of spirit.

古文：久注观人精神，乍见观人情态。
现代文：久久注目，要着重看人的精神；乍一放眼，则要首先看人的情态。
English: If you pay attention for a long time, you should focus on a person's spirit; if you take a quick glance, you should first look at a person's demeanor.

古文：大家举止，羞涩亦佳；小儿行藏，跳叫愈失。大旨亦辨清浊，细处兼论取舍。
现代文：凡属大家如高官显宦、硕儒高僧的举止动作，即使是羞涩之态，也不失为一种佳相；而凡属小儿举动，如市井小民的哭哭笑笑、又跳又叫，愈是矫揉造作，反而愈是显得幼稚粗俗。
English: All the manners and actions that belong to people such as high-ranking officials and great monks, even if they are shy, are a good look; but all the childish behaviors, such as the crying, laughing, jumping and shouting of the common people, the more artificial, the more childish and vulgar.

古文：有弱态，有狂态，有疏懒态，有周旋态。
现代文：看人的情态，对于大处当然也要分辨清浊，而对细处则不但要分辩清浊，而且还要分辨主次方可做出取舍。
English: Looking at a person's state, for large areas, of course, it is necessary to distinguish between clear and hazy, while for small areas, it is not only necessary to distinguish between clear and hazy, but also to distinguish between the main and secondary parties can make a choice.

古文：飞鸟依人，情致婉转，此弱态也。不衫不履，旁若无人，此狂态也。
现代文：常见的情态有以下四种：委婉柔弱的弱态，狂放不羁的狂态，怠慢懒散的疏懒态，交际圆滑周到的周旋态。
English: There are the following four common states: the weak state of euphemism and weakness, the wild and uninhibited state of madness, the lazy state of neglect and laziness, and the smooth and thoughtful state of communication.

古文：坐止自如，问答随意，此疏懒态也。饰其中机，不苟言笑，察言观色，趋吉避凶，则周旋态也。
现代文：如小鸟依依，情致婉转，娇柔亲切，这就是弱态；衣着不整，不修边幅，恃才傲物，目空一切，旁若无人，这就是狂态；想做什么就做什么，想怎么说就怎么说，不分场合，不论忌宜，这就是疏懒态；把心机深深地掩藏起来，处处察颜观色，事事趋吉避凶，与人接触圆滑周到，这就是周旋态。
English: If a little bird is affectionate, affectionate, gentle and kind, this is a weak state; if the clothes are not neat and tidy, if the talent is arrogant, if there is no one around, this is a crazy state; if you want to do what you want to do, if you want to say what you want to say, regardless of the occasion, regardless of whether it is taboo, this is a lazy state; if you hide your heart deeply, look at the appearance everywhere, if things are good or bad, and if you are tactful and thoughtful in contact with people, this is a circumspect state.

古文：皆根其情，不由矫枉。
现代文：这些情态，都来自于内心的真情实性，不由人任意虚饰造作。
English: These states all come from the true nature of the heart, and are not fabricated by people.

古文：弱而不媚，狂而不哗，疏懒而真诚，周旋而健举，皆能成器；反之，败类也。
现代文：委婉柔弱而不曲意谄媚，狂放不羁而不喧哗取闹，怠慢懒散却坦诚纯真，交际圆润却强干豪雄，日后都能成为有用之材；反之，即委婉柔弱又曲意谄媚，狂放不羁而又喧哗取闹，怠慢懒散却不坦诚纯真，交际圆滑却不强干豪雄，日后都会沦为无用的废物。
English: Those who are tactful and soft-spoken but not devious and charming, wild and uninhibited but not noisy and rowdy, negligent and lazy but honest and pure, and communicative and well-rounded but strong and heroic can become useful people in the future; on the other hand, those who are tactful and soft-spoken but not devious and charming, wild and uninhibited but noisy and rowdy, negligent and lazy but not honest and pure, and communicative and well-rounded but not strong and heroic can become useless wastes in the future.

古文：大概亦得二三矣。前者恒态，又有时态。方有对谈，神忽他往；众方称言，此独冷笑；深险难近，不足与论情。言不必当，极口称是，未交此人，故意底毁；卑庸可耻，不足与论事。漫无可否，临事迟回；不甚关情，亦为堕泪。妇人之仁，不足与谈心。
现代文：这类人城府深沉，居心险恶，不能跟他们建立友情；别人发表的意见未必完全妥当，他却在一旁连声附和，足见此人胸无定见；还没有跟这个人打交道，他却在背后对人家进行恶意诽谤和诬蔑，足见此人信口开河，不负责任。这类人庸俗下流，卑鄙可耻，不能跟他们合作共事；无论遇到什么事情都不置可否，而一旦事到临头就迟疑不决，犹豫不前，足见此人优柔寡断；遇到一件根本不值得大动感情的事情，他却伤心落泪，大动感情，足见此人缺乏理智。这类人的仁慈纯属 妇人之仁 ，不能跟他们推诚交心。
English: This kind of person is deep-rooted, has a sinister motive, and cannot build a friendship with them; the opinions expressed by others may not be completely appropriate, but he echoes them on the sidelines, which shows that this person is indecisive; he has not yet dealt with this person, but he has maliciously slandered and slandered others behind his back, which shows that this person is outspoken and irresponsible; this kind of person is vulgar, despicable and shameful, and cannot work with them; no matter what happens, he does not say whether or not, but once it happens, he hesitates and hesitates, which shows that this person is indec

古文：三者不必定人终身。
现代文：然而以上三种情态却不一定能够决定一个人终身的命运。
English: However, the above three situations are not necessarily able to determine a person's life-long fate.

古文：反此以求，可以交天下士。
现代文：如果能够反以上三种人而求之，那么就几乎可以遍交天下之士了。
English: If you can ask the above three kinds of people for it, then you can almost give it to everyone in the world.

