古文：杨愔，字遵彦，小名秦王，弘农华阴人。
现代文：杨愔，字遵彦，小名秦王，弘农华阴人氏。
English: Yang Xuan, Zhaozhong, Xiaoming Qin Wang, Hongnong Hua Yinren.

古文：父津，魏时累为司空侍中。
现代文：父津，魏时官至司空、侍中。
English: His father, Tsu, was an official from the Wei Dynasty to the Siku Dynasty and a courtier.

古文：愔儿童时，口若不能言，而风度深敏，出入门闾，未尝戏弄。
现代文：愔孩提时，好像不能说话，但风度深敏，出入门闾，不曾嬉戏。
English: When I was a child, I couldn't seem to speak, but I had a sensitive demeanor. I walked in and out of doors, but I never played.

古文：六岁学史书，十一受诗、易，好左氏春秋。
现代文：六岁学史书，十一接受《诗》、《易》，喜欢《左氏春秋》。
English: At the age of six, he studied history, and at eleven, he accepted "Poetry" and "Easy," and liked "The Spring and Autumn of Zuo Shi."

古文：幼丧母，曾诣舅源子恭。
现代文：幼年丧母，曾在舅源子恭家生活过一段时间。
English: His mother died when he was young, and he went to live with his uncle, Minamoto no Tsukuda.

古文：子恭与之饮。问读何书，曰： 诵诗。 
现代文：子恭同他一块吃饭，问读什么书，答： 《诗》。 
English: His son dined with him, asked him what book he was reading, and he replied, "Poetry."

古文：子恭曰： 诵至渭阳未邪。 
现代文：子恭说： 读到《渭阳》篇了吗？ 
English: Zi Gong said, "Have you read the "Shuyang" chapter?"

古文：愔便号泣感噎，子恭亦对之歔欷，遂为之罢酒。
现代文：愔便号哭不止，子恭也跟着愔欷感叹，这样，一顿饭也没有吃完。
English: Zou Bin did not stop crying, and Zi Qiong also sighed with Zou, so the meal was not finished.

古文：子恭后谓津曰： 常谓秦王不甚察慧，从今已后，更欲刮目视之。 
现代文：子恭后来对杨津讲： 我们常说秦王不聪明，从今天开始，当刮目相看。 
English: His uncle later said to his father, Yang Jin, "Originally, you thought that King Qin was not very smart. From now on, you should look at him with fresh eyes.

古文：愔一门四世同居，家甚隆盛，昆季就学者三十余人。
现代文：愔家一门四世同堂，家道隆盛，兄弟读书的三十多人。
English: Four generations of the Yang Hui family live together and are very prosperous. More than 30 people go to school.

古文：学庭前有柰树，实落地，□儿咸争之，愔颓然独坐。其季父暐适入学馆，见之大用嗟异，顾谓宾客曰： 此儿恬裕，有我家风。 
现代文：学馆庭院中有棵李树，李子掉到了地上，儿童们都争着去抢，只杨愔一个人坐着不动，其叔父日韦刚好有事来学馆，看见此景后大为嗟叹，回过头来对宾客们说： 此儿恬适，有我们家的家风。 
English: There was a plum tree in the courtyard of the academy. The plum fell to the ground, and the children were all scrambling to grab it. Only Yang Wei was sitting still. His uncle, Sun Wei, happened to come to the academy on business. When he saw this scene, he sighed and turned to the guests and said, "This is a good place, it has our family style."

古文：宅内有茂竹，遂为愔于林边别葺一室，命独处其中，常以铜盘具盛馔以饭之。
现代文：宅园中有茂竹，杨日韦就为愔在竹林边做了一间房子，让他独处其中，常常用铜盘盛最好的饭菜送给他吃。
English: There were bamboo trees in the garden, so Yang Rihwei built a house next to the bamboo forest for the toad, let him be alone in it, and often gave him the best meal in a copper dish.

古文：因以督厉诸子曰： 汝辈但如遵彦谨慎，自得竹林别室、铜盘重肉之食。 
现代文：并且督促别的孩子说： 你们如果也像遵彦那样谨慎好学，自然就会得到竹林别室、铜盘鱼肉之食的。 
English: He used this to urge the other children, saying, "If you are as careful as Zunyan, we can build you a house next to the bamboo grove and serve you meat on copper plates."

古文：愔从父兄黄门侍郎昱特相器重，曾谓人曰： 此儿驹齿未落，已是我家龙文。
现代文：杨愔的从父兄黄门侍郎杨昱尤其器重他，曾对人夸赞道： 这小家伙乳齿未落，已是我家的龙文。
English: Yang Hui's brother-in-law, Huangmen waiter Yang Hui, was particularly fond of him. He once praised others: "This little fellow's milk teeth have not yet fallen, he is already the dragon of our family.

古文：更十岁后，当求之千里外。 
现代文：再过十年，当求之千里之外。 
English: In another ten years, it will be thousands of miles away.

古文：昱尝与十余人赋诗，愔一览便诵，无所遗失。
现代文：昱曾和十多个人在一块赋诗，愔看了这些诗一眼后，马上背诵，没有遗漏。
English: Yang Hui and more than ten people composed poems. Yang Hui could recite them after reading them once, and there was not a single mistake or omission.

古文：及长，能清言，美音制，风神俊悟，容止可观。
现代文：长大了，能清谈，且声音节奏优美，风神俊悟，容止可观。
English: Grown up, can talk clearly, and the sound rhythm is beautiful, the wind god is brilliant, and the tolerance is impressive.

古文：人士见之，莫不敬异，有识者多以远大许之。
现代文：士人见了，莫不敬仰，有识者则认为他前程远大。
English: When people see him, they can't help but admire him, while those with insight think he has a great future.

古文：正光中，随父之□州。
现代文：正光中，跟随父亲到了并州。
English: In the full light of day, he followed his father to Benguizhou.

古文：性既恬默，又好山水，遂入晋阳西悬瓮山读书。
现代文：由于愔性好恬默，又乐山水，因而就入晋阳西边的悬瓮山读书。
English: Because of his taciturn nature and enjoyment of the landscape, he went to the Suspension Mountain on the west side of Jinyang to study.

古文：孝昌初，津为定州刺史，愔亦随父之职。
现代文：孝昌初，其父津做定州刺史，愔也随父赴任。
English: In the first year of Xiaochang, Yang Jin was appointed as the governor of Dingzhou, and Yang Wei also followed his father to the post.

古文：以军功除羽林监，赐爵魏昌男，不拜。
现代文：津因军功升为羽林监，赐爵魏昌男，不拜。
English: Because of his military achievements, he was appointed as an overseer of the feather forest. The imperial court gave Wei Changnan a peerage, but he did not accept it.

古文：及中山为杜洛周陷，全家被囚絷。
现代文：当中山被杜洛周攻陷，愔全家便遭到囚禁。
English: Zhongshan was invaded by Du Luo Zhou, and his entire family was imprisoned.

古文：未几，洛周灭，又没葛荣，荣欲以女妻之，又逼以伪职。
现代文：不久，洛周败灭，却落入葛荣之手，荣想把女儿嫁给他，又用伪职引诱。
English: Soon, Luo Zhou was defeated, but fell into the hands of Ge Rong. Rong wanted to marry his daughter to him, and lured her with a fake job.

古文：愔乃托疾，密含牛血数合，于□中吐之，仍佯喑不语。
现代文：愔便称病，口含牛血，在众人面前呕吐，还装扮成哑巴。
English: The baboon then called in sick, with cow's blood in his mouth, vomited in front of everyone, and dressed up as a mute.

古文：荣以为信然，乃止。
现代文：葛荣信以为真，才没有逼他。
English: Ge Rongxin believed this to be true and no longer persecuted him.

古文：永安初，还洛，拜通直散骑侍郎，时年十八。
现代文：永安初，回洛阳，拜通直散骑侍郎，只有十八岁。
English: At the beginning of Yong'an, back in Luoyang, he was only eighteen years old when he was asked to be a horseback riding attendant.

古文：元颢入洛，时愔从父兄侃为北中郎将，镇河梁。
现代文：元颢入洛，此时愔从父兄侃为北中郎将，镇守河梁。
English: Yuan Xuan entered Luo, at this time, he was promoted from his father and brother Kan to the North Vice Admiral, and became the town guard of He Liang.

古文：愔适至侃处，便属乘舆失守，夜至河。
现代文：愔跑到侃处，告知乘舆失守，侃便来到黄河边上。
English: He just happened to come to Yang Kan here, and the two of them came to the Yellow River at night.

古文：侃虽奉迎车驾北渡，而潜欲南奔，愔固谏止之。
现代文：侃虽奉迎皇帝北渡，但内心里想跑到南方，经愔反复劝说，他才回心转意。
English: Although he was proud to welcome the emperor to the north, in his heart he wanted to go to the south. After repeated persuasion, he changed his mind.

古文：遂相与扈从达建州。
现代文：这样他们就扈从车驾抵达建州。
English: In this way, they arrived in Jianzhou by car.

古文：除通直散骑常侍。
现代文：授通直散骑常侍。
English: Yang Xuan was appointed as a regular attendant.

古文：愔以世故未夷，志在潜退，乃谢病，与友人中直侍郎河间邢卲隐于嵩山。
现代文：愔因时事艰难，志在隐退，于是装病，同朋友中直侍郎河间人邢邵隐居到嵩山。
English: Due to the difficult current situation, he wanted to retreat, so he pretended to be ill and went into seclusion in Songshan with his friend, Chuang Zhi Lang (中直侍郎河间人邵).

古文：及庄帝诛尒朱荣，其从兄侃参赞帷幄。朝廷以其父津为□州刺史、北道大行台，愔随之任。
现代文：当庄帝诛杀尔朱荣时，愔从兄侃参预帷幄，朝廷拜愔父津为并州刺史、北道大行台，愔随父到任。
English: When Emperor Zhuangzong killed Zhu Rong, he was accompanied by his elder brother, and the imperial court paid homage to his father, and Zhu Rongzong was appointed to the post of prefectural governor and governor of North Hebei Province. Zhu Rongzong followed his father to the post.

古文：有邯郸人杨宽者，求义从出藩，愔请津纳之。
现代文：邯郸人杨宽，请求跟随在津左右，愔便劝其父亲收纳他。
English: Yang Kuan, the son of Xing, asked to follow him around Tsu, and Xing persuaded his father to take him in.

古文：俄而孝庄幽崩，愔时适欲还都，行达邯郸，过杨宽家，为宽所执。
现代文：不久孝庄幽崩，愔刚好想回京城去，走到邯郸，路过杨宽的家，却被宽抓住。
English: Soon after, Xiaozhuang died, and Zou just wanted to go back to Beijing. He walked to Zou, passed Yang Guang's home, but was caught by Guang.

古文：至相州，见刺史刘诞，以愔名家盛德，甚相哀念，付长史慕容白泽禁止焉。
现代文：押解到相州，拜见刺史刘诞，诞认为愔为名家之子，甚是哀怜，交付长史慕容白泽拘禁。
English: He was escorted to Xiangzhou, where he met Liu Xizhi, who thought him to be the son of a famous family. It was very pitiful, and he was handed over to the detention of Murong Baizhe.

古文：遣队主巩荣贵防禁送都。
现代文：之后，派队主巩荣贵护送进京。
English: After that, the leader of the group, Gong Ronggui, escorted them to Beijing.

古文：至安阳亭，愔谓荣贵曰： 仆家世忠臣，输诚魏室，家亡国破，一至于此。
现代文：抵安阳亭，愔对荣贵说： 仆家世代忠臣，忠心魏室，家亡国破，以至于此。
English: Arriving at Anyangting, Zou said to Ronggui: I have been a loyal servant for generations, loyal to the Wei family, and my family has been defeated by the country, so much so.

古文：虽曰囚虏，复何面目见君父之。
现代文：虽说是囚虏，还有什么面目去见君、父的仇敌。
English: Even though they are prisoners, how can they face the prince, their father's enemy?

古文：得自缢于一绳，传首而去，君之惠也。 
现代文：请让我自缢而死，再将头颅送去，这便是你对我的恩惠。 
English: Please give me a rope so that I can kill myself. If you cut off my head, you will get a reward.

古文：荣贵深相怜感，遂与俱逃。
现代文：荣贵被他说服了，两人一同逃亡。
English: Rong Gui was convinced by him, and the two fled together.

古文：愔乃投高昂兄弟。
现代文：愔于是投奔了高昂兄弟。
English: He then joined Gao's brothers.

古文：既潜窜累载，属神武至信都，遂投刺辕门。
现代文：逃窜民间数年后，恰逢神武抵达信都，愔便向辕门投送名刺。
English: A few years after the fleeing civilians, coinciding with Shenwu's arrival in Xindu, he sent a business card to Ximen.

古文：便蒙引见，赞扬兴运，陈诉家祸，言辞哀壮，涕泗横集，神武为之改容。即署行台郎中。
现代文：很快得到召见。愔赞颂义举，陈诉家祸，言辞哀壮，涕泪俱下，神武为之动容，马上署为行台郎中。
English: He was soon summoned. He praised the heroic deed, denounced the family's misfortune, spoke sadly, and with tears streaming down his face, he was moved by the divine power, and immediately signed up to be one of Gyotai's retainers.

古文：大军南攻邺，历杨宽村，宽于马前叩头请罪。
现代文：大军南攻邺城，经过杨宽村庄，宽在愔的马前叩头请罪。
English: The large army attacked the city of Handan to the south, passing through the village of Yang Guang, who bowed before the horse of Handan and pleaded guilty.

古文：愔谓曰： 人不识恩义，盖亦常理，我不恨卿，无假惊怖。 
现代文：愔说： 人不知道恩义，大概也是一种常情。我不恨你，你也不必惊恐。 
English: Zou said, "People don't know what gratitude is, and it's probably a normal feeling. I don't hate you, and you don't have to be scared.

古文：时邺未下，神武命愔作祭天文，燎毕而城陷。
现代文：此时未能攻下邺城，神武就请愔作祭天之文，祭文刚焚烧完，城就被占领了。
English: At this time, he was unable to capture the city, so Shenwu asked him to make a heavenly offering. As soon as the offering was burned, the city was occupied.

古文：由是转大行台右丞。
现代文：由是转任大行台右丞。
English: Yuki was transferred to the post of Daigodai Ujo.

古文：于时霸图草创，军国务广，文檄教令，皆自愔及崔□出。
现代文：此时霸图草创，军国事繁，文檄教令，皆出愔和崔愔之手。
English: At this time, the drafts of the domineering map, the military and state affairs, and the edicts of Wen Xuan, all came from the hands of Xuan and Cui Xuan.

古文：遭离家难，以丧礼自居，所食唯盐米而已，哀毁骨立。
现代文：因家遭难，愔常自居丧礼，所食只有盐米之类，哀毁瘦弱。
English: Due to his family's hardships, Zou often self-immolated, eating only salted rice and the like. He was thin and weak.

古文：神武愍之，恒相开慰。
现代文：神武可怜，经常开导劝慰他。
English: Shenwu pitiful, often enlighten and comfort him.

古文：及韩陵之战，愔每阵先登，朋僚咸共怪叹曰： 杨氏儒生，今遂为武士，仁者必勇，定非虚论。 
现代文：韩陵大战时，愔时常冲锋在前，朋友同僚都觉惊奇，说： 杨氏儒生，一下子成了武士，仁者必勇，实非虚语。 
English: At the time of the Hanling War, Zou often led the charge. His friends and colleagues were surprised and said, "Yang's Confucianism made him a samurai all of a sudden. Those who are benevolent must be brave. This is not a lie."

古文：顷之，表请解职还葬。
现代文：不久，上书请求辞职归家处理葬事。
English: Soon, a letter was sent requesting him to resign and return home to deal with the funeral.

古文：一门之内，赠太师、太傅、丞相、大将军者二人，太尉、录尚书及中书令者三人，仆射、尚书者五人，刺史、太守者二十余人。
现代文：一门之中，赠太师、太傅、丞相、大将军的两人，太尉、录尚书及中书令的三人，仆射、尚书的五人，刺史、太守的二十多人。
English: In one family, there were two grand masters, grand masters, grand ministers and grand generals, three grand lieutenants, grand secretaries and grand secretaries, five courtiers and grand secretaries, and more than 20 court historians and grand secretaries.

古文：追荣之盛，古今未之有也。
现代文：追荣之盛，古今未有。
English: The pursuit of glory is flourishing like never before.

古文：及丧柩进发，吉凶仪□□二十余里，会葬者将万人。
现代文：当丧柩出门，吉凶仪卫连绵二十多里，赶来送葬的多达万人。
English: When the funeral cortege leaves, the procession of auspicious and inauspicious ceremonies stretches for more than twenty miles, and as many as ten thousand people come to attend the funeral.

古文：是日隆冬盛寒，风雪严厚，愔跣步号哭，见者无不哀之。
现代文：这天寒风凛冽，风雪交加，愔却赤脚号哭，见者没有不哀怜他的。
English: On this day, the cold wind was biting, the wind and snow were increasing, but the baboon cried with bare feet. Those who saw him could not help but feel sorry for him.

古文：寻征赴晋阳，仍居本职。
现代文：很快被征召到晋阳，依然充任原职。
English: Soon after, he was called back to Jinyang by the imperial court, and he still held his original position.

古文：愔从兄幼卿为岐州刺史，以直言忤旨见诛。
现代文：愔从兄幼卿为岐州刺史，因直言忤旨被诛。
English: His cousin, Yang Youqing, was killed for speaking out against the imperial edict and violating the imperial edict.

古文：愔闻之悲惧，因哀感发疾，后取急就雁门温汤疗疾。
现代文：愔听到这个消息十分悲恸，与此同时，突然发病，迅速派人火速赶往雁门求温泉水治疗。
English: After he heard the news, he was filled with grief and fear. Due to the sad stimulus, he fell ill and was quickly sent to Yanmen for hot spring treatment.

古文：郭秀素害其能，因致书恐之曰： 高王欲送卿于帝所。 仍劝其逃亡。
现代文：郭秀向来嫉妒他的才能，便写信恐吓说： 高王想把你送到皇上那边去。 ，还劝他逃走。
English: Guo Xiu had always been jealous of his talent, so he wrote a threatening letter saying, "Gao Wang wants to send you to the emperor," and advised him to run away.

古文：愔遂弃衣冠于水滨若自沉者，变易名姓，自称刘士安，入嵩山，与沙门昙谟征等屏居削□。
现代文：愔于是将衣服帽子弃置在水边，佯装投水自尽的样子，改换名姓，自称刘士安，进嵩山，与沙门昙谟征等隐居起来。
English: He then abandoned his clothes and hat at the water's edge, pretended to commit suicide by throwing himself into the water, changed his name, called himself Liu Shian, went into the Songshan Mountains, and lived in seclusion with Shamen Yu Mo Zheng.

古文：又潜之光州，因东入田横岛，以讲诵为业，海隅之士，谓之刘先生。
现代文：又潜赴光州，向东入田横岛，以讲诵为业，海边的人们称他为刘先生。
English: He also sneaked into Gwangju and headed east to Tanegashima, where he made a living as a lecturer. People on the beach called him Mr. Liu.

古文：太守王元景阴佑之。
现代文：太守王元景则暗暗地护佑着他。
English: The daimyō, Prince Motokage, secretly protected him.

古文：神武知愔存，遣愔从兄宝猗赍书慰喻，仍遣光州刺史奚思业令搜访，以礼发遣。
现代文：神武明白愔还活着，派愔从兄宝猗带着书信慰抚，还遣光州刺史奚思业搜寻查访。愔依礼答报。
English: Shenwu understood that Yao was still alive, sent Yao with a letter of consolation from his brother Bao Yao, and also sent Guanzhou to search and investigate Yao's studies. Yao Yili replied.

古文：神武见之悦，除太原公开府司马，转长史，复授大行台右丞，封华阴县侯，迁给事黄门侍郎，妻以庶女。
现代文：神武见后十分欢悦，委任他做太原公开府司马，转长史，再授大行台右丞，封华阴县侯，迁给事黄门侍郎，还妻以庶女。
English: Shenwu was very pleased to see him, and appointed him to be the steward of the Taiyuan Open Government, and then he was transferred to Changshi, and then he was given the title of Grand Marshal of the Taiyuan Open Government, and then he was given the title of Grand Marshal of the Taiyuan Open Government, and then he was given the title of Grand Marshal of the Taiyuan Open Government, and then he was given the title of Grand Marshal of the Taiyuan Open Government, and then he was given the title of Grand Marshal of the Taiyuan Open Government, and then he was given the title of Marquis of Huayin County, and then he

古文：又兼散骑常侍，为聘梁使主。
现代文：又兼散骑常侍，做过聘梁使主。
English: He was also a knight-errant, and served as a hirer.

古文：至碻磝戍，州内有愔家旧佛寺，入精庐礼拜，见太傅容像，悲感恸哭，呕血数升，遂发病不成行，舆疾还邺。
现代文：当其往梁，抵愔郂戍时，州内有自家的旧佛寺，便入精庐进行礼拜，看到太傅遗像，悲感恸哭，呕血数升，病发不能赶路，坐车返回邺城。
English: When he went to Liang and arrived in Handan, the state had its own old Buddhist temple, so he went to Jing'an to worship, saw the remains of Taifu, cried with sadness, vomited several liters of blood, was unable to make the journey, and returned to Handan by car.

古文：久之，以本官兼尚书吏部郎中。
现代文：过了很长时间，才以本官兼任尚书吏部郎中。
English: It took a long time before he was appointed to the post of vice-minister of literature.

古文：武定末，以望实之美，超拜吏部尚书，加侍中、□将军，侍学典选如故。
现代文：武定末年，因其声名美好，超拜为吏部尚书，加侍中、卫将军，依然是侍学、典选。
English: At the end of Wuding's life, because of his good reputation, he was promoted to the post of secretary of the general staff, and he was also promoted to the posts of vice-minister and general of the imperial guard. He was still a student of the imperial court and a member of the imperial selection committee.

古文：天保初，以本官领太子少傅，别封阳夏县男。
现代文：天保初，以本官领太子少傅，别封阳夏县男。
English: At the beginning of the Tenpo era, he was given the title of crown prince, but he was not given the title of Yangxia County man.

古文：又诏监太史，迁尚书右仆射。
现代文：又诏监太史，迁任尚书右仆射。
English: He was also given the post of imperial inspector and moved to the post of Shangshu Rongsha.

古文：尚太原长公主，即魏孝静后也。
现代文：尚太原长公主，公主就是魏孝静帝的皇后。
English: Shang Taiyuan's eldest princess, the princess is the empress of Emperor Wei Xiao Jing.

古文：会有雉集其舍，又拜开府仪同三司、尚书左仆射，改封华山郡公。
现代文：当野鸡聚集其宅时，又拜开府仪同三司、尚书左仆射，改封华山郡公。
English: When the pheasants gathered at his house, he also paid homage to Kaifu Yi, Tong San Shi, and Shang Shuxi Zuo Jiao, and changed his title to Huashan County.

古文：九年，徙尚书令，又拜特进、骠骑大将军。
现代文：九年，迁尚书令，又拜特进、骠骑大将军。
English: In the ninth year, he was transferred to Shang Shuling, and then to Baitujin, and became a grand general.

古文：十年，封开封王。
现代文：十年，封开封王。
English: Ten years later, it has been crowned the king.

古文：文宣之崩，百僚莫有下泪，愔悲不自胜。
现代文：文宣驾崩，百官没有不掉泪的，愔更是悲不自胜。
English: When Wen Xuan passed away, there was not a single official who did not shed tears, and Zou was even more inconsolable.

古文：济南嗣业，任遇益隆，朝章国命，一人而已，推诚体道，时无异议。
现代文：济南王嗣位后，礼遇更重，凡朝章国命，就是他一个人办理，推诚体道，时无异议。
English: After the succession of the king of Jinan, the courtesies were more serious. He was the only one to carry out the orders of the emperor and the state. He was sincere and never had any objections.

古文：干明元年二月，为孝昭帝所诛，时年五十。
现代文：乾明元年二月，愔遭孝昭帝诛杀。时年五十。
English: In February of the first year of the Qianming Dynasty, he was assassinated by Emperor Xiaozhao at the age of fifty.

古文：天统末，追赠司空。
现代文：天统末，追赠司空。
English: At the end of the Heian period, Jikku was posthumously awarded.

古文：愔贵公子，早着声誉，风表鉴裁，为朝野所称。
现代文：杨愔为贵家公子，早著声名，风度仪表，学识人品，为朝野称道。
English: Yang Hui was a member of a noble family. He was famous early on for his manners and etiquette, his knowledge of human nature, and he was praised for his chivalry.

古文：家门遇祸，唯有二弟一妹及兄孙女数人，抚养孤幼，慈旨温颜，咸出人表。
现代文：家门遭祸，只有二弟一妹以及兄之孙女几人幸免于难，他抚养孤幼，慈旨温颜，都在众人之上。
English: When disaster struck his family, only his second brother and sister, as well as several of his brother's granddaughters, survived. He raised orphaned children, had a kind heart and a gentle face, and was above everyone else.

古文：重义轻财，前后赐与，多散之亲族，□从弟侄十数人，并待而举火。
现代文：重义轻财，凡朝廷赐赠，多分发给了亲族。跟着他生活的十几个弟妹侄子，都等着他生火做饭。
English: When the imperial court gave gifts, it was mostly distributed to relatives. The dozen or so brothers, sisters and nephews who lived with him were all waiting for him to light a fire and cook.

古文：又调之曰： 名以定体，漫汉果自不虚。 
现代文：愔不断地遭受厄运，凡受人一顿饭之惠，必定重重酬谢。若是仇敌，他则是舍弃不问。
English: He who has suffered constant misfortune, who has received the benefit of a meal, must be greatly rewarded. If he is an enemy, he will not ask.

古文：又令吏唱人名，误以卢士深为士琛，士深自言。
现代文：主持二十多年的选举，以奖擢人才为己任。不过，愔取士多重言论容貌，以此招致谤语，时人认为他的用人，就像穷人买瓜，选大的拿。
English: He presided over the election for more than 20 years, and it was his duty to reward and promote talents. However, he attracted a lot of slanderous remarks from people who thought that his employer was like a poor man buying a melon and choosing the biggest one.

古文：愔曰： 卢郎玉润，所以从玉。 
现代文：愔听说后，并不放在心上。其博记强识，过目不忘。
English: After hearing about it, he didn't take it to heart. He has a strong memory and doesn't forget things.

古文：自尚公主后，衣紫罗袍，金缕大带。
现代文：召问举子时，对他们或是称姓，或是呼名，从来没有搞错过。愔自从娶公主后，身穿紫罗袍，腰束金缕大带。
English: When she summoned her sons, she never failed to call them either by their surnames or by their first names.Since she married the princess, she has been wearing a violet robe and a large gold sash around her waist.

古文：遇李庶，颇以为□，谓曰： 我此衣服，都是内裁，既见子将，不能无愧。 
现代文：路遇李庶，深以为耻，解释说： 我穿的这身衣服，都是内裁，突然遇见子将，不能没有羞愧。 
English: When he met Li Shizhu on the road, he was deeply ashamed and explained, "The clothes I'm wearing are all tailored, and when I suddenly met Zongyang, I couldn't help but feel ashamed.

古文：及居端揆，权综机衡，千端万绪，神无滞用。
现代文：及为宰相，权综机衡，千头万绪，井井有条。
English: and as Prime Minister, the balance of power is well-ordered.

古文：自天保五年已后，一人丧德，维持匡救，实有赖焉。
现代文：自天保五年之后，皇上丧德，维持匡救，不可或缺。
English: After five years of Tianbao, the imperial court lost its virtue, and it was entirely up to him to maintain government affairs and save the situation.

古文：每天子临轩，公卿拜授，施号发令，宣扬诏册。
现代文：每当天子临轩，愔便令公卿跪拜，发号施令，宣读诏册。
English: Every day, on the day of Linxuan, the emperor ordered the nobles to kneel, issued orders, and read the imperial rescript.

古文：愔辞气温辩，神仪秀发，百僚观听，莫不悚动。
现代文：愔温文尔雅，神仪秀发，百僚听观，莫不悚动。
English: Elegant and mild-mannered, beautiful hair, hundreds of people listening and watching, it's thrilling.

古文：自居大位，门绝私交。
现代文：自居高位之后，家门里禁绝私交。
English: He has cut off all personal contact since taking the top job.

古文：轻货财，重仁义，前后赏赐，积累巨万，散之九族，架箧之中，唯有书数千卷。
现代文：轻财货，重仁义，前后赏赐，累积巨万，散发九族，箱柜之中，只有数千卷书。
English: Light on wealth and goods, heavy on benevolence and righteousness, rewarding back and forth, accumulating a huge amount, distributing to nine ethnic groups, among the boxes and cabinets, there are only thousands of volumes of books.

古文：太保、平原王隆之与愔邻宅，愔尝见其门外有富胡数人，谓左右曰： 我门前幸无此物。 
现代文：太保、平原王隆之与愔隔壁，愔曾看见隆之的门外有几位富胡，就对左右道： 我的门前幸亏没有这种东西。 
English: When he saw several wealthy Hu people in front of Gao's house, he said to the people around him, "Fortunately, I don't have these things in front of my house."

古文：性周密畏慎，恒若不足，每闻后命，愀然变色。
现代文：胆小慎微，常常感觉自己的不足。每每提任新的官职，总是愀然变色。
English: He is timid and cautious, and often feels inadequate. Every time he is appointed to a new official position, he always changes dramatically.

古文：文宣大渐，以常山、长广二王位地亲逼，深以后事为念。
现代文：文宣病情加重，还时常担忧常山、长广二王野心膨胀，威逼其子。
English: Emperor Wenzhong's illness worsened, because the two kings of Changshan and Changguang had a closer relationship with Emperor Wenzhong, and they were very concerned about what happened after Emperor Wenzhong.

古文：愔与尚书左仆射平秦王归彦、侍中燕子献、黄门侍郎郑子默受遗诏辅政，并以二王威望先重、咸有猜忌之心。
现代文：愔便与尚书左仆射平秦王归彦、侍中燕子献、黄门侍郎郑子默受遗诏辅政，他们都认为二王威望过重，因此就有猜忌之心。
English: Zou and Shang Shuxu's left-hand man, Shaiping Qin Wang Guihong, the chamberlain Yan Zi Xian, and the Yellow Gate's chamberlain Zheng Zi silently accepted the imperial edict to assist the government. They all thought that the two kings' prestige was too heavy, so they had a suspicious heart.

古文：初在晋阳，以大行在殡，天子谅闇，议令常山王在东馆，欲奏之事，皆先谘决。
现代文：当初在晋阳，以大行皇帝在殡，天子守孝，议定常山王处东馆，想上奏的事情，都必须先行咨决。
English: At that time, in Jinyang, Emperor Taizhong was in the funeral procession, and Emperor Taizhong and Prince Shouhiao had agreed to meet at the East Hall of the Changshan King's Palace. If they wanted to perform, they had to consult with each other first.

古文：二旬而止。
现代文：二十天才止。
English: It's only been 20 days.

古文：仍欲以常山王随梓宫之邺，留长广王镇晋阳。
现代文：依然打算让常山王随梓宫往邺，留下长广王镇守晋阳。
English: He still intended to let Changshan Wang follow Zi Gong to Handan, leaving Changguang Wang to guard Jinyang.

古文：由是嬖宠失职之徒，尽归心二叔。
现代文：执政者们又生疑心，于是二王又都跟着到了邺城。燕子献定计，想让太皇太后居住北宫，并归政皇太后。
English: Since then, those who were once favored but have now lost their official positions have all turned their hearts to Gao Yuan and Gao Zhan, the two imperial uncles.

古文：高归彦初虽同德，后寻反动，以疏忌之迹尽告两王，可朱浑天和又每云： 若不诛二王，少主无自安之理。 
现代文：又由于天保八年以来，爵赏太滥，到这个时候，愔主动上表请求解除自己开府封王的资格，很多人的恩荣奖赏也宣布作废。这样，那些嬖宠失职之徒，全部投靠了二王。
English: Moreover, since the eight years of the Tenpo era, the peerage rewards were too extravagant, and by this time, Zou had taken the initiative to request the upper table to remove his qualification of opening the palace and crowning the king, and many people's honor and reward were also declared invalid. In this way, those who were favored and failed to perform their duties all joined the two kings.

古文：宋钦道面奏帝，称二叔威权既重，宜速去之。
现代文：高归彦开始与愔一德同心，很快背叛了他，并将疏忌之举尽数向二王作了报告。
English: Song Qin, addressing the young emperor, said that the two kings' authority was too heavy, and that they should quickly leave the imperial court.

古文：帝不许曰： 可与令公共详其事。 愔等议出二王为刺史。
现代文：愔等议论出二王为刺史。
English: The two kings are a bitter history.

古文：以帝仁慈，恐不可所奏，乃通启皇太后，具述安危。
现代文：因帝仁慈，上奏大概不能施行，于是就启禀皇太后，陈说利害，详述安危。
English: Due to the benevolence of the emperor, the opening ceremony could not be carried out, so the empress dowager was summoned, told the stakes, and detailed the safety and security.

古文：有宫人李昌仪者，北豫州刺史高仲密之妻，坐仲密事入宫。
现代文：有个宫人名叫李昌仪，是北豫州刺史高仲密的妻子，因仲密犯事而连坐入宫。
English: There was a courtier named Li Changyi, who was the wife of Gao Zhongmi, a courtier in North Henan Province. She was imprisoned for the crime of being a courtier.

古文：太后以昌仪宗情，甚相昵爱。
现代文：太后由于昌仪与之同宗，极其喜爱。
English: The empress dowager was extremely fond of Changyi as they were from the same family.

古文：太后以启示之，昌仪密启太皇太后。
现代文：太后将启给昌仪看，昌仪便偷偷地报告了太皇太后。
English: The empress dowager showed it to Changyi, who secretly reported it to the empress dowager.

古文：愔等又议不可令二王俱出，乃奏以长广王为大司马、□州刺史，常山王为太师、录尚书事。
现代文：愔等又议不能让二王一同出京，便奏请拜长广王为大司马、并州刺史，常山王为太师、录尚书事。
English: Yu and others also argued that the two kings should not be allowed to go to Beijing together, so they asked King Baichangguang to be the grand steward and write the history of the state, and King Changshan to be the grand master and write the history.

古文：及二王拜职，于尚书省大会百僚，愔等并将同赴。
现代文：当二王接受职务，在尚书省大会百僚时，愔等打算一同参加。
English: When the two kings accepted their duties and became the hundred members of the General Assembly of Shangshu Province, they planned to participate together.

古文：子默止之，云： 事不可量，不可轻脱。 
现代文：郑子默制止说： 事不可测，勿要轻举。 
English: Zheng Zi silently stopped him and said, "Things are unpredictable, don't take things lightly."

古文：愔云： 吾等至诚体国，岂有常山拜职，有不赴之理，何为忽有此虑？ 
现代文：愔说： 我等至诚奉国，岂有常山拜职，不去祝贺的道理？为何突然生出这样的念头？ 
English: Zou said, "Waiting to serve our country with all sincerity, is there any reason why we should not go to the Changshan Mountain to worship and congratulate? Why did such an idea suddenly arise?

古文：长广旦伏家僮数十人于录尚书后室，仍与席上勋贵数人相知。并与诸勋冑约，行酒至愔等，我各劝双杯，彼必致辞。
现代文：长广王事前指使家僮几十人埋伏在录尚书室的后室，并向几位勋贵通报了计划，并约定说： 敬酒到杨愔等人身边后，我就劝他们每人喝两杯，他们必定推辞。
English: In advance, Changguang Wang ordered dozens of courtiers to lie in ambush in the back room of Guoxiang Library, and informed several nobles of the plan, and agreed to say: After toasting to Yang Xuan and others, I will advise them to drink two cups each, and they will certainly refuse.

古文：我一曰 捉酒 ，二曰 捉酒 ，三曰 何不捉 ，尔辈即捉。
现代文：我说一遍 捉酒 ，又说一遍 捉酒 ，再说 何不捉 时，你们就马上把他们捉起来。 
English: If I say, "Catch them drinking," and I say, "Catch them drinking," and I say, "Catch them drinking," and I say, "Catch them drinking," and I say, "Catch them drinking," and I say, "Catch them drinking," and I say, "Catch them drinking," and I say, "Catch them drinking," and I say, "Catch them drinking," and I say, "Catch them drinking," you catch them drinking.

古文：及宴如之。
现代文：阴谋实现。
English: You take them down.

古文：愔大言曰： 诸王构逆，欲杀忠良邪！
现代文：愔高声说： 诸王造乱，想杀忠良啦！
English: The Grasshopper said in a loud voice: The kings have created a disturbance and want to kill Tadanori!

古文：尊天子，削诸侯，赤心奉国，未应及此。 
现代文：尊崇天子，削弱诸侯，忠心奉国，没有想到会有如此下场。 
English: You should not treat me like this. I respect the Son of God, I am willing to give up all my worldly possessions to serve my country wholeheartedly.

古文：常山王欲缓之，长广王曰： 不可。 
现代文：常山王想饶恕他，长广王说： 不行。 
English: Changshan Wang wanted to soften the matter, Changguang Wang said: No!

古文：于是愔及天和、钦道皆被拳杖乱殴击，头面血流，各十人持之。
现代文：此时愔及天和、钦道等都遭受了拳棒的殴击，血流满面，依然被许多的人按押着。
English: As a result, Yang Hui, Zhu Hun Tianhe, and Song Qin Dao were all beaten with fists and clubs, with blood streaming down their faces. They were each held hostage by more than ten people.

古文：使薛孤延、康买执子默于尚药局。
现代文：常山王又派薛孤延、康买到尚药局抓捕了郑子默。
English: The King of Changshan also sent Xue Kuyan and Kangbei to Shang Pharmacy to arrest Zheng Zimou.

古文：子默曰： 不用智者言，以至于此，岂非命也。 
现代文：子默说： 不听智者的话，终于落到了这样的田地，这难道不是命吗？ 
English: Zi Mu said, "If you don't listen to the words of the wise, and you end up in a field like this, isn't this just life?

古文：二叔率高归彦、贺拔仁、斛律金拥愔等唐突入云龙门。
现代文：二王带领高归彦、贺拔仁、斛律金等押持着愔等人冲进了云龙门。
English: The two kings, led by Gao Guihang, He Bajin, Bao Rujin and Yang Qian, hurried to Yunlongmen.

古文：见都督叱利骚，招之不进，使骑杀之。
现代文：看见都督叱利骚，招他，他不来，就派骑士杀了。
English: The governor scolded Lissau not to let them enter, and then sent cavalry to kill him.

古文：开府成休宁拒门，归彦喻之，乃得入。
现代文：开府成休宁把守着宫门，高归彦劝说后，这伙人才一拥而入。
English: Kaifu Shigenobu guarded the palace gate, and Takakihiko had to persuade him to enter.

古文：送愔等于御前。
现代文：他们将愔等人挟持到了废帝面着。
English: They pushed Yang Qi and others in front of the young master.

古文：长广王及归彦在朱华门外。
现代文：长广王及归彦在朱华门外。
English: Changguang Wang and Guihang outside Zhuhua Gate.

古文：太皇太后临昭阳殿，太后及帝侧立。
现代文：太皇太后亲临昭阳殿，太后及帝站在她的旁边。
English: The empress dowager received them at Shoyang Palace, with the empress dowager and the young emperor standing next to the empress dowager.

古文：常山王以砖叩头，进而言曰： 臣与陛下骨肉相连。杨遵彦等欲擅朝权，威福自己，王公以还，皆重足屏气。
现代文：常山王用砖打着头，走近几步，说： 臣与陛下是骨肉相连，杨遵彦等人想擅朝政，威福自己，王公以下，都吓得战战兢兢。
English: Changshan Wang hit his head with a brick, walked a few steps closer, and said: Minister and Majesty are connected by flesh and blood, Yang Zunyan and others want to be good at politics, Wei Fu himself, Wang Gong and below, are scared and trembling.

古文：共相唇齿，以成乱阶，若不早图，必为宗社之害。
现代文：共相唇齿，以成乱阶，若不早图，必然是宗庙社稷之害。
English: The common phase of the lips and teeth, with the formation of disordered steps, if not early, will inevitably be the harm of the ancestral temple.

古文：臣与湛等为国事重，贺拔仁、斛律金等惜献皇帝基业，共执遵彦等领入宫，未敢刑戮，专辄之失，罪合万死。 
现代文：臣与湛等认为国事重大，贺拔仁、斛律金等珍惜献皇帝基业，一同抓了遵彦等人，并将他们押进宫来，我们不敢处罚他们。先斩后奏，罪该万死。 
English: The vassals and officials thought that the state affairs were very important, and He Bajin, Yu Liujin and others cherished the idea of donating the foundation to the emperor. Together, they arrested Zunyan and others, and pushed them into the palace. We did not dare to punish them. First behead, then play, the crime deserves death.

古文：帝时默然，领军刘桃枝之徒陛□，叩刀仰视，帝不睨之。
现代文：此时废帝默不作声，领军刘桃枝之徒卫护在阶下，敲着刀仰视，帝却不看他们一眼。
English: At this time, Emperor Wudi remained silent. Liu Taoji, the leader of the army, stood guard at the foot of the steps, tapping his sword and looking up, but the emperor did not look at them.

古文：太皇太后令□仗，不肯。
现代文：太皇太后命令他们后退，不听。
English: The Empress Dowager ordered them to move back, but they did not listen.

古文：又厉声曰： 奴辈即今头落。 
现代文：又厉声说： 你们还要不要脑袋？ 
English: He also snapped: "Do you want the head or not?"

古文：乃□。
现代文：这才退下。
English: Only then did he back down.

古文：因问杨郎何在。
现代文：太皇太后便问杨郎在哪里。
English: The Empress Dowager then asked where Yang Rong was.

古文：贺拔仁曰： 一目已出。 
现代文：贺拔仁便说： 一只眼睛已被挖出。 
English: He Bajin then said: One eye has been gouged out.

古文：太皇太后怆然曰： 杨郎何所能，留使不好耶！ 
现代文：太皇太后凄怆地说： 杨郎能做什么，留着眼不好吗？ 
English: The empress dowager said sadly, "What can Yang Lang do? Isn't it good to keep an eye on him?

古文：乃让帝曰： 此等怀逆，欲杀我二儿，次及我，尔何纵之？ 
现代文：接着责备废帝说： 这帮人怀有叛逆之心，想杀掉我的两个儿子，然后再处死我，你为何纵容他们？ 
English: Then he reproached the emperor and said: "These people harbor a rebellious heart and want to kill my two sons and then execute me. Why are you indulging them?

古文：帝犹不能言。
现代文：废帝还是不能说话。
English: The young emperor still did not speak.

古文：太皇太后怒且悲，王公皆泣。
现代文：太皇太后愤怒而且悲哀，王公都泣涕涟涟。
English: The empress dowager was angry and sad, and the prince was in tears.

古文：太皇太后曰： 岂可使我母子受汉老妪斟酌。 
现代文：太皇太后说： 哪能让我母子受汉人老太婆的取舍。 
English: The great empress dowager said, "How can I let my mother and son be chosen by an old Chinese woman?"

古文：太后拜谢。
现代文：太后叩头请罪。
English: The empress dowager knelt down and repented.

古文：常山王叩头不止。
现代文：常山王不停地磕头。
English: Changshan Wang kept bowing his head.

古文：太皇太后谓帝： 何不安慰尔叔。 
现代文：太皇太后对废帝说： 你为何不安慰安慰你的叔叔？ 
English: The empress dowager said to the deposed emperor: Why don't you comfort your uncle?

古文：帝乃曰： 天子亦不敢与叔惜，岂敢惜此汉辈？
现代文：废帝才说： 天子连叔父也不敢怜惜，岂敢怜惜这些汉辈？
English: The deposed emperor said, "The Son of Heaven does not even dare to show mercy to his uncle, how dare he show mercy to these Chinese generations?"

古文：但愿乞儿性命，儿自下殿去，此等任叔父处分。 
现代文：但愿留儿一条性命，让儿自下殿去，这些人就交给叔父随便处分。 
English: I hope I can save one life, let me go from the lower hall, and these people will be handed over to my uncle to be arbitrarily punished.

古文：遂皆斩之。
现代文：于是，愔等人都被处死了。
English: He then beheaded Yang Hui and others.

