古文：起著雍涒滩，尽上章淹茂，凡三年。
现代文：起，止，一共三年。晋穆帝永和四年
English: three years in total. Jin Mudiayong and four-year

古文：孝宗穆皇帝上之下永和四年夏，四月，林邑寇九真，杀士民什八九。
现代文：夏季，四月，林邑国的军队进犯九真郡，当地的士兵百姓十之八九被杀。
English: In the summer, in April, the army of Lin's country invaded Jiuzhen County, and nine out of ten local soldiers and civilians were killed.

古文：赵秦公韬有宠于赵王虎，欲立之，以太子宣长，犹豫未决。
现代文：后赵秦公石韬受到后赵王石虎宠爱，石虎想立他为太子，可是因为已立太子石宣为长，犹豫不决。
English: Later, Zhao Qin Gong Shisheng was favored by Zhao Wang Shigu. Shigu wanted to make him the prince, but hesitated because the prince Shixuan was already established.

古文：宣尝忤旨，虎怒曰： 悔不立韬也！ 
现代文：石宣曾违背后赵王的指令，石虎气愤地说： 真后悔当初没立石韬为太子！ 
English: Shi Xuan once disobeyed the orders of King Zhao behind his back. Shi Hu said angrily, "I really regret that I didn't make Shi Xuan the crown prince!

古文：韬由是益骄，造堂于太尉府，号曰宣光殿，梁长九丈。
现代文：石韬因此而更加傲慢无忌。他在太尉府建造了一座殿堂，命名为宣光殿，横梁长达九丈。
English: As a result, Ishizuchi became even more arrogant. He built a hall of fame in the captain's residence, named the Hall of Light, with a nine-story beam.

古文：宣见而大怒，斩匠，截梁而去；韬怒，增之至十丈。
现代文：石宣看到后认为冒犯了他的姓名，勃然大怒，便杀掉了工匠，截断了横梁，拂袖而去。石韬对此也怒不可遏，又把横梁加长到十丈。
English: Seeing this, Shi Xuan thought his name had been insulted, and flew into a rage. He killed the craftsman, cut off the crossbeam, and ran away. Shi Yao was also furious about this, and lengthened the crossbeam to ten meters.

古文：宣闻之，谓所幸杨柸、牟成、赵生曰： 凶竖傲愎乃敢尔！
现代文：石宣听说后，对他的亲信杨杯、牟成、赵生说： 这小子竟敢如此傲慢刚愎！
English: After hearing this, Shi Xuan said to his cronies Yang Cup, Mucheng and Zhao Sheng: "How dare this boy be so arrogant and stubborn!

古文：汝能杀之，吾入西宫，当尽以韬之国邑分封汝等。
现代文：你们如果能把他杀掉，我即位入主西宫后，一定把他现在占据的封国郡邑全都分封给你们。
English: If you can kill him, I will surely assign all the counties he currently occupies to you after I ascend to the throne of the Western Palace.

古文：韬死，主上必临丧，吾因行大事，蔑不济矣。 
现代文：石韬死后，主上一定会亲临哀悼，到时我趁机把他也杀掉，没有不能成功的。 
English: After Shi Hao's death, the Lord will surely come to mourn in person. At that time, I will take the opportunity to kill him, and I will not fail.

古文：柸等许诺。
现代文：杨杯等人同意了。
English: Yang Hai and others agreed.

古文：秋，八月，韬夜与僚属宴于东明观，因宿于佛精舍。
现代文：秋季，八月，石韬因为和他手下的同僚在东明观夜宴，就宿于佛精舍。
English: In the autumn, in August, Ishizaki stayed at the Buddha's hermitage because he and his colleagues were attending a dinner in Dongmingyuan.

古文：宣使杨柸等缘獼猴梯而入，杀韬，置其刀箭而去。
现代文：石宣乘机派杨杯等人爬着梯子溜进佛精舍，杀死了石韬，扔下杀人刀箭潜逃而去。
English: Shi Xuan took the opportunity to send Yang Jia and others to climb the ladder to sneak into the Buddha's hermitage, killed Shi Yao, threw down the murderous knife and arrow and absconded.

古文：旦日，宣奏之，虎哀惊气绝，久之方苏。
现代文：第二天，石宣禀报了石韬被杀的消息，石虎闻讯后悲惊交加，顿时昏厥过去，许久才苏醒过来。
English: The next day, Shi Xuanqian reported the news of Shi Xuan's murder. After hearing the news, Shi Hu was shocked and sad. He suddenly fainted and did not wake up for a long time.

古文：将出临其丧，司空李农谏曰： 害秦公者未知何人，贼在京师，銮舆不宜轻出。 
现代文：当他正要前往参加丧事活动时，司空李农劝他说： 杀害秦公石韬的人现在还不知道是谁，凶手尚在京师，国王的车乘不宜轻率出动。 
English: When he was about to go to attend the funeral activities, Sikuo Li Nong advised him: The person who killed Qin Gongshi Yao still does not know who he is, the murderer is still in Beijing, and the king's carriage should not be dispatched rashly.

古文：虎乃止，严兵发哀于太武殿。
现代文：石虎于是取消了亲临丧事的计划，命令士兵严加戒备，只在太武殿进行哀悼。
English: Shihu then canceled the plan to attend the funeral in person, ordered the soldiers to be on high alert, and mourned only in the Taiwu Palace.

古文：宣往临韬丧，不哭，直言 呵呵 ，使举衾观尸，大笑而去。
现代文：石宣前往参加石韬的丧事活动，不仅不哭，还 呵呵 窃笑，又让人揭开覆盖尸体的被子观看尸体，然后大笑离去。
English: Shi Xuan went to participate in the funeral activities of Shi Yao. Not only did he not cry, he also sniggered. He also let people open the quilt covering the corpse to see the corpse, and then laughed and left.

古文：收大将军记室参军郑靖、尹武等，将委之以罪。
现代文：他又把大将军记室参军郑清、尹武等人抓了起来，准备委罪于他们。
English: He also arrested Zheng Qing, Yin Wu and other members of the General Staff's Records Office, preparing to pin the blame on them.

古文：虎疑宣杀韬，欲召之，恐其不入，乃诈言其母杜后哀过危惙；宣不谓见疑，入朝中宫，因留之。
现代文：石虎怀疑石宣杀害了石韬，想召见他，又怕他不来，于是便谎称他母亲杜后因悲哀过度而病危。石宣没有察觉已怀疑到了自己头上，入朝来到中宫，便被扣留了起来。
English: Shihu suspected that Shi Xuan had killed Shi Yao, wanted to summon him, and was afraid that he would not come, so he falsely claimed that his mother, Du Guo, was critically ill due to excessive grief. Shi Xuan did not realize that he had suspected himself, entered the court and came to the middle palace, and was detained.

古文：建兴人史科知其谋，告之；虎使收杨柸、牟成，皆亡去；获赵生，诘之，具服。
现代文：建兴人史科知道石宣策划杀害石韬的计谋，告发了他们，石虎便派人去抓杨杯、牟成，但他们都逃跑了，只抓到了赵生。经过追问，他全部招供。
English: Jian Xingren Shike knew that Shi Xuan was planning to kill Shi Xuan and denounced them. Shi Hu sent people to catch Yang Cup and Mucheng, but they all ran away. Only Zhao Sheng was caught. After questioning, he confessed everything.

古文：虎悲怒弥甚，囚宣于席库，以铁环穿其颔而鏁之，取杀韬刀箭，舐其血，哀号震动宫殿。
现代文：石虎听完后更加悲痛愤怒，于是便把石宣囚禁在贮藏坐具的仓库中，用铁环穿透他的下巴颏并上了锁，拿来杀害石韬的刀箭让他舔上面的血，石宣的哀鸣嚎叫声震动宫殿。
English: After listening to this, Shi Hu became even more sad and angry. Therefore, he imprisoned Shi Xuan in the warehouse where the seats were stored. He used an iron ring to pierce his jaw and locked it. He made him lick the blood from the knife and arrow used to kill Shi Xuan. Shi Xuan's wailing and howling shook the palace.

古文：佛图澄曰： 宣、起皆陛下之子，今为韬杀宣，是重祸也。
现代文：佛图澄对石虎说： 石宣、石韬都是陛下的儿子，今天如果为了石韬被杀而再杀了石宣，这便是祸上加祸了。
English: Buddha Tucheng said to Shigu: Both Shixuan and Shigu are sons of your majesty. If Shigu is killed today and Shigu is killed, it will be even worse.

古文：陛下若加慈恕，福祚犹长。若必诛之，宣当为彗星下扫鄴宫。 
现代文：陛下如果能对他施以仁慈宽恕，福祚的气运尚可延长；如果一定要杀了他，石宣当化为彗星而横扫邺宫。 
English: If His Majesty can bestow mercy and forgiveness on him, Fu Xuan's good fortune can be prolonged; if he must be killed, Shi Xuan will turn into a comet and sweep across the Summer Palace.

古文：虎不从。
现代文：石虎没有听从劝说。
English: The stone tiger does not obey.

古文：积柴于鄴北，树标其上，标末置鹿卢，穿之以绳，倚梯柴积。送宣其下，使韬所幸宦者郝稚、刘霸拔其发，抽其舌，牵之登梯。郝稚以绳贯其颔，鹿卢绞上。
现代文：他命令在邺城之北堆上柴草，上面架设横杆，横杆的末端安置辘轳，绕上绳子，把梯子倚靠在柴堆上，将石宣押解到下边，又让石韬所宠爱的宦官郝稚、刘霸揪着石宣的头发，拽着石宣的舌头，拉他登上梯子；郝稚把绳索套在他的脖子上，用辘轳绞上去。
English: He ordered that firewood and grass be placed on the north mound of Lucheng, and that a crossbar be set up on top of it, and that a hoe be placed at the end of the crossbar, and that a rope be wound around it, and that a ladder be leaned on the pile of firewood, and that Shixuan be pushed down to the bottom, and that Shixuan's favorite eunuchs, Zangzhu and Liu Ba, pull Shixuan's hair, and pull Shixuan's tongue, and pull him up the ladder; Zangzhu put the rope around his neck, and use the hoe to hang him up.

古文：刘霸断其手足，斫眼溃肠，如韬之伤。
现代文：刘霸砍断他的手脚，挖出他的眼睛，刺穿他的肠子，使他被伤害的程度和石韬一样。
English: Liu Ba cut off his hands and feet, gouged out his eyes, and pierced his intestines, so that he was injured to the same extent as Shifu.

古文：四面纵火，烟炎际天，虎从昭仪已下数千人登中台以观之。
现代文：然后又在柴堆四周点火，浓烟烈焰冲天而起。石虎则跟随昭仪官以下数千人登上中台观看。
English: Then, fires were lit around the pyre, and thick smoke and flames rose into the sky. Shihu followed thousands of people up to the middle platform to watch.

古文：火灭，取灰分置诸门交道中。
现代文：火灭以后，又取来灰烬分别放在通向各个城门的十字大路当中。
English: After the fire was extinguished, the ashes were taken and placed separately in the middle of the crossroads leading to each gate.

古文：杀其妻子九人。
现代文：还杀掉了石宣的妻儿九人。
English: They also killed nine of his wives and children.

古文：宣小子才数岁，虎素爱之，抱之而泣，欲赦之，其大臣不听，就抱中取而杀之。
现代文：石宣的小儿子刚刚几岁，石虎平素非常喜爱他，因此临杀前抱着他哭泣，意欲赦免，但手下的大臣们却不同意，从怀抱中要过来就给杀掉了。
English: Shi Xuan's youngest son was just a few years old, and Shi Huping loved him very much. Therefore, before killing him, he held him and cried, wanting to pardon him. However, the ministers under his command did not agree, and they killed him when he tried to come out of their arms.

古文：儿挽虎衣大叫，至于绝带，虎因此发病。
现代文：当时小孩拽着石虎的衣服大叫大闹，以至于连腰带都拽断了，石虎也因此得了大病。
English: At that time, a child dragged the clothes of the stone tiger and shouted loudly, so that even the belt was torn, and the stone tiger became seriously ill as a result.

古文：又废其后杜氏为庶人，诛其四率已下三百人，宦者五十人，皆车裂节解，弃之漳水。
现代文：石虎还黜废了石宣的母后杜氏，贬其为庶人。又杀掉了石宣周围的三百人，宦官五十人，全都是车裂肢解以后，抛尸于漳水河中。
English: Shihu also dethroned Shi Xuan's mother, Hou Du, and reduced her to a commoner. He also killed 300 people around Shi Xuan and 50 eunuchs, all of whom were dismembered and thrown into the Surabaya River.

古文：洿其东宫以养猪牛。
现代文：石宣居住的太子东宫被改作饲养猪牛的地方。
English: The East Palace of the Crown Prince, where Isenobu lived, was converted into a place for raising pigs and cattle.

古文：东官卫士十馀万人皆谪戍凉州。
现代文：东宫卫士十多万人全都被贬谪戍卫凉州。
English: More than one hundred thousand East Palace guards were all demoted to guarding Liangzhou.

古文：先是，散骑常侍赵揽言于虎曰： 宫中将有变，宜备之。 
现代文：谋杀石韬事发之前，赵揽曾对石虎说： 宫中将有变故，宜加防备。 
English: Before the murder of Shi Yan, Zhao Zhao once said to Shi Hu: There will be changes in the palace, it is better to be prepared.

古文：及宣杀韬，虎疑其知而不告，亦诛之。
现代文：等到石宣谋杀石韬以后，石虎怀疑他早知此事而不禀告，把他也杀了。
English: After Shih Xuan murdered Shih Chao, Shih Hu suspected him of knowing about the matter without denouncing it, and killed him as well.

古文：朝廷论平蜀之功，欲以豫章郡封桓温。
现代文：东晋朝廷讨论平定蜀汉的功劳，想把豫章郡赐封给桓温。
English: The Eastern Jin Dynasty court discussed the merits of pacifying Shu Han and wanted to bestow the county of Yuzhang to Kuan Wen.

古文：尚书左丞荀蕤曰： 温若复平河、洛，将何以赏之？ 
现代文：尚书左丞荀蕤说： 桓温如果再平定了黄河、洛水一带，那将用什么赏赐他呢？ 
English: Shangshu Zuozhen said, "If Kuan Wen can once again pacify the Yellow River and the Luoshui area, what will he be rewarded with?

古文：乃加温征西大将军、开府仪同三司，封临贺郡公；加谯王无忌前将军；袁乔龙骧将军，封湘西伯。
现代文：于是朝廷让桓温担任征西大将军、开府仪同三司，封为临贺郡公，让谯王司马无忌担任前将军，让袁乔出任龙骧将军，并封为湘西伯。
English: As a result, the imperial court appointed Kuan Wen as the general of the Western Expedition, Kaifu Yi Tong as the third secretary, and Lin He as the county magistrate, Wang Sima as the former general, Yuan Qiao as the general of the Long March, and Xiang Xi Bo.

古文：蕤，崧之子也。
现代文：荀蕤是荀菘的儿子。
English: Toad is Toad's son.

古文：温既灭蜀，威名大振，朝廷惮之。
现代文：桓温平定了蜀地以后，权威日盛，名声大振，连朝廷对他也惧怕三分。
English: After Kuan-Wen had pacified Shudi, his authority increased and his reputation soared. Even the imperial court was afraid of him.

古文：会稽王昱以扬州刺史殷浩有盛名，朝野推服，乃引为心膂，与参综朝权，欲以抗温，由是与温寝相疑贰。
现代文：会稽王司马昱认为扬州刺史殷浩素有盛名，朝野对他都很推崇佩服，便以他作为心腹骨干，让他参与总揽朝廷权力，想以此来和桓温抗衡。
English: Wang Sima Yao, the auditor of the imperial court, thought that Yin Hao Rong, Yangzhou's chief historian, was well-known, and the court respected and admired him, so he used him as a confidant and made him participate in the overall power of the imperial court, hoping to compete with Kuan Wen.

古文：浩以征北长史荀羡、前江州刺史王羲之夙有令名，擢羡为吴国内史，羲之为护军将军，以为羽翼。
现代文：从此殷浩和桓温便逐渐开始互相猜忌，进而彼此产生了异心。殷浩认为征北长史荀羡和前任江州刺史王羲之历来名声不错，便提升荀羡为吴国内史，提升王羲之为护军将军，作为自己的辅佐。
English: From then on, Yin Hao and Huan Wen gradually began to be suspicious of each other, which led to mutual animosity. Yin Hao believed that the reputation of the Northern Warlord Shi Qianlong and the predecessor of the Jiangzhou Warlord Wang Qianlong had always been good, so he promoted Shi Qianlong to the Wuxi Domestic History, and promoted Wang Qianlong to the General of the Guard, as his assistant.

古文：羡，蕤之弟；羲之，导之从子也。
现代文：荀羡是荀蕤的弟弟，王羲之是王导的侄子。
English: Zou En is Zou's younger brother, and Wang Xizhi is Wang Du's nephew.

古文：羲之以为内外协和，然后国家可安，劝浩及羡不宜与温构隙，浩不从。
现代文：王羲之认为只有朝廷内外融洽团结、和谐相处，然后国家才能安定，于是就劝说殷浩不要和桓温制造隔阂，但殷浩却没有听从。
English: Wang Xizhi believed that the country could only be stable if there was harmony and unity inside and outside the imperial court, so he persuaded Yin Hao not to create a rift with Huan Wen, but Yin Hao did not listen.

古文：燕王皝有疾，召世子俊属之曰： 今中原未平，方资贤杰以经世务。
现代文：前燕王慕容身患疾病，他召来太子慕容俊嘱咐说： 如今中原尚未平定，正是需要依靠贤良杰出人士掌管朝政的时候。
English: Former Yan Wang Murong was ill, he summoned Prince Murong Jun and ordered: Today, the Central Plains have not yet been pacified, it is time to rely on virtuous and outstanding people to take charge of the government.

古文：恪智勇兼济，才堪任重，汝其委之，以成吾志！ 
现代文：慕容恪智勇双全，才能出众，你应当委他以重任，以实现我入主中原的远大志向！ 
English: Murong has both wisdom and courage, and his talent is outstanding. You should entrust him with an important task in order to realize my lofty ambition of becoming the head of Zhongyuan!

古文：又曰： 阳士秋士行高洁，忠干贞固，可托大事，汝善待之！ 
现代文：又说：阳鹜具有高尚的士大夫品行，忠诚不二，坚贞不屈，可以委托他掌管大事，一定要很好地对待他！ 
English: He also said: "The impotent man has a high moral character, is loyal and unyielding, and can be entrusted with the management of major affairs. We must treat him well!"

古文：九月，丙申，薨。
现代文：九月，丙申，前燕王慕容去世。
English: In September, the former Yan Wang Murong passed away.

古文：赵王虎议立太子，太尉张举曰： 燕公斌有武略，彭城公遵有文德，惟陛下所择。 
现代文：后赵王石虎与群臣商议立太子。太尉张举说： 燕公石斌长于军事统治，彭城公石遵长于礼乐教化，只看陛下选择。 
English: Later, Zhao Wang Shihhu and his courtiers discussed the establishment of the prince. Lieutenant Zhang Jue said: Yan Gong Shibin is better than military rule, Pengcheng Gongshi is better than ceremonial music education, just look at His Majesty's choice.

古文：虎曰： 卿言正起吾意。 
现代文：石虎说： 你的意见正合我意。 
English: Shihu said: Your opinion is just what I want.

古文：戎昭将军张豺曰： 燕公母贱，又尝有过；彭城公母前以太子事废，今立之，臣恐不能无微恨。陛下宜审思之。 
现代文：戎昭将军张豺则说： 燕公石斌，其母亲出身低贱，本人又曾经有过过错；彭城公石遵，其母亲以前因为太子石邃的事情被黜废，如今再立石遵为太子，我担心他对您不可能没有丝毫的忌恨，愿陛下慎重考虑！ 
English: Zhang Ye, the general of the army of Zhao Zhao, said: Yan Gong Shi Bin, his mother came from a lowly background, and he himself once made a mistake; Pengcheng Gong Shi Zun, his mother was previously decadent because of the matter of Prince Shi Yan, and now he is Prince Shi Zun, I am worried that he may not have the slightest hatred for you, may your majesty carefully consider!

古文：初，虎之拔上邽也，张豺获前赵主曜幼女安定公主，有殊色，纳于虎，虎嬖之，生齐公世。
现代文：当初，石虎攻克上的时候，张豺虏获了前赵主刘曜的小女儿安定公主，因姿色出众，被石虎纳为妾，并深得宠爱，生下了齐公石世。
English: At first, when the stone tiger conquered, Zhang Ye captured the little daughter of the former Zhao Lord Liu You, Princess Stability, because of her outstanding appearance, she was accepted as a concubine by the stone tiger, and was deeply loved, and gave birth to Qi Gong Shi Shi.

古文：豺以虎老病，欲立世为嗣，冀刘氏为太后，己得辅政，乃说虎曰： 陛下再立太子，其母皆出于倡贱，故祸乱相寻；今宜择母贵子孝者立之。 
现代文：眼下张豺考虑到石虎年老有病，想立石世为继承人，希望刘氏为太后，这样自己便能得以辅佐朝政。基于这种考虑，张豺劝石虎说： 陛下以前两次立太子，他们的母亲全都出身低贱，所以才导致了朝廷祸乱不断。如今应该选择母贵子孝者立为太子了。 
English: At the moment, Zhang Ye considered that Shi Hu was old and ill, and wanted to appoint Shi Shi as the heir, and hoped that Liu would be the empress dowager, so that he could assist the imperial government. Based on this consideration, Zhang Ye advised Shi Hu, saying: His Majesty has twice appointed the crown prince before, and their mothers were all from lowly backgrounds, which is why the court has been plagued. Now it is time to choose a mother who is filial to her son to be appointed as the crown prince.

古文：虎曰： 卿勿言，吾知太子处矣。 
现代文：石虎回答： 你不必说了，我知道太子该是谁了。 
English: Shihu replied: You don't have to say it, I know who the crown prince is.

古文：虎再与群臣议于东堂。
现代文：此后，石虎又一次和群臣在东堂商议。
English: After that, Shihu once again held discussions with the ministers in the East Hall.

古文：虎曰： 吾欲以纯灰三斛自涤其肠，何为专生恶子，年逾二十辄欲杀父！
现代文：石虎说： 我要用三斛纯净的灰洗涮我内脏的秽恶，否则为什么我专生凶恶无赖的儿子，年龄一过二十就要杀害他的父亲！
English: Shihu said, "I will wash away the filth of my internal organs with three handfuls of pure ash. Otherwise, why would my only son, a vicious scoundrel, kill his father at the age of twenty?"

古文：今世方十岁，比其二十，吾已老矣。 
现代文：如今石世年方十岁，等到他二十岁时，我已经老了！ 
English: Now I'm ten years old, and when he's twenty, I'll be old!

古文：乃与张举、李农定议，令公卿上书请立世为太子。
现代文：于是便与张举、李农作出决定，命令公卿大臣们上书，请求立石世为太子。
English: As a result, he made a decision together with Zhang Jue and Li Nong, and ordered the noblemen and ministers to submit a letter requesting that Shixi be made the crown prince.

古文：大司农曹莫不肯署名，虎使张豺问其故，莫顿首曰： 天下重器，不宜立少，故不敢署。 
现代文：大司农曹莫不肯在上书上签名，石虎派张豺去询问原因，曹莫叩头拜首回答道： 治理天下这样的重任，不应该选择年少者，所以我不敢签名。 
English: Chief farmer Cao Mo refused to sign the petition. Shihu sent Zhang Ye to inquire the reason. Cao Mo bowed his head and replied, "It is not right to choose a younger person to take on such an important task of governing the world, so I dare not sign it."

古文：虎曰： 莫，忠臣也，然未达朕意；张举、李农知朕意矣，可令谕之。 
现代文：石虎说： 曹莫确实是忠臣，然而却没有领会朕的用意；张举、李农深知朕意，可以让他们去说明一下。 
English: Shihu said: Cao Mo is indeed a loyal subject, but he did not understand my intention; Zhang Qiu and Li Nong are well aware of my intention, so they can explain it.

古文：遂立世为太子，以刘昭仪为后。
现代文：于是便确立石世为太子，以刘昭仪为后。
English: As a result, Shisei was established as the crown prince, followed by Liu Zhaoyi.

古文：冬，十一月，甲辰，葬燕文明王。
现代文：冬季，十一月，甲辰，安葬前燕王慕容。
English: In winter, November, Jia Chen, Yan Wang Murong before burial.

古文：世子俊即位，赦境内，遣使诣建康告丧。
现代文：太子慕容俊即位，境内实行大赦。慕容俊派遣使臣到建康向东晋朝廷报告了丧事。
English: Prince Murongjun ascended the throne, and a general amnesty was implemented in the country. Murongjun dispatched envoys to Jiankang to report the death to the Eastern Jin court.

古文：以弟交为左贤王，左长史阳骛郎中令。
现代文：他还任命弟弟慕容交为左贤王，任命左长史阳鹜为郎中令。
English: He also appointed his younger brother, Murong Jiao, as Zuoxian Wang, and appointed Zuochang Shiyang Jiao as his second-in-command.

古文：十二月，以左光禄大夫、领司徒、录尚书事蔡谟为侍中、司徒。
现代文：十二月，东晋朝廷任命左光禄大夫、领司徒、录尚书事蔡谟为侍中、司徒。
English: In December, the Eastern Jin Dynasty court appointed Zuo Guanglu as the doctor, the leader and the steward, and the record clerk, Cai Mu, as the chamberlain and the steward.

古文：谟上疏固让，谓所亲曰： 我若为司徒，将为后代所晒，义不敢拜也。 
现代文：蔡谟上疏，执意推辞。他对周围比较亲近的人说： 如果我当了司徒，必将为后人所耻笑，所以按照道义我不敢接受任命。 
English: He said to those who were close to him, "If I become a disciple, I will surely be ridiculed by future generations, so in accordance with morality, I dare not accept the appointment."

古文：孝宗穆皇帝上之下永和五年春，正月，辛未朔，大赦。
现代文：永和五年春季，正月，辛未朔。
English: In the spring of the fifth year of the Yonghe era, the first month of the year is just around the corner.

古文：赵王虎即皇帝位，大赦，改元太宁，诸子皆进爵为王。
现代文：晋穆帝实行大赦。后赵王石虎即皇帝位，实行大赦，改年号为太宁，并将儿子们的爵位全都晋升为王。
English: Emperor Jinmu implemented an amnesty. Later, Zhao Wang Shiguang, the emperor, implemented an amnesty, changed his era name to Taining, and promoted all of his sons' titles to king.

古文：故东宫高力等万馀人谪戍凉州，行达雍城，既不在赦例，又敕雍州剌史张茂送之，茂皆夺其马，使之步推鹿车，致粮戍所。
现代文：原来守卫石宣东宫号称 高力 的一万多人被贬戍凉州，此时已行至雍城，因为他们不在赦免的范围内，石虎又命令雍州刺史张茂继续遣送他们。张茂却乘机扣留了他们所有的马匹，让他们推着运粮的小车徒步前往凉州。
English: Originally, more than 10,000 people who guarded the East Palace of Shi Xuan, known as Gaoli, were deported to Liangzhou. At this time, they had already gone to Yongcheng, because they were not within the scope of the amnesty. Shi Hu also ordered Zhang Mao, the governor of Yongzhou, to continue to deport them. However, Zhang Mao took the opportunity to detain all their horses and let them push the grain cart on foot to Liangzhou.

古文：高力督定阳梁犊因众心之怨，谋作乱东归，众闻之，皆踊抃大呼。
现代文：高力督定阳人梁犊利用众人内心的怨恨，策划造反作乱，返回家园。众人听说后，全都跳跃欢呼。
English: Using the resentment in the hearts of the people, the high-power director Yang Liang and his followers plotted to rebel and return to their homeland. After hearing this, everyone jumped and cheered.

古文：犊乃自称晋征东大将军，帅众攻拔下辨；安西将军刘宁自安定击之，为犊所败。
现代文：于是梁犊便自称晋朝征东大将军，率领众卫士攻克了下辨。安西将军刘宁率兵从安定出发攻打梁犊，却被梁犊打败。
English: As a result, Liang Hui claimed to be the general of the Jin Dynasty to conquer the East, and led all the guards to conquer the Lower Dan. Anxi General Liu Ning led the troops to attack Liang Hui from the stable, but was defeated by Liang Hui.

古文：高力皆多力善射，一当十馀人，虽无兵甲，掠民斧，施一丈柯，攻战若神，所向崩溃；戍卒皆随之，攻陷郡县，杀长吏、二千石，长驱而东，比至长安，众已十万。
现代文：这些号称 高力 的卫士们全都身强力壮，善于射箭，一人足以抵挡十余人。他们虽然没有武器盔甲，但抢来老百姓的斧头，再安上一丈来长的斧柄，交战时用起来出神入化，所向披靡。卫士们跟随着梁犊，攻克郡县，杀掉郡守、县令等官吏，长驱直入，向东而来。等到抵达长安时，参加的人已达十万。
English: These so-called high-powered guards were all strong and good at archery, and one was enough to resist more than ten people. Although they did not have weapons and armor, they snatched the people's axes, and then installed a long axe handle. When they were used in battle, they were amazing and unbeatable. The guards followed Liang Zheng, conquered counties and counties, killed officials such as county governors and county magistrates, and drove straight into the east. By the time they arrived in Chang'an, the number of participants had reached one hundred thousand.

古文：乐平王苞尽锐拒之，一战而败。
现代文：乐平王石苞率领全部精锐士兵阻挡他们，但一交战就被打败。
English: Leping Wang Shijun led all the elite soldiers to block them, but they were defeated in a battle.

古文：犊遂东出潼关，进趣洛阳。
现代文：梁犊于是东出潼关，向洛阳进发。
English: As a result, Liang Jun left Shaoguan in the east and headed for Luoyang.

古文：赵主虎以李农为大都督、行大将军事，统卫军将军张贺度等步骑十万讨之，战于新安，农等大败；战于洛阳，又败，退壁成皋。
现代文：后赵国主石虎任命李农为大都督、行大将军事，统领卫军将军张贺度等人的步兵、骑兵十万人前来讨伐，在新安交战，李农等大败；在洛阳交战，又被打败，只好退至成皋，坚壁防守。
English: Later, the ruler of Zhao, Shihhu, appointed Li Nong as the grand governor and acting general of the military, and he led the infantry and cavalry of 100,000 men led by the general of the guard Zhang He Du and others to fight. They fought in Xin'an, and Li Nong and others were defeated; they fought in Luoyang, and were defeated again, so they had to retreat to Chengdu and defend against the wall.

古文：犊遂东掠荥阳、陈留诸郡，虎大惧，以燕王斌为大都督，督中外诸军事，统冠军大将军姚弋仲、车骑将军蒲洪等讨之。
现代文：梁犊于是继续东进，攻取荥阳、陈留等郡。石虎十分害怕，任命燕王石斌为大都督，掌管内外各种军事事务，统领冠军大将军姚弋仲、车骑将军蒲洪等人的部队前来讨伐。
English: Liang Jun then continued eastward, conquering Fenyang, Chenliu and other counties. Shihu was very afraid, appointed Yan Wang Shibin as the grand governor, in charge of various military affairs at home and abroad, and led the champion general Yao Yuzhong, the chariot and cavalry general Pu Hong and other troops to come to fight.

古文：弋仲将其众八千馀人至鄴，求见虎。
现代文：姚弋仲率领他的士兵八千多人来到了邺城，求见石虎。
English: Yao Yuzhong led his soldiers more than eight thousand people came to Lucheng, to see the stone tiger.

古文：虎病，未之见，引入领军省，赐以己所御食。
现代文：石虎正在患病，没有见他，而是派人把他带到领军省，用专供自己所吃的御食赏赐他。
English: Shihu, who was ill, did not see him, but sent someone to take him to the leading army province and reward him with a special meal.

古文：弋仲怒，不食，曰： 主上召我来击贼，当面见授方略，我岂为食来邪！
现代文：姚弋仲勃然大怒，不仅不吃，还说： 主上召唤我前来讨伐乱贼，理当向我面授计谋，难道我是为了吃一顿饭才来的吗！
English: Yao Yizhong flew into a rage and not only refused to eat, but also said, "The Lord has called me to come and fight against the ruffians. It is right that He should teach me strategies. Did I come just to eat a meal?"

古文：且主上不见我，我何以知其存亡邪？ 
现代文：再说如果主上不见我，我怎么知道他现在是死是活呢？ 
English: Besides, if the Lord does not see me, how can I know whether he is dead or alive?

古文：虎力疾见之，弋仲让虎曰： 儿死，愁邪？何为而病？
现代文：石虎勉强支撑着病体会见了他。姚弋仲责怪石虎说： 儿子死了，很忧愁吧，要不然为什么病了呢？
English: Shihu reluctantly supported his sick body and met with him. Yao Yuzhong blamed Shihu and said: My son is dead, I am very sad, otherwise why is he sick?

古文：儿幼时不择善人教之，使至于为逆；既为逆而诛之，又何愁焉！
现代文：儿子小的时候你不选择好人教育他，这才使他长大后干出了叛逆之事；既然是因为干了叛逆之事才杀了他，又有什么可忧愁的呢？
English: If you do not choose a good man to teach your son when he is young, he will grow up to be a rebel; and if you kill him because he is a rebel, why should you be sad?

古文：且汝久病，所立儿幼，汝若不愈，天下必乱。当先忧此，勿忧贼也！
现代文：再说你已经病了很久，立为太子的儿子年龄幼小，如果你病情不见好转，天下必将大乱，这才是首先应该忧虑的，不必忧虑那些乱贼！
English: Besides, you have been ill for a long time, and the son of the crown prince is very young. If your condition does not improve, there will be chaos in the world. This is what you should worry about first. Don't worry about those ruffians!

古文：犊等穷困思归，相聚为盗，所过残暴，何所能至！
现代文：梁犊等人因为穷困无路，思家心切才相聚成为强盗，他们在所经过的地方烧杀抢掠，能成什么事！
English: Liang Qi and others, because of their poverty and homesickness, gathered together to become robbers. They burned, killed and looted wherever they went. What could have happened?

古文：老羌为汝一举了之！ 
现代文：老夫为你一举消灭他们！ 
English: The old man will destroy them for you in one fell swoop!

古文：弋仲情狷直，人无贵贱皆 汝 之，虎亦不之责，于坐授使持节、侍中、征西大将军赐以铠马。
现代文：姚弋仲性情耿直暴躁，对人不论贵贱高下都直呼为 你 ，因此石虎也不责怪他，当即坐在座位上任命他为使持节、征西大将军，并赏赐给他铠甲、战马。
English: Yao Yizhong's temperament is straightforward and irascible. He calls everyone, no matter how high or low they are, "you." Therefore, the stone tiger does not blame him. He immediately sat down on the seat and appointed him as the envoy, the general of the Western Conquest, and awarded him armor and horses.

古文：弋仲曰： 汝看老羌堪破贼否？ 
现代文：姚弋仲说： 你看老夫能打败乱贼吗？ 
English: Yao Yizhong said: Do you think an old man can defeat a bandit?

古文：乃被铠跨马于庭中，因策马南驰，不辞而出。
现代文：说着在庭院里就披挂盔甲，跨上战马，然后扬鞭策马，连告辞的话也没说便南驰而去。
English: Saying that, he put on his armor in the courtyard, mounted his war horse, and then whipped the horse, without even saying goodbye, he rode away south.

古文：遂与斌等击犊于荥阳，大破之，斩犊首而还，讨其馀党，尽灭之。
现代文：于是，姚弋仲和石斌等率部在荥阳攻打梁犊，大获全胜，斩掉梁犊的头颅返回。接着又讨伐其残余士卒，把他们也干净彻底地消灭了。
English: As a result, Yao Yuzhong and Shi Bin led their troops to attack Liang Qi in Fenyang, won a complete victory, cut off Liang Qi's head and returned. Then they attacked his remaining soldiers and wiped them out completely.

古文：虎命弋仲剑履上殿，入朝不趋，进封西平郡公；蒲洪为侍中、车骑大将军、开府仪同三司、都督雍、秦州诸军事、雍州剌史，进封略阳郡公。
现代文：石虎因此给予姚弋仲可以佩剑穿鞋上殿、允许他大步入朝晋见国君的特殊礼遇，并晋封他为西平郡公。任命蒲洪为车骑大将军、开府仪同三司、都督雍、秦州诸军事、雍州刺史，并晋封为略阳郡公。
English: Shihu therefore gave Yao Yizhong the special courtesy of being able to wear shoes and wear a sword to enter the palace, allowed him to stride into the court to see the sovereign, and promoted him to Xiping County. He appointed Pu Hong as General of Cavalry and Cavalry, Kaifu Yi Tong Three Division, Governor of Yong, Qinzhou Zhu Military, and Yongzhou Zhishi, and promoted him to Liaoyang County.

古文：始平人为勖聚兵自称将军，赵乐平王苞讨灭之，诛三千馀家。
现代文：始平人马勖纠集兵卒，自称将军。后赵乐平王石苞率兵讨伐消灭了他们，杀掉三千多家。
English: At the beginning of the war, Zhao Leping gathered soldiers and claimed to be a general. Later, Zhao Leping's son, Wang Shijun, led soldiers in a crusade to eliminate them, killing more than three thousand.

古文：夏，四月，益州刺史周抚、龙骧将军硃焘出范贲，斩之，益州平。
现代文：夏季，四月，益州刺史周抚、龙骧将军朱焘率兵攻打范贲，将其斩杀，益州得以平定。
English: In the summer, in April, Zhou Fu, the governor of Yizhou, and Zhu Xi, the general of Longyi, led troops to attack Fan Qi and killed him, and Yizhou was able to be pacified.

古文：诏遣谒者陈沈如燕，拜慕容俊为使持节、侍中、大都督、督河北诸军事、幽、平二州牧、大将军、大单于、燕王。
现代文：东晋穆帝下诏书派遣使者陈沈前往前燕，授予慕容俊使持节、侍中、大都督、督河北诸军事以及，幽、平二州牧、大将军、大单于、燕王等官职。
English: Emperor Mu of the Eastern Jin Dynasty sent an envoy Chen Shen to Qianyan with an imperial decree, and conferred on Murongjun the military posts of the envoy of the festival, the chamberlain, the grand governor, and the governor of Hebei Province, as well as the official posts of Yu, the governor of the two states of Ping, the general, the great single, and the king of Yan.

古文：桓温遣督护滕畯帅交、广之兵击林邑王文于卢容，为文所败，退屯九真。
现代文：桓温派督护滕率领交、广二州的士兵在卢容攻击林邑王范文，反被范文打败，只好撤退驻扎在九真郡。
English: In Lu Rong, soldiers from Guanzhou and Guanzhou led by Guo Jia Teng attacked Lin Yi Wang Fanwen, but were defeated by Fanwen, who had to retreat and stay in Jiu Zhen County.

古文：乙卯，赵王虎病甚，以彭城王遵为大将军，镇关右；燕王斌为丞相，录尚书事；张豺为镇卫大将军、领军将军、吏部尚书；并受遗诏辅政。
现代文：乙卯，后赵国主石虎病情恶化，任命彭城王石遵为大将军，镇守关右；任命燕王石斌为丞相，总领尚书职事；任命张豺为镇卫大将军、领军将军、吏部尚书。他们还接受遗诏，辅佐朝政。
English: After the illness of Zhao Guozhong Shihu worsened, he appointed Pengcheng Wang Shizhong as the general and the town guard Guanzhong; appointed Yan Wang Shibin as the chancellor and the chief secretary; appointed Zhang Xi as the town guard general, the leading general and the chief secretary. They also accepted the will and assisted the government.

古文：刘后恶斌辅政，恐不利于太子，与张豺谋去之。
现代文：刘皇后讨厌石斌辅佐朝政，怕这样对太子不利，因此和张豺一起谋划想除掉他。
English: Empress Liu hated Shi Bin as an assistant to the imperial government, fearing that this would be unfavorable to the prince, so she plotted with Zhang Ye to get rid of him.

古文：斌时在襄国，遣使诈谓斌曰： 主上疾已渐翕，王须猎者，可小停也。 
现代文：当时石斌在襄国，她派遣使者前往欺骗石斌说： 主上的病情已逐渐好转，您可以稍迟些再前来。 
English: At that time, Shi Bin was in Xiang Province. She sent an emissary to deceive Shi Bin and said, "The Lord's condition has gradually improved. You can come back later."

古文：斌素好猎，嗜酒，遂留猎，且纵酒。
现代文：石斌历来喜好打猎喝酒，听到这消息后，便又开始打猎纵酒。
English: Shi Bin has always been fond of hunting and drinking. After hearing this news, he started hunting and drinking again.

古文：刘氏与豺因矫诏称斌无忠教之心，免官归第，使豺弟雄帅龙腾五百人守之。
现代文：刘氏和张豺于是就假传诏令，称石斌毫无忠孝之心，将他免官归家，派张豺的弟弟张雄率宫中的龙腾卫士五百人看守他。
English: Mr. Liu and Zhang Ye then issued a false edict, saying that Shi Bin had no sense of loyalty and filial piety, dismissed him from his post and sent Zhang Ye's brother Zhang Xiong and 500 Longteng guards from the palace to guard him.

古文：乙丑，遵自幽州至鄴。敕朝堂受拜，配禁兵三万遣之，遵涕泣而去。
现代文：乙丑，石遵从幽州来到邺城，传诏让他在朝堂接受任命，给他配备了三万宫中的亲兵，便让他回去，石遵流着眼泪走了。
English: Second Ugly, Shi Zunong came to Lucheng from Yuzhou, the messenger told him to accept the appointment in the imperial court, equipped him with thirty thousand palace soldiers, and then let him go back. Shi Zunong left in tears.

古文：是日，虎疾小瘳，问： 遵至末？ 
现代文：这天，石虎的病情稍有好转，问道： 石遵来了没有？ 
English: On this day, Shihu's condition improved slightly, and he asked: Has Shi Zun come?

古文：左右对曰： 去已久矣。 
现代文：左右的人回答说： 已经离开很久了。 
English: "It's been a long time," some of them replied.

古文：虎曰： 恨不见之！ 
现代文：石虎说： 真痛心没有见到他！ 
English: Shihu said, "I'm so sorry I didn't get to see him!

古文：虎临西閤，龙腾中郎二百馀人列拜于前。
现代文：石虎来到太武殿的西阁，担任宫中护卫任务的龙腾中郎二百多人上前列队拜见。
English: Shihu came to the west pavilion of the Taiwu Palace, and more than two hundred people of Longteng Zhonglang, who served as the guard of the palace, came to the front to meet him.

古文：虎问： 何求？ 
现代文：石虎问： 你们有什么请求？ 
English: Shihu asked: What is your request?

古文：皆曰： 圣体不安，宜令燕王入宿卫，典兵马。 
现代文：众卫士回答说： 主上圣体欠安，应该让燕王石斌入宫主管警卫，典掌兵马。 
English: The guards replied, "Our Lord's body is not in good condition, so we should let Yan Wang Shibin, the chief guard, enter the palace.

古文：或言： 乞为皇太子。 
现代文：有的人还说： 请求以他为皇太子。 
English: Some people also said: "Ask him to be crown prince."

古文：虎曰： 燕王不在内邪？
现代文：石虎说： 燕王不在宫内吗？
English: Shihu said: Isn't the king of swallows in the palace?

古文：召以来！ 
现代文：把他召来！ 
English: Bring him in!

古文：左右言： 王酒病，不能入。 
现代文：左右的人回答： 燕王因纵酒而病，不能入宫了。 
English: The people around replied, "Yan Wang is ill due to heavy drinking and cannot enter the palace."

古文：虎曰： 促持辇迎之，当付玺授。 
现代文：石虎说： 赶快用我乘坐的车子把他接来，应当把玺印交给他。 
English: Shihu said, "Hurry and use my car to pick him up. You should give him the seal.

古文：亦竟无行者。
现代文：但左右竟然始终无人行动。
English: However, no one on the left or right actually took any action.

古文：寻惛眩而入。
现代文：不一会儿，石虎因头昏目眩，只好回去了。
English: After a while, Shihu became dizzy and had to go back.

古文：张豺使张雄矫诏杀斌。
现代文：张豺派张雄假传诏令杀掉了石斌。
English: Zhang Ye sent Zhang Xiong to kill Shi Bin Rong with a fake edict.

古文：戊辰，刘氏复矫诏以豺为太保、都督中外诸军，录尚书事，如霍光故事。
现代文：戊辰，刘氏再次假传诏令，任命张豺为太保、都督中外诸军，总管尚书职事，就像西汉霍光辅政专权一样。
English: In Wucheng, the Liu clan once again issued a fake imperial edict, appointing Zhang Ye as the Taipo, the governor of the Chinese and foreign armies, and the head of the clerical staff, just like the Western Han Dynasty's Ho Guang Auxiliary Government.

古文：侍中徐统叹曰： 乱将作矣，吾无为预之。 
现代文：侍中徐统叹息道： 祸乱将要来临了，我不必参与它。 
English: Xu Tong, a chamberlain, sighed, "The calamity is coming, I don't have to take part in it.

古文：仰药而死。
现代文：随即服毒自杀身亡。
English: He then took poison and committed suicide.

古文：己巳，虎卒，太子世即位，尊刘氏为皇太后。
现代文：己巳，石虎去世，太子石世即位，尊奉刘氏为皇太后。
English: Now that Shih Ho has passed away, Prince Shih Si has ascended the throne, and the Liu clan is revered as the empress dowager.

古文：刘氏临朝称制，以张豺为丞相；豺辞不受，请以彭城王遵、义阳王鉴为左右丞相，以慰其心，刘氏从之。
现代文：刘氏当朝行使皇帝的权力，任命张豺为丞相。张豺辞让不肯接受，请求任命彭城王石遵、义阳王石鉴为左右丞相，以此来安抚他们，刘氏听从了。
English: Liu exercised the power of the emperor and appointed Zhang Ye as the prime minister. Zhang Ye refused to accept Zhang Ye's resignation and requested the appointment of Pengcheng Wang Shizhun and Yiyang Wang Shijian as the left and right prime ministers to appease them. Liu complied.

古文：豺与太尉张举谋诛司空李农，举素与农善，密告之；农奔广宗，帅乞活数万家保上白刘氏使张举统宿卫诸军围之。
现代文：张豺找太尉张举谋划诛杀司空李农，然而张举和李农历来关系密切，就把此事悄悄地告诉了李农。李农闻讯后逃到广宗，率领乞活等残余部众数万家固守上白，刘氏派张举统领多路朝廷禁卫军队包围了他们。
English: Zhang Hui sought out Zhang Hui, a captain, to plan the assassination of the governor Li Nong. However, Zhang Hui and Li Nong had always had a close relationship, so he quietly told Li Nong about the matter. After hearing the news, Li Nong fled to Guangzong, leading tens of thousands of remnants such as beggars to adhere to Shangbai. The Liu clan sent Zhang Hui to lead the multi-way imperial guard army to surround them.

古文：豺以张离为镇军大将军，监中外诸军事，以为己副。
现代文：张豺任命张离为镇军大将军，监督朝廷内外的各项军务，以作为自己的副手。
English: Zhang Xuan appointed Zhang Li as the general of the town army to supervise all military affairs inside and outside the imperial court and to serve as his deputy.

古文：彭城王遵至河内，闻丧；姚弋仲、蒲洪、刘宁及征虏将军石闵、武卫将军王鸾等讨梁犊还，遇遵于李城，共说遵曰： 殿下长且贤，先帝亦有意以殿下为嗣；正以末年惛惑，为张豺所误。
现代文：彭城王石遵行至河内时，听到了父亲病故的丧讯。姚弋仲、蒲洪、刘宁以及征虏将军石闵、武卫将军王鸾等人在讨伐梁犊后的归途中，和石遵在李城相遇。他们一起劝石遵说： 殿下年长而且德才兼备，先帝也曾有意让殿下当继承人。正是因为他晚年昏然迷惑，才被张豺所欺误。
English: When Pengcheng Wang Shizhong traveled to Hanoi, he heard the news of his father's death. Yao Shizhong, Pu Hong, Liu Ning, as well as the conscript general Shizhong and the military general Wang Shizhong, met Shizhong in Licheng on their way back after fighting against Liang Shizhong. Together, they persuaded Shizhong and said: Your highness is old and talented. The former emperor also intended to make your highness the heir. It was precisely because he was confused in his later years that he was deceived by Zhang Shizhong.

古文：今女主临朝，奸臣用事，上白相持未下，京师宿卫空虚，殿下若声张豺之罪，鼓行而讨之，其谁不开门倒戈而迎殿下者！ 
现代文：如今女主当朝，奸臣独揽朝政，上白那里双方相持不下，京师的守卫力量空虚，殿下如果声讨张豺的罪行，击鼓进军对他进行讨伐，有谁不打开城门、掉转武器而迎接殿下呢！ 
English: Nowadays, the mistress reigns supreme, the treacherous vassal monopolizes the court politics, the two sides cannot stand against each other, the guard force of the Beijing Division is empty, and if His Imperial Highness condemns Zhang Ye's crime and marches against him with drums, who would not open the city gate and turn weapons around to welcome His Imperial Highness!

古文：遵从之。
现代文：石遵听从了劝说。
English: Shi Zun listened to the persuasion.

古文：五月，遵自李城举兵，还趣鄴，洛州刺史刘国帅洛阳之众往会之。
现代文：五月，石遵自李城发兵，掉头直奔邺城。洛州刺史刘国率领洛阳的部众前来与他会合。
English: In May, Shizun sent troops from Licheng and headed straight for Shicheng. Liu Guo, the governor of Luoyang, led his troops from Luoyang to join him.

古文：檄至鄴，张豺大惧，驰召上白之军。
现代文：讨伐檄文到邺城后，张豺十分害怕，急忙命令包围上白的军队返回。
English: After the crusade against Xianwen reached Shicheng, Zhang Ye was very afraid and hurriedly ordered the army that had surrounded Shangbai to return.

古文：丙戌，遵军于荡阴，戎卒九万，石闵为前锋。
现代文：丙戌，石遵的部队驻扎在荡阴，士兵达九万人，石闵为前锋。
English: Shi Zun's troops were stationed at Pingyin, with 90,000 soldiers. Shi Zun was the vanguard.

古文：豺将出拒之，耆旧、羯士皆曰： 彭城王来奔丧，吾当出迎之，不能为张豺守城也！ 
现代文：张豺打算出去拦截，但邺城的德高望重的老人和羯族士兵都说： 彭城王前来奔丧，我们应当出城迎接他，再也不能为张豺守城了！ 
English: Zhang Ye planned to go out to intercept them, but the highly respected old men and the Yi soldiers in Handan City all said: King Pengcheng has come to mourn, we should go out of the city to meet him, we can no longer defend the city for Zhang Ye!

古文：逾城而出；豺斩之，不能止。
现代文：于是纷纷翻越城墙跑了出来，张豺虽然以杀头来制止，但也不能奏效。
English: As a result, they scaled the city wall one after another and ran out. Although Zhang Ye tried to stop them by killing them, it did not work.

古文：张离亦帅腾二千，斩关迎遵。
现代文：就连张离也率领龙腾卫士二千人，冲破关卡，准备迎接石遵。
English: Even Zhang Liang led two thousand Longteng guards to break through the checkpoint and prepare to meet Shizhong.

古文：刘氏惧，召张豺入，对之悲哭曰： 先帝梓宫未殡，而祸难至此！
现代文：刘氏十分恐惧，召张豺来到宫中，裴痛地对他边哭边说： 先帝的棺材还没有入土，而祸乱就到了这种地步！
English: Mr. Liu was so frightened that he called Zhang Ye to the palace and said to him in tears: "The coffin of the former emperor has not yet been buried, and this is the extent of the calamity!

古文：今嗣子冲幼，托之将军，将军将若之何？
现代文：如今太子年幼，只能依靠将军您了。将军您打算怎么办呢？
English: Now that the prince is young, he can only rely on you, the general. What do you plan to do, general?

古文：欲加遵重位，能弭之乎？ 
现代文：我想给石遵加封显赫的官位，这样能安抚住他吗？ 
English: I want to give Shizun a high-ranking official title. Will this appease him?

古文：豺惶怖不知所出，但云 唯唯 。
现代文：张豺这时也十分惊慌害怕，不知道该怎样回答，只是说： 是的是的。 
English: At this time, Zhang Ye was also very panicked and afraid, and did not know how to answer, but said: Yes, yes.

古文：乃下诏，以遵为丞相，领大司马、大都督、督中外诸军，录尚书事，加黄钺、九锡。
现代文：于是刘氏便发下诏令，任命石遵为丞相，兼领大司马、大都督、督中外诸军，总管尚书职事，并给予他以持黄钺、加九锡等特殊权力和礼遇。
English: As a result, the Liu clan issued an imperial edict, appointing Shi Zun as chancellor, concurrently leading the grand secretary of the horse, the grand governor, the governor of the armies at home and abroad, and the head of the clerical staff, and giving him special powers and courtesies such as holding the yellow scepter and adding nine pennies.

古文：己丑，遵至安阳亭，张豺惧而出迎，遵命执之。
现代文：己丑，石遵抵达安阳亭，张豺十分害怕，出来迎接，石遵命令拘捕了他。
English: Self-loathing, Shi Zun arrived at Anyang Pavilion, Zhang Ye was very afraid, came out to meet him, and ordered Shi Zun to arrest him.

古文：庚寅，遵擐甲曜兵，入自凤阳门，升太武前殿，擗踊尽哀，退如东閤。
现代文：庚寅，石遵身穿铠甲，炫耀武力，从凤阳门进入邺城，登上太武前殿，捶胸顿足，宣泄悲哀，然后退至东阁。
English: Geng Yin, dressed in armour and showing off his military prowess, entered Shicheng from Fengyang Gate, ascended the Taibu Front Hall, beat his chest and stamped his feet, and then retreated to the East Pavilion.

古文：斩张豺于平乐市，夷其三族。
现代文：在平乐市杀了张豺，还灭了他的三族。
English: He killed Zhang Ye in Pingle City, and also exterminated his three clans.

古文：假刘氏令曰： 嗣子幼冲，先帝私恩所授，皇业至重，非所克堪，其以遵嗣位。 
现代文：石遵借刘氏之令说： 太子年幼，之所以立他为太子，那是先帝个人的情义所致。然而国家大业至关重要，不是他所能承担的。应当以石遵为继位人。 
English: Shi Zun borrowed Liu's order and said: The crown prince is young, and the reason why he was made crown prince was due to the previous emperor's personal feelings. However, the great cause of the country is very important, and it is not something he can undertake. Shi Zun should be the successor.

古文：于是遵即位，大赦，罢上白之围。
现代文：于是石遵便即皇帝位，实行大赦，并解除了对上白的包围。
English: As a result, Shi Zunben became emperor, implemented an amnesty, and lifted the siege on Shangbai.

古文：辛卯，封世为谯王，废刘氏为太妃，寻皆杀之。
现代文：辛卯，封石世为谯王，废黜刘氏为太妃。过了不久，便把他们全都杀了。
English: Xin Wu crowned Shi Shi as the Dragon King and dethroned Liu Shi as the Empress Dowager. Soon after, he killed them all.

古文：李农来归罪，使复其位。
现代文：李农前来归附谢罪，石遵让他官复原位。
English: Li Nong came to admit his guilt, and Shi Zun restored his position.

古文：尊母郑氏为皇太后，立妃张氏为皇后，故燕王斌子衍为皇太子。
现代文：尊奉石遵的母亲郑氏为皇太后，立妃张氏为皇后，原来燕王石斌的儿子石衍被立为皇太子。
English: Zheng, the mother of the revered Shi Zun, was made the empress dowager, and Zhang was made the empress. Shi Yan, the son of Yan Wang Shi Bin, was made the crown prince.

古文：以义阳王鉴为侍中、太傅，沛王冲为太保，乐平王苞为大司马，汝阴王琨为大将军，武兴公闵为都督中外诸军事、辅国大将军。
现代文：任命义阳王石鉴为侍中、太傅；沛王石冲为太保；乐平王石苞为大司马；汝阴王石琨为大将军；任武兴公石闵为都督中外诸军事、辅国大将军。
English: He appointed Yiyang Wang Shijian as a chamberlain and taifu; Pei Wang Shichong as a taibo; Leping Wang Shijun as a grand steward; Ruyin King Shijun as a general; and appointed Wu Xinggong Shijun as a military governor and assistant general.

古文：甲午，鄴中暴风拔树，震雷，雨雹大如盂升。
现代文：甲午，邺城内狂风拔树，雷电交加，下的冰雹像盂钵和粮升一样大。
English: In the afternoon of the 1st, the strong wind in the city uprooted trees, thunder and lightning were added, and the hail under the city was as large as hailstones and grain.

古文：太武晖华殿灾，及诸门观阁荡然无馀，乘舆服御，烧者太半，金石皆尽，火月馀乃灭。
现代文：太武殿、晖华殿发生火灾，波及到许多门观亭阁，烧得荡然无存，皇宫的车乘服饰，也被烧了大半，金银玉石之类，全都损失殆尽。
English: A fire broke out at the Taiwu Palace and the Suihua Palace, which spread to many of the pavilions and burned to nothing. Most of the palace's carriages and clothing were also burned, and all of the gold, silver and jade were lost.

古文：时沛王冲镇蓟，闻遵杀世自立，谓其僚佐曰： 世受先帝之命，遵辄废而杀之，罪莫大焉！
现代文：大火一直烧了一个多月才灭。当时沛王石冲正在镇守蓟城，当听说石遵杀掉了石世自立以后，就对辅佐他的同僚们说： 石世是秉承先帝的旨意继位的，石遵专横地把他废黜并杀掉，再也没有比这更大的罪过了！
English: The fire continued to burn for more than a month before it was extinguished. At that time, Pei Wang Shichong was in charge of the defense of Shicheng. When he heard that Shizhong had killed Shixi, after he had become independent, he said to his colleagues who assisted him: Shixi succeeded to the throne in accordance with the will of the former emperor. Shizhong arbitrarily deposed and killed him. There is no greater sin than this!

古文：其敕内外戒严，孤将亲讨之。 
现代文：命令内外严加戒备，我要亲自出征去讨伐他！ 
English: I order that both inside and outside the country be on high alert. I will personally go out to fight him!

古文：于是留宁北将军沐坚戍幽州，帅众五万自蓟南下，传檄燕、赵，所在云集；比至常山，众十馀万，军于苑乡；遇遵赦书，冲曰： 皆吾弟也；死者不可复追，何为复相残乎！
现代文：于是石冲留下宁北将军沭坚守卫幽州，自己率领五万士兵自蓟城南下，并将讨伐檄文传递到燕、赵之地。他每到一地，人们都云集而来，等到抵达常山，兵众已有十多万。驻扎在苑乡时，石冲见到了石遵实行大赦的诏书，他说： 石世、石遵都是我的弟弟，死去的已无法复生，为什么还要再互相残杀呢！
English: Therefore, Shi Chong left the Ningbei general Zou Jian to guard Wei Youzhou. He led fifty thousand soldiers from Zou to the south, and passed on the battle instructions to Yan and Zhao. Every place he went, people gathered. By the time he arrived at Changshan, there were more than one hundred thousand soldiers. When stationed in Yuanxiang, Shi Chong saw Shi Zun's amnesty decree. He said: Shi Shi and Shi Zun are my younger brothers. The dead can no longer be revived. Why do they have to kill each other again?

古文：吾将归矣！ 
现代文：我要返回去了。 
English: I'm going back.

古文：其将陈暹曰： 彭城篡弑自尊，为罪大矣！
现代文：石冲手下的将领陈暹却说： 彭城王石遵杀君夺位，自立为帝，罪大恶极！
English: However, Chen Siam, a general under Shi Chong, said: Pengcheng's King Shi Zun killed the king, seized the throne, and established himself as the emperor. This was an extremely heinous crime!

古文：王虽北旆，臣将南辕。俟平京师，擒彭城，然后奉迎大驾。 
现代文：虽然君主您要挥旗北返，但我还将继续南进，等到平定了京师，擒获了彭城王，然后再来恭迎您的大驾。 
English: Although your majesty wants to return to the north waving the flag, I will continue to march south until I have pacified the Beijing Division and captured the King of Pengcheng, and then I will come to greet you.

古文：冲乃复进。遵驰遣王擢以书喻冲，冲弗听。
现代文：听到这话，石冲又改变了主意，于是继续前进。石遵急速派王擢送信劝说石冲，但石冲没有听从。
English: Upon hearing this, Shi Chong changed his mind again and continued on his way. Shi Zun quickly sent Wang Yang to persuade Shi Chong, but Shi Chong did not listen.

古文：遵使武兴公闵及李农等帅精卒十万讨之，战于平棘，冲兵大败。
现代文：石遵便派武兴公石闵及李农率领精锐士卒十万人讨伐石冲。双方在平棘交战，石冲的军队大败。
English: Shi Zun then sent Wu Xing Gong Shi Yan and Li Nong to lead 100,000 elite soldiers to fight against Shichong. The two sides fought in Pingxiong, and Shichong's army was defeated.

古文：获冲于元氏，赐死，坑其士卒三万馀人。
现代文：他本人在元氏县被擒。石遵赐他自杀，并活埋了石冲手下的士卒三万多人。
English: He himself was captured in Wonshi County. Shizong ordered him to commit suicide, and buried alive more than thirty thousand of Shizong's soldiers.

古文：武兴公闵言于遵曰： 蒲洪，人杰也；今以洪镇关中，臣恐秦、雍之地非复国家之有。
现代文：武兴公石闵对石遵进言说： 蒲洪是杰出的人才，如今让他镇守关中，我恐怕秦州、雍州之地就不再会归赵国所有了。
English: Wu Xing Gong Shi Yan said to Shi Zun Jin, "Puhong is an outstanding talent, now let him guard Guanzhong, I am afraid that Qinzhou and Yongzhou will no longer belong to Zhao.

古文：此虽先帝临终之命，然陛下践祚，自宜改图。 
现代文：让蒲洪镇守关中虽然是先帝临终前的指令，然而如今陛下登位，自然应当改变谋略。 
English: Although it was the last instruction of the former emperor to let Bukhong Town guard the pass, now that His Majesty has ascended to the throne, it is natural that the strategy should be changed.

古文：遵从之，罢洪都督，馀如前制。
现代文：石遵听从了进言，罢免了蒲洪的都督官职，其他的官职待遇则一如从前。
English: Shi Zun heeded the advice and dismissed Pu Hong from the post of governor, while the other official treatment was the same as before.

古文：洪怒，归枋头，遣使来降。
现代文：蒲洪对此感到愤怒，回到枋头后，便派使者前来向东晋投降。
English: Puhong was angry about this, and after returning to Shantou, he sent an envoy to surrender to Dongjin.

古文：燕平狄将军慕容霸上书于燕王俊曰： 石虎穷凶极暴，天之所弃，馀烬仅存，自相鱼肉。
现代文：前燕平狄将军慕容霸给前燕王慕容俊上书说： 石虎穷凶极恶，残暴无比，已被上天所抛弃。其仅存的一点残余，还自相鱼肉残食。
English: The former Yanping Di general Murongba wrote to the former Yan Wang Murongjun: "The stone tiger is extremely ferocious and cruel, and has been abandoned by heaven. Its only remaining remnant is still eating scraps of fish meat.

古文：今中国倒悬，企望仁恤，若大军一振，势必投戈。 
现代文：如今中原之国危难至极，人们急切盼望以仁爱安恤，如果您统率大军奋起，石氏的士兵势必会放下武器。 
English: Now that the Central Plains country is in extreme danger, people are eagerly looking forward to benevolence and mercy. If you rise up with a large army, Shi's soldiers will certainly lay down their weapons.

古文：北平太守孙兴亦表言： 石氏大乱，宜以时进取中原。 
现代文：北平太守孙兴也上表说： 眼下石氏内部大乱，应当不失时机地进取中原。 
English: Sun Xing, the governor of Beiping, also said on the table: At the moment, there is great turmoil within the Shi clan, and we should not lose the opportunity to enter the Central Plains.

古文：俊以新遭大丧，弗许。
现代文：慕容俊考虑到先帝大丧刚刚过去，没有答应。
English: Considering that the great funeral of the former emperor had just passed, Murongjun did not agree.

古文：霸驰诣龙城，言于俊曰： 难得而易失者，时也。
现代文：慕容霸急忙来到龙城，对慕容俊进言说： 难以得到而容易失去的东西，是时机。
English: Murongba hurried to Longcheng and said to Murongjun: What is hard to get and easy to lose is opportunity.

古文：万一石氏衰而复兴，或有英雄据其成资，岂惟失此大利，亦恐更为后患。 
现代文：万一石氏由衰败转而复兴，抑或出现英雄之辈占据了他们已有的积聚，这岂止是痛失大利，更恐怕是给我们留下了后患。 
English: In the unlikely event that the Seki clan turns from decay to revival, or that a generation of heroes takes over their existing accumulation, this will not only be a painful loss for Italy, but I am afraid it will also be a legacy for us.

古文：俊曰： 鄴中虽乱，邓恒据安乐，兵强粮足，今若伐赵，东道不可由也，当由卢龙；卢龙山径险狭，虏乘高断要，首尾为患，将若之何？ 
现代文：慕容俊说： 邺城中虽已大乱，但邓桓占据着安乐，兵力强大粮草充足，如今若要讨伐赵国，东面的道路无法通过，只能经由卢龙。然而卢龙的山路险峻狭隘，敌人如果居高山之势把我们的部队拦腰截断，则首尾受敌，那将怎么办呢？ 
English: Murongjun said: Although there has been great turmoil in Lucheng, Deng Huan is at peace, the army is strong, and there is plenty of grain and grass. Now, if we want to attack Zhao Province, the road to the east cannot be passed, but only through Lulong. However, the mountain road of Lulong is steep and narrow. If the enemy holds the high mountain potential to cut off our troops, it will be attacked by the enemy. What will happen then?

古文：霸曰： 恒虽欲为石氏拒守，其将士顾家，人怀归志，若大军临之，自然瓦解。
现代文：慕容霸说： 邓桓虽然想为石氏抵抗坚守，但其将士念家，人怀归心，如果我们的大军一到，他们自然就会土崩瓦解。
English: Murongba said, "Although Deng Huan wanted to hold out for the resistance of the Shi clan, his soldiers were homesick and yearned to return home. If our army arrived, they would naturally collapse.

古文：臣请为殿下前驱，东出徒河，潜趣令支，出其不意，彼闻之，势必震骇，上不过闭门自守，下不免弃城逃溃，何暇御我哉！
现代文：我请求率部作为殿下的前锋，东出徒河，暗赴令支，出其不意。等到他们闻讯后，势必感到震惊，这时，其上策不过是闭门固守而已，下策就不免要弃城溃逃了，哪有功夫抵抗我呢！
English: I asked my staff, as the vanguard of His Imperial Highness, to go to the east of the river Tsuka, secretly go to Lingzhi, and take them by surprise. When they heard the news, they were bound to be shocked. At that time, their best strategy was just to stay behind closed doors. The next strategy was to abandon the city and flee. There was no way to resist me!

古文：然则殿下可以安步而前，无复留难矣。 
现代文：然而殿下却可以慢慢前进，这样就不会出现被截留围困的灾难了。 
English: However, His Highness can advance slowly, so there will be no disaster of being intercepted and besieged.

古文：俊犹豫未决，以问五材将军封弈，对曰： 用兵之道，敌强则用智，敌弱则用势。
现代文：慕容俊仍然犹豫不决，以此去询问五材将军封奕，封奕对他说： 用兵之道，在于碰到强大的敌人就用智取，碰到软弱的敌人就用势夺。
English: Murongjun was still hesitant, so he asked the five generals about Feng Yi. Feng Yi said to him: The way to use soldiers is to use wisdom when encountering a strong enemy, and to use strength when encountering a weak enemy.

古文：是故以大吞小，犹狼之食豚也；以治易乱，犹日之消雪也。
现代文：所以以大吞小，就像狼吃小猪一样；拨乱反正，就像太阳融化积雪一样。
English: Therefore, it is like a wolf eating a pig to eat big and small, and it is like the sun melting snow to melt the snow.

古文：大王自上世以来，积德累仁，兵强士练。
现代文：大王自先帝在世以来，积累道德仁义，士兵强悍武器精良。
English: Since the last emperor was alive, the great king has accumulated morality, benevolence and righteousness, and the soldiers are equipped with powerful and sophisticated weapons.

古文：石虎极其残暴，死未瞑目，子孙争国，上下乖乱。
现代文：石虎则因残暴至极，死未瞑目，其子孙便争夺天下，上下一片混乱。
English: Shihu, on the other hand, was extremely cruel and died before his time. His children and grandchildren fought for control of the world, creating chaos everywhere.

古文：中国之民，坠于涂炭，廷颈企踵以待振拔，大王若扬兵南迈，先取蓟城，次指鄴都，宣耀威德，怀抚遗民，彼孰不扶老提幼以迎大王？
现代文：中原地区的百姓，落入水深火热的深渊，翘首盼望起兵拯救。大王如果率兵南进，先攻取蓟城，再直指邺城，炫耀威力，弘扬道德，关怀安抚亡国之民，有谁能不扶老携幼迎接大王呢？
English: The people of the Central Plains region have fallen into a deep and fiery abyss, and they are looking forward to the army's rescue. If the great king leads the army to the south, first conquering Shicheng, then pointing directly at Shicheng, showing off power, promoting morality, and caring to pacify the people of the lost country, who can not help the old and the young to meet the great king?

古文：凶党将望旗冰碎，安能为害乎！ 
现代文：石氏那些凶残的党羽必将是一望见大王的旗帜就像冰块破碎一样倾刻崩溃，怎么还能继续为害呢？ 
English: Shi's murderous henchmen will surely see the great king's banner crumble like a piece of ice. How can they continue to do harm?

古文：从事中郎黄泓曰： 今太白经天，岁集毕北，天下易主，阴国受命，此必然之验也，宜速出师，以承天意。 
现代文：从事中郎黄泓说： 如今太白星中天可见，木星停留在毕宿之北，这正是北方之国必然接受天命的应验。大王应尽快出师，以禀承天意。 
English: Huang Qi, a middle-aged practitioner, said, "Nowadays, the sky is so white that Jupiter can be seen in the middle of the sky, and Jupiter stays in the north of the final destination. This is exactly the fulfillment of the destiny that the northern country must accept. The great king should become a teacher as soon as possible in order to carry out the will of heaven.

古文：折冲将军慕舆根曰： 中国之民困于石氏之乱，咸思易主以救汤火之急，此千载一时，不可失也。
现代文：折冲将军慕舆根说： 中原地区的百姓久困于石氏的祸乱，全都想改换君主以摆脱水深火热的危急苦难，这是一个千载难逢的时机，不能丧失。
English: General Orichon Mu Myogen said: The people of the Central Plains have been trapped in the disaster of the Shi clan for a long time, and they all want to change the monarch to get rid of the deep-rooted critical suffering. This is a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity that cannot be lost.

古文：自武宣王以来，招贤养民，务农训兵，正俟今日。
现代文：我国自武宣王慕容以来，广招贤士，养育百姓，致力农耕，训练士兵，等待的正是今天。
English: Since the reign of King Mu Rong of Wu Xuan, our country has widely recruited sages, nurtured the people, devoted itself to agriculture, and trained soldiers. What we are waiting for is today.

古文：今时至不取，更复顾虑，岂天意未欲使海内平定邪，将大王不欲取天下也？ 
现代文：如今时机已到，如果弃而不用，顾虑再三，难道是天意不想使海内安定，还是大王不想夺取天下呢？ 
English: Now that the time has come, if we give up and do not use it, and if we hesitate again and again, is it the will of heaven that we do not want to make the sea stable, or is it that the great king does not want to conquer the world?

古文：俊笑而从之。
现代文：慕容俊笑着听从了他们的劝告。
English: Murong Jun followed their advice with a smile.

古文：以慕容恪为辅国将军，慕容评为辅弼将军，左长史阳鹜为辅义将军，谓之 三辅 。
现代文：任命慕容恪为辅国将军，慕容评为辅弼将军，左长史阳鹜为辅义将军，称之为 三辅 。
English: Murong Ke was appointed as a general of the auxiliary state, Murong was rated as a general of the auxiliary state, and Zuo Chang Shi Yang Jie as a general of the auxiliary state, which was called the three auxiliary states.

古文：慕容霸为前锋都督、建锋将军。选精兵二十馀万，讲武戒严，为进取之计。
现代文：任命慕容霸为前锋都督、建锋将军，选择精兵二十多万，讲习武艺，进入临战状态，为进攻石氏做准备。
English: He appointed Murongba as the vanguard governor and Jianfeng general, selected more than 200,000 elite soldiers, studied martial arts, entered a state of war, and prepared for the attack on Shi.

古文：六月，葬赵王虎于显原陵，谥曰武帝，庙号太祖。
现代文：六月，后赵国主石虎被安葬在显原陵，上庙号为太祖。
English: In June, the late Zhao Guozhong Shihu was buried in the Xianyuan Mausoleum, and his temple name was Taizu.

古文：桓温闻赵乱，出屯安陆，遣诸将经营北方。
现代文：桓温听说后赵国大乱，便出兵驻扎安陆，派遣手下几员大将去开创北方。
English: After hearing of the Great Turmoil in Zhao, Kuan Wen sent troops to Anlu and dispatched several generals to open up the north.

古文：赵扬州刺史王浃举寿春降，西中郎将陈逵进据寿春。
现代文：后赵的扬州刺史王浃拱手让出寿春投降。桓温手下的西中郎将陈逵占据了寿春。
English: Later, Zhao's Yangzhou vassal Wang Qian surrendered Shouchun. West Middle Lord under Kuan Wen occupied Chen Qian and Shouchun.

古文：征北大将军褚裒上表请伐赵，即日戒严，直指泗口，朝议以裒事任贵重，不宜深入，宜先遣偏师。
现代文：征北大将军褚裒向晋朝廷上表，请求讨伐后赵，并从当天开始进入临战的戒备状态，目标直指泗口。朝廷商议考虑到褚裒肩负着镇守京口的重大责任，不应过于深入，而应当先派遣其他部分的军队出征。
English: The general of the Northern Expedition sent a petition to the court of the Jin Dynasty, requesting Zhao to come after the crusade, and from that day on, he entered a state of alert for war, with the target pointing directly at the Hukou. Considering that he shouldered the great responsibility of guarding the Hukou, the court should not go too far, but should first send other parts of the army to fight.

古文：裒奏言： 前已遣前锋督护王颐之等径造彭城，后遣督护麋嶷进据下邳。今宜速发，以成声势。 
现代文：褚裒上书奏言： 前已派前锋督护王颐之等人直接前往彭城，后又派督护麋嶷进据下邳，如今应该迅速发兵，以造成强大的声势。 
English: The imperial edict said, "Formerly, the vanguard overseer Wang Minzhi and others had been sent directly to Pengcheng, and later, the overseer and guards had been sent to the fortress of Jiaojing. Now, the troops should be dispatched quickly to create a strong momentum.

古文：秋，七月，加裒征讨大都督，督徐、兗、青、扬、豫五州诸军事，裒帅众三万，径赴彭城，北方士民降附者日以千计。
现代文：秋季，七月，朝廷授予褚裒征讨大都督，监督徐、兖、青、扬、豫五州的各种军务。褚裒率领三万兵众，直接开赴彭城，北方地区投降归附的士人百姓日以千计。
English: In the autumn, in July, the imperial court granted him the title of grand governor to supervise the military affairs of the five states of Xu, Qi, Qing, Yang and Hen. He led 30,000 soldiers and went directly to Pengcheng, and the number of soldiers and civilians who surrendered in the northern region was in the thousands.

古文：朝野皆以为中原指期可复，光禄大夫蔡谟独谓所亲曰： 胡灭诚为大庆，然恐更贻朝廷之忧。 
现代文：东晋朝野上下都认为光复中原指日可待，只有光禄大夫蔡谟对和他亲近的人说： 胡人被消灭确实是非常值得庆贺的事情，然而恐怕这更给朝廷带来了忧患。 
English: The Eastern Jin Dynasty and the whole court thought that the recovery of the Central Plains was just around the corner. Only the Guanglu doctor, Cai Mu, said to those close to him: The extermination of the Hu people is indeed a very worthy cause for celebration, but I am afraid that this has brought more sorrow to the imperial court.

古文：其人曰： 何谓也？ 
现代文：听的人问： 您说的是什么意思呢？ 
English: The listener asked: What do you mean by that?

古文：谟曰： 夫能顺天乘时，济群生于艰难者，非上圣与英雄不能为也，自馀则莫若度德量力。
现代文：蔡谟答道： 能够顺应天意、掌握时机把百姓从艰难困苦中拯救出来的事业，如果不是最杰出的圣人和英雄是不能承担的。不如老老实实地衡量一下自己的德行与力量。
English: Tsai Moo replied: If you are not the most outstanding saint and hero, you cannot undertake the cause of being able to comply with the will of heaven and seize the opportunity to save the people from hardship and suffering. It is better to honestly measure your own virtue and strength.

古文：观今日之事，殆非时贤所及，必将经营分表，疲民以逞；既而材略疏短，不能副心，财殚力竭，智勇俱困，安得不忧及朝廷乎！ 
现代文：反观如今讨伐赵国之事，恐怕不是当今的贤达之辈就能办成的。结果只能步步为营，分兵攻守，这是以劳民伤财为代价，来炫耀个人的志向。最后会因为才能和见识粗陋平庸，难以遂心，财力耗尽，智慧和勇气全都变得窘困，怎么能不给朝廷带来忧患呢！ 
English: On the other hand, I'm afraid that today's generation of sages won't be able to carry out the crusade against Zhao. As a result, they can only fight step by step and divide their forces. This is to flaunt their personal ambitions at the cost of labor, people and wealth. In the end, because their talent and insight are coarse and mediocre, their heart is hard to fulfill, their financial resources are exhausted, and their wisdom and courage are all in trouble, how can they not bring sorrow to the imperial court!

古文：鲁郡民五百馀家相与起兵附晋，求援于褚裒，裒遣部将王龛、李迈将锐卒三千迎之。
现代文：鲁郡的五百多家百姓相聚起兵，归附东晋，他们向褚裒求援，褚裒派部将王龛、李迈率领精锐士兵三千人去迎接他们。
English: More than five hundred people from Lu County gathered together and raised an army to join the Eastern Jin Dynasty. They appealed to Yao for help, and Yao sent three thousand elite soldiers to meet them, led by Generals Wang Hui and Li Mai.

古文：赵南讨大都督李农帅骑二万与龛等战于代陂，龛等大败，皆没于赵。
现代文：后赵的南讨大都督李农率领二万骑兵和王龛等在代陂交战，王龛等大败，都被后赵俘获。
English: After Zhao's Southern Expedition, the great viceroy Li Nong led 20,000 cavalry and Wang Qi and others to fight in the Battle of Daiyuan. Wang Qi and others were defeated and captured by Zhao.

古文：八月，裒退屯广陵。
现代文：八月，褚裒后退驻扎在广陵。
English: In August, he was stationed in Guangling.

古文：陈逵闻之，焚寿春积聚，毁城遁还。
现代文：陈逵听说后，把寿春城里贮存的粮草武器付之一炬，破坏了城池，然后逃了回去。
English: After hearing this, Chen Zhe set fire to the grain and grass weapons stored in Shouchun City, destroyed the city, and then fled back.

古文：裒上疏乞自贬，诏不许，命裒还镇京口，解征讨都督。
现代文：褚裒主动上疏请求贬职处分，穆帝下诏不予同意，命令褚裒回去继续镇守京口，解除了他征讨都督的职务。
English: Zou took the initiative to appeal to Shang Su for a demotion, but Emperor Mo did not agree and ordered Zou to go back and continue to guard Jingkou, dismissing him from his duties as governor.

古文：时河北大乱，遗民二十馀万口渡河欲来归附，会裒已还，威势不接，皆不能自拔，死亡略尽。
现代文：这时黄河以北大乱，二十多万晋朝遗民渡过黄河，要来归附东晋。但褚裒正好在这时已回到了京口，声威气势已去，不能接应，结果遗民们陷于孤立无援的境地而不能自救，几乎全部死亡。
English: At this time, there was a great turmoil north of the Yellow River. More than two hundred thousand remnants of the Jin Dynasty crossed the Yellow River to join the Eastern Jin Dynasty. However, at this time, Yao had already returned to Beijing, his prestige was gone, and he could not respond. As a result, the remnants were left in a helpless situation and could not save themselves, and almost all of them died.

古文：赵乐平王苞谋帅关右之众攻鄴，左长史石光、司马曹曜等固谏，苞怒，杀光等百馀人。
现代文：后赵乐平王石苞谋划率领关右的兵众攻打邺城，左长史石光、司马曹曜等人竭力劝谏，石苞大怒，杀掉了石光等一百多人。
English: Later, Zhao Leping's King Shih Kui planned to lead the troops of Guan Yu to attack Shicheng. Left Long Shi Shiguang, Sima Caoyou and others tried their best to persuade Shih Kui, but Shih Kui was furious and killed more than a hundred people including Shiguang.

古文：苞性贪而无谋，雍州豪杰知其无成，并遣使告晋，梁州刺史司马勋帅众赴之。
现代文：石苞生性贪婪但无谋略，雍州的豪杰之士都知道他一事无成，于是就一起派人把他想攻打邺城的事情报告了东晋朝廷，梁州刺史司马勋便率领兵众开赴雍州。
English: Shi Hao was greedy by nature but had no strategy. The heroes of Yongzhou knew that he could not achieve anything, so they sent someone together to report to the East Jin Dynasty court that he wanted to attack Shicheng. Sima Xun, the governor of Liangzhou, then led the troops to Yongzhou.

古文：杨初袭赵西城，破之。
现代文：杨初袭击并攻破了后赵国的西城。
English: At the beginning of the year, Yang attacked and broke through the western city of Hou Zhao.

古文：九月，凉州官属共上张重华为丞相、凉王、雍、秦、凉三州牧。
现代文：九月，凉州的官吏们共同拥戴张重华为丞相、凉王及雍、秦、凉三州的州牧。
English: In September, the officials of Liangzhou jointly supported Zhang Chonghua, the prime minister, Liangwang and the provincial governors of Yong, Qin and Liangzhou.

古文：重华屡以钱帛赐左右宠臣；又喜博弈，颇废政事。
现代文：张重华经常用钱帛赏赐周围所宠信的大臣们，又喜欢玩六博和围棋，很耽误政事。
English: Zhang Chonghua often used money to reward the favored ministers around him. He also liked to play six-ball and go, and was very slow in political affairs.

古文：从事索振谏曰： 先王夙夜勤俭以实府库，正以仇耻未雪，志平海内故也。
现代文：征事索振劝他说： 先王昼夜勤于政务，生活简朴，以使国家府库充实，正是由于仇恨未报，耻辱未雪，立志要平定海内的缘故。
English: Solicitor Suo Zhen advised him, "The late king worked day and night on government affairs and lived a simple life in order to enrich the national treasury. It was precisely because of unreported hatred, unreported shame, and determination to pacify the inland sea.

古文：殿下嗣位之初，强寇侵逼，赖重饵之故，得战士死力，仅保社稷。
现代文：殿下刚刚即位的时候，强敌前来进犯，依赖重赏，才得到战士们的拼死效力，勉强保住江山。
English: When His Imperial Highness had just ascended the throne, a powerful enemy came to attack, and it was only by relying on heavy rewards that the soldiers were able to fight to the death and barely hold the country together.

古文：今蓄积已虚而寇仇尚在，岂可轻有耗散，以与无功之人乎！
现代文：如今积蓄已经空虚，而敌人与仇恨依然存在，怎么能轻易地耗费，把它送给无功之辈呢？
English: Now that the savings are empty, and the enemies and hatred still exist, how can they easily spend it and give it to the deadbeats?

古文：昔汉光、武躬亲万机，章奏诣阙，报不终日，故能隆中兴之业。
现代文：过去汉光武帝日理万机，奏章文书送到朝廷后，复诏不出当天就发下，所以他才能使中兴大业兴隆昌盛。
English: In the past, Emperor Guangwu of Han ruled the country with an iron fist. After the written document was sent to the imperial court, it was issued on the same day without the imperial rescript, so he was able to make ZTE flourish.

古文：今章奏停滞，动经时月，下情不得上通，沉冤困于囹圄，殆非明主之事也。 
现代文：如今奏章文书滞留积压，往返传递动辄数月，下情不能上达，沉冤困在牢狱，这大概不是英明的君主所干的事情。 
English: Today, there is a backlog of written documents, the back-and-forth transfer of which can take months at a time, documents cannot be delivered, and people are unjustly imprisoned. This is probably not something that a wise monarch would do.

古文：重华谢之。
现代文：张重华对索振表示谢罪。
English: Zhang Chonghua expressed his gratitude to So Zhen.

古文：司马勋出骆谷，破赵长城戍，壁于悬钩，去长安二百里，使治中刘焕攻长安，斩京兆太守刘秀离，又拔贺城；三辅豪杰多杀守令以应勋，凡三十馀壁，众五万人。
现代文：司马勋率兵出骆谷，攻克了后赵的长城戍，在悬钩设置营垒，离长安二百里。他派治中刘焕攻打长安，杀掉了京兆太守刘秀离。又攻克了贺城。三辅地区的豪杰之士大多都杀掉郡守县令等官吏，以响应司马勋。此时，司马勋共有三十多座营垒，五万兵众。
English: Sima Xun led the troops out of Luogu, conquered the Great Wall of Hou Zhao, and set up a camp in Huanhu, two hundred miles from Chang'an. He sent Liu Huan to attack Chang'an and killed Liu Xiu Li, the governor of Beijing. He also conquered Hecheng. Most of the heroes in the Sanfu region killed the county governor and other officials in response to Sima Xun. At this time, Sima Xun had a total of more than thirty camps and fifty thousand soldiers.

古文：赵乐平王苞乃辍攻鄴之谋，使其将麻秋、姚国等将兵拒勋。
现代文：后赵乐平王石苞于是也就放弃了攻打邺城的图谋，派他的部将麻秋、姚国等统领士兵抵抗司马勋。
English: Later, Zhao Leping Wang Shijun also gave up his plan to attack Shicheng, and sent his general Ma Qiu, Yao Guo and other leading soldiers to resist Sima Xun.

古文：赵主遵遣车骑将军王朗帅精骑二万以讨勋为名，因劫苞送鄴。
现代文：后赵国主石遵派车骑将军王朗率领二万精锐骑兵，以讨伐司马勋为名，顺势劫持了石苞送到邺城。
English: Later, the ruler of Zhao, Shizhong, sent the cavalry general Wang Lang, who led twenty thousand elite cavalrymen, in the name of fighting against Sima Xun, hijacked Shizhong and sent him to Lucheng.

古文：勋兵少，畏朗，不敢进。
现代文：司马勋这时手下兵力不足，由于害怕王朗的精锐骑兵，不敢继续前进。
English: At this time, Sima Xun's subordinates were short of troops, and they were afraid of Wang Lang's elite cavalry, and dared not move forward.

古文：冬，十月，释悬钩，拔宛城，杀赵南阳太守袁景，复还梁州。
现代文：冬季，十月，司马勋放弃了悬钩，攻克宛城，杀掉了后赵南阳太守袁景，又回到了梁州。
English: In winter, October, Sima Xun gave up the hook, conquered Wancheng, killed Zhao Nanyang's governor Yuan Jing, and returned to Liangzhou.

古文：初，赵主遵之发李城也，谓武兴公闵曰： 努力！
现代文：当初，后赵国主石遵在李城起兵时，曾经对武兴公石闵说： 努力干吧！
English: At the beginning, when the late Zhao Guozhong Shi Zun raised an army in Licheng, he once said to Wu Xing Gong Shi Yao: Work hard!

古文：事成，以尔为太子。 
现代文：事成以后，让你当太子。 
English: After the matter is settled, I will make you crown prince.

古文：既而立太子衍。
现代文：但后来却立石衍为太子。
English: However, he later became crown prince.

古文：闵恃功。欲专朝政，遵不听。
现代文：石闵自恃有功，想要专擅朝政，但石遵不听他的。
English: Shi Zong fancied himself a meritorious person and wanted to be an expert in court politics, but Shi Zun didn't listen to him.

古文：闵素骁勇，屡立战功，夷、夏宿将皆惮之。
现代文：石闵历来英勇善战，屡立战功，四夷和中原久经沙场的老将都害怕他。
English: Shi Hao has always been brave and good at fighting, and has repeatedly made war achievements. The veterans of Shii and Zhongyuan who have been in the battlefield for a long time are afraid of him.

古文：既为都督，总内外兵权，乃抚循殿中将士，皆奏为殿中员外将军，爵关外侯。
现代文：眼下他既然做了都督，总揽内外兵权，便安抚手下的将士，奏请让他们全都出任殿中员外将军，封爵关外侯。
English: At the moment, since he had become the governor of the capital and was in charge of military power at home and abroad, he appeased the soldiers under his command, and requested that they all be appointed to the position of general outside the palace and knighted as Kansai vassals.

古文：遵弗之疑，而更题名善恶以挫抑之，众咸怨怒。
现代文：石遵对于石闵的所做所为不加怀疑，反而对这些人题记姓名，品评善恶，加以贬抑，于是众将士都怨恨愤怒。
English: Shi Zun did not doubt what Shi Yao had done, but instead wrote down the names of these people, commented on the good and evil, and belittled them, so the generals were resentful and angry.

古文：中书令孟准、左卫将军王鸾劝遵稍夺闵兵权，闵益恨望，准等咸劝诛之。
现代文：中书令孟准、左卫将军王鸾劝石遵应该逐渐剥夺石闵的兵权，石闵越发心怀不满。
English: In the middle of the letter, Meng Jun and the left guard general Wang Qi advised Shizun that Shizun should gradually deprive Shizun of military power. Shizun became more and more dissatisfied.

古文：十一月，遵召义阳王鉴、乐平王苞、汝阳王琨、淮南王昭等入议于郑太后前，曰： 闵不臣之迹渐著，今欲诛之，如何？ 
现代文：孟准等人全都劝说石遵把石闵杀掉。十一月，石遵召义阳王石鉴、乐平王石苞、汝阴王石琨、淮南王石昭等人入宫，来到郑太后面前进行商议。石遵说： 石闵不忠于君主的迹象已逐渐明显，如今我想把他杀掉，怎么样？ 
English: Meng Jun and others all persuaded Shizhong to kill Shizhao. In November, Shizhong summoned Yiyang King Shijuan, Leping King Shizhao, Ruyin King Shizhao, Huainan King Shizhao and others to enter the palace and come to discuss in front of Empress Zheng. Shizhong said: Shizhong's signs of disloyalty to the monarch have gradually become obvious, now I want to kill him, how about it?

古文：鉴等皆曰： 宜然！ 
现代文：石鉴等人都说： 应当如此！ 
English: Shi Jian and others all said: This is how it should be!

古文：郑氏曰： 李城还兵，无棘奴，岂有今日！
现代文：郑氏说： 当初在李城起兵时，如果没有石闵，岂能有今天？
English: Mr. Zheng said, "If there were no stalagmites when the troops were raised in Licheng, would we be here today?

古文：小骄纵之，何可遽杀！ 
现代文：石闵有点居功自傲，应当对他有所宽纵，怎么能急急忙忙把他杀掉呢？ 
English: Shi Hao is a bit proud of his achievements. He should be treated with leniency. How can he be killed in a hurry?

古文：鉴出，遣宦者杨环驰以告闵。
现代文：这时石鉴借故外出，派宦官杨环迅速去把这一消息告诉石闵。
English: At this time, Shijian took advantage of the situation to go out, and sent the eunuch Yang Huan to quickly tell Shijian this news.

古文：闵遂劫李农及右卫将军王基密谋废遵，使将军苏彦、周成帅甲士三千人执遵于南台。
现代文：石闵闻讯后就胁迫了李农及右卫将军王基密谋废黜石遵，派将军苏彦、周成率领披甲士兵三千人在南台把石遵捉拿起来。
English: After hearing about Shizhu, he coerced Li Nong and Wang Ji, the right guard general, to conspire to depose Shizhu, and sent three thousand armored soldiers led by generals Su Yan and Zhou Cheng to capture Shizhu in Nantai.

古文：遵方与妇人弹棋，问成曰： 反者谁也？ 
现代文：士兵们来到石遵的住处时，他正和妇人玩弹。他问周成说： 造反的是谁？ 
English: When the soldiers came to Shizun's residence, he was playing billiards with a woman. He asked Zhou Cheng: "Who is the rebel?

古文：成曰： 义阳王鉴当立。 
现代文：周成说： 义阳王石鉴应当立为继承人。 
English: Zhou Cheng said: Yiyang Wang Shijian should be appointed as the successor.

古文：遵曰： 我尚如是，鉴能几时！ 
现代文：石遵说： 我尚且如此，石鉴又能支撑多长时间！ 
English: Shi Zun said: I am still like this, how long can Shi Jian support it!

古文：遂杀之于琨华殿，并杀郑太后、张后、太子衍、孟准、王鸾及上光禄张斐。
现代文：于是，在琨华殿把石遵杀掉了，同时杀了郑太后、张后、太子石衍、孟准、王鸾以及上光禄张斐。
English: As a result, he killed Shizun at the Summer Palace, as well as Empress Zheng, Empress Zhang, Prince Shiyan, Meng Jun, Wang Qi, and Shangguanglu Zhang Fei.

古文：鉴即位，大赦。
现代文：石鉴即位，实行大赦。
English: Shi Jian was enthroned and a general amnesty was implemented.

古文：以武兴公闵为大将军，封武德王，司空李农为大司马，并录尚书事。
现代文：任命武兴公石闵为大将军，封为武德王。任命司空李农为大司马，同时统管尚书职事。
English: He appointed Wu Xing Gong Shi Jiao as the grand general and named him the King of Wu De. He appointed Sikuo Li Nong as the grand secretary, and at the same time, he was in charge of Shang Shuxi's duties.

古文：郎闿为司空，秦州刺史刘群为尚书左仆射，侍中卢谌为中书监。
现代文：任命郎为司空，秦州刺史刘群为尚书左仆射，侍中卢谌为中书监。
English: He appointed his son as the Secretary of the Empty, Liu Qun, the Governor of Qin Province, as the Left Assistant of the Secretary of the Empty, and Lu Wei, the Servant of the Central Government, as the Supervisor of the Central Government.

古文：秦、雍流民相帅西归，路由枋头，共推蒲洪为主，众至十馀万。
现代文：秦州、雍州的流民结伴西归，路经枋头时，共同推举蒲洪为首领，部众多达十余万。
English: The exiles from Qinzhou and Yongzhou accompanied the westward returnees, and when passing through Shantou, they jointly elected Pu Hong as the leader, with more than 100,000 followers.

古文：洪子健在鄴，斩关出奔枋头。
现代文：蒲洪的儿子蒲健在邺城，这时也冲破关卡投奔枋头。
English: Pu Hong's son, Pu Jian, was in Lucheng, when he also broke through the checkpoint to rush to Shantou.

古文：鉴惧洪之逼，欲以计遣之，乃以洪为都督关中诸军事、征西大将军、雍州牧、领秦州刺史。
现代文：石鉴害怕蒲洪过于靠近自己，想用计谋把他调开，于是就任命蒲洪为都督关中诸军事、征西大将军、雍州牧、领秦州刺史。
English: Shi Jian was afraid that Pu Hong was too close to him and wanted to use tricks to move him away, so he appointed Pu Hong as the military governor of Guanzhong, the general of the Western Conquest, the Yongzhou herdsman, and the territorial governor of Qinzhou.

古文：洪会官属，议应受与不；主簿程朴请且与赵连和，如列国分境而治。
现代文：蒲洪召集手下的官吏，商量是否接受任命。主簿程朴请求暂且和赵讲和，就像诸侯列国一样分地而治。
English: Pu Hong called together his officials to discuss whether to accept the appointment. Master Cheng Pak requested to make peace with Zhao for the time being, just like the princes of various countries.

古文：洪怒曰： 吾不堪为天子邪，而云列国乎！ 
现代文：蒲洪大怒，说道： 我不配做天子吗？要不为什么说列国分地而治的话呢！ 
English: Puhong was furious and said, "Am I not worthy to be the son of heaven? Otherwise, why do they say that the nations should divide the land and rule it?"

古文：引朴斩之。
现代文：因此把程朴拉出去杀了。
English: So he took out Cheng Pak La and killed her.

古文：都乡元穆侯褚裒还至京口，闻哭声甚多，以问左右，对曰： 皆代陂死者之家也。 
现代文：都乡元侯褚裒回到京口，听见到处是哭声，他问周围的人，人们对他说： 全是代陂之战中阵亡者的家属。 
English: When the former lord of Miyakonosho returned to Kyoguchi, he heard cries everywhere. He asked the people around him, and they said to him, "They are all the families of those who died in the battle of Tsugaru."

古文：裒惭愤发疾；十二月，己酉，卒。
现代文：褚裒既惭愧又愤恨，因此就病倒了。十二月，己酉，去世。
English: Both ashamed and angry, she fell ill and passed away in December.

古文：以吴国内史荀羡为使持节、监徐、兗二州、扬州之晋陵诸军事、徐州刺史，时年二十八，中兴方伯未有如羡之少者。
现代文：东晋朝廷任命吴国内使荀羡为使持节、监徐兖二州及扬州之晋陵诸军事、徐州刺史。荀羡时年二十八岁，晋朝中兴以来的地方长官中，没有一个像他这样年轻的。
English: The Eastern Jin Dynasty court appointed the Wuzhong envoy Zou En as the envoy of the festival, the warden of the Jin mausoleums in the two states of Xuzhou and Yangzhou, and the historian of Xuzhou. Zou En was twenty-eight years old at the time, and none of the local governors since the rise of the Jin Dynasty have been as young as him.

古文：赵主鉴使乐平王苞、中书令李松、殿中将军张才夜攻石闵、李农于琨华殿，不克，禁中扰乱。
现代文：后赵国主石鉴派乐平王石苞、中书令李松、殿中将军张才夜里去琨华殿攻打石闵、李农，没有成功，引起了宫中的混乱。
English: Later, Zhao Guozhong Shi Jian sent Leping Wang Shijun, Censer Li Song, and General Zhang Cai to attack Shijun and Li Nong at night, but they did not succeed, causing confusion in the palace.

古文：鉴惧，伪若不知者，夜斩松、才于西中华门，并杀苞。
现代文：石鉴很害怕，装作不知其事的样子，当夜就在西中华门杀掉了李松、张才，并杀了石苞。
English: Shijian was very scared and pretended not to know what was going on. That night, he killed Li Song, Zhang Cai, and Shijuan at the West China Gate.

古文：新兴王祗，虎之子也，时镇襄国，与姚弋仲、蒲洪等连兵，移檄中外，欲共诛闵、农；闵、农以汝阴王琨为大都督，与张举及侍中呼延盛帅步骑七万分讨祗等。
现代文：新兴王石祗，是石虎的儿子，这时镇守襄国。他与姚弋仲、蒲洪等人联合兵力，四处传递檄文，想一起杀掉石闵、李农。石闵、李农闻讯后，任命汝阴王石琨为大都督，和张举以及侍中呼延盛率领七万步兵、骑兵，分路出发讨伐石祗等人。
English: The newly-emerging King Shih Chou, the son of Shih Hu, was in charge of Xiang Province at the time. He joined forces with Yao Shizhong, Pu Hong and others to pass around the edict, hoping to kill Shih Chou and Li Nong together. After Shih Chou and Li Nong heard about it, they appointed Ruyin King Shih Chou as the grand governor, and Zhang Zhou and the attendant Hu Yan Sheng led 70,000 infantry and cavalry, and set out to fight Shih Chou and others.

古文：中领军石成、侍中石启、前河东太守石晖谋诛闵、农；闵、农皆杀之。
现代文：中领军石成、侍中石启、以前的河东太守石晖谋划诛杀石闵、李农。石闵、李农把他们都杀掉。
English: The leader of the middle army, Shicheng, the attendant, Shikichi, and the former governor of Hedong Province, Shijun, plotted to kill Shijun and Li Nong. Shijun and Li Nong killed them all.

古文：龙骧将军孙伏都、刘铢等帅羯士三千伏于胡天，亦欲诛闵、农。
现代文：龙骧将军孙伏都、刘铢等率领羯族士兵三千人埋伏在宫中叫做胡天的地方，也想诛杀石闵、李农。
English: Long March generals Sun Fudu and Liu Ye led 3,000 Yi soldiers to lie in ambush in a place called Hu Tian in the palace, and also wanted to kill Shijie and Li Nong.

古文：鉴在中台，伏都帅三十馀人将升台挟鉴以攻之。
现代文：当时石鉴正在中台，孙伏都率领三十多人想进入中台挟持石鉴一起攻打石闵、李农。
English: At that time, Shijian was in Zhongtai, and Sun Fudu led more than 30 people who wanted to enter Zhongtai to attack Shijuan and Li Nong together.

古文：鉴见伏都毁阁道，临问其故。
现代文：石鉴看见孙伏都捣毁了楼阁通道，便上前询问原因。
English: When Shi Jian saw that Sun Fudu had destroyed the passage of the pavilion, he came forward to inquire the reason.

古文：伏都曰： 李农等反，已在东掖门。臣欲帅卫士以讨之，谨先启知。 
现代文：孙伏都说： 李农等人造反，眼下已在东掖门，我想率领卫士讨伐他，特地先来禀告您。 
English: Sun Fudu said: Li Nong and others have started a rebellion and are now at the East Gate. I want to lead the guards to fight him and come to report to you first.

古文：鉴曰： 卿是功臣，好为官陈力。
现代文：石鉴说： 你是朝廷的功臣，好好为朕出力讨伐。
English: Shi Jian said: You are a meritorious subject of the imperial court, do your best to fight for me.

古文：朕从台上观，卿勿虑无报也。 
现代文：朕在中台上观看，你不必顾虑事成之后没有丰厚的赏赐。 
English: I watched from the middle of the stage. You don't have to worry about not getting a rich reward after accomplishing something.

古文：于是伏都、铢帅众攻闵、农，不克，屯于凤阳门。
现代文：于是孙伏都、刘铢率领兵众攻打石闵、李农，但没有成功，只好屯兵于凤阳门。
English: As a result, Sun Fudu and Liu Ye led the troops to attack Shijie and Li Nong, but they were unsuccessful, and the troops had to be stationed at Fengyang Gate.

古文：闵、农帅众数千毁金明门而入。
现代文：石闵、李农率领数千兵众捣毁金明门，进入中台。
English: Shi Hao and Li Nong led thousands of soldiers to destroy the Jinming Gate and enter Zhongtai.

古文：鉴惧闵之杀己，驰招闵、农，开门内之，谓曰： 孙伏都反，卿宜速讨之。 
现代文：石鉴害怕石闵杀掉自己，急忙招来石闵、李农，开门接纳，对他们说： 孙伏都造反，你们应该迅速去讨伐他。 
English: Shijian was afraid that Shijuan would kill him, so he hurriedly summoned Shijuan and Li Nong, opened the door and said to them, "Sun Fudu has rebelled, you should quickly go and fight him."

古文：闵、农攻斩伏都等，自凤阳至琨华，横尸相枕，流血成渠。
现代文：于是石闵、李农前去攻打，斩杀了孙伏都等一大批人，以至于从凤阳门至琨华殿，横尸遍地，血流成渠。
English: As a result, Shih Kui and Li Nong went to attack and killed a large number of people, including Sun Fudu, so that from Fengyang Gate to Yuhua Hall, there were corpses all over the place, and blood flowed into canals.

古文：宣令内外六夷，敢称兵仗者斩。
现代文：石闵还向内外宣布命令：六夷如果有胆敢拿起武器的，一律斩首！
English: Shi Yan also announced an order to the outside world: If any Liushi dared to take up arms, they would all be beheaded!

古文：胡人或斩关、或逾城而出者，不可胜数。
现代文：胡人中有的冲破关卡，有的翻越城墙，逃出来的不计其数。
English: Some of the Hu people broke through the checkpoint, some climbed over the city wall, and countless escaped.

古文：闵使尚书王简、少府王郁帅众数千守鉴于御龙观，悬食以给之。
现代文：石闵派尚书王简、少府王郁率领数千兵众把石鉴看押在御龙观，用绳子把食品悬吊进去让石鉴吃。
English: Shi Yan sent Shang Shu Wang Jian and Shao Fu Wang Yu, leading thousands of soldiers, to hold the stone book at the Dragon View, and use a rope to suspend the food inside for the stone book to eat.

古文：下令城中曰： 近日孙、刘构逆，支党伏诛，良善一无预也。
现代文：石闵还在邺城中颁布命令说： 近日孙伏都、刘铢制造叛逆，他们的亲信党羽已经全都被杀掉，好人没有一个参与其事。
English: Shi Yan also issued an order in Shicheng, saying, "Recently, Sun Fudu and Liu Bei have started a rebellion, and all their trusted followers have been killed, and no good person has participated in it.

古文：今日已后，与官同心者留，不同者各任所之。
现代文：从今天以后，凡是和我同心一致的人留下，不同心的人想去哪里悉尊其便。
English: From now on, those who share my heart will stay, and those who don't will go wherever they want.

古文：敕城门不复相禁。 
现代文：我命令城门不再关闭。 
English: I ordered the gates not to be closed again.

古文：于是赵人百里内悉入城，胡、羯去者填门。
现代文：于是方圆百里之内的汉族人全都蜂拥进城，而胡人、羯人则争相离去，以致挤满了城门。
English: As a result, all the Han people within a hundred-mile radius flocked into the city, while the Hu people and the Xiong people left one after another, crowding the city gates.

古文：闵知胡之不为己用，班令内外： 赵人斩一胡首送凤阳门者，文官进位三等，武官悉拜牙门。 
现代文：石闵知道胡人不会为自己所用，便又在宫廷内外颁布命令： 凡是斩掉一个胡人的脑袋并送到凤阳门的汉人，文官晋升官位三等，武官全都升为牙门将。 
English: Shi Yan knew that Hu Man would not be used for his own purposes, so he issued an order both inside and outside the court: Any Han Chinese who cut off the head of a Hu Man and sent it to Fengyang Gate would be promoted to the third rank of civil officer, and all military officers would be promoted to the position of tooth keeper.

古文：一日之中，斩首数万。
现代文：命令发布后，一天之中，被斩首的胡人多达数万。
English: After the order was issued, tens of thousands of Hu people were beheaded in a single day.

古文：闵亲帅赵人以诛胡、羯，无贵贱、男女、少长皆斩之，死者二十馀万，尸诸城外，悉为野犬豺狼所食。
现代文：石闵亲自率领汉人诛杀胡人、羯人，不论贵贱、男女、老幼，全都斩首，被杀掉的人有二十多万，尸体堆在城外，全让野狗豺狼吃掉了。
English: Shi Yan personally led the Han people to fight and kill the Hu people and the Qiang people, regardless of whether they were high or low, men or women, old or young, they were all beheaded. More than two hundred thousand people were killed, and the bodies were piled up outside the city, all of which were eaten by wild dogs and wolves.

古文：其屯戍四方者，闵皆以书命赵人为将帅者诛之，或高鼻多须滥死者半。
现代文：对于屯戍边疆的胡人、羯人，石闵以书信下达命令，让军队中汉人当将帅的把属下胡人、羯人统统杀掉。
English: For the Hu people and the Yao people in the border areas, Shijiazhuang issued an order in a letter, asking the Han general in the army to kill all the subordinate Hu people and Yao people.

古文：燕王俊遣使至凉州，约张重华共击赵。
现代文：以至于长得鼻子高一点、胡须多一点的人，大半都被滥杀而死。前燕王慕容俊派遣使者到凉州，与张重华相约共同攻打后赵。
English: So much so that the majority of people with a slightly higher nose and more whiskers were killed indiscriminately. Former Yan King Murongjun sent an envoy to Liangzhou to make an appointment with Zhang Chonghua to jointly attack Hou Zhao.

古文：高句丽王钊送前东夷护军宋晃于燕，燕王俊赦之，更名曰活，拜为中尉。
现代文：高句丽王钊遣送以前的东夷护军宋晃到达前燕国，前燕王慕容俊赦免了他，将其名改为宋活，授官中尉。
English: Goguryeo's King Goguryeo dispatched the former Dongyi Protector Song Huan to the former Yan Kingdom. The former Yan King Murong Jun pardoned him and changed his name to Song Huan and promoted him to lieutenant.

古文：孝宗穆皇帝上之下永和六年
现代文：永和六年
English: Six years of peace

古文：春，正月，赵大将军闵欲灭去石氏之迹，托以谶文有 继赵李 ，更国号曰卫，易姓李氏，大赦，改元青龙。
现代文：春季，正月，后赵大将军石闵想消除石氏的痕迹，以谶文中有 继赵李 的字样为托辞，便更改国号叫卫，改姓李氏，实行大赦，改年号为青龙。
English: In the spring, the first month of the year, after the death of Zhao, General Shi Yan wanted to erase the traces of the Shi clan, and with the excuse of "following Zhao Li," he changed the country name to Wei, changed the surname to Li, implemented an amnesty, and changed the year name to Qinglong.

古文：太宰赵庶、太尉张举、中军将军张春、光禄大夫石岳、抚军石宁、武卫将军张季及公侯、卿、校、龙腾等万馀人，出奔襄国，汝阴王琨奔冀州。
现代文：太宰赵庶、太尉张举、中军将军张春、光禄大夫石岳、抚军石宁、武卫将军张季，以及公侯、卿、校、龙腾卫士等一万多人，全都投奔襄国。汝阴王石琨投奔冀州。
English: Dazai Zhao Shiao, Taijun Zhang Jiu, the general of the Chinese army Zhang Chun, the doctor of Guanglu Shi Yue, the general of the Chinese army Shi Ning, the general of the Chinese army Wu Wei Zhang Ji, as well as more than ten thousand people such as princes, lords, schoolmasters, and defenders of Longteng, all went to Xiangguo. Ruyin Wang Shihong went to Jizhou.

古文：抚军将军张沈据滏口，张贺度据石渎，建义将军段勤据黎阳，宁南将军杨群据桑壁，刘国据阳城，段龛据陈留，姚弋仲据滠头，蒲洪据枋头，众各数万，皆不附于闵。
现代文：抚军将军张沈占据着滏口，张贺度占据着石渎，建义将军段勤占据着黎阳，宁南将军杨群占据着桑壁，刘国占据着阳城，段龛占据着陈留，姚弋仲占据着滠头，蒲洪占据着枋头，各有兵众数万，全都不归附石闵。
English: Zhang Shen, the general of the Fuzhun army, occupied Hukou, Zhang Heidu occupied Shifang, Jianyi general Duan Qin occupied Liyang, Ningnan general Yang Qun occupied Sanbi, Liu Guo occupied Yangcheng, Duan Jie occupied Chenliu, Yao Yizhong occupied Shantou, and Pu Hong occupied Shantou, each with tens of thousands of soldiers, all of which did not belong to Shifang.

古文：勤，末柸之子；龛，兰之子也。
现代文：段勤是段末的儿子；段龛是段兰的儿子。
English: Duan Qin is the son of Duan Ma; Duan Yu is the son of Duan Lan.

古文：王朗、麻秋自长安赴洛阳。
现代文：王朗、麻秋从长安奔赴洛阳。
English: Wang Lang and Ma Qiu rushed from Chang'an to Luoyang.

古文：秋承闵书，诛朗部胡千馀人。
现代文：麻秋按照石闵书信中的命令，杀掉了王朗部队中的数千名胡人。
English: In accordance with the order in Shi Yan's letter, Ma Qiu killed thousands of Hu people in Wang Lang's army.

古文：朗奔襄国。
现代文：王朗投奔襄国。
English: Wang Lang fled to Xiangyang.

古文：秋帅众归鄴，蒲洪使其子龙骧将军雄迎击，获之，以为军师将军。
现代文：麻秋率领兵众要返回邺城，蒲洪派他的儿子龙骧将军蒲雄迎头攻击，俘获了麻秋，任命他为军师将军。
English: As Ma Qiu led the troops to return to Lushan, Pu Hong sent his son, the dragon general Pu Xiong, to attack head-on. He captured Ma Qiu and appointed him general of the division.

古文：汝阴王琨及张举、王朗帅众七万伐鄴，大将军闵帅骑千馀与战于城北；闵操两刃矛，驰骑击之，所向摧陷，斩首三千级，琨等大败而去。
现代文：汝阴王石琨以及张举、王朗率领七万兵众攻打邺城，大将军石闵率领千余骑兵和他们在城北交战。石闵手持双刃矛，策马攻击，所向披靡，斩首三千级，石琨等大败而逃。
English: Ruyin King Shizhao, Zhangzhu and Wanglang led 70,000 soldiers to attack Shicheng, and General Shizhao led more than 1,000 cavalry to fight with them in the north of the city. Shizhao held a double-edged spear and attacked with a horse. He was invincible, decapitated three thousand levels, and Shizhao and others fled in defeat.

古文：闵与李农帅骑三万讨张贺度于石渎。
现代文：石闵与李农率领三万骑兵在石渎讨伐张贺度。
English: Shi Hao and Li Nong led 30,000 cavalry to fight Zhang He Du in Shigou.

古文：闰月，卫主鉴密遣宦者赍书召张沈等，使乘虚袭鄴。
现代文：闰二月，卫国主石鉴秘密派遣宦官给张沈等人送去书信，让他们乘石闵率兵外出后方空虚前来袭击邺城。
English: In leap February, the patron of the country, Shi Jian, secretly sent eunuchs to send letters to Zhang Shen and others, so that they could go out to the rear with soldiers led by Shi Jian to attack the city.

古文：宦者以告闵、农，闵、农驰还，废鉴，杀之，并杀赵主虎三十八孙，尽灭石氏，姚弋仲子曜武将军益、武卫将军若帅禁兵数千斩关奔滠头。
现代文：送信的宦官却把消息告诉了石闵、李农。石闵、李农急忙返回，废黜石鉴，并把他杀掉，一起被杀的还有后赵国主石虎的二十八个孙子，石氏家族的人全被消灭。姚弋仲的儿子曜武将军姚益、武卫将军姚若率领宫廷卫兵数千人冲破关卡，投奔滠头。
English: However, the eunuch who sent the message told Shi Yan and Li Nong. Shi Yan and Li Nong hurriedly returned, dethroned Shi Jian and killed him. The twenty-eight grandchildren of Shi Hu, the ruler of Zhao, were also killed. All members of the Shi family were exterminated. Yao Yizhong's son, General Yowu Yao Yi, and General Wu Wei Yao Ruo led thousands of palace guards to break through the barrier and rush to Shantou.

古文：弋仲帅众讨闵，军于混轿。
现代文：姚弋仲率领兵众讨伐石闵，驻扎在混桥。
English: Yao Yizhong led the soldiers to fight against the stone piers and stationed at the mixed bridge.

古文：司徒申钟等上尊号于闵，闵以让李农，农固辞。
现代文：司徒申钟等人向石闵进献尊号，石闵要谦让给李农，李农执意推辞，不肯接受。
English: Szeto Shenzhong and others made a tribute to Shi Hao. Shi Hao had to make a modest concession to Li Nong. Li Nong stubbornly refused to accept the offer.

古文：闵曰： 吾属故晋人也，今晋室犹存，请与诸君分割州郡，各称牧、守、公、侯，奉表迎晋天子还都洛阳，何如？ 
现代文：石闵说： 我们原是晋朝的人士，如今晋皇室尚在，我希望和诸君一起分割州郡而治，各自称为牧、守、公、侯，然后上表迎接晋朝天子返回故都洛阳。 
English: Shi Hao said: We were originally people of the Jin Dynasty, but now the Jin royal family is still alive. I hope to work with you to divide the state into counties and governors, each of whom will be called the herdsman, the governor, the prince, and the prince, and then go to the table to welcome the son of heaven of the Jin Dynasty to return to the former capital Luoyang.

古文：尚书胡睦进曰： 陛下圣德应天，宜登在位，晋氏衰微，远窜江表，岂能总驭英雄，混壹四海乎！ 
现代文：尚书胡睦进言说： 陛下的圣德顺应天意，理应登上天子之位。如今晋氏衰败，远逃江南，怎么能驾驭各路英雄，统一四海江山呢！ 
English: Shangshu Hummut said, "Your Majesty's virtue is in accordance with the will of Heaven, and you should ascend to the throne of the Son of Heaven. Now that the Jin Dynasty is in decline and has fled to the south of the Yangtze River, how can you control heroes from all walks of life and unify the four seas and mountains?"

古文：闵曰： 胡尚书之言，可谓识机知命矣。 
现代文：石闵说： 胡尚书之言，真可谓识时务知天命啊。 
English: Shi Yao said: The words of Hu Shangshu are truly the words of knowing the time and knowing the destiny.

古文：乃即皇帝位，大赦，改元永兴，国号大魏。
现代文：于是石闵便即皇帝位，实行大赦，改年号为永兴，立国号为大魏。
English: As a result, Shih Kui became emperor, amnesty was implemented, the year name was changed to Yongxing, and the founding year was changed to Wei.

古文：朝廷闻中原大乱，复谋进取。
现代文：东晋朝廷听到中原大乱的消息，再次谋划进取收复。
English: The Eastern Jin Dynasty court heard the news of the Central Plains Revolt and once again planned to take the initiative to recover.

古文：己丑，以扬州刺史殷浩为中军将军、假节、都督扬、豫、徐、兗、青五州诸军事，以蒲洪为氐王、使持节、征北大将军、都督河北诸军事、冀州剌史、广川郡公；蒲健为假节、右将军、监河北征讨前锋诸军事、襄国公。
现代文：己丑，任命扬州刺史殷浩为中军将军、假节和都督扬、豫、徐、兖、青五州诸军事。任命蒲洪为氐王、使持节、征北大将军、都督黄河以北诸军事、冀州刺史、广川郡公。任命蒲健为假节、右将军、监黄河以北征讨前锋诸军事、襄国公。
English: Ji Jiu appointed the Yangzhou general Yin Hao as the general of the Chinese army and the military governor of the five states of Yang, Yu, Xu, Zhou and Qing as the false festival and the military governor of the five states of Yang, Yu, Xu, Zhou and Qing. He appointed Pu Hong as the king of Zhou, the envoy of the festival, the general of the Northern Expedition, the military governor of the north of the Yellow River, the Jizhou general of the festival and the Guangchuan County governor. He appointed Pu Jian as the false festival, the right general, the military governor of the northern expedition of the Yellow River and the Xiangguo governor.

古文：姚弋仲、蒲洪各有据关右之志。
现代文：姚弋仲、蒲洪都怀有占据关右的志向。
English: Yao Yizhong and Pu Hong both have the ambition to occupy the right side of the pass.

古文：弋仲遣其子襄帅众五万击洪，洪迎击，破之，斩获三万馀级。
现代文：姚弋仲派他的儿子姚襄率领五万兵众攻击蒲洪，蒲洪迎头反击，打败了姚襄，斩杀三万多人。
English: Yao Yizhong sent his son Yao Xiang to lead fifty thousand soldiers to attack Pu Hong. Pu Hong counterattacked head-on, defeated Yao Xiang and killed more than thirty thousand people.

古文：洪自称大都督、大将军、大单于、三秦王，改姓苻氏。
现代文：蒲洪自称为大都督、大将军、大单于、三秦王，改姓为苻。
English: Puhong called himself the great governor, the great general, the great single yu, the three Qin kings, and changed his surname to Yu.

古文：以南安雷弱儿为辅国将军；安定梁椤为前将军，领左长史；冯翊鱼遵为右将军，领右长史；京兆段陵为左将军，领左司马；王堕为右将军，领右司马；天水赵俱、陇西牛夷、北地辛牢皆为从事中郎；氐酋毛贵为单于辅相。
现代文：任命南安人雷弱儿为辅国将军，安定人梁楞为前将军，并兼任左长史。任命冯翊人鱼遵为后将军，并兼任右长史。任命京兆人段陵为左将军，并兼任左司马，王堕为右将军，兼任右司马。天水人赵俱、陇西人牛夷、北地人辛牢全都被任命为从事中郎，氐族酋长毛贵则被任命为单于辅相。
English: Nan'an's Lei Weak'er was appointed assistant general, Anning's Liang Qiao was appointed former general and concurrently served as left chief historian, Feng Qian's Renru Zun was appointed future general and concurrently served as right chief historian, Jing Zhao's Duan Ling was appointed left general and concurrently served as left secretary, Wang Kui was appointed right general and concurrently served as right secretary, Tianshui's Zhaogu, Shaanxi's Niuyi, and Hokkien's Xin Gou were all appointed to serve as middlemen, and the chief of the Yao people, Mao Gui, was appointed to serve as assistant

古文：二月，燕王俊使慕容霸将兵二万自东道出徒河，慕舆于自西道出蠮螉塞，俊自中道出卢龙塞，以伐赵。
现代文：二月，前燕王慕容俊派慕容霸统率兵卒二万人由东路出徒河，慕舆于由西路出塞，慕容俊自己则由中路出卢龙塞，前去讨伐赵。
English: In February, the former King of Yan, Murong Jun, sent Murong Hegemony to lead 20,000 soldiers out of Tuhe by the east road, Murong Jun himself by the west road, and Murong Jun himself by the middle road out of Lulongse to fight against Zhao.

古文：以慕容恪、鲜于亮为前驱，命慕舆泥槎山通道。
现代文：他以慕容恪、鲜于亮为前锋，命令慕舆开通山路。
English: With Murong Ke and Sheng Yu Liang as the forwards, he ordered Murong Ke to open the mountain road.

古文：留世子晔守龙城，以内史刘斌为大司农，与典书令皇甫真留统后事。
现代文：留下世子慕容晔镇守龙城，任命内史刘斌为大司农，和典书令皇甫真一起留下统管后方事务。
English: He left his heir, Murong Xizhen, to guard Longcheng, and appointed Liu Bin, the Inner Historian, as the Grand Secretary of Agriculture. He also left Emperor Fuzhen, the Chief of the General Staff, to supervise the rear affairs.

古文：霸军至三陉，赵征东将军邓恒惶怖，焚仓库，弃安乐遁去，与幽州刺史王午共保蓟。
现代文：慕容霸的军队抵达三陉，后赵国征东将军邓恒惊慌恐怖，焚烧了储备粮饷武器的仓库后，弃安乐城逃走，去和幽州刺史王午一起保卫蓟城。
English: After Murongba's army arrived in Sanlu, Deng Heng, the general of Zhao's Eastern Expedition, panicked and panicked. After burning the storehouse of reserve grain and weapons, he abandoned Anle City and fled, and went to defend Yancheng with Yuzhou scribe Wang Bao.

古文：徙河南部都尉孙泳急入安乐，扑灭馀火，籍其谷帛。
现代文：徒河南部都尉孙泳迅速开进安乐城，扑灭余火，没收了粮食、布匹。
English: In the southern part of Tuhe, Captain Sun Yong quickly drove into Anle City, extinguished the residual fire, and confiscated the grain and cloth.

古文：霸收安乐、北平兵粮，与俊会临渠。
现代文：慕容霸收取了安乐、北平的武器粮饷后，与慕容俊会师于临渠。
English: After Murongba received weapons and provisions from Anle and Peiping, he met with Murongjun in Linqu.

古文：三月，燕兵至无终。王午留其将王佗以数千人守蓟，与邓恒走保鲁口。
现代文：三月，前燕国的军队抵达无终，王午留下部将王佗带领数千人守卫蓟城，自己与邓恒一起前去保卫鲁口。
English: In March, when the troops of the former Yan Kingdom arrived in Wujiang, Wang Huan led thousands of people to guard Yancheng, and he and Deng Heng went to defend Lukou.

古文：乙巳，俊拔蓟，执王佗，斩之。
现代文：乙巳，慕容俊攻下了蓟城，抓到王佗把他杀掉。
English: Soon after, Murongjun captured Lucheng, caught Wang Yao and killed him.

古文：俊欲悉坑其士卒千馀人，慕容霸谏曰： 赵为暴虐，王兴师伐之，将以拯民于涂炭而抚有中州也；今始得蓟而坑其士卒，恐不可以为王师之先声也。 
现代文：慕容俊还想把王佗手下的一千多士兵全部活埋，慕容霸劝道： 赵国施行暴虐，大王您才兴师讨伐，目的是想把百姓从水深火热之中拯救出来，进而安抚占据整个中原地区。如今刚刚攻下蓟城，就要坑杀赵国的士兵，恐怕不能以此作为国王军队的先声。 
English: Murong Jun also wanted to bury all the more than one thousand soldiers under Wang Yao alive. Murong Ba advised: The state of Zhao has been tyrannical, and you, the great king, have just launched a crusade. The purpose is to save the people from the heat of the moment, and then pacify the entire Central Plains region. Now that you have just captured Lucheng, you are going to kill the soldiers of the state of Zhao. I'm afraid you can't use this as a prelude to the king's army.

古文：乃释之。俊入都于蓟，中州士女降者相继。
现代文：慕容俊于是释放了这些兵士，把都城定在蓟城，中原地区的士人百姓相继来归降。
English: Murongjun then released these soldiers and set the capital in Lucheng, and the officials and people in the Central Plains region surrendered one after another.

古文：燕兵至范阳，范阳太守李产欲为石氏拒燕，众莫为用，乃帅八城令长出降；俊复以产为太守。
现代文：前燕国的军队抵达范阳，范阳太守李产想替石氏抵抗后燕军，但手下的兵众却拒不听命上阵，李产只好率领所辖八县的县令出来投降。慕容俊又任命李产为太守。
English: The army of the former Yan Kingdom arrived in Fanyang. Fanyang's grand marshal, Li Zan, wanted to resist the Yan army on behalf of the Shi clan, but the soldiers under his command refused to go to battle. Li Zan had to lead the county magistrates of the eight counties under his jurisdiction to surrender. Murong Jun also appointed Li Zan as grand marshal.

古文：产子绩为幽州别驾，弃其家从王午在鲁口。
现代文：李产的儿子李绩任幽州别驾，他远离家乡跟随王午守卫鲁口。
English: Li Jizhen, the son of Li Zhanzhong, stayed away from Yuzhou. He followed Wang Wu to guard Lukou far away from his hometown.

古文：邓恒谓午曰： 绩乡里在北，父已降燕，今虽在此，恐终难相保，徒为人累，不如去之。 
现代文：邓恒对王午说： 李绩的家乡在鲁口之北，他的父亲已经投降了前燕国，眼下他虽然身在此地，但恐怕最终也难与我们相互保全，徒然成为我们的忧患。不如趁早把他灭掉。 
English: Deng Heng said to Wang Wu: Li Bi's hometown is in the north of Lukou, his father has already surrendered to the former Yan Kingdom. Although he is here at the moment, I am afraid that it will eventually be difficult for us to protect each other, and he will become our sorrow in vain. It is better to eliminate him as soon as possible.

古文：午曰： 此何言也！
现代文：王午说： 这叫什么话呢？
English: Wang Wu said: What is this saying?

古文：夫以当今丧乱，而绩乃能立义捐家，情节之重，虽古烈士无以过，乃欲以猜嫌害之？
现代文：面对当今这样的丧乱局势，李绩仍然能够坚持大义，置家园于不顾，这种高尚的情操，即使是古代的刚烈之士也难以超越，而你却想以毫无根据的猜忌谋害他。
English: In the face of today's tragic situation, Li Jie is still able to uphold the great cause and disregard the homeland. This noble sentiment is difficult to surpass even by the ancient heroes, but you want to murder him with groundless suspicion.

古文：燕、赵之士闻之，谓我直相聚为贼，了无意识。
现代文：如果让燕、赵的将士们知道后，只能说我们不过是一帮乌合之众，毫无见识。
English: If we let Yan and Zhao's soldiers know, we can only say that we are just a bunch of rabble, with no insight.

古文：众情一散，不可复集，此为坐自屠溃也。 
现代文：大家的心情一离散，就再也难以凝聚了，这是坐以自毙。 
English: Once everyone's mood is dispersed, it will no longer be possible to bring everyone together. This is self-defeating.

古文：恒乃止。
现代文：邓恒放弃了杀害李绩的念头。
English: Deng Heng gave up the idea of killing Li Bi.

古文：午犹虑诸将不与己同心，或致非意，乃遣绩归。
现代文：王午仍然担心手下的将领们持有异见，或许会违背自己的意愿而擅自杀害李绩，于是就打发李绩返回家乡。
English: Wang Wu was still worried that the generals under his command held dissenting views and might kill Li Zizhi against his will, so he sent Li Zizhi back to his hometown.

古文：绩始辞午往见燕王俊，俊让之曰： 卿不识天命，弃父邀名，今日乃始来邪！ 
现代文：李绩辞别了王午就去拜见前燕王慕容俊，慕容俊责备他说： 你不识天命，背弃了父亲而去沽名钓誉，直到今天才迷途知返呀！ 
English: After Li Jie said goodbye to Wang Wu, he went to visit the former Yan Wang, Mu Rongjun. Mu Rongjun scolded him and said, "You don't know the fate of heaven. You abandoned your father to chase fame. Only today have you found your way back!"

古文：对曰： 臣眷恋旧主，志存微节，官身所在，何事非君！
现代文：李绩回答说： 我一直眷恋旧主，心存小小的气节，但我的身子是官家的，什么事不由君主做主呢！
English: Li Bin replied, "I have always been attached to the old lord, and I have a little bit of pride in my heart, but my body is that of an official, and what matters are not decided by the monarch?"

古文：殿下方以义取天下，臣未谓得见之晚也。 
现代文：如今正是殿下以道义夺取天下的时候，我不认为投奔您为时已晚。 
English: Now is the time for Your Highness to take the moral high ground, and I don't think it's too late for me to join you.

古文：俊悦，善待之。
现代文：慕容俊听后很高兴，便很好地对待他。
English: Murong Jun was very happy to hear this and treated him well.

古文：俊以弟宜为代郡城郎，孙泳为广宁太守，悉置幽州郡县守宰。
现代文：慕容俊任命弟弟慕容宜为代郡城郎，孙泳为广宁太守，并且全部安置了幽州郡县的地方官。
English: Murongjun appointed his younger brother Murongyi as the deputy county castellan, Sun Yong as the governor of Guangning, and all the local officials of Yuzhou County.

古文：甲子，俊使中部俟釐慕舆句督蓟中留事，自将击邓恒于鲁口。
现代文：甲子，慕容俊派中部俟厘慕舆句监督蓟城中的留守事务，自己将率兵前往鲁口攻打邓恒。
English: At the same time, Murong Jun sent his central general, Muri Li, to supervise the affairs left behind in Shicheng, and he himself led his troops to attack Deng Heng in Lukou.

古文：军至清梁，恒将鹿勃早将数千人夜袭燕营，半已得入，先犯前锋都督慕容霸，突入幕下，霸起奋击，手杀十馀人，早不能进。
现代文：部队行进到清梁时，邓恒的将领鹿勃早统领数千人乘夜偷袭前燕军的营地，当半数士兵潜入营地后，先去捉拿前锋都督慕容霸。士兵们突然冲进慕容霸的军帐中，慕容霸起而反击，亲手杀死了十多人。
English: When the troops marched to Qingliang, Deng Heng's general Lu Buyao led thousands of people to raid the camp of the former Yan army at night. When half of the soldiers sneaked into the camp, they first went to capture the forward Tudou Murongba. The soldiers suddenly rushed into Murongba's military account, Murong fought back and killed more than ten people with his own hands.

古文：由是燕军得严，俊谓慕舆根曰： 贼锋甚锐，宜且避之。 
现代文：鹿勃早无法继续进击，前燕军因此得以严加戒备。慕容俊对慕舆根说： 敌人的先锋部队很精锐，应该暂且躲避一下。 
English: Deerskin was unable to continue the attack early, so the front of Yan's army was on high alert. Murongjun said to Muronggen: The enemy's vanguard troops are very elite, you should temporarily avoid them.

古文：根正色曰： 我众彼寡，力不相敌，故乘夜来战，冀万一获利。
现代文：慕舆根严肃地说： 我众敌寡，力量悬殊，所以他们才乘夜偷袭，寄希望于万一取胜。
English: Mu Yugen said gravely: My enemies are few and far between, so they used the night to make a surprise attack, hoping to win by any chance.

古文：今求贼得贼，正当击之，复何所疑！
现代文：如今正想消灭他们，他们却送上门来，理当给以打击，还有什么可迟疑的！
English: Now they are trying to destroy them, but they are sending them to the door, they should be given a blow, what is there to hesitate!

古文：王但安卧，臣等自为王破之！ 
现代文：大王您只管安睡，我等自己去为您消灭他们！ 
English: Great King, you just sleep peacefully, I will wait for myself to destroy them for you!

古文：俊不能自安，内史李洪从俊出营外，屯高冢上。
现代文：慕容俊当然无法自己安睡，内史李洪跟随他走出营外，在一个高土堆上停了下来。
English: Of course, Murongjun couldn't sleep peacefully by himself. Li Hong followed him out of the camp and stopped on a high mound.

古文：根帅左右精勇数百人从中牙直前击早，李洪徐整骑队还助之，早乃退走。
现代文：慕舆根率领左右精悍勇敢的士兵数百人从中牙军帐出发，一往直前，攻打鹿勃早，稍后，李洪也返回去整理好骑兵队伍前往助战，鹿勃早败退逃走。
English: Mu Myugen led several hundred brave soldiers from the Zhongya army to attack Degu Bai early. Later, Li Hong also returned to organize a cavalry team to assist in the battle. Degu Bai was defeated early and fled.

古文：众军追击四十馀里，早仅以身免，所从士卒死亡略尽。
现代文：众士兵穷追猛打四十多里，鹿勃早仅仅得以逃生，其他随从士卒死亡殆尽。
English: The soldiers chased him for more than forty miles, Deerslayer only managed to escape, the other soldiers died.

古文：俊引兵还蓟。
现代文：慕容俊带领士兵返回蓟城。
English: Murongjun led the soldiers back to Lucheng.

古文：魏主闵复姓冉氏，尊母王氏为皇太后，立妻董氏为皇后，子智为皇太子，胤、明裕皆为王。
现代文：魏国主石闵恢复冉姓，尊奉母亲王氏为皇太后，立妻子董氏为皇后，立儿子冉智为皇太子，冉胤、冉明、冉裕三个儿子全都被封为王。
English: Shi Yan, the ruler of Wei, restored the surname Ran, honored his mother Wang as empress dowager, his wife Dong as empress, and his son Ran Zhi as crown prince. His three sons, Ran Yin, Ran Ming, and Ran Yu, were all crowned as kings.

古文：以李农为太宰、领太尉、录尚书事，封齐王，其子皆封县公。
现代文：任命李农为太宰、兼太尉、录尚书事，并封为齐王，李农的儿子们全都被封为县公。
English: He appointed Li Nong as Dazai, concurrently as Taifu, recorded his records, and was given the title of Qi Wang. Li Nong's sons were all given the title of county magistrate.

古文：遣使者持节赦诸军屯，皆不从。
现代文：冉闵派遣使者带着作为凭证的符节向驻扎在各地的将领通报任命，他们都不服从。
English: Ran Ran sent an envoy to inform the generals stationed in various places of the appointment with the symbols as evidence, but they did not obey.

古文：麻秋说苻洪曰： 冉闵、石祗方相持，中原之乱未可平也。
现代文：麻秋劝苻洪说： 冉闵、石祗正在相持对峙，中原之乱难以平定。
English: Ma Qiu advised Zou Hong that: Ran Zou and Shi Zou are in confrontation with each other, and the Central Plains Rebellion is difficult to quell.

古文：不如先取关中，基业已固，然后东争天下，谁能敌之！ 
现代文：您不如先攻取关中，等到大业的根基稳固以后，再东进争夺天下，到那时谁敢与您为敌。 
English: It is better for you to conquer Guanzhong first, wait until the foundation of the great cause is solid, and then go east to compete for the world. By then, who will dare to be your enemy.

古文：洪深然之。
现代文：苻洪深以为然。
English: Hao Hongxin disagreed.

古文：既而秋因宴鸩洪，欲并其众；世子健收秋斩之。
现代文：此后不久，麻秋利用宴请的机会让苻洪喝下了有毒药的酒，想要吞并苻洪的兵众。太子苻健捉拿了麻秋，并把他杀掉。
English: Shortly thereafter, Maqiu used the opportunity of a banquet to get Shihong to drink poisoned wine in an attempt to swallow up Shihong's soldiers. Prince He Jian captured Maqiu and killed him.

古文：洪谓健曰： 吾所以未入关者，以为中州可定；今不幸为竖子所困。
现代文：苻洪对苻健说： 我以前之所以没有入关的原因，是以为中州可以安定。如今我不幸被麻秋这小子困在这里。
English: Hao Hong said to Hao Jian: The reason why I did not enter the customs before was that I thought that Zhongzhou could be stable. Now I am unfortunately trapped here by Ma Qiu.

古文：中州非汝兄弟所能办，我死，汝急入关！ 
现代文：平定中州不是你们兄弟所能办到的事情，我死了，你要迅速入关！ 
English: To pacify Chuzhou is not something your brothers can do. I'm dead, you have to get in quickly!

古文：言终而卒。
现代文：说完这话，苻洪便死了。
English: And then he died.

古文：健代统其众，乃去大都督、大将军、三秦王之号，称晋官爵，遣其叔父安来告丧，且请朝命。
现代文：苻健代替父亲统领兵众，因此也就除去了大都督、大将军、三秦王的称号，改称晋朝的官职爵位。派他的叔父苻安前往东晋朝廷报告丧讯，并且请求朝廷的旨意。
English: He removed the titles of Grand Governor, General, and Three Kings, and renamed them the official ranks and titles of the Jin Dynasty. He sent his uncle Yan'an to the East Jin Dynasty to report the news of the death and to request the will of the court.

古文：赵新兴王祗即皇帝位于襄国，改元永守。
现代文：后赵国新兴王石祗在襄国即皇帝位，改年号为永宁。
English: Later, the new king of Zhao, Shijie, became the emperor of Xiang, and changed his name to Yongning.

古文：以汝阴王琨为相国，六夷据州郡拥兵者皆应之。
现代文：任命汝阴王石琨为相国，占据州郡的六夷将领们全都响应他。
English: He appointed Ruyin King Shisheng as his ally, and the six Yi generals who occupied the prefectures all responded to him.

古文：祗以姚弋仲为右丞相、亲赵王，待以殊礼。
现代文：石祗任命姚弋仲为右丞相、亲赵王，以特殊的礼遇对待他。
English: Shi Yan appointed Yao Jizhong as the Minister of the Right, Prince Zhao Wang, and treated him with special courtesy.

古文：弋仲子襄，雄勇多才略，士民爱之，请弋仲以为嗣，弋仲以襄非长子，不许；请者日以千数，弋仲乃使之将兵。
现代文：姚弋仲的儿子姚襄，英勇过人，多才多谋，士人百姓大都喜爱他，就请求姚戈仲以他作为继承人。姚弋仲以姚襄不是长子为由，没有同意，但继续前来请求的人日以千计，姚弋仲于是就让他统领军队。
English: Yao Jizhong's son, Yao Xiang, was very brave and resourceful. Most of the scholars and common people loved him, so he asked Yao Guozhong to make him his successor. Yao Jizhong did not agree on the grounds that Yao Jizhong was not the eldest son, but the number of people who continued to come to ask was in the thousands. Yao Jizhong then let him command the army.

古文：祗以襄为骠骑将军、豫州刺史、新昌公。
现代文：石祗任命姚襄为骠骑将军、豫州刺史、新昌公。
English: Shijiazhuang appointed Yao Xiang as the general of the cavalry, the governor of Yuzhou and the governor of Xinchang.

古文：又以苻健为都督河南诸军事、镇南大将军、开府仪同三司，兗州牧、略阳郡公。
现代文：又任命苻健为都督河南诸军事、镇南大将军、开府仪同三司、兖州牧、略阳郡公。
English: He also appointed Gong Jian as the military governor of Henan Province, the general of Zhenan Province, the third secretary of Kaifu County, the governor of Bozhou County and the governor of Liaoyang County.

古文：夏，四月，赵主祗遣汝阴王琨将兵十万伐魏。
现代文：夏季，四月，后赵国主石祗派汝阴王石琨统领，十万士兵讨伐魏国。
English: In the summer, in April, after the Zhao sovereign Shi Yan sent the Ruyin king Shi Yan to lead, a hundred thousand soldiers fought against Wei.

古文：魏主闵杀李农及其三子，并尚书令王谟、侍中王衍、中常待严震、赵升。
现代文：魏国主冉闵杀掉了李农及他的三个儿子，一起被杀的还有尚书令王谟、侍中王衍、中常侍严震、赵。
English: The ruler of Wei, Ran Xuan, killed Li Nong and his three sons. Also killed were Shang Shuling Wang Moo, Wang Yan, Yan Zhen, and Zhao.

古文：闵遣使临江告晋曰： 逆胡乱中原，今已诛之；能共讨者，可遣军来也 。
现代文：冉闵派遣使者前往长江畔向东晋朝廷报告说： 叛逆胡人使中原大乱，如今已经诛杀了他们。如果能共同讨伐乱军的话，可以派遣部队来。 
English: Ran sent an envoy to the banks of the Yangtze River to report to the East Jin court: The rebellious Hu people caused the Central Plains Great Turmoil, and now they have been killed. If we can fight the rebels together, we can send troops.

古文：朝廷不应。
现代文：东晋朝廷不作回应。
English: The Eastern Jin Dynasty court did not respond.

古文：五月，庐江太守袁真攻魏合肥，克之，虏其居民而还。
现代文：五月，庐江太守袁真攻克魏国的合肥，掳劫那里的民众返回。
English: In May, the governor of the Li River, Yuan Zhen, conquered Hefei in Wei, and the people who had been kidnapped there returned.

古文：六月，赵汝阴王琨进据邯郸，镇南将军刘国自繁阳会之。
现代文：六月，后赵国汝阴王石琨进攻占据邯郸，镇南将军刘国从繁阳来与他会师。
English: In June, after Zhao Guo Ru Yin Wang Shijiazhuang attacked and occupied Shijiazhuang, Zhenan General Liu Guo came from Shangyang to join his division.

古文：魏卫将军王泰击琨，大破之，死者万馀人。
现代文：魏国卫将军王泰攻击石琨，把石琨打得大败，死亡的将士达一万多人。
English: Wang Tai, a Wei general, attacked Shijiazhuang and defeated it so badly that more than ten thousand soldiers died.

古文：刘国还繁阳。
现代文：刘国只好返回了繁阳。
English: Liu Guo had no choice but to return to the sun.

古文：初，段兰卒于令支，段龛代领其众，因石氏之乱，拥部落南徙。
现代文：当初，段兰死于令支，段龛代替他率领兵众，乘着石氏大乱的机会，率领着部落南迁。
English: At first, Duan Lan was killed by the Lingshi, and Duan Yao led the troops in his place, and took the opportunity of the Shi Rebellion to lead the tribe to move south.

古文：秋，七月，龛引兵东据广固，自称齐王。
现代文：秋季，七月，段龛带领士兵东进，占据了广固，自称齐王。
English: In the autumn, in July, Duan Yu led the soldiers eastward, occupied Guanggu, and called himself the King of Qi.

古文：八月，代郡人赵榼帅三百馀家叛燕，归赵并州刺史张平。
现代文：八月，代郡人赵率领三百多家的兵众背叛前燕国而归附后赵国的并州刺史张平。
English: In August, Zhao, the representative of the county, led more than three hundred soldiers to betray the former Yan country and annexed Zhang Ping, the annexation of Zhao country.

古文：燕王俊徙广宁、上谷二郡民于徐无，代郡民于凡城。
现代文：前燕王慕容俊将广宁、上谷二郡的百姓迁徙到徐无，将代郡的百姓迁徙到凡城。
English: Former Yan Wang Murongjun migrated the people of Guangning and Shanggu two counties to Xuwu, and migrated the people of Dai County to Fancheng.

古文：王朗之去长安也，朗司马京兆杜洪据长安，自称晋征北将军、雍州刺史，以冯翊张琚为司马；关西夷、夏皆应之。
现代文：王朗离开长安的时候，他的司马杜洪占据了这里，自称为晋朝的征北将军、雍州刺史，任命冯翊人张琚为司马，关西的夷人、汉人全都响应他。
English: When Wang Lang left Chang'an, his Sima Duhong occupied here. The self-proclaimed Northern Expeditionary General of the Jin Dynasty, Yongzhou Zhishi, appointed the Fenghuang man Zhang Qi as Sima, and all the Yi people and Han people in Kansai responded to him.

古文：苻健欲取之，恐洪知之，乃受赵官爵。
现代文：苻健想要夺取长安，又怕杜洪知道，就接受了后赵国授予的官职爵位。
English: Xing Jian wanted to seize Chang'an, but he was afraid that Du Hong would find out, so he accepted the official title and knighthood conferred by the State of Zhao.

古文：以赵俱为河内太守，戍温；牛夷为安集将军，戍怀；治宫室于枋头，课民种麦，示无西意，有知而不种者，健杀之以徇。
现代文：他任命赵俱为河内太守，戍卫温县；任命牛夷为安集将军。戍卫怀县；在枋头修建了宫室，督促百姓种上麦子，以表示没有西进的意图。如果有知道底细而不愿种麦的人，苻健便将其斩杀示众。
English: He appointed Zhaogu as the governor of Hanoi, He Weiwen County; appointed Niuyi as the general of Anji, He Weihuai County; built a palace in Shantou and urged the people to grow wheat to show that they had no intention of moving west. If there were people who knew the details and did not want to grow wheat, He Jian would kill them in public.

古文：既而自称晋征西大将军、都督关中诸军事、雍州刺史；以武威贾玄硕为左长史，洛阳梁安为长史，段纯为左司马，辛牢为右司马，京兆王鱼、安定程肱、胡文等为军咨祭酒，悉众而西。
现代文：此后苻健自称晋朝的征西大将军、都督关中诸军事、雍州刺史，任命武威人贾玄硕为左长史，洛阳人梁安为右长史，段纯为左司马，辛牢为右司马，京兆人王鱼、安定人程肱、胡文等为军谘祭酒，命令他们向西进发。
English: After that, He Jian, who claimed to be the general of the Western Conquest of the Jin Dynasty, the military of the Central Military Region and the military of Yongzhou, appointed Jia Xuanshuo from Wuwei as the left long history, Liang'an from Luoyang as the right long history, Duan Chun as the left Sima, Xin Jiao as the right Sima, and Wang Yu from Jing Zhao, Cheng Yu from An and Hu Wen as the military sacrificial liquor, and ordered them to go west.

古文：以鱼遵为前锋，行至盟津，为浮梁以济。
现代文：他以鱼遵为前锋，当行进到盟津时，架设浮桥渡过了黄河。
English: He took Fushun as his vanguard, and when he marched to Mengjin, he built a pontoon bridge to cross the Yellow River.

古文：遣弟辅国将军雄帅众五千自潼关入，兄子扬武将军菁帅众七千自轵关入。
现代文：派遣弟弟辅国将军苻雄率领五千兵众从潼关进入，派遣哥哥的儿子杨武将军苻菁率领七千兵众从轵关进入。
English: He dispatched his younger brother, General Fu Guo Xiong, to lead five thousand soldiers from Shaoguan, and dispatched his brother's son, General Yang Wu Zuo, to lead seven thousand soldiers from Shaoguan.

古文：临别，执菁手曰： 若事不捷，汝死河北，我死河南，不复相见。 
现代文：临别的时候，苻健拉着苻菁的手说： 如果事情不能成功，你死在黄河之北，我死在黄河以南，就不再见面了。 
English: At the time of parting, Zou Jian took the hand of Zou Jing and said: If things do not work out, you will die north of the Yellow River, and I will die south of the Yellow River, and we will no longer meet.

古文：既济，焚桥，自帅大众随雄而进。
现代文：渡过黄河以后，烧毁了浮桥，苻健亲自率领大批兵众跟随着苻雄前进。
English: After crossing the Yellow River, the pontoon bridge was burned, and Zou Jian personally led a large number of soldiers to advance with Zou Xiong.

古文：杜洪闻之，与健书，侮嫚之。
现代文：杜洪听到消息以后，给苻健写了一封信，对他表示轻蔑。
English: After hearing the news, Du Hong wrote a letter to Hao Jian, expressing contempt for him.

古文：以张琚弟先为征虏将军，帅众万三千逆战于潼关之北。
现代文：杜洪任命张琚的弟弟张先为征虏将军，率领兵众一万三千人在潼关以北迎战苻健。
English: Du Hong appointed Zhang Xuan's younger brother Zhang Xian as a conscript general, who led 13,000 soldiers north of Shaoguan to fight against Xian Jian.

古文：先兵大败，走还长安。
现代文：结果张先的兵众大败，逃回到长安。
English: As a result, Zhang Xian's soldiers were defeated and fled back to Chang'an.

古文：洪悉召关中之众以拒健。
现代文：杜洪征召了关中的全部兵众以抵抗苻健。
English: Du Hong conscripted all the soldiers in Guanzhong to resist Xing Jian.

古文：洪弟郁劝洪迎健，洪不从；郁帅所部降于健。
现代文：他的弟弟杜郁劝说他去迎接苻健，他没有听从。杜郁便率领他的部队投降苻健。
English: His younger brother Du Yu persuaded him to go to meet He Jian, but he did not listen. Du Yu then led his troops to surrender to He Jian.

古文：健遣苻雄徇渭北。
现代文：苻健派苻雄带兵巡行渭水以北地区。
English: Zou Jian sent Zou Xiong to lead troops on a parade in the area north of Surabaya.

古文：氐酋毛受屯高陵，徐磋屯好畤，羌酋白犊屯黄白，众各数万，皆斩洪使，遣子降于健。
现代文：当时，氐人首领毛受驻扎在高陵，徐磋驻扎地在，羌人首领白犊驻扎在黄白，各有兵众数万。他们全都杀死杜洪的使者，派儿子为代表去向苻健投降。
English: At that time, Mao Shou, the leader of the Xiongnu, was stationed in Gaoling, Xu Ren was stationed in Tongtu, and the leader of the Xiongnu, Paige, was stationed in Huangbai, each with tens of thousands of soldiers. They all killed Du Hong's envoy and sent their sons as representatives to surrender to Xiong Jian.

古文：苻菁、鱼遵所过城邑，无不降附。
现代文：苻菁、鱼遵所经过的城乡，也无不投降归附。
English: The towns and villages through which the reeds and fishes pass have all surrendered to the annexation.

古文：洪惧，固守长安。
现代文：杜洪十分害怕，固守长安。
English: Du Hong was very afraid and held fast to Chang'an.

古文：张贺度、段勤、刘国、靳豚会于昌城，将攻鄴。
现代文：张驾度、段勤、刘国、靳豚会师于昌城，准备进攻邺城。
English: Zhang Jidu, Duan Qin, Liu Guo, and the Warthog Association trained in Changcheng and prepared to attack Fucheng.

古文：魏主闵自将击之，战于苍亭，贺度等大败，死者二万八千人，追斩靳豚于阴安，尽俘其众而归。
现代文：魏国主冉闵亲自统领军队反击，在苍亭交战，张贺度等大败，死亡二万八千人。冉闵追到阴安，杀了靳豚，将其兵众全部俘虏后返回。
English: The head of the Wei state, Ran Yu, personally led the army to counterattack, fought in Cangting, Zhang He Du and other big defeats, and killed twenty-eight thousand people. Ran Yu chased to Yin'an, killed the warthog, captured all his soldiers and returned.

古文：闵戎卒三十馀万，旌旗、钲鼓绵亘百馀里，虽石氏之盛，无以过也。
现代文：冉闵的士兵达三十多万，旌旗、战鼓绵延一百多里，就是石氏最兴盛的时候，也无法与之相比。
English: There were more than three hundred thousand soldiers, banners and war drums stretching for more than a hundred miles. Even at the peak of the Stone Age, it was incomparable.

古文：故晋散骑常侍陇西辛谧，有高名，历刘、石之世，征辟皆不就；闵备礼征为太常。
现代文：过去晋朝的散骑常侍、陇西人辛谧，名声高尚，虽然经历了刘氏、石氏时代，征召授官全都不接受。冉闵以完备的礼遇征召他出任太常。
English: Although he lived through the times of the Liu and Shishi dynasties, he did not accept any of the appointments he was called upon to make. Ran Zheng called him to take up the post of Grand Steward with complete courtesy.

古文：谧遗闵书，以为： 物极则反，致至则危。
现代文：辛谧致信冉闵，认为 物极必反，到了极点就危险了。
English: Xin Zheng wrote to Ran Zheng, saying that things must be extreme, and it would be dangerous to go to the extreme.

古文：君王功已成矣，宜因兹大捷，归身晋朝，必有由、夷之廉，享松、乔之寿矣。 
现代文：如今君王大功已成，应该就此辉煌战果，归身于晋朝，必定会有许由、伯夷那样的正直名声，享受赤松子、王子乔那样的天年高寿。 
English: Now that the king's great achievement has been made, it should be a brilliant victory. If he returns to the Jin Dynasty, he will certainly have the reputation of honesty like Xu Yu and Bo Yi, and enjoy the heavenly life like Akamatsu Zi and Prince Qiao.

古文：因不食而卒。
现代文：接着他便绝食而死。
English: He died of starvation as a result.

古文：九月，燕王俊南徇冀州，取章武、河间。
现代文：九月，前燕王慕容俊带兵南巡冀州，攻取了章武、河间。
English: In September, the former Yan Wang Murongjun led troops on a southern tour of Jizhou, capturing Zhangwu and Hebei.

古文：初，勃海贾坚，少尚气节，仕赵为殿中督。
现代文：当初，勃海人贾坚从小崇尚气节，效力于赵国，任殿中督。
English: At first, Jia Jian, a person from Bohai, had been advocating qi jie since childhood. He served in Zhao Province and was appointed as the vice governor of the palace.

古文：赵亡，坚弃魏主闵还乡里，拥部曲数千家。
现代文：赵灭亡后，贾坚抛弃了魏国主冉闵回到家乡，拥有家兵数千家。
English: After the death of Zhao, Jia Jian abandoned the Wei sovereign, Ran Yu, and returned to his hometown with thousands of soldiers.

古文：燕慕容评徇勃海，遣使招之，坚终不降。
现代文：前燕国慕容评带兵巡行勃海，派遣使者去招纳他，但他始终不投降。
English: Former Yan's country, Murong Han, sent an envoy to recruit him, but he never surrendered.

古文：评与战，擒之。
现代文：慕容评与他交战，擒获了他。
English: Murong Han fought with him and captured him.

古文：俊以评为章武太守，封裕为河间太守。
现代文：慕容俊任命慕容评为章武太守，任命封裕为河间太守。
English: Murong Jun appointed Murong as Zhangwu Daju, and appointed Fuyu as Kawama Daju.

古文：俊与慕容恪皆爱贾坚之材。
现代文：慕容俊和慕容恪全都欣赏贾坚的才能。
English: Both Murong Jun and Murong Ke appreciated Jia Jian's talent.

古文：坚时年六十馀，恪闻其善射，置牛百步上以试之。
现代文：贾坚时年六十多岁，慕容恪听说他善长射箭，便把一头牛放在百步以远的地方以试验他的箭法。
English: When Jia Jian was in his sixties, Murong Ke heard that he was good at archery, so he put a cow a hundred paces away to test his archery.

古文：坚曰： 少之时能令不中，今老矣，往往中之。 
现代文：贾坚说： 年轻时能让箭不射中牛，如今老了，往往要射中牛了。 
English: Jia Jian said: When I was young, I could avoid hitting a cow with an arrow, but now that I am old, I often have to hit a cow.

古文：乃射再发，一矢拂脊，一矢磨腹，皆附肤落毛，上下如一，观者咸服其妙。
现代文：于是就射了两箭，一箭擦着牛的脊梁而过，一箭擦着牛的肚皮而过，上下两箭都是紧擦牛皮，射落牛毛，上、下全一样，围观的人地不佩服他箭法的神妙。
English: So he shot two arrows. One arrow grazed the cow's backbone and one arrow grazed the cow's belly. The upper and lower arrows grazed the cow's hide and shot off the cow's hair. The upper and lower arrows were the same. The onlookers were not impressed by the magic of his archery.

古文：俊以坚为乐陵太守，治高城。
现代文：慕容俊任命贾坚为乐陵太守，治所为高城。
English: Murongjun appointed Jia Jian as the governor of Le Ling, and the administrative center was Gaocheng.

古文：苻菁与张先战于渭北，擒之，三辅郡县堡壁皆降。
现代文：苻菁与张先在渭水以北交战。擒获了张先，周围的三个郡、县以及营垒、营寨全都投降。
English: Yan Jing and Zhang Xian fought to the north of Surabaya. Zhang Xian was captured, and the surrounding three counties, counties, camps and encampments all surrendered.

古文：冬，十月，苻健长驱至长安，杜洪、张琚奔司竹。
现代文：冬季，十月，苻健长驱直入到达长安，杜洪、张琚逃奔到司竹。
English: In winter, in October, Gong Jian Chang drove straight into Chang'an, Du Hong and Zhang Ye fled to Sizhu.

古文：燕王俊还蓟，留诸将守之；俊还龙城，谒陵庙。
现代文：前燕王慕容俊回到蓟城，留下了一些将领镇守该地。他自己又回到龙城，拜谒陵庙。
English: Former Yan Wang Murongjun returned to Lucheng, leaving some generals to guard the place. He himself returned to Longcheng to worship the Lucheng Mausoleum.

古文：十一月，魏主闵帅骑十万攻襄国。
现代文：十一月，魏国主冉闵率领步兵、骑兵十万人攻打襄国。
English: In November, Ran Xuan, the ruler of Wei, led 100,000 infantry and cavalry to attack Xiang.

古文：署其子太原王胤为大单于、骠骑大将军，以降胡一千配之为麾下。
现代文：委任他的儿子太原王冉胤为大单于、骠骑大将军，并给他手下配备了一千名投降的胡族士兵。
English: He appointed his son, King Ran of Taiyuan, as the grand general of troops and cavalry, and equipped him with a thousand Hu soldiers who had surrendered.

古文：光禄大夫韦謏谏曰： 胡、羯皆我之仇敌，今来归附，苟存性命耳；万一为变，悔之何及！
现代文：光禄大夫韦劝谏冉闵说： 胡族、羯族都是我们的仇敌，如今他们归附投降，只是为了苟全性命罢了，万一他们哗变，后悔怎么来得及？
English: Dr. Guanglu Wei advised him, saying, "The Hu and the Yao are our enemies. Now they have surrendered, just to save their lives. If they mutiny, how can they regret it?

古文：请诛屏降胡，去单于之号，以防微杜渐。 
现代文：请求您斩尽杀绝那些投降的胡兵！去掉单于的称号，以防微杜渐。 
English: I request you to kill those surrendering Hu soldiers to the last! Remove the title of "Sai Yu" in order to prevent any confusion.

古文：闵方欲抚纳群胡，大怒，诛謏及其子伯阳。
现代文：冉闵正想要安抚招纳群胡，听了此话，勃然大怒，杀掉了韦以及他的儿子韦伯阳。
English: After listening to this, Ran Xuan, who was trying to appease Zhaoyuan Qunhu, flew into a rage and killed Wei and his son Wei Boyang.

古文：甲午，苻健入长安，以民心思晋，乃遣参军杜山伯诣建康献捷，并修好于桓温。
现代文：甲午，苻健进入长安，考虑到民心都思念晋朝，就派参军杜山伯到建康去进献俘虏和战利品，并要与桓温重归于好。
English: In the afternoon of the 1st day of the 1st month, when Hun Jian entered Chang'an, considering that the people's hearts were yearning for the Jin Dynasty, he sent Du Shan Bo, a member of the army, to Jiankang to present the captives and spoils of war, and to make peace with Huan Wen.

古文：于是秦、雍夷夏皆附之。
现代文：因此秦州、雍州的夷人、汉人全都归附了他。
English: As a result, the Qin and Yong states, the barbarians, and the Han people all joined him.

古文：赵凉州刺史石宁独据上邽不下，十二月，苻雄击斩之。
现代文：后赵国凉州刺史石宁独自占据着上，暂时没有被攻下。十二月，苻雄率兵攻击，斩杀了石宁。
English: Later, Shi Ning, the governor of Liangzhou, Zhao Province, occupied the upper area alone and was not attacked for a while. In December, Shao Xiong led an attack and killed Shi Ning.

古文：蔡谟除司徒，三年不就职；诏书屡下，太后遣使谕意，谟终不受。
现代文：蔡谟被东晋朝廷任命为司徒后，三年没去就职。诏令多次下达，太后也派人去说明意图，蔡谟最终还是不接受任命。
English: After Jaume was appointed as a tutor by the Eastern Jin court, he did not take office for three years. The imperial decree was issued several times, and the empress dowager also sent someone to explain her intentions. In the end, Jaume did not accept the appointment.

古文：于是帝临轩，遣侍中纪据、黄门郎丁纂征谟；谟陈疾笃，使主簿谢攸陈让。
现代文：于是穆帝亲自临朝，派侍中纪据、黄门郎丁纂去征召蔡谟。蔡谟向他们陈说自己身患重病，并派主簿谢攸陈述自己愿意辞让的意见。
English: As a result, Mu Di himself went to the imperial court and sent the attendant, Zhong Ji Ji Ji, and Huangmen Lang Ding to recruit Cai Mu. Cai Mu told them that he was seriously ill, and sent the chief accountant, Xie You, to state his opinion that he was willing to resign.

古文：自旦至申，使者十馀返，而谟不至。
现代文：从早到晚，朝廷派来征召蔡谟的使者往返十多次，然而蔡谟就是不去任职。
English: From morning to night, the emissaries sent by the imperial court to recruit Jaume went back and forth more than ten times. However, Jaume would not take up the post.

古文：时帝方八岁，甚倦，问左右曰： 所召人何以至今不来？
现代文：当时穆帝年仅八岁，临朝一天，非常疲倦。他问周围的人说： 所征召的人为什么到现在还不来？
English: At that time, Mudi was only eight years old, and he was very tired the day before the funeral. He asked the people around him, "Why haven't the people who were called up come yet?"

古文：临轩何时当竟？ 
现代文：临朝什么时候才能结束？ 
English: When will Lintao be over?

古文：太后以君臣俱疲，乃诏： 必不来者，宜罢朝。 
现代文：太后考虑到穆帝和臣下们都很疲劳，就下诏说： 一定不来的话，就结束临朝吧。 
English: The empress dowager, considering that both Mu Di and his subjects were very tired, issued an edict saying, "If he does not come, let's end the imperial court."

古文：中军将军殷浩奏免吏部尚书江虨官。
现代文：中军将军殷浩奏请免除吏部尚书江的官职。
English: Chinese General Yin Haosong asked to remove Shang Shujiang from the cadre department.

古文：会稽王昱令曹曰： 蔡公傲违上命，无人臣之礼。
现代文：会稽王司马昱给尚书曹下令说： 蔡谟傲慢地违抗皇上的命令，这是没有臣下之礼的行为。
English: The Auditor-General Wang Sima Yu ordered Shang Shucao to say: "Chaimou arrogantly defied the emperor's order, which is not the behavior of a vassal.

古文：若人主卑屈于上，大义不行于下，亦不知所以为政矣。 
现代文：如果皇上在上卑躬屈膝，臣子在下又不履行君臣大义，那么也就不知道靠什么来处理朝政了。 
English: If the emperor grovels at the top, and the vassals do not fulfill the great justice of the monarch and the vassals at the bottom, then I do not know what to rely on to deal with the imperial government.

古文：公卿乃奏： 谟悖慢傲上，罪同不臣，请送廷尉以正刑书。 
现代文：于是公卿们便进上奏书说： 蔡谟狂妄傲慢地对待皇上的命令，罪同叛逆，请求将他送交廷尉依法论处。 
English: As a result, the nobles submitted a petition saying, "Zae Mo treated the emperor's order with arrogance and arrogance, which is a crime of rebellion, and requested that he be sent to the court to be dealt with according to the law."

古文：谟惧，帅子弟素服诣阙稽颡，自到廷尉待罪。
现代文：蔡谟十分害怕，率领他的子弟们到朝廷去叩头谢罪，并自己到廷尉处等待治罪。
English: Zhaimu was so afraid that he led his sons to the court to bow down and apologize, and went to the palace to wait for the punishment.

古文：殷浩欲加谟大辟。会徐州刺史荀羡入朝，浩以问羡，羡曰： 蔡公今日事危，明日必有桓、文之举。 
现代文：殷浩想处以蔡谟死刑，恰巧这时徐州刺史荀羡来到朝廷，殷浩就此询问荀羡，荀羡回答说： 如果蔡公今天被处死，明天就一定会出现齐桓公、晋文公那样举兵问罪的行动。 
English: Yin Hao wanted to execute Cai Mu with the death penalty. At the same time, the Xuzhou assassin Shi Xuan came to the imperial court. Yin Hao asked Xuan Xuan about this, and Xuan Xuan replied: If Cai Gong is executed today, tomorrow there will certainly be an action of raising an army to investigate the crime like Qi Huan Gong and Jin Wengong.

古文：浩乃止。下诏免谟为庶人。
现代文：于是殷浩放弃了处死蔡谟的打算，下达诏书将其免官并贬为庶人。
English: As a result, Yin Hao gave up the plan to execute Cai Mu, and issued an edict to dismiss him and reduce him to a commoner.

