古文：镐王永中，本名实鲁剌，又名万僧。
现代文：镐王完颜永中本名完颜实鲁剌，又名完颜万僧。
English: The real name of King Kan Yan Yong is Kan Yan Shilou, also known as Kan Yan Wan Zang.

古文：大定元年，封许王。
现代文：大定元年，完颜永中被封为许王。
English: In the first year of Dading, he was named Xu Wang after Yan Yong.

古文：五年，判大兴尹。
现代文：大定五年，完颜永中为判大兴尹。
English: In the fifth year of Dading, Yan Yongzhong was sentenced to Daxing Yin.

古文：七年，进封越王。
现代文：大定七年，完颜永中进封为越王。
English: In the seventh year of Dading, Yan Yongzhong was crowned King of Yue.

古文：十一年，进封赵王。
现代文：大定十一年，完颜永中进封为赵王。
English: In the eleventh year of Dading, Yan Yongzhong was enthroned as King Zhao.

古文：十三年，拜枢密使。
现代文：大定十三年，完颜永中被授予枢密使。
English: In the thirteenth year of the Taisho era, he was awarded the post of Privy Councilor.

古文：十九年，子石古乃加光禄大夫。
现代文：大定十九年，完颜永中的儿子完颜石古乃加封为光禄大夫。
English: In the 19th year of Dading, Kan Yan Yongzhong's son, Kan Yan Shiguo, was awarded the title of Guanglu Doctor.

古文：是岁，改葬明德皇后于坤厚陵，永中母元妃张氏陪葬。
现代文：这一年，把明德皇后改葬到坤厚陵，完颜永中的母亲元妃张氏陪葬。
English: In this year, the Mingde Empress was reburied in Kun Hou Mausoleum, and Yan Yongzhong's mother, Yuanfei Zhang, was buried with her.

古文：十一月庚申，自磐宁宫发引。
现代文：十一月初六，灵柩队从磐宁宫出发。
English: On the 6th day of the 11th month, the funeral cortege set off from the Iwanning Palace.

古文：永中以元妃柩先发，使执黄伞者前导。
现代文：完颜永中让元妃的灵柩先出发，派打黄伞的人作为前导。
English: After Yan Yongzhong let Yuanfei's coffin go first, and sent a person with a yellow umbrella as a guide.

古文：俄顷，皇后柩出磐宁宫，显宗徒跣。
现代文：尔后，皇后的灵柩从磐宁宫出发，显宗光着脚步行。
English: Afterwards, the coffin of the empress departed from the Iwanning Palace, and Emperor Henzong walked barefoot.

古文：少府监张仅言呼执黄伞者，不应。
现代文：少府监张仅言喊打黄伞的人，打黄伞的人没有回答。
English: Xiaofu Supervisor Zhang only shouted at the person who played the yellow umbrella, and the person who played the yellow umbrella did not answer.

古文：既葬，仅言欲奏其事，显宗解之曰： 是何足校哉，或伞人误耳。 
现代文：葬后，张仅言想把这件事上奏给皇帝，显宗解释说： 这不值得改正，或许是打伞的人弄错了。 
English: After the funeral, Zhang only said that he wanted to report the matter to the emperor. Xuanzong explained: It's not worth correcting, maybe the umbrella man made a mistake.

古文：仅言乃止。
现代文：张仅言于是停止上奏。
English: Zhang Mianyan then stopped the upbeat.

古文：二十一年，改判大宗正事。
现代文：大定二十一年，完颜永中改任判大宗正事。
English: In the 21st year of Dading, after Yan Yongzhong was reappointed, he was sentenced to a large number of serious cases.

古文：永中不悦，显宗劝之曰： 宗正之职，自亲及疏，自近及远，此亲贤之任也。
现代文：完颜永中不高兴，显宗劝他说 ：正直的职位，从亲近的到疏远的，从近到远，这是亲族贤人的位置。
English: When Yan Yongzhong was not happy, Hsien Tsung advised him, "Honest position, from close to distant, from near to far, this is the position of a kindred sage.

古文：且皇子之贵，岂以官职闲剧为计邪？ 
现代文：况且皇子的可贵，难道用官职衡量吗？ 
English: Besides, is the value of a prince measured by his official position?

古文：永中乃喜。
现代文：完颜永中于是很高兴。
English: So I was very happy when I finished Yan Yongzhong.

古文：二十四年，世宗幸上京，显宗居守，并留永中。
现代文：大定二十四年，金世宗到达上京，显宗留守，一同留下的还有完颜永中。
English: In the 24th year of Dading, Kim Sejong arrived in Beijing, while Hyonjong stayed behind. Also left behind was Kangyan Yongzhong.

古文：显宗先遣章宗、宣宗奉表问起居于上京，既而遣永中子光禄大夫石古乃奉表。
现代文：显宗先派章宗、宣宗奉奏章到上京问安世宗的起居，不久又派完颜永中的儿子光禄大夫完颜石古乃奉奏章前去问安。
English: The Hien sect first sent the Zhang sect and the Xuan sect the Bongseong sect to go to Beijing to inquire about the residence of the Anseong sect, and soon sent the son of Yan Yongzhong, the doctor of Guanglu, the Bongseong sect, to inquire about the residence of the Anseong sect.

古文：世宗喜谓豫国公主曰： 皇太子孝德天成，先遣二子，继遣此子，兄弟之际相友爱如此也。 
现代文：金世宗高兴地对豫国公主说 ：皇太子显宗很孝顺且有德行，选派他的两个儿子，既而又派永中的儿子来问安，他们兄弟像这样友爱。 
English: Kim Sejong happily said to Princess Yeonguk: "Crown Prince Hyonjong is very filial and virtuous. He sent his two sons, and also sent Yong Jung's son to say hello. Their brothers are so friendly.

古文：二十五年六月，世宗在天平山好水川清暑，显宗薨于中都，诏曹王永功视章宗，召永中赴行在。
现代文：大定二十五年六月，皇帝金世宗在天平山好水川避暑，显宗在中都死去，皇帝下诏让曹王完颜永功看望章宗，召完颜永中到他所在的地方。
English: In June of the 25th year of Dading, Emperor Jin Shizong was summering in Tianping Mountain, and Xian Zong died in Zhongdu. The emperor issued an edict to Cao Wang to visit Zhang Zong after Yan Yonggong's death, and to summon Yan Yongzhong to his place.

古文：是岁，与章宗及永功等并加开府仪同三司。
现代文：这一年，完颜永中与章宗及完颜永功等一同被加封为开府仪同三司。
English: In the same year, Gan Yan Yongzhong, along with Zhang Zong and Gan Yan Yonggong, was awarded the title of Kaifu Yi Tong San Sisi.

古文：二十六年，复为枢密使。
现代文：大定二十六，完颜永中又为枢密使。
English: He was twenty-six at the time, and became a Privy Counsellor after Yan Yongzhong died.

古文：是岁，世宗赐诸孙名。
现代文：这一年，金世宗赏赐诸孙名字。
English: In this year, Kim Sejong gave names to his grandchildren.

古文：石古乃曰瑜，神土门日璋，阿思懑曰玘，阿离合懑曰瑑。
现代文：完颜石古乃赐名为瑜，完颜神土门赐名为璋，完颜阿思懑赐名为王己，完颜阿离合懑赐名为蠪。
English: Kanyan Sekkoku was given the name Yu, Kanyan Shintomon was given the name, Kanyan Ashi was given the name Wang Ji, and Kanyan Aiyakai was given the name.

古文：二十七年，玘年十五以上，加奉国上将军。
现代文：大定二十七年，十五岁的完颜王己进入官层，加封为奉国上将军。
English: In the twenty-seventh year of Dading, the fifteen-year-old Kan Yan Wang entered the official ranks and was awarded the title of General of the Nation.

古文：章宗即位，起复判西京留守，进封汉王，与诸弟各赐金五百两、银五千两、钱二千贯、重币三百端、绢二千匹。
现代文：金章宗即皇帝位，起用完颜永中做判西京留守，进封为汉王，他与弟兄们都被赏赐五百两黄金、五千两白银、二千贯钱、三百端重币、二千匹绢。
English: Jinzhangzong was the emperor, and after Yan Yongzhong was appointed to judge, he stayed in West Beijing and was crowned the king of Han. He and his brothers were awarded five hundred and two gold, five thousand two silver, two thousand crowns, three hundred crowns, and two thousand horses.

古文：再赐永中修公廨钱三百万，特加石古乃银青荣禄大夫，阿离合懑奉国上将军。
现代文：不久皇帝再次赏赐完颜永中修公廨钱三百万，特别加封完颜石古乃为银青荣禄大夫，完颜阿离合懑为奉国上将军。
English: Soon after, the emperor once again rewarded Yan Yongzhong with three million yuan in public money, and specially sealed Yan Shiguo as the doctor of honor, and Yan Aiyi as the general of the country.

古文：明昌二年正月辛酉，孝懿皇后崩。
现代文：明昌二年正月十二日，孝懿皇后死去。
English: On the 12th day of the 1st month of the 2nd year of the reign of Emperor Mingchang, Empress Xiaojun passed away.

古文：判真定府事吴王永成、判定武军节度使隋王永升奔丧后期，各罚俸一月，杖其长史五十。
现代文：判真定府事吴王完颜永成、判定武军节度使隋王完颜永升奔丧错过日期，各被罚一个月的俸禄，杖打年长的官吏五十下。
English: They were each fined one month's salary, and senior officials were caned fifty strokes of the cane.

古文：永中适有寒疾，不能至。
现代文：完颜永中当时正患寒病，不能前去奔丧。
English: Yan Yongzhong was suffering from a cold at the time and could not go to the funeral.

古文：上怒，颇意诸王有轻慢心，遣使责永中曰： 已近公除，亦不须来。 
现代文：皇帝金章宗很气愤，怀疑诸王对他有轻慢之心，于是派使者去斥责完颜永中说： 已经临近除服日，却不去。 
English: Emperor Jinzhangzong was very angry, suspecting that the kings had slighted him, so he sent an envoy to reprimand Yan Yong and said: It is close to the day of removal from service, but I will not go.

古文：二月丙戌，禫祭，永中始至，入临。
现代文：二月初七，除服祭祀时，完颜永中才赶到进去祭祀。
English: On the seventh day of the second month of the year, when they were removing their robes for the sacrifice, Yan Yongzhong had just finished and rushed to enter the sacrifice.

古文：辛卯，始克行烧饭礼。
现代文：二月十二日，开始按规定的期限行烧饭礼。
English: On February 12th, the rice-cooking ceremony began according to the prescribed time limit.

古文：壬辰，永中及诸王朝辞，赐遗留物，礼遇虽在，而嫌忌自此始矣。
现代文：二月十三日，完颜永中及诸王离开朝廷，皇帝把一些遗物赏赐给他们，礼节虽在，而嫌疑忌恨之心从此产生。
English: On February 13, after Yan Yongzhong and the kings left the court, the emperor gave them some relics. Although there was etiquette, suspicion and hatred arose from this.

古文：四月，进封并王。
现代文：明昌二年四月，完颜永中进封为并王。
English: In April of the second year of the Ming and Chang dynasties, Yan Yongzhong was crowned co-emperor.

古文：三年，判平阳府事，进封镐王。
现代文：明昌三年，完颜永中任判平阳府事，进封镐王。
English: In the third year of Mingchang, after Yan Yong was appointed to Pingyang Prefecture, he was promoted to the king.

古文：初置王傅、府尉官，名为官属，实检制之也。
现代文：这时金朝开始设置王傅、府尉官，名义上是官府，实际上是检察的机构。
English: At this time, the Kim dynasty began to set up wangfu and prefectural officials, which were nominally government offices, but in fact were inspection agencies.

古文：府尉希望风旨，过为苛细。
现代文：完颜永中自以为是金世宗的长子，而且年纪大，行动不方便，思维迟钝，于是上表请求退休。
English: After Yan Yongzhong thought that he was the eldest son of Kim Sejong, and he was old, his actions were inconvenient, and his thinking was slow, so the above table requested retirement.

古文：永中自以世宗长子，且老矣，动有掣制，情思不堪，殊郁郁，乃表乞闲居。诏不许。
现代文：皇帝下诏不允许。
English: The emperor decreed that it was not allowed.

古文：四年，郑王永蹈以谋逆诛。
现代文：明昌四年，郑王完颜永蹈因谋反被杀。
English: In the fourth year of the Ming and Chang dynasties, Zheng Wang Ganyan Yongbai was killed for plotting rebellion.

古文：增置诸王司马一员，检察门户出入，球猎游宴皆有制限，家人出入皆有禁防。
现代文：朝廷设置诸王司马一员，检察宫门人员的出入，打球狩猎游玩宴会都有限制，家里人出入都有禁止防备。
English: The imperial court set up a member of the Wang Sima, the procurator's entrance and exit of the palace gate personnel, the playing ball, hunting and playing banquets are all restricted, and the family members are prohibited from entering and leaving.

古文：河东提刑判官把里海坐私谒永中，杖一百，解职。
现代文：河东提刑判官把里海因为私下拜谒完颜永中，被杖打一百下，解除官职。
English: A criminal court judge in the eastern province of Hedong sentenced Caspian Sea to 100 strokes of the cane and removal from his official post for privately bowing to Yan Yongzhong.

古文：前近侍局副使裴满可孙尝受永中请托，为石古乃求除官，可孙已改同知西京留守，犹坐免。
现代文：前近侍局副使裴满可孙曾经接受完颜永中的请求托嘱，为他的儿子完颜石古乃求官，裴满可孙被改任同知西京留守，免去连坐。
English: Former Vice-Minister of the Privy Council, Pei Mankosun, once accepted a request from Yan Yongzhong to seek a post for his son, Yan Shikunai. Pei Mankosun was reassigned to stay with his friend in West Beijing and was exempted from serving concurrently.

古文：故尚书右丞张汝弼，永中母舅也。
现代文：已故尚书右丞张汝弼是完颜永中的舅舅。
English: Zhang Ruzhen, the late Shang Shuyuan, was the uncle of Guan Yan Yongzhong.

古文：汝弼妻高陀斡自大定间画永中母像，奉之甚谨，挟左道为永中求福，希觊非望。
现代文：张汝弼的妻子高陀斡于大定年间画了完颜永中母亲的像，很谨慎地对待画像，并挟持左道教士为完颜永中求福，想有非分之想。
English: Zhang Ruxuan's wife, Gaotao, painted a portrait of Yan Yongzhong's mother in the Taiding period. She was very cautious about the image, and held a Taoist priest to seek blessings for Yan Yongzhong.

古文：明昌五年，高陀斡坐诅祝诛。
现代文：明昌五年，高陀斡因为诅咒被杀。
English: In the fifth year of the Ming Dynasty, Gautama was killed because of a curse.

古文：上疑事在永中，未有以发也。
现代文：皇帝怀疑这事情是完颜永中指使的，但没有发现证据。
English: The emperor suspected that the incident was orchestrated by Guan Yongzhong, but found no evidence.

古文：会镐王傅尉奏永中第四子阿离合懑因防禁严密，语涉不道。
现代文：适逢镐王完颜永中的傅尉向皇帝上奏完颜永中的第四个儿子因为防禁严密，说了一些违反道义的话。
English: At the right time, the fourth son of Yan Yongzhong, the fourth son of Yan Yongzhong, the fourth son of Yan Yongzhong, the fourth son of Yan Yongzhong, the fourth son of Yan Yongzhong, the fourth son of Yan Yongzhong, the fourth son of Yan Yongzhong, said some words that violated morality.

古文：诏同签大睦亲府事袴、御史中丞孙即康鞫问，并求得第二子神徒门所撰词曲有不逊语。
现代文：皇帝下诏同签大睦亲府事礮、御史中丞孙即康审讯此事，同时得到完颜永中的第二个儿子神徒门写的词曲中有不恭顺的语言。
English: The emperor issued an imperial edict, which was co-signed by the imperial family and the government, and the imperial historian Sun Jiekang investigated the matter. At the same time, Yan Yongzhong's second son, Shen Tu Men, wrote a song that contained disrespectful language.

古文：家奴德哥首永中尝与侍妾瑞雪言： 我得天下，子为大王，以尔为妃。 
现代文：完颜永中的家奴德哥告发完颜永中曾经对侍妾瑞雪说： 我得到天下后，儿子做大王，用你做妃子。 
English: Yan Yongzhong's manservant, De Ge, reported that Yan Yongzhong once said to his concubine, Ruixue, "When I rule the world, my son will be king, and I will use you as my concubine."

古文：诏遣官复按状同。
现代文：皇帝下诏派官吏掩盖他的罪状。
English: The emperor sent officials to cover up his crime.

古文：再遣礼部尚书张暐、兵部侍郎乌古论庆裔复之。
现代文：皇帝再派礼部尚书张日韦、兵部侍郎乌古论庆裔掩盖罪状。
English: The emperor then dispatched Zhang Rongwei, the secretary of the Ministry of Ceremonies, and Wu Gu, the attendant of the Ministry of War, to discuss and cover up the crime.

古文：上谓宰臣曰： 镐王只以语言得罪，与永蹈罪异。 
现代文：皇帝对家臣说 ：镐王只是在语言上有得罪，与永蹈的罪不一样。 
English: The emperor said to his vassal: "King Gong only offended in language, which is not the same as the eternal sin.

古文：参知政事马琪曰： 永中与永蹈罪状虽异，人臣无将，则一也。 
现代文：参知政事马琪说 ：永中与永蹈罪状虽不同，但性质是一样的。 
English: Party secretary Ma Qi said: Although the crimes of Yongzhong and Yongpiao are different, they are of the same nature.

古文：上曰： 大王何故辄出此言？ 
现代文：皇帝说： 大王你为什么说这样的话？ 
English: The emperor said, "Great King, why did you say such a thing?

古文：左丞相清臣曰： 素有妄想之心也。 
现代文：左丞相清臣说 ：这是完颜永中平常就有的妄想之心。 
English: Zuojo Minister Kiyomi said, "This is the usual delusional mind of Kanenaga.

古文：诏以永中罪状宣示百官杂议，五品以下附奏，四品以上入对便殿。
现代文：皇帝把完颜永中的罪状讲给百官让他们讨论，五品以下的官员附带上奏，四品以上的官到便殿回答。
English: The emperor told the hundreds of officials about the crimes committed by Yan Yongzhong and asked them to discuss them. The officials below the fifth grade accompanied the speech, and the officials above the fourth grade went to the hall to answer.

古文：皆曰： 请论如律。 
现代文：官员都说 ：请按法律判罪。 
English: Officials all said: please convict according to the law.

古文：惟宫籍监丞卢利用乞贷其死。
现代文：只有宫籍监丞卢利用乞求宽恕完颜永中的死罪。
English: Only the imperial procurator Lu took advantage of Yan Yongzhong's death by begging for forgiveness.

古文：诏赐永中死，神徒门、阿离合懑等皆弃市。
现代文：皇帝下诏赐完颜永中死，神徒门、阿离合懑等暴尸于市。
English: After the emperor issued an edict, Yan Yongzhong died, and the corpses of Shentumen, A Lianghe and others were found in the city.

古文：敕有司用国公礼收葬永中，平阳府监护，官给葬具，妻子威州安置。
现代文：皇帝命令有司用国公的礼节埋葬完颜永中，平阳府监护执行，朝廷发给葬具，把他的妻子安置到威州。
English: The emperor ordered the imperial secretary to bury Yan Yongzhong with the etiquette of the sovereign, and the supervision of Pingyang Prefecture was carried out. The court issued funeral paraphernalia and placed his wife in Wizhou.

古文：泰和七年，诏复永中王爵，赐谥曰厉。
现代文：泰和七年，金章宗皇帝下诏恢复完颜永中的王爵，赐谥号厉。
English: In the seventh year of the Taihe era, Emperor Jinzhangzong issued an edict to restore the title of prince to Yan Yongzhong.

古文：敕石古乃于威州择地，以礼改葬，岁时祭奠。
现代文：命令完颜石古乃在威州选地用王爵礼节改葬完颜永中，按明年岁时节进行祭祀。
English: He ordered Yan Yongzhong to use the royal etiquette to change the burial place of Yan Shiguo to the selected place in Weizhou, and to carry out the sacrifice according to the next year's New Year's festival.

古文：贞祐二年，诏徙永中妻、子石古乃等郑州安置。
现代文：贞二年，皇帝下诏把完颜永中的妻子、儿子完颜石古乃迁到郑州安居。
English: In the second year of Zhen, the emperor decreed that the wife and son of Kan Yan Yongzhong, Kan Yan Shiguo, moved to Zhengzhou to live in peace.

古文：贞祐三年，太康县人刘全尝为盗，亡入卫真界，诡称爱王。
现代文：贞三年，太康县人刘全曾经做盗贼，逃到卫真境内，诈称是爱王。
English: Three years ago, Liu Quan, a resident of Taikang County, used to be a thief and fled to the territory of Weizhen, falsely claiming to be Ai Wang.

古文：所谓爱王，指石古乃。
现代文：所谓爱王指的是完颜石古乃。
English: The so-called "Ai Wang" refers to the end of the stone age.

古文：石古乃实未尝有王封，小人妄以此目之。
现代文：完颜石古乃实际上未曾被封王，只是老百姓把他看作爱王。
English: In fact, Kanenishi Kuni was never crowned king, but the common people regarded him as a beloved king.

古文：刘全欲为乱，因假托以惑众，诱王氏女为妻，且言其子方聚兵河北。
现代文：刘全想叛乱，因此假装爱王来迷惑百姓，由此他引诱了王姓的女子做妻子，并且说他的儿子正在河北聚集军队。
English: Liu Quan wanted to rebel, so he pretended to love Wang to deceive the people. He seduced a woman surnamed Wang to be his wife, and said that his son was gathering troops in Hebei.

古文：东平人李宁居嵩山，有妖术。
现代文：东平人李宁居在嵩山，会妖术。
English: Li Ning, a Dongping man, lives in Songshan and is good at magic.

古文：全同县人时温称宁可论大事，乃使范元书伪号召之。宁至，推为国师，议僣立。
现代文：刘全本县的人时温称赞李宁能议论大事，于是派范元写个假文书召李宁，李宁到了，被推为国师，议论做皇帝的事。
English: The people of Liu Quan's county praised Li Ning's ability to discuss important matters, so they sent Fan Yuan to write a fake document to summon Li Ning. Li Ning arrived, was promoted to state teacher, and discussed the matter of becoming emperor.

古文：事觉，全、温、宁皆伏诛。
现代文：后来他们的阴谋被发现，刘全、时温、李宁都被处死。
English: Later, their plot was discovered, and Liu Quan, Shi Wen and Li Ning were all executed.

古文：贞祐四年，潼关破，徙永中子孙于南京。
现代文：贞四年，潼关被元兵攻破，完颜永中的子孙迁居到南京。
English: In the fourth year of Zhen, Shaoguan was defeated by Yuan soldiers, and Yan Yongzhong's descendants moved to Nanjing.

古文：兴定二年，亳州谯县人孙学究私造妖言云： 爱王终当奋发，今匿迹民间，自号刘二。 
现代文：兴定二年，亳州谯县人孙学究私造妖言说： 爱王最终会振作兴起，现在匿迹在民间，自号刘二。 
English: In the second year of Xingding, Sun Xuechuan, a native of Zhangzhou's Zhangxian County, said: Love the king will eventually rise, and now he has disappeared among the people, calling himself Liu II.

古文：卫真百姓王深等皆信以为诚然。
现代文：卫真境内百姓王深等都相信此话。
English: People in Weizhen, including Wang Sheng, believed this.

古文：有刘二者出而当之，遣欧荣辈结构逆党，市兵仗，大署旌旗，谋慄立。
现代文：有个叫刘二的人出来冒充爱王，派欧荣等人去联结逆党，买兵器，大肆遍插自己的旗帜，阴谋自立为皇帝。
English: A man named Liu Er came out pretending to love the king and sent Ou Rong and others to link up with the rebel party, buy weapons, plant their own flags everywhere, and plot to become emperor.

古文：事觉，诛死者五十二人，缘坐者六十余人。
现代文：后来事情被发现，五十二人被杀死，六十多人因为株连被杀。
English: Later, it was discovered that fifty-two people were killed, and more than sixty people were killed because of the stock company.

古文：永中子孙禁锢，自明昌至于正大末，几四十年。
现代文：完颜永中的子孙被禁锢了起来，从明昌年间到正大末年，一共四十年。
English: Yan Yongzhong's children and grandchildren were imprisoned for a total of forty years, from the Mingshang period to the end of the Zhengda period.

古文：天兴初，诏弛禁锢。
现代文：天兴初年，皇帝下诏解除完颜永中子孙的禁锢。
English: In the first year of Tianxing, the emperor issued an edict to lift the ban on Yan Yongzhong's descendants.

古文：未几，南京亦不守云。
现代文：不久，南京也被元兵攻下。
English: Soon, Nanjing was also captured by Yuan soldiers.

古文：郑王永蹈，本名银术可，初名石狗儿。
现代文：郑王完颜永蹈本名完颜银术可，他开始名叫石狗儿。
English: Zheng Wang was born with the name of Wang Yan Rong, but he began to be called Shiguer.

古文：大定十一年，封滕王，未期月进封徐王。
现代文：大定十一年，完颜永蹈被封为滕王，不到一个月又被封为徐王。
English: In the eleventh year of Dading, Guan Yan Yongtu was named King of Teng, and less than a month later he was named King of Xu.

古文：二十五年，加开府仪同三司。
现代文：大定二十五年，完颜永蹈加封为开府仪同三司。
English: In the 25th year of Dading, he was awarded the title of Kaifu Yi Tong San Shi.

古文：二十六年，为大兴尹。
现代文：大定二十六年，完颜永蹈任大兴尹。
English: In the twenty-sixth year of his reign, Dading was succeeded by Dading Xingyin.

古文：章宗即位，判彰德军节度使，进封卫王。
现代文：金章宗即皇帝位，完颜永蹈为判彰德军节度使，进封为卫王。
English: Jinzhangzong, that is, the emperor's throne, was awarded the title of the German army's ceremonial envoy, and was crowned as the king of Wei.

古文：明昌二年，徙封郑王。
现代文：明昌二年，调封为郑王。
English: In the second year of the Ming and Chang dynasties, he was transferred to Zheng Wang.

古文：三年，改判定武军。
现代文：明昌三年，改为判定武军。
English: In the third year of the Ming and Chang dynasties, it was changed to the military.

古文：初，崔温、郭谏、马太初与永蹈家奴毕庆寿私说谶记灾祥，毕庆寿以告永蹈： 郭谏颇能相人。 
现代文：开始，崔温、郭谏、马太初与完颜永蹈的家奴毕庆寿暗地里陈述谶语记录灾难吉祥，毕庆寿把它告诉了完颜永蹈，说 ：郭谏很能给人看相。 
English: At the beginning, Cui Wen, Guo Wei, and Ma Taizhong and Bi Qing Shou, the family slave of Guo Yan Yong, secretly stated that it was auspicious to record disasters, and Bi Qing Shou told it to Guo Yan Yong, saying: Guo Yan is very good at giving people a face.

古文：永蹈乃召郭谏相已及妻子。
现代文：完颜永蹈于是召令郭谏给自己和妻子看相。
English: Guo Yao then ordered Guo Yao to have a look at himself and his wife.

古文：谏说永蹈曰： 大王相貌非常，王妃及二子皆大贵。 
现代文：郭谏劝完颜永蹈说： 大王您相貌非常，王妃和两个儿子都是大贵的相。 
English: Guo Yu finished his persuasion of Yan Yongbai and said, "Great King, you are very handsome. The princess and your two sons are very handsome.

古文：又曰： 大王，元妃长子，不与诸王比也。 
现代文：郭谏又说： 大王，您是元妃的长子，不能同诸王相比拟。 
English: Guo Yao also said: Great King, you are the eldest son of the Empress Yuan, you cannot be compared to other kings.

古文：永蹈召崔温、马太初论谶记天象。
现代文：完颜永蹈召令崔温、马太初议论谶语记录天象。
English: At the end of the ceremony, Choi Win and Ma Tae first discussed the slang of recording the celestial objects.

古文：崔温曰： 丑年有兵灾，属兔命者来年春当收兵得位。 
现代文：崔温说： 丑年有兵灾，属兔的人第二年春天应当是收拢军队得到皇帝位子。 
English: Cui Wen said: In the Year of the Ugly Rabbit, there was a military disaster. People born in the Year of the Rabbit should gather the army and win the emperor's position in the following spring.

古文：郭谏曰： 昨见赤气犯紫微，白虹贯月，皆注丑后寅前兵戈慄乱事。 
现代文：郭谏说： 昨天见赤气犯紫微，白虹穿月亮，都说明丑年末寅年初军队叛乱。 
English: Guo Wei said, "Yesterday, I saw a red-hot criminal fainting and a white rainbow crossing the moon, both of which indicate that the army rebelled at the end of the year and the beginning of the year.

古文：永蹈深信其说，乃阴结内侍郑雨儿伺上起居，以崔温为谋主，郭谏、马太初往来游说。
现代文：完颜永蹈完全相信他们所说的，于是暗地里勾结内侍郑雨儿探查皇帝的起居时间，并用崔温作为谋主，郭谏、马太初往来游说。
English: Gan Yan Yong completely believed what they said, so he secretly colluded with the chambermaid Zheng Yuer to investigate the emperor's living time, and used Cui Wen as the mastermind to lobby Guo Gan and Matthew for the first time.

古文：河南统军使仆散揆尚永蹈妹韩国公主，永蹈谋取河南军以为助，与妹泽国公主长乐谋，使驸马都尉蒲剌睹致书于揆，且先请婚，以观其意。
现代文：河南统军使仆散揆向完颜永蹈的妹妹韩国公主仰攀婚姻，完颜永蹈阴谋取得河南军队作为援助，完颜永蹈与妹妹泽国公主长乐商量，派驸马都尉蒲剌睹写信给仆散揆，先结婚，以观察他的诚意。
English: The Henan United Army sent the servant, Sanzang, to the younger sister of the Korean princess, who was married. Sanzang plotted to obtain the Henan Army as assistance. Sanzang discussed with the younger sister, Princess Zeguko Changle, and sent the cavalry officer, Bu Shixian, to write to the servant, Sanzang, to get married first to observe his sincerity.

古文：揆拒不许结婚，使者不敢复言不轨事。
现代文：仆散揆拒绝了结婚，使者不敢向他说叛乱的事。
English: His servant Sanzang refused to marry, and the envoy dared not tell him about the rebellion.

古文：永蹈家奴董寿谏永蹈，不听。
现代文：完颜永蹈的家奴董寿劝谏完颜永蹈，他不听。
English: He did not listen to his family slave, Dong Shou, who urged him to finish his work.

古文：董寿以语同辈奴千家奴，上变。
现代文：董寿把这些告诉了另一家奴千家奴，他告发了完颜永蹈叛乱的事。
English: Dong Shou told this to another slave, and he denounced the rebellion.

古文：是时，永蹈在京师，诏平章政事完颜守贞、参知政事胥持国、户部尚书杨伯通、知大兴府事尼庞古鉴鞫问，连引甚众，久不能决。
现代文：这时，完颜永蹈在京都，皇帝下诏平章政事完颜守贞、参知政事胥持国、户部尚书杨伯通、知大兴府事尼庞古鉴审讯完颜永蹈的案子，此案牵连的人很多，很久不能判决。
English: At this time, Yan Yongkang was in Kyoto, the emperor issued the edict of Pingzhang, the political affairs of Yan Shouzhen were completed, the political affairs of Sanzhi were completed, the political affairs of Xuchang were completed, the household affairs of Shangshu Yang Bertong, the intellectual affairs of Xingfu were completed, and the case of Yan Yongkang was completed. There were many people involved in this case, and it could not be decided for a long time.

古文：上怒，召守贞等问状。
现代文：皇帝很生气，召见完颜守贞等人问明情况。
English: The emperor was very angry and summoned Yan Shuzhen and others to clarify the situation.

古文：右丞相夹谷清臣奏曰： 事贵速绝，以安人心。 
现代文：右丞相夹谷清臣上奏说 ：这件事贵在速决，以安定人心。 
English: The Minister of the Right, Tsetsuya Kiyomi, reported to the Emperor, saying, "This matter must be resolved quickly in order to stabilize the people's minds."

古文：于是，赐永蹈及妃卞玉，二子按春、阿辛，公主长乐自尽。
现代文：于是，皇帝赐完颜永蹈及其妃卞玉，两个儿子完颜按春、阿辛，公主长乐自杀。
English: As a result, the emperor gave Yan Yongtu and his concubine Yu Yu, two sons Yan Yingchun and Ashin, and Princess Changle committed suicide.

古文：蒲剌睹、崔温、郭谏、马太初等皆伏诛。
现代文：蒲剌睹、崔温、郭谏、马太初等都被杀。
English: Pu Shujian, Cui Wen, Guo Qi, and Ma Taizhong were all killed.

古文：仆散揆虽不闻问，犹坐除名。
现代文：仆散揆虽然没有参与此事，也被株连除名。
English: Although he was not involved in the matter, his servant, Sanzang, was also expelled from the company.

古文：董寿免死，隶监籍。
现代文：董寿免去死罪，被监视起来。
English: Dong Shou was spared the death penalty and put under surveillance.

古文：千家奴赏钱二千贯，特迁五官杂班叙使。
现代文：千家奴被赏二千贯钱，特别加升为五官杂班叙使。
English: Qian Jia Nong was rewarded with 2,000 crowns and was specially promoted to the rank of five officials and miscellaneous class envoy.

古文：自是诸王制限防禁密矣。
现代文：从此对诸王的限制防范更严密。
English: From then on, the restriction and prevention of kings became more stringent.

古文：泰和七年，诏复王封，备礼改葬，赐谥曰剌，以卫王永济子按辰为永蹈后，奉其祭祀。
现代文：泰和七年，金章宗皇帝下诏恢复完颜永蹈的王位，按礼节改葬他，赐谥号剌，以卫王完颜永济的儿子完颜按辰作为完颜永蹈的后代，供给他祭祀。
English: In the seventh year of the Taihe era, Emperor Jinzhangzong issued an edict to restore the throne of Gan Yan Yongchong, to re-bury him according to the etiquette, to give him the posthumous name, and to worship Gan Yan Yongchong as the descendant of Gan Yan Yongchong, the son of King Gan Yan Yongji.

古文：越王永功，本名宋葛，又名广孙，贞元二年生。
现代文：越王完颜永功，本名完颜宋葛，又名完颜广孙，贞元二年生。
English: Yue Wang Guan Yan Yong Gong, real name Guan Yan Song Ge, also known as Guan Yan Guangsun, was born in the second year of Zhenyuan.

古文：沉默寡言笑，勇健绝人，涉书史，好法书名画。
现代文：他沉默寡言，不苟言笑，勇敢健壮超人，广泛涉猎历史书籍，爱好书法名画。
English: He is a taciturn, unsmiling, brave and robust superman, a wide-ranging reader of history books, and a lover of calligraphy and famous paintings.

古文：大定四年，封郑王。
现代文：大定四年，他被封为郑王。
English: In the fourth year of Dading, he was named King Zheng.

古文：七年，进封隋王。
现代文：大定七年，他进封为隋王。
English: In the seventh year of Dading, he was enthroned as the King of Sui.

古文：十一年，进封曹王。
现代文：大定十一年，他进封为曹王。
English: In the eleventh year of Dading, he was enthroned as Cao Wang.

古文：十五年，除刑部尚书。
现代文：大定十五年，他被授予刑部尚书。
English: In the fifteenth year of Dading, he was awarded the title of "penal scholar" by the Ministry of Justice.

古文：上曰： 侍郎张汝霖，汝外舅行也，可学为政。 
现代文：皇帝金世宗说： 你的舅舅侍郎张汝霖的品行可以，可学习他的为政。 
English: Emperor Kim Sejong said, "Your uncle's servant, Jang Rulin, has a good moral character, and you can learn from his politics.

古文：十七年，授活活土世袭猛安。
现代文：大定十七年，完颜永功被授予活活土世袭猛安。
English: In the 17th year of Dading, Guanyan Yonggong was awarded the title of "Living Earth, Hereditary Good Fortune."

古文：十八年，改大兴尹。
现代文：大定十八年，改任大兴尹。
English: In the 18th year of Dading, he was reappointed as Daxing Yin.

古文：世宗幸金莲川，始出中都，亲军二苍头纵马食民田，诏永功： 苍头各杖一百。
现代文：金世宗皇帝前往金莲川，刚出中都时，亲军中的两个苍头纵马吃百姓田里的农作物。皇帝诏令完颜永功说 ：苍头每个人杖打一百。
English: Emperor Kim Il-sung went to the Jinlian River. When he first left the capital, two horses in his army were eating the crops in the fields of the common people. The emperor issued an edict and said: "Hundred strokes of the cane for each horse."

古文：弹压百户二人失觉察，勒停。 
现代文：弹压百户两人没有发现此事，勒令他停止前进。 
English: Two people in the bouncing house did not find out about this and ordered him to stop moving.

古文：上次望京淀，永功奏曰： 亲军人止一苍头、两弹压服勤，为日久矣。
现代文：皇帝暂时驻在望京淀，完颜永功上奏说： 亲近的军人只一个苍头、两个弹压殷勤服侍，且已很长时间。
English: The emperor was temporarily stationed in Wangjingyuan, and after receiving the award, he said: The soldiers who are close to me have only served diligently for a long time.

古文：臣昧死违诏，量决苍头，使弹压待罪，可使偿其田直，惟陛下怜察。 
现代文：我冒昧违反了诏令，宽大判决苍头，让弹压等待判罪，可让他按价赔偿百姓的损失，请陛下怜悯考察。 
English: I had the temerity to violate the imperial edict, and the lenient sentence was imposed on me, and I was made to wait for sentencing, so that he could compensate the people's losses according to the price, and I asked His Majesty for a pity inspection.

古文：上皆从之。
现代文：皇帝听从了完颜永功的意见。
English: The emperor obeyed him.

古文：老妪与男妇憩道傍，妇与所私相从亡去，或告妪曰： 向见年少妇人自水边小径去矣。 
现代文：一老妇人与其儿媳妇在道旁休息，儿媳妇同自己的相好跑了，有人告诉老妇人说 ：刚才看见一个年轻妇人从水边小路走了。 
English: An old woman was resting by the roadside with her daughter-in-law, who had run away with her sweetheart. Someone told the old woman that they had just seen a young woman walking along a path by the water.

古文：妪告伍长踪迹之。
现代文：老妇人告诉伍长追踪她。
English: The old woman told the corporal to follow her.

古文：有男子私杀牛，手持血刃，望见伍长，意其捕己，即走避之。
现代文：有一个男子私自杀了牛，手拿着沾满血的刀，他看见伍长，怀疑是来逮捕自己的，就跑了逃避伍长。
English: A man who had killed a cow with a blood-stained knife saw the corporal and, suspecting he was coming to arrest him, ran away.

古文：妪与伍长疑是杀其妇也，捕送县，不胜楚毒，遂诬服。
现代文：老妇人与伍长怀疑此男子是杀他儿媳妇的人，逮捕并把他送到县里，那男子不堪忍受毒刑，就屈认了杀人。
English: The old woman and the corporal suspected that this man was the murderer of his daughter-in-law, arrested and sent him to the county. The man could not bear the torture and confessed to the murder.

古文：问尸安在？
现代文：问他尸体放在哪里？
English: Ask him where he put the body?

古文：诡曰： 弃之水中矣。 
现代文：男子欺诈说 ：弄到水中去了。 
English: The man lied and said: I got it into the water.

古文：求之水中，果获一尸，已半腐。
现代文：在水中打捞，果然获得一具尸体，已经腐烂了一半。
English: They fished in the water and found a half-decomposed corpse.

古文：县吏以为是男子真杀若妇矣，即具狱上。
现代文：县吏以为这就是那男子杀的那个妇人，就把他投进监狱。
English: Thinking it was the woman the man had killed, county officials threw him in jail.

古文：永功疑之曰： 妇死几何日，而尸遽半腐哉。 
现代文：完颜永功怀疑说 ：妇人没死几天，尸体就腐烂一半？ 
English: Guanyang Yonggong was suspicious and said, "If a woman hasn't been dead for a few days, will half of her body rot away?"

古文：顷之，妪得其妇于所私者。
现代文：不久，老妇人在她儿媳妇的相好那里找到了她儿媳妇。
English: Soon, the old woman found her daughter-in-law at her daughter-in-law's friend's place.

古文：永功曰： 是男子偶以杀人就狱，其拷掠足以称杀牛之科矣。 
现代文：完颜永功说 ：这男子偶然被误认为杀人进了监狱，他被打得足够抵消他杀牛的罪状。 
English: Gan Yan Yong Gong said: The man was accidentally mistaken for a murderer and went to prison. He was beaten enough to offset his crime of killing a cow.

古文：遂释之而去。
现代文：于是把那男子放了。
English: So they let the man go.

古文：武清黄氏、望云王氏豪猾不逞，永功发其罪，畿内肃然。
现代文：武清黄氏、望云王氏蛮横放肆，完颜永功公布了他们的罪状，于是京城周围的地区都安定了。
English: The Wuching Huang clan and the Wangyun Wang clan were extremely arrogant and reckless, and their crimes were publicized after they had achieved fame and glory. As a result, the areas around the capital were stabilized.

古文：二十三年，判东京留守。
现代文：大定二十三年，完颜永功为判东京留守。
English: In the 23rd year of the Taisho era, Yanaga was sentenced to stay away from Tokyo.

古文：是月，改河间尹。
现代文：这一月，又改任河间尹。
English: This month, he was reappointed to the post of Kawama Yin.

古文：阅月，改北京留守。
现代文：一个月后，又改任北京留守。
English: A month later, he was reassigned to Beijing.

古文：居无何，上谓宰臣曰： 朕闻永功到北京为政无良，虽朕子，万一败露，法可废乎。
现代文：没多久，皇帝对宰臣说 ：我听说永功到北京从政有不良行为，他虽然是我的儿子，万一事情败露，可以将他绳之以法。
English: Not long after, the emperor said to the vice-minister, "I heard that Yonggong went to Beijing to engage in political activities, but he is my son, so if anything happens to him, I can bring him to justice."

古文：朕已戒敕永功，卿等可谕其长史，俾匡正之。 
现代文：我已经告诫永功，你们可以告诉他的年长官吏，使他们帮助改正他的行为。 
English: I have warned Yonggong that you can tell his senior officials so that they can help correct his behavior.

古文：到北京凡七月，改东京留守。
现代文：完颜永功到北京总共七个月，又改任东京留守。
English: After Yan Yonggong went to Beijing for a total of seven months, he was reassigned to stay in Tokyo.

古文：世宗幸上京，过东京，永功从。
现代文：金世宗皇帝前往上京，路过东京，完颜永功跟从。
English: Emperor Kim Sejong went to Shangjing, passing through Tokyo, and Yan Yonggong followed.

古文：明年，上还至天平山好水川，皇太子薨。
现代文：第二年，皇帝回到天平山好水川，皇太子死去。
English: The following year, the emperor returned to Tenpyo-san, Yoshimizu-gawa, and the crown prince died.

古文：诏永功护丧事，寻拜御史大夫。
现代文：皇帝诏令完颜永功保护丧事，不久他被授予御史大夫。
English: The emperor issued a decree to protect Yan Yonggong after the funeral, and soon he was awarded the title of Imperial Historian.

古文：章宗封原王，加开府仪同三司。
现代文：章宗被封为原王，加封开府仪同三司。
English: Zhang Zong was appointed as the original king, and the opening ceremony and the three offices were added.

古文：赵王永中及永功兄弟皆加开府仪同三司。
现代文：赵王完颜永中和完颜永功兄弟都加封为开府仪同三司。
English: Zhao Wang Ganyan Yongzhong and his brother Ganyan Yonggong were both awarded the title of Kaifu Yi Tong Sanshi.

古文：明年，判大宗正事。
现代文：第二年，完颜永功任判大宗正事。
English: In the second year, Yan Yonggong was appointed to judge major cases.

古文：应州僧与永功有旧，将诉事于彰国军节度使移剌胡剌，求永功手书与胡剌为地。
现代文：应州一僧人与完颜永功有故交，他将向彰国军节度使移剌胡剌求情，求完颜永功写一封信给移剌胡剌。
English: A monk in Yingzhou has a long-standing friendship with Guan Yan Yonggong. He will make a request to Zhang Guo Jun to intercede with Guan Yan Yonggong and write a letter to Guan Yan Yonggong.

古文：胡剌得书，奏之。
现代文：移剌胡剌得到信后，把这件事上奏给金世宗皇帝。
English: After receiving the letter, Empress Dowager Hu Jintao reported the matter to Emperor Kim Il Sung.

古文：上谓宰臣曰： 永功以书嘱事胡剌，此虽细微，不可不惩也。
现代文：皇帝对宰臣说 ：永功用书信嘱托移剌胡剌，这虽是很小的事，但不可不惩处。
English: The emperor said to the vice-minister: Yonggong used a letter to order the transfer of Zhu Huan. Although this is a very small matter, it must be punished.

古文：凡人小过不治，遂至大咎。
现代文：凡是人的小过失不加以治理，于是就会发展为大错误。
English: All of man's minor faults, if not corrected, will develop into major faults.

古文：有犯必惩，庶几能改，是亦教也。 
现代文：有犯错的我们一定要惩罚，希望他能够改正，这也是教育他。 
English: If someone makes a mistake, we must punish him and hope that he can correct himself. This is also educating him.

古文：皆曰： 陛下用法无私，臣下敢不敬畏。 
现代文：宰臣都说 ：陛下执法无私，大臣们怎敢不敬畏。 
English: The vice-ministers all said, "His Majesty enforces the law selflessly, how dare the ministers not be in awe of him."

古文：于是永功解职。
现代文：于是解除了完颜永功的职务。
English: As a result, the post of Ganyan Yonggong was dismissed.

古文：未几，复判大宗正事。
现代文：不久，又恢复了他的判大宗正事职务。
English: Soon after, he was reinstated to his post as a judge of major cases.

古文：章宗即位，除判平阳府事，进封冀王。
现代文：章宗即皇帝位，完颜永功任判平阳府事，进封为冀王。
English: Zhangzong became the emperor, Yan Yonggong was appointed as the governor of Pingyang, and Jinfei became the king of Ji.

古文：永功之官，随引医人沈思存过制限，当解职。
现代文：完颜永功做官时，跟随引医人沈思存违反了一些禁令，应当解除官职。
English: After Yan Yonggong became an official, he violated some prohibitions and should be relieved of his official duties.

古文：上曰： 朕知此事，当痛断监奴及治府掾长史管辖府事者罪，仍著于令。 
现代文：金章宗皇帝说 ：朕知道这件事，就当干净利落地判监奴和治府掾长史管辖府事的罪，并仍然发布命令。 
English: Emperor Jinzhangzong said, "Since I know about this matter, I should give a clear-cut sentence to the jailer and the governor for the crime of administering the affairs of the government, and still issue an order."

古文：家奴王唐犯罪至徒，永功曲庇之。
现代文：家奴王唐犯了罪跑到完颜永功那里，完颜永功庇护他。
English: When the family slave Wang Tang committed a crime, he ran to Guan Yan Yonggong, and Guan Yan Yonggong protected him.

古文：平阳治中高德裔失觉察，笞四十。
现代文：平阳治中高德裔失去警惕，杖打四十大板。
English: The Germans of Pingyang Middle School and High School lost their vigilance, and the stick hit the forty-one board.

古文：于是永功改判济南府。
现代文：于是完颜永功改任判济南府。
English: As a result, Yan Yonggong was reassigned to Jinan Prefecture.

古文：诏永功曰： 所坐虽细事，法令不得不如此。
现代文：皇帝下诏完颜永功说 ：你所犯的虽然都是一些小事，但法律不得不如此。
English: After the emperor issued the edict, Yan Yonggong said: Although what you have committed are all small things, the law has to be like this.

古文：今已释矣，后毋复然。
现代文：今天释放你，以后不要再这样。
English: You're getting out today. Don't do it again.

古文：济南先帝旧治，风土甚好，可悉此意也。 
现代文：济南是先帝治理过的地方，风水很好，你可以慢慢领会我的意思。 
English: Jinan is a place that was governed by the previous emperor, the feng shui is very good, you can slowly understand what I mean.

古文：改授山东西路把鲁古世袭猛安。
现代文：完颜永功改授为山东西路把鲁古世袭猛安。
English: After Yan Yonggong was awarded the title of Mountain East-West Road, Lu Gu's inheritance was greatly improved.

古文：二年，判广宁府事，进封鲁王。
现代文：明昌二年，他任判广宁府事，进封为鲁王。
English: In the second year of the Ming and Chang dynasties, he was appointed as the governor of Guangning and was crowned as the King of Lu.

古文：明年，判彰德府事。
现代文：第二年，任判彰德府事。
English: The following year, he was appointed to the post of Jangde prefect.

古文：承安元年，进封郢王。
现代文：承安元年，进封郢王。
English: In the first year of the Cheng'an era, he was promoted to the post of Shao Wang.

古文：明年，判太原府事。
现代文：第二年，任判太原府事。
English: The following year, he was appointed as Taiyuan prefectural governor.

古文：泰和七年，改西京留守。
现代文：泰和七年，改任西京留守。
English: After seven years in Taihe, he was transferred to Saikyo and stayed there.

古文：八年，复判平阳府事。
现代文：泰和八年，又任判平阳府事。
English: In the 8th year of the Taihe era, he was also appointed as the magistrate of Pingyang Prefecture.

古文：大安元年，进封谯王，判中山府事。
现代文：大安元年，进封为谯王，判中山府事。
English: In the first year of the Taian era, he was crowned as the king of Shanshan and was awarded the post of Zhongshan prefect.

古文：明年，进封越王。
现代文：第二年，进封为越王。
English: In the second year, Jinfeng became the king of Yue.

古文：宣宗即位，免常参。
现代文：金宣宗即皇帝位，免去完颜永功常常朝拜。
English: Jin Xuan Zong, that is, the emperor's throne, often worships Yan Yonggong.

古文：明年，从迁汴京。
现代文：第二年，他又迁居汴京。
English: The following year, he moved to Beijing.

古文：久之，诏永功每月朔一朝。
现代文：很久以后，皇帝诏令完颜永功每月初一朝拜。
English: After a long time, the emperor issued a decree to end Yan Yonggong's monthly first-day worship.

古文：兴定四年，诏永功无朝。
现代文：兴定四年，皇帝诏令完颜永功不朝拜。
English: In the fourth year of the reign of Emperor Xingding, the emperor issued a decree that Yan Yonggong should not be worshipped.

古文：五年，有疾，赐御药。
现代文：兴定五年，完颜永功生病，皇帝赏给他御药。
English: In the fifth year of Xingding, after Yan Yonggong fell ill, the emperor gave him medicine.

古文：疾革，赐尚医诊视，一日五遣使候问。
现代文：病重后，皇帝赏赐御医诊断，一天五次派人前去问候。
English: After his serious illness, the emperor rewarded his doctor with a diagnosis and sent people to greet him five times a day.

古文：是岁，薨。
现代文：这一年，完颜永功死去。
English: He died that year.

古文：上哭之恸，谥曰忠简。
现代文：皇帝哭得很悲痛，赐谥号忠简。
English: The emperor wept bitterly and gave the title to Zhong Jian.

古文：子福孙、寿孙、粘没曷。
现代文：完颜永功的儿子叫完颜福孙、完颜寿孙、完颜粘没曷。
English: The son of Gan Yan Yonggong was called Gan Yan Fusun, Gan Yan Shousun, and Gan Yan Jian.

古文：卫绍王时，累迁太子太师。宣宗即位，改同判大睦亲府事。
现代文：大定二十六年，皇帝下诏赏赐完颜福孙名为完颜璐，完颜寿孙名为完颜王寿，完颜粘没曷名为完颜琳。这一年，完颜璐加封为奉国上将军。章宗即皇帝位，他加封为银青荣禄大夫，封为萧国公。
English: In the twenty-sixth year of Dading, the emperor issued a decree awarding the grandson of Yan Fu with the name of Yan Jie, the grandson of Yan Shou with the name of Yan Wang Shou, and the grandson of Yan Jie with the name of Yan Lin. In this year, Yan Jie was awarded the title of minister-general. Zhang Zong was the emperor, and he was awarded the title of doctor of Yin Qing Ronglu and the title of Xiao Guogong.

古文：兴定五年，迁判大睦亲府事。
现代文：早年完颜璐为兴陵崇妃的养子，常住在京城，奉旨早上向皇帝请安。
English: In his early years, Guan Yanjun was the adopted son of Xingling Chongfei. He often lived in Beijing and was ordered to greet the emperor in the morning.

古文：子斡论，赐名琰。
现代文：泰和五年，完颜璐死去，章宗皇帝停朝一日，百官进朝安慰。
English: In the fifth year of the reign of Emperor Taizong, Emperor Zhangzong died suddenly, and hundreds of officials came to comfort him.

古文：豫王永成，本名鹤野，又曰娄室。
现代文：豫王完颜永成本名完颜鹤野，又叫完颜娄室。
English: Yancheng, the king of Henan, is also called Yancheng, Yancheng, Yancheng.

古文：母昭仪梁氏。
现代文：母亲是昭仪梁氏。
English: His mother was Zhaoyi Liang.

古文：永成风姿奇伟，博学，善属文。
现代文：完颜永成风流伟岸，学识渊博，善于写文章。
English: He is well-educated and good at writing articles.

古文：世宗尤爱重之。
现代文：金世宗很看重他。
English: Kim Sejong thinks very highly of him.

古文：大定七年，始封沈王，以太学博士王彦潜为府文学，永成师事之。
现代文：大定七年，他开始被封为渖王，用太学博士王彦潜做府文学，完颜永成拜他为师。
English: In the seventh year of Dading, he began to be appointed as the king of Shao. He used Wang Yanqian, a doctor of science, to do prefectural literature, and Yan Yongcheng worshiped him as a teacher.

古文：十一年，进封豳。
现代文：大定十一年，完颜永成被封幽地。
English: In the eleventh year of Dading, Yancheng was sealed forever.

古文：十五年，就外第。
现代文：大定十五年，完颜永成在外地。
English: After 15 years in Daejeon, Yan Yongcheng is no longer in the area.

古文：十六年，判秘书监。
现代文：大定十六年，完颜永成为判秘书监。
English: In the 16th year of Dading, Yan Rong became the judge's supervisor.

古文：明年，授世袭山东东路把鲁古猛安，判大睦亲府事。
现代文：第二年，被授予世袭山东东路把鲁古猛安，判大睦亲府事。
English: In the second year, he was awarded the Hereditary Shandong East Road to bring Lu Gu a great peace, and was sentenced to the Great Harmony Family Affairs.

古文：既而改中都路胡土霭哥蛮猛安。
现代文：不久，改任中都路胡土霭哥蛮猛安。
English: Soon after, he was reassigned to Zhongdu Road.

古文：二十年，改授翰林学士承旨。
现代文：大定二十年，改授翰林学士承旨。
English: Twenty years later, he was awarded the Hanlin Baccalaureate.

古文：二十三年，判定武军节度使事，寻改判广宁府。
现代文：大定二十三年，任判定武军节度使，不久改为判广宁府。
English: In the 23rd year of Dading, he was appointed as the commander of the military festival, and soon changed to Guangningfu.

古文：二十五年，世宗幸上京，命留守中都，判吏部尚书，进开府仪同三司，为御史大夫。
现代文：大定二十五，金世宗到达上京，命令完颜永成留守中都，任判吏部尚书，进封开府仪同三司，任御史大夫。
English: On the 25th day of the month of Dading, King Sejong arrived in Beijing. He ordered Yancheng to stay in the capital permanently, and appointed him as the judge, the secretary, the secretary of the imperial court, the secretary of the imperial court, the secretary of the imperial court, and the secretary of the imperial court.

古文：章宗即位，起复，进封吴，判真定府事。
现代文：金章宗即皇帝位后，重用完颜永成，进封吴地，任判真定府事。
English: After Emperor Jinzhangzong ascended the throne, Yan Yongcheng, who had spent a lot of money, was given the fief of Wudi and appointed to judge and decide government affairs.

古文：朕素不工词翰，临文草草，直写所怀，冀不以辞害意也。 
现代文：明昌元年，改为山东西路盆买必剌猛安。第二年，他被进封兖地。
English: In the first year of the Ming and Chang dynasties, it was changed to the East-West Mountain Road Basin. In the second year, he was put into the fief.

古文：未几，授沁南军节度使。
现代文：完颜永成因为率领军民围猎，被解职，奉表谢罪。不久，任沁南军节度使。
English: Yan Yongcheng was dismissed from his post for leading the army and people in a siege, and was given a certificate of apology. Soon, he was appointed as the festival envoy of the Southern Wei Army.

古文：三年，改判咸平府事，未赴，移判太原府事。
现代文：三年，改任判咸平府事，未赴任，又改任判太原府事。
English: Three years later, he was reassigned to the position of Xianping prefectural magistrate, but before taking up the post, he was reassigned to the position of Taiyuan prefectural magistrate.

古文：上以永成诞日，亲为诗以赐，有 美誉自应辉玉牒，忠诚不待启金滕 之语，当世荣之。
现代文：皇上在他过生日那天，亲自做诗相赐，诗中有 美玉自应辉玉牒，忠诚不待启金鄊 之语，举世引以为荣。
English: On the day of his birthday, the emperor personally gave him a poem. In the poem, there is a saying that "beautiful gems respond to brilliant gems" and "loyalty does not wait for a gold medal," which the world is proud of.

古文：七年，改判平阳府事。
现代文：明昌七年，完颜永成改任判平阳府事。
English: In the seventh year of the Ming and Chang dynasties, Yan Yongcheng was appointed to the post of Pingyang prefect.

古文：承安改元，以覃恩进封豫。
现代文：承安元年，因荫恩被封豫地。
English: In the first year of the Cheng'an era, he was exiled to Henan Province for his kindness.

古文：俄召还，以疾不能入见。
现代文：承安五年完颜永成因病不能入朝。
English: After five years in Cheng'an, Yan Yongcheng was unable to enter the imperial court due to illness.

古文：上亲幸其第临视。
现代文：金章宗皇帝亲自到他府上探望。
English: Emperor Jinzhangzong personally visited him at his residence.

古文：泰和四年，薨。
现代文：泰和四年，完颜永成死去。
English: After four years of peace, Yan Yongcheng died.

古文：讣闻，上为之震悼，赙赠甚厚，谥曰忠献。
现代文：讣闻到朝，金章宗皇帝很震惊，给他很厚的钱财丧葬，谥号忠献。
English: When Emperor Jinzhangzong heard the news in the morning, he was shocked and gave him a large sum of money for his funeral, and his posthumous name was Zhongxian.

