古文：田预王晙高智周王儦裴伷先张文瓘袁嘉祚齐瀚张守珪裴有敞王超张齐丘冯七言事桓臣范张嘉贞僧金师
现代文：田预王晙高智周王儦裴伷先张文瓘袁嘉祚齐瀚张守珪裴有敞王超张齐丘冯七言事桓臣范张嘉贞僧金师
English: Tian Wu Wang, Gao Zhizhi, Zhou Wang, Pei Xian, Zhang Wen, Yuan Jiayu, Qi Han, Zhang Shou, Pei Youzhang, Wang Chao, Zhang Qiqiu, Feng Qigong, Fan Zhang Jiazhen, Monk Jin Shi

古文：田预
现代文：田预
English: Tabu District

古文：唐奉御田预，自云： 少时见奚三儿患气疾，寝食不安。
现代文：唐朝的奉御田预自己说；年轻时看到奚三儿得了气管的疾病，吃不好饭，睡不好觉。
English: The Tang Dynasty's Bong Mita said it himself; when he was young, he saw that his third son had a disease of the trachea, and he could not eat well or sleep well.

古文：田乃请与诊候，出一饮子方剂愈。 
现代文：田预就请求给他诊断。结果出了一个饮剂的方子病就好了。
English: Tian Yuan immediately asked for a diagnosis, and the result was that he was cured of the disease with just one drink.

古文：三儿大悦云： 公既与某尽心治病，某亦当与公尽心，以定贵贱。 
现代文：三儿很高兴，说： 你既然给我尽心治病，我也应该尽心为你定一生的命运。 
English: The third son was very happy and said, "Since you have given me your best to cure my illness, I should also give my best to determine the fate of your life."

古文：可住宿，既至晓，命纸录一生官禄，至第四政，云： 作桥陵丞。 
现代文：留田预住宿，到天亮时，让他拿纸记录一生的官禄，写到第四个征兆，三儿说： 作桥陵丞。 
English: Let him take a piece of paper and record his official position for the rest of his life. At the fourth sign, the third son said, "Build a bridge."

古文：时未有此官，田诘之。对云： 但至时，自有此官出。 
现代文：当时根本没有桥陵丞这个官职，田预就追问他，他回答说： 只要到那个时候，自然就会有这个官职。 
English: At that time, there was no such official position as choryo chojo, so Tian Yue asked him about it. He replied, "As long as it's by that time, there will naturally be such an official position."

古文：又云： 当二十四年任奉御。 
现代文：又说： 你该当作二十四年奉御。 
English: And he said, Thou shalt serve twenty-four years.

古文：及大帝崩，田果任桥陵丞，后为奉御。
现代文：等到皇帝驾崩以后，田预果然任桥陵丞。后任奉御。
English: After the emperor's death, Tian Yuan was appointed to the position of Qiao Lingzheng, and later to the position of Fengyou.

古文：二十四年而改。
现代文：二十四年后改任别的官职。
English: Twenty-four years later, he was transferred to another post.

古文：王晙
现代文：王晙
English: Wang Yao

古文：王晙任渭南已数载。
现代文：王晙任渭南县令已有几年了。
English: Wang Hui has been the county magistrate of Yinan County for several years.

古文：自云： 久厌此县，但得蒲州司马可矣。 
现代文：他自己说： 早就厌烦在这个县当县令了。只要能作蒲州司马就行。 
English: He said himself: I'm tired of being the county magistrate in this county. As long as I can be the sheriff of Puzhou, that's fine.

古文：时奚三儿从北来，见一鬼云： 送牒向渭南，报明府改官。 
现代文：当时奚三儿从冥府来，见一个鬼说： 送公文去渭南，报告明天县府改官。 
English: At that time, Xing San'er came from Hebei Province and saw a ghost saying, "Send the official document to southern Anhui Province and report that the county government will change officials tomorrow."

古文：问何官，云改蒲州司马，便与相随来渭南，见晙云： 公即改官为蒲州司马。 
现代文：奚三儿问： 改为什么官？ 鬼说： 改为蒲州司马。 说完奚三儿便同他一块儿来到渭南，见到王晙，说： 您马上就要改任为蒲州司马了。 
English: Hao San'er asked, "What kind of official are you changing to?" The ghost said, "To Puzhou Sima." After saying this, Hao San'er went with him to the south of Anhui Province, met Wang Yao, and said, "You are about to change your post to Puzhou Sima."

古文：当时鬼在厅阶下曲躬立。
现代文：当时鬼在厅阶下面曲身躬立。
English: At the time, the ghost was crouching at the bottom of the steps.

古文：三儿言讫，走出。
现代文：三儿说完就走了。
English: After three words, she left.

古文：果三数日改蒲州司马。
现代文：果然三天后王晙就改任为蒲州司马了。
English: Sure enough, three days later, Wang Yao was reassigned to the post of Puzhou Sima.

古文：改后二十余日，敕不到。
现代文：但改官后二十多天，皇帝的敕令还不到。
English: However, more than twenty days after the change of post, the emperor's edict had not yet arrived.

古文：问三儿，三儿后见前鬼，问故。
现代文：王晙问三儿，三儿又去见前次那个鬼，问他是什么原因。
English: Wang Yao asked Saner, and Saner went to see the ghost again and asked him what the reason was.

古文：鬼云： 缘王在任剩请官钱，所以折除，今折欲尽，至某时，当得上。后验如其言。
现代文：鬼说： 因为王晙在任上剩有官钱，所以得折草掉，现在已折算完了，等到以后某时才能当上蒲州司马，后来果然像他说的那样。
English: The ghost said, "Because Wang Xi had some government money left over from his post, he had to cut corners. Now the calculations have been completed, and it will be sometime in the future before he can become the Gushu Sima. It turned out to be as he said.

古文：高智周
现代文：高智周
English: Gaozhi Week

古文：高智周，义兴人也。
现代文：高智周是义兴人，青少年时同安陆的郝处俊、广陵的来济。
English: Gao Zhi Zhou was a philanthropist. When he was a teenager, he came to work with Anlu's Zou Chuangjun and Guangling.

古文：少与安陆郝处俊、广陵来济、富阳孙处约同寓于石仲览。
现代文：富阳的孙处约同住在石仲览家里。
English: Fuyang's grandchildren live together at the home of Shi Zhongshan.

古文：仲览宣城人，而家于广陵，破产以待此四人，其相遇甚厚。
现代文：石仲览是宣城人。而在广陵安了家。为招待他们四个人几乎使家庭破产，所以他们几个人交情很深。
English: Shi Zhongyan is a native of Xuancheng. He made his home in Guangling. In order to invite the four of them, he almost bankrupted his family, so several of them are very close friends.

古文：尝夜卧，因各言其志。
现代文：曾有时晚上躺在床上，趁还没有睡着，各自谈论起自己的志向。
English: Sometimes they would lie in bed at night and talk about their ambitions while they were still awake.

古文：处俊先曰： 愿秉衡轴一日足矣。 
现代文：处俊先说： 我哪怕只掌权一天就满足了。 
English: "I'd be satisfied with just one day in power," he said.

古文：智周、来济愿亦当然。
现代文：智周、来济们的愿望也是如此。
English: The same is true of Zhizhou and the wishes of those who came to help.

古文：处约于被中遽起曰： 丈夫枢轴或不可冀，愿且为通事舍人，殿庭周旋吐纳足矣。 
现代文：处约在被中突然起来说： 大丈夫作一个重要大臣或许是难，我只想作一个通事舍人，在皇宫内跑腿学舌，发号施令就满足了。 
English: In the middle of a meeting, he suddenly stood up and said: "It's all right, it may be difficult to be an important minister, I just want to be a hands-on person, running errands in the palace, learning the language, and giving orders is enough.

古文：仲览素重四人，尝引相工视之，皆言贵及人臣，顾视仲览曰： 公因四人而达。 
现代文：仲览平常就很看重这四个人，曾经到相面先生那里去，相面先生都说这四个人都是贵人可当大官，又看了看仲览说： 你会因为他们而发达。
English: Zhongshan usually thinks highly of these four people. Once, he went to Mr. Facing, and Mr. Facing said that these four people are all dignitaries and can be great officials. He also looked at Zhongshan and said: You will be developed because of them.

古文：后各从官州郡。
现代文：后来都各自到州郡里当官了。
English: Later, they all became officials in their respective prefectures.

古文：来济已领吏部，处约以瀛州书佐。
现代文：来济做了吏部长官，处约任瀛州书佐。
English: He served as minister of finance and minister of finance, and was appointed as the secretary of Zhangzhou.

古文：因选引时，随铨而注。济见约，遽命笔曰： 如志如志。 
现代文：有一次选拔推荐官员时，随着选官批注，来济见了处约的名字，立刻拿起笔来说： 可以满足他的志向。 
English: Once, during the selection of a recommendation officer, with the approval of the selection officer, I saw the name of the appointment, immediately picked up the pen and said: I can satisfy his ambition.

古文：乃注通事舍人，注毕下阶，叙平生之言，亦一时之美也。
现代文：就批注为通事舍人。批注后走下台阶，与处约同叙当年的志向，也是一时的美谈。
English: After the commendation, he walked down the steps and shared his aspirations for the year with everyone, which was also a nice moment.

古文：智周尝出家为沙门，乡里惜其才字，勉以进士充赋，擢第，授越王府参军，累迁费县令，与佐官均分俸钱，迁秘书郎，累迁中书侍郎，知政事，拜银青光禄大夫。
现代文：智周曾经出家作了道士，同乡的人都爱惜他的才学，勉励他考进士，考中了，被授予越王府参军，多次升迁作费县县令，与佐官平均分俸禄，又升为秘书郎，又升为中书侍郎。掌管政事，拜为银青光禄大夫。
English: Zhi Zhou once became a Taoist monk. His fellow villagers cherished his talent and encouraged him to pass the entrance examination. After passing the examination, he was awarded the Yuewangfu to join the army. He was promoted many times to the position of Feixian County Commander, and shared his salary equally with the admiral. He was also promoted to secretary and secretary. He was in charge of government affairs and was known as the doctor of silver and blue light.

古文：智周聪慧，举朝无比，日诵数万言，能背碑覆局。
现代文：智周聪慧过人，满朝大臣无人可比，可以一天背诵几万字，能背诵碑文翻转棋局。
English: Zhou Zhi was a brilliant man, a peerless minister of the Manchu Dynasty. He could recite tens of thousands of words a day, and could turn a board game on its head by reciting inscriptions.

古文：淡泊于冠冕，每辞职辄迁，赠越州都督，谥曰定。
现代文：但他对官职的事看得很谈泊，经常要求辞职回乡。死后赠给他越州都督的官爵，谥号为定。
English: After his death, he was given the title of governor of Yuezhou, and his posthumous name was decided.

古文：王儦
现代文：王儦
English: Wang Yao

古文：唐太子通事舍人王儦曰： 人遭遇皆系之命，缘业先定，吉凶乃来，岂必诫慎。
现代文：唐朝的太子通事舍人王儦说： 人生的遭遇都和你的命运有联系，命运事业早就定好了，所以不是吉就是凶，该什么时候来也是注定的，难道一定守诫谨慎吗？
English: Wang Jun, the Tang Dynasty's prince general, said, "The experiences of life are all related to your destiny. Your destiny and career have already been determined. Therefore, whether you are lucky or unlucky is predetermined. When to come is also predetermined. Is it necessary to keep the commandments and be cautious?

古文：昔天后诛戮皇宗，宗子系大理当死。宗子叹曰： 既不免刑，焉用污刀锯？
现代文：过去太后诛杀皇帝的宗族，宗子被送到大理寺审判应当死刑，宗子长叹说： 我既然免不了一死，何必污染了刀锯！ 
English: In the past, the empress dowager killed the emperor's clan, and the patriarch was sent to Dali Temple for trial and sentenced to death. The patriarch sighed and said, "Since I can't avoid death, why should I pollute the knife and saw!"

古文：夜中，以衣领自缢死。晓而苏，遂言笑饮食，不异在家。
现代文：半夜时，用自己的衣服领子上吊而死，到天亮时又苏醒过来，立刻又说又笑，又吃又喝，同在家里一样。
English: In the middle of the night, he hanged himself with the collar of his robe and died. When he woke up in the morning, he immediately started talking and laughing, eating and drinking, just like at home.

古文：数日被戮，神色不变。
现代文：几天以后被杀，脸色神气一点儿也没有改变。
English: He was killed a few days later, his countenance unchanged.

古文：初苏言曰： 始死，冥官怒之曰： 尔合戮死，何为自来？
现代文：当他刚苏醒的时候说： 我刚死，冥府的官就生气对我说： 你该被杀死，为什么自己就来了？
English: When he had just woken up, he said: "I have just died. The officials of the underworld got angry and said to me: You should be killed. Why did you come here?

古文：速还受刑！ 
现代文：快回去受刑！ 
English: Go back and serve your sentence!

古文：宗子问故，官示以冥簿，及前世杀人，今偿对乃毕报。
现代文：宗子问什么缘故，冥官把生死簿给他看，因为你前世杀了人，现在要报偿。
English: Sonoko asked why, and the netherworld official showed him the book of life and death, because you killed someone in a previous life, and now you want to be repaid.

古文：宗子既知，故受害无难色。
现代文：宗子知道是怎么回事了，所以受害时面无一点难色。 
English: Sonoko knew what was going on, so there was no hard feelings when she was victimized.

古文：裴伷先
现代文：裴伷先
English: Pei Xuanxian

古文：工部尚书裴伷先，年十七，为太仆寺丞。
现代文：工部尚书裴伷先。十一岁，任太仆寺丞。
English: He was eleven years old and was appointed to the post of Daju-ji-jo.

古文：伯父相国炎遇害。
现代文：他的伯父是相国，叫裴炎，被杀害。
English: His uncle from the same country, named Pei Yan, was killed.

古文：伷先废为民，迁岭外。
现代文：伷先也被废官为平民，迁到岭外。
English: Yan Xian was also dismissed as a civilian and moved to the outskirts of Ling.

古文：伷先素刚，痛伯父无罪，乃于朝廷封事请见，面陈得失。
现代文：伷先的性格刚直，痛惜伯父无罪被害，就呈上封事在朝庭前请示接见，以便当着皇帝的面陈述得失利害。
English: Xian Xian's character was upright, and he regretted his uncle's innocent death, so he submitted a letter to request an audience in front of the imperial court, so that he could state his gains and losses in front of the emperor.

古文：天后大怒，召见，盛气以待之，谓伷先曰： 汝伯父反，干国之宪，自贻伊戚，尔欲何言？ 
现代文：皇后很生气，召见了伷先，以凌人盛气对待他。对伷先说： 你的伯父反叛，触犯国法。自然留下你这个他的亲戚，你有什么话说？ 
English: The empress was very angry. She summoned her cousin and treated him with domineering arrogance. She said to her cousin: Your uncle rebelled and violated the law of the land. Naturally, he left you, his relative, what do you have to say?

古文：伷先对曰： 臣今请为陛下计，安敢诉冤？
现代文：伷先回答说： 我今天完全是为陛下你着想，怎么敢诉冤呢？
English: Yan Xian replied: "Today, I am only thinking about your majesty. How dare I sue for wrongdoing?"

古文：且陛下先帝皇后，李家新妇。
现代文：再说陛下您是先帝的皇后，李家的新媳妇，先帝遗弃的家业，陛下上朝廷主持朝事。
English: Furthermore, Your Majesty, you are the empress of the former emperor, the new daughter-in-law of the Li family, the family business abandoned by the former emperor, and Your Majesty presides over the affairs of the imperial court.

古文：先帝弃世，陛下临朝，为妇道者，理当委任大臣，保其宗社。
现代文：我看，作为妇道人家，从道理上讲应该把国家大事委任给大臣们，保护好李家的社稷。
English: In my opinion, as a feminist, it is reasonable to delegate state affairs to ministers to protect the Li family's social status.

古文：东宫年长，复子明辟，以塞天人之望。
现代文：东宫年长，应恢复他的儿子掌管朝政，来满足在天上先帝的愿望。
English: Donggong the Elder should restore his son to the throne to fulfill the wishes of the Heavenly Emperor.

古文：今先帝登遐未几，遽自封崇私室，立诸武为王，诛斥李宗，自称皇帝。海内愤惋，苍生失望。
现代文：现在先帝上天没有几天，你就自作主张册封了自己的私党，并立了很多姓武的为王。诛杀排斥李家宗室，自称为皇帝，这样全国都为你气愤婉惜，百姓深感失望。
English: Now, just a few days after the former emperor ascended to heaven, you have made your own proposal to register your own private party, and have set up many surnamed Wu as kings. You have killed and ostracized the Li family line, and called yourself emperor. The whole country is angry and sorry for you, and the people are deeply disappointed.

古文：臣伯父至忠于李氏，反诬其罪，戮及子孙。
现代文：我的伯父最忠于李家，反被你诬陷有罪。连子孙也不能幸免。
English: My uncle was the most loyal to the Li family, but he was framed by you. Even his children and grandchildren cannot be spared.

古文：陛下为计若斯，臣深痛惜。
现代文：为你这样打算，我很痛惜。
English: I'm sorry to do this to you.

古文：臣望陛下复立李家社稷，迎太子东宫。陛下高枕，诸武获全。
现代文：我希望你重新立李家的国家。迎东宫太子为王，你就可以高枕无忧，各位姓武的也就安全了。
English: I hope you will re-establish the country of the Li family. With the crown prince of the Eastern Palace as king, you can rest easy, and everyone with the surname Wu will be safe.

古文：如不纳臣言，天下一动，大事去矣。产、禄之诚，可不惧哉？
现代文：如果不采纳我的话，全国都起来，你就会大事已去，吕产、吕禄二人的教训。你能不害怕吗？
English: If you do not accept my words, the whole country will rise up, and you will have already gone through the great event, the lesson of Lvang and Lulu. Can you not be afraid?

古文：臣今为陛下用臣言未晚。 
现代文：我认为你现在采纳我的话还不晚。 
English: I don't think it's too late for you to take me at my word.

古文：天后怒曰： 何物小子，敢发此言！ 
现代文：皇后气愤地说： 你是什么东西，敢说这种话。 
English: The Queen said angrily: "How dare you say such a thing?

古文：命牵出。伷先犹反顾曰： 陛下采臣言实未晚。 
现代文：命人拉出去，伷先还回头说： 陛下你采纳我的话实在还不晚。 
English: After ordering the man to leave, he turned back and said, "Your Majesty, it's not too late for you to accept my words.

古文：如是者三。
现代文：像这样几次。
English: This went back and forth several times.

古文：天后令集朝臣于朝堂，杖伷先至百，长隶攘州。
现代文：皇后下令把朝中大臣召集在朝堂，给伷先杖刑一百，到攘州做奴隶。
English: The empress ordered that the ministers of both the imperial court and the middle court be summoned to the imperial hall, and that Zou Xianxing be sentenced to one hundred strokes of the cane and sent to Jozhou to be a slave.

古文：伷先解衣受杖，笞至十而先死，数至九十八而苏，更二笞而毕。
现代文：伷先解开衣服受打，打到十杖伷先就昏死过去数到九十八又苏醒，又打了两下才结束。
English: The first to undo his clothes was beaten, and when the beating reached ten strokes, the first to faint and die, and when he counted to ninety-eight, he woke up, and only after two more beatings was it over.

古文：伷先疮甚，卧驴舆中，至流所，卒不死。
现代文：伷先满身创伤，又发展为疮痍遍身，躺在驴车里，到了流放的地点，但最终没有死。
English: First covered with wounds, and then developed into sores all over his body, lying in a donkey cart, to the place of exile, but ultimately did not die.

古文：在南中数岁，娶流人卢氏，生男愿。卢氏卒，伷先携愿，潜归乡。岁余事发，又杖一百，徙北庭。
现代文：在南中几年，娶了一个流放的卢家的女儿为妻，生一个男孩叫愿，卢氏死后，伷先带着愿，偷偷地回到家乡，几年后被发现，又杖刑一百，迁居到北庭。
English: After a few years in the Southern Middle School, he married a daughter of the exiled Lu family and gave birth to a boy named Wei. After the death of the Lu family, Yan first secretly returned to his hometown with a wish. A few years later, he was discovered and was punished with a hundred strokes of the cane. He moved to Beiting.

古文：货殖五年，致资财数千万。
现代文：在北庭做五年买卖，达到家产几千万。
English: After five years of doing business in Beiting, the family has made tens of millions.

古文：伷先贤相之侄，往来河西，所在交二千石。
现代文：伷先是贤明的宰相的侄儿，往来在河西地界，每年都向当地官府上缴二千石。
English: Xian Xian is the nephew of a wise prime minister. He travels to and from the Hexi region, and every year he hands over 2,000 koku to the local government.

古文：北庭都护府城下，有夷落万帐，则降胡也，其可汗礼伷先，以女妻之。可汗唯一女，念之甚，赠伷先黄金马牛羊甚众。
现代文：北庭都护府城下，有少数民族的部落达到上万个帐蓬。伷先就投降这个部落了，部落首领对伷先以礼相待，并把他的女儿嫁给伷先，可汗只有一个女儿，特别疼爱，就赠给伷先很多黄金和马牛羊。
English: There are tens of thousands of tents belonging to ethnic minority tribes under the city of Beitingduofu. Xianxian surrendered to this tribe first. The tribal leader treated Xianxian with courtesy and married his daughter to Xianxian. The khan had only one daughter, and he loved her very much, so he gave Xianxian a lot of gold and horses, cattle and sheep.

古文：伷先因而致门下食客，常数千人。
现代文：伷先因此收养了门下的食客常常达到几千人。
English: As a result, the number of diners who have adopted the restaurant as their home often reaches several thousand.

古文：自北庭至东京，累道致客，以取东京息耗。朝廷动静，数日伷先必知之。
现代文：从北庭到东京，每条道路上都安排了食客，用来探听东京的消息，朝廷里有什么动静，几天以后伷先一定会知道。
English: From Kitaniwa to Tokyo, diners have been arranged on every road to listen for news from Tokyo. If there is any movement in the imperial court, I will certainly know about it in a few days.

古文：时补阙李秦授寓直中书，封事曰： 陛下自登极，诛斥李氏及诸大臣，其家人亲族，流放在外者，以臣所料，且数万人。如一旦同心招集为逆，出陛下不意，臣恐社稷必危。
现代文：当时补阙李秦任寓直中书，上奏的封事中说： 陛下自从登上皇位，诛杀排斥李家的人以及各大臣，他们的家人和亲戚门被流放在外的，依我估计，将近几万人，如果一旦他们招集在一起同心反乱，出于你的意料之外，我怕你的天下一定很危险。
English: At that time, the supplementary Li Qin Ren Zhuo Zhongzhong book said in the opening letter: Your Majesty, since ascending the throne, has fought and killed the people who have excluded the Li family and the ministers, and their families and relatives have been exiled, according to my estimate, nearly tens of thousands of people. If they are called together in a concerted rebellion, due to your unexpectedness, I am afraid that your world must be very dangerous.

古文：谶曰： 代武者刘。 
现代文：谶语说： 代武者刘。 
English: The slang says: Liu, the representative of the warriors, is the best.

古文：夫刘者流也。陛下不杀此辈，臣恐为祸深焉。 
现代文：刘就是流。陛下不杀这些人，我怕祸患太大了。 
English: Liu is the stream. If Your Majesty does not kill these people, I am afraid the disaster will be too great.

古文：天后纳之，夜中召入。
现代文：则天皇后采纳了他的意见，半夜时召他入宫。
English: The Empress took his advice and summoned him to the palace in the middle of the night.

古文：谓曰： 卿名秦授，天以卿授朕也，何启予心，即拜考功员外郎，仍知制诰，敕赐朱绂，女妓十人，金帛称是。
现代文：对他说： 你的名叫秦授，是上天把你授给我，亏你启发了我。 立刻拜他为考功员外郎，仍然传达皇帝的命令。并赏赐给他红袍和十个美女，金银财宝更多。
English: He said to him, "Your name is Qin Zu, the heavens have given you to me, and you have inspired me. I immediately worshipped him as a guru, still conveying the emperor's orders, and gave him a red robe and ten beautiful women, and more gold and silver and treasure.

古文：与谋发敕使十人于十道，安慰流者。 
现代文：他与则天皇后谋密派十个特使到十个道，安慰被流放的人，其实是要全部杀掉那些被流放的人。
English: He conspired with Empress Jie to send ten special envoys to ten provinces to comfort the exiles, but in reality he wanted to kill all those who had been exiled.

古文：敕既下，伷先知之。会宾客计议，皆劝伷先入胡。伷先从之。
现代文：命令已经下达，伷先就知道了，就聚会宾客们商量，大家都劝伷先到少数民族地区去，伷先听从了。
English: The order had already been issued, and they knew about it in advance, and the guests at the gathering discussed it. Everyone advised them to go to the minority areas first, and they obeyed.

古文：日晚，舍于城外，因装，时有铁骑果毅二人，勇而有力，以罪流。伷先善待之，及行，使将马装橐駞八十头，尽金帛，宾客家僮从之者三百余人。甲兵备，曳犀超乘者半。
现代文：当天晚上住在城外，化了装，当时有二个铁骑果毅，勇猛而又有力气，因犯罪被流放，伷先对他们很好，要出发时，命令他们率领八十匹驮着财物的马，口袋箱子里全是金银玉帛等，随从的宾客家僮等也有三百多人，备有铁甲兵车，拿着兵器等追随的有一半。
English: On the evening of the same day, he was living outside the city, disguised. At that time, there were two iron horsemen, Gou Yi, brave and powerful, who had been exiled for crime. He was very kind to them at first. When he wanted to set out, he ordered them to lead eighty horses with their belongings. Their pockets and chests were full of gold, silver, and jade, etc. There were also more than three hundred guests, including guests, with iron armored vehicles, and half of them were armed with weapons.

古文：有千里足马二，伷先与妻乘之。装毕遽发，料天晓人觉之，已入虏境矣。
现代文：有二匹千里马，伷先与妻各骑一匹，整装完毕立刻出发，估计天亮被人发觉时已经进入少数民族的境地了。
English: There were two draught horses, the mule and his wife rode one each, and they set off immediately after finishing their preparations. It is estimated that they had already entered the minority status when they were discovered at dawn.

古文：即而迷失道，迟明，唯进一舍，乃驰。
现代文：不巧的是迷了路，天快亮时只前进了三十多里，只好夺路乱跑。
English: Unfortunately, I lost my way. When it was almost dawn, I had only advanced more than thirty miles, and had to run wildly to find my way.

古文：待报而使者至，召流人数百，皆害之。伷先以未报故免。天后度流人已死，又使使者安抚流人曰： 吾前使十道使安慰流人，何使者不晓吾意，擅加杀害，深为酷暴。 其辄杀流人使，并所在锁项，将至害流人处斩之，以快亡魂。
现代文：则天皇后考虑被流放的人已经都死了，又派使臣安抚被流放的人说： 我以前派十个特使分十道安抚被流放的人，不知道为什么使臣不明白我的用意，擅自杀害，太残暴酷毒了，现在追究杀流放人的使臣，并就地逮捕，把他们带到杀害流放人的地方处斩，使亡魂得到快慰。
English: Then the Empress, thinking that all the exiles were dead, sent envoys to pacify the exiles, saying: I once sent ten envoys in ten directions to pacify the exiles. I don't know why the envoys didn't understand my intention and killed themselves. It was so cruel and vicious. Now, I will investigate the envoys who killed the exiles, arrest them on the spot, take them to the place where the exiles were killed, and execute them, so that the souls of the dead can be comforted.

古文：诸流人未死，或他事系者，兼家口放还。
现代文：那些没死的流放人，或者因为别的事受牵连的，连同他们的家属一律放回。 
English: Those exiles who are not dead, or who are implicated in other matters, will be returned together with their families.

古文：由是伷先得免，乃归乡里。
现代文：因此伷先才得免死，于是回到家乡。
English: As a result, he narrowly escaped death and returned to his hometown.

古文：及唐室再造，宥裴炎，赠以益州大都督。求其后，伷先乃出焉，授詹事丞。
现代文：等到唐朝再次恢复，宽恕了裴炎，赠给他益州大都督的名号，寻找他的后代，伷先才出头露面。
English: He waited until the Tang Dynasty was restored again, forgave Pei Yan, gave him the title of Yizhou Grand Governor, and searched for his descendants, before he came forward.

古文：岁中四迁，遂至秦州都督，再节制桂广。一任幽州帅，四为执金吾，一兼御史大夫，太原京兆尹太府卿，凡任三品官向四十政。
现代文：授给他詹事丞的官职，一年中四次升迁，直到作了秦州都督，又统管桂广两地，作了一任幽州帅，四任执金吾，一次兼御史大夫，太原京兆尹太府卿。
English: He was given the official post of Zhan Shizhen, and was promoted four times in one year, until he became the governor of Qin State, and also governed Guigang and Guizhou, and served as the governor of Yuzhou, the four-time governor of Jingu, the one-time chief historian, and the Taiyuan Emperor Jingzhao Yin.

古文：所在有声绩，号曰唐臣，后为工部尚书东京留守薨，寿八十六。
现代文：共任三品官接近四十年，他任官期间都有政绩，号为唐臣，后来在任工部尚书东京留守时死去，享年八十六岁。
English: He served as the third-ranked official for nearly forty years. During his tenure, he had political achievements, and was called Tang Chen. Later, he died at the age of eighty-six while staying in Tokyo as the official of the Ministry of Industry.

古文：张文瓘
现代文：张文瓘
English: Zhang Wenyi

古文：张文瓘少时，曾有人相云： 当为相，然不得堂饭食吃。 
现代文：张文瓘年轻时，曾经有人给他相面说： 应该作宰相，然而不能在堂上吃饭。 
English: When Zhang Wenyi was young, someone once said to him, "You should be the prime minister, but you can't eat in the hall."

古文：及在此位，每升堂欲食，即腹胀痛霍乱，每日唯吃一碗浆水粥。
现代文：等到他真的作了宰相，每次升堂要吃饭，就会肚子发胀甚至闹霍乱。只好每天吃一碗浆水粥。
English: By the time he actually became prime minister, every time he had to eat, his stomach would swell and he would even get cholera. He had to eat a bowl of porridge every day.

古文：后数年，因犯堂食一顿，其夜便卒。
现代文：以后过了几年，因为在堂上吃了顿饭，当天晚上就死了。
English: A few years later, because he ate a meal in the hall, he died that evening.

古文：袁嘉祚
现代文：袁嘉祚
English: Yuan Jiayuan

古文：袁嘉祚为滑州别驾。
现代文：袁嘉祚是滑州别驾。
English: Yuan Jiayuan is a star in the city of Leshou.

古文：在任得清状，出官末迁。
现代文：在任期间清廉公正，但自从出任这个官也没有升迁。
English: He was clean and fair during his time in office, but has not been promoted since taking up the post.

古文：接萧岑二相自言，二相叱之曰： 知公好踪迹，何乃躁求！ 
现代文：有一次迎接萧岑二宰相时说了希望升迁的意思，二相都呵斥他说： 知道你好追随别人，何必这么急呢？ 
English: Once, when greeting Prime Minister Xiao Rongji, he said that he hoped to be promoted. Both ministers shouted at him: "If you know that you are following others, why are you in such a hurry?

古文：袁惭退，因于路旁树下休息，有二黄衣人见而笑之。
现代文：袁嘉祚惭愧只好退下，靠在路旁的树下休息，这时有两个穿黄衣服的人看见他就笑了。
English: Embarrassed, Yuan Jiaqi had to retreat and rest under a tree on the side of the road, when two people in yellow clothes saw him and smiled.

古文：袁问何笑，二人曰： 非笑公笑彼二相耳！ 三数月间并家破，公当断其罪耳。 
现代文：袁嘉祚问为什么笑。二人回答说： 我们笑那两个宰相罢了，三个月以内他们连家都会破败，你将审判他们的案子。 
English: Yuan Jiaqi asked why they were laughing. The two replied, "We are only laughing at those two prime ministers. Within three months, their families will be ruined. You will judge their case."

古文：袁惊而问之，忽而不见。
现代文：袁嘉祚惊奇地问怎么回事，但那二人忽然间就不见了。
English: Yuan Jiayuan was surprised and asked what was going on, but the two suddenly disappeared.

古文：数日，敕除袁刑部郎中。
现代文：几天后，特敕袁嘉祚为刑部郎中。
English: A few days later, Special Envoy Yuan Jiayu became a junior member of the Criminal Investigation Department.

古文：经旬月，二相被收，果为袁公所断。
现代文：又过了一个多月，二相被收监，果然被袁嘉祚审断。
English: More than a month later, the two were taken into custody, and Yuan Jiaxuan finally adjudicated.

古文：齐瀚
现代文：齐瀚
English: Qihang

古文：东京玩敲师，与侍郎齐瀚游往。
现代文：东京的玩敲师与侍郎齐瀚游览同行。
English: Tokyo's playful knockers go on a tour with the waiter Chihiro.

古文：齐自吏部侍郎而贬端州高安具尉。
现代文：齐瀚从吏部侍郎贬官到端州任高安县县尉。
English: Qi Han was demoted from the servant of the cadre department to the county lieutenant of Gao'an County in Danzhou.

古文：僧云： 从今十年，当却回，亦有权要。 
现代文：有个和尚说： 从今十年以后，你还会回去，也会当重要官职。 
English: A monk said, "Ten years from now, you will still go back, and you will also become an important official."

古文：后如期，入为陈留采访使。
现代文：后来真的如期实现了，被提升为陈留采访使。
English: Later, it really came to fruition as planned, and he was promoted to Chen Ruzhong's press secretary.

古文：师尝云： 侍郎前身曾经打杀两人，今被谪罪，所以十年左降。 
现代文：玩敲师曾说： 侍郎前世曾经打死过两个人，被贬官是抵罪，所以有十年被贬。 
English: A jester once said: A waiter once killed two people in his previous life. Being demoted was a punishment, so he was demoted for ten years.

古文：张守珪
现代文：张守珪
English: Zhang Shouyi

古文：张守珪，曾有人录其官禄十八政，皆如其言。
现代文：张守珪，曾有人记录他的官禄共十八次任官。
English: Zhang Shoucheng, it was once recorded that he held a total of eighteen positions.

古文：及任括州刺史，疾甚，犹谓人曰： 某当为凉州都督，必应未死。 
现代文：后来都像记录那样实现了。等到他当了括州刺史，得了重病，还对别人说： 我应该作凉州都督，一定会应验所以不会死。 
English: Later, it all came to fruition, as the record shows. Until he became the state's chief historian, fell seriously ill, and said to others, "I should be the governor of Liangzhou, I will certainly fulfill it, so I won't die."

古文：既而脑发疡，疮甚，乃曰： 某兄弟皆有此疮而死，必是死后赠凉州都督。 
现代文：后来头部溃烂，生疮很重。他又说： 我的兄弟们都是得这种病死的，一定是我死后赠凉州都督。 
English: Later, his head became ulcerated with severe sores. He also said, "My brothers all died of this disease. I must have been given the governorship of Liangzhou after my death."

古文：遂与官吏设酒而别，并作遗书，病五六日卒。
现代文：于是与众官吏设酒宴告别，并写了遗书。病五六天以后死了。
English: So he held a farewell banquet with all the officials and wrote a suicide note. He died five or six days later.

古文：后果赐凉府都督。
现代文：后来果然赐为凉州都督。
English: Later, he was given the post of the governor of Liangzhou.

古文：裴有敞
现代文：裴有敞
English: Pei Yuchang

古文：唐杭州刺史裴有敞疾甚，令钱塘县主簿夏荣看之。
现代文：唐朝的杭州刺史裴有敞得了重病，请钱塘县主簿夏荣来看病。
English: The Tang Dynasty's Hangzhou ruler, Shibei Youchan, fell seriously ill, and asked Qiantang County's chief official, Xia Rong, to come and see him.

古文：荣曰： 使君百无一虑，夫人早须崇福禳之。 而崔夫人曰： 禳须何物？ 
现代文：夏荣说： 刺史大人百无一虑，夫人早就应该祭祀祈祷，崔夫人说： 祭祀须用什么东西？ 
English: Xia Rong said, "Tashi adults have no qualms, Mrs. should have offered prayers long ago. Mrs. Cui said, "What should be used for the sacrifice?

古文：荣曰： 使君娶二姬以压之，出三年则危过矣。 
现代文：夏荣说： 使君应再娶二妾压祸，过三年以后就没有什么危险了。 
English: Xia Rong said: It is a great misfortune that you should marry two concubines. After three years, there will be no danger.

古文：夫人怒曰： 此獠狂语，儿在身无病。 
现代文：夫人气愤地说： 这是那老东西发疯的话，儿在我不会有病。 
English: My wife said angrily, "If it's just that old thing going crazy, my son won't get sick."

古文：荣退曰： 夫人不信，荣不敢言。使君合有三妇，若不更娶，于夫人不祥。 
现代文：夏荣边后退边说： 夫人不信，我就不敢说了，使君命中该有三妇，若不再娶，对夫人不好。 
English: Xia Rong stepped back and said, "My wife doesn't believe me, so I don't dare to say it. There should be three wives in your life. If you don't marry again, it won't be good for your wife."

古文：夫人曰： 乍可死，此事不相当也。 
现代文：夫人说： 刚好该死的话，这件事也不恰当。 
English: She said: "It's just not the right thing to do, for crying out loud.

古文：其年夫人暴亡，敞更娶二姬。
现代文：这一年夫人暴病身亡，裴有敞又娶了二妾。
English: In the same year, his wife died of a violent illness, and Bae married two concubines.

古文：荣言信矣。
现代文：夏荣的话是可信的。
English: Xia Rong's words are credible.

古文：王超
现代文：王超
English: Wang Chao

古文：王超者，尝为汜水县令。
现代文：王超，曾经当过汜水县县令。
English: Wang Chao was once the county magistrate of Surabaya County.

古文：严损之曰： 公从此为京官讫，即为河北二太守。 
现代文：严迥贬斥他说： 你从这里当到京官就终止了，此后还可作了河北太守。 
English: Yan Xun rebuked him, saying, "From here, when you become a Beijing official, you are finished. After that, you can become the governor of Hebei Province.

古文：后果入为著作郎，出为真定太守，又改为京城守，超又谓汜水令严迥云： 公宜修福。 
现代文：后来果然入京作著作郎。又出任真定太守，又改任为京城太守，王超又对汜水县令严迥说： 你应该祈祷赐福。 
English: Later, Wang Chao went to Beijing to become a scholar. He was also appointed as the governor of Jinding and the governor of Beijing. Wang Chao also said to the governor of Surabaya: "You should pray for blessings."

古文：严不信。果被人诉，解官除名，配流身亡也。
现代文：严迥不信，果然被人所告，解除官名，刺配流放身亡。
English: Strictly disbelieving, he was indeed accused by others, stripped of his official title, and exiled to death.

古文：张齐丘
现代文：张齐丘
English: Zhang Qiqiu

古文：张齐丘妻怀姙，过期数月不产。谓是病，方欲合药疗之。
现代文：张齐丘的妻子怀孕，过了产期几个月也没有生产，说是病，正要配药治病。
English: Zhang Qiqiu's wife was pregnant, and she had not given birth for several months after her due date. She said she was ill and was about to be prescribed medicine to treat her illness.

古文：吴郡尼宝珠见之曰： 慎勿服药，后必生一卫佐。 
现代文：吴郡有个尼姑叫宝珠的看了以后说： 千万不要吃药，以后一定会生一个卫佐。 
English: A nun in Wuxi County named Baozhu said after watching the film: "Don't take any medicine, you'll definitely give birth to a Weizao in the future."

古文：既而果生男。
现代文：不久果然生一个男孩。
English: Soon after, a boy was born.

古文：齐丘贵后，恩敕令与一子奉御官。齐丘奏云： 两侄早孤，愿与侄。 
现代文：齐丘显贵后，皇帝恩敕命给他一子奉御官，齐丘上奏说： 有两个侄儿早孤，希望授侄儿官职。 
English: After Qiqiu became eminent, Emperor Enshi ordered him to give him a son to serve as an imperial official. Qiqiu reported: I have two prematurely orphaned nephews, and I hope to give my nephew an official post.

古文：帝嘉之，令别与两侄六品已下官。齐丘之子，仍与东宫卫佐，年始十岁。
现代文：皇帝很赞赏他，命令另外授予两侄六品以下的官职，齐丘的儿子仍然授予东宫卫佐的官职。那年才十岁。
English: The emperor appreciated him very much and ordered that two of his nephews, who were under the sixth grade, be given official posts. Qiqiu's son, who was only ten years old at the time, was still given the official post of Donggong Weizao.

古文：冯七言事
现代文：冯七言事
English: The Story of Feng Qigong

古文：陈留郡有冯七者，能饮酒，每饮五斛，言事无不中者。无何，语郡佐云： 城中有白气，郡守当死。 
现代文：陈留郡有个叫冯七的，能喝酒，每次能喝五斗。他说的事没有不说中的，不多时，他对郡佐说： 城中有白气，郡守要死。 
English: In Chenliu County, there is a man named Feng Qi, who can drink alcohol, and can drink five bucks at a time. There is nothing he says that is not true. Not long ago, he said to the county magistrate: There is white gas in the city, and the county magistrate will die.

古文：太守裴敦复闻而召问。冯七云： 其气未全，急应至半年已来。
现代文：太守裴敦听说这件事以后召见他何，冯七说： 那白气还不全，快的话半年就会来。 
English: When Governor-General Petun heard about this, he summoned Feng Qi to see him. Feng Qi said, "That white wind is not yet complete. If you hurry, it will come in half a year."

古文：裴公即经营求改。
现代文：裴敦马上想办法要求改任。
English: Petun immediately tried to find a way to ask for a transfer.

古文：改后韦恒为太守，未到而卒。
现代文：改后韦恒任太守，但韦恒还没到郡就死了。
English: After the reform, Wei Heng was appointed as the governor, but he died before reaching the county.

古文：人问得应否？
现代文：有人问冯七： 应验了吗？ 
English: Someone asked Feng Qi: Have you passed the examination?

古文：曰： 未！ 
现代文：冯七说： 没有。 
English: Feng Qi said: No.

古文：寻又张利贞主郡，卒于城中。
现代文：随即，张利贞主持郡事，死在城中。
English: Immediately afterwards, Zhang Lizhen presided over the county affairs and died in the city.

古文：杜华尝见陈留僧法晃云： 开封县令沈庠合改畿令，十五月作御史中丞。 
现代文：杜华曾见到陈留的一个和尚叫法晃的说： 开封县令沈庠命中应改为京畿令，十五日以后作御史中丞。 
English: Du Hua once saw a monk named Fa-Kang in Chenliu, who said: "The Kaifeng County order should be changed to the Gyeonggi County order, and after the fifteenth day, the order should be changed to the Gyeonggi County order.

古文：华信之，又遇冯七问焉。
现代文：杜华相信了。又遇到冯七就问冯七对不对。
English: Du Hua believed it. When he met Feng Qi again, he asked Feng Qi if he was right.

古文：冯七云： 沈君不逾十日。 
现代文：冯七说： 沈庠君不超过十天就会死。 
English: Feng Qi said, "Shen Yao Jun will die in less than ten days.

古文：皆不之信。
现代文：大家都不信他的话。
English: No one believed him.

古文：经数日，沈公以病告，杜华省之，沈云： 但苦头痛，忍不堪。 
现代文：经过几天，沈庠告病，杜华才明白过来提醒沈庠。沈庠说： 只是头痛得很，实在忍受不了。 
English: After a few days, when Shen Rong fell ill, Du Hua came to understand and reminded Shen Rong. Shen Rong said, "It's just a bad headache, I really can't stand it."

古文：数日而卒。
现代文：几天以后死了。
English: Xue Shaoyin recounted the story.

古文：桓臣范
现代文：桓臣范
English: Kanshin Fan

古文：汝州刺史桓臣范自说： 前任刺史入考，行至常州，有暨生者，善占事。
现代文：汝州刺史桓臣范自己说： 同前任刺史进京考核。走到常州，有个双生的人很会占卜。
English: Ruzhou chief historian Huan Chen Fan said, "I had the same examination as my predecessor when I went to Beijing. When I went to Changzhou, there was a twin who was very good at divination.

古文：三日，饮之以酒，醉。至四日，乃将拌米并火炷来。暨生以口衔火炷，忽似神言。
现代文：一连喝了三天酒，醉了，到第四天，拿来拌米和火炷，双生人口含火炷，忽然间像神仙一样说话。
English: He drank wine for three days in a row, got drunk, and on the fourth day, he took mixed rice and firecrackers, the twin population containing firecrackers, and suddenly spoke like a god.

古文：其时有东京缑氏庄，奴婢初到，桓问以庄上有事。
现代文：那时东京有缑家庄，一奴一婢刚从缑家庄来，桓臣范就问他们庄上的事。
English: At that time, there was a Shingasho in Tokyo. A servant and a maid had just come from Shingasho, and Kanen Fan asked them about the Shingasho.

古文：暨生云： 此庄姓卢，不姓桓。 
现代文：双生人说： 这个庄姓卢，不姓桓。 
English: The twins said, "This village's surname is Lu, not Huan.

古文：见一奴，又云： 此奴即走，仍偷两贯钱。 
现代文：见到那个奴仆，又说： 这个人要走，还要偷两贯钱。 
English: And when he saw the bondman, he said, This fellow will go out and steal two talents.

古文：见一婢，复云： 此婢即打头破血流。 
现代文：见到那个奴婢，又说： 这个人即将被打得头破血流。 
English: And when he saw the servant, he said, This man is about to be beaten until his head bleeds.

古文：桓问今去改得何官，暨生曰： 东北一千里外作刺史，须慎马厄。 
现代文：桓臣范问现在到东京将改为什么官职？双生人说： 到东北方向一千里以外作刺史，但要小心马给你带来厄运。
English: Kanshin Fan asked, "What official position will you change to now that you are in Tokyo?" The twins said, "Go a thousand miles to the northeast to make history, but beware that horses will bring you bad luck."

古文：及行至扬府，其奴果偷两千而去。
现代文：走到扬州，那个奴仆果然偷了两贯钱逃跑了。
English: When he got to Yangzhou, the servant stole two cords of money and ran away.

古文：至徐州界，其婢与夫相打，头破血流。
现代文：到了徐州地界，那奴婢与别人打架，被打得头破血流。
English: When they reached the border of Xuzhou, the slave girl got into a fight with another person and was beaten so badly that she was bleeding from the head.

古文：至东京，改瀛州刺史。方始信之。
现代文：到了东京，改任瀛州刺史，这才相信了双生人的话。
English: When he arrived in Tokyo, he was reassigned to the post of the governor of Luzhou, and only then did he believe in the words of the twins.

古文：常慎马厄。
现代文：于是便常常提防马给他带来厄运。
English: As a result, he was always on the lookout for horses that could bring him bad luck.

古文：及至郡，因拜跪，左脚忽痛，遂行不得。
现代文：等到了郡守，因为拜跪，左脚忽然疼痛起来。
English: When I got to the county governor's residence, my left foot suddenly started to ache because I was kneeling.

古文：有一人云解针，针讫，其肿转剧，连膝焮痛。遂请告，经一百日停官。
现代文：然后就走不了路。有一个人说他会用针刺治疗，用针扎完，他的脚肿得更厉害了，连膝盖以下也发烧肿胀，疼痛难忍，于是请病假，过了一百天被停了官。
English: Then he couldn't walk. One person said that he would use acupuncture to treat it. After using the needle, his foot swelled even more. Even below the knee, the fever swelled and the pain was unbearable. So he took sick leave and was suspended for 100 days.

古文：其针人乃姓马，被上佐械系责之，言马厄者，即此人也。
现代文：那个用针给治病的人姓马。
English: The name of the person who treated him with a needle is Ma.

古文：归至东都，于伊阙住，其缑氏庄卖与卢从愿。方知诸事无不应者。
现代文：那人被上了刑具责问。所说的 马厄 ，就是指这个人啊。回到东京，在京兆尹家暂住，那个缑氏庄卖给了卢从愿，这才知道那双生人说的话没有不和事实相符的。
English: The man was put on a torture device and interrogated. The so-called "Mae" refers to this man. Back in Tokyo, he temporarily stayed at the house of Kyocho Yin, and that Shinshicho was sold to Lu Congnian. Only then did he know that what those two strangers said did not contradict the truth.

古文：桓公自此信命，不复营求。
现代文：桓臣范从此相信命运，不再为名利而奔波劳累了。
English: From then on, Kanshin Fan believed in fate and was no longer tired of running for fame and fortune.

古文：张嘉贞
现代文：张嘉贞
English: Zhang Jiazhen

古文：张嘉贞未遇，方贫困时，曾于城东路，见一老人卖卜。嘉贞访焉。
现代文：张嘉贞还没有当官，正贫困的时候，曾经在城东的大道上看见一个老人给人算卦，嘉贞就请他给算命。
English: When Zhang Jiazhen was not yet an official and was poor, she once saw an old man on the road to the east of the city who was telling fortunes. Jiazhen invited him to tell fortunes.

古文：老人乃粘纸两卷，具录官禄，从始至末，仍封令勿开。每官满，即开看之，果皆相当。
现代文：那算命老人粘纸两卷，从头到尾都封上了，让他不要打开，每次当官满任，再打开看纸卷。后来果然都和那纸卷里话相符。
English: The fortune-telling old man sealed two rolls of sticky paper from the beginning to the end, asking him not to open them. Every time the official completed his duties, he opened the paper roll to read it. Later, it all matched the words in the paper roll.

古文：后至宰相某州刺史，及定州刺史。病重将死，乃云： 吾犹有一卷官禄未开，岂能即死？
现代文：以后到宰相，到某州刺史，直到定州刺史，这时他病重就要死了，就说： 我还有一卷官禄没有打开看，怎么能就死了呢？
English: Later, he went to the prime minister, to a certain prefecture to make history, and finally to Dingzhou to make history. At this time, he was seriously ill and about to die, so he said, "I still have a roll of official robes that I haven't opened, how can I die?"

古文：今既困矣，试令开视。 
现代文：现在被疾病所困，不妨让人打开看看。 
English: Now trapped by the disease, it may be a good idea to let someone open it.

古文：乃一卷内并书空字，张果卒也。
现代文：打开一看，卷内并写两个 空 字。张嘉贞果然死了。
English: When opened, the scroll contained two blank lines. Zhang Jiazhen was indeed dead.

古文：僧金师
现代文：僧金师
English: The monk goldsmith

古文：睢阳有新罗僧，号金师，谓录事参军房琬云： 太守裴宽当改。 
现代文：睢阳有个新罗僧，号金师。他对录事参军房琬说： 太守裴宽合当改官。 
English: In Shenyang, there is a Silla monk, known as Jin Shi. He said to the record of joining the army: Taishu Pei Kuan is suitable for changing posts.

古文：琬问何时，曰， 明日日午，敕书必至。
现代文：房琬问： 什么时候？ 金师说： 明天中午皇上的敕令一定会到。
English: Fong Yao asked, "When?" The goldsmith said, "Tomorrow at noon, the Emperor's edict will definitely come.

古文：当与公相见于郡西南角。 
现代文：我将与你在郡西南角相见。 
English: I'll meet you in the southwest corner of the county.

古文：琬专候之。午前有驿使，而封牒到不是，琬以为谬也。
现代文：房琬第二天专门等候，午前有一个驿使到，而那个公文不是。房琬认为金师说的不对。
English: The next day, Fong Yu waited in anticipation. In the morning, an envoy arrived, but the official document was not. Fong Yu thought that what the goldsmith said was not right.

古文：至午，又一驿使送牒来，云： 裴公改为安陆别驾。 
现代文：到了中午，又一个驿使送公文来，说： 裴公改官任安陆别驾。 
English: At noon, another envoy came with a letter saying: "Pei Gong, please change your official title to Anlu.

古文：房遽命驾迎僧，身又自去，果于郡西南角相遇。
现代文：房琬马上命人迎接金师，自己又亲自去。果然在郡的西南角相遇了。
English: Fusang immediately ordered someone to meet the goldsmith, and went himself. They met in the southwest corner of the county.

古文：裴召问之，僧云： 官虽改，其服不改。然公甥侄各当分散。 
现代文：裴宽召见金师问这件事，金师说： 官职虽然改了，服饰不改，但你的甥侄将各自分散。 
English: Pei Kuan summoned Jin Shi Huang to inquire about the matter. Jin Shi Huang said: Although the official position has changed, the clothing will not change, but your nephews will be separated.

古文：及后敕至，除别驾，紫绂犹存，甥侄之徒，各分散矣。
现代文：到后来皇上的敕令到了，任命为别驾，紫色的官服和品级还保留。甥侄那些人，各自分散了。
English: Later, the Emperor's edict arrived, appointing him as a privy councillor, with the purple official uniform and rank still retained. The nephews and nieces dispersed.

