古文：十年春，王正月辛卯，臧孙辰卒。
现代文：十年春季，周历正月辛卯日，臧孙辰去世。
English: In the spring of the tenth year, on the first day of the first month of the lunar calendar, Sun Chen passed away.

古文：夏，秦伐晋。
现代文：夏季，秦国讨伐晋国。
English: In the summer, Qin attacked Jin.

古文：楚杀其大夫宜申。
现代文：楚国杀掉自己的大夫宜申。
English: It is proper for the state of Chu to kill its own doctor.

古文：自正月不雨，至于秋七月。
现代文：从正月到七月一直没有下雨。
English: There was no rain from the first month of the year to July.

古文：及苏子盟于女栗。
现代文：文公和苏子在女栗结盟。
English: Wenguang and Suzi form an alliance at the chestnut tree.

古文：冬，狄侵宋。
现代文：冬季，狄国入侵宋国。
English: In winter, Di invaded Song.

古文：楚子、蔡侯次于厥貉。
现代文：楚穆王和蔡庄侯一起领兵驻扎在厥貉。
English: King Chu Mu and Prince Cai Zhuang together led the troops stationed in Jueyuan.

古文：十年春，晋人伐秦，取少梁。
现代文：十年春季，晋国人攻打秦国，占领了少梁。
English: In the spring of the tenth year, the people of Jin attacked Qin and occupied Shaoliang.

古文：夏，秦伯伐晋，取北徵。
现代文：夏季，秦国攻打晋国，占领了北征。
English: In the summer, Qin attacked Jin and occupied the Northern Expedition.

古文：初，楚范巫矞似谓成王与子玉、子西曰： 三君皆将强死。 
现代文：当初，楚国范地的巫人矞似预言成王和子玉、子西说： 这三位都将被杀死。 
English: At the beginning, the sorcerers in the provinces of Chu predicted that Chengwang, Zidama, and Zixi would all be killed.

古文：城濮之役，王思之，故使止子玉曰： 毋死。 
现代文：城濮那次战役，楚王想起了这句话，所以阻止子玉说： 不要自杀。 
English: During the battle of Chenghuang, King Chu remembered this sentence, so he stopped Zidama and said, "Don't commit suicide."

古文：不及。
现代文：但是没有来得及。
English: But it was too late.

古文：止子西，子西缢而县绝，王使適至，遂止之，使为商公。
现代文：去阻止子西，子西正在上吊而绳子断了，楚王的使者刚刚来到，就阻止了他自杀，让他做了商公。
English: To stop Zixi, Zixi was hanging himself and the rope broke, King Chu's messenger had just arrived, he stopped him from committing suicide and made him a merchant.

古文：沿汉泝江，将入郢。
现代文：子西沿汉江而下，逆长江而上，将要进入郢都。
English: Zixi will go down along the Han River and up against the Yangtze River, and will enter Shidu.

古文：王在渚宫，下见之。惧而辞曰： 臣免于死，又有谗言，谓臣将逃，臣归死于司败也。 
现代文：楚王正在渚宫，下来接见他，子西害怕，就解释说： 下臣幸而免于一死，但又有人诬陷，说下臣准备逃走，下臣现在回来请求死在司败那里。 
English: King Chu was in Nagisa Palace and came down to meet him. Zixi was afraid and explained: The vassal was lucky to avoid death, but someone else framed him, saying that the vassal was preparing to escape, and the vassal is now coming back to ask to die there.

古文：王使为工尹，又与子家谋弑穆王。
现代文：楚王让他做了工尹，他又和子家策划杀死穆王。
English: King Chu made him a gongyin, and he and his family plotted to kill King Mu.

古文：穆王闻之。五月，杀鬥宜申及仲归。
现代文：穆王听到后，在五月间杀了子西和子家。
English: After hearing this, King Mu killed Zixi and his family in May.

古文：秋七月，及苏子盟于女栗，顷王立故也。
现代文：秋季，七月，文公和苏子在女栗结盟，这是由于周顷王即位的缘故。
English: In the autumn, in July, Wen Gong and Su Zi made an alliance in Zhouzhuang. This was due to the accession of King Zhou He.

古文：陈侯、郑伯会楚子于息。
现代文：陈恭公、郑穆公在息地会见楚穆王。
English: Chen Qiong and Zheng Mu met with King Chu Mu at his residence.

古文：冬，遂及蔡侯次于厥貉。将以伐宋。
现代文：冬季，就和蔡庄侯一起领兵驻扎在厥貉，准备攻打宋国。
English: In the winter, together with Cai Zhuang Hou, he led the troops stationed in Jueyun, preparing to attack Song.

古文：宋华御事曰： 楚欲弱我也。
现代文：宋国的华御事说： 楚国想要让我们归服，是不是我们先主动表示顺服？
English: Song's Emperor Hua said, "If Chu wants us to submit, shouldn't we submit first?"

古文：先为之弱乎，何必使诱我？
现代文：他们何必摆出这副架势来逼迫我们？
English: Why do they have to go to these lengths to persecute us?

古文：我实不能，民何罪？ 
现代文：我们实在没有能耐，但是百姓有什么罪？ 
English: We really don't have the capacity, but what are the people guilty of?

古文：乃逆楚子，劳，且听命。
现代文：于是就亲自去迎接楚穆王，向他表示慰劳，同时听候命令。
English: So he personally went to meet King Chumu, expressed his condolences to him, and awaited orders.

古文：遂道以田孟诸。
现代文：于是就引导楚穆王在孟诸打猎。
English: So he guided King Chumu to go hunting in Mengzhu.

古文：宋公为右盂，郑伯为左盂。
现代文：宋昭公率领右边圆阵，郑穆公率领左边圆阵。
English: Song Zhaogong led the right circle, Zheng Muogong led the left circle.

古文：期思公复遂为右司马，子朱及文之无畏为左司马。
现代文：期思公复遂作为右司马，子朱和文之无畏作为左司马，下令早晨在车上装载取火工具出发。
English: Zhi Xigongfu as the right secretary, Zi Zhu and Wen Daowu as the left secretary, ordered to load the fire tools on the car in the morning and set off.

古文：命夙驾载燧，宋公违命，无畏抶其仆以徇。或谓子舟曰： 国君不可戮也。 
现代文：宋昭公违背命令，无畏笞打他的仆人并在全军示众。有人对文之无畏说： 国君是不能够侮辱的。 
English: Song Zhaogong disobeyed the order, fearlessly beat his servant and showed it to the whole army. Some people said to Wen Zhaogong: The sovereign cannot be insulted.

古文：子舟曰： 当官而行，何强之有！《诗》曰： 刚亦不吐，柔亦不茹。 
现代文：文之无畏说： 按照职责办事，有什么强横？《诗》说： 硬的不吐出来，软的不吞下去。 
English: "Poetry" says: Hard things should not be spit out, soft things should not be swallowed.

古文： 毋纵诡随，以谨罔极。 
现代文：又说： 不要放纵狡诈的人，以使放荡的行为得以检点。 
English: And he said, Let there be no guile in a man: but let there be deceit in his heart.

古文：是亦非辟强也，敢爱死以乱官乎！ 
现代文：这也是不避强横的意思。我哪里敢爱惜生命而放弃职守呢！ 
English: This is also the meaning of not shirking one's duty. How dare I give up my duty for the sake of my life!

古文：厥貉之会，麇子逃归。
现代文：在厥貉会见的时候，麇子逃走回国。
English: At the time of the Jueyi meeting, Zizi fled back to China.

