古文：圣宗八五年春正月乙酉，如混同江。
现代文：太平五年春正月初二，到混同江。
English: On the second day of the first month of the first month of the spring of Taiping in the year of Taiping, he arrived at the Mudongjiang River.

古文：二月戊午，禁天下服用明金及金线绮；国亲当服者，奏而后用。
现代文：二月初五，禁止天下人服饰使用明金和金线绮；皇亲国戚可以使用时，应先上奏皇帝得到允许后才能使用。
English: On the fifth day of the second month of the year, the use of bright gold and gold thread brooches in the world's people's clothing was prohibited; when the emperor's relatives could use it, they should first obtain permission from the emperor before using it.

古文：是月，如鱼儿泺。
现代文：同月，到鱼儿泊。
English: In the same month, he went to stay with a fish.

古文：三月壬辰，以左丞相张俭为武定军节度使、同政事门下平章事，郑弘节临潢少尹，刘慎行辽兴军节度使，武定军节度使萧匹敌契丹行宫都部署，枢密副使杨又玄吏部尚书、参知政事兼枢密使。
现代文：三月初十，任命丞相张俭为武定军节度使、同政事门下平章事，郑弘节为临潢少尹，刘慎行为辽兴军节度使，武定军节度使萧匹敌为契丹行宫都部署，枢密副使杨又玄为吏部尚书、参知政事兼枢密使。
English: On the 10th day of the 3rd month of the year, the prime minister Zhang Jian was appointed as the festival envoy of the Wuding Army and the political affairs subordinate to the Pingzhang, Zheng Hongjie was appointed as the Linyi Shaoyin, Liu Sheng was appointed as the festival envoy of the Liao Xing Army, the festival of the Wuding Army was assigned to Xiao Biqi as the palace of the Khitan, and the vice-envoy of the privy council Yang Mata Xuan was appointed as the official of the civil affairs department and the political affairs and the privy council envoy.

古文：是月，如长春河鱼儿泺，其水一夕有声如雷，越沙冈四十里，别为一陂。
现代文：同月，到长春河鱼儿泊，该河在一天傍晚突然发出雷鸣般的响声，在越过沙冈四十里的地方，另外又形成了一片湖水。
English: In the same month, at the fish pond of the Changchun River, the river suddenly emitted a thunderous sound in the evening one day. At a place 40 miles beyond the sand dunes, another lake was formed.

古文：夏五月，清暑永安山。
现代文：夏五月，在永安山避暑。
English: Summer in May, summering in Yongan Mountain.

古文：以萧从顺为太子太师，吴叔达翰林学士，道士冯若谷加太子中允，耶律晨武定军节度使，张俭彰信军节度使，吕士宗礼部员外郎，李可举顺义军节度使。
现代文：任命萧从顺为太子太师，吴叔达为翰林学士，道士冯若谷加太子中允官号，耶律晨为武定军节度使，张俭为彰信军节度使，吕士宗为礼部员外郎，李可举为顺义军节度使。
English: Appointed Xiao Cong Shun as the Prince's Grand Master, Wu Shuda as the Hanlin Scholar, Taoist Feng Ruogu plus the title of the Crown Prince's Vice Admiral, Yerutchen as the Wuding Army's Grand Marshal, Zhang Jian as the Zhangxin Army's Grand Marshal, Lu Shizong as the member of the Ceremonial Department, and Li Keju as the Shunyi Army's Grand Marshal.

古文：秋七月，猎平地松林。
现代文：秋七月，出猎于平地松林。
English: In autumn and July, they go hunting in the flat pine forest.

古文：九月，驻跸南京。
现代文：九月，歇驾于南京。
English: In September, it stopped in Nanjing.

古文：己亥，以萧迪烈、李绍琪充贺宋太后生辰使副，耶律守宁、刘四端充贺宋主生辰使副。
现代文：二十日，派萧迪烈、李绍琪充任祝贺宋国太后生辰的正副使者，耶律守宁、刘四端充任祝贺宋主生辰的正副使者。
English: On the 20th, Xiao Di Lie and Li Shaoqi were sent to congratulate Empress Dowager Song on her birthday, and Ye Lu Shuning and Liu Si Duan were sent to congratulate Emperor Song on his birthday.

古文：冬十月辛未，宋太后遣冯元宗、史方来贺顺天节。
现代文：冬十月二十三日，宋国太后派冯元宗、史方前来祝贺顺天节。
English: In the winter of October 23rd, the empress dowager of the Song Dynasty sent Feng Yuanzong and Shi Fang to congratulate the Shun Tian Festival.

古文：十一月庚子，幸内果园宴，京民聚观。
现代文：十一月二十二日，临幸内果园宴饮，引得京城百姓齐集于旁观看。
English: On November 22nd, a banquet was held at the fruit orchard in Linxing, attracting the people of Beijing to gather and watch.

古文：求进士，得七十二人，命赋诗，第其工拙，以张昱等一十四人为太子校书郎，韩栾等五十八人为崇文馆校书郎。
现代文：选取进士七十二人，让他们赋诗，按其诗之高下，任命张昱等一十四人为太子校书郎，韩栾等五十八人为崇文馆校书郎。
English: Seventy-two scholars were selected to compose poems, and according to the level of their poetry, fourteen such as Zhang Jun were appointed as the prince's school scribes, and fifty-eight such as Han Jun were appointed as the school scribes of the Chongwen Museum.

古文：辛丑，以左祗候郎君详稳萧罗罗为右夷离毕。
现代文：二十三日，任命左祗候郎君详稳萧罗罗为右夷离毕。
English: On the 23rd, the appointment of Zuo Xinghou Langjun Jiouwen Xiao Luo Luo as Zuo Yi left.

古文：十二月丁巳，以汉人行宫都部署萧孝先为上京留守，皇侄长沙郡王谢家奴匡义军节度使，耶律仁举兴国军节度使。
现代文：十二月初九，任命汉人行宫都部署萧孝先为上京留守，皇侄、长沙郡王谢家奴为匡义军节度使，耶律仁举为兴国军节度使。
English: On the 9th day of the 12th month of the year, Xiao Xiaoxian was appointed as the Han people's envoy to Beijing, the emperor's nephew, Wang Xiejianu of Changsha County, was appointed as the festival envoy of the Kuangyi Army, and Yelujin was appointed as the festival envoy of the Xingguo Army.

古文：甲子，萧守宁为点检侍卫亲军马步军。
现代文：十六日，任命萧守宁为点检侍卫亲军马步军。
English: On the 16th, Xiao Shouning was appointed as the point guard of the pro-army horse cavalry.

古文：乙丑，北院枢密使萧合卓薨。
现代文：十七日，北院枢密使萧合卓逝世。
English: On the 17th, Xiao Hezhuo, the Privy Councilor of the Northern Court, passed away.

古文：戊辰，以北府宰相萧普古为北院枢密使。
现代文：二十日，任命北府宰相萧普古为北院枢密使。
English: On the 20th, Xiao Pugu, the prime minister of Beifu, was appointed to be the envoy of the Northern Yuan Privy Council.

古文：己巳，遣萧谐、李琪充贺宋正旦使副。
现代文：二十一日，派萧谐、李琪充任祝贺宋正旦的正副使者。
English: On the twenty-first day, Xiao Jinyi and Li Qi were sent to congratulate Song Zhengdan.

古文：庚午，以参知政事刘京为顺义军节度使。
现代文：二十二日，任命参知政事刘京为顺义军节度使。
English: On the 22nd, Liu Jing, a political advisor to the governor, was appointed as the Shunyi Army's envoy to the festival.

古文：乙亥，宋使李维、张纶来贺千龄节。
现代文：二十七日，宋派李维、张纶前来祝贺千龄节。
English: On the 27th, Song sent Li Wei and Zhang Ye to congratulate the Chilang Festival.

古文：是岁，燕民以年谷丰熟，车驾临幸，争以土物来献。
现代文：这一年，燕地居民因粮食丰收，在皇上车驾临幸时，争相进献土产。
English: In this year, due to the bumper grain harvest, the residents of Yan Di competed with each other to offer their local produce when the imperial carriage arrived.

古文：上礼高年，惠鳏寡，赐酺馀。
现代文：皇上礼事老人，施恩于鳏夫寡妇，赐给他们酒脯饮食。
English: The emperor, as a courtesy to the elderly, was kind to widows and widowers, and gave them food and drink.

古文：至夕，六街灯火如昼，士庶嬉游，上亦微行观之。
现代文：到了晚上，六条街道灯火通明如白昼，士庶居民嬉戏游玩其中，皇上也微服夹在居民之中观灯。
English: In the evening, the lights of the six streets were as bright as the day, and the residents of Shizhuang played and played among them. The emperor was also caught in the middle of the residents watching the lights.

古文：丁丑，禁工匠不得销毁金银器。
现代文：二十九日，禁止工匠销毁金银器皿。
English: On the 29th, craftsmen were prohibited from destroying gold and silverware.

古文：六年春正月己卯朔，宋遣徐奭、裴继起、张若谷、崔准来贺。
现代文：六年春正月初一，宋派徐、裴继起、张若谷、崔准前来祝贺正旦。
English: On the first day of the first month of the sixth year of the Spring Festival, Song sent Xu, Pei Jiji, Zhang Ruogu and Cui Jun to congratulate Zhengdan.

古文：庚辰，如鸳鸯泺。
现代文：初二，皇上到鸳鸯泊。
English: On the second day of the first month, the emperor came to Oshidomari.

古文：二月己酉，以迷离己同知枢密院，黄翩为兵马都部署，达骨只副之，赦石为都监，引军城混同江、疏木河之间。
现代文：二月初二，任命迷离己为同知枢密院，黄翩为兵马都部署，达骨只为其副手，赫石为都监，命他们率军在混同江、疏木河之间修筑城池。
English: On the second day of the second month of February, he appointed Muxiyi as Tongzhi Privy Council, Huang Ping as the deployment of soldiers and horses, Dagu only as his deputy, and Heshi as the inspector of the capital, and ordered them to lead the army to build the castle between the mixed river and the narrow river.

古文：黄龙府请建堡障三、烽台十，诏以农隙筑之。
现代文：黄龙府请求修建三座堡障、十座烽火台，皇上下诏令其在农闲时修筑。
English: Huanglong Prefecture requested the construction of three castle barriers and ten campfire towers, and the emperor ordered them to be built during the farmer's leisure time.

古文：东京留守八哥奏黄翩领兵入女直界徇地，俘获人、马、牛、豕，不可胜计，得降户二百七十，诏奖谕之。
现代文：东京留守八哥奏报黄翩率领部队进入女真境内征战，俘获人、马、牛、猪不可胜计，得到归降民户二百七十户，皇上下诏褒奖黄翩。
English: It was reported that Huang Ping, a mynah who stayed in Tokyo, led the troops to enter the territory of Nanzhen for war, captured people, horses, cattle, and pigs, and obtained the surrender of 270 households, and Huang Ping was praised by the emperor.

古文：戊午，以耶律野为副点检，以国舅帐萧柳氏、徒鲁骨领西北路十二班军、奚王府舍利军。
现代文：十一日，任命耶律野为副点检，以国舅帐萧柳氏、徒鲁骨统领西北路十二班军和奚王府舍利军。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Ye Liwu was appointed as a deputy inspector, and he led the 12th North-west Road Army and the Shanwangfu Sheri Army with the support of the Xiao Liu clan and the Tulu clan.

古文：己巳，南京水，遣使振之。
现代文：二十二日，南京发生水灾，派使者前去赈济灾民。
English: On the 22nd, a flood occurred in Nanjing, and an envoy was sent to help the victims.

古文：庚午，诏党项别部塌西设契丹节度使治之。
现代文：二十三日，下诏设契丹节度使以统治党项别部塌西。
English: On the 23rd, the Khitan festival was set up to make the ruling party fall to the west.

古文：三月戊寅朔，以大同军节度使张俭入为南院枢密使、左丞相兼政事令，参知政事吴叔达责授将作少监，出为东州刺史。
现代文：三月初一，任命大同军节度使张俭入京任南院枢密左丞相兼政事令，参知政事吴叔达降级为将作少监，出京任东州刺史。
English: On the first day of March, the appointment of the Datong Army Festival brought Zhang Jian to Beijing to serve as the Privy Secretary of the Southern Yuan and the Minister of Political Affairs, and Wu Shuda, the Councillor of the Council of State and the Minister of Political Affairs, was downgraded to be the Junior Inspector, and went to Beijing to serve as the Historian of Dongzhou.

古文：是月，阻卜来侵，西北路招讨使萧惠破之。
现代文：同月，阻卜前来侵扰，被西北路招讨使萧惠击溃。
English: In the same month, Blockb came to intrude, and was defeated by Xiao Hui who was invited by Northwest Road.

古文：夏四月丁未朔，以武定军节度使耶律洪古为惕隐。
现代文：夏四月初一，任命武定军节度使耶律洪古为惕隐。
English: On the first day of the fourth month of the summer, the appointment of the Wuding Army Festival made Yeruhongu a secret.

古文：戊申，蒲卢毛朵部多兀惹户，诏索之。
现代文：初二，蒲户毛朵部额外拥有许多兀惹民户，皇上下诏向他们索要。
English: On the second day of the new year, the hair department of the shogun's residence had a lot of angry residents, and the emperor asked them for the imperial edict.

古文：丙寅，如永安山。
现代文：二十日，皇上到永安山。
English: On the 20th, the emperor went to Mount Yongan.

古文：五月辛卯，以东京统军使萧纟廷古为契丹行宫都部署。
现代文：五月十六日，任命东京统军使萧訸古为契丹行宫都部署。
English: On May 16th, Xiao Binggu was appointed as the envoy of the Tokyo unified army and was deployed to the palace of Khitan.

古文：癸卯，遣西北路招讨使萧惠将兵伐甘州回鹘。
现代文：二十八日，派西北路招讨使萧惠率军讨伐甘州回鹘。
English: On the 28th, Xiao Hui led an army to recapture Gansu by sending an invitation from the Northwest Road.

古文：六月辛丑，诏凡官畜并印其左以识之。
现代文：六月二十七日，下诏凡是官府牲畜，均在身体左侧盖印做上记号。
English: On June 27th, all government livestock were stamped and marked on the left side of their bodies.

古文：秋七月戊申，猎黑岭。
现代文：秋七月初五，出猎于黑岭。
English: On the 5th day of the 7th month of autumn, I went hunting in Heiling.

古文：八月，萧惠攻甘州不克，师还。
现代文：八月，萧惠攻打甘州回鹘，无功而还。
English: In August, Xiao Hui attacked Ganzhou and Huizhou, but failed.

古文：自是阻卜诸部皆叛，辽军与战，皆为所败，监军涅里姑、国舅帐太保曷不吕死之。
现代文：从此阻卜诸部都叛变了，辽军与之交战，均为阻卜所败，监军涅里姑、国舅帐太保曷不吕战死。
English: From then on, all the departments of the Liao rebelled, and the Liao army fought with them. They were all defeated by the resistance, and the overseer of the army, Nierigu, and the uncle of the country, Taobao, died in battle.

古文：诏遣惕隐耶律洪古、林牙化哥等将兵讨之。
现代文：皇上诏令派惕隐耶律洪古、林牙化哥率兵前往征讨。
English: The emperor issued an imperial edict to send Emperor Jingye, Emperor Honggu and Emperor Lingya to lead the troops to fight.

古文：九月，驻跸辽河浒。
现代文：九月，皇上歇驾于辽河。
English: In September, the emperor retired to Liaohe.

古文：冬十月丙子，曷苏馆诸部长来朝。
现代文：冬十月初四，曷苏馆诸部酋长前来朝见。
English: On the 4th day of the 10th month of winter, the chiefs of various departments of the Su Pavilion came to see the morning.

古文：庚辰，遣使问夏国五月与宋交战之故。
现代文：初八，派使者前去责问夏国在五月与宋交战的原因。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, he sent an envoy to ask the reason for the war between Xia and Song in May.

古文：辛巳，以前院大王直鲁衮为乌古敌烈都详稳。
现代文：初九，任命前南院大王直鲁衮为乌古敌烈都详稳。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, the appointment of the former King of the Southern Yuan Dynasty, Jiu Lucheng, as the enemy of the Ugu people was confirmed.

古文：庚寅，以萧孝顺、萧绍宗兼侍中，驸马萧绍业平章政事，前南院大王胡睹堇同知上京留守，安哥通化州节度使。
现代文：十八日，任命萧孝顺、萧绍宗为兼侍中，驸马萧绍业为平章政事，前南院大王胡睹堇同知上京留守，安哥为通化州节度使。
English: On the 18th, Xiao Xiaozhun and Xiao Shaozong were appointed as concurrent chamberlains, Ma Xiaoshaoye was appointed as Pingzhang political affairs, the former king of the Southern Yuan Dynasty Hu Jian and Tongzhi stayed in Beijing, and Ango was appointed as Tonghua State Festival envoy.

古文：十一月乙丑，宋遣韩翼、田承说来贺顺天节。
现代文：十一月二十三日，宋派韩翼、田承说前来祝贺顺天节。
English: On November 23rd, Song sent Han Ying and Tian Cheng to congratulate the Shun Tian Festival.

古文：戊辰，西北路招讨司小校扫姑诉招讨萧惠三罪，诏都监奥骨祯按之。
现代文：二十六日，西北路招讨司小校扫姑上书控告招讨萧惠三大罪状，皇上诏令都监奥骨祯查办此事。
English: On the 26th, Saogu, a primary school teacher from Northwest Road, filed a complaint against Xiao Hui, accusing her of three major crimes. The emperor ordered the overseer to investigate the matter.

古文：十二月庚辰，曷苏馆部乞建旗鼓，许之。
现代文：十二月初八，曷苏馆部请求建旗鼓，得到允许。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of December, the Department of the Museum of the Former Soviet Union requested the construction of a drum and was granted permission.

古文：辛巳，诏北南诸部廉察州县及石烈、弥里之官，不治者罢之。
现代文：初九，下诏北南诸部州县及石烈、弥里的官员，罢免治理不善者。
English: On the ninth day of the first month of the year, officials from various counties in the north and south of the country, as well as from Shili and Miri, will be removed from office for poor governance.

古文：诏大小职官有贪暴残民者，立罢之，终身不录；其不廉直，虽处重任，即代之；能清勤自持者，在卑位亦当荐拔；其内族受赂，事发，与常人所犯同科。
现代文：诏令大小官员如果贪婪残暴虐害百姓，立即罢免，终身不得再任公职；如果不是廉洁正直，即使身居要职，也要将他撤换下来；如果能够以清廉勤恳自持，即使是职位卑微，也应该予以推荐提拔；皇家宗室如有受贿者，一经察觉，与常人犯罪一样依法论处。
English: According to the imperial edict, officials of all ranks, if they abuse the people with greed and brutality, should be immediately dismissed and banned from holding public office for life; if they are not honest and upright, they should be removed even if they hold important positions; if they can be honest and diligent, they should be recommended for promotion even if their positions are humble; if there are bribe-takers in the royal family, once they are discovered, they should be dealt with according to the law, just like ordinary crimes.

古文：戊戌，遣杜防、萧蕴充贺宋生辰使副。
现代文：二十六日，派杜防、萧蕴担任贺宋生辰使、副使。
English: On the 26th, Du Fang and Xiao Yun were appointed as the envoy and deputy envoy of He Song Shengchen.

古文：庚子，驻跸辽河。
现代文：二十八日，皇上歇驾于辽河。
English: On the 28th, the emperor retired to Liaohe.

古文：七年春正月壬寅朔，宋遣张保维、孙继业、孔道辅、马崇至来贺。
现代文：七年春正月初一朔，宋派遣张保维、孙继业、孔道辅、马崇至前来祝贺正旦。
English: On the first day of the first month of the seventh year of Spring, Song dispatched Zhang Baowi, Sun Jiye, Kong Daowu and Ma Chong to come and congratulate Zhengdan.

古文：如混同江。
现代文：皇上到混同江。
English: The emperor arrived at the Mudong River.

古文：辛亥，以女直白缕为惕隐，蒲马为岩母部太师。
现代文：初十，任命女真白缕为惕隐，蒲马为岩母部太师。
English: On the tenth day of the first month of the year, he appointed Onna Makoto Shirasaka as Tachibana, and Puma as Iwamotobu Taishi.

古文：甲寅，蒲卢毛朵部遣使来贡。
现代文：十三日，蒲卢毛朵部派使者来进贡。
English: On the thirteenth day of the month, the Ploughshares' Department sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：夏四月乙未，猎黑岭。
现代文：夏四月二十五日，出猎于黑岭。
English: On the 25th day of the 4th month of summer, I went hunting in Heiling.

古文：五月，清暑永安山。
现代文：五月，在永安山避暑。
English: In May, summering in Yongan Mountain.

古文：西南路招讨司奏阴山中产金银，请置冶，从之。
现代文：西南路招讨司奏称阴山产金银，请在那里设置冶局，得到允许。
English: The south-west road recruiting officer said that Yinshan produced gold and silver, please set up a metallurgical bureau there, and was allowed.

古文：复遣使循辽河源求产金银之矿。
现代文：皇上又派使者沿辽河而上寻找金银矿。
English: The emperor also sent an envoy up the Liao River to look for gold and silver mines.

古文：六月，禁诸屯田不得擅货官粟。
现代文：六月，禁止屯田机构擅自出卖官粟。
English: In June, it was prohibited for tonden organizations to sell official millet without authorization.

古文：癸巳，诏萧惠再讨阻卜。
现代文：二十四日，诏令萧惠再次领兵讨伐阻卜。
English: On the 24th, Xiao Hui was once again ordered to lead troops to fight against the obstructionists.

古文：秋七月己亥朔，诏更定法令。
现代文：秋七月初一，下诏改定法令。
English: On the first day of autumn in July, the amended ordinance was promulgated.

古文：庚子，诏谕驸马萧鉏不、公主粘米衮： 尔于后有父母之尊，后或临幸，祗谒先祖，祗拜空帐，失致敬之礼，今后可设像拜谒。 
现代文：初二，下诏晓谕驸马萧锄不、公主粘米衮说： 你们对于皇后是父母之辈，皇后有时临幸你们帐下，只拜谒先祖和空帐，有失对长辈的敬意。今后你们可以在帐内设自己的挂像让皇后拜谒。 
English: On the second day of the first year of junior high school, the following edict was issued: "You are the parents of the queen, and the queen sometimes visits your account, only to worship your ancestors and empty accounts, and lose respect for your elders. In the future, you can set up your own hanging statue in the account for the queen to worship.

古文：乙巳，诏辇路所经，旁三十步内不得耕种者，不在诉讼之限。
现代文：初七，下诏凡是辇路所经过的地方，如果两旁三十步以内无法耕种粮食，民户不得因此而提出诉讼。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, the following edict was issued: If it is impossible to cultivate grain within 30 paces on both sides of any place along the Kushiro Road, private households may not file lawsuits for this reason.

古文：九月，驻跸辽河。
现代文：九月，皇上歇驾于辽河。
English: In September, the emperor retired to Liaohe.

古文：冬十月丁卯朔，诏诸帐院庶孽，并从其母论贵贱。
现代文：冬十月初一，诏令诸帐院所出庶子，按其母亲身份的尊卑来定贵贱。
English: On the first day of October in winter, the Emperor issued an edict ordering that the children born out of wedlock in the Counting House should be ranked according to their mother's status.

古文：十一月，宋遣石中立、石贻孙来贺千龄节，王博文、王双贺顺天节。
现代文：十一月，宋派石中立、石贻孙前来祝贺千龄节，王博文、王双前来祝贺顺天节。
English: In November, Song Dynasty emperors Shizhong Zhongli and Shizhong Sun came to congratulate the Millennium Festival, and Wang Bowen and Wang Shuang came to congratulate the Spring Festival.

古文：辛亥，以杨又玄、邢祥知贡举。
现代文：十五日，派杨又玄、邢祥主持乡试。
English: On the 15th, Yang Mata Xuan and Zou Xiang were sent to preside over the township trial.

古文：己未，匡义军节度使中山郡王查葛、保宁军节度使长沙郡王谢家奴、广德军节度使乐安郡王遂哥奏，各将之官，乞选伴读书史，从之。
现代文：二十三日，匡义军节度使中山郡王查葛、保宁军节度使长沙郡王谢家奴、广德军节度使乐安郡王遂哥奏称，各位将领级的官员，请求选派人来伴读经史书籍，得到皇上允许。
English: On the 23rd, Wang Cha Ge of Zhongshan County, Wang Xie Jia Nu of Changsha County, and Wang Sui Ge of Le'an County, who were sent by the Kuang Yi Army for the festival, and the Bao Ning Army for the festival, respectively, said that the officials of the generals and leaders requested to send someone to accompany the reading of the history books, and obtained the emperor's permission.

古文：癸亥，以三韩王钦为启圣军节度使，杨佶刑部侍郎。
现代文：二十七日，任命三韩王钦为启圣军节度使，杨佶为刑部侍郎。
English: On the 27th, Wang Qin of the Three Han was appointed as the festival envoy of the Kai Sheng Army, and Yang Xuan was appointed as the attendant of the Criminal Investigation Department.

古文：甲子，以左千牛卫上将军耶律古昱为北院大王。
现代文：二十八日，任命左千牛卫上将军耶律古昱为北院大王。
English: On the 28th, he appointed Zuo Qian Niu Wei's superior general, Yelu Guzhen, as the Great King of the Northern Court.

古文：十二月丁卯朔，遣耶律遂英、王永锡充贺宋太后生辰，萧速撒、马保永充贺正旦使副。
现代文：十二月初一，派耶律遂英、王永锡担任祝贺宋国太后生辰正副使者，萧速撒、马保永担任祝贺宋正旦正副使者。
English: On the first day of December, he sent Ye Lu Su Ying and Wang Yongxi to congratulate Empress Dowager Song on her birthday, and Xiao Suisa and Ma Baoyong to congratulate Song Zhengdan.

古文：癸酉，以金吾萧高六为奚舍利军详稳。
现代文：初七，任命金吾萧高六为奚舍利军详稳。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, he appointed Kingu Xiao Gaoli to be the commander of the army of Jiaozhou.

古文：八年春正月乙亥，如混同江。
现代文：八年春正月初三，皇上到混同江。
English: On the third day of the first month of the eighth year of spring, the emperor went to the Mudong River.

古文：庚申，党项侵边，破之。
现代文：二十四日，党项侵犯边境，被击退。
English: On the 24th, the party invaded the border and was repulsed.

古文：甲子，诏州县长吏劝农。
现代文：二十八日，诏令州县长吏劝勉农事。
English: On the 28th, the prefectural and county governors issued an edict to encourage farming.

古文：二月戊子，燕京留守萧孝穆乞于拒马河接宋境上置戍长巡察，诏从之。
现代文：二月二十三日，燕京留守萧孝穆请求在拒马河边靠近宋国边境的地方设置戍长巡察边境，得到皇上批准。
English: On February 23rd, Xiao Xiaomu, who stayed in Yanjing, asked the emperor for permission to set up a border patrol in a place close to the Song border on the edge of the Yaoma River.

古文：三月，驻跸长春河。
现代文：三月，皇上歇驾于长春河。
English: In March, the emperor rested on the Changchun River.

古文：夏五月，清暑永安山。
现代文：夏五月，在永安山避暑。
English: Summer in May, summering in Yongan Mountain.

古文：六月，以韩宁、刘湘充贺宋太后生辰使副，吴克荷充贺夏国王李德昭生辰使。
现代文：六月，任命韩宁、刘湘担任祝贺宋太后生辰的正副使者，吴克荷充任祝贺夏国王李德昭生辰使者。
English: In June, Han Ning and Liu Xiang were appointed as the chief and deputy envoys to congratulate Empress Dowager Song on her birthday, and Wu Kehotong was appointed as the envoy to congratulate Xia King Li Dezhao on his birthday.

古文：癸巳，权北院大王耶律郑留奏，今岁十一月皇太子纳妃，诸族备会亲之帐。
现代文：三十日，代理北院大王耶律郑留奏报为今年十一月皇太子纳妃，诸族都要准备会亲用的幕帐。
English: On the 30th, the acting Great King of the Northern Court, Ye Lu Zheng, announced that the crown prince Na Fei would be crowned in November this year, and all ethnic groups should prepare the curtain for their own use.

古文：诏以豪盛者三十户给其费。
现代文：皇上诏令由三十户豪门富户负担其费用。
English: The emperor decreed that 30 wealthy families should bear the cost.

古文：秋七月丁酉，以遥辇帐郎君陈哥为西北路巡检，与萧谐领同管二招讨地。以南院大王耶律敌烈为上京留守。
现代文：秋七月初四，任命遥辇帐郎君陈哥为西北路巡检，与萧谐一同管理两片招讨区域，任命南院大王耶律敌烈为上京留守。
English: On the 4th day of the 7th month of the autumn, he appointed Chen Ge, the son of Yao Jie, as the inspector of the Northwest Road, and together with Xiao Jing, he managed the two areas of solicitation. He also appointed the King of the Southern Yuan Dynasty, Ye Lu Ji Lie, as the one who stayed in Beijing.

古文：戊戌，猎平地松林。
现代文：初五，出猎于平地松林。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, he went hunting in a flat pine forest.

古文：九月壬辰朔，以渤海宰相罗汉权东京统军使。
现代文：九月初一，任命渤海宰相罗汉暂时担任东京统军使。
English: On the first day of September, Bohai Prime Minister Rohan was temporarily appointed as Tokyo's envoy.

古文：壬子，幸中京。
现代文：二十日，临幸中京。
English: On the 20th, Linxing Zhongjing.

古文：北敌烈部节度使耶律延寿请视诸部，赐旗鼓，诏从之。
现代文：北敌烈部节度使耶律延寿请求皇上视察他所辖诸部，赐给他旗鼓，皇上下诏答允其要求。
English: During the Northern Warring States period, Yelu Yanzhou requested the emperor to inspect the ministries under his jurisdiction, and the emperor granted his request.

古文：癸丑，阻卜别部长胡懒来降。
现代文：二十二日，阻卜酋别部酋长胡懒前来降附。
English: On the 22nd, Hu Lazy, the leader of the Zhibu chiefdom, came to annex it.

古文：乙卯，阻卜长舂古来降。
现代文：二十四日，阻卜酋长舂古前来归降。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, the chief of the Dangb, Zanggu, came to surrender.

古文：冬十月，宋遣唐肃、葛怀愍来贺顺天节。
现代文：冬十月，宋派唐肃、葛怀愍前来祝贺顺天节。
English: In the winter of October, the Song Dynasty sent Tang Su and Ge Huaiqi to congratulate the Shun Tian Festival.

古文：枢密使、魏王耶律斜轸孙妇阿聒指斥乘舆，其孙骨欲为之隐，事觉，乃并坐之，仍籍其家。
现代文：枢密使、魏王耶律斜轸之孙媳阿聒直呼皇上姓名，斜轸之孙骨欲又替她隐瞒罪行，事情败露之后，一起受到判刑处罚，家也被查抄。
English: The imperial envoy, the granddaughter-in-law of Wei King Yeludong Qianqian, directly called the emperor's name, and Qianqian's grandson, Bone Zhi, also concealed the crime for her. After the matter was revealed, they were both sentenced and punished, and their home was also searched.

古文：诏燕城将士，若敌至，总管备城之东南，统军守其西北，马步军备其野战，统军副使缮壁垒，课士卒，各练其事。
现代文：皇上诏令燕城将士，如果敌军到来，守将要分别熟悉份内之事，总管准备城东南防御，统军守卫城之西北，马步军准备野战，统军副使则负责修缮壁垒，督促士卒。
English: The emperor ordered the Yancheng soldiers that if the enemy army arrived, the guards would be familiar with their respective duties, the general manager would prepare the southeastern defense of the city, the united army would guard the northwest of the city, the horse infantry would prepare for field battles, and the deputy envoy of the united army would be responsible for repairing the barriers and supervising the soldiers.

古文：十一月丙申，皇太子纳妃萧氏。
现代文：十一月初六，皇太子纳萧氏为妃。
English: On the 6th day of the 11th month, Crown Prince Na Xiao became a princess.

古文：以耶律求翰为北院大王十二月辛酉朔，以遥辇太尉谢佛留为天云军详稳。
现代文：皇上任命耶律求翰为北院大王。十二月初一，任命遥辇太尉谢佛留为天云军详稳。
English: The emperor appointed Jeruchuchuchan as the Great King of the Northern Court, and on the first day of December, he appointed Yao Xingtaifu as the commander of the Heavenly Cloud Army.

古文：壬申，以前北院大王耶律留宁为双州节度使，康筠崇德宫都部署，谢十永兴宫都部署，旅坟宜州节度使，菴辽州节度使，耶律野同知中京留守，耶律曷鲁突愧为大将军。
现代文：十二日，任命前北院大王耶律留宁为双州节度使，康筠为崇德宫都部署，谢十为永兴宫都部署，旅坟为宜州节度使，□庵为辽州节度使，耶律野为同知中京留守，耶律曷鲁突愧为大将军。
English: On the 12th, he appointed the former Grand Prince of the Northern Yuan Dynasty, Ye Liuning, as the delegate to the Shuangzhou Festival, Kang Xi as the delegate to the Chongde Palace, Xie Zhi as the delegate to the Yongxing Palace, Liguo as the delegate to the Yizhou Festival, Xiang as the delegate to the Liaozhou Festival, Ye Luno as the delegate to the Beijing Festival, and Ye Liun Lu as the grand marshal.

古文：丁丑，诏庶孽虽已为良，不得预世选。
现代文：十七日，下诏妃妾所生庶子即使已经成年，仍不得参与世选。
English: On the seventeenth day, the illegitimate son of the concubine of the Empress Dowager Zhao was still not allowed to participate in the election, even though he was already an adult.

古文：丁亥，宋遣寇瑊、康德来贺千龄节。朱谏、曹英、张逸、刘永钊贺来岁两宫正旦。
现代文：二十七日，宋派寇王咸、康德前来祝贺千龄节，朱谏、曹英、张逸、刘永钊前来祝贺来年两宫正旦。
English: On the 27th, Song sent Wang Xian and Kant to congratulate the Millennium Festival, and Zhu Xi, Cao Ying, Zhang Ying, and Liu Yongqi came to congratulate the next year's Two Palaces Day.

古文：诏两国舅及南、北王府乃国之贵族，贱庶不得任本部官。
现代文：下诏称两国舅及南、北王府乃是一国之贵族，庶出贱子不得出任本部官。
English: The following edict stated that the two countries and the Southern and Northern royal courts were the aristocracy of one country, and that a bastard child of a bastard child was not allowed to serve as a headquarters officer.

古文：是岁，放进士张宥等五十七人。
现代文：这一年，放榜录取进士张宥等五十七人及第。
English: This year, 57 new students, including Zhang Yu, were admitted to the university.

古文：九年春正月，至自中京。
现代文：九年春正月，皇上自中京回宫。
English: In the first month of the spring of the ninth year, the emperor returned to the palace from central Kyoto.

古文：二月戊辰，遣使赐高丽王钦物。
现代文：二月初九，派使者赏赐高丽王钦财物。
English: On the 9th day of the 2nd month, an envoy was sent to reward the wealth of King Jin of Goryeo.

古文：如斡凛河。
现代文：皇上到斡凛河。
English: The emperor went to the river.

古文：夏五月，清暑永安山。
现代文：夏五月，在永安山避暑。
English: Summer in May, summering in Yongan Mountain.

古文：六月戊子朔，以长沙郡王谢家奴为广德军节度使，乐安郡王遂哥匡义军节度使，中山郡王查葛保定军节度使，进封潞王，豫章王贴不长宁军节度使。
现代文：六月初一，任命长沙郡王谢家奴为广德军节度使，乐安郡王遂哥为匡义军节度使，中山郡王查葛为保定军节度使、进封潞王，豫章王贴不为长宁军节度使。
English: On the first day of June, Wang Xie Jia Nu of Changsha County was appointed as the festival envoy of the Guangde Army, Wang Sui Ge of Le'an County was appointed as the festival envoy of the Kuangyi Army, Wang Chagat of Zhongshan County was appointed as the festival envoy of the Baoding Army, and Wang Jinfu was appointed as the festival envoy of the Jinbei Army, and Yu Zhang Wang Tipu was appointed as the festival envoy of the Changning Army.

古文：以耶律思忠、耶律荷、耶律暠、遥辇谢佛留、陈邈、韩绍一、韩知白、张震充贺宋两宫生辰及来岁正旦使副。
现代文：任命耶律思忠、耶律荷、耶律詗、遥辇谢佛留、陈邈、韩绍一、韩知白、张震充任祝贺宋两宫生辰及来年正旦的正副使者。
English: Appointed Ye Ruzhizhong, Ye Rujhe, Ye Ruzhuan, Ya Ruzhuan, Ya Ruzhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhiz

古文：秋七月戊午朔，如黑岭。
现代文：秋七月初一，皇上到黑岭。
English: On the first day of autumn in July, the emperor arrived in Heiling.

古文：八月己丑，东京舍利军详稳大延琳囚留守驸马都尉萧孝先及南阳公主，杀户部使韩绍勋、副使王嘉、四捷军都指挥使萧颇得，延琳遂僣位，号其国为兴辽，年为天庆。
现代文：八月初三，东京舍利军详稳大延琳囚禁留守、驸马都尉萧孝先及南阳公主，杀户部使韩绍勋、副使王嘉、四捷军都指挥使萧颇得，延琳僭位登基，称国号为兴辽，年号为天庆。
English: On the 3rd day of the 8th month of the year, Yan Lin, the commander of the Tokyo Sheli Army, was imprisoned and left behind, as well as Captain Xiao Xiaoxian and Princess Nanyang, the commander of the Household Division, Han Shao Xun, the deputy commander, Wang Jia, and the commander of the Four Kingdoms Army, Xiao Baodu, and Yan Lin ascended to the throne, saying that the country name was Xingliao and the year name was Tianqing.

古文：初，东辽之地，自神册来附，未有榷酤盐曲之法，关市之征亦甚宽弛。
现代文：东辽之地，自从神册年间归附辽国之后，没有对酒、盐、曲实行专卖，关市之征也十分宽松。
English: East Liao Province, since it was annexed to Liao Province in the years of the Divine Book, has not implemented a monopoly on wine, salt, and music, and the collection of customs duties is also very loose.

古文：冯延休、韩绍勋相继以燕地平山之法绳之，民不堪命。
现代文：冯延休、韩绍勋相继用燕地平山一带的法规来约束他们，百姓苦不堪言。
English: Feng Yanxiu and Han Shao Xun successively used the laws and regulations in the area of Yanping Mountain to restrict them, and the people suffered greatly.

古文：燕又仍岁大饥，户部副使王嘉复献计造船，使其民谙海事者，漕粟以赈燕民。
现代文：燕地又连年大闹饥荒，户部副使王嘉又献计造船，让百姓中熟悉海上事务者，漕运粟米以赈济燕地百姓，水路艰险难行，许多船只沉没了。
English: Yan's land suffered from famine for several years in a row. Wang Jia, the Deputy Envoy of the Ministry of Household Affairs, also proposed shipbuilding, so that the people who were familiar with maritime affairs could transport corn to feed the people of Yan's land. The waterway was difficult and dangerous, and many ships sank.

古文：水路艰险，多至覆没，虽言不信，鞭楚搒掠，民怨思乱。
现代文：但百姓即使说明灾情官吏也不肯相信，动辄鞭打拷掠，百姓怨恨，便想肇乱。
English: However, even when the officials explained the situation of the disaster, the people refused to believe them. They were whipped and plundered at every turn. The people resented this and wanted to start a riot.

古文：故延琳乘之，首杀绍勋、嘉，以快其众。
现代文：所以延琳得以乘机起事，首先杀掉韩绍勋、王嘉以快众人之心。
English: Therefore, Yanlin was able to take advantage of the situation and first killed Han Shaoxun and Wang Jia to win the hearts of the people.

古文：延琳先事与副留守王道平谋，道平夜弃其家，逾城走，与延琳所遣召黄龙府黄翩者，俱至行在告变。
现代文：延琳先行与副留守王道平商议，道平连夜弃家越城逃走，与延琳所派前去招徕黄龙府的黄翩，一同赶往皇上行宫告变。
English: Yanlin first discussed the matter with the vice-resident Wang Daoping. Daoping abandoned his home Yuecheng overnight and fled, and together with Huangpin, who was sent by Yanlin to recruit Huanglongfu, they hurried to the emperor's palace to inform him of the change.

古文：上即征诸道兵，以时进讨。
现代文：皇上当即征发各道兵马，及时进军讨伐。
English: The emperor immediately conscripted soldiers and horses from all provinces and marched into the crusade in time.

古文：时国舅详稳萧匹敌治近延琳，先率本管及家兵据其要害，绝其西渡之计。
现代文：当时国舅详稳萧匹敌治所靠近延琳，先率辖内兵马及家兵据守要地，断绝延琳西渡之计。
English: At that time, the uncle of the state, Ji Jianwen, was close to Yanlin, leading the soldiers and horses under his jurisdiction and the soldiers of his family to defend the important place and cut off the plan of Yanlin westward.

古文：渤海太保夏行美亦旧主兵，戍保州，延林密驰书，使图统帅耶律蒲古。
现代文：渤海太保夏行美旧时也曾统兵，戍守保州，延琳暗里派人给他送信，让他算计其统帅耶律蒲古。
English: In the old days, Erhai Taipo Xia Xingmei also led an army and guarded Bozhou. Yanlin secretly sent him a letter, asking him to calculate his commander, Yerubugu.

古文：行美乃以实告，蒲古得书，遂杀渤海兵八百人，而断其东路。
现代文：行美将实情告诉蒲古，蒲古得书后，便杀死渤海兵八百人，从而切断了其东下之路。
English: Xingmei told the truth to Pugu, and after Pugu got the letter, he killed eight hundred Bohai soldiers, thus cutting off his way to the east.

古文：延琳知黄龙、保州皆不附，遂分兵西取沈州，其节度使萧王六初至，其副张杰声言欲降，故不急攻。
现代文：延琳得知黄龙、保州均不归附，于是分兵向西攻取沈州，沈州节度使萧王六刚到任，节度副使张杰声称想要出降，所以没有急攻。
English: Yanlin learned that Huanglong and Bozhou would not be annexed, so a detachment of soldiers went west to capture Shenzhou. The Shenzhou Sect had just appointed Xiao Wanglugang to the post, and Deputy Sect Secretary Zhang Jie claimed that he wanted to surrender, so there was no sudden attack.

古文：及知其诈，而已有备，攻之不克而还。
现代文：待到得知是诈降，沈州已经有了防备，攻之不下，只好回军。
English: When it was learned that it was a fraudulent surrender, Shenzhou was already on the defensive and could not be attacked, so it had no choice but to return to the army.

古文：时南、北女直皆从延琳，高丽亦稽其贡。
现代文：当时南、北女真都附从延琳，高丽也拖延其应纳之贡。
English: At that time, both South Korea and North Korea were subordinate to Yanlin, and Goryeo was also delaying its payment of tribute.

古文：及诸道兵次第皆至，延琳婴城固守。
现代文：待到各道兵马先后赶到，延琳环城固守。
English: After waiting for the soldiers and horses from each province to arrive, Yanlin Ring City held fast.

古文：冬十月丙戌朔，以南京留守燕王萧孝穆为都统，国舅详稳萧匹敌为副统，奚六部大王萧蒲奴为都监以讨之。
现代文：冬十月初一，任命南京留守燕王萧孝穆为都统，国舅详稳萧匹敌为副都统，奚六部大王萧蒲奴为都监讨伐大延琳。
English: On the first day of October in the winter, Xiao Xiaomu, the king of Yan who stayed in Nanjing, was appointed as the governor of the capital, the uncle of the country, Zhaozheng Xiaobigu, was appointed as the deputy governor of the capital, and the great king of the Six Departments, Xiao Punu, was appointed as the governor of the capital to fight against Yanlin.

古文：十一月乙卯朔，如显陵。
现代文：十一月初一，皇上到显陵。
English: On the first day of the first month of November, the emperor went to Xianling.

古文：丙寅，以沈州节度副使张杰为节度使，其皇城进士张人纪、赵睦等二十二人入朝。试以诗赋，皆赐第，超授保州戍将夏行美平章事。
现代文：十二日，任命沈州节度使张杰为节度使，皇城进士张人纪、赵睦等二十二人入朝，以诗赋考试之，都赐予及第出身，破格提拔保州戍将夏行美为平章事。
English: On the 12th, Zhang Jie, the Shenzhou Festival Emissary, was appointed as the Festival Emissary, and twenty-two people, including Zhang Renji and Zhao Mutu, who entered the imperial city, were appointed to the imperial court. All of them were awarded the first place in the poetry examination and the first place in the birth, and the unprecedented promotion of Bozhou Xuan made Xia Xingmei a peerage.

古文：壬申，以驸马刘四端权知宣徽南院事。
现代文：十八日，任命驸马刘四端暂代宣徽南院政务。
English: On the 18th, Liu Yifan was appointed to temporarily take over the government affairs of the Southern Yuan.

古文：十二月丁未，宋遣仇永、韩永锡来贺千龄节。
现代文：十二月二十三日，宋国派仇永、韩永锡前来祝贺千龄节。
English: On December 23rd, the Song Dynasty sent Qiu Yong and Han Yongxi to congratulate the Millennium Festival.

古文：命耶律育、吴克荷、萧可观、赵利用充贺宋生辰使副，耶律元吉、崔闰、萧昭古、窦振充来岁贺宋正旦使副。
现代文：命令耶律育、吴克荷、萧可观、赵利用充任庆贺宋主生辰正副使者，耶律元吉、崔闰、萧昭古、窦振充任来年贺宋正旦使、副使。
English: He ordered Ye Luyu, Wu Kehe, Xiao Kekan and Zhao Lijian to be appointed as deputy envoys to celebrate the birthday of the Song emperor, and Ye Luyuanji, Cui Yue, Xiao Zhaogu and Dou Zhensheng to be appointed as envoys and deputy envoys of the Song emperor next year.

古文：十年春正月乙卯朔，宋遣王夷简、窦处约、张易、张士宜来贺。
现代文：十年春正月初一，宋主派王夷简、窦处约、张易、张士宜前来祝贺正旦。
English: On the first day of the first month of the tenth year of the Spring Festival, the Lord of Song sent Wang Yijian, Dou Shijiao, Zhang Yi and Zhang Shiyi to congratulate Zheng Dan.

古文：二月，幸龙化州。
现代文：二月，皇上临幸龙化州。
English: In February, the Emperor visited Gwangju.

古文：三月甲寅朔，详稳萧匹敌至自辽东，言都统萧孝穆去城四面各五里许，筑城堡以围之。
现代文：三月初一，详稳萧匹敌自辽东还，称言其都统萧孝穆在离城四面各约五里的地方筑修城堡以围困大延琳。
English: On the first day of March, Zhengde Xiao matched his rival from Liaodong, saying that his capital Xiao Xiaomu had built a castle to besiege Dayenlin in a place about five miles from the city on all sides.

古文：驸马延宁与其妹穴地遁去，惟公主崔八在后，为守陴者觉而止。
现代文：驸马延宁与其妹夫掘地逃出大延琳的掌握，唯有公主崔八在后面被守卫者发觉，没有逃脱。
English: Princess Ma Yanning and her brother-in-law dug their way out of the clutches of the Great Yanlin, but Princess Cui Bachi was discovered by the guards in the back and did not escape.

古文：夏四月，如乾陵。
现代文：夏四月，皇上到乾陵。
English: In the summer of April, the emperor went to Qianling.

古文：以耶律行平为广平军节度使，夏行美为忠顺军节度使，李延弘知易州，萧从顺加太子太师。
现代文：任命耶律行平为广平军节度使，夏行美为忠顺军节度使，李延弘为易州知州，萧从顺任太子太师。
English: He appointed Ye Lu Xingping as the envoy of the Guangping Army, Xia Xingmei as the envoy of the Zhongshun Army, Li Yanhong as the envoy of the Yizhou-Chizhou Army, and Xiao Congshun as the prince of the prince.

古文：五月戊申，清暑柏坡。
现代文：五月戊申日，皇上消夏于柏坡。
English: In May, the Emperor spent the summer in Baipo.

古文：秋七月壬午，诏来岁行贡举法。
现代文：秋七月初七，下诏公布来年实行贡举之法。
English: On the 7th day of the 7th month of the autumn, the law to implement the tribute next year was announced.

古文：八月丙午，东京贼将杨详世密送款，夜开南门纳辽军。擒延琳，渤海平。
现代文：八月二十五日，东京叛军将领杨详世秘密归附辽军，晚上开城门放辽军入城，延琳被生擒，渤海之乱平。
English: On August 25th, the Tokyo rebel general Yang Jieshi secretly surrendered to the Liao army. In the evening, he opened the city gate to let the Liao army enter the city. Yanlin was captured alive, and the Bohai Sea was leveled.

古文：冬十月，驻跸长宁淀。
现代文：冬十月，皇上歇驾于长宁淀。
English: In the winter of October, the emperor rested in Changningyodo.

古文：十一月辛亥，南京留守燕王萧孝穆以东征将士凯还，戎服见上，上大加宴劳。
现代文：十一月初二，东京留守燕王萧孝穆率东征将士凯旋而归，身着戎服觐见皇上，皇上对他大加宴赏犒劳。
English: On the second day of the first month of November, Xiao Xiaomu, the king of Yan, who stayed in Tokyo, led the eastward expedition and returned in triumph. Dressed in military uniform, he met the emperor, who rewarded him with a grand banquet.

古文：翌日，以孝穆为东平王、东京留守，国舅详稳、驸马都尉萧匹敌封兰陵郡王，奚王蒲奴加侍中；以权燕京留守兼侍中萧惠为燕京统军使，前统军委窊大将军、节度使，宰相兼枢密使马保忠权知燕京留守，奚王府都监萧阿古轸东京统军使。
现代文：第二天，任命萧孝穆为东平王、东京留守；国舅详稳、驸马都尉萧匹敌被封为兰陵郡王；奚王蒲奴升任侍中；任命权燕京留守兼侍中萧惠为燕京统军使；前统军使委纞为大将军、节度使；宰相兼枢密使马保忠为权知燕京留守；奚王府都监萧阿古轸为东京统军使。
English: On the next day, Xiao Xiaomu was appointed as the King of Dongping and stayed in Tokyo; the uncle of the country, Zhaozhen, and the lieutenant of the imperial horse, Xiao Bihu, were appointed as the King of Lanling County; the king of the horse, Banu, was promoted to the chamberlain; Xiao Hui, the governor of Yanjing and the chamberlain, was appointed as the envoy of the unified army of Yanjing; the former envoy of the unified army, Gu Wei, was appointed as the great general and the envoy of the festival; the prime minister and the confidential envoy, Ma Baozhong, was appointed as the governor of

古文：诏渤海旧族有勋劳材力者叙用，馀分居来、隰、迁、润等州。
现代文：诏令叙用渤海旧族中有功勋才干者为官，余众则让其分居来、隰、迁、润等州。
English: According to the imperial edict, the meritorious and talented members of the former Bohai ethnic group were appointed as officials, while the rest of the people were allowed to live in, emigrate to, move to, or be transferred to other prefectures.

古文：十二月乙巳，宋遣梅询、王令杰来贺千龄节。
现代文：十二月二十七日，宋派梅询、王令杰前来祝贺千龄节。
English: On December 27th, Song Pai, Mei Xuan and Wang Lingjie came to congratulate the Millennial Day.

古文：漆水郡王耶律敌烈加尚父，乌古部节度使萧普达为乙室部大王，尚书左仆射萧琳为临海军节度使。
现代文：加漆水郡王耶律敌烈尚父称号，任命乌古部节度使萧普达为乙室部大王，尚书左仆射萧琳为临海军节度使。
English: He added the title of the father of the enemy of King Yerut of Suishui County, and appointed Wu Gu as the head of the Department of Ancient Affairs to make Xiaopuda the great king of the Second Division, and Shang Shuxu's left-hand servant, Ya Xiaolin, as the head of the Department of Naval Affairs.

古文：十一年春正月己酉朔，如混同江。
现代文：十一年春正月初一，皇上到混同江。
English: On the first day of the first month of the eleventh year of spring, the emperor went to the Mudong River.

古文：二月，如长春河。
现代文：二月，到长春河。
English: February, to Changchun River.

古文：三月，上不豫。
现代文：三月，皇上病重。
English: In March, the Emperor fell seriously ill.

古文：夏五月，大雨水，诸河横流，皆失故道。
现代文：夏五月，大雨连绵，诸河泛滥成灾，均改道。
English: In summer and May, continuous heavy rain caused rivers to flood, and they were all diverted.

古文：六月丁丑朔，驻跸大福河之北。
现代文：六月初一，皇上歇驾于大福河之北。
English: On the first day of June, the Emperor died north of the Dafu River.

古文：己卯，帝崩于行宫，年六十一，在位四十九年。
现代文：初三，在行宫驾崩，时年六十一岁，在位共四十九年。
English: He was in his third year of junior high school when he died at the age of 61, after reigning for a total of 49 years.

古文：景福元年闰十月壬申，上尊谥曰文武大孝宣皇帝，庙号圣宗。
现代文：景福元年闰十月二十八日，奉上尊谥为文武大孝宣皇帝，庙号为圣宗。
English: On October 28th, the leap day of the first year of the reign of King Gyeongbokgung, he was given the honorific title of Emperor Munwudaihyo, and the temple name was changed to Seongjong.

