古文：外物不可必，故龙逄诛，比干戮，箕子狂，恶来死，桀、纣亡。
现代文：外在事物不可能有客观的不变的确定性的标准。所以关龙逢被杀，比干被挖心，箕子不得不通过装疯来避祸，恶来死于武王伐纣战争中，桀和纣作为一代国君也不能逃避国破人亡的命运。
English: It is impossible for external things to have an objective, unchanging standard of certainty. Therefore, Guan Longfeng was killed, Bi Gan was gouged, Zizi had to avoid disaster by pretending to be mad, and Evil came to die in the war of King Wu and Zou, and Zou and Zou, as a generation of sovereigns, could not escape the fate of national ruin.

古文：人主莫不欲其臣之忠，而忠未必信，故伍员流于江，苌弘死于蜀，藏其血，三年而化为碧。
现代文：君主没有不希望他的臣子尽忠竭智的，但尽忠的人却未必能受到君主的信任。所以伍子胥的尸体被扔进长江上漂流，苌弘屈死在东周的蜀地，他的血保藏了三年之后，因精诚感动天地而化成碧玉。
English: There is no monarch who does not want his vassals to be loyal and wise, but those who are loyal may not be trusted by the monarch. Therefore, Wu Zixuan's body was thrown into the Yangtze River and drifted. Yu Hong succumbed to death in Shudi in eastern Zhou. After his blood was preserved for three years, it was transformed into jasper because it sincerely moved heaven and earth.

古文：人亲莫不欲其子之孝，而孝未必爱，故孝己忧而曾参悲。
现代文：但那又怎么样呢！父母没有不希望子女尽孝的，但是，在礼仪教化下的孝顺未必就是真正的爱，所以，孝己忧苦而曾参悲伤。
English: But so what! There are no parents who do not want their children to be filial, but filial piety under the influence of etiquette is not necessarily true love, so filial piety is sorrowful and has been involved in sorrow.

古文：木与木相摩则然，金与火相守则流，阴阳错行，则天地大骇，于是乎有雷有霆，水中有火，乃焚大槐。
现代文：木与木相摩擦就会燃烧，金与火放置一起烧炼就会熔化。阴阳二气交错运行，就连天地也会惊恐起来，于是雷霆发作，雨中带电，殛焚大树。
English: Wood and wood friction will burn, gold and fire placed together will melt. Yin and yang are interlaced, even heaven and earth will be alarmed, so thunder will occur, rain will be charged, and large trees will be set on fire.

古文：有甚忧两陷而无所逃。螴蜳不得成，心若县于天地之间，慰暋沈屯，利害相摩，生火甚多，众人焚和，月固不胜火，于是乎有僓然而道尽。
现代文：有的人由于忧虑过度，而陷入利害两端的自相矛盾之中，这是在政治生活中讨饭吃的人无可逃避的必然现象，怵惕不安，却终于一事无成，心就像悬在天地之间一样，一天到晚忧郁沉闷，在得失之间斤斤计较，利害冲突，内心焦灼甚多，众人都跟着忧心如焚，伤害了心中的平和之气，清明的自然之心不能克制焦躁的心火，于是乎精神上崩溃不算，连身躯也不能够依天命所赐而享尽天年，一个个中年夭亡。
English: Some people, due to excessive worries, fall into the self-contradiction between the two ends of interests. This is an inevitable phenomenon for those who beg for food in political life. They are anxious and uneasy, but in the end nothing is accomplished. The heart is like hanging between heaven and earth. It is gloomy and dull all day long. There is a constant struggle between gains and losses. There are conflicts of interest. There is a lot of anxiety in the heart. Many people are burning with worry, which has hurt the spirit of peace in the heart. The clear natural heart cannot restrain the anxious heart, so it does not count as a mental collapse. Even the body cannot enjoy the years given by

古文：庄周家贫，故往贷粟于监河侯。
现代文：庄周家里十分贫穷，于是有一天就去向监河侯借粮。
English: Zhuang Zhou's family was very poor, so one day he went to borrow grain from the bailiff.

古文：庄周忿然作色曰： 周昨来，有中道而呼者，周顾视车辙，中有鲋鱼焉。
现代文：监河侯说： 可以呀，我马上要去我的封邑去收取的税金，收上来后，借给你三百金，好吗？ 庄周听了脸色骤变忿忿地说： 我昨天来的时候，有谁在半道上呼唤我。我回头看看路上车轮辗过的小坑洼处，有条鲫鱼在那里挣扎。
English: The bailiff said, "Yes, I will immediately go to my fief to collect the tax, and after collecting it, I will lend you three hundred gold, okay?" Zhuang Zhou listened and his face suddenly turned angry and said, "When I came yesterday, someone called me halfway. I looked back at the small pothole where the wheels had passed on the road, and there was a catfish struggling there.

古文：周问之曰： 鲋鱼来，子何为者耶？ 对曰： 我，东海之波臣也。
现代文：我问它： 鲫鱼，你干什么呢？ 鲫鱼回答： 我是东海水族中的一员。
English: I asked him, "What are you doing, eel?" The eel replied, "I am a member of the East Sea eel family.

古文：君岂有斗升之水而活我哉！ 
现代文：你也许能用斗升之水使我活下来吧。 
English: You might be able to keep me alive with buckets of water.

古文：周曰： 诺，我且南游吴越之王，激西江之水而迎子，可乎？ 
现代文：我对它说： 行啊，我将到南方去游说吴王越王，引发西江之水来迎候你，可以吗？ 
English: I said to it: OK, I will go to the south to lobby Wu Wang Yue Wang, trigger the water of the West River to welcome you, is it OK?

古文：鲋鱼忿然作色曰： 吾失我常与，我无所处。
现代文：鲫鱼变了脸色生气地说： 我失去我经常生活的环境，没有安身之处。
English: Trout changed his face and said angrily, "I've lost the environment I used to live in, and I have nowhere to live.

古文：我得斗升之水然活耳。君乃言此，曾不如早索我于枯鱼之肆。  
现代文：眼下我能得到斗升那样多的水就活下来了，而你竟说出这样的话，还不如早点到干鱼店里找我！  
English: Right now, I can survive on as much water as I can get, and if you're going to say something like that, you might as well have come to the dried fish store to find me!

古文：任公子为大钩巨缁，五十犗以为饵，蹲乎会稽，投竿东海，旦旦而钓，期年不得鱼。
现代文：任国公子做了个大鱼钩系上粗大的黑绳，用五十头阉牛做鱼饵，蹲在会稽山上，把钓竿投进东海，每天都这样钓鱼，可是一连一条鱼也没钓到。
English: Ren Guozhong made a big fishhook, tied it to a thick black rope, used fifty yaks as bait, squatted on the Huiqi Mountain, and cast the fishing rod into the East Sea. He fished like this every day, but he did not catch a single fish.

古文：已而大鱼食之，牵巨钩，陷没而下骛，扬而奋鬐，白波若山，海水震荡，声侔鬼神，惮赫千里。
现代文：不久之后，大鱼食吞鱼饵，牵着巨大的钓钩，急速沉没海底，又迅急地扬起脊背腾身而起，掀起如山的白浪，海水剧烈震荡，吼声犹如鬼神，震惊千里之外。
English: Soon after, the big fish devoured the bait, leading a huge fishing hook, quickly sank to the bottom of the sea, and quickly raised its back and rose up, setting off mountain-like white waves. The sea was violently shaking, and the roar was like a ghost, shocking thousands of miles away.

古文：任公子得若鱼，离而腊之，自制河以东，苍梧已北，莫不厌若鱼者。
现代文：任公子钓到这条大鱼后，剥开了而做成干肉，从浙江以东到苍梧山以北，人人都饱食了一顿大餐。
English: After Ren Gongzi caught this big fish, he peeled it off and made it into dried meat. From the east of Zhejiang to the north of Cangwu Mountain, everyone had a big meal.

古文：已而后世辁才讽说之徒，皆惊而相告也。
现代文：从此之后，世世代代的后生小子中有喜爱道听途说的人们，都惊讶不已，奔走相告。
English: From then on, generations of young boys, some of whom loved to listen to gossip, were astonished and ran to tell others.

古文：夫揭竿累，趣灌渎，守鲵鲋，其于得大鱼难矣！
现代文：他们举着钓竿丝绳，奔跑在山沟小渠旁，守候小鱼上钩，至于想得到大鱼那就很难很难了。
English: They held up fishing rods and ropes and ran alongside the ravines and canals, waiting for small fish to be hooked, but it was very difficult to get big fish.

古文：饰小说以干县令，其于大达亦远矣。是以未尝闻任氏之风俗，其不可与经于世亦远矣！
现代文：修饰浅薄的言辞以求得高高的美名，对于达到通晓大道的境界来说距离也就很远很远了，因此说不曾了解过任公子有所大成的志趣，恐怕也不可以说是善于治理天下，而且其间的差距也是很远很远了。
English: To embellish shallow words in order to gain a high reputation is a long way from reaching the realm of wisdom. Therefore, it can not be said that he has never understood the ambition of Ren Junzi, and he may not be able to say that he is good at governing the world, and the gap between them is also very far away.

古文：儒以《诗》、《礼》发冢，大儒胪传曰： 东方作矣，事之何若？ 
现代文：儒生表面运用诗、书而暗地里却在盗墓。大儒在上面传话说： 太阳即将升起，事情般得怎么样了？ 
English: On the surface, Confucianism uses poetry and books, but secretly they are robbing tombs. The Great Confucius sent a message saying: The sun is about to rise, how are things?

古文：小儒曰： 未解裙襦，口中有珠。 
现代文：小儒说： 衣裙还没有脱下来，口中含有珍珠。
English: Xiaoju said, "The dress has not come off yet, and there are pearls in my mouth.

古文： 《诗》固有之曰： 青青之麦，生于陵陂。
现代文：古诗中有一首说： 青青的麦苗，生在山坡上。
English: There is an ancient poem that says: "A young seedling is born on a hillside."

古文：生不布施，死何含珠为？ 
现代文：活时不接济别人，死后何必含珍珠！  
English: If you don't help others when you are alive, why should you have pearls when you die!

古文：接其鬓，压其顪，儒以金椎控其颐，徐别其颊，无伤口中珠。 
现代文：大儒说： 挤压他的两鬓，按着他的胡须，你再用锤子敲打他的下巴，慢慢地分开他的两颊，不要损坏了口中的珠子！ 
English: The great scholar said: Squeeze his cheeks, press his whiskers, then hit his chin with a hammer, slowly separate his cheeks, do not damage the beads in his mouth!

古文：老莱子之弟子出薪，遇仲尼，反以告，曰： 有人于彼，修上而趋下，末偻而后耳，视若营四海，不知其谁氏之子。 
现代文：老莱子的弟子外出去打柴，碰到了孔丘，打柴归来告诉给老莱子，说： 有个人在那里，上身长下身短，伸颈曲背，耳朵向后贴在头的两边，一副目光远大，胸怀天下的样子，不知道他是哪个贵族之家的人。 
English: Laozi's disciple went out to collect firewood and met Kongqiu. When he came back from collecting firewood, he told Laozi, "There is a man out there. He is tall and short, with an elongated neck and curved back. His ears are on both sides of his head. He has a far-sighted and worldly look. I don't know which noble family he belongs to.

古文：老莱子曰： 是丘也，召而来。 
现代文：老莱子说： 这个人一定是孔丘。快去叫他来见我。 
English: Laozi said, "This man must be Confucius. Quickly go and call him to see me."

古文：仲尼至。曰： 丘，去汝躬矜与汝容知，斯为君子矣。 
现代文：孔丘来了，老莱子说： 孔丘，去掉你仪态上的矜持和容颜上的睿智之态，那就可以成为君子了。 
English: When Confucius arrived, Laozi said, "Confucius, if you can get rid of your formal reserve and the wise look on your face, then you can become a gentleman."

古文：仲尼揖而退，蹙然改容而问曰： 业可得进乎？ 
现代文：孔丘听了后谦恭地作揖而退，面容顿改心悸不安地问道： 我所追求的仁义之学可以修进并为世人所用吗？ 
English: After listening, Confucius humbly bowed and retreated, his face suddenly changed, and he asked anxiously: Can the study of benevolence and righteousness that I pursue be cultivated and used by the world?

古文：老莱子曰： 夫不忍一世之伤，而骜万世之患。
现代文：老莱子说： 不忍心一世的损伤却会留下使后世奔波不息的祸患，你是本来就孤陋蔽塞，还是才智赶不上呢？
English: Lao Lai Zi said, "If you can't bear the damage of the first life, but leave behind the calamity that makes the future life run ceaselessly, are you originally alone, or can't your intelligence keep up?

古文：抑固窭邪？
现代文：布施恩惠以博取欢心并因此自命不凡，这是终身的丑恶，是庸人的行为罢了，这样的人总是用名声来相互招引，用私利来相互勾结。
English: It is a life-long abomination, a philistine act, to bestow favors in order to win favor and thus to make oneself pretentious. Such people always use fame to attract each other and use self-interest to collude with each other.

古文：与其誉尧而非桀，不如两忘而闭其所誉。
现代文：与其称赞唐尧非议夏桀，不如两种情况都能遗忘而且堵住一切称誉。
English: Instead of praising Tang Xuan and criticizing Xia Xuan, it is better to forget both situations and block all praise.

古文：反无非伤也，动无非邪也，圣人踌躇以兴事，以每成功。
现代文：背逆事理与物性定会受到损伤，心性被搅乱就会邪念顿起。圣哲的人顺应事理稳妥行事，因而总是事成功就。
English: Those who go against reason and nature are bound to suffer damage, and when the mind is disturbed, evil thoughts will suddenly arise. Those who follow reason and act steadily will always succeed.

古文：奈何哉，其载焉终矜尔！ 
现代文：你执意推行仁义而且以此自矜又将会怎么样呢？ 
English: What will happen if you insist on promoting benevolence and pride yourself on it?

古文：宋元君夜半而梦人被发窥阿门，曰： 予自宰路之渊，予为清江使河伯之所，渔者余且得予。 
现代文：宋元君半夜梦见一个披散头发的人在偏门窥视，说： 我来自宰路的深渊，我做清江的使者到河神那里，被打鱼人余且捉到了我。 
English: In the middle of the night, Song Yuanjun dreamed that a man with disheveled hair was peering at the side gate, saying: I come from the abyss of the roadside, I am the messenger of the Qingjiang River to the river god, and I was caught by the fisherman.

古文：元君觉，使人占之，曰： 此神龟也。 
现代文：宋元君醒来，使人占梦，说： 这是神龟。 
English: When Song Yuanjun woke up, he divined the dream and said, "It's a divine turtle."

古文：君曰： 渔者有余且乎？ 左右曰： 有。 
现代文：宋元君说： 打鱼的有余且这个人吗？ 左右说： 有。 
English: Song Yuanjun said, "Is this the right person to fish with?" Both sides said, "Yes."

古文：君曰： 令余且会朝。 
现代文：宋元君说： 令余且来朝见。 
English: Song Yuanjun said: Let me come and see you.

古文：明日，余且朝。君曰： 渔何得？ 
现代文：第二天，余且来朝，宋元君说： 捕鱼得到了什么？ 
English: The next day, after coming to the DPRK, Song Yuanjun said, "What did I get from fishing?

古文：对曰： 且之网得白龟焉，箕圆五尺。 
现代文：回答说： 我的网得到一个白龟，周圆五尺。 
English: He answered: My net caught a white turtle with a circumference of five feet.

古文：君曰： 献若之龟。 
现代文：宋元君说： 献上你的龟。 
English: Song Yuanjun said: Present your turtle.

古文：龟至，君再欲杀之，再欲活之。心疑，卜之。曰： 杀龟以卜吉。 
现代文：龟送到，宋元君一再想杀了它，又一再想养活它，心里犹豫，叫人占卜，说： 杀龟来卜卦吉。 
English: When the turtle was delivered, Song Yuanjun repeatedly wanted to kill it, and repeatedly wanted to feed it. He hesitated in his heart and asked someone to tell fortunes, saying: "Kill the turtle to tell fortunes."

古文：乃刳龟，七十二钻而无遗生筴。
现代文：于是剖龟占卜，占了七十二卦而没有不应验的。
English: As a result, the dissection of the turtle divination accounted for seventy-two divination riddles and there was no failure to pass the test.

古文：仲尼曰： 神龟能见梦于元君，而不能避余且之网；知能七十二钻而无遗囗，不能避刳肠之患。
现代文：孔子说： 神龟能托梦于宋元君，而不能逃避余且的渔网；智能占七十二卦而无不应验，不能逃避割肠的祸患。
English: Confucius said: "The tortoise can dream of Song Yuanjun, but cannot escape Yu Yu's fishing net; intelligence accounts for seventy-two sagas, but there is no incompatibility, and it cannot escape the scourge of cutting the intestines.

古文：如是则知有所困，神有所不及也。
现代文：如此看来，智能也有穷困的时候，神也有不灵的地方。
English: From this perspective, when intelligence is also impoverished, God also has a weak spot.

古文：虽有至知，万人谋之。
现代文：纵有最高的机智，却有上万人谋划它。
English: Even with the greatest ingenuity, there are tens of thousands of people planning it.

古文：鱼不畏网而畏鹈鹕。
现代文：鱼不知畏网而怕鹈鹕。
English: A fish fears not the net, but the bait.

古文：去小知而大知明，去善而自善矣。
现代文：除掉小知而大知明，去掉自以为善而善自显。
English: Eliminate the small knowledge and the big knowledge is clear, remove the self-righteousness and the good will reveal itself.

古文：婴儿生，无硕师而能言，与能言者处也。 
现代文：婴儿生来没有大师教而能说话，这是与会说话的人在一起的缘故。 
English: Babies are born with the ability to speak without being taught, this is due to being around people who can talk.

古文：惠子谓庄子曰： 子言无用。 
现代文：惠施对庄子说： 你的言论总是大而无用。 
English: Hui Shi said to Zhuang Zi: Your words are always big and useless.

古文：庄子曰： 知无用而始可与言用矣。
现代文：庄子说： 知道了什么是无用的东西才能和你讨论什么叫有用。
English: Zhuangzi said, "Only when we know what is useless can we discuss with you what is useful."

古文：夫地非不广且大也，人之所用容足耳，然则厕足而垫之致黄泉，人尚有用乎？ 惠子曰： 无用。 庄子曰： 然则无用之为用也亦明矣。 
现代文：大地并非不宽广，可人所实际占据的只是一个立足之地，然而如果把你容下两只脚以外的 土地 都向深处挖，而且挖得很深，你的脚踩的那一块 地 还能够像原来那样供你使用吗？ 惠说： 不能。 庄子说： 这样说来， 无用 的东西的用处，也就很明显了。 
English: The earth is not very wide, but what people actually occupy is just a foothold. However, if you dig deep and dig very deep into the land that does not accommodate your two feet, will the piece of land that your feet step on still be able to be used by you as it was before? Hui said: No. Zhuangzi said: In this way, the usefulness of useless things is also obvious.

古文：庄子曰： 人有能游，且得不游乎！
现代文：庄子说： 人若能悠然自得，哪有不悠然自得的呢？
English: Chuang Tzu said: If a man can be at ease with himself, what is there not to be at ease with?

古文：人而不能游，且得游乎！
现代文：人如果不能悠然自得，哪里有悠然自得呢？
English: If people cannot be at ease with themselves, where can they be at ease with themselves?

古文：夫流遁之志，决绝之行，噫，其非至知厚德之任与！
现代文：流荡忘返的心志，固执孤异的行为，唉，那都不是至知厚德的人所为的！
English: Wandering and forgetful mind, stubborn and solitary behavior, alas, those are not the actions of a man of great wisdom and virtue!

古文：覆坠而不反，火驰而不顾。
现代文：陷溺世俗而不返，逐物如火而不顾。
English: Drowning in the mundane and not returning, disregarding things one by one.

古文：虽相与为君臣，时也。
现代文：虽然相互异位，有的为君有的为臣，只是一时之争而已。
English: Although mutual heterotopia, some for the prince and some for the vassal, is only a temporary struggle.

古文：易世而无以相贱。
现代文：时代更替了也就不再互为贵贱了。
English: Times have changed, and there is no longer a distinction between the rich and the poor.

古文：故曰：至人不留行焉。
现代文：所以说，得道的人是不会固执于某种行为方式的。
English: Therefore, a person who has attained the Way will not persist in a certain way of behavior.

古文：夫尊古而卑今，学者之流也。
现代文：崇尚古代鄙薄当今，这是未能通达事理之人的观点。
English: It is the view of an unreasoning person to advocate the view that ancient times are inferior to the present.

古文：且以狶韦氏之流观今之世，夫孰能不波！
现代文：用狶韦氏之流的角度来观察当今的世事，谁又能不在心中引起波动？
English: Looking at today's world from the perspective of Wei's school, who can not but cause fluctuations in the heart?

古文：唯至人乃能游于世而不僻，顺人而不失己。
现代文：道德修养极为高尚的人方才能够混迹于世而不出现邪僻，顺随于众人之中却不会失却自己的真性。
English: Only a person with extremely high moral cultivation can mingle in the world without appearing perverse, and follow the crowd without losing his true nature.

古文：彼教不学，承意不彼。
现代文：尊古卑今的见教不应学取，禀受其意也不必相互对立争辩不已。 
English: It is not necessary to learn from the teachings of the past or the present, nor is it necessary to oppose and argue with each other.

古文：目彻为明，耳彻为聪，鼻彻为颤，口彻为甘，心彻为知，知彻为德。
现代文：眼光敏锐叫做明，耳朵灵敏叫做聪，鼻子灵敏叫做膻，口感灵敏叫做甘，心灵透彻叫做智，聪明贯达叫做德。
English: Sharp eyesight is called "Ming," sensitive ears are called "Zhuang," sensitive nose is called "Jing," sensitive palate is called "Gan," thorough mind is called "Zhi," and cleverness is called "De."

古文：凡道不欲壅，壅则哽，哽而不止则跈，跈则众害生。
现代文：大凡道德总不希望有所壅塞，壅塞就会出现梗阻，梗阻而不能排除就会出现相互践踏，相互残踏那么各种祸害就会随之而起。
English: The great morality always hopes that there will be no prevarication, and if there is prevarication, there will be obstruction, and if there is obstruction and it cannot be eliminated, there will be mutual trampling, and if there is mutual trampling, then all kinds of disasters will ensue.

古文：物之有知者恃息。其不殷，非天之罪。
现代文：物类有知觉靠的是气息，假如气息不盛，那么绝不是自然禀赋的过失。
English: Sentient things rely on the breath. If the breath is not strong, then it is by no means a fault of natural endowment.

古文：天之穿之，日夜无降，人则顾塞其窦。
现代文：自然的真性贯穿万物，日夜不停，可是人们却反而堵塞自身的孔窍。
English: The truth of nature penetrates everything, day and night, but people, on the contrary, block their own orifices.

古文：胞有重阆，心有天游。室无空虚，则妇姑勃谿；心无天游，则六凿相攘。
现代文：腹腔有许多空旷之处因而能容受五脏怀藏胎儿，内心虚空便会没有拘系地顺应自然而游乐。屋里没有虚空感，婆媳之间就会争吵不休；内心不能虚空而且游心于自然，那么六种官能就会出现纷扰。
English: There are many empty spaces in the abdominal cavity so that it can accommodate the five internal organs and the fetus. The inner emptiness will freely follow nature and play. If there is no sense of emptiness in the house, the mother-in-law and daughter-in-law will quarrel incessantly; if the heart cannot be empty and is focused on nature, then the six senses will be disturbed.

古文：大林丘山之善于人也，亦神者不胜。
现代文：森林与山丘之所以适宜于人，也是因为人们的内心促狭、心神不爽。
English: The reason why forests and hills are suitable for people is also because people's hearts are cramped and uneasy.

古文：德溢乎名，名溢乎暴，谋稽乎誸，知出乎争，柴生乎守，官事果乎众宜。
现代文：德行的外溢是由于名声，名声的外溢是由于张扬，谋略的考究是由于危急，才智的运用是由于争斗，闭塞的出现是由于执滞，官府事务处理果决是由于顺应了民众。
English: The outflow of virtue is due to fame, the outflow of fame is due to publicity, the study of strategy is due to crisis, the use of talent is due to struggle, the occurrence of blockage is due to delay, and the decisive handling of government affairs is due to compliance with the public.

古文：春雨日时，草木怒生，铫鎒于是乎始修，草木之倒植者过半而不知其然。
现代文：春雨应时而降，草木勃然而生，锄地的农具开始整修，田地里杂草锄后再生超过半数，而人们往往并不知道为什么会这样。
English: Spring rains fall from time to time, plants and trees sprout, farm tools in ploughed fields begin to be renovated, and more than half of the weeds in the fields regenerate after weeding, and people often do not know why this is so.

古文：静默可以补病，眦媙可以休老，宁可以止遽。
现代文：沉静可以调养病体，摩摩擦擦可以延缓衰老，宁寂安定可以止息内心的急促。
English: Calmness can restore the diseased body, friction and rubbing can delay aging, tranquility and stability can stop the inner rush.

古文：虽然，若是劳者之务也，非佚者之所未尝过而问焉；圣人之所以骇天下，神人未尝过而问焉；贤人所以骇世，圣人未尝过而问焉；君子所以骇国，贤人未尝过而问焉；小人所以合时，君子未尝过而问焉。
现代文：虽然如此，像这样，仍是操劳的人所务必要做到的，闲逸的人却从不予以过问。圣人用来惊骇天下的办法，神人不曾过问；贤人用来惊骇时世的办法，圣人不曾过问；君子用来惊骇国人的办法，贤人不曾过问；小人用来苟合于一时的办法，君子也不曾过问。
English: Nevertheless, as it is, it is done as a matter of necessity by the industrious, and is never questioned by the idle; the methods of a sage to terrify the world have never been questioned by a god; the methods of a sage to terrify the world have never been questioned by a saint; the methods of a gentleman to terrify his countrymen have never been questioned by a gentleman; and the methods of a ruffian to make love for a moment have never been questioned by a gentleman.

古文：演门有亲死者，以善毁爵为官师，其党人毁而死者半。
现代文：宋国东门有个死了双亲的人，因为格外哀伤日渐消瘦而加官进爵封为官师，他的同乡仿效他也消瘦毁容却死者过半。
English: In the eastern gate of the Song Dynasty, there was a man whose parents had died. Because of his extreme grief, he became thinner and thinner and was promoted to a peerage and appointed as an official teacher. His fellow villagers imitated his thinness and disfigurement, but more than half of them died.

古文：尧与许由天下，许由逃之；汤与务光，务光怒之；纪他闻之，帅弟子而蹲于窾水，诸侯吊之。三年，申徒狄因以踣河。
现代文：尧要禅让天下给许由，许由因而逃到箕山；商汤想把天下禅让给务光，务光大发脾气；纪他知道了这件事，率领弟子隐居在窾水一带，诸侯纷纷前往慰问，过了三年，申徒狄仰慕其名而投河自溺。
English: Shun wanted to give the world of Zen to Xu Rong, so Xu Rong fled to Shaoshan; Shang Tang wanted to give the world of Zen to Wu Guang, and Wu Guang lost his temper; Ji knew about this and led his disciples to live in seclusion in the vicinity of Surabaya. Princes and lords came to offer their condolences. After three years, Shentudi admired his name and drowned himself in the river.

古文：荃者所以在鱼，得鱼而忘荃；蹄者所以在兔，得兔而忘蹄；言者所以在意，得意而忘言。
现代文：竹笱是用来捕鱼的，捕到鱼后就忘掉了鱼笱；兔网是用来捕捉兔子的，捕到兔子后就忘掉了兔网；言语是用来传告思想的，领会了意思就忘掉了言语。
English: Bamboo shoots are used to catch fish, and when the fish is caught, the shoots are forgotten; rabbit nets are used to catch rabbits, and when the rabbits are caught, the rabbit nets are forgotten; words are used to convey thoughts, and when the meaning is understood, the words are forgotten.

古文：吾安得夫忘言之人而与之言哉！ 
现代文：我怎么才能寻找到忘掉言语的人而跟他谈一谈呢！
English: How can I find a man who has forgotten words and talk to him?

