古文：十有四年春，齐人、陈人、曹人伐宋。
现代文：十四年春季，齐国、陈国、曹国一起攻打宋国。
English: In the spring of the 14th year, Qi, Chen and Cao attacked Song together.

古文：夏，单伯会伐宋。
现代文：夏季，单伯带兵同诸侯相会一起攻打宋国。
English: In the summer, he single-handedly led his soldiers to attack Song with the concurrence of the princes.

古文：秋七月，荆入蔡。
现代文：秋季七月，楚军进入蔡国。
English: In the autumn of July, the Chu army entered Cai Province.

古文：冬，单伯会齐侯、宋公、卫侯、郑伯于鄄。
现代文：冬季，单伯在鄄地与齐侯、宋公、卫侯、郑伯会面。
English: In winter, Shanbo met with Qi Hou, Song Gong, Wei Hou, and Zheng Bo in Handan.

古文：十四年春，诸侯伐宋，齐请师于周。
现代文：十四年春季，齐国、陈国、曹国联军进攻宋国。齐国请求成周出兵。
English: In the spring of the 14th year, the allied forces of Qi, Chen and Cao attacked Song. Qi asked Cheng Zhou to send troops.

古文：夏，单伯会之，取成于宋而还。
现代文：夏季，单伯带兵同诸侯相会。同宋国讲和后回国。
English: In the summer, he led his soldiers to meet the princes and made peace with the Song Dynasty before returning to China.

古文：郑厉公自栎侵郑，及大陵，获傅瑕。
现代文：郑厉公从栎地带兵入侵郑国国都，到达大陵，俘虏了傅瑕。
English: Zheng Liguang invaded the capital of Zheng Province with soldiers from Zhai, reached Daling, and captured Fu Kegong.

古文：傅瑕曰： 苟舍我，吾请纳君。 
现代文：傅瑕说： 如果放了我，我可以使君王回国再登君位。 
English: Fu Ke said, "If I am released, I can make the king return to China and ascend the throne again."

古文：与之盟而赦之。
现代文：郑厉公和他盟誓，便把他释放了。
English: Zheng Li Gong swore an oath to him and released him.

古文：六月甲子，傅瑕杀郑子及其二子而纳厉公。
现代文：六月二十日，傅瑕杀死郑子子仪和他的两个儿子，接纳厉公回国。
English: On June 20, Fu Ke killed Zheng Zi Zi and his two sons, and accepted Li Gong to return to China.

古文：初，内蛇与外蛇斗于郑南门中，内蛇死。
现代文：当初，在郑国国都的南门下面，一条在门里的蛇和一条在门外的蛇相斗，门里的蛇被咬死。
English: At first, under the south gate of the capital of Zhengzhou, a snake inside the gate and a snake outside the gate fought with each other. The snake inside the gate was bitten to death.

古文：六年而厉公入。
现代文：过了六年而郑厉公回国。
English: After six years, Zheng Liguo returned to China.

古文：公闻之，问于申曰： 犹有妖乎？ 
现代文：鲁庄公听说这件事，向申繻询问说： 厉公的回国难道与妖蛇有关系吗？ 
English: Lu Zhuang Gong heard about this and asked Shen Qi: Did Li Gong's return to China have anything to do with the snake?

古文：对曰： 人之所忌，其气焰以取之，妖由人兴也。
现代文：申繻回答说： 一个人是否会遇到他所顾忌的事，是由于他自己的气焰所招致的。妖孽是由于人才起来的。
English: Shen Li replied: Whether a person encounters the things he is afraid of is caused by his own arrogance. Sorcery is caused by talent.

古文：人无衅焉，妖不自作。
现代文：人没有毛病，妖孽自己不能起来。
English: People don't have signs, and demons don't arise on their own.

古文：人弃常则妖兴，故有妖。 
现代文：人丢弃正道，妖孽就自己来了，所以才有妖孽。 
English: Wickedness comes of its own accord, when a man abandons the right way. That is why there is such wickedness.

古文：厉公入，遂杀傅瑕。
现代文：郑厉公回国，就杀死了傅瑕。
English: When Zheng Liguo returned to China, he killed Fu Kehong.

古文：使谓原繁曰： 傅瑕贰，周有常刑，既伏其罪矣。
现代文：派人对原繁说： 傅瑕对国君有二心，周朝定有惩处这类奸臣的刑罚，现在傅瑕已经得到惩处了。
English: The dispatched person said to Yuan Shiang: Fu Keh has a double heart towards the sovereign. The Zhou Dynasty had a penalty for punishing such a treacherous vassal, and now Fu Keh has been punished.

古文：纳我而无二心者，吾皆许之上大夫之事，吾愿与伯父图之。
现代文：帮助我回国而没有二心的人，我都答应给他上大夫的职位，我愿意跟伯父一起商量。
English: I have promised to give a doctor's position to anyone who helps me return to my country without any second thoughts, and I am willing to discuss it with my uncle.

古文：且寡人出，伯父无裏言；入，又不念寡人，寡人憾焉。 
现代文：而且我离开国家在外，伯父没有告诉我国内的情况。回国以后，又并不亲附我，我对此感到遗憾。 
English: Moreover, when I was out of the country, my uncle didn't tell me about the situation at home, and when I came back, he didn't keep in touch with me, which I regret.

古文：对曰： 先君桓公命我先人典司宗祏。社稷有主而外其心，其何贰如之？
现代文：原繁回答说： 先君桓公命令我的先人管理宗庙列祖列宗的主位，国家有君主而自己的心却在国外，还有比这更大的二心吗？
English: Hara-Shige replied, "My forefather, King Huan, ordered my forefathers to administer the throne of the ancestral temple. The country has a monarch, but its heart is abroad. Is there a greater double heart than this?

古文：苟主社稷，国内之民其谁不为臣？
现代文：如果主持国家，国内的百姓，又谁不是他的臣下呢？
English: If he presides over the country and the people within it, who are not his vassals?

古文：臣无二心，天之制也。
现代文：臣下不应该有二心，这是上天的规定。
English: It is God's rule that a vassal should not be double-minded.

古文：子仪在位十四年矣，而谋召君者，庸非贰乎。
现代文：子仪居于君位，十四年了，现在策划召请君王回国的，难道不是二心吗？
English: Your son has been on the throne for fourteen years, and now you are planning to invite the king to return to the country. Isn't that double-minded?

古文：庄公之子犹有八人，若皆以官爵行赂，劝贰而可以济事，君其若之何？
现代文：庄公的儿子还有八个人，如果都用官爵做贿赂以劝说别人三心二意而又可能成功，君王又怎么办？
English: Zhuang Gong's son has eight other sons. If they all use the peerage as a bribe to persuade others half-heartedly and may succeed, what will the king do?

古文：臣闻命矣。 
现代文：下臣知道君王的意思了。 
English: I'm just following orders.

古文：乃缢而死。
现代文：原繁说完，就上吊死了。
English: He then hanged himself.

古文：蔡哀侯为莘故，绳息妫以语楚子。
现代文：蔡哀侯由于莘地战役被俘，在楚文王面前赞美息妫。
English: As a result of being captured in the Battle of Plains of Abraham, Cai Yehou praised his death in front of King Chuwen.

古文：楚子如息，以食入享，遂灭息。
现代文：楚文王到息国，设宴招待息侯而加以袭杀，就灭亡了息国。
English: When King Chuwen arrived at Sui Province, he held a banquet to invite Sui Hou and attacked and killed him, which led to the downfall of Sui Province.

古文：以息妫归，生堵敖及成王焉，未言。
现代文：他把息妫带回楚国，生了堵敖和成王。
English: He brought the cormorant back to Chu and gave birth to the cormorant and the king.

古文：楚子问之，对曰： 吾一妇人而事二夫，纵弗能死，其又奚言？ 
现代文：息妫没有主动说过话，楚文王问她，她回答说： 我一个女人，伺候两个丈夫，即使不能死，又能说什么？ 
English: She replied, "I am a woman who has served two husbands. Even if I cannot die, what can I say?

古文：楚子以蔡侯灭息，遂伐蔡。
现代文：楚文王由于蔡侯的缘故才灭亡了息国，于是再进攻蔡国。
English: King Chuwen only lost his kingdom because of Cai Hou, so he attacked Cai again.

古文：秋七月，楚入蔡。
现代文：秋季，七月，楚军进入蔡国。
English: In the autumn, in July, the Chu army entered Cai.

古文：君子曰： 《商书》所谓 恶之易也，如火之燎于原，不可乡迩，其犹可扑灭 者，其如蔡哀侯乎。 
现代文：君子说： 《商书》所说的 恶的蔓延，如同大火在草原上燃烧，不可以接近，难道还可以扑灭？ 恐怕就像蔡哀侯吧！ 
English: The gentleman said, "The spread of evil, as mentioned in the "Commercial Book," is like a fire burning on the grassland, it cannot be approached, can it be extinguished? I'm afraid it's like Cai Yehou!

古文：冬，会于鄄，宋服故也。
现代文：冬季，单伯和齐桓公、宋桓公、卫惠公、郑厉公在鄄地会见，这是由于宋国顺服的缘故。
English: In winter, Sun Bo met with Qi Huan Gong, Song Huan Gong, Wei Hui Gong, and Zheng Li Gong in Handan, which was due to the obedience of Song.

