古文：谓秦王曰： 臣窃惑王之轻齐易楚，而卑畜韩也。
现代文：有人对秦武王说： 臣私下十分疑惑大王何故轻视齐、楚，而且待韩国就象对待奴仆，极不礼貌。
English: Someone said to King Qin Wu: Privately, the vassal was very puzzled as to why the great king despised Qi and Chu, and treated Korea like a slave, which was extremely impolite.

古文：臣闻，王兵胜而不骄，伯主约而不忿。
现代文：臣听过这样的话，胜而不骄是王者作为，败而不忿是霸主胸襟。
English: The minister has heard such words, victory without arrogance is the king's deed, defeat without anger is the overlord's heart.

古文：胜而不骄，故能服世；约而不忿，故能从邻。
现代文：胜而不骄，故能服众；败而不忿，才能与周围和睦共处。
English: To be victorious but not arrogant is to be able to obey the crowd; to be defeated but not angry is to be able to coexist harmoniously with others.

古文：今王广德魏、赵，而轻失齐，骄也；战胜宜阳，不恤楚交，忿也。
现代文：现在大王很看重和魏、赵两国的关系，不惜广施恩德，可却淡薄与齐国的交往，这可是骄傲的表现；取得宜阳大捷，就疏远楚国，这是忿怒的原因。
English: At present, the great king attaches great importance to the relations with Wei and Zhao, and although he is generous, he has little contact with Qi, which is a manifestation of pride; if he achieves a great victory in Yiyang, he will alienate Chu, which is the reason for anger.

古文：骄忿非伯主之业也。臣窃为大主虑之而不取也。
现代文：骄忿难以成就霸业，臣私下认为大王应当加以深思，不该这样做。
English: Arrogance is difficult to achieve hegemony, and the vassal privately thought that the great king should think about it and should not do so.

古文：《诗》云： 靡不有初，鲜克有终。 故先王之所重者，唯始与终。
现代文：《诗经》上说： 做任何事情总有个开头，但是很少能做到善始善终。 
English: The Book of Songs says: To do anything, there is always a beginning, but it is seldom possible to make a good beginning and a good ending.

古文：何以知其然?
现代文：因此先王要特别注重善始善终。
English: Therefore, the late king should pay special attention to a good beginning and a good ending.

古文：昔智伯瑶残范、中行，围逼晋阳，卒为三家笑。吴王夫差栖越于会稽，胜齐于艾陵，为黄池之遇，无礼于宋，遂与勾践禽，死于干隧。梁君伐楚胜齐，制赵、韩之兵，驱十二诸侯以朝天子于孟津，后子死，自布冠而拘于秦。
现代文：过去智伯灭掉范、中行氏，又围攻晋阳以求灭赵，结果为韩、赵、魏三家所灭；吴王夫差把越王勾践围困在会稽山上，又在艾陵一役中大败齐国，后来在黄池主持诸侯会盟，对宋无礼最后为勾践所擒，死在干隧这个地方；魏惠王当年更是盛极一时，伐楚胜齐，使韩、赵屈服，还邀集十二家诸侯朝天子于孟津，最后太子死于马陵一役，自己为形势所迫，素衣布冠为秦所囚。
English: In the past, Zhi Bo destroyed the Fan and Zhong Xing clans, and besieged Jinyang in order to destroy Zhao. As a result, Han, Zhao, and Wei were destroyed; Wu Wangfu sent the Yue King to besiege and besiege the Yue King on the Hechi Mountain, and then defeated Qi in the Ailing Campaign. Later, he presided over the princes' alliance in Huangchi, and finally was killed by the Hechi against Song Rude, and died in the Qian Tunnel. King Wei Hui was even more prosperous at that time. He defeated Chu and made Han and Zhao submit. He also invited twelve princes to meet Tianzi in

古文：三者非无功也，能始而不能终也。
现代文：这三人当初都建有赫赫战功，只因不能将谨慎贯彻于始终，才招致后来的惨败。
English: All three of them had made great achievements in the war at the beginning, but only because they could not implement prudence throughout, they incurred the subsequent fiasco.

古文： 今王破宜阳，残三川，而使天下之士不敢言；雍天下之国，徙西周之疆，而世主不敢交阳侯之塞；取董棘，而韩、楚之兵不敢进。
现代文：如今秦国攻破宜阳，占领三川，使得天下策士惶恐震惧、闭口无言；隔绝诸侯之间的呼应，使东、西二周疆界因秦兵的进逼而屡屡更改，使各路诸侯不敢聚合策划图谋秦国；还夺取了黄棘这地，使韩、楚之兵不敢西进。
English: Now Qin has broken through Yiyang and occupied the Three Rivers, causing the world's strategists to be terrified and speechless; isolated the echoes between the princes, so that the eastern and western borders have been repeatedly changed due to the advance of Qin soldiers, so that the princes did not dare to gather and plan Qin; also seized the Yellow Thorn, so that the soldiers of Han and Chu did not dare to go west.

古文：王若能为此尾，则三王不足四，五伯不足六。
现代文：既已取得这样的成就，大王如果兢兢业业，谨慎到底，王霸之业可指日而待。
English: Having already made such achievements, if the great king is conscientious and prudent to the end, the cause of Wangba can wait for the day.

古文：王若不能为此尾，而有后患，则臣恐诸侯之君，河、济之士，以王为吴、智之事也。
现代文：假如慎始而不能克终，就会后患无穷。臣担心诸侯之君，河、济一带的有识之士会认为大王步夫差、智伯之后尘。
English: If you start cautiously but fail to finish, you will have endless troubles later. The vassal worries about the prince of princes, and the people with insight in the areas of rivers and economy will think that the great king is a poor husband and a follower of Zhi Bo.

古文： 《诗》云： 行百里者半于九十。 
现代文：《诗经》上说： 走一百里路，即使走了九十里还只是一半。 
English: The "Song of Songs" says, "If you walk a hundred miles, even if you walk ninety miles, it is only half done."

古文：此言末路之难。
现代文：着重指出走最后一段道路是十分艰难的。
English: He stressed that it was very difficult to take the last part of the road.

古文：今大王皆有骄色，以臣之心观之，天下之事，依世主之心，非楚受兵，必秦也。
现代文：如今大王常常有骄傲的情绪，臣曾经留心观察，方今天下之事，根据诸侯的心意，不是联合对付楚国，就是并力收拾秦国。
English: Nowadays, the great king is often in a proud mood. The vassal has observed attentively that the current situation, according to the will of the princes, is either a joint fight against Chu or a joint effort to clean up Qin.

古文：何以知其然也?
现代文：何以见得？
English: How is that possible?

古文：秦人援魏以拒楚，楚人援韩以拒秦，四国之兵敌，而未能复战也。
现代文：秦人援魏抗楚，楚人援韩抗秦，只因势均力敌，正处在相恃不下的局面。
English: Qin people supported Wei against Chu, and Chu people supported Han against Qin, but because of the balance of power, they are in a situation where they cannot compete with each other.

古文：齐、宋在绳墨之外以为权，故曰先得齐、宋者伐秦。
现代文：而宋、齐两国置身四国之外，就显得举足轻重。因此可以断言秦、楚两国谁先争取到宋、齐，谁就能取得最后的成功。
English: But Song and Qi, being outside the Four Kingdoms, are more important. Therefore, it can be asserted that whoever wins Song and Qi from Qin and Chu first will be able to achieve the final success.

古文：秦先得齐、宋，则韩氏铄；韩氏铄，则楚孤而受兵也。楚先得齐，则魏氏铄；魏氏铄，则秦孤而受兵矣。
现代文：秦国如果争得两家外援，就能遏制削弱韩国；韩国受到遏制，那么楚国便孤立无援而遭到打击；假如楚国先得到齐国的援助，魏国就会衰败，魏国衰败之后，秦国就会陷入孤立，饱受战祸。
English: If Qin wins two foreign aid, it will be able to contain the weakening of South Korea; if South Korea is contained, then Chu will be alone and will be hit; if Chu first receives aid from Qi, Wei will decline, and after Wei's decline, Qin will fall into isolation and suffer from war.

古文：若随此计而行之，则两国者必为天下笑矣。 
现代文：如果按这条路走下去的话，那么秦、楚两国必然有一方遭受败亡之辱。 
English: If we continue on this path, then one side of the Qin and Chu countries will inevitably suffer the humiliation of defeat.

