古文：桓荣字春卿，沛郡龙亢人也。
现代文：◆桓荣传，桓荣字春卿，沛郡龙亢人。
English: ◆Kuan Rong Chuan, Kuan Rong Zi Chunqing, Pei County Longjing Man.

古文：少学长安，习《欧阳尚书》，事博士九江朱普。贫窭无资，常客佣以自给，精力不倦，十五年不窥家园。至王莽篡位乃归。
现代文：少年时在长安，学习《欧阳尚书》，以九江朱普为师，家中贫困，常靠佣工养活自己，精力不倦，十五年没有回家探视，到王莽篡位时才回去。
English: When he was a boy in Chang'an, he studied the Ouyang Shangshu, with Jiujiang Zhu Pu as his teacher. His family was poor, and he often relied on helpers to support himself. He was tireless. He did not visit home for fifteen years, and only returned when Wang Mang usurped the throne.

古文：会朱普卒，荣奔丧九江，负土成坟，因留教授，徒众数百人。
现代文：恰逢老师朱普去世，桓荣到九江奔丧，自己负土替老师筑坟，于是留下来教学，徒众达几百人。
English: Coinciding with the death of teacher Zhu Pu, Huan Rong went to Jiujiang to mourn, and built a grave for the teacher himself, so he stayed to teach, with hundreds of disciples.

古文：莽败，天下乱。荣抱其经书与弟子逃匿山谷，虽常饥困而讲论不辍，后复客授江淮间。
现代文：王莽失败，天下大乱，桓荣抱着经书与学生一道逃入山谷之中，虽常饥饿但讲经论卷不止，后来又在江淮一带教学。
English: Wang Mang failed, the world was in turmoil, Huan Rong fled into the valley with his students, holding the scriptures. Although he was often hungry, he continued to lecture on the scriptures, and later taught in the Jianghuai area.

古文：建武十九年，年六十余，始辟大司徒府。
现代文：建武十九年，桓荣六十多岁了，才被授职大司徒府。
English: In the 19th year of the Jianwu era, when Kan Rong was more than 60 years old, he was awarded the post of Daisetsufu.

古文：时，显宗始立为皇太子，选求明经，乃擢荣弟子豫章何汤为虎贲中郎将，以《尚书》授太子。
现代文：当时显宗刚立为太子，选求明经，于是提升桓荣的学生豫章何汤做虎贲中郎将，用《尚书》教太子。
English: At that time, Emperor Xuanzong was enthroned as the crown prince, and he chose to study the Ming Dynasty, so he promoted the student of King Huan Rong, Yu Zhang He Tang, to be the vice-commander of the Tiger Clan, and taught the crown prince with the "Shang Shu."

古文：世祖从容问汤本师为谁，汤对曰： 事沛国桓荣。 
现代文：世祖从容问何汤的本师是谁，何汤答道： 沛国桓荣。 
English: The patriarch calmly asked He Tang who his teacher was, to which He Tang replied: Pei Guo Huan Rong.

古文：帝即召荣，令说《尚书》，甚善之。
现代文：皇帝即召桓荣，命令他讲解《尚书》，觉得很好。
English: The emperor summoned Kuan Rong and ordered him to explain "Shang Shu," which he thought was very good.

古文：拜为议郎，赐钱十万，入使授太子。
现代文：便拜桓荣为议郎，赐钱十万，让他入宫教太子。
English: He then worshipped Kan Rong as a mediator, gave him one hundred thousand dollars, and allowed him to enter the imperial court as crown prince.

古文：每朝会，辄令荣于公卿前敷奏经书。
现代文：每朝会，常叫桓荣在公卿面前讲解经书。
English: At every imperial court meeting, Kuan Rong was often called upon to explain scriptures in front of the nobles.

古文：帝称善。曰： 得生几晚！ 
现代文：皇帝称赞道 ：得到先生太晚了！ 
English: The emperor praised, "It's too late to get a teacher!"

古文：会欧阳博士缺，帝欲用荣。
现代文：恰逢欧阳博士出缺，帝想用荣。
English: Dr. Ouyang's vacancy coincided with the Emperor's wish to use Rong.

古文：荣叩头让曰： 臣经术浅薄，不如同门生郎中彭闳，扬州从事皋弘。 
现代文：荣叩头辞让道： 臣经术浅薄，不及同门生郎中彭闳、扬州从事皋弘。 
English: Rong kowtowed and conceded: the vassal's economy was shallow, not as good as that of his disciple, Peng Yao, and Yangzhou was engaged in expansion.

古文：帝曰： 俞，往，女谐。 
现代文：帝说 ：好，去吧，你能胜任。 
English: The emperor said, "Okay, go ahead, you can do it."

古文：因拜荣为博士，引闳、弘为议郎。
现代文：于是拜桓荣为博士，引荐彭闳、皋弘做议郎。
English: As a result, Bai Huan Rong was promoted to doctor, and Peng Yao and Zou Hong were recommended as mediators.

古文：车驾幸大学，会诸博士论难于前，荣被服儒衣，温恭有蕴藉，辩明经义，每以礼让相厌，不以辞长胜人，儒者莫之及，特加赏赐。
现代文：皇上车驾到了大学，正逢诸博士讨论问题，桓荣穿着儒生衣服，温良恭敬，宽博有余，辩明经义，每以礼让相服，不用言词胜人，众儒生谁也不及他，皇上特加赏赐。
English: The imperial carriage drove to the university, just as the doctors were discussing the issue. Huan Rong was dressed in Confucian clothes, gentle and respectful, broad-minded, clear in his arguments, courteous and accommodating, no need for words to win people over, none of the Confucian students were as good as him, and the emperor specially rewarded him.

古文：又诏诸生雅吹击磬，尽日乃罢。
现代文：皇上又诏诸生雅吹击磬，整天才完。
English: The emperor also decreed that all living beings should blow the shofar, and the whole day was over.

古文：后荣入会庭中，诏赐奇果，受者皆怀之，荣独举手捧之以拜。
现代文：后来桓荣入会庭中，皇上诏赐奇果，受果者都纳入怀中，桓荣举手捧着果物拜谢。
English: Later, when Huan Rong entered the court of the association, the emperor gave him a miraculous fruit, and all the recipients of the fruit were brought into his arms. Huan Rong raised his hand and held the fruit in thanks.

古文：帝笑指之曰： 此真儒生也。 
现代文：帝笑着指他说 ：这人真正是儒生呀！ 
English: The emperor smiled and pointed at him, saying, "This man is truly a Confucian!"

古文：以是愈见敬厚，常令止宿太子宫。
现代文：从此更受敬重，常叫他住宿在太子宫中。
English: From then on, he was held in even higher esteem, and he was often invited to stay in the princess's womb.

古文：积五年，荣荐门下生九江胡宪侍讲，乃听得出，旦一入而已。
现代文：过了五年，桓荣推荐门生九江人胡宪作侍讲，自己只是听听，每天早晨进一次宫罢了。
English: Five years later, Huan Rong recommended his protégé Hu Xian, a native of Jiujiang, to be the guest speaker. He just listened and went to the palace once a day in the morning.

古文：荣尝寝病，太子朝夕遣中傅问病，赐以珍羞、帷、帐、奴婢，谓曰： 如有不讳，无忧家室也。 
现代文：桓荣曾经生病，太子早晚派中傅问病，赐以珍馐、帷帐、奴婢等，并且说 ：如果有什么三长两短，不必为家室担忧。 
English: When Huan Rong fell ill, the prince would send a middle-ranking official to inquire about his health. He would give him precious brooms, curtains, slaves, etc. and say, "If there are any shortcomings, there is no need to worry about the family."

古文：后病愈，复入侍进。
现代文：后来病愈了，又进宫侍讲。
English: Later, after he recovered from his illness, he returned to the palace to attend court.

古文：二十八年，大会百官，诏问谁可傅太子者，群臣承望上意，皆言太子舅执金吾原鹿侯阴识可。
现代文：二十八年，朝中大会百官，皇上诏问谁可做太子的师傅？群臣体察上意，都说太子的舅父执金吾原鹿侯阴识可以。
English: In the 28th year of the reign of the emperor, the emperor asked who could be the prince's tutor. The courtiers listened attentively and all agreed that the prince's uncle, King Ugyen, could be the prince's mentor.

古文：博士张佚正色曰： 今陛下立太子，为阴氏乎？为天下乎？
现代文：博士张佚正色道： 今陛下立太子，是为阴氏呢，还是为天下？
English: Dr. Zhang Ye Zhengxue said: Now that His Majesty has appointed a crown prince, is it for the Yin clan, or for the world?

古文：即为阴氏，则阴侯可；为天下，则固宜用天下之贤才。 
现代文：如果为阴氏，那么阴侯可以；如为天下，就应用天下之贤才。 
English: If it is Yin clan, then Yin Hou can be used; if it is the world, then the world's talents should be used.

古文：帝称善，曰： 欲置傅者，以辅太子也。
现代文：帝认为讲得好，说道： 想设太傅，是为了辅佐太子。
English: The emperor thought this was a good idea and said: I want to set up a taifu to assist the crown prince.

古文：今博士不难正朕，况太子乎？ 
现代文：现在博士不能帮助我，何况太子呢？ 
English: Now the doctor can't help me, and what about the crown prince?

古文：即拜佚为太子太傅，而以荣为少傅，赐以辎车、乘马。
现代文：于是拜张佚为太子太傅，而以桓荣为少傅，赐以辎车、乘马。
English: Therefore, Zhang Ye was named the prince's daifu, while Kan Rong was given the title of shoofu, a carriage, and a horse.

古文：荣大会诸生，陈其车马、印绶，曰： 今日所蒙，稽古之力也，可不勉哉！ 
现代文：桓荣大会诸生，陈列出车马、印绶道 ：今日蒙皇上所赐，这是稽考古书的力量，可不勉励吗？ 
English: All living beings of the Great Reverence Assembly, display chariots, horses, and printing methods: Today we have been given by the emperor, this is the power of reading archaeological books, can we not encourage it?

古文：荣以太子经学成毕，上疏谢曰： 臣幸得侍帷幄，执经连年，而智学浅短，无以补益万分。
现代文：桓荣认为太子经学已经完成，上疏谢道： 臣下有幸得在帷幄，讲经几年，可智学浅短，无以补益万分。
English: Huan Rong thought that the prince's study of the classics had been completed, and Shang Shao Rong said with gratitude: His vassal was fortunate enough to be in the eaves, lecturing on the classics for several years, but his study of wisdom was too short, and there was nothing he could do to make up for it.

古文：今皇太子以聪睿之姿，通明经义，观览古今，储君副主莫能专精博学若此者也。
现代文：现在皇太子凭着聪明的资质，通明经义，观览古今，没有哪位太子能专精博学像这样的。
English: Today, the crown prince is a man of great wisdom, who is well-versed in the study of ancient and modern times. No other crown prince is as well-versed in learning as this one.

古文：斯诚国家福祐，天下幸甚。
现代文：这真是国家的福，天下的幸运。
English: This is truly a blessing for the country and a stroke of luck for the world.

古文：臣师道已尽，皆在太子，谨使掾臣汜再拜归道。 
现代文：臣师道已尽，其他皆在太子。谨使掾臣汜再拜回家。 
English: The path of the vassals has been exhausted, and the others are all in Taizi. I would like to invite you to return home.

古文：太子报书曰： 庄以童蒙，学道九载，而典训不明，无所晓识。
现代文：太子复信道 ：庄以童蒙，学道九年，无所晓识。
English: Prince Fuxin said: Zhuang is a child, he has been studying for nine years, he knows nothing.

古文：夫《五经》广大，圣言幽远，非天下之至精，岂能与于此！
现代文：《五经》这么广大，圣言幽道，不是天下最聪明的人，岂能精通得了！
English: The Five Classics are so vast, and the Holy Word is so profound, that even the wisest person in the world would not be able to master it!

古文：况以不才，敢承诲命。
现代文：何况不才如我，敢承教诲面命。
English: What's more, I'm not the only one who dares to face life and death.

古文：昔之先师谢弟子者有矣，上则通达经旨，分明章句，下则去家慕乡，求谢师门。
现代文：从前的先师感谢弟子的有人了，上则通达经旨，弄明章句，下则去家慕乡，求谢师门。
English: In the past, when a teacher thanked a disciple, the first was to understand the sutras and clarify the passages, and the second was to go to his hometown to thank the teacher.

古文：今蒙下列，不敢有辞，愿君慎疾加餐，重爱玉体。 
现代文：现在蒙受下列，不敢有辞，愿您养病加餐，重爱玉体。 
English: Now suffer from the following, dare not make excuses, may you have a healthy diet, cherish the body.

古文：三十年，拜为太常。
现代文：三十年桓荣拜为太常。
English: Thirty years of Kan Rongbai is over.

古文：荣初遭仓卒，与族人桓元卿同饥厄，而荣讲诵不息。
现代文：桓荣开始遭难，与族人桓元卿同挨饿，可桓荣仍讲诵经书不止。
English: Kan Rong began to suffer hardships and starved together with his kinsman Kan Yuanqing, but Kan Rong still continued to recite scriptures.

古文：元卿嗤荣曰： 但自苦气力，何时复施用乎？ 
现代文：元卿嗤笑道 ：只是自苦气力，什么时候又会施用呢？ 
English: Yuanqing scoffed, "It's just self-effort. When will you use it again?"

古文：荣笑不应。
现代文：桓荣笑而不应。
English: Kan Rong laughed inappropriately.

古文：及为太常，元卿叹曰： 我农家子，岂意学之为利乃若是哉！ 
现代文：等到做了太常，元卿叹道： 我是农家出身的人，没想到学问之有用竟这样哩。 
English: When he had done it too many times, Yuanqing sighed, "I come from a farming family, I didn't expect the usefulness of learning to be like this."

古文：显宗即位，尊以师礼，甚见亲重，拜二子为郎。
现代文：显宗即位，尊桓荣以师礼，很受亲近和尊重，拜桓荣二子为郎。
English: When Emperor Xuanzong ascended to the throne, he honored Kan Rong as his teacher and was very close to and respected by him. He was the second son of Kan Rong.

古文：荣年逾八十，自以衰老，数上书乞身，辄加赏赐。
现代文：桓荣年过八十，自以衰老，几次上书请求退休，每加赏赐。
English: Huan Rong was over 80 years old, and he thought he was getting old. He wrote several times to request retirement, and was rewarded for each request.

古文：乘与尝幸太常府，令荣坐东面，设几仗，会百官骠骑将军东平王苍以下及荣门生数百人，天子亲自执业，每言辄曰 大师在是 。
现代文：皇上曾经坐车到太常府，叫桓荣坐东面，设几杖，集合百官骠骑将军东平王苍以下和桓荣的学生数百人，天子亲自执业，每开口就说： 大师在这里。 
English: The emperor once took a car to Taizhengfu, told Huan Rong to sit on the east side, set up a few staffs, and gathered hundreds of officials and cavalry generals from Dongping Wangcheng and below and hundreds of Huan Rong's students. Tianzi practiced in person, and said every time he opened his mouth: "The master is here."

古文：既罢，悉以太官供具赐太常家。
现代文：礼毕，把太官供具全部赐给太常家。
English: Respectfully, give all of the eunuch's offerings to the Taijō family.

古文：其恩礼若此。
现代文：其恩礼就是这样。
English: That's the way it goes.

古文：永平二年，三雍初成，拜荣为五更。
现代文：永平二年，三雍初建成，拜桓荣为五更养老。
English: In the second year of Yongping, when Sanyong was first built, Bai Huan Rong was the eldest of five children.

古文：每大射养老礼毕，帝辄引荣及弟子升堂，执经自为下说。
现代文：每次举行大射养老礼毕，帝就引桓荣和弟子升堂，执经书自己下语讲说。
English: Every time after the grand retirement ceremony, the emperor would invite Huan Rong and his disciples to the hall, and recite the sutras in his own words.

古文：乃封荣为关内侯，食邑五千户。
现代文：于是封桓荣为关内侯，食邑五千户。
English: As a result, Kan Rong was given the title of Kwanai-hō, with 5,000 households in the shokui.

古文：荣每疾病，帝辄遣使者存问，太官、太医相望于道。
现代文：桓荣每次生病，皇上就派使者慰问，太官、太医络绎不绝。
English: Whenever Huan Rong fell ill, the emperor sent emissaries to offer condolences, and the eunuchs and doctors were incessant.

古文：及笃，上疏谢恩，让还爵士。
现代文：后来病重，桓荣上疏谢恩，让还爵土。
English: Later, seriously ill, Kan Rong was relieved of his position and allowed to return to the peerage.

古文：帝幸其家问起居，入街下车，拥经而前，抚荣垂涕，赐以床茵、帷帐、刀剑、衣被，良久乃去。
现代文：皇上亲自到他家问安，入街下车，捧着经书上前，抚摸着桓荣，流着眼泪，赐以订床茵、帷帐、刀剑、衣被，好久才走开。
English: The emperor himself went to his house to say hello, entered the street, got off the car, held the scripture book in front of him, stroked Huan Rong, shed tears, gave him a bed, curtains, swords, and quilts, and walked away for a long time.

古文：自是诸侯将军大夫问疾者，不敢复乘车到门，皆拜床下。
现代文：从此诸侯将军大夫问疾的，不敢再乘车到门口，都拜倒在床下。
English: Since then, the princes, generals, and doctors have not dared to take the car to the door to ask for illness, and they have all bowed down under the bed.

古文：为人者，凭誉以显物；为己者，因心以会道。
现代文：桓荣死后，帝亲自变服，临丧送葬，赐冢茔在首阳山之南。
English: After the death of Huan Rong, the emperor personally changed his clothes, attended the funeral, and gave him a funeral in the south of Shouyang Mountain.

古文：桓荣之累世见宗，岂其为己乎！丁鸿字孝公，颍川定陵人也。
现代文：除兄子二人补四百石，都讲生八人补二百石，其余门徒多数做到公卿。◆丁鸿传，丁鸿字孝公，颍川定陵人。
English: Except for his elder brother and two younger brothers, who each made 400 koku, only eight disciples made 200 koku, and most of the remaining disciples became court nobles. ◆Ding Hong Chuan, Ding Hong Zi Xiaogong, Xichuan Dingling Ren.

古文：公綝，字幼春，王莽末守颍阳尉。
现代文：父丁纟林，字幼春，王莽末年守颍阳尉。
English: His father, Ding Yulin, surnamed Yuchun, and Wang Meng, in his later years, served as Shanyang's lieutenant.

古文：世祖略地颍阳，颍阳城守不下，綝说其宰，遂与俱降，世祖大喜，厚加赏劳，以綝为偏将军，因从征伐。綝将兵先度河，移檄郡国，攻营略地，下河南、陈留、颍川二十一县。
现代文：世祖略地颍阳，颍阳城守不下，丁纟林说服其县令，便与他一起投降。世祖大喜，大加赏赐，用丁纟林带领兵士先渡河，发檄文给郡国，攻营略地，攻下河南、陈留、川二十一县。
English: Ding Bailin convinced his county magistrate to surrender with him. The ancestor was overjoyed and rewarded greatly. He used Ding Bailin to lead the soldiers to cross the river first, send a proclamation to the county, attack the camp, and capture 21 counties in Henan, Chenliu, and Sichuan.

古文：建武元年，拜河南太守。
现代文：建武元年，丁纟林被拜为河南太守。
English: In the first year of Jianwu, Ding Yulin was revered as the governor of Henan Province.

古文：及封功臣，帝令各言所乐，诸将皆占丰邑美县，惟綝愿封本乡。
现代文：等到封功臣时，皇帝叫大家各言所乐，诸将都占丰邑美县，只有丁纟林愿封本乡。
English: When it came time to seal the meritorious vassals, the emperor told everyone to do as they pleased. All the generals were in Fengyi County, and only Ding Yulin was willing to seal his hometown.

古文：或谓綝曰： 人皆欲县，子独求乡，何也？ 
现代文：有人对丁纟林说： 人家都想占县，你却只求乡，这是为什么？ 
English: Someone said to Ding Yulin: People want to occupy counties, but you only want to occupy townships. Why is that?

古文：綝曰： 昔孙叔敖敕其子，受封必求硗埆之地，今綝能蒲功微，得乡亭厚矣。 
现代文：丁纟林说： 从前孙叔敖嘱咐儿子，受封时一定求瘠薄之地，今我能薄功小，得到乡亭就很不错了。 
English: Ding Yulin said: Once upon a time, Sun Xiuquan told his son that when he was given a title, he must look for a small place. Now I can do a small work, and it is very good to get a country pavilion.

古文：帝从之，封定陵新安乡侯，食邑五千户，后徙封陵阳侯。
现代文：皇上听从之，封他为定陵新安乡侯，食邑五千户，后来改封为陵阳侯。
English: The emperor listened to him and made him the lord of Dingling Xinyan Township, with 5,000 households, and later the lord of Lingyang Township.

古文：鸿年十三，从桓荣受《欧阳尚书》，三年而明章句，善论难，为都讲，遂笃志精锐，布衣荷担，不远千里。
现代文：丁鸿年十三时，从桓荣学习《欧阳尚书》，三年明白了章句，会论辩，为都讲，于是立志深造，穿上布衣，挑着行李，不远千里求学。
English: In the thirteenth year of Ding Hong's life, he studied the Ouyang Shangshu from Huan Rong. In three years, he understood the chapters and sentences, could debate, and speak for the capital, so he decided to further his education, put on a cloth coat, picked up his luggage, and traveled thousands of miles to study.

古文：初，綝从世祖征伐，鸿独与弟盛居，怜盛幼小而共寒苦。
现代文：起初，丁纟林跟随世祖征伐，丁鸿与弟弟丁盛居在一起，怜爱丁盛幼小而一起过着寒苦生活。
English: At first, Ding Yulin followed his ancestor in the conquest. Ding Hong and his brother Ding Sheng lived together, and they lived a hard life together because Ding Sheng was too young.

古文：及綝卒，鸿当袭封，上书让国于盛，不报。
现代文：等到丁纟林死后，丁鸿应世袭受封，上书让国给丁盛，没有得到回批。
English: After Ding Yulin's death, Ding Hong was sealed by heredity, and the petition to cede the country to Ding Sheng was not approved.

古文：既葬，乃挂缞绖于冢庐而逃去，留书与盛曰： 鸿贪经书，不顾恩义，弱而随师，生不供养，死不饭，皇天先祖，并不祐助，身被大病，不任茅土。
现代文：已葬父亲，于是挂孝服于庐墓而溜走了，留信给丁盛道： 鸿贪经书，不顾恩义，少而随师学习，生不供养父母，死不能尽孝道，皇天先祖，并不保佑帮助，身受大病，不堪茅土。
English: After burying his father, he left a letter to Ding Sheng saying: Hungry and greedy for scriptures, he does not care about kindness, he studies less and follows his teacher, he cannot provide for his parents when he is born, he cannot fulfill his filial duty when he dies, the ancestors of the emperor do not bless and help him, he is seriously ill, and he is not able to bear the mud.

古文：前上疾状，愿辞爵仲公，章寝不报，迫且当袭封。
现代文：前次上书言明病情，愿辞爵给弟弟，奏章搁置没有回批，时间迫近当袭封爵土。
English: The previous letter stated the condition of the disease, he would like to give the title to his brother, the petition was shelved without re-approval, the time is approaching when the knighthood lands.

古文：谨自放弃。逐求良医。
现代文：谨自放弃袭爵，到外寻求良医。
English: I'd like to renounce my knighthood and seek out a good doctor.

古文：如遂不瘳，永归沟壑。 
现代文：如果病治不好，死在沟壑算了。 
English: If the disease is not cured, death in the ravine is a foregone conclusion.

古文：鸿初与九江人鲍骏同事桓荣，甚相友善，及鸿亡封，与骏遇于东海，阳狂不识骏。
现代文：丁鸿起初与九江人鲍骏同事桓荣为师，两人友情很厚，后来丁鸿逃封，与鲍骏在东海相遇，丁鸿装作不认识鲍骏。
English: At first, Ding Hong was a student of Jiujiang native Bao Wei's colleague, Huan Rong. The two had a strong friendship. Later, Ding Hong escaped and met Bao Wei in the East China Sea. Ding Hong pretended not to know Bao Wei.

古文：骏乃止而让之曰： 昔伯夷、吴札乱世权行，故得申其志耳。
现代文：鲍骏就挽住丁鸿并且责备道： 从前伯夷、吴季札处在乱世，所以得申其让国之志。
English: Bao Tong took hold of Ding Hong and scolded him: In the past, Bo Yi and Wu Jizhata were in a chaotic world, so they had to declare their desire to give up the country.

古文：《春秋》之义，不以家事废王事。今子以兄弟私恩而绝父不灭之基，可谓智乎？ 
现代文：《春秋》之大义，不因家事废王事，现在你以兄弟的私情而断绝父亲不灭的基业，可说是聪明吗？ 
English: The great virtue of "Spring and Autumn" is not to abandon royal duties because of family affairs. Now you are using your brother's private feelings to cut off your father's indestructible inheritance. Can you be said to be clever?

古文：鸿感悟，垂涕叹息，乃还就国，开门教授。
现代文：丁鸿很受感动，流泪叹息，于是回去就国，开门教授学徒。
English: Ding Hong was very moved, shed tears and sighed, so he went back to his home country and opened the door to teach apprentices.

古文：鲍骏亦上书言鸿经学至行，显宗甚贤之。
现代文：鲍骏也上书称丁鸿经学至行，显宗很赏识他。
English: Bao Tong also wrote in a letter that Ding Hong was a good scholar and that Emperor Xuanzong appreciated him very much.

古文：永平十年诏征，鸿至即召见，说《文侯之命篇》，赐御衣及绶，禀食公车，与博士同礼。
现代文：永平十年皇帝下诏征贤，丁鸿到了即被召见，讲述《文侯之命》篇，皇上赐御衣及绶带，禀食公车，与博士同等礼遇。
English: In the 10th year of Yongping, the emperor issued an edict to recruit sages. Ding Hong was summoned to see the emperor and narrated the story of "The Life of Wen Hou." The emperor gave him a robe and a sash, a meal and a bus, and the same courtesy as a doctor.

古文：顷之，拜侍中。
现代文：不久，拜为侍中。
English: He was soon promoted to the position of chamberlain.

古文：十三年，兼射声校尉。
现代文：十三年，兼射声校尉。
English: Thirteen years old, and a captain.

古文：建初四年，徙封鲁阳乡侯。
现代文：建初四年徙封为鲁阳乡侯。
English: He was transferred to Luyang Township in the first four years of construction.

古文：肃宗诏鸿与广平王羡及诸儒楼望、成封、桓郁、贾逵等，论定《五经》同异于北宫白虎观，使五官中郎将魏应主承制问难，侍中淳于恭奏上，帝亲称制临决。
现代文：肃宗诏丁鸿与广平王羡和诸儒楼望、成封、桓郁、贾逵等，在北宫白虎观讨论《五经》的同异，使五官中郎将魏应主持承制问难，侍中淳于恭奏上，皇帝亲自称制临决。
English: Emperor Su Zong, Emperor Ding Hong, Emperor Guangping, Emperor Xian, and the Confucian scholars including Rouwang, Chengfu, Huan Yu, and Jia Yu discussed the similarities and differences of the Five Classics in the Northern Palace of the White Tiger, so that the five officials presided over Wei Ying's interrogation, the attendants presided over Jun Ying's speech, and the emperor himself presided over the pre-decision.

古文：鸿以才高，论难最明，诸儒称之，帝数嗟美焉。
现代文：丁鸿以才高，论难最明，诸儒称赞，皇上也多次赞美。
English: Ding Hong is the most talented, the most clear on the difficulties, praised by the Confucianists, and praised by the emperor many times.

古文：时人叹曰： 殿中无双丁孝公。 
现代文：当时人叹道： 殿中无双丁孝公。 
English: At that time, people lamented: There is no match for Ding Xiaogong in the palace.

古文：数受赏赐，擢徙校书，遂代成封为少府。
现代文：丁鸿多次受赏赐，拔为校书，于是代替成封为少府。
English: Ding Hong was awarded many times and selected as a school book, so he replaced Chengfeng as a minor prefect.

古文：门下由是益盛，远方至者数千人。
现代文：门下从此更盛，远方来的数千人。
English: Since then, the school has flourished, attracting thousands of people from far and wide.

古文：彭城刘恺、北海巴茂、九江朱伥皆至公卿。
现代文：彭城刘恺、北海巴茂、九江朱伥都做到了公卿。
English: Liu Bei of Pengcheng, Bamao of the North Sea, and Zhu Xi of Jiujiang all achieved nobility.

古文：元和三年，徙封马亭乡侯。
现代文：元和三年，改封为马亭乡侯。
English: In the 3rd year of the Yuan Dynasty, it was renamed as Matei Township.

古文：和帝即位，迁太常。永元四年，代袁安为司徒。
现代文：和帝即位，升迁为太常，永元四年代袁安为司徒。
English: When Emperor He ascended to the throne, he was promoted to Taizang, and Yuan An became a disciple in the fourth year of the Yong Yuan Dynasty.

古文：是时窦太后临政，宪兄弟各擅威权。
现代文：这时窦太后临朝执政，兄弟窦宪各擅威权。
English: At this time, Empress Dowager Dou was in power, and her brother Dou Xian had absolute power.

古文：鸿因日食，上封事曰：臣闻日者阳精，守实不亏，君之象也；月者阴精，盈毁有常，臣之表也。
现代文：丁鸿借日食，上封事道： 臣下听说太阳为阳精，守实不亏，君王之象征；月亮为阴精，盈虚有一定规则，臣子的表象哩。
English: Ding Hong took advantage of the solar eclipse to promote his cause, saying, "Our subjects have heard that the sun is a yang essence, which is a symbol of the king, and that the moon is a yin essence, which has certain rules for waxing and waning, and is the image of a courtier."

古文：故日食者，臣乘君，阴陵阳；月满不亏，下骄盈也。
现代文：所以日食，臣在君上，阴凌于阳；月满不亏，下面骄盈的缘故。
English: Therefore, the eclipse of the sun, the vassal is above the prince, the shade is above the sun; the full moon is not a disadvantage, because of the pride below.

古文：昔周室衰季，皇甫之属专权于外，党类强盛，侵夺主势，则日月薄食，故《诗》曰： 十月之交，朔月辛卯，日有食之，亦孔之丑。 
现代文：从前周室衰微，皇甫等人专权于外，党类强盛，侵压主势，所以日月薄食。《诗经》上说 ：十月之交，朔月辛卯，日有食之，亦孔之酉鬼。 
English: From the previous Zhou dynasty to the decline, the emperor and others had exclusive power outside, the party was strong, and the main trend was oppression, so the sun and the moon were weak. "The Book of Songs" said: The turn of October, the new moon is hard, the sun has food, and the hole is a lazy ghost.

古文：《春秋》日食三十六，弑君三十二。
现代文：《春秋》记载：日食三十六次，弑君三十二人。
English: "Spring and Autumn" records: Thirty-six solar eclipses, thirty-two emperors.

古文：变不空生，各以类应。
现代文：变不空生，各以类应。
English: Change does not come out of thin air, but from each according to their kind.

古文：夫威柄不以放下，利器不可假人。
现代文：凡威权不可以放下，利器不可以假人。
English: Authoritarianism must not be abandoned, and dummies must not be used as weapons.

古文：览观往古，近察汉兴，倾危之祸，靡不由之。
现代文：看看往古，近看汉兴，倾危之祸，没有不由此产生。
English: Look at the past, look at Han Xing, the disaster of crisis, there is no way out of this.

古文：是以三桓专鲁，田氏擅齐，六卿分严；诸吕握权，统嗣几移；哀、平之末，庙不血食。
现代文：因此三桓专鲁之权，田氏擅齐之政，六卿瓜分晋室，诸吕掌握汉室，统嗣几次变更；哀帝、平帝的末年，宗庙不能祭祀。
English: As a result, the power of the three Kanto clans, the power of the Tian clan, the power of the six Kyo clans, the power of the Han dynasty, the power of the Han dynasty, the power of the Han dynasty, the power of the three Kanto clans, the power of the Tian clan, the power of the six Kyo clans, the power of the six Kyo clans, the power of the six Kyo clans, the power of the six Kyo clans, the power of the six Kyo clans, the power of the six Kyo clans, the power of the six Kyo clans, the power of the six Kyo clans

古文：故虽有周公之亲，而无其德，不得行其势也。今大将军虽欲敕身自约，不敢僭差，然而天下远近皆惶怖承旨，刺史二千石初除谒辞，求通待报，虽奉符玺、受台敕，不敢便去，久者至数十日。
现代文：所以虽有周公之亲，而无周公之德，不得行其权势。 现在大将军窦宪，虽想束力身自约，不敢僭越权势，然而天下远近的百姓都恐怖承旨，刺史二千石初除谒辞，求通待报，虽奉符玺，受了台束力，不敢马上便去，久的拖到几十天。
English: Therefore, although there is a relative of Zhou Gong, but there is no virtue of Zhou Gong, it is not allowed to exercise its power. Now, General Dou Xian, although he wants to restrain himself, does not dare to exceed the power, but the people all over the world are afraid to carry out the will, and the history of two thousand stone is removed at the beginning of the speech, and they are waiting for the report. Although they have received the letter, they are constrained by the table, and they do not dare to go immediately, and it has been dragged out for dozens of days.

古文：背王室，向私门，此乃上威损，下权盛也。
现代文：背着王室，走向私门，这是上威降低，下权势盛的缘故。
English: Behind the back of the royal family, towards the private door, this is due to the fact that the upper authority is reduced, and the lower authority is more powerful.

古文：人道悖于下，效验见于天，虽有隐谋，神照其情，垂象见戒，以告人君。
现代文：人道悖于下面，效验现于上天，虽有隐谋，神明照察其情，垂象见戒，以警告人君。
English: Humanity is contrary to the below, the effect appears in the sky, although there is a hidden plot, the gods look at the situation, see the warning, and warn people.

古文：间者月满先节，过望不亏，此臣骄溢背君，专功独行也。
现代文：近来，月满先节，过了十五还不亏缺，这是臣下骄傲横溢，违背君王，专功独行的缘故。
English: Recently, on the day before the full moon, there was no shortage of horses after the fifteenth day of the month. This was due to the fact that the vassals were overflowing with pride, disobeying the king, and doing their own work.

古文：陛下未深觉悟，故天重见戒，诚宜畏惧，以防其祸。
现代文：陛下没有察觉，所以上天再次见戒，应该畏惧，以防大祸临头。
English: His Majesty did not notice, so Heaven once again warned him that he should be afraid in case of a great disaster.

古文：《诗》云： 敬天之怒，不敢戏豫。 
现代文：《诗经》上说： 敬天之怒，不敢戏豫。 
English: "The Book of Songs" says: "Respect the wrath of heaven, and do not hesitate."

古文：若敕政责躬，杜渐防萌，则凶妖销灭，害除福凑矣。夫坏崖破岩之水，源自涓涓；干云蔽日之木，起于葱青。
现代文：如果束力政自责，杜渐防微，那么凶妖就会消灭，害除而福降了。 坏崖破岩之水，来源于涓涓的小泉；干云蔽日的大树，起于葱青的小苗。
English: If the self-condemnation of the government and the prevention and control of the minor, then the evil demon will be eliminated, the harm will be eliminated and the blessing will be reduced. The water of the broken rock of the bad cliff originates from the small spring of the reed; the big tree covered by the sun by the dry cloud originates from the small seedling of the green onion.

古文：禁微则易，救末者难，人莫不忽于微细，以致其大。
现代文：禁微就容易，救末就难，人们没有不忽略于微细，以致成为大祸。
English: It is easy to forbid the trivial, but difficult to save the trivial. People do not pay attention to the trivial, so that it becomes a big disaster.

古文：恩不忍诲，义不忍割，去事之后，未然之明镜也。
现代文：恩不忍诲，又不忍割，事情过去之后，没有发生的明镜。
English: Grace does not tolerate, and does not tolerate, after the event has passed, there is no clear mirror.

古文：臣愚以为左官外附之臣，依托权门，倾覆谄谀，以者容媚者，宜行一切之诛。
现代文：臣愚以为左官外附之臣，依托权门，倾覆谄谀，以求容媚的人，应该一切杀光。
English: The vassal foolishly thought that the plasterer was a subordinate of the vassal, relying on the gate of power, overturning the yoke, and seeking to be agreeable, should all be killed.

古文：间者大将军再出，威振州郡，莫不赋敛吏人，遣使贡献。
现代文：近来大将军再出，威震州郡，没有不向吏人征赋税，派使者贡献物资。
English: Recently, the general has re-emerged, and Weizhen County has not failed to collect taxes from officials and sent emissaries to contribute materials.

古文：大将军虽云不受，而物不还主，部署之吏无所畏惮，纵行非法，不伏罪辜，故海内贪猾，竞为奸吏，小民吁嗟，怨气满腹。
现代文：大将军虽说不受，可是物不还主，部署之吏无所畏惧，纵行非法，不伏罪辜，所以海内贪猾成风，竞为奸吏，小民叹息，怨气满腹。
English: Although the great general is said to be unwelcome, he does not return anything to the Lord, and the deployed officials are fearless, do things illegally, and do not confess their sins. Therefore, greed is rampant in the sea, competition is treacherous, and the common people are sighing and full of resentment.

古文：臣闻天不可以不刚，不刚则三光不明；王不可以不强，不强则宰牧从横。
现代文：臣听说天不可以不刚，不刚则三光不明；王不可以不强，不强则宰牧纵横。
English: The vassal heard that the sky cannot be not strong, and if it is not strong, then the three lights are not clear; the king cannot be not strong, and if it is not strong, then the shepherd is not strong.

古文：宜因大变，改政匡失，以塞天意。
现代文：应该趁大变之际，改政匡失，来补充天意。 
English: It is necessary to take advantage of the time of great change, the change of government and the loss of power, to supplement the will of heaven.

古文：书奏十余日，帝以鸿行太尉兼卫尉，屯南、北宫。
现代文：书奏上十多天，皇帝派丁鸿行太尉兼卫尉，屯于南、北宫。
English: More than ten days after the calligraphy performance, the emperor sent Ding Hongxing, a captain and lieutenant of the Imperial Guards, to stay in the South and North Palaces.

古文：于是收窦宪大将军印绶，宪及诸弟皆自杀。
现代文：于是收缴窦宪大将军的印绶，窦宪和诸弟们都自杀。
English: As a result, Gen. Dou Xian's seal money was confiscated, and Dou Xian and his brothers all committed suicide.

古文：时大郡口五六十万举孝廉二人，小郡口二十万并有蛮夷者亦举二人，帝以为不均，下公卿会议。
现代文：当时大郡按人口每五六十万举孝廉二人，小郡每二十万并有蛮夷的也举二人，帝认为不均，下交公卿会议。
English: At that time, according to the population of 5.6 million, every large county should raise two filial piety persons, and every 200,000 small counties should also raise two barbarian pagans. The emperor considered this to be unequal, and submitted it to the meeting of nobles.

古文：鸿与司空刘方上言： 凡口率之科，宜有阶品，蛮夷错杂，不得为数。
现代文：丁鸿与司空刘方上言： 凡按人口作标准的，应有阶品，蛮夷错杂，不得列入数内。
English: Ding Hong and Liu Fang, the chief magistrate, said, "Any standard that is based on population should be based on rank, and should not be included in the number.

古文：自今郡国率二十万口岁举孝廉一人，四十万二人，六十万三人，八十万四人，百万五人，百二十万六人。
现代文：自今郡国一律每二十万人每年举孝廉一人，四十万举二人，六十万举三人，八十万举四人，百万举五人，百二十万举六人。
English: From now on, every 200,000 people in the county and the country shall nominate one filial piety person, every 400,000 people shall nominate two filial piety persons, every 600,000 people shall nominate three filial piety persons, every 800,000 people shall nominate four filial piety persons, every 1 million people shall nominate five filial piety persons, and every 1.2 million people shall nominate six filial piety persons.

古文：不满二十万二岁一人，不满十万三岁一人。 
现代文：不满二十万的二年举一人，不满十万的三年举一人。 
English: A person who earns less than 200,000 shall be nominated in two years, and a person who earns less than 100,000 shall be nominated in three years.

古文：帝从之。
现代文：帝听从了。
English: The emperor obeyed.

古文：六年，鸿薨，赐赠有加常礼。
现代文：六年丁鸿死了，赐赠比常礼有增加。
English: Six years after Ding Hong's death, the number of gifts has increased.

