古文：姚广孝，长洲人，本医家子。
现代文：姚广孝，长洲人，本是医家子弟。
English: Yao Guangxiao, a native of Cheung Chau, is the son of a doctor.

古文：年十四，度为僧，名道衍，字斯道。事道士席应真，得其阴阳术数之学。
现代文：十四岁时，他出家为僧，法号道衍，字斯道，奉事道士席应真，获得其阴阳术数之学。
English: At the age of fourteen, he entered the priesthood as a monk. His Dharma name was Do Yan and his Buddhist name was Shido. He served as a Taoist priest under Ying Zhen and acquired his knowledge of yin and yang.

古文：尝游嵩山寺，相者袁珙见之曰： 是何异僧！目三角，形如病虎，性必嗜杀，刘秉忠流也。 
现代文：道衍曾游历嵩山寺，有一名叫袁珙的相士见到他后说 ：这是何等僧人，三角眼，形如病虎，必定嗜杀成性，是刘秉忠之流。 
English: When Tao Yan visited Songshan Temple, a consort named Yuan Xuan saw him and said, "What kind of monk is this? He has triangular eyes and is shaped like a sick tiger. He must be a homicidal maniac. He belongs to Liu Bingzhong's lineage."

古文：道衍大喜。
现代文：道衍听后大喜。
English: Doyan was overjoyed after listening to it.

古文：洪武中，诏通儒书僧试礼部。
现代文：洪武年中，太祖诏令精通儒书的僧人到礼部应试。
English: In the middle of the Hongwu era, Emperor Taizu ordered monks who were proficient in Confucianism to go to the ritual department to take an exam.

古文：不受官，赐僧服还。
现代文：道衍不受官，被赐僧服而归。
English: Doyan did not accept the post, but was given a monk's robe and returned home.

古文：经北固山，赋诗怀古。
现代文：途经北固山，赋诗怀古。
English: Passing through Beigushan, the poem goes back to ancient times.

古文：其侪宗泐曰： 此岂释子语耶？ 
现代文：其同辈宗泐问道 ：这难道是僧人该说的话吗？ 
English: His peer Zong Xi asked: Is this really what a monk should say?

古文：道衍笑不答。
现代文：道衍笑而不答。
English: Doyan laughed and did not reply.

古文：高皇后崩，太祖选高僧侍诸王，为诵经荐福。
现代文：高皇后去世后，太祖要挑选高僧陪侍诸王，为他们诵经祝福。
English: After the death of Empress Gao, the great-grandfather wanted to choose a high priest to accompany the kings and recite blessings for them.

古文：宗泐时为左善世，举道衍。
现代文：宗泐当时为左善世，于是举荐道衍。
English: At that time, Zonglu was Zuo Zenshi, so he recommended Doyan.

古文：燕王与语甚合，请以从。
现代文：燕王与他交谈，十分投合，便奏请让道衍跟随自己。
English: Yan Wang conversed with him, and they hit it off very well. He then asked Do Yan to follow him.

古文：至北平，住持庆寿寺。
现代文：到北平后，道衍住持庆寿寺。
English: After arriving in Beiping, Doan lived in Jichengju Temple.

古文：出入府中，迹甚密，时时屏人语。
现代文：他出入燕王府中，行踪十分隐密，经常与燕王避人而语。
English: He went in and out of Yan Wangfu Middle School, his whereabouts were very secret, and he often avoided contact with Yan Wang.

古文：及太祖崩，惠帝立，以次削夺诸王。周、湘、代、齐、岷相继得罪。道衍遂密劝成祖举兵。
现代文：太祖去世后，惠帝即位，依次削除诸王，周、湘、代、齐、岷诸王相继获罪，道衍于是密劝成祖举兵。
English: After the death of his great-grandfather, Emperor Hui ascended to the throne and removed the kings one by one. The kings of Zhou, Hunan, Dai, Qi, and Qin were successively convicted, so Doyan secretly persuaded Cheng Zu to raise an army.

古文：成祖曰： 民心向彼，奈何？ 
现代文：成祖说 ：民心向着他，怎么办？ 
English: Cheng Zu said: The people's hearts are turning to him, what should we do?

古文：道衍曰： 臣知天道，何论民心。 
现代文：道衍回答说： 臣知天道，何必去理会民心呢？ 
English: Doyan replied, "A subject knows the heavenly way, why should he care about the people's heart?

古文：乃进袁珙及卜者金忠。
现代文：然后向成祖推荐袁珙及卜者金忠。
English: He then recommended Yuan Qi and the fortuneteller Jin Zhong to Cheng Zu.

古文：于是成祖意益决。阴选将校，勾军卒，收材勇异能之士。
现代文：于是成祖主意更加坚定，暗地里挑选将校，聚集军队，收纳才勇异能之士。
English: As a result, Cheng Zu became even more determined, secretly selecting officers, gathering troops, and recruiting talented people.

古文：燕邸，故元宫也，深邃。
现代文：燕王宫邸是以前元朝的王宫，宫内十分深邃。
English: The residence of Yan Wang Gong is the former royal palace of the Yuan Dynasty, and the palace is very deep.

古文：道衍练兵后苑中。
现代文：道衍在后苑中练兵。
English: Doyan drills soldiers in the backyard.

古文：穴地作重屋，缭以厚垣，密甃翎甋瓶缶，日夜铸军器，畜鹅鸭乱其声。
现代文：穴地建造层叠的房屋，又以厚墙环绕，暗中用砖将瓶子瓦器砌在其中，日夜在屋内铸造兵器，并畜养鹅、鸭来掩盖所发出的声响。
English: They built cascading houses in caves and surrounded them with thick walls, secretly using bricks to build bottles and tiles in them, casting weapons inside the house day and night, and raising geese and ducks to cover up the noise emitted.

古文：建文元年六月，燕府护卫百户倪谅上变。
现代文：建文元年六月，燕府护卫百户倪谅上奏告变。
English: In June of the first year of the Jianwen era, there was a change of guard in Yanfu.

古文：诏逮府中官属。
现代文：皇上诏令逮捕府中官属。
English: The imperial edict ordered the arrest of a subordinate of a government official.

古文：都指挥张信输诚于成祖，成祖遂决策起兵。
现代文：都指挥张信向成祖献纳诚心，成祖于是决意起兵。
English: Zhang Xin, the commander of the capital, offered his sincerity to Cheng Zu, and Cheng Zu decided to raise an army.

古文：适大风雨至，檐瓦堕地，成祖色变。
现代文：适逢大风雨突至，屋上的瓦片坠落下地，成祖见此色变。
English: When a heavy wind and rain came, the tiles on the roof fell to the ground, and Cheng Zu saw this change.

古文：道衍曰： 祥也。
现代文：道衍却说 ：这是祥兆。
English: However, Do Yan said, "This is a good omen."

古文：飞龙在天，从以风雨。
现代文：飞龙在天，风雨相随。
English: The dragon flies in the sky, and the wind and rain follow.

古文：瓦堕，将易黄也。 
现代文：瓦片坠地，意味着将换成黄色了。 
English: If a tile falls to the ground, it means that it will be changed to yellow.

古文：兵起，以诛齐泰、黄子澄为名，号其众曰 靖难之师。 
现代文：成祖这才起兵，以诛杀齐泰、黄子澄为名，其军队号称 靖难之师 。
English: It was only then that Cheng Zu raised an army in the name of fighting and killing Qitai and Huang Zicheng, and his army was known as the Jingnan Division.

古文：道衍辅世子居守。
现代文：道衍辅佐世子留守。
English: Doyanosuke Saseko is away.

古文：其年十月，成祖袭大宁，李景隆乘间围北平。
现代文：这年十月，成祖率军袭击大宁，李景隆乘机围攻北平。
English: In October of that year, Cheng Zu led an army to attack Daning, and Li Jinglong took the opportunity to besiege Beiping.

古文：道衍守御甚固，击却攻者。
现代文：道衍防守十分严密，击退来攻者。
English: Doyan defended very tightly and repelled the attackers.

古文：夜缒壮士击伤南兵。
现代文：又在夜间派壮士，缒城而出击伤南兵。
English: In the night, he sent strong men to Lucheng to attack and wound the Southern soldiers.

古文：援师至，内外合击，斩首无算。
现代文：援军赶到，内外合击，斩首无数。
English: Reinforcements arrived and clashed inside and outside, beheading countless people.

古文：景隆、平安等先后败遁。
现代文：李景隆、平安等先后败逃。
English: Li Jinglong, Ping'an and others were defeated and fled.

古文：成祖围济南三月，不克。道衍驰书曰： 师老矣，请班师。 
现代文：成祖围攻济南达三个月，未能攻克，道衍马上去信说 ：我军已经疲惫了，请班师回来吧。 
English: Chengzu besieged Jinanda for three months, but failed to conquer it. Doian immediately sent a letter saying, "Our army is exhausted. Please ask your squadron to return."

古文：乃还。
现代文：成祖因而撤军返回。
English: So I came back.

古文：复攻东昌，战败，亡大将张玉，复还。
现代文：又攻东昌，战败，损失大将张玉，又返回。
English: They also attacked Dongchang, were defeated, and the general Zhang Yu, who suffered great losses, returned.

古文：成祖意欲稍休，道衍力趣之。益募勇士，败盛庸，破房昭西水寨。
现代文：成祖意欲稍微休整一下，道衍却极力催促他，更抓紧招募勇士，击败盛庸，攻破房昭西水寨。
English: Cheng Zu wanted to take a little rest, but Duoyan urged him to recruit more warriors, defeat Sheng Yong, and break through the west water castle.

古文：道衍语成祖： 毋下城邑，疾趋京师。
现代文：道衍对成祖说： 不要去攻城邑，而要迅速直趋京城。
English: Doyan said to Cheng Zu: Don't attack the cities and towns, but go straight to the capital.

古文：京师单弱，势必举。 
现代文：京城兵力单薄，一定能攻克。 
English: The capital's military strength is thin, and it can certainly be overcome.

古文：从之。
现代文：成祖采纳了他的建议。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：遂连败诸将于淝河、灵璧，渡江入京师。
现代文：于是连败诸将于氵肥水、灵璧，渡江进入京城。
English: As a result, the consecutive defeats of Zhuge Fei Shui and Ling Bi, crossing the river into the capital.

古文：成祖即帝位，授道衍僧录司左善世。
现代文：成祖即帝位后，授道衍为僧录司左善世。
English: After his ancestor became emperor, he was awarded the title of Sozonsei, the head of the Sozoku Sect.

古文：帝在藩邸，所接皆武人，独道衍定策起兵。
现代文：皇上在藩邸时，所接触的都是武人，唯独道衍定策起兵。
English: When the emperor was at the residence of the domain, all the people he came into contact with were warriors. However, he was able to devise a plan to raise an army.

古文：及帝转战山东、河北，在军三年，或旋或否，战守机事皆决于道衍。
现代文：当皇上转战山东、黄河之北时，在军中三年，或去或归，战守机宜都由道衍决定。
English: When the emperor went to fight in Shandong and the north of the Yellow River, he was in the army for three years, and whether he went or returned, the battle plan was decided by Doyan.

古文：道衍未尝临战阵，然帝用兵有天下，道衍力为多，论功以为第一。
现代文：道衍虽未曾临阵作战，但是皇上用兵得天下，道衍出力最多，论功时名列第一。
English: Although Doyan did not fight in the front line, the emperor used soldiers to conquer the world. Doyan contributed the most and ranked first in terms of merit.

古文：永乐二年四月，拜资善大夫、太子少师。复其姓，赐名广孝，赠祖父如其官。
现代文：永乐二年四月，皇上授道衍为资善大夫、太子少师，恢复其姓，赐名广孝，追赠其祖父以同样的官职。
English: In April of the second year of Yongle, the emperor conferred the title of Senior Physician and Young Teacher to Do Yan, restored his surname, gave him the name Guang Xiao, and posthumously bestowed the same official position on his grandfather.

古文：帝与语，呼少师而不名。
现代文：皇上与他交谈时，称他为少师而不叫他的名字。
English: When the emperor talked with him, he called him Shoushi without giving his name.

古文：命蓄发，不肯。
现代文：命他蓄发，他不肯。
English: He refused to do what he was told.

古文：赐第及两宫人，皆不受。
现代文：又赐给府邸及两名宫女，他都不接受。
English: He was also given a palace and two maids of honour, neither of which he accepted.

古文：常居僧寺，冠带而朝，退仍缁衣。
现代文：姚广孝常住僧寺，去朝见皇上时便穿着冠服，佩上腰带，退朝之后则仍换回僧服。
English: Yao Guangxiao often lived in a monk's temple. When he went to the court to see the emperor, he wore a crown robe and a belt. After he left the court, he still changed back to the monk's robe.

古文：出振苏、湖。至长洲，以所赐金帛散宗族乡人。
现代文：他曾去赈济苏、湖，到长洲时，将所赐的黄金、布帛全都分发给宗族乡人。
English: He used to go to Kansu and the lake to give alms, and when he came to Cheung Chau, he distributed all the gold and cloth he had been given to the villagers of his clan.

古文：重修《太祖实录》，广孝为监修。
现代文：朝廷重新编修《太祖实录》，姚广孝为监修。
English: The imperial court re-edited "The True Record of the Great Ancestors," supervised by Yao Guangxiao.

古文：又与解缙等纂修《永乐大典》。
现代文：他又与解缙等纂修《永乐大典》。
English: He also compiled and revised the Yongle Grand Text with Ge Ge and others.

古文：书成，帝褒美之。
现代文：书成之后，皇上褒奖了他。
English: After the book was completed, the emperor praised him.

古文：帝往来两都、出塞北征，广孝皆留辅太子于南京。
现代文：皇上往来于两都，出塞北征时，姚广孝都留在南京辅佐太子。
English: The emperor went back and forth between the two capitals. When he left for the Northern Expedition, Yao Guangxiao stayed in Nanjing to assist the crown prince.

古文：五年四月，皇长孙出阁就学，广孝侍说书。
现代文：五年四月，皇长孙出门就学，姚广孝陪同讲解书籍。
English: In April of the fifth year, the emperor's eldest grandson went to school, accompanied by Yao Guangxiao to explain the books.

古文：十六年三月，入观，年八十有四矣，病甚，不能朝，仍居庆寿寺。
现代文：十六年三月，姚广孝入朝觐见，这时他已八十四岁，病得很重，此后再也不能去朝见了，仍住在庆寿寺。
English: In March of the 16th year, Yao Guangxiao entered the imperial court. At that time, he was eighty-four years old and very ill. After that, he could no longer go to the imperial court, but still lived in the Qing Shou Temple.

古文：车驾临视者再，语甚欢，赐以金睡壶。
现代文：皇上两次乘车前去探视，两人谈得十分高兴。皇上赐给他金唾壶，并问他有什么要求。
English: The emperor went to visit him twice by car, and the two had a very happy talk. The emperor gave him a golden spittoon and asked him what he wanted.

古文：问所欲言，广孝曰： 僧溥洽系久，愿赦之。 
现代文：姚广孝说道 ：僧人溥洽被关在牢里已经很久了，希望能赦免他。 
English: Yao Guangxiao said, "Monk Gongchao has been in prison for a long time, and I hope he will be pardoned."

古文：溥洽者，建文帝主录僧也。
现代文：溥洽是建文帝的主录僧。
English: Gongchao was the chief monk of Emperor Jianwen.

古文：初，帝入南京，有言建文帝为僧遁去，溥洽知状，或言匿溥洽所。
现代文：当初，皇上进入南京，有人说建文帝装成僧人逃走了，溥洽知道这件事，有人则说建文帝藏在溥洽家里。
English: At first, when the emperor entered Nanjing, some people said that Emperor Jianwen disguised himself as a monk and ran away. Gongchao knew about this, while others said that Emperor Jianwen was hiding in Gongchao's home.

古文：帝乃以他事禁溥洽。而命给事中胡濙等遍物色建文帝，久之不可得。溥洽坐系十余年。
现代文：皇上便以他事为由禁锢溥洽，而命给事中胡氵荧等到处寻找建文帝，一直都找不到，溥洽被下狱已有十余年。
English: The emperor then imprisoned Jia Jia on the grounds of other matters, and ordered Hu Yufu to search everywhere for Emperor Jianwen, but he could not find him. Jia Jia has been in prison for more than ten years.

古文：至是，帝以广孝言，即命出之。
现代文：直到这时，皇上因姚广孝的请求，马上下令将他放出来。
English: Until this time, the emperor immediately ordered to release Yao Guangxiao at his request.

古文：广孝顿首谢。
现代文：姚广孝叩首拜谢。
English: Yao Guangxiao bows his head in thanks.

古文：寻卒。
现代文：不久便去世了。
English: He died soon after.

古文：帝震悼，辍视朝二日，命有司治丧，以僧礼葬。
现代文：皇上为之震动悲悼，辍朝二日，并命有关官员治丧，以僧礼安葬。
English: The emperor was shocked by the mourning, resigned from the imperial court on the 2nd, and ordered the relevant officials to mourn and bury him with a monk's rite.

古文：追赠推诚辅国协谋宣力文臣、特进荣禄大夫、上柱国、荣国公，谥恭靖。
现代文：追赠他为推诚辅国协谋宣力文臣、特进荣禄大夫、上柱国、荣国公，谥号恭靖。
English: He was posthumously awarded the titles of Xuan Li Wenshen, Xuan Li Wenshen, Xuan Li Wenshen, Xuan Li Wenshen, Xuan Li Wenshen, Xuan Li Wenshen, and Xuan Li Wenshen.

古文：赐葬房山县东北。
现代文：赐葬于房山县东北。
English: He was buried in the northeast of Fangshan County.

古文：帝亲制神道碑志其功。官其养子继尚宝少卿。
现代文：皇上亲自书写神道碑文以记述他的功劳，并授给其养子姚继尚宝少卿的官职。
English: The emperor himself wrote a Shinto inscription to record his achievements, and gave his adopted son Yao Jishangpo the official position of Shaoqing.

古文：广孝少好学，工诗。
现代文：姚广孝年少好学，擅长作诗。
English: Yao Guangxiao is young, eager to learn, and good at writing poetry.

古文：与王宾、高启、杨孟载友善。
现代文：他与王宾、高启、杨孟载是好友。
English: He is good friends with Wang Bin, Gao Qi and Yang Mengzai.

古文：宋濂、苏伯衡亦推奖之。
现代文：宋濂、苏伯衡也都推举他。
English: Song Tao and Su Boheng also nominated him.

古文：于是尚书李时偕大学士张璁、桂萼等议请移祀大兴隆寺，太常春秋致祭。
现代文：晚年著有《道余录》，诋毁以往的儒者，知道这本书的人都开始轻视他。他到长洲去问候同胞姐姐，其姐竟不让他进门。去拜访朋友王宾，王宾也不见他，只是远远地对他说： 和尚错了，和尚错了。 
English: In his later years, he wrote "Dao Yu Lu," which slandered the Confucianists of the past, and people who knew this book began to despise him. He went to Changzhou to greet his compatriot sister, but his sister did not let him enter the door. He went to visit his friend Wang Bin. Wang Bin did not see him, but said to him from a distance: The monk is wrong, the monk is wrong.

古文：诏曰： 可 。
现代文：又再去见他姐姐，其姐骂他。
English: Empress Dowager: That's fine.

古文：张玉，字世美，祥符人。
现代文：姚广孝十分惘然。张玉，字世美，祥符人。
English: Yao Guangxiao is very handsome. Zhang Yu, a world-class beauty, is a good luck charm.

古文：仕元为枢密知院。
现代文：元朝时任枢密知院。
English: He served as Privy Councilor during the Yuan Dynasty.

古文：元亡，从走漠北。
现代文：元朝灭亡后，他跟随逃往漠北。
English: After the demise of the Yuan Dynasty, he fled to the north of the desert.

古文：洪武十八年来归。
现代文：洪武十八年，前来归附太祖。
English: In the eighteenth year of Hongwu, he came to join his great-grandfather.

古文：从大军出塞，至捕鱼儿海，以功授济南卫副千户，迁安庆卫指挥佥事。
现代文：他随大军出塞，到达捕鱼儿海，因功被授为济南卫副千户，升为安庆卫指挥佥事。
English: He accompanied the great army out of the city and reached the fishing sea. For his service, he was awarded the title of Jinan Deputy of the People's Armed Forces, and was promoted to Anqing Commander of the People's Armed Forces.

古文：又从征远顺、散毛诸洞。北逐元人之扰边者，至鸦寒山还，调燕山左护卫。
现代文：又随征远顺、散毛诸洞，北逐骚扰边境的元朝人，追至鸦寒山而返，调任燕山左护卫。
English: He also followed Yuan Shun and Shanzhao Zhuodu to the north to harass the Yuan Dynasty people on the border, chased them back to the Raven Mountain, and was transferred to the left guard of Yanshan Mountain.

古文：从燕王出塞，至黑松林。
现代文：他随燕王出塞，到达黑松林。
English: He followed the Swallow King out of the city and reached the black pine forest.

古文：又从征野人诸部。以骁果善谋画为王所亲任。
现代文：又跟随征讨野人诸部，因为他骁勇果敢，善于谋划，而被燕王重用。
English: He also followed the campaign to subdue the barbarians in various parts of the country. Because he was brave and daring and good at planning, he was often used by the king of swallows.

古文：建文元年，成祖起兵。
现代文：建文元年，成祖起兵。
English: In the first year of Jianwen, Cheng Zu raised an army.

古文：玉帅众夺北平九门，抚谕城内外，三日而定。
现代文：张玉率军夺取北平九门，安抚城中内外，三日遂定。
English: Zhang Yu led the army to seize the nine gates of Beiping and pacify the city inside and outside, which was completed on the third day.

古文：师将南，玉献计，遣朱能东攻蓟州，杀马宣，降遵化。分兵下永平、密云，皆致其精甲以益师。
现代文：军队将往南，张玉献计，派朱能东攻蓟州，杀死马宣，降服遵化，分兵攻下永平、密云，每到一处，都将所获精锐充实军中。
English: The army will head south, Zhang Yu will devise a plan, send Zhu Neng east to attack Bozhou, kill Ma Xuan, surrender to Zunhua, and the detachment will capture Yongping and Miyun. In each place, the elite will be enriched with what they have gained.

古文：擢都指挥佥事。
现代文：张玉因而被提升为都指挥佥事。
English: As a result, Zhang Yu was promoted to the post of metropolitan conductor.

古文：是时朝廷遣大兵讨燕：都督徐凯军河间；潘忠、杨松军鄚州；长兴侯耿炳文以三十万众军真定。
现代文：这时朝廷派大军伐燕，都督徐凯驻扎河间，潘忠、杨松驻扎莫阝州，长兴侯耿炳文率三十万军队驻扎真定。
English: At this time, the imperial court sent a large army to Yanping, with the governor Xu Kai stationed in Hema, Pan Zhong and Yang Song stationed in Mogao, and the 300 thousand troops stationed in Zhending led by the Changxing Prince Geng Bingwen.

古文：玉进说曰： 潘、杨勇而无谋，可袭而俘也。 
现代文：张玉劝说道 ：潘、杨二人有勇无谋，可以前去袭击，俘获他们。 
English: Zhang Yu advised, "Pan and Yang are both brave and resourceful, they can go ahead and attack and capture them.

古文：成祖命玉将亲兵为前锋，抵楼桑。
现代文：成祖便命张玉率领亲兵为前锋，直抵楼桑。
English: Chengzu then ordered Zhang Yu to lead his soldiers as a forward, right up to Lousang.

古文：值中秋，南军方宴会。
现代文：恰好是中秋节，南军正在设宴。
English: It happened to be the Mid-Autumn Festival, and the Southern Army was holding a banquet.

古文：夜半，疾驰破雄县。
现代文：夜半时分，张玉军迅速攻破雄县。
English: At midnight, Zhang Yu's army quickly broke through Xiong County.

古文：忠、松来援，邀击于月漾桥，生擒之。遂克鄚州。
现代文：当潘忠、杨松前来救援时，便在月漾桥进行拦击，生擒他俩，遂克莫阝州。
English: When Pan Zhong and Yang Song came to the rescue, they intercepted them at Yueyuan Bridge and captured the two of them alive.

古文：自以轻骑觇炳文军。
现代文：张玉亲率轻骑窥探耿炳文军。
English: Zhang Yucai rides lightly to spy on Geng Bingwen's army.

古文：还言： 军无纪律，其上有败气，宜急击。 
现代文：回来后说耿炳文军毫无纪律，在当官的中间有失败气氛，应当迅速进击。
English: After returning, he said that Geng's army was undisciplined and that there was an atmosphere of defeat among the officials, and that they should attack quickly.

古文：成祖遂引兵西，至无极，顾诸将谋所向。
现代文：成祖遂引兵往西，到达无极时，回头与诸将商量该往何处。
English: Cheng Zu then led the troops westward, and when they reached Wuji, he turned back to discuss with the generals where to go.

古文：诸将以南军盛，请屯新乐。
现代文：诸将认为南军盛多，请求驻扎新乐。
English: The generals thought that there were too many Confederates and requested that Shinraku be stationed there.

古文：玉曰： 彼虽众，皆新集。
现代文：张玉则说 ：他们人虽多，但都是新招集的。
English: Zhang Yu said: Although there are many of them, they are all new recruits.

古文：我军乘胜径趋真定，破之必矣。 
现代文：我军乘胜直趋真定，一定能攻克它。 
English: Our army is determined to take advantage of the victory and will surely be able to overcome it.

古文：成祖喜曰： 吾倚玉足济大事！ 
现代文：成祖高兴地说 ：我有了张玉便足以成大事了。 
English: Chengzu said happily, "I have Zhang Yuping, and that is enough to become a great man."

古文：明日抵真定，大破炳文军，获副将李坚、甯忠，都督顾成等，斩首三万。复败安陆侯吴杰军。燕兵由是大振。
现代文：第二天便抵达真定，大破耿炳文军，俘获副将李坚、宁忠，都督顾成等，斩首三万，又击败安陆侯吴杰军，燕兵从此大振。
English: The next day, they arrived at Zhending, defeated the Geng Shouwen army, captured the vice generals Li Jian, Ning Zhong, and the governor Gu Cheng, beheaded 30,000 people, and defeated the Anlu Hou Wu Jie army. Yan soldiers have been greatly shaken since then.

古文：江阴侯吴高以辽东兵围永平。
现代文：江阴侯吴高率辽东兵围攻永平。
English: Wu Gao of Jiangyin Province led the Liaodong soldiers to besiege Yongping.

古文：曹国公李景隆引数十万众将攻北平。
现代文：曹国公李景隆则率数十万大军将攻北平。
English: Cao Guogong Li Jinglong led hundreds of thousands of troops to attack Beiping.

古文：成祖与玉谋，先援永平。
现代文：成祖与张玉商量，决定先援永平。
English: Chengzu discussed with Zhang Yu and decided to help Yongping first.

古文：至则高遁走，玉追斩甚众。
现代文：燕兵一到，吴高便逃走了，张玉追斩甚多。
English: As soon as Yan Bing arrived, Wu Gao ran away, and Zhang Yu chased after him.

古文：遂从间道袭大宁，拔其众而还，次会州。
现代文：然后抄小道袭击大宁，俘虏多人而返。驻扎会州。
English: Then they followed a trail to attack Daning, taking many prisoners before returning. They were stationed in Hezhou.

古文：初立五军，以玉将中军。
现代文：开始设立五军，张玉统领中军。
English: The Five Armies began to be established, with Zhang Yu leading the Chinese army.

古文：时李景隆已围北平，成祖旋师，大战于郑村坝，景隆败。
现代文：当时李景隆已围攻北平，成祖回师，双方大战于郑村坝。
English: At that time, Li Jinglong had besieged Peiping, Chengzu returned to the division, and the two sides fought in Zhengcunba.

古文：成祖乘胜抵城下。
现代文：李景隆战败，成祖乘胜直抵城下。
English: Li Jinglong was defeated, and Cheng Zu took the victory straight to the city.

古文：城中兵鼓噪出，内外夹攻，南军大溃。
现代文：城中守军呐喊而出，内外夹攻，南军大溃。
English: The defenders in the city shouted out, attacked both inside and outside, and the Southern Army was routed.

古文：明年从攻广昌、蔚州、大同。
现代文：第二年，张玉随军进攻广昌、蔚州、大同。
English: In the second year, Zhang Yu followed the army to attack Guangchang, Ulshu and Datong.

古文：谍报景隆收溃卒，号百万，且复至。
现代文：探子报告说李景隆收集溃兵，号称百万，即将来到。
English: The scout reported that Li Jinglong was about to come to collect the routed soldiers, known as the million.

古文：玉曰： 兵贵神速，请先据白沟河，以逸待劳。 
现代文：张玉说： 兵贵神速，我们要先占白沟河，以逸待劳。 
English: Zhang Yu said: "Be quick, soldiers, we must first occupy Baigou River, and then wait for labor.

古文：驻河上三日，景隆至。以精骑驰击，复大败之。
现代文：燕军驻扎河上三日后，李景隆才到，燕兵以精锐骑兵迅速进击，又大败之。
English: Three days after Yan's army was stationed on the river, Li Jinglong arrived. Yan's army quickly attacked with elite cavalry and was defeated.

古文：进拔德州，追奔至济南，围其城三月，解围还。
现代文：并进拔德州，追赶到济南，围攻三月后，解围而返。
English: and advanced to Dezhou, pursued to Jinan, besieged in March, relieved and returned.

古文：寻再出，破沧州，擒徐凯。进攻东昌，与盛庸军遇。
现代文：随后再次出兵，破沧州，擒徐凯，进攻东昌，与盛庸军相遇。
English: Subsequently, troops were sent out again, and after breaking through Cangzhou, Zou Xukai attacked Dongchang and met with Sheng Yong's army.

古文：成祖以数十骑绕出其后。
现代文：成祖率数十名骑兵绕到其后。
English: Dozens of cavalrymen circled behind him.

古文：庸围之数重，成祖奋击得出。
现代文：盛庸将他们层层包围起来，成祖奋击才得以冲出重围。
English: Shengyong surrounded them layer by layer, and Chengzu was able to break out of the encirclement only by fighting hard.

古文：玉不知成祖所在，突入阵中力战，格杀数十人，被创死。
现代文：张玉不知成祖在何处，便突入阵中拼力而战，格杀数十人，自己也受伤而死。
English: Zhang Yu did not know where Cheng Zu was, so he rushed into the battle and fought hard, killing dozens of people, and he was also injured and died.

古文：年五十八。
现代文：终年五十八岁。
English: He was fifty-eight years old.

古文：燕兵起，转斗三年，锋锐甚。
现代文：燕兵兴起以来，转战三年，兵锋极锐。
English: Since the rise of Yan Bing, it has been three years since the turn of the war, and the military front is extremely sharp.

古文：至是失大将，一军夺气。
现代文：现在损失大将，全军气馁。
English: Now the losses are huge and the whole army is discouraged.

古文：师还北平，诸将叩头请罪。
现代文：回师北平后，诸将叩首请罪。
English: After returning to Beiping, the generals bowed their heads and pleaded guilty.

古文：成祖曰： 胜负常事，不足计，恨失玉耳。
现代文：成祖说： 胜败乃是常事，不必在意，只可惜失去了张玉。
English: Cheng Zu said, "Winning and losing is a common thing, you don't have to worry about it. It's just a pity that you lost Zhang Yu."

古文：艰难之际，失吾良辅。 
现代文：正是艰难之际，我却失去了一位好帮手。 
English: It was a difficult time, but I lost a good helper.

古文：因泣下不能止，诸将皆泣。
现代文：成祖泪流不止，诸将也都哭了。
English: Cheng Zu was in floods of tears, and all the generals were also crying.

古文：其后谭渊没于夹河，王真没于淝河，虽悼惜，不如玉也。
现代文：此后谭渊死于夹河，王真死于氵肥河，成祖虽然悲悼痛惜，却都不如当初对张玉。
English: After that, Tan Yuan died in a river accident, Wang Zhen died in the Qianfei River, and although Cheng Zu mourned and lamented, they were not as good as Zhang Yu.

古文：建文四年六月，成祖称帝，赠玉都指挥同知。
现代文：建文四年六月，成祖称帝，追赠张玉为都指挥同知。
English: In June of the fourth year of the Jianwen era, Cheng Zu was proclaimed emperor, and Zhang Yuping was posthumously awarded the title of imperial commander.

古文：宣德六年迁四川都指挥佥事。
现代文：九月初四日，又追赠他为荣国公，谥号忠显。
English: On the 4th day of the 9th month, he was posthumously awarded the title of Rongguo, and his posthumous name was Zhongxian.

古文：在蜀十五年致仕。朱能，字士弘，怀远人。
现代文：洪熙元年三月，张玉被加封河间王，改谥忠武，与东平王朱能、金乡侯王真、荣国公姚广孝一起配享成祖庙庭。朱能，字士弘，怀远人。
English: In March of the first year of Hongxi, Zhang Yu was given the additional fief of King He, changed his name to Zhongwu, and became the ancestral temple garden together with Dongping King Zhu Neng, Jinxiang Hou Wang Zhen, and Rongguo Gong Yao Guangxiao. Zhu Neng, the word Shihong, is a distant person.

古文：父亮，从太祖渡江，积功至燕山护卫副千户。
现代文：父亲朱亮，跟随太祖渡江，积功升至燕山护卫副千户。
English: His father, Zhu Liang, followed his great-grandfather, Wujiang, and rose to the rank of deputy guardian of Yanshan.

古文：能嗣职，事成祖藩邸。
现代文：朱能承袭父职，在成祖藩邸奉事。
English: Zhu Neng inherited his father's position and served in the residence of Cheng Zu.

古文：尝从北征，降元太尉乃儿不花。
现代文：曾随军北征，降服元太尉乃儿不花。
English: He once followed the army on the Northern Expedition, and it did not cost him anything to surrender to the former captain.

古文：燕兵起，与张玉首谋杀张昺、谢贵，夺九门。
现代文：燕王起兵后，朱能与张玉谋划杀死张籨、谢贵，夺取九门。
English: After Yan Wang raised an army, Zhu Neng and Zhang Yu plotted to kill Zhang Xuan and Xie Gui and seize the Nine Gates.

古文：授指挥同知。
现代文：朱能被授为指挥同知。
English: Zhu Neng was awarded as a conductor friend.

古文：帅众拔蓟州，杀马宣，下遵化。
现代文：他率军拔蓟州，杀马宣，下遵化。
English: He led the army to pull out of Bozhou, kill Ma Xuan, and go down to Zunhua.

古文：从破雄县，战月漾桥，执杨松、潘忠，降其众于鄚州。
现代文：又随军破雄县，战月漾桥，捉拿杨松、潘忠，在莫阝州降服其部众。
English: He also accompanied the army to break through Xiong County, capture Yang Song and Pan Zhong, and subdue his subordinates in Mopu County.

古文：长驱至真定，大败耿炳文军。
现代文：长驱直入真定，大败耿炳文军。
English: Long drive straight into Zhending, defeat Geng Bingwen's army.

古文：独与敢死士三十骑追奔至滹沱河，跃马大呼突南军，军数万人皆披靡，蹂藉死者甚众，降三千余人。
现代文：朱能独自与三十名骑兵敢死队追奔至滹沱河，跃马大呼冲向南军。南军数万人望风披靡，被踩死者甚多，三千人投降。
English: Zhu Neng alone with thirty cavalry death squads ran to the Wei River, leaping onto horses and rushing to the Southern Army. Tens of thousands of Southern Army soldiers were overwhelmed, many were trampled to death, and three thousand surrendered.

古文：成祖以手札劳之，进都指挥佥事。
现代文：成祖亲自写信慰劳朱能，并进升他为都指挥佥事。
English: Chengzu personally wrote a letter to comfort Zhu Neng, and promoted him to be the commander of the capital.

古文：从援永平，走吴高，袭克大宁。
现代文：朱能随军支援永平，赶走吴高，攻克大宁。
English: Zhu Neng followed the army to support Yongping, drive away Wu Gao, and conquer Daning.

古文：还，将左军，破李景隆于郑村坝。
现代文：返回后，统领左军。在郑村坝打败李景隆。
English: After returning, he led the Left Army and defeated Li Jinglong at Zhengcun Dam.

古文：从攻广昌、蔚州、大同，战白沟河，为前锋，再败平安军。
现代文：又随军进攻广昌、蔚州、大同，战于白沟河，朱能为前锋，再败平安军。
English: He also followed the army to attack Guangchang, Ulshu, Datong, fought in Baigouhe, Zhu Can was the forward, and defeated the Heian army.

古文：进攻济南，次铧山。
现代文：进攻济南，驻扎铧山。
English: Attack Jinan, station in Shaoshan.

古文：南军乘高而阵，能以奇兵绕其后，袭破之，降万余人。
现代文：南军居高列阵，朱能以奇兵绕到其后，击败之，降服万余人。
English: The Southern Army was in a high-ranking array, and Zhu Neng went around it with a miracle soldier, defeated it, and subdued more than 10,000 people.

古文：从攻沧州，破东门入，斩首万余级。
现代文：又随攻沧州，斩杀万余人。
English: It also attacked Cangzhou, killing more than 10,000 people.

古文：东昌之战，盛庸、铁铉围成祖数重。张玉战死。
现代文：东昌之战，成祖陷入盛庸、铁铉军的重重包围之中，张玉战死。
English: In the Battle of Dongchang, Cheng Zu fell into Shengyong and was besieged by the Tiefen Army. Zhang Yu was killed in the battle.

古文：事急，能帅周长等殊死斗，翼成祖溃围出。
现代文：情况十分危急，朱能率周长等殊死作战，帮助成祖突围而出。
English: The situation was very critical. Zhu Neng Rong Zhou and others fought desperately to help Cheng Zu break out of the siege.

古文：复从战夹河，谭渊死，燕师挫。
现代文：又随军战于夹河，谭渊战死，燕军受挫。
English: In addition, with the army fighting in Jiahe, Tan Yuan was killed in battle, and Yan's army was defeated.

古文：能至，再战再捷，军复振。
现代文：朱能赶到，再战再捷，使燕军重新振作起来。
English: Zhu Neng arrived, fought again and again, and reinvigorated Yan's army.

古文：与平安战藁城，败之。追奔至真定，略地彰德、定州，破西水寨。
现代文：又与平安战于藁城，击败之，追奔至真定，夺取彰德、定州，攻破西水寨。
English: He also fought the Heian War in Shicheng, defeated it, chased it to Zhending, captured Zhangde and Dingzhou, and broke through the West Water Village.

古文：将轻骑千人掠衡水，获指挥贾荣。克东阿、东平，尽破汶上诸寨。
现代文：朱能率轻骑千人夺取衡水，俘获指挥贾荣，攻克东阿、东平，尽克汶上诸寨。
English: Zhu Neng led a light cavalry of a thousand men to seize Hengshui, captured the commander Jia Rong, conquered Donga, Dongping, and all the villages in Kebun.

古文：既而王真战死淝河，燕军屡败。
现代文：不久，王真在氵肥河战死，燕军屡屡战败，诸将建议回师。
English: Soon after, Wang Zhen was killed in the Battle of Qianfei River, and Yan's army was repeatedly defeated. The generals suggested returning to the division.

古文：诸将议旋师，能独按剑曰： 汉高十战九败，终有天下。
现代文：唯独朱能按剑说道： 汉高祖开始十战九败，最终却获得了天下。
English: However, Zhu Neng pressed his sword and said: Han Gao Zu started with ten battles and nine defeats, but eventually gained the world.

古文：今举事连得胜。小挫辄归，更能北面事人耶！ 
现代文：而今举兵连连得胜，遇上小挫动辄就归，岂能因此而北面事人耶？ 
English: But now, after raising an army and winning victory after victory, in the event of a minor setback, they return home. Could this be the reason why things are not going well?

古文：成祖亦叱诸将曰： 任公等所之！ 
现代文：成祖也大声呵斥诸将说 ：你们想怎么办都行。 
English: Cheng Zu also loudly rebuked the generals, saying, "You can do whatever you want.

古文：诸将乃不敢言。
现代文：诸将遂不再敢言。
English: The generals did not dare to say any more.

古文：遂引兵南，败平安银牌军。
现代文：于是引兵往南，击败平安的银牌军。
English: So he led his troops south and defeated Ping'an's silver medal army.

古文：都督陈晖来援，又败之。
现代文：都督陈晖来援，又败之。
English: The governor Chen Xi came to help, but was defeated again.

古文：遂拔灵璧军，擒平安等，降十万众。
现代文：然后击败灵璧军队，擒获平安等，降服十万人。
English: Then he defeated Ling Bi's army, gained peace, etc., and subjugated 100,000 people.

古文：累迁右军都督佥事。
现代文：朱能累升至右军都督佥事。
English: Zhu Neng was promoted to the right-wing military governor.

古文：进克泗州，渡淮，败盛庸兵。
现代文：又进克泗州，渡过淮河，击败盛庸军。
English: He also entered Kezhu, crossed the Huai River, and defeated the Shengyong Army.

古文：拔盱眙，下扬州，渡江，入金川门。
现代文：然后拔盱眙，下扬州，渡长江，入金川门。
English: Then, it will pull up the raft, descend to Yangzhou, cross the Yangtze River, and enter the Jinchuan Gate.

古文：九月甲申论功，次邱福。授奉天靖难推诚宣力武臣、特进荣禄大夫、右柱国、左军都督府左都督，封成国公，禄二千二百石，与世券。
现代文：九月初四日，论功时，朱能仅次于邱福，被授为奉天靖难推诚宣力武臣、特进荣禄大夫、右柱国、左军都督府左都督，封为成国公，食禄二千二百石，并被授予世袭凭证。
English: On the 4th day of the 9th month of the year, Zhu Neng was second only to Qiu Fu when it came to meritorious service. He was awarded the titles of "Mong Tianjing, Difficult to Push Forward, Sincerity, Preaching, Military Minister," "Special Promotion, Honorary Doctor," "Right Pillar of the State," "Left Pillar of the State," "Left Governor of the Capital of the Left Army," and "Cheng Guo," with a stipend of 2,200 koku, and was also awarded a hereditary certificate.

古文：永乐二年兼太子太傅，加禄千石。
现代文：永乐二年，朱能兼任太子太傅，加禄一千石。
English: In the second year of Yongle, Zhu Neng concurrently served as the prince's daifu, with a stipend of one thousand koku.

古文：四年七月诏能佩征夷将军印，西平侯沐晟为左副将军，由广西、云南分道讨安南，帝亲送之龙江。
现代文：四年七月，皇上下诏命朱能佩征夷将军印，西平侯沐晟为左副将军，由广西、云南分道征讨安南，皇上亲自送到龙江。
English: In July of the fourth year, the emperor issued an imperial edict ordering Zhu Neng to wear the seal of the General of the Conquest of Yiwu, and Xiping Hou Muxun to be the left deputy general, and to conquer Annan from Guangxi and Yunnan, and the emperor personally sent him to Longjiang.

古文：十月行次龙州，卒于军。
现代文：十月，朱能行至龙州，死于军中。
English: In October, Zhu Neng went to Longzhou and died in the army.

古文：年三十七。
现代文：年仅三十七岁。
English: He was thirty-seven years old.

古文：能于诸将中年最少，善战，张玉善谋，帝倚为左右手。
现代文：朱能在诸将中年纪最轻，十分善战，张玉则善于谋略，皇上将他俩当作左右手。
English: Zhu Neng was the youngest of the generals and was very good at fighting, while Zhang Yu was good at strategizing. The emperor treated them both as his right and left hands.

古文：玉殁后，军中进止悉谘能。
现代文：张玉死后，关于军中进退之事全都找朱能商量。
English: After Zhang Yu's death, Zhu Neng was consulted on all matters concerning promotion and demotion in the army.

古文：能身长八尺。雄毅开豁，居家孝友。
现代文：朱能身高八尺，雄毅豁达，孝敬友爱。
English: Zhu Neng is eight feet tall, courageous and open-minded, respectful and friendly.

古文：李自成薄京师，帝手刺纯臣总督中外诸军，辅太子。
现代文：虽位列上公，却不曾因富贵而放纵自己。他善于安抚士卒，他死的时候，将校们都为之悲痛流泪。
English: Although he was a high-ranking officer, he did not indulge in self-indulgence because of his wealth. He was good at placating his subordinates, and when he died, his officers shed tears of grief.

古文：敕未下，城已陷，为贼所杀。
现代文：皇上将他赐葬于昌平，追封为东平王，谥号武烈。
English: The emperor had him buried in Changping, posthumously crowned as the King of Dongping, and given the posthumous name Wu Rong.

古文：邱福，凤阳人。
现代文：洪熙时，朱能配享成祖庙庭。邱福，凤阳人。
English: At the time of Hongxi, Zhu Neng was entitled to enjoy the ancestral temple garden. Qiu Fu, Fengyang people.

古文：起卒伍，事成祖藩邸。
现代文：出身于行伍，在成祖藩邸奉事。
English: He was born in the military and served at the residence of the Chengzu clan.

古文：积年劳，授燕山中护卫千户。
现代文：积多年功劳，被授为燕山中护卫千户。
English: For his many years of service, he was awarded the title of Yanshan Middle Guard of a Thousand Households.

古文：燕师起，与朱能、张玉首夺九门。
现代文：燕王起兵后，邱福与朱能、张玉一起率先攻夺九门。
English: After Yan Wang raised an army, Qiu Fu, together with Zhu Neng and Zhang Yu, took the lead in conquering Jiumen.

古文：大战真定，突入子城。
现代文：大战真定，突入子城。
English: The great battle is truly decided, and we have entered the sub-city.

古文：战白沟河，以劲卒捣中坚。
现代文：战于白沟河，他率劲卒直捣敌军中坚。
English: At the Battle of Baigou River, he led his troops in a direct assault on the enemy's core.

古文：夹河、沧州、灵璧诸大战，皆为军锋。
现代文：夹河、沧州、灵璧诸场大战，邱福都为前锋。
English: Jihe, Cangzhou, and Lingbi have been involved in all the major battles, and Qiu Fu has been the striker.

古文：盛庸兵扼淮，战舰数千艘蔽淮岸。
现代文：盛庸军扼守淮河，数千艘战舰排列淮河岸边。
English: Sheng Yong's army guarded the Huai River, and thousands of warships lined the banks of the Huai River.

古文：福与朱能将数百人，西行二十里，自上流潜济，猝薄南军。
现代文：邱福与朱能率领数百人，西行二十里，从上游悄悄渡过淮河，突然进逼南军。
English: Qiu Fu and Zhu Neng led hundreds of people twenty miles westward, quietly crossed the Huai River from the upper reaches, and suddenly advanced to force the Southern Army.

古文：庸惊走，尽夺其战舰，军乃得渡。
现代文：盛庸大惊而逃，燕军夺取全部战舰，使大军得以渡河。
English: Shengyong panicked and fled, and Yan's army captured all the warships, allowing the large army to cross the river.

古文：累迁至中军都督同知。
现代文：邱福累升至中军都督同知。
English: Qiu Fu gradually rose to the position of the Chinese military governor.

古文：福为人朴戆鸷勇，谋画智计不如玉，敢战深入与能埒。
现代文：邱福为人朴实憨厚，十分勇猛，出谋划策不如张玉，敢冲敢战却与朱能相同。
English: Qiu Fu is a simple and dignified person, very brave. He is not as good as Zhang Yu in making plans and proposals, but he is the same as Zhu Neng in daring to fight.

古文：每战胜，诸将争前效虏获，福独后。
现代文：每打胜仗诸将都争相献上所俘获的东西，邱福却独落其后。
English: Every time they won a battle, generals would compete to present what they had captured, but Qiu Fu was left behind.

古文：成祖每叹曰： 丘将军功，我自知之。 
现代文：成祖每次都叹道： 丘将军之功，我心里明白。 
English: Chengzu sighed every time: I know in my heart that General Yau did a great job.

古文：即位，大封功臣，第福为首。
现代文：即位后，大封功臣，将邱福排在首位。
English: After the enthronement, the Daifeng gongchen ranked Qiu Fu in the first place.

古文：授奉天靖难推诚宣力武臣、特进荣禄大夫、右柱国、中军都督府左都督，封淇国公，禄二千五百石，与世券。命议诸功臣封赏，每奉命议政，皆首福。
现代文：授为奉天靖难推诚宣力武臣、特进荣禄大夫、右柱国、中军都督府左都督，封为淇国公，食禄二千五百石，并被授予世袭凭证，成祖下令商议诸功臣的封赏，及每次奉命议政，邱福均排在首位。
English: He was awarded the titles of "Mong Tianjing, the hard-to-push-forward-sincerity-proclamation-power-warrior-minister," "Special-advancement-honor-lucrative-doctor," "Right-pillar-country," and "Left-pillar-country-governor-general-of-the-Chinese-army-governor-general-of-the-civil-army-governor-of-the-civil-army-governor-of-the-civil-army-governor-of-the-civil-army-governor-of-the

古文：汉王高煦数将兵有功，成祖爱之。
现代文：汉王高煦多次率军有功，成祖很疼爱他。
English: Han Wang Gaoqi led the army many times and made great achievements. Cheng Zu loved him very much.

古文：福武人，与之善，数劝立为太子。
现代文：邱福是个武人，与高煦关系很好，多次劝皇上立他为太子。
English: Qiu Fu was a warrior and had a good relationship with Gao Yao. He repeatedly urged the emperor to make him crown prince.

古文：帝犹豫久之，竟立仁宗。以福为太子太师。
现代文：皇上犹豫再三，最终立仁宗为太子，命邱福为太子太师。
English: The emperor hesitated again and again, but finally made Rinzong the crown prince and ordered Qiu Fu to be the crown prince and grand master.

古文：六年加岁禄千石。
现代文：六年，邱福增加食禄一千石。
English: In the sixth year, Qiu Fu increased his stipend by one thousand koku.

古文：寻命与蹇义、金忠等辅导皇长孙。
现代文：随即受命与蹇义、金忠等辅导皇长孙。
English: He was then ordered to work with Shunyi, Jinzhong and others to tutor the emperor's eldest grandson.

古文：明年七月将大军出塞，至胪朐河，败没。
现代文：第二年七月，邱福率大军出塞，至胪朐河，邱福战败而死。
English: In July of the following year, Qiu Fu led a large army out of the citadel to the Li River. Qiu Fu was defeated and died.

古文：先是，本雅失里杀使臣郭骥，帝大怒，发兵讨之。
现代文：在此之前，本雅失里处死使臣郭骥，皇上大怒，发兵声讨。
English: Prior to this, Benya lost his way and executed the envoy Guo Yao. The emperor was furious and sent troops to punish him.

古文：命福佩征虏大将军印，充总兵官。武城侯王聪、同安侯火真为左、右副将，靖安侯王忠、安平侯李远为左、右参将，以十万骑行。
现代文：命邱福佩征虏大将军印，充任总兵官，武城侯王聪、同安侯火真为左、右副将，靖安侯王忠、安平侯李远为左、右参将，率十万骑兵前往。
English: He ordered Qiu Fupei to collect the seal of the general and serve as the chief military officer, with Wucheng marquis Wang Cong, Tongan marquis Huizhen as left and right vice-commanders, Jingan marquis Wang Zhong, and Anping marquis Li Yuan as left and right vice-commanders, leading 100,000 cavalrymen.

古文：帝虑福轻敌，谕以： 兵事须慎重。
现代文：皇上担心邱福轻敌，嘱咐道： 兵事必须慎重。
English: The emperor was worried that Qiu Fook was underestimating the enemy, and ordered him: You must be cautious in military affairs.

古文：自开平以北，即不见寇。宜时时如对敌，相机进止，不可执一。
现代文：自开平以北，即使未见贼寇，也应时时如临敌兵，相机进退，不可固执一见。
English: From the north of Kaiping, even if there is no thief, it should always be like an enemy soldier, the camera advances and retreats, and it should not be stubborn.

古文：一举未捷，俟再举。 
现代文：一战未捷，可图再举。 
English: The first battle has not been successful, but we can try again.

古文：已行，又连赐敕，谓军中有言敌易取者，慎勿信之。
现代文：出发之后，又接连赐诏，说军中如果有人认为敌兵容易攻取，千万不要相信。
English: After the departure, he issued a series of edicts, saying that if anyone in the army thought that the enemy soldiers were easy to capture, they should not believe it.

古文：福出塞，帅千余人先至胪朐河南。
现代文：邱福出塞后，率千余人先至胪朐河之南。
English: After Qiu Fu left Tibet, he led more than a thousand people to the south of the Li River.

古文：遇游骑，击败之，遂渡河。
现代文：遇上敌军游骑，击败之，遂渡河。
English: Encountered the enemy's cavalry, defeated it, and then crossed the river.

古文：获其尚书一人，饮之酒，问本雅失里所在。
现代文：俘获其一名尚书，给他酒喝，并询问本雅失里现在何处。
English: He captured one of them, Shangshu, gave him wine to drink, and asked where Benyasuli was now.

古文：尚书言： 闻大兵来，惶恐北走，去此可三十里。 
现代文：尚书说： 听说大军来到，他惶恐北逃，现在大概离这三十里。 
English: Shang Shu said: He heard that a large army was coming, he panicked and fled north, and is now about thirty miles away.

古文：福大喜曰： 当疾驰擒之。 
现代文：邱福大喜道 ：应当马上去将他擒获。 
English: Qiu Fu Daxi said, "We should go and capture him immediately."

古文：诸将请俟诸军集，侦虚实而后进。
现代文：诸将请求等诸军齐集，并侦察虚实后再出兵。
English: The generals will request that all the troops gather together, and then send out troops after reconnaissance.

古文：福不从。
现代文：邱福不听。
English: Qiu Fu did not listen.

古文：以尚书为乡导，直薄敌营。
现代文：以尚书为向导，直逼敌营。
English: With Shang Shu as his guide, he drove straight into the enemy camp.

古文：战二日，每战，敌辄佯败引去，福锐意乘之。
现代文：交战二日，每次作战，敌军总是佯装战败退去，邱福急于想乘机取之。
English: On the second day of the battle, in every battle, the enemy always feigned defeat and retreated. Qiu Fu was eager to take advantage of the opportunity.

古文：李远谏曰： 将军轻信敌闲，悬军转斗。敌示弱诱我深入，进必不利，退则惧为所乘，独可结营自固。
现代文：李远劝道 ：将军轻信敌人之言，毫无把握地率军转战，敌人故意示弱引诱我军深入，我军前进必然不利，后退则恐怕为敌所乘，所以只能结营自固。
English: Li Yuan advised: The general was gullible enough to believe the enemy's words and led the army into battle without any certainty. The enemy deliberately showed weakness to lure our army deeper. Our army's advance is inevitably unfavorable, and the retreat is probably taken advantage of by the enemy, so we can only camp and fortify ourselves.

古文：昼扬旗伐鼓，出奇兵与挑战；夜多燃炬鸣炮，张军势，使彼莫测。
现代文：白天扬旗击鼓，出奇兵向敌人挑战；夜里则燃炬鸣炮，声张军势，使敌人摸不着头脑。
English: During the day, banners are raised and drums are beaten, and extraordinary soldiers challenge the enemy; at night, torches are lit and cannons are fired, proclaiming military strength, making the enemy lose their heads.

古文：俟我军毕至，并力攻之，必捷。否，亦可全师而还。
现代文：待我军全部赶到，合力而攻，必定获胜，否则也可以全军而返。
English: If we wait until all of our troops have arrived and attack together, we will surely win. Otherwise, the whole army can also return.

古文：始上与将军言何如，而遂忘之乎？ 
现代文：当初皇上对将军说了些什么，你难道都忘了吗？ 
English: Have you forgotten what the Emperor said to the general?

古文：王聪亦力言不可。
现代文：王聪也力言不可。
English: Wang Cong also had to speak out.

古文：福皆不听，厉声曰： 违命者斩！ 
现代文：邱福都听不进去，并厉声说道： 违命者斩！ 
English: Qiu Fu did not listen, and said in a sharp voice: "Behead those who violate orders!"

古文：即先驰，麾士卒随行。
现代文：随即率先驱马前进，命士卒随行。
English: Then the first to drive the horse forward, followed by the messenger.

古文：控马者皆泣下。
现代文：骑马的人都哭了。
English: All the riders were crying.

古文：诸将不得已与俱。
现代文：诸将不得已与他同行。
English: The generals had no choice but to accompany him.

古文：俄而敌大至，围之数重。聪战死，福及诸将皆被执遇害，年六十七，一军皆没。
现代文：不久，敌军大至，将他们重重包围起来，王聪战死，邱福及诸将都被俘遇害，邱福当时六十岁，全军覆没。
English: Soon, the enemy army arrived and encircled them. Wang Cong was killed in the battle, Qiu Fu and his generals were all captured and killed. Qiu Fu was sixty years old at the time, and his entire army was wiped out.

古文：败闻，帝震怒。以诸将无足任者，决计亲征。
现代文：消息传至朝廷，成祖为之震怒，因为诸将中无人能承担此任，决定亲征。
English: The news reached the imperial court, and Cheng Zu was furious, because none of the generals could take on this task, and decided to enlist himself.

古文：夺福世爵，徙其家海南。
现代文：并剥夺邱福的世袭爵位，将其家迁徙海南。
English: He also stripped Qiu Fu of his hereditary title and moved his family to Hainan.

古文：李远，怀远人。
现代文：李远，怀远人。
English: Li Yuan, Huai Yuan Ren.

古文：袭父职为蔚州卫指挥佥事。
现代文：承袭父职为蔚州卫指挥佥事。
English: Anecdote about inheriting his father's position as Ulsan garrison commander.

古文：燕兵攻蔚州，举城降。
现代文：燕兵进攻蔚州时，李远举城投降。
English: When the Yan soldiers attacked Ulshu, Li Yuan surrendered the city.

古文：南军驻德州，运道出徐、沛间。
现代文：南军驻扎德州，运送粮饷时途经徐、沛之间。
English: The Southern Army was stationed in Dezhou, transporting grain and straw between Xu and Pei.

古文：远以轻兵六千，诈为南军袍铠，人插柳一枝于背，径济宁、沙河至沛，无觉者。
现代文：李远率轻兵六千，假装南军官兵，每人在背上插一支柳条，经济宁、沙河至沛无人发觉。
English: Li Yuan led six thousand light soldiers, pretending to be South Korean officers and soldiers, each with a wicker on his back, and no one noticed the economy of Ning and Shahe.

古文：焚粮舟数万，河水尽热，鱼鳖皆浮死。
现代文：他们焚毁南军数万粮船，河水全被烧热，连鱼鳖都被烫死，浮于水面。
English: They burned tens of thousands of grain barges belonging to the Southern Army. The river water was scorched, and even the fish hooks were scorched to death and floated on the surface.

古文：南将袁宇三万骑来追，伏兵击败之。
现代文：南军将领袁宇率领三万骑兵来追，李远伏兵击败之。
English: Yuan Yu, the general of the Southern Army, led 30,000 cavalry to chase them, and Li Yuan and his soldiers defeated them.

古文：建文四年正月，燕军驻蠡县。
现代文：建文四年正月，燕军驻扎蠡县。
English: In the first month of the fourth year of Jianwen, Yan's army was stationed in Jixian County.

古文：远分哨至藁城，遇德州将葛进步骑万余，乘冰渡滹沱河。
现代文：李远巡哨至藁城，恰遇德州守将葛进率步骑万余，乘结冰时渡过滹沱河。
English: Li Yuan patrolled to Lucheng, and happened to meet the Texas guard Ge Jin Rong, who rode more than ten thousand steps, and crossed the Lucheng River when it was frozen.

古文：远迎击之。
现代文：李远迎击之。
English: Li Yuan came out to meet it.

古文：进系马林间，以步兵接战。
现代文：葛进将马系在树林中，率步兵接战。
English: Ge Jin kept his horse in the woods and led the infantry into battle.

古文：远佯却，潜分兵出其后，解所系马，再战。
现代文：李远佯装后退，暗中分兵抄至其后，解开系着的马匹，然后再战。
English: Li Yuan pretended to retreat, secretly sent a detachment to follow, untied the horses, and then fought again.

古文：进引退失马，遂大败。
现代文：葛进引兵退却，却失去了战马，于是大败。
English: Ge Jin led the troops to retreat, but lost his horse, and suffered a crushing defeat.

古文：斩首四千，获马千匹。
现代文：李远斩首四千，获马千匹。
English: Li Yuan beheaded four thousand and gained a thousand horses.

古文：成祖以岁首大捷，赐书嘉劳曰： 将军以轻骑八百，破敌数万，出奇应变，虽古名将不过也。 
现代文：成祖因岁首大捷，赐信嘉奖、慰劳道 ：将军以轻骑八百，破敌数万，出奇应变，即使古之名将也不过如此。 
English: Cheng Zu was given a letter of commendation and a consolation prize for the first great victory of the year: the general rode eight hundred lightly, defeated tens of thousands of enemies, and made a surprising response, even if the old name would be no more than that.

古文：复遣哨淮上，败守淮将士，斩千余级。
现代文：李远又奉命巡哨淮河上，击败守淮将士，斩杀千余人。
English: Li Yuan was also ordered to patrol the Huai River, defeat the Huai soldiers, and kill more than a thousand people.

古文：累功为都督佥事，封安平侯，禄千石，予世伯券。
现代文：他积功升为都督佥事，被封为安平侯，食禄一千石，并被授予世袭伯爵凭证。
English: He was awarded the title of Anping Marquis, received a stipend of one thousand koku, and was granted a certificate of hereditary count.

古文：永乐元年，偕武安侯郑亨备宣府。
现代文：永乐元年李远偕同武安侯郑亨守备宣府。
English: In the first year of Yongle, Li Yuanjun and Wu'an marquis Zheng Heng guarded Xuanfu.

古文：远沈毅有胆略，言论慷慨。
现代文：李远沉毅有胆略，言谈慷慨。
English: Li Yuan Shen Yi is bold and speaks generously.

古文：既从邱福出塞，至胪朐河。
现代文：他随邱福出塞，至胪朐河。
English: He followed Qiu Fu out of the fortress to the Li River.

古文：谏福，不听，师败。
现代文：劝谏邱福，邱福不听。
English: Persuade Qiu Fu, Qiu Fu will not listen.

古文：后军不继，被擒。不屈，贼支解之。
现代文：兵败后，李远率五百名骑兵突围，杀死数百人，因战马摔倒被俘，骂不绝口而死。年仅四十六岁。
English: After the defeat, Li Yuan led five hundred cavalrymen to break out of the encirclement, killed hundreds of people, was captured when his horse fell, and died after cursing endlessly. He was only forty-six years old.

古文：官为建祠曰 忠勇 。
现代文：李远被追封为莒国公，谥号忠壮。
English: Li Yuan was posthumously named the Duke of Shandong Province, and his posthumous name was Zhongzhuang.

古文：谭渊，清流人。
现代文：谭渊，清流人。
English: Tan Yuan, a man of clear stream.

古文：嗣父职为燕山右护卫副千户。
现代文：承袭父职为燕山右护卫副千户。
English: Inherited his father's position as Yanshan right guard vice-Senju.

古文：燕兵起，从夺九门。破雄县。
现代文：燕王起兵时，他随军攻夺九门，攻取雄县。
English: When Yan Wang raised an army, he followed the army to conquer Jiumen and capture Xiongxian.

古文：潘忠、杨松自鄚州来援，渊帅壮士千余人，伏月漾桥水中，人持茭草一束，蒙头通鼻息。
现代文：潘忠、杨松自莫阝州来援。谭渊率壮士千余人，埋伏于月漾桥下的水里，每人持一束茭草，将头蒙在水中以茭草通气息。
English: Pan Zhong and Yang Song came from Mogao to help. Tan Yuan led more than a thousand strong men to lie in wait in the water under the Yueyuan Bridge, each holding a bunch of reeds, covering their heads in the water with reeds to breathe.

古文：南军已过，即出据桥。
现代文：南军过后，便马上出来占据此桥。
English: Immediately after the Confederates left, they came out to occupy the bridge.

古文：忠等战败，趋桥不得渡，遂被擒。
现代文：潘忠等战败，过不了桥，因而被擒。
English: Pan Zhong and others were defeated and could not cross the bridge, so they were captured.

古文：累进都指挥同知。
现代文：谭渊累升至都指挥同知。
English: Tan Yuanyuan has risen to become a well-known conductor.

古文：渊骁勇善战，引两石弓，射无不中。
现代文：谭渊骁勇善战，能张开两石弓，百发百中。
English: Tan Yuanzhong is brave and good at fighting. He can open two stone bows, and can make a hundred shots.

古文：然性嗜杀。
现代文：但是却嗜杀成性。
English: But he developed a taste for killing.

古文：沧州破，成祖命给牒散降卒。
现代文：攻克沧州后，成祖下令遣散降兵。
English: After conquering Cangzhou, Chengzu ordered the demobilization of the troops.

古文：未遣者三千余人，待明给牒。
现代文：还未遣散的三千余人，待第二天再给予凭证遣散。
English: More than 3,000 people who have not yet been dismissed will be given a certificate of dismissal the next day.

古文：渊一夜尽杀之。
现代文：谭渊却一夜之间将他们全部杀了。
English: However, Tan Yuan killed them all in one night.

古文：王怒。
现代文：燕王大怒。
English: Yan Wang flew into a rage.

古文：渊曰： 此曹皆壮士，释之为后患。 
现代文：谭渊则说 ：这些人都是壮士，放了他们，将成为后患。 
English: Tan Yuan said, "These people are all heroes. If we let them go, they will become a problem in the future."

古文：王曰： 如尔言，当尽杀敌。
现代文：燕王说道： 如你所说，应当将敌人全部杀掉。
English: Yan Wang said: As you said, we should kill all the enemies.

古文：敌可尽乎？ 
现代文：敌人杀得完吗？ 
English: Can the enemy be killed completely?

古文：渊惭而退。
现代文：谭渊惭愧而退。
English: Ashamed, Tan Yuan retreated.

古文：嘉靖十四年镇湖广，剿九溪蛮有功，益禄。
现代文：夹河之战，南军齐军上阵。谭渊迅速向前冲杀，马倒被杀。
English: In the battle of the river, the Southern Army and Qi Army went into battle. Tan Yuan quickly rushed forward and was killed.

古文：坐占役军士夺爵。
现代文：成祖为之悲悼痛惜。
English: Cheng Zu mourned and lamented for him.

古文：数传至弘业，国亡，死于贼。王真，咸宁人。
现代文：即位之后，追赠他为都指挥使，追封为崇安侯，谥号壮节，并立祠祭祀。王真，咸宁人。
English: After his accession to the throne, he was posthumously awarded the title of Metropolitan Commander, posthumously awarded the title of Chong'an Hou, given the posthumous name of Zhuang Jie, and had an ancestral shrine built. Wang Zhen, a native of Xianning.

古文：洪武中，起卒伍。
现代文：洪武年间，起于行伍。
English: During the Hongwu era, he joined the army.

古文：积功至燕山右护卫百户。
现代文：积功升至燕山右护卫百户。
English: Accumulated achievements have risen to Yanshan right guard hundred households.

古文：燕兵起，攻九门。
现代文：燕王兴兵，攻夺九门。
English: Yan Wang rallied his troops and captured the Nine Gates.

古文：战永平、真定，下广昌，徇雁门。
现代文：战于永平、真定，攻下广昌，攻战于雁门。
English: They fought in Yongping and Zhending, captured Guangchang, and fought in Yanmen.

古文：从破沧州，追南兵至滑口，俘获七千余人。
现代文：王真随军攻克沧州，追击南军至滑口，俘获七千余人。
English: Wang Zhen followed the army to conquer Cangzhou, pursued the Southern Army to Slidkou, and captured more than seven thousand people.

古文：累迁都指挥使。
现代文：累升至都指挥使。
English: He rose to the rank of Metropolitan Commander.

古文：淝河之战，真与白义、刘江各帅百骑诱平安军。
现代文：氵肥河之战，王真与白义、刘江各帅百名骑兵前去引诱平安军，将草绑起来放置袋中成束帛状。
English: At the Battle of the Qin Fei River, Wang Zhen, Bai Yi, and Liu Jiang each led a hundred cavalry to lure the Heian Army, tied up the grass, and placed it in bags to form bundles of straw.

古文：缚草置囊中为束帛状，安追击，真等佯弃囊走，安军士竞取之。
现代文：平安军追击，王真等佯装弃袋逃走，平安军纷纷去抢他们扔下的袋子。
English: Pursued by the Heian troops, Wang Zhen and the others packed their bags and fled. The Heian troops rushed to snatch the bags they had thrown down.

古文：伏发，两军鏖战。
现代文：这时伏兵趁机出击，两军鏖战。
English: At this time, the ambush took the opportunity to attack, and the two armies fought.

古文：真帅壮士直前，斩馘无算。
现代文：王真率领壮士直冲向前，斩首无数。
English: Wang Zhen led the strong men to rush forward and behead countless people.

古文：后军不继，安军围之数匝。
现代文：可是后军不继，平安军将他们包围数层。
English: However, the rearguard did not follow, and the Heian army encircled them in several layers.

古文：真被重创，连格杀数十人，顾左右曰： 我义不死敌手。 
现代文：王真身受重伤，还接连格杀数十人，对左右说道 ：我决不死于敌人之手。 
English: Wang Zhen was seriously wounded and killed dozens of people one after another. He said to the left and right: I will never die at the hands of the enemy.

古文：遂自刎。
现代文：于是自刎而死。
English: After saying this, he committed suicide.

古文：成祖即位，追封金乡侯，谥忠壮。
现代文：成祖即位后，追封他为金乡侯，谥号真壮。
English: After Chengzu ascended the throne, he was given the title of Jinxianghou (金乡侯) and the posthumous name Zhenzong (真壮).

古文：真勇健有智略。
现代文：王真强健勇敢，富有智谋。
English: Wang Zhen is strong, brave and resourceful.

古文：成祖每追悼之曰： 奋武如王真，何功不成！
现代文：成祖每当追悼他时便说 ：如果都能像王真那么勇猛，还有什么功业不能实现的呢？
English: Whenever Cheng Zu mourned him, he would say, "If everyone could be as brave as Wang Zhen, what would there be left to accomplish?"

古文：不死，功当冠诸将。 
现代文：他不死的话，功劳应当居诸将之首。 
English: If he doesn't die, the credit should go to the generals.

古文：仁宗时，追封宁国公，加号效忠。
现代文：仁宗时，追封王真为宁国公，加封号为效忠。
English: During the reign of Emperor Nanzong, Wang Zhen was posthumously awarded the title of Prince of Ning Province, and the additional title of allegiance.

古文：子通自有传。陈亨，寿州人。元末扬州万户。
现代文：陈亨，寿州人，元末扬州万户。
English: Chen Heng, a native of Shoushou, was the head of a million households in Yangzhou at the end of the Yuan Dynasty.

古文：从太祖于濠，为铁甲长，擢千户。
现代文：在濠州跟随太祖，为铁甲长，后提升为千户。
English: In Zhangzhou, he followed his great-grandfather and was promoted to the post of iron armor commander, and later to the post of chief of a thousand households.

古文：从大将军北征，守东昌。
现代文：他随大将军北征，驻守东昌。
English: He went on the Northern Expedition with the general and was stationed in Dongchang.

古文：敌数万奄至，亨固守，出奇兵诱败之。
现代文：数万敌军突至，陈亨固守，派出奇兵引诱敌军，将其击败。
English: Tens of thousands of enemy troops stormed in, but Chen Heng held fast, and sent out special soldiers to lure the enemy troops and defeat them.

古文：复从徇未下诸城。
现代文：又随军攻夺，未下诸城。
English: He also followed the army in conquering and not going down to the cities.

古文：洪武二年守大同。
现代文：洪武二年，陈亨驻守大同。
English: In the second year of Hongwu, Chen Heng was stationed in Datong.

古文：积功至燕山左卫指挥佥事。
现代文：积功升至燕山左卫指挥佥事。
English: Yanshan Zuwei's commanding officer's anecdote.

古文：数从出塞，迁北平都指挥使。
现代文：他多次随军出塞。升为北平都指挥使。
English: He accompanied the army out of Tibet many times and was promoted to the commanding officer of Beipingdu.

古文：及惠帝即位，擢都督佥事。
现代文：惠帝即位后，陈亨被提升为都督佥事。
English: After Emperor Hui ascended to the throne, Chen Heng was promoted to the post of governor-general.

古文：燕师起，亨与刘真、卜万守大宁。
现代文：燕王起兵时，陈亨与刘真、卜万驻守大宁。
English: When Yan Wang raised an army, Chen Heng, Liu Zhen and Bu Wan were stationed in Danying.

古文：移兵出松亭关，驻沙河，谋攻遵化。
现代文：他移兵出松亭关，驻扎沙河，谋攻遵化。
English: He moved his troops out of Songting Pass, stationed them in Shahe, and plotted to attack Zunhua.

古文：燕兵至，退保关。
现代文：燕兵到后，陈亨退兵保关。
English: After the arrival of the Yan soldiers, Chen Heng left the army to secure the pass.

古文：当是时，李景隆帅五十万众将攻北平。
现代文：当时，李景隆率五十万大军将攻北平。
English: At that time, Li Jinglong led half a million troops to attack Beiping.

古文：北平势弱，而大宁行都司所领兴州、营州二十余卫，皆西北精锐；朵颜、泰宁、福余三卫，元降将所统番骑彍卒，尤骁勇。
现代文：北平兵力虚弱，而大宁行都司所统领的兴州、营州二十余卫，都是西北精锐。朵颜、泰宁、福馀三卫，元降将所统的番骑弓广卒，尤其骁勇。
English: Beiping's military strength was weak, but the twenty-odd guardsmen of Xingzhou and Yingzhou, led by the general Da Ning Xingdu, were the elite of the northwest. The three guardsmen of Do Yan, Taining and Fuyu, the guardsmen and archers of the general Yuan, were especially brave.

古文：卜万将与景隆军合。成祖惧，以计绐亨囚万，遂从刘家口间道疾攻大宁。
现代文：卜万将与李景隆军会合，成祖很担心，便设计哄骗陈亨拘禁卜万，然后从刘家口抄小路进攻大宁。
English: Bu Wan would meet with Li Jinglong's army. Cheng Zu was very worried, so he devised a plan to trick Chen Heng into detaining Bu Wan, and then cut a path from Liujiakou to attack Daning.

古文：亨及刘真自松亭回救，中道闻大宁破，乃与指挥徐理、陈文等谋降燕。
现代文：陈亨及刘真自松亭回救，途中获悉大宁已陷，便与指挥徐理、陈文等商量投降燕军。
English: Chen Heng and Liu Zhen were rescued from Songting. On the way, they learned that Danying had fallen, so they negotiated with commanders Xu Li and Chen Wen to surrender to Yan's army.

古文：夜二鼓，袭刘真营。
现代文：夜里二更时分，袭击刘真营垒。
English: At two o'clock in the morning, Liu Zhen's camp was attacked.

古文：真单骑走广宁，亨等帅众降。
现代文：刘真独自骑马逃往广宁，陈亨等率众投降。
English: Liu Zhen alone fled on horseback to Guangning, Chen Heng and others led the crowd to surrender.

古文：成祖尽拔诸军及三卫骑卒，挟宁王以归。
现代文：成祖尽拔诸军及三卫骑兵，挟持宁王而归。
English: Cheng Zu made every effort to pull out the troops and the three guards cavalry, and returned with Ning Wang.

古文：自是冲锋陷阵多三卫兵。
现代文：从此为成祖冲锋陷阵的大多是三卫兵。
English: From then on, it was mostly the three guards who led the charge for Cheng Zu.

古文：成祖取天下，自克大宁始。
现代文：成祖获取天下，即自大宁开始。
English: Chengzu acquired the whole country, that is, from the beginning of Daming.

古文：亨、理既降，累从破南军。
现代文：陈亨、徐理投降后，屡屡随军击败南军。
English: After Chen Heng and Xu Li surrendered, they repeatedly defeated the Southern Army.

古文：白沟河之战，亨中创几死。已，攻济南，与平安战铧山，大败。
现代文：白沟河之战，陈亨受伤，几乎丧命，不久进攻济南，陈亨与平安战于铧山，大败。
English: In the Battle of Baigouhe, Chen Heng was injured and almost died. Soon, he attacked Jinan. Chen Heng and Ping'an fought in Shaoshan and were soundly defeated.

古文：创甚，舆还北平。
现代文：他伤势极重，乘车返回北平。
English: He was seriously injured and returned to Beiping by car.

古文：进都督同知。
现代文：进升为都督同知。
English: Shi Zhaozhong was promoted to the post of governor-general.

古文：成祖还军，亲诣亨第劳问。
现代文：成祖率军返回后，亲自到陈亨的府邸慰劳问候。
English: After the return of the army led by Cheng Zu, he personally went to Chen Heng's residence to offer condolences and greetings.

古文：其年十月卒。
现代文：这年十月，陈亨去世。
English: In October of that year, Chen Heng passed away.

古文：成祖自为文以祭。
现代文：成祖亲自写文章祭祀。
English: Cheng Zu himself wrote an article about the ritual.

古文：比即位，追封泾国公，谥襄敏。
现代文：即位之后，追封他为泾国公，谥号襄敏。
English: After he ascended the throne, he was given the posthumous title of Duke of Xing, and his posthumous name was Xiangmin.

