古文：起昭阳赤奋若，尽上章困敦，凡四十八年。
现代文：起癸丑，止庚子，共四十八年。
English: A total of forty-eight years have passed since the beginning of the Ugly Duckling and the end of Geng Zi.

古文：显王元年
现代文：显王元年
English: In the first year of King Hsien

古文：齐伐魏，取观津。
现代文：齐国发兵攻打魏国，占领观津。
English: Qi sent troops to attack Wei and occupied Guanzhong.

古文：赵侵齐，取长城。
现代文：赵国侵犯齐国，占领齐长城。
English: Zhao invaded Qi and occupied the Qi Great Wall.

古文：显王三年
现代文：显王三年
English: The three years of King Hsien

古文：魏、韩会于宅阳。
现代文：魏、韩两国在宅阳举行会盟。
English: Wei and Han held an alliance in Zhayang.

古文：秦败魏师、韩师于洛阳。
现代文：秦国在洛阳击溃了魏国和韩国的军队。
English: Qin defeated the armies of Wei and Korea at Luoyang.

古文：显王四年
现代文：显王四年
English: The four years of King Hsien

古文：魏伐宋。
现代文：魏国攻打宋国。
English: Wei attacked Song.

古文：显王五年
现代文：显王五年
English: Five years of King Hsien

古文：秦献公败三晋之师于石门，斩首六万。
现代文：秦献公在石门大胜韩、赵、魏三晋的联军，斩首六万人。
English: Qin Xiangong defeated the allied forces of Han, Zhao and Wei Sanjin in Shimen, beheading 60,000 people.

古文：王赐以黼黻之服。
现代文：周显王赏赐绣着黼黻图案的朝服给他，作为奖励。
English: As a reward, King Zhou Xian gave him a royal robe embroidered with a skull and crossbones pattern.

古文：显王七年
现代文：显王七年
English: The seven years of King Hsien

古文：魏败韩师、赵师于浍。
现代文：魏国在浍地战胜了韩、赵两国的军队。
English: Wei defeated the armies of Han and Zhao in Handan.

古文：秦、魏战于少梁，魏师败绩；获魏公孙痤。
现代文：秦、魏两国在少梁交战，魏国军队失败，落魄而逃；公孙痤被俘。
English: The two countries of Qin and Wei fought in Shaoliang. The Wei army was defeated and fled in despair; Gongsun Rong was captured.

古文：卫声公薨，子成侯速立。
现代文：卫声公逝世，他的儿子卫速即位，即卫成侯。
English: After the death of Lord Wei Sheng, his son Wei Wei was enthroned as Wei Cheng Hou.

古文：燕桓公薨，子文公立。
现代文：燕桓公逝世，他的儿子即位，即燕文公。
English: Prince Yanhuan died and his son, Prince Yanwen, ascended to the throne.

古文：秦献公薨，子孝公立。
现代文：秦献公逝世，他的儿子秦孝公即位。
English: Qin Xianguo died and his son Qin Xiaogong ascended to the throne.

古文：孝公生二十一年矣。
现代文：孝公那时已经二十一岁。
English: At that time, Takakuni was already 21 years old.

古文：是时河、山以东强国六，淮、泗之间小国十馀，楚、魏与秦接界。
现代文：当时，在黄河、崤山以东，兵强马壮的国家有六个，淮河、泗水流域之间，十几个小国并存林立，楚、魏两国和秦国交界。
English: At that time, to the east of the Yellow River and Lushan Mountain, there were six countries with powerful armies. Between the Huai River and Lushui River basins, more than a dozen small countries coexisted. Chu, Wei and Qin countries shared a border.

古文：魏筑长城，自郑滨洛以北有上郡；楚自汉中，南有巴、黔中；皆以夷翟遇秦，摈斥之，不得与中国之会盟。
现代文：魏国修筑有长城，沿着洛水从郑县一路向北，一直到达上郡。楚国以汉中为基业，向南还占有巴郡和黔中等地。他们都以对待夷狄的鄙夷态度对待秦国，极力排斥秦国，不允许秦国和中原各国集会结盟。
English: Wei built the Great Wall, stretching along the Luoshui River from Zheng County all the way north to Shang County. Chu took Han Zhong as its foundation, and to the south it also occupied Ba County and Yunnan Province. They all treated Qin State with a contemptuous attitude towards Yidi, strongly rejected Qin State, and did not allow Qin State and the Central Plains countries to form an alliance.

古文：于是孝公发愤，布德修政，欲以强秦。
现代文：于是秦孝公奋发图强，广修仁德，整修政治，想要使秦国强大起来。
English: As a result, Qin Xiaogong worked hard to strengthen his image, cultivate benevolence, and renovate politics in order to make Qin stronger.

古文：显王八年
现代文：显王八年
English: In the eighth year of King Hsien

古文：孝公令国中曰： 昔我穆公，自岐、雍之间修德行武，东平晋乱，以河为界，西霸戎翟，广地千里，天子致伯，诸侯毕贺，为后世开业甚光美。
现代文：秦孝公在国中下令说： 过去我们的先祖秦穆公，以岐、雍二地为根基，广修明德，扩充武力，向东平息了晋国的内乱，以黄河为界，向西征讨狄戎，称霸西方，开拓疆土数千里，周天子赐他为伯侯，管辖一方，各国诸侯都来庆贺，为后世子孙开创的基业可谓光大美好。
English: Qin Xiaogong ordered in the middle of the country: In the past, our ancestors Qin Mu Gong, based on Qi and Yong Er, extensively cultivated wisdom and virtue, expanded the armed forces, quelled the civil strife in Jin country to the east, took the Yellow River as the boundary, marched west to conquer Dijon, dominated the west, and explored thousands of miles of territory. Zhou Tianzi gave him the title of prince, governed one side, and the princes of all countries came to celebrate. The inheritance created for future generations can be described as brilliant and beautiful.

古文：会往者厉、躁、简公、出子之不宁，国家内忧，未遑外事。
现代文：后来经过厉公、躁公、简公及出子在位时期的动荡不安，内忧外患丛生，很长一段时间都无暇过问对外的事务。
English: Later, after the turbulent and uneasy periods of the reigns of Liguo, Maniguo, Jianguo and Desi, internal and external troubles piled up, and for a long time there was no time to deal with external affairs.

古文：三晋攻夺我先君河西地，丑莫大焉。
现代文：尤其是韩、赵、魏三晋攻占我先君的河西地，更是国家莫大的屈辱。
English: In particular, Han, Zhao and Wei's conquest of Hexi, which was occupied by my predecessor, was a great humiliation for the country.

古文：献公即位，镇抚边境，徙治栎阳，且欲东伐，复穆公之故地，修穆公之政令。
现代文：我的父王献公即位后，平定边境安抚军民，迁都栎阳，筹划东征事宜，想要收复穆公时的旧地，重修穆公时的政令。
English: After my father, Wang Xianguo, ascended the throne, he calmed the border to appease the military and the people, moved the capital to Shenyang, planned the Eastern Expedition, wanted to recover the old land of Mu Gongde, and restored the government decree of Mu Gongde.

古文：寡人思念先君之意，常痛于心。
现代文：每当我想到先君未完成的志向，内心就悲痛万分。
English: When I think of my late husband's wishes, my heart aches.

古文：宾客群臣有能出奇计强秦者，吾且尊官，与之分土。 
现代文：在座的各位宾客群臣中，有人能想出富国强兵的计谋策略，我就赏赐他高官厚禄，给他分封土地。 
English: If there are guests and courtiers who can come up with a wonderful plan to make Qin a powerful country, I will appoint them as high-ranking officials and give them land.

古文：于是卫公孙鞅闻是令下，乃西入秦。
现代文：卫国的公孙鞅听闻秦孝公的政令，就向西来到秦国。
English: Hearing of Qin Xiaogong's edict, Gongsun Yao, the defender of the country, went west to Qin.

古文：公孙鞅者，卫之庶孙也，好刑名之学。
现代文：公孙鞅，是卫国宗族中庶出的后裔，喜好法家刑名的学说。
English: Gongsun Zang, a descendant of the offspring of the Weiguo clan, likes the doctrine of the legalist's criminal name.

古文：事魏相公叔痤，痤知其贤，未及进。
现代文：在事奉魏国宰相公叔痤的时候，公叔痤了解他的才能，然而还没来得及向上推荐。
English: While serving the Wei chancellor Gong Shuluan, Gong Shuluan understood his talent, but did not have time to recommend him.

古文：会病，魏惠王往问之曰： 公叔病如有不可讳，将奈社稷何？ 
现代文：公叔痤身患重病卧床不起，魏惠王亲自来看望他，说： 你的病情万一有个三长两短，国家大事托付给谁呢？ 
English: His uncle was seriously ill and bedridden. Wei Hui Wang came to visit him in person and said, "In case there is a problem with your illness, who should be entrusted with national affairs?

古文：公叔曰： 痤之中庶子卫鞅，年虽少，有奇才，愿君举国而听之！ 
现代文：公叔痤说： 我的家臣担任中庶子的公孙鞅，虽年纪轻轻，却是一个奇才，希望国君把国家大事托付他、信任他！ 
English: Uncle Gong said, "My vassal Gongsun Ren, who is the middle child, although he is young, is a prodigy. I hope that the sovereign will entrust him with national affairs and trust him!"

古文：王嘿然。
现代文：魏惠王听完默不作声。
English: Wei Hui Wang was speechless after listening to the song.

古文：公叔曰： 君即不听用鞅，必杀之，无令出境。 王许诺而去。
现代文：公叔痤又说： 国君如果没有按照我的话重用他，一定要把他杀掉，不能让他离开魏国到其他国家去。 
English: Uncle Gong also said: If the sovereign does not use him according to my words, he must be killed, and he must not be allowed to leave Wei to go to other countries.

古文：公叔召鞅谢曰： 吾先君而后臣，故先为君谋，后以告子。
现代文：魏惠王答应后就离开了。这时公叔痤急忙召见公孙鞅，对他道歉说： 我做人一向是先君后臣，所以先为国君考虑建议杀你，现在又把详情告诉你，你赶紧逃走吧！ 
English: After Wei Hui Wang agreed, he left. At this time, Gong Xiuquan hurriedly summoned Gong Sunquan and apologized to him, saying, "As a person, I have always been a vassal before a prince. Therefore, I first considered and proposed to kill you for the sake of the king, and now I am telling you the details. You should run away immediately!"

古文：子必速行矣！ 鞅曰： 君不能用子之言任臣，又安能用子之言杀臣乎？ 
现代文：公孙鞅说： 国君既然不相信你的话重用我，又怎会听从你的话来杀害我呢？ 
English: Gongsun Yao said: Since the sovereign does not believe in your words to use me, how can he listen to your words to kill me?

古文：卒不去。
现代文：所以他一直都没有出逃。
English: Finally, he did not leave Wei.

古文：王出，谓左右曰： 公叔病甚，悲乎！
现代文：魏惠王从公孙痤家里出来以后，对身边的侍从说： 公叔痤病情太严重了，实在叫人伤心啊！
English: After Wei Hui Wang came out of Gongsun Yao's house, he said to the attendants around him: Gongsun Yao's illness is too serious, it's really sad!

古文：欲令寡人以国听卫鞅也，既又劝寡人杀之，岂不悖哉！ 
现代文：他先让我把国家大事托付给公孙鞅，又劝我杀掉他，岂不是自相矛盾吗？ 
English: Is it not self-contradictory that he first asked me to entrust the affairs of state to Gongsun Yao, and then advised me to kill him?

古文：卫鞅既至秦，因嬖臣景监以求见孝公，说以富国强兵之术。
现代文：公孙鞅到秦国之后，通过宠臣景监的引荐见到了秦孝公，向孝公阐述了自己富国强兵的计策。
English: After Gongsun Rong arrived in Qin, he met Qin Xiaogong through the introduction of his favorite vassal Jingsuan, and expounded his strategy of enriching the country and strengthening the army to Xiaogong.

古文：公大悦，与议国事。
现代文：孝公听后十分高兴，从此便和他共同商讨国是。
English: Xiaogong was very happy to hear this, and from then on they discussed the state of the country with him.

古文：显王十年
现代文：显王十年
English: 10 years of Hsien Wang

古文：卫鞅欲变法，秦人不悦。
现代文：公孙鞅想要进行变法改制，谋求富强，秦国的贵族们知道后很不高兴。
English: The nobles of Qin were very unhappy when they learned that Gongsun Rong wanted to change the law and reform the system in order to become rich and powerful.

古文：卫鞅言于秦孝公曰： 夫民不可与虑始，而可与乐成。
现代文：他对秦孝公说： 对一般人，当新的政策刚开始施行的时候，没有必要和他们商量，只需要和他们共享成功的利益。
English: He said to Qin Xiaogong: For ordinary people, when the new policy is just beginning to be implemented, there is no need to consult with them, just need to share the benefits of success with them.

古文：论至德者不和于俗，成大功者不谋于众。
现代文：有着高尚德行的人，言行不会和世俗的人一样；成就大功业的人，做事情不会和普通人一起谋划。
English: People with high moral standards will not say and do the same things as worldly people; people who have accomplished great feats will not plan things together with ordinary people.

古文：是以圣人苟可以强国，不法其故。 
现代文：所以圣明的人治理国家，如果采取的措施能够富国强兵，那么就是没有必要墨守成规。 
English: Therefore, holy men govern the country, and if the measures taken can enrich the country and strengthen the army, then there is no need to stick to the rules.

古文：甘龙曰： 不然。缘法而治者，吏习而民安之。 
现代文：大夫甘龙说： 事情不一定是这样，按照原先的法制章程来实施，官吏做起事来熟习，而百姓生活也安定。 
English: Dr. Ganlong said, "Things don't have to be like this. They should be implemented in accordance with the original legal system and regulations. Government officials should become familiar with doing things, and people's lives should be stable.

古文：卫鞅曰： 常人安于故俗，学者溺于所闻，以此两者，居官守法可也，非所与论于法之外也。
现代文：卫鞅说： 一般人往往习惯于旧的习俗，读书人也往往陷于自己的见闻难以自拔，这两类人，可以让他做官，让他守法，但不能和他讨论法制以外的事。
English: Wei Wei said: Ordinary people are often accustomed to old customs, and readers are often trapped in their own knowledge. These two types of people can let him be an official and let him abide by the law, but they cannot discuss matters other than the legal system with him.

古文：智者作法，愚者制焉；贤者更礼，不肖者拘焉。 公曰： 善。 
现代文：有才智的人制定法律政策，愚笨的人只能接受统治；贤良的人因时革新礼法，平庸的人则只知道死守现有的法规。 秦孝公说： 说得真好！ 
English: Talented people make laws and policies, stupid people can only accept rule; virtuous people innovate etiquette according to the times, while mediocre people only know how to stick to existing laws and regulations.Qin Xiaogong said: That's really good!

古文：以卫鞅为左庶长，卒定变法之令。
现代文：于是任命卫鞅为左庶长，负责订立变法的政令。
English: As a result, Wei Wei was appointed as the left subordinate commander, and finally formulated an order to change the law.

古文：令民为什伍而相收司、连坐，告奸者与斩敌首同赏，不告奸者与降敌同罚。
现代文：卫鞅下令使人民五家为一保，十家为一什，彼此之间互相监视纠举，若隐瞒不纠举的话，则十家一同受到惩罚；检举告发奸私犯罪的按照斩敌人首级的标准奖赏；隐瞒不报的，按照投降敌国的标准惩罚。
English: The palace guards ordered that the five families of the people should be protected as one, and the ten families as one, and that they should supervise the picketing among each other. If they did not report the picketing, the ten families would be punished together; if they reported the crime of treason, they would be rewarded according to the standard of beheading the enemy; if they did not report the crime, they would be punished according to the standard of surrendering to the enemy.

古文：有军功者，各以率受上爵。为私斗者，各以轻重被刑大小。
现代文：作战立功的，根据不同情况授予上等爵位的奖赏；私下械斗的，根据情形的严重状况严加处罚。
English: Those who have distinguished themselves in battle shall be rewarded with a higher peerage according to different circumstances; those who have fought in secret shall be severely punished according to the severity of the circumstances.

古文：僇力本业，耕织致粟帛多者，复其身。事末利及怠而贫者，举以为收孥。
现代文：致力本业，辛勤耕织生产粮食布帛多的，可减免赋税徭役；从事工商业追求小利和懒惰贫穷的，全家都收为奴隶。
English: Those who are dedicated to their work and work hard to produce more grain and cloth can be exempted from taxes and duties; those who are engaged in industry and commerce in pursuit of small profits and those who are lazy and poor, the whole family will be enslaved.

古文：宗室非有军功论，不得为属籍。
现代文：即便是王公贵族，如果没有战功，也不得享有宗亲的待遇。
English: Members of the royal family who do not have military merit cannot be included in the family register.

古文：明尊卑爵秩等级，各以差次名田宅、臣妾、衣服。
现代文：明确身份地位的尊卑、官阶的高下，分别按照等级的名号及次序赐予田宅、侍女和衣饰器物。
English: According to the name and order of the rank, the rice field house, the maid and the clothing and ornaments were given to the highest and the lowest, respectively.

古文：有功者显荣，无功者虽富无所芬华。
现代文：有功劳的人显赫而荣耀，没有功劳的人，即使富有也不能显赫荣耀。
English: Those who have military merit can enjoy great glory, while those who do not have military merit, even if they are very rich, cannot enjoy great glory.

古文：令既具未布，恐民之不信，乃立三丈之木于国都市南门，募民有能徙置北门者予十金。
现代文：法令制定后，并没有立刻公布，卫鞅担心百姓不相信，就在国都南门的集市上立了一根三丈高的木杆，下令如果有人能把木杆搬到北门，赏十金。
English: After the enactment of the decree, it was not immediately announced. The garrison, fearing that the people would not believe it, erected a three-meter-high wooden pole in the market of the south gate of the capital, and ordered that if someone could move the wooden pole to the north gate, he would reward ten gold.

古文：民怪之，莫敢徙。
现代文：人们觉得很奇怪，但是没人敢去搬。
English: The people thought it was very strange, and no one dared to move.

古文：复曰： 能徙者予五十金！ 
现代文：于是又下令： 能搬到北门的，给五十金！ 
English: Then he gave another order: Anyone who could move to the north gate would get fifty gold coins!

古文：有一人徙之，辄予五十金。
现代文：有一个人过去把木杆搬到北门，马上就赏给他五十金。
English: A man once carried a wooden pole to the north gate and was immediately rewarded with fifty gold coins.

古文：乃下令。
现代文：这才公布变法的政令。
English: It was only then that the decree changing the law was published.

古文：令行期年，秦民之国都言新令之不便者以千数。于是太子犯法。
现代文：法令颁布实施一年后，成百上千的秦国百姓纷纷前往国都陈述新法给人民带来的不便。这个时候，太子也触犯了法律。
English: One year after the promulgation and implementation of the law, hundreds of thousands of Qin people went to the capital to report the inconvenience caused by the new law. At this time, the prince also violated the law.

古文：卫鞅曰： 法之不行，自上犯之。
现代文：卫鞅说： 法令之所以不能很好地施行，是因为在上位的都不去带头遵守。
English: Wei Wei said: The new law cannot be implemented smoothly because the upper-class people violate it.

古文：太子，君嗣也，不可施刑。刑其傅公子虔，黥其师公孙贾。 
现代文：而太子是储君，又不能对他施以刑罚，便处罚他的右傅公子虔，在太子的老师公孙贾脸上刺墨字。 
English: However, since the prince was the crown prince and could not impose a penalty on him, he punished his right-hand man, Gongzi Qian, by tattooing ink on the face of the prince's teacher, Gongsun Jia.

古文：明日，秦人皆趋令。
现代文：第二天，秦国人听说之后，都开始遵奉法令了。
English: The next day, the people of Qin were all in compliance with the new law.

古文：行之十年，秦国道不拾遗，山无盗贼，民勇于公战，怯于私斗，乡邑大治。
现代文：新法施行十年后，秦国人不捡路边他人遗失的东西，山林里也没有强盗，人民为国作战积极奋勇，不敢私自发动械斗，城市和乡村都非常安宁。
English: Ten years after the implementation of the new law, Qin people do not pick up things lost by others on the roadside, there are no robbers in the mountains and forests, the people actively fight for the country and do not dare to start fights, and the cities and villages are very peaceful.

古文：秦民初言令不便者，有来言令便。
现代文：这时，最初控诉新法不便的，又有人来赞颂新法的好处。
English: At this time, some people initially complained about the inconvenience of the new law, while others praised the benefits of the new law.

古文：卫鞅曰： 此皆乱法之民也！ 
现代文：卫鞅说： 这些都是破坏法令的刁民！ 
English: Wei Wei said: These are all law-breaking ruffians!

古文：尽迁之于边。
现代文：把他们都流放到边境。
English: Exile them all to the border.

古文：其后民莫敢议令。
现代文：从这以后，再也没有人敢议论法令的好坏了。
English: From then on, no one dared to discuss whether the decree was good or bad.

古文：臣光曰：夫信者，人君之大宝也。
现代文：司马光说：信誉，是君主至高无上的法宝。
English: Sima Guang said: Credibility is the supreme treasure of the monarch.

古文：国保于民，民保于信。非信无以使民，非民无以守国。
现代文：能保国家局势稳定的，是老百姓；能保民众安居乐业的，在于信义；不讲信誉无法使人民服从，没有人民便无法维持国家。
English: It is the common people who can ensure the stability of the national situation; it is trustworthiness that can ensure that the people can live and work in peace; without trustworthiness, the people cannot be made to obey, and without the people, the country cannot be maintained.

古文：是故古之王者不欺四海，霸者不欺四邻，善为国者不欺其民，善为家者不欺其亲。
现代文：所以古代成就王道者不欺骗天下，建立霸业者不欺骗四方邻国，善于治国者不欺骗人民，善于治家者不欺骗亲人。
English: Therefore, in ancient times, those who made great achievements did not deceive the world, those who established a dominant industry did not deceive their neighbors in the four directions, those who were good at governing the country did not deceive the people, and those who were good at managing the family did not deceive their relatives.

古文：不善者反之：欺其邻国，欺其百姓，甚者欺其兄弟，欺其父子。
现代文：只有蠢人才反其道而行之，欺骗邻国，欺骗百姓，甚至欺骗兄弟、父子。
English: Only a fool would do the opposite, deceiving his neighbors, deceiving the people, and even deceiving his brother, father, and son.

古文：上不信下，下不信上，上下离心，以至于败。
现代文：上不信下，下不信上，上下离心，以至一败涂地。
English: Don't believe up, don't believe down, don't believe up, don't believe up, don't believe down, don't believe up, don't believe down, don't believe up, don't believe up, don't believe down, don't believe up, don't believe up, don't believe down, don't believe up, don't believe up, don't believe up, don't believe down, don't believe up, don't believe up, don't believe up, don't believe down, don't believe up, don't believe up, don't believe up, don't believe

古文：所利不能药其所伤，所获不能补其所亡，岂不哀哉！
现代文：靠欺骗所占的一点儿便宜救不了致命之伤，所得到的远远少于失去的，这岂不令人痛心！
English: Isn't it heartbreaking that a little advantage gained by deception can't save a fatal injury, and what is gained is far less than what is lost!

古文：昔齐桓公不背曹沫之盟，晋文公不贪伐原之利，魏文侯不弃虞人之期，秦孝公不废徙木之赏。此四君者，道非粹白，而商君尤称刻薄，又处战攻之世，天下趋于诈力，犹且不敢忘信以畜其民，况为四海治平之政者哉！
现代文：当年齐桓公不违背曹沫以胁迫手段订立的盟约，晋文公不贪图攻打原地而遵守信用，魏文侯不背弃与山野之人打猎的约会，秦孝公不收回对移动木杆之人的重赏，这四位君主的治国之道尚称不上完美，而公孙鞅可以说是过于刻薄了，但他们处于你攻我夺的战国乱世，天下尔虞我诈、斗智斗勇之时，尚且不敢忘记树立信誉以收服人民之心，又何况今日治理一统天下的当政者呢！
English: In those days, Prince Qi Huan did not violate the treaty concluded by Cao Moru by coercion, Prince Jin Wen did not covet to attack the original place and abide by the trust, Wei Wen Hou did not renege on the date of hunting with the people of the mountains and fields, and Qin Xiaogong did not withdraw the reward for the person who moved the wooden pole. The way of governing the country of these four monarchs is not perfect, and Gongsun Yao can be said to be too mean, but they are in the war-torn world where you attack and conquer me, the world is in turmoil, I am a fraud, I am a fighter, I am a

古文：韩懿侯薨，子昭侯立。
现代文：韩懿侯逝世，他的儿子即位，即韩昭侯。
English: Han Shao Hou died and his son, Han Zhaohou, ascended to the throne.

古文：显王十一年
现代文：显王十一年
English: The eleventh year of King Hsien

古文：秦败韩师于西山。
现代文：秦军在西山击败韩国军队
English: The Qin army defeated the Korean army in Xishan

古文：显王十二年
现代文：显王十二年
English: In the twelfth year of King Hsien

古文：魏、韩会于鄗。
现代文：魏国、韩国在鄗地举行会盟。
English: China and South Korea held an alliance in Handan.

古文：显王十三年
现代文：显王十三年
English: The Thirteenth Year of King Hsien

古文：赵、燕会于阿。
现代文：赵国与燕国在阿地会盟。
English: Zhao State and Yan State formed an alliance in Adi.

古文：赵、齐、宋会于平陆。
现代文：赵国、齐国、宋国在平陆举行会议。
English: Zhao, Qi and Song held a meeting in Pinglu.

古文：显王十四年
现代文：显王十四年
English: In the fourteenth year of King Hsien

古文：齐威王、魏惠王会田于郊。
现代文：齐威王、魏惠王约定在郊野打猎。
English: King Qi Wei and King Wei Hui agreed to go hunting in the countryside.

古文：惠王曰： 齐亦有宝乎？ 
现代文：魏惠王问： 齐国也有国宝吗？ 
English: Wei Hui Wang asked: Does Qi have a national treasure?

古文：威王曰： 无有。 
现代文：齐威王说： 没有。 
English: Wei Wang said: No.

古文：惠王曰： 寡人国虽小，尚有径寸之珠，照车前后各十二乘者十枚。
现代文：魏惠王说： 我的国家虽小，尚有十颗直径一寸以上、可以照亮十二辆车的珍珠。
English: Wei Hui Wang said: Although my country is small, there are still ten pearls with a diameter of more than one inch, which can light up twelve cars.

古文：岂以齐大国而无宝乎？ 
现代文：以齐国之大，难道真的没有宝贝吗？ 
English: With the size of the country, is there really no treasure?

古文：威王曰： 寡人之所以为宝者与王异。
现代文：齐威王说： 我对国宝的看法和你可不一样。
English: King Qi Wei said: My view of the national treasure is different from yours.

古文：吾臣有檀子者，使守南城，则楚人不敢为寇，泗上十二诸侯皆来朝；吾臣有盼子者，使守高唐，则赵人不敢东渔于河；吾吏有黔夫者，使守徐州，则燕人祭北门，赵人祭西门，徙而从者七千馀家；吾臣有种首者，使备盗贼，则道不拾遗。
现代文：我有位臣子名叫檀子，我派他镇守南城，楚国不敢来犯，泗水流域的十二个诸侯国都来朝贺。我的臣子中还有位盼子，派遣他镇守高唐，赵国人怕得不敢向东到黄河边来打渔。我的官吏中有位黔夫，令他守徐州，燕国人在北门、赵国人在西门望空礼拜求福，相随来投奔的多达七千余家。我的大臣中有位种首，让他防备盗贼，便出现路不拾遗的太平景象。
English: I have a vassal named Danzi. I sent him to guard Nancheng. Chu did not dare to invade, and the twelve vassal states of the Surabaya Valley all came to congratulate. Among my vassals, there was also a Fan Zi. I sent him to guard Gaotang. The people of Zhao were too afraid to go east to the Yellow River to fish. Among my officials, there was a widower who was ordered to guard Xuzhou. The people of Yan looked at the sky and prayed for blessings at the north gate, and the people of Zhao at the west gate. As many as more than seven thousand families followed him. One of my ministers

古文：此四臣者，将照千里，岂特十二乘哉！ 
现代文：这四位大臣，光照千里，岂止是十二乘车子呢！ 
English: These four ministers, who travel thousands of miles, are not more than twelve in a carriage!

古文：惠王有惭色。
现代文：魏惠王听了面色十分惭愧。
English: Hearing this, Wei Hui Wang was very ashamed.

古文：秦孝公、魏惠王会于杜平。
现代文：秦孝公、魏惠王在杜平举行会盟。
English: Qin Xiaogong and Wei Hui Wang held a league in Duping.

古文：鲁共公薨，子康公毛立。显王十五年
现代文：鲁国鲁共公去世，其子姬毛即位为鲁康公。显王十五年
English: The Prince of Lu died, and his son Himege ascended to the throne as the Prince of Lu Kang.

古文：秦败魏师于元里，斩首七千级，取少梁。
现代文：秦国在元里击败魏国军队，斩首七千余人，夺取了少梁。
English: Qin defeated the Wei army in Yuanli, beheaded more than seven thousand people, and captured Shao Liang.

古文：魏惠王伐赵，围邯郸。
现代文：魏惠王率领军队攻打赵国，包围了邯郸。
English: Wei Hui Wang led the army to attack Zhao Province and encircled Shao.

古文：楚王使景舍救赵。
现代文：楚王派景舍带兵援救赵国。
English: King Chu sent Jingshe with soldiers to rescue Zhao.

古文：显王十六年
现代文：显王十六年
English: In the sixteenth year of King Hsien

古文：齐威王使田忌救赵。
现代文：齐威王派田忌率领军队营救赵国。
English: King Qi Wei sent Tian Bo to lead the army to rescue Zhao.

古文：初，孙膑与庞涓俱学兵法。庞涓仕魏为将军，自以能不及孙膑，乃召之。至，则以法断其两足而黥之，欲使终身废弃。
现代文：当初，孙膑和庞涓一起学习兵法，庞涓在魏国当上了将军，觉得自己的才能比不上孙膑，于是把孙膑请到魏国；孙膑到来后，庞涓就设计加罪于他，剔掉他的膝盖骨，又在他脸上刺字，想让他一生都被嫌弃而得不到重用。
English: At first, Sun Yat-sen and Pang Yat-sen studied the art of war together. Pang Yat-sen became a general in Wei and felt that his talent was not as good as Sun Yat-sen, so he invited Sun Yat-sen to Wei. After Sun Yat-sen's arrival, Pang Yat-sen designed to add to his guilt by removing his kneecaps and tattooing his face. He wanted him to be despised for the rest of his life and not be able to be reused.

古文：齐使者至魏，孙膑以刑徒阴见，说齐使者。齐使者窃载与之齐。
现代文：齐国的使者来到魏国，孙膑私下里以受刑者的身份与齐国使者约见，说服了齐国使者，齐国使者偷偷地把孙膑带回齐国。
English: The emissary of Qi came to Wei. Sun Yat-sen met with the emissary of Qi secretly as a prisoner, and persuaded the emissary of Qi. The emissary of Qi secretly brought Sun Yat-sen back to Qi.

古文：田忌善而客待之，进于威王。
现代文：田忌待孙膑以贵客之礼，又把他引荐给齐威王。
English: Tianqi treated Sun Yat-sen as an honored guest and introduced him to King Qi Wei.

古文：威王问兵法，遂以为师。
现代文：齐威王向孙膑请教兵法，之后就任命他做军师。
English: After King Wei asked him to teach him the art of war, he took him as his teacher.

古文：于是威王谋救赵，以孙膑为将，辞以刑馀之人不可。乃以田忌为将而孙子为师，居辎车中，坐为计谋。
现代文：这个时候，齐威王打算出兵营救赵国，任命孙膑为将军，孙膑因为自己是残疾之人而推辞，于是齐威王改任田忌为将军，孙膑为军师，坐在运送辎重的车里，谋划作战大计。
English: At this time, King Qiwei planned to send troops to rescue Zhao, and appointed Sun Yat-sen as the general. Sun Yat-sen refused because he was a disabled person, so King Qiwei was appointed as the general of Tianyi, and Sun Yat-sen as the military division. They sat in the heavy vehicle and planned the battle plan.

古文：田忌欲引兵之赵。
现代文：田忌想率兵到赵国去。
English: Tabi wanted to lead an army to Zhao.

古文：孙子曰： 夫解杂乱纷纠者不控拳，救斗者不搏撠。
现代文：孙膑说： 要化解纠缠不清的两方之间的纷乱，不可以握拳开打；要劝解斗殴的人更不能参加到搏斗之中。
English: Sun Yat-sen said: To resolve the entanglement between the two parties, it is not possible to fight with a clenched fist; to dissuade the fight, the person should not participate in the fight.

古文：批亢捣虚，形格势禁，则自为解耳。
现代文：只需要根据形势乘虚而入，使打斗的紧张形势缓和，双方自然就会退兵了。
English: It is only necessary to take advantage of the situation to ease the tension of the fight, and the two sides will naturally withdraw.

古文：今梁、赵相攻，轻兵锐卒必竭于外，老弱疲于内。
现代文：现在魏、赵两国互相攻伐，精锐部队必定全部出战，只剩下老弱残兵在城内。
English: Now that Wei and Zhao are attacking each other, all the elite troops must go to war, leaving only the old and weak remnants in the city.

古文：子不若引兵疾走魏都，据其街路，冲其方虚，彼必释赵以自救。
现代文：你不如派兵突袭魏国国都，占领要塞路段，攻击魏国空虚的大后方，魏国肯定会放弃攻打赵国回兵自救。
English: You might as well send troops to raid the capital of Wei, occupy the fortress section, and attack the empty large rear of Wei. Wei will certainly give up attacking Zhao and return the soldiers to save themselves.

古文：是我一举解赵之围而收弊于魏也。 
现代文：这样既解除了赵国的围困之局，又打击了魏国，可谓一举两得。 
English: This not only relieved the siege of Zhao, but also dealt a blow to Wei, which can be described as a one-two punch.

古文：田忌从之。
现代文：田忌听从了孙膑的计谋。
English: Tabi listened to Sun Yat-sen's stratagem.

古文：十月，邯郸降魏。魏师还，与齐战于桂陵，魏师大败。
现代文：十月，邯郸城向魏国投降，魏国军队又回师救援都城，在桂陵与齐军激战，魏国军队大败。
English: In October, Shicheng surrendered to Wei, and the Wei army returned to the capital to rescue the capital, and fought fiercely with the Qi army in Guiling, and the Wei army was defeated.

古文：韩伐东周，取陵观、廪丘。
现代文：韩国攻打东周，占领陵观、廪丘。
English: South Korea attacked Eastern Zhou and occupied Neungguan and Mengqiu.

古文：楚昭奚恤为相。
现代文：楚国的昭奚恤做了宰相。
English: Zhaohui of Chu became prime minister.

古文：江乙言于楚王曰： 人有爱其狗者，狗尝溺井，其邻人见，欲入言之，狗当门而噬之。
现代文：江乙对楚王说： 有一个人非常宠爱自己的狗，狗往井里撒尿，他邻居家的人看见了，想去他家告诉他，却被狗堵在门口撕咬。
English: Jiang Yi said to King Chu: There was a man who loved his dog very much. The dog peed into the well. His neighbor saw it and wanted to go to his house to tell him, but the dog blocked the door and bit him.

古文：今昭奚恤常恶臣之见，亦犹是也。
现代文：如今昭奚恤经常阻止我来拜见国王，这和恶狗堵门的情形是一样的。
English: Now, Zhaohui often prevents me from visiting the king, just as a vicious dog blocks the door.

古文：且人有好扬人之善者，王曰： 此君子也， 近之；好扬人之恶者，王曰： 此小人也， 远之。
现代文：况且，有的人喜欢到处说别人的好处，您听了就说： 这是君子。 就亲近宠爱他；有人喜欢指出别人的不足，您听了就说： 这是小人。 就疏远他。
English: Moreover, some people like to talk about the merits of others, and when you listen to them, you say, "This is a gentleman," and you grow fond of them; others like to point out the shortcomings of others, and when you listen to them, you say, "This is a villain," and you distance yourself from them.

古文：然则且有子弑其父、臣弑其主者，而王终己不知也。
现代文：然而天下还有儿子杀死自己的父亲，臣子杀死国君的事情，而您一直都不知道。
English: But there are sons who kill their fathers, and courtiers who kill their sovereigns, and you never know about it.

古文：何者？
现代文：为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：以王好闻人之美而恶闻人之恶也。 
现代文：由于您喜欢听人讲优点，不喜欢听人讲缺点的缘故啊！ 
English: Because you like to listen to people talk about their strengths and don't like to listen to people talk about their weaknesses!

古文：王曰： 善！寡人愿两闻之。 
现代文：楚王听了说： 说得很好，两方面的话以后我都要听。 
English: After listening, King Chu said, "That's very well said. I'll listen to both sides later."

古文：显王十七年
现代文：显王十七年
English: In the 17th year of King Hsien

古文：秦大良造卫鞅伐魏。
现代文：秦国派大良造卫鞅攻伐魏国。
English: Qin sent Dalang to set up a garrison and attack Wei.

古文：诸侯围魏襄陵。
现代文：诸侯各国发兵围困魏国襄陵城。
English: The princes of various countries sent troops to besiege the Xiangling City of Wei.

古文：显王十八年
现代文：显王十八年
English: In the 18th year of King Hsien

古文：秦卫鞅围魏固阳，降之。
现代文：秦国卫鞅带兵围攻魏国的固阳，固阳投降。
English: Qin Guo Wei led troops to besiege Goyang in Wei, and Goyang surrendered.

古文：魏人归赵邯郸，与赵盟漳水上。
现代文：魏人把邯郸归还给赵国，并在漳水边和赵国缔结盟约。
English: The Wei people returned Yunnan to Zhao, and signed an alliance treaty with Zhao on the edge of Yunnan.

古文：韩昭侯以申不害为相。
现代文：韩昭侯任命申不害为宰相。
English: Han Zhaohou appointed Shen Bihong as prime minister.

古文：申不害者，郑之贱臣也，学黄、老、刑名，以干昭侯。
现代文：申不害先前是郑国地位低贱的小臣，熟习黄帝、老子以及法家刑名之学，后来来到韩国求见昭侯。
English: Previously, Shin was a low-ranking minister in Zheng, familiar with the teachings of the Yellow Emperor, Laozi, and the legalist surnames. Later, he came to South Korea to meet Zhaohu.

古文：昭侯用为相，内修政教，外应诸侯，十五年，终申子之身，国治兵强。
现代文：韩昭侯便任用他做宰相，对内修整政治教化，对外积极联合其他诸侯国。申不害做了宰相十五年，直到他去世，韩国始终政治清明，国富兵强。
English: Han Zhaohou then appointed him as prime minister, to rectify and educate the internal politics, and to actively unite other vassal states with the outside world. Shin did no harm as prime minister for fifteen years, until his death, South Korea has always been politically clear, the country is rich and strong.

古文：申子尝请仕其从兄，昭侯不许，申子有怨色。
现代文：申不害曾请求给他堂兄一个官做，韩昭侯没有同意，申不害有点不高兴，脸上露出怨怒的表情。
English: Shen Fuxiong had requested that his cousin be made an official, but Han Zhaohou did not agree. Shen Fuxiong was a bit upset, and his face showed a resentful expression.

古文：昭侯曰： 所为学于子者，欲以治国也。今将听子之谒而废子之术乎，已其行子之术而废子之请乎？
现代文：韩昭侯说： 我向你学习，是想把国家治理好，现在我是答应你的要求而废弃你创制的制度，还是推行你的制度而拒绝你的请求呢？
English: Han Zhaohou said: I am learning from you, I want to govern the country well. Now, do I accept your request and abandon the system you created, or do I implement your system and reject your request?

古文：子尝教寡人修功劳，视次第；今有所私求，我将奚听乎？ 
现代文：你以前教我赏赐功名，要按照功劳的大小来进行；现在你又有个人的请求，我该听从哪种说法呢？ 
English: You used to tell me to reward merit according to the amount of merit; now you have a personal request, which one should I listen to?

古文：申子乃辟舍请罪曰： 君真其人也。 
现代文：于是申不害离席谢罪说： 您实在是位贤明的君王！ 
English: Then Shen Niu left the throne and said, "You are indeed a wise king!"

古文：昭侯有弊袴，命藏之。
现代文：韩昭侯有一条裤子又破又旧，让身边的人收藏起来。
English: Han Zhaohou has a pair of pants that are worn and old, so that people around him can collect them.

古文：侍者曰： 君亦不仁者矣。不赐左右而藏之！ 
现代文：身边的仆人说： 您也太不仁义了，不奖赏给我们，反而还收藏起来！ 
English: The servants around him said: "You are too uncharitable, you don't reward us, instead you collect it!"

古文：昭侯曰： 吾闻明主爱一嚬一笑，嚬有为嚬，笑有为笑。
现代文：韩昭侯说： 我听说圣明的君王不轻易一颦一笑，有值得颦的事才会颦，有值得笑的事才会笑。
English: Han Zhaohou said: I've heard that the king of Shengming doesn't smile easily. He only smiles when there's something worth smiling about.

古文：今袴岂特嚬笑哉！吾必待有功者。 
现代文：这条裤子可不是一颦一笑就能比得上的，一定要遇到有功的人才能赏赐给他。 
English: This pair of trousers is not something that can be matched with a smile, it must be awarded to a meritorious person.

古文：显王十九年
现代文：显王十九年
English: In the 19th year of King Hsien

古文：秦商鞅筑冀阙宫庭于咸阳，徙都之。
现代文：秦国公孙鞅在咸阳修建宫殿，将国都迁到那里。
English: Qin Emperor Sun Quan built a palace in Xianyang and moved the capital there.

古文：令民父子、兄弟同室内息者为禁。
现代文：又下令禁止百姓家庭不分长幼尊卑地父子、兄弟混居一堂。
English: He also issued an order prohibiting common people's families from living in the same house, regardless of whether they are father, son or brother.

古文：并诸小乡聚集为一县，县置令、丞，凡三十一县。
现代文：把四散的小村落合并到一起，成为一个县，设置县令、县丞等官员，共设了三十一个县。
English: The scattered small villages were merged into one county, and officials such as the county magistrate and the county magistrate were set up, creating a total of 31 counties.

古文：废井田，开阡陌，平斗、桶、权、衡、丈、尺。
现代文：还废除旧的井田制度，打破原来的土地疆界。并统一斗、桶、权、衡、丈、尺等计量单位。 
English: It also abolished the old rice field system, breaking the original land boundaries, and unified the measuring units of bucket, bucket, weight, measure, length, and yardstick.

古文：秦、魏遇于彤。
现代文：秦、魏两国在彤地相遇并发生战争。
English: The two countries of Qin and Wei met and went to war.

古文：赵成侯薨，公子緤与太子争立。
现代文：赵成侯逝世，公子赵和太子争抢王位。
English: When Zhao Chenghou died, his son Zhao and the crown prince fought for the throne.

古文：緤败，奔韩。
现代文：赵失败，出逃到韩国。
English: Zhao failed and fled to South Korea.

古文：显王二十一年
现代文：显王二十一年
English: The 21st year of King Hsien Wang

古文：秦商鞅更为赋税法，行之。
现代文：秦国商鞅改革旧的赋税法，公布新法并施行。
English: Qin merchants reformed the old tax law, promulgated the new law and implemented it.

古文：显王二十二年
现代文：显王二十二年
English: In the 22nd year of King Hsien

古文：赵公子范袭邯郸，不胜而死。
现代文：赵国公子范领兵偷袭邯郸，兵败后被人杀死。
English: Zhao Guokongzi Fan led the troops to attack the imperial palace, and was killed after the defeat.

古文：显王二十三年
现代文：显王二十三年
English: The 23rd year of King Hsien Wang

古文：齐杀其大夫牟。
现代文：齐国杀死了自己国家的士大夫牟。
English: Qi killed his own country's top scholar, Dafu Mou.

古文：鲁康公薨，子景公偃立。
现代文：鲁国鲁康公去世，其子姬偃即位，即为鲁景公。
English: Prince Lukang of the State of Lu died, and his son Hsi Ye ascended to the throne, becoming Prince Lu Jing.

古文：卫更贬号曰侯，服属三晋。
现代文：卫国被降为侯，成为三晋的臣属国。
English: He was demoted to marquis and became a vassal state of the Three Kingdoms.

古文：显王二十五年
现代文：显王二十五年
English: Twenty-five years of Hsien Wang

古文：诸侯会于京师。
现代文：诸侯各国在京师举行集会。
English: Princes from all over the world held a meeting in Beijing.

古文：显王二十六年
现代文：显王二十六年
English: Twenty-six years of Hsien Wang

古文：王致伯于秦，诸侯皆贺秦。
现代文：周天子封秦国国君为诸侯之中地位最高的，其他各国都来庆贺。
English: Zhou Tian Zi Feng Qin Guo Guo Jun became the highest-ranking among the princes, and other countries came to celebrate.

古文：秦孝公使公子少官帅师会诸侯于逢泽以朝王。
现代文：秦孝公派公子少官统率军队，在逢泽与诸侯举行集会，来朝见周天子。
English: Qin Xiaogong sent a young officer named Gongzi to lead the army, and held a meeting with the princes in Aizawa to meet Zhou Tianzi in the morning.

古文：显王二十八年
现代文：显王二十八年
English: In the 28th year of King Hsien

古文：魏庞涓伐韩。
现代文：魏国庞涓率兵进攻韩国。
English: Pang Yong of Wei attacked Korea with an army.

古文：韩请救于齐。
现代文：韩国向齐国寻求救援。
English: South Korea turned to China for help.

古文：齐威王召大臣而谋曰： 蚤救孰与晚救？ 
现代文：齐威王把大臣召集起来商讨说： 是早点去救还是晚点去救？ 
English: King Qi Wei called the ministers together to discuss: should they rescue sooner or later?

古文：成侯曰： 不如勿救。 
现代文：成侯邹忌说： 倒不如不救。 
English: Cheng Hou said, "It's better not to save them."

古文：田忌曰： 弗救则韩且折而入于魏，不如蚤救之。 
现代文：田忌说： 如果不救，韩国肯定会被魏国吞并，还是早些去救好。 
English: Tabi said, "If we don't save South Korea, it will definitely be annexed by Wei, so we'd better save it sooner."

古文：孙膑曰： 夫韩、魏之兵未弊而救之，是吾代韩受魏之兵，顾反听命于韩也。
现代文：孙膑说： 现在韩、魏两国的军队还没有到精疲力竭的时候，这时去救韩国，实际上是我们代替韩国对付魏军，反而显得我们听命于韩国了。
English: Sun Yat-sen said: Now that the armies of South Korea and Wei have not yet reached exhaustion, to save South Korea at this time, in fact, we are replacing South Korea to deal with the Wei army, but it seems that we are obeying the orders of South Korea.

古文：且魏有破国之志，韩见亡，必东面而愬于齐矣。
现代文：况且魏国有吞并韩国的野心，等到韩国快要灭亡的时候，肯定会东来向我们求助。
English: Moreover, the state of Wei has the ambition to annex South Korea. When South Korea is about to perish, it will surely come to us for help.

古文：吾因深结韩之亲而晚承魏之弊，则可受重利而得尊名也。 王曰： 善！ 
现代文：这样我们可以进一步加深与韩国之间的邦交，还可以攻打疲劳不堪的魏国军队，这样不仅可获得更大的利益，还可赢得尊荣的声誉。 齐威王说： 妙计。 
English: In this way, we can further deepen the diplomatic relations with South Korea, and also attack the tired Wei army, so that we can not only obtain greater benefits, but also win honorable reputation.

古文：乃阴许韩使而遣之。
现代文：于是私下里承诺韩国使者出兵相救，把他送回韩国，却按兵不动。
English: The South Korean envoy then privately promised to send troops to rescue him and send him back to South Korea, but he did not budge.

古文：韩因恃齐，五战不胜，而东委国于齐。
现代文：果然，韩国以为有齐国做依靠，经过五次激烈的战役都失败了，只好向东依附齐国。
English: Relying on Qi for rescue, South Korea lost all five wars and had to entrust the country to Qi.

古文：齐因起兵，使田忌、田婴、田盼将之，孙子为师，以救韩，直走魏都。
现代文：齐国因此而出兵，派田忌、田婴、田盼统领军队，孙膑为军师，前去营救韩国，大军长驱直入，到达魏国都城。
English: As a result, the State of Qi dispatched soldiers, sending Tianqi, Tianying, and Tianpan to lead the army, with Sun Yat-sen as the military instructor, to rescue South Korea, and the commander of the large army drove straight in and reached the capital of Wei.

古文：庞涓闻之，去韩而归。
现代文：庞涓听说后急忙从韩国撤军。
English: Upon hearing the news, Pang Yong hastily withdrew his troops from South Korea.

古文：魏人大发兵，以太子申为将，以御齐师。
现代文：魏国集合全国的兵力，以太子申作为将军，抗击齐国军队。
English: Wei gathered troops from all over the country, and Ether Zishen, as a general, fought against the Qi army.

古文：孙子谓田忌曰： 彼三晋之兵素悍勇而轻齐，齐号为怯。
现代文：孙膑对田忌说： 三晋地区的军队一向以骁勇剽悍著称，轻视齐国军队，齐军也有胆怯的坏名声。
English: Sun Yat-sen said to Tian Bo: The troops in the Sanjin region have always been famous for their bravery and courage, and they despise the Qi troops. The Qi troops also have a bad reputation for cowardice.

古文：善战者因其势而利导之。
现代文：善于领兵作战的将领，应该利用自然情势而诱导敌人。
English: Generals who are good at using troops should take advantage of this situation and adopt a combat strategy.

古文：《兵法》： 百里而趣利者蹶上将，五十里而趣利者军半至。  
现代文：《孙武兵法》上说： 距离一百多里就奔袭想要取胜的，即便是上将也会失败，距离五十里而奔袭求胜，往往只有半数军士可以到达。  
English: "Sun Wu's Art of War" said: If you attack from a distance of more than one hundred miles to win, even the admiral will fail. If you attack from a distance of fifty miles to win, often only half of the sergeants can reach.

古文：乃使齐军入魏地为十万灶，明日为五万灶，又明日为二万灶。
现代文：就下令齐国军队刚进入魏国边界，修建十万座炉灶，第二天减为五万座，第三天减为两万座。
English: He ordered the Qi army to build 100,000 stoves as soon as they entered the Wei border, reducing the number to 50,000 the next day and 20,000 the day after that.

古文：庞涓行三日，大喜曰： 我固知齐军怯，入吾地三日，士卒亡者过半矣！ 
现代文：庞涓带领军队追击齐兵三天，看到这种情况，十分高兴，说： 我早知齐军胆小畏惧，才进入魏国三天，就已经有一半以上的士兵逃跑了！ 
English: Pang Xuan led the army to chase the Qi soldiers for three days. Seeing this situation, he was very happy, saying: I already knew that the Qi army was timid and afraid. It took three days to enter Wei, and more than half of the soldiers had already fled!

古文：乃弃其步军，与其轻锐倍日并行逐之。
现代文：于是舍弃步兵，亲自率领着魏国轻锐军队，日夜兼程，追击齐军。
English: So he gave up his infantry, and only his lightly armed elite troops pursued the Qi army day and night.

古文：孙子度其行，暮当至马陵。
现代文：孙膑估算庞涓的行程，当天晚上应该到达马陵。
English: Sun Yat-sen estimated that he could reach the horse mausoleum that evening.

古文：马陵道狭而旁多阻隘，可伏兵。乃斫大树，白而书之曰： 庞涓死此树下！ 
现代文：马陵道路狭窄，有许多断壁险隘，可以设兵埋伏，于是派人削去一棵大树的树皮，在树干上写道： 庞涓死于此树下！ 
English: The Ma Ling road is narrow and there are many precipitous walls, so they can set up an ambush. So they sent someone to cut the bark off a large tree and write on the trunk: Pang Xuan died under this tree!

古文：于是令齐师善射者万弩夹道而伏，期日暮见火举而俱发。
现代文：又挑选齐国射箭精良的士兵一万多人，埋伏在山路两侧，约定当天晚上看见有火光就万弩齐发。
English: He also selected more than ten thousand soldiers who were good at archery in Qi and ambushed them on both sides of the mountain road. It was agreed that if they saw fire on the evening of the same day, they would attack.

古文：庞涓果夜到斫木下，见白书，以火烛之。
现代文：夜里，庞涓果然来到削去表皮的树下，看见树干上隐约有字，就拿起火把察看。
English: In the night, Pang Yao came to the tree where the bark had been peeled off. When he saw the words written on the tree trunk, he picked up a torch to take a look.

古文：读未毕，万弩俱发，魏师大乱相失。
现代文：还没有读完，两边就箭如雨下，魏军乱作一团，四散逃窜。
English: Before the reading was over, arrows rained down on both sides, and the Wei army scattered and fled.

古文：庞涓自知智穷兵败，乃自刭，曰： 遂成竖子之名！ 
现代文：庞涓自知才智已尽，兵败之势无法改变，于是自刎而死，死前说道： 就成就孙膑你小子的名声吧！ 
English: Knowing that there was nothing he could do, and that his defeat was a foregone conclusion, Pang Xuan drew his sword and killed himself, saying on his deathbed, "I have made this boy's reputation!

古文：齐因乘胜大破魏师，虏太子申。
现代文：齐国军队乘胜追击，魏军大败，俘虏了魏国太子申。
English: The Qi army took advantage of the victory to pursue, the Wei army was defeated, and the Wei prince Shen was captured.

古文：成侯邹忌恶田忌，使人操十金，卜于市，曰： 我，田忌之人也。
现代文：成侯邹忌妒恨田忌，于是找人带着黄金十斤，到集市上去算卦说： 我是田忌的下属。
English: Cheng Houyi was jealous of Tianyi, so he sent someone with ten catties of gold to go to the bazaar to calculate divination and said, "I am a subordinate of Tianyi.

古文：我为将三战三胜，欲行大事，可乎？ 
现代文：我为将军统率军队作战，三战三胜，想要成就一番大事业，运气怎么样？ 
English: I am fighting for the general leading the army, three battles and three victories, I want to achieve a great cause, how is my luck?

古文：卜者出，因使人执之。
现代文：算卦的一出来，就派人捉拿住他。
English: As soon as the fortune-teller came out, they sent someone to catch him.

古文：田忌不能自明，率其徒攻临淄，求成侯。不克，出奔楚。
现代文：田忌没有办法解释自己的清白，索性率领手下的军队攻打都城临淄，要求交出成侯邹忌，没有获得成功，只好逃去楚国。
English: Tian Bo did not have a way to explain his innocence. He simply led his troops to attack the capital Linyi and demanded the surrender of Cheng Hou Qi. He did not succeed and had to flee to Chu.

古文：显王二十九年
现代文：显王二十九年
English: In the 29th year of King Hsien

古文：卫鞅言于秦孝公曰： 秦之与魏，譬若人之有腹心之疾，非魏并秦，秦即并魏。
现代文：商鞅对秦孝公说： 秦、魏两国之间的关系，就好像人有心腹之患，不是魏国侵吞秦国，就是秦国攻占魏国，原因是什么呢？
English: Shangtao said to Qin Xiaogong, "The relationship between Qin and Wei is like that of a man with an ulterior motive. Either Wei invades Qin, or Qin invades Wei. What is the reason?

古文：何者？魏居岭厄之西，都安邑，与秦界河，而独擅山东之利。利则西侵秦，病则东收地。
现代文：魏国处在险恶的山岭西侧，在安邑城建都，和秦国以黄河为界线，独自占有崤山以东的利势，国力强盛时就向西侵犯秦国，国势衰微时就向东收缩保土。
English: Wei was located on the west side of the treacherous mountains, built its capital in the city of Anyi, and had the Yellow River as its border with Qin. It alone held the advantageous position east of Mount Lushan. When its national strength was strong, it invaded Qin to the west, and when its national strength was weak, it retreated to the east to protect its territory.

古文：今以君之贤圣，国赖以盛；而魏往年大破于齐，诸侯畔之，可因此时伐魏。
现代文：如今秦国凭着君王的圣明，国家逐渐强盛起来；而魏国由于去年被齐国击败，各个诸侯国都背叛了和它之间的约定，可以趁这个机会攻取魏国。
English: Now Qin, with the help of the king's wisdom, has gradually become a strong country. As opposed to Wei, which was defeated by Qi last year, all the principalities have betrayed the agreement with it, and can take advantage of this opportunity to conquer Wei.

古文：魏不支秦，必东徙。然后秦据河山之固，东乡以制诸侯，此帝王之业也。 
现代文：魏国抵抗不了，肯定向东迁徙，这样秦国就以险要的黄河、崤山作为天然屏障，向东挟制各诸侯国，从而建立起称帝尊王的宏大功业啊！ 
English: Wei couldn't resist and definitely migrated to the east, so Qin used the dangerous Yellow River and Lushan Mountain as a natural barrier to control all the principalities to the east, thus establishing the great work of the emperor!

古文：公从之，使卫鞅将兵伐魏。
现代文：秦孝公采纳了他的提议，派商鞅率军进攻魏国。
English: Qin Xiaogong accepted his proposal and sent Shangguan Jun to lead an army to attack Wei.

古文：魏使公子卬将而御之。
现代文：魏国派公子卬统率军队抵御秦军。
English: Wei dispatched Gongzi Yu to lead an army to resist the Qin army.

古文：军既相距，卫鞅遗公子卬书曰： 吾始与公子欢，今俱为两国将，不忍相攻，可与公子面相见盟，乐饮而罢兵，以安秦、魏之民。 
现代文：两军对垒，公孙鞅派人送信给公子，写道： 当年我与公子您交情很好，现在都成为两军大将，不忍心互相攻杀。我们可以见面互相起誓结盟，畅饮之后罢兵回国，以使秦国、魏国的百姓安心。 
English: When the two armies faced each other, Gongsun Yao sent a messenger to his son-in-law, writing: "Back then, I had a good relationship with you son-in-law. Now that we are both generals of the two armies, I can't bear to attack and kill each other. We can meet, swear an alliance to each other, have a good drink, and then go back to China to reassure the people of Qin and Wei.

古文：公子卬以为然，乃相与会。
现代文：公子信以为真，便前来赴会。
English: He believed it to be true and came to the meeting.

古文：盟已，饮。而卫鞅伏甲士，袭虏公子卬，因攻魏师，大破之。
现代文：两方盟誓已毕，正饮酒时，公孙鞅事先埋伏下的甲士冲出来，俘虏了公子，又乘势攻击魏军，使其大败。
English: After the two sides had sworn an oath, when they were drinking, Gongsun Yao's ambushed soldiers rushed out, captured Gongson, and attacked the Wei army, causing it to be defeated.

古文：魏惠王恐，使使献河西之地于秦以和。因去安邑，徙都大梁。
现代文：魏惠王惊恐万分，派遣使臣把黄河以西的土地割让给秦国求和，然后离开安邑，迁都到大梁。
English: King Wei Hui was so frightened that he sent envoys to cede the land west of the Yellow River to Qin to sue for peace. He then left Anyi and moved the capital to Daliang.

古文：乃叹曰： 吾恨不用公叔之言！ 
现代文：此时魏惠王叹息说： 我真后悔当初没听公叔痤的建议而杀掉商鞅。 
English: At this time, Wei Hui Wang sighed and said, "I really regret that I didn't listen to my uncle's advice and killed the merchant."

古文：秦封卫鞅商於十五邑，号曰商君。
现代文：秦国封赏给公孙鞅商於地方的十五个县。于是他号称为商君。
English: Qin Guofeng rewarded Gongsun Yi's merchants in the local fifteen counties. Therefore, he was called the merchant.

古文：齐、赵伐魏。
现代文：齐国和赵国联合出兵攻击魏国。
English: Qi and Zhao jointly sent troops to attack Wei.

古文：楚宣王薨，子威王商立。
现代文：楚国楚宣王去世，其子商继位为楚威王。
English: King Chu Xuan of the State of Chu died, and his son Shang Rong became the King of Chu Wei.

古文：显王三十一年
现代文：显王三十一年
English: The 31st year of King Hsien Wang

古文：秦孝公薨，子惠文王立，公子虔之徒告商君欲反，发吏捕之。
现代文：秦国秦孝公去世，其子即位为秦惠文王。因公子虔的门下人指控商君要谋反，便派官吏前去捕捉他。
English: Qin State's Qin Xiaogong passed away, and his son ascended the throne as Qin Huiwen Wang. Because his devout followers accused the merchant of plotting a rebellion, they sent officials to capture him.

古文：商君亡之魏。魏人不受，复内之秦。
现代文：商君急忙逃往魏国，魏国人拒不接纳，把他送回到秦国。
English: The merchant hurriedly fled to Wei, but the Wei people refused to accept him and sent him back to Qin.

古文：商君乃与其徒之商於，发兵北击郑。
现代文：商君只好与他的门徒来到封地商於，起兵向北攻打郑。
English: The merchant had no choice but to come to the fief with his disciples and raise an army to attack Zheng to the north.

古文：秦人攻商君，杀之，车裂以徇，尽灭其家。
现代文：秦国军队向商君进攻，将他斩杀，车裂分尸示众，全家老小也被杀光。
English: The Qin army attacked the merchant, killed him, cut up his body and displayed it to the public, and the whole family was killed.

古文：初，商君相秦，用法严酷，尝临渭沦囚，渭水尽赤，为相十年，人多怨之。
现代文：当初，商鞅做秦国宰相的时候，施行的法令非常严厉残酷，他曾经亲自在渭水边惩处罪犯，渭河水都被鲜血染红了。他做宰相十年，百姓都怨恨他。
English: At first, when Shang Kui was the prime minister of Qin, the laws he enforced were very harsh and cruel. He once personally punished criminals on the edge of Surabaya. The water of the Surabaya River was stained red with blood. He had been prime minister for ten years, and the people resented him.

古文：赵良见商君，商君问曰： 子观我治秦，孰与五羖大夫贤？ 
现代文：有一次，赵良遇见商君，商君问他： 你看我治理秦国和五羖大夫相比，谁更贤明？ 
English: Once, Zhao Liang met a merchant. The merchant asked him: Do you think I am wiser in governing Qin compared to the Five Immortals?

古文：赵良曰： 千人之诺诺，不如一士之谔谔。
现代文：赵良说： 一千个人唯唯诺诺，也比不上一个人正直敢言。
English: Zhao Liang said, "A thousand people are more willing to be loyal than one person is willing to be honest."

古文：仆请终日正言而无诛，可乎？ 商君曰 诺。 
现代文：我希望把心里的想法都直接说出来，而不会受到杀身之灾，可以吗？ 商君说： 可以。 
English: I hope I can express my thoughts directly without being killed, is that okay? The merchant said, "Yes."

古文：赵良曰： 五羖大夫，荆之鄙人也，穆公举之牛口之下，而加之百姓之上，秦国莫敢望焉。
现代文：赵良回答： 五羖大夫原本是荆楚边地卑贱的小民，秦穆公把他从一个牧牛郎提拔起来，地位在百姓之上，秦国没有人能比得上他。
English: Zhao Liang replied, "Dr. Wuchuan was originally a lowly commoner from the outskirts of Jingzhu. Qin Mu Gong promoted him from a cowherd to a position above the common people. No one in Qin State can match him.

古文：相秦六七年而东伐郑，三置晋君，一救荆祸。
现代文：他做秦国宰相的六七年时间里，曾率军向东进攻郑国，先后三次协助晋国扶持新的国君，还有一次把楚国从灾难之中挽救出来。
English: During the sixty-seven years that he was the prime minister of Qin, he led an army eastward to attack Zheng, assisted Jin in supporting a new sovereign three times, and once saved Chu from disaster.

古文：其为相也，劳不坐乘，暑不张盖。
现代文：他担任宰相时，即便劳累也不乘车，天气炎热也不让人撑伞遮凉。
English: When he was prime minister, he would not ride in a car even if he was tired, and he would not let people hold umbrellas to keep them cool in hot weather.

古文：行于国中，不从车乘，不操干戈。
现代文：在国都内巡视，不让车辆跟随，也不用武士护驾。
English: On patrol in the national capital, do not allow vehicles to follow, and do not use a samurai escort.

古文：五羖大夫死，秦国男女流涕，童子不歌谣，舂者不相杵。
现代文：五羖大夫逝世的时候，秦国男女老幼都掩面痛哭流涕，小孩也不再唱童谣，舂米的人们也不再捣杵。
English: When the fifth widower died, both men and women in Qin cried bitterly, even children did not sing ballads, and people who were eating rice did not make corresponding cries because of sadness.

古文：今君之见也，因嬖人景监以为主；其从政也，凌轹公族，残伤百姓。
现代文：如今先生您出任相国，是因宦官景监引荐给孝公的缘故；先生您颁行的政令，欺压凌辱权贵，残酷伤害百姓。
English: Today, sir, your appointment as consort of the emperor is due to the recommendation of the eunuch, the inspector of scenery, to the filial piety; sir, the decree you issued, bullied and humiliated the powerful, and cruelly harmed the people.

古文：公子虔杜门不出已八年矣。
现代文：公子虔因受刑已经有八年没有出过门了。
English: As a result of his imprisonment, Kimiko Kyon hasn't left the house for eight years.

古文：君又杀祝欢而黥公孙贾。
现代文：您又杀了祝懽，以脸上刺字来惩罚公孙贾。
English: You killed Zhu Xi again, and punished Gongsun Jia by tattooing words on his face.

古文：《诗》曰： 得人者兴，失人者崩。 
现代文：《诗经》说： 得人心者兴旺，失人心者败亡。 
English: "The Book of Songs" says: Those who win the hearts of the people prosper, and those who lose the hearts of the people perish.

古文：此数者，非所以得人也。
现代文：您做的这几件事，都不能算是赢得民心。
English: These few things you have done cannot be regarded as winning the hearts and minds of the people.

古文：君之出也，后车载甲，多力而骈胁者为骖乘，持矛而操闟戟者旁车而趋。
现代文：所以您外出的时候，在后边跟随大量载满披甲士兵的车辆，有力大无穷的精壮勇士做侍卫，而手持着戈矛、荷戟的守卫在车两旁巡逻前行。
English: Therefore, when you go out, follow a large number of vehicles loaded with armored soldiers in the back, with powerful and powerful warriors as bodyguards, while guards armed with spears and hoes patrol on both sides of the car.

古文：君之危若朝露，而尚贪商於之富，宠秦国之政，畜百姓之怨。
现代文：这几件有一样没有，您肯定是不会外出的。《尚书》上说： 凭借恩义仁德的人昌盛，依靠暴力的人败亡。 
English: If you don't have any of these things, you certainly won't be able to go out. "Shangshu" said: Those who rely on benevolence will prosper, and those who rely on violence will perish.

古文：秦王一旦捐宾客而不立朝，秦国之所以收君者岂其微哉！ 
现代文：这几件事，没有一件是凭借仁义道德的。您现在的处境如同早上的露水一样危险，却还要贪图商於的财富，独掌秦国的大权，使百姓对您的怨恨日益增加。一旦秦王驾崩，秦国等着收拾您的人，只怕不会少啊！ 
English: None of these things are based on benevolence, righteousness and morality. Your current situation is as dangerous as the morning dew, but you still want to covet the wealth of the merchants, hold the power of Qin alone, so that the people's resentment towards you is increasing day by day. Once Qin Wang passes away, Qin State is waiting to clean up your people, I'm afraid there are not a few!

古文：商君弗从。
现代文：商鞅没有听从。
English: But the businessman did not listen to Zhao Liang's advice.

古文：居五月而难作。
现代文：五个月之后灾祸就发生了。
English: Five months later, disaster struck.

古文：显王三十二年
现代文：显王三十二年
English: In the thirty-second year of King Hsien

古文：韩申不害卒。
现代文：韩国的申不害逝世。
English: South Korea's Shin passed away.

古文：显王三十三年
现代文：显王三十三年
English: The 33rd year of King Hsien Wang

古文：宋太丘社亡。
现代文：宋国在太丘的神坛宗社坍塌。
English: The Shintan Sosha of Song collapsed in Taiyau.

古文：邹人孟轲见魏惠王。王曰： 叟，不远千里而来，亦有以利吾国乎？ 
现代文：邹地人士孟轲求见魏惠王，惠王问道： 老先生，您不远千里而来，能给我的国家带来什么利益呢？ 
English: Meng Rong, a person from Shandong Province, asked to see Wei Hui Wang. Wei Hui Wang asked: Old gentleman, you have come thousands of miles, what benefits can you bring to my country?

古文：孟子曰： 君何必曰利，仁义而已矣！
现代文：孟轲说： 君主您何必张口就要利益，有了仁义就足够了！
English: Meng Yao said: Monarch, why do you need to open your mouth to ask for profit, it is enough to have benevolence and righteousness!

古文：君曰何以利吾国，大夫曰何以利吾家，士庶人曰何以利吾身，上下交征利而国危矣。
现代文：如果君主光说为国谋利益，大夫光说为家谋利益，士民百姓所说的也是如何让自身得到利益，上上下下都追逐利益，那么国家就危险了。
English: If the monarch only says that he is seeking the interests of the country, the doctor only says that he is seeking the interests of his family, and the scholars, the people, and the common people also say how to make themselves benefit, and they all pursue interests, then the country is in danger.

古文：未有仁而遗其亲者也，未有义而后其君者也。 王曰： 善。 
现代文：只有仁爱的人不会抛弃他的亲人，忠义的人不会把国君放到脑后。 魏惠王点头说： 对。 
English: Only a benevolent person would not abandon his relatives, and a loyal person would not forget the sovereign. Wei Hui Wang nodded and said, "That's right."

古文：初，孟子师子思，尝问牧民之道何先。
现代文：起初，孟子师从子思学习时，曾经询问什么是治理百姓首要的事。
English: At the beginning, when Mencius was learning from Zisi, he once asked what was the most important thing in governing the people.

古文：子思曰： 先利之。 
现代文：子思说： 先为人民谋取福利。 
English: Zisi said: First, seek welfare for the people.

古文：孟子曰： 君子所以教民，亦仁义而已矣，何必利？ 
现代文：孟子说： 君子教化百姓，不过是仁义而已，又为什么要讲利益呢？ 
English: Mencius said: It is nothing but benevolence and righteousness for a gentleman to enlighten the people, so why talk about benefits?

古文：子思曰： 仁义固所以利之也。
现代文：子思说： 讲求仁义，就是为了给人民谋取福利。
English: Zisi said, "To seek benevolence and righteousness is to seek welfare for the people."

古文：上不仁则下不得其所，上不义则下乐为诈也。此为不利大矣。
现代文：身居上位的人不行仁德，下层的人民就要流离失所，身居上位的人不施道义，下层百姓就会尔虞我诈，这才是最大的不利啊。
English: If those at the top do not practice benevolence, the people at the bottom will be displaced. If those at the top do not practice morality, the people at the bottom will cheat each other. This is the biggest disadvantage.

古文：故《易》曰： 利者，义之和也。 
现代文：因此《易经》上说： 利益，就是要从道义上让万物和谐而不相害。 
English: Therefore, the "I Ching" says: "Benefit is to let all things harmonize and not harm each other from the moral point of view."

古文：又曰： 利用安身，以崇德也。 
现代文：又说： 利益可以让人安稳生息，从而推崇高尚的品格。 
English: He also said: Profit can make people live in a stable way, thus promoting noble character.

古文：此皆利之大者也。 
现代文：这才是最大的利益啊！ 
English: This is the greatest benefit!

古文：臣光曰：子思、孟子之言，一也。
现代文：臣司马光说：子思、孟子所说的其实是一个意思。
English: Subordinate Sima Guang said: What Zisi and Mencius said is actually a meaning.

古文：夫唯仁者为知仁义之利，不仁者不知也。
现代文：只有施行仁义的人，才明白仁义的作用，没有仁义的人是不会了解的。
English: Only those who practice benevolence and righteousness can understand the role of benevolence and righteousness. Those who do not practice benevolence and righteousness will not understand.

古文：故孟子对梁王直以仁义而不及利者，所与言之人异故也。
现代文：因此孟子对魏惠王直接宣讲仁义，而不涉及利益，是所谈话的对象不同的缘故啊！
English: Therefore, Mencius directly preached benevolence and righteousness to Wei Hui Wang, without involving interests. It was because of the different target of the conversation!

古文：显王三十四年
现代文：显王三十四年
English: In the thirty-fourth year of King Hsien

古文：秦伐韩，拔宜阳。
现代文：秦国进攻韩国，攻克宜阳。
English: Qin attacked Korea and conquered Yiyang.

古文：显王三十五年
现代文：显王三十五年
English: Thirty-five years of Hsien Wang

古文：齐王、魏王会于徐州以相王。
现代文：齐王、魏王在徐州会面，互相尊称为王。
English: King Qi and King Wei met in Xuzhou and called each other "king."

古文：韩昭侯作高门，屈宜臼曰： 君必不出此门。
现代文：韩昭侯修建高大的宫门，屈宜臼说： 主公您一定出不了这个门。
English: When Han Zhaohong built the tall palace gate, Qu Yiusu said, "Master, you will not be able to get out of this gate."

古文：何也？
现代文：为什么呢？
English: What is it for?

古文：不时。
现代文：因为不合时宜。
English: Because it was not the right time.

古文：吾所谓时者，非时日也。
现代文：我所说的时宜，并不光指时间。
English: When I say timely, I don't just mean timely.

古文：夫人固有利、不利时。
现代文：大部分人都有顺利和不顺利的时候。
English: Most people have good days and bad days.

古文：往者君尝利矣，不作高门。
现代文：当年您曾经有十分顺利的时候，没有修建高大的门楼。
English: Back then, when things were going well for you, you didn't build a tall gatehouse.

古文：前年秦拔宜阳，今年旱，君不以此时恤民之急而顾益奢，此所谓时诎举赢者也。故曰不时。 
现代文：而去年秦国攻克了宜阳，今年旱灾又发生，这个时候不救助人民于危难之中，反而越发奢靡，这就是常常说的时势拮据而做法还宽裕，所以我说不合时宜。 
English: But last year, Qin conquered Yiyang, and this year droughts have occurred again. At this time, instead of rescuing the people in danger, it has become more and more extravagant. This is often said that the situation is tight and the approach is still generous, so I say it is not timely.

古文：越王无疆伐齐。
现代文：越王无彊进攻齐国。
English: Yue Wang attacked Qi without hesitation.

古文：齐王使人说之以伐齐不如伐楚之利，越王遂伐楚。
现代文：齐王派出使者游说，指出进攻齐国没有进攻楚国有利。于是越王就攻打楚国。
English: King Qi sent an envoy to lobby, pointing out that attacking Qi was not advantageous to attacking Chu. Therefore, King Yue attacked Chu.

古文：楚人大败之，乘胜尽取吴故地，东至于浙江。
现代文：楚国人击败了越王，又乘胜占领了以前吴国的土地，向东一直扩张到浙江。
English: The people of Chu defeated King Yue and took advantage of the victory to occupy the land of the former State of Wu, expanding eastward all the way to Zhejiang.

古文：越以此散，诸公族争立，或为王，或为君，滨于海上，朝服于楚。
现代文：从此越国土崩瓦解，王室贵族都争抢着自立为王，还有的人自封国君，散居在海边，向楚国俯首称臣。
English: From then on, the territory of Yue collapsed, and the royal aristocrats were all vying to establish themselves as kings. Others were self-appointed sovereigns, scattered along the coast, bowing their heads to the state of Chu and proclaiming themselves as its vassals.

古文：显王三十六年
现代文：显王三十六年
English: In the thirty-sixth year of King Hsien

古文：楚王伐齐，围徐州。
现代文：楚王攻打齐国，围困徐州。
English: King Chu attacked Qi and besieged Xuzhou.

古文：韩高门成，昭侯薨，子宣惠王立。
现代文：韩国高大的宫门建成，韩昭侯也逝世了，他的儿子即位，就是韩宣惠王。
English: Korea's tall palace gate was completed, Han Zhaohong also died, and his son, Han Xuan Hui Wang, ascended the throne.

古文：初，洛阳人苏秦说秦王以兼天下之术，秦王不用其言。苏秦乃去，说燕文公曰： 燕之所以不犯寇被甲兵者，以赵之为蔽其南也。
现代文：当初，洛阳人苏秦向秦王进献兼并天下的计划，秦王却不采纳，苏秦于是离去，又游说燕文公道： 燕国之所以不遭受侵犯和掠夺，是因为南面有赵国做挡箭牌。
English: At first, Su Qin, a Luoyang resident, proposed to King Qin a plan to annex the whole world, but King Qin did not accept it. So, Su Qin left and lobbied Yan Wen for justice: The reason why Yan's country was not invaded and plundered was because Zhao's country was to the south.

古文：且秦之攻燕也，战于千里之外；赵之攻燕也，战于百里之内。
现代文：秦国要想攻打燕国，必须远涉千里之外，而赵国要攻打燕国，只需行军百里以内。
English: If Qin wanted to attack Yan, it would have to go thousands of miles away, while if Zhao wanted to attack Yan, it would only have to march within a hundred miles.

古文：夫不忧百里之患而重千里之外，计无过于此者。
现代文：现在您不担忧眼前的灾患，反倒顾虑千里之外，办事情没有比这更错的了。
English: Now you do not worry about the immediate disaster, but worry about thousands of miles away. There is nothing more wrong with doing things.

古文：愿大王与赵从亲，天下为一，则燕国必无患矣。 
现代文：我希望大王您能与赵国结为亲密友邦，两国一体，则燕国可以无忧无虑了。 
English: I hope that you, the great king, can form a close friendship with Zhao Guo. If the two countries become one, then Yan Guo can have no worries.

古文：文公从之，资苏秦车马，以说赵肃侯曰： 当今之时，山东之建国莫强于赵，秦之所害亦莫如赵。
现代文：燕文公听从了苏秦的意见，给苏秦资助车马，去劝说赵肃侯。苏秦对赵肃侯说： 现在的时局，崤山以东的国家没有比赵国强盛的，最让秦国头疼的也是赵国。
English: Yan Wengong listened to Su Qin's advice and gave Su Qin financial support for chariots and horses to persuade Zhao Su Hou. Su Qin said to Zhao Su Hou: In the current situation, there is no country east of Lushan that is more prosperous than Zhao Guo, and it is Zhao Guo that is the biggest headache for Qin Guo.

古文：然而秦不敢举兵伐赵者，畏韩、魏之议其后也。
现代文：而秦国之所以一直不敢起兵攻打赵国，就是因为害怕韩国、魏国在背后打秦国的主意。
English: And the reason why Qin has always been afraid to attack Zhao is that it is afraid of the idea of South Korea and Wei attacking Qin behind its back.

古文：秦之攻韩、魏也，无有名山大川之限，稍蚕食之，傅国都而止。
现代文：秦国进攻韩国和魏国，没有山河险要的屏障，只要稍加蚕食，便可以直达国都。
English: If Qin attacked Han and Wei, there would be no famous mountains or rivers to block it. It would gradually encroach on them like a silkworm eating a mulberry leaf, until it approached the capitals of both countries.

古文：韩、魏不能支秦，必入臣于秦。秦无韩、魏之规则祸中于赵矣。
现代文：韩、魏不能抵抗秦国，只能臣服于秦国；秦国缺少了韩、魏两国的牵制，那么战火必然波及赵国。
English: Han and Wei could not resist Qin, they could only submit to Qin; if Qin lacked the restraint of Han and Wei, then the war would inevitably spread to Zhao.

古文：臣以天下地图案之，诸侯之地五倍于秦，料度诸侯之卒十倍于秦。
现代文：臣拿着天下的地图分析，诸侯各国的疆域五倍于秦国，各国军队的总数大概是秦国的十倍。
English: Taking a map of the world, the vassal analyzed that the territory of the vassal states was five times that of Qin, and the total number of armies of various countries was about ten times that of Qin.

古文：六国为一，并力西乡而攻秦，秦必破矣。
现代文：六国若是结为一体，齐心协力向西进攻秦国，秦国必然被攻破。
English: If the six countries unite as one and make a concerted effort to attack Qin in the west, Qin will inevitably be defeated.

古文：夫衡人者皆欲割诸侯之地以与秦，秦成则其身富荣，国被秦患而不与其忧，是以衡人日夜务以秦权恐愒诸侯，以求割地。
现代文：那些提倡连横的人，都想让各个诸侯国割地给秦国，秦国日渐强大，他们自己也可以富贵荣华，自己的国家被秦国侵略却没有一点忧患之心，因此天天拿着秦国的权势来恐吓诸侯，从而割让土地。
English: Those who advocate the continuation of the war all want to have the various vassal states cede land to Qin. Qin is becoming more and more powerful, and they themselves can be rich and glorious. Their own country has been invaded by Qin, but they do not have a bit of sorrow. Therefore, they use the power of Qin to intimidate the vassals every day, and thus cede land.

古文：故愿大王熟计之也！
现代文：希望大王一定要好好考虑啊！
English: I hope the king will think about it!

古文：窃为大王计，莫如一韩、魏、齐、楚、燕、赵为从亲以畔秦，令天下之将相会于洹水上，通质结盟，约曰： 秦攻一国，五国各出锐师，或桡秦，或救之。
现代文：我私下为您考虑，联合韩、魏、齐、楚、燕、赵六国合纵而背叛秦国是再好不过了，在洹水边召集各国的将相，互相交换人质，结成盟国，订立盟约说： 秦国进攻任何一国，其他五个诸侯国都要派出精锐军队，有的袭扰秦国，有的实施救援。
English: I have privately considered for you that it would be best to unite the six countries of Han, Wei, Qi, Chu, Yan and Zhao and betray Qin. Gather the generals of all countries at the edge of Surabaya, exchange hostages with each other, form an alliance, and conclude a covenant saying: If Qin attacks any country, the other five principalities will send elite troops, some to harass Qin, and some to carry out rescue.

古文：有不如约者，五国共伐之！ 
现代文：有不践行约定的，另外五国就一起讨伐它。 
English: If one country does not live up to the agreement, the other five countries will fight it together.

古文：诸侯从亲以摈秦，秦甲必不敢出于函谷以害山东矣。 
现代文：各诸侯国实行合纵来共同抵御秦国，秦国军队必定不敢再从函谷关出兵进攻崤山东边的各诸侯国了。 
English: All the vassal states joined together to resist Qin. The Qin army would no longer dare to attack the vassal states east of Mount Lushan from Hanyu Pass.

古文：肃侯大说，厚待苏秦，尊宠赐赉之，以约于诸侯。
现代文：赵肃侯听后特别高兴，赐给苏秦丰厚的赏赐和崇高的爵位，派他去联合各国诸侯。
English: After hearing this, Zhao Su Hou was particularly pleased and gave Su Qin a rich reward and a noble title, and sent him to unite the princes of all countries.

古文：会秦使犀首伐魏，大败其师四万馀人，禽将龙贾，取雕阴，且欲东兵。
现代文：这时秦国派犀首为大将攻打魏国，大败四万多魏军，活捉魏将龙贾，攻取雕阴，又要引兵东下。
English: At this time, Qin State sent the head of the rhinoceros as the general to attack Wei, defeated more than 40,000 Wei troops, captured Wei general Long Jia alive, captured Zhiyin, and wanted to lead the troops eastward.

古文：苏秦恐秦兵至赵而败从约，念莫可使用于秦者，乃激怒张仪，入之于秦。
现代文：苏秦担心秦兵到赵国会挫败联合各国的计划，盘算没有别人可以到秦国去用计，于是用激将法挑动张仪，前往秦国。
English: Su Qin was worried that the Qin soldiers would defeat the plan to unite the countries at the Zhao National Congress, and he thought that no one else could go to Qin to use the plan, so he used the method of exciting Zhang Yi to go to Qin.

古文：张仪者，魏人，与苏秦俱事鬼谷先生，学纵横之术，苏秦自以为不及也。
现代文：张仪，魏国人，早年和苏秦一起求学于鬼谷子先生，学习合纵连横的谋略，苏秦自认才能比不上张仪。
English: Zhang Yi, a native of the State of Wei, in her early years studied with Su Qin under the tutelage of Mr. Chiguizi, learning the stratagem of combining the vertical and horizontal. Su Qin believed that her talent was no match for Zhang Yi.

古文：仪游诸侯无所遇，困于楚，苏秦故召而辱之。
现代文：张仪到各国进行游说，不被君主赏识，落魄困于楚国，苏秦故意召见并羞辱他。
English: Zhang Yi went to various countries to lobby, was not appreciated by the monarch, was hopelessly trapped in Chu, and Su Qin deliberately summoned and humiliated him.

古文：仪怒，念诸侯独秦能苦赵，遂入秦。
现代文：张仪十分恼怒，考虑到各诸侯国只有秦国能与赵国抗衡，就前去秦国。
English: Zhang Yi was very angry, considering that only Qin could compete with Zhao, he went to Qin.

古文：苏秦阴遣其舍人赍金币资仪，仪得见秦王。
现代文：苏秦又私下里派门人带着黄金布帛资助张仪，张仪才见到秦王。
English: Su Qin also secretly sent a messenger with a golden cloth to subsidize Zhang Yi, and only then did Zhang Yi meet King Qin.

古文：秦王说之，以为客卿。
现代文：秦王十分喜欢张仪，让他做客卿。
English: King Qin liked Zhang Yi very much and made him the guest of honor.

古文：舍人辞去，曰： 苏君忧秦伐赵败从约，以为非君莫能得秦柄，故激怒君，使臣阴奉给君资，尽苏君之计谋也。 张仪曰： 嗟乎！
现代文：苏秦的门人临行前对张仪说： 苏秦害怕秦国进攻赵国会破坏合纵的计划，认为除了您以外没有能执掌秦国大权的人，因此把您惹怒，又让我暗中给您金钱布帛，这些都是苏秦的计策啊！ 张仪说： 唉！
English: Before leaving, Su Qin's gatekeeper said to Zhang Yi: Su Qin was afraid of Qin attacking Zhao's plan to sabotage the merger, and believed that there was no one other than you who could hold the power of Qin. Therefore, it was Su Qin's strategy to make you angry and have me secretly give you money. Zhang Yi said: Alas!

古文：此在吾术中而不悟，吾不及苏君明矣。
现代文：我中了人家的圈套还一点也不知道，很明显我比不上苏秦！
English: I fell into someone's trap and didn't even know it, it's obvious that I'm no match for Su Qin!

古文：为吾谢苏君，苏君之时，仪何敢言！ 
现代文：请替我谢谢苏秦，只要苏秦还在世，我决不说连横的策略。 
English: Please thank Su Qin for me. As long as Su Qin is still alive, I will never talk about the strategy of continuous improvement.

古文：于是苏秦说韩宣惠王曰： 韩地方九百馀里，带甲数十万，天下之强弓、劲弩、利剑皆从韩出。
现代文：于是苏秦又劝说韩宣惠王： 韩国方圆九百多里，有几十万甲士，天下的强弓、劲弩、利剑都产于韩国。
English: So Su Qin also persuaded Han Xuan Hui Wang: South Korea is more than nine hundred miles in circumference, with hundreds of thousands of soldiers. The world's strong bows, powerful crossbows, and sharp swords are all produced in South Korea.

古文：韩卒超足而射，百发不暇止。
现代文：韩国士兵双脚踏弩射箭，能连续百发以上。
English: South Korean soldiers can fire more than 100 arrows in a row by stepping on the crossbow with both feet.

古文：以韩卒之勇，被坚甲，跖劲弩，带利剑，一人当百，不足言也。
现代文：用这样勇猛的士兵，披上坚固的盔甲，张起强劲的弓弩，手持锋利宝剑，一个顶百个也不在话下。
English: With the bravery of Korean soldiers, wearing sturdy armor, stepping on a strong crossbow, and wearing a sharp sword, one person can resist hundreds of people.

古文：大王事秦，秦必求宜阳、成皋。今兹效之，明年又复求割地。
现代文：大王若是屈服秦国，秦国必定索要宜阳、成皋两城，现在满足了它，明年还会要割别的地。
English: If the great king were to give in to Qin, Qin would certainly demand the two cities of Yiyang and Chengdu. Now it has been satisfied, and next year it will want to divide the land.

古文：与则无地以给之，不与则弃前功，受后祸。
现代文：再给它已无地可给，不给又白费了以前的讨好，要蒙受后祸。
English: There is no room to give it any more, and if you don't give it, you have wasted the previous favor and will suffer the subsequent misfortune.

古文：且大王之地有尽而秦之求无已，以有尽之地逆无已之求，此所谓市怨结祸者也。
现代文：况且大王的地有限而秦国的贪欲无止，以有限的地来迎合无穷的贪求，这正是自找苦吃，没打一仗就丢了土地。
English: Moreover, the land of the great king was limited, but the greed of the Qin state was boundless. Using limited land to cater to endless greed was just asking for trouble. They lost the land without fighting a single battle.

古文：不战而地已削矣！鄙谚曰： 宁为鸡口，无为牛后。 
现代文：俗话说得好： 宁为鸡口，无为牛后。 
English: As the saying goes: It is better to be the chicken's mouth than the cow's hindquarters.

古文：夫以大王之贤，挟强韩之兵，而有牛后之名，臣窃为大王羞之。 
现代文：大王您这样贤明，拥有韩国的强兵，而落个尾从的名声，那时我也背地里要为您害羞了！ 
English: I am secretly ashamed of you, with your great wisdom and such a powerful army, yet you have the bad reputation of being a cowherd.

古文：韩王从其言。
现代文：韩王听从了苏秦的劝说。
English: Han Wang listened to Su Qin's persuasion.

古文：苏秦说魏王曰： 大王之地方千里，地名虽小，然而田舍、庐庑之数，曾无所刍牧。
现代文：苏秦又游说魏王： 大王的疆土地广千里，面积虽不算大，但是农田、村舍非常密集，几乎没有用来放牧的草地。
English: Su Qin also lobbied the Wei king: The Great King's territory is thousands of miles wide. Although the area is not large, the farmland and villages are very dense, and there is almost no grassland for grazing.

古文：人民之众，车马之多，日夜行不绝，輷輷殷殷，若有三军之众。
现代文：人口、车马的数量众多，日夜行走不曾断绝，声音轰轰隆隆，像三军部队一样。
English: The city is densely populated, there are many cars and horses, and they drive around day and night, in an endless stream, rumbling and rumbling, as if there were three soldiers.

古文：臣窃量大王之国不下楚。
现代文：我私下里估算大王的实力，不比楚国差。
English: Privately, I estimate the strength of the Great King to be no worse than that of Chu.

古文：今窃闻大王之卒，武士二十万，苍头二十万，奋击二十万，厮徒十万；车六百乘，骑五千匹，乃听于群臣之说，而欲臣事秦。
现代文：现在又听说大王的兵卒，有二十万武士、二十万苍头军、二十万精兵、十万杂役、六百辆战车、五千匹军马，却因为听信群臣的意见，想要向秦国屈服！
English: Now we hear that the great king's soldiers, consisting of two hundred thousand warriors, two hundred thousand cavalry, two hundred thousand elite soldiers, one hundred thousand non-commissioned officers, six hundred chariots, and five thousand horses, want to submit to the Qin state because they have listened to the opinions of their ministers!

古文：愿大王熟察之。故敝邑赵王使臣效愚计，奉明约，以大王之诏诏之。 
现代文：所以我们赵王派我为您献上计谋，奉上盟约，希望大王明断。 魏王采纳了苏秦的建议。
English: Therefore, we, King Zhao, sent me to offer you a strategy and a covenant, hoping that the great king would make a clear decision.

古文：魏王听之。苏秦说齐王曰： 齐四塞之国，地方二千馀里，带甲数十万，粟如丘山。
现代文：苏秦再游说齐王说： 齐国四面要塞，广袤二千余里，披甲士兵几十万，谷积如山。
English: Su Qin then lobbied the king of Qi and said, "The four fortresses of Qi cover a vast area of more than 2,000 miles, with hundreds of thousands of armored soldiers and mountains of valleys.

古文：三军之良，五家之兵，进如锋矢，战如雷霆，解如风雨。
现代文：精良的三军，郊外二十县的五都之兵，进攻像离弦利箭，作战如雷霆万钧，解散似风雨扫过。
English: Three excellent armies, the soldiers of five families united, the attack was as brave and swift as the blade of a sharp sword and the arrow of a good bow, the battle was as fierce as the thunder and fury, and the retreat dissipated as quickly as the wind and rain.

古文：即有军役，未尝倍泰山，绝清河，涉渤海也。
现代文：有了他们，即使遇到战事，也不用到泰山、清河、渤海一带去征兵。
English: With them, even if there is a war, there is no need to go to Taishan, Qinghe and the Bohai Sea to recruit soldiers.

古文：临菑之中七万户，臣窃度之，不下户三男子，不待发于远县，而临菑之卒固已二十一万矣。
现代文：临淄城里有七万户，以我的猜度，每户男子不下三人，不用到边远县乡去征发，仅临淄城里的人已够二十一万兵了。
English: There are seventy thousand households in Linyi City. According to my guess, there are no less than three men in each household. There is no need to go to outlying counties and townships for conscription. The people in Linyi City alone are enough for 210,000 soldiers.

古文：临菑甚富而实，其民无不斗鸡、走狗、六博、阘鞠。
现代文：临淄城富庶殷实，居民都斗鸡、赛狗、下棋、踢球。
English: Linyi City is rich and affluent, with residents involved in cockfighting, greyhound racing, chess and football.

古文：临菑之涂，车毂击，人肩摩，连衽成帷，挥汗成雨。
现代文：临淄的道路上，车多得互相碰撞，人多得摩肩接踵，衣服连起来成了帷帐，众人挥汗如同下雨。
English: On the roads of Linyi, more and more cars collide with each other, more and more people rub shoulders, clothes are connected to form curtains, and everyone is sweating like rain.

古文：夫韩、魏之所以重畏秦者，为与秦接境壤也。兵出而相当，不十日而战胜存亡之机决矣。
现代文：那韩国、魏国之所以十分害崐怕秦国，是因为与秦国接壤，出兵对阵，作战用不了十天，就到了存亡的生死关头。
English: The reason why Korea and Wei were so afraid of Qin was because they had a border with Qin and sent troops to fight against it. The battle lasted less than ten days, and it was a matter of life and death.

古文：韩、魏战而胜秦，则兵半折，四境不守；战而不胜，则国已危亡随其后。
现代文：韩国、魏国如果打败了秦国，自身也损伤过半，边境难守；如果败给秦国，那么紧接着国家就濒临危亡。
English: If Korea or Wei defeated Qin, they would lose more than half of their territory, and their borders would be difficult to defend. If they were defeated by Qin, their countries would be in danger of extinction.

古文：是故韩、魏之所以重与秦战而轻为之臣也。
现代文：所以韩国、魏国对与秦国作战十分慎重，常常表示屈服忍让。
English: As a result, Han and Wei countries did not dare to fight against Qin easily, but easily declared their allegiance to Qin.

古文：今秦之攻齐则不然。倍韩、魏之地，过卫阳晋之道，经乎亢父之险，车不得方轨，骑不得比行。
现代文：而秦国来攻齐国就不一样了，要背靠韩国、魏国的国土，经过卫国阳晋之路，再经过亢父的险隘，车辆、骑兵都难以并行。
English: However, it is not the same for Qin to attack Qi. It is necessary to rely on the land of Korea and Wei, pass through the path of defending Yangjin, and then pass through the perilous straits of Yifu. It is difficult for vehicles and cavalry to travel in parallel.

古文：百人守险，千人不敢过也。
现代文：只要有一百人守住险要，一千人也不敢通过。
English: As long as there are a hundred people guarding the pass, a thousand will not dare to pass.

古文：秦虽欲深入则狼顾，恐韩、魏之议其后也。是故恫疑、虚喝、骄矜而不敢进，则秦之不能害齐亦明矣。
现代文：秦国即使想驱兵深入，也要顾忌韩、魏两国在它背后的活动，所以它虽骄横，却又疑心重重，虚张声势而不敢冒进攻齐，以此而见，秦国难以危害齐国是明显的。
English: Even if Qin wanted to drive the troops deeper, it had to beware of the activities of South Korea and Wei behind it. Therefore, although it was arrogant, it was also suspicious and did not dare to attack Qi with bluff and bluster. Therefore, it was obvious that Qin would not be able to harm Qi.

古文：夫不深料秦之无奈齐何，而欲西面而事之，是群臣之计过也。
现代文：而你们不仔细考虑秦国对齐国的无可奈何，却要向西俯首称臣，这是齐国群臣的失策。
English: On the other hand, you do not carefully consider the helplessness of Qin against Qi, but you bow to the west and call yourself a minister. This is the blunder of Qi's ministers.

古文：今无臣事秦之名而有强国之宝，臣是故愿大王少留意计之。 
现代文：现在听我的建议，齐国可以免去屈服于秦国的卑名，而获得强国的实际利益，因此我希望大王您能留意划算一下！ 
English: Now listen to my suggestion, Qi can avoid succumbing to the lowly name of Qin and gain the actual benefits of a powerful country, so I hope you can pay attention to the cost-effective calculation!

古文：齐王许之。
现代文：齐王也应允了苏秦的建议。
English: King Qi also agreed to Su Qin's suggestion.

古文：乃西南说楚威王曰： 楚，天下之强国也，地方六千馀里，带甲百万，车千乘，骑万匹，粟支十年，此霸王之资也。
现代文：苏秦于是又向西南去游说楚威王说： 楚国是天下的强国，方圆六千多里，身披战甲的士兵有一百万，战车有一千辆，战马有一万匹，粮草足够十年的供应，这是成就霸王之业的资本。
English: Su Qin then went to the southwest to lobby King Chu Wei, saying: Chu is a powerful country in the world, with a radius of more than six thousand miles, a million soldiers in battle armor, a thousand chariots, ten thousand horses, and enough grain and grass to supply for ten years. This is the capital to achieve the industry of overpowering the king.

古文：秦之所害莫如楚，楚强则秦弱，秦强则楚弱，其势不两立。
现代文：秦国最大的忧患莫过于楚国，楚国强盛则秦国就衰弱，秦国强盛则楚国就衰弱，两国一向势不两立。
English: The biggest worry for Qin is Chu. When Chu is strong, Qin is weak. When Qin is strong, Chu is weak. The two countries have always been at odds.

古文：故为大王计，莫如从亲以孤秦。
现代文：因此我为大王谋划，没有比实行合纵而孤立秦国更好的办法了。
English: Therefore, I advise the great king to plan, it is better to make a long-term relationship, to isolate Qin.

古文：臣请令山东之国奉四时之献，以承大王之明诏。委社稷，奉宗庙，练士厉兵，在大王之所用之。
现代文：我可以号召崤山以东的各个诸侯国，按照四时的节令进献贡品，来遵循大王英明的命令；把他们的江山、宗庙都委托给大王您，厉兵秣马，整顿军队以供大王随时调遣。
English: I can call on all the principalities east of Mount Lushan to pay tribute in accordance with the four o'clock festival, to follow the great king's wise order; to entrust their provinces, ancestral temples to the great king, to strengthen the army, and to reorganize the army for the great king to dispatch at any time.

古文：故从亲则诸侯割地以事楚，衡合则楚割地以事秦。此两策者相去远矣，大王何居焉？ 
现代文：因此，合纵则诸侯各国都割让土地而侍奉楚国，实行连横的话楚国就要割地向秦国臣服，这两种策略相差千里之远，大王您要怎么选择呢？ 
English: Therefore, in the case of a vertical merger, all the vassal states would cede land to serve the state of Chu. In the case of a horizontal merger, the state of Chu would have to cede land to the state of Qin. These two strategies are thousands of miles apart. Great King, how would you choose?

古文：楚王亦许之。
现代文：楚王也采纳了苏秦的计策。
English: King Chu also adopted Su Qin's strategy.

古文：于是苏秦为从约长，并相六国，北报赵，车骑辎重拟于王者。
现代文：于是苏秦成为主持六国联盟的纵约长，兼任六国的国相。他北归赵国复命时，车马随从之多，可与王君相比。
English: As a result, Su Qin became the chairman of the Six-Nation Alliance, and also served as the Minister of State of the Six Nations. When he returned to Zhao Province, he was accompanied by so many horses and chariots that he could be compared to Wang Jun.

古文：齐威王薨，子宣王辟疆立；知成侯卖田忌，乃召而复之。
现代文：齐威王逝世，他的儿子田辟疆即位，即齐宣王。宣王知道成侯邹忌出卖了田忌，就把田忌召回来，给他官复原职。
English: After the death of King Qiwei, his son Tian Bi Jia ascended to the throne, that is, King Qi Xuan. When King Xuan learned that Cheng Hou Yi Ji had betrayed Tian Ji, he recalled Tian Ji and reinstated him as an official.

古文：燕文公薨，子易王立。
现代文：燕国燕文公去世，其子即位为燕易王。
English: Yanwen Gong of Yan State died, and his son ascended to the throne as Yan Yi Wang.

古文：卫成侯薨，子平侯立。
现代文：卫国的卫成侯去世，他的儿子即位为平侯。
English: Wei Chenghou, the protector of the country, passed away, and his son Tsu was enthroned as the Prince of Peace.

古文：显王三十七年
现代文：显王三十七年
English: In the thirty-seventh year of King Hen

古文：秦惠王使犀首欺齐、魏，与共伐赵，以败从约。
现代文：秦惠王派犀首强迫齐国和魏国与秦国联合出兵进攻赵国，借此来破坏各国合纵的盟约。
English: Qin Hui Wang sent the head of the rhinoceros to force Qi and Wei and Qin to jointly send troops to attack Zhao, thereby destroying the alliance between the countries.

古文：赵肃侯让苏秦，苏秦恐，请使燕，必报齐。
现代文：赵肃侯呵斥苏秦，苏秦非常恐慌，要求派他出使燕国，要报复齐国。
English: Zhao Su Hou rebuked Su Qin. Su Qin was very panicked and asked him to send an envoy to Yan Province to take revenge on Qi Province.

古文：苏秦去赵而从约皆解。
现代文：然而苏秦刚刚离开赵国，合纵的盟约就完全崩解。
English: After Su Qin left Zhao, the alliance disintegrated.

古文：赵人决河水以灌齐、魏之师，齐、魏之师乃去。
现代文：赵国掘开黄河堤防，引河水灌入齐、魏两国军队阵中，齐、魏联军才从赵国撤离。
English: Zhao dug up the Yellow River embankment and diverted the water into the army lines of Qi and Wei. Only then did the Qi and Wei allied forces withdraw from Zhao.

古文：魏以阴晋为和于秦，实华阴。
现代文：魏国献出阴晋向秦国求和，阴晋实际上就是华阴。
English: Wei offered Yin Jin to sue for peace with Qin. Yin Jin was actually Hua Yin.

古文：齐王伐燕，取十城，已而复归之。
现代文：齐王发兵进攻燕国，攻占十座城池，没过多久又还给了燕国。
English: King Qi sent an army to attack Yan Province, captured ten cities, and soon returned it to Yan Province.

古文：显王三十九年
现代文：显王三十九年
English: In the 39th year of King Hsien

古文：秦伐魏，围焦、曲沃。
现代文：秦国进攻魏国，包围焦和曲沃两地。
English: Qin attacked Wei and besieged Jiao and Quwo.

古文：魏入少梁、河西地于秦。
现代文：魏国把少梁、河西两地割让给秦国。
English: Wei ceded Shaoliang and Hexi to Qin.

古文：显王四十年
现代文：显王四十年
English: Hsien Wang's Forty Years of Singing

古文：秦伐魏，渡河，取汾阴、皮氏，拔焦。
现代文：秦国进攻魏国，越过黄河，攻占了汾阴、皮氏，攻克了焦。
English: Qin attacked Wei, crossed the Yellow River, conquered Yin and Pi, and conquered Jiao.

古文：楚威王薨，子怀王槐立。
现代文：楚国楚威王去世，其子槐即位为楚怀王。
English: King Chu Wei of the State of Chu died, and his son Zou ascended the throne as King Chu Huai.

古文：宋公剔成之弟偃袭攻剔成。剔成奔齐，偃自立为君。
现代文：宋公宋剔成的弟弟宋偃偷袭剔成，剔成逃奔到齐国，宋偃自立为王。
English: Song Gong, the younger brother of Song Erchen, sneaked up on Song Erchen and fled to Qi. Song Erchen became king.

古文：显王四十一年
现代文：显王四十一年
English: The 41st year of King Hsien Wang

古文：秦公子华、张仪帅师围魏蒲阳，取之。
现代文：秦国公子华和张仪带领军队围困魏国蒲阳城，攻占蒲阳。
English: Qin's princes Hua and Zhang Yi led the army to besiege Wei's Puyang City and capture Puyang.

古文：张仪言于秦王，请以蒲阳复与魏，而使公子繇质于魏。
现代文：张仪向秦王建议，把蒲阳再归还给魏国，又把公子繇送到魏国做人质。
English: Zhang Yi suggested to the Qin King to return Puyang to Wei and to send Gongzi Yao to Wei as a hostage.

古文：仪因说魏王曰： 秦之遇魏甚厚，魏不可以无礼于秦。 
现代文：张仪因此向魏王游说道： 秦国对待魏国如此优厚，魏国对秦国可不能不讲礼义。 
English: Therefore, Zhang Yi said to Wei Wangyou: Qin treated Wei so well that Wei could not but be polite to Qin.

古文：魏因尽入上郡十五县以谢焉。
现代文：于是魏国把上郡十五县割让给秦国作为答谢。
English: As a result, the State of Wei ceded 15 counties of Shang County to the State of Qin as a thank you.

古文：张仪归而相秦。
现代文：张仪回到秦国担任了秦国的宰相。
English: Zhang Yi returned to Qin and became the prime minister of Qin.

古文：显王四十二年
现代文：显王四十二年
English: The 42nd year of King Hsien

古文：秦县义渠，以其君为臣。
现代文：秦国设置义渠县，原来的国君成为秦王的臣子。
English: Qin established Yiqu County, and the former sovereign became a vassal of King Qin.

古文：秦归焦、曲沃于魏。
现代文：秦国归还焦城、曲沃给魏国。
English: Qin returned Jiaocheng and Quwo to Wei.

古文：显王四十三年
现代文：显王四十三年
English: The 43rd year of King Hsien Wang

古文：赵肃侯薨，子武灵王立。置博闻师三人，左、右司过三人，先问先君贵臣肥义，加其秩。
现代文：赵国赵肃侯去世，其子即位为赵武灵王；设置 博闻师 的官职三人，又设左、右司过的官职三人。即位后先问候先王的贵臣肥义，增加了他的俸禄。
English: Zhao Su Hou of Zhao died, and his son ascended to the throne as King Zhao Wuling; three official positions of scholars were set up, and three official positions of left and right officers were set up. After the enthronement, he first greeted the former king's noblemen Huiyi and increased his salary.

古文：显王四十四年
现代文：显王四十四年
English: In the 44th year of King Hsien

古文：夏，四月，戊午，秦初称王。
现代文：夏季，四月，戊午，秦国君首次称王。
English: In the summer, in April, at noon, Qin Guojun became king for the first time.

古文：卫平侯薨，子嗣君立。
现代文：卫平侯逝世，他的儿子嗣君继承王位。
English: Prince Weiping died, and his son, Prince He, succeeded to the throne.

古文：卫有胥靡亡之魏，因为魏王之后治病。
现代文：卫国有个囚犯跑到魏国，给魏王的王后治病。
English: There was a prisoner of the imperial guard who went to Wei to cure the queen of the Wei king.

古文：嗣君闻之，使人请以五十金买之。五反，魏不与，乃以左氏易之。
现代文：嗣君听说了这件事，想用五十斤黄金把他买回来，前前后后派了五次使者，魏国都没有答应，于是就打算用左氏城来换。
English: When the prince heard about this, he wanted to buy him back with fifty catties of gold. He sent five emissaries back and forth, but Wei did not agree, so he planned to exchange Zuo Shi Cheng.

古文：左右谏曰： 夫以一都买一胥靡，可乎？ 
现代文：身边的臣子进谏说： 拿一座城池来换一个囚犯，合适吗？ 
English: The courtier next to him said, "Is it appropriate to exchange a castle for a prisoner?"

古文：嗣君曰： 非子所知也。
现代文：嗣君说： 这你们就不知道了！
English: The heir said: You don't know that!

古文：夫治无小，乱无大。
现代文：治理国家不放过一点一滴的小事，就不容易出大的乱子。
English: It is not easy to make a big mess if you do not let go of every little thing in governing the country.

古文：法不立，诛不必，虽有十左氏，无益也。
现代文：法令不能保证实施，该杀的没有杀，就算有十个左氏城也没有什么用处。
English: There is no guarantee that the decree will be implemented, and even if there are ten Zuo Shi Cheng, it is of no use.

古文：法立，诛必，失十左氏，无害也。 
现代文：法制森严，刑罚得以贯彻，即便丢失十个左氏城，也没什么关系！ 
English: The legal system is strict, punishments are carried out, and even if ten Zuozhicheng are lost, it doesn't matter!

古文：魏王闻之曰： 人主之欲，不听之不祥。 
现代文：魏王听说了这件事，说： 这是卫国国君的愿望，不听从不太合适。 
English: When the Wei King heard about this, he said, "This is the wish of the Emperor, and it is not proper to disobey it."

古文：因载而往，徒献之。
现代文：于是就把那个囚犯送回卫国，没有任何其他要求。
English: As a result, the prisoners were loaded into a car and taken to the capital, where they were handed over to the Emperor at no cost.

古文：显王四十五年
现代文：显王四十五年
English: Hsien Wang's forty-five years

古文：秦张仪帅师伐魏，取陕。
现代文：秦国派张仪带领军队攻打魏国，占领陕地。
English: Qin sent Zhang Yi to lead the army to attack Wei and occupy Shaanxi.

古文：苏秦通于燕文公之夫人，易王知之。
现代文：苏秦与已故燕文公的夫人私通，被燕易王发现。
English: Su Qin had an affair with the late Yan Wengong's wife, which was discovered by Yan Yi Wang.

古文：苏秦恐，乃说易王曰： 臣居燕不能使燕重，而在齐则燕重。 
现代文：苏秦十分恐惧，于是对燕易王说： 我留在燕国不能使燕国变得重要，而我要是在齐国，可以设法增强燕国的力量。 
English: Su Qin was very afraid, so he said to Yan Yi Wang: If I stay in Yan Guo, I cannot make Yan Guo important, but if I stay in Qi Guo, I can try to strengthen the power of Yan Guo.

古文：易王许之。乃伪得罪于燕而奔齐，齐宣王以为客卿。
现代文：易王同意了，苏秦便伪装得罪燕国逃奔齐国，齐宣王留他崐做客卿。
English: Yi Wang agreed, and Su Qin disguised himself as Yan Guo and fled to Qi Guo. Qi Xuan Wang kept him as a guest.

古文：苏秦说齐王高宫室，大苑囿，以明得意，欲以敝齐而为燕。
现代文：苏秦鼓动齐王增高宫殿、扩大林园，显示齐王的地位，想借此来削弱齐国的财力，为燕国效劳。
English: Su Qin encouraged the king of Qi to increase the height of the palace and expand the forest garden, showing the status of the king of Qi. He wanted to use this to weaken the financial resources of Qi and serve Yan.

古文：显王四十六年
现代文：显王四十六年
English: The 46th year of King Hsien

古文：秦张仪及齐、楚之相会啮桑。
现代文：秦国张仪与齐国、楚国的国相在啮桑举行会议。
English: Zhang Yi of Qin held a meeting with the ministers of Qi and Chu in Wuxang.

古文：韩、燕皆称王，赵武灵王独不肯，曰： 无其实，敢处其名乎？ 
现代文：韩国、燕国国君都以王自称，唯独赵武灵王不愿意称王，他说： 我还没有称王的实力，怎么能享有王的名号呢？ 
English: South Korea and the King of Yan all claimed to be kings, but King Zhao Wuling did not want to be called a king. He said, "I do not yet have the strength to be called a king. How can I enjoy the title of king?"

古文：令国人谓己曰君。
现代文：命令赵国百姓称自己为君。
English: ordered the people of Zhao to call themselves "jun."

古文：显王四十七年
现代文：显王四十七年
English: The 47th year of King Hsien

古文：秦张仪自啮桑还而免相，相魏。欲令魏先事秦而诸侯效之，魏王不听。
现代文：秦国张仪从桑回来后，被免除了宰相的职位，担任魏国的宰相，想逼迫魏国第一个向秦国俯首称臣，让诸侯各国效法魏国，魏王没有听从。
English: After Zhang Yi of Qin returned from San, he was relieved of the post of prime minister and assumed the post of prime minister of Wei. He wanted to force Wei to be the first to bow down to Qin and become a vassal, so that the vassal states would follow the example of Wei. The Wei king did not listen.

古文：秦王伐魏，取曲沃、平周。复阴厚张仪益甚。
现代文：于是秦国发兵进攻魏国，攻取曲沃、平周，暗地里对张仪的待遇更加优厚。
English: As a result, Qin sent troops to attack Wei, capturing Quwo and Ping Zhou, and secretly treated Zhang Yi more generously.

古文：显王四十八年
现代文：显王四十八年
English: The 48th year of King Hsien

古文：王崩，子慎靓王定立。
现代文：周显王驾崩，他的儿子姬定即位，即周慎靓王。
English: Zhou Xian Wang passed away, and his son Ji Ding ascended to the throne, that is, Zhou Shensheng Wang.

古文：燕易王薨，子哙立。
现代文：燕国燕易王去世，其子姬哙即位。
English: King Yan Yi of the State of Yan died, and his son, Hsi Ye, ascended the throne.

古文：齐王封田婴于薛，号曰靖郭君。
现代文：齐王把田婴封到薛地，号称靖郭君。
English: King Qi sent Tian Ying to Xue Di, known as Jing Guo Jun.

古文：靖郭君言于齐王曰： 五官之计，不可不日听而数览也。 
现代文：靖郭君向齐王说： 大臣提出的建议，每天都应该细心听取，仔细阅览。 
English: Jing Guo Jun said to King Qi: The suggestions made by the minister should be carefully listened to and carefully read every day.

古文：王从之。已而厌之，悉以委靖郭君。
现代文：齐王按照他的建议实行，没过多久就感觉腻烦了，于是把国家大事全权委托给靖郭君。
English: King Qi followed his suggestion and soon felt bored, so he entrusted the national affairs to Jing Guo Jun.

古文：靖郭君由是得专齐之权。
现代文：从此以后，靖郭君独掌齐国的大权。
English: From then on, Jing Guo became the sole ruler of the country.

古文：靖郭君欲城薛，客谓靖郭君曰： 君不闻海大鱼乎？
现代文：靖郭君想在薛建城，一个幕客对他劝阻说： 您没有看到海里的大鱼吗？
English: When Jing Guo Jun wanted to build a city in Xue Jiancheng, a guest in the tent dissuaded him, saying, "Don't you see the big fish in the sea?

古文：网不能止，钩不能牵，荡而失水，则蝼蚁制焉。
现代文：海网罩不住它，鱼钩也牵不住它，然而它一离开海水，连小小蚂蚁也可以制它于死地。
English: The nets cannot cover it, the hooks cannot hold it, but as soon as it leaves the sea, even tiny ants can kill it.

古文：今夫齐，亦君之水也。
现代文：今天的齐国，就是您的汪洋大海。
English: Today's Qi Province is your vast ocean.

古文：君长有齐，奚以薛为！
现代文：您能长期掌握住齐国，又要薛城做什么！
English: If you can control Qi Province for a long time, what do you want Xuecheng to do?

古文：苟为失齐，虽隆薛之城到于天，庸足恃乎？ 
现代文：如果失去齐国大权，即使把薛城城墙砌到天上，也保不住自己！ 
English: If you lose the supreme power of Qi, even if you build the city wall of Xue to the sky, you will not be able to save yourself!

古文：乃不果城。
现代文：靖郭君于是放弃了扩建计划。
English: Jing Guo then abandoned the expansion plan.

古文：靖郭君有子四十馀人，其贱妾之子曰文。
现代文：靖郭君有四十个儿子，其中有一个卑贱的小妾所生的孩子叫作田文。
English: Jing Guo-kun had forty sons, one of whom was a child called Tianwen, born to a lowly concubine.

古文：文通傥饶智略，说靖郭君以散财养士。
现代文：田文风流倜傥，又有智略，他劝说靖郭君广施钱财，蓄养一批读书人。
English: He persuaded Jing Guo Jun to spend a lot of money and raise a group of readers.

古文：靖郭君使文主家待宾客，宾客争誉其美，皆请靖郭君以文为嗣。
现代文：靖郭君就让田文主持家务，负责接待宾客，宾客们都互相称赞田文的优点，都提议立田文为接班人。
English: Jing Guo asked Tian Wen to take charge of the housework and to be responsible for receiving guests. The guests all praised the merits of Tian Wen to each other and suggested that Tian Wen be appointed as his successor.

古文：靖郭君卒，文嗣为薛公，号曰孟尝君。
现代文：靖郭君逝世，田文继位为薛公，号称孟尝君。
English: After the death of Jing Guo, Tian Wen was succeeded by Xue Gong, known as Meng Yaojun.

古文：孟尝君招致诸侯游士及有罪亡人，皆舍业厚遇之，存救其亲戚。
现代文：他招揽各诸侯国的游历士人以及触犯法律而逃亡的才人，给他们修建房舍、建立家业，待遇十分优厚，还救助他们的家属亲戚。
English: He recruited wanderers from various provinces as well as talented people who broke the law and fled, built houses for them, established family businesses, treated them very well, and also helped their families and relatives.

古文：食客常数千人，各自以为孟尝君亲己。由是孟尝君之名重天下。
现代文：孟尝君的府内常有食客数千人，他们都认为孟尝君对待自己十分亲和，因此孟尝君的美名天下皆知。
English: There are often thousands of diners in Meng Yakun, and they all think that Meng Yakun treats them very kindly, so Meng Yakun's reputation is known all over the world.

古文：臣光曰：君子之养士，以为民也。
现代文：臣司马光说：君子蓄养士人，是为了天下万民。
English: Sima Guang, a courtier, said, "It is for the sake of all the people in the world that a gentleman nurtures and raises a scholar."

古文：《易》曰： 圣人养贤，以及万民。 
现代文：《易经》上说： 圣人蓄养贤才，造福天下百姓。 
English: In the I Ching, it says: The sages accumulate and nurture talents to benefit the people of the world.

古文：夫贤者，其德足以敦化正俗，其才足以顿纲振纪，其明足以烛微虑远，其强足以结仁固义。
现代文：一个贤德的人，他的德行能够使教化敦厚，匡正民风民俗；他的才能能够整顿朝廷纲纪；他的聪明才智能够观察到细微的东西，又能做长远的打算；他的能力可以团结笼络仁义之士。
English: A virtuous person, his virtue can enlighten the people and rectify the folk customs; his talent can rectify the imperial discipline; his intelligence can observe the subtle things and can make long-term plans; his ability can unite the people of benevolence.

古文：大则利天下，小则利一国。
现代文：大的方面可以造福天下，小的方面可以造福一国百姓。
English: Large aspects can benefit the world, small aspects can benefit the people of a country.

古文：是以君子丰禄以富之，隆爵以尊之。
现代文：因此对于君子要给他丰厚的俸禄，让他富足；给他高贵的爵位，让他处于尊贵的地位。
English: Therefore, for a gentleman, he should be given a rich salary to make him rich; he should be given a noble title to put him in an honorable position.

古文：养一人而及万人者，养贤之道也。
现代文：蓄养一个人使天下万民都受益，这才是蓄养贤士的真谛所在。
English: Nurturing a person benefits everyone in the world. This is the true meaning of nurturing sages.

古文：今孟尝君之养士也，不恤智愚，不择臧否，盗其君之禄，以立私党，张虚誉，上以侮其君，下以蠹其民，是奸人之雄也，乌足尚哉！
现代文：如今孟尝君养士，不分才智愚笨，不论好坏，盗用国君用作俸禄的钱财，来营结自己的党羽，夸大虚美名誉，对上欺侮君王，对下私侵民财，这真是个大奸贼，有什么值得推崇歌颂的！
English: Nowadays, Meng Yuqun cultivates scholars, regardless of talent and stupidity, no matter how good or bad, embezzles the money and wealth used by the country's ruler as a salary, to build up his own party, exaggerates the false and beautiful reputation, bullies the king on the one hand, and invades the people's wealth on the other hand. This is really a big thief, and there is nothing worth praising!

古文：《书》曰： 受为天下逋逃主、萃渊薮。 
现代文：《尚书》上说： 殷纣王是全天下逃犯的窝藏者，他的身边是贼人的藏匿地。 
English: "Shangshu" said: King Yinqian is the one who harbors fugitives from all over the world, and his side is the hiding place of thieves.

古文：此之谓也。
现代文：这也是说孟尝君这样的人啊。
English: This is exactly what is happening.

古文：孟尝君聘于楚，楚王遗之象床。
现代文：孟尝君到楚国访问，楚王赠给他象牙床。
English: When Meng Yuqun visited the State of Chu, King Chu presented him with an ivory bed.

古文：登徒直送之，不欲行，谓孟尝君门人公孙戌曰： 象床之直千金，苟伤之毫发，则卖妻子不足偿也。
现代文：楚王让登徒直先把象牙床护送回去，登徒直不愿意去，对孟尝君的食客公孙戌说： 这象牙床价值千金，万一有丝毫的损伤，即便把妻儿卖了也偿还不起。
English: King Chu asked Deng Tuo to escort the ivory bed back first. Deng Tuo did not want to go, and said to Meng Yu's diner, Gongsun Yao: This ivory bed is worth a lot of money. If there is the slightest damage, even if I sell my wife and children, I cannot repay it.

古文：足下能使仆无行者，有先人之宝剑，愿献之。 
现代文：如果你能让我免去这次护送的任务，我愿意把祖先留下来的宝剑赠送给你。 
English: If you can spare me the escort, I'll give you the sword my ancestors left me.

古文：公孙戌许诺，入见孟尝君曰： 小国所以皆致相印于君者，以君能振达贫穷，存亡继绝，故莫不悦君之义，慕君之廉也。
现代文：公孙戌答应了，进宫拜见孟尝君说： 那些小国都让您做宰相，是因为您能够救穷助困，使处于生死存亡境地的人得以保全下去，因此大家无不敬仰你的高义，钦慕您清廉的为人。
English: Gongsun Yao agreed and went to the palace to see Meng Yaojun and said, "Those small countries have made you prime minister because you are able to save the poor and help the needy, so that people who are in a life-or-death situation can be preserved. Therefore, everyone admires your high righteousness and admires your integrity.

古文：今始至楚而受象床，则未至之国将何以待君哉！ 孟尝君曰： 善。 
现代文：现在你刚到楚国就收下了象牙床，那么其他还没有去的国家，又该怎么来款待先生呢？ 孟尝君说： 说得好。 
English: Now that you have just arrived in Chu and received the ivory bed, how should other countries that have not yet visited come to entertain you? Meng Qijun said: Well said.

古文：遂不受。
现代文：于是没有接受象牙床。
English: He finally refused to accept it.

古文：公孙戌趋去，未至中闺，孟尝君召而反之，曰： 子何足之高，志之扬也？ 
现代文：公孙戌快步退出去，还没有走到中门，就又被孟尝君召回，说： 你那么趾高气扬干吗？ 
English: Gongsun Yao quickly retreated, and before he reached the middle gate, he was called back by Meng Yaojun, who said, "Why are you so arrogant?

古文：公孙戌以实对。
现代文：公孙戌把实情告诉了孟尝君。
English: Gongsun Yao told Meng Yaojun the truth.

古文：孟尝君乃书门版曰： 有能扬文之名，止文之过，私得宝于外者，疾入谏！ 
现代文：于是孟尝君在门板上张贴公告： 有谁能够帮我彰显名声，帮助我制止过错，即便私下里收受别人的礼物，也希望及时进谏！ 
English: So Meng Yatjun posted a notice on the door board: Who can help me highlight my reputation, help me stop my mistakes, and even if I accept gifts from others in private, I hope to get into trouble in time!

古文：臣光曰：孟尝君可谓能用谏矣。
现代文：臣司马光曰：孟尝君可以算是能虚心接受意见的人了。
English: Minister Sima Guang said: Meng Yaojun can be regarded as a person who can humbly accept opinions.

古文：苟其言之善也，虽怀诈谖之心，犹将用之，况尽忠无私以事其上乎！《诗》云： 采葑采菲，无以下体。 
现代文：只要提的意见对，即使是别有用心，他也予以采纳，更何况那些毫无私心的尽忠之言呢！《诗经》写道： 采集蔓菁，采集土瓜，根好根坏不要管它。 
English: As long as the suggestions are right, even if they have ulterior motives, he will adopt them, not to mention those selfless words of devotion! "Song of Songs" wrote: "Collect cranberries, collect cucumbers, root well, root bad, leave it alone."

古文：孟尝君有焉。
现代文：孟尝君是做到了这种兼容并包的雅度。
English: Meng Tanjun has achieved this kind of inclusive elegance.

古文：韩宣惠王俗两用公仲、公叔为政，问于缪留。对曰： 不可。晋用六卿而国分，齐简公用陈成子及阚止而见杀，魏用犀首、张仪而西河之外亡。今君两用之，其多力者内树党，其寡力者藉外权。群臣有内树党以骄主，有外为交以削地，君之国危矣！ 
现代文：韩宣惠王想同时用公仲、公叔两人执政，问缪留意见，缪留说： 不可以，晋国用六卿而国家分裂；齐简公用陈成子和阚止却被杀，魏国用犀首、张仪而西河之外的土地丢失，现在君王要同时用两个人执政，两人中势力大的会在国内树立党羽，势力小的会借助国外势力，群臣中有的在国内树立党羽，有的通过削地来结交外国，君王的国家就危险了。 
English: Han Xuan Hui Wang wanted to use Gongzhong and Gongzhuang to govern at the same time. He asked Miusu for advice. Miusu said, "No, Jin used the Six Lords to divide the country; Qi Jian used Chen Chengzi and Xuan Hui, but they were killed; Wei used Rhino Head and Zhang Yi, but the land outside the West River was lost. Now the king wants to use two people to govern at the same time. The more powerful of the two will establish the party in the country, and the less powerful will use foreign forces. Some of the courtiers will establish the party in the country, and some will make friends with foreign countries by

