古文：黄帝问曰：合人形以法四时五行而治，何如而从？
现代文：黄帝问道：结合人体五脏之气的具体情况，取法四时五行的生克制化规律，作为救治疾病的法则，怎样是顺从呢？
English: Huangdi asked: combined with the specific situation of the human body's five viscera, how to take the four-hour and five-line law of restraint, as the law of curing diseases, how to obey?

古文：何如而逆？
现代文：怎样是悖逆呢？
English: What is rebellion?

古文：得失之意，愿闻其事！
现代文：我想了解治法中的从逆和得失是怎么一会事。
English: I'd like to know what the pros and cons of the treatment are.

古文：岐伯对曰：五行者，金木水火土也。更贵更贱，以知死生，以决成败，而定五脏之气，间甚之时，死生之期也。
现代文：岐伯回答说：五行就是金、木、水、火、土，表现在时令气候，有生克衰旺的更迭变化，依据这些变化，可以测知疾病的死生，决定医疗的成败，进而确定五脏之气的盛衰、疾病轻重的时间，以及死生的日期。
English: Qi Bo replied: The five elements are gold, wood, water, fire and earth. They are manifested in the seasonal climate. There are alternating changes of life and death. According to these changes, it is possible to detect the life and death of the disease, determine the success or failure of medical treatment, and then determine the rise and fall of the five internal organs, the severity of the disease, and the date of death.

古文：帝曰：愿卒闻之。
现代文：黄帝说：我想听你详尽地讲一讲。
English: Huang Di said, "I hope you can tell me everything in detail."

古文：岐伯曰：肝主春，足厥阴、少阳主治。
现代文：岐伯说：肝属木、旺于春，肝与胆互为表里，春天是足厥阴肝经和足少阳胆经主治的时间。
English: Qi Bo said: The liver is a tree and flourishes in spring. The liver and the gallbladder are on the same level. Spring is the time for the administration of the Yin-Yang-Yang and Yang-Yang-Yang.

古文：其日甲乙。肝苦急，急食甘以缓之。
现代文：甲乙属木，足少阳胆经主甲木，足厥阴肝经主乙木，所以肝胆旺日为甲乙。
English: A and B are trees. The foot is less yang and the gallbladder is more yang and the foot is more yin and the liver is more yang and the liver is more yang and the gallbladder is more yang and the gallbladder is more yang.

古文：心主夏，手少阴、太阳主治。
现代文：肝在志为怒，怒则气急，甘味能缓急，故宜急食甘以缓之。
English: The liver is angry in aspiration, anger is impatient, and sweetness can be delayed, so it is advisable to eat quickly and eat slowly.

古文：其日丙丁。心苦缓，急食酸以收之。脾主长夏，足太阴、阳明主治。
现代文：心属火，旺于夏，心与小肠互为表里，夏天是手少阴心经和手太阳小肠经主治的时间。
English: The heart is fire. It is strong in the summer. The heart and the small intestine are inside each other. The summer is the time for the main treatment of the Hand-Small Yin Heart Sutra and the Hand-Sun Small Intestine Sutra.

古文：其日戊己。脾苦湿，急食苦以燥之。
现代文：丙丁属火，手少阴心经主丁火，手太阳小肠经主丙火，所以心与小肠的旺日为丙丁。
English: The heart and small intestine are fire, and the heart and small intestine are fire, so the heart and small intestine are fire.

古文：肺主秋，手太阴、阳明主治。其日庚辛。
现代文：庚辛属金，手太阴肺经主辛金，手阳明大肠经主庚金，所以肺与大肠的旺日为庚辛。
English: Genghis Khan is gold, the hands are too yin, the lungs are mainly yin, and the hands are too yang, the large intestine is mainly yang, so the lungs and the large intestine are hot.

古文：肺苦气上逆，急食苦以泄之。
现代文：肺主气，其性清肃，若气上逆则肺病，苦味能泄，故宜急食苦以泄之。
English: The lung is the main source of qi, its nature is pure, if it is contrary to qi, it is lung disease, bitterness can be released, so it is advisable to eat quickly to release it.

古文：肾主冬，足少阴、太阳主治。
现代文：肾属水，旺于冬，肾与膀胱互为表里，冬天是足少阴肾经与足太阳膀胱经主治的时间。
English: Kidney belongs to water. It is in full bloom in winter. Kidney and bladder are inside each other. Winter is the time for the main treatment of foot-shadow kidney and foot-sun bladder.

古文：其日壬癸。肾苦燥，急食辛以润之，开腠理，致津液，通气也。
现代文：壬癸属水，足少阴肾经主癸水，足太阳膀胱经主壬水，所以肾与膀胱的旺日为壬癸。肾为水脏，喜润而恶燥，故宜急食辛以润之。如此可以开发腠理，运行津液，宣通五脏之气。
English: Ren is water, the foot is small, the kidney is through the main body of water, and the foot is the sun, the bladder is through the main body of water, so the kidney and the bladder have a good day for Ren. The kidney is watery, moist and dry, so it is advisable to eat spicy food to moisturize it. In this way, it is possible to develop the body, run the body fluid, and promote the five viscera.

古文：病在肝，愈于夏，夏不愈，甚于秋，秋不死，持于冬，起于春，禁当风。
现代文：肝脏有病，在夏季当愈，若至夏季不愈，到秋季病情就要加重，如秋季不死，至冬季病情就会维持稳定不变状态，到来年春季病即好转，但此时要注意千万不能遭受风邪。
English: If the liver is diseased, it will get better in summer. If it does not get better by summer, it will get worse by autumn. If it does not die by autumn, it will remain stable and unchanged by winter. Next spring, the disease will get better, but at this time, be careful not to catch a cold.

古文：肝病者，愈在丙丁，丙丁不愈，加于庚辛，庚辛不死，持于壬癸，起于甲乙。
现代文：患有肝病的人，愈于丙丁日，如果丙丁日不愈，到庚辛日病就加重，如果庚辛日不死，到壬癸日病情就会维持稳定不变状态，到了甲乙日病即好转。
English: For people with liver disease, the more days they have, the more severe the disease will be. If they do not have enough days, the disease will get worse. If they do not die, the disease will remain stable and unchanged. If they do not die, the disease will get better.

古文：肝病者，平旦慧，下晡甚，夜半静。
现代文：患肝病的人，在早晨的时候精神清爽，傍晚的时候病就加重，到半夜时便安静下来。
English: People with liver disease are refreshed in the morning, get worse in the evening, and calm down by midnight.

古文：肝欲散，急食辛以散之，用辛补之，酸泻之。
现代文：肝木性喜条达而恶抑郁，故肝病急用辛味以散之，若需要补，以辛味补之；若需要泻，以酸味泻之。
English: Hepatic woody merry-go-round is full of evil and depression, so the liver disease urgently uses the pungent taste to dissipate, if it needs to be supplemented, it is supplemented with the pungent taste; if it needs to be diarrhea, it is diarrhea with the sour taste.

古文：病在心，愈在长夏，长夏不愈，甚于冬，冬不死，持于春，起于夏，禁温食、热衣。
现代文：心脏有病，愈于长夏，若至长夏不愈，到了冬季病情就会加重，如果在冬季不死，到了明年的春季病情就会维持稳定不变状态，到了夏季病即好转，但此时要注意应禁忌温热食物，衣服也不能穿的太暖。
English: If you have heart disease, it will last longer than the summer. If you don't get better until the summer, the disease will get worse in winter. If you don't die in winter, the disease will remain stable in the spring of next year. In summer, the disease will get better, but at this time, you should pay attention to the fact that warm food should be prohibited, and clothes should not be too warm.

古文：心病者，愈在戊己，戊己不愈，加于壬癸，壬癸不死，持于甲乙，起于丙丁。
现代文：患有心病的人，愈于戊已日，如果戊已日不愈，到壬癸日病就加重，如果在壬癸日不死，到甲乙日病情就会维持稳定不变状态，到丙丁日病即好转。
English: For people with heart disease, if the number of days passed is more than the number of days passed, if the number of days passed is not more than the number of days passed, the disease will be aggravated by the number of days passed, if the number of days passed is not less than the number of days passed, the disease will remain stable and unchanged by the number of days passed, and the disease will get better by the number of days passed.

古文：心病者，日中慧，夜半甚，平旦静。
现代文：心脏有病的人，在中午的时候神情爽慧，半夜时病就加重，早晨时便安静了。
English: People with heart disease look refreshed at midday, worse at midnight, and calmer in the morning.

古文：心欲软，急食咸以软之，用咸补之，甘泻之。
现代文：心病欲柔软，宜急食咸味以软之，若需要补，以咸味补之；若需要泻，以甘味泻之。
English: The desire of heart disease is soft, it is advisable to eat salty food with softness. If you need to supplement, supplement with salty food; if you need to have diarrhea, supplement with sweet food.

古文：病在脾，愈在秋，秋不愈，甚于春，春不死，持于夏，起于长夏，禁温食饱食、湿地濡衣。
现代文：脾脏有病，愈于秋季，若至秋季不愈，到春季病就加重，如果在春季不死，到夏季病情就会维持稳定不变状态，到长夏的时间病即好转，但此时要注意应禁忌吃温热性食物、饮食过饱、居湿地、穿湿衣等。
English: If the spleen is diseased, it will get worse in the autumn. If it does not get better by the autumn, it will get worse in the spring. If it does not die in the spring, the condition will remain stable and unchanged in the summer. By the time of the long summer, the disease will get better. However, at this time, it should be noted that it is forbidden to eat warm food, overeat, live in wetlands, wear wet clothes, etc.

古文：脾病者，愈在庚辛，庚辛不愈，加于甲乙，甲乙不死，持于丙丁，起于戊己。
现代文：患有脾病的人，愈于庚辛日，如果在庚辛日不愈，到甲乙日加重，如果在甲乙日不死，到丙丁日病情就会维持稳定不变状态，到了戊已日病即好转。
English: If a person with spleen disease does not get better on the day of Gengxin, it will get worse on the day of Jia Yi. If the person does not die on the day of Jia Yi, the disease will remain stable and unchanged on the day of Hnding. If the person does not get better on the day of Gensin, it will get worse on the day of Jia Yi. If the person does not die on the day of Jia Yi, the disease will remain stable and unchanged on the day of Hnding. If the person does not die on the day of Gensin, it will get better on the day of Gensin.

古文：脾病者，日昳慧，日出甚，下晡静。
现代文：患有脾病的人，在午后的时间精神清爽，日出时病就加重，傍晚时便安静了。
English: People who suffer from spleen disease are refreshed in the afternoon. The disease worsens at sunrise and calms down in the evening.

古文：脾欲缓，急食甘以缓之，用苦泻之，甘补之。
现代文：脾脏病需要缓和，甘能缓中，故宜急食甘味以缓之，若需要泻，用苦味泻之；若需要补，以甘味补之。
English: Spleen disease needs to be alleviated, and sweetness can be alleviated, so it is advisable to eat sweetness quickly to alleviate it. If it needs to be relieved, it should be relieved with bitterness; if it needs to be supplemented, it should be supplemented with sweetness.

古文：病在肺，愈在冬，冬不愈，甚于夏，夏不死，持于长夏，起于秋，禁寒饮食、寒衣。
现代文：肺脏有病，愈于冬季，若至冬季不愈，到夏季病就加重，如果在夏季不死，至长夏时病情就会维持稳定不变状态，到了秋季病即好转，但此时要注意应禁忌寒冷饮食及穿的太单薄。
English: The lungs are diseased. The more the winter, if the winter does not heal, the worse the disease will be in the summer. If you do not die in the summer, the disease will remain stable and unchanged in the long summer. The disease will get better in the fall. However, at this time, it should be noted that cold diet and wearing too thin should be prohibited.

古文：肺病者，愈在壬癸，壬癸不愈，加于丙丁，丙丁不死，持于戊己，起于庚辛。
现代文：患有肺病的人，愈于壬癸日，如果在壬癸日不愈，到丙丁日病就加重，如果在丙丁日不死，到戊已日病情就会维持稳定不变状态，到了庚辛日，病即好转。
English: If a person with lung disease does not get better on the day of Yin, the disease will get worse on the day of Yin. If he does not die on the day of Yin, the disease will remain stable and unchanged on the day of Yin. On the day of Yin, the disease will get better.

古文：肺病者，下晡慧，日中甚，夜半静。
现代文：患有肺病的人，傍晚的时候精神爽慧，到中午时病就加重，到半夜时便安静了。
English: People with lung disease are in good spirits in the evening, become more ill at noon, and are quiet by midnight.

古文：肺欲收，急食酸以收之，用酸补之，辛泻之。
现代文：肺气欲收敛，宜急食酸味以收敛，若需要补，用酸味补之；若需要泻，用辛味泻之。
English: Lung qi desire to converge, it is advisable to quickly eat sour taste to converge. If you need to supplement, supplement it with sour taste; if you need to have diarrhea, relieve it with spicy taste.

古文：病在肾，愈在春，春不愈，甚于长夏，长夏不死，持于秋，起于冬，禁犯焠㶼热食、温炙衣。
现代文：肾脏有病，愈于春季，若至春季不愈，到长夏时病就加重，如果在长夏不死，到秋季病情就会维持稳定不变状态，到冬季病即好转，但此时要注意应禁食火烧烤的过热食物和穿着经过火烘干的衣服。
English: If the kidney is diseased, it will get worse in the spring, and if it does not get better in the spring, it will get worse in the long summer. If it does not die in the long summer, the condition will remain stable and unchanged in the autumn, and the disease will get better in the winter. However, at this time, it should be noted that the overheated food grilled on the fire and the clothes dried on the fire should be avoided.

古文：肾病者，愈在甲乙，甲乙不愈，甚于戊己，戊己不死，持于庚辛，起于壬癸。
现代文：患有肾病的人，愈于甲乙日，如果在甲乙日不愈，到戊己日病就加重，如果在戊己日不死，到庚辛日病情就会维持稳定不变状态，到壬癸日病即好转。
English: For people with kidney disease, if it is more than the second day, if it does not go away on the second day, the disease will worsen on the third day, if it does not die on the third day, the disease will remain stable and unchanged on the fourth day, and the disease will get better on the fifth day.

古文：肾病者，夜半慧，四季甚，下晡静。
现代文：患有肾病的人，在半夜的时候精神爽慧，在一日当中辰、戌、丑、未四个气温转换的时辰病情加重，在傍晚时便安静了。
English: People with kidney disease are refreshed in the middle of the night, and their condition is aggravated in the middle of the day when the temperature changes from hot to cold and from cold to hot, and quiet in the evening.

古文：肾欲坚，急食苦以坚之，用苦补之，咸泻之。
现代文：肾主秘藏，其气欲坚，宜急食苦味以坚之，若需要补，用苦味补之；若需要泻，用咸味泻之。
English: The kidney is the main secret, its qi is strong, it is advisable to eat bitter with strong qi, if you need to supplement, supplement it with bitter; if you need diarrhea, use salty diarrhea.

古文：夫邪气之客于身也，以胜相加，至其所生而愈，至其所不胜而甚，至于所生而持，自得其位而起。必先定五脏之脉，乃可言间甚之时，死生之期也。
现代文：总之，邪气侵袭人体，都是以强凌弱，到了脏腑所生的时候病情就可以痊愈，到了脏腑被克制的时候病情就会加重，到了脏腑转旺的时间病情就稳定不变，到了脏腑旺盛的时间病情就会好转。但必须先明确五脏各自的平脉，然后才能推测疾病的轻重时间及死生的日期。
English: In short, evil spirits invade the human body, all with strength over weakness. When the viscera are born, the disease can be cured. When the viscera are restrained, the disease will worsen. When the viscera are strong, the disease will be stable. When the viscera are strong, the disease will get better. However, it is necessary to first clarify the flat veins of each of the five organs, and then the severity of the disease and the date of death can be estimated.

古文：肝病者，两胁下痛引少腹，令人善怒。虚则目䀮䀮无所见，耳无所闻，善恐，如人将捕之。
现代文：肝脏有病，则两肋下疼痛牵引少腹，使人多怒，这是肝气实的症状；如果肝气虚，则出现两目昏花而视物不明，两耳也听不见声音，多恐惧，好像有人要逮捕他一样。
English: If the liver is diseased, the pain under the two ribs pulls the abdomen and makes people angry, which is a symptom of the liver. If the liver is weak, the eyes will be dizzy and the sight will be unclear, the ears will not hear the sound, and there will be more fear, as if someone is going to arrest him.

古文：取其经，厥阴与少阳。
现代文：针灸治疗时，取用足厥阴肝经和足少阳胆经的经穴。
English: In acupuncture treatment, the meridian points of the foot-jue-yin-liver meridian and the foot-shao-yang-bile meridian are used.

古文：气逆则头痛，耳聋不聪，颊肿，取血者。
现代文：如肝气上逆，则头痛、耳聋而听觉失灵、颊肿，应取厥阴、少阳经脉，刺其出血。
English: If the liver qi is on the contrary, then the headache, deafness and hearing failure, cheek swelling, should take Jueyin, Shaoyang meridians, prick its bleeding.

古文：心病者，胸中痛，胁支满，胁下痛，膺背肩甲间痛，两臂内痛。
现代文：心脏有病，则出现胸中痛，肋部支撑胀满，肋下痛，胸膺部、背部及肩胛间疼痛，两臂内侧疼痛，这是心气实的症状。
English: If the heart is diseased, there will be pain in the middle of the chest, swelling of the rib support, pain under the ribs, pain in the sternum, back and shoulder girdle, pain in the inner side of both arms, which is a symptom of a strong heart.

古文：虚则胸腹大，胁下与腰相引而痛。
现代文：心气虚的症状，则出现胸腹部胀大，肋下和腰部牵引作痛。
English: The symptoms of qi deficiency are enlarged chest and abdomen, and pain in the lower ribs and lower back.

古文：取其经，少阴、太阳，舌下血者。
现代文：针灸治疗时，取手少阴心经和手太阳小肠经的经穴，并刺舌下之脉以出其血。
English: During acupuncture treatment, the acupoints of the Shao Yin Heart Chakra and the Sun Small Intestine Chakra are pricked, and the veins under the tongue are pricked to release their blood.

古文：其变病，刺郄中血者。
现代文：如病情有变化，与初起不同，刺委中穴出血。
English: If there is a change in the condition, different from the initial onset, there will be bleeding in the middle of the puncture.

古文：脾病者，身重，善饥肉痿，足不收，行善瘛，脚下痛。
现代文：脾脏有病，则出现身体沉重，易饥，肌肉痿软无力，两足弛缓不收，行走时容易抽搐，脚下疼痛，这是脾气实的症状。
English: If the spleen is diseased, the body will be heavy, easy to starve, the muscles will be limp and weak, the legs will not relax, it will be easy to twitch when walking, and the feet will be painful, which is a symptom of temper.

古文：虚则腹满，肠鸣飧泄，食不化。
现代文：脾气虚的症状，则腹部胀满，肠鸣，泄下而食物不化。
English: The symptoms of a bad temper are a bloated abdomen, rumbling bowels, passing gas and not digesting food.

古文：取其经，太阴、阳明、少阴血者。
现代文：针灸治疗时，取足太阴脾经、足阳明胃经和足少阴肾经的经穴，刺其出血。
English: During acupuncture and moxibustion treatment, the acupoints of the foot-too-yin spleen meridian, foot-yang-bright stomach meridian, and foot-less-than-yin kidney meridian are taken and pricked for bleeding.

古文：肺病者，喘咳逆气，肩背痛，汗出，尻阴股膝髀腨胻足皆痛。
现代文：肺脏有病，则喘咳气逆，肩背部疼痛，出汗，尻、阴、股、膝、髀骨、足等部皆疼痛，这是肺气实的症状。
English: If the lungs are diseased, then the wheezing and coughing are reversed, the shoulder and back pain, sweating, pain in the buttocks, genitals, thighs, knees, shins, feet and other parts are all painful, which is a symptom of lung stiffening.

古文：虚则少气，不能报息，耳聋嗌干。
现代文：肺气虚的症状，则出现少气，呼吸困难而难于接续，耳聋，咽干。
English: The symptoms of pulmonary qi deficiency include shortness of breath, difficulty in breathing, deafness, and dry throat.

古文：取其经，太阴、足太阳之外，厥阴内血者。
现代文：针灸治疗时，取手太阴肺经、足太阳膀胱经外侧的经穴，以及足厥阴肝经内侧的经穴，刺其出血。
English: During acupuncture and moxibustion treatment, the hand is used to prick the external meridian of the yin lung meridian, the external meridian of the foot-sun-bladder meridian, and the internal meridian of the foot-jowl-yin-liver meridian, causing bleeding.

古文：肾病者，腹大，胫肿，喘咳，身重，寝汗出憎风。
现代文：肾脏有病，则腹部胀大，胫部浮肿，气喘，咳嗽，身体沉重，睡后出汗，恶风，这是肾气实的症状。
English: If the kidneys are diseased, the abdomen will swell, the hips will be swollen, asthma, cough, heavy body, sweating after sleep, bad wind, this is a symptom of kidney vitality.

古文：虚则胸中痛，大腹小腹痛，清厥意不乐。
现代文：肾气虚的症状，则出现胸中疼痛，大腹和小腹疼痛，四肢厥冷，心中不乐。
English: The symptoms of kidney qi deficiency include pain in the chest, pain in the abdomen and lower abdomen, coldness in the limbs, and unhappiness in the heart.

古文：取其经，少阴、太阳血者。
现代文：针灸治疗时，取足少阴肾经和足太阳膀胱经的经穴，刺其出血。
English: During acupuncture treatment, the acupoints of the Shao Yin Renal and the Shao Sun Bladder meridians are taken and pricked for bleeding.

古文：肝色青，宜食甘，粳米、牛肉、枣、葵皆甘。
现代文：肝合青色，宜食甘味，粳米、牛肉、大枣、葵菜都是属于味甘的。
English: Liver is blue, suitable for eating sweet, glutinous rice, beef, jujube, sunflower are all sweet.

古文：心色赤，宜食酸，小豆、犬肉、李、韭皆酸。
现代文：心合赤色，宜食酸味，小豆、狗肉、李子、韭菜都是属于酸味的。
English: Heart-shaped red, suitable for sour food, red beans, dog meat, plums, leeks are all sour.

古文：肺色白，宜食苦，麦、羊肉、杏、薤皆苦。
现代文：肺合白色，宜食苦味，小麦、羊肉、杏、薤白都是属于苦味的。
English: Lung is white, suitable for eating bitterness. Wheat, mutton, apricots and sorrel are all bitter.

古文：脾色黄，宜食咸，大豆、豕肉、栗、藿皆咸。
现代文：脾合黄色，宜食咸味，黑豆、猪肉、板栗、藿菜都是属于咸味的。
English: The spleen is yellow and salty, and black beans, pork, chestnuts, and leeks are all salty.

古文：肾色黑，宜食辛，黄黍、鸡肉、桃、葱皆辛。
现代文：肾合黑色，宜食辛味，黄黏米、鸡肉、桃、葱都是属于辛味的。
English: Kidney is black, suitable for spicy food, yellow sticky rice, chicken, peach, spring onion are all spicy.

古文：辛散，酸收，甘缓，苦坚，咸软。
现代文：五味的功用：辛味能发散，酸味能收敛，甘味能缓急，苦味能坚燥，咸味能软坚。
English: The functions of the five tastes: pungent taste can diffuse, sour taste can converge, sweet taste can slow down, bitter taste can be hard, and salty taste can be soft and hard.

古文：毒药攻邪，五谷为养，五果为助，五畜为益，五菜为充。
现代文：药物的偏性可用来攻逐病邪，五谷用以充养五脏之气，五果帮助五谷以营养人体，五畜用以补益五脏，五菜用以充养脏腑。
English: The partiality of the medicine can be used to attack and chase the disease, the grain can be used to nourish the five internal organs, the five fruits can help the grain to nourish the human body, the five animals can be used to replenish the five internal organs, and the five vegetables can be used to nourish the internal organs.

古文：气味合而服之，以补精益气。
现代文：气味和合而服食，可以补益精气。
English: The combination of smell and food can replenish qi.

古文：此五者有辛酸甘苦咸，各有所利，或散或收，或缓或急，或坚或软。
现代文：这五类食物，各有辛、酸、甘、苦、咸的不同气味，各有利于某一脏气，或散、或收、或缓、或急、或坚、或软。
English: Each of these five types of food has a different smell, such as spicy, sour, sweet, bitter, and salty, and each is conducive to a certain foul breath, either loose, or close, or slow, or quick, or hard, or soft.

古文：四时五脏，病随五味所宜也。
现代文：在运用的时候，要根据春、夏、秋、冬四时，结合五脏之气的偏盛偏衰等具体情况，各随其所宜而用之。
English: When using it, it is necessary to use it according to the spring, summer, autumn and winter seasons, combined with the specific conditions such as the prevalence and decline of the five internal organs, and use it as appropriate.

