古文：穰侯魏冄者，秦昭王母宣太后弟也。
现代文：穰侯魏冉，是秦昭王母亲宣太后的弟弟。
English: Gong Hou Wei Ran was the younger brother of Qin Zhao Wang's mother, Empress Dowager Xuan.

古文：其先楚人，姓羋氏。
现代文：他的祖先是楚国人，姓芈。
English: His ancestor was a native of Chu, surnamed Wu.

古文：秦武王卒，无子，立其弟为昭王。
现代文：秦武王死后，没有儿子，所以立他的弟弟为国君，就是昭王。
English: After the death of King Qinwu, he had no son, so he appointed his younger brother, King Zhao, as the ruler of the country.

古文：昭王母故号为羋八子，及昭王即位，羋八子号为宣太后。
现代文：昭王的母亲原是宫内女官称为芈八子，等到昭王即位，芈八子被尊为宣太后。
English: The mother of King Zhao was originally a court lady known as Zhaobaxi. When King Zhao ascended the throne, Zhaobaxi was revered as Empress Dowager.

古文：宣太后非武王母。
现代文：宣太后并不是武王的生母。
English: Empress Dowager Xuan was not King Wu's real mother.

古文：武王母号曰惠文后，先武王死。
现代文：武王的母亲是惠文后，在武王去世之前就已经死了。
English: King Wu's mother was Huiwen, and she died before King Wu passed away.

古文：宣太后二弟：其异父长弟曰穰侯，姓魏氏，名厓；同父弟曰羋戎，为华阳君。
现代文：宣太后有两个弟弟：她的异父长弟叫穰侯，姓魏，名冉；她的同父弟弟叫芈戎，就是华阳君。
English: Empress Dowager Xuan had two younger brothers: her eldest half-brother was named Zhou Hou, surnamed Wei, surnamed Ran; her younger half-brother was named Zhou Rong, that is, Hua Yang Jun.

古文：而昭王同母弟曰高陵君、泾阳君。
现代文：昭王还有两个同母弟弟：一个叫高陵君，一个叫泾阳君。
English: Zhao Wang also has two younger brothers from the same mother: one is named Gao Lingjun, and the other is named Shenyangjun.

古文：而魏厓最贤，自惠王、武王时任职用事。
现代文：诸多人中，魏冉最为贤能，从惠王、武王时期即已任职掌权。
English: Among many people, Wei Ran was the most capable. He had been in power since the time of King Hui and King Wu.

古文：武王卒，诸弟争立，唯魏厓力为能立昭王。
现代文：武王死后，他的弟弟们争相继承王位，只有魏冉得力能干，拥立了昭王。
English: After the death of King Wu, his younger brothers vied to inherit the throne. Only Wei Ran, who was very capable, supported King Zhao.

古文：昭王即位，以厓为将军，卫咸阳。
现代文：昭王即位后，便任命魏冉为将军，守卫咸阳。
English: After the enthronement of King Zhao, he appointed Wei Ran as a general to guard Xianyang.

古文：诛季君之乱，而逐武王后出之魏，昭王诸兄弟不善者皆灭之，威振秦国。
现代文：他曾经平定了季君公子壮及一些大臣们的叛乱，并且把武王后驱逐到魏国，昭王的那些兄弟中有图谋不轨的全部诛灭，魏冉的声威一时震动秦国。
English: He once quelled the rebellion of Ji Jun Junzi Zhuang and some ministers, and expelled Queen Wu to Wei. Among the brothers of King Zhao, there were those who plotted to ruin everything. Wei Ran's prestige shook Qin for a while.

古文：昭王少，宣太后自治，任魏厓为政。
现代文：当时昭王年纪还轻，宣太后亲自主持朝政，让魏冉执掌大权。
English: At that time, King Zhao was still young, and Empress Dowager Xuan personally presided over the government, leaving Wei Ran in charge.

古文：昭王七年，樗里子死，而使泾阳君质於齐。
现代文：昭王七年，樗里子死去，秦国派泾阳君到齐国作人质。
English: In the seventh year of the reign of King Zhao, Qilian Zi died, and Qin State sent Ziyang to Qi as a hostage.

古文：赵人楼缓来相秦，赵不利，乃使仇液之秦，请以魏厓为秦相。
现代文：赵国人楼缓来秦国任相，这对赵国显然不利，于是赵国派仇液到秦国游说，请求让魏冉担任秦国丞相。
English: Zhao Guozhenrou was slow to assume the post of minister of Qin, which was obviously unfavorable to Zhao, so Zhao sent Qianye to Qin to lobby and request Wei Ran to serve as Qin's prime minister.

古文：仇液将行，其客宋公谓液曰： 秦不听公，楼缓必怨公。
现代文：仇液即将出发，他的门客宋公对仇液说： 假如秦王不听从您的劝说，楼缓必定怨恨您。
English: When Qianye was about to set out, his protégé Song Gong said to Qianye: "If Qin Wang does not listen to your persuasion, Lou Ye will certainly resent you."

古文：公不若谓楼缓曰 请为公毋急秦 。
现代文：您不如对楼缓说 请为您打算，我劝说秦王任用魏冉为相将会有所保留。 
English: You might as well say to the building, please plan for you, I will have some reservations about persuading the Qin King to appoint Wei Ran as his consort.

古文：秦王见赵请相魏厓之不急，且不听公。
现代文：秦王见赵国使者请求任用魏冉并不急切，必感奇怪，就不会听从您的建议。
English: It must be strange for the Qin king to see that the Zhao envoy's request to appoint Wei Ran is not urgent, and he will not listen to your suggestion.

古文：公言而事不成，以德楼子；事成，魏厓故德公矣。 
现代文：您这么说了，如果事情不成功，秦王乃用楼缓为相，您会得到楼缓的好感；如果事情成功了，秦王任用魏冉为相，那么魏冉就会感激您了。
English: As you said, if things don't work out and the King of Qin appoints Wei Ran as his consort, you will gain favor with him; if things work out and the King of Qin appoints Wei Ran as his consort, then Wei Ran will be grateful to you.

古文：於是仇液从之。
现代文：于是，仇液听从了宋公的意见。
English: As a result, Qiu Yu listened to Song Gong's advice.

古文：而秦果免楼缓而魏厓相秦。
现代文：秦国果然罢免了楼缓，让魏冉做了丞相。
English: As expected, the State of Qin dismissed Lou Ye and made Wei Ran the prime minister.

古文：欲诛吕礼，礼出奔齐。
现代文：秦昭王要诛杀吕礼，吕礼逃到齐国。
English: Qin Zhao Wang wanted to kill Lü Li, but Lü Li fled to Qi.

古文：昭王十四年，魏厓举白起，使代向寿将而攻韩、魏，败之伊阙，斩首二十四万，虏魏将公孙喜。
现代文：昭王十四年，魏冉举用白起为将军，派他代替向寿领兵攻打韩国和魏国，在伊阙战败了它们，斩敌二十四万人，俘虏了魏将公孙喜。
English: In the fourteenth year of King Zhao, Wei Ran Ho used Bai as a general and sent him to attack Korea and Wei in place of Xiang Shou, defeated them in Ili, killed 240,000 enemies, and captured Wei general Gong Sunxi.

古文：明年，又取楚之宛、叶。
现代文：第二年，又夺取了楚国的宛、叶两座城邑。
English: In the following year, they also captured the two towns of Wan and Ye in Chu.

古文：魏厓谢病免相，以客卿寿烛为相。
现代文：此后，魏冉托病免职，秦王任用客卿寿烛为丞相。
English: After that, Wei Ranto was relieved of his duties due to illness, and King Qin appointed Hakka Emperor Shoucheng as chancellor.

古文：其明年，烛免，复相厓，乃封魏厓於穰，复益封陶，号曰穰侯。
现代文：第二年，寿烛被免职，又起用魏冉任丞相，于是赐封魏冉于穰地，后来又加封陶邑，称为穰侯。
English: In the second year, Shuzeng was removed from his post, and Wei Ran was appointed as chancellor. Therefore, Wei Ran was given the title of Shunde, and later he was also given the title of Tawu, known as Shuhou.

古文：穰侯封四岁，为秦将攻魏。
现代文：穰侯受封四年后，担任秦国将领率兵攻打魏国。
English: Four years after he received the title, Yan Hou served as the general of Qin and led the troops to attack Wei.

古文：魏献河东方四百里。
现代文：魏国被迫献出河东方圆四百里的土地。
English: Wei was forced to give up four hundred miles of land east of the river.

古文：拔魏之河内，取城大小六十馀。
现代文：其后，他又占领了魏国的河内地区，夺取了大小城邑六十余座。
English: After that, he occupied the Hanoi region of Wei and seized more than sixty cities and towns.

古文：昭王十九年，秦称西帝，齐称东帝。
现代文：昭王十九年，由魏冉操持，秦昭王自称西帝，尊齐湣王为东帝。
English: In the 19th year of King Zhaozhou, led by Wei Ran, King Qin Zhaozhou claimed to be the Western Emperor, while King Zizhi was the Eastern Emperor.

古文：月馀，吕礼来，而齐、秦各复归帝为王。
现代文：过了一个多月，吕礼又来到秦国，齐、秦两国国君取消了帝号仍旧称王。
English: After more than a month, Luli came to Qin again. The sovereigns of Qi and Qin abolished the imperial title and still called themselves kings.

古文：魏厓复相秦，六岁而免。
现代文：魏冉再度出任秦国丞相，六年后被免职了。
English: Wei Ran again became the Minister of the Qin Dynasty, but was dismissed six years later.

古文：免二岁，复相秦。
现代文：被罢免二年，第三次出任秦国丞相。
English: Two years after being removed from office, he became the third Minister of Qin.

古文：四岁，而使白起拔楚之郢，秦置南郡。
现代文：四年以后，魏冉派白起攻取了楚国的郢都，秦国设置了南郡。
English: Four years later, the Wei-Ran faction captured the capital of Chu and the Qin set up Nan County.

古文：乃封白起为武安君。
现代文：于是赐封白起为武安君。
English: As a result, he was given the title of Buanjun.

古文：白起者，穰侯之所任举也，相善。
现代文：白起，是穰侯所举荐的将军，两人关系很好。
English: Baiqi was the general recommended by Yan Hou, and the two had a good relationship.

古文：於是穰侯之富，富於王室。
现代文：当时，穰侯的财富，甚至超过了国君之家。
English: At that time, the wealth of the vassal lord even exceeded that of the sovereign's family.

古文：昭王三十二年，穰侯为相国，将兵攻魏，走芒卯，入北宅，遂围大梁。
现代文：秦昭王三十二年，穰侯任相国，带兵攻打魏国，使魏将芒卯战败而逃，进入北宅，随即包围了魏国都城大梁。
English: In the 32nd year of the reign of Qin Zhao Wang, Yan Hou was appointed as a foreign minister, and led an army to attack Wei, causing Wei general Meng Wu to be defeated and flee, enter the North House, and then surrounded the capital city of Wei, Dalian.

古文：梁大夫须贾说穰侯曰： 臣闻魏之长吏谓魏王曰： 昔梁惠王伐赵，战胜三梁，拔邯郸；赵氏不割，而邯郸复归。
现代文：魏国大夫须贾劝说穰侯道： 我听魏国的一位长吏对魏王说： 从前梁惠王攻打赵国，取得了三梁，攻下了邯郸；而赵王虽然战败也不肯割地，后来邯郸终于被收复。
English: Su Jia, a doctor of Wei, persuaded Zou Hou: I heard one of the officials of Wei say to the king of Wei: Once upon a time, Liang Hui attacked Zhao, captured Sanliang, and took Zhou; Zhao, although defeated, did not want to cut the land, and later Zhou was finally recovered.

古文：齐人攻卫，拔故国，杀子良；卫人不割，而故地复反。
现代文：齐国人攻打卫国，攻下了国都楚丘，杀死了子良；而卫人即使受辱也决不割地，后来丧失的国都仍归卫人所有。
English: The people of Qi attacked the defenders of the country, captured the capital of the country, Chu Qiu, and killed Ziliang; and the defenders, even if they were humiliated, would never cut the ground, and the country that was later lost still belonged to the defenders.

古文：卫、赵之所以国全兵劲而地不并於诸侯者，以其能忍难而重出地也。
现代文：卫、赵两国之所以国家完整，军队强劲，土地不被诸侯兼并，就是因为他们能够忍受苦难，爱惜自己的每一寸土地。
English: The reason why the two countries of Wei and Zhao have a complete country, a strong army, and the land is not annexed by the princes is because they can endure hardships and cherish every inch of their land.

古文：宋、中山数伐割地，而国随以亡。
现代文：宋国、中山国屡遭进犯又屡次割地，结果国家随即灭亡。
English: The Song and Zhongshan dynasties were repeatedly invaded and their lands repeatedly divided, with the result that the states soon perished.

古文：臣以为卫、赵可法，而宋、中山可为戒也。
现代文：我认为卫国、赵国的做法值得效仿，而宋国、中山国的做法则当引以为戒。
English: I think that the practices of the states of Wei and Zhao are worth emulating, while the practices of the states of Song and Zhongshan should be cautioned against.

古文：秦，贪戾之国也，而毋亲。
现代文：秦国是个贪婪无厌，凶恶暴戾的国家，切勿不要跟它太过接近。
English: Don't get too close to Qin, it's an insatiably greedy, vicious and violent country.

古文：蚕食魏氏，又尽晋国，战胜暴子，割八县，地未毕入，兵复出矣。
现代文：它蚕食魏国，吞尽原属晋国之地，战胜韩将暴鸢后，割取八个县之多，土地来不及全部并入，军队又再次出动了。
English: It encroached on the state of Wei, swallowed up the land that originally belonged to the state of Jin, and after defeating the Han general, it cut off as many as eight counties. The land was too late to be fully incorporated, and the army was once again dispatched.

古文：夫秦何厌之有哉！
现代文：秦国哪里有满足的时候呢？
English: Where is there any time of contentment in Qin?

古文：今又走芒卯，入北宅，此非敢攻梁也，且劫王以求多割地。
现代文：现在又使芒卯败逃，进入了北宅，这并不是他们想要进攻魏都，而是威胁大王要求多多割让土地。
English: Now they have made Meng Yu escape and entered the North House. This is not because they want to attack the Wei capital, but to threaten the great king and demand more land from him.

古文：王必勿听也。
现代文：大王切勿接受它的要求。
English: The Great King must not accept its demands.

古文：今王背楚、赵而讲秦，楚、赵怒而去王，与王争事秦，秦必受之。
现代文：现在若大王背弃楚国、赵国而与秦国讲和，楚、赵两国必定怨恨而背离大王，而与大王争着事奉秦国，秦国必定会接受。
English: Now, if the great king turned his back on the states of Chu and Zhao and made peace with the state of Qin, the states of Chu and Zhao would surely resent and turn their backs on the great king, while competing with the great king to serve the state of Qin, and the state of Qin would surely accept.

古文：秦挟楚、赵之兵以复攻梁，则国求无亡不可得也。
现代文：秦国挟制楚、赵两国的军队再攻魏都，那么魏国想要不亡国是不可能的。
English: If the armies of Qin, Chu and Zhao were to attack Wei again, it would be impossible for Wei not to be defeated.

古文：原王之必无讲也。
现代文：希望大王一定不要讲和。
English: I hope the emperor will not make peace.

古文：王若欲讲，少割而有质；不然，必见欺。 
现代文：大王若打算讲和，也要少割地并且要有人质作保；不然，必定上当受骗。 
English: If the great king intends to make peace, he must also reduce the amount of land and have a hostage as a guarantor; otherwise, he will certainly be deceived.

古文：此臣之所闻於魏也，原君之以是虑事也。周书曰 惟命不于常 ，此言幸之不可数也。
现代文：这是我在魏国所听到的，希望您据此来考虑围攻大梁的事。《周书》上说 要想到上天的意旨不是固定不变的。 
English: This is what I heard in Wei, and I hope you will use it as a basis for your consideration of the siege of Dalian. "Zhou Shu" said, "Remember that God's will is not fixed and unchanging."

古文：夫战胜暴子，割八县，此非兵力之精也，又非计之工也，天幸为多矣。
现代文：这就是说天赐幸运是不可多次得到的。秦国战胜暴鸢，割取了八县，并非是兵力精良，也非计谋的高超巧妙，而靠的主要是运气。
English: That is to say, God-given luck cannot be obtained many times. Qin's victory over the Mongols and the taking of the eight counties was not due to superior military strength, nor was it due to superior cunning, but was mainly due to luck.

古文：今又走芒卯，入北宅，以攻大梁，是以天幸自为常也。智者不然。
现代文：现在秦国又打败了芒卯，兵入北宅，进而围攻大梁，以此看来是自己把徼天之幸当作了常态，明智的人不是这样的。
English: Now Qin has defeated Mengwu again, the soldiers have entered the North House, and then besieged the Great Beam, so it seems that they have taken the blessing of heaven as the norm, which is not the case for wise people.

古文：臣闻魏氏悉其百县胜甲以上戍大梁，臣以为不下三十万。
现代文：据我所知魏国已经调集了全部上百个县的精兵良将来保卫大梁，兵力不少于三十万人。
English: As far as I know, the State of Wei has mobilized the best soldiers from all the hundreds of counties to defend the girders in the future, with a force of no less than 300,000 people.

古文：以三十万之众守梁七仞之城，臣以为汤、武复生，不易攻也。
现代文：以三十万的大军来守卫七丈高的城垣，我认为即使商汤、周武王死而复生，也是难以攻下的。
English: Even if Shang Tang and King Zhou Wu were to come back from the dead, I think it would be difficult to capture them with 300,000 troops guarding a seven-story-high city wall.

古文：夫轻背楚、赵之兵，陵七仞之城，战三十万之众，而志必举之，臣以为自天地始分以至于今，未尝有者也。
现代文：轻易的背着楚、赵两国军队，要登七丈高的城垣，与三十万大军对垒，而且志在必得，我认为从开天辟地以来直到今天，还不曾有过这样的事情。
English: It is easy to carry the armies of Chu and Zhao on one's back, to climb the seven-story-high city wall, to confront the 300,000-strong army, and to aspire to win. I think that from the beginning of the world until today, there has never been such a thing.

古文：攻而不拔，秦兵必罢，陶邑必亡，则前功必弃矣。
现代文：攻打却不能攻破，秦军必然疲惫不堪，大梁攻不下而陶邑却定要丧失，那就会前功尽弃了。
English: If you attack but fail to break through, the Qin army will inevitably be exhausted, the girders will not be able to be attacked and the pottery villages will be lost, then the previous achievements will be abandoned.

古文：今魏氏方疑，可以少割收也。
现代文：现在魏国正犹疑未决，可以先少割一些土地稳住它。
English: Now Wei is hesitating and undecided, it can first cut some land to stabilize it.

古文：原君逮楚、赵之兵未至於梁，亟以少割收魏。
现代文：希望您抓住楚、赵援军尚未到达大梁的时机，赶快以少割土地来收服魏国。
English: I hope that you will seize the opportunity when the Chu and Zhao reinforcements have not yet reached the girders, and quickly conquer Wei with less land.

古文：魏方疑而得以少割为利，必欲之，则君得所欲矣。
现代文：魏国正当犹疑之际，会把得到以少割土地换取大梁解围的做法看作是有利的上策，这样做你才能得到您想要的。
English: When the State of Wei is justifiably hesitant, it will regard the practice of getting less land cut in exchange for the lifting of the siege as an advantageous superior strategy. Only by doing so can you get what you want.

古文：楚、赵怒於魏之先己也，必争事秦，从以此散，而君後择焉。
现代文：楚、赵两国对于魏国抢先与秦国联合会大为恼火，必定争着讨好秦国，合纵便因此瓦解，而后您再从中寻找时机个个攻破。
English: The two countries of Chu and Zhao were very angry that Wei took the lead over the Qin confederation, and they must have been competing to please Qin. As a result, the confederation collapsed, and you then looked for opportunities to break through.

古文：且君之得地岂必以兵哉！
现代文：况且，您要取得土地也不一定非用军事手段呀！
English: Moreover, if you want to acquire land, you don't necessarily have to use military means!

古文：割晋国，秦兵不攻，而魏必效绛安邑。
现代文：割取了原来的晋国土地，秦军不用发动进攻，魏国就会乖乖地献出绛、安邑两城。
English: Having taken away the original land of Jin, the Qin army did not need to launch an attack, and Wei would obediently offer the two cities of Handan and Anyi.

古文：又为陶开两道，几尽故宋，卫必效单父。
现代文：这样又为您打开了河西、河东两条通道，原来的宋国土地也将全部为秦国所有，随即卫国必会献出单父。
English: In this way, the two channels of Hexi and Hedong have been opened for you. The original land of Song will also be all owned by Qin, and then Weiguo will surely offer a single father.

古文：秦兵可全，而君制之，何索而不得，何为而不成！
现代文：秦军不动一兵一卒，而您却能控制全面局势，有什么索取不能得到，有什么作为不能成功呢！
English: The Qin army does not move a single soldier, but you can control the overall situation. What can you ask for but not get, and what can you do but not succeed?

古文：原君熟虑之而无行危。 穰侯曰： 善。 
现代文：希望您仔细考虑围攻大梁这件事而不要冒险行事。 穰侯说： 好。 
English: I hope you will carefully consider the matter of besieging the girders and not take any risks.

古文：乃罢梁围。
现代文：于是停止攻梁，解围而去。
English: So they stopped attacking the bridge, broke the siege and left.

古文：明年，魏背秦，与齐从亲。
现代文：第二年，魏国背离了秦国，同齐国合纵交好。
English: In the following year, the State of Wei broke away from the State of Qin and established diplomatic relations with the State of Qi.

古文：秦使穰侯伐魏，斩首四万，走魏将暴鸢，得魏三县。
现代文：秦王派穰侯进攻魏国，斩敌四万人，使魏将暴鸢战败而逃，取得了魏国的三个县。
English: The King of Qin sent Xiong Hou to attack the State of Wei, killed 40,000 of the enemy, defeated the Wei general and fled, and gained three counties of Wei.

古文：穰侯益封。
现代文：穰侯又增加了封邑。
English: He also increased the number of fiefs.

古文：明年，穰侯与白起客卿胡阳复攻赵、韩、魏，破芒卯於华阳下，斩首十万，取魏之卷、蔡阳、长社，赵氏观津。
现代文：第三年，穰侯与白起、客卿胡阳再次攻打赵国、韩国和魏国，在华阳城下，大败芒卯的军队，斩敌十万人，夺取了魏国的卷、蔡阳、长社，赵国的观津。
English: In the third year, Gong Hou, Bai Qi, and Hu Yang, the guest lord, once again attacked Zhao, Korea, and Wei. At the foot of Huayang Castle, they defeated the powerful army, slaughtered 100,000 enemies, and seized the volumes of Wei, Caiyang, Changsha, and Guanzin of Zhao.

古文：且与赵观津，益赵以兵，伐齐。
现代文：接着又把观津还给了赵国，并且派兵增援赵国，让它去攻打齐国。
English: He then returned Guanzhong to Zhao, and sent reinforcements to Zhao to attack Qi.

古文：齐襄王惧，使苏代为齐阴遗穰侯书曰： 臣闻往来者言曰 秦将益赵甲四万以伐齐 ，臣窃必之敝邑之王曰 秦王明而熟於计，穰侯智而习於事，必不益赵甲四万以伐齐 。
现代文：齐襄王害怕被打，就让苏代替齐国暗地里送给穰侯一封信说： 我听往来两国的人说 秦国将要给赵国增援四万士兵来攻打齐国 ，我私下一定对我们国君说 秦王精明而谙熟谋略，穰侯机智而精通军事，一定不会这么做 。为什么这么说呢？
English: King Qixiang was afraid of being beaten, so he had Su secretly send a letter to the warlord in place of Qi, saying: "I have heard people from both countries say that Qin is going to reinforce Zhao with 40,000 soldiers to attack Qi. I must tell our sovereign in private that King Qin, who is shrewd and skillful in strategy, and who is witty and proficient in military affairs, will definitely not do this. Why do you say this?

古文：是何也？夫三晋之相与也，秦之深雠也。
现代文：韩、赵、魏三国友好结盟，这是秦国极度仇恨厌恶的。
English: The three countries of Han, Zhao, and Wei formed a friendly alliance, which was extremely hated and detested by Qin.

古文：百相背也，百相欺也，不为不信，不为无行。
现代文：它们三国之间的关系非同一般，尽管有上百次的背弃，上百次的相骗，但都不算是背信弃义，一旦对外它们是互信不疑的。
English: The relationship between the three countries is unusual. Although there have been hundreds of betrayals and hundreds of mutual deceptions, they are not considered treachery. Once they are outside, they trust each other.

古文：今破齐以肥赵。
现代文：现在打败齐国会使赵国强盛起来。
English: Defeating Qi now will make Zhao stronger.

古文：赵，秦之深雠，不利於秦。此一也。
现代文：赵国是秦国所仇视的大敌，显然对秦国不利。这是第一点。
English: Zhao was a hated enemy of Qin, and was obviously unfavorable to Qin. This is the first point.

古文：秦之谋者，必曰 破齐，弊晋、楚，而後制晋、楚之胜 。
现代文：秦国的谋臣策士们，一定会说 打败齐国，先削弱三晋和楚国的力量，然后再战而胜之 。
English: The strategists of Qin will surely say, "Defeat Qi, first weaken the power of Sanjin and Chu, and then win the war."

古文：夫齐，罢国也，以天下攻齐，如以千钧之弩决溃筴也，必死，安能弊晋、楚？
现代文：其实，齐国是个势单力薄的疲惫之国，调集天下诸侯的兵力攻打齐国，就如同用千钓强弓去冲开溃烂的痈疽，齐国必亡无疑，怎么能削弱三晋和楚国呢？
English: As a matter of fact, Qi was a weak and exhausted country. Summoning the forces of all the princes in the world to attack Qi was like using a thousand powerful bows to break out the festering gangrene. Qi would undoubtedly perish. How could they weaken Sanjin and Chu?

古文：此二也。
现代文：这是第二点。
English: This is the second point.

古文：秦少出兵，则晋、楚不信也；多出兵，则晋、楚为制於秦。
现代文：秦国若出兵少，那么三晋和楚国就不相信秦国；若出兵多，就会让三晋和楚国担忧将被秦国控制。
English: If Qin sends fewer troops, then the three Jin and Chu states will not trust Qin; if they send more troops, then the three Jin and Chu states will worry that they will be controlled by Qin.

古文：齐恐，不走秦，必走晋、楚。
现代文：齐国惧怕被攻打，不会投靠秦国，而必定投靠三晋和楚国。
English: For fear of being attacked, the State of Qi would not support the State of Qin, but would definitely support the State of Sanjin and the State of Chu.

古文：此三也。
现代文：这是第三点。
English: This is the third point.

古文：秦割齐以啖晋、楚，晋、楚案之以兵，秦反受敌。
现代文：秦国以瓜分齐国来引诱三晋和楚国，而三晋和楚国派兵进驻加以扼守，秦国反而会腹背受敌。
English: Qin tempted Sanjin and Chu by carving up Qi, while Sanjin and Chu stationed troops to defend themselves. Qin, on the other hand, would suffer at the hands of the enemy.

古文：此四也。
现代文：这是第四点。
English: This is the fourth point.

古文：是晋、楚以秦谋齐，以齐谋秦也，何晋、楚之智而秦、齐之愚？
现代文：这种做法就是让三晋和楚国借秦国之力谋取齐国，拿齐国之地对付秦国，怎么三晋、楚国如此聪明而秦国、齐国如此愚蠢？
English: This practice is to let the three Jin and Chu countries use the strength of Qin to seek the best of Qi, and take the land of Qi to deal with Qin. How can the three Jin and Chu countries be so smart while Qin and Qi are so stupid?

古文：此五也。
现代文：这是第五点。
English: This is the fifth point.

古文：故得安邑以善事之，亦必无患矣。
现代文：因此，取得安邑把它治理好，也就一定没有祸患了。
English: Therefore, getting Ami and managing it well, there must be no disaster.

古文：秦有安邑，韩氏必无上党矣。
现代文：秦国占据了安邑，韩国也就必定无法控制上党了。
English: If Qin occupied An'yun, Korea would not be able to control Shangdang.

古文：取天下之肠胃，与出兵而惧其不反也，孰利？
现代文：夺取天下的中心区域，与出兵而担忧其不能返回比较起来，哪个有利呢？
English: What is the advantage of seizing the central region of the world, compared to sending troops and worrying that they cannot return?

古文：臣故曰秦王明而熟於计，穰侯智而习於事，必不益赵甲四万以代齐矣。 
现代文：这些道理都是显而易见的，所以我才说秦国精明而谙熟谋略，穰侯机智而精通军事，肯定不会给赵国四万士兵让他攻打齐国了。 
English: These reasons are all obvious, which is why I said that Qin was a shrewd and skillful strategist, and Zhou was witty and proficient in military affairs. He would certainly not give 40,000 soldiers to Zhao and let him attack Qi.

古文：於是穰侯不行，引兵而归。
现代文：于是穰侯不再进军，领兵回国了。
English: As a result, Yan Hou no longer marched into battle and led his troops back to the country.

古文：昭王三十六年，相国穰侯言客卿灶，欲伐齐取刚、寿，以广其陶邑。
现代文：昭王三十六年，当时相国穰侯与客卿灶商议，要攻打齐国夺取刚、寿两城，借以扩大自己在陶邑的封地。
English: In the 36th year of King Zhao's reign, at that time, the warlords of the neighboring countries discussed with the guest lord Zhao to attack Qi and seize the two cities of Gang and Shou, in order to expand their fiefs in Tao.

古文：於是魏人范睢自谓张禄先生，讥穰侯之伐齐，乃越三晋以攻齐也，以此时奸说秦昭王。
现代文：这时有个魏国人叫范睢自称张禄先生，讥笑穰侯竟然越过韩、魏等国去攻打齐国，他趁着这个机会请求劝说秦昭王。
English: At this time, there was a man from Wei called Fan Qi, who called himself Mr. Zhang Lu. He mocked Zhou for crossing Han, Wei and other countries to attack Qi. He took this opportunity to ask to persuade Qin Zhao Wang.

古文：昭王於是用范睢。
现代文：昭王于是任用了范睢。
English: King Zhao then appointed Fan Jun.

古文：范睢言宣太后专制，穰侯擅权於诸侯，泾阳君、高陵君之属太侈，富於王室。
现代文：范睢向昭王阐明宣太后在朝廷内专制，穰侯在外事上独揽大权，泾阳君、高陵君等人则过于奢侈，以致比国君之家还富有。
English: Fan Rong explained to King Zhao that Empress Dowager Xuan was an autocrat within the imperial court, that the princes of the imperial court monopolized power in foreign affairs, and that the princes of the imperial court, such as Puyang and Gaoling, were so extravagant that they were even richer than the imperial family.

古文：於是秦昭王悟，乃免相国，令泾阳之属皆出关，就封邑。
现代文：这使秦昭王幡然醒悟，就免掉穰侯的相国职务，责令泾阳君等人都一律迁出国都，到自己的封地去。
English: This made Qin Zhaowang suddenly wake up, and he relieved Xun Hou of his duties as a provincial governor, and ordered Xun Yangjun and others to all move out of the capital to their own fiefdoms.

古文：穰侯出关，辎车千乘有馀。
现代文：穰侯离开函谷关的时候，载物坐人的车子有一千多辆。
English: By the time he left Hakodate, there were more than a thousand cars carrying goods and passengers.

古文：穰侯卒於陶，而因葬焉。
现代文：穰侯在陶邑去世，就葬在那里。
English: He died in Tawau and was buried there.

古文：秦复收陶为郡。
现代文：秦国收回陶邑设为郡。
English: The State of Qin took back Tao County and set it up as a county.

古文：太史公曰：穰侯，昭王亲舅也。
现代文：太史公说：穰侯是秦昭王的亲舅舅。
English: Tai Shikong said, "Qin Hou was the uncle of Qin Zhao Wang.

古文：而秦所以东益地，弱诸侯，尝称帝於天下，天下皆西乡稽首者，穰侯之功也。
现代文：秦国之所以能够向东扩张领土，削弱诸侯，曾经称帝于天下，各国诸侯无不俯首称臣，这当是穰侯的功劳。
English: The reason why Qin was able to expand its territory to the east and weaken the vassals, once called the emperor in the world, the vassals of all countries bowed down and called him a vassal, this should be the merit of the vassal.

古文：及其贵极富溢，一夫开说，身折势夺而以忧死，况於羁旅之臣乎！
现代文：等到显贵至极豪富无比之时，一人说破，便屈居下位，权势被夺，忧愁而死，何况那些寄居异国的臣子呢！
English: When the time comes for the nobles to become extremely rich and wealthy beyond compare, if one speaks out, he will be relegated to a lower position, his power will be taken away, and he will die of sorrow, not to mention those courtiers who live in foreign countries!

