古文：《孟子》： 后稷教民稼穑，树艺五谷；五谷熟，而民人育。 
现代文：《孟子》： 后稷教民农作、种植五谷；五谷丰收，人民得到养育。 
English: "Mencius": Houyi taught the people to farm and plant grain; grain harvest, the people were nurtured.

古文：《氾胜之书》： 汤有旱灾，伊尹作为 区田 ，教民粪种，负水浇稼。 
现代文：《汜胜之书》： 商汤的时候，发生过旱灾，伊尹创造区田种植法，教导百姓用粪水给区田施肥，背着水浇灌庄稼。 
English: "The Book of Victory": When Shang Tang, there was a drought, Yi Yin created the method of planting fields, teaching the people to fertilize the fields with manure, and water the crops with water on their backs.

古文：氾，扶岩反，水名。又姓，出敦煌、济北二望，本姓凡氏，避地于汜水，因改焉。
现代文：氾，扶岩反，水名。 氾 字作为姓氏，起源于敦煌、济北地方的两个名门望族，他们本来姓 凡 ，因为避秦乱，逃到氾水，便改姓 氾 。
English: Fangfang,扶岩反,水名. As a surname, the word "fangfang" originated in Dunhuang and two famous families in Jibei Province. They originally had the surname "Van," but because they fled the Qin Dynasty, they changed their surname to "fangfang."

古文：《史记》： 管仲相齐，与俗同好恶。
现代文：《史记》： 管仲在齐国做宰相时，他的喜好和憎恶与世俗百姓相同。
English: "History": When Guan Zhong was the prime minister of Qi, his likes and dislikes were the same as ordinary people.

古文：其称曰： 仓廪实，而知礼节；衣食足，而知荣辱。  
现代文：他曾说： 百姓的粮仓充足，丰衣足食，才能顾及到礼仪，重视荣誉和耻辱。  
English: He once said: Only when the people's granaries are sufficient, and they are well-fed and clothed, can they pay attention to etiquette, and value honor and disgrace.

古文：猗顿，鲁穷士，闻陶朱公富，问术焉。告之曰： 欲速富，养五牸。 
现代文：猗顿是鲁国的穷困的读书人，听说陶朱公非常富有，便前去请教致富的方法，陶朱公告诉他说： 要想很快致富，就养五畜中雌性的牲畜。 
English: He was once a poor reader in the country of Lu. When he heard that Tao Zhu Gong was very rich, he went to ask for advice on how to get rich. Tao Zhu Gong told him: If you want to get rich quickly, raise the female of the five animals.

古文：乃畜牛、羊，子息万计，赀拟王公。
现代文：他就开始畜养牛羊，繁殖的幼畜要以万来计量，他的资产能与王公比拟。
English: He began to raise cattle and sheep, the breeding of young animals to be measured in ten thousand, his assets can be compared with Wang Gong.

古文：《庄子》： 长梧封人曰： 昔予为禾稼，而卤莽种之，其实亦卤莽而报予；芸而灭裂之，其实亦灭裂而报予。
现代文：《庄子》： 长梧封人说： 往年我种庄稼，随随便便地将种子种下，庄稼也随便地回报我；锄草时马虎了事，庄稼也马虎了事地回报我。
English: "Zhuangzi": Changwufeng said: In previous years, I planted crops, planted seeds casually, and the crops also rewarded me casually; I was careless when I was weeding, and the crops also rewarded me carelessly.

古文：来年深其耕而熟耨之，其禾繁以滋，予终年厌飱。  
现代文：第二年，我深耕田地，并且勤加耘锄，庄稼生长得繁茂旺盛，我全年饱食不受饥饿。  
English: In the second year, I ploughed the fields deeply and worked hard. The crops grew luxuriantly, and I was well-fed all year round and never went hungry.

古文：《前汉·食货志》： 李悝为魏文侯作尽地力之教。
现代文：《汉书·食货志》： 魏文侯时，李悝倡行充分利用地力的教化。
English: "Hanshu·Shokuhou Zhi": During the reign of Wei Wenhou, Li Qian advocated the education of making full use of the earth's forces.

古文：师古曰： 李悝，文侯臣也；悝音恢。 
现代文：师古说： 李悝是魏文侯的臣；悝，音 恢 。 
English: Shigu said: Li Qiye is a vassal of Wei Wenhou;, pronounced.

古文：以为地方百里，提封九万顷，除山泽、邑居，参分去一，为田六百万亩。
现代文：他说：方圆百里的土地，提封九万顷，除山陵、沼泽、城市、村居，占地三分之一，剩余的耕地还有六百万亩。
English: He said: The land with a hundred-mile radius covers 90,000 hectares, excluding mountains, marshes, cities and villages, covering one-third of the land, and the remaining arable land is six million mu.

古文：治田勤谨，则亩益三升；服虔曰： 与之三升也。 
现代文：种田勤勉，每亩可增收三升；服虔说： 是给农民三升。 
English: Diligent cultivation of fields can increase income by three liters per mu; Fook Qian said: Yes, give farmers three liters.

古文：臣瓉曰： 当言三斗。谓治田勤，则亩加三斗也。 
现代文：臣瓒说： 三升应作三斗，是说农事勤勉的时候，每亩可增产三斗。 
English: The minister said: "Three liters should be equal to three buckets, which means that when farming is done diligently, each mu can increase production by three buckets.

古文：师古曰： 计数而言，字当为斗。
现代文：师古说： 根据实地计算，三升应作三斗。
English: Shigu said: According to field calculations, three liters should be made into three buckets.

古文：瓒说是也。
现代文：臣瓒的说法是对的。
English: What the minister said was right.

古文：不勤，则损亦如之。
现代文：种田不勤勉时，每亩减收的数量也是三升。
English: When cultivation is not diligent, the amount of revenue reduction per mu is also three liters.

古文：地方百里之增减，辄为粟百八十万石矣。 
现代文：所以说方百里的土地，增收和减收的数字，都会达到一百八十万石。 
English: An increase or decrease of grain on the land of a hundred miles radius is one million eight hundred thousand koku of millet.

古文：又曰： 籴甚贵，伤民；韦昭曰： 此 民 ，谓士、工、商也。
现代文：又说： 粮食的价钱太高就会损害百姓的利益，韦昭说： 这里说的百姓，是指士、工、商。 
English: He also said: If the price of grain is too high, it will damage the interests of the people. Wei Zhao said: The people mentioned here are soldiers, workers and merchants.

古文：甚贱，伤农。
现代文：粮价过低会伤害农民的利益。
English: Low grain prices will hurt the interests of farmers.

古文：民伤，则离散；农伤，则国贫。故甚贵与甚贱，其伤一也。  
现代文：士工商受到伤害，便会离开这里去往其他的地方；农民受到伤害，国家就会贫穷；所以粮价过高或过低，都会造成危害。  
English: If businesses are hurt, they will leave here for other places; if farmers are hurt, the country will be poor; so if food prices are too high or too low, they will cause harm.

古文：汉文帝时，贾谊说上曰： 管子曰： 仓廪实，而知礼节。 
现代文：汉文帝时，贾谊劝说皇上说： 管子说： 百姓的粮仓充足，丰衣足食，才能顾及到礼仪。 
English: At the time of Emperor Hanwen, Jia Yi persuaded the emperor to say: The pipe said: The people's granaries are sufficient, and they have plenty of food and clothing before they can take the etiquette into account.

古文：民不足而可治者，自古及今，未之尝闻。
现代文：百姓的粮食不充足，而能将国家治理好的例子，从古到今还未曾听说过。
English: From ancient times to the present, it has never been heard of that the people's material resources are insufficient but manageable.

古文：汉之为汉，几四十年矣，公私之积，犹可哀痛。
现代文：汉朝建国至今，历时已近四十年，国家和百姓的储粮，仍使人感到非常痛心。
English: It has been nearly forty years since the founding of the Great Han Dynasty, and it is still sad and regrettable that the amount of national treasury and private reserves is so small.

古文：世之有饥穰，天之行也，禹、汤被之矣引。
现代文：人世间有丰穰和饥馑，是天时运行的常事，虽禹、汤在位，仍不免有天灾。
English: There are plenty and famine in the human world, which is a normal thing that runs from day to day. Although Yu and Tang are in power, there are still natural disasters.

古文：即不幸，有方二三千里之旱，国胡以相恤？
现代文：假如不幸发生宽广二三千里的大旱灾，国家用什么救济百姓？
English: If, unfortunately, a large-scale drought with a width of 23,000 miles occurs, what will the state use to relieve the people?

古文：卒然边境有急，数十百万之众，国胡以馈之？
现代文：再如边境突然遭受敌人入侵，常须调动数十万甚至上百万的军队，国家用什么去供给军粮？
English: Suddenly there is an emergency on the border, hundreds of thousands to millions of troops, what does the country take as food?

古文：夫积贮者，天下之大命也。
现代文：贮积一事，实为关系天下安危的大事。
English: Accumulation and storage is the lifeblood of the world.

古文：苟粟多而财有余，何为而不成？
现代文：只要国家粮多和财力充足，还有什么办不成功的事情？
English: If there is plenty of corn and more than enough wealth, what can't be done?

古文：以攻则取，以守则固，以战则胜。
现代文：用以攻城必取，用以守土必固，用以兴兵作战必胜。
English: The attack will be able to seize, the defense will be strong, and the war will be won.

古文：怀敌附远，何招而不至？
现代文：怀柔敌人，哪怕是遥远的番邦也一定会归顺朝廷；那时还会有什么人，不听从朝廷命令！
English: To turn the enemy into submission, to bring the far away into the fold, to call those who would not come?

古文：今驱民而归之农，使天下各食其力。末技游食之人，转而缘南亩，则蓄积足，而人乐其所矣。 
现代文：现在应当驱使众人回到农业中去，让天下的人都能自己生产自己吃；让从事末技游食的人，都能从事农业生产，必会使蓄积充足，人民安居乐业。 
English: Now is the time to urge everyone to return to agriculture, so that everyone in the world can produce and eat their own food; so that people who are engaged in semi-skilled and itinerant food can engage in agricultural production, which will surely make the accumulation sufficient and the people can live and work in peace.

古文：前汉，宣曲任氏。
现代文：西汉时，宣曲任氏，善储粟谷。
English: During the Western Han Dynasty, the Xuanqu Ren clan was good at storing millet.

古文：楚汉相距于荥阳，米石至万。
现代文：当时楚汉两军正在荥阳交战，米价上涨到每石一万钱。
English: At that time, the two armies of Chu and Han were fighting in Fenyang, and the price of rice rose to 10,000 yuan per stone.

古文：而豪杰金玉，尽归任氏，以此起富。
现代文：大户人家不得不用金玉交换粮食，金玉全都进入于任氏手中，任氏由此大富。
English: Large households had to exchange gold for grain, and all the gold went into Ren's hands, making him very rich.

古文：折节为俭，力田畜。
现代文：改变平时的志趣行为，努力从事种田和畜牧。
English: They should change their usual selfish behavior and strive to engage in farming and animal husbandry.

古文：人争取贱贾，任氏独取贵善。
现代文：别人买东西，都抢着要便宜的，唯独任氏乐意出高价买好的。
English: Everyone else rushes to buy things that are cheap, but Mr. Ren is willing to pay a high price to buy a good one.

古文：富者数世。
现代文：他家的富足，保持了好几代人。
English: His family has been wealthy for generations.

古文：然任公家约： 非田畜所生，不衣食。
现代文：任公所立的 家约 规定： 非自家田地出产，非自养畜禽所生，一概不准穿不准吃。
English: The house contract established by the government stipulates that no one is allowed to wear or eat anything that is not produced from their own fields, or is not born from their own livestock or poultry.

古文：公事不毕，则身不得饮酒食肉。 
现代文：国家的钱粮没有缴纳完毕，就不准饮酒吃肉。 
English: If you have not paid the state money and grain, you are not allowed to drink alcohol or eat meat.

古文：以此为闾里率，故富而主上重之。
现代文：并能身体力行成为乡里众人的表率。为此，他既极为富有，又受到人主的敬重。
English: He used this as an example in the village, so he was rich and the emperor also respected him.

古文：赵过，为搜粟都尉，能为代田，以故田多垦辟；用力少而得谷多。
现代文：赵过，任搜粟都尉，创行代田法，田地大多得到开垦。代田法花费的劳力少，但得到的谷物更多。
English: Zhao Guo, who was the commander of the poppy harvest, introduced the daiden method, and most of the fields were reclaimed. The daiden method required less labor, but yielded more grain.

古文：黄霸为颍川，使邮亭、乡官皆畜鸡、豚，以赡鳏、寡、贫穷者。
现代文：黄霸，任颍川郡太守，让邮亭、乡官都饲养鸡猪，用来赡养鳏、寡和贫穷的人。
English: Huang Ba, who served as the governor of Luochuan County, let the post office and the township officials raise chickens and pigs to support the poor, widows and the poor.

古文：及务耕桑，节用殖财，种树畜养，去浮淫之费，治为天下第一。
现代文：又让耕种，事蚕桑，节省用度，增值资财，种植树木和蓄养牲畜，去除百姓的铺张浪费，他的政绩为天下第一。
English: He also allowed farming, silkworming, saving consumption, adding value to capital, planting trees and raising livestock, and removing the extravagance and waste of the people. His political achievements are the first in the world.

古文：龚遂为渤海，劝民务农桑，今口种一株榆，百本睻，五十本葱，一畦韭；家二母彘，五鸡。
现代文：龚遂，任渤海郡太守，劝导百姓勤务农耕，从事蚕桑；要求每人栽种榆树一株、睻一百本、葱五十本、韭菜一畦，每家养母猪两头、鸡五只。
English: Therefore, he was appointed as the governor of Bohai County to persuade the people to work hard in agriculture and engage in silkworm mulberry. He required each person to plant one eucalyptus, one hundred alfalfa, fifty onions, one leek, and raise two sows and five chickens in each house.

古文：民有带持刀剑者，使卖剑买牛，卖刀买犊，曰： 何为带牛佩犊？ 
现代文：百姓有佩带刀剑的，便让他卖掉剑买牛，卖掉刀买牛犊，说： 为什么把牛和犊佩带在身上？ 
English: If any of the people have swords, let them sell their swords for oxen, and their swords for yoke of oxen, and say, "Why do you have yoke of oxen and yoke of donkeys on you?

古文：春夏不得不趣田亩；秋冬课收敛，益蓄果实、菱、芡。
现代文：春天和夏天，农人必须到田间劳动；秋天和冬天，督促百姓收刈入仓，增储果实、菱芡。
English: In spring and summer, farmers must go to the field to work; in autumn and winter, they must urge the people to harvest into the warehouse and increase the storage of fruits and honeysuckle.

古文：吏民皆富实。
现代文：全境吏民都过上富足殷实的生活。
English: Officials and people all over the territory lived a rich and affluent life.

古文：何武为刺史，行部必问垦田顷亩、五谷美恶。
现代文：何武任刺吏，巡行所属部域一定要询问州郡垦田若干顷亩，五谷生长好坏。
English: How many military officers are assigned to the patrol, and the department to which the patrol belongs must inquire about the state county's several hectares of rice paddies, and whether the grain is growing well or not.

古文：召信臣为南阳，好为民兴利，务在富之。
现代文：召信臣任南阳郡，重视为人民兴办有利的事业，一心一意地要让百姓快些富裕。
English: He summoned his trusted vassals to Nanyang County, attaching great importance to the establishment of a favorable business for the people, and single-mindedly trying to make the people get rich faster.

古文：躬劝耕农，出入阡陌，止舍离乡亭，稀有安居时。
现代文：他深入农村，出没在路边田畔，亲自劝说农民重视农耕。他住宿过的地方，遍及全郡各地的乡亭，极少有休息的时间。
English: I personally work hard at farming, go in and out of the fields, and stay in public housing in the countryside. I rarely have time to relax.

古文：行视郡中水泉，开通沟渎，起水门提阏，凡数十处，以广溉灌；岁岁增加，多至三万顷。
现代文：他视察郡中的水源，挖通沟渠，修建水门提阏共数十处，用来扩大灌溉面积。灌田数年年增加，多达三万顷。
English: He inspected the water sources in the county, dug ditches, and built sluice gates and sluice gates at dozens of places to expand the irrigation area. Irrigated fields increased over the years, up to 30,000 hectares.

古文：民得其利，蓄积有余。
现代文：人民蒙受到灌溉的利益，家有储积。
English: The people have benefited from water conservancy and irrigation, and the harvested grain reserves are more than enough.

古文：信臣为民作《均水约束》，刻石立于田畔，以防分争。
现代文：他为百姓制定《均平用水公约》，刻于碑石，立在田首地畔，以防发生争水的纠纷。
English: He established the "Convention on the Equalization of Water Use" for the people, engraved on a stone monument, standing on the bank of the Tianshou, in order to prevent disputes over water.

古文：禁止嫁娶送终奢靡，务出于俭约。
现代文：嫁娶、丧葬务求节约，禁止奢侈浪费。郡中百姓无不努力务农，勤勉耕耘。
English: In addition, he also prohibited extravagance and waste in marriage and devoted himself to promoting the fashion of thrift and economy.

古文：郡中莫不耕稼力田。吏民亲爱信臣，号曰 召父 。
现代文：全郡官民无不对信臣怀有敬爱的感情，尊称他为 召父 。
English: All the officials and people in the county have affectionate feelings for Nobutomi, and respectfully call him "the father."

古文：后汉王丹，家累千金，好施与，周人之急。
现代文：后汉王丹，家中资产累积了千金，为人好施舍，常常帮助别人解决困难。
English: After the Han Dynasty, Wang Dan accumulated a lot of money in his family's assets, was charitable, and often helped others solve difficulties.

古文：每岁时农收后，察其强力收多者，辄历载酒肴，从而劳之；便于田头树下，饮食劝勉之；因留其余肴而去。
现代文：每到年终收获大忙过后，察访劳动好、收谷多的农人，便携带着酒肉，一一前去犒劳。常在田头树下，席地饮食，劝勉慰问他人。临走时把剩余的酒菜留下，随即辞去。
English: At the end of every year, after a busy harvest, he would visit farmers who had done a good job and harvested a lot of grain. He would bring wine and meat with him and go one by one to reward them for their hard work. He would often eat and drink under the rice field trees, and he would encourage and console others. When he was about to leave, he would leave the remaining wine and vegetables and then resign.

古文：其隋懒者，独不见劳，各自耻不能致丹，其后无不力田者。
现代文：那些懒惰的人，得不到王丹的犒劳，他们都以王丹不来慰劳自己为耻，此后没有不努力种田的。
English: Those lazy people could not get Wang Dan's reward. They were all ashamed that Wang Dan did not come to comfort themselves. Since then, no one has not worked hard to cultivate the fields.

古文：聚落以致殷富。
现代文：由此全村百姓，无不富裕。
English: As a result, all the people in the village are rich.

古文：杜为南阳，省爱民役，广拓土田，郡内比室殷足。
现代文：杜诗任南阳太守，省简劳役，爱护百姓，垦田数量大大增加，全郡百姓家家殷实富足。
English: Du Xi served as the governor of Nanyang, simplified labor service, cared for the people, greatly increased the number of rice fields, and the whole county's people were prosperous.

古文：为之语曰： 前有召父，后有杜母。 
现代文：人民歌颂他说： 前有召父，后有杜母。 
English: The people sing his praises: "Before, there was Zhaofeng, and after, there was Douma."

古文：任延为九真太守。
现代文：任延官为九真太守。
English: He was appointed to the post of Jiu Zhen governor.

古文：九真俗以射猎为业，不知牛耕，每致困乏。
现代文：九真地方的百姓，向来以射猎鸟兽为生，尚不知晓牛耕的方法，故时常陷于贫困。
English: The people of Jiuzhen have always made a living by shooting birds and beasts, but they still do not know how to farm cattle, so they often fall into poverty.

古文：延乃令铸作田器，教之垦辟；岁岁开广，百姓充给。
现代文：任延便叫百姓铸造各种农具，教给他们使用的方法，开垦土地。从此新开辟的耕地年年增加，百姓生活充足。
English: Ren Yan then asked the people to cast various agricultural tools, taught them how to use them, and reclaimed the land. Since then, the newly opened arable land has increased year by year, and the people's lives are sufficient.

古文：茨充为桂阳令，俗不种桑，无蚕织、丝麻之利，类皆以麻枲头贮衣。
现代文：茨充任桂阳县令，当地百姓不知种桑，人民享受不到养蚕和纺织丝麻的利益，多用麻枲头填充冬衣。
English: The local people did not know how to grow mulberry, and the people could not enjoy the benefits of raising silkworms and weaving silk. They mostly used hemp straw to fill winter clothes.

古文：民惰窳，少粗履，足多剖裂血出，盛冬皆然火燎灸。
现代文：百姓习于懒惰，生活简陋，连脚上穿的粗履都极少见到；许多人的脚冻裂开口出血，严冬时都点火烘烤。
English: The people are accustomed to laziness, their lives are simple, and it is rare to see even a pair of rough shoes on their feet; many people's feet are frozen, their mouths are bleeding, and they all light fires to bake in the winter.

古文：充教民益种桑柘，养蚕、织履；复令种苎麻。
现代文：茨充让百姓多栽桑树和柘树，养蚕缫丝织履；并让多种苎麻。
English: Tsuchong let the people plant more mulberry and eucalyptus trees, raise silkworms to weave silk; and let a variety of nettles grow.

古文：数年之间，大赖其利，衣履温暖。
现代文：经过数年的时间，便享受到丝麻的利益，穿上了温暖的衣服和鞋子。
English: After a few years, they enjoy the benefits of silk and linen, and wear warm clothes and shoes.

古文：今江南知桑蚕、织履，皆充之教也。
现代文：今日江南知道种桑、养蚕、织作丝履，都是茨充的教导。
English: Today, the south of the Yangtze River knows that planting mulberry trees, raising silkworms, and weaving silk shoes are all the teachings of Tsucheng.

古文：张堪拜渔阳太守，开稻田八千余顷，劝民耕种，以致殷富。
现代文：张堪官拜渔阳太守，开辟稻田八千多顷，劝百姓种稻，使人民过上富裕生活。
English: Zhang Kan, an official, paid homage to Yuyang Dazhu, opened up more than eight thousand hectares of rice fields, and advised the people to grow rice, so that the people could live a prosperous life.

古文：百姓歌曰： 桑无附枝，麦穗两歧；张君为政，乐不可支。 
现代文：百姓歌颂他说： 桑树无附枝，麦穗分两歧；张君施仁政，其乐不可支。 
English: The people sang his praises: "The mulberry tree has no branches, and the ears of wheat are divided into two; Zhang Jun pursues a benevolent policy, and his joy cannot be contained.

古文：樊重，字君云，谥寿张敬侯。世善农稼，好货殖。
现代文：樊重，字君云，追封寿张敬侯，世世代代擅长农事种植和喜好经营商业。
English: Zou Junyun, Zoufeng Shou Zhang Jinghou, have been good at farming and business for generations.

古文：重性温厚，有法度。
现代文：樊重为人性情温和敦厚，治家有法度。
English: He is a mild-mannered and strong-willed person, and his family is well-governed.

古文：三世共财，子孙朝夕礼敬，常若公家。
现代文：三世同堂共居，子孙早晚向他请安问候，俨如身在公家。
English: The third generation lived together in the same house, and their children and grandchildren greeted him in the morning and evening, as if they were in a public house.

古文：其营理产业，物无所弃；课役童隶，各得其宜。
现代文：他经管家产，向来没有被抛弃掉的东西；督促使用童仆，都很得当。
English: He was the steward of the household, and he never threw anything away; he was very good at enforcing the use of child servants.

古文：故能上下戮力，财利岁倍，至乃开广田土三百余顷。
现代文：所以能上下齐心协力，家庭收入年年成倍增加，开垦的田地多至三百多顷。
English: As a result, family income has doubled year on year, and more than 300 hectares of farmland have been reclaimed.

古文：其所起庐舍，皆有重堂高阁，陂渠灌注。
现代文：他建造的房舍，都有好几进厅堂和高阁，引陂渠水灌注庭院间。
English: The residences built by them all have a high-ceilinged main hall and are fed by a pond.

古文：又池鱼牧畜，有求必给。
现代文：他家又养鱼、饲牲畜，家中所有需用之物都能自给。
English: Also, pond fish and livestock, there is a need to give.

古文：尝欲作器物，先种梓、漆，时人嗤之；然积以岁月，皆得其用，向之笑者，咸求假焉。
现代文：他曾为了想做家具，先着手栽种梓、漆，受到别人的讥笑；但若干年后，梓、漆皆得到应用，过去讥笑他的人也前来向他请求借用。
English: In order to make furniture, he had first started to plant wisteria and lacquer, and was ridiculed by others; but after a few years, both wisteria and lacquer were used, and those who had ridiculed him in the past came to ask him to borrow them.

古文：赀至巨万，而赈赡宗族，恩加乡闾。
现代文：他的财产多达好多万，便用来周济抚恤本宗族的人，本乡本土的人也得到他的惠赐。
English: His property, amounting to many millions, was used to support the people of his clan, and the people of his hometown and native land also received his bounty.

古文：外孙何氏，兄弟争财，重耻之，以田二顷，解其忿讼，县中称美。
现代文：有外孙何姓，兄弟之间为争家产闹纠纷，樊重认为这事很不光彩，便用他自己的田地二百亩，平息了他们的争讼，受到县人的称赞和好评。
English: There was a grandson, surnamed He, and there was a dispute between the brothers over the family property. Zou Chong thought that this was very disgraceful, so he used his own 200 mu of farmland to settle their dispute, which was praised and well received by the county people.

古文：其素所假贷人间数百万，遗令焚削文契。
现代文：他平时借贷出去的钱款，累计不下数百万，临终留下遗言，把文契全部焚削掉。
English: He had accumulated millions of dollars in debts to people who had borrowed money from him under false pretenses, and he had ordered the burning of documents.

古文：责家闻者皆惭，争往偿之。
现代文：借债的人听说以后，皆感到非常惭愧，争先恐后地前来还债。
English: When borrowers heard about it, they felt very ashamed and scrambled to pay off their debts.

古文：常戒其子曰： 富贵盈溢，未有能终者。
现代文：樊重时常告诫儿子们说： 大富大贵的人家，没有能保持始终不败的。
English: He often admonished his son: "If you are too rich, you won't have a happy ending."

古文：吾非不喜荣势也，天道恶满而好谦，前世贵戚，皆明戒也。
现代文：我并非不喜欢荣华富贵，怎奈天道厌恶骄满，喜好谦恭，前朝权贵外戚的结局，都可作为明戒。
English: It's not that I don't like prosperity and wealth, it's just that the heavenly way abhors arrogance, prefers humility, and the outcome of the previous government's powerful relatives can be used as a clear commandment.

古文：保身全己，岂不乐哉！ 
现代文：但求保全父母，保全自己，岂不是很快乐吗！ 
English: Wouldn't it be nice to be able to protect yourself?

古文：王景为庐江太守，百姓不知牛耕，致地力有余，而食常不足。
现代文：王景为庐江郡太守，百姓不知晓使用牛耕，故土地虽然有潜力，但粮食却常不够吃。
English: Wang Jing is the governor of Lijiang County. The people do not know how to use cattle farming, so although the land has potential, the grain is often not enough to eat.

古文：景乃教民用犁耕，垦辟倍多，境内丰给。
现代文：王景就教百姓用牛和犁耕田，所开垦的土地，成倍增加，使本郡百姓丰衣足食。
English: Wang Jing taught the people to use oxen and ploughs to plough the fields, and the land reclaimed increased exponentially, so that the people of the county had plenty of food and clothing.

古文：又训令蚕织，为作法制，著于乡亭。
现代文：他又教百姓养蚕和纺织，并编写出蚕织方法规程，张贴在各地乡亭。
English: He also taught the people how to raise silkworms and weave textiles, and compiled a silkworm weaving method specification, which was posted in village pavilions around the country.

古文：王符曰： 一夫不耕，天下受其饥；一妇不织，天下受其寒。
现代文：王符说： 一个农夫不耕田，天下便会受到饥饿；一个妇女不织布，天下便会受到冻寒。
English: Wang Fu said, "If a farmer does not plow the field, the whole world will suffer from hunger; if a woman does not weave cloth, the whole world will suffer from cold."

古文：今举俗舍本农，趋商贾，是则一夫耕，百人食之；一妇桑，百人衣之。
现代文：如今世俗都舍弃农耕本业，转而趋向商贾，这无疑是：一个人种田，供一百人吃食；一个妇女种桑养蚕，供一百人穿衣。
English: Nowadays, the secular world is abandoning the basic business of farming and turning to business. This is undoubtedly: one person cultivates land for a hundred people to eat; a woman grows mulberry and silkworms for a hundred people to wear.

古文：以一奉百，孰能供之！ 
现代文：用一个人的力量，供养一百人，怎么能供应够呢！ 
English: With the strength of one person, to support a hundred people, how can supply enough!

古文：崔寔为五原，土宜麻枲，而俗不知织绩。
现代文：崔寔任五原郡太守，那里的土地本来适合种麻，但当地百姓却不知晓纺绩织布。
English: Cui Rong was the governor of Wuhuan County, where the land was originally suitable for growing hemp, but the local people did not know how to spin or weave cloth.

古文：民冬月无衣，积细草卧其中。
现代文：百姓冬天没有衣穿，便将细草堆积起来，人卧在草堆里避寒。
English: In winter, when people have no clothes to wear, they pile up the fine grass, and people lie down in the grass to avoid the cold.

古文：见吏，则衣草而出。
现代文：会见官吏，便身披细草当衣。
English: When meeting with government officials, he would dress in grass.

古文：寔为作纺绩、织纴之具以教，民得以免寒苦。
现代文：崔寔为他们制作纺绩织布的工具，教给纺织的方法，使他们免受冻寒的痛苦。
English: Cui Wei made tools for them to spin and weave cloth, and taught them how to weave, so that they could avoid the pain of freezing.

古文：刘陶曰： 民可百年无货，不可一朝有饥，故食为至急也。 
现代文：刘陶说： 百姓可以百年无器用，不可以一天没饭吃，可见粮食是不可缺少的急需物资。 
English: Liu Tao said: People can be useless for a hundred years, but they can't go a day without eating. It can be seen that grain is an indispensable and urgently needed material.

古文：仇览为蒲亭长，劝人生业，为制科令，至于果菜为限，鸡豕有数。
现代文：仇览任蒲亭长，劝令百姓搞好生活和生产，并制定出明文条令，详细规定种植蔬菜和果树的数量，喂养鸡只和生猪的数目。
English: He urged the people to improve their lives and production, and formulated a clear order, detailing the number of vegetables and fruit trees to be planted, and the number of chickens and pigs to be fed.

古文：农事既毕，乃令子弟群居就学。
现代文：农事完毕，便让子弟聚集起来学习。
English: After the farm work is finished, he lets his children gather to study.

古文：其剽轻游恣者，皆役以田桑，严设科罚。
现代文：百姓中如有剽轻不轨或游手好闲、恣意妄为的人，便责令他们从事种田和蚕桑劳动，并规定有严格的监督惩治条例。
English: Those who were idle and misbehaved were all made to work the fields, and were strictly disciplined.

古文：躬助丧事，赈恤穷寡。
现代文：他本人能亲自帮助百姓料理丧葬，赈济贫穷，抚恤孤寡。
English: He personally administered funerals for the people and provided relief for the poor and widows.

古文：期年，称大化。
现代文：一年过后，民风大变。
English: A year later, the public mood has changed dramatically.

古文：杜畿为河东，劝耕桑，课民畜牸牛、草马，下逮鸡豚，皆有章程，家家丰实。
现代文：杜畿任河东郡太守，劝令百姓耕农、务蚕桑，督促他们畜养牸牛、草马，甚至养鸡豚多少，皆有规定，家家衣食丰足。
English: Dugui served as the governor of Hedong County, exhorting the people to cultivate and grow silkworms, urging them to raise yaks, horses, and even raise chickens and pigs. There are regulations, and the family has enough food and clothing.

古文：然后兴学校，举孝悌。
现代文：接下来便是着手兴办学校，选举孝悌。
English: The next step is to start building schools and electing filial sons and daughters.

古文：河东遂安。
现代文：河东郡遂趋向安定。
English: As a result, the situation in Hedong County became more stable.

古文：童恢除不其令，若吏称其职，人行善事，皆赐酒肴以劝励之。
现代文：童恢除任不其县令，凡本县官吏，只要能胜任本职工作，本人能行善事，皆赐予酒肉，以资奖励。
English: Tong Wei removed all officials who did not obey the county's orders, and all officials in the county were given meat and drink and financial rewards as long as they were competent in their duties and could do good deeds.

古文：耕、织、种、收，皆有条章。
现代文：对农耕、纺织、播种、收获，各种农活，皆规定有具体要求。
English: There are specific requirements for farming, weaving, sowing, harvesting, and all kinds of agricultural work.

古文：一境清静。
现代文：全县境内，安宁无事。
English: There is peace and tranquility throughout the prefecture.

古文：《齐民要术》：皇甫隆为敦煌。敦煌俗不晓作耧犁；及种，人牛功力既费，而收谷更少。
现代文：《齐民要术》载：皇甫隆任敦煌郡刺史，百姓不知晓制作耧犁，播种时既费人工和牛力，而且谷子的产量也很低。
English: "Qi Min Yaoshu" recorded: Emperor Fulong presided over the history of Dunhuang County, and the people did not know how to make straw. When sowing, it cost both labor and cattle power, and the production of grain was also very low.

古文：隆乃教作耧犁，所省佣力过半，得谷加五。
现代文：皇甫隆便教给百姓制造耧犁，节省的劳力超过一半，收获的谷子增加五成。
English: Emperor Fulong then taught the people to make ploughs, saving more than half of the labour and increasing the harvest of millet by 50%.

古文：又敦煌俗，妇女作裙，孪缩如羊肠，用布一匹。
现代文：又敦煌的风俗，妇女穿的裙子，习惯做成折绉孪缩如同羊肠一般的百褶裙，一条裙子要费掉一匹布。
English: And the custom of Dunhuang, the skirts worn by women, used to be made into pleated skirts with folds as small as a sheep's intestine. One skirt would cost one horse of cloth.

古文：隆又禁改之，所省复不赀。
现代文：皇甫隆加以禁止，并改用新裙式，所节省的费用也不可胜计。
English: Emperor Fulong banned it and replaced it with a new skirt style, and the cost savings are incalculable.

古文：僮种为不其令，率民养一猪、雌鸡四头，以供祭祀，死买棺木。
现代文：僮种任不其县令，规定每人养一头猪、四只母鸡，以供祭祀或死后卖掉用来买棺材。
English: According to the county ordinance, each person is allowed to keep one pig and four hens for sacrifice or to sell after death to buy a coffin.

古文：颜裴为京兆，乃令整阡陌，树桑果。
现代文：颜裴任京兆尹，于是让百姓整修田间道路，种植桑树和果树。
English: Yan Pei was appointed as the Beijing Zhaoyun, so he let the people renovate the field road and plant mulberry trees and fruit trees.

古文：又课以闲月取材，使得转相教匠作车。
现代文：又规定在农闲月份，伐取木材，使民转相传授造车技术。
English: It also stipulates that during the off-peak months, timber should be cut and people should be taught car-making skills.

古文：又课民无牛者，令畜猪；投贵时卖以买牛。
现代文：又规定凡是没有牛的人家，必须养猪，趁猪价贵时卖出，用卖猪的钱买牛。
English: It also stipulates that all people who do not have cattle must raise pigs, sell them when the price of pigs is high, and use the money from selling pigs to buy cattle.

古文：始者民以为烦，一二年间，家有丁车引、大牛，整顿引丰足。
现代文：初开始时，百姓感到政令过于烦琐，但一二年过去，每家都有丁车、大牛，事事整顿，丰衣足食。
English: At the beginning, the people felt that the government order was too cumbersome, but in the past one or two years, every family has a small car and a large cow, everything has been rectified, clothing and food are plentiful.

古文：谯子曰： 朝发而夕异宿，勤则菜盈倾筐。
现代文：谯子说： 早晨同时出发，到天晚投宿，便会有不同；勤快的人可采满筐。
English: The mule said, "If you set out at the same time in the morning and stay overnight, it will be different; a diligent person can pick up a basket full of camels."

古文：且苟有羽毛，不织不衣；不能茹草饮水，不耕不食。
现代文：即使有了羽毛，不织成布，仍然没有衣服穿；人不能依靠吃青草喝凉水生活，不从事农耕，便没有饭吃。
English: Even if they have feathers and are not woven into cloth, they still have no clothes to wear; people cannot live by eating grass and drinking cold water, and if they do not engage in farming, they have no food to eat.

古文：安可以不自力哉？ 
现代文：难道一个人可以不自己努力吗？ 
English: Is it possible for a person not to work hard?

古文：李衡于武陵龙阳洲上作宅，种甘橘千树。敕儿曰： 吾州里，有千头木奴，不责汝衣食，岁上一匹绢，亦可足用矣。 
现代文：李衡在武陵郡龙阳洲上，修建住宅，种植了一千株柑橘，告诫儿子说： 我州里有一千头木奴，不要你供给它们吃穿，每头每年向你献上一匹绢，也可以足够用了。 
English: Li Heng built a house on Longyangzhou, Wuling County, and planted a thousand citrus trees. He admonished his son, saying, "There are a thousand woodchucks in my state. If you don't provide them with food and clothing, I will offer you a donkey every year, and it will be enough.

古文：橘成，岁得绢数千匹。
现代文：橘树长成后，果然一年可得到好几千匹绢。
English: After the orange tree grows up, it turns out that several thousand dragonflies can be obtained in a year.

古文：仲长子曰： 天为之时，而我不农，谷亦不可得而取之。
现代文：仲长子说： 上天替人作成四时，我若不务农，也不可能得到粮食。
English: Naka's eldest son said, "If I didn't work as a farmer, I wouldn't be able to get food.

古文：青春至焉，时雨降焉，始之耕田，终之簠簋，惰者釜之，勤者钟之。
现代文：春天已到，时雨已经降下，从整地播种开始，到粮食收获入簠簋结束，懒惰的人亩收一釜，勤勉的人亩收一钟。
English: Spring has arrived, the rain has fallen, from the beginning of the sowing of the whole land to the end of the grain harvest, the lazy people collect one kettle per mu, and the diligent people collect one mu per minute.

古文：时及不为，而尚乎食也哉？ 
现代文：农时已到，而不及时播种的人，尚可得到吃食吗？ 
English: Can the farmer who does not sow his seed when it is already late have anything to eat?

古文：北魏辛纂，拜河内刺史，督劝农桑，亲自检视，勤者资以物帛，惰者加以罪。
现代文：北魏辛纂，官拜河内郡刺史，督促劝导百姓从事农业和蚕桑生产，常亲自下乡检查视察。对勤勉的人，奖给财物、布帛；对懒惰的人，则进行惩罚。
English: In the Northern Wei Dynasty, Xin Cao, an official of the Hanoi County Historian's Office, urged and advised the people to engage in agriculture and silkworm production, and often personally went to the countryside to inspect and inspect. For diligent people, awards were given to property and cloth; for lazy people, they were punished.

古文：魏陈思王曰： 寒者，不贪尺玉，而思短褐；饥者，不愿千金，而美一食。 
现代文：曹魏陈思王说： 身受冻寒的人，并不贪求尺玉，而是渴望得到一件短褐；饥饿的人，并不愿得到千两黄金，而是以能得到一顿饱餐为美事。 
English: Cao Wei Chen Si Wang said: People who are freezing cold are not greedy for ruler, but long for a short brown; hungry people do not want to get a thousand gold, but to get a full meal is a beautiful thing.

古文：晋桓宣镇襄阳，劝课农桑，或载鉏耒于轺轩，或亲耘获于垄亩。
现代文：晋桓宣镇守襄阳，督促奖励农耕蚕桑，有时将锄头、耒耜置放在轺轩上，有时亲赴田间参加锄地和收刈劳动。
English: Jin Huan Xuan guarded Xiangyang and urged rewards for farming silkworms. Sometimes, he placed the heads of silkworms on the threshing floor, and sometimes he went to the fields to participate in ploughing and harvesting.

古文：唐张全义为河南尹，经黄巢之乱，继以秦宗权、孙儒残暴，居民不满百户，四野俱无耕者。
现代文：唐张全义任河南尹，当时经过黄巢作乱，接着又遭秦宗权、孙儒的大烧杀，居民不到一百户，城四郊看不到有耕田的人。
English: Tang Zhang Quan Yi was in Yin, Henan Province. At that time, after the Yellow Nest, there was a riot, followed by the great burning of Qin Zongquan and Sun Ju. There were less than a hundred residents, and no one could be seen cultivating fields in the four suburbs of the city.

古文：全义招怀流散，劝之树艺。数年之后，都城坊曲，渐复旧制；诸县户口，率皆归复；桑麻蔚然，野无旷土。
现代文：全义招流民安置，劝他们从事农耕；几年以后，都城中大街小巷，逐渐恢复旧日的规模；各县的户口，亦多恢复。遍地是生长茂盛的桑麻，田野中看不到有不耕的荒地。
English: After several years, the streets and alleys in the capital gradually regained their former scale, and the hukou of each prefecture was also restored. Mulberry trees were growing luxuriantly everywhere, and there was no uncultivated wasteland in the fields.

古文：全义明察，人不能欺，而为政宽简。
现代文：全义为人明察事理，别人不能欺瞒，但他的治理方法，却宽缓和平，政令简约。
English: Zhang Quanyi is a shrewd and strong man. People cannot deceive him. At the same time, he is generous and concise in handling government affairs.

古文：出见田畴美者，辄下马与僚佐共观之，召田主劳以酒食。
现代文：全义每外出，看到有的田地庄稼生长好，便下马和随从人等共同观看，召见田主用酒饭进行慰劳。
English: Whenever Zeng Yi went out and saw that some field crops were growing well, he dismounted his horse and his followers to watch together, and summoned the farmer to comfort him with wine and rice.

古文：有蚕麦善收者，或亲至其家，悉呼出老幼，赐以茶彩衣物。
现代文：谁家的蚕茧、麦子收成好，有时便亲自到他家，叫出全家老幼，赐给茶彩衣物。
English: If someone's silkworm cocoon or wheat harvest is good, they will sometimes come to their home in person, call out the whole family, old and young, and give them tea-colored clothing.

古文：民间言： 张公不喜声伎，见之未尝笑；独见佳麦良茧则笑耳！ 
现代文：民间传说： 张公不喜爱歌舞女伎，有时观看，亦不曾见他有笑容；只有看到好麦、好蚕茧，才会喜笑颜开！ 
English: Folklore: Zhang Gong doesn't like Kabuki actresses. Sometimes he watches them, but he has never seen him smile. Only when he sees good wheat and good silkworms will he smile!

古文：有田荒秽者，则集众杖之。
现代文：有的人家，田地荒芜草多，全义便将此家人召集到一起，用杖责打。
English: In some families, the fields were barren and there was a lot of weeds, so the family was called together and beaten with a cane.

古文：或诉以 乏人牛 ，乃召其邻里，责之曰： 彼诚乏人牛，何不助之？ 
现代文：假如被打人申诉说， 田荒，是因缺乏人力牛力 ，便召集他的邻人加以责问说： 如他确是缺乏人力牛力，你们为何不帮助他？ 
English: If the beaten man complains that the field is barren because of a lack of manpower, his neighbours should be summoned and asked: If he really lacks manpower, why don't you help him?

古文：众皆谢，乃释之。
现代文：直到众人都承认错误，才放他们离开。
English: Everyone said they were sorry, and Zhang Quanyi let them go.

古文：由是邻里有无相助，故比户皆有蓄积，凶年不饥，遂成富庶焉。
现代文：从此邻里之间有无相通，彼此互相帮助，所以家家有存粮，即便遇到灾荒的凶年，也不会挨饿。从此变成富足的地方。
English: Since then, neighbors have been communicating with each other and helping each other, so families have stored grain, and even if they encounter a bad year of disaster, they will not go hungry. From now on, it has become a prosperous place.

古文：李袭誉，尝谓子孙曰： 吾负京有田十顷，能耕之，足以食；河内千树桑，事之，可以衣；能勤此，无资于人矣。 
现代文：李袭誉曾经告诉子孙说： 我家在京城附近有田地十顷，能耕种的好，可足够吃的；河内有千株桑树，从事蚕绩，便可供穿衣；只要能勤于这些，便不需要他人的资助了。 
English: Li He Rong once told his children and grandchildren: My family has ten hectares of farmland near the capital, which can be cultivated well and is enough to eat; there are a thousand mulberry trees in Hanoi, which can be used for clothing; as long as you can be diligent in these things, you do not need the support of others.

