古文：汉元帝时，珠崖反，连年不定。
现代文：万汉元帝时候，珠崖反叛，几年平定不了。
English: At the time of Emperor Wanhan Yuan, Zhu Yap rebelled and could not be subdued for several years.

古文：上与有司议大发军，待诏贾捐之建议，以为不当击。
现代文：皇帝和大臣商议使用兵平叛，待诏贾捐之建议，以为不应当打。
English: The emperor and the minister discussed the use of soldiers to quell the rebellion, and waited for the suggestion of Jia Dong, thinking that it should not be fought.

古文：上以问丞相、御史、御史大夫陈万年以为当击，丞相于定国以为捐之议是，上从之，遂罢珠崖郡。
现代文：皇帝便问丞相和御史，御史大夫陈万年认为应当打，丞相于定国以为贾捐之的建议对，皇帝采用了贾捐之的意见。就撤消了珠崖郡。
English: The emperor then asked the prime minister and the imperial historian, the imperial historian Dr. Chen Wanren thought that it should be fought, the prime minister Yu Dingguo thought that Jia Dongzhi's suggestion was right, the emperor adopted Jia Dongzhi's opinion.

古文：匈奴呼韩邪单于既事汉，上书愿保塞上谷以西，请罢边备塞吏卒，以休天子人民。
现代文：匈奴呼韩邪兰于既归服了汉朝，上书说愿意保卫汉朝边塞，从上谷以西，撤走汉朝守边的军队，让人民得到休养生息。
English: The Xiongnu called on Han Yalan to surrender to the Han Dynasty, and sent a letter saying that he was willing to defend the Han Dynasty border fortress, and withdraw the Han Dynasty border troops from the west of the upper valley, so that the people could rest and recuperate.

古文：天子令下有司议，议者皆以为便，郎中侯应习边事，以为不可许。
现代文：皇帝让大臣们商议，都以为可行。郎中侯应熟悉边疆情况，以为不可答应。
English: The emperor asked the ministers to discuss it, and they all thought it was feasible. The vassal lord should be familiar with the situation on the frontier, and thought it was unacceptable.

古文：上问状，应对十策，有诏勿议罢边塞事。
现代文：皇帝询间情况，侯应提出了十条不能答应的意见，皇帝于是下诏不要再谈撤掉边备的意见。
English: When the emperor inquired about the situation, Hou Ying put forward ten opinions that could not be accepted, and the emperor then issued an edict not to talk about withdrawing the border-guarding opinions.

古文：成帝时，匈奴使者欲降，下公卿议，议者言宜如故事受其降。
现代文：汉成帝时候，匈奴使者想要投降，皇帝让大臣们商议，大巨们主张应按旧例接受他投降。
English: At the time of Emperor Han Shing, the Hun envoy wanted to surrender, the emperor asked the ministers to discuss, and the great giants advocated that his surrender should be accepted according to the old practice.

古文：光禄大夫谷永以为不如勿受，天子从之。
现代文：光禄大夫谷永以为不可答应，皇帝采纳了谷永的意见。
English: Dr. Gu Yong, the doctor of Guanglu, thought it was unacceptable, and the emperor adopted Gu Yong's opinion.

古文：使者果诈也。
现代文：使者果然是诈降。
English: The envoy was indeed a traitor.

古文：哀帝时，单于求朝，帝欲止之，以问公卿，亦以为虚费府帑，可且勿许。单于使辞去。
现代文：汉哀帝时侯，单于要求朝见皇帝，皇帝不想答应，便征求大臣意见，大臣们也认为耗费国家钱财，不宜答应，单于使臣便走了。
English: At the time of Emperor Han, Emperor Han did not want to agree to Emperor Han's request to meet the emperor, so he asked the ministers for their opinion. The ministers also thought that it was not appropriate to agree to the request, as it would cost the country money. The envoys simply left.

古文：黄门郎扬雄上书谏，天子寤焉，召还匈奴使者，更报单于书而许之。
现代文：黄门郎扬雄上书劝谏，皇帝省悟过来，召回匈奴使臣，另写了诏书，答应了单于的请求。
English: Huangmen Lang Yangxiong sent a letter to persuade him, and the emperor came to his senses and recalled the Xiongnu envoys. He also wrote an edict and agreed to Shan Yu's request.

古文：安帝时，大将军邓骘欲弃凉州，并力北边，会公卿集议，皆以为然，郎中虞诩陈三不可，乃更集四府，皆从诩议。
现代文：汉安帝时候，大将军邓鹭想放弃凉州，加强力量，以对付北方边患。朝廷召集公卿商议，都以为可行，郎中虞诩陈述了三条意见，以为不能放弃。
English: At the time of Emperor Han, the great general Deng Yu wanted to give up Liangzhou and strengthen the forces to deal with the northern border problems. The court convened the nobles to discuss, all of which were considered feasible. Langzhong Yuxuan stated three opinions, which he believed could not be given up.

古文：北匈奴复强，西域诸国既绝于汉，公卿多以为宜闭玉门关绝西域。
现代文：于是又召集四府商议，都同意虞诩的建议。北匈奴再度强盛，西域诸国断绝了和汉朝的关系，大臣们多主张关闭玉门关，和西域断绝交往。
English: As a result, the four prefectures were convened for deliberation, and they all agreed to the suggestion of Gu Yu. The Northern Xiongnu was once again strong, the countries of the Western Regions broke off relations with the Han Dynasty, and the ministers mostly advocated closing the Yumen Pass and breaking off contacts with the Western Regions.

古文：邓太后召军司马班勇问之，勇以为不可，于是从勇议。
现代文：邓太后召来军司马班勇，询问他的意见，班勇以为不宜断绝，于是采纳了班勇的意见。
English: Empress Dowager Deng summoned the Secretary of the Army, Ma Ban Yong, to inquire about his opinion. Ban Yong thought that it was not appropriate to break off, so he adopted Ban Yong's opinion.

古文：顺帝时，交趾蛮叛，帝召公卿百官及四府掾属，问以方略，皆议遣大将发兵赴之，议郎李固驳之，乞选刺史太守以往，四府悉从固议，岭外复平。
现代文：汉顺帝时候，交趾蛮反叛，皇帝召集公卿百宫和四府的僚属商讨对策，都主张派大将进兵征讨，议郭李固提出反对意见，要求选派刺史太守去安抚，四府都听从了李固的意见，岭南又安定下来。
English: At the time of Emperor Han Shun, there was a violent rebellion, and the emperor convened the court nobles of Baigu and the colleagues of the four provinces to discuss countermeasures. They all advocated sending a general to conscript soldiers, and Guo Li Guo raised objections and requested the appointment of Zishi Taishou to pacify. The four provinces all listened to Li Guo's opinions, and Lingnan settled down again.

古文：灵帝时，凉州兵乱不解，司徒崔烈以为宜弃，诏会公卿百官议之，议郎傅燮以为不可，帝从之。
现代文：汉灵帝时候，凉州军士骚乱不止，司徒崔烈以为应该放弃，朝廷乃召集公卿百官商议，议郎傅燮以为不能放弃，皇帝听从了傅燮的建议。
English: At the time of Han Lingdi, the Liangzhou sergeant rioted more and more. Stul Cui Rong thought that it should be abandoned. The court convened a hundred officials to discuss. The negotiator Fu Xi thought that it could not be abandoned. The emperor listened to Fu Xi's suggestion.

古文：此八事者，所系利害甚大，一时公卿百官既同定议矣，贾损之以下八人，皆以郎大夫之微，独陈异说。
现代文：这八件事，都关系着国家成败，当时公卿百官都有了共同意见，贾捐之等八人，都是郎、大夫一类的小官，却敢提出不同意见。
English: These eight matters were all related to the success or failure of the country. At that time, all the nobles and officials had a common opinion, but eight people such as Jia Tongzhi, who were minor officials such as lords and doctors, dared to put forward different opinions.

古文：汉元、成、哀、安、顺、灵皆非明主，悉能违众而听之，大臣无贤愚亦不复执前说，盖犹有公道存焉。
现代文：汉元帝、成帝、哀帝、安帝，顺帝、灵帝都不是英明的皇帝，都能够违背众人，听从他们的意见，大臣们不论贤愚，也不再坚持前议，这是公道还存在的表现。
English: Emperor Han Yuan, Emperor Cheng, Emperor Pao, Emperor An, Emperor Shun, and Emperor Ling are not wise emperors. They can all disobey the people and listen to their opinions. The ministers, whether wise or foolish, no longer insist on the previous proposal. This is a manifestation that justice still exists.

古文：每事皆能如是，天下其有不治乎？
现代文：每件事都能这样，天下还有不太平的吗？
English: Everything can be like this. Is there anything in the world that is not peaceful?

