古文：◎英宗后纪
现代文：英宗后纪
English: Yingzong Houji

古文：天顺元年春正月壬午，昧爽，武清侯石亨，都督张輗、张軏，左都御史杨善，副都御史徐有贞，太监曹吉祥以兵迎帝于南宫，御奉天门，朝百官。
现代文：天顺元年正月十七日，天刚拂晓，武清侯石亨，都督张輗、张軏，左都御史杨善，副都御史徐有贞，太监曹吉祥以兵变迎接英宗于南宫，在奉天门朝见文武百官。
English: On the seventeenth day of the first month of the first year of Tianshun, just before dawn, Wuching marquis Shi Heng, governors Zhang Ye and Zhang Ye, left capital governor Shi Yang Shan, vice-governor governor Xu Yuzhen, and eunuch Cao Jixiang met Yingzong at the South Palace with a mutiny, and met with hundreds of civil and military officials at the Gate of Heaven.

古文：徐有贞以原官兼翰林学士，入阁预机务。
现代文：徐有贞以原官兼翰林学士，入值文渊阁参与机要事务。
English: Xu Youzhen, as a former official and a scholar of Hanlin, was assigned to Wenyuan Pavilion to participate in important affairs.

古文：日中，御奉天殿即位。
现代文：中午，英宗在奉天殿即皇帝位。
English: At noon, Emperor Yingzong ascended to the throne in the Hall of Heaven.

古文：下兵部尚书于谦、大学士王文锦衣卫狱。
现代文：下兵部尚书于谦、大学士王文于锦衣卫狱。
English: The lower-ranking military officer, Shang Shu, was imprisoned in Qian, and the university scholar, Wang Wen, was imprisoned in Jinwei.

古文：太常寺卿许彬、大理寺卿薛瑄为礼部侍郎兼翰林学士，入阁预机务。
现代文：太常寺卿许彬、大理寺卿薛王宣为礼部侍郎兼翰林学士，入文渊阁参与重要事务。
English: Xu Bin, Lord of Taizho-ji Temple, and Xue Wang Xuan, Lord of Dali-ji Temple, were attendants of the etiquette department and scholars of Hanlin, and participated in important affairs in Wen Yuange.

古文：丙戌，诏赦天下，改景泰八年为天顺元年。
现代文：二十一日，下诏赦免天下，改景泰八年为天顺元年。
English: On the twenty-first day of the year, the emperor issued an edict to pardon the whole country, and the year of the first year of Tianshun was changed to the eighth year.

古文：论夺门迎复功，封石亨忠国公，张軏太平侯，张輗文安伯，杨善兴济伯，曹吉祥嗣子钦都督同知。
现代文：论夺取奉天门之功劳，封石亨忠国公，张车兀太平侯，张为文安伯，杨善为兴济伯，曹吉祥嗣子曹钦为都督同知。
English: On the merits of seizing the Gate of Heaven, Fuxi Heng Zhongguo, Zhang Chejun Taiping, Zhang Wen'anbo, Yang Shan as Xing Zhibo, Cao Jixiang's heir Cao Qin as the governor of Tongzhi.

古文：丁亥，杀于谦、王文，籍其家。
现代文：二十二日，杀于谦、王文，抄没其家。
English: On the 22nd, they killed Yu Qian and Wang Wen and ransacked their homes.

古文：陈循、江渊、俞士悦谪戍，萧鎡、商辂除名。
现代文：陈循、江渊、俞士悦贬官戍边，萧钅兹、商辂除名。
English: Chen Cun, Jiang Yuan, and Wei Shiyu were demoted to subordinate officials, and Xiao Yuzi and Shang Qi were removed from their posts.

古文：己丑，复论夺门功，封孙镗怀宁伯，董兴海宁伯，钦天监正汤序礼部右侍郎，官舍旂军晋级者凡三千余人。
现代文：二十四日，再论夺门之功，封孙镗怀宁伯，董兴海宁伯，钦天监正汤序为礼部右侍郎，官舍旗军晋级的共三千多人。
English: On the 24th, in addition to the achievements of winning the gate, there were more than three thousand people who were promoted to the ranks of Sun Yat-sen Wai Ning Bo, Dong Xing Hai Ning Bo, Qin Tianjun Zheng Tang Zi as the right attendant of the ceremonial department, and the official flag army.

古文：辛卯，罢巡抚提督官。
现代文：二十六日，罢免巡抚提督官。
English: On the 26th, the inspector general was dismissed.

古文：壬辰，榜于谦党人示天下。
现代文：二十七日，公布于谦党徒姓名告示天下。
English: On the 27th, the names of the humble party members were announced to the world.

古文：甲午，杀昌平侯杨俊。
现代文：二十九日，杀昌平侯杨俊。
English: On the 29th, he killed Yang Jun, the mayor of Changping.

古文：二月乙未朔，废景泰帝为郕王。
现代文：二月一日，废景泰帝为成阝王。
English: On the first day of February, Emperor Taejo was crowned as King Seongyeong.

古文：庚子，高谷致仕。
现代文：六日，高谷辞官退职。
English: On the 6th, Takaya resigned from his post.

古文：汤序请除景泰年号，不许。
现代文：汤序请求除掉景泰年号，不许。
English: Tang sequence request to remove the Jing Tai years, not allowed.

古文：癸卯，吏部侍郎李贤兼翰林学士，入阁预机务。
现代文：九日，吏部侍郎李贤兼翰林学士，入值文渊阁参与机要事务。
English: On the 9th, Li Xian (李贤) and Han Lin (翰林), both of whom were attendants of the cadre department, were assigned to participate in important affairs at Wen Yuan Pavilion.

古文：杀都督范广。
现代文：杀都督范广。
English: He killed the governor, Fan Guang.

古文：戊申，柳溥破广西蛮。
现代文：十四日，柳溥攻破广西蛮酋。
English: On the 14th, Liu Bei defeated the Guangxi barbarian chiefs.

古文：癸丑，郕王薨。
现代文：十九日，成阝王死。
English: On the 19th, King Chengxuan died.

古文：戊午，方瑛、石璞大破湖广苗。
现代文：二十四日，方瑛、石璞大败湖广苗民。
English: On the 24th, Fangying and Shijiazhuang were defeated by Guangmiao.

古文：召璞还。
现代文：召石璞回京。
English: Ishizaki was called back to Kyoto.

古文：壬戌，免南畿被灾秋粮。
现代文：二十八日，免南畿秋粮。
English: On the 28th, Nanki Autumn Grain was exempted.

古文：三月己巳，复立长子见深为皇太子，封皇子见潾为德王，见澍秀王，见泽崇王，见浚吉王。
现代文：三月六日，又立长子朱见深为皇太子，封皇子朱见贎为德王，见澍为秀王，见泽为崇王，见浚为吉王。
English: On March 6, Zhu Mingshen's eldest son Zhu Mingshen was also appointed crown prince, and Zhu Mingshen's sons Zhu Mingshan was named De Wang, Mingshan was named Xiu Wang, Mizawa was named Chong Wang, and Mingshan was named Ji Wang.

古文：癸酉，封徐有贞武功伯。
现代文：十日，封徐有贞武功伯。
English: On the 10th, Feng Xu was awarded the title of Zhenwu Gongbo.

古文：乙亥，大赉文武军民。
现代文：十二日，大加赏赐文武军民。
English: On the 12th, a large reward was given to the military and civilians.

古文：庚辰，赐黎淳等进士及第、出身有差。
现代文：十七日，赐黎淳等进士及第、出身各有差别。
English: On the seventeenth day, Li Jun and others were awarded the title, and the number and origin were different.

古文：石亨为征虏副将军，剿寇延绥。
现代文：石亨为征虏副将军，征剿延绥寇贼。
English: Shi Heng was the vice-general of the conscript, and the conscript Yan Yan was the bandit.

古文：丁亥，振山东饥。
现代文：二十四日，赈济山东饥荒。
English: On the 24th, famine broke out in Shandong Province.

古文：夏四月甲午朔，以灾异数见求直言。
现代文：四月初一日，因多次出现奇怪灾害求直言。
English: On the first day of April, due to the repeated occurrence of strange disasters, it is necessary to speak frankly.

古文：乙未，免浙江被灾税粮。
现代文：二日，免浙江遭灾税粮。
English: On the second day, Zhejiang was exempted from the disaster tax grain.

古文：丁酉，方瑛攻铜彭藕洞苗，讨平之。丁未，录囚。
现代文：四日，方瑛攻平铜鼓藕洞苗民。十四日，审查囚犯。
English: On the 4th, Fang Ying attacked and leveled Miao Min in Tongluo Cave. On the 14th, he reviewed the prisoners.

古文：癸丑，罢团营。
现代文：二十日，罢废团营。
English: On the 20th, the strike ended.

古文：乙卯，孛来寇宁夏，参将种兴战死。
现代文：二十二日，孛来侵犯宁夏，参将种兴战死。
English: On the 22nd, the Lai invaded Ningxia, and general Zeng Xing was killed in the battle.

古文：五月辛未，安远侯柳溥备宣、大边。
现代文：五月九日，安远侯柳溥防备宣府、大同边境。
English: On May 9th, Anyuan Hou Liuyi defended Xuanfu and Datong border.

古文：是月，以石亨言下御史杨瑄、张鹏狱。
现代文：当月，因石亨谈论下御史杨王宣、张鹏于狱。
English: In the same month, Yang Wangxuan and Zhang Peng were jailed because of Shek Heng's discussion about the next-in-line to the throne.

古文：六月甲午，下右都御史耿九畴、副都御史罗绮锦衣卫狱。
现代文：六月二日，下右都御史耿九畴、副都御史罗绮于锦衣卫狱。
English: On June 2, Geng Jiu Zang, the Lower Right Metropolitan, and Luo Yao, the Deputy Metropolitan, were taken to Jinwei Prison.

古文：己亥，下徐有贞、锦衣卫狱。
现代文：当天，大风雨，下大冰雹，打坏奉天殿上鸱吻，命令群臣修身反省。
English: On the same day, a heavy storm, heavy hail, and a bad kiss on the altar of the Temple of Heaven, ordered the ministers to reflect on themselves.

古文：是日，大风雨雹，坏奉天门鸱吻，敕修省。庚子，徐有贞、李贤、罗绮、耿九畴谪外任，杨瑄、张鹏戍边。
现代文：八日，徐有贞、李贤、罗绮、耿九畴贬官外任，杨王宣、张鹏戍边。
English: On the 8th, Xu Yuzhen, Li Xian, Luo Wei and Geng Jiu Jiao were demoted to non-official positions, and Yang Wangxuan and Zhang Pengyuan were promoted.

古文：通政司参议兼侍讲吕原入阁预机务。
现代文：通政司参议兼侍讲吕原入文渊阁参与机要事务。
English: Lv Yuan, the Councillor of the Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs and the Vice-Speaker of the State Council, participated in important affairs at the Yuan Pavilion.

古文：壬寅，薛瑄致仕。
现代文：十日，薛王宣退休。
English: On the 10th, Xue Wangxuan retired.

古文：癸卯，修撰岳正人阁预机务。
现代文：十一日，修撰岳正入文渊阁参与机要事务。
English: On the 11th day, Shoshen Yuezheng entered Wenyuan Pavilion to participate in important affairs.

古文：甲辰，复李贤为吏部侍郎。
现代文：十二日，恢复李贤为吏部侍郎。
English: On the 12th, Li Xian was reinstated as the secretary of the cadre department.

古文：乙巳，巡抚贵州副都御史蒋琳坐于谦党弃市。
现代文：十三日，巡抚贵州副都御史蒋琳定罪为于谦党徒弃市示众。
English: On the 13th, the governor of Guizhou, the deputy capital of Guizhou, Jiang Lin, was convicted of abandoning the city to show the public.

古文：秋七月乙丑，复下徐有贞于狱。
现代文：七月四日，再下徐有贞于狱。
English: On July 4, Xu Youzhen was sent to prison again.

古文：丙寅，承天门灾。
现代文：五日，承天门发生火灾。
English: On the fifth day, a fire broke out at Chengtianmen.

古文：丁卯，躬祷于南郊。
现代文：六日，亲自到南郊祈祷。
English: On the sixth day, I personally went to the southern suburbs to pray.

古文：戊辰，敕修省。
现代文：七日，命群臣修身反省。
English: On the seventh day, the ministers were ordered to reflect on their lives.

古文：庚午，李贤复入阁。
现代文：九日，李贤又入值文渊阁。
English: On the 9th, Li Xian was again assigned to Wenyuan Pavilion.

古文：改许彬南京礼部侍郎。
现代文：改许彬为南京礼部侍郎。
English: He changed his name to Xu Bin and became a chamberlain of the Nanjing Ceremonial Department.

古文：辛未，出岳正为钦州同知，寻下狱，谪戍。
现代文：十日，出岳正为钦差同知，不久下狱，贬官戍边。
English: On the 10th, De Yue Zheng was a confidant of Qin Zha, and he was soon sent to prison and demoted.

古文：癸酉，大赦。
现代文：十二日，大赦。
English: On the 12th, the amnesty ended.

古文：癸未，放徐有贞于金齿。
现代文：二十二日，将徐有贞流放到金齿。
English: On the 22nd, Xu Youzhen was exiled to Jinzu.

古文：辛卯，大赉诸边军士。
现代文：三十日，大加赏赐各边境将士。
English: On the 30th, a large reward was given to the soldiers of each frontier.

古文：八月甲午，以彗星屡见，躬祷于上帝。
现代文：八月三日，因多次出现彗星，英宗亲自向上天祈祷。
English: On August 3, due to the repeated appearance of comets, Yingzong himself prayed to heaven.

古文：九月甲子，太常少卿彭时兼翰林学士，入阁预机务。
现代文：九月三日，太常少卿彭时兼翰林学士，入值文渊阁参与机要事务。
English: On September 3rd, Peng Shih, Taizhong Shaoqing and Hanlin Baccalaureate, was assigned to Wen Yuange to participate in important affairs.

古文：冬十月丁酉，赐王振祭葬，立祠曰： 旌忠 。
现代文：十月七日，赐准祭祀安葬王振。立祭祠叫 旌忠 。
English: On October 7th, permission was granted to hold a memorial service to bury Wang Zhen. The memorial service was held at a small shrine called Shizhong.

古文：壬寅，徵江西处士吴与弼。
现代文：十二日，征召江西处士吴与弼。
English: On the 12th, Jiangxi officers Wu and Zou were conscripted.

古文：丙辰，释建文帝幼子文圭及其家属，安置凤阳。
现代文：二十六日，释放建文帝幼子朱文奎及其家属，安置于凤阳。
English: On the 26th, Emperor Jianwen's young son Zhu Wenkui and his family were released and resettled in Fengyang.

古文：十一月甲戌，广西总兵官朱瑛讨田州叛蛮。
现代文：十一月十四日，广西总兵官朱瑛征讨田州叛蛮。
English: On November 14th, Zhu Yingzheng, the military commander of Guangxi, went to Tianzhou to discuss the rebellion.

古文：己丑，免山东被灾夏税。
现代文：二十九日，免山东遭灾夏税。
English: On the 29th, Shandong was exempted from the summer tax.

古文：十二月壬辰，封曹钦昭武伯。辛丑，安远侯柳溥充总兵官，御孛来于甘、凉。
现代文：十二月二日，封曹钦昭武伯，十一日，安远侯柳溥充任总兵官，在甘、凉等处抵御孛来兵。
English: On December 2nd, Cao Qin Zhaowu was appointed as the commander-in-chief, and on the 11th, Anyuan Hou Liujuan was appointed as the commander-in-chief. They resisted the invaders in Gan, Liang and other places.

古文：是年，琉球中山、安南、暹罗、占城、哈密、乌斯藏入贡。
现代文：这年，琉球中山、安南、暹罗、占城、哈密、乌斯藏入朝进贡。
English: In that year, the Ryukyu kingdoms of Nakayama, Annan, Siam, Zhancheng, Hami, and Usuko paid tribute to the imperial court.

古文：二年春正月辛酉，兵部尚书陈汝言有罪下狱。
现代文：天顺二年正月二日，兵部尚书陈汝言犯罪下狱。
English: On the 2nd day of the 1st month of the 2nd year of Tianshun, the military secretary Chen Ruyan was released from prison.

古文：乙丑，享太庙。
现代文：六日，祭祀太庙。
English: On the 20th, the memorial service was held at the Imperial Temple.

古文：甲戌，太祀天地于南郊。
现代文：十五日，大祭天地于京城南郊。
English: On the fifteenth day, the grand festival took place in the southern suburbs of Beijing.

古文：己卯，上皇太后尊号。
现代文：二十日，上皇太后尊号。
English: On the 20th, the former empress dowager's honorary title came to an end.

古文：二月戊申，开云南、福建、浙江银场。
现代文：二月十九日，开云南、浙江、福建银场。
English: On February 19, the Yunnan, Zhejiang and Fujian silver fields were opened.

古文：中官市云南珍宝。
现代文：中官买云南珍宝。
English: Vice-minister buys Yunnan treasures.

古文：闰月己卯，瘗土木暴骸。
现代文：闰二月二十一日，掩埋土木暴露尸骨。
English: On the 21st day of the second month of the leap year, the bones were buried and exposed by the earthwork.

古文：夏四月，复设巡抚官。
现代文：四月，又设巡抚官。
English: In April, an inspector was also appointed.

古文：五月壬寅，授处士吴与弼左谕德，辞不拜，寻送还乡。
现代文：五月十六日，授与处士吴与弼左谕德官职，吴不接受也不朝拜，不久被送回乡里。
English: On May 16th, the awarding officer Wu and Zou Zuo were appointed to the position. Wu did not accept nor bow, and was soon sent back to the village.

古文：秋七月癸卯，定远伯石彪为平夷将军，充总兵官，御寇宁夏。
现代文：七月十八日，定远伯石彪为平夷将军，充任总兵官，在宁夏抵御来犯之敌。
English: On July 18th, Dingyuan Bo Shibiao was appointed as the general of the Pingyi, and was appointed as the chief military officer to resist the invading enemy in Ningxia.

古文：八月戊辰，孛来寇镇番。
现代文：八月十三日，孛来侵犯镇番。
English: On August 13th, he came to encroach on the town guard.

古文：冬十月甲子，猎南海子。
现代文：十月十日，在南海子打猎。
English: October 10, hunting in Nanhaizi.

古文：壬午，武平伯陈友为征夷将军，充总兵官，剿寇宁夏。
现代文：二十八日，武平伯陈友为征夷将军，充任总兵官，剿宁夏犯敌。
English: On the 28th, Wu Ping Bo Chen You was appointed as the general of the expeditionary force, and served as the commander-in-chief.

古文：十一月甲寅，免山东秋粮。
现代文：十一月三十日，免山东秋粮。
English: On November 30, Shandong Autumn Grain will be exempted.

古文：是年，安南、乌斯藏、占城、哈密入贡。
现代文：这年，安南、乌斯藏、占城、哈密入朝进贡。
English: In that year, Annan, Uthzang, Zhancheng, and Hami paid tribute to the emperor.

古文：三年春正月乙未，大祀天地于南郊。
现代文：天顺三年正月十二日，在京城南郊大祭天地。
English: On the 12th day of the 1st month of the 3rd year of Tenshun, a grand festival was held in the southern suburb of Beijing.

古文：甲辰，定远伯石彪、彰武伯杨信败孛来于安边营，都督佥事周贤、都指挥李鉴战死。
现代文：二十一日，定远伯石彪、彰武伯杨信在安边营打败孛来，都督佥事周贤、都指挥李鉴战死。
English: On the twenty-first day, Dingyuan Bo Shi Biao and Zhangwu Bo Yangxin defeated Yan Lai in the Anbian camp. The governor of the capital, Zhou Xian, and the commander of the capital, Li Jian, died in the battle.

古文：进彪为侯。
现代文：进封石彪为侯。
English: Jinfeng Shi Biao was the mayor.

古文：二月丁卯，遣御史及中官采珠广东。
现代文：二月十四日，派御史及中官去广东采集珠宝。
English: On February 14th, he sent the imperial historian and the lieutenant-general to Guangdong to collect jewels.

古文：夏四月壬子，巡抚两广佥都御史叶盛破泷水瑶。
现代文：四月一日，巡抚两广佥都御史叶盛攻破泷水瑶民。
English: On April 1st, the governor of the two provinces, Ip Shih-sheng, invaded and defeated the people of Shishui.

古文：己巳，南和侯方瑛克贵州苗。
现代文：十八日，南和侯方瑛攻下贵州苗民。
English: On the 18th, Nanhe Hou Fangying attacked Miao Min in Guizhou.

古文：六月辛酉，复命巡抚官以八月集京师议事。
现代文：六月十一日，又命巡抚官于八月集会京师讨论大事。
English: On June 11, the procuratorate was ordered to convene a meeting in August to discuss major events.

古文：秋八月庚戌，石彪有罪，下锦衣卫狱。
现代文：八月一日，石彪犯罪，投入锦衣卫监狱。
English: On August 1st, Shi Biao committed a crime and was sent to Jinwei Prison.

古文：己未，禁文武大臣、给事中、御史、锦衣卫官往来交通，违者依铁榜例论罪。
现代文：十日，禁止文武大臣、给事中、御史、锦衣卫官员互相往来通好，有违反者按铁榜例治罪。
English: On the 10th, the Minister of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology, the Vice-Minister of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology, the Vice-Minister of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology, and the Vice-Minister of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology were prohibited from communicating with each other.

古文：乙亥，免湖广被灾秋粮。
现代文：二十六日，免湖广受灾秋粮。
English: On the 26th, the autumn grain affected by the disaster was exempted from the lake.

古文：冬十月己未，幸南海子。
现代文：十月十一日，巡幸南海子。
English: On October 11th, the inspection tour of Nanhaizi began.

古文：庚午，石亨以罪罢。
现代文：二十二日，石亨因犯罪被免职。
English: On the 22nd, Shi Heng was removed from office for the crime.

古文：诸夺门冒功者许自首改正。
现代文：允许冒夺取奉天门之功的诸大臣悔过自新。
English: The ministers who allowed themselves to be cheated out of the honor of serving Heaven have repented and reformed themselves.

古文：是月，命法司会廷臣，每岁霜降录囚，后以为常。
现代文：本月，命法官召集廷臣，每年霜降时审查囚犯，以后成为常制。
English: This month, the judge ordered courtiers to be summoned to review the prisoners every year at the time of frost, which will become a regular practice.

古文：十一月癸巳，振湖广饥。
现代文：十一月十五日，赈济湖广饥荒。
English: On the 15th of November, the famine spread to the whole of Lake Biji.

古文：是年哈密、琉球中山、锡兰山、满剌加入贡。
现代文：当年，哈密、琉球中山、锡兰山、满剌加入朝进贡。
English: In that year, Hami, Ryukyu Nakayama, Ceylon Mountain, and Manchukuo joined the tribute to the North.

古文：四年春正月丁亥，太祀天地于南郊。
现代文：天顺四年正月九日，大祭天地于京师南郊。
English: On the 9th day of the 1st month of the 4th year of Tenshun, the grand festival took place in the southern suburbs of Beijing.

古文：癸卯，石亨有罪下狱，寻死。
现代文：二十五日，石亨犯罪下狱，不久死去。
English: On the 25th, Shi Heng was released from prison and died soon after.

古文：二月壬子，僮陷梧州。
现代文：二月五日，壮族人攻陷梧州。
English: On February 5, the Zhuang people invaded Wuzhou.

古文：丁卯，石彪弃市。
现代文：二十日，石彪抛尸弃市。
English: On the 20th, Shi Biao abandoned the city.

古文：三月庚辰，赐王一夔等进士及第、出身有差。
现代文：三月三日，赐王一夔等进士及第、出身各有差别。
English: On March 3rd, there were a number of new recruits, including Ji Wang and Yi Jun, each with a different rank and background.

古文：戊戌，免南畿被灾秋粮。
现代文：二十一日，免南畿遭灾秋粮。
English: On the 21st, Nanki was spared from the autumn grain disaster.

古文：夏四月己酉，分遣内臣督浙江、云南、福建、四川银课。
现代文：四月三日，分别派朝中大臣监督浙江、云南、福建、四川银课。
English: On April 3, the DPRK and Chinese ministers were sent to supervise the Zhejiang, Yunnan, Fujian and Sichuan banking sectors respectively.

古文：壬子，襄王瞻墡来朝。
现代文：六日，襄王朱瞻王善前来朝见。
English: On the sixth day, the king of Xiang, Zhu Zhan Wang Zhen, came to see the emperor.

古文：五月壬午，免畿内、浙江被灾秋粮。
现代文：五月七日，免畿内、浙江受灾秋粮。
English: On May 7, the affected autumn grain crops in Kinai and Zhejiang were exempted.

古文：己亥，罢中官督苏、杭织造。
现代文：二十四日，停止中官监督苏、杭二州织造。
English: On the 24th, the liaison officers supervising the weaving in Suzhou and Hangzhou were suspended.

古文：六月癸亥，免湖广被灾税粮。
现代文：六月十八日，免湖广受灾税粮。
English: On June 18th, tax-free grain was distributed to those affected by the disaster.

古文：秋七月乙亥朔，日有食之。
现代文：七月一日，有日食。
English: On July 1st, there was a solar eclipse.

古文：辛卯，自五月雨至是月，淮水决，没军民田庐，遣使振恤。
现代文：十七日，从五月下雨一直到七月，淮河水冲出堤外，淹没军民田地及房屋，派使者赈救抚恤。
English: On the 17th, from May, when it rained, until July, the water of the Huai River burst out of the dike, flooding the fields and houses of the military and the people. An envoy was sent to rescue them.

古文：八月甲子，孛来三道入寇，大同总兵官李文、宣府总兵官杨能御之。
现代文：八月二十一日，孛来分三路大军入侵中原，大同总兵官李文、宣府总兵官杨能率兵抵抗。
English: On August 21, a three-pronged army invaded the Central Plains. Li Wen, the general officer of Datong, and Yang Neng, the general officer of Xuanfu, led the resistance.

古文：癸酉，孛来入雁门，掠忻、代、朔诸州。
现代文：三十日，孛来攻入雁门，抢掠忻、代、朔诸州。
English: On the 30th, the Jurchens came to invade the Wild Goose Gate and plundered the Jurchen, Dai, and Shuo states.

古文：九月庚辰，孛来围大同右卫。
现代文：九月七日，孛来围攻大同右卫。
English: On September 7th, they came to besiege Datong Uwei.

古文：庚寅，抚宁伯朱永，都督白玉、鲍政备宣府边。
现代文：十七日，抚宁伯朱永，都督白玉、鲍政防备宣府边境。
English: On the 17th, Zhu Yong, the governor of Fuxing, Bai Yu, and Bao Zheng prepared the border of Xuanfu.

古文：甲午，免江西被灾秋粮。
现代文：二十一日，免江西受灾税粮。
English: On the 21st, Jiangxi was exempted from the disaster tax grain.

古文：冬十月甲子，阅京营将领骑射于西苑。
现代文：十月二十二日，在西苑检阅京师营兵将领骑射情况。
English: On October 22nd, the commander of the battalion of the Beijing Division inspected the situation of horse shooting in the West Courtyard.

古文：戊幸南海子。
现代文：二十六日，巡幸南海子。
English: On the 26th, they went on a sightseeing tour of Nanhaizi.

古文：十一月丁酉，阅随操武臣骑射于西苑。
现代文：十一月二十五日，检阅随操武臣骑射技术于西苑。
English: On November 25th, the inspection of the riding and shooting techniques of the accompanying samurai was held in the West Garden.

古文：闰月己未，幸郑村坝，阅甲仗军马。
现代文：闰十一月十七日，巡幸郑村坝，检阅甲仗兵马。
English: On the 17th day of the 11th month, Zhengcun Dam was inspected.

古文：是年，琉球中山、安南、占城、爪哇、哈密、乌斯藏入贡。
现代文：本年，琉球中山、安南、占城、爪哇、哈密、乌斯藏入朝进贡。
English: This year, Ryukyu Nakayama, Annan, Zhancheng, Java, Hami, and Usuko paid tribute to the North.

古文：五年春正月庚戌，大祀天地于南郊。
现代文：天顺五年正月九日，大祭天地于京师南郊。
English: On the 9th day of the 1st month of the 5th year of Tenshun, the grand festival was held in the southern suburb of Beijing.

古文：二月己卯，免山东被灾税粮。
现代文：二月八日，免山东遭灾税粮。
English: On February 8th, the disaster-hit grain in Shandong was exempted from tax.

古文：丙申，都督佥事颜彪为征夷将军，充总兵官，讨两广瑶贼。
现代文：二十五日，都督佥事颜彪任征夷将军，充任总兵官，征讨两广瑶贼。
English: On the 25th day of the month, Yan Biao, the governor of the capital, was appointed as the general of the expeditionary force to conquer the two provinces.

古文：三月壬子，免苏、松、常、镇被灾税粮。
现代文：三月十一日，减免苏、松、常、镇遭灾税粮。
English: On March 11th, the reduction and exemption of the tax grain of Su, Song, Chang and Zhen suffered from the disaster.

古文：甲寅，湖广、贵州总兵官李震会广西军剿瑶、僮，悉破之。
现代文：十三日，湖广、贵州总兵官李震与广西军征剿瑶、壮，大获全胜。
English: On the 13th, Li Zhen, the commander-in-chief of the Hukang and Guizhou armies, and the Guangxi army won a great victory.

古文：夏四月癸巳，兵部侍郎白圭督陕西诸边。讨孛来。
现代文：四月二十三日，兵部侍郎白圭监督陕西各边境军务，征讨孛来。
English: On April 23, Bai Gui, an adjutant of the military department, supervised the military affairs of each border of Shaanxi and came to solicit contributions.

古文：五月丁未，免河南被灭秋粮。
现代文：五月八日，免河南受灾秋粮。
English: On May 8, Henan was exempted from the affected autumn grain.

古文：六月丙子，孛来寇河西，官军败绩。
现代文：六月七日，孛来侵犯河西，官军溃败。
English: On June 7, the Liao invaded Hexi, and the government army was routed.

古文：壬午，兵部尚书马昂总督军务，怀宁伯孙镗充总兵官，帅京营军御之。
现代文：十三日，兵部尚书马昂总督军务，怀宁伯孙镗充任总兵官，率京师营兵反击。
English: On the 13th, General Ma'an, the military governor of the Ministry of Military Affairs, appointed Huaining Bozhong as the chief military officer, and led the battalion of the Beijing Division to counterattack.

古文：秋七月庚子，总督京营太监曹吉祥及昭武伯曹钦反，左都御史寇深、恭顺侯吴瑾被杀，怀宁伯孙镗师兵讨平之。
现代文：七月二日，总督京营太监曹吉祥及昭武伯曹钦反叛，左都御史寇深、恭顺侯吴瑾被杀，怀宁伯孙镗最后率兵平定叛乱。
English: On July 2, Cao Jixiang and Zhaowu Bo Caoqin, the governor of the Beijing camp, rebelled, Zuo Guo Shikoshen and Gongshun Hou Wu Yao were killed, and Huaining Bo Sun Yao finally led the troops to quell the rebellion.

古文：癸卯，磔吉祥于市，夷其族，其党汤序等悉伏诛。
现代文：五日，分裂曹吉祥尸体弃市，诛灭其家族。其党徒汤序等全部诛灭。
English: On the fifth day, Cao Jixiang's body was dismembered and abandoned, and his family was annihilated. All of his party members, including Tang Xuan, were annihilated.

古文：丁未，免南畿被灾税粮。
现代文：九日，免南畿受灾税粮。
English: On the 9th, Nanki was exempted from the disaster-affected tax grain.

古文：庚戌，大赦，求直言。
现代文：十二日，大肆赦免，征求直言。
English: On the 12th, he pardoned a large number of people and solicited their candid opinions.

古文：丁巳，河决开封，侍郎薛远往治之。
现代文：二十日，开封黄河决堤，侍郎薛远前往整治。
English: On the 20th, the Yellow River burst its banks in Kaifeng, and the steward Xue Yuan went to rectify the situation.

古文：戊午，都督冯宗充总兵官，御寇于河西，兵部侍郎白圭、副都御史王参赞军务。
现代文：二十一日，都督冯宗充任总兵官，御敌于河西，兵部侍郎白圭、副都御史王辅助军务。
English: On the twenty-first day, the governor Feng Zongcheng was appointed as the chief military officer, the enemy was in the west of the river, the military secretary Bai Gui and the vice-governor Wang Shih assisted in military affairs.

古文：辛酉，孛来上书乞和。
现代文：二十四日，孛来上书请求讲和。
English: On the 24th, I came to petition for peace.

古文：九月壬戌，京师地震有声。
现代文：九月二十五日，京师地震发出声响。
English: On September 25th, the Beijing earthquake made a sound.

古文：冬十月壬申，以西边用兵，令河南、山西、陕西士民纳马者予冠带。
现代文：十月六日，因西边用兵，命河南、山西、陕西军民上交马匹的授与他们衣帽。
English: On October 6, due to the West's use of troops, the soldiers and civilians of Henan, Shanxi and Shaanxi were ordered to hand over their horses.

古文：十一月丁酉朔，日有食之。壬戌，幸南海子。
现代文：十一月初一日，有日食。二十六日，巡幸南海子。
English: On the first day of the first month of November, there was a solar eclipse. On the 26th, I went on a sightseeing tour of Nanhaizi.

古文：是年，安南、流球中山、哈密、亦力把里入贡。
现代文：这年，安南、琉球中山、哈密、亦力把里入朝进贡。
English: In that year, Annan, Ryukyu Nakayama, Hami, and Yoriki went to Korea to pay tribute.

古文：六年春正月丁未，大祀天地于南郊。
现代文：天顺六年正月十二日，在京师南郊大祭天地。
English: On the 12th day of the first month of the 6th year of Tenshun, a grand festival was held in the southern suburb of Beijing.

古文：戊申，孛来遣使入贡。
现代文：十三日，孛来派使臣来朝进贡。
English: On the 13th, Xing Lai sent envoys to pay tribute to the emperor.

古文：二月癸酉，谕孛来。
现代文：二月八日，谕示孛来。
English: On February 8th, the announcement came.

古文：三月癸丑，召冯宗等还。
现代文：三月十八日，召冯宗等回京。
English: On March 18, Feng Zong and others were summoned back to Beijing.

古文：夏四月壬申，免河南被灾秋粮。
现代文：四月七日，免河南受灾税粮。
English: On April 7, Henan was exempted from the disaster-affected tax grain.

古文：五月庚子，颜彪讨平两广诸瑶。
现代文：五月六日，颜彪征讨并平定两广诸瑶。
English: On May 6th, Yan Biao led a campaign to conquer and subdue the two provinces of Guangxi and Zhuhai.

古文：己未，免陕西被灾秋粮。
现代文：二十五日，免陕西遭灾秋粮。
English: On the 25th, Shaanxi was exempted from the autumn grain disaster.

古文：六月戊辰，淮王祁铨来朝。
现代文：六月五日，淮王朱祁铨来朝见皇帝。
English: On June 5, Huai King Zhu Xi came to see the emperor.

古文：秋七月，淮安海溢。
现代文：七月，淮安海涨水。
English: In July, the waters of the Huai'an Sea rose.

古文：九月乙未，皇太后崩。
现代文：九月四日，皇太后死。
English: On September 4, the Empress Dowager passed away.

古文：冬十一月甲午，葬孝恭章皇后。
现代文：十一月三日，葬孝恭章皇后。
English: On November 3rd, the funeral of Empress Xiao Rongzhang took place.

古文：是年，琉球中山、哈密、乌斯藏、暹罗入贡。
现代文：这年，琉球中山、哈密、乌斯藏、暹罗入朝进贡。
English: In that year, Ryukyu Nakayama, Hami, Ussuri, and Siam paid tribute to the imperial court.

古文：七年春正月丙午，大祀天地于南郊。
现代文：天顺七年正月十六日，在京城南郊大祭天地。
English: On the 16th day of the 1st month of the 7th year of Tianshun, a grand festival was held in the southern suburb of Beijing.

古文：二月壬戌，詹事陈文为礼部侍郎兼翰林学士，入阁预机务。
现代文：二月三日，詹事陈文为礼部侍郎兼翰林学士，入值文渊阁参与机要事务。
English: On February 3rd, Zhan Zhi Chen Wen, a waiter of the Ceremonial Department and a scholar of Hanlin, was assigned to the Wen Yuan Pavilion to participate in important affairs.

古文：三月壬寅，旱，诏行宽恤之政，停各处银场。
现代文：三月十三日，天旱，下诏施行宽大政策，停开各处银场。
English: On March 13th, with the onset of the drought, the government issued an edict to implement a lenient policy and close all the banks.

古文：夏四月壬午，逮宣、大巡按御史李蕃，荷校于长安门，寻死。
现代文：四月二十三日，逮捕宣府、大同巡按御史李蕃，受刑于长安门，不久死去。
English: On April 23, Li Xi, the inspector of Xuanfu and Datong, was arrested and imprisoned at Chang'an Gate. He died soon after.

古文：丙戌，复遣中官督苏、杭织造。
现代文：二十七日，又命中官监督苏、杭织造事务。
English: On the 27th, he also ordered a middle-ranking official to supervise the weaving affairs of Su and Hang.

古文：五月己丑朔，日有食之。
现代文：五月初一日，有日食。
English: On the first day of May, there was a solar eclipse.

古文：甲寅，辽东巡按御史杨琎以擅挞军职逮治。
现代文：二十八日，辽东巡按御史杨王进因擅自鞭打军职人员被逮捕惩治。
English: On the 28th, Yang Wangjin, the inspector of Liaodong, was arrested and punished for whipping military personnel without authorization.

古文：六月丁卯，逮山西巡按御史韩祺，荷校于长安门，数日死。
现代文：六月九日，逮捕山西巡按御史韩祺，在长安门受刑后，不久死去。
English: On June 9th, Han Zheng, the chief inspector of Shanxi Province, was arrested. He died shortly after being sentenced at Chang'an Gate.

古文：秋七月庚戌，免陕西被灾税粮。
现代文：七月二十三日，免陕西受灾税粮。
English: On July 23, Shaanxi was exempted from the disaster-affected tax grain.

古文：闰月甲戌，上宣宗废后胡氏尊谥。
现代文：闰七月十七日，上宣宗废除皇后胡氏尊谥。
English: On the 17th day of the 7th month of the leap year, Shang Xuan Zong abolished the Empress Hu.

古文：戊寅，命湖广、贵州会师讨洪江叛苗。
现代文：二十一日，命湖广、贵州会师征讨洪江叛乱苗民。
English: On the twenty-first day, Hu Guang and Guizhou were ordered to recruit the Hongjiang Rebellion Miao people.

古文：九月甲戌，敕广东总兵官欧信会广西兵讨瑶贼。
现代文：九月十八日，命令广东总兵官欧信会合广西兵征讨瑶民。
English: On September 18th, he ordered the Guangdong Commander-in-Chief of the European Letters Association to recruit soldiers from Guangxi.

古文：冬十月丁酉，振西安诸府饥。
现代文：十月十二日，赈济西安各府饥荒。
English: On October 12th, famine broke out in all prefectures of Xi'an.

古文：丁未，巡抚广西佥都御史吴桢节制两广诸军，诸瑶贼。
现代文：二十二日，巡抚广西佥都御史吴桢节制两广诸军，征讨瑶民。
English: On the twenty-second day, the governor of Guangxi, the governor of the capital, Wu Gan, ordered the two armies of Guangxi to subdue the people.

古文：十一月癸酉，贼陷梧州，致仕布政使宋钦死之。
现代文：十一月十九日，瑶贼攻陷梧州，已辞官退职的布政使宋钦战死。
English: On November 19th, the bandits invaded Wuzhou, and Song Qin, the retired Bu political envoy, died in the battle.

古文：壬午，下右都御史李宾、副都御史林聪于锦衣卫狱。
现代文：二十八日，下右都御史李宾、副都御史林聪于锦衣卫狱。
English: On the 28th, Lower Right Metropolitan Li Bin and Vice-Metropolitan Lin Cong were taken to Jinwei Prison.

古文：十二月辛卯，下刑部尚书陆瑜，侍郎周瑄、程信于锦衣卫狱，寻释之。
现代文：十二月七日，刑部尚书陆瑜，侍郎周王宣、程信被下锦衣卫狱，不久释放。
English: On December 7th, the head of the criminal investigation department, Shang Shul Lu Yu, and his attendants, Zhou Wang Xuan and Cheng Xin, were taken to the prison and released soon after.

古文：是年，琉球中山、哈密、安南、乌斯茂入贡。
现代文：当年，琉球中山、哈密、安南、乌斯藏入朝进贡。
English: In that year, Ryukyu's Nakayama, Hami, Annan, and Usuko paid tribute to the imperial court.

古文：八年春正月乙卯，帝不豫。
现代文：天顺八年正月二日，英宗身体不适。
English: On the second day of the first month of the eighth year of Tianshun, Yingzong became unwell.

古文：己未，皇太子摄事于文华殿。
现代文：六日，皇太子在文华殿摄政处理政事。
English: On the 6th, the Crown Prince presided as regent over affairs of state at the Palace of Literature.

古文：己巳，大渐，遗诏罢宫妃殉葬。
现代文：十六日，病危，留遗诏停止用宫妃殉葬。
English: On the 16th, when he was critically ill, he left a will forbidding the use of the imperial concubine's body for burial.

古文：庚午，崩，年三十有八。
现代文：十七日，英宗死，终年三十八岁。
English: On the 17th, Ying Zong died at the age of 38.

古文：二月乙未，上尊谥，庙号英宗，葬裕陵。
现代文：二月十二日，上尊谥，庙号英宗，葬于裕陵。
English: On February 12th, Shangzong Zang, temple name Yingzong, was buried in Yuling.

古文：赞曰：英宗承仁、宣之业，海内富庶，朝野清晏。
现代文：评论：英宗继承仁宗、宣宗之大业，天下富裕，而朝廷内外清静无事。
English: Comment: Emperor Yingzong inherited the great cause of Emperor Renzong and Emperor Xuanzong. The world was rich, but there was no trouble inside or outside the imperial court.

古文：大臣如三杨、胡濙、张辅，皆累朝勋旧，受遗辅政，纲纪未弛。
现代文：大臣如三杨、胡荣、张辅，均是多朝元老功臣，受遗诏辅佐政治，使得朝纲没遭破坏。
English: Ministers such as Sanyang, Hu Rong, and Zhang Fu were all veterans of many dynasties, and they were assisted by the imperial edict, so that the imperial edict was not destroyed.

古文：独以王振擅权开衅，遂至乘舆播迁。
现代文：唯独因任用王振擅自专权，以至于使帝王北掳。
English: However, because of the appointment of Wang Zhen, he took the power without authorization, so that the emperor was exiled to the north.

古文：乃复辟而后，犹追念不已，抑何其感溺之深也。
现代文：复位以后，还追念不忘，可见他内心昏惑沉迷之深。
English: After his reinstatement, he still remembers it, which shows the depth of his delusion.

古文：前后在位二十四年，无甚稗政。
现代文：英宗前后在位二十四年，没什么非常突出的政绩。
English: In the twenty-four years that Yingzong reigned, there were no outstanding political achievements.

古文：至于上恭让后谥，释建庶人之系，罢宫妃殉葬，则盛德之事可法后世者矣。
现代文：至于上恭让后谥号，释放建文帝之后世，不准宫妃殉葬，盛德之事可供后世效法。
English: As for Shang Gong, he allowed Emperor Jianwen to be enthroned, released the afterlife of Emperor Jianwen, and did not allow the imperial concubine to be buried. This was a great deed that could be emulated by future generations.

