古文：太史公读秦楚之际，曰：初作难，发于陈涉；虐戾灭秦，自项氏；拨乱诛暴，平定海内，卒践帝祚，成于汉家。
现代文：太史公研读关于秦楚之际的记载，说：最早起义反秦的是陈涉；残酷暴戾地灭掉秦朝的是项羽；拨乱反正，诛除凶暴，平定天下，终于登上帝位，取得成功的是汉家。
English: Taishi Gong studied the records on the occasion of Qin Chu and said: the earliest uprising against Qin was Chen Zhou; it was Xiang Yu who brutally and violently extinguished the Qin Dynasty; it was the Han Dynasty that successfully resolved the chaos, eliminated the violence, pacified the world, and finally ascended to the throne.

古文：五年之间，号令三嬗。自生民以来，未始有受命若斯之亟也。
现代文：五年之间，发号施令的人就换了三次，自从有人类以来，帝王受天命的变更，还不曾有这样快的。
English: In the space of five years, the man who gave the orders changed three times, and never since the dawn of humanity has an emperor been changed so quickly by the will of heaven.

古文：昔虞、夏之兴，积善累功数十年，德洽百姓，摄行政事，考之于天，然后在位。
现代文：当初虞舜、夏禹兴起的时候，他们积累善行和功劳的时间长达几十年，百姓都受到他们恩德的润泽，他们代行君主的政事，还要受到上天的考验，然后才即位。
English: At the time of the rise of Gu Yu and Xia Yu, it took decades for them to accumulate their good deeds and merits. The people were blessed by their benevolence, and they carried out the monarch's political affairs on behalf of the monarch, but they had to be tested by heaven before ascending to the throne.

古文：汤、武之王，乃由契、后稷修仁行义十余世。不期而会孟津八百诸侯，犹以为未可。
现代文：商汤、周武称王是由契、后稷开始讲求仁政，实行德义，经历了十几代，到周武王时，竟然没有约定就有八百诸侯到孟津相会，他们还认为时机不到。
English: Shang Tang and Zhou Wu, who claimed to be the king, began to preach benevolent politics and practice virtue and righteousness through more than a dozen generations. By the time of King Zhou Wu, there were eight hundred princes who had come to Mengjin without an appointment. They also thought that the time was not right.

古文：其后乃放弑。
现代文：从那时以后，才放逐了夏桀，杀了殷纣王。
English: It was only after that time that they exiled Xia Yao and killed the king of Yin Yao.

古文：秦起襄公，章于文、缪，献、孝之后，稍以蚕食六国，百有余载，至始皇乃能并冠带之伦。
现代文：秦国自襄公时兴起，在文公、穆公时显示出强大的力量，到献公、孝公之后，逐步侵占六国的土地。经历了一百多年以后，到了始皇帝才兼并了六国诸侯。
English: Qin emerged from the time of Emperor Xiang, and showed great strength during the reigns of Emperor Wen and Emperor Mu. After the reigns of Emperor Xiang and Emperor Mu, it gradually occupied the lands of the Six Kingdoms. After more than a hundred years, it was the First Emperor who annexed the princes of the Six Kingdoms.

古文：以德若彼，用力如此，盖一统若斯之难也。
现代文：实行德治像虞、夏、汤、武那样，使用武力像秦国这样，才能成功，统一天下是如此艰难！
English: Only by practicing moral governance like Yu, Xia, Tang and Wu, and using force like Qin, can we succeed. It is so difficult to unify the country!

古文：秦既称帝，患兵革不休，以有诸侯也，于是无尺土之封，堕坏名城，销锋镝，锄豪桀，维万世之安。然王迹之兴，起于闾巷，合从讨伐，轶于三代。
现代文：过去虞、夏的兴起，开创帝业的君主们都是积累善行和功绩好几十年，他们的功德恩泽百姓，他们在执行政事的时候都接受了上天的考验，然后才正式登上帝位。商汤和周武王之所以能称王，是由于从他们的祖先契和后稷开始，就修行仁义长达十几代。
English: In the past, the rise of Shu and Xia, the monarchs who pioneered the empire, all accumulated good deeds and merits for decades. Their merits benefited the people. They all received the test of heaven when they carried out political affairs, and then officially ascended to the throne. Shang Tang and King Zhou Wu were able to become kings because they had practiced benevolence and righteousness for more than ten generations since their ancestors Ji and Houyi.

古文：乡秦之禁，适足以资贤者为驱除难耳。故愤发其所为天下雄，安在 无土不王 ？
现代文：周武王讨伐商纣时八百诸侯没有通过邀约就在孟津会盟了，但周武王还是认为推翻商纣的条件并不成熟。等到时机成熟后，商汤才流放了夏桀，周武王才杀掉了商纣。
English: At the time of King Zhou Wu's crusade against Shangguan, eight hundred princes did not accept the invitation to join Shangguan in Mengjin, but King Zhou Wu still believed that the conditions for overthrowing Shangguan were not ripe. It was not until the time was ripe that Shangtang exiled Xia Yao and King Zhou Wu killed Shangguan.

古文：此乃传之所谓大圣乎？岂非天哉，岂非天哉！
现代文：像虞、夏、商、周那样以恩德泽润百姓，像秦国这样使用强力兼并诸侯，都是经历了长期的努力才能成功的，原来统一天下是如此的艰难啊！
English: Like Yu, Xia, Shang, and Zhou, who used ndezherun to benefit the people, and like Qin, who used forceful annexation of principalities, they all went through long-term efforts to succeed. Originally, it was so difficult to unify the country!

