古文：程颢为越州佥判，蔡卞为帅，待公甚厚。
现代文：原文宋朝程颢担任越州佥判时，蔡卞为元帅，对待程颢颇为优厚。
English: When the Song Dynasty's Cheng Yu served as the judge of Yuezhou Military Procuratorate, Cai Yu was the marshal, and treated Cheng Yu quite generously.

古文：初，卞尝为公语： 张怀素道术通神，虽飞禽走兽能呼遣之。
现代文：当初，蔡卞对程颢说： 张怀素的道术非常神通广大，即使是飞禽走兽，也可以呼喝差遣。
English: At first, Cai Qi said to Cheng Qi: Zhang Huai Su's Taoism is very powerful and vast, even if it is a bird or a beast, it can be called out and dispatched.

古文：至言孔子诛少正卯，彼尝谏以为太早；汉祖成皋相持，彼屡登高观战。
现代文：张怀素说孔子杀少正卯时，他曾劝孔子说杀得太早了；汉高祖和项羽在成皋作战相持不下时，他也曾多次登楼观战。
English: Zhang Huai Su said that when Confucius killed Shosho Zhengwu, he had persuaded Confucius to say that the killing was too early; when Han Gaozu and Xiang Yu could not stand each other in battle, he also went to the building to watch the battle many times.

古文：不知其岁数，殆非世间人也！ 
现代文：不知道他现在有多大年纪了，大概不是世间的凡人吧。 
English: I don't know how old he is now, but he's probably not an ordinary person.

古文：公每窃笑之。
现代文：程颢每次听了这样的话都偷笑不已。
English: Cheng Yao couldn't stop laughing every time she heard this.

古文：及将往四明，而怀素且来会稽。
现代文：后来程颢去四明时，张怀素也正准备去会稽，蔡卞便示意程颢稍微等一下。
English: Later, when Cheng Yu went to Shiming, Zhang Huai Su was also preparing to go to the audition, Cai Yu then gestured to Cheng Yu to wait a little.

古文：卞留少俟，公不为止，曰：  子不语怪、力、乱、神 ，以不可训也，斯近怪矣。州牧既甚信重，士大夫又相谄合，下民从风而靡，使真有道者，固不愿此。
现代文：程颢没有等他，说： 孔子不谈怪力乱神之事，因为这些内容不适合教育学生，张怀素的所作所为也接近神怪的迹象，州牧既看重他，士大夫又都逢迎他，老百姓更是盲目附和。真有道术的人是不会如此的。
English: Cheng Yao did not wait for him and said: Confucius did not talk about supernatural things, because these contents are not suitable for educating students. Zhang Huai Su's actions are also close to signs of supernatural phenomena. State pastors value him, scholars and doctors welcome him, and the common people blindly agree with him. People with true virtue will not be like this.

古文：不然，不识之未为不幸也！ 
现代文：更何况，不认识他也未必不是件好事。 
English: What's more, not knowing him isn't necessarily a bad thing.

古文：后二十年，怀素败，多引名士。
现代文：二十年后，张怀素东窗事发，供出一些与他有关系的名人。
English: Twenty years later, the Zhang Huai Su East Window Incident brought out some celebrities who were related to him.

古文：或欲因是染公，竟以寻求无迹而止。
现代文：有人想借机诬陷程颢，但后来因为找不到二人有丝毫的关系而作罢。
English: Some people wanted to take the opportunity to frame Cheng Yao, but later gave up because they couldn't find the slightest connection between the two.

古文：非公素论守正，则不免于罗织矣。
现代文：如果不是因为程颢向来言行正直，没有漏洞可寻，就不免要被人陷害了。
English: If it weren't for the fact that Cheng Yu's words and deeds have always been honest, with no loopholes to be found, she would inevitably have been framed.

古文：张让，众所弃也，而太丘独不难一吊。张怀素，众所奉也，而伯淳独不轻一见。
现代文：评译张让是大家都讨厌的人，唯有陈寔却肯去吊祭他的父亲；张怀素是众人所推崇的，而独有程颢不肯与他见面。
English: Zhang Zhan is hated by everyone, but only Chen Yu is willing to sacrifice his father; Zhang Huai Su is respected by everyone, but Cheng Yu is the only one who refuses to meet him.

古文：明哲保身，岂有定局哉！
现代文：明哲保身，哪有固定的方法呢？
English: When it comes to self-protection, is there a fixed method?

古文：具二公之识，并行不悖可矣！
现代文：如果能同时具有这两位先生的见识，不相违背而行就可以了。
English: If you can have the insight of these two gentlemen at the same time, you can do it without contradiction.

古文：蔡邕亡命江海积十二年矣，不能自晦以预免董卓之辟；逮既辟，称疾不就犹可也，乃因卓之一怒，惧祸而从；受其宠异，死犹叹息。
现代文：蔡邕逃亡隐居长达十二年之久，还是不能隐藏自己的才名而被董卓征召；既被征召，他也还可以称病不去，却因为害怕董卓生气，怕降祸于自己而最终顺从了；并且受到董卓的宠幸，最后还为董卓之死而叹息。
English: Cai Qi fled and lived in seclusion for as long as twelve years. He still couldn't hide his talent and was conscripted by Dong Zhuo. Even though he was conscripted, he could still say that he wasn't sick, but because he was afraid of Dong Zhuo's anger, he was afraid of bringing harm to himself and finally complied. He was also favored by Dong Zhuo, and finally he lamented Dong Zhuo's death.

古文：初心谓何？介而不果，涅而遂淄，公论自违，犹望以续史幸免，岂不愚乎？
现代文：蔡邕起初心志耿介却不能坚持到底，终于受到小人的影响，而违背自己的理念和言论，还希望继续修纂历史以求赦免，这不是很愚蠢吗？
English: Isn't it stupid that Tsai Ing-wen can't stick to the original intention of Geng Shuo, but is finally influenced by villains, and goes against her own philosophy and speech, and still hopes to continue to revise history in order to seek pardon?

古文：视太丘愧死矣！
现代文：蔡邕比起陈寰，真应该羞愧而死!
English: Compared to Chen Xi, Cai Wei really should die of shame!

古文：《容斋随笔》云：会稽天宁观老何道士，居观之东廊，栽花酿酒，客至必延之。
现代文：据《容斋笔记》记载：会稽天宁观的何道士，住在观里的东廊，平日种花酿酒，有客人来就热情地招待。
English: According to the "Yongzhai Notes": He Taoist, who was in charge of Tianningzhuang, lived in the east corridor of Guanli, planted flowers and brewed wine on weekdays, and warmly invited guests.

古文：一日有道人貌甚伟，款门求见。善谈论，能作大字。
现代文：一天，有个道人登门求见，其人容貌俊伟，善于言谈，写得一手好字。
English: One day, a Taoist came to see him. He was handsome, eloquent, and had a good hand at writing.

古文：何欣然款留，数日方去。
现代文：何道士很高兴地招待他，此人待了好几天才离开。
English: Several Taoists were happy to host him, and he stayed for several days before leaving.

古文：未几，有妖人张怀素谋乱，即前日道人也。何亦坐系狱，良久得释。
现代文：不久有妖人张怀素谋乱，而张怀素正是前日他招待的道人，何道士因此受到连累，在牢里待了很长时间才被释放出来。
English: Not long after, there was a demon Zhang Huai Su plotting a riot, and Zhang Huai Su was the Taoist he had invited the day before. As a result, He Taoist was implicated and spent a long time in prison before being released.

古文：自是畏客如虎，杜门谢客。
现代文：从此，何道士害怕客人就像害怕老虎一般，并关起门来谢绝拜访。
English: From then on, He Taoist was afraid of guests as if he were afraid of a tiger, and refused visits behind closed doors.

古文：忽有一道人，亦美风仪，多技术。西廊道士张若水介之来谒，何大怒骂，合扉拒之。
现代文：某天忽然有一个道人，容貌也很俊美，又多才多艺，是西廊道士张若水介绍他来的，何道士不问青红皂白开口大骂，关起门来不让他进来。
English: One day, suddenly, there was a Taoist who was very handsome and multi-talented. He was introduced by Zhang Ruoshui, a Taoist from Xilang. The Taoist didn't hesitate to open his mouth to curse and shut the door to prevent him from entering.

古文：此道乃永嘉林灵噩，旋得上幸，贵震一时，赐名灵素，平日一饭之恩无不厚报。
现代文：但没想到这位道士是永嘉的林灵噩，其不久之后得到皇帝宠幸，显贵一时，赐名灵素。林灵素平日接受别人一点恩惠，无不加倍报答。
English: However, it did not occur to me that this Taoist was Lin Lingyun of Yongjia. Soon after, he was favored by the emperor, and was given the name Ling Su for a short time. Lin Ling Su usually receives a little favor from others, but he always returns the favor.

古文：若水乘驿赴阙，官至蕊珠殿校籍，父母俱荣封。而老何以尝骂故，朝夕忧惧。
现代文：张若水乘驿车到京城去，官至蕊珠殿校籍，父母也都受到封赏；而何道士则因为曾经骂过他的缘故，早晚都担心害怕。
English: Zhang Ruoshui took a tuk-tuk to go to Beijing. The official was enrolled at Ruizhudun School, and his parents were also rewarded. However, many Taoists were worried and afraid because they had once scolded him.

古文：若水以书慰之，始少安。
现代文：直到张若水写信安慰他，何道士才稍微安心了些。
English: It wasn't until Zhang Ruoshui wrote a letter to comfort him that He Daoshi felt a little more at ease.

古文：此亦知其一不知其二之鉴也！
现代文：这些事件是可以作为只知其一、不知其二的借鉴吧！
English: These incidents can be used as a reference for those who don't know the first thing about it!

