古文：契丹乘朝廷有西夏之忧，遣使来言关南之地。
现代文：原文契丹趁着西夏人侵犯宋朝边境的时候，派遣使者前来要求归还关南的土地。
English: Original text The Khitan took advantage of the time when the Xixia people violated the border of the Song Dynasty and sent an envoy to demand the return of the land of Guannan.

古文：地是石晋所割，后为周世宗所取。
现代文：这是五代时期石敬瑭为求契丹骑兵帮，割让给契丹的土地之一，后来由后周世宗夺回。
English: This was one of the lands ceded to Khitan by Shi Jingyao for the Khitan cavalry during the Five Dynasties period, and later recaptured by Zhou Shizong.

古文：富弼奉使，往见契丹主曰： 两朝继好，垂四十年，一旦求割地，何也？ 
现代文：富弼奉命出使契丹，见到契丹主说： 两国修好已经有年了，为什么现在突然提出割地呢？ 
English: Fuxi was ordered to send an envoy to Khitan, and when he saw the Khitan lord, he said: The two countries have been repaired for years, why is it suddenly proposed to cut the land now?

古文：契丹主曰： 南朝违约，塞雁门，增塘水，治城隍，籍民兵，将以何为？
现代文：契丹主说： 宋朝违背了盟约，派兵防守雁门关，增辟水塘，整修城墙，征调民兵，这是要干什么呢？
English: The Khitan lord said: The Song Dynasty violated the covenant, sent troops to defend the Wild Goose Gate, built more reservoirs, renovated the city wall, and conscripted the militia. What was this for?

古文：群臣请举兵而南，吾谓不若遣使求地，求而不获，举兵未晚。 
现代文：本王的臣子们都要求本王立即出兵南下，我的意思是先派使者要求割地，如果宋朝不答应，再出兵南下也不迟。 
English: The king's courtiers have all demanded that the king immediately send troops to the south. I mean, first send an envoy to demand land division. If the Song Dynasty does not agree, then it is not too late to send troops to the south.

古文：弼曰： 北朝忘章圣皇帝之大德乎？
现代文：富弼说： 北朝难道忘了真宗皇帝的恩德吗？
English: Fuxi said: Did the Northern Dynasty forget the kindness of Emperor Zhenzong?

古文：澶渊之役，苟从诸将言，北兵无得脱者。
现代文：当年澶渊之役，如果当时真宗皇帝采纳了将军们的意见，北朝士兵有谁能够活着回去呢？
English: In that year's Battle of Pengyuan, if Emperor Zhenzong had adopted the generals' opinions, who of the Northern Dynasty soldiers would have been able to return alive?

古文：且北朝与富弼中国通好，则人主专其利，而臣下无所获；若用兵，则利归臣下，而人主任其祸。
现代文：再说北朝和中国修好，君王可以独自享有所有的好处，而臣下没有丝毫的利益。一旦双方交战，如果胜利，功劳归大臣所有；如果失败，君王却要承担战争中所有的责任。
English: Furthermore, if the Northern Dynasty and China are reconciled, the king can enjoy all the benefits alone, while his vassals have no benefit at all. Once the two sides fight, if they win, the minister will get all the credit; if they lose, the king will have to bear all the responsibilities of the war.

古文：故劝用兵者，皆为身谋耳。
现代文：因此臣子劝君王用兵，无非是出于自身利益的考虑。
English: Therefore, it is nothing more than a consideration of self-interest for the vassal to persuade the monarch to use the army.

古文：今中国提封万里，精兵百万，北朝欲用兵，能保必胜乎？
现代文：中国疆域辽阔，精兵百万，北朝想要出兵，一定会取得胜利吗？
English: China's vast territory, millions of elite soldiers, the Northern Dynasty wants to send troops, will it win?

古文：就使其胜，所亡士马，群臣当之与，抑人主当之与？
现代文：就算侥幸获胜，阵亡的士兵，损失的战马，这责任是由群臣来承担，还是由君王您来承担呢？
English: Even if there is a fluke victory, the dead soldiers, the lost horses, will the responsibility be borne by the courtiers, or by you, the king?

古文：若通好不绝，岁币尽归人主，群臣何利焉？ 
现代文：如果两国修好，每年君王都可以享受到赏赐的金银、丝绢，您的大臣能从中分到什么好处吗？ 
English: If the two countries make peace, every year the king can enjoy the rewards of gold, silver and silk, can your minister get any benefit from it?

古文：契丹主大悟，首肯者久之。
现代文：契丹主听后连连点头。
English: The Khitan chief nods repeatedly after listening.

古文：弼又曰： 雁门者，备元昊也。塘水始于何承矩，事在通好前。城隍修旧，民兵亦补阙，非违约也。 
现代文：富弼接着说： 防守雁门关是为了防备西夏元昊；辟建水塘是由何承矩开始兴建，这些事在两国订盟之前就已经有了；至于修墙是因为城墙过于老旧了，而征调民兵也是为了递补军中的遗缺，并没有违背任何盟约啊。 
English: Fuxi went on to say: The defense of the Wild Goose Gate was to protect against the Western Xia Yuanhao; the construction of the reservoir was started by He Rongmen, these things were already in place before the two countries signed an alliance; as for the repair of the wall, it was because the city wall was too old, and the recruitment of the militia was also to fill the gaps in the army, and did not violate any covenant.

古文：契丹主曰： 虽然，吾祖宗故地，当见还耳。 
现代文：契丹主说： 就算南朝没有违背盟约，但关南是我祖先的土地，也应当归还。 
English: The Khitan lord said: Even if the Southern Dynasty did not violate the covenant, but Guannan is the land of my ancestors, it should also be returned.

古文：弼曰： 晋以卢龙赂契丹，周世宗复取关南地，皆异代事，若各求地，岂北朝之利哉。 
现代文：富弼说： 后晋以卢龙地贿赂契丹，周世宗又从契丹人手中夺取回来，这些都是前朝的事了，如果各自索要旧地，北朝能得到什么好处吗？ 
English: Fuxi said, "Later Jin used Lulong to bribe the Khitan, and Zhou Shizong took it back from the Khitan. These are matters of the previous dynasty. If they each claim the old land, can the Northern Dynasty gain any benefit?

古文：既退，刘六符曰： 吾主耻受金币，坚欲十县，何如？ 
现代文：富弼告辞退下。刘六符对富弼说： 我王认为每年接受南朝的岁币是一种耻辱，如果我王坚持要求宋割地，你认为如何呢？ 
English: Liu Liufu said to Fuxiong: My king thinks that it is a disgrace to accept the Southern Dynasty's year-old money every year. If my king insists on Song's land allocation, what do you think?

古文：弼曰： 本朝皇帝言： 为祖宗守国，岂敢望以土地与人？
现代文：富弼说： 本朝皇帝曾经说： 要为祖先固守国土，不敢随便割让土地。
English: Fuxi said, "The emperor of this dynasty once said, 'We must hold fast to the land for the sake of our ancestors, and dare not cede land arbitrarily.'

古文：北朝所欲，不过租赋耳，朕不忍多杀两朝赤子，故屈地增币以代之。 
现代文：北朝希望得到的，无非是土地所产生的租税收，朕不忍心看到两国的无辜百姓因为战争而丧命，因此可以增加每年的岁币来代替割地。 
English: What the Northern Dynasty hoped to get was nothing more than the tax revenue generated by the land. I could not bear to see the innocent people of the two countries die as a result of the war, so I could increase the annual rent to replace the land allocation.

古文：若必欲得地，是志在败盟，假此为辞耳。 
现代文：如果北朝坚持要土地，那就是成心撕毁盟约，割地仅仅是个借口罢了。 
English: If the Northern Dynasty insists on the land, it is determined to tear up the treaty, and the land division is just an excuse.

古文：明日契丹主召弼同猎，引弼马自近，谓曰： 得地则欢好可久。 
现代文：第二天契丹主邀请富弼一起打猎，其间将富弼叫到身边说： 如果契丹得到土地，那么两国的友谊还可以长久保持下去。 
English: The next day, the Khitan lord invited the rich man to go hunting with him, during which he called the rich man to his side and said: If the Khitan gets land, then the friendship between the two countries can be maintained for a long time.

古文：弼曰： 北朝既以得地为荣，南朝必以失地为辱，兄弟之国，岂可一荣一辱哉？ 
现代文：富弼说： 假如北朝会因得到土地而荣耀，那么南朝必会因失去土地而感到屈辱难过。宋、契丹是兄弟之邦，怎么能做令一个觉得光荣，一个觉得屈辱的事呢？ 
English: Fuxi said, "If the Northern Dynasty will be glorified by gaining land, then the Southern Dynasty will surely feel humiliated and saddened by losing land. Song and Khitan are brotherly countries, how can you make one feel glorious and one feel humiliated?

古文：猎罢，六符曰： 吾主闻公荣辱之言，意甚感悟，今唯结姻可议耳。 
现代文：狩猎结束以后，刘六符对富弼说： 听完我王和先生所谈有关荣辱之事后，很有感悟，我想如今只有两国结为亲家才能巩固两国的友谊。 
English: After the hunting was over, Liu Liufu said to Fulong: After listening to what my king and my master said about honor and disgrace, I was very impressed. I think that only if the two countries become relatives can the friendship between the two countries be consolidated.

古文：弼曰： 婚姻易生嫌隙，本朝长公主出嫁，赍送不过十万缗，岂若岁币无穷之利哉。 
现代文：富弼说： 婚姻很容易会产生摩擦。再说本朝长公主出嫁的时候，陪嫁的嫁妆不过才十万元钱，哪里比得上每年获赠的岁银呢。 
English: Fuxi said, "Marriage can easily cause friction. Moreover, when the eldest princess of this dynasty got married, the dowry for the bride was only 100,000 yuan, which is nothing compared to the annual gift of silver.

古文：弼还报，帝许增币。
现代文：富弼离开契丹后，便回国向仁宗报告了经过，仁宗答应增加岁银。
English: After Fuxi left Khitan, he returned to China and reported the incident to Nanzong, who agreed to increase the amount of money.

古文：契丹主曰： 南朝既增我币，辞当曰 献 。 
现代文：契丹主说： 南朝既然答应每年再增加岁银，盟约上也就应该写成 献 岁银了。 
English: The Khitan lord said: Since the Southern Dynasty has promised to increase the annual silver, the covenant should also be written as "donation of silver."

古文：弼曰： 南朝为兄，岂有兄献于弟乎？ 
现代文：富弼说： 两国既然结盟为兄弟，南朝是兄长，哪有兄长给弟弟东西称之为 献 的道理呢？ 
English: Fuxi said, "Since the two countries are allied as brothers, and the Southern Dynasty is the elder brother, is there any reason for the elder brother to give something to the younger brother and call it a gift?"

古文：契丹主曰： 然则为 纳 。 ，弼亦不可，契丹主曰： 南朝既以厚币遗我，是惧我矣，于二字何有？
现代文：契丹主又说： 那称之为 纳 如何？ 
English: The Khitan lord also said: How about calling it Na?

古文：若我拥兵而南，得无悔乎？ 弼曰： 本朝兼爱南北，故不惮更成，何名为惧？
现代文：富弼还是坚持不妥协。契丹主说： 宋既然答应每年给本王丰厚的岁银和丝绢，害怕本王会南侵，改一个字又有什么关系呢？
English: The Khitan lord said: Since Song promised to give the king a generous amount of silver and silk every year, fearing that the king would invade the south, what does it matter to change a word?

古文：或不得已而至于用兵，则当以曲直为胜负，非使臣之所知也。 
现代文：如果我率领军队南下，宋难道就不后悔吗？ 富弼说： 两国人民的生命宋都兼爱，因此希望两国能够和平，这哪里是害怕呢？
English: If I lead the army to the south, won't Song regret it? Fulong said: Song loves the lives of the people of both countries, so he hopes that the two countries can make peace. What is there to be afraid of?

古文：契丹主曰： 卿勿固执，古有之矣。 
现代文：如果真是到了不得已的地步，非得两国交战不可，将会以理之曲直来决出胜负，那么结果就不是充当和平使者的我所能预料的了。 
English: If it really comes to the point of no return, and the two countries have to go to war, the outcome will be decided on the basis of reason, and the outcome is not something that I, as a peace envoy, can predict.

古文：弼曰： 自古唯唐高祖借兵突厥。
现代文：契丹主说： 你不要太固执了，其实改动一两个字，在历史上早就有过先例了。 
English: The Khitan lord said: Don't be too stubborn. In fact, changing one or two words has long been a precedent in history.

古文：当时赠遗，或称献纳，其后颉利为太宗所擒。
现代文：富弼说： 历史上只有唐高祖曾经因向突厥人借兵，为了酬谢突厥人，或称之为 献纳 。可是后来突厥可汗颉利被唐太宗擒获。
English: Fuxi said, "In history, only Emperor Gaozu of the Tang Dynasty ever borrowed soldiers from the Turks, in order to reward the Turks, or called it a "donation." However, later, the Turkish khan Qili was captured by Emperor Taizong of Tang.

古文：岂复有此哉？ 
现代文：现在怎么能让那样的情形再现呢？ 
English: How can that be allowed to happen now?

古文：契丹主知不可夺，自遣人来议。
现代文：契丹主知道没有办法说服富弼，就私下派遣使者到宋朝议和。
English: The Khitan lord knew that there was no way to convince Fuxi, so he secretly sent an envoy to the Song Dynasty to discuss peace.

古文：帝用晏殊议，竟以 纳 字与之。
现代文：结果仁宗采纳晏殊的意见，竟然采用了 纳 字。
English: As a result, Nanzong adopted the opinion of others, and even adopted the word "Naxi."

古文：富郑公与契丹主往复再四，句句占上风，而语气又和婉，使人可听。
现代文：富弼和契丹主先后进行了四次面谈，句句话都占了上风，而语气温和、态度委婉，让人很容易接受。
English: Fuxi and the Khitan master had four interviews in succession, and they had the upper hand in every sentence, and the tone was mild and the attitude was euphemistic, which was easy to accept.

古文：此可与李邺侯参看，说辞之最善也。
现代文：富弼的这番说辞，可以和李邺侯相媲美，是外出使臣谈话的最高境界。
English: This speech by Fuxi can be compared to that of Li Shihou, and it is the highest level of a foreign envoy's speech.

古文：弼始受命往，闻一女卒，再往，闻一男生，皆不顾。
现代文：富弼第一次奉命前往契丹的时候正好遇上自己的女儿死了，第二次再去契丹的时候，家中添了一个男孩，但是富弼都没有回家探望。
English: The first time Fusao was ordered to go to Khitan, he happened to meet his daughter who had died. The second time he went to Khitan, a boy was added to the family, but Fusao did not go home to visit.

古文：得家书，未尝发，辄焚之，曰： 徒乱人意。 
现代文：收到家书也没有拆阅就顺手烧毁了，他说： 看家书只会扰乱我的思绪。 
English: After receiving the family book, he burned it without taking it apart, saying, "Looking at the family book only disturbs my thoughts.

古文：有此一片精诚，自然不辱君命。
现代文：有这样一片忠诚，自然也就能做到不辱君命了。
English: With such loyalty, it is natural to be able to do so without dishonoring the king's life.

