古文：后主讳纬，字仁纲，武成皇帝之长子也。
现代文：齐后主名纬，字仁纲，是武成皇帝的长子。
English: After Qi, the main name of Wei, the word Ren Gang, is the eldest son of Emperor Wucheng.

古文：母曰胡皇后，梦于海上坐玉盆，日入裙下，遂有娠。
现代文：母亲为胡皇后，她梦见在海上坐在一只玉盆里，太阳进了她的裙子下，便怀了孕。
English: Her mother was Queen Hu. She dreamed that she was sitting in a jade pot on the sea, the sun got under her skirt, and she became pregnant.

古文：天保七年五月五日，生帝于并州邸。
现代文：天保七年五月五日，在并州府邸生下了后主。
English: On May 5th, Tenpo 7th year, the heir was born in the residence of the provincial governor.

古文：帝少美容仪，武成特所爱宠，拜世子。
现代文：高纬小时候长得容貌俊美，武成皇帝格外疼爱他，立为世子。
English: When Gao Wei was a child, he was very handsome. Emperor Wu Cheng loved him very much and made him his heir.

古文：及武成入纂大业，大宁二年正月丙戌，立为皇太子。
现代文：武成皇帝继承皇位后，在太宁二年的正月十六日，立为皇太子。
English: After Emperor Wucheng succeeded to the throne, he was enthroned as the crown prince on the 16th day of the first month of the second year of Taining.

古文：河清四年，武成禅位于帝。
现代文：河清四年，武成帝禅位于后主。
English: In the fourth year of the Heqing Dynasty, Emperor Wu Rongcheng was enthroned.

古文：天统元年夏四月丙子，皇帝即位于晋阳宫。大赦，改河清四年为天统。
现代文：天统元年夏四月二十四日，后主即位于晋阳宫，大赦天下，改河清四年为天统元年。
English: On the 24th day of the 4th month in the summer of the first year of the reign of Heaven, the empress dowager was located in the Jinyang Palace, forgave the world, and changed the fourth year of the Qing Dynasty to the first year of the reign of Heaven.

古文：丁丑，以太保贺拔仁为太师；太尉侯莫陈相为太保；司空、冯翊王润为司徒；录尚书事、赵郡王睿为司空；尚书左仆射、河间王孝琬为尚书令。
现代文：二十五日，任命太保贺拔仁为太师，太尉侯莫陈相为太保，司空、冯翊王高润为司徒，录尚书事、赵郡王睿又为司空，尚书左仆射、河间王孝琬为尚书令。
English: On the 25th, he appointed the grand tutor He Ba Ren as the grand master, the grand lieutenant Hou Mo Chen Xiang as the grand tutor, the secretary Kuo, Feng Xuan Wang Gaorun as the secretary, Luo Shang Shujie, Zhao Gu Wang Rui as the secretary Kuo, the secretary Zuo Shuai, and the secretary Haima Wang Xiaojun as the secretary.

古文：戊寅，以瀛州刺史尉粲为太尉；斛律光为大将军；东安王娄睿为太尉；尚书右仆射赵彦深为左仆射。
现代文：二十六日，任命瀛州刺史尉粲为太尉，斛律光为大将军，东安王娄睿又为太尉，尚书右仆射赵彦深为左仆射。
English: On the twenty-sixth day, he appointed Zhangzhou Zhangshi Liang as the second lieutenant, Zang Riguang as the general, Dongan Wang Zhaorai as the second lieutenant, and Shangshu's right-hand man Zhao Yanshen as the left-hand man.

古文：六月壬戌，彗星出文昌东北，其大如手，后稍长，乃至丈余，百日乃灭。
现代文：六月十一日，彗星出现在文昌星的东北，大得像一只手，后来又不断加长，直长至一丈多，百天以后才灭。
English: On June 11th, the comet appeared in the northeast of Wenchang Star. It was as big as a hand, and then it continued to grow, reaching more than a meter in length, before it disappeared after 100 days.

古文：己巳，太上皇帝诏兼散骑常侍王季高使于陈。
现代文：十八日，太上皇帝派兼散骑常侍王季高出使陈国。
English: On the 18th, Emperor Taizong sent the imperial equerry Wang Ji, who also rode horseback, to escort Chen Guo.

古文：秋七月乙未，太上皇帝诏增置都水使者一人。
现代文：秋七月十五日，太上皇帝令增设一位都水使者。
English: On the 15th day of the 7th month of the autumn, the empress dowager ordered the creation of an additional water envoy.

古文：冬十一月癸未，太上皇帝至自晋阳。
现代文：冬十一月初五，太上皇帝从晋阳回京。
English: In winter, on the fifth day of the first month of November, the emperor returned to Beijing from Jinyang.

古文：己丑，太上皇帝诏改太祖献武皇帝为神武皇帝，庙号高祖；献明皇后为武明皇后。
现代文：十一日，太上皇帝下诏改称太祖献武皇帝为神武皇帝，庙号高祖；献明皇后为武明皇后。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Emperor Taizong issued an edict to change the name of Emperor Taizhong Xianwu to Emperor Shenwu, the name of the temple to Emperor Gao; and the name of Empress Xianming to Empress Wuming.

古文：其文宣谥号，委有司议定。
现代文：文宣帝的谥号，交给有关部门议定。
English: The nickname of Emperor Wenxuan was handed over to the relevant departments for approval.

古文：乙卯，狩于西郊。
现代文：十二月初二，太上皇帝到西郊狩猎。
English: On the second day of the first month of December, the emperor went deer hunting in the western suburbs.

古文：壬戌，太上皇帝幸晋阳。
现代文：初四，到南郊狩猎。十四日，太上皇帝前往晋阳。
English: On the fourth day of the first month, he went hunting in the southern suburbs. On the 14th day, the emperor went to Jinyang.

古文：丁卯，帝至自晋阳。
现代文：十九日，后主从晋阳回京。
English: On the 19th, the empress dowager returned to Beijing from Jinyang.

古文：庚午，有司奏改高祖文宣皇帝为威宗景烈皇帝。
现代文：二十二日，有关方面奏改谥高祖文宣皇帝为威宗景烈皇帝。
English: On the 22nd, the relevant parties changed Emperor Gao Zuwenxuan to Emperor Weizong Jingli.

古文：是岁，高丽、契丹、靺鞨并遣使朝贡。
现代文：当年，高丽、契丹、靺鞨都派使者朝贡。
English: In that year, Goryeo, Khitan, and Goryeo all sent envoys to pay tribute.

古文：河南大疫。
现代文：河南发生大瘟疫。
English: A great plague broke out in Henan.

古文：二年春正月辛卯，祀圆丘。
现代文：二年春正月十四日，祭祀于圆丘。
English: On the 14th day of the first month of the second year of spring, the ritual was held at the round mound.

古文：癸巳，祫祭于太庙。
现代文：十六日，祭祀太庙。
English: On the sixteenth day, the ritual was held at the Imperial Temple.

古文：诏降罪人各有差。
现代文：下诏减罪人的刑罚，轻重不等。
English: The following edict reduces the criminal's punishment, the severity of which varies.

古文：丙申，以吏部尚书尉瑾为尚书右仆射。
现代文：十九日，任命吏部尚书尉谨为尚书右仆射。
English: On the 19th, Lieutenant Shang Shuxiao of the Personnel Department was appointed as his right-hand man.

古文：庚子，行幸晋阳。
现代文：二十三日，巡幸晋阳。
English: On the 23rd, the parade went to Jinyang.

古文：二月庚戌，太上皇帝至自晋阳。
现代文：二月初三，太上皇帝从晋阳归来。
English: On the third day of the second month, the emperor returned from Jinyang.

古文：壬子，陈人来聘。
现代文：初五，陈国派人问聘。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, Chen Guo sent a person to inquire about employment.

古文：三月乙巳，太上皇帝诏以三台施兴圣寺。
现代文：三月二十九日，太上皇帝下诏把三台布施给兴圣寺。
English: On March 29, the empress dowager issued an imperial edict to give three sets of money to the Xingsheng Temple.

古文：以旱故，降禁囚。
现代文：由于大旱，给囚犯减罪。
English: Prisoners have had their sentences reduced because of the drought.

古文：夏四月，陈文帝殂。
现代文：夏四月，陈文帝去世。
English: In the summer of April, Chen Wenti passed away.

古文：五月乙酉，以兼尚书左仆射、武兴王普为尚书令。
现代文：五月初九，任命兼尚书左仆射、武兴王普为尚书令。
English: On the 9th day of the 5th month of the year, both Shang Shuxi Zuopu and Wu Xing Wang Pu were appointed as Shang Shuling.

古文：己亥，封太上皇帝子俨为东平王，仁弘为齐安王，仁固为北平王，仁英为高平王，仁光为淮南王。
现代文：二十三日，封太上皇帝的儿子高俨为东平王，高仁弘为齐安王，高仁坚为北平王，高仁英为高平王，高仁光为淮南王。
English: On the 23rd, Gao Jun, the son of the emperor, was crowned the king of Dongping, Gao Renhong was crowned the king of Qian, Gao Renjian was crowned the king of Beiping, Gao Renying was crowned the king of Gaoping, and Gao Renguang was crowned the king of Huainan.

古文：六月，太上皇帝诏兼散骑常侍韦道儒聘于陈。
现代文：六月，太上皇帝派兼散骑常侍韦道儒到陈国问聘。
English: In June, the empress dowager sent Wei Daoju, who was also an equestrian, to Chen Guo for an interview.

古文：秋八月，太上皇帝幸晋阳。
现代文：秋八月，太上皇帝前往晋阳。
English: In autumn and August, the empress dowager went to Jinyang.

古文：冬十月乙卯，以太保侯莫陈相为太傅；大司马、任城王湝为太保；太尉娄睿为大司马，徙冯翊王润为太尉，开府仪同三司韩祖念为司徒。
现代文：秋十月十二日，任命太保侯莫陈相为太傅，大司马、任城王高氵皆为太保，太尉娄睿又为大司马。改任冯翊王高润为太尉，开府仪同三司韩念祖为司徒。
English: On the 12th day of the 10th month of the autumn, the Tai Bo Hou Mo Chen Xiang was appointed as the Tai Fu, the Da Sima and the Ren Cheng Wang Gao Yao were both appointed as the Taibo, the Taifu Zha Rui was also appointed as the Da Sima, the Feng Yao Wang Gao Run was appointed as the Taifu, and the Kaifu Yi and the San Si Han Nian Zu were appointed as the Sito.

古文：十一月，大雨雪。
现代文：十一月，天下大雨雪。
English: In November, there was heavy rain and snow.

古文：盗窃太庙御服。
现代文：有盗贼偷了太庙的御服。
English: Thieves have stolen the Emperor's robes.

古文：十二月乙丑，陈人来聘。
现代文：十二月二十三日，陈人前来问聘。
English: On December 23rd, Chen came to ask for a job.

古文：是岁，杀河间王孝琬。
现代文：当年，杀了河间王孝琬。
English: That year, he killed Kawama Wang Xiaohui.

古文：突厥、靺鞨国并遣使朝贡。
现代文：突厥、国都派使者朝贡。
English: Turkic states and capitals sent envoys to pay tribute.

古文：于周为天和元年。
现代文：这一年是周朝的天和元年。
English: This year is the first year of the Zhou Dynasty.

古文：三年春正月壬辰，太上皇帝至自晋阳。
现代文：三年春正月二十日，太上皇帝从晋阳回京。
English: On the 20th day of the first month of the third year of Spring, the emperor returned to Beijing from Jinyang.

古文：乙未，大雪，平地三尺。
现代文：二十三日，天降大雪，平地雪厚二尺。
English: On the 23rd, heavy snow fell from the sky, and the snow on the ground was two feet thick.

古文：戊戌，太上皇帝诏，京官执事散官三品已上，举三人，五品已上，各举二人；称事七品已上，及殿中侍御史、尚书都、检校御史、主书及门下录事，各举一人。
现代文：二十六日，太上皇帝下诏，京官执事散官三品以上，各举荐三人；五品以上的，各举荐二人；称事七品以上的以及殿中侍御史、尚书郎、检校御史、主书和门下录事，各举荐一人。
English: On the 26th, the empress dowager issued an imperial edict, recommending three people for each of the three-rank or higher posts of the deacons and officials in Beijing; two people for each of the five-rank or higher posts; and one person for each of the seven-rank or higher posts of the palace attendant, the secretary, the inspector, the secretary, and the secretary.

古文：鄴宫九龙殿灾，延烧西廊。
现代文：邺城宫殿的九龙殿火灾，延伸烧到西廊。
English: The fire in the Jiu Long Hall of the Shicheng Palace has spread to the west corridor.

古文：二月壬寅朔，帝加元服，大赦。
现代文：二月初一为朔日，皇帝加冠，大赦天下。
English: The first day of February is the New Year's Day. The emperor crowns the new year and grants amnesty to the whole world.

古文：九州职人，各进四级；内外百官，普进二级。
现代文：九州职役的人员各晋爵四级；内外百官，普遍晋爵二级。
English: Kyushu functionaries were each promoted to the fourth level of peerage; hundreds of officials at home and abroad were generally promoted to the second level.

古文：夏四月癸丑，太上皇帝诏兼散骑常侍司马幼之使于陈。
现代文：夏四月十三日，太上皇帝令兼散骑常侍司马幼之出使陈国。
English: On the 13th day of the 4th month of the summer, Chen Guo, the envoy of the Emperor's father-in-law and Sanzhiyang's constant attendant Ma You, arrived.

古文：五月甲午，太上皇帝诏以领军大将军、东平王俨为尚书令。
现代文：五月二十四日，太上皇帝任命领军大将军、东平王俨为尚书令。
English: On May 24th, Emperor Taizong appointed the leading general, Dongping Wangye, as Shang Shuling.

古文：乙未，大风，昼晦，发屋拔树。
现代文：二十五日，刮大风，白天昏暗，吹倒房屋拔起树木。
English: On the 25th, there was a strong wind and the day was dark. Houses were blown down and trees uprooted.

古文：六月己未，太上皇帝诏封皇子仁机为西河王，仁约为乐浪王，仁俭为颍川王，仁雅为安乐王，统为丹杨王，仁谦为东海王。
现代文：六月二十日，太上皇帝下诏封皇子仁机为西河王，仁约为乐浪王，仁俭为颍川王，仁雅为安乐王，统为丹杨王，仁谦为东海王。
English: On June 20, the empress dowager issued an imperial edict proclaiming Prince Rongji as the king of the West River, Ren as the king of the Le Lang, Ren as the king of the Beichuan, Rongya as the king of the Anle, Du as the king of the Danyang, and Ren as the king of the East Sea.

古文：闰六月辛巳，左丞相斛律金薨。
现代文：闰六月十二，左丞相斛律金去世。
English: On the 12th day of the 6th month, Zuo Rujin, the Minister of the Left, passed away.

古文：壬午，太上皇帝诏尚书令、东平王俨录尚书事。以尚书左仆射赵彦深为尚书令，并省尚书右仆射娄定远为尚书左仆射，中书监徐之才为右仆射。
现代文：十三日，太上皇帝下诏任命尚书令、东平王高俨为录尚书事，尚书左仆射赵彦深为尚书令，并省尚书右仆射娄定远为尚书左仆射，中书监徐元才为右仆射。
English: On the 13th, Emperor Taizong issued an edict appointing Shang Shuling and Dongping Wang Gaoqi as Shang Shuling's recorders, Shang Shuling's left-hand servant Zhao Yancheng as Shang Shuling, and Shang Shuling's right-hand servant Shao Dingyuan as Shang Shuling's left-hand servant Shuling, and the Chinese supervisor Xu Yuancai as his right-hand servant Shuling.

古文：秋八月辛未，太上皇帝诏以太保、任城王湝为太师，太尉、冯翊王润为大司马，太宰段韶为左丞相，太师贺拔仁为右丞相，太傅侯莫陈相为太宰，大司马娄睿为太傅，大将军斛律光为太保，司徒韩祖念为大将军，司空、赵郡王睿为太尉，尚书令、东平王俨为司徒。
现代文：秋八月初三，太上皇帝下诏任命太保、任城王氵皆为太师，太尉、冯翊王润为大司马，太宰段韶为左丞相，太师贺拔仁为右丞相，太傅侯莫陈相为太宰，大司马娄睿又为太傅，大将军斛律光为太保，司徒韩念祖为大将军，司空、赵郡王睿又为太尉，尚书令、东平王俨为司徒。
English: On the 3rd day of the 8th month of the autumn, the Emperor issued an edict appointing Tai Bao and Rencheng Wang Yao as the Grand Master, Tai Li and Feng Yao Wang Run as the Grand Master, Dazai Dan Yao as the Left Minister, Dazai He Bairin as the Right Minister, Dazai Hou Mo Chen as the Grand Master, Dazai Ma Zhaorui as the Grand Master, General Zhaoluguang as the Grand Master, Siku Han Nianzu as the General, Siku, Zhao Guo Wang Yao as the Second Lieutenant, Shang Shuling and Dongping Wang Yao as the Grand Masters.

古文：九月己酉，太上皇帝诏诸寺署所绾杂保户姓高者，天保之初，虽有优放，权假力用未免者，今可悉蠲杂户，任属郡县，一准平人。
现代文：九月十一日，太上皇帝下诏，各寺署所管辖的杂役户中姓高的，在天保初年，虽然曾经下诏优放各杂役人员为白户，但还有因暂时需要借用他们的力量，尚未免去，从今以后一律免去这些杂户，听由归属于郡县，和平民一样对待。
English: On September 11, the Empress Dowager issued an edict that the highest-ranking servants in the households under the jurisdiction of each temple were to be exempted. In the first year of the Tenpo era, although the edict had been issued to exempt the servants, there were still people who needed to borrow their power temporarily and were not exempted. From now on, all these servants were to be exempted. They were to belong to the county and were to be treated the same as commoners.

古文：丁巳，太上皇帝幸晋阳。
现代文：十九日，太上皇帝巡幸晋阳。
English: On the 19th, the empress dowager went on a tour of Jinyang.

古文：是秋，山东大水，人饥，僵尸满道。
现代文：这年秋天，山东大水，民众饥荒，僵死的尸体满路。
English: In the autumn of that year, Shandong was flooded, the people were starving, and the roads were full of dead bodies.

古文：冬十月，突厥、大莫娄、室韦、百济、靺鞨等国，各遣使朝贡。
现代文：冬十月，突厥、大莫娄、室韦、百济、靺鞨等国各派使者朝贡。
English: In the winter of October, envoys from Turkic, Great Mogul, Murway, Baekje, and Goryeo were sent to pay tribute.

古文：十一月丙午，以晋阳大明殿成故，大赦。文武百官进二级。免并州居城、太原一郡来年租。
现代文：十一月初九，因晋阳的大明殿建成，大赦天下，文武百官都晋爵二级，免并州城和太原一郡明年一年田租。
English: On the 9th day of the 11th month, due to the completion of the Great Ming Palace in Jinyang, the world was amnestied, and all the civil and military officials were promoted to the second level, and they were exempted from the next year's land rent in Shuzhen and Taiyuan County.

古文：癸未，太上皇帝至自晋阳。
现代文：癸未，太上皇帝自晋阳返京。
English: On the following day, the emperor returned to Beijing from Jinyang.

古文：十二月己巳，太上皇帝诏以故左丞相、赵郡王琛配飨神武庙廷。
现代文：十二月初三，太上皇帝下诏以已故的左丞相、赵郡王琛配享于神武帝的庙庭中。
English: On the third day of the first month of December, the Emperor issued an edict that the late Zuozhong Minister, Zhao Gu Wangqi, should be honored in the temple courtyard of Emperor Shenwu.

古文：四年春正月壬子，诏以故清河王岳、河东王潘相乐十人并配飨神武庙廷。
现代文：四年春正月十六，下诏已故的清河王岳、河东王潘相业等十人都配享于神武帝庙庭。
English: On the 16th day of the 1st month of the 4th year of Spring, the late Qinghe Wangyue, Hedong King Pan Xiangye and other ten people were all assigned to enjoy the temple garden of Emperor Shenwu.

古文：癸亥，太上皇帝诏兼散骑常侍郑大护使于陈。三月乙巳，太上皇帝诏以司徙、东平王俨为大将军，南阳王绰为司徒，开府仪同三司、广宁王孝珩为尚书令。
现代文：二十七日，太上皇帝下诏令司徒、东平王俨为大将军，南阳王绰为司徒，开府仪同三司、广宁王孝珩为尚书令。
English: On the 27th, the empress dowager issued an imperial edict to promote Szeto and Dongping Wangye to the rank of general, Nanyang Wangchuk to the rank of Szeto, and Kaifu Yidong Sanji and Guangning Wangchuk to the rank of general.

古文：夏四月辛未，鄴宫昭阳殿灾，及宣光、瑶华等殿。
现代文：夏四月初七，邺城宫的昭阳殿火灾，烧及宣光、瑶华等殿。
English: On the 7th day of the 4th month of the summer, the Zhaoyang Hall of the Shicheng Palace caught fire, and the halls of Xuan Guang and Zhaohua were burned.

古文：辛巳，太上皇帝幸晋阳。
现代文：十七日，太上皇帝前往晋阳。
English: On the 17th, the empress dowager went to Jinyang.

古文：五月癸卯，以尚书右仆射胡长仁为左仆射，中书监和士开为右仆射。
现代文：五月初七，任命尚书右仆射胡长仁为左仆射，中书监和士开为右仆射。
English: On the seventh day of the fifth lunar month, the right-hand servant of Shang Shu, Hu Changren, was appointed as the left-hand servant, and the middle school librarian and scholar were appointed as the right-hand servants.

古文：壬戌，太上皇帝至自晋阳。
现代文：二十八日，太上皇帝从晋阳归来。
English: On the 28th, the emperor returned from Jinyang.

古文：自正月不雨，至于是月。
现代文：从正月就没有下雨，一直延续到这个月。
English: There has been no rain since the first of the month, and it has continued into this month.

古文：六月甲子朔，大雨。
现代文：六月初一，下大雨。
English: On the first day of June, it rained heavily.

古文：甲申，大风，拔木折树。
现代文：二十一日，刮大风，拔起树木，折断树干。
English: On the 21st, a strong wind blew, uprooting trees and breaking their trunks.

古文：是月，彗星见于东井。
现代文：当月，彗星出现在东井。
English: That month, a comet appeared over Higashii.

古文：秋九月丙申，周人来通和。太上皇帝诏侍中斛斯文略报聘于周。
现代文：秋九月初四，周人来通和，太上皇帝诏令侍中斛斯文略回访周国。
English: On the fourth day of autumn and the beginning of September, the Zhou people came to Tonghe, and the Emperor Da Shang ordered the chamberlain, Gao Siwen, to make a brief return visit to Zhou.

古文：冬十月辛巳，以尚书令、广宁王孝珩为录尚书事，左仆射胡长仁为尚书令，右仆射和士开为左仆射，中书监唐邕为右仆射。
现代文：冬十月二十日，任命尚书令、广宁王孝珩为录尚书事，左仆射胡长仁为尚书令，右仆射和士开为左仆射，中书监唐邕为右仆射。
English: On the 20th day of October in winter, Shang Shuling and Guangning Wang Xiaojuan were appointed to record Shang Shuling affairs, the left-hand servant Sha Hu Changren was appointed as Shang Shuling, the right-hand servant Sha He Shikai was appointed as the left-hand servant Sha, and the Chinese book supervisor Tang Jun was appointed as the right-hand servant Sha.

古文：十一月壬辰，太上皇帝诏兼散骑常侍李翥使于陈。
现代文：十一月初一，太上皇帝令兼散骑常侍李翥出使陈国。
English: On the first day of the first month of November, the Emperor's messenger Chen Guo was dispatched by the order of the Empress Dowager and her equestrian attendant Li Xuan.

古文：是月，陈安成王顼废其主伯宗而自立。
现代文：当月，陈国安成王顼废掉皇帝伯宗，自立为帝。
English: In the same month, Chen Guoan became king, overthrew Emperor Bozong, and declared himself emperor.

古文：十二月辛未，太上皇帝崩。
现代文：十二月初十，太上皇帝驾崩。
English: On the tenth day of the twelfth month, the emperor died.

古文：丙子，大赦。九州职人普加一级，内外百官并加两级。
现代文：十五日，大赦天下，九州职事人员加爵一级，内外百官都加爵两级。
English: On the fifteenth day, the world was amnestied, Kyushu officials were given a first-class knighthood, and hundreds of officials at home and abroad were given a second-class knighthood.

古文：戊寅，上太上皇后尊号为皇太后。
现代文：十七日，尊称太上皇后为皇太后。
English: On the 17th, she was given the title of Empress Dowager.

古文：甲申，诏细作之务及所在百工悉罢之。
现代文：二十三日，下令所有细作人员和各处营建制作的百工全部免除。
English: On the 23rd, he ordered that all laborers and construction workers be exempted.

古文：又诏掖廷、晋阳、中山宫人等，及鄴下、并州太官官口二处，其年六十已上，及有癃患者，仰所司简放。
现代文：又诏令宫廷、晋阳、中山宫人等，以及邺城、并州太官官口两处，凡年纪六十岁以上以及有手足不灵活等老年性疾病的，由所管辖部门挑选放回。
English: It also ordered that people from the Imperial Court, Jinyang, Zhongshan Palace, and other places, as well as those from Fucheng and the two offices of the State Great Commission, who are over sixty years old and have senile diseases such as inflexibility of the hands and feet, should be selected and sent back by the departments under their jurisdiction.

古文：庚寅，诏天保七年已来，诸家缘坐配流者，所在令还。
现代文：二十九日，诏令从天保七年以来，各家因坐罪而被发配流放的，各所在地让他们返回。
English: On the 29th, it was decreed that since the 7th year of Tian Bao, all families who had been exiled for sedition would be allowed to return to their hometowns.

古文：是岁，契丹、靺鞨国并遣使朝贡。
现代文：当年，契丹、靺鞨国都派使者朝贡。
English: In that year, Khitan and Shan states both sent emissaries to pay tribute.

古文：五年春正月辛亥，诏以金凤等三台未入寺者，施大兴圣寺。
现代文：五年春正月二十一日，下诏将金凤等三台还未交给寺院的部分，全都布施给大兴圣寺。
English: On the 21st day of the first month of the fifth year of spring, the emperor issued an edict to donate all the parts of the three sets that had not yet been handed over to the temple, including Jinfeng, to the Daxing Holy Temple.

古文：是月，杀定州刺史、博陵王济。
现代文：当月，杀了定州刺史、博陵王高济。
English: That month, he killed Dingzhou Shishi and Boling Wang Gaoji.

古文：二月乙丑，诏应宫刑者，普免刑为官口。
现代文：二月初五，下诏应实行宫刑的，全部免刑作为官家奴隶。
English: On the fifth day of the second month of the year, the following edict decreed that those who should be subjected to palace punishment would all be exempted from punishment as slaves of officials.

古文：又诏禁网捕鹰鹞及畜养笼放之物。
现代文：又下诏禁止用网捕捉鹰鹞以及饲养在笼中的动物。
English: It also banned the use of nets to catch eagle owls and the keeping of animals in cages.

古文：癸酉，大莫娄国遣使朝贡。
现代文：十三日，大莫娄国派使者朝贡。
English: On the 13th, the Great Mogul State sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：乙丑，改东平王俨为琅邪王。
现代文：二十九日，改封东平王俨为琅笽王。
English: On the 29th, the title of Dongping Wangye was changed to Shao Wangye.

古文：诏侍中叱列长文使于周。
现代文：下诏派侍中叱列长叉出使周朝。
English: The Emperor sent a long line of courtiers to reprimand the envoys to Zhou.

古文：是月，杀太尉、赵郡王睿。
现代文：当月，杀了太尉、赵郡王睿又。
English: That month, he killed the first lieutenant, Zhao County Wang Rui.

古文：三月丁酉，以司空徐显秀为太尉，并省尚书令娄定远为司空。
现代文：三月初八，任命司空徐显秀为太尉，并省尚书令娄定远为司空。
English: On the 8th day of the 3rd month of the year, Xu Xianxiu, the Secretary of the Air Force, was appointed as the first lieutenant, and the Minister of the Air Force ordered that Yu Dingyuan be appointed as the Secretary of the Air Force.

古文：是月，行幸晋阳。
现代文：当月，行幸晋阳。
English: That month, he went to Jinyang.

古文：夏四月甲子，诏以并州尚书省为大基圣寺，晋祠为大崇皇寺。
现代文：夏四月初五，下诏将并州的尚书省作为大基圣寺，晋祠改为大崇皇寺。
English: On the 5th day of the 4th month of the summer, the next edict designated the annexed province of Shangshu as the Daiji Holy Temple, and the Jin Temple as the Dai Chonghuang Temple.

古文：乙丑，车驾至自晋阳。
现代文：初六，车驾从晋阳归来。
English: On his sixth day of junior high school, he returned from Jinyang by car.

古文：秋七月己丑，诏降罪人各有差。
现代文：秋七月初二，下诏给罪人减刑，各有不同。
English: On the 2nd day of the 7th month of autumn, the following edict was issued to commute the sentence of a criminal.

古文：戊申，诏使巡省河北诸州无雨处，境内偏旱者，优免租调。
现代文：二十一日，派使者巡察河北各州没有下雨的以及境内雨水偏少发生旱灾的地方，优待免除租税。
English: On the 21st, an envoy was sent to inspect the states of Hebei where there was no rain, as well as the places where there was little rain and droughts occurred in the country. They were given preferential treatment and exempted from taxes.

古文：冬十月壬戌，诏禁造酒。
现代文：冬十月初六，下诏禁止造酒。
English: On the 6th day of the 10th month in winter, it was officially forbidden to make alcohol.

古文：十一月辛丑，诏以太保斛律光为太傅，大司马、冯翊王润为太保，大将军、琅邪王俨为大司马。
现代文：十一月十六日，下诏任命太保斛律光为太傅，大司马、冯翊王润为太保，大将军、琅笽王俨为大司马。
English: On November 16th, the following edict was issued, appointing Taibao Gong Riguang as Taifu, Dai Sima, Feng Xuan Wangrun as Taibao, and Da Geng, Xuan Wangye as Dai Sima.

古文：十二月庚午，以开府仪同三司、兰陵王长恭为尚书令。
现代文：十二月十五日，任命开府仪同三司、兰陵王长恭为尚书令。
English: On December 15th, Kaifu Yi Tong Sanji and Lanling Wang Changgyang were appointed to be the next Shang Shuling.

古文：庚辰，以中书监魏收为尚书右仆射。
现代文：二十五日，任命中书监魏收为尚书右仆射。
English: On the twenty-fifth day, Wei Hui, the Chinese book supervisor, was appointed as Shang Shuxu's right-hand man.

古文：武平元年春正月乙酉朔，改元。
现代文：武平元年春正月初一，改年号。
English: On the first day of the first month of the spring of the first year of Wuping, the year name was changed.

古文：太师、并州刺史、东安王娄睿薨。
现代文：太师、并州刺史、东安王娄睿又去世。
English: The Grand Master, and the State Historian, Dongan Wang Zhaorui passed away again.

古文：戊申，诏兼散骑常侍裴献之聘于陈。
现代文：二十四日，令兼散骑常侍裴献之到陈国问聘。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, the emperor's equerry Pei went to Chen Guo for an interview.

古文：二月癸亥，以百济王余昌为使持节、侍中、骠骑大将军、带方郡公，王如故。
现代文：二月初九，封百济国王馀昌为使持节、侍中、骠骑大将军、带方郡公，王号照旧。
English: On the 9th day of the 2nd month of the year, King Yuchang of Baekje was appointed to the position of envoy, equerry, cavalry general, and county magistrate, with the title of king as before.

古文：己巳，以太傅、咸阳王斛律光为右丞相，并州刺史、右丞相、安定王贺拔仁为录尚书事，冀州刺史、任城王湝为太师。
现代文：十五日，任命太傅、咸阳王斛律光为右丞相，并州刺史、右丞相、安定王贺拔仁为录尚书事，冀州刺史、任城王氵皆为太师。
English: On the 15th, Taifu, Xianyang Wang Zhaoriguang was appointed as the Minister of the Right, and Zhou Zhishi, the Minister of the Right, and Wang Hebairin, the Prince of Stability, were appointed as the Secretary, and Zhou Zhishi and Rencheng Wang Xi were both appointed as the Grand Master.

古文：丙子，降死罪已下囚。
现代文：二十二日，给死罪以下囚犯减刑。
English: On the 22nd, prisoners sentenced to less than the death penalty had their sentences commuted.

古文：闰月戊戌，录尚书事、安定王贺拔仁薨。
现代文：闰月十五日，录尚书事、安定王贺拔仁去世。
English: On the fifteenth day of the leap month, Wang He Bainin passed away.

古文：三月辛酉，以开府仪同三司徐之才为尚书左仆射。
现代文：三月初八，任命开府仪同三司徐之才为尚书左仆射。
English: On the 8th day of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the year, Kaifu Yi and the 3rd secretary Xu Zhicai were appointed.

古文：夏六月乙酉，以广宁王孝珩为司空。
现代文：夏六月初三，任命广宁王孝珩为司空。
English: On the third day of the sixth month of the summer, Guangning Wang Xiaojun was appointed as the secretary.

古文：甲辰，以皇子恆生故，大赦。
现代文：二十二日，因为皇子恒出生的缘故，大赦天下，内外百官，普遍晋爵二级。
English: On the 22nd, because of the birth of Prince Heng, the world was amnestied, and hundreds of officials at home and abroad were generally promoted to the second level.

古文：内外百官，普进二级；九州职人，普进四级。己酉，诏以开府仪同三司唐邕为尚书右仆射。秋七月癸丑，封孝昭皇帝子彦基为城阳王，彦康为定陵王，彦忠为梁郡王。
现代文：九州供职人员，全部晋升四级。二十七日，任命开府仪同三司唐邕为尚书右仆射。秋七月初二，封孝昭皇帝的儿子彦基为城阳王，彦康为定陵王，彦忠为梁郡王。
English: On the 27th, Kaifu Yi Tong, the Third Secretary of the Tang Dynasty, was appointed as Shangshu's right-hand man. In the autumn, on the second day of the first month of July, Emperor Xiao Zhao's son, Hikki, was appointed as the King of Chengyang, Hikang as the King of Dingling, and Hikochu as the King of Liang County.

古文：甲寅，以尚书令、兰陵王长恭为录尚书事，中领军和士开为尚书令。
现代文：初三，任命尚书令、兰陵王长恭为录尚书事，中领军和士开为尚书令。
English: On the third day of junior high school, Shang Shuling and Lanling Wang Changqiong were appointed to record Shang Shuling affairs, and Zhong Lian Jun and Shi Xuan were appointed as Shang Shuling.

古文：癸亥，靺鞨遣使朝贡。
现代文：十二日，派使者朝贡。
English: On the 12th, he sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：癸酉，以华山王凝为太傅。
现代文：二十二日，任命华山王凝为太傅。
English: On the 22nd, Huashan Wang Rong was appointed Taifu.

古文：八月辛卯，行幸晋阳。
现代文：八月初十，巡行到晋阳。
English: At the beginning of August, the parade went to Jinyang.

古文：九月乙巳，立皇子恆为皇太子。
现代文：九月乙巳，立皇子恒为皇太子。
English: In September, Prince Hisahito was appointed Crown Prince.

古文：冬十月辛巳，以司空、广宁王孝珩为司徒，以上洛王思宗为司空，封萧庄为梁王。
现代文：冬十月初一，任命司空、广宁王孝珩为司徒，任命上洛王思宗为司空，封萧庄为梁王。
English: On the first day of October in winter, Siku and Guangning Wang Xiaojun were appointed as the tutors, Shangluo Wang Sizong was appointed as Siku, and Xiaozhuang was appointed as Liang Wang.

古文：戊子，曲降并州死罪已下囚。
现代文：初八，特赦减并州死罪以下囚犯。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, the amnesty reduced the state's death penalty to the following prisoners.

古文：己丑，复改威宗景烈皇帝谥号为显祖文宣皇帝。
现代文：初九，重新改威宗景烈皇帝的谥号为显祖文宣皇帝。
English: On the 9th day of the first month, Emperor Wei Zongjingli's nickname was changed back to Emperor Xianzu Wenxuan.

古文：十二月丁亥，车驾至自晋阳。
现代文：十二月初八，车驾从晋阳归来。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of December, I drove back from Jinyang.

古文：诏左丞相斛律光出晋州道，修城戍。
现代文：下诏命令右丞相斛律光从晋州道出发，修建城戍。
English: He issued an imperial edict ordering the Minister of the Right, Gong Liguang, to set out from Jinzhou Road to build the castle.

古文：二年春正月丁巳，诏兼散骑常侍刘环俊使于陈。
现代文：二年春正月初九，令兼散骑常侍刘环亻隽出使陈国。
English: On the 9th day of the 1st month of the 2nd year of Spring, Liu Huanqian, who was also a knight errant, sent an envoy to Chen Guo.

古文：戊寅，以百济王余昌为使持节、都督、东青州刺史。
现代文：三十日，任命百济王馀昌为使持节、都督、东青州刺史。
English: On the 30th, the king of Baekje, Yu Chang, was appointed as the envoy, the governor, and the governor of East Qingzhou.

古文：二月壬寅，以录尚书事、兰陵王长恭为太尉，并省录尚书事赵彦深为司空，尚书令和士开为录尚书事，左仆射徐之才为尚书令，右仆射唐邕为左仆射，吏部尚书冯子琮为右仆射。
现代文：二月二十四日，任命录尚书事、兰陵王长恭为太尉，并省录尚书事赵彦深为司空，尚书令和士开为录尚书事，左仆射徐之才为尚书令，右仆射唐邕为左仆射，吏部尚书冯子琮为右仆射。
English: On February 24th, Wang Changgong of Lanling was appointed as the first lieutenant of Shang Shujie, Zhao Yanshen of the provincial Shang Shujie was appointed as the secretary, Shang Shuling and Shi Kai were appointed as Shang Shujie, Zuoying Xu Zhicai was appointed as Shang Shuling, Zuoying Tangye was appointed as Zuoying, and Zuoying Feng Zixuan was appointed as Zuoying.

古文：夏四月壬午，以大司马、琅邪王俨为太保。
现代文：夏四月初五，任命大司马、琅笽王俨为太保。
English: On the 5th day of the 4th month of the summer, Dai Sima and Xing Wangye were appointed as Tai Po.

古文：甲午，陈遣使连和，谋伐周，朝议弗许。
现代文：十七日，陈国派使者联盟，谋划共同攻打周国，朝议不赞同。
English: On the 17th, Chen Guo sent an alliance of emissaries to plan a joint attack on Zhou Guo, but the North Koreans did not agree.

古文：六月，段韶攻周汾州克之，获刺史杨敷。
现代文：六月，段韶攻打周所占的汾州，攻克并俘获了刺史杨敷。
English: In June, Duan Yu attacked Zhangzhou, which was occupied by Zhou, and conquered and captured Zhangshi Yangshiki.

古文：秋七月庚午，太保、琅邪王俨矫诏杀录尚书事和士开于南台，即日诛领军大将军库狄伏连、书侍御史王子宣等，尚书右仆射冯子琮赐死殿中。
现代文：秋七月二十五日，太保、琅笽王俨假传诏书杀录尚书事和士开于南台，当天又杀了领军大将军厍狄伏连、书侍御史王子宣等，尚书右仆射冯子琮被赐死在殿中。
English: On the 25th day of the 7th month of the autumn, the eunuchs, the king and the false herald killed Shang Shuxi and his soldiers in Nantai. On the same day, they also killed the leading general Zi Divolian, the secretary Prince Xuan, and so on. Shang Shuxu's right-hand man, Feng Zixuan, was shot dead in the palace.

古文：八月己亥，行幸晋阳。
现代文：八月十四日，皇帝巡幸晋阳。
English: On August 14, the emperor went on a tour of Jinyang.

古文：九月辛亥，以太师、任城王湝为太宰，冯翊王润为太师。
现代文：九月初六，任命太师、任城王氵皆为太宰，冯翊王润为太师。
English: On the 6th day of the 9th month, Taishi and Rencheng Wangye were both appointed as Dazai, and Fengqi Wangrun was appointed as Taishi.

古文：己未，左丞相、平原王段韶薨。
现代文：十四日，左丞相、平原王段韶去世。
English: On the 14th, the Minister of the Left, Pingyuan Wang Duanjun, passed away.

古文：戊午，曲降并州界内死罪已下，各有差。
现代文：十三日，特旨减并州界内死罪以下的囚犯刑罚，视情况不等。
English: On the 13th, the special order reduced the sentence of prisoners below the death penalty within the state, depending on the circumstances.

古文：庚午，杀太保、琅邪王俨。
现代文：二十五日，杀了太保、琅笽王俨。
English: On the twenty-fifth day, he killed the eunuch and the king's son.

古文：壬申，陈人来聘。
现代文：二十七日，陈国人前来问聘。
English: On the 27th, Chen Guoren came to ask for a job.

古文：冬十月，罢京畿府入领军府。
现代文：冬十月，废除京畿府并入领军府。
English: In the winter of October, Gyeonggi Province was abolished and merged into the leading military province.

古文：己亥，车驾至自晋阳。
现代文：二十五日，车驾从晋阳归来。
English: On the 25th, he drove back from Jinyang.

古文：十一月庚戍，诏侍中赫连子悦使于周。
现代文：十一月初六，诏令侍中赫连子悦出使周朝。
English: On the 6th day of the 11th month of the lunar calendar, Emperor Taizong issued an imperial edict ordering the chamberlain, Kheryanzi Yue, to dispatch an envoy to the Zhou Dynasty.

古文：丙寅，以徐州行台、广宁王孝珩为录尚书事。
现代文：二十二日，任命徐州行台、广宁王孝珩为录尚书事。
English: On the 22nd, Xuzhou, Xingtai and Guangning Wang Xiaojuan were appointed as recorders.

古文：庚午，以录尚书事、广宁王孝珩为司徒。
现代文：二十六日，任命录尚书事、广宁王孝珩为司徒。
English: On the 26th, he appointed Qu Shang Shujing and Guangning Wang Xiaojun as his assistants.

古文：癸酉，以右丞相斛律光为左丞相。
现代文：二十九日，任命右丞相斛律光为左丞相。
English: On the 29th, Minister of the Right, Minoru Ritsuko, was appointed Minister of the Left.

古文：三年春正月己巳，祀南郊。
现代文：三年春正月二十六日，在南郊祭祀。
English: On the 26th day of the first month of the third year of spring, a ritual was held in the southern suburbs.

古文：辛亥，追赠故琅邪王俨为楚帝。
现代文：初八，追赠已故的琅笽王高俨为楚帝。
English: On the 8th day of the first month of the year, the late King Gong Gao Rong was posthumously awarded the title of Chu Emperor.

古文：二月己卯，以卫菩萨为太尉。
现代文：二月初七，任命卫菩萨为太尉。
English: On the seventh day of the second month of the year, he was promoted to the rank of lieutenant.

古文：辛巳，以并省吏部尚书高元海为尚书右仆射。
现代文：初九，任命原并省吏部尚书高元海为尚书右仆射。
English: On the ninth day of the first month of the year, Gao Yuanhai, a former provincial official, was appointed as the right-hand man of Shangshu.

古文：庚寅，以左仆射唐邕为尚书令，侍中祖珽为左仆射。
现代文：十八日，任命左仆射唐邕为尚书令，侍中祖王廷为左仆射。
English: On the 18th, he appointed his left-hand servant, Tang Jia, as Shang Shuling, and his attendant, Zuo Wangting, as Zuo Jia Reng.

古文：是月，敕撰《玄州苑御览》，后改名《圣寿堂御览》。
现代文：当月，下令编撰《玄洲苑御览》，后又改名为《圣寿堂御览》。
English: In the same month, he ordered the compilation of the "Genzhou Courtyard Survey," which was later renamed the "Sacred Life Hall Survey."

古文：三月辛酉，诏文武官五品已上，各举一人。
现代文：三月十九日，下诏文武官员五品以上的各举荐一人。
English: On March 19th, one person was recommended by each of the five or more civil and military officials.

古文：是月，周诛冢宰宇文护。
现代文：当月，周朝杀了冢宰宇文护。
English: In the same month, Zhou Dynasty killed Yanzai Uwenguo.

古文：夏四月，周人来聘。
现代文：夏四月，周人前来问聘。
English: In the summer of April, Zhou Ren came to ask for a job.

古文：秋七月戊辰，诛左丞相、咸阳王斛律光，及其弟幽州行台、荆山公丰乐。
现代文：秋七月二十八日，杀左丞相、咸阳王斛律光和他的弟弟幽州行台、荆山公丰乐。
English: On the 28th day of the 7th month of autumn, he killed the minister of justice, Xianyang Wang Zhaoriguang, and his brother, Yuzhou Xingtai, and Jingshan Gong Fengle.

古文：八月庚寅，废皇后斛律氏为庶人。
现代文：八月二十一日，废皇后斛律氏为庶人。
English: On August 21st, the former Empress Yan Rude became a commoner.

古文：以太宰、任城王湝为右丞相，太师、冯翊王润为太尉，兰陵王长恭为大司马，广宁王孝珩为大将军，安德王廷宗为司徒。
现代文：任命太宰、任城王氵皆为右丞相，太师、冯翊王润为太尉，兰陵王长恭为大司马，广宁王孝珩为大将军，安德王延宗为司徒。
English: He appointed Dazai and Rencheng Wang Rong as the minister of the right, Taishi and Feng Jun Wang Run as the lieutenant, Lanling Wang Chang Rong as the grand secretary, Guangning Wang Xiao Rong as the general, and And Wang Yan Zong as the tutor.

古文：使领军封辅相聘于周。
现代文：派领军封辅相到周聘问。
English: He sent his leading troops to Zhou to ask for reinforcements.

古文：戊子，拜右昭仪胡氏为皇后。
现代文：十九日，立右昭仪胡氏为皇后。
English: On the 19th, Wu Zhaoyi crowned Hu as empress.

古文：己丑，以司州牧、北平王仁坚为尚书令，特进许季良为左仆射，彭城王宝德为右仆射。
现代文：二十日，任命司州牧、北平王仁坚为尚书令，特进许季良为左仆射，彭城王宝德为右仆射。
English: On the 20th, he appointed Shizhou Maki and Beiping Wang Renjian as Shang Shuling, Xu Qiliang as Zuo Fuxia, and Pengcheng Wang Baode as Zuo Fuxia.

古文：癸巳，行幸晋阳。
现代文：二十四日，前往晋阳。
English: On the 24th, he went to Jinyang.

古文：是月，《圣寿堂御览》成，敕付史阁。后改为《修文殿御览》。
现代文：当月，《圣寿堂御览》撰成，下令交付史阁，后改为《修文殿御览》。
English: In the same month, the "Sacred Life Hall Tour" was compiled and ordered to be delivered to the History Pavilion, and later changed to the "Revival Hall Tour."

古文：九月，陈人来聘。
现代文：九月，陈人前来问聘。
English: In September, Chen came to ask for a job.

古文：冬十月，降死罪已下囚。
现代文：冬十月，减死罪以下的囚犯刑罚。
English: In the winter of October, prisoners sentenced to less than the death penalty.

古文：甲午，拜弘德夫人穆氏为左皇后，大赦。
现代文：二十六日，封弘德夫人穆氏为左皇后，大赦天下。
English: On the 26th, Lady Mu, the wife of Emperor Hirohito, became the Left Empress and was pardoned by the emperor.

古文：十二月辛丑，废皇后胡氏为庶人。
现代文：十二月初四，废皇后胡氏为庶人。
English: On the 4th day of the 12th month, the deposed Empress Hu became a commoner.

古文：是岁，新罗、百济、勿吉、突厥并遣使朝贡。
现代文：当年，新罗、百济、勿吉、突厥都派使者朝贡。
English: In that year, Silla, Baekje, Bukit, and Turk all sent emissaries to pay tribute.

古文：于周为建德元年。
现代文：在周朝为建德元年。
English: It was the first year of Jiande in the Zhou Dynasty.

古文：四年春正月戊寅，以并省尚书令高阿那肱为录尚书事。
现代文：四年春正月十一日，任命并省尚书令高阿那肱为录尚书事。
English: On the eleventh day of the first month of the fourth year of the Spring, Gao Ananyuan was appointed and ordered by the provincial government to record the records.

古文：庚辰，诏兼散骑常侍崔象使于陈。
现代文：十三日，令兼散骑常侍崔象出使陈国。
English: On the thirteenth day, the order and horseback riding attendant Cui Xiang sent Chen Guo.

古文：是月，鄴都、并州并有狐媚，多截人发。
现代文：当月，邺城、并州都有狐狸出来媚人，许多人头发被割断。
English: That month, foxes came out to charm people in Handan and Binzhou, and many people had their hair cut off.

古文：二月乙巳，拜左皇后穆氏为皇后。
现代文：二月初九，封左皇后穆氏为皇后。
English: On the 9th day of the 2nd month, Empress Mu, the left-behind empress, became the empress.

古文：丙午，置文林馆。
现代文：初十，设立文林馆。
English: On the 10th day of the first month, the Wenlin Museum was established.

古文：乙卯，以尚书令、北平王仁坚为录尚书事。
现代文：十九日，任命尚书令、北平王仁坚为录尚书事。
English: On the 19th, Shang Shuling and Beiping Wang Renjian were appointed to record Shang Shuling.

古文：丁巳，行幸晋阳。
现代文：二十一日，前往晋阳。
English: On the 21st, he went to Jinyang.

古文：是月，周人来聘。
现代文：当月，周人前来问聘。
English: That month, Zhou came to ask for a job.

古文：三月辛未，盗入信州，杀刺史和士休，南兗州刺史鲜于世荣讨之。
现代文：三月初五，强盗攻进信州，杀了刺史和士休，南兖州刺史鲜于世荣前去讨伐。
English: On the 5th day of March, the bandits invaded Shinshu, killed Shishi and Shixiu, and Shishi from Southern Luzhou went to fight against Shi Rong.

古文：庚辰，车驾至晋阳。
现代文：十四日，车驾到达晋阳。
English: On the 14th, the car arrived in Jinyang.

古文：夏四月戊午，以大司马、兰陵王长恭为太保，大将军、定州刺史、南阳王绰为大司马，大司马、太尉卫菩萨为大将军，司徒、安德王延宗为太尉，司空、武兴王普为司徒，开府仪同三司、宜阳王赵彦深为司空。
现代文：夏四月二十三日，任命大司马、兰陵王长恭为太保，大将军、定州刺史、南阳王绰为大司马，太尉卫菩萨为大将军，司徒、安德王延宗为太尉，司空、武兴王普为司徒，开府仪同三司、宜阳王赵彦深为司空。
English: On the 23rd day of the 4th month of the summer, the grand secretary Ma, Lanling Wang Changgong was appointed as the grand marshal, the grand general, Dingzhou Shishi, Nanyang Wang Zhuo was appointed as the grand secretary Ma, the grand captain Wei Bodhisattva was appointed as the grand general, the tutor, Ando Wang Yanzong was appointed as the grand captain, the tutor, Wuxing Wang Pu was appointed as the tutor, the Kefu Yi and the three tutors, and the Yiyang King Zhao Yanshen was appointed as the tutor.

古文：癸丑，祈皇祠。
现代文：十八日，在皇祠祈祷。
English: On the 18th, they prayed at the Imperial Shrine.

古文：坛壝蕝之内忽有车轨之辙，案验，傍无人迹，不知车所从来。
现代文：祭坛上设立束茅的地方忽然发现有车轮的辙印，可是检查以后旁边并没有发现人的踪迹。也不知车子是从什么地方来的。
English: In the place where the cassock was set up on the altar, there was suddenly a wheel rut mark, but after inspection, there was no trace of a person next to it. I don't know where the car came from.

古文：乙卯，诏以为大庆，班告天下。
现代文：二十日，为此而下诏大加庆贺，布告天下。
English: On the 20th, to this end, the Emperor issued a proclamation of congratulations and announced it to the world.

古文：己未，周人来聘。
现代文：二十四日，周人前来问聘。
English: On the 24th, Zhou Ren came to ask for a job.

古文：五月丙子，诏史官更撰《魏书》。
现代文：五月十一日，下诏让史官重新编写《魏书》。
English: On May 11, an edict was issued ordering the historian to rewrite the "Weishu."

古文：癸巳，以领军穆提婆为尚书左仆射，以侍中、中书监段孝言为右仆射。
现代文：二十八日，任命领军穆提婆为尚书左仆射，任命侍中、中书监段孝言为右仆射。
English: On the 28th, the leader of the army, Mutiba, was appointed as the left attendant of Shangshu, and the attendant, the middle attendant, and the middle attendant, Duan Xiaogan, were appointed as the right attendants.

古文：是月，开府仪同三司尉破胡、长孙洪略等与陈将吴明彻战于吕梁南。大败，破胡走以免，洪略战殁。遂陷秦、泾二州。
现代文：当月，开府仪同三司尉破胡、长孙洪略等和陈将吴明彻在吕梁南面交战，大败，尉破胡逃跑而免死，长孙洪略战死，秦、泾两州沦陷。
English: In the same month, Kaifu Yi, together with the third lieutenant Pahu, the eldest son Hongliu, and the Chen general Wu Mingche, fought in the south of Luliang and suffered a great defeat. The first lieutenant Pahu escaped death, the eldest son Hongliu died in battle, and the two states of Qin and Handan fell.

古文：明彻进陷和、合二州。
现代文：吴明彻又继续进攻占领了和州和明州。
English: Wu Mingcher continued to attack and occupied He Prefecture and Ming Prefecture.

古文：是月，杀太保、兰陵王长恭。
现代文：当月，杀了太保、兰陵王长恭。
English: In the same month, he killed Lanling Wang Changqong.

古文：六月，明彻进军围寿阳。
现代文：六月，吴明彻进军并围困了寿阳。
English: In June, Wu Mingche marched into and besieged Shouyang.

古文：壬子，幸南苑，从官暍死者六十人。
现代文：十八日，巡幸南苑，随从官员中暑而死的有六十人。
English: On the 18th, there were 60 people who died of heatstroke in the procession of officials visiting the South Garden.

古文：以录尚书事高阿那肱为司徒。
现代文：任命录尚书事高阿那肱为司徒。
English: Appointed Anahong, a high-ranking official of the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology, as a scholar.

古文：丙辰，诏开府王师罗使于周。
现代文：二十二日，诏令开府王师罗出使周朝。
English: On the 22nd, Emperor Gaifu ordered King Shiro to send an envoy to the Zhou Dynasty.

古文：秋九月，校猎于鄴东。
现代文：秋九月，在邺城东围猎。
English: Autumn and September, hunting in the east of Lucheng.

古文：冬十月，陈将吴明彻陷寿阳。
现代文：冬十月，陈将吴明彻攻陷寿阳。
English: In the winter of October, Chen led Wu Mingche to invade Shouyang.

古文：辛丑，杀侍中崔季舒、张雕唐、散骑常侍刘逖、封孝琰、黄门侍郎裴泽、郭遵。
现代文：初九，杀侍中崔季舒、张唐，散骑常侍刘逖、封孝琰，黄门侍郎裴泽、郭遵。
English: On the ninth day of the first month, Cui Jishu and Zhang Tang in the killing of the attendants, Liu Yao and Feng Xiao Yao in the horseback riding attendants, Peizhe and Guo Zun in the yellow gate attendants.

古文：癸卯，行幸晋阳。
现代文：十一日，前往晋阳。
English: On the 11th, he went to Jinyang.

古文：十二月戊寅，以司徒高阿那肱为右丞相。
现代文：十二月戊寅，任命司徒高阿那肱为右丞相。
English: In December, Wu Yin appointed Sittu Gao Anaxun as the Minister of the Right.

古文：是岁，高丽、靺鞨并遣使朝贡，突厥使求婚。
现代文：当年，高丽、都派使者朝贡，突厥派人来求婚。
English: In that year, both Korea and Japan sent envoys to pay tribute, and the Turks sent someone to propose marriage.

古文：五年春正月乙丑，置左右娥英各一人。
现代文：五年春正月初四，设左右娥英各一人。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the spring of the fifth year, one person from each side was appointed.

古文：二月乙未，车驾至自晋阳。
现代文：二月初五，车驾从晋阳归来。
English: On the fifth day of February, I drove back from Jinyang.

古文：朔州行台、南安王思好反。
现代文：朔州行台、南安王思好谋反。
English: Shuozhou Xingtai and Nan'an Wang are plotting to rebel.

古文：辛丑，行幸晋阳。
现代文：十一日，前往晋阳。
English: On the 11th, he went to Jinyang.

古文：尚书令唐邕等大破思好，投火死，焚其尸，并其妻李氏。
现代文：尚书令唐邕大败思好，思好投水而死，焚烧了他的尸体，他的妻子李氏一起被焚烧。
English: Shang Shuling ordered Tang Yao's great defeat, thinking that he would die by drowning, and burned his corpse. His wife, Li Shizhe, was also burned.

古文：丁未，车驾至自晋阳。
现代文：十七日，车驾从晋阳归来。
English: On the 17th, he drove back from Jinyang.

古文：甲寅，以尚书令唐邕为录尚书事。
现代文：二十四日，任命尚书令唐邕为录尚书事。
English: On the 24th, Shang Shuling appointed Tang Jun to record Shang Shuling.

古文：夏五月，大旱，晋阳得死魃，长二尺，面顶各二目。
现代文：夏五月，大旱，晋阳人找到一个死的旱魃，长二尺，面上和头顶都长有两只眼睛。
English: In the summer and May, when there was a big drought, the people of Jinyang found a dead marmot, two feet long, with two eyes on its face and on the top of its head.

古文：帝闻之，使刻木为其形以献。庚申，大赦。
现代文：皇帝听说以后，让人用木头刻下它的形状以祭祀。初一，大赦。
English: After the emperor heard about it, he had someone carve its shape in wood as a sacrifice. On the first day of the new year, there was a general amnesty.

古文：丁亥，陈人寇淮北。
现代文：二十八日，陈人入侵淮北。
English: On the 28th, the Chen people invaded Huaibei.

古文：六年春三月乙亥，车驾至自晋阳。
现代文：秋八月十五日，前往晋阳。十六日，任命高劢为尚书右仆射。六年春三月二十一日，车驾从晋阳归来。
English: On the 15th day of the 8th month of the autumn, he went to Jinyang. On the 16th day, he appointed Gao Jun as his right-hand man. On the 21st day of the 3rd month of the 6th year of the spring, he drove back from Jinyang.

古文：丁丑，烹妖贼郑子饶于都市。是月，周人来聘。
现代文：二十三日，在都市中烹烧了妖贼郑子饶。当月，周人前来问聘。
English: On the 23rd, the thief Zheng Zirao was burned in the city. That month, Zhou people came to inquire.

古文：夏四月庚子，以中书监阳休之为尚书右仆射。
现代文：夏四月十六日，任命中书监阳休之为尚书右仆射。
English: On the 16th day of the 4th month of the summer, Yang Jie was appointed as the supervisor of calligraphy.

古文：癸卯，靺鞨遣使朝贡。
现代文：十九日，派使者朝贡。
English: On the 19th, he sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：秋七月甲戌，行幸晋阳。
现代文：秋七月二十一日，前往晋阳。
English: On the 21st day of the 7th month of autumn, I went to Jinyang.

古文：八月丁酉，冀、定、赵、幽、沧、瀛六州大水。
现代文：八月十五日，冀、定、赵、幽、沧、瀛六州大水灾。
English: On August 15, Hebei, Ding, Zhao, Yu, Cang and Handan provinces were hit by major floods.

古文：是月，周师入洛川，屯芒山，攻逼洛城。纵火船焚浮桥，河桥绝。
现代文：当月，周军进入洛川，屯兵于芒山，攻近洛城，派火船焚烧浮桥，河桥被烧断。
English: In the same month, the Zhou army entered Luochuan, stationed troops in Mangshan, attacked Luocheng, sent fire ships to burn the pontoon bridge, and the river bridge was burned.

古文：闰月己丑，遣右丞相高阿那肱自晋阳御之，师次河阳，周师夜遁。
现代文：闰八月己丑，派右丞相高阿那肱从晋阳出兵对抗，当齐军到达河阳时，周军连夜逃走。
English: In late August, he sent the Minister of the Right Gao Ananyuan from Jinyang to fight against the Qi army. When the Qi army arrived in Hebei, the Zhou army fled overnight.

古文：庚辰，以司空赵彦深为司徒，斛律阿列罗为司空。
现代文：二十八日，任命司空赵彦深为司徒，斛律阿列罗为司空。
English: On the 28th, Zhao Yanshen was appointed as the steward of the steward, and Baolu Aliero was appointed as the steward.

古文：辛巳，以军国资用不足，税关市、舟车、山泽、盐铁、店肆，轻重各有差，开酒禁。
现代文：二十九日，因军队和国家费用不够，在关市、舟车、山泽、盐铁、店市收税，轻重有别，放开造酒的禁令。
English: On the 29th, due to insufficient military and national expenses, taxes were collected in Guan, Zhouche, Yamazawa, Salt Iron, and Dengshi, and the ban on making liquor was lifted.

古文：七年春正月壬辰，诏去秋已来，水潦，人饥不自立者，所在付大寺及诸富户，济其性命。
现代文：七年春正月十三日，下诏说，去年秋天以来，因水灾民众饥荒难以维持的，各所在地方官员交给大寺院以及各富户赈济，维持生命。
English: On the 13th day of the first month of the seventh year of the Spring, the following edict said that since last autumn, due to the floods, the people's hunger was difficult to maintain, and local officials in various places handed over to the great temples and rich households to support their lives.

古文：甲寅，大赦。
现代文：甲寅，大赦天下。
English: On the 10th day of the first month, there will be a general amnesty.

古文：乙卯，车驾至自晋阳。
现代文：乙卯，车驾从晋阳归来。
English: B, driving back from Jinyang.

古文：二月辛酉，括杂户女，年二十已下十四已上未嫁，悉集省。隐匿者，家长处死刑。
现代文：二月十二，搜查杂户的女儿，凡年纪二十岁以下十四岁以上未出嫁的，全部集中到省，隐藏起来的，家长处死刑。
English: On February 12th, the daughters of all households were searched, and all unmarried girls under the age of twenty and over the age of fourteen were concentrated in the province, hidden away, and their parents were sentenced to death.

古文：二月丙寅，风从西北起，发屋拔树，五日乃止。
现代文：二月十七日，大风从西北刮起，毁屋拔树，五天以后才停止。
English: On February 17th, a strong wind blew from the northwest, destroying houses and uprooting trees, and only stopped five days later.

古文：夏六月戊申朔，日有蚀之。庚申，司徒赵彦深薨。
现代文：夏六月初一，日食。十三日，司徒赵彦深去世。
English: On the 13th day of the 6th lunar month, the day of the solar eclipse, the disciple Zhao Yanshen passed away.

古文：秋七月丁丑，大雨霖。
现代文：秋七月初一，大雨连绵。
English: On the first day of autumn in July, continuous heavy rain.

古文：是月，以水涝，遣使巡抚流亡人户。
现代文：当月，因水灾，派使者巡视和安抚流亡的人家。
English: That month, due to floods, envoys were sent to inspect and pacify the homes of the exiles.

古文：八月丁卯，行幸晋阳。
现代文：八月二十一日，前往晋阳。
English: On August 21, he left for Jinyang.

古文：雉集于御坐，获之，有司不敢以闻。
现代文：有野鸡聚集在皇帝的御座上，捕获了，但有关人员不敢告知皇帝。
English: Some pheasants gathered on the emperor's throne and were caught, but the people concerned did not dare to inform the emperor.

古文：诏营邯郸宫。
现代文：下诏营建邯郸宫。
English: He issued an edict to build the Summer Palace.

古文：冬十月丙辰，帝大狩于祁连池。
现代文：冬十月十一，皇帝在祁连池大举狩猎。
English: In winter, on October 11th, the emperor went hunting in Qilian Pond.

古文：周师攻晋州。
现代文：周军攻打晋州。
English: The Zhou army attacked Jinzhou.

古文：癸亥，帝还晋阳。
现代文：十八日，皇帝回到晋阳。
English: On the 18th, the emperor returned to Jinyang.

古文：甲子，出兵，大集晋祠。
现代文：十九日，出兵，在晋祠集合队伍。
English: On the 19th, troops were dispatched and assembled at Jin Temple.

古文：庚午，帝发晋阳。
现代文：二十五日，皇帝从晋阳出发。
English: On the 25th, the emperor set out from Jinyang.

古文：癸酉，帝列阵而行，上鸡栖原，与周齐王宪相对，至夜不战。周师敛阵而退。
现代文：二十八日，皇帝列阵而行，登上鸡栖原，和周齐王宪相互对阵，到天黑没有交战，周军收阵而退。
English: On the 28th, the emperor marched in formation, ascended the Jixi Plain, and confronted Zhou Qi Wang Xian. By nightfall, there was no fighting, and Zhou's army withdrew.

古文：十一月，周武帝退还长安，留偏师守晋州，高阿那肱等围晋州城。
现代文：十一月，周武帝退回长安，留偏师据晋州，高阿那肱等人围困晋州。
English: In November, Emperor Zhou retreated to Chang'an, leaving his division in Jinzhou, where they were besieged by Gao Anaxuan and others.

古文：戊寅，帝至围所。
现代文：初三，皇帝来到合围的地方。
English: On the third day of the first month, the emperor came to the place where they were encircled.

古文：十二月戊申，周武帝来救晋州。
现代文：十二月初四，周武帝来救援晋州。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of December, Zhou Wudi came to the rescue of Jinzhou.

古文：庚戌，战于城南，齐军大败。
现代文：初六，在城南交战，齐军大败。
English: On the 6th day of the first month, they fought in the south of the city, and the Qi army was soundly defeated.

古文：帝弃军先还。
现代文：皇帝丢下军队先回。
English: The emperor left his army behind for the last time.

古文：癸丑，入晋阳，忧惧不知所之。
现代文：初九，进入晋阳，又担忧又害怕，不知怎么办好。
English: At the beginning of ninth grade, when I entered Jinyang, I was worried and scared, and I didn't know what to do.

古文：甲寅，大赦。
现代文：初十，大赦天下。
English: On the 10th day of the first month, there will be a general amnesty.

古文：帝谓朝臣曰： 周师甚盛，若何？ 
现代文：皇帝对朝臣们说： 周军强盛，怎么办？ 
English: The emperor said to his courtiers: Zhou's army is strong, what should we do?

古文：群臣咸曰： 天命未改，一得一失，自古皆然。
现代文：群臣都说 ：天命并未改变，一得一失，自古都是这样。
English: The courtiers all said, "Man's destiny hasn't changed. One gain, one loss, it's been like this since ancient times."

古文：宜停百赋，安朝野，收遗兵，背城死战，以存社稷。 
现代文：应当停收各种赋税，安定朝野民心，收集遗下的军队，背城决一死战，以存社稷。 
English: It is necessary to suspend the collection of all kinds of taxes, stabilize the hearts of the people, collect the remaining troops, and fight a battle to the death in order to save society.

古文：帝意犹预，欲向北朔州。
现代文：皇帝犹豫不定，想要去北朔州。
English: The emperor hesitated and wanted to go to Beishuozhou.

古文：乃留安德王廷宗、广宁王孝珩等守晋阳。
现代文：便留下安德王延宗、广宁王孝珩等守卫晋阳。
English: Ando Wang Yanzong, Guangning Wang Xiaojun and others stayed behind to guard Jinyang.

古文：若晋阳不守，即欲奔突厥。
现代文：如果晋阳守不住，就投奔突厥。
English: If you can't defend Jinyang, go to Turkestan.

古文：群臣皆曰不可，帝不从其言。
现代文：群臣都认为不能够这样，可是皇帝不听从他们的意见。
English: The courtiers thought it was impossible, but the emperor did not listen to them.

古文：开府仪同三司贺拔伏恩、封辅相、慕容钟葵等宿卫近臣三十余人，西奔周师。
现代文：开府仪同三司贺拔伏恩、封辅相、慕容钟葵等宿卫近臣三十多人，西去投奔周军。
English: Kaifu Yi, together with more than 30 close vassals of the three guards, such as He Ba Fuen, Fu Fu Xiang, and Murong Zhong Kwai, went west to join the Zhou army.

古文：乙卯，诏募兵，遣安德王延宗为左广，广宁王孝珩为右广。
现代文：十一日，招募兵士，派安德王延宗为左广，广宁王孝珩为右广。
English: On the 11th day of the month, soldiers were recruited, and Anding Wang Yan Zong was assigned to the left wing, and Guangning Wang Xiaojun to the right wing.

古文：延宗入见帝，帝告欲向北朔州，延宗泣谏，不从。
现代文：延宗入见皇帝，皇帝告诉他要去北朔州，延宗哭着进谏，皇帝不听。
English: Yan Zong went to see the emperor. The emperor told him to go to Beishuozhou. Yan Zong cried and went to the emperor, but the emperor did not listen.

古文：帝密遣王康德与中人齐绍等送皇太后、皇太子于北朔州。
现代文：皇帝暗暗派遣王康德和太监齐绍等人护送皇太后、皇太子到北朔州。
English: The emperor secretly sent Wang Kangde and the eunuch Qi Shao and others to escort the empress dowager and the crown prince to North Shuozhou.

古文：丙辰，帝幸城南军营，劳将士，其夜欲遁，诸将不从。
现代文：十二日，皇帝到城南军营里犒劳将士，当夜准备逃走，众将不肯听从。
English: On the twelfth day, the emperor went to the military camp in the south of the city to reward the soldiers for their hard work. That night, he prepared to flee, but the soldiers would not listen.

古文：丁巳，大赦。
现代文：十三日，大赦天下。
English: On the 28th, a general amnesty was declared.

古文：改武平七年为隆化元年。
现代文：改武平七年为隆化元年。
English: It was the first year of the Longhua era.

古文：其日，穆提婆降周。
现代文：当天，穆提婆投降了周人。
English: On the same day, Muti surrendered to Zhou.

古文：诏除安德王延宗为相国，委以备御，延宗流涕受命。
现代文：下诏任命安德王延宗为相国，委任他进行防御。延宗流着泪接受委命。
English: The next imperial edict appointed the Ando king, Yan Zong, as the consort of the country and assigned him to defend it. Yan Zong accepted the commission with tears.

古文：帝乃夜斩五龙门而出。
现代文：皇帝便在深夜斩开五龙门出城，准备奔往突厥，随从官员大多散去。
English: In the middle of the night, the emperor cut open the Five Dragon Gate and left the city, preparing to rush to Turkey. Most of the officials who followed him dispersed.

古文：欲走突厥，从官多散，领军梅胜郎叩马谏，乃回之鄴。时唯高阿那肱等十余骑，广宁王孝珩、襄城王彦道续至，得数十人同行。
现代文：领军梅胜郎勒住马进谏，这才转回到邺城。当时只有高阿那肱等十多骑人，后来广宁王孝珩、襄城王彦道陆续赶到，共得几十人同行。
English: The leader of the army, Mei Sheng Lang, held back the horse from entering the city, and only then did he turn back to Lucheng. At that time, there were only more than ten riders such as Gao Anaxun. Later, Guangning Wang Xiaojun and Xiangcheng Wang Yandao arrived one after another, bringing together dozens of people.

古文：戊午，延宗从众议，即皇帝位于晋阳，改隆化为德昌元年。
现代文：十五日，延宗采纳了众人的意见，在晋阳即皇帝位，改隆化为德昌元年。
English: On the fifteenth day, Yan Zong adopted the opinions of many people, and in Jinyang, that is, the emperor's throne, was changed to the first year of Dechang.

古文：庚申，帝入鄴。
现代文：十六日，皇帝进入邺城。
English: On the 16th, the emperor entered Shicheng.

古文：辛酉，延宗与周师战于晋阳，大败，为周师所虏。
现代文：十七日，延宗和周军在晋阳交战，大败，被周军俘虏。
English: On the 17th, Yan Zong and the Zhou army fought in Jinyang, suffered a great defeat, and were captured by the Zhou army.

古文：帝遣募人，重加官赏，虽有此言，而竟不出物。
现代文：皇帝于是派人招募军队，重加封官和赏赐。他虽是这样说，但却不拿出东西来。
English: The emperor then sent men to recruit an army, re-instate him and reward him. Although he said this, he did not come up with anything.

古文：广宁王孝珩奏请出宫人及珍宝，班赐将士，帝不悦。
现代文：广宁王孝珩奏请放出宫女和拿出珍宝来赏赐给将士们，皇帝听后很不高兴。
English: The emperor was very unhappy after listening to Guangning Wang Xiaojun's request to release the palace maids and bring out precious treasures to reward the soldiers.

古文：斛律孝卿居中，受委带甲以处分。
现代文：斛律孝卿在宫中接受委任，带领甲兵以处置各种事态。
English: Gong Ritsutaka received an appointment in the palace and led the armored soldiers to deal with various situations.

古文：请帝亲劳，为帝撰辞，且曰： 宜慷慨流涕，感激人心。 
现代文：他请皇帝亲自慰问将士，并替他写了讲话稿，还对他说 ：应当慷慨流涕，以感动和激励人心。 
English: He asked the emperor to personally offer condolences to the soldiers, and wrote a speech for him. He also told him: "You should be generous in order to move and inspire people."

古文：帝既出临众，将令之，不复记所受言，遂大笑。左右亦群咍，将士莫不解体。
现代文：皇帝出来以后，见到将士们，准备向他们发布命令，却记不得原来想好的话，于是便大笑起来，他身边的人也跟着嘻笑，将士们人心思叛了。
English: When the emperor came out, he saw the generals and was about to give them an order, but he couldn't remember what he had originally wanted to say, so he burst out laughing, and the people around him also laughed, and the generals were heartbroken.

古文：于是自大丞相已下，太宰、大司马、三师、大将军、三公等官，并增员而授，或三或四，不可胜数。
现代文：于是，从大丞相以下，太宰、大司马、三师、大将军、三公等官职，都增加授官人数，一个职务或三个或四人，数也数不清。
English: As a result, the number of officials awarded from the rank of Dazai, Daishima, Sanji, Daisen, and Sanko to the rank of Dazai, Dazai, Daishima, Sanji, Dazai, Dazai, Dazai, Dazai, Dazai, Dazai, Dazai, Dazai, Dazai, Dazai, Dazai, Dazai, Dazai, Dazai, Dazai, Dazai, Dazai, Dazai, Dazai, Dazai, Dazai, Dazai, Dazai, Dazai, Dazai

古文：甲子，皇太后从北道至。引文武一品已上入硃华门。赐酒食及纸笔，问以御周之方略。
现代文：二十日，皇太后从北道回来，皇帝把一品以上文武官员引入朱华门，赐给他们酒食和纸笔，询问抵御周军的策略。
English: On the 20th, when the Empress Dowager returned from the Northern Province, the emperor brought more than a hundred civil and military officials to Zhu Huamen, gave them food and drink and paper and pen, and inquired about the strategy to resist Zhou's army.

古文：群臣各异议，帝莫知所从。
现代文：群臣各持己见，异议很多，皇帝不知所从。
English: The courtiers all have their own opinions, there are many objections, and the emperor doesn't know what to do.

古文：又引高元海、宋士素、卢思道、李德林等欲议禅位皇太子。
现代文：他又引见高元海、宋士素、卢思道、李德林等人要商议禅位于皇太子。
English: He also introduced Gao Yuanhai, Song Shisu, Lu Sidao, Li Delin and others to discuss the role of Zen in the crown prince.

古文：先是，望气者言，当有革易，于是依天统故事，授位幼主。
现代文：起先，有会望气的人说，天下当有变革和改易，于是依照天统时故事，传位给幼主。
English: At first, some hopeful people said that there should be change and reform in the world, so according to the story of the unification of heaven and earth, the position was passed on to the young master.

古文：幼主名恆，帝之长子也。
现代文：齐幼主名恒，是后主皇帝的长子。
English: Qizhong Nianheng was the eldest son of Emperor Qizhong.

古文：母曰穆皇后。
现代文：母亲是穆皇后。
English: His mother was Empress Mu.

古文：武平元年六月，生于鄴。
现代文：武平元年六月出生于邺城。
English: Wu Ping was born in June of the first year of the Heian period in Shicheng.

古文：其年十月，立为皇太子。
现代文：当年十月，立为皇太子。
English: In October of that year, he became crown prince.

古文：隆化二年春正月乙亥，即皇帝位，时年八岁。
现代文：隆化二年春正月初一，即皇帝位，年纪只有八岁。
English: On the first day of the first month of the second year of Longhua, that is, the emperor's reign, he was only eight years old.

古文：改元为承光元年，大赦。尊皇太后为太皇太后，帝为太上皇帝，后为太上皇后。
现代文：改年号为承光元年，大赦天下，尊称皇太后为太皇太后，皇帝为太上皇帝，皇后为太上皇后。
English: The name of the year was changed to the first year of Zheng Guang, and the country was amnestied. The empress dowager was called the great empress dowager, the emperor was called the great emperor, and the empress was called the great empress dowager.

古文：于是黄门侍郎颜之推、中书侍郎薛道衡、侍中陈德信等劝太上皇帝往河外募兵，更为经略。
现代文：这时，黄门侍郎颜之推、中书侍郎薛道衡、侍中陈德信等人劝太上皇帝到黄河以南地区招兵，再重新经营。
English: At this time, Huangmen's chamberlain Yan Zhixu, Zhongshu's chamberlain Xue Daoheng, and chamberlain Chen Dexin and others persuaded the emperor to recruit soldiers in the area south of the Yellow River and then restart the business.

古文：若不济，南投陈国。
现代文：如果不成，就南走投奔陈国。
English: If that doesn't work, they'll head south to Chen Guo.

古文：从之。
现代文：太上皇听从了。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：丁丑，太皇太后、太上皇自鄴先趣济州。
现代文：初三，太皇太后、太上皇后从邺城先往济州。
English: On the third day of the first month, the empress dowager and the empress dowager went to Jeju from Yeongseong first.

古文：周师渐逼。
现代文：周朝军队逐渐逼近。
English: The Zhou army gradually approached.

古文：癸未，幼主又自鄴东走。
现代文：初九，幼主又从邺城往东走。
English: On the ninth day of the first month, the young master left Shicheng and went east.

古文：己丑，周师至紫阳桥。
现代文：十五日，周军到达紫陌桥。
English: On the 15th, Zhou's army arrived at the Ziguang Bridge.

古文：癸巳，烧城西门，太上皇将百余骑东走。
现代文：十九日，放火烧了城西门，太上皇带一百多骑向东逃走。
English: On the 19th, the west gate of the city was set on fire, and the emperor fled east with more than a hundred horsemen.

古文：乙亥，度河入济州。
现代文：二十一日，渡过黄河进入济州。
English: On the 21st, he crossed the Yellow River and entered Jeju.

古文：其日，幼主禅位于大丞相、任城王湝，令侍中斛律孝卿送禅文及玺绂于瀛州。
现代文：当天，幼主禅位给大丞相、任城王高氵皆。让侍中斛律孝卿送禅让的册文和玉玺到瀛州。
English: On the same day, the young lord gave the position of zen master to the grand chancellor and the king of the city, Gao Xuan, and asked the chamberlain, Yao Lv Xiaoqing, to send the book and the jade bowl of the zen master to Zhangzhou.

古文：孝卿乃以之归周。
现代文：斛律孝卿便带着这些东西投降了周朝。
English: Gong Ritsutaka surrendered to the Zhou Dynasty with these items.

古文：又为任城王诏，尊太上皇为无上皇。幼主为守国天王。
现代文：他们又替任城王起草诏书，尊称太上皇为无上皇，幼主为守国天王。
English: They also drafted an imperial edict on behalf of the newly appointed city king, honourably calling the retired emperor the "absolute emperor" and the young lord the "guardian of the country."

古文：留太皇太后济州，遣高阿那肱留守。
现代文：留下太皇太后住在济州，派高阿那肱留守济州。
English: He left the grand empress dowager to live in Jeju and sent Gao Anaxun to stay in Jeju.

古文：太上皇并皇后携幼主走青州，韩长鸾、邓颙等数十人从。
现代文：太上皇和皇后带着幼主跑到青州，韩长鸾、邓等几十个人随从。
English: The emperor and empress took the infant emperor to Qingzhou, accompanied by dozens of people including Han Changyu and Deng.

古文：太上皇既至青州，即为入陈之计。
现代文：太上皇到达青州以后，立即准备南投陈朝。
English: After the Empress Dowager arrived in Qingzhou, she immediately prepared for the Southern Expedition of the Chen Dynasty.

古文：而高阿那肱召周军，约生致齐主。
现代文：而高阿那肱却派人去请周军赶快前来，并约定活捉齐皇帝。
English: However, Gao Ananyuan sent someone to invite the Zhou army to come quickly, and agreed to capture Emperor Qi alive.

古文：而屡使人告，言贼军在远，已令人烧断桥路。
现代文：同时，他又几次派人告诉太上皇，说周兵还在很远的地方，自己已经派人烧了大桥，挖断道路。
English: At the same time, he repeatedly sent people to tell the emperor that Zhou Bing was still far away, and that he had already sent people to burn the bridge and dig up the road.

古文：太上所以停缓。
现代文：太上皇听说之后便不急于南奔。
English: After hearing this, the Empress Dowager was in no hurry to leave for the south.

古文：周军奄至青州，太上窘急，将逊于陈，置金囊于鞍后。
现代文：突然间，周军到达青州，太上皇急迫不已，准备向陈国称臣。
English: All of a sudden, Zhou's army arrived in Qingzhou, and Emperor Taizong was in a hurry, ready to offer his allegiance to Chen Guo.

古文：与长鸾、淑妃等十数骑至青州南邓村，为周将尉暹纲所获，送鄴。
现代文：便把金袋放在马鞍后面，和长鸾、淑妃等十几骑人马奔到青州以南的邓村，被周朝将领尉迟纲抓获，送往邺城。
English: He then put the bag of gold behind the saddle, and ran to Dengcun, south of Qingzhou, with more than a dozen horsemen, including Changyu and Shufei, and was captured by the Zhou Dynasty general, Lieutenant Chi Gang, and sent to Lucheng.

古文：周武帝与抗宾主礼，并太后、幼主、诸王，俱送长安。
现代文：周武帝以宾主的礼节和他见面，把他和太后、幼主、各亲王，都送往长安。
English: Emperor Zhou Wu met him with the etiquette of a guest and sent him to Chang'an with the empress dowager, the young lord, and the princes.

古文：封帝温国公。
现代文：封太上皇为温国公。
English: The title of the retired emperor is Wen Guogong.

古文：至建德七年，诬与宜州刺史穆提婆谋反，及延宗等数十人，无少长咸赐死。
现代文：到建德七年，诬告后主皇帝跟宜州刺史穆提婆谋反，便把他和延宗等几十人，不论长幼都赐死。
English: In the seventh year of Jiande's reign, after being falsely accused, the Lord Emperor plotted a rebellion with Yizhou's Empress Shumutibah, and put him and dozens of others, including Yan Zong, to death, regardless of whether they were old or young.

古文：神武子孙所存者一二而己。
现代文：神武帝的子孙留下来的只有一两人而已。
English: There are only one or two descendants of Emperor Jimmu left.

古文：至大象末，阳休之、陈德信等启大丞相隋公，请收葬。
现代文：到大象末年，阳休之、陈德信等人禀告大丞相隋公，请求收葬他们。
English: Towards the end of the elephant's life, Yang Xuzhi, Chen Deshin and others sent an obituary to the grand chancellor Sui Gong, requesting that they be buried.

古文：听之，葬于长安北原洪渎川。
现代文：隋公听从他们的意见，把后主皇帝等埋葬在长安北原的洪渎川。
English: Sui Gong listened to their opinions and buried the late emperor and others in the Hongzhu River in the northern plain of Chang'an.

古文：帝幼而令善；及长，颇学缀文，置文林馆，引诸文士焉。
现代文：齐幼主自幼善美，长大以后，很爱学写诗文，设置了文林馆，接纳了许多文人。
English: Since he was a child, Master Qi was good-natured and beautiful. When he grew up, he loved to learn how to write poetry. He set up a literary library and accepted many writers.

古文：而言语涩呐，无志度，不喜见朝士。
现代文：可是他言语不流畅，没有风度，不喜欢见朝臣。
English: However, his speech is not fluent, he has no manners, and he does not like to meet courtiers.

古文：自非宠私昵狎，未尝交语。
现代文：如果不是宠爱和亲近的人，他就不说一句话。
English: If it wasn't someone he loved and was close to, he wouldn't say a word.

古文：性懦不堪，人视者即有忿责。
现代文：性格懦弱不堪，有人注视他时，他便生气并加以斥责。
English: He has a very weak personality, and when people stare at him, he gets angry and scolds them.

古文：其奏事者，虽三公、令、录莫得仰视。皆略陈大旨，惊走而出。
现代文：向他奏事时，哪怕是三公、令、录等大臣，都不能仰视，大都简略说一下情况，便惊走而出。
English: When reporting to him, even ministers such as Sangong, Rong, and Luo could not look up. Most of them said a few words about the situation and then left in a hurry.

古文：每灾异寇盗水旱，亦不自贬损；唯诸处设斋，以此为修德。
现代文：每当遇到灾异、贼寇、水旱灾等时，也不自我检束并寻求不足之处，只是到各处设斋坛而已，认为这就是修德了。
English: Whenever they encounter disasters, bandits, floods, droughts, etc., they do not examine themselves and look for shortcomings, but just go everywhere to set up altars, thinking that this is cultivating virtue.

古文：雅信巫觋，解祷无方。
现代文：非常相信巫觋的话，可是礻襄除凶害却没有办法。
English: He believed very much in the words of the sorceress, but there was nothing he could do to stop the evil.

古文：初，琅邪王举兵，人告者误云库狄伏连反，帝曰： 此必仁威也。 
现代文：起初，琅笽王起兵时，报告人误说是厍狄伏连反叛，幼主说： 这肯定是仁威干的。 
English: At first, when King Yao raised an army, the reporter mistakenly said that it was a rebellion against King Dievlin. The young lord said: This must have been done by Ren Wei.

古文：又斛律光死后，诸武官举高思好堪大将军，帝曰： 思好喜反。 
现代文：又一次斛律光死后，众武官推举高思好，说他可以当大将军。幼主说 ：高思好喜欢谋反。 
English: After the death of Baoliguang again, the military officers nominated Gao Sihao, saying that he could be a great general. The young master said: Gao Sihao likes to rebel.

古文：皆如所言，遂自以策无遗算，乃益骄纵。
现代文：后来果然都应了他的话，于是，他自以为策算无误，便更加骄傲和放纵自己。
English: Later, his words came true, and he became more proud and self-indulgent, thinking that his plan was perfect.

古文：盛为无愁之曲，帝自弹胡琵琶而唱之，侍和之者以百数，人间谓之无愁天子。
现代文：大奏《无愁》的乐曲，皇帝亲自弹胡琵琶歌唱，侍卫唱和的有百人以上，所以民间称他为无愁天子。
English: The emperor himself played the lute and sang, and there were more than a hundred attendants to sing along, so the people called him the "Son of Sorrowless Heaven."

古文：尝出见群厉，尽杀之。
现代文：他曾经外出遇见一群恶鬼，他把鬼全都杀光。
English: He once went out and met a group of evil spirits, and he killed them all.

古文：或杀人，剥面皮而视之。
现代文：有时杀了人，还剥开面皮看。
English: Sometimes they killed people and stripped them naked.

古文：任陆令萱、和士开、高阿那肱、穆提婆、韩长鸾等宰制天下；陈德信、邓长颙、何洪珍参预机权。
现代文：他任命陆令萱、和士开、高阿那肱、穆提婆、韩长鸾等人统摄天下大事，让陈德信、邓长、何洪珍等参与机谋。
English: He appointed Lu Lingyao, He Shikai, Gao Anyao, Muti Bao, Han Changyao and others to take charge of world affairs, and let Chen Deshin, Deng Chang, He Hongzhen and others participate in the scheme.

古文：各引亲党，超居非次；官由财进，狱以贿成；其所以乱政害人。难以备载。
现代文：这些人各引自己的亲党，不按次序提拔，有钱就可以当官，给贿赂就制作冤狱，因而造成朝政混乱，祸害人民，这些事多得难以记载。
English: It is difficult to record the number of these people, who each led their own party, were promoted out of order, were able to become officials if they had money, and were unjustly imprisoned if they were bribed, thus causing chaos in imperial politics and harming the people.

古文：诸官奴婢、阉人、商人、胡户、杂户、歌舞人、见鬼人滥得富贵者，将以万数。
现代文：那些官奴婢、太监、商人、胡族人、杂户、歌舞人、见鬼人等，随随便便就得到富贵的，数以万计。
English: Those officials and servants, eunuchs, merchants, Hu people, miscellaneous households, singers and dancers, and exorcists, etc. casually get rich, tens of thousands.

古文：庶姓封王者百数，不复可纪。
现代文：异姓而被封为王爵的有百人以上，难以记清。
English: There are more than a hundred people with different surnames who have been made a royal duke. It is difficult to keep track of them all.

古文：开府千余，仪同无数。
现代文：开府官一千多人，仪同官员数不清楚。
English: There are more than a thousand prefectural governors, but the number of ceremonial officials is unclear.

古文：领军一时三十，连判文书，各作依字，不具姓名，莫知谁也。诸贵宠祖祢追赠，官岁一进，位极乃止。
现代文：领军同时有三十多人，他们连判文书，都写上 依 字，也不签名，不知是什么人写的，各种贵宠的人追赠祖宗官职，每年晋一级，直到极品才停止。
English: At the same time, there are more than 30 people leading the army. They even write down the award documents according to the word, but do not sign them. I do not know who wrote them. All kinds of precious people give their ancestors official positions, and they are promoted to the first level every year, and they do not stop until the best.

古文：宫掖婢皆封郡君。
现代文：宫中的女婢们也被封为郡君。
English: The maidservants in the palace were also made county princes.

古文：宫女宝衣玉食者五百余人。一裙直万疋，镜台直千金。竞为变巧，朝衣夕弊。
现代文：宫女穿珍宝制作的衣服，吃上等美食的有五百人，一件裙子价值万匹布钱，一个镜台价值千金，竞相制作巧妙的东西，早晨刚穿的新衣晚上就当成旧衣扔掉。
English: Court ladies wear clothes made of precious materials, five hundred people eat fine food, a dress is worth a million cloth money, a mirror stand is worth a thousand gold, they compete to make clever things, and new clothes just worn in the morning are thrown away as old clothes in the evening.

古文：承武成之奢丽，以为帝王当然。
现代文：他继续武成皇帝时追求奢丽的风气，认为是当帝王理所当然做的事情。
English: He continued Emperor Wu Cheng's pursuit of luxury and considered it a natural thing for an emperor to do.

古文：乃更增益宫苑，造偃武修文台。其嫔嫱诸院中，起镜殿、宝殿、瑇瑁殿，丹青雕刻，妙极当时。
现代文：便更加大张旗鼓地修建宫苑，建造偃武修文台，在各嫔妃的院内，修有镜殿、宝殿、瑁殿，彩绘雕刻，华丽无比。
English: He then proceeded with even greater fanfare to build a palace garden and a palace martial arts and literature hall. In the courtyards of each empress dowager, there was a hall of mirrors, a hall of treasures, and a hall of coffins, with paintings and carvings of incomparable magnificence.

古文：又于晋阳起十二院，壮丽逾于鄴下。
现代文：又在晋阳修建十二院，壮丽超过邺城。
English: He also built twelve monasteries in Jinyang, the grandeur of which exceeded that of Shicheng.

古文：所爱不恆，数毁而又复。
现代文：他没有长久喜欢的东西，多次打掉又重建。
English: He doesn't have a long-term affinity for things, knocking them down and rebuilding them again and again.

古文：夜则以火照作，寒则以汤为泥。百工困穷，无时休息。
现代文：夜间用火照着修建，冬天烧水和泥，百工们困乏不堪，没有一刻得以休息。
English: At night, fires were used to light the building, and in winter, water and mud were boiled. The hundreds of workers were exhausted and did not have a moment to rest.

古文：凿晋阳西山为大佛像，一夜燃油万盆，光照宫内。
现代文：把晋阳西山凿为大佛像，一夜烧油万盆，亮光照进宫内。
English: He chiseled the West Mountain of Jinyang into a large Buddha statue, burned a million pots of oil overnight, and shined the light into the palace.

古文：又为胡昭仪起大慈寺，未成，改为穆皇后大宝林寺。
现代文：又给胡昭仪修建大慈寺，还未建成，又改成给穆皇后修造的大宝林寺。
English: He also built Dai Ci Temple for Hu Zhaoyi, but it has not yet been completed, and it has been changed into the Dabaolin Temple built for Empress Mu.

古文：穷极工巧，运石填泉，劳费亿计，人牛死者，不可胜纪。
现代文：务必穷极巧变，搬运石头填塞泉水，耗费资财以亿计数，人、牛死去的，难以统计。
English: It is necessary to be extremely resourceful, transporting stones to fill the spring water, costing hundreds of millions of dollars, and it is difficult to count the deaths of people and cattle.

古文：御马则藉以氈罽，食物有十余种。将合牝牡，则设青庐，具牢馔而亲观之。
现代文：御马圈地上铺设毡垫，吃的有十多种东西，交配时特地建造青庐，安排丰盛食物，皇帝亲临观看。
English: On the ground of the imperial horse enclosure, straw mats are laid, and there are more than ten kinds of things to eat. When mating, special green straw is built, and rich food is arranged. The emperor came to watch.

古文：狗则饲以梁肉。
现代文：饲养狗用精美的食品。
English: Fine food for dogs.

古文：马及鹰犬，乃有仪同、郡君之号。故有赤彪仪同、逍遥郡君、陵霄郡君。高思好书所谓驮龙，逍遥著也。
现代文：马匹和鹰犬，也被封为仪同、郡君的封号，所以当时有赤彪仪同、逍遥郡君、陵霄郡君等，也就是高思好所写的马交龙、逍遥之类。
English: Horses and eagle-dogs were also named Yi Tong and Gu Jun, so at that time there were Akabiao Yi Tong, Shouyao Gu Jun, Lingxiao Gu Jun, etc., that is, Ma Jia Long and Shouyao written by Gao Sihao.

古文：犬于马上设褥以抱之。斗鸡亦号开府。犬马鸡鹰，多食县干。
现代文：狗被抱在马上，用褥子包住，斗鸡也被封为开府官职，犬、马、鸡、鹰，养尊处优。
English: Dogs are held on horses and wrapped in cocoons. Cockfighting has also been made an official government function. Dogs, horses, chickens, and eagles are all well-cared for.

古文：鹰之入养者，稍割犬肉以饲之，至数日乃死。
现代文：凡是养的鹰，每天割一点狗肉饲养，连割几天狗才死去。
English: Every eagle that is raised is fed a little bit of dog meat every day, and it takes several days for the dog to die.

古文：又于华林园立贫穷村舍，帝自弊衣为乞食兒。
现代文：他又在华林园设置了穷村舍，皇帝自己穿着破衣扮成乞丐。
English: He also set up a poor village in Hualin Garden, and the emperor himself dressed in rags as a beggar.

古文：又为穷兒之市，躬自交易。
现代文：又设立穷人集市，他亲自到市中交易。
English: He also set up a poor people's market, and he personally went to the market to trade.

古文：写筑西鄙诸城，黑衣为羌兵；鼓噪陵之，亲率内参临拒，或实弯弓射人。
现代文：模仿西部边境少数民族，建筑城镇，让人穿黑衣装作羌兵，大声吆喝追逐，他亲自带领宫内侍卫前去对阵，有时弯弓用箭射人。
English: He imitated the western border ethnic minorities, built towns, made people wear black clothes as soldiers, shouted loudly and chased, he personally led the palace guards to fight, and sometimes shot people with a bow and arrow.

古文：自晋阳东巡，单马驰骛，衣解发散而归。
现代文：从晋阳出外东巡，单身匹马疾驰，披发散衣归来。
English: From Jinyang outbound eastbound tour, single horse galloping, wearing loose clothes returning.

古文：又好不急之务，曾一夜索蝎，及旦，得三升。
现代文：又喜欢搞不急用的东西，有一天夜里，他想要蝎子，便到处捕捉，天亮时，共抓到了三升。
English: He also likes to do things that are not urgent. One night, he wanted scorpions, so he went around catching them. By dawn, he had caught a total of three liters.

古文：特爱非时之物，取求火急，皆须朝征夕办。当势者因之，贷一而责十焉。
现代文：他又特别喜欢要其他季节才有的东西，想要的时候又格外急迫，都要求早上要晚上就送到，那些当权者变本加厉，他想要一个他们就向下要十个。
English: He also particularly likes to ask for things that are only available in other seasons, and when he wants them, he is particularly urgent. He asks for them to be delivered in the morning and in the evening. Those in power are getting tougher. If he wants one, they will ask for ten.

古文：赋敛日重，徭役日烦；人力既殚，帑藏空竭。乃赐诸佞幸卖官，或得郡两三，或得县六七，各分州郡，下逮乡官，亦多降中者。
现代文：赋税日益加重，徭役更加烦杂，人力耗尽，库藏空竭，于是便赐各佞臣卖官，有的分给两三郡，有的分给六七县，各分配到州郡里，甚至卖到乡官一级，也往往是皇帝下旨。
English: Taxes were getting heavier and heavier, officials were becoming more and more cumbersome, manpower was running out, and the treasury was depleted. Therefore, he gave each vassal a vassal, some were assigned to two or three counties, some were assigned to sixty-seven counties, each was assigned to a prefecture-level county, and even sold to a township-level official, often at the emperor's command.

古文：故有敕用州主簿，敕用郡功曹。
现代文：因而出现下诏任命州主簿，下诏任命郡功曹的现象。
English: As a result, the phenomenon of appointing the main book of the state under the edict and appointing the county gong cao under the edict appeared.

古文：于是州县职司，多出富商大贾。竞为贪纵，人不聊生。
现代文：于是州县的各种职务，大多由富商大贾来担任，他们竞相贪污枉法，胡作非为，搞得民不聊生。
English: As a result, most of the various posts in prefectures and counties were held by rich businessmen. They competed to embezzle, do wrong, and make people bored.

古文：爰自鄴都及诸州郡，所在征税，百端俱起。
现代文：从邺城直至各州郡，到处征税，名目繁多。
English: Taxes are levied everywhere, from Penang to the states and counties, under a wide variety of names.

古文：凡此诸役皆渐于武成，至帝而增广焉。
现代文：这些情况，都起源于武成帝时，到后主便越来越厉害了。
English: These situations all originated during the reign of Emperor Wu Cheng Rong, and became more and more severe after his reign.

古文：然未尝有有帷薄淫秽，唯此事颇优于武成云。
现代文：不过，后主不大有后宫男女间的淫秽传闻，只有这件事比武成帝好些。
English: However, the empress dowager did not have a lot of obscene rumors between men and women in the harem, only this thing was better than Emperor Wu Cheng.

古文：初，河清末，武成梦大蝟攻破鄴城，故索境内蝟膏以绝之。
现代文：起初，在河清末年，武成皇帝梦见大刺猬攻破了邺城。醒来以后便索要境内的猬膏，以此把刺猬都杀尽。
English: At first, at the end of the Heqing Dynasty, Emperor Wu Cheng dreamed that a large hedgehog had broken through the city of Handan. After waking up, he asked for the ointment of the territory to kill all the hedgehogs.

古文：识者以后主名声与蝟相协，亡齐征也。
现代文：有见识的人认为，后主的名字发音和猬字相谐，所以是齐灭亡的征兆。
English: People with insight believe that the pronunciation of the name of the successor is in harmony with the character, so it is a sign of Qi's demise.

古文：又妇人皆剪剔以著假髻；而危邪之，状如飞鸟，至于南面，则髻心正西。
现代文：又当时的妇女都喜欢把头发剪短戴上假发髻，高高耸起偏向一边，样子就像一只要飞的鸟，偏南面时，髻心正指向西边。
English: At that time, women also liked to cut their hair short and put on wigs. They stood tall and leaned to one side, looking like a bird in flight. When they were facing south, their heart was facing west.

古文：始自宫内为之。被于四远。天意若曰： 元首翦落，危侧，当走西也。 
现代文：起初在宫内盛行，后来渐渐传到四面八方，好像是天意说，元首被翦落，摇摇欲坠，危向西侧，预示着将往西去。
English: At first, it prevailed in the palace, and then gradually spread to all directions. It seemed to be a sign from heaven that the head of state had been overthrown, was teetering on the brink, and was heading west, foreshadowing that he would go west.

古文：又为刀子者，刃皆狭细，名曰尽势。
现代文：又当时制造一种刀子，刀刃又狭又细，名叫尽势，也就是大势已尽了。
English: At that time, they also produced a knife with a narrow and thin blade, which was called "Jinzhuang," which means "the great potential has been exhausted."

古文：游童戏者，好以两手持绳，拂地而却上跳，且唱曰 高末 。
现代文：许多孩子玩耍，喜欢用两手拿绳子，拂地以后人往上跳，边跳边唱 高末、高末 。
English: Many children play, like to use both hands to hold the rope, after sweeping the ground, people jump up, while jumping and singing high school, high school.

古文：高末之言，盖高氏运祚之末也。
现代文：高末的意思，就是说高氏已经到了末运了。
English: The meaning of the end of high school is that Gao has reached the end of his life.

古文：然则乱亡之数，盖有兆云。
现代文：可见败乱灭亡的运数，都是有前兆的。
English: It can be seen that the number of operations of defeat, chaos and destruction all have precursors.

