古文：东城老父传柳氏传
现代文：东城老父传柳氏传
English: Dongcheng old father passed down the willow family tradition

古文：东城老父传
现代文：东城老父传
English: The Story of Dongcheng Old Father

古文：老父姓贾名昌，长安宣阳里人，开元元年癸丑生。元和庚寅岁，九十八年矣，视听不衰，言甚安徐，心力不耗。语太平事，历历可听。
现代文：老人姓贾名昌，是长安宣阳里人，开元元年即癸丑年生，到元和庚寅年已九十八岁，他的视力和听力都没衰退，言谈安详且很有条理，脑力也没减退，谈起太平公主时期的事情清清楚楚，使人很爱听。
English: The old man, surnamed Jia Mingchang, was from Xuanyang Village, Chang'an. He was born in the first year of the first century, that is, in the year of Jiu Jiu. By the year of the first century and the year of the second century, he was ninety-eight years old. His eyesight and hearing had not deteriorated. His speech was calm and well-organized, and his mental strength had not declined. He spoke clearly about the events of the Taiping Princess period, which made people love to listen.

古文：父忠，长九尺，力能倒曳牛，以材官为中宫幕士。
现代文：贾昌的父亲名叫忠，身高九尺，力气很大，能拽住向前走的牛，以武士的身份担任皇后住的宫殿的侍卫。
English: Jia Chang's father's name was Zhong. He was nine feet tall and very strong. He was able to pull the cattle that were moving forward. As a samurai, he served as an attendant of the palace where the queen lived.

古文：景龙四年，持幕竿，随玄宗入大明宫诛韦氏，奉睿宗朝群后，遂为景云功臣，以长刀备亲卫，诏徙家东云龙门。
现代文：景龙四年，贾忠拿着武器随着唐玄宗进入大明宫，杀掉了韦氏，拥戴睿宗登上皇位，使大臣们臣服，于是便成为景云年间的功臣，被选入长刀队做了皇帝的贴身侍卫。皇帝下令让他把家迁到了东云龙门。
English: In the fourth year of Jinglong, Jia Zhong took weapons with Tang Xuan Zong into the Daming Palace, killed the Wei clan, supported Ruizong to ascend the throne, and made the ministers submit, so he became a meritorious subject in the Jingyun years. He was selected into the long sword team and became the emperor's personal bodyguard. The emperor ordered him to move his home to Dongyun Longmen.

古文：昌生七岁，趫捷过人，能抟柱乘梁。
现代文：贾昌长到七岁时，身手灵活超过一般人，能顺着柱子爬上屋梁。
English: When Jia Chang was seven years old, his dexterity exceeded that of the average person, and he was able to climb up the roof along the pillars.

古文：善应对，解鸟语音。
现代文：他善于回答别人问话，还能听懂鸟的语言。
English: He is good at answering other people's questions and can also understand the language of birds.

古文：玄宗在藩邸时，乐民间清明节斗鸡戏。
现代文：玄宗住在亲王府时，喜欢民间在清明节期间举行的斗鸡游戏。
English: When living in the Prince's Palace, Xuanzong liked the cockfighting games held by the people during the Qingming Festival.

古文：及即位，治鸡坊于两宫间。
现代文：等到做了皇帝以后，他就在两宫之间修建了鸡场，到处收购长安的公鸡。
English: After he became emperor, he built a chicken farm between the two palaces and bought roosters from all over Chang'an.

古文：索长安雄鸡，金毫铁距，高冠昂尾千数，养于鸡坊。
现代文：长着金黄色的羽毛，铁一般的爪子，高冠翘尾的大公鸡共有一千多只，都养在鸡场里。
English: There are more than a thousand large roosters with golden feathers, iron claws, and high crests and tails, all raised in chicken farms.

古文：选六军小儿五百人，使驯扰教饲。
现代文：又从皇帝的禁军中选出五百位少年，让他们饲养教练这些公鸡。
English: Five hundred boys were selected from the emperor's forbidden army to breed and train the roosters.

古文：上之好之，民风尤甚，诸王世家，外戚家，贵主家，侯家，倾帑破产市鸡，以偿鸡直。
现代文：皇帝喜欢这种游戏，下面就更加盛行。各位亲王皇族，皇帝的外婆家和岳父家、公主家、封侯之家，都不惜倾家荡产去买鸡，或偿还欠下的买鸡钱。
English: The emperor liked this game, and it became more and more popular. All the princes and members of the imperial family, the emperor's grandmother and father-in-law's family, the princess's family, and the feudal lord's family, would not hesitate to spend all their money to buy chickens, or to pay back the money they owed to buy chickens.

古文：都中男女以弄鸡为事，贫者弄假鸡。
现代文：京城中的男男女女，都把摆弄鸡作为营生干，贫穷的人家就玩弄假鸡。
English: Both men and women in the capital make a living by playing with chickens, while poor families play with fake chickens.

古文：帝出游，见昌弄木鸡于云龙门道旁，召入为鸡坊小儿，衣食右龙武军。
现代文：一次，皇帝出去游逛，看见贾昌在云龙门外道边上玩木鸡，于是把他召入皇宫，充当鸡场的驯鸡少年，吃穿待遇超过禁军兵士。
English: Once, the emperor went out for a stroll and saw Jia Chang playing with a woodcock on the side of the road outside Yunlongmen, so he called him into the imperial palace to serve as a chicken tamer boy in the chicken farm, and he was treated better than the forbidden soldiers.

古文：三尺童子入鸡群，如狎群小，壮者弱者，勇者怯者，水谷之时，疾病之候，悉能知之。
现代文：三尺高的孩子，进入鸡群中，就像摆弄一群小孩子，健壮的、瘦弱的、勇敢的、怯懦的，喂水喂食的时间，疾病的迹象，贾昌全都了如指掌。
English: A three-foot-tall child entering a flock of chickens is like playing with a group of small children, strong, weak, brave, cowardly, feeding time, signs of illness, Jia Chang knows everything.

古文：举二鸡，鸡畏而驯，使令如人。
现代文：贾昌随便拿出两只鸡，都很畏怯而驯服，可以像指挥人那样指挥它们。
English: Jia Chang casually took out two chickens, both timid and tame, and could direct them like a conductor.

古文：护鸡坊中谒者王承恩言于亥宗，召试殿庭，皆中玄宗意。
现代文：监护鸡场的传旨太监王承恩把这情况向玄宗作了汇报。
English: Wang Cheng'en, the eunuch sent to supervise the chicken farm, reported the situation to Xuanzong.

古文：即日为五百小儿长，加之以忠厚谨密，天子甚爱幸之，金帛之赐，日至其家。
现代文：玄宗就把贾昌召来在院中验证，结果非常合乎皇上的心意，当天就任命他担任五百驯鸡少年的首领。加上贾昌忠厚谨慎周到，天子所以很钟爱他，金帛之类的赏赐，每天都送到他家。
English: Emperor Xuanzong then summoned Jia Chang to the hospital to verify the cockroach, and the result was very much in line with the emperor's intention. On the same day, he appointed him as the leader of the five hundred young chicken tamers. In addition, Jia Chang was loyal, prudent and thoughtful, so the emperor loved him very much. Rewards such as gold ingots were sent to his home every day.

古文：开元十三年，笼鸡三百从封东岳。
现代文：开元十三年，宫里用笼子装了三百只鸡，跟着玄宗到泰山去祭天。
English: In the thirteenth year of the first year of the Heian period, the imperial court put three hundred chickens in cages and followed Emperor Xuanzong to Mount Taishan to offer sacrifices to the gods.

古文：父忠死太山下，得子礼奉尸归葬雍州。
现代文：贾昌的父亲在泰山脚下去世，由于儿子得宠，所以由贾昌护送遗体回到雍州安葬。
English: Jia Chang's father died at the foot of Mount Tai. Because his son was favored, Jia Chang escorted his body back to Yongzhou for burial.

古文：县官为葬器。丧车乘传洛阳道。
现代文：县官备办了殡葬用品和丧车，用公家驿站的车辆从洛阳大道上运送。
English: County officials prepared funeral supplies and a hearse, which was transported from Luoyang Avenue by a vehicle from a public station.

古文：十四年三月，衣斗鸡服，会玄宗于温泉。
现代文：开元十四年三月，贾昌穿上斗鸡的衣服，在温泉与玄宗会见。
English: In March of the 14th year of the first century, Jia Chang put on a cockfight outfit and met with Xuanzong in a hot spring.

古文：当时天下号为神鸡童。
现代文：当时天下人把贾昌称为 神鸡童 。
English: At that time, people all over the world called Jia Chang the Chicken Boy.

古文：时人为之语曰： 生儿不用识文字，斗鸡走马胜读书。
现代文：当时人们为他编出了这样的话： 生儿不用识文字，斗鸡走马胜读书。
English: At that time, people made up such words for him: "Born children don't need to know words, cockfighting is better than studying."

古文：贾家小儿年十三，富贵荣华代不如。
现代文：贾家小儿年十三，富贵荣华代不如。
English: Jia's child is 13 years old. He is not as rich as the Ronghua generation.

古文：能令金距期胜负，白罗绣衫随软舆。
现代文：能令金距期胜负，白罗绣衫随软舆。
English: Can make the gold distance period win or lose, Bai Luo embroidered shirt with soft cotton.

古文：父死长安千里外，差夫持道挽丧车。 
现代文：父死长安千里外，差夫持道挽丧车。 
English: A thousand miles away from his father's death in Chang'an, a policeman drove a funeral car along the road.

古文：昭成皇后之在相王府，诞圣于八月五日，中兴之后，制为千秋节。
现代文：昭成皇后在相王府时，于八月五日生下了唐玄宗。
English: Empress Shosho gave birth to Tang Xuan Zong on August 5 while she was at the Prince Regent's Palace.

古文：赐天下民牛酒乐三日，命之曰酺，以为常也，大合乐于宫中。岁或酺于洛，元会与清明节，率皆在骊山。
现代文：玄宗登位后，把这一天定为千秋节，赏给天下百姓牛和肉，让他们娱乐三天，把这称作 大酺 ，以后成为定规，在宫中举行大规模的音乐合奏会，有的年头还到洛阳举行这种庆祝活动，元宵节和清明节大都在骊山度过。
English: After Emperor Xuanzong ascended the throne, he designated this day as the Thousand-Autumn Festival, awarded cattle and meat to the people of the world, and let them entertain for three days. This was called the Great Lantern Festival, and later became a fixed rule. Large-scale musical ensembles were held in the palace. Some years, this kind of celebration was also held in Luoyang. The Lantern Festival and the Tomb-Sweeping Festival were mostly spent in Shaoshan.

古文：每至是日，万乐俱举，六宫毕从。
现代文：每到这些日子，各种娱乐活动同时举行，六宫的后妃嫔媵全都跟随着。
English: On these days, all kinds of entertainment activities are held at the same time, and the concubines of the Six Palaces all follow.

古文：昌冠雕翠金华冠，锦袖绣襦裤，执铎拂，导群鸡，叙立于广场，顾眄如神，指挥风生。
现代文：贾昌头戴雕翠金花的帽子，穿着锦袖绣花的袄裤，手拿铃铛，在前清道。雄鸡们都很有秩序地站在广场上，贾昌左顾右盼，眼神灵活，指挥活跃而有风度。
English: Jia Chang, wearing a hat with a crown of gold flowers on his head, brocade trousers with embroidered cuffs, and a bell in his hand, was on Qianqing Road. The roosters were all standing in a very orderly manner on the square. Jia Chang looked to the right and to the left, his eyes were flexible, and he conducted the roosters actively and with grace.

古文：树毛振翼，砺吻磨距，抑怒待胜，进退有期，随鞭指低昂，不失昌度。
现代文：雄鸡们竖毛振翅，磨嘴蹭爪，抑住怒气夺取胜利，一进一退都符合章法；随着鞭子的指挥时而低头时而仰首，都没有越出贾昌的规定。
English: The roosters raised their feathers, fluttered their wings, sharpened their beaks and claws, suppressed their anger to win, and went in and out in accordance with the rules; with the command of the whip, they bowed their heads and raised their heads, all of which did not exceed Jia Chang's regulations.

古文：胜负既决，强者前，弱者后，随昌雁行，归于鸡坊。
现代文：胜负决出以后，胜者在前，败者在后，跟随贾昌像大雁飞行一样有秩序地回到鸡场。
English: After the winner is decided, the winner is in front, and the loser is behind, following Jia Chang back to the chicken farm in an orderly manner like geese flying.

古文：角觝万夫，跳剑寻撞，蹴球踏绳，舞于竿颠者，索气沮色，逡巡不敢入，岂教猱扰龙之徒欤？
现代文：那些摔倒很多人的摔跤手，舞剑的、爬高竿的、踢球的、走绳索的、在竿顶作舞的，看了贾昌的表演都垂头丧气，神情沮丧，不敢再上场表演。贾昌难道是教猿猴、驯天龙这一类的人吗？
English: Those wrestlers who felled many people, those who danced with swords, those who climbed poles, those who kicked balls, those who walked ropes, and those who danced at the top of poles, watched Jia Chang's performance and were downhearted, depressed, and did not dare to perform again. Is Jia Chang the kind of person who teaches monkeys and tames dragons?

古文：二十三年，玄宗为娶梨园弟子潘大同女，男服珮玉，女服绣襦，皆出御府。
现代文：二十三年，玄宗为贾昌娶了皇帝戏班子里的潘大同的女儿作妻子，新郎带的佩玉，新娘穿的绣袄，都是皇帝库房中的。
English: In 233, Xuanzong married the daughter of Pan Datong, a member of the emperor's troupe, to Jia Chang. The pearl necklace worn by the groom and the embroidered chasuble worn by the bride are both in the emperor's treasury.

古文：昌男至信、至德。
现代文：贾昌后来生了两个儿子，一叫至信，一叫至德。
English: Jia Chang later gave birth to two sons, one named Zhixin and the other named Zhu De.

古文：天宝中，妻潘氏以歌舞重幸于杨贵妃，夫妇席宠四十年，恩泽不渝，岂不敏于伎，谨于心乎？
现代文：天宝年间，贾昌的妻子凭着能歌善舞深受杨贵妃的宠爱。贾昌夫妇承受宠幸四十年，皇恩一直没改变，难道不是因为他俩擅长技艺而又思想谨慎吗？
English: During the Tenpo era, Jia Chang's wife was favored by Yang Guifei because she could sing and dance well. Jia Chang and his wife have been favored for forty years, and the royal favor has not changed, is it not because they are both good at skills and cautious?

古文：上生于乙酉鸡辰，使人朝服斗鸡，兆乱于太平矣，上心不悟。
现代文：皇上生在乙酉年，生肖属鸡，让人穿上朝服斗鸡，祸乱的兆头在太平公主时期就显露出来了，可是皇上却没有省悟。
English: The emperor was born in the year of the rooster. The Chinese zodiac sign is the rooster. People put on imperial robes to fight roosters. The omen of disaster appeared during the reign of the Taiping princess, but the emperor did not reflect.

古文：十四载，胡羯陷洛，潼关不守，大驾幸成都。
现代文：天宝十四年，胡人羯人攻下了洛阳，潼关也守不住了，皇帝的车骑只好到成都去。
English: In the 14th year of Tianbao, the Hu people and the Xiong people conquered Luoyang, and Shaoguan could not be defended. The emperor's chariot and horse had to go to Chengdu.

古文：奔卫乘舆，夜出便门，马踣道穽，伤足不能进，杖入南山。
现代文：贾昌赶紧跑去保护皇帝的车，夜晚从便门出来，马跌倒在道边土坑里。他伤了脚，不能前进，拄着拐杖进入南山。
English: Jia Chang hurriedly ran to protect the emperor's car. At night, he came out of the toilet door, and the horse fell into a roadside pit. He injured his foot and could not move forward. He entered the Nanshan on crutches.

古文：每进鸡之日，则向西南大哭。
现代文：每逢到了在皇帝面前斗鸡的日子，贾昌就面朝西南放声痛哭。
English: Whenever it came to the day of the cockfight in front of the emperor, Jia Chang faced the southwest and cried bitterly.

古文：禄山往年朝于京师，识昌于横门外，及乱二京，以千金购昌长安洛阳市。
现代文：安禄山当年到京城朝见皇帝时，在横门外认识了贾昌。等到他攻下东西二京后，就在长安洛阳两市用千金悬赏寻找贾昌。
English: When An Lushan went to the imperial court in Beijing that year, he met Jia Chang outside the side gate. After he conquered the east and west of Beijing, he offered a thousand-dollar reward in two cities of Chang'an and Luoyang to find Jia Chang.

古文：昌变姓名，依于佛舍，除地击钟，施力于佛。
现代文：贾昌改了姓名，寄住于佛寺。扫地敲钟，把精力用到供佛上。
English: Jia Chang changed his name and lodged in a Buddhist temple. He swept the floor, rang the bell, and used his energy to make offerings to Buddha.

古文：洎太上皇归兴庆宫，肃宗受命于别殿，昌还旧里。
现代文：等到太上皇回到兴庆宫，肃宗已在另外的殿中登上皇位时，贾昌回到原来住的里弄。
English: By the time the retired emperor returned to the Xingqing Palace, Su Zong had already ascended the throne in another hall, and Jia Chang returned to his original place.

古文：居室为兵掠，家无遗物，布衣憔悴，不复得入禁门矣。
现代文：他居住的房子已被兵抢掠，家中东西一点没剩。贾昌穿着粗布衣服，面容憔悴，不能再入皇宫了。
English: The house he lived in had been looted by soldiers, and there was nothing left in the house. Jia Chang was dressed in coarse cloth, his face was gaunt, and he could no longer enter the palace.

古文：明日，复出长安南门道，见妻儿于招国里，菜色黯焉。儿荷薪，妻负故絮。
现代文：第二天，他又出了长安南门，在招国里的道上遇见了妻子和儿子，他们脸色都枯黄暗淡：儿子背着柴禾，妻子穿着旧棉袄。
English: The next day, he went out of the South Gate of Chang'an again, and met his wife and son on the road of Zhaoguoli. Their faces were dull and yellow: the son was carrying firewood, and his wife was wearing an old cotton swab.

古文：昌聚哭，诀于道，遂长逝。
现代文：贾昌和他们聚在一起哭了起来，跟他们在路上诀别，然后就永远离去了。
English: Jia Chang cried together with them, said goodbye to them on the road, and then left forever.

古文：息长安佛寺，学大师佛旨。
现代文：后来贾昌栖息在长安佛寺，学习高僧的佛家学说。
English: Later, Jia Chang lived in the Chang'an Buddhist Temple, studying the teachings of the Buddhist monks.

古文：大历元年，依资圣寺大德僧运平住东市海池，立陁罗尼石幢。
现代文：大历元年，贾昌随着资圣寺的高僧运平住在东市海池，建造了刻有陀罗尼经咒的石柱。
English: In the first year of the Great Calendar, Jia Chang lived in Dongshi Haichi with Yunping, a high priest of Zhisheng Temple, and built a stone pillar engraved with Dharani's sutra.

古文：书能纪姓名，读释氏经，亦能了其深义至道。以善心化市井人。
现代文：他学写字，已能记自己的姓名；读佛家经书，也能明了书中的深刻含义和高妙的道理，并以善心感化民间的人。
English: When he learns to write, he can already remember his own name; when he reads Buddhist scriptures, he can also understand the profound meaning and sublime truth in the books, and inspire the people with a good heart.

古文：建僧房佛舍，植美草甘木。
现代文：他又建造了僧房佛舍，种上了美的草和甜的树。
English: He also built a Buddhist monk's house and planted beautiful grass and sweet trees.

古文：昼把土拥根，汲水灌竹，夜正观于禅室。
现代文：白天就用土培根，提水浇竹；晚上就在禅室中打坐。
English: During the day, they use bacon and water to water the bamboo; in the evening, they meditate in the Zen room.

古文：建中三年，僧运平人寿尽。
现代文：建中三年，运平和尚人寿已尽，死去了。
English: In the third year of Jianzhong, Yunping and Shang Lifespan were exhausted and died.

古文：服礼毕，奉舍利塔于长安东门外镇国寺东偏，手植松柏百株，构小舍，居于塔下。
现代文：贾昌完成丧礼后，就在长安东门外的镇国寺东边建了一座塔，把运平的遗骨放在了里边。
English: After Jia Chang completed the funeral, he built a tower on the east side of the town's State Temple outside the East Gate of Chang'an, and placed Yunping's remains inside.

古文：朝夕焚香洒扫，事师如生。顺宗在东宫，舍钱三十万，为昌立大师影堂及斋舍。
现代文：在塔周围他又亲手栽了一百棵松柏树，还在塔下建了一个小房子，自己住在里面，早晚烧香洒水扫地，侍奉师父如同生前。顺宗做太子时，施舍三十万钱，替贾昌建造奉祀高僧遗像的屋子和读经斋戒的屋子。
English: Around the tower, he planted a hundred pine and cypress trees with his own hands. He also built a small house under the tower, in which he lived. In the morning and evening, he burned incense, sprinkled water, and swept the floor. He served his master as if he were still alive. When Shunzong was crown prince, he gave 300,000 yuan in charity to build a house for Jia Chang to worship the remains of the high priest and a house for reading scripture and fasting.

古文：又立外屋，居游民，取佣给。
现代文：又建了外屋，备流浪的百姓住，但收取租费。
English: Outbuildings have also been built for homeless people to live in, but rent is charged.

古文：昌因日食粥一杯，浆水一升，卧草席，絮衣，过是悉归于佛。
现代文：贾昌于是每天喝一杯粥，一升浆水，睡在草席上，穿的是粗丝绵衣。
English: As a result, Jia Chang drinks a cup of porridge and a liter of starch water every day, sleeps on a straw mat, and wears a thick silk robe.

古文：妻潘氏后亦不知所往。
现代文：除掉这些，剩余的钱财全都用来供佛。贾昌的妻子潘氏后来也不知道到何处去了。
English: After eliminating these, the remaining money and wealth were all used to provide for the Buddha. Jia Chang's wife, Pan, did not know where to go afterwards.

古文：贞元中，长子至信，依并州甲，随大司徒燧入觐，省昌于长寿里。昌如己不生，绝之使去。次子至德归，贩缯洛阳市，来往长安间，岁以金帛奉昌，皆绝之。
现代文：贞元年间，贾昌长子至信在并州当兵，随着大司徒马燧入京朝见皇上，到长奉里探望贾昌，贾昌像没生过这个儿子似的，跟他断绝关系，让他离开；次子至德回来了，到洛阳市贩卖绸缎，来往于洛阳长安之间，每年都向贾昌献上金帛，贾昌一次也没有接受。
English: In the first year of the Zhengyuan era, Jia Chang's eldest son, Zhixin, served as a soldier in Bianzhou. Along with the grand master Tu Ma Jun, he entered the Beijing court to see the emperor. He visited Jia Chang in Changfeng. Jia Chang broke off relations with him as if he had never had this son, and let him leave. His second son, Zhide, came back, sold silk and satin in Luoyang, and went back and forth between Luoyang and Chang'an. Every year, he presented Jia Chang with gold satin. Jia Chang did not accept it once.

古文：遂俱去，不复来。
现代文：于是两个儿子都走了，再也没有来过。
English: So both sons left and never came back.

古文：元和中，颍川陈洪祖携友人出春明门，见竹柏森然，香烟闻于道。
现代文：元和年间，颖川的陈鸿祖带一个朋友从春明门出来，看见竹子柏树长得很茂盛，烧香的烟味在道上都能闻到，二人便到塔下拜见贾昌。
English: During the Yuan and He years, Chen Hongzu of Yingchuan came out of the Chunming Gate with a friend, saw the bamboo cypress trees growing very luxuriantly, and the smoke of burning incense could be smelled on the road, and the two went to the tower to see Jia Chang.

古文：下马觐昌于塔下，听其言，忘日之暮。宿鸿祖于斋舍，话身之出处，皆有条贯，遂及王制。
现代文：光顾着听贾昌说话了，不知不觉天色已晚，贾昌便把鸿祖二人留宿在读经斋戒的屋子中，叙述自身的经历，讲得很有条理，自然就及到朝廷过去的一些制度。
English: After patronizing and listening to Jia Chang's speech, I didn't realize that it was too late. Jia Chang then put the two great-grandfathers to stay in a room where they read the scriptures and fasted. He described his own experience in a very organized manner, naturally touching on some of the systems of the imperial court in the past.

古文：鸿祖问开元之理乱，昌曰： 老人少时，以斗鸡求媚于上，上倡优畜之，家于外宫，安足以知朝廷之事？
现代文：陈鸿祖询问开元年间治乱情况，贾昌说： 老夫少年时期，以斗鸡向皇上讨好，皇上把我当成歌伎戏子一样养着，家住在外宫，哪能知道朝廷的事情？
English: Chen Hongzu inquired about the situation of the turmoil in the first year of the 21st century. Jia Chang said: When the old man was a boy, he used cockfighting to please the emperor. The emperor raised me as if I were a kabuki actor. My family lived in the outer palace. How could I know anything about the imperial court?

古文：然有以为吾子言者。
现代文：然而也还有些值得跟你谈一谈的。
English: However, there is something else worth talking to you about.

古文：老人见黄门侍郎杜暹，出为碛西节度，摄御史大夫，始假风宪以威远。见哥舒翰之镇凉州也，下石堡，戍青海城，出白龙，逾葱岭，界铁关，总管河左道，七命始摄御史大夫。见张说之领幽州也，每岁入关，辄长辕挽辐车，辇河间蓟州佣调缯布，驾轊连軏，坌入关门。
现代文：老夫看见黄门侍郎杜暹出朝担任碛西节度使兼职御使大夫，开始凭借国家的风纪法度来威镇远方；看见哥舒翰镇守凉州时，攻下石堡，保卫青海城，从白龙城出了发，越过葱岭，使铁门关成为边界，总管河左道，七次任命才兼任御史大夫；又看见张说统辖幽州的时候，每年入关，总是用长辕大车，运送河间、蓟州百姓交纳的缯和布，连续不断涌入关门。
English: The old man saw Du Siem, the Yellow Gate's chamberlain, go out of the imperial palace to serve as a part-time envoy of the Western Han Dynasty, and began to rely on the country's etiquette and discipline laws to come to Wei Town far away; saw Goshukhan, when he was in charge of Liangzhou, capture the stone castle, defend Qinghai City, set out from the White Dragon City, cross the Qianling Mountains, make the Iron Gate the border, and the chief administrator of He Zuo Road, seven times appointed to serve as the chief historian; and saw Zhang He, when he ruled Yuzhou, enter the gate every year, always

古文：输于王府，江淮绮縠，巴蜀锦绣，后宫玩好而已。
现代文：运进王府的只有江淮的细绞和绉纱，巴蜀的锦绣，还有后宫妃嫔们玩耍的东西而已。
English: The only things that were brought into the royal palace were the fine twine and embroidery from Jianghuai, the brocade from Bashu, and the things for the harem concubines to play with.

古文：河州敦煌道，岁屯田，实边食，余粟转输灵州，漕下黄河，入太原仓，备关中凶年。
现代文：河州敦煌道每年都屯垦，充实边防军的粮食，多余的小米转运到灵州，再由黄河水运东下，存入太原的粮库，以备关中荒年时食用。
English: Hezhou Dunhuang Road is flooded every year, enriching the grain of the border guards, and the excess millet is transported to Lingshou, and then transported eastward by the Yellow River, and deposited in the grain bank of Taiyuan, in preparation for consumption in the middle of the famine.

古文：关中粟麦藏于百姓。
现代文：关中的小米，都储藏在百姓家里。
English: All the millet in Guanzhong is stored in people's homes.

古文：天子幸五岳，从官千乘万骑，不食于民。
现代文：天子到五岳去，随从的官员坐满了千辆车万匹马，但都不用百姓供应吃喝。
English: When Tianzi went to Wuyue, the officials accompanying him filled thousands of cars and horses, but they did not need the people to supply them with food and drink.

古文：老人岁时伏腊得归休，行都市间，见有卖白衫白叠布。行邻比鄽间，有人禳病，法用皂布一匹，持重价不克致，竟以幞头罗代之。
现代文：老夫碰到节日和伏天、腊月回家休息的日子，走在城市的市场上，常看见有卖白衣衫、白叠布的；走到街坊邻居当中，看到有人用祈祷治病，方法是用墨布一匹，如果出重价还买不到，就用裹头的黑色丝织品来代替。
English: When the old man comes across festivals and the days when Foutian and Lazy Moon go home to rest, when he walks in the city market, he often sees people selling white shirts and white folded cloths; when he walks among his neighbors, he sees people using prayer to cure diseases, the method is to use an ink cloth, and if it can't be bought at a high price, it is replaced with a black silk cloth wrapped around the head.

古文：近者老人扶杖出门，阅街衢中，东西南北视之，见白衫者不满百，岂天下之人，皆执兵乎？
现代文：近来老夫拄着拐杖出门，走到十字路口，向各个方向细看，穿白衫的人不满一百人。难道天下的人都当兵了吗？
English: Recently, the old man went out on crutches, walked to the crossroads, looked carefully in all directions, and there were less than a hundred people wearing white shirts. Has everyone in the world become a soldier?

古文：开元十二年，诏三省侍郎有缺，先求曾任刺史者。郎官缺，先求曾任县令者。
现代文：开元十二年，皇帝下令：中书省、尚书省、门下省的侍郎有缺额时，先选用曾经担任过刺史的人；郎官有缺额时，先选用曾担任过县令的人。
English: In the 12th year of the first century, the emperor ordered: when there was a shortage of attendants in the Chinese, Shang and subordinate provinces, the first to be selected was the person who had served as a sashimi; when there was a shortage of attendants, the first to be selected was the person who had served as a county magistrate.

古文：及老人见四十，三省郎吏，有理刑才名，大者出刺郡，小者镇县。
现代文：到老夫四十岁时，中央三省官员，有点治理刑狱才能的，官职大的便到州郡去做刺史，官职小的做县令。
English: By the time the old man was forty years old, the officials of the three provinces of the central government, who had some ability to manage prisons, would go to the state and county to do the history, and the small officials would do the county orders.

古文：自老人居大道旁，往往有郡太守休马于此，皆惨然，不乐朝廷沙汰使治郡。
现代文：从老夫住在大道旁边以来，时常看到有州郡长官在此歇脚，他们脸色惨淡，不高兴朝廷的裁减和罢免，让那些人去管理州郡里的事。
English: Since the old man lived next to the avenue, it was common to see state and county governors resting here, their faces gloomy, unhappy with the reduction and dismissal of the court, and let those people manage the affairs of the state and county.

古文：开元取士，孝弟理人而已，不闻进士宏词拔萃之为其得人也。
现代文：开元年间选用人才，只看孝悌和办事才能，没听说用什么 进士 ； 宏词 ； 拔萃 等就可以选出人才的。
English: In the first year of the 21st century, the selection of talents was only based on filial piety and ability to do things, and it was not heard that talents could be selected by using such words as "junior scholar," "grand words" and "outstanding."

古文：大略如此。 
现代文：我谈了大概就这些。 
English: That's pretty much all I talked about.

古文：因泣下。
现代文：于是流下了眼泪。
English: And cry.

古文：复言曰： 上皇北臣穹庐，东臣鸡林，南臣滇池，西臣昆夷，三岁一来会。
现代文：又说道： 太上皇在位时，北面使游牧民族称臣，东面使鸡林国称巨，南面使滇池国称臣，西面使西方少数民族称臣，三年他们来朝见一次。
English: He also said: When the Emperor was on the throne, the nomadic people in the north called him a minister, the chicken forest country called him a great man in the east, the pond country called him a minister in the south, and the western ethnic minorities called him a minister in the west. They came to see him once every three years.

古文：朝觐之礼容，临照之恩泽，衣之锦絮，饲之酒食，使展事而去，都中无留外国宾。
现代文：朝见时的礼仪很隆重，接待时的恩惠也很优厚，给他们穿上锦絮，供给他们酒饭，让他们把事情办完了就回国，京都不留外国来宾长住。
English: The etiquette at the morning meeting is very grand, and the favors at the reception are also very generous. They dress them in kimchi, provide them with wine and rice, and let them return home when they have finished their business. Kyoto does not keep foreign guests for a long time.

古文：今北胡与京师杂处，娶妻生子，长安中少年有胡心矣。
现代文：现在胡人和京都的人混杂在一起居住，娶妻生子，长安的少年都有胡人的思想了。
English: Now Hu people and Kyoto people live together, marry and have children, and the boys in Chang'an all have Hu people's thoughts.

古文：吾子视首饰靴服之制，不与向同，得非物妖乎？ 
现代文：你看看首饰靴鞋服装的样式，已不跟过去相同，这能不算怪现象吗？ 
English: If you look at the styles of jewelry, shoes and clothing, they are no longer the same as in the past. Is this not a strange phenomenon?

古文：鸿祖默不敢应而去。
现代文：鸿祖听了，默然无语，不敢应声就离开了。
English: Hongzu listened, was speechless, did not dare to answer, and left.

古文：柳氏传
现代文：柳氏传
English: The Story of Yanagi

古文：天宝中，昌黎韩翊有诗名，性颇落托，羁滞贫甚。
现代文：唐代天宝年间，昌黎人韩翊的诗颇有名气，他性格放荡不羁。
English: During the Tang Dynasty's Tenpo era, the poems of Han Zheng, a native of Changli, were quite famous, and his character was wild and uninhibited.

古文：有李生者，与翊友善。
现代文：因怀才不遇穷得很厉害。
English: It's hard to be poor when you have so much.

古文：家累千金，负气爱才。
现代文：有一位李生跟韩翊很友好，他家里有千金的积蓄，气盛自负，但很爱才。
English: There is a Li Sheng who is very friendly with Han Yu. His family has thousands of dollars in savings. He is arrogant, but very talented.

古文：其幸姬曰柳氏，艳绝一时，喜谈谑，善讴咏。
现代文：李生有个爱妾叫柳氏，她的美丽在当时没有人能赶上。她喜欢说笑，善于唱歌。
English: Li Sheng had a beloved concubine named Liu Shi, whose beauty no one could match at the time. She liked to tell jokes and was good at singing.

古文：李生居之别第，与翊为宴歌之地，而馆翊于其侧。
现代文：李生让她住在另一座宅院，这座宅院是李生与韩翊宴会唱歌的地方，李生就安排韩翊住在这座宅院的旁边。
English: Li Sheng asked her to live in another mansion, this mansion was the place where Li Sheng and Han Qi would sing at the banquet, Li Sheng arranged for Han Qi to live next to this mansion.

古文：翊素知名，其所候问，皆当时之彦。
现代文：韩翊是当时的名人，那些前来拜访问候他的人，都是当时的德才兼备之人。
English: Han Xuan was a celebrity at the time, and those who came to pay homage and visit him were all people with both virtue and talent at the time.

古文：柳氏自门窥之，谓其侍者曰： 韩夫子岂长贫贱者乎？ 
现代文：柳氏从门缝偷看他，对侍女说： 韩先生哪里会是长久贫贱之辈呢？ 
English: Mr. Liu peeked at him through a crack in the door and said to the maid: "How can Mr. Han be poor forever?

古文：遂属意焉。
现代文：于是对他产生了爱慕之意。
English: So I developed an affinity for him.

古文：李生素重翊，无所吝惜，后知其意，乃具饍请翊饮。
现代文：李生一向看重韩翊，对韩翊没有什么舍不得的，后来知道柳氏的心意，便备好了饭菜请韩翊喝酒。
English: Li Sheng had always valued Han Xuan, and there was nothing reluctant about Han Xuan. Later, knowing Mr. Liu's intention, he prepared a meal and invited Han Xuan to drink.

古文：酒酣，李生曰： 柳夫人容色非常，韩秀才文章特异，欲以柳荐枕于韩君，可乎？ 
现代文：酒喝到兴头，李生说： 柳氏容貌不一般，韩秀才您的文章也不同凡响，我打算让她侍候您安寝，可以吗？ 
English: Li Sheng said after drinking wine to his heart's content: Liu's appearance is not ordinary, Han Xiucai, your article is also extraordinary, I plan to let her serve you a good night's sleep, is that okay?

古文：翊惊栗避席曰： 君之恩，解衣辍食久之，岂宜夺所爱乎？ 
现代文：韩翊惊讶颤栗，当即离开座位说： 承蒙您的关照，经常送衣服、食物给我，我怎么还能夺去你所爱的人呢？ 
English: Surprised and trembling, Han Zheng immediately left his seat and said: Thanks to your care, you often send me clothes and food. How can I take away the person you love?

古文：李坚请之，柳氏知其意诚，乃再拜，引衣接席。
现代文：李生坚持要把柳氏送给韩翊。柳氏知道李生是诚心诚意的，就拜了两拜，提起衣服坐到了韩翊的旁边。
English: Li Sheng insisted on giving Mr. Liu to Han Qi. Knowing that Li Sheng was sincere, Mr. Liu bowed twice and lifted his clothes to sit next to Han Qi.

古文：李坐翊于客位，引满极欢。
现代文：李生让韩翊坐在客位，端起酒杯一饮而尽，极为高兴。
English: Li Sheng let Han Hui sit in the guest seat, took up a glass of wine and drank it down, extremely happy.

古文：李生又以资三十万，佐翊之费。
现代文：李生又拿出三十万钱的财物，帮助韩翊解决困难。
English: Li Sheng also took out 300,000 yuan of property to help Han Wei solve the difficulties.

古文：翊仰柳氏之色，柳氏慕翊之才，两情皆获，喜可知也。
现代文：韩翊敬仰柳氏的美貌，柳氏羡慕韩翊的文才，两人的心思都实现了，那快乐是可想而知的。
English: Han Ye admired Liu's beauty, and Liu admired Han Ye's literary talent. Both of their dreams have come true, and their happiness can be imagined.

古文：明年，礼部侍郎杨度擢翊上第。
现代文：第二年，礼部侍郎杨度在考试中选拔韩翊为上等，韩翊却在家闲住了一年。
English: In the second year, Yang Du, the attendant of the Ceremonial Department, selected Han Qi as the best in the examination, but Han Qi idled at home for a year.

古文：屏居间岁，柳氏谓翊曰： 荣名及亲，昔人所尚，岂宜以濯浣之贱，稽采兰之美乎？
现代文：柳氏对韩翊说： 荣誉和名声可以光宗耀祖，这也是自古以来人们所追求的，你怎么能因为我这个洗洗涮涮的贱人，而耽误你美好的前程呢？
English: Mr. Liu said to Mr. Han: "Honor and fame can only be passed down from one generation to the next, which is what people have been pursuing since ancient times. How can you delay your bright future because of me, a dirty slut?"

古文：且用器资物，足以待君之来也。 
现代文：再说用具财物也足够等到您回来。 
English: In addition, your equipment and belongings will be sufficient until your return.

古文：翊于是省家于清池。
现代文：韩翊于是到清池老家探望父母。
English: As a result, Han Yan went to visit his parents in his hometown of Qingchi.

古文：岁余，乏食，鬻妆具以自给。
现代文：过了一年多，柳氏开始缺少吃的，就卖掉化妆用品以自给。
English: After more than a year, Ms. Liu started to run out of food, so she sold her cosmetics to support herself.

古文：天宝末，盗覆二京，士女奔骇。柳氏以艳独异，且惧不免，乃剪发毁形，寄迹法灵寺。
现代文：天宝末年，安禄山攻陷了长安与洛阳，男男女女奔走惊恐，柳氏因为长得漂亮，特别显眼，害怕不能免祸，便剪去头发毁坏容貌，寄居在法灵寺。
English: At the end of the Tenpo era, Mount Anlu captured Chang'an and Luoyang. Men and women ran in fear. Liu, because she was beautiful and conspicuous, was afraid that she would not be spared, so she cut off her hair and disfigured her face, and lived as a hermit in the Faling Temple.

古文：是时侯希逸自平卢节度淄青，素藉翊名，请为书记。
现代文：当时侯希逸用平卢节度使的名义统辖淄青，一向仰慕韩翊的声名，就请去做了秘书。
English: At that time, Hou Xiyi used the name of Pinglu Jiedu Envoy to supervise Aoqing. He had always admired Han Zheng's reputation, so he asked him to be his secretary.

古文：洎宣皇帝以神武返正，翊乃遣使间行，求柳氏。
现代文：等到肃宗皇帝凭着神明英武使国家恢复正常后，韩翊才派人暗地行动，寻找柳氏。
English: It was only after Emperor Sozong restored the country to normalcy with the help of Shinmei Yingwu that Han Yan sent people to secretly search for the Liu clan.

古文：以练囊盛麸金，题之曰： 章台柳，章台柳，昔日青青今在否？
现代文：他用丝绸做个袋子，装着碎金，在袋上写道： 章台柳，章台柳，昔日青青今在否？
English: He made a bag out of silk, filled it with pieces of gold, and wrote on the bag: Zhang Tielu, Zhang Tielu, was there a Qing Qing in the past?

古文：纵使长条似旧垂，亦应攀折他人手。 
现代文：纵使长条似旧垂，亦应攀折他人手。 
English: Even if the long strip seems to be sagging, it should be folded by hand.

古文：柳氏捧金呜咽，左右凄悯。
现代文：柳氏捧着金袋子呜呜咽咽地哭，身旁侍奉的人都伤心怜悯。
English: Holding the gold bag, Mr. Yoo whimpered and cried, and the attendants around him were sad and pitiful.

古文：答之曰： 杨柳枝，芳菲节，所恨年年赠离别。
现代文：柳氏针对韩翊的题词答复说： 杨柳枝，芳菲节，所恨年年赠离别。
English: Mr. Liu replied to the inscription of Han Zheng: "Yang Liu Zhi, Fangfei Festival, what you hate every year is a parting gift.

古文：一叶随风忽报秋，纵使君来岂堪折。 
现代文：一叶随风忽报秋，纵使君来岂堪折？ 
English: A leaf with the wind suddenly returns the autumn, even if you come, what can you do?

古文：无何，有蕃将沙吒利者，初立功，窃知柳氏之色，劫以归第，宠之专房。
现代文：不久，有一个在唐朝为官的叫沙吒利的少数民族将领，刚刚立了功，私下里知道了柳氏姿色非凡，就把她抢到了家里，并把宠爱全部加到了她一人身上。
English: Not long after, an ethnic minority general named Shajili, who was an official in the Tang Dynasty, had just made a great achievement. He secretly knew that Liu's appearance was extraordinary, so he took her to his home and lavished all his love on her.

古文：及希逸除左仆射入觐，翊得从行，至京师，已失柳氏所止，叹想不已。
现代文：等到侯希逸被授官左仆射入朝见皇帝时，韩翊得以随行。到了京城，他已经找不到柳氏的住处，感叹想念不止。
English: By the time Hou Xiyi was sent to the imperial court to meet the emperor, Han Zheng was able to accompany him. When he arrived in Beijing, he couldn't find Liu's residence, and he couldn't stop thinking about it.

古文：偶于龙首冈，见苍头以駮牛驾辎軿，从两女奴。
现代文：有一天，偶然在龙首冈看见一个仆役用杂色牛驾着一辆带帷幕的车，车后还跟着两个女仆。
English: One day, he happened to see a servant driving a draped cart with a mixed-colored ox in Longshougang, followed by two maids.

古文：翊偶随之，自车中问曰： 得非韩员外乎？
现代文：韩翊便与车并行，忽然车中有人问： 莫不是韩员外吗？
English: Han Ye then walked alongside the car. Suddenly, someone in the car asked, "Isn't there a Korean guy outside?"

古文：某乃柳氏也。 
现代文：我是柳氏啊。 
English: I'm Yuuji.

古文：使女奴窃言失身沙吒利。阻同车者，请诘旦幸相待于道政里门。
现代文：就让女仆偷偷告诉韩翊，自己已被沙吒利占有，碍于同车的人，不便交谈，请求韩翊明天早晨一定要在道政里门等着。
English: He asked the maid to secretly tell Han Zheng that she had been possessed by Sha Zhengli, and that it was inconvenient to talk because of the people in the car, and asked Han Zheng to wait at the Doushengli Gate tomorrow morning.

古文：及期而往，以轻素结玉合，实以香膏，自车中授之，曰： 当遂永诀，愿置诚念。 
现代文：韩翊如期前往，柳氏用薄薄的绸子系着玉盒，玉盒中装着香膏，从车中交给韩翊，说： 该永别了，愿你留下它做个纪念。 
English: Han Yan went as scheduled. Mr. Liu tied a jade box with a thin silk cord. The jade box contained balm. He handed it to Han Yan from the car and said, "It's time to say goodbye. I hope you leave it as a souvenir."

古文：乃回车，以手挥之，轻袖摇摇，香车辚辚，目断意迷，失于惊尘。
现代文：于是掉转车头，挥着手告别，她的衣袖轻轻地飘动着，随散发出香味的车辚辚而去。韩翊目送香车远车，直到看不见时，心中茫然一片，仿佛一切都在飞扬的尘土中消失了。
English: So she turned the car around and waved goodbye, her sleeves fluttering gently, and went away with the scented chariot. Han Xingme sent the chariot away, until she couldn't see it, her mind was blank, as if everything had disappeared in the flying dust.

古文：翊大不胜情。
现代文：韩翊实在承受不了这种深深的离情。
English: Han Yan really can't bear this deep separation.

古文：会淄青诸将合乐酒楼，使人请翊，翊强应之，然意色皆丧，音韵凄咽。
现代文：当时，正赶上淄青的各位将领要在酒楼上聚会取乐，派人请韩翊，韩翊勉强答应了，然而神色颓丧，说话的声音都有些哽咽。
English: At that time, the generals who were catching up with Ao Qing wanted to have a party in the restaurant to have fun, and sent someone to invite Han Zheng. Han Zheng reluctantly agreed, but his face was gloomy and his voice was a little choked.

古文：有虞候许俊者，以材力自负，抚剑言曰： 必有故，愿一效用。 
现代文：有个虞侯叫许俊，凭着才能、力气非常自信，他摸着剑说道： 这里面一定有原因，我愿意为您出一次力。 
English: There was a magistrate named Xu Jun, who was very confident with his talent and strength. He touched his sword and said, "There must be a reason for this. I am willing to do my best for you."

古文：翊不得已，具以告之。
现代文：韩翊迫不得已，就把情况全告诉了他。
English: As a last resort, Han Yu told him the whole story.

古文：俊曰： 请足下数字，当立致之。 
现代文：许俊说： 请您写几个字，我会立刻把她带来。 
English: Xu Jun said: Please write a few words, I will bring her immediately.

古文：乃衣缦胡，佩双鞬，从一骑，径造沙吒利之第。
现代文：许俊于是穿上军服，佩戴上双弓，让一个骑兵跟着，直接来到沙吒利的住宅。
English: Xu Jun then put on a military uniform, wore a double bow, let a cavalryman follow him, and came directly to Shajili's house.

古文：候其出行里余，乃被衽执辔，犯关排闼，急趋而呼曰： 将军中恶，使召夫人。 
现代文：许俊等沙吒利走出门并离家一里多路时，就披着衣服，拉着马缰绳冲进大门，又闯进里面的小门，急匆匆地边走边喊道： 将军得了急病，让我来请夫人！ 
English: When Xu Jun and Shajili walked out of the door and were more than a mile away from home, he put on his clothes, pulled the reins of the horse and rushed into the gate, and then broke into the small door inside, shouting as he hurriedly walked: The general has a sudden illness, let me invite my wife!

古文：仆侍辟易，无敢仰视。
现代文：仆人侍女都惊得连连后退，没有敢抬头看的。
English: The servants and maids all recoiled in shock, not daring to look up.

古文：遂升堂，出翊札示柳氏，挟之跨鞍马。
现代文：于是许俊登上堂屋，拿出韩翊的信交给柳氏看，然后挟着柳氏跨上了鞍马。
English: So Xu Jun went up to the hall, took out Han Zheng's letter and showed it to Mr. Liu, and then, with Mr. Liu in his arms, he mounted the pommel horse.

古文：逸尘断鞅，倏忽乃至，引裾而前曰： 幸不辱命。 
现代文：马在飞扬的尘土中奔跑，连马脖子上的带子都跑断了，不一会儿就到了韩翊处。许俊整理衣襟，走上前去，说： 我幸而未辱使命。 
English: The horse ran in the flying dust, and even the strap on the horse's neck broke, and soon it reached Han Xuan's place. Xu Jun straightened his coat and walked forward, saying, "I'm lucky I didn't dishonor my mission."

古文：四座惊叹。
现代文：四座惊叹不已。
English: The four wowed the audience.

古文：柳氏与翊，执手涕泣，相与罢酒。
现代文：柳氏与韩翊手拉手哭泣不止，大家因此停止了饮宴。
English: Mr. Yoo and Ms. Han were holding hands and crying, so everyone stopped the banquet.

古文：是时沙吒利恩宠殊等。翊、俊惧祸，乃诣希逸。
现代文：当时沙吒利受到皇帝特殊的宠幸，许俊、韩翊害怕会有灾祸，就去进见侯希逸。
English: At that time, Shajili was especially favored by the emperor. Xu Jun and Han Zheng were afraid that there would be a disaster, so they went to see Hou Xiyu.

古文：希逸大惊曰： 吾平生所为事，俊乃能尔乎？ 
现代文：希逸非常吃惊，说： 我平生敢干的事，你许俊也敢干呵！ 
English: Xiyi was very surprised and said, "What I dare to do in my lifetime, you Xu Jun also dare to do!"

古文：遂献状曰： 检校尚书金部员外郎兼御史韩翊久列参佐，累彰勋效。
现代文：随即向皇帝上奏说： 检校尚书金部员外郎兼御史韩翊长久以来担任僚属之职，屡次建立功劳。
English: He immediately reported to the emperor, saying: "For a long time, the inspector of the school, Shang Shuxin, the member of the finance department, Wai Rong, and the historian, Han Zheng, have served as colleagues and subordinates, and have repeatedly established merit.

古文：顷从乡赋。有妾柳氏阻绝凶寇，依止名尼。
现代文：前不久参加乡赋，他的爱妾柳氏被凶寇所隔绝，暂住在尼姑庵中。
English: His beloved concubine, Yanushi, who had recently taken part in a village fufu, had been cut off by a bandit and was temporarily living in a nunnery.

古文：今文明抚运，遐迩率化。将军沙吒利凶恣挠法，凭恃微功，驱有志之妾，干无为之政。
现代文：现在由于国家文明昌盛，又注意安抚百姓，使远近的人都被感化了；但将军沙吒利凶暴恣肆，违犯法纪，仅依微小的功绩，劫掠有节操的妇女，破坏了祥和的社会秩序。
English: Now, due to the country's flourishing civilization and attention to appeasing the people, people near and far have been influenced; but General Shahri is violent and arbitrary, violates laws and regulations, relies only on minor merits, plunders women with integrity, and destroys a peaceful social order.

古文：臣部将兼御史中丞许俊，族本幽蓟，雄心勇决，却夺柳氏，归于韩翊。
现代文：臣的部将兼御史中丞许俊，家族本在幽州、蓟州一带，有胆略且勇敢果决，夺回了柳氏，还给了韩翊。
English: The vassal's subordinate general and goshi chujo, Xu Jun, whose family was originally from Yuzhou and Zhangzhou, had the courage and determination to recapture the Liu clan and return it to Han Yu.

古文：义切中抱，虽昭感激之诚；事不先闻，固乏训齐之令。 
现代文：许俊内心里充满了正义，此次虽然出于义愤，但事先不向上级请示，实在是我平时缺乏严明教育所致。 
English: Xu Jun's heart was filled with justice. This time, although out of righteous indignation, he did not ask his superiors in advance. It was really due to my lack of rigorous education.

古文：寻有诏： 柳氏宜还韩翊，沙吒利赐钱二百万。 柳氏归翊。
现代文：不久，皇帝下了诏书：柳氏应该还给韩翊，赐给沙吒利二百万钱，柳氏于是重又回到韩翊手里。
English: Soon after, the emperor issued an edict: the Liu clan should be returned to Han Zheng, and two million yuan should be given to Sha Zhengli. The Liu clan then returned to Han Zheng's hands.

古文：翊后累迁至中书舍人。
现代文：韩翊后来屡次升迁，最后升到中书舍人。
English: Later, Han Wei was promoted several times, and finally he was promoted to the top of the middle school.

古文：然即柳氏志防闲而不克者，许俊慕感激而不达者也。
现代文：然而，柳氏志在防范外人的非礼，却未能做到，许俊能够见义勇为却不够通达事理。
English: However, Liu Shizhi failed to prevent the misconduct of outsiders, and Xu Jun was able to act bravely but was not knowledgeable enough.

古文：向使柳氏以色选，则当熊辞辇之诚可继；许俊以才举，则曹柯渑池之功可建。
现代文：如果柳氏凭容貌能够被选入皇宫，她一定会像汉元帝的妃子冯婕妤那样临危不惧为皇帝挡住扑来的熊，也会像汉成帝时的班婕妤那样，为了皇帝的声名而拒绝和皇帝同车出游。
English: If Ms. Liu can be elected to the imperial palace based on her appearance, she will surely be like Feng Yu, the concubine of Emperor Han Yuan, who was not afraid to block the bear for the emperor in the face of danger. She will also refuse to travel in the same car with the emperor for the sake of the emperor's reputation, just like Banzhuan at the time of Emperor Han Cheng.

古文：夫事由迹彰，功待事立。惜郁堙不偶，义勇徒激，皆不入于正。
现代文：事业必须靠行动才能展示，功勋靠事业才能建立，可惜世上怀才不遇的人却很多，有勇无谋的人也成不了大业。
English: A career must be demonstrated through action, and merit can only be established through a career. Unfortunately, there are many people in the world who lack talent, and those who are brave and reckless cannot achieve a great career.

古文：斯岂变之正乎？盖所遇然也。
现代文：这些事情并不能归咎于世事的变化无常，而是形势走到那一步，必然要产生那样的结果。
English: These things cannot be blamed on the vicissitudes of the world, but the situation has come to that step, and it is inevitable to produce such a result.

