古文：屠维大荒落，一年。
现代文：屠维大荒落，一年。
English: Tuwei was devastated for a year.

古文：高祖武皇帝十八太清三年
现代文：梁武帝太清三年
English: Emperor Liangwu in the third year of the Qing Dynasty

古文：春，正月，丁巳朔，柳仲礼自新亭徙营大桁。
现代文：春季，正月，丁巳朔，柳仲礼将新亭的军营迁往大桁。
English: In the spring, in the first month of the year, Liu Zhongli moved the military camp from Xinting to Dadi.

古文：会大雾，韦粲军迷失道，比及青塘，夜已过半，立栅未合，侯景望见之，亟帅锐卒攻粲。
现代文：这一天遇上有大雾，书粲的军队的在路上迷失了方向，等他们到达青塘的时候，已经过了半夜。军营外围扎下的栅栏还没来得及合拢，侯景就已经望见，他迅速率领精锐部队前来攻打。
English: On this day, there was heavy fog, and Shuxuan's troops lost their way on the road. By the time they reached Qingtang, it was already past midnight. Before the fence around the military camp could be closed, Hou Jing could already be seen, and he quickly led the elite troops to attack.

古文：粲使军主郑逸逆击之，命刘叔胤以舟师截其后，叔胤畏忄需不敢进，逸遂败。
现代文：韦粲派军主郑逸进行迎击，又命令刘叔胤带着乘船的部队从后面截击。刘叔胤心里害怕不敢前进，郑逸于是遭到了失败。
English: Wei Gan sent the commander Zheng Yi to counterattack, and ordered Liu Shuyun to intercept from behind with the troops on the boat. Liu Shuyun was afraid and did not dare to advance, and Zheng Yi was defeated.

古文：景乘胜入粲营，左右牵粲避贼，粲不动，叱子弟力战，遂与子尼及三弟助、警、构、从弟昂皆战死，亲戚死者数百人。
现代文：侯景乘胜攻进韦粲的军营，韦粲身边的下属都拉韦粲躲避贼兵，韦粲一动不动，大声命令子弟奋力战斗，最后他与儿子韦尼以及三个弟弟韦助、韦警、韦构，还有堂弟韦昂一起战死了，同时死去的亲戚共有几百人。
English: Hou Jing took advantage of the victory to attack Wei Wei's military camp. The subordinates around Wei Wei all fled to avoid the bandits. Wei Wei remained motionless and loudly ordered his sons to fight hard. Finally, he and his son Wenyi and his three brothers Wei Shu, Wei Gu, Wei Jie, and his cousin Wei Ang died together. There were hundreds of relatives who died at the same time.

古文：仲礼方食，投箸被甲，与其麾下百骑驰往救之，与景战于青塘，大破之，斩首数百级，沉淮水死者千馀人。
现代文：战斗开始时，柳仲礼正在吃饭，他扔下筷子，穿上盔甲，与他的一百来名下属骑马赶去救援，在青塘和侯景展开激战，将侯景的部队打得大败，斩敌人首级数百，敌人淹死在秦淮河的达一千多人。
English: At the beginning of the battle, Liu Zhongli was eating. He threw down his chopsticks, put on his armor, and rode to the rescue with his hundred or so subordinates. He launched a fierce battle in Qingtang and Houjing, defeated Houjing's troops, beheaded hundreds of enemies, and drowned more than a thousand enemies in the Qinhuai River.

古文：仲礼槊将及景，而贼将支伯仁自后斫仲礼中肩，马陷于淖，贼聚槊刺之，骑将郭山石救之，得免。
现代文：柳仲礼的槊眼看就要扎到侯景，正在这时，叛贼将领支伯仁从后面挥刀砍中柳仲礼的肩膀，柳仲礼骑的马陷入泥淖里，贼兵的长矛集中向他刺去，幸好骑兵将领郭山石赶上去救援，柳仲礼才得免一死。
English: Liu Zhongli's narrow-eyed look is about to pierce Houjing. At this time, the traitor general Zhi Bohren swung his sword from behind and slashed Liu Zhongli's shoulder. The horse that Liu Zhongli was riding fell into the mud, and the spears of the robbers concentrated on him. Fortunately, the cavalry general Guo Shanshi rushed to the rescue, and Liu Zhongli was spared from death.

古文：仲礼被重疮，会稽人惠臶吮疮断血，故得不死。
现代文：见到柳仲礼身受重伤，会稽人惠为他吸吮伤口止血，所以柳仲礼最后没有死去。
English: Seeing that Liu Zhongli was seriously injured, the inspector helped him suck the wound to stop the bleeding, so Liu Zhongli did not die in the end.

古文：自是景不敢复济南岸，仲礼亦气衰，不复言战矣。
现代文：从此，侯景不敢再渡河到南岸，柳仲礼也失去了原来的气势，不再提要和对方交战了。
English: From then on, Hou Jing did not dare to cross the river to the south bank again, and Liu Zhongli also lost his original momentum and no longer wanted to fight with the other side.

古文：邵陵王纶复收散卒，与东扬州刺史临城公大连、新淦公大成等自东道并至；庚申，列营于桁南，亦推柳仲礼为大都督。
现代文：邵陵王萧纶重新聚集逃散的士兵，与东扬州刺史临城公萧大连、新淦公萧大成等人一起从东边赶到了；庚申，他们在大桁的南面排列起营垒，也推举柳仲礼为大都督。
English: Shao Ling Wang Xiao Yao re-gathered the soldiers who had fled and arrived from the east together with Dongyang Zhou Shi Lincheng Gong Xiao Dalian, Xinlu Gong Xiao Dacheng and others; Goshun, they lined up the camp on the south side of the large girder, and also elected Liu Zhongli as the grand governor.

古文：大连，大临之弟也。
现代文：萧大连是萧大临的弟弟。
English: Xiao Dalian is the younger brother of Xiao Dalin.

古文：朝野以侯景之祸共尤硃异，异惭愤发疾，庚申，卒。
现代文：梁朝朝廷内外都因为侯景造成的祸患而责怪朱异，朱异愤恨、惭愧，渐渐发病，庚申，去世。
English: Both inside and outside the imperial court of the Liang Dynasty blamed Zhu Yixing for the disaster caused by Houjing, Zhu Yixing was indignant and ashamed, and gradually fell ill and died.

古文：故事，尚书官不以为赠。上痛惜异，特赠尚书右仆射。
现代文：以往的制度规定：尚书官不能作为追封，梁武帝对朱异的死感到痛惜，特地追封他为尚书右仆射。
English: The previous system stipulated that Shang Shukan could not be posthumously awarded. Emperor Wu of Liang deplored Zhu Yi's death and specially awarded him the title of Shang Shukan's right-hand man.

古文：甲子，湘东世子方等及王僧辩军至。
现代文：甲子，梁朝湘东王的嫡长子萧方等以及王僧辩的部队赶到。
English: Gao Zi, Xiao Fang, the eldest legitimate son of the Liang Dynasty's King of Shandong, and the troops of Wang Sanbo arrived.

古文：戊辰，封山侯正表以北徐州降东魏，东魏徐州刺史高归彦遣兵赴之。
现代文：戊辰，梁朝封山侯萧正表带领北徐州军民投降了东魏，东魏徐州刺史高归彦派遗部队赶到北徐州。
English: During the Eastern Wei Dynasty, the Northern Xuzhou army and people surrendered to the Eastern Wei Dynasty, led by the Northern Xuzhou warlord Xiao Zhengbo of the Liang Dynasty, and the Eastern Wei Dynasty sent the remnants of the Xuzhou army to the Northern Xuzhou.

古文：归彦，欢之族弟也。
现代文：高归彦是高欢的同族弟弟。
English: Gao Guihang is Gao Huan's younger brother.

古文：己巳，太子迁居永福省。
现代文：己巳，梁朝的皇太子搬到永福省居住。
English: Meanwhile, the crown prince of the Liang Dynasty moved to Yongfu Province to live.

古文：高州刺史李迁仕、天门太守樊文皎将援兵万馀人至城下。
现代文：高州刺史李迁仕、天门太守樊文皎率领一万多名援兵赶到城下。
English: Gaozhou bard Li Qianshi and Tianmen grand marshal Yu Wenyu led more than 10,000 reinforcements to the city.

古文：台城与援军信命久绝，有羊车儿献策，作纸鸱，系以长绳，写敕于内，放以从风，冀达众军，题云： 得鸱送援军，赏银百两。 
现代文：朝廷与援军之间的书信往来已经中断很久，有一位叫羊车儿的人出了一个主意，按照这一主意做了一只纸鸢，在上面系上长绳，将敕令写在里头，顺风放出去，希望它能到达援军中的任何崐一支部队里。为了保证成功，纸鸢上还题上这样几个字： 如果得到纸鸢后把它送给援军，将赏一百两银子。 
English: Correspondence between the imperial court and the reinforcements had been interrupted for a long time. A man named Sheep Cart came up with an idea. According to this idea, he made a paper gong, tied a long rope to it, wrote the order inside, and released it with the wind, hoping that it would reach any of the reinforcements. In order to ensure success, the paper gong was also inscribed with these words: If you get a paper gong and give it to the reinforcements, you will be rewarded with one hundred and two silver coins.

古文：太子自出太极殿前乘西北风纵之，贼怪之，以为厌胜，射而下之。援军募人能入城送启者，鄱阳世子嗣左右李朗请先受鞭，诈为得罪，叛投贼，因得入城，城中方知援兵四集，举城鼓噪。
现代文：皇太子亲自走到太极殿的前面，乘着西北风放出纸鸢，贼兵见了觉得奇怪，以为这是一种能以诅咒制服人的巫术用品，就把它射了下来，援军那一边也在招募能进入都城呈送文书的人，鄱阳王嫡长子萧嗣身边的下属李朗主动请求先打自己一顿鞭子，然后假装得罪了上司，叛逃到贼兵那里，因此得到机会进入城中，城中的军民这才知道援军已经聚集在周围，全城上下高兴得又是擂鼓又是呐喊。
English: The crown prince himself walked to the front of the Taiji Hall and, riding the northwesterly wind, released a paper lantern. The thief soldiers thought it was a magic item that could subdue people with a curse and shot it down. The reinforcements were also recruiting people who could enter the capital city to deliver documents. Li Lang, a subordinate of the eldest son of the King of Poyang, Xiao Zhi, took the initiative to ask for a whipping. Then he pretended to offend his boss and defected to the thief soldiers, thus getting the opportunity to enter the city. The soldiers and civilians in the city then knew that reinforcements had gathered around. The whole city was happy

古文：上以朗为直阁将军，赐金遣之。
现代文：梁武帝任命李朗为直将军，赏赐他金银后又派他出城。
English: Emperor Liangwu appointed Li Lang as General Zhi, rewarded him with gold and silver, and then sent him out of the city.

古文：朗缘钟山之后，宵行昼伏，积日乃达。
现代文：李朗沿着钟山的后面，晚上行走白天潜伏，几天之后才到达援军的营垒。
English: Li Lang walked along the back of Zhongshan Mountain at night, lurked during the day, and arrived at the reinforcement camp a few days later.

古文：癸未，鄱阳世子嗣、永安侯确、庄铁、羊鸦仁、柳敬礼、李迁仕、樊文皎将兵度淮，攻东府前栅，焚之；侯景退。
现代文：癸未，鄱阳王的嫡长子萧嗣、永安侯萧确、庄铁、羊鸦仁、柳敬礼、李迁仕、樊文皎率领部队渡过秦淮河，攻打并焚烧了东府前面的栅栏；侯景向后退却。
English: At that time, Xiao Zhi, Yongan Hou, Xiao Ji, Zhuo Tie, Yang Guoren, Liu Jingli, Li Qian Shi, and Zou Wenyi, the eldest legitimate son of King Shenyang, led the troops across the Qinhuai River, attacked and burned the fence in front of Dongfu; Hou Jing retreated backwards.

古文：众军营于青溪之东，迁仕、文皎帅锐卒五千独进深入，所向摧靡。
现代文：援军的大部队在青溪的东面安营扎寨，李迁仕、樊文皎率领五千名精锐的士兵单独前进，一直深入到敌军营地，每到一个地方，都把敌人打得一败涂地。
English: A large force of reinforcements set up camp on the east side of Qingxi. Li Qianshi and Gong Wenjun led five thousand elite soldiers to advance alone, all the way deep into the enemy camp, and every place they went, they defeated the enemy.

古文：至菰首桥东，景将宋子仙伏兵击之，文皎战死，迁仕遁还。敬礼，仲礼之弟也。
现代文：打到菰首桥东面的时候，侯景手下的将领宋子仙埋伏的部队袭击了他们，樊文皎战死，李迁仕逃了回去，柳敬礼是柳钟礼的弟弟。
English: When they reached the east side of the Dagger Bridge, the ambush troops of Song Zixian, a general under Hou Jing, attacked them. Xing Wenqi died in the battle, Li Qianshi fled back, and Liu Jingli was the younger brother of Liu Zhongli.

古文：仲礼神情傲很，陵蔑诸将，邵陵王纶每日执鞭至门，亦移时弗见，由是与纶及临城公大连深相仇怨。
现代文：柳仲礼看上去总是一副傲慢狠毒的样子，平时经常欺侮怠慢各位将领，邵陵王萧纶按照部将求见主帅时的礼节，每天拿着鞭子来到他的门口，他也好长时间不见。由于这一点，他与萧纶以及临城公萧大连结下了深深的仇怨。
English: Liu Zhongli always looked like an arrogant and vicious person, and he often bullied and neglected the generals. Shao Ling Wang Xiao Wei, according to the etiquette when the general asked to see the commander, came to his door every day with a whip. He also disappeared for a long time. Because of this, he had a deep grudge with Xiao Wei and Lincheng Gong Xiao Dalian.

古文：大连又与永安侯确有隙，诸军互相猜阻，莫有战心。
现代文：萧大连又和永安侯萧确有矛盾，这些部队之间互相猜疑，给对方设置障碍，都没有打仗的心思。
English: Xiao Dalian and Yongan Hou Xiao indeed had conflicts. These forces were suspicious of each other, set obstacles for each other, and had no intention of fighting.

古文：援军初至，建康士民扶老携幼以候之，才过淮，即纵兵剽掠。
现代文：援军刚到的时候，建康的老百姓纷纷扶老携幼出来迎接，可是部队刚刚渡过秦淮河，就放纵将士们抢劫掠夺。
English: When the reinforcements had just arrived, the people of Jiankang came out in droves to help the elderly with their children, but as soon as the troops crossed the Qinhuai River, they allowed the soldiers to rob and plunder.

古文：由是士民失望，贼中有谋应官军者，闻之，亦止。
现代文：老百姓们因此都感到失望，叛贼里面一些人原来打算响应官军，听到这一情况之后，也停止了自己的行动。
English: The people were disappointed, and some of the renegades, who had planned to respond to the government troops, stopped their action when they heard the news.

古文：王显贵以寿阳降东魏。
现代文：王显贵率领寿阳军民投降了东魏。
English: Wang Xiangui led the Shouyang army and people to surrender to the Eastern Wei Dynasty.

古文：临贺王记室吴郡顾野王起兵讨侯景，二月，己丑，引兵来至。
现代文：南梁临贺王的记室，吴郡人顾野王拉起队伍讨伐侯景，二月，己丑，顾野王率部队赶到了京城。
English: Nanliang Lin He Wang's record office, Wu County people Gu Niu Wang pulled up the team to fight Houjing, in February, he was ugly, Gu Niu Wang and his troops arrived in Beijing.

古文：初，台城之闭也，公卿以食为念，男女贵贱并出负米，得四十万斛，收诸府藏钱帛五十万亿，并聚德阳堂，而不备薪刍、鱼盐。
现代文：当初，台城关闭城门的时候，公卿们将粮食问题记挂在自己的心上，男的、女的、尊贵的、低贱的都出来背米，一共得到四十万斛粮食，同时还收集了各个府第贮藏的钱和帛达五十万亿，它们全都集中在德阳堂，但是他们并没有储备柴禾、牲口草料，以及鱼、盐。
English: At first, when Taicheng closed its gates, the nobles took the grain issue to heart. Men and women, high and low, came out to carry rice, and received a total of 400,000 cormorants of grain. At the same time, they also collected the money stored by various prefectures and up to 50 trillion cormorants. They were all concentrated in Deyangtang, but they did not have reserves of firewood, livestock and grass, as well as fish and salt.

古文：至是，坏尚书省为薪。撤荐，剉以饲马。荐尽，又食以饭。
现代文：到了此时，只好拆除尚书省的建筑作木柴，拿掉垫席，磨碎了以后喂马，垫席用光了，又把米饭喂马。
English: At this point, they had no choice but to dismantle Shang Shuxuan's building to make firewood, remove the cushion, grind it up and feed it to the horse. When the cushion was used up, they fed rice to the horse.

古文：军士无膎，或煮铠、熏鼠、捕雀而食之。
现代文：士兵们没有肉吃之后，有的人都煮甲衣上的皮革，烤老鼠，捕捉鸟雀来吃。
English: After the soldiers had no meat to eat, some of them boiled the leather on their armor, roasted mice, and caught birds and finches to eat.

古文：御甘露厨有干苔，味酸咸，分给战士。
现代文：皇室的厨房里有一种干的海苔，味道又酸又咸，不得已拿出来分给战士。
English: In the kitchen, there was dried moss in the kitchen, the taste was sour and salty, and it was also given to the soldiers to eat.

古文：军人屠马于殿省间，杂以人肉，食者必病。
现代文：军人们在皇宫与各省的办公地点之间杀马，煮的马肉中还夹杂着人肉，吃得人无不得病。
English: The soldiers killed horses between the royal palace and the provincial offices, and cooked horse meat mixed with human flesh, which made everyone sick.

古文：侯景众亦饥，抄掠无所获；东城有米，可支一年，援军断其路。
现代文：侯景的部队也很饥饿，四处搜寻掠夺没有取得什么收获。东府城里有不少大米，可以供应部队整整一年，可是去那里的路被援军切断了。
English: Houjing's troops were also very hungry, and they searched and plundered everywhere without any gain. Dongfu Town had a lot of rice, which could supply the troops for a whole year, but the road to there was cut off by reinforcements.

古文：又闻荆州兵将至，景甚患之。
现代文：在这种情况下，侯景又听说荆州的部队将要赶到，心里非常害怕。
English: In this situation, Hou Jing also heard that Jingzhou's troops were about to arrive, and he was very scared.

古文：王伟曰： 今台城不可猝拔，援兵日盛，吾军乏食，若伪且求和以缓其势，东城之米，足支一年，因求和之际，运米入石头，援军必不得动，然后休士息马，缮修器械，伺其懈怠击之，一举可取也。 
现代文：王伟对他说： 现在看来，台城不可能迅速攻克，对方的援军力量日益强大，而我们的部队缺少粮食，如果我们假装向他们求和的话，可以缓解他们逼近的势头，东城的大米，足够让我们吃一年，趁着求和的时候，把大米运进石头城，援军一定不敢行动，然后我们使将士与战马都得到休息，修理好有关器械，看到对方懈怠下来再攻击他们，一下子就可以夺取台城。 
English: Wang Wei said to him: Now it seems that Taicheng cannot be quickly conquered. The other side's reinforcement force is getting stronger and stronger, and our troops are short of food. If we pretend to sue for peace, we can ease their approaching momentum. The rice in Dongcheng is enough for us to eat for a year. While suing for peace, we can transport the rice to Stone Town. The reinforcement troops must not dare to act. Then we can give the soldiers and horses a rest, repair the relevant equipment, and see the other side slack off and attack them again. We can seize Taicheng at once.

古文：景从之，遣其将任约、于子悦至城下，拜表求和，乞复先镇。
现代文：侯景接受了他的建议，派遣手下的将领任约、于子悦来到台城下面，恭敬地递上文书求和，请皇上允许他去恢复原先镇守的失地。
English: Hou Jing accepted his suggestion, sent his generals to take charge of the treaty, and Yu Ziyue came to the bottom of Taicheng, respectfully submitted a document to sue for peace, and asked the emperor to allow him to restore the lost land of the original town guard.

古文：太子以城中穷困，白上，请许之。
现代文：皇太子考虑到城里已穷困不堪，就将此事禀报给梁武帝，请他答应侯景的要求。
English: Considering that the city was already in dire straits, the crown prince reported the matter to Emperor Liangwu and asked him to agree to Houjing's request.

古文：上怒曰： 和不如死！ 
现代文：梁武帝愤怒地说道： 跟侯景和好，还不如死！ 
English: Emperor Liangwu said angrily, "If you make peace with Houjing, you might as well die!"

古文：太子固请曰： 侯景围逼已久，援军相仗不战，宜且许其和，更为后图。 
现代文：皇太子再三请求说： 侯景围困逼迫我们已经很久，我们的援军又相互推诿不投入战斗，应该暂且答应与侯景媾和，以后再作其它打算。 
English: The crown prince repeatedly pleaded: "We have been besieged and persecuted by Hou Jing for a long time, and our reinforcements have been pushing each other not to engage in battle. We should temporarily agree to make peace with Hou Jing, and then make other plans.

古文：上迟回久之，乃曰： 汝自图之，勿令取笑千载。 
现代文：梁武帝犹豫了很久才说： 你自己考虑吧，不要让千载以下的人讥笑。 
English: Emperor Liangwu hesitated for a long time before he said: Think about it yourself, don't let people under a thousand years old laugh at you.

古文：遂报许之。
现代文：于是派人告诉侯景，说皇上已答应他的请求。
English: So they sent someone to tell Hou Jing that the emperor had agreed to his request.

古文：景乞割江右四州之地，并求宣城王大器出送，然后济江。
现代文：侯景乞求朝廷割让长江西面的四个州给他，又表示得让宣城王萧大器出来相送，然后他才渡过长江。
English: Hou Jing begged the imperial court to cede the four states on the west side of the Yangtze River to him, and also said that he had to let Xuancheng Wang Xiao send a large instrument, and then he crossed the Yangtze River.

古文：中领军傅岐固争曰： 岂有贼举兵围宫阙而更与之和乎！
现代文：中领军傅岐态度坚决地争辩说： 哪有叛贼兴兵包围宫殿，而我们转过头来跟他们媾和的道理！
English: The middle leader Fu Qi resolutely argued: What kind of reason is there for traitors to surround the palace with soldiers, and for us to turn around and make peace with them!

古文：此特欲却援军耳。
现代文：侯景现在的这一行动是想让援军撤走而已。
English: What Hou Jing is doing now is just trying to get the reinforcements to withdraw.

古文：戎狄兽心，必不可信。
现代文：戎狄侯景人面兽心，绝对不能相信。
English: It is absolutely impossible to believe that Eun Di Hou Jing is a man with a beast's heart.

古文：且宣城嫡嗣之重，国命所系，岂可为质！ 
现代文：况且宣城王是皇上的直系后裔，地位重要，国家的命运维系在他的身上，怎么可以叫他去当人质！ 
English: Moreover, the King of Xuancheng is a direct descendant of the emperor, his position is important, the fate of the country depends on him, how can he be called to be a hostage!

古文：上乃以大器之弟石城公大款为侍中，出质于景。
现代文：梁武帝于是便任命萧大器的弟弟，石城公萧大款为侍中，派他去侯景部做人质。
English: Emperor Liangwu then appointed Xiao Daqi's younger brother, Shicheng Gong Xiao Daqi, as an attendant and sent him to Houjing as a hostage.

古文：又敕诸军不得复进，下诏曰： 善兵不战，止戈为武。
现代文：他又命令各路援军一律不得再前进，同时还颁下这样的诏书： 善于用兵的人不必以刀兵定胜负，止与戈两字合成为 武 。
English: He also ordered all reinforcements not to advance any further. At the same time, he also issued the following edict: Those who are good at using soldiers do not need to use swords and soldiers to determine the outcome, but should combine the two words "go" and "wu."

古文：可以景为大丞相，都督江西四州诸军事，豫州牧、河南王如故。 
现代文：我可以再任命侯景为大丞相，统管江西四个州诸军事，仍照旧担任豫州牧、河南王之职。 
English: I can again appoint Hou Jing as the grand chancellor, supervise the military of the four provinces in Jiangxi Province, and still serve as the governor of Yuzhou and the king of Henan Province.

古文：己亥，设坛于西华门外，遣仆射王克、上甲侯韶、吏部郎萧瑳与于子悦、任约、王伟登坛共盟。
现代文：己亥，梁武帝在西华门外设立神坛，派遣仆射王克、上甲侯萧韶、吏部郎萧与于子悦、任约、王伟一同登上神坛订立盟约。
English: At the same time, Emperor Liangwu set up a sacred altar outside the West China Gate, and sent his servants Wang Ke, Shangjia Hou Xiaoqi, and the chief of staff, Lang Xiao, to ascend the sacred altar together with Yu Ziyue, Ren Yue, and Wang Wei to conclude a covenant.

古文：太子詹事柳津出西华门，景出栅门，遥相对，更杀牲歃血为盟。
现代文：太子詹事柳津来到西华门外，侯景则来到栅门外，遥遥相对，双方再屠宰牲畜，口中含血，订立盟誓。
English: Prince Zhan Zhi Liu Jin came to the West China Gate, and Hou Jing came to the gate, far away from each other. Both sides then slaughtered livestock, with blood in their mouths, and made an oath.

古文：既盟，而景长围不解，专修铠仗，托云 无船，不得即发 ，又云 恐南军见蹑 ，遣石城公还台，求宣城王出送；邀求稍广，了无去志。
现代文：盟约订立以后，侯景却长时间地不解除原来的包围，集中精力专门修缮铠甲与兵器，还找借口说： 没有船只，不能立即出发。 又说： 害怕那些屯驻在秦淮河南岸的援军追击我们。 他叫石城公返回台城，要宣城王出来相送，提的要求越来越多，丝毫没有离去的意思。
English: After the conclusion of the treaty, Hou Jing did not lift the original siege for a long time, concentrating his efforts on repairing armor and weapons. He also made excuses, saying: "There are no ships, we cannot leave immediately." He also said: "I am afraid of those reinforcements stationed on the south bank of the Qin Huai River chasing us." He told Shicheng Gong to return to Taicheng, to announce that the king of the city would come out to see him off. He made more and more demands, and had no intention of leaving.

古文：太子知其诈言，犹羁縻不绝。
现代文：皇太子明知他说的都假话，却还是不停地笼络他。
English: The crown prince knew he was lying, but he kept trying to woo him.

古文：韶，懿之孙也。
现代文：萧韶是萧懿的孙子。
English: Xiao Yao is the grandson of Xiao Yao.

古文：庚子，前南兗州刺史南康王会理、前青冀二州刺史湘潭侯退、西昌侯世子彧众合三万，至于马卬洲，景虑其自白下而上，启云： 请敕北军聚还南岸，不尔，妨臣济江。 
现代文：庚子，前南兖州刺史、南康王萧会理，前青冀二州刺史、湘谭侯萧退，西昌侯的嫡长子萧率领合起来数量为三万的人马来到马洲。侯景担心他们从白下攻打上来，就向梁武帝呈交奏折，说， 请让驻扎在北面马洲的部队聚集起来，回到南岸去，如果不这样的话，就会妨碍我们渡长江。 
English: Geng Zi, the former governor of South Luzhou, Nan Kang Wang Xiao Hui Li, the former governor of the two states of Qinghai and Hebei, Hunan Hou Xia Wei, and the eldest son of Xichang Hou Xiao led a total of 30,000 men and horses to Mazhou. Hou Jing was worried that they would attack from below the Bai, so he presented a report to Emperor Liang Wudi, saying, Please let the troops stationed in the north of Mazhou gather and return to the south bank, if not, it will prevent us from crossing the Yangtze River.

古文：太子即勒会理自白下城移军江潭苑。
现代文：皇太子便命萧会理将部队从白下城转移到江潭苑。
English: The crown prince then ordered Xiao Huili to transfer the troops from Baixia Town to Jiangtan Court.

古文：退，恢之子也。
现代文：萧退是萧恢的儿子。
English: Xiao Wei is the son of Xiao Wu.

古文：辛丑，以邵陵王纶为司空，鄱阳王范为征北将军，柳仲礼为侍中、尚书右仆射。
现代文：辛丑，梁武帝任命邵陵王萧纶为司空，鄱阳王萧范为征北将军，柳仲礼为侍中，尚书右仆射。
English: Sincerely, Emperor Liangwu appointed Shaoling Wang Xiaojun as the Secretary of the Air Force, Shenyang Wang Xiaofan as the General of the Northern Expedition, Liu Zhongli as the chamberlain, and Shang Shuxu as the right-hand man.

古文：景以于子悦、任约、傅士悊皆为仪同三司，夏侯譒为豫州刺史，董绍先为东徐州刺史，徐思玉为北徐州刺史，王伟为散骑常侍。
现代文：侯景任命于子悦、任约、傅士三人为仪同三司，夏侯为豫州刺史，董绍先为东徐州刺史，徐思玉为北徐州刺史，王伟为散骑常侍。
English: Hou Jing appointed Yu Ziyue, Ren Yao and Fu Shi as the three officials of the Third Division, Xia Hou as the historian of Yuzhou, Dong Shaoxian as the historian of East Xuzhou, Xu Siyu as the historian of North Xuzhou, and Wang Wei as the cavalryman.

古文：上以伟为侍中。
现代文：梁武帝又任命王伟为侍中。
English: Emperor Liangwu also appointed Wang Wei as an attendant.

古文：乙卯，景又启曰： 适有西岸信至，高澄已得寿阳、钟离，臣今无所投足，求借广陵并谯州，俟得寿阳，即奉还朝廷。 
现代文：乙卯，侯景又启奏梁武帝，说： 刚才我接到一封来自西岸的信，上面说高澄已经取得了寿阳、钟离这两地方，我现在没有地方可以立足，请求皇上将广陵和谯州借给我，等我夺取了寿阳，马上会把广陵和谯州奉还给朝廷。 
English: Second, Houjing also addressed Emperor Liangwu, saying: Just now, I received a letter from the west coast, which said that Gaocheng had obtained Shouyang and Zhongli, and I now have no place to base myself. I asked the emperor to lend me Guangling and Zhangzhou. When I have captured Shouyang, I will immediately return Guangling and Zhangzhou to the imperial court.

古文：又云： 援军既在南岸，须于京口渡江。 
现代文：又说： 援军既然在南岸，我军说必须在京口渡江。 
English: He also said: Since the reinforcements are on the south bank, our army must cross the river at the Kyoguchi.

古文：太子并答许之。
现代文：对这些要求，皇太子全都答应了。
English: The crown prince agreed to all of these demands.

古文：癸卯，大赦。
现代文：癸卯，梁朝大赦天下。
English: On the first day of the eighth month, a general amnesty was implemented.

古文：庚戌，景又启曰： 永安侯确、直閤赵威方频隔栅见诟云： 天子自与汝盟，我终当破汝。 
现代文：庚戌，侯景又递上奏折，说： 永安侯萧确，直赵威方频繁地隔着栅栏骂我说： 皇上同你订立盟约是他自己的事，我反正终究要打败你。 
English: Geng Yao, Hou Jing also submitted a report, saying: Yong An, Hou Xiao Ji, and Zhi Zhao Wei frequently scolded me across the fence, saying: It is the emperor's own business to make a covenant with you, I will eventually defeat you anyway.

古文：乞召侯及威方入，即当引路。 
现代文：我乞求皇上叫永安侯与赵威方入城，我将立即指挥部队上路返回北方。 
English: I implore the emperor to call Yongan Hou and Zhao Weifang into the city, and I will immediately command the troops to return to the north.

古文：上遣吏部尚书张绾召确，辛亥，以确为广州刺史，威方为盱眙太守。
现代文：梁武帝派遗吏部尚书张绾去召回萧确。辛亥，梁武帝任命萧确为广州刺史，赵威方为盱眙太守。
English: Emperor Liangwu sent Shangshu Zhangye to recall Xiao Jizhi. In Xinhai, Emperor Liangwu appointed Xiao Jizhi as the governor of Guangzhou and Zhao Weifang as the governor of Shandong.

古文：确累启固辞，不入，上不许。
现代文：萧确屡次启奏梁武帝，坚决推辞，不进台城，但是梁武帝没有答应。
English: Xiao Zhengyi repeatedly appealed to Emperor Liangwu and firmly refused to enter Taicheng, but Emperor Liangwu did not agree.

古文：确先遣威方入城，因欲南奔。
现代文：萧确先派遣赵威方进城，自己想奔向南面的荆、江二镇。
English: Xiao Jian first sent Zhao Weifang into the city, and he wanted to run to the south of the town of Jing and Jiang.

古文：邵陵王纶泣谓确曰： 围城既久，圣上忧危，臣子之情，切于汤火，故欲且盟而遣之，更申后计。
现代文：邵陵王萧纶流着眼泪对萧确说： 台城已经被围困很久，皇上的处境危险，让人忧虑，作为臣下和儿子的心情，就跟沸水与大火差不多，所以我们想暂且与侯景订立盟约，打发他离开。以后再作其它打算。
English: With tears streaming down his face, Shao Ling King Xiao Wei said to Xiao Zhen: Taicheng has been besieged for a long time. The emperor's situation is dangerous and worrisome. As a vassal and son, his mood is similar to that of boiling water and fire. Therefore, we would like to conclude a treaty with Hou Jing for the time being and send him away. We will make other plans later.

古文：成命已决，何得拒违！ 
现代文：这一决定已经作出，怎么能够抗拒与违反？ 
English: This decision has already been made, how can it be resisted and violated?

古文：时台使周石珍、东宫主书左法生在纶所，确谓之曰： 侯景虽云欲去而不解长围，意可见也。
现代文：此时，台使周石珍，东宫主书左法生正在萧纶的住所，萧确对他们说： 侯景虽然说要撤离，但又不解除长长的包围圈，他的意图由此可见。
English: At this time, the Taiwan envoy Zhou Shizhen and Zuo Farsheng, the master of the East Palace, were at Xiao Yao's residence. Xiao Zhen said to them: Although Hou Jing said he wanted to evacuate, he did not lift the long encirclement. His intention can be seen from this.

古文：今召仆入城，何益于事！ 
现代文：现在皇上叫我进城，对现在的局势能有什么好处呀？ 
English: Now that the Emperor has asked me to come to the city, what good can it do for the current situation?

古文：石珍曰： 敕旨如此，郎那得辞！ 
现代文：周石珍回答说： 皇上的圣旨叫你这么做，你哪能推辞？ 
English: Zhou Shizhen replied, "The emperor's sacred will has asked you to do this. How can you refuse?

古文：确意尚坚，纶大怒，谓赵伯超曰： 谯州为我斩之！
现代文：萧确的主意还是不动摇，萧纶非常愤怒，对赵伯超说道： 你替我把他杀了，提着他的头颅进城！ 
English: Xiao Jizhen's idea remained unshaken. Xiao Yao was very angry and said to Zhao Bochao: You killed him for me, carry his head into the city!

古文：持其首去！ 伯超挥刃眄确曰： 伯超识君侯，刀不识也！ 
现代文：赵伯超挥起腰刀斜眼看着萧确说： 我本人认识君侯您，可是手中的刀却不认识你。 
English: Zhao Bochao waved his waist knife and looked at Xiao Jizhen cross-eyed and said: I know you personally, but the knife in my hand does not know you.

古文：确乃流涕入城。
现代文：萧确这才流着眼泪进入台城。
English: It was only then that Xiao Zhengyi entered Taicheng in tears.

古文：上常蔬食，及围城日久，上厨蔬茹皆绝，乃食鸡子。
现代文：梁武帝平时经常吃蔬菜，随着台城被包围的时间一长，皇帝专用厨房里的蔬菜都吃光了，他就开始吃鸡蛋。
English: Emperor Liangwu often ate vegetables. As Taicheng was besieged for a long time, the vegetables in the emperor's special kitchen were all eaten up, and he began to eat eggs.

古文：纶因使者暂通，上鸡子数百枚，上手自料简，歔欷哽咽。
现代文：萧纶趁着使者能够与台城取得短时间的联系的机会，呈送给梁武帝几百个鸡蛋，梁武帝一边亲手料理，一边哽咽抽泣。
English: Taking advantage of the opportunity for the envoy to get a short-term contact with Taicheng, Xiao Wei presented several hundred eggs to Emperor Liangwu. Emperor Liangwu choked and sobbed while cooking with his own hands.

古文：湘东王绎军于郢州之武城，湘州刺史河东王誉军于青草湖，信州刺史桂阳王慥军于西峡口，托云俟四方援兵，淹留不进。
现代文：湘东王萧绎的部队驻扎在郢州的武城。湘州刺史河东王萧誉的部队驻扎在青草湖，信州刺史桂阳王萧的部队驻扎在西峡口，他们都借口要等待四面来的援兵，久留在原地不前进。
English: The troops of King Xiaoyan of East Hunan were stationed in Wucheng, Ganzhou; the troops of King Xiaoyan of East Hunan were stationed in Qingcao Lake; and the troops of King Xiao of Guiyang, Shinshu, were stationed at the mouth of the West Gorge. They all stayed in the same place for a long time without advancing, on the pretext of waiting for reinforcements from all directions.

古文：中记室参军萧贲，骨鲠士也，以绎不早下，心非之；尝与绎双六，食子未下，贲曰： 殿下都无下意。 
现代文：中记室参军萧贲是位耿直的人，看到萧绎不尽早向下游进发，心里反感。他曾经和萧绎玩一种叫做双六的赌博游戏，吃了子却不拿下，对萧绎说： 殿下您全然没有下的意思。 
English: He once played a gambling game called double six with Xiao Yu, but he did not win. He said to Xiao Yu, "Your highness, you have no intention of losing at all."

古文：绎深衔之。
现代文：萧绎深深地恨上了萧贲。
English: Xiao Yuanzhang deeply resented Xiao Yuanzhang.

古文：及得上敕，绎欲旋师，贲曰： 景以人臣举兵向阙，今若放兵，未及渡江，童子能斩之矣，必不为也。
现代文：等得到梁武帝诏书，萧绎准备回师原地，萧贲对他说： 侯景以臣子的身份带兵攻打皇宫，现在他如果放下武器，那么等不到渡江，一个小孩子就能杀掉他，所以他必定不会这么做。
English: After receiving Emperor Liangwu's edict, Xiao Yu prepared to return to his position. Xiao Yu said to him, "Hou Jing, as a courtier, led an army to attack the imperial palace. If he were to lay down his weapons now, he would not be able to cross the river. A small child could kill him, so he would definitely not do that."

古文：大王以十万之众，未见贼而退，奈何！ 
现代文：大王您拥有十万大军，还没看见叛贼就撤退，这是为什么？ 
English: Great King, you have a hundred thousand-strong army, and you retreat before you see the traitors. Why is that?

古文：绎不悦，未几，因事杀之。
现代文：萧绎听了很不高兴，没有多久，就找了一个理由杀掉了萧贲。
English: Xiao Yu was very unhappy to hear this. Before long, he found a reason to kill Xiao Yu.

古文：扌造，懿之孙也。
现代文：萧是萧懿的孙子。
English: Xiao is the grandson of Xiao Yao.

古文：东魏河内民四千馀家，以魏北徐州刺史司马裔，其乡里也，相帅归之。
现代文：东魏河内地区有四千多家百姓，因为西魏的北徐州刺史司马裔是他们的同乡，所以都相互领着归附了他。
English: There were more than four thousand people in the Hanoi area of the Eastern Wei Dynasty, because the North Xuzhou Jinshi Sima people of the Western Wei Dynasty were their fellow townsmen, so they all led each other to join him.

古文：丞相泰欲封裔，裔因辞曰： 士大夫远归皇化，裔岂能帅之！
现代文：丞相宇文泰想要授司马裔爵位，司马裔坚决推辞，说： 读书人远道而来归附到皇上的政令、教化所能达到的地方，我司马裔哪里能够率领他们！
English: The prime minister, Umentai, wanted to confer a title of nobility on the Sima people, but the Sima people firmly refused, saying: "Wherever the readers come from far away to be attached to the emperor's edict and enlightenment, where can we, the Sima people, lead them!

古文：卖义士以求荣，非所愿也。 
现代文：出卖忠义之士以追求荣华富贵，不是我愿意做的事情。 
English: Selling out the loyal in pursuit of glory and riches is not something I'm willing to do.

古文：侯景运东府米入石头，既毕，王伟闻荆州军退，援军虽多，不相统壹，乃说景曰： 王以人臣举兵，围守宫阙，逼辱妃主，残秽宗庙，擢王之发，不足数罪。
现代文：侯景将东府的大米运进石头城，事情办完之后，王伟听说来自荆州的部队已经撤退，援军的人数虽然多，但是相互不统一，于是就劝侯景道： 大王您以臣子的身份发动兵变，包围皇宫，逼迫污辱妃嫔，毁坏弄脏宗庙，犯下的罪行之多，就是拔掉大王您的头发来数也不够。
English: Hou Jing transported the rice from Dongfu to Stone Town. After the work was done, Wang Wei heard that the troops from Jingzhou had retreated. Although the number of reinforcements was large, they were not unified with each other. So he advised Hou Jing: Your Majesty, as a courtier, launched a mutiny, surrounded the palace, persecuted and defiled the concubines, destroyed and defiled the ancestral temple, and committed so many crimes that it is not enough to count the number of times you pulled out your hair.

古文：今日持此，欲安所容身乎！
现代文：今天弄到这种地步，您还想平平安安地呆在一个地方吧？
English: It's gotten to the point today where you just want to stay in one place and be safe, right?

古文：背盟而捷，自古多矣，愿且观其变。 
现代文：背弃盟约而取得胜利这类事情，自古以来就很多，希望您暂且观察事态的发展。 
English: There have been many such cases of victory achieved by reneging on a treaty since ancient times. I hope you will observe the development of the situation for the time being.

古文：临贺王正德亦谓景曰： 大功垂就，岂可弃去！ 
现代文：临贺王萧正德也对侯景说： 大功眼看就要告成，怎么可以放弃呢？ 
English: Lin He Wang Xiao Zhengde also said to Hou Jing: A great achievement is about to be completed, how can you give it up?

古文：景遂上启，陈上十失，且曰： 臣方事睽违，所以冒陈谠直。
现代文：侯景于是上书梁武帝，陈述梁武帝的十大过失，并且说： 我正要准备离去，所以冒昧地陈述以下谠直之言。
English: Hou Jing then sent a letter to Emperor Liangwu, stating the ten major faults of Emperor Liangwu, and said: I was about to leave, so I took the liberty of stating the following straightforward words.

古文：陛下崇饰虚诞，恶闻实录，以袄怪为嘉祯，以天谴为无咎。
现代文：陛下您喜欢崇饰虚诞，恶闻实录，将妖怪视为呈祥的象征，而对上天的谴责却置若罔闻。
English: Your Majesty, you like to glorify the fictitious, the bad news, and regard the specter as a symbol of auspiciousness, but you ignore the condemnation of heaven.

古文：敷演六艺，排摈前儒，王莽之法也。
现代文：您解说六艺，排斥前儒之说，这是王莽的做法。
English: Your explanation of the six arts and your rejection of pre-Confucianism is reckless.

古文：以铁为货，轻重无常，公孙之制也。
现代文：您用铁来铸造货币，轻重时常变化，这是公孙述所采用的办法。
English: You use iron to cast money, and the weight often changes, which is the method used by Gongsun Shu.

古文：烂羊镌印，朝章鄙杂，更始、赵伦之化也。
现代文：您还滥授官爵，乱刻官印，使官职象烂羊头，烂羊胃一样不值钱，弄得朝纲混乱，这是汉朝更始年间、晋代司马伦篡位时期的风气。
English: You also conferred titles of nobility indiscriminately, engraved official seals inappropriately, and made official posts as worthless as a rotten sheep's head and a rotten sheep's stomach, leading to confusion in the hierarchy of the imperial court. This was the style during the reign of Sima Lun, who usurped the throne in the Jin Dynasty, at the beginning of the Han Dynasty.

古文：豫章以所天为血仇，邵陵以父存而冠布，石虎之风也。
现代文：豫章王萧综将父皇视为仇敌，邵陵王萧纶在父皇在世之时，便把一个老头装扮成自己的父亲而加以捶打，这是晋代石虎的作法。
English: Yu Zhang Wang Xiao Zui regarded his father as an enemy, while Shao Ling Wang Xiao Yao, when his father was alive, dressed up an old man as his father and beat him, which was the practice of the Stone Tiger in the Jin Dynasty.

古文：修建浮图，百度糜费，使四民饥馁，笮融、姚兴之代也。 
现代文：您还大肆建造佛塔，造成极大的浪费，使得四方的百姓饥饿不堪，这分明又是当年笮融、姚兴佞佛的再演。 
English: You also wantonly built pagodas, causing great waste and making the people in the four directions starve. This is clearly a reenactment of that year's Pu Rong and Yao Xing's Buddha.

古文：又言： 建康宫室崇侈，陛下唯与主书参断万机，政以贿成，诸阉豪盛，众僧殷实。
现代文：侯景又说： 建康的皇宫中移崇奢侈的风气，陛下您只跟主书一道决断各种机要大事，政务要通过贿赂才能办成，宦官们豪奢富足，僧人们产业殷实。
English: Hou Jing also said, "In the palace of Emperor Jiankang, there is a tradition of worshiping luxury. Your majesty, you only decide on various important matters together with the master, government affairs can only be done through bribery, eunuchs are luxurious and rich, and monks are rich in industry.

古文：皇太子珠玉是好，酒色是耽，吐言止于轻薄，赋咏不出《桑中》；邵陵所在残破；湘东群下贪纵；南康、定襄之属，皆如沐猴而冠耳。亲为孙侄，位则籓屏，臣至百日，谁肯勤王！
现代文：皇太子一味喜好珠宝，沉湎于洒宴与女色之中，说出的都是轻薄的话语，撰写与呤咏的都是淫荡的赋；邵陵王到处残害百姓，湘东王的官员们贪婪放纵；南康王、定襄王的下属个个沐猴而冠，象孙子、侄子一类的亲人，都封王封侯，我到这里都一百天了，又有谁真的前来保卫王室？
English: The crown prince is obsessed with jewelry, indulges in lavish banquets and womanizing, and says frivolous words, and writes and recites lascivious tales; King Shaoling is everywhere destroying the people, and the officials of the King of Eastern Hunan are greedy and indulgent; the subordinates of King Nankang and King Dingxiang are all crowned, and relatives such as grandchildren and nephews are all crowned. I have been here for a hundred days, and who has really come to defend the royal family?

古文：此而灵长，未之有也。
现代文：象这样而能国运绵长，以前从来未曾有过。
English: Such a long period of national prosperity has never been seen before.

古文：昔鬻拳兵谏，王卒改善，今日之举，复奚罪乎！
现代文：昔日鬻拳以武器强谏楚王，楚王最终改正了自己的错误，我今天的举动，又有什么罪过呢？
English: In the past, taekwondo was used as a weapon to defeat King Chu. King Chu eventually corrected his mistake. What is my fault for my actions today?

古文：伏愿陛下小惩大戒，放谗纳忠，使臣无再举之忧，陛下无婴城之辱，则万姓幸甚！ 
现代文：我希望陛下您受到这次小的惩罚之后，能够进一步警戒自己，放逐那些谗佞小人，接纳忠贞的臣子，这样就能使我不用忧虑再次发动兵变，陛下您也不用蒙受被围困在城中的耻辱了，这对百姓来说也是非常幸运的！ 
English: I hope that after this small punishment, Your Majesty will be able to be more vigilant, expel the scoundrels and accept loyal subjects, so that I will not have to worry about starting another mutiny, and Your Majesty will not have to suffer the shame of being besieged in the city, which is also very lucky for the people!

古文：上览启，且惭且怒。
现代文：梁武帝阅读着这份文书，又羞惭又愤怒。
English: Emperor Liangwu read the document, ashamed and angry.

古文：三月，丙辰朔，立坛于太极殿前，告天地。以景违盟，举烽鼓噪。
现代文：三月，丙辰朔，他下令在太极殿前设立祭坛，禀告天地，以侯景违背盟约为由，举起烽火擂鼓呐喊，准备与侯景继续战斗。
English: In March, he ordered an altar to be set up in front of the Taiji Hall, announcing to heaven and earth that, on the grounds that Hou Jing had violated the treaty, he would hold a bonfire, play drums and shout, and prepare to continue fighting with Hou Jing.

古文：初，闭城之日，男女十馀万，擐甲者二万馀人；被围既久，人多身肿气急，死者什八九，乘城者不满四千人，率皆羸喘。
现代文：当初，城门关闭的时候，城里有男男女女十几万人，披盔带甲的将士有二万多人；被围困的时间一长，大多数人身体浮肿，气喘吁吁，十个人中有八九个死亡，登上城墙的不满四千人，他们都瘦弱不堪。
English: At first, when the city gates were closed, there were more than 100,000 men and women in the city, and more than 20,000 soldiers wearing armor; after being besieged for a long time, most people were bloated and breathless, and eight or nine out of ten people died. There were less than 4,000 people who climbed the city walls, and they were all very thin and weak.

古文：横尸满路，不可瘗埋，烂汁满沟，而众心犹望外援。
现代文：城里的道路到处横躺着尸体，无法掩埋，腐料后的尸体流出的汁液积满了沟渠。在这样的时刻，大家将希望还寄托在外面的援军身上。
English: At a time when the city's roads are strewn with corpses that cannot be buried, and the sewage from decomposing bodies fills the gutters, people are pinning their hopes on outside help.

古文：柳仲礼唯聚妓妾，置酒作乐，诸将日往请战，仲礼不许。
现代文：柳仲礼只知聚集歌舞妓女，终日设洒宴寻欢作乐，将领们天天去向他请战，他都没有答应。
English: Liu Zhongli only knew how to gather singing and dancing prostitutes. He held banquets all day long in search of pleasure. The generals went to him every day to ask him to fight, but he did not agree.

古文：安南侯骏说邵陵王纶曰： 城危如此，而都督不救，若万一不虞，殿下何颜自立于世！
现代文：安南侯萧骏劝说邵陵王萧纶道： 台城面临的危险已经如此严重，但是都督却还不去救援，如果万一真的发生了料想不到的事，那么殿下您还有什么脸面在这个世界上立身？
English: Annan Hou Xiaohui persuaded Shaoling Wang Xiaohui: The danger facing Taicheng is already so serious, but the governor has not yet come to the rescue. If something unexpected really happens, then Your Highness, what face do you still have to stand up in this world?

古文：今宜分军为三道，出贼不意攻之，可以得志。 
现代文：现在我们应该把部队分成三路，出其不意地攻打叛贼，一定可以取胜。 
English: Now we should divide the troops into three groups, attack the traitors by surprise, and we are sure to win.

古文：纶不从。
现代文：萧纶没有听从他们的意见。
English: Xiao Yao did not listen to their advice.

古文：柳津登城谓仲礼曰： 汝君父在难，不能竭力，百世之后，谓汝为何！ 
现代文：柳津登上城楼对柳仲礼说： 你的君王与父亲正在受难，而你却不能竭尽全力救援，百世以后，人们将会把你说成什么人？ 
English: Liu Jin climbed to the castle tower and said to Liu Zhongli: Your king and father are suffering, but you can't do your best to save them. In a hundred lifetimes, who will people say you are?

古文：仲礼亦不以为意。
现代文：柳仲礼听了也不在意。
English: Liu Zhongli listened and didn't care.

古文：上问策于津，对曰： 陛下有邵陵，臣有仲礼，不忠不孝，贼何由平！ 
现代文：梁武帝向柳津询问计策，柳津回答说： 陛下您有邵陵王这样的儿子，我有柳仲礼这样的儿子，他们不忠又不孝，叛贼怎能平定呢？ 
English: Emperor Liangwu asked Liu Tian about his strategy, and Liu Tian replied, "Your Majesty, you have a son like Shao Ling Wang, and I have a son like Liu Zhongli. They are both disloyal and unfilial. How can you subdue a traitor?"

古文：戊午，南康王会理与羊鸦仁、赵伯超等进营于东府城北，约夜渡军。
现代文：戊午，南康王萧会理与羊鸦仁、赵伯超等人把军营推进到东府城的北面，约定晚上指挥部队渡江。
English: In the afternoon, Nankang Wang Xiao Huili, Yang Guoren, Zhao Bochao and others pushed the military camp to the north of Dongfu Town, and agreed to command the troops to cross the river in the evening.

古文：既而鸦仁等晓犹未至，景众觉之。
现代文：到了拂晓，羊鸦仁等人还未到指定地点，侯景的部队就已发现。
English: By dawn, Yang Rongren and others had not yet arrived at the designated location, and Hou Jing's troops had already been discovered.

古文：营未立，景使宋子仙击之，赵伯超望风退走。
现代文：没等援军建立营地，侯景便派遣宋子仙前来攻击，赵伯超望风而逃。
English: Without waiting for reinforcements to set up camp, Hou Jing sent Song Zixian to attack, and Zhao Bo Chao fled.

古文：会理等兵大败，战及溺死者五千人。
现代文：萧会理等人的部队遭到惨重的失败，战死以及淹死的达五千人。
English: The troops of Xiao Huili and others suffered a crushing defeat, with as many as five thousand killed in battle and drowned.

古文：景积其首于阙下，以示城中。
现代文：侯景把这些人的头颅堆到宫门下面，向城里人展示。
English: Hou Jing piled the heads of these people under the palace gate and displayed them to the people of the city.

古文：景又使于子悦求和，上使御史中丞沈浚至景所。
现代文：侯景又派于子悦向梁武帝求和。梁武帝派御史中丞沈浚来到侯景处。
English: Hou Jing also sent Yu Ziyue to sue for peace from Emperor Liangwu. Emperor Liangwu sent the Grand Historian Zhongzheng Shenjun to come to Hou Jing's place.

古文：景实无去志，谓浚曰： 今天时方热，军未可动，乞且留京师立效。 
现代文：侯景实际上并没有离去的想法，他对沈浚说： 现在天气正是炎热的时候，我们的部队无法行动，请让我们暂且留在就城立功效力。 
English: Hou Jing did not really have the idea of leaving, he said to Shen Jun: Now that the weather is hot, our troops are unable to act, please let us stay in the city for the time being.

古文：浚发愤责之，景不对，横刀叱之。
现代文：听罢，沈浚愤怒地遣责起侯景，侯景不作正面回答，而是横刀喝斥沈浚，示意要杀掉他。
English: Listen, Shen Jun angrily reprimanded Hou Jing. Hou Jing did not give a positive answer, but shouted at Shen Jun with a sword, indicating that he wanted to kill him.

古文：浚曰： 负恩忘义，违弃诅盟，固天地所不容！
现代文：沈浚说道： 你忘恩负义，违背盟誓，本身就被天地所不容！
English: Shen Jun said: You are ungrateful, you have broken your oath, and you have been disallowed by heaven and earth!

古文：沈浚五十之年，常恐不得死所，何为以死相惧邪！ 
现代文：我沈浚已经五十岁，经常担心自己不能死得其所，你何必要用死来吓唬我？ 
English: I am already fifty years old, and I often worry that I can't die properly. Why do you need to scare me with death?

古文：因径去不顾。
现代文：说着，他头也不回就径直离去。
English: Saying this, he did not turn his head and went straight away.

古文：景以其忠直，舍之。
现代文：侯景敬佩他忠诚正直，放掉了他。
English: Hou Jing admired his loyalty and honesty and released him.

古文：于是景决石阙前水，百道攻城，昼夜不息。
现代文：侯景于是挖开皇宫石门前的玄武湖，引出里面的湖水灌城，开始从各处攻城，昼夜不停。
English: Hou Jing then dug up the Xuanwu Lake in front of the stone gate of the Imperial Palace, brought out the lake water inside to flood the city, and began to attack the city from everywhere, day and night.

古文：邵陵世子坚屯太阳门，终日蒲饮，不恤吏士，其书佐董勋、熊昙朗恨之。
现代文：邵陵王的嫡长子萧坚屯驻在太阳门，终日不是赌博就是饮洒，不体恤手下官史与将士的疾苦，他的书佐董勋、能昙朗恨透了他。
English: Xiao Jian, the eldest legitimate son of King Shao Ling, was stationed at the Gate of the Sun. He either gambled or drank all day long. He did not care about the hardships of his subordinates, officials and soldiers.

古文：丁卯，夜向晓，勋、昙朗于城西北楼引景众登城，永安侯确力战，不能却，乃排闼入启上云： 城已陷。 
现代文：丁卯，下半夜临近拂晓的时候，董勋、熊昙朗从台城的西北楼引导侯景的人马攀登上来，永安侯萧确奋力拼搏，不能打退敌人，就推开宫中的小门启禀梁武帝道： 台城已经陷落了。 
English: Dingwu, in the second half of the night, when it was close to dawn, Dong Xun and Xiong Yulang led Houjing's men and horses from the northwest tower of Taicheng to climb up. Yongan Hou Xiaojing fought hard. Unable to repel the enemy, he pushed open the small door in the palace and opened the Liangwu Emperor Road: Taicheng has fallen.

古文：上安卧不动，曰： 犹可一战乎？ 
现代文：梁武帝平静地躺着不动，问道： 还可以打一仗吗？ 
English: Emperor Liangwu calmly lay still and asked, "Can we still have a battle?"

古文：对曰： 不可。 
现代文：萧确回答说： 已经不行了。 
English: Fan Ye replied, "It's not appropriate."

古文：上叹曰： 自我得之，自我失之，亦复何恨！ 
现代文：梁武帝叹了一口气说道： 从我这儿得到的，又从我这儿失去，还有什么可遗憾的呢！ 
English: Emperor Liangwu sighed and said, "What is there to be sorry for, if you gain from me and lose from me?

古文：因谓确曰： 汝速去，语汝父，勿以二宫为念。 
现代文：他于是对萧确说道： 你快些离开，告诉你的父亲不要记挂我和太子。 
English: He then said to Xiao Zhen: "Hurry up and leave, and tell your father not to worry about me and the prince."

古文：因使慰劳在外诸军。
现代文：于是便派萧确慰劳在外面的各路援军。
English: As a result, Xiao Jizhen sent reinforcements from all directions.

古文：俄而景遣王伟入文德殿奉谒，上命褰帘开户引伟入，伟拜呈景启，称： 为奸佞所蔽，领众入朝，惊动圣躬，今诣阙待罪。 
现代文：没有多久，侯景派遣三伟来到文德殿拜见梁武帝，梁武帝下令揭起帘幕，打开房门带王伟进来，王伟跪拜之后，将侯景的文书呈交给梁武帝，声称： 我们受到一些奸佞的蒙蔽，带领人马进入朝堂，惊动了皇上，现在特地到宫中等候降罪。 
English: Not long after, Hou Jing sent Sanwei to visit Emperor Liangwu at the Palace of Literature and Art. Emperor Liangwu ordered the curtain to be raised and the door to be opened for Wang Wei to enter. After Wang Wei knelt down, he presented Hou Jing's document to Emperor Liangwu and said, "We were deceived by some traitors, who led people and horses into the palace and alarmed the emperor. Now we have come specially to the palace to wait for the sentence to be reduced."

古文：上问： 景何在？
现代文：梁武帝问道： 侯景在什么地方？
English: Liang Wudi asked: Where is Houjing?

古文：可召来。 
现代文：你可以把他叫来。 
English: He can be summoned.

古文：景入见于太极东堂，以甲士五百人自卫。
现代文：侯景来太极殿的东堂晋见梁武帝，随身带了五百多顶盔带甲的武士保护自己。
English: Hou Jing came to the East Hall of the Taiji Temple to see Emperor Liangwu and brought more than five hundred armor-clad samurai to protect himself.

古文：景稽颡殿下，典仪引就三公榻。
现代文：侯景在大殿下面跪拜，以额触地，典仪带着他走到三公坐的榻前。
English: Hou Jing knelt at the bottom of the hall and touched his forehead to the ground. The ceremony took him to the bed where the three princes were sitting.

古文：上神色不变，问曰： 卿在军中日久，无乃为劳！ 
现代文：梁武帝神色不变，问侯景道： 你在军队里的时间很长，真是劳苦功高呀？ 
English: Emperor Liangwu looked unchanged and asked Hou Jing: You have been in the army for a long time, is it really hard work?

古文：景不敢仰视，汗流被面。
现代文：侯景不敢抬头正视梁武帝，汗水流了一脸。
English: Hou Jing did not dare to look up at Emperor Liang, and his face was dripping with sweat.

古文：又曰： 卿何州人，而敢至此，妻子犹在北邪？ 
现代文：梁武又问道： 你是哪个州的人，敢到这里来，你的妻儿还在北方吗？ 
English: Liang Wu also asked: What state are you from, do you dare to come here, are your wife and children still in the north?

古文：景皆不能对。
现代文：对这些问题侯景都不能回答。
English: Houjing could not answer any of these questions.

古文：任约从旁代对曰： 臣景妻子皆为高氏所屠，唯以一身归陛下。 
现代文：任约在旁边代替侯景回答说： 臣下侯景的妻儿都被高家屠杀光了，只有我单身一人投靠了陛下您。 
English: Ren Joo, who was standing next to him in place of Hou Jing, replied, "The wives and children of my vassal Hou Jing were all massacred by the Gao family, and I am the only one who has sided with Your Majesty.

古文：上又问： 初渡江有几人？ 
现代文：梁武帝又问道： 当初你渡江过来的时候有多少人？ 
English: Liang Wu Di also asked: How many people were there when you crossed the river?

古文：景曰： 千人。 
现代文：侯景说道： 一千人。 
English: Hou Jing said: One thousand people.

古文： 围台城几人？ 
现代文：再问道： 包围台城时共有多少人？ 
English: Another question: How many people were there when Taicheng was besieged?

古文：曰： 十万。 
现代文：回答说： 十万人。 
English: And he said, An hundred thousand.

古文： 今有几人？ 
现代文：问： 现在共有多少人？ 
English: Q: How many people are in the troupe now?

古文：曰： 率土之内，莫非己有。 
现代文：回答说： 十万人。 问： 现在共有多人？ 
English: And he answered, An hundred thousand. And he said, How many are there now?

古文：上俯首不言。
现代文：回答： 四海之内没有不属于我的人。 
English: Answer: There is no one in the four seas who does not belong to me.

古文：景复至永福省见太子，太子亦无惧容。
现代文：梁武帝低下头去不再说话。侯景又到永福省去拜见皇太子，皇太子也没有表现出害怕的神情。
English: Emperor Liangwu bowed his head and stopped talking. Hou Jing also went to Yongfu Province to meet the crown prince. The crown prince did not show any fear.

古文：侍卫皆惊散，唯中庶子徐扌离、通事舍人陈郡殷不害侧侍。
现代文：皇太子身边的侍卫都已惊慌地逃散了，唯独中庶子徐、通事舍人陈郡人殷不害在一旁侍奉。
English: The bodyguards around the crown prince had fled in panic. Only the middle son, Xu, and the clerk, Chen Gu Ren Yin, were not harmed.

古文：扌离谓景曰： 侯王当以礼见，何得如此！ 
现代文：徐对侯景说： 你来拜见应遵守礼节，怎么可以象现在这样？ 
English: Xu said to Hou Jing: You should observe the etiquette when you come to visit, how can it be like this now?

古文：景乃拜。
现代文：侯景听了就跪下参拜。
English: When Hou Jing heard this, he knelt down to pay homage.

古文：太子与言，又不能对。
现代文：皇太子与侯景说话，侯景又不能回答。
English: The crown prince spoke to Hou Jing, but Hou Jing could not answer.

古文：景退，谓其厢公王僧贵曰： 吾常跨鞍对陈，矢刃交下，而意气安缓，了无怖心。今见萧公，使人自慑，岂非天威难犯！
现代文：侯景离开之后，对他的厢公王僧贵说道： 我经常跨上马鞍与敌人对阵，面临刀丛箭雨，心绪平稳如常，一点也不害怕；今天见到萧公，心里竟然不由自主地恐慌起来，这岂不是天子的威严难以触犯吗？
English: After Hou Jing left, he said to his disciple: I often saddled up to fight with the enemy, faced with swords and arrows, my mood was stable as usual, and I was not afraid at all. Today, when I saw Xiao Gong, I couldn't help but panic. Isn't the majesty of the Son of Heaven hard to offend?

古文：吾不可以再见之。 
现代文：我不能再见他们了。 
English: I can't see him anymore.

古文：于是悉撤两宫侍卫，纵兵掠乘舆、服御、宫人皆尽。
现代文：于是他把两宫的侍卫都撤掉，放纵将士把皇帝及后妃使用的车辆、服装，还有宫女都抢得一干二净。
English: As a result, he removed the guards from both palaces, and allowed the generals to take all the vehicles, clothing, and maids of honor used by the emperor and his empress.

古文：收朝士、王侯送永福省，使王伟守武德殿，于子悦屯太极东堂。
现代文：又将朝上、王侯们捉了送到永福省，派王伟守卫武德殿，于子悦屯驻在太极殿的东堂。
English: He also captured the emperor and princes and sent them to Yongfu Province, sent Wang Wei to guard the Wude Hall, and stationed Yu Ziyue in the East Hall of the Taiji Hall.

古文：矫诏大赦，自加大都督中外诸军、录尚书事。
现代文：侯景接着又伪造梁武帝的诏书，下令大赦天下，还加封自己为都督中外诸军、录尚书事。
English: Hou Jing then forged Emperor Liangwu's imperial edict, ordered a general amnesty for the whole world, and also sealed himself as the military governor of all armies in and out of China, according to records.

古文：建康士民逃难四出。
现代文：建康的老百姓往四面八方逃难。
English: The people of Jiankang fled in all directions.

古文：太子洗马萧允至京口，端居不行，曰： 死生有命，如何可逃！
现代文：太子洗马萧允来到京口时，端正地坐着不走，说道： 死生都是命中注定，怎么可以逃掉呢？
English: When Prince Zima Xiaoyun came to Beijing, he sat upright and did not move, saying: Life and death are predestined, how can you escape?

古文：祸之所来，皆生于利；苟不求利，祸从何生！ 
现代文：灾祸都是由利面生的，如果不追求利益，灾祸怎会产生？ 
English: All disasters are caused by profits. If we do not pursue profits, how will disasters occur?

古文：己巳，景遣石城公大款以诏命解外援军。
现代文：己巳，侯景派遣石城公萧大款带上梁武帝的诏书，去下令解散外面的救援部队。
English: At this time, Hou Jing sent Shicheng Gongxiao Daqi with Emperor Liangwu's edict to order the disbandment of the outside rescue force.

古文：柳仲礼召诸将议之，邵陵王纶曰： 今日之命，委之将军。 
现代文：柳仲礼召集各位将领商议此事，邵陵王萧纶对柳仲礼说道： 今天该下什么样的命令，我们都听将军您了。 
English: Liu Zhongli called all the generals to discuss the matter. Shao Ling Wang Xiao Wei said to Liu Zhongli: What kind of order should be given today, we have all listened to you, the general.

古文：仲礼熟视不对。
现代文：柳仲礼注目细看萧纶不作回答。
English: Liu Zhongli paid close attention to Xiao Yao and did not answer.

古文：裴之高、王僧辩曰： 将军拥众百万，致宫阙沦没，正当悉力决战，何所多言！ 
现代文：裴之高、王僧辩说道： 将军您拥有百万人马，却致使皇宫沦陷，眼下正崐是应该投入全部力量决一死战的时候，何必多言呢？ 
English: Pei Zhigao and Wang Sangye said: General, you have a million men and horses, but you have caused the fall of the imperial palace. Now is the time when we should devote all our strength to fight a war to the death. Why do you need to say more?

古文：仲礼竟无一言，诸军乃随方各散。
现代文：柳仲礼竟然绐终不发一言，各路援军于是只好分散，回到各自原来驻守的地方去了。
English: Liu Zhongli actually did not utter a single word, and the reinforcements had to disperse and return to their original garrisons.

古文：南兗州刺史临成公大连、湘东世子方等、鄱阳世子嗣、北兗州刺史湘潭侯退、吴郡太守袁君正、晋陵太守陆经等各还本镇。
现代文：南兖州刺史临成公萧大连、湘东王嫡长子萧方等、鄱阳王嫡长子萧嗣、北兖州刺史湘潭侯萧退、吴郡太守袁君正、晋陵太守陆经等人都返回本来镇守的州郡。
English: Xiao Dalian, the eldest legitimate son of King Lincheng of Southern Luzhou, Xiao Fang, the eldest legitimate son of King Shandong of Hunan, Xiao Zi, the eldest legitimate son of King Shanyang, Xiao Hui, the eldest legitimate son of King Xiangtan of Northern Luzhou, Yuan Junzheng, the governor of Wu County, and Lu Jing, the governor of Jinling County, all returned to their original counties.

古文：君正，昂之子也。
现代文：袁君正是袁昂的儿子。
English: Yuan Jun is Yuan Ang's son.

古文：邵陵王纶奔会稽。
现代文：邵陵王萧纶逃往会稽。
English: Shao Ling Wang Xiao Yao fled to the auditorium.

古文：仲礼及弟敬礼、羊鸦仁、王僧辩、赵伯超并开营降，军士莫不叹愤。
现代文：柳仲礼和他的弟弟柳敬礼，还有羊鸦仁、王僧辩、赵伯超一道打开营门向侯景投降，将士们没有不叹息愤恨的。
English: Liu Zhongli and his brother Liu Jiali, as well as Yang Guoren, Wang Sofen, and Zhao Bochao, opened the camp gate to surrender to Houjing. The soldiers were not without sighs of indignation.

古文：仲礼等入城，先拜景而后见上；上不与言。
现代文：柳仲礼等人进入京城之后，先拜会侯景然后才晋见梁武帝，梁武帝不跟他们说话。
English: After Liu Zhongli and others entered the capital, they first visited Houjing and then went to see Emperor Liangwu. Emperor Liangwu did not speak to them.

古文：仲礼见父津，津恸哭曰： 汝非我子，何劳相见！ 
现代文：柳仲礼见到了父亲柳津，柳津痛哭道： 你不是我的儿子，何必来跟我相见！ 
English: When Liu Zhonglei met his father, Liu Tian, Liu Tian cried bitterly, "You are not my son, why do you want to meet me!"

古文：湘东王绎使全威将军会稽王琳送米二十万石以馈军，至姑孰，闻台城陷，沉米于江而还。
现代文：湘东王萧绎派遣全威将军会稽人王琳运送二十万石大米来馈赠援军，到达姑孰时，他们听说台城又经陷落，就将大米沉到江中，然后回去了。
English: King Xiaoyan of eastern Hunan dispatched Wang Lin, inspector of the General Association of Zhenwei Generals, to deliver 200,000 kilos of rice as a gift to the reinforcements. When they arrived in Guzhen, they heard that Taicheng had fallen again, so they sank the rice into the river and then went back.

古文：景命烧台内积尸，病笃未绝者，亦聚而焚之。
现代文：侯景下令焚烧掉宫殿内堆积的尸体，那些病重但是还没有断气的人，也都被堆集在一块烧掉了。
English: Hou Jing ordered the bodies piled up in the palace to be burned, and those who were seriously ill but had not died were also piled up and burned.

古文：庚午，诏征镇牧守可复本任。
现代文：庚午，朝廷颁下诏书征召原来的镇牧守，可以回到他们过去的任所去。
English: In the afternoon, the imperial court issued an edict summoning the former town pastors, who could return to their former posts.

古文：景留柳敬礼、羊鸦仁，而遣柳仲礼归司州，王僧辩归竟陵。
现代文：侯景留下了柳敬礼、羊鸦仁，而派遣柳仲礼返回司州，王僧辩回归竟陵。
English: Houjing left Liu Jingli and Yang Guoren, but sent Liu Zhongli back to Shizhou, and Wang Sangye returned to Jingling.

古文：初，临贺王正德与景约，平城之日，不得全二宫。
现代文：当初，临贺王萧正德与侯景约定：平定台城的那一天，不得保全皇上与太子。
English: At first, Lin He Wang Xiao Zhengde and Hou Jing agreed: on the day that Taicheng was conquered, the emperor and the prince should not be protected.

古文：及城开，正德帅众挥刀欲入，景先使其徒守门，故正德不果入。
现代文：等到城门打开时，萧正德率领人马挥着刀准备进去，侯景称派手下的士兵把守大门，所以萧正德最终没能达到目的。
English: When the city gate was opened, Xiao Zhengde led the procession of people waving swords to prepare to enter. Hou Jing said that he sent his soldiers to guard the gate, so Xiao Zhengde ultimately failed to achieve his goal.

古文：景更以正德为侍中、大司马，百官皆复旧职。
现代文：侯景让萧正德改任侍中、大司马，文武百官都恢复了的原来的职务。
English: Hou Jian allowed Xiao Zhengde to be reappointed as a chamberlain and grand steward, and all the civil and military officials were restored to their original positions.

古文：正德入见上，拜且泣。
现代文：萧正德进入皇宫晋见梁武帝，一边跪拜一边哭泣。
English: Xiao Zhengde entered the imperial palace to see Emperor Liangwu, kneeling and crying.

古文：上曰： 啜其泣矣，何嗟及矣！ 
现代文：梁武帝说道： 你眼泪流个不停，是感叹不能再跟他在一起了吧？ 
English: Liang Wudi said: You shed tears incessantly, are you lamenting that you can no longer be with him?

古文：秦郡、阳平、盱眙三郡皆降景，景改阳平为北沧州，改秦郡为西兗州。
现代文：秦郡、阳平、盱眙三个郡都向侯景投降了，侯景把阳平改为北沧州，把秦郡改为西兖州。
English: The three counties of Qin, Yangping, and Handan all surrendered to Houjing, who changed Yangping to North Cangzhou and Qin County to West Handan.

古文：东徐州刺史湛海珍、北青州刺史王奉伯、淮阳太守王瑜，并以地降东魏。青州刺史明少遐、山阳太守萧邻弃城走，东魏据其地。
现代文：东徐州刺史湛海珍、北青州刺史王奉伯都率领全城投降了东魏，青州刺史明少遐、山阳太守萧邻弃城逃跑，东魏占据了这些地方。
English: Zhan Haizhen, the governor of East Xuzhou, and Wang Fengbo, the governor of North Qingzhou, led the entire city to surrender to the Eastern Wei Dynasty. Ming Shaoqi, the governor of Qingzhou, and Xiao Jiang, the governor of Shanyang, abandoned the city and fled. The Eastern Wei Dynasty occupied these places.

古文：侯景以仪同三司萧邕为南徐州刺史，代西昌侯渊藻镇京口。
现代文：侯景任命仪同三司萧邕为南徐州刺史，代替西昌侯萧渊藻镇守京口。
English: Hou Jing appointed Ji Tong San Si Xiao Wei as the governor of South Xuzhou, replacing Xichang Hou Xiao Yuan Zhaozhen as the governor of Beijing.

古文：又遣其将徐相攻晋陵，陆经以郡降之。
现代文：又派遣手下的将领徐相攻打晋陵郡，郡守陆经率领全郡军民投降。
English: He also sent his general Xu Xiang to attack Jinling County, and the county governor Lu Jing led the entire county's military and civilians to surrender.

古文：初，上以河东王誉为湘州刺史，徙湘州刺史张缵为雍州刺史，代岳阳王詧。
现代文：当初，梁武帝任河东王萧誉为湘州刺史，调湘州刺史张缵任雍州刺史，取代岳阳王萧。
English: At first, Emperor Liangwu appointed King Xiaowu of Hedong Province as the governor of Hunan Province, and transferred the governor of Hunan Province, Zhang Qian, as the governor of Yongzhou Province, replacing King Xiaowu of Yueyang Province.

古文：缵恃其才望，轻誉少年，迎候有阙。
现代文：张缵依仗自己有一定的才能与名望，轻视萧誉年轻，在迎候对方时缺少应有的礼节。
English: Zhang Ye relied on his certain talent and reputation, despised Xiao Ren for being young, and lacked proper etiquette when greeting the other party.

古文：誉至，检括州府付度事，留缵不遣；闻侯景作乱，颇陵蹙缵。
现代文：萧誉在到任之后，检查州府的交接事宜，留下了张缵没有让他走；他听到侯景犯上作乱的消息后，便常欺侮逼迫张缵。
English: After Xiao Rong took office, he checked the handover of the state capital and left Zhang Ye without letting him go; after he heard the news that Hou Jing had committed a riot, he often bullied and persecuted Zhang Ye.

古文：缵恐为所害，轻舟夜遁，将之雍部，复虑詧拒之。
现代文：张缵害怕自己被萧誉害死，于是乘上轻捷的小船趁着夜色逃跑了，将要到达雍州时，他又担心萧会拒绝接受他。
English: Fearing that he would be killed by Xiao Yu, Zhang Jun took advantage of the darkness to escape in a light boat. When he was about to reach Yongzhou, he was worried that Xiao would refuse to accept him.

古文：缵与湘东王绎有旧，欲因之以杀誉兄弟，乃如江陵。
现代文：张缵与湘东王萧绎过去有交情，便想通过他来杀掉萧誉兄弟，于是来到了江陵。
English: Zhang Ye had a friendship with the king of eastern Hunan, Xiao Yu, in the past. He wanted to use him to kill Xiao Yu's brothers, so he came to Jiangling.

古文：及台城陷，诸王各还州镇，誉自湖口归湘州。
现代文：等到台城陷落后，藩王们都回到各自镇守的州郡，萧誉也从湖口返回了湘州。
English: After the fall of Taicheng, the feudal lords all returned to their respective towns and counties, and Xiaoyu also returned to Hunan from Hukou.

古文：桂阳王慥以荆州督府留军江陵，欲待绎至拜谒，乃还信州。
现代文：桂阳王萧因为荆州都督府的部队留在江陵，准备等萧绎来了之后，拜见了他，再回到信州。
English: King Xiao of Guiyang stayed in Jiangling because the troops of the Jingzhou Governor's Office were preparing to wait for Xiao Yu to come, and then he met him and returned to Shinshu.

古文：缵遗绎书曰： 河东戴樯上水，欲袭江陵，岳阳在雍，共谋不逞。 
现代文：张缵送了一封书信给萧绎，说： 河东王和部队乘着挂帆的船只向上游开来，准备袭击江陵，岳阳王在岳州，他们两崐人一同密谋起事。 
English: Zhang Ye sent a letter to Xiao Yuanzhong, saying: The King of Hedong and his troops sailed upstream on ships with sails, preparing to attack Jiangling. The King of Yueyang was in Yuezhou, and the two of them plotted together to start an uprising.

古文：江陵游军主硃荣亦遣使告绎云： 桂阳留此，欲应誉、詧。 
现代文：江陵的机动部队将领朱荣也派人告诉萧绎说： 桂阳王留在这里，是准备响应萧誉、萧。 
English: Zhu Rong, the general of the mobile force in Gangneung, also sent a person to tell Xiao Yu that: Guiyang Wang is staying here and is preparing to respond to Xiao Rong and Xiao Yu.

古文：绎惧，凿船，沉米，斩缆，自蛮中步道驰归江陵，囚慥，杀之。
现代文：萧绎很害怕，下令凿沉船只，将大米沉到江底，又砍断了缆绳，从蛮人地区的陆路上骑马赶回江陵，把萧囚禁起来，接着又杀掉了他。
English: Xiao Yu was very scared. He ordered to scuttle the ship, sink the rice to the bottom of the river, cut the cable, rode back to Jiangling from the barbarian area by land, imprisoned Xiao Yu, and then killed him.

古文：侯景以前临江太守董绍先为江北行台，使赍上手敕，召南兗州刺史南康王会理。
现代文：侯景任命前临江太守董绍先为江北行台，派他带着梁武帝的敕令，前去召请南兖州刺史南康王萧会理。
English: Hou Jing appointed the former governor of the Linjiang River, Dong Shao, as the leader of the north-bound trip, and sent him with Emperor Liangwu's edict to summon the governor of southern Luzhou, Nankang Wang Xiao.

古文：壬午，绍先至广陵，众不满二百，皆积日饥疲。
现代文：壬午，董绍先到达广陵，他带的人马不满二百，由于连日赶路，都又累又饿，萧会理的人马却非常强盛。
English: At noon, Dong Shao arrived at Guangling first. He brought less than 200 people with him. Due to the long journey, they were tired and hungry. Xiao Huili's people were very strong.

古文：会理士马甚盛，僚佐说会理曰： 景已陷京邑，欲先除诸籓，然后篡位。
现代文：僚佐们劝萧会理： 侯景已经攻占了京城，如今准备先除去各位藩王，然后再篡夺皇位。
English: Colleagues advised Xiao Huirong: Hou Jing has already captured the capital, and now he is preparing to first remove the kings of the domain, and then usurp the imperial throne.

古文：若四方拒绝，立当溃败，奈何委全州之地以资寇手！
现代文：如果四面八方都反对他，他立即就会溃败，怎么能把全州的土地交到强盗手里，使他的力量得以壮大呢？
English: If he is opposed on all sides, he is immediately defeated, and how can he increase his power by giving the whole state to the robbers?

古文：不如杀绍先，发兵固守，与魏连和，以待其变。 
现代文：我们不如杀掉董绍先，派兵固守我们的地盘，再和魏国联合起来，等待形势发生变化。 
English: We might as well kill Dong Shaoxian, send troops to hold our ground, then unite with Wei and wait for the situation to change.

古文：会理素懦，即以城授之。绍先既入，众莫敢动。
现代文：萧会理一向懦弱，立即将全城交给了董绍先，董绍先进城之后，大家都不敢轻举妄动。
English: Xiao Huili has always been cowardly, and immediately handed over the whole city to Dong Shaoshan. After Dong Shaoshan advanced into the city, no one dared to make any rash moves.

古文：会理弟通理请先还建康，谓其姊曰： 事既如此，岂可阖家受毙！
现代文：萧会理的弟萧通理请求先返回建康，对他的姐姐说： 事情既然已经如此，怎么可以让全家被人杀光？
English: Xiao Tongli, Xiao Huili's younger brother, begged Xiao Huili to return to Jiankang first, saying to his sister, "Since things are like this, how can the whole family be killed?

古文：前途亦思立效，但未知天命如何耳。 
现代文：我以后也想为国家效力，只是不知道天命到底怎样而已。 
English: I want to play for my country in the future, but I don't know what my destiny is.

古文：绍先悉收广陵文武部曲、铠仗、金帛，遣会理单马还建康。
现代文：董绍先将广陵的文武官员的部曲、铠甲兵器、金银绢帛都接管过来，派萧会理单人匹马回到建康。
English: Dong Shao first took over Guangling's military and civilian officials, armored weapons, gold and silver ingots, and sent Xiao Huili single-handedly back to Jiankang.

古文：湘潭侯退与北兗州刺史定襄侯祗出奔东魏。
现代文：湘潭侯萧退与北兖州刺史、定襄侯萧祗逃出来投奔了东魏。
English: Xiangtan marquis Xiao Wei fled to the Eastern Wei Dynasty, together with Beizhou marquis Shi Shi and Dingxiang marquis Xiao Wei.

古文：侯景以萧弄璋为北兗州刺史，州民发兵拒之；景遣直阁将军羊海将兵助之，海以其众降东魏，东魏遂据淮阴。
现代文：侯景任命萧弄璋为北兖州刺史，该州的百姓组成队伍将他挡在城外；侯景派遣直阁将军羊海统率部队前来相助，羊海却带领自己的人马投降了东魏，东魏于是占据了淮阴。
English: Hou Jing appointed Xiao Nanzhong as the governor of Beizhu, and the people of the state formed a team to block him from the city; Hou Jing sent Zhougu General Yang Hai to lead the troops to help, but Yang Hai led his men to surrender to the East Wei, and the East Wei then occupied Huaiyin.

古文：祗，伟之子也。
现代文：萧祗是萧伟的儿子。
English: Xiao Yu is the son of Xiao Wei.

古文：癸未，侯景遣于子悦等将羸兵数百东略吴郡。
现代文：癸未，侯景派遣于子悦等人率领几百名疲弱的士兵去东方强夺吴郡。
English: Shortly after, Hou Jing sent Yu Ziyue and others to lead hundreds of weak soldiers to the east to seize Wu County.

古文：新城戍主戴僧逷有精甲五千，说太守袁君正曰： 贼今乏食，台中所得，不支一旬。若闭关拒守，立可饿死。 
现代文：新城县的戍卒主将戴僧逖拥有五千名精锐士兵，他劝太守袁君正道： 贼兵现在缺乏粮食，他们从台中所得到的不够支持十天，如果我们闭关防守，抗拒他们，他们马上就会饿死。 
English: The commander-in-chief of Xincheng County, Dai Sengyu, who had five thousand elite soldiers, advised the eunuch Yuan Jun to take the right path: The robber soldiers now lack food, they have not received enough support from Taichung for ten days, if we close the gate for defense and resist them, they will soon starve to death.

古文：土豪陆映公等恐不能胜而资产被掠，皆劝君正迎之。
现代文：当地豪强陆映公害怕不能取得胜利，自己的资产遭到掠夺，便和其他人一道劝说袁君正去迎候于子悦。
English: The local strongman Lu Yinggong was afraid that he would not be able to win and that his assets would be plundered, so he and others persuaded Yuan Junzheng to meet Yu Ziyue.

古文：君正素怯，载米及牛酒郊迎。
现代文：袁君正一向怯懦无能，于是就载着米、牛、酒到郊外迎接。
English: Yuan Junzhen has always been cowardly and incompetent, so he took rice, cattle, and wine to the suburbs to meet them.

古文：子悦执君正，掠夺财物、子女，东人皆立堡拒之。
现代文：于子悦扣押了袁君正，大肆掠夺该城百姓的财产、子女，东部的人都建起城堡抵抗他。
English: Yu Ziyue detained Yuan Junzheng and plundered the property and children of the people of the city. People in the east built castles to resist him.

古文：景又以任约为南道行台，镇姑孰。
现代文：侯景又任命任约为南道行台，镇守姑孰。
English: Hou Jing also appointed him as the governor of the Southern Highway, and the town guard of Guzheng.

古文：夏，四月，湘东世子方等至江陵，湘东王绎始知台城不守，命于江陵四旁七里树木为栅，掘堑三重而守之。
现代文：夏季，四月，湘东王的嫡长子萧方等来到江陵，湘东王萧绎这才知道城已经陷落，就下令砍伐江陵周围七里之内的树木设立栅栏，又挖掘三道壕沟进行防守。
English: In the summer, in April, Xiao Fang, the eldest legitimate son of the king of eastern Hunan, came to Jiangling. It was only then that Xiao Yu, the king of eastern Hunan, knew that the city had fallen. He ordered the trees within seven miles around Jiangling to be cut down, a fence to be set up, and three trenches to be dug for defense.

古文：东魏高岳等攻魏颍川，不克。
现代文：东魏的高岳等人攻打西魏的颍川，没有成功。
English: Gao Yue of the Eastern Wei Dynasty and others unsuccessfully attacked the Western Wei Dynasty's Minchuan.

古文：大将军澄益兵助之，道路相继，逾年犹不下。
现代文：大将军高澄增派兵力前崐去相助，在通往颍川的道路上不断有东魏的援军行进，一年过去了，还是没有攻克颍川。
English: The great general Gao Chengzeng sent troops to the front to help, and East Wei reinforcements kept marching on the road leading to the Lugu River. A year passed, but the Lugu River was still not conquered.

古文：山鹿忠武公刘丰生建策，堰洧水以灌之，城多崩颓，岳悉众分休迭进。
现代文：山鹿忠武公刘丰生想出一个办法，在洧水之上建起拦河堰，提高水位灌城，致使该城的许多地方崩塌了，高岳将部队分成十几部分，轮番休息与进攻。
English: Mountain Deer Chungwu Liu Fengsheng thought of a way to build a barrage weir on the floodplain and raise the water level to flood the city, causing many parts of the city to collapse. Gao Yue divided the troops into more than a dozen parts, taking turns to rest and attack.

古文：王思政身当矢石，与士卒同劳苦，城中泉涌，悬釜而炊。
现代文：王思政亲自在箭石横飞的情况下指挥作战，与士兵一起同甘共苦。城里到处水如泉涌，他们就把锅挂起来做饭。
English: Wang Sizheng personally commanded the battle in the situation of flying arrows and stones, and shared the joys and sorrows with the soldiers. Water was gushing everywhere in the city, and they hung up the pot to cook.

古文：太师泰遣大将军赵贵督东南诸州兵救之，自长社以北，皆为陂泽，兵至穰，不得前。
现代文：西魏的太师宇文泰派遣大将军赵贵督率东南各州的部队赶来救援，但是长社以北的地区都成了河泽，部队到达穰城之后便无法继续前进了。
English: The Grand Master of the Western Wei Dynasty, Yu Wentai, dispatched General Zhao Guidu to lead the troops from the southeastern states to come to the rescue, but the areas north of Changsha all became rivers and streams, and the troops could not continue to advance after arriving in Lucheng.

古文：东魏人使善射者乘大舰临城射之，城垂陷；燕郡景惠公慕容绍宗与刘丰生临堰视之，见东北尘起，同入舰坐避之。俄而暴风至，远近晦冥，缆断，飘船径向城；城上人以长钩牵船，弓弩乱发，绍宗赴水溺死，丰生游上，向土山，城上人射杀之。
现代文：东魏派箭术高超的人乘着大舰靠近颍川城发射羽箭，颍川城眼看着就要陷落；燕郡景惠公慕容绍宗与刘丰生一起来到拦河堰前视察，看见东北方向尘土飞扬，便都到舰上坐下躲避，一会儿暴风刮了起来，远近一片昏黑，缆绳被刮断了，船一直向颍川城飘去；城上的人用长钩拉住船，羽箭胡乱射出，慕容绍宗跳到水里淹死了，刘丰生浮在水面向土山游去，城上的人将他射死了。
English: In the Eastern Wei Dynasty, people with excellent archery skills were sent to launch feather arrows on a large ship near Luchuan City. Luchuan City was about to fall. Murong Shaosong, Jinghui Gong of Yan County, and Liu Fengsheng came to inspect the barrage together. When they saw the dust flying in the northeast direction, they all sat down on the ship to avoid it. A moment later, a storm blew up. It was dark far and near, the cable was broken, and the ship drifted all the way to Luchuan City. The people on the city used a long hook to pull the ship, and the feather arrows shot out randomly. Mur

古文：甲辰，东魏进大将军勃海王澄位相国，封齐王，加殊礼。
现代文：甲辰，东魏晋升大将军、勃海王高澄为相国，并加封他为齐王，给予他特殊的礼遇。
English: Jia Chen, East Wei promoted to general, Bo Hai King Gao Cheng as a partner country, and he was given the title of Qi King, giving him special courtesy.

古文：丁未，澄入朝于鄴，固辞；不许。
现代文：丁未，高澄来到邺城朝拜孝静帝，坚决推辞，但是孝静帝没有同意。
English: Ding Wei and Gao Cheng came to Lucheng to pay homage to Emperor Xiao Jing and firmly refused, but Emperor Xiao Jing did not agree.

古文：澄召将佐密议之，皆劝澄宜膺朝命，独散骑常侍陈元康以为未可，澄由是嫌之。崔暹乃荐陆元规为大行台郎以分元康之权。
现代文：商澄召集手下的将领及其他辅佐官员秘密商议此事，大家都劝高澄应该接受朝廷的任命；唯独散骑常侍陈元康认为不可以这么做，高澄从此开始嫌恶他，崔暹就推荐陆元规出任大行台郎，以分陈元康之权。
English: Shangcheng gathered his generals and other supporting officials to discuss the matter in secret, and everyone advised Gao Cheng that he should accept the appointment of the imperial court; however, Chen Yuankang, the rider of the imperial cavalry, thought that he could not do so, and Gao Cheng began to dislike him from then on. Cui Siam recommended Lu Yuanjie to serve as the grand steward to share Chen Yuankang's power.

古文：湘东王绎之入援也，令所督诸州皆发兵，雍州刺史岳阳王詧遣府司马刘方贵将兵出汉口；绎召詧使自行，詧不从。
现代文：湘东王萧绎去京城救援的时候，命令他所统管的各州都派兵，雍州刺史兵阳王萧派遣府司马刘方贵带领人马发兵汉口，萧绎叫萧本人也出征，萧没有服从。
English: When Xiao Yu, the king of eastern Hunan, went to the capital for rescue, he ordered all the states under his control to send troops. Yang Wang Xiao, the governor of Yongzhou, sent Liu Fanggui, the prefectural secretary, to lead the troops to Hankou. Xiao Yu asked Xiao himself to go to the front, but Xiao did not obey.

古文：方贵潜与绎相知，谋袭襄阳，未发；会詧以它事召方贵，方贵以为谋泄，遂据樊城拒命，詧遣军攻之。
现代文：刘方贵与萧绎暗地里有很深的交情，密谋袭击襄阳，但是没等出兵，就遇上萧为了别的事召见刘方贵，刘方贵以为计划泄露了，于是占据了樊城拒绝接受命令，萧就派遣部队攻打樊城。
English: Liu Fanggui and Xiao Yu secretly had a deep friendship and plotted to attack Xiangyang, but before they sent troops, they met Xiao summoned Liu Fanggui for another matter. Liu Fanggui thought the plan was leaked, so he occupied Lucheng and refused to accept the order. Xiao sent troops to attack Lucheng.

古文：绎厚资遣张缵使赴镇，缵至大堤，詧已拔樊城，斩方贵。
现代文：萧绎用很多财物资助张缵，叫他赶往雍州。张缵到达大堤时，萧已经攻占了樊城，并杀死了刘方贵。
English: Xiao Yu used a lot of money and materials to subsidize Zhang Xuan and told him to rush to Yongzhou. By the time Zhang Xuan arrived at the embankment, Xiao had already captured Lucheng and killed Liu Fanggui.

古文：缵至襄阳，詧推迁未去，但以城西白马寺处之；詧犹总军府之政，闻台城陷，遂不受代。
现代文：张缵来到襄阳，萧推三阻四不愿离开，只给了城西的白马寺让他住下；萧自己仍统管着军府的政务，他听到台城陷落的消息后，便不接受由张缵取代他官职的命令。
English: When Zhang Xuan came to Xiangyang, Xiao hesitated to leave, and only allowed him to live in the White Horse Temple in the west of the city; Xiao himself was still in charge of the government affairs of the military government. After he heard the news of the fall of Taicheng, he did not accept the order to replace his official position by Zhang Xuan.

古文：助防杜岸绐缵曰： 观岳阳势不容使君，不如且往西山以避祸。 
现代文：助防杜岸欺骗张缵说： 看岳阳王这边的势头，他是不会容下您的，您不如暂时到西山去躲避灾祸。 
English: Zhang Ye said: "Look at the momentum of Yueyang Wang's side, he will not tolerate you. You might as well go to Xishan temporarily to avoid the disaster."

古文：岸既襄阳豪族，兄弟九人，皆以骁勇著名。
现代文：杜岸一家是襄阳的豪门大族，兄弟九人都以骁勇著名。
English: The Dugan family is one of the most powerful families in Yangyang. All nine brothers are famous for their bravery.

古文：缵乃与岸结盟，著妇人衣，乘青布舆，逃入西山。
现代文：张缵于是与杜岸结成同盟，自己穿上女人的衣服，乘上青布围起来的车子，逃进了西山。
English: Zhang Yao then formed an alliance with Dugan, put on women's clothes, took a car surrounded by blue cloth, and fled into the West Mountain.

古文：詧使岸将兵追擒之，缵乞为沙门，更名法缵，詧许之。
现代文：萧派杜岸带领人马追上捉住了他。张缵请求让自己入寺为僧，把名字改为法缵，萧同意了。
English: Xiao sent Dugan to catch up with him. Zhang Ye asked him to enter the temple as a monk and change his name to Fa Yu. Xiao agreed.

古文：荆州长史王冲等上笺于湘东王绎，请以太尉、都督中外诸军事承制主盟，绎不许。
现代文：荆州长史王冲等人向湘东王萧绎呈上书信，请他以太尉、都督中外诸军事的身份，秉承皇帝的意志，出任由各位藩王组成的联盟的盟主，萧绎没有答应。
English: The governor of Jing, Shi Wangchong, and others sent a letter to the king of eastern Hunan, Xiao Yuanzhong, asking him to uphold the emperor's will and serve as the leader of the alliance composed of the kings of various domains as a lieutenant and military governor. Xiao Yuanzhong did not agree.

古文：丙辰，又请以司空主盟，亦不许。
现代文：丙辰，他们又请他以司空的身份出任盟主，萧绎也没有同意。
English: Bichen, they also asked him to serve as the team leader in the capacity of the coach, but Xiao Yuanzhong did not agree.

古文：上虽外为侯景所制，而内甚不平。
现代文：梁武帝虽然表面上被侯景控制，但是他的心里却非常不平。
English: Although Emperor Liangwu was controlled by Houjing on the surface, his heart was very uneasy.

古文：景欲以宋子仙为司空，上曰： 调和阴阳，安用此物！ 
现代文：侯景想让宋子仙出任司空，梁武帝说道： 三公是要调和阴阳的，怎么可以任用宋子仙这种人？ 
English: Hou Jing wanted to appoint Song Zixian as Siku, Liang Wu Di said: The three princes are to reconcile yin and yang, how can they appoint a person like Song Zixian?

古文：景又请以其党二人为便殿主帅，上不许。
现代文：侯景又请求让他的两位同党出任便殿主帅，梁武帝没有同意。
English: Hou Jing also requested that two of his party members be appointed as the captain of the palace, but Emperor Liang Wu did not agree.

古文：景不能强，心甚惮之。太子入，泣谏，上曰： 谁令汝来！
现代文：侯景不能强迫梁武帝，心里非常害怕他，皇太子进来，流着眼泪劝告梁武帝，梁武帝说道： 谁让你来的！
English: Hou Jing could not force Liang Wu Di, he was very afraid of him in his heart. The crown prince came in and advised Liang Wu Di with tears. Liang Wu Di said: Who let you come!

古文：若社稷有灵，犹当克复；如其不然，何事流涕！ 
现代文：如果国家的神灵还在，还可以恢复；如果不是这样，何必流泪！ 
English: If the spirit of the country is still there, it can be restored; if not, why shed tears!

古文：景使其军士入直省中，或驱驴马，带弓刀，出入宫庭，上怪而问之，直閤将军周石珍对曰： 侯丞相甲士。 
现代文：侯景派手下的士兵到几个省里值勤，有的人赶着驴马，带着弓刀，在宫廷中出出进进。梁武帝感到奇怪，询问这是怎么回事，直将军周石珍回答说： 这是侯丞相的卫兵。 
English: Hou Jing sent his soldiers to several provinces on duty. Some people drove donkeys and horses, carried bows and swords, and went in and out of the court. Emperor Liang Wu felt strange and asked what was going on. General Zhou Shizhen replied: "This is the guard of Prime Minister Hou.

古文：上大怒，叱石珍曰： 是侯景，何谓丞相！ 
现代文：梁武帝听了非常愤怒，斥责周石珍道： 是侯景，为什么管他叫丞相？ 
English: Hearing this, Emperor Liang Wudi was very angry and rebuked Zhou Shizhen, saying, "It is Hou Jing, why do you call him the prime minister?

古文：左右皆惧。
现代文：旁边的人都很害怕。
English: People around me were scared.

古文：是后上所求多不遂志，饮膳亦为所裁节，忧愤成疾。
现代文：从此以后梁武帝所提出的要求大多数都不能满足，饮料与膳食也被减少，在忧虑与气愤交加的情况下他病倒了。
English: From then on, most of the demands made by Emperor Liangwu could not be met, drinks and meals were also reduced, and he fell ill with anxiety and anger.

古文：太子以幼子大圜属湘东王绎，并剪爪发以寄之。
现代文：皇太子把小儿子萧大圜托咐给了湘东王萧绎，并且将剪下的头发与指甲寄给他。
English: The crown prince entrusted the youngest son, Xiao Daxun, to the Hunan king, Xiaoyan, and sent him the cut hair and nails.

古文：五月，丙辰，上卧净居殿，口苦，索蜜不得，再曰： 荷！荷！ 
现代文：五月，丙辰，梁武帝躺在净居殿，嘴里发苦，要喝蜂蜜却没人拿来，发出了两声 荷！荷！ 
English: In May, Hsin-Chen, Emperor Liangwu was lying in the Pure Residence Hall, with bitterness in his mouth. He wanted to drink honey, but no one brought it. He uttered two shouts of "Ho! Ho!"

古文：遂殂。
现代文：的声音，便死去了。
English: And with that, he died.

古文：年八十六。景秘不发丧，迁殡于昭阳殿，迎太子于永福省，使如常入朝。
现代文：享年八十六岁，侯景封锁消息不发丧，将梁武帝的遗体收殓后移到了昭阳殿，又从永福省接来皇太子，叫他象平常一样入朝。
English: At the age of eighty-six, the news of the blockade of Houjing did not make him sad. After collecting Emperor Liangwu's body, he moved it to the Zhoyang Palace. The crown prince came from Yongfu Province and told him to enter the imperial court as usual.

古文：王伟、陈庆皆侍太子，太子呜咽流涕，不敢泄声，殿外文武皆莫之知。
现代文：王伟、陈庆都在旁边监视皇太子，皇太子呜咽着泪流满面，不敢发出声音，殿堂外的文武百官都不知道这件事。
English: Wang Wei and Chen Qing were both watching the crown prince. The crown prince was sobbing and in tears, not daring to utter a sound. All the military and civilian officials outside the palace did not know about this.

古文：东魏高岳既失慕容绍宗等，志气沮丧，不敢复逼长社城。
现代文：东魏的高岳失去了慕容绍宗等人以后，变得沮丧失去斗志，不敢再进攻长社城。
English: After Gao Yue of the Eastern Wei Dynasty lost Murong Shaosong and others, he became depressed, lost his fighting spirit, and dared not attack Changsha City again.

古文：陈元康言于大将军澄曰： 王自辅政以来，未有殊功。虽破侯景，本非外贼。
现代文：陈元康对大将军高澄说道： 大王您自从辅佐皇上执政以来，还没有建立突出的功勋，虽然曾经打败过侯景，但是他本来就不是外贼。
English: Chen Yuankang said to the general Gao Cheng: Your Majesty, since you have been assisting the emperor in power, you have not yet established outstanding merits. Although he once defeated Hou Jing, he was not originally a foreigner.

古文：今颍川垂陷，愿王自以为功。 
现代文：现在颖川快要陷落，希望大王您亲自去建立这一功业。 
English: Now that Yingchuan is about to fall, I hope that you, the great king, will personally build up this cause.

古文：澄从之，戊寅，自将步骑十万攻长社，亲临作堰。堰三决，澄怒，推负土者及囊并塞之。
现代文：高澄采纳了这一建议。戊寅，高澄自己率领步兵与骑兵共十万人攻打长社城，还亲自督造拦河堰，拦河堰三次决口，高澄大为恼怒，把背土的人以及袋子一齐推下去堵塞缺口。
English: Gao Cheng accepted this suggestion. In response, Gao Cheng himself led a total of 100,000 infantry and cavalry to attack Chosha City. He also personally supervised the construction of a barrage, and the barrage was breached three times. Gao Cheng was very angry, and he pushed the people from the hinterland and the bags down to block the gap.

古文：辛巳，发高祖丧，升梓宫于太极殿。
现代文：辛巳，侯景为梁武帝发丧，将棺材抬到太极殿。
English: Soon after, Hou Jing mourned Emperor Liang Wu and carried his coffin to the Taiji Hall.

古文：是日，太子即皇帝位，大赦。侯景出屯朝堂，分兵守卫。
现代文：这一天，皇太子登上了皇位，大赦天下，侯景出屯朝堂，把士兵派到各处守卫。
English: On this day, the crown prince ascended the throne and pardoned the world. Hou Jing left the palace and sent soldiers to guard everywhere.

古文：壬午，诏北人在南为奴婢者，皆免之，所免万计；景或更加超擢，冀收其力。
现代文：壬午，梁简文帝颁下诏书，指明凡是在南朝当奴婢的北方人，都免去他们的奴隶身份，被免的人数以万计；侯景对他们中的有些人还大提拔，希望能笼络他们。
English: At noon, Emperor Liang Jianwen issued an edict, stating that all northerners who had been slaves in the Southern Dynasty were exempted from their slave status, and the number of those exempted was tens of thousands; Hou Jing also promoted some of them greatly, hoping to entice them.

古文：高祖之末，建康士民服食、器用，争尚豪华，粮无半年之储，常资四方委输。
现代文：梁武帝末年，建康城的官民在吃、穿、用方面都争相崇尚豪华，储存的粮食不够半年用的，常常要各地运来粮食。
English: At the end of Emperor Liangwu's reign, officials and commoners in Jiankang City were competing to eat, wear, and use luxury goods. The stored grain was not enough for half a year, and grain had to be transported from various places.

古文：自景作乱，道路断绝，数月之间，人至相食，犹不免饿死，存者百无一二。
现代文：自从侯景叛乱以来，道路断绝了，几个月内，便发展到了人吃人的地步，仍免不了有饿死之人，一百个人里面活下来的不到一二。
English: Since the rebellion of Hou Jing, the roads have been cut off, and within a few months, it has developed to the point of people eating people. People still inevitably starve to death, and less than one or two people out of a hundred survive.

古文：贵戚、豪族皆自出采稆，填委沟壑，不可胜纪。
现代文：那些皇亲国戚、豪门大族都自己出来采割野生的稻子，一时间因饿死而埋在沟壑中的人，数不胜数。
English: There are countless numbers of people who are related to the emperor, relatives of the emperor, and members of powerful families who went out to harvest wild rice themselves, and who died of starvation and were buried in a ravine for a while.

古文：癸未，景遣仪同三司来亮入宛陵，宣城太守杨白华诱而斩之。
现代文：癸未，侯景派遣仪同三司萧来亮来到宛陵县，宣城太守杨白华将萧来亮诱而杀之。
English: Not long after, Hou Jing sent the instrument with the three divisions of Xiao Lai Liang to Wanling County. Yang Baihua, the governor of Xuancheng, lured Xiao Lai Liang and killed him.

古文：甲申，景遣其将李贤明攻之，不克。
现代文：甲申，侯景派手下的将领李贤明攻打宣城，未能成功。
English: Gao Shen and Hou Jing sent their general Li Xianming to attack Xuancheng, but they failed.

古文：景又遣中军侯子鉴入吴郡，以厢公苏单于为吴郡太守，遣仪同宋子仙等将兵东屯钱塘，新城戍主戴僧逷据县拒之。
现代文：侯景又派遣中军侯子鉴进入吴郡，任命厢公苏单于为吴郡太守，派遣仪同宋子仙等人率领兵马屯驻在东部的钱塘，新城戍主戴僧逖带兵进行抵抗。
English: Hou Jing also sent the Chinese army, Hou Zi Jian, into Wu County, appointed Feng Gong, Su Shan, to be the governor of Wu County, sent Yi Tong, Song Zixian and others to lead the soldiers stationed in Qiantang in the east, and the new city lord, Dai Sengyu, led the soldiers to resist.

古文：御史中丞沈浚避难东归，至吴兴，太守张嵊与之合谋，举兵讨景。
现代文：御崐史中丞沈浚为了避难来到东部，到达吴兴县时，太守张嵊同他合谋，发兵讨代侯景。
English: In order to take refuge, Grand Historian Shen Jun came to the east, and when he arrived in Wuxing County, the governor Zhang Ye conspired with him and sent an army to fight for Houjing.

古文：嵊，稷之子也。
现代文：张嵊是张稷的儿子。
English: Zhang Rong is the son of Zhang Rong.

古文：东扬州刺史临城公大连，亦据州不受景命。
现代文：东扬州刺史临城公萧大连也占据东扬州不接受侯景的命令。
English: Xiao Dalian, the governor of East Yangzhou, also occupied East Yangzhou and did not accept Hou Jing's order.

古文：景号令所行，唯吴郡以西、南陵以北而已。
现代文：侯景号令能够得到执行的，仅限于吴郡以西，南陵以北的地区而已。
English: Houjing's order can only be implemented in the areas west of Wuxian and north of Nanling.

古文：魏诏： 太和中代人改姓者皆复其旧。 
现代文：西魏文帝颁下诏书： 太和年间代郡人改姓的都恢复的姓氏。 
English: Emperor Wen of the Western Wei Dynasty issued an edict: All surnames that were changed during the reign of Emperor Taizong were to be restored.

古文：六月，丙戌，以南康王会理为侍中、司空。
现代文：六月，丙戍，梁朝任命南康王萧会理为侍中、司空。
English: In June, the Liang Dynasty appointed Nankang Wang Xiao as a chamberlain and secretary.

古文：丁亥，立宣城王大器为皇太子。
现代文：丁亥，梁简文帝立宣城王萧大器为皇太子。
English: On the third day, the king of Xuancheng was proclaimed crown prince.

古文：初，侯景将使太常卿南阳刘之遴授临贺王正德玺绶，之遴剃发僧服而逃。
现代文：当初，侯景要派太常卿南阳刘之遴去把印玺授给临贺王萧正德，刘之遴剃了头发，穿上和尚服装逃跑了。
English: At first, Hou Jing wanted to send the Tai Changqing Nanyang Liu Zhizhong to give the seal to Lin He Wang Xiao Zhengde. Liu Zhizhong shaved his hair, put on a monk's costume and ran away.

古文：之遴博学能文，尝为湘东王绎长史；将归江陵，绎素嫉其才，己丑，之遴至夏口，绎密送药杀之，而自为志铭，厚其赙赠。
现代文：刘之遴学识广博，文才出众，曾经担任湘东王萧绎的长史。这次他准备回到江陵，但是萧绎一向妒嫉他的才能，己丑，刘之遴到达夏口，萧绎暗中送药过去毒死了他。刘之遴死后，萧绎又亲自为他撰写墓志铭，还出了一大笔钱给他办丧事。
English: Liu Zhixuan was a scholar with extensive knowledge and outstanding literary talent. He had served as the long-term secretary of Xiaoyan, the king of eastern Hunan. This time he was preparing to return to Jiangling, but Xiaoyan had always been jealous of his talent and was ugly. Liu Zhixuan arrived in Xiakou, and Xiaoyan secretly sent drugs to poison him. After Liu Zhixuan died, Xiaoyan personally wrote an epitaph for him, and also paid a large sum of money to pay for his funeral.

古文：壬辰，封皇子大心为寻阳王，大款为江陵王，大临为南海王，大连为南郡王，大春为安陆王，大成为山阳王，大封为宜都王。
现代文：壬辰，梁简文帝封皇子萧大心为寻阳王，萧大款为江陵王，萧大临为南海王，萧大连为南郡王，萧大春为安陆王，萧大成为山阳王，萧大封为宜都王。
English: In Imjin, Liang Jianwen's imperial prince Xiao Daxin became the king of Xiangyang, Xiao Daxin became the king of Jiangling, Xiao Dacron became the king of Nanhai, Xiao Dalian became the king of Nan County, Xiao Dachun became the king of Anlu, Xiao Dacron became the king of Shanyang, and Xiao Dacron became the king of Yidu.

古文：长社城中无盐，人病挛肿，死者什八九。
现代文：长社城里没有盐吃，人人痉挛、浮肿，死的人有十分之八九。
English: There was no salt to eat in the city of Chosha, everyone was gaunt and puffy, and eight out of ten people died.

古文：大风从西北起，吹水入城，城坏。
现代文：大风从西北方刮了起来，把水吹到了城里，城被冲坏了。
English: A north-westerly gale blew up, bringing water into the city, which was washed away.

古文：东魏大将军澄令城中曰： 有能生致王大将军者封侯；若大将军身有损伤，亲近左右皆斩。 
现代文：东魏的大将军高澄向城里的人宣布： 有能够把王大将军王思政活捉送来的人，就封他为侯；如果王大将军身上受伤，那么他的亲属以及他身边的人都得被杀掉。 
English: Gao Cheng, a general of the Eastern Wei Dynasty, announced to the people in the city: If there is someone who can capture and send Wang Shizheng alive, he will be made a marquis; if Wang Shizheng is injured, then his relatives and people around him must be killed.

古文：王思政帅众据土山，告之曰： 吾力屈计穷，唯当以死谢国！ 
现代文：王思政率领人马占据了东魏人堆起的土山，告诉东魏人： 我的力气已经使尽，计策也已经用光，只能以一死来报答国家了。 
English: Wang Sizheng led his men and horses to occupy the mounds of earth piled up by the Eastern Wei people, and told the Eastern Wei people: My strength has been exhausted, my strategy has been exhausted, and I can only repay the country with one death.

古文：因仰天大哭，西向再拜，欲自刎，都督骆训曰： 公常语训等： 汝赍我头出降，非但得富贵，亦完一城人。 
现代文：说着他就仰面朝天大哭起来，向西面拜了两拜，然后准备自刎。都督骆训对他说道： 您常常对我们说： 你们带着我的头颅出去投降，非但能得到富贵，也能使全城的人保全性命。 
English: Saying this, he cried loudly with his face upturned to the sky, bowed twice to the west, and then prepared to commit suicide. Duke Luo Xun said to him, "You often said to us, 'Take my head and go out and surrender. Not only will you gain wealth and riches, but you will also save the lives of everyone in the city.'

古文：今高相既有此令，公独不哀士卒之死乎！ 
现代文：现在高相国既然有这样的命令，您难道就不哀怜士兵们因您而死吗？ 
English: Now that the government has such an order, don't you feel sorry for the soldiers who died because of you?

古文：众共执之，不得引决。
现代文：大家一起上去抓住王思政，王思政因此没能自杀成。
English: Everyone went up together to catch Wang Sizheng, so Wang Sizheng was not able to commit suicide.

古文：澄遣通直散骑赵彦深就土山遗以白羽扇，执手申意，牵之以下。
现代文：高澄派了通直散骑赵彦深来到土山上，送给王思政白羽扇，握住他的手说明自己的意图，又把他拉了下来。
English: Gaocheng sent Zhao Yanshen, who rode straight ahead, to the top of the dirt hill, gave Wang Shizheng a white feather fan, held his hand to explain his intention, and pulled him down.

古文：澄不令拜，延而礼之。
现代文：高澄没有叫王思政下拜，对他彬彬有礼。
English: Gao Cheng did not ask Wang Shizheng to bow down, and was polite to him.

古文：思政初入颍川，将士八千人，及城陷，才三千人，卒无叛者。
现代文：王思政当初进入颍川的时候，手下的将士共有八千人，等到长社城陷落，才剩下三千人，但是他们中间最终没有一个叛变的。
English: When Wang Sizheng first entered the Li River, he had a total of eight thousand soldiers under his command. By the time Chosha Castle fell, only three thousand remained, but in the end, not a single one of them had mutinied.

古文：澄悉散配其将卒于远方，改颍川为郑州，礼遇思政甚重。
现代文：高澄把这些将士分散开来，都安排到遥远的地方，又将颍州改为郑州，给了王思政很高的礼遇。
English: Gao Cheng dispersed these soldiers and sent them to distant places. He also changed Zhangzhou to Zhengzhou, and gave Wang Sizheng a high courtesy.

古文：西阁祭酒卢潜曰： 思政不能死节，何足可重！ 
现代文：西祭洒卢潜说道： 王思政没能以死来保全气节，有什么值得看重的？ 
English: West Festival sprinkler Lu Qian said: Wang Sizheng failed to preserve the festival with death, what is worth valuing?

古文：澄谓左右曰： 我有卢潜，乃是更得一王思政。 
现代文：高澄对旁的人说道： 我有了卢潜，如同又得了一个王思政。 
English: Gao Cheng said to the person next to him, "I have Lu Qianwu, just like I have another Wang Sizheng."

古文：潜，度世之曾孙也。
现代文：卢潜是卢度世的曾孙。
English: Lu Qian is the great-grandson of Lu Du.

古文：初，思政屯襄城，欲以长社为行台治所，遣使者魏仲启陈于太师泰，并致书于淅州刺史崔猷。
现代文：当初，王思政在襄城时，想把长社定为行台所在地，他派遣使者魏仲去向太师宇文泰请求批准，并且给淅州的刺史崔猷写了一封信。
English: At first, when Wang Sizheng was in Xiangcheng, he wanted to designate Changsha as the location of Xiangtai. He sent an envoy, Wei Zhong, to request approval from Grand Master Uwentai, and wrote a letter to Zhangzhou's Xizhi Cui Wei.

古文：猷复书曰： 襄城控带京、洛，实当今之要地，如有动静，易相应接。
现代文：崔猷在回信中说道： 襄城控制连接着京、洛地区，实在是当今的战略要地，要是有什么变故，很容易相互接应。
English: In his reply, Cui Wei said, "Xiangcheng, which is connected to Beijing and Los Angeles, is indeed a strategic place today. If there is any change, it is easy to communicate with each other.

古文：颍川既邻寇境，又无山川之固，贼若潜来，径至城下。
现代文：而颍川既邻近敌寇占领的地方，又没有山川之险，敌人如果悄悄过来，可以直接到达城下。
English: However, the Lugu River was close to the area occupied by the enemy, and there was no danger from the mountains and rivers. If the enemy came stealthily, they could reach the city directly.

古文：莫若顿兵襄城。为行台之所。颍川置州，遣良将镇守，则表里胶固，人心易安，纵有不虞，岂能为患！ 
现代文：不如让部队屯驻在襄城，将襄城作为行台所在地；再在颍川设置州，派优秀的将领前去镇守，这样里里外外就都牢固了，人心也容易安定，纵然出现意想不到的情况，也不会有什么祸患。 
English: It would be better to have the troops stationed in Xiangcheng and regard Xiangcheng as the location of the line of march; then set up a prefecture in Luochuan and send outstanding generals to guard the town. In this way, everything inside and outside is solid, and people's hearts are easy to stabilize. Even if unexpected situations occur, there will be no disaster.

古文：仲见泰，具以启闻。
现代文：魏仲见到宇文泰，把王思政的意见向他作了汇报。
English: Wei Zhong saw Yu Wentai and reported Wang Sizheng's opinion to him.

古文：泰令依猷策。
现代文：宇文泰下令按照崔猷策略去做。
English: U Wentai ordered to do it according to Cui Gan strategy.

古文：思政固请，且约： 贼水攻期年、陆攻三年之内，朝廷不烦赴救。 
现代文：王思政再三请求，并且约定： 敌人如果在一年之内从水上进攻，如果在三年之内从陆地上进攻，朝廷都不必派兵赶来救授。 
English: Wang Sizheng repeatedly requested and agreed: If the enemy attacks from the water within one year, and if they attack from the land within three years, the court does not have to send troops to rescue him.

古文：泰乃许之。
现代文：宇文泰这才答应。
English: It was only then that Uwentai agreed.

古文：及长社不守，泰深悔之。
现代文：等到长社城陷落，宇文泰对此深感后悔。
English: By the time of the fall of Nagashe Castle, Uwentai deeply regretted this.

古文：猷，孝芬之子也。
现代文：崔猷是崔孝芬的儿子。
English: Cui Wei is the son of Cui Xiaofeng.

古文：侯景之南叛也，丞相泰恐东魏复取景所部地，使诸将分守诸城。
现代文：侯景叛逃梁朝之后，西魏丞相宇文泰害怕东魏又来夺取侯景原来管辖的地方，就派将领们分别把守各城。
English: After Hou Jing's defection to the Liang Dynasty, the Western Wei chancellor, Wu Wentai, was afraid that the Eastern Wei Dynasty would again seize the places originally governed by Hou Jing, so he sent generals to guard each city separately.

古文：及颍川陷，泰以诸城道路阻绝，皆令拔军还。
现代文：等到颍川陷落，各城的道路都被隔断，宇文泰便下令叫将领们率领部队返回。
English: After the fall of Liuchuan, the roads of all cities were cut off, and Uwentai ordered the generals to lead the troops back.

古文：上甲侯韶自建康出奔江陵，称受高祖密诏征兵，以湘东王绎为侍中、假黄钺、大都督中外诸军事、司徒、承制，自馀籓镇并加位号。
现代文：梁朝的上甲侯萧韶从建康逃奔到江陵，声称他是拿着梁武帝的秘密诏书来征兵的，任命湘东王萧绎为侍中、假黄、大都督中外诸军事、司徒、承制，其余的藩王也都增加了职位与名号。
English: Xiao Yao, the Shang Jia Hou of the Liang Dynasty, fled from Jiankang to Gangneung, claiming that he came to recruit soldiers with the secret edict of Emperor Liangwu. He appointed Xiao Yu, the king of Hunan, as the attendant, the false Huang, the great military governor, the military governor, the military governor, and the military governor. The remaining kings of the domain also increased their positions and names.

古文：宋子仙围戴僧逷，不克。
现代文：宋子仙包围了戴僧逖，但没有打垮对方。
English: Song Zisen surrounded Dai Sengyu, but did not defeat the other side.

古文：丙午，吴盗陆缉等起兵袭吴郡，杀苏单于，推前淮南太守文成侯宁为主。
现代文：丙午，吴郡的强盗陆缉等人起兵攻打吴郡，杀掉了苏单于，推举前淮南太守、文成侯萧宁为他们的首领。
English: In the afternoon of the 3rd day of the 4th month, the bandits of Wu County, including Lu Ji, raised an army to attack Wu County, killed Su Shan Yu, and elected the former governor of Huainan Province, Wencheng Hou Xiaoning, as their leader.

古文：临贺王正德怨侯景卖己，密书召鄱阳王范，使以兵入；景遮得其书，癸丑，缢杀正德。
现代文：梁朝的临贺王萧正德怨恨侯景出卖自己，秘密写信召请鄱阳王萧范，叫他带兵前来；侯景截住了这封信，癸丑，勒死了萧正德。
English: Lin He Wang Xiao Zhengde of the Liang Dynasty resented Hou Jing for betraying him, and secretly wrote a letter to the King of Shenyang, Xiao Fan, asking him to come with soldiers; Hou Jing intercepted the letter, humiliated and strangled Xiao Zhengde.

古文：景以仪同三司郭元建为尚书仆射、北道行台、总江北诸军事，镇新秦；封元罗等诸元十馀人皆为王。
现代文：侯景任命仪同三司郭元建为尚书仆射、北道行台、总江北诸军事，让他镇守新秦；又封元罗等十几位元姓人为王。
English: Hou Jing appointed Guo Yuanjian and the three commissioners of Guo Yuanjian to be Shang Shuxu, Fu Sha, Bei Dao, Xing Tai, and General of the Northern Jiangxi Military, and made him the commander of Xinqin; he also made more than a dozen Yuan surnames such as Yuan Luo the king.

古文：景爱永安侯确之勇，常置左右。
现代文：侯景很欣赏永安侯萧确的勇敢，经常把他安排在自己的身边。
English: Houjing appreciated the bravery of Yongan Hou Xiaojing, and often placed him by his side.

古文：邵陵王纶潜遣人呼之，确曰： 景轻佻，一夫力耳，我欲手刃之，正恨未得其便，卿还启家王，勿以确为念。 
现代文：邵陵王萧纶秘密派人叫萧确回去，他对来人说： 侯景为人轻佻，一夫之勇而已,我想亲手用刀杀掉他，只是恨没有便于下手的机会。
English: Shao Ling King Xiao Wei secretly sent someone to ask Xiao Jing to go back. He said to the person: "Hou Jing is a light-hearted person, he is only brave. I want to kill him with my own hands with a knife, but I hate not having an easy opportunity to start.

古文：景与确游钟山，引弓射鸟，因欲射景，弦断，不发，景觉而杀之。
现代文：你回去告诉我的父王，叫他不要把我挂在心上。 侯景与萧确一同游览钟山，拉弓射鸟，萧确就准备射死侯景，不料弓弦拉断，箭没有射出去，侯景发觉了萧确的企图，于是杀掉了他。
English: Go back and tell my father-in-law, and tell him not to hold me in his heart. Hou Jing and Xiao Zhen together toured the Bell Mountain, drew a bow and shot birds, Xiao Zhen was ready to shoot Hou Jing, but the bow string broke, the arrow did not shoot out, Hou Jing discovered Xiao Zhen's intention, so he killed him.

古文：湘东王绎娶徐孝嗣孙女为妃，生世子方等。
现代文：湘东王萧绎娶了徐孝嗣的孙女为王妃，生下了嫡长子萧方等。
English: Xiao Yu, the king of eastern Hunan, married the granddaughter of Xu Xiaozhi and gave birth to his eldest son, Xiao Fang.

古文：妃丑而妒，又多失行，绎二三年一至其室。
现代文：徐妃容貌丑陋又性好妒嫉，行为还常常有失检点，萧绎要过二三年才去徐妃房间一次。
English: Xu Fei's appearance is ugly and her sex is jealous, and her behavior is often immoral. It takes Xiao Yu two or three years to go to Xu Fei's room once.

古文：妃闻绎当至，以绎目眇，为半面妆以待之，绎怒而出，故方等亦无宠。
现代文：徐妃听说萧绎要来，因为他瞎了一只眼，于是便仅仅在自己的半边脸上化了妆，等他前来，萧绎发现后愤怒地离开了徐妃的房间，所以萧方等也不受萧绎的宠信。
English: Xu Fei heard that Xiao Yu was coming because he was blind in one eye, so she only put makeup on half of her face. When he came, Xiao Yu found out and angrily left Xu Fei's room. Therefore, Xiao Fang and others were not favored by Xiao Yu.

古文：及自建康还江陵，绎见其御军和整，始叹其能，入告徐妃，妃不对，垂泣而退。
现代文：等到萧方等从建康返回江陵，萧绎见他驾御部队有条有理，这才称叹崐赏赞他有能力。萧绎进去把这一情况告诉了徐妃，徐妃没有回答，只是流着眼泪转身离开。
English: It wasn't until Xiao Fang and others returned to Gangneung from Jiankang that Xiao Yuanzhang saw that he was driving the troops in an orderly manner, and praised his ability. Xiao Yuanzhang went in and told Xu Fei about this situation. Xu Fei didn't answer, but turned away in tears.

古文：绎怒，疏其秽行，榜于大閤，方等见之，益惧。
现代文：萧绎愤怒起来，陈述徐妃的肮脏行为，在大中张榜公布，萧方等见了之后，更加害怕。
English: Xiao Yuang got angry, stated the dirty behavior of Xu Fei, and announced the list in the middle school. After Xiao Fang saw it, he was even more afraid.

古文：湘州刺史河东王誉，骁勇得士心，绎将讨侯景，遣使督其粮众，誉曰： 各自军府，何忽隶人！ 
现代文：湘州刺史河东王萧誉骁勇善战，很得士兵们的拥戴，萧绎将要讨伐侯景，派遣使者去督察他的粮食和人马。萧誉说道： 各自有各自军府，为什么忽然来督率看人？ 
English: Xiao Yu, the king of Shishihe Dongdong in Hunan Province, fought bravely and well, and was greatly admired by the soldiers. Xiao Yu was going to fight Houjing and sent an envoy to inspect his grain and men. Xiao Yu said: Each has its own military headquarters, why suddenly come to inspect people?

古文：使者三返，誉不与。
现代文：使者往返了多次，萧誉就是不给粮食与人马。
English: The envoys went back and forth several times, and it was rumored that they were not given food and horses.

古文：方等请讨之，绎乃以少子安南侯方矩为湘州刺史，使方等将精卒二万送之。
现代文：萧方等请求讨伐萧誉，萧绎于是任命他的小儿子安南侯萧方矩为湘州刺史，派萧方等率领二万名精兵护送他上任。
English: Xiao Fang and others requested a crusade against Xiao Ren, and Xiao Yuanzhong then appointed his youngest son, Annan Hou Xiao Fang Rui, as the prefect of Hunan Province, and sent Xiao Fang and others to escort him into office with twenty thousand elite soldiers.

古文：方等将行，谓所亲曰： 是行也，吾必死之；死得其所，吾复奚恨！ 
现代文：萧方等临行之前，对他亲近的人说道： 这次出行，我一定会死；但是死得其所，我又有什么可遗憾的呢？ 
English: Before leaving, Xiao Fang said to those close to him: This trip, I will surely die; but death has its place, what do I have to regret?

古文：侯景以赵威方为豫章太守，江州刺史寻阳王大心遣军拒之，擒威方，系州狱，威方逃还建康。
现代文：侯景任命赵威方为豫章太守，江州刺史寻阳王萧大心派部队进行抵抗，活捉了赵威方，把他关在该州的监狱里，后来赵威方又逃回了建康。
English: Hou Jing appointed Zhao Weifang as the governor of Yuzhang, and Jiangzhou sent troops to resist, captured Zhao Weifang alive, and imprisoned him in the state prison. Later, Zhao Weifang fled back to Jiankang.

古文：湘东世子方等军至麻溪，河东王誉将七千人击之，方等军败，溺死。
现代文：湘东王的嫡长子萧方等的部队到达麻溪时，河东王萧誉率领七千人马攻击他，萧方等的部队遭到了失败，他本人淹死。
English: When the troops of Xiao Fang, the eldest legitimate son of the king of eastern Hunan, reached Ma Xi, the king of eastern Hebei, Xiaoyuan, led seven thousand horses to attack him. Xiao Fang's troops were defeated, and he drowned.

古文：安南侯方矩收馀众还江陵，湘东王绎无戚容。
现代文：安南侯萧方矩收拾剩余的人马返回江陵，湘东王萧绎没有任何悲戚的表情。
English: Annan Hou Xiao Fang Mom cleaned up the remaining people and horses and returned to Gangneung. Shandong Wang Xiaoyuan did not have any expression of sorrow.

古文：绎宠姬王氏，生子方诸。
现代文：萧绎宠爱的姬妾王氏，生下了儿子萧方诸。
English: Xiao Yu's favorite concubine Wang Shi gave birth to a son, Xiao Fang Zhu.

古文：王氏卒，绎疑徐妃为之，逼令自杀，妃赴井死，葬以庶人礼，不听诸子制服。
现代文：王氏去世，萧绎疑心是徐妃下毒杀害的，逼迫徐妃自杀，徐妃就投井而死。萧绎用对庶人的礼仪埋葬了徐妃，不让儿子们为她穿丧服。
English: After Wang's death, Xiao Yu suspected that Xu Fei was poisoned and killed. He forced Xu Fei to commit suicide, and Xu Fei threw herself into a well and died. Xiao Yu buried Xu Fei with the etiquette of a commoner, and did not allow her sons to wear mourning clothes for her.

古文：西江督护陈霸先欲起兵讨侯景，景使人诱广州刺史元景仲，许奉以为主，景仲由是附景，阴图霸先。
现代文：西江督护陈霸先打算带兵讨代侯景，侯景派人诱劝广州刺史元景仲，答应要拥戴他为道领，元景仲因此归附侯景，阴谋算计陈霸先。
English: The governor of the Xijiang River, Chen Baxian, planned to lead an army to negotiate on behalf of Houjing. Houjing sent someone to persuade Guangzhou to assassinate the historian Yuan Jianzhong, promising to support him as the leader. As a result, Yuan Jianzhong was subordinated to Houjing. The conspiracy was planned by Chen Baxian.

古文：霸先知之，与成州刺史王怀明等集兵南海，驰檄以讨景仲曰： 元景仲与贼合从，朝廷遣曲阳侯勃为刺史，军已顿朝亭。 
现代文：陈霸先知道了这件事，便与成州刺史王怀明等在南海郡集中部队，然后传布声讨元景仲的檄文，说： 元景仲与叛贼勾结，朝廷任命曲阳侯萧勃为广州刺史，现在部队已经屯驻在朝亭。 
English: Chen Ba first learned of this matter, and then concentrated troops in Nanhai County with the Chengdu assassin Wang Huiming and others, and then spread the rumor about Yuan Jianzhong's slanderous article, saying: Yuan Jianzhong colluded with traitors, the imperial court appointed Qu Yang Hou Xiao Bo as the assassin of Guangzhou, and now the troops have been stationed in the imperial palace.

古文：景仲所部闻之，皆弃景仲而散。
现代文：元景仲的部属们听说之后，都离弃元景仲逃散了。
English: After hearing about this, all of Motokage's subordinates abandoned him and fled.

古文：秋，七月，甲寅，景仲缢于阁下。
现代文：秋季，七月，甲寅，元景仲在下上吊自杀。
English: In the autumn, in July, Kuching, Yuan Jianzhong hanged himself.

古文：霸先迎定州刺史萧勃镇广州。
现代文：陈霸先迎来定州刺史萧勃镇守广州。
English: Chen Baxi first ushered in the Dingzhou assassin Xiao Bo to defend Guangzhou.

古文：前高州刺史兰裕，钦之弟也，与其诸弟扇诱始兴等十郡，攻监衡州事欧阳頠。
现代文：前高州刺史兰裕是兰青的弟弟，他与他的弟弟们煽动引诱始兴等十郡，一起攻打监衡州事欧阳。
English: Lan Yu, a former high school student, is the younger brother of Lan Qing. He and his younger brothers instigated and lured Shixing and other ten counties to attack Ouyang, the supervisor of the state affairs.

古文：勃使霸先救之，悉擒裕等，勃因以霸先监始兴郡事。
现代文：萧勃派遣陈霸先赶去久远，将兰裕等人全都抓获了，萧勃便委派陈霸先为监始兴郡事。
English: Xiao Bo dispatched Chen Baxian to catch up with Lan Yu and all the others. Xiao Bo then appointed Chen Baxian as the supervisor of the county affairs of Shixing.

古文：湘东王绎遣竟陵太守王僧辩、信州刺史东海鲍泉击湘州，分给兵粮，刻日就道。
现代文：梁朝湘东王萧绎派遗竟陵太守王僧辩、信州刺史东海人鲍泉攻打湘州，分别给予他们人马与粮食，叫他们在指定日期上路。
English: The Liang Dynasty's Eastern King of Hunan, Xiao Yuanzhi, dispatched the remains of the imperial eunuch, Wang Sangfen, and the East Sea people, Bao Quan, to attack Hunan, and gave them men and horses and grain, respectively, and told them to go on the road on the designated date.

古文：僧辩以竟陵部下未尽至，欲俟众集然后行，与泉入白绎，求申期日。
现代文：王僧辩考虑到他在竟陵的部下还没有到齐，打算等到部队全部集中之后再出兵，就和鲍泉来到江陵向萧绎反映情况，要求延缓行动日期。
English: Wang Sangye, considering that his subordinates in Jingling had not yet arrived, planned to wait until all the troops were concentrated before sending troops. He and Bao Quan came to Jiangling to report the situation to Xiao Yu and request a delay in the date of action.

古文：绎疑僧辩观望，按剑厉声曰： 卿惮行拒命，欲同贼邪？
现代文：萧绎怀疑王僧辩是要采取观望态度，就按住剑柄厉声说道： 你害怕出兵，抗拒命令，是想和叛结成一伙吗？
English: Xiao Yu suspected that Wang Sangye was trying to adopt a wait-and-see attitude, so he held the hilt of his sword and said sharply: Are you afraid of sending troops, resisting orders, or do you want to join the rebels?

古文：今日唯有死耳！ 
现代文：今天你只有死路一条！ 
English: Today you have no choice but to die!

古文：因斫僧辩，中其左髀，闷绝，久之方苏，即送狱。
现代文：说道拔出佩剑朝王僧辩砍去，砍中了他的左大腿，王僧辩昏厥过去，很久才苏醒过来，接着马上送进临狱。
English: He said that he pulled out his sword and slashed Wang Sangye, hitting him in the left thigh. Wang Sangye fainted and took a long time to wake up, and was immediately sent to prison.

古文：泉震怖，不敢言。
现代文：鲍泉很震惊、巩惧，不敢说一句话。
English: Bao Quan was shocked and afraid, and did not dare to say a word.

古文：僧辩母徒行流涕入谢，自陈无训，绎意解，赐以良药，故得不死。丁卯，鲍泉独将兵伐湘州。
现代文：王僧辩的母亲流着眼泪徒步来到萧绎的府第谢罪，陈说自己平时对儿子缺乏训导。萧绎心中的不快这才解开，赐给王僧辩一些好药，因此王僧辩才没有死去，丁卯，鲍泉单独率领人马讨伐湘州。
English: Wang Sangye's mother came to Xiao Yu's residence in tears on foot to apologize, saying that she usually lacked discipline for her son. Xiao Yu's unhappiness was only resolved when he gave Wang Sangye some good medicine. As a result, Wang Sangye did not die. Ding Yu and Bao Quan alone led the people to fight against Hunan.

古文：陆辑等竞为暴掠，吴人不附，宋子仙自钱塘旋军击之。
现代文：陆缉等人竞相掠夺，制造暴行，吴郡一带的百姓都不归附他们，宋子仙从钱塘率领部队调头对他们发起了攻击。
English: Lu Zhi and others raced to plunder and commit atrocities. The people around Wuxian did not join them. Song Zixian led the troops from Qiantang and launched an attack on them.

古文：壬戌，缉弃城奔海盐，子仙复据吴郡。
现代文：壬戌，陆缉放弃郡城逃到海盐，宋子仙重新占据了吴郡。
English: In Renmin, Lu Jian abandoned the county seat and fled to Haiyan, while Song Zixian reoccupied Wu County.

古文：戊辰，侯景置吴州于吴郡，以安陆王大春为刺史。
现代文：戊辰，侯景在吴郡设置了吴州，任命安陆王萧大春为刺史。
English: In Wucheng, Houjing set up Wuzhou in Wuxian, and appointed Anlu Wang Xiao Dachun as the crown prince.

古文：庚午，以南康王会理兼尚书令。
现代文：庚午，梁朝任命南康王萧会理兼任尚书令。
English: In the afternoon of the 7th day of the 7th month, the Liang Dynasty appointed Nankang Wang Xiao as the secretary of the association.

古文：鄱阳王范闻建康不守，戒严，欲入，僚佐或说之曰： 今魏人已据寿阳，大王移足，则虏骑必窥合肥。
现代文：梁朝的鄱阳王萧范听到建康失守的消息，下令戒严，准备打进建康，他的僚佐中有人劝他： 现在魏人已经占据了寿阳，大王您一旦动身离开，这些胡骑一定会窥伺合服。
English: Xiao Fan, the king of Shouyang in the Liang Dynasty, heard the news of Jiankang's loss of defense, ordered martial law, and prepared to enter Jiankang. Someone from his colleagues advised him: Now the Wei people have occupied Shouyang. Once you leave, these horses will certainly spy on you.

古文：前贼未平，后城失守，将若之何！
现代文：前面的贼兵还没有平定，后面的州城又失守，那将怎么办？
English: The bandits in the front have not yet been subdued, and the state capital in the back has been lost, so what will happen?

古文：不如待四方兵集，使良将将精卒赴之，进不失勤王，退可固本根。 
现代文：不如等四面的部队集中之后，派良将率领精锐的士兵赶赴建康，这样进不耽误卫国勤王，退可以巩固自己的根基。 
English: It would be better to wait for the concentration of troops on all sides, and send Liang to lead the elite soldiers to rush to Jiankang. In this way, the advance will not delay the defense of the country, and the retreat can consolidate its foundation.

古文：范乃止。
现代文：萧范听到这才放弃了原来的念头。
English: When Xiao Fan heard this, she gave up her original idea.

古文：会东魏大将军澄遣西兗州刺史李伯穆逼合肥，又使魏收为书谕范。
现代文：这时刚好遇上东魏的大将军高澄派遣西兖州刺史李伯穆带兵逼迫合肥，高澄又叫魏收写信把情况告诉萧范。
English: At this time, Gao Cheng, the general of the Eastern Wei Dynasty, happened to meet Xiao Fan. Gao Cheng dispatched Xizhu Zhishi Li Bo Mu to lead the troops to force Hefei. Gao Cheng also asked Wei Jie to write a letter to inform Xiao Fan of the situation.

古文：范方谋讨侯景，藉东魏为援，乃帅战士二万出东关，以合州输伯穆，并遣咨议刘灵议送二子勤、广为质于东魏以乞师。
现代文：萧范这才谋划讨代侯景，借助东魏的人马，使他们成为援助自己的力量。于是萧范率领二万人马从东关出发，同时把合州献给李伯穆，还派遣咨议刘灵议将自己的两个儿子萧勤、萧广送到东魏当人质，以此作为请求东魏出兵的条件。
English: It was only then that Xiao Fan planned to negotiate with the viceroys of Jing, with the help of the East Wei people, so that they would become a force to help themselves. So Xiao Fan led twenty thousand people to set out from Dongguan, and at the same time dedicated Heshou to Li Bo Mu. He also sent Liu Ling to negotiate to send his two sons Xiao Qin and Xiao Guang to the East Wei as hostages, as a condition for requesting the East Wei to send troops.

古文：范屯濡须以待上游之军，遣世子嗣将千馀人守安乐栅，上游军皆不下，范粮乏，采苽稗、菱藕以自给。
现代文：萧范屯驻在濡须，等待上游的部队到来，又派遣嫡长子萧嗣带领一千多人守卫安乐栅，可是上游的各路部队都不下来，萧范的粮食开始缺乏，只好采摘蘑菇、稗子、菱角、莲藕为食。
English: Xiao Fan Tun stationed in Wusu, waiting for the upstream troops to arrive, and sent his eldest son Xiao Zi to lead more than a thousand people to guard Anle Grate, but the upstream troops did not come down, and Xiao Fan's food began to be scarce, so he had to pick mushrooms, hazelnuts, hawthorn and lotus root for food.

古文：勤、广至鄴，东魏人竟不为出师。范进退无计，乃溯流西上，军于枞阳。
现代文：萧勤、萧广到达邺城之后，东魏竟然不为萧范出兵，萧范进退两难，无计可施，于是只好溯江西上，驻扎在枞阳。
English: After Xiao Qin and Xiao Guang arrived in Licheng, the Eastern Wei Dynasty did not send troops for Xiao Fan. Xiao Fan was in a dilemma and had no choice, so he had to go to the west of Jiangxi Province and stationed in Fenyang.

古文：景出屯姑孰，范将裴之悌以众降之。之悌，之高之弟也。
现代文：侯景出兵屯驻在姑孰，萧范的部将裴之悌率领大队人马投降了他，裴之悌是裴之高的弟弟。
English: Hou Jing stationed troops in Gushan. Xiao Fan's subordinate general Pei Zhisheng led a large force to surrender to him. Pei Zhisheng was Pei Gao's younger brother.

古文：东魏大将军澄诣鄴，辞爵位殊礼，且请立太子。
现代文：东魏的大将军高澄来到邺城，要辞去孝静帝授予他的爵位和特殊待遇，并且请求立皇太子。
English: Gao Cheng, a general of the Eastern Wei Dynasty, came to Handan to renounce the title and special treatment granted to him by Emperor Xiao Jing, and to request the establishment of a crown prince.

古文：澄谓济阴王晖业曰： 比读何书？ 
现代文：他问济阴王晖业： 近来你读了什么书？ 
English: He asked King Gongye of Jilin Province: What books have you read recently?

古文：晖业曰： 数寻伊、霍之传，不读曹、马之书。 
现代文：元晖业回答说： 我读了许多遍伊尹、霍光的传记，不读曹氏、司马氏的书。 
English: Yuan Yingye replied: I have read many biographies of Yi Yin and Huo Guang, but I do not read the books of Cao and Sima.

古文：八月，甲申朔，侯景遣其中军都督侯子鉴等击吴兴。
现代文：八月，甲申朔，侯景派遣他的中军都督侯子鉴等人攻打吴兴。
English: In August, Gao Shengshuo, Hou Jing sent his Chinese military governor Hou Zi Jian and others to attack Wu Xing.

古文：己亥，鲍泉军于石椁寺，河东王誉逆战而败；辛丑，又败于橘洲，战及溺死者万馀人。
现代文：己亥，鲍泉的部队驻扎在石椁寺，河东王萧誉进行反击失败；辛丑，又在桔州战败，战死和溺死的有一万多人。
English: In Ji Hai, Bao Quan's troops were stationed in Shijiazhuang Temple, and the counterattack of King Xiaoyu of Hedong failed; Xin Qiu was also defeated in Quzhou, and more than 10,000 people died in battle or drowned.

古文：誉退保长沙，泉引军围之。
现代文：萧誉只好向后撤退以保卫长沙，鲍泉等将领指挥部队包围了长沙。
English: Xiao Rong had to retreat backwards to defend Changsha, while generals such as Bao Quan surrounded Changsha.

古文：辛卯，东魏立皇子长仁为太子。
现代文：辛卯，东魏立皇子元长仁为皇太子。
English: Soon after, the Eastern Wei Dynasty made Prince Yuan Changren the crown prince.

古文：勃海文襄王高澄以其弟太原公洋次长，意常忌之。
现代文：勃海文襄王高澄由于他的弟弟太原公高洋在兄弟中年龄仅次于自己，心里常忌恨他。
English: Because his younger brother, Taiyuan Gong Gao Yang, was second only to him in age among his brothers, Bo Hai Wen Xiang Wang Gao Cheng often hated him in his heart.

古文：洋深自晦匿，言不出口，常自贬退，与澄言，无不顺从。
现代文：高洋处处倍加小心、谨慎，有话也不轻易说出来，常常自己贬低自己，与高澄说话，无不顺从高澄的意志。
English: Gao Yang was always very careful and cautious. It was not easy for him to say anything. He often belittled himself. When he spoke to Gao Cheng, he always obeyed Gao Cheng's will.

古文：澄轻之，常曰： 此人亦得富贵，相书亦何可解！ 
现代文：高澄很轻视高洋，经常对人说： 这个人也能享受到荣华富贵，相书上怎么解释得通呀？ 
English: Gao Cheng despised Gao Yang very much, and often said to people: This person can also enjoy the glory and wealth, how can it be explained in the photo album?

古文：洋为其夫人赵郡李氏营服玩小佳，澄辄夺取之；夫人或恚未与，洋笑曰： 此物犹应可求，兄须何容吝惜！ 
现代文：高洋经常为他的夫人赵郡人李氏做一些精巧的衣服玩物，高澄见了总是要占为己有；高洋的夫人有时很崐气愤，不想给高澄，高洋笑着对她说： 这种东西还可以再弄到，现在兄长需要，我们怎能如此吝啬呢？ 
English: Gao Yang often made some exquisite clothes and toys for his wife, Mr. Li, a resident of Zhao County. Gao Cheng always wanted to take possession of them. Gao Yang's wife was sometimes very angry and did not want to give them to Gao Cheng. Gao Yang smiled and said to her, "This kind of thing can still be obtained. Now my brother needs it. How can we be so stingy?"

古文：澄或愧不取，洋即受之，亦无饰让。
现代文：高澄有时也很惭愧，便不要，高洋就拿了过来，也不做出谦让的样子。
English: Takasumi is sometimes ashamed, so he doesn't want it, and Takahiro takes it and doesn't look like he's giving in.

古文：每退朝还第，辄闭阁静坐，虽对妻子，能竟日不言。
现代文：每次退朝之后，高洋一回到自己的府第，就关闭楼阁的门在里面静坐，即便对自己的妻子，也能整天不说一句话。
English: After each retreat, as soon as Gao Yang returned to his palace, he would close the door of the castle and sit quietly inside. Even for his wife, he could not say a word all day.

古文：或时袒跣奔跃，夫人问其故，洋曰： 为尔漫戏。 
现代文：有时候人他还赤着脚又跑又跳，夫人问他为什么这么做，高洋回答说： 随便给你作作游戏。 
English: Sometimes he would also run and jump around barefoot. When his wife asked him why he did that, Gao Yang replied, "I'll play any game for you."

古文：其实盖欲习劳也。
现代文：其实他是要锻炼身体。
English: In fact, he wants to exercise.

古文：澄获徐州刺史兰钦子京，以为膳奴，钦请赎之，不许；京屡自诉，澄杖之，曰： 更诉，当杀汝！ 
现代文：高澄抓获了徐州刺史兰钦的儿子兰京，让他充当服侍自己用餐的奴仆，兰钦请求用钱财赎兰京出去，但是高澄不答应。兰京自己多次提出请求，高澄就用木杖打他，对他说： 你要是再求诉的话，就杀掉你！ 
English: Gao Cheng captured Ran Jing, the son of Xuzhou assassin Ran Qin, and made him serve as his dinner servant. Ran Qin asked for money to ransom Ran Qin, but Gao Cheng did not agree. Ran Qin himself made repeated requests, and Gao Cheng beat him with a cane and said to him, "If you appeal again, I will kill you!"

古文：京与其党六人谋作乱。澄在鄴，居北城东柏堂，嬖琅邪公主，欲其往来无间，侍卫者常遣出外。
现代文：兰京与他的六个同伙密谋犯上作乱，高澄呆在邺城，住在北城东侧的柏堂，很宠幸琅邪公主，他为了使自己与公主之间的来往方便，经常把侍卫们派到外面。
English: Rankin and his six accomplices plotted to start a riot, while Gaocheng stayed in Lucheng. He lived in the castle town of Baotou on the east side of Beicheng. He was very favored by the evil princess. In order to make it easier for him to get to and from the princess, he often sent his bodyguards outside.

古文：辛卯，澄与散骑常侍陈元康、吏部尚书侍中杨愔、黄门侍郎崔季舒屏左右，谋受魏禅，署拟百官。
现代文：辛卯，高澄与散骑常侍陈元康，吏部尚书侍中杨、黄门侍郎崔季舒一起打发走身边的人，密谋逼东魏皇帝禅让皇位给高澄，还议定了对文武百官的安排。
English: Xinwu, Gao Cheng and his equestrian attendant Chen Yuankang, his secretary Yang, and his steward Cui Jishu together sent away the people around them, conspired to force the Eastern Wei Emperor Zhen to give the throne to Gao Cheng, and also agreed on the arrangements for the civil and military officials.

古文：兰京进食，澄却之，谓诸人曰： 昨夜梦此奴斫我，当急杀之。 
现代文：兰京送来食品，高澄叫他退下，对众人说： 昨天夜里，我梦见这个奴才用刀砍我，应该赶快把他杀掉。 
English: Rankin brought food, but Gao Cheng told him to back off, saying to the crowd, "Last night, I dreamed that this villain slashed me with a knife. I should kill him immediately."

古文：京闻之，置刀盘下，冒言进食。澄怒曰： 我未索食，何为遽来！ 
现代文：兰京听到这句话，便将刀子放在盘子底下，假装说要送食物过来，高澄恼怒地说道： 我没要食物，你为什么突然进来？ 
English: When Rankin heard this, he put his knife under the plate and pretended to bring food. Gao Cheng said angrily, "I didn't ask for food, why did you suddenly come in?"

古文：京挥刀曰： 来杀汝！ 
现代文：兰京挥着刀说道： 是来杀你！ 
English: Rankin waved his knife and said: I've come to kill you!

古文：澄自投伤足，入于床下，贼去床，弑之。
现代文：高澄扑过去，不料自己的脚受了伤，他就钻到了床下，兰京把床掀开杀掉了他。
English: Gao Cheng pounced on him, but his foot was injured, and he crawled under the bed. Lan Jing opened the bed and killed him.

古文：愔狼狈走出，遗一靴；季舒匿于厕中；元康以身蔽澄，与贼争刀被伤，肠出；库直王纮冒刃御贼；纥奚舍乐斗死。
现代文：杨狼猾逃走，一只靴子还丢在房间里；崔季舒藏到了厕所里面；陈元康用自己的身体掩护高澄，在和兰京争夺刀子时被砍伤，肠子流了出来；库直王迎着刀刃抵御叛贼；纥奚舍乐在搏斗中死去。
English: Yang Wol cunningly fled, leaving one boot in the room; Cui Jishu hid in the toilet; Chen Yuankang used his body to cover Gao Cheng, and was slashed while fighting with Lan Jing for the knife, and his intestines flowed out; Ku Zhi Wang faced the blade to resist the traitor; Zou Shele died in the fight.

古文：时变起仓猝，内外震骇。
现代文：当时这一事变发生得很突然，朝廷内外都感到震惊、害怕。
English: At that time, this event happened very suddenly, and both inside and outside the imperial court were shocked and afraid.

古文：太原公洋在城东双堂，闻之，神色不变，指挥部分，入讨群贼，斩而脔之，徐出，言曰： 奴反，大将军被伤，无大苦也。 
现代文：太原公高洋正在城东的双堂，听到这一消息，而不改色，立即指挥部队到出事地点讨伐这群叛贼，把他们杀死并将尸体切成了肉块。接着慢慢地走出来说道： 奴才造反，大将军受了伤，但是伤势不严重。 
English: Taiyuan Duke Gao Yang, who was in Shuangdong in the east of the city, heard the news and, without changing his mind, immediately ordered his troops to the scene of the accident to fight the group of traitors, kill them and cut the bodies into pieces of meat. Then he slowly came out and said: The slaves rebelled, the general was injured, but the injury was not serious.

古文：内外莫不惊异。
现代文：朝廷内外都对高洋的镇定自若感到惊异。
English: Both inside and outside the imperial court were surprised at Gaoyang's composure.

古文：洋秘不发丧。
现代文：高洋封锁了高澄的死讯，秘不发丧。
English: Gao Yang blocked the news of Gao Cheng's death, secretly mourning.

古文：陈元康手书辞母，口占使功曹参军祖珽作书陈便宜，至夜而卒；洋殡之第中，诈云出使，虚除元康中书令。
现代文：陈元康亲笔给母亲写了封诀别信，又向功曹参军祖口授，叫他整理出论述国家当务之急的文书，到了夜里，陈元康便死了。
English: Chen Yuankang wrote a farewell letter to his mother in his own handwriting, and dictated to Gong Cao, the military ancestor, asking him to sort out a document discussing the country's urgent tasks. At night, Chen Yuankang died.

古文：以王纮为领左右都督。纮，基之子也。
现代文：高洋把陈元康收殓在自己的府第里，假装说派他出使到外地了，还授予他中书令的职务。高洋任命王为领左右都督。王是王基的儿子。
English: Gao Yang detained Chen Yuankang in his palace, pretending that he had sent him on a mission to a foreign country, and also gave him the post of the Central Commissar of Letters. Gao Yang appointed Wang as the leader of the left and right governors. Wang is the son of Wang Ji.

古文：勋贵以重兵皆在并州，劝洋早如晋阳，洋从之。
现代文：功臣权贵们考虑到大部队都在并州，劝高洋尽快赶到晋阳，高洋接受了这一意见。
English: Considering that most of the troops were in Binzhou, the heroes and dignitaries urged Gao Yang to get to Jinyang as soon as possible, and Gao Yang accepted this opinion.

古文：夜，召大将军督护太原唐邕，使部分将士，镇遏四方；邕支配须臾而毕，洋由是重之。
现代文：连夜召来大将军督护太原人唐邕，叫唐邕部署安排将士们镇守四方；唐邕很快分配安排完毕，高洋从此很器重唐邕。
English: He summoned the general overnight to supervise the protection of the Taiyuan people, Tang Jun, and asked Tang Jun to deploy and arrange the soldiers to guard the four directions; Tang Jun soon completed the distribution and arrangement, and Gao Yang has been very important to Tang Jun since then.

古文：癸巳，洋讽东魏主以立太子大赦。
现代文：癸巳，高洋劝说东魏国主孝静帝以立了太子的名义大赦天下。
English: At this time, Gao Yang persuaded Emperor Xiao Jing, the ruler of the Eastern Wei Dynasty, to grant amnesty to the world in the name of the crown prince.

古文：澄死问渐露，东魏主窃谓左右曰： 大将军今死，似是天意，威权当复归帝室矣！ 
现代文：高澄的死讯渐渐透露出来，孝静帝悄悄地对身边的人说： 现在大将军死了，似乎是崐天意，权威应当重新归于皇室了！ 
English: The news of Gao Cheng's death gradually leaked out, and Emperor Xiao Jing quietly said to the people around him: Now that the great general is dead, it seems to be the will of heaven, and authority should be returned to the royal family!

古文：洋留太尉高岳、太保高隆之、开府仪同三司司马子如、侍中杨愔守鄴，馀勋贵皆自随。
现代文：高洋留下太尉高岳、太保高隆之、开府仪同三司司马子如、侍中杨守卫邺城，其余的功臣权贵都让他们跟随着自己。
English: Gao Yang left behind First Lieutenant Gao Yue, Grand Marshal Gao Long Zhi, Kaifu Yi, Third Secretary Ma Zi Ru, and Chamberlain Yang to guard Shicheng, and the rest of the heroes and dignitaries let them follow him.

古文：甲午，入谒东魏主于昭阳殿，从甲士八千人，登阶者二百馀人，皆攘袂扣刃，若对严敌。
现代文：甲午，高洋来到昭阳殿拜见孝静帝，身后跟着八千名披甲戴盔的士兵，登上宫殿台阶的就有二百多人，他们都捋着袖子按住刀剑，就象面对厉害的敌人一样。
English: At one o'clock in the afternoon, Gao Yang came to the Shoyang Palace to pay homage to Emperor Xiao Jing. He was followed by eight thousand soldiers wearing armor and helmets. More than two hundred people climbed the palace steps. They all held their swords in their sleeves, as if they were facing a powerful enemy.

古文：令主者传奏曰： 臣有家事，须诣晋阳。 
现代文：高洋叫主持朝仪的官员向孝静帝转报： 我有一些家事，必须直到晋阳。 
English: Gao Yang asked the official who presided over the morning ceremony to report to Emperor Xiao Jing: I have some household chores that must be done before I leave for Jinyang.

古文：再拜而出。
现代文：说完，他拜了两拜离开皇宫。
English: Having said this, he left the palace after two bows.

古文：东魏主失色，目送之曰： 此人又似不相容，朕不知死在何日！ 
现代文：孝静帝大惊失色，他目送着高洋远去的身影说道： 此人看来还是不能容纳我的，我真不知道会死在哪一天？ 
English: Xiao Jingdi was stunned and lost his composure. He looked at the figure that had gone far away and said: This person still can't hold me, I really don't know when I will die?

古文：晋阳旧臣宿将素轻洋；及至，大会文武，神彩英畅，言辞敏洽，众皆大惊。
现代文：晋阳原来的文官武将们一向轻视高洋，等到高洋抵达晋阳，他们看到高洋大会文武官员，神采英伟不凡，言语敏锐周到，都觉得非常吃惊。
English: The former civil officials and military commanders of Jinyang had always despised Gaoyang. When Gaoyang arrived in Jinyang, they were very surprised to see the Gaoyang Assembly's civil and military officials, who were extraordinary in spirit, and thoughtful in speech.

古文：澄政令有不便者，洋皆改之。
现代文：高澄以往制订的政策、下达的命令中有不便于执行的。高洋都作了修改。
English: Some of the policies and orders issued by Gao Cheng in the past were not easy to implement.

古文：高隆之、司马子如等恶度支尚书崔暹，奏暹及崔季舒过恶，鞭二百，徙边。
现代文：高隆之、司马子如等人憎恨度支尚书崔暹，向上汇报他与崔季舒的过失与罪恶，结果他们都被打了二百鞭子，然后给发配到边远地区了。
English: Gao Longzhi, Sima Ziru and others hated Du Zhi Shangshu Cui Siam and reported his and Cui Jishu's faults and crimes to the higher-ups. As a result, they were all given 200 lashes and sent to remote areas.

古文：侯景以宋子仙为司徙、郭元建为尚书左仆射，与领军任约等四十人并开府仪同三司，仍诏： 自今开府仪同不须更加将军。 
现代文：侯景任命宋子仙为司徒，郭子建为尚书左仆射，与领军任约等四十个人一起任开府仪同三司，还下达诏书： 从今以后开府仪同不必再增加将军名号。 
English: Hou Jing appointed Song Zixian as the tutor, Guo Zijian as the left-hand man of Shang Shu, and appointed about forty people such as the leader of the army to serve as the Kaifu ceremony and the three departments. He also issued an edict: From now on, the Kaifu ceremony and the name of the general do not need to be added.

古文：是后开府仪同至多，不可复记矣。
现代文：此后开府仪同多得数不胜数。
English: Since then, countless numbers of people have been awarded the title of Kaifu-gi.

古文：鄱阳王范自枞阳遣信告江州刺史寻阳王大心，大心遣信邀之。
现代文：鄱阳王萧范从枞阳派人送信给江州刺史寻阳王萧大心，告诉他有关情况，萧大心闻讯后就派人带着信前去邀请萧范。
English: Shenyang King Xiao Fan sent a person from Shenyang to send a letter to Jiangzhou Zhisheng Wang Xiao Daxin, telling him about the situation. After Xiao Daxin heard the news, he sent a person with a letter to invite Xiao Fan.

古文：范引兵诣江州，大心以湓城处之。
现代文：萧范带领人马到达江州，萧大心将湓城让给他屯驻。
English: Xiao Fan led the men and horses to Jiangzhou, and Xiao Daxin gave him the settlement of Shicheng.

古文：吴兴兵力寡弱，张嵊书生，不闲军旅。或劝嵊效袁君正以郡迎侯子鉴。
现代文：吴兴兵员少力量弱，张嵊是一介书生，不熟习军中事务；有人劝张嵊仿效袁君正，也率领全郡军民迎接侯子鉴。
English: Wu Xing's soldiers were few and weak, and Zhang Ye was a mere student, not familiar with military affairs. Some people advised Zhang Ye to follow the example of Yuan Junzheng and lead the county's soldiers and civilians to meet Hou Zi Jian.

古文：嵊叹曰： 袁氏世济忠贞，不意君正一旦隳之。
现代文：张嵊叹道： 袁家世世代代都以忠贞著称，没想到这名声被袁君正毁于一旦。
English: Zhang Yu sighed, "The Yuan family has been famous for its loyalty for generations. I didn't expect that this reputation would be destroyed by Yuan Jun Zheng.

古文：吾岂不知吴郡既没，吴兴势难久全；但以身许国，有死无贰耳！ 
现代文：我难道不知道吴郡陷落之后，吴兴也就势必难以长久保全的道理吗？
English: Didn't I know that after the fall of Wu County, Wu Xing would be difficult to maintain for a long time?

古文：九月，癸丑朔，子鉴军至吴兴，嵊战败，还府，整服安坐，子鉴执送建康。
现代文：只是我既然已经把一切都献给了国家，那么我就只能选择这么一条死路罢了！ 九月，癸丑朔，侯子鉴的部队到达吴兴，张嵊迎战失败，返回府中，空戴整齐然后安然坐着，侯子鉴将他捉信，押送到建康。
English: But since I have already devoted everything to the country, then I can only choose such a dead end! In September, at the dawn of the new year, Hou Zi Jian's troops arrived in Wuxing, Zhang Ye met with defeat, returned to the capital, dressed neatly and then sat peacefully. Hou Zi Jian caught him and escorted him to Jiankang.

古文：侯景嘉其守节，欲活之，嵊曰： 吾忝任专城，朝廷倾危，不能匡复，今日速死为幸！ 
现代文：侯景赞许张嵊能够守节，想保全他的性命。张嵊却说道： 我有愧于担任吴兴郡守，在朝廷危亡之际，不能进行挽救，使之转危为安，今天我只求马上死，也算是一件幸事。 
English: Hou Jing praised Zhang Ye for being able to keep the festival and wanted to save his life. Zhang Ye, however, said: I am worthy of being the governor of Wuxing County. When the imperial court is in danger, I cannot save it and turn it around. Today, I only ask to die immediately, which is also a blessing.

古文：景犹欲存其一子，嵊曰： 吾一门已在鬼录，不就尔虏求恩！ 
现代文：侯景还想留下他的一个儿子，张嵊说道： 我们一家人都已经上了鬼藉，我才不会向你胡虏乞求恩惠呢！ 
English: Hou Jing also wanted to leave one of his sons behind, Zhang Ye said: Our whole family has already gone to the devil, so I won't beg for favors from you, Hurru!

古文：景怒，尽杀之；并杀沈浚。
现代文：侯景听了大为恼怒，杀光了他全家老小，并且还杀掉了沈浚。
English: Hearing this, Hou Jing became very angry and killed his entire family, including his son and daughter, and also killed Shen Jun.

古文：河东王誉告急于岳阳王詧，詧留咨议参军济阳蔡大宝守襄阳，帅众二万、骑二千伐江陵以救湘州。
现代文：河东王萧誉向岳阳王萧告急，萧留下谘议参军济阳人蔡大宝守卫襄阳，自己统率两万兵众，两千名骑兵，计伐江陵以授救湘州。
English: King Xiaoyu of Hedong rushed to King Xiao of Yueyang, leaving Xiao to consult with Cai Dabao, a Jiyang man who had joined the army to guard Xiangyang, and led 20,000 soldiers and 2,000 cavalrymen to attack Jiangling in order to save Hunan.

古文：湘东王绎大惧，遣左右就狱中问计于王僧辩，僧辩具陈方略，绎乃赦之，以为城中都督。
现代文：湘东王萧绎非常害怕，派身边的人来到狱中向王僧辩询问对策，王僧辩详细地陈述了用兵策略，萧绎于是赦免了王僧辩，叫他担任城中的都督。
English: King Xiaoyan of eastern Hunan was very afraid, and sent people around him to come to the prison to ask Wang Sangyan for countermeasures. Wang Sangyan detailed the strategy of using soldiers, and Xiaoyan then pardoned Wang Sangyan and asked him to serve as the governor of the city.

古文：乙卯，詧至江陵，作十三营以攻之；会大雨，平地水深四尺，詧军气沮。
现代文：乙卯，萧赶到江陵，安置了十三个军营，向守城的部队发起了进攻；正好遇上大雨，平地上都积起四尺深的水，萧的部队士气低落。
English: Second, Xiao rushed to Jiangling, set up thirteen military camps, and launched an attack on the troops guarding the city; just in case of heavy rain, water four feet deep accumulated on the plain, and the morale of Xiao's troops was low.

古文：绎与新兴太守杜崱有旧，密邀之。
现代文：萧绎与新兴太守杜过去有交情，暗中请他赶来援助。
English: Xiao Yuanyuan had a friendship with the newly-appointed Emperor Du in the past, and secretly asked him to come to his aid.

古文：乙丑，崱与兄岌、岸、弟幼安、兄子龛各帅所部降于绎。
现代文：乙丑，杜与他的哥哥杜岌、杜岸崐、弟弟杜幼安、侄子杜龛各自率领部属投降了萧绎。
English: Bixiu, Du and his elder brother Du Rui, Du Guanzhang, younger brother Du Yu'an, and nephew Du Yao each led their subordinates to surrender.

古文：岸请以五百骑袭襄阳，昼夜兼行，去襄阳三十里，城中觉之，蔡大宝奉詧母龚保林登城拒战。
现代文：杜岸请求带领五百名骑兵去袭击襄阳，征得同意后，就夜以继日地赶路。当他们距离襄阳三十里的时候，城里的人发现了他们，蔡大宝帮着萧的母亲龚保林登上城墙进行防守。
English: Du Guan requested to lead five hundred cavalry to attack Xiangyang, and after obtaining the consent of Zhuang, he rushed to the road day and night. When they were thirty miles away from Xiangyang, the people in the city found them, Cai Dabao helped Xiao's mother Zou Baolin to climb the city wall for defense.

古文：詧闻之，夜遁，弃粮食、金帛、铠仗于湕水，不可胜纪。
现代文：萧听到这一消息，连夜逃跑，丢弃在水中的粮食、金银、绢帛、铠甲、兵器，数不胜数。
English: Upon hearing this news, Xiao fled in the middle of the night, abandoning countless grain, gold and silver, plows, armor, and weapons in the water.

古文：张缵病足，詧载以随军；及败走，守者恐为追兵所及，杀之，弃尸而去。
现代文：张缵脚上有伤，萧绎用车马载上他，让他跟随部队行动；等他们败逃的时候，看守张缵的人恐怕让追兵赶上，就把张赞杀了，然后丢下他的尸体离开了。
English: Zhang Zhan was wounded in the foot. Xiao Yu loaded him onto a cart and let him follow the troops. When they were defeated and fled, Zhang Zhan's guards were afraid to let the pursuing soldiers catch up, so they killed Zhang Zhan and left his body behind.

古文：詧至襄阳，岸奔广平，依其兄南阳太守献。
现代文：萧一到襄阳，杜岸就逃到广平，依附他的哥哥南阳太守杜去了。
English: As soon as Xiao arrived in Xiangyang, Dugan fled to Guangping and went to join his brother Nanyang Taizhou Du.

古文：湘东王绎以鲍泉围长沙久不克，怒之，以平南将军王僧辩代为都督，数泉十罪，命舍人罗重欢与僧辩偕行。
现代文：湘东王萧绎因鲍泉包围长沙后，很长时间都没把它打下来，对此感到很愤怒，就让平南将军王僧辩代替鲍泉为都督，还列举了鲍泉十条罪状，命令舍人罗重权与王僧辩同行。
English: After encircling Changsha with Baoquan, King Xiaoyan of Eastern Hunan did not defeat it for a long time. He felt very angry about this, so he let the Pingnan general Wang Sofen replace Baoquan as the governor. He also listed ten crimes of Baoquan and ordered to give up the heavy weight to go with Wang Sofen.

古文：泉闻僧辩来，愕然曰： 得王竟陵来助我，贼不足平。 
现代文：鲍泉听到王僧辩来的消息，惊愕地说道： 王竟陵能够来帮助我，贼兵就不愁不能平定了。 
English: When Bao Quan heard the news that Wang Jingling had arrived, he was stunned and said, "If Wang Jingling can help me, then the bandits can be pacified."

古文：拂席待之。
现代文：然后他便掸净席子等待王僧辩。
English: Then he cleared his seat and waited for Wang Sangyan to speak.

古文：僧辩入，背泉而坐，曰： 鲍郎，卿有罪，令旨使我锁卿，卿勿以故意见期。 
现代文：王僧辩走进屋里，背着鲍泉坐了下来，说道： 鲍郎，你有罪，有命令叫我把你锁起来，你可不要认为我是有意的。 
English: Wang Sangye walked into the room, sat down with Bao Quan on his back, and said: Bao Lang, you are guilty, there is an order for me to lock you up, don't think I did it on purpose.

古文：使重欢宣令，锁之床侧。
现代文：说着他就叫罗重权宣读萧绎的命令，然后将鲍泉锁在床边。
English: Saying this, he asked Luo Chongquan to read out Xiao Yuanzhang's order, and then locked Bao Quan on the edge of the bed.

古文：泉为启自申，且谢淹缓之罪，绎怒解，遂释之。
现代文：鲍泉为自己的罪责申辩，并且请求对自己进展缓慢进行处罚，萧绎的怒气平息下来，于是就释放了他。
English: Bao Quan pleaded guilty to his crime and asked to be punished for his slow progress. His anger subsided and he was released.

古文：冬，十月，癸未朔，东魏以开府仪同三司潘相乐为司空。
现代文：冬季，十月，癸未朔，东魏任命开府仪同三司潘相乐为司空。
English: In the winter, in October, before the new year, the Eastern Wei Dynasty appointed Kaifu Yi and San Sipan Sangle as Sikyu.

古文：初，历阳太守庄铁帅众归寻阳王大心，大心以为豫章内史。
现代文：当初，历阳太守庄铁率领人马归附了寻阳王萧大心，萧大心任命他为豫章内史。
English: At the beginning, Liyang Daju Zhuang Tie led a group of men and horses to attach the Sun King Xiao Daxin, and Xiao Daxin appointed him as the internal history of Yuzhang.

古文：铁至郡即叛，推观宁侯永为主。
现代文：庄铁到达郡城之后就叛变了，推举观宁侯萧永为首领。
English: After Zhuo Tie arrived at the county seat, he mutinied and promoted Guoning Hou Xiao Yong as the leader.

古文：永，范之弟也。
现代文：萧永是萧范的弟弟。
English: Xiao Yong is Xiao Fan's younger brother.

古文：丁酉，铁引兵袭寻阳，大心遣其将徐嗣徽逆击，破之。
现代文：丁酉，庄铁指挥部队袭击寻阳，萧大心派遣手下的将领徐嗣徽进行迎击，打垮了庄铁。
English: Ding Xi, Zhuo Tie's commanding troops attacked Xuan Yang, and Xiao Dashin dispatched his general Xu Shihui to counterattack, defeating Zhuo Tie.

古文：铁走，至建昌，光远将军韦构邀击之，铁失其母弟妻子，单骑还南昌，大心遣构将兵追讨之。
现代文：庄铁逃到了建昌，光远将军韦构半道拦击，这一仗庄铁失去了母亲、弟弟以及妻儿，单骑返回南昌，萧大心派遣韦构率领人马继续追击庄铁。
English: Zhuo Tie fled to Jianchang. Guangyuan General Wei Jie stopped Zhuo Tie halfway. Zhuo Tie lost his mother, brother, wife and child in this battle. He rode back to Nanchang alone. Xiao Dashin sent Wei Jie to lead the cavalry to continue chasing Zhuo Tie.

古文：宋子仙自吴郡趣钱塘。
现代文：宋子仙从吴郡赶向钱塘。
English: Song Zisen rushed to Qiantang from Wu County.

古文：刘神茂自吴兴趣富阳，前武州刺史富阳孙国恩以城降之。
现代文：刘神茂从吴兴赶向富阳，前武州刺史富阳人孙国恩打开城门向他投降。
English: Liu Shenmao hurried from Wu Xing to Fuyang. Sun Guoen, the former governor of Wuzhou and a native of Fuyang, opened the city gate and surrendered to him.

古文：十一月，乙卯，葬武皇帝于修陵，庙号高祖。
现代文：十一月，乙卯，梁武帝被安葬在陵，庙号高祖。
English: In November, Emperor Liangwu was buried in a mausoleum with the name Gaozu.

古文：百济遣使入贡，见城阙荒圮，异于向来，哭于端门；侯景怒，录送庄严寺，不听出。
现代文：百济派遣使者来到建康进贡，使者看到城关已经荒废毁坏，同以前大不一样，就在端门前哭了起来；侯景闻讯后大怒，扣留了使者，把他押送到庄严寺，不让他出城。
English: Baekje sent an envoy to Jiankang to pay tribute. The envoy saw that the city gate had been abandoned and destroyed, very different from before, and cried in front of the gate; Hou Jing was furious after hearing the news, detained the envoy, escorted him to the solemn temple, and did not let him leave the city.

古文：壬戌，宋子仙急攻钱塘，戴僧逷降之。
现代文：壬戌，宋子仙向钱塘发起迅猛的攻击，戴僧逖投降了宋子仙。
English: In Nanking, Song Zixian launched a swift attack on Qiantang, and Dai Sengyu surrendered to Song Zixian.

古文：岳阳王詧使将军薛晖攻广平，拔之，获杜岸，送襄阳。
现代文：岳阳王萧派将军薛晖攻打广平，薛晖占领了该城，并俘虏了杜岸，将他送到了襄阳。
English: King Xiao of Yueyang sent General Xue Bing to attack Guangping. Xue Bing occupied the city, captured Du Gang and sent him to Xiangyang.

古文：詧拔其舌，鞭其面，支解而烹之。
现代文：萧拔掉了杜岸的舌头，用鞭子抽打他的面孔。然后将他肢解烹煮了。
English: Xiao pulled out Dugan's tongue, lashed his face with a whip, and then dismembered and cooked him.

古文：又发其祖父墓，焚其骸而扬之，以其头为漆碗。
现代文：接着萧又挖开杜岸祖父和父亲的坟墓，烧掉了他们的遗赅，扔掉了剩下的骨灰，还把死者的头盖骨做成漆碗。
English: Xiao then dug up the graves of Dugan's grandfather and father, burned their widows, threw away the remaining ashes, and made the skulls of the deceased into lacquer bowls.

古文：詧既与湘东王绎为敌，恐不能自存，遣使求援于魏，请为附庸。
现代文：萧与湘东王萧绎为敌之后，害怕自己难以生存，就派出使者去向西魏求援，请求充当西魏的附庸。
English: After Xiao became enemies with Xiao Yu, the king of eastern Hunan, he was afraid that it would be difficult for him to survive, so he sent an envoy to ask for help from the Western Wei Dynasty, requesting to serve as a vassal of the Western Wei Dynasty.

古文：丞相泰令东阁祭酒荣权使于襄阳。
现代文：西魏的丞相宇文泰命令东阁祭酒荣权出使襄阳，萧绎派遣司州刺史柳仲礼镇守竟陵，图谋对付萧。
English: The Western Wei chancellor U Wentai ordered the Donggak Festival of Wine and Honor to send an envoy to Xiangyang, and Xiao Yu dispatched the prefectural governor Liu Zhongli to guard Qingting Mausoleum in an attempt to deal with Xiao.

古文：绎使司州刺史柳仲礼镇竟陵以图詧，詧惧，遣其妃王氏及世子詧为质于魏。丞相泰欲经略江、汉，以开府仪同三司杨忠都督三荆等十五州诸军事，镇穰城。
现代文：萧害怕了，就派他的妃子王氏以及他的嫡子萧到西魏当人质。丞相宇文泰想占领江、汉地区，使任命开府仪同三司杨忠为都督三荆等十五州诸军事，镇守穰城。
English: Xiao was afraid, so he sent his concubine Wang and his legitimate son Xiao to the Western Wei Dynasty to be a hostage. The prime minister, Yu Wentai, wanted to occupy the Jiang and Han regions, so he appointed Kaifu Yi and the third secretary, Yang Zhong, as the governor of Sanjing and other fifteen states and the military, to guard Lucheng.

古文：仲礼至安陆，安陆太守沈勰以城降之。
现代文：柳仲礼到达安陆，安陆的太守柳勰打开城门向他投降。
English: Liu Zhongli arrived in Anlu, and the governor of Anlu, Liu Ye, opened the city gate and surrendered to him.

古文：仲礼留长史马岫与其弟子礼守之，帅众一万趣襄阳，泰遣杨忠及行台仆射长孙俭将兵击仲礼以救詧。
现代文：柳仲礼留下长史马岫与自己的弟弟柳子礼一道镇守该城，然后率领一万人马赶往襄阳，宇文泰派遣杨忠和行台仆射长孙俭带领人马袭击柳仲礼，以援救萧。
English: Liu Zhongli left Chang Shima and his brother Liu Zili to guard the city together, and then led ten thousand horses to Yangyang. Wu Wentai dispatched Yang Zhong and Xingtai's servant Changsha Sun Jian to attack Liu Zhongli to rescue Xiao.

古文：宋子仙乘胜度浙江，至会稽。
现代文：宋子仙乘胜渡过浙江，到达会稽。
English: Song Zixian crossed Zhejiang by triumph and arrived at the auditorium.

古文：邵陵王纶闻钱塘已败，出奔鄱阳，鄱阳内史开建侯蕃以兵拒之，范进击蕃，破之。
现代文：邵陵王萧纶听说钱塘的部队已经失败，就出逃至鄱阳，鄱阳内史、开建侯萧蕃带兵拒绝萧纶入城，萧纶进军攻击萧蕃，打败了对方。
English: When King Xiaoling of Shao Ling heard that Qiantang's troops had been defeated, he fled to Fenyang. Fenyang's internal history and the construction of the warlord Xiao Yu led the soldiers to refuse Xiao Yu to enter the city. Xiao Yu marched to attack Xiao Yu and defeated the other side.

古文：魏杨忠将至义阳，太守马伯符以下溠城降之，忠以伯符为乡导。
现代文：西魏的杨忠将要到达义阳的时候，太守马伯符率下城军民向他投降，杨忠让马伯符充当向导。
English: When Yang Zhong of the Western Wei Dynasty was about to arrive in Yiyang, the people of the city surrendered to him under the leadership of the eunuch Ma Bofu. Yang Zhong let Ma Bofu act as a guide.

古文：伯符，岫之子也。
现代文：马伯符是马岫的儿子。
English: Ma Bo Fu is the son of Ma Yao.

古文：南郡王大连为东扬州刺史。时会稽丰沃，胜兵数万，粮仗山积，东人惩侯景残虐，咸乐为用，而大连朝夕酣饮，不恤军事；司马东阳留异，凶狡残暴，为众所患，大连悉以军事委之。
现代文：南郡王萧大连担任东扬州刺史，当时会稽物产丰富，土地肥沃，能够负担几万兵员，粮食、兵器堆成了山，东部地区的人苦于侯景的残酷暴虐，都乐意为萧大连效力，可是萧大连整天大量喝酒，对军事一点也不用心；司马东阳人留异凶狠、狡诈、残暴，大家都很痛恨他，萧大连却将军事大权都交给了他。
English: Nan County's Wang Xiao Dalian served as the chief historian of East Yangzhou. At that time, the county was rich in products, fertile land, and could afford tens of thousands of soldiers. Grain and weapons piled up into a mountain. People in the eastern region suffered from the cruel tyranny of Houjing and were willing to work for Xiao Dalian. However, Xiao Dalian drank heavily all day and did not care about the military at all. Sima Dongyang people were fierce, cunning, and cruel. Everyone hated him, but Xiao Dalian handed over military power to him.

古文：十二月，庚寅，宋子仙攻会稽，大连弃城走，异奔还乡里，寻以其众降于子仙。
现代文：十二月，庚寅，宋子仙向会稽发起进攻，萧大连弃城逃跑了，留异逃回家乡，很快率其部众投降了宋子仙。
English: In December, Geng Yin and Song Zixian launched an attack on the party committee. Xiao Dalian abandoned the city and ran away. He fled to his hometown, and soon led his subordinates to surrender to Song Zixian.

古文：大连欲奔鄱阳，异为子仙乡导，追及大连于信安，执送建康，大连犹醉不之知。帝闻之，引帷自蔽，掩袂而泣。
现代文：萧大连准备逃到鄱阳，留异充当宋子仙的向导，在信安追上了萧大连，将他活捉后押送到建康。简文帝听到这一消息，拉起帷幕躲在里面，用袖子捂住脸哭泣。
English: Xiao Dalian was preparing to flee to Fenyang, and stayed behind to act as a guide for Song Zixian. He caught up with Xiao Dalian in Xin'an, captured him alive, and escorted him to Jiankang. When Emperor Jianwen heard this news, he pulled up the curtain and hid inside, covering his face with his sleeve and weeping.

古文：于是三吴尽没于景，公侯在会稽者，俱南度岭。
现代文：于是三吴地区都被侯景占领，在会稽的公侯们都越过南岭避难而逃。
English: As a result, all of the Sanwu region was occupied by the Houjing, and the princes who were present at the meeting all fled across the Nanling for refuge.

古文：景以留异为东阳太守，收其妻子为质。
现代文：侯景任命留异为东阳太守，但把他的妻儿留下充当人质。
English: Hou Jing appointed Rui Yi as the governor of Dongyang, but kept his wife and son as hostages.

古文：乙酉，东魏以并州刺史彭乐为司徒。
现代文：乙酉，东魏任命并州刺史彭乐为司徒。
English: Acetylene, the Eastern Wei Dynasty appointed the state magistrate Spenle as the magistrate.

古文：邵陵王纶进至九江，寻阳王大心以江州让之，纶不受，引兵西上。
现代文：邵陵王萧纶进军到九江，寻阳王萧大心将江州让给他，萧纶没有接受，又指挥部队沿江西上。
English: Shao Ling King Xiao Wei marched into Jiujiang. Seeking the sun, King Xiao Da Xin ceded Jiangzhou to him. Xiao Wei did not accept, and commanded the troops along the west of Jiangsu.

古文：始兴太守陈霸先结郡中豪杰欲讨侯景，郡人侯安都、张亻思等各帅众千馀人归之。
现代文：始兴太守陈霸先集结郡中豪杰，准备讨伐侯景，郡人侯安都、张等各自率领一千多人来归附他。
English: First, Shixing governor Chen Ba first gathered the county's heroes and prepared to fight Houjing. County people Hou Andu, Zhang and others each led more than a thousand people to join him.

古文：霸先遣主帅杜僧明将二千人顿于岭上，广州刺史萧勃遣人止之曰： 侯景骁雄，天下无敌，前者援军十万，士马精强，犹不能克，君以区区之众，将何所之！
现代文：陈霸先派遣主帅僧明率两千人到大庾岭上屯驻，广州刺史萧勃派人来制止他说： 侯景骁勇强悍有力，天下无敌，前一段时间，来援救朝廷的部队多达十万人，兵强马壮，尚且不能打败他，现在您只有这么一点人，能对他怎么样呢？
English: Chen Baxi first dispatched the head coach, Monk Ming, and two thousand men to set up a garrison on the Dalatling Mountain, and the Guangzhou censor, Xiao Bo, sent people to stop him, saying: "Hou Jingyao is brave and powerful, invincible in the world. Some time ago, as many as one hundred thousand troops came to the rescue of the imperial court. They are strong and powerful, yet they cannot defeat him. Now you only have so many people. What can you do to him?

古文：如闻岭北王侯又皆鼎沸，亲寻干戈，以君疏外，讵可暗投！
现代文：听说岭北地区的王侯那里局势又很不稳定，这些崐皇亲之间都互相开战，您只不过是跟萧家没什么关系的外人，怎么可以明珠暗投呢？
English: I heard that the situation of the princes in the northern part of Lingyin is very unstable, and these imperial relatives are at war with each other. You are just a stranger who has nothing to do with the Xiao family. How can you secretly invest in the pearl?

古文：未若且留始兴，遥张声势，保太山之安也。 
现代文：您不如暂且留在始兴，远远地张扬自己的声势，可以像泰山一般保证安全。 
English: You might as well stay in Shixing for the time being and spread your fame far and wide. You can guarantee your safety like Mount Tai.

古文：霸先曰： 仆荷国恩，往闻侯景度江，即欲赴援，遭值元、兰，梗我中道。
现代文：陈霸先回答说： 我蒙受国恩，以前听到侯景渡江的消息，我就准备前去救援，可是在途中让元仲景与兰裕给阻拦住了。
English: Chen Baxian replied: I have received the grace of the state. I heard the news of Hou Jing crossing the river before, and I was ready to go to the rescue, but I was stopped by Yuan Zhongjing and Lan Yu on the way.

古文：今京都覆没，君辱臣死，谁敢爱命！
现代文：如今国都沦陷，国君受到污辱，做臣子的就应为国君而死，谁还敢顾惜自己的性命？
English: Now that the capital of the country has fallen and the sovereign has been humiliated, a courtier should die for the sovereign. Who would dare to spare his own life?

古文：君侯体则皇枝，任重方岳，遣仆一军，犹贤乎已，乃更止之乎！ 
现代文：君侯您是皇亲国戚，承担着一个方面的重任，您派我带领一支军队去讨伐国贼，还比不派要好得多，怎么又来制止我呢？ 
English: Your Highness, you are a relative of the Emperor and bear a heavy responsibility in one respect. It is much better for you to send me to lead an army to fight the traitors than not. How can you stop me?

古文：乃遣使间道诣江陵，受湘东王绎节度。
现代文：于是他就派使者抄小路赶到江陵，表示接受湘东王萧绎的指挥调度。
English: So he sent an envoy to pick up the trail and rush to Gangneung, indicating that he accepted the command and dispatch of Xiao Yu, the king of eastern Hunan.

古文：时南康土豪蔡路养起兵据郡，勃乃以腹心谭世远为曲江令，与路养相结，同遏霸先。
现代文：当时南康的当地豪强蔡路养拉起武装占据了郡城，萧勃就派自己的心腹谭世远出任曲江县令，与蔡路养联合起来，共同遏制陈霸先。
English: At that time, the local strongman Cai Luyang of Nankang took up arms and occupied the county seat. Xiao Bo sent his henchman, Tan Shiyuan, to serve as the county magistrate of Qujiang, and united with Cai Luyang to jointly contain Chen Baxian.

古文：魏杨忠拔随郡，执太守桓和。
现代文：西魏的杨忠攻占了随郡，活捉了太守桓和。
English: Yang Zhong of the Western Wei conquered Su County and captured Taishu Kanwa alive.

古文：东魏使金门公潘乐等将兵五万袭司州，刺史夏侯强降之。
现代文：东魏派金门公潘乐等人率领五万人马袭击司州，司州刺史夏侯强投降了东魏。
English: The Eastern Wei Dynasty sent Kinmen Gong Pan Le and others led by fifty thousand people to attack Sizhou, and Sizhou's leader Xia Houqiang surrendered to the Eastern Wei Dynasty.

古文：于是东魏尽有淮南之地。
现代文：于是东魏占据了淮河以南的所有土地。
English: As a result, the Eastern Wei Dynasty occupied all the land south of the Huai River.

