古文：管子曰： 身不善之患，毋患人莫己知。
现代文：管子说： 可怕的是自身不善，不怕别人不了解自己。
English: Guanzi said: What's terrible is that you're not good at yourself. Don't be afraid that others don't understand you.

古文：丹青在山，民知而取之；美珠在渊，民知而取之。
现代文：丹青在深山，人们了解并把它取出来；美珠在深渊，人们也能了解并把它取出来。
English: Danqing is deep in the mountains, people understand and take it out; Beauty Pearl is in the abyss, people can also understand and take it out.

古文：是以我有过为，而民毋过命。
现代文：所以，我个人可以有错误的行为，人民却不会有错误的评价。
English: Therefore, I personally can have a wrong behavior, but the people will not have a wrong evaluation.

古文：民之观也察矣，不可遁逃以为不善。
现代文：人民看问题是太清楚了，谁也不能瞒过他而为非作歹。
English: The people see the problem all too clearly, and no one can deceive them and do evil.

古文：故我有善，则立誉我；我有过，则立毁我。
现代文：所以，我有好处，人们就表扬我；我有过错，人们就指责我。
English: Therefore, when I do well, people praise me; when I do poorly, people blame me.

古文：当民之毁誉也，则莫归问于家矣，故先王畏民。
现代文：对待人民的指责与表扬，不需要再回去问自家人。所以，先王总是敬畏人民的。
English: There is no need to go back and ask his family members about the criticisms and praises he gave to the people. Therefore, the former king always feared the people.

古文：操名从人，无不强也；操名去人，无不弱也。
现代文：持有善名而且听从人民，没有不强盛的；持有恶名而且抵制人民，没有不衰弱的。
English: He who has a good name and obeys the people will not lack power; he who has a bad name and opposes the people will not lack strength.

古文：虽有天子诸侯，民皆操名而去之，则捐其地而走矣，故先王畏民。
现代文：虽然有天子诸侯的地位，人民都持其恶名而离去，那就只好弃其领地而出走了。所以先王是敬畏人民的。
English: Although he had the status of the prince of princes, the people held on to his bad reputation and left, so he had to abandon his territory and leave. Therefore, the former king feared the people.

古文：在于身者孰为利？
现代文：人身上什么最敏感？
English: What is the most sensitive part of the human body?

古文：气与目为利。
现代文：耳目最敏感。
English: The ears and eyes are the most sensitive.

古文：圣人得利而托焉，故民重而名遂。
现代文：圣人得耳目之利而依靠它，故人民倚重而名声远扬。
English: The saint gained the favor of the ears and eyes and relied on it, so the people relied on him and his fame spread far and wide.

古文：我亦托焉，圣人托可好，我托可恶，以来美名，又可得乎？
现代文：我也要依靠它。但圣人以它行善，我则以它行恶，我用以行恶，而想求美名，怎么行呢？
English: And I will put my trust in him. But how can a holy man do good with it, and I with evil? Or how can I do evil, and seek for a good name?

古文：我托可恶，爱且不能为我能也，毛嫱、西施，天下之美人也，盛怨气于面，不能以为可好。
现代文：即使爱我的人也不能帮我得到美名的。毛嫱、西施是天下的美人，脸上满载怨气，也不能算作美。
English: Even people who love me can't help me get a beautiful name. Mao Dun and Xi Shi are the most beautiful women in the world, and their faces are full of bitterness, so they can't be considered beautiful.

古文：我且恶面而盛怨气焉，怨气见于面，恶言出于口，去恶充以求美名，又可得乎？
现代文：我本身丑恶而满载怨气，怨气表现在面上，恶言又出于口，以恶的实际而想美的名声，能办到么？
English: I myself am ugly and full of bitterness. The bitterness shows on my face, evil words come out of my mouth, and I want to make a beautiful reputation with the reality of evil. Can I do it?

古文：甚矣，百姓之恶人之有余忌也，是以长者断之，短者续之，满者洫之，虚者实之。 
现代文：太严重了！百姓是憎恶人有重大缺陷的。所以，过长的要断短，过短的要续长，过满的要疏泄，空了要加以充实。 
English: It's too serious! The people hate people with major defects. Therefore, what is too long should be cut short, what is too short should be extended, what is too full should be drained, and what is empty should be filled.

古文：管子曰： 善罪身者，民不得罪也；不能罪身者，民罪之。
现代文：管子说： 善于责备自己的，人民就不会责备他；只有不肯责备自己的，人民才去遣责。
English: Guanzi said: If a person is good at blaming himself, the people will not blame him; if he is unwilling to blame himself, the people will punish him.

古文：故称身之过者，强也；洽身之节者，惠也；不以不善归人者，仁也。
现代文：所以，承认自己错误，是 强 的表现；修养自身节操，是 智 的表现；不把不善之事归于人，是 仁 的表现。
English: Therefore, admitting one's own mistakes is a sign of strength; cultivating one's own self-restraint is a sign of wisdom; not attributing bad things to others is a sign of benevolence.

古文：故明王有过则反之于身，有善则归之于民。
现代文：所以，明君有过则归之于己，有善则归之于民。
English: Therefore, if Ming Jun has something, it is attributed to himself, and if he has something good, it is attributed to the people.

古文：有过而反之身则身惧，有善而归之民则民喜。
现代文：有过归之己则自身戒惧，有善归之民则人民喜悦。
English: Those who have returned are afraid of themselves, while those who have returned well are welcomed by the people.

古文：往喜民，来惧身，此明王之所以治民也。
现代文：推善以取悦于民，反过以警戒自身，所以明君能治理人民。
English: Mingjun is able to govern the people because he promotes virtue to please the people, and vice versa to guard himself.

古文：今夫桀纣不然，有善则反之于身，有过则归之于民。
现代文：至于梁、纣就不是这样，有善则归之于已，有过则归之于民。
English: As for Liang and Zou, this is not the case. If there is any good, it belongs to Ya, and if there is any bad, it belongs to the people.

古文：归之于民则民怒，反之于身则身骄。
现代文：过归于民则民怒，善归于己则自骄。
English: Over-attribution to the people is the people's anger, good attribution to oneself is self-conceit.

古文：往怒民，来骄身，此其所以失身也。
现代文：推过以激怒人民，反善以骄纵自身，这便是身败的原因。
English: Pushing through to provoke the people, and arrogance against the good, are the reasons for failure.

古文：故明王惧声以感耳，惧气以感目。
现代文：所以明君戒惧恶声影响听，戒惧恶气影响看。
English: Therefore, you should beware of the influence of evil voices on hearing, and the influence of evil spirits on seeing.

古文：以此二者有天下矣，可毋慎乎？
现代文：这两者有关天下得失，怎么能不谨慎呢？
English: These two are related to the world's gains and losses, how can we not be cautious?

古文：匠人有以感斤，故绳可得断也，羿有以感弓矢，故彀可得中也。造父有以感辔策，故遬兽可及，远道可致。天下者，无常乱，无常治。
现代文：工匠有办法影响斤斧，所以绳墨能料定木材；羿因为有办法影响弓矢，所以张弓能射中标的；造父因为有办法影响辔鞭，所以能赶速兽、致远道。天下没有常乱，没有常治。
English: Craftsmen have the means to influence the hammer and sickle, so the rope and ink can determine the wood; the plough has the means to influence the bow and arrow, so the bow can shoot the target; the father has the means to influence the whip, so he can speed up the beast and go far. There is no constant chaos in the world, there is no constant rule.

古文：不善人在则乱，善人在则治，在于既善，所以感之也。 
现代文：坏人当政则乱，善人当政则治。当政达到尽善，是因为善人有办法施加影响的原故。 
English: When bad men govern, there is disorder; when good men govern, there is order. When good men govern, all is well, because good men have the means of influencing.

古文：管子曰： 修恭逊、敬爱、辞让、除怨、无争以相逆也，则不失于人矣。
现代文：管子说： 讲求恭逊、敬爱、谦让、除怨、无争，以互相对待，就不会失去人心。
English: Guanzi said, "If you insist on being submissive, respectful, humble, removing grudges and avoiding disputes, and treat each other with mutual respect, you will not lose the hearts of the people."

古文：尝试多怨争利，相为不逊，则不得其身。
现代文：试行多怨、争利，互相不讲恭逊，则身亦难保。
English: If you try to have a lot of grudges, compete for profits, and treat each other with disrespect, it will be difficult to protect yourself.

古文：大哉！恭逊敬爱之道。
现代文：恭逊敬爱之道，是太伟大了。
English: The way of deference and respect is too great.

古文：吉事可以入察，凶事可以居丧。
现代文：遇有吉事可依此精神主持祭礼，遇有凶事可依此精神主持居丧。
English: In the event of a good event, he can preside over the ceremony in this spirit, and in the event of a bad event, he can preside over the funeral in this spirit.

古文：大以理天下而不益也，小以治一人而不损也。尝试往之中国、诸夏、蛮夷之国，以及禽兽昆虫、皆待此而为治乱。
现代文：大可以治理天下而不必增加，小可以治理一人而无需裁减，行之于京都、全中国、蛮夷之国以及禽兽昆虫，都可以靠它决定治乱。
English: Large can govern the world without increasing, small can govern one person without reducing, and it can be used in Kyoto, all of China, barbarian countries, and animals and insects.

古文：泽之身则荣，去之身则辱。
现代文：身上沾染它则荣，身上失掉它则辱。
English: If you get it on your body, you will be proud, if you lose it, you will be humiliated.

古文：审行之身毋怠，虽夷貉之民，可化而使之爱。审去之身，虽兄弟父母，可化而使之恶。
现代文：认真执行而不懈怠虽然不开化的人也能化为相爱；确实抛弃了它，虽然兄弟父母也能变为相恶。
English: Those who practice it diligently and do not slack off, though unenlightened, can be transformed into love; those who abandon it, though brothers and parents, can be transformed into enemies.

古文：故之身者，使之爱恶；名者，使之荣辱。此其变名物也，如天如地，故先王曰道。 
现代文：所以，在身上可以使之爱恶，在名上可以使之荣辱，其变化名物的作用，简直和天地一样大。所以，先王把这叫作 道 。 
English: Therefore, in the body it can be made to love or hate, in the name it can be made to honor or dishonor, and its effect of changing famous things is almost as great as heaven and earth. Therefore, the ancients called it the Tao.

古文：管仲有病，桓公往问之曰： 仲父之病病矣，若不可讳而不起此病也，仲父亦将何以诏寡人？ 管仲对曰： 微君之命臣也，故臣且谒之，虽然，君犹不能行也。 
现代文：管仲有病，桓公亲自去慰问说： 仲父的病很重了，如不讳言而此病不起，仲父有什么遗言教我呢？ 管仲回答说： 您即使不来问我，我也要有话对您说的。不过，怕您做不到罢了。 
English: When Guan Zhong fell ill, Prince Huan went to console him in person and said, "Your father's illness is very serious. If you do not hide it, you will not be able to cope with this illness. What last words did your father have for me?" Guan Zhong replied, "Even if you do not come to ask me, I still have something to say to you. However, I am afraid that you will not be able to do so."

古文：公曰： 仲父命寡人东，寡人东；令寡人西，寡人西。仲父之命于寡人，寡人敢不从乎？ 
现代文：桓公说： 仲父要我往东就往东，要我往西就往西，仲父对我说的话，我敢不听么？ 
English: Prince Kan said, "If my stepfather wants me to go east, I will go east. If he wants me to go west, I will go west. Do I dare not listen to what my stepfather says to me?

古文：管仲摄衣冠起，对曰： 臣愿君之远易牙、竖刁、堂巫、公子开方。
现代文：管仲整整衣冠起来回答说： 我希望您把易牙、竖刁、堂巫和公子开方辞退掉。
English: Guanzhong dressed up and replied, "I hope you will give up your false teeth, barbells, witches' broomsticks, and boys' toothbrushes."

古文：夫易牙以调和事公，公曰：惟烝婴儿之未尝。于是烝其首子而献之公。
现代文：易牙用烹调侍候您，您说，唯有婴儿的味道没有尝过，于是易牙蒸了他的儿子献给您。
English: You said that only the taste of the baby had not been tasted, so Iga steamed his son for you.

古文：人情非不爱其子也，于子之不爱，将何有于公？
现代文：人情没有不爱自己儿女的，他对自己的儿子都不爱，能爱您么？
English: There is no man who does not love his own children. He does not love his own son. Can he love you?

古文：公喜宫而妒，竖刁自刑而为公治内。
现代文：您喜欢女色而忌妒，竖刁自己宫身而为您管理宫女们。
English: You are envious because you are a womanizer; you have built your palace and have your maids of honor under your command.

古文：人情非不爱其身也，于身之不爱，将何有于公？
现代文：人情没有不爱自己身体的，他对自己身体都不爱，能爱您么？
English: There is no human being who does not love his or her body. He or she does not love his or her body. Can he or she love you?

古文：公子开方事公，十五年不归视其亲，齐卫之间，不容数日之行。
现代文：公子开方侍奉您，十五年不回家探亲，齐国与卫国之间，不用几天行程就到了。
English: He has been serving you for fifteen years without going home to visit his relatives, and it will only take him a few days to travel between Qi and Wei.

古文：于亲之不爱，焉能有于公？
现代文：人情没有不爱双亲的，对自己双亲都不爱，能爱您么？
English: There are no people who do not love their parents, and there are no people who do not love their own parents. Can they love you?

古文：臣闻之，务为不久，盖虚不长。
现代文：我听说过：作假的不可能持久，掩盖虚伪也不会长远。
English: I have heard it said that a lie cannot last long, nor can a cover-up.

古文：其生不长者，其死必不终。 桓公曰： 善。 
现代文：活着不干好事的人们，也一定不得好死。 桓公说： 好。 
English: People who don't do good deeds while they are alive must also die a bad death.Kanko said, "Good."

古文：管仲死，已葬。公憎四子者，废之官。
现代文：管仲死后，埋葬完毕，桓公憎恶此四人而废掉他们的官职。
English: After the death and burial of Guanzhong, King Kan detested the four men and abolished their official positions.

古文：逐堂巫而苛病起兵，逐易牙而味不至，逐竖刁而宫中乱，逐公子开方而朝不治。
现代文：但是驱逐了堂巫，却生了怪病；驱逐了易牙，却感到食味不佳；驱逐了竖刁而宫中混乱；驱逐了公子开方而感到自己的朝政没有条理。
English: However, when he expelled the witch, he got a strange disease; when he expelled the false teeth, he felt that the taste was not good; when he expelled the boa constrictor, there was chaos in the palace; when he expelled the nobles who opened the government, he felt that his government was not organized.

古文：桓公曰： 嗟！
现代文：桓公说： 呵！
English: Prince Kan said, "Oh!

古文：圣人固有悖乎！ 
现代文：圣人也难免有错误吧！ 
English: Even saints make mistakes, right?

古文：乃复四子者。
现代文：乃重新起用四人。
English: However, four people were reappointed.

古文：处期年，四子作难，围公一室不得出。
现代文：再过一年，四人作乱，把桓公围困在一个屋子里不得外出。
English: A year later, four people caused a riot and trapped Huan Gong in a room. He was not allowed to leave.

古文：有一妇人、遂从窦入，得至公所。
现代文：有一妇女，从小洞钻入，到了桓公住所。
English: A woman drilled her way into Huan's residence through a small hole.

古文：公曰： 吾饥而欲食，渴而欲饮，不可得，其故何也？ 
现代文：桓公说： 我饿得要吃，渴得要喝，都得不到，为什么？ 
English: Lord Huan said: I am so hungry that I want to eat, so thirsty that I want to drink, but I can't get either. Why?

古文：妇人对曰： 易牙、竖刁、堂巫、公子开方四人分齐国，涂十日不通矣。
现代文：宫女回答说： 易牙、竖刁、堂巫、公子开方，四人瓜分了齐国，道路已十天不通了。
English: The lady-in-waiting replied, "The four of them, Iga, Shizuka, Domi, and Koji, have divided the country of Qi, and the roads have been impassable for ten days.

古文：公子开方以书社七百下卫矣，食将不得矣。 
现代文：公子开方已把七百多社的土地和人口送给卫国了。吃的东西将得不到了。 
English: The land and people of more than seven hundred communities have been given to the homeland by the prince who founded the country. There will be nothing left to eat.

古文：公曰： 嗟兹乎！
现代文：桓公说： 咳，原来如此!
English: Kanko said: Well, that's how it is!

古文：圣人之言长乎哉！
现代文：圣人话实在是高明呵!
English: The sage's words are really clever!

古文：死者无知则已，若有知，吾何面目以见仲父于地下！ 
现代文：要是死了没有知觉还好，若有所知，我有什么面目见仲父于地下呢！ 
English: If I die without consciousness, that's fine, but if I know something, what kind of face will I have when I see my stepfather in the ground!

古文：乃援素幭以裹首而绝。
现代文：便拿过头巾包头而死。
English: He then took a headscarf to cover his head and died.

古文：死十一日，虫出于户，乃知桓公之死也。
现代文：死十一天，蛆虫从门缝里爬出来，才发现桓公死了。
English: Eleven days after his death, maggots crawled out of the cracks in the door, only to find that Huan Gong was dead.

古文：葬以杨门之扇。
现代文：用门板掩盖了桓公的尸体。
English: They used the door panel to cover up Kan's body.

古文：桓公之所以身死十一日，虫出户而不收者，以不终用贤也。
现代文：齐桓公之所以死十一天，蛆虫出户而无人收尸，就是因为最终没有用贤的原故。
English: The reason why the maggots came out of the house and no one collected the body 11 days after the death of Prince Qi Huan is because there was no reason to use him in the end.

古文：桓公、管仲、鲍叔牙、宁戚四人饮，饮酣，桓公谓鲍叔牙曰： 阖不起为寡人寿乎？ 鲍叔牙奉杯而起曰： 使公毋忘出如莒时也，使管子毋忘束缚在鲁也，使宁戚毋忘饭牛车下也。 
现代文：桓公、管仲、鲍叔牙、宁戚四人曾在一起饮酒，饮到高兴时，桓公对鲍叔说： 为什么不给我祝酒？ 鲍叔捧杯而起说： 希望您别忘记流亡在莒国的时候，希望管仲别忘记被绑在鲁国的时候，希望宁戚别忘记车下喂牛的时候。 
English: The four of them, Huan Gong, Guanzhong, Bao Shuga, and Ning Qi, used to drink together. When they were happy, Huan Gong said to Bao Qi: Why don't you give me a toast? Bao Qi raised his glass and said: I hope you don't forget when you were exiled in Shandong Province, I hope Guanzhong doesn't forget when you were tied up in Lu Province, I hope Ning Qi doesn't forget when you were feeding cattle under a car.

古文：桓公辟席再拜曰： 寡人与二大夫能无忘夫子之言，则国之社稷必不危矣。 
现代文：桓公离席再拜说： 我和两位大夫能够不忘记您的忠告，国家就一定没有危险了。 
English: Prince Kan left his seat and bowed again, saying, "If I and the two doctors can not forget your advice, the country will definitely not be in danger."

