古文：杨亿晁迥刘筠薛映杨亿，字大年，建州浦城人。
现代文：杨亿字大年，建州浦城人。
English: Yang Yuanzhida, a native of Pucheng, Jianzhou.

古文：祖文逸，南唐玉山令。
现代文：祖父杨文逸，南唐玉山县令。
English: His grandfather, Yang Wenyi, was the governor of Yushan County in Southern Tang Dynasty.

古文：亿将生，文逸梦一道士，自称怀玉山人来谒。
现代文：杨亿将出生时，杨文逸梦见一位道士，自称怀玉山人前来拜见。
English: When Yang Yizhong was born, Yang Wenyi had a dream about a Taoist priest who claimed to be from the Jade Mountain and came to visit him.

古文：未几，亿生，有毛被体，长尺余，经月乃落。
现代文：不久，杨亿出生，身上长有一尺左右的长毛，过了一月才脱落。
English: Soon after, Yang Er was born, with about a foot of long hair growing on his body, which only fell out after a month.

古文：能言，母以小经口授，随即成诵。
现代文：能够说话，他的母亲用小经进行口授，马上就能背诵。
English: Able to speak, his mother taught him by dictation from the Xiao Jing, and he was able to recite it immediately.

古文：七岁，能属文，对客谈论，有老成风。
现代文：七岁，就能写作文章，对客人谈论，显出很老成的样子。
English: At the age of seven, he can write articles and talk to guests, showing a very mature appearance.

古文：雍熙初，年十一，太宗闻其名，诏江南转运使张去华就试词艺，送阙下。
现代文：雍熙初年，杨亿十一岁，宋太宗听说了杨亿的事情，诏令江南转运使张去华前往考试他的词艺水平，送至朝廷。
English: In the first year of Yongxi, when Yang Yuanzhong was eleven years old, Song Taizong heard about Yang Yuanzhong, and ordered the southern part of the Yangtze River to transport Zhang to China to test his level of poetry, and sent him to the imperial court.

古文：连三日得对，试诗赋五篇，下笔立成。
现代文：连续三天应对，考试诗赋五篇，都是下笔就成。
English: Three days in a row, five poems for the exam, all written down.

古文：太宗深加赏异，命内侍都知王仁睿送至中书，又赋诗一章，宰相惊其俊异，削章为贺。
现代文：太宗对他大加赞赏认为是一个奇才，令内侍都知王仁睿将他送到中书，又赋诗一首，宰相也惊讶其才能出众，并作文章为他祝贺。
English: Emperor Taizong highly appreciated him and considered him to be a prodigy, so that the palace attendant Du Zhi Wang Ren Rui sent him to the Chinese Academy of Letters, and he also composed a poem. The prime minister was also surprised by his outstanding talent and wrote an article to congratulate him.

古文：翌日，下制曰： 汝方髫龀，不由师训，精爽神助，文字生知。
现代文：第二天，朝廷下达制书说： 你正当年少，没有老师教导，却能识字作文，精神清爽似有神助。越影绝尘，一日千里，我对你寄有厚望。 
English: The next day, the imperial court issued a book-making order saying: You are justly young, have no teacher to teach you, but you can write a literate composition, and your spirit is so fresh that it seems to have divine assistance.

古文：越景绝尘，一日千里，予有望于汝也。 即授秘书省正字，特赐袍笏。俄丁外艰，服除，会从祖徽之知许州，亿往依焉。
现代文：就授予秘书省正字，特地赐予官袍和官牌。不久因遭父丧离职，服丧期满，恰巧从祖杨徽之任许州知州，杨亿前往依靠从祖父。
English: The secretary was awarded the official title of "Minister of the People's Republic of China" and was specially given an official robe and an official badge. Soon after he left the post due to his father's death, the mourning period expired, and it so happened that Yang Hui's father was appointed as the governor of Xuzhou, and Yang Yili went to rely on his grandfather.

古文：务学，昼夜不息，徽之间与语，叹曰： 兴吾门者在汝矣。 
现代文：致力学习，昼夜不停止，杨徽之间或与杨亿谈论，感叹说 ：兴旺杨家门庭就靠你了。 
English: Dedicated to learning, day and night do not stop, between Yang Hui or talk with Yang billion, sighed: the prosperity of Yang Jia Men Court depends on you.

古文：淳化中，诣阙献文，改太常寺奉礼郎，仍令读书秘阁。
现代文：淳化年间，杨亿到朝廷上奏，改为太常寺奉礼郎，仍旧于秘阁读书。
English: During the reign of Emperor Junka, Yang Er performed at the Imperial Court and was changed to a priest of Taejō-ji Temple, but he continued to study at Hikkō.

古文：献《二京赋》，命试翰林，赐进士第，迁光禄寺丞。属后苑赏花曲宴，太宗召命赋诗于坐侧；又上《金明池颂》，太宗诵其警句于宰相。
现代文：敬献《二京赋》，命令考试翰林，赐予进士等级，升任光禄寺丞，后来又在后苑赏花曲宴，太宗特召杨亿坐在旁边作诗，杨亿又敬献《金明池颂》，太宗向宰相诵读杨亿所作之警句。
English: Taizong paid tribute to "Erjing Fu," ordered the examination of Hanlin, granted the grade of entering the priesthood, was promoted to Guanglu Temple, and later held a flower music banquet in the backyard. Taizong specially invited Yang Yili to sit next to him to write poetry, Yang Yili also paid tribute to "Kinming Pond Ode," and Taizong read the epigrams made by Yang Yili to the prime minister.

古文：明年三月，苑中曲宴，亿复以诗献。
现代文：淳化二年三月，苑中曲宴，杨亿又献诗。
English: In March of the second year of Chunhua, during a music banquet in the courtyard, Yang Yili also presented a poem.

古文：太宗讶有司不时召，宰相言： 旧制，未贴职者不预。 即以亿直集贤院。
现代文：太宗奇怪有司没有按时征召杨亿，宰相说： 按照以前的规定，没有授予一定的官职不得参预。 太宗就授予杨亿直集贤院。
English: Emperor Taizong was surprised that the Imperial Household Agency did not conscript Yang Rongzhi on time, and the prime minister said, "According to the previous regulations, if you have not been awarded a certain official post, you are not allowed to participate in the preliminaries. Emperor Taizong awarded Yang Rongzhi to Zhijian Academy.

古文：表求归乡里，赐钱十五万。
现代文：杨亿上奏请求回归乡里，被赐钱十五万缗。
English: Yang Er requested to return to his hometown and was given 150,000 baht.

古文：至道初，太宗亲制九弦琴、五弦阮，文士奏颂者众，独称亿为优，赐绯鱼。
现代文：至道初年，太宗亲自制作九弦琴、五弦阮，许多文人学士上奏赞颂，唯独杨氏颂词最优异，太宗赐予红鱼。
English: In the first year of the Dao, Emperor Taizong personally made a nine-stringed fiddle and a five-stringed gong, and many literati and scholars sang praises. However, Yang's eulogy was the best, and Emperor Taizong gave him a red fish.

古文：二年春，迁著作佐郎，帝知其贫，屡有沾赉，尝命为越王生辰使。
现代文：至道二年春天，升任著作佐郎，太宗了解杨亿家中贫穷，多次给予赏赐和馈赠，曾任命杨亿为越王生辰使。
English: In the spring of the second year of the Dao, he was promoted to the post of Shosho-saro. Taizong understood the poverty of Yang Yi's family and repeatedly gave rewards and gifts. He once appointed Yang Yi as the birth envoy of King Yue.

古文：时公卿表疏，多假文于亿，名称益著。
现代文：这时公卿大臣的上表奏疏，大多借用杨亿作文，因此杨亿的名声更加显著。
English: At this time, most of the nobles and ministers borrowed the compositions of Yang Rong, so Yang Rong's fame became more prominent.

古文：真宗在京府，徽之为首僚，邸中书疏，悉亿草定。
现代文：真宗在京府，杨徽之为首席幕僚，官府中的书章上疏，都是杨亿起草写定的。
English: Shinsong is in Beijing, Yang Huigong is the chief of staff, and the bookmarks in the government office are sparse, all drafted and written by Yang Yili.

古文：即位初，超拜左正言。
现代文：真宗即位初年，破格升为左正言。
English: In the first year of the enthronement of the True Sect, he was promoted to Zuo Zhenggen.

古文：诏钱若水修《太宗实录》，奏亿参预，凡八十卷，而亿独草五十六卷。
现代文：诏令钱若水撰修《太宗实录》，钱若水上奏请求杨亿参加，《太宗实录》共八十卷，而杨亿单独起草初稿五十六卷。
English: The emperor ordered Qian Ruoshui to write "The Record of Emperor Taizong," and Qian Ruoshui requested Yang Yi to participate. "The Record of Emperor Taizong" totaled eighty volumes, and Yang Yi alone drafted the first draft of fifty-six volumes.

古文：书成，乞外补就养，知处州。
现代文：书写成后，杨亿上表请求离京前去休养，任处州知州。
English: After the document was written, Yang Yili requested to leave Beijing to recuperate, and was assigned to Zhouzhou.

古文：真宗称其才长于史学，留不遣，固请，乃许之任。
现代文：真宗称赞杨亿擅长史学，挽留而不派往外地，坚持请求离京，才允许到任。
English: Shingzong praised Yang Yili for being good at history, retaining him instead of sending him abroad, and insisting on his request to leave Beijing before allowing him to take office.

古文：郡人周启明笃学有文，深加礼待。
现代文：同郡中人周启明坚持学习有文采，杨亿对他以礼相待。
English: Zhou Qiming, a native of the same county, insisted on studying and had literary talent. Yang Yi treated him with courtesy.

古文：召还，拜左司谏、知制诰，赐金紫。
现代文：奉诏回到京城，授予左司谏、知制诰，赐予金紫之衣。
English: He returned to the capital with the imperial edict, and was awarded the title of Zuo Si (Left Division of the Inner Palace Guards) and Zhi Shi (Imperial Guards), as well as the Gold and Purple Robe.

古文：咸平中，西鄙未宁，诏近臣议灵州弃守之事。亿上疏曰：
现代文：咸平年间，西部边境不安定，真宗诏令左右大臣议论灵州放弃还是保存之事，杨亿上疏说：
English: During the Han and Ping Dynasties, when the western border was unstable and ministers around the Emperor Zhenzong were debating whether to give up or preserve Lingshou, Yang Yiliang said:

古文：臣尝读史，见汉武北筑朔方之郡，平津侯谏，以为罢敝中国，以奉无用之地，愿罢之。
现代文：我曾经读史书，知汉武帝在北边设置了朔方郡，平津侯上谏，认为这将使汉朝劳民伤财，以供奉一片没有用处的地方，希望能撤销朔方郡。
English: I once read a history book and learned that Emperor Wudi of the Han Dynasty set up Shuofang County in the north, Pingjin Hou Shangdi, thinking that this would make the Han Dynasty laborers lose money to worship a useless place, hoping to revoke Shuofang County.

古文：上使辩士朱买臣等发十策以难平津，平津不能对。
现代文：汉武帝让辩士朱买臣等想出十条对策来问难平津侯，平津侯不能回答。
English: Emperor Hanwu asked the debater Zhu Mai Shen and others to come up with ten countermeasures to ask difficulties to Pingjin Hou, but Pingjin Hou could not answer.

古文：臣以为平津为贤相，非不能折买臣之舌，盖所以将顺人君之意尔。
现代文：臣下认为平津侯是贤明之相，因为平津侯并非不能使朱买臣折服，回答其问难，只不过是他顺从汉武帝的意志罢了。
English: The vassals thought that the court of Pingjin was a sign of wisdom, because it was not that the court of Pingjin could not make Zhu Bai submit and answer his questions, but that he was only obeying the will of Emperor Han.

古文：旧称朔方，地在要荒之外，声教不及。
现代文：从前的朔方，远离中原，皇帝的各种政令都无法传达。
English: In the former Shuo side, far away from the Central Plains, the emperor's various decrees could not be conveyed.

古文：元朔中，大将军卫青奋兵掠地，列置郡县。
现代文：元朔年间，大将军卫青率兵占地，设置郡县。
English: During the Yuan Shuo era, the general Wei Qing led the troops to occupy the land and set up counties.

古文：今灵州盖朔方之故墟，僻介西鄙，数百里间无有水草，烽火亭障不相望。
现代文：如今的灵州大概就是过去朔方的废墟，处在西部僻远之地，数百里间没有水草，烽火亭障不能互相望。
English: Today's Lingshou is probably the ruins of the former Shuo Fang, located in the remote west, with no water plants for hundreds of miles, and no view of each other.

古文：当其道路不壅，馕馈无虞，犹足以张大国之威声，为中原之扞蔽。
现代文：当这儿道路没有堵塞，粮饷吃饭没有任何担心时，还完全可以用来扩张大国的名声和威望，成为中原的屏障。
English: When the roads here are not clogged and there is no worry about food shortages, it can also be fully used to expand the reputation and prestige of the big country and become a barrier to the Central Plains.

古文：自边境屡惊，凶党猖炽，爵赏之而不恭，讨罚之而无获。
现代文：自从边境多次发生战争，使人震动，敌人猖狂势力强盛，赏赐官爵敌人却无礼，进行讨罚又没有什么收获。
English: Since there have been many wars on the border, people are shocked, the enemy is rampant and powerful, it is impolite to reward the noble enemy, and there is little to be gained by seeking punishment.

古文：自曹光实、白守荣、马绍忠及王荣之败，资粮屝屦，所失至多，将士丁夫，相枕而死。
现代文：从曹光实、白守荣、马绍忠及王荣被敌人打败以来，军资粮饷，失去很多，将士民夫，相继死亡。
English: Since Cao Guangshi, Bai Shou Rong, Ma Shao Zhong and Wang Rong were defeated by the enemy, military supplies and food have lost a lot, and soldiers and civilians have died one after another.

古文：以至募商人输帛入谷，偿价数倍；孤壤筑城，边民绎骚，国帑匮乏，不能制边人之命，及济灵武之急。
现代文：以至于招募商人在山谷中运输布帛，给予的价钱为原来的数倍；在僻远之地修筑城池，边境老百姓不断受到骚扰，国家钱财缺乏，不能保证边境老百姓的安全，解救灵武郡的困境。
English: So much so that merchants were recruited to transport cloth cocoons in the valley, and the price they were given was several times the original price; cities were built in remote places, the border people were constantly harassed, and the country lacked money and resources, which could not guarantee the safety of the border people and solve the predicament of Lingwu County.

古文：数年之间，凶党逾盛。
现代文：多年来，敌人的势力更加强盛。
English: Over the years, the enemy has become more powerful.

古文：灵武危堞，岿然仅存，河外五城，继闻陷没。
现代文：灵武犹如一座危险的城墙，仅仅是高大独立地竖在那里，黄河以北五座城池，听说已相继攻陷。
English: Lingwu is like a dangerous city wall, just standing there tall and independent. It is said that five cities north of the Yellow River have been conquered one after another.

古文：但坚壁清野，坐食糗粮，闭垒枕戈，苟度朝夕，未尝出一兵驰一骑，敢与之角。
现代文：灵武仅仅坚壁清野，守兵白吃粮食，关闭城垒枕着武器，苟且度日，没有出动一兵一骑，与敌人战斗。
English: Lingwu is just a solid wall and a clear field, the guards eat free food, close the ramparts with weapons, and spend the day without dispatching a soldier or a horse to fight with the enemy.

古文：此灵武之存无益，明矣。
现代文：灵武的存在毫无益处，就很明显了。
English: It is clear that the existence of Lingwu is of no benefit.

古文：平津所言罢敝中国以奉无用之地，正今日谓也。
现代文：平津侯所说的衰败中国来奉养一片无用之地，正是说的今天的情况。
English: The situation today is exactly what the Prince of Pingjin meant when he said that a decadent China was cultivating a useless land.

古文：臣以为存有大害，弃有大利，国家輓粟之劳，士卒流离之苦，悉皆免焉。
现代文：臣下认为保存灵州有很大的危害，而撤除却十分有利，国家运输军粮的烦劳，士卒离开家园的痛苦，都可以全部免除。
English: The retainers believed that the preservation of Lingshou was very harmful, but the removal was very beneficial. The trouble of transporting military rations by the state and the pain of soldiers leaving their homes could all be avoided.

古文：尧、舜、禹，圣之盛者也，地不过数千里，而明德格天，四门穆穆。
现代文：尧、舜、禹，是盛世的圣人，地方不超过数千里，但光明的恩德却能达于上天，全国安定。
English: Yu, Yu, Yu, is a saint of prosperity, the place does not exceed thousands of miles, but the bright benevolence can reach the heavens, and the country is stable.

古文：武丁、成王，商、周之明主也，然地东不过江、黄，西不过氐、羌，南不过蛮荆，北不过太原，而颂声并作，号为至治。
现代文：武丁、成王，是商、周两朝英明的君主，但其土地东边不超过江、黄，西边不超过氐、羌，南边不超过蛮荆，北边不超过太原，却到处都是一片歌舞之声，被称作最好的治世。
English: Wuding and Chengwang were the wise monarchs of the Shang and Zhou dynasties, but their lands did not exceed Jiang and Huang in the east, Yao and Qian in the west, Brute Jing in the south, and Taiyuan in the north, but everywhere there was the sound of singing and dancing, which was called the best reign.

古文：及秦、汉穷兵拓土，肝脑涂地，校其功德，岂可同年而语哉！
现代文：到秦、汉时期用尽兵力开拓疆土，致使百姓肝脑涂地，比较他们的功德，怎能和上面所说的同日而语呢！
English: During the Qin and Han dynasties, they exhausted their military strength to explore the territory, causing the people to be brainwashed and compare their merits. How can it be the same day as the above?

古文：昔西汉贾捐之建议弃朱崖，当时公卿，亦有异论，元帝力排众说，奋乎独见，下诏废之，人颂其德。
现代文：从前西汉贾捐之建议放弃朱崖，当时的公卿大臣，也有不同的议论，汉元帝极力排除其他说法，振扬贾捐之的独特见解，下达诏令废除朱崖，老百姓歌颂他的恩德。
English: Former Western Han Dynasty Emperor Jia Duan's proposal to abandon Zhu Yap, the then Minister of the Court, also had different discussions. Emperor Han Yuan tried his best to exclude other opinions, promoted Jia Duan's unique views, issued a decree to abolish Zhu Yap, and the people praised his kindness.

古文：故其诏曰： 议者以弃朱崖羞威不行，夫通于时变，即忧万民之饥鋨，危孰大焉。
现代文：原来的诏令说 ：反对的人认为废弃朱崖有羞于国君的威望导致政令不行，对于时代变化灵活变通，担心老百姓的饥饿，比之弃地，两相比较哪种危害更大。
English: The original edict said: Opponents believe that the abandonment of the Zhujiajiao is not acceptable due to the prestige of the sovereign, flexible to the changes of the times, and worried about the hunger of the people. Compared with abandoning the land, which of the two is more harmful?

古文：且宗庙之祭，凶年不备，况乎避不嫌之辱哉？ 臣以为类于灵武也，必以失地为言，即燕蓟八州，河湟五郡，所失多矣，何必此为？
现代文：宗庙祭祀，灾年已是难以备办，何况还要避免万一战败会给祖先带来的耻辱呢？ 
English: It is already difficult to prepare for the year of disaster for the ancestral temple's ritual, and what's more, how can we avoid the shame that a defeat would bring to our ancestors?

古文：臣窃惟太祖命姚内斌领庆州，董遵诲领环州，统兵裁五六千，悉付以阃外之事，士卒效命，疆埸晏然，朝廷无旰食之忧，疆埸无羽书之警。
现代文：臣下认为这与灵武的情形相似。一定要说是丢失土地，那么燕蓟等州，河湟五郡，丢失的土地已经很多了，又何必为了这点土地呢？臣下私下认为太祖命姚内斌领庆州，董遵诲领环州，率领军队才五六千人，将城外之事全部交给他们，士卒效力，战场平静，朝廷没有因忧郁而晚食，边境没有军事警报。
English: His subjects thought that this was similar to Lingwu's situation. It must be said that it was a loss of land, so there was already a lot of land lost in the states such as Yanzhang and the five counties of Hebei, so why did they need this land? Privately, his subjects thought that Yao Neibin led Qingzhou, and Dong Zunyi led Huanzhou, and the army was only five or six thousand people, and all matters outside the city were handed over to them, the soldiers were effective, the battlefield was calm, the court did not eat late because of melancholy, and there was no military alarm at the border.

古文：臣乞选将临边，赐给廪赋，资以策略，许以便宜而行。
现代文：臣下请求选择将领亲临边境，赐给粮食，提供策略，允许他们见机行事。
English: The vassals asked for a choice of generals to come to the border, give them food, provide a strategy, and allow them to act opportunistically.

古文：傥寇扰内属，挠之以劲兵，示之以大信，怀荒振远，谕以赏格，彼则奔溃众叛，安能与大邦为敌哉？
现代文：如果敌人侵扰内地，用强大的兵力来阻击，用确实的信用显示给天下，安抚灾民救济贫民，使人明白奖赏的标准，那么敌人就会溃败众叛，又怎么能够与大国作对呢？
English: If the enemy invades the inland, uses powerful troops to repel, shows the world with real credibility, soothes the victims, relieves the poor, and makes people understand the standard of reward, then the enemy will defeat the rebellion, and how can it oppose the big country?

古文：若欲谋成庙堂，功在漏刻，臣以为彼众方黠，积财犹丰，未可以岁月破也。
现代文：如果想谋划成于朝廷，在短时间内取得成功，臣下认为敌人十分狡猾，积蓄还丰富，不可能短时间内就能打败。
English: If you want to make a plan for the imperial court and succeed in a short time, your subjects think that the enemy is very cunning and has a lot of savings, and it is impossible to defeat it in a short time.

古文：直须弃灵州，保环庆，然后以计困之尔。
现代文：只需要放弃灵州，保住环庆，然后用计谋对敌人加以围困罢了。
English: All that is needed is to give up Lingzhou, keep Huanqing, and then besiege the enemy with stratagems.

古文：如臣之策，得骁将数人，提锐兵一二万，给数县赋以资所用，令分守边城，则寇可就擒，而朝廷得以无虞矣。
现代文：按臣下的想法，选择数名勇猛的将领，率领精锐兵力一二万人，提供数县的赋税来供给他们，让他们分别戍守边城，那么就可以擒获敌人，朝廷就可以没有什么担心的了。
English: According to the thoughts of the subjects, select a few brave generals, lead an elite force of 120,000, provide several counties of taxes to supply them, and let them separately guard the border city, then the enemy can be captured, and the court can have nothing to worry about.

古文：景德初，以家贫，乞典郡江左，诏令知通进、银台司兼门下封驳事。
现代文：景德初年，家中贫困，杨亿请求主管江左郡，朝廷下令知通进银台司兼门下封驳事。
English: In the first year of Jingde, the family was poor, Yang Yili requested the head of Jiangza County, and the court ordered Zhitong to enter the Bank of Taiwan and the case was sealed.

古文：时以吏部铨主事前宜黄簿王太冲为大理评事，亿以丞吏之贱，不宜任清秩，即封诏还。
现代文：这时以吏部铨主事前宜黄主簿王太冲任大理评事，杨亿认为丞吏官职低微，不适宜担任清闲之职，就封还诏书。
English: At this time, it was decided that Wang Taichong, the head of the cadre department, should be appointed as the commentator of Dali, and Yang Yi thought that the post of the cadre officer was low and was not suitable for the post of leisure, and returned the imperial rescript.

古文：未几，太冲补外。
现代文：不久，王太冲离京听候任命。
English: Soon after, Wang Taichong left Beijing to await an appointment.

古文：俄判史馆，会修《册府元龟》，亿与王钦若同总其事。其序次体制，皆亿所定，群僚分撰篇序，诏经亿窜定方用之。
现代文：随即杨亿主管史馆，恰逢修撰《册府元龟》，杨亿与王钦若共同负责这件事，该书的体例编次，都是杨亿决定的，其他人分别撰写每篇序言，诏令让杨亿审定后才能使用。
English: Subsequently, Yang Yili, in charge of the History Museum, coincided with the revision of "Zhangfu Yuancheng." If Yang Yili and Wang Qin were jointly responsible for this matter, the style and order of the book would be decided by Yang Yili. Others would write each preface separately, and the edict would only be used after Yang Yili had approved it.

古文：三年，召为翰林学士，又同修国史，凡变例多出亿手。
现代文：三年，召任翰林学士，又共同修撰国史，凡是变化的体例都出自杨亿之手。
English: In three years, he was appointed as a scholar of Hanlin, and he also jointly compiled the national history. All the examples of change are from the hands of Yang Yi.

古文：大中祥符初，加兵部员外郎、户部郎中。
现代文：大中祥符初年，加任兵部员外郎、户部郎中。
English: In Shobu's first year of junior high school, he was also appointed as a member of the military department, and a junior member of the household department.

古文：五年，以疾在告，遣中使致太医视之，亿拜章谢，上作诗批纸尾，有 副予前席待名贤 之句。
现代文：大中祥符五年，由于疾病告老归乡，朝廷派遣宦官让太医前去看望，杨亿上章致谢，在纸的末尾真宗作有 副予前席待名贤 的诗句。
English: In the fifth year of Dazhong Xiangfu, due to illness, he returned to his hometown. The imperial court sent a eunuch to let the great doctor visit him. Yang Yiliangzhang expressed his thanks. At the end of the paper, Shinsong wrote a poem, "Added to the front seat, waiting for a great sage."

古文：以久疾，求解近职，优诏不许，但权免朝直。
现代文：由于长时间害病，杨亿请求解除近职，真宗下诏不予批准，仅暂时免除朝廷当值。
English: Due to a long-term illness, Yang Er requested to be relieved of his duties, but was not approved by Emperor Zhenzong, and was only temporarily exempted from duty at the imperial court.

古文：亿刚介寡合，在书局，唯与李维、路振、刁衎、陈越、刘筠辈厚善。
现代文：杨亿刚直不合众，在书局，仅与李维、路振、刁絗、陈越、刘筠等人十分友善。
English: At the bookstore, Yang Yi Gang Zhi was only very friendly with Li Wei, Lu Zhen, Zou, Chen Yue, Liu Yao and others.

古文：当时文士，咸赖其题品，或被贬议者，退多怨诽。
现代文：当时的文人学士，都依赖杨亿的品评，有的被遭贬的人，被贬后大多怨恨诽谤杨亿。
English: At that time, scholars of literature and humanities all relied on Yang Rongbai's evaluation, and some people who were demoted mostly resented and slandered Yang Rongbai after they were demoted.

古文：王钦若骤贵，亿素薄其人，钦若衔之，屡抉其失；陈彭年方以文史售进，忌亿名出其右，相与毁訾。
现代文：王钦若突然富贵，杨亿一直看不起他，王钦若怀恨在心，多次挑剔他的过失，陈彭年正以文史求取升官，忌讳杨亿比他出名，双方一起诋毁。
English: If Wang Qin is suddenly rich, Yang Yili has always looked down on him; if Wang Qin holds a grudge and repeatedly criticizes his mistakes, Chen Pengnian is seeking promotion with literary history, Yang Yili is more famous than him, and both sides are slandering.

古文：上素重亿，皆不惑其说。
现代文：真宗一直器重杨亿，对他们所说的都不相信。
English: Shinshong has always been loyal to Yang Rong, and doesn't believe anything they say.

古文：亿有别墅在阳翟，亿母往视之，因得疾，请归省，不待报而行。
现代文：杨亿在阳翟有一座别墅，他的母亲前去看他，由于害病，请求回归家中，不等批准就离开了。
English: Yang Yili has a villa in Yangshuo. His mother went to see him and, due to illness, asked him to return home, but he left without waiting for approval.

古文：上亲缄药剂，加金帛以赐。
现代文：真宗亲自写信问候，配备药方，并赐予金帛。
English: Shinsong personally wrote a letter of greetings, equipped with a prescription, and gave him a gold ingot.

古文：亿素体羸，至是，以病闻，请解官。
现代文：杨亿身体一向瘦弱，这时候，由于疾病，请求解除官职。
English: Yang Yi's body has always been thin and weak. At this time, due to illness, he requested to be relieved of his official duties.

古文：有嗾宪官劾亿不俟命而去，授太常少卿，分司西京，许就所居养疗。
现代文：有人唆使宦官弹劾杨亿没有得到答复就离开京城，授予太常少卿，分司两京，杨亿被允许在居所附近休养。
English: Someone instigated the eunuch to impeach Yang Yili and left Beijing without receiving an answer. Yang Yili was awarded the title of Minor Lord of Taizang and was allowed to rest and recuperate near his residence.

古文：尝作《君可思赋》，以抒忠愤。
现代文：曾经作《君可思赋》，来抒发其忠诚愤恨的心绪。
English: He once wrote "Jun Kesifu" to express his feelings of loyalty and resentment.

古文：《册府元龟》成，进秩秘书监。
现代文：《册府元龟》写成后，升为秘书监。
English: He was promoted to the position of secretary superintendent after the writing of "Chengfu Yuanjie."

古文：七年，病愈，起知汝州。会加上玉皇圣号，表求陪预，即代还，以为参详仪制副使，知礼仪院，判秘阁、太常寺。
现代文：大中祥符七年，疾病痊愈，杨亿又任汝州知州，恰遇真宗加封玉皇名号，上表请求陪预，立即让人代职回京，作为参详仪制副使，知礼仪院，判秘阁、太常寺。
English: In the seventh year of the Great Middle Xiangfu, the disease was cured, and Yang Yizhong was appointed to Ruzhou Chizhou, and when it was time for Zhenzong to add the name of the Jade Emperor, he requested the above table to accompany him, and immediately sent someone to return to Beijing on his behalf, as the Deputy Envoy of the Sanyo Ceremonial System, the Zhili Ceremonial Academy, the Secret Cabinet, and the Taiji Temple.

古文：天禧二年冬，拜工部侍郎。
现代文：天禧二年冬天，授予工部侍郎。
English: In the winter of the 2nd year of the reign of Emperor Tenji, he was awarded the title of Chamberlain of the Ministry of Works.

古文：明年，权同知贡举，坐考较差谬，降授秘书监。
现代文：第二年，权同知贡举，由于考核论定等级有差错而犯有过错，降职授予秘书监。
English: In the second year, he was demoted to the position of secretary-supervisor due to an error in the assessment and determination of the grade.

古文：丁内艰，属行郊礼，以亿典司礼乐，未卒哭，起复工部侍郎，令视事。
现代文：母亲去世，当时举行郊礼，朝廷让杨亿担任典司礼乐，典礼没完毕就哭起来了，未服满丧期便担任工部侍郎，命令杨亿主持政事。
English: When his mother passed away, a suburban ceremony was held, and the imperial court asked Yang Yili to serve as the master of ceremonies. Before the ceremony was over, he began to cry. Before the period of mourning was over, he served as the chamberlain of the Ministry of Industry and ordered Yang Yili to preside over political affairs.

古文：四年，复为翰林学士，受诏注释御集，又兼史馆修撰、判馆事，权景灵宫副使。
现代文：天禧四年，又成为翰林学士，接受诏令注释真宗文集，又兼任史馆修撰、判馆事，代理景灵宫副使。
English: In the fourth year of Tian Hei, he also became a scholar of Hanlin, accepted the edict to annotate the anthology of the True Sect, and concurrently served as a reviewer and judge of the history museum, acting as deputy envoy of the Jingling Palace.

古文：十二月，卒，年四十七。录其子纮为太常寺奉礼郎。
现代文：十二月，去世，四十七岁，选拔杨亿之子杨任太常寺奉礼郎。
English: In December, he passed away at the age of forty-seven. Yang Ren, the son of Yang Bi, was selected as the successor of Taejoji Temple.

古文：亿天性颖悟，自幼及终，不离翰墨。文格雄健，才思敏捷，略不凝滞，对客谈笑，挥翰不辍。
现代文：杨亿天生颖悟，从小到死，都没有离开文辞，文章风格雄健，才思敏捷，没有稍许迟疑，与客人谈笑，挥笔不停。
English: Yang Yibing was born with insight, from childhood to death, he did not leave the words, the style of the article is vigorous, he is quick-witted, he did not hesitate a bit, he talked and laughed with the guests, and he kept waving his pen.

古文：精密有规裁，善细字起草，一幅数千言，不加点窜，当时学者，翕然宗之。
现代文：文章精密有章法，喜欢用细字起草文书，一篇数千言，从不圈点改动，当时的文人学士，纷纷尊崇杨亿。
English: The article has precise rules and regulations, likes to use fine words to draft documents, thousands of words in one article, never circle point changes, the literati bachelor at that time, have all respected Yang Yuanzhong.

古文：而博览强记，尤长典章制度，时多取正。
现代文：杨亿广泛阅读记忆很好，尤其擅长典章制度，当时大多依赖他来制定和修改。
English: Yang Yi read widely and had a good memory. He was particularly good at the regulation system, which he was mostly responsible for formulating and revising.

古文：喜诲诱后进，以成名者甚众。
现代文：杨亿喜欢教育引导后进之士，受他的引导而成名的人有许多。
English: Yang Yili likes to educate and guide the under-achievers, and there are many people who have become famous under his guidance.

古文：人有片辞可纪，必为讽诵。
现代文：别人有一句言辞值得记载，杨亿一定背诵它。
English: Others have a saying worth recording, Yang Yi will surely recite it.

古文：手集当世之述作，为《笔苑时文录》数十篇。
现代文：曾亲手汇集当世人的述作，集为《笔苑时文录》数十篇。
English: He has personally collected the works of contemporary people, and collected dozens of "Pen Garden Chronicle."

古文：重交游，性耿介，尚名节。
现代文：杨亿看重友情，性格耿直，崇尚节操。
English: Yang Yi valued friendship, had a straightforward personality, and advocated self-restraint.

古文：多周给亲友，故廪禄亦随而尽。
现代文：经常接济亲朋好友，因此他做官所得的俸禄也散尽。
English: He often gave money to relatives and friends, so the salary he earned as an official also ran out.

古文：留心释典禅观之学，所著《括苍武夷颍阴韩城退居汝阳蓬山冠鳌》等集、《内外制》、《刀笔》，共一百九十四卷。
现代文：对佛教禅宗之学有所涉猎，写有《括巷》、《武夷》、《颍阴》、《韩城》、《退居》、《汝阳》、《蓬山》、《冠硁》等文集、《内外制》、《刀笔》共一百九十四卷。
English: He dabbled in the study of the Buddhist Zen sect, and wrote collections of essays such as "Wu Xiang," "Wu Yi," "Wu Yin," "Han Cheng," "Retreat," "Ru Yang," "Peng Shan" and "Guan Yao," as well as a total of one hundred and ninety-four volumes of "Inside-Out System" and "Sword and Pen."

古文：晁迥，字明远，世为澶州清丰人，自其父佺，始徙家彭门。
现代文：杨亿的弟弟杨倚，景德年间考中进士，得第三等，由于杨亿的缘故，升为二等。杨亿没有儿子，以其侄子杨作为后嗣。弟弟杨伟。晁迥字明远，世代都是澶州清丰人，从其父亲晁亻全开始，全家迁移到彭门。
English: Yang Yi's younger brother, Yang Jie, was the top student in Jingdezhen's junior high school entrance examination, and got the third grade, but because of Yang Yi, he was promoted to the second grade. Yang Yi had no son, and his nephew, Yang, was his heir. His younger brother, Yang Wei, was a distant relative, and all generations were from the Qingfeng people of Zhangzhou. Starting with his father, Zhang Quan, the whole family moved to Pengmen.

古文：迥举进士，为大理评事，历知岳州录事参军，改将作监丞，稍迁殿中丞。
现代文：晁迥考中进士，任大理评事，知岳州录事参军，改任将作监丞，不久升任殿中丞。
English: He entered the examination as a junior high school student, and was appointed as a commentator at the University of Economics, and joined the army as a recorder of Zhiyue Prefecture. He was later appointed as a superintendent, and was soon promoted to the position of a palace junior high school student.

古文：坐失入囚死罪，夺二官。
现代文：由于将监牢罪犯判为死罪有所过失，被解除二官。
English: Two officials were dismissed for negligence in sentencing a prisoner to death.

古文：复将作丞，监徐、婺二州税，迁太常丞。
现代文：又恢复将作丞，监管徐州、婺州二州的税收，升任太常丞。
English: He was also reinstated as general secretary, supervised the taxation of the two states of Xuzhou and Ganzhou, and was promoted to general secretary.

古文：真宗即位，用宰相吕端、参知政事李沆荐，擢右正言、直史馆。
现代文：真宗即位，由于宰相吕端、参知政事李沆的推荐，提升为右正言、直史馆。
English: After the enthronement of the True Sect, it was promoted to the Right Speech and Direct History Museum due to the recommendation of the Prime Minister Lv Duan and the Councillor and Politician Li Xi.

古文：献《咸平新书》五十篇，又献《理枢》一篇。
现代文：向朝廷敬献《咸平新书》五十篇，又敬献《理枢》一篇。
English: He presented the Imperial Court with fifty copies of "Xianping New Book" and one copy of "The Logic."

古文：召试，除右司谏、知制诰，判尚书刑部。
现代文：召见应试，授予右司谏、知制诰，判尚书刑部。
English: He was summoned to appear for the examination, awarded the Right Magistrate's Badge and the Honorable Magistrate's Badge, and sentenced to the Penal Department.

古文：帝北征，雍王元份留守京师，加右谏议大夫，为判官，进翰林学士。
现代文：真宗北征，雍王赵元份留守京城，晁迥又任右谏议大夫，为判官，升翰林学士。
English: True Northern Expedition, Yong Wang Zhao Yuanfen stayed in Beijing, and he was also appointed as a right-handed doctor, a judge, and a scholar of Hanlin.

古文：未几，知审官院，为明德、章穆二园陵礼仪使，同修国史。
现代文：不久，知审官院，任明德、章穆两处园陵的礼仪使，共同撰修国史。
English: Soon after, the Chihonin Academy, Ren Mingde, and Zhang Mu, the etiquette envoys of the two gardens and tombs, worked together to write a national history.

古文：知大中祥符元年贡举。
现代文：主管大中祥符元年贡举。
English: The person in charge of Daizhong Xiangfu was given a tribute in the first year of the year.

古文：封泰山，祀汾阴，同太常详定仪注，累迁尚书工部侍郎。
现代文：封禅泰山，祭祀汾阴，晁迥与太常详细制定礼仪诠释，多次升任尚书工部侍郎。
English: He established the detailed interpretation of the etiquette for the enthronement of Zen Emperor Taishan, and the worship of Gu Yin, Gu Ying and Tai Chang, and was promoted to the position of chamberlain of the Imperial Calligraphy Department several times.

古文：使契丹，还，奏《北庭记》，加史馆修撰、知通进银台司。
现代文：出使契丹，归国后，上奏《北庭记》，又被加封史馆修撰、知通进银台司。
English: After returning to the country, he played "Beijing Chronicle" on behalf of Khitan. He was also assigned to the History Museum to revise it, and he was promoted to the director of the Bank of China.

古文：献《玉清昭应宫颂》，其子宗操继上《景灵宫庆成歌》。
现代文：晁迥敬献《玉清昭应宫颂》，他的儿子晁宗悫继续敬献《景灵宫庆成歌》。
English: He dedicated "Ode to the Palace of the Jade Emperor Zhao Ying," and his son Zou Zongxuan continued to dedicate "Celebration Song of the Jingling Palace."

古文：帝曰： 迥父子同献歌颂，搢绅间美事也。 
现代文：真宗说： 晁迥父子同时敬献歌颂，这是官员中间的一件美事。 
English: Shinshu said, "It is a beautiful thing among officials to have father and son hold a worship service at the same time.

古文：史成，擢刑部侍郎，进承旨。
现代文：国史修成后，提升为刑部侍郎，进京接受皇旨。
English: After the completion of the national history, he was promoted to the sergeant of the criminal department, and went to Beijing to accept the imperial order.

古文：时朝廷方修礼文之事，诏令多出迥手。
现代文：这时朝廷正制定礼仪条文，各种诏令大多出自晁迥之手。
English: At this time, the Imperial Court was formulating etiquette regulations, and most of the various edicts were issued by the shogun.

古文：尝夜召对，帝令内侍持烛送归院。
现代文：曾在晚上应召问对，真宗让内侍举烛送晁迥返回。
English: When he was summoned in the evening to answer a question, Shinso asked the chambermaid to hold up a candle to send the urn back.

古文：方盛暑，为蠲宿直，令三五日一至院；迥辞以非故事，乃听俟秋还直。
现代文：正当炎夏酷暑，为除去晁迥晚上值班殿堂，让晁迥三五天才去一次朝廷，晁迥认为没有惯例，于是听命等待到秋天返回朝廷。
English: When the summer heat was at its peak, in order to get rid of the night watchman, he asked the night watchman to go to the imperial court once every three to five days. The night watchman thought that there was no practice, so he was ordered to wait until autumn to return to the imperial court.

古文：迁兵部侍郎，请分司西京，特拜工部尚书、集贤院学士、判西京留司御史台。
现代文：升为兵部侍郎，请求分掌西京，特地授予工部尚书、集贤院学士、判西京留司御史台。
English: He was promoted to the position of the attendant of the military department, and requested to be assigned to the Western Capital, and was specially awarded the title of the member of the engineering department, the bachelor of the Academy of Confucianism, and the title of the governor of the Western Capital.

古文：赐一子官河南，以就养。
现代文：朝廷给其一子赐官河南，以便就近赡养。
English: The imperial court gave one of his sons an official post in Henan Province so that he could be supported nearby.

古文：仁宗即位，迁礼部尚书。
现代文：仁宗即位，升为礼部尚书。
English: Emperor Ninsong ascended to the throne, and he was promoted to the position of the ceremonial secretary.

古文：居台六年，累章请老，以太子少保致仕，给全俸，岁时赐赉如学士。
现代文：任职六年，多次上书请求告老还乡，以太子少保退休，给予全部俸禄，每年像学士一样给予赏赐。
English: After serving for six years, he repeatedly wrote to request that he be allowed to return to his hometown, that he be granted retirement with full salary, and that he be rewarded every year like a bachelor.

古文：天圣中，迥年八十一，召宴太清楼，免舞蹈。
现代文：天圣年间，晁迥八十一岁，仁宗在太清楼设宴召见，免掉舞蹈。
English: During the Tenshin era, when he was eighty-one years old, Rinzong held a banquet at Taiqing Building and invited everyone to come and see him without dancing.

古文：子宗悫为知制诰，侍从同预宴。
现代文：晁迥的儿子晁宗悫为知制诰，侍奉其父一起参加宴会。
English: Zou's son, Zou Zongyao, served as his father's attendant at the banquet.

古文：迥坐御史中丞之南，与宰臣同赐御飞白大字。
现代文：晁迥坐在御史中丞的南边，和宰相大臣们同被赐予皇帝的飞白大字。
English: Zou sits on the south side of the Imperial Historian, and together with the prime ministers and ministers, the Emperor is given the Flying White Swastika.

古文：既罢，所以宠赉者甚厚，进太子少傅。
现代文：宴会完毕，得到仁宗的大量赏赐，担任太子少傅。
English: After the banquet, he received a large amount of rewards from Rinzong and served as the prince's sous-chef.

古文：后复召对延和殿，帝访以《洪范》雨暘之应。
现代文：后来又在延和殿被仁宗召见，仁宗用《洪范》中下雨与日出的对应来询问晁迥。
English: Later, he was summoned by Ninsong in Yanhe Hall. Ninsong used the correspondence between rain and sunrise in "Flood" to interrogate Gong.

古文：对曰： 比年变灾荐臻，此天所以警陛下。
现代文：晁迥说 ：今年各种灾变不断发生，这是上天用来警告陛下的，希望陛下整顿朝政，来符合上天旨意，这样或许可以变灾难为吉祥。 
English: Zou said, "This year, all kinds of calamities keep happening. This is Heaven's way of warning Your Majesty. I hope that Your Majesty will rectify the imperial government to conform to Heaven's will. In this way, it may be possible to turn disaster into good luck."

古文：愿陛下修饬王事，以当天心，庶几转乱而为祥也。 既而献《斧扆》、《慎刑箴》，《大顺》、《审刑》、《无尽灯颂》，凡五篇。
现代文：不久敬献《斧》、《慎刑箴》、《大顺》、《审刑》、《无尽灯颂》共五篇。
English: Soon after, he dedicated a total of five works, "Axe," "Principle of Prudence," "Grand Order," "Sentencing," and "Ode to Endless Light."

古文：及感疾，绝人事，屏医药，具冠服而卒，年八十四。
现代文：感染疾病，谢绝人来探望，不服药，穿着官服戴着官帽而死，终年八十四岁。
English: He contracted a disease, refused to be visited by anyone, refused to take medicine, and died in his official uniform and cap, at the age of eighty-four.

古文：罢朝一日，赠太子太保，谥文元。
现代文：朝廷罢朝一天，追赠太子少保，谥号 文元 。
English: One day after the imperial court's attack on the government, the crown prince was posthumously granted the title of Junior Protector and the posthumous name of Wen Yuan.

古文：迥善吐纳养生之术，通释老书，以经传傅致，为一家之说。
现代文：晁迥擅长吐纳养生之术，精通佛道典籍，以经传傅致，成一家之说。
English: He is good at the art of tuning in and keeping fit, is well-versed in Buddhist classics, and is inspired by the teachings of the sutras.

古文：性乐易宽简，服道履正，虽贵势无所屈，历官临事，未尝挟情害物。
现代文：晁迥性格开朗，待人平易，为政宽简，坚持真理，即使是权贵之势也不能使他屈服，做官行事，从来没有心怀私情而陷害别人。
English: He had a cheerful personality, treated people easily, was a moderate politician, adhered to the truth. Even the influence of power and nobility could not make him give in. When he was an official, he never framed others out of selfish motives.

古文：真宗数称其好学长者。
现代文：真宗多次称赞他是好学长者。
English: Shinshu praised him many times for being a good student.

古文：宗悫性敦厚，事父母孝，笃于故旧，凡任子恩皆先其族人。
现代文：杨亿曾经说晁迥所作的上书制命没有过度褒扬之词，符合代言的体裁，晁迥喜欢评判纠正经史文籍中的疑义，搜求珍藏各种古字。有人对晁迥说术命，晁迥回答说： 人的命运是自然的职分，是一种天命。
English: Yang Yili once said that the letter-writing mission made by Yao was not overly praiseworthy, it was in line with the style of endorsement. Yao liked to judge and correct the doubts in the historical literature, and searched for and collected various ancient characters. When someone said to Yao about the art mission, Yao replied: The destiny of man is a natural function, it is a kind of destiny.

古文：在翰林，一夕草将相五制，褒扬训戒，人得所宜。
现代文：对天命以欢乐之心对待而不忧郁，这是了解天命。推究天理安于现状，是托付天命，又何必预先知道未来的结果呢？ 
English: To treat fate with a joyful heart and not to be depressed is to understand fate. It is to entrust fate to inquire into the heavenly reason to be at peace with the status quo, and why do we have to know the future result in advance?

古文：尝密诏访边策，陈七事，颇施用之。
现代文：晁迪写的《翰林集》三十卷，《道院集》十五卷，《法藏碎金录》十卷，《耆智余书》、《随因纪述》、《昭德新编》各三卷。
English: Thirty volumes of "Hanlin Collection," fifteen volumes of "Daoin Collection," ten volumes of "Faso Gold Record," three volumes each of "Shu Zhi Yu's Book," "Causal Narrative" and "Zhao De's New Edition" were written by Hao Di.

古文：刘筠，字子仪，大名人。
现代文：他的儿子晁宗悫。刘筠字子仪，大名人。
English: His son, Zou Zongyao, Liu Zi Zi Zi Yi, is a great celebrity.

古文：举进士，为馆陶县尉。
现代文：考中进士，为馆陶县县尉。
English: He passed the junior high school entrance examination and became a county officer of Guantao County.

古文：还，会诏知制诰杨亿试选人校太清楼书，擢筠第一，以大理评事为秘阁校理。
现代文：回京，恰逢朝廷诏令知制诰杨亿考试选拔人校对太清楼藏书，刘筠被选拔为第一名，以大理评事为秘阁校理。
English: When he returned to Beijing, it coincided with the imperial edict that the selection of candidates for the Zou Yangyuan Examination should be made according to the Taiqing Building collection. Liu Wei was selected as the first, with the Dali critic as the secret proofreader.

古文：真宗北巡，命知大名府观察判官事。
现代文：真宗北巡，命刘筠知大名府观察判官事。
English: The Northern Inspection of the True Sect ordered Liu Xizhi to observe the magistrate's work in the Great Hall of the People.

古文：自边鄙罢兵，国家闲暇，帝垂意篇籍，始集诸儒考论文章，为一代之典。
现代文：自从边境罢兵，国家太平，真宗有意于典籍文章，开始汇集儒生们的考论文章，成为一代文献。
English: Since the border strike and the country's peace and tranquility, the True Sect has been interested in classic articles, and has begun to collect the essays of Confucians, which have become a generation of literature.

古文：筠预修图经及《册府元龟》，推为精敏。
现代文：刘筠参预修撰图经及《册府元龟》，被公认为精细敏捷。
English: Liu Xuan participated in the preparatory work of compiling the picture book and the "Book of the First Turtle" and was recognized as fine and agile.

古文：真宗将祀汾睢，屡得嘉奖，召筠及监察御史陈从易崇和殿赋歌诗，帝数称善。
现代文：真宗准备祭祀汾月隹，多次降下瑞雪，召见刘筠及监察御史陈从易在崇和殿作歌颂之诗，真宗对颂诗多次称好。
English: The Shinshu Sect prepared for the rite of the lunar eclipse, repeatedly rained down snow, and summoned Liu Ye and the inspector Chen Congyi to compose a poem of praise in the Chonghe Hall. The Shinshu Sect praised the poem many times.

古文：车驾西巡，又命筠纂土训。
现代文：真宗驾车西巡，又命刘筠编纂土训。
English: Shenzong drove westward, and ordered Liu Xing to compile the teachings.

古文：是时四方献符瑞，天子方兴礼文之事，筠数上赋颂。
现代文：这时各地敬献符瑞，真宗正要制定礼仪条文，刘筠多次敬献赋颂。
English: At this time, various regions offered tribute to Fu Rui, the True Sect was about to formulate a code of etiquette, and Liu Bei repeatedly offered tribute to Fu Chong.

古文：及《册府元龟》成，进左正言、直史馆、修起居注。
现代文：《册府元龟》完成后，刘筠任左正言、直史馆、修起居注。
English: After the completion of "The Tale of Genghis Khan," Liu Xuan was appointed to the post of Zu Zhenggen, the direct history museum, and the construction and residence note.

古文：尝属疾，予告满，辄再予，积二百日，每诏续其奉。
现代文：曾经接连患病，给朝廷上书请求告老还乡，未被允许，又再次上书，共三百页，每次都诏继续给刘筠俸禄。
English: He had been ill successively, and had written to the imperial court requesting to return to his hometown, but he was not allowed to do so, and he wrote again, a total of three hundred pages, and each time he continued to give Liu Ye a stipend.

古文：迁左司谏、知制诰，加史馆修撰，出知邓州，徙陈州。
现代文：升任左司谏、知制诰，又任史馆修撰。离京任邓州知州，调任陈州。
English: He was promoted to the posts of Zuo Siqi and Zhizhi Shiqi, and also served as a reviewer for the History Museum. He left Beijing to serve as Dangzhou Zhizhou, and was transferred to Chenzhou.

古文：还，纠察在京刑狱，知贡举，迁尚书兵部员外郎。
现代文：回京，负责督察京城的刑事案件，知贡举，升任尚书兵部员外郎。
English: He returned to Beijing, where he was responsible for inspecting criminal cases in Beijing, collecting tribute, and was promoted to Shangshu member of the military department.

古文：复请邓州，未行，进翰林学士。
现代文：又请求任邓州知州，没有成行，任翰林学士。
English: He also requested to be appointed as Dengzhou Zhizhou, but it did not go through, and he was appointed as Hanlin Scholar.

古文：初，筠尝草丁谓与李迪罢相制，既而谓复留，令别草制，筠不奉诏，乃更召晏殊。
现代文：开始，刘筠曾经奉诏起草丁谓与李迪罢免宰相之制书，不久丁谓又留任，令刘筠另外起草，刘筠没有接受，于是又征召晏殊。
English: At the beginning, Liu Bei was ordered to draft a document to remove Ding Zeta and Li Di from the post of prime minister. Soon after, Ding Zeta remained in office and ordered Liu Bei to draft another document. Liu Bei did not accept it, so he also conscripted Gong Shu.

古文：筠自院出，遇殊枢密院南门，殊侧面而过，不敢揖，盖内有所愧也。
现代文：刘筠从朝堂出来，与晏殊相遇于枢密院南门，晏殊侧身走过，不敢对刘筠行礼问候，恐怕晏殊是内心有愧。
English: Liu Bei came out of the Great Hall and met Gan Shou at the south gate of the Privy Council. Gan Shou walked sideways and did not dare to salute Liu Bei. I am afraid that Gan Shou felt guilty.

古文：帝久疾，谓浸擅权，筠曰： 奸人用事，安可一日居此。 请补外，以右谏议大夫知庐州。
现代文：真宗长期患病，丁谓逐渐独断专权，刘筠说： 奸人执掌朝政，此地一天都不可久留。 请求离京候补，以右谏议大夫知庐州。
English: After the long-term illness of Shenzong, Ding said that he gradually assumed dictatorial power, and Liu Ye said: "An impostor is in charge of the imperial government, and it is not possible to stay here for a long time.

古文：仁宗即位，迁给事中，复召为翰林学士。
现代文：仁宗即位，升任给事中，又受召为翰林学士。
English: When Emperor Nanzong ascended the throne, he was promoted to the middle of the hierarchy, and was also called to be a scholar of Hanlin.

古文：逾月，拜御史中丞。
现代文：过了一月，又授予御史中丞。
English: A month later, he was appointed to the post of Goshi chujo.

古文：先是，三院御史言事，皆先白中丞。
现代文：在此之前，三院御史上书言事，都要先告知中丞。
English: Prior to this, all the documents and speeches in the history of the Third Court must first be reported to the chujo.

古文：筠榜台中，御史自言事，毋白丞杂。
现代文：刘筠在御史台张贴布告，御史自己上书言事，不需报告中丞。
English: Liu Ye posted an announcement on the official history channel, and the official history channel itself did not need to make a report.

古文：知天圣二年贡举，数以疾告，进尚书礼部侍郎、枢密直学士、知颍州。
现代文：知天圣二年贡举，多次由于疾病告退，任尚书礼部侍郎、枢密直学士、知颍州。
English: He was appointed to attendant of the Ceremonial Department of Shangshu, Privy Direct Bachelor, and Zhishang Prefecture. He retired several times due to illness.

古文：召还，复知贡举，进翰林学士承旨兼龙图阁直学士、同修国史、判尚书都省。
现代文：奉召回京。又知贡举，任翰林学士承旨兼任龙图阁直学士、同修国史、判尚书都省。
English: He was called back to Beijing. He was also known as a tribute, and was appointed as a Hanlin scholar with the order to also serve as a Longtuge direct scholar, a national history scholar, and a provincial scholar.

古文：祀南郊，为礼仪使，请宿斋太庙日，罢朝飨玉清昭应宫，俟礼成，备銮驾恭谢。
现代文：在南郊举行祭祀，任礼仪使，请求在斋戒太庙那天，停止上朝在玉清昭应宫供奉神灵，等到礼仪完成后，准备皇帝车驾到昭应宫致谢。
English: A ritual was held in the southern suburb, and the ceremonial envoy requested that on the day of fasting at the Great Temple, the offering of deities at the Jade Emperor's Zhaoying Palace be stopped. After the ceremony was completed, the emperor's car was prepared to drive to the Zhaoying Palace to express his thanks.

古文：从之。
现代文：得到同意。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：筠素爱庐江，遂筑室城中，构阁藏前后所赐书，帝飞白书曰 真宗圣文秘奉之阁 。
现代文：刘筠一直喜爱庐江，于是就在庐江城中修筑居室，建筑楼阁收藏朝廷前后所赏赐之书，仁宗挥笔赐字 真宗圣文秘奉之阁 。
English: Liu Bei has always loved the Li River, so he built a residence in the middle of the Li River, building a pavilion to collect the books awarded by the imperial court, and the pavilion of the True Sect's sacred literature.

古文：再知庐州，营冢墓，作棺，自为铭刻之。
现代文：又任庐州知州，建造坟墓，制作棺材，自己在墓碑上刻字。
English: He was also known as Zhangzhou Zhizhou. He built tombs, made coffins, and engraved his name on tombstones.

古文：既病，徙于书阁，卒。
现代文：病后，移到书阁，去世。
English: After his illness, he moved to Shukaku and passed away.

古文：筠，景德以来，居文翰之选，其文辞善对偶，尤工为诗。
现代文：刘筠，景德以来，一直选为文官，文辞擅长对偶，尤其擅长作诗。
English: Since Liu Bei and Jingde, he has always been elected as a civil servant. He is good at pairing words, and especially good at writing poetry.

古文：初为杨亿所识拔，后遂与齐名，时号 杨刘 。
现代文：起初被杨亿赏识提拔，后来和杨亿一样出名，当时号称 杨刘 。
English: At first, he was praised and promoted by Yang Rong, and later he became as famous as Yang Rong. At that time, he was known as Yang Liu.

古文：凡三入禁林，又三典贡部，以策论升降天下士，自筠始。
现代文：一共三次进入禁林，又三次任职贡部，用策论来决定天下人才的进退，从刘筠开始。
English: He entered the Forbidden Forest a total of three times, and served as a tributary three times. He used strategy to determine the advancement and retreat of the world's talents, starting with Liu Jun.

古文：性不苟合，遇事明达，而其治尚简严。
现代文：性情严肃，办事明了通达，为政崇尚简易严厉。
English: His disposition is serious, his work is clear and accessible, and his politics are simple and strict.

古文：然晚为阳翟同姓富人奏求恩泽，清议少之。
现代文：但晚年替阳翟一位同姓的富人上奏请求赏赐，被清议者轻视。
English: However, in his later years, he petitioned for a reward on behalf of a rich man with the same surname, who was despised by the purifiers.

古文：著《册府应言》、《荣遇》、《禁林》、《肥川》、《中司》、《汝阴》、《三入玉堂》凡七集。
现代文：写有《册府应言》、《荣遇》、《禁林》、《肥川》、《中司》、《汝阴》、《三入玉堂》共七集。
English: A total of seven episodes were written, including "Changfu's Response," "Honor," "Forbidden Forest," "Hechuan," "Central Division," "Ruyin" and "Three into the Temple."

古文：一子蚤卒，田庐没官。
现代文：一个儿子早逝，田地房舍全部被官府没收。
English: One son died early, and all the farm buildings were confiscated by the government.

古文：包拯少时，颇为筠所知。
现代文：包拯年轻时，被刘筠所知。
English: When Bao Zheng was young, he was known by Liu Ye.

古文：及拯显，奏其族子为后，又请还所没田庐云。
现代文：到包拯显赫后，包拯上奏让其家族之子作为后代，又请求归还被官府没收的田地和房舍。
English: After Bao Zhengxing became famous, Bao Zhengxing appealed to his family's son to be his descendant, and also requested the return of the fields and houses confiscated by the government.

