古文：孙搴陈元康杜弼
现代文：孙搴，字彦举，乐安人氏。
English: Sun Yat-sen, Aza Hikokke, and the Le Anjin clan.

古文：孙搴，字彦举，乐安人也。少厉志勤学，自检校御史再迁国子助教。
现代文：少时厉志好学，从检校御史迁为国子助教。
English: When he was young, he was eager to learn and was transferred from a school inspector to an assistant teacher.

古文：太保崔光引修国史，频历行台郎，以文才著称。
现代文：太保崔光推荐其撰修国史，后又做过行台郎，因文才而被世人称许。
English: Taibao Cui Guang recommended him to write a history of the country, and later he worked as a hawker, and was praised by the world for his literary talent.

古文：崔祖螭反，搴预焉，逃于王元景家，遇赦乃出。
现代文：由于参与过崔祖螭的反叛活动，被迫逃到王元景家中躲藏，得大赦令才出门。
English: Because he had participated in the rebel activities of Cui Zuyao, he was forced to flee to Wang Yuanjing's home to hide, and only left after receiving an amnesty order.

古文：孙腾以宗情荐之，未被知也。
现代文：孙腾看在宗族的情份上向朝廷举荐，但没有得到任用。
English: Sun Tengkan was recommended to the imperial court because of his family background, but he was not appointed.

古文：会高祖西讨，登风陵，命中外府司马李义深、相府城局李士略共作檄文，二人皆辞，请以搴自代。
现代文：高祖西讨，登风陵，请中外府司马李义深、相府城局李士略同作檄文，二人推辞，要求搴帮忙代作。
English: Gao Zu Xitun, climbed the mausoleum, asked the Chinese and foreign prefectural governor Ma Li Yishen, and the governor of the city of the same prefecture, Li Shiliu, to write a memorial, but they both declined, asking for help to write it on their behalf.

古文：高祖引搴入帐，自为吹火，催促之。
现代文：高祖带搴进入军帐，亲自为他生火取暖，催促他快些动笔。
English: Gao Zu took Zou into the military account, personally lit a fire for him to warm up, and urged him to write faster.

古文：搴援笔立成，其文甚美。
现代文：搴提笔后一气呵成，且文辞极其华美。
English: After picking up the pen, it was done in no time, and the words were extremely beautiful.

古文：高祖大悦，即署相府主簿，专典文笔。
现代文：高祖十分高兴，马上任命他为相府主簿，专掌文笔。
English: Gaozu was very pleased and immediately appointed him as the chief secretary of the Sangu, in charge of writing.

古文：又能通鲜卑语，兼宣传号令。当烦剧之任，大见赏重。
现代文：搴通晓鲜卑语，加之宣传号令，十分称职，大得高祖敬重。
English: With his fluency in the Cebuano language, as well as his propaganda skills, he is very competent and highly respected.

古文：赐妻韦氏，既士人子女，又兼色貌，时人荣之。
现代文：赐给妻子韦氏，韦氏是士人的女儿，而且十分漂亮，因此时人都很钦佩。
English: Gao Huan gave him Wei's wife as his wife. She was Shijun's daughter, and she was also very beautiful. People were proud of him.

古文：寻除左光禄大夫，常领主簿。
现代文：寻除左光禄大夫，常掌领主簿。
English: Search for and remove Doctor Sakoroku, the main character of the book.

古文：世宗初欲之邺，总知朝政，高祖以其年少未许。
现代文：世宗最初想去邺城，总揽朝政，高祖认为年纪太小，没有同意。
English: At first, Shizong wanted to go to Shicheng and take over the government, but Gaozu thought he was too young and did not agree.

古文：搴为致言，乃果行。
现代文：搴就为世宗游说，高祖才同意放行。
English: Sun Yat-sen spoke for him, and Emperor Jimmu finally agreed.

古文：恃此自乞特进，世宗但加散骑常侍。
现代文：凭借此事，搴向朝廷请求特进，世宗却只给了他一个散骑常侍。
English: On the strength of this, Shun asked the imperial court for a special advance, but Shizong only gave him a straggler.

古文：时又大括燕、恒、云、朔、显、蔚、二夏州、高平、平凉之民以为军士，逃隐者身及主人、三长、守令罪以大辟，没入其家。
现代文：此时朝廷又大括燕、恒、云、朔、显、蔚、二夏州、高平、平凉的民众充任军士，逃亡、隐身者牵涉到主人、三长、守令，并处以大辟之刑，还没收其家人财产。
English: At this time, the imperial court also enlisted Yan, Heng, Yun, Shuo, Xian, Wei, Erxiazhou, Gaoping, and Pingliang to serve as sergeants. Those who fled or went into hiding implicated their masters, commanders, and guards, and were punished with a large fine and confiscation of their family's property.

古文：于是所获甚众，搴之计也。
现代文：这样征到了许多兵士，这是孙搴的主意。
English: Many soldiers were recruited in this way, which was Sun Yat-sen's idea.

古文：搴学浅而行薄，邢邵尝谓之曰： 更须读书。 
现代文：搴学问浅显、德行鄙薄。邢邵曾对他说： 你必须好好读书。 
English: Zou Shao once said to him: "You must study hard.

古文：搴曰： 我精骑三千，足敌君羸卒数万。 
现代文：搴说： 我精骑三千，抵御你几万老弱病残的士卒绰绰有余。 
English: Zou said, "I can only ride three thousand horses. I have more than enough to resist your tens of thousands of old, weak, sick and disabled soldiers."

古文：尝服棘刺丸，李谐等调之曰： 卿棘刺应自足，何假外求。 坐者皆笑。
现代文：搴曾服食棘刺丸，李谐等人调笑他说： 你身上的棘刺多得很，何必再补充？ 满座人大笑。
English: Zou had taken acanthus pills, and Li Jing and others made fun of him, saying: You have a lot of acanthus on your body, why do you need to supplement it? The audience laughed loudly.

古文：司马子如与高季式召搴饮酒，醉甚而卒，时年五十二。
现代文：司马子如和高季式请他喝酒，由于喝得太多，醉死了。死时只有五十二岁。
English: Sima Zi Ru and Gao Ji Zhu invited him to drink, and because he drank too much, he got drunk and died. He was only fifty-two years old when he died.

古文：高祖亲临之。
现代文：高祖亲自来向遗体告别。
English: Gaozu himself came to bid farewell to the body.

古文：子如叩头请罪，高祖曰： 折我右臂，仰觅好替还我。 
现代文：子如叩头，向高祖请罪。高祖说： 你折断了我的右臂，必须找一个来还给我。 
English: The son prostrated himself and begged for forgiveness from Gao Zu. Gao Zu said, "You broke my right arm, you must find someone to give it back to me."

古文：子如举魏收、季式举陈元康，以继搴焉。
现代文：子如推举魏收，季式荐引陈元康，以接替孙搴。
English: For example, Wei Hui was recommended, and Chen Yuankang was recommended to succeed Sun Yat-sen.

古文：赠仪同三司、吏部尚书、青州刺史。
现代文：朝廷赠搴仪同三司、吏部尚书、青州刺史。
English: The imperial court presented Puyi with the three departments, the personnel department, and the history of Qingzhou.

古文：陈元康，字长猷，广宗人也。
现代文：陈元康，字长猷，广宗人氏。
English: Chen Yuankang, a famous poet, was born in Guangbao.

古文：父终德，魏济阴内史，终于镇南将军、金紫光禄大夫。
现代文：父终德，魏济阴内史，终于镇南将军、金紫光禄大夫位上。
English: His father Zhengde, Wei Zi Yin Inner History, finally Zhenan General, Jin Zi Guanglu Doctor ascended the throne.

古文：元康贵，赠冀州刺史，谥曰贞。
现代文：元康贵盛，赠冀州刺史，谥号贞。
English: Yuan Kang Guisheng, bestowed the title of Jizhou Jishi, and was given the name Zhen.

古文：元康颇涉文史，机敏有干用。
现代文：元康广涉文史，机敏有才气。
English: Yuan Kang extensively dabbled in literary history, alert and agile, very talented.

古文：魏正光五年，从尚书令李崇北伐，以军功赐爵临清县男。
现代文：魏正光五年，跟随尚书令李崇北伐，以军功赐爵临清县男。
English: In the fifth year of Wei Zhengguang, he followed Shang Shuling and Li Chong to the Northern Expedition, and was awarded the title of Linqing County Man for his military service.

古文：普泰中，除主书，加威烈将军。
现代文：普泰中，除主书，加威烈将军。
English: In Putai, in addition to the main text, General Gawerey appears.

古文：天平元年，修起居注。
现代文：天平元年，撰修起居注。
English: In the first year of the Tenpyo era, he began to write a commentary.

古文：二年，迁司徒府记室参军，尤为府公高昂所信。
现代文：二年，迁司徒府记室参军，尤受府公高昂信任和礼遇。
English: Two years later, he joined the army and received high trust and courtesy from the prefectural government.

古文：后出为瀛州开府司马，加辅国将军。
现代文：出朝为瀛州开府司马，加辅国将军。
English: At the time of his enthronement, he was the Sima of the Prefecture of Zhangzhou and the General of the Province of Jiaozuo.

古文：所历皆为称职，高祖闻而征焉。
现代文：所任之处都很称职，高祖知道后就把他召了去。
English: Everything he did was very competent, and when Gaozu found out, he called him away.

古文：稍被任使，以为相府功曹参军，内掌机密。
现代文：慢慢地受到重用，为相府功曹参军后，便掌管了机密。
English: Gradually, he was put to heavy use, and after joining the army as Sangu Gong Cao, he was put in charge of secrets.

古文：高祖经纶大业，军务烦广，元康承受意旨，甚济速用。
现代文：高祖图谋大业，所以军务繁剧，元康承受意旨后，理事又快又好。
English: Gao Zu planned a great cause, so the military affairs were complicated. After Yuan Kang received the will, the director was fast and good.

古文：性又柔谨，通解世事。
现代文：元康柔顺谨慎，通晓时事。
English: Yuan Kang Rong Shun is prudent and aware of current affairs.

古文：高祖尝怒世宗于内，亲加殴蹋，极口骂之。
现代文：高祖有次对世宗不满，当着家里人的面殴打，还破口大骂，事完后告诉了元康。
English: Gaozu was once dissatisfied with Shizong, beat him in front of his family, and cursed at him. After the incident, he told Yuan Kang.

古文：出以告元康，元康谏曰： 王教训世子，自有礼法，仪刑式瞻，岂宜至是。 
现代文：元康进谏说： 大王教训世子，自有礼法规定，您应该依照仪刑办事，而不必动手动脚。 
English: Yuan Kang Jinqi said: "The Great King teaches his descendants, and has his own etiquette rules, you should act according to the ritual, without having to move your hands and feet.

古文：言辞恳恳，至于流涕。
现代文：言辞恳切，甚至流了眼泪。
English: He spoke earnestly, and even shed tears.

古文：高祖从此为之惩忿。
现代文：从此之后，高祖再也不对世宗非礼了。
English: Since then, Gaozu has never been rude to Shizong again.

古文：时或恚挞，辄曰： 勿使元康知之。 
现代文：即使忍无可忍，动了手脚，就要说： 千万不要让陈元康知道。 
English: Even if you can't bear it any longer, if you do something, you should say: Don't let Chen Yuankang know.

古文：其敬惮如此。
现代文：高祖对他敬重畏惮，即可见一斑。
English: Gaozu respected and feared him, as can be seen.

古文：高仲密之叛，高祖知其由崔暹故也，将杀暹。
现代文：高仲密反叛，高祖晓得是因为崔暹的作用，想杀掉暹。
English: Gao Zhongmi rebelled, Gao Zu knew that it was because of the role of Cui Siem and wanted to kill Siem.

古文：世宗匿而为之谏请。
现代文：世宗隐匿好崔暹后，接着去求情。
English: Sejong hid behind Choi Siam and then went to plead for mercy.

古文：高祖曰： 我为舍其命，须与苦手。 
现代文：高祖说： 看在你的面上，我饶他一命，但要狠揍一顿才好。 
English: Gaozu said: For your sake, I will spare his life, but it would be better to give him a severe beating.

古文：世宗乃出暹而谓元康曰： 卿若使崔得杖，无相见也。 
现代文：世宗就放出崔暹，对元康说： 你若让暹挨打，我就再也不同你见面了。 
English: Sejong then released Choe Siam and said to Won Kang: "If you let Siem be beaten, I will never see you again."

古文：暹在廷，解衣将受罚，元康趋入，历阶而升，且言曰： 王方以天下付大将军，有一崔暹不能容忍耶？ 
现代文：暹入军帐，脱下衣服准备接受惩罚。元康快步走了进来，沿着台阶边上边说： 大王刚要把天下托付给大将军，难道连一崔暹也不能原谅？ 
English: Siem entered the military tent, took off his clothes and prepared to accept the punishment. Yuan Kang walked in at a fast pace and walked up the steps and said: The great king has just entrusted the world to the great general, can he not even forgive a tri-siem?

古文：高祖从而宥焉。
现代文：高祖听从建议宽免了崔暹。
English: Gao Zu heeded the advice and pardoned Cui Siam.

古文：世宗入辅京室，崔暹、崔季舒、崔昂等并被任使，张亮、张徽纂并高祖所待遇，然委任皆出元康之下。
现代文：世宗入朝辅政，崔暹、崔季舒、崔昂等同受信任，虽然张亮、张徽纂等得到高祖礼遇，但其职位都在元康之下。
English: Shizong entered the government as an aide to the emperor, and Cui Siem, Cui Jishu, and Cui Ang were all trusted. Although Zhang Liang and Zhang Huizan were treated as high ancestors, their positions were all under Yuan Kang.

古文：时人语曰： 三崔二张，不如一康。 
现代文：时人评论说： 三崔二张，不如一康。 
English: At that time, there was a legend that it was better to have three good results than two bad ones.

古文：魏尚书仆射范阳卢道虞女为右卫将军郭琼子妇，琼以死罪没官，高祖启以赐元康为妻，元康乃弃故妇李氏，识者非之。
现代文：魏尚书仆射范阳卢道虔之女是右卫将军郭琼儿子的媳妇，琼因死罪没官，高祖启奏朝廷，请将其儿媳赐给元康为妻，元康便休掉了发妻李氏，对此人们议论纷纷。
English: The daughter of Wei Shang's servant Fan Yang and Lu Daoqian was the daughter-in-law of the son of the Right Guard General Guo Qiong. Qiong had no official position due to the death penalty, and Gao Zuo appealed to the imperial court to give his daughter-in-law to Yuan Kang as his wife. Yuan Kang then divorced his wife, Li, and people discussed this.

古文：元康便辟善事人，希颜候意，多有进举，而不能平心处物，溺于财利，受纳金帛，不可胜纪，放责交易，遍于州郡，为清论所讥。
现代文：元康逢迎谄媚善事人，而且会看脸色、能揣摸心思，举荐之人很多，但他不能平心待物，喜好财货，受纳钱帛，不可计算，放债交易，遍于州郡，所以受到了清议的讽讥。
English: Yuan Kang is a charming and good-natured person, and he can look at faces, can figure out thoughts, and there are many people to recommend him, but he can't treat things with equanimity, likes goods, accepts money, can't be calculated, and deals with money lenders all over the state and county, so he has been ridiculed.

古文：从高祖破周文帝于邙山，大会诸将，议进退之策。
现代文：随从高祖在邙山打败了周文帝，之后大会诸将，讨论进退的计划。
English: Gao Zu's followers defeated Zhou Wenti in Shaoshan, after which the generals met to discuss the plan of advance and retreat.

古文：咸以为野无青草，人马疲瘦，不可远追。
现代文：各位将领认为野无青草，人马疲瘦，不能乘胜追击。
English: All generals believe that there is no green grass, the men and horses are tired, and they cannot pursue victory.

古文：元康曰： 两雄交战，岁月已久，今得大捷，便是天授，时不可失，必须乘胜追之。 
现代文：元康说： 两雄交战，岁月已久，今天大胜，便是天意，时不可失，应该乘胜追击。 
English: Yuan Kang said: The two men have been at war for a long time. Today's great victory is God's will. The time is not lost. We should pursue the victory.

古文：高祖曰： 若遇伏兵，孤何以济？ 
现代文：高祖说： 如果碰上了周的伏兵，我怎么处理？ 
English: Gaozu said, "If I encounter Zhou's ambush, what should I do?

古文：元康曰： 王前涉沙苑还军，彼尚无伏，今奔败若此，何能远谋。
现代文：元康说： 前些日子大王从沙苑撤军，他们都没有设伏，今天他们败到如此地步，哪能制定出周密计划？
English: Yuan Kang said: A few days ago, the king withdrew his troops from Sha Yuan, and they did not surrender. Today, they have been defeated to such an extent, how can they make a detailed plan?

古文：若舍而不追，必成后患。 
现代文：假若舍弃而不追击，一定会成为大王的心腹之患。 
English: If you don't pursue it, it will be a hindrance.

古文：高祖竟不从。
现代文：高祖始终没有听从。
English: Gaozu never obeyed.

古文：以功封安平县子，邑三百户。
现代文：以功封安平县子，食邑三百户。
English: In Anping County, there are 300 households in food villages.

古文：寻除平南将军、通直常侍，转大行台郎中，徙右丞。
现代文：不久除平南将军、通直常侍，转大行台郎中，徙为右丞。
English: Soon after, he was removed from the position of the general of Pingnan and the regular attendant of Tsunenao, and became a junior vassal of Dadaigotai, and was transferred to the position of Ujo.

古文：及高祖疾笃，谓世宗曰： 邙山之战，不用元康之言，方贻汝患。以此为恨，死不瞑目。 
现代文：当高祖病重时，对世宗说： 邙山之战，没有采纳元康的建议，正好给你留下了祸患，这是我最大的遗憾，因此死也闭不上眼睛。 
English: When Gao Zu was seriously ill, he said to Shizong: The Battle of Lushan, not adopting the advice of Yuan Kang, just left you with a disaster. This is my biggest regret, so I can't close my eyes when I die.

古文：高祖崩，秘不发丧，唯元康知之。
现代文：高祖死，秘不发丧，只有元康一个人知道。
English: Gao Zu's death is not a secret. Only Yuan Kang knows about it.

古文：世宗嗣事，又见任待。
现代文：世宗主事，元康又得恩宠。
English: As the head of the Sejong, Motoyasu was favored again.

古文：拜散骑常侍、中军将军，别封昌国县公，邑一千户。
现代文：拜散骑常侍、中军将军，别封昌国县公，食邑千户。
English: Bye bye samurai, general of the Chinese army, bye bye chengguo county magistrate, bye bye thousand households of food villages.

古文：侯景反，世宗逼于诸将，欲杀崔暹以谢之，密语元康。
现代文：世宗偷偷地将其打算告诉了元康。元康进谏说： 如今四海未清，纲纪已定。
English: Sejong secretly told his plan to Yuan Kang. Yuan Kang said, "Nowadays, the four seas are not clear, and the outline of discipline has been determined.

古文：元康谏曰： 今四海未清，纲纪已定，若以数将在外，苟悦其心，枉杀无辜，亏废刑典，岂直上负天神，何以下安黎庶？
现代文：如果认为几位大将在外，想赢得他们的欢心，而枉杀无辜，损害刑典，这难道不是上负天神，那么下边怎样安定黎庶呢？
English: If it is believed that several generals are on the outside, trying to win their favor, but killing innocents and damaging the criminal code, is this not a negative angel, then how can the bottom be stable?

古文：晁错前事，愿公慎之。 
现代文：晁错的教训，希望您牢牢记住。 
English: I hope you can carefully learn from the mistakes of the Han Dynasty.

古文：世宗乃止。
现代文：听了元康的话，世宗才没有行动。
English: After listening to Motoyasu's words, Sejong did not act.

古文：高岳讨侯景未克，世宗欲遣潘相乐副之。
现代文：高岳讨伐侯景没有获胜，世宗想派潘相乐作他的助手。
English: Gao Yue's crusade against Hou Jing did not succeed, and Shizong wanted to appoint Pan Xiangle as his assistant.

古文：元康曰： 相乐缓于机变，不如慕容绍宗，且先王有命，称其堪敌侯景，公但推赤心于此人，则侯景不足忧也。 
现代文：元康说： 相乐不善于随机应变，不如让慕容绍宗去，再说，先王有命，称能与侯景抗衡的，只有绍宗，您真心诚意地对待他，那么侯景之乱就不用放在心上了。 
English: Yuan Kang said: Sorong is not good at random contingency, it is better to let Murong Shao Zong go. Moreover, the former king has a life, saying that he can compete with Hou Jing, only Shao Zong, if you treat him sincerely, then you do not have to worry about Hou Jing's chaos.

古文：是时绍宗在远，世宗欲召见之，恐其惊叛。
现代文：这时绍宗在很远的地方，世宗想召见他，又担心他惊疑而生叛意。
English: At this time, Shōzō was far away. Shizō wanted to summon him, but he was afraid that he would be surprised and rebel.

古文：元康曰： 绍宗知元康特蒙顾待，新使人来饷金，以致其诚款。
现代文：元康说： 绍宗知道我特受恩宠，派人给我送来金子，表示对霸朝的忠心。
English: Yuan Kang said, "Shao Zong knew that I was especially favored, so he sent someone to bring me gold to show his loyalty to the oppressor.

古文：元康欲安其意，故受之而厚答其书。
现代文：元康想让他安下心来，所以接受了他的金子还认真地给他写了回信。
English: Yuan Kang wanted to put him at ease, so he accepted his gold and wrote him a serious reply.

古文：保无异也。 
现代文：我可以保证他不会生出异心。 
English: I can guarantee that he won't have an affair.

古文：世宗乃任绍宗，遂以破景。
现代文：世宗拜绍宗为将，很快打败了侯景。
English: Shizong Baishaosong was the winner and soon defeated Houjing.

古文：赏元康金五十斤。
现代文：帝奖赏给元康金五十斤。
English: The emperor rewarded Yuan Kang with fifty catties of gold.

古文：王思政入颍城，诸将攻之不能拔，元康进计于世宗曰： 公匡辅朝政，未有殊功，虽败侯景，本非外贼。
现代文：王思政入据颍城，诸将攻打他，却没有成功。元康向世宗献计说： 您辅佐朝政，还没有立下大功，虽然打败了侯景，但侯景不是外贼。
English: Wang Shizheng entered the city of Zhouzhuang, and the generals attacked him, but without success. Yuan Kang presented a plan to Shizong and said: You have assisted the government, but have not yet made a great contribution. Although you have defeated Hou Jing, Hou Jing is not a foreign thief.

古文：今颍城将陷，原公因而乘之，足以取威定业。 
现代文：如今颍城将要被攻破，希望您借此机会，一举下城，便可奠定大的事业了。 
English: Now that Lucheng is about to be breached, I hope you will take this opportunity to go down to the city at one fell swoop, so that you can lay the foundation for a great cause.

古文：世宗令元康驰驿观之。
现代文：世宗命令元康骑驿站的马火速考察颍城情况。
English: King Sejong ordered Yuan Kang to ride a horse from the Yeongseong Station to quickly investigate the situation in Yeongseong.

古文：复命曰： 必可拔。 
现代文：回来报告说： 肯定可以攻下来。 
English: When he came back, he reported: "We can definitely take it.

古文：世宗于是亲征，既至而克，赏元康金百铤。
现代文：于是世宗亲自领兵攻打，一到城下，就取得了胜利。世宗因此赏元康金百铤。
English: As a result, Shizong personally led the troops to attack, and as soon as they reached the city, they achieved victory. Shizong therefore awarded Yuan Kang with one hundred talents of gold.

古文：初，魏朝授世宗相国、齐王，世宗频让不受。
现代文：当初，魏朝授给世宗相国、齐王，世宗极力推辞不受。
English: At first, the Wei Dynasty conferred the title to King Qi, who was Shizong's brother-in-law, but Shizong refused to accept the offer.

古文：乃召诸将及元康等密议之，诸将皆劝世宗恭应朝命，元康以为未可。
现代文：又召集诸将以及元康密议，将领们都劝世宗接受朝命。元康却不同意。
English: He also convened the generals and Yuan Kang for secret discussions. The generals all urged Shizong to accept the imperial order, but Yuan Kang did not agree.

古文：又谓魏收曰： 观诸人语，专欲误王。
现代文：他对魏收说： 听人们的话，是想让大王犯错误。
English: He said to Wei Wei: Listening to people's words is to let the great king make mistakes.

古文：我向已启王，受朝命，置官僚，元康叨忝或得黄门郎，但时事未可耳。 
现代文：我早就启奏大王，受朝命，置官僚，元康或许有幸得黄门侍郎之职，但现在的形势却不允许这样。 
English: I have long played the role of the great king, and by order of the imperial court, I appointed bureaucrats. Yuan Kang may have been fortunate enough to get the position of Yellow Gate waiter, but the current situation does not allow this.

古文：崔暹因间之，荐陆元规为大行台郎，欲以分元康权也。
现代文：崔暹乘机介入，推荐陆元规为大行台郎，想削弱元康的权力。
English: Cui Sie took the opportunity to intervene, recommending Lu Yuanbai as the leader, hoping to weaken Yuan Kang's power.

古文：元康既贪货贿，世宗内渐嫌之，元康颇亦自惧。
现代文：由于元康贪求货财贿赂，世宗渐渐地嫌弃着他，元康也开始害怕起来。
English: Because Yuan Kang was greedy for goods, money and bribes, Shizong gradually disliked him, and Yuan Kang also began to be afraid.

古文：又欲用为中书令，以闲地处之，事未施行。
现代文：世宗想让他作中书令，用闲职来处置，但没来得及施行。
English: King Sejong wanted him to issue an imperial edict to deal with idleness, but he did not have time to implement it.

古文：属世宗将受魏禅，元康与杨愔、崔季舒并在世宗坐，将大迁除朝士，共品藻之。
现代文：世宗将受魏禅，元康与杨愔、崔季舒都坐在世宗的身边，计划对朝士分别品藻，然后进行大规模地升迁除授。
English: Sejong will be guided by Wei Zen, and Yuan Kang, Yang Mi, and Cui Jishu will all sit next to Sejong, planning to grade the Asashi separately, and then carry out large-scale promotion and elimination.

古文：世宗家苍头奴兰固成先掌厨膳，甚被宠昵。
现代文：世宗家中的苍头奴兰固成掌管厨房膳食，极受宠幸。
English: In the family of the Sejong, the chief servant Lan Gucheng was in charge of the kitchen meals and was greatly favored.

古文：先是，世宗杖之数十，其人性躁，又恃旧恩，遂大忿恚，与其同事阿改谋害世宗。
现代文：早些时候，世宗杖打了他几十下，他是梁朝的人，性情急躁，又依仗着旧恩，因而极为恚愤，与其同事阿改企图谋害世宗。
English: Earlier, Shizong's staff had struck him dozens of times. He was a member of the Liang Dynasty, impatient, and relying on old favors, so he was extremely angry. He and his colleague Akai attempted to assassinate Shizong.

古文：阿改时事显祖，常执刀随从，云若闻东斋叫声，即以加刃于显祖。
现代文：这时阿改服侍显祖，常常带着刀剑侍从左右，说 如果听到东斋高声喊叫 ，就马上砍下显祖的脑袋。
English: At this time, Akaichi served Henzo, often with a sword at his side, saying that if he heard Tosai shout loudly, he would immediately cut off Henzo's head.

古文：是日值魏帝初建东宫，群官拜表。
现代文：这天，正好东宫建成，群官向魏帝祝贺。
English: On this day, just as the East Palace was completed, the officials congratulated Emperor Wei.

古文：事罢，显祖出东止车门，别有所之，未还而难作。
现代文：贺礼结束，显祖出东止车门，想到别的地方去，没有返回来，祸难就开始了。
English: At the end of the ceremony, Xianzu went out of the east gate, thought of going somewhere else, and did not return, and the calamity began.

古文：固成因进食，置刀于盘下而杀世宗。
现代文：兰固成乘献食之机，拿出事先藏在食盘中的刀向世宗刺去。
English: Taking advantage of the opportunity to offer food, Lan Gu Cheng took out a knife that had been hidden in the food dish and stabbed Sejong.

古文：元康以身扞蔽，被刺伤重，至夜而终，时年四十三。
现代文：元康以身阻挡，也被刺成重伤，到晚上就咽了气，时年四十有三。
English: Yuan Kang blocked it with his body, was also stabbed and seriously injured, and died in the evening at the age of forty-three.

古文：杨愔狼狈走出，季舒逃匿于厕，库直纥奚舍乐扞贼死。
现代文：杨忄音仓惶逃出，季舒躲藏在厕所里，库真都督纥奚舍乐同贼搏斗而死。
English: Yang Xuan escaped in panic, Ji Shu hid in the toilet, and Ku Zhen's governor, Xuan Shele, fought with the thief and died.

古文：是时秘世宗凶问，故殡元康于宫中，托以出使南境，虚除中书令。
现代文：这时没有公布世宗的凶讯，所以就将元康殡在宫中，对外说他出使到南方去了，还假意擢升他为中书令。
English: At this time, there was no announcement of the terrible news of Shizong, so they buried Yuan Kang in the palace, saying to the outside world that he had gone to the south on a mission, and also pretended to promote him to the position of middle secretary.

古文：明年，乃诏曰： 元康识超往哲，才极时英，千仞莫窥，万顷难测。
现代文：第二年，帝下诏书说： 元康才识越超往昔的贤人，品行为时代的楷模，可谓千仞莫窥，万顷难测。
English: In the second year, the imperial edict said: Yuan Kang was a wise man who knew more and more than the wise men of the past, and he was a model for the times. It can be said that there is nothing to see, and it is difficult to measure.

古文：综核戎政，弥纶霸道，草昧邵陵之谋，翼赞河阳之会，运筹定策，尽力尽心，进忠补过，亡家徇国，扫平逋寇，廓清荆楚，申、甫之在隆周，子房之处盛汉，旷世同规，殊年共美。
现代文：参议军事，统摄霸道，草昧邵陵之谋，翼赞河阳之会，运筹定策，尽心尽力，进忠补过，亡家殉国。扫平贼寇，廓清荆楚，申、甫在西周，子房处刘汉，旷世同规，殊年共美。
English: He was a military councillor, a military leader, a military strategist, a member of the Shao-Ling conspiracy, a member of the Xiang-Zan-Heyang Association, a strategist, a dedicated worker, a loyalist, and a martyr. He fought against bandits, defeated the Qing Dynasty, defeated the Western Zhou Dynasty, and defeated Liu Han Dynasty. He was a great statesman in his lifetime and a great statesman in his later years.

古文：大业未融，山隤奄及，悼伤既切，宜崇茂典。
现代文：大业未成，山崩地坼，悼伤既切，宜崇仪典。
English: When a great cause has not been accomplished, when a landslide has occurred, and when it is time to mourn, it is appropriate to hold a ceremony.

古文：赠使持节、都督冀定瀛殷沧五州诸军事、骠骑大将军、司空公、冀州刺史，追封武邑县一千户，旧封并如故，谥曰文穆。
现代文：赠使持节，都督冀、定、瀛、殷、沧五州诸军事，骠骑大将军，司空公，冀州刺史，追封给武邑县一千户，旧封全部保存，谥号文穆。
English: The gift of the festival, the military of the five prefectures of Hebei, Ding, Yunnan, Yin and Cangzhou, the general of the cavalry, Sikuo, and the history of Jizhou, was traced to a thousand households in Wuyi County, and all the old seals were preserved, and the nickname was Wenmu.

古文：赙物一千二百段。
现代文：赙物一千二百段。
English: There are twelve hundred pieces of stolen property.

古文：大鸿胪监丧事。
现代文：大鸿胪卿监护丧事。
English: The funeral was overseen by Taihong Qianqing.

古文：凶礼所须，随由公给。 
现代文：凶礼所需要支出的钱财物品，一律从国库开支。 
English: All the money, goods and materials needed to be expended for the sacrificial rites shall come from the state treasury.

古文：元康母李氏，元康卒后，哀感发病而终，赠广宗郡君，谥曰贞昭。
现代文：元康母李氏，在其子死后，因悲伤过度暴病而亡，朝廷赠其广宗郡君，谥号贞昭。
English: After the death of her son, Li's mother, formerly Kang, died of a violent illness brought on by grief. The imperial court presented her with the title of Guangzong Guojun and the posthumous name of Zhenzhao.

古文：元康子善藏，温雅有鉴裁，武平末，假仪同三司、给事黄门侍郎。
现代文：元康子善藏，温文尔雅有识人之鉴，武平末假仪同三司、给事黄门侍郎。
English: Motoyasu Yasuko was a virtuous person, mild-mannered, elegant, and a good judge of character. He was the third-ranking official at the end of the Warring States period, and the attendant of the Yellow Gate.

古文：隋开皇中，尚书礼部侍郎。
现代文：隋开皇中，为尚书礼部侍郎。
English: In the middle of the Sui and Qing dynasties, he was the attendant of the ceremonial department of Shangshu.

古文：大业初，卒于彭城郡赞治。
现代文：大业初，死在彭城郡赞治位上。
English: At the beginning of his great career, he died in Pengcheng County.

古文：元康弟谌，官至大鸿胪。
现代文：元康弟谌，官至大鸿胪。
English: He was a former disciple of Kangxi, and rose through the ranks to become a great general.

古文：次季璩，巨鹿太守，转冀州别驾。
现代文：次弟季璩，巨鹿太守，转冀州别驾。
English: His second younger brother, Ji Yao, the governor of Jiu Degu, moved to Jizhou.

古文：平秦王归彦反，季璩守节不从，因而遇害。
现代文：平秦王归彦反叛，季璩守节不降，因此被害。
English: King Quihang of the Ping Qin Dynasty rebelled against Guihang and refused to abdicate the throne. As a result, he was killed.

古文：赠卫尉卿、赵州刺史。
现代文：赠卫尉卿、赵州刺史。
English: He was awarded the title of Lieutenant of the Imperial Guards and the title of Zhaozhou Sashishi.

古文：以预定策之功，迁骠骑将军、卫尉卿，别封长安县伯。尝与邢邵扈从东山，共论名理。
现代文：杜弼，字辅玄，中山曲阳人氏，小字辅国。自序说，本是京兆杜陵人氏，弼曾同邢邵扈从到东山，两人一起讨论名理问题。
English: Du Xuan, Zhefu Xuan, Zhongshan Quyangren, Xiao Zhefu Guo. From the preface, it is said that the original is Jingzha Du Lingren, Zhe once went to Dongshan with Zhe Shao, and the two discussed the problem of name and principle.

古文：邢以为人死还生，恐为蛇画足。
现代文：邢认为人死再生，大概是画蛇添足。
English: Zou believes that people die and are reborn, which is probably an exaggeration.

古文：弼答曰： 盖谓人死归无，非有能生之力。
现代文：弼回答说： 一般说来，人死为归无，没有了再生的力量。
English: Zou replied, "Generally speaking, when a person dies, there is nothing, and there is no power of rebirth.

古文：然物之未生，本亦无也，无而能有，不以为疑，因前生后，何独致怪？ 
现代文：当然啦，物未生之前，本来也是无，无而能够有，不应怀疑。因为前生出后，这有什么奇怪？ 
English: Of course, it should not be doubted that before a thing is born, it is nothing, and nothing can have it. Because after the birth, what is strange about it?

古文：邢云： 圣人设教，本由劝奖，故惧以将来，理望各遂其性。 
现代文：邢说： 圣人设立教令，本是为了劝奖，故让民众警戒将来，希望能够成就自己的品性。 
English: Zou said: The holy man set up the edict, originally for the purpose of persuasion, so let the people beware of the future, hoping to be able to achieve their own character.

古文：弼曰： 圣人合德天地，齐信四时，言则为经，行则为法，而云以虚示物，以诡劝民，将同鱼腹之书，有异凿楹之诰，安能使北辰降光，龙宫韫椟。
现代文：弼说： 圣人合德天地，齐信四时，言语为经，行动为法，还说以虚示物，以诡劝民，与鱼腹之书相同，和凿楹之诰有异，怎能让北斗星生光，龙宫藏宝？
English: Zou said: The sage is in harmony with the heavens and the earth, he believes in all four directions, his words are the scripture, his actions are the law, he also said that he would persuade the people with false signs and tricks, which is the same as the book of the fish's belly, and different from the chisel of the hammer. How can the Big Dipper give birth to light, and the Dragon Palace store treasures?

古文：就如所论，福果可以熔铸性灵，弘奖风教，为益之大，莫极于斯。
现代文：就像你讲的那样，福果然可以熔铸性情，光大风教，益处之多，没有能够超过它的了。
English: As you said, it is true that good fortune can mold one's disposition, enlighten one's morality, and have so many benefits that nothing can surpass it.

古文：此既真教，何谓非实？ 
现代文：这是真正的教化，为什么说不是实在的？ 
English: This is real indoctrination, so why is it not real?

古文：邢云： 死之言澌，精神尽也。 
现代文：邢答： 死又可以说成 澌 ，讲的是精神尽了。 
English: A: Death can also be said to be the end of life, it is about running out of energy.

古文：弼曰： 此所言澌，如射箭尽，手中尽也。
现代文：弼问： 你所说的澌，就像将箭全部射出，手中再也没有了。
English: Interrogator: What you said about the crossbow, it's like shooting all the arrows, and there's nothing left in your hand.

古文：《小雅》曰 无草不死 ，《月令》又云 靡草死 ，动植虽殊，亦此之类。
现代文：《小雅》说 没有草能够活过冬天 ，《月令》也云 所有的草死了 ，动物植物虽有区别，也属于这一类。
English: "Xiao Ya" said that no grass can survive the winter, "Lunar" also said that all grasses died, although animals and plants are different, they also belong to this category.

古文：无情之卉，尚得还生，含灵之物，何妨再造。
现代文：无情性的花卉，尚可以再生，饱含灵气的物事，为何不能重造。
English: Flowers, which are merciless, can still be regenerated. Why can't things, which are full of aura, be recreated?

古文：若云草死犹有种在，则复人死亦有识。
现代文：假如说草死还有种在，那么人死也有意识存在。
English: If grass death still exists, then human death also has a conscious existence.

古文：识种不见，谓以为无者。
现代文：看不见意识、种子，就认为是无。
English: If you can't see the consciousness, the seed, you think it's nothing.

古文：神之在形，亦非自瞩，离朱之明不能睹。
现代文：神借助形表现，也不能自己看到自己，离朱的眼睛最好也无法瞧见。
English: With the help of form and expression, God cannot see Himself, nor can He be seen with the naked eye.

古文：虽孟轲观眸，贤愚可察；钟生听曲，山水呈状。
现代文：虽然蒋济看人的眼睛，能够察觉到是贤是愚；钟子期听曲，觉察到山水也有了情感。
English: Although Jiang Jie looked at people's eyes and was able to detect whether they were wise or foolish, Zhong Zi listened to music and noticed that the landscape also had emotions.

古文：乃神之工，岂神之质。
现代文：这乃是精神的巧妙，岂能说是精神的本体？
English: This is the ingenuity of the spirit, can it be said to be the essence of the spirit?

古文：犹玉帛之非礼，钟鼓之非乐，以此而推，义斯见矣。 
现代文：就像玉帛不是礼，钟鼓不是乐，依此而推论，其意思就很明确了。 
English: Just as the jade gong is not a ritual, and the bell and drum are not music, the meaning is clear.

古文：邢云： 季札言无不之，亦言散尽，若复聚而为物，不得言无不之也。 
现代文：邢又说： 季札讲 无不之 ，也言 散尽 ，如果重新聚合而为物，就不能讲 无不亡 了。 
English: Zou Shao said, "Wu Jizha said that when a person dies, he will be omnipresent, and he also said that after death, the body will be dispersed. If a person dies and can gather adults, it should not be said to be omnipresent."

古文：弼曰： 骨肉下归于土，魂气则无不之，此乃形坠魂游，往而非尽。
现代文：弼又道： 骨肉不入黄泉，那么魂气就 无不之 了。这便是形坠魂游，去了而不是尽。
English: Hao also said, "If the flesh and bones don't go to hell, then the spirit will. This is a form of soul-searching, rather than dying.

古文：如鸟出巢，如蛇出穴。
现代文：如鸟出巢，如蛇离洞。
English: Like a bird out of the nest, like a snake out of the hole.

古文：由其尚有，故无所不之，若令无也，之将焉适？
现代文：因为还有，所以无所不至；若令没有，又将往哪里去？
English: Because there is more, it can reach everywhere; if not, where will it go?

古文：延陵有察微之识，知其不随于形；仲尼发习礼之叹，美其斯与形别。
现代文：延陵有察微的本领，知道神不随从于形；仲尼发出习礼的感叹，赞美神与形的区别。
English: Yanling has the ability to be perceptive, knowing that God does not follow form; Zhongni gives a ritual exclamation, praising the difference between God and form.

古文：若许以廓然，然则人皆季子。
现代文：若允许扩张的话，那么人人都是季札了。
English: If expansion is allowed, then everyone is a season ticket holder.

古文：不谓高论，执此为无。 
现代文：不说是高论，坚持此点就是无。 
English: Not to say that it is a lofty theory, but insisting on this point is nothing.

古文：邢云： 神之在人，犹光之在烛，烛尽则光穷，人死则神灭。 
现代文：邢道： 神依附于人体，就像光离不开烛，烛烧完光也就熄灭了，人死，精神也就灭亡了。 
English: Zou Shao said: "For a person, the soul is like candlelight for a candle. When the candle burns out, the light will be extinguished. When a person dies, the soul will disappear."

古文：弼曰： 旧学前儒，每有斯语，群疑众惑，咸由此起。
现代文：弼说： 前儒旧学，常讲这样的话，群疑众惑，都是由此产生出来的。
English: Zou said: Pre-Confucianism and old school, often talk about such a thing, suspicion and bewilderment, are all derived from this.

古文：盖辨之者未精，思之者不笃。
现代文：可以说是辨别的人不精明，思考的人不专一。
English: It can be said that discerning people are not shrewd, and thinking people are not specific.

古文：窃有末见，可以核诸。
现代文：我有一点不成熟的看法，可以核实。
English: I have a bit of an unsubstantiated opinion, which I can verify.

古文：烛则因质生光，质大光亦大；人则神不系于形，形小神不小。
现代文：烛因本体而生光，本体大光也大；人则是神不系于形，形小神却不一定小。
English: A candle is bright because of its body, and its body is bright; a person is a god regardless of shape, but a small god is not necessarily small.

古文：故仲尼之智，必不短于长狄；孟德之雄，乃远奇于崔琰。
现代文：因此仲尼的智慧，一定比长狄高；曹孟德的雄武，远远地超过了崔琰。
English: Therefore, the wisdom of Confucius is certainly not shallower than that of Chang Di; Cao Mengde's genius is roughly, far more than that of Cui Yao.

古文：神之于形，亦犹君之有国。
现代文：神对于形，就像君王拥有国家。
English: God is to form as a prince is to a state.

古文：国实君之所统，君非国之所生。
现代文：国家是君王统治的，但君王却不是国家生出来的。
English: The country is ruled by a king, but the king is not born from the country.

古文：不与同生，孰云俱灭？ 
现代文：不与它一同生出来，怎么能够一块灭亡？ 
English: If we are not born with it, how can we die with it?

古文：邢云： 舍此适彼，生生恒在。
现代文：邢问： 舍此往彼，生生常在。
English: Q: If you don't want to go to him, why are you always here?

古文：周、孔自应同庄周之鼓缶，和桑扈之循歌？ 
现代文：周、孔自当与庄周鼓缶一样，和桑扈循歌相同？ 
English: Should Zhou and Kong Zi be the same as Zhuang Zhou's drums and cans, and the same as Mulberry's song?

古文：弼曰： 共阴而息，尚有将别之悲；穷辙以游，亦与中途之叹。
现代文：弼答： 同在一树荫下歇息，还有即将告别的悲伤；穷尽车辙印而游玩，也会在中途发生感叹。
English: A: There is the sadness of saying goodbye while resting in the shade of the same tree, and there is also the sigh of regret in the middle of playing the game after exhausting the ruts.

古文：况曰联体同气，化为异物，称情之服，何害于圣。 
现代文：何况是联体同气，变化成了别的东西，符合心意的事情，对智慧有何害处？ 
English: Besides, what harm is there to wisdom in being united, in changing into something else, in conforming to one's will?

古文：邢云： 鹰化为鸠，鼠变为鴽，黄母为鳖，皆是生之类也。
现代文：邢说： 鹰变成鸠，鼠变成如鸟，黄母变成鳖，都是有生命之类的东西。
English: Zou said, "An eagle turns into a stork, a mouse into a bird, and a turtle into a cormorant, all of which are living things.

古文：类化而相生，犹光去此烛，复然彼烛。 
现代文：类化而相生，就如光离开了此烛，又去点燃了彼烛。 
English: It is as if the light left this candle and went to light another one.

古文：弼曰： 鹰未化为鸠，鸠则非有。
现代文：弼说： 鹰没有变化成鸠时，鸠是没有的。
English: The stork said, "When the eagle does not turn into a stork, there is no stork.

古文：鼠既二有，何可两立。
现代文：鼠未变成如鸟前，如鸟是没有的。既然不是两种东西同时都有，怎么可能两相对立？
English: Before the mouse becomes like a bird, there is no such thing as a bird. Since there are not two things at the same time, how can the two be opposed?

古文：光去此烛，得燃彼烛，神去此形，亦托彼形，又何惑哉？ 
现代文：光离开此烛，能够点燃彼烛，神离开此形，则寄托于彼形，那有什么两样？ 
English: What is the difference between light leaving this candle and being able to light another candle, and God leaving this form and entrusting it to another form?

古文：邢云： 欲使土化为人，木生眼鼻，造化神明，不应如此。 
现代文：邢说： 想让土化成人，树木生出眼鼻，造化神明，不当这样。 
English: Zou said, "If you want to make earthworms grow into adults, trees produce eyes and noses, and create gods, this is not appropriate.

古文：弼曰： 腐草为萤，老木为蝎，造化不能，谁其然也？ 
现代文：弼说： 腐草中飞出流萤，朽木中爬出蝎虫，如果不是造化，那又是什么致使出现这种现象呢？ 
English: Zou said: Fireflies fly out of rotten grass, scorpions crawl out of dead trees. If it is not creation, then what causes this phenomenon?

古文：其后别与邢书云： 夫建言明理，宜出典证，而违孔背释，独为君子。
现代文：之后又给邢邵写信说： 立言明理，当据经典，违儒背佛，只有君子。
English: After that, he wrote a letter to Zou Shao, saying, "Speak the truth, follow the classics, reject Confucianism and Buddhism, and be a gentleman."

古文：若不师圣，物各有心，马首欲东，谁其能御？
现代文：如不法圣，物各有性，马首欲东，谁人能御？
English: If there is no sacredness, if everything has its own nature, if the horse's head wants to go east, who can stop it?

古文：奚取于适衷，何贵于得一。
现代文：为什么取于适中，怎能贵于得一。
English: Why take more than a moderate amount, how can it be more expensive than getting one.

古文：逸韵虽高，管见未喻。 
现代文：逸韵虽然极高，但管见也没有很好地表达出来。 
English: Although the rhyme is very high, the meaning is not well expressed.

古文：前后往复再三，邢邵理屈而止，文多不载。
现代文：前后来往了许多次书信，邢邵被杜弼驳倒了，因文字太多我们不准备抄录了。
English: After going there and back many times, Zou Shao was overruled by Du Yu, and we were not prepared to transcribe the letter because there were too many words.

古文：又以本官行郑州事，未发，为家客告弼谋反，收下狱，案治无实，久乃见原。
现代文：又以本官行郑州刺史事，还没有动身上路，就被家客告发谋反，收押监狱，审查不实，很久才受宽大。
English: He also used his official position to meddle in the history of Zhengzhou. Before he set out on the road, he was accused of plotting a rebellion by a family guest, detained in prison, censored falsely, and received leniency for a long time.

古文：因此绝朝见。
现代文：弼因此再也不朝见皇帝了。
English: As a result, he never again appeared before the emperor.

古文：复坐第二子廷尉监台卿断狱稽迟，与寺官俱为郎中封静哲所讼。
现代文：不久又由于第二子廷尉监台卿断狱拖延时间受到牵连，与寺官一同遭郎中封静哲的起诉。
English: Soon after, he was implicated in the delay in the release of the second son of the imperial lieutenant, Guan Taiqing, and together with the temple officials, he was sued by his brother-in-law, Fong Jing Zhe.

古文：事既上闻，显祖发忿，遂徙弼临海镇。
现代文：事情已向皇帝作了报告，显祖发火，于是把弼流放到了临海镇。
English: The matter had been reported to the emperor, and Emperor Xianzu was enraged, so he banished him to Linhai Town.

古文：时楚州人东方白额谋反，南北响应，临海镇为贼师张绰、潘天合等所攻，弼率厉城人，终得全固。
现代文：这时楚州人东方白额谋反，南北响应，临海镇被贼帅张绰、潘天合等人围攻，弼带领全城军民奋起抵抗，终于保全了城池。
English: At this time, the people of Chuzhou, East and West, plotted a rebellion, and North and South responded. Linhai Town was besieged by Zhang Qiao, Pan Tianhe and others, who led the whole city's army and people to rise up and resist, and finally preserved the city.

古文：显祖嘉之，敕行海州事，即所徙之州。
现代文：显祖得报，给予嘉奖，敕弼行海州刺史事。海州就是他的流放州。
English: Hsien Zu was reported, given awards, and carried out the history of Haizhou. Haizhou was his exile state.

古文：在州奏通陵道并韩信故道。
现代文：在海州奏请修通陵道和韩信的旧道。
English: In Haizhou, the old roads of Tongling Road and Hanxin Road were repaired.

古文：又于州东带海而起长堰，外遏咸潮，内引淡水。
现代文：又在州东沿海筑起长堰，对外拦截咸潮，对内导引淡水。
English: In addition, a long weir was built on the east coast of the state to intercept the salty tide and guide fresh water inwards.

古文：敕并依行。
现代文：帝敕令一同办理。
English: The imperial edict will be handled together.

古文：转徐州刺史，未之任，又除胶州刺史。
现代文：转任徐州刺史，未赴任，又拜胶州刺史。
English: He was transferred to the post of Xuzhou chief historian, but did not take up the post, and then became the chief historian of Jiaozhou.

古文：弼儒雅宽恕，尤晓史职。
现代文：弼儒雅宽厚，尤其通晓吏职。
English: He is polite, courteous, and generous, and is especially familiar with official duties.

古文：所在清洁，为吏民所怀。
现代文：在官清洁，被吏民怀念。
English: He was remembered fondly by officials and the public for his cleanliness in office.

古文：耽好玄理，老而愈笃。
现代文：喜好玄理，年龄越大越是专一。
English: The older you are, the more you like the occult.

古文：又注《庄子·惠施篇》、《易上下系》，名《新注义苑》，并行于世。
现代文：又注《庄子·惠施篇》、《易·上下系》，名之为《新注义苑》，同在社会上流行。
English: He also wrote "Zhuang Zi Hui Shi Hen" and "Yi Xiang Jie" with the name "Xin Zhuyi Yuan," which were also popular in the society.

古文：弼性质直，前在霸朝，多所匡正。
现代文：弼性格率直，前在神武的霸朝，对高祖多有匡正。
English: He is an outspoken person. He was once a tyrant in the Jinwu Dynasty, and he is more upright than Gao Zu.

古文：及显祖作相，致位僚首，初闻揖让之议，犹有谏言。
现代文：显祖为丞相后，弼位在僚首，初听揖让之议，还有谏诤。
English: After Xianzu became chancellor, he was promoted to the position of chief of staff. At first, there was talk of him being demoted, but then there was no decision.

古文：显祖尝问弼云： 治国当用何人？ 
现代文：显祖曾问弼： 治理国家应该用什么样的人？ 
English: Xianzu once asked: What kind of person should be used to govern the country?

古文：对曰： 鲜卑车马客，会须用中国人。 
现代文：答： 鲜卑是车马客，当用中国人。 
English: He replied: Xianbei people can only be allowed to manage chariots and horses, and Central Plains people should be used to govern the country.

古文：显祖以为此言讥我。
现代文：显祖认为弼的话是讥讽。
English: Xianzu thought that Yu's words were sarcastic.

古文：高德政居要，不能下之，乃于众前面折云： 黄门在帝左右，何得闻善不惊，唯好减削抑挫！ 
现代文：高德政执掌大政，弼不想屈居其下，就当着众人的面折损说： 黄门在帝的前后左右，为什么闻善不惊，却喜欢削减抑压？ 
English: Gao Desheng was in charge of the great political power, and Zou did not want to bow down to him, so he broke down and said in front of everyone: The Yellow Gate is around the emperor, why is it not surprising, but it likes to reduce oppression?

古文：德政深以为恨，数言其短。
现代文：德政极其愤恨，多次说弼的坏话。
English: Desheng was extremely angry and repeatedly said bad things about Yao.

古文：又令主书杜永珍密启弼在长史日，受人请属，大营婚嫁。
现代文：他又令主书杜永珍秘密上书，说弼作长史时，受人好处，大操婚嫁之事。
English: He also ordered the main writer, Du Yongzhen, to secretly write a letter, saying that when he made a long history, he was favored by others and made a big fuss about getting married.

古文：显祖内衔之。
现代文：显祖内心不满。
English: Xianzu was deeply dissatisfied.

古文：弼恃旧，仍有公事陈请。
现代文：弼依仗着自己的旧臣身份，向帝陈请公事。
English: Relying on his status as a former vassal, Zou Chen asked Emperor Chen for a job.

古文：十年夏，上因饮酒，积其愆失，遂遣就州斩之，时年六十九。
现代文：天保十年夏，帝借饮酒之机，清算他的过失，于是便派人赴州诛杀了他，时年六十九。
English: In the summer of the tenth year of the Tenpo era, the emperor used the opportunity of drinking to clear up his mistakes, so he sent someone to the state to kill him, at the age of sixty-nine.

古文：既而悔之，驿追不及。
现代文：帝觉察到这样处理不妥，马上派驿马追赶，却来不及了。
English: The emperor sensed that this was not the right way to handle the matter, and immediately sent his horse to chase after them, but it was too late.

古文：长子蕤、第四子光远徙临海镇。
现代文：长子蕤、第四子光，流放临海镇。
English: The eldest son, Zou, and the fourth son, Guang, were exiled to Linhai Town.

古文：次子台卿，先徙东豫州。
现代文：次子台卿，先徙东豫州。
English: The second son, Taiqing, first migrated to East Henan.

古文：史臣曰：孙搴便藩左右，处文墨之地，入幕未久，情义已深。
现代文：乾明初，几人一同得令返回邺城。天统五年，朝廷追赠弼使持节，扬、郢二州军事，开府仪同三司，尚书右仆射，扬州刺史，谥文肃。史臣曰：孙搴多次在高祖左右，处于舞文弄墨的位置，入幕府不久，情义已深。
English: At the beginning of the Qianming era, several people were ordered to return to Shicheng together. In the fifth year of the unification of heaven and earth, the imperial court posthumously awarded the following to Sun Yat-sen: Zhi Ji Jie, Yang and Zou two-state military, Kaifu ceremony and three departments, Shangshu right-hand shooting, Yangzhou engraving history, and Zou Wenshu. The historian said: Sun Yat-sen was around Gaozu many times, in the position of dancing and writing, and soon after entering the bakufu, the situation was profound.

古文：及仓卒致殒，高祖折我右臂，虽戎旌未卷，爱惜才子，不然何以成霸王之业。
现代文：到仓猝死去，直担说折我右臂，虽然当时军旗未卷，却爱惜人才，不然怎么能够成就霸王之业。
English: When he died suddenly, he broke my right arm. Although the military banner was not rolled up at that time, he cherished talent, otherwise how could he achieve the overlord's career.

古文：太史公云： 非死者难，处死者难。 
现代文：太史公说： 不是死去难，如何对待死难。 
English: Tai Shikong said: It is not difficult to die, but how to deal with death.

古文： 或重于太山，或轻于鸿毛。 
现代文： 有的比泰山还重，有的比鸿毛还轻。 
English: Some are heavier than Mount Tai, some are lighter than a feather.

古文：斯其义也。
现代文：这就是怎么死的意义。
English: That's what it means to die.

古文：元康以智能才干，委质霸朝，绸缪帷幄，任寄为重。
现代文：五尘凭藉他的智能才干，托身于高氏，运筹帷幄，寄托重任。
English: With the help of his intelligence and talent, Wuchang entrusted himself to Gao, making plans and entrusting him with important tasks.

古文：及难无苟免，忘生殉义，可谓得其地焉。
现代文：至危难之时不苟且偷生，舍生殉义，可以说死得其所。
English: At the time of greatest peril, he was scrupulous and stole his own life, sacrificing his own life for martyrdom. It can be said that his death was well deserved.

古文：杨愔自谓异行奇才，冠绝夷等，弑逆之际，趋而避之，是则非处死者难，死者亦难也。
现代文：杨惰自己认为品行和才能奇异，冠盖同辈，有人弑君篡位之时，却赶快逃跑躲避，造就不仅是对待死难，死也难啊。
English: Yang Lian himself thought that his character and talent were extraordinary. He was ahead of his peers. When someone tried to usurp the throne, he quickly ran away to avoid it. This made it not only difficult to deal with death, but also difficult to die.

古文：显祖弱龄藏器，未有朝臣所知，及北宫之难，以年次推重，故受终之议，时未之许焉。
现代文：颢担弱冠之年怀才待时，没有朝臣知道，到了北宫之难，以年龄排序被推举，所以承受帝位的理由，当时人们不赞成啊。
English: In the year of the weak crown, no courtier knew that when it came to the difficulty of the Northern Palace, he was elected in order of age, so the reason for accepting the throne was not approved by the people at that time.

古文：杜弼识学甄明，发言谠正，禅代之际，先起异图。
现代文：杜弼学识通达，说话正直，禅让皇位之时，先起异圃。
English: Du Qian is well-educated, speaks honestly, and when Zen abdicated the throne, Heipu took the lead.

古文：王怒未息，卒蒙显戮。
现代文：王怒未消，最终遭受加罪杀戮。
English: Wang's anger did not subside, and he eventually suffered an aggravated homicide.

古文：直言多矣，能无及是者乎？
现代文：直言太多了，能不遭遇这种结局吗?
English: Is it possible to be too outspoken and not end up like this?

古文：赞曰：彦举驱驰，才高行诐。
现代文：赞曰：产墨奔走效力，才气高而行为不正。
English: Praise says: the production of ink is effective, the talent is high and the behavior is improper.

古文：元康忠勇，舍生存义。
现代文：五鏖忠勇，舍生取义。
English: Wuzhen is loyal and brave, and is willing to sacrifice his own life for righteousness.

古文：卬卬辅玄，思极谈天，道亡时晦，身没名全。
现代文：高大的辅玄，思致深远而好谈玄理，国无道时运不佳，身虽死亡而名声保全。
English: A lofty sophisticate, a profound thinker and a good talker about metaphysics, a country without a road and bad luck, and a reputation preserved even though he is dead.

