古文：老子者，楚苦县厉乡曲仁里人也，姓李氏，名耳，字聃，周守藏室之史也。
现代文：老子是楚国苦县厉乡曲仁里人。姓李，名耳，字聃，做过周朝掌管藏书室的史官。
English: Lao Zi was from Li Xiang and Qu Renli in Ku County, Chu Province. His surname was Li, and he was a historian who was in charge of the library in the Zhou Dynasty.

古文：孔子適周，将问礼於老子。
现代文：孔子前往周国的都城，想向老子请教礼关于礼的问题。
English: Confucius went to the capital city of Zhou Province and wanted to ask Laozi for advice on the matter of etiquette.

古文：老子曰： 子所言者，其人与骨皆已朽矣，独其言在耳。
现代文：老子说： 你所说的礼，倡导它的人和骨头都已经腐烂了，只有他的言论还在。
English: Laozi said, "The ritual you mentioned, the person who advocated it and his bones have all rotted away, only his words remain.

古文：且君子得其时则驾，不得其时则蓬累而行。
现代文：况且君子时运来了就驾着车出去做官，生不逢时，就像蓬草一样随风飘转。
English: Moreover, when a gentleman is lucky, he drives his car to go out to work as an official. When he is unlucky, he is like a puff of grass, drifting with the wind.

古文：吾闻之，良贾深藏若虚，君子盛德容貌若愚。
现代文：我听说，善于经商的人把货物隐藏起来，就像什么东西都没有一样，君子具有高尚的的品德，他的容貌谦虚得像愚钝的人。
English: I have heard it said that a good merchant hides his goods as if they were nothing, that a gentleman has a noble character, and his countenance is as modest as that of a dullard.

古文：去子之骄气与多欲，态色与淫志，是皆无益於子之身。
现代文：摒弃您的骄气和过多的欲望，摒弃您做作的情态神色和不切实际的志向，这些对于您自身都是没有好处的。
English: Give up your pride and excessive desires, give up your pretentious airs and unrealistic aspirations, which are of no benefit to yourself.

古文：吾所以告子，若是而已。 
现代文：我能告诉您的，只有这些而已。 
English: That's all I can tell you.

古文：孔子去，谓弟子曰： 鸟，吾知其能飞；鱼，吾知其能游；兽，吾知其能走。
现代文：孔子离去以后，对弟子们说： 鸟，我知道它善于飞翔；鱼，我知道它善于游泳；兽，我知道它善于奔跑。
English: After his departure, Confucius said to his disciples: "Bird, I know it is good at flying; fish, I know it is good at swimming; beast, I know it is good at running.

古文：走者可以为罔，游者可以为纶，飞者可以为矰。
现代文：会跑的可以织网捕获它，会游的可制成丝线去钓它，会飞的可以用箭去射它。
English: Those who can run can weave a net to catch it, those who can swim can make a silk thread to catch it, and those who can fly can shoot it with an arrow.

古文：至於龙，吾不能知其乘风云而上天。
现代文：至于龙，我就不知道该怎么办了，据说它是驾着风而飞腾升天的。
English: As for the dragon, I don't know what to do with it. It is said that it was driven by the wind and soared into the sky.

古文：吾今日见老子，其犹龙邪！ 
现代文：我今天见到的老子，他大概像一条龙吧！ 
English: The old man I saw today, he probably looks like a dragon!

古文：老子脩道德，其学以自隐无名为务。
现代文：老子研究道德学问，他的学说以隐匿声迹，不求闻达为宗旨。
English: Laozi studied moral science, and his doctrine aimed at concealing the sound and not seeking to hear it.

古文：居周久之，见周之衰，乃遂去。
现代文：他在周都住了很久，见周朝衰微了，于是就离开周都。
English: He lived in Zhoudu for a long time, saw the decline of the Zhou Dynasty, and then left Zhoudu.

古文：至关，关令尹喜曰： 子将隐矣，彊为我著书。 
现代文：到了函谷关，关令尹喜对他说： 您就要隐居了，勉力为我们写一本书吧。 
English: When he arrived in Hakodate, the governor of Hakodate, Yin Xi, said to him, "You are about to live in seclusion. Try your best to write a book for us."

古文：於是老子乃著书上下篇，言道德之意五千馀言而去，莫知其所终。
现代文：于是老子就撰写了本书，分上下两篇，阐述了道德的本意，一共五千多字，然后才离去，没有人知道他最终去了哪里。
English: So Laozi wrote a book, divided into two parts, expounding the moral intention, a total of more than five thousand words, and then left, no one knows where he eventually went.

古文：或曰：老莱子亦楚人也，著书十五篇，言道家之用，与孔子同时云。
现代文：有的人说：老莱子也是楚国人，著书十五篇，阐述的是道家学问怎么应用，和孔子是同一时代的人。
English: Some people say: Lao Lai Zi is also a native of the State of Chu. He wrote fifteen books, explaining how to apply the teachings of Taoism. He was a man of the same era as Confucius.

古文：盖老子百有六十馀岁，或言二百馀岁，以其脩道而养寿也。
现代文：据说老子活了一百六十多岁，也有的人说活了二百多岁，这是因为他能修道养心而长寿的啊。
English: It is said that Laozi lived more than one hundred and sixty years old, and some people say that he lived more than two hundred years old. This is because he was able to cultivate his mind and live a long life.

古文：自孔子死之後百二十九年，而史记周太史儋见秦献公曰： 始秦与周合，合五百岁而离，离七十岁而霸王者出焉。 
现代文：孔子死后一百二十九年，史书记载周太史儋会见秦献公时，曾预言说： 当初秦国与周朝合在一起，合了五百年而又分开了，分开七十年之后，就会有称王称霸的人出现。 
English: One hundred and twenty-nine years after the death of Confucius, the historian Zhou Taishi predicted that: When the Qin and Zhou dynasties were united, they were united for five hundred years and then separated. After seventy years of separation, there will be people who want to be king.

古文：或曰儋即老子，或曰非也，世莫知其然否。
现代文：有的人说太史儋就是老子，也有的人说不是，世上没有人知道哪种说法正确。
English: Some people say that Taishihong is Laozi, while others say that it is not. No one in the world knows which statement is correct.

古文：老子，隐君子也。
现代文：总之，老子是一位真正的隐君子。
English: In short, Lao Tzu was a true hermit.

古文：老子之子名宗，宗为魏将，封於段干。
现代文：老子的儿子叫李宗，做过魏国的将军，封地在段干。
English: Lao Zi's son was called Li Zong, who had been a general in Wei and whose fief was in Duan Gan.

古文：宗子注，注子宫，宫玄孙假，假仕於汉孝文帝。
现代文：李宗的儿子叫李注，李注的儿子叫李宫，李宫的玄孙叫李假，李假在汉文帝时做过官。
English: The son of Li Zong is called Li Chun, the son of Li Chun is called Li Gong, the great-great-grandson of Li Gong is called Li Jiao, Li Jiao was an official during the reign of Emperor Hanwen.

古文：而假之子解为胶西王卬太傅，因家于齐焉。
现代文：而李假的儿子李解担任过胶西王刘卬的太傅，因此，李氏就定居在齐地。
English: However, Li Xuan's son Li Xie served as the Taifu of Liu Xuan, King of Jiaoxi, so the Li clan settled in Qiudi.

古文：世之学老子者则绌儒学，儒学亦绌老子。 道不同不相为谋 ，岂谓是邪？
现代文：世人凡是学习老子的学问的，都会贬黜儒家的思想学说；而学习儒家学问的人，也会贬黜老子的学说。 主张不同的人，彼此说不到一块去 ，难道就是说的这种情况吗？
English: All people in the world who study the teachings of Lao Tzu will disparage the ideas and doctrines of Confucianism; and those who study Confucianism will also disparage the teachings of Lao Tzu.

古文：李耳无为自化，清静自正。
现代文：老子认为，无为而治，百姓自然趋于 化 ；清静无为，百姓自然会归于 正 。
English: Lao Tzu believed that the people would naturally become enlightened if nothing was done, and that the people would naturally return to righteousness if they were quiet and did nothing.

古文：庄子者，蒙人也，名周。
现代文：庄子是蒙邑人，名叫庄周。
English: Zhuang Zi is a native of Mengyi, named Zhuang Zhou.

古文：周尝为蒙漆园吏，与梁惠王、齐宣王同时。
现代文：他曾经担任过蒙地漆园的小吏，和梁惠王、齐宣王是同一时代的人。
English: He once served as a minor official of Mengdi Lacquer Garden, and was from the same era as Liang Hui Wang and Qi Xuan Wang.

古文：其学无所不闚，然其要本归於老子之言。
现代文：他学识渊博，涉猎、研究的范围无所不包，他的中心思想却本源于老子的学说。
English: His knowledge is profound, and the scope of his involvement and research is all-encompassing. However, his central thought originates from the teachings of Lao Tzu.

古文：故其著书十馀万言，大抵率寓言也。作渔父、盗跖、胠箧，以诋訿孔子之徒，以明老子之术。
现代文：他撰写了十余万字的著作，大多是托词寄意的寓言。他写的《渔父》《盗跖》《胠箧》是用来诋毁孔子学派的人。而表明老子学说为目的的。
English: He wrote more than 100,000 words of works, most of which are allegories with pretexts. His "Fisherman," "Thief" and "Cormorant" were used to discredit the Confucian school, but the aim was to show that Confucianism was the goal.

古文：畏累虚、亢桑子之属，皆空语无事实。
现代文：《畏累虚》《亢桑子》一类的，都是凭空虚构，没有事实作依据。
English: The likes of "Fear and Trembling" and "The Mulberry Tree" are made up out of thin air and have no basis in fact.

古文：然善属书离辞，指事类情，用剽剥儒、墨，虽当世宿学不能自解免也。
现代文：可是庄子善于行文措辞，描摹事物的情状，用来攻击和驳斥儒家和墨家，即使是当世博学之士，也难免受到他的攻击。
English: However, Zhuangzi was good at wording, describing the situation of things, and used it to attack and refute Confucianism and Mohism. Even today's scholars are inevitably attacked by him.

古文：其言洸洋自恣以適己，故自王公大人不能器之。
现代文：他的语言汪洋浩渺，纵横恣肆，都是随心率性之言，所以从王公大人以下，都不愿意重用他。
English: His language is vast and capricious, and he speaks at his own pace. Therefore, no one under the age of a prince is willing to use him again.

古文：楚威王闻庄周贤，使使厚币迎之，许以为相。
现代文：楚威王听说庄周贤能，派遣使臣带着丰厚的礼物去聘请他，答应他出任楚国的宰相。
English: King Chu Wei heard that Zhuang Zhou was capable and sent envoys with rich gifts to hire him, promising him the post of prime minister of Chu.

古文：庄周笑谓楚使者曰： 千金，重利；卿相，尊位也。
现代文：庄周笑着对楚国使臣说： 千金，确是厚礼；卿相，确是尊贵的高位。
English: Zhuang Zhou smiled and said to the ambassador of the State of Chu: "Thousands of gold is indeed a great honor; the title of nobility is indeed an honorable high position.

古文：子独不见郊祭之牺牛乎？
现代文：您难道没见过祭祀天地用的牛吗？
English: Haven't you ever seen a cow used to worship heaven and earth?

古文：养食之数岁，衣以文绣，以入大庙。当是之时，虽欲为孤豚，岂可得乎？
现代文：喂养它好几年，给它披上带有花纹的绸缎，把它牵进太庙去当祭品，在这个时候，它即使想做一头孤独的小猪，难道能办得到吗？
English: Feeding it for several years, draping it in silk with patterns, taking it to the temple to be a sacrifice, at this time, even if it wants to be a lonely pig, can it do it?

古文：子亟去，无污我。
现代文：您赶快离去，不要玷污了我。
English: Leave at once, and do not defile me.

古文：我宁游戏污渎之中自快，无为有国者所羁，终身不仕，以快吾志焉。 
现代文：我宁愿在小水沟里身心愉快地游戏，也不愿被国君所束缚。我终身不做官，来使自己的心志愉快。 
English: I would rather play merrily in the gutter than be shackled by a prince, and I would not be an official for the rest of my life in order to make my mind happy.

古文：申不害者，京人也，故郑之贱臣。
现代文：申不害是京邑人，原先是郑国的低级官吏。
English: Shen Fuxia is from Beijing and was originally a low-ranking official in Zhengzhou.

古文：学术以干韩昭侯，昭侯用为相。
现代文：后来研究了刑名法术学问，向韩昭侯求官，昭侯任命他作了宰相。
English: Later, he studied the science of criminal magic and asked Han Zhaohou for a post, and Zhaohou appointed him as prime minister.

古文：内脩政教，外应诸侯，十五年。
现代文：他对内修明政教，对外应对诸候，前后执政十五年。
English: He reformed politics and religion at home and dealt with various problems abroad. He was in power for fifteen years.

古文：终申子之身，国治兵彊，无侵韩者。
现代文：一直到申子逝世，韩国都被治理得很好，政治清明，军队强大，没有哪个国家敢侵犯韩国。
English: Up until Shinji's death, South Korea was well governed, with a clear-cut politics and a strong military. No country dared to invade South Korea.

古文：申子之学本於黄老而主刑名。著书二篇，号曰申子。
现代文：申不害的学说本源黄帝和老子而以循名责实为主，他的著作有两篇，叫作《申子》。
English: The origin of the theory of Shen's non-harming originates from the Yellow Emperor and Laozi, and is based on the principle of following the name and the truth. There are two of his works, called "Shen Zi."

古文：韩非者，韩之诸公子也。
现代文：韩非，是韩国公子。
English: Han Fei is a Korean actor.

古文：喜刑名法术之学，而其归本於黄老。
现代文：他爱好刑名法术学问。他学说的理论基础来源于黄帝和老子学说。
English: He is fond of the study of criminal magic. The theoretical basis of his theory is derived from the teachings of the Yellow Emperor and Laozi.

古文：非为人口吃，不能道说，而善著书。
现代文：韩非有口吃的缺陷，不善于讲话，却擅长于著书立说。
English: Han Fei has the defect of stuttering and is not good at speaking, but he is good at writing.

古文：与李斯俱事荀卿，斯自以为不如非。
现代文：他和李斯都是荀卿的学生，李斯自认为学识比不上韩非。
English: He and Li Si are both students of Gongqing, and Li Si thinks that his knowledge is not as good as that of Han Fei.

古文：非见韩之削弱，数以书谏韩王，韩王不能用。
现代文：韩非看到韩国渐渐衰弱下去，屡次上书规劝韩王，但韩王没有采纳他的意见。
English: Seeing the gradual weakening of Korea, Han Fei repeatedly wrote to advise Han Wang, but Han Wang did not accept his opinion.

古文：於是韩非疾治国不务脩明其法制，执势以御其臣下，富国彊兵而以求人任贤，反举浮淫之蠹而加之於功实之上。
现代文：这种情况下，韩非痛恨君主治理国家不致力于修明法制，不能凭借君王手中掌握的权势用来驾驭臣子，不能富国强兵寻求任用是贤能之士，反而任用夸夸其谈、对国家有害的文学游说之士，并且让他们的地位高于讲求功利实效的人。
English: Under such circumstances, Han Fei hated the monarch for governing the country, not being committed to clarifying the legal system, not being able to use the power held by the monarch to control the vassals, not being able to seek the appointment of a man of merit, but instead appointing literary lobbyists who were bombastic and harmful to the country, and giving them a higher status than those who sought practical benefits.

古文：以为儒者用文乱法，而侠者以武犯禁。
现代文：他认为儒家用经典文献扰乱国家法度，而游侠凭借着武力违犯国家禁令。
English: He believed that the Confucianists used classical literature to disrupt the national legal system, while the rangers violated the national ban by force.

古文：宽则宠名誉之人，急则用介胄之士。
现代文：国家太平时，君主就宠信那些徒有虚名假誉的人，形势危急时，就使用那些披甲戴盔的武士。
English: When the country is at peace, the monarch favors those who have a false name and reputation, and when the situation is critical, he uses those armored and helmeted warriors.

古文：今者所养非所用，所用非所养。
现代文：现在国家供养的人并不是所要用的，而所要用的人又不是所供养的。
English: At present, those who are supported by the state are not needed, and those who are needed are not supported.

古文：悲廉直不容於邪枉之臣，观往者得失之变，故作孤愤、五蠹、内外储、说林、说难十馀万言。
现代文：他悲叹廉洁正直的人不被邪曲奸枉之臣所容，他考察了古往今来的的得失变化，所以写了《孤愤》《五蠹》《内外储》《说林》《说难》等十余万字的著作。
English: He lamented that a clean and honest person would not be tolerated by a wicked and dishonest vassal. He examined the changes in gains and losses from ancient times to the present, so he wrote a work of more than 100,000 words, such as "Lonely Anger," "Five Precepts," "Internal and External Reserves," "Talking Forest" and "Difficult to Talk."

古文：然韩非知说之难，为说难书甚具，终死於秦，不能自脱。说难曰：
现代文：但是韩非知道游说有多么困难，他所写的《说难》对此进行了完备的论述，韩非最终死在了秦国，没能免于游说带来的灾难。《说难》写道：
English: However, Han Fei knew how difficult lobbying was, and his "Saying Difficult" made a complete discussion of this. Han Fei eventually died in Qin, unable to avoid the disaster brought about by lobbying. "Saying Difficult" wrote:

古文：凡说之难，非吾知之有以说之难也；又非吾辩之难能明吾意之难也；又非吾敢横失能尽之难也。
现代文：大凡游说的困难，不是我的才智不足以说服君主有困难；也不是我的口才不足以明确地表达出我的思想有困难；也不是我不敢毫无顾虑地把意见全部表达出来有困难。
English: The great difficulty of lobbying is not that I am not clever enough to convince the sovereign; nor that I am not eloquent enough to express my thoughts clearly; nor that I dare not express all my opinions without hesitation.

古文：凡说之难，在知所说之心，可以吾说当之。
现代文：大凡游说，它的困难在于如何了解游说对象的心理，然后用我的说辞去满足他的心愿。
English: In the case of large-scale lobbying, the difficulty lies in how to understand the psychology of the lobbying target, and then use my words to satisfy his wishes.

古文：所说出於为名高者也，而说之以厚利，则见下节而遇卑贱，必弃远矣。
现代文：所游说的对象意在博取高名，而游说的人却用重利去劝说他，就会被对方认为你品德低下而受到卑贱的待遇，一定会被遗弃和疏远了。
English: If the object of the lobbying is intended to gain a high reputation, but the lobbyist uses heavy profits to persuade him, the other party will think that you are of low moral character and will be treated despicably, and you will definitely be abandoned and alienated.

古文：所说出於厚利者也。而说之以名高，则见无心而远事情，必不收矣。
现代文：游说的对象志在贪图重利，而游说的人却用博取高名去劝说他，他就会认为你没有头脑而脱离实际，一定不会接受你的意见。
English: If the target of lobbying is greedy for heavy profits, but the lobbyist uses his fame to persuade him, he will think that you have no brains and are out of touch with reality, and will definitely not accept your opinion.

古文：所说实为厚利而显为名高者也，而说之以名高，则阳收其身而实疏之；若说之以厚利，则阴用其言而显弃其身。此之不可不知也。
现代文：游说的对象实际上意在重利，表面上却装出一副追求高尚的样子，而游说的人用博取高名去劝说他，他就会表面上接受你而实际上疏远你；假如游说的人用重利去劝说他，他就会暗中采纳你的意见，但在表面上抛弃你本人，这些都是游说的人不能不知道的。
English: The object of lobbying is actually intended to make heavy profits, but on the surface it pretends to be pursuing a noble appearance, and the lobbyist uses high reputation to persuade him, he will accept you on the surface and actually alienate you; if the lobbyist uses heavy profits to persuade him, he will secretly adopt your opinion, but on the surface abandon you personally, these are lobbyists can not know.

古文：夫事以密成，语以泄败。
现代文：行事能保密就成功，言谈之中泄露了机密就会失败。
English: If the event can be kept secret, it will be a success, but if the secret is leaked during the talk, it will be a failure.

古文：未必其身泄之也，而语及其所匿之事，如是者身危。
现代文：不一定是游说者本人有意去泄露机密，而往往是在言谈之中无意地说到君主内心隐藏的秘密，像这样，游说的人就会身遭灾祸。
English: It is not necessarily that the lobbyist himself intentionally divulges secrets, but often inadvertently speaks of the secrets hidden in the heart of the monarch, and in this way, the lobbyist will be plagued.

古文：贵人有过端，而说者明言善议以推其恶者，则身危。
现代文：君主有过失，而游说的人却引用一些美善之议推导出他过失的严重，那么游说的人就会有危险。
English: There is danger for the lobbyist if the monarch is at fault and the lobbyist deduces the seriousness of the monarch's fault by quoting some virtuous arguments.

古文：周泽未渥也而语极知，说行而有功则德亡，说不行而有败则见疑，如是者身危。
现代文：君主对游说者的恩宠还没有达到深厚的程度，而游说的人把知心话全部说出来，如果意见被采纳实行而且见到了功效，那么，君主就会忘掉你的功劳；如果意见行不通而且遭到失败，那么游说者就会被君主怀疑，像这样，游说的人就会有危险。
English: The monarch's favour towards the lobbyist has not yet reached a profound level, and the lobbyist speaks all the words of wisdom. If the opinion is adopted, implemented and effective, then the monarch will forget your merit; if the opinion does not work and fails, then the lobbyist will be suspected by the monarch, like this, the lobbyist will be in danger.

古文：夫贵人得计而欲自以为功，说者与知焉，则身危。彼显有所出事，乃自以为也故，说者与知焉，则身危。
现代文：君主自认为有了如愿的良策，而且打算据为自己的功绩，游说的人参与这件事，那么也会有危险，君主公开做着一件事，而自己另有别的目的，如果游说者预知其计，那么他也会有危险。
English: There is danger, too, when the sovereign thinks he has got the desired good, and intends to claim the credit for it; when the lobbyist is concerned in the matter; when the sovereign is openly doing one thing, but has another object in view; when the lobbyist foresees the scheme, he is also in danger.

古文：彊之以其所必不为，止之以其所不能已者，身危。
现代文：君主坚决不愿做的事，却勉力让他去做，君主去做丢不下的事，又阻止他去做，游说的人就危险。
English: What the sovereign resolutely does not want to do, but tries to make him do, what the sovereign wants to do, and prevents him from doing, the lobbyist is dangerous.

古文：故曰：与之论大人，则以为间己；与之论细人，则以为粥权。
现代文：所以说： 和君主议论在任的大臣，就会认为你离间他们彼此的关系；和君主议论地位低下的人，就会认为你卖弄权势。
English: Therefore it is said: If you argue with the monarch, the ministers in office will think that you have severed their relationship with each other; if you argue with the monarch, who is in a low position, you will think that you are showing off your power.

古文：论其所爱，则以为借资；论其所憎，则以为尝己。
现代文：议论他所喜爱的，那么君主就会认为你是在利用他；议论君主所憎恶的，就会认为你试探他含怒的深浅。
English: Speak of what he loves, and he will think you are taking advantage of him; speak of what he hates, and he will think you are testing the depths of his wrath.

古文：径省其辞，则不知而屈之；汎滥博文，则多而久之。
现代文：如果游说者文辞简略，那么就会认为你没有才智而使你遭到屈辱；如果你铺陈辞藻，夸夸其谈，那么就会认为你语言放纵而无当。
English: If a lobbyist is terse, you'll be humiliated by being thought unintelligent; if you're verbose, you'll be thought intemperate.

古文：顺事陈意，则曰怯懦而不尽；虑事广肆，则曰草野而倨侮。
现代文：如果你顺应君主的主张陈述事情，那么就会说你胆小而做事不尽人意。如果你谋虑深远，那么就会说你鄙陋粗俗，倨傲侮慢。
English: If you state things in accordance with the monarch's opinion, then you will be said to be timid and unsatisfactory. If you are far-sighted, then you will be said to be despicable, vulgar and arrogant.

古文：此说之难，不可不知也。
现代文：这些游说的难处，是不能不知道的啊。
English: It is impossible not to be aware of the difficulties of lobbying.

古文：凡说之务，在知饰所说之所敬，而灭其所丑。
现代文：游说君主的关键，在于懂得美化君主所推崇的事情，而掩盖他认为丑陋的事情。
English: The key to lobbying the monarch is to know how to beautify what the monarch admires and conceal what he considers ugly.

古文：彼自知其计，则毋以其失穷之；自勇其断，则毋以其敌怒之；自多其力，则毋以其难概之。
现代文：他自认为高明的计策，就不要拿以往的过失使他难堪；他自认为是勇敢的决断，就不要用自己的意愿使他激怒；他夸耀自己的力量强大，就不必用他为难的事来拒绝他。
English: If he thinks he is clever, do not embarrass him with his past mistakes; if he thinks he is brave, do not make him angry with his will; if he boasts of his strength, do not use his difficulties to reject him.

古文：规异事与同计，誉异人与同行者，则以饰之无伤也。
现代文：游说的人谋划另一件与君主相同的事，赞誉另一个与君主同样品行的人，就要把那件事和另一个人加以美化，不要坏其事伤其人。
English: If a lobbyist plans to do another thing that is the same as the monarch, and praises another person who behaves in the same way as the monarch, he must beautify that thing and the other person, and not damage the thing and hurt the person.

古文：有与同失者，则明饰其无失也。
现代文：有与君主同样过失的人，游说者就明确地粉饰说他没有过失。
English: Where there is someone as culpable as the monarch, the lobbyists make it clear that he is blameless.

古文：大忠无所拂悟，辞言无所击排，乃後申其辩知焉。
现代文：待到游说者的忠心使君主不再抵触，游说者的说辞，君主不再排斥，此后，游说者就可以施展自己的口才和智慧了。
English: Wait until the lobbyist's loyalty no longer contradicts the monarch, and the lobbyist's words no longer repel the monarch. After that, the lobbyist can exercise his eloquence and wisdom.

古文：此所以亲近不疑，知尽之难也。
现代文：这就是与君主亲近不被怀疑，能说尽心里话的难处啊！
English: This is the difficulty of not being suspected of being close to the monarch and being able to speak your heart out!

古文：得旷日弥久，而周泽既渥，深计而不疑，交争而不罪，乃明计利害以致其功，直指是非以饰其身，以此相持，此说之成也。
现代文：等到历经很长的时间之后，君主对游说的人恩泽已经深厚了，游说者深远的计谋也不被怀疑了，交相争议也不被加罪了，便可以明白地计议利害关系达到帮助国君立业建功，可以直接指出君主的是非以正其身，用这样的办法扶持君主，就是游说成功了。
English: When, after a long period of time, the favor of the monarch to the lobbyists has become profound, the far-reaching schemes of the lobbyists have not been suspected, and the disputes between the parties have not been aggravated, it is possible to clearly consider the interests and help the monarch to make a contribution. It can be directly pointed out that the monarch is right. If the monarch is supported in this way, the lobbying is successful.

古文：伊尹为庖，百里奚为虏，皆所由干其上也。
现代文：伊尹曾经做过厨师，百里奚曾经做过俘虏，都是由此求得君上的任用。
English: Yi Yin once worked as a cook, and Bai Lijuan once worked as a prisoner, both of which helped him to obtain his appointment.

古文：故此二子者，皆圣人也，犹不能无役身而涉世如此其汙也，则非能仕之所设也。
现代文：所以说这两个人都是圣人。他们仍然不得不做低贱的事而经历世事如此地卑污，那么这也就不算是贤能人士所觉得耻辱的事情了。
English: So both of these men are saints, and they still had to do lowly things and go through things so lowly, so it's not like it's something that a virtuous person would be ashamed of.

古文：宋有富人，天雨墙坏。
现代文：宋国有个富人，因为天下雨毁坏了墙。
English: There was a rich man in the Song Dynasty whose wall was destroyed by rain.

古文：其子曰 不筑且有盗 ，其邻人之父亦云，暮而果大亡其财，其家甚知其子而疑邻人之父。
现代文：他儿子说： 不修好就会有盗贼 ，他的邻居有位老人也这么说。晚上果然丢了很多财物，他全家的人都认为他儿子特别聪明却怀疑邻居那位老人。
English: His son said, "If you don't fix it, there will be thieves," and his neighbor, an old man, said the same. In the evening, a lot of property was lost, and his whole family thought that his son was particularly clever, but they suspected the old man next door.

古文：昔者郑武公欲伐胡，乃以其子妻之。因问群臣曰： 吾欲用兵，谁可伐者？ 关其思曰： 胡可伐。 
现代文：从前郑武公想要攻打胡国，反而把自己的女儿嫁给胡国的君主。就问大臣们说： 我要用兵，可以攻打谁？ 关其思回答说： 可以攻打胡国。 
English: Once upon a time, Zheng Wukong wanted to attack Hu, but instead married his daughter to the monarch of Hu. He asked the ministers: "I want to use soldiers, who can I attack?" Guan Qisi replied: "I can attack Hu."

古文：乃戮关其思，曰： 胡，兄弟之国也，子言伐之，何也？ 
现代文：郑武公就把关其思杀了，并且说： 胡国，是我们兄弟之国，你说攻打它，什么居心？ 
English: Zheng Wu Gong killed Guan Qishi and said, "Hu is our brother's country. If you say you will attack it, what is your intention?

古文：胡君闻之，以郑为亲己而不备郑。郑人袭胡，取之。
现代文：胡国君主听到这件事，就认为郑国君主是自己的亲人而不防备他，郑国就趁机偷袭胡国，并占领了它。
English: When the monarch of Hu heard about this, he thought that the monarch of Zheng was his relative and did not guard against him. Zheng took the opportunity to secretly attack Hu and occupied it.

古文：此二说者，其知皆当矣，然而甚者为戮，薄者见疑。非知之难也，处知则难矣。
现代文：这两件事情的说客，他们的预见都是正确的，然而言重的被杀死，言轻的被怀疑，所以知道某些事情并不难，知道如何去处理已知的事才是困难的。
English: Both of these things lobbyists, their foresight is correct, but the heavy is killed, the light is suspected, so it is not difficult to know certain things, it is difficult to know how to deal with known things.

古文：昔者弥子瑕见爱於卫君。
现代文：从前弥子瑕被卫国君主宠爱。
English: Once upon a time, Yashiko was a favorite of the Emperor of Japan.

古文：卫国之法，窃驾君车者罪至刖。
现代文：按照卫国的法律，偷驾君车的人要砍掉脚。
English: According to the laws of the motherland, a person who steals a royal car must have his foot amputated.

古文：既而弥子之母病，人闻，往夜告之，弥子矫驾君车而出。
现代文：不久，弥子瑕的母亲病了，有人知道这件事，就连夜通知他，弥子瑕就诈称主的命令驾着君主的车子出去了。
English: Soon after, Yashiko's mother fell ill. Someone who knew about this informed him overnight, and Yashiko went out driving the monarch's car, falsely claiming that it was the Lord's command.

古文：君闻之而贤之曰： 孝哉，为母之故而犯刖罪！ 
现代文：君主听到这件事反而赞美他说： 多孝顺啊，为了母亲的病竟愿犯下断足的惩罚！ 
English: When the monarch heard about this, he praised him instead, saying: "What a filial son, to be willing to commit the punishment of amputating his mother's feet because of her illness!

古文：与君游果园，弥子食桃而甘，不尽而奉君。
现代文：弥子瑕和卫君到果园去玩，弥子瑕吃到一个甜桃子，没吃完就献给卫君。
English: Yaziko and Weijun went to the orchard to play. Yaziko ate a sweet peach and dedicated it to Weijun before finishing it.

古文：君曰： 爱我哉，忘其口而念我！ 
现代文：卫君说： 真爱我啊，自己不吃却想着我！ 
English: Wei Jun said, "You really love me, you don't eat but you think about me!"

古文：及弥子色衰而爱弛，得罪於君。
现代文：等到弥子瑕容色衰退，卫君对他的宠爱也疏淡了，后来得罪了卫君。
English: By the time Yako's beauty faded, Wei Jun's fondness for him had also dimmed, and he later offended Wei Jun.

古文：君曰： 是尝矫驾吾车，又尝食我以其馀桃。 
现代文：卫君说： 这个人曾经诈称我的命令驾我的车，还曾经把咬剩下的桃子给我吃。 
English: Wei Jun said, "This man once falsely claimed that he had been ordered by me to drive my car, and also once gave me the remaining peach to eat.

古文：故弥子之行未变於初也，前见贤而後获罪者，爱憎之至变也。
现代文：弥子瑕的德行与当初相比并没有变化，以前所以被认为孝顺而后来被治罪的原因，是由于卫君对他的爱憎改变了的缘故。
English: Yashiko's virtue did not change compared to the beginning. The reason why he was considered to be filial and was later punished was due to the change in the way he was loved and hated by the prince.

古文：故有爱於主，则知当而加亲；见憎於主，则罪当而加疏。
现代文：所以说，被君主宠爱时就认为他聪明能干，愈加亲近。被君主憎恶了，就认为他罪有应得，就愈加疏远。
English: Therefore, when he is loved by the sovereign, he is considered to be clever and capable, the closer he is. When he is hated by the sovereign, he is considered to have deserved it, and the more distant he is.

古文：故谏说之士不可不察爱憎之主而後说之矣。
现代文：因此，劝谏游说的人，不能不调查君主的好恶爱憎，然后再进行游说。
English: Therefore, those who advise and lobby cannot but investigate the likes and dislikes of the monarch, and then lobby.

古文：夫龙之为蟲也，可扰狎而骑也。
现代文：龙是一种动物，可以驯养，可以与它嬉戏，还能乘坐。
English: The dragon is an animal that can be tamed, played with, and ridden.

古文：然其喉下有逆鳞径尺，人有婴之，则必杀人。
现代文：然而他喉咙下端有一尺长的逆鳞，人要触动它的逆鳞，一定会被它伤害。
English: However, there is a foot-long inverse scale at the lower end of his throat. If you touch its inverse scale, you will definitely be hurt by it.

古文：人主亦有逆鳞，说之者能无婴人主之逆鳞，则几矣。
现代文：君主也有逆鳞，游说的人能不触犯君主的逆鳞，就差不多算得上善于游说的人了。
English: Monarchs also have their drawbacks. If lobbyists can avoid offending the monarch's drawbacks, they can almost be considered good at lobbying.

古文：人或传其书至秦。
现代文：有人把韩非的著作传到秦国。
English: Someone brought Han Fei's works to Qin.

古文：秦王见孤愤、五蠹之书，曰： 嗟乎，寡人得见此人与之游，死不恨矣！ 
现代文：秦王见到《孤愤》《五蠹》这些书，说： 唉呀，我要见到这个人并且能和他交往，就是死也不算遗憾了。 
English: When King Qin saw the books "Lonely Rage" and "Five Horseshoes," he said, "Alas, I want to meet this person and be able to associate with him. Even if I die, I won't regret it."

古文：李斯曰： 此韩非之所著书也。 
现代文：李斯说： 这是韩非撰写的书。 
English: "This is a book written by Han Fei," Li said.

古文：秦因急攻韩。
现代文：秦王因此立即攻打韩国。
English: As a result, King Qin immediately attacked Korea.

古文：韩王始不用非，及急，乃遣非使秦。
现代文：起初韩王不重用韩非，等到情势吃紧，才派遣韩非出使秦国。
English: At first, Han Wang did not make heavy use of Han Fei, but when the situation was tight, he sent Han Fei to Qin.

古文：秦王悦之，未信用。
现代文：秦王很喜欢他，可是却不信任也不重用他。
English: King Qin liked him very much, but he did not trust him and did not make much use of him.

古文：李斯、姚贾害之，毁之曰： 韩非，韩之诸公子也。
现代文：李斯、姚贾嫉妒他，在秦王面前底毁他说： 韩非，是韩国贵族子弟。
English: Li Si and Yao Jia were jealous of him and insulted him in front of King Qin, saying, "Han Fei is the son of a Korean aristocrat.

古文：今王欲并诸侯，非终为韩不为秦，此人之情也。
现代文：现在大王要吞并各国，韩非最终还是要帮助韩国而不帮助秦国，这是人之常情啊。
English: Now the Great King wants to annex various countries. In the end, South Korea and Africa still want to help South Korea and not help Qin. This is human nature.

古文：今王不用，久留而归之，此自遗患也，不如以过法诛之。 
现代文：如今大王不任用他，虽然可以长久地将他留在秦国，但最终会将他放回去，这是给自己留下的祸根啊。不如给他加个罪名，依法处死他。 
English: Now the great king does not appoint him, although he can keep him in Qin for a long time, he will eventually put him back, which is the bane he left for himself. It is better to add a crime to him and execute him according to the law.

古文：秦王以为然，下吏治非。
现代文：秦王认为他说的对，就下令司法官吏给韩非定罪。
English: King Qin thought he was right and ordered judicial officials to convict Han Fei.

古文：李斯使人遗非药，使自杀。
现代文：李斯派人给韩非送去了毒药，叫他自杀。
English: Li Si sent someone to give Han Fei poison and told him to commit suicide.

古文：韩非欲自陈，不得见。
现代文：韩非想要当面向秦王陈述是非，却见不到秦王。
English: Han Fei wanted to face Qin Wang to explain the rights and wrongs, but he could not see Qin Wang.

古文：秦王後悔之，使人赦之，非已死矣。
现代文：后来秦王后悔了，派人去赦免他，可惜韩非已经死了。
English: Later, King Qin regretted and sent someone to pardon him, but unfortunately Han Fei had already died.

古文：申子、韩子皆著书，传於後世，学者多有。余独悲韩子为说难而不能自脱耳。
现代文：申子、韩子都著书立说，留传到后世，学者大多有他们的书，我唯独悲叹韩非撰写了《说难》而本人却逃脱不了游说君主的灾祸。
English: Shen Zi and Han Zi both wrote books and passed them down to future generations. Most scholars have their books. I, on the other hand, lament that Han Fei wrote "Difficult to Say" but I cannot escape the scourge of lobbying the monarch.

古文：太史公曰：老子所贵道，虚无，因应变化於无为，故著书辞称微妙难识。
现代文：太史公说：老子推重的 道 ，虚无，顺应自然，以无为来顺应各种变化，所以，他写的书很多措辞微妙不易理解。
English: Tai Shikong said: "Lao Tzu's emphasis is on the Tao, nothingness, conforming to nature, and conforming to all kinds of changes by doing nothing. Therefore, many of the words in his books are subtle and difficult to understand.

古文：庄子散道德，放论，要亦归之自然。
现代文：庄子宣演道德，纵意推论，其学说的要点也归本于自然无为的道理。
English: Zhuangzi promulgated morality, even if by inference, the main points of his doctrine were also based on the principle of natural inaction.

古文：申子卑卑，施之於名实。
现代文：申子勤奋自勉，推行于循名责实。
English: Shenzi is diligent and self-disciplined, and pursues the principle of accountability.

古文：韩子引绳墨，切事情，明是非，其极惨礉少恩。
现代文：韩子依据法度作为规范行为的绳墨，决断事情，明辨是非，用法严酷苛刻，绝少施以恩惠。
English: Han Zi based on the law as the standard behavior of the rope ink, to decide things, to distinguish right from wrong, to use the law harshly, and rarely to grant favors.

古文：皆原於道德之意，而老子深远矣。
现代文：他们的学说都原始于道德的理论，因此老子的思想可以说是深邃旷远了。
English: Their doctrines are all rooted in moral theory, so Laozi's thought can be said to be profound and far-reaching.

古文：伯阳立教，清净无为。道尊东鲁，迹窜西垂。
现代文：老子树立教化，追求心境洁净，不受外扰，让人得到大智慧；他的学说在东边的鲁地受到推崇，人的足迹却去了西部的边疆。
English: Laozi established enlightenment, pursued a pure state of mind, was not disturbed by external disturbances, and allowed people to gain great wisdom; his teachings were respected in the eastern land of Lu, but people's footsteps went to the western frontier.

古文：庄蒙栩栩，申害卑卑。刑名有术，说难极知。
现代文：庄周纵意推论，欢喜自得，申不害勤奋自勉，充满权谋，韩非《说难》极其智慧。
English: Zhuang Zhou, despite the inference, is pleased with himself, Shen is diligent and self-disciplined, full of power, and Han Fei's "Difficult to Say" is extremely wise.

古文：悲彼周防，终亡李斯。
现代文：可悲啊他们的谨密防患，最后却在李斯手上终结了。
English: It's sad that their careful precautions ended up in Reese's hands.

