古文：一
现代文：一
English: 1st

古文：卫孙文子聘于鲁，公登亦登。
现代文：卫国的孙文子到鲁国进行国事访问，鲁襄公登上台阶，他也同时登上台阶。
English: Sun Yat-sen, the patron of the country, paid a state visit to Lu. Lu Xianggong climbed the steps, and he also climbed the steps at the same time.

古文：叔孙穆子趋进曰： 诸侯之会，寡君未尝后卫君也。
现代文：鲁卿叔孙穆子快步上前对孙文子说： 各国诸侯聚会，敝国君主从来没有列在卫君后面。
English: Lu Qing's uncle Sun Mu Zi quickly stepped forward and said to Sun Wenzi: Princes of various countries are gathering, and the monarchs of these countries have never been listed behind Wei Jun.

古文：今子不后寡君一等，寡君未知所过也。
现代文：现在您不比敝国君主后一步，敝国君主不知道有什么过错。
English: Now you are not one step behind the monarch of your country, who does not know what is wrong.

古文：子其少安。 
现代文：请您稍慢一点。 
English: Please slow down a little.

古文：孙子无辞，亦无悛容。
现代文：孙文子没有回答，也没有悔改的神色。
English: Sun Wenzi did not answer, nor did he look repentant.

古文：穆子退而告人曰： 孙子必亡。
现代文：叔孙穆子回来告诉别人说： 孙文子一定会灭亡。
English: Uncle Sun Mu Zi came back to tell others: Sun Wenzi will surely perish.

古文：亡臣而不后君，过而不悛，亡之本也。 
现代文：忘记臣子的身份而不走在君主后面，有了错误又不改悔，这是灭亡的根源。 
English: To forget one's status as a vassal and not to walk behind the sovereign, to make a mistake and not to repent, this is the root of ruin.

古文：或曰：天子失道，诸侯伐之，故有汤、武。
现代文：有人说；天子失去治国之道，诸侯起而讨伐，所以才有商汤、周武王出现。
English: Some people say that Shang Tang and King Zhou Wu only appeared because the emperor lost the way of governing the country and the princes rose up to fight.

古文：诸侯失道，大夫伐之，故有齐、晋。
现代文：诸侯失去治国之道，大夫起而讨伐，所以才有田氏代齐、三家分晋的事。
English: The feudal lords lost their way of governing the country, and the doctors rose up to fight, which is why the Tian family became equal and the three families were separated.

古文：臣而伐君者必亡，则是汤、武不王，晋、齐不立也。
现代文：如果做臣子却讨伐君主的人必定灭亡，那么商场、武王就不能称王天下，韩、赵、魏三家和田氏也不能立国了。
English: If those who were vassals but fought against the monarch were doomed to perish, then the merchants and King Wu would not be able to call themselves kings of the world, and the Han, Zhao, Wei and Tian dynasties would not be able to establish a state.

古文：孙子君于卫，而后不臣于鲁，臣之君也。
现代文：孙文子在卫国掌握了君主的权势，后来又不以使臣的身份对待鲁君，他名义上是臣子而实际上成了君主。
English: Sun Wenzi seized the power of the monarch in the defense of the country, and later he did not treat Lu Jun as a vassal. He was nominally a vassal but actually became a monarch.

古文：君有失也，故臣有得也。
现代文：君主有失，所以臣子有得。
English: The sovereign loses, so the vassal gains.

古文：不命亡于有失之君，而命亡于有得之臣，不察。
现代文：不断定有失的君主灭亡，却断定有得的臣子灭亡，这是不明察。
English: It is unwise to predict the downfall of a monarch who has lost something, while predicting the downfall of a vassal who has gained something.

古文：鲁不得诛卫大夫，而卫君之明不知不悛之臣。孙子虽有是二也，臣以亡？
现代文：鲁国不能处罚卫国的大夫，而卫君的明察又识别不了不知悔改的臣子，孙文子虽然有忘记使臣身份和不知悔改这两种表现，又怎么会灭亡呢？
English: The state of Lu could not punish the doctor of the defenders, and the vigilance of the defenders could not identify the unrepentant vassal. Although Sun Wenzi had the two manifestations of forgetting the status of the envoy and not repenting, how could he perish?

古文：其所以亡其失，所以得君也。
现代文：他正是因为忘记了自己的这种过失，所以才能取得君主的权势。
English: It was because he had forgotten this fault of his that he was able to acquire the power of a monarch.

古文：或曰：臣主之施，分也。
现代文：有人说：君臣的设立是名分制度规定的。
English: Some people say that the establishment of the title of prince or minister is stipulated by the system of ranks.

古文：臣能夺君者，以得相也。
现代文：臣子能夺得君主的位置，是因为他比君主更得民心。
English: A vassal can take the place of the monarch because he is more popular than the monarch.

古文：故非其分而取者，众之所夺也；辞其分而取者，民之所予也。
现代文：所以不属本分而取得的，是民众要夺回的；辞去本分而取得的，是民众所给予的。
English: Therefore, what the people want to take back is what they have gained without doing their duty; what they have gained by giving up their duty is what the people have given them.

古文：是以桀索岷山之女，纣求比干之心，而天下离；汤身易名，武身受詈，而海内服；赵咺走山，田氏外仆，而齐、晋从。
现代文：因此夏桀索得珉山的琬、琰二女，商纣取出比干的心脏，结果天下人都离心离德；商汤自身改变姓名，武王自身受到责骂，结果海内的人都臣服了；赵盾进山避难，田氏出外当仆人，结果齐、晋两国民众都归附他们。
English: As a result, Xia Xiao solicited Shaoshan's brother and sister-in-law, and Shaoshan took out Bi Gan's heart. As a result, people around the world were alienated from Germany; Shang Tang himself changed his name, King Wu himself was scolded, and as a result, people in the sea were subjugated; Zhao Dun took refuge in the mountains, and the Tian family went abroad to be servants. As a result, the people of Qi and Jin were all attached to them.

古文：则汤、武之所以王，齐晋之所以立，非必以其君也，彼得之而后以君处之也。
现代文：那么成汤、武王之所以称王天下，田氏和三晋中的赵氏之所以立国，原因不一定在他们原来的君主身上，而是成汤他们得到民众拥护以后才当上君主的。
English: So the reason why Cheng Tang and King Wu were called the kings of the world, and the reason why the Tian clan and the Zhao clan in the Three Kingdoms founded the country, was not necessarily because of their original monarchs, but because they became monarchs only after Cheng Tang and they were supported by the people.

古文：今未有其所以得，而行其所以处，是倒义而逆德也。
现代文：现在孙文子还没有得到民众的拥护，却像君主一样去做，这是违反义和德的。
English: Now that Sun Yat-sen has yet to win the support of the people, he is acting like a monarch, which is a violation of righteousness and morality.

古文：倒义，则事之所以败也；逆德，则怨之所以聚也。
现代文：违反义，是事情失败的原因；违反德，是怨恨聚集的原因。
English: Violation of righteousness is the reason for the failure of things; violation of virtue is the reason for the accumulation of resentment.

古文：败亡之不察，何也？
现代文：连失败和灭亡都不了解，为什么呢？
English: They don't even understand defeat and demise, why?

古文：二
现代文：二
English: 2nd

古文：鲁阳虎欲攻三桓，不克而奔齐，景公礼之。
现代文：鲁国的阳虎想攻打季孙、叔孙、孟孙三家，失败后逃奔齐国，齐景公很敬重他。
English: The Yanghu of Lu wanted to attack the three families of Ji Sun, Jiu Sun, and Meng Sun, but after failing, he fled to Qi. Qi Jing respected him very much.

古文：鲍文子谏曰： 不可。
现代文：鲍文子劝谏说： 不行。
English: Bao Wenzi said: "It's impossible.

古文：阳虎有宠于季氏而欲伐于季孙，贪其富也。
现代文：阳虎得宠于季孙却想攻打季孙，是贪图季孙的财富。
English: Yanghu is favored by Qisun but wants to attack Qisun, is coveting Qisun's wealth.

古文：今君富于季孙，而齐大于鲁，阳虎所以尽诈也。
现代文：现在您比季孙还富，而齐国又比鲁国大，这是阳虎要全力欺诈的原因。 
English: Now you are richer than Qisun, and Qi is bigger than Lu. This is the reason why Yang Hu is trying his best to cheat.

古文：景公乃囚阳虎。
现代文：于是景公就拘禁了阳虎。
English: As a result, Jing Gong detained Yang Hu.

古文：或曰：千金之家，其子不仁，人之急利甚也。
现代文：有人说：有千金财富的家庭，儿子们不和睦，因为人们追求利益的心情非常迫切。
English: Some people say that the sons of families with great wealth do not get along with each other, because people's pursuit of profit is very urgent.

古文：桓公，五伯之上也，争国而杀其兄，其利大也。
现代文：齐桓公是五霸之首，为了争当国君而杀掉哥哥公子纠。
English: Prince Qi Kuan was the head of the Five Overlords, and he killed his brother, Prince Guan, in order to compete for the throne.

古文：臣主之间，非兄弟之亲也。
现代文：因为当国君利大。君臣之间没有兄弟之间的亲情。
English: Because when the country's ruler is rich, there is no brotherly affection between the ruler and his subjects.

古文：劫杀之功，制万乘而享大利，则群臣孰非阳虎也？
现代文：劫杀的结果，能统治大国而享有大利，那么群臣哪一个不是阳虎呢？
English: As a result of the hijacking and killing, they can rule a great country and enjoy Italy, so which one of the ministers is not a Yanghu?

古文：事以微巧成，以疏拙败。
现代文：事情因办得隐蔽巧妙而成功，因办得疏忽笨拙而失败。
English: Things succeed because they are done subtly and cleverly, and fail because they are done carelessly and clumsily.

古文：群臣之未起难也，其备未具也。
现代文：群臣还没有作乱，是因为条件还不具备。
English: The ministers have not yet rioted because the conditions are not yet there.

古文：群臣皆有阳虎之心，而君上不知，是微而巧也。
现代文：群臣都怀着阳虎一样的心思，而君主不知道，可见群臣办得隐蔽而巧妙。
English: The courtiers all have the same thoughts as Yang Hu, and the monarch does not know, it can be seen that the courtiers are hidden and clever.

古文：阳虎贪于天下，以欲攻上，是疏而拙也。
现代文：阳虎贪心，天下的人都知道，可见他干得疏忽而笨拙。
English: Yanghu is greedy, everyone in the world knows that, it can be seen that he is careless and clumsy.

古文：不使景公加诛于拙虎，是鲍文子之说反也。
现代文：不叫齐景公去处罚齐国巧妙的奸臣，却叫他去处罚笨拙的阳虎，这是鲍文子的话说反了。
English: He did not ask Qi Jing Gong to punish the clever traitor of Qi, but asked him to punish the clumsy Yanghu, which is the opposite of what Bao Wenzi said.

古文：臣之忠诈，在君所行也。
现代文：臣子的忠顺或欺诈，取决于君主的所作所为。
English: The fidelity or treachery of a subject depends on the conduct of the sovereign.

古文：君明而严，则群臣忠；君懦而暗，则群臣诈。
现代文：君主明察而严厉，群臣就会忠顺；君主懦弱而昏庸，群臣就会欺诈。
English: If the sovereign is prudent and severe, his subjects will be loyal; if the sovereign is cowardly and stupid, his subjects will be treacherous.

古文：知微之谓明，无救赦之谓严。
现代文：能察觉隐情的叫明，不赦免罪行的叫严。
English: Those who can detect hidden feelings are called bright, and those who do not pardon crimes are called strict.

古文：不知齐之巧臣而诛鲁之成乱，不亦妄乎？
现代文：不知道齐国隐蔽巧妙的奸臣而去处罚鲁国已经作乱的笨臣，不是很荒谬的吗？
English: Is it not absurd not to know that Qi concealed clever and treacherous vassals to punish the clumsy ones who had already caused chaos in Lu?

古文：或曰：仁贪不同心。
现代文：有人说：仁者和贪者心地不同。
English: Some people say that benevolent people and greedy people have different hearts.

古文：故公子目夷辞宋，而楚商臣弑父；郑去疾予弟，而鲁桓弑兄。
现代文：所以公子目夷让出君位，而楚国商臣却逼死父王；郑公子去疾把君位让给弟弟，而鲁桓公杀掉哥哥自当国君。
English: Therefore, Prince Mei abdicated the throne, while the merchant minister of Chu State forced his father to die; Prince Zheng abdicated the throne to his brother, while Prince Lu Huan killed his brother to become the king.

古文：五伯兼并，而以桓律人，则是皆无贞廉也。
现代文：五霸都是从事兼并的，而以齐桓公为标准来衡量人，那就没有忠贞廉洁的人了。
English: The five hegemons are all engaged in mergers, and if people are measured by the standard of Qi Huan Gong, then there is no such thing as a loyal and honest person.

古文：且君明而严，则群臣忠。
现代文：再说君主明察而严厉，群臣就会忠顺。
English: Furthermore, if the monarch is clear-sighted and strict, the courtiers will be loyal.

古文：阳虎为乱于鲁，不成而走，入齐而不诛，是承为乱也。
现代文：阳虎在鲁国作乱，失败后逃跑，逃到齐国而不杀他的话，这是让他在齐国继续作乱。
English: Yanghu made a riot in the State of Lu, fled after the defeat, and fled to the State of Qi without killing him, which is to let him continue to make a riot in the State of Qi.

古文：君明则诛，知阳虎之可济乱也，此见微之情也。
现代文：君主明察就会用刑，因为知道阳虎会助成叛乱，这是看到了隐微的阴谋。
English: The monarch will use punishment when he sees it, because he knows that Yanghu will help the rebellion, which is a subtle conspiracy.

古文：语曰： 诸侯以国为亲。 
现代文：俗话说： 诸侯把别国作为亲戚。 
English: As the saying goes: Princes regard other countries as their relatives.

古文：君严则阳虎之罪不可失，此无救赦之实也，则诛阳虎，所以使群臣忠也。
现代文：君主严厉，就不能放过阳虎的罪行，这是不赦免罪行主张的实施。杀了阳虎，是为了让群臣忠顺。
English: If the monarch is strict, he cannot let the Yanghu's crime go unpunished. This is the implementation of the principle of not pardoning crimes. The Yanghu was killed in order to make the courtiers loyal.

古文：未知齐之巧臣而废明乱之罚，责于未然而不诛昭昭之罪，此则妄矣。
现代文：不知道齐国巧妙的奸臣而免掉对公开作乱者的惩罚，追究还没有发生的事情而不惩罚明摆着的罪过，这是荒谬的。
English: It is absurd not to know that the crafty and treacherous vassals of the State of Qi are exempt from punishing those who openly commit disorder, and that they are pursuing things that have not yet happened without punishing obvious crimes.

古文：今诛鲁之罪乱以威群臣之有奸心者，而可以得季、孟、叔孙之亲，鲍文之说，何以为反？
现代文：现在如能惩处在鲁国作乱的罪犯阳虎，用来警告臣子中那些心怀不良的人，从而又可以博得鲁国季孙、孟孙；叔孙的亲善，鲍文子的话，怎么就说反了呢？
English: Now, if it is possible to punish Yang Hu, a criminal who caused turmoil in Lu, and use it to warn those courtiers who have bad intentions, and thus win the goodwill of Lu's descendants, descendants, and grandchildren, in the words of Bao Wenzi, how can it be said to be the opposite?

古文：三
现代文：三
English: Third

古文：郑伯将以高渠弥为卿，昭公恶之，固谏不听。
现代文：郑庄公要用高渠弥为卿，而太子昭公很讨厌高渠弥，再三劝阻，庄公不听。
English: Zheng Zhuang Gong wanted to use Gao Quiya as a lord, but Prince Akigong hated Gao Quiya very much. He repeatedly dissuaded him, but Zhuang Gong did not listen.

古文：及昭公即位，惧其杀己也，辛卯，弑昭公而立子亶也。
现代文：到昭公即位，高渠弥怕他杀害自己，就在辛卯这天，杀了昭公而立公子亶为国君。
English: When Shoko ascended to the throne, Gaoku feared that he would kill himself, so on this day, he killed Shoko and installed his son as the sovereign.

古文：君子曰： 昭公知所恶矣。 
现代文：君子说： 昭公知道自己讨厌的人。 
English: The gentleman said, "Akihiro knows who he hates.

古文：公子圉曰： 高伯其为戮乎，报恶已甚矣。 
现代文：公子圉说： 高渠弥该被杀戮吧！报复人家对他的厌恶也太过分了点。 
English: He said, "Gaoqiuya should be killed! It's too much to retaliate against people's dislike of him."

古文：或曰：公子圉之言也，不亦反乎？
现代文：有人说：公子圉的话，不是说反了吗？
English: Some people say: If you say that you are a gentleman, doesn't that mean the opposite?

古文：昭公之及于难者，报恶晚也。然则高伯之晚于死者，报恶甚也。
现代文：昭公遭到死难，是因为他惩处讨厌的人太晚了；既然这样，高渠弥比昭公死得晚，恰恰因为他对昭公进行了过分的报复。
English: Shogun was killed because he was too late to punish the people he disliked; in that case, Takakuchiya died later than Shogun, precisely because he took excessive revenge on Shogun.

古文：明君不悬怒，悬怒，则臣罪轻举以行计，则人主危。
现代文：明君不会把愤怒之情束之高阁，假使把愤怒之情束之高阁，不对罪臣及时予以处罚，罪臣就会轻率行动而行使计谋，这样君主就危险了。
English: Emperor Ming would not keep his anger bottled up. If he kept his anger bottled up and did not punish the guilty minister in time, the guilty minister would act rashly and make plans, and the emperor would be in danger.

古文：故灵台之饮，卫侯怒而不诛，故褚师作难；食鼋之羹，郑君怒而不诛，故子公杀君。
现代文：因此，在灵台饮酒时，卫出公对褚师有怒，但没有及时给予处罚，结果就发生了褚师作乱的事；吃大鳖的浓汁时，郑灵公对子公有怒，但没有及时给予处罚，结果子公就杀死了郑君。
English: Therefore, when drinking alcohol in Lingdai, Wei De Gong was angry with Zong Shi, but did not punish him in time, as a result, Zong Shi caused a disturbance; when eating the thick juice of the giant clam, Zheng Ling Gong was angry with Zi Gong, but did not punish him in time, as a result, Zi Gong killed Zheng Jun.

古文：君子之举 知所恶 ，非甚之也，曰：知之若是其明也，而不行诛焉，以及于死。
现代文：君子指出昭公知道自己厌恶的人，并非说得太过分了，他的意思是：昭公既已了解得这样清楚，却不立即把高渠弥杀掉，以致自己被杀。
English: The gentleman pointed out that it was not too much to say that Shoko knew whom he disliked. What he meant was that since Shoko had understood so clearly, he did not immediately kill Takaoka, so that he was killed.

古文：故 故所恶 ，以见其无权也。
现代文：所以说昭公知道自己厌恶的人，意在表明他不懂得权衡得失。
English: Therefore, saying that Akogimi knows who he dislikes is intended to show that he does not know how to weigh the pros and cons.

古文：人君非独不足于见难而已，或不足于断制，今昭公见恶，稽罪而不诛，使渠弥含憎惧死以侥幸，故不免于杀，是昭公之报恶不甚也。
现代文：君主不只是不能充分地看到祸难，有时还会不能及时作出决断和加以制裁。现在昭公表露了对高渠弥的厌恶，又搁置他的罪过，迟迟不予惩处，结果使高渠弥怀恨在心，因为害怕被杀而想侥幸得免，所以昭公不能免于被杀，这是因为昭公惩处自己厌恶的人太软弱了。
English: The monarch is not only unable to fully see the calamity, but sometimes he is also unable to make a decision and impose sanctions in time. Now Zhao has publicly revealed his dislike for Gao Jiuya, and has put aside his sins and delayed punishing him. As a result, Gao Jiuya harbored hatred in his heart. For fear of being killed, he wanted to get away with it, so Zhao Gong could not be spared from being killed. This is because Zhao Gong is too weak to punish those he dislikes.

古文：或曰：报恶甚者，大诛报小罪。
现代文：有人说：报仇过分，就是用大的诛戮来报复小的罪过，是最严酷的刑狱。
English: Some people say that "excessive revenge," that is, using great slaughter to avenge small sins, is the most severe form of punishment.

古文：大诛报小罪也者，狱之至也。
现代文：刑狱的危害，本来并不在于已经处罚了的人，而在于诛戮不当引起更多人的仇恨。
English: The harm of imprisonment does not lie in the person who has already been punished, but in causing more people's hatred.

古文：狱之患，故非在所以诛也，以仇之众也。是以晋厉公灭三郄而栾、中行作难，郑子都杀伯咺而食鼎起祸，吴王诛子胥而越句践成霸。
现代文：因此晋厉公杀掉郤氏三卿，栾书、中行偃二卿就起而发难；郑子都杀掉伯限，食鼎就起而作祸；吴王夫差杀掉伍子胥，越王勾践就乘机灭吴称霸。
English: Therefore, Jin Li Gong killed the three nobles of the Yi clan, and the two nobles of the Yi Shuxu and the Zhong Xing Yi rose up to cause trouble; Zheng Zi both killed Bo Jian, and Shiding rose up to cause trouble; Wu Wangfuchai killed Wu Zi Yao, and Yue Wang Ke Jian took the opportunity to destroy Wu's hegemony.

古文：则卫侯之逐，郑灵之弑，不以褚师之不死而公父之不诛也，以未可以怒而有怒之色，未可诛而有诛之心。
现代文：那么卫出公被逐，郑灵公被杀，并不因为卫出公没有杀掉褚师和郑灵公没有惩罚子公，而是因为不该发怒却表现出发怒的脸色，不该杀戮却产生出杀戮的想法。
English: So Wei Deguang was expelled and Zheng Linggong was killed, not because Wei Deguang did not kill his master and Zheng Linggong did not punish his son, but because he should not be angry but showed a look of anger, should not kill but produced the idea of killing.

古文：怒其当罪，而诛不逆人心，虽悬奚害？
现代文：如果君主发怒符合臣下的罪过，如果臣子杀君不违背人心，即使蕴而未发，又有什么害处呢？
English: If it is a crime for a vassal to incur the wrath of the sovereign, and if it is not against the spirit of the people for a vassal to kill the prince, what is the harm, even if it does not occur?

古文：夫未立有罪，即位之后，宿罪而诛，齐胡之所以灭也。
现代文：君主未即位之前臣子有了罪，即位之后却把臣子的旧罪重提加以论处，这就是齐君胡公靖灭亡的原因。
English: Before the enthronement of the monarch, the vassal had committed a crime, but after the enthronement, the old crime of the vassal was re-examined and dealt with. This is the reason for the death of Qi Jun Hu Gongjing.

古文：君行之臣，犹有后患，况为臣而行之君乎？
现代文：君主对臣子这样做，还会留下后患，何况作为臣子而对君主这样做呢？
English: If a monarch does this to a vassal, it will leave a legacy. How much more so if a vassal does this to a monarch?

古文：诛既不当，而以尽为心，是与天下有仇也。
现代文：处罚已属不当，还要起心斩尽杀绝，这便是与天下人为仇了。
English: The punishment is already inappropriate, but it is also necessary to make every effort to kill and exterminate, which is an enmity with the world.

古文：则虽为戮，不亦可乎！
现代文：那么公子圉说高渠弥该杀，不也是可以的吗？
English: So it's okay for him to say that Gao Qiuya should be killed?

古文：四
现代文：四
English: IV.

古文：卫灵之时，弥子瑕有宠于卫国。
现代文：卫灵公时，弥子暇受到宠信，在卫国专权。
English: When Wei Ling was in public, Yizi Leisure was favored and had the exclusive right to defend the country.

古文：侏儒有见公者曰： 臣之梦浅矣。 
现代文：有个谒见灵公的侏儒说： 我的梦应验了。 
English: A dwarf who met a spiritual father said: My dream has come true.

古文：公曰： 奚梦？ 
现代文：灵公问： 梦见了什么？ 
English: Ling Gong asked: What did you dream about?

古文： 梦见灶者，为见公也。 
现代文： 梦了灶了，预示要见到您。 
English: Dreaming of a stove, foretells that I will see you.

古文：公怒曰： 吾闻人主者梦见日，奚为见寡人而梦见灶乎？ 
现代文：卫灵公发怒说： 我听说将见君主的人会梦见太阳。为什么你要见我，会梦见灶呢？ 
English: Wei Ling Gong said angrily, "I heard that people who are going to see the monarch will dream of the sun. Why do you want to see me and dream of the stove?"

古文：侏儒曰： 夫日兼照天下，一物不能当也。人君兼照一国，一人不能壅也。
现代文：侏儒说； 太阳普照天下，一件东西遮挡不了它；君主普照一国人，一个人蒙蔽不了他。
English: The dwarf said: The sun shines all over the world, and nothing can block it; the sovereign shines all over a nation, and no one can blind him.

古文：故将见人主而梦日也。夫灶，一人炀焉，则后人无从见矣。
现代文：所以将见君主的人会梦见太阳，是灶的话，一人对着灶门烤火，后面的人就无法看见火光了。
English: Therefore, people who see the monarch will dream of the sun. If it is a stove, one person will bake a fire against the stove door, and the person behind will not be able to see the fire.

古文：或者一人炀君邪？
现代文：或许就有一个人挡住君主了吧？
English: Perhaps there is just one person standing in the monarch's way?

古文：则臣虽梦灶，不亦可乎？ 公曰： 善。 
现代文：那么即使我梦见灶，不也是可以的吗？ 卫灵公说： 好。 
English: So even if I dream of a stove, isn't that okay? Wei Ling Gong said: Good.

古文：遂去雍鉏，退弥子瑕，而用司空狗。
现代文：于是罢掉雍，辞退弥子瑕，任用司空史狗。
English: As a result, he dismissed Yong, dismissed Yaziko, and appointed Siku Shigou.

古文：或曰：侏儒善假于梦以见主道矣，然灵公不知侏儒之言也。
现代文：有人说： 侏儒善于假借梦来阐明君主的治国原则，但是卫灵公不理解侏儒的话。
English: Some people said: Dwarfs are good at pretending to dream to clarify the monarch's principles of governance, but Wei Ling Gong does not understand the words of dwarfs.

古文：去雍鉏，退弥子瑕，而用司空狗者，是去所爱而用所贤也。
现代文：罢掉雍，辞退弥子瑕，任用司空史狗，这是去掉自己宠爱的人而用自认为贤的人。
English: Removing Yong, dismissing Yizi Mei, and appointing Sikuo Shi Xue, this is to remove one's favorite person and use one who thinks he is virtuous.

古文：郑子都贤庆建而壅焉，燕子哙贤子之而壅焉。
现代文：郑子都认为庆建贤明，结果受到蒙蔽；燕王哙认为子之贤明，结果受到蒙蔽。
English: Zheng Zi thought that Qing Jian was wise, but he was deceived; Yan Wang Yao thought that Zi Zi was wise, but he was deceived.

古文：夫去所爱而用所贤，未免使一人炀己也。
现代文：去掉自己宠爱的人而用自认为贤的人，并不能免除使一个人遮蔽自己的祸患。
English: To get rid of one's favorite in favor of a self-proclaimed superior does not absolve one of the evils of covering one's self.

古文：不肖者炀主，不足以害明；今不加知而使贤者炀主己，则贤矣。
现代文：不贤的人蒙蔽君主，不足以危害君主的明察；现在君主不加以了解而让贤人蒙蔽自己，那就一定危险了。
English: It is not enough for a wicked man to blind a prince to the prince's vision; it is now dangerous for a prince to be blinded by a wise man without the prince's knowledge.

古文：或曰：屈到嗜芰，文王嗜菖蒲菹，非正味也，而二贤尚之，所味不必美。
现代文：有人说：屈到喜欢吃菱角，周文王喜欢吃菖蒲做腌莱，这两样东西都没有什么好的味道，但这两位贤人却很喜爱，可知人们喜欢的味道并不一定美。
English: Some people said: Keng likes to eat horse chestnuts, and Zhou Wenwang likes to eat calamus to make wonton noodles. These two things do not have any good taste, but these two sages are very fond of them. However, it is known that the taste that people like is not necessarily beautiful.

古文：晋灵侯说参无恤，燕哙贤子之，非正士也，而二君尊之，所贤不必贤也。
现代文：晋灵公喜欢参无恤，燕王哙认为子之贤明，参无恤、子之都不是正直的人，但两个君主却尊宠他们，可见君主认为贤的人并不一定是真正的贤人。
English: Jin Linggong likes Zhan Wuhong, and Yan Wangtao thinks his son is a wise man. Zhan Wuhong and his son are not honest people, but the two monarchs respect and favor them. It can be seen that the person the monarch thinks is a wise man is not necessarily a true wise man.

古文：非贤而贤用之，与爱而用之同。
现代文：不是贤人而作为贤人来用，和因为宠爱而使用他是一样的。
English: To use him as a sage, when he is not a sage, is the same as using him as a pet.

古文：贤诚贤而举之，与用所爱异状。
现代文：君主认为贤的人确是真正的贤人而提拔他，和君主用自宠爱的人是不一样的。
English: It is not the same for a sovereign to promote a wise man because he believes that he is a true wise man, as it is for a sovereign to use a self-favored person.

古文：故楚庄举叔孙而霸，商辛用费仲而灭，此皆用所贤而事相反也。
现代文：所以楚庄玉提拔了孙叔敖而称霸，商纣任用了费仲而灭亡，这些都是任用自己认为贤的人而事情结果却相反的实例。
English: Therefore, Chu Zhuangyu promoted Sun Shuxuan to dominate, and Shangyu appointed Feizhong to perish. These are all examples of appointing people who think they are virtuous, but the result is the opposite.

古文：燕哙虽举所贤，而同于用所爱，卫奚距然哉？
现代文：燕王哙虽然用了他认为贤的人，其实与用他宠爱的人是一样的，卫灵公哪里是同样情形呢？
English: Although Yan Wangtao used people he thought were virtuous, it was actually the same as using people he liked. Where is the same situation for Wei Linggong?

古文：则侏儒之未可见也。
现代文：这是侏儒认识不到的。
English: This is what the gnome does not recognize.

古文：君壅而不知其壅也，已见之后而知其壅也，故退壅臣，是加知之也。
现代文：君主被蒙蔽而不知道受到蒙蔽，听侏儒话后知道自己受了蒙蔽，因此辞退蒙蔽自己的臣子，证明他对此有了进一步的认识。
English: The monarch was deceived without knowing that he was deceived, and after listening to the dwarf, he knew that he was deceived, so he declined to deceive his vassal, proving that he had further understanding of this.

古文：曰 不加知而使贤者炀己则必危 ，而今以加知矣，则虽炀己，必不危矣。
现代文：说什么 不加以了解而让贤人蒙蔽自己，那就一定危险 ，现在已经有了进一步的认识，那么即使蒙蔽自己，也一定没危险了。
English: What do you say? If you don't understand and let the wise man blind you, then there must be danger. Now that you have further understanding, then even if you blind yourself, there must be no danger.

