古文：甾丘朱遵赵云吕蒙魏任城王桓石虔杨大眼麦铁杖彭乐高开道
现代文：甾丘朱遵赵云吕蒙魏任城王桓石虔杨大眼麦铁杖彭乐高开道
English: 丘朱遵赵云吕蒙魏任城王桓石虔杨大眼麦鐵杖彭 LEGO opens the way

古文：杜伏威尉迟敬德柴绍弟秦叔宝薛仁贵公孙武达程知节薛万李楷固
现代文：杜伏威尉迟敬德柴绍弟秦叔宝薛仁贵公孙武达程知节薛万李楷固
English: Du Fu Wei's lieutenant Du Chi respected De Chai Shao's brother Qin's uncle Bao Xue, Ren Guigong's grandson Wu Da, Cheng Zhi Jie, Xue Wanli, Kai Gui

古文：王君毚宋令文彭博通李宏辛承嗣
现代文：王君毚宋令文彭博通李宏辛承嗣
English: Wang Jun, Song Lingwen, Bloomberg Tong, Li Hongxin, Succession

古文：甾丘
现代文：甾丘
English: 丘

古文：周世，东海之上，有勇士甾丘以勇闻于天下。
现代文：周朝，东海上，有一勇士叫甾丘，以勇敢名闻天下。
English: In the Zhou Dynasty, on the East Sea, there was a brave man called Yan Qiu, who was famous for his bravery.

古文：过神泉，令饮马。
现代文：路经一神泉，他命令饮马。
English: Passing a sacred spring, he ordered his horse to drink.

古文：其仆曰：饮马于此者，马必死。
现代文：仆人说：在这饮马，马必然死。
English: The servant said, "The horse will surely die if it drinks that water."

古文：丘曰：以丘之言饮之。
现代文：丘说，你就按我说的饮吧。
English: You just drink what I tell you to drink, Qiu Yao said.

古文：其马果死。
现代文：饮后，他的马果然死了。
English: After drinking it, his horse died.

古文：丘乃去衣拔剑而入，三日三夜，杀二蛟一龙而出。
现代文：丘便脱衣拔剑，跳入泉中。三天三夜，杀死了二蛟一龙后出来了。
English: Qiu Gan then stripped off his clothes, drew his sword and jumped into the spring. After three days and three nights, he killed two dragonflies and one dragon and came out.

古文：雷神随而击之，十日十夜，眇其左目。
现代文：随后，雷神用雷电击打他，十天十夜，打瞎了他的左眼。
English: Then, Thor struck him with lightning for ten days and ten nights, blinding his left eye.

古文：要离闻而往见之，丘出送有丧者。
现代文：要离知道了去看他，丘出去送丧去了。
English: Wanting to leave knowing to see him, Qiu Yao went out to see him off.

古文：要离往见丘于墓所曰：雷神击子，十日十夜，眇子左目。夫天怨不旋日，人怨不旋踵。子至今弗报，何也？
现代文：要离在墓旁见到了丘，说：雷神打你，十天十夜，打瞎了你的左眼，报天上的怨不过日，报人间的怨不过时，你至今不报仇，为什么？
English: You should see the mound next to the grave and say, "Thunder God has beaten you for ten days and nights, blinding your left eye. It is not a day to report heavenly grievances, nor is it a time to report human grievances. You still have not taken revenge. Why?

古文：叱之而去。
现代文：要离斥责了丘后走了。
English: After being reprimanded for leaving, Qiu Yao left.

古文：墓上振愤者不可胜数。
现代文：来送葬的人都很愤怒不平。
English: The mourners were very angry.

古文：要离归，谓人曰：甾丘诉天下勇士也，今日我辱之于众人之中，必来杀我。
现代文：要离回去后，对人说：甾丘是天下的勇士，今天，我在众人面前污辱了他，他必然来杀我。
English: When he was about to leave, he said to the people, "Qiu Qiuqin is the bravest man in the world. Today, I insulted him in front of everyone. He will surely come to kill me."

古文：暮无闭门，寝无闭户。
现代文：到了晚上，他不闭门，睡觉时不关窗。
English: At night, he does not close the door, and he does not close the window when he sleeps.

古文：丘至夜半果来，拔剑柱颈曰：子有死罪三，辱我于众人之中，死罪一也；暮无闭门，死罪二也；寝不闭户，死罪三也。
现代文：丘在半夜时果然来了，拔剑按在要离脖子上说，你有三条死罪，在众人之中污辱我，这是第一条；晚不闭门，这是第二条；睡觉不关窗，这是第三条。
English: In the middle of the night, Qiu Ye indeed came, drew his sword and pressed it against his neck to be cut off, saying, "You have three capital offenses, insulting me in the midst of the crowd, this is the first; not closing the door at night, this is the second; sleeping without closing the window, this is the third."

古文：要离曰：子待我一言而后杀也。
现代文：要离说，你等我说完后再杀我。
English: In other words, wait for me to finish before you kill me.

古文：子来不谒，一不肖也；拔剑不刺，二不肖也；刃先词后，三不肖也。
现代文：你来而不拜，这是第一件不正派的事；拔剑不刺，这是第二件；先出剑后说话，这是第三件。
English: If you come without bowing, this is the first improper thing to do; if you draw your sword without thrusting, this is the second; if you draw your sword first and then speak, this is the third.

古文：子能杀我者，是毒药之死耳。
现代文：你要能杀死我，最好用毒药毒死。
English: If you want to kill me, you'd better poison me.

古文：丘收剑而去曰：嘻，天下所不若者，唯此子耳。
现代文：丘收剑而去，说：嘿，天下不服我的，唯有他呀！
English: Qiu Gan took up his sword and went away, saying, "Hey, the whole world does not accept me, only he does!"

古文：朱遵
现代文：朱遵
English: Zhu Zun

古文：汉朱遵仕郡功曹。
现代文：汉时，朱遵任郡功曹。
English: In Han Dynasty, Zhu Zun was appointed as a county meritorious person.

古文：公孙述僭号，遵拥郡人不伏。
现代文：公孙述自立为王，朱遵号召郡内的人都不服从公孙述。
English: Zhu Zun called on the people in the county not to obey Gongsun Su.

古文：述攻之，乃以兵拒述。
现代文：公孙述派兵攻打朱遵，朱遵也领兵抵抗公孙述。
English: Gongsun Su sent troops to attack Zhu Zun, and Zhu Zun also led troops to resist Gongsun Su.

古文：埋车绊马而战死。
现代文：战斗中，朱遵的车毁、马死，最后他也战死了。
English: During the battle, Zhu Zun's chariot was destroyed, his horse died, and finally he also died in the battle.

古文：光武追赠辅汉将军，吴汉表为置祠。
现代文：汉光武帝刘秀追赠他为辅汉将军。吴汉上表请求为朱遵建祠堂。
English: Han Guangwu Emperor Liu Xiu posthumously presented him as an auxiliary Han general. The Wu Han Dynasty petitioned to build an ancestral hall for Zhu Zun.

古文：一曰。遵失首，退至此地，绊马讫，以手摸头，始知失首。
现代文：有人曾说，朱遵掉了头，退到这里，马被绊倒，他用手摸头，才知头没了。
English: Someone once said that Zhu Zun lost his head and retreated here, the horse was tripped, he touched his head with his hand, and only then did he know that his head was gone.

古文：于是土人感而义之，乃为置祠，号为健儿庙。后改勇士祠。
现代文：于是，当地人被他勇敢的行为所感召，为他建了祠堂，名为健儿庙，后改勇士祠。
English: As a result, the local people were inspired by his brave act and built a shrine for him, called the Jian'er Temple, which was later changed to the Warriors' Shrine.

古文：赵云
现代文：赵云
English: Zhao Yun

古文：蜀赵云，字子龙，身长八尺，姿容雄伟。
现代文：蜀国赵云，字子龙，身高八尺，雄健魁伟，任刘备前锋。
English: Zhao Yun of Shu, the Dragon, is eight feet tall, strong and powerful, and serves as Liu Bei's striker.

古文：居刘备前锋，为曹公所围，乃大开门，偃旗鼓。曹公引去，疑有伏兵。
现代文：一次被曹操包围，他却大开城门，息鼓匿旗，曹操怀疑有伏兵，便退去了。
English: Once he was surrounded by Cao Cao, but he opened the city gate and withdrew his banner. Cao Cao suspected an ambush and withdrew.

古文：云于后射之，公军大骇，死者甚多。
现代文：赵云指挥在后边射箭，曹兵很害怕，死者很多。
English: Commander Zhao Yun is shooting arrows in the back, Cao soldiers are very scared, and there are many dead.

古文：备明日自来，视昨日战处，曰：子龙一身都是胆也。
现代文：第二天，刘备来了，看到昨天的战场，说：子龙一身都是胆哪！
English: The next day, Liu Bei arrived, saw yesterday's battlefield, and said, "Zilong is nothing but a coward!

古文：吕蒙
现代文：吕蒙
English: Lymon

古文：吴吕蒙随姊夫邓当击贼，时年十六，呵叱而前，当不能禁。
现代文：吴国人吕蒙，随姐夫邓当打贼兵，当时十六岁。他呐喊冲杀，邓当都拦不住他。
English: Lu Meng, a native of Wu, followed his brother-in-law Deng Dang to fight the bandits. He was 16 years old at the time. He shouted and rushed to kill, but Deng Dang couldn't stop him.

古文：归言于母曰：贫贱难可居，设有功，富贵可致。
现代文：回来后对母亲说，贫贱的日子难过，假如我立了功，就能过上富贵的日子。
English: After returning, he said to his mother, "It's sad to be poor. If I work hard, I can live a rich life."

古文：又曰：不探虎穴，安得虎子。
现代文：他又说，不入虎穴，怎能得到虎子。
English: He also said, "If you don't go into the tiger's den, how can you get the tiger cub?"

古文：果就成大名。
现代文：后来，果然成了大名。
English: Later, he became a daimyo.

古文：魏任城王
现代文：魏任城王
English: Wei Ren, the king of the city

古文：魏任城王章，武帝子也。
现代文：魏国任城王曹章，是魏武帝曹操的儿子。
English: Cao Zhang, the city king of Wei, was the son of the Wei Emperor Cao Cao.

古文：少而刚毅，学阴阳纬候之术，诵六韬洪范之书数千言。
现代文：年轻刚毅，既学过阴阳占卜之术，又读过很多文韬武略的书。
English: Young Gang Yi has not only learned the art of Yin and Yang divination, but has also read many books on military strategy.

古文：武帝谋伐吴，问章，取其利师之决。
现代文：魏武帝想攻打吴国时咨问曹章，听取一些有利于用兵的策略。
English: Emperor Wei Wu wanted to attack Wu, so he asked Cao Zhang to listen to some strategies conducive to the use of soldiers.

古文：王善左右射，好击剑，百步中于悬发。
现代文：曹章善左右射箭，好击剑，百步中能射中悬发。
English: Cao Zhang is good at archery left and right, good at fencing, and can make a shot in a hundred paces.

古文：乐闻国献彪虎，文如锦斑，以铁为栏。
现代文：乐闻国献了一只大虎，身上斑纹很好看，用铁栏围着。
English: Luoyang offered a big tiger with beautiful markings, which was surrounded by an iron fence.

古文：骁勇之徒，莫放轻视。章曳虎尾以绕臂，虎弭无声矣。莫不伏其神勇。
现代文：一般的勇士不敢靠前，曹章却拽虎尾巴绕在手臂上，虎却不叫不动，大家都佩服他的勇气。
English: Ordinary warriors do not dare to move forward, but Cao Zhang tugged the tiger's tail around his arm, but the tiger did not move, and everyone admired his courage.

古文：时南越献白象子，在帝前，手顿其鼻，象伏不动。
现代文：当时，南越献了头白象，在武帝面前，曹章用手敲打象鼻，象便伏地不动。
English: At that time, South Vietnam offered the head of a white elephant. In front of Emperor Wu, Cao Zhang tapped the elephant's trunk with his hand, and the elephant remained motionless.

古文：文帝铸万钧钟置崇华殿前，欲徙之，力士百人，引之不动，章乃负之而趋，四方闻其神勇，皆寝兵自固。
现代文：魏文帝曹丕铸了一口很大很重的钟，想放在崇华殿前，为了搬运，找了一百多名大力士，没拉动。曹章背起那钟走得很快。各国听说他这样神勇，都不敢轻举妄动。
English: Cao Zheng, the Wei Emperor, cast a very large and heavy bell, and wanted to place it in front of the Chonghua Hall. In order to carry it, he found more than a hundred strong men, but did not pull it. Cao Zheng picked up the bell and walked quickly. All countries heard that he was so courageous and did not dare to move.

古文：帝曰：以王权武吞并吴蜀，如鸱衔腐鼠耳。
现代文：文帝说，若是用任城王曹章领兵吞并吴、蜀，就象大鹰叼个死老鼠一样。
English: Emperor Wen said that if Cao Zhang, the appointed king of the city, was used to lead the troops to annex Wu and Shu, it would be like an eagle carrying a dead mouse.

古文：章薨，如汉东平王葬礼。
现代文：曹章死后，以汉时东平王那样的礼仪殡葬了。
English: After Cao Zhang died, he was buried with the same etiquette as Dongping Wang in Han Dynasty.

古文：及丧出，空中闻数百人泣声。送丧者皆言，昔乱军伤杀者皆无椁，王之仁惠，收其朽骨。
现代文：在出丧时，听到空中有数百人哭泣声，送丧的人都说，从前兵慌马乱，一些被杀死者都没有棺材，任城王很仁惠，收了死者的朽骨装棺殡葬。
English: At the time of the funeral, the sound of hundreds of people crying was heard in the air. The mourners all said that in the past, the soldiers panicked, and some of those who were killed did not have coffins. The king of the city was very benevolent and received the dead bones of the deceased to be buried in a coffin.

古文：死者欢于九土，精灵知其怀感。故人美王之德。
现代文：死者在九泉下很高兴，这些精灵为了感激任城王的恩德，在空中哭泣送丧。
English: The dead were overjoyed, and these elves wept in the air to express their gratitude for the city king's kindness.

古文：国史撰《任城旧事》二卷。至东晋初，藏于密阁。
现代文：所以人们都称赞任城王的美德。国史中有《任城旧事》两卷，到东晋初年，藏于秘阁。
English: Therefore, people praised the virtue of Rencheng. There are two volumes of "Rencheng Ancient History" in the national history, which were hidden in the secret cabinet in the first year of the Eastern Jin Dynasty.

古文：桓石虔
现代文：桓石虔
English: Huan Shikian

古文：诸督将素知其勇，戏令拔箭。
现代文：晋时，桓石虔很有才干，他特别矫健敏捷，随他父亲桓豁在荆州。在一次围猎中，一猛虎被数箭射中，伏地。
English: At the time of the Jin Dynasty, Huan Shikian was very talented. He was particularly agile and agile. He followed his father Huan Wu in Jingzhou. During a hunt, a tiger was shot by several arrows and fell to the ground.

古文：石虔因急往，拔一箭，猛虎踞跃，石虔亦跳，高于猛兽。复拔一箭而归。
现代文：督将们平时就知道石虔很勇敢，开玩笑地叫他去拔箭，他急忙去拔了一箭。猛虎跳起来了，他也跳，比老虎跳得还高，他又拔了一只箭回来。
English: The commanders usually knew that Shi Qian was very brave, and jokingly asked him to draw an arrow. He hurriedly pulled out an arrow. The fierce tiger jumped up, and he also jumped, even higher than the tiger, and he pulled out another arrow to come back.

古文：时人有患疾者，谓曰：桓石虔来以怖之，病者多愈。
现代文：当时，如果有人患病，只要对病人说一声：桓石虔来了！这一吓，有病的人多半就好了。
English: At that time, if someone was ill, all they had to do was to say to the patient: "Huan Shijian is coming!" This scare would cure most sick people.

古文：杨大眼
现代文：杨大眼
English: Yang Dajian

古文：后魏杨大眼，武都氐难当之孙。
现代文：后魏时有个杨大眼，武都氐人，杨难当的孙子。
English: In the late Wei Dynasty, there was a grandson of Yang Dajian, a military commander, Yang Nandu.

古文：少有胆气，跳走如飞。
现代文：年少时就有胆量，跳走如飞。
English: When I was young, I had the guts to jump away.

古文：高祖南伐，李冲典选征官，大眼求焉。冲不许。
现代文：高祖南伐时，尚书李冲典选征讨官，杨大眼自荐，李冲不允许。
English: During Gaozhu's Southern Expedition, Shangshu Li Chongdian was selected as the recruiting officer, Yang Dajian recommended himself, and Li Chong was not allowed.

古文：大眼曰：尚书不见知，为尚书出一技。
现代文：大眼说：尚书你不了解我，我为你表演一技。
English: Big Eyes said, "Shang Shu, you don't know me. I'll perform a trick for you."

古文：便以绳长三丈，系髻而走，绳直如矢，马驰不及。
现代文：他便用三丈的长绳，系在发髻上而后飞跑，绳便像射出的箭头那样快、那样直，马都撵不上。
English: So he tied a three-metre-long rope to his topknot and flew backwards. The rope was as fast and as straight as an arrow, and the horse couldn't catch it.

古文：见者莫不惊叹。
现代文：观看者都很惊叹。
English: Onlookers were stunned.

古文：冲曰：千载以来，未有逸材若此者。
现代文：李冲说：千载以来，没有见过这样奇异的人才。
English: Li Chong said: "I haven't seen such a strange talent in thousands of years.

古文：遂用为军主。稍迁辅国将军。
现代文：便用他当军主，不久，升为辅国将军。
English: He used him as his commander and was soon promoted to the rank of adjutant general.

古文：王肃初归国也，谓大眼曰：在南闻君之名，以为眼如车轮。
现代文：王肃刚回国时，对大眼说：在南方就听到你的名字，以为你的眼比车轮大。
English: When Wang Su had just returned to China, he said to Big Eyes: "I heard your name in the south and thought your eyes were bigger than the wheels.

古文：今见，乃不异人眼。
现代文：现在看到，和别人的眼没有什么不同。
English: Now I see that it is no different from other people's eyes.

古文：大眼曰：若旗鼓相望，瞋眸奋发，足使君亡魂丧胆，何必大如车轮？
现代文：大眼说：咱俩若是旗鼓对阵，我怒瞪双眼，足以使你亡魂丧胆，何必大于车轮？
English: Said the great-eyed one, "If we were pitted against each other, and my glaring eyes were enough to frighten the life out of you, why should I be greater than the wheel?

古文：当代推其骁果，以为张关不过也。
现代文：当时人都说只有他这样骁勇，就是张飞、关云长也比不过他。
English: At that time, everyone said that he was the only one who was so brave. Even Zhang Fei and Guan Yunlang were better than him.

古文：麦铁杖
现代文：麦铁杖
English: Wheat Iron Cane

古文：麦铁杖，韶州翁源人也。有勇力，日行五百里。
现代文：麦铁杖是韶州翁源人，勇敢有力量，一日能行五百里。
English: Wheat Iron Cane is a native of Wengyuan, Zhangzhou. He is brave and strong, and can walk 500 miles a day.

古文：初仕陈朝，常执伞随驾。
现代文：初在陈朝当官，常执伞随皇伴驾。
English: He first became an official in the Chen Dynasty, and often rode with the emperor holding an umbrella.

古文：夜后，多潜往丹阳郡行盗。及明，却趁仗下执役。往回三百余里，人无觉者。
现代文：入夜，他便潜往丹阳郡行盗，天亮，又回来在仪仗中执伞，往返三百多里，无人觉察。
English: At night, he sneaked to Danyang County to steal, and at dawn, he came back to hold an umbrella in a ceremonial battle, a round trip of more than three hundred miles, no one noticed.

古文：后丹阳频奏盗贼踪由，后主疑之，而惜其材力，舍而不问。
现代文：后来，丹阳频频上奏盗贼猖獗。陈后主曾怀疑过他，而又珍惜他这个人才，没有向他问罪。
English: Later, Danyang was frequently attacked by rampant thieves. The Empress Dowager Chen once doubted him, but treasured his talent and did not charge him with any crime.

古文：陈亡入隋，委质于杨素。
现代文：陈亡后入隋，归顺在杨素门下。
English: After Chen's death, he entered the Sui Dynasty and submitted to Yang Su.

古文：素将平江南诸郡，使铁杖夜泅水过扬子江，为巡逻者所捕。
现代文：杨素要扫平江南诸郡，派铁杖夜渡扬子江，被巡逻的抓住。
English: Yang Su wanted to sweep the counties in the south of the Yangtze River and sent an iron rod to cross the Yangtze River at night. He was caught by the patrol.

古文：差人防守，送于姑苏，到庱亭，过夜。伺守者寐熟，窃其兵刃，尽杀守者走回，乃口衔二首级，携剑复浮渡大江。深为杨素奖用。
现代文：派人看守，送往姑苏，到了庱亭，晚上看守睡熟后，他窃取了兵器，杀死了看守，回来时口衔两个人头，带着剑渡过了大江，深受杨素的褒奖。
English: He sent guards and sent them to Gusu, and when he arrived at Jingting, after the guards fell asleep at night, he stole the weapons and killed the guards. When he returned, he had two heads and crossed the big river with a sword, which was highly praised by Yang Su.

古文：后官至本郡太守。
现代文：后来，他做了本郡太守。
English: Later, he became the governor of the county.

古文：今南海多麦氏，皆其后也。
现代文：如今海南多姓麦的，都是他的后裔。
English: Today, most surnamed Mai in Hainan are his descendants.

古文：彭乐
现代文：彭乐
English: Peng Le

古文：北齐将领彭乐勇猛无双。
现代文：北齐将彭乐勇猛无双。
English: North Qi made Peng Le a matchless hero.

古文：时神武帝率乐等十余万人，于沙苑与宇文护战。
现代文：那时，神武率彭乐等十余万人，在沙苑与宇文护交战。
English: At that time, more than one hundred thousand people, including Shenwu and Peng Le, fought with Uwenguo in Sha Yuan.

古文：时乐饮酒，乘醉深入，被刺得肝肚俱出，内之不尽，截去之，复入战。
现代文：当时，彭乐喝了酒，乘醉深入敌阵。被刺，肝肠都流出来了，有些被塞回去，露在外面的被他截去了。
English: At that time, Peng Le drank wine and got drunk and went deep into the enemy lines. He was stabbed, his liver and intestines came out, some were stuffed back, and he cut them off when they were exposed.

古文：护兵遂败，相枕籍死者三万余人。
现代文：又进入战场，宇文护的兵被打败了，横倒竖躺的死者三万余人。
English: When they entered the battlefield again, the soldiers of Uwen Guo were defeated, and there were more than thirty thousand dead people lying upside down.

古文：高开道
现代文：高开道
English: Gaokao Road

古文：隋末，高开道被箭，镞入骨，命一医工拔之，不得。
现代文：隋朝末年，高开道被箭射中，箭头刺入骨中。他命一个医生拔，没有拔掉，高开道问他。
English: At the end of the Sui Dynasty, Gao Kaido was shot by an arrow, and the arrowhead pierced his bone. He ordered a doctor to pull it out, but he did not pull it out. Gao Kaido asked him.

古文：开道问之，云：畏王痛。开道斩之。
现代文：他说：害怕大王痛。高开道杀了这个医生。
English: He said, "I'm afraid of the pain. Gao Kaido killed this doctor."

古文：更命一医云：我能拔之。
现代文：又找一个医生，这医生说，我能拔。
English: I found another doctor, who said I could pull it out.

古文：以一小斧子，当刺下疮际，用小棒打入骨一寸，以钳拔之。
现代文：他用一小斧子，从伤口处把小棒打入骨中一寸，用钳子把箭头拔出。
English: Using a small axe, he drove a small rod an inch into the bone from the wound and pulled the arrow out with pliers.

古文：开道饮啗自若，赐医工绢三百匹。
现代文：高开道喝酒吃饭坦然自若。赐给医生绢三百匹。
English: Gao Kaido drank and ate with ease. He gave the doctor three hundred yakitori.

古文：后为其将张金树所杀。
现代文：高开道后来却被他的部将张金树所杀。
English: However, Gao Kaido was later killed by his subordinate Zhang Jinshu.

古文：杜伏威
现代文：杜伏威
English: Dufourville

古文：隋大业末，杜伏威与陈棱战于齐州，裨将射中伏威额。怒曰：不杀射者，终不拔此箭。
现代文：隋朝大业末年，杜伏威与陈棱在齐州交战。陈棱一个偏将射中伏威的额，他大怒说：不杀死射我的人，决不拔掉此箭。
English: In the last years of the Sui Dynasty, Du Fuwei and Chen Ren were at war in Chizhou. Chen Ren accidentally shot Fu Wei in the forehead. He said angrily, "If you don't kill the person who shot me, you will never remove this arrow."

古文：由是奋入，获所射者，乃令拔箭，然后斩首。
现代文：因此，他奋勇进入战场，抓到那个射箭者，叫他给拔箭，然后又杀死了他。
English: So he fought his way onto the battlefield, caught the archer, made him draw his arrows, and then killed him.

古文：棱乃大败。
现代文：陈棱大败。
English: Chen Ren suffered a crushing defeat.

古文：尉迟敬德
现代文：尉迟敬德
English: Fei Chi Jingde

古文：王充兄子琬使于窦建德军中，乘炀帝所御骏马，铠甲甚鲜。
现代文：王充哥哥的儿子王琬，被派往窦建德军中，他骑着隋炀帝骑过的马，铠甲也很漂亮。
English: Wang Zhen, the son of Wang Zhen's elder brother, was sent to the Dou Jian German army. He rode a horse that the Sui and Qian emperors had ridden, and his armor was also very beautiful.

古文：太宗曰：彼所乘真良马也。
现代文：唐太宗说：他骑的那匹马真是好马呀！
English: Tang Taizong said, "The horse he rode is really a good horse!"

古文：尉迟敬德请往取之。乃与三骑，直入贼军擒琬，引其马以归。贼众无敢当者。
现代文：尉迟敬德请求去取那匹马，分配给他三个骑兵，他们直入敌阵抓住了王琬，把他的马也牵回来了，敌阵中没有敢出来抵挡的。
English: Lieutenant Xi Jingde requested to take the horse, and three cavalrymen were assigned to him. They went straight into the enemy lines, caught Wang Yao, and brought his horse back. No one in the enemy lines dared to come out to resist.

古文：敬德常侍宴庆善宫，时有班在其上者，敬德怒曰：汝有何功，合坐我上？
现代文：尉迟敬德常庆善宫侍宴，有一次有人坐在了他的上首，他很生气，说：你有什么功，可以坐在我上首？
English: During a banquet at the De Changqing Palace of Virtue, someone once sat on his head. He was very angry and said, "What merit do you have to be able to sit on my head?"

古文：任城王道宗次其下，解喻之，敬德勃焉，拳殴道宗，目几至眇。
现代文：任城王道宗坐在下首，想解释解释，敬德勃然大怒，挥拳打道宗，眼睛几乎被打瞎。
English: Rencheng Wang Daozong sat at the head of the table and tried to explain. Jingde flew into a rage and punched Daozong, nearly blinding him.

古文：柴绍弟
现代文：柴绍弟
English: Chai Shao's brother

古文：唐柴绍之弟某，有材力，轻矫迅捷，踊身而上，挺然若飞，十余步乃止。
现代文：唐时，柴绍的弟弟柴某，有功夫，身体轻巧，动作敏捷迅速。一跃身，能像鸟似的飞出十多步才能停下。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, Chai Shao's younger brother, Chai Mou, was a skilled martial artist with a light body and quick movements. He could leap up and fly like a bird for more than ten steps before stopping.

古文：太宗令取赵公长孙无忌鞍鞯，仍先报无忌，令其守备。
现代文：唐太宗命令他去取赵公长孙无忌的马鞍，并事前告诉了长孙无忌，让他派人守备。
English: Emperor Taizong ordered him to take the saddle of Zhao Gong's eldest grandson, Mujie, and told Mujie in advance to send someone to guard it.

古文：其夜，见一物如鸟，飞入宅内，割双鞎而去，追之不及。
现代文：那天晚上，见一物像鸟似的飞入房中，割了鞍上的双鞎，拿着马鞍走了，没有追上。
English: That night, I saw something that looked like a bird fly into the room, cut the stirrups on the saddle, took the saddle and left without catching up.

古文：又遣取丹阳公主镂金函枕，飞入内房，以手拈土公主面上，举头，即以他枕易之而去。
现代文：又一次，派他去取丹阳公主镂金枕套，他飞入内室，先用手在公主脸上拈土，等公主一抬头，他便用另一枕头换走了这只。
English: On another occasion, he was sent to fetch Princess Danyang's gold-plated pillowcase. He flew into the inner room and first rubbed dirt on the princess's face with his hand. As soon as the princess looked up, he replaced it with another pillow.

古文：至晓乃觉。
现代文：天亮后公主才知道。
English: The princess didn't find out until after dawn.

古文：尝著吉莫靴走上砖城，且至女墙，手无攀引。
现代文：他曾经穿着吉莫靴，脚蹬墙壁走上砖城，直至女墙，不用手攀引。
English: He used to walk up the brick walls, up to the women's wall, in his Jimmy Choo boots, climbing the walls without using his hands.

古文：又以足蹈佛殿柱，至檐头，捻掾覆上。
现代文：他又用脚蹬着佛殿前的大柱，爬到檐头，把着椽头上屋顶。
English: He also put his foot on the big pillar in front of the Buddhist temple, climbed up to the steeple, and took the roof off the steeple.

古文：越百尺楼阁，了无障碍。
现代文：跨越百尺楼阁，一点障碍也没有。
English: Crossing the hundred-foot pavilion, there is no obstacle at all.

古文：太宗奇之曰：此人不可处京邑。
现代文：太宗感觉这人很奇特，说：这人不能住在京城。
English: Taizong felt that this man was very strange and said: This man cannot live in Beijing.

古文：出为外官。时人号为壁龙。
现代文：便把他派出去当官，当时人们叫他壁龙。
English: They sent him out to be an official, and at that time people called him the Wall Dragon.

古文：太宗尝赐长孙无忌七宝带，直千金。
现代文：太宗曾赏赐长孙无忌七宝带，价值千金。
English: Emperor Taizong once gave his eldest grandson the Mugu Seven Treasures Belt, worth thousands of gold.

古文：时有大盗段师子从屋上椽孔间而下露，拔刀谓曰：公动即死。
现代文：当时有大盗段师子从屋上椽孔间下来，拔刀对他说：你要动就杀死你。
English: At that time, a master thief came down from the roof, pulled out a knife and said to him: "If you move, I will kill you."

古文：遂于枕函中取带去，以刀拄地，踊身椽孔间出。
现代文：随即从枕套中取走了宝带，又用刀拄地，一纵身从椽孔间出去了。
English: He then took the treasure belt from the pillowcase, dug the ground with a knife, and went out from between the holes.

古文：秦叔宝
现代文：秦叔宝
English: Qin Shubao

古文：唐太宗每临阵，望贼中骁将骁士，炫耀人马，出入来去者，颇病之。
现代文：唐太宗李世民每临阵地，看到敌阵中骁勇的将士，出出进进，炫耀人马，他就很不舒服。
English: Tang Taizong Li Shimin was very uncomfortable whenever he came to a position and saw the brave soldiers in the enemy line marching in and out, showing off their men and horses.

古文：辄命秦叔宝取之。
现代文：便命令秦叔宝去敌营中攻打，叔宝便领命跃马，负枪而去。
English: He then ordered Qin Shubao to attack the enemy camp. Shubao took the order, jumped on his horse, loaded his gun and left.

古文：叔宝应命跃马，负枪而进，必刺之于万众之中，人马俱倒。
现代文：他单枪匹马冲入敌阵万人之中，所条之人马俱倒。
English: He single-handedly rushed into the midst of tens of thousands of enemy troops, knocking everyone down.

古文：及后叔宝居多疾病，谓人曰：吾少长戎马，前后所经二百余阵，屡中重疮，计吾出血亦数斛矣，何能不病乎？
现代文：后来，叔宝有很多疾病，对人说：我从年轻时就开始了戎马生活，前后经历过二百多阵仗，屡负重伤，计算一下我出的血也有多少升了，怎么能没病呢！
English: Later, Shubao had many illnesses and said to people, "I started my military life when I was young. I have experienced more than 200 battles, and I have been seriously injured many times. Calculate how much my blood has risen. How can I not be sick?"

古文：薛仁贵唐太宗征辽东，驻跸于阵。
现代文：薛仁贵唐太宗征辽东，驻跸于阵。
English: Xue Rengui, Emperor Taizong of Tang, conquered Liaodong and stayed there.

古文：薛仁贵著白衣，握戟橐鞬，张弓大呼，所向披靡。
现代文：薛仁贵著白衣，握戟橐鞬，张弓大呼，所向披靡。
English: Xue Ren was dressed in a white robe, holding a scepter and shouting with a bow. He was invincible.

古文：太宗谓曰： 朕不喜得辽东，喜得卿也。 
现代文：太宗谓曰：朕不喜得辽东，喜得卿也。
English: Emperor Taizong said, "I am not pleased with Liaodong, but you should be.

古文：后率兵击突厥于云州。
现代文：后来，薛仁贵率兵去云州攻打突厥。
English: Later, Xue Rengui led an army to Yunnan to attack the Turks.

古文：突厥先问唐将为何，曰： 薛仁贵也。 
现代文：突厥人先问唐将是谁？回答说，是薛仁贵。
English: The Turks first asked who Tang would be? He replied that it would be Xue Rengui.

古文：突厥曰： 吾闻薛仁贵流会州死矣，安得复生？ 
现代文：突厥人说，听说薛仁贵在会州死了，怎么能又活了？
English: The Turks said that they had heard that Xue Rengui had died in Huizhou. How could he still be alive?

古文：仁贵脱兜鍪见之，突厥相视失色，下马罗拜，稍遁去。
现代文：薛仁贵脱掉头盔让他们看。突厥人一看大惊失色，下马叩拜后便逃走了。
English: Xue Rengui took off his helmet and showed it to them. The Turks were shocked, dismounted, bowed and then fled.

古文：公孙武达
现代文：公孙武达
English: Public Grandson Wuda

古文：唐左武卫大将军公孙武达有膂力。
现代文：唐朝左武卫大将军公孙武达，非常有臂力。
English: Gongsun Wuda, the Tang Dynasty's General of the Left Division of the Middle Palace Guards, was very strong.

古文：尝遇贼，尽劫其衣物，逼武达索靴，武达授足与之。贼俯就引靴，武达殴之，死于手下，以其兵仗御余寇，获免。
现代文：曾经有一次他遇到了贼，抢了他的衣服，还要脱掉他的靴子。公孙武达伸出脚让他脱，趁贼伏身脱靴之际，将其打死，又用他的兵器赶走了其余的贼寇，没有受到损失。
English: Once he encountered a thief, robbed his clothes, and had to take off his boots. Gongsun Wuda stretched out his foot for him to take off, took advantage of the thief to take off his shoes, beat him to death, and used his weapon to drive away the rest of the thieves, without loss.

古文：程知节
现代文：程知节
English: Chengzhi Festival

古文：唐裴行俨与王充战，先驰赴敌，为流矢所中，坠于地。程知节救之，杀数人，充军披靡。
现代文：唐时，裴行俨与王充交战。裴行俨先骑马冲入敌阵，被敌箭射中，坠马倒地，程知节去救他，杀了很多敌人，王充的军队溃逃。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, Pei Xingtao fought with Wang Chong. Pei Xingtao first rode into the enemy lines, was shot by enemy arrows, fell to the ground, Cheng Zhijie went to save him, killed many enemies, and Wang Chong's army fled.

古文：知节乃抱行俨，重骑而还，为充骑所逐，刺槊洞过。知节回身，捩折其槊，斩获者，与行俨皆免。
现代文：程知节抱着裴行俨，二人骑一匹马回来时，被王充的骑兵追赶，一槊刺穿了程知节，他回身便把槊折断，把那人杀了，他和裴行俨都免除了杀身之灾。
English: Cheng Zhijie was holding Bae Xingtao in his arms. When the two of them were riding back on a horse, they were chased by Wang Chong's cavalry. Once the crossbow pierced Cheng Zhijie, he turned around and broke the crossbow, killing the man. Both he and Bae Xingtao were spared from death.

古文：薛万
现代文：薛万
English: Xue Wan

古文：唐契苾阿，力征辽东。以骑八百，遇贼合战，被槊中腰，为贼所窘。尚辇奉御薛万备单马入杀贼骑，救阿力于群贼之中，与之俱出。
现代文：唐时，契苾阿力征辽东，率领八百骑兵，遇贼交战，被槊刺中腰，尚辇奉御薛万单枪匹马冲入敌阵，从群贼中救出阿力，二人都逃出了敌群。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, Qizong A Li led eight hundred cavalrymen to conquer Liaodong. When he encountered a bandit, he was stabbed in the waist by the bandit. Shangyu Bongyou Xue Wan single-handedly rushed into the enemy camp and rescued A Li from the bandits. Both of them escaped from the enemy camp.

古文：阿力气尽，束疮而战，贼乃退。
现代文：阿力身负重伤，包扎了伤口后又战，敌人才退去。
English: A Li was seriously injured. After the wound was bandaged, they fought again, and the enemy retreated.

古文：李楷固
现代文：李楷固
English: Li Kaigou

古文：唐天后时，将军李楷固，契丹人也，善用搨索。
现代文：唐则天皇后时，将军李楷固是契丹人，善用套索。
English: When Tang Zi was empress, the general Li Kai Gu was a Khitan and was good at using a noose.

古文：李尽忠之败也，麻仁节、张玄遇等并被搨将。
现代文：李尽忠那次战败了，麻仁节、张玄遇等人都被他用套索抓住。
English: Li Jianzhong was defeated in that battle, and Ma Rensi, Zhang Xuanyu and others were all caught by him with a noose.

古文：獐鹿狐兔，走马遮截，放索搨之，百无一漏。
现代文：獐、鹿、狐、兔，只要是他骑马追截，放索一套，百无一漏。
English: Badger, deer, fox, rabbit, as long as he rides a horse to intercept, release a set of ropes, there is no omission.

古文：鞍马上弄弓矢矛矟，状如飞仙。
现代文：在马上使用弓箭和八尺长矛，状如飞仙。
English: They use bows and arrows and eight-foot spears on their horses, which are shaped like flying fairies.

古文：天后惜其材，不杀，用以为将。
现代文：则天皇后很珍惜其才，没有杀他，用做将军。
English: However, the empress treasured his talent, did not kill him, and used him as a general.

古文：稍贪财好色，出为潭州乔口镇将，愤恚而卒也。
现代文：他有些贪财好色，降为潭州乔口镇守将。他愤恨恼怒而死。
English: He was a bit greedy and lascivious, and was demoted to Tamzhou Qiaokou Town Guard. He died of resentment and anger.

古文：王君毚
现代文：王君毚
English: Wang Junyao

古文：唐王君毚摄御史中丞，判凉州都督事。
现代文：唐朝，王君毚任御史中丞，兼管凉州都督事物。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, Wang Junyao was appointed as the Vice-President of the Imperial History, and was also in charge of the affairs of the capital of Liangzhou.

古文：玄宗于广达楼，引君毚及妻夏氏宴设，赐金帛。
现代文：玄宗李隆基在广达楼设宴，宴请君毚和他的妻子夏氏，赏赐金银布匹。
English: Emperor Xuanzong Li Longji held a banquet in the Quanta Building, inviting Junyao and his wife Xia, awarding them with gold, silver and cloth.

古文：夏氏亦勇决，每君毚临阵，夏氏亦有战功。
现代文：夏氏也很勇敢，经常和丈夫一起参战，也立过战功。
English: Ms. Xia is also very brave. She often goes to war with her husband, and they have made great achievements in the war.

古文：凉州有回纥契苾思结阵，四部落为酋长。
现代文：凉州有个回纥人契苾思，联合四个部落推他为酋长。
English: In Liangzhou, there is an Uyghur named Qixi, who was elected chief by four tribes.

古文：君毚微时往来凉府，为回纥所轻。
现代文：王君毚在身分低微时经常往来凉州，回纥人很轻视他。
English: Wang Junyao often traveled to and from Liangzhou when he was low in status, and the Uighurs despised him very much.

古文：及君毚为河西节度使，回纥等怏怏，耻在麾下。
现代文：等他升为河西节度使，回纥人很不服气，觉得在他的治理下很耻辱。
English: When he was promoted to the Hexi Festival, the Uighur people were not convinced and felt very humiliated under his governance.

古文：君毚奏回纥等部落难制，潜有谋叛，遂留四部都督。
现代文：君毚上奏皇上，说回纥等部落难以管制，暗地策划叛乱，便留下四部落都督。
English: When the emperor was summoned, he said that tribes such as the Hui were difficult to control and were secretly plotting a rebellion, so he left four tribal governors.

古文：后四部落党与谋叛君毚以复怨。
现代文：后来，四部落联合叛乱，向君毚报仇。
English: Later, the four tribes jointly rebelled and took revenge on Junlun.

古文：会吐蕃间道往突厥，君毚率精骑往肃州掩之。还至甘州南巩笔驿，四部落伏兵突起，君毚与贼力战，自朝至晡，左右尽死，遂杀君毚。
现代文：恰在这时，吐蕃间道去突厥，王君毚率精骑去肃州抵挡，回来时到甘州巩笔驿，四部落伏兵突起，王君毚与贼力战，从早到晚，他的部下都战死了，他也被杀。
English: It was at this time that he went to Turkestan on the way from Tubo. Wang Junyao and his horsemen went to Suizhou to resist, and when he came back to Ganzhou, the four tribes ambushed, and Wang Junyao fought with the bandits. From morning to night, his subordinates died in battle, and he was also killed.

古文：宋令文
现代文：宋令文
English: Song Lingwen

古文：唐宋令文者有神力。
现代文：唐时，宋令文力大无穷。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, the Song Dynasty had great literary power.

古文：禅定寺有牛触人，莫之敢近，筑圈以阑之。
现代文：禅定寺牛顶人，没有人敢靠近，只有用圈拦着。
English: No one dares to get close to the Zenjō-ji temple's cow-topped man, and they can only stop him with a hoop.

古文：令文怪其故，遂袒褐而入。牛竦角向前，令文接两角拔之，应手而倒，颈骨皆折而死。
现代文：宋令文奇怪问什么原因，于是他光着膀子进去了，牛伸着两角向他冲来，他抓住两只牛角，用手按倒牛，牛的颈骨都断了，牛也死了。
English: Song Lingwen wondered why, so he went in with bare arms. The cow rushed at him with its horns outstretched. He grabbed two horns and pushed the cow down with his hands. The cow's neck bones were broken and the cow died.

古文：又以五指撮碓觜，壁上书得四十字诗。
现代文：他又能以五指抓起捣米的石臼，在墙壁上写了四十字的诗。
English: He was also able to pick up a stone mortar for pounding rice with his five fingers, and wrote a poem of four crosses on the wall.

古文：为太学生以一手挟讲堂柱起，以同房生衣于柱下压之，许重设酒，乃为之出。
现代文：在太学生面前，他一手拔起讲堂的柱子，把同室学生的衣服放在柱下压着。答应请酒，才取出衣服。
English: In front of the students, he pulled up the pillar of the lecture hall with one hand, put the roommate's clothes under the pillar and pressed it. He only took out the clothes after agreeing to have a drink.

古文：令文有三子，长之问有文誉，次之逊善书，次之悌有勇力。
现代文：宋令文有三个儿子，长子宋之问的文章很有声誉；二子宋之逊擅长书法；三子宋之悌很勇敢。
English: Song Lingwen has three sons. The eldest son, Song Zhiwen, is famous for his articles; the second son, Song Zhixun, is good at calligraphy; and the third son, Song Zhiyao, is very brave.

古文：之悌后左降朱鸢。会贼破欢州，以之悌为总管击之。募壮士得八人。
现代文：之悌后来左降朱鸢，恰遇贼兵攻打欢州，派之悌为总管前去击敌，招募了八名壮士。
English: Later, Zhu Xi, who was left by Zhi Xi, happened to encounter the bandits attacking Hanzhou. He sent Zhi Xi as the chief to attack the enemy and recruited eight strong men.

古文：之悌身长八尺，被重甲，直前大叫曰：獠贼，动即死！
现代文：宋之悌身高八尺，披戴重甲，边前冲边大声叫喊：獠贼，谁敢动就叫他死！
English: Song Zhiyao is eight feet tall, wearing heavy armor, rushing forward and shouting loudly: "Thief, whoever dares to move, let him die!"

古文：贼七百人，一时俱剉，大破之。
现代文：七百多敌人一时都受了伤，宋之悌大破敌阵。
English: More than seven hundred enemies were injured at one time, and Song Ziqi broke the enemy line.

古文：彭博通
现代文：彭博通
English: Bloomberg.com

古文：唐彭博通者，河间人也，身长八尺。
现代文：唐时，河间人氏彭博通，身高八尺。
English: At the time of the Tang Dynasty, he was eight feet tall.

古文：曾于讲堂阶上，临阶而立。取鞋一双，以臂夹，令有力者后拔之，鞋底中断，博通脚终不移。
现代文：他曾站在讲堂的台阶上，用臂夹着一双鞋，叫有力量的人从后边拔这双鞋，鞋底拉断，他的脚却没移动一下。
English: He once stood on the steps of the lecture hall with a pair of shoes under his arm and asked a strong man to pull the shoes from behind, breaking the soles, but his feet did not move.

古文：牛驾车正走，博通倒曳车尾，却行数十步，横拔车辙深二尺，皆纵横破裂。
现代文：牛拉车正往前走时，他从后边拉着车尾，倒行数十步。横拔车辙二尺多深，车都碎裂了。
English: When the ox-drawn cart was moving forward, he pulled the tail of the cart from the back and walked backwards for dozens of steps. The ruts were more than two feet deep, and the cart was broken.

古文：曾游瓜步江，有急风张帆，博通捉尾缆挽之，不进。
现代文：他曾游过瓜步江，江上有一船，大风吹动着风帆向前进，彭博通却挽着船尾的缆绳，船不能前进。
English: He once swam across the Guabou River. There was a boat on the river. A strong wind was blowing the sails forward, but Bloomberg was holding the rope at the back of the boat. The boat could not move forward.

古文：李宏
现代文：李宏
English: Li Hong

古文：唐定襄公李宏，虢王之子，身长八尺。
现代文：唐朝，定襄公李宏，是虢王的儿子，身高八尺。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, Dingxiang Prince Li Hong, the son of the King of Qi, was eight feet tall.

古文：曾猎，遇虎搏之，踣而卧，虎坐其上。
现代文：曾经有一次打猎，遇老虎，和老虎搏斗时，他跌倒了，老虎坐在他身上。
English: Once when he was hunting, he met a tiger. When he was fighting with the tiger, he fell down and the tiger sat on him.

古文：奴走马旁过，虎跳攫奴后鞍。宏起，引弓射之而毙。宏及奴一无所伤。
现代文：有一奴仆骑马从旁经过，老虎跳起来抓马的后鞍，这时，李宏跃起，用弓箭将老虎射死，李宏和奴仆都没有受伤。
English: A servant riding a horse passed by. The tiger jumped up and grabbed the horse's back saddle. At this time, Li Hong jumped up and shot the tiger to death with a bow and arrow. Neither Li Hong nor the servant were injured.

古文：辛承嗣
现代文：辛承嗣
English: Shin Seung Hee

古文：唐忠武将军辛承嗣轻捷。
现代文：唐朝，忠武将军辛承嗣，行动非常敏捷迅速。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, the loyal general Xin Chengzhe took the lead and acted very quickly.

古文：曾解鞍绊马，脱衣而卧，令一人百步，走马持枪而来。承嗣鞴马解绊，著衣擐甲，上马盘枪，逆拒刺马，擒人而还。
现代文：曾有一次，他解鞍绊马，脱衣而卧，令一人从百步以外骑马持枪而来，他备马解绊，穿衣披甲，上马盘枪，迎着来人，刺马、擒人而归。
English: Once upon a time, he unsaddled his horse, undressed and lay down, and ordered a man to come from a hundred paces away on horseback with a gun. He prepared his horse, undressed, dressed in armor, put on a horse gun, met people coming, thorn horse, and beat people and returned.

古文：承嗣后与将军元帅奖驰聘，一手捉鞍桥，双足直上捺蜻蜓，走马二十里。
现代文：后来，承嗣与军中将军元帅比赛马术，他一手抓马鞍，双足倒立竖蜻蜓，在马上跑了二十里。
English: Later, he competed in an equestrian event with a lieutenant general and a field marshal. He grabbed the saddle with one hand, stood on the stirrup with both feet upside down, and ran twenty miles on the horse.

古文：与中郎裴绍业，于青海被吐番所围。谓绍业曰：将军相随共出。
现代文：他和中郎将裴绍业，在青海被吐蕃包围，他对绍业说：你随我一起冲出去。
English: He and Zhonglang besieged Pei Shaoye in Qinghai and was surrounded by Tuobao. He said to Shaoye: "Follow me and rush out."

古文：绍业惧，不敢。
现代文：绍业害怕不敢。
English: Shao Ye was afraid and didn't dare to go.

古文：承嗣曰：为将军试之。
现代文：承嗣说：我先去给你试试。
English: He said, "I'll give you a try first."

古文：单马持枪，所向皆靡，却迎绍业出。
现代文：他单枪匹马，敌人四处逃散，他反回来迎绍业出去。
English: He single-handedly, the enemy fled everywhere, he in turn came back to welcome Shao Ye out.

古文：承嗣马被箭，乃跳下，夺贼壮马乘之，一无所伤。
现代文：辛承嗣的马被射中，他跳下马，夺了敌人一匹壮马骑上，没有一处受伤。
English: When Xin's horse was shot, he jumped off the horse, grabbed a strong horse from the enemy and rode on it. He was not injured at all.

古文：裴旻与幽州都督孙佺北征，被奚贼所围。旻马上立走，轮刀雷发，箭若星流，应刀而断。贼不敢取，蓬飞而去。
现代文：裴旻和幽州都督孙佺北征时，被奚贼包围，裴旻站在马上，挥舞大刀，敌人射来的箭象流星似的，都被裴旻的大刀砍断，贼不敢抓他，他腾飞而去。
English: When Pei Jun and Yuzhou Governor Sun Yat-sen were on the Northern Expedition, they were surrounded by bandits. Pei Jun stood on a horse, waving a big sword. The arrows shot by the enemy were like meteors, and were all cut off by Pei Jun's big sword. The bandits did not dare to catch him, and he took off.

