古文：文惠太子文惠太子长懋，字云乔，世祖长子也。
现代文：文惠太子名长懋，字云乔，是世祖的长子。
English: Prince Wen Hui, also known as Nagase and Yun Qiao, was the eldest son of the founder of the dynasty.

古文：世祖年未弱冠而生太子，为太祖所爱。
现代文：世祖不到二十岁就生了太子，太子受到太祖的喜爱。
English: Less than twenty years old, the ancestor gave birth to the prince, who was loved by the great-grandfather.

古文：姿容丰润，小字白泽。
现代文：他容貌丰润，小名白泽。
English: He has a plump face, and his nickname is Shirasawa.

古文：宋元徽末，随世祖在郢。世祖还镇盆城拒沈攸之，使太子劳接将帅，亲侍军旅。
现代文：宋元徽末年，跟着世祖住在郢州，世祖回来镇守盆城抗拒沈攸之的时候，让太子慰问和接待将帅，管理军队。
English: In the late years of Song Yuanhui, he lived with his ancestor in Zhangzhou. When his ancestor came back to defend Bincheng against Shen Yuanzhi, he asked the prince to console and receive the general and manage the army.

古文：除秘书郎，不拜。
现代文：任命他为秘书郎，他没有就职。
English: He was appointed secretary, but did not take up the post.

古文：授辅国将军，迁晋熙王抚军主簿。
现代文：任辅国将军，调任为晋熙王的抚军主簿。
English: He was appointed as the general of Fu Guo, and was transferred to be the master of the army of King Jinxi.

古文：事宁，世祖遣太子还都。太祖方创霸业，心存嫡嗣，谓太子曰： 汝还，吾事办矣。 
现代文：乱事被平定后，世祖派太子回都城，太祖刚创霸业，心裹考虑嗣位的人，对太子说： 你同都，我的事成了。 
English: After the turmoil was calmed down, the ancestor sent the prince back to the capital. The great-grandfather had just created a domineering business, and those who were thinking about the succession said to the prince: You and the capital, my job is done.

古文：处之府东斋，令通文武宾客。
现代文：安排他住在府中的东斋，让他与文武宾客交往。
English: Arrange for him to live in Tosa in the middle of the house, and let him mingle with the literati guests.

古文：敕荀伯玉曰： 我出行日，城中军悉受长懋节度。
现代文：命令荀伯玉说： 我出去的时候，城中军队都由长懋指挥。
English: "When I go out, the troops in the city will be under the command of Nagatoro.

古文：我虽不行，内外直防及诸门甲兵，悉令长懋时时履行。 
现代文：我即使没出门，内外防卫以及守卫各门的军队，都由长懋经常管理。 
English: Even if I didn't go out, the internal and external defense as well as the troops guarding each gate were always managed by Nagase.

古文：转秘书丞，以与宣帝讳同，不就，改除中书郎，迁黄门侍郎，未拜。
现代文：转任秘书丞因为 丞 字与宣帝的名字谐音，避讳没就任，改授中书郎，升黄门侍郎，没去就职。
English: He was transferred to the position of secretary because the character 丞 sounds the same as Emperor Xuan's name. He avoided taking up the post, and was instead awarded the position of junior secretary, and was promoted to the position of yellow gate attendant, but did not take up the post.

古文：升明三年，太祖将受禅，世祖已还京师，以襄阳兵马重镇，不欲处他族，出太子为持节、都督雍梁二州、郢州之竟陵、司州之随郡军事、左中郎将、宁蛮校尉、雍州刺史。
现代文：升明三年，太祖将受禅即帝位，世祖已回京都，因襄阳是军事重镇，不想安排外人，就让太子出京属持节、都督雍梁两州以及郢州的竟陵和司州的随郡的军事、左中郎将、宁蛮校尉、雍州刺史等职。
English: Three years after his ascension to the throne, the great-grandfather will be enthroned as emperor. The great-grandfather has already returned to Kyoto. Since Yangyang is a military stronghold, he did not want to arrange for outsiders, so he let the prince go out of Beijing to hold the positions of Jisai, the governor of Yongliang two provinces, and the military, the left middle-ranking officer, the Ningban lieutenant, and the Yongzhou chief historian of Goryeong and Shizhou counties.

古文：建元元年，封南郡王，邑二千户。
现代文：建元元年，封为南郡王，食邑二千户。
English: In the first year of Jianyuan, it was named the king of Nan County, with 2,000 households in food villages.

古文：江左未有嫡皇孙封王，始自此也。进号征虏将军。
现代文：开江左皇孙封王的先例。进号为征虏将军。
English: The precedent of the grandson of the Emperor of the Left of the Kaijiang River being crowned king.

古文：先是，梁州刺史范柏年诱降晋寿亡命李乌奴，讨平氐贼杨城、苏道炽等，颇著威名。
现代文：原来，梁州刺史范柏年诱降晋寿的败将李乌奴讨平了氐地贼寇杨城、苏道炽等人，很有威名。
English: It turns out that Liangzhou stabber Fan Pakren's defeat in inducing Jin Shou's demotion leveled Li Wunu, the land thief Kou Yangcheng, Su Daoguang and others, which is very prestigious.

古文：沈攸之事起，柏年遣将阴广宗领军出魏兴声援京师，而候望形势。事平，朝廷遣王玄邈代之。
现代文：沈攸之的事件发生时，柏年一面派将领阴广塞领兵从翘兴出发声援京师，一面等待形势的发展，乱事平定后，朝廷派王玄邈取代柏年。
English: When Shen You's incident occurred, the court sent Wang Xuanqi to replace him after the turmoil was settled. On the one hand, the court sent the general leading the Yin and Guangxi armies to Gexing to support the Beijing division. On the other hand, it waited for the situation to develop.

古文：乌奴劝柏年据汉中不受命，柏年计未决，玄邈已至，柏年迟回魏兴不肯下。太子虑其为变，乃遣说柏年，许启为府长史，柏年乃进襄阳，因执诛之。
现代文：乌奴劝说担年坚守选生不接受命令，由逛犹豫不决，玄邈已经到达，柏年在魏兴徘徊不肯束下，太子担心他作乱，就派人劝说柏年，答应用他为府长史，柏年才进襄阳，太子乘机捉住杀了他。
English: Wu Niu persuaded Shan Nian to stick to the selection of students and not accept the order, from wandering to hesitating, Xuanzang has arrived, Bao Nian wandered in Wei Xing and refused to be bound, the prince was worried that he would make a mess, so he sent someone to persuade Bao Nian and agreed to use him as the governor of the capital. Bao Nian only entered Xiangyang, the prince took the opportunity to catch and kill him.

古文：柏年，梓潼人，徙居华阳，世为土豪，知名州里。
现代文：柏年是梓潼人，迁到华阳，世代是当地豪强，在州里出了名。
English: He was born in Zizhou and moved to Huayang. He belonged to the generation of local heroes and became famous in the state.

古文：宋泰始中，氐寇断晋寿道，柏年以仓部郎假节领数百人慰劳通路，自益州道报命。除晋寿太守。
现代文：宋泰始年间，氐地贼寇切断晋寿的通路，柏年以仓部郎假节带几百人去慰劳，打通了道路。在益州道回报结果，授予他晋寿太守。
English: In the early years of Song Dynasty, the bandits cut off the access to Jinju. In the year of Kaku, he took hundreds of people to work for him on the Kurabe Lantern Festival and opened the road. As a result, he was awarded the title of Jinju Taishu (governor of Jinju).

古文：讨平氐贼，遂为梁州。
现代文：讨平了氐贼，就经营梁州。
English: After getting even with the bandits, he began to run Liangzhou.

古文：柏年强立，善言事，以应对为宋明帝所知。
现代文：柏年为人果毅，善于剖析事理，以应对的才能被宋明帝所了解。
English: He was a resolute person, good at analyzing matters, and his ability to deal with them was understood by Song Mingdi.

古文：既被诛，巴西太守柳弘称启太祖，敕答曰： 柏年幸可不尔，为之恨恨！ 
现代文：被杀后，巴西太守柳弘在太祖面前称赞他，太祖说： 柏年如果不这样就好了，这事真遣憾。 
English: After he was killed, the Brazilian daimyō, Yanagihiro, praised him in front of the great-grandfather, who said, "It would have been better if it hadn't happened in the year of the boar. I'm really sorry about it."

古文：时襄阳有盗发古冢者，相传云是楚王冢，大获宝物玉屐、玉屏风、竹简书、青丝编。
现代文：当时襄阳有盗贼掘了古墓，相传是楚王坟墓，得到了大量宝物如玉屐、玉屏风、竹简书、青丝编等。
English: At that time, thieves in Yangyang dug up an ancient tomb, which was rumored to be the tomb of King Chu, and obtained a large number of treasures such as jade urns, jade screens, bamboo books, blue silk knitting, etc.

古文：简广数分，长二尺，皮节如新。
现代文：竹简宽数分，长二尺，表皮和竹节都像新的。
English: The bamboo strips are a few centimeters wide and two feet long, and the skin and bamboo knots are like new.

古文：盗以把火自照，后人有得十余简，以示抚军王僧虔，僧虔云是科斗书《考工记》，《周官》所阙文也。
现代文：盗贼用来做火把照明，后来有人找到了十多个简片，拿给抚军王僧虔看，僧虔说是蝌蚪文的《考工记》，为《周官》一书中所缺。
English: Thieves used it to light torches. Later, someone found more than ten copies and showed them to Fuzhun Wang Zengqian. Zengqian said that it was a plagiarized copy of "Kaohongji," which was missing from the book "Zhou Guan."

古文：是时州遣按验，颇得遗物，故有同异之论。
现代文：这个时候州里派人验证，也得到些遗留的东西，所以结论不一致。
English: At this time, the state sent someone to verify and also got some leftovers, so the conclusions are inconsistent.

古文：会北虏南侵，上虑当出樊、沔。
现代文：正逢北虏南侵，皇上想应当从樊、沔一带出兵。
English: At the time of the invasion of the south by the northern Huns, the emperor thought that he should send troops from the areas of Yunnan and Shandong.

古文：二年，征为侍中、中军将军，置府，镇石头。
现代文：二年，被召为侍中、中军将军，设置府衙，镇守石头。
English: In the second year, he was called to be a chamberlain and a general of the Chinese army, set up a prefectural government, and served as the town guard.

古文：穆妃薨，成服日，车驾出临丧，朝议疑太子应出门迎。
现代文：穆妃死，成服之曰，皇帝临丧，朝中议论太子是否该出门迎接。
English: After the death of Mu Fei, it was rumored that the emperor was about to be buried, and the court discussed whether the crown prince should go out to greet him.

古文：左仆射王俭曰： 寻《礼记·服问》 君所主夫人妻、太子、嫡妇 ，言国君为此三人为主丧也。
现代文：左仆射王俭说： 根据《礼记服问》篇中 君所主，夫人妻、太子、嫡妇 ，说的是国君为这三个人主丧。
English: His left-hand man, Shaowang Jian, said, "According to the "Rituals and Customs" article, the sovereign, his wife, his son-in-law, and his daughter-in-law, it says that the sovereign mourns for these three people.

古文：今鸾舆临降，自以主丧而至，虽因事抚慰，义不在吊，南郡以下不应出门奉迎。
现代文：现在銮车到来，白当是主丧到了，虽然抚慰，义不在吊问，南郡王以下不应出门迎接。
English: Now that the carriage has arrived, it is time for the mourners to arrive. Although it is a consolation, it is not a blessing. The people of Nanshan Wang and below should not go out to welcome it.

古文：但尊极所临，礼有变革，权去杖绖，移立户外，足表情敬，无烦止哭。
现代文：衹是尊长到来，礼仪上得有所更改，暂除下麻丧，站在门外，足能表达恭敬之情，无须止哭。
English: Now that His Eminence has arrived, the etiquette has to be changed, temporarily removing the mourning, standing outside the door, enough to express respect, no need to stop crying.

古文：皇太子既一宫之主，自应以车驾幸宫，依常奉候。
现代文：皇太子既然为一宫之主，自当因皇帝到宫中，按常例侍候。
English: Since the crown prince is the lord of a palace, he should come to the palace because of the emperor and wait for him as usual.

古文：既当成服之日，吉凶不容相干，宜以衰帻行事。
现代文：既然是居丧时期，吉凶不能相冲，应当穿着丧服理事。
English: Since it is a period of mourning, good luck and bad luck cannot be the same, and directors should wear mourning clothes.

古文：望拜止哭，率由旧章。
现代文：望拜止哭，都按旧例。
English: It's business as usual.

古文：尊驾不以临吊，奉迎则惟常体，求之情礼，如为可安。 
现代文：尊驾不临吊问，奉迎就衹是通常的做法，从情从礼上说，这样是可行的。 
English: It is common practice to greet rather than to be greeted, and this is feasible in terms of etiquette.

古文：解侍中。
现代文：辞去侍中职务。
English: Resigned from the post of chamberlain.

古文：上以太子哀疾，不宜居石头山障，移镇西州。
现代文：皇上因为太子哀伤过重，不宜住在亘头山障之内，移往西州镇守。
English: Because the prince was too sad, it was not suitable for the emperor to live within the Watanabe mountain range, so he moved to the town of Saishu.

古文：四年，迁使持节、都督南徐兖二州诸军事、征北将军、南徐州刺史。
现代文：四年，升任使持节、都督直途兖二州诸军事、征北将军、南徐州刺史。
English: In four years, he was promoted to the position of envoy, the military governor of the two states, the general of the Northern Expedition, and the governor of Southern Xuzhou.

古文：世祖即位，为皇太子。
现代文：世祖即位，立他为皇太子。
English: The founder ascended the throne and made him crown prince.

古文：初，太祖好《左氏春秋》，太子承旨讽诵，以为口实。
现代文：当初，太祖喜读《左氏春秋》，太子为迎合太祖亦读《左氏春秋》，被人传为话柄。
English: At first, the great-grandfather liked to read "The Spring and Autumn of Zuo," and the prince also read "The Spring and Autumn of Zuo" in order to meet the great-grandfather.

古文：即正位东储，善立名尚，礼接文士，畜养武人，皆亲近左右，布在省闼。
现代文：立为太子后，喜好立名，礼遇文人，蓄养武士，都作为亲信，分布于朝廷。
English: After he became crown prince, he liked to make a name for himself, courted writers, and cultivated warriors, all of which were distributed throughout the imperial court as close confidants.

古文：永明三年，于崇正殿讲《孝经》，少傅王俭以擿句令太子仆周颙撰为义疏。
现代文：永明三年，在崇正殿讲《孝经》，少傅王俭拿《孝经》摘句让太子仆周颐注解。
English: In the third year of Yongming, he lectured on the "Filial Piety Sutra" at the Chongzheng Hall. Shao Fu Wang Jian took excerpts from the "Filial Piety Sutra" and asked the prince's servant Zhou Qi to annotate it.

古文：五年冬，太子临国学，亲临策试诸生，于坐问少傅王俭曰： 《曲礼》云 无不敬 。
现代文：五年冬，太子巡视国学，亲自考核众位生员，即席问少傅王俭： 《曲礼》上蜕 无不敬 。
English: In the winter of the fifth year, the prince made a tour of the Chinese school, personally examined all the students, and asked Wang Jian, the junior teacher, off-handedly: "There is no disrespect in reciting the "Song of Songs."

古文：寻下之奉上，可以尽礼，上之接下，慈而非敬。
现代文：我想以下侍奉上，可以尽礼，以上对待下，是慈爱而不是恭敬。
English: I think that the following servants can be polite, and the above treatment is affectionate rather than respectful.

古文：今总同敬名，将不为昧？ 
现代文：现在笼统地说敬，岂不是混淆了吗? 
English: Isn't it confusing to speak of respect in a general way now?

古文：俭曰： 郑玄云 礼主于敬 ，便当是尊卑所同。 
现代文：王俭说： 郑玄说 礼的主要精神是敬，就应该是尊卑相同的。 
English: Wang Jian said: Zheng Xuan said that the main spirit of etiquette is respect, so it should be equal in dignity.

古文：太子曰： 若如来通，则忠惠可以一名，孝慈不须另称。 
现代文：太子说： 如果像这样可以通用，那么忠和惠可以用同一个名称，孝和慈也不须用不同的说法。 
English: The crown prince said, "If it is possible to use the same name for both loyalty and benevolence, there is no need to use different names for filial piety and benevolence."

古文：俭曰： 尊卑号称，不可悉同，爱敬之名，有时相次。
现代文：王俭说： 尊卑的说法，不能都相同，爱和敬的说法，有的时候相近。
English: Wang Jian said: The notions of superiority and inferiority cannot all be the same, and the notions of love and respect are sometimes similar.

古文：忠惠之异，诚以圣旨，孝慈互举，窃有征据。
现代文：忠与惠的差别，确是根据圣人的要旨，孝慈并举，也有考证。
English: The difference between loyalty and benefit is indeed based on the essence of the saint, filial piety and benevolence, and there is also evidence.

古文：《礼》云 不胜丧比于不慈不孝 ，此则其义。 
现代文：《礼》上说 不尽到丧礼，等于不慈不孝 ，就是这个含义。 
English: "Li" says that failing to attend a funeral is tantamount to being uncharitable and unfilial, which is the meaning.

古文：太子曰： 资敬奉君，资爱事亲，兼此二涂，唯在一极。今乃移敬接下。岂复在三之义？ 
现代文：太子说： 凭着恭敬侍奉君主，凭着爱心对待亲属，这两个方面总起来说都在一个方面，现在又要恭敬地待下，难道还有第三个意义? 
English: The crown prince said, "To serve the monarch with respect and to treat relatives with love, these two aspects are all in one aspect, and now we have to be respectful. Is there a third meaning?"

古文：俭曰： 资敬奉君，必同至极，移敬逮下，不慢而已。 
现代文：王俭说： 以恭敬之心对待君王，一定得尽心尽力，恭敬对下，衹要不怠慢就行了。 
English: Wang Jian said: If you want to treat the king with respect, you must do your best. If you want to be respectful, you must not be negligent.

古文：太子曰： 敬名虽同，深浅既异，而文无差别，弥复增疑。 
现代文：太子说： 敬的名称相同，深浅的程度不同，但文字上没有差别，更增疑问。 
English: The crown prince said: "The names of the honorifics are the same, the degree of profundity is different, but there is no difference in the text, which adds to the doubt.

古文：俭曰： 繁文不可备设，略言深浅已见。
现代文：王俭说： 复杂的文字不能全部写出来，简要说出，程度的深浅就已明白了。《传》释说 不忘恭敬，民之主也 。
English: Wang Jian said, "It is impossible to write out all the complex characters, but if you say it briefly, you will understand the degree of profundity. "Biography" explanation Do not forget to be respectful, even the lord of the people.

古文：《传》云 不忘恭敬，民之主也 ；《书》云 奉先思孝，接下思恭 。
现代文：《书经》上说 奉先思孝，接下思恭 。
English: The "Book of Songs" says, "Bong first thought of filial piety, then thought of patriotism."

古文：此又经典明文，互相起发。 
现代文：这又是经典中的明白的文字，可以互相参照理解。 
English: This is again a clear text in the canon, which can be understood by reference to each other.

古文：太子问金紫光禄大夫张绪，绪曰： 愚谓恭敬是立身之本，尊卑所以并同。 
现代文：太子讯问金紫光禄大夫张绪，张绪说： 我认为恭敬是立身的根本，因此尊卑都相同。 
English: The crown prince interrogated Jin Zi Guanglu's doctor Zhang Xu. Zhang Xu said, "I believe that respect is the foundation of one's self-esteem. Therefore, superiority and inferiority are the same.

古文：太子曰： 敬虽立身之本，要非接下之称。
现代文：太子说： 敬虽然是立身的根本，总的来说，不是对下的说法。
English: The crown prince said, "Although respect is the foundation of one's standing, it is not, on the whole, a statement about the lower classes.

古文：《尚书》云 惠鲜鳏寡 ，何不言恭敬鳏寡邪？ 
现代文：《尚书》上说 给鳏寡之人以恩惠，为什么不说给鳏寡之人以恭敬呢? 
English: "Shangshu" says to bestow favor on the widowed, why not say to bestow respect on the widowed?

古文：绪曰： 今别言之，居然有恭惠之殊，总开记首，所以共同斯称。 
现代文：张绪说： 现在用不同的说法，当然有恭敬和恩惠的区别，最早开始记事的《尚书》才有这样的相同说法。 
English: Zhang Xu said: Nowadays, different terms are used. Of course, there is a difference between respect and favor. Shangshu, which was the first to record things, only had such a similar term.

古文：竟陵王子良曰： 礼者敬而已矣。
现代文：竟陵王子良说： 礼就是恭敬罢了。
English: Even Prince Lingliang said, "Ri is nothing but respect."

古文：自上及下，愚谓非嫌。 
现代文：从上到下，我认为没有疑问。 
English: From top to bottom, I don't think there's any doubt.

古文：太子曰： 本不谓有嫌，正欲使言与事符，轻重有别耳。 
现代文：太子说： 本来是没有疑问，我正想使言与事相符合，使轻舆重有区别罢了。 
English: The prince said: Originally, there was no doubt, I was just trying to make the words match the things, so that there would be a difference between light and heavy.

古文：临川王映曰： 先举必敬，以明大体，尊卑事数，备列后章，亦当不以总略而碍。 
现代文：临川王萧映说： 先提出的定是恭敬，以此明大体，尊卑方面的事多了，就完备地列在后面，也应不因总述或略述而有不明之处。 
English: Linchuan Wang Xiao Ying said: The first thing mentioned must be respect, so that it is clear in general. If there are more things related to superiority and inferiority, they should be listed in the latter, and there should be no ambiguity due to summary or summary.

古文：太子又以此义问诸学生，谢几卿等十一人，并以笔对。
现代文：太子又用这个问题来问众位生员，谢几卿等十一人，都用笔答。
English: The prince also used this question to ask the students, and eleven of them, including Xie Qiqing, all answered in writing.

古文：太子问王俭曰： 《周易·乾卦》本施天位，而《说卦》云 帝出乎《震》 。
现代文：太子问王俭说： 《周易乾卦》本来代表天，但是《说卦》上说 帝出乎《震》 。
English: The prince asked Wang Jian: "Zhou Yi Qian Gua" originally represented heaven, but "Say Gua" said that the emperor came from "Earthquake."

古文：《震》本非天，义岂相主？ 
现代文：《震》本来不是天，怎么产生主宰的意义呢? 
English: "Earthquake" was not originally heaven, so how did the meaning of dominion arise?

古文：俭曰： 《乾》健《震》动，天以运动为德，故言 帝出《震》 。 
现代文：王俭说： 《干》劲健《震》就运动了，天以运行为德，所以说 帝出《震》 。 
English: Wang Jian said: "Dry" vigorous "shock" on the movement of the movement, the day with the operation of the moral, so that the emperor out of the "shock."

古文：太子曰： 天以运动为德，君自体天居位，《震》雷为象，岂体天所出？ 
现代文：太子说： 天以运行为德，君主是承天命摄位的，《震》的形象是雷，怎么是承天所出呢? 
English: The prince said, "The operation of the heavens is the source of virtue, and the monarch is appointed by heaven. The image of "earthquake" is thunder. How is it from heaven?

古文：俭曰： 主器者莫若长子，故受之以《震》。万物出乎《震》，故亦帝所与焉。 
现代文：王俭说： 主持神器的没有人比得上长子，因此靠《震》来授予，万事万物都从《震》所出，所以帝位也是《震》授予的。 
English: Wang Jian said: No one who presides over the artifact is comparable to the eldest son, so it is awarded by the "shock." Everything comes from the "shock," so the throne is also awarded by the "shock."

古文：俭又谘太子曰： 《孝经》 仲尼居，曾子侍 。
现代文：王俭又问太子说： 《孝经》上说 仲尼居，曾子侍 。
English: Wang Jian also asked the prince: "According to the Filial Piety Sutra, Zhong Ni Ju, Zeng Zi Zhi.

古文：夫孝理弘深，大贤方尽其致，何故不授颜子，而寄曾生？ 
现代文：孝道博大精深，衹有大圣贤才能懂透，是什么原因不授给颜子，却寄希望于曾子呢? 
English: Filial piety is profound and profound, and only a great sage can understand it. What is the reason for not bestowing it on children, but hoping for grandchildren?

古文：太子曰： 曾生虽德惭体二，而色养尽礼，去物尚近，接引非隔，弘宣规教，义在于此。 
现代文：太子说： 曾子虽然德操和行为都稍逊，但是神态奉养都尽到了礼，距离至高境界也近，诱导他也就没有阻碍，可以宣扬教化，真意在这裹。 
English: The prince said: Although Zeng Zi's moral conduct and behavior are a little inferior, his appearance and upbringing are all polite, and he is close to the highest level. There is no obstacle to inducing him, and he can promote enlightenment. This is the true meaning.

古文：俭曰： 接引非隔，弘宣虽易，去圣转远，其事弥轻。既云 人能弘道 ，将恐人轻道废。 
现代文：王俭说： 引导没有障碍，宣扬教化虽然容易，但离圣行变得远了，那奉行就更轻微了，既然说 人能弘道 ，恐怕要因人轻微而使孝道废了。 
English: Wang Jian said: There is no obstacle to guidance. Although it is easy to propagate and enlighten, it is far from the holy practice, and the practice is even lighter. Since it is said that people can propagate the way, I am afraid that the filial piety is invalid because of the lightness of people.

古文：太子曰： 理既有在，不容以人废言，而况中贤之才，弘上圣之教，宁有壅塞之嫌？ 
现代文：太子说： 道理既然存在，就不能因人废言，何况是中等贤才，弘扬先代圣人的教义，岂有壅塞的疑惑。 
English: The prince said, "Since there is truth, we cannot allow people to speak nonsense, let alone a medium-level sage who promotes the teachings of the saints of the past. Is there any doubt of prevarication?"

古文：临川王映谘曰： 孝为德本，常是所疑。德施万善，孝由天性，自然之理，岂因积习？ 
现代文：临川王萧映请教说： 孝是道德的根本，对此总有疑问，德施行于千万善行，孝道来自于天性，是自然而然的道理，怎么是因为积久的习惯? 
English: Linchuan Wang Xiao Ying asked for advice and said: Filial piety is the foundation of morality. There are always doubts about this. Virtue is practiced through thousands of good deeds. Filial piety comes from nature and is a natural principle. How can it be due to long-established habits?

古文：太子曰： 不因积习而至，所以可为德本。 
现代文：太子说： 正是由于不是因积习而具有，所以能为德的根本。 
English: The prince said: It is precisely because it is not due to the accumulation of habits, so it can be the foundation of virtue.

古文：映曰： 率由斯至，不俟明德，大孝荣亲，众德光备，以此而言，岂得为本？ 
现代文：萧映说： 都是由此而成，就不用等德行完美。大孝事亲，众德大备，以此说来，怎么是根本呢? 
English: Xiao Ying said, "It all comes from this, so there is no need to wait for the virtue to be perfect. Great filial piety, great virtue, so to speak, how is it fundamental?

古文：太子曰： 孝有深浅，德有小大，因其分而为本，何所稍疑？ 
现代文：太子说： 孝有深有浅，德有大有小，正是有分别而孝为根本，有什么可疑的呢? 
English: The prince said: Filial piety has its depth and its shallowness, virtue has its greatness and its smallness. Filial piety is based on distinction. What is suspicious about it?

古文：太子以长年临学，亦前代未有也。
现代文：太子常常视察学府，也是历朝未有的。
English: Princes often visit schools, which is unprecedented in history.

古文：明年，上将讯丹阳所领囚，及南北二百里内狱，诏曰： 狱讼之重，政化所先。
现代文：第二年，皇上将要审理丹阳府的囚犯，以及南北二百里之内的案件，下韶说： 狱讼是政治教化中首要的事。
English: In the following year, the emperor was to hear the cases of prisoners from Danyang Prefecture, as well as those within 200 miles to the north and south. He said, "Prison litigation is the most important thing in political education."

古文：太子立年作贰，宜时详览，此讯事委以亲决。 
现代文：太子已到而立之年，作为国之副君应时时详细审查，这次审查的事都让太子亲自处理。 
English: The crown prince has reached the year of his enthronement, and as the vice-regent of the country, he should always be scrutinized in detail. This time, let the crown prince deal with the matter of scrutiny in person.

古文：太子乃于玄圃园宣猷堂录三署囚，原宥各有差。
现代文：太子随即在玄圃园宣猷堂对三个地方的囚犯进行了甄别，罪犯的判决各有不同的减免。
English: The crown prince then screened the prisoners from the three places at the Xuanfu Yuan Xuanwu Hall. The sentences of the criminals had different reductions and exemptions.

古文：上晚年好游宴，尚书曹事亦分送太子省视。
现代文：皇上晚年喜欢游玩，尚书曹事务也分送太子管理。
English: In his later years, the emperor liked to travel, and the affairs of Shang Shucao were also managed by the crown prince.

古文：太子与竟陵王子良俱好释氏，立六疾馆以养穷民。
现代文：太子与竟陵王子良都喜欢佛教，设立六疾馆来收容穷人。
English: Both the prince and the prince of Jingling liked Buddhism and set up a six-disease hospital to accommodate the poor.

古文：风韵甚和而性颇奢丽，宫内殿堂，皆雕饰精绮，过于上宫。
现代文：太子风韵温和，而颇爱奢华。宫内殿堂，都是雕饰精美，超过皇帝的宫殿。
English: The prince has a gentle demeanor, but loves luxury. The palace halls are beautifully carved, surpassing the emperor's palace.

古文：开拓玄圃园，与台城北堑等，其中楼观塔宇，多聚奇石，妙极山水。
现代文：扩展玄圃园，与台城的北河差不多。裹面建有楼观塔宇，大量搜集奇石，造成极美的山水景致。
English: The expansion of the botanical garden is similar to that of the Beihe River in Taichung. There are buildings and towers built on the surface, and a large number of strange stones are collected, resulting in an extremely beautiful landscape.

古文：虑上宫望见，乃傍门列修竹，内施高鄣，造游墙数百间，施诸机巧：宜须鄣蔽，须臾成立；若应毁撤，应手迁徙。
现代文：为防止皇宫裹望见，就在门旁种上竹子，裹面建有高高的屏障，造游墙几百段，设置机关，在需要隐蔽的时候，一会儿就立起来了，如果要撤除时，随手就移开了。
English: In order to prevent the view of the palace from being obscured, bamboo was planted next to the door, a high barrier was built on the surface, hundreds of sections of the wall were built, and an organ was set up. When it was necessary to hide, it stood up in a moment, and if it was to be removed, it moved away.

古文：善制珍玩之物，织孔雀毛为裘，光彩金翠，过于雉头矣。
现代文：又善于制造珍玩物品，织孔雀毛为皮毛大衣，光彩金翠，都超过野雉头了。
English: They are also good at making rare toys, knitting peacock feathers into fur coats, and shining gold and emeralds, all of which are superior to wild buns.

古文：以晋明帝为太子时立西池，乃启世祖引前例，求东田起小苑，上许之。
现代文：因为晋明帝做太子时建了西池，于是便以此为先例奏请世祖，要求在束田建设园林，皇上批准。
English: Because Emperor Jinming built the West Pond when he was crown prince, he used this as a precedent to ask the ancestor to build a garden in Sokcho, which was approved by the emperor.

古文：永明中，二宫兵力全实，太子使宫中将吏更番役筑，宫城苑巷，制度之盛，观者倾京师。
现代文：永明年间，两宫卫兵力量充足，太子派宫中将士轮流修建，造就宫城苑巷，形势盛美，全京城的人都来观赏。
English: For a long time, the guards of the two palaces had sufficient strength, and the princes sent the palace generals to take turns to build, creating the palace gardens and lanes. The situation was magnificent, and people from all over Beijing came to watch.

古文：上性虽严，多布耳目，太子所为，无敢启者。
现代文：皇上性格严厉，耳目也多，但太子的行为没有人敢报告。
English: The Emperor has a stern personality and many ears and eyes, but no one dares to report the actions of the Crown Prince.

古文：后上幸豫章王宅，还过太子东田，见其弥亘华远，庄丽极目，于是大怒，收监作主帅；太子惧，皆藏匿之，由是见责。
现代文：后来皇上驾幸豫章王府，归来时经过太子的束田，看到宫墙高速华丽，壮美悦目，对此大发雷霆，逮捕主持建造的人，太子惶恐，把他们藏起来，因此被责斥。
English: Later, the emperor drove to the palace of Prince Xuanzang, and when he returned, he passed through the prince's field, saw the palace wall with high speed and gorgeous, magnificent and pleasing to the eye, and was furious about it. He arrested the people who presided over the construction. The prince was frightened and hid them, so he was reprimanded.

古文：太子素多疾，体又过壮，常在宫内，简于遨游。
现代文：太子向来多病，身体又太胖，常常在宫内，很少外出游览。
English: The prince has always been sickly and overweight. He is often in the palace and rarely goes out for excursions.

古文：玩弄羽仪，多所僭疑，虽咫尺宫禁，而上终不知。
现代文：玩弄些羽饰仪仗等，很多处都超过限制，尽管皇宫近在咫尺，但皇上始终不知道。
English: Playing around with some feather ornaments, many places are over the limit, although the palace is close at hand, but the emperor still does not know.

古文：十年，豫章王嶷薨，太子见上友于既至，造碑文奏之，未及镌勒。
现代文：十年，豫章王萧嶷去世，太子知道皇上兄弟感情极好，就写篇碑文上奏，没有镌刻。
English: Ten years later, Yuanzhang Wang Xiaohui passed away. The prince knew that the emperor and his brother had a very good relationship, so he wrote an epitaph and played it, but it was not engraved.

古文：十一年春正月，太子有疾，上自临视，有忧色。
现代文：十一年春正月，太子有病，皇上亲自来看望，忧愁满面。
English: In the first month of the spring of the eleventh year, the prince was ill, and the emperor himself came to visit, his face full of sorrow.

古文：疾笃，上表曰： 臣地属元良，业微三善，光道树风，于焉盖阙，晨宵忷惧，有若临渊。
现代文：病重，上表说： 我身为太子，事业无成，光大道德树立好风气，这方面也很不足，夜惶恐，像面临着深渊似的。
English: He was seriously ill, and the above table said: As a prince, I have no achievements in my career, and I am not able to establish a good moral atmosphere. I am also deficient in this aspect, and I am terrified at night, as if I were facing the abyss.

古文：摄生舛和，构离疴疾，大渐惟几，雇阴待谢。
现代文：平常养生不得法，患上顽症，病情已沉重，离死不远，守重器难以长久。
English: The usual health regimen is out of the question, he suffers from an intractable disease, his condition is already serious, he is not far from death, and the weight-saving device cannot last long.

古文：守器难永，视膳长违，仰恋慈颜，内怀感哽。
现代文：我很久未敬侍父皇，依恋慈爱的容颜，我内心感伤。
English: It's been a long time since I've respected my father-in-law, I'm attached to his loving face, and my heart is sad.

古文：窃惟死生定分，理不足悲，伏愿割无已之悼，损既往之伤，宝卫圣躬，同休七百，臣虽没九泉，无所遗恨。 
现代文：我想死生是命定的，照理不值得悲伤，希望父皇抛弃无穷的思念，减少逝去的悲伤，珍重身体，同享国运，我即使在九泉之下，也无所遣憾。 
English: I think that life and death are predestined, and by rights, they do not deserve sadness. I hope that my father, the emperor, will abandon his boundless thoughts, reduce the sadness of his passing, cherish his body, and share the national fortune. Even if I am under the nine springs, I will have no regrets.

古文：时年三十六。
现代文：死于束宫，时年三十六岁。
English: He was thirty-six years old.

古文：太子年始过立，久在储宫，得参政事；内外百司，咸谓旦暮继体。及薨，朝野惊惋焉。
现代文：太子才过而立之年，却久在束宫，参与政事，内外百官，都以为早晚必将即位，等到知道太子死讯，朝野都惊骇惋惜。
English: The crown prince was only a year old, but he had been at Sokgong for a long time, participating in political affairs. Hundreds of officials at home and abroad thought that he would ascend to the throne sooner or later. When they learned of the death of the crown prince, the court and the country were shocked and saddened.

古文：上幸东宫，临哭尽哀，诏敛以衮冕之服，谥曰文惠，葬崇安陵。
现代文：皇上到束宫哭泣尽哀，韶命用衮冕服饰收殓，谧号为文惠，葬于崇安陵。
English: The emperor went to Sokgong to weep and mourn, and died wearing a crown. His posthumous name was Wen Hui, and he was buried in Chong'an Mausoleum.

古文：世祖履行东宫，见太子服玩过制，大怒，敕有司随事毁除，以东田殿堂为崇虚馆。
现代文：世祖步游东宫，看到太子的服饰用具玩好之物超过礼制，大怒，命官员随即毁除，把塞旦的殿堂作为塞尘垄。
English: The ancestor walked around the East Palace, saw that the prince's favorite items of clothing and equipment exceeded the etiquette, was furious, ordered officials to immediately destroy them, and used the palace of Sedan as a dust ridge.

古文：郁林立，追尊为文帝，庙称世宗。
现代文：郁叠即位，追尊为塞童，庙号世塞。
English: Yu Zhe ascended to the throne, and was given the posthumous name of Jie Tong, and the temple name of Shisai.

古文：初，太子内怀恶明帝，密谓竟陵王子良曰： 我意色中殊不悦此人，当由其福德薄所致。 
现代文：当初太子心裹不喜欢明帝，暗地裹对竟陵王子良说： 我心裹不喜欢这个人，该是因为他福德薄造成的。 
English: At first, the prince did not like Emperor Ming at all, and he secretly said to Emperor Jingling: I do not like this man at all, it must be because he is not good at his job.

古文：子良便苦救解。
现代文：子良就苦苦劝解。
English: Zorya went to great lengths to persuade him.

古文：后明帝立，果大相诛害。
现代文：后来明帝即位，果然大肆诛杀。
English: Later, when Emperor Ming ascended to the throne, they fought and killed each other.

古文：史臣曰：上古之世，父不哭子。寿夭悠悠，尚嗟恒事。
现代文：史臣曰：远古时代，父亲不哭儿子，长寿的短命的很多，叹为常事。
English: Shichen said: In ancient times, fathers did not cry for their sons, and there were many short-lived longevity, which was a common occurrence.

古文：况夫正体东储，方树年德；重基累叶，载茂皇家；守器之君，已知耕稼，虽温文具美，交弘盛迹，武运将终，先期夙殒，传之幼少，以速颠危。推此而论，亦有冥数矣。
现代文：况且位居东宫，正树立德望，培土长叶，皇家茂盛。守国的君王，已知耕种，虽然温良文雅，交往广泛影响大，在武帝之运将终时，却提前失去太子，传国给幼小的孩子，加速了国家的颠覆，按此推论，也是有定数的了。
English: Moreover, he is in the East Palace, is building up moral prestige, cultivating the soil, growing leaves, and the royal prosperity. The monarch who protects the country, is known to be cultivated, although he is gentle and elegant, and has a wide range of influence. At the end of Emperor Wu's career, he lost his prince ahead of time, passed the country to his young children, and accelerated the subversion of the country. According to this inference, there is also a fixed number.

古文：赞曰：二象垂则，三星丽天。
现代文：赞曰：天地垂留法则，曰月星高悬天空。
English: Praise said: the law of the heavens and the earth hanging down, said the moon and stars hanging high in the sky.

古文：树嫡惟长，义匪求贤。
现代文：立太子要立长子，按义理不求贤才。
English: The crown prince should be the eldest son, according to the principle of not seeking wisdom.

古文：方为守器，植命不延。
现代文：正要成为国君，却叹命不久长。
English: He was about to become the country's ruler, but his life was cut short.

