古文：张仪为秦连横齐王曰： 天下强国无过齐者，大臣父兄殷众富乐，无过齐者。
现代文：张仪为了秦国的连横策略，到齐国游说齐宣王说： 天下的强国没有能超过齐国的，大臣和宗亲都殷实众多富足安乐，这没有哪个国家能超过齐国的。
English: Zhang Yi went to Qi to lobby Qi Xuan Wang for the succession strategy of Qin. She said, "There is no powerful country in the world that can surpass Qi, and there are many rich and prosperous ministers and relatives. No country can surpass Qi."

古文：然而为大王计者，皆为一时说而不顾万世之利。
现代文：然而为大王出谋划策的人，都在谈论眼前一时的安定，却不顾齐国长远的利益。
English: However, the people who advise the king are all talking about the immediate stability, but they do not care about the long-term interests of Qi.

古文：从人说大王者，必谓齐西有强赵，南有韩、魏，负海之国也，地广人众，兵强士勇，虽有百秦，将无奈我何!
现代文：那些主张合纵而游说大王的人，必定说齐国是一个西面有强大的赵国，南面有韩国和魏国，东面背靠大海的国家，土地辽阔，百姓众多，兵士勇猛善战，即使有一百个秦国，也不能奈何得了齐国。
English: Those who advocate merging the vertical and horizontal and lobbying the great king must say that Qi is a country with a strong Zhao in the west, Korea and Wei in the south, and a country with its back to the sea in the east. The land is vast, the people are numerous, and the soldiers are brave and good at fighting. Even if there are a hundred Qin countries, they can't help but get Qi.

古文：大王览其说，而不察其至实。
现代文：大王只是看到了他们所说的那些，却没有看到事情的实质所在。
English: The great king only saw what they said, but did not see the essence of the matter.

古文： 夫从人朋党比周，莫不以从为可。
现代文： 主张合纵的人都互相结党，没有认为合纵的策略不好的。
English: Those who advocate the merger do not think that the merger is feasible because they want to form a party and exclude dissenters.

古文：臣闻之，齐与鲁三战而鲁三胜，国已危，亡随其后，虽有胜名而有亡之实，是何故也?
现代文：据臣所知：齐鲁交战三次，鲁国三战三胜，可是鲁国却因胜而衰，最后竟因此而亡国。徒有战胜的虚名，实际上却陷于危亡的命运，这是什么道理呢？
English: According to the minister's knowledge, Qi and Lu fought three times, and Lu won three victories in three battles. However, Lu was defeated by the victory, and eventually lost the country. What is the reason for the false name of victory, but actually fell into the fate of peril?

古文：齐大而鲁小。
现代文：因为齐国大而鲁国小。
English: Because Qi is big and Lu is small.

古文：今赵之与秦也，犹齐之于鲁也。
现代文：现在赵国跟秦国相比，就如同齐国跟鲁国。
English: Now compared to Qin, Zhao is like Qi and Lu.

古文：秦、赵战于河漳之上，再战而再胜秦；战於番吾之下，再战而再胜秦。
现代文：秦、赵两次战于漳水之上，又两次在番吾山交战，都是赵国打败了秦军。
English: Qin and Zhao twice fought over Surabaya, and twice fought in Pangu Mountain. Zhao defeated the Qin army.

古文：四战之后，赵亡卒数十万，邯郸仅存。
现代文：但四次战争以后，赵国损失几十万大军，仅仅剩下一个首都邯郸。
English: However, after four wars, Zhao lost hundreds of thousands of troops, and only one capital remained.

古文：虽有胜秦之名，而国破矣!是何故也?
现代文：虽然有战胜秦国的虚名，可是赵国却因此而衰弱，这是什么缘故呢？
English: Although there is a false reputation of defeating Qin, Zhao was weakened as a result. Why is this?

古文：秦强而赵弱也。
现代文：还是秦国强大而赵国弱小啊。
English: Or Qin is strong and Zhao is weak.

古文：今秦、楚嫁子取妇，为昆弟之国；韩献宜阳，魏效河外，赵入朝黾池，割河间以事秦。
现代文：如今秦、楚互通婚姻，两国结为兄弟之邦；韩国献宜阳给秦国，魏国献河外给秦国，而赵国更到秦邑渑池给秦国朝贡，并且割让河间地方给秦，纷纷成为秦的附庸国。
English: Nowadays, Qin and Chu have intermarried, and the two countries have formed a brotherly state; South Korea offered Yiyang to Qin, Wei offered Hebei to Qin, and Zhao even went to Qin's hometown of Dianchi to pay tribute to Qin, and ceded the Hebei region to Qin, becoming a vassal state of Qin.

古文：国一日被攻，虽欲事秦，不可得也。是故愿大王熟计之。 
现代文：假如大王不臣事秦国，秦国就会驱使韩、魏攻打齐国南部，然后还将全部征调赵国之兵渡过河关，长驱直入向博关进攻，这样即使再想臣事秦国已来不及了，因此希望大王慎重考虑！ 
English: If the great king does not submit to the Qin state, the Qin state will drive Han and Wei to attack the south of Qi, and then all the soldiers of the Zhao state will be transferred across the river and driven straight into the attack on Bo Guan, so even if you want to submit to the Qin state, it is too late, so I hope the great king will consider carefully!

古文：齐王曰： 齐僻陋隐居，托于东海之上，未尝闻社稷之长利。
现代文：齐宣王说： 齐国地处边远偏僻的地方，而且东临大海，还没有考虑过国家的长远利益。
English: Qi Xuanwang said: Qi is located in a remote and isolated place, and it faces the sea to the east. The long-term interests of the country have not been considered.

古文：今大客幸而教之，请奉社稷以事秦。 
现代文：今天有幸得到贵客的赐教，寡人愿意奉国家来侍奉秦国。 
English: Today, I have the honor to be taught by a distinguished guest. Few people are willing to serve the Qin State.

古文：献鱼盐之地三百于秦也。
现代文：于是齐国割让出产鱼盐的土地方圆三百里给秦国。
English: As a result, the State of Qi ceded about three hundred li of land producing fish salt to the State of Qin.

