古文：欧阳文忠常爱林逋诗 草泥行郭索，云木叫钩辀 之句，文忠以谓语新而属对新切。钩辀，鹧鸪声也，李群玉诗云： 方穿诘曲崎岖路，又听钩辀格磔声。 
现代文：欧阳文忠公曾特别喜欢林逋的 草泥行郭索，云木叫钩辀 两句诗，他以为这两句用语新颖而且对仗亲和贴切。 钩辀 是形容鹧鸪的鸣叫声，李群玉有诗说： 方穿诘曲崎岖路，又听钩辀格磔声。 
English: Ouyang Wenzhong was particularly fond of two poems by Lin Qi: "Grass and mud walk on the same path," and "Clouds and trees call out to each other," which he thought were both novel and apt for the war. "Clouds call out to each other" is a description of the chirping of crickets. Li Qunyu once said in a poem: "The road is rugged and winding, and I hear crickets chirping."

古文：郭索，蟹行貌也。扬雄《太玄》曰： 蟹之郭索，用心躁也。 
现代文： 郭索 是形容螃蟹爬行的样子，扬雄的《太玄经》说： 蟹之郭索，用心躁也。 
English: Guo Sok is a way of describing the way crabs crawl. Yang Xiong's "Tao Xuan Jing" says: Guo Sok of crabs is also cautious.

古文：韩退之集中《罗池神碑铭》有 春与猿吟兮秋与鹤飞 ，今验石刻，乃 春与猿吟兮秋鹤与飞。 
现代文：韩愈文集里的《罗池神碑铭》中，有 春与猿吟兮秋与鹤飞 一句，现在跟石刻核对，原来应该是 春与猿吟兮秋鹤与飞 。
English: In Han Yu's collection of poems, "The Inscription on the Monument to the God of Luo Lake," there is a line about spring and the chirping of monkeys, and autumn and the flying of cranes. Now I have checked with the stone carvings, and it should have been about spring and the chirping of monkeys, and autumn and the flying of cranes.

古文：古人多用此格，如《楚词》： 吉日兮辰良 ，又 蕙肴蒸兮兰藉，奠桂酒兮椒浆。 
现代文：古人经常使用这种格式，如《楚辞》里的 吉日兮辰良 ，又如 蕙肴蒸兮兰藉，奠桂酒兮椒浆 。
English: The ancients often used this format, such as the auspicious day and the auspicious day in the "Chuji," as well as the steamed steamed steamed steamed steamed steamed steamed steamed steamed steamed steamed steamed steamed steamed steamed steamed steamed steamed steamed steamed steamed steamed steamed steamed steamed steamed steamed steamed steamed steamed steamed steamed steamed steamed steamed steamed steamed steamed steamed steamed steamed steamed steamed steamed steamed steamed steamed steamed steamed steamed steamed steamed steamed steamed steamed steamed steamed steamed steamed

古文：盖欲相错成文，则语势矫健耳。
现代文：大概是想要交错行文，以求文章气势矫健。
English: It's probably because they want to interleave the sentences to make the article more powerful.

古文：杜子美诗： 红飰啄余鹦鹉粒，碧梧栖老凤凰枝。 此亦语反而意全。
现代文：杜甫诗里有 红稻啄余鹦鹉粒，碧梧栖老凤凰枝 的句子，也是语序倒置而语意完整。
English: In Du Fu's poem, there are sentences such as "Red rice sprinkled with parrot seeds" and "Old phoenix twigs" which are also inverted and complete in meaning.

古文：韩退之《雪诗》： 舞镜鸾窥沼，行天马度桥。 亦效此体，然稍牵强，不若前人之语浑成也。
现代文：韩愈《雪诗》里的 舞镜鸾窥沼，行天马度桥 ，也是效法这种格式，不过略微有点牵强，不如前人那些语句来得浑然天成。
English: Han Yu's "Snow Poem" in "Dancing Mirror, Peeping Pond, Walking Sky, Horse-Drawn Bridge" also follows this format, but it is a little bit far-fetched, not as natural as those sentences of the predecessors.

古文：诗人以诗主人物，矿虽小诗，莫不埏蹂极工而后已。所谓旬锻月炼者，信非虚言。
现代文：唐人以诗歌评价作者，所以作诗者虽是小诗，莫不反复锤炼以至极为工致才肯罢休，所谓 旬锻月炼 ，诚然不是虚说。
English: The Chinese use poetry to evaluate authors, so although a poet is a minor poet, he must be repeatedly tempered until he is willing to give up. The so-called "monthly tempering" is certainly not a lie.

古文：小说崔护《题城南诗》，其始曰： 去年今日此门中，人面桃花相映红。
现代文：有关崔护《题城南诗》的小说记载，其诗最初是： 去年今日此门中，人面桃花相映红。
English: According to the records of Cui You's novel "Theme of Southern Poetry," his poem was originally: Last year, today, in this gate, people's faces were red with peach blossoms.

古文：人面不知何处去，桃花依旧笑春风。 
现代文：人面不知何处去，桃花依旧笑春风。 
English: People don't know where to go, the peach blossoms are still smiling in the spring breeze.

古文：后以其意未全，语未工，改第三句曰： 人面只今何处在。 
现代文：后以诗意未全，用语未工，改第三句为 人面只今何处在 。
English: The third sentence should be changed to "Where is the human face now?"

古文：至今传此两本，唯《本事诗》作 只今何处在。 
现代文：至今所传这两种文本，只有《本事诗》作 只今何处在 。
English: Of the two texts that have been handed down to this day, only the "Genuine Poem" by Jigen wo wo wo wo is extant.

古文：唐人工诗，大率多如此，虽有两 今 字，不恤也，取语意为主耳，后人以其有两 今 字，只多行前篇。
现代文：唐人作诗追求精工，大率多如此例。所改虽有两个 今 字，作者也不顾忌，但取语意的完善为主。后人以其有两个 今 字，多只采用前篇。
English: Although there are two kanji in the revised text, the author did not hesitate to improve the meaning of the text. Later generations took advantage of the fact that there are two kanji, and mostly used only the first part.

古文：唐人作富贵诗，多纪其奉养器服之盛，乃贫眼所惊耳，如贯休《富贵曲》云： 刻成筝柱雁相挨。 
现代文：唐代人写富贵诗，大多记述他们用于侍奉和赡养的器物及衣服的丰盛，那只不过是穷人看来感到惊奇的东西罢了。例如贯休的《富贵诗》里说： 刻成筝柱雁相挨。 
English: The Tang Dynasty people wrote rich and noble poems, mostly describing the abundance of their utensils and clothes for serving and sustaining, which was just something that the poor seemed to be surprised by. For example, in the uninterrupted "Rich and Noble Poem," it says: Carved into a kite pillar, geese stand next to each other.

古文：此下里鬻弹者皆有之，何足道哉！又韦楚老《蚊诗》云： 十幅红绡围夜玉。 
现代文：这样的筝就连在乡间卖唱的艺人都有，哪里值得夸耀！另外韦楚老的《蚊诗》里说： 十幅红绡围夜玉。 
English: Such a kite is even owned by an artist who sings in the countryside, which is something to be proud of! In addition, Wei Chu's old "Mosquito Poem" says: Ten red kites surround a nightingale.

古文：十幅红绡为帐，方不及四五尺，不知如何伸脚？
现代文：用十幅红绡做成的帐子，还不到四五尺见方，不知道人怎么能伸直腿？
English: A curtain made of ten red satin sheets is less than four or five feet square. I don't know how people can straighten their legs.

古文：此所谓不曾近富儿家。
现代文：这些都是所谓 从来没有接触过富贵人家的人 啊！
English: These are the so-called people who have never come into contact with the rich and famous!

古文：王圣美治字学，演其义以为右文。
现代文：王圣美研究文字学，推演文字的义类而提出了 右文 说。
English: Wang Shengmei studied philology and deduced the semantics of characters and proposed the right-hand sentence.

古文：古之字书，皆从左文。
现代文：古代的字书，都是从文字的左偏旁归类的。
English: Ancient calligraphy books are classified from the left side of the characters.

古文：凡字，其类在左，其义在右。
现代文：大凡一个字的构成，表示类别的部分在左边，表示意义的部分在右边。
English: In the composition of an ordinary word, the part representing the category is on the left, and the part representing the meaning is on the right.

古文：如木类，其左皆从木。
现代文：如表示树木这一类别的字，其左边都从 木 。
English: For example, the left-hand side of the word for the category of trees starts with 木.

古文：所谓右文者，如戋，小也，水之小者曰浅，金之小者曰钱，歹而小者曰残，贝之小者曰贱。
现代文：所谓 右文 ，如 戋 字，意义为小，所以水之小者写作 浅 ，金之小者写作 钱 ，歹之小者写作 残 ，贝之小者写作 贱 。
English: So-called right-hand sentences, such as, have a small meaning, so a person with a small amount of water would write 浅, a person with a small amount of gold would write 钱, a person with a small amount of 歹 would write 残, and a person with a small amount of 贝 would write 贱.

古文：如此之类，皆以戋为义也。
现代文：诸如此类，都以右边的 戋 为字的意义。
English: And so on, all with the right  as the meaning of the word.

古文：王圣美为县令时，尚未知名，谒一达官，值其方与客谈《孟子》，殊不顾圣美。
现代文：王圣美做县令的时候，还没有什么名气，去拜见一位大官，碰到大官正在跟客人谈论《孟子》，一点也不顾及来访的王圣美。
English: When Wang Shengmei was a county magistrate, she did not have any fame. When she went to visit a high-ranking official, she found that the official was talking about "Mencius" with a guest, and did not pay any attention to the visiting Wang Shengmei.

古文：圣美窃哂其所论。
现代文：王圣美暗笑他们所谈论的内容。
English: Wang Shengmei chuckled at what they were talking about.

古文：久之，忽顾圣美曰： 尝读《孟子》否？ 
现代文：过了很长时间，那位大官突然回头对王圣美说： 曾经读过《孟子》吗？ 
English: After a long time, the official suddenly turned to Wang Shengmei and said, "Have you ever read Mencius?"

古文：圣美对曰： 本生爱之，但都不晓其义。 
现代文：王圣美回答说： 平生就喜欢《孟子》，只是一点儿都不懂它的意思。 
English: Wang Shengmei replied: I have always liked "Mencius," but I do not understand its meaning at all.

古文：主人问： 不晓何义？ 
现代文：作为主人的大官问道： 不懂什么意思呀？ 
English: The official, who was the host, asked, "What do you mean, you don't understand?"

古文：圣美曰： 从头不晓。 
现代文：王圣美说： 从开头起就不懂。 
English: Wang Shengmei said, "I didn't understand it from the beginning.

古文：主人曰： 如何从头不晓？
现代文：大官说： 怎么个从开头起就不懂呢？
English: The official said, "How can you not understand something from the beginning?

古文：试言之。 
现代文：试着说说看。 
English: Try to talk it out.

古文：圣美曰：  孟子见梁惠王 ，已不晓此语。 
现代文：王圣美说：  孟子见梁惠王 ，就已经不懂了。 
English: Wang Shengmei said: Mencius did not understand Liang Hui Wang when he saw him.

古文：达官深讶之，曰： 此有何奥义？ 
现代文：大官对他的说法感到很吃惊，说： 这一句有什么深奥难懂的呢？ 
English: The dignitary was very surprised by his statement and said, "What is so profound and difficult to understand about this sentence?

古文：圣美曰： 既云孟子不见诸侯，因何见梁惠王？ 
现代文：王圣美说： 既然说孟子不见诸侯，为什么去见梁惠王呢？ 
English: Wang Shengmei said, "Since it is said that Mencius does not see princes, why did he go to see King Liang Hui?

古文：其人愕然无对。
现代文：那位大官大为诧异以至无言以对。
English: The official was so surprised that he was speechless.

古文：往歳士人多尚对偶为文。穆修、张景辈始为平文，当时谓之古文。
现代文：往年士人大都崇尚对偶的骈体文，穆修、张景等人始提倡散文，当时称之为 古文 。
English: In previous years, most of the scholars advocated the paired 體文, and Mu Xiu, Zhang Jing and others began to advocate prose, which was then called ancient literature.

古文：穆、张尝同造朝，待旦于东华门外，方论文次，适见有奔马践死一犬，二人各记其事，以较工拙。
现代文：穆、张曾一同参加朝会，在东华门外等待天亮。正讨论古文章法，恰好看到有一匹奔马踏死了一条犬，二人于是相约各描述其事，以比较各自的工拙。
English: Mu and Zhang once attended the imperial court meeting together, waiting for dawn outside the Donghua Gate. While discussing ancient writing methods, they happened to see a running horse trample a dog to death, and the two agreed to describe the matter to compare their respective work.

古文：穆修曰： 马逸，有黄犬遇蹄而毙。 
现代文：穆修说： 马逸，有黄犬遇蹄而毙。 
English: Mu Xiu said: Ma Yat, there is a yellow dog killed by a hoof.

古文：张景曰： 有犬死奔马之下。 
现代文：张景说： 有犬死奔马之下。 
English: Zhang Jing said, "Some dogs ran under the horse and died.

古文：时文体新变，二人之语皆拙涩。当时已谓之工，传之至今。
现代文：其时文体刚开始发生变化，二人之语都朴拙硬涩，而当时已认为精工，故流传至今。
English: At that time, the style was just beginning to change, and the language of the two was simple and stiff, but at that time it was already considered a fine work, so it has been passed down to this day.

古文：古人诗有 风定花犹落 之句，以谓无人能对。
现代文：古人诗有 风定花犹落 之句，以为无人能对出下联。
English: In ancient poetry, there is a saying, "The wind is steady, the flowers are withering," which implies that no one can tell the difference between up and down.

古文：王荆公以对 鸟鸣山更幽 。 鸟鸣山更幽 本宋王籍诗，元对 蝉噪林逾静，鸟鸣山更幽 ，上下句只是一意； 风定花犹落，鸟鸣山更幽 则上句乃静中有动，下句动中有静。
现代文：王荆公以 鸟鸣山更幽 为对。 鸟鸣山更幽 本为刘宋王籍的诗句，原诗是以 蝉噪林逾静，鸟鸣山更幽 为对的，上下句只是一个意思；荆公以 风定花犹落，鸟鸣山更幽 为对，则上句是静中有动，下句是动中有静。
English: Wang Jing Gong took "Birdsong Mountain More Silent" as the pair. "Birdsong Mountain More Silent" was originally a poem of the Liu Song royal family, the original poem was based on "Cicadas are noisier than silence," "Birdsong Mountain More Silent" as the pair, the next sentence is just a meaning; Jing Gong took "Winds are steady, flowers are falling slowly," and "Birdsong Mountain More Silent" as the pair, the first sentence is quiet and moving, the next sentence is quiet and moving.

古文：荆公始为集句诗，多者至百韵，皆集合前人之句，语意对偶，往往亲切，过于本诗。
现代文：荆公先前为集句诗，多的时候达上百首，都集合前人的诗句而成，语意和对偶，往往比原诗更为融洽和贴切。
English: Jing Gong was previously a collection of poems, often reaching hundreds of poems, all of which were made up of the poems of predecessors. The semantic meaning and the couplet are often more harmonious and appropriate than the original poem.

古文：后人稍稍有效而为者。
现代文：后人渐渐有仿效而作这种集句诗的。
English: Later generations have gradually imitated and made this kind of anthology.

古文：毗陵郡士人家有一女，姓李氏，方年十六歳，颇能诗，甚有佳句，吴人多得之。
现代文：毗陵郡某士人家有个女儿，姓李，年龄刚十六岁，颇能写诗，很有些佳句，吴人往往能够得到。
English: A certain family in Viling County has a daughter, surnamed Li, who is just 16 years old. She is quite capable of writing poetry, and has some good sentences, which Wu people are often able to obtain.

古文：有《拾得破钱诗》云： 半轮残月掩尘埃，依稀犹有开元字。
现代文：她有《拾得破钱诗》说： 半轮残月掩尘埃，依稀犹有开元字。
English: She said in "The Poem of Picking Up Lost Money": "Half of the remaining moon hides the dust, and there is still a faint trace of the original word."

古文：想得清光未破时，买尽人间不平事。 
现代文：想得清光未破时，买尽人间不平事。 
English: When you think you're invincible, you buy up all the world's troubles.

古文：又有《弹琴诗》云： 昔年刚笑卓文君，岂信丝桐解误身。
现代文：又有《弹琴诗》说： 昔年刚笑卓文君，岂信丝桐解误身。
English: There is also a "Percussion Poem" that says: "In the past, when Zhuo Wenjun smiled, would you believe that it was a mistake?

古文：今日未弹心已乱，此心元自不由人。 
现代文：今日未弹心已乱，此心元自不由人。 
English: Today, the unshakable spirit has been shattered, and this spirit cannot be changed.

古文：虽有情致，乃非女子所宜也。
现代文：这类诗虽有情致，却不是女子适宜作的。
English: Although this kind of poem is sentimental, it is not suitable for a woman to write.

