古文：郑綮，字蕴武。
现代文：郑綮的字叫蕴武。
English: Zheng Yi's character is called "Kunwu."

古文：及进士第，历监察御史，擢累左司郎中。
现代文：他考中了进士，任过监察御史，多次升官后任左司郎中。
English: He passed the entrance examination, served as inspector of history, and was promoted several times before serving as a junior secretary.

古文：因窭甚，丐补庐州刺史。
现代文：因家里很穷，请求任命为庐州刺史。
English: Because his family was very poor, he asked to be appointed as the chief historian of Zhangzhou.

古文：黄巢掠淮南，綮移檄请无犯州境，巢笑，为敛兵，州独完。
现代文：黄巢掳掠淮南，他发文请求不要侵犯州界，黄巢笑了，为这收了兵，庐州单单保全了。
English: Huang Chao captured Huainan, he sent a request not to violate the state border, Huang Chao smiled, for this he gathered soldiers, and Zhangzhou alone was preserved.

古文：僖宗嘉之，赐绯鱼。
现代文：唐僖宗嘉奖他，赐给他绯官服银鱼袋。
English: Tang Yanzong praised him and gave him an eunuch uniform and a silver fish bag.

古文：岁满去，赢钱千缗藏州库。
现代文：他任职期满离职，将剩余的一千贯钱存在庐州仓库里。
English: At the end of his term of office, he left the company and deposited the remaining 1,000 yuan in a warehouse in Zhangzhou.

古文：后它盗至，终不犯郑使君钱。及杨行密为刺史，送都还綮。
现代文：后来别的盗贼来了，都不动他的钱；到杨行密任庐州刺史，送到京城还给了他。
English: Later, other thieves came, but they didn't touch his money. Yang Xingmi was sent to Zhangzhou to collect the money, and it was returned to him in Beijing.

古文：王徽为御史大夫，以兵部郎中表知杂事，迁给事中。
现代文：王徽任御史大夫，上表推荐他任兵部郎中、知杂事，后升任给事中。
English: Wang Hui was appointed as the chief historian, and the above table recommended that he be appointed as the junior secretary of the military department and the secretary of miscellaneous affairs, and later he was promoted to the middle secretary.

古文：杜弘徽任中书舍人，綮以其兄让能辅政，不宜处禁要，上还制书，不报，辄移病去。
现代文：杜弘徽被任命为中书舍人，郑綮因他哥哥杜让能任宰相，不应在宫禁中任要职，上奏退回任命诏书，皇帝不答复，他就称病离职了。
English: Du Honghui was appointed as the scribe of China, and Zheng Qi, because his brother Du Jiang could be appointed as the prime minister, should not hold an important position in the palace ban. The imperial rescript of appointment was returned to the emperor. When the emperor did not reply, he claimed to be ill and left the post.

古文：召为右散骑常侍，往往条摘失政，众讠雚传之，宰相怒，改国子祭酒，议者不直，复还常侍。
现代文：后又被召去任右散骑常侍，常常上奏指责不当的政令，大家都高兴地传诵，宰相发怒了，调他任国子祭酒，有人议论不恰当，又复任常侍官。
English: Later, he was called to serve as a regular attendant of the Right Zangjia, and he often recited inappropriate decrees, and everyone was happy to recite them. The prime minister was angry and transferred him to serve as the son of the country's sacrificial wine. Some people said that it was inappropriate, and he was reinstated as a regular attendant.

古文：大顺后，王政微，綮每以诗谣托讽，中人有诵之天子前者。
现代文：大顺年以后，皇帝威望下降，他常写诗歌暗含劝告，近侍有人在皇帝面前读了这些诗。
English: After the Chinese New Year, the emperor's prestige declined. He often wrote poems with implicit advice, and some close attendants read these poems in front of the emperor.

古文：昭宗意其有所蕴未尽，因有司上班簿，遂署其侧曰： 可礼部侍郎、同中书门下平章事。 
现代文：唐昭宗认为他有抱负没能施展，趁有关部门呈上文书时，就在旁边写道 ：可任命为礼部侍郎、同中书门下平章事。 
English: Tang Zhaozong thought that he had failed to fulfill his ambition, and when he took advantage of the relevant departments to submit a document, he wrote on the side: "Can be appointed as a waiter of the ceremonial department, and a member of the book department of the same department."

古文：綮本善诗，其语多俳谐，故使落调，世共号 郑五歇后体 。
现代文：郑綮原本善于写诗，诗句多滑稽诙谐，故意不把话说完，当时人都称作 郑老五歇后体 。
English: Originally, Zheng Yao was good at writing poems. His poems were often funny and witty, and he deliberately did not finish what he was saying. At that time, people called him "Zheng Lao Wu Xie Hou Ti."

古文：至是，省史走其家上谒，綮笑曰； 诸君误矣，人皆不识字，宰相亦不及我。 
现代文：这时，中书省官员跑到他家去拜见，他笑着说： 诸位弄错了，人们都不认得字，宰相也轮不上我。 
English: At this time, officials from the Ministry of Education and Culture came to visit him at his home. He smiled and said, "You've made a mistake. People don't recognize the characters, and it's not my turn to be prime minister."

古文：史言不妄。
现代文：官员们说没弄错。
English: Officials said there was no mistake.

古文：俄闻制诏下，叹曰： 万一然，笑杀天下人！ 
现代文：后听说任命诏书已颁下，他叹气说： 如果真是这样，让全国人都笑死了！ 
English: After hearing that the imperial rescript of appointment had been issued, he sighed and said: If this is really the case, the whole country will die of laughter!

古文：既视事，宗戚诣庆，搔首曰： 歇后郑五作宰相，事可知矣。 
现代文：他上任后，亲戚们来庆贺，他搔着头说： 歇后体郑老五当了宰相，政事可想而知。 
English: After he took office, his relatives came to congratulate him. He shook his head and said, "After a long absence, Zheng Laowu became prime minister. You can imagine the political situation.

古文：兄储，历天雄节度使，终兵部尚书。
现代文：他自认为不能使人信服，在任职才三个月，就称病请求退休，被任命为太子少保后退了休，此后去世了。
English: He did not think he could convince people. After only three months in office, he claimed to be ill and asked to retire. He retired after being appointed Crown Prince Junior Protector, and then passed away.

古文：韩偓，字致光，京兆万年人。
现代文：韩偓的字叫致光，京兆府万年县人。
English: Han Han's character is called Zhiguang, and he was born and raised in Jinghao County.

古文：擢进士第，佐河中幕府。
现代文：他考中了进士后，任河中府幕僚。
English: After he passed the entrance examination, he served as a staff member of the Central Government of Hebei Province.

古文：召拜左拾遗，以疾解。
现代文：后被召进朝廷任命为左拾遗，因为生病免职了。
English: Later, he was summoned to the imperial court and appointed as Zuo Zuo, but was relieved of his duties due to illness.

古文：后迁累左谏议大夫。
现代文：多次升官后任左谏议大夫。
English: After being promoted several times, he became a doctor of the Left Division of the Council of State.

古文：宰相崔胤判度支，表以自副。
现代文：宰相崔胤兼任度支，任命他做副手。
English: Prime Minister Choi In, who also serves as the provincial party chief, appointed him as his deputy.

古文：王溥荐为翰林学士，迁中书舍人。
现代文：王浦又推荐他任翰林学士，后升任中书舍人。
English: Wang Pu also recommended him to be a scholar of Hanlin, and later he was promoted to be a scholar of Zhongshu.

古文：偓尝与胤定策诛刘季述，昭宗反正，为功臣。
现代文：韩偓曾和崔胤定计杀刘季述。唐昭宗复位，他是功臣。
English: Han Xuan and Cui Yin once plotted to kill Liu Ji. Tang Zhaozong was restored to the throne, and he was a meritorious subject.

古文：帝疾宦人骄横，欲尽去之。
现代文：皇帝恨宦官骄横，想除尽他们。
English: The emperor hated the arrogance of eunuchs and wanted to get rid of them.

古文：偓曰： 陛下诛季述时，余皆赦不问，今又诛之，谁不惧死？
现代文：韩偓说： 皇上杀刘季述时，说其余的都赦免不追问，现在又杀他们，哪个不担心被处死呢？
English: Han Zheng said: When the emperor was describing the killing of Liu Ji, he said that the rest would be pardoned without questioning, and now they are killing them, who is not worried about being put to death?

古文：含垢隐忍，须后可也。
现代文：现应忍受羞侮，等待以后再说。
English: You should bear the humiliation now, and wait until later.

古文：天子威柄，今散在方面，若上下同心，摄领权纲，犹冀天下可治。
现代文：皇上的权力现在被各地篡夺，如果君臣协力，掌管法令，国家治理好还有希望。
English: The power of the emperor has now been usurped by various regions. If monarchs and subjects work together and administer the laws, there is still hope for good national governance.

古文：宦人忠厚可任者，假以恩幸，使自翦其党，蔑有不济。
现代文：宦官中忠厚可以信任的，给予他们恩惠，要他们自己杀死他们的党羽，没有不成功的。
English: The loyal eunuchs, who could be trusted, were given the favour of killing their own henchmen, without fail.

古文：今食度支者乃八千人，公私牵属不减二万，虽诛六七巨魁，未见有益，适固其逆心耳。 
现代文：现在在度支官署领食物的宦官就有八千人，公私牵连的不下两万人，即使杀死六七个头子，不会有好处，只会坚定他们叛逆的决心。 
English: Now, there are eight thousand eunuchs receiving food at the provincial branch office, and no less than twenty thousand people involved in public and private affairs. Even if they kill six or seven chiefs, it will not do any good, it will only strengthen their determination to rebel.

古文：帝前膝曰： 此一事终始属卿。 
现代文：皇帝移近他说 ：这件事就交给你了。 
English: The emperor approached him and said, "This matter is up to you."

古文：中书舍人令狐涣任机巧，帝尝欲以当国，俄又悔曰： 涣作宰相或误国，朕当先用卿。 
现代文：中书舍人令狐涣以机智灵巧见长，皇帝曾想任命为宰相，不久又后悔说： 令狐涣任宰相可能会危害国家，我应该先任用你。 
English: The emperor once wanted to appoint him as prime minister, but soon regretted it, saying, "Making Foxtel prime minister may harm the country. I should have appointed you first."

古文：辞曰： 涣再世宰相，练故事，陛下业已许之。若许涣可改，许臣独不可移乎？ 
现代文：他推辞说 ：令狐涣两代当宰相，熟悉过去的情况，皇上已答应了他，如果答应他可以改变，答应我就不能改变了吗？ 
English: He declined, saying, "The emperor has already promised to make Foxtrot the prime minister for two generations, and he is familiar with the past. If he promises he can change, if he promises I can't change?"

古文：帝曰： 我未尝面命，亦何惮？ 
现代文：皇帝说： 我没有当面任命，怕什么？ 
English: The emperor said, "I didn't make the appointment in person, what am I afraid of?

古文：偓因荐御史大夫赵崇劲正雅重，可以准绳中外。
现代文：他就推荐御史大夫赵崇刚强、正直、文雅、稳重，可以做朝廷内外的楷模。
English: He recommended the imperial historian Zhao Chong as strong, honest, gentle, and steady, and could serve as a role model both inside and outside the imperial court.

古文：帝知偓，崇门生也，叹其能让。
现代文：皇帝了解他是赵崇的学生，赞叹他能谦让。
English: The emperor understood that he was a student of Zhao Chong and admired his ability to be humble.

古文：初，李继昭等以功皆进同中书门下平章事，时谓 三使相 ，后稍稍更附韩全诲、周敬容，皆忌胤。
现代文：当初，李继昭等人因功都升任同中书门下平章事，当时人称为 三位使职宰相 ，后来又逐渐增加了韩全诲、周敬容，都忌妒崔胤。
English: At first, Li Jizhao and others were all promoted to the position of Tongzhong Shumen Shimo Pingzhang because of their merits. At that time, they were called the three acting prime ministers. Later, they gradually added Han Quanzhang and Zhou Jingzhang, all of whom were jealous of Cuiyin.

古文：胤闻，召凤翔李茂贞入朝，使留族子继筠宿卫。
现代文：崔胤听说后，召凤翔节度使李茂贞来京朝拜，要他把侄儿李继先留下管侍卫。
English: After hearing this, Cui Yin summoned Fengxiang Jiedu to make Li Maozhen come to Beijing to pay homage, and asked him to leave his nephew Li Jianxin in charge of the guards.

古文：偓闻，以为不可，胤不纳。
现代文：韩偓听说了，认为不好，崔胤不采纳。
English: Han Ye heard about it, thought it was not good, and Cui Yin did not adopt it.

古文：偓又语令狐涣，涣曰： 吾属不惜宰相邪？
现代文：韩偓又对令狐涣说，令狐涣道 ：我们难道不顾惜宰相职位吗？
English: Han Zheng also said to Ling Fuxuan, Ling Fuxuan said: Do we not care about the position of prime minister?

古文：无卫军则为阉竖所图矣。 
现代文：没有卫兵就被宦官控制了。 
English: Without guards, they were controlled by eunuchs.

古文：偓曰： 不然。无兵则家与国安，有兵则家与国不可保。 
现代文：韩偓说： 不对，没有军队，家庭和国家都安全，有军队家庭和国家就无法保全了。 
English: Han Zheng said: No, without an army, the family and the country are safe, but with an army, the family and the country cannot be preserved.

古文：胤闻，忧，未知所出。
现代文：崔胤听说后，发愁了，不知怎么好。
English: After hearing this, Cui Yan was worried and did not know what to do.

古文：李彦弼见帝倨甚，帝不平，偓请逐之，赦其党许自新，则狂谋自破，帝不用。
现代文：李彦昭见皇帝时很傲慢，皇帝生气了，韩偓请求把他赶走，赦免他的党羽，准许他们重新做人，他们的计谋自然破败了，皇帝没有采纳。
English: When Li Yan Zhao saw the emperor, he was very arrogant. The emperor became angry. Han Xuan begged to drive him away, pardon his followers, and allow them to be human again. Naturally, their plan failed, and the emperor did not accept it.

古文：彦弼谮偓及涣漏禁省语，不可与图政，帝怒，曰： 卿有官属，日夕议事，奈何不欲我见学士邪？ 
现代文：李彦弼说韩偓和令狐涣泄漏皇帝在皇宫里说的话，不能和他们商量政事，皇帝发怒说： 你有部下，日夜在一起商议事务，为什么不想要我会见学士呢？ 
English: Li Yanqi said that Han Xuan and Ling Xuan had leaked what the emperor had said in the imperial palace, and that he could not discuss political affairs with them. The emperor became angry and said: You have subordinates, and you discuss matters with them day and night. Why don't you want me to meet with the scholar?

古文：继昭等饮殿中自如，帝怒，偓曰： 三使相有功，不如厚与金帛官爵，毋使豫政事。
现代文：李继昭等人在宫殿里随便喝酒，皇帝发怒了，韩偓说： 三位使职宰相有功劳，不如多赏财物，多封官爵，不要让他们参与政务。
English: Li Jizhao and others were casually drinking in the palace. The emperor became angry, and Han Zheng said: The three acting prime ministers have made great contributions. It is better to reward them with more wealth and more titles. Don't let them participate in government affairs.

古文：今宰相不得颛决事，继昭辈所奏必听。它日遽改，则人人生怨。
现代文：现在宰相不单独决定政事，李继昭等人上奏必定听从，今后突然改变，人人都会怨恨。
English: Now the prime minister does not decide on political affairs alone, and Li Jizhao and others must listen to the appeal. In the future, if there is a sudden change, everyone will resent it.

古文：初以卫兵检中人，今敕使、卫兵为一，臣窃寒心，愿诏茂贞还其卫军。
现代文：当初用卫兵约束宦官，现在命使、卫兵合一，我暗地里担心，希望令李茂贞撤回他的卫兵。
English: At first, guards were used to restrain eunuchs, but now the commander and the guards are united. Secretly, I was worried and hoped that Li Maozhen would withdraw his guards.

古文：不然，两镇兵斗阙下，朝廷危矣。 
现代文：不这样，两个藩镇的军队在京城里争斗，国家就危险了。 
English: Otherwise, the armies of the two provinces and towns would fight in the capital, and the country would be in danger.

古文：及胤召硃全忠讨全诲，汴兵将至，偓劝胤督茂贞还卫卒。
现代文：到崔胤召朱全忠来讨伐韩全诲，汴州兵快到了，韩偓劝崔胤催李茂贞撤回卫兵。
English: By the time Cui Yin called Zhu Quanzhong to fight Han Quanzhong, the National Guard was about to arrive, and Han Zheng advised Cui Yin to urge Li Maozhen to withdraw the guards.

古文：又劝表暴内臣罪，因诛全诲等；若茂贞不如诏，即许全忠入朝。未及用，而全诲等已劫帝西幸。
现代文：又劝他上奏宣布宦官的罪状，杀死韩全诲等人；如果李茂贞不听命令，就允许朱全忠到朝廷来，没来得及采纳，韩全诲等人已把皇帝劫持到西边去了。
English: If Li Maozhen did not obey the order, he would allow Zhu Quanzhong to come to the imperial court. Before he could accept, Han Quanzhong and others had already kidnapped the emperor to the west.

古文：偓夜追及鄠，见帝恸哭。
现代文：韩偓夜晚追到户县，见到皇帝后痛哭起来。
English: Han Xuan chased him to Huxian at night, and burst into tears after seeing the emperor.

古文：至凤翔，迁兵部侍郎，进承旨。
现代文：到了凤翔，他升任兵部侍郎、学士承旨。
English: When he came to Fengxiang, he was promoted to the position of the attendant of the military department and the bachelor's degree.

古文：宰相韦贻范母丧，诏还位，偓当草制，上言： 贻范处丧未数月，遽使视事，伤孝子心。
现代文：宰相韦贻范为母亲守丧，有昭命他回朝廷任职，轮到韩偓起草诏书，他上奏说 ：韦贻范守丧没几个月，现马上要他来管事，伤害了儿子的孝心。
English: The prime minister, Wei Fan, was attending his mother's funeral. He was ordered to return to the imperial court. It was Han Zheng's turn to draft the edict. He reported: "Wei Fan, who has been dead for several months, now wants him to take care of things immediately. This has hurt his son's filial piety."

古文：今中书事，一相可办。
现代文：现在中书府的事务，一位宰相就能办好。
English: At present, the affairs of the Central Library can be handled well by a prime minister.

古文：陛下诚惜贻范才，俟变缞而召可也。何必使出峨冠庙堂，入泣血柩侧，毁瘠则废务，勤恪则忘哀，此非人情可处也。 学士使马从皓逼偓求草，偓曰： 腕可断，麻不可草！ 从皓曰： 君求死邪？ 
现代文：皇上确实看重韦贻范的才干，应等他服完丧再召他来，为什么一定要叫他出门到朝廷行礼，回家到灵柩边哭泣，悲伤过度伤害了身体就耽误了政事，勤于政事又会影响哀悼亲人，这不是人能忍受得了的。 学士使马从皓逼韩偓起草，他说： 你可以砍断我的手腕，但诏令不能起草！ 马从皓说： 你找死吗？ 
English: The emperor really valued Wei Xuanfan's talent and should wait for him to finish the funeral before summoning him. Why did he have to ask him to go out to the imperial court to make a bow, to go home to the casket and cry? Grief hurts the body too much and delays government affairs. Being busy with government affairs will affect the mourning of relatives. This is not something that people can bear. The scholar made Ma Conglu force Han Qian to draft, he said: You can cut off my wrist, but you can't draft the edict! Ma Conglu said: Are you looking for death?

古文：明日，百官至，而麻不出，宦侍合噪。
现代文：第二天，群臣来了，但诏书没写，宦官侍从一同起哄。
English: The next day, the courtiers came, but the imperial edict was not written, and the eunuchs and attendants began to make a fuss.

古文：茂贞入见帝曰： 命宰相而学士不草麻，非反邪？ 
现代文：李茂贞进宫拜见皇帝说 ：任命宰相但学士不肯起草诏令，不是反了吗？ 
English: Li Maozhen went to the palace to see the emperor and said, "The prime minister has been appointed, but the scholar does not want to draft the edict. Isn't it the other way around?"

古文：艴然出。
现代文：满脸怒气地出去了。
English: He stormed out in a huff.

古文：姚洎闻曰： 使我当直，亦继以死。 
现代文：姚洎知道后说 ：要我值班，我也会接着去以死抗争。 
English: After Yao Yao found out, he said, "If they put me on duty, I will continue to fight to the death."

古文：既而帝畏茂贞，卒诏贻范还相，洎代草麻。
现代文：后来皇帝怕李茂贞，终于命韦贻范回来当了宰相，姚洎代替起草了诏令。
English: Later, the emperor was afraid of Li Maozhen, and finally ordered Wei Yufan to return as prime minister, and Yao Jun drafted the edict instead.

古文：自是宦党怒偓甚。
现代文：从此宦官很恨韩偓。
English: From then on, the eunuch hated Han Yan very much.

古文：从皓让偓曰： 南司轻北司甚，君乃崔胤、王溥所荐，今日北司虽杀之可也。
现代文：马从皓斥责韩偓说： 南朝廷太轻视北朝廷了，你是崔胤、王溥推荐的，现在北朝廷可以杀了他们。
English: Ma Congtao rebuked Han Xuan, saying, "The Southern Court is too contemptuous of the Northern Court. You were recommended by Cui Yin and Wang Qi. Now the Northern Court can kill them."

古文：两军枢密，以君周岁无奉入，吾等议救接，君知之乎？ 
现代文：两军的枢密官，因为你一年没有俸禄了，我们正在商量救济，你知道吗？ 
English: Privy Counsellor of the two armies, because you have not been paid for a year, we are discussing relief, do you know?

古文：偓不敢对。
现代文：韩偓不敢回答。
English: Han Yan didn't dare to answer.

古文：茂贞疑帝间出依全忠，以兵卫行在。
现代文：李茂贞怀疑皇帝想逃出去依靠朱全忠，派兵守卫皇帝住处。
English: Li Maozhen suspected that the emperor wanted to escape and rely on Zhu Quanzhong, and sent soldiers to guard the emperor's residence.

古文：帝行武德殿前，因至尚食局，会学士独在，宫人招偓，偓至，再拜哭曰： 崔胤甚健，全忠军必济。 
现代文：皇帝走到武德殿前面，顺便到了尚食局，遇到只有学士在，命宫人召唤韩偓。韩偓来了，拜了两次哭着说： 崔胤很健康，朱全忠的军队必定获胜。 
English: The emperor walked to the front of the Wude Hall, and by the way, he went to the Shang Food Bureau. When he encountered only bachelors, he summoned Han Zheng. Han Zheng came, bowed twice and cried and said: Cui Yan is very healthy, Zhu Quanzhong's army will surely win.

古文：帝喜，偓曰： 愿陛下还宫，无为人知。 
现代文：皇帝高兴了，韩偓说： 希望皇上回宫中，不要被人知道了。 
English: The emperor was delighted, and Han Yan said, "I hope the emperor will not be discovered when he returns to the palace."

古文：帝赐以面豆而去。
现代文：皇帝赏饭给他后离去了。
English: The emperor rewarded him with a meal and then left.

古文：全诲诛，宫人多坐死。
现代文：韩全诲被杀了，宦官们多数牵连被处死了。
English: Han Quanzhang was killed, and most of the eunuchs were implicated and executed.

古文：帝欲尽去余党，偓曰： 礼，人臣无将，将必诛，宫婢负恩不可赦。然不三十年不能成人，尽诛则伤仁。
现代文：皇帝想杀光剩下的党羽，韩偓说： 按照礼制，臣子不能自己做主，自己做主就必定处死，奴婢辜负了皇上的恩德，罪不该赦免，但不到三十年不能长成人，都杀死了就伤害了仁德。
English: The emperor wanted to kill all the remaining party members, Han Zheng said: According to the etiquette, the vassal cannot decide for himself, and if he decides for himself, he must be put to death. The slave has betrayed the emperor's grace, and the crime should not be pardoned, but he cannot grow up in less than thirty years. If he kills them all, he will hurt benevolence.

古文：愿去尤者，自内安外，以静群心。 帝曰： 善。 
现代文：希望杀死最坏的，从宫内到宫外，使大家安心。 皇帝说 ：好。 
English: Hoping to kill the worst of them, from inside and outside the palace, and reassure everyone, the emperor said, "Good."

古文：崔胤请以辉王为元帅，帝问偓： 它日累吾儿否？ 
现代文：崔胤请求任命辉王为元帅，皇帝问韩偓： 这今后会不会拖累我的儿子呢？ 
English: Cui Yan asked for the appointment of Hui Wang as marshal, and the emperor asked Han Xuan: Will this drag my son down in the future?

古文：偓曰： 陛下在东内时，天阴雺，王闻乌声曰： 上与后幽困，乌雀声亦悲。 
现代文：韩偓说： 皇上困在东宫时，天阴有雾，辉王听见乌鸦叫声后说 ：皇上和皇后被关押，乌鸦的叫声也是悲伤的。 
English: Han Zheng said: When the emperor was trapped in the East Palace, it was cloudy and foggy. After hearing the crow's cry, Hui Wang said: The emperor and the queen were detained, and the crow's cry was also sad.

古文：陛下闻之恻然，有是否？ 
现代文：皇上听到后很伤心，有这事吗？ 
English: The Emperor was very sad to hear this. Is this true?

古文：帝曰： 然。是儿天生忠孝，与人异。 
现代文：皇帝说： 是的，这孩子生来忠诚行孝，和别人不一样。 
English: The emperor said, "Yes, this child was born with loyalty and filial piety, unlike others.

古文：意遂决。
现代文：决心就定了。
English: The decision was made.

古文：偓议附胤类如此。
现代文：韩偓附和崔胤都和这一样。
English: Han Yuxu and Cui Yan are the same.

古文：帝反正，励精政事，偓处可机密，率与帝意合，欲相者三四，让不敢当。
现代文：皇帝复位后，一心想治理好国家。韩偓处理机密政务，都和皇帝的意见相合，皇帝几次想任命他为宰相，他都推让不敢承担。
English: After the emperor was restored to the throne, he devoted himself to governing the country well. Han Zheng's handling of confidential government affairs was in line with the emperor's opinion. The emperor wanted to appoint him as prime minister several times, but he did not dare to do so.

古文：苏检复引同辅政，遂固辞。
现代文：苏检又推荐他一起任宰相，他还是坚决推辞。
English: Su Guan also recommended that he be appointed prime minister, but he still firmly refused.

古文：初，偓侍宴，与京兆郑元规、威远使陈班并席，辞曰： 学士不与外班接。 
现代文：当初，韩偓侍奉宴席，见和京兆尹郑元规、威远军使陈班坐在一起，就告辞说： 学士不敢和外廷官员交往。 
English: At first, when Han Kui was serving at a banquet and saw the Emperor Jing Zhaoyun, Zheng Yuan and the military commander Chen Ban sitting together, he made a farewell speech, saying, "A scholar dares not mingle with the officials of the Outer Court."

古文：主席者固请，乃坐。既元规、班至，终绝席。
现代文：主持宴会的人坚决请求，他才坐下了，到郑元规、陈班来了，他还是离开了宴席。
English: The person who presided over the banquet firmly requested that he sit down, but when Zheng Yuanbai and Chen Ban arrived, he still left the banquet.

古文：全忠、胤临陛宣事，坐者皆去席，偓不动，曰： 侍宴无辄立，二公将以我为知礼。 
现代文：朱全忠、崔胤到殿前宣布政事，坐着的人都行避席礼，韩偓却不动，并说 ：侍奉宴席的人不能随便站着，二位大人会认为我懂得礼节。 
English: Zhu Quanzhong and Cui Yin went to the front of the hall to announce the government affairs. The seated people performed the formalities, but Han Zheng did not move, and said: The person serving the banquet cannot stand casually. The two adults will think that I know the etiquette.

古文：全忠怒偓薄己，悻然出。
现代文：朱全忠认为韩偓对自己不尊重，愤然离席走了。
English: Zhu Quanzhong thought that Han Wei did not respect him, and he left the table angrily.

古文：有谮偓喜侵侮有位，胤亦与偓贰。
现代文：有人讲谗言说韩偓喜欢顶撞宰相，崔胤也和韩偓不和了。
English: Some people say that Han Kuo likes to confront the prime minister, and Cui Yan and Han Kuo are not getting along.

古文：会逐王溥、陆扆，帝以王赞、赵崇为相，胤执赞、崇非宰相器，帝不得已而罢。赞、崇皆偓所荐为宰相者。
现代文：遇到驱逐了王溥、陆，皇帝任命王赞、赵崇为宰相，崔胤坚持说他们两人不是当宰相的材料，皇帝没办法才将他们免职了，他们两人都是韩偓推荐任宰相的。
English: When Wang Qian and Lu were expelled, the emperor appointed Wang Zan and Zhao Chong as prime ministers. Cui Yin insisted that the two of them were not qualified to be prime ministers, and the emperor had no choice but to dismiss them. Both of them were recommended by Han Zheng to be prime ministers.

古文：全忠见帝，斥偓罪，帝数顾胤，胤不为解。
现代文：朱全忠见到皇帝，斥责韩偓的罪过，皇帝多次看着崔胤，崔胤不帮韩偓说话。
English: Zhu Quanzhong saw the emperor and reprimanded Han Qi for his sins. The emperor looked at Cui Yin many times, but Cui Yin did not help Han Qi to speak.

古文：全忠至中书，欲召偓杀之。
现代文：朱全忠到了中书省，想把韩偓叫去杀掉。
English: Zhu Quanzhong arrived at the Ministry of Chinese Literature and Literature and wanted to kill Han Xuan.

古文：郑元规曰： 偓位侍郎、学士承旨，公无遽。 
现代文：郑元规说： 韩偓官任侍郎学士承旨，您不要太着急。 
English: Zheng Yuanbai said, "Han Yingguan has been appointed as the attendant of the bachelor's degree. Don't worry too much.

古文：全忠乃止，贬濮州司马。
现代文：朱全忠才住手了，将他贬为濮州司马。
English: Zhu Quanzhong only stopped when he was relegated to the position of Zhangzhou Sima.

古文：帝执其手流涕曰： 我左右无人矣。 
现代文：皇帝拉着他的手流下眼泪说 ：我身边没有人了。 
English: The emperor took him by the hand, shed tears, and said, "I have no one with me."

古文：再贬荣懿尉，徙邓州司马。
现代文：他又被贬为荣懿县尉，后升任邓州司马。
English: He was also demoted to Ronglu County Lieutenant, and later promoted to Dengzhou Sima.

古文：天祐二年，复召为学士，还故官。
现代文：天佑二年，又被召去任学士，复任旧职。
English: By the grace of God, two years later, he was again called to serve as a bachelor and resumed his old position.

古文：偓不敢入朝，挈其族南依王审知而卒。
现代文：韩偓不敢进朝廷，带着他的家族到南边依附王审知，后去世了。
English: Han Zheng did not dare to enter the imperial court, and took his family to the south to cling to Wang Xizhi, and later died.

古文：兄仪，字羽光，亦以翰林学士为御史中丞。
现代文：他哥哥韩仪的字叫羽光，也以翰林学士身份任御史中丞。
English: His brother Han Yi's nickname was "Haguang" (羽光), and he also held the title of "Goshi Chujo" (御史中丞) as a Hanlin scholar.

古文：偓贬之明年，帝宴文思球场，全忠入，百官坐庑下，全忠怒，贬仪棣州司马，侍御史归蔼登州司户参军。
现代文：韩偓被贬的第二年，皇帝在文思院球场设宴，朱全忠进院，群臣都坐在屋檐下，朱全忠发怒了，将韩仪贬为棣州司马，将侍御史归蔼贬为登州司户参军。
English: In the second year after Han Ji was demoted, the emperor held a banquet in the stadium of Wensi Academy. Zhu Quanzhong entered the academy, and all the ministers were sitting under the eaves. Zhu Quanzhong became angry, and demoted Han Yi to the position of Zhangzhou Sima, and the attendant Shi Quian to the position of Dengzhou Sifu.

