古文：太祖受命之始，属天下分崩，于时戎马交驰，而学术之士盖寡，故曲艺末技，咸见引纳。
现代文：太祖开始受命的时候，正是天下分崩之时，战争频繁，学术之士很少，所以曲艺末技，都被搜罗接纳。
English: When the great-grandfather began to receive orders, it was the time when the world was falling apart, wars were frequent, and scholars were few, so the last skills of acrobatics were accepted by the collection.

古文：至若冀隽、蒋升、赵文深之徒，虽才愧昔人，而名著当世。
现代文：例如冀俊、蒋升、赵文深等人，虽然才能不如古人，但是名著当世。
English: For example, Jijun, Jiang Sheng, Zhao Wenshen and others, although they are not as talented as the ancients, they are famous in the world.

古文：及克定鄢、郢，俊异毕集。
现代文：当平定了鄢、郢之后，人才齐集。
English: When the chaos and turmoil have been calmed down, talent will be gathered.

古文：乐茂雅、萧吉以阴阳显，庾季才以天官称，史元华相术擅奇，许奭、姚僧垣方药特妙，斯皆一时之美也。
现代文：乐茂雅、萧吉在阴阳学说方面很突出，庾季才在天文学方面著称于世，史元华擅长相术，许奭、姚僧垣精于方药，都是一时的著名人物。
English: Le Maoya and Xiao Jie were outstanding in the theory of yin and yang, Zi Jicai was famous in the world for astronomy, Shi Yuanhua was good at physiognomy, and Xu Yao and Yao Sangaki were good at medicine. They were all famous figures at the time.

古文：茂雅、元华、许奭，史失其传。
现代文：茂雅、元华、许奭，史书没有记载。
English: Mao Ya, Yuan Hua, Xu Xi, there is no record in the history books.

古文：季才、萧吉，官成于隋。
现代文：季才、萧吉，在隋朝任官。
English: Ji Cai and Xiao Jie were appointed officials in the Sui Dynasty.

古文：自余纪于此篇，以备遗阙云尔。
现代文：其余记于此篇，以备拾遣补阙。
English: The rest is recorded in this article, in order to prepare for the next step.

古文：冀隽字僧隽，太原阳邑人也。
现代文：冀隽字僧隽，太原阳邑人。
English: He is from Taiyuan Yangyup, Jiangxi Province.

古文：性沉谨，善隶书，特工模写。
现代文：性情深沉谨慎，擅长隶书，尤其工于临摹。
English: His disposition is deep and cautious. He is good at handwriting, especially at copying.

古文：魏太昌初，为贺拔岳墨曹参军。
现代文：魏太昌初年，担任贺拔岳的墨曹参军。
English: In the first year of Wei Taichang, Mozo, who played the role of He Biakue, joined the army.

古文：及岳被害，太祖引为记室。
现代文：贺拔岳被害之后，太祖任用为记室。
English: After Mt. Hebatake was damaged, Taizu used it as a recording room.

古文：时侯莫陈悦阻兵陇右，太祖志在平之。
现代文：当时侯莫陈悦拥兵陇右，太祖决心平定他。
English: At that time, Hou Mo Chen Yue was supporting the right side of the war, and the great-grandfather was determined to pacify him.

古文：乃令隽伪为魏帝敕书与费也头，令将兵助太祖讨悦。
现代文：于是令冀俊伪造魏帝给费也头的敕书，命令他率兵助太祖征讨侯莫陈悦。
English: Therefore, he ordered Ji Jun to forge the imperial edict issued by Emperor Wei to Fei Ya, ordering him to lead an army to help the great ancestor to conquer Hou Mo Chen Yue.

古文：隽依旧敕模写，及代舍人、主书等署，与真无异。
现代文：冀俊依照旧敕加以摹写，及代舍人、主书等署名，与真敕没有分别。
English: Jijun copied it according to the old seal, and the signatures of the bearer, the principal, etc. are no different from the real seal.

古文：太祖大悦。
现代文：立担十分高兴。
English: I am very happy.

古文：费也头已曾得魏帝敕书，及见此敕，不以为疑。
现代文：费也题原先已得过魏童的敕书，见到遣一敕书，没有怀疑。
English: Fei also mentioned that he had previously obtained Wei Tong's imperial edict, and when he saw the imperial edict, he had no doubts.

古文：遂遣步骑一千，受太祖节度。
现代文：因而派遣一千步骑兵，接受太祖的指挥。
English: So he sent a thousand foot cavalry under the command of his grandfather.

古文：大统初，除丞相府城局参军，封长安县男，邑二百户。
现代文：大统初年，任丞相府城局参军，封长安县男爵位，食邑二百户。
English: In the first year of the Great Reunification, he joined the army as the Minister of the Fucheng Bureau, was given the title of Baron of Chang'an County, and owned 200 households.

古文：从复弘农，战沙苑，进爵为子，出为华州中正。
现代文：随从收复弘农，在沙苑作战，晋为子爵，外任华州中正。
English: Accompanied by the recovery of Hongnong, fought in Sha Yuan, promoted to viscount, and appointed to the post of Huazhou middle-ranking official.

古文：十三年，迁襄乐郡守。
现代文：十三年，调任襄銮邮守。
English: Thirteen years later, he was transferred to be the postmaster of Xiangfan.

古文：寻征教世宗及宋献公等隶书。
现代文：不久被征召教授世宗和宋献公等人隶书。
English: Soon after, he was called up to teach Sejong and Song Xiangong.

古文：时俗入书学者，亦行束修之礼，谓之谢章。
现代文：当时一般人学书法，亦行束脩之礼，称为谢章。
English: At that time, ordinary people learned calligraphy, and also performed the ceremony of bundling, known as Xiezhang.

古文：隽以书字所兴，起自苍颉，若同常俗，未为合礼。
现代文：冀俊以为书字的兴创，源于苍颉，如果和常俗一样，不合礼仪。
English: Jijun believed that the creation of calligraphy originated from the heron. If it is the same as the common practice, it is not in accordance with etiquette.

古文：遂启太祖，释奠苍颉及先圣、先师。
现代文：因而启禀太祖，设酒食祭奠苍颉和先圣、先师。
English: Therefore, the founding of the ancestor, set up a wine and food festival to pay tribute to the heron, the first saint and the first teacher.

古文：除黄门侍郎、本州大中正。
现代文：授黄门侍郎、本州大中正。
English: He was awarded the title of Huangmen waiter and became a junior high school principal at Honshu University.

古文：累迁抚军将军、右金紫光禄大夫、都督、通直散骑常侍、车骑大将军、仪同三司。
现代文：屡经升迁为抚军将军、右金紫光禄大夫、都督、通直散骑常侍、车骑大将军、仪同三司。
English: After repeated promotions, he became the general of the army, the doctor of the right gold and purple light, the governor of the capital, the attendant, the general of the chariot and cavalry, and the three departments of the ceremony.

古文：世宗二年，以本官为大使，巡历州郡，察风俗，理冤滞。
现代文：世宗二年，以本官任为大使，到各州巡行，观察风俗，处理冤情滞案。
English: In the second year of his reign, he appointed himself as ambassador and went on a tour of the states to observe customs and deal with grievances.

古文：还，拜小御正。
现代文：回朝后，拜为小御正。
English: After returning to the Imperial Court, he was given the title of Kogosho.

古文：寻出为湖州刺史。
现代文：不久外任湖州刺史。
English: He was soon appointed to the post of Huzhou chief historian.

古文：性退静，每以清约自处，前后所历，颇有声称。
现代文：性情淡泊，处身以清约为原则，前后所任各官，声誉都很好。
English: He is a light-hearted person. He lives according to the principle of discretion. All the officials he has appointed before and after him have a good reputation.

古文：寻加骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司，改封昌乐县伯。
现代文：不久加骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司，改封为昌乐县伯爵位。
English: Soon after, he was promoted to the rank of Count of Changle County.

古文：又进爵为侯，增邑并前一千六百户。
现代文：又进爵为侯，食邑增至一千六百户。
English: He was also given the title of marquess, and the number of households increased to 1,600.

古文：后以疾卒。
现代文：后因病去世。
English: At that time, powerful, rich and noble families were all competing to be the most luxurious and gorgeous.

古文：蒋升字凤起，楚国平河人也。
现代文：蒋升字凤起，楚国平河人也。
English: Jiang Shengzhi Fengqi, also from Pinghe, Chu.

古文：父隽，魏南平王府从事中郎、赵兴郡守。
现代文：父隽，任魏南平王府从事中郎、赵兴郡守。
English: His father was the second-in-command and Zhao Xing was the county magistrate of the Wei Nanping royal court.

古文：升性恬静，少好天文玄象之学。
现代文：蒋升天性恬静，从小喜好天文天象之学。
English: Jiang Sheng had a quiet nature and liked studying astronomy and celestial phenomena from an early age.

古文：太祖雅信待之，常侍左右，以备顾问。
现代文：太祖很信任他，常侍于左右，以备咨询。
English: The great-grandfather trusted him very much and often sat to his right and left for consultation.

古文：大统三年，东魏将窦泰入寇，济自风陵，顿军潼关。
现代文：大统三年，束魏将领窦泰入侵，从风陵渡河，驻扎在潼关。
English: In the third year of the Great Reunification, Shu Wei general Dou Tai invaded, crossed the river from Fengling, and stationed in Shaoguan.

古文：太祖出师马牧泽。
现代文：太祖率兵从马牧泽出发。
English: Taizu and his soldiers set out from Mamuzawa.

古文：时西南有黄紫气抱日，从未至酉。
现代文：当时西南方有黄紫气环抱太阳，从未时至酉时。
English: At that time, a yellow-violet atmosphere surrounded the sun in the southwest, and it never got to twilight.

古文：太祖谓升曰： 此何祥也？ 
现代文：太祖对蒋升说： 这是什么征兆? 
English: The great-grandfather said to Jiang Sheng, "What is this sign?"

古文：升曰： 西南未地，主土。
现代文：蒋升回答说： 西南未地，所主为土。
English: Jiang Sheng replied, "The southwest is not land, but soil.

古文：土王四季，秦之分也。
现代文：土王四季，为秦的分地。
English: The four seasons of the king of the soil are the divisions of the Qin Dynasty.

古文：今大军既出，喜气下临，必有大庆。 于是进军与窦泰战，擒之。
现代文：如今大军既然出动，喜气下临，必定有极大的喜庆。 于是进军攻打窦泰，将其擒获。
English: Now that the great army has set out and the joy has come down, there must be a great celebration. So they marched to attack Dou Tai and captured it.

古文：自后遂降河东，克弘农，破沙苑。
现代文：接着降河东，克弘农，破沙苑。
English: After that, they went to the east of the river, Kehongnong, and Baoshaen.

古文：由此愈被亲礼。
现代文：由此愈加受到亲信礼遇。
English: As a result, he was treated more and more like a close friend.

古文：九年，高仲密以北豫州来附。
现代文：九年，高仲密以北豫州来归附。
English: In the ninth year, Gao Zhongmi went to North Henan Province to annex it.

古文：太祖欲遣兵援之，又以问升。
现代文：太祖想派兵支援，又以此事问蒋升。
English: The great-grandfather wanted to send troops to support, and asked Jiang Sheng about this.

古文：升对曰： 春王在东，荧惑又在井、鬼之分，行军非便。 太祖不从，军遂东行。
现代文：蒋升回答说： 春王在束，火星又在井、鬼的分界，不便于行军。 太担不听，率军束行。
English: Jiang Sheng replied, "Chun Wang is in the cords, Mars is in the well, and the demarcation of the ghosts is inconvenient for marching.

古文：至邙山，不利而还。
现代文：到达邙山，不利而还。
English: Arriving in Shaoshan, he was unfavorably received.

古文：太师贺拔胜怒，白太祖曰： 蒋升罪合万死。 
现代文：太师贺拔胜大怒，对左担说： 蓝昱罪该万死。 
English: Grandmaster He Baxing was furious and said to the left-hander: "The crime of being a blue heron deserves death.

古文：太祖曰： 蒋升固谏，云出师不利。
现代文：主担说： 蓝星执意劝谏，认为出师不利。
English: The supervisor said: "Blue Star persisted in persuading him, believing that it would be disadvantageous to become a teacher.

古文：此败也，孤自取之，非升过也。 
现代文：这次失败，是我自己所取，不是蒋升的过错。 
English: This failure is my own doing, not Jiang Sheng's fault.

古文：魏恭帝元年，以前后功，授车骑大将军、仪同三司，封高城县子，邑五百户。
现代文：魏恭帝元年，以前后功劳，授车骑大将军、仪同三司，封为高城县子爵位，食邑五百户。
English: In the first year of the Wei Gong Emperor, he was awarded the title of Viscount of Gaocheng County and 500 households in the food village.

古文：保定二年，增邑三百户，除河东郡守。
现代文：堡宣二年，增加食邑三百户，任为回墓盛守。
English: In the second year of the castle's proclamation, 300 households of food villages were added, and he was appointed as the keeper of the tomb.

古文：寻入为太史中大夫。
现代文：不久入朝任太史中大夫。
English: Soon after, he entered the imperial court and was appointed Taishi Chunodaibu.

古文：以老请致仕，诏许之。
现代文：由于年老请求退休，诏令允许。
English: His request to retire due to old age was allowed by the imperial edict.

古文：加定州刺史。
现代文：加宣州刺史荣衔。
English: He was awarded the honorary title of Kazen-shu stabbing history.

古文：卒于家。
现代文：于家中去世。
English: He died at home.

古文：姚僧垣字法卫，吴兴武康人，吴太常信之八世孙也。
现代文：姚僧垣字法卫，是吴兴武康人，为吴太常姚信的八世孙。
English: Yao Sanguo, also known as Fa Wei, was a Wu Xing Wu Kang person and the eighth-generation grandson of Wu Taizang Yao Xin.

古文：曾祖郢，宋员外散骑常侍、五城侯。
现代文：曾祖姚郢，为宋员外散骑常侍、五城侯。
English: Zengzu Yao Jun, was a Song general, a knight errant, and a five-city warlord.

古文：父菩提，梁高平令。
现代文：父菩提，梁朝时任高干令。
English: His father, Yao Bodi, was a magistrate of Gaoping County in the Liang Dynasty.

古文：尝婴疾历年，乃留心医药。
现代文：因为多年患病，所以留心于医药。
English: Because he has been ill for many years, he pays attention to medicine.

古文：梁武帝性又好之，每召菩提讨论方术，言多会意，由是颇礼之。
现代文：梁武帝也喜好医药，经常召见菩提讨论方术，所言多能会意，因此颇为礼遇他。
English: Emperor Liangwu was also fond of medicine. He often summoned Bodhi to discuss the art of medicine, and what he had to say met with a great deal of approval, so he was treated with great courtesy.

古文：僧垣幼通洽，居丧尽礼。
现代文：僧垣幼年通达，居丧尽礼。
English: As a child, Sangaki was well-versed in Buddhist teachings.

古文：年二十四，即传家业。
现代文：二十四岁时，已经传承家业。
English: At the age of twenty-four, he had already inherited the family business.

古文：梁武帝召入禁中，面加讨试。
现代文：梁武帝召入禁中，当面加以考查。
English: Emperor Liangwu was summoned to the detention center to be examined in person.

古文：僧垣酬对无滞。
现代文：僧垣对答如流。
English: The monks responded enthusiastically.

古文：梁武帝甚奇之。
现代文：梁武帝认为他不同寻常。
English: Emperor Liangwu thought he was unusual.

古文：大通六年，解褐临川嗣王国左常侍。
现代文：大通六年，出仕任临!嗣王国左常侍。
English: He served for six years, and was appointed to the post of the Crown Prince and the Crown Prince's Left-Handed Attendant.

古文：大同五年，除骠骑庐陵王府田曹参军。
现代文：大同五年，任骠骑庐陵王府田曹参军。
English: In the fifth year of Datong, he was appointed to join the army on the horse of Gongling Wangfutian Cao.

古文：九年，还领殿中医师。
现代文：九年，回朝领殿中医师。
English: Nine years later, he returned to the Imperial Court as a Chinese medicine practitioner.

古文：时武陵王所生葛修华，宿患积时，方术莫效。
现代文：当时武陵王生母葛修华，积疾多时，方术无效。
English: At that time, Wuling Wang's birth mother, Ge Xiuhua, was ill for a long time, and the method was ineffective.

古文：梁武帝乃令僧垣视之。
现代文：梁武帝就令僧垣诊视。
English: Emperor Liangwu ordered the monk to be examined.

古文：还，具说其状，并记增损时候。
现代文：回来后，细说她的情状，并且记下了增减变化的时间。
English: When she returned, she detailed her condition and noted the times of increase and decrease.

古文：梁武帝叹曰： 卿用意绵密，乃至于此，以此候疾，何疾可逃。
现代文：梁武帝叹服地说： 你用心精细，竞达到这样的程度，这样来诊治疾病，什么病治不好。
English: Emperor Liangwu sighed and said: You are meticulous in your efforts, competing to such an extent, diagnosing and treating diseases in this way, what diseases are difficult to cure.

古文：朕常以前代名人，多好此术，是以每恒留情，颇识治体。
现代文：我常以为前代的名人，多喜好此术，因此经常留意，也颇识此道。
English: I often think that celebrities of the previous generation are more fond of this art, so I always pay attention to it and know it well.

古文：今闻卿说，益开人意。 十一年，转领太医正，加文德主帅、直合将军。
现代文：如今听你一说，越发开通心窍了。 十一年，转领太医正，加文德主帅、直合将军。
English: Now, listening to your words, I have become more and more open-minded. In the eleventh year, I was transferred to the Taiji Zheng, the coach Gawande, and the general Zhaohui.

古文：梁武帝尝因发热，欲服大黄。
现代文：梁武帝曾因发热，想服用大黄。
English: Emperor Liangwu once wanted to take rhubarb for fever.

古文：僧垣曰： 大黄乃是快药。
现代文：僧垣说道： 大黄是快药。
English: The monk said: Rhubarb is a fast-acting medicine.

古文：然至尊年高，不宜轻用。 帝弗从，遂至危笃。
现代文：不过至尊年事已高，不宜轻用。 帝不听从，以致病情危重。
English: However, the Supreme Being is very old and should not be used lightly. The Emperor does not listen, resulting in a critical condition.

古文：梁简文帝在东宫，甚礼之。
现代文：梁简文帝此时在束宫，对他相当礼遇。
English: Emperor Liang Jianwen was at Sokong at the time, and treated him with considerable courtesy.

古文：四时伏腊，每有赏赐。
现代文：四时伏腊，都有赏赐。
English: At four o'clock, there is a reward.

古文：太清元年，转镇西湘东王府中记室参军。
现代文：太清元年，转任镇西湘束王府中记室参军。
English: In the first year of the Taiqing Dynasty, he joined the army from the Central Records Office of the Eastern King's Mansion in Xixiang.

古文：僧垣少好文史，不留意于章句。
现代文：僧垣年轻时喜好文学历史，不大留意章句之学。
English: When he was young, Sangaki liked literature and history, but paid little attention to the study of chapters and sentences.

古文：时商略今古，则为学者所称。
现代文：有时评论今古，为学者所称赞。
English: Sometimes commenting on the present and the past, it has been praised by scholars.

古文：及侯景围建业，僧垣乃弃妻子赴难。
现代文：当堡量围攻建业的时候，灯垣抛妻舍子去救危难。
English: When the castle besieges Jianye, the lantern throws his wife and son to save the day.

古文：梁武帝嘉之，授戎昭将军、湘东王府记室参军。
现代文：矾亘瞳嘉奖他，授戎昭将军、湘东王府记室参军。
English: He was commended by Emperor Gofukakusa, awarded the title of General of the Shogunate, and joined the army.

古文：及宫城陷，百官逃散。
现代文：当宫城陷落时，百官逃散。
English: When Miyagi fell, hundreds of officials fled.

古文：僧垣假道归，至吴兴，谒郡守张。
现代文：僧垣另外寻道回归，到达县兴，谒见郡守张嵊。
English: The monks searched for another way to return, arrived in Xing County, and met with the county governor Zhang Ye.

古文：嵊见僧垣流涕曰： 吾过荷朝恩，今报之以死。
现代文：张嵊见到僧垣哭着说： 我所负朝恩很重，今日衹有以死相报。
English: Zhang Ye saw the monk crying and said, "I owe the imperial court a great debt of gratitude. Today, I have received the news of my death.

古文：君是此邦大族，又朝廷旧臣。
现代文：你是此邦的大族，又是朝廷的旧臣。
English: You are a member of this great nation and a former courtier.

古文：今日得君，吾事办矣。 俄而景兵大至，攻战累日，郡城遂陷。
现代文：今日见到你，我的事都可办了。 不久侯景大兵到来，连日攻战，郡城陷落。
English: When I saw you today, I could do anything. Soon, the Houjing soldiers arrived, and they fought for days, and the county seat fell.

古文：僧垣窜避久之，乃被拘执。
现代文：僧垣逃避很久，还是被拘获。
English: The monk evaded capture for a long time, but was eventually arrested.

古文：景将侯子鉴素闻其名，深相器遇，因此获免。
现代文：侯景将领侯子鉴素间其名，对他很器重，所以获免。
English: Houjing general Hou Zi Jian is his middle name, he is very important to him, so he was exempted.

古文：及梁简文嗣位，僧垣还建业，以本官兼中书舍人。
现代文：当梁简文帝嗣位之时，僧垣回到建业，以本官兼中书舍人。
English: When Emperor Liang Jianwen ascended to the throne, the monk returned to Jianye and served as his own official and teacher.

古文：子鉴寻镇广陵，僧垣又随至江北。
现代文：子鉴不久镇守广陵，僧垣跟随他到了辽北。
English: Zi Jian soon became the warden of Guangling, and the monks followed him to northern Liaoning.

古文：梁元帝平侯景，召僧垣赴荆州，改授晋安王府谘议。
现代文：梁元帝平定侯景，召僧垣赴荆州，改任为晋安王府谘议。
English: Emperor Liang Yuan subdued Houjing, called the monks to Jingzhou, and appointed them as advisors to the Jinan royal court.

古文：其时虽克平大乱，而任用非才，朝政混淆，无复纲纪。
现代文：当时虽然平定了大乱，但是任用的都非人才，朝政混乱，没有法度。
English: At that time, although the turmoil had been quelled, the appointees were not talented people, the imperial government was chaotic, and there was no rule of law.

古文：僧垣每深忧之。
现代文：僧垣深为忧虑。
English: Sangaki is deeply worried.

古文：谓故人曰： 吾观此形势，祸败不久。
现代文：对故人说： 我看这样的形势，不久就会祸败。
English: He said to the deceased, "I see this situation as one that will soon end in disaster."

古文：今时上策，莫若近关。 闻者皆掩口窃笑。
现代文：现在的上策，莫若出走避难。 闻者都掩口偷偷地笑。
English: The best strategy now is to run away and take refuge. Everyone who hears about this is hiding behind a smile.

古文：梁元帝尝有心腹疾，乃召诸医议治疗之方。
现代文：梁元帝曾经患有心腹疾病，于是征召各位医生讨论治疗的方药。
English: Emperor Liang Yuan suffered from a disease of the heart, so he summoned doctors to discuss the treatment.

古文：咸谓至尊至贵，不可轻脱，宜用平药，可渐宣通。
现代文：都认为是至尊贵体，不可轻率，宜使用平和的药物，可逐渐疏通。
English: It is considered to be the supreme noble body, not to be reckless, it is advisable to use peaceful drugs, and can be gradually dredged.

古文：僧垣曰： 脉洪而实，此有宿食。
现代文：僧垣说： 脉洪而实，是有宿食。
English: The monk said, "The pulses are strong and solid, and there is a food source.

古文：非用大黄，必无差理。 梁元帝从之，进汤讫，果下宿食，因而疾愈。
现代文：不用大黄，病不能愈。 梁元帝从之，进完汤药，果然打下宿食，疾病也就好了。
English: If you don't use rhubarb, you won't be able to get better. Emperor Liang Yuan used it to make soup and medicine, and it really did cure his illness.

古文：梁元帝大喜。
现代文：梁元帝十分高兴。
English: Emperor Liang Yuan was very happy.

古文：时初铸钱，一当十，乃赐钱十万，实百万也。
现代文：当时铸造新钱，以一当十，赐给他十万钱，实际上是一百万钱。
English: At that time, new money was minted, and he was given 100,000 yuan, actually one million yuan, at a rate of one to ten.

古文：及大军克荆州，僧垣犹侍梁元帝，不离左右。
现代文：当大军平定荆州时，僧垣还是侍候梁元帝，不离左右。
English: When the great army had subdued Jingzhou, the monks still waited on Emperor Liang Yuan, never leaving his side.

古文：为军人所止，方泣涕而去。
现代文：被军人所阻止，方才哭泣而去。
English: Only after being stopped by soldiers did she weep and leave.

古文：寻而中山公护使人求僧垣。
现代文：不久中山公宇文护派人来找僧垣。
English: Soon after, Zhongshan Gongwu sent guards to look for the monks.

古文：僧垣至其营。
现代文：僧垣到达其军营之中。
English: Sangaki arrives at his camp.

古文：复为燕公于谨所召,大相礼接。
现代文：又被燕公于谨召见，极为礼遇。
English: He was also invited to see Yan Gongyu, which was a great courtesy.

古文：太祖又遣使驰驿征僧垣，谨留不遣。
现代文：太祖又遣使臣乘驿马疾驰征召僧垣，于谨不愿放他走。
English: The great-grandfather also sent an envoy on a galloping steed to recruit a group of monks, and I was reluctant to let him go.

古文：谓使人曰： 吾年时衰暮，疹疾婴沉。
现代文：对使臣说： 我已是垂暮之年，疾病缠身。
English: And he said unto them, I am an old man, and I am sick of the palsy.

古文：今得此人，望与之偕老。 太祖以谨勋德隆重，乃止焉。
现代文：现在得到此人，希望与他偕老。 太祖因为于谨勋德隆重，因此不再征召。
English: Now that I have this person, I hope to grow old with him. My great-grandfather was no longer conscripted because he was too honorable.

古文：明年，随谨至长安。
现代文：第二年，跟随于谨到长安。
English: Next year, I will follow you to Chang'an.

古文：武成元年，授小畿伯下大夫。
现代文：武成元年，授小畿伯下大夫。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Wucheng, he was awarded the post of junior doctor.

古文：金州刺史伊娄穆以疾还京，请僧垣省疾。
现代文：金州刺史伊娄穆因为生病回京，请僧垣诊视。
English: Jinzhou priest Shi Yanmu returned to Beijing because of illness, and asked the monk for a medical examination.

古文：乃云： 自腰至脐，似有三缚，两脚缓纵，不复自持。 僧垣为诊脉，处汤三剂。
现代文：说道： 从腰至脐，似乎捆着三道绳子，南脚松弛乏力，不听使唤。 僧垣为他诊脉，开了三剂汤药。
English: He said, "From the waist to the ankles, he seemed to be tied with three ropes, and his south foot was weak and did not respond to commands.

古文：穆初服一剂，上缚即解；次服一剂，中缚复解；又服一剂，三缚悉除。
现代文：伊娄穆刚服了一剂，上绳便解除了；又服一剂，中绳也解除了；再服一剂，三绳全无。
English: Yim Moo had just taken one dose, and the upper cord was loosened; he took another dose, and the middle cord was also loosened; he took another dose, and all three cords were gone.

古文：而两脚疼痹，犹自挛弱。
现代文：但两脚还是疼痛麻木，蜷曲无力。
English: But my feet are still numb from the pain, and I can't curl up.

古文：更为合散一剂，稍得屈申。
现代文：又给他配了一服散剂，双脚逐渐可以伸屈。
English: He was also given a dose of a disinfectant, and his legs were gradually able to flex.

古文：僧垣曰： 终待霜降，此患当愈。 及至九月，遂能起行。
现代文：僧垣说： 要等到霜降，这病就可以痊愈。 到了九月，就可以行走了。
English: The monk said, "Wait for the frost to fall, and the sickness will be cured, and by September, you will be able to walk."

古文：大将军、襄乐公贺兰隆先有气疾，加以水肿，喘息奔急，坐卧不安。
现代文：大将军、襄乐公贺兰隆原先有气疾，加上又有水肿，喘息急促，坐卧不安。
English: General He Lanlong began to suffer from chest gas blockage disease, coupled with edema, shortness of breath, and restlessness.

古文：或有劝其服决命大散者，其家疑未能决，乃问僧垣。
现代文：有人劝他服用决命大散，其家人疑虑而未能决定，因而问僧垣。
English: His family members hesitated and could not decide whether to advise him to take the fatal medicine, so they asked Yao Sangaki for advice.

古文：僧垣曰： 意谓此患不与大散相当。
现代文：僧垣说： 我想这种病服大散不合适。
English: The monk said, "I don't think it's appropriate to wear such a large number of scrubs.

古文：若欲自服，不烦赐问。 因而委去。
现代文：如果自己想服用，也就不必问我。 因此而离去。
English: If you want to take it, you don't have to ask me, so I leave.

古文：其子殷勤拜请曰： 多时抑屈，今日始来。
现代文：其子殷勤拜请说： 已经委屈多时了，今日才来。
English: His son kindly said, "It's been a long time since I've been wronged, I just came today."

古文：竟不可治，意实未尽。 僧垣知其可差，即为处方，劝使急服。
现代文：如果不加治疗，意实未尽。 僧垣知道此病可以治愈，随即为他开了处方，劝他急速服用。
English: Knowing that the disease could be cured, the monk immediately wrote him a prescription and advised him to take it quickly.

古文：便即气通，更服一剂，诸患悉愈。
现代文：其气便能通畅了，又服了一剂，各种症状都消失了。
English: His qi was able to flow freely, he took another dose, and all kinds of symptoms disappeared.

古文：天和元年，加授车骑大将军、仪同三司。
现代文：天和元年，加授车骑大将军、仪同三司。
English: In the first year of the new year, the general of the cavalry and the three divisions of the etiquette were added.

古文：大将军、乐平公窦集暴感风疾，精神瞀乱，无所觉知。
现代文：大将军、乐平公窦集突然感受风疾，精神错乱，没有什么知觉。
English: The great general, Leping Gongzui, was suddenly taken ill by the wind and became delirious and unconscious.

古文：诸医先视者，皆云已不可救。
现代文：先往治疗的医生，都认为不可救治了。
English: The doctors who had previously treated him thought that he was beyond help.

古文：僧垣后至，曰： 困则困矣，终当不死。
现代文：僧垣后来，说道： 虽然被困，终当不死。
English: Afterward, the monk said, "Although you are trapped, you will not die.

古文：若专以见付，相为治之。 其家忻然，请受方术。
现代文：如果专门委托我，我可以为他治疗。 其家人同意，请求方术。
English: If I am specially commissioned, I can treat him, his family agrees, and requests a prescription.

古文：僧垣为合汤散，所患即瘳。
现代文：僧垣为他配制汤散，药到病除。
English: The monks prepared a decoction for him to cure his illness.

古文：大将军、永世公叱伏列椿苦利积时，而不废朝谒。
现代文：大将军、永世公叱伏列椿腹泻多时，却不停止上朝谒拜。
English: The great general, Yong Shigong, had diarrhea for a long time, but he did not stop going to the temple.

古文：燕公谨尝问僧垣曰： 乐平、永世俱有痼疾，若如仆意，永世差轻。 对曰： 夫患有深浅，时有克杀。
现代文：燕公于谨曾经问僧垣说： 乐平、永世都有痼疾，照我的看法，永世要轻一些。 回答说： 病有深有浅，时有克有杀。
English: Yan Gong Yu Jian once asked a monk: "Leping, forever has a disease, in my opinion, forever should be lighter." He replied: "Disease has depth and shallowness, sometimes there is pain and death.

古文：乐平虽困，终当保全。
现代文：乐平虽然困于疾病，终当保全。
English: Although Leping was plagued by illness, he was eventually saved.

古文：永世虽轻，必不免死。 谨曰： 君言必死，当在何时？ 
现代文：永世虽然略轻，必不免死。 于谨说： 君言必死，当在何时? 
English: Although eternal life is a little light, it will not avoid death. Therefore, I would like to say: When should you die?

古文：对曰： 不出四月。 果如其言。
现代文：回答说： 不出四月。 结果正如他所说。
English: He answered, "Not until the fourth month," and it was done as he had said.

古文：谨叹异之。
现代文：于谨十分叹服。
English: Yu Zheng was very impressed.

古文：六年，迁遂伯中大夫。
现代文：六年，迁任遂伯中大夫。
English: Six years later, he was transferred to Suibo Junior High School.

古文：建德三年，文宣太后寝疾，医巫杂说，各有异同。
现代文：建德三年，文宣太后卧病，医巫所说非常杂乱，各有异同。
English: During the three years of Jiande, Empress Dowager Wenzhong was bedridden. According to doctors and witches, it was very chaotic, with both similarities and differences.

古文：高祖御内殿，引僧垣同坐，曰： 太后患势不轻，诸医并云无虑。
现代文：高祖御于内殿，召僧垣同坐，说道： 太后的病情不轻，诸医都说不必忧虑。
English: In the inner hall, Emperor Gaozong called the monks to sit together and said, "Your empress's illness is not light, and all the doctors say there is no need to worry.

古文：朕人子之情，可以意得。
现代文：朕人子之情，可以理解。
English: It is understandable why I feel like a son of man.

古文：君臣之义，言在无隐。
现代文：君臣之义，说话不必隐瞒。
English: For the sake of the king and the court, there is no need to hide what you say.

古文：公为何如？ 对曰： 臣无听声视色之妙，特以经事已多，准之常人，窃以忧惧。 帝泣曰： 公既决之矣，知复何言！ 寻而太后崩。
现代文：你认为如何? 回答说： 臣没有听声观色的妙技，衹因经历的事很多，如果是常人，确实值得忧惧。 帝哭泣说： 公既然已确定，知复何言! 接着太后去世。
English: What do you think? replied: "The minister does not have the skill of listening and seeing, because he has experienced a lot of things, and if he is an ordinary person, he is really worth worrying about." Emperor Weeping said: "Since the public has been determined, what can I say!" Then the empress dowager died.

古文：其后复因召见，帝问僧垣曰： 姚公为仪同几年？ 
现代文：其后又召见，帝问僧垣说： 姚公任仪同多少年了? 
English: Afterward, he was summoned again, and the emperor asked the monk: "How many years has Yao Gongren Yi been with you?"

古文：对曰： 臣忝荷朝恩，于兹九载。 帝曰： 勤劳有日，朝命宜隆。 乃授骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司。
现代文：回答说： 臣愧受朝恩，已经九年了。 帝说道： 这么长时间的辛劳，朝命宜隆重。 于是授骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司。
English: He replied, "It has been nine years since I have been humbled by the grace of the Imperial Court." The Emperor said, "After such a long period of hard work, the Imperial command should be grand." He then conferred the title of Grand General of Cavalry, the title of Kaifu, and the title of Sanji.

古文：又敕曰： 公年过县车，可停朝谒。
现代文：又下敕令： 公年事已高，可停请谒。
English: Another imperial edict was issued: The public event has reached a high point, and it is possible to suspend the imperial edict.

古文：若非别敕，不劳入见。 
现代文：如果没有专门敕令，不劳入见。 
English: If there is no special imperial edict, there is no need to work hard.

古文：四年，高祖亲戎东讨，至河阴遇疾。
现代文：四年，高祖亲自率军东讨，至河阴而患疾病。
English: In the fourth year, Gaozu personally led the army to the East, and fell ill in Heyin.

古文：口不能言；垂覆目，不复瞻视；一足短缩，又不得行。
现代文：无法说话；眼睑下垂遮住眼睛，看不见东西；一只脚短缩，无法行走。
English: Unable to speak; eyelids drooping to cover eyes, unable to see; one leg shortened, unable to walk.

古文：僧垣以为诸藏俱病，不可并治。
现代文：僧垣认为各脏都有病，不能并治。
English: The monks believed that all the internal organs were diseased and could not be treated together.

古文：军中之要，莫先于语。
现代文：军队中的机要，莫先于语言。
English: Tactics in the army take precedence over words.

古文：乃处方进药，帝遂得言。
现代文：于是处方进药，帝就可以说话了。
English: So the prescription was filled, and the emperor was able to speak.

古文：次又治目，目疾便愈。
现代文：接着治疗眼睛，目疾痊愈。
English: He then treated his eyes, and his eye disease was cured.

古文：末乃治足，足疾亦瘳。
现代文：然后治疗足疾，亦得以痊愈。
English: He was then treated for a foot ailment and was able to recover.

古文：比至华州，帝已痊复。
现代文：等到了华州，帝已康复。
English: By the time he arrived in Washington, the emperor had fully recovered.

古文：即除华州刺史，仍诏随入京，不令在镇。
现代文：当即被任命为华州刺史，韶令随之入京，不必上任。
English: He was immediately appointed as the governor of Huazhou, and the imperial edict followed him to Beijing, without him having to take office.

古文：宣政元年，表请致仕，优诏许之。
现代文：宣政元年，上表请求退休，优诏允许。
English: In the first year of the proclamation of the Republic of China, a petition was sent to the emperor asking him to resign his post and return home, which was granted with a special favor.

古文：是岁，高祖行幸云阳，遂寝疾。乃诏僧垣赴行在所。
现代文：当年，高祖行幸云阳，卧病。于是诏令僧垣赴行在所。
English: In that year, Gao Zu went on a pilgrimage to Yunyang and was sick in bed. Therefore, the emperor ordered the monks to go to the monastery.

古文：内史柳私问曰： 至尊贬膳日久，脉候何如？ 对曰： 天子上应天心，或当非愚所及。
现代文：内史柳昂私下问道： 至尊贬膳日久，脉候何如? 回答说： 天子上应天心，并非我所能料及的。
English: Inner Historian Liu Ang privately asked, "How long has it been since the Supreme Leader was dethroned, and what is his pulse?" He replied, "It is not something I could have anticipated.

古文：若凡庶如此，万无一全。 寻而帝崩。
现代文：如若是凡庶之人如此，万无一全。 不久帝驾崩。
English: If it were an ordinary person, everything would be imperfect, and the emperor would soon die.

古文：宣帝初在东宫，常苦心痛。
现代文：宣帝当初做太子的时候，经常心痛。
English: When Emperor Xuancheng was crown prince, he was often heartbroken.

古文：乃令僧垣治之，其疾即愈。帝甚悦。及即位，恩礼弥隆。常从容谓僧垣曰： 常闻先帝呼公为姚公，有之乎？ 对曰： 臣曲荷殊私，实如圣旨。 帝曰： 此是尚齿之辞，非为贵爵之号。
现代文：及至即位，礼遇更加隆重。曾经随口对僧垣说： 常常闻知先帝称呼你为姚公，是吗? 回答说： 臣曲荷殊恩，实是圣旨所赠。 帝说： 造衹是口头上的赞誉，非为贵爵之号。
English: When he ascended the throne, he was treated with even more pompous courtesy. He once casually said to a monk: "I often heard that the former emperor called you Yao Gong, didn't I?" He replied: "Subject Cho Ho Shuen, it is actually a gift from the Holy Will." The emperor said: "Achievement is a verbal praise, not a title of nobility."

古文：朕当为公建国开家，为子孙永业。 乃封长寿县公，邑一千户。
现代文：朕当为公建国开家，作为子孙的永业。 于是封为长寿县公，食邑一千户。
English: I should open a house for the public to build a country, as the eternal career of the descendants. Therefore, I was appointed as the public of Changshou County, and a thousand households in the food village were created.

古文：册命之日，又赐以金带及衣服等。
现代文：册封之曰，又赐以金带和衣服等。
English: He was also given a gold belt and clothes.

古文：大象二年，除太医下大夫。
现代文：大象二年，授太医下大夫。
English: Two years later, he was promoted to the post of junior doctor.

古文：帝寻有疾，至于大渐。
现代文：帝不久患病，病势很重。
English: The emperor soon fell ill and became very ill.

古文：僧垣宿直侍。
现代文：僧垣值夜侍候。
English: Sangakitori waits in the evening.

古文：帝谓随公曰： 今日性命，唯委此人。 僧垣知帝诊候危殆，必不全济。
现代文：帝对随公说： 今的性命，惟有委托此人了。 僧垣知道帝诊候危殆，不可能活命。
English: The emperor said to Su Gong, "This man is the only one to whom I can entrust my life now." The monk knew that the emperor's condition was critical and that he could not live.

古文：乃对曰： 臣荷恩既重，思在效力。
现代文：因而说道： 臣既蒙重恩，志在效命。
English: Therefore, he said, "Since I have received a great favor, I am determined to serve."

古文：但恐庸短不逮，敢不尽心。 帝颔之。
现代文：衹恐才疏学浅，怎敢不尽心尽力。 帝点了点头。
English: "How dare you not do your best when you're afraid you're not smart enough to learn," the emperor nodded.

古文：及静帝嗣位，迁上开府仪同大将军。
现代文：到静帝嗣位的时候，调任上开府仪同大将军。
English: After Emperor Jing ascended the throne, he was promoted to Kaifu Yi and became a general.

古文：隋开皇初，进爵北绛郡公。
现代文：隋开皇初年，晋爵为北绛郡公。
English: In the first year of the Sui Dynasty, he was awarded the title of Beibei County.

古文：三年卒，时年八十五。
现代文：三年去世，时年八十五岁。
English: He died three years later, aged 85.

古文：遗诫衣白帢入棺，朝服勿敛。
现代文：遣诫以白衣入棺，不要以朝服入殓。
English: The admonition is to wear a white coat into the coffin, and not to wear a morning suit into the coffin.

古文：灵上唯置香奁，每日设清水而已。
现代文：灵位上衹置香奁，每曰祇设清水而已。
English: Champagne is placed on the altar, but only fresh water is provided each day.

古文：赠本官，加荆、湖二州刺史。
现代文：追赠本官，加荆、湖二州刺史荣衔。
English: He was posthumously awarded the title, and was also awarded the Jing and the Huzhou two-pronged history.

古文：僧垣医术高妙，为当世所推。
现代文：灯垣医术高妙，为当时所推崇。
English: He was highly respected for his skill in the art of lantern medicine.

古文：前后效验，不可胜记。
现代文：前后的应验效果，不可胜记。
English: The results before and after passing the test are unforgettable.

古文：声誉既盛，远闻边服。至于诸蕃外域，咸请托之。
现代文：声誉既然很盛，远处闻知边地钦服，连诸番外域，也经常加以请托。
English: Since the reputation is very prosperous, it is widely known and admired in the distance, and even in the outlying areas, it is often requested.

古文：僧垣乃搜采奇异，参校征效者，为集验方十二卷，又撰行记三卷，行于世。
现代文：丰旦便搜集各种奇异医方，相互参照，编为《集验方》十二卷，又撰《行记》三卷，流行于世。
English: Fontan then collected all kinds of strange medical prescriptions, cross-referenced them, compiled twelve volumes of "Collection of Prescriptions," and compiled three volumes of "Diary," which became popular in the world.

古文：长子察在江南。
现代文：长子垄随在辽南。
English: The eldest son, Ren, followed in Liaoning Province.

古文：次子最，字士会，幼而聪敏，及长，博通经史，尤好著述。
现代文：次子姚最，字士会，年幼聪敏，长大以后，博通经史，尤其喜好著述。
English: The second son, Yao Zhi, is a member of the Calligraphers Association. He is young and intelligent. When he grows up, he will be well-versed in the history of calligraphy. He especially likes to write.

古文：年十九，随僧垣入关。
现代文：十九岁时，随从僧垣入关。
English: At the age of nineteen, he followed the monks into the customs.

古文：世宗盛聚学徒，校书于麟趾殿，最亦预为学士。
现代文：世宗广聚学徒，于麟趾殿校书，姚最亦预为学士。
English: He was an apprentice of the Shizong Guangju School and a student of the Linzi School. Yao Zhi was also expected to become a bachelor.

古文：俄授齐王宪府水曹参军，掌记室事。
现代文：不久授齐王宇文宪府水曹参军，掌记室事。
English: Wang Yuwen of Qianfu was soon given a commission to join the army as a midshipman and was put in charge of the office.

古文：特为宪所礼接，赏赐隆厚。
现代文：宇文宪对他十分礼遇，赏赐丰厚。
English: Uwen Hsien treated him with great courtesy and rewarded him handsomely.

古文：宣帝嗣位，宪以嫌疑被诛。
现代文：宣帝嗣位，宇文宪受到嫌疑而被诛杀。
English: Emperor Xuan succeeded to the throne, and Uwen Xian was suspected and killed.

古文：隋文帝作相，追复官爵。
现代文：隋文帝做丞相，追复其官爵。
English: Emperor Sui Wen made him chancellor and restored his title of nobility.

古文：最以陪游积岁，恩顾过隆，乃录宪功绩为传，送上史局。
现代文：姚最因陪伴了多年，恩遇又很隆盛，就将宇文宪的功绩记录为传，送上编纂史书的史局。
English: Because Yao had accompanied him for many years and was very prosperous, he recorded the exploits of Yu Wenzhen and sent it to the History Bureau for compiling history books.

古文：最幼在江左，迄于入关，未习医术。
现代文：姚最幼年生活在江左，到入关之时还未学习医术。
English: Yao, the youngest, lived in Jiangzao and had not yet studied medicine when he entered the customs.

古文：天和中，齐王宪奏高祖，遣最习之。
现代文：天和年间，齐王宇文宪上奏高祖，遣姚最学习医术。
English: During the Heian and Qing dynasties, Qi Wang Yuwen Xian played the role of a high-ranking ancestor, and sent Yao to study medicine.

古文：宪又谓最曰： 尔博学高才，何如王褒、庾信。
现代文：宇文宪又对姚最说： 你博学多才，与王褒、庾信相比如何。
English: Yu Wenxian also said to Yao Chong: You are well-read and multi-talented, how do you compare with Wang Bo and Xuan Xin.

古文：王、庾名重两国，吾视之蔑如。
现代文：王、庾名重两国，我视之很渺小。
English: The king, the king's name, the two countries, I regard it as very small.

古文：接待资给，非尔家比也。
现代文：待遇和给予的钱财物品，你家就比不上了。
English: Your home is no match for the treatment and the money and goods given.

古文：尔宜深识此意，勿不存心。
现代文：你要深刻地认识此中的意义，不要不用心去想。
English: You have to deeply understand the meaning of this, don't just think about it.

古文：且天子有敕，弥须勉励。 最于是始受家业。
现代文：而且天子有敕令，更要自勉。 姚最于是开始接受家学。
English: Moreover, it was God's command that he should be more self-disciplined. Yao then began to receive home schooling.

古文：十许年中，略尽其妙。
现代文：十多年中，基本掌握了其中奥妙。
English: In more than ten years, we have basically mastered the essence of it.

古文：每有人造请，效验甚多。
现代文：常常有人求医问药，疗效显著。
English: People often seek medical treatment, and the curative effect is remarkable.

古文：隋文帝践极，除太子门大夫。
现代文：隋文帝登基，授太子门大夫。
English: Emperor Sui Wen ascended to the throne and was awarded the title of crown prince.

古文：以父忧去官，哀毁骨立。
现代文：由于父亲丧事去官，悲伤过度以致形销骨立。
English: Due to his father's death and leaving the government, his grief was so excessive that he was devastated.

古文：既免丧，袭爵北绛郡公，复为太子门大夫。
现代文：免丧之后，袭爵北绛郡公，复为太子门大夫。
English: After being exempted from death, he succeeded to the title of Duke of Beilun County and was reinstated as the prince's doctor.

古文：俄转蜀王秀友。
现代文：不久转任蜀王杨秀友。
English: He was soon replaced by Yang Xiuyou, the King of Shu.

古文：秀镇益州，迁秀府司马。
现代文：杨秀镇守益州，升任为杨秀府司马。
English: Yang Xiuzhen guarding Yizhou, promoted to Yang Xiufu Sima.

古文：及平陈，察至。
现代文：及至平定陈朝，姚察到来。
English: and to the Chen dynasty, Yao Zha arrived.

古文：最自以非嫡，让封于察，隋文帝许之。
现代文：姚最自己认为不是嫡生之子，请求将爵封让给姚察，隋文帝允许。
English: Yao himself believed that he was not the legitimate son, and requested that the title be given to Yao Zha, which was allowed by the Sui Emperor.

古文：秀后阴有异谋，隋文帝令公卿穷治其事。开府庆整、郝伟等并推过于秀。
现代文：查睦后来有阴谋，堕塞童令公卿彻底清查开府庆整、郝伟等人都将过错推给杨昼。
English: After that, there was a conspiracy in Camo, and the prostitute Tong Ling and the court noble thoroughly investigated, and Kaifu Qingtai, Zou Wei and others all blamed Yang Rong.

古文：最独曰： 凡有不法，皆最所为，王实不知也。 搒讯数百，卒无异辞。
现代文：衹有挑虽说： 凡有不法之事，都是我做的，王实在不知情。 刑讯拷问数百次，没有其他的话。
English: "I did everything that was illegal, and Wang really didn't know about it," he said, adding that he was interrogated hundreds of times and had nothing else to say.

古文：最竟坐诛。
现代文：型睦终于获罪被杀。
English: At last, he was convicted and killed.

古文：时年六十七。
现代文：时年六十七岁。
English: He was sixty-seven years old.

古文：论者义之。
现代文：评论者认为他讲义气。
English: Critics say he is a charlatan.

古文：撰梁后略十卷，行于世。
现代文：撰有《梁后略》十卷，流行于州。
English: Authored "Liang Houliu" ten volumes, popular in the state.

古文：黎景熙字季明，河间人也，少以字行于世。
现代文：黎景熙字季明，是河间郑人，年轻时以字行于世。
English: Lai King Hee, also known as Ji Ming, was a member of the Zheng Clan in Kawama. When he was young, he traveled the world with a pen.

古文：曾祖嶷，魏太武时，从破平凉，有功，赐爵容城县男，加鹰扬将军。
现代文：曾祖父黎嶷，魏太武时，从征攻破平凉，有功，赐封容城县男爵位，加授鹰扬将军。
English: The great-grandfather of Lihong, Wei Taiwu, was awarded the title of Baron of Chengxian County and the additional award of General Ying Yang.

古文：后为燕郡守。
现代文：后来任戚遝守。
English: Later, he was appointed to the position of kizikizome no kami.

古文：祖镇，袭爵，为员外散骑侍郎。
现代文：祖父垫镕，继承爵位，任员外散骑侍郎。
English: His grandfather, Matanagi, inherited the title of nobility and was appointed as a non-commissioned officer.

古文：父琼，太和中，袭爵，历员外郎、魏县令，后至鄜城郡守。
现代文：父亲黎琼，太和年间，继承爵位，历任员外郎、魏县县令，后来官至鄘城郡守。
English: Li Qiong's father, during the reign of the Empress Dowager Cixi, inherited the title of nobility, and successively held the posts of Jian Wai Lang, Wei County magistrate, and later the post of Lucheng County governor.

古文：季明少好读书，性强记默识，而无应对之能。
现代文：季明年少喜好读书，记忆力很强，但是没有应对的能力。
English: When Li Jiming was a child, he liked to read, had a strong natural memory, and had the talent of silent memory, but did not have the talent of answering questions.

古文：其从祖广，太武时为尚书郎，善古学。
现代文：他的堂房祖父黎广，太武时为尚书郎，擅长古学。
English: His great-great-grandfather, Li Guang, was a scholar who excelled in ancient studies.

古文：尝从吏部尚书清河崔玄伯受字义，又从司徒崔浩学楷篆，自是家传其法。
现代文：曾经师从吏部尚书清河崔玄伯学习字义，又师从司徒崔浩学习楷篆书法，此后家传其法。
English: He once learned the meaning of Chinese characters from the official Shangshu Qinghe Cui Xuanbo, and the calligraphy of Chinese characters from the scholar Cui Hao. After that, his method was passed down in his family.

古文：季明亦传习之，颇与许氏有异。
现代文：季明亦学习到了，与许氏颇有不同。
English: Ji Ming also studies the meaning of words, Chinese characters and Chinese characters, which is very different from Xu Sheng.

古文：又好占玄象，颇知术数。
现代文：又喜好占玄象，颇知术数。
English: He also likes to predict the future and knows a lot about numbers.

古文：而落魄不事生业。
现代文：但是落魄不从事生业。
English: But the down-and-out don't make a living.

古文：有书千余卷。
现代文：有一千多卷书。
English: There are more than a thousand volumes of books.

古文：虽穷居独处，不以饥寒易操。
现代文：虽然隐居独处，却不以饥寒而改变操守。
English: Although poverty is a lonely place to live, it does not force people to change their habits.

古文：与范阳卢道源为莫逆之友。
现代文：与范阳卢道源为莫逆之友。
English: Lu Dogen and Fan Yang are inseparable friends.

古文：永安中，道源劝令入仕，始为威烈将军。
现代文：永安年间，道源劝他进入仕途，开始任威烈将军。
English: During the Northern Wei Xiaozhuang Emperor Yongan, Lu Daoyuan persuaded him to go out to work as an official, and only then did he become a powerful general.

古文：魏孝武初，迁镇远将军，寻除步兵校尉。
现代文：魏孝武帝初年，调任镇远将军，不久授步兵校尉。
English: In the first year of Emperor Wei Xiaowu, he was transferred to the post of General Zhenyuan, and was soon promoted to the rank of infantry captain.

古文：及孝武西迁，季明乃寓居伊、洛。
现代文：到孝武帝西迁的时候，季明就在伊、洛地区寓居。
English: When Emperor Xiaowu moved to the west, Ji Ming lived in the I and Luo regions.

古文：侯景徇地河外，召季明从军。
现代文：侯景在河外扩展势力，召季明从军。
English: Hou Jing expanded his influence beyond the river and called Ji Ming to join the army.

古文：寻授银青光禄大夫，加中军将军，拜行台郎中，除黎阳郡守。
现代文：不久授银青光禄大夫，加授中军将军，拜为行台郎中，授黎阳郡守。
English: He was soon awarded the silver medal of Qing Guanglu Doctor, the additional award of the General of the Chinese Army, and the award of the Governor of Liyang County.

古文：季明从至悬瓠，察景终不足恃，遂去之。
现代文：季明随从到悬瓠，觉察到侯景最终不足以依靠，因此离去。
English: Ji Ming followed him to the gallows, realized that Hou Jing was ultimately not enough to rely on, so he left.

古文：客于颍川，以世路未清，欲优游卒岁。
现代文：旅居颖川，因世道混乱，想悠闲自得聊以度日。
English: He lives in Yingchuan, and because of the chaos in the world, he wants to spend his days chatting leisurely.

古文：时王思政镇颍川，累使召。
现代文：此时王思政镇守颖，多次派人召请。
English: At this time, Wang Shizheng sent several people to summon Shouying.

古文：季明不得已，出与相见。
现代文：季明没有办法，出来与其相见。
English: Ji Ming had no choice but to come out to meet him.

古文：留于内馆月余。
现代文：在内馆留住一个多月。
English: It stayed in the inner hall for more than a month.

古文：太祖又征之，遂入关。
现代文：太祖又征召他，于是入关。
English: The great-grandfather conscripted him again, and he was sent to prison.

古文：乃令季明正定古今文字于东阁。
现代文：乃令季明在束合校订古今文字。
English: Zhou Wendi ordered Ji Ming to revise and determine the ancient and modern characters in the East Pavilion.

古文：大统末，除安西将军，寻拜著作佐郎。
现代文：大统末年，授安西将军，不久拜为著作佐郎。
English: At the end of the Taito era, he was given the title of Anshi Shogun, and soon became known as Shososaro.

古文：于时伦辈，皆位兼常伯，车服华盛。
现代文：当时同朝为官者，都位兼常伯，车辆服饰很华丽。
English: At that time, officials of the same dynasty, all of whom were also great-grandfathers, had very ornate vehicles.

古文：唯季明独以贫素居之，而无愧色。
现代文：惟有季明甘居贫穷朴素，面无愧色。
English: Only Ji Ming was willing to live in poverty and simplicity, and his face was without shame.

古文：又勤于所职，著述不怠。
现代文：又勤于职守，著述不知疲倦。
English: Ji Ming is also very diligent in his duties and does not slack off in his writing.

古文：然性尤专固，不合于时。
现代文：不过性格特别固执，不合于时。
English: However, his character is particularly stubborn and out of step with the times.

古文：是以一为史官，遂十年不调。
现代文：所以一旦做了史官，十年都不得调任。
English: So once you become a historian, you cannot be transferred for ten years.

古文：魏恭帝元年，进号平南将军、右银青光禄大夫。
现代文：魏恭帝元年，进号为平南将军、右银青光禄大夫。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Wei Gong, he was given the title of General Pingnan and the title of Doctor of the Right Bank Qingguanglu.

古文：六官建，为外史上士。
现代文：建立六官时，任外史上士。
English: When the six offices were established, he was appointed as a foreign historian.

古文：孝闵帝践阼，加征南将军、右金紫光禄大夫。
现代文：孝闵帝登基，加授征南将军、右金紫光禄大夫。
English: Emperor Xiaojun ascended to the throne, conferred the title of General of the Southern Expeditionary Army, and became a doctor of the Right Gold and Purple Star.

古文：时大司马贺兰祥讨吐谷浑，诏季明从军。
现代文：此时大司马贺兰祥征讨吐谷浑，韶令季明从军。
English: At this time, the chief magistrate, Magoran Xiang, summoned Tu Guhun and ordered Ji Ming to join the army.

古文：还，除骠骑将军、右光禄大夫。
现代文：回来后，拜为骠骑将军、右光禄大夫。
English: After returning, he bowed to the general of the cavalry and the doctor of the Right Guanglu.

古文：武成末，迁外史下大夫。
现代文：武成末年，调任外史下大夫。
English: In the last years of Emperor Zhou Ming Wucheng, he was promoted to the post of foreign doctor.

古文：保定三年，盛营宫室。
现代文：惺室三年，大量建造宫室。
English: For three years, a large number of palace rooms were built.

古文：春夏大旱，诏公卿百寮，极言得失。
现代文：春夏两季都大旱，下诏公卿百官，极言得失。
English: Both the spring and summer seasons were very dry, and hundreds of court nobles and officials were dismissed.

古文：季明上书曰：臣闻成汤遭旱，以六事自陈。
现代文：季明上书说：臣闻知盛荡时由于大旱灾，以六事自我
English: Ji Ming's letter said: Due to the great drought, when the vassal Wenzhi was in full bloom, six things happened to me

古文：宣王太甚，而珪璧斯竭。
现代文：谢罪。宣王过分祈祷下雨，用尽了玉珪玉璧。
English: Xie sinned. Xuan Wang prayed excessively for rain and used up all of his jade brooches.

古文：岂非远虑元元，俯哀兆庶。
现代文：这不正是远虑大众，俯哀百姓。
English: This is not exactly looking out for the public and mourning the people.

古文：方今农要之月，时雨犹愆，率土之心，有怀渴仰。
现代文：现在是农耕最重要的时候，却未能有及时雨，全国人民心中，都满怀着渴望。
English: Now is the most important time for farming, but there has been no timely rain, and the hearts of the people across the country are full of longing.

古文：陛下垂情万类，子爱群生，觐礼百神，犹未丰洽者，岂或作事不节，有违时令，举措失中，傥邀斯旱。
现代文：陛下对万物都有情意，爱民如子，向百神加以祭祀，犹未能得到风调雨顺的原因，这或许是做事没有节度，举措失去分寸，所以引致如此大旱。
English: His majesty has affection for all things, loves the people like a son, and offers sacrifices to hundreds of gods. The reason why he has not been able to get the wind and rain is probably because he does things without restraint, and his measures are out of proportion, which has led to such a drought.

古文：春秋，君举必书，动为典礼，水旱阴阳，莫不应行而至。
现代文：《春秋》之义，君主的举止必定要加以记载，所作所为成为典范礼仪，水涝干早阴阳交替，无不是顺此而成。
English: According to "Spring and Autumn," the monarch's behavior must be recorded, and what he does becomes a model of etiquette. The alternation of morning, afternoon, and evening is a result of this.

古文：孔子曰： 言行，君子之所以动天地，可不慎乎。 春秋庄公三十一年冬，不雨。
现代文：孔子说： 言论行为，君子用来与天地相呼应，怎么可以不谨慎呢。 《春秋》庄公三十一年冬季，不下雨。
English: Confucius said: How can a gentleman not be prudent when he uses words and deeds to resonate with heaven and earth. "Spring and Autumn" Zhuangguo 31st year of winter, no rain.

古文：五行传以为是岁一年而三筑台，奢侈不恤民也。
现代文：《五行传》认为是一年之中三次建筑高台，奢侈而不体恤百姓的结果。
English: "The Legend of the Five Elements" believes that it is the result of building high platforms three times a year, extravagant and inconsiderate of the people.

古文：僖公二十一年夏，大旱。
现代文：僖公二十一年夏季，出了大旱灾。
English: In the summer of the twenty-first year of King Gong, there was a great drought.

古文：五行传以为时作南门，劳民兴役。
现代文：《五行传》认为是当时建造南门，劳役人民大众的原因。
English: "The Legend of the Five Elements" believes that the reason for building the south gate at that time was to labor the people.

古文：汉惠帝二年夏，大旱。
现代文：汉惠帝二年夏季，大旱灾。
English: In the summer of Han Hui's second year, there was a severe drought.

古文：五年夏，大旱，江河水少，溪涧水绝。
现代文：五年夏季，大旱灾。江河水量都减少，溪涧断流。
English: In the summer of 2005, there was a severe drought. The amount of water in the rivers decreased, and the streams were cut off.

古文：五行传以为先是发民十四万六千人城长安。
现代文：《五行传》认为是先前征发十四万六千人修建长安城的结果。
English: "The Legend of the Five Elements" is considered to be the result of previously conscripting 146,000 people to build Chang'an City.

古文：汉武帝元狩三年夏，大旱。
现代文：汉亘逊五猹三年夏季，大旱灾。
English: In the summer of the third year of the Han Dynasty, there was a severe drought.

古文：五行传以为是岁发天下故吏穿昆明池。
现代文：《五行传》认为是这一年征发天下故吏挖掘昆明池所致。
English: "The Legend of the Five Elements" believes that this year's excavation of Kunming Pool by the world's ancient officials was the cause.

古文：然则土木之功，动民兴役，天辄应之以异。
现代文：所以兴建土木工程，对民众的劳役负担很重，上天便会有异常现象相应。
English: Therefore, the construction of civil engineering projects has a heavy labor burden on the public, and there will be corresponding abnormal phenomena in the sky.

古文：典籍作诫，傥或可思。
现代文：典籍所作的告诫，应该值得考虑。
English: The admonitions of the classics should be worthy of consideration.

古文：上天谴告，改之则善。
现代文：上天谴责告诫，改过来就是从善。
English: Heaven's condemnation and admonition, in turn, is to do good.

古文：今若息民省役，以答天谴，庶灵泽时降，嘉谷有成，则年登可觊，子来非晚。
现代文：现在如果使民众休息减少劳役，以回答上天的谴责，可以希望霖雨按时而降，良好的谷物长成了，就有望得到大丰收，现在做并不晚。
English: Now, if the people are allowed to rest and reduce their labor in response to God's condemnation, we can hope that the rain will fall on time and the good grain will grow, and we can hope for a great harvest. It is not too late to do it now.

古文：诗云： 民亦劳止，迄可小康。
现代文：《诗》中有说： 民众停止劳役，求得小康。
English: There is a saying in the "Poem": People stop labor service and seek a moderate well-off life.

古文：惠此中国，以绥四方。 或恐极阳生阴，秋多雨水，年复不登，民将无觊。
现代文：对中国有恩惠，来安定四方。 怕的是极阳会转化为阴，秋季雨水太多，又不能成为丰年，人民又无希望。
English: It is feared that the extreme sun will turn to shade, that there will be too much rain in the autumn to make it a good year, and that the people will have no hope.

古文：如又荐饥，为虑更甚。
现代文：如果连续灾荒，忧虑就更是巨大了。
English: If famine is added, there is even more to worry about.

古文：时豪富之家，竞为奢丽。
现代文：当时豪富的人家，竞相追逐奢侈华丽。
English: At that time, powerful, rich and noble families were all competing to be the most luxurious and gorgeous.

古文：季明又上书曰：臣闻宽大所以兼覆，慈爱所以怀众。
现代文：季明又上书说：臣听说宽大所以恩泽广覆，慈爱可以使百姓归化。
English: Ji Ming also sent a letter saying: "The minister has heard that leniency leads to widespread benevolence, and benevolence can naturalize the people.

古文：故天地称其高厚者，万物得其容养焉。
现代文：天地之所以称为高厚，是万物得其容纳养育。
English: The reason why heaven and earth are called high and thick is that all things have to be accommodated and nurtured.

古文：四时着其寒暑者，庶类资其忠信焉。
现代文：四时所分别的寒暑，等于就是考验忠信的程度。
English: The cold and hot weather at four o'clock is equal to the degree of test of loyalty.

古文：是以帝王者，宽大象天地，忠信则四时。
现代文：因此作为帝王的人，宽怀大量要同天地一样，忠信要合于四时。
English: Therefore, the emperor's tolerance and generosity are like heaven and earth, and his faithfulness and honesty are like the four seasons.

古文：招摇东指，天下识其春。
现代文：北斗指向东方，天下知道已是春天。
English: The Big Dipper points to the east, and the whole world knows that it is spring.

古文：人君布德，率土怀其惠。
现代文：人们的君主布下仁德，天下都享有恩惠。
English: People's monarchs spread benevolence, and the whole world enjoys grace.

古文：伏惟陛下资干御宇，品物咸亨，时乘六龙，自强不息，好问受规，天下幸甚。
现代文：愿陛下拥有帝位统治天下，万物亨通，依时乘驾六爻之阳气以御天，自强不息，勤于请教接受规劝，那么天下就很幸运了。 
English: May your majesty have the imperial throne to rule the world, and may all things be prosperous, and may you always ride on the yang of the six elements to rule the world, be self-reliant, and be diligent in seeking advice and accepting persuasion. Then the world will be very lucky.

古文：自古至治之君，亦皆广延博访，询采刍荛，置喜树木，以求其过。
现代文：自古治理有方的君主，都是广泛延请人才多方访问，听取割草采薪者的意见，设置进谏的鼓植下提意见的树，寻求自己的过错。
English: Since ancient times, monarchs with good governance have extensively invited talented people to visit many places, listened to the opinions of those who cut grass and collected wages, set up a gong drum, planted a tree to put forward opinions, and sought their own mistakes.

古文：顷年亢旱踰时，人怀望岁。
现代文：近年来大旱时间很长，人人都盼望有好的收成。
English: In recent years, droughts have lasted a long time, and everyone hopes for a good harvest.

古文：陛下爰发明诏，广求人瘼。
现代文：陛下于是发出明诏，广求民间疾苦。
English: His Majesty then issued an edict, calling for the suffering of the people.

古文：同禹、汤之罪己，高宋景之守正。
现代文：如同禹、汤的引咎自责，高于宋景的恪守自身之正。
English: Like Yu, Tang's self-reproach is higher than Song Jing's adherence to self-correctness.

古文：澍雨应时，年谷斯稔。
现代文：风调雨顺如时而至，五谷丰登。
English: The wind and rain come as time goes by, and the grain is abundant.

古文：克己节用，慕质恶华，此则尚矣。
现代文：约束自己节省费用，向往朴素不喜欢奢侈华丽，则蔚然成风。
English: Constraining oneself to save costs, yearning for simplicity and not liking luxury and glamor have become the fashion.

古文：然而朱紫仍耀于衢路，绮縠犹侈于豪家；裋褐未充于细民，糟糠未厌于编户。
现代文：但是身穿朱衣紫衫的人还是炫耀于街道上，穿戴绫罗绸缎的人还是挥霍于豪富家中；平民百姓衣不遮体，贫困的人糟糠都吃小饱。
English: However, people wearing vermilion and purple shirts still show off in the streets, and people wearing satin and silk blouses still spend lavishly in the homes of the rich and wealthy; ordinary people do not cover their bodies with clothing, and poor people eat little.

古文：此则劝导之理有所未周故也。
现代文：如此说明劝谕和引导都做得不完全。
English: This shows that the exhortation and guidance are not complete.

古文：今虽导之以政，齐之以刑，风俗固难以一矣。
现代文：现在虽然以政令来加以引导，以刑法加以整治，但是风气习俗很难统一起来。
English: Although it is now guided by government decrees and rectified by criminal law, it is difficult to unify customs.

古文：昔文帝集上书之囊，以作帷帐；惜十家之产，不造露台；后宫所幸，衣不曳地，方之今日富室之饰，曾不如婢隶之服。
现代文：过去文帝将上书的袋子收集起来，用作帷幕帐子；爱惜价值十家产业的财物，不建造露台；后宫受宠幸的嫔妃，所穿的衣裳不会长到拖在地上，与今日富豪家相比，简直不如奴婢的服装。
English: In the past, Emperor Wen would collect up the bags used to hold the books and use them as curtain rods; he would not build terraces because he cherished the wealth of ten families; the favored concubines in his harem would not wear clothes that dragged on the ground. Compared to today's rich families, they were simply inferior to the clothing of slaves.

古文：然而以身率下，国富刑清，庙称太宗，良有以也。
现代文：应该亲身为臣下作出表率，国家富强刑罚公正清明，庙号称为太宗，确实有其道理。
English: However, Emperor Hanwen himself set an example for his subordinates, the country was rich, the punishment was fair, and the temple was called Taizong. There was indeed a reason for this.

古文：臣闻圣人久于其道，而天下化成。
现代文：臣知道圣人长久施行仁道，天下治理教化得以成功。
English: The minister knew that the saint had been practicing benevolence for a long time, and the world governance and enlightenment had been successful.

古文：今承魏氏丧乱之后，贞信未兴。
现代文：现在承担了魏氏时期的丧败祸乱，正直诚实尚未兴盛。
English: Now that we have taken on the calamity of the Wei Dynasty, honesty and integrity have yet to flourish.

古文：宜先 遵五美，屏四恶 ，革浮华之俗，抑流竞之风，察鸿都之小艺，焚雉头之异服，无益之货勿重于时，亏德之器勿陈于侧，则民知德矣。
现代文：应该 遵五美，屏四恶 ，革除过于浮华的习俗，禁止争相追逐名声的风气，督察鸿都的雕虫小技，焚毁雉头等奇装异服，没有用处的货物不要在世上受到重视，损害仁德的器物不要陈设在身边，那么民众就知道仁德了。
English: It is necessary to abide by the Five Beauties, Screen the Four Evils, get rid of excessively flashy customs, prohibit the culture of competing to chase fame, inspect Hongdu's carved insect tricks, burn strange clothes such as hoes, goods that are not useful should not be valued in the world, and objects that damage benevolence should not be displayed around, then the people will know benevolence.

古文：臣又闻之，为治之要，在于选举。
现代文：臣又听说，行政治国的要点，在于选拔举用人才。
English: The minister also heard that the key to running a political country lies in the selection of talent.

古文：若差之毫厘，则有千里之失。
现代文：如果有毫厘的差错，就会失之千里。
English: If there is a millimeter of error, it will be a loss of a thousand miles.

古文：后来居上，则致积薪之讥。
现代文：选用人才如果后来居上，就会招致堆积薪柴的批评。
English: If the selection of talents lags behind, it will lead to criticism of piling up firewood.

古文：是以古之善为治者，贯鱼以次，任必以能。
现代文：因此古代善于为政的人，晋升按照顺序，所任用的人依照才能确定。
English: Therefore, in ancient times, those who were good at politics were promoted in order, and those who were appointed were determined according to their talents.

古文：爵人于朝，不以私爱。
现代文：选取贤才授给官职，根据才能高低加以任用。
English: A knighthood is not bestowed in the imperial court because of personal preference.

古文：简材以授其官，量能以任其用。官得其材，用当其器，六辔既调，坐致千里。
现代文：官府得到人才，使用他们的能力，就如同马车调好了六辔所有缰绳，可以安全到达千里之外。
English: If the government gets talented people and uses their abilities, it will be like a carriage that has adjusted all six reins and can safely reach thousands of miles away.

古文：虞、舜选众，不仁者远。
现代文：虞、舜选人的原则，对不仁的人加以疏远。
English: The principle of selecting people on the basis of wealth and power, and alienating those who are not kind.

古文：则庶事康哉，民知其化矣。
现代文：这样就万事安康， 人民知道教化。
English: In this way, everything will be safe and sound, and the people will be enlightened.

古文：帝览而嘉之。
现代文：帝看后十分赞赏。
English: After Zhou Wudi read it, he praised Li Jiming.

古文：时外史廨宇屡移，未有定所。
现代文：此时外史官舍多次迁址，没有固定的地方。
English: At that time, the Foreign History Office was frequently relocated and had no fixed location.

古文：季明又上言曰： 外史之职，汉之东观，仪等石渠，司同天禄。
现代文：季明又上言说： 外史的职务，汉代有束观，仪等同于石渠，职任如同天禄。
English: Ji Ming went on to say, "In the Han Dynasty, the position of foreign historian was equivalent to the position of shakugan, and the ceremony was equivalent to the stone canal, and the position was like the heavenly lotus.

古文：是乃广内秘府，藏言之奥。
现代文：因为是广内秘府，实在是藏言之奥。
English: Because it is a secret place, it is truly a hidden gem.

古文：帝王所宝，此焉攸在。
现代文：帝王的实况，亦在于此。
English: The emperor's real situation also lies here.

古文：自魏及周，公馆不立。
现代文：自魏至周，没有设立公馆。
English: From Wei to Zhou, there was no official residence.

古文：臣虽愚瞽，犹知其非，是以去年十一月中，敢冒陈奏。
现代文：臣虽然愚昧，犹知其非。因此去年十一月中，冒昧而陈奏。
English: Although the minister is stupid, he knows better. Therefore, in the middle of November last year, he had the temerity to play.

古文：将降中旨，即遣修营。
现代文：降下旨意。立即修缮。
English: The order has been issued. Repairs must begin immediately.

古文：荏苒一周，未加功力。
现代文：已经这么长时间了，未加功力。
English: It's been so long, it hasn't sunk in.

古文：臣职思其忧，敢不重请。 帝纳焉。
现代文：臣考虑到此，因而重新再请。 帝接纳了。
English: Considering this, the vassal asked again, and the emperor accepted.

古文：于是廨宇方立。
现代文：于是官舍方立。
English: As a result, the official residence was established.

古文：天和三年，进车骑大将军、仪同三司。
现代文：天和三年，晋为车骑大将军、仪同三司。
English: At the age of three, he was promoted to General of Chariot and Cavalry and Third Division of Ceremonial Arts.

古文：后以疾卒。
现代文：后因病去世。
English: At that time, powerful, rich and noble families were all competing to be the most luxurious and gorgeous.

古文：赵文深字德本，南阳宛人也。
现代文：赵文深字德本，是南阳宛人。
English: Zhao Wenshen's name is German, and he is from Nanyang.

古文：父遐，以医术进，仕魏为尚药典御。
现代文：父亲赵遐，以医术为官，任魏尚药典御。
English: His father, Zhao Jun, was a medical official and was appointed as Wei Shang Pharmacopoeia Emperor.

古文：文深少学楷隶，年十一，献书于魏帝。
现代文：文深从小学习楷隶，十一岁时，将所书呈给魏帝。
English: At the age of eleven, he presented the book to Emperor Wei.

古文：立义归朝，除大丞相府法曹参军。
现代文：立义归朝，授大丞相府法曹参军。
English: Returning to the imperial court, he was awarded the title of Dajo (Senior Secretary) of the Prime Minister's Office and joined the army.

古文：文深雅有钟、王之则，笔势可观。
现代文：文深有钟、王的笔法，十分可观。
English: Wenshen has a bell, Wang's brushwork, very impressive.

古文：当时碑牓，唯文深及冀隽而已。
现代文：当时的碑碣牌匾，衹出于文深和冀俊而已。
English: At that time, the inscriptions and plaques were only made by Wenshen and Jijun.

古文：大统十年，追论立义功，封白石县男，邑二百户。
现代文：大统十年，追论立义功，封爵位白石县男，食邑二百户。
English: In the 10th year of the Great Reunification, a man from Shiroishi County was awarded a knighthood for his meritorious service. Two hundred households in Shiroishi were affected.

古文：太祖以隶书纰缪，命文深与黎季明、沉遐等依说文及字林刊定六体，成一万余言，行于世。
现代文：太祖认为隶书有谬误，命文深与黎季明、沈遐等依照《说文》及《字林》刊定六体，成一万余言，流行于世。
English: The great-grandfather thought that there was a fallacy in the script, and ordered Wen Sheng, Li Jiming, and Shen Qi to publish six books according to "Shuwen" and "Zhilin," which amounted to more than 10,000 words and became popular in the world.

古文：及平江陵之后，王褒入关，贵游等翕然并学褒书。
现代文：平定江陵之后，王褒入关，王公贵族等人都学习王褒的书法。
English: In the summer of the twenty-first year of King Gong, there was a big drought. "Five Elements" thought that the south gate would be built at this time, so that the people would work hard and work hard.

古文：文深之书，遂被遐弃。
现代文：文深的书法被人抛弃。
English: Wenshen's calligraphy was abandoned.

古文：文深惭恨，形于言色。
现代文：文深羞愧遗憾，形于言色。
English: Deep shame and regret, expressed in words and deeds.

古文：后知好尚难反，亦攻习褒书，然竟无所成，转被讥议，谓之学步邯郸焉。
现代文：后来知道好尚难违，亦攻习王褒书法，但是最终无所成就，反而被人讥讽，说是邯郸学步。
English: Later, knowing that good is hard to resist, he also tried to learn the Wang Bao calligraphy method, but in the end he did not achieve anything. Instead, he was ridiculed and said to be a toddler.

古文：至于碑牓，余人犹莫之逮。
现代文：至于碑碣牌匾，其他人还是比不上他。
English: As far as plaques go, the others are no match for him.

古文：王褒亦每推先之。
现代文：王褒亦每次推先他。
English: "The Legend of the Five Elements" believes that in this year, the original officials of the world were dispatched to chisel Kunming Lake.

古文：宫殿楼阁，皆其迹也。
现代文：宫殿楼阁的题字，都是他的笔迹。
English: In this way, things such as construction projects, a labor service, and the heavens have strange things to correspond.

古文：迁县伯下大夫，加仪同三司。
现代文：迁任为县伯下大夫，加授仪同三司。
English: He was transferred to the position of County Deputy Chief Physician, and was awarded the same three titles.

古文：世宗令至江陵书景福寺碑，汉南人士，亦以为工。
现代文：世宗令他去江陵为景福寺书碑，汉南人士，都以为书法很好。
English: The Sejong ordered him to go to Gangneung to be a monument for Gyeongbokgung Temple, and the people of Hannam all thought that the calligraphy was very good.

古文：梁主萧察观而美之，赏遗甚厚。
现代文：梁主萧察观看后认为很美，给了丰厚的赏赐。
English: After watching, Master Liang Xiao thought it was very beautiful and gave it a rich reward.

古文：天和元年，露寝等初成，文深以题牓之功，增邑二百户，除赵兴郡守。
现代文：天和元年，建好露寝等，文深以题写匾额的功劳，增加二百户食邑，授赵兴郡守。
English: In the first year of the Heian and Kamakura Periods, he was awarded the title of County Governor of Zhao Xing County for his contribution to the construction of Luye and other towns, and for increasing the number of households by 200 households.

古文：文深虽外任，每须题牓，辄复追之。
现代文：塞遝虽然在外任职，但每次题写匾额，都要招他回来。
English: Although Sai Yeon is out of office, he has to be called back every time he inscribes a cheque.

古文：后以疾卒。
现代文：后因病去世。
English: At that time, powerful, rich and noble families were all competing to be the most luxurious and gorgeous.

古文：褚该字孝通，河南阳翟人也。
现代文：褚该字孝通，是河南阳翟人。
English: This character, Xiaotong, is from Yangshuo, Henan Province.

古文：晋末，迁居江左。
现代文：晋朝末年，迁居于江左。
English: At the end of the Jin Dynasty, he moved to Jiangzao.

古文：祖长乐，齐竟陵王录事参军。
现代文：祖父长乐，为齐朝竟陵王录事参军。
English: Grandfather Changle joined the army for the record of the Qing Dynasty.

古文：父义昌，梁鄱阳王中记室。
现代文：父亲义昌，为梁朝鄱阳王中记室。
English: His father, Yichang, was the secretary of Liang Zhaoyang.

古文：该幼而谨厚，有誉乡曲。
现代文：褚该幼年便谨厚，在家乡有声誉。
English: From a young age, he was polite and had a good reputation in his hometown.

古文：尤善医术，见称于时。
现代文：尤其擅长医术，在当时很有口碑。
English: He was particularly good at medicine and had a good reputation at the time.

古文：仕梁，历武陵王府参军。
现代文：仕宦于梁朝，历任武陵王府参军。
English: He served in the Liang Dynasty, and successive Wuling kings joined the army.

古文：随府西上。
现代文：随府西上。
English: Following the prefecture westward.

古文：后与萧撝同归国，授平东将军、左银青光禄大夫，转骠骑将军、右光禄大夫。
现代文：后来与萧揭一同归国，授平东将军、左银青光禄大夫，转任骠骑将军、右光禄大夫。
English: Later, together with Xiao Jie, he returned to China and was awarded the titles of General Pingdong, Left Silver, Qingguang, and Lu Doctor, and transferred to the titles of General Xie Jie, and Uguang, Lu Doctor.

古文：武成元年，除医正上士。
现代文：武成元年，任医正上士。
English: In 1901, he was promoted to the post of senior medical officer.

古文：自许奭死后，该稍为时人所重，宾客迎候，亚于姚僧垣。
现代文：自许奭死后，褚该逐渐被时人所重视，来往的宾客，仅仅少于姚僧垣。
English: After the death of Zi Xuan, he was gradually valued by the people of the time, and the number of guests coming and going was only less than that of Yao Sangaku.

古文：天和初，迁县伯下大夫。
现代文：天和初年，迁任县伯下大夫。
English: In the first year of Tianhe, he was transferred to the post of county deputy doctor.

古文：五年，进授车骑大将军、仪同三司。
现代文：五年，晋升为车骑大将军、仪同三司。
English: Five years later, he was promoted to the General of Chariot and Cavalry and the Third Division of Ceremonial Affairs.

古文：该性淹和，不自矜尚，但有请之者，皆为尽其艺术。
现代文：褚该性格和缓，不自高自大，凡是有所请求的人，都尽力而为。
English: He is gentle, not arrogant, and will do his best for anyone who asks him.

古文：时论称其长者焉。
现代文：当时的评论都称他是位长者。
English: Comments at the time described him as elderly.

古文：后以疾卒。
现代文：后来因病去世。
English: At that time, powerful, rich and noble families were all competing to be the most luxurious and gorgeous.

古文：子士则，亦传其家业。
现代文：子士则，亦传其家业。
English: His children, on the other hand, also inherited the family business.

古文：时有强练，不知何许人，亦不知其名字。
现代文：当时有一人名强练，不知是何许人，亦不知真正的名字。
English: At that time, there was a person with a strong reputation, I don't know who he was, and I don't know his real name.

古文：魏时有李顺兴者，语默不恒，好言未然之事，当时号为李练。
现代文：魏朝有一位李顺兴，常常不说话，说话便是未然之事，当时人号称为李练。
English: In the Wei Dynasty, there was a man named Li Shunxing. He often did not speak, and speaking was a matter of course. At that time, his nickname was Li Lianwu.

古文：世人以强类练，故亦呼为练焉。
现代文：世间的人因为强与练相似，所以也称呼为练。
English: People in the world call it "practice" because "strong" is similar to "practice."

古文：容貌长壮，有异于人。
现代文：容貌高大强壮，有异于人。
English: His appearance is tall and strong, unlike that of a human.

古文：若值其不欲言，纵苦加祈请，亦不相酬答。
现代文：神情恍惚，无人能测。如果有想评论的，逢人就说。如果他不想说，如何问他，也不回答。
English: He has a dazed look that no one can read. If someone wants to comment, he says it. If he doesn't want to say it, he doesn't answer, no matter how he is asked.

古文：初闻其言，略不可解。
现代文：初闻其言，不可理解。
English: When I first heard his words, they were incomprehensible.

古文：事过之后，往往有验。
现代文：事过之后，却常常应验。
English: After the fact, they often do.

古文：恒寄住诸佛寺，好游行民家，兼历造王公邸第。
现代文：经常在各佛寺中居住，喜好在民间来往，兼而造访王公的府邸。
English: He often lived in Buddhist temples, preferring to mingle with the common people, and he also visited the prince's residence.

古文：所至之处，人皆敬而信之。
现代文：所到的地方。人们都崇敬信服他。
English: Everywhere he went, people respected and believed in him.

古文：晋公护未诛之前，曾手持一大瓠，到护第门外，抵而破之。
现代文：置公宇文护被诛杀之前，他手持一大瓠，到了宇文护的大宅门，将其打破。
English: Before he was beaten to death, he went to the gate of Uwenshu's mansion with a large hammer and broke it.

古文：乃大言曰： 瓠破子苦。 
现代文：乃大声说道： 瓠破子苦。 
English: Nao said loudly, "It's hard to beat a child.

古文：时柱国、平高公侯伏侯龙恩早依随护，深被任委。
现代文：此时柱国、平高公侯伏侯龙恩早就依附皇塞谨，得到重用。
English: At this time, the pillar state, Pinggao Prince Fuhou Long'en had long been attached to the Emperor Saigong, and was heavily used.

古文：强练至龙恩宅，呼其妻元氏及其妾媵并婢仆等，并令连席而坐。
现代文：逊来到垄墨住宅，呼叫其妻疽臣及其妾媵婢女仆人等，令她们连席而坐。
English: Sun came to the Rengmo residence, called his wife and his concubines and maidservants, and ordered them to sit together.

古文：诸人以逼夫人，苦辞不肯。
现代文：诸人因为靠近夫人，不肯同坐。
English: People wouldn't sit next to her because she was a woman.

古文：强练曰： 汝等一例人耳，何有贵贱。 
现代文：强练说： 你们都是一样的人，没有贵贱分别。 
English: Qiangren said: You are all the same people, there is no distinction between high and low.

古文：遂逼就坐。
现代文：于是挨在一起就坐。
English: So they sat next to each other.

古文：未几而护诛，诸子并死。
现代文：不久宇文护被诛杀，诸子并死。
English: Soon after, Umenomori was killed in a fight, and his sons also died.

古文：龙恩亦伏法，仍籍没其家。
现代文：龙恩也被诛杀，其家被查抄。
English: Long En was also beaten to death, and his home was searched.

古文：建德中，每夜上街衢边树，大哭释迦牟尼佛，或至申旦，如此者累日，声甚哀怜。
现代文：建德年间，经常夜上路旁之树，大哭释迦牟尼佛，有时通宵达旦，连日如此哭声哀怜。
English: During his virtuous years, he often went to a tree by the roadside at night to weep loudly for Buddha Shakyamuni. Sometimes he stayed up all night, crying and lamenting for days on end.

古文：俄而废佛、道二教。
现代文：不久佛、道二教被废除。
English: Buddhism and Taoism were soon abolished.

古文：大象末，又以一无底囊，历长安市肆告乞，市人争以米麦遗之。
现代文：大象末年，又以一无底皮袋，在长安各店铺告乞，市人争相以米麦给他。
English: At the end of his life, the elephant used a bottomless leather bag to beg in various shops in Chang'an, and the townspeople scrambled to give him rice and barley.

古文：强练张囊投之，随即漏之于地。
现代文：强练用皮袋来接，随后都漏在地上。
English: Qiang Rong used a leather bag to catch it, and then it all leaked onto the ground.

古文：人或问之曰： 汝何为也？ 
现代文：有人间他： 你这是为何? 
English: Someone said to him: Why are you doing this?

古文：强练曰： 此亦无余，但欲使诸人见盛空耳。 至隋开皇初，果移都于龙首山，长安城遂空废。
现代文：强銮说： 这没有别的，衹是想使诸位见到 盛空，罢了。 至隋开皇初年，果然移都城于龙首山，长安城便空废了。
English: Qiang Yu said, "This is nothing else, I just wanted you to see the grandeur of the sky." In the first year of the Sui Dynasty, the capital was moved to Longshou Mountain, and Chang'an City was abandoned.

古文：后亦莫知其所终。
现代文：后来亦不知他的下落如何。
English: It is not known what happened to him afterwards.

古文：又有蜀郡卫元嵩者，亦好言将来之事，盖江左宝志之流。
现代文：又有蜀郡卫元嵩的人，亦喜好说将来之事，大概属于左宝志之流。
English: There is also a person from Weiyuan County, Shu County, who also likes to talk about the future, and probably belongs to the Left Treasure School.

古文：天和中，着诗预论周、隋废兴及皇家受命，并有征验。
现代文：天和中，着诗预测评论凰、鹰的废兴及皇家受命，都有应验。
English: In heaven and on earth, the poem predicted and commented on the rise and fall of the phoenix and the eagle, as well as the royal commission, all of which have come to pass.

古文：性尤不信释教，尝上疏极论之。
现代文：性情尤其不信佛教，曾经上疏极力评论。
English: In particular, he does not believe in Buddhism, and he once made a strong comment about it.

古文：史失其事，故不为传。
现代文：史书失载其事，所以不为之立传。
English: The history books lost the story, so it wasn't passed down.

古文：史臣曰：仁义之于教，大矣，术艺之于用，博矣。
现代文：史臣曰：仁义于教化，作用很大，术艺在使用中，很广博。
English: Shichen said: benevolence and righteousness play a great role in education, and arts and crafts are widely used.

古文：狥于是者，不能无非，厚于利者，必有其害。
现代文：对此认真的，不能无非，厚于利者，必有其害。
English: For those who are serious about this, it can't be helped, but those who are more greedy than beneficial will certainly be harmful.

古文：诗、书、礼、乐所失也浅，故先王重其德。
现代文：《诗》、《书》、《礼》、《乐》所失亦浅，所以先王重其德。
English: The loss of "Poetry," "Book," "Rite" and "Music" is also shallow, so the first king emphasized his virtue.

古文：方术技巧，所失也深，故往哲轻其艺。
现代文：方术技巧，所失亦深，所以早先的贤哲看轻其艺。
English: He has also lost much of his skill in the art of magic, so the earlier sages looked down on his art.

古文：夫能通方术而不诡于俗，习技巧而必蹈于礼者，岂非大雅君子乎。
现代文：如果能够通于方术而不诡于俗气，能习其技巧又合乎礼的人，不就是大雅君子了吗。
English: If you can be proficient in the art of table manners without resorting to vulgarity, and if you can learn its techniques while remaining polite, aren't you an elegant gentleman?

古文：姚僧垣诊候精审，名冠于一代，其所全济，固亦多焉。
现代文：姚僧垣诊候精审，名冠一代，其所救治的人，确是很多。
English: Yao Sangaki's diagnosis and treatment are meticulous, and the people he has treated are indeed many.

古文：而弘兹义方，皆为令器，故能享眉寿，縻好爵。
现代文：同时以兹义方，皆为令器，所以可以长寿获得好爵位。
English: At the same time, all of them are rulers, so they can live long and get a good title.

古文：老聃云 天道无亲，常与善人 ，于是信矣。
现代文：老子说 天道无亲，常与善人 ，于是可以相信。
English: Lao Tzu said that the Tao has no relatives and is often associated with good people, so it can be believed.

