古文：孝惠皇帝讳衷，字正度，武帝第二子也。
现代文：惠帝纪，孝惠皇帝名衷，字正度，是武帝的第二个儿子。
English: Hui Di Ji, the name of Emperor Xiao Hui, was the second son of Emperor Wu.

古文：泰始三年，立为皇太子，时年九岁。
现代文：泰始三年，立为皇太子，当时九岁。
English: He was nine years old when he became crown prince three years later.

古文：太熙元年四月己酉，武帝崩。是日，皇太子即皇帝位，大赦，改元为永熙。尊皇后杨氏曰皇太后，立妃贾氏为皇后。
现代文：太熙元年四月二十日，武帝死，当天皇太子即皇帝位，大赦罪人，改年号为永熙，尊皇后杨氏为皇太后，立太子妃贾氏为皇后。
English: Emperor Wu died on April 20, Tahei 1st, and when Emperor Taishi became emperor, he pardoned all criminals, changed the era name to Yongxi, made Empress Yang the empress dowager, and made Princess Jia the empress.

古文：夏五月辛未，葬武皇帝于峻阳陵。
现代文：夏五月十三日，葬武帝于峻阳陵。
English: On the 13th day of the 5th month of the summer, Emperor Wu was buried in the Junyang Mausoleum.

古文：丙子。增天下位一等，预丧事者二等，复租调一年，二千石已上皆封关中侯。
现代文：十八日，增加天下官位一级，参预武帝丧事的增加二级，免除百姓租税一年，二千石以上的官都封为关中侯。
English: On the 18th, the official rank of the whole country was increased by one level, the participation in the funeral of Emperor Wu was increased by two levels, the people were exempted from tax for one year, and officials with more than 2,000 koku were appointed as Guanzhonghou.

古文：以太尉杨骏为太傅，辅政。
现代文：以太尉杨骏为太傅，辅助朝政。
English: Yang Jie, the imperial lieutenant, was appointed as the grand steward to assist the imperial government.

古文：秋八月壬午，立广陵王遹为皇太子，以中书监何劭为太子太师，吏部尚书王戎为太子太傅，卫将军杨济为太子太保。
现代文：秋八月二十六日，立广陵王司马睶为皇太子，以中书监何劭为太子太师，吏部尚书王戎为太子太傅，卫将军杨济为太子太保。
English: On the 26th day of the 8th month of autumn, Guangling Wang Sima Luo was established as the crown prince, with the middle school librarian He Jun as the prince's teacher, the headmaster Shang Shu Wang Rong as the prince's teacher, and the general of the guard Yang Ji as the prince's tutor.

古文：赖祖宗遗灵，宰辅忠贤，得以眇身托于群后之上，昧于大道，不明于训，战战兢兢，夕惕若厉。乃者哀迷之际，三事股肱，惟社稷之重，率遵翼室之典，犹欲长奉先皇之制，是以有永熙之号。然日月逾迈，已涉新年，开元易纪，礼之旧章。
现代文：派遣南中郎将石崇、射声校尉胡奕、长水校尉赵俊、扬烈将军赵欢率军驻守四方。冬十月初六，以司空石鉴为太尉，前镇西将军、陇西王司马泰为司空。永平元年春正月初一，惠帝临朝庆贺，但不设音乐。下诏说： 朕早遭不幸，久经忧患，赖祖宗之灵和宰辅忠贤，才得以渺小之身，托于王侯诸臣之上。不明大道和古训，战战兢兢，朝夕戒惧。三公大臣，以社稷为重，遵守宫中旧典，长奉先皇之制，所以改年号为永熙，然光阴流逝，今已进入新年，新元改纪，仍为旧礼。
English: On the first day of the first month of the spring of the first year of Yongping, Emperor Hui came to the morning to celebrate, but there was no music. The following edict said: I have suffered misfortune before, and I have been through sorrow for a long time. I rely on the spirit of the ancestors and the loyalty of the imperial aides to be able to be small and rely on the princes and courtiers. Unknown roads and ancient teachings, trembling, fear in the morning and evening. Three ministers,

古文：其改永熙二年为永平元年。 
现代文：现改永熙二年为永平元年。 
English: It is now changed from Yongxi Year 2 to Yongping Year 1.

古文：又诏子弟及郡官并不得谒陵。
现代文：又下诏令子弟及群官不得拜谒陵墓。
English: He also issued an edict that his children and officials were not allowed to visit the tomb.

古文：丙午，皇太子冠，丁未，见于太庙。
现代文：二十二日，皇太子成年加冠，二十三日，到太庙拜谒。
English: On the 22nd, the crown prince was crowned as an adult, and on the 23rd, he went to the Imperial Temple to pay homage.

古文：二月甲寅，赐王公已下帛各有差。
现代文：二月初一，赐给王公以下帛不等。
English: On the first day of February, the crown prince and those below him were given varying amounts of money.

古文：癸酉，镇南将军楚王玮、镇东将军淮南王允来朝。
现代文：二十日，镇南将军，楚王司马玮，镇东将军、淮南王司马允来朝见。
English: On the 20th, General Zhenan, King Sima of Chu, General Zhendong, and King Sima of Huainan came to see the emperor.

古文：戊寅，复置秘书监官。
现代文：二十五日，恢复秘书监官职。
English: On the 25th, he resumed his duties as secretary-supervisor.

古文：三月辛卯，诛太傅杨骏，骏弟卫将军珧，太子太保济，中护军张劭，散骑常侍段广、杨邈。左将军刘预，河同尹李斌，中书令符俊，东夷校尉文淑，尚书武茂，皆夷三族。
现代文：三月初八，杀太傅杨骏、杨骏之弟卫将军杨珧，太子太保杨济，中护军张劭，散骑常侍段广、杨邈，左将军刘预，河南尹李斌，中书令蒋俊，东夷校尉文淑，尚书武茂，都灭三族。
English: On the 8th day of the 3rd month of the year, the three tribes were annihilated by the killing of the grand tutor Yang Hui, Yang Hui's brother General Yang Hui, the prince's son Yang Ji, the middle guard Zhang Hui, the cavalry officers Duan Guang and Yang Hui, the left general Liu Yuanyuan, the Henan general Yin Libin, the Chinese scholar Jiang Jun, the Dongyi lieutenant Wen Shu, and the scholar Wu Mao.

古文：壬辰，大赦，改元。
现代文：初九，大赦罪人，改年号。
English: New Year's Eve, amnesty for criminals, new year's number.

古文：贾后矫诏废皇太后为庶人，徙于金墉城，告于天地宗庙。
现代文：贾后假借皇帝诏令，废皇太后为平民，迁居金墉城，祭告于天地宗庙。
English: The Empress Dowager Jia, under the pretext of the Emperor's edict, and the deposed Empress Dowager, a commoner, moved to Jinshan City and were enshrined in the Temple of Heaven and Earth.

古文：诛太后母庞氏。
现代文：杀太后母庞氏。
English: The murder of Empress Dowager Pang.

古文：壬寅，征大司马、汝南王亮为太宰，与太保卫瓘辅政。
现代文：十九日，征召大司马、汝南王司马亮为太宰，与太保卫馞共同辅助朝政。
English: On the 19th, Dai Sima and Ru Nan Wang Sima Liang were summoned to serve as Dazai, and they assisted the imperial government together with Taibo Weimin.

古文：以秦王柬为大将军，东平王楙为抚军大将军，镇南将军、楚王玮为卫将军，领北军中候，下邳王晃为尚书令，东安公繇为尚书左仆射，进封东安王。
现代文：以秦王司马柬为大将军，东平王司马懋为抚军大将军，镇南将军、楚王司马玮为卫将军，领北军中侯，下邳王司马晃为尚书令，东安公司马繇为尚书左仆射，晋封为东安王。
English: Qin King Sima Qian was the general, Dongping King Sima Qian was the general of Fuzhou Army, Zhenan General, Chu King Sima Qian was the general of Wei, led the Northern Army, Wang Sima Qian was the commander of Shangshu, Dongan Company Sima Qian was the left-hand man of Shangshu, and was promoted to the king of Dongan.

古文：督将侯者千八十一人。
现代文：都督将军封侯的有一千零八十一人。
English: There are 1,081 persons who are vassals of the governor-general.

古文：庚戌，免东安王繇及东平王楙，繇徙带方。
现代文：二十七日，免除了东安王司马繇、东平王司马懋的官职，司马繇迁徙到带方。
English: On the 27th, Dongan Wang Sima Ye and Dongping Wang Sima Ye were relieved of their official duties, and Sima Ye moved to Bihang.

古文：夏四月癸亥，以征东将军、梁王肜为征西大将军、都督关西诸军事，太子少傅阮垣为平东将军、监青徐二州诸军事。
现代文：夏四月十一日，以征东将军、梁王司马肜为征西大将军、都督关西诸军事，太子少傅阮坦为平东将军、监青、徐二州诸军事。
English: On the 11th day of the 4th month of summer, the general of the East Conquest, Liang Wang Simak, became the general of the West Conquest and the military governor of Kansai, and the young prince Fu Ruan Tan became the general of the East Conquest and the military governor of Guizhou and Hebei.

古文：己巳，以太子太傅王戎为尚书右仆射。
现代文：十七日，以太子太傅王戎为尚书右仆射。
English: On the seventeenth day of the month, Wang Rong, the ethereal son of a grand tutor, was shot by Shang Shuxu's right-hand man.

古文：五月甲戌，毗陵王轨薨。
现代文：五月甲戌这天，毗陵王司马轨死。
English: On the day of the May Armor, Viling Wang Simasong died.

古文：壬午，除天下户调绵绢，赐孝悌、高年、鳏寡、力田者帛，人三匹。
现代文：壬午，免除天下百姓的赋税绵绢，孝悌者、高龄者、鳏寡者、努力耕田者，每人赐帛三匹。
English: At that time, the tax of the people of the world was exempted, and the filial piety, the elderly, the widows and widowers, and the hard-working farmers were each given three donkeys.

古文：六月，贾后矫诏使楚王玮杀太宰、汝南王亮，太保、菑阳公卫瓘。
现代文：六月，贾后假借皇帝诏令，使楚王司马玮杀太宰、汝南王司马亮，太保菑阳公卫瓘。
English: In June, Jia Hou used the Emperor's edict to have King Sima of Chu assassinate Dazai, King Sima Liang of Yunnan, and Yang Gongwei, the imperial bodyguard.

古文：乙丑，以玮擅害亮、瓘，杀之。
现代文：十三日，因司马玮擅自杀害司马亮与卫馞，被处死。
English: On the 13th, he was executed for killing Sima Liang and Wei Wei by committing suicide.

古文：曲赦洛阳。
现代文：特赦洛阳囚犯。
English: Amnesty for Luoyang prisoners.

古文：以广陵王师刘寔为太子太保，司空、陇西王泰录尚书事。
现代文：以广陵王的老师刘实为太子太保，司空、陇西王司马泰录尚书事。
English: With Guangling Wang's teacher Liu Si as the prince's eunuch, Siku and Shaanxi Wang Sima Tai recorded in the records.

古文：秋七月，分扬州、荆州十郡为江州。
现代文：秋七月，从荆州、扬州分出十郡为江州。
English: In autumn and July, ten counties were separated from Jingzhou and Yangzhou to form Jiangzhou.

古文：八月庚申，以赵王伦为征东将军、都督徐兗二州诸军事；河间王颙为北中郎将，镇鄴；太子太师何劭为都督豫州诸军事，镇许昌。
现代文：八月初九，以赵王司马伦为征东大将军、都督徐、兖二州诸军事；河间王司马颙为北中郎将，镇守邺城；太子太师何劭为都督豫州诸军事，镇守许昌。
English: On the 9th day of the 8th month, Zhao Wang Sima Lun was appointed as the general of the Eastern Expedition, the governor of Xu, and the military of the two states; Kawama Wang Sima Yu was appointed as the commander of the Northern Middle, and the town guard of Lucheng; Prince Daishi He Yu was appointed as the military governor of Yuzhou, and the town guard of Xu Chang.

古文：徙长沙王乂为常山王。
现代文：迁徙长沙王司马磖为常山王。
English: The migratory Changsha king Sima Qian became the king of Changshan.

古文：己巳，进西阳公羕爵为王。
现代文：十八日，西阳公司马羕晋爵为王。
English: On the 18th, the king of Xiyang Company was Ma Yu Jinzhu.

古文：辛未，立陇西世子越为东海王。
现代文：二十日，立陇西王司马泰的世子司马越为东海王。
English: On the 20th, Sima Yue, the son of Sima Tai, the king of Western Gansu, was made the king of the East Sea.

古文：九月甲午，大将军、秦王柬薨。
现代文：九月十四日，大将军秦王司马柬死。
English: On September 14th, the great general Qin Wang Simakam died.

古文：辛丑，徵征西大将军、梁王肜为卫将军、录尚书事，以赵王伦为征西大将军、都督雍梁二州诸军事。
现代文：二十一日，征召征西大将军、梁王司马肜为卫将军、录尚书事，以赵王司马伦为征西大将军、都督雍、梁二州诸军事。
English: On the twenty-first day, Zhao Wang Simaron was conscripted as the general of the Western Expeditionary Force, and Liang Wang Simaron was conscripted as the general of the Western Expeditionary Force. Zhao Wang Simaron was conscripted as the general of the Western Expeditionary Force, the military governor of Yong and Liang Erzhou.

古文：冬十二月辛酉，京师地震。
现代文：冬十二月十二日，京师地震。
English: On the 12th day of winter in December, the Beijing Earthquake occurred.

古文：是岁，东夷十七国、南夷二十四部并诣校尉内附。
现代文：这一年，东夷十七国，南夷二十四部到辖蛮夷的校尉处联系内附。
English: In the same year, 17 Eastern Yi provinces and 24 Southern Yi provinces came under the jurisdiction of the Captain's Office of the Barbarian Yi.

古文：二年春二月己酉，贾后弑皇太后于金墉城。
现代文：二年春二月初一，贾后把皇太后杀死在金墉城。
English: On the first day of February in the spring of the second year, Jia Hou killed the Empress Dowager in Jinlu City.

古文：秋八月壬子，大赦。
现代文：秋八月初七，实行大赦。
English: Autumn On the 7th day of the 8th month, a general amnesty is implemented.

古文：九月乙酉，中山王耽薨。
现代文：九月十一日，中山王司马耽死。
English: On September 11, Zhongshan Wang Sima passed away.

古文：冬十一月，大疫。
现代文：红潮网冬十一月，发生大瘟疫。
English: In the winter of November, a great plague occurred.

古文：是岁，沛国雨雹，伤麦。
现代文：这一年，沛国下冰雹，毁坏了麦子。
English: That year, the country was hit by a hailstorm, which destroyed the wheat.

古文：三年夏四月，荥阳雨雹。
现代文：三年夏四月，荥阳下冰雹。
English: In April of the summer of the third year, hailstones fell in the sun.

古文：六月，弘农郡雨雹，深三尺。
现代文：六月，弘农郡下冰雹，深三尺。
English: In June, Hongnong County was hit by hailstones up to three feet deep.

古文：冬十月，太原王泓薨。
现代文：冬十月，太原王司马泓死。
English: In the winter of October, Taiyuan Wang Simasong died.

古文：四年春正月丁酉朔，侍中、太尉、安昌公石鉴薨。
现代文：四年春正月初一，侍中、太尉、安昌公石鉴死。
English: On the first day of the first month of the fourth year of spring, the chamberlains, the lieutenant, and Anchang Kinseki died.

古文：夏五月，蜀郡山移，淮南寿春洪水出，山崩地陷，坏城府及百姓庐舍。
现代文：夏五月，蜀郡山移动，淮南寿春洪水决堤，山崩地陷，毁坏了城池官府及百姓庐舍。
English: In summer and May, Shuguishan Mountain moved, Huainan Shuchun Flood broke the dike, landslides and landslides, destroyed the government office and people's homes.

古文：匈奴郝散反，攻上党，杀长吏。
现代文：匈奴人郝散反，攻掠上党，杀死地方长官。
English: The Xiongnu scattered and rebelled, attacked and plundered the upper party, and killed the local governor.

古文：六月，寿春地大震，死者二十余家。
现代文：六月，寿春发生强烈地震，死二十余家。
English: In June, a strong earthquake occurred in Shuchun, killing more than 20 families.

古文：上庸郡山崩，杀二十余人。
现代文：上庸郡山崩，压死二十多人。
English: A landslide in Shangyong County killed more than 20 people.

古文：秋八月，郝散帅众降，冯翊都尉杀之。
现代文：秋八月，郝散率众投降，冯翊都尉把他杀掉。
English: In the autumn and August, Xizan led the crowd to surrender, and Lieutenant Feng Jun killed him.

古文：上谷居庸、上庸并地陷裂，水泉涌出，人有死者。
现代文：上谷、居庸、上庸地陷裂，泉水从地下涌出，有人伤亡。
English: Shanggu, Juyong and Shangyong are cracked, spring water gushes out from the ground, and there are casualties.

古文：大饥。
现代文：发生大饥荒。
English: There was a great famine.

古文：九月丙辰，赦诸州之遭地灾者。
现代文：九月二十三日，各州遭地震灾害的地方予以赦免。
English: On September 23, earthquake-affected areas in all prefectures were pardoned.

古文：甲午，枉矢东北竟天。
现代文：甲午，大流星从东北起，横贯天空。
English: At noon, a large meteor streaked across the sky from the northeast.

古文：是岁，京师及郡国八地震。
现代文：这一年，京师及八个郡国发生地震。
English: In the same year, an earthquake occurred in Beijing and eight counties.

古文：五年夏四月，彗星见于西方，孛于奎，至轩辕。
现代文：五年夏四月，彗星出现于西方，掠过奎星，到达轩辕星座。
English: In April of the summer of the fifth year, the comet appeared in the west, swept past the star Kui, and reached the constellation of Regulus.

古文：六月，金城地震。
现代文：六月，金城地震。
English: In June, the Jincheng earthquake occurred.

古文：东海雨雹，深五寸。
现代文：东海下冰雹，深五寸。
English: There is hail under the East China Sea, five inches deep.

古文：秋七月，下邳暴风，坏庐舍。
现代文：秋七月，下邳刮暴风，毁坏房舍。
English: In autumn and July, a storm blew in from the south, destroying houses.

古文：九月，雁门、新兴、太原、上党大风，伤禾稼。
现代文：九月，雁门、新兴、太原、上党刮大风，毁坏禾稼。
English: In September, strong winds hit the cities of Yanmen, Xingxing, Taiyuan and Shangdang, destroying crops.

古文：冬十月，武库火，焚累代之宝。
现代文：冬十月，武库发生火灾，焚毁了历代留下的宝物。
English: In the winter of October, a fire broke out in the arsenal, destroying the treasures left behind by past generations.

古文：十二月丙戌，新作武库，大调兵器。
现代文：十二月初一，新建武库，大量调集兵器。
English: On the first day of December, a new arsenal was built and a large number of weapons were mobilized.

古文：丹杨雨雹。
现代文：丹杨下冰雹。
English: Poplars are covered in hail.

古文：有石生于京师宜年里。
现代文：京师宜年里从地下生出一块石头。
English: Every year, a stone emerges from the ground.

古文：是岁，荆、扬、兗、豫、青、徐等六州大水，诏遣御史巡行振贷。
现代文：这一年，荆、扬、兖、豫、青、徐六州发大水，皇帝下诏派遣御史到各地巡视救济灾民。
English: In the same year, Jing, Yang, Handan, Henan, Qing and Hsu provinces were hit by floods, and the emperor issued an edict to dispatch the imperial historian to inspect the disaster-affected areas to provide relief to the victims.

古文：六年春正月，大赦。
现代文：六年春正月，大赦罪人。
English: In the first month of the spring of the sixth year, an amnesty for criminals began.

古文：司空、下邳王晃薨。
现代文：司空、下邳王司马晃死。
English: Siku, the king of the lower jaw, Sima, is dead.

古文：以中书监张华为司空，大尉、陇西王泰为尚书令，卫将军、梁王肜为太子太保。
现代文：以中书监张华为司空，太尉、陇西王司马泰为尚书令，卫将军、梁王司马肜为太子太保。
English: Zhang Huasikong, the Chinese inspector of books, was appointed as Shang Shuling, Taifu and Shansi Wang Simatai as Shang Shuling, and Wei Geng and Liang Wang Simatai as Taipo.

古文：丁丑，地震。
现代文：二十二日，地震。
English: On the 22nd, an earthquake.

古文：三月，东海陨霜，伤桑麦。
现代文：三月，东海郡下霜，伤害桑树与麦苗。
English: In March, frost hit Donghai County, damaging mulberry trees and wheat seedlings.

古文：彭城吕县有流血，东西百余步。
现代文：彭城吕县地上有流血，东西长百余步。
English: There is bloodshed on the ground in Pengcheng Lyu County, more than a hundred paces long from east to west.

古文：夏四月，大风。
现代文：夏四月，起大风。
English: In the summer, in April, there is a strong wind.

古文：五月，荆、扬二州大水。
现代文：五月，荆、扬二州发大水。
English: In May, two prefectures, Jing and Yang, experienced serious water shortages.

古文：匈奴郝散弟度元帅冯翊、北地马兰羌、庐水胡反，攻北地，太守张损死之。
现代文：匈奴郝散之弟度元率领冯翊、北地一带的马兰羌及卢水胡人反叛，攻北地，北地太守战死。
English: The brother of Xiongnu Xizan, Duyuan, led the rebellion of Feng Yu, Malan Yu and Luzhuhu people in the area of the Northland, and attacked the Northland. The Northland Taishou died in the battle.

古文：冯翊太守欧阳建与度元战，建败绩。
现代文：冯翊太守欧阳建与度元交战，欧阳建大败。
English: Emperor Feng Rong sent Ouyang Jian to fight against Duyuan, and Ouyang Jian was soundly defeated.

古文：徵征西大将军、赵王伦为车骑将军，以太子太保、梁王肜为征西大将军、都督雍梁二州诸军事，镇关中。
现代文：召征西大将军、赵王司马伦为车骑将军，以太子太保、梁王司马肜为征西大将军，都督雍、梁二州诸军事，镇守关中。
English: Zhao Wang Simaren was called up as the general of the Western Expeditionary Force, and he was the general of the cavalry and cavalry. Tai Bao of the Tai Zi Dynasty and Wang Simak of the Liang Dynasty were called up as the general of the Western Expeditionary Force. The military of the two prefectures of Yong and Liang were called up to guard Guanzhong.

古文：秋八月，雍州刺史解系又为度元所破。
现代文：秋八月，雍州刺史解系又被度元打败。
English: In the autumn and August, the Yongzhou Jishi Dissolution System was once again defeated by the Duyuan.

古文：秦雍氐、羌悉叛，推氐帅齐万年僭号称帝，围泾阳。
现代文：秦雍一带的氐人、羌人都反叛，推举氐族统帅齐万年僭号称帝，围攻泾阳。
English: The Qin and Qiang people around Qin and Yong rebelled and elected the general of the Qin people, Qi Wanren, as emperor and besieged Fenyang.

古文：冬十月乙未，曲赦雍、凉二州。
现代文：冬十月十四日，特赦雍、凉二州。
English: On the 14th day of October in winter, the Yong and Liang states were amnestied.

古文：十一月丙子，遣安西将军夏侯俊、建威将军周处等讨万年，梁王肜屯好畤。
现代文：十一月二十六日，派遣安西将军夏侯骏、建威将军周处等讨伐齐万年，梁王司马肜屯兵好畤。
English: On November 26th, General Xia Houyi of Anxi Province and General Jian Wei's entourage were dispatched to wage a thousand-year crusade, and Liang Wang Simatai's garrison troops were well received.

古文：关中饥，大疫。
现代文：关中发生饥荒和瘟疫。
English: Famine and plague struck Guanzhong.

古文：七年春正月癸丑，周处及齐万年战于六陌，王师败绩，处死之。
现代文：七年春正月初四，周处与齐万年在六陌交战，晋军大败，周处战死。
English: On the 4th day of the 1st month of the 7th year of the Spring, the Jin army was defeated in the battle with the Qi army in the 6th month of the 1st year of the Spring, the Jin army was defeated, and the Jin army was defeated.

古文：夏五月，鲁国雨雹。
现代文：夏五月，鲁国下冰雹。
English: In the summer of May, the country of Lu was hit by hail.

古文：秋七月，雍、梁州疫。
现代文：秋七月，雍州、梁州发生瘟疫。
English: In autumn and July, plague broke out in Yongzhou and Liangzhou.

古文：大旱，陨霜，杀秋稼。
现代文：大旱，下霜，毁坏秋庄稼。
English: Severe drought, frost, destroying autumn crops.

古文：关中饥，米斛万钱。诏骨肉相卖者不禁。
现代文：关中饥荒，米每斛一万钱，皇帝下诏，允许卖儿卖女。
English: During the famine in Guanzhong, the price of rice was 10,000 yuan per bushel, and the emperor issued an edict permitting the sale of sons and daughters.

古文：丁丑，司徒、京陵公王浑薨。
现代文：丁丑，京陵公王浑死。
English: Ding Chou, the prince of the imperial mausoleum, is dead.

古文：九月，以尚书右仆射王戎为司徒，太子太师何劭为尚书左仆射。
现代文：九月，以尚书右仆射王戎为司徒，太子太师何劭为尚书左仆射。
English: In September, Shosho's right-hand man, Shao Wang Rong, was appointed as a disciple, and Prince Shosho's right-hand man, Shao Wang Rong, as a disciple, and Prince Shosho's right-hand man, Shao Wang Rong, as a disciple.

古文：八年春正月丙辰，地震。
现代文：八年春正月十三，地震。
English: On the 13th day of the first month of the eighth year of the Spring, an earthquake occurred.

古文：诏发仓禀，振雍州饥人。
现代文：皇帝下诏开仓救济雍州饥民。
English: The emperor issued an edict to open warehouses to help the starving people in Yongzhou.

古文：三月壬戌，大赦。
现代文：三月十九日，大赦罪人。
English: On March 19th, an amnesty for criminals was announced.

古文：夏五月，郊禖石破为二。
现代文：夏五月，京郊祭礻某神的石案破裂为二。
English: In the summer of May, at a festival in the suburbs of Kyoto, the stone case of a certain god broke in two.

古文：秋九月，荆、豫、扬、徐、冀等五州大水。
现代文：秋九月，荆、豫、扬、徐、冀五州发大水。
English: In autumn and September, Jing, Yu, Yang, Xu, and Hebei Provinces experienced heavy rainfall.

古文：雍州有年。
现代文：雍州庄稼丰收。
English: A bumper harvest of crops in Yongzhou.

古文：九年春正月，左积弩将军孟观伐氐，战于中亭，大破之，获齐万年。
现代文：九年春正月，左积弩将军孟观讨伐叛乱的氐人，在中亭交战，大破氐人，俘获齐万年。
English: In the first month of the ninth year of the Spring, General Meng Guan of the Zuo Jizhong besieged the rebellious Jurchens, fought in Zhongting, defeated the Jurchens and captured them for ten thousand years.

古文：徵征西大将军、梁王肜录尚书事。
现代文：召征西大将军、梁王司马肜录尚书事。
English: General Liang Wang Sima, who was called up to the Western Theater, recorded the event in his diary.

古文：以北中郎将、河间王颙为镇西将军，镇关中；成都王颍为镇北大将军，镇鄴。
现代文：以北中郎将、河间王司马颙为镇西将军，镇守关中；成都王司马颖为镇北大将军，镇守邺城。
English: Wang Sima Ying of Chengdu was the general of the town of Beidai, and Wang Sima Ye of Kawama was the general of the town of Xi, and the town guard of Guanzhong; Wang Sima Ye of Chengdu was the general of the town of Beidai, and the town guard of Shicheng.

古文：夏四月，鄴人张承基等妖言署置，聚党数千。
现代文：夏四月，邺人张承基等妖言惑众，设署置官，聚集党徒数千人。
English: In the summer of April, Zhang Chengji and other sorcerers seduced the public, set up offices, and gathered thousands of party members.

古文：郡县逮捕，皆伏诛。
现代文：郡县加以逮捕，都被处死。
English: County after county arrested them, and they were all executed.

古文：六月戊戌，太尉、陇西王泰薨。
现代文：六月初三，太尉陇西王司马泰死。
English: On the 3rd day of the 6th month, the Tai Liang Wang Simatai died.

古文：秋八月，以尚书裴頠为尚书仆射。
现代文：秋八月，以尚书裴危页为尚书仆射。
English: In the autumn and August, the Shangshu Pei Gui page was used as the Shangshu minion.

古文：冬十一月甲子朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：冬十一月初一，日蚀。
English: Winter, the first day of November, a solar eclipse.

古文：京师大风，发屋折木。
现代文：京师刮大风，掀翻屋顶，折断树木。
English: A strong wind blew in Beijing, tearing off roofs and snapping trees.

古文：十二月壬戌，废皇太子遹为庶人，及其三子幽于金墉城，杀太子母谢氏。
现代文：十二月三十日，皇太子司马睶被废为平民，连同他的三个儿子，一起被幽禁在金墉城，杀了太子的母亲谢氏。
English: On December 30th, Crown Prince Sima Yu was deposed as a commoner. Together with his three sons, he was imprisoned in Jinyuan City and killed the prince's mother Xie.

古文：永康元年春正月癸亥朔，大赦，改元。
现代文：永康元年正月初一，大赦罪人，改年号。
English: On the first day of the first month of the first month of the first year of Yongkang, the criminals were amnestied and the year was changed.

古文：己卯，日有蚀之。丙子，皇孙霖卒。
现代文：十七日，日蚀。十四日，皇孙司马磗死。
English: On the 17th, there was a solar eclipse, and on the 14th, the grandson of the emperor, Sima Qian, died.

古文：二月丁酉，大风，飞沙拔木。
现代文：二月初六，刮大风，扬起沙砾，拔起树木。
English: On the 6th day of the 2nd month of the year, a strong wind blew, blowing up gravel and uprooting trees.

古文：三月，尉氏雨血，妖星见于南方。
现代文：三月，尉氏县从天上落血，妖星出现于南方。
English: In March, blood fell from the sky in Fuxi County, and a monster star appeared in the south.

古文：癸未，贾后矫诏害庶人遹于许昌。
现代文：二十二日，贾后假借皇帝诏令在许昌害死被废太子司马睶。
English: On the 22nd, Jia Hou borrowed the Emperor's edict to kill the deposed Crown Prince Sima Yu in Xu Chang.

古文：夏四月辛卯，日有蚀之。
现代文：夏四月初一，日蚀。
English: Summer, first day of April, solar eclipse.

古文：癸巳，梁王肜、赵王伦矫诏废贾后为庶人，司空张华、尚书仆射裴頠皆遇害，侍中贾谧及党与数十人皆伏诛。
现代文：初三，梁王司马肜、赵王司马伦假借皇帝诏命废贾后为平民，司空张华、尚书仆射裴危页同时遇害，侍中贾谧及其党羽数十人都被处死。
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, Liang Wang Simakun and Zhao Wang Simalen used the emperor's imperial edict to abolish Jia Hou as a commoner, while Siku Zhanghua and Shang Shu's servant Shibei Guozhe were killed at the same time, and the attendant Jia Hou and dozens of his followers were all executed.

古文：甲午，伦矫诏大赦，自为相国、都督中外诸军，如宣文辅魏故事，追复故皇太子位。
现代文：初四，司马伦假借皇帝诏命实行大赦，自封为相国、都督中外诸军事，地位如魏时的司马懿，恢复故皇太子的位号。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, Sima Lun, under the guise of the emperor's edict, implemented an amnesty, appointed himself as a relative of the country and the military governor of foreign countries, with the status of Sima Lun in the Wei Dynasty, and restored the title of the late crown prince.

古文：丁酉，以梁王肜为太宰，左光禄大夫何劭为司徒，右光禄大夫刘寔为司空，淮南王允为骠骑将军。
现代文：初七，以梁王司马肜为太宰，左光禄大夫何劭为司徒，右光禄大夫刘萛为司空，淮南王司马允为骠骑将军。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, Liang Wang Simak was appointed as the grand vizier, the left Guanglu doctor He Kun as the tutor, the right Guanglu doctor Liu Kun as the secretary, and Huainan Wang Simak as the cavalry general.

古文：己亥，赵王伦矫诏害贾庶人于金墉城。
现代文：初九，赵王司马伦假借皇帝诏命在金墉城杀死被废的贾后。
English: In the early 9th century, Zhao Wang Simaren borrowed the emperor's edict to kill the deposed Empress Jia in Jinqiao City.

古文：五月己巳，立皇孙臧为皇太孙，尚为襄阳王。
现代文：五月初九，立皇孙司马臧为皇太孙，司马尚为襄阳王。
English: On the 9th day of the 5th month of the year, the grandson of the emperor, Sima Qian, was established as the grandson of the emperor, and Sima Shang as the king of Xiangyang.

古文：六月壬寅，葬怀愍太子于显平陵。
现代文：六月十三日，将愍怀太子安葬于显平陵。
English: On June 13, he was buried in the Xianping Mausoleum.

古文：抚军将军、清河王遐薨。
现代文：抚军将军、清河王司马遐死。
English: The general of the Fuzhou army, the king of Qinghe, Sima Xuan, died.

古文：癸卯，震崇阳陵标。
现代文：十四日，雷击崇阳陵陵顶。
English: On the 14th, lightning struck the top of the Chongyang Mausoleum.

古文：秋八月，淮南王允举兵讨赵王伦，不克，允及其二子秦王郁、汉王迪皆遇害。
现代文：秋八月，淮南王司马允举兵讨伐司马伦，没有取胜，司马允及其二子秦王司马郁、汉王司马迪都遇害。
English: In autumn and August, King Sima Yun of Huainan raised an army to fight Sima Lun, but did not win. Sima Yun and his two sons, Qin King Sima Yu and Han King Sima Di, were all killed.

古文：曲赦洛阳。
现代文：特赦洛阳囚犯。
English: Amnesty for Luoyang prisoners.

古文：平东将军、彭城王植薨。
现代文：平东将军、彭城王司马植死。
English: General Pingdong and Pengcheng Wang Simasue died.

古文：改封吴王晏为宾徒县王。
现代文：改封吴王司马晏为宾徒县王。
English: The king of Wu, Sima Ye, was renamed the king of Bintu County.

古文：以齐王冏为平东将军，镇许昌；光禄大夫陈准为太尉、录尚书事。
现代文：以齐王司马为平东将军，镇守许昌；光禄大夫陈准为太尉、录尚书事。
English: With Qi Wang Sima as the general of Pingdong, and the town guard Xu Chang; Guanglu doctor Chen Jun as the first lieutenant, and Shang Shuji as the recorder.

古文：九月，改司徒为丞相，以梁王肜为之。
现代文：九月，改司徒为丞相，使梁王司马肜任此职。
English: In September, Liang Wang Simak was promoted to the post of chancellor.

古文：冬十月，黄务四塞。
现代文：冬十月，黄雾四处弥漫。
English: In winter and October, the yellow fog pervades everywhere.

古文：十一月戊午，大风飞沙石，六日乃止。
现代文：十一月初一，大风扬起沙石，刮了六天才止息。
English: On the first day of November, a gale blew up sand and rocks, which lasted for six days.

古文：甲子，立皇后羊氏，大赦，大酺三日。
现代文：初七，立皇后羊氏，大赦天下罪人，特许民间宴会三日以示庆贺。
English: On the seventh day of the new year, the Queen of Sheep was established, the world's sinners were pardoned, and a special folk banquet was held on the third day to celebrate.

古文：十二月，彗星见于东方。
现代文：十二月，彗星出现于东方。
English: In December, the comet appeared in the east.

古文：益州刺史赵廞与洛阳流人李庠害成都内史耿胜、犍为太守李密、汶山太守霍固、西夷校尉陈总，据成都反。
现代文：益州刺史赵貵与略阳流人李庠杀害成都内史耿胜、犍为太守李密、汶山太守霍固、西夷校尉陈总，占据成都反叛。
English: Yizhou assassin Zhao Jun and Li Jun, a member of the Liangyang school, killed Chengdu Inner Historian Geng Sheng, and occupied Chengdu in rebellion. Jun was the governor of Li Mi, the governor of Wenshan, and the captain of Xiyi, Chen Zong.

古文：永宁元年春正月乙丑，赵王伦篡帝位。
现代文：永宁元年正月初九，赵王司马伦篡帝位。
English: On the ninth day of the first month of the first year of Yongning, Zhao Wang Simarun usurped the throne.

古文：丙寅，迁帝于金墉城，号曰太上皇，改金墉曰永昌宫。
现代文：初十，将惠帝迁到金墉城，号称太上皇，改金墉叫永昌宫。
English: On the tenth day of the first month of the year, Emperor Hui moved to Jincheng City, and was known as the Great Emperor. He changed the name of Jincheng Palace to Yongchang Palace.

古文：废皇太孙臧为濮阳王。
现代文：废皇太孙司马臧为濮阳王。
English: The grandson of the former Empress Dowager Sima Yi became the King of Shenyang.

古文：五星经天，纵横无常。
现代文：五颗星在天上流动，纵横无常。
English: Five stars are floating in the sky, fluctuating from side to side.

古文：癸酉，伦害濮阳王臧。
现代文：十七日，司马伦杀害濮阳王司马臧。
English: On the seventeenth day, Sima Lun killed Sima Ye, the king of Shenyang.

古文：洛阳流人李特杀赵廞，传首京师。
现代文：略阳流人李特杀赵貵，首级传到京师。
English: Li Te, a member of the Slightly Yang School, killed Zhao Yao, and his head was sent to the capital.

古文：三月，平东将军、齐王冏起兵以讨伦，传檄州郡，屯于阳翟。
现代文：三月，平东将军、齐王司马礒起兵讨伐司马伦，檄文传到各州郡，屯军于阳翟。
English: In March, General Pingdong and King Sima Yi of Qi raised an army to fight against Sima Lun, and the news spread to all prefectures and counties, and the army was encamped in Yangshuo.

古文：征北大将军、成都王颖，征西大将军、河间王颙，常山王乂，豫州刺史李毅，兗州刺史王彦，南中朗将、新野公歆，皆举兵应之，众数十万。
现代文：征北大将军、成都王司马颖，征西大将军、河间王司马颙，常山王司马磖，豫州刺史李毅，兖州刺史王彦，南中郎将、新野公司马歆，都举兵响应齐王司马礒，各路军共数十万。
English: The General of the Northern Expedition, Chengdu Wang Sima Ying, the General of the Western Expedition, Kawama Wang Sima Qian, Changshan Wang Sima Qian, Yuzhou Shishi Li Yi, Zhangzhou Shishi Wang Yan, Nan Zhong Lang Zheng, Nino Company Ma Qian, all raised troops in response to Qi Wang Sima Qian, with a total of hundreds of thousands of troops from all directions.

古文：伦遣其将闾和出伊阙，张泓、孙辅出堮坂以距冏，孙会、士猗、许超出黄桥以距颍。及颖将赵骧、石超战于溴水，会等大败，弃军走。
现代文：司马伦派遣其将领闾和出兵伊阙，张泓孙辅出兵坂以抗击司马礒，孙会、士猗、许超出兵黄桥以抗拒司马颖，与司马颖将领赵骧、石超在溴水交战，孙会等大败，弃军而逃。
English: Sima Lun dispatched his generals  and sent troops to Yili, Zhang Ye Sun Fu sent troops to the slope to fight against Sima Ye, Sun Hui, Shi Ye and Xu Bai sent soldiers to the Yellow Bridge to resist Sima Ying, and Sima Ying's generals Zhao Hui and Shi Chao fought in Bromine Water, and Sun Hui and others were defeated and abandoned the army and fled.

古文：闰月丙戌朔，日有蚀之。夏四月，岁星昼见。
现代文：闰三月初一，日蚀。夏四月，岁星在白天出现。
English: On the first day of the leap month of March, there is a solar eclipse. In summer and April, the New Year's star appears in the daytime.

古文：冏将何勖等击张泓于阳翟，大破之，斩孙辅等。
现代文：司马礒的部将何勖、卢播在阳翟大破张泓军，斩孙辅等。
English: Sima Qian's generals He Qian and Lu Bo defeated Zhang Qian's army in Yangtze River and executed Sun Fu.

古文：辛酉，左卫将军王舆与尚书、淮陵王漼勒兵入宫，禽伦党孙秀、孙会、许超、士猗、骆休等，皆斩之。
现代文：初七，左卫将军王舆与尚书淮陵王司马氵崔率兵入宫，捉住了司马伦的党羽孙秀、孙会、许超、士猗、骆休等，都被斩首。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, the left guard general Wang Yiwu and Shangshu Huairing King Sima Bingcui led the troops into the palace, captured Sima Lun's party feather Sun Xiu, Sun Hui, Xu Chao, Shijun, Luo Xiu, etc., and were all beheaded.

古文：逐伦归第，即日乘舆反正。
现代文：把司马伦赶回自己的府第。当天惠帝反正即帝位。
English: He drove Smalen back to his own capital. On that day, Emperor Hui ascended the throne anyway.

古文：群臣顿首谢罪，帝曰： 非诸卿之过也。
现代文：群臣叩头谢罪，惠帝说： 这不是诸卿的过错。 
English: The courtiers bowed their heads in penitence, and Hui Di said, "This is not the fault of the lords.

古文：癸亥，诏曰： 朕以不德，纂承皇统，远不能光济大业，靖绥四方；近不能开明刑威，式遏奸宄，至使逆臣孙秀敢肆凶虐，窥间王室，遂奉赵王伦饕据天位。
现代文：初九，惠帝下诏说： 朕作为一个无德之人，继承皇位，远不能兴隆大业，安抚四方，近不能严明刑威，禁止奸人，至使逆臣孙秀放肆作恶，伺机离间王室，遂奉赵王司马伦窃据帝位。
English: On the 9th day of the first month, Emperor Hui issued an edict saying, "I, as a man without virtue, have succeeded to the imperial throne, but I am far from being able to make great achievements, pacify the four quarters, and I am almost unable to impose strict discipline and prohibit traitors. Therefore, I allowed the traitor Sun Xiu to act recklessly and seek an opportunity to split the royal family, and then I gave the imperial throne to Zhao Wang Simarun.

古文：镇东大将军、齐王冏，征北大将军、成都王颖，征西大将军、河间王颙，并以明德茂亲，忠规允著，首建大策，匡救国难。
现代文：镇东大将军、齐王礒，征北大将军、成都王颖，征西大将军、河间王司马颙，皆有明德，又是王室宗亲，忠于国家，行为允当，首倡讨逆大计，匡救国难。
English: General Zhen Dongda, Qi Wangtao, General of the Northern Expedition, Chengdu Wang Ying, General of the Western Expedition, and Wang Simatang of Kham, were all virtuous, royal relatives, loyal to the country, behaved appropriately, and took the lead in advocating a counter-strategy to save the country.

古文：尚书漼共立大谋，左卫将军王舆与群公卿士，协同谋略，亲勒本营，斩秀及其二子。
现代文：尚书氵崔共同参与谋划，左卫将军王舆与群公卿士，协同谋划，亲自指挥本营士卒，斩了孙秀及其二子。
English: Shang Shuxuan and Cui jointly participated in the planning, and the left guard general Wang Ying and a group of noblemen jointly planned, personally commanded the soldiers of the battalion, and beheaded Sun Xiu and his two sons.

古文：前赵王伦为秀所误，与其子等已诣金墉迎朕幽宫，旋轸阊阖。岂在予一人独飨其庆，宗庙社稷实有赖焉。 
现代文：前赵王司马伦为孙秀所误，与其子等已到金墉幽宫迎朕复位，岂止是我一个人值得庆幸，宗庙社稷也赖此以存。 
English: Former Zhao Wang Simarun was mistaken for Sun Xiu, and he and his sons have come to the Jinyu Palace to welcome me back to the throne. I am not the only one who deserves to be happy, the family temple also depends on this to survive.

古文：于是大赦，改元，孤寡赐谷五斛，大酺五日。
现代文：于是实行大赦，改年号，孤寡无靠者每人赐谷五斛，让民间宴会五日。
English: As a result, an amnesty was implemented, the year was changed, the lonely and the helpless were each given five grains of rice, and the folk banquet was held for five days.

古文：诛赵王伦、义阳王威、九门侯质等及伦之党与。
现代文：杀了赵王司马伦、义阳王司马威、九门侯质等，以及司马伦的党羽。
English: They killed Zhao Wang Sima Lun, Yiyang Wang Sima Wei, Jiumen Hou Quan, etc., as well as Sima Lun's followers.

古文：五月，立襄阳王尚为皇太孙。
现代文：五月，立襄阳王司马尚为皇太孙。
English: In May, King Sima Shang of Xiangyang became the emperor's grandson.

古文：六月戌辰，大赦，增吏位二等。复封宾徒王晏为吴王。
现代文：六月十五日，大赦罪人，官吏增位二级，宾徒王司马晏复封为吴王。
English: On June 15, criminals were pardoned, officials were promoted to the second level, and the king of the Bintu, Sima Qian, was reinstated as the king of Wu.

古文：庚午，东莱王蕤、左卫将军王舆谋废齐王冏，事泄，蕤废为庶人，舆伏诛，夷三族。
现代文：十七日，东莱王司马蕤、左卫将军王舆谋划废黜齐王司马礒，阴谋泄露，司马蕤废为平民，王舆处死，夷灭三族。
English: On the 17th, Wang Simak, the king of Donglai, and Wang Ying, the general of the Left Division, plotted to depose Qi Wang Simak, the plot was leaked, Sima was deposed as a commoner, Wang Ying was executed, and the three ethnic groups were exterminated.

古文：甲戌，以齐王冏为大司马、都督中外诸军事，成都王颍为大将军、录尚书事，河间王颙为太尉。
现代文：二十一日，以齐王司马礒为大司马、都督中外诸军事，成都王司马颖为大将军、录尚书事，河间王司马颙为太尉。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, Qi Wang Sima Yi was appointed as the grand steward and military governor of the Middle and Outer Provinces, Chengdu Wang Sima Ying as the general and recorded in the records, and Kawama Wang Sima Yi as the first lieutenant.

古文：罢丞相，复置司徒官。
现代文：撤销丞相，恢复司徒官。
English: Revoke the post of chancellor and reinstate the post of magistrate.

古文：已卯，以梁王肜为太宰，领司徒。
现代文：二十六日，以梁王司马肜为太宰，兼领司徒职。
English: On the 26th, Liang Wang Sima Wei was appointed as Dazai and concurrently held the post of steward.

古文：封齐王冏功臣葛牟平公，路季小黄公，卫毅平阴公，刘真安乡公，韩泰封丘公。
现代文：封齐王司马礒的功臣葛旗为牟平公，路季为小黄公，卫毅为平阴公，刘真为安乡公，韩泰为封丘公。
English: Geqi, the meritorious vassal of King Sima Qian, was Muping Gong, Lu Ji was Xiao Huang Gong, Wei Yi was Pingyin Gong, Liu Zhen was Anxiang Gong, and Han Tai was Fengqiu Gong.

古文：秋七月甲午，立吴王晏子国为汉王，复封常山王乂为长沙王。
现代文：秋七月十一日，立吴王司马晏的儿子为汉王，常山王司马磖恢复为长沙王。
English: On the 11th day of the 7th month of autumn, the son of the king of Wu, Sima Ye, was made the king of Han, and the king of Changshan, Sima Ye, was restored as the king of Changsha.

古文：八月，大赦。
现代文：八月，实行大赦。
English: In August, an amnesty was implemented.

古文：戊辰，原徙边者。
现代文：十六日，宽免徙边之民。
English: On the 16th, the people of Iyo Province were pardoned.

古文：益州刺史罗尚讨羌，破之，己巳，徙南平王祥为宜都王。
现代文：益州刺史罗尚讨伐并击破羌人。十七日，徙南平王司马祥为宜都王。
English: On the 17th, Nanping King Sima Xiang became the king of Yidu.

古文：下邳王韡薨。
现代文：下邳王司马韦华死。
English: The king of the lower jaw, Sima Weihua, died.

古文：以东平王楙为平东将军、都督徐州诸军事。
现代文：以东平王司马懋为平东将军，都督徐州诸军事。
English: With the East Ping Wang Sima Qian as the general of Pingdong and the governor of Xuzhou as the military leader.

古文：九月，追东安王繇复其爵。
现代文：九月，追复东安王司马繇的爵位。
English: In September, the peerage of Dongan King Sima Yi was restored.

古文：丁丑，封楚王玮子范为襄阳王。
现代文：丁丑，封楚王司马玮的儿子司马范为襄阳王。
English: Ding Yuxiu, the son of the King of Chu, Sima Fan, was the King of Xiangyang.

古文：冬十月，流人李特反于蜀。
现代文：冬十月，流人李特据蜀叛乱。
English: In the winter of October, Li Te Rong led the Shu Rebellion.

古文：十二月，司空何劭薨。
现代文：十二月，司空何劭死。
English: In December, Sikuo He died.

古文：封齐王冏子冰为乐安王，英为济阳王，超为淮南王。
现代文：封齐王司马礒的儿子司马冰为乐安王，司马英为济阳王，司马超为淮南王。
English: King Sima Bing, the son of King Sima Yao of Qi, became King Le'an, King Sima Ying became King Jiyang, and King Sima Chao became King Huainan.

古文：是岁，郡国十二旱，六蝗。
现代文：这一年，十二个郡国发生旱灾，六个郡国发生蝗灾。
English: This year, droughts occurred in twelve counties and locust plagues occurred in six counties.

古文：太安元年春正月庚子，安东将军、谯王随薨。
现代文：太安元年正月二十日，安东将军谯王司马随死。
English: On the 20th day of the first month of the first year of the Taian era, General Anton Shao Wang Sima died.

古文：三月癸卯，赦司、冀、兗、豫四州。
现代文：三月二十四日，赦司、冀、兖、豫四州囚犯。
English: On March 24, he pardoned prisoners from the four prefectures of Ji, Jie, Handan and Henan.

古文：皇太孙尚薨。
现代文：皇太孙司马尚死。
English: The Emperor's grandson Sima is still dead.

古文：夏四月，彗星昼见。
现代文：夏四月，彗星在白天出现。
English: In the summer, in April, the comet appears in the daytime.

古文：五月；乙酉，侍中、太宰、领司徒、梁王肜薨。
现代文：五月初七，侍中、太宰、领司徒、梁王司马肜死。
English: On the seventh day of the fifth month, the chamberlains, the dazai, the leading magistrates, and Liang Wang Simao died.

古文：以右光禄大夫刘寔为太傅。
现代文：以右光禄大夫刘实为太傅。
English: Dr. Liu Si, the doctor of Uguanglu, is the Taifu.

古文：太尉、河间王颙遣将衙博击李特于蜀，为特所败。
现代文：太尉、河间王司马颙派遣部将衙博入蜀攻李特，被李特打败。
English: Lieutenant, the dispatching department of Wang Simak of Kawama sent Zibo into Shu to attack Li Te, and was defeated by Li Te.

古文：特遂陷梓潼、巴西，害广汉太守张微，自号大将军。
现代文：李特随即攻陷梓潼、巴西，杀死广汉太守张微，自号大将军。
English: Li Te immediately invaded Zizhi and Brazil, killed the Guanghan Emperor Zhang Wei, and called himself a great general.

古文：癸卯，以清河王遐子覃为皇太子，赐孤寡帛，大酺五日。
现代文：二十五日，以清河王司马遐的儿子司马覃为皇太子，赐给孤寡无靠者布帛，使民宴会五日。
English: On the twenty-fifth day, Sima Yu, the son of Sima Yu, the king of Qinghe, was made the crown prince, cloth was given to the lonely and helpless, and the people had a banquet for five days.

古文：以齐王冏为太师，东海王越为司空。
现代文：以齐王司马礒为太师，东海王司马越为司空。
English: King Sima of Qi was the Grand Master, and King Sima Yue of the East Sea was the Grand Master.

古文：秋七月，兗、豫、徐、冀等四州大水。
现代文：秋七月，兖、豫、徐、冀四州大雨成灾。
English: In autumn and July, heavy rain caused disasters in the four prefectures of Handan, Henan, Hebei and Jiangsu.

古文：冬十月，地震。
现代文：冬十月，地震。
English: Winter, October, earthquake.

古文：十二月丁卯，河间王颙表齐王冏窥伺神器，有无君之心，与成都王颍、新野王歆、范阳王虓同会洛阳，请废冏还第。
现代文：十二月二十二日，河间王司马颙向皇帝上表，说齐王司马礒欲伺机篡权，心中无君，与成都王司马颖、新野王司马歆、范阳王司马羉会集洛阳，请求皇帝废黜司马礒，使之归还府第。
English: On December 22nd, King Sima of Kawama petitioned the emperor, saying that King Sima of Qi wanted to usurp power while waiting for an opportunity and had no prince in his heart. He gathered with King Sima Ying of Chengdu, King Sima Ying of Nino, and King Sima Ying of Fanyang in Luoyang to request the emperor to depose King Sima Ying and return it to the capital.

古文：长沙王乂奉乘舆屯南止车门，攻冏，杀之，幽其诸子于金墉城，废冏弟北海王寔。
现代文：长沙王司马磖裹挟皇帝屯兵南止车门，攻击司马礒并杀了他，将司马礒的几个儿子幽禁在金墉城，废掉司马礒之弟北海王司马实。
English: Changsha's King Sima Qian, surrounded by the emperor's garrison, attacked Sima Qian and killed him, imprisoned several of Sima Qian's sons in Jinqian City, and dethroned Sima Qian's brother, Beihai's King Sima Qian.

古文：大赦，改元。
现代文：实行大赦，改年号。
English: An amnesty will be implemented and the year will be changed.

古文：以长沙王乂为太尉、都督中外诸军事。
现代文：以长沙王司马磖为太尉、都督中外诸军事。
English: Changsha's King Sima Qian was promoted to the rank of lieutenant and became the military governor of the province.

古文：封东莱王蕤子照为齐王。
现代文：封东莱王司马蕤之子司马火召为齐王。
English: Sima Hui, the son of the Donglai King Sima Jiao, was proclaimed the King of Qi.

古文：二年春正月甲子朔，赦五岁刑。
现代文：二年春正月初一，赦免五年以下的罪犯。
English: On the first day of the first month of the second year of spring, criminals under the age of five were pardoned.

古文：三月，李特攻陷益州。
现代文：三月，李特攻陷益州。
English: In March, Little invaded Yizhou.

古文：荆州刺史宋岱击特，斩之，传首京师。
现代文：荆州刺史宋岱进击李特，李特被杀，首级传往京师。
English: In Jingzhou, Song Xuan attacked Li Te, Li Te was killed, and his head was sent to the Beijing Division.

古文：夏四月，特子雄复据益州。
现代文：夏四月，李特之子李雄又占据益州。
English: In the summer of April, Li Xiong, son of Li Te, occupied Yizhou again.

古文：五月，义阳蛮张昌举兵反，以山都人丘沈为主，改姓刘氏，伪号汉，建元神凤，攻破郡县，南阳太守刘彬，平南将军羊尹，镇南大将军、新野王歆并遇害。
现代文：五月，义阳蛮人张昌举兵反叛，推山都人丘沈为君主，改姓刘，伪号汉，年号为神凤，攻破郡县，南阳太守刘彬，平南将军羊伊，镇南大将军新野王司马歆一起遇害。
English: In May, Zhang Chang, the barbarian of Yiyang, raised an army and rebelled, pushing the mountain capital man Qiu Shen to become the monarch, changing his surname to Liu, his pseudonym to Han, and his year name to Shenfeng, and conquering counties and counties. Liu Bin, the governor of Nanyang, Yang Yi, the general of Pingnan, and Sima Ye, the general of the town of Nanyang, were killed together.

古文：六月，遣荆州刺史刘弘等讨张昌于方城，王师败绩。
现代文：六月，派遣荆州刺史刘弘等讨伐张昌，攻方城，晋军大败。
English: In June, Jingzhou sent Liu Hong and others to fight against Zhangchang and attack the city. The Jin army suffered a crushing defeat.

古文：秋七月，中书令卞粹、侍中冯荪、河南尹李含等贰于长沙王乂，乂疑而害之。
现代文：秋七月，中书令卞粹，侍中冯荪、河南尹李含等对司马磖产生二心，司马磖也猜疑他们而把他们杀害。
English: In the autumn and July, the Chinese scribe Ling Zizhi, the aide-de-camp Feng Yao, Henan Yin Li Han and others were suspicious of Sima Yao. Sima Yao also suspected them and killed them.

古文：张昌陷江南诸郡，武陵太守贾隆、零陵太守孔纮、豫章太守阎济、武昌太守刘根皆遇害。
现代文：张昌攻陷江南诸郡，武陵太守贾隆、零陵太守孔纮、豫章太守阎济、武昌太守刘根都被杀害。
English: Zhang Chang invaded the counties in the south of the Yangtze River, and the Wuling governor Jialong, the Luling governor Kong Qi, the Yuzhang governor Yan Ji, and the Wuchang governor Liu Gen were all killed.

古文：昌别帅石冰寇扬州，刺史陈徽与战，大败，诸郡尽没。
现代文：张昌部将石冰侵犯扬州，刺史陈徽迎战，大败，扬州诸郡都被石冰占领。
English: Zhang Changbu invaded Yangzhou with stone ice, and Chen Hui, a scholar, fought against it. He was defeated, and all the counties in Yangzhou were occupied by stone ice.

古文：临淮人封云举兵应之，自阜陵寇徐州。
现代文：临淮人封云举兵响应张昌，从阜陵出发，进犯徐州。
English: In response to Zhang Chang, the people of Linhuai and Fengyun raised an army and set out from Fulin to attack Xuzhou.

古文：八月，河间王颙、成都王颖举兵讨长沙王乂，帝以乂为大都督，帅军御之。
现代文：八月，河间王司马颙，成都王司马颖举兵讨伐长沙王司马磖，惠帝以司马磖为大都督，率兵抵抗。
English: In August, King Sima Jie of Hebei and King Sima Ying of Chengdu raised an army to fight against King Sima Jie of Changsha. Emperor Hui made Sima Jie the grand governor and led the army to resist.

古文：庚申，刘弘及张昌战于清水，斩之。
现代文：十九日刘弘与张昌在清水交战，张昌被杀。
English: On the 19th, Liu Hong and Zhang Chang fought in Qingshui, and Zhang Chang was killed.

古文：颙遣其将张方，颍遣其将陆机、牵秀、石超等来逼京师。
现代文：司马颙派遣部将张方，司马颖派遣部将陆机、牵秀、石超等进逼京师。
English: Sima Yi dispatched Zhang Fang and Sima Ying dispatched Lu Ji, Tu Xiu and Shi Chao to force the Beijing Division.

古文：乙丑，帝幸十三里桥，遣将军皇甫商距方于宜阳。
现代文：二十四日，惠帝亲临十三里桥，派遣将军皇甫商在宜阳抗拒张方。
English: On the 24th, Emperor Hui personally visited the Thirteen-Mile Bridge and dispatched the general Emperor Fusang to resist Zhang in Yiyang.

古文：己巳，帝旋军于宣武。
现代文：二十八日，惠帝回到宣武场。
English: On the 28th, Hui Di returned to the battlefield.

古文：庚午，舍于石楼。
现代文：二十九日，在石楼住宿。
English: On the 29th, they stayed in a stone building.

古文：天中裂，无云而雷。
现代文：天的正中出现一道裂缝，天空无云而有雷声。
English: A crack appeared in the middle of the sky. There was no cloud in the sky, but there was thunder.

古文：九月丁丑，帝次于河桥。
现代文：九月初六惠帝转移到河桥。
English: At the beginning of September, Liu Huidi was transferred to Heqiao.

古文：壬午，皇甫商为张方所败。
现代文：十一日，皇甫商被张方打败。
English: On the 11th day, Emperor Fu Shang was defeated by Zhang Fang.

古文：甲申，帝军于芒山。
现代文：十三日，惠帝驻军于芒山。
English: On the 13th, Emperor Hui stationed troops in Mangshan.

古文：丁亥，幸偃师。
现代文：十六日，到达偃师。
English: On the 16th, he arrived in Tsukushi.

古文：辛卯，舍于豆田。
现代文：二十日，宿于豆田。
English: On the 20th, we stayed at Mameya.

古文：癸巳，尚书右仆射、兴晋侯羊玄之卒。帝旋于城东。
现代文：二十二日，尚书右仆射兴晋侯羊玄之死，惠帝转回城东。
English: On the 22nd, after the death of Yang Xuan, Shang Shuxu's right-hand man, Emperor Hui turned back to the east of the city.

古文：丙申，进军缑氏，击牵秀，走之。
现代文：二十五日，进军缑氏，攻击牵秀并把他赶出。
English: On the 25th, the army marched into the Shou clan, attacked TsuShou and drove him out.

古文：大赦。
现代文：大赦罪犯。
English: Amnesty for criminals.

古文：张方入京城，烧清明、开阳二门，死者万计。
现代文：张方进入京师，烧清明、开阳二门，被烧杀而死的以万计。
English: Zhang Fang entered Beijing Division, burned Qingming, Kaiyang two doors, and tens of thousands of people were burned to death.

古文：石超逼乘舆于缑氏。
现代文：石超在缑氏威逼惠帝。
English: Shi Chao forced Emperor Hui to surrender.

古文：冬十月壬寅，帝旋于宫。
现代文：冬十月初二，惠帝回到宫中。
English: In winter, on the second day of October, Hui Di returned to the palace.

古文：石超焚缑氏，服御无遗。
现代文：石超焚烧缑氏，衣物车马等全部烧毁。
English: Shi Chao incinerated the Zou family, and all of their clothes, cars and horses were burned.

古文：丁未，破牵秀、范阳王虓于东阳门外。
现代文：初七，在东阳门外大破牵秀及范阳王司马九虎。初八，在建春门打败陆机，石超败逃。
English: In the seventh year of junior high school, he defeated and defeated Fan Yang Wang Sima Jiuhu outside Dongyang Gate. In the eighth year of junior high school, he defeated Lu Jia at Jianchun Gate, but Shi Chao escaped.

古文：戊申，破陆机于建春门，石超走，斩其大将贾崇等十六人，悬首铜驼街。
现代文：斩其大将贾崇等十六人，人头悬于铜驼街示众。
English: Sixteen people, including General Jia Chong, were beheaded, and their heads were displayed on Copper Camel Street.

古文：张方退屯十三里桥。
现代文：张方退驻十三里桥。
English: Zhang Fang retreated to the Thirteen-Mile Bridge.

古文：十一月辛巳，星昼陨，声如雷。
现代文：十一月十一日，有星白日坠落，响声如雷。
English: On November 11th, a star fell in broad daylight with a thunderous crash.

古文：师王攻方垒，不利。
现代文：王师进攻张方的营垒，未获胜。
English: Wang's division attacked Zhang's camp, but did not win.

古文：方决千金堨，水碓皆涸。
现代文：张方挖开名叫千金土曷的水堰，舂米磨面的水碓都无水。
English: Zhang Fang dug up the water weir called Qianjin Doushan, and the water weir on the glutinous rice grinding surface had no water.

古文：乃发王公奴婢手舂给兵禀，一品已下不从征者、男子十三以上皆从役。又发奴助兵，号为四部司马。
现代文：于是征发王公及奴婢以手舂米供应军粮，一品以下的官员未从军出征者以及十三岁以上的男子，都服此劳役，又征发奴隶补充军队，号称四部司马。
English: As a result, the emperor and his servants were conscripted to supply military grain with hand-squeezed rice, officials below the rank of one who did not go to war and men over the age of thirteen all served this labor service, and slaves were conscripted to supplement the army, known as Shibe Sima.

古文：公私穷踧，米石万钱。
现代文：公家和私人都十分穷困，米一石一万钱。
English: Both the public and private sectors are very poor, with rice costing 10,000 yuan per kilo.

古文：诏命所至，一城而已。
现代文：皇帝下的诏命，只能在京城有效。
English: The imperial edict issued by the emperor is only valid in the capital.

古文：壬寅夜，赤气竟天，隐隐有声。
现代文：十二月初三夜里，一股赤色气体上冲天际，发出声音隐约可闻。
English: On the third night of early December, a stream of red gas shot up into the sky, emitting a faintly audible sound.

古文：丙辰，地震。
现代文：十七日，地震。
English: On the 17th, there was an earthquake.

古文：癸亥，东海王越执长沙王乂，幽于金墉城，寻为张方所害。
现代文：二十四日，东海王司马越逮捕长沙王司马磖，囚禁在金墉城，不久被张方杀害。
English: On the 24th, the East Sea King Sima Yue arrested the Changsha King Sima Qian, imprisoned him in Jinyuan City, and was soon killed by Zhang Fang.

古文：甲子，大赦。丙寅，扬州秀才周、前南平内史王矩、前吴兴内史顾秘起义军以讨石冰。冰退，自临淮趣寿阳。
现代文：二十五日，实行大赦，二十七日，扬州秀才周王己、前南平内史王矩，前吴兴内史顾礻必组建义军以讨伐石冰，石冰退走，自临淮奔寿阳。
English: On the 25th, an amnesty was implemented, and on the 27th, Yangzhou's outstanding talents Zhou Wangqi, former Nanping Naxi historian Wang Gui, and former Wu Xing Naxi historian Gu Ya were forced to form a rebel army to fight against Shi Bing. Shi Bing retreated and went to Shouyang.

古文：征东将军刘准遣广陵度支陈敏击冰。
现代文：征东将军刘准派遣广陵度支陈敏进击石冰。
English: Liu Jun, the general of the Eastern Expedition, dispatched Guangling Du Zhi Chen Min to attack Shih Bing.

古文：李雄自郫城攻益州刺史罗尚，尚委城而遁，雄尽有成都之地。
现代文：李雄从郫城攻益州刺史罗尚，罗尚弃城而逃，李雄全部占据成都一带。
English: Li Xiong attacked Luo Shang of Yizhou from Fucheng, Luo Shang abandoned the city and fled, Li Xiong occupied all the areas around Chengdu.

古文：封鲜卑段勿尘为辽西公。
现代文：朝廷封鲜卑人段勿尘为辽西公。
English: The imperial court sealed fresh low-ranking officials as Liao Xi Gong.

古文：永兴元年春正月丙午，尚书令乐广卒。
现代文：永兴元年正月初八，尚书令乐广死。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the first year of Yongxing, Shang Shuling Le Guang died.

古文：成都王颖自鄴讽于帝，乃大赦，改元为永安。
现代文：成都王司马颖从邺上奏建议实行大赦，改年号为永安。
English: Chengdu's Wang Sima Ying proposed to implement an amnesty and change the name of the year to Yongan.

古文：帝逼于河间王颙，密诏雍州刺史刘沈、秦州刺史皇甫重以讨之。
现代文：惠帝受河间王司马颙胁迫，秘密下诏令雍州刺史刘沈、秦州刺史皇甫重讨伐司马颙。
English: Emperor Hui was coerced by King Sima Qian of Kawama and secretly issued an imperial edict ordering Liu Shen of Yongzhou and Emperor Hui of Qinzhou to fight against Sima Qian.

古文：沈举举兵攻长安，为颙所败。
现代文：刘沈发兵攻长安，被司马颙打败。
English: Liu Shen sent troops to attack Chang'an and was defeated by Sima Yu.

古文：张方大掠洛中，还长安。
现代文：张方在洛阳大肆抢掠，然后还长安。
English: Zhang Fang plundered extensively in Luoyang, and then returned to Chang'an.

古文：于是军中大馁，人相食。
现代文：当时军民无粮，人相杀而食。
English: At that time, there was no food for the military and the people, and they killed and ate each other.

古文：以成都王颖为丞相。
现代文：朝廷以成都王司马颖为丞相。
English: The imperial court appointed Chengdu Wang Sima Ying as chancellor.

古文：颖遣从事中郎盛夔等以兵五万屯十二城门，殿中宿所忌者，颍皆杀之，以三部兵代宿卫。
现代文：司马颖派遣从事中郎成夔等率兵五万屯守十二个城门，平时被司马颖所忌恨的朝臣，都被司马颖杀害，以三部兵代替宫中宿卫。
English: Sima Ying dispatched fifty thousand soldiers to guard the twelve gates of the city, led by Zhonglang Chengyu and others. The courtiers, who were hated by Sima Ying in peacetime, were all killed by Sima Ying, and three soldiers replaced the palace guards.

古文：二月乙酉，废皇后羊氏，幽于金墉城，黜皇太子覃复为清河王。
现代文：二月十七日，废皇后羊氏，幽禁于金墉城，黜退皇太子司马覃为清河王。
English: On February 17th, the dethroned Empress Yang, imprisoned in Jinyuan City, and the dethroned Crown Prince Sima Yi became the King of Qinghe.

古文：三月，陈敏攻石冰，斩之，扬、徐二州平。
现代文：三月，陈敏攻石冰，石冰被杀，扬、徐二州平定。
English: In March, Chen Min attacked Shih Bing, Shih Bing was killed, Yang and Xu pacified Erzhou.

古文：河间王颙表请立成都王颖为太弟。
现代文：河间王司马颙上表请立成都王司马颖为皇太弟。
English: Wang Sima Ying of Chengdu was appointed as the younger brother of the crown prince.

古文：戊申，诏曰： 朕以不德，纂承鸿绪，于兹十有五载。
现代文：十一日，惠帝下诏说： 朕以无德之人，继承皇位，至今已十五年。
English: On the 11th day, Emperor Hui issued an edict saying, "It has been fifteen years since I ascended the throne as a man without virtue.

古文：祸乱滔天，奸逆仍起，至乃幽废重宫，宗庙圮绝。
现代文：祸乱滔天，奸人逆贼接连而起，以致使朕幽禁深宫，宗庙祭祀断绝。
English: The calamity was tremendous, and the traitors and usurpers rose up one after another, so that I was confined to the Deep Palace, and the sacrificial rites of the ancestral temple were cut off.

古文：成都王颖温仁惠和，克平暴乱。
现代文：成都王颖，温厚仁慈，惠和百姓，平定暴乱。
English: Chengdu Wang Ying, mild-mannered and benevolent, benefiting the people and quelling riots.

古文：其以颖为皇太弟、都督中外诸军事，承相如故。 
现代文：现以司马颖为皇太弟、都督中外诸军事，丞相职位如故。 
English: At present, Sima Ying is the younger brother of the crown prince, the military governor of the Middle and Outer Provinces, and the position of the prime minister remains unchanged.

古文：大赦，赐鳏寡高年帛三匹，大酺五日。
现代文：实行大赦，赐鳏寡高寿者帛三匹。民间宴会五日。
English: An amnesty was implemented, granting three horses to widows and widowers with a long life. A folk banquet was held on the fifth day.

古文：丙辰，盗窃太庙服器。
现代文：十九日，盗贼偷去太庙中的服饰器物。
English: On the 19th, the thieves stole the clothing and utensils in the Great Temple.

古文：以太尉颙为太宰，太傅刘实为太尉。
现代文：以太尉司马颙为太宰，太傅刘实为太尉。
English: With the lieutenant Sima Qian as Dazai and the lieutenant Liu Si as Taifu.

古文：六月，新作三城门。
现代文：六月，新建三座城门。
English: In June, three new gates were built.

古文：秋七月丙申朔，右卫将军陈以诏召百僚入殿中，因勒兵讨成都王颖。
现代文：秋七月初一，右卫将军陈纁，以诏书召百官入殿中，并布署兵力讨伐成都王司马颖。
English: On the first day of the seventh month of autumn, the right guard general, Chen Qi, summoned hundreds of officials to the palace with an edict, and dispatched troops to fight against Chengdu Wang Sima Ying.

古文：戊戌，大赦，复皇后羊氏及皇太子覃。
现代文：初三，实行大赦，被废的皇后羊氏和太子司马覃复位。
English: On the third day of the junior high school year, an amnesty was implemented, and the abolished Empress Yang and Prince Sima Yi were reinstated.

古文：己亥，司徒王戎、东海王越、高密王简、平昌公模、吴王晏、豫章王炽、襄阳王范、右仆射荀籓等奉帝北征，至安阳，众十余万，颖遣其将石超距战。
现代文：初四，司徒王戎、东海王司马越、高密王司马简、平昌公司马模、吴王司马晏、豫章王司马炽、襄阳王司马范、右仆射荀藩等拥着惠帝北伐，至安阳，有军队十余万。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, King Sittu Wang Rong, King Sima Yue of the East Sea, King Sima Jian of Gaomi, Ma Miao of the Pyeongchang Company, King Sima Jie of Wu, King Sima Jiao of Yuzhang, King Sima Fan of Xiangyang, and the right-hand man of the Shao clan supported Hui Di in the Northern Expedition to Anyang, with more than 100,000 troops.

古文：己未，六军败绩于荡阴，矢及乘舆，百官分散，侍中嵇绍死之。
现代文：司马颖派遣其将领石超抗拒，二十四日，朝廷六军在荡阴战败，箭射到惠帝的乘车上，百官被冲散，侍中嵇绍死于乱军之中。
English: Sima Ying dispatched his general, Collarstone, to overcome the resistance. On the 24th, the six armies of the imperial court were defeated in the dark, arrows were shot at Hui Di's car, hundreds of officials were dispersed, and the chamberlain Jinshao died among the rebels.

古文：帝伤颊，中三矢，亡六玺。
现代文：惠帝面颊受伤，中了三箭，丢了六块印玺。
English: Hui Di's cheek was injured, he was hit by three arrows and lost six pieces of seal money.

古文：帝遂幸超军，馁甚，超进水，左右奉秋桃。
现代文：惠帝来到石超军中，饥渴已甚，石超送上些水，左右侍从献上些秋桃供惠帝享用。
English: Hui Di came to Shi Chao's army, he was very hungry and thirsty. Shi Chao sent some water, and the attendants on his right and left presented some autumn peaches for Hui Di to enjoy.

古文：超遣弟熙奉帝之鄴，颖帅群官迎谒道左。
现代文：石超派遣其弟石熙送惠帝到邺城，司马颖率群官列队道左迎接。
English: Shi Chao sent his brother Shi Xi to escort Hui Di to Handan City. Sima Ying led a group of officials to line up on the left to greet him.

古文：帝下舆涕泣，其夕幸于颖军。
现代文：惠帝下车涕泣哀伤，当晚宿于司马颖军中。
English: Hui Di got out of the car with tears and sorrow, and stayed in Sima Ying Jun that night.

古文：颖府有九锡之仪，陈留王送貂蝉文衣鹖尾，明日，乃备法驾幸于鄴，唯豫章王炽、司徒王戎、仆射荀籓从。
现代文：司马颖府中有九锡仪仗之类，陈留王又送上貂蝉文衣曷鸟尾，第二天准备了专供皇帝乘坐的法驾进入邺城。这时只有豫章王司马炽、司徒王戎、仆射荀藩跟从惠帝。
English: In Sima Yingfu, there were ceremonial battles such as Jiuxi, and Chen Liu Wang also sent a cicada-patterned robe and a bird's tail. The next day, a special carriage for the emperor to ride was prepared to enter Shicheng. At this time, only Yu Zhang Wang, Sima Zhao, Sittu Wang Rong, and the servants of Shao Han followed Hui Di.

古文：庚申，大赦，改元为建武。
现代文：二十五日，实行大赦，改年号为建武。
English: On the 25th, an amnesty was implemented, and the year name was changed to Jianwu.

古文：八月戊辰，颖杀东安王繇。
现代文：八月初三，司马颖杀死东安王司马繇。
English: On the third day of August, Sima Ying killed Dongan Wang Sima Yao.

古文：张方复入洛阳，废皇后羊氏及皇太子覃。
现代文：张方又一次进入洛阳，废掉皇后羊氏及皇太子司马覃。
English: Zhang Fang once again entered Luoyang and deposed Empress Yang and Crown Prince Sima Yu.

古文：匈奴左贤王刘元海反于离石，自号大单于。
现代文：匈奴左贤王刘元海在离石反叛，自称大单于。
English: Liu Yuanhai, the Xiongnu king Zuoxian, rebelled against Li Shishi and claimed to be the sole ruler.

古文：安北将军王浚遣乌丸骑攻成都王颖于鄴，大败之。颖舆帝单车走洛阳，服御分散，仓卒上下无赍，侍中黄门被囊中赍私钱三千，诏贷用。所在买饭以供，宫人止食于道中客舍。
现代文：安北将军王浚派遣乌丸骑兵攻打成都王司马颖，司马颖大败于邺城，与惠帝坐单车逃奔洛阳，侍从人员分散而去，行动仓促，上下都未携带钱财给养，侍中黄门在被囊中藏了私钱三千，惠帝下诏借下这三千钱，沿途买饭供应皇室，宫人只能到途中客舍食宿。
English: Wang Jun, the Anbei general, dispatched the Wu Maru cavalry to attack Wang Sima Ying in Chengdu. Sima Ying was defeated in Lucheng, and he and Hui Di fled to Luoyang by bicycle. The attendants dispersed and left in a hurry. They did not carry money and supplies. The attendant Huang Men hid three thousand yuan in his pocket. Hui Di borrowed the three thousand yuan to buy food and supply the royal family along the way. The courtiers could only go to the guest house for meals and accommodation.

古文：宫人有持升余粇米饭及燥蒜盐豉以进帝，帝啖之，御中黄门布被。
现代文：有个宫人弄来一升多粳米饭和干蒜盐豉献给惠帝，惠帝大口吞食，晚上盖中黄门的布被。
English: A palace attendant brought a liter of glutinous rice and dried garlic and salt to present to Hui Di. Hui Di devoured it with a big mouth, and covered the cloth quilt in the middle of the Yellow Gate at night.

古文：次获嘉，市粗米饭，盛以瓦盆，帝啖两盂。
现代文：到获嘉县，买到些粗米饭，装在瓦盆里，惠帝吃了两碗。
English: When he went to Huojia County, he bought some coarse rice and put it in a clay pot. Hui Di ate two bowls of cucumber.

古文：有老父献蒸鸡，帝受之。
现代文：有一老人送上蒸鸡，惠帝接受下来。
English: An old man brought steamed chicken, and Hui Di accepted it.

古文：至温，将谒陵，帝丧履，纳从者之履，下拜流涕，左右皆歔欷。
现代文：到了温县，要拜谒祖坟，惠帝丢了鞋子，穿了侍从的鞋子，流着泪下拜，旁边的人也为之哀叹。
English: When he arrived in Wen County, he wanted to pay homage to his ancestral tomb. Hui Di lost his shoes and put on his servant's shoes. He paid homage with tears, and the people around him also lamented.

古文：及济河，张方帅骑三千，以阳燧青盖车奉迎。方拜谒，帝躬止之。
现代文：过了黄河，张方率三千骑兵，用阳燧青盖车迎接惠帝，张方下拜，惠帝亲自把他扶起。
English: After crossing the Yellow River, Zhang Fang led three thousand cavalrymen and greeted Hui Di with a chariot. Zhang Fang bowed down, and Hui Di personally helped him up.

古文：辛巳，大赦，赏从者各有差。
现代文：十六日，实行大赦，赏赐随从人员各有差等。
English: On the 16th, an amnesty was carried out, and the attendants were given different rewards.

古文：冬十一月乙未，方请帝谒庙，因劫帝幸长安。
现代文：冬十一月初一，张方请惠帝拜谒宗庙，并要趁机将惠帝劫持到长安。
English: On the first day of November in winter, Zhang Fang asked Hui Di to visit the Ancestral Temple, and took the opportunity to kidnap Hui Di to Chang'an.

古文：方以所乘车入殿中，帝驰避后园竹中。
现代文：张方坐着车子进入殿中，惠帝跑到后园竹林中躲避。
English: Zhang Fang entered the hall in a car, and Hui Di ran to the bamboo grove in the backyard to hide.

古文：方逼帝升车，左右中黄门鼓吹十二人步从，唯中书监卢志侍侧。
现代文：张方逼着惠帝上车，左右中黄门及鼓吹手十二人徒步跟从，只有中书监卢志在惠帝身旁侍从。
English: Zhang Fang forced Hui Di to get on the bus. Around him, twelve people followed on foot, including Zhonghuangmen and propagandists. Only Lu Zhi, the Chinese librarian, waited on Hui Di's side.

古文：方以帝幸其垒，帝令方具车载宫人宝物，军人因妻略后宫，分争府藏。
现代文：张方带着惠帝到自己军垒，惠帝让张方准备车辆装载宫人和宫中宝物，军人们趁机奸辱宫女，抢掠宫中财宝，争夺府中藏物。
English: Zhang Fang took Hui Di to his military base. Hui Di asked Zhang Fang to prepare a vehicle to load palace people and palace treasures. The soldiers took advantage of the opportunity to humiliate the princess, loot the palace treasures, and compete for the palace treasures.

古文：魏晋已来之积，扫地无遗矣。
现代文：魏晋以来所积藏的财宝文物，被抢掠一空。
English: All the treasures and cultural relics accumulated since the Wei and Jin dynasties were plundered.

古文：行次新安，寒甚，帝堕马伤足，尚书高光进面衣，帝嘉之。
现代文：走到新安，天气冷得厉害，惠帝从马上掉下来，跌伤了脚，尚书高光献上用于旅途御寒的面衣，惠帝大加赞赏。
English: When they arrived in Xin'an, the weather was extremely cold. Hui Di fell off his horse and hurt his foot. Shang Shuxu Gao Guang presented him with a winter coat for the journey, which Hui Di greatly appreciated.

古文：河间王颙帅官属步骑三万，迎于霸上。
现代文：河间王司马颙率领官属及步骑三万，在霸上迎接惠帝。
English: The king of Kawama, Sima Ye, led 30,000 officials and courtiers on foot and horseback to welcome Emperor Hui at the castle.

古文：颙前拜谒，帝下车止之。
现代文：司马在惠帝面前下拜，惠帝下车扶起了他。
English: Sima bowed down in front of Hui Di. Hui Di got out of the car and helped him up.

古文：以征西府为宫。
现代文：以征西将军府为宫。
English: The palace is Seisei Shogun's palace.

古文：唯仆射荀籓、司隶刘暾、太常郑球、河南尹周馥与其遗官在洛阳，为留台，承制行事，号为东西台焉。
现代文：只有仆射荀藩、司隶刘暾、太常郑球、河南尹周馥和他们的属官留在洛阳，组成留台，代替皇帝履行国家职权，号称东西台。
English: Only the servants of the Shao clan, the subordinates of Liu Bei, Taizhang Zhengqiu, Henan Yin Zhouqiu and their subordinate officials remained in Luoyang to form the Rui Tai and perform state duties in place of the emperor, known as the East-West Tai.

古文：丙午，留台大赦，改元复为永安。
现代文：十二日，留台实行大赦，恢复永安年号。
English: On the 12th, Taiwan implemented an amnesty and resumed the Yongan Year.

古文：辛丑，复皇后羊氏。
现代文：初七日，羊氏恢复皇后地位。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, the Yang clan restored the status of the empress.

古文：李雄僭号成都王，刘元海僭号汉王。
现代文：李雄僭号称成都王，刘元海僭号称汉王。
English: Li Xiongkun was known as the King of Chengdu, and Liu Yuanhai was known as the King of Han.

古文：十二月丁亥，诏曰： 天祸晋邦，冢嗣莫继。
现代文：十二月二十四日，惠帝下诏说： 天要使晋国遭殃，无太子继承皇位。
English: On December 24th, Emperor Hui issued an edict saying, "God will bring disaster to Jin, and no prince will succeed to the throne."

古文：成都王颖自在储贰，政绩亏损，四海失望，不可承重，其以王还第。豫章王炽先帝爱子，令闻日新，四海注意，今以为皇太弟，以隆我晋邦。以司空越为太傅，与太宰颙夹辅朕躬。司徒王戎参录朝政，光禄大夫王衍为尚书左仆射。
现代文：成都王司马颖自居太弟之位，政绩亏损，四海之人失望，不能承担天下重任，现令其以王的身份退还府第，豫章王司马炽是先帝的爱子，美好的名声不断增高，受到四海人民的重视，现定为皇太弟，以使我晋邦兴隆，以司空司马越为太傅，与太宰司马颙共同辅助朕身，司徒王戎参与朝政，光禄大夫王衍为尚书左仆射。
English: Chengdu King Sima Ying took the position of the great-uncle, but his political achievements were poor, and the people of the four seas were disappointed, and he could not undertake the heavy responsibilities of the world. He was now ordered to return to the palace as the king. Yuzhang King Sima Zhao was the beloved son of the former emperor, and his good reputation continued to increase. He was valued by the people of the four seas. He was now designated as the great-uncle of the emperor, so that I could make Jinpang flourish. With Siu Kuo Sima Yue as the great-uncle, and Dazai Sima Yu as the great-unc

古文：安南将军虓、安北将军浚、平北将军腾各守本镇。
现代文：安南将军司马羉、安北将军王浚、平北将军司马腾各守本镇。
English: Annan's General Sima Ye, Anbei's General Wang Jun, and Pingbei's General Sima Teng each guarded the town.

古文：高密王简为镇南将军，领司隶校尉，权镇洛阳；东中郎将模为宁北将军、都督冀州，镇于鄴；镇南大将军刘弘领荆州，以镇南土。
现代文：高密王司马简为镇南将军，兼领司隶校尉，暂且镇洛阳；东中郎将司马模为宁北将军、都督荆州，镇守邺城；镇南大将军刘弘领荆州牧，以镇守南方。
English: Gaomi Wang Sima Jian was the Zhenan general, and also the leader of the Zhi Li lieutenant, and temporarily the town of Luoyang; Dong Zhong Lang took Sima Miao as the Ningbei general, the governor of Jingzhou, and the town guard of Shicheng; the Zhenan general Liu Hong led the Jingzhou pasture, with the town guard of the south.

古文：周馥、缪胤各还本部，百官皆复职。
现代文：周馥、缪胤各回本部，百官都恢复原职。
English: Zhou Rong and Miao Yin were each sent back to headquarters, and all 100 officials were reinstated to their original posts.

古文：齐王冏前应还第，长沙王乂轻陷重刑，封其子绍为乐平县王，以奉其嗣。
现代文：齐王司马礒以前应该免职回府第，长沙王司马磖轻率处以死刑，封其子司马绍为乐平县王，作为继嗣。
English: King Sima Qian of Qi should have been relieved of his duties and returned to the capital before, King Sima Qian of Changsha was rashly sentenced to death, and his son Sima Shao was made the king of Leping County as his successor.

古文：自顷戎车屡征，劳费人力，供御之物皆减三分之二，户调田租三分减一。
现代文：征战频繁，劳费人力，因而宫中费用减少三分之二，赋税田租减三分之一。
English: Conscription was frequent, and labor was expensive. As a result, the palace expenses were reduced by two-thirds, and the tax field rent was reduced by one-third.

古文：蠲除苛政，爱人务本。
现代文：废除苛政，爱惜民力，奖励农耕。
English: Abolish oppressive government, cherish the people's strength, and reward farming.

古文：清通之后，当还东京。 
现代文：战乱平息之后，当即回到东都。 
English: After the war calmed down, he immediately returned to Dongdu.

古文：大赦，改元。
现代文：实行大赦，改年号。
English: An amnesty will be implemented and the year will be changed.

古文：以河间王颙都督中外诸军事。
现代文：以河间王司马颙都督中外诸军事。
English: With Kawama's King Sima Yu as the governor, military forces from both inside and outside the country were on the march.

古文：二年春正月甲午朔，帝在长安。
现代文：二年春正月初一，惠帝在长安。
English: On the first day of the first month of the second year of spring, Hui Di was in Chang'an.

古文：夏四月，诏封乐平王绍为齐王。
现代文：夏四月，惠帝下诏封乐平王司马绍为齐王。
English: In the summer of April, Emperor Hui decreed that King Leping and King Sima Shao would be the kings of Qi.

古文：丙子，张方废皇后羊氏。
现代文：十五日，张方废皇后羊氏。
English: On the 15th, Zhang Fang dethroned Empress Yang.

古文：六月甲子，侍中、司徒、安丰侯王戎薨。
现代文：六月初四，侍中、司徒、安丰侯王戎死。
English: On the 4th day of the 6th month of the year, Wang Rong, a chamberlain, an attendant, and a vassal of Anfeng, died.

古文：陇西太守韩稚攻秦州刺史张辅，杀之。
现代文：陇西太守韩稚攻打秦州刺史张辅，并把他杀掉。
English: Han Zhi, the governor of Shaanxi Province, attacked Zhang Fu, the governor of Qin, and killed him.

古文：李雄僭即帝位，国号蜀。
现代文：李雄僭号即帝位，国号蜀。
English: Li Xiong Yao is the imperial throne, and Shu is the country name.

古文：秋七月甲午，尚书诸曹火，烧崇礼闼。
现代文：秋七月初四，尚书各官署发生火灾，崇礼闼被烧。
English: On the 4th day of the 7th month of the autumn, a fire broke out in all the government offices of Shangshu, and Chonglei Pagoda was burned.

古文：东海王越严兵徐方，将西迎大驾。
现代文：东海王司马越在徐州整顿兵马，准备往西迎接圣驾。
English: The king of the East Sea, Sima Yue, readjusted his troops in Xuzhou and prepared to go west to welcome the saint.

古文：成都王颖部将公师籓等聚众攻陷郡县，害阳平太守李志、汲郡太守张延等，转攻鄴，平昌公模遣将军赵骧击破之。
现代文：成都王司马颖的部将公师藩等聚众攻陷郡县，杀死阳平太守李志、汲郡太守张延等，转而进攻邺城，平昌公司马模派遣将军赵骧击破公师藩。
English: Chengdu's Wang Sima Ying's troops attacked Gongshi and other provinces, killing Yangping's grand marshal Li Zhi and Gu County's grand marshal Zhang Yan, and then attacked Lucheng. The Pyeongchang Company dispatched general Zhao Wei to defeat Gongshi.

古文：八月辛丑，大赦。
现代文：八月辛丑，实行大赦。
English: August was grim, and an amnesty was implemented.

古文：骠骑将军、范阳王虓逐冀州刺史李义。
现代文：骠骑将军范阳王司马羉驱逐冀州刺史李义。
English: The cavalry general Fan Yang Wang Sima Qian drove out the Jizhou assassin Li Yi.

古文：扬州刺史曹武杀丹阳太守硃建。
现代文：扬州刺史曹武杀丹杨太守朱建。
English: Yangzhou stabbing Cao Wu killed Tang Yang Taishou Zhu Jian.

古文：李雄遣其将李骧寇汉安。
现代文：李雄遣其将李骧侵犯汉安。
English: Li Xiong sent his general Li Xi to invade Han'an.

古文：车骑大将军刘弘逐平南将军、彭城王释于宛。
现代文：车骑大将军刘弘将平南将军彭城王司马释驱逐出宛。
English: The cavalry general Liu Hong expelled the Pingnan general Pengcheng Wang Sima.

古文：九月庚寅朔，公师籓又害平原太守王景、清河太守冯熊。
现代文：九月初一，公师藩又杀害了平原太守王景、清河太守冯熊。
English: On the first day of September, the Gongshi clan killed Wang Jing, the governor of Pingyuan, and Feng Xiong, the governor of Qinghe.

古文：庚子，豫州刺史刘乔攻范阳王虓于许昌，败之。
现代文：十一日，豫州刺史刘乔在许昌攻击并打败了范阳王司马羉。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Liu Qiao attacked and defeated Fan Yang Wang Simak in Xuchang.

古文：壬子，以成都王颖为镇军大将军、都督河北诸军事，镇鄴。
现代文：二十三日，以成都王司马颖为镇军大将军、都督河北诸军事，镇守邺城。
English: On the 23rd, with Chengdu Wang Sima Ying as the general of the town army and the military governor of Hebei, the town guard of Lucheng began.

古文：河间王颙遣将军吕郎屯洛阳。
现代文：河间王司马颙派遣将军李朗屯守洛阳。
English: Wang Simak of Kawama dispatched General Li Langton to defend Luoyang.

古文：冬十月丙子，诏曰： 得豫州刺史刘乔檄，称颍川太守刘舆迫胁骠骑将军虓，距逆诏令，造构凶逆，擅劫郡县，合聚兵众，擅用苟晞为兗州，断截王命。
现代文：冬十月十八日，皇帝下诏说： 得到豫州刺史刘乔的檄文，说是颍川太守刘舆逼迫骠骑将军司马九虎，违抗诏令，制造祸端，劫掠郡县，聚合兵众，擅自任命苟为兖州刺史，阻断皇帝诏命。
English: On the 18th day of October in winter, the emperor issued an imperial edict saying, "I have received an imperial edict from Liu Qiao, the governor of Yuzhou, saying that Liu Myou, the governor of Yuchuan, forced the general Sima Jiuhuo to defy the imperial edict, created a disaster, plundered counties, gathered soldiers, appointed Gou as the governor of Yuzhou without authorization, and blocked the imperial edict.

古文：镇南大将军、荆州刺史刘弘，平南将军、彭城王释等，其各勒所统，径会许昌，与乔并力。
现代文：镇南大将军荆州刺史刘弘，平南将军、彭城王司马释等，各自统率所辖军队，直赴许昌会师，与刘乔协同作战。
English: Zhenan Major General Jingzhou Zhishi Liu Hong, Pingnan General, Pengcheng Wang Sima Xie, etc., each led the army under their jurisdiction, went straight to Xu Changhui Division, and fought together with Liu Qiao.

古文：今遣右将军张方为大都督，统精卒十万，建武将军吕郎、广武将军骞貙、建威将军刁默等为军前锋，共会许昌，除舆兄弟。 
现代文：现遣右将军张方为大都督，统率精兵十万，建武将军吕朗、广武将军骞豸区、建威将军刁默等为军队前锋，共同会师许昌，消灭刘舆兄弟。 
English: At present, Zhang Fang, the general sent to the right, is the grand governor, leading 100,000 elite soldiers, and Jianwu General Lulang, Guangwu General Yu District, Jianwei General Zimiao, etc. are the army forwards, jointly joining the division Xu Chang and eliminating Liu Ying brothers.

古文：丁丑，使前车骑将军石超、北中郎将王阐讨舆等。
现代文：十九日，又使前车骑将军石超、北中郎将王阐讨伐刘舆等人。
English: On the 19th, he also ordered the front chariot and cavalry generals, Shi Chao and Kitanakuro, to lead Wang Yan to fight Liu Yue and others.

古文：赤气见于北方，东西竟天。
现代文：北方天空出现赤气，直达东西天边。
English: Red gas appeared in the northern sky, reaching to the eastern and western edges of the sky.

古文：有星孛于北斗。
现代文：有彗星出现于北斗星座。
English: A comet appears in the constellation of the Big Dipper.

古文：平昌公模遣将军宋胄等屯河桥。
现代文：平昌公司马模派遣将军宋胄等屯兵河桥。
English: The PyeongChang Company dispatched General Song Min and other soldiers to Heqiao.

古文：十一月，立节将军周权诈被檄，自称平西将军，复皇后羊氏。
现代文：十一月，立节将军周权诈称接到讨贼檄文，自称平西将军，使羊氏恢复皇后地位。
English: In November, Lixi General Zhou Quan fraudulently claimed to have received a ransom note, calling himself General Pingxi, and restored the status of the Queen to the Yang clan.

古文：洛阳令何乔攻权，杀之，复废皇后。
现代文：洛阳令何乔攻周权，并将他杀死，又废掉皇后。
English: Luoyang ordered He Qiao to attack Zhou Quan, and killed him, and abolished the queen.

古文：十二月，吕朗等东屯荥阳，成都王颖进据洛阳，张方、刘弘等并桉兵不能御。
现代文：十二月，吕朗等东进屯兵荥阳，成都王司马颖进兵占据洛阳，张方、刘弘等都按兵不能抵御。
English: In December, Lulang and others marched east to occupy Fenyang, Chengdu Wang Sima Ying marched to occupy Luoyang, Zhang Fang, Liu Hong and others were unable to resist.

古文：范阳王虓济自官渡，拔荥阳，斩石超，袭许昌，破刘乔于萧，乔奔南阳。
现代文：范阳王司马九虎从官渡过黄河，攻克荥阳，斩石超，袭击许昌，在萧打败刘乔，刘乔逃奔南阳。
English: Fan Yang Wang Sima Jiuhu crossed the Yellow River from Guanzhong, conquered Fenyang, defeated Shi Chao, attacked Xu Chang, defeated Liu Qiao in Xiao, and Liu Qiao fled to Nanyang.

古文：右将军陈敏举兵反，自号楚公，矫称被中诏，从沔汉奉迎天子；逐扬州刺史刘机、丹杨太守王旷；遣弟恢南略江州，刺史应邈奔弋阳。
现代文：右将军陈敏举兵反叛，自称楚公，假称受皇帝诏命，从沔汉北上迎接天子；驱逐扬州刺史刘机、丹杨太守王旷；派遣其弟陈恢向南占据江州，江州刺史应邈逃到弋阳。
English: The right-wing general Chen Min raised an army and rebelled, calling himself Chu Gong and pretending to be ordered by the emperor to go north from Shanhan to meet the heavenly son; he expelled the Yangzhou prince Liu Ji and the Yangzhou prince Wang Kuang; he sent his brother Chen Wei south to occupy Jiangzhou, and the Jiangzhou prince Ying Yi fled to Shenyang.

古文：光熙元年春正月戊子朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：光熙元年春正月初一，日蚀。惠帝在长安。
English: The solar eclipse occurred on the first day of the first month of the spring of Guangxi in the first year of Guangxi. Emperor Hui was in Chang'an.

古文：帝在长安。河间王颙闻刘乔破，大惧，遂杀张方，请和于东海王越，越不听。
现代文：河间王司马颙听说刘乔兵败，非常害怕，随即杀了张方，请求与东海王司马越和解，司马越不答应。
English: After hearing of Liu Qiao's defeat, the king of Kawama, Sima Qian, was very afraid and immediately killed Zhang Fang. He asked for reconciliation with the king of the East Sea, Sima Yue, but Sima Yue refused.

古文：宋胄等破颖将楼裒，进逼洛阳，颖奔长安。
现代文：宋胄等击破司马颖部将楼裒的军队，进逼洛阳，司马颖逃奔长安。
English: Song Yao and others defeated Sima Ying's troops and forced them into Luoyang, while Sima Ying fled to Chang'an.

古文：甲子，越遣其将祁弘、宋胄、司马纂等迎帝。
现代文：甲子这天，司马越派遣其部将祁弘、宋胄、司马纂等迎接惠帝。
English: On the same day, Sima Yue sent his subordinates, including Gong Hong, Song Ye, and Sima Zuo, to meet Hui Di.

古文：三月，东莱惤令刘柏根反，自称惤公，袭临淄，高密王简奔聊城。
现代文：三月，东莱巾弦令刘柏根反叛，自称巾弦公，进攻临淄，高密王司马简逃奔聊城。
English: In March, Liu Bergen of Donglai rebelled and attacked Linyi, claiming to be the ruler of Linyi. Gaomi Wang Sima Jian fled to Liaocheng.

古文：王浚遣将讨柏根，斩之。
现代文：王浚派遣部将讨伐并杀了刘柏根。
English: The dispatching department of Wang Jun led the crusade and killed Liu Bergen.

古文：夏四月己巳，东海王越屯于温。
现代文：夏四月十三日，东海王司马越屯兵于温。
English: On the 13th day of the 4th month of the summer, the troops of the East Sea Wang Sima Yue arrived in Wen.

古文：颙遣弘农太守彭随、北地太守刁默距祁弘等于湖。
现代文：司马派遣弘农太守彭随，北地太守刁默在湖抵抗祁弘等。
English: Sima dispatched Peng Zui, the eunuch governor of Hongnong, and the eunuch governor of Hokkien silently resisted Gong Hong in the lake.

古文：五月，枉矢西南流。
现代文：五月，枉矢星向西南流动。
English: In May, it flows southwestward.

古文：范阳国地燃，可以爨。
现代文：范阳国土地燃烧，可以煮饭。
English: In Fanyang, the land is burning, so you can cook rice.

古文：壬辰，祁弘等与刁默战，默大败，颙、颍走南山，奔于宛。
现代文：七日，祁弘等与刁默交战，刁默大败，司马颙、司马颖逃入南山，又投奔宛。
English: On the seventh day, Zhi Hong and others fought with Zi Mu, Zi Mu was defeated, Sima Yao and Sima Ying fled to Nanshan, and then to Wan.

古文：弘等所部鲜卑大掠长安，杀二万余人。
现代文：祁弘等所率领的鲜卑人大肆在长安抢掠，杀了二万多人。
English: The Xianbei people led by Zou Hong and others plundered and killed more than 20,000 people in Chang'an.

古文：是日，日光四散，赤如血。
现代文：这天，日光四散，色赤如血。
English: On this day, the sunlight is scattered everywhere, and the color is red like blood.

古文：甲午又如之。
现代文：九日，又是如此。
English: It was the same in the afternoon.

古文：己亥，弘等奉帝还洛阳，帝乘牛车，行宫藉草，公卿跋涉。
现代文：十四日，祁弘等护送惠帝回洛阳，惠帝乘坐牛车，住宿行宫时睡在草铺上，公卿都是徒步跋涉。
English: On the 14th, Zou Hong and others escorted Hui Di back to Luoyang. Hui Di took an ox cart and slept on the grass while traveling to the palace. The nobles all trekked on foot.

古文：戊申，骠骑、范阳王虓杀司隶校尉刑乔。
现代文：二十三日，骠骑将军范阳王司马九虎杀司隶校尉邢乔。
English: On the 23rd, the cavalry general Fan Yang Wang Sima Jiuhu killed the lieutenant Sisi Qiaoqiao.

古文：己酉，盗取太庙金匮及策文各四。
现代文：二十四日，盗贼偷去太庙中的四个金匮和四个策文。
English: On the 24th, the thieves stole four gold necklaces and four jade necklaces from the Great Temple.

古文：六月丙辰朔，至自长安，升旧殿，哀感流涕。
现代文：六月初一，惠帝及公卿到达洛阳，惠帝升上旧殿，不禁伤感流泪。
English: On the first day of June, Hui Di and the noblemen arrived in Luoyang. Hui Di ascended to the old palace. He could not help but shed tears.

古文：谒于太庙。
现代文：拜谒太庙。
English: Paying homage to the Empress Dowager.

古文：复皇后羊氏。
现代文：恢复羊氏皇后位。
English: She was reinstated as Empress of the Goat Clan.

古文：辛未，大赦，改元。
现代文：十六日，实行大赦，改年号。
English: On the 16th, an amnesty was implemented and the year was changed.

古文：秋七月乙酉朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：秋七月初一，日蚀。
English: On the first day of autumn in July, there is a solar eclipse.

古文：太庙吏贾苞盗太庙灵衣及剑，伏诛。
现代文：太庙官吏贾苞盗走太庙灵衣及剑，被处死。
English: Jia Jun, an official of the Great Temple, stole the sacred vestments and swords of the Great Temple and was executed.

古文：八月，以太傅、东海王越录尚书，骠骑将军、范阳王虓为司空。
现代文：八月，以太傅东海王司马越录尚书，骠骑将军范阳王司马九虎为司空。
English: In August, the ethereal deity Donghai Wang Sima Yue was recorded as a noble, and the equestrian general Fan Yang Wang Sima Jiuhu was recorded as a noble.

古文：九月，顿丘太守冯嵩执成都王颖，送之于鄴。
现代文：九月，顿丘太守冯嵩逮捕成都王司马颖，押送到邺城。
English: In September, Feng Song, the governor of Dongqiu, arrested Wang Sima Ying from Chengdu and sent her to Lucheng.

古文：进东嬴公腾爵为车燕王，平昌公模为南阳王。
现代文：东嬴公司马腾进爵为东燕王，平昌公司马模晋爵为南阳王。
English: Ma Teng Jin Jie of Donglu Company is the king of Dongyan, and Ma Mojin Jie of Pyeongchang Company is the king of Nanyang.

古文：冬十月，司空、范阳王虓薨。
现代文：冬十月，司空范阳王司马九虎死。
English: In the winter of October, Siku Fanyang Wang Sima Jiuhu died.

古文：虓长史刘舆害成都王颖。
现代文：司马九虎的长史刘舆杀害成都王司马颖。
English: Sima Jiuhu's long history Liu Ying killed Chengdu Wang Sima Ying.

古文：十一月庚午，帝崩于显阳殿，时年四十八，葬太阳陵。
现代文：十一月十八日，惠帝死于显阳殿，终年四十八岁，葬在太阳陵。
English: On November 18th, Hui Di died in Xianyang Palace, at the age of 48, and was buried in the Sun Mausoleum.

古文：帝之为太子也，朝廷咸知不堪政事，武帝亦疑焉。
现代文：惠帝为太子时，朝中大臣都知道他不能胜任天下政事，武帝也对他有怀疑。
English: When Hui Di was crown prince, the ministers of the two Koreas knew that he was not capable of handling the affairs of state, and Emperor Wu also had doubts about him.

古文：尝悉召东宫官属，使以尚书事令太子决之，帝不能对。
现代文：曾经将东宫官属召集到一起，把尚书的政务让太子裁决，太子不能回答。
English: He once called together officials and dependents of the East Palace and asked the crown prince to adjudicate on the government affairs of Shangshu, but the prince could not answer.

古文：贾妃遣左右代对，多引古义。
现代文：贾妃使亲信代替太子回答，多引经据典。
English: Jiafei sent a close confidant to answer on the prince's behalf, and quoted many scriptures.

古文：给事张泓曰： 太子不学，陛下所知，今宜以事断，不可引书。 
现代文：给事张泓对贾妃说： 太子平时不爱学习，这是陛下知道的。今天应该就事论事回答问题，不要引用古书。 
English: To this, Zhang Ye said to Jia Fei: The prince does not like to study at ordinary times, which is something that His Majesty knows. Today, you should answer questions about things, not quote ancient books.

古文：妃从之。
现代文：贾妃同意这个意见。
English: Princess Jia agreed with this opinion.

古文：泓乃具草，令帝书之。
现代文：于是使张泓起草答卷，让太子抄写呈上。
English: Therefore, Zhang Ye was asked to draft an answer sheet, and let the prince copy it and submit it.

古文：武帝览而大悦，太子遂安。
现代文：武帝看后大喜，太子的地位才得以稳定。
English: Emperor Wu was overjoyed, and the position of the crown prince was stabilized.

古文：及居大位，政出群下，纲纪大坏，货赂公行，势位之家，以贵陵物，忠贤路绝，谗邪得志，更相荐举，天下谓之互市焉。
现代文：即位以后，国家大事皆出于群臣之手，纲纪败坏，贿赂公行，有权位的势族以贵凌人，忠贤之路断绝，谗邪之人得志，得志者更相荐引，天下人称之为 互市 。
English: After the enthronement, the major national events were all caused by the hands of vassals, the discipline of the system was corrupted, bribery was used in public affairs, the powerful clans ruled the people with nobility, the path of the virtuous was cut off, those who fought against evil won the hearts of the people, and those who won the hearts of the people were recommended to each other, which was called "mutual market" by the people of the world.

古文：高平王沈作《释时论》，南阳鲁褒作《钱神论》，庐江杜嵩作《任子春秋》，皆疾时之作也。
现代文：高平人王沈作《释时论》，南阳人鲁褒作《钱神论》，庐江人杜嵩作《任子春秋》，都是愤世疾俗之作。
English: Gaoping's Wang Shen's "On the Interpretation of Time," Nanyang's Lu Bo's "On the God of Money," and Liangjiang's Du Song's "The Spring and Autumn of Ren Zi" are all works of indignation.

古文：帝文尝在华林园，闻虾蟆声，谓左右曰： 此鸣者为官乎，私乎？ 
现代文：惠帝曾经在华林园游玩，听到青蛙鸣叫，对左右侍从说 它们如此鸣叫，是为公事呢，还是为私事呢？ 
English: Hui Di once visited the Hualin Garden, heard frogs singing, and said to the attendants on his right and left, "Do they sing like this for business or for private matters?"

古文：或对曰： 在官地为官，在私地为私。 
现代文：有人回答说： 在公众场合就是为公事，在私下场合就是为私事。 
English: Someone answered: In public it is business, in private it is personal.

古文：及天下荒乱，百姓饿死，帝曰： 何不食肉糜？ 
现代文：后来天下战乱饥荒，很多百姓饿死，惠帝说： 他们没有粮食，为什么不吃肉呢？ 
English: Later, the world was ravaged by war and famine, and many people starved to death. Emperor Hui said, "They have no food, so why not eat meat?"

古文：其蒙蔽皆此类也。
现代文：惠帝昏聩糊涂大多类此。
English: Most of Hui Di's delusions are like this.

古文：后因食饼中毒而崩，或云司马越之鸩。
现代文：惠帝是因吃饼子中毒而死，有人说是司马越下的毒。
English: Hui Di died from eating poisoned biscuits. Some say it was Sima Yue's poison.

古文：史臣曰：不才之子，则天称大，权非帝出，政迩宵人。
现代文：史臣曰：不肖之子，登上皇位，皇权旁落，当政者亲近小人。
English: Shichen said: "The son of a villain, ascended the throne, the imperial power fell by the wayside, and the politicians were close to villains."

古文：褒姒共叔带并兴，襄后与犬戎俱运。
现代文：褒姒和叔带同兴，襄后和犬戎同运。
English: Bo Xun and his uncle are in the same group, and Xiang Hou and his dog are in the same group.

古文：昔者，丹硃不肖，赧王逃责，相彼凶德，事关休咎，方乎土梗，以坠其情。
现代文：从前，丹朱不肖，赧王逃责，看他们丑恶的德行，事情关系到吉凶，就如同泥塑之人一样，失去了他们的感情。
English: Once upon a time, Danzhu was not a good person, and Shao Wang evaded responsibility. Looking at their ugly virtues, things were related to good luck and bad luck, just like clay sculptors, they lost their feelings.

古文：溽暑之气将阑，淫蛙之音罕记，乃彰蚩笑，用符颠陨。
现代文：湿热的暑气将到尽头，淫乐很少能记录下来，这些东西祇能招致嗤笑，而使国家颠覆。
English: The humid heat will come to an end, the debauchery can rarely be recorded, these things can only invite ridicule, and subvert the country.

古文：岂通才俊彦犹形于前代，增淫助虐独擅于当今者欤？
现代文：难道通才俊杰之人衹在前代出现，而淫邪助虐之人衹在当今出现吗?
English: Could it be that the generalist and brilliant man appeared in the previous generation, while the lecher and abuser appeared in the present day?

古文：物号忠良，于兹拔本，人称袄孽，自此疏源。
现代文：忠良的人从此彻底消失，而妖邪的人从此不断出现。
English: Faithful and good people have completely disappeared since then, while evil people have continued to appear.

古文：长乐不祥，承华非命，生灵版荡，社稷丘墟。
现代文：太后不祥，太子横死；百姓动荡不安，国家一片荒芜。
English: The empress dowager was ominous, the prince died a violent death; the people were restless, and the country was desolate.

古文：古者败国亡身，分镳共轸，不有乱常，则多庸暗。
现代文：自古以来败国亡身的事，虽然方式不同，但原因都是一样的，不是破坏了纲纪常规，就是政治昏暗。
English: Since ancient times, the death of the defeated country, although the methods are different, but the reasons are the same. Either it has destroyed the normal discipline, or the politics is dim.

古文：岂明神丧其精魄，武皇不知其子也！
现代文：难道是神明失去了他的明鉴，武帝不了解他的后代吗!
English: Could it be that the gods have lost their compass, and Emperor Wu does not understand his descendants?

古文：赞曰：惠皇居尊，临朝听言。
现代文：赞日：惠帝登基，临朝听政。
English: Day of Praise: Hui Di ascends to the throne, Lin Dynasty listens to politics.

古文：厥体斯昧，其情则昏。
现代文：他自己很糊涂，他对国情也不明白。
English: He's confused himself, he doesn't understand the national situation.

古文：高台望子，长夜奚冤。
现代文：被幽禁在高台上盼望儿子，漫长的夜晚冤屈难伸。
English: Imprisoned on a high platform, hoping for a son, the long night of injustice is unbearable.

古文：金墉毁冕，汤阴释胄，及尔皆亡，滔天来遘。
现代文：在金墉失去了皇位，在荡阴解甲。等到都死了，就构成了滔天大难。
English: In Jinyu lost the throne, in the swinging Yin dissolved armour. When they all died, it constituted a tremendous disaster.

