古文：始于文而卒于武，天地之道也；四时有度，天地之理也；日月星辰有数，天地之纪也。
现代文：始于生育长养而终于肃杀，这是天地的自然规律。四时的更迭运行自有一定的规则，这是天地自然的道理。日月星辰自有定位和运行固有轨道、周期，这是天地本有的纲纪。
English: It is the natural law of heaven and earth that life begins with growth and ends with death. The four-hour cycle has its own rules, which is the natural principle of heaven and earth. The sun, moon and stars have their own positioning and inherent orbit and cycle, which is the inherent discipline of heaven and earth.

古文：三时成功，一时刑杀，天地之道也；四时而定，不爽不忒，常有法式，天地之理也；一立一废，一生一杀，四时代正，终而复始，人事之理也。
现代文：所谓天地之道，即是春夏秋三季生长收获而冬季枯萎凋谢。
English: The so-called way of heaven and earth is to grow and harvest in the three seasons of spring, summer and autumn, and wither and wither in winter.

古文：逆顺是守，功溢于天，故有死刑。
现代文：所谓天地之理，即是四时的交替更迭既已确定，便永无差错，常有定则。
English: The so-called principle of heaven and earth, that is, once the alternation of four o'clock has been determined, there will never be an error, and there are often rules.

古文：功不及天，退而无名；功合于天，名乃大成。
现代文：有生长就有凋谢，有繁荣就有枯萎，四季交相行事，终而复始，这就是天道，人类社会的运行法则即是这些天道的取法和再现。
English: If there is growth, there will be withering, if there is prosperity, there will be withering. The four seasons interact with each other and eventually recur. This is the heavenly way. The operating law of human society is the adoption and reproduction of these heavenly ways.

古文：人事之理也。顺则生，理则成，逆则死，失则无名。
现代文：顺应天道便得以生存，吻合天道方能成就功业，违逆天道便会灭亡，迷失天道则一事无成。
English: Those who follow the way of heaven can survive, those who conform to the way of heaven can accomplish their work, those who disobey the way of heaven will perish, and those who lose the way of heaven will achieve nothing.

古文：背天之道，国乃无主。
现代文：如果背逆了天道，国家便失去了根本。
English: If it goes against the heavenly way, the country will lose its foundation.

古文：无主之国，逆顺相攻。
现代文：失去了根本的国家，就会出现逆顺标准的混乱。
English: If the basic state is lost, there will be chaos in the standard of "reverse and forward."

古文：伐本隳功，乱生国亡。
现代文：根本遭破损、事功被毁坏，那么就会天下大乱、国家灭亡。
English: If the foundation is damaged and the achievements are destroyed, there will be chaos in the world and the country will perish.

古文：为若得天、亡地、更君；不循天常，不节民力，周迁而无功。
现代文：一旦失去了天佑，就会丧失国土，更换君主。不遵守天道，不节约民力，其结果便是一切行事无所获。
English: Once you lose God's blessing, you will lose the land and change the monarch. If you do not follow the heavenly way and do not save the people's strength, the result will be that you will do nothing.

古文：养死伐生，命曰逆成。不有人戮，必有天刑。
现代文：错误地对待合理与不合理的事物，就称之为违反常规。这就必然会受到天灾人祸的惩罚。
English: Mistaking what is reasonable and what is unreasonable is called going against the norm, which is bound to be punished by natural and man-made disasters.

古文：逆节始生，慎毋戡正，彼且自抵其刑。
现代文：悖逆的行为或事物的气势方刚时，切勿诛讨矫正它，它将自然受到上天的惩罚。
English: When an act of disobedience or the momentum of things is just beginning, do not try to correct it, it will naturally be punished by heaven.

古文：故执道者之观于天下也，必审观事之所始起，审其形名。
现代文：因此作为掌握 道 的圣人，在他观照天下的时候一定要首先详细考察事物起因，审核他们的形和名。
English: Therefore, as a sage who has mastered the Tao, when he observes the world, he must first examine the causes of things in detail and examine their forms and names.

古文：形名已定，逆顺有位，死生有分，存亡兴坏有处，然后参之于天地之恒道，乃定祸福死生存亡兴坏之所在。
现代文：形与名确定了，那么背理还是合理也就有了区分的标准，死亡与新生也就有了确切的分际，存亡兴衰也就有了定位。然后再参照天地自然规律，就可以确定祸福死生存亡兴衰的原因所在了。
English: If the form and name are determined, then there will be a criterion for distinguishing whether the contradiction is reasonable or not, there will be a precise distinction between death and rebirth, and there will be a positioning for existence, death, and rise and fall. Then, with reference to the natural laws of heaven and earth, it will be possible to determine the reasons for the rise and fall of life, death, and survival.

古文：是故万举不失理，论天下无遗策。
现代文：这样的话，一切举措都会合理，谋虑天下万事都不会失算。
English: In this way, all measures will be reasonable, and everything in the world will not be miscalculated.

古文：故能立天子，置三公，而天下化之：之谓有道。
现代文：因此能够设立天子，置建三公，使天下百姓都受到教化，这就称为 有道 。
English: Therefore, it is possible to establish a heavenly son, establish the Three Kingdoms, and make the people all over the world be enlightened. This is called having the Way.

