古文：凡治之大者，非谓其赏罚之当也。
现代文：自己国家最重要的，不仅仅指的赏罚得当。
English: The most important thing in one's own country is not only to reward and punish properly.

古文：赏无功之人，罚不辜之民，非谓明也。
现代文：赏没有功的人，罚没有罪的人，不能称作明察。
English: Rewarding those without merit and punishing those without sin cannot be called discernment.

古文：赏有功，罚有罪，而不失其人，方在于人者也，非能生功止过者也。
现代文：奖赏有功的人，惩罚有罪的人，且没有遗漏差错，作用仅仅局限在个别人身上，并不能起鼓励立功和禁止犯罪的作用。
English: Reward the meritorious, punish the guilty, and make no mistake, the effect is only limited to individuals, and can not play the role of encouraging meritorious and prohibiting crime.

古文：是故禁奸之法，太上禁其心，其次禁其言，其次禁其事。
现代文：因此，禁止奸邪的办法，最重要的是禁止奸邪的思想，其次是禁止奸邪的言论，再次是禁止奸邪的行为。
English: Therefore, the most important way to prohibit adultery is to prohibit the thought of adultery, followed by the speech of adultery, and then the act of adultery.

古文：今世皆曰： 尊主安国者，必以仁义智能 ，而不知卑主危国者之必以仁义智能也。
现代文：现在世人都说： 给君主带来尊崇，国家带来安定的，必然要靠仁义智能 ，但是人们却不知道导致君主卑下、国家危乱的，必定因为仁义智能。
English: Nowadays, people say: to bring dignity to the monarch and stability to the country, it is necessary to rely on benevolence and wisdom, but people do not know that what leads to the abasement of the monarch and the crisis of the country must be due to benevolence and wisdom.

古文：故有道之主，远仁义，去智能，服之以法。
现代文：所以掌握法术的君主，据弃仁义，废除智能，用法来使人服从。
English: Therefore, the ruler who has mastered magic abandons benevolence and righteousness, abolishes intelligence, and uses methods to make people obey.

古文：是以誉广而名威，民治而国安，知用民之法也。
现代文：因此声誉远播而名震四海，百姓太平而国家安定，在于君主懂得使用民众的方法。
English: Therefore, the reputation spread far and wide, the people are peaceful and the country is stable, because the monarch knows how to use the people.

古文：凡术也者，主之所以执也；法也者，官之所以师也。
现代文：一般而论，术是君主应该掌握的，法是官吏应该遵循的。
English: Generally speaking, the art is what the monarch should master, and the law is what officials should follow.

古文：然使郎中日闻道于郎门之外，以至于境内日见法，又非其难者也。
现代文：既然这样，那么派遣侍从官员每天把法治的道理传达到宫门之外，直到境内的民众每天都看到法令，也不是一件困难的事。
English: Since this is the case, it is not a difficult matter to send officials to convey the principle of the rule of law outside the palace gates every day, until the people in the territory see the decrees every day.

古文：昔者有扈氏有失度，讙兜氏有孤男，三苗有成驹，桀有侯侈，纣有崇侯虎，晋有优施，此六人者，亡国之臣也。
现代文：过去有扈氏有个臣子叫失度，兜氏有个臣子叫孤男，三苗有个臣子叫成驹，夏桀有个臣子侯侈，商封有个臣子叫崇侯虎，晋国有个臣子叫优施，这六个人都是导致国家灭亡的臣子。
English: In the past, there was a vassal of the Shun clan called Fudu, a vassal of the Kabu clan called Ouang, a vassal of the Sanmiao clan called Chenglu, a vassal of the Xia clan called Houla, a vassal of the Shang dynasty called Chonghu, and a vassal of the Jin dynasty called Youshi. These six people were all vassals who led the country to ruin.

古文：言是如非，言非如是，内险以贼，其外小谨，以征其善；称道往古，使良事沮；善禅其主，以集精微，乱之以其所好：此夫郎中左右之类者也。
现代文：他们把是说成非，把非说成是，内心阴险毒辣，外表小心谨慎，用以表明自己善良；称颂远古，使好事变坏；善于控制君主，收集君主隐微的意向，以投合君主的爱好来扰乱君主：这些都是郎中官和左右侍从一类的人。
English: They twist truth into falsehood and falsehood into truth, they are insidious and malicious at heart, they are cautious in appearance to show that they are good; they praise the ancients and turn good things into bad things; they are good at controlling the monarch, collecting the monarch's subtle intentions, and disturbing the monarch with the monarch's hobbies: these are the same kind of people as the lieutenant and the right and left attendants.

古文：往世之主，有得人而身安国存者，有得人而身危国亡者。
现代文：以往的君主，有的得到大臣后身安国存，有的得到大臣后身危国亡。
English: In the past, some monarchs were able to secure the safety of the country after they became ministers, while others were in danger of losing the country after they became ministers.

古文：得人之名一也，而利害相千万也，故人主左右不可不慎也。
现代文：得到大臣这一点是相同的，但利弊相差极大，所以君主对于左右近臣不能不加倍小心。
English: Getting a minister is the same thing, but the pros and cons are very different, so the monarch has to be very careful with his or her closest ministers.

古文：为人主者诚明于臣之所言，则别贤不肖如黑白矣。
现代文：做君主的确实能明察臣子说的话，那么区别贤与不贤的人就像区别黑白那样清楚了。
English: If the monarch can really see what his subjects are saying, then the difference between those who are virtuous and those who are not is as clear as black and white.

古文：若夫许由、续牙、晋伯阳、秦颠颉、卫侨如、狐不稽、重明、董不识、卞随、务光、伯夷、叔齐，此十二者，皆上见利不喜，下临难不恐，或与之天下而不取，有萃辱之名，则不乐食谷之利。
现代文：至于许由、续牙、晋伯阳、秦颠颉、卫侨如、狐不稽、重明、董不识、卞随、务光、伯夷、叔齐，这十二个人，都是见利不动心，临危不惧的。有的给他天下都不接受，一旦遇到劳苦和屈辱，就不愿要官府的俸禄。
English: As for Xu Yu, Zhaozha, Jin Boyang, Qin Bumpsy, Wei Qiao Rong, Fuxi Fuxi, Chongming, Dong Fuxi, Xing Sui, Mu Guang, Bo Yi, Xiu Qi, these twelve people are all profit-motivated, not afraid of danger. Some do not accept him all over the world, and once they encounter labor and humiliation, they are not willing to ask for the salary of the government.

古文：夫见利不喜，上虽厚赏，无以劝之；临难不恐，上虽严刑，无以威之：此之谓不令之民也。
现代文：见利不动心的人，即使君主厚赏，也不能勉励他；临危不惧的人，即使君主重罚，也不能镇服他：这叫做不服从命令的人。
English: He who does not think of profit cannot be encouraged, even if the ruler rewards him well; he who does not fear danger cannot be subdued, even if the ruler punishes him severely: this is called a person who does not obey orders.

古文：此十二人者，或伏死于窟穴，或槁死于草木，或饥饿于山谷，或沉溺于水泉。
现代文：这十二个人，有的隐居而死在山洞里，有的枯槁而死在荒野上，有的在深山里饿死，有的投水自尽。
English: Some of these twelve people died in seclusion in a cave, some died withered in the wilderness, some starved to death in the deep mountains, and some committed suicide by throwing themselves into the water.

古文：有如此，先古圣王皆不能臣，当今之世，将安用之？
现代文：有了这样的人，古代的圣王都不能让他们做臣，当今之世，又用他们派何用场？
English: With such people, the ancient holy kings could not make them ministers. In today's world, what is the use of them?

古文：若夫关龙逄、王子比干、随季梁、陈泄冶、楚申胥、吴子胥，此六人者，皆疾争强谏以胜其君。
现代文：至于夏桀时的关龙逄，商纣时的五子比干、随国的季梁、陈国的泄治、楚国的申胥、吴国的伍子胥，这六个人都是凭借激烈争辩和极力劝谏来说服君主。
English: As for Guan Longtao of the Xia Dynasty, Wuzi Bi Gan of the Shang Dynasty, Sui Liang of the Sui Dynasty, Qie Zhi of the Chen Dynasty, Shen Yao of the Chu Dynasty, and Wu Zi Yao of the Wu Dynasty, these six people all persuaded the monarch by means of fierce arguments and strenuous persuasion.

古文：言听事行，则如师徒之势；一言而不听，一事则不行，则陵其主以语，待之以其身，虽死家破，要领不属，手足异处，不难为也。
现代文：如果君主采用他们的主张处理政事，君臣之间就如师徒一般；如果君主不接受他的意见，不按他们的意愿做事情，他们就会用强硬的措施来侮辱君主；豁出命来等待处理，即使家破人亡，腰斩两段，手脚异处，也不畏惧。
English: If the monarch adopts their suggestions to deal with political affairs, the monarchs and ministers are like masters and apprentices; if the monarch does not accept his opinion and does not do things according to their wishes, they will use tough measures to insult the monarch; they will wait for the treatment with all their lives, even if the family is destroyed, the waist is cut in two, the hands and feet are different, they are not afraid.

古文：如此臣者，先古圣王皆不能忍也，当今之时，将安用之？
现代文：像这样的臣子，古代的圣王都不能容忍，当今之世，又怎么用他们呢？
English: In ancient times, holy kings would not tolerate such courtiers, but in today's world, how can they be used?

古文：若夫齐田恒、宋子罕、鲁季孙意如、晋侨如、卫子南劲、郑太宰欣、楚白公、周单荼、燕子之，此九人者之为其臣也，皆朋党比周以事其君，隐正道而行私曲，上逼君，下乱治，援外以挠内，亲下以谋上，不难为也。
现代文：至于齐国的田常、宋国的子罕、鲁国的季孙如意、晋国的孙侨如、卫国的子南劲、郑国的太宰欣，楚国的白公胜、周国的单荼、燕国的子之，这九个人作为臣子，他们的行事都是结党营私来蒙蔽君主，不走正道而大搞谋私的勾当，对上威逼君主，对下扰乱法治，破坏国家安定，勾结外国势力来扰乱国内政事，拉拢下属来对付君主，做来毫无顾忌。
English: As for Tian Chang of Qi, Zi Han of Song, Wu Sun Ru Yi of Lu, Sun Qiao Ru of Jin, Nan Jin of Wei, Dazai Xin of Zheng, Bai Gongsheng of Chu, Shan Xuan of Zhou, and Zi Zhi of Yan, these nine people, as courtiers, all of their actions are to form a party to deceive the monarch, not to follow the right path but to engage in large-scale private business, to force the monarch, to disrupt the rule of law, to undermine national stability, to collude with foreign forces to disrupt domestic politics, to recruit subordinates to deal with the monarch, and to do so without scruples.

古文：如此臣者，唯圣王智主能禁之，若夫昏乱之君，能见之乎？
现代文：像这样的臣子，只有贤德和圣明的君主才能禁止他们，至于昏庸糊涂的君主，能看得出来吗？
English: Such courtiers can only be forbidden by a wise and holy ruler, but can a foolish ruler see them?

古文：若夫后稷、皋陶、伊尹、周公旦、太公望、管仲、隰朋、百里奚、蹇叔、舅犯、赵襄、范蠡、大夫种、逢同、华登，此十五人者为其臣也，皆夙兴夜寐，单身贱体，竦心白意；明刑辟、治官职以事其君，进善言、通道法而不敢矜其善，有成功立事而不敢伐其劳；不难破家以便国，杀身以安主，以其主为高天泰山之尊，而以其身为壑谷洧之卑；主有明名广誉于国，而身不难受壑谷洧之卑。
现代文：至于后稷、皋陶、伊尹、周公旦、太公望、管仲、隰朋、百里奚、蹇叔、舅犯、赵衰、范蠢、文种、逢同、华登，这十五个人作为臣子，都是早起晚睡，自谦自卑，恭敬地表达自己的意见；严明地执行刑法、优异地干好职事来侍奉自己的君主，进献好的建议、通晓统治法术而不敢自我夸耀，做成功了事情也不敢张扬自己的功劳；为了国家的利益，不惜损害家庭利益，为了君主安全，不惜献出自己的生命；把君主当作高高在上的天和泰山一样尊崇，把自身看成谷底和河床一样低下；君主在全国有美好的名声和广泛的声誉，而自己安于接受谷底和河床一样低下的地位。
English: As for Hou Yi, Zhaotao, Yi Yin, Zhou Gongdan, Tang Gongvong, Guanzhong, Zhaopeng, Bai Lijun, Zhaojun, Zhao Zhen, Fan Yu, Wenzhong, Feng Tong, and Huaden, these fifteen people, as courtiers, all went to bed early and late, were self-effacing and humble, and respectfully expressed their opinions; strictly enforced criminal law, excellently performed their duties to serve their monarchs, gave good advice, were familiar with ruling spells and did not dare to boast, and did not dare to publicize their achievements when things were successful; for the benefit of the

古文：如此臣者，虽当昏乱之主尚可致功，况于显明之主乎？
现代文：像这样的臣子，即使遇到昏庸糊涂的君主仍可建立功业，何况遇到贤明的君主呢？
English: A courtier like this can still build a career even if he meets a dim-witted monarch, let alone a wise monarch.

古文：此谓霸王之佐也。
现代文：这就叫做霸王的助手啊。
English: This is called the overlord's assistant.

古文：若夫周滑之、郑王孙申、陈公孙宁、仪行父、荆芋尹申亥、随少师、越种干、吴王孙、晋阳成泄、齐竖刁、易牙，此十二人者之为其臣也，皆思小利而忘法义，进则掩蔽贤良以阴暗其主，退则挠乱百官而为祸难；皆辅其君，共其欲，苟得一说于主，虽破国杀众，不难为也。
现代文：至于西周的滑之、郑国的公孙申、陈国的公孙宁、仪行父、楚国的芋尹申亥、随国的少师、越国的种干、吴国的王孙额、晋国的阳成泄、齐国的竖刁、易牙等，这十二个人作为臣子，都是见小利而忘法纪，在内埋没贤良去蒙蔽君主，在外扰乱百官而兴祸作乱；都辅佐他们的君主，迎合君主的欲望，假如能取得君主的一点欢心，即使败坏国家、残杀民众，他们也不害怕去做。
English: As for Xi Zhou's Nuxi, Zheng's Gongsun Shen, Chen's Gongsun Ning, Yi Xingfu, Chu's Imo Yin Shenhai, Sui's Shoshi, Yue's Zenggan, Wu's Wangsun Qu, Jin's Yangcheng Leak, Qi's Zhisheng, Yi Zha and so on, these twelve people, as courtiers, are all small-minded and forget the law and discipline, burying the virtuous inside to deceive the monarch, and disturbing the officials outside to create turmoil; they all assist their monarchs and cater to the monarch's desires. If they can get a

古文：有臣如此，虽当圣王尚恐夺之，而况昏乱之君，其能无失乎？
现代文：像这样的臣子，即使是圣明君王尚且害怕他们篡权夺位，何况是昏庸糊涂的君主，能不失去权柄吗？
English: Can such courtiers, whom even a saintly king fears to usurp, much less a dim-witted monarch, remain in power?

古文：有臣如此者，皆身死国亡，为天下笑。
现代文：有这些臣子的君主，都身死国灭，被天下人耻笑。
English: The monarchs who had these courtiers all perished and were ridiculed by the world.

古文：故周威公身杀，国分为二；郑子阳身杀，国分为三；陈灵身死于夏征舒氏；荆灵王死于乾谿之上；随亡于荆；吴并于越；知伯灭于晋阳之下；桓公身死七日不收。
现代文：所以周威王被杀，国家分成两半；郑君子阳被杀，国家一分为三。陈灵公死于夏征舒之手，楚灵玉死在乾溪之上，随国被楚国所灭，吴国被越国吞并，智伯被消灭在晋阳城下，桓公死后六十七天不得收殓。
English: Therefore, King Zhou Wei was killed, and the country was divided into two halves; Zheng Junziyang was killed, and the country was divided into three. Chen Linggong died at the hands of Xia Xianshu, Chu Lingyu died on the dry creek, and the country was destroyed by the State of Chu, the State of Wu was annexed by the State of Yue, Zhibo was destroyed under the city of Jinyang, and Huan Gong died sixty-seven days after his death.

古文：故曰：謟谀之臣，唯圣王知之，而乱主近之，故至身死国亡。
现代文：所以说：阿谀奉承的臣子，只有圣明的君主才能识别，而昏君乱主却去亲近他们，所以得到身死国灭的下场。
English: Therefore, it is said that the flattery of the courtiers can only be recognized by the enlightened monarch, but the weak monarch and the chaotic lord are close to them, so they end up with death and destruction of the country.

古文：圣王明君则不然，内举不避亲，外举不避仇。
现代文：圣王明君就不是这样，他们选拔臣子时，对内回避自己的亲属，对外不排除自己的仇敌。
English: This is not the case with Shingwang Mingjun. When choosing their vassals, they avoid their relatives at home and do not exclude their enemies abroad.

古文：是在焉，从而举之；非在焉，从而罚之。
现代文：正确的，就据以任用；错误的，就施以惩戒。
English: The correct one will be appointed accordingly; the wrong one will be disciplined.

古文：是以贤良遂进而奸邪并退，故一举而能服诸侯。
现代文：因此，贤良的人就得到进用，而奸邪之臣都被斥退，所以一举就能使诸侯臣服。
English: As a result, virtuous people were promoted and treacherous vassals were repelled, thus subjugating the princes in one fell swoop.

古文：其在记曰：尧有丹朱，而舜有商均，启有五观，商有太甲，武王有管、蔡。
现代文：据史书记载：尧时有儿子丹朱，舜时有儿子商均，夏启时有儿子太康等五人，商场时有孙子太甲，武玉时有弟弟管叔、蔡叔，都受到了处罚。
English: According to historical records, there were five people who were punished, including his son, Dan Zhu, at the time of his death; his son, Shangjun, at the time of his death; his son, Taikang, at the time of his death; his grandson, Taiga, at the time of his death; and his brothers, Guan Shifu and Cai Shifu, at the time of his death.

古文：五王之所诛者，皆父兄子弟之亲也，而所杀亡其身残破其家者何也？
现代文：以上五王所处罚的，都是父兄子弟一类的亲属，使他们家破人亡的原因是什么呢？
English: The above-mentioned five kings punished are all relatives such as father, brother and son, so what is the reason for the destruction of their family?

古文：以其害国伤民败法类也。
现代文：因为他们祸国殃民，败坏法治。
English: Because they bring disaster to the country and the people, and corrupt the rule of law.

古文：观其所举，或在山林薮泽岩穴之间，或在囹圄緤绁缠索之中，或在割烹刍牧饭牛之事。
现代文：观察圣王选拔的人，有的隐居在山林洞穴之中，有的囚禁在监狱桎梏之中，有的从事宰割烹调、割草放牧、喂牛等活计。
English: Some of the people who observed the selection of the holy king lived in seclusion in mountain caves, some were imprisoned in prison cells, and some were engaged in activities such as slaughtering and cooking, cutting grass and grazing, and feeding cattle.

古文：然明主不羞其卑贱也，以其能，为可以明法，便国利民，从而举之，身安名尊。
现代文：然而明君不嫌弃他们地位卑贱，因为他们的才能，可以彰明法度，有利于国计民生，据此任用他们，君主地位得以巩固，声望得到了提高。
English: However, the Ming rulers did not dislike their lowly status, because their talents could clarify laws and regulations and benefit the national economy and people's livelihood. By appointing them accordingly, the monarch's status was consolidated and his reputation was enhanced.

古文：乱主则不然，不知其臣之意行，而任之以国，故小之名卑地削，大之国亡身死。不明于用臣也。
现代文：昏君乱主却不是这样，他们不了解臣子的思想行为，却把国家大权委任给他们，所以轻者君主名望下降、国土丧失，重者国家灭亡、君主姓名不保，根源就在于君主不懂得任用臣子。
English: However, this is not the case with weak monarchs. They do not understand the thoughts and actions of their vassals, but delegate the power of the state to them. Therefore, the reputation of the monarch declines and the country is lost, and the country is destroyed, and the name of the monarch is not guaranteed. The root cause lies in the fact that the monarch does not know how to appoint vassals.

古文：无数以度其臣者，必以其众人之口断之。
现代文：不能用法术来衡量臣子，必然根据众人的议论来判断他们的好坏。
English: You can't use magic to measure your vassals. You have to judge them based on the opinions of others.

古文：众人所誉，从而悦之；众之所非，从而憎之。
现代文：众人称赞，就跟着喜爱；众人诽谤，就跟着憎恶。
English: When men praise, they please; when they revile, they hate.

古文：故为人臣者破家残賥，内构党与、外接巷族以为誉，从阴约结以相固也，虚相与爵禄以相劝也。
现代文：所以做臣子的不惜破家费财，在朝廷内结成同党、在朝廷外勾结地方势力来制造声誉，用暗中订立盟约来加强勾结，用口头上封官许愿来给予鼓励。
English: Therefore, as a courtier, he did not hesitate to spend a lot of money, to form a party within the imperial court, to collude with local forces outside the imperial court to create reputation, to strengthen collusion by secretly concluding alliances, and to give encouragement by verbally sealing officials and making a wish.

古文：曰： 与我者将利之，不与我者将害之。 
现代文：说什么 顺从我的就能得到好处，不顺从我的只能得到祸害 。
English: What do you say, "If you obey me, you will be blessed, but if you do not obey me, you will be cursed"?

古文：众贪其利，劫其威： 彼诚喜，则能利己；忌怒，则能害己。 
现代文：众人贪图奸臣给的利益，又迫于他的威势，从而认为： 他真能对我高兴，就会让我得到好处；对我猜忌恼怒，就会伤害我。 
English: People covet the benefits given by the treacherous minister, and are compelled by his authority, thus thinking: If he can really be happy with me, he will do me good; if he is suspicious and angry with me, he will hurt me.

古文：众归而民留之，以誉盈于国，发闻于主。
现代文：众人都归附他，民众也靠拢他，把一片赞美声传遍全国，上达到君主那里。
English: All the people followed him, and the people also drew near to him, and they spread the sound of praise throughout the whole land, as far as the prince.

古文：主不能理其情，因以为贤。
现代文：君主又不能弄清楚实情，因此认为他是贤人。
English: The monarch could not figure out the truth, so he thought he was a wise man.

古文：彼又使谲诈之士，外假为诸侯之宠使，假之以舆马，信之以瑞节，镇之以辞令，资之以币帛，使诸侯淫说其主，微挟私而公议。
现代文：奸臣又会派出诡诈的人，在外充当别国宠信的使者，把马车借给他，给他瑞节使人相信，教他外交辞令使他庄重，用贵重的礼物资助他，让他作为外国使者来游说本国君主，暗中夹带为奸臣说话的私心而议论公事。
English: A treacherous minister will also send a treacherous person abroad to act as an emissary of another country's favorite, lend him a carriage, make him believe that he is a saint, teach him diplomatic language to make him dignified, support him with valuable gifts, let him lobby his sovereign as a foreign emissary, and secretly discuss business for the selfishness of the treacherous minister.

古文：所为使者，异国之主也；所为谈者，左右之人也。
现代文：为谁做使者呢，是为别国的君主；为谁讲话呢，是为君主左右的奸臣。
English: For whom is he acting as an envoy, but for the ruler of another country; for whom is he speaking, but for the treacherous vassals of the ruler?

古文：主说其言而辩其辞，以此人者天下之贤士也。
现代文：君主喜欢使者的话，认为他讲得头头是道，从而认为他称赞的奸臣是天下的贤士。
English: The monarch liked the words of the messenger, thinking that he spoke the truth, and thus thought that the treacherous minister he praised was the world's wise man.

古文：内外之于左右，其讽一而语同。大者不难卑身尊位以下之，小者高爵重禄以利之。
现代文：国家内外对于君主左右的那个奸臣，都异口同声地暗示君主：重者要君主甘愿卑身让位而居其下，轻者赏赐高爵厚禄使奸臣得利。
English: For the treacherous vassal around the monarch, both inside and outside the country, they all hinted to the monarch in unison: the heavy one wanted the monarch to be willing to abase himself and stay under him, and the light one rewarded the treacherous vassal with a high rank and rich reward.

古文：夫奸人之爵禄重而党与弥众，又有奸邪之意，则奸臣愈反而说之，曰： 古之所谓圣君明王者，非长幼弱也，及以次序也；以其构党与，聚巷族，逼上弑君而求其利也。 彼曰： 何知其然也？ 
现代文：奸臣位高禄厚，党羽越聚越多，又有篡夺君权的野心，其他党羽就变本加厉地迎合他的心意，劝他说： 古代的所谓圣明君主，并不是父子兄弟依次传授王位；而是依靠在朝廷内结成同党，在朝廷外勾结地方势力，威逼和杀害君主而谋求大利的。 奸臣问： 怎么知道是这样的？ 
English: The treacherous vassal was high-ranking and wealthy, the number of his followers was increasing, and he had the ambition to usurp the royal power. The other followers of the party eagerly pandered to his wishes and persuaded him: The so-called holy emperors of ancient times did not pass the throne to their sons and brothers in succession; instead, they relied on forming a common party within the imperial court, colluding with local forces outside the imperial court, and intimidating and killing the monarch in order to gain power. The treacherous vassal asked: How do you know this?

古文：因曰： 舜逼尧，禹逼舜，汤放桀，武王伐纣。
现代文：党羽就说： 舜逼迫尧，禹逼迫舜，汤放逐桀，武王讨伐纣。
English: The party members said: "We persecute you, you persecute us, you persecute us, we expel you, we fight you."

古文：此四王者，人臣弑其君者也，而天下誉之。
现代文：这四个王，都是作为臣子而杀了自己的君主，天下却都称赞他们。
English: These four kings killed their sovereigns as their vassals, but the whole world praised them.

古文：察四王之情，贪得人之意也；度其行，暴乱之兵也。
现代文：考察四个王的思想，是出于贪得天下的野心；衡量他们的行为，是使用了暴乱的武力。
English: The thoughts of the four kings are examined in terms of their ambition to conquer the world; their actions are measured in terms of their use of violent force.

古文：然四王自广措也，而天下称大焉；自显名也，而天下称明焉。
现代文：然而这四个王虽说自管扩充势力，天下的人却称赞他们了不起；自管显耀名声，天下的人却称赞他们很高明。
English: However, although these four kings expanded their power by their own means, people around the world praised them for being great. People around the world praised them for being clever by their own means.

古文：则威足以临天下，利足以盖世，天下从之。 
现代文：这样，威势足以凌驾天下，利益足以压倒一世，天下人都顺从他们。 
English: In this way, the power is enough to dominate the world, the benefits are enough to overwhelm the world, and the world obeys them.

古文：又曰： 以今时之所闻，田成子取齐，司城子罕取宋，太宰欣取郑，单氏取周，易牙之取卫，韩、魏、赵三子分晋，此六人者，臣之弑其君者也。 
现代文：又说； 根据现在知道的，田成子夺取齐国，司城子罕夺取宋国，太宰欣夺取郑国，单荼夺取周国，易牙夺取齐国，韩、赵、魏三家分晋，这八个人，都是臣子杀死自己的君主而立的。 
English: He also said: According to what is now known, Tian Cheng Zi conquered Qi, Shicheng Zi Han conquered Song, Dazai Xin conquered Zheng, Shan Zi conquered Zhou, Yi Ya conquered Qi, and Han, Zhao, and Wei divided Jin. These eight people were all vassals who killed their own monarchs.

古文：奸臣闻此，然举耳以为是也。
现代文：奸臣听到这些话，急忙竖起耳朵点头称是。
English: Hearing these words, the treacherous minister quickly pricked up his ears and nodded.

古文：故内构党与，外摅巷族，观时发事，一举而取国家。
现代文：所以在朝廷内结成同党，在朝廷外勾结地方势力，窥测时机，发动政变，一举而夺取国家政权。
English: Therefore, they formed a party within the imperial court, colluded with local forces outside the imperial court, spied the opportunity, launched a coup, and seized state power in one fell swoop.

古文：且夫内以党与劫弑其君，外以诸侯之讙骄易其国，隐敦适，持私曲，上禁君，下挠治者，不可胜数也。
现代文：再说，对内利用党羽挟持或杀害君主，对外利用诸侯势力来颠覆自己的国家，背离正道，心怀阴谋，对上钳制君主，对下扰乱法治，这样的奸臣，是数不清的。
English: Furthermore, there are innumerable treacherous retainers who use party members to hold hostage or kill the monarch internally, use the power of the princes to subvert their own country externally, deviate from the right path, harbor conspiracies, attempt to control the monarch from above, and disrupt the rule of law from below.

古文：是何也？
现代文：这是什么原因呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：则不明于择臣也。
现代文：就在于君主不懂得选择臣子。
English: It is because the monarch does not know how to choose his vassals.

古文：记曰： 周宣王以来，亡国数十，其臣弑其君取国者众矣。 
现代文：史书记载说： 周宣王以来，亡国的就有几十个，其中臣子杀死君主而夺取国家政权的所在多有。 
English: The historical record says: Since King Zhou Xuan, there have been dozens of countries that have been overthrown, and many of them were where courtiers killed the monarch and seized state power.

古文：然则难之从内起与从外作者相半也。
现代文：那么祸乱从国内产生和从国外兴起的各占一半。
English: So half of the scourge comes from within the country and half from abroad.

古文：能一尽其民力，破国杀身者，尚皆贤主也。
现代文：能集中民力抵抗祸乱，即使国破身死，也还算是贤明的君主。
English: If he can concentrate the people's power to resist evil, even if the country is destroyed, he is still a wise monarch.

古文：若夫转身法易位，全众傅国，最其病也。
现代文：至于改变法令，君臣易位，把整个国家和全体民众拱手交给别人，这才是最大的错误。
English: As for changing laws and regulations, replacing monarchs and ministers, and handing over the entire country and all the people to others, this is the biggest mistake.

古文：为人主者，诚明于臣之所言，则虽弋驰骋，撞钟舞女，国犹且存也；不明臣之所言，虽节俭勤劳，布衣恶食，国犹自亡也。
现代文：做君主的，假如真能洞察臣子的言论，那么即使打猎骑马，沉溺女乐，国家还是可保全的；不能洞察臣子的言论，即使节俭勤劳，布衣粗食，国家还是会灭亡。
English: As a monarch, if you can truly understand the words of your subjects, then even if you hunt and ride horses and indulge in women's music, the country can still be preserved; if you can't understand the words of your subjects, even if you are frugal and hard-working and eat only cloth and coarse food, the country will still perish.

古文：赵之先君敬侯，不修德行，而好纵欲，适身体之所安，耳目之所乐，冬日弋，夏浮淫，为长夜，数日不废御觞，不能饮者以筒灌其口，进退不肃、应对不恭者斩于前。
现代文：赵国的前代君主敬侯，不修德行，而喜欢尽情享乐，满足于身体安适，耳目快乐，冬天射箭打猎，夏天泛舟游湖，不分昼夜地饮酒，有时一脸几天都不曾放下酒杯，不会喝酒的就用竹筒对着嘴巴往里灌，进退不严肃，回答不恭敬的，就将其杀死在座前。
English: The former monarchs of Zhao respected life, did not cultivate virtue, but liked to enjoy themselves to the fullest, satisfied with physical comfort, happy eyes and ears, went archery hunting in winter, went boating on the lake in summer, drank alcohol day and night, and sometimes did not put down the glass for several days. If they could not drink, they poured it into their mouths with a bamboo tube. If they were not serious, and if they did not answer respectfully, they would be killed in front of the audience.

古文：故居处饮食如此其不节也。制刑杀戮如此其无度也，然敬侯享国数十年，兵不顿于敌国，地不亏于四邻，内无君臣百官之乱，外无诸侯邻国之患，明于所以任臣也。
现代文：起居饮食像这样没有节制，处罚杀戮像这样没有标准，但是敬侯在位几十年，军队不曾被敌国挫败，土地不曾被四邻侵占，内部没有群臣百官闹事，外面没有邻国侵略的祸患，这些都是因为他懂得如何任用臣子。
English: There is no standard for living and eating like this, and there is no standard for punishing and killing like this, but because he has been on the throne for decades, the army has never been defeated by the enemy country, the land has never been occupied by the four neighbors, there is no group of ministers and officials rioting inside, and there is no scourge of neighboring countries' aggression outside, all of these are because he knows how to appoint ministers.

古文：燕君子哙，邵公之后也，地方数千里，持戟数十万，不安子女之乐，不听钟石之声，内不堙污池台榭，外不弋田猎，又亲操耒耨以修畎亩。
现代文：燕王哙是召公爽的后裔，拥有方圆几千里国土，士兵几十万。他，不沉溺于女色，不听妙音佳乐，在宫内不兴建深池高台，在宫外不射箭打猎，还亲自拿着农具来整治田地。
English: Yan Wangtao was a descendant of Zogong Shuang, who owned thousands of miles of land and hundreds of thousands of soldiers. He did not indulge in women, did not listen to wonderful music, did not build deep pools in the palace, did not shoot arrows and hunt outside the palace, and also personally took agricultural tools to cultivate the fields.

古文：子哙之苦身以忧民如此其甚也，虽古之所谓圣王明君者，其勤身而忧世不甚于此矣。然而子哙身死国亡，夺于子之，而天下笑之。
现代文：子哙甘受劳苦来为民操心达到了这样的程度，即使古代所说的圣王明君，他们不辞辛劳而为国操心，也是不会比子哙在上的，但是子哙却身死国亡，君位被子之篡夺，被天下人所耻笑。
English: Zixuan's willingness to work hard to care for the people has reached such a level that even the so-called holy king Mingjun in ancient times, who worked hard to care for the country, would not be higher than Zixuan, but Zixuan died and the country died, and the usurpation of the sovereign's position by the quilt was laughed at by the world.

古文：此其何故也？
现代文：这是什么原因呢？
English: What is the reason for this?

古文：不明乎所以任臣也。
现代文：就是因为不懂得如何任用臣子啊。
English: It's because they don't know how to appoint a vassal.

古文：故曰：人臣有五奸，而主不知也。
现代文：所以说：臣子中有五种奸邪行为，而君主却不曾识别。
English: Therefore, it is said that there are five kinds of treachery among the courtiers, but the monarch did not recognize them.

古文：为人主者，有侈用财货赂以取誉者，有务庆赏赐予以移众者，有务朋党徇智尊士以擅逞者，有务解免赦罪狱以事威者，有务奉下直曲、怪言、伟服、瑰称以眩民耳目者。
现代文：做臣子的，有滥用财物行贿来骗取声誉的，有致力于奖赏赐予来拉拢民众的，有致力于结党营私网罗智士来胡作非为的，有凭借免除赋役、赦免罪犯来提高声威的，有致力于迎合下属而颠倒是非和用危言耸听、奇装异服、漂亮称号来惑乱人们视听的。
English: As a courtier, there are those who abuse wealth and property and offer bribes to gain reputation, those who devote themselves to giving rewards to win over the people, those who devote themselves to forming a party and recruiting wise men to commit crimes, those who raise their reputation by exempting them from military service and pardoning criminals, those who devote themselves to pandering to subordinates while reversing the rights and wrongs, and those who use alarmism, fancy dress, and beautiful titles to confuse people.

古文：此五者，明君之所疑也，而圣主之所禁也。
现代文：这五种人，是明君所疑虑、圣君所禁止的；去掉这五种人，那么诡辩和奸诈的人就不敢在君主面前乱说乱动了。
English: These five kinds of people are doubted by emperors and forbidden by holy men. If these five kinds of people were eliminated, then the sophists and treacherous people would not dare to say or do anything in front of the monarch.

古文：去此五者，则譟诈之人不敢北面谈立；文言多、实行寡而不当法者，不敢诬情以谈说。是以群臣居则修身，动则任力，非上之令不敢擅作疾言诬事，此圣王之所以牧臣下也。
现代文：而好话说得多、实事做得少，行为不合法令的人，就不敢歪曲事实来夸夸其谈了。因此，群臣闲居时就会加强自身修养，办事时就会尽力守职，没有君主的命令不敢自作主张，乱说乱动，这是圣明君主用来驾驭臣子的办法。
English: On the other hand, those who talk a lot, do few things, and act illegally will not dare to distort the facts to boast. Therefore, the courtiers will strengthen their self-cultivation when they are idle, and they will try their best to keep their duties when they are working. Without the monarch's order, they will not dare to make their own opinions and speak nonsense. This is the method used by the holy monarch to control the courtiers.

古文：彼圣主明君，不适疑物以窥其臣也。
现代文：那些圣明的君主，并不局限于在可疑的事上观测臣子。
English: Those saintly monarchs did not confine themselves to observing their subjects in doubtful matters.

古文：见疑物而无反者，天下鲜矣。
现代文：见到可疑的事而不反过来联系到其他事，弄清真相的，是天下少见的。
English: It's a rare person who sees something suspicious and doesn't connect it to something else and figure it out.

古文：故曰：孽有拟适之子，配有拟妻之妾，廷有拟相之臣，臣有拟主之宠，此四者，国之所危也。
现代文：所以说：庶子中有和嫡子行事一样的人，配偶中有和正妻尊荣相等的妄，朝廷中有和国相权势相同的大臣，臣子中有和君主地位相似的宠臣，这四种情况，是使国家陷于危险的根源。
English: Therefore, it is said that among the illegitimate children there are those who act like the legitimate children, among the spouses there are those who have the same honor as the legitimate wife, among the courtiers there are ministers who have the same power as the minister of state, and among the courtiers there are favorites who have a similar status to the monarch. These four situations are the root causes of the country's danger.

古文：故曰：内宠并后，外宠贰政，枝子配适，大臣拟主，乱之道也。
现代文：所以说：内廷的宠妃与王后并列，外朝宠臣和君主争权，庶子和嫡子匹敌，大臣和君主相似，都是通向祸乱的必由之路。
English: Therefore, it is said that the favorite concubine of the Inner Court is on the same level as the queen, the favorite vassal of the Outer Court is competing with the monarch for power, the illegitimate son is comparable to the legitimate son, and the minister is similar to the monarch, all of which are the only way to disaster.

古文：故《周记》曰： 无尊妾而卑妻，无孽适子而尊小枝，无尊嬖臣而匹上卿，无尊大臣以拟其主也。 
现代文：所以《周记》上说： 不要抬高妄的身价而压低正妻的地位，不要降低嫡子的地位而抬高庶出者的身份，不要推重宠臣而使他们与上卿匹敌，不要因为尊敬大臣而使他的权势与君主相当。 
English: Therefore, the "Weekly Journal" said: Don't raise the status of the arrogant and lower the status of the legal wife, don't lower the status of the legitimate son and raise the status of the illegitimate son, don't promote the favorite and make them equal to the lord, and don't respect the minister and make his power equal to the monarch.

古文：四拟者破，则上无意、下无怪也；四拟不破，则陨身灭国矣。
现代文：上述四种混淆上下关系的做法一旦被摧毁，君主就没有顾忌，臣下就没有邪行；这四种做法要是不被摧毁，便会以君主身死、国家灭亡而告终。
English: Once the above-mentioned four ways of confusing the relationship between the upper and lower levels are destroyed, the monarch will have no scruples and the vassal will have no evil deeds; if these four ways are not destroyed, they will end with the death of the monarch and the destruction of the country.

