古文：十有五年春，公孙归父会楚子于宋。
现代文：十五年春季，公孙归父在宋国会见楚庄王。
English: In the spring of the fifteenth year, Gongsun Guifu met King Chu Zhuang at the Song National Congress.

古文：夏五月，宋人及楚人平。
现代文：夏季五月，宋国和楚国讲和。
English: In the summer of May, Song and Chu made peace.

古文：秦人伐晋。
现代文：六月癸卯日，晋国军队灭掉赤狄潞氏。
English: Qin attacked Jin.

古文：王札子杀召伯、毛伯。
现代文：秦国攻打晋国。王子捷杀死了召戴公和毛伯卫。
English: Qin attacked Jin. Prince Jie killed Zhao Dai Gong and Mao Bo Wei.

古文：秋，螽。
现代文：秋季，有螽虫。
English: In autumn, there are aphids.

古文：仲孙蔑会齐高固于无娄。
现代文：仲孙蔑在无娄与齐国的高固会见。
English: Nakasunri met with Gao Guo of Qi in Muxun.

古文：初税亩。
现代文：鲁国开始按田亩征税
English: Russia starts taxing land by the mu

古文：冬，蝝生。饥。
现代文：冬季，蝗的幼虫蜉化，造成饥荒。
English: In winter, the larvae of locusts pupate, causing famine.

古文：十五年春，公孙归父会楚子于宋。
现代文：十五年春季，鲁国的公孙归父在宋国会见楚庄王。
English: In the spring of the fifteenth year, Lu's great-grandson, Guifu, met with King Chu Zhuang at the Song National Congress.

古文：宋人使乐婴齐告急于晋。晋侯欲救之。
现代文：宋国人派乐婴齐到晋国报告急难，晋景公想要救援宋国。
English: The Song people sent all of their children to Jin to report the impending disaster, and Jin Jing Gong wanted to rescue Song.

古文：伯宗曰： 不可。
现代文：伯宗说： 不行。
English: Hozon said, "No, we can't."

古文：古人有言曰： 虽鞭之长，不及马腹。 
现代文：古人有话说： 鞭子虽然长，达不到马肚子。 
English: The ancients said: Although the whip is long, it cannot reach the horse's belly.

古文：天方授楚，未可与争。
现代文：上天正在保佑楚国，不能和他竞争。
English: Heaven is blessing the state of Chu and cannot compete with him.

古文：虽晋之强，能违天乎？
现代文：晋国虽然强盛，能够违背上天吗？
English: Can Jin, though powerful, defy Heaven?

古文：谚曰： 高下在心，川泽纳汙，山薮藏疾，瑾瑜匿瑕。 国君含垢，天之道也。
现代文：俗话说： 高高下下，都在心里。 河流湖泊里容纳污泥浊水，山林草野里暗藏毒虫猛兽，美玉也藏匿着斑痕，国君也得忍受点耻辱，这是上天的常道。君王还是等着吧！ 
English: As the saying goes: The ups and downs are all in the heart. The rivers and lakes are full of muddy water, the mountains and forests are full of poisonous beasts and beasts of prey, the beauties are covered with spots, and the sovereign has to endure a little shame. This is the common way of heaven. The monarch should wait!

古文：君其待之。 乃止。使解扬如宋，使无降楚，曰： 晋师悉起，将至矣。 
现代文：于是，晋景公就停止发兵救宋，派遣解扬到宋国去，让宋国不要投降楚国，解扬对宋国说： 晋国的军队都已经出发，将要到达了。 
English: As a result, Prince Jinjing stopped sending troops to save Song, and sent Xie Yang to Song to prevent Song from surrendering to Chu. Xie Yang said to Song, "The troops of Jin have already set out and are about to arrive."

古文：郑人囚而献诸楚，楚子厚赂之，使反其言，不许，三而许之。
现代文：解扬路过郑国时，郑国人把他囚禁起来献给楚国。楚庄王重重地贿赂他，让他把话反过来说。解扬不答应。
English: When Xie Yang was passing through Zheng, the Zheng people imprisoned him and dedicated him to the state of Chu. The king of Chu Zhuang bribed him heavily to say the opposite. Xie Yang did not agree.

古文：登诸楼车，使呼宋人而告之。
现代文：经过三次劝说以后才答应了。楚国人让解扬登上楼车，向宋国人喊话，而将楚国人要说的话告诉他们。
English: After three times of persuasion, they agreed. The Chu people let Xie Yang board the car, call out to the Song people, and tell them what the Chu people wanted to say.

古文：遂致其君命。
现代文：解扬就乘机传达晋君的命令。
English: He took the opportunity to convey Jinjun's order.

古文：楚子将杀之，使与之言曰： 尔既许不穀而反之，何故？
现代文：楚庄王准备杀死他，派人对他说： 你既已答应了我，现在又反过来，是什么缘故？
English: Chu Zhuang Wang prepared to kill him and sent someone to say to him: "You have already agreed to me, and now it is the other way around, what is the reason for this?

古文：非我无信，女则弃之，速即尔刑。 
现代文：不是我没有信用，而是你丢失了它。快去受你的刑罚吧！ 
English: It's not that I don't have trust, it's that you've lost it. Go and take your punishment!

古文：对曰： 臣闻之，君能制命为义，臣能承命为信，信载义而行之为利。
现代文：解扬回答说： 臣听说，国君能制订命令就是道义，臣下能接受命令就是信用，信用贯彻了道义然后去做就是利益。
English: Xie Yang replied: "Courtier, I have heard that if the sovereign can make an order, it is moral; if a courtier can accept an order, it is credit; if credit carries out moral, then it is benefit.

古文：谋不失利，以卫社稷，民之主也。
现代文：谋划不失去利益，以保卫国家，才是百姓的主人。
English: The master of the people is the one who plans without losing profits to defend the country.

古文：义无二信，信无二命。
现代文：道义不能有两种信用，信用不能接受两种命令。
English: Morality cannot have two kinds of trust, and trust cannot accept two kinds of orders.

古文：君之赂臣，不知命也。
现代文：君王的贿赂下臣，就是不懂得命令的意义。
English: A king who bribes his vassals does not know the meaning of command.

古文：受命以出，有死无，又可赂乎？
现代文：接受了国君的命令而出国，宁可一死而不能废弃命令，难道又可以贿赂的吗？
English: Having accepted the sovereign's order to leave the country, and preferring to die rather than abandon the order, is it possible to bribe?

古文：臣之许君，以成命也。
现代文：下臣所以答应您，那是为了借机会完成国君的使命。
English: The reason why the vassal promised you was to take advantage of the opportunity to fulfill the mission of the sovereign.

古文：死而成命，臣之禄也。
现代文：死而能完成使命，这是下臣的福气。
English: It is the fortune of a subordinate to be able to complete his mission even if he dies.

古文：寡君有信臣，下臣获考，死又何求？ 
现代文：寡君有守信的下臣，下臣死得其所，又有什么可以追求的？ 
English: Few lords have trustworthy vassals, and vassals die in their place, so what is there to pursue?

古文：楚子舍之以归。
现代文：楚庄王赦免了解扬放他回去。
English: Chu Zhuang Wang pardoned him and let him go back.

古文：夏五月，楚师将去宋。申犀稽首于王之马前，曰： 毋畏知死而不敢废王命，王弃言焉。 
现代文：夏季，五月，楚军准备离开宋国，申犀在楚庄王马前叩头说： 无畏知道死而不敢废弃君王的命令，君王丢掉自己的话了。 
English: In the summer, in May, when the Chu army was preparing to leave Song, Shen Xiao prostrated himself before King Ma of Chu and said, "Even though he knows he will die, he dares not abandon the king's order. The king has lost his word."

古文：王不能答。
现代文：楚庄王不能回答。
English: Chu Zhuang Wang could not answer.

古文：申叔时仆，曰： 筑室反耕者，宋必听命。 
现代文：申叔时正为楚庄王驾车，说： 造起房子，让种田的人回来，宋国必然听从命令。 
English: Uncle Shen was driving for the king of Chu Zhuang at the time and said, "Build a house and let the farmers come back, Song will surely follow the order."

古文：从之。
现代文：楚庄王听从了。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：宋人惧，使华元夜入楚师，登子反之床，起之曰： 寡君使元以病告，曰：敝邑易子而食，析骸以爨。
现代文：宋国人害怕，派华元在夜里进入楚军营，登上子反的床，叫他起来，说： 寡君派元把困难情况告诉你，说： 敝邑交换着儿子杀了吃掉，把尸骨拆开来烧着做饭。
English: The Song people were afraid, so they sent Hua Yuan to enter the Chu camp at night, climb onto the son of a traitor's bed, wake him up, and say: The tyrant sent Yuan to tell you about the difficult situation, saying: In exchange, the county killed and ate the son, and burned the bones to cook.

古文：虽然，城下之盟，有以国毙，不能从也。
现代文：尽管如此，无条件投降，宁可让国家灭亡，也是不能这样做的。
English: Still, unconditional surrender, or letting the country perish, is not an option.

古文：去我三十里，唯命是听。 
现代文：你们退兵三十里，宋国将唯命是听。  
English: If you retreat thirty li, Song Guozhong will only listen to your orders.

古文：子反惧，与之盟而告王。
现代文：子反害怕，就和华元私自订盟誓然后报告楚庄王。
English: The son was afraid, so he made a private oath with Hua Yuan and then reported to the king of Chu Zhuang.

古文：退三十里。
现代文：楚军退兵三十里，宋国和楚国讲和。
English: The Chu army retreated thirty miles, and the Song and Chu states made peace.

古文：宋及楚平，华元为质。
现代文：华元作为人质。盟誓说： 我不骗你，你不欺我。 
English: Hua Yuan as a hostage. Swear: I will not lie to you, you will not deceive me.

古文：盟曰： 我无尔诈，尔无我虞。 潞子婴儿之夫人，晋景公之姊也。
现代文：潞子婴儿的夫人，是晋景公的姐姐。
English: The wife of the crippled baby is the elder sister of Jin Jinggong.

古文：酆舒为政而杀之，又伤潞子之目。
现代文：鄷舒执政以后杀了她，又伤了潞子的眼睛。
English: After Gongshu took power, he killed her and injured Zou Zi's eyes.

古文：晋侯将伐之，诸大夫皆曰： 不可。
现代文：晋景公准备进攻他。大夫们都说： 不行。
English: Lord Jinjing prepared to attack him. The doctors all said, "No."

古文：酆舒有三儁才，不如待后之人。 
现代文：鄷舒有三项显著的才能，不如等待他的后任。 
English: It's better to wait for his successor as Gongshu has three remarkable talents.

古文：伯宗曰： 必伐之。
现代文：伯宗说： 一定要进攻他。
English: Hozong said, "We must attack him."

古文：狄有五罪，儁才虽多，何补焉？
现代文：狄人有五条罪状，突出的才能虽然多，有什么补益？
English: Di people have five crimes, although there are many outstanding talents, what are the benefits?

古文：不祀，一也。
现代文：不祭祀，这是一。
English: Not sacrificing, that's one thing.

古文：耆酒，二也。
现代文：喜欢喝酒，这是二。
English: Likes to drink, that's two.

古文：弃仲章而夺黎氏地，三也。
现代文：废弃仲章而夺取黎氏的土地，这是三。
English: Abandoning Zhongzhang and seizing Li's land, this is the third.

古文：虐我伯姬，四也。
现代文：杀害我们伯姬，这是四。
English: For killing our birdie, it's four.

古文：伤其君目，五也。
现代文：伤了他国君的眼睛，这是五。
English: Wounds the eyes of another sovereign, that's five.

古文：怙其儁才，而不以茂德，滋益罪也。
现代文：依仗他自己的显著才能，而不用美德，这就更增加了罪过。
English: Relying on his own conspicuous talents, rather than on virtue, adds to the sin.

古文：后之人或者将敬奉德义以事神人，而申固其命，若之何待之？
现代文：继任的人或者将会敬奉德义以奉事神明，而巩固国家的命运，到时又怎么对待他？
English: What will his successor do with him when he or she will strengthen the country's destiny by honoring virtue and serving the gods?

古文：不讨有罪，曰 将待后 ，后有辞而讨焉，毋乃不可乎？
现代文：不进攻有罪的人，说 将等待后继人 ，以后有了理由再去进攻，恐怕不可以吧！
English: If you do not attack the guilty, if you say that you will wait for your successor, if you have a reason to attack later, I'm afraid you can't!

古文：夫恃才与众，亡之道也。
现代文：依仗才能和人多，这是亡国之道。
English: Relying on military talent and a large number of people, this is the way to ruin a country.

古文：商纣由之，故灭。
现代文：商纣按这样去做，所以被灭亡。
English: The merchants did so, and were destroyed.

古文：天反时为灾，地反物为妖，民反德为乱，乱则妖灾生。故文反正为乏，尽在狄矣。 
现代文：有了祸乱就有妖异和灾祸发生。所以在文字上，正字反过来就是乏字。上面这些反常的事在狄人那里都是存在的。 
English: When there is a calamity, there are monsters and disasters. Therefore, in writing, the correct word is the opposite of the missing word. All of the above abnormal things exist in the Di people.

古文：晋侯从之。
现代文：晋景公听从了。
English: Jin Jing Gong obeyed.

古文：六月癸卯，晋荀林父败赤狄于曲梁。辛亥，灭潞。
现代文：六月十八日，晋国荀林父在曲梁打败赤狄。二十六日，灭潞国。
English: On June 18th, the father of Jilin Province, Jin, defeated Chedi in Qu Liang. On the 26th, the destruction of Jilin Province began.

古文：酆舒奔卫，卫人归诸晋，晋人杀之。
现代文：鄷舒逃亡到卫国，卫国人把他送还到晋国，晋国人杀死了他。
English: Gongshu fled to the Qing Dynasty, the Qing Dynasty sent him back to the Jin Dynasty, the Jin Dynasty killed him.

古文：王孙苏与召氏、毛氏争政，使王子捷杀召戴公及毛伯卫。卒立召襄。
现代文：王孙苏与召氏、毛氏争夺政权，指使王子捷杀死了召戴公和毛伯卫，最后立了召襄为执政卿士。
English: Wang Sun Su competed for power with Zhao and Mao, ordered Prince Jie to kill Zhao Dai Gong and Mao Bo Wei, and finally appointed Zhao Xiang as the ruling noblemen.

古文：秋七月，秦桓公伐晋，次于辅氏。
现代文：秋季，七月，秦桓公进攻晋国，驻扎在辅氏。
English: In the autumn, in July, Qin Huankong attacked Jin Province and was stationed in Fu.

古文：壬午，晋侯治兵于稷以略狄土，立黎侯而还。
现代文：二十七日，晋景公在稷地进行武装演习，来占领狄人的土地，立了黎侯然后回来。
English: On the 27th, Jin Jing Gong carried out an armed drill in Handan, came to occupy the land of the Di people, set up a Lihou and then returned.

古文：及雒，魏颗败秦师于辅氏。获杜回，秦之力人也。
现代文：到达洛水，魏颗在辅氏击败秦军，俘获了杜回这个秦国的大力士。
English: Arriving in Luoshui, Wei Wei defeated the Qin army at Fu, and captured Du Hui, the great wrestler of Qin.

古文：初，魏武子有嬖妾，无子。
现代文：当初，魏武子有一个爱妾，没有生儿子。
English: At first, Wei Wu Zi had a mistress and no son.

古文：武子疾，命颗曰： 必嫁是。 疾病则曰： 必以为殉。 
现代文：魏武子生病，分咐魏颗说： 等我死去以后，一定要嫁了她 病危时，又说： 一定要让她殉葬！ 
English: When Wei Wu Zi fell ill, he told Wei Yu to marry her after his death. When Wei Wu Zi was critically ill, he said, "We must have her buried alive!"

古文：及卒，颗嫁之，曰： 疾病则乱，吾从其治也。 
现代文：等到魏武子死后，魏颗把她嫁了，说： 病重了就神志不清，我听从他清醒时候的话。 
English: After Wei Wu Zi's death, Wei Chen married her off, saying, "When he was seriously ill, he was delirious. I listened to his words when he was lucid."

古文：及辅氏之役，颗见老人结草以亢杜回，杜回踬而颠，故获之。
现代文：等到辅氏这一役，魏颗看到一个老人把草打成结来遮拦杜回。杜回绊倒在地，所以俘虏了他。
English: During this battle, Wei saw an old man tying a knot of grass to block Du Wei, who tripped and fell to the ground, so he captured him.

古文：夜梦之曰： 余，而所嫁妇人之父也。
现代文：夜里梦见老人说： 我，是你所嫁女人的父亲。
English: At night I dreamed of an old man saying: I am the father of the woman you married.

古文：尔用先人之治命，余是以报。 
现代文：你执行你先人清醒时候的话，我以此作为报答。 
English: I am rewarding you for carrying out the words of your forefathers when they were awake.

古文：晋侯赏桓子狄臣千室，亦赏士伯以瓜衍之县。曰： 吾获狄土，子之功也。
现代文：晋景公赏给桓子狄国的臣民一千家，也把瓜衍的县城赏给士伯，说： 我得到狄国的土地，是您的功劳。
English: Jinjing rewarded the subjects of Hanzi Di with a thousand cranes, and also awarded the county seat of Guayan to Shibo, saying: I got the land of Di, it is your merit.

古文：微子，吾丧伯氏矣。 
现代文：如果没有您，我就丧失伯氏了。 
English: Without you, I would have lost my uncle.

古文：羊舌职说是赏也，曰： 《周书》所谓 庸庸祗祗 者，谓此物也夫。
现代文：羊舌职对这些赏赐感到高兴，说： 《周书》所谓 能用可用的、能敬可敬的 ，说的就是这一类吧。
English: Sheep Tongue Service was pleased with these awards, saying: "Zhou Shu's so-called usable, respectable, respectable, is this kind of thing.

古文：士伯庸中行伯，君信之，亦庸士伯，此之谓明德矣。
现代文：士伯认为中行伯为可以任用，国君相信他，就任用他，这就叫做明德了。
English: Shi Bo thought that Zhong Xingbo could be appointed, and the sovereign believed him and appointed him, which is called Mingde.

古文：文王所以造周，不是过也。
现代文：文王所以能创立周朝，也不超过这些了。
English: These are the reasons why King Wen was able to establish the Zhou Dynasty.

古文：故《诗》曰： 陈锡载周。 能施也。
现代文：所以《诗》说 把利益布施给天下，创立了周朝 ，这是说文王能够施恩于百姓。
English: Therefore, the "Poem" says that he gave the profits to the world and founded the Zhou Dynasty, which means that King Wen can be kind to the people.

古文：率是道也，其何不济？ 
现代文：遵循这个道理去做，还有什么不能成功的？ 
English: If you follow this principle, what else cannot be successful?

古文：晋侯使赵同献狄俘于周，不敬。
现代文：晋景公派遣赵同到成周进献俘虏的狄人，表现得不恭敬。
English: Jin Jing Gong sent Zhao Tong to Cheng Zhoujin to offer sacrifices to the captives, but he did not show respect.

古文：刘康公曰： 不及十年，原叔必有大咎，天夺之魄矣。 
现代文：刘康公说： 不到十年，原叔一定有大灾难。上天已经夺走了他的魂魄了。 
English: Liu Kangong said, "In less than ten years, the original uncle must have suffered a great disaster. Heaven has already taken away his soul.

古文：初税亩，非礼也。
现代文：鲁国开始按田亩征税，这是不合于礼的。
English: It is unseemly for the State of Lu to start levying taxes based on the number of mu of land.

古文：穀出不过藉，以丰财也。
现代文：过去的征税方法是所征的稻谷不超过 藉 的规定，这是用以增加财货的办法。
English: In the past, the method of taxation was that the amount of rice collected did not exceed the amount of tax. This was a method used to increase goods and services.

古文：冬，蝝生，饥。
现代文：冬季，蝗的幼虫蜉化，造成饥荒。
English: In winter, the larvae of locusts pupate, causing famine.

古文：幸之也。
现代文：《春秋》所以记载这件事，是由于庆幸没有造成严重灾害。
English: "Spring and Autumn" recorded this event because it was fortunate that no serious disasters were caused.

