古文：高宗上
现代文：高宗本纪
English: Gaozong Bongji

古文：高宗天皇大圣大弘孝皇帝，讳治，太宗第九子也，母曰文德顺圣长孙皇后。
现代文：高宗天皇大圣大弘孝皇帝，名治，是太宗的第九个儿子。母亲是文德顺圣长孙皇后。
English: Emperor Gaozong, the ninth son of Emperor Daisho, was born to Empress Wente Shun, the eldest grandchild of Emperor Daisho.

古文：以贞观二年六月，生于东宫之丽正殿。
现代文：贞观二年六月，出生在东宫的丽正殿。
English: In June of the second year of Zhenguan, he was born in the East Palace's Lizheng Palace.

古文：五年，封晋王。
现代文：贞观五年，封为晋王。
English: In the fifth year of Zhenguan's reign, he was given the title of Jin Wang.

古文：七年，遥授并州都督。
现代文：贞观七年，不到任所而接受并州都督之职。
English: In the seventh year of Zhenguan's reign, he accepted the post of provincial governor.

古文：幼而岐嶷端审，宽仁孝友。
现代文：幼而聪慧，端庄安详，宽厚仁慈，和睦兄弟。
English: Young and intelligent, dignified and serene, generous and kind, brothers in peace.

古文：初授《孝经》于著作郎萧德言，太宗问曰： 此书中何言为要？ 
现代文：开始由著作郎萧德言教授《孝经》，太宗问道： 这部《孝经》说的什么最重要？ 
English: Taizong asked, "What is the most important thing that this "Book of Filial Piety" says?"

古文：对曰： 夫孝，始于事亲，中于事君，终于立身。
现代文：对答道： 孝，开始是事奉双亲，长大后是事奉君王，最终是修身。
English: Answer: Filial piety begins with serving one's parents, grows into serving the king, and ends with cultivating one's body.

古文：君子之事上，进思尽忠，退思补过，将顺其美，匡救其恶。 
现代文：君子事奉皇上，进朝廷想着尽忠，退居在家想到弥补皇上的过错，将顺从其美，纠正其恶。 
English: A gentleman will serve the emperor, enter the court with the desire to be loyal, retire at home with the desire to make up for the emperor's mistakes, obey his beauty, and correct his evil.

古文：太宗大悦曰： 行此，足以事父兄，为臣子矣。 
现代文：太宗大喜道： 按此行事，完全能够事奉好父兄，做好臣子了。 
English: Taizong Daixi said, "If you act in this way, you will be able to serve your father and brother and your vassal well."

古文：及文德皇后崩，晋王时年九岁，哀慕感动左右，太宗屡加慰抚，由是特深宠异。
现代文：等到文德皇后去世，晋王时年九岁，悲哀思念之情感动左右的人，太宗多次加以安慰，从此特别受到宠爱。
English: After the death of Empress Wende, when King Jin was nine years old, Taizong often comforted those who were sad and emotional, and became a special favorite.

古文：寻拜右武候大将军。
现代文：不久被任命为右武候大将军。
English: He was soon appointed to the post of General of the Right Division.

古文：十七年，皇太子承乾废，魏王泰亦以罪黜，太宗与长孙无忌、房玄龄、李勣等计议，立晋王为皇太子。
现代文：贞观十七年，皇太子承乾被废弃，魏王泰也因犯罪被贬，太宗与长孙无忌、房玄龄、李责力等人计议，立晋王为皇太子。
English: In the seventeenth year of Zhenguan, the crown prince Cheng Qian was abandoned, Wei Wang Tai was also demoted for crime, Taizong and the eldest grandson Mujie, Fang Xuanling, Li Li Liuli and others deliberated, and established Jin Wang as the crown prince.

古文：太宗每视朝，常令在侧，观决庶政，或令参议，太宗数称其善。
现代文：太宗每次上朝，常令晋王在旁边，让他观看自己决断各种政务，有时候让他参加议事，太宗多次称赞他好。
English: Every time Taizong ascended to the throne, he often had Jin Wang next to him, let him watch him decide on various government affairs, and sometimes let him participate in the deliberation. Taizong praised him many times.

古文：十八年，太宗将伐高丽，命太子留镇定州。
现代文：贞观十八年，太宗将讨伐高丽，命令太子留守定州。
English: In the eighteenth year of Zhenguan, Emperor Taizong will fight against Goryeo and order the prince to stay in Dingzhou.

古文：及驾发有期，悲啼累日，因请飞驿递表起居，并递敕垂报，并许之。
现代文：等到太宗基本确定了发兵日期，太子悲哀，整天啼哭，因而请求驿站飞马传递自己生活工作起居的表章，并传递边境情况的报告，太宗都同意了。
English: When Taizong basically determined the date of sending troops, the prince was sad and cried all day, so he asked the post station Pegasus to pass on the seal of his life, work and living, and to pass on the report of the border situation, Taizong agreed.

古文：飞表奏事，自此始也。
现代文：用快马奏事，从此开始。
English: Play fast and loose, starting now.

古文：及军旋，太子从至并州。
现代文：等到太宗大军凯旋，太子跟从皇上到并州。
English: After the triumphant return of Emperor Taizong's army, the crown prince followed the emperor to Bianzhou.

古文：时太宗患痈，太子亲吮之，扶辇步从数日。
现代文：当时太宗生了个大毒疮，太子亲自用口吸毒脓，扶着车辇步行跟从了几天。
English: At that time, Taizong was born with a large poisonous sore, and the prince himself used his mouth to take drugs and followed her for a few days on foot.

古文：二十三年五月己巳，太宗崩。
现代文：贞观二十三年五月二十六日，太宗去世。
English: Taizong died on the 26th day of May in the 23rd year of Zhenguan.

古文：内外文武赐勋官一级。诸年八十以上赉以粟帛。雍州及诸州比年供军劳役尤甚之处，并给复一年。 辛巳，改民部尚书为户部尚书。
现代文：二十七日，以礼部尚书、兼太子少师、黎阳县公于志宁为侍中，太子少詹事、兼尚书左丞张行成为兼侍中、检校刑部尚书，太子右庶子、兼吏部侍郎、代理户部尚书高季辅为兼中书令、检校吏部尚书，太子左庶子、高阳县男许敬宗兼礼部尚书。二十八日，太子回京。六月一日，皇太子即皇帝位，时年二十二岁。八日，改民部尚书为户部尚书。
English: On the 27th, Prince Reibe no Shosho, Prince Kaneko no Shoshi, and Koyushinin of Liyang County were appointed as attendants, Prince Shosho no Zhanji, Prince Kanebo no Sajo, and Zhang Xing were appointed as attendants and inspectors, Prince Reibe's son-in-law, Prince Reibe's servant, Prince Reibe's son-in-law, Prince Reibe's son-in-law, Prince Reibe's son-in-law, Prince Reibe's son-in-law, Prince Reibe's son-in-law, Prince Reibe's son-in

古文：叠州都督、英国公勣为特进、检校洛州刺史，仍于洛阳宫留守。
现代文：叠州都督英国公李责力为特进、检校洛州刺史，仍在洛阳宫留守。
English: The British official Li Zhili, the governor of Meizhou, is a special envoy, inspecting the history of Luozhou, and is still staying at Luoyang Palace.

古文：癸未，诏司徒、扬州都督、赵国公无忌为太尉兼检校中书令，知尚书门下二省事，余并如故，赐物三千段。
现代文：十日，诏令司徒、扬州都督、赵国公长孙无忌为太尉兼检校中书令，主持尚书省、门下省二省政事，其余官职依前一样，赐物三千缎。
English: On the tenth day of the month, Sun Muxui, the governor of Yangzhou, the governor of Zhao, and the governor of Yangzhou, was promoted to the rank of lieutenant and inspector, presided over the government affairs of Shangshu Province and two provinces under his command, and the remaining official positions were the same as before, with a gift of three thousand baht.

古文：癸巳，特进、英国公勣为开府仪同三司、同中书门下三品。
现代文：二十日，特进、英国公李责力为开府仪同三司、同中书门下三品。
English: On the 20th, the special advance and the British public Li Li Li Li Li Li were the three divisions of the Kaifu ceremony and the three classes of the middle school.

古文：秋七月丙午，有司请改治书侍御史为御史中丞，诸州治中为司马，别驾为长史，治礼郎为奉礼郎，以避上名。
现代文：秋七月三日，有关衙门请求改治书侍御史为御史中丞，诸州治中为司马，别驾为长史，治礼郎为奉礼郎，以避讳皇上李治的名。
English: On the 3rd day of the 7th month of the autumn, the relevant court officials requested to change the title of Jishi Shusai Goshi to Goshi Chujo, the title of Jushi Chujo to Sima, the title of Biejie to Choshi, and the title of Jireiro to Boreiro, in order to avoid the name of Emperor Riji.

古文：以贞观时不讳先帝二字，诏有司，奏曰： 先帝二名，礼不偏讳。
现代文：因为贞观时不避讳先帝太宗 世民 二字，所以不同意，有关衙门上奏道 ：先帝两个名字，在礼制上不偏向某一避讳。
English: Because Zhenguan did not avoid the words of the former emperor Taizong Shimin, he did not agree, and the relevant eulogy said: the two names of the former emperor are not biased towards a certain shunning in the etiquette.

古文：上既单名，臣子不合指斥。 
现代文：皇上既是单名，臣下不应指斥。 
English: As the Emperor is a single name, his subjects should not point fingers at him.

古文：上乃从之。
现代文：皇上于是听从之。
English: The emperor listened to Jia Dongzhi's opinion.

古文：己酉，于阗王伏阇信来朝。
现代文：六日，于阗王伏信来朝见。
English: On the 6th, King Fuxin came to see the emperor.

古文：八月癸酉朔，河东地震，晋州尤甚，坏庐舍，压死者五千余人。
现代文：八月一日，河东地震，晋州尤其厉害，毁坏了房屋，压死了五千多人。
English: On August 1, the earthquake in Hedong, especially in Jinzhou, destroyed houses and killed more than 5,000 people.

古文：三日又震。
现代文：三日又发生地震。
English: On the third day, another earthquake occurred.

古文：诏遣使存问，给复二年，压死者赐绢三匹。
现代文：诏令派遣使者慰问，免赋税三年，压死的人家各赐给绢绸三匹。
English: The emperor issued a decree to send an envoy to offer condolences, exempted from taxes for three years, and each family of those who were crushed to death was given three yakitori.

古文：以开府仪同三司、英国公勣为尚书左仆射、同中书门下三品。
现代文：以开府仪同三司、英国公李责力为尚书左仆射、同中书门下三品。
English: With the Kaifu Yi and the three divisions and the British Gong Li Li Li, it is the left hand side of the book, and the middle of the book is the bottom three.

古文：仆射始带同中书门下。
现代文：仆射开始连带同中书门下。
English: Foot-shooting began to take place under the gate, along with Chinese calligraphy.

古文：庚寅，葬太宗于昭陵。
现代文：十八日，在昭陵安葬太宗。
English: On the 18th, Emperor Taizong was buried in Zhaoling.

古文：九月甲寅，加授鄜州刺史、荆王元景为司徒，前安州都督、吴王恪为司空兼梁州刺史。
现代文：九月十二日，加授州刺史、荆王元景为司徒，前安州都督、吴王恪为司空兼梁州刺史。
English: On September 12th, Jing Wang and Wang Yuanjing were awarded the title of State Historian, and Wu Wang Ke, the former Governor of Anzhou, was awarded the title of Secretary and State Historian of Liangzhou.

古文：丙寅，赠太尉、梁国公玄龄，赠司徒、申国公士廉，赠左仆射、蒋国公屈突通，并可配食太宗庙庭。
现代文：二十四日，赠梁国公房玄龄为太尉；赠申国公高士廉为司徒，赠蒋国公屈突通为左仆射，都可在太宗庙庭配祭。
English: On the 24th, Liang Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo

古文：冬十一月甲子，以瑶池都督阿史那贺鲁为左骁卫大将军。
现代文：冬十一月二十三日，以瑶池都督阿史那贺鲁为左骁卫大将军。
English: On the 23rd day of November in winter, Ashina Horu, the governor of Tsugaike, was appointed General of the Left Division of the Imperial Guards.

古文：乙丑，晋州地又震。
现代文：二十四日，晋州又地震。
English: On the 24th, another earthquake hit Jinzhou.

古文：是冬无雪。
现代文：这年冬天无雪。
English: There was no snow this winter.

古文：永徽元年春正月辛丑朔，上不受朝，诏改元。
现代文：永徽元年春正月一日，皇上不受诸侯朝拜，诏令改元。
English: On the first day of the first month of the spring of the first year of Yonghui, the emperor was not worshiped by the princes, and the imperial decree changed the era.

古文：壬寅，御太极殿，受朝而不会。
现代文：二日，皇上登太极殿，接受诸侯朝拜而不按时会见。
English: On the second day, the emperor ascended to the Taiji Hall and accepted the worship of the lords without meeting them on time.

古文：丙午。立妃王氏为皇后。
现代文：六日，立妃子王氏为皇后。
English: On the 6th, the crown princess became the empress.

古文：丁未，以陈王忠为雍州牧。
现代文：七日，以陈王忠为雍州牧。
English: On the seventh day, Chen Wangzhong was appointed as Yongzhou herdsman.

古文：二月辛卯，封皇子孝为许王，上金为杞王，素节为雍王。
现代文：二月二十二日，封皇子孝为许王，上金为杞王，素节为雍王。
English: On February 22nd, Feng's son Xiao became King Xu, Shangguan became King Yao, and Su Jie became King Yong.

古文：夏四月己巳朔，晋州地又震。
现代文：夏四月一日，晋州又地震。
English: Summer On April 1st, another earthquake hit Jinzhou.

古文：五月丁未，上谓群臣曰： 朕谬膺大位，政教不明，遂使晋州之地屡有震动。
现代文：五月九日，皇上对群臣道： 朕继承皇帝大位，刑罚教化不明，致使晋州多次地震。
English: On May 9th, the emperor said to the courtiers, "I have succeeded to the throne of the emperor, and the punishment and education are unknown. This has caused many earthquakes in Jinzhou.

古文：良由赏罚失中，政道乖方。
现代文：确实是由于赏罚不公正，政理荒谬所致。
English: It is indeed due to the injustice of rewards and punishments and the absurdity of political principles.

古文：卿等宜各进封事，极言得失，以匡不逮。 
现代文：您们应该晋封章奏事，尽量指明政教得失，以挽救朕之不足。 
English: You should report the matter to the emperor, and try your best to point out the gains and losses of politics and religion, so as to remedy my shortcomings.

古文：吐火罗遣使献大鸟如驼，食铜铁，上遣献于昭陵。
现代文：吐火罗派遣使者献大鸟，大鸟像骆驼，吃铜铁，皇上派人献到昭陵。
English: Fire-breathing Luo sent an envoy to offer a large bird, a large bird like a camel, eating copper and iron, and the emperor sent someone to offer it to Zhaoling.

古文：吐蕃赞普死，遣右武卫将军鲜于匡济赉玺书往吊祭。
现代文：吐蕃赞普死，皇上派遣右武卫将军鲜于匡济持皇帝书信前往吊祭。
English: After the death of Zhuge Zhanpu, the emperor sent the general of the Right Division of the Imperial Guard to the hanging ceremony with the emperor's letter.

古文：六月庚辰，晋州地震。
现代文：六月十三日，晋州地震。
English: On June 13, the Jinzhou earthquake occurred.

古文：秋七月丙寅，以旱，亲录京城囚徒。
现代文：秋七月二十九日，因为干旱，皇上亲自审查并记录囚徒罪状。
English: On the 29th day of the 7th month in the autumn, because of the drought, the Emperor personally reviewed and recorded the prisoners' criminal records.

古文：九月癸卯，右骁卫郎将高侃执车鼻可汗诣阙，献于社庙及昭陵。
现代文：九月七日，右骁卫郎将高侃活捉车鼻可汗送到朝廷，将俘虏献到太庙和昭陵。
English: On September 7th, Uhyeong Weiro sent Gao Kan alive to the Imperial Court, and presented the captive to the Imperial Temple and Shoryo.

古文：己未，尚书左仆射、英国公勣固请解职，许之，令以开府仪同三司同中书门下三品。
现代文：二十三日，尚书左仆射、英国公李责力坚决请求解除职务，皇上同意了，令以开府仪同三司同中书门下三品任用。
English: On the 23rd, Shang Shuxu's right-hand man Shuai and the British official Li Lianli resolutely requested to be relieved of their duties. The emperor agreed and ordered the appointment of three officials under the Kefu Yi, the Three Departments and the Middle School.

古文：十一月已未，中书令、河南郡公褚遂良左授同州刺史。
现代文：十一月二十四日，中书令、河南郡公褚遂良降职为同州刺史。
English: On November 24th, according to the Chinese Book Order, Gongjun Suiliang of Henan County was demoted to be the state historian.

古文：十二月，瑶池都督、沙钵罗叶护阿史那贺鲁以府叛，自称可汗，总有西域之地。
现代文：十二月，瑶池都督、沙钵罗叶护阿史那贺鲁凭借州府叛乱，自称为可汗，全部占有西域之地。
English: In December, the governor of Dianchi, Shajiro Yegu Ashina Heru, rose up by virtue of the rebellion in the state capital, called himself a khan, and occupied all the land in the western region.

古文：是岁，雍、绛、同等九州旱蝗，齐、定等十六州水。
现代文：这年，雍、绛、同等九州旱灾、蝗虫灾，齐、定等十六个州水灾。
English: This year, sixteen prefectures were affected by floods, including Yong, Handan, Kyushu (drought, locusts), Qi, and Ding.

古文：二年春正月戊戌，诏曰： 去岁关辅之地，颇弊蝗螟，天下诸州，或遭水旱，百姓之间，致有罄乏。
现代文：永徽二年春正月四日，皇帝诏曰 ：去年关中畿辅之地，颇受蝗虫之灾，天下各州，有的遭水灾和旱灾，以致粮食空竭。
English: On the 4th day of the 1st month of the 2nd year of the Spring of Yonghui, the emperor issued an edict saying: Last year, Guanzhong, Kiyosu, and other places were plagued by locusts, and all regions of the country suffered from floods and droughts, resulting in food shortages.

古文：此由朕之不德，兆庶何辜？
现代文：这是由于朕德行不好，亿万百姓有何罪？
English: This is due to my bad moral conduct. What are the sins of hundreds of millions of people?

古文：矜物罪己，载深忧惕。
现代文：恃才傲物，罪在自己，朕深感忧虑，当引以为戒。
English: If you are proud of your talent, the fault is in yourself. I am deeply worried and should be cautioned.

古文：今献岁肇春，东作方始，粮廪或空，事资赈给。
现代文：现在是一年的开始，春天到了，春耕生产开始，粮食有的空尽，应从事资助救济。
English: Now is the beginning of the year, spring has arrived, spring farming production has begun, grain is running out, and we should engage in funding and relief.

古文：其遭虫水处有贫乏者，得以正、义仓赈贷。
现代文：那些遭受虫灾水灾之处有贫乏的人，应以正仓、义仓救济。
English: Those who are impoverished in areas that have suffered from insect infestation and flooding should receive relief from the main warehouse and charity warehouse.

古文：雍、同二州，各遣郎中一人充使存问，务尽哀矜之旨，副朕乃眷之心。 
现代文：雍、同二州，各派郎中一人任使者去慰问，务必尽哀悯同情之意，以符朕眷顾思念百姓之心。 
English: Yong, along with the two states, each sent one of their emissaries to offer condolences. We must do our best to show our sympathy and compassion, and think about the hearts of the people.

古文：乙巳，黄门侍郎、平昌县公宇文节加银青光禄大夫，依旧同中书门下三品。
现代文：十一日，黄门侍郎、平昌县公宇文节加银青光禄大夫，依旧任同中书门下三品。
English: On the 11th day, Huangmen waiter, Pyeongchang County Gongyuan Festival silver medalist and Qingguanglu doctor, still held the same position as the third grade of Zhongshumen.

古文：守中书侍郎柳奭为中书侍郎，依旧同中书门下三品。
现代文：试用中书侍郎柳为中书侍郎，依旧任同中书门下三品。
English: Chusho-ziroro Yanagi was used as Chusho-ziroro on a trial basis, and he was still appointed as the third-ranked disciple of Chusho.

古文：夏四月乙酉，秩太庙令及献、昭二陵令从五品，丞从七品。
现代文：夏四月二十二日，增太庙令及献陵令、昭陵令从五品的俸禄，丞则是从七品的俸禄。
English: On the 22nd day of the 4th month of the summer, the salary of the Fifth Rank was increased by the Order of the Imperial Temple, the Order of the Imperial Mausoleum and the Order of the Imperial Mausoleum, and the salary of the Seventh Rank was increased by the Order of the Imperial Family.

古文：五月壬辰，开府仪同三司及京官文武职事四品、五品，并给随身鱼。
现代文：四月二十九日，开府仪同三司及京官文武职事四品、五品官员，都赐给随身带铜鱼符。
English: On April 29, the Kaifu Yi and the three departments and the Beijing civil and military officials of the fourth and fifth grades were all given a bronze fish charm to carry with them.

古文：六月辛酉，开府仪同三司、襄邑王神符薨。
现代文：五月二十九日，开府仪同三司、襄邑王神符去世。
English: On May 29th, Kaifu Yi, along with Sanji and Xiangyi Wang Shenfu, passed away.

古文：秋七月丁未，贺鲁寇陷金岭城、蒲类县，遣武候大将军梁建方、右骁卫大将军契苾何力为弓月道总管以讨之。
现代文：秋七月十六日，贺鲁入侵攻陷金岭城、蒲类县，派武候大将军梁建方、右骁卫大将军契艹必何力为弓月道总管而讨伐他。
English: On the 16th day of the 7th month of autumn, Horu invaded and conquered Jinling City and Putu County, and sent the military commander general Liang Jianfang and the right guard general Qi Xuan to fight against him for the general manager of the Yunyue Road.

古文：八月乙丑，大食国始遣使朝献。
现代文：八月四日，大食国开始派遣使者来唐朝拜贡献。
English: On August 4, China began to send envoys to Tang Dynasty to pay homage and make contributions.

古文：己巳，侍中、燕国公于志宁为尚书左仆射，侍中兼刑部尚书、北平县公张行成为尚书右仆射，并同中书门下三品，犹不入衔。
现代文：八日，侍中、燕国公于志宁为尚书左仆射；侍中兼刑部尚书、北平县公张行成为尚书右仆射，都任同中书门下三品，中书令兼检校吏部尚书、艹县公高季辅为侍郎。
English: On the eighth day, Yu Zhining, a chamberlain, and Yan Guogong were appointed as Shang Shuxu's left-hand servant; Shang Shuxu, a chamberlain and the head of the criminal justice department, and Beiping County official Zhang Xing were appointed as Shang Shuxu's right-hand servant, both of whom were appointed as the third grade of the same school, Shang Shuxu, the head of the Chinese school inspection department and the school inspector department, and Jixian County public high school junior high school assistant were appointed as attendants.

古文：中书令兼检校吏部尚书、条县公高季辅为侍郎。九月癸巳，改九成宫为万年宫，废玉华宫以为佛寺。
现代文：九月三日，改九成宫为万年宫，废弃玉华宫以它作为佛寺。
English: On September 3, Jiucheng Palace was changed to Wanyan Palace, and Yuhua Palace was abandoned and used as a Buddhist temple.

古文：闰月辛未，颁新定律、令、格、式于天下。
现代文：闰九月十一日，向天下颁布新定的律、令、格、式。
English: On September 11, the newly established laws, decrees, codes, and regulations were promulgated to the world.

古文：冬十月辛卯，晋州地震。
现代文：冬十月二日，晋州地震。
English: Winter On October 2nd, the Jinzhou earthquake occurred.

古文：十一月辛酉，有事于南郊。
现代文：十一月二日，在南郊祭天。
English: On the second day of the first month of November, a grand festival was held in the southern suburbs of Beijing.

古文：戊辰，定襄地震。
现代文：九日，定襄地震。
English: On the 9th, Dingxiang earthquake.

古文：丁丑，以高昌故地置安西都护府。
现代文：十八日，在高昌旧地设置安西都护府。
English: On the 18th, the Anxi tutelary capital was set up in the former site of Gaochang.

古文：白水蛮冠麻州，命左领军将军赵孝祖讨平之。
现代文：白水蛮入侵麻州，命令左领将军赵孝祖讨平他。
English: Baishui brutally invaded Massachusetts and ordered the left-collar general Zhao Xiaozu to defeat him.

古文：三年春正月癸亥，以去秋至于是月不雨，上避正殿，降天下死罪及流罪递减一等，徒以下咸宥之。
现代文：三年春正月五日，因为从去年秋天到这月不下雨，皇上避开正殿，将天下死罪及流放罪人顺次降低一等，徒刑以下罪犯都宽恕他们。
English: On the 5th day of the 1st month of the 3rd year of spring, because there was no rain from the previous autumn to this month, the emperor avoided the main hall and reduced the world's capital crimes and exiled criminals one by one, and pardoned all criminals below imprisonment.

古文：弓月道总管梁建方、契苾何力等大破处月硃耶孤注于牢山，斩首九千级，虏渠帅六千，俘生口万余，获牛马杂畜七万。
现代文：弓月道总管梁建方、契艹必何力等人在牢山大破处月朱耶孤注，斩首级九千个，俘虏敌大帅六千人，活捉俘虏一万多，获取牛马及各种牲畜七万头。
English: Liang Jianfang, the head of the Yunyue Dao, and Qi Junbin He Li and others broke through the mountains of prisoners, decapitated nine thousand, captured six thousand enemy generals, captured more than ten thousand prisoners alive, and acquired seventy thousand heads of cattle and horses and various livestock.

古文：丙寅，太尉、赵国公无忌以旱请逊位，不许。
现代文：八日，太尉、赵国公长孙无忌因为干旱请求辞位，皇上不许。
English: On the eighth day, Sun Mu Boi, the first lieutenant and the head of Zhao Guogong, requested to resign because of the drought, but the emperor did not allow him to do so.

古文：己巳，同州刺史、河南郡公褚遂良为吏部尚书、同中书门下三品。
现代文：十一日，同州刺史、河南郡公褚遂良为吏部尚书、同中书门下三品。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Shishi from the same prefecture and Gongyi Suiliang from Henan County were promoted to Shoshu from the cadre department, and Shoshu from the middle school.

古文：丙子，亲祠太庙。
现代文：十八日，皇上亲自在太庙祭祀。
English: On the 18th, the Emperor himself performed the ritual at the Imperial Temple.

古文：丁亥，籍于千亩，赐群官帛有差。
现代文：二十九日，皇上征用民力耕种的田地一千亩，按等级赐给群官绸缎。
English: On the 29th, the emperor requisitioned one thousand mu of farmland cultivated by the people and gave silk and straw to the group officials according to their ranks.

古文：三月辛巳，黄门侍郎、平昌县公宇文节为侍中，中书侍郎柳奭为中书令。
现代文：三月二十四日，黄门侍郎、平昌县公宇文节为侍中，中书侍郎柳为中书令。
English: On March 24th, Huangmen waiter, Pyeongchang County's Gongyubunjie served as a chamberlain, and Chusho waiter, Rongyu, served as a chusho.

古文：庚申，幸观德殿，赐文武群官大射。
现代文：三日，皇上驾到观德殿，赐文武百官大射之礼。
English: On the third day, the emperor drove to the Kuangde Hall and gave a grand salute to all the military and civilian officials.

古文：夏四月庚寅，左领军将军赵孝祖大破白水蛮大勃律。
现代文：夏四月三日，左领将军赵孝祖大破白水蛮大勃律。
English: On the third day of the fourth month of summer, the left-collar general Zhao Xiaozu had a very big erection.

古文：甲午，澧州刺史、彭王元则薨。
现代文：七日，澧州刺史、彭王元则去世。
English: On the 7th, Zhangzhou Shishi and Peng Wangyuan passed away.

古文：五月庚辰，诏以周司沐大夫裴融，齐侍中崔季舒、给事黄门侍郎裴泽、尚书左丞封孝琰，隋仪同三司豆卢毓、御史中丞游楚客等，并门挺忠鲠，其子孙各宜甄擢。
现代文：五月二十四日，皇上诏令因周朝司沐大夫裴融、齐国侍中崔季舒、给事黄门侍郎裴泽、尚书左丞封孝琰、隋朝仪同三司豆卢毓、御史中丞游楚客等，都是正直忠诚，他们的子孙各应提升。
English: On May 24th, the emperor issued an imperial edict, stating that Zhou Dynasty Secretary Mu Doctor Pei Rong, Qi National Attendant Choi Ji Shu, Yellow Gate Attendant Pei Ze, Shang Shu Zuo Jiao, Sui Dynasty Secretary Zhu Lu, and Grand Historian Zhong Jiao You Chu Ke were all honest and loyal, and their children and grandchildren should be promoted.

古文：秋七月丁巳，立陈王忠为皇太子，大赦天下，五品己上子为父后者赐勋一转，大酺三日。
现代文：秋七月二日，立陈王忠为皇太子，大赦天下，五品以上官员，儿子为父亲的继承人者勋位升一等，大宴三日。
English: On the 2nd day of the 7th month of autumn, Chen Wangzhong was appointed as the crown prince. He was pardoned by the emperor, officials with five or more peerages, and sons who were the heirs of their fathers were promoted to the first class of the order. The grand banquet was held on the 3rd day.

古文：乙丑，左仆射于志宁兼太子少师，右仆射张行成兼太子少傅，侍中高季辅兼太子少保，侍中宇文节兼太子詹事。
现代文：十日，左仆射于志宁兼太子少师，右仆射张行成兼太子少傅，侍中高季辅兼太子少保，侍中宇文节兼太子詹事。
English: On the 10th day, the left-hand servant shot at Shining and the prince's apprentice, the right-hand servant shot at Zhang Xingcheng and the prince's apprentice, the attendant at the middle school and the high school and the prince's apprentice, and the attendant at the middle school and the high school and the prince's apprentice.

古文：丁丑，上问户部尚书高履行： 去年进户多少？ 
现代文：二十二日，皇上问户部尚书高履行 ：去年增加多少户？ 
English: On the 22nd, the emperor asked the head of the household department, Shang Shugao, to fulfill: How many households were added last year?

古文：履行奏称： 进户总一十五万。 
现代文：高履行奏道 ：去年增加十五万户。 
English: High performance: 150,000 households were added last year.

古文：又问曰 隋日有几户？
现代文：皇上又问道： 隋朝有多少户？
English: The emperor also asked: How many households were there in the Sui Dynasty?

古文：今见有几户？ 
现代文：现在有多少户？ 
English: How many households are there now?

古文：履行奏： 隋开皇中有户八百七十万，即今见有户三百八十万。 
现代文：高履行奏道 ：隋朝开皇中期有八百七十万户，现在有三百八十万户。 
English: Gao Shengzong said: In the middle of the Sui Dynasty, there were 8.7 million households, and now there are 3.8 million households.

古文：九月丁巳，改太子中允为内允，中书舍人为内史舍人，诸率府中郎改为旅贲郎将，以避太子名。
现代文：九月三日，改太子中允为内允，中书舍人改为内史舍人，所有率府中郎将改为旅贲郎将，以回避太子之名。
English: On September 3, he changed the title of the crown prince from chujo (中允) to chujo (内允), the title of chusho (中書舍人) to naishi (内史舍人), and the title of all chujo (率府中郎) to shakuhachi (旅郎将) in order to avoid the title of crown prince.

古文：冬十月戊戌，幸同安大长公主第，又幸高阳长公主第，即日还宫。
现代文：冬十月十四日，驾到同安大长公主府第，又驾到高阳长公主府第，当日回宫。
English: On the 14th day of October in winter, she drove to the First Princess' residence in Tong'an University, and then to the First Princess' residence in Gaoyang, returning to the palace the same day.

古文：十一月乙亥，驳马国遣使朝贡。
现代文：十一月二十二日，驳马国派遣使者前来朝贡。
English: On November 22nd, the State of Tajima sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：庚寅，弘化长公主自吐谷浑来朝。
现代文：弘化长公主从吐谷浑来朝见。
English: The eldest princess of Hongwha came all the way from Tugu to see me in the morning.

古文：十二月癸巳，濮王泰薨。
现代文：十二月十日，濮王泰去世。
English: On the 10th day of the 12th month of the lunar calendar, the king of Zhou, Li Tai, passed away.

古文：四年春正月癸丑朔，上临轩，不受朝，以濮王泰在殡故也。
现代文：永徽四年春正月一日，皇上驾临殿堂前檐下的平台，而不接受朝拜，因为濮王泰灵柩未葬的缘故。
English: On the first day of the first month of spring in the fourth year of the Yonghui Emperor, the emperor came to the platform in front of the hall, but did not accept the worship, because the tomb of King Tai Lingya had not been buried.

古文：丙子，新除房州刺史、驸马都尉房遗爱，司徒、秦州刺史、荆王元景，司空、安州刺史、吴王恪，宁州刺史、驸马都尉薛万彻，岚州刺史、驸马都尉柴令武谋反。
现代文：二十四日，新任命的房州刺史、驸马都尉房遗爱，司徒、秦州刺史、荆王元景，司空、安州刺史、吴王恪，宁州刺史、驸马都尉薛万彻，岚州刺史、驸马都尉柴令武等人谋反。
English: On the 24th, the newly-appointed Fangzhou Sashih, Xingma Duifeng Zhe Ai, Sitou, Qinzhou Sashih, Jingwang Yuanjing, Siku, Anzhou Sashih, Wuwang Ke, Ningzhou Sashih, Xingma Duifeng Xue Wanche, Zhangzhou Sashih, Xingma Duifeng Chai Lingwu and others plotted a rebellion.

古文：二月乙酉，遗爱、万彻、令武等并伏诛；元景、恪、巴陵高阳公主并赐死。
现代文：二月三日，房遗爱、薛万彻、柴令武等都被判死刑；元景、恪、巴陵高阳公主都被赐以自杀。
English: On February 3, Fang Youai, Xue Wancher, Chai Lingwu and others were all sentenced to death; Yuanjing, Gu, and Baling Gaoyang Princess were all sentenced to suicide.

古文：左骁卫大将军、安国公执失思力配流巂州，侍中兼太子詹事、平昌县公宇文节配流桂州。
现代文：左骁卫大将军、安国公执失思力发配到辒州充军；侍中兼太子詹事、平昌县公宇文节发配到桂州充军。
English: General Zuo Jianwei and An Guo Gongzhi were dispatched to Bozhou to join the army; Zhan Zi, an aide-de-camp and crown prince, and Gong Yuwen Jie of Pyeongchang County were dispatched to join the army in Guizhou.

古文：戊子，特进、太常卿、江夏王道宗配流桂州，恪母弟蜀王愔废为庶人。
现代文：六日，特进、太常卿、江夏王道宗发配到桂州充军，吴王恪之母弟蜀王忄音废为庶人。
English: On the 6th, Tejin, Taizongqing, and Jiangxia Wang Daozong were dispatched to Guizhou to join the army, and Shu Wang Yuying, the younger brother of Wu Wangke's mother, became a commoner.

古文：己亥，绛州刺史、徐王元礼加授司徒，开府仪同三司、英国公勣为司空。
现代文：十七日，绛州刺史、徐王元礼加授司徒；加授开府仪同三司、英国公李责力为司空。
English: On the 17th, Zhangzhou Zishi and Xu Wangyuan were awarded the honorary title of priest; the honorary title of Kaifu was awarded to three officials, and the British official Li Guoli was awarded the honorary title of secretary.

古文：三月壬子朔，颁孔颖达《五经正义》于天下，每年明经令依此考试。
现代文：三月一日，在天下颁布孔颖达的《五经正义》，每年秋举明经考试就依据《五经正义》。
English: On March 1, the "Five Classics of Justice" of Kong Yingda was promulgated in the world, and the annual autumn examination was based on the "Five Classics of Justice."

古文：丙辰，上御观德殿，陈逆人房遗爱等口马资财为五垛，引王公、诸亲、蕃客及文武九品己上射。
现代文：五日，皇上驾到观德殿，陈列叛逆房遗爱、薛万彻等人口马匹资财为五垛，带引王公、所有皇亲、外国宾客以及文武官员九品以上者猜测垛内之物而赏赐他们。
English: On the fifth day, the emperor drove to the Kuangde Hall, displayed the treasonous house's last love, Xue Wancher, and other people's horses, and the wealth was five pennies, and led the prince, all the imperial relatives, foreign guests, and civil and military officials with more than nine pennies to guess what was in the pennies and reward them.

古文：夏四月戊子，林邑国王遣使来朝，贡驯象。
现代文：夏四月七日，林邑国王派遣使者前来朝贡，贡献驯化的大象。
English: On the 7th day of the 4th month of the summer, the King of Linyi sent an envoy to pay tribute and donate domesticated elephants.

古文：壬寅，以旱避正殿，减膳，亲录系囚，遣使分省天下冤狱，诏文武官极言得失。
现代文：二十一日，因为干旱，避开正殿，减少膳食，亲自审查并记录囚犯罪状，派遣使者分别检查天下冤案，诏令文武官员尽量陈述朝政得失。
English: On the twenty-first day, because of the drought, avoid the main hall, reduce meals, personally review and record the status of prisoners, send emissaries to check the world's grievances separately, and order civil and military officials to report the gains and losses of the government as much as possible.

古文：八月己亥，陨石十八于同州之冯翊，有声如雷。
现代文：八月二十日，在同州之冯翊有十八颗陨石降落，落地响声如雷。
English: On August 20th, 18 meteorites landed in Fengyu, Tongzhou, with a thunderous crash.

古文：九月壬寅，尚书右仆射、北平县公张行成薨。
现代文：九月，尚书右仆射、北平县公张行成去世。
English: In September, Shang Shuxu's right-hand man, Beiping County official Zhang Xingcheng passed away.

古文：甲戌，吏部尚书、河南郡公褚遂良为尚书右仆射，依旧知政事。
现代文：二十五日，吏部尚书、河南郡公褚遂良为尚书右仆射，依旧任参知政事。
English: On the 25th, Shangshu's right-hand man, Guanqian Suiliang of Henan County, became Shangshu's right-hand man, and still served as a member of the Council of State.

古文：冬十月庚子，幸新丰之温汤。
现代文：冬十月二十二日，驾到新丰之温泉。
English: On the 22nd day of winter in October, I drove to the hot springs in Xinfeng.

古文：甲辰，曲赦新丰。
现代文：二十六日，特赦新丰罪囚。
English: On the 26th, Xinfeng prisoners were pardoned.

古文：乙巳，至自温汤。
现代文：二十七日，从温泉回来。
English: On the 27th, Gao Zong returned to Beijing from the hot springs.

古文：戊申，睦州女子陈硕贞举兵反，自称文佳皇帝，攻陷睦州属县。
现代文：三十日，睦州女子陈硕真起兵造反，自称为文佳皇帝，攻陷睦州下属县城。
English: On the 30th, Chen Shuzhen, a woman from Munchau, rebelled, calling herself Emperor Wenjia, and captured the county seat of Munchau.

古文：婺州刺史崔义玄、扬州都督府长史房仁裕各率众讨平之。
现代文：婺州刺史崔文玄、扬州都督府长史房仁裕分别率众军讨伐平定了她。
English: Cui Wenxuan, the governor of Zhangzhou, and Shifang Renyu, the governor of Yangzhou, led the army to fight and defeat her.

古文：十一月癸丑，兵部尚书、固安县公崔敦礼为侍中。颁新律疏于天下。
现代文：十一月五日，兵部尚书、固安县公崔敦礼为侍中，向天下颁布新律疏。
English: On November 5, Shangshu of the Ministry of Military Affairs and Gu'an County official Cui Dunli, who was an aide-de-camp, promulgated the new code to the world.

古文：十二月庚子，侍中兼太子少保、条县公高季辅卒。
现代文：十二月二十三日，侍中兼太子少保、艹县公高季辅去世。
English: On December 23rd, Jisuke, a chamberlain and junior bodyguard to the Crown Prince, died.

古文：五年春三月戊午，幸万年宫。
现代文：永徽五年春三月十二日，驾到万年宫。
English: On the 12th day of March in the spring of the fifth year of Yonghui, he drove to the Palace of Ten Thousand Years.

古文：辛未，曲赦所经州县系囚。
现代文：二十五日，因经过州县，皇上特加赦免该州县所监押的犯人。
English: On the twenty-fifth day, because he passed through the prefecture, the emperor specially pardoned the prisoners detained in the prefecture.

古文：以工部尚书阎立德领丁夫四万筑长安罗郭。
现代文：以工部尚书阎立德率领丁壮人夫四万人修筑长安城墙外的凸形小城圈。
English: Led by Shangshu Yan Lide of the Ministry of Industry, Ding Zhuang led 40,000 people to build a convex small city circle outside the Chang'an city wall.

古文：夏四月，守黄门侍郎颍川县公韩瑗、守尚书侍郎来济，并加银青光禄大夫，依旧同中书门下三品。
现代文：夏四月，试用黄门侍郎颍川县公韩瑗、试用尚书侍郎来济，都给予银青光禄大夫的加官，依旧任同中书门下三品。
English: In the summer of April, Huangmen's chamberlain, Gong Hanjun, was put on probation, and Shangshu's chamberlain was put on probation. They were both promoted to the rank of silver Qingguanglu doctor, and were still assigned to the third grade of Zhongshu.

古文：闰五月丁丑夜，大雨，水涨暴溢，漂溺麟游县居人及当番卫士，死者三千余人。
现代文：闰五月三日夜，大雨，河水暴涨，漂没淹溺麟游县居民及轮流值班的卫士，死亡三千多人。
English: On the night of May 3rd, heavy rain and surging river waters drowned the residents of Linyou County and the guards on duty in rotation, killing more than three thousand people.

古文：六月，恆州大雨，滹沱河泛溢，溺五千余家。
现代文：六月，恒州大雨，滹沱河泛滥，淹没五千多家。
English: In June, heavy rain in Hengzhou caused the Li River to flood, inundating more than 5,000 people.

古文：癸丑，蒲州汾阴县暴雨，漂溺居人，浸坏庐舍。
现代文：九日，蒲州汾阴县暴雨，漂没淹死居民，浸蚀损坏了房屋。
English: On the 9th, heavy rain in Shiyin County, Puzhou, drowned and drowned residents, and erosion damaged houses.

古文：癸亥，中书令柳奭兼吏部尚书。
现代文：十九日，中书令柳兼吏部尚书。
English: On the 19th, the Chinese government decreed that Liu and other officials should not write.

古文：丙寅，河北诸州大水。
现代文：二十二日，河北各州大水。
English: On the 22nd, all the prefectures of Hebei Province were flooded.

古文：七月辛巳，有小鸟如雀，生大鸟如鸠于万年宫皇帝旧宅。
现代文：七月八日，有小鸟如雀，在万年宫皇帝旧宅生一大鸟像鸠。
English: On July 8th, a small bird like a finch was born, and a large bird like a dragonfly was born in the old mansion of the Emperor of the Palace of Ten Thousand Years.

古文：八月，大理奏决死囚，总管七十余人。
现代文：八月，大理寺奏请判决死囚犯，总数约七十多人。
English: In August, more than 70 people were sentenced to death at the request of the Dali Temple.

古文：辛亥，诏自今已后，五品已上有薨亡者，随身鱼并不须追收。
现代文：八日，诏令从今以后，五品以下官员有去世者，随身带的鱼符并不要追回。
English: On the 8th, it was decreed that from now on, officials below the 5th grade who have passed away should not recover the fish charms they brought with them.

古文：辛未，吐蕃使人献马百匹及大庐可高五丈，广袤各二十七步。
现代文：二十八日，吐蕃派人献马一百匹以及大毛帐一个，高约五丈，宽阔各二十七步。
English: On the twenty-eighth day, Tubo sent a hundred horses and a large cart, each about five meters high and twenty-seven meters wide.

古文：九月丁酉，至自万年宫。
现代文：九月二十五日，皇上从万年宫回来。
English: On September 25, Gaozong returned to the capital from the Palace of 10,000 Years.

古文：冬十一月癸酉，筑京师罗郭，和雇京兆百姓四万一千人，板筑三十日而罢，九门各施观。
现代文：冬十一月一日，修筑京城墙外凸形小城圈，由官府出钱雇佣京兆百姓四万一千人，用零部件板筑土墙筑了三十天才完工，京师九门都建筑台观。
English: On the first day of November in winter, the construction of the convex small city circle outside the Beijing city wall began. Forty-one thousand citizens of Beijing were hired by the government at the expense of the government. It took thirty days to complete the construction of the earthen wall with parts and components, and the view of Beijing from the nine gates was built.

古文：十二月癸丑，倭国献琥珀、码瑙，琥珀大如斗，码瑙大如五斗器。
现代文：十二月十二日，倭国献琥珀、玛瑙，琥珀大如斗，玛瑙大如五斗器皿。
English: On December 12th, Wa offered amber and agate, amber as big as a bucket, and agate as big as a five-bucket vessel.

古文：戊午，发京师谒昭陵，在路生皇子贤。
现代文：十七日，从京师出发拜谒昭陵，在半路上生皇子贤。
English: On the 17th, they set out from Beijing to visit the Mausoleum of Zhao Zhaozhao. Halfway there, Prince Xian was born.

古文：已未，敕二年一定户。
现代文：十八日，命令两年确定一次户数。
English: On the 18th, an order was issued to determine the number of households once every two years.

古文：六年春正月壬申朔，亲谒昭陵，曲赦醴泉县民，放今年租赋。
现代文：六年春正月一日，亲自晋谒昭陵，因特殊情况赦免醴泉县民当年的租税。
English: On the first day of the first month of spring in the sixth year, he personally visited Jinshan Zhaoling and, due to special circumstances, pardoned the tax of the year for the people of Juxuan County.

古文：陵所宿卫将军、郎将进爵一等，陵令、丞加阶赐物。
现代文：昭陵所在地住宿守卫的将军、郎将晋爵一等，昭陵令、昭陵丞加一阶并赐物。
English: The generals and retainers of the residential guards at the location of the Shoryo mausoleum were awarded the first class of peerage, and the Shoryo order and the Shoryo chojo were awarded the first class as well.

古文：甲戌，至自昭陵。
现代文：三日，皇上从昭陵回来。
English: On the third day of the new year, he returned to Kyoto from Shoryo.

古文：于陵侧建佛寺。
现代文：在昭陵侧旁建佛寺。
English: A Buddhist temple was built next to Shoryo.

古文：庚寅，封皇子弘为代王，贤为潞王。
现代文：十九日，封皇子弘为代王、皇子贤为潞王。
English: On the 19th, Prince Hiroshi was appointed acting king, and Prince Hyon was appointed regent.

古文：二月乙巳，皇太子忠加元服，内外文武职事五品已上为父后者，赐勋一级。
现代文：二月五日，皇太子忠加冕。朝廷内外文武职事官五品以上成为父亲的继承人者，赐勋一级。
English: On February 5, Crown Prince Chung was crowned. Civil and military officials from inside and outside the imperial court with the rank of Fifth Rank or higher who became their father's heirs were awarded the first rank.

古文：大酺三日。
现代文：大宴三天。
English: Three days of partying and feasting.

古文：三月，营州都督程名振破高丽于贵端水。
现代文：三月，营州都督程名振在贵端水攻破高丽。
English: In March, Yingzhou Governor Cheng Nanzhun defeated Goryeo at Gudang Water.

古文：嘉州辛道让妻一产四男。
现代文：嘉州辛道让之妻一次生下四个儿子。
English: Jiazhou Xin Dao let his wife give birth to four sons at once.

古文：壬戌，昭仪武氏著《内训》一篇。
现代文：四月二十三日，昭仪武氏著《内训》一篇。
English: On April 23rd, an article was published in "Naikyo" by Shogi Takeuji.

古文：夏五月癸未，命左屯卫大将军、卢国公程知节等五将军帅师出葱山道以讨贺鲁。
现代文：夏五月十四日，命令左屯卫将军、卢国公程知节等五将军率军队从葱山道以讨伐贺鲁。
English: On May 14, Xia ordered five generals, including General Zuotunwei and Lu Guocheng Zhisai, to lead the army from the Qianshan Road to fight against Heru.

古文：黄门侍郎、颍川郡公韩瑗为侍中，中书侍郎、南阳男来济为中书令。
现代文：黄门侍郎、颍川郡公韩瑗为侍中，中书侍郎、南阳男来济为中书令。
English: Huangmen Zhi Rong, Gong Han Zi of Beichuan County were Zhi Rong, Chusho Zhi Rong and Nanyang Nanzhao were Chusho Rong.

古文：兼吏部尚书、河东县男柳奭贬遂州刺史。
现代文：兼吏部尚书、河东县男柳贬降为遂州刺史。
English: Shangshu, concurrently the head of the cadre department, and Otanryu of Hedong County were demoted to Suizhou Shishi.

古文：六月，大食国遣使朝贡。
现代文：六月，大食国派遣使者来朝贡。
English: In June, the big-eating country sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：秋七月乙亥，侍中、固安县公崔敦礼为中书令。
现代文：秋七月七日，侍中、固安县公崔敦礼为中书令。
English: On the 7th day of the 7th month of the autumn, the courtier and Guan County official Cui Dunli was made a middle-ranking official.

古文：乙酉，均天下州县公廨。
现代文：十七日，使天下州县衙门均等。
English: On the 17th, it was decided to equalize the number of gates in all prefectures of the country.

古文：八月，尚药奉御蒋孝璋员外特置，仍同正。
现代文：八月，尚药奉御蒋孝璋员外郎特置，仍然与正职相同。
English: In August, Shangyue was given the special position of Jiang Xiaojun's attendant, still the same as his regular position.

古文：员外同正，自蒋孝璋始也。
现代文：员外郎为副职与正职相同，从蒋孝璋开始。
English: The deputy foreign minister is the same as the official position, starting from Jiang Xiaolu.

古文：己酉，大理更置少卿一员。
现代文：十二日，大理寺再设置大理少卿一员。
English: On the 12th, a member of the Dali Shaoqing was set up in Dali Temple.

古文：先是大雨，道路不通，京师米价暴贵，出仓粟粜之，京师东西二市置常平仓。
现代文：先前这里大雨，道路不通，京师米价暴涨，官府拿出官仓粮食出卖，京师东西两市设置常平仓。
English: Previously, there was heavy rain here, roads were impassable, the price of rice in Beijing rose sharply, the government took out government warehouses to sell grain, and the eastern and western cities of Beijing set up permanent warehouses.

古文：九月庚午，尚书右仆射、河南郡公褚遂良以谏立武昭仪，贬授潭州都督。
现代文：九月三日，尚书右仆射、河南郡公褚遂良因为劝谏不应立武昭仪为皇后，降职为潭州都督。
English: On September 3rd, Shangshu's right-hand man, Zhao, and the Henan County public official Suiliang were demoted to the post of the governor of Tanzhou for advising Zhao not to make Wu Zhaoyi the empress.

古文：乙酉，洛州大水，毁天津桥。
现代文：十八日，洛州大水，毁坏了天津桥。
English: On the 18th day of the month, the Tianjin Bridge was destroyed by the floods in Lozhou.

古文：冬十月己酉，废皇后王氏为庶人，立仪武昭氏为皇后，大赦天下。
现代文：冬十月十三日，废黜皇后为平民，立武昭仪为皇后，大赦天下。
English: On the 13th day of winter in October, the dethroned empress was made a commoner, and Wu Zhaoyi was made empress, and the country was amnestied.

古文：十一月丁卯朔，临轩，命司空勣、左仆射志宁册皇后，文武群官及番夷之长，奉朝皇后于肃义门。
现代文：十一月一日，皇上面临殿堂前檐下的平台，命令司空李责力、左仆射于志宁封立皇后，文武百官及少数民族国家之长官，在肃义门恭迎朝见皇后。
English: On November 1, facing the platform under the eaves in front of the hall, the emperor ordered the secretary of the palace, Li Zheili, and the left-hand servant, Sha Yu Shining, to enthrone the empress. Hundreds of civil and military officials and the heads of ethnic minority countries greeted the empress at the Suyi Gate.

古文：十一月己巳，皇后见于庙。
现代文：十一月三日，皇后谒见太庙。
English: On November 3, the empress dowager visited the Imperial Temple.

古文：癸酉，追赠后父故工部尚书、应国公、赠并州都督武士为司空。
现代文：七日，追赠皇后之父、已故工部尚书、应国公、赠并州都督武士为司空。
English: On the seventh day, the father of the empress, the late Kobusho Shosho, was posthumously presented to the emperor, and the provincial governor and samurai were presented to Siku.

古文：丙子，淄州高苑县吴文威妻魏氏一产四男，三见育。
现代文：十日，淄州高苑县吴文威妻魏氏一次生下四个儿子，三次生育。
English: On the 10th, Wu Wenwei's wife, Wei, of Gaoyuan County, Luzhou, gave birth to four sons at once, giving birth three times.

古文：癸巳，应国夫人杨氏改封代国夫人。
现代文：二十七日，应国夫人杨氏改封为代国夫人。
English: On the 27th, Ms. Yang, the wife of the country, was changed to the acting wife of the country.

古文：十二月，遣礼部尚书、高阳县男许敬宗每日待诏于武德殿西门。
现代文：十二月，派遣礼部尚书、高阳县男许敬宗每天在武德殿西门等待皇上诏命。
English: In December, Shosho of the Ministry of Ceremonies was dispatched, and Xu Jingzong, a man from Goyang County, waited for the emperor's imperial command at the west gate of Wude Hall every day.

古文：七年春正月辛未，废皇太子忠为梁王，立代王弘为皇太子。
现代文：七年春正月六日，废皇太子忠为梁王，立代王弘为皇太子。
English: On the 6th day of the 1st month of the 7th year of the Spring, the deposed Crown Prince Zhong became King Liang, and the newly appointed Crown Prince Wang Hong became Crown Prince.

古文：壬申，大赦，改元为显庆。
现代文：七日，大赦，改元为显庆。
English: On the 7th, there was an amnesty, and the era was changed to Xianqing.

古文：文武九品已上及五品己下子为父后者，赐勋官一转。
现代文：文武官员九品以上及五品以下儿子为父亲继承人者，赐予勋官升一等。
English: If the son of a civil and military official of the ninth grade or higher and the fifth grade or lower is the heir of his father, he will be given a promotion to the first grade.

古文：大酺三日。
现代文：大宴三天。
English: Three days of partying and feasting.

古文：甲子，尚书左仆射兼太子少师、燕国公于志宁兼太子太傅，侍中韩瑗、中书令来济、礼部尚书许敬宗，并为太子宾客。始有宾客也。
现代文：尚书右仆射兼太子少师、燕国公于志宁兼太子太傅，侍中韩瑗、中书令来济、礼部尚书许敬宗，都任命为太子宾客，开始有了宾客一职。
English: Shang Shuxu's right-hand man Jie Jian, the young teacher of the prince, Yan Guogong Yuzhining, the prince's grand tutor, the attendant Han Zheng, the prince's second-in-command, Shang Shuxu's secretary Xu Jingzong, were all appointed as the prince's guests, and began to have the position of guests.

古文：御玄武门，饯葱山道大总管程知节。
现代文：皇上驾到玄武门，设宴送别葱山道大总管程知节。
English: The emperor drove to the Xuanwu Gate and held a banquet to bid farewell to Cheng Zhi Jie, the general manager of the Jiaoshan Road.

古文：二月庚寅，名《破阵乐》为《神功破阵乐》。
现代文：二月，名《破阵乐》为《神功破阵乐》。
English: In February, the name of "Breaking the Waves" was changed to "Shen Gong Breaking the Waves."

古文：辛亥，赠司空武士为司徒、周国公。
现代文：十七日，追赠司空武士为司徒、周国公。
English: On the 17th, the posthumous award of Siku Samurai was given to Sitoru and Zhou Guogong.

古文：三月辛巳，皇后祀先蚕于北郊。
现代文：三月十七日，皇后在北郊祭祀先蚕，以表示鼓励蚕桑。
English: On March 17th, the Empress held a ceremony to celebrate the arrival of the first silkworms in the northern suburbs, as a sign of encouragement for silkworm mulberry.

古文：丙戌，户部侍郎杜正伦为守黄门侍郎、同中书门下三品。
现代文：二十二日，户部侍郎杜正伦为试用黄门侍郎、同中书门下三品。
English: On the 22nd, Household Attendant Du Zhenglun was appointed as a probationary Yellow Gate Attendant, and was promoted to Third Rank of Junior Middle School Attendant.

古文：夏四月戊申，御安福门，观僧玄奘迎御制并书慈恩寺碑文，导从以天竺法仪，其徒甚盛。
现代文：夏四月十四日，皇上驾到安福门，观里僧人玄奘迎接皇上亲自书写并制好的慈恩寺碑文，用古印度佛教法规导从，慈恩寺佛徒很多。
English: On the 14th day of the 4th month of summer, the emperor drove to the Anfu Gate, and the Guanli monk Xuanzang greeted the inscription of the Jiongzi Temple, which was personally written and prepared by the emperor himself. It was guided by the ancient Indian Buddhist laws and regulations, and there were many Buddhists in the Jiongzi Temple.

古文：五月己卯，太尉长孙无忌进史官所撰梁、陈、周、齐、隋《五代史志》三十卷。
现代文：五月十六日，太尉长孙无忌奉上史官所撰写的梁、陈、周、齐、隋《五代史志》三十卷。
English: On the 16th of May, the eldest grandson of the captain presented the thirty-volume "History of the Five Dynasties" written by the senior historian Liang, Chen, Zhou, Qi, and Sui.

古文：弘文馆学士许敬宗进所撰《东殿新书》二百卷，上自制序。
现代文：弘文馆学士许敬宗奉上所撰写的《东殿新书》二百卷，皇上亲自写序。
English: The scholar Xu Jingzong of the Hongwen Museum presented 200 volumes of the "East Hall New Book" written by the emperor, and the emperor himself wrote the preface.

古文：六月，岐州刺史、潞王贤为雍州牧。
现代文：六月，岐州刺史、潞王贤为雍州牧。
English: In June, Qizhou Shishi and Zou Wangxian became Yongzhou herdsmen.

古文：秋七月癸未，中书令兼检校太子詹事、固安县公崔敦礼为太子少师、同中书门下三品。
现代文：秋七月二十一日，中书令兼检校太子詹事、固安县公崔敦礼为太子少师、同中书门下三品。
English: On the 21st day of autumn in July, Prince Zhan Zhi of Guan County and Prince Cui Dunli of Guan County were appointed as the junior teachers of the prince and the three best students of the same school.

古文：改户部尚书为度支尚书，侍郎亦然。
现代文：改户部尚书为度支尚书，户部侍郎亦改为度支侍郎。
English: The title of Hube Shosho was changed to Doushi Shosho, and the title of Hube Samurai was also changed to Doushi Samurai.

古文：八月丙申，太子少师崔敦礼卒。
现代文：八月四日，太子少师崔敦礼去世。
English: On August 4th, Crown Prince Choi Dong-Ri passed away.

古文：左卫大将军程知节与贺鲁所部歌逻禄获剌颉发及处月预支俟斤等战于榆幕谷，大破之，斩首千余级，获驼马牛羊万计。
现代文：左卫大将军程知节与贺鲁所部歌逻禄获剌颉发以及处月预支俟斤等在榆幕谷大战，大破他们，斩首级一千多个，缴获马、牛、羊以上万来计算。
English: General Zuo Wei, Cheng Zhijie, and the leader of the Heru Division, Gu Lu Lu, were defeated and defeated in the Battle of Shimo-Maku Valley. They were decapitated more than a thousand times, and more than ten thousand horses, cattle, and sheep were captured.

古文：九月癸酉，初诏户满三万已上为上州，二万已上为中州；先为上州、中州者各依旧。
现代文：九月十二日，开始诏令户数满三万以上的为上等州，二万户以上的为中等州，先前已为上等州、中等州的各个按照旧的规定。
English: On September 12th, it was announced that the counties with more than 30,000 households would be designated as high-level counties, and the counties with more than 20,000 households would be designated as medium-level counties. Previously, the counties had been designated as high-level counties and medium-level counties in accordance with the old regulations.

古文：皇后制《外戚诫》。
现代文：皇后武则天制定《外戚诫》。
English: Empress Wu Zetian formulated the "Foreign Relatives Commandment."

古文：庚辰，括州海水泛溢，坏安固、永嘉二县，损四千余家。
现代文：十九日，括州海水泛滥，破坏了安固、永嘉二县，毁损四千多家。
English: On the 19th, the flooding of sea water in Bozhou damaged Angu and Yongjia counties, and more than 4,000 people were damaged.

古文：辛巳，初制都督及上州各置执刀十五人，中州、下州十人。癸未，初置骠骑大将军，官为从一品。
现代文：二十日，开始制定都督及上等州各设置执刀手十人。二十二日，开始设置骠骑大将军，官阶为从一品。
English: On the 20th, the establishment of ten sword-wielding magistrates in each of the governorates and higher-ranking prefectures began, and on the 22nd, the establishment of a grand admiral of the cavalry began, with the rank of junior first class.

古文：程知节与贺鲁男咥运战，斩首数千级，进至怛笃城，俘其部落户口及货物巨积。
现代文：程知节与贺鲁之子口至运战，斩首级数千个，进军到怛笃城，俘获贺鲁部落户口及货物堆积如山。
English: Cheng Chih-tse fought with the sons of Horu from the beginning to the end of the war, decapitating thousands of them, marching to the city of Suidu, capturing Horu tribal hukou and piling up goods.

古文：冬十一月乙丑，皇子显生，诏京官、朝集使各加勋级。
现代文：冬十一月五日，皇子显出生，诏令京官、朝集使各加勋一级。
English: On November 5th in winter, Prince Hsien was born, and the imperial edict was issued to promote the officials in Beijing and Choshu to the first class.

古文：十二月乙酉，置算学。
现代文：十二月十九日，设置算学。
English: December 19th, maths set.

古文：左屯卫大将军程知节坐讨贺鲁逗留，追贼不及，减死免官。
现代文：左屯卫大将军程知节讨伐贺鲁逗留不前而犯罪，追杀贼人没有追上，减去死罪，免除官爵。
English: General of the Left Tunwei, Cheng Zhijie, committed the crime of delaying the attack on Horu, and did not catch up with the pursuit and killing of thieves. He was deducted from the death penalty and exempted from the title of nobility.

古文：罢兰州都督。鄯州置都督。
现代文：撤销兰州都督，鄯州设置都督。
English: The governor of Lanzhou was revoked, and the governor of Zhangzhou was set up.

古文：二年春正月庚寅，幸洛阳。
现代文：显庆二年春闰正月一日，皇上驾到洛阳。
English: On the first day of the first month of the second year of the Spring Festival, the emperor drove to Luoyang.

古文：命右屯卫将军苏定方等四将军为伊丽道将军，帅师以讨贺鲁。
现代文：命令右屯卫将军苏定方等四位将军为伊丽道将军，率军队以讨伐贺鲁。
English: He ordered four generals, including the Right Tunwei General Su Dingfang, to become the Eridu Generals and lead the army to fight against Heru.

古文：二月辛酉，入洛阳宫，曲赦洛州。
现代文：二月三日，皇上入洛阳宫，因特殊情况赦免洛州人犯。
English: On February 3, the emperor entered the Luoyang Palace and pardoned the criminals from Luoyang due to special circumstances.

古文：庚午，封皇第七子显为周王，徙封许王素节为郇王。
现代文：十二日，封皇第七子显为周王，迁徙改封许王素节为郇王。
English: On the twelfth day, the seventh son of the emperor was revealed to be King Zhou, and the migration changed the name of King Xu to King Su.

古文：三月甲子，中书侍郎李义府为中书令兼检校御史大夫，黄门侍郎杜正伦兼度支尚书，依旧同中书门下三品。
现代文：三月，中书侍郎李义府为中书令兼检校御史大夫，黄门侍郎杜正伦兼度支尚书，依旧任同中书门下三品。
English: In March, Li Yifu, the attendant of the Chinese classics, was promoted to the post of the secretary of the Chinese classics and the inspector of the history of the school, and Du Zhenglun, the attendant of the Yellow Gate, was promoted to the post of the secretary of the Chinese classics, and he was still appointed as the third grade of the Chinese classics.

古文：夏五月丙申，幸明德宫。
现代文：夏五月九日，皇上驾到明德宫。
English: On the 9th day of the 5th month of the summer, the emperor drove to the Mingde Palace.

古文：秋七月丁亥，还洛阳宫。
现代文：秋七月一日，回洛阳宫。
English: On the first day of autumn in July, he returned to Luoyang Palace.

古文：八月丁卯，侍中、颍川县公韩瑗左授振州刺史，中书令兼太子詹事、南阳侯来济左授台州刺史，皆坐谏立武昭仪为皇后，救褚遂良之贬也。
现代文：八月十一日，侍中、颍川县公韩瑗降职为振州刺史，中书令兼太子詹事、南阳侯来济降职为台州刺史，都犯了劝谏立武昭仪为皇后的罪，为援救褚遂良而遭贬职也。
English: On August 11th, Han Zhe, the courtier and the governor of Luochuan County, was demoted to the position of the regent of Zhenzhou, and Zhan Zhe, the prince of Zhongshu and the prince of Nanyang, was demoted to the position of the regent of Taizhou. They all committed the crime of persuading Wu Zhaoyi to become the empress, and they were also demoted in order to save Zhe Suiliang.

古文：礼部尚书、高阳郡公许敬宗为侍中，以立武后之功也。
现代文：礼部尚书、高阳郡公许敬宗为侍中，因为同意立武则天为皇后的功劳。
English: Shosho from the Ministry of Ceremonies and Goyang County's Kinkosho Keizong were appointed as chamberlains, and the fact that they agreed to establish the military was a credit to the empress.

古文：九月庚寅，度支尚书杜正伦为中书令。
现代文：九月五日，度支尚书杜正伦为中书令。
English: On September 5th, Du Zhenglun, the Du Shi Shangshu, was promoted to the position of Zhongshu Ling.

古文：冬十月戊戌，亲讲武于许、郑之郊，曲赦郑州。
现代文：冬十月，皇上在许、郑之郊外亲自练习武事，因特殊情况而赦免郑州人犯。
English: In the winter of October, the emperor personally practiced martial arts in the suburbs of Xu and Zheng, and pardoned Zhengzhou criminals due to special circumstances.

古文：遣使祭郑大夫国侨、汉太丘长陈实墓。
现代文：派使者祭祀郑国大夫国侨、汉太丘长陈宀是之墓。
English: An emissary was sent to pay homage to the tomb of Zheng Guodaifu, a Chinese expatriate, and the head of Hantai Qiu, Chen Xuan.

古文：十二月乙卯，还洛阳宫。
现代文：十二月一日，皇上回洛阳宫。
English: On December 1, the emperor returned to Luoyang Palace.

古文：庚午，改 皞  叶 字。
现代文：十六日，改 民日 、 叶 两字。
English: On the 16th, it was changed to "People's Day" and "Leaf."

古文：丁卯，手诏改洛阳宫为东都，洛州官员阶品并准雍州。
现代文：十三日，皇上手令改洛阳宫为东都，洛州官员官阶品第都以雍州为准。
English: On the 13th, the emperor issued an order to change Luoyang Palace to the eastern capital, and the official ranks of officials in Luoyang were based on those in Yongzhou.

古文：废谷州，以福昌等四县，并怀州河阳、济源、温，郑州汜水并隶洛州。
现代文：废弃谷州，以福昌等四县并入怀州之河阳、济源、温等县，郑州汜水都隶属洛州。
English: Abandoned Guizhou, with Fuchang and other four counties merged into Huayang, Jiyuan, Wenzhou and other counties of Huizhou, and Zhengzhou and Lishui are all under the jurisdiction of Luozhou.

古文：已巳，中书省置起居舍人两员，品同起居郎。
现代文：十五日，中书省设置起居舍人两员，品级相同于起居郎。
English: On the 15th, the Ministry of Education and Culture set up two living attendants, with the same grade as the living attendant.

古文：庚午，以周王显为洛州牧。
现代文：十六日，以周王显为洛州牧。
English: On the 16th, Zhou Wangxian was appointed as the mayor of Lozhou.

古文：壬午，分散骑常侍为左右各两员，其右散骑常侍隶中书省。
现代文：二十八日，分散骑常侍为左、右各两员，右散骑常侍隶属中书省。
English: On the 28th, there were two riding attendants on the left and two on the right. The right riding attendant belonged to the Ministry of Education and Culture.

古文：三年春正月戊子，太尉、赵国公无忌等修《新礼》成，凡一百三十卷，二百五十九篇，诏颁于天下。
现代文：三年春正月五日，太尉、赵国公长孙无忌等人修《新礼》完成，总计一百三十卷，二百五十九篇，皇上诏令在全国颁行。
English: On the 5th day of the 1st month of the 3rd year of the Spring, the Tai Li, Zhao Guogong, Sun Mugu and others completed the "New Rite," a total of one hundred and thirty volumes, two hundred and fifty-nine articles, and the imperial edict was issued throughout the country.

古文：二月丁巳，车驾还京。
现代文：二月四日，皇上车驾回京。
English: On February 4, the imperial carriage drove back to Kyoto.

古文：壬午，亲录囚徒，多所原宥。
现代文：二十九日，皇上亲自审查并记录囚徒的罪状，大多加以宽恕。
English: On the 29th, the emperor personally reviewed and recorded the crimes of the prisoners, and most of them were pardoned.

古文：苏定方攻破西突厥沙钵罗可汗贺鲁及咥运、阙啜。
现代文：苏定方攻破西突厥沙钵罗可汗贺鲁及口至运、阙啜。
English: Su Dingfang defeated the West Turk Shah Rukh Khan Heru and the mouth to the transport, 啜.

古文：贺鲁走石国，副将萧嗣业追擒之，收其人畜前后四十余万。
现代文：贺鲁逃往石国，副将萧嗣业追上将其抓获，俘获贺鲁人畜前后共计四十多万。
English: Horu fled to Shikoku, Vice Admiral Xiao Ziye caught up with him and captured him, capturing a total of more than four hundred thousand of Horu's people and animals.

古文：甲寅，西域平，以其地置濛池、昆陵二都护府。
现代文：二月，西域平定，在西域地方设置氵蒙池、陵两个都护府。
English: In February, the western region was pacified, and two tutelary capitals were set up in the western region: Ye Mengchi and Ling.

古文：复于龟兹国置安西都护府，以高昌故地为西州。
现代文：又在龟兹国设置安西都护府，以高昌原地为西州。
English: In addition, the Anxi Capital Protectorate was set up in Guizi Province, with Gaochang as the western prefecture.

古文：置怀化大将军正三品，归化将军从三品，以授初附首领，仍分隶诸卫。
现代文：设置怀化大将军，为正三品；归化将军，为从三品，以授给一开始就归附的少数民族首领，仍然分别隶属于各都护府。
English: The General of Huaihua was set up as the first three prizes, and the General of Naturalization was set up as the second three prizes, to be awarded to the leaders of ethnic minorities who had been affiliated from the beginning, and still belonged to each provincial capital separately.

古文：六月，程名振攻高丽。
现代文：六月，程名振攻打高丽。
English: In June, Cheng Na Zhen attacked and defeated Goryeo.

古文：九月，废书、算、律学。有司奏请造排车七百乘，拟行幸载排城；上以为劳民，乃于旧顿置院墙焉。冬十一月乙酉，兼中书令、皇太子宾客兼检校御史大夫、河间郡公李义府左授普州刺史，兼中书令、皇太子宾客、襄阳郡公杜正伦左授横州刺史。
现代文：冬十一月六日，兼中书令、皇太子宾客兼检校御史大夫、河间郡公李义府降职为普州刺史；兼中书令、皇太子宾客、襄阳郡公杜正伦降职为横州刺史。
English: On the 6th of November in winter, Li Yifu, also a chancellor, a guest of the crown prince, and a school inspector, was demoted from his post as the governor of Hema County to the governor of Puzhou; Du Zhenglun, also a chancellor, a guest of the crown prince, and a governor of Xiangyang County, was demoted from his post to the governor of Hengzhou.

古文：中书侍郎李友益除名，配流巂州。
现代文：中书侍郎李友益除去名籍，充军到辒州。
English: Li Youyi, the attendant of Zhongshu, removed his name from the register and joined the army in Zhangzhou.

古文：戊戌，侍中许敬宗权检校中书令。
现代文：十九日，侍中许敬宗暂代检校中书令。
English: On the 19th, the attendant, Xu Jingzong, issued a temporary inspection order.

古文：戊子，侍中、皇太子宾客、权检校中书令、高阳郡公许敬宗为中书令，宾客已下如故；大理卿辛茂将为侍中。
现代文：戊子日，高阳郡公许敬宗为中书令，宾客以下的职务依旧；大理卿辛茂将为侍中。
English: On Boshi Day, Goyang County's Gongxu Jingzong will be the chancellor, and the positions below the guest will remain the same; Dali Lord Xinmao will be the chamberlain.

古文：鸿胪卿萧嗣业于石国取贺鲁至，献于昭陵。
现代文：鸿胪卿萧嗣业在石国活捉贺鲁到来，献到昭陵。
English: Hongyuqing Xiao Ziye arrived in Shikoku to capture Heru alive and presented it to Shoryo.

古文：甲辰，开府仪同三司、鄂国公尉迟敬德薨。
现代文：二十五日，开府仪同三司、鄂国公尉迟敬德去世。
English: On the twenty-fifth day, Kaifu Yi, along with three officers and a public officer from Hubei Province, passed away.

古文：四年春二月乙亥，上亲策试举人，凡九百人，惟郭待封、张九龄五人居上第，令待诏弘文馆，随仗供奉。
现代文：四年春二月二十八日，皇上亲自考试举人策论，总计九百人，只有郭待封、张九龄两人居于优等，命他们为弘文馆待诏，随着皇帝仪仗供奉皇帝。
English: On February 28th, the spring of the fourth year, the emperor personally held an examination to nominate a total of nine hundred people. Only Guo Zhifeng and Zhang Jiuling were ranked higher, and they were ordered to wait for the edict of the Hongwen Museum and serve the emperor with the emperor's ceremonial war.

古文：三月，以左骁卫大将军、郕国公契苾何力往辽东经略。
现代文：三月，以左骁卫大将军、成阝国公契艹必何力前往辽东谋划处理军务。
English: In March, General Zuo Jianwei and Chengye Guo Jian went to Liaodong to plan and deal with military affairs.

古文：夏四月己未，太子太傅、尚书左仆射、燕国公于志宁为太子太师，仍同中书门下三品。
现代文：夏四月十三日，太子太傅、尚书左仆射、燕国公于志宁为太子太师，仍然是同中书门下三品。
English: On the 13th day of the 4th month of the summer, Prince Daifu, Shang Shuzo Zuojiao, and Yan Guoguo Yu Zhining were appointed as Prince Daishi, and they are still the three best students in the same school.

古文：乙丑，黄门侍郎许圉师同中书门下三品。
现代文：十九日，黄门侍郎许圉师任同中书门下三品。
English: On the 19th, Huangmen waiter Xu Yanshi was appointed to the third grade of the same middle school.

古文：丙戌，太子太师、同中书门下三品、燕国公于志宁免官，放还私第。
现代文：五月十日，太子太师、同中书门下三品、燕国公于志宁免去官职，放其归家。
English: On May 10, Prince Daishi, the third grade of the same middle school, and Yanshukong Yushining were relieved of their official duties and sent home.

古文：戊戌，太尉、扬州都督、赵国公无忌带扬州都督于黔州安置，依旧准一品供给。
现代文：二十二日，太尉、扬州都督、赵国公长孙无忌带扬州都督衔到黔州安置，依旧按一品官职俸禄供给。
English: On the 22nd, the first lieutenant, Yangzhou governor and Zhao Guogong's eldest grandson took the title of Yangzhou governor and resettled in Zhangzhou, and was still provided with a piece of official salary.

古文：五月丙申，兵部尚书任雅相、度支尚书卢承庆并参知政事。
现代文：五月二十日，兵部尚书任雅相、度支尚书卢承庆都任参知政事。
English: On May 20th, Hyobu Shosho was appointed as Minister of the Army, and Doshishosho Shosho Lu Chengqing was appointed as a member of the Council of State.

古文：秋七月壬子，普州刺史李义府为吏部尚书，同中书门下三品。
现代文：秋八月八日，普州刺史李义府为吏部尚书，同中书门下三品。
English: On the 8th day of the 8th month of autumn, Li Yifu, the governor of Puzhou Province, was awarded the title of the highest-ranking official and the third-highest-ranking scholar.

古文：冬十月乙巳，皇太子加元服，大赦天下，文武五品己上子孙为父祖后者加勋官一级，大酺三日。
现代文：冬十月二日，皇太子加冠，大赦天下，文武官员五品以上子孙为父亲、祖父继承人者加勋官一级，大宴三日。
English: In winter, on October 2, the crown prince was crowned, the world was amnestied, and the sons and grandsons of civil and military officials of the Fifth Rank or higher who were the heirs of their fathers and grandfathers were awarded first-class officers, and the grand banquet was held on the third day.

古文：闰十月戊寅，幸东都，皇太子监国。
现代文：闰十月五日，皇上驾到东都，皇太子代管国政。
English: On leap October 5th, the emperor drove to Dongdu, and the crown prince took charge of state affairs.

古文：戊戌，至东都。
现代文：二十五日，皇上从东都归来。
English: On the twenty-fifth day, the emperor returned from Dongdu.

古文：十一月，以中书侍郎许圉师为散骑常侍、检校侍中。
现代文：十一日，以中书侍郎许圉师为散骑常侍、检校侍中。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the junior high school secretary, Xu Yanshi, was appointed as the riding attendant and the junior high school inspector.

古文：戊午，兼侍中辛茂将卒。
现代文：十六日，兼侍中辛茂将去世。
English: On the 16th, Shinmao, also a chamberlain, will pass away.

古文：癸亥，以邢国公苏定方为神丘道总管，刘伯英为昆夷道总管。
现代文：二十一日，以邢国公苏定方为神丘道总管，刘伯英为禺夷道总管。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, Su Dingfang, the governor of Shan State, was appointed as the chief administrator of Shengyu Road, and Liu Boying was appointed as the chief administrator of Qianyi Road.

古文：五年春正月甲子，幸并州。
现代文：五年春正月二十三日，皇上驾到并州。
English: On the 23rd day of the first month of the fifth year of the Spring, the emperor arrived in Nianzhou.

古文：二月辛巳，至并州。
现代文：二月十日，到并州。
English: On February 10, he arrived in Wenzhou.

古文：丙戌，宴从官及诸亲、并州官属父老，赐帛有差。
现代文：十五日，宴请随从官员及诸亲族、并州官属父老，按等级赐予绸缎。
English: On the 15th, a banquet was held for the officials and their relatives, as well as the parents and grandparents of the state officials, who were awarded silk brocades according to their ranks.

古文：曲赦并州及管内诸州。
现代文：因特殊情况赦免并州及管辖内各州。
English: Due to special circumstances, amnesty was granted to the states and the states within their jurisdiction.

古文：义旗初职事五品已上身亡殁坟墓在并州者，令所司致祭。
现代文：起义之初职事官五品以上官员死后坟墓在并州者，令有关部门致以祭祀。
English: At the beginning of the uprising, the relevant departments were ordered to hold a memorial service for officials of the Fifth Rank and above whose graves were in the annexed provinces after their death.

古文：佐命功臣子孙及大将军府僚佐已下今见存者，赐阶级有差，量才处分。
现代文：佐命功臣子孙及大将军府僚属以下官员现在还活着的人，量才录用，赐给品级也不相同。
English: Only those who are still alive, such as the sons and grandsons of senior generals and generals, cabinet ministers, and subordinate officials, can be hired, and the grades given to them are not the same.

古文：起义之徒职事一品己下，赐物有差。
现代文：起义的人职事官一品以下官员，按等级赐物。
English: In the uprising, officials below the rank of personnel officer were given gifts according to their ranks.

古文：年八十已上，版授刺史、县令。
现代文：年八十以上者，授予刺史、县令职衔。
English: Those who are over 80 years old will be awarded the title of Sashishi and County Commissioner.

古文：佐命功臣食别封身已殁者，为后子孙各加两阶。
现代文：辅佐王命之功臣另外封赠后已经死亡者，为他继承的子孙各加两级。
English: If a meritorious vassal of the king's life who assisted the king dies after being granted another title, the descendants he inherits will each be raised two levels.

古文：赐酺三日。
现代文：赐大宴三日。
English: Allow three days for your subjects to gather and drink.

古文：甲午，祠旧宅，以武士、殷开山、刘政会配食。
现代文：二十三日，祭祀起义旧宅，以武士、殷开山、刘政会为附带陪祭。
English: On the 23rd, a memorial service was held at the former residence of the uprising, with a samurai, Yin Kaishan, and Liu Zhenghui as accompanying offerings.

古文：三月丙午，皇后宴亲族邻里故旧于朝堂，命妇妇人入会于内殿，及皇室诸亲赐帛各有差，及从行文武五品以上。
现代文：三月五日，皇后武则天在朝堂宴请亲族邻里朋友，受封诰的妇人及一般妇女在内殿会合，皇室诸亲贵按等级赐绸缎，随行文武五品以上官员也按等级赐绸缎。
English: On March 5th, Empress Wu Zetian held a banquet in the Imperial Hall to invite relatives, neighbors and friends, as well as women who had received the imperial seal and ordinary women to gather in the inner hall. The royal family and their relatives were given silk brocades according to their rank, and the officials who accompanied the emperor and empress were also given silk brocades according to their rank.

古文：制以皇后故乡并州长史、司马各加勋级。
现代文：皇上命令，由于并州是皇后故乡，所以并州长史、司马各加勋一级。
English: The emperor ordered that, since the annexed prefecture was the hometown of the empress, the governor of the prefecture, Simagaga, be awarded the first level of the order.

古文：又皇后亲预会，每赐物一千段，期亲五百段，大功已下及无服亲、邻里故旧有差。
现代文：另外，皇后亲自参加宴会，赏赐绸缎一千段，祖父母、叔、伯、姑、兄弟、姐妹等亲人各五百段，姑表亲、堂兄弟等以及没有五服之亲戚、乡里朋友赐物也有等级差别。
English: In addition, the empress attended the banquet in person and awarded 1,000 silk and satin ruffs, 500 ruffs each to relatives such as grandparents, uncles, aunts, brothers, and sisters, and 500 ruffs each to aunts, cousins, and relatives who did not have five sets of clothes, as well as gifts from friends in the countryside.

古文：城内及诸妇女年八十已上，各版授郡君，仍赐物等。
现代文：城内及所有妇女年龄八十岁以上，各给予郡君的职务，又赐物。
English: In the city and all women over the age of eighty, each was given the duties of a county magistrate, as well as gifts.

古文：己酉，讲武于并州城西，上御飞阁，引群臣临观。
现代文：八日，在交州城西练习武事，皇上驾临飞阁，带领群臣下临观看练武。
English: On the eighth day, in the west of the city of Jiaozhou, the emperor was practicing martial arts. He drove to Fei Pavilion and led his courtiers to watch the martial arts practice.

古文：辛亥，发神丘道军伐百济。
现代文：十日，派遣神丘道军讨伐百济。
English: On the 10th, he dispatched the Shinkyu troops to fight against Baekje.

古文：丁巳，左右领始改左右千牛。
现代文：十六日，左右领军开始改为左右千牛。
English: On the 16th, the left and right leaders began to change to the left and right thousand cows.

古文：五月壬戌，幸八关宫，改为合璧宫。
现代文：夏四月八日，车驾还京都，在东都花园内建造八关宫。五月，皇上从并州来。二十二日，皇上驾到八关宫，又改为合璧宫。
English: In the summer, on April 8th, the car drove back to Kyoto to build the Hachiguan Palace in the Dongdu Garden. In May, the emperor came from Nianzhou. On the 22nd, the emperor drove to the Hachiguan Palace and changed it to the He Bi Palace.

古文：六月庚午朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：六月一日，有日蚀。
English: On June 1st, there was a solar eclipse.

古文：辛卯，诏文武五品己上四科举人。
现代文：二十二日，诏令文武官员五品以上四科举人。
English: On the 22nd, the imperial edict ordered the civil and military officials to nominate people with five or more grades in four subjects.

古文：甲午，驾还东都。
现代文：二十五日，车驾还东都。
English: On the 25th, I drove back to Dongdu.

古文：秋七月乙巳，废梁王忠为庶人，徙于黔州。
现代文：秋七月六日，废梁王忠为庶人，迁徙到黔州。
English: On the 6th day of the 7th month of autumn, Liang Wangzhong became a commoner and moved to Zhangzhou.

古文：戊辰，度支尚书、同中书门下三品卢承庆以罪免。
现代文：二十九日，度支尚书、同中书门下三品卢承庆因犯罪免官。
English: On the 29th, three-star Lu Chengqing was removed from office for a crime.

古文：八月庚辰，苏定方等讨平百济，面缚其王扶余义慈。
现代文：八月十二日，苏定方等人讨伐平定百济，将其王扶余义慈反手缚住。
English: On August 12th, Su Dingfang and others fought to pacify Dingbaoji, and tied the hands of its king, Fuyu Yicci.

古文：国分为五部，郡三十七，城二百，户七十六万，以其地分置熊津等五都督府。
现代文：将百济国分为五部，三十七郡，二百个城，户口七十六万，把当地分设熊津等五都督府。
English: Baekje was divided into five provinces, thirty-seven counties, two hundred towns, and seven hundred and sixty thousand households. Five governorates, including Kumatsu, were established in the region.

古文：曲赦神丘、昆夷道总管已下，赐天下大酺三日。
现代文：因特殊情况而赦免神丘、禺夷道总管以下的人，赐天下人大饮宴三天。
English: Due to special circumstances, he pardoned people below the level of Shengqiu and the general manager of Qi Road, and gave them a grand banquet for three days.

古文：九月戊午，赐英国公勣墓茔一所。
现代文：九月二十日，赐给英国公李责力墓地一处。
English: On September 20th, a cemetery was given to the British public Li Ruili.

古文：冬十月丙子，代国夫人杨氏改荣国夫人，品第一，位在王公母妻之上。
现代文：冬十月九日，代国夫人杨氏改为荣国夫人，品级第一，地位在王公之母亲、妻子之上。
English: In the winter of October 9th, the acting wife of the country, Ms. Yang, was changed to Mrs. Rongguo, the first grade, and the status was above the mother and wife of the prince.

古文：十一月戊戌朔，邢国公苏定方献百济王扶余义慈、太子隆等五十八人俘于则天门，责而宥之。
现代文：十一月一日是朔日，邢国公苏定方在则天门献上百济王扶余义慈、太子隆等五十八个俘虏，皇上谴责他们而后宽恕了他们。
English: On the first day of November, which was the New Year's Day, the prince of the State of Shandong, Su Dingfang, presented the King of Baekje, Fu Yu Yi Ci, Prince Long and other fifty-eight prisoners at the Gate of Heaven. The emperor condemned them and then pardoned them.

古文：乙卯，狩于许、郑之郊。
现代文：十八日，在许、郑之郊野打猎。
English: On the 18th, they went hunting in the countryside of Xu and Zhengzhou.

古文：十二月己卯，至自许州。
现代文：十二月十三日，皇上从许州归来。
English: On December 13, the emperor returned from Xuzhou.

古文：六年春正月乙卯，于河南、河北、淮南六十七州募得四万四千六百四十六人，往平壤带方道行营。
现代文：六年春正月十九日，在河南、河北、淮南六十七个州招募了四万四千六百四十六人，前往带方道行营。
English: On the 19th day of the first month of the sixth year of the Spring, 44,646 people were recruited from 67 prefectures in Henan, Hebei and Huainan to go to the camp.

古文：二月乙未，以益、绵等州皆言龙见，改元。
现代文：二月三十日，因为益州、绵州等州都说有龙出现，因此改纪元。
English: On February 30th, because Yizhou, Mianzhou and other provinces all said that a dragon appeared, the era was changed.

古文：曲赦洛州。
现代文：因这一特殊情况而赦免洛州犯人。
English: Because of this special circumstance, he pardoned the Los Angeles prisoners.

古文：龙朔元年三月丙申朔，改元。
现代文：龙朔元年三月一日，改元。
English: On March 1st, the year of the Dragon, the Yuan was changed.

古文：壬戌，幸合璧宫。
现代文：二十七日，皇上驾幸合璧宫。
English: On the 27th, the emperor arrived at the Imperial Palace.

古文：夏五月丙申，命左骁卫大将军、凉国公契苾何力为辽东道大总管，左武卫大将军、邢国公苏定方为平壤道大总管，兵部尚书、同中书门下三品、乐安县公任雅相为浿江道大总管，以伐高丽。
现代文：夏五月二日，命令左骁卫大将军、凉国公契艹必何力为辽东道大总管，左武卫大将军、邢国公苏定方为平壤道大总管，兵部尚书、同中书门下三品、乐安县公任雅相为氵贝江道大总管，来讨伐高丽。
English: On the 2nd day of the 5th month of the summer, he ordered General Zuo Bingwei and Liang Guo Gong Qi Bin He Liang to be the general manager of Liaodong University, General Zuo Wuwei and Xing Guo Gong Su Dingfang to be the general manager of Pyongyang University, and Hyobu Shangshu, Sanpin under the guidance of Dongzhongshu, and Le'an County public official Yaxiang to be the general manager of Zubeijiang University, to fight against Goryeo.

古文：是日，皇后请禁天下妇人为俳优之戏，诏从之。
现代文：这天，皇后请求禁止天下妇女做歌舞的事，诏令听从之。
English: On this day, the empress requested that women all over the world be banned from singing and dancing, and the imperial edict was obeyed.

古文：甲子晦，日有蚀之。
现代文：三十日是月末，有日蚀。
English: The 30th is the last day of the month, and there will be a solar eclipse.

古文：六月庚寅，中书令许敬宗等进《累璧》六百三十卷，目录四卷。
现代文：六月二十六日，中书令许敬宗等人奉上《累璧》六百三十卷，目录四卷。
English: On June 26th, Xu Jingzong and others submitted 630 volumes of "Records" and 4 volumes of catalogues.

古文：秋七月癸卯，车驾还东都。
现代文：秋七月十日，车驾回东都洛阳。
English: On July 10th, I drove back to Luoyang, the eastern capital.

古文：八月丙戌，令诸州举孝行尤著及累叶义居可以励风俗者。
现代文：八月二十三日，命令各州举荐孝行特别显著以及累代同居、孝义著称的家庭以及可以勉励风俗的人。
English: On August 23rd, it ordered the states to recommend families with particularly conspicuous filial piety, families that have lived together for generations, families known for filial piety, and people who can encourage customs.

古文：九月甲辰，以河南县大女张年百三岁，亲幸其第。
现代文：九月十二日，因为河南县大女张某年龄一百零三岁，皇上亲自驾临其家。
English: On September 12, because Zhang, the eldest daughter of Henan County, was 103 years old, the emperor personally visited her home.

古文：又幸李勣之第。
现代文：又驾临李责力府第。
English: He also visited Li Rongli Prefecture.

古文：天宫寺是高祖潜龙时旧宅，上周历殿宇，感怆久之，度僧二十人。
现代文：天宫寺是高祖未当皇上前的旧住宅，皇上环绕殿宇，感伤凄凉很久，引度二十人出家为僧。
English: Tiangong Temple is the former residence of Gao Zu before he became emperor. The emperor surrounded the hall, and it was sentimental and desolate for a long time. Twenty people were ordained as monks.

古文：皇后至许圉师第。
现代文：皇后到许圉师府第。
English: The Empress arrives at the Prince's residence.

古文：壬子，徙封潞王贤为沛王。
现代文：二十日，迁徙改封潞王贤为沛王。
English: On the 20th, he was transferred and changed his title from Shao Wangxian to Pei Wang.

古文：是日，以雍州牧、幽州都督、沛王贤为扬州都督、左武候大将军，牧如故。
现代文：这天，以雍州牧、幽州都督、沛王贤为扬州都督、左武候大将军，仍然做雍州牧。
English: On this day, with Yongzhou herdsman, Yuzhou governor, Pe Wangxian as Yangzhou governor, and Zuo Wu as general, he is still the Yongzhou herdsman.

古文：以洛州牧、周王显为并州都督。
现代文：以洛州牧、周王显为并州都督。
English: With Luozhou Maki and Zhou Wangxian as joint provincial governors.

古文：是日，敕中书门下五品已上诸司长官、尚书省侍郎并诸亲三等已上，并诣沛王宅设宴礼，奏《九部乐》。
现代文：这天，命令中书门下五品以上各司长官、尚书省侍郎及诸亲族三等以上勋爵，都到沛王府参加所设宴礼，奏《九部乐》。
English: On this day, it was ordered that the directors of the departments of the five grades and above, the attendants of the Ministry of Education and Culture, and the relatives of the lords of the third grade and above, all went to the Peiwang Palace to attend the banquet and play "Nine Part Music."

古文：礼毕，赐帛杂彩等各有差。冬十月丁卯，狩于陆浑。
现代文：礼毕，按官阶等级赐予杂彩。冬十月五日，在陆浑打猎。
English: On the 5th of October in winter, they went hunting on land.

古文：癸酉，还宫。
现代文：十一日，皇上回宫。
English: On the 13th, he returned to the Imperial Palace.

古文：是岁，新罗王金春秋卒，其子法敏嗣立。
现代文：这年，新罗王金春秋去世。其子法敏继立为新罗王。
English: In the same year, King Jinchunqiu of Silla died, and his son, Fa Min, succeeded him as King of Silla.

古文：二年春正月乙巳，太府寺更置少卿一员，分两京检校。
现代文：二年春正月十五日，太府寺另设置少卿一员，分东、西两京查核。
English: On the fifteenth day of the first month of the second year of the Spring, a member of the Shokei was also set up at the Taifu-ji Temple to inspect the East and West.

古文：丙午，东都初置国子监，并加学生等员，均分于两都教授。
现代文：十六日，东都首次设置国子监，并增加学生等生员，平均分到两京去教授。
English: On the 16th, for the first time, Dongdu set up the State Children's Supervisor, and increased the number of students and other students, with an average of two to teach.

古文：二月甲子，改京诸司及百官名：尚书省为中台，门下省为东台，中书省为西台，左右仆射为左右匡政，左右丞为肃机，侍中为左相，中书令为右相，自余各以义训改之。
现代文：二月四日，改变京都各司及百官名：尚书省为中台，门下省为东台，中书省为西台，左右仆射为左右匡政，左右丞为肃机，侍中为左相，中书令为右相，其余各官名根据含义改变它。
English: On February 4th, the names of the various departments and hundreds of officials in Kyoto were changed: Shangshu was changed to Zhongtai, Mengshu was changed to Dongtai, Zhongshu to Xitai, Zuohei to Zuohei, Zuohei to Zuohei, Zhizhong to Zuohei, Zhizhong to Zuohei, Zhongshu to Zuohei, and the remaining names were changed according to their meanings.

古文：又改六宫内职名。
现代文：又更改六宫内职名。
English: Six titles within the Imperial Household were also changed.

古文：甲戌，司戎太常伯、浿江道总管、乐安县公任雅相卒于军。
现代文：十四日，司戎太常伯、氵具江道总管、乐安县公任雅相死在军中。
English: On the 14th, Sijong Taizhongbo, the general manager of Suigu River, and the public official of Le'an County, Yaxiang, died in the army.

古文：三月甲申，自东都还京。
现代文：三月，皇上从东都回京。
English: In March, the Emperor returned to Kyoto from the eastern capital.

古文：癸丑，幸同州。
现代文：二十四日，驾幸同州。
English: On the 24th, I was lucky enough to go to Tongzhou.

古文：苏定方破高丽于苇岛，又进攻平壤城，不克而还。
现代文：苏定方在苇岛打破高丽，又进攻平壤城，不能攻克而回。
English: The Su Ding side defeated the Goryeo side on the main island of Koh Tao, and attacked Pyongyang City, but could not take it back.

古文：夏四月庚申朔，至自东都。
现代文：夏四月一日，是朔日，皇上从东都来。
English: On the first day of the fourth month of the summer, which was the new moon, the emperor came from Dongdu.

古文：辛巳，造蓬莱宫成，徙居之。
现代文：二十二日，造蓬莱宫城，皇上迁徙居住在蓬莱宫。
English: On the 22nd, Penglai Palace was built, and the emperor moved to live in Penglai Palace.

古文：五月丙申，左侍极许圉师为左相。
现代文：五月八日，黄门侍郎许圉师为左相。
English: On May 8th, Huangmen waiter Xu Yanshi became the left minister.

古文：乙巳，复置律、书、算三学。
现代文：十七日，重新设置律、书、算三学。
English: On the 17th, the three schools of law, calligraphy and arithmetic were re-established.

古文：六月己未朔，皇子旭轮生。
现代文：六月一日，皇子旭轮出生。
English: On June 1, Prince Asahiro was born.

古文：乙丑，初令道士、女冠、僧、尼等，并尽礼致拜其父母。
现代文：七日，首次命令道士、女道士、僧、尼等，都尽礼致拜其父母。
English: On the seventh day, for the first time, Taoists, female Taoists, monks, nuns, etc. were ordered to pay their respects to their parents.

古文：乙亥，制蓬莱宫诸门殿亭等名。
现代文：十七日，皇上制定蓬莱宫诸门及殿亭等名字。
English: On the 17th, the emperor decreed the names of the gates and pavilions of Penglai Palace.

古文：秋七月丁亥朔，以东宫诞育满月，大赦天下，赐酺三日。
现代文：秋七月一日，因为皇子满月，大赦天下，赐群臣大宴三天。
English: On the first day of autumn and July, because the prince was full moon, the emperor pardoned the whole country and gave the ministers a grand banquet for three days.

古文：八月甲午，右相许敬宗乞骸骨。
现代文：八月八日，右相许敬宗请求退职。
English: On August 8th, the Minister of the Right, Xu Jingzong, resigned.

古文：壬寅，许敬宗为太子少师，同东西台三品，仍知西台事。
现代文：十六日，许敬宗为太子少师，同东西台三品，仍然主持西台事。
English: On the 16th, Xu Jingzong became the prince's junior teacher, and still presided over the West Taiwan Affairs, along with the East and West Taiwan Affairs.

古文：九月，司礼少常伯孙茂道奏称： 八品、九品旧令著青，乱紫，非卑品所服，望令著碧。 
现代文：九月，司礼少常伯孙茂道奏称： 八品、九品过去让他们穿青色官服，与紫色相混淆，不是低品级所应穿的，希望让他们穿碧色官服。 
English: In September, the Young Master of Ceremonies, Bozhong Bozhong said: "In the past, the eighth and ninth grades had them wear blue uniforms, which was confused with purple. This is not what the lower grades should wear. I hope they will wear blue uniforms."

古文：诏从之。
现代文：诏令采纳。
English: He complied.

古文：戊寅，前吏部尚书、河间郡公李义府起复为司列太常伯，同东西台三品。
现代文：二十二日，前吏部尚书、河间郡公李义府重新起用为司列太常伯，同东西台三品。
English: On the 22nd, Shang Shu, the former head of the cadre department, and Li Yifu, the governor of Kawama County, were reappointed as Sirei Taizhongbo, and received the same three awards as the East and West.

古文：冬十月丁酉，幸温汤，皇太子弘监国。
现代文：冬十月十一日，驾到温汤，皇太子弘代理国政。
English: On the 11th day of the 10th month of winter, after driving to Ontang, Crown Prince Hirohito became the acting head of state.

古文：丁未，至自温汤。
现代文：二十一日，皇上从温汤到来。
English: On the 21st, Gao Zong returned to Beijing from the hot springs.

古文：庚戌，西台侍郎上官仪同东西台二品。
现代文：二十四日，西台侍郎上官仪同东西台三品。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, the west table attendant and the east and west table three dishes went to the official ceremony.

古文：十一月辛未左相许圉师下狱。
现代文：十一月十六日，左相许圉师下狱。
English: On November 16th, the Minister of the Left, Xu Junshi, was released from prison.

古文：癸酉，封皇第四子旭轮为殷王。
现代文：十八日，封第四皇子旭轮为殷王。
English: On the 18th, the fourth prince, Xurun, was crowned King Yin.

古文：十二月辛丑，改魏州为冀州大都督府，改冀州为魏州。
现代文：十二月十六日，改魏州为冀州大都督府，改冀州为魏州。
English: On December 16th, Wei Prefecture was changed to Jizhou Grand Duchy, and Jizhou was changed to Wei Prefecture.

古文：又以并、扬、荆、益四都督府并为大都督府。
现代文：又以并、扬、荆、益四都督府并为大都督府。
English: In addition, four prefectural governor's offices, namely, Yanbin, Yang, Jing and Yixing, were designated as major prefectural governor's offices.

古文：沛王贤为扬州大都督，周王显为并州大都督，殷王旭轮遥领冀州大都督。
现代文：沛王贤为扬州大都督，周王显为并州大都督，殷王旭轮任冀州大都督但不到任。
English: Pei Wangxian was the Yangzhou grand governor, Zhou Wangxian was the unified state grand governor, and Yin Wangxulun was the Jizhou grand governor but did not take office.

古文：左相许圉师解见任。
现代文：左相许圉师解除现任职务。
English: Left-wing Minister Xu Yanshi has been relieved of his duties.

古文：三年春正月，左武卫大将军郑仁泰等帅师讨铁勒余种，尽平之。
现代文：三年春正月，左武卫大将军郑仁泰等率军讨伐铁勒残余，全部平定了他们。
English: In the first month of the third year of the Spring, Zuo Wuwei General Zheng Rintai led the army to fight against the remnants of Tiele, and all of them were pacified.

古文：乙丑，司列太常伯李义府为右相。
现代文：十一日，司列太常伯李义府为右相。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Silei Taizhongbo Li Yifu became the Minister of the Right.

古文：庚戌，诏曰： 天德施生，阳和在节，言念幽圄，载恻分宵。
现代文：二月二日，陇、雍、同、岐四州等共一十五州户口之人，征调前来修建蓬莱宫。九日，设置太子左右谕德及桂坊大夫等官员，改司经局为桂坊馆，崇贤馆撤销而隶属于左春坊。
English: On February 2nd, people with a total of 15 states of residence, including those from the four states of Min, Yong, Tong and Qi, were conscripted to come and build the Penglai Palace. On the 9th, officials such as the Prince of the Left and Right and the doctor of Guifang were set up, the Department of Economic Affairs was changed to Guifang Pavilion, and the Chongxian Pavilion was revoked and subordinated to Zuochun Pavilion.

古文：虽复每有哀矜，犹恐未免枉滥。
现代文：十三日，减去京官一月的薪俸，资助修建蓬莱宫。
English: On the 13th, the construction of the Penglai Palace was funded by deducting one month's salary of the Beijing official.

古文：在京系囚应流死者，每日将二十人过。 于是亲自临问，多所原宥，不尽者令皇太子录之。
现代文：二十六日，皇上亲自过问京中被关押之囚犯，大多加以宽恕，没有问完的被关押囚犯，命令皇太子审查并记录罪囚情况。
English: On the 26th, the emperor personally interrogated the prisoners in custody in Beijing, pardoned most of them, and ordered the crown prince to review and record the situation of prisoners who had not been interrogated.

古文：诏以书学隶兰台，算学隶秘阁，律学隶详刑寺。
现代文：诏令以书学隶属兰台，算学隶属秘阁，律学隶属于详刑寺。
English: According to the edict, calligraphy was subordinate to the Landai, mathematics was subordinate to the Hikou, and law was subordinate to the Zhouji Temple.

古文：改燕然都护府为瀚海都护府，瀚海都护府为云中都护府。
现代文：改燕然都护府为瀚海都护府，改瀚海都护府为云中都护府。
English: Change Yanran Duopu to Hanhai Duopu, and change Hanhai Duopu to Yunzhong Duopu.

古文：二月，前左相许圉师左迁虔州刺史。
现代文：二月，前左相许圉师降职为虔州刺史。
English: In February, the former left-wing minister, Xu Yanshi, was demoted to the position of Kenzhou magistrate.

古文：太子弘撰《瑶山玉彩》成，书凡五百卷。
现代文：太子弘撰写《瑶山玉彩》成功，书总计五百卷。
English: Prince Hiroshi succeeded in writing "Lushan Gyokusai," a total of five hundred volumes.

古文：夏四月乙丑，右相李义府下狱。
现代文：夏四月二日，右相李义府犯法下狱。
English: On April 2nd, the Minister of the Right, Li Yifu, was sent to prison for breaking the law.

古文：戊子，李义府除名，配流巂州。
现代文：五日，李义府被除去名籍，流放充军到辒州。
English: On the fifth day, Li Yifu was stripped of his honorary citizenship and exiled to Ganzhou.

古文：丙午，幸蓬莱宫新起含元殿。
现代文：二十三日，皇上驾到蓬莱宫中新修起的含元殿。
English: On the 23rd, the emperor drove to the newly built Kanemoto Hall in the Penglai Palace.

古文：秋八月癸卯，彗星见于左摄提。
现代文：秋八月二十二日，有彗星在左摄提星座旁出现，乃不吉之征兆。
English: On the 22nd day of the 8th month of autumn, a comet appeared next to the left photo constellation, which was an ominous sign.

古文：戊申，诏百僚极言正谏。
现代文：二十七日，诏令百官尽情说出正确的意见。
English: On the 27th, the emperor ordered all officials to express their correct opinions as much as possible.

古文：命司元太常伯窦德玄、司刑太常伯刘详道等九人为持节大使，分行天下。
现代文：命令司元太常伯窦德玄、司刑太常伯刘祥道等九人为持节大使，分行天下。
English: He ordered nine people, including the first secretary of the Imperial Household Agency, Baodu Dexuan, and the second secretary of the Imperial Household Agency, Liu Xiangdao, to become the ambassadors of the festival and establish branches all over the world.

古文：仍令内外官五品已上各举所知。
现代文：又命令内外官员五品以上者各人提出所了解的情况。
English: He also ordered all officials at or above the fifth grade, both at home and abroad, to report what they know.

古文：冬十月丙申，绛州麟见于介山。
现代文：冬十月十六日，绛州有麒麟在介山出现。
English: On the 16th day of October in winter, a unicorn appeared in Jieshan, Luzhou.

古文：丙午，含元殿前麟趾见。
现代文：二十六日，含元殿前面出现了麒麟的脚趾印。
English: On the 26th, a Kirin's toe print appeared in front of the Hongyuan Hall.

古文：十一月癸酉，雨冰。
现代文：十一月二十四日，天上下冰。
English: On November 24th, the sky was covered with ice.

古文：十二月庚子，诏改来年正月一日为麟德元年。
现代文：十二月二十一日，诏令改第二年正月一日为麟德元年。
English: On December 21, the imperial edict changed the first day of the first month of the second year to the first year of Lin De.

古文：麟德元年春正月甲子，改云中都护府为单于大都护府，官品同大都督府。
现代文：麟德元年春正月十六日，改云中都护府为单于大都护府，官员品级相同于大都督府。
English: On the 16th day of the first month of the spring of the year of Lin De, Zhongduofu was changed to Daduofu, and the official rank was the same as that of Daduofu.

古文：二月丁亥，加授殷王旭轮单于大都护。
现代文：二月九日，加授殷王旭轮为单于大都护。
English: On February 9, Yin Wang Xulun was awarded the title of Daduo.

古文：戊子，幸万年宫。
现代文：十日，皇上驾到万年宫。
English: On the tenth day, the Emperor drove to the Palace.

古文：三月辛亥，展大射礼。丁卯，长女追封安定公主，谥曰思，其卤簿鼓吹及供葬所须，并如亲王之制，于德业寺迁于崇敬寺。
现代文：三月十九日，已死去的大女儿追封为安定公主，谥号曰思，她的仪仗鼓吹以及供给安葬所需物资，都按照亲王的规定供给，从德业寺迁葬到崇敬寺。
English: On March 19, the eldest daughter, who had died, was posthumously crowned Princess Anzai, and her posthumous name was Saisei. According to the prince's regulations, her eulogy and funeral supplies were provided, and her funeral was moved from Deye Temple to Chongye Temple.

古文：夏四月，卫州刺史、道王元庆薨。
现代文：夏四月，卫州刺史、道王元庆去世。
English: In the summer of April, Wei Zhou Shishi and Tao Wang Yuanqing passed away.

古文：五月，许王孝薨。
现代文：五月，许王孝去世。
English: In May, Xu Wangxiao died.

古文：乙卯，于昆明之弄栋川置姚州都督府。
现代文：十二日，在昆明之弄栋川设置姚州都督府。
English: On the 12th, the Yaozhou Governor's Office was set up in Dongchuan, Kunming.

古文：秋八月丙子朔，至自万年宫，便幸旧宅。
现代文：秋八月一日，皇上从万年宫到来，顺便驾到旧住宅。
English: On the first day of autumn in August, the emperor arrived from the Palace of Ten Thousand Years and drove to the old residence.

古文：己卯，降万年县系囚，因幸大慈恩寺。
现代文：四日，降低万年县所关押囚犯之罪名，因而驾到大慈恩寺。
English: On the fourth day, he reduced the charges of the prisoners held in the Mannen County Detention Center, and thus drove to Dai Ci En Temple.

古文：壬午，还蓬莱宫。
现代文：七日，皇上回蓬莱宫。
English: On the seventh day, the emperor returned to Penglai Palace.

古文：戊子，兼司列太常伯、检校沛王府长史、城阳县侯刘祥道兼右相，大司宪窦德玄兼司元太常伯、检校左相。
现代文：十三日，兼司列太常伯、检校沛王府长史、城阳县侯刘祥道兼右相，大司宪窦德玄兼司元太常伯、检校左相。
English: On the thirteenth day, and the secretary of the line was the grand secretary, and the chief inspector of the school was the governor of Pei Wang Prefecture, and the mayor of Chengyang County, Liu Xiangdao, was also the right minister, and the chief secretary of the gendarmerie, Dou Dexuan, was also the grand secretary of the line and the left minister of the school.

古文：九月己卯，诏曰： 周京兆尹、左右宫伯大将军、司卫上将军、少冢宰、广陵郡公宇文孝伯，忠亮存心，贞贤表志。
现代文：九月十日，皇上下诏： 周朝京兆尹、左右宫伯大将军、司卫上将军、少冢宰、广陵郡公宇文孝伯，品格思想忠诚，德行意志坚贞。
English: On September 10th, the emperor issued an imperial edict: Zhou Dynasty's Jing Zhaoyun, Grand Generals of the Left and Right Palaces, General of the Imperial Guards, Shao Xizai, and Guangling County's Gong Yuwen Xiaobing, are loyal in character and thought, and steadfast in their will to do good.

古文：淫刑既逞，方纳谏而求仁；忍忌将加，甘捐躯而徇节。
现代文：周朝虽滥用刑法，但他为求正义而纳谏，忍受猜忌，甘心牺牲性命而殉节。
English: Although the Zhou Dynasty abused the criminal law, he accepted the punishment for seeking justice, endured suspicion, and was willing to sacrifice his life for martyrdom.

古文：年载虽久，风烈犹生，宜峻徽章，式旌胤胄。
现代文：年代虽然久了，但风范刚毅，仍然长存在世上。
English: Although it has been a long time, the spirit of fortitude still exists in the world.

古文：其孙左威卫长史思纯，可加授朝散大夫。 
现代文：应该急速表彰这善良美好的忠义之士，以表扬鼓励后代。他的孙子左威卫长史思纯，可加授朝散大夫。 
English: This kind, beautiful, and loyal man should be commended quickly, and future generations should be encouraged by praise. His grandson, Zuo Wei Wei Chang Shi Sizhun, can be awarded the title of Chosan doctor.

古文：十二月丙戌，杀西台侍郎上官仪。
现代文：十二月十三日，杀西台侍郎上官仪。
English: On December 13th, he killed the West Taiwanese attendant and went to the official ceremony.

古文：戊子，庶人忠坐与仪交通，赐死。
现代文：庶人、原皇子李忠，犯了与上官仪勾结之罪，赐他自杀。
English: Li Zhong, a commoner and the former prince, committed the crime of colluding with the higher-ranking officials and was sentenced to suicide.

古文：右相、城阳县侯刘祥道为司礼太常伯。
现代文：右相城阳县侯刘祥道为司礼太常伯。
English: Liu Xiangdao, a marquess of Zhenyang County of the right-hand side, is a ceremonial great-uncle.

古文：太子右中护检校西台侍郎乐彦玮、西台侍郎孙处约同知政事。
现代文：太子右中护检校西台侍郎乐彦玮、西台侍郎孙处约都任参知政事。
English: Prince Utsunomiya's tutor, Saidai's chamberlain, Yoshihiko, and Saidai's chamberlain's grandson were all appointed to the post of prefectural governor.

古文：是冬无雪。
现代文：这年冬天无雪。
English: There was no snow this winter.

古文：二年春正月壬午，幸东都。
现代文：二年春正月皇上驾到东都合璧宫。
English: In the first month of the second year of the Spring, the Emperor drove to the East Palace.

古文：丁酉，幸合璧宫。戊子，虑雍、洛二州及诸司囚。
现代文：十六日，审讯并记录雍、洛二州及各衙门所关押之囚徒。
English: On the 16th, interrogated and recorded the prisoners detained in Yong, Luo two states and each county.

古文：甲子，以发向泰山，停选。
现代文：二十一日，因皇上出发去泰山，停止选拔贤能。
English: On the twenty-first day, because the emperor left for Mount Taishan, the selection of talents was stopped.

古文：三月甲寅，兼司戎太常伯、永安郡公姜恪同东西台三品。
现代文：三月十二日，兼司戎太常伯、永安郡公姜恪同东西台三品。
English: On March 12th, Emperor Rong of the Eastern and Western Dynasties and Emperor Gong of the Eastern and Western Dynasties and Emperor Gong of the Eastern and Western Dynasties and Emperor Gong of the Western Dynasties and Western Dynasties and Emperor Gong of the Eastern and Western Dynasties and Emperor Gong of the Eastern and Western Dynasties and Emperor Gong of the Western Dynasties and Western Dynasties and Emperor Gong of the Eastern and Western Dynasties and Emperor Gong of the Eastern and Western Dynasties and Emperor Gong of the Eastern Dynasties and Western Dynasties.

古文：辛未，东都造乾元殿成。
现代文：二十九日，东都造乾元殿成功。
English: On the 29th, Dongdu successfully built the Qianyuan Hall.

古文：闰月癸酉，日有蚀之。
现代文：闰三月二日，有日蚀。
English: On March 2nd, a solar eclipse occurs.

古文：四月丙午，曲赦桂、广、黔三都督府管内大辟罪已上。
现代文：四月五日，因特殊情况赦免桂、广、黔三都督府管辖内死罪以下囚徒。
English: On April 5, due to special circumstances, Gui, Guang and Zou were pardoned from the death penalty within the jurisdiction of the three prefectures.

古文：丙寅，讲武邙山之阳，御城北楼观之。
现代文：二十五日，在邙山之南练武，皇上驾到城北楼观看。
English: On the twenty-fifth day, after practicing martial arts in the south of Lushan, the emperor drove to the north tower of the city to watch.

古文：戊辰，左侍极、仍检校大司成、嘉兴县子陆敦信为检校右相，其大司成宜停。
现代文：二十七日，左侍极、因袭检校大司成、嘉兴县子陆敦信为检校右相，他的检校大司成一职应该罢免。
English: On the 27th, the left-hand man, Lu Dunxin, son of Jiaxing County, became the right-hand man for the inspection of the school because of the attack on the inspection of the school. His inspection of the school should be dismissed.

古文：西台侍郎孙处约、乐彦玮并停知政事。
现代文：西台侍郎孙处约、乐彦玮都罢免参知政事。
English: Nishidai's chamberlains, sons and grandsons, Tsuchiyo and Yoshihiko, were both removed from their posts as councillors.

古文：五月辛卯，以秘阁郎中李淳风造历成，名《麟德历》，颁之。
现代文：五月二十日，因为秘阁郎中李淳风建造历法成功，取名为《麟德历》，颁布《麟德历》。
English: On May 20th, because of the success of the construction of the calendar by Li Junfeng, a member of the Secret Cabinet, it was named "Linde Calendar" and "Linde Calendar" was promulgated.

古文：以司空、英国公李勣，少师、高阳郡公许敬宗，右相、嘉兴县子陆敦信，左相、钜鹿男窦德玄为检校封禅使。
现代文：以司空、英国公李责力，少师、高阳郡公许敬宗，右相、嘉兴县子陆敦信，左相、巨鹿男窦德玄为检校封禅使。
English: With Siku, the British official Li Rongli, the young teacher, the Goyang County official Xu Jingzong, the right minister, the Jiaxing County official Lu Dunxin, the left minister, and the giant deer man Dou Dexuan as the school inspection Zen envoys.

古文：六月，鄜州大水，坏城邑。
现代文：六月，州大水，冲坏城镇。
English: In June, the state's floodwaters washed away entire towns.

古文：秋七月，邓王元裕薨。
现代文：秋七月，邓王元裕去世。
English: In autumn and July, Deng Wang Yuanyu passed away.

古文：冬十月戊午，皇后请封禅，司礼太常伯刘祥道上疏请封禅。
现代文：冬十月二十日，皇后请求在泰山祭祀天地，司礼太常伯刘祥道上奏章请求在泰山祭祀天地。
English: On the 20th day of winter in October, the empress requested that the heavens and the earth be sacrificed on Mount Tai, and the priest, the great-uncle Liu Xiang, recited a sermon requesting that the heavens and the earth be sacrificed on Mount Tai.

古文：癸亥，高丽王高藏遣其子福男来朝。
现代文：二十五日，高丽王高藏派遣他的儿子福男前来朝拜。
English: On the 25th, Goryeo King Gozang sent his son, Fuman, to pay homage to the emperor.

古文：丁卯，将封泰山，发自东都。
现代文：二十九日，将祭祀泰山，从东都出发。
English: On the 29th, the worship of Mount Tai will begin, starting from Dongdu.

古文：是岁大稔，米斗五钱，麦不列市。
现代文：这年是大丰年，一斗米五个钱。大麦小麦不陈列在市场出卖。
English: This year was a bumper year, with a barrel of rice costing five yuan. Barley and wheat were not displayed for sale in the market.

古文：十一月丙子，次于原武，以少牢祭汉将纪信墓，赠骠骑大将军。
现代文：十一月八日，皇上临时驻扎在原武，用猪、羊祭祀汉大将纪信之墓，赠骠骑大将军。
English: On November 8th, the emperor temporarily stationed himself in Harabu, and used pigs and sheep to offer sacrifices at the grave of Han Dynasty General Jixin, and presented him with a horse and saddle.

古文：庚寅，华州刺史、燕国公于志宁卒。
现代文：二十二日，华州刺史、燕国公于志宁去世。
English: On the 22nd, Huazhou Shishi and Yan Guogong passed away in Zhining.

古文：十二月丙午，御齐州大。
现代文：十二月九日，皇上驾到齐州大厅。
English: On December 9th, the Emperor arrived at the Qizhou Great Hall.

古文：乙卯，命有司祭泰山。
现代文：十八日，命令有关部门祭祀泰山。
English: On the 18th, the relevant departments were ordered to stop offering sacrifices to Mount Tai.

古文：丙辰，发灵岩顿。
现代文：十九日，皇上从灵岩顿出发。
English: On the 19th, the emperor set out from Lingyan Tong.

