古文：裴耀卿，字焕之，宁州刺史守真次子也。
现代文：裴耀卿，字焕之，是宁州刺史裴守真的次子。
English: Pei Yaoqing, also known as Huanzhi, was the second son of Pei Shoujin, the governor of Ningzhou.

古文：数岁能属文，擢童子举，稍迁秘书省正字、相王府典签，与掾丘悦、文学韦利器更直，备顾问，府中号 学直 。
现代文：几岁时就能写文章了。考中童子科。二十岁时任秘书省正字、相王府典签。相王要他与掾丘说、文学韦利器轮流在府中值班，以备顾问。府中称之为 学值 。
English: At the age of twenty, he was appointed secretary of the Ministry of Justice and the King's Court. The king asked him to say with Mengqiu that the literary well-wishers would take turns on duty in the central government to prepare advisers. The central government called it learning value.

古文：王即帝位，授国子主簿，累迁长安令。
现代文：相王即帝位，任裴耀卿为国子主簿，后升为长安令。
English: King Si was enthroned as emperor, and he appointed Pei Yaoqing as the head of the state, and later he was promoted to Chang'an.

古文：旧有配户和市法，人厌苦，耀卿一切责豪门坐贾，豫给以直，绝僦欺之敝。
现代文：长安以前有配户和市之法，百姓不堪其苦，裴耀卿到任，一切所需皆向豪富及商人索要，预先给值，杜绝了奸邪欺瞒的弊病。
English: In the past, Chang'an had the Law of Matching Households and the Law of the City, and the people endured great hardships. When Pei Yaoqing took office, he demanded everything he needed from the rich and the merchants, and gave the value in advance. This eliminated the evil of treachery and deceit.

古文：及去，人思之。
现代文：到他离职后，人们还思念赞扬他。
English: After he left office, people still wanted to praise him.

古文：为济州刺史，济当走集，地广而户寡。
现代文：开元十三年，裴耀卿任济州刺史。济州是个交通要道，地广人稀。
English: In the 13th year of the first century, Pei Yaoqing was appointed as the governor of Jeju. Jeju is a major transportation route and is sparsely populated.

古文：会天子东巡，耀卿置三梁十驿，科敛均省，为东州知顿最。
现代文：那年天子东巡，裴耀卿设置三梁十驿，科配收敛平均分摊，是东州主持供应最好的。
English: That year, during the Eastern Tour of the Son of Heaven, Pei Yaoqing set up three beams and ten beams, and the average allocation of subjects was convergent, which was the best supply presided over by Dongzhou.

古文：封禅还，次宋州，宴从官，帝欢甚，谓张说曰： 前日出使巡天下，观风俗，察吏善恶，不得实。
现代文：天子封禅回来，宿在宋州，设宴招待随从官员。皇帝心中十分高兴，对宰相张说说 ：日前派使者巡视天下，观风俗，考察官吏的善恶，不能得到确实情况。
English: Tianzi Fengzen returned, stayed in Songzhou, and held a banquet to entertain the attendant officials. The emperor was very happy, and said to the prime minister Zhang: Recently, an envoy was sent to inspect the world, observe customs, and investigate the good and evil of officials, but it was not possible to get the exact situation.

古文：今朕有事岱宗，而怀州刺史王丘饩牵外无它献，我知其不市恩也；魏州刺史崔沔遣使供帐，不施锦绣，示我以俭，此可以观政也；济州刺史裴耀卿上书数百言，至曰 人或重扰，则不足以告成 ，朕置书座右以自戒，此其爱人也。 
现代文：现在，我去岱宗有事，怀州刺史王丘，馈饷以外没有其他的贡献，我知道他不愿意讨好求恩；魏州刺史崔沔派人安排供帐，不用锦绣，表示了俭朴，从此可以看出他的政治；济州刺史裴耀卿上书几百字，说到 百姓如果反复被扰，那就不能算是完满成功 。我把他写的信放在座右，时时警戒。这是他爱百姓的心啊！ 
English: Now, when I go to Shanzong, I have something to do. In Waizhou, Shishi Wangqiu has nothing to contribute other than to feed the people, and I know that he is not willing to curry favor. In Weizhou, Shishi Cuiqiu sent someone to arrange the supply of accounts, and did not use brocade, but expressed frugality, from which we can see his politics. In Jeju, Shishi Peiyao wrote several hundred words, saying that if the people are repeatedly disturbed, it cannot be considered a complete success. I put the letter he wrote on the right side of the seat, always alert. This is the heart of his love

古文：俄徙宣州。
现代文：不久，迁往宣州。
English: Soon, they moved to Xuanzhou.

古文：前此大水，河防坏，诸州不敢擅兴役。
现代文：裴耀卿到任前，这里发大水，河防被破坏。各州都不敢擅自动工。
English: Before Pei Yaoqing took office, there was a lot of water here, and the river defenses were destroyed. All states are afraid of unauthorized construction.

古文：耀卿曰： 非至公也。 
现代文：裴耀卿说： 不动工筑堤，不是至公。 
English: Pei Yaoqing said, "If you don't start the construction of the dike, it's not fair.

古文：乃躬护作役，未讫，有诏徙官。
现代文：于是亲自操持工程。工程未完，有诏来调动。
English: As a result, he personally managed the project. The project was not completed, and there was an order to move it.

古文：耀卿惧功不成，弗即宣，而抚巡饬厉愈急。
现代文：裴耀卿怕他离开后工程受阻，没有及时宣布诏令，而抚巡则催他到职。
English: Pei Yaoqing was afraid that the project would be blocked after he left, so he did not announce the edict in time, and Fuzhong urged him to take office.

古文：堤成，发诏而去。
现代文：终于，堤成，裴耀卿宣布诏令后离去。
English: Finally, Tsutsujinari and Pei Yao announced the edict and left.

古文：济人为立碑颂德。
现代文：济州人为他立碑颂德。
English: The people of Jeju erected a monument in his honor.

古文：历冀州，入拜户部侍郎。
现代文：后来又任冀州刺史，入朝任户部侍郎。
English: Later, he was also appointed as Jizhou sashimi, and entered the imperial court as a household attendant.

古文：开元二十年，副信安王祎讨契丹，又持帛二十万赐立功奚官，耀卿曰： 币涉寇境，不可以不备。 
现代文：开元二十年，信安王祎奉诏讨伐契丹，命裴耀卿为副手。不久，又令裴耀卿带绢二十万匹分赐给立功的奚官，要他到各部落去颁赐。裴耀卿说 ：带了财物深入寇境，不可不做防备。 
English: In the 20th year of the Heian period, King Shun of Shunan issued an edict to fight the Khitan and appointed Pei Yao as his deputy. Soon after, he ordered Pei Yao to bring two hundred thousand yakitori to be given to the meritorious eunuch, and asked him to go to each tribe to present it. Pei Yao said, "If you take your property deep into the territory of the Khitan, you must be prepared."

古文：乃令先与期，而分道赐之，一日毕。
现代文：于是与各部落事先约好日期，然后许多人分道同时出发，一天就分送完毕。
English: As a result, a date was agreed in advance with each tribe, and then many people set off at the same time, and the delivery was completed in one day.

古文：突厥、室韦果邀险来袭，耀卿已还。
现代文：那时，突厥及室韦果然发兵到险要处准备袭劫，而裴耀卿已完成任务回去了。
English: At that time, the Turks and Murowe sent troops to the critical point to prepare for the raid, and Pei Yaoqing had completed his mission and returned.

古文：迁京兆尹。
现代文：这年冬天，裴耀卿升为京兆尹。
English: In the winter of that year, Pei Yaoqing was promoted to Jing Zhaoyun.

古文：明年秋，雨害稼，京师饥。
现代文：第二年秋天，连续下雨淹坏了庄稼，京师也闹饥荒。
English: In the autumn of the second year, continuous rain drowned the crops, and the capital also suffered from famine.

古文：帝将幸东都，召问所以救人者。
现代文：皇帝将去东都，召裴耀卿询问如何拯救百姓。
English: The emperor will go to Dongdu and call Pei Yaoqing to inquire about how to save the people.

古文：耀卿曰： 陛下既东巡，百司毕从，则太仓、三辅可遣重臣分道赈给，自东都益广漕运，以实关辅，关辅既实，则乘舆西还，事蔑不济。
现代文：裴耀卿说 ：陛下既要东巡，那百司全要跟随而去，那太仓三辅以前的积储，可派重臣分道赈灾，再从东都扩充漕运，以充实关辅，关辅充实了，皇上再西还。这样，两头都顾上了。
English: Pei Yaoqing said, "Since His Majesty wants to go on an eastern tour, the Hundred Division should go with him. As for the accumulated reserves before Taicang Sanfu, he can send his senior vassals to make a detour to relieve the disaster, and then expand the transportation from Dongdu to enrich Guanfu, and when Guanfu is enriched, the emperor will return to the west. In this way, both ends are taken care of.

古文：且国家大本在京师，但秦地狭，水旱易匮。
现代文：且国家的大业在于京师，但秦中地狭，收粟不多，一遇水旱，容易匮乏。
English: Moreover, the great cause of the country lies in Beijing, but the land in the middle of Qin is narrow, the harvest of millet is not much, and in the event of drought, it is easy to lack.

古文：往贞观、永徽时，禄禀者少，岁漕粟二十万略足；今用度浸广，运数倍且不支，故数东幸，以就敖粟。
现代文：以往贞观、永徽年代，拿国家俸禄的人少，每年漕运二十万石就足够了。如今国用日益增多，漕运增加了几倍，还不够供给。陛下多次巡行东都，那里积储较多。
English: In the past, during the Zhenguan and Yonghui dynasties, the number of people who received state salaries was small, and it was enough to paddle 200,000 koku per year. Nowadays, the state use is increasing day by day, and the paddling has increased several times, but it is not enough supply. His Majesty has made many rounds of the eastern capital, where there are more reserves.

古文：为国大计，臣愿广陕运道，使京师常有三年食，虽水旱不足忧。
现代文：为国家长远计划，臣以为应拓广陕地运输通道，使京师常备三年的粮食，那就水旱不足忧了。
English: For the national long-term plan, the minister thought that it was necessary to expand the transportation channels in Shaanxi and make Beijing prepare three years of grain, then the drought would not be a problem.

古文：今天下输丁约四百万，使丁出百钱为陕、洛运费，又益半为营窖用，分纳司农，河南、陕州。
现代文：现在天下应输税的人约四百万，每人出钱一百文为陕、洛的运费，另加五十文做建窖之用，分别交给司农、河南、陕州。
English: At present, there are about four million people in the world who should pay taxes. Each person should pay one hundred yuan for the freight of Shaanxi and Luo, and another fifty yuan for the construction of the cellar, respectively, to the farmers, Henan and Shaanxi.

古文：又令租米悉输东都。
现代文：再令租米由各地自出脚力送缴东都，从东都到陕一段，河流湍急难行。
English: In addition, rent rice will be sent to Dongdu from all over the country. From Dongdu to Shaanxi, the river is too fast to travel.

古文：从都至陕，河益湍沮，若广漕路，变陆为水，所支尚赢万计。且江南租船候水始进，吴工不便河漕，处处停留，易生隐盗。
现代文：假如能开通河漕，变陆运为水运，支出可以省下上万钱。且江南的租船要等水合适才能行进，吴地船工不习惯河漕，处处停留，容易引起偷盗。
English: If the river can be opened and the land transport can be changed to water transport, the expenditure can be saved by tens of thousands of dollars. And the chartered ship in the south of the Yangtze River has to wait for the water to be suitable before it can travel. The boatmen in Wudi are not used to the river, they stop everywhere, and it is easy to cause theft.

古文：请置仓河口，以纳东租，然后官自顾载，分入河、洛。
现代文：希望能在河口设仓，可以收纳东来的租米，然后分官各载运入河、洛。
English: It is hoped that a warehouse can be set up at the mouth of the river, and the rented rice from the east can be collected, and then transported into the river and Luo.

古文：度三门东西各筑敖仓，自东至者，东仓受之；三门迫险，则旁河凿山，以开车道，运十数里，西仓受之。
现代文：在三门的东西各筑敖仓，从东方来的租米，存入东仓；三门地势险峻，则顺河凿山，开辟车道，运十几里，就可以送入西仓。
English: At each of the three gates, build a warehouse, and store the rented rice from the east in the east warehouse; if the three gates are steep, then dig a mountain along the river, open a lane, and transport it for more than ten miles, then it can be sent to the west warehouse.

古文：度宜徐运抵太原仓，趋河入渭，更无留阻，可减费钜万。 
现代文：然后慢慢运到太原仓，从黄河入渭水，就没有什么困难了。
English: Then slowly transported to Taiyuan warehouse, from the Yellow River into Surabaya, there is no difficulty.

古文：天子然其计，拜黄门侍郎、同中书门下平章事，充转运使。
现代文：这样可节省大量费用。 天子同意他的建议，任他为黄门侍郎、同中书门下平章事，充转运使。
English: This would save a lot of money. Tianzi agreed to his suggestion and appointed him as the Yellow Gate's attendant, and the Middle Gate's lower gate's deputy, as well as the envoy.

古文：于是置河阴、集津、三门仓，引天下租繇盟津溯河而西。
现代文：于是裴耀卿营建河阴、集津、三门的敖仓，将天下之租米由孟津沿河导引而西。
English: As a result, Pei Yaoqing built warehouses in Heyin, Jijin and Sanmen, and led the world's rice from Mengjin along the river to the west.

古文：三年积七百万石，省运费三十万缗。
现代文：三年积储了七百万石，节约运费三十万缗。
English: Seven million stones have been accumulated and stored for three years, saving 300,000 baht in shipping costs.

古文：或曰： 以此缗纳于上，足以明功。 
现代文：有人说： 把这些钱献给皇帝，可以表明自己的功绩。 
English: Some people said, "By donating this money to the emperor, you can show your merit."

古文：答曰： 是谓以国财求宠，其可乎？ 
现代文：裴耀卿说 ：这样做是拿国家的财产来求得个人的得宠，不可以。 
English: Pei Yaoqing said, "It is not right to use the state's assets to seek personal favor.

古文：敕吏为和市费。
现代文：奏请将这笔钱作为所司的和市钱。
English: Please report this money as your own and the city's money.

古文：迁侍中。
现代文：明年，升任侍中。
English: Transferred to the position of Samurai Junior High School.

古文：二十四年，以尚书左丞相罢，封赵城侯。
现代文：开元二十四年，任尚书左丞相，罢知政事，封爵赵城侯。
English: In the 24th year of the year of the founding of the Republic of China, Shang Shuxu was appointed as the left chancellor, and Zhaocheng marquis was knighted.

古文：夷州刺史杨浚以赃抵死，有诏杖六十，流古州。
现代文：夷州刺史杨浚犯罪判死刑，杨浚缴纳钱款后，诏令廷杖六十，流放古州。
English: Yang Jun was sentenced to death for the crime of stabbing Shi Yangjun in Yizhou. After Yangjun paid the money, he was sentenced to 60 years in prison and banished to Guzhou.

古文：耀卿上言： 刺史、县令异诸吏，为人父母，风化所瞻。
现代文：裴耀卿上疏说： 刺史、县令与其他官吏不一样。他们为民父母，是民俗风化瞻望的对象。
English: Pei Yaoqing Shang Zuo said: The chief historian and the county magistrate are different from other officials. They are the parents of the people and are the object of folk customs.

古文：令使裸躬受笞，事太逼辱。
现代文：现在要他们裸体受鞭打，太过侮辱。
English: Now to have them flogged naked is too humiliating.

古文：法至死，则天下共之。然一朝下吏，屈挫牵顿，民且哀怜，是忘免死之恩，而有伤心之痛，恐非崇守长、劝风俗意。
现代文：刑法至于死，是天下所共识的，但一朝交给吏人，拉扯挫顿，百姓看见会生哀怜之心，这样会忘了皇上免其死之恩，而有伤心之痛，恐怕不符合尊敬官长、树立好风气的宗旨。
English: As far as the death penalty is concerned, it is the consensus of the world, but once it is handed over to the officials, it will be dragged and frustrated, and the people will have a sad heart when they see it. In this way, they will forget that the emperor was spared from death, and have a sad pain. I am afraid that it is not in line with the purpose of respecting officials and establishing a good culture.

古文：又杂犯抵死无杖刑，必三覆后决，今非时不覆，或夭其命，非所以宽宥之也。
现代文：且杂犯抵罪，没有杖刑，奏报以后三次复核，然后执行。现在没有经过复核，杖责以后即刻流放，倘若因杖责而死，也有违宽宥的意思。
English: In addition, if a minor offender pleads guilty, there will be no caning. After the report is submitted, it will be reviewed three times and then executed. If there is no review now, he will be banished immediately after the caning. If he dies as a result of the caning, it will also be a violation of forgiveness.

古文：凡大暑决囚多死，秋冬乃有全者。
现代文：凡是大暑盛夏决杖的人，大多数会死，而秋冬决杖的，才可能活命。
English: Most people who die in the heat of the summer will die, but those who die in the autumn and winter may live.

古文：请今贷死决杖，会盛夏生长时并停，则有再生之实。 
现代文：切盼凡是刺史、县令，所定的杖刑以及盛夏之时的杖刑一并停止，以符合陛下爱好生灵之德，对犯死罪者有再生之恩。 
English: It is my fervent hope that the historical punishment, the county ordinance, the prescribed cane punishment, and the cane punishment at the height of summer will all be stopped at the same time, so as to conform to the virtue of His Majesty's love of life, and to have the grace of rebirth for those who commit capital crimes.

古文：是时，特进盖嘉运破突骑施还，诏为河西、陇右节度使，因令经略吐籓。
现代文：这时，特进盖嘉运击破突骑施立功而回，诏令任盖嘉运为河西、陇右节度使，仍令他经营管理吐蕃。
English: At this time, the special envoy Gai Jiayun defeated the surprise attack and achieved great success, and the imperial edict appointed Gai Jiayun as the governor of Hexi and Shiyu, and still ordered him to operate and manage Tuyun.

古文：嘉运以新立功，日酣遨未赴屯。
现代文：盖嘉运因新立功，每日酣宴，没有及时赴任。
English: Gai Jiayun did not take up his post in time because of his new achievements and the daily feast.

古文：耀卿言于帝曰： 嘉运精劲勇烈诚有余，然臣见其夸言骄色，窃忧之，恐不足与立事。
现代文：裴耀卿对皇帝说： 盖嘉运确实勇敢强劲，但他的言语行为，颇有夸耀骄矜之色，臣深以为忧，担心他不足以成事。
English: Pei Yaoqing said to the emperor: Gai Jiayun is indeed brave and strong, but his words and deeds are quite boastful and arrogant. The vassal is deeply worried that he is not enough to accomplish things.

古文：今盛秋防边，日月已薄，当与军中士卒相见。
现代文：现在入秋正要加强边防，时间已经不早了，该与军中的士卒相见。
English: Now, in the autumn, it is time to strengthen the border defense, and it is not too early to meet with the soldiers in the army.

古文：若不素讲，虽决在一时，恐非制胜万全之义。
现代文：假若平时素不见面，虽一时有好的决断，恐怕也难调动自如，不能制胜万全。
English: If we don't meet in ordinary times, even if we have a good decision for a while, it will be difficult to mobilize freely, and we can't win everything.

古文：且兵未及训，不能知法；士未怀惠，不可共心。
现代文：何况，兵未训练，不知礼法，士无交往，不能同心。
English: Moreover, soldiers are untrained and don't know etiquette, and officers don't interact and can't be of the same mind.

古文：使幸而有楞，非师出以律之善。
现代文：纵使威逼而进，侥幸有功，也不是以律令出师的长久之法。
English: Even if you advance by force, if by chance you succeed, it is not a long-term method of teaching by precept.

古文：又万人之命倚于将，示不得已，故凿凶门而出。
现代文：几万人的性命，全系在将军。实在是不得而已，才凿开凶门而投入战斗。
English: The lives of tens of thousands of people depended entirely on the generals. It was only out of necessity that they opened the floodgates and went into battle.

古文：今酣呶朝夕，胖肆自安，非爱人忧国者，不可不察。
现代文：如今盖嘉运朝夕沉溺于酣饮，自以为无事。这样恐怕也不是爱人忧国的意思，不可不注意。
English: Nowadays, Gai Jiayun indulges in heavy drinking in the morning and evening, thinking that nothing is wrong. This is probably not the meaning of loving others and worrying about the country, so you must pay attention.

古文：苟不易帅，宜严诏申约，以督其行。 
现代文：假如不能调换将帅，那就该下诏严命，督促限期到任。 
English: If it is not possible to replace the commander-in-chief, then it is time to issue a strict order and urge him to stay in office until the deadline.

古文：帝乃促嘉运诣部，卒无功还。
现代文：皇帝乃催促盖嘉运赴军，最后竟以无功而还。
English: The emperor urged Gai Jia Rong to go to the army, but in the end he did not succeed.

古文：天宝初，进尚书左仆射，俄改右仆射，而李林甫代之。
现代文：天宝初年，进任尚书左仆射，不久改为右仆射，由李林甫代任。
English: In the first year of Tianbao, he was appointed as the left footman of Shang Shu, and soon changed to the right footman, and was replaced by Li Linfu.

古文：上日，林甫到本省，具朝服剑佩，博士导，郎官唱案。
现代文：到任日，李林甫到本省，穿着朝服佩了剑，由博士导引，郎官唱案。
English: On the day of his arrival, Li Linfu came to the province, wearing a imperial robe and a sword, guided by a doctor, and accompanied by officials.

古文：礼毕，就耀卿听事，乃常服，以赞者主事导唱。
现代文：礼毕，靠近裴耀卿听事，裴耀卿则穿平常衣服，由赞者主持导唱。
English: After bowing, they approached Pei Yaoqing to listen to him. Pei Yaoqing wore ordinary clothes and was led in the chanting by his admirer.

古文：林甫惊曰： 班爵与公同，而礼数异，何也？  耀卿曰： 比苦眩，不堪重衣。又郎、博士纷泊，非病士所宜。 
现代文：李林甫吃惊地说： 我的班爵与公一样，而礼数不同，为什么？ 裴耀卿说： 我头晕眩，负担不了那规矩的礼服，而且，郎、博士相连而来，不是病人所相宜的。 
English: Li Linfu was surprised and said, "My banner is the same as the official one, but the number of formalities is different, why?" Pei Yaoqing said, "I am dizzy, I can't afford the formal dress, and it's not appropriate for a patient to have a brother-in-law and a doctor come together."

古文：林甫默然惭。
现代文：李林甫心中颇愧。
English: Li Linfu felt quite ashamed.

古文：居一岁，卒，年六十三，赠太子太傅，谥曰文献。
现代文：一年后，裴耀卿死，终年六十三岁。追赠太子太傅，赐谥为 文献 。
English: A year later, Pei Yaoqing died at the age of 63. He was posthumously awarded the title of Crown Prince and Grand Duke, and bestowed the title of literature.

古文：子综，吏部郎中。
现代文：儿子裴综，任吏部郎中。
English: His son, Pei Zong, served as a junior official in the Ministry of Civil Affairs.

