古文：起柔兆涒滩十月，尽强圉作噩闰月，不满一年。
现代文：起柔兆涒滩十月，尽强圉作噩闰月，不满一年。
English: From October to the end of the year, it will be a leap month as much as possible.

古文：肃宗文明武德大圣大宣孝皇帝中之上
现代文：肃宗文明武德大圣大宣孝皇帝中之上
English: Su Zong civilization, martial arts, great wisdom, great holiness, great proclamation, great filial piety

古文：至德元年丙申，公元七五六年
现代文：唐肃宗至德元载冬季，十月，辛巳朔，出现日全食。
English: From Tang Su Zong to De Yuan Zang

古文：冬，十月，辛巳朔，日有食之，既。
现代文：肃宗从顺化郡出发，癸未，到达彭原。
English: Su Zong departed from Hue County and arrived in Pengyuan before dawn.

古文：上发顺化，癸未，至彭原。初，李林甫为相，谏官言事皆先白宰相，退则又以所言白之；御史言事须大夫同署。
现代文：先前，李林甫作宰相时，谏官向皇上进谏以前都要先告诉宰相，退朝后也要把与皇上谈话的内容告诉宰相。御史进言须御史大夫同时署名。
English: Previously, when Li Linfu was the prime minister, the eunuchs had to inform the prime minister before presenting the imperial edict to the emperor, and they also had to inform the prime minister of the contents of the conversation with the emperor after the abdication. The imperial edict had to be signed by the imperial historian.

古文：至是，敕尽革其弊，开谏诤之涂。
现代文：这时，肃宗下敕书命令全部革除这些弊政，大开进谏之路。
English: At this time, Su Zong issued an imperial edict ordering that all of these maladministration be eliminated and the road to seclusion be opened up.

古文：又令宰相分直政事笔、承旨，旬日而更，惩林甫及杨国忠之专权故也。
现代文：又命令宰相分别在政事堂值日，听候皇上的召见，每十日一更换，这都是为了戒除李林甫和杨国忠那样的宰相专权局面。
English: He also ordered the chancellors to be on duty separately in the government hall, to wait for the emperor's summons, and to be replaced every ten days. This was all done in order to prevent the chancellors' monopoly of power like that of Li Linfu and Yang Guozhong.

古文：第五琦见上于彭原，请以江、淮租庸市轻货，溯江、汉而上至洋川，令汉中王瑀陆运至扶风以助军；上从之。
现代文：第五琦晋见肃宗于彭原，请求把江、淮地区征收的租庸变买成贵重的货物，沿着长江、汉水而上运到洋川郡，然后命令汉中王李从陆地运到扶风以助唐军，肃宗同意。
English: The Fifth Emperor Jin saw Su Zong in Pengyuan and asked him to convert the tributes collected from the Jiang and Huai regions into valuable goods and transport them along the Yangtze River and the Han River to Yangchuan County. He then ordered the Han Middle King Li to be transported from the mainland to Fufeng to help the Tang army. Su Zong agreed.

古文：寻加琦山南等五道度支使。
现代文：不久，加封第五琦为山南等五道度支使。
English: Soon, Jafeng Fifth Precinct became Shannan and other Five Prefectures' highest-ranking envoy.

古文：琦作榷盐法，用以饶。
现代文：第五琦又制定了食盐专营制度，使国用充足。
English: The Fifth Five-Year Plan also established a salt monopoly system to ensure that the country has enough salt.

古文：房琯喜宾客，好谈论，多引拔知名之士，而轻鄙庸俗，人多怨之。
现代文：房喜欢接交朋友，爱好高谈阔论，引荐了许多知名士人，而鄙视无名庸俗之辈，所以很多人怨恨他。
English: Fong likes to make friends, likes to talk a lot, has introduced many famous people, and despises unknown vulgar people, so many people resent him.

古文：北海太守贺兰进明诣行在，上命琯以为南海太守，兼御史大夫，充岭南节度使；琯以为摄御史大夫。
现代文：北海太守贺兰进明到达行在，肃宗命令房任命贺兰进明为南海太守，兼御史大夫，并充任岭南节度使，而房却任命贺兰进明为代理御史大夫。
English: When the governor of the North Sea, Helan Jinming, arrived and departed, the Emperor Su Zong ordered the chamber to appoint Helan Jinming as the governor of the South Sea, concurrently grand secretary, and to serve as the delegate to the Lingnan Festival, but the chamber appointed Helan Jinming as the acting grand secretary.

古文：进明入谢，上怪之，进明因言与琯有隙，且曰： 晋用王衍为三公，祖尚浮虚，致中原板荡。
现代文：贺兰进明入朝谢恩，肃宗感到奇怪，贺兰进明乘机说自己与房有矛盾，并说： 西晋任用王衍为三公，因为崇尚浮华虚名，致使五胡乱华，中原沦陷。
English: Su Zong was surprised that He Lan Jinming took the opportunity to say that he had a conflict with Fang, and said: The Western Jin Dynasty appointed Wang Yan as the Three Princes, because he advocated pomp and false fame, resulting in chaos and chaos, and the Central Plains fell.

古文：今房琯专为迂阔大言以立虚名，所引用皆浮华之党，真王衍之比也！
现代文：现在房喜好迂阔不切实际的言论而图虚名，所引用的人都是轻浮之辈，真是第二个王衍！
English: Now Fang likes to make broad and impractical statements to make a name for himself. The people he quotes are frivolous people. He really is a second Wang Yan!

古文：陛下用为宰相，恐非社稷之福。
现代文：陛下任用这样的人为宰相，恐怕对国家不利。
English: I am afraid that His Majesty's appointment of such a person as Prime Minister is not good for the country.

古文：且琯在南朝佐上皇，使陛下与诸王分领诸道节制，仍置陛下于沙塞空虚之地，又布私党于诸道，使统大权。
现代文：再说房在成都辅佐太上皇，使陛下与诸王分别为各道节度使，而把陛下分置在塞外荒凉空虚的地方，又把自己的亲信私党分别安插在各地，使他们统领大权。
English: Moreover, Fang assisted the retired emperor in Chengdu, so that his majesty and the kings were sent to each festival separately, and his majesty was placed in a desolate and empty place outside the city, and his cronies and private parties were placed in various places, so that they could dominate the power.

古文：其意以为上皇一子得天下，则己不失富贵，此忠臣所为乎？ 
现代文：房的用心是不管皇上的那一个儿子得天下继承皇位，自己都会大富大贵，这难道是忠臣应该做的事吗！ 
English: Fong's intention is that no matter which son of the emperor succeeds to the throne, he will become rich and famous. Is this really what a loyal subject should do?

古文：上由是疏之。
现代文：肃宗因此疏远了房。
English: As a result, Suizong distanced himself from Fang.

古文：房琯上疏，请自将兵复两京；上许之，加持节、招讨西京兼防御蒲、潼两关兵马、节度等使。
现代文：房上疏肃宗，请求亲自率兵收复两京，肃宗同意，于是就加封房为持节、招讨西京兼防御蒲、漳两关兵马及节度等使。
English: He asked Su Zong to personally lead the troops to recapture the two capitals, and Su Zong agreed, so he sealed the house as a festival, invited the West Beijing and defense, and sent soldiers and horses to the two gates and the festival.

古文：琯请自选参佐，以御史中丞邓景山为副，户部侍郎李揖为行军司马，给事中刘秩为参谋。
现代文：房请求由自己挑选部下参佐，于是以御史中丞邓景山为副将，户部侍郎李揖为行军司马，给事中刘秩为参谋。
English: At the request of Fang, he was allowed to select his subordinate staff officers by himself, so he chose the vice-commander of the imperial army, the vice-commander of the imperial army, the vice-commander of the imperial army, the vice-commander of the imperial army, the vice-commander of the imperial army, the vice-commander of the imperial army, the vice-commander of the imperial army, the vice-commander of the imperial army, the vice-commander of the imperial army, the vice-commander of the imperial army, the vice-commander of the imperial army, the vice-commander of the imperial army, the vice-commander of

古文：既行，又令兵部尚书王思礼副之。
现代文：临行前，肃宗又命令兵部尚书王思礼去协助房。
English: He has already acted, and he has also appointed the vice-minister of the Ministry of Military Affairs, Shangshuang Sili, to the vice-ministerial post.

古文：琯悉以戎务委李揖、刘秩，二人皆书生，不闲军旅。
现代文：房把军务大事都委托给李揖与刘秩，此二人都是文弱书生，不懂得军事。
English: Fang entrusted the military affairs to Li Ying and Liu Chizhi, both of whom were poor students and did not understand military affairs.

古文：琯谓人曰： 贼曳落河虽多，安能敌我刘秩！ 
现代文：房对人说： 叛军的精锐壮士曳落河虽然多，但怎么能够敌得过我的谋士刘秩呢！ 
English: Fang said to the man: Although there are many elite warriors of the rebel army dragging down the river, how can they defeat my strategist Liu Ritchi?

古文：琯分为三军：使裨将杨希文将南军，自宜寿入；刘贵哲将中军，自武功入；李光进将北军，自奉天入。
现代文：房把部队分成三军：派副将杨希文率领南军，从宜寿县进攻；派刘贵哲率领中军，从武功县进攻；派李光进率领北军，从奉天县进攻。
English: Fang divided the troops into three armies: he sent Vice Admiral Yang Xiwen to lead the Southern Army and attack from Yishou County; he sent Liu Guizhe to lead the Central Army and attack from Wugong County; and he sent Li Guangjin to lead the Northern Army and attack from Mingtian County.

古文：光进，光弼之弟也。
现代文：李光进是李光弼的弟弟。
English: Li Guangjin is the younger brother of Li Guangyao.

古文：以贺兰进明为河南节度使。
现代文：肃宗任命贺兰进明为河南节度使。
English: Su Zong appointed Helan Jinming as the Henan Festival envoy.

古文：颍王璬之至成都也，崔圆迎谒，拜于马首，璬不之止；圆恨之。
现代文：颍王李到达成都，崔圆去迎接，于马首下拜见，李不予制止，所以崔圆心里怨恨他。
English: When Li Shao Wang arrived in Chengdu, Cui Yuan went to meet him and paid his respects at the horse's head. Li did not stop him, so Cui Yuan hated him in his heart.

古文：璬视事两月，吏民安之。
现代文：李上任两个月，官吏与百姓安定。
English: Two months after Li took office, officials and people are stable.

古文：圆奏罢璬，使归内宅；以武部侍郎李璬为剑南节度使，代之。
现代文：但崔圆却奏请玄宗罢免李，让他回到宫中宅舍，并任命武部侍郎李为剑南节度使，以代替李。
English: However, Cui Yuan asked Xuanzong to dismiss Li, let him return to the palace residence, and appointed Takebe's servant Li as the Jianan Festival envoy to replace Li.

古文：璬，岘之兄也。
现代文：李是李岘的哥哥。
English: Li is the elder brother of Li Yao.

古文：上皇寻命璬与陈王珪诣上宣慰，至是，见上于彭原。
现代文：不久，玄宗又命令李与陈王李去宣慰肃宗，至此，李在彭原见到肃宗。
English: Soon after, Xuanzong also ordered Li and Chen Wang Li to pay tribute to Su Zong. At this point, Li saw Su Zong in Pengyuan.

古文：延王玢从上皇入蜀，追车驾不及；上皇怒，欲诛之，汉中王瑀救之，乃命玢亦诣上所。
现代文：延王李玢追随玄宗逃入蜀中，因为追赶不及，玄宗发怒，想要杀掉他。汉中王李从中援救，于是玄宗命令李玢也去肃宗所在地。
English: Yan Wang Lijun followed Xuan Zong and fled to Shu, but Xuan Zong got angry and wanted to kill him because he couldn't catch up. Hanzhong King Li came to his rescue, so Xuan Zong ordered Li Lijun to also go to Su's location.

古文：甲申，令狐潮、王福德复将步骑万馀攻雍丘。
现代文：甲申，叛军将领令狐潮与王福德又率领步、骑兵一万余人进攻雍丘。
English: In Jiaxing, the rebel generals ordered Fox Tide and Wang Fude to lead the way, and more than ten thousand cavalry attacked Yongqiu.

古文：张巡出击，大破之，斩首数千级，贼遁去。
现代文：张巡领兵出击，大败叛军，杀死数千人，叛军败逃而去。
English: Zhang's patrol soldiers attacked, defeated the rebels, killed thousands of people, and the rebels fled in defeat.

古文：房琯以中军、北军为前锋，庚子，至便桥。
现代文：房琯命令中军与北军为前锋，庚子，进军到便桥。
English: Fusang ordered the Central Army and the Northern Army to march to the bridge as forwards, Geng Zi.

古文：辛丑，二军遇贼将安守忠于咸阳之陈涛斜。
现代文：辛丑，二军与叛军将领安守忠相遇于咸阳的陈涛斜。
English: The Second Army and the rebel general An Shou Zhong met at the Chen Tao slope in Xianyang.

古文：琯效古法，用车战，以牛车二千乘，马步夹之；贼顺风鼓噪，牛皆震骇。
现代文：房效法古人，用战车进攻，组成牛车二千辆，并让步、骑兵护卫。叛军顺风擂鼓呼喊，牛都受到惊吓。
English: Following the example of the ancients, the house attacked with chariots, forming two thousand ox carts, and gave way to a cavalry escort. The rebels shouted in the wind, and the cattle were frightened.

古文：贼纵火焚之，人畜大乱，官军死伤者四万馀人，存者数千而已。
现代文：这时叛军放火焚烧战车，顿时战阵大乱，人畜相杂，唐军死伤达四万余人，逃命存活的仅数千名。
English: At this time, the rebels set fire to the chariot, and suddenly the battle was in chaos, people and animals were mixed, the Tang army killed and injured more than forty thousand people, and only a few thousand survived to escape.

古文：癸卯，琯自以南军战，又败，杨希文、刘贵哲皆降于贼。
现代文：癸卯，房亲自率领南军作战，又被打得大败，杨希文与刘贵哲都投降了叛军。
English: However, Fang personally led the Southern Army to fight, and was defeated again. Yang Xiwen and Liu Guizhe both surrendered to the rebels.

古文：上闻琯败，大怒。
现代文：肃宗得知房大败，十分愤怒。
English: Su Zong was very angry when he learned that his house had been defeated.

古文：李泌为之营救，上乃宥之，待琯如初。
现代文：李泌从中营救，肃宗才赦免了房，仍像过去那样对待他。
English: Su Zong only pardoned Fong and continued to treat him as before.

古文：以薛景仙为关内节度副使。
现代文：肃宗任命薛景仙为关内节度副使。
English: Su Zong appointed Xue Jingxian as the deputy envoy of the Guanai Festival.

古文：敦煌王承寀至回纥牙帐，回纥可汗以女妻之，遣其贵臣与承寀及仆固怀恩偕来，见上于彭原。
现代文：敦煌王李承来到回纥牙帐，回纥可汗把女儿嫁给了他，并派自己的大臣与李承及仆固怀恩一起来唐朝，在彭原见到肃宗。
English: Li Cheng, the king of Dunhuang, came to Huizhou, Huizhou Khan married his daughter to him, and sent his own minister to Tang Dynasty together with Li Cheng and his servant Gu Wai Yan to see Su Zong in Pengyuan.

古文：上厚礼其使者而归之，赐回纥女号毘伽公主。
现代文：肃宗对回纥使节度重加赏赐，然后使他们归国，并将回纥可汗的女儿赐号为毗伽公主。
English: Su Zong rewarded the Uighur envoys with great rewards, then sent them back to their homeland, and gave the Uighur Khan's daughter the title of Princess Viga.

古文：尹子奇围河间，四十馀日不下。史思明引兵会之。
现代文：叛军将领严子奇率兵围攻河间，四十多天未攻克，史思明率兵来增援。
English: The rebel general Yan Ziqi led his troops to besiege Hema, which they did not conquer for more than forty days. Shi Siming led his troops to reinforce them.

古文：颜真卿遣其将和琳将万二千人救河间，思明逆击，擒之，遂陷河间；执李奂送洛阳，杀之。
现代文：颜真卿派大将和琳率兵一万二千人来救河间，遭到史思明的阻击，和琳被俘，于是叛军攻陷了河间，抓获守将李奂送往洛阳杀掉。
English: Yan Zhenqing sent General He Lin and twelve thousand soldiers to rescue He Mi. He was blocked by Shi Siming, and He Lin was captured, so the rebels captured He Mi, captured the guards and sent Li Xi to Luoyang to kill him.

古文：又陷景城，太守李赴湛水死。
现代文：叛军又攻陷了景城，太守李投湛水自杀。
English: The rebels also captured Jingcheng, and the governor, Li Tou Tan Shui, committed suicide.

古文：思明使两骑赍尺书以招乐安，即时举郡降。
现代文：史思明派遣两名骑兵持书信去招降乐安郡，乐安郡立刻投降了叛军。
English: Shi Siming sent two cavalrymen with a letter to recruit Le'an County. Le'an County immediately surrendered to the rebels.

古文：又使其将康没野波将先锋攻平原，兵未至，颜真卿知力不敌，壬寅，弃郡度河南走。
现代文：史思明又派部将康没野波率先锋兵攻打平原，兵还未到，颜真卿自知兵力不敌叛军，壬寅，遂放弃郡城渡过黄河南撤。
English: Shi Siming also sent his subordinate, Kang Mianbo, to lead the vanguard to attack the plain. Before the soldiers arrived, Yan Zhenqing, knowing that the rebels were outnumbered, abandoned Guzheng, crossed the Yellow River and retreated south.

古文：思明即以平原兵攻清河、博平，皆陷之。
现代文：于是史思明用平原郡兵攻打清河、博平，均攻陷。
English: As a result, Shi Siming used soldiers from Pingyuan County to attack Qinghe and Boping, and both were conquered.

古文：思明引兵围乌承恩于信都，承恩以城降，亲导思明入城，交兵马、仓库，马三千匹、兵五万人，思明送承恩诣洛阳，禄山复其官爵。
现代文：史思明又亲自率兵于信都包围了乌承恩，乌承恩投降，并亲自引导史思明入城，把兵马及府库中的物资交给史思明，共有马三千匹，兵一万人。史思明把乌承恩送往洛阳，安禄山恢复了他的官职与爵位。
English: Shi Siming personally led the troops to encircle Ucheng in Xindu, and Ucheng surrendered, and personally led Shi Siming into the city, and handed over the soldiers and horses and the materials in the treasury to Shi Siming, with a total of three thousand horses and ten thousand soldiers. Shi Siming sent Ucheng to Luoyang, and Anlu Mountain restored his official position and peerage.

古文：饶阳裨将束鹿张兴，力举千钧，性复明辩，贼攻饶阳，弥年不能下。
现代文：饶阳副将束鹿人张兴不但勇力过人，而且心有计谋，叛军围攻饶阳，一年都未攻克。
English: Raoyang's vice-commander Zhang Xing, a Sokujin, was not only a man of great courage, but also a man of cunning. The rebels besieged Raoyang and did not conquer it for a year.

古文：及诸郡皆陷，思明并力围之，外救俱绝，太守李系窘迫，赴火死，城遂陷。
现代文：及至其他的郡城都被攻陷，史思明遂全力围攻饶阳。外援全部断绝，太守李系无计可施，投火而死，城遂被攻陷。
English: Other county towns were also captured, and Shishiming besieged Raoyang with all his might. Foreign aid was cut off, and the castle was eventually captured after the daimyō, Li Ke, died after throwing himself into the flames.

古文：思明擒兴，立于马前，谓曰： 将军真壮士，能与我共富贵乎？ 
现代文：史思明抓住了张兴，让他立在马前，然后说： 将军真是一位壮士，不知道能否与我同享富贵？ 
English: Shi Siming grabbed Zhang Xing, let him stand in front of the horse, and then said: The general is really a strong man, I wonder if I can share the wealth with him?

古文：兴曰： 兴，唐之忠臣，固无降理，今数刻之人耳，愿一言而死。 
现代文：张兴说： 我张兴，是唐朝的忠臣，绝没有投降的道理。现在活在世上的时间已不长了，只希望进一言而死。 
English: Zhang Xing said: I, Zhang Xing, am a loyal vassal of the Tang Dynasty, and there is no reason to surrender. Now I have not lived in the world for a long time, I only hope to die with a word.

古文：思明曰： 试言之。 
现代文：史思明说： 请你说出来。 
English: Shi Siming said: You tell me.

古文：兴曰： 主上待禄山，恩如父子，群臣莫及，不知报德，乃兴兵指阙，涂炭生人，大丈夫不能剪除凶逆，乃北面为之臣乎！
现代文：张兴说： 皇上对待安禄山恩如父子，群臣都无法相比，安禄山却忘恩负义，不知报答皇上的恩德，反而兴兵攻打长安，使生灵涂炭。大丈夫不能平叛除掉逆凶，怎么还能再做逆臣呢！
English: Zhang Xing said: The emperor treated An Lushan like a father and son, and the ministers could not be compared. However, An Lushan was ungrateful and did not know how to repay the emperor's kindness. Instead, he raised an army to attack Chang'an and make the living and the dead suffer. It's okay, you can't defeat the rebel and get rid of the traitor, how can you be a rebel again?

古文：仆有短策，足下能听之乎？
现代文：我有一点浅见，不知道足下愿意听否？
English: I'm a bit shallow, I don't know if I'm willing to listen?

古文：足下所以从贼，求富贵耳，譬如燕巢于幕，岂能久安！
现代文：足下之所以跟随安禄山反叛，贪图的不过是富贵，这就好似燕子作巢于帏幕之上，怎么能够长久呢！
English: The reason why the foot follows the Anlu Mountain rebellion, the covetousness is only rich and noble, this is like a swallow making a nest on top of a curtain, how can it last long!

古文：何如乘间取贼，转祸为福，长享富贵，不亦美乎！ 
现代文：不如乘机攻灭叛贼，转祸为福，长享荣华富贵，不也是一件美事吗！ 
English: It is better to take advantage of the opportunity to defeat the traitors, turn misfortune into blessing, and enjoy long-term prosperity and wealth. Isn't it also a beautiful thing!

古文：思明怒，命张于木上，锯杀之，詈不绝口，以至于死。
现代文：史思明听后大怒，命令把张兴捆绑在木头上，用锯子锯杀了他。张兴到死还骂不绝口。
English: After hearing this, Shi Siming flew into a rage, ordered Zhang Xing to be tied to a tree, and killed him with a saw. Zhang Xing cursed endlessly until his death.

古文：贼每破一城，城中人衣服、财贿、妇人皆为所掠。男子，壮者使之负担，羸、病、老、幼皆以刀槊戏杀之。
现代文：叛军每当攻破一城，就把城中的衣服、财物和妇女全部抢掠而去，让壮年男人为他们运送，把老弱病幼者在戏笑中用刀枪杀死。
English: Whenever the rebels conquered a city, they took all the clothes, property and women in the city, let the men carry them, and killed the old, the weak, the sick and the young with knives and guns in a joke.

古文：禄山初以卒三千人授思明，使定河北，至是，河北皆下之，郡置防兵三千，杂以胡兵镇之；思明还博陵。
现代文：起初，安禄山授给史思明兵卒三千，让他平定河北地区，至此，河北地区全部落入叛军之手，每郡驻兵三千，并掺杂胡兵镇守，史思明返回博陵。
English: At first, Anlu Mountain awarded 3,000 soldiers to Shi Siming to pacify the Hebei region. At this point, the entire Hebei region fell into the hands of the rebels, with 3,000 soldiers stationed in each county, and mixed with Hu soldiers to guard the town. Shi Siming returned to Boling.

古文：尹子奇将五千骑度河，略北海，欲南取江、淮。
现代文：叛军大将尹子奇率领骑兵五千渡过黄河，侵犯北海郡，想向南攻占江、淮地区。
English: The rebel general Yin Ziqi led five thousand cavalry across the Yellow River, invaded Beihai County, and wanted to occupy the Jiang and Huai regions to the south.

古文：会回纥可汗遣其臣葛逻支将兵入援，先以二千骑奄至范阳城下，子奇闻之，遽引兵归。
现代文：适逢回纥可汗派大臣葛逻支率兵助唐平叛，先以骑兵二千突然出现在范阳城下，尹子奇得知后，立刻领兵退回。
English: At the time of the Hui-Khan rebellion, Ge Luo, the minister of the Khan faction, led the troops to aid Tang Ping's rebellion. At first, he suddenly appeared with two thousand cavalry under Fanyang Castle. After Yin Ziqi learned of this, he immediately led the troops back.

古文：十一月，戊午，回纥至带汗谷，与郭子仪军合；辛酉，与同罗及叛胡战于榆林河北，大破之，斩首三万，捕虏一万，河曲皆平。
现代文：十一月戊午，回纥兵到达带汗谷，与郭子仪兵相会。辛酉，回纥及唐兵与同罗及反叛的胡兵战于榆林河北岸，大获全胜，杀敌三万余人，俘虏一万，河曲平定。
English: In the afternoon of November, Hui soldiers arrived in Zhudao Khan Valley and met with Guo Ziyi soldiers. Xin Hui, Hui and Tang soldiers fought with Tongluo and rebel Hu soldiers on the north bank of the Yulin River, and won a complete victory, killing more than 30,000 enemies, capturing 10,000 prisoners, and pacifying the river.

古文：子仪还军洛交。
现代文：郭子仪率军返回洛交。
English: Guo Ziyi led the troops back to Lojiao.

古文：上命崔涣宣慰江南，兼知选举。
现代文：肃宗命令崔涣安慰江南地区，并兼主管科举选人的事情。
English: Su Zong ordered Cui Gan to comfort the south of the Yangtze River and also to be in charge of the selection of candidates for the imperial examinations.

古文：永王璘，幼失母，为上所鞠养，常抱之以眠；从上皇入蜀。
现代文：叛军将领令狐潮率兵一万余人扎营于雍丘城北面，张巡领兵出击，大败叛军，叛军逃走。永王李幼年失去母亲，由肃宗抚养，常常抱在怀中同睡。后来李跟随玄宗逃向蜀中。
English: The rebel general ordered the fox tide to lead more than 10,000 soldiers to camp in the north of Yongqiu City. Zhang's patrol leader attacked, defeated the rebels, and the rebels fled. Yong Wang Li lost his mother at an early age, was raised by Su Zong, and often slept with him in his arms. Later, Li followed Xuanzong and fled to Shuzhong.

古文：上皇命诸子分总天下节制，谏议大夫高适谏，以为不可；上皇不听。
现代文：玄宗任命诸子分别兼领天下节度使。谏议大夫高适进谏说不可行，但玄宗不听。
English: Xuanzong appointed each of his sons to be concurrently in charge of the world's festival envoys. Xuanzong said that it was not feasible, but Xuanzong did not listen.

古文：璘领四道节度都使，镇江陵。
现代文：李兼领四道节度都使，坐镇江陵。
English: Li Jianlian presided over all four festivals and presided over Jiangling.

古文：时江、淮租赋山积于江陵，璘召募勇士数万人，日费巨万。
现代文：当时江、淮地区所征收的租赋都积聚于江陵，李招募数万勇士为兵，每日耗费巨大。
English: At that time, all the rents collected in Jiang and Huai regions were accumulated in Jiangling. Li recruited tens of thousands of warriors as soldiers, and the daily expenditure was huge.

古文：璘生长深宫，不更人事，子襄城王瑒，有勇力，好兵，有薛镠等为之谋主，以为今天下大乱，惟南方完富，璘握四道兵，封疆数千里，宜据金陵，保有江表，如东晋故事。
现代文：李从小长于深宫之中，不懂人间世事，儿子襄城王李勇武有力，喜好用兵，又有薛等人为谋士，认为当今天下大乱，只有南方富有，未遭破坏，李手握四道重兵，疆土数千里，应该占据金陵，保有江东，像东晋王朝那样占据一方。
English: Li grew up in the deep palace, and did not understand the world. His son, the king of Xiangcheng, Li Yongwu, was powerful and liked to use soldiers, and Xue and others were his advisers. They believed that when there was a great turmoil today, only the south was rich and had not been destroyed. Li had four heavy armies and thousands of miles of territory. He should occupy Jinling and keep Jiangdong, and occupy one side like the East Jin Dynasty.

古文：上闻之，敕璘归觐于蜀；璘不从。
现代文：肃宗得知后，下敕让李往蜀中朝见玄宗，李不听。
English: After Su Zong learned of this, he ordered Li to go to Shuzhong to see Xuanzong, but Li did not listen.

古文：江陵长史李岘辞疾赴行在，上召高适与之谋。
现代文：江陵长史李岘以有病为名辞别李奔赴行在，肃宗召来高适与他一同商讨计策。
English: The governor of Gangneung, Li Yan, said that he was ill, and left Li Ben to go. Su Zong called Gao Si to discuss strategies with him.

古文：适陈江东利害，且言璘必败之状。
现代文：高适陈说了江东的形势，并分析说李必败。
English: Gao Xi Chen talked about the situation in the east of the Yangtze River, and analyzed that Li must be defeated.

古文：十二月，置淮南节度使，领广陵等十二郡，以适为之；置淮南西道节度使，领汝南等五郡，以来瞋为之；使与江东节度使韦陟共图璘。
现代文：十二月，设置淮南节度使，管辖广陵等十二郡，任命高适为节度使。又设置淮南西道节度使，管辖汝南等五郡，任命来为节度使。让他们与江东节度使韦陟共同对付李。
English: In December, the Huainan Provincial Party Committee was set up, with jurisdiction over twelve counties including Guangling, and Gaoshu was appointed as the Party Committee. The Huainan West Road Party Committee was also set up, with jurisdiction over five counties including Runan, and was appointed as the Party Committee. Let them work with the Jiangdong Party Committee to deal with Li.

古文：安禄山遣兵攻颍川。
现代文：安禄山派兵攻打颍川。
English: An Lushan sent troops to attack Luchuan.

古文：城中兵少，无蓄积，太守薛愿、长史庞坚悉力拒守，绕城百里庐舍、林木皆尽。
现代文：城中兵力少，也没有粮草储备，太守薛愿与长史庞坚竭力坚守，城周围百里以内的房舍和林木都被毁掉。
English: The number of soldiers in the city was small, and there was no grain and grass reserve. The eunuchs Xue Xian and Changshi Pang struggled to hold on, and the houses and trees within a hundred miles around the city were destroyed.

古文：期年，救兵不至，禄山使阿史那承庆益兵攻之，昼夜死斗十五日，城陷，执愿、坚送洛阳，禄山缚于洛滨木上，冻杀之。
现代文：坚守了一年，救兵不来，安禄山又派阿史那承庆增兵攻打，昼夜连续死战十五天，最后城被攻陷，薛愿与庞坚被抓住送往洛阳，安禄山把他们捆绑在洛水边的冰上，活活冻死。
English: He held out for a year, no rescue came, and Anlu Mountain sent Ashina Chengqing to increase the number of troops to attack, and the battle continued for fifteen days and nights. Finally, the city was captured. Xue Jian and Pang Jian were caught and sent to Luoyang. Anlu Mountain tied them to the ice on the edge of Luoshui, and they froze to death.

古文：上问李泌曰： 今敌强如此，何时可定？ 
现代文：肃宗问李泌说： 现在叛军如此强大，不知什么时候才能够平定？ 
English: Su Zong asked Li Jiu, "Now that the rebels are so powerful, when will they be able to be subdued?"

古文：对曰： 臣观贼所获子女金帛，皆输之范阳，此岂有雄据四海之志邪！
现代文：李泌回答说： 我看到叛军把抢掠的子女与财物都运往老巢范阳，这难道有雄据天下的志向吗！
English: Li Xiu replied: "I saw the rebels transport their plundered children and property to their old home Fanyang. Is this the aspiration of the world?

古文：今独虏将或为之用，中国之人惟高尚等数人，自馀皆胁从耳。
现代文：现在只是那些胡人将领为安禄山卖力，汉人只有高尚等几个人，其余的都不过是一些胁从。
English: Now, only those Hu generals are working hard for Anlu Mountain, the Han people only have a few people such as Gao Gao, and the rest are nothing more than followers.

古文：以臣料之，不过二年，天下无寇矣。 
现代文：以我的看法，不过二年，天下就会平定。 
English: In my opinion, but in two years, the world will be pacified.

古文：上曰： 何故？ 
现代文：肃宗说： 这有什么道理？ 
English: Dezong said, "Why do you say that?

古文：对曰： 贼之骁将，不过史思明、安守忠、田乾真、张忠志、阿史那承庆等数人而已。
现代文：李泌回答说： 叛军中勇将不过是史思明、安守忠、田乾真、张忠志、阿史那承庆等几个人。
English: Li Xiu replied: The rebel generals were just Shi Siming, An Shou Zhong, Tian Qian Zhen, Zhang Zhongzhi, Ashina Chengqing and a few others.

古文：今若令李光弼自太原出井陉，郭子仪自冯翊入河东，则思明、忠志不敢离范阳、常山，守忠、乾真不敢离长安，是以两军絷其四将也，从禄山者，独承庆耳。
现代文：现在我们如果命令李光弼率兵从太原出井陉关，郭子仪率兵从冯翊进入河东，这样史思明与张忠志便不敢离开范阳与常山，安守忠与田乾真则不敢离开长安，我们以两支军队拖住了叛军的四员骁将，跟随安禄山的只有阿史那承庆了。
English: Now, if we ordered Li Guangyao and his soldiers to leave Taiyuan for Jing'an, and Guo Ziyi and his soldiers to leave Fengyuan for Hedong, then Shi Siming and Zhang Zhongzhi would not dare to leave Fanyang and Changshan, and Anshu Zhong and Tian Qianzhen would not dare to leave Chang'an. With two armies, we could hold back the four rebel generals, and only Ashina Chengqing would follow Anlu Mountain.

古文：愿敕子仪勿取华阴，使两京之道常通，陛下以所征之兵军于扶风，与子仪、光弼互出击之，彼救首则击其尾，救尾则击其首，使贼往来数千里，疲于奔命，我常以逸待劳，贼至则避其锋，去则乘其弊，不攻城，不遏路。
现代文：希望下敕书命令郭子仪不要攻取华阴，使两京之间的道路畅通，陛下率领所征召的军队驻扎于扶风，与郭子仪、李光弼交互攻击叛军，叛军如果救援这头，就攻击他们的那头，如果救援那头，就攻击这头，使叛军在数千里长的战线上往来，疲于奔命，我们则以逸待劳，叛军如果来交战，就避开他的锋芒，如果要撤退，就乘机攻击，不攻占城池，不切断来往的道路。
English: It is hoped that the imperial edict will order Guo Ziyi not to attack Huayin, so that the road between the two capitals will be smooth. His Majesty led the conscripted army stationed in Fu Feng, and attacked the rebels with Guo Ziyi and Li Guangyao. If the rebels rescue this side, they will attack their other side. If they rescue the other side, they will attack this side. The rebels traveled thousands of miles on the front line, exhausted, while we waited for labor. If the rebels came to fight, they would avoid his front. If they wanted to retreat, they would attack at the right time. They would not attack, occupy the city, or cut off

古文：来春复命建宁为范阳节度大使，并塞北出，与光弼南北掎角以取范阳，覆其巢穴。
现代文：明年春天再任命建宁王李为范阳节度大使，从塞北出击，与李光弼形成南北夹击之势，以攻取范阳，颠覆叛军的巢穴。
English: In the spring of the next year, Jianning Wang Li was appointed as the ambassador of Fanyang Festival. He attacked from the north of Sai and formed a north-south clampdown with Li Guangyao to capture Fanyang and subvert the rebels' lair.

古文：贼退则无所归，留则不获安，然后大军四合而攻之，必成擒矣。 
现代文：这样叛军想要撤退则归路已断，要留在两京则不得安宁，然后各路大军四面合击而进攻，就一定能够平息叛军。 
English: In this way, if the rebels want to retreat, the way back is broken, if they want to stay in the two capitals, there will be no peace, and then the various armies will attack in all directions, and they will definitely be able to quell the rebels.

古文：上悦。
现代文：肃宗听后很高兴。
English: The second generation is very happy.

古文：时张良娣与李辅国相表里，皆恶泌。
现代文：当时张良娣与李辅国内外勾结，二人都嫉恨李泌。
English: At that time, Zhang Liangyao colluded with Li Shuo at home and abroad, and both of them envied Li Xiu.

古文：建宁王倓谓泌曰： 先生举倓于上，得展臣子之效，无以报德，请为先生除害。 
现代文：建宁王李对李泌说： 先生你在皇上面前荐举了我，使我得以效臣子之忠，大恩大德无以报答，请让我为先生除掉大害。 
English: Jianning Wang Li said to Li Xiu: Sir, you have recommended me in front of the emperor, so that I can be loyal to my vassal. There is no way to repay the great kindness. Please let me remove the great harm for my master.

古文：泌曰： 何也？ 
现代文：李泌说： 你说的是什么意思？ 
English: Li Rui said: What do you mean by that?

古文：倓以良娣为言。
现代文：李就说到张良娣。
English: Li mentioned Zhang Liangyao.

古文：泌曰： 此非人子所言，愿王姑置之，勿以为先。 
现代文：李泌听后说： 这样的话不是作臣子所应该说的，希望你暂时把这件事放下，不要先做这种事。 
English: After listening, Li Xiu said, "Such words are not what a courtier should say. I hope you will put this matter aside for the time being and not do such things in the first place."

古文：倓不从。
现代文：但李不听从李泌的话。
English: But Li didn't listen to Li Xiu.

古文：甲辰，永王璘擅引舟师东巡，沿江而下，军容甚盛，然犹未露割据之谋。
现代文：甲辰，永王李擅自率兵东巡，沿着长江而下，军势浩大，但还没有显露出割据一方的图谋。
English: At that time, Yong Wang Li led his troops on an unauthorized eastward patrol along the Yangtze River. The army was huge, but it did not reveal the intention of the other side.

古文：吴郡太守兼江南东路采访使李希言平牒璘，诘其擅引兵东下之意。
现代文：吴郡太守兼江南东路采访使李希言写信给李，责问他擅自发兵东下的意图。
English: The interview with the governor of Wu County and the south-east of the Yangtze River prompted Li Xiyan to write to Li and ask him about his intention to send troops to the east without authorization.

古文：璘怒，分兵遣其将浑惟明袭希言于吴郡，季广琛袭广陵长史、淮南采访使李成式于广陵。
现代文：李大怒，于是就分兵派遣部将浑惟明在吴郡袭击李希言，季广琛在广陵袭击广陵长史、淮南采访使李成式。
English: Li was enraged, so he ordered the dispatching division commander, Hun Weiming, to attack Li Xiyan in Wu County, Ji Guangyao to attack Guangling Changshi in Guangling, and Huainan to interview Li Chengshih.

古文：璘进至当涂，希言遣其将元景曜及丹徒太守阎敬之将兵拒之，李成式亦遣其将李承庆拒之。
现代文：李率兵进至当涂，李希言派遣部将元景曜与丹徒太守阎敬之率兵抵挡，李成式也派部将李承庆迎击。
English: Li led the troops to Dangtu, Li Xiyan dispatched troops to oppose Yuan Jingyou and the troops led by Dantou Taishu Yan Jian, and Li Chengshih also sent troops to meet Li Chengqing.

古文：璘击斩敬之以殉，景曜、承庆皆降于璘，江、淮大震。
现代文：李将阎敬之斩首示众，于是元景曜与李承庆都投降了李，江、淮地区大为震动。
English: Li decapitated Yan Jing in front of the public. As a result, both Yuan Jingyou and Li Chengqing surrendered to Li. The region of Jiang and Huai was greatly shaken.

古文：高适与来瑱、韦陟会于安陆，结盟誓众以讨之。
现代文：高适、来与韦陟会合于安陆，结盟誓师讨伐李。
English: Gao Shih, came to meet Wei Wei in Anlu and made an alliance to fight against Li.

古文：于阗王胜闻安禄山反，命其弟曜摄国事，自将兵五千入援。上嘉之，拜特进，兼殿中监。
现代文：于阗王尉迟胜得知安禄山谋反，就任命他的弟弟尉迟曜代理国政，自己亲自率兵五千入朝援助平叛，肃宗嘉奖他的忠诚，拜他为特进，兼殿中监。
English: When Yu Shao Wang Li Sheng learned of the rebellion in Anlu Mountain, he appointed his younger brother, Li Shao Yu, to be in charge of state affairs. He personally led five thousand soldiers to the North to aid in the suppression of the rebellion. Su Zong praised his loyalty and worshiped him as a special envoy, as well as the palace overseer.

古文：令狐潮、李庭望攻雍丘，数月不下，乃置杞州，筑城于雍丘之北以绝其粮援。
现代文：叛军将领令狐潮与李庭望率兵攻打雍丘，数月未攻克，于是就设置了杞州，在雍丘北面筑杞州城，以断绝雍丘城的粮食援助。
English: The rebel generals ordered Fox Tide and Li Tingwang to lead the troops to attack Yongqiu, but they did not conquer it for several months, so they set up Zhangzhou and built Zhangzhou City in the north of Yongqiu to cut off food aid from Yongqiu City.

古文：贼常数万人，而张巡众才千馀，每战辄克。
现代文：叛军经常用数万兵力来进攻，而张巡的兵力才有一千余人，但每次交战都打退叛军。
English: The rebels often attack with tens of thousands of troops, while Zhang Jun's troops only have more than a thousand people, but they beat back the rebels in every engagement.

古文：河南节度使虢王巨屯彭城，假巡先锋使。
现代文：河南节度使虢王李巨率兵屯驻于彭城，命张巡为代理先锋使。
English: Henan King Li Jiu and his army were stationed in Pengcheng for the Henan Festival, and Zhang Jun was appointed as the acting vanguard envoy.

古文：是月，鲁、东平、济阴陷于贼。
现代文：此月，鲁郡、东平、济阴都落入叛军之手。
English: This month, Lu County, Dongping and Jiyin all fell into the hands of the rebels.

古文：贼将杨朝宗帅马步二万，将袭宁陵，断巡后。
现代文：叛军大将杨朝宗率领步、骑兵二万将要袭击宁陵，断绝张巡的后路。
English: The rebel general Yang Chaozong led the way, and twenty thousand cavalrymen were about to attack Ningling, cutting off Zhang Jun's back route.

古文：巡遂拔雍丘，东守宁陵以待之，始与睢阳太守许远相见。
现代文：张巡于是率兵撤出雍丘，向东坚守宁陵，抵抗叛军，这时张巡才与睢阳太守许远见面。
English: Zhang Jun then led his troops to withdraw from Yongqiu and hold fast to Ningling in the east to resist the rebels. At this time, Zhang Jun finally met with the governor of Shenyang at a great distance.

古文：是日，杨朝宗至宁陵城西北，巡、远与战，昼夜数十合，大破之，斩首万馀级，流尸塞汴而下，贼收兵夜遁。
现代文：当天，杨朝宗率兵到达宁陵城西北，张巡、许远与他交战，一昼夜达数十次，大败叛军，杀死一万余人，死尸塞满汴水，顺流而下，叛军收兵连夜逃走。
English: On the same day, Yang Chaozong led his troops to the northwest of Ningling City. Zhang Jun and Xu Yuan fought with him, dozens of times in one day and night. They defeated the rebels, killed more than 10,000 people, stuffed the dead bodies with salty water, and went down the river. The rebels gathered their troops and fled overnight.

古文：敕以巡为河南节度副使。
现代文：肃宗下敕书任命张巡为河南节度副使。
English: Zhang Jun was appointed as the deputy envoy of Henan Festival by Su Zong's edict.

古文：巡以将士有功，遣使诣虢王巨请空名告身及赐物，巨唯与折冲、果毅告身三十通，不与赐物。
现代文：张巡认为部下将士有功，派遣使者向虢王李巨请求给予空名的委任状以及赏赐物品，而虢王李巨只给了折冲都尉与果毅都尉的委任状三十通，没有给予赏赐的物品。
English: Zhang Jun thought that his subordinates were meritorious, so he sent an envoy to King Li Jue to request that he give him an empty letter of appointment and reward items. However, King Li Jue only gave Captain Orichon and Captain Guo Yi 30 letters of appointment, but no reward items.

古文：巡移书责巨，巨竟不应。
现代文：张巡写信责备李巨，李巨竟不回信。
English: Zhang Jun wrote a letter to reproach Li Jiu, but Li Jiu did not reply to the letter.

古文：是岁，置北海节度使，领北海等四郡；上党节度使，领上党等三郡；兴平节度使，领上洛等四郡。
现代文：这一年，唐朝设置北海节度使，统辖北海等四郡；设置上党节度使，统辖上党等三郡；设置兴平节度使，统辖上洛等四郡。
English: In this year, the Tang Dynasty set up the North Sea Festival Envoy, with jurisdiction over four counties including the North Sea; set up the Upper Party Festival Envoy, with jurisdiction over three counties including the Upper Party; set up the Xingping Festival Envoy, with jurisdiction over four counties including Shangluo.

古文：吐蕃陷威戎、神威、定戎、宣威、制胜、金天、天成等军，石堡城、百谷城、雕窠城。
现代文：吐蕃军队攻陷唐朝的威戎、神威、定戎、宣威、制胜、金天、天成等军及石堡城、百谷城、雕窠城。
English: The Tubo army captured the Tang Dynasty's Wei Rong, Shen Wei, Ding Rong, Xuan Wei, Sheng Sheng, Jin Tian, Tiancheng and other armies, as well as Shibao City, Baotian City, and Jiaojun City.

古文：初，林邑王范真龙为其臣摩诃漫多伽独所杀，尽灭范氏。
现代文：当初，林邑国王范真龙被臣子摩诃漫多伽独杀死，并族灭了范氏。
English: At the beginning, King Fan Zhenglong of Linyi was killed by his vassal, Mahamandogatari, and the clan exterminated the Fan clan.

古文：国人立其王头黎之女为王，女不能治国，更立头黎之姑子诸葛地，谓之环王，妻以女王。
现代文：国人又立国王头黎的女儿为王，因为头黎的女儿不能治理国家，国人就改立头黎姑母的儿子诸葛地为王，被称为环王，并把女王嫁给他。
English: The people of the country also made the daughter of King Toure the king. Since Toure's daughter could not rule the country, the people made the son of Toure's aunt, Zhuge Di, the king, known as the Ring King, and married the queen to him.

古文：至德二年丁酉，公元七五七年
现代文：至德二载
English: Two years in Germany

古文：春，正月，上皇下诰，以宪部尚书李麟同平章事，总行百司，命崔圆奉诰赴彭原。
现代文：春季，正月，玄宗颁下诰命，任命宪部尚书李麟为同平章事，总管朝中各个部门，并命令崔圆奉诰命赴彭原。
English: In the spring, the first month of the year, Emperor Xuanzong issued an edict, appointing Li Lin of the Constitutional Department of Shangshu as Tongping, the head of all departments in the dynasty, and ordered Cui Yuan to go to Pengyuan.

古文：麟，懿祖之后也。
现代文：李麟是懿祖光皇帝李天锡的后代。
English: Li Lin is a descendant of Emperor Li Tianxi.

古文：安禄山自起兵以来，目渐昏，至是不复睹物；又病疽，性益躁暴，左右使令，小不如意，动加棰挞，或时杀之。
现代文：安禄山从起兵反叛以来，视力逐渐下降，至此已看不清东西，又因为身上长了毒疮，性情更加暴躁，对左右的官员稍不如意，就用鞭子抽打，有时干脆杀掉。
English: Anlu Shan's eyesight had gradually deteriorated since he started his rebellion. At this point, he could no longer see anything clearly, and because of the poisonous sores on his body, his temper was more irritable. If he was not satisfied with the officials around him, he would lash them with a whip, and sometimes kill them outright.

古文：既称帝，深居禁中，大将希得见其面，皆因严庄白事。
现代文：称帝以后，居于深宫之中，大将难得见他的面，都是通过严庄向安禄山报告。
English: After he was proclaimed emperor, he lived in the depths of the palace, and it was rare for the general to see him. He always reported to Anlu Mountain through Yan Zhuang.

古文：庄虽贵用事，亦不免棰挞，阉竖李猪儿被挞尤多，左右人不自保。
现代文：严庄虽然贵有权势，但也免不了被鞭打。宦官李猪儿挨的打尤其多，安禄山左右的人都感到自身难保。
English: Although Yan Zhuang was noble and powerful, he could not avoid being whipped. The eunuch Li Xuer received a particularly large number of beatings, and people around Anlu Mountain felt insecure.

古文：禄山嬖妾段氏，生子庆恩，欲以代庆绪为后。
现代文：安禄山的爱妾段氏生子名叫庆恩，想要替代安庆绪为太子。
English: An Lushan's beloved concubine, Duan's son named Qing'en, wanted to replace An Qingxu as crown prince.

古文：庆绪常惧死，不知所出。
现代文：所以安庆绪常常害怕被杀死，不知道怎么办才好。
English: Therefore, An Qingxu is often afraid of being killed and does not know what to do.

古文：庄谓庆绪曰： 事有不得已者，时不可失。 
现代文：严庄对安庆绪说： 事情往往有迫不得已的时候，机不可失。 
English: Yan solemnly said to An Qingxu: When things are often under pressure, the opportunity must not be lost.

古文：庆绪曰： 兄有所为，敢不敬从。 
现代文：安庆绪说： 老兄如果要想有所为，我怎么敢不跟从。 
English: An Qingxu said, "Brother, if you want to do something, how dare I not follow you.

古文：又谓猪儿曰： 汝前后受挞，宁有数乎！
现代文：严庄又对李猪儿说： 你前后挨的毒打难道还有数吗！
English: Yan solemnly said to Li Shuer, "Do you still remember the number of severe beatings you received back and forth?

古文：不行大事，死无日矣！ 
现代文：如果再不干大事，恐怕离死就不远了！ 
English: If I don't do something big, I'm afraid I'm not far from death!

古文：猪儿亦许诺。
现代文：李猪儿也答应一块行动。
English: Li Xuer also agreed to join the action.

古文：庄与庆绪夜持兵立帐外，猪儿执刀直入帐中，斫禄山腹。
现代文：于是严庄与安庆绪夜里手持武器立在帐幕外面，李猪儿手执大刀直入帐中，向安禄山的腹部砍去。
English: As a result, Yan Zhuang and An Qingxu stood outside the tent in the night with weapons in their hands. Li Xuer, holding a big knife, went straight into the tent and cut the belly of Anlu Mountain.

古文：左右惧，不敢动。
现代文：安禄山左右的人因为恐惧都不敢动。
English: People around Mt. Anlu are afraid to move.

古文：禄山扪枕旁刀，不获，撼帐竿，曰： 必家贼也。 
现代文：安禄山用手摸枕旁的刀，没有拿到，于是就用手摇动帐幕的竿子说： 这一定是家贼干的。 
English: An Lushan felt with his hand for the knife beside his pillow, but did not get it, so he shook the pole of the tent with his hand and said: This must have been done by the thief.

古文：腹已流血数斗，遂死。
现代文：这时肠子已流出一大堆，随即死去。
English: By this time, a large amount of intestine had leaked out, and he died immediately.

古文：掘床下深数尺，以氈裹其尸埋之，诫宫中不得泄。
现代文：严庄等在安禄山的床下挖了数尺深的坑，用毡包裹了安禄山的尸体，埋了进去，并告诫宫中人不得向外泄露真相。
English: Yan Zhuang dug a pit several feet deep under the bed of Anlu Mountain, wrapped the body of Anlu Mountain with cocoons, buried it, and warned the people in the palace not to leak the truth to the outside world.

古文：乙卯旦，庄宣言于外，云禄山疾亟。
现代文：乙卯早晨，严庄向外宣布说安禄山病重，立晋王安庆绪为太子。
English: In the morning of the second day, Yan solemnly announced to the outside world that An Lushan was seriously ill, and An Qingxu, the King of Jin, was appointed as the crown prince.

古文：立晋王庆绪为太子，寻即帝位，尊禄山为太上皇，然后发丧。
现代文：不久安庆绪即皇帝位，尊称安禄山为太上皇，然后才发丧。
English: Soon after, An Qingxu was enthroned as emperor, and An Lushan was given the honorific title of "Grand Retired Emperor" before he passed away.

古文：庆绪性昏懦，言辞无序，庄恐众不服，不令见人。
现代文：安庆绪性情昏庸懦弱，说话时语无伦次，严庄恐怕众人不服，所以不让安庆绪出来见人。
English: An Qingxu's temperament is dim, cowardly, incoherent when speaking, and solemn. I'm afraid everyone is not convinced, so they don't let An Qingxu come out to meet people.

古文：庆绪日纵酒为乐，兄事庄，以为御史大夫、冯翊王，事无大小，皆取决焉；厚加诸将官爵以悦其心。
现代文：安庆绪每天以饮酒为乐，称严庄为兄，任命他为御史大夫，封冯翊王爵位，大小事情都由严庄决定，并加封诸将的官爵，借以笼络人心。
English: An Qingxu enjoyed drinking alcohol every day. He called Yan Zhuang as his elder brother, appointed him as the Imperial Historian, bestowed a title of nobility on King Fengxuan. Everything big and small was decided by Yan Zhuang. He also conferred titles of nobility on generals to win the hearts of the people.

古文：上从容谓李泌曰： 广平为元帅逾年，今欲命建宁专征，又恐势分。
现代文：肃宗从容地对李泌说： 广平王李为元帅已经过了一个年头，现在想命令建宁王李专管征讨叛军的军事，但又恐怕大权分散。
English: Su Zong calmly said to Li Xiu: It has been a year since Guangping Wang Li became a marshal, and now he wants to order Jianning Wang Li to be in charge of recruiting the military of the rebel army, but I am afraid that power is scattered.

古文：立广平为太子，何如？ 
现代文：立广平王李为太子如何？ 
English: How about making Guangping Wang Li the crown prince?

古文：对曰： 臣固尝言之矣，戎事交切，须即区处，至于家事，当俟上皇。
现代文：李泌回答说： 我早已说过，现在战事急迫，形势紧张，必须立刻处理，至于立太子这一类的家事，应当等待上皇的命令。
English: Li Xiu replied: I have already said that now the war is urgent and the situation is tense, we must deal with it immediately. As for the family affairs such as the appointment of the crown prince, we should wait for the emperor's order.

古文：不然，后代何以辨陛下灵武即位之意邪！
现代文：不然，后代的人怎么看待陛下灵武即帝位的用意呢！
English: Otherwise, how will future generations view His Majesty's preparations for enthronement!

古文：此必有人欲令臣与广平有隙耳；臣请以语广平，广平亦必未敢当。 
现代文：这一定是有人想要挑拨我与广平王的关系，我请求把此事告诉广平王，广平王也必定不敢接受。 
English: This must be someone trying to provoke my relationship with Guangping Wang. I asked to tell this to Guangping Wang, and Guangping Wang would certainly not dare to accept it.

古文：泌出，以告广平王亻叔，亻叔曰： 此先生深知其心，欲曲成其美也。 
现代文：李泌出宫后把此事告诉了广平王李，李说： 这是先生深知我的心意，并想从侧面促成美事。 
English: After Li Jing was released from the palace, he told Guangping Wang Li about this. Li said, "This is because my master is well aware of my intentions and wants to promote a good thing from the side.

古文：乃入，固辞，曰： 陛下犹未奉晨昏，臣何心敢当储副！
现代文：于是就入宫，坚持推辞不受说： 陛下即帝位后还没有来得及行早晚看望上皇的礼节，我怎么敢于当太子呢！
English: So he entered the palace, insisting that he would not be pushed aside, saying: "Your Majesty, after the throne, has not yet had time to perform the etiquette of visiting the emperor in the morning and evening. How dare I become a prince!"

古文：愿俟上皇还宫，臣之幸也。 
现代文：愿能等待上皇还宫，这是我的荣幸。 
English: I wish I could wait for the emperor to return to the palace. It would be my honor.

古文：上赏慰之。
现代文：肃宗赏赐并慰勉了广平王。
English: Emperor Suzong rewarded and consoled King Guangping.

古文：李辅国本飞龙小儿，粗闲书计，给事太子宫，上委信之。
现代文：李辅国本是宦官中的飞龙小儿，粗通文墨，肃宗为太子时，李辅国在宫中侍奉，所以深受肃宗的信任。
English: Li Fuguo was originally the youngest of the eunuchs, with a rudimentary knowledge of literature and calligraphy. When Su Zong was crown prince, Li Fuguo served in the palace, so he was deeply trusted by Su Zong.

古文：辅国外恭谨寡言而内狡险，见张良娣有宠，阴附会之，与相表里。建宁王倓数于上前诋讦二人罪恶，二人谮之于上曰： 倓恨不得为元帅，谋害广平王。 
现代文：李辅国外表恭顺谨慎，寡言少语，而内心却狡诈阴险，看见张良娣受到肃宗的宠爱，就暗中依附张良娣，与她内外勾结，建宁王李多次在肃宗面前揭发二人的罪恶，二人就在肃宗面前进谗言说： 建宁王因为没有被任命为元帅，心中怨恨，想要谋害广平王李。 
English: Li Yu was outwardly courteous and discreet, but inwardly he was cunning and insidious. When he saw that Zhang Liangyao was favored by Su Zong, he secretly attached himself to Zhang Liangyao and colluded with her inside and out. Jianning Wang Li repeatedly exposed the two men's crimes in front of Su Zong, and the two of them said in front of Su Zong: Jianning Wang, because he was not appointed as a marshal, had resentment in his heart and wanted to murder Guangping Wang Li.

古文：上怒，赐倓死。
现代文：肃宗听后大怒，就下令赐建宁王李自杀。
English: After hearing this, Su Zong was furious and ordered Jianning Wang Li to commit suicide.

古文：于是广平王倓及李泌皆内惧。
现代文：因此广平王李与李泌都心怀恐惧。
English: Therefore, both Guangping Wang Li and Li Jie were filled with fear.

古文：倓谋去辅国及良娣，泌曰： 不可，王不见建宁之祸乎？ 
现代文：李谋划要除掉李辅国与张良娣，李泌说： 此事不可行，您难道没有看见建宁王遭到了杀身之祸吗？ 
English: Li planned to get rid of Li Shuogu and Zhang Liangyao. Li Xiu said, "This is not feasible. Didn't you see that King Jianning was killed?

古文：亻叔曰： 窃为先生忧之。 
现代文：李说： 我私下为先生的生命担忧。 
English: Li said: I am privately worried about my husband's life.

古文：泌曰： 泌与主上有约矣。
现代文：李泌说： 我与皇上有约定。
English: Li Zuo said: I have an appointment with the emperor.

古文：俟平京师，则去还山，庶免于患。 
现代文：等待收复京师以后，我就返回山中过隐居生活，这样或许可以免除祸患。 
English: After waiting for the restoration of the capital, I will return to the mountains to live a secluded life, which may be able to avoid the disaster.

古文：亻叔曰： 先生去，则亻叔益危矣。 
现代文：李说： 先生如果离开，我就更加危险了。 
English: Mr. Li said, "If you leave, I will be in more danger."

古文：泌曰： 王但尽人子之孝，良娣妇人，王委曲顺之，亦何能为！ 
现代文：李泌说： 您只管尽儿子的孝心。张良娣是一个妇人，您如果能够委曲求全，顺从她的心意，她还能有什么作为呢？ 
English: Li Xiu said, "You only need to fulfill your son's filial piety. Zhang Liangyao is a woman. If you can do her bidding and obey her wishes, what else can she do?

古文：上谓泌曰： 今郭子仪、李光弼已为宰相，若克两京，平四海，则无官以赏之，奈何？ 
现代文：肃宗对李泌说： 现在郭子仪与李光弼已贵为宰相，如果他们克复两京，平定天下，就再也没有官赏赐他们了，那将怎么办呢？ 
English: Su Zong said to Li Xiu: Now that Guo Zi Yi and Li Guangyao have become prime ministers, if they recover the two capitals and pacify the world, there will no longer be any officials to reward them, so what will happen?

古文：对曰： 古者官以任能，爵以酬功。
现代文：李泌回答说： 古时候官职任命给有能力的人，爵位酬答有功勋的人。
English: Li Xiu replied: In ancient times, government posts were appointed to those with ability, and titles were awarded to those with meritorious deeds.

古文：汉、魏以来，虽以郡县治民，然有功则锡以茅土，传之子孙，至于周、隋皆然。
现代文：汉魏以来，虽然设立郡县用来治理民众，但对有功人则赏赐土地，可以传给子孙，直至北周、隋朝都是如此。
English: Since the Han and Wei Dynasties, although counties were set up to govern the people, those with meritorious deeds were rewarded with land that could be passed down to their descendants. This was the case up until the Northern Zhou and Sui Dynasties.

古文：唐初，未得关东，故封爵皆设虚名，其食实封者，给缯布而已。
现代文：唐朝建立之初，因为还没有取得关东，所以封爵都只有虚名，享受实封者，只给他们封地上所征收的丝织品与布匹而已。
English: At the beginning of the establishment of the Tang Dynasty, because Kanto had not yet been acquired, the knighthoods were only fictitious, and those who enjoyed the real seal only gave them the silk and cloth levied on the fief.

古文：贞观中，太宗欲复古制，大臣议论不同而止。
现代文：贞观年间，太宗皇帝想要恢复古代的制度，因为大臣们有不同的意见而没有实行。
English: During the Zhenguan era, Emperor Taizong wanted to restore the ancient system, but it was not implemented because the ministers had different opinions.

古文：由是赏功者多以官。
现代文：因此赏赐有功的人多是给他们以高官。
English: Therefore, rewarding meritorious people mostly means giving them high-ranking positions.

古文：夫以官赏功有二害，非才则废事，权重则难制。
现代文：用官职赏赐功劳有两种危害：如果所任非才就会误事，如果权力过重则难以控制。
English: There are two kinds of harms in rewarding merit with official positions: if you do something wrong, you will make a mistake, and if you have too much power, it will be difficult to control.

古文：是以功臣居大官者，皆不为子孙之远图，务乘一时之权以邀利，无所不为。
现代文：所以有功之臣被任命为大官的，都不为子孙的长远利益考虑，只是借权力谋取利益，无所不为。
English: Therefore, when meritorious ministers are appointed to high-ranking positions, they do not consider the long-term interests of their children and grandchildren, but only use their power to seek benefits and do anything.

古文：向使禄山有百里之国，则亦惜之以传子孙，不反矣。
现代文：假如过去封给安禄山百里之国，那么他就会珍惜封国以传子孙，不谋反了。
English: If he had been given the land of Anlu Mountain in the past, he would have treasured it and passed it down to his children and grandchildren.

古文：为今之计，俟天下既平，莫若疏爵土以赏功臣，则虽大国，不过二三百里，可比今之小郡，岂难制哉！
现代文：为现在的情况考虑，等天下平定后，不如分土封爵以赏功臣，虽是大国也不过二三百里，与现在的小郡差不多，难道不好控制吗！
English: Considering the current situation, after the world is pacified, it would be better to allocate land and bestow knighthoods to reward meritorious vassals. Although it is a big country, it is only two or three hundred li, which is similar to the current small counties. Isn't it better to control it?

古文：于人臣乃万世之利也。 
现代文：这样对于为臣子的人乃是万世的利益。 
English: This is an eternal benefit for those who are courtiers.

古文：上曰： 善！ 
现代文：肃宗听后说： 你说的好！ 
English: Emperor Wu said: You said it well!

古文：上闻安西、北庭及拔汗那、大食诸国兵至凉、鄯，甲子，幸保定。
现代文：肃宗得知安西、北庭及拔汗那、大食诸国援兵到达凉州、鄯州，甲子，临幸保定郡。
English: Su Zong learned that Ansi, Beiting and Bajangna, and the reinforcements from various countries arrived in Liangzhou, Zhangzhou, Kosi, and Lincheng Baoding County.

古文：丙寅，剑南兵贾秀等五千人谋反，将军席元庆、临邛太守柳奕讨诛之。
现代文：丙寅，剑南镇兵贾秀等五千人举兵谋反，被将军席元庆与临邛太守柳奕讨伐诛杀。
English: Hsin Yin, Jian Nan Town soldier Jia Xiu and other five thousand people raised an army to rebel, and were killed by the general Shi Yuanqing and the Linyi governor Liu Yi.

古文：河西兵马使盖庭伦与武威九姓商胡安门物等，杀节度使周泌，聚众六万。
现代文：河西兵马使盖庭伦与武威郡昭武九姓胡商安门物等杀死节度使周泌，聚集兵众至六万人。
English: The soldiers and horses from the west of the Hebei Province sent Gaiting Lun and Wuwei County's Zhaowu nine surnamed Hu Shang'anmen to kill Zhengdu and gather up to 60,000 soldiers.

古文：武威大城之中，小城有七，胡据其五，二城坚守。
现代文：武威郡大城之中有七个小城，胡人已占据了五个，只有两个城还在坚守。
English: Among the large cities in Wuwei County, there are seven small cities. The Hu people have occupied five, and only two cities are still holding out.

古文：支度判官崔称与中使刘日新以二城兵攻之，旬有七日，平之。
现代文：河西支度判官崔称与中使刘日新率领二城中的军队攻打叛胡，经过十七日苦战，平定了叛乱。
English: Cui, the magistrate of Hexi Prefecture, said that he and the Chinese envoy Liu Rixin led the troops of the two cities to attack the rebel Hu, and after 17 days of hard fighting, they quelled the rebellion.

古文：史思明自博陵，蔡希德自太行，高秀岩自大同，牛廷介自范阳，引兵共十万，寇太原。
现代文：叛军大将史思明率兵从博陵，蔡希德从太行，高秀岩从大同，牛廷介从范阳，发兵共十万，来进攻太原。
English: Rebel general Shi Siming led troops from Boling, Cai Xide from Taihang, Gao Xiuyan from Datong, and Niu Ting Jie from Fanyang, sending a total of 100,000 troops to attack Taiyuan.

古文：李光弼麾下精兵皆赴朔方，馀团练乌合之众不满万人。
现代文：李光弼部下的精兵都奔赴朔方，其余的团练兵都是乌合之众，不满一万人。
English: The elite soldiers under Li Guangyao's command all rushed to the Shuo side, and the rest of the regimental drill soldiers were a rabble of less than ten thousand.

古文：思明以为太原指掌可取，既得之，当遂长驱取朔方、河、陇。
现代文：史思明认为太原城垂手可得，如果攻下太原，当立即长驱直取朔方、河西、陇右。
English: Shi Siming believed that Taiyuan City was within reach, and if Taiyuan was captured, it should be immediately driven straight to Shuofang, Hexi and Shizhu.

古文：太原诸将皆惧，议修城以待之，光弼曰： 太原城周四十里，贼垂至而兴役，是未见敌先自困也。 
现代文：太原城中的将领都十分害怕，商议修治城池抵抗叛军，李光弼说： 太原城周长四十里，在叛军即刻就要来到时修治城池，是未见敌人而先疲困自己。 
English: The generals in the city of Taiyuan were very afraid. They discussed how to repair the city and resist the rebels. Li Guangyao said: The city of Taiyuan has a circumference of forty miles. When the rebels were about to arrive, they repaired the city. They did not see the enemy and exhausted themselves first.

古文：乃帅士卒及民于城外凿壕以自固。
现代文：于是率领士兵及民众于城外开凿壕沟准备固守。
English: So he led the soldiers and people to dig a trench outside the city to prepare to hold on.

古文：作墼数十万，众莫知所用；及贼攻城于外，光弼用之增垒于内，坏辄补之。
现代文：又让士卒做了数十万块砖坯，大家都不知道有什么用处。等到叛军在城外进攻，李光弼就让士卒用砖坯在城内加高城墙，有毁坏的地方便立刻补修。
English: When the rebels attacked outside the city, Li Guangyao ordered his soldiers to use the bricks to build up the walls inside the city, and to repair any damage immediately.

古文：思明使人取攻具于山东，以胡兵三千卫送之，至广阳，别将慕容溢、张奉璋邀击，尽杀之。
现代文：史思明派人到崤山以东去取攻城的器具，并且让胡兵三千护送，他们到达广阳时，遭到别将慕容溢、张奉璋的拦击，胡兵全部被杀死。
English: Shishiming sent people to the east of Lushan to get the equipment for attacking the city, and let three thousand Hu soldiers escort them. When they arrived in Guangyang, they were intercepted by the commanders Murong Yiyi and Zhang Bongyao, and all the Hu soldiers were killed.

古文：思明围太原，月馀不下，乃选骁锐为游兵，戒之曰： 我攻其北则汝潜趣其南，攻东则趣西，有隙则乘之。 
现代文：史思明围攻太原一个多月，还未攻下，于是挑选了一批骁勇善战的精兵，作为流动作战的军队，告诫他们说： 我率兵攻打城北时，你们就暗中往城南；攻打城东时，你们就向城西，见到有机可乘时就进攻。
English: Shi Siming besieged Taiyuan for more than a month, but failed to capture it, so he selected a group of brave and skillful soldiers as a mobile army, and warned them: When I lead the troops to attack the north of the city, you will secretly go to the south of the city; when attacking the east of the city, you will go to the west of the city, and attack when you see an opportunity.

古文：而光弼军令严整，虽寇所不至，警逻未尝少懈，贼不得入。
现代文：但因为李光弼军令严整，即使叛军没有攻打的地方，巡逻的士卒也十分警惕，未曾大意，所以叛军攻不进城。
English: However, because of the strictness of Li Guangyao's military orders, even if the rebels did not attack the place, the patrolling officers were very vigilant and did not hesitate, so the rebels could not enter the city.

古文：光弼购募军中，苟有小技，皆取之，随能使之，人尽其用，得安边军钱工三，善穿地道。
现代文：李光弼在军中征募人才，只要是有小技艺的人都被选中，根据能力予以使用，所以人尽其才。李光弼得到安边军的三个铸钱工匠，他们善于挖掘地道。
English: Li Guangyao recruited talents in the army. As long as people with minor skills were selected, they were used according to their abilities, so people did their best. Li Guangyao got three money-minting craftsmen from the Anbian Army, who were good at digging tunnels.

古文：贼于城下仰而侮詈，光弼遣人从地道中曳其足而入，临城斩之。
现代文：叛军士卒站在城下抬头辱骂，李光弼就派人从地道中拉住叫骂人的脚，拽入城中，在城墙上杀掉。
English: The rebel sergeant-at-arms stood at the foot of the city and raised his head to curse. Li Guangya sent someone to pull the curser's foot from the tunnel, drag it into the city, and kill it on the city wall.

古文：自是贼行皆视地。
现代文：从此叛军士卒行走时都看着地。
English: From then on, the rebel sergeant-at-arms walked with his eyes on the ground.

古文：贼为梯冲、土山以攻城，光弼为地道以迎之，近城辄陷。
现代文：叛军又制做云梯和土山作为攻城的器具，李光弼就挖地道以迎战，所以这些器具在临近城时都陷入地中。
English: The rebels also made ladders and earthen mounds as tools to attack the city, and Li Guangyao dug tunnels to meet the battle, so these tools fell into the ground when approaching the city.

古文：贼初逼城急，光弼作大砲，飞巨石，一发辄毙二十馀人，贼死者什二三，乃退营于数十步外，围守益固。
现代文：叛军起初攻城急迫，李光弼就作了大炮，发射大石，一发打死二十多人。叛军在攻城中战死了十分之二三，于是就退营到城墙数十步以外，死死地把城围住。
English: At first, the rebels were in a hurry to attack the city, so Li Guangyao made a cannon, fired large stones, and killed more than twenty people with one shot. The rebels died in battle during the siege of the city, so they retreated to dozens of steps away from the city wall and surrounded the city.

古文：光弼遣人诈与贼约，刻日出降；贼喜，不为备。
现代文：李光弼又派人假装与叛军相约，定好日子出城投降，叛军大为喜欢，不加防备。
English: Li Guangyao also sent someone to pretend to make a deal with the rebels and set a good day to leave the city and surrender. The rebels liked it and did not take precautions.

古文：光弼使穿地道周贼营中，搘之以木。
现代文：而李光弼却让士卒在叛军的营地周围穿掘地道，然后用木头顶住。
English: Instead, Li Guangyao had his soldiers dig a tunnel around the rebel camp and then used wood to hold it up.

古文：至期，光弼勒兵在城上，遣裨将将数千人出，如降状，贼皆属目。
现代文：到了约好的投降日期，李光弼率兵站在城上，派遣裨将率领数千人出城，假装投降，叛军都一心站着观看。
English: When the agreed-upon surrender date arrived, Li Guangyao led his soldiers to stand on the city wall, dispatched generals to lead thousands of people out of the city, and pretended to surrender. The rebels all stood and watched.

古文：俄而营中地陷，死者千馀人，贼众惊乱，官军鼓噪乘之，俘斩万计。
现代文：忽然营中地面塌陷，死了一千余人，叛军顿时惊慌散乱，官军乘机擂鼓呼喊，出城袭击，俘虏杀死叛军一万多人。
English: Suddenly, the ground in the camp caved in, killing more than a thousand people. The rebels immediately panicked and scattered. The government troops took the opportunity to shout and attack outside the city. The prisoners killed more than ten thousand rebels.

古文：会安禄山死，庆绪使思明归守范阳，留蔡希德等围太原。
现代文：这时恰逢安禄山死去，安庆绪命令史思明归守范阳，留下蔡希德等人继续围攻太原。
English: At this time, An Lushan died, and An Qingxu ordered Shi Siming to return to defend Fanyang, leaving Cai Xide and others to continue to besiege Taiyuan.

古文：庆绪以尹子奇为汴州刺史、河南节度使。
现代文：安庆绪任命尹子奇为汴州刺史、河南节度使。
English: An Qingxu appointed Yin Ziqi as the chief historian of Zhangzhou and the chief envoy of Henan Festival.

古文：甲戌，子奇以归、檀及同罗、奚兵十三万趣睢阳。
现代文：甲戌，尹子奇率领归州、檀州以及同罗、奚人部兵共十三万来进攻睢阳。
English: Armor, Yin Ziqi led by Guizhou, Danzhou and Tongluo, Xing Renbu soldiers a total of 130,000 to attack Fenyang.

古文：许远告急于张巡，巡自宁陵引兵入睢阳。
现代文：许远向张巡求援，张巡即率兵从宁陵进入睢阳。
English: Xu Yuan appealed to Zhang Jun for help, and Zhang Jun immediately led his troops from Ningling into Fenyang.

古文：巡有兵三千人，与远兵合六千八百人。
现代文：张巡有兵三千人，与许远合兵共六千八百人。
English: Zhang Jun had three thousand soldiers, and he and Xu Yuan had a total of six thousand eight hundred soldiers.

古文：贼悉众逼城，巡督励将士，昼夜苦战，或一日至二十合；凡十六日，擒贼将六十馀人，杀士卒二万馀，众气自倍。
现代文：叛军全力攻城，张巡亲自督战，勉励将士，昼夜与叛军苦战，有时一天交战二十多次，共激战十六日，俘虏叛军将领六十多人，杀死叛军士卒二万多，士气大振。
English: The rebels attacked the city with all their might. Zhang Jun personally supervised the battle and encouraged the soldiers. He fought hard against the rebels day and night, sometimes fighting more than twenty times a day, and the battle raged for sixteen days. He captured more than sixty rebel generals and killed more than twenty thousand rebel soldiers. Morale was greatly boosted.

古文：远谓巡曰： 远懦，不习兵，公智勇兼济，远请为公守，请公为远战。 
现代文：许远对张巡说： 我性情懦弱，不懂得军事，你智勇双全，请让我为你坚守，你代我指挥作战。 
English: Xu Yuan said to Zhang Jun: I have a weak temperament and do not understand military affairs. You are both wise and brave. Please let me stand up for you and command the battle on my behalf.

古文：自是之后，远但调军粮，修战具，居中应接而已，战斗筹画一出于巡。
现代文：从此以后，许远只调集军粮，修理作战器具，在军中处理杂事接应而已，作战指挥权都交给了张巡。
English: From then on, Xu Yuan only mobilized military rations, repaired combat equipment, and dealt with miscellaneous matters in the army, and the command of operations was handed over to Zhang Jun.

古文：贼遂夜遁。
现代文：叛军攻城不下，乘夜退去。
English: Unable to attack the city, the rebels withdrew during the night.

古文：郭子仪以河东居两京之间，扼贼要冲，得河东则两京可图。
现代文：郭子仪认为河东居于东京与西京之间，如果占据了河东则两京就容易收复。
English: Guo Ziyi believes that Hedong is located between Tokyo and West Beijing, and if you occupy Hedong, it will be easy to recover the two capitals.

古文：时贼将崔乾祐守河东，丁丑，子仪潜遣人入河东，与唐官陷贼者谋，俟官军至，为内应。
现代文：当时叛军大将崔乾率兵守卫河东，丁丑，郭子仪秘密地派人潜入河东，与陷于叛军中的唐朝官员密谋，等待唐军来攻时，作为内应。
English: At that time, the rebel general Cui Qian led the troops to guard the east of the river. Ding Jiu and Guo Ziyi secretly sent people to infiltrate the east of the river, conspired with the Tang Dynasty officials trapped in the rebels, and waited for the Tang Army to attack, as an internal response.

古文：初，平卢节度使刘正臣自范阳败归，安东都护王玄志鸩杀之。
现代文：当初，平卢节度使刘正臣从范阳败归后，被安东都护王玄志毒死。
English: At first, after the Pinglu Festival defeated Liu Zhengchen from Fanyang, Liu Zhengchen was poisoned to death by Emperor Anton's tutelary, Emperor Xuanzhi.

古文：禄山以其党徐归道为平卢节度使，玄志复与平卢将侯希逸袭杀之；又遣兵马使董秦将兵以苇筏度海，与大将田神功击平原、乐安，下之。
现代文：安禄山任命部将徐归道为平卢节度使，王玄志又联合平卢军将侯希逸袭击杀死了徐归道，并派遣兵马使董秦率兵乘苇筏渡过大海，与大将军田神功进攻平原与乐安，都被攻克。
English: Anlu Mountain appointed General Xu Qidao as the envoy of the Pinglu Festival, Wang Xianzhi and the Pinglu Army attacked Hou Xiyi and killed Xu Qidao, and sent soldiers and horses to make Dong Qin and his soldiers cross the sea by raft, and attack the plain and Le'an with General Tian Shengong. Both were conquered.

古文：防河招讨使李铣承制以秦为平原太守。
现代文：防河招讨使李铣遵照皇上的制书任命董秦为平原太守。
English: The appeal for protection of the river made Li Xi appoint Dong Qin as the governor of the plain in accordance with the emperor's edict.

古文：二月，戊子，上至凤翔。
现代文：二月戊子，肃宗到达凤翔。
English: In February, Su Zong arrived in Fengxiang.

古文：郭子仪自洛交引兵趣河东，分兵取冯翊。
现代文：郭子仪从洛交率兵向河东进发，途中分兵攻取了冯翊。
English: Guo Ziyi led an army from Liaocheng to Hedong. On the way, a detachment of soldiers captured Feng Lu.

古文：己丑夜，河东司户韩旻等翻河东城迎官军，杀贼近千人。
现代文：己丑夜晚，河东司户参军韩等翻越河东城来迎接官军，杀死叛军近一千人。
English: On that fateful night, the troops of the East Hedong Provincial Government and the South Korean army rolled over the city of Hedong to meet the government troops, killing nearly a thousand rebels.

古文：崔乾祐逾城得免，发城北兵攻城，且拒官军，子仪击破之。
现代文：叛军大将崔乾跳过城墙得以逃脱，然后他召集驻扎在城北的士兵来攻城，并阻击郭子仪的军队，被郭子仪击败。
English: The rebel general, Cui Qian, was able to escape by jumping over the city wall. He then summoned soldiers stationed in the north of the city to attack the city and block Guo Ziyi's army, which was defeated by Guo Ziyi.

古文：乾祐走，子仪追击之，斩首四千级，捕虏五千人，乾祐至安邑，安邑人开门纳之，半入，闭门击之，尽殪。
现代文：崔乾领兵退逃，郭子仪领兵追击，杀死四千人，俘虏五千人。崔乾逃至安邑，安邑人打开城门，让他入城，当叛军人马进去一半时，安邑人闭门袭击，把进入城中的敌人全部杀死。
English: Cui Qian led the troops to retreat, Guo Ziyi led the troops to pursue, killed four thousand people and captured five thousand. Cui Qian fled to Anyi, the people of Anyi opened the gate and let him enter the city. When the rebel soldiers were halfway inside, the people of Anyi attacked behind closed doors and killed all the enemies who entered the city.

古文：乾佑未入，自白迳岭亡去。
现代文：崔乾没有入城，从白径岭逃走。
English: Cui Qian did not enter the city, but fled from Baiji Ridge.

古文：遂平河东。
现代文：郭子仪于是平定了河东。
English: Guo Ziyi then pacified the eastern part of the river.

古文：上至凤翔旬日，陇右、河西、安西、西域之兵皆会，江、淮庸调亦至洋川、汉中，上自散关通表成都，信使骆驿。
现代文：肃宗到达凤翔十天，陇右、河西、安西、西域的援兵都来相会，江、淮地区所征收的丝织品与布匹也运到洋川、汉中。肃宗从散关向在成都的玄宗上表书，信使络绎不绝。
English: Within ten days of Su Zong's arrival in Fengxiang, reinforcements from Shiyu, Hexi, Anxi, and the western regions came to meet him, and the silk and cloth collected in the Jiang and Huai regions were also transported to Yangchuan and Hanzhong. Su Zong sent a steady stream of messengers from Sankuan to Chengdu to deliver the letter to Xuanzong.

古文：长安人闻车驾至，从贼中自拔而来者日夜不绝。
现代文：长安城中的民众听说皇上到达，纷纷从叛军的统治下逃出，奔向朝廷，日夜不绝。
English: When the people in Chang'an heard that the emperor had arrived, they fled from the rebels and rushed to the imperial court, day and night.

古文：西师憩息既定，李泌请遣安西及西域之众，如前策并塞东北，自归、檀南取范阳。
现代文：西方增援的部队既已休整充足，李泌请求肃宗按原来制定的战略，派遣安西及西域兵进军东北，从归州、檀州向南攻取范阳。
English: Since the reinforcement troops from the West had had enough rest, Li Xiu requested Su Zong to follow the original strategy and send troops from Anxi and the Western Regions to march to the northeast and capture Fanyang from Guizhou and Danzhou to the south.

古文：上曰： 今大众已集，庸调亦至，当乘兵锋捣其腹心，而更引兵东北数千里，先取范阳，不亦迂乎？ 
现代文：肃宗说： 现在大军已集，征收的丝织品、布匹等庸调也到达，应该以强兵直捣叛军的腹心，而您却要领兵向东北数千里，先攻取范阳，不是迂腐的计策吗？ 
English: Su Zong said: Now that the large army has been assembled, and the collected silk, cloth and other mediocre goods have arrived, it is necessary to use strong soldiers to directly attack the rebels' confidants, but you want to lead soldiers thousands of miles to the northeast, first to capture Fanyang, is not it a pedantic strategy?

古文：对曰： 今以此众直取两京，必得之。然贼必再强，我必又困，非久安之策。 
现代文：李泌回答说： 现在让大军直接攻取两京，一定能够收复，但是叛军还会东山再起，我们又会陷入困难的境地，这不是久安之策。 
English: Li Xiu replied: Now let the great army directly capture the two capitals, we will surely be able to recover, but the rebels will rise again, and we will fall into a difficult situation. This is not a long-term strategy.

古文：上曰： 何也？ 
现代文：肃宗说： 你说的有什么根据？ 
English: Taizong asked: What is the reason?

古文：对曰： 今所恃者，皆西北守塞及诸胡之兵，性耐寒而畏暑，若乘其新至之锐，攻禄山已老之师，其势必克。
现代文：李泌说： 我们现在所依靠的是西北各军镇的守兵以及西域各国的胡兵，他们能够忍耐寒冷而害怕暑热，如果借新到之兵的锐气，攻击安禄山已经疲劳的叛军，定能够取胜。
English: Li Xiu said: We now rely on the defenders of the military towns in the northwest and the Hu soldiers in the western countries. They can tolerate the cold and are afraid of the heat. If we use the spirit of the newly arrived soldiers to attack the tired rebels in Anlu Mountain, we will surely win.

古文：两京春气已深，贼收其馀众，遁归巢穴，关东地热，官军必困而思归，不可留也。
现代文：但是两京已到了春天，叛军如果收集残兵，逃回老巢，而关东地区气候炎热，官军必定会由于炎热的气候而想要西归，难以在那里久留。
English: However, spring has already arrived in the two capitals. If the rebels gather the remnants of their soldiers and flee back to their old homes, and the Kanto region is hot, the government troops will certainly want to return to the west due to the hot weather, and it will be difficult to stay there for a long time.

古文：贼休兵秣马，伺官军之去，必复南来，然则征战之势未有涯也。
现代文：叛军休整兵马，看见官军撤退，一定会卷土重来，这样与叛军的交战就会无休无止。
English: When the rebels rest and recuperate and see the government troops retreating, they will surely make a comeback. In this way, the war with the rebels will be endless.

古文：不若先用之于寒乡，除其巢穴，则贼无所归，根本永绝矣。 
现代文：不如先向北方寒冷的地区用兵倾覆叛军的巢穴，那样叛军就会无路可退，可以一举彻底平息叛乱。 
English: It would be better to first overthrow the rebels' lair with soldiers in the cold regions of the north, so that the rebels would have no way to retreat and the rebellion could be completely quelled at one stroke.

古文：上曰： 朕切于晨昏之恋，不能待此决矣。 
现代文：肃宗说： 朕急于收复两京，迎接上皇回来，难以按照你的战略行事。 
English: Su Zong said: I am anxious to recover the two capitals and welcome the retired emperor back. It is difficult to act according to your strategy.

古文：关内节度使王思礼军武功，兵马使郭英乂军东原，王难得军西原。
现代文：关内节度使王思礼率兵驻于武功，兵马使郭英义驻于东原，王难得驻于西原。
English: The Guanai Festival made Wang Sili and his soldiers stay in Wugong, the soldiers and horses made Guo Yingyi stay in Dongyuan, and Wang Nandu stayed in Xiyuan.

古文：丁酉，安守忠等寇武功，郭英乂战不利，矢贯其颐而走；王难得望之不救，亦走；思礼退军扶风。
现代文：丁酉，叛军将领安守忠等率兵进攻武功，郭英义与叛军交战不利，被箭射穿脸颊而败走，王难得见死不救，也随之败退，王思礼率兵撤退至扶风。
English: Ding Yao, the rebel general An Shou Zhong and other leaders led the troops to attack Wu Gong, Guo Ying Yi and the rebels fought against the odds, was shot through the cheek and defeated, Wang rarely saw death and was defeated, and Wang Sili led the troops to retreat to Fufeng.

古文：贼游兵至大和关，去凤翔五十里，凤翔大骇，戒严。
现代文：叛军的游兵至大和关，离凤翔五十里，肃宗在凤翔大为惊骇，进行戒严。
English: The guerrillas of the rebel army went as far as Yamato Pass, fifty miles from Fengxiang. Su Zong was greatly alarmed in Fengxiang and imposed martial law.

古文：李光弼将敢死士出击蔡希德，大破之，斩首七万馀级；希德遁去。
现代文：李光弼亲自率领敢死队出城袭击蔡希德，大败叛军，杀敌七万余人，蔡希德逃走。
English: Li Guangyao personally led the death squad out of the city to attack Cai Xide, defeated the rebels, killed more than 70,000 people, and Cai Xide fled.

古文：安庆绪以史思明为范阳节度使，兼领恒阳军事，封妫川王；以牛廷介领安阳军事；张忠志为常山太守兼团练使，镇井陉口；馀各令归旧任，募兵以御官军。
现代文：安庆绪任命史思明为范阳节度使，并兼任指挥恒阳军事，封爵为妫川王；又命令牛廷介指挥安阳军事；任命张忠志为常山太守兼团练使，镇守井陉口。其余的将领仍各任旧职，招募军队抵御官军。
English: An Qingxu appointed Shi Siming as Fanyang's festival envoy, and also served as the commander of Hengyang's military, and was knighted as the king of Shichuan; he also ordered Niu Tingjie to command Anyang's military; appointed Zhang Zhongzhi as Changshan's governor and regimental training envoy, and the town guard of Jinghongou. The remaining generals still held their old positions, recruiting troops to resist the government army.

古文：先是安禄山得两京珍货，悉输范阳。
现代文：先前安禄山攻陷两京时，把两京中的珍宝财物全部运往范阳。
English: Previously, when Anlu Mountain conquered the two capitals, all the precious treasures and goods in the two capitals were transported to Fanyang.

古文：思明拥强兵，据富资，益骄横，浸不用庆绪之命；庆绪不能制。
现代文：史思明手握重兵，拥有财物，更加骄横，逐渐不听从安庆绪的命令，安庆绪不能节制。
English: Shi Siming held a heavy soldier in his hand, owned property, became more arrogant, and gradually disobeyed An Qingxu's orders. An Qingxu could not be restrained.

古文：戊戌，永王璘败死，其党薛镠等皆伏诛。
现代文：戊戌，永王李兵败身死，他的同党薛等也被杀死。
English: Wu Xi, Yong Wang, Li Bing, and his comrade Xue were also killed.

古文：时李成式与河北招讨判官李铣合兵讨璘，铣兵数千，军于扬子；成式使判官裴茂将兵三千，军于瓜步，广张旗帜，列于江津。
现代文：当时李成式与河北招讨判官李铣合兵讨伐李，李铣有兵数千，驻扎在扬子，李成式派判官裴茂率兵三千驻扎在瓜步，广树军旗，列于长江沿岸。
English: At that time, Li Chengshih and Hebei's recruiting adjudicator Li Jia joined forces to fight against Li. Li Jia had thousands of soldiers and was stationed in Yangzi. Li Chengshih sent adjudicator Pei Mao and 3,000 soldiers to be stationed in Guabou. The banner of the Guangshu Army was displayed along the Yangtze River.

古文：璘与其子瑒登城望之，始有惧色。
现代文：李与他的儿子李登上城头，望见军旗极多，心中开始感到惧怕。
English: When Li and his son Li climbed to the top of the castle and saw so many banners, they began to feel afraid.

古文：季广琛召诸将谓曰： 吾属从王至此，天命未集，人谋已隳，不如及兵锋未交，早图去就。
现代文：其部将季广琛召集其他的将领们说： 我们跟随永王走到这一步，只因为天命不助，人谋已不能成功，不如趁还未交战，赶快图谋出路。
English: His subordinate, General Ji Guangyao, called together the other generals and said, "We have followed King Yongwang to this point. It is only because fate has not helped us that we have not been able to succeed. It is better to take advantage of the fact that we are not yet at war and quickly try to find a way out."

古文：不然，死于锋镝，永为逆臣矣。 
现代文：否则就会战败身死，永远成为逆臣贼子。 
English: Otherwise, they will be defeated and die, forever becoming traitors.

古文：诸将皆然之。
现代文：诸将听后都认为他说的对。
English: The generals agree with him.

古文：于是广琛以麾下奔广陵，浑惟明奔江宁，冯季康奔白沙。
现代文：于是季广琛领着自己的部队逃向广陵，浑惟明逃向江宁，冯季康逃向白沙。
English: As a result, Ji Guangyao led his troops to flee to Guangling, Hun Weiming fled to Jiangning, and Feng Qikang fled to Baisha.

古文：璘忧惧，不知所出。
现代文：永王李恐惧，不知道怎么办才好。
English: Yong Wang Li is afraid and does not know what to do.

古文：其夕，江北之军多列炬火，光照水中，一皆为两，璘军又以火应之。
现代文：当天晚上，长江北面的军队盛列火炬，光照水中，一变为二，李的军队也列火炬响应。
English: In the evening of the same day, the troops on the north side of the Yangtze River lined up with torches. When the light shined on the water, one became two, and Li's troops also lined up with torches in response.

古文：璘以为官军已济江，遽挈家属与麾下潜遁；及明，不见济者，乃复入城收兵，具舟楫而去。
现代文：李错认为官军已经渡过长江，匆忙携家眷与部下潜逃。等到天亮，不见过江的官军，李又返回城中收集军队，乘船而逃。
English: Li mistakenly thought that the government army had already crossed the Yangtze River, and he hurriedly fled with his family and subordinates. When it was dawn, he did not see the government army on the river. Li returned to the city to gather the army and fled by boat.

古文：成式将赵侃等济江至新丰，璘使瑒及其将高仙琦将兵击之；侃等逆战，射瑒中肩，璘兵遂溃。
现代文：李成式的部将赵侃等渡过长江到达新丰，李派儿子李与部将高仙琦率兵迎击，赵侃与李等交战，射中李的肩臂，李的军队于是溃败。
English: Li Cheng-style general Zhao Kan and others crossed the Yangtze River to Xinfeng. Li sent his son Li and general Gao Xianqi to lead the troops to meet the attack. Zhao Kan fought with Li and others, shot Li's shoulder arm, and Li's army was defeated.

古文：璘与仙琦收馀众，南奔鄱阳，收库物甲兵，欲南奔岭表，江西采访使皇甫侁遣兵追讨，擒之，潜杀之于传舍；瑒亦死于乱兵。
现代文：李与高仙琦收集残兵，向南逃奔鄱阳，收聚库中的兵器物资，想向南逃奔岭表，江西采访使皇甫派兵追击，俘获了李，秘密杀死于传舍，李也死于乱军之中。
English: Li and Gao Xianqi gathered the remaining soldiers, fled to the south to Poyang, collected the weapons and materials in the warehouse, and wanted to flee to the south to Lingbo, Jiangxi Province, so that the Emperor sent troops to chase, captured Li, secretly killed him in the mission house, and Li also died among the rebels.

古文：侁使人送璘家属还蜀，上曰： 侁既生得吾弟，何不送之于蜀而擅杀之邪！ 
现代文：皇甫派人送李的家属回蜀中，肃宗说： 皇甫既然生擒了我弟弟永王李，为什么不送回蜀中而要擅自把他杀死呢？ 
English: Emperor Fu sent someone to take Li's family members back to Shuzhong. Su Zong said, "Since Emperor Fu took my brother Yong Wang Li alive, why not send him back to Shuzhong and kill him without permission?

古文：遂废侁不用。
现代文：于是撤了皇甫的官职而不录用。
English: As a result, the imperial father's official position was removed and he was not hired.

古文：庚子，郭子仪遣其子旰及兵马使李韶光、大将军王祚济河击潼关，破之，斩首五百级。
现代文：庚子，郭子仪派他的儿子郭旰与兵马使李韶光、大将王祚等渡过黄河攻下了潼关，杀敌五百。
English: Geng Zi, Guo Zi Yi sent his son Guo Qi and soldiers and horses to send Li Yuguang, General Wang Qi and others to cross the Yellow River and capture Shaoguan, killing five hundred enemies.

古文：安庆绪遣兵救潼关，郭旰等大败，死者万馀人。
现代文：安庆绪又派兵援救潼关，郭旰等大败，官军死者一万余人。
English: An Qingxu also sent troops to rescue Shiguan, Guo Gan and others were defeated, and more than 10,000 government troops died.

古文：李韶光、王祚战死，仆固怀恩抱马首浮渡渭水，退保河东。
现代文：李韶光与王祚战死，仆固怀恩抱着马头渡过渭水，退保河东。
English: Li Yuguang and Wang Qian were killed in the battle. The servant Gu Hui'en held the horse's head and crossed the Surabaya River to the east of He Bao.

古文：三月，辛酉，以左相韦见素为左仆射，中书侍郎、同平章事裴冕为右仆射，并罢政事。
现代文：三月辛酉，肃宗任命左相韦见素为左仆射，中书侍郎、同平章事裴冕为右仆射，罢免了二人的施政办事权力。
English: At the end of March, Su Zong appointed Zuo Wei Mingsu as Zuo Minzhao, Zhongshu Jirong, and Tongping Zhangji Pei Guan as Zuo Minzhao, and removed the power of the two to carry out political affairs.

古文：初，杨国忠恶宪部尚书苗晋卿，安禄山之反也，请出晋卿为陕郡太守，兼陕、弘农防御使。
现代文：当初，杨国忠因为嫉恨宪部尚书苗晋卿，安禄山反叛后，就请求玄宗让苗晋卿出朝为陕郡太守，兼陕郡、弘农郡防御使。
English: At first, because Yang Guozhong was jealous of the Constitutional Department's Shang Shumiao Jintao, after the rebellion of Anlu Mountain, he asked Xuanzong to let Miao Jintao go to the court as the governor of Shaanxi County, and also the defense envoy of Shaanxi County and Hongnong County.

古文：晋卿固辞老病，上皇不悦，使之致仕。
现代文：苗晋卿以老弱多病坚决推辞，玄宗不高兴，就让苗晋卿退休。
English: Miao Jinqing firmly rejected the old, weak and sick, and Xuanzong was not happy, so he let Miao Jinqing retire.

古文：及长安失守，晋卿潜窜山谷；上至凤翔，手敕征之为左相，军国大务悉咨之。
现代文：及至长安失守，苗晋卿潜身逃入山谷之中，肃宗来到凤翔，下手敕征苗晋卿为左相，军国大事都向他征求意见。
English: When Chang'an fell, Miao Jinqing fled into the valley. Su Zong came to Fengxiang and started to recruit Miao Jinqing as his left-hand man. He was asked for advice on military affairs.

古文：上皇思张九龄之先见，为之流涕，遣中使至曲江祭之，厚恤其家。
现代文：玄宗思念张九龄对安禄山有先见之明，因此痛哭流涕，派宦官到韶州曲江县祭祀张九龄，并重赏他的家属。
English: Xuanzong thought that Zhang Jiuling was prescient about Anlu Mountain, so he cried bitterly and sent eunuchs to Zhangzhou Qujiang County to sacrifice Zhang Jiuling and reward his family members.

古文：尹子奇复引大兵攻睢阳。
现代文：叛军大将尹子奇又率大军来进攻睢阳。
English: The rebel general Yin Ziqi once again led a large army to attack Shenyang.

古文：张巡谓将士曰： 吾受国恩，所守，正死耳。
现代文：张巡对将士们说： 我身受国恩，要死守此城，为国家效命。
English: Zhang Jun said to the soldiers: I am blessed by the country, I want to defend this city and serve the country.

古文：但念诸君捐躯命，膏草野，而赏不酬勋，以此痛心耳！ 
现代文：但想到大家为国家献身，血染原野，而赏赐难以酬劳所建立的功勋，感到万分痛心。 
English: However, it is extremely painful to think of everyone sacrificing their lives for the country, staining the wilderness with blood, and rewarding the hard-earned merits.

古文：将士皆激励请奋。
现代文：将士们听后都情绪激动，奋勇请战。
English: After hearing this, the generals were all emotional and bravely asked for battle.

古文：巡遂椎牛，大飨士卒，尽军出战。
现代文：于是张巡杀牛设宴，犒劳士卒，率全军出战。
English: As a result, Zhang Junzhi Niu held a banquet, invited Lao soldiers, and led the whole army to go to war.

古文：贼望见兵少，笑之。
现代文：叛军看见官军兵少，而嘲笑官军。
English: When the rebels saw that the official army was short of soldiers, they laughed at the official army.

古文：巡执旗，帅诸将直冲贼阵。
现代文：张巡手执战旗，率领众将直冲叛军阵中，叛军全军溃败！
English: Officer Zhang raised the battle flag and led the crowd to charge straight into the rebel army, and the entire rebel army was routed!

古文：贼乃大溃，斩将三十馀人，杀士卒三千馀人，逐之数十里。
现代文：斩敌将三十余人，杀死士卒三千余人，追赶敌军数十里。
English: He killed more than 30 enemy generals, more than 3,000 soldiers and officers, and chased the enemy for dozens of miles.

古文：明日，贼又合军至城下，巡出战，昼夜数十合，屡摧其锋，而贼攻围不辍。
现代文：第二天，叛军又集兵逼临城下，张巡率兵出战，昼夜交战数十回合，屡次挫败了叛军进攻的锋锐，但叛军仍然不停地围城攻打。
English: The next day, the rebels gathered more soldiers and forced their way under the city. Zhang Jun and his soldiers went out to fight, and fought dozens of rounds day and night. They repeatedly thwarted the sharpness of the rebels' attack, but the rebels still besieged and attacked the city.

古文：辛未，安守忠将骑二万寇河东，郭子仪击走之，斩首八千级，捕虏五千人。
现代文：辛未，叛军大将安守忠率领骑兵二万进攻河东，被郭子仪领兵击退，杀敌八千，俘虏五千。
English: In Xinwei, the rebel general An Shou Zhong led 20,000 cavalry to attack the east of the river, and was repulsed by Guo Ziyi's leading troops, killing 8,000 enemies and taking 5,000 prisoners.

古文：夏，四月，颜真卿自荆、襄北诣凤翔，上以为宪部尚书。
现代文：夏季四月，平原太守颜真卿绕道从荆州、襄阳北至凤翔，肃宗任命他为宪部尚书。
English: In the summer of April, Yan Zhenqing, the governor of the plain, took a detour from Jingzhou, north of Yangyang, to Fengxiang. Su Zong appointed him as the constitutional secretary.

古文：上以郭子仪为司空、天下兵马副元帅，使将兵赴凤翔。
现代文：肃示任命郭子仪为司空、天下兵马副元帅，让他率兵赴凤翔。
English: Su Shi appointed Guo Ziyi as the Vice Marshal of the Air Force and the World's Troops and Horses, and let him lead the troops to Fengxiang.

古文：庚寅，李归仁以铁骑五千邀之于三原北，子仪使其将仆固怀恩、王仲升、浑释之、李若幽等伏兵击之于白渠留运桥，杀伤略尽，归仁游水而逸。
现代文：庚寅，叛军大将李归仁率领五千精锐骑兵在三原县北面截击郭子仪，郭子仪派部将仆固怀恩、王仲升、浑释之、李若幽等埋伏于白渠留连边桥，几乎全歼叛军，李归仁游水逃脱。
English: Geng Yin, the rebel general Li Guiren led five thousand elite cavalrymen to intercept Guo Ziyi in the north of Mihara County. Guo Ziyi sent minions Gu Huain, Wang Zhongsheng, Hun Xizhi, Li Ruoyu, etc. to ambush the Baiqiu Lilian Bridge, almost completely annihilating the rebels. Li Guiren escaped by swimming.

古文：若幽，神通之玄孙也。
现代文：李若幽是李神通的玄孙。
English: Li Ruoyu is the great-great-grandson of Li Shentong.

古文：子仪与王思礼军合于西渭桥，进屯潏西。
现代文：郭子仪与王思礼在西渭桥合兵，进军驻扎在水西岸。
English: Guo Ziyi and Wang Sili joined forces at Xidi Bridge and marched to the west bank of the river.

古文：安守忠、李归仁军于京城西清渠。
现代文：叛军大将安守忠与李归仁率兵驻扎在京城西面的清渠。
English: Rebel generals An Shou Zhong and Li Guiren led the troops stationed in the west of the capital in the clear canal.

古文：相守七日，官军不进。
现代文：两军相持七日，官军没有进攻。
English: The two armies held each other for seven days, and the government army did not attack.

古文：五月，癸丑，守忠伪遁，子仪悉师逐之。
现代文：五月癸丑，安守忠假装撤退，郭子仪率全军追击。
English: In May, An Shou Zhong pretended to retreat, and Guo Ziyi led the whole army in pursuit.

古文：贼以骁骑九千为长蛇阵，官军击之，首尾为两翼，夹击官军，官军大溃。
现代文：叛军以九千精锐骑兵摆成长蛇阵，官军从中间进击，叛军变首尾为两军，夹击官军，官军大败。
English: The rebel army formed a snake formation with nine thousand elite cavalry, the government army attacked from the middle, the rebel army turned into two armies, clamped the government army, and the government army was defeated.

古文：判官韩液、监军孙知古皆为贼所擒，军资器械尽弃之。
现代文：判官韩液与监军孙知古都被叛军俘获，军用物资全部丢弃。
English: Both the judge Han Ru and the supervisor Sun Zhigu were captured by the rebels, and all military supplies were discarded.

古文：子仪退保武功，中外戒严。
现代文：郭子仪退军防守武功，内外严加戒备。
English: Guo Ziyi withdrew from the army to defend martial arts, and was on high alert both at home and abroad.

古文：是时府库无蓄积，朝廷专以官爵赏功，诸将出征，皆给空名告身，自开府、特进、列卿、大将军，下至中郎、郎将，听临事注名。
现代文：当时朝廷的府库中没有财物积蓄，对于立功的将士只能赏赐官爵，诸将出征时，都给予空名委任状，上自开府、特进、列卿、大将军，下至中郎、郎将，都允许临时填写名字。
English: At that time, the imperial treasury did not have any financial or material savings. For meritorious soldiers, they could only award official ranks. When the generals went to war, they were all given a blank letter of appointment, and they were allowed to temporarily fill in their names, from Kaifu, Tokujin, Reikyo, Taisho, down to Churo and Rojo.

古文：其后又听以信牒授人官爵，有至异姓王者。
现代文：后来又允许用信牒授予官爵，以至有异姓被封为王的。
English: Later, it was allowed to use a letter to confer a title of nobility, and even a person with a different surname was crowned king.

古文：诸军但以职任相统摄，不复计官爵高下。
现代文：各路军队都以职务大小相互统辖，不看官爵的高低。
English: The armies of all directions are mutually controlled by the size of their posts, regardless of the rank of their officers.

古文：及清渠之败，复以官爵收散卒。
现代文：这次清渠战败后，又滥赏官爵以召集散兵游勇。
English: After the defeat in this battle to clear the canal, officials and nobles were rewarded for their bravery in summoning skirmishers.

古文：由是官爵轻而货重，大将军告身一通，才易一醉。
现代文：因此官爵贱而钱货贵，一通大将军委任状才能换取一次酒醉。
English: As a result, official titles are cheap and money is expensive, and a general's commission can only be exchanged for one drunk.

古文：凡应募入军者，一切衣金紫，至有朝士僮仆衣金紫，称大官，而执贱役者，名器之滥，至是而极焉。
现代文：凡是被招募参军的人，都穿金紫色衣服，甚至有朝士的仆人身着金紫色衣服，口称自己是大官，而实际却干的是低贱的工作。唐朝的封官赏爵之滥，至此达到了极点。
English: All those who were recruited to join the army wore gold and purple clothes, and there were even servants of the imperial officials who wore gold and purple clothes and claimed to be high-ranking officials, but actually did low-level work. The Tang Dynasty's abuse of awarding titles to high-ranking officials reached its peak.

古文：房琯性高简，时国家多难，而琯多称病不朝谒，不以职事为意，日与庶子刘秩、谏议大夫李揖高谈释、老，或听门客董庭兰鼓琴，庭兰以是大招权利。
现代文：房琯性情高傲，这时国家正处于危难之际，而房却常常说有病不入朝，不积极处理自己职权内的政事，每天与庶子刘秩、谏议大夫李揖高谈佛教与道教，有时听自己的门客董庭兰弹琴，董庭兰也借此而弄权谋利。
English: At a time when the country was in a critical situation, Fang Zheng was arrogant. However, he often said that he was too ill to enter the imperial court, and did not actively deal with the political affairs within his authority. Every day, he talked about Buddhism and Taoism with his son-in-law, Liu Ritchi, and his advisor, Li Yinggao. Sometimes, he listened to his guest, Dong Tinglan, play the piano. Dong Tinglan also used this opportunity to gain power and profit.

古文：御史奏庭兰赃贿，丁巳，罢琯为太子少师。
现代文：御史上奏说董庭兰受贿，丁巳，肃宗贬房为太子少师。
English: According to the historical record, Dong Tinglan accepted bribes, Ding Si and Su Zong were demoted to prince's apprentice.

古文：以谏议大夫张镐为中书侍郎、同平章事。
现代文：同时任命谏议大夫张镐为中书侍郎、同平章事。
English: At the same time, he appointed Zhang Ye, the doctor of the imperial edict, as the attendant of the imperial edict, and Tongping Zhangji.

古文：上常使僧数百人为道场于内，晨夜诵佛。
现代文：肃宗常常召纳僧人数百名在宫内作道场，早晚诵读佛经。
English: Su Zong often summoned hundreds of monks to make a dojo in the palace and read Buddhist scriptures in the morning and evening.

古文：镐谏曰： 帝王当修德以弭乱安人，未闻饭僧可致太平也！ 
现代文：张镐进谏说： 帝王应该修治德行以平乱安民，没有听说过布施僧人能使天下太平的！ 
English: Zhang Yujing said, "The emperor should cultivate virtue to pacify the people. I've never heard that monks who give alms can bring peace to the world!"

古文：上然之。
现代文：肃宗认为他说的对。
English: She wrote a very elegant and beautiful piece of music, and the emperor gladly accepted her suggestion.

古文：庚申，上皇追册上母杨妃为元献皇后。
现代文：庚申，玄宗追封册命肃宗的母亲杨妃为元献皇后。
English: Goshun, the mother of Xuanzong, Yangfei, was the original queen.

古文：山南东道节度使鲁炅守南阳，贼将武令珣、田承嗣相继攻之。
现代文：山南东道节度使鲁灵守卫南阳，叛军将领武令与田承嗣率军相继来攻城。
English: Shannan hosted the festival and sent Luling to guard Nanyang. Rebel generals Wu Rong and Tian Chengzhe led their armies to attack the city one after another.

古文：城中食尽，一鼠直钱数百，饿死者相枕藉。
现代文：城中的粮食吃尽，以至一只老鼠值钱数百，到处都是饿死的人。
English: The food in the city is exhausted, so much so that a mouse is worth hundreds of dollars. People are starving to death everywhere.

古文：上遣宦官将军曹日升往宣慰，围急，不得入。
现代文：肃宗派宦官将军曹日升往南阳宣慰士卒，因为叛军包围，不得入城。
English: Su Sect sent eunuch general Cao Risheng to Nanyang to comfort the soldiers, because the rebels were surrounded and were not allowed to enter the city.

古文：日升请单骑入致命，襄阳太守魏仲犀不许。
现代文：曹日升请求单枪匹马入城传达帝旨，襄阳太守魏仲犀不答应。
English: Cao Risheng requested to enter the city single-handed to convey the imperial order, but Yangyang's governor Wei Zhongxiao did not agree.

古文：会颜真卿自河北至，曰： 曹将军不顾万死，以致帝命，何为沮之！
现代文：这时颜真卿从河北到达，说： 曹将军冒着生命危险要去传达皇上的命令，为何要阻拦他呢！
English: At this time, Yan Zhenqing arrived from Hebei and said: General Cao is risking his life to convey the emperor's order, why should we stop him!

古文：借使不达，不过亡一使者；达，则一城之心固矣。 
现代文：假使他不能到达，也不过是死一个使者；如果能够到达，那么城中人的信心就会更加坚强。 
English: If he does not arrive, he is no more than a messenger of death; if he does arrive, then the faith of the people of the city will be stronger.

古文：日升与十骑偕往，贼畏其锐，不敢逼。
现代文：于是曹日升与十名骑兵一起入城，叛军害怕他们的锋锐，不敢逼近。
English: So Cao Risheng entered the city with ten horsemen, and the rebels were afraid of their sharpness and dared not approach.

古文：城中自谓望绝，及见日升，大喜。
现代文：南阳城中的人已经绝望，及至见到曹日升，都十分欢喜。
English: The people in Nanyang City were already in despair, and when they saw Cao Rissheng, they were very happy.

古文：日升复为之至襄阳取粮，以千人运粮而入，贼不能遏。
现代文：曹日升去襄阳又为南阳守城将士取粮，领着一千人运粮入城，叛军不能阻挡。
English: Cao Risheng went to Xiangyang and fetched grain for the Nanyang defenders, leading a thousand people to transport grain into the city. The rebels could not stop him.

古文：炅在围中凡周岁，昼夜苦战，力竭不能支，壬戌夜，开城，帅馀兵数千突围而出，奔襄阳，承嗣追之，转战二日，不能克而还。
现代文：鲁炅在城中已经一年，昼夜苦战，力尽而无法坚守，壬戌夜晚，打开城门率领剩余的数千兵力突围而出，奔向襄阳。田承嗣领兵追击，连续两天辗转交战，没有战果而返回。
English: Lu Wei had been in the city for a year, fighting hard day and night, trying his best but unable to hold on. In the middle of the night, he opened the city gate and led the remaining thousands of troops to break out of the encirclement and run to Yangyang. Tian Chengzhi led the troops to chase, fought for two consecutive days, and returned without any results.

古文：时贼欲南侵江、汉，赖炅扼其冲要，南夏得全。
现代文：当时叛军想要向南侵略江、汉地区，多亏鲁炅扼守住了战略要地，南夏得以保全。
English: At that time, the rebels wanted to invade the south of the Yangtze River and the Han region. Thanks to Lu Wei, they held the strategic location, and the southern Xia was preserved.

古文：司空郭子仪诣阙请自贬；甲子，以子仪为左仆射。
现代文：司空郭子仪赴朝自请贬官，甲子，肃宗任命郭子仪为左仆射。
English: Sikyong Guo Ziyi went to the DPRK to ask for demotion, and Su Zong appointed Guo Ziyi as his second-in-command.

古文：尹子奇益兵围睢阳益急，张巡于城中夜鸣鼓严队，若将出击者；贼闻之，达旦儆备。
现代文：叛军将领尹子奇增兵把睢阳包围得更紧，夜晚，张巡在城中鸣鼓整理队伍，像要出击的样子，叛国闻知，整夜严备。
English: The rebel general Yin Ziqi increased the number of troops to encircle Poyang more tightly. At night, Zhang Jun was beating drums in the city to organize the team. It looked like he was going to attack. He had heard about the treason and was prepared all night.

古文：既明，巡乃寝兵绝鼓。
现代文：天亮后，张巡却停鼓息兵。
English: After dawn, however, Zhang Jun stopped beating the drums.

古文：贼以飞楼瞰城中，无所见，遂解甲休息。
现代文：叛军在楼上了望城中，什么也看不见，于是解甲休息。
English: The rebels went upstairs to watch the city, but they couldn't see anything, so they took off their armor and rested.

古文：巡与将军南霁云、郎将雷万春等十馀将各将五十骑开门突出，直冲贼营，至子奇麾下，营中大乱，斩贼将五十馀人，杀士卒五千馀人。
现代文：这时，张巡与将军南霁云、郎将雷万春等十多名将领各率五十名骑兵打开城门突然杀出，直冲叛军营地，来到尹子奇的战旗下，敌营顿时大乱，杀敌将五十余人，杀十卒五千余人。
English: At this time, Zhang Jun and more than ten generals, such as General Nan Xiyun and Lieutenant General Lei Wanchun, each led fifty cavalrymen to open the city gate and suddenly drove out, directly stormed the rebel camp, came to Yin Ziqi's battle flag, the enemy camp was suddenly in turmoil, killed more than fifty enemy generals, and killed more than ten thousand people.

古文：巡欲射子奇而不识，乃剡蒿为矢，中者喜，谓巡矢尽，走白子奇，乃得其状，使霁云射之，丧其左目，几获之。
现代文：张巡想要射杀尹子奇，但不认识他，于是就削蒿草作箭头，被射中的叛军十分高兴，以为张巡他们的箭头已射完，就去报告尹子奇，张巡因此认出了尹子奇。于是让南霁云射击，射中尹子奇左眼，差一点抓获了他。
English: Zhang Jun wanted to shoot Yin Ziqi, but he didn't know him, so he whittled rushes to make arrows. The rebels who were shot were very happy, thinking that Zhang Jun had finished shooting their arrows, they went to report Yin Ziqi, so Zhang Jun recognized Yin Ziqi. So let Nan Xiyun shoot, shot Yin Ziqi's left eye, almost caught him.

古文：子奇乃收军退还。
现代文：尹子奇只好收兵退去。
English: Yin Ziqi had to withdraw his troops.

古文：六月，癸未，田乾真围安邑。
现代文：六月，叛军将领田乾真率兵包围了安邑。
English: In June, the rebel general, Tian Qianzhen, led his troops to encircle An'yun.

古文：会陕郡贼将杨务钦密谋归国，河东太守马承光以兵应之，务钦杀城中诸将不同己者，翻城来降。
现代文：这时守卫陕郡的叛军将领杨务钦暗中图谋归顺朝廷，河东太守马承光领兵接应，杨务钦杀了城中不同意归顺的诸将，翻越城墙前来投降。
English: At this time, Yang Muqin, the rebel general guarding Shaanxi, was secretly plotting to surrender to the imperial court. Ma Chengguang, the grand marshal of Hedong, led the troops to accept. Yang Muqin killed the generals in the city who did not agree to surrender and climbed over the city wall to surrender.

古文：乾真解安邑，遁去。
现代文：田乾真解安邑之围而去。
English: Tian Qianzhen broke the siege of An'yun and left.

古文：将军王去荣以私怨杀本县令，当死。
现代文：将军王去荣因为私仇杀了本县富平县令，按罪应当处死。
English: General Wang De Rong killed the Fuping County magistrate of this county because of personal vendetta, and should be executed according to the crime.

古文：上以其善用砲，壬辰，敕免死，以白衣于陕郡效力。
现代文：肃宗因为他善于使用石炮，壬辰，下敕书免其死罪，让他作为一名普通战士在陕郡效力。
English: Su Zong let him serve as an ordinary soldier in Shaanxi County because he was good at using stone cannons.

古文：中书舍人贾至不即行下，上表，以为： 去荣无状，杀本县之君。
现代文：中书舍人贾至没有立刻颁下敕书，上表认为： 王去荣行为不端，杀死本县的长官。
English: Jia Zhi, the person in charge of the Chinese school of calligraphy, did not immediately issue an imperial edict, and the above table held that: Wang Qirong had misbehaved and killed the prefect of this county.

古文：《易》曰： 臣弑其君，子弑其父，非一朝一夕之故，其所由来者渐矣。 
现代文：《周易》说： 臣子杀死君主，儿子杀死父亲，都不是一朝一夕的原因，而是长久演变的结果。 
English: "Zhou Yi" said: A courtier killing a monarch, a son killing his father, are not overnight causes, but the result of long-term evolution.

古文：若纵去荣，可谓生渐矣。
现代文：如果赦免了王去荣的罪，就是放纵此种行为，使恶人萌生这种邪念。
English: If Wang Derong's crime is pardoned, it is to indulge such behavior and make the wicked sprout such evil thoughts.

古文：议者谓陕郡初复，非其人不可守。
现代文：有人认为陕郡刚刚收复，没有王去荣难以坚守。
English: Some people think that Shaanxi County has just been recovered, and it is difficult to hold fast without Wang Derong.

古文：然则它无去荣者，何以亦能坚守乎？
现代文：然而其他的郡县没有王去荣这样的人，为何也能坚守？
English: However, other counties do not have a person like Wang Derong, why can they stick to it?

古文：陛下若以砲石一能即免殊死，今诸军技艺绝伦者，其徒实繁。
现代文：陛下如果因为善于使用石炮这一种技能就免除一个人的死罪，那么现在各军中有绝技的士卒实在太多了。
English: Your Majesty, if the ability to use a stone cannon absolves a man from the death penalty, then there are too many skilled soldiers in the army.

古文：必恃其能，所在犯上，复何以止之！
现代文：这些人必定依仗他们的技能，在各地犯上作乱，又怎么制止他们呢？
English: These people are bound to rely on their skills to cause chaos everywhere, and how can they be stopped?

古文：若止舍去荣而诛其馀者，则是法令不一而诱人触罪也。
现代文：如果只是赦免王去荣的罪而杀掉其他的人，那就是法律没有准则而诱人犯罪。
English: If Wang Derong is only pardoned for his crime but others are killed, it means that the law has no standards and tempts people to commit crimes.

古文：今惜一去荣之材而不杀，必杀十如去荣之材者，不亦其伤益多乎！
现代文：现在如果怜惜一个王去荣的才能而不杀，以后必定要杀掉十个这样像王去荣一样有才能的人，那样伤害的人不是更多了吗？
English: If we now spare the talent of one Wang Derong without killing him, in the future we must kill ten people who are as talented as Wang Derong. Won't that hurt more people?

古文：夫去荣，逆乱之人也，焉有逆于此而顺于彼，乱于富平而治于陕郡，悖于县君而不悖于大君欤！
现代文：这个王去荣实在是一个逆臣贼子，怎么能够在这里为逆而在那里恭顺，在富平作乱而在陕郡治安，逆乱于县令而不逆乱于天子呢！
English: This Wang Derong is really a traitorous son of a traitor, how can he be obedient here and submissive there, create turmoil in Fuping but keep the peace in Shaanxi County, rebel against the county government but not rebel against the Son of Heaven!

古文：伏惟明主全其远者、大者，则祸乱不日而定矣。 
现代文：真诚地希望陛下作为贤明的君主能从长远和大处考虑，那么祸乱不久就可以平定。 
English: I sincerely hope that Your Majesty, as a wise monarch, can think long-term and broadly, so that the calamity can be calmed down soon.

古文：上下其事，令百官议之。
现代文：肃宗把这件事下达百官，让他们发表意见。
English: Su Zong sent the matter to hundreds of officials and asked them to express their opinions.

古文：太子太师韦见素等议，以为： 法者天地大典，帝王犹不敢擅杀，而小人得擅杀，是臣下之权过于人主也。
现代文：太子太师韦见素等人认为： 法律是天下的根本大法，作为帝王都不敢随意杀人，而王去荣竟敢擅自杀人，这是臣下的权力超过君主。
English: Prince and Daishi Wei Sim Su and others believed that: Law is the fundamental law of the world. As emperors, they dare not kill at will, but Wang Derong dared to commit suicide. This is the power of subjects over the monarch.

古文：去荣既杀人不死，则军中凡有技能者，亦自谓无忧，所在暴横。为郡县者，不亦难乎！
现代文：王去荣既然犯了杀人罪而不处死，那么军队中凡是身怀一技一能的人都会自认为无所顾虑，在各地横行为暴，那些做郡县官的不就很难治理了吗？
English: Since Wang Derong committed the crime of homicide and was not executed, then everyone in the army who has a skill and ability will think that they have nothing to worry about and commit violence in various places. If they are not county officials, will it be difficult to govern?

古文：陛下为天下主，爱无亲疏，得一去荣而失万姓，何利之有！
现代文：陛下作为天下的君主，对人的爱应当没有亲疏之分，如果那样做，保全了一个王去荣而失掉天下的百姓，有什么利益可言呢！
English: Your Majesty, as the monarch of the world, should have no alienation of love for people. If you do that and save a king from glory and lose the people of the world, what is the benefit?

古文：于律，杀本县令，列于十恶。
现代文：按照刑律，杀本县县令属于十恶之罪。
English: According to the Criminal Law, killing the county magistrate is a crime of ten evils.

古文：而陛下宽之，王法不行，人伦道屈，臣等奉诏，不知所从。
现代文：而陛下却要加以赦免，致使王法不能施行，人伦道德不能伸张，我等奉行诏书，实在难以服从。
English: But Your Majesty wants to pardon him, so that the royal law cannot be enforced, human ethics cannot be upheld, and it is really difficult for us to obey the edict.

古文：夫国以法理，军以法胜；有恩无威，慈母不能使其子，陛下厚养战士而每战少利，岂非无法邪！
现代文：国家要以法律来治理，军队要严格执行军令才能取得胜利。如果只用恩惠而无威权，就是慈祥的母亲也不能说动他的儿子。陛下重赏战士，但每当作战时却少能取胜，难道不是因为执行军法不严吗？
English: A country needs to be governed by law, and an army needs to strictly enforce military orders in order to achieve victory. If it only uses grace and has no authority, even a kind mother cannot persuade his son. His Majesty rewards soldiers, but whenever there is a battle, they rarely win, is it not because of the lax enforcement of military law?

古文：今陕郡虽要，不急于法也。
现代文：现在陕郡虽然要紧，但也没有执行国家的法令急迫。
English: Now, although Shaanxi is important, there is no urgency to implement the state's laws and regulations.

古文：有法则海内无忧不克，况陕郡乎！
现代文：如果有法必依，则天下不愁不能够平定，何况一区区陕郡！
English: If there is a law that must be followed, then the world will not be able to be pacified, not to mention the county of Shaanxi!

古文：无法则陕郡亦不可守，得之何益！
现代文：如果无法无天，就是陕郡也难以守住，得到它又有什么益处呢！
English: If there is no law and order, even Shaanxi County will be hard to hold on to, and what good will it do to get it?

古文：而去荣末技，陕郡不以之存亡；王法有无，国家乃为之轻重。
现代文：何况王去荣不过有一点雕虫小技，陕郡不会因为有他无他而存亡。而王法的有无，才是国家的根本所在。
English: What's more, Wang Derong only has a little skill in carving insects, and Shaanxi will not survive because of him. And the existence or non-existence of Wang Fa is the foundation of the country.

古文：此臣等所以区区愿陛下守贞观之法。 
现代文：我们都衷心地希望陛下遵守贞观年间制定下来的法律。 
English: We all sincerely hope that His Majesty will abide by the laws established during the Zhenguan era.

古文：上竟舍之。
现代文：但肃守竟不听臣下的意见，赦免了王去荣。
English: However, Shushu did not listen to the opinions of his subjects and pardoned Wang Qirong.

古文：至，曾之子也。
现代文：贾至是贾曾的儿子。
English: Jia Zhi is the son of Jia Zeng.

古文：南充土豪何滔作乱，执本郡防御使杨齐鲁；剑南节度使卢元裕发兵讨平之。
现代文：南充土豪何滔作乱，抓住了本郡防御使杨齐鲁。剑南节度使卢元裕发兵讨平了何滔。
English: Nanchong local strongman He Tao made a disturbance and caught the county's defense to make Yang Qilu. Jianan Festival made Lu Yuanyu send troops to level He Tao.

古文：秋，七月，河南节度使驾兰进明克高密、琅邪、杀贼二万馀人。
现代文：秋季七月，河南节度使贺兰进明率兵收复高密与琅邪，杀死叛军二万余人。
English: In the autumn of July, the Henan Festival made He Lan Jinming and his soldiers recapture Gaomi and Shiji, killing more than 20,000 rebels.

古文：戊申夜，蜀郡兵郭千仞等反，六军兵马使陈玄礼、剑南节度使李峘讨诛之。
现代文：戊申夜，蜀郡兵郭千仞等人谋反，被六军兵马使陈玄礼、剑南节度使李讨杀。
English: On the night of Wushin, the Shu County military base of Qianye and others plotted a rebellion, and were killed by the Sixth Army soldiers and horses sent by Chen Xuanli and Jiannan Jiedu sent by Li.

古文：壬子，尹子奇复征兵数万，攻睢阳。
现代文：壬子，叛军大将尹子奇又征兵数万名，来围攻睢阳。
English: In response, the rebel general Yin Ziqi recruited tens of thousands of soldiers to besiege Fenyang.

古文：先是，许远于城中积粮至六万石，虢王巨以其半给濮阳、济阴二郡，远固争之，不能得；既而济阴得粮，遂以城叛，而睢阳城至是食尽。
现代文：先前，许远于睢阳城中积蓄资粮达六万石，虢王李巨命令分其一半，给濮阳、济阴二郡，许远坚决反对，但意见未被采纳。济阴得到粮食以后，随即连城投降了叛军，而睢阳城中的积粮此时已被吃尽。
English: Previously, Xu Yuan objected to Li Jiu's order to allocate half of the 60,000 koku of grain and other resources that he had accumulated in the city of Puyang to the two counties of Puyang and Jiyin, but his opinion was not adopted. After Jiyin received the grain, Liancheng surrendered to the rebels, and the grain reserves in the city of Puyang were exhausted at this time.

古文：将士人廪米日一合，杂以茶纸、树皮为食，而贼粮运通，兵败复征。
现代文：将士每人每日给米一合，并夹杂茶纸、树皮而食，而叛军却粮道畅通，兵员充足，伤亡能够及时得到补充。
English: Each soldier was given a daily ration of rice, mixed with tea paper and tree bark, while the rebels had an unimpeded food supply, sufficient troops, and casualties could be replenished in time.

古文：睢阳将士死不加益，诸军馈救不至，士卒消耗至一千六百人，皆饥病不堪斗，遂为贼所围，张巡乃修守具以拒之。
现代文：睢阳守城的将士死伤得不到援兵，诸军粮食救应不至，士卒损耗得仅剩下一千六百人，都因为饥饿疾病没有多少战斗力，于是睢阳城被叛军紧紧地包围，张巡便准备守城的战具抵御敌人。
English: The dead and wounded soldiers of the Shuyang garrison could not get reinforcements, the army could not get food relief, and only 1,600 soldiers were left, all of whom had little combat effectiveness due to starvation and disease. As a result, Shuyang was tightly surrounded by the rebels, and Zhang Jun prepared the battle equipment to defend the city against the enemy.

古文：贼为云梯，势如半虹，置精卒二百于其上，推之临城，欲令腾入。
现代文：叛军制作了云梯，高大如半个彩虹，上面安置了二百精兵，推临城下，想令士兵跳入城中。
English: The rebels made a ladder, as tall as half a rainbow, and placed two hundred elite soldiers on it, pushing it under the city, trying to make the soldiers jump into the city.

古文：巡预于城潜凿三穴，候梯将至，于一穴中出大木，末置铁钩，钩之使不得退；一穴中出一木，拄之使不得进；一穴中出一木，木末置铁笼，盛火焚之，其梯中折，梯上卒尽烧死。
现代文：张巡事先在城墙上凿了三个洞穴，等待云梯快临近时，从一穴中伸出一根大木，头上设置了铁钩，钩住云梯使不得退去，又一穴中出一根木头，顶住云梯使不得前进；其余一穴中出一大木，头上安置了一个铁笼，笼中装着火焚烧云梯，云梯从中间被烧断，梯上的士卒全部被烧死。
English: Zhang Jun had previously dug three caves in the city wall. When he was waiting for the ladder to approach, a large tree protruded from one hole, with an iron hook on its head. The ladder was hooked so that it could not retreat, and a piece of wood came out of another hole, holding the ladder so that it could not advance. A large tree came out of the remaining hole, and an iron cage was placed on its head. The cage was filled with fire to burn the ladder. The ladder was burned from the middle, and all the soldiers on the ladder were burned to death.

古文：贼又以钩车钩城上棚阁，钩之所及，莫不崩陷。
现代文：叛军又用钩车钩城头上的敌楼，钩车所到之处，敌楼纷纷崩陷。
English: The rebels also used a grappling hook to hook the enemy buildings at the top of the city. Wherever the grappling hook went, the enemy buildings collapsed one after another.

古文：巡以大木，末置连锁，锁末置大镮，搨其钩头，以革车拔之入城，截其钩头而纵车令去。
现代文：张巡在大木头上安置了连锁，锁头装置大环，套住叛军的钩车头，然后用皮车拔入城中，截去车上的钩头，然后把车放掉。
English: Zhang Jun placed a chain on a large log, the locking device was a large ring, and the rebel's hook head was put on, and then pulled into the city with a leather car, cut off the hook head on the car, and then let go of the car.

古文：贼又造木驴攻城，巡熔金汁灌之，应投销铄。
现代文：叛军又制作木驴来攻城，张巡就熔化铁水浇灌木驴，木驴立刻被销毁。
English: The rebels also made wooden donkeys to attack the city. Zhang Jun melted the iron and poured water on the wooden donkeys. The wooden donkeys were immediately destroyed.

古文：贼又于城西北隅以土囊积柴为磴道，欲登城。
现代文：叛军最后在城西北角用土袋和柴木积成阶道，想借此登城。
English: In the end, the rebels used dirt bags and firewood to build a stairway in the northwest corner of the city, hoping to use it to climb up to the city.

古文：巡不与争利，每夜，潜以松明、干蒿投之于中，积十馀日，贼不之觉，因出军大战，使人顺风持火焚之，贼不能救，经二十馀日，火方灭。
现代文：张巡不与叛军交战，只是每天夜晚，暗中把松明与干草投进正在堆积的阶道中，共十多天，叛军没有察觉，张巡乘机出军大战，派人顺风纵火焚烧阶道，叛军无法救火，经过二十多天大火才熄灭。
English: Zhang Jun did not fight with the rebels, but every night, secretly threw torches and hay into the stairway that was being piled up, for a total of more than ten days. The rebels did not notice that Zhang Jun took the plane to go to war and sent people downwind to set fire to the stairway. The rebels could not put out the fire, and it took more than twenty days for the fire to go out.

古文：巡之所为，皆应机立办，贼伏其智，不敢复攻，遂于城外穿三重壕，立木栅以守巡，巡亦于其内作壕以拒之。
现代文：张巡的所作所为都是随机应变，立刻办理。
English: Zhang Jun's actions are random contingencies, and should be dealt with immediately.

古文：丁巳，贼将安武臣攻陕郡，杨务钦战死，贼遂屠陕。
现代文：叛军信服他智谋高强，不敢再来进攻。于是在城外挖了三道壕沟，并置立木栅而围城，张巡也在城内挖了壕沟以对抗敌人。
English: The rebels were convinced that he was too clever and powerful to attack again, so they dug three trenches outside the city and set up a wooden fence to surround the city. Zhang Jun also dug a trench inside the city to fight the enemy.

古文：崔涣在江南选补，冒滥者众，八月，甲申，罢涣为馀杭太守、江东采访、防御使。
现代文：丁巳，叛军大将安武臣率兵进攻陕郡，杨务钦战死，叛军遂在城中大肆屠杀。崔涣在江南主持科举选人的事务，作弊的人很多，八月，肃宗将崔涣罢免，任命为余杭太守、江东采访、防御使。
English: At the same time, the rebel general An Wuxin led troops to attack Shaanxi, Yang Muqin was killed in the battle, and the rebels then massacred people in the city. Cui Wei presided over the selection of candidates in the south of the Yangtze River, and there were many people who cheated. In August, Su Zong dismissed Cui Wei and appointed him as the governor of Yuhang, the interview of the east of the Yangtze River, and the defense envoy.

古文：以张镐兼河南节度、采访等使，代贺兰进明。
现代文：肃宗任命张镐兼河南节度、采访等使，以代替贺兰进明。
English: Su Zong appointed Zhang Qian and Henan Festival, interview and other envoys to replace Helan Jinming.

古文：灵昌太守许叔冀为贼所围，救兵不至，拔众奔彭城。
现代文：灵昌太守许叔冀被叛军包围，外无救兵，只好率兵逃奔彭城。
English: Lingchang's daimyō, Xu Shuji, was surrounded by rebels, and with no outside help, he had no choice but to lead his soldiers to flee to Pengcheng.

古文：睢阳士卒死伤之馀，才六百人，张巡、许远分城而守之，巡守东北，远守西南，与士卒同食茶纸，不复下城。
现代文：坚守睢阳的士卒死伤仅剩下六百人，张巡与许远把全城分为两部分，亲自率兵固守，张巡守东北，许远守西南，二人与士卒一起吃茶纸，日夜苦战，不再下城。
English: There were only 600 soldiers who died or were wounded in defending Fenyang. Zhang Jun and Xu Yuan divided the whole city into two parts, personally leading the soldiers to defend, Zhang Jun guarded the northeast, Xu Yuan guarded the southwest, the two men and the soldiers ate tea paper together, fought hard day and night, and no longer went to the city.

古文：贼士攻城者，巡以逆顺说之，往往弃贼来降，为巡死战，前后二百馀人。
现代文：对于攻城的叛军，张巡对他们讲说逆顺的道理，经常有人脱离敌军，前来投诚，为张巡死战，前后有二百余人。
English: As for the rebels who besieged the city, Zhang Jun told them about the principle of going against the will of the people. There were often people who broke away from the enemy army and came to join the rebels. There were more than two hundred people before and after the death battle for Zhang Jun.

古文：是时，许步冀在谯郡，尚衡在彭城，贺兰进明在临淮，皆拥兵不救。
现代文：这时，许叔冀在谯郡，尚衡在彭城，贺兰进明在临淮，都拥兵不救睢阳。
English: At this time, Xu Shuji was in Jixian County, Shang Heng was in Pengcheng, and Helan Jinming was in Linhuai. They all supported the soldiers to save Fenyang.

古文：城中日蹙，巡乃令南霁云将三十骑犯围而出，告急于临淮。
现代文：城中日益艰难，于是张巡命令南霁云率领三十名骑兵突围出城，往临淮去求援兵。
English: As the situation in the city became increasingly difficult, Zhang Jun ordered Nan Xiyun to lead thirty cavalrymen to break out of the city and go to Linhuai to ask for reinforcements.

古文：霁云出城，贼众数万遮之，霁云直冲其众，左右驰射，贼众披靡，止亡两骑。
现代文：南霁云出城后，叛军数万人来阻击，霁云帅骑兵直冲敌阵，左右射击，叛军披靡，霁云仅伤亡了两名骑兵。
English: After Nanluoyun left the city, the rebel army of tens of thousands of people came to block the attack. The cavalry of the general of the Minluoyun charged the enemy line, shooting left and right. The rebel army was invincible, and only two cavalrymen were killed and wounded in the Minluoyun.

古文：既至临淮，见进明，进明曰： 今日睢阳不知存亡，兵去何益！ 
现代文：南霁云到达临淮，见到贺兰进明，贺兰进明说： 现在睢阳城不知存亡，派援兵去又有什么用呢！ 
English: Nanluoyun arrived at Linhuai and met Helan Jinming. Helan Jinming said, "Now that the city of Shenyang no longer exists, what is the use of sending reinforcements?

古文：霁云曰： 睢阳若陷，霁云请以死谢大夫。
现代文：南霁云说： 我以死来向你担保，睢阳城还没有被攻陷。
English: Nan Xiyun said: I guarantee you with my death that the city of Shenyang has not yet been taken.

古文：且睢阳既拔，即及临淮，譬如皮毛相依，安得不救！ 
现代文：再说睢阳如果被叛军攻占，下一个就是临淮，此二城犹如毛皮相依，怎么能够见死不救呢！ 
English: Besides, if Shenyang is conquered by the rebels, the next one will be Lianhuai. These two cities are like two furs clinging to each other. How can they not help each other?

古文：进明爱霁云勇壮，不听其语，强留之，具食与乐，延霁去坐。
现代文：贺兰进明很喜欢南霁云的勇敢，但不听他的劝告，还强行把他留下，准备了酒食与音乐歌舞，来招待南霁云。
English: Helan Jinming liked Nan Xiyun's bravery very much, but he did not listen to his advice and forced him to stay. He prepared food, wine, music, song and dance to entertain Nan Xiyun.

古文：霁云慷慨，泣且语曰： 霁云来时，睢阳之人不食月馀矣！
现代文：南霁云慷慨激昂地哭着说： 我突围出来时，睢阳城中的将士已经有一个多月没有粮食吃了！
English: Nan Rongyun cried passionately and said: When I broke out of the encirclement, the soldiers in the city of Shenyang had not eaten food for more than a month!

古文：霁云虽欲独食，且不下咽，大夫坐拥强兵，观睢阳陷没，曾无分灾救患之意，岂忠臣义士之所为乎！ 
现代文：我虽然想在此进食，但实在难以下咽。大夫你手握强兵，眼看着睢阳将要陷落，却丝毫没有救援之意，这难道是忠臣义士所应该有的行为吗！ 
English: Although I want to eat here, it is really hard to swallow. Doctor, you have a strong army in your hands, you are watching the fall of Shenyang, but you have no intention of rescuing. Is this the behavior that a loyal subject should have?

古文：因啮落一指以示进明，曰： 霁云既不能达主将之意，请留一指以示信归报。 
现代文：南霁云咬掉自己一个手指头让贺兰进明看，并说： 我南霁云既然不能完成主将交付给我的命令，请留下一个指头以表示信用而归报主将。 
English: Nan Xunyun bit off one of his fingers so that He Lan could see it clearly, and said: Since I, Nan Xunyun, cannot complete the order given to me by the master, please leave one finger to show your trust and report it to the master.

古文：座中往往为泣下。
现代文：座中的人都被感动而哭泣。
English: Everyone in the audience was moved to tears.

古文：霁云察进明终无出师意，遂去。
现代文：南霁云知道贺兰进明终不肯出兵救援，只好离开了临淮。
English: Nan Yuyun knew that Helan Jinming finally refused to send troops to rescue, so he had to leave Linhuai.

古文：至宁陵，与城使廉坦同将步骑三千人，闰月，戊申夜，冒围，且战且行，至城下，大战，坏贼营，死伤之外，仅得千人入城。
现代文：到达宁陵，与宁陵城使廉垣一起率领步、骑兵三千人，闰月戊申夜，突进叛军的包围圈，边战边进，来到睢阳城下，与叛军交战，毁坏了敌营，自己所率领的军队伤亡很大，只剩下一千人得以入城。
English: Arriving at Ningling, he led 3,000 cavalry led by Liangqi, the governor of Ningling City, into the encirclement of the rebel army on the night of the leap month of Wushen. He went into the battle side by side, came to the city of Shenyang, fought with the rebel army, and destroyed the enemy camp. The army he led suffered heavy casualties, and only one thousand people were able to enter the city.

古文：城中将吏知无救，皆恸哭，贼知援绝，围之益急。
现代文：城中将士与官吏得知救兵无望，都大声痛哭。叛军知道没有援兵，围攻更加急迫。
English: When the generals and officials in the city learned that there was no hope of rescuing the soldiers, they all cried loudly and bitterly. The rebels knew that there were no reinforcements, so the siege was even more urgent.

古文：初，房琯为相，恶贺兰进明，以为河南节度使，以许叔冀为进明都知兵马使，俱兼御史大夫。
现代文：当初，房作宰相时，因为嫉恨贺兰进明，就任命他为河南节度使，又任命许叔冀为他的都知兵马使，二人都兼御史大夫。
English: At first, when Fang was the prime minister, because he was jealous of He Lan Jinming, he appointed him as the Henan Festival Envoy, and also appointed Xu Shuji as his Tochi Terracotta Warriors and Horses Envoy, both of whom were also the Imperial Historian.

古文：叔冀自恃麾下精锐，且官与进明等，不受其节制。
现代文：许叔冀自恃部下兵力强壮，并且官职与贺兰进明相等，不接受贺兰进明节制。
English: Xu Shuji's troops under his command were strong, and his official position was equal to that of He Lan Jinming. He did not accept He Lan Jinming's moderation.

古文：故进明不敢分兵，非惟疾巡、远功名，亦惧为叔冀所袭也。
现代文：所以贺兰进明不敢分兵去救援睢阳，不是仅仅嫉妒张巡、许远的功名，也害怕乘机遭到许叔冀的袭击。
English: Therefore, He Lan Jinming did not dare to send troops to rescue Fenyang, not only because he was jealous of Zhang Jun and his great achievements, but also because he was afraid of being attacked by Xu Shuji.

古文：戊辰，上劳飨诸将，遣攻长安，谓郭子仪曰： 事之济否，在此行也！ 
现代文：戊辰，肃宗犒劳诸位将领，让他们进攻长安，并对郭子仪说： 事情成功与否，在此一举！ 
English: Wu Chen, Su Zong and all the generals, let them attack Chang'an, and said to Guo Ziyi: "Whether the matter is successful or not, it's up to you!"

古文：对曰： 此行不捷，臣必死之！ 
现代文：郭子仪回答说： 这一次如果不能够战胜，我一定以死相报。 
English: Guo Ziyi replied: "If I can't win this time, I will surely pay with my life."

古文：辛未，御史大夫崔光远破贼于骆谷，光远行军司马王伯伦、判官李椿将二千人攻中渭桥，杀贼守桥者千人，乘胜至苑门。
现代文：辛未，御史大夫崔光远败叛军于骆谷。崔光远的行军司马王伯伦、判官李椿率领二千人进攻中渭桥，杀死叛军守桥将士一千人，乘胜进兵至苑门。
English: In Xinwei, Grand Historian Cui Guangyuan defeated the rebels in Luogu. Cui Guangyuan's marching army, led by Sima Wang Buren and Judge Li Qin, attacked Zhongyao Bridge with two thousand people, killed one thousand rebels guarding the bridge, and took advantage of the victory to march to Yuanmen.

古文：贼有先屯武功者，闻之，奔归，遇于苑北，合战，杀伯伦，擒椿送洛阳。
现代文：叛军先前驻扎在武功的军队得知后，逃回长安，在禁苑北面与官军相遭遇，两军交战，王伯伦战死，李椿被俘虏后送往洛阳。
English: After the rebel army previously stationed in Wukong learned of this, they fled back to Chang'an. They encountered the government army on the north side of the Forbidden City, and the two armies fought. Wang Buren was killed in the battle, and Li Chin was captured and sent to Luoyang.

古文：然自是贼不复屯武功矣。
现代文：但是从此叛军不再占据武功。
English: But from then on, the rebels no longer dominated martial arts.

古文：贼屡攻上党，常为节度使程千里所败。
现代文：叛军多次进攻上党郡，都被节度使程千里打败。
English: The rebels repeatedly attacked Shangdang County, but were defeated by Cheng Qianli.

古文：蔡希德复引兵围上党。
现代文：叛军大将蔡希德又率兵围攻上党。
English: The rebel general Cai Xide once again led his troops to besiege Shangdi.

