古文：谢晦谢晦，字宣明，陈郡阳夏人也。
现代文：谢晦字宣明，陈郡阳夏人。
English: Xie Yoji Xuanming, Chen County Yang Xia Ren.

古文：祖朗，东阳太守。父重，会稽王道子骠骑长史。兄绚，高祖镇军长史，蚤卒。
现代文：他祖父谢朗，是晋朝东阳太守；父亲谢重，是晋朝会稽王道子的骠骑长史；他的哥哥谢绚，是高祖的镇军长史，去世得很早。
English: His grandfather, Xie Lang, was the governor of Dongyang of the Jin Dynasty; his father, Xie Jiu, was the commander of the cavalry of the Jin Dynasty; his brother, Xie Hua, was the commander of the town army of Gaozu, and died very early.

古文：晦初为孟昶建威府中兵参军。
现代文：谢晦最初当孟昶的建威府中兵参军。
English: At first, Xie Yu served as a middle-ranking soldier of Mengye Jianwei Prefecture to join the army.

古文：昶死，高祖问刘穆之： 孟昶参佐，谁堪入我府？ 
现代文：孟昶死后，高祖问刘穆之： 孟昶的部属中，谁适合到我的府中？ 
English: After Meng Xuan's death, Gao Zu asked Liu Muzhi: Among Meng Xuan's subordinates, who is suitable for my government?

古文：穆之举晦，即命为太尉参军。
现代文：刘穆之推荐了谢晦。于是高祖便叫谢晦当太尉参军。
English: Liu Muzhi recommended Xie Yu. So Gaozhu asked Xie Yu to join the army as a captain.

古文：高祖尝讯囚，其旦刑狱参军有疾，札晦代之，于车中一鉴讯牒，催促便下。
现代文：一次，高祖审讯犯人，当天早晨刑狱参军病了，高祖叫谢晦代理。在车中，谢晦一看审讯的记录，便马上作出判决。
English: On one occasion, Gao Zu was interrogating a prisoner. On the morning of the day, Gao Zu called Xie Hui to act as his deputy. In the car, Xie Hui looked at the record of the interrogation and immediately made a judgment.

古文：相府多事，狱繁殷积，晦随问酬辩，曾无违谬。
现代文：相府中的事务特别多，狱中的犯人也很多，谢晦随问随答，竟无一点错误。
English: There are a lot of affairs in the government, and a lot of prisoners in the prison, and there is no mistake at all.

古文：高祖奇之，即日署刑狱贼曹，转豫州治中从事。
现代文：高祖非常惊奇，当天便任他为刑狱贼曹，又转任豫州治中从事。
English: Gaozu was very surprised. On the same day, he appointed him as the prison thief Cao, and he was transferred to the Yuzhou Middle School.

古文：义熙八年，土断侨流郡县，使晦分判扬、豫民户，以平允见称。
现代文：义熙八年，朝庭按地域划定郡县，叫谢晦管理扬州和豫州的户口，因办事公平而被人们称道，于是升为太尉主簿。
English: In the eighth year of the reign of Emperor Yixi, the imperial court delineated counties according to regions, and asked Xie Yu to manage the hukou of Yangzhou and Yuzhou. He was praised for his fairness, and was promoted to the rank of captain.

古文：入为太尉主簿，从征司马休之。
现代文：谢晦随同高祖征讨司马休之。
English: Xie Yu followed Gao Zu to fight against Sima Xiu.

古文：时徐逵之战败见杀，高祖怒，将自被甲登岸，诸将谏，不从，怒愈甚。
现代文：当时徐逵之战败被杀，高祖十分愤怒，要亲自披挂铠甲上岸作战，将领们都极力劝阻，高祖不仅不听，反而更加愤怒。
English: At that time, Xu Yao's defeat was killed, Gaozu was very angry, he wanted to personally wear armor to go ashore to fight, the generals tried their best to dissuade him, Gaozu not only did not listen, but became even more angry.

古文：晦前抱持高祖，高祖曰： 我斩卿！ 
现代文：谢晦上前抱住高祖，不让他上岸。高祖说： 你不放手我便杀了你！ 
English: Xie Yao stepped forward and hugged Gao Zu, preventing him from going ashore. Gao Zu said, "If you don't let go, I'll kill you!"

古文：晦曰： 天下可无晦，不可无公，晦死何有！ 
现代文：谢晦说： 天下可以没有我谢晦，但是不能没有了你明公，谢晦死了又有什么呢？ 
English: Xie Yao said: The world can do without me, Xie Yao, but it cannot do without you, my lord. What if Xie Yao is dead?

古文：会胡籓已得登岸，贼退走，乃止。
现代文：此时恰好胡藩已登上江岸，敌人退走，于是高祖才作罢。
English: At this time, the Hu clan had just landed on the riverbank, and the enemy retreated, so Gao Zu finally gave up.

古文：晦美风姿，善言笑，眉目分明，鬓发如点漆。
现代文：谢晦风度翩翩，善言谈，有风趣，眉目清秀，鬓发如漆。
English: Xie Yue has a charming demeanor, is good at conversation, funny, has a beautiful face, and her hair is like lacquer.

古文：涉猎文义，朗赡多通，高祖深加爱赏，群僚莫及。
现代文：他博览群书，学识渊博，通晓事理。高祖对他非常喜爱和欣赏，其他官员们是远远赶不上的。
English: He is well-read, learned and knowledgeable. Gaozhu likes and appreciates him very much, and other officials are far behind.

古文：从征关、洛，内外要任悉委之。
现代文：谢晦随同高祖出征关中、洛阳，高祖把里里外外的重要事务都交给他办。
English: Xie Yu accompanied Gao Zu on his expedition to Guanzhong and Luoyang. Gao Zu entrusted him with important affairs at home and abroad.

古文：刘穆之遣使陈事，晦往往措异同，穆之怒曰： 公复有还时否？ 
现代文：刘穆之派人来向高祖报告情况，谢晦往往要提出不同的意见，刘穆之恼火地说： 你谢晦不知有没有回来之日？ 
English: Liu Mu Zhi sent someone to report the situation to Gao Zu. Xie Hui often wanted to put forward different opinions. Liu Mu Zhi angrily said: Do you know if Xie Hui has returned?

古文：高祖欲以为从事中郎，以访穆之，坚执不与。
现代文：高祖想用谢晦为从事中郎，征求刘穆之的意见，刘穆之坚决反对。
English: Gao Zu wanted to use Xie Hui to engage in Zhong Lang, solicited Liu Mu Zhi's opinion, Liu Mu Zhi resolutely opposed.

古文：终穆之世，不迁。
现代文：因此刘穆之在的时候，谢晦一直没有能升官。
English: As a result, when Liu Muzhi was in office, Xie Hui was never promoted.

古文：穆之丧问至，高祖哭之甚恸。
现代文：刘穆之去世的消息传来，高祖哭得很伤心。
English: When the news of Liu Mu Zhi's death came, Gao Zu cried very sad.

古文：晦时正直，喜甚，自入阁内参审穆之死问。
现代文：谢晦当时正值班，听说后非常高兴，并亲自到帐内落实刘穆之的死讯。
English: Xie Hui was on duty at the time, and was very happy to hear about Liu Mu Zhi's death, and personally went to his account to confirm the news.

古文：其日教出，转晦从事中郎。
现代文：当日高祖便签署命令，升谢晦为从事中郎。
English: On the same day, Gaozu signed an order to promote Xie Yao to the position of middle son.

古文：宋台初建，为右卫将军，寻加侍中。
现代文：宋国国府开始建立时，谢晦任右将军，不久又加官侍中。
English: When the government of the Song Dynasty began to be established, Xie Yu was appointed as the right general, and soon he was promoted to the middle officer.

古文：高祖受命，于石头登坛，备法驾入宫。
现代文：高祖称帝，在石头城中登基，坐着皇帝的车子进入宫殿。
English: Gaozu proclaimed himself emperor, ascended the throne in the stone city, and entered the palace in the emperor's carriage.

古文：晦领游军为警备，迁中领军，侍中如故。
现代文：谢晦率领巡逻军队负责高祖的警卫工作。随之他又升为中领军，侍中还照旧。
English: Xie Yao led the patrol army and was responsible for Gao Zu's guard work. Subsequently, he was promoted to the middle leader of the army, and the attendants remained as before.

古文：以佐命功，封武昌县公，食邑二千户。
现代文：因为是开国功臣，谢晦被封为武昌县令，食邑二千户。
English: Because he was a hero of the founding of the People's Republic of China, Xie Yu was given the title of Wuchang County magistrate, with a population of 2,000 households.

古文：二年，坐行玺封镇西司马、南郡太守王华大封，而误封北海太守球，版免晦侍中。
现代文：永初二年，谢晦带着玺印去给镇西司马、南郡太守王华封爵，却误把爵位封给了北海太守王球，因此，高祖便免去了他的侍中职务。
English: In the second year of the Yongzheng era, Xie Hui took the seal to confer the title of nobility on the town's western governor Sima and the southern governor Wang Hua, but mistakenly conferred the title of nobility on the northern governor Wang Qiu. As a result, Gao Zu was relieved of his position as an attendant.

古文：寻转领军将军、散骑常侍，依晋中军羊祜故事，入直殿省，总统宿卫。
现代文：不久之后，谢晦又被任命为领军将军、散骑常侍，仿照晋朝的中领军羊的故事，谢晦到宫殿内值班，总管大内警备工作。
English: Soon after, Xie Yu was also appointed as the leading general and mounted equerry. Based on the story of the middle-ranking military leader in the Jin Dynasty, Xie Yu went on duty in the palace and was in charge of the inner-city guard work.

古文：三月，高祖不豫，给班剑二十人，与徐羡之、傅亮、檀道济并侍医药。
现代文：三月，高祖病重，配给谢晦卫兵二十人，让他和徐羡之、傅亮、檀道济同时服侍自己。
English: In March, Gao Zu was seriously ill and was assigned 20 Xie Yu guards, allowing him to serve himself at the same time as Xu Enzhi, Fu Liang, and Dang Daoji.

古文：少帝即位，加领中书令，与羡之，亮共辅朝政。
现代文：少帝即位，加任谢晦为中书令，与徐羡之、傅亮共同辅佐朝政。
English: The young emperor ascended to the throne, and Xie Yu was appointed as the middle secretary, and he and Xu Enzhi and Fu Liang jointly assisted the imperial government.

古文：少帝既废，司空徐羡之录诏命，以晦行都督荆湘雍益宁南北秦七州诸军事、抚军将军、领护南蛮校尉、荆州刺史，欲令居外为援，虑太祖至或别用人，故遽有此授。
现代文：少帝被废后，司空徐羡之宣布圣旨，用谢晦代理荆州、湘州、雍州、益州、宁州、南秦州和北秦州等七州诸军事，官为抚军将军，兼任护南蛮校尉、荆州刺史，希望叫谢晦在外藩作为援助，这是因为徐羡之等考虑到太祖即位后或许会用其他人，所以才突然有这一任命。
English: After the young emperor was dethroned, the emperor's aide-de-camp, Xu Enzhi, announced the sacred will to use Xie Hui as the representative of the military of seven states including Jingzhou, Hunan, Yongzhou, Yizhou, Ningzhou, South Qin and North Qin, and the official was the general of the army, concurrently serving as the captain of the guard of Nanban and the historian of Jingzhou. He hoped to have Xie Hui as an aid in the foreign domain. This was because Xu Enzhi and others considered that others might be used after the great-grandfather's enthronement, so there was a sudden appointment

古文：精兵旧将，悉以配之，器仗军资甚盛。
现代文：其中的精锐部队和老成将领，一概配给谢晦，武器丰富，粮食充裕。
English: Among them, the elite troops and veteran generals were all assigned to Xie Ying, with abundant weapons and food.

古文：太祖即位，加使持节，依本位除授。
现代文：太祖即位后，又给谢晦加上使持节，其他的职位照旧。
English: After the great-grandfather ascended to the throne, he also added the position of envoy to Xie Hui, and the other positions remained the same.

古文：晦虑不得去，甚忧惶，及发新亭，顾望石头城，喜曰： 今得脱矣。 
现代文：这使谢晦担心不能离开南京，日夜忧思不安。等到他从新亭上路离开南京时，谢晦回顾石头城，欢快地说： 现在总算能走脱了。 
English: This made Xie Hui worry about not being able to leave Nanjing, and he worried day and night. When he left Nanjing on the road from Xinting, Xie Hui looked back at Stone Town and said cheerfully: Now I can finally get away.

古文：寻进号卫将军，加散骑常侍，进封建平郡公，食邑四千户，固让进封。
现代文：不久谢晦又加号卫将军、任散骑常侍，晋封为建平郡公，食邑四千户，谢晦则坚决辞这个封爵。
English: Soon after, Xie Hui was also given the title of General of the Guards, appointed as a cavalryman, and promoted to Jianping County, with a population of 4,000 households. However, Xie Hui resolutely refused this knighthood.

古文：又给鼓吹一部。
现代文：后又赐给谢晦鼓吹一部。
English: He was also given a part in the band.

古文：初为荆州，甚有自矜之色，将之镇，诣从叔光禄大夫澹别。
现代文：谢晦刚当荆州刺史时，很是得意。到荆州上任前，他去与堂叔光禄大夫谢澹辞别。
English: When Xie Yao was just appointed as the governor of Jingzhou, he was very proud. Before he took office in Jingzhou, he went to bid farewell to his uncle, Guanglu doctor Xie Yao.

古文：澹问晦年，晦答曰： 三十五。 
现代文：谢澹问谢晦有多大年纪了，谢晦回答说： 三十五岁。 
English: When Xie Jun asked Xie Hui how old he was, Xie Hui replied, "Thirty-five years old."

古文：澹笑曰： 昔荀中郎年二十七为北府都督，卿比之，已为老矣。 
现代文：谢澹听后笑着说： 从前荀中郎二十七岁当上北府都督，你与他相比，已算是老了。 
English: After listening, Xie Yao said with a smile, "Compared to the twenty-seven-year-old Shizhong Lang, who once became the governor of Beifu, you are already considered old.

古文：晦有愧色。
现代文：谢晦听后面有愧色。
English: There is a sense of shame behind listening to Xie Yue.

古文：至江陵，深结侍中王华，冀以免祸。
现代文：谢晦到了江陵后，极力结纳侍中王华，希望能免除灾祸。
English: When he arrived in Gangneung, he made deep friends with the chamberlain Wang Hua, hoping to be spared from misfortune.

古文：二女当配彭城王义康、新野侯义宾。
现代文：谢晦的两个女儿要嫁给彭城王刘义康和新野侯刘义宾。
English: The two daughters were betrothed to Liu Yikang, the king of Pengcheng, and Liu Yibin, the lord of Xinye.

古文：元嘉二年，遣妻曹及长子世休送女还京邑。
现代文：元嘉二年，他派他的妻子曹氏及其长子谢世休把女儿送到京城。
English: In the second year of Yuan Jia, he sent his wife Cao and his eldest son Xie Shixiu to take their daughter to Beijing.

古文：先是景平中，索虏为寇，覆没河南。
现代文：这以前的景平年间，魏人侵略宋国，侵吞了河南。
English: During the previous Jingping years, the Wei people invaded Song and annexed Henan.

古文：至是上欲诛羡之等，并讨晦。
现代文：此时皇上想杀掉徐羡之等人，也想讨伐谢晦。
English: At this time, the emperor wanted to kill Xu Enzhu and others, and also wanted to fight Xie Yue.

古文：声言北伐，又言拜京陵，治装舟舰。
现代文：声言要北伐，又说要拜谒京陵武帝墓，便准备船舰。
English: Saying that they wanted to go to the North, and that they wanted to visit the tomb of Emperor Wu in the Beijing Mausoleum, they prepared the ships.

古文：傅亮与晦书曰： 薄伐河朔，事犹未已，朝野之虑，忧惧者多。 
现代文：傅亮写信给谢晦说： 征伐河北，事情还未了结，朝廷内外的考虑，担心害怕的人占多数。 
English: Fu Liang wrote a letter to Xie Hui saying: The conquest of Hebei is still unfinished, and the majority of people are worried and afraid due to considerations inside and outside the imperial court.

古文：又言： 朝士多谏北征，上当遣外监万幼宗往相咨访。 
现代文：又说： 朝中大多数人上谏北伐，皇上准备派外监万幼宗到你处咨询讨论。 
English: He also said, "The majority of people in the DPRK are going to the Northern Expedition, and the emperor is preparing to send the overseer Wan Yong Zong to you for consultation and discussion."

古文：时朝廷处分异常，其谋颇泄。
现代文：当时朝廷比较混乱，泄露了不少密谋。
English: At that time, the imperial court's disposition was unusual, and the scheme was often leaked.

古文：三年正月，晦弟黄门侍郎爵驰使告晦，晦犹谓不然，呼咨议参军何承天，示以亮书，曰： 计幼宗一二日必至，傅公虑我好事，故先遣此书。 
现代文：三年正月，谢晦的弟弟谢爵派人飞报谢晦，谢晦仍认为不会如此，叫来谘议参军何承天，给他看傅亮的来信，说： 估计万幼宗一两天内便会到来，傅公担心我多事，所以先给我送来这封书信。 
English: In the first month of the third year, Xie Xie's younger brother Xie Jie sent someone to report to Xie Xie. Xie Xie still thought that this would not be the case. He called He Chengtian to advise him to join the army. He showed him Fu Liang's letter and said: It is estimated that Wan Youzong will arrive in one or two days. Fu Gong is worried that I have a lot of things to do, so he sent me this letter first.

古文：承天曰： 外间所闻，咸谓西讨已定，幼宗岂有上理。 
现代文：何承天说： 外面听人们说，都认为西征已定，万幼宗哪有北上的道理。 
English: He Chengtian said: From what I hear from people outside, they all think that the Western Expedition has been decided, and there is no reason for Wan Rongzong to go to the north.

古文：晦尚谓虚妄，使承天豫立答诏启草，伐虏宜须明年。
现代文：谢晦仍然认为那些传闻是虚妄的，叫何承天预先起草好对诏书的答复，说讨伐魏人应该明年进行。
English: Xie Yu still thought that those rumors were false, and asked He Chengtian to draft a reply to the edict in advance, saying that the campaign against the Wei people should be carried out next year.

古文：江夏内史程道惠得寻阳人书，言： 朝廷将有大处分，其事已审。 使其辅国府中兵参军乐冏封以示晦。
现代文：江夏内史程道惠接到氵寻阳人的来信，信中说： 朝廷将有大的行动，这事已然确定 ，程道惠派他的辅国府中兵参军乐礒把氵寻阳人的信封送给谢晦。
English: Cheng Daohui, a historian in Jiangxi Province, received a letter from Zou Huan Yangren. The letter said: The imperial court will have a big action. This matter has already been determined. Cheng Daohui sent his auxiliary soldiers to join the army to send Zou Huan Yangren's envelope to Xie Yu.

古文：晦又谓承天曰： 幼宗尚未至，若复二三日无消息，便是不复来邪？ 
现代文：谢晦又对何承天说： 万幼宗还未到，要是再过二三天还没有消息，便不会再来吗？ 
English: Xie Hui also said to He Chengtian: Wan Youzong has not arrived yet, if there is no news in another two or three days, will he not come again?

古文：承天答曰： 诏使本无来理，如程所说，其事已判，岂容复疑。 
现代文：何承天回答说： 皇上的使者本来就没有来的道理，按程道惠说的，这事情已很清楚了，难道还有什么怀疑吗？ 
English: He Chengtian replied: The reason why the emperor's envoy did not come in the first place, according to the way Daohui said, this matter is already very clear, is there any doubt?

古文：晦欲焚南蛮兵籍，率见力决战。
现代文：谢晦想烧掉南蛮的兵册，率领所有的部下士兵决战。
English: Xie Hui planned to destroy the Southern Manchu soldiers' register and lead the existing troops into a decisive battle.

古文：士人多劝发兵，乃立幡戒严，谓司马庾登之曰： 今当自下，欲屈卿以三千人守城，备御刘粹。 
现代文：他的部下有许多人劝他发兵，于是谢晦扯起大旗，实行戒严，他对司马庾登之说： 如今我准备亲自率军东下，想委屈你带三千人守城，以防备刘粹。 
English: Many of his subordinates urged him to send troops, so Xie Yu raised the flag and imposed martial law. He said to Sima Qiandenzhi: "Now I am preparing to lead the army to the east myself. I want to offend you and take three thousand people to defend the city in case of Liu Qi.

古文：登之曰： 下官亲老在都，又素无旅，情计二三，不敢受此旨。 
现代文：庾登之说： 我的亲人前辈都在京城，我又一向没有军事才能，经考虑再三，我不敢接受这个重任。 
English: Zou Dengzhi said: My relatives and predecessors are all in Beijing, and I have never had military talent. After repeated consideration, I do not dare to accept this important task.

古文：晦仍问诸佐： 战士三千，足守城不？ 
现代文：谢晦于是又问其他将官： 三千士兵，能守住江陵城吗？ 
English: Xie Hui then asked the other generals: Can three thousand soldiers defend Gangneung City?

古文：南蛮司马周超对曰： 非徒守城而已，若有外寇，可以立勋。 
现代文：南蛮司马周超回答说： 不仅仅能守住城，而且如果有外来的侵犯者，还可以立功。 
English: Nanban Sima Zhou Chao replied: Not only can we defend the city, but if there are foreign invaders, we can also make meritorious contributions.

古文：登之乃曰： 超必能办，下官请解司马、南郡以授。 
现代文：庾登之于是说： 周超一定能办好此事，我请求解除我的司马和南郡太守的职务，把它授给周超。 
English: Zou Dengzhi then said: Zhou Chao is sure to do a good job in this matter. I request that my post of Sima and Nanshun governor be removed and given to Zhou Chao.

古文：即于坐命超为司马、建威将军、南义阳太守，转登之为长史，南郡如故。
现代文：谢晦当场任命周超为司马、建威将军、南义阳太守。转任庾登之为长史，南郡太守照旧。
English: Xie Yu appointed Zhou Chao as Sima, General Jian Wei, and the governor of South Yiyang on the spot. It has been a long history since he was transferred to the post of Shandong governor, and the governor of South County remains the same.

古文：太祖诛羡之等及晦子新除秘书郎世休，收爵、爵子世平、兄子著作佐郎绍等。
现代文：太祖杀掉徐羡之等人以及谢晦的儿子一一一刚被任命的秘书郎一一一谢世休，逮捕了谢爵、谢爵的儿子谢世平和谢爵哥哥的儿子著作佐郎谢绍等人。
English: The great-grandfather killed Xu Xianzhi and others, as well as Xie Yao's son, the newly-appointed secretary, and arrested Xie Jie, Xie Jie's son, Xie Shiping, and Xie Jie's brother's son, the writer, and others.

古文：乐冏又遣使告晦： 徐、傅二公及爵等并已诛。 
现代文：乐礒又派人告诉谢晦： 徐羡之和傅亮二人以及谢爵等人已被杀。 
English: Le Yao also sent someone to tell Xie Yu: Two people, Xu Enzhi and Fu Liang, as well as Xie Jie and others, had been killed.

古文：晦先举羡之、亮哀，次发子弟凶问。既而自出射堂，配衣军旅。
现代文：谢晦于是先为徐、傅二人治丧，其后又给自己的兄弟儿子发丧，然后走出射堂，亲自给士兵们发放衣服。
English: Xie Hui first mourned for Xu and Fu, then mourned for his own brother and son, and then walked out of the firing hall to personally distribute clothes to the soldiers.

古文：数从高祖征讨，备睹经略，至是指麾处分，莫不曲尽其宜。
现代文：谢晦曾多次随高祖征讨，多次目睹高祖的用兵方略，因此这时安排指挥，莫不曲尽其妙。
English: Xie Hui had accompanied Gao Zu on many expeditions, and had witnessed Gao Zu's strategy of using soldiers many times. Therefore, there was nothing wrong with arranging a conductor at this time.

古文：二三日中，四远投集，得精兵三万人。
现代文：二三日之内，四方人众汇集，共得到精兵三万。
English: Within two or three days, people from four directions gathered, and a total of 30,000 elite soldiers were obtained.

古文：乃奉表曰：
现代文：于是谢晦上书说：
English: So Xie Yao wrote:

古文：臣阶缘幸会，蒙武皇帝殊常之眷，外闻政事，内谋帷幄，经纶夷险，毗赞王业，预佐命之勋，膺河山之赏。
现代文： 下臣谢晦幸会有缘，承蒙高祖特别的照顾，外则参与朝政，内则谋划计策，历经艰难困苦，竭尽心智，赞助皇室大业，成为开国功臣中的一员，接受封疆土的赏赐。
English: The vassals were grateful for the good fortune and special care of Gao Zu. On the one hand, they participated in the court politics. On the other hand, they planned strategies, went through hardships and exhausted their minds, sponsored the great cause of the royal family, became one of the founding heroes, and received the reward of the fenced territory.

古文：及先帝不豫，导扬末命，臣与故司徒臣羡之、左光禄大夫臣亮、征北将军臣道济等，并升御床，跪受遗诏，载贻话言，托以后事。
现代文：等到高祖病重时，我仍忠诚地执行先帝的命令，与故司徒徐羡之、左光禄大夫傅亮和征北将军檀道济等人一同伺候在先帝的病床前，跪着接受了高祖弥留时的圣旨，高祖把后事托付给我们。
English: When Gao Zu was gravely ill, I still faithfully carried out the orders of the former emperor. Together with the late Stu Xu Enzhi, Dr. Zuo Guanglu Fu Liang and the Northern Expeditionary General Dang Daoji, I served at the bedside of the former emperor. I knelt down and accepted Gao Zu's last will and testament, and Gao Zu entrusted the aftercare to us.

古文：臣虽凡浅，感恩自厉，送往事居，诚贯幽显。
现代文：我虽然平庸，但深感先帝的恩德，时时勉励自己，送走先帝奉侍太后，竭心尽力。
English: Although I am mediocre, I deeply feel the benevolence of the former emperor, I always encourage myself, send away the former emperor to serve the empress dowager, and do my best.

古文：逮营阳失德，自绝宗庙，朝野岌岌，忧及祸难，忠谋协契，徇国忘己，援登圣朝，惟新皇祚。
现代文：等到营阳王不守道德，自绝于国家时，朝野岌岌可危，担心发生大的灾难，我们几个人忠诚的考虑，不顾自身的安危，把陛下立为皇帝，再造皇室。
English: When Emperor Yingyang became immoral and cut himself off from the country, the government and the country were in a precarious situation. Fearing a great disaster, a few of us loyally considered, regardless of our own safety, to establish His Majesty as emperor and rebuild the imperial family.

古文：陛下驰传乘流，曾不惟疑，临朝殷勤，增崇封爵。
现代文：皇帝乘势东下，不加怀疑，殷勤地慰劳我们，增封我们的爵位。
English: The emperor took advantage of the situation and, without hesitation, consoled us diligently and increased our titles.

古文：此则臣等赤心已亮于天鉴，远近万邦咸达于圣旨。
现代文：这就是我们臣子的忠心为天地所鉴，远近万国的人民都明白皇上的真心。
English: This is how the loyalty of our courtiers is judged by heaven and earth, and the people of far and near all nations understand the emperor's sincerity.

古文：若臣等志欲专权，不顾国典，便当协翼幼主，孤背天日，岂复虚馆七旬，仰望鸾旗者哉？
现代文：我们如果志在专权，不顾国法，便应该辅佐小孩做皇帝，掌握大权，又怎能让皇位空缺七十多天，等待陛下的到来呢？
English: If we aspire to absolute power and disregard the laws of the country, we should support a child to become an emperor and wield great power. How can we leave the throne vacant for more than seventy days and wait for the arrival of His Majesty?

古文：故庐陵王于营阳之世，屡被猜嫌，积怨犯上，自贻非命。
现代文：故庐陵王在营阳王在位的时候，屡次被猜疑，于是他积怨在心，侵主犯上，自取灭亡。
English: Therefore, when Yingyang Wang was on the throne, the King of Fuling was suspected many times, so he accumulated resentment in his heart, attacked the main criminal, and destroyed himself.

古文：天祚明德，属当昌运，不有所废，将何以兴？
现代文：皇天保佐我朝，该当我国昌盛繁荣，不废去昏君，国家又怎会兴盛？
English: Emperor Tian Baozhao, when our country flourishes and prospers, it is not wasted to go to Dimunjun, how can the country prosper?

古文：成人之美，《春秋》之高义；立帝清馆，臣节之所司。
现代文：成人之美是《春秋》所称颂的，树立皇室，安定天下，是做臣子的职责。
English: The beauty of adulthood is praised in "Spring and Autumn." Establishing the imperial family and stabilizing the world are the duties of a courtier.

古文：耿弇不以贼遗君父，臣亦何负于宋室邪？
现代文：耿不把贼留给君父，我又有什么对不住宋国的呢？
English: If Geng didn't leave the thief to your father, why should I feel sorry for Song?

古文：况衅结阋墙，祸成畏逼，天下耳目，岂伊可诬！
现代文：况且我们今日的矛盾正是兄弟相争所致，灾祸产生形成于畏惧和逼迫，天下人所见，又岂能诬陷。
English: Moreover, our present conflict is the result of fratricidal strife, a scourge born of fear and persecution, which no man can see and frame.

古文：臣忝居蕃任，乃诚匪懈，为政小大，必先启闻。
现代文： 我身为封疆大臣，能力低劣，但诚心工作，不敢松懈，无论大事小事，必定首先启告朝廷。
English: As the minister of the fiefs, I am of inferior ability, but I work sincerely and dare not slacken. No matter how big or small the matter is, I must first inform the imperial court.

古文：纠剔群蛮，清夷境内，分留弟侄，并侍殿省。
现代文：平息清除蛮人反叛，安宁境内，把弟弟侄儿们留在京城，让他们一同侍候皇上。
English: He put down the rebellion of the barbarians, pacified the territory, and left his brothers and nephews in the capital, so that they could serve the emperor together.

古文：陛下聿遵先志，申以婚姻，童稚之目，猥荷齿召，荐女迁子，合门相送。
现代文：陛下遵守先帝遗令，和我家结为姻亲，我家的小孩也得到皇上的非常待遇，嫁女儿时，全家护送。
English: His Majesty abided by the Emperor's last will and testament, and became in-laws to my family. The children of my family were also treated very well by the Emperor. When he married his daughter, the whole family accompanied her.

古文：事君之道，义尽于斯。
现代文：臣子我侍候皇上的心意，已到了这步田地。
English: As a vassal, I have waited for the Emperor's will, and I have come this far.

古文：臣羡之总录百揆，翼亮三世，年耆乞退，屡抗表疏，优旨绸缪，未垂顺许。
现代文：大臣徐羡之总管朝政，辅佐三朝，年老力衰，请求退职，多次上书，但皇上对他非常照顾，不允许他离职。
English: Minister Xu Enzhi, the chief administrator of the imperial government and the assistant of the three dynasties, was old and weak. He asked to retire and wrote to the emperor many times, but the emperor took great care of him and did not allow him to leave the post.

古文：臣亮管司喉舌，恪虔夙夜，恭谨一心，守死善道。
现代文：臣子傅亮管理朝中监察要事，他日夜小心尽责，恭谨诚敬，坚定地遵守道德和法律。
English: The vassal Fu Liang was in charge of supervising important matters between the two Koreas. He was careful and conscientious day and night, respectful and sincere, and firmly adhered to ethics and laws.

古文：此皆皇宋之宗臣，社稷之镇卫，而谗人倾覆，妄生国衅，天威震怒，加以极刑，并及臣门，则被孥戮。
现代文：他们都是大宋的重臣、国家的柱石，但是奸臣进谗，卑鄙地制造国家的矛盾和混乱，皇上因此发怒，判处他们的死刑，而且还殃及到我的家门，使同时受到屠戮。
English: They were the senior vassals of the Great Song Dynasty and the pillars of the country, but the treacherous vassals entered the imperial palace and despicably created contradictions and chaos in the country. Therefore, the emperor was angry and sentenced them to death, and it also affected my family, causing them to be slaughtered at the same time.

古文：虽未知臣道济问，推理即事，不容独存。
现代文：虽然目前我还不知道檀道济的情况如何，但按常理推断，他不会独自安然无恙。
English: While I don't yet know what has happened to Thando, it is reasonable to assume that he is not alone and safe.

古文：先帝顾托元臣翼命之佐，剿于佞邪之手，忠贞匪躬之辅，不免夷灭之诛。
现代文：先帝临终托付于朝廷重任的大臣，被佞幸奸臣消灭，忠心耿耿的宰相也免不了全家被诛。
English: On his deathbed, the late emperor entrusted important ministers to the imperial court, but they were annihilated by his treacherous vassals. The entire family of the loyal prime minister was also executed.

古文：陛下春秋方富，始览万机，民之情伪，未能鉴悉。
现代文：陛下正当青春年华，刚开始处理朝廷政事，人们的真情虚伪，还没有完全清楚明白。
English: His Majesty is in his youthful years and has just begun to deal with the affairs of state of the Imperial Court. The true feelings of the people, as well as their hypocrisy, have not yet been fully understood.

古文：王弘兄弟，轻躁昧进；王华猜忌忍害，规弄威权，先除执政，以逞其欲。
现代文：王弘兄弟轻浮躁进；王华残忍猜忌，利用手中的大权，先除去执政的人，然后实现他的野心。
English: Wang Hong's brothers are flighty and impatient; Wang Hua is cruel and suspicious, using the power in his hands to first remove the person in power, and then realize his ambition.

古文：天下之人，知与不知，孰不为之痛心愤怨者哉！
现代文：天下的人，知道或不知道的，哪个不为之痛心疾首、悲忿万分呢！
English: Who in the world, knowing or not knowing, would not be heartbroken and full of sorrow?

古文：臣等见任先帝，垂二十载，小心谨慎，无纤介之愆，伏事甫尔，而婴若斯之罪。
现代文： 我们这些人被先帝委以重任达二十个春秋，小心谨慎，没出丝毫差错。而刚开始侍奉皇上只有这么短的时间，却遭到如此悲痛的惨遇。
English: Those of us who were entrusted with important tasks by the former emperor for twenty years, were careful and cautious, and did not make the slightest mistake. However, we only served the emperor for such a short time at the beginning, but we suffered such a sad fate.

古文：若非先帝谬于知人，则为陛下未察愚款。
现代文：不知是先帝不了解我们的好坏，还是陛下您没有体察出我们的忠心。
English: I don't know whether it was the former emperor who didn't understand how good or bad we were, or whether it was Your Majesty who didn't sense our loyalty.

古文：臣去岁末使反，得朝士及殿省诸将书，并言嫌隙已成，必有今日之事。
现代文：去年年底，我派出的人回来，带了一些朝中人士和殿中将领的书信，都说双方的矛盾已形成，必定会有今日征讨的事情发生。
English: At the end of last year, the person I sent came back with some letters from people in the DPRK and China and generals in the palace, all saying that the contradiction between the two sides had formed and that there would definitely be something to discuss today.

古文：臣推诚仰期，罔有二心，不图奸回潜遘，理顺难恃，忠贤陨朝，愚臣见袭，到彦之、萧欣等在近路。
现代文：我一片好心期待，没有二心，没想到奸臣暗中作了手脚，正义的人难以保存，忠良的人在朝中被杀，愚臣我也将被袭击，到彦之和萧欣便在附近准备攻击我们。
English: I was full of good-hearted anticipation, with no second thoughts. I had no idea that treacherous ministers had secretly made moves, that righteous people were difficult to save, that loyal people were killed in the morning, and that I, a foolish minister, would also be attacked. By the time I got there, Hikozhi and Xiao Xin were nearby, preparing to attack us.

古文：昔白公称乱，诸梁婴胄，恶人在朝，赵鞅入伐。
现代文：从前白公作乱，叶公便拿起了武器；恶人在朝中横行，赵鞅便回都讨伐。
English: Once upon a time, Bai Gong started a riot, Ye Gong took up arms; evildoers ran rampant in the court, and Zhao Wei returned to the capital to fight them.

古文：臣义均休戚，任居分陕，岂可颠而不扶，以负先帝遗旨！
现代文：我一则和皇室是亲近的亲戚，二则是本朝的荆州总管，见到朝庭如此，怎么能漠然不顾，辜负先帝遗托的恩德！
English: On the one hand, I am a close relative of the imperial family, and on the other hand, I am the Jingzhou chief administrator of this court. Seeing the court like this, how can I be indifferent and fail to live up to the grace of the former emperor!

古文：辄率将士，缮治舟甲，须其自送，投袂扑讨。
现代文：所以率领将士，修治船只和武器，等到奸人来到这里时，我便迅速消灭他们。
English: So I led the soldiers, repaired the ships and weapons, and when the traitors came here, I quickly eliminated them.

古文：若天祚大宋，卜世灵长，义师克振，中流清荡，便当浮舟东下，戮此三竖，申理冤耻，谢罪阙庭，虽伏锧赴镬，无恨于心。
现代文：如果上天保佑我大宋国，便叫我们正义之师获胜，顺流东下，除掉那三个奸人，为冤曲的忠臣们申冤昭雪，然后我再到朝廷谢罪，即使是油煎火煮、斧刀杀头，我也毫无怨言。
English: If the heavens bless me with the Great Song Dynasty, I will let our righteous teacher win, go down the river to the east, get rid of the three traitors, and redress the grievances of the loyalists, and then I will go to the court to apologize. Even if I am boiled in oil and killed with an axe, I have no complaints.

古文：伏愿陛下远寻永初托付之旨，近存元嘉奉戴之诚，则微臣丹款，犹有可察。
现代文：我诚恳地希望陛下能缅怀先帝临终前托付的旨意，近想元嘉初年我奉戴你的忠心，那么小臣我的忠心，仍然可以体察。
English: I sincerely hope that Your Majesty will remember the will entrusted to you by the late Emperor Go-Shirakawa before his death. If I recall your loyalty during the first year of Yuan Jia's reign, then my loyalty as a vassal can still be felt.

古文：临表哽慨，言不自尽。
现代文：我写这檄文时，哽咽悲痛，其中言语不能表达我的全部感情的万分之一。 
English: As I write this, I am choking with grief, of which words cannot express one ten-thousandth part of all my feelings.

古文：太祖时已戒严，诸军相次进路。
现代文：太祖当时已宣布戒严，各路讨伐大军已相继出发。
English: At that time, Taizu had declared martial law, and all the crusading armies had set out one after another.

古文：尚书符荆州曰：
现代文：尚书省给荆州下文说：
English: Shangshu gave the following message to Jingzhou:

古文：祸福无门，逆顺有数，天道微于影响，人事鉴于前图，未有蹈义而福不延，从恶而祸不至也。
现代文： 幸运和灾难是偶然的，叛逆和顺从则是必然的，天意从一丝一毫中表现出它的征兆，人情世态从历史中可以看出，从来没有身行仁义而幸福不延长，作恶多端而不受到惩罚的。
English: Fortune and misfortune are fortuitous, rebellion and obedience are inevitable. Providence shows its signs in every detail. The human condition, as can be seen from history, has never been one in which righteousness is practiced but happiness is not prolonged, and evil is perpetrated with impunity.

古文：故智计之士，审败以立功，守正之臣，临难以全节。
现代文：所以聪明的人能在失败中立功；坚守正义的臣子在危难面前能保持节操。
English: Therefore, a clever person can play a role in defeat; a vassal who adheres to justice can maintain discipline in the face of danger.

古文：徐羡之、傅亮、谢晦，安忍鸩杀，获罪于天，名教所极，政刑所取，已远暴四海，宣于圣诏。
现代文：徐羡之、傅亮和谢晦残忍毒杀国君，罪大于天，是礼义不能容忍的，是法律要惩罚的，这些全国的人都知道，诏书中已明白的宣告。
English: Xu Enzhi, Fu Liang, and Xie Hui brutally poisoned and murdered the sovereign, a crime greater than heaven, which is intolerable according to propriety and justice, and punishable by law. People all over the country know that this has been clearly declared in the edict.

古文：羡之父子、亮及晦息，电断之初，并即大宪。复王室之仇，摅义夫之愤，国典澄明，人神感悦。
现代文：徐羡之父子、傅亮和谢晦的儿子在开始时便被杀头，为王室复仇，为义士泄愤，国法显明，人神俱感到欢悦。
English: The father and son of Xu Enzhi, Fu Liang and Xie Yu's son were killed at the beginning, avenging the royal family and venting the anger of the righteous. The law of the country was clear, and everyone was happy.

古文：三姓同罪，既擒其二，晦之室属，缧仆狱户，苟幽明所怨，孤根易拔，以顺讨逆，虽厚必崩。
现代文：三家同一罪行，现在已抓住了两家，谢晦的家室也已被投入监狱，如果是人间阴间都怨恨的人，他们众叛亲离很容易被铲除，用正义去讨伐邪恶，即使他们一时强大，最终也会垮台。
English: Three families have committed the same crime, and now two families have been caught, and the family of Xie Xiang has also been thrown into prison. If they are people who are hated by the human world and the underworld, their rebellion and defection will be easily eradicated, and they will fight evil with justice. Even if they are strong for a while, they will eventually fall.

古文：然归死难图，兽困则噬，是以爰整其旅，用为过防。
现代文：然而亡命之徒不顾一切，困兽犹斗，所以调动我们的部队作为防卫。
English: However, the outlaws defied all odds and continued to fight, so we mobilized our troops as a defense.

古文：京师之众，天下云集，士练兵精，大号响震。
现代文：京师的部队汇集于全国，士强兵精，声威远扬。
English: The troops of the Beijing Division are gathered from all over the country, and their soldiers are strong, and their reputation is far-reaching.

古文：使持节、中领军佷山县开国侯到彦之率羽林选士果劲二万，云旍首路，组甲曜川。
现代文： 使持节、中领军山县开国侯到彦之率领羽林军精兵二万首先出发，他的部队使山川失色。
English: On the occasion of the Jochi Festival, the central leader of the army, Kaikokuho Dajihiko of Yamagata, led 20,000 elite soldiers of the Uebayashi Army to set off first, and his troops made the mountains and rivers lose their color.

古文：使持节、散骑常侍、都督南徐兗之江北淮南青州徐州之淮阳下邳琅邪东莞七郡诸军事、征北将军、南兗州刺史、永修县开国公檀道济统劲锐武卒三万，戈船蔽江，星言继发，千帆俱举，万棹遄征。
现代文：使持节、散骑常侍、都督南徐兖的江北、淮南、青州、徐州的淮阳、下邳、琅王牙、东莞七郡诸军事、征北将军、南兖州刺史、永修县开国公檀道济统率精锐部队三万人，船甲满江，千帆同举，万舟竞发。
English: He led the elite troops of 30,000 soldiers, the military of the seven counties of Dongguan, the general of the Northern Expedition, the history of Southern Luzhou, and the founding of Yongshu County, the general of the Southern Expedition, the cavalryman of the Northern Expedition, the governor of Jiangbei, Huainan, Qingzhou, the Huaiyang of Xuzhou, the Lower Expedition, the King of Zhai, and the Wangya of Xuzhou. The boat was full of rivers, and thousands of sails were raised at the same time.

古文：散骑常侍、骁骑将军段宏铁马二千，风驱电击，步自竟陵，直至鄢郢。
现代文：散骑常侍、骁骑将军段宏率铁骑二千，风驰电掣，从竟陵出发，直捣鄢、郢。
English: General Duan Hong, accompanied by his attendants and cavalrymen, rode on horseback for two thousand miles, riding with the wind and the waves, starting from the Tomb of the Unknown Soldier.

古文：又命征虏将军、雍州刺史刘粹控河阴之师，冲其巢窟。
现代文：又命征虏将军、雍州刺史刘粹带领河北的部队，进击谢晦的巢穴。
English: He also ordered the conscript general, the Yongzhou assassin Liu Zi, to lead the troops from Hebei Province to attack Xie Yao's lair.

古文：湘州刺史张邵提湘川之众，直据要害。
现代文：湘州刺史张邵率领湘州的部队，占据关塞要害之地。
English: Zhang Shao, the statesman of Hunan Province, led the troops of Hunan Province to occupy the place of the customs fortress.

古文：巴、蜀杜荆门之险，秦、梁绝丹圻之迳，云网四合，走伏路尽。
现代文：巴、蜀的部队截断荆门，秦、梁的部队断绝丹圻的道路，真是天罗地网，叫敌人走投无路。
English: The troops of Ba and Shu cut off Jingmen, and the troops of Qin and Liang cut off the road of Danzhang. It was truly a heavenly network, leaving the enemy with no choice.

古文：然后銮舆效驾，六军鹏翔，警跸前驱，五牛整旆。虽以英布之气，彭宠之资，登陴无名，授兵谁御？
现代文：然后皇上亲临前线，六军同发，先锋开路，纵然有英布的气概，彭宠的天资，但师出无名，谁还听你谢晦的？
English: Then the emperor himself came to the front line, the six armies set out together, the vanguard opened the way, even if they have the courage of Yingbu, the talent of Pengzhu, but the teacher is unknown, who still listens to you?

古文：加以西土之人，咸沐皇泽，东吴将士，怀本首丘，必不自陷罪人之党，横为乱亡之役。
现代文：加上西土的人民都蒙受过皇上的大恩，东吴将士，怀恋故土，必然不会与罪人为伍，白白地成为战争的牺牲者。
English: In addition, the people of the West have all received the great grace of the emperor, and the soldiers of the East Wu, who are nostalgic for their homeland, will inevitably not be with the sinners and become victims of the war in vain.

古文：置军则鱼溃，婴城则鸟散，其势然矣。
现代文：谢晦如果指挥军队，士兵必然像鱼儿般地散去，保守城池则如鸟兽散，这是形势使然，大势已定矣。
English: If Xie Yu directs the army, the soldiers will inevitably scatter like fish, while the guards will scatter like birds and beasts. This is due to the situation, and the general trend has already been determined.

古文：圣上殷勤哀愍，其罪由晦，士民何辜。是用一分前麾，宣示朝旨。
现代文：皇上同情百姓，此次战乱完全由谢晦引起，士民们都是无辜的，所以命先锋前进，宣布皇帝圣旨。
English: The emperor sympathized with the people. This war was entirely caused by Xie Yu. The people were all innocent, so he ordered the vanguard to advance and announce the emperor's sacred will.

古文：符到，其即共收擒晦身，轻舟护送。
现代文：你们见到本文告，请马上捉拿谢晦，用快船把他送到京城。
English: If you see this notice, please immediately catch Xie Ying and send him to Beijing by fast boat.

古文：若已猖蹶，先事阻卫，宜翻然背乱，相率归朝。
现代文：如果谢晦势力已很大，预先有了防卫，你们应该马上背叛他，一起投归朝廷。
English: If Xie Yu's forces are already very strong and he has a defense in advance, you should immediately betray him and return to the imperial court together.

古文：顷大刑所加，洪恩旷洽，傅亮三息，特蒙全宥，晦同产以下，羡之诸侄，咸无所染。况彼府州文武，并列王职，荷国荣任，身虽在外，乃心辰极。
现代文：前不久，皇恩浩荡，傅亮的三个儿子已特别得到赦免；谢晦的兄弟以外的亲戚、徐羡之的侄儿们都没有被株连，何况荆州文武将士都是朝廷的官员，担负着国家的重任，虽然身在外藩，但一心向着皇上。
English: Not long ago, Fu Liang's three sons had been specially pardoned by the emperor. Xie Yu's relatives other than his brothers and Xu Enzhi's nephews were not pardoned. What's more, the Jingzhou literati warriors were all officials of the imperial court, shouldering the heavy responsibilities of the country. Although they were outside the domain, they were devoted to the emperor.

古文：夫转祸贵速，后机则凶，遂使王师临郊，雷电皆至，噬脐之恨，亦将何及。
现代文：转祸为福，需要迅速，失去了这次机会则会招致凶灾，一旦官军到达，迅雷不及掩耳，那时被捉拿，后悔就来不及了。 
English: To turn misfortune into a blessing, you need to be quick. If you lose this opportunity, it will lead to disaster. Once the government army arrives, it will be too late to hide the thunderbolt. If you are caught at that time, it will be too late to regret.

古文：时益州刺史萧摹之、巴西太守刘道产被征还，始至江陵，晦并系絷，没其财货，以充军资。
现代文：当时益州刺史萧摹之、巴西太守刘道产被调回，刚一到江陵，谢晦就把他们抓了起来，没收了他们的财物充作军用物资。
English: At that time, the governor of Yizhou, Xiao Jizhi, and the governor of Brazil, Liu Daoshan, were transferred back. As soon as they arrived in Jiangling, Xie Hui arrested them and confiscated their property to use as military supplies.

古文：竟陵内史殷道鸾未之郡，以为咨议参军。
现代文：竟陵内史殷道鸾来到郡上赴任，谢晦让他当谘议参军。
English: In fact, Ling Neishi Yin Daojun came to Guzheng to take office, and Xie Yu asked him to join the army as a consultant.

古文：以弟遁为冠军、竟陵内史，总留任；兄子世猷为建威将军、南平太守。
现代文：谢晦又用自己的弟弟谢遁为冠军将军、竟陵内史，留下作总管，他的侄儿谢世猷为建威将军、南平太守。
English: Xie Hui also used his younger brother Xie Jun as the champion general and the chief administrator of the tomb, leaving his nephew Xie Shijun as the general of Jianwei and the governor of Nanping.

古文：刘粹若至，周超能破之者，即以为龙骧将军、雍州刺史。
现代文：刘粹若到达，周超能打败刘粹的话，便让周超当龙骧将军和雍州刺史。
English: If Liu Zi arrives, if Zhou Chao can defeat Liu Zi, then let Zhou Chao be the general of Longjing and the history of Yongzhou.

古文：晦率众二万，发自江陵，舟舰列自江津至于破冢，旍旗相照，蔽夺日光。
现代文：谢晦率兵二万，从江陵出发，舟船从江津一直排列到破冢，旌旗蔽日。
English: Xie Yao led 20,000 soldiers and set out from Gangneung. Boats from Gangjin lined up to the pier, and flags covered the sun.

古文：晦乃叹曰： 恨不得以此为勤王之师！ 
现代文：谢晦见此乃感叹地说： 真恨不得以此作为勤王的部队！ 
English: Seeing this, Xie Yueh sighed and said, "I really wish I could use this as a loyal army!"

古文：自领湘州刺史，以张邵为辅国将军，邵不受命。
现代文：他自任湘州刺史，用张邵为辅国将军，张邵没有应命。
English: He appointed himself as the chief historian of Hunan Province and used Zhang Shao as an auxiliary general, but Zhang Shao did not carry out his orders.

古文：晦檄京邑曰：
现代文：谢晦给京都下檄文说：
English: Xie Jia told the Kyoto Shimo Xuanwen:

古文：王室多故，祸难荐臻。
现代文： 王室变故纷繁，祸乱不已。
English: The royal family has gone through many vicissitudes and has been plagued by misfortune.

古文：营阳失德，自绝宗庙。
现代文：营阳王没有人君的道德，自决于朝宗。
English: Yingyang Wang does not have the morality of a prince, he is a self-determined emperor.

古文：庐陵王构阋有本，屡被猜嫌，且居丧失礼，遐迩所具，积怨犯上，自贻非道。
现代文：庐陵王与朝廷的矛盾是有原因的，加上在丧事期间不守礼节，远近皆知，积怨犯上，自取灭亡。
English: There was a reason for the conflict between King Fuling and the imperial court. In addition, he did not observe the etiquette during the funeral, which was known far and wide. He accumulated grudges and killed himself.

古文：群后释位，爰登圣明，乱之未乂，职有所系。
现代文：众亲王都放弃了皇位而选择陛下作皇帝，无非是因为祸乱不止，必须树立一个国君。
English: All the princes have renounced the throne and chosen your majesty as emperor, simply because of the constant turmoil and the need to establish a sovereign.

古文：按车骑大将军王弘、侍中王昙首，谬蒙时私，叨窃权要。
现代文：经调查，车骑大将军王弘、侍中王昙首，恰逢个人机遇，占据了重要职位。
English: According to the investigation, Wang Hong, the general of the cavalry, and Wang Xizhou, the attendant, coincided with personal opportunities and occupied important positions.

古文：弘于永初之始，实荷不世之恩，元嘉之让，自谓任遇浮浅，进诬先皇委诚之寄，退长嫌隙异同之端。
现代文：王弘在永初初年，确实蒙受了先帝非凡的宠遇，元嘉初年辞让时，他又说自己任职不深，进则诬蔑先帝托付的诚心，退则制造各方的矛盾。
English: When Wang Hong resigned in the first year of Yuan Jia, he said that he did not have a deep understanding of his duties. When he resigned, he slandered the sincerity entrusted to him by Yuan Jia, and when he resigned, he created conflicts between all parties.

古文：昙首往因使下，访以今上起居，不能光扬令德，彰于朝听，其言多诬，故不具说。
现代文：王昙首以前作为使者东下，了解当今皇上的情况，他不能弘扬皇上的美德，被朝廷人士所熟知，他的话多数是不可信的，这里就不用细说了。
English: Wang Xizhu used to go to the East as an emissary to learn about the current emperor. He cannot promote the emperor's virtues and is well known by people in the imperial court. Most of his words are not credible. There is no need to elaborate here.

古文：王华贼亡之余，赏擢之次，先帝常见访逮，庶有一分可取，而华禀性凶猜，多所忍害。曩者纵人入城，托疾辞事，此都士庶，咸所闻知。
现代文：王华是亡贼之残余，是被赏赐的第二号人物，先帝曾经多次了解过他，希望能从他身上找到一点优点，但王华秉性凶残多疑，残酷无情，当年放任敌人入城，又推说有病辞避公务，这些，京都的官吏和百姓都很清楚。
English: Wang Hua is the remnant of the dead thief, the second person to be awarded. The former emperor had known him many times, hoping to find some advantage from him. However, Wang Hua was vicious and suspicious, cruel and merciless. That year, he allowed the enemy to enter the city, and suggested that he was sick to avoid official duties. Officials and people in Kyoto are well aware of these things.

古文：以其所启及上手答示宗叔献，又令宣告徐、傅二公。
现代文：他把他的上书和自己的请求小文给本人的家叔谢献看，又叫谢献告诉徐羡之和傅亮。
English: He showed his letter of appeal and his petition to his uncle Xie Xie, and told Xie Xie to tell Xu Enzhi and Fu Liang.

古文：及周纠使下，又令见咨，云： 欲自揽政事，求离任还都，并令昙首具述此意。 
现代文：周纠作为使者东下时，他又对周纠说： 想自己抓到朝政大权，你就要请求辞去现在的职务回到京都，同时向王昙首转述这个意思。 
English: When Zhou Guan went to the East as an emissary, he said to Zhou Guan: If you want to seize the supreme political power of the dynasty, you should ask to resign from your current position and return to Kyoto, and at the same time convey this meaning to Wang Xizhou.

古文：又惠观道人说，外人告华及到彦之谋反，不谓无之。
现代文：另外，惠观道人说，外人告王华和到彦之谋反，不能说就没有这回事。
English: In addition, Hui Guan Dao said that outsiders accuse Wang Hua and Du Yan of plotting against him, it cannot be said that there is no such thing.

古文：城内东将，数日之内，操戈相待。
现代文：城内东方籍将士，几日之内，手持武器准备战斗。
English: Within a few days, the Eastern soldiers in the city were armed and ready to fight.

古文：华说数为秋当所谮，常不自安。
现代文：王华说他多次被秋当诬陷，常常感到不安。
English: Wang Hua said that he was repeatedly framed by Qiu Dang and often felt uneasy.

古文：凡此诸事，岂有忠诚冥契若此者邪？
现代文：所有这些事难道是忠臣应该干的吗？
English: Are these all things a loyal subject should do?

古文：自以父亡道侧，情事异人，外绝酒醴，而宵饮是恣。
现代文：王华自以为父亲在路旁死去，与一般人不同，在外不近酒肉，但到了晚上则通宵酗酒，他就这样表里不一。
English: Wang Hua thought that his father died on the side of the road. Unlike the average person, he didn't go out drinking, but in the evening he would drink all night long.

古文：腼貌囗囗囗囗囗囗凡厥士庶，谁不侧目。又常叹宰相顿有数人，是何愤愤，规总威权，不顾国典。
现代文：所有官民，谁不为之侧目。他又常常叹息宰相现今没有几个人，这是何种令人气愤的事情，想收揽皇朝大权，不顾忌国家法典。
English: He often sighed that there were few chancellors nowadays, and what an outrageous thing it was, to want to take over the power of the imperial court, regardless of the state code.

古文：保祐皇家者，罹屠戮之诛；效勤社稷者，致歼夷之祸。
现代文：忠心为国的人遭到屠杀，效力于朝廷的人惨遇灭顶之灾。
English: Those who were loyal to the country were massacred, and those who worked for the imperial court suffered the worst fate.

古文：搢绅之徒，孰不慷慨！
现代文：所有的仁人志士，谁不感到愤慨。
English: All humanitarians, who do not feel indignant.

古文：遂矫违诏旨，遣到彦之、萧欣之轻舟见袭。
现代文：他们甚至假传或违背圣旨，派遣到彦之、萧欣之率轻兵袭击我。
English: They even spread false rumours or violated the sacred edict by sending light soldiers to attack me in the company of Hikozhi and Xiao Xin.

古文：即日监利左尉露檄众军已至扬子。
现代文：今日监利左尉便传告说袭击的部队已到了扬子。
English: Today, Lieutenant Kanri announced that the attacking troops had arrived in Yangtze.

古文：虽以不武，忝荷蕃任，国家艰难，悲愤兼集。
现代文： 我虽然是一介文士，勉强掌管藩疆重任，对于国家的灾难，真是悲愤交加。
English: Although I am a mere scribe, barely in charge of the heavy responsibilities of the domain, I am really sad and angry about the national disaster.

古文：若使小人得志，君子道消，凡百有殄瘁之哀，苍生深横流之惧。
现代文：如果使小人得志，君子倒霉，那么百姓就有死亡的灾祸，众生就有惨遭涂炭的苦难。
English: If the villain succeeds and the gentleman fails, then the people will have the scourge of death, and sentient beings will have the misery of suffering.

古文：辄纠勒义徒，缮治舟甲，舳舻亘川，驷介蔽野，武夫鸷勇，人百其诚。
现代文：我深感不平，所以便聚集义兵，修治船舰，舟帆布满大江，骑兵笼盖四野，勇敢善斗之人，个个诚心效力。
English: I was deeply dissatisfied, so I gathered volunteers, repaired and repaired ships, boats and sails covered the rivers, cavalry covered the four fields, brave and good fighters, and everyone was sincere and effective.

古文：今遣南蛮司马宁远将军庾登之统参军事建武将军建平太守安泰、宣威将军昭弘宗、参军事宣威将军王绍之等，精锐一万，前锋致讨。
现代文：现在派南蛮司马、宁远将军庾登之统参军事建武将军建平太守安泰、宣威将军昭弘宗、参军事宣威将军王绍之等率领精兵一万先锋先行。
English: Now, he sent Nanban Sima, Ningyuan General Xudeng's military participant General Jianwu, Jianping Taizhu Antai, Xuanwei General Xiao Hongzong, and military participant Xuanwei General Wang Shao to lead 10,000 elite soldiers ahead.

古文：南蛮参军、振武将军魏像统参军事、宣威将军陈珍虎旅二千，参军事、建威将军、新兴太守贺愔甲卒三千，相系取道。
现代文：南蛮参军、振武将军魏像率参军事、宣威将军陈珍劲兵二千和参军事、建威将军、新兴太守贺忄音的士兵三千接着前进。
English: Nanban joined the army, Zhenwu General Wei Zang led the military, Xuanwei General Chen Zhen and two thousand soldiers joined the military, General Jianwei, and three thousand soldiers of the new Empress Dowager He Yuyin followed.

古文：南蛮参军、振威将军郭卓铁骑二千，水步齐举。
现代文：南蛮参军、振威将军郭卓带铁骑二千，水陆并进。
English: The Southern Barbarians joined the army, and General Guo Zhuo of the Zhenwei Army led two thousand cavalry, marching on land and sea.

古文：大军三万，骆驿电迈。
现代文：大军三万，在后面继发。
English: A large army of thirty thousand followed behind.

古文：行冠军将军竟陵内史河东太守谢遁、建威将军南平太守谢世猷骁勇一万，留守江陵。
现代文：代理冠军将军、竟陵内史、河东太守谢遁和建威将军、南平太守谢世猷率勇士一万，留守江陵。
English: The acting champion general, Jingling Naishi, the Empress Dowager of Hedong Province, Xie Jun, the Empress Dowager of Nanping Province, Xie Shijun, and the Empress Dowager of Nanping Province led 10,000 warriors to stay in Gangneung.

古文：分命参军、长宁太守窦应期步骑五千，直出义阳。
现代文：另派参军、长宁太守窦应期率步兵五千，出击义阳。
English: In addition, 5,000 foot soldiers were dispatched to join the army and attack Yiyang.

古文：司马、建威将军、行南义阳太守周超之统军司马、振武将军胡崇之精悍一万，北出高阳，长兼行参军、宁远将军硃澹之步骑五千，西出雁塞，同讨刘粹，并趋襄阳。
现代文：司马、建威将军、代理南平太守周超之率领军司马、振武将军胡崇之精兵一万，北伐高阳，长兼行参军、宁远将军朱澹之率步兵五千出击雁塞，同讨刘粹，杀向襄阳。
English: Sima, General Jianwei, acting Nanping Governor Zhou Chao led the army of Sima, Zhenwu General Hu Chong, 10,000 elite soldiers, the Northern Expedition Gaoyang, 5,000 infantrymen led by General Zhu Xi, who also joined the army, and Ningyuan General Zhu Xi attacked Gansei, together with Liu Qi, and killed Xiangyang.

古文：奇兵尚速，指景齐奋。
现代文：奇兵需要迅速，指到哪儿就打到哪儿。
English: The odd soldier needs to be quick, and hit wherever he points.

古文：诸贤并同国恩，情兼义烈，今诚志士忘身之日，义夫著绩之秋，见机而动，望风而不待勖。晦至江口，到彦之已到彭城洲。
现代文：各位贤士都蒙受过国家大恩德，都是忠烈之士，现在正是仁人志士们舍身成仁建功立业的大好时机。 谢晦到了江口，到彦之已到了彭城洲。
English: All the sages have received the great benevolence of the state, they are all loyal martyrs, and now is a great opportunity for the benevolent heroes to devote themselves to benevolence and make achievements. Xie Yue has arrived in Jiangkou, and Zu Hanzhi has arrived in Pengchengzhou.

古文：庾登之据巴陵，畏懦不敢进。
现代文：庾登之据守巴陵，畏惧而不敢前进。
English: He was afraid to advance because of his stronghold in Baling.

古文：会霖雨连日，参军刘和之曰： 彼此共有雨耳，檀征北寻至，东军方强，唯宜速战。 
现代文：恰遇阴雨绵绵，参军刘和之说： 他们和我们都遇到这个雨天，檀道济不久就要到了，东方的官军就更强了，我们应该速战速决。 
English: It happened to be a rainy day, and Liu Hezhi, who had joined the army, said, "They and all of us have encountered this rainy day. The winter solstice is coming soon, and the government army in the East is stronger. We should fight quickly.

古文：登之忄匡怯，使小将陈祐作大囊，贮茅数千斛，县于帆樯，云可以焚舰，用火宜须晴，以缓战期。
现代文：庾登之非常害怕，叫小将陈做了许多大袋子，贮藏茅草几千捆，悬挂在墙壁上，说用它可以烧毁敌人的船舰，用火攻应该等候天晴，因此应该暂缓战期。
English: Yu Dengzhi was very afraid, so he had the young general Chen make many large bags, store several thousand bundles of thatch, and hang them on the walls, saying that it could be used to burn the enemy's ships, and that the fire attack should wait for the weather to clear, so the war period should be suspended.

古文：晦然之，遂停军十五日。
现代文：谢晦觉得有理，于是停止进军达十五天。
English: Xie Yu felt justified, so he stopped marching for fifteen days.

古文：乃攻萧欣于彭城洲，中兵参军孔延秀率三千人进战，甚力。
现代文：然后才进攻彭城洲的萧欣，中兵参军孔延秀率领三千人前往攻击，很是勇敢。
English: Only then did Xiao Xin attack Pengchengzhou. The Chinese soldiers who joined the army, Kong Yanxiu, led three thousand people to attack, which was very brave.

古文：欣于陈后拥楯自卫，又委军还船，于是大败。
现代文：萧欣躲在兵阵的后面，后来又逃到船上，于是大败。
English: Xiao Xin hid behind the troops, and later fled to the ship, and suffered a crushing defeat.

古文：延秀又攻洲口栅，陷之，彦之退保隐圻。
现代文：孔延秀帮助又进攻彭城洲洲口的栅栏，成功了，于是到彦之只好退守隐圻。
English: Kong Yanxiu helped attack the fence at the entrance of Pengcheng Chau Chau, which was successful, so Duan Yanzhi had to retreat to Yinlu.

古文：晦又上表曰：
现代文：谢晦又上表说：
English: Xie Hui went on to say:

古文：臣闻凶邪败国，先代成患；谗竖乱朝，异世齐祸。
现代文： 我听说奸邪之人败乱国家，从前已有很多例子；奸谗小人祸乱朝廷，每一个朝代都受到过这样的不幸。
English: I have heard that there have been many examples in the past of treacherous people ruining the country, and that every dynasty has suffered such a misfortune.

古文：故赵高矫逼，秦氏用倾；董卓阶乱，汉祚伊覆。
现代文：赵高架空秦二世，秦朝便覆灭了，董卓作乱，汉朝的命运便告完结。
English: When Zhao Gao overtook Qin II, the Qin Dynasty was destroyed, and when Dong Zhuo caused chaos, the fate of the Han Dynasty came to an end.

古文：虽哲王宰世，大明照临，未能使其渐弗兴，兹害不作。
现代文：纵然是圣明的皇帝君临天下，英明俯照国家，也不能使这种祸乱不产生。
English: Even if a saintly emperor reigns over the world and wisely overshadows the country, he cannot prevent this calamity from occurring.

古文：奸臣王弘等窃弄威权，兴造祸乱，遂与弟华内外影响，同恶相成，忌害忠贤，图希非望。故司徒臣羡之、左光禄大夫臣亮横被酷害，并及臣门。
现代文：奸臣王弘等人窃弄权威，制造祸乱，于是和他的弟弟王华内外勾结，同恶相济，忌害忠良，企图夺取皇位，因此司徒徐羡之、左光禄大夫傅亮横遭迫害，我的家门也受到株连。
English: The treacherous vassal Wang Hong and others stole authority and created havoc, so he and his younger brother Wang Hua colluded with each other and with the outside world, befriending evil and shunning loyalty, in an attempt to seize the imperial throne. As a result, Stul Xu Enzhi and Dr. Zuo Guanglu Fu Liang were persecuted, and my family was also persecuted.

古文：虽未知征北将军臣道济存亡，不容独免。
现代文：目前虽然还不知道征北将军檀道济的生死存亡，我想他也不会独立幸免。
English: Although the life and death of the Northern Expeditionary General Dang Daoji is still unknown, I think he will not be spared independently.

古文：遂遣萧欣、到彦之等轻舟见袭，奸伪之甚，一至于斯。
现代文：于是派萧欣、到彦之等人率轻兵袭击我们，奸伪之甚，以至于此。
English: So they sent Xiao Xin, Zu Yan Zhi and others to attack us with light troops, and they were so deceitful that it came to this.

古文：羡之及亮，或宿德元臣，姻娅皇极，或任总文武，位班三事，道济职惟上将，捍城是司，皆受遇先朝，栋梁一代。
现代文：徐羡之和傅亮要么是德高望重的老臣，和皇室联姻，结为亲戚，要么是总管文武两职，位列三公，檀道济则官至上将，是国家的护卫神，他们都受到先帝的宠遇，是一代栋梁之材。
English: Xu Enzhi and Fu Liang were either highly respected dignitaries, married into the imperial family and became relatives, or they were the chief of the two posts of civil and military affairs, ranked among the three princes, the supreme general of the Buddhist and Taoist orders, and the guardian deities of the country. They were all favored by the former emperor and were the backbone of a generation.

古文：臣昔因时幸，过蒙先眷，内闻政事，外经戎旅，与羡之、亮等同被齿盼。
现代文：我当年因缘机遇，也承受过先帝的眷顾，在内参与朝廷政事，在外则管理军务。我和徐羡之、傅亮等人同时被委于重任。
English: Due to a fortuitous opportunity, I also received the patronage of the former emperor. I participated in the political affairs of the imperial court and managed the military affairs abroad. I and Xu Enzhi, Fu Liang and others were also entrusted with important duties.

古文：既经启王基，协济大业，爰自权舆，暨于揖让，诚策虽微，仍见纪录，并蒙丹书之誓，各受山河之赏，欲使与宋升降，传之无穷。
现代文：既然是功在开国事业之中，成就本朝大业，从当初大业之兴一直到先帝登基，功劳虽然不算大，但仍被先帝记住，任于重职，受到封赏，希望我们和宋朝同始终，传给后代，永不断绝。
English: Since it is the merit in the founding of the country, the achievement of the great cause of this dynasty, from the rise of the great cause to the enthronement of the former emperor, although the merit is not great, it is still remembered by the former emperor, entrusted with important duties, and rewarded. I hope that we will always be the same as the Song Dynasty, passed on to future generations, and will never die.

古文：及圣体不预，穆卜无吉，召臣等四人，同升御床，顾命领遗，委以家国。
现代文：到了先帝病重时，他预感后继无人，便召我们四人来到他的床前，接受他的临终托付，把国家大业委任给我们管理。
English: When the former emperor fell seriously ill, he sensed that there would be no successor, so he called the four of us to his bedside, accepted his last-minute commission, and entrusted the great cause of the country to our management.

古文：仰奉成旨，俯竭股肱，忠贞不效，期之以死。
现代文：我们完全遵从先帝的旨意，竭尽全力，忠贞不二，一直到死。
English: We will fully comply with the will of the former emperor, do our best, and be loyal until death.

古文：但营阳悖德，自绝于天，社稷之危，忧在托付，不有所废，将焉以兴。
现代文：但营阳王不守国君道德，自绝于天，国家危机，我们十分忧虑，不废除昏君，国家怎会兴盛呢？
English: However, if we do not uphold the morality of the king and abdicate ourselves to the heavens, the country will face a crisis. We are very worried. If we do not abolish the king, how can the country prosper?

古文：乃远稽殷、汉，用升圣德。
现代文：于是乃远效殷朝和汉朝的故事，选立皇上。
English: As a result, the story of the Yuan Dynasty and the Han Dynasty, the Emperor was elected.

古文：陛下顺流乘传，不听张武之疑，入邸龙飞，非俟宋昌之议，斯乃主臣相信，天人合契，九五当阳，化形四海。
现代文：陛下顺流而下，听不到张武那种疑惑，入京称帝，也没有观察宋昌议论的那种形势，这乃是因为皇上和臣子相互信任，天人合一，九五正当阳位，教化布满四海。
English: His majesty went down the river and did not hear the doubts of Zhang Wu, entered Beijing and proclaimed himself emperor, nor did he observe the situation that Song Chang discussed. This is because the emperor and his vassals trust each other, heaven and man are one, the Ninth Five-Year Plan is a legitimate yang position, and enlightenment spreads all over the world.

古文：羡之及亮，内赞皇猷，臣与道济，分翰于外，普天之下，孰曰不宜。
现代文：徐羡之和傅亮在内辅助皇上，我和檀道济则在外效力，普天下的人哪个不说好？
English: Xu Enzhi and Fu Liang assisted the emperor inside, while I and Dang Daozhi worked outside. Who in the world wouldn't say yes?

古文：遂蒙宠授，来镇此方，分留弟侄，以侍台省。
现代文：于是我蒙受皇恩，来这里作一方长官，并留下弟弟和侄儿在朝廷侍候。
English: So, by the grace of the Emperor, I came here to serve as an aide-de-camp, leaving my brother and nephew to wait on the Imperial Court.

古文：到任以来，首尾三载，虽形在远外，心系本朝，事无大小，动皆咨启，八州之政，罔一专辄，尊上之心，足贯幽显。
现代文：我到任以来，前后三年，虽然远离朝廷，但时时刻刻都是心系本朝，事无大小都要向皇上请示，八州的政事，没有一样是专断独行的，我尊崇皇上的心意，绝对可以使神人相信。
English: Since I took office, for the past three years, although I have been away from the imperial court, I have always been concerned about this imperial court. I have to ask the emperor for instructions on all matters, large and small. There is nothing arbitrary in the political affairs of the eight states. I respect the emperor's will, and I can definitely make the gods believe.

古文：陛下远述先旨，申以婚姻，大息世休，复蒙引召，是以去年送女遣兒，阖家俱下，血诚如此，未知所愧。
现代文：陛下念及先帝的旨意，与我家结为姻亲，我的大儿子世休又蒙召见，所以去年我送来女儿派来儿子，全家东下，如此的赤诚，我不知哪儿做得不好。
English: Your Majesty, mindful of the will of the late Emperor, has married into our family, and my eldest son has been summoned to see me again. So last year, I sent my daughter and my son, and the whole family went east. With such sincerity, I don't know where I did a bad job.

古文：而凶狡无端，妄生衅祸，羡之内诛，臣受外伐，顾省诸怀，不识何罪？
现代文：但是凶人无事生非，制造矛盾，徐羡之在朝被杀，我在外受到讨伐，我内心反复思考，不知罪在何处？
English: However, the murderer is making trouble out of nothing, creating contradictions, Xu Enzhi was killed in the morning, I was attacked outside, I thought over and over in my heart, I don't know where the crime is?

古文：天听遐邈，陈诉靡由。
现代文：真是天老爷太远，我无法向其陈述冤情。
English: God is too far away for me to complain to him.

古文：弘等既蒙宠任，得侍左右，自谓势擅狐鼠，理隔熏掘。又以陛下富于春秋，始览政事，欲冯陵恩幸，窥望国权，亲从磐歭，规自封殖，不除臣等，罔得专权，所以交结谗慝，成是乱阶。
现代文：王弘既然蒙受宠任，得以呆在皇上身边，于是狐假虎威，自以为是，又因陛下正当年华，刚刚开始处理政事，他们便想凭借自己的宠遇，企图得到国家的大权，亲戚兄弟们盘踞朝廷，打算给自己封官授土。他们如果不除掉我们便无法专权，所以他们交结谗佞小人，造成现在的巨大矛盾和内乱。
English: Since Wang Hong was favored and was able to stay by the emperor's side, he became arrogant and self-righteous, and because His Majesty was of the right age and had just begun to deal with political affairs, they wanted to take advantage of their favor and attempt to obtain the power of the state. Relatives and brothers entrenched themselves in the court and planned to give themselves the title of official. If they did not get rid of us, they would not be able to have absolute power, so they made friends with villains, causing the current huge contradictions and civil unrest.

古文：又惟弘等所构，当以营阳为言，庐陵为罪。又以臣等位高功同，内外胶固。
现代文：另外我想，王弘等人所进献的计策，无非是以废除营阳王和铲除庐陵王作为我的罪过，又认为我们功高职重，内外相连，影响较大。
English: In addition, I think that the strategy advanced by Wang Hong and others is nothing more than the abolition of Yingyang Wang and the eradication of Fuling Wang as my sin, and that we have high achievements and responsibilities, are connected internally and externally, and have greater influence.

古文：陛下信其厚貌，忘厥左道，三至下机，能不暂惑。
现代文：陛下相信他们忠厚的外貌，忘记了他们邪恶的计谋，古人尚且有曾参母亲被人骗下织机的事，陛下在他们的煽动下，怎么能不受迷惑。
English: His Majesty believes in their loyal appearance and forgets their evil schemes. The ancients even had a story about a mother who was tricked into giving up her loom. How can His Majesty not be deceived by their instigation?

古文：伏自寻省，废昏立明，事非为己。
现代文： 我常常自己独思，废除昏君，树立明君，并不是为了我自己。
English: I often think to myself, it is not for my own sake that I abolish the dim prince and establish the bright prince.

古文：庐陵之事，不由傍人，内积萧墙之衅，外行叔段之罚，既制之有主，臣何预焉。
现代文：庐陵王的事不怪他人，一方面是兄弟相争，另一方面是因为庐陵王本人野心勃勃，就像春秋时郑国的太叔段一样，对庐陵王的处理完全是出于营阳王的主意，我们又能干些什么呢？
English: The matter of King Fuling is not to be blamed on others. On the one hand, it is a dispute between brothers. On the other hand, it is because King Fuling himself is ambitious, just like the great uncle of Zhengzhou in the Spring and Autumn Period. The treatment of King Fuling is entirely the idea of King Yingyang. What can we do?

古文：然庐陵为性轻险，悌顺不足，武皇临崩，亦有口诏，比虽发自营阳，实非国祸。
现代文：然而庐陵王为人性格暴躁，心思险恶，对兄长不顺从，武帝去世前也曾口传旨意，这事虽由营阳王处理，但并不至于构成大宋国的祸乱。
English: However, King Fuling had a violent personality, a sinister mind, and disobeyed his brother. Before Emperor Wu died, he also orally transmitted his will. Although this matter was handled by King Yingyang, it did not constitute the disaster of the Great Song Dynasty.

古文：至于羡之、亮等，周旋同体，心腹内外，政欲戮力皇家，尽忠报主。
现代文：至于徐羡之、傅亮等人，同心同德，只想一心为了皇室，尽忠报国。
English: As for Xu Enzhi, Fu Liang and others, they are of the same mind and have the same morality. They only want to be loyal to the imperial family and serve the country.

古文：若令臣等颇欲执权，不专为国，初废营阳，陛下在远，武皇之子，尚有童幼，拥以号令，谁敢非之。
现代文：如果我们想独揽朝政大权，不是一心为了国家，那么开始在废除营阳王时，陛下还远在外地，武皇的儿子中还有一些幼童，我们拥立他们为帝，号令天下，谁敢说一个不字。
English: If we want to monopolize the supreme power of the court and government, and not concentrate on the country, then when we began to abolish Yingyang Wang, His Majesty was still far away from home, and Emperor Wu's sons included some young children. We made them emperors and called out to the world, "Who dares to say a word against him?"

古文：而溯流三千，虚馆三月，奉迎銮驾，以遵下武，血心若斯，易为可鉴。
现代文：但我们却沿江上溯三千里，让皇位空缺三个月，奉迎您的大驾，听从您的安排，我们如此苦心、忠心，应该是显而易见的。
English: But here we are, three thousand miles up the river, leaving the throne vacant for three months, bowing to your majesty, obeying your arrangements. It should be obvious that we are so painstaking and loyal.

古文：且臣等奉事先朝，十有七年，并居显要，世称恭谨，不图一旦致兹衅罚。
现代文：况且我们侍奉先帝，共十七年，都是身居要职，世人都称赞我们恭谨小心，却没有想到会有今天这样的惩罚。
English: Moreover, we have been serving the former emperor for a total of seventeen years, all in important positions. The world praised us for being respectful and careful, but they did not expect such a punishment as today.

古文：夫周公大贤，尚有流言之谤，伯奇至孝，不免谮诉之祸。
现代文：以周公旦这样的大贤人，还有一些人流言诽谤，伯奇这样的孝子，也免不了有不孝的名声。
English: With a great sage like Zhou Gongdan, and some people gossiping and slandering, a filial son like Berch cannot help but have a reputation of being unfilial.

古文：慈父非无情于仁子，明君岂有志于贞臣。
现代文：这并不是慈父对仁孝的儿子无情，也不是明君对忠贞的臣子故意为难。
English: This does not mean that the benevolent father is merciless to his benevolent and filial son, nor does it mean that the Ming ruler is purposely difficult for his loyal vassal.

古文：奸遘所移，势回山岳，况乃精诚微浅，而望求信者哉！《诗》不云乎： 谗人罔极，交乱四国。
现代文：这完全是奸臣构造的罪名，他们能移山倒海，一手遮天。更何况我们的忠心不被别人体会，怎么能让人信服呢？《诗经》不是说过吗： 进谗的人真卑鄙啊，使四国发生灾难。
English: This is entirely a crime fabricated by treacherous vassals. They can move mountains and cover the sky with one hand. What's more, how can we convince people that our loyalty is not appreciated by others? Didn't the "Book of Songs" say: Those who go into exile are truly despicable, bringing disaster to the four kingdoms.

古文：恺悌君子，无信谗言。 
现代文：正真的君子啊，千万别听信谗言。 
English: Kind-hearted gentleman, don't listen to gossip.

古文：陛下躬览篇籍，研核是非，衅兆之萌，宜应深察。
现代文：陛下博览典籍，深明是非，我们之间的矛盾，应该仔细想一想。
English: Your Majesty is well-versed in classical literature, he knows what is right and what is wrong, and the contradictions between us should be carefully considered.

古文：臣窃惧王室小有皇甫之患，大有阎乐之祸，夙夜殷忧，若无首领。
现代文：我私下担心，王室小则有皇甫奸人的祸害，大则导致阎乐那样的专权后果，日夜忧心，好像失去了主心骨。
English: Privately, I'm worried that the royal family, on the small scale, will suffer the scourge of the emperors' traitors, and on the large scale, the consequences of autocracy will lead to hell and gloom. I'm worried day and night, as if I've lost my backbone.

古文：夫周道浸微，桓、文称伐，君侧乱国，赵鞅入诛。
现代文：当年周朝日渐衰微时，齐桓公、晋文公便讨伐不守规矩的乱国，国君身边出现了祸国之人，赵鞅便入都讨伐。
English: In that year, when the Zhou Dynasty was on the wane, Prince Qi Huan and Prince Jinwen led a crusade against the unruly and chaotic country. A person who was a scourge to the country appeared around the sovereign, and Zhao Jun went to the capital to fight.

古文：况今凶祸滔天，辰极危逼，台辅孥戮，岳牧倾陷。
现代文：况且现在这些人罪恶滔天，国家危急，宰相被杀，藩镇几乎倾覆。
English: Moreover, now these people's crimes are monstrous, the country is in crisis, the prime minister has been killed, and the town has almost been overthrown.

古文：臣才非绛侯，安汉是职，人愧博陆，厕奉遗旨。
现代文：我才能赶不上绛侯周勃，但扶助朝廷是做臣下的天职；我人虽比不上博陆，但坚定地奉行先帝的遗志，我们却是一致的。
English: I can't keep up with Zhou Bo, but supporting the imperial court is my duty as a subject; although I can't match Bolu, I firmly follow the last wishes of the former emperor, but we are consistent.

古文：国难既深，家痛亦切。辄简徒缮甲，军次巴陵，萧欣窘慑，望风奔迸。
现代文：国难已深，家痛更切，因此我便挑选兵士，准备武器，大军驻守巴陵，萧欣败退，望风而逃。
English: The national calamity was deep and the family pain was more acute, so I selected soldiers, prepared weapons, and stationed a large army in Baling. Xiao Xin was defeated and retreated, hoping to escape.

古文：臣诚短劣，在国忘身，仰凭社稷之灵，俯厉义勇之气，将长驱电扫，直入石头，枭翦元凶，诛夷首恶，吊二公之冤魂，写私门之祸痛。
现代文：我确实是平庸无能，但为了国家忘掉自身，上凭朝廷的神灵，下借将士们的勇敢，将要长驱直进，直抵石头城，翦除元凶，消灭罪魁祸首，凭吊徐、傅二公的冤魂，报家门之私恨。
English: I am indeed mediocre and incompetent, but in order for the country to forget itself, relying on the gods of the imperial court and the bravery of the soldiers, I will drive straight ahead, straight to Stone Town, eliminate the culprit, eliminate the culprit, rely on the evil spirits of Hang Xu and Fu Ergong, and report the hatred of the family.

古文：然后分归司寇，甘赴鼎镬，虽死之日，犹生之年。
现代文：然后到法庭自首，甘心被火煮砍头，如此虽死犹生。
English: Then he surrendered to the court and was willing to be boiled in fire and have his head chopped off, even though he was still alive.

古文：伏惟陛下德合乾元，道侔玄极，鉴凶祸之无端，察贞亮之有本，回日月之照，发霜电之威，枭四凶于庙庭，悬三监于绛阙，申二台之匪辜，明两蕃之无罪，上谢祖宗，下告百姓，遣一乘之使，赐咫尺之书，臣便勒众旋旗，还保所任。
现代文： 我思虑陛下道德与天同高，智慧过人，明白凶祸的缘故，体察忠臣的本心，恢复日月的光明，发出严霜闪电般的威严，杀掉朝廷中的四个坏蛋，在午门前将三个奸臣斩首，为徐、傅二人伸雪，宣明两个藩镇无罪，上谢罪于祖宗，下告天下百姓，派一个使者，只要给我送来咫尺的书信，我便撤回部队，回去尽自己的职责。
English: I thought about His Majesty, whose morality is as high as the heavens, whose wisdom surpasses all others, who understands the causes of evil, who perceives the true intentions of his loyal subjects, who restores the brightness of the sun and moon, who emits the majesty of frost and lightning, who kills the four villains in the imperial court, who beheads the three treacherous subjects before the noon gate, who sheds snow for Xu and Fu, who proclaims the innocence of the two towns, who expresses his gratitude for the sins of his ancestors, who tells the people of the world, and who sends an envoy. As long as he sends me a letter, I will withdraw my troops

古文：须次近路，寻复表闻。
现代文：等我驻在稍近的地方，再向您启告。 
English: I'll let you know when I'm stationed a little closer.

古文：初，晦与徐羡之、傅亮谋为自全之计，晦据上流，而檀道济镇广陵，各有强兵，以制持朝廷；羡之、亮于中秉权，可得持久。
现代文：当初，谢晦和徐羡之、傅亮商议自保的计策，认为叫谢晦据有荆州，让檀道济占据广陵，各自都拥有强兵，用以牵制朝廷；徐羡之和傅亮在朝中掌握大权，这样就可保永远不败。
English: At first, Xie Hui, Xu Enzhi, and Fu Liang discussed the strategy of self-preservation. They thought that Xie Hui should have Jingzhou and let the Taoists occupy Guangling. Each of them had strong soldiers to hold back the imperial court; Xu Enzhi and Fu Liang held great power in the court, so they could be guaranteed to never be defeated.

古文：及太祖将行诛，王华之徒咸云： 道济不可信。 
现代文：等到太祖想拿他们开刀时，王华等人都说： 檀道济不可相信。 
English: When their great-grandfather wanted to kill them, Wang Hua and the others said, "You can't believe in the Dharma."

古文：太祖曰： 道济止于胁从，本非事主。
现代文：太祖说： 檀道济只是协从的人，并不是主谋。
English: The great-grandfather said, "Dang Daozhe is just a follower, not the mastermind.

古文：杀害之事，又所不关。
现代文：杀害营阳的事，与他无关。
English: The killing of Yingyang has nothing to do with him.

古文：吾召而问之，必异。 
现代文：我召回他来询问，他必然和谢晦他们不一样。 
English: I called him back to inquire. He must be different from the others.

古文：于是诏道济入朝，授之以众，委之西讨。
现代文：于是下诏书叫檀道济回到朝廷，把大军交给他，叫他向西讨伐谢晦。
English: Therefore, he issued an imperial edict ordering Dondoji to return to the imperial court, handing him a large army and ordering him to fight in the west.

古文：晦闻羡之等死，谓道济必不独全，及闻率众来上，惶惧无计。
现代文：谢晦听说徐羡之等人被害死了，以为檀道济必然不会幸免于难，到这时获知檀道济率兵来讨伐，便惶恐不安，手足无措。
English: Xie Hui heard that Xu Enzhi and others were killed and thought that Dang Daoji would not be spared. When he learned that Dang Daoji was leading an army to fight, he was terrified and helpless.

古文：道济既至，与彦之军合，牵舰缘岸。
现代文：檀道济的大军到了后，便和到彦之的部队会合，沿江岸牵引船舰。
English: After the arrival of the great army of Tandooji, they met with the troops of Zuihanki and towed the ships along the riverbank.

古文：晦始见舰数不多，轻之，不即出战。
现代文：刚开始谢晦见到他们的船只不多，就很轻视官军，没有马上出战。
English: At the beginning of Xie Yue, there were not many ships to see them, so they despised the government army and did not go to war immediately.

古文：至晚，因风帆上，前后连咽，西人离阻，无复斗心。
现代文：到了晚上，檀道济便借着东风，突然西进，船帆前后相连，声势浩大，谢晦的士兵见了，非常恐惧，顿时便产生了逃跑的心意，根本就不想打仗了。
English: In the evening, thanks to the easterly wind, the ship suddenly sailed westward. The sails were connected in front and behind, and the noise was tremendous. When the soldiers saw it, they were very afraid and immediately had the idea of running away. They didn't want to fight at all.

古文：台军至忌置洲尾，列舰过江，晦大军一时溃散。
现代文：官军到了忌置洲的后尾，军舰一字儿摆开渡过长江，谢晦的大军便一下子溃散了。
English: When the government army arrived at the tail end of Imoji Island, the warships sailed across the Yangtze River, and the grateful army was suddenly dispersed.

古文：晦夜出，投巴陵，得小船还江陵。
现代文：谢晦在半夜逃出，投奔巴陵，找到一只小船才回到江陵。
English: Xie Hui escaped in the middle of the night, ran to Baling, and found a small boat to return to Gangneung.

古文：初，雍州刺史刘粹遣弟竟陵太守道济与台军主沈敞之袭江陵，至沙桥，周超率万余人与战，大破之。
现代文：之前，雍州刺史刘粹派他的弟弟竟陵太守刘道济和官军队长沈敝之袭击江陵，到了沙桥时，周超率领一万人迎战，大败官军。
English: Previously, Liu Zi, the statesman of Yongzhou, had sent his brother Liu Daoji, the governor of the imperial mausoleum, and the commander of the official army, Shen Xizhi, to attack Jiangling. When they reached the sand bridge, Zhou Chao led ten thousand people to fight and defeated the official army.

古文：俄而晦败问至。
现代文：不久谢晦兵败的消息便传来了。
English: Soon after, news of Xie Yu's defeat came.

古文：晦至江陵，无它处分，唯愧谢周超而已。
现代文：谢晦逃到江陵，没有其他措施，只有惭愧地说对不起周超而已。
English: Xie Yue fled to Jiangling, there was no other measures, only to say with shame that he was sorry to Zhou Chao.

古文：超其夜舍军单舸诣到彦之降。
现代文：周超当夜便离开江陵，坐一只小船到到彦之那里投降。
English: That night, Zhou Chao left Gangneung and took a small boat to Yan's place to surrender.

古文：众散略尽，乃携其弟遁、兄子世基等七骑北走。
现代文：谢晦计穷人散，只好带着弟弟谢遁、哥哥的儿子谢世基等七人向北逃去。
English: Xie Xie planned to scatter the poor, so he had to take his brother Xie Yao, his brother's son Xie Shiji and seven others to flee to the north.

古文：遁肥壮不能骑马，晦每待之，行不得速。
现代文：谢遁非常肥胖，不能骑马，谢晦时常要停下来等他，所以走的不快。
English: Xie Yao is very fat and can't ride a horse. Xie Yao often has to stop and wait for him, so it's not pleasant to walk.

古文：至安陆延头，为戍主光顺之所执。
现代文：到了安陆的延头时，被巡逻队长光顺之抓住。
English: When he arrived at the end of the anchorage, he was caught by patrol captain Guang Shun Zhou.

古文：顺之，晦故吏也。
现代文：光顺之是谢晦的老部下。
English: Ko Shunzhi is a long-time subordinate of Xie Ying.

古文：槛送京师，于路作《悲人道》，其词曰：
现代文：光顺之便将谢晦等人锁起来送到京城。在路上谢晦作了一道《悲人道》的长诗。其诗为：
English: Guang Shun then locked up Xie Hui and others and sent them to Beijing. On the way, Xie Hui composed a long poem "Pathetic Humanity." The poem is:

古文：悲人道兮，悲人道之实难。
现代文：悲人道兮，悲人道之实难。
English: It is very difficult to be compassionate and humane.

古文：哀人道之多险，伤人道之寡安。
现代文：哀人道之多险，伤人道之寡安。
English: Woe to humanity for its many perils, woe to humanity for its lack of peace.

古文：懿华宗之冠胄，固清流而远源。
现代文：懿华宗之冠胄，固清流而远源。
English: It is the crown jewel of the Huazhong sect, with a solid and clear stream and a distant source.

古文：周超既降，到彦之以参府事，刘粹遣参军沈敞之告彦之沙桥之败，事由周超，彦之乃执之。
现代文：树文德于庭户，立操学于衡门。应积善之余，当履福之所延。何小子之凶放，实招祸而作愆。周超投降后，到彦之用他当参府事，刘粹派参军沈敝之告诉到彦之沙桥失败的情况，说这事完全是周超导致的，于是到彦之便把周超抓了起来。
English: Zhu Wende studied in Tiuhu, and Zhidong studied in Hengmen. In addition to accumulating good deeds, it is necessary to do good deeds. If a boy is reckless, he will actually invite disaster and commit crimes. After Zhou Chao's surrender, Zhu Yanzhi used him as an adviser to the government. Liu Zi sent a military officer, Shen Yanzhi, to tell Zhu Yanzhi about the failure of the sand bridge, saying that this was entirely caused by Zhu Yanzhi. Therefore, Zhu Yanzhi arrested Zhu Yanzhi.

古文：先系爵等，犹未即戮，于是与晦、遁、兄子世基、世猷及同党孔延秀、周超、贺愔、窦应期、蒋虔、严千斯等并伏诛。
现代文：朝廷先抓起来的谢日爵等人，还没有斩首，到这时便和谢晦、谢遁、谢世基、谢世猷以及同党孔延秀、周超、费忄音、窦应期、蒋虔、严千斯等人一同被杀。
English: Xie Nizhe and others, who were first arrested by the imperial court, had not yet been beheaded. At this time, they were killed together with Xie Yu, Xie Jun, Xie Shiji, Xie Shijun, as well as party members Kong Yanxiu, Zhou Chao, Fei Xuan, Dou Yingjie, Jiang Qian, Yan Qians and others.

古文：世基，绚之子也，有才气。临死为连句诗曰： 伟哉横海鳞，壮矣垂天翼。
现代文：谢世基是谢绚的儿子，很有才气，临死前作诗说： 伟哉横海鳞，壮矣垂天翼。
English: Xie Shiji, the son of Xie Hua, was very talented. Before his death, he wrote a poem saying: "Great is the scale of the sea, strong is the wing that reaches the sky."

古文：一旦失风水，翻为蝼蚁食。 
现代文：一旦失风水，翻为蝼蚁食。 
English: Once it loses its feng shui, it will turn into food for ants.

古文：晦续之曰： 功遂侔昔人，保退无智力。
现代文：谢晦接着写道： 功遂侔昔人，保退无智力。
English: Xie Yu continued: Achievement and achievement are for the ancients, retreat and retreat are for the unintelligent.

古文：既涉太行险，斯路信难陟。 
现代文：既涉太行险，斯路信难陟。 
English: Even if it involves travel insurance, it is difficult to obtain a letter of recommendation.

古文：晦死时，年三十七。
现代文：谢晦死时，只有三十七岁。
English: Xie Yu was only 37 years old when he died.

古文：庾登之、殷道鸾、何承天并皆原免。
现代文：庾登之、殷道鸾、何承天都被赦免。
English: Zheng Deng, Yin Dao Zheng and He Zheng Tian were all pardoned.

古文：初，河东人商玄石为晦参军，晦为逆，玄石密欲推西人庾田夫及到彦之从弟为主，田夫等不敢许。
现代文：当初河东人商玄石当谢晦的参军，谢晦造反，玄石暗中推举西州人庾田夫和到彦之的堂弟为首领，庾田夫等人不敢答应。
English: At the beginning, the east-Hedong merchant, Xuanzhi, urged Xie Yao to join the army, and Xie Yao rebelled. Xuanzhi secretly nominated the Xizhou man, Xutianfu, and the cousin of Zuihanki as leaders, but Xutianfu and others did not dare to agree.

古文：知玄石独谋不立，遂为晦领幢。
现代文：商玄石知道自己的谋划实现不了，于是当了谢晦手下的一名队长。
English: Shang Xuanshi knew that his plan could not be realized, so he became a captain under Xie Yu.

古文：事既平，恨本心之不遂，投水死。
现代文：谢晦之事被平定之后，商玄石恨自己的志向没有达到，便投水自杀了。
English: After the events of Xie Yu were settled, the merchant Xuan Shi, hating that his ambition had not been achieved, committed suicide by throwing himself into the water.

古文：太祖嘉之，以其子怀福为衡阳王义季右军参军督护。
现代文：太祖很赞赏他这种行为，便用他的儿子商怀福作衡阳王刘义季的右军参军督护。
English: The great-grandfather was very appreciative of this behavior, so he used his son Shang Huaifu to supervise the right-wing army of Hengyang King Liu Yizi.

古文：晦走，左右皆弃之，唯有延陵盖追随不舍。
现代文：谢晦逃走时，他身边的人都离弃了他，只有延陵盖追随着他。
English: When Xie Yu fled, everyone around him abandoned him, only Yanling Gai followed him.

古文：太祖嘉之，后以盖为长沙王义欣镇军功曹督护。
现代文：太祖也很赞赏延陵盖的行为，后来用他当了长沙王刘义欣的镇军功曹督护。
English: The great-grandfather also appreciated the behavior of Yanlinggai, and later used him as the town military gong cao supervisor of Changsha King Liu Yixin.

