古文：小司徒之职，掌建邦之教法，以稽国中及四郊都鄙之夫家九比之数，以辨其贵贱、老幼、废疾，凡征役之施舍，与其祭祀、饮食、丧纪之禁令。
现代文：小司徒的职责，负责建立王国教官的为官法则，以考察王都中以及四郊和畿内采邑的男女人民的数目，分辨他们当中的贵贱、老幼和残疾者，凡赋税徭役的免除，和有关他们祭祀、饮食、丧事方面的禁令都掌管。
English: The duties of the minor preceptors, who are responsible for establishing the code of conduct for the instructors of the kingdom, to examine the number of men and women in the royal capital and the four suburbs and the villages in the Kinai region, to distinguish the noble and the lowly, the old and the disabled among them, to administer all exemptions from tax and service, and the prohibitions concerning their sacrifices, food, and funerals.

古文：乃颁比法于六乡之大夫，使各登其乡之众寡、六畜、车辇，辨其物，以岁时入其数，以施政教，行征令。
现代文：向六乡大夫颁布校比法，使他们各自登记本乡人数的多少、六畜和车辇的数目，弄清各家的财物，每年按季呈报数字，以便施行政教，执行征收赋役的法令。
English: A school comparison law was promulgated to the doctors of the six townships, so that they could each register the number of people in their hometowns, the number of livestock and carriages, find out the property of each family, and report the figures quarterly every year, so as to carry out administrative education and implement the decree of levying forced labor.

古文：及三年则大比。
现代文：到三年就举行大校比。
English: By the third year, a large school comparison will be held.

古文：大比则受邦国之比要。
现代文：大校比时接受各诸侯国呈报的登记校比结果的簿册。
English: A register of the results of the registration and comparison submitted by each vassal state was accepted at the time of the great school comparison.

古文：乃会万民之卒伍而用之。
现代文：协助大司徒编制万民的军事组织而备用。
English: To assist the Daisetsu in the preparation of the military organization of the people.

古文：五人为伍，五伍为两，四两为卒，五卒为旅，五旅为师，五师为军，以起军旅，以作田役，以比追胥，以令贡赋。
现代文：五人为一伍，五伍为一两，四两为一卒，五卒为一旅，五旅为一师，五师为一军，以起兵征伐，以进行田猎，以相配合追击外寇和伺捕国内盗贼，以施行有关贡赋的政令。
English: Five men are a troop, five troops are one or two, four or two are one man, five men are a brigade, five brigades are a division, five divisions are an army, to raise troops for conquest, to carry out field hunting, to cooperate in the pursuit of foreign invaders and the pursuit of domestic thieves, to implement the government decree on tribute.

古文：乃均土地，以稽其人民，而周知其数。
现代文：协助大司徒合理调配土地，核查人民，而遍知人民的数目。
English: to assist the Daishi people to rationally allocate land, check the people, and know the number of people.

古文：上地家七人，可任也者家三人；中地家六人，可任也者二家五人；下地家五人，可任也者家二人。
现代文：上等土地授给七口以上人家，这样的人家可以胜任兵役和劳役的一家有三人；中等土地授给六口的人家，这样的人家可以胜任兵役和劳役的二家有五人；下等土地授给五口以下的人家，这样的人家可以胜任兵役和劳役的一家有二人。
English: Superior land is granted to families with seven or more members, so that a family with three members can be qualified for military service and labor service; intermediate land is granted to families with six members, so that two families with five members can be qualified for military service and labor service; inferior land is granted to families with five members or less, so that a family with two members can be qualified for military service and labor service.

古文：凡起徒役，毋过家一人，以其余为羡，唯田与追胥竭作。
现代文：凡征调兵役和劳役，不超过每家一人，把其余的丁壮作为羡卒，只有田猎和追捕寇贼时正卒和羡卒全体出动。
English: No more than one person from each family should be conscripted for military service or labor service, and the rest of the Ding Zhuang should be sent as envoys. Only when hunting in the fields or chasing bandits should all the regulars and envoys be sent out.

古文：凡用众庶，则掌其政教，与其戒禁，听其辞讼，施其赏罚，诛其犯命者。
现代文：凡征用民众，就掌管有关的政教和对被征用者的禁戒，评断他们的争讼之辞，施行对他们的赏罚，惩罚他们当中的的触犯禁戒者。
English: Whoever requisitions the people shall be in charge of the relevant politics and religion and the prohibitions of the requisitioned people, judge their disputes, reward and punish them, and punish the violators of the prohibitions among them.

古文：凡国之大事致民，大故致余子。
现代文：凡国家有出兵征伐的事就召集正卒，有灾害寇贼的事就还要召集羡卒。
English: Whenever a country has to send out troops for a campaign, it must call up regular soldiers, and when there is a disaster or banditry, envious soldiers must also be called up.

古文：乃经土地，而井牧其田野。
现代文：划分土地，而用井法和牧法划分田野。
English: The land is divided, and the fields are divided using the well method and the pasture method.

古文：九夫为井，四井为邑，四邑为丘，四丘为甸，四甸为县，四县为都，以任地事，而令贡赋，凡税敛之事。
现代文：九夫所受的土地为一井，四井为一邑，四邑为一丘，四丘为一甸，四甸为一县，四县为一都，以使民从事土地生产事业，使民交纳贡赋，以及田税等所有当收取的租税。
English: The land given to the nine was one well, four wells, one township, four townships, one hill, four hills, one delta, four deltas, one county, and four counties, so that the people could engage in land production, pay tribute, and all the taxes that should be collected, such as the field tax.

古文：乃分地域而辨其守，施其职而平其政。
现代文：协助大司徒划分各行政区域而确定守护地产的官职，使民各自从事自己的职业而合理地征收地税。
English: Assisting the grand council to divide the administrative regions and determine the official position of guarding the real estate, so that the people can engage in their own occupation and reasonably collect the land tax.

古文：凡小祭祀奉牛牲，羞其肆。
现代文：凡有小祭祀就奉进牛牲，进献经解割的牲体。
English: Whenever there is a small sacrifice, cattle are brought in, and the animals that have been slaughtered are offered.

古文：小宾客，令野修道、委积。
现代文：接待诸侯的使臣，命令在野外修整道路、积聚粮草以待使臣到来。
English: Receiving the envoys of the lords, he ordered the roads to be repaired in the field and the grain and grass to be gathered until the envoys arrived.

古文：大军旅，帅其众庶。
现代文：有大征伐，就率领徒众交给大司徒。
English: When there was a large-scale campaign, he led the disciples and handed them over to the Daishi disciples.

古文：小军旅，巡役，治其政令。
现代文：有小征伐，就负责巡视徒役，执行有关他们的政令。
English: If there is a small campaign, they will be responsible for patrolling the foot soldiers and implementing the relevant decrees.

古文：大丧，帅邦役，治其政教。
现代文：有大丧，就率领王国中为丧事服役的民众，执行有关他们的政教。
English: When there is a great mourning, he leads the people of the kingdom who are serving for the funeral, and carries out the politics and religion related to them.

古文：凡建邦国，立其社稷，正其畿疆之封。
现代文：凡建立诸侯国，使他们设立社稷坛遗，规正诸侯国疆域的封界。
English: Whoever establishes a vassal state, let them establish a shrine and rectify the boundaries of the territory of the vassal state.

古文：凡民讼，以地比正之；地讼，以图正之。
现代文：凡民众在赋税、徭役方面有争讼，就依据当地清查居民的簿册来判决；有关土地的争讼，就依据地图来判决。
English: Where there are disputes among the people in the areas of taxation and corvée, the disputes shall be adjudicated on the basis of the local residents' register; disputes concerning land shall be adjudicated on the basis of the map.

古文：岁终，则考其属官之治成而诛赏，令群吏正要会而致事。
现代文：夏历年终，考察属官们办事的文书记录而进行惩罚和奖赏，命令官吏们明白审慎地整理全年的会计文书而上报。
English: At the end of the year of the lunar calendar, officials were punished and rewarded for inspecting the paperwork records of their work, and officials were ordered to sort out the accounting documents of the whole year and report them.

古文：正岁则帅其属而观教法之象，徇以木铎，曰： 不用法者，国有常刑。 
现代文：夏历正月初一，就率领属官们观看悬挂在象魏上的教法，边走边摇动木铎，说： 不执行法令的，国家自有常刑。 
English: On the first day of the first month of the lunar calendar, he led his subordinate officials to watch the teachings hanging on the elephant weir, shaking the raft as he walked, saying: If you do not enforce the law, the state has its own capital punishment.

古文：令群吏宪禁令，修法，纠职，以待邦治。
现代文：命令官吏们：各自在治所悬挂禁令，加强法制，纠察职事，以待满足国家对于治理的要求。
English: The officials were ordered to: each hang a ban in the administration, strengthen the legal system, and picket the office to meet the state's requirements for governance.

古文：及大比，六乡四郊之吏，平教治，正政事，考夫屋及其众寡、六畜、兵器，以待政令。
现代文：到大校比时，对于六乡四郊的官吏，评断他们的教育和治理情况，规正他们的政事，考察田地以及人民、六畜、武器和器械的数目，以待国家下达有关政令。
English: At the time of the grand comparison, for the officials in the six townships and four suburbs, assess their education and governance, regulate their political affairs, inspect the fields and the number of people, livestock, weapons and equipment, and wait for the state to issue relevant government orders.

