古文：八年春，公至自会。
现代文：八年春季，宣公
English: In the spring of 1978, the proclamation

古文：夏六月，公子遂如齐，至黄乃复。
现代文：夏季六月，公子遂去齐国，到了黄乃这个地方又回来了。
English: In the summer of June, he went to Qi Province and came back to Huangnai.

古文：辛巳，有事于大庙，仲遂卒于垂。
现代文：辛巳日，在太庙举行祭祀。仲遂在垂地去世。
English: On the day of Xin Si, a ritual was held in the Great Temple. Zhong Sui passed away on the hanging ground.

古文：壬午，犹绎。《万》入去籥。
现代文：壬午日，再次举行祭祀，《万》舞进去表演。
English: On the morning of the third day of the third lunar month, the ritual was held again, and the "Million" dance was performed.

古文：戊子，夫人嬴氏薨。
现代文：戊子日，鲁国夫人夫人嬴氏去世。
English: On the day of Bosi, Mrs. Lu Guo's wife, Mrs. Zou, passed away.

古文：晋师、白狄伐秦。
现代文：晋国军队和白狄人攻打秦国。
English: The Jin army and the Paidi people attacked Qin.

古文：楚人灭舒、蓼。
现代文：楚国灭掉舒、蓼小国。
English: Chu wiped out the small states of Shu and Qin.

古文：秋七月甲子，日有食之，既。
现代文：秋季七月甲子日，有日食，是日全食。
English: In autumn, there is a solar eclipse, a total solar eclipse, on July 1st.

古文：冬十月己丑，葬我小君敬嬴。
现代文：冬季十月己丑日，安葬鲁国夫人敬嬴。
English: In the winter of October, on the Day of the Ugly, Lu Guo's wife, Jingyao, was buried.

古文：雨，不克葬。
现代文：下大雨，难以安葬。
English: Heavy rain makes it difficult to bury the dead.

古文：庚寅，日中而克葬。
现代文：庚寅日，中午才下葬。
English: On the day of Geng Yin, he was buried at noon.

古文：城平阳。
现代文：鲁国在平阳这个地方筑城。
English: The state of Lu built a city in this area of Pingyang.

古文：楚师伐陈。
现代文：楚国军队攻打陈国。
English: The army of Chu attacked Chen.

古文：八年春，白狄及晋平。
现代文：八年春季，白狄和晋国讲和。
English: In the spring of the eighth year, Paidi and Jin made peace.

古文：夏，会晋伐秦。
现代文：夏季，会合晋国进攻秦国。
English: In the summer, Jin attacked Qin.

古文：晋人获秦谍，杀诸绛市，六日而苏。
现代文：晋国人抓住秦国的一个间谍，把他杀死在绛城的街市上，过了六天又复活了。
English: The Jin people caught one of Qin's spies, killed him in the streets of Lushan, and resurrected him six days later.

古文：有事于大庙，襄仲卒而绎，非礼也。
现代文：在太庙举行祭祀，襄仲死后接连两天举行祭祀，这是不合礼的。
English: It is not proper to hold a ritual in the Great Temple and then hold it two days in a row after Xiang Zhong's death.

古文：楚为众舒叛故，伐舒、蓼，灭之。
现代文：楚国因为舒姓诸侯背叛，所以进攻舒、蓼，灭亡了舒、蓼两国。
English: Because of the treachery of the princes surnamed Shu, the state of Chu attacked Shu and Yunnan, and the two countries of Shu and Yunnan were destroyed.

古文：楚子疆之，及滑汭。盟吴、越而还。
现代文：楚庄王给它们划定疆界，到达滑水的转折处，同时和吴国、越国结盟而回去。
English: The king of Chu Zhuang delineated the boundaries for them, reached the turning point of water skiing, and at the same time allied with Wu and Yue.

古文：晋胥克有蛊疾，郤缺为政。
现代文：晋国胥克食物中毒，郤缺主持国政。
English: Food poisoning in Jin Province, lack of food to preside over state affairs.

古文：秋，废胥克。使赵朔佐下军。
现代文：秋季，废了胥克，任命赵朔做下军的副帅。
English: In the autumn, Zeng Ke was abolished and Zhao Shuo was appointed the vice-commander of the lower army.

古文：冬，葬敬嬴。
现代文：冬季，安葬敬嬴。
English: In winter, they are buried with respect.

古文：旱，无麻，始用葛茀。
现代文：由于旱灾，没有麻，开始用葛做牵引棺材的绳子。
English: Due to the drought, there was no hemp, and they began to use kudzu to make the rope to pull the coffin.

古文：雨，不克葬，礼也。
现代文：由于下雨，不能如期下葬，这是符合礼的。
English: Due to the rain, the burial could not be carried out as scheduled, which is in accordance with the etiquette.

古文：礼，卜葬先远日，辟不怀也。
现代文：按礼的一般的规定，占卜安葬的日期，先占卜较远的日期，以避免别人认为对死者不加怀念。
English: According to the general rules of the rite, when divining the date of burial, first divine the more distant date, so as to avoid the impression that the deceased is not being remembered.

古文：城平阳，书时也。
现代文：鲁国在平阳筑城，《春秋》记载这件事，是因为合于时令。
English: Lu Kingdom built a city in Pingyang. "Spring and Autumn" recorded this event because it was in accordance with the season.

古文：陈及晋平。
现代文：陈国与晋国讲和。
English: Chen and Jin make peace.

古文：楚师伐陈，取成而还。
现代文：楚国的军队攻打陈国，讲和以后就领兵回国。
English: The army of Chu attacked Chen, and after peace was declared, they led their soldiers back to the country.

