古文：黄帝问于伯高曰：夫邪气之客人也，或令人目不瞑、不卧出者，何气使然？
现代文：黄帝问伯高道：邪气侵犯人体，有时使人不能闭目睡觉，卧不安枕，这是什么气造成的呢？
English: The Yellow Emperor asked Baogao Dao: Evil qi invades the human body, sometimes making people unable to sleep with their eyes closed and unable to lie down. What is the cause of this qi?

古文：伯高曰：五谷入于胃也，其糟粕津液宗气，分为三隧：故宗气积于胸中，出于喉咙，以贯心脉，而行呼吸焉；营气者，泌其津液，注之于脉，化以为血，以荣四末，内注五脏六腑，以应刻数焉；卫气者，出其悍气之慓疾，而先行于四末分肉皮肤之间，而不休者也，昼日行于阳，夜行于阴。
现代文：伯高说：饮食五谷进入胃中消化后，其糟粕、津液、宗气分为三路：宗气积聚在胸中，出于喉咙，贯通心肺，使呼吸得以进行；营气分泌津液，灌注于脉中化为血液，在外营养四肢，在内灌注脏腑，循脉流行在一昼夜之间运行五十周，与一昼夜分为百刻的时刻数相应；卫气是一种比较滑利剽悍的水谷之气，首先运行在四肢的末端，分肉、皮肤之间，而没有休止，白天行于阳分之属，夜间行于阴分之属。
English: Bo Gao said: After the dietary grain enters the stomach for digestion, its dregs, juice and qi are divided into three ways: the qi accumulates in the chest, from the throat, penetrates the heart and lungs, so that breathing can proceed; the qi secretes juice, perfuses into the blood in the veins, nourishes the limbs outside, and perfuses the viscera inside. The vascular circulation runs for fifty weeks between day and night, corresponding to the number of hours divided into one day and night; the qi is a relatively smooth and vigorous water valley qi, first running at the end of the limbs, between the meat and the skin,

古文：常从足少阴之分间，行于五脏六腑。
现代文：卫气的入于阴分，常以足少阴肾经为起点，循行于五脏六腑。
English: The entry of the spirit of virtue into the yin points, often with the foot less yin and kidney as the starting point, followed by the five viscera and six glands.

古文：今厥气客于五脏六腑，则卫气独卫其外，行于阳，不得入于阴。
现代文：如有厥逆之气留于五脏六腑时，则卫气仅能捍卫体表，行于阳分而不能入于阴分。
English: If the spirit of rebellion remains in the five viscera and six bowels, then the spirit of virtue can only defend the surface of the body, and it can only go to the yang point, but not to the yin point.

古文：行于阳则阳气盛，阳气盛则阳蹻陷，不得入于阴，阴虚，故目不瞑。
现代文：仅止行于阳分，就造成阳气偏盛，阳气偏盛则阳跷脉气充塞满胀，卫气不得通过而不能进入阴分，导致阴虚，所以人就不能闭目入睡了。
English: Just stopping at the yang point will cause yang qi to be overabundant, and when yang qi is overabundant, the yang qi vein will be filled with gas, and the yin qi will not be able to pass through and enter the yin point, resulting in yin deficiency, so people can not close their eyes and fall asleep.

古文：黄帝曰：善。
现代文：黄帝说：讲得好！
English: Huang Di said, "That was well said."

古文：治之奈何？
现代文：不眠症怎样治疗呢？
English: How is it treated?

古文：伯高曰：补其不足，泻其有余，调其虚实，以通其道，而去其邪。饮以半夏汤一剂，阴阳已通，其卧立至。
现代文：伯高说：补其阴气的不足，泻其阳气的有余，调和其虚实的偏差，以使卫气行于阴分的道路通畅而去除其邪气，再饮以半夏汤一剂，待阴阳之气已通，则睡意立时而至。
English: Bogao said: to make up for the deficiency of yin, to reduce the excess of yang, to reconcile the deviation of fact and reality, so that the path of yin and yang is smooth and the evil spirit is removed, and then drink a dose of semi-summer soup. After the yin and yang have passed, sleepiness will come immediately.

古文：黄帝曰：善。
现代文：黄帝说：讲得对。
English: Huang Di said, "That was well said."

古文：此所谓决渎壅塞，经络大通，阴阳和得者也。
现代文：这就是所谓决而泄之，排除壅塞，从而使经络通畅，阴阳得以和调的疗法了。
English: This is the so-called decisive release, eliminating obstruction, thus making the meridians smooth, and the yin and yang can be harmonized.

古文：愿闻其方。
现代文：我想知道半夏汤的制作方法。
English: I want to know why.

古文：伯高曰：其汤方以流水千里以外者八升，扬之万遍，取其清五升，煮之，炊以苇薪火，沸置秫米一升，治半夏五合，徐炊，令竭为一升半，去其滓，饮汁一小杯，日三，稍益，以知为度。
现代文：伯高说：半夏秫米汤一方，是用流经千里以上的江河之水八升，搅和、扬动一万遍，待水澄清后，取足五升煎煮，煎煮时柴薪须用芦苇，等水滚沸，放入秫米一升及制半夏五合，以缓火煎煮，等水蒸发减少只剩一升半时，滤去药滓，便可饮用，每次饮药汁一小杯，每天饮用三次，根据情况，饮用的剂量也可以逐渐增加，以见效为度。
English: Bo Gao said: the half-summer glutinous rice soup, on the other hand, is made with eight liters of river water flowing through more than a thousand miles, stirred and stirred ten thousand times. After the water is clarified, take five liters of feet and boil. When cooking, the firewood must be used asparagus. When the water is boiling, put in one liter of glutinous rice and make half-summer glutinous rice soup. When cooking with slow fire, when the water evaporation is reduced to only one liter and a half, filter out the medicinal tincture, then it can be drunk. Drink a small cup of medicinal juice each time, drink three

古文：故其病新发者，复杯则卧，汗出则已矣；久者，三饮而已也。
现代文：如果病系初起，药一饮下，立刻就会思睡，服药后应立即卧床，汗一出来，病就好了；病发已久的，连服三剂，便可痊愈。
English: If the disease is in its early stages, the first time you take the medicine, you will immediately feel sleepy. After taking the medicine, you should immediately stay in bed. As soon as you sweat, the disease will be cured. If you have been ill for a long time, you can take three doses at a time and be cured.

古文：黄帝问于伯高曰：愿闻人之肢节，以应天地奈何？
现代文：黄帝问伯高说：人的四肢百节，怎样和天地相应呢？
English: The Yellow Emperor asked Bogao, "How do the four limbs of a human being correspond to heaven and earth?

古文：伯高答曰：天圆地方，人头圆足方以应之。天有日月，人有两目。
现代文：伯高回答说：天圆地方，人则头圆足方。天有日月，人则有双眼。
English: He replied, "The sky is round, but man's head is round and his feet are square. The sky has the sun and the moon, but man has two eyes.

古文：地有九州岛，人有九窍。
现代文：地有九州，人则有九窍。
English: The land has Kyushu, but the people have nine provinces.

古文：天有风雨，人有喜怒。
现代文：天有风雨，人则有喜怒。
English: The weather has its ups and downs, but people have their ups and downs.

古文：天有雷电，人有音声。
现代文：天有雷电，人则有声音。
English: The sky has thunder and lightning, but people have sound.

古文：天有四时，人有四肢。
现代文：天有四季，人则有四肢。
English: Heaven has four seasons, but man has four limbs.

古文：天有五音，人有五脏。
现代文：天有五音，人则有五脏。
English: Heaven has five tones, but man has five stomachs.

古文：天有六律，人有六腑。
现代文：天有六律，人则有六腑。
English: Heaven has six laws, but man has six vagaries.

古文：天有冬夏，人有寒热。
现代文：天有冬夏，人则有冷热。
English: The weather has winter and summer, but people have hot and cold.

古文：天有十日，人有手十指。
现代文：天有十天干，人则有十指。
English: Heaven has ten days, and man has ten fingers.

古文：辰有十二，人有足十趾、茎、垂以应之，女子不足二节，以抱人形。
现代文：天有十二个时辰，人则有两足十趾、阴茎、睾丸以对应，女子无阴茎、睾丸，但可受孕而怀有胎儿，以补其不足之数。
English: There are twelve hours in a day. Humans have two feet and ten toes, a penis, and testicles to match. Women do not have a penis or testicles, but they can conceive and carry a fetus to make up for their lack of numbers.

古文：天有阴阳，人有夫妻。
现代文：天有阴阳，人则有夫妻。
English: Heaven has yin and yang, but people have husband and wife.

古文：岁有三百六十五日，人有三百六十五节。
现代文：一年有三百六十五日，人身则有三百六十五个主要穴位。
English: There are three hundred and sixty-five days in a year, and there are three hundred and sixty-five major acupuncture points on the human body.

古文：地有高山，人有肩膝。
现代文：地有高山，人则有两肩和双膝。
English: The earth has high mountains, but man has two shoulders and two knees.

古文：地有深谷，人有腋腘。
现代文：地有深谷，人则有腋窝和腘窝。
English: The earth has its valleys, but man has his armpits and his crotch.

古文：地有十二经水，人有十二经脉。
现代文：地有十二条大河，人则有十二条主要的经脉。
English: The earth has twelve great rivers, and man has twelve major meridians.

古文：地有泉脉，人有卫气。
现代文：地下有泉水暗流，人则有卫气。
English: Underground there is an undercurrent of spring water, and the people have the spirit of the age.

古文：地有草蓂，人有毫毛。
现代文：地有丛草，人则有毫毛。
English: The earth is covered with grass, but man is covered with hair.

古文：天有昼夜，人有卧起。
现代文：天有昼夜，人则有起卧。
English: There is day and night, but there is also waking and sleeping.

古文：天有列星，人有牙齿。
现代文：天有列星，人则有牙齿。
English: The sky has stars, but people have teeth.

古文：地有小山，人有小节。
现代文：地有小山包，人则有小骨节。
English: The earth has small bones, but people have small bones.

古文：地有山石，人有高骨。
现代文：地有耸起的山石，人则有高突的骨骼。
English: The earth has towering mountains and rocks, while man has protruding bones.

古文：地有林木，人有募筋。
现代文：地有林木，人则有筋膜。
English: The earth has forests and trees, but people have fascia.

古文：地有聚邑，人有䐃肉。
现代文：地有人群聚集的都市，人则有聚结隆起的肌肉。
English: In cities, where crowds gather, people have bulging muscles.

古文：岁有十二月，人有十二节。
现代文：一年有十二月，人体四肢则有十二节。
English: There are twelve months in a year, and the human limbs have twelve joints.

古文：地有四时不生草，人有无子。
现代文：有些地方四季草木不生，人则有终身不育的。
English: In some places, plants and trees do not grow in all four seasons, while people are sterile for life.

古文：此人与天地相应者也。
现代文：以上这些情况都是人体与天地相应的情况。
English: All the above-mentioned situations are the corresponding situations between the human body and heaven and earth.

古文：黄帝问于岐伯曰：余愿闻持针之数，内针之理，纵舍之意，扞皮开腠理，奈何？
现代文：黄帝问岐伯说：我想知道持针的技法，进针的道理，比如，纵针而不持，或舍针而不用的缘故，以及展平皮肤而使腠理张开的刺法，这些是怎样的呢？
English: Huang Di asked Qibo, "I want to know the technique of holding the needle, the reason for inserting the needle, for example, the reason for not holding the longitudinal needle, or not using the needle, and the piercing method of flattening the skin and opening the jaw, what are these?

古文：脉之屈折，出入之处，焉至而出，焉至而止，焉至而徐，焉至而疾，焉至而入？
现代文：再有，经脉屈折运行，出此入彼，脉气到什么地方出，到什么地方止，到什么地方快，到什么地方慢，到什么地方入呢？
English: Furthermore, the meridians run in a refraction, coming from here and going to there. Where does the pulse go, where does it stop, where does it speed up, where does it slow down, and where does it enter?

古文：六腑之输于身者，余愿尽闻少叙。
现代文：以及六腑输注于全身的情况，我希望知道这些情况。
English: I would like to know the circumstances of the injection of hexavalent chromium into the whole body.

古文：别离之处，离而入阴，别而入阳，此何道而从行？
现代文：另外，经脉分道别行以及它与阴分、阳分或离或合的情况，它们或离阳而入于阴，或别阴而入于阳，这都是从什么通道运行的呢？
English: In addition, the meridians are separated and separated from the yin and yang, and they are separated from the yang and joined to the yang, and they are separated from the yang and joined to the yang, and they are separated from the yang and joined to the yang, and they are separated from the yang and joined to the yang, and they are separated from the yang and joined to the yang.

古文：余愿尽闻其方。
现代文：我想详细知道其中的道理。
English: I would like to know the reason for this in detail.

古文：岐伯曰：帝之所问，针道毕矣。
现代文：岐伯说：针刺的道理已尽在你所提的问题中了。
English: Qibo said, "The principle of acupuncture is fully explained in the question you raised.

古文：黄帝曰：愿卒闻之。
现代文：黄帝说：我愿意尽快地知道这些道理。
English: Huang Di said, "I want to know everything immediately."

古文：岐伯曰：手太阴之脉，出于大指之端；内屈，循白肉际，至本节之后太渊，留以澹；外屈，上于本节下；内屈，与阴诸络会于鱼际，数脉并注，其气滑利，伏行壅骨之下；外屈，出于寸口而行，上至于肘内廉，入于大筋之下；内屈，上行臑阴，入腋下；内屈，走肺。
现代文：岐伯说：手太阴肺经的脉气，出于拇指的尖端；由此向内屈折而行，沿着白肉际，到拇指本节之后的太渊穴迟留而形成动脉搏动的现象；再向外屈折而行，上于本节以下；又屈而向内，在鱼际穴与诸阴络会合，手太阴、手少阴、手厥阴数条经脉合并流注，其气滑利，伏行在手鱼骨之下；又屈而向外，出于寸口而上行，至肘的内侧，进入大筋之下；屈而向内，上行于臂臑内侧，进入腋下；再屈折向内，趋走于肺脏。
English: Qi Bo said: the pulse gas of the palmar-pancreatic meridian comes from the tip of the thumb; it is then refracted inward and travels along the white flesh to the pituitary sinus after the thumb joint, forming the phenomenon of arterial pulsation; it is then refracted outward and travels up to the lower part of the joint; it is then bent inward and meets the various yin networks at the pituitary sinus. The palmar-pancreatic, palmar-pancreatic, and palmar-pancreatic meridians merge and flow, and their gas is slippery and hides under the carpal bone; it is then bent outward

古文：此顺行逆数之屈折也。
现代文：这就是手太阴肺经顺行走向而逆数的屈折运行情况。
English: This is the case of the hand moving in the forward direction and the lung moving in the reverse direction.

古文：心主之脉，出于中指之端；内屈，循中指内廉以上，留于掌中，伏行两骨之间；外屈，出两筋之间，骨肉之际，其气滑利；上二寸，外屈，出行两筋之间，上至肘内廉，入于小筋之下，留两骨之会，上入于胸中，内络于心脉。
现代文：心主手厥阴经的脉气，出于中指尖端；屈而向内，循着中指内侧上行，留于掌中，伏行在中指本节与食指本节两骨之间；又屈而向外，出前臂掌侧两筋之间及腕关节骨肉之际，其气行滑利；去腕上行三寸，又屈而向外，出行于两筋之间，上至肘的内侧，入于小筋的下方，迟留在两骨会合处，而后上行入于胸中，在内连络着心脏的经脉。
English: The qi of the main hand of the heart, the jueyin, comes from the tip of the middle finger; bends inward, follows the inside of the middle finger, stays in the palm of the hand, and falls between the bones of the middle finger and the index finger; bends outward again, and when it comes out of the forearm between the two lines of the palm and the bone of the wrist joint, its qi is smooth; goes to the wrist three inches, bends outward again, travels between the two lines, up to the inside of the elbow, enters below the small line, stays at the meeting place of the two bones, and then goes up into the chest, connecting the

古文：黄帝曰：手太阴之脉独无俞，何也？
现代文：黄帝说：为什么唯独手少阴心经没有腧穴呢？
English: The Yellow Emperor said, "Why is it that only the hands and the heart are not pierced?"

古文：岐伯曰：少阴，心脉也。心者，五脏六腑之大主也，精神之所舍也，其脏坚固，邪弗能容也。
现代文：岐伯说：手少阴是心脏的经脉，心脏是五脏六腑的大主宰，是精神的藏居之处，它的器质坚固，外邪不能侵入。
English: Qi Bo said, "The small yin of the hand is the meridian of the heart, the heart is the great master of the five viscera, and is the hiding place of the spirit. Its organic quality is solid, and external evil cannot invade.

古文：容之则心伤，心伤则神去，神去则死矣。
现代文：如果外邪侵入，心脏就会受到伤害，心脏为外邪所伤，则精神离去，精神离去则人死亡。
English: If a foreign evil invades, the heart will be harmed. If the heart is harmed by a foreign evil, the spirit will depart, and if the spirit departs, the person will die.

古文：故诸邪之在于心者，皆在于心之包络。包络者，心主之脉也，故独无俞焉。
现代文：所以，各种外邪留止于心脏的，实则都是留止于心包络，心包络是心脏所主宰的经脉，既然有手厥阴心包络经代替手少阴心经受邪，所以手少阴经脉独无腧穴。
English: Therefore, all kinds of external evils stay in the heart, but in fact they stay in the heart envelope. The heart envelope is the meridian dominated by the heart. Since there is a hand-shrinking heart envelope meridian to replace the hand-shrinking heart to experience evil, there is no flaw in the hand-shrinking meridian.

古文：黄帝曰：少阴独无俞者，不病乎？
现代文：黄帝说：手少阴心经没有腧穴，难道它不受病吗？
English: The Yellow Emperor said, "If the hand is small and the heart is without a cavity, won't it get sick?

古文：岐伯曰：其外经病而脏不病，故独取其经于掌后锐骨之端。
现代文：岐伯说：手少阴经行于浅表的部分有病，而心脏本部无病，所以，当手少阴经的外经有病时，取该经在掌后锐骨之端针治。
English: Qi Bo said: The superficial part of the inferior mesentery of the hand is diseased, but the heart is not diseased. Therefore, when the external mesentery of the inferior mesentery is diseased, it is treated with a needle at the end of the sharp bone behind the palm.

古文：其余脉出入屈折，其行之徐疾，皆如手少阴、心主之脉行也。
现代文：其余各条经脉的出入屈折及脉气运行的快慢，都像手太阴肺经、心包络经那样。
English: The other meridians have the same out-going and in-coming refraction and the same speed of pulse-gas movement as the carpal-pulmonary meridians and the pericardial meridians.

古文：故本俞者，皆因其气之虚实疾徐以取之，是谓因冲而泻，因衰而补，如是者，邪气得去，真气坚固，是谓因天之序。
现代文：所以，属于某经的腧穴，都应根据该经脉气的虚实疾徐而选用它，也就是所谓因其充盛而泻之，因其衰弱而补之，如此，则邪气可以除去，真气得以坚固，这就叫做 因天之序 。
English: Therefore, all the antechambers belonging to a certain meridian should be selected according to the real and imaginary diseases of the meridian gas, that is, the so-called because of its richness and slackness, because of its weakness and supplement it, so that the evil gas can be removed and the true gas can be solidified, which is called the order of heaven.

古文：黄帝曰：持针纵舍奈何？
现代文：黄帝说：持针有纵舍之法，是怎样的呢？
English: The Yellow Emperor said, "How is it that holding the needle is the same as letting go?"

古文：岐伯曰：必先明知十二经脉之本末，皮肤之寒热，脉之盛衰滑涩。
现代文：岐伯说：一定先要清楚了解十二经脉的起处和出处，皮肤的或寒或热，以及脉气的或盛或衰，或滑或涩。
English: Qi Bo said, "We must first clearly understand the origin and source of the twelve meridians, whether the skin is cold or hot, and whether the pulse is strong or weak, or slippery or astringent.

古文：其脉滑而盛者，病日进；虚而细者，久以持；大以涩者，为痛痹；阴阳如一者，病难治；其本末尚热者，病尚在；其热以衰者，其病亦去矣。
现代文：脉滑利而充盛的，病将日渐严重；脉虚而细的，其病经久不愈；脉大而涩的，是痛痹症；脉阴阳如一，不可分辨的，病难医治；胸腹四肢还有热象，说明病还存在；如胸腹四肢热已消退，说明病也已痊愈了。
English: If the pulse is smooth and full, the disease will become increasingly serious; if the pulse is weak and thin, the disease will not be cured for a long time; if the pulse is large and astringent, it is a pox; if the pulse is yin and yang, it is indistinguishable, and the disease is difficult to cure; if there is fever in the chest, abdomen and limbs, it means that the disease still exists; if the fever in the chest, abdomen and limbs has subsided, it means that the disease has also been cured.

古文：持其尺，察其肉之坚脆、大小、滑涩、寒温、燥湿。
现代文：诊视患者的尺肤，借以察知其肌肉的坚实与脆软，脉象的大小滑涩，以及病的属寒属热，属燥属湿。
English: Examine the patient's skin to detect the firmness and brittleness of the muscles, the size and smoothness of the pulse, and the coldness, heat, dryness and wetness of the disease.

古文：因视目之五色，以知五脏，而决死生。
现代文：通过审视眼睛的青赤黄白黑五色，借以测知五脏的内在变化，并由此断定患者的生死。
English: By examining the blue-red-yellow-white-black five colors of the eyes, it is possible to detect the internal changes of the internal organs, and thus determine the patient's life and death.

古文：视其血脉，察其色，以知其寒热痛痹。
现代文：再是诊视患者的血脉，观察其肤色的青赤黄白黑五色，借以了解疾病的寒、热、痛、痹。
English: Then, they will examine the patient's blood vessels and observe the five colors of the patient's skin: blue, red, yellow, white and black, in order to understand the cold, heat, pain and palsy of the disease.

古文：黄帝曰：持针纵舍，余未得其意也。
现代文：黄帝说：对于持针纵舍之法，我还没弄懂它的意思。
English: Huang Di said, "I still don't understand the meaning of the method of holding a needle and holding it vertically."

古文：岐伯曰：持针之道，欲端以正，安以静。先知虚实而行疾徐。
现代文：岐伯说：持针施治的法则是，身姿要端正，心神要安静专一，先要诊知病症的虚实，而后考虑进针的快慢。
English: Qi Bo said: The rule of needle treatment is that the body should be neat, the mind should be quiet and single-minded, and the truth of the disease should be diagnosed first, and then the speed of the needle should be considered.

古文：左手执骨，右手循之，无与肉果。
现代文：进针时，用左手握持着相关部位的骨骼，右手循按穴位，注意针不要被肌肉所缠裹。
English: When inserting the needle, use the left hand to hold the bone of the relevant part, the right hand to follow the pressure point, and be careful not to wrap the needle with the muscle.

古文：泻欲端以正，补必闭肤。辅针导气，邪得淫泆，真气得居。
现代文：施以泻法时，进针务求端正；施以补法时，一定要封闭皮肤上的针眼，并采用转针手法，以导引其气，使邪气不能蔓延扩散，而真气得以安定。
English: When applying the laxative method, the needle should be inserted correctly; when applying the tonic method, it is necessary to close the needle eye on the skin and use the turning needle method to guide the qi, so that the evil qi cannot spread and the true qi can be stabilized.

古文：黄帝曰：扞皮开腠理奈何？
现代文：黄帝问：以手抻展皮肤使腠理张开，以便于进针，是怎样的呢？
English: Huang Di asked: What is it like to stretch the skin with a handkerchief to open the wound so that the needle can be inserted?

古文：岐伯曰：因其分肉，左别其肤，微内而徐端之，适神不散，邪气得去。
现代文：岐伯说：顺着分肉的纹理，审察、辨明正当穴位的表皮，轻轻刺入并慢慢使针端正不偏，只要医者精神专一而不外驰，邪气就可以除去。
English: Qi Bo said: "Follow the texture of the split flesh, examine and identify the epidermis of the legitimate points, gently pierce and slowly make the needle straight and unbalanced. As long as the doctor's spirit is single-minded and does not go out, the evil spirit can be removed.

古文：黄帝问于岐伯曰：人有八虚，各何以候？
现代文：黄帝问：人身有八虚，可分别诊察哪些疾病呢？
English: Huang Di asked: There are eight imperfections in the human body, which diseases can be diagnosed separately?

古文：岐伯答曰：以候五脏。
现代文：岐伯回答说：可诊察五脏病变。
English: Qi Bo replied: Five-vessel lesions can be diagnosed.

古文：黄帝曰：候之奈何？
现代文：黄帝说：怎样诊察呢？
English: Huang Di asked: How to judge whether the disease is suitable to use the pricking method?

古文：岐伯曰：肺心有邪，其气留于两肘。肝有邪，其气流于两腋。脾有邪，其气留于两髀。肾有邪，其气留于两腘。
现代文：岐伯说：如果肺与心有邪，则邪气居留在两肘窝；肝有邪，则邪气居留在两腋窝；脾有邪则气居留在两大腿窝；肾有邪，则邪气居留在两腘窝。
English: Qi Bo said: If the lungs and heart are evil, the evil spirit will stay in the two elbow sockets; if the liver is evil, the evil spirit will stay in the two armpit sockets; if the spleen is evil, the evil spirit will stay in the two thigh sockets; if the kidney is evil, the evil spirit will stay in the two armpit sockets.

古文：凡此八虚者，皆机关之室，真气之所过，血络之所游。
现代文：以上的八虚位置，都是关节屈伸的枢纽，也是真气和血络通行的要处。
English: The above eight virtual positions are the hub of joint flexion and extension, and are also the key points for the passage of true qi and blood circulation.

古文：邪气恶血，固不得住留。
现代文：邪气和恶血，不能令其盘踞或停留。
English: Evil spirits and bad blood cannot be allowed to take root or remain.

古文：住留则伤筋络，骨节机关不得屈伸，故痀挛也。
现代文：如果有停留，就会损伤筋脉骨节，使关节屈伸不利，以致发生拘挛的症状。
English: If there is a stay, it will damage the sinews and bones, making the joint flexion and extension unfavorable, resulting in symptoms of cramping.

