古文：◎太祖三十五年春正月辛巳，宴群臣于谨身殿，始用九奏乐。
现代文：洪武十五年正月一日，在谨身殿大宴群臣，开始用九奏乐。
English: On the first day of the first month of the 15th year of Hongwu's reign, at a grand banquet held in the Hall of Honor, he began to play the nine sonatas.

古文：景川侯曹震、定远侯王弼下威楚路。
现代文：景川侯曹震、定远侯王弼攻下威楚路。
English: Jingchuan marquis Cao Zhen and Dingyuan marquis Wang Yao captured Weizhu Road.

古文：壬午，元曲靖宣慰司及中庆、澄江、武定诸路俱降，云南平。
现代文：二日，元曲靖宣慰司以及中庆、澄江、武定各路全部投降，云南于是平定。
English: On the second day, Yuan Qujing Xuan Jie, as well as Zhongqing, Chengjiang, and Wuding all surrendered, and Yunnan was pacified.

古文：己丑，减大辟囚。
现代文：九日，减少死罪囚犯。
English: On the 9th, the number of prisoners sentenced to death was reduced.

古文：乙未，大祀天地于南郊。庚戌，命天下朝觐官各举所知一人。
现代文：十五日，在南郊隆重祭祀天地。二月二日，命令天下朝觐官各举荐一人。
English: On the fifteenth day, in the southern suburbs, the heavens and the earth were ceremoniously sacrificed. On February 2nd, the imperial eunuchs were ordered to nominate one person each.

古文：二月壬子。河决河南，命驸马都尉李祺振之。
现代文：四日，黄河在河南决口，驸马都尉李祺受命赈饥。
English: On the fourth day, the Yellow River broke its banks in Henan Province, and Captain Li Jun was ordered to fight hunger.

古文：甲寅，以云南平，诏天下。
现代文：六日，诏谕天下：云南已经平定。
English: On the 6th, it was announced to the world that Yunnan had been pacified.

古文：闰月癸卯，蓝玉、沐英克大理，分兵徇鹤庆、丽江、金齿，俱下。
现代文：闰二月二十三日，蓝玉、沐英攻克大理，接着分兵巡回鹤庆、丽江、金齿，各地俱下。
English: On February 23rd, Blue Jade and Mu Ying conquered Dali, followed by detachments touring Heqing, Lijiang, Jintao, and all over the country.

古文：三月庚午，河决朝邑。
现代文：三月二十一日，黄河在朝邑决口。
English: On the afternoon of March 6th, the Yellow River burst its banks in Chaoyu.

古文：夏四月甲申，迁元梁王把匝剌瓦儿密及威顺王子伯伯等家属于耽罗。
现代文：四月五日，将元朝梁王把匝剌瓦儿密及威顺王的儿子伯伯的家属迁到耽罗。
English: On April 5th, King Liang of the Yuan Dynasty moved the family members of Xingwa Ermi and Uncle, the son of King Weishun, to Tanluo.

古文：丙戌，诏天下通祀孔子。
现代文：七日，诏谕天下一律祭祀孔子。
English: On the seventh day, it was decreed that Confucius should be worshipped.

古文：壬辰，免畿内、浙江、江西、河南、山东税粮。
现代文：十日，免除京畿、浙江、江西、河南、山东的税粮。
English: On the 10th, Gyeonggi, Zhejiang, Jiangxi, Henan and Shandong were exempted from grain tax.

古文：五月乙丑，太学成，释奠于先师孔子。
现代文：五月十七日，建成太学，隆重祭祀先师孔子。
English: On May 17th, Taigaku was completed, and a grand ceremony was held to worship the forerunner, Confucius.

古文：丙子，广平府吏王允道请开磁州铁冶。
现代文：二十八日，广平府官吏王允道奏请发展磁州冶铁业。
English: On the 28th, Wang Yundao, an official of Guangping Prefecture, requested the development of the magneto iron and steel industry.

古文：帝曰： 朕闻王者使天下无遗贤，不闻无遗利。
现代文：朱元璋说 ：我只听说当帝王的人要使天下没有遗漏的贤人，而没有听说要使天下没有遗漏的利益。
English: Zhu Yuanzhang said, "I have only heard that when you are emperor, you should make sure that there are no missing sages in the world, but I have not heard that you should ensure that there are no missing benefits in the world."

古文：今军器不乏，而民业已定，无益于国，且重扰民。 
现代文：现在，兵器不缺，而且民众安定，此事对国家无益，只能骚扰人民。 
English: Now that there is no shortage of weapons and the people are stable, this is not good for the country, but only disturbs the people.

古文：杖之，流岭南。
现代文：将王允道施杖刑后，流放岭南。
English: After punishing Wang Yundao with a cane, he was exiled to Lingnan.

古文：乙亥，傅友德、沐英击乌撒蛮，大败之。
现代文：二十九日，派遣行人探访贤哲之士。七月八日，黄河在荥泽、阳武决口。十二日，罢免了四个辅官。八月一日，傅友德、沐英击败乌撒蛮。
English: On the 29th, pedestrians were sent to visit the sages. On the 8th of July, the Yellow River broke through in Heze and Yangwu. On the 12th, four aides were dismissed. On the 1st of August, Fu Youde and Mu Ying defeated Usaman.

古文：八月丁丑，复设科取士，三年一行，为定制。丙戌，皇后崩。
现代文：三日，恢复科举，三年一次，作为制度。十二日，皇后死去。
English: On the 3rd, the imperial examinations were reinstated, once every three years, as a system. On the 12th, the empress died.

古文：己丑，延安侯唐胜宗、长兴侯耿炳文屯田陕西。
现代文：十五日延安侯唐胜宗、长兴侯耿炳文在陕西屯田。
English: On the 15th, Yan'an vassals Tang Shengzong and Changxing vassal Geng Bingwen arrived in Tunden, Shaanxi.

古文：丁酉，擢秀才曾泰为户部尚书。
现代文：二十三日，提升秀才曾泰为兵部尚书。
English: On the 23rd, Zeng Tai, an outstanding talent, was promoted to the rank of Hyobusho.

古文：辛丑，命徵至秀才分六科试用。
现代文：二十七日，告示天下选拔秀才要分六科考试。
English: On the 27th, it was announced that the world's top talent selection would be divided into six exams.

古文：九月己酉，吏部以经明行修之士郑韬等三千七百余人入见，令举所知，复遣使徵之。
现代文：九月三日，吏部将郑韬等三千七百多贤哲之士引见给皇帝，并令他们举荐所知人才，立即派人征召。
English: On September 3, the Ministry of Personnel introduced more than 3,700 sages such as Zheng Qi to the emperor, and ordered them to recommend talents they knew, and immediately sent people to be recruited.

古文：赐韬等钞，寻各授布政使、参政等官有差。
现代文：赏赐郑韬等人钱钞，不久又分别授予布政使、参政等不同的官职。
English: Zheng Rong and others were rewarded with money and banknotes, and soon they were awarded different official positions such as political envoy and politician respectively.

古文：庚午，葬孝慈皇后于孝陵。
现代文：二十四日，将孝慈皇后葬在孝陵。
English: On the 24th, Empress Xiaozi was buried in the Xiaoling Mausoleum.

古文：冬十月丙子，置都察院。
现代文：十月一日，设置都察院。
English: On October 1, the Duka-in was established.

古文：丙申，录囚。
现代文：二十一日，审查囚犯罪状。
English: On the 21st, the status of prisoners will be reviewed.

古文：甲辰，徐达还。
现代文：十一月十三日，徐达还京。
English: On November 13, Xu Da returned to Beijing.

古文：是月，广东群盗平，诏赵庸班师。
现代文：当月，平定广东群盗，诏赵庸撤军。
English: In the same month, the Guangdong bandits were subdued, and Zhao Yong withdrew his troops.

古文：十一月戊午，置殿阁大学士，以邵质、吴伯宗、宋讷、吴沉为之。
现代文：二十六日，设置殿阁大学士，让邵质、吴伯宗、宋讷、吴沉担任。
English: On the 26th, the Tongge University Scholarship was set up, with Shao Qian, Wu Bozong, Song Ne and Wu Shen as the recipients.

古文：十二月辛卯，振北平被灾屯田士卒。
现代文：十二月十七日，赈济北平受灾的屯田士兵。
English: On December 17th, the soldiers from Tonden who were affected by the disaster in Peiping, Shaanxi Province, left.

古文：乙亥，永城侯薛显理山西军务。
现代文：二十五日，永城侯薛显料理山西军务。
English: On the 25th, Yongcheng marquis Xue Xian was in charge of Shanxi military affairs.

古文：是年，爪哇、琉球、乌斯藏、占城入贡。
现代文：这一年有爪哇、琉球、乌斯藏、占城前来朝贡。
English: This year, Java, Ryukyu, Ussuri, and Jamsil came to pay tribute.

古文：十六年春正月乙卯，大祀天地于南郊。戊午，徐达镇北平。
现代文：洪武十六年正月十一日，在南郊隆重祭祀天地。十四日，徐达镇守北平。
English: On the 11th day of the first month of the 16th year of Hongwu, a grand ritual was held in the southern suburbs. On the 14th day, Xu Da Zhen stood guard over Beiping.

古文：二月丙申，初命天下学校岁贡士于京师。
现代文：二月二十二日，要天下各学校每年要向京师输送人才。
English: On February 22, it was decided that all schools in the world should send talents to Beijing every year.

古文：三月甲辰，召征南师还，沐英留镇云南。
现代文：三月一日，召南征军队回师，沐英留守云南。
English: On March 1, the Southern Expeditionary Army was called back to the division, and Mu Ying remained in Yunnan.

古文：丙寅，复凤阳、临淮二县民徭赋，世世无所与。
现代文：二十三日，返还凤阳、临淮两县百姓的徭赋，以后世代不贡。
English: On the 23rd, the endowments of the people of Fengyang and Linhuai counties were returned, and future generations would not pay tribute.

古文：夏五月庚申，免畿内各府田租。
现代文：五月十七日，免除京畿各府的田租。
English: On May 17, rice field rent was exempted in all prefectures of Gyeonggi Province.

古文：六月辛卯，免畿内十二州县养马户田租一年，滁州免二年。
现代文：六月十九日，免除京畿十二州县养马人户的田租一年，免除滁州养马户田租二年。
English: On June 19, households raising horses in 12 counties of Gyeonggi Province were exempted from land rent for one year, and those raising horses in Gyeongju Province were exempted from land rent for two years.

古文：秋七月，分遣御史录囚。
现代文：七月，派遣御史审查囚犯罪状。
English: In July, an inspector was dispatched to review the prisoners' criminal status.

古文：八月壬申朔，日有食之。
现代文：八月一日，日食。
English: August 1st, solar eclipse.

古文：九月癸亥，申国公邓镇为征南将军，讨龙泉山寇，平之。
现代文：九月二十三日，申国公邓镇被封为征南将军，讨伐龙泉山贼寇，并予以平定。
English: On September 23rd, Shen Guogong Deng Zhen was appointed as a general to conquer the south, to fight the Longquan Mountain bandits, and to subdue them.

古文：冬十月丁丑，召徐达等还。
现代文：十月七日，召回徐达。
English: On October 7, Xu Da was recalled.

古文：十二月甲午，刑部尚书开济有罪诛。
现代文：十二月二十五日刑部尚书开济犯罪被杀。
English: On December 25th, the head of the criminal investigation department, Shang Shuxu, was killed.

古文：是年，琉球、占城、西番、打箭炉、暹罗、须文达那入贡。
现代文：这一年，琉球、占城、西番、打箭炉、暹罗、须文达那前来朝贡。
English: In that year, Ryukyu, Zhancheng, Siban, Daming, Siam, and Suvarnabhumi came to pay tribute.

古文：十七年春正月丁未，太祀天地于南郊。戊申，徐达镇北平。
现代文：洪武十七年一月九日，在南郊隆重祭祀天地。十日，徐达镇守北平。
English: On January 9th, the 17th year of Hongwu, a grand ritual was held in the southern suburbs. On the 10th, Xu Da Zhen stood guard over Beiping.

古文：壬戌，汤和巡视沿海诸城防倭。
现代文：二十四日，汤和巡视沿海诸城，防御倭寇。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, Tang He inspected the coastal cities and defended against the wako.

古文：三月戊戌朔，颁科举取士式。
现代文：三月一日，颁布科举考试的格式。
English: On March 1, the format of the entrance examination was promulgated.

古文：曹国公李文忠卒。
现代文：曹国公李文忠死去。
English: Cao Guogong Li Wenzhong died.

古文：甲子，大赦天下。
现代文：二十七日，大赦天下。
English: On the 15th, a general amnesty was declared.

古文：夏四月壬午，论平云南功，进封傅友德颍国公，陈桓恒等侯者四人，大赉将士。
现代文：四月十五日，对平定云南的将士论功，封傅友德颍国公，陈桓等四人为侯，大赏将士。
English: On April 15th, for the soldiers who contributed to the pacification of Yunnan, four soldiers, including Fu You, De Guo Guo, and Chen Huan, were awarded the grand prize.

古文：庚寅，收阵亡遗骸。
现代文：十八日，收殓阵亡将士遗骸。
English: On the 18th, the remains of the fallen soldiers were collected.

古文：增筑国子学舍。
现代文：扩建国子学学舍。
English: Expansion of the Kuniko Gakuen dormitory.

古文：五月丙寅，凉州指挥宋晟讨西番于亦集乃，败之。
现代文：五月二十九日，凉州指挥宋成讨伐西番，在亦集乃将其击败。
English: On May 29th, Song Cheng, the commander of Liangzhou, fought against Xifan and defeated it in Yixin.

古文：秋七月戊戌，禁内官预外事，敕诸司毋通内官监文移。
现代文：七月二日，禁止内官干预国事，并传文告示各司不准与内官交往。
English: On July 2, officials were prohibited from interfering in state affairs, and a notice was sent to all departments that they were not allowed to interact with officials.

古文：癸丑，诏百官迎养父母者，官给舟车。
现代文：十七日，诏谕百官，有迎接养父母的，官府供给车船。
English: On the 17th, hundreds of officials were ordered to welcome foster parents, and the government provided cars and boats.

古文：丁巳，免畿内今年田租之半。
现代文：二十一日，免除京畿内当年的一半田租。
English: On the 21st, half of the rice field rent in Gyeonggi Province for that year was exempted.

古文：庚申，录囚。
现代文：二十四日，审查囚犯罪状。
English: On the 28th, the inspectors heard the prisoners' confessions.

古文：壬戌，盱贻人献天书，斩之。
现代文：二十六日，有一个盱眙人进献天书，被斩首。
English: On the 26th, a man was beheaded for entering into the Book of Consecration.

古文：八月丙寅，河决开封。
现代文：八月一日，黄河在开封决口。
English: On August 1st, the Yellow River was at the mouth of Kaifeng.

古文：壬申，决杞县，遣官塞之。
现代文：七日，杞县黄河决口，派遣官吏堵塞大堤。
English: On the 7th, officials were dispatched to block the dike at the mouth of the Yellow River in Handan County.

古文：己丑，蠲河南诸省逋赋。
现代文：二十四日，免除河南诸省拖欠的赋税。
English: On the 24th, the provinces of Henan were exempted from tax arrears.

古文：冬十月丙子，河南、北平大水，分遣驸马都尉李祺等振之。
现代文：十月十二日，河南、北平发生水灾，派遣驸马都尉李祺等人整治。
English: On October 12th, floods occurred in Henan and Beiping, and Captain Li Jun and others were dispatched to rectify the situation.

古文：闰月癸丑，诏天下罪囚，刑部、都察院详议，大理寺覆谳后奏决。
现代文：闰十月十九日，告示对天下囚犯，必须由刑部、都察院详细审查，由大理寺反复审判后上奏判决。
English: On October 19th, it was announced that all prisoners in the country must be examined in detail by the Criminal Law Department and the Criminal Investigation Department, and the judgment must be reported after repeated trials by the Dali Temple.

古文：是月，召徐达还。
现代文：当月，召回徐达。
English: That month, Xu Da was recalled.

古文：十二月壬子，蠲云南逋赋。
现代文：十二月十九日，免除云南拖欠的赋税。
English: On December 19, Yunnan Province was exempted from tax arrears.

古文：是年，琉球、暹罗、安南、占城入贡。
现代文：这一年，琉球、暹罗、安南、占城前来朝贡。
English: This year, Ryukyu, Siam, Annan, and Cham came to pay tribute.

古文：十八年春正月辛未，大祀天地于南郊。
现代文：洪武十八年正月初九，在南郊隆重祭祀天地。
English: On the 9th day of the 1st month of the 18th year of Hongwu, a grand ritual was held in the southern suburbs.

古文：癸酉，朝觐官分五等考绩，黜陟有差。
现代文：十一日，对朝觐官分成五等进行考查，罢黜升迁各有不同。
English: On the 11th, the imperial eunuchs were divided into five grades for examination, with different levels of dismissal and promotion.

古文：二月甲辰，以久阴雨雷雹，诏臣民极言得失。
现代文：二月十二日，由于连连阴雨、打雷下冰雹，要臣民帮助检举过失。
English: On February 12th, due to continuous rain, thunder and hail, the subjects were asked to help report the fault.

古文：己未，魏国公徐达卒。
现代文：二十七日，魏国公徐达死去。
English: On the 27th, Wei Guogong Xuda passed away.

古文：三月壬戌，赐丁显等进士及第、出身有差。
现代文：三月十一日，赐给丁显等人进士及第以及其他不同的出身。
English: On March 11th, Ding Xian and others were given the title of Jin Shigu and Dai, as well as other different origins.

古文：诏中外官父母殁任所者，有司给舟车归其丧，著为令。
现代文：诏谕国内外官员之父母死在其任职之地，有司供给车船送回安葬，并定为制度。
English: It was decreed that the parents of officials at home and abroad who died in the place of their post should be provided with a car and a boat to be sent back for burial, and it was established as a system.

古文：乙亥，免畿内今年田租。
现代文：十四日，免除京畿内当年田租。
English: On the 14th, the current year's rice field rent in Gyeonggi Province was exempted.

古文：命天下郡县瘗暴骨。
现代文：命天下各郡县埋葬暴露在外的尸骨。
English: All counties in the country were ordered to bury the exposed bones.

古文：丙子，初选进士为翰林院、承敕监、六科庶吉士。
现代文：十五日，初次选出的进士担任翰林院、承敕监、六科庶吉士。
English: On the 15th, the newly-elected scholars served as scholars of the Hanlin Academy, scholars of the Confucian Academy, and scholars of the six disciplines.

古文：己丑，户部侍郎郭桓坐盗官粮诛。
现代文：二十八日，户部侍郎郭桓坐盗官粮，被诛杀。
English: On the 28th, Guo Kuan, a steward of the household, was beaten to death for stealing official grain.

古文：夏四月丁酉，吏部尚书余熂以罪诛。
现代文：四月六日，吏部尚书余火气犯罪被诛。
English: On April 6, the head of the personnel department, Shang Shu, was arrested for the crime of arson.

古文：丙辰，思州蛮叛，汤和为征虏将军，周德兴为副将军，帅师从楚王桢讨之。
现代文：二十五日。思州蛮叛乱，汤和被封征虏将军，周德兴担任副将军，率兵跟随楚王朱桢讨伐叛军。
English: On the 25th day of the month, Sizhou rebelled violently, and Tang He was made a general and Zhou Dexing was made a vice-general. They led the troops to fight against the rebels with King Zhu Xi of Chu.

古文：六月戊申，定外官三年一朝，著为令。
现代文：六月十八日，规定外地官员三年进京朝见一次，并定为制度。
English: On June 18, it was stipulated that foreign officials should visit Beijing to meet with the emperor once every three years, and this was made a system.

古文：秋七月甲戌，封王禑为高丽国王。
现代文：七月十四日，封王礻禺为高丽国王。
English: On July 14th, King Fongjo ascended to the throne of Korea.

古文：庚辰，五开蛮叛。
现代文：二十日，五开蛮反叛。
English: On the 20th, Wukai rebelled violently.

古文：甲辰，诏曰： 孟子传道，有功名教。
现代文：十六日，下诏书说： 孟子传道，功绩卓著。
English: On the 16th, the next imperial edict said: Mencius's preaching is outstanding.

古文：历年既久，子孙甚微。
现代文：经过了这么多年，其子孙后代甚少。
English: After so many years, his descendants are few.

古文：近有以罪输作者，岂礼先贤之意哉。
现代文：近来有一些以罪输作者，岂是尊敬先贤的道理。
English: Lately, there have been some authors who have been convicted of crimes. Isn't this a reason to respect the sages?

古文：其加意询访，凡圣贤后裔输作者，皆免之。 
现代文：必须着意探访，凡是圣贤的后代输作，皆释免。 
English: It is necessary to pay attention to the visit, and all the descendants of the sages are exempted.

古文：是月，楚王桢、信国公汤和讨平五开蛮。
现代文：当月，楚王朱桢、信国公汤和平定了五开蛮叛乱。
English: In the same month, Chu King Zhu Xi and Xingguo Gongtang pacified the Wukai Rebellion.

古文：十一月乙亥，蠲河南、山东、北平田租。
现代文：十一月十七日，免除河南、山东、北平的田租。
English: On November 17th, the land rent of Henan, Shandong and Beiping was exempted.

古文：十二月丙午，诏有司举孝廉。
现代文：十二月十九日，下诏要有司举荐孝廉。
English: On December 19th, the next edict was to have the secretary recommend Xiao Lian.

古文：癸丑，麓川平缅宣慰使思伦发反，都督冯诚败绩，千户王升死之。
现代文：二十六日，麓川平缅宣慰使思伦发反叛，都督冯诚被打败，千户王升战死。
English: On the twenty-sixth day of the year, Lukawa Pingmen's proclamation of consolation caused Shilun to rebel, the governor Feng Cheng was defeated, and Chihou Wang Sheng died in battle.

古文：是年，高丽、琉球、安南、暹罗入贡。
现代文：这一年，有高丽、琉球、安南、暹罗前来朝贡。
English: This year, Korea, Ryukyu, Annam, and Siam came to pay tribute.

古文：十九年春正月辛酉，振大名及江浦水灾。
现代文：洪武十九年正月四日，赈济大名以及江浦的水灾。
English: On the 4th day of the 1st month of the 19th year of Hongwu, the floods in the Daming and Jiangpu Dynasties occurred.

古文：甲子，大祀天地于南郊。
现代文：七日，在南郊隆重祭祀天地。当月，征蛮军队回师。
English: On the 7th, in the southern suburbs, there was a grand sacrifice to heaven and earth. That month, the barbarian army returned to the division.

古文：是月，征蛮师还。
现代文：二月十日，耕耘耒昔田。
English: On February 10th, the old fields were ploughed.

古文：二月丙申，耕耤田，癸丑，振河南饥。夏四月甲辰，诏赎河南饥民所鬻子女。
现代文：二十七日，赈济河南饥荒。四月十九日，诏令赎下河南贫苦人家所卖的子女。
English: On the 27th, the famine in Henan Province was alleviated. On the 19th of April, a decree was issued to redeem the children sold by the poor families in Henan Province.

古文：六月甲辰，诏有司存问高年。
现代文：六月二十日，诏令有司抚恤慰问年纪大的人。
English: On June 20th, the prefectural government issued a decree to increase the allowance for the elderly.

古文：贫民年八十以上，月给米五斗，酒三斗，肉五斤；九十以上，岁加帛一匹，絮一斤；有田产者罢给米。
现代文：贫民年纪在八十以上，每月给五斗米、三斤酒、五斤肉；九十岁以上的，每年加帛一匹，棉花一斤；有田产的人不给米。
English: The poor aged over eighty are given five barrels of rice, three catties of wine, and five catties of meat per month; those aged over ninety are given one gallon of horse manure and one cattie of cotton per year; those with farmland are not given rice.

古文：应天、凤阳富民年八十以上赐爵社士，九十以上乡士；天下富民八十以上里士，九十以上社士。
现代文：应天、凤阳的富裕人，八十岁以上赐封爵社士，九十岁以上封为乡士；其他地方富民八十岁以上为里士，九十岁以上为社士。
English: According to Heaven and Fengyang, rich people over the age of eighty are given the title of peer, and those over the age of ninety are given the title of countryman; elsewhere, rich people over the age of eighty are given the title of rich man, and those over the age of ninety are given the title of peer.

古文：皆与县官均祀，复其家。
现代文：都与县官同礼，免除全家徭役。
English: All of them were given the same courtesy as the county officials, and the whole family was exempted from the ceremonial duties.

古文：鳏寡孤独不能自存者，岁给米六石。
现代文：鳏寡孤独不能生活的，一年给米六石。
English: Widows and widowers who can't live alone are given six stone of rice a year.

古文：士卒战伤除其籍，赐复三年。
现代文：士兵在战场上负伤的，免除兵役以及三年徭役。
English: Soldiers wounded on the battlefield are exempt from military service and three years of national service.

古文：将校阵亡，其子世袭加一秩。岩穴之士，以礼聘遣。
现代文：军官阵亡，其子世袭并加一级俸禄，对隐居之士，以礼相聘。
English: An officer died in battle, his son inherited and added a first-class salary, and for those who live in seclusion, they were hired by courtesy.

古文：丁未，振青州及郑州饥。
现代文：二十三日，赈济青州和郑州的饥荒。
English: On the 23rd, famine broke out in Qingzhou and Zhengzhou.

古文：秋七月癸未，诏举经明行修练达时务之士。年六十以上者，置翰林备顾问，六十以下，于六部、布按二司用之。
现代文：七月二十九日，诏令举荐各种人才。六十岁以上的，担任翰林院顾问；六十岁以下的，在六部、布按二司任职。
English: On July 29, the imperial edict recommended a variety of talents. Those over the age of 60 would serve as advisors to the Hanlin Academy; those under the age of 60 would serve in the Sixth Division and the Second Division of the Printing Bureau.

古文：八月甲辰，命皇太子修泗州盱眙祖陵，葬德祖以下帝后冕服。
现代文：三十日，命皇太子在泗州、盱眙修建祖陵，将德祖以后皇后的衣冠葬于此陵。
English: On the 30th, the crown prince ordered the construction of the ancestral mausoleum in Zhangzhou and Handan, and the crown of the empress after the ancestor was buried in this mausoleum.

古文：九月庚申，屯田云南。
现代文：九月七日，在云南屯田。
English: September 7 in Tunden, Yunnan Province.

古文：冬十月，命官军已亡子女幼或父母老者皆给全俸，著为令。
现代文：十月，诏令给子女幼年或父母年老的已亡官兵照发全部俸禄。并定为制度。
English: In October, the Emperor issued a decree to pay all salaries to officers and soldiers who died when their children were young or their parents were old, and it became a system.

古文：十二月癸未朔，日有食之。
现代文：十二月一日，有日食。
English: On December 1, a solar eclipse occurred.

古文：是月，命宋国公冯胜分兵防边。
现代文：当月，命令宋国公冯胜派兵防御边疆。
English: In the same month, Song Guogong Feng Sheng ordered to send troops to defend the border.

古文：发北平、山东、山西、河南民运粮于大宁。
现代文：派遣河南、北平、山东、山西百姓往大宁运粮。
English: Send people from Henan, Beiping, Shandong and Shanxi to transport grain to Daning.

古文：是年，高丽、琉球、暹罗、占城、安南入贡。
现代文：这一年，有高丽、琉球、暹罗、占城、安南前来朝贡。
English: This year, Goryeo, Ryukyu, Siam, Champa and Annam came to pay tribute.

古文：二十年春正月癸丑，冯胜为征虏大将军，傅友德、蓝玉副之，率师征纳哈出。
现代文：洪武二十年一月二日，冯胜被封为征虏大将军，傅友德、蓝玉为副将军，率兵征伐纳哈出。
English: On January 2nd, Hongwu's 20th year, Feng Sheng was appointed as the Conscript General, Fu Youde and Lan Yu as Vice-Generals, and led the army to conquer Naha.

古文：焚锦衣卫刑具，以系囚付刑部。
现代文：焚毁锦衣卫刑具，将囚犯押往刑部。
English: They burned the brocade-wearing guards' torture equipment and sent the prisoners to the punishment department.

古文：甲子，大祀天地于南郊。礼成，天气清明。
现代文：十三日，在南郊隆重祭祀天地。祭祀结束，天气转好。
English: On the 13th, a grand ritual was held in the southern suburbs. The ritual ended, and the weather improved.

古文：侍臣进曰： 此陛下敬天之诚所致。 
现代文：侍臣赞美说 ：这是陛下诚心敬天所至。 
English: A courtier said in praise: "This is His Majesty's sincerity and reverence to the heavens.

古文：帝曰： 所谓敬天者，不独严而有礼，当有其实。
现代文：朱元璋说 ：所谓敬天，不仅要有庄敬、有礼之形式，还要实际的东西。
English: Zhu Yuanzhang said: The so-called reverence for the heavens not only requires the form of solemnity and courtesy, but also something practical.

古文：天以子民之任付于君，为君者欲求事天，必先恤民。
现代文：天将管理子民的大任交给君王，为君的，若想侍奉上天，必须首先体恤万民。
English: Heaven has given the great task of managing the people to the king. If you want to serve heaven, you must first sympathize with the people.

古文：恤民者，事天之实也。
现代文：体恤万民，才是事天之实。
English: Compassion for all people is the only reality.

古文：即如国家命人任守令之事，若不能福民，则是弃君之命，不敬孰大焉。 
现代文：就像国家派去担任太守县令等官的人一样，若不能造福于民，则未完成君王交给的使命，这是大不敬啊。 
English: Just like those who are sent by the state to serve as governors, county magistrates and other officials, if they cannot benefit the people, they have not completed the mission given by the monarch. This is a great disrespect.

古文：又曰： 为人君者，父天母地子民，皆职分之所当尽，祀天地，非祈福于己，实为天下苍生也。 
现代文：又说 ：为万民之君的人，天为父，地为母，民为子，应尽各种职责，祭祀天地，并非为自己祈福，而是为了天下万民。 
English: He also said, "He who is the king of all nations, for whom heaven is the father, the earth the mother, and the people the son, should perform all kinds of duties, and offer sacrifices to heaven and earth, not to pray for his own blessings, but for all the peoples of the world."

古文：二月壬午，阅武。
现代文：二月一日，观看军队操练。
English: On February 1st, watching the army drill.

古文：乙未，耕耤田。
现代文：十四日，耕耘耒昔田。
English: On the 14th, the old fields were ploughed.

古文：三月辛亥，冯胜率师出松亭关，城大宁、宽河、会州、富峪。
现代文：三月一日，冯胜率兵出松亭关，攻克大宁、宽河、会州、富峪。
English: On March 1st, Feng Sheng led his troops out of Songting Pass to conquer Daning, Kuanhe, Hezhou and Fuxi.

古文：夏四月戊子，江夏侯周德兴筑福建濒海城，练兵防倭。
现代文：四月八日，江夏侯周德兴在福建沿海修筑城防，抵御倭寇。
English: On April 8th, Zhou Dexing, the prince of Jiangxia, began to build city defenses along the coast of Fujian to fend off the Japanese invaders.

古文：六月庚子，临江侯陈镛从征失道，战没。
现代文：六月二十二日，临江侯陈镛率军出征，迷失方向，全军覆没。
English: On June 22, Linjiang marquis Chen Qi led the army to go to war, lost direction, and the whole army disappeared.

古文：癸卯，冯胜兵逾金山。
现代文：二十五日，冯胜率兵越过金山。
English: On the 25th, Feng Sheng and his soldiers crossed the Jinshan Mountain.

古文：丁未，纳哈出降。
现代文：二十九日，纳哈出投降。
English: On the 29th, Naha surrendered.

古文：闰月庚申，师还次金山，都督濮英殿军遇伏，死之。
现代文：闰六月十二日，回师停留金山，都督濮英率兵殿后，遇到伏击，战死。
English: On the twelfth day of the leap month of June, the returning division stopped at Jinshan, and after the duke Jianying led the troops, he was ambushed and killed in battle.

古文：秋八月癸酉，收冯胜将军印，召还，蓝玉摄军事。
现代文：八月二十六日，没收冯胜将军印，并将其召回，蓝玉主管军中事务。
English: On August 26, Feng Sheng's general seal was confiscated and recalled, and Blue Jade was put in charge of affairs in the military.

古文：景川侯曹震屯田云南品甸。
现代文：景川侯曹震在云南品甸屯田。
English: Jingchuan Hou Cao Zhen in Pindian Tunden, Yunnan.

古文：九月戊寅，封纳哈出海西侯。
现代文：九月一日，封纳哈出为海西侯。
English: On September 1st, Feng Naha was promoted to Haixi Hou.

古文：癸未，置大宁都指挥使司。
现代文：六日，设置大宁都指挥使司。
English: On the 6th, an envoy office was set up in Daming.

古文：丁酉，安置郑国公常茂于龙州。
现代文：二十日，安置郑国公常茂于龙州。
English: On the 20th, Zheng Guogong placed Changmao in Longzhou.

古文：丁未，蓝玉为征虏大将军，延安侯唐胜宗、武定侯郭英副之，北征沙漠。
现代文：三十日，封蓝玉为征虏大将军，延安侯唐胜宗、武定侯郭英为副将军，北征沙漠。
English: On the 30th, Fang Lanyu was the general of the conquest, Yan'an Hou Tang Shengzong and Wuding Hou Guo Ying were the deputy generals, and the Northern Expedition was the desert.

古文：是月，城西宁。
现代文：当月，攻克西宁。
English: In the same month, the city of Xining was conquered.

古文：冬十月戊申，封朱寿为舳舻侯，张赫为航海侯。
现代文：十月一日，封朱寿为舳舻侯，张赫为航海侯。
English: On October 1st, Zhu Shou was given the title of magistrate, and Zhang He was given the title of mariner.

古文：是月，冯胜罢归凤阳，奉朝请。
现代文：当月，将冯胜罢免送回凤阳，奉诏才去朝见。
English: That month, Feng Sheng was recalled and sent back to Fengyang. It was only after receiving the imperial edict that he went to see the emperor.

古文：十一月壬午，普定侯陈桓、靖宁侯叶升屯田定边、姚安、毕节诸卫。
现代文：十一月六日，普定侯陈桓、靖宁侯叶升在定边、姚安、毕节各卫屯田。
English: On November 6, Chen Huan of Puding and Ye Sheng of Jingning marched to Dingbian, Yao'an and Bijie.

古文：己丑，汤和还，凡筑宁海、临山等五十九城。
现代文：八日，汤和返回，共筑宁海、临山等五十九处城防。
English: On the eighth day, Tang He returned and built a total of fifty-nine city defenses such as Ninghai and Linshan.

古文：十二月，振登、莱饥。
现代文：十二月，赈济登、莱饥荒。
English: In December, famine broke out in Fujideng and Lai.

古文：是年，琉球、安南、高丽、占城、真腊、朵甘、乌斯藏入贡。
现代文：这一年有琉球、安南、高丽、占城、真腊、朵甘、乌斯藏前来朝贡。
English: This year, Ryukyu, Annan, Goryeo, Zhancheng, Jinla, Dokan and Ussuri came to pay tribute.

古文：二十一年春正月辛巳，麓川蛮思伦发入寇马龙他郎甸，都督甯正击败之。
现代文：洪武二十一年正月六日，麓川蛮思伦发进攻马龙他郎甸，都督宁正将其击败。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the 21st year of Hongwu, Lu Chuan Bansilun launched an attack on Marong Tarang Dian, and was defeated by Du Du Ning.

古文：辛卯，大祀天地于南郊。
现代文：十六日，在南郊隆重祭祀天地。
English: On the 16th, a grand ritual was held in the southern suburbs.

古文：甲午，振青州饥，逮治有司匿不以闻者。
现代文：十九日，赈济青州饥荒，逮捕惩治有司中隐匿上报饥灾文书的人。
English: On the 19th, in response to the famine in Qingzhou, the authorities arrested and punished the person who concealed the document reporting the famine.

古文：三月乙亥，赐任亨泰等进士及第、出身有差。
现代文：三月一日，封赐任亨泰等进士及第以不同的出身。
English: On March 1st, Hengtai and other young scholars from different backgrounds were awarded the title.

古文：丙戌，振东昌饥。
现代文：十二日，赈济东昌饥荒。
English: On the 12th, famine struck Dongchang, Shaanxi Province.

古文：甲辰，沐英讨思伦发败之。
现代文：三十日，沐英讨伐思伦发，将其击败。
English: On the 30th, Mu Ying fought against Sleng Fa and defeated him.

古文：夏四月丙辰，蓝玉袭破元嗣君于捕鱼儿海，获其次子地保奴及妃主王公以下数万人而还。
现代文：四月十二日，蓝玉打败元嗣君王于捕鱼儿海，俘获其次子地保奴及妃主王公以下几万人后返回。
English: On April 12th, the Blue Jade defeated the Yuan Heir in the Fishing Sea and captured tens of thousands of people, including the second son, the second son's slave, and the second son's wife.

古文：五月甲戌朔，日有食之。六月甲辰，信国公汤和归凤阳。
现代文：五月一日，日食。六月二日，信国公汤和回归凤阳。
English: On May 1st, the solar eclipse. On June 2nd, Shinkokukong-tang and the return of Fengyang.

古文：甲子，傅友德为征南将军，沐英、陈桓为左、右副将军，帅师讨东川叛蛮。
现代文：二十二日，封傅友德为征南将军，沐英、陈桓为左、右副将军，率兵讨伐东山叛蛮。
English: On the 22nd, Feng Fu Youde was appointed as the general of the Southern Expedition, Mu Ying and Chen Huan as the left and right vice-generals, and led the troops to fight against the Dongshan Rebellion.

古文：秋七月戊寅，安置地保奴于琉球。
现代文：七月六日，将地保奴安置到琉球。
English: On July 6th, the slaves were relocated to Ryukyu.

古文：八月癸丑，徙泽、潞民无业者垦河南、北田，赐钞备农具，复三年。
现代文：八月十二日，将泽、潞无业百姓迁至黄河两边开垦土地，赏给钱钞，为其发放农具，免赋税三年。
English: On August 12th, the unemployed people from Zaozhe and Zou were relocated to reclaim land on both sides of the Yellow River, and were rewarded with money and banknotes, agricultural tools were issued for them, and they were exempt from tax for three years.

古文：丁卯，蓝玉师还，大赉北征将士。
现代文：二十六日，蓝玉回师，对北征将士大加赏赐。
English: On the 26th, Blue Jade returned to the division and rewarded the Northern Expedition soldiers.

古文：戊辰，封孙恪为全宁侯。
现代文：二十七日，封孙恪为全宁侯。
English: On the 27th, Fong Sun Jia was promoted to the position of Quan Ning Hou.

古文：是月，御制八谕饬武臣。
现代文：当月，皇帝亲自制定八谕告诫武臣。
English: That month, the emperor personally issued eight edicts to admonish the samurai.

古文：九月丙戌，秦、晋、燕、周、楚、齐、湘、鲁、潭九王来朝。
现代文：九月十五日，秦、晋、燕、周、楚、齐、湘、鲁、潭九王来京朝拜。
English: On September 15, the nine kings of Qin, Jin, Yan, Zhou, Chu, Qi, Hunan, Lu and Tan came to Beijing to pay homage.

古文：癸巳，越州蛮阿资叛，沐英会傅友德讨之。
现代文：二十二日，越州蛮阿资叛乱，沐英与傅友德同往讨伐。
English: On the 22nd day of the year, Mu Ying and Fu Youde went to fight against the barbarian Azhi rebellion in Yuezhou.

古文：冬十月丁未，东川蛮平。
现代文：十月七日，东川蛮被平定。
English: On October 7th, the East River was finally pacified.

古文：十二月壬戌，进封蓝玉凉国公。
现代文：二十四年升封蓝玉为凉国公。
English: Twenty-four years later, Blue Jade was enthroned as the Prince of Liang.

古文：是年，高丽、古城、琉球、暹罗、真腊、撒马儿罕、安南入贡。
现代文：这一年有高丽、占城、琉球、暹罗、真腊、撒马儿罕、安南前来朝贡。
English: This year, Goryeo, Jamsil, Ryukyu, Siam, Manchuria, Samarkand, and Annam came to pay tribute.

古文：诏安南三岁一朝，象犀之属毋献。
现代文：下诏要安南三年朝贡一次，像犀之类的东西不要进献。
English: The following edict required Annan to pay tribute to the imperial court once every three years, and things like rhinoceroses were not to be offered.

古文：安南黎季犛弑其主炜。
现代文：安南黎季睺杀掉其主炜。
English: Annan Lijian killed his master.

古文：二十二年春正月丙戌，改大宗正院曰宗人府，以秦王樉为宗人令，晋王、燕王棣为左、右宗正，周王橚、楚王桢为左、右宗人。
现代文：洪武二十二年正月十六日，将大宗正院改为宗人府，让秦王朱担任宗人令，晋王朱木罔、燕王朱棣为左、右宗正，周王朱木肃、楚王朱桢为左、右宗人。
English: On the 16th day of the first month of the 22nd year of Hongwu, he changed Daizongzheng Yuan to Sohenfu, and made Qin King Zhu the Sohen, Jin King Zhu Muxuan and Yan King Zhu Xuan the left and right Sohen, and Zhou King Zhu Muxuan and Chu King Zhu Xuan the left and right Sohen.

古文：丁亥，大祀天地于南郊。乙未，傅友德破阿资于普安。二月己未，蓝玉练兵四川。
现代文：十七日，在南郊隆重祭祀天地。二十五日，傅友德在普安击破阿资。二月二十日，蓝玉在四川练兵。
English: On the 17th, the Southern Suburbs held a grand sacrifice for heaven and earth. On the 25th, Fu Youde defeated Azi in Pu'an. On the 20th of February, Blue Jade trained soldiers in Sichuan.

古文：壬戌，禁武臣预民事。
现代文：二十三日，禁止武臣参与地方事务。
English: On the 23rd, samurai retainers were prohibited from participating in local affairs.

古文：癸亥，湖广千户夏得忠结九溪蛮作乱，靖宁侯叶升讨平之，得忠伏诛。
现代文：二十四日，湖广千户夏得忠勾结九溪蛮叛乱，靖宁侯叶升平定叛乱，夏得忠伏诛。
English: On the 24th, thousands of households in Huguang, Shadzhong, colluded in the rebellion in Jiuxi, Jingning, Houye and Sheng suppressed the rebellion, and Shadzhong fled.

古文：是月，阿资降。
现代文：当月，阿资投降。
English: That month, Aziz surrendered.

古文：三月庚午，傅友德帅诸将分屯四川，湖广，防西南蛮。
现代文：三月一日，傅友德率诸将驻扎四川、湖广，防御西南蛮。
English: On March 1, Fu Youde and his generals stationed in Sichuan and Hougang to defend against the southwestern barbarians.

古文：夏四月己亥，徙江南民田淮南，赐钞备农具，复三年。
现代文：四月一日，迁徙江南人到淮南，发给钱钞和农具，免征三年赋税。
English: On April 1, people who migrated south of the Yangtze River to Huainan were issued banknotes and agricultural tools and exempted from taxes for three years.

古文：癸丑，魏国公徐允恭、开国公常升等练兵湖广。
现代文：五月十五日，魏国公徐允恭、开国公常开等在湖广练兵。
English: On May 15, Xu Yunqong, the prince of Wei, and Chang Kai, the prince of the founding of the People's Republic of China, trained soldiers in Hougang.

古文：甲寅，徙元降王于眈罗。
现代文：十六日，将元降王迁至眈罗。
English: On the 16th, the exiled emperor was moved to Xingluo.

古文：是月，遣御史按山东官匿灾不奏者。
现代文：当月，派御史审查山东隐匿灾情不报的官吏。
English: That month, the commission was sent to investigate officials in Shandong who concealed the extent of the disaster and did not report it.

古文：五月辛卯，置泰宁、朵颜、福余三卫于兀良哈。秋七月，傅友德等还。
现代文：五月二十三日，在兀良哈设置泰宁、朵颜、福馀三卫。七月，傅友德等返回。
English: On May 23rd, Taining, Do Yan and Fu Yu Sanwei were set up in Ailiangha. In July, Fu Youde and others returned.

古文：八月乙卯，诏天下举高年有德识时务者。
现代文：八月二十日，诏令全国推荐德高望重又洞悉时务的长者。
English: On August 20th, the Emperor issued an edict recommending elders with high moral standards and insight into current affairs.

古文：是月，更定《大明律》。
现代文：当月，更定大明律。
English: In the same month, the Great Reform Act came into force.

古文：九月丙寅朔，日有食之。
现代文：九月一日，日食。
English: On the first day of September, a solar eclipse.

古文：冬十一月丙寅，宣德侯金镇等练兵湖广。
现代文：十一月二日，宣德侯金镇等在湖广练兵。
English: On November 2nd, Xuan Dehuo, Jin Zhen and others began to train soldiers in Hukang.

古文：己卯，思伦发入贡谢罪，麓川平。
现代文：十五日，思伦发朝贡谢罪，于是麓川平定。
English: On the fifteenth day, Shilun issued a tribute to the court, and then the Luchuan River was pacified.

古文：十二月甲辰，周王橚有罪，迁云南，寻罢徙，留居京师。
现代文：十二月十日，周王朱木肃犯罪，迁云南，不久免迁，仍留居京师。
English: On December 10, Zhou Wang Zhu Miusu committed a crime and moved to Yunnan, but was soon allowed to stay in Beijing.

古文：定远侯王弼等练兵山西、河南、陕西。
现代文：定远侯王弼等在山东、河南、陕西练兵。
English: Dingyuan Hou Wangqi and others trained soldiers in Shandong, Henan and Shaanxi.

古文：是年，高丽、安南、占城、暹罗、真腊入贡。
现代文：这一年有高丽、安南、占城、暹罗、真腊前来朝贡。
English: This year, Goryeo, Annam, Champa, Siam, and Manchukuo came to pay tribute.

古文：元也速迭儿弑其主脱古思帖木儿而立坤帖木儿。
现代文：元也速迭儿杀其君主脱古思帖木儿另立坤帖木儿。
English: Yuan also hastened to kill his monarch Degu Si Timur and set up Kun Timur.

古文：高丽废其主禑，又废其主昌。
现代文：高丽废君主礻禺，接着又废君主昌。
English: Goryeo abolished monarchs and then abolished monarchs.

古文：安南黎季犛复弑其主日焜。
现代文：安南黎季睺杀害其主日火昆。
English: Annan Lijie's murder on the Lord's Day ignited a firestorm.

古文：二十三年春正月丁卯，晋王、燕王棣帅师征元丞相咬住、太尉乃儿不花，征虏前将军颍国公傅友德等皆听节制。
现代文：洪武二十三年一月三日，晋王木冈、燕王棣率兵征讨元朝丞相咬住、太尉乃儿不花，征虏前将军颍国公傅友德等皆听其节制。
English: On January 3 of the 23rd year of Hongwu, the Jin kings Mogao and Yan Wangtao led the troops to recruit the former imperial minister, the captain did not spend, and the former general, the provincial governor Fu Youde, all listened to their restraint.

古文：己卯，大祀天地于南郊。庚辰，贵州蛮叛，延安侯唐胜宗讨平之。
现代文：十五日，在南郊隆重祭祀天地。十六日，贵州蛮叛乱，延安侯唐胜宗平定叛乱。
English: On the 15th, the Southern Suburbs held a grand sacrifice to Heaven and Earth. On the 16th, the Guizhou Rebellion and the Yan'an Rebellion led by Tang Shengzong were put down.

古文：乙酉，齐王榑帅师从燕王棣北征。
现代文：六日，齐王率兵跟随燕王棣北征。
English: On the 6th, King Qi and his soldiers followed King Yan in the Northern Expedition.

古文：赣州贼为乱，东川侯胡海充总兵官，普定侯陈桓、靖宁侯叶升为副将，讨平之。
现代文：赣州贼寇作乱，东川侯胡海担任总兵官，普定侯陈桓、靖宁侯叶升为副将，将其平定。
English: Cangzhou bandits made a riot, Dongchuan Hou Hu Hai served as the commander-in-chief, Puting Hou Chen Huan and Yasuning Hou Ye were promoted to vice-commanders, and they were subdued.

古文：唐胜宗督贵州各卫屯田。
现代文：唐胜宗督促贵州各卫屯田。
English: Tang Shengzong urged Guizhou's tutelary dynasties.

古文：二月戊申，蓝玉讨平西番叛蛮。
现代文：二月十四日，蓝玉平定西番蛮的叛乱。
English: On February 14th, the Blue and White Army put down the rebellion of the Xifan Rebellion.

古文：丙辰，耕耤田。
现代文：二十二日，耕种耒昔田。
English: On the 16th, I personally cultivated the fields.

古文：癸亥，河决归德，发诸军民塞之。
现代文：二十九日，黄河在归德决口，发动各地军民堵塞。
English: On the 29th, the Yellow River was blocked by soldiers and civilians from all over the country.

古文：三月癸巳，燕王棣师次迤都，咬住等降。
现代文：三月三十日，燕王军队停留迤都，咬住等人投降。
English: On March 30th, Yan Wang's army stopped at Xindu, biting and waiting for others to surrender.

古文：夏四月，吉安侯陆仲亨等坐胡惟庸党下狱。
现代文：四月，吉安侯陆仲亨等人被胡惟庸一案连坐下狱。
English: In April, Ji'an Hou Lu Zhongheng and others were sent to prison in connection with the Hu Wei Yong case.

古文：丙申，潭王梓自焚死。
现代文：三日，潭王梓自焚而死。
English: On the third day, Tan Wang Zi set himself on fire and died.

古文：闰月丙子，蓝玉平施南、忠建叛蛮。
现代文：闰四月十四日，蓝玉平定施南、忠建蛮的叛乱。
English: On the 14th day of the 4th month of the leap year, Blue Jade put down the rebellion of Shi Nan and Zhong Jianmang.

古文：五月甲午，遣诸公侯还里，赐金币有差。
现代文：五月二日，将各公侯遣回故里，分别赏赐金钱。
English: On May 2nd, he sent all the princes back to their hometowns and rewarded them with money.

古文：乙卯，赐太师韩国公李善长死，陆仲亨等皆坐诛。
现代文：二十三日，将太师韩国公李善长赐死，陆仲亨等人连坐被杀。
English: On the 23rd, the Grand Master of Korea, Ri Son Chung, was put to death, and Lu Chung Hang and others were killed in quick succession.

古文：作《昭示奸党录》，布告天下。
现代文：作《昭示奸党录》，并公告天下。
English: He wrote the "Record of the Traitor Party" and announced it to the world.

古文：六月乙丑，蓝玉遣凤翔侯张龙平都匀、散毛诸蛮。
现代文：六月四日，蓝玉派凤翔侯张龙平定都匀、散毛诸蛮。
English: On June 4th, Blue Jade faction Fengxiang marquis Zhang Long won the battle and defeated the barbarians.

古文：庚寅，授耆民有才德知典故者官。
现代文：二十九日，给有才德、知典故的老人授官。
English: On the 29th, the old man with talent and wisdom was awarded the post.

古文：秋七月壬辰，河决开封，振之。
现代文：七月二日，黄河在开封决口，进行整治。
English: On July 2nd, the Yellow River was repaired at Kaifeng Junction.

古文：癸巳，崇明、海门风雨海溢，遣官振之，发民二十五万筑堤。
现代文：三日，崇明、海门风雨成灾，海潮泛滥，派遣官吏治理，并征集二十五万民工筑堤。
English: On the 3rd, Chongming and Haimen were hit by the storm, the sea tide flooded, officials were dispatched to control the situation, and 250,000 migrant workers were recruited to build the dike.

古文：八月壬申，诏毋以吏卒充选举。
现代文：八月十三日，诏令禁止以官吏、兵士充当选举。
English: On August 13, a royal edict prohibited the use of officials and soldiers as electoral agents.

古文：蓝玉还。
现代文：蓝玉返回。
English: Blue Jade returns.

古文：是月，振河南、北平、山东水灾。
现代文：当月，赈济河南、北平、山东水灾。
English: In the same month, flooding occurred in Henan Province, Beiping Province and Shandong Province.

古文：九月庚寅朔，日有食之。冬十月己卯，振湖广饥。
现代文：九月一日，日食。十月二十一日，赈济湖广饥荒。
English: On September 1st, the solar eclipse. On October 21st, widespread famine in Lake Biji.

古文：十一月癸丑，免山东被灾田租。
现代文：十一月二十五日，免除山东受灾之地的田租。
English: On November 25th, the land rent of the affected areas in Shandong was exempted.

古文：十二月癸亥，令殊死以下囚输粟北边自赎。
现代文：规定凡是斩首以下的囚犯到北方边疆种植，交粟赎罪。
English: It is stipulated that all prisoners who have been beheaded or less should go to the northern border to plant poppies to atone for their sins.

古文：壬申，罢天下岁织文绮。
现代文：十二月五日，停止天下织造文绮。
English: On December 5th, the world stopped weaving paper money.

古文：是年，墨刺、哈梅里、高丽、占城、真腊、琉球、暹罗入贡。
现代文：这一年，墨剌、哈梅里、高丽、占城、真腊、琉球、暹罗前来朝贡。
English: In that year, the tributes came from Murong, Hameli, Goryeo, Champa, Manchukuo, Ryukyu, and Siam.

古文：二十四年春正月癸卯，大祀天地于南郊。
现代文：洪武二十四年正月十五日，在南郊隆重祭祀天地。
English: On the fifteenth day of the first month of the twenty-fourth year of Hongwu, a grand ritual was held in the southern suburbs.

古文：戊申，颍国公傅友德为征虏将军，定远侯王弼、武定侯郭英副之，备北平边。
现代文：二十日，颍国公傅友德被封为征虏大将军，定远侯王弼、武定侯郭英为副将军，守备北平四周。
English: On the 20th, Fu Youde, the governor of Shandong Province, was appointed as the general of the conquest, and Dingyuan Hou Wang Qian and Wuding Hou Guo Ying were appointed as deputy generals, guarding the four corners of Peking.

古文：丁巳，免山东田租。
现代文：二月十五日，免去山东田租。
English: On February 15, the Shandong farmland rent was exempted.

古文：二月壬申，耕耤田。
现代文：二十九日，耕种耒昔田。
English: On the 29th, the old fields were cultivated.

古文：三月戊子朔，日有食之。
现代文：三月一日，日食。
English: March 1st, solar eclipse.

古文：魏国公徐辉祖、曹国公李景隆、凉国公蓝玉等备边陕西。
现代文：魏国公徐辉祖、曹国公李景隆、凉国公蓝玉守备陕西边疆。
English: Xu Huizu, Duke of Wei, Li Jinglong, Duke of Cao, and Lan Yu, Duke of Liang, guarded the Shaanxi frontier.

古文：乙未，靖宁侯叶升练兵甘肃。
现代文：八日，靖宁侯叶升在甘肃练兵。
English: On the 8th, Jingning Hou Ye Sheng left to train soldiers in Gansu.

古文：丁酉，赐许观等进士及第、出身有差。
现代文：十日，封赐许观等人以进士及第等不同出身。
English: On the 10th, Xu Guan and others were awarded the title of "Chamberlain."

古文：夏四月辛未，封皇子〈木旃〉为庆王，权宁王，楩岷王，橞谷王，松韩王，模王，楹安王，桱唐王，栋郢王，〈木彝〉伊王。
现代文：四月十四日，封皇子朱木旃为庆王，朱权为宁王，朱木便为岷王，朱木惠为谷王，朱松为韩王，朱模为沈王，朱楹为安王，朱逪为唐王，朱栋为郢王，朱木彝为伊王。
English: On April 14th, the crown prince Zhu Muxun became the king of Qing, Zhu Quan became the king of Ning, Zhu Muxun became the king of Zou, Zhu Muxu became the king of Gu, Zhu Song became the king of Han, Zhu Miao became the king of Shen, Zhu Xi became the king of An, Zhu Xi became the king of Tang, Zhu Dong became the king of Zou, and Zhu Muxun became the king of Yi.

古文：癸未，燕王棣督傅友德诸将出塞，败敌而还。
现代文：二十六日，燕王朱棣率傅友德诸将出塞，败敌而归。
English: On the 26th, Yan Wang, Zhu Xi and Fu Youde led the troops out of the fortress, defeated the enemy and returned.

古文：五月戊戌，汉、卫、谷、庆、宁、岷六王练兵临清。
现代文：五月十二日，汉、卫、谷、庆、宁、岷六位王公在临清练兵。
English: On May 12th, the six princes Han, Wei, Gu, Qing, Ning and Zou went to train soldiers in Linqing.

古文：六月己未，诏廷臣参考历代礼制，更定冠服、居室、器用制度。
现代文：六月四日，诏令廷臣参考历代礼典制度，修改、制定冠服、居室、器用等方面的制度。
English: On June 4, the emperor ordered courtiers to refer to the ceremonial system of past generations, and revise and formulate the systems of crown clothing, living room, and dexterity.

古文：甲子，久旱录囚。
现代文：九日，长时间干旱。审查囚犯罪状。
English: On the 9th, after a long period of drought, the status of prisoners was reviewed.

古文：秋七月庚子，徙富民实京师。
现代文：七月十五日，将一些富民迁到京师，以充实都城。
English: On July 15, some rich people were moved to Beijing to enrich the capital.

古文：辛丑，免畿内官田租之半。
现代文：十六日，免除京畿内官员的一半田租。
English: On the 16th, officials in Gyeonggi Province were exempted from paying half of their farm rent.

古文：八月乙卯，秦王樉有罪，召还京师。
现代文：八月一日，秦王朱犯罪，召回京师。
English: On August 1, Qin Wang Zhu committed a crime and recalled the Beijing division.

古文：乙丑，皇太子巡抚陕西。
现代文：九月九日，皇太子巡抚陕西。
English: On September 9, the crown prince became the governor of Shaanxi Province.

古文：乙亥，都督佥事刘真、宋晟讨哈梅里，败之。
现代文：十一日，都督佥事刘真、宋晟讨伐哈梅里，将其击败。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Liu Zhen and Song Xi, the governors of the capital, led the troops to fight against Hameli and defeated him.

古文：九月乙酉，遣使谕西域。
现代文：二十一日，派人出使西域。
English: On the 21st, an envoy was sent to the western region.

古文：是月，倭寇雷州，百户李玉、镇抚陶鼎战死。
现代文：当月，倭贼攻打雷州，百户李玉、镇抚陶鼎战死。
English: In the same month, the Japanese invaders attacked Leizhou, and the hundred households of Li Yu and Zhen Fuding Tao Ding were killed in battle.

古文：冬十月丁巳，免北平、河间被水田租。
现代文：十月四日，免除北平、河间遭受水灾地方的田租。
English: On October 4, the farm rents of flood-affected areas in Beiping and Hama were exempted.

古文：十一月甲午，五开蛮叛，都督佥事茅鼎讨平之。
现代文：十一月十二日，五开蛮叛乱，都督佥事茅鼎平定叛乱。
English: On November 12th, there was a rebellion in Wukai, and the governor, Mao Ding, came to quell the rebellion.

古文：庚戌，皇太子还京师，晋王来朝。
现代文：二十八日，皇太子返回京师，晋王木罔前来朝见。
English: On the 28th, the crown prince returned to Beijing, and Jin Wang Muxuan came to see him.

古文：辛亥，振河南水灾。
现代文：二十九日，赈济河南水灾。
English: On the 29th, flooding occurred in the southern part of Qijihe.

古文：十二月庚午，周王橚复国。
现代文：十二月十八日，周王木肃返回封地。
English: On December 18th, Zhou Wang Mizu returned to his fief.

古文：辛巳，阿资复叛，都督佥事何福讨降之。
现代文：二十九日，阿资又反，都督佥事何福讨伐，降服了阿资。
English: On the 29th, Azhi counterattacked again, with the help of the local governor, Anji Hefu, and defeated Azhi.

古文：是年，天下郡县赋役黄册成，计户千六十八万四千四百三十五，丁五千六百七十七万四千五百六十一。
现代文：这一年，天下郡县赋役黄册编成，共计一千零六十八万四千四百三十五户，五千六百七十七万四千五百六十一人。
English: In this year, the Yellow Book of Fuyeong of counties and counties in the world was compiled, with a total of 10,684,435 households and 56,774,561 people.

古文：琉球、暹罗、别失八里、撒马儿罕入贡。
现代文：琉球、暹罗、别失八里、撒马儿罕前来朝贡。
English: Ryukyu, Siam, Beppu, and Samarkand came to pay tribute.

古文：以占城有篡逆事，却之。
现代文：占城因有篡位之事，拒受其朝贡。
English: Because of his usurpation of the throne, Zhancheng refused to accept the imperial tribute.

古文：二十五年春正月戊子，周王橚来朝，庚寅，河决阳武，发军民塞之，免被水田租。
现代文：洪武二十五年一月六日，周王朱木肃前来朝见。二月八日，黄河在阳武决口，征集军民堵塞，免除受水灾之地的田租。
English: On the 6th day of January in the 25th year of Hongwu, King Zhou Zhu Muxu came to see the emperor. On the 8th day of February, the Yellow River was blocked at the Yangwu mouth, and the army and people were recruited to exempt the land rent of the flood-affected land.

古文：乙未，大祀天地于南郊。何福讨都匀、毕节诸蛮，平之。
现代文：十三日，在南郊隆重祭祀天地。何福平定都匀、毕节诸蛮。
English: On the 13th, in the southern suburbs, a grand sacrifice was held for heaven and earth.

古文：辛丑，令死困输粟塞十。
现代文：十九日，规定死囚，纳粟到塞下赎罪。
English: On the 19th, it was decreed that death row prisoners should make atonement for their sins.

古文：壬寅，晋王、燕王棣、楚王桢、湘王柏来朝。
现代文：二十日，晋王朱木罔，燕王朱棣、楚王朱桢、湘王朱柏前来朝见。
English: On the 20th, Jin King Zhu Muxuan, Yan King Zhu Xi, Chu King Zhu Xi, and Hunan King Zhu Bai came to see the emperor.

古文：二月戊午，召曹国公李景隆等还京师。
现代文：二月七日，召曹国公李景隆等人返回京师。
English: On February 7, Cao Guogong Li Jinglong and others were summoned to return to the capital.

古文：靖宁侯叶升等练兵于河南及临、巩、甘、凉、延庆。
现代文：靖宁侯叶升等人在河南及临、巩、甘、凉、延庆练兵。
English: Jingning Hou Ye Sheng and others trained soldiers in Henan, Lin, Gong, Gan, Liang and Yanqing.

古文：都督茅鼎等平五开蛮。
现代文：都督茅鼎等人平定五开蛮。
English: The governor, Mao Ding, and others pacified the Wukai barbarians.

古文：丙寅，耕耤田。
现代文：十五日，耕种耒昔田。
English: On the fifteenth day, he ploughed his old fields.

古文：庚辰，诏天下卫所军以十之七屯田。
现代文：二十九日，诏令天下卫所军队抽出十分之七屯田。
English: On the 29th, the Imperial edict ordered the army of the Imperial Guard to withdraw seven-tenths of its garrisons.

古文：三月癸未，冯胜等十四人分理陕西、山西、河南诸卫军务。庚寅，改封豫王桂为代王，汉王楧为肃王，卫王植为辽王。
现代文：三月二日，冯胜等十四人分别料理陕西、山西，河南诸卫军务，三月九日，改封豫王朱桂为代王，汉王朱木英为肃王，卫王朱植为辽王。
English: On March 2nd, Feng Sheng and fourteen others were appointed to take care of the military affairs of Shaanxi, Shanxi and Henan provinces respectively. On March 9th, Yu Wang Zhu Gui was appointed as the acting king, Han King Zhu Muying as the king of Su, and Wei King Zhu Zhi as the king of Liao.

古文：夏四月壬子，凉国公蓝玉征罕东。
现代文：四月一日，凉国公蓝玉出征罕东。
English: On April 1, the Duke of Liangguo, Lanyu, left for the east of Han.

古文：癸丑，建昌卫指挥月鲁帖木儿叛，指挥鲁毅败之。
现代文：二日，建昌卫指挥月鲁帖木儿叛乱，被指挥鲁毅击败。
English: On the second day, Jian Changwei led the rebellion of Yue Lütjelmur and was defeated by the commander Lu Yi.

古文：丙子，皇太子标薨。
现代文：二十五日，皇太子朱标死去。
English: On the 25th, Crown Prince Zhubiao passed away.

古文：戊寅，都督聂纬、徐司马、瞿能讨月鲁帖木儿，俟蓝玉还，并听节制。
现代文：二十七日，都督聂纬、徐司马、瞿能讨伐月鲁帖木儿，等蓝玉返回，一并受其节制。
English: On the twenty-seventh day, Tudor Zou Wei, Xu Sima, and Zou Neng went to fight against Yue Lutie Mu'er, and Blue Jade returned, and they were all restrained by him.

古文：五月辛巳，蓝玉至罕东，寇遁，遂趋建昌。
现代文：五月一日，蓝玉到达罕东，叛军逃跑，于是趋兵建昌。
English: On May 1st, the Blue Jade arrived in Handong, the rebels fled, and then the troops gathered.

古文：己丑，振陈州原武水灾。
现代文：九日，赈济陈州、原武水灾。
English: On the 9th, flood disasters in Chenzhou and Huanwu occurred.

古文：六月丁卯，西平候沐英卒于云南。
现代文：六月十日，西平侯沐英死于云南。
English: On June 10, Xi Ping Hou Mu Ying died in Yunnan.

古文：秋七月庚辰，秦王樉复国。
现代文：七月一日，秦王朱返回封地。
English: On July 1, King Zhu of Qin returned to his fief.

古文：癸未，指挥瞿能败月鲁帖木儿于双狼寨。
现代文：四日，指挥瞿能在双狼寨打败月鲁帖木儿。
English: On the fourth day, the conductor Zou Yan was able to defeat Yue Luchemuer in Shuanglu Village.

古文：八月己未，江夏侯周德兴坐事诛。
现代文：八月十日，江夏侯周德兴连坐被诛。
English: On August 10, Zhou De Xinglian, a prince of Jiangxia, was arrested.

古文：丁卯，冯胜、傅友德帅开国公常升等分行山西，籍民为军，屯田于大同、东胜，立十六卫。
现代文：十八日，冯胜、傅友德率领开国公常升等分行山西，籍民为军。在大同、东胜屯田，建立了十六卫。
English: On the 18th, Feng Sheng and Fu Youde led the troops of the Shanxi branch of the opening of the country, and the soldiers were from the people. In Datong and Dongsheng Tunden, the 16th Division was established.

古文：甲戌，给公侯岁禄，归赐田于官。
现代文：二十五日，供给王公诸侯每年的俸禄，归赐田地于官。
English: On the 25th, the annual salary was provided to the princes and lords, and the fields were given to the officials.

古文：丙子，靖宁侯叶升坐胡惟庸党诛。
现代文：二十七日，靖宁侯叶升连坐胡惟庸一案被诛。
English: On the 27th, Jingning Hou Ye Sheng Lian was arrested in the case of Hu Wei Yong.

古文：九月庚寅，立皇孙允炆为皇太孙，高丽李成桂幽其主瑶而自立，以国人表来请命，诏听之，更其国号曰朝鲜。
现代文：九月十二日，册立皇孙允火文为皇太孙。高丽李成桂囚禁其主瑶而自立为王，借国人之名上表请命，诏令允奏，改其国号为朝鲜。
English: On September 12th, Emperor Sun Yat-sen was enthroned as the great-grandson of the emperor. Goryeo Syngman Rhee imprisoned his master Kim Il-sung and established himself as king. He used the name of his countrymen to ask for orders, received them by imperial decree, and changed his country's name to Korea.

古文：冬十月乙亥，沐春袭封西平侯，镇云南。
现代文：十月二十七日，沐春承袭封号西平侯，镇守云南。
English: On October 27th, Mu Chun inherited the title of Xiping Hou, the town guard of Yunnan.

古文：十一月甲午，蓝玉擒月鲁帖木儿，诛之，召玉还。
现代文：十一月十七日，蓝玉擒获月鲁帖木儿，处死，召回蓝玉。
English: On November 17th, Blue Jade was sentenced to death, and Blue Jade was recalled.

古文：十二月甲戌，宋国公冯胜、颍国公傅友德等兼东宫师保官。
现代文：十二月二十八日，宋国公冯胜、颍国公傅友德等人兼任东宫师保官。
English: On December 28, Song Guo Gong Feng Sheng, Song Guo Gong Fu Youde and others also served as Dongguo Shi Bao officials.

古文：闰月戊戌，冯胜为总兵官，傅友德副之，练兵山西、河南、兼领屯卫。
现代文：闰十二月二十二日，冯胜担任总兵官，傅友德为副总兵，在山西、河南练兵，兼任领屯卫。
English: On December 22, Feng Sheng assumed the post of chief military officer, and Fu Youde became deputy chief military officer. They trained soldiers in Shanxi and Henan and concurrently served as commanders of garrisons.

古文：是年，琉球中山、山南、高丽，哈梅里入贡。
现代文：这一年，有琉球、中山、山南、高丽、哈梅里前来朝贡。
English: This year, Ryukyu, Zhongshan, Shannan, Goryeo, and Hameli came to pay tribute.

古文：二十六年春正月戊申，免天下耆民来朝。
现代文：洪武二十六年正月二日，规定天下耆民免朝。
English: On the 2nd day of the 1st month of the 26th year of Hongwu, it was stipulated that the people of the whole country would be exempted from the imperial court.

古文：辛酉，大祀天地于南郊。
现代文：十五日，在南郊隆重祭祀天地。
English: On the fifteenth day, in the southern suburbs, a grand ritual was held.

古文：二月丁丑，晋王统山西、河南军出塞，召冯胜、傅友德、常升、王弼等还。
现代文：二月二日，晋王朱木冈统领山西、河南军队出塞，召回冯胜、傅友德、常升、王弼等人。
English: On February 2, the Jin king Zhu Mugang led the Shanxi and Henan armies out of the fortress and recalled Feng Sheng, Fu Youde, Chang Sheng, Wang Qi and others.

古文：乙酉，蜀王椿来朝。
现代文：十日，蜀王朱椿来京朝见。
English: On the 10th, Zhu Tsiming, King of Shu, came to see the emperor in Beijing.

古文：凉国公蓝玉以谋反，并鹤庆侯张翼、普定侯陈桓、景川侯曹震、舳舻侯朱寿、东莞伯何荣、吏部尚书詹徽等皆坐诛。
现代文：凉国公蓝玉因为谋反被诛，鹤庆侯张翼、普定侯陈桓、景川侯曹震、舳舻侯朱寿、东莞伯何荣、吏部尚书詹徽等都被连坐诛杀。
English: Yang Guogong Lan Yu was executed for plotting a rebellion, and Zhe Qing Hou Zhang Ying, Puding Hou Chen Huan, Jingchuan Hou Cao Zhen, Yan Hou Zhu Shou, Dongguan Bo He Rong, and Li Bu Shangshu Zhan Hui were all killed.

古文：己丑，颁《逆臣录》于天下。
现代文：十四日，颁发逆臣录于天下。
English: On the 14th, the record of the traitor was issued to the world.

古文：庚寅，耕耤田。
现代文：十五日，耕种耒昔田。
English: On the fifteenth day, he ploughed his old fields.

古文：三月辛亥，代王桂率护卫兵出塞，听晋王节制。
现代文：三月六日，代王朱桂率护卫兵出塞，受晋王节制。
English: On March 6, the acting king Zhu Gui led the guards out of the fortress and was restrained by the king of Jin.

古文：长兴侯耿炳文练兵陕西。
现代文：长兴侯耿炳文在陕西练兵。
English: Changxing Hou Geng Bingwen is training soldiers in Shaanxi.

古文：丙辰，冯胜、傅友德备边山西、北平，其属卫将校悉听晋王、燕王节制。
现代文：十一日，冯胜、傅友德守卫山西、北平边防，其属卫将校都受晋王、燕王节制。
English: On the 11th day, Feng Sheng and Fu Youde guarded the Shanxi and Beiping border, and their officers were restrained by Jin Wang and Yan Wang.

古文：庚申，诏二王军务大者始以闻。
现代文：十五日，诏令晋、燕二王，重要军务要事先奏知。
English: On the 15th, Emperor Jin and Emperor Yan decreed that important military affairs should be reported in advance.

古文：壬戌，会宁侯张温坐蓝玉党诛。
现代文：十七日，会宁侯张温连坐于蓝玉一案而被诛杀。
English: On the 17th, Zhang Wenlian, a member of the Nanning Municipal People's Congress, was involved in the Blue Jade case and was beaten to death.

古文：夏四月乙亥，孝感饥，遣使乘传发仓贷之。
现代文：四月一日，孝感发生饥荒，派人开官仓、贷粮赈饥。
English: On April 1, famine occurred in Xiaogan, and he sent people to open government warehouses and lend grain to relieve the famine.

古文：诏自今遇岁饥，先贷后闻，著为令。
现代文：诏谕自今以后，发生饥荒，先贷后奏，定为制度。
English: The edict stipulates that from now on, in the event of a famine, the first loan will be made, and the system will be established.

古文：戊子，周王橚来朝。
现代文：十七日，周王朱木肃来京朝拜。
English: On the 17th, King Zhu Muxu came to Beijing to pay homage.

古文：庚寅，旱，诏群臣直言得失，省狱囚。
现代文：十九日，天气干旱，要群臣直言其得失，审查监狱的囚犯。
English: On the 19th, the weather was dry, and the ministers were asked to speak frankly about their gains and losses, and to examine the prisoners in the prison.

古文：丙申，以安南擅废立，绝其朝贡。
现代文：二十五日，由于安南擅自废立君主，拒绝接受其朝贡。
English: On the 25th, Annan refused to accept tribute from the deposed monarch.

古文：秋七月甲辰朔，日有食之。
现代文：七月一日，日食。
English: July 1st, solar eclipse.

古文：戊申，选秀才张宗浚等随詹事府官分直文华殿，侍皇太孙。
现代文：五日，选拔秀才张宗等人跟随詹事府官到文华殿，侍候皇太孙。
English: On the fifth day, Zhang Zong and others, who were selected as outstanding talents, followed Zhanji prefectural officials to Wenhua Palace to wait for the imperial grandson.

古文：八月，秦、晋、燕、周、齐五王来朝。
现代文：八月，秦、晋、燕、周、齐五王前来朝见。
English: In August, the five kings of Qin, Jin, Yan, Zhou and Qi came to see the emperor.

古文：九月癸丑，代、肃、辽、庆、宁五王来朝。
现代文：九月十一日，代、肃、辽、庆、宁五王来京朝拜。
English: On September 11th, the five kings, Dai, Su, Liao, Qing and Ning, came to Beijing to pay homage.

古文：赦胡惟庸、蓝玉余党。
现代文：赦免胡惟庸、蓝玉余党。
English: He pardoned Hu Weiyong and the Blue and White Party.

古文：冬十月丙申，擢国子监生六十四人为布政使等官。
现代文：十月二十四日，提升国子监生六十四人担任布政使等官职。
English: On October 24th, 64 Kuniko students were promoted to political envoys and other official positions.

古文：十二月，颁《永鉴录》于诸王。
现代文：十二月，给诸王颁发《永鉴录》。
English: In December, the "Forever Catalog" was issued to the kings.

古文：是年，琉球、爪哇、暹罗入贡。
现代文：这一年，琉球、爪哇、暹罗前来朝贡。
English: This year, Ryukyu, Java, and Siam came to pay tribute.

古文：二十七年春正月乙卯，大祀天地于南郊。
现代文：洪武二十七年正月十五日，在南郊祭祀天地。
English: On the fifteenth day of the first month of the 27th year of Hongwu, the Southern Suburbs began to offer sacrifices to heaven and earth.

古文：辛酉，李景隆为平羌将军，镇甘肃。
现代文：二十一日，封李景隆为平羌将军，镇守甘肃。
English: On the twenty-first day, Li Jinglong was appointed as the general of Pingyao, the town guard of Gansu.

古文：发天下仓谷贷贫民。
现代文：各地开仓贷粮给贫民百姓。
English: All regions have opened warehouses to lend grain to the poor.

古文：三月庚子，赐张信等进士及第、出身有差。
现代文：三月一日，封赐张信等人以进士及第和其他不同的出身。
English: On March 1st, Zhang Xin and others were awarded the title of Jin Shi He Ji and other different origins.

古文：辛丑，魏国公徐辉祖、安陆侯吴杰备倭浙江。
现代文：二日，魏国公徐辉祖、安陆侯吴杰在浙江防备倭寇。
English: On the second day, Wei Guogong Xu Huizu and Anlu Hou Wu Jie went to Zhejiang to guard against the Japanese invaders.

古文：庚戌，课民树桑枣木棉。
现代文：十一日，督促百姓种植桑、枣、木、棉。
English: On the 11th, urged the people to plant mulberry, jujube, wood and cotton.

古文：甲子，以四方底平，收藏甲兵，示不复用。
现代文：二十五日，由于四方平定，收藏兵器，表示永不复用。
English: On the 25th, due to the four-way pacification, the collection of weapons increased, indicating that they would never be reused.

古文：秋八月甲戌，吴杰及永定侯张铨率致仕武臣，备倭广东。
现代文：八月七日，吴杰以及永定侯张铨率领辞官的武将，在广东防备倭寇。
English: On August 7th, Wu Jie and Yongding marquis Zhang Jun, led by a military commander, prepared for the Japanese invaders in Guangdong.

古文：乙亥，遣国子监生分行天下。督吏民修水利。
现代文：八日，派国子监生前往各地，督促官吏、百姓兴修水利。
English: On the 8th, he sent his son Kuniko to go to various regions to urge officials and people to build water conservancy.

古文：丙戌，阶、文军乱，都督甯正为平羌将军讨之。
现代文：十九日，阶、文军队叛乱，都督宁正被封为平羌将军前往征讨。
English: On the 19th day of the month, the troops of the Cadre and the Peasants' Revolt rebelled, and the governor Ning Zheng was appointed as the general of the Peasants' Revolt and went to fight.

古文：九月，徐辉祖节制陕西沿边诸军。
现代文：九月，徐辉祖节制陕西沿边各路军队。
English: In September, Xu Huizou restrained the troops along the border of Shaanxi.

古文：冬十一月乙丑，颍国公傅友德坐事诛。
现代文：十一月二十九日，颍国公傅友德犯罪被诛。
English: On November 29th, Yu De, a public official of Shan State, was arrested for the crime.

古文：阿资复叛，西平侯沐春击败之。
现代文：阿资又反，西平侯沐春将其击败。
English: Azhi counterattacked again, and Xiping Hou Muchun defeated him.

古文：十二月乙亥，定远侯王弼坐事诛。
现代文：十二月，定远侯王弼犯罪被杀。
English: In December, Dingyuan Hou Wangyao was killed.

古文：是年，乌斯藏、琉球、缅、朵甘、爪哇、撒马儿罕、朝鲜入贡。
现代文：这一年，乌斯藏、琉球、缅、朵甘、爪哇、撒马儿罕、朝鲜来京朝贡。
English: In that year, Ussuri, Ryukyu, Burma, Dokan, Java, Samarkand, and Korea came to pay tribute to the imperial court in Kyoto.

古文：安南来贡，却之。
现代文：安南前来朝贡被拒绝。
English: Annan came to pay tribute and was refused.

古文：二十八年春正月丙午，阶、文寇平，甯正以兵从秦王樉征洮州叛番。
现代文：洪武二十八年正月十日，阶、文贼寇平定，宁正率兵跟随秦王朱征伐洮州叛番。
English: On the 10th day of the first month of the 28th year of Hongwu, when the Jie and the literary bandits were defeated, Ning Zheng led the soldiers to follow the Qin King Zhu to conquer the Bozhou rebels.

古文：丁未，大祀天地于南郊。甲子，西平侯沐春擒斩阿资，越州平。
现代文：十二日，在南郊祭祀天地。二十九日，西平侯沐春擒斩阿资，平定越州。
English: On the 12th, in the southern suburbs, the heavens and the earth were sacrificed. On the 29th, Xiping marquess Mu Chun  beheaded Azi and conquered Yuezhou.

古文：是月，周王橚、晋王、率河南、山西诸卫军出塞，筑城屯田。
现代文：当月，周王朱木肃、晋王朱木冈率领河南、山西各卫军队出塞，修筑城防和屯田。
English: In the same month, Zhou King Zhu Muxu and Jin King Zhu Mugang led the guards of Henan and Shanxi out of the fortress to build city defenses and military camps.

古文：燕王棣帅总兵官周兴出辽东塞。
现代文：燕王朱棣率总兵官周兴出辽东要塞。
English: Yan Wang and Zhu Xi led the general officer Zhou Xing out of the Liaodong Fortress.

古文：二月丁卯，宋国公冯胜坐事诛。
现代文：二月三日，宋国公冯胜犯罪被杀。
English: On February 3, Song Guogong Feng Sheng was killed.

古文：己丑，谕户部编民百户为里。
现代文：二十五日，诏谕户部编民以一百户为一里。
English: On the twenty-fifth day, it was decreed that the population of the household department should be increased to one hundred households per mile.

古文：婚姻死丧疾病患难，里中富者助财，贫者助力。
现代文：遇婚丧病死以及其他困难，里中富裕的人帮助钱财，贫穷的人助力。
English: When it comes to marriage, death, illness, and other difficulties, the rich people help with money, and the poor people help.

古文：春秋耕获，通力合作，以教民睦。
现代文：春耕秋收，通力合作，以便百姓和睦。
English: Spring ploughing and autumn harvest, all-out cooperation, so that the people can live in harmony.

古文：夏六月壬申，诏诸土司皆立儒学。
现代文：六月十日，诏令各地土司都要提倡儒学。
English: On June 10, it was decreed that all local magistrates should promote Confucianism.

古文：辛巳，周兴等自开原追敌至甫答迷城，不及而还。
现代文：十九日，周兴等人从开原追敌到甫答迷城，没能赶到，于是返回。
English: On the 19th, Zhou Xing and others chased the enemy from Kaiyuan to Fudao, but could not reach it, so they returned.

古文：己丑，御奉天门，谕群臣曰： 朕起兵至今四十余年，灼见情伪，惩创奸顽或法外用刑，本非常典。
现代文：二十七日，皇帝在奉天门对群臣说： 我起兵到今天有四十多年了，灼见情伪，惩治奸顽，有时不按法典用刑，这不能长久。
English: On the 27th, the emperor said to his courtiers at the Gate of Heaven: I have been in the army for more than forty years now. I can see through hypocrisy, punish traitors, and sometimes use punishments that are not in accordance with the code. This cannot last long.

古文：后嗣止颁《律》与《大诰》，不许用黥剌、剕、劓、阉割之刑。
现代文：以后，只能按照法典与大诰办事，不许用黥、刺、非刂、劓、阉割等刑罚。
English: From now on, they can only act in accordance with the code and the major punishments, and are not allowed to use punishments such as beating, stabbing, non-beating, whipping, and castration.

古文：臣下敢以请者，置重典。 
现代文：对敢请求施酷刑的人要从重处罚。 
English: Those who dare to ask for torture will be severely punished.

古文：又曰： 朕罢丞相，设府、部、都察院分理庶政，事权归于朝廷。
现代文：又说 ：我废除丞相，设置府、部、都察院分管各种事务，大权归于朝廷。
English: He also said, "I will abolish the post of chancellor, and set up the prefectural government, ministries, and the Central Investigating Agency to be in charge of various affairs, and the supreme power will be vested in the Imperial Court."

古文：嗣君不许复立丞相。
现代文：以后的君王不准再设丞相。
English: Subsequent monarchs were not allowed to appoint a chancellor again.

古文：臣下敢以请者置重典。
现代文：有为臣的胆敢请求设置，从重处罚。
English: If a vassal dares to make a request, he will be given a heavier punishment.

古文：皇亲惟谋逆不赦。
现代文：皇亲犯谋逆之罪，严惩不赦。
English: Imperial relatives who commit the crime of plotting treason will be severely punished.

古文：余罪，宗亲会议取上裁。
现代文：我，犯法，由宗亲会议从严制裁。
English: I, who broke the law, was severely sanctioned by the patriarchal meeting.

古文：法司只许举奏，毋得擅逮。
现代文：法司只许上奏检举，不得擅自捕人。
English: The Department of Justice is only allowed to report the case to the procuratorate, and may not arrest anyone without authorization.

古文：勒诸典章，永为遵守。 
现代文：严格制定这些典章，永世遵守。 
English: These rules shall be strictly enforced and observed at all times.

古文：秋八月丁卯，都督杨文为征南将军，指挥韩观、都督佥事宋晟副之，讨龙州士官赵宗寿。
现代文：八月六日，封都督杨文为征南将军，指挥韩观、都督佥事宋成为副将军，讨伐龙州土官赵宗寿。
English: On August 6th, Yang Wen, the governor of the capital, was appointed as the general to conquer the south, and Han Guan, the commander, and Song, the governor of the capital, became the vice-generals to fight against Zhao Zongshu, the local official of Longzhou.

古文：戊辰，信国公汤和卒。
现代文：七日，信国公汤和死去。
English: On the seventh day, Nobukuni died.

古文：辛巳，赵宗寿伏罪来朝，杨文移兵讨奉议、南丹叛蛮。
现代文：二十日，赵宗寿来朝谢罪，杨文又率兵讨伐奉议、南丹叛蛮。
English: On the 20th, Zhao Zongshou came to the imperial court to apologize, and Yang Wen led the army to fight against the Southern Han rebels.

古文：九月丁酉，免畿内、山东秋粮。
现代文：九月六日，免除京畿、山东秋粮。
English: On September 6, Gyeonggi and Shandong Autumn Grains were exempted.

古文：庚戌，颁《皇明祖训条章》于中外， 后世有言更祖制者，以奸臣论 。
现代文：十九日，向天下颁发皇明祖训条章， 后人若有谈论更改祖制的，以奸臣论处 。
English: On the 19th, the Emperor Ming Ancestor's Instruction was issued to the world. If future generations talk about changing the ancestral system, they will be dealt with as treacherous subjects.

古文：十一月乙亥，奉议、南丹蛮悉平。
现代文：十一月十五日，奉议、南丹蛮都被平定。
English: On November 15th, the Southern Dynasties and Barbarian Dynasties were conquered.

古文：十二月壬辰，诏河南、山东桑枣及二十七年后新垦田，毋徵税。
现代文：十二月三日，诏令对河南、山东栽种桑枣以及二十七年以后新开垦的土地，不要征税。
English: On December 3, it was decreed that no tax should be levied on the planting of mulberry jujube in Henan and Shandong and on newly reclaimed land after the 27th year.

古文：是年，朝鲜、琉球、暹罗入贡。
现代文：这一年，朝鲜、琉球、暹罗来京朝贡。
English: In this year, Korea, Ryukyu, and Siam came to pay tribute to Beijing.

古文：二十九年春正月壬申，大祀天地于南郊。
现代文：洪武二十九年一月十五日，在南郊祭祀天地。
English: On January 15, the 29th year of Hongwu, the Southern Suburbs began to offer sacrifices to heaven and earth.

古文：二月癸卯，征虏前将军胡冕讨郴、桂蛮，平之。
现代文：二月十五日，征虏前将军胡冕讨伐郴、桂蛮，予以平定。
English: On February 15th, Hu Guanyin, a former general who had been conscripted into the army, led a crusade against Guizhou and Guizhou barbarians and subdued them.

古文：辛亥，燕王棣帅师巡大宁，周世子有敦帅师巡北平关隘。
现代文：二十三日，燕王朱棣率兵巡视大宁，周世子有墩领军巡视北平关隘。
English: On the 23rd, Yan Wang Zhu Xi led the troops to inspect Daning, and Zhou Shi Zi led the troops to inspect Beiping Pass.

古文：三月辛酉，楚王桢、湘王柏来朝。
现代文：三月四日，楚王朱桢、湘王朱柏入京朝见。
English: On March 4, Zhu Xi, the King of Chu, and Zhu Bai, the King of Hunan, visited the Imperial Court in Beijing.

古文：甲子，燕王败敌于彻彻儿山，又追败之于兀良哈秃城而还。
现代文：七日，燕王朱木肃在彻彻儿山打败敌军，又追剿到兀良哈秃城后返回。
English: On the seventh day, Yan Wang Zhu Muxu defeated the enemy army in Chechier Mountain, and chased them to Ailiang Hualian City and then returned.

古文：秋八月丁未，免应天、太平五府田租。
现代文：八月二十二日，免除应天、太平五府田租。
English: On August 22nd, the five prefectures of Yingtian and Taiping were exempted from land rent.

古文：九月乙亥，召致仕武臣二千五百余人入朝，大赉之，各进秩一级。
现代文：九月二十日，召见辞官的武将二千五百多人，大加赏赐，并加一级俸禄。
English: On September 20th, more than 2,500 generals were summoned to appear before the magistrate, and were given a large reward and a one-level salary.

古文：是年，琉球、安南、朝鲜、乌斯茂入贡。
现代文：这一年，琉球、安南、朝鲜、乌斯藏来京朝贡。
English: That year, Ryukyu, Annan, Korea, and Ussuri came to pay tribute to the imperial court in Kyoto.

古文：三十年春正月丙辰，耿炳文为征西将军，郭英副之，巡西北边。
现代文：洪武三十年一月三日，封耿炳文为征西将军、郭英为副将军，巡视西北边防。
English: On January 3, the 30th year of Hongwu's reign, Geng Bingwen was appointed as the general of the Western Expedition and Guo Ying as the vice-general, and they patrolled the northwest border defense.

古文：丙寅，大祀天地于南郊。
现代文：十三日，在南郊祭祀天地。
English: On the 13th, in the southern suburbs, a ritual was held to celebrate heaven and earth.

古文：丁卯，置行太仆寺于山西、北平、陕西、甘肃、辽东，掌马政。
现代文：十四日，在山西、北平、陕西、甘肃、辽东设置流动的太仆寺，掌管马匹管事宜。
English: On the 14th, mobile Taipo temples were set up in Shanxi, Beiping, Shaanxi, Gansu and Liaodong to take charge of horse management.

古文：己巳，左都督杨文屯田辽东。
现代文：十六日，左都督杨文在辽东屯田。
English: On the 16th, the Left Governor Yang Wen arrived in Liaodong Tunden.

古文：是月，沔县盗起，诏耿炳文讨之。
现代文：当月，沔县盗贼起事，诏令耿炳文征讨。
English: In the same month, thieves in Handan County rioted, and Geng Bingwen was ordered to investigate.

古文：二月庚寅，水西蛮叛，都督佥事顾成为征南将军，讨平之。
现代文：二月七日，水西蛮叛乱，都督佥事顾成被封为征南将军，平定反叛。
English: On February 7th, there was a rebellion in the west of the country, and the governor, Anji Gucheng, was appointed as a general to invade the south to quell the rebellion.

古文：三月癸丑，赐陈安阝等进士及第、出身有差。
现代文：三月一日，赐封陈安阝等人以进士及第等不同的出身。
English: On March 1st, Chen Anhui and others were awarded the title of "Chamberlain" with different ranks and ranks.

古文：庚辰，古州蛮叛，龙里千户吴得、镇抚井孚战死。
现代文：二十八日，古州蛮反叛，龙里千户吴得、镇抚井孚战死。
English: On the 28th, Guzhou rebelled violently, and Longli Qianhu Wu De and Zhenfujing Fu were killed in battle.

古文：夏四月己亥，都指挥齐让为平羌将军，讨之。
现代文：四月十七日，都指挥齐让被封为平羌将军，前往征讨。
English: On April 17th, Du Du under the command of Qi Zhan was appointed as the General of Pingyao and went to the battlefield.

古文：壬寅，水西蛮平。
现代文：二十日，平定水西蛮。
English: On the 20th, the pacification of Western barbarism began.

古文：五月壬子朔，日有食之。
现代文：五月一日，日食。
English: On the first day of May, the sun and moon are new, and there is a solar eclipse.

古文：乙卯，楚王桢、湘王柏帅师讨古州蛮。
现代文：四日，楚王朱桢、湘王朱柏率兵讨伐古州蛮。
English: On the fourth day, Chu King Zhu Xi and Hunan King Zhu Bai led the troops to fight the ancient state barbarians.

古文：六月辛巳，赐礼部覆试贡士韩克忠等进士及第、出身有差。
现代文：六月一日，封赐礼部覆试贡士韩克忠等人以进士及第等不同的出身。
English: On June 1st, the bestowal ceremony department re-examined the tributary Han Kezhong and others with different origins and ranks.

古文：己酉，驸马都尉欧阳伦有罪赐死。
现代文：二十九日，驸马都尉欧阳伦犯罪被赐死。
English: On the 29th, Captain Ouyang Lun was sentenced to death for his crimes.

古文：秋八月丁亥，河决开封。
现代文：八月八日，黄河在开封决口。
English: On August 8th, the Yellow River was at the mouth of Kaifeng.

古文：甲午，李景隆为征虏大将军，练兵河南。
现代文：十五日，李景隆被封为征虏大将军，在河南练兵。
English: On the 15th, Li Jinglong was appointed as a conscript general and trained soldiers in Henan.

古文：九月庚戌，汉、沔寇平。
现代文：九月一日，汉、沔贼寇被平定。
English: On September 1st, the Han Dynasty and the Kuomintang were defeated.

古文：戊辰，麓川平缅土酋刀干孟逐其宣慰使思伦发以叛。
现代文：十九日，麓川平缅土酋刀干孟追随宣慰使思伦发反叛。
English: On the 19th, Luchuanping Bactrian chief Jian Meng followed Xuan Tong to make Shilun rebel.

古文：乙亥，都督杨文为征虏将军，代齐让。冬十月戊子，停辽东海运。
现代文：二十六日，都督杨文代替齐让担任征虏将军。十月十日，停止辽东海运。
English: On the 26th, Yang Wen, the governor of Liaodong, replaced Qi Zhen as the conscript general. On October 10th, Liaodong Shipping was suspended.

古文：辛卯，耿炳文练兵陕西。
现代文：十三日，耿炳文在陕西练兵。
English: On the 13th, Geng Bingwen went to train soldiers in Shaanxi.

古文：乙未，重建国子监先师庙成。
现代文：七日，重建国子监先师庙完工。
English: On the seventh day, the reconstruction of the temple was completed.

古文：十一月癸酉，沐春为征虏前将军，都督何福等副之，讨刀干孟。
现代文：十一月二十五日，沐春为征虏前将军，都督何福等人为将军，讨伐刀干孟。
English: On November 25th, Mu Chun, as a former general of conscription, and the governor He Fu and others as generals, fought against Meng.

古文：是年，琉球、占城、朝鲜、暹罗、乌斯藏、泥八剌入贡。
现代文：这一年有琉球、占城、朝鲜、暹罗、乌斯藏、泥八剌入京朝贡。
English: In that year, Ryukyu, Zhancheng, Korea, Siam, Wuzang, and Muyatai were brought to Beijing as tribute.

古文：三十一年春正月壬戌，大祀天地于南郊。
现代文：洪武三十一年正月十四日，在南郊祭祀天地。
English: On the 14th day of the first month of the 31st year of Hongwu's reign, he went to the southern suburbs to offer sacrifices to heaven and earth.

古文：乙丑，遣使之山东、河南课耕。
现代文：十七日，派人到山东、河南督促农耕。
English: On the 17th, people were sent to Shandong and Henan to urge farming.

古文：二月乙酉，倭寇宁海，指挥陶铎击败之。
现代文：二月八日，倭寇攻打宁海，被指挥陶铎击败。
English: On February 8th, the wokou attacked Ninghai and were defeated by the commander, Tao Zhen.

古文：辛丑，古州蛮平，召杨文还。
现代文：二十四日，平定古州蛮，召回杨文。
English: On the 24th, Guizhou was pacified and Yang Wen was recalled.

古文：甲辰，都督佥事徐凯讨平么些蛮。
现代文：二十七日，都督佥事徐凯平定么些蛮。
English: On the 27th, the governor of the capital said something about Xu Kaipingding, which was a bit rude.

古文：夏四月庚辰，廷臣以朝鲜屡生衅隙请讨，不许。
现代文：四月四日，廷臣以朝鲜屡生事端为由，请求讨伐，未准。
English: On April 4, the courtier requested a crusade on the grounds that North Korea had repeatedly caused trouble, but it was not approved.

古文：五月丁未，沐春击刀干孟，大败之。
现代文：五月初一日，沐春大败刀干孟。八日，皇上患病。
English: On the first day of May, Mu Chun defeated Gan Meng. On the eighth day, the emperor fell ill.

古文：甲寅，帝不豫。戊午，都督杨文从燕王棣，武定侯郭英从辽王植，备御开平，俱听燕王节制。
现代文：十二日，都督杨文跟随燕王朱棣，武定侯郭英跟随辽王朱植，在开平守备，俱受燕王节制。
English: On the 12th, Yang Wen, the governor-general, followed Yan Wang Zhu Xi, and Guo Ying, the governor-general of Wuding, followed Liao Wang Zhu Zhi, to defend Kaiping. Both were restrained by Yan Wang.

古文：闰月癸未，帝疾大渐。
现代文：闰五月八日，皇上病情恶化。
English: On May 8, the Emperor's condition worsened.

古文：乙酉，崩于西宫，年七十有一。
现代文：十日，驾崩于西宫，终年七十一岁。
English: On the 10th, he passed away in Nishinomiya, at the age of 71.

古文：遗诏曰： 朕膺天命三十有一年，忧危积心，日勤不怠，务有益于民。
现代文：遗诏说： 我在位三十一年，忧心于天下，日夜操劳，以求有益于民。
English: The last will and testament said: "I have been on the throne for 31 years. I am worried about the world and work day and night to benefit the people.

古文：奈起自寒微，无古人之博知，好善恶恶，不及远矣。
现代文：无奈出身寒微，无古人之博识，扬善惩恶，做得很不够。
English: Reluctantly coming from humble beginnings, without the knowledge of the ancients, promoting good and punishing evil, it is not enough.

古文：今得万物自然之理，其奚哀念之有。
现代文：现在顺其万物自然的法则，没有必要哀念。
English: Now everything is in accordance with the laws of nature, there is no need to mourn.

古文：皇太孙允炆仁明孝友，天下归心，宜登大位。
现代文：皇太孙允火文英明仁孝，受天下拥戴，应继承皇位。
English: The Emperor's great-great-grandson, Yunhuo Wenying Mingrenxiao, is favored by the whole world and should succeed to the throne.

古文：内外文武臣僚同心辅政，以安吾民。
现代文：内外文武大臣要齐心辅佐，以使天下安定。
English: The Ministers of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology at home and abroad should work together to make the world stable.

古文：丧祭仪物，毋用金玉。
现代文：丧礼祭祀所需的东西，不要用金银器皿。
English: Do not use gold or silver utensils for funerary offerings.

古文：孝陵山川因其故，毋改作。
现代文：孝陵的山水保持原貌，不要改变。
English: The landscape of Xiaoling should keep its original appearance and should not be changed.

古文：天下臣民，哭临三日，皆释服，毋妨嫁娶。
现代文：天下臣民，哀悼三天之后，全部脱去孝服，以免影响嫁娶之事。
English: After three days of mourning, all the subjects of the world take off their filial piety, so as not to affect the marriage.

古文：诸王临国中，毋至京师。
现代文：诸王留在封地，不要前往京师。
English: Kings should stay in their fiefdoms and not go to Beijing.

古文：诸不在令中者，推此令从事。 
现代文：此诏令未说之事，按诏令意思酌情办理。 
English: Matters not mentioned in this edict shall be handled as appropriate in accordance with the intention of the edict.

古文：辛卯，葬孝陵。
现代文：十六日，安葬于孝陵。
English: On the 16th, he was buried at the Xiaoling Mausoleum.

古文：谥曰高皇帝，庙号太祖。
现代文：被追封为高皇帝，庙号为太祖。
English: He was given the posthumous title of Emperor Gao and the temple name Taizu.

古文：永乐元年，谥圣神文武钦明启运俊德成功统天大孝高皇帝。
现代文：永乐元年，追封为圣神文武钦明启运俊德成功统天大孝高皇帝。
English: In the first year of Yongle, he was posthumously crowned as the Holy Spirit Emperor Wenwu Qinming.

古文：嘉靖十七年，增谥开天行道肇纪立极大圣至神仁文义武俊德成功高皇帝。
现代文：嘉靖十七年，进而追封为开天行道肇纪立极大圣至神仁文义武俊德成功高皇帝。
English: In the seventeenth year of the Jiajing Dynasty, he was subsequently crowned as the emperor who opened the way to heaven, initiated the establishment of discipline, and achieved great success in holiness, benevolence, righteousness, military prowess and virtue.

古文：帝天授智勇，统一方夏，纬武经文，为汉、唐、宋诸君所未及。
现代文：太祖皇帝有天授智勇，统一华夏，文韬武略，为汉、唐、宋各代君主所不及。
English: The great-grandfather emperor was gifted with wisdom and courage, unified China, and mastered literature and military strategy. He was second to none among the monarchs of the Han, Tang, and Song dynasties.

古文：当其肇造之初，能沉几观变，次第经略，绰有成算。
现代文：开始之初，能深藏不露，静观变化，战略顺序，成算在胸。
English: At the beginning of the beginning, can be hidden, quietly watching the changes, the strategic sequence, the achievement is in the chest.

古文：尝与诸臣论取天下之略，曰： 朕遭时丧乱，初起乡土，本图自全。
现代文：曾与各位臣僚谈论夺取天下的谋略，说： 我遭遇战乱，起事于穷乡僻壤，本来只想保全自己。
English: He once talked with his ministers about the strategy of conquering the world, saying: I encountered a war, started in a poor and remote country, and originally just wanted to protect myself.

古文：及渡江以来，观群雄所为，徒为生民之患，而张士诚、陈友谅尤为巨蠹。
现代文：到渡江以后，看群雄的所作所为，只是使百姓遭受灾难，其中张士诚、陈友谅尤为突出。
English: After crossing the river, looking at the behavior of Qunxiong, he only caused the people to suffer a disaster, of which Zhang Shicheng and Chen Youyuan are particularly prominent.

古文：士诚恃富，友谅恃强，朕独无所恃。
现代文：士诚可凭借财富，友谅凭借强大，唯独我没有依靠。
English: A scholar can succeed by virtue of his wealth, a friend by virtue of his strength, but I have no one to rely on.

古文：惟不嗜杀人，布信义，行节俭，与卿等同心共济。
现代文：只是不喜杀人，提倡信义，厉行节俭，与各位同舟共济。
English: They just don't like to kill, advocate loyalty, practice thrift, and help others.

古文：初与二寇相持，士诚尤逼近。或谓宜先击之。
现代文：起初与张、陈二寇相持，士诚与我更接近，有的人建议要先攻击他。
English: At first, I was on the same side as Zhang and Chen Erko, and Shicheng was closer to me. Some people suggested attacking him first.

古文：朕以友谅志骄，士诚器小，志骄则好生事，器小则无远圆，故先攻友谅。
现代文：我认为友谅性格骄狂，士诚器量窄小，性格骄狂则喜欢挑起战事，器量窄小则没有远大抱负，因此要先进攻友谅。
English: I think that Yu Peng's character is arrogant and conceited, while Shicheng's capacity is narrow and small. The arrogant character likes to provoke wars, while the narrow-minded one does not have lofty ambitions. Therefore, it is necessary to attack Yu Peng in advance.

古文：鄱阳之役，士诚卒不能出姑苏一步以为之援。
现代文：鄱阳之战，士诚军队没有迈出姑苏一步去进行援救。
English: In the Battle of Shenyang, Shicheng's army did not take a single step to go to the rescue.

古文：向使先攻士诚，浙西负固坚守，友谅必空国而来，吾腹背受敌矣。
现代文：如果先进攻士诚，浙西凭借牢固城防坚守，友谅必然率全部兵马赶来，我就会腹背受敌。
English: If the advanced attackers are sincere, West Zhejiang will take the lead by virtue of the firm defense of the city, and all the soldiers and horses will inevitably come, I will suffer from the enemy.

古文：二寇既除，北定中原，所以先山东、次河洛，止潼关之兵不遽取秦、陇者，盖扩廓帖木儿、李思齐、张思道皆百战之余，未肯遽下，急之则并力一隅，猝未易定，故出其不意，反旆而北。
现代文：除掉二寇，北上平定中原，之所以先攻山东，再进河洛，而停止潼关兵马不去攻取秦、陇，是因为扩廓帖木儿、李思齐、张思道虽经百余战却胜负未分，急于进攻，他们就会联合一起抵抗，短期内不能平定他们，因此，出其不意，反而率军北上。
English: After eliminating the two invasions, they went north to pacify the Central Plains. The reason why they attacked Shandong first and then entered Helo, and why they stopped the Shaoguan soldiers and horses from attacking Qin and Qi, was because Timur, Li Siqi, and Zhang Sidao, although they had won more than a hundred battles, were still undecided and eager to attack. They would jointly resist and could not pacify them in the short term. Therefore, unexpectedly, they led the army north.

古文：燕都既举，然后西征。
现代文：燕都既然攻克，再行西征。
English: Now that Yandu has been conquered, it is time to march west again.

古文：张、李望绝势穷，不战而克，然扩廓犹力抗不屈。
现代文：张、李势单力薄，于是不战而胜，然而扩廓还拼力抵抗。
English: Zhang and Li were not strong enough on their own, so they won without a fight, but Zhan Guo still resisted with all his might.

古文：向令未下燕都，骤与角力，胜负未可知也。 
现代文：如果不先攻下燕都，就急于与他角逐，胜负就难说了。 
English: If you do not capture Yandu first, you will be eager to compete with him, and it is difficult to say whether you will win or lose.

古文：帝之雄才大略，料敌制胜，率类此。
现代文：太祖皇帝的雄才大略，制胜于敌，可见一斑。
English: It can be seen that the great-great-grandfather emperor's talent was great, and he prevailed over the enemy.

古文：故能戡定祸乱，以有天下。
现代文：因此，他能平息祸乱，取得天下。
English: Therefore, he can quell the calamity and win the world.

古文：语云 天道后起者胜 ，岂偶然哉。
现代文：有道是 后来者居上的道理 岂是偶然的吗？
English: Is it a coincidence that there is a reason why latecomers come out on top?

古文：赞曰：太祖以聪明神武之资，抱济世安民之志，乘时应运，豪杰景从，戡乱摧强，十五载而成帝业。
现代文：评论：太祖凭聪明神武的天资，胸怀济世安民之志，审时度势，豪杰景仰，平定战乱，消除强暴，十五年完成帝业。
English: Comment: The great-great-grandfather, by virtue of his clever and powerful talent, cherished the dream of benefiting the world and keeping the people safe, judged the times and the situation, admired the heroes, settled the war, eliminated the violence, and completed the imperial career in 15 years.

古文：崛起布衣，奄奠海宇，西汉以后所未有也。
现代文：从一介布衣到基业覆盖海宇，自西汉以后从未有过。
English: From a piece of cloth to a foundation covering the sea, there has never been anything like it since the Western Han Dynasty.

古文：惩元政废弛，治尚严峻。
现代文：吸取元朝政治废弛的教训，整肃政治。
English: draw lessons from the political waste of the Yuan Dynasty and clean up politics.

古文：而能礼致耆儒，考礼定乐，昭揭经义，尊崇正学，加恩胜国，澄清吏治，修人纪，崇凤都，正后宫名义，内治肃清，禁宦竖不得干政，五府六部官职相维，置卫屯田，兵食俱足。
现代文：而且对耆儒以礼相待，考查制定礼典乐章，彰明经义，尊崇正学，施恩于亡国亡地，澄清吏治，修定做人准则，尊崇风俗宗教，正后宫名义，内治肃清，禁止宦官太监干预政事，五府六部官职互相牵制，设卫屯田，兵器粮食充足。
English: Moreover, they treated each other with courtesy, examined and formulated ceremonial music, clarified scriptures and doctrines, revered proper learning, extended grace to a ruined country and a ruined land, clarified the rule of officials, revised the code of conduct, revered customs and religions, in the name of the imperial harem, purified internal governance, prohibited eunuch eunuchs from interfering in political affairs, the five prefectures and six departments of government officials from interfering with each other, set up guard camps, and had sufficient weapons and grain.

古文：武定祸乱，文致太平，太祖实身兼之。
现代文：以武平定祸乱，以文建立太平盛世，太祖一身兼有。
English: To settle the calamity by military means and to establish a peaceful and prosperous world by means of literature, the great-grandfather was both.

古文：至于雅尚志节，听蔡子英北归。
现代文：在崇尚节义方面，允许蔡子英北归。
English: In terms of advocating the festival, Cai Ziying was allowed to return to the north.

古文：晚岁忧民益切，尝以一岁开支河暨塘堰数万以利农桑、备旱潦。
现代文：晚年更加忧民，曾以一年的时间开挖支河数万处河渠塘堰，以利农桑，预防旱灾。
English: In his later years, he was even more concerned about the people. He once spent a year digging tens of thousands of canals and weirs in tributary rivers to prevent droughts by using agricultural mulberry trees.

古文：用此子孙承业二百余年，士重名义，闾阎充实。
现代文：凭借这些，其子孙承袭基业二百多年，士重名义，平民充实。
English: By virtue of these, his descendants inherited the foundation for more than two hundred years, in the name of nobles, and the commoners were enriched.

古文：至今苗裔蒙泽，尚如东楼、白马，世承先祀，有以哉。
现代文：至今后代蒙受恩泽，就如东楼、白马，世代相传祭祀太祖，享受这些决不是平白无故的啊！
English: So far, future generations have received grace, just like the East Tower, the White Horse, and the ancestor worship handed down from generation to generation. Enjoying these is by no means gratuitous!

