古文：凡与敌对垒，不可令军士通家书，亲戚往来；恐言语不一，众心疑惑。
现代文：凡是在与敌人作战对阵中，都不可允许士兵同家庭通信和同亲戚往来，这是为了防止他们说法口径不一致，导致军心士气疑惑不振。
English: Soldiers are not allowed to communicate with their families and relatives in any battle with the enemy, in order to prevent them from making inconsistent statements, leading to doubts about the morale of the military.

古文：法曰： 信问通，则心有所恐；亲戚往来，则心有所恋。 
现代文：诚如兵法所说： 与家人通信，容易引起士兵畏敌怯战心理；与亲戚往来，容易导致士卒恋亲思乡而产生厌战的情绪。 
English: As it is said in the Art of War: Correspondence with family members is likely to cause soldiers to be afraid of the enemy and war-weary; contact with relatives is likely to cause soldiers to be homesick and war-weary.

古文：蜀将关羽屯江陵，吴以吕蒙代鲁肃屯陆口。
现代文：三国时期，蜀国大将关羽驻军江陵，吴国派遣吕蒙接替鲁肃职务而驻守陆口。
English: During the Three Kingdoms period, the general of Shu, Guan Yu, stationed troops in Gangneung, and the State of Wu sent Liumeng to take over the duties of Rusu and stationed in Lukou.

古文：蒙初至，外倍修恩德，与羽结好。
现代文：吕蒙初到陆口时，表面上倍加修行恩德，与关羽表示友好。
English: When Lv Meng first arrived in Lukou, he ostensibly doubled down on his benevolence and expressed his friendship with Guan Yu.

古文：后蒙袭收公安、南郡，而蜀将皆降于蒙。
现代文：但后来竟乘隙偷袭而占领了公安、南郡，两地蜀军守将傅士仁、糜芳都投降了吕蒙。
English: However, they later took advantage of a loophole to attack and occupy the Public Security Bureau and Nan County. The two Shu military commanders, Fu Shiren and Yu Fang, both surrendered to Liumeng.

古文：蒙入据城，得羽将士家属，皆抚慰，令军卒不得干历人家，有所取求。
现代文：吕蒙率军进据两城后，俘获关羽部将家属，都进行抚慰，命令官兵不得干扰人家和勒索东西。
English: After the army led by Lv Meng entered the two cities, they captured Guan Yu's family members and comforted them, ordering the officers and soldiers not to interfere with people's homes and extort things.

古文：蒙麾下士，与蒙同汝南人，取民一笠，以覆官铠；虽公，蒙犹以为犯军令，不可以乡里故废法，乃泣而斩之。
现代文：吕蒙手下有个士兵，与吕蒙同为汝南人，擅自拿民家一顶斗笠用来遮盖官家铠甲，这虽是为公事，但吕蒙还是认为他违犯了军令，不能因为是同乡人就废弃军法，便含泪将其斩首。
English: One of Lv Meng's soldiers, who was from the south of the Ryukyus like Lv Meng, took a hat from a local family and used it to cover the official armor without permission. Although this was for official business, Lv Meng still thought that he had violated the military order and could not abandon the military law because he was a fellow villager, so he beheaded him in tears.

古文：于是，军中震栗，道不拾遗。
现代文：于是，全军为之震动，自此部队中出现路不拾遗的好风尚。
English: As a result, the whole army was shaken, and since then, there has been a good tradition in the army.

古文：蒙旦暮使亲近存恤耆老，问所不足，疾病者给医药，饥寒者与衣粮。
现代文：吕蒙还早晚都派身边人员去慰问救济老年人，询问他们缺少什么东西；对生病的人主动请医送药，对饥寒的人发放衣服粮食。
English: Sooner or later, Lv Meng also sent people around him to offer condolences and relief to the elderly, asking what they lacked; for those who were sick, he took the initiative to ask the doctor to send medicine, and for those who were hungry and cold, he distributed clothes and grain.

古文：羽还，在道，每使人相问，蒙则厚遇之，周游城中，家家致问，羽人还，私相参问，咸贺家门无恙，相待过于平时，故羽士卒皆无斗志。
现代文：关羽在回军途中，多次派人到吕蒙住处探问情况，吕蒙总是厚待其使者，让他周游全城，逐家进行问候，有的家属亲笔写信托使者带给家人。关羽派出的使者一回到军营后，将士们私下互相询问，都庆幸自己家中平安无事，知道家人所受待遇又超过平时，因此，关羽部队的士卒人人自安而无再战之志了。
English: On the way back to the army, Guan Yu repeatedly sent people to Lv Meng's residence to inquire about the situation. Lv Meng always treated his envoys kindly, letting him travel around the city and greet each family. Some family members wrote letters of trust to bring to their families. Once the envoys sent by Guan Yu returned to the military camp, the soldiers asked each other privately. They were all happy that their homes were safe and knew that their families were treated better than usual. As a result, the soldiers of Guan Yu's army were all safe and had no desire to fight again.

古文：会权又至，羽，西至漳乡，众皆降，羽被杀。
现代文：因此，关羽的官兵都没有斗志，恰逢孙权又来夹攻，关羽终于向西败走，部众都投降了吴军。
English: Therefore, Guan Yu's officers and soldiers had no fighting spirit, which coincided with Sun Quan's attack. Guan Yu was finally defeated to the west, and his subordinates all surrendered to the Wu Army.

