古文：王汝训，字古师，聊城人。
现代文：王汝训，字古师，山东聊城人。
English: Wang Ruxun, an ancient calligrapher, from Liaocheng, Shandong Province.

古文：隆庆五年进士。除元城知县。
现代文：隆庆五年进士，授职元城知县。
English: He was promoted to Shishi in the fifth year of the Longqing era.

古文：万历初，入为刑部主事。改兵部，累迁光禄少卿。
现代文：万历初年，进入朝廷为刑部主事，后改任兵部，逐渐升到光禄少卿。
English: In the first year of the Wanli era, he entered the imperial court as the head of the criminal department, later he was transferred to the military department, and gradually rose to the rank of Guanglu Shaoqing.

古文：吏科都给事中海宁陈与郊者，大学士王锡爵门生，又附申时行，恣甚。
现代文：吏科都给事中海宁陈与郊是大学士王锡爵的门生，又依附申时行，很专横。
English: Hao Ning Chen and Suburban are the protégés of the university judge Wang Xizhe, and they are very domineering.

古文：汝训抗疏数其罪，言： 与郊今日荐巡抚，明日荐监司。
现代文：王汝训上疏列出他的罪行，说： 陈与郊今天推荐巡抚，明天推荐监司。
English: Wang Ruxun listed his crimes in detail, saying: Chen Yujun recommended an inspector today, and a supervisor tomorrow.

古文：每疏一出，受贿狼籍。
现代文：每次上疏一出，到处受贿。
English: Each time, he skimmed off the top and took bribes everywhere.

古文：部曹吴正志一发其奸，身投荒徼。
现代文：部曹吴正志一揭发他的奸情，就被贬到荒远的地方。
English: As soon as Minister Cao Wu Zhengzhi exposed his adultery, he was banished to a desolate place.

古文：吏部尚书杨巍亦尝语侍郎赵焕，谓为小人。乞速罢谴。
现代文：吏部尚书杨巍也曾对侍郎赵焕说他是个小人，陈与郊请求皇上立即将杨巍罢官。
English: Yang Xi, the secretary of the personnel department, also told Zhao Huan, the chamberlain, that he was a villain. Chen and the suburbs asked the emperor to immediately dismiss Yang Xi.

古文：且科道以言为职，乃默默者显，谔谔者绌。直犯乘舆，屡荷优容。
现代文：科道本是议论国事的，闷不吭声者被提拔，直言进谏的人被贬退。
English: Science and technology is originally a discussion of national affairs. Those who are silent are promoted, and those who are outspoken are demoted.

古文：稍涉当途，旋遭摈斥。
现代文：稍稍涉及到当道的人，立即遭到贬斥。
English: The slightest hint of involvement with the right people is immediately denigrated.

古文：言官不难于批鳞，而难于借剑，此何为也？
现代文：言官不难犯颜直谏，难在借刀杀人，这是为什么呢？
English: Why is it that it is not difficult for a government official to commit a brazen crime, or to murder with a borrowed sword?

古文：天下惟公足以服人。
现代文：天下唯有公正才能让人信服。
English: In this world, only justice can be convincing.

古文：今言者不论是非，被言者不论邪正，模棱两可，曲事调停，而曰务存大体。
现代文：现在言官不论说的对还是不对，被议论的人不论是正是邪，都模棱两可，从中调停，还说是务求保存大体。
English: Now, whether the spokesperson is right or wrong, whether the person being discussed is evil, is ambiguous, mediated, and said to be preserved in general.

古文：是惩议论之纷纭，而反致政体之决裂也。
现代文：结果对纷纭的议论的惩戒，反而导致政体的分裂。
English: As a result, the punishment of divisive speech has led to a divided body politic.

古文：乞特敕吏部，自后迁转科道，毋恶异喜同，毋好谀丑正。 
现代文：乞求皇上特令吏部，以后升迁，转入科道，不要厌恶异己喜欢同类，不要好阿谀之人而憎恶正直的大臣。 
English: Begging the emperor to give special orders to the cadres, to be promoted in the future, to be transferred to science, not to detest the different and like the same, not to be a good flatterer and hate the honest minister.

古文：是时，巍以政府故，方厚与郊。
现代文：杨巍因为执政的缘故，与陈与郊培养感情。
English: Yang Hui cultivated feelings with Chen and Xuan for the sake of ruling.

古文：闻汝训言引己且刺之，大恚，言： 臣未尝诋与郊。
现代文：听到王汝训言词中引用了他的话讽刺陈与郊，很生气，说： 我没有诋毁过陈汝郊。
English: When Wang Ru heard that his words were quoted in Wang Ru's sermon to satirize Chen Yujuan, he was very angry and said: I have not slandered Chen Yujuan.

古文：汝训以寺臣攻言路，正决裂政体之大者。 
现代文：王汝训以光禄侍臣身份攻击言官，正是严重分裂政体的人。 
English: Wang Ruxun, who attacked the speaker as a retainer of Guanglu, is the one who seriously divided the political system.

古文：乃调汝训南京。
现代文：于是将王汝训调往南京。
English: As a result, Wang Ruxun was transferred to Nanjing.

古文：顷之，御史王明复劾与郊，并及巍，诏夺明俸，擢与郊太常少卿。
现代文：随即御史王明又弹劾陈与郊与杨巍，皇上下诏停发王明的俸禄，提升陈与郊为太常少卿。
English: Subsequently, Wang Ming, the Grand Historian, impeached Chen Yojuan and Yang Xi, and the emperor issued an imperial edict to suspend Wang Ming's salary and promote Chen Yojuan to the post of Minor Lord.

古文：都人为之语曰： 欲京堂，须弹章。 
现代文：京城人因此说： 欲做京堂，须抨击奏章。 
English: People in the capital therefore say: If you want to build a cathedral, you have to attack the musical score.

古文：与郊寻以忧去。
现代文：陈与郊不久因家人去世离职。
English: Chen and Qiao left the company soon after due to the death of a family member.

古文：后御史张应扬追劾其交通文选郎刘希孟，考选纳贿，并免官。
现代文：后来御史张应扬弹劾他与文选郎刘希孟相勾结，考选时受贿，两人都被免官。
English: Later, the Minister of History Zhang Yingyang impeached him for colluding with Liu Ximeng, a literary critic, and accepting bribes during the election. Both were removed from office.

古文：未几，其子杀人论死，与郊悒悒卒。
现代文：没有多久，陈与郊因儿子杀人犯了死罪，郁郁而终。
English: Not long after, Chen and Yuan committed the capital crime of murdering their son, and died of depression.

古文：汝训入为太常少卿。
现代文：王汝训入朝廷为太常少卿。
English: Wang Ruxun entered the imperial court as a minor noble.

古文：孟秋飨庙，帝不亲行。
现代文：孟秋时节，祭祀祖庙，皇上不亲自去。
English: The Emperor does not personally go to the ancestral temple for the Mengqiu Festival.

古文：汝训极谏。
现代文：王汝训极力劝谏。
English: Wang Ruxun tried his best to dissuade him.

古文：帝愠甚，以其言直，不罪也。
现代文：皇上很愤怒，但因为他说的是直话，也不怪罪他。
English: The Emperor was very angry, but because he spoke the truth, he did not blame him.

古文：寻进太仆卿，调光禄。
现代文：不久，他升为太仆卿，调为光禄。
English: Soon after, he was promoted to Dajuqing (太僕卿) and transferred to Guanglu (光禄).

古文：汝训先为少卿，寺中岁费二十万，至是滥增四万有奇。
现代文：王汝训先前为少卿时，寺中每年花费二十万，到这时滥增四万多。
English: When Wang Ruxun was previously a Shaoqing, the temple spent 200,000 yuan a year, and by this time it had increased by more than 40,000 yuan.

古文：汝训据《会典》，请尽裁内府冗食，不许。
现代文：王汝训依据《会典》，请求将内府的见食全部减去，皇上不许。
English: According to the Code of Canon Law, Wang Ruxun requested that all the dinners in the Inner Palace be deducted, but the emperor would not allow it.

古文：二十二年，改左佥都御史。
现代文：万历二十二年他改任左佥都御史。
English: In the 22nd year of the Manchurian calendar, he was reassigned to the post of Zuozhongdu Goshi.

古文：旋进右副都御史，巡抚浙江。
现代文：不久，又升为右副都御史，巡抚浙江。
English: Soon, he was promoted to the right vice-governor of the capital, the governor of Zhejiang.

古文：汝训性清介，方严疾恶。
现代文：王汝训生性耿直、廉洁，嫉恶如仇。
English: Wang Ru Xunshu is honest, incorruptible, and envious.

古文：巡按御史南昌彭应参亦雅以强直名，相与力锄豪右。
现代文：巡抚御史南昌彭应参平素也以正直、严厉著称，两人互相支持全力锄除豪门。
English: The governor, Shi Nanchang Peng Ying, is also known for his honesty and strictness, and the two support each other in their efforts to get rid of the wealthy.

古文：乌程故尚书董份、祭酒范应期里居不法，汝训将绳之。
现代文：乌程旧尚书董份、祭酒范应期居家行为多有不轨，王汝训正准备将他绳之以法。
English: Wu Cheng, the former director of Shangshu, and Fan Ying, the director of Sacrificial Wine, have often behaved improperly while staying at home. Wang Ruxun is preparing to bring him to justice.

古文：适应参行部至，应期怨家千人遮道陈牒。
现代文：刚好彭应参到了，与范应期有仇的人家千余人遮蔽道路、呈上牒子。
English: Just as Peng Yingzang arrived, more than a thousand people blocked the road and presented an ultimatum to those who had a grudge against Fan Yingzai.

古文：应参持之急，檄乌程知县张应望按之。应期自缢死，其妻吴氏诣阙诉冤。
现代文：彭应参操之过急，命令乌程知县张应望抓住他，范应期自杀身亡，他的妻子吴氏到官府喊冤。
English: Peng Ying was in too much of a hurry to participate in the drill and ordered Zhang Yingwang of Wucheng County to catch him. Fan Ying committed suicide and died. His wife Wu went to the government office to appeal for justice.

古文：帝命逮应参、应望诏狱，革汝训职，诘吏部都察院任用非人。
现代文：皇上命令逮捕彭应参、张应望，在狱中审问，革去王汝训的职务，责备吏部都察院任用不恰当的人。
English: The emperor ordered the arrest of Peng Yingzang and Zhang Yingwang, interrogated them in prison, dismissed Wang Ruxun from his post, and reprimanded the cadre department of the Imperial Procuratorate for appointing inappropriate people.

古文：尚书孙丕扬、都御史衷贞吉等引罪，且论救。
现代文：尚书孙丕扬、都御史贞吉等伏罪，且上疏救援王汝训等。
English: Shang Shusun, Sun Jianyang, Doushi Zhengyi and others committed the crime of lying in wait, and Shang Shu's rescue of Wang Ruxun was outstanding.

古文：帝意未释，谪救应参者给事中乔胤等于外。
现代文：皇上怒气未消，将救援彭应参的给事中乔胤等贬出京城。
English: The emperor's anger did not dissipate, and he banished Qiao Yan and others from the capital for their involvement in the rescue of Peng Ying.

古文：言官讼汝训、应参，亦及胤，帝愈怒。疏入，辄重胤谴，至除名，而谪应望戍烟瘴，应参为民。
现代文：言官为王汝训、彭应参辩冤也涉及到乔胤，皇上更为不高兴，奏疏上来后，就重重责罚乔胤，除掉他的名籍，贬谪张应望戍守烟瘴之地。
English: The magistrate was Wang Ruxun, and Peng Ying's participation in the debate also involved Qiaotian. The emperor was even more displeased. After the report came up, he severely punished Qiaotian, removed his name and nationality, and demeaned Zhang Yingwang's place of residence.

古文：汝训家居十五年，起南京刑部右侍郎。
现代文：王汝训居家十五年后，起用为南京刑部右侍郎。
English: After Wang Ruxun had lived at home for fifteen years, he was appointed as the right hand man of the Nanjing Criminal Investigation Department.

古文：召改工部，署部事。
现代文：后召改为工部，署理部事。
English: Later, it was changed to the Ministry of Industry and Trade, and the acting ministry was established.

古文：初，矿税兴，以助大工为名。后悉输内帑，不以供营缮。而四方采木之需多至千万，费益不訾。汝训屡请发帑佐工，皆不报。
现代文：起初，矿税兴起，以资助修建大殿为名，后全部输入内库，不足以营建大殿，而四方采伐树木的需要多达千万，经费更加不够，王汝训屡次请求发放钱财补助工程，都没有得到答复。
English: At first, the rise of the mining tax, in the name of funding the construction of the Great Hall, after all the input into the treasury, is not enough to build the Great Hall, and the need for logging trees in all directions is as high as tens of millions, the funds are even more insufficient, Wang Ruxun repeatedly requested the issuance of money and subsidies for projects, but did not receive a reply.

古文：十五年，御史杨尔铭、给事中倪仁祯相继论荐，未及用而卒。邹维琏，字德辉，江西新昌人。
现代文：在工部一年多的时间里，大力整治过去的陋习。宦官请求经费，就上奏坚持不给，节省无益费用数万。死后，被赠为工部尚书，谥号恭介。邹维琏，字德辉，江西新昌人。
English: For more than a year in the Ministry of Industry and Trade, he vigorously rectified the bad habits of the past. When eunuchs requested funds, he insisted on not giving them, saving tens of thousands of useless expenses. After his death, he was presented with the Ministry of Industry and Trade's Shangshu, the posthumous name Kyosuke.

古文：万历三十五年进士。授延平推官。
现代文：万历三十五年进士，授职延平推官。
English: In the 35th year of the Manchurian calendar, he was promoted to the post of Yanping superior officer.

古文：耿介有大节。
现代文：正直而又高风亮节。
English: Honest and upbeat.

古文：巡抚袁一骥以私憾摭布政窦子偁罪，维琏以去就争。
现代文：巡抚袁一骥因私利不满意就寻找布政使窦子翶的过失论罪，邹维琏不惜免职与他争论。
English: The procurator, Yuan Yikun, was dissatisfied with his personal gain and sought to find fault with Dou Zixuan, a political appointee. Zou Weixuan did not hesitate to argue with him.

古文：监司欲为一骥建生祠，维琏抗词力阻。行取，授南京兵部主事，进员外郎。
现代文：监司想为袁一骥修建生祠，邹维琏据理极力阻拦，被推荐调任京职，授职南京兵部主事，升员外郎。
English: The superintendent wanted to build a shrine for Yuan Yixuan, but Yan Weiyuan tried his best to prevent it. He was recommended to be transferred to the Beijing post, given the post of the head of the Nanjing Military Department, and promoted to the position of foreign minister.

古文：辽左用兵，疏陈数事。
现代文：辽东用兵，上疏陈明数件事。
English: Liaodong uses soldiers, Shangxu clarifies several things.

古文：寻以忧去。
现代文：不久因家人去世回乡。
English: He returned to his hometown shortly after his family members passed away.

古文：天启三年，起官职方，进郎中。
现代文：天启三年起用为兵部职方官，升郎中。
English: Since the third year of the Apocalypse, he has been an officer of the Ministry of Military Affairs.

古文：刑部主事谭谦益荐妖人宋明时能役神兵复辽左地，魏忠贤阴主之。
现代文：刑部主事谭谦益推荐妖人宋明时能够统役神兵，恢复辽东土地，魏忠贤暗中支持他。
English: The head of the Criminal Investigation Department, Tan Qianyi, recommended that Song Ming, the demon, could lead the divine soldiers and restore the land of Liaodong. Wei Zhongxian secretly supported him.

古文：维琏极言其妖妄。
现代文：邹维琏极力证明是妖人的妄想。
English: Zou Weiqi tried his best to prove that this was a delusion of a demon.

古文：忠贤怒，矫旨谯责。
现代文：魏忠贤发怒，假传圣旨责备他。
English: Wei Zhongxian flew into a rage and accused him of passing on false teachings.

古文：海内方用师，将帅悉贿进，职方尤冗秽。
现代文：国家正用兵，将帅都贿赂以求升迁，职方尤其冗杂污秽。
English: The state is using soldiers, generals are bribed for promotion, and officials are especially filthy.

古文：维琏素清严，请寄皆绝，因极论债帅之弊，讥切中官、大臣。
现代文：邹维琏素为清明、严厉，一概予以拒绝。因此极力疏论以贿进职的将帅之弊，讥讽中官、大臣。
English: Zou Weizhen was very clear and strict, and refused all bribes. Therefore, he tried his best to avoid discussing the drawbacks of bribing generals, and ridiculed middle-ranking officials and ministers.

古文：吏部尚书赵南星知其贤，调为稽勋郎中。
现代文：吏部尚书赵南星知道他贤明，将他调为稽员郎中。
English: Zhao Nanxing, the secretary of the personnel department, knew that he was wise and transferred him to the auditor's junior.

古文：时言路横恣，凡用吏部郎，必咨其同乡居言路者。给事中傅櫆、陈良训、章允儒以南星不先咨己，大怒，共诟谇维琏。
现代文：当时言官霸道，凡是任命吏部郎中，必然先问他做言官的同乡，给事中傅魁、陈良训、章允儒因为赵南星没有先问自己，大怒，一同辱骂邹维琏。
English: At that time, the speaker was domineering, and anyone who appointed a junior official of the cadre must first ask his compatriot who was a speaker, and Fu Kui, Chen Liangxun, and Zhang Yunru were very angry because Zhao Nansing did not ask himself first, and together they insulted Zou Weiqi.

古文：及维琏调考功，櫆等益怒，交章力攻。又以江西有吴羽文，例不当用，两人迫羽文去，以窘辱维琏。
现代文：等到邹维琏调任为考功，傅魁等更为恼怒，轮流上疏攻击他，又以江西有吴羽文，邹维琏照例不应当任用，两人迫使吴羽文离去，以此羞辱邹维琏。
English: Fu Kui and others were even more angry when Yan Weichen was appointed as a test of merit. They took turns attacking him. They also said that Jiangxi had Wu Yuwen, and Yan Weichen should not be appointed as usual. The two of them forced Wu Yuwen to leave, thereby humiliating Yan Weichen.

古文：维琏愤，拜疏求罢，即日出城。
现代文：邹维琏很气愤，上疏请求罢官，当日就出京城。
English: Yan Weizhen was very angry. He asked Shangsu to dismiss him, and left Beijing on the same day.

古文：疏中以章惇攻苏轼、蔡京逐司马光为言，櫆等愈怒。
现代文：疏中有章攻击苏轼，蔡京驱遂司马光的话，傅魁等更为不高兴。
English: Xiao Zhongzhang attacked Su Shi, Cai Jing drove out Sima Guang, Fu Kui and others were even more unhappy.

古文：櫆遂显攻魏大中、左光斗以及维琏。
现代文：傅魁于是明显地攻击魏大中、左光斗和邹维琏。
English: Fu Kui then clearly attacked Wei Dazhong, Zuo Guangdou and Zou Weizhen.

古文：自是朝端水火，诸贤益不安其位矣。
现代文：从此两方水火不相容，各位贤明的大臣更加不安于其位。
English: Since then, the two sides have been at loggerheads, and the wise ministers are even more uneasy in their positions.

古文：维琏欲去不得，诏留视事。
现代文：邹维琏想离职也不行，皇上下诏将他留下。
English: He could not leave his post even if he wanted to, and the emperor ordered him to stay.

古文：乃严核官评，无少假借。
现代文：于是他严格考查官员评语，毫不徇私。
English: As a result, he strictly examined the officials' comments and did not show any favoritism.

古文：杨涟劾魏忠贤，被旨切责。
现代文：杨涟弹劾魏忠贤，被圣旨严厉地指责。
English: Yang Jie impeached Wei Zhongxian and was severely criticized by the imperial edict.

古文：维琏抗疏曰： 忠贤大奸大恶，罄竹难书。
现代文：邹维琏上疏说： 魏忠贤的罪行，罄竹难书。
English: Wei Wei said: Wei Zhongxian's crimes are too numerous to list.

古文：陛下怜其小信小忠，不忍割弃。
现代文：陛下顾念他的小信小忠，不忍让他走。
English: His Majesty, mindful of his little faith and loyalty, could not bear to let him go.

古文：岂知罪恶既盈，即不忍不可得。
现代文：难道不知道，恶贯满盈，即使不忍心都不可心。
English: Don't you know that even if you can't bear it, you won't be able to do anything about it?

古文：汉张让、赵忠，灵帝以父母称之；唐田令孜，僖宗亦以阿父称之；我朝王振、曹吉祥、刘瑾，亦尝宠之群臣之上。
现代文：汉代张让、赵忠、灵帝称他们为父母。唐代的田令孜，僖宗也称他为阿父，明代的王振、曹吉祥、刘瑾，皇上宠爱他们的程度甚过了群臣。
English: Zhang Zhan, Zhao Zhong, and Ling Di in the Han Dynasty called them their parents. Tian Ling Ze in the Tang Dynasty, Shizong also called him his father, and Wang Zhen, Cao Jixiang, and Liu Ye in the Ming Dynasty. The emperor loved them more than his ministers.

古文：有一人老死牖下，获保富贵哉？
现代文：他们中有一个在窗下老死、保全了富贵吗？
English: Did one of them die of old age under a window, preserving his wealth?

古文：今陛下以太阿授忠贤，非所以为宗社计，亦非所以为忠贤计也。
现代文：现在陛下授予魏忠贤无上的职权，不是为国家考虑，也不是为魏忠贤着想。
English: Now that His Majesty has given Wei Zhongxian supreme authority, it is not for the sake of the country, nor for the sake of Wei Zhongxian.

古文：若夫黄扉元老，九列巨卿，安可自处于商辂、刘健、韩文下？ 
现代文：如果不是宰相元老，九列巨卿，怎么可以自己处于商辂、刘健、韩文之下呢？ 
English: If you are not the prime minister, the elder statesman, or one of the nine great nobles, how can you be under the leadership of Shangguan, Liu Jian, and Hanwen?

古文：疏入，责其渎奏。
现代文：奏疏呈上，皇上责备他亵渎。
English: The Emperor accused him of blasphemy.

古文：崔呈秀坐赃被劾，维琏论戍边。
现代文：崔呈秀因贪赃被弹劾，邹维琏认为应让他戍边。
English: Cui Chengxiu was impeached for corruption, and Yan Weixuan thought that he should be allowed to stay in power.

古文：诸媚珰者力别其是非，请托，拒不听，诸逆党交憾。
现代文：那些讨好魏忠贤的人极力为崔呈秀申辩、求情，邹维琏一概不听，这些人特别恨他。
English: Those who were in favor of Wei Zhongxian tried their best to argue and plead for Cui Xianxiu, but Wei Wei did not listen at all. These people especially hated him.

古文：及赵南星去国，维琏愿与俱去，忠贤即放归。
现代文：等到赵南星离职，邹维琏愿与他一起走，魏忠贤立即同意。
English: When Zhao Nansing left office, Wei Wei was willing to go with him, and Wei Zhongxian immediately agreed.

古文：无何，张讷劾南星，追论维琏调部非法，诏削籍。
现代文：没有多久，张讷弹劾赵南星，认为邹维琏调到吏部是不合法的，皇上下诏将他的名籍除掉。
English: Not long after, Zhang Ne impeached Zhao Nansing, believing that it was illegal for Xing Weiqi to be transferred to the cadre department, and the emperor issued an edict to remove his name from the register.

古文：复构入汪文言狱，下吏，戍贵州。
现代文：又卷入汪文言一事，被审问，派去戍守贵州。
English: He was also involved in the Wang Wenyan affair, was interrogated, and sent to Guizhou.

古文：崇祯初，起南京通政参议，就迁太仆少卿，疏陈卜相、久任、纳言、议谥、筹兵五事。
现代文：崇祯初年，起用为南京通政参议，接着升任太仆少卿，上疏陈明阁臣选择、官员久任、接纳谏言、议论号谥、运筹兵事等五件事。
English: In the first year of Chongzhen, he was appointed as the Nanjing Political Counselor, and then he was promoted to Taigu Shaoqing, Shangshu Chenming, the selection of cabinet ministers, the long-term appointment of officials, the acceptance of criticisms, the discussion of slogans, the operational planning of the military and other five things.

古文：五年二月，擢右佥都御史，代熊文灿巡抚福建。
现代文：崇祯五年二月提右佥都御史，代替熊文灿巡抚福建。
English: In February of the 5th year of the Chongzhen Emperor, he was promoted to the position of the governor of Fujian Province, replacing Xiong Wencang.

古文：海寇刘香乱，遣游击郑芝龙击破之。
现代文：海盗刘香叛乱，派遣游击郑芝龙击破他。
English: The pirate Liu Xiang rebelled and sent the guerrilla Zheng Zhilong to defeat him.

古文：海外红夷据彭湖，挟互市，后徙台湾，渐泊厦门。
现代文：荷兰人占据澎湖，要挟互市，后又移往台湾，逐渐停泊在厦门。
English: The Dutch occupied Penghu, threatened each other, and then moved to Taiwan, gradually anchoring in Xiamen.

古文：维琏屡檄芝龙防遏之，不听。
现代文：邹维琏屡次命令郑芝龙防备，郑芝龙总是不听。
English: Nie Weizhen repeatedly ordered Zheng Zhilong to be on the alert, but Zheng Zhilong always disobeyed.

古文：明年夏，芝龙剿贼福宁，红夷乘间袭陷厦门城，大掠。
现代文：第二年夏天，郑芝龙在福宁剿灭盗贼，荷兰人乘机偷袭占领厦门城，大肆抢掠。
English: In the summer of the following year, Zheng Zhilong defeated the thieves in Fuming, and the Dutch took the opportunity to raid and occupy Xiamen City, looting and pillaging.

古文：维琏急发兵水陆进，芝龙亦驰援，焚其三舟，官军伤亦众。
现代文：邹维琏急忙发兵水陆并进，郑芝龙也驰援，烧毁了荷兰人三条船，官军伤亡也不少。
English: Yan Weixuan hurriedly sent troops to advance by land and sea, and Zheng Zhilong also came to the rescue, burned three Dutch ships, and the official army suffered many casualties.

古文：寇乃泛舟大洋，转掠青港、荆屿、石湾。
现代文：盗寇于是乘舟出洋，转而在青港、荆屿、石湾抢掠。
English: The robbers then sailed out to sea by boat and plundered Qinggang, Jingyu and Shihwan.

古文：诸将御之铜山，连战数日，始败去。
现代文：诸将在铜山守御，连续战斗数日，盗寇才败走。
English: Zhu will be on guard in Tongshan, fighting for several days in a row, before the robbers are defeated.

古文：维琏在事二年，劳绩甚著。
现代文：邹维琏在福建二年时间中，成绩甚为显著。
English: In his two years in Fujian, Wei Wei's achievements are quite remarkable.

古文：会当国者温体仁辈雅忌维琏，而闽人宦京师者腾谤于朝，竟坐是罢官。
现代文：恰好当权的温体仁平素就忌恨邹维琏，而福建人在京城当官的人也在朝廷诽谤他，邹维琏竟然被免职。
English: The warm-blooded and benevolent ruler who happened to be in power hated Gong Weichen, and the Fujianese officials in Beijing also slandered him in the imperial court. Gong Weichen was even dismissed from his post.

古文：八年春，叙却贼功，诏许起用。
现代文：八年春天，陈叙打退盗贼的功劳，皇上下诏起用他。
English: In the spring of the eighth year, Chen Xiu fought off the thieves, and the emperor made an imperial edict to use him.

古文：旋召拜兵部右侍郎，遘疾不赴，卒于家。
现代文：不久，拜为兵部右侍郎，正好患病没有赴任，在家死去。
English: Soon after, he was appointed as the right hand man of the military department. However, he fell ill and did not go to work, and died at home.

