古文：混沌初开，乾坤始奠。
现代文：混沌宇宙，元气一经开辟，天地便开始形成。
English: In a chaotic universe, the heavens and the earth began to form as soon as the vitality was opened up.

古文：气之轻清上浮者为天，气之重浊下凝者为地。
现代文：轻清的元气向上浮升形成了天，厚重混浊的元气凝结在下面就形成了地。
English: The light and clear elemental air floated upward to form the sky, and the thick and turbid elemental air condensed below to form the earth.

古文：日月五星，谓之七政；天地与人，谓之三才。
现代文：太阳、月亮及金、木、水、火、土五星并称为七政。天、地和人合称为三才。
English: The sun, the moon, and the five stars - gold, wood, water, fire, and earth - are also called the seven elements. Heaven, earth, and man are collectively called the three elements.

古文：日为众阳之宗，月乃太阴之象。
现代文：太阳是所有阳气的主宰，月亮是太阴的精华象征。
English: The sun is the master of all yang, and the moon is the essence of yin.

古文：虹名螮蝀，乃天地之淫气；月里蟾蜍，是月魄之精光。
现代文：长虹又称为螮蝀，是天地之气交汇浸淫而成；月宫中的蟾蜍，是月亮的精华凝聚而成。
English: Changhong, also known as the cormorant, is formed by the convergence of the atmosphere of heaven and earth; the cormorant in the moon palace is formed by the condensation of the essence of the moon.

古文：风欲起而石燕飞，天将雨而商羊舞。
现代文：风要刮起时，石燕就成群的飞起；天要下雨时，商羊就会出来飞舞。
English: When the wind is about to blow, the stone swallows fly up in flocks; when it is about to rain, the sheep come out to fly.

古文：旋风名为羊角，闪电号曰雷鞭。
现代文：盘旋屈曲的狂风，仿佛弯曲的羊角，闪烁的电光划破长空，如同雷神挥动着鞭子。
English: The swirling, twisting wind is like a crooked ram's horn, and the flashing lightning cuts across the sky like Thor swinging his whip.

古文：青女乃霜之神，素娥即月之号。
现代文：青女是主管降霜的神灵，素娥就是嫦娥，也是月亮的别名。
English: Aomei is the deity in charge of frost reduction, Su'e is Chang'e, also an alias of the moon.

古文：雷部至捷之鬼曰律令，雷部推车之女曰阿香。
现代文：雷部里行动敏捷且能迅走如飞的鬼叫做 律令 ，专管雷雨推车的女孩叫做 阿香 。
English: The swift-moving and fast-moving ghost in the Mines Department is called Ritsuryo, and the girl in charge of the thunderstorm cart is called Aka.

古文：云师系是丰隆，雪神乃是滕六。
现代文：世人称云神为 丰隆 ，雪神为 滕六 。
English: The world calls the god of clouds Fenglong and the god of snow Tenglu.

古文：歘火、谢仙，俱掌雷火；飞廉、箕伯，悉是风神。
现代文： 欻火 和 谢仙 都是掌管雷火的神祇， 飞廉 、 箕伯 都是风神。
English: Bonfire and Xie Xianwu are both gods who preside over thunder and lightning, while Fei Liang and Zou Bo are both gods of wind.

古文：列缺乃电之神，望舒是月之御。
现代文： 列缺 是掌管闪电的神， 望舒 是月宫中的御车之神。
English: Lian Gao is the god of lightning, and Wang Shu is the god of the chariot in the Moon Palace.

古文：甘霖、甘澍，皆指时雨；玄穹、彼苍，悉称上天。
现代文： 甘霖 和 甘澍 都是指及时雨；玄穹和彼苍都是上天的称呼。
English: Amarin and Amakasu both mean timely rain; Genkyu and His heaven are the names of heaven.

古文：雪花飞六出，先兆丰年；日上已三竿，乃云时晏。
现代文：飘飞的雪花都是六角形的，可以用来预卜年岁的丰收；太阳升起已有三竿的高度，表示时间已经不早了。
English: The flying snowflakes are hexagonal and can be used to predict the year's harvest; the sun has risen to a height of three poles, indicating that the time is already late.

古文：蜀犬吠日，比人所见甚稀；吴牛喘月，笑人畏惧过甚。
现代文：蜀地因山高少日，所以当地的狗看见太阳，就对着太阳狂吠，是比喻人见识太少，少见多怪。吴地的水牛看见月亮便气喘吁吁，用来嘲笑世人恐惧得太过分了。
English: Because of the small height of the mountains, the local dogs in Shu see the sun and bark wildly at the sun, which is a metaphor for people seeing too little, rare and strange. The buffaloes in Wu see the moon and pant, which is used to ridicule the world for being too afraid.

古文：望切者，若云霓之望；恩深者，如雨露之恩。
现代文：期盼之心殷切，就好像大旱之年企盼下雨；恩泽深厚，如同万物受到雨露恩泽。
English: The yearning for rain is as ardent as the yearning for rain in a year of drought; the bounty is as deep as the rain that falls on all things.

古文：参商二星，其出没不相见；牛女两宿，惟七夕一相逢。
现代文：参星与商星此出彼没，永远不能相见；牛郎和织女隔着银河相望，每年七月初七才能相会。
English: Gansing and Shangxing come and go, and never meet; Cowherd and Weaver Girl look across the Milky Way, and only meet on the seventh day of the seventh month every year.

古文：后羿妻，奔月宫而为嫦娥；傅说死，其精神托于箕尾。
现代文：后羿的妻子，飞升到月宫成为了嫦娥；殷高宗的贤相傅说死后，其精神依托在箕、尾二星之间。
English: Hou Yi's wife, flew up to the Moon Palace and became Chang E; Yin Gaozong's sage Fu said that after his death, his spirit rested between the two stars.

古文：披星戴月，谓早夜之奔驰；沐雨栉风，谓风尘之劳苦。
现代文： 披星戴月 是说早晚不停地奔波，整日操劳非常艰苦； 栉风沐雨 是说奔波在外，不避风雨地辛苦经营。
English: To follow the star and the moon means to run around incessantly in the morning and evening, and to toil all day is very arduous; to follow the wind and the rain means to run around outside, and to work hard without avoiding the wind and rain.

古文：事非有意，譬如云出无心；恩可遍施，乃曰阳春有脚。
现代文：事情在无意中完成，就好像浮云在山间无意飘荡；恩泽广泛的施行，就像阳春滋长着万物一般。
English: Accomplishing things unintentionally is like floating clouds drifting unintentionally among the mountains; the widespread implementation of grace is like the sun and spring nourishing all things.

古文：馈物致敬，曰敢效献曝之忱；托人转移，曰全赖回天之力。
现代文：送礼物给人家，要自谦说聊表献曝的诚意；托人挽转情势，要说全靠您的回天之力。
English: To give a gift to someone, you should humbly say that you are sincere; to ask someone to turn the situation around, you should say that it all depends on your ability to return to heaven.

古文：感救死之恩，曰再造；诵再生之德，曰二天。
现代文：感谢他人援救的恩情叫做 再造 ；称颂再生的德泽叫做 二天 。
English: The grace of thanking others for rescue is called remaking; the virtue of praising rebirth is called two days.

古文：势易尽者若冰山，事相悬者如天壤。
现代文：看似坚固，实则容易消亡的情势或权力，好像冰山见到太阳一样；事物相差悬殊、相去甚远，可称为天壤之别。
English: A situation or power that seems solid, but is actually perishable, is like an iceberg facing the sun; things are so different and far apart that they can be called worlds apart.

古文：晨星谓贤人廖落，雷同谓言语相符。
现代文：用早晨的星星比喻稀少罕见的贤德之人；雷同是用来比喻人云亦云，大家所说的话都相似。
English: The morning star is used as a metaphor for a rare and unusual person of virtue; the same is used as a metaphor for the same cloud, and everyone's words are similar.

古文：心多过虑，何异杞人忧天；事不量力，不殊夸父追日。
现代文：心中太过忧虑，好像杞人担心天要塌下来一样；做事不自量力，和夸父追逐太阳一样没有差别。
English: There is too much anxiety in the heart, as if a deaf person is worried that the sky is about to fall; there is no difference between doing things without self-measurement and chasing the sun.

古文：如夏日之可畏，是谓赵盾；如冬日之可爱，是谓赵衰。
现代文：赵盾之为人，就像夏日的太阳，威猛似火让人害怕。赵衰待人和蔼，如冬日的阳光一样温暖可亲。
English: Zhao Dun as a person is like the summer sun, his fierceness is frightening. Zhao Zhen treats people kindly, and is as warm and amiable as the winter sun.

古文：齐妇含冤，三年不雨；邹衍下狱，六月飞霜。
现代文：齐国有一孝妇窦氏含冤而死，上天因而震怒，三年都不下雨；战国时候邹衍被屈捕下狱，六月的盛暑天气，忽然飞起霜来。
English: In the State of Qi, there was a filial daughter of the Dou clan who died unjustly. As a result, Heaven was outraged, and it did not rain for three years. During the Warring States period, Yan Yan was arrested and imprisoned. In the hot weather of June, frosts suddenly appeared.

古文：父仇不共戴天，子道须当爱日。
现代文：杀父之仇必报，不愿和仇人共同站立在天地之间；为人子女者应尽孝道，要珍惜父母健在的日子。
English: The revenge of killing one's father must be avenged. One does not want to stand between heaven and earth with one's enemy. Children should be filial and cherish the days when their parents are alive.

古文：盛世黎民，嬉游于光天化日之下；太平天子，上召夫景星庆云之祥。
现代文：太平盛世之时，百姓安居乐业，所以能在光天化日之下快乐地嬉游；太平时期有才德的皇帝能感召上天，而出现景星、庆云等各种祥瑞的景象。
English: When the Taiping era was in full bloom, the people lived and worked peacefully, so they were able to play happily in broad daylight; during the Taiping era, a talented emperor could invoke the heavens, and various auspicious scenes such as stars and clouds appeared.

古文：夏时大禹在位，上天雨金；春秋孝经既成，赤虹化玉。
现代文：夏朝时大禹平治水患，功劳与天地齐，使上天接连着下了三天黄金雨；孔子编纂了《春秋》和《孝经》这两部书，赤虹从天而降化为黄玉。
English: In the summer dynasty, Dayu Ping dealt with floods, and his merits were equal to those of heaven and earth, so that the heavens rained gold for three days in a row; Confucius compiled the two books "Spring and Autumn" and "Filial Piety," and the red rainbow fell from the sky to the topaz.

古文：箕好风，毕好雨，比庶人愿欲不同；风从虎，云从龙，比君臣会合不偶。
现代文：箕星主风，毕星主雨，比喻人的愿望各有不同；虎啸生风，龙腾生云，说明了君臣的会合相辅并不是偶然的。
English: It is not by chance that the meeting of monarchs and ministers is mutually supportive, as illustrated by the metaphors that the wind is the main wind and the rain is the main rain.

古文：雨旸时若，系是休征；天地交泰，斯称盛世。
现代文：晴雨适宜应时而至，这是吉庆福禄的好征兆。天地融和通畅，万事亨通便称得上是太平盛世。
English: It is a good omen for auspicious fortune that the weather should be fine or rainy from time to time. When the heavens and the earth are harmonious and smooth, everything can be said to be peaceful and prosperous.

