古文：潘孟阳，礼部侍郎炎之子也。
现代文：潘孟阳，礼部侍郎潘炎之子。
English: Pan Mengyang, the son of the etiquette attendant Pan Yan.

古文：孟阳以父廕进，登博学宏辞科。累迁殿中侍御史，降为司议郎。
现代文：潘孟阳因父亲之荫庇而仕进，登博学宏辞科，屡升至殿中侍御史，后又降为司议郎。
English: Pan Mengyang rose to the top under the shadow of his father. He was awarded a scholarship to study Chinese language and literature, and was repeatedly promoted to the position of palace attendant and historian, before being demoted to the position of councilor.

古文：孟阳母，刘晏女也。
现代文：潘孟阳之母，乃刘晏之女。
English: Pan Mengyang's mother is Liu Yao's daughter.

古文：公卿多父友及外祖宾从，故得荐用，累至兵部郎中。
现代文：公卿中多有他父亲的朋友及其外祖父的幕僚，故得以推荐任用，屡升至兵部郎中。
English: Many of his father's friends and his maternal grandfather's staff were recommended for appointment to court nobility, and he was repeatedly promoted to the middle ranks of the military.

古文：德宗末，王绍以恩幸，数称孟阳之材，因擢授权知户部侍郎，年未四十。
现代文：德宗末年，王绍因受恩宠，数次在皇上面前称赞潘孟阳有才干，因而潘孟阳被提升为权知户部侍郎，当时年未满四十。
English: At the end of the reign of Emperor Dezong, Wang Shao was favored by the emperor and praised Pan Mengyang's talent several times in front of the emperor. As a result, Pan Mengyang was promoted to attendant of the household department of the imperial court. At that time, he was under forty.

古文：顺宗即位，永贞内禅，王叔文诛，杜佑始专判度支，请孟阳代叔文为副。
现代文：顺宗即位，永贞间传位，王叔文被诛，杜佑开始专门兼任度支，奏请潘孟阳顶替王叔文为副职。
English: Shunzong ascended the throne, Yongzheng passed the throne, Wang Shouwen was executed, Du You began to serve as a special subordinate, and asked Pan Mengyang to replace Wang Shouwen as a deputy.

古文：时宪宗新即位，乃命孟阳巡江淮省财赋，仍加盐铁转运副使，且察东南镇之政理。
现代文：当时宪宗新即位，便命潘孟阳巡察江淮省财政赋税，依例加授盐铁转运副使，并监察东南各镇之政务。
English: At that time, when Emperor Xianzong was newly enthroned, he ordered Pan Mengyang to inspect the financial taxation of Jianghuai Province, and, as usual, to award him the vice-envoy of salt and iron transportation, and to supervise the government affairs of the southeastern towns.

古文：时孟阳以气豪权重，领行从三四百人，所历镇府，但务游赏，与妇女为夜饮。
现代文：此时潘孟阳仗着权重气豪，带领随从三四百人，所经镇府，专务游乐，携妇女做夜饮。
English: At this time, Pan Mengyang, with the weight of power and prestige, led the three or four hundred followers through the town hall, dedicated to entertainment, with women making evening drinks.

古文：至盐铁转运院，广纳财贿，补吏职而已。
现代文：每至盐铁转运院，则广收财货，补办一点公务罢了。
English: Every time I go to the Salt Railway Transfer Station, I receive a lot of money and goods, and I just have to do a little business.

古文：及归，大失人望，罢为大理卿。
现代文：及至归期，令人大失所望，被削职为大理卿。
English: and, to his great disappointment, he was demoted to the post of Lord of Dali.

古文：三年，出为华州刺史，迁梓州刺史、剑南东川节度使。
现代文：元和三年，出任华州刺史，调梓州刺史、剑南东川节度使。
English: In the 3rd year of Yuanhe, he served as the secretary of Huazhou, the secretary of Zizhou, and the secretary of Jian'nan Dongchuan.

古文：与武元衡有旧，元衡作相，复召为户部侍郎、判度支，兼京北五城营田使，以和籴使韩重华为副。
现代文：因与武元衡有旧交，武元衡做宰相后，重新召他入朝为户部侍郎、判度支，兼京北五城营田使，命和籴使韩重华为副使。
English: Because of his old friendship with Takemoto, after Takemoto assumed the position of prime minister, he recalled him to the imperial court to serve as the head of the Household Department, the Judgement Department, the Beijing North Five Cities Yingtaishi, and the Vice-Minister of War and Peace, Han Chonghua.

古文：太府卿王遂与孟阳不协，议以营田非便，持之不下，孟阳忿憾形于言。
现代文：太府卿王遂与潘孟阳不和，认为营田使不合适，彼此相持不下，潘孟阳愤恨之意形于言表。
English: Wang, the prefectural governor, then fell out with Pan Mengyang, believing that Ying Tianshi was unsuitable and that they could not stand each other. Pan Mengyang's resentment was expressed in his words.

古文：二人俱请对，上怒不许，乃罢孟阳为左散骑常侍。
现代文：二人俱请奏对论理，皇上怒而不许。于是将潘孟阳免职贬为左散骑常侍。
English: The two of them were asked to argue the case, but the emperor was angry and would not allow it. So he dismissed Pan Mengyang and demoted him to the rank of left horseback riding attendant.

古文：明年，复拜户部侍郎。
现代文：次年，重新拜为户部侍郎。
English: The following year, he was reappointed as the chief steward of the household.

古文：孟阳气尚豪俊，不拘小节。
现代文：潘孟阳气度豪放出众，不拘小节。
English: Pan Mengyang's temperament is outstanding, no matter how small.

古文：居第颇极华峻。宪宗微行至乐游原，见其宏敞，工犹未已，问之。
现代文：居宅极为华丽高峻，宪宗微服出行至乐游原，见宅第宏伟，尚未竣工，问是谁人宅第，左右回答是潘孟阳。
English: The house is extremely gorgeous and lofty, the travel of the constitutionalist micro-suit to the pleasure of the original, see the house is magnificent, has not yet been completed, ask who is the house, the answer is Pan Mengyang.

古文：左右以孟阳对，孟阳惧而罢工作。性喜宴，公卿朝士多与之游，时指怒者不一。
现代文：潘孟阳畏惧而停止修建。他喜好宴饮，公卿朝官许多人同他交往，当时指而恨他的也不止一人。
English: Pan Mengyang was afraid and stopped the construction. He liked to feast, many nobles and court officials associated with him, and there was more than one person who hated him at that time.

古文：俄以风缓不能行，改左散骑常侍。
现代文：不久因风痹之症不能行走，改任左散骑常侍。
English: Soon, he was unable to walk due to wind paralysis, and was reassigned to the position of left horseback riding attendant.

古文：元和十年八月卒，赠兵部尚书。
现代文：元和十年八月去世，追赠兵部尚书。
English: He died in August of the 10th year of the Yuan and was posthumously awarded the Heibu Shojo.

古文：遂既死，监军使封其杖进呈。上令出示于朝，以诫廉使。
现代文：卿筹措精明品行纯洁，今登车传命，当理解我之胸怀，勿学潘孟阳，奉使所到之处，只顾一心酣饮、游玩山寺而已。 
English: Sir, you have raised your shrewd character and acted with purity. Now you have boarded the train and passed on your mission. You should understand my heart. Don't learn from Pan Mengyang. Wherever you go, you only care about drinking and visiting mountain temples.

古文：曹华，宋州楚丘人，仕宣武军为牙校。
现代文：潘孟阳竟遭人主如此鄙薄！曹华，宋州楚丘人，在宣武军任职为牙校。
English: Pan Mengyang was so despised by his masters! Cao Hua, a native of Chuqiu, Songzhou, served in the Xuanwu army as a dentist.

古文：贞元末，吴少诚叛，本军以华骁果有智算，用为襄城戍将。
现代文：贞元末，吴少诚叛乱，宣武军因曹华骁勇果断有智谋，任用他为襄城守将。
English: At the end of the Zhengyuan era, Wu Shaocheng rebelled, and the Xuanwu army appointed him as the commander of Xiangcheng because of Cao Huayang's courage and wisdom.

古文：蔡贼攻襄城，华屡败之，德宗特赐旗甲。
现代文：蔡州贼人攻襄城，曹华屡屡将其击败，德宗特赐予旗甲。
English: The Caizhou Thieves attacked Xiangcheng, Cao Hua repeatedly defeated them, and Dezong specially gave them a banner.

古文：元和九年，以功授宁州刺史。未行而吴元济叛，朝廷命河阳帅乌重胤讨贼。
现代文：元和九年，因功授宁州刺史，未及赴任而吴元济叛乱，朝廷命河阳主帅乌重胤讨贼。
English: In the ninth year of the Yuan Dynasty, Wu Yuanji rebelled before taking office, and the imperial court ordered Heyang coach Wu Chungyan to hunt down the thief.

古文：重胤请华为怀汝节度行营副使。
现代文：乌重胤奏请曹华为怀汝节度行营副使。
English: Wu Chongyan asked Cao Huai to be the deputy envoy for the Huairou Festival.

古文：前后数十战，大破贼于青陵城。
现代文：前后数十战，大破贼兵于青陵城。
English: Dozens of battles were fought back and forth, and the Great Thief's soldiers emerged in Qingling City.

古文：贼平，授棣州刺史，封陈留郡王。
现代文：叛贼平定，曹华授棣州刺史，封陈留郡王。
English: The traitors were subdued, and Cao Hua was awarded the title of County Historian of Zhangzhou, and Chen Liu was named County King.

古文：棣邻于郓，贼屡侵逼，华招募群盗之劲者，补之军卒，分据要路。
现代文：棣州与郓州相邻，贼兵屡屡侵逼，曹华招募群盗中身强力壮者，补入军中，分兵据守要路。
English: Luzhou is adjacent to Luzhou, the bandits repeatedly invaded and forced, Cao Hua recruited the strong and able-bodied among the bandits to join the army, and the detachment guarded the important road.

古文：其后，贼至皆击败之，郓人不敢北顾。
现代文：其后，贼兵每至皆遭击败，致使郓州贼人不敢北顾。
English: After that, the bandits were defeated at every turn, so that the bandits in Zhangzhou did not dare to look north.

古文：及李师道诛，分所管十二州为三镇。
现代文：及至李师道被诛，将他原管辖之十二州分为三镇。
English: When Li Shidao was arrested, the twelve provinces under his jurisdiction were divided into three towns.

古文：王遂为沂兗海观察使，褊刻不能驭众，为牙将王弁所害，朝廷遂授华左散骑常侍、沂州刺史、沂海兗观察使。
现代文：王遂为沂兖海观察使，因他为人偏狭刻板不能驾驭属下，被牙将王弁所害，朝廷便授曹华为左散骑常侍、沂州刺史、沂兖海观察使。
English: Wang Sui was the observation envoy to the Bohai Sea. Because he was narrow-minded and rigid and could not control his subordinates, he was victimized by the commander Wang Ben. The imperial court then awarded Cao Huai the position of left horseback riding attendant, the post of Zhangzhou historian, and the observation envoy to the Bohai Sea.

古文：华至镇，视事三日，宴将吏，伏甲士千人于幕下。
现代文：曹华至镇，任职三日，宴请将吏，埋伏甲士千人于帐幕之后。
English: Cao Hua went to the town, served for three days, held a banquet for the generals, and ambushed a thousand soldiers behind the tent.

古文：群校既集，华喻之曰： 吾受命廉问，奉圣旨，以郓州将士分割三处，有道途转徙之劳。
现代文：众军官到齐后，曹华告诉他们说： 本人受命察问，奉圣旨，将郓州将士分割为三处，皆有行路转徙之辛劳。
English: After all the officers arrived, Cao Hua told them: I was ordered to investigate, and according to the Holy Will, I divided the soldiers of Zhangzhou into three places, and they all had the toil of traveling.

古文：今有颁给，北州兵稍厚。
现代文：现有颁发赐给，棣州兵稍许优厚。
English: According to the existing awards, the soldiers of Zhangzhou are slightly superior.

古文：郓州士卒处右，州兵处左，冀易以区别。 分定，并令州兵出外。
现代文：郓州兵靠右棣州兵靠左希望便于区别。 分定之后，又命棣州兵出外。
English: The soldiers of Zhangzhou were ordered to stand on the right and the soldiers of Zhangzhou on the left, hoping to facilitate the distinction.

古文：既出阖门，乃谓郓卒曰： 天子深知郓人之劳，然前害主帅者，不能免罪。 
现代文：等他们出了门，曹华便对郓州兵士道： 天子深知郓州人的辛劳，但先前杀害主帅者，不能免罪。 
English: After they left the gate, Cao Hua said to the soldiers of Zhangzhou: God knows the hard work of the people of Zhangzhou, but those who previously killed the commander cannot be exonerated.

古文：甲士自幕中出，周环之，凡郓一千二百人，立斩于庭，血流成渠。
现代文：甲士从帐幕后涌出，将郓州兵团团围住，郓州兵共一千二百人，立即被斩杀于庭中，血流成渠。
English: Warriors poured out from behind the tent curtain and surrounded the Bozhou legionaries. A total of 1,200 Bozhou soldiers were immediately beheaded in the courtyard, and blood flowed into the canal.

古文：是日，门屏之间，有赤雾高丈余，久之方散。
现代文：当天，门屏之间，有赤雾弥漫高丈余，许久方才消散。
English: On the same day, between the door screens, there was a thick red mist, which took a long time to dissipate.

古文：自是海、沂之人，重足股栗，无敢为盗者。
现代文：从此海州、沂州之人，恐惧已极，无人再敢为盗。
English: Since then, people in Haizhou and Zhangzhou have been extremely afraid, and no one dares to steal anymore.

古文：华恶沂之地褊，请移理于兗，许之。
现代文：曹华厌恶沂州地处偏僻，请求移署于兖州，朝廷应许。
English: Cao Hua disliked the remoteness of Zhangzhou and requested to be transferred to Zhangzhou, which was granted by the imperial court.

古文：初，李正己盗有青、郓十二州，传袭四世，垂五十年，人俗顽骜，不知礼教。
现代文：先前，李正己窃据青、郓十二州，传袭四世，达五十年，民俗顽冥桀骜，不知礼法教化。
English: Previously, Li Zhenggi stole 12 states from the Qing and Han dynasties, passed down to the fourth generation for 50 years, and the folk customs were stubborn, and he did not know how to teach etiquette and law.

古文：华令将吏曰： 邹、鲁儒者之乡，不宜忘于礼义。 
现代文：曹华命令将吏道： 邹、鲁为儒者之乡，不可忘记礼义。 
English: Cao Hua ordered the magistrate to say, "Feng and Lu are the hometown of Confucians, and we must not forget the etiquette.

古文：乃躬礼儒士，习俎豆之容，春秋释奠于孔子庙，立学讲经，儒冠四集。
现代文：于是亲自以礼厚待儒士，令其演习祭祀之礼法，春秋二季设祭于孔子庙，建立学坛讲授经典，四方儒士会集于此。
English: As a result, he personally treated the Confucianists with courtesy and made them practice the ritual of sacrifice, set up a festival in the spring and autumn at the Confucius Temple, established a school to teach the classics, and the four-party Confucianists gathered here.

古文：出家财赡给，俾成名入仕，其往者如归。
现代文：又拿出财物资助儒士家用，使其潜心攻读成名入仕，故前来投奔者极多。
English: He also took out money and materials to subsidize the household of Confucian scholars, so that they could devote themselves to studying to become famous and enter the service. Therefore, there were many people who came to join him.

古文：及镇州军乱，杀田弘正，华表请以本军进讨，就加检校工部尚书，升兗海为武宁节度，赐之节钺。
现代文：及至镇州军乱，杀了田弘正，曹华上表请以本军进讨，朝廷即加授检校工部尚书，升沂兖海观察使之职为节度使，赐符节斧钺。
English: When the Zhenzhou Rebellion broke out, Tian Hongzheng was killed, and Cao Hua requested to use his own army to advance the discussion. The imperial court granted him the title of inspector of schools, the title of inspector of schools, the title of inspector of the Bohai Sea, the title of inspector of festivals, and the title of inspector of festivals.

古文：李絺叛于大梁，华不俟命赴讨。
现代文：李宀介在大梁叛乱，曹华未等候诏命即行征讨。
English: Li Jiankui rebelled in Daliang, Cao Hua did not wait for the imperial edict and immediately went to collect.

古文：絺方遣兵三千人取宋州，华逆击败之。
现代文：李宀介正派兵三千人攻取宋州，被曹华迎头击败。
English: Li Hongjie was sending three thousand soldiers to conquer Songzhou, and was soundly defeated by Cao Hua.

古文：由是，宋、亳不从絺乱。
现代文：因此，宋州、亳州未跟从李宀介叛乱。
English: As a result, Songzhou and Zhangzhou did not follow the rebellion of Li Bingkai.

古文：絺平，以功加检校尚书右仆射。
现代文：李宀介平定，曹华因功加授检校尚书右仆射。
English: Li Yingjie was subdued, Cao Hua was punished by the school for his outstanding performance.

古文：以河朔拒命，移华为滑州刺史、义成军节度使。
现代文：因河朔叛乱，调曹华为滑州刺史、义成军节度使。
English: Due to the rebellion in Hexuo, Cao Cao was appointed as the military governor of Slanting and the military governor of Yicheng.

古文：长庆三年七月，卒于镇，时年六十九。
现代文：长庆三年七月，卒于镇署，时年六十九。
English: In July of the third year of Changqing, he passed away at the township office, at the age of 69.

古文：华虽出自戎行，而动必由礼。尤重士大夫，未尝以富贵骄人；下迨仆隶走使之徒，必待之以诚信，人以为难。
现代文：曹华虽行伍出身，但行事必遵礼法，尤其敬重士大夫，从不曾倚仗富贵傲慢待人，下至奴仆差役，也必定以诚信相待，人们认为真是难能可贵。
English: Although Cao Hua was born in the military, he must act according to the etiquette law. In particular, he must respect senior officers and doctors. He has never relied on wealth and arrogance to treat people. Even if he is a servant, he must treat each other with integrity. People think he is really valuable.

古文：赠司空。
现代文：追赠司空。
English: The after-gift is Siku.

