古文：天命之谓性，率性之谓道，修道之谓教。
现代文：天生下来的叫做 性 ，顺着性发展叫做 道 ，依照道去修养，叫做 教 。
English: To be born according to nature is called nature, to develop according to nature is called the Way, and to cultivate according to the Way is called teaching.

古文：道也者，不可须臾离也，可离非道也。
现代文：道是不可以一刻离开的，如果可以离开，那就不是道了。
English: You can't leave the Tao for a moment. If you could, it wouldn't be the Tao.

古文：是故君子戒慎乎其所不睹，恐惧乎其所不闻。
现代文：所以君子在人所不见之处，特别警惕小心；对人所不闻之事，惶恐畏惧。
English: Therefore, a gentleman should be particularly vigilant and careful in places where people cannot see him; he should be afraid of things that people do not know.

古文：莫见乎隐，莫显乎微，故君子慎其独也。
现代文：没有什么比隐蔽的东西更能说明问题，没有什么比细微的小事更能显露本相。所以君子对自己独处时的行为和思想特别谨慎。
English: Nothing is more revealing than what is hidden, nothing is more revealing than the small things, so a gentleman should be very careful about his behavior and thoughts when he is alone.

古文：喜怒哀乐之未发，谓之中；发而皆中节，谓之和；中也者，天下之大本也；和也者，天下之达道也。
现代文：喜怒哀乐没有表现出来时，叫做 中 ；表现出来如果符合规矩，恰到好处，就叫做 和 。中是天下最大的根本，和是天下通行的道理。
English: When emotions are not expressed, it is called middle; if they are expressed in accordance with the rules, just right, it is called and. The middle is the world's greatest fundamental, and is the world's common sense.

古文：致中和，天地位焉，万物育焉。
现代文：努力达到中和，天地就各安其所，万物就发育生长了。
English: Strive to achieve a balance, and heaven and earth will be stable in their respective places, and all things will develop and grow.

古文：仲尼曰： 君子中庸，小人反中庸，君子之中庸也，君子而时中；小人之中庸也，小人而无忌惮也。 
现代文：孔子说: 君子的言行符合中庸，而小人却违反中庸。君子符合中庸，是因为君子的言行时时处在适中的位置上。小人违反中庸，是因为小人的言论没有什么顾忌和害怕。 
English: Confucius said: A gentleman's words and deeds conform to the middle way, but a villain violates the middle way. A gentleman conforms to the middle way because a gentleman's words and deeds are always in a moderate position. A villain violates the middle way because a villain's speech has no scruples and fears.

古文：子曰： 中庸其至矣乎！民鲜能久矣！ 
现代文：孔子说: 中庸的道德大概是至高无上的了，民众很久以来很少有人能做到了。 
English: Confucius said: "Moderate morality is probably supreme, and few people have been able to achieve it for a long time."

古文：子曰： 道之不行也，我知之矣：知者过之，愚者不及也。
现代文：孔子说: 道不能实行的原因，我知道了:聪明人做得太过分，愚蠢的人却又达不到。
English: Confucius said: I know the reason why the Tao cannot be practiced: the wise man does too much, but the stupid man does not reach it.

古文：道之不明也，我知之矣：贤者过之，不肖者不及也。
现代文：道不能被世人所明了的原因，我也知道了:贤人的理解过了头，不肖的人又理解不了。
English: I also know the reason why the Tao cannot be understood by the world: the wise man understands too much, and the ugly man cannot understand.

古文：人莫不饮食也，鲜能知味也。 子曰： 道其不行矣夫！ 
现代文：人没有不吃不喝的，但却很少有人品尝出真味。 孔子说: 道大概是难以推行了。 
English: There is no one who does not eat or drink, but very few people taste the real taste.Confucius said: The way is probably difficult to implement.

古文：子曰： 舜其大知也与！
现代文：孔子说: 君子的言行符合中庸，而小人却违反中庸。
English: Confucius said: The words and deeds of a gentleman conform to the middle way, while those of a villain violate the middle way.

古文：舜好问而好察迩言，隐恶而扬善，执其两端，用其中于民，其斯以为舜乎！ 子曰： 人皆曰予知，驱而纳诸罟擭陷阱之中，而莫之知辟也。人皆曰予知，择乎中庸，而不能期月守也。 子曰： 回之为人也，择乎中庸，得一善，则拳拳服膺弗失之矣。 
现代文：君子符合中庸，是因为君子的言行时时处在适中的位置上。小人违反中庸，是因为小人的言论没有什么顾忌和害怕。 孔子说： 中庸是最高的境界，人们很少有人能够做到。 孔子说： 中庸之道不能被实行，我是知晓的啊：有智慧的人做得太过分，愚昧的人达不到它。
English: A gentleman conforms to the middle way because a gentleman's words and deeds are always in a moderate position. A villain violates the middle way because a villain's speech has no scruples and fears. Confucius said: The middle way is the highest level, and few people can achieve it. Confucius said: The middle way cannot be practiced, I know: a wise person does too much, and a foolish person cannot reach it.

古文：子曰： 天下国家可均也，爵禄可辞也，白刃可蹈也，中庸不可能也。 
现代文：中庸之道不能被发扬，我是知晓的啊：贤明的人做得太过分，不贤明的人达不到它。
English: The middle way cannot be pursued, I know: the wise man overdoes it, the unwise man does not reach it.

古文：子路问强，子曰： 南方之强与？
现代文：这就好像人没有不吃饭的，但能够品尝滋味的人却非常少。 孔子说： 恐怕中庸之道是不能实施的了。 
English: It is as if there are no people who do not eat, but there are very few people who can taste the taste.Confucius said: I am afraid that the middle way cannot be implemented.

古文：北方之强与？
现代文：孔子说: 舜大概真是大智的人啊!
English: Confucius said, "You must be a very wise man!

古文：抑而强与？宽柔以教，不报无道，南方之强也，君子居之。
现代文：宽容温柔地教诲别人，不对无道的人进行报复，这是南方人的刚强，君子守着这样一种刚强。
English: To teach others with tolerance and gentleness, and not to take revenge on the wicked, this is the fortitude of the people of the south. A gentleman maintains this kind of fortitude.

古文：衽金革，死而不厌，北方之强也，而强者居之。
现代文：日夜与刀枪铠甲相伴，战死也不怨恨，这是北方人的刚强，尚武好斗的人守着这种刚强。
English: They live day and night with swords, guns, and armor, and do not resent death in battle. This is the toughness of the northerners. Armed and aggressive people keep this toughness.

古文：故君子和而不流，强哉矫！
现代文：君子与人和睦相处，但不迁就流俗，这才是真正的刚强啊!
English: A gentleman gets along well with people, but does not give in to fashion. This is true toughness!

古文：中立而不倚，强哉矫！
现代文：坚守中庸的道德永不偏移，这才是真正的刚强啊!
English: Adhering to the morality of moderation and never deviating from it, that is true strength!

古文：国有道，不变塞焉，强哉矫！
现代文：国家太平，走在正确道路上时，他不改变自己穷困时的操守，这才是真正的刚强啊!
English: The country is peaceful, and when he walks on the right path, he does not change his behavior when he is poor. This is true strength!

古文：国无道，至死不变，强哉矫！ 
现代文：国家混乱，离开正道时，他宁愿死去也不改变自己的操守，这才是真正的刚强啊! 
English: The country is in chaos, and when he strays from the right path, he would rather die than change his ethics. This is true toughness!

古文：子曰： 素隐行怪，后世有述焉，吾弗为之矣。
现代文：孔子说: 故意追求隐僻的生活，行动诡异，这种人后代可能会被人称述，但我不这样做。
English: Confucius said: "A person who deliberately pursues a secluded life and acts strangely may be described by posterity, but I do not do so."

古文：君子遵道而行，半涂而废，吾弗能已矣。
现代文：君子沿着正道前进，半途而废的事，我是不干的。
English: A gentleman advances along the right path. I will not do anything half-heartedly.

古文：君子依乎中庸，遁世不见知而不悔，唯圣者能之。 
现代文：君子依照中庸之道，遁世隐居而不被人知道，也永不后悔，只有圣人才能做到这一点。 
English: A gentleman, according to the middle way, lives in seclusion without being known, and never regrets it. Only a saint can do this.

古文：君子之道，费而隐。
现代文：君子所奉行的道既广大又精微。
English: The way of a gentleman is both broad and subtle.

古文：夫妇之愚，可以与知焉，及其至也，虽圣人亦有所不知焉。
现代文：黎民百姓虽然愚昧但还是可以知道它的，但至于最高境界的道，即使圣人也有不知晓的地方。
English: Although the common people are ignorant, they can still know it, but as for the path of the highest realm, even saints have places they do not know.

古文：夫妇之不肖，可以能行焉；及其至也，虽圣人亦有所不能焉。
现代文：普通百姓虽然不贤明，但还是可以实行它，但至于最高境界的道，即使圣人也有不能做到的地方。
English: Although ordinary people are not wise, they can still practice it, but as for the path of the highest realm, even saints can't do it.

古文：天地之大也，人犹有所憾。
现代文：天地如此之大，但人仍有不满意的地方。
English: Heaven and earth are so big, but there are still unsatisfactory places.

古文：故君子语大，天下莫能载焉；语小，天下莫能破焉。
现代文：因此，君子说的 大 ，天下都载不起；君子说的 小 ，天下都不能够理解。
English: Therefore, when a gentleman says "big," the whole world cannot contain him; when a gentleman says "small," the whole world cannot understand him.

古文：《诗》云： 鸢飞戾天，鱼跃于渊。 
现代文：《诗经》上说： 鸢在天空上飞翔，鱼在深水处跳跃。 
English: The "Song of Songs" says: Dragonflies fly in the sky, and fish jump in deep water.

古文：言其上下察也。
现代文：这是说君子的中庸之道在天地上下之间都是显豁的。
English: This is to say that the gentleman's way of moderation is evident both in heaven and on earth.

古文：君子之道，造端乎夫妇，及其至也，察乎天地。
现代文：君子所奉行的道，发端于普通百姓，在达到最高境界时便彰著于天地之间。
English: The path followed by a gentleman starts from the common people, and when it reaches the highest level, it shines between heaven and earth.

古文：子曰： 道不远人，人之为道而远人，不可以为道。
现代文：孔子说： 中庸之道不远离人。人去实行中庸之道却远离了人，他就不是在实行中庸之道。
English: Confucius said: The way of moderation is not far away from people. If people practice the way of moderation but are far away from people, they are not practicing the way of moderation.

古文：《诗》云： 伐柯，伐柯，其则不远。 
现代文：《诗经》上说： 砍伐斧柄，砍伐斧柄，斧柄制作的方法就在手边。 
English: The Book of Songs says: "Cut down the axe handle, cut down the axe handle, the method of making the axe handle is at hand."

古文：执柯以伐柯，睨而视之，犹以为远。
现代文：手握斧柄伐木制斧柄，斜着眼审度两者，仍然觉得相差太远。
English: Hand holding axe handle logging axe handle, squinting to judge the two, still feel too far apart.

古文：故君子以人治人，改而止。
现代文：所以，君子应以对待人的方式治理人，直到他们改正为止。
English: Therefore, a gentleman should treat people the way he wants to be treated until they correct themselves.

古文：忠恕违道不远，施诸己而不愿，亦勿施于人。
现代文：忠恕与道不远，不愿施于己身的，也不要施与别人。
English: Loyalty is not far from the path. If you are not willing to give to yourself, do not give to others.

古文：君子之道四，丘未能一焉，所求乎子，以事父，未能也；所求乎臣，以事君，未能也；所求乎弟，以事兄，未能也；所求乎朋友，先施之，未能也。
现代文：君子所奉行的道有四条，我孔丘一条都做不到。对侍奉父亲的儿子所要求的，我尚未做到；对侍奉国君的臣下所要求的，我尚未做到，对侍奉兄长的弟弟所要求的，我尚未做到；要求朋友做到的自己先做，我尚未做到。
English: There are four paths for a gentleman to follow, and I, Confucius, cannot follow any of them. I have not yet done what I asked the son who served his father to do; I have not yet done what I asked the vassal who served the sovereign to do; I have not yet done what I asked the younger brother who served the elder brother to do; I have not yet done what I asked my friend to do.

古文：庸德之行，庸言之谨；有所不足，不敢不勉，有余，不敢尽；言顾行，行顾言，君子胡不慥慥尔！ 
现代文：在日常德行的实施方面，在日常语言的慎重方面，我做得还不好，不敢不继续努力，即使有做得完满的地方也不敢把话说尽。言语要照顾到行为，行为要照顾到言语，君子怎么能不笃实忠厚呢？ 
English: In the implementation of daily virtues, in the prudence of daily language, I have not done well, I dare not not continue to work hard, even if there is a place where I have done well, I dare not say everything. Words should take care of actions, actions should take care of words, how can a gentleman not be faithful and loyal?

古文：君子素其位而行，不愿乎其外。
现代文：君子安于目前的地位做他所应该做的事，不羡慕自己地位以外的东西。
English: A gentleman is content with his present position and does what he should do. He does not envy anything other than his position.

古文：素富贵，行乎富贵；素贫贱，行乎贫贱；素夷狄，行乎夷狄；素患难行乎患难，君子无入而不自得焉。
现代文：地位富贵，就做富贵人做的事；地位贫贱，就做贫贱人应该做的事，处在夷狄的地位上，就做夷狄应该做的事；处在患难的地位上，就做患难时应该做的事。如此，君子无处不感觉到悠然自得。
English: When one is in a position of wealth, one should do what a wealthy person does; when one is in a position of poverty, one should do what a poor person should do; when one is in a position of poverty, one should do what a poor person should do; when one is in a position of hardship, one should do what one should do in times of hardship. In this way, a gentleman feels at ease everywhere.

古文：在上位不陵下，在下位不援上，正己而不求于人，则无怨。上不怨天，下不尤人。
现代文：居上位，不欺凌下级。在下位，不攀附上级。端正自己不苛求他人，这样就没有怨恨，对上不怨恨天命，对下不归咎别人。
English: In the upper ranks, do not bully the lower ranks. In the lower ranks, do not cling to the superiors. Correct yourself and do not demand others, so there is no resentment, do not resent the fate of heaven, and do not blame others.

古文：故君子居易以俟命。小人行险以徼幸。
现代文：所以，君子安于自己的地位等候天命的到来，小人则冒险求得本不应该获取的东西。
English: Therefore, a gentleman is content with his position and waits for the arrival of fate, while a villain takes risks to obtain things that should not be obtained.

古文：子曰： 射有似乎君子，失诸正鹄，反求诸其身。 君子之道，辟如行远必自迩，辟如登高必自卑。
现代文：孔子说： 射箭的道理与君子的行为有相似的地方：假如没有射中靶子，就应反过来责求自己。实行君子的中庸之道，就好像是走远路，必须从近处开始，就如同是登高，必须从低处开始。
English: Confucius said: The principle of archery is similar to the behavior of a gentleman: if you don't hit the target, you should blame yourself in turn. Practicing the middle way of a gentleman is like going a long way, you must start from the near, just like climbing high, you must start from the low.

古文：《诗》曰： 妻子好合，如鼓瑟琴。兄弟既翕，和乐且耽。
现代文：《诗经》上说： 夫妻情投意合，协调有如琴瑟，兄弟和睦相处，快乐安顺长久。
English: "The Book of Songs" says: "Husband and wife are in perfect accord; their harmony is like that of a harp; brothers and sisters live in harmony; happiness and prosperity are long-lasting."

古文：宜尔室家，乐尔妻帑。 
现代文：家庭美满，妻儿愉快。 
English: The family is happy, the wife and children are happy.

古文：子曰： 父母其顺矣乎！ 
现代文：孔子说： 这样父母是多舒畅啊！ 
English: Confucius said: How comfortable such parents are!

古文：子曰： 鬼神之为德，其盛矣乎？
现代文：孔子说： 鬼神的功用真是宏大啊！
English: Confucius said, "How great is the power of ghosts and gods!"

古文：视之而弗见，听之而弗闻，体物而不可遗，使天下之人齐明盛服，以承祭祀。
现代文：看，看不到它；听，听不到它。
English: See, can't see it; hear, can't hear it.

古文：洋洋乎如在其上，如在其左右。
现代文：它养育万物，没有一种事物可以遗弃它。
English: It nurtures all things, and nothing can abandon it.

古文：《诗》曰： 神之格思，不可度思！
现代文：它使天下的人斋戒沐浴，身穿华丽的祭服，举行祭祀典礼。它浩浩荡荡，好像在天之上，在人身旁。
English: It makes the people of the world fast and bathe, wear gorgeous ceremonial robes, and hold sacrificial ceremonies. It is vast and vast, as if it is above the sky, next to people.

古文：矧可射思！ 夫微之显，诚之不可掩如此夫。 
现代文：《诗经》上说： 鬼神来到，不可揣测，不敢对它厌怠不敬啊！ 
English: "The Book of Songs" says: When ghosts and gods come, do not speculate, do not dare to be disrespectful to it!

古文：子曰： 舜其大孝也与！
现代文：从隐微到明显，真诚的心意就是这样隐藏不住啊。 孔子说： 舜可是个最孝敬的人吧！
English: From the subtle to the obvious, the sincerity of the heart cannot be hidden in this way.Confucius said: You are a most honorable person!

古文：德为圣人，尊为天子，富有四海之内。
现代文：有圣人的德行，有天子的尊贵地位，有普天下的财富。
English: He has the virtue of a saint, the noble status of a heavenly son, and the wealth of the whole world.

古文：宗庙飨之，子孙保之。
现代文：宗庙祭他，子孙维护他。
English: The ancestral temple festival worships him, and his descendants protect him.

古文：故大德必得其位，必得其禄。必得其名，必得其寿，故天之生物，必因其材而笃焉。
现代文：因此，有崇高德行的人必然会获得应有的地位，必然会获得应有的俸禄，必然会获得应有的名望，必定会获得应有的为命。因此，上天生育的万物，必会因为它们的资质而受到厚爱。
English: Therefore, people with lofty virtues will inevitably obtain the status they deserve, will inevitably obtain the salary they deserve, will inevitably obtain the fame they deserve, and will inevitably obtain the life they deserve. Therefore, all things born of heaven will surely be loved for their qualities.

古文：故栽者培之，倾者覆之。
现代文：所以，能够栽培的就培养它们，而歪斜的就让它们歪斜。
English: So if you can grow them, grow them, and if they're crooked, make them crooked.

古文：《诗》曰： 嘉乐君子，宪宪令德。
现代文：《诗经》上说： 快快乐乐的君子，美德盛明。
English: "The Book of Songs" says, "A gentleman who is happy and joyful has great virtue."

古文：宜民宜人，受禄于天，保佑命之，自天申之。 
现代文：让上下都感受快乐，上天赐给他福禄。保佑他，任用他，上天这样告诫。 
English: Let everyone feel happy. Heaven has given him a blessing. Bless him. Appoint him. Heaven admonishes him.

古文：故大德者必受命。 
现代文：因此，有伟大的德行的人一定是受了天命的。 
English: Therefore, a man of great virtue must be predestined.

古文：子曰： 无忧者，其惟文王乎！
现代文：孔子说： 恐怕只有周文王是个无忧无虑的人吧！
English: Confucius said: I am afraid that only King Zhouwen is a carefree person!

古文：以王季为父，以武王为子，父作之，子述之。
现代文：王季是他的父亲，周武王是他的儿子。他有父亲开创事业，有儿子继承事业。
English: Wang Ji is his father, and Zhou Wu Wang is his son. His father started the business, and his son inherited the business.

古文：武王缵大王、王季、文王之绪，壹戎衣而有天下。
现代文：周武王继续着大王、王季、文王未完成的功业，披挂战衣，取得了天下。
English: King Zhou Wu continued the unfinished work of the Great King, Wang Ji, and King Wen, put on the battle suit, and won the world.

古文：身不失天下之显名，尊为天子，富有四海之内。
现代文：他没有失去自己显赫的名声，获得了天子的尊贵，获得了普天下的财富。
English: He did not lose his illustrious reputation, gained the dignity of the Son of Heaven, and gained the wealth of the whole world.

古文：宗庙飨之，子孙保之。
现代文：宗庙祭奉他，子孙维护他。
English: The ancestral temple festival worships him, and his descendants protect him.

古文：武王末受命，周公成文、武之德，追王大王、王季，上祀先公以天子之礼。
现代文：武王年迈的时候才承受天命。周公成就了文王、武王的德业，追尊大王、王季为王，用天子的礼制祭祀祖先。
English: King Wu only received his destiny when he was very old. Zhou Gong fulfilled the virtues of King Wen and King Wu, honored the great king, King Ji, as king, and worshipped his ancestors with the ritual system of the Son of Heaven.

古文：斯礼也，达乎诸侯大夫，及士庶人。
现代文：这种礼制一直贯彻到诸侯、大夫、士和普通百姓。
English: This etiquette has been implemented down to the lords, doctors, nobles and common people.

古文：父为大夫，子为士，葬以大夫，祭以士。
现代文：假如父亲是大夫，儿子是士，父死就要按大夫的礼制安葬，按士的礼制祭祀。
English: If the father is a doctor and the son is a scholar, when the father dies, he should be buried according to the doctor's etiquette and offered up according to the scholar's etiquette.

古文：父为士，子为大夫，葬以士，祭以大夫。期之丧，达乎大夫。三年之丧，达乎天子。
现代文：如果父亲是士，儿子是大夫，父死就要按士的礼制安葬，按大夫的礼制祭祀，守丧一年，通行到大夫；守丧三年，通行到天子。
English: If the father is a scholar and the son is a doctor, when the father dies, he should be buried according to the etiquette of a scholar, and the funeral rites should be performed according to the etiquette of a doctor. The mourning period should last for one year, and the deceased should be allowed to go to the doctor; the mourning period should last for three years, and the deceased should be allowed to go to heaven.

古文：父母之丧，无贵贱一也。 
现代文：但给父母守丧本身没有贵贱的区别，都是一样的。 
English: However, there is no difference between the nobility and the commoners in holding a memorial service for one's parents, they are all the same.

古文：子曰： 武王、周公，其达孝矣乎！
现代文：孔子说： 武王，周公真是最守孝道的人啊！
English: Confucius said: King Wu, Zhou Gong is really the most filial person!

古文：夫孝者，善继人之志，善述人之事者也。
现代文：守孝道的人，善于继承先人的遗志，善于继承先人未完的功业。
English: Those who keep filial piety are good at inheriting the will of the ancestors, and are good at inheriting the unfinished work of the ancestors.

古文：春秋修其祖庙，陈其宗器，设其裳衣，荐其时食。
现代文：在春秋两季，修缮祖上庙宇，陈列祭祀器具，摆设祭祀服饰，贡献应时的食品。
English: In the spring and autumn, the ancestral temple is repaired, the sacrificial instruments are displayed, the sacrificial clothing is set up, and the food that is in season is donated.

古文：宗庙之礼，所以序昭穆也。
现代文：宗庙祭祀的礼制，是要排列父子、长幼的顺序。
English: The ritual system of the ancestral temple ritual is to arrange the father and son, the eldest and youngest in order.

古文：序爵，所以辨贵贱也。序事，所以辨贤也。旅酬下为上，所以逮贱也。燕毛，所以序齿也。
现代文：按官爵排列次序，就可以分辨出贵贱，按职位排列次序，就能分辨出贤与不贤；敬酒时晚辈先向长辈举杯，这样祖先的恩惠就会延及到晚辈，宴饮时按头发的黑白次序坐，这样就使老少有次序。
English: According to the order of officials and nobles, it is possible to distinguish the noble and the lowly, and according to the order of positions, it is possible to distinguish the virtuous and the wicked; when toasting, the younger generation first raises a glass to the elders, so that the ancestors' bounty will extend to the younger generation, and when dining, they sit according to the black and white order of the hair, so that the old and the young are in order.

古文：践其位，行其礼，奏其乐，敬其所尊，爱其所亲，事死如事生，事亡如事存，孝之至也。
现代文：站在应该站的位置上，行先王传下的祭礼，演奏先王的音乐，尊敬先王所尊敬的，亲爱先王所亲爱的。侍奉死者如同侍奉活着的人，侍奉亡故的人如同侍奉现存的人，这是最高境界的孝啊。郊社祭礼。
English: To stand in the proper place, to perform the rites handed down by the previous king, to play the music of the previous king, to respect the respected by the previous king, the dear by the previous king. To serve the dead as if they were alive, to serve the dead as if they were alive, this is the highest level of filial piety. Suburban festival.

古文：郊社之礼，所以事上帝也。
现代文：是用于侍奉上天的。庙宇的祭礼，是祭祀祖先的。
English: It is for the service of heaven. Temple festivals are for the worship of ancestors.

古文：宗庙之礼，所以祀乎其先也。
现代文：明白了郊社的祭礼，大祭小祭的意义，治理国家就如同看手掌一样容易吧！ 
English: Once you understand the significance of the suburb's festivals, the great and small festivals, governing the country is as easy as looking at the palm of your hand!

古文：明乎郊社之礼、禘尝之义，治国其如示诸掌乎！ 
现代文：鲁哀公问孔子如何治理好政事。孔子说： 文王、武王的政令，都写在木板竹简上。
English: Lu Aikong asked Confucius how to manage political affairs well. Confucius said: The decrees of King Wen and King Wu are all written on wooden boards and bamboo slips.

古文：哀公问政。子曰： 文武之政，布在方策。
现代文：像他们那样有贤臣，政令就会得到贯彻施行，没有贤臣，政令就会消失。
English: If there are wise men like them, the decree will be implemented, and if there are no wise men, the decree will disappear.

古文：其人存，则其政举；其人亡，则其政息。人道敏政，地道敏树。
现代文：以人立政，政治就会迅速清明，这就像用沃土植树，树木会迅速生长。
English: It is like using fertile soil to plant trees, and the trees will grow quickly.

古文：夫政也者，蒲卢也。
现代文：这政事啊，就好像是蒲苇。
English: This government thing, it's like a cankerworm.

古文：故为政在人，取人以身，修身以道，修道以仁。
现代文：因此，治理政事取决于贤臣，贤臣的获得取决于明君的修德养性，修养德行取决于遵循天下的大道，遵循天下大道取决于仁爱之心。
English: Therefore, the governance of government affairs depends on the wise men, the acquisition of the wise men depends on the cultivation of virtue of the wise men, the cultivation of virtue depends on following the road of the world, and following the road of the world depends on the heart of benevolence.

古文：仁者人也。亲亲为大；义者宜也。
现代文：所谓仁，就是人，亲爱亲人是最大的仁。
English: The so-called benevolence is people, and dear relatives are the greatest benevolence.

古文：尊贤为大。
现代文：所谓义，就是相宜，尊重贤臣是最大的义。
English: The so-called righteousness is appropriate, and respect for the wise is the greatest righteousness.

古文：亲亲之杀，尊贤之等，礼所生也。
现代文：亲爱亲人时的亲疏之分，尊重贤臣时的等级划分，是从礼制中产生出来的。
English: The distinction between relatives and strangers in the case of dear relatives, and the division of ranks in the case of respect for wise men, arose from the ceremonial system.

古文：在下位不获乎上，民不可得而治矣！
现代文：处在下位的人得不到上级的信任，人民就不可能治理好了。
English: If those at the bottom do not have the trust of those at the top, it is impossible for the people to govern well.

古文：故君子不可以不修身；思修身，不可以不事亲；思事亲，不可以不知人，思知人，不可以不知天。
现代文：因此，君子不能不修德养性想要修德养性，不能不侍奉亲人，想要侍奉亲人，不能不知贤善用，想要知贤善用，不能不知道天理。
English: Therefore, if a gentleman wants to cultivate his moral character, he must cultivate his moral character. If he wants to serve his relatives, he must serve them. If he wants to serve his relatives, he must know how to use them wisely. If he wants to use them wisely, he must know how to use them wisely.

古文：天下之达道五，所以行之者三。
现代文：普天下的大道有五种，实践大道的美德有三种。
English: There are five kinds of roads in the whole world, and three kinds of virtues in the practice of roads.

古文：曰：君臣也，父子也，夫妇也，昆弟也，朋友之交也，五者天下之达道也。
现代文：君臣、父子、夫妇、兄弟、朋友交往，这五项是天下的大道。智慧、仁爱、英勇这三者是天下的大德行。
English: To associate with princes and ministers, fathers and sons, husbands and wives, brothers and sisters, and friends - these five are the highways of the world. Wisdom, benevolence, and valor - these three are the great virtues of the world.

古文：知，仁，勇，三者天下之达德也，所以行之者一也。或生而知之，或学而知之，或困而知之，及其知之一也。
现代文：实践大道的道理是同样的。有的人生来就通晓大道，有的人通过学习才通晓大道，有的人经历过困惑后才通晓大道；他们最终通晓大道，这是同样的。
English: Some people are born knowing the way, some people learn the way through study, some people learn the way after experiencing confusion; they eventually learn the way, it is the same.

古文：或安而行之，或利而行之，或勉强而行之，及其成功，一也。 
现代文：有的人从容不迫地实行大道，有的人凭着利害关系去实行大道，有的人勉强去实行大道，最终成功的时候是一样的。 
English: Some people pursue the road of leisurely, some people pursue the road of interest, some people pursue the road of reluctance, and the ultimate success is the same.

古文：子曰： 好学近乎知，力行近乎仁，知耻近乎勇。
现代文：孔子又说： 喜爱学习就接近智慧了，尽力去实行就接近仁爱了，知晓羞耻就接近英勇了。
English: Confucius also said: "Loving to learn is close to wisdom, doing one's best is close to benevolence, and knowing shame is close to valor."

古文：知斯三者，则知所以修身；知所以修身，则知所以治人；知所以治人，则知所以治天下国家矣。
现代文：知道这三点，就知道如何修养德行；知道怎样修养德行，就知道怎样治理人，知道怎样治理人，就知道怎样治理国家了。
English: If you know these three points, you will know how to cultivate virtue; if you know how to cultivate virtue, you will know how to govern people; if you know how to govern people, you will know how to govern the country.

古文：凡为天下国家有九经，曰：修身也。尊贤也，亲亲也，敬大臣也，体群臣也。子庶民也，来百工也，柔远人也，怀诸侯也。
现代文：治理天下国家大凡有九条准则，分别是修养德行、尊重贤人、亲爱亲族、敬重大臣、体贴众臣、爱民如子、招集各种工匠、优待边远异族、安抚四方的诸侯。
English: There are nine principles for governing the world's great nations, namely, cultivating virtue, respecting the wise, loving relatives, honoring great ministers, being considerate to all ministers, loving the people as sons and daughters, inviting all kinds of craftsmen, giving preferential treatment to outlying ethnic groups, and appeasing the princes of the four directions.

古文：修身则道立，尊贤则不惑，亲亲则诸父昆弟不怨，敬大臣则不眩，体群臣则士之报礼重，子庶民则百姓劝，来百工则财用足，柔远人则四方归之，怀诸侯则天下畏之。齐明盛服，非礼不动。
现代文：修养德行，大道就能够顺利实行。尊重贤人就不会被迷惑。
English: Cultivate virtue, and the road can be smoothly implemented. Respect the wise, and you will not be confused.

古文：所以修身也；去谗远色，贱货而贵德，所以劝贤也；尊其位，重其禄，同其好恶，所以劝亲亲也；官盛任使，所以劝大臣也；忠信重禄，所以劝士也；时使薄敛，所以劝百姓也；日省月试，既廪称事，所以劝百工也；送往迎来，嘉善而矜不能，所以柔远人也；继绝世，举废国，治乱持危。
现代文：亲爱亲族，父、兄、弟就不会抱怨。敬重大臣，处事就不会恍惚不定。
English: Dear relatives, the father, elder brother and younger brother will not complain. With respect to the minister, the handling will not be in a trance.

古文：朝聘以时，厚往而薄来，所以怀诸侯也。
现代文：体贴众臣，士就会以重礼相报。爱民如子，百姓就会勤奋努力。
English: If you are considerate to your ministers, your officials will reciprocate with great courtesy. If you love your people like a son, your people will work diligently.

古文：凡为天下国家有九经，所以行之者一也。
现代文：招集各种工匠，财富用度就充足。优待边远异族，四方就会、归顺。
English: Convene all kinds of craftsmen, and the use of wealth will be sufficient. Give preferential treatment to remote ethnic groups, and all sides will submit.

古文：凡事豫则立，不豫则废。
现代文：安抚各诸侯，普天下就会敬畏。
English: Appease the princes, and the whole world will be awestruck.

古文：言前定则不跲，事前定则不困，行前定则不疚，道前定则不穷。在下位不获乎上，民不可得而治矣。获乎上有道，不信乎朋友，不获乎上矣；信乎朋友有道，不顺乎亲，不信乎朋友矣；顺乎亲有道，反诸身不诚，不顺乎亲矣；诚身有道，不明乎善，不诚乎身矣。
现代文：行动之前事先想好就不会内心不安，法则事先想好就不会陷入绝境。在下位的人得不到上级的信任，百姓就治理不好。得到上级的信任是有途径的，得不到朋友的信任就得不到上级的信任。得到朋友的信任是有途径的，不顺从父母就得不到朋友的信任。顺从父母是有途径的，自己心不诚就不能顺从父母。心诚是有途径的，不知晓善就不能心诚。诚实是上天的法则。
English: There is a way to gain the trust of superiors, but not the trust of friends. There is a way to gain the trust of friends, but not the trust of parents. There is a way to gain the trust of parents, but not the trust of parents. There is a way to gain the trust of parents, but not the trust of parents. There is a way to gain the trust of parents, but not the trust of parents. There is a way to gain the trust of parents, but not the trust of parents. There is a way to gain the trust of superiors, but not the trust of friends. There is a way to gain the trust of superiors, but not the trust of friends. There

古文：诚者，天之道也；诚之者，人之道也。诚者不勉而中，不思而得，从容中道，圣人也。
现代文：做到诚实是人的法则。诚实，不必努力就能达到，不必思考就能获得，从容不迫地达到天道法则，这就是圣人。
English: To be honest is the law of man. Honesty can be achieved without effort, can be obtained without thinking, and can reach the law of heaven unhurriedly. This is a sage.

古文：诚之者，择善而固执之者也。
现代文：做到诚实，就是选择善并坚持做到它。
English: A sincere person is one who chooses the goal of being good and pursues it persistently.

古文：博学之，审问之，慎思之，明辨之，笃行之。
现代文：要广泛地学习，仔细地询问，审慎地思考，清晰地分辨，忠实地实践。
English: Study widely, inquire carefully, reflect soberly, discern clearly, and practice faithfully.

古文：有弗学，学之弗能，弗措也；有弗问，问之弗知，弗措也；有弗思，思之弗得，弗措也；有弗辨，辨之弗明，弗措也；有弗行，行之弗笃，弗措也。
现代文：要么就不学，学了没有学会就不中止。要么就不问，问了还不明白就不中止。
English: Either they don't learn, and if they learn, they don't stop. Or they don't ask, and if they ask and still don't understand, they don't stop.

古文：人一能之己百之，人十能之己千之。
现代文：要么就不思考，思考了不懂得就不中止。
English: Either you don't think about it, or you don't stop thinking about it or you don't understand it.

古文：果能此道矣。虽愚必明，虽柔必强。 
现代文：如果真能这样做，即便愚笨也会变得聪明，即使柔弱也会变得刚强。 
English: If you can do this, even the dull will become bright, even the weak will become strong.

古文：自诚明谓之性。
现代文：由真诚达到通晓事理，这叫天性。
English: To be able to reason from sincerity is called nature.

古文：自明诚谓之教。
现代文：由通晓事理达到真诚，这叫教化。
English: From knowledge to sincerity, this is called enlightenment.

古文：诚则明矣，明则诚矣。
现代文：真诚就会通晓事理，通晓事理就会真诚。
English: Sincerity will lead to knowledge of the facts, and knowledge of the facts will lead to sincerity.

古文：唯天下至诚，为能尽其性；能尽其性，则能尽人之性；能尽人之性，则能尽物之性；能尽物之性，则可以赞天地之化育；可以赞天地之化育，则可以与天地参矣。
现代文：只有天下最真诚的人才能充分发挥天赋的本性，能发挥天赋的本性才能发挥所有人的本性，能发挥所有人的本性才能充分发挥事物的本性，能够发挥事物的本性才能帮助天地养育万物，可以帮助天地养育万物，才可以与天地并列。
English: Only the most sincere people in the world can give full play to the nature of talent. Only those who can give full play to the nature of talent can give full play to the nature of all people. Only those who can give full play to the nature of all people can give full play to the nature of things. Only those who can give full play to the nature of things can help heaven and earth nurture all things, can help heaven and earth nurture all things, and can be on a par with heaven and earth.

古文：其次致曲。
现代文：次一等真诚的人从细微处人手。
English: The second class of sincere people are those who deal with people delicately.

古文：曲能有诚，诚则形，形则著，著则明，明则动，动则变，变则化。
现代文：细微之处也能达到诚的境界，达到真诚就会表现出来，表现出来就会昭然显著，昭然显著就会光辉明亮，光辉明亮就会感动万物，感动万物就会发生变革，发生变革就会感化人们。
English: Subtleties can also reach the realm of sincerity, and when sincerity is achieved, it will be manifested, and when it is manifested, it will be obvious, and when it is obvious, it will shine brightly, and when it shines brightly, it will move all things, and when it moves all things, there will be change, and when there is change, it will affect people.

古文：唯天下至诚为能化。
现代文：只有天下最真诚的人才能感化人们。
English: Only the most sincere person in the world can inspire people.

古文：至诚之道，可以前知。
现代文：最高境界的真诚可以预知未来。
English: The sincerity of the highest realm can predict the future.

古文：国家将兴，必有祯祥；国家将亡，必有妖孽。
现代文：国家将要兴盛，必定有吉祥的前兆；国家将要衰败，必定有妖孽作怪。
English: If a country is to prosper, there must be auspicious omens; if a country is to decline, there must be witchcraft.

古文：见乎蓍龟，动乎四体。
现代文：它呈现在蓍草龟甲上，体现在身体仪态上。
English: It appears on the tortoise shell and is reflected in the body posture.

古文：祸福将至，善必先知之；不善必先知之。
现代文：祸福要来临时：好事一定会提前知道，不好的事也一定提前知道。
English: When misfortune or good fortune is about to come: good things must be known in advance, and bad things must also be known in advance.

古文：故至诚如神。
现代文：因此，最高境界的真诚如同神灵一般。
English: Therefore, the highest level of sincerity is like a god.

古文：诚者，自成也，而道，自道也。
现代文：真诚，是自己成全自己。道，是自己引导自己。
English: Sincerity is to perfect oneself. Tao is to guide oneself.

古文：诚者物之终始，不诚无物。
现代文：真诚贯穿万物的始终，没有真诚就没有万物。
English: Sincerity runs through everything. Without sincerity, there would be nothing.

古文：是故君子诚之为贵。
现代文：因此，君子把真诚看得非常珍贵。
English: Therefore, a gentleman regards sincerity as very precious.

古文：诚者非自成己而已也，所以成物也。
现代文：真诚，并不只是成全自己就完了，还要成全万物。
English: Sincerity is not just about perfecting oneself, but also about perfecting all things.

古文：成己仁也；成物知也。
现代文：成全自己是仁义，成全万物是智慧。
English: To perfect oneself is benevolence and righteousness, and to perfect all things is wisdom.

古文：性之德也，合外内之道也，故时措之宜也。
现代文：这是发自本性的德行，是结合了内外的道，因此，适合在任何时候实行。
English: It is a virtue that comes from one's nature, and it is a combination of the internal and external paths, so it is suitable for practice at any time.

古文：故至诚无息，不息则久，久则征；征则悠远，悠远则博厚，博厚则高明。
现代文：所以，最高境界的真诚是永不休止的。永不休止就会长久，长久就会有效验，有效验就会深远无穷，深远无穷就会博大深厚，博大深厚就会高大光明。
English: Therefore, the sincerity of the highest realm is never-ending. Never-ending will be long-lasting, long-lasting will be effective, effective will be far-reaching and infinite, far-reaching and infinite will be vast and profound, and vast and profound will be lofty and bright.

古文：博厚所以载物也；高明所以覆物也；悠久所以成物也。
现代文：博大深厚，能够负载万物；高大光明，可以覆盖万物；深远无穷，可以生成万物。
English: Vast and profound, it can support all things; lofty and bright, it can cover all things; far-reaching and infinite, it can create all things.

古文：博厚配地，高明配天，悠久无疆。
现代文：博大深厚与地相配，高大光明与天相配，深远长久可以无穷无尽。
English: The vastness and profundity match the earth, the loftiness and brightness match the sky, and the far-reaching and long-lasting can be endless.

古文：如此者不见而章，不动而变，无为而成。
现代文：这样，不表现也会显著，不行动也有改变，不做也会成功。
English: In this way, non-performance will also be significant, non-action will also change, and non-action will also succeed.

古文：天地之道，可一言而尽也。其为物不贰，则其生物不测。
现代文：天地的法则，可以用一句话涵盖：作为物它纯一不二，因而它化生万物就不可测度了。
English: The law of heaven and earth can be summed up in one sentence: as a thing, it is pure and one, and therefore it is immeasurable in all things.

古文：天地之道，博也，厚也，高也，明也，悠也，久也。
现代文：天地的法则，博大、深厚、高大、光明、涤远、长久。
English: The laws of heaven and earth are vast, profound, lofty, bright, far-reaching and long-lasting.

古文：今夫天，斯昭昭之多，及其无穷也，日月星辰系焉，万物覆焉。
现代文：现在来说天，论小它不过是一小片光明，而它的整体无穷无尽，日月星辰悬挂在天上，覆盖着万物。
English: Now, as for the sky, although it is small, it is just a small piece of light, and its entirety is endless. The sun, moon, and stars hang in the sky, covering all things.

古文：今夫地，一撮土之多。及其广厚，载华岳而不重，振河海而不泄，万物载焉。
现代文：现在来说地，论小它不过是一小撮土，而它的整体广大深厚，负载着华山不觉得重，收拢着江河湖海没有泄，负载着万物。
English: Now, in terms of small, it is just a small handful of soil, and its overall breadth is deep, it does not feel heavy to load Huashan, it does not leak to close the rivers, lakes and seas, and it is loaded with all things.

古文：今夫山，一卷石之多，及其广大，草木生之，禽兽居之，宝藏兴焉，今夫水，一勺之多，及其不测，鼋、鼍、蛟龙、鱼鳖生焉，货财殖焉。《诗》曰： 惟天之命，于穆不已！ 
现代文：现在来说山，论小这不过是一小块石头，但它整体高峻厚重，草木生长在上面，飞禽走兽居住在上面，宝藏从里面开发出来。现在来说水，论小它不过是一小勺水，但它的整体深不可测，里面生活着鼋鼍、蛟龙、鱼鳖，繁殖着货物财富。《诗经》上说： 只有上天的定命，深远不止。 
English: Now, mountains, on the small scale, are just a small piece of stone, but it is overall high and thick, plants and trees grow on it, birds and beasts live on it, and treasures are developed from it. Now, water, on the small scale, is just a small spoonful of water, but its whole is unfathomable, with dragonflies, dragonflies and fish eggs living in it and multiplying the wealth of goods. "The Book of Songs" says: Only God's predestined destiny is far more profound.

古文：盖曰天之所以为天也。 于乎不显，文王之德之纯！ 
现代文：这大概是说天之所以成为天的原因。啊，难道不光明！
English: This is probably the reason why the sky is the sky. Ah, isn't it bright!

古文：盖曰文王之所以为文也，纯亦不已。
现代文：文王的德行这么纯洁，这大概是说文王之所以被尊奉为文王，是因为他纯一，而且永无止境。
English: The fact that King Wen's virtue is so pure probably means that the reason why he is revered as King Wen is because he is pure and endless.

古文：大哉，圣人之道！
现代文：伟大啊，圣人的道。
English: Great is the way of the sage.

古文：洋洋乎，发育万物，峻极于天。
现代文：浩浩荡荡，生长发育万物，与天一样高峻。
English: Vastness, growth and development of all things, as lofty as the sky.

古文：优优大哉！礼仪三百，威仪三千。待其人然后行。
现代文：充足而且伟大啊，三百条礼仪，三千条威仪，等待圣人出现后才能实施。
English: Sufficient and great, three hundred rites, three thousand dignities, waiting for a saint to appear before they can be implemented.

古文：故曰：苟不至德，至道不凝焉。
现代文：因此说，如果达不到最高境界的道德，最高境界的道就不会成功。
English: Therefore, if the highest morality is not reached, the highest way will not succeed.

古文：故君子尊德性而道问学。致广大而尽精微。极高明而道中庸。
现代文：所以，君子应当尊奉德行，善学好问，达到宽广博大的境界同时又深入到细微之处，达到极端的高明同时又遵循中庸之道。
English: Therefore, a gentleman should respect and practice virtue, be good at learning and asking questions, reach a broad and broad realm while delving into subtleties, achieve extreme wisdom while following the middle way.

古文：温故而知新，敦厚以崇礼。
现代文：温习过去所学习过的从而获取新的认识，用朴实厚道的态度尊崇礼仪。
English: Review what you have learned in the past to gain new knowledge, and respect etiquette with a simple and kind attitude.

古文：是故居上不骄，为下不倍；国有道，其言足以兴；国无道，其默足以容。
现代文：这样，在上位时不骄傲，在下位时不背弃。国家政治清明时力争主张被接受采纳，国家政治黑暗时以沉默保全自己。
English: Thus, do not be proud when you are at the top, and do not turn your back when you are at the bottom. When national politics are clear, strive to be accepted and adopted, and when national politics are dark, preserve yourself with silence.

古文：《诗》曰： 既明且哲，以保其身。 
现代文：《诗经》上 既明达又聪慧，这样才能保全自身 这句话，说的就是这个意思吧！
English: In the "Book of Songs," it is said that one must be both wise and intelligent in order to preserve oneself. This is what is meant by this sentence.

古文：其此之谓与！子曰： 愚而好自用，贱而好自专，生乎今之世，反古之道：如此者，灾及其身者也。 
现代文：孔子说： 愚蠢但又只凭主观意图行事，卑贱但又好独断专行，生活在现在这个时代，却要恢复古代的做法，这样的话，灾难就要降临在他身上了。 
English: Confucius said: "If a man is stupid and acts according to his own will, if he is mean and arbitrary, if he lives in the present age but wants to return to the old ways, disaster will befall him."

古文：非天子，不议礼，不制度，不考文。
现代文：不是天子，就不议论礼制，不制定制度，不考核文字。
English: If he is not the son of heaven, he will not discuss the etiquette, not establish a system, and not evaluate the characters.

古文：今天下车同轨，书同文，行同伦。
现代文：现在普天下车辙统一，文字统一，伦理观念统一。
English: Now, the whole world has a unified railway, a unified written language, and a unified ethical concept.

古文：虽有其位，苟无其德，不敢作礼乐焉；虽有其德。苟无其位，亦不敢作礼乐焉。
现代文：虽然有天子的地位，但如果没有天子的德行，就不要轻易制礼作乐，虽有天子的德行，但是如果没有天子的地位，也不要轻易制礼作乐。
English: Although you have the status of the son of heaven, if you do not have the virtue of the son of heaven, you should not easily make music. Although you have the virtue of the son of heaven, if you do not have the status of the son of heaven, you should not easily make music.

古文：子曰： 吾说夏礼，杞不足徵也。
现代文：孔子说： 我解说夏代的礼法，但杞国的文献不足以验证。
English: Confucius said, "I have explained the etiquette of the Xia Dynasty, but the literature of the Qin Dynasty is not enough to verify it.

古文：吾学殷礼，有宋存焉。
现代文：我学习殷朝的礼法，仅仅有宋国保持着它。
English: I study the etiquette of the Yin Dynasty. Only the Song Dynasty maintained it.

古文：吾学周礼，今用之，吾从周。 
现代文：我学习周代的礼法，现在正实行着它，因此，我遵从周代的礼法。 
English: I study the Zhou Dynasty etiquette, and now I am practicing it, so I follow the Zhou Dynasty etiquette.

古文： 王天下有三重焉，其寡过矣乎！
现代文： 统治天下要做三件重要的事情，做好了就会减少损失。
English: There are three important things to do to rule the world. If you do them well, you will reduce losses.

古文：上焉者虽善无徵，无徵不信，不信民弗从；下焉者虽善不尊，不尊不信，不信民弗从。
现代文：居于上位的人，品德虽好但没有验证，没有验证就不权威，不权威百姓就不会服从；居于下位的人，品德虽好，但不尊贵，不尊贵就不权威，不权威百姓就不服从。
English: For those in higher positions, although their moral character is good, it is not verified; without verification, there is no authority; without authority, the people will not obey; for those in lower positions, although their moral character is good, it is not honorable; without honor, there is no authority; without authority, the people will not obey.

古文：故君子之道：本诸身，徵诸庶民，考诸三王而不缪，建诸天地而不悖，质诸鬼神而无疑，百世以俟圣人而不惑。
现代文：因此，君子的道，根本在自身，在黎民百姓那里得到验证，考查到三代先王不显现出错误，树立在天地之间没有悖理的地方，卜问鬼神没有可疑的地方，等到百世以后圣人到来不感到困惑。
English: Therefore, the way of a gentleman is basically to be verified in oneself and among the people of Lai, and to be examined until the three generations of ancestors do not show any mistakes, establish a place without contradiction between heaven and earth, and there is no suspicious place to inquire about ghosts and gods, and do not feel confused until the saint arrives after a hundred generations.

古文：质诸鬼神而无疑，知天也；百世以俟圣人而不惑，知人也。
现代文：卜问鬼神没有可疑的地方，这是了解了天，等到百世以后圣人到来不感到困惑，这是了解了人。
English: There is nothing suspicious in asking about ghosts and gods. This is understanding heaven. When a sage comes after a hundred lifetimes, he will not be confused. This is understanding people.

古文：是故君子动而世为天下道，行而世为天下法，言而世为天下则。
现代文：因此，君子的举动能世世代代成为天下的法则，君子的行为能世世代代成为天下的法度，君子的言谈能世世代代成为天下的准则。
English: Therefore, the actions of a gentleman can become the law of the world for generations, the actions of a gentleman can become the law of the world for generations, and the words of a gentleman can become the standard of the world for generations.

古文：远之则有望，近之则不厌。
现代文：离得远使人仰慕，离得近也不让人厌烦。
English: Being far away makes people admire you, and being close to you does not make people bored.

古文：《诗》曰： 在彼无恶，在此无射。
现代文：《诗经》上说： 在那里无人厌恶，在这里不遭人厌恨。
English: The Book of Psalms says: "There is no disgust there, no hatred here.

古文：庶几夙夜，以永终誉！ 
现代文：几乎是日夜操劳，这样永远保持大家的称赞。 
English: It's almost like working day and night to keep everyone's praise forever.

古文：君子未有不如此，而蚤有誉于天下者。 
现代文：君子没有不先做到这一点就早已闻名于天下的。 
English: No gentleman has ever become famous in the world without first achieving this.

古文：仲尼祖述尧舜，宪章文武：上律天时，下袭水土。
现代文：孔子遵循尧、舜的传统，模仿文王、武王。
English: Confucius followed the tradition of Zou and Zou, imitating King Wen and King Wu.

古文：辟如天地之无不持载，无不覆帱，辟如四时之错行，如日月之代明。
现代文：上遵从天时变化，下符合地理位置，好像天地没有什么不能负载，没有什么不能覆盖的，又好像四季的更替运行，日月交替光明，万物同时生长发育互不伤害，天地的道同时运行而互不违背。
English: The above conforms to the changes of time and space, and the below conforms to the geographical location, as if there is nothing in heaven and earth that cannot be loaded, and nothing that cannot be covered. It is also like the alternation of the four seasons, the sun and the moon alternate in brightness, all things grow and develop at the same time without harming each other, and the ways of heaven and earth run simultaneously without violating each other.

古文：万物并育而不相害，道并行而不相悖，小德川流，大德敦化，此天地之所以为大也。唯天下至圣为能聪明睿知，足以有临也；宽裕温柔，足以有容也；发强刚毅，足以有执也；齐庄中正，足以有敬也；文理密察，足以有别也。
现代文：小德如江河流行，大德敦厚化育，这就是天地之所以为大的原因。只有天下最高尚的圣人是聪明智慧的，能够居上位临下民，宽大为怀，温和柔顺，能够包容天下；奋发勇健，刚强坚毅，能够决断天下大事，威严庄重，忠诚正直，能够博得人们的尊敬，条理清晰，详细观察，能够分辨区别是非曲直。
English: Only the noblest saints in the world are clever and wise, able to stand above the people, generous, gentle and pliable, able to embrace the world; brave, strong and resolute, able to decide the world's major events, dignified, loyal and honest, able to win people's respect, well-organized, detailed observation, able to distinguish between right and wrong.

古文：溥博渊泉，而时出之。
现代文：圣人的德行广博深厚，时时会表现出来。
English: The saint's virtue is broad and deep, and it will always manifest itself.

古文：溥博如天，渊泉如渊。见而民莫不敬，言而民莫不信，行而民莫不说。
现代文：广博如天，深厚如渊，表现出来百姓没有不尊敬的，说出话来百姓没有不信服的，做起事来百姓没有不高兴的。
English: Broad as the sky, deep as the abyss, it shows that the people have no disrespect, the people are not unconvinced when they speak, and the people are not unhappy when they do things.

古文：是以声名洋溢乎中国，施及蛮貊。
现代文：这样，声誉在中国广泛传播，并延续到蛮貊这样的边远地区。
English: In this way, the reputation is widely spread in China and extends to remote areas such as Savage.

古文：舟车所至，人力所通，天之所覆，地之所载，日月所照，霜露所队，凡有血气者，莫不尊亲，故曰配天。
现代文：船车所能达到的地方，人的力量所能通到的地方，天所覆盖的地方，地所负载的地方，日月所照耀的地方，霜露落下的地方，凡有血气生命的，没有不尊重亲近他们的，因此说能与天相配。
English: Where the cart can reach, where man's strength can reach, where the sky covers, where the earth is burdened, where the sun and moon shine, where the frost and dew fall, all fleshly beings, without disrespecting their closeness, are said to be able to match the sky.

古文：唯天下至诚，为能经纶天下之大经，立天下之大本，知天地之化育。
现代文：只有天下最高的真诚，才能成为治理国家的典范，树立天下的根本，认识到天地化育万物的道理。
English: Only the highest sincerity in the world can become a model for governing the country, establish the foundation of the world, and recognize the principle of transforming the world and nurturing all things.

古文：夫焉有所倚？
现代文：这需要什么依凭呢？
English: What does this depend on?

古文：肫肫其仁！渊渊其渊！浩浩其天！
现代文：仁爱之心那样诚挚，像潭水那样幽深，像天空那样广阔。
English: Kindness is as sincere as a heart, as deep as a pool, as vast as the sky.

古文：苟不固聪明圣知达天德者，其孰能知之？《诗》曰： 衣锦尚絅 ，恶其文之著也。
现代文：如果不是真正聪明智慧、达到天德的人，还有谁能知道天下最高的真诚呢？《诗经》上说： 内穿锦缎，外罩麻衣。 
English: If it were not for those who are truly clever and wise, who have attained heavenly virtue, who else could know the highest sincerity in the world? "The Book of Songs" says: "Wear brocade on the inside, and linen on the outside."

古文：故君子之道，闇然而日章；小人之道，的然而日亡。
现代文：这是讨厌锦缎衣服的花纹太艳丽了。因此，君子的道，暗淡无光，但日见彰显，小人的道，鲜艳显著但日趋灭亡。
English: This is because the patterns of brocade clothes are too bright. Therefore, the way of the gentleman is dull and dull, but the sun is shining, and the way of the villain is bright and prominent, but it is dying out.

古文：君子之道：淡而不厌，简而文，温而理，知远之近，知风之自，知微之显，可与入德矣。
现代文：君子的道，平淡但不令人厌恶，简约但文彩熠熠，温和但有条理。知道远是从近开始，知道教化是来自哪里，知道微弱的会变得显著，这样就可进入到圣人的德行行列中去了。
English: The way of the gentleman, plain but not repulsive, simple but elegant, gentle but methodical, knows that far begins from near, knows where enlightenment comes from, knows that the weak will become prominent, and thus can enter the ranks of the virtues of the saints.

古文：《诗》云： 潜虽伏矣，亦孔之昭！ 
现代文：《诗经》上说： 尽管潜藏隐匿在水下，仍然清晰可见。 
English: The "Song of Songs" says, "Though hidden and concealed under water, it is still clearly visible."

古文：故君子内省不疚，无恶于志。
现代文：因此，君子内心省察自己而不感到内疚，无愧于心。
English: Therefore, a gentleman should introspect himself without feeling guilty.

古文：君子之所不可及者，其唯人之所不见乎！《诗》云： 相在尔室，尚不愧于屋漏。 
现代文：别人不及君子的原因，大概是君子在人看不到的地方也能严格要求自己。《诗经》上说： 看你独自一人在室，应当无愧于神灵。 
English: The reason why others are not as good as a gentleman is probably that a gentleman can also be strict with himself in a place where people cannot see him. "The Book of Songs" says: If you are alone in a room, you should be worthy of the gods.

古文：故君子不动而敬，不言而信。
现代文：所以，君子即使没有行动也能表现出他的恭敬态度，即使没有言谈也能表现出他的忠诚。
English: Therefore, a gentleman can show his respect even without action, and his loyalty even without words.

古文：《诗》曰： 奏假无言，时靡有争。 
现代文：《诗经》上说： 默默祈祷，不再有争执。 
English: The Book of Psalms says, "Pray in silence, and there will be no more strife."

古文：是故君子不赏而民劝，不怒而民威于鈇钺。
现代文：因此，君子不用赏赐，百姓就会受到勉励，不用发怒，百姓就会比看到铁钺还要畏惧。
English: Therefore, without rewarding the gentleman, the people will be encouraged, without anger, the people will be more afraid than seeing the spade.

古文：《诗》曰： 不显惟德！
现代文：《诗经》上说： 让上天的德行大放光彩，凡诸侯都来实行。 
English: "The Book of Songs" says: Let the virtue of heaven shine brightly, and let all the princes practice it.

古文：百辟其刑之。 
现代文：因此，君子忠厚恭敬天下就会太平。
English: Therefore, if the gentleman is loyal and respectful, the world will be peaceful.

古文：是故君子笃恭而天下平。
现代文：《诗经》上说： 我怀念文王的美德，但不声张宣扬。 
English: "The Book of Songs" says: I remember the virtues of King Wen, but I do not proclaim them.

古文：末也。 《诗》曰： 德輶如毛。 
现代文：孔子说： 用声张宣扬来感化百姓，这是最不根本的啊！ 《诗经》上说： 德行犹如羽毛。 
English: Confucius said, "It is the most unprincipled thing to use loud propaganda to influence the people." "Virtue is like feathers," said the Book of Songs.

古文：毛犹有伦，上天之载，无声无臭，至矣！
现代文：但羽毛仍是可比的。 上天所承载的道，无声无味 ，这才是最高的境界啊！
English: But feathers are still comparable. The path carried by heaven is silent and tasteless, this is the highest realm!

