古文：○李圆通
现代文：○李圆通
English: ○ Li Yuntong

古文：李圆通，京兆泾阳人也。
现代文：李圆通，京兆泾阳人。
English: Li Yantong, Beijing-Shanghai Yangren.

古文：父景，以军士隶武元皇帝，因与家僮黑女私，生圆通。
现代文：他的父亲李景，以军士的身份隶属于武元皇帝，李景与他家里的僮仆黑女私通，生下李圆通。
English: His father, Li Jing, belonged to the Emperor Wuyuan as a sergeant. Li Jing had an illicit affair with his family's servant, a black woman, and gave birth to Li Yantong.

古文：景不之认，由是孤贱，给使高祖家。
现代文：李景不认他这个儿子，因此他又孤又贱，后来把他送给了隋高祖家。
English: Li Jing did not recognize his son, so he was lonely and cheap, and later gave him to Sui Gao's family.

古文：及为隋国公，擢授参军事。
现代文：等到高祖做隋国公时，提拔李圆通当参军事。
English: When Gao Zu became the prince of Sui, he promoted Li Yuntong to be a military officer.

古文：初，高祖少时，每宴宾客，恆令圆通监厨。
现代文：当初，高祖年少的时候，每逢宴请宾客，常常叫李圆通当监厨。
English: At first, when Gao Zu was young, whenever he invited guests to a banquet, he often asked Li Yuntong to be the supervising chef.

古文：圆通性严整，左右婢仆咸所敬惮。
现代文：李圆通个性严谨，高祖的左右和婢女仆人都敬畏他。
English: Li Yantong has a strict personality. Gao Zu's right and left and maidservants are all in awe of him.

古文：唯世子乳母恃宠轻之，宾客未供，每有干请，圆通不许，或辄持去。
现代文：只有世子杨勇的乳母仗着被宠爱而轻视他。还没有招待宾客，乳母就常来厨房要这要那，李圆通不答应，她拿着东西就走。
English: Only Yang Yong's nanny despised him on the grounds that he was a favorite. Before inviting guests, the nanny often came to the kitchen to ask for this and that. Li Yuntong did not agree, and she took the things and left.

古文：圆通大怒，叱厨人挝之数十，叫呼之声彻于閤内，僚吏左右代其失色。
现代文：圆通生气，就呵叱厨师打她几十下，叫喊的声音在楼内响起，大小官员和身边的侍从，为此都替他害怕得失去了颜色。
English: When Yuan Tong became angry, he scolded the chef and beat her dozens of times. The sound of shouting rang out in the building, and the officials and attendants around him were so afraid of him that they lost their color.

古文：宾去之后，高祖具知之，召圆通，命坐赐食，从此独善之，以为堪当大任。
现代文：宾客离开之后，高祖都知道了，于是召见李圆通，让他坐下，并赏赐他美食，从此以后特别地厚待他，认为他堪当大任。
English: After the guests left, Gao Zu knew all about it, so he summoned Li Yuntong, let him sit down, and rewarded him with delicious food. From then on, he treated him with special kindness, thinking that he was worthy of the great responsibility.

古文：高祖作相，赐封怀昌男。
现代文：高祖作了相国，封他为怀昌男爵。
English: Gao Zu became a fellow countryman, and he was given the title of Baron Huaichang.

古文：久之，授帅都督，进爵新安子，委以心膂。
现代文：过了很久，又授给他帅都督，晋封为新安子爵，把他当心腹。
English: After a long time, he was also awarded the title of "Grand Duke" and promoted to "Viscount Shinan," so beware of him.

古文：圆通多力劲捷，长于武用。
现代文：李圆通力大快捷，擅长武功。
English: Li Yuan is very quick and good at martial arts.

古文：周氏诸王素惮高祖，每伺高祖之隙，图为不利，赖圆通保护，获免者数矣。
现代文：北周的诸王子一向害怕高祖，常常钻高祖的空子，谋划做不利于高祖的事，高祖多次靠李圆通的保护而免遭不幸。
English: The princes of Northern Zhou had always been afraid of Gaozu. They often took advantage of Gaozu's loopholes and plotted to do things that were unfavorable to Gaozu. Gaozu repeatedly relied on the protection of Li Yantong to avoid misfortune.

古文：高祖深感之，由是参预政事。
现代文：高祖深深感念，于是让他参与政事。
English: He was deeply impressed by Gaozu, so he allowed him to participate in politics.

古文：授相国外兵曹，仍领左亲信。
现代文：授给他相国外兵曹的官职，仍然兼任左亲信。
English: He was given the official post of foreign petty officer, and still served as the left confidant.

古文：寻授上仪同。
现代文：不久授他上仪同。
English: He was soon promoted to the same position.

古文：高祖受禅，拜内史侍郎，领左卫长史，进爵为伯。
现代文：高祖受禅后，授他为内史侍郎，兼任左卫长史，加爵位为伯。
English: After Gaozu became a Zen priest, he was given the title of Naishi no Jiro (a chamberlain of the Inner Palace Guards) and concurrently the title of Sae no Choshi (Major Captain of the Left Division of Inner Palace Guards), as well as the title of Kanshaku.

古文：历左右庶子、给事黄门侍郎、尚书左丞，摄刑部尚书，深被任信。
现代文：历任左右庶子、给事黄门侍郎、尚书左丞、代理刑部尚书，很受信任。
English: Successive left and right illegitimate sons, including Huangmen Zhi Rong, Shangshu Zu Rong, and Shangshu of the Department of Criminal Law, won the deep trust of Emperor Wen.

古文：后以左丞领左翊卫骠骑将军。
现代文：后来担任左丞，兼任右翊卫骠骑将军。
English: Later, he served as a left-handed general and concurrently as a right-handed guard and cavalry general.

古文：伐陈之役，圆通以行军总管从杨素出信州道，以功进位大将军，进封万安县侯，拜扬州总管长史。寻转并州总管长史。
现代文：在讨伐陈国的战役中，李圆通以行军总管的身份跟从杨素出兵信州，因功晋升为大将军，加封为万安县侯，授他扬州总管长史，不久转为并州总管长史。
English: In the campaign to subdue Chen Guo, Li Yuntong, as the commander-in-chief of the marching troops, followed Yang Su to send troops to Shinshu, and was promoted to general for his merits. He was also given the title of the lord of Wan'an County, and was awarded the title of the governor-in-chief of Yangzhou, and soon became the governor-in-chief of Shinshu.

古文：秦孝王仁柔自善，少断决，府中事多决于圆通。
现代文：秦孝王为人仁爱善良，处理事情缺乏决断，因此，府中的事情大多由李圆通处理。
English: Qin Xiaowang was a benevolent and kind person, and lacked the determination to deal with things. Therefore, most of the things in the palace were handled by Li Yuntong.

古文：入为司农卿、治粟内史，迁刑部尚书。后数岁，复为并州长史。
现代文：后来李圆通进朝廷，做司农卿，兼粟内史，升迁为刑部尚书，数年后，又做了并州长史。
English: Later, Li Yuntong entered the imperial court, served as the Secretary of Agriculture, and also served as the Minister of Internal Affairs, and was promoted to the Minister of Justice. A few years later, he also served as the Governor of Shandong Province.

古文：孝王以奢侈得罪，圆通亦坐免官。
现代文：秦孝王因奢侈犯了罪，李圆通也因此罢了官。
English: Qin Xiaowang was guilty of extravagance, and Li Yuntong was dismissed from his post.

古文：寻检校刑部尚书事。
现代文：不久李圆通又代理刑部尚书。
English: Soon after, he was appointed as the secretary of the school inspection and punishment department.

古文：仁寿中，以勋旧进爵郡公。
现代文：仁寿年间，李圆通因是功勋老臣晋爵为郡公。
English: During his benevolent life, he was promoted to the rank of Count for his meritorious service.

古文：炀帝嗣位，拜兵部尚书。
现代文：隋炀帝继位，授李圆通兵部尚书。
English: Emperor Sui and Qian succeeded to the throne, and Li Yuntong was appointed as the military secretary.

古文：炀帝时，授协律郎，迁通事谒者，兵曹承务郎。
现代文：炀帝驾临扬州时，让李圆通留下镇守京都。李圆通判决宇文述把田归还给老百姓，宇文述告他接受了贿赂。
English: When Emperor Qian came to Yangzhou, he asked Li Yantong to remain as the town guard of Kyoto. Li Yantong sentenced Uwen Shu to return the fields to the people, and Uwen Shu accused him of accepting bribes.

古文：帝美其才，甚重之。
现代文：隋炀帝大怒，征召李圆通，在洛阳面见炀帝，因此被免官。
English: Emperor Sui was furious and summoned Li Yuntong to meet him in Luoyang. As a result, Li Yuntong was dismissed.

古文：宇文化及之乱也，以为太常卿。
现代文：李圆通因担忧害怕得疾病而死。后追封他为柱国，爵位和从前一样。
English: Li Yantong died of illness due to worry and fear. Later, he was made a pillar state, and his title was the same as before.

古文：后归大唐，卒于梁州总管。
现代文：他的儿子孝常，在大业末年做了华阴县令。
English: His son, Takatsune, became the governor of Huayin County at the end of the Taiei era.

古文：○张定和
现代文：○张定和
English: ○ Zhang Dinghe

古文：张定和，字处谧，京兆万年人也。
现代文：张定和字处谧，京兆万年人。
English: Zhang Dinghe was born in Beijing.

古文：少贫贱，有志节。
现代文：年少时贫寒低贱，有志气，守节操。
English: When he was young, he was poor, humble, ambitious, and disciplined.

古文：初为侍官。
现代文：起初做侍官。
English: He started out as a steward.

古文：会平陈之役，定和当从征，无以自给。
现代文：时逢平定陈国的战争，定和理当去打仗，但生活不能自给。
English: Whenever there is a war to pacify Chen Guo, Ding He should go to war, but life cannot be self-sufficient.

古文：其妻有嫁时衣服，定和将鬻之，妻靳固不与，定和于是遂行。
现代文：他要把妻子的嫁衣卖掉，妻子坚决不给他。从此定和就走了。
English: He wanted to sell his wife's wedding dress, but his wife resolutely refused to give it to him. From then on, Dinghe left.

古文：以功拜仪同，赐帛千匹，遂弃其妻。
现代文：因作战有功，被任命为仪同，赏赐布帛千匹。于是定和抛弃了妻子。
English: Due to his distinguished service in the war, he was appointed as a gitong and awarded a thousand cloth ponies. Therefore, he settled down and abandoned his wife.

古文：是后数以军功加上开府、骠骑将军。
现代文：此后定和屡建军功，升迁为上开府、骠骑将军。
English: After that, Dinghe repeatedly built military merit, and was promoted to Shangkaifu, the general of the cavalry.

古文：从上柱国李充击突厥，先登陷阵，虏刺之中颈，定和以草塞创而战，神气自若，虏遂败走。
现代文：定和跟随上柱国李充攻打突厥，他身先士卒，冲锋陷阵。贼兵刺中了他的脖子，他就用草塞住伤口继续作战，神态自若，于是贼兵大败而逃。
English: Ding He followed Li Chong, the upper pillar, to attack the Turks. He was the first to charge into the battle. The bandits stabbed him in the neck, he covered the wound with grass and continued to fight, looking confident, so the bandits were defeated and fled.

古文：上闻而壮之，遣使者赍药，驰诣定和所劳问之。
现代文：皇上得此消息，派使者给他送药，驾快马到他的处所慰劳。
English: The emperor received the news, sent an envoy to bring him medicine, and rode a fast horse to his residence to console him.

古文：进位柱国，封武安县侯，赏物二千段，良马二匹，金百两。
现代文：升官为柱国，晋爵为武安县侯。赏赐布帛二千段，骏马两匹，黄金一百两。
English: He was promoted to pillar state and given the title of marquis of Wu'an County. He was awarded 2,000 denarii of cloth, two horses, and 100 taels of gold.

古文：炀帝嗣位，拜宜州刺史，寻转河内太守，颇有惠政。
现代文：炀帝继位后，任命定和为宜州刺吏，不久又派遣他到河内做太守，很有政绩。
English: After Emperor Shun succeeded to the throne, he appointed Dinghe as the assassin of Yizhou, and soon sent him to Hanoi to be the governor, which was a great achievement.

古文：岁馀，征拜左屯卫大将军。
现代文：一年多后，定和奉诏回京，任左屯卫大将军。
English: More than a year later, Dinghe returned to Beijing after receiving the imperial edict and was appointed General of the Left Tunwei.

古文：从帝征吐谷浑，至覆袁川。
现代文：定和随从炀帝征伐吐谷浑，到了覆袁川。
English: Dinghe followed Emperor Qian in the conquest of Tuyugun and came to overpower Yuanchuan.

古文：时吐谷浑主与数骑而遁，其名王诈为浑主，保车我真山，帝命定和率师击之。既与贼相遇，轻其众少，呼之令降，贼不肯下。
现代文：当时吐谷浑主与几个骑兵逃跑了，他手下一位有名的番王假称浑主，守卫着车我真山。炀帝命令定和率兵进攻，定和的部队已跟贼寇相遇，轻视贼寇兵少力薄，喊叫贼寇投降，贼人不肯。
English: At that time, the lord of Tugu and several cavalrymen ran away. One of his famous guards, pretending to be the lord of Tugu, guarded the mountain. Emperor Xuan ordered Ding He to attack with his soldiers. Ding He's troops had already encountered the bandits, despised the weak bandits, and shouted for the bandits to surrender. The bandits refused.

古文：定和不被甲，挺身登山，贼伏兵于岩谷之下，发矢中之而毙。
现代文：定和不披甲挺身登山，贼寇在山谷里埋下了伏兵，用暗箭射死了定和。
English: Sada and his armor-less friend climbed up the mountain. The bandit planted an ambush in the valley and shot Sada dead with a hidden arrow.

古文：其亚将柳武建击贼，悉斩之。
现代文：副将柳武建率兵奋力还击，全部消灭了敌人。
English: Vice-commander Liu Wu Jian led the troops to fight back hard and completely eliminated the enemy.

古文：诸军多物故，奫众独全。
现代文：炀帝为定和以身殉国而悲痛流泪，追封他为光禄大夫。
English: Emperor Qian shed tears of grief for Ding He's martyrdom, and he was awarded the title of Guanglu Doctor.

古文：高祖善之，赐物二百五十段。
现代文：当时原有的爵位已按例免除了，因而重新封他为武安侯，谥号 壮武 。
English: At that time, the original title of nobility had been exempted as usual, so he was re-christened as Wu'an Hou, with the nickname Zhuangwu.

古文：仁寿中，迁潭州总管，在职三年卒。有子孝廉。
现代文：馈赠丝绸一千匹，大米一千石。他的儿子张世立继承了爵位，不久为光禄大夫。
English: His son, Zhang Shili, inherited the title of nobility and soon became the doctor of Guanglu.

古文：○麦铁杖
现代文：○麦铁杖
English: ○Wheat iron cane

古文：麦铁杖，始兴人也。
现代文：麦铁杖是始兴人。
English: Wheat iron cane is the beginning of Xingren.

古文：骁勇有膂力，日行五百里，走及奔马。
现代文：勇猛而有膂力，能日行五百里，跑起来可以赶上奔马。
English: He is brave and strong. He can travel 500 miles a day. When he runs, he can catch up with a galloping horse.

古文：性疏诞使酒，好交游，重信义，每以渔猎为事，不治产业。
现代文：粗犷放荡且好酒，喜欢结交朋友，重信义，平常以捕鱼打猎为生，不置产业。
English: Rough, debauched and a good drinker, he likes to make friends and is very loyal. He usually makes a living by fishing and hunting, and does not own any property.

古文：陈太建中，结聚为群盗，广州刺史欧阳頠俘之以献，没为官户，配执御伞。
现代文：陈国太建年间与人合伙做贼，广州刺史欧阳危页俘获了他，麦铁杖从此沦为朝廷的奴仆，专给皇帝撑伞。
English: During the reign of Chen Guotaijian, he collaborated with others to become a thief. He was captured by the Guangzhou assassin Ouyang Guozhe. From then on, the wheat iron cane became a slave of the imperial court, used exclusively to hold up the emperor's umbrella.

古文：每罢朝后，行百馀里，夜至南徐州，俞城而入，行光火劫盗。
现代文：铁杖常常在皇帝退朝之后，步行一百多里，夜间到南徐州，翻越城墙而入，借灯光打劫偷盗。
English: After the emperor's abdication, Tie Jian often walked more than a hundred miles to the south of Xuzhou at night, climbed over the city wall, and used lights to rob and steal.

古文：旦还，及时仍又执伞。
现代文：次日早晨返回时，仍旧替皇帝撑伞。
English: When he returned the next morning, he was still holding an umbrella for the emperor.

古文：如此者十馀度，物主识之，州以状奏。
现代文：像这样十多次，失主们认出了他，南徐州官府用状子告到皇帝那里。
English: Like this more than ten times, the owners recognized him, and the South Xuzhou government office reported to the emperor with a letter.

古文：朝士见铁杖每旦恆在，不之信也。
现代文：朝中官员见铁杖每天早晨都在，不相信他做贼。
English: Officials in North Korea and China saw that the iron cane was there every morning and did not believe that he was a thief.

古文：后数告变，尚书蔡徵曰： 此可验耳。 
现代文：后来南徐州官员又多次状告铁杖，尚书蔡徵说： 这是可以验证的。 
English: Later, officials in South Xuzhou repeatedly sued the iron rod, and Shangshu Caizhen said: This can be verified.

古文：于仗下时，购以百金，求人送诏书与南徐州刺史。
现代文：在卫兵们退出的时候，以百金悬赏，招募可以送诏书给南徐州刺史的人。
English: When the guards withdrew, a reward of 100 gold was offered to recruit a person who could send an imperial edict to South Xuzhou to assassinate history.

古文：铁杖出应募，赍敕而往，明旦及奏事。
现代文：铁杖出来应招，怀揣诏书而去，次日早晨及时回奏。
English: The scepter came out to answer the call, went away with the edict, and returned in time the next morning.

古文：帝曰： 信然，为盗明矣。 
现代文：皇帝说： 的确是徐州官员说的那样，铁杖偷盗之事是很清楚的。 
English: The emperor said, "Indeed, as the Xuzhou official said, the theft of the iron cane is very clear.

古文：惜其勇捷，诫而释之。
现代文：因怜惜他勇猛敏捷，警告后便放他回家了。
English: Pitying him for his bravery and agility, they let him go home after a warning.

古文：陈亡后，徙居清流县。
现代文：陈国灭亡后，铁杖迁到清流县居住。
English: After the death of Chen Guo, Tie Jie moved to Qingliu County to live.

古文：遇江东反，杨素遣铁杖头戴草束，夜浮渡江，觇贼中消息，具知还报。
现代文：恰巧江东谋反，杨素派铁杖到江南去侦察。铁杖头戴草把，在夜间浮水过江，全部弄清贼营情况后回报杨素。
English: It just so happened that the east side of the Yangtze River was plotting a rebellion, so Yang Su sent his iron staff to the south side of the Yangtze River to investigate. The head of the iron staff wore a straw hat, and floated across the river at night. After ascertaining the situation of the thieves' camp, he reported back to Yang Su.

古文：后复更往，为贼所擒。逆帅李棱遣兵仗三十人卫之，缚送高智慧。
现代文：后来又再次到贼营窥探，被贼兵捉住，贼帅李棱派三十个军士押送他，绑着准备送给高智慧。
English: Later, he went to the bandit camp again to spy, and was caught by the bandits. The bandit commander Li Ren sent thirty sergeants to escort him, tie him up and prepare to give him to Gao Zhizhi.

古文：行至庆亭，卫者憩食，哀其馁，解手以给其餐。
现代文：押到肻亭，军士们吃饭休息，可怜他饿，解开绑着的手让他吃饭。
English: Pushed to the pavilion, the sergeants ate and rested, pitied him for being hungry, untied his hands and let him eat.

古文：铁杖取贼刀，乱斩卫者，杀之皆尽，悉割其鼻，怀之以归。素大奇之。
现代文：铁杖夺取军士的刀，乱砍押送的军士，直到杀尽为止，然后一一割下他们的鼻子，怀揣而归，杨素十分惊奇。
English: Yang Su was very surprised when he seized the sergeant's knife with an iron rod, slashed the escorting sergeants until they were all dead, and then cut off their noses one by one and returned with the knife.

古文：后叙战勋，不及铁杖，遇素驰驿归于京师，铁杖步追之，每夜则同宿。
现代文：后来论功行赏，却没有麦铁杖，碰上杨素坐驿车回京都，铁杖徒步追随杨素，每夜同宿一店。
English: Later, on the subject of reward for meritorious service, he did not have a barley iron cane. He met Yang Su taking a carriage back to Kyoto. The iron cane followed Yang Su on foot, and they stayed at the same hotel every night.

古文：素见而悟，特奏授仪同三司。
现代文：杨素发现铁杖时才明白铁杖的用心，特地向皇上请奏授铁杖为仪同三司。
English: When Yang Su found the iron staff, he understood the intention of the iron staff. He specifically asked the emperor to give him the iron staff as a gift.

古文：以不识书，放还乡里。
现代文：但因铁杖不识字，放回乡里。
English: However, because he could not read with a cane, he was sent back to the countryside.

古文：成阳公李彻称其骁武，开皇十六年，征至京师，除车骑将军，仍从杨素北征突厥，加上开府。
现代文：成阳公李彻欣赏铁杖勇猛，在开皇十六年，征召铁杖到京城，任命他为车骑将军。仍跟随杨素北征突厥，加封为上开府。
English: Chengyang Gong Li Che appreciated the iron staff's bravery. In the 16th year of the Emperor's reign, he conscripted the iron staff to the capital and appointed him as a cavalry general. He still followed Yang Su in the Northern Expedition to Turkey, and Gaofen as the Upper Kaifu.

古文：炀帝即位，汉王谅反于并州，又从杨素击之，每战先登。进位柱国。
现代文：炀帝即位，汉王杨凉在并州谋反，铁杖又跟随杨素征讨汉王杨谅，每次作战总是身先士卒，后任柱国大将军。
English: Emperor Qian ascended to the throne, Han King Yang Liang was plotting a rebellion in the annexation of the state, and Tie Sze followed Yang Su to recruit Han King Yang Peng. He was always the first to fight in every battle, and later served as the general of the pillar country.

古文：寻除莱州刺史，无治名。
现代文：不久调任莱州刺史，但无政绩。
English: He was soon transferred to the post of governor of Laizhou Province, but had no political achievements.

古文：后转汝南太守，稍习法令，群盗屏迹。
现代文：升转任汝南太守，渐渐学习法令制度，群盗绝迹。
English: He was promoted to the position of the governor of Runan Province, gradually learned the legal system, and the bandits disappeared.

古文：后因朝集，考功郎窦威嘲之曰： 麦是何姓？ 
现代文：后来上朝，考功郎窦威嘲笑铁杖说： 麦是什么姓？ 
English: Later, in the morning of the previous day, Dou Wei, a meritorious scholar, laughed at the iron rod and said: What is the surname of Mai?

古文：铁杖应口对曰： 麦豆不殊，那忽相怪！ 
现代文：铁杖应声答道： 麦窦没有差异，有什么值得奇怪的？ 
English: The iron cane replied: There is no difference between the two, what's so strange?

古文：威赧然，无以应之，时人以为敏慧。
现代文：窦威非常羞愧，无言以对，当时的人都认为铁杖机敏聪慧。
English: Dou Wei was very ashamed and speechless. At that time, people thought that the iron rod was quick and clever.

古文：寻除右屯卫大将军，帝待之逾密。
现代文：不久铁杖又调任右屯卫大将军，炀帝对他更加亲密。
English: Soon after, Tie Jie was transferred to the post of General of the Right Tunwei Army, and Emperor Zhou became even closer to him.

古文：铁杖自以荷恩深重，每怀竭命之志。
现代文：铁杖认为炀帝对他恩重如山，常怀尽忠报国之志。
English: Tie cane believed that Emperor Xizong was extremely grateful to him and always cherished his loyalty to the country.

古文：及辽东之役，请为前锋，顾谓医者吴景贤曰： 大丈夫性命自有所在，岂能艾炷灸頞，瓜蒂喷鼻，治黄不差，而卧死兒女手中乎？ 
现代文：等到炀帝征讨辽东，铁杖请求当前锋。他回头对随从医生吴景贤说： 大丈夫的性命自有所在，岂能去用艾炷烫鼻梁，用瓜蒂喷鼻孔，治黄不差，而死在妇人怀里呢？ 
English: He turned to his attendant, the doctor Wu Jingxian, and said, "The life of an able-bodied man is of its own accord. Couldn't he go and burn the bridge of his nose with mugwort, blow out his nostrils with eucalyptus, cure his jaundice, and die in a woman's arms?

古文：将渡辽，谓其三子曰： 阿奴当备浅色黄衫。
现代文：将要渡辽河，铁杖对他的三个儿子说： 你们应该准备浅黄色的衣衫。
English: About to cross the Liao River, Tie Sze said to his three sons: You should prepare light yellow shirts.

古文：吾荷国恩，今是死日。
现代文：我久蒙国恩，今天应是为国捐躯的时候。
English: I have long been beholden to the nation. Today should be the time to give my life for the country.

古文：我既被杀，尔当富贵。
现代文：我如果战死，你们将会富贵。
English: If I die in battle, you will be rich.

古文：唯诚与孝，尔其勉之。 
现代文：在忠与孝上，希望你们多努力。 
English: In terms of loyalty and filial piety, I hope you will work harder.

古文：及济，桥未成，去东岸尚数丈，贼大至。
现代文：等到渡河时，桥未完工，离东岸还有几丈，贼兵大批涌来。
English: When it came time to cross the river, the bridge was not yet completed, and there were still several meters from the east bank. A large number of soldiers came.

古文：铁杖跳上岸，与贼战，死。
现代文：铁杖跳上岸，与贼兵拼搏，战死。
English: The scepter jumped ashore, fought with the bandits, and died.

古文：武贲郎将钱士雄、孟金叉亦死之，左右更无及者。
现代文：同时战死的还有武贲郎将钱士雄、孟金叉。
English: At the same time, there were also Takehiro, Qian Shixiong and Meng Jinsha who died in the battle.

古文：帝为之流涕，购得其尸，下诏曰： 铁杖志气骁果，夙著勋庸，陪麾问罪，先登陷阵，节高义烈，身殒功存。
现代文：炀帝为铁杖哭泣，赎回铁杖的尸体，下诏说： 铁杖志坚气勇，平素以功著称，这次陪朕讨伐贼人，身先士卒，冲锋陷阵，节高义烈，虽身死而功存。
English: Emperor Qian wept for the iron scepter, redeemed the corpse of the iron scepter, and issued the following edict: The iron scepter has a strong and courageous spirit, and has always been famous for its merits. This time, it accompanied me to fight against the bandits. It was the first to charge into the battle, and it was highly virtuous. Although it died, it still had merits.

古文：兴言至诚，追怀伤悼，宜赉殊荣。
现代文：他的誓言至忠至诚，追怀他的平生，让人伤感不已。
English: His vow to be loyal and sincere, and his life-long pursuit, make people feel sad.

古文：用彰饰德。可赠光禄大夫、宿国公。谥曰武烈。 
现代文：应赐给他特殊荣誉，以表彰他的功德，可追赠光禄大夫之职，追封宿国公，谥号武烈。 
English: He should be given a special honor, in recognition of his merits, he can be posthumously awarded the post of Guanglu Doctor, posthumously awarded the title of Prince of the host country, and given the title of Wu Rong.

古文：子孟才嗣。寻授光禄大夫。
现代文：铁杖之子麦孟才承袭爵位，不久授为光禄大夫。
English: Iron Rod's son, Mai Mengcai, succeeded to the title of nobility and was soon awarded the title of Guanglu Doctor.

古文：孟才有二弟，仲才、季才，俱拜正议大夫。
现代文：孟才有仲才、季才两个弟弟，都被拜为正议大夫。
English: Meng's two younger brothers, Zhongcai and Qicai, are both revered as doctors.

古文：赗赠巨万，赐辒辌车，给前后部羽葆鼓吹。平壤道败将宇文述等百馀人皆为执绋，王公已下送至郊外，士雄赠左光禄大夫、右屯卫将军、武强侯，谥曰刚。
现代文：炀帝还赠钱巨万，为铁杖办丧事，赐鍂车京丧车，前后配有吹鼓手，丧车的竿子上插着羽毛，在平壤被贼军打破的宇文述等一百多人都在车前为铁杖执绳引棺，王公以下的官员送到郊外。钱士雄被追封为左光禄大夫、右屯卫将军、武强侯，谥号刚。
English: Emperor Gong also gave a huge amount of money to pay for the funeral of the iron cane. He gave the funeral carriage to the Beijing funeral carriage, which was equipped with a trumpeter in front and behind. Feathers were stuck on the pole of the funeral carriage. More than a hundred people, including Wu Wenshu, who was broken by the thief army in Pyongyang, were holding the rope to lead the coffin for the iron cane in front of the carriage. Officials below Wang Gong were sent to the suburbs. Qian Shixiong was posthumously awarded the titles of Doctor of the Left Guanglu, General of the Right Tunwei, Wu Qiang Hou, and Gong Gang.

古文：子杰嗣。
现代文：他的儿子钱杰继承了爵位。
English: He has a son named Jian Chen.

古文：金叉赠右光禄大夫，子善谊袭官。
现代文：孟金叉被追赠为右光禄大夫，其子孟善谊继承官位。
English: Meng Jinsha was posthumously awarded the title of Uguanglu Doctor, and his son Meng Zhengyi succeeded to the post.

古文：孟才字智棱，果烈有父风。
现代文：孟才字智棱，坚强刚烈，有他父亲铁杖的遗风。
English: Meng Cai is intelligent, strong and tough, with the legacy of his father's iron rod.

古文：帝以孟才死节将子，恩赐殊厚，拜武贲郎将。
现代文：炀帝因为孟才是为国损躯的将领的儿子，对他恩惠不同一般，拜为武贲郎将。
English: Because Meng was the son of a general who lost his life for his country, Emperor Zhao granted him different favors than usual, and he was worshipped as the warrior general.

古文：及江都之难，慨然有复仇之志。
现代文：等到江都宇文化及叛乱弑君，孟才便胸怀报仇之志。
English: It wasn't until Jiangdu Yu Culture and the rebellion of Zou Jun that Meng first harbored a desire for revenge.

古文：与武牙郎钱杰素交友，二人相谓曰： 吾等世荷国恩，门著诚节。
现代文：孟才和钱武牙郎钱杰感情一向很好，二人密谋说： 我们两家世代蒙受皇恩，家门又以忠诚有节而著称。
English: Meng Cai and Qian Wujia Lang Qian Jie have always had a good relationship. The two conspired to say: Our two families have received royal grace for generations, and the family is known for its loyalty and discipline.

古文：今贼臣弑逆，社稷沦亡，无节可纪，何面目视息世间哉！ 
现代文：现在贼臣弑君叛逆，国家沦亡，无节可谈，我们还有什么脸面活在世上呢？ 
English: Now that the traitorous vassals have rebelled and the country has fallen, there is nothing to talk about. What kind of face do we have left to live in the world?

古文：于是流涕扼腕，遂相与谋，纠合恩旧，欲于显福宫邀击宇文化及。
现代文：于是伤心落泪，扼腕愤激，相约纠集旧部，想拦截宇文化及在显福宫杀死他。
English: As a result, he was heartbroken and tearful, angry and angry, and gathered his old unit to intercept U Bunka and kill him at the Hanfu Palace.

古文：事临发，陈籓之子谦知其谋而告之，与其党沈光俱为化及所害，忠义之士哀焉。
现代文：将要行动时，陈藩之子陈谦告密，孟才和党羽沈光等都被宇文化及杀害，忠义之士都为他们感到悲痛。
English: When they were about to act, Chen Qian, the son of the Chen clan, informed on them, and Meng Cai and Shen Guang, both loyalists, were brutally murdered. All the loyalists grieved for them.

古文：○沈光
现代文：○沈光字
English: ○ Shen Guang Zi

古文：沈光，字总持，吴兴人也。
现代文：沈光字总持，吴兴人。
English: Wu Xingren plays Shen Guang, the chief of the characters.

古文：父君道，仕陈吏部侍郎，陈灭，家于长安。
现代文：父亲沈君道，陈国吏部侍郎。陈国灭亡后，家住长安。
English: His father, Shen Jundao, was a steward of Chen Guoli Bu. After the fall of Chen Guoli, the family lived in Chang'an.

古文：皇太子勇引署学士。
现代文：皇太子杨勇署他为学士。
English: Crown Prince Yang Yong received his bachelor's degree.

古文：后为汉王谅府掾，谅败，除名。
现代文：后任汉王杨谅的府掾。杨谅失败后，他被除名为民。
English: He later became the governor of the Han king Yang Chong. After Yang Chong's defeat, he was removed from his position as Min.

古文：光少骁捷，善戏马，为天下之最。
现代文：沈光小时就骁勇快捷，善于马术，为天下之最。
English: In the twilight hours, he is brave and quick, good at horsemanship, and is the best in the world.

古文：略综书记，微有词藻，常慕立功名，不拘小节。
现代文：他略通书记，会写点文章，常思慕立功扬名，不拘小节。
English: He knows a bit about secretarial work, can write a few articles, and often thinks about making a name for himself, no matter how small.

古文：家甚贫窭，父兄并以佣书为事，光独跅驰，交通轻侠，为京师恶少年之所朋附。
现代文：家境贫寒，父兄都以为人抄书为生，只有沈光放纵不羁，交结侠客和轻薄之徒，与京师的放纵少年结为朋友。
English: His family was poor, and both his father and brother thought that people copied books for a living. Only Shen Guang indulged without restraint, befriended knights and frivolous people, and made friends with the indulgent boys of the Beijing division.

古文：人多赡遗，得以养亲，每致甘食美服，未尝困匮。
现代文：人家常常送东西给他，他得以侍养父母，甚至常有甘食美服，未曾困乏。
English: People often gave him things, he was able to take care of his parents, and even often had sweet food and beautiful clothes, he was never tired.

古文：初建禅定寺，其中幡竿高十馀丈，适遇绳绝，非人力所及，诸僧患之。
现代文：刚建禅定寺，其中的幡竿高十几丈，刚好绳子又断了，不是人力上得去的，诸僧都很忧虑。
English: The monks of the newly built Zenjo-ji Temple were very worried when the rope of the flagpole, which was more than a dozen meters high, broke. It was not humanly possible for them to carry it.

古文：光见而谓僧曰： 可持绳来，当相为上耳。 
现代文：沈光见了，对和尚们说： 可拿绳子来，我为你们爬上去就是了。 
English: When he saw the light fading, he said to the monks, "But bring me a rope, and I will climb up for you."

古文：诸僧惊喜，因取而与之。
现代文：诸僧很惊喜，拿来绳子给他。
English: The monks were surprised and brought him a rope.

古文：光以口衔索，拍竿而上，直至龙头。
现代文：沈光用口衔绳子，沿竹竿子爬上去，一直爬到龙头上。
English: Shen Guang used the rope to climb up along the bamboo pole and climbed all the way to the dragon's head.

古文：系绳毕，手足皆放，透空而下，以掌拒地，倒行数十步。
现代文：他系好绳子，手足都放松，透空而下，用手掌落地，倒行几十步。
English: He tied the rope, relaxed his hands and feet, soared through the air, landed on the ground with his palms, and walked backwards for dozens of steps.

古文：观者骇悦，莫不嗟异，时人号为 肉飞仙 。
现代文：观众莫不惊骇高兴，叹异不止。当时人叫他 肉飞仙 。
English: The audience was stunned and delighted, gasping in amazement. At the time, people called him the Flying Meat Fairy.

古文：大业中，炀帝征天下骁果之士以伐辽左，光预焉。
现代文：大业中，炀帝征集天下骁勇之士以伐辽东，沈光参预其中。
English: In the great undertaking, Emperor Gong enlisted the world's bravest warriors to attack Liaodong, and Shen Guang was among them.

古文：同类数万人，皆出其下。
现代文：同类几万人，都在他之下。
English: Tens of thousands like him, all under him.

古文：光将诣行在所，宾客送至灞上者百馀骑。
现代文：沈光将到行宫去，送他到灞上的宾客有一百多人。
English: Shen Guang will go to the palace, and there are more than a hundred guests to escort him to the raft.

古文：光酹酒而誓曰： 是行也，若不能建立功名，当死于高丽，不复与诸君相见矣。 
现代文：沈光洒酒于地，发誓说： 这次去，如不能建功扬名，当死在高丽，不再与各位相见了。 
English: Shen Guang sprinkled wine on the ground and swore: "This time, if I can't make a name for myself, I'll die in Korea and never see you again."

古文：及从帝攻辽东，以冲梯击城，竿长十五丈，光升其端，临城与贼战，短兵接，杀十数人。
现代文：到跟随炀帝进攻辽东时，用冲梯攻城，竹竿长十五丈，沈光爬到顶端上去，临城与贼人交战，短兵相接，杀了十几人。
English: When he followed Emperor Qian to attack Liaodong, he used a ladder to attack the city. The bamboo pole was fifteen meters long, and Shen Guang climbed to the top. He fought with the thieves in the city, and the short soldiers met and killed more than a dozen people.

古文：贼竞击之而坠，未及于地，适遇竿有垂絙，光接而复上。
现代文：贼人竞相攻击他，他从城上掉下来，没落到地上，刚好抓住了竹竿上的绳子，沈光又上去。
English: Thieves competed to attack him, he fell from the castle, fell to the ground, just caught the rope on the bamboo pole, and sank again.

古文：帝望见，壮异之，驰召与语，大悦，即日拜朝请大夫，赐宝刀良马，恆致左右，亲顾渐密。
现代文：炀帝望见了，壮之异之，驰马过去与他交谈，很高兴，当天授他朝请大夫，赐给他宝刀良马。炀帝常把他带在身边，渐渐对他很亲密。
English: Emperor Yao saw him and was so impressed that he rode over to talk to him. He was so pleased that he gave him a doctor's appointment that day and gave him a good sword. Emperor Yao often took him with him and gradually became very close to him.

古文：未几，以为折冲郎将，赏遇优重。
现代文：不久，命他为折冲郎将，赏赐、待遇很优厚。
English: Not long after, he was appointed as Orichoro's second-in-command, and was rewarded and treated very generously.

古文：帝每推食解衣以赐之，同辈莫与为比。
现代文：炀帝常常推食解衣赏赐给他，同类人中没谁可与他相比。
English: Emperor Qian often rewarded him with food and clothing, and no one of his kind could compare to him.

古文：光自以荷恩深重，思怀竭节。
现代文：沈光自因受恩深重，想尽力尽忠。
English: Shen Guang was deeply grateful for the favor and wanted to do his best to be loyal.

古文：及江都之难，潜构义勇，将为帝复仇。
现代文：江都之难发生，炀帝为宇文化及所杀后，沈光偷偷地召集义士，将为炀帝报仇。
English: When the Jiangdu Incident occurred and Emperor Gong was killed for the sake of world culture, Shen Guang secretly summoned the righteous to avenge Emperor Gong's death.

古文：先是，帝宠昵官奴，名为给使，宇文化及以光骁勇，方任之，令其总统，营于禁内。
现代文：此前，炀帝宠幸官奴，把他们叫给使，宇文化及因沈光勇敢，才任用他们，让他总管给使，在宫内安营。
English: Previously, Emperor Gong favored lucky officials and called them to the envoys. However, because of Yu's culture and Shen Guang's bravery, he only appointed them, and let his general manager give them to the envoys to camp in the palace.

古文：时孟才、钱杰等阴图化及，因谓光曰： 我等荷国厚恩，不能死难以卫社稷，斯则古人之所耻也。
现代文：当时孟才、钱杰等人谋划杀死宇文化及，因此对沈光说： 我们受国大恩，不能死于难，以保卫国家，这是古人所羞耻的。
English: At that time, Meng Cai, Qian Jie and others plotted to kill Yu Qian and therefore said to Shen Guang: We are greatly blessed by the country and cannot die from hardship to defend the country, which is a shame for the ancients.

古文：今又俯首事雠，受其驱率，有熏面目，何用生为？
现代文：现又俯首侍奉仇敌，受他驱使，面目惭愧，何必活着呢？
English: Why should you live, seeing that you have bowed your heads to your enemies, and served them, and been brought into subjection to them?

古文：吾必欲杀之，死无所恨，公义士也，肯从我乎？ 
现代文：我们一定要杀死他，死而无憾。你是义士，肯跟随我们吗？ 
English: We must kill him and die without regret. You are a righteous man, will you follow us?

古文：光泣下沾衿，曰： 是所望于将军也。
现代文：沈光泣下沾襟，说： 这是我所希望于将军的。
English: "This is what I hope for from the general," said a tearful Shen Guang.

古文：仆领给使数百人，并荷先帝恩遇，今在化及内营。
现代文：我率领着几百个给使，都受到先帝的大恩，今在宇文化及营内。
English: I led several hundred envoys, all of whom were greatly blessed by the former emperor, and are now in U Bunka and the camp.

古文：以此复雠，如鹰鹯之逐鸟雀。
现代文：用他们来复仇，就像老鹰抓小鸟一样。
English: Using them to get revenge is like an eagle catching a bird.

古文：万世之功，在此一举，愿将军勉之。 
现代文：万世之功，在此一举，望将军好自为之。 
English: This is a once-in-a-lifetime achievement, and General Bong did it all by himself.

古文：孟才为将军，领江淮之众数千人，期以营将发时，晨起袭化及。
现代文：孟才为将军，率领江淮之众几千人，相约在军营中将起床时，早晨进攻宇文化及。
English: Meng Cai was a general, and he led several thousand people from Jianghuai. They agreed to attack Yucun in the morning when the general got up in the camp.

古文：光语泄，陈谦告其事。
现代文：沈光的话泄漏了出去，陈谦把此事告了出去。
English: Shen Guang's words leaked out, and Chen Qian reported the matter.

古文：化及大惧曰： 此麦铁杖子也，及沈光者，并勇决不可当，须避其锋。 
现代文：宇文化及很惊惧，说： 这是麦铁杖的儿子，他和沈光，都勇不可挡，我要躲避其锋锐。 
English: "This is the son of Wheat Iron Cane. He and Shen Guang are both unstoppable. I want to avoid their sharpness."

古文：是夜即与腹心走出营外，留人告司马德戡等，遣领兵马，逮捕孟才。
现代文：当夜就与心腹逃到营外，留下人告诉司马德戡等人，让他率领兵马，逮捕孟才。
English: That night, he and his confidant fled outside the camp, leaving behind someone to tell Sima Deyao and others to let him lead the soldiers to arrest Meng Cai.

古文：光闻营内喧声，知事发，不及被甲，即袭化及营，空无所获。
现代文：沈光听到营内喧哗声，知道事情暴露了，来不及披甲，就袭击宇文化及营，空无所获。
English: Shen Guang heard the noise in the camp, knew that the matter was exposed, and had no time to put on armor. He attacked U Culture and the camp, but got nothing.

古文：值舍人元敏，数而斩之。
现代文：碰上舍人元敏，数落其罪而斩之。
English: When he came across the traitor, Yuan Min, he found him guilty and executed him.

古文：遇德戡兵入，四面围合。
现代文：又遇上司马德戡兵入，把沈光四面包围。
English: In another incident, his superior, Ma Deyu, sent in soldiers to surround Shen Guang on all sides.

古文：光大呼溃围，给使齐奋，斩首数十级，贼皆披靡。
现代文：沈光大叫突围，给使们也一起奋勇，杀了几十个，贼皆退后。
English: Shen Guang shouted to break out of the encirclement, and encouraged the envoys to do the same. Dozens were killed, and the thieves all retreated.

古文：德戡辄复遣骑，持弓弩，翼而射之。
现代文：司马德戡又派来骑兵，拿着弓箭射他。
English: Sima De again sent his cavalry to attack him with bows and arrows.

古文：光身无介胄，遂为所害。
现代文：沈光身无甲胄，于是被害。
English: Shen Guang did not have any armor, so he was killed.

古文：麾下数百人皆斗而死，一无降者。
现代文：麾下几百人都战斗而死，没有一个投降的。
English: Hundreds of his men died in battle, and not one surrendered.

古文：时年二十八。
现代文：沈光死时二十八岁。
English: He was only twenty-eight at the time.

古文：壮士闻之，莫不为之陨涕。
现代文：壮士们听说此事，没有不为他流泪的。
English: When the heroes heard about this, there was no one who did not shed tears for him.

古文：○来护兒
现代文：○来护儿
English: ○ to babysit

古文：来护兒，字崇善，江都人也。
现代文：来护儿字崇善，江都人。
English: The nursery is run by a man from Jiangdu, surnamed Chongzen.

古文：幼而卓诡，好立奇节。
现代文：幼年就卓越不群，好立奇节。
English: At an early age, he was exceptional and had a good imagination.

古文：初读《诗》，至 击鼓其镗，踊跃用兵 、 羔裘豹饰，孔武有力 ，舍书而叹曰： 大丈夫在世当如是。
现代文：刚读《诗经》，读到 击鼓其镗，踊跃用兵 和 羔裘豹饰，孔武有力 的诗句时，放下书感叹说： 大丈夫在世就应该是这个样子！
English: When I had just read the "Book of Songs" and read the powerful verses of Kong Wu, with the drums beating and the cymbals rattling, the soldiers marching and the leopards dancing, I put down the book and sighed, "It's okay, this is how a husband should be in this world!"

古文：会为国灭贼以取功名，安能区区久事陇亩！ 
现代文：我要为国杀敌，建功立名，怎么能碌碌无为老死田间！ 
English: I want to kill the enemy for the country, make achievements and make a name for myself, how can I work hard for nothing and die in the field!

古文：群辈惊其言而壮其志。
现代文：同伴听了都很惊讶，佩服他很有志气。
English: Many people were surprised by his words and thought that his ambition was great.

古文：护兒所住白土村，密迩江岸。
现代文：来护儿居住的白土村，离长江岸边很近。
English: The village of Baidu, where the nanny lives, is very close to the Yangtze River.

古文：于时江南尚阻，贺若弼之镇寿州也，常令护兒为间谍，授大都督。
现代文：在那时，长江以南还有阻隔，贺若弼镇守寿州时，常派来护儿做间谍，授给他大都督的官职。
English: At that time, there was still a barrier south of the Yangtze River. When He Ruoqi Town guarded Shoushou, he often sent his nanny to be a spy and gave him the official post of grand governor.

古文：平陈之役，护兒有功焉，进位上开府。
现代文：在平定陈国的战役中，来护儿立了功，升迁为上开府。
English: In the campaign to pacify Chen Guo, Lai Guo'er made great contributions and was promoted to Shangkaifu.

古文：从杨素击高智慧于浙江，而贼据岸为营，周亘百馀里，船舰被江，鼓噪而进。
现代文：他跟随杨素在浙江攻打高智慧，敌军盘踞河岸扎下营寨，绵延一百多里，大小战船覆盖了江面，击鼓呐喊向前进军。
English: He followed Yang Su to attack Gaoshu in Zhejiang. The enemy troops entrenched themselves on the riverbank and set up camp, stretching more than a hundred miles. Large and small warships covered the river, beating drums and shouting to the advancing troops.

古文：素令护兒率数百轻艓径登江岸，直掩其营，破之。
现代文：杨素命令来护儿率领数百只轻快小船，径直登上江岸，直往敌营掩杀过去，一举攻破敌军。
English: Yang Su ordered his son-in-law to lead hundreds of light boats and go straight to the river bank to cover the enemy camp and defeat the enemy army at one stroke.

古文：时贼前与素战不胜，归无所据，因而溃散。
现代文：当时敌军和杨素交战，不能取胜，退回去又无立足之地，因此就溃败逃散了。
English: At that time, the enemy was at war with Yang Su, unable to win, and there was no place to retreat to, so they were routed and dispersed.

古文：智慧将逃于海，护兒追至泉州，智慧穷蹙，遁走闽、越。
现代文：高智慧将要向海上逃窜，来护儿追赶到泉州，高智慧走投无路，只好逃向闽越。
English: High wisdom will flee to the sea, come to Quanzhou to catch up with Quanzhou, and high wisdom will have no choice but to flee to Yunnan.

古文：进位大将军，除泉州刺史。
现代文：来护儿升任大将军，授任泉州刺史。
English: Lai Guo'er was promoted to general and appointed as Quanzhou chief historian.

古文：时有盛道延拥兵作乱，侵扰州境，护兒进击，破之。
现代文：当时有个叫盛道延的人聚众叛乱，在州境内侵犯骚扰，来护儿率兵攻打，击败了叛军。
English: At that time, a man named Sheng Daoyan gathered a crowd of rebels, invaded and harassed the state, came to the nursery to lead the troops to attack and defeated the rebels.

古文：又从蒲山公李宽破汪文进于黟、歙，进位柱国。
现代文：又跟随蒲山公李宽在黟、歙大败汪文进，升职为柱国。
English: He also followed Busan official Li Kuang in defeating Wang Wenzhong and Wang Wenzhong, and was promoted to pillar state.

古文：仁寿三年，除瀛州刺史，赐爵黄县公，邑三千户。寻加上柱国，除右御卫将军。
现代文：仁寿三年，授任瀛州刺史，赐予他黄县公的爵位，食邑三千户，不久又加升为上柱国，授任右御卫将军。
English: In his third year of life, he was awarded the title of Bozhou Sashishi, and was given the title of Huangxian Zongxing, with 3,000 households. Soon after, he was promoted to Shangzhuang Guo, and was awarded the title of Ugui General.

古文：炀帝即位，迁右骁卫大将军，帝甚亲重之。
现代文：隋炀帝即位，来护儿升职为右骁卫大将军，皇上待他很亲近很敬重。
English: When the Sui and Qian Dynasties ascended the throne, he was promoted to General of the Right Division of Inner Palace Guards. The Emperor treated him with great closeness and respect.

古文：大业六年，从驾江都，赐物千段，令上先人冢，宴父老，州里荣之。
现代文：大业六年，他跟随皇上前往江都，皇上赐他千段布匹，让他上祖坟祭祀祖先，宴请乡里父老，州郡乡里都认为很荣耀。
English: After six years of hard work, he followed the emperor to Jiangdu. The emperor gave him a thousand pieces of cloth, let him go to the ancestral grave to worship the ancestors, and invited the parents in the village. The county and township all thought it was a great honor.

古文：数岁，转右翊卫大将军。
现代文：几年后，他转任右翊卫大将军。
English: A few years later, he was transferred to the post of General of the Right Division of the National Guard.

古文：辽东之役，护兒率楼船，指沧海，入自坝水，去平壤六十里，与高丽相遇。
现代文：辽东战役中，来护儿率领楼船，直指沧海，进入氵贝水，离平壤六十里，和高丽人相遇。
English: During the Liaodong Campaign, Lai Guo Er led the ro-ship, pointed straight at the sea of vicissitudes, entered the mussel water, sixty miles from Pyongyang, and met the Korean people.

古文：进击，大破之，乘胜直造城下，破其郛郭。
现代文：来护儿进军攻击，大败高丽人，又乘胜追击直逼城下，攻破他们的外城。
English: They marched into the city to attack, defeated the Goryeo people, and took advantage of the victory to chase them down to the city and break through their outer city.

古文：于是纵军大掠，稍失部伍，高元弟建武募敢死士五百人邀击之。护兒因却，屯营海浦，以待期会。
现代文：来护儿于是纵恿军队大肆抢掠，军队纪律渐渐松懈。高元的弟弟建武招募五百人的敢死队迎战来护儿，来护儿因此后退，在海浦扎下营寨，等待机会反击。
English: Gao Yuan's younger brother, Jianwu, recruited a death squad of 500 men to fight Gao Yuan. Gao Yuan therefore retreated and set up camp in Haipu, waiting for an opportunity to fight back.

古文：后知宇文述等败，遂班师。
现代文：后来知道宇文述等人已经兵败，于是班师回朝。
English: Later, knowing that Uwenshu and the others had been defeated, the team returned to the imperial court.

古文：明年，又出沧海道，师次东莱，会杨玄感作逆黎阳，进逼巩、洛，护兒勒兵与宇文述等击破之。
现代文：第二年，又出兵沧海地区，军队驻扎在东莱，赶上杨玄感在黎阳叛乱，进军巩、洛，来护儿率兵与宇文述会合大败叛军。
English: The next year, he sent troops to the Canghai region, the army was stationed in Donglai, caught up with Yang Xuanxuan's rebellion in Liyang, marched into Gong and Luo, and led the soldiers to meet with Yu Wenshu to defeat the rebels.

古文：封荣国公，邑二千户。
现代文：皇上因此封他为荣国公，二千户。
English: As a result, the emperor made him a national hero, and two thousand households followed suit.

古文：十年，又帅师度海，至卑奢城，高丽举国来战，护兒大破之，斩首千馀级。
现代文：大业十年，又率兵渡海，到卑奢城，高丽全国人都来迎战，来护儿大败高丽人，斩杀一千多人。
English: After ten years of hard work, he led his troops across the sea to the city of Pusan. All the people of Goryeo came to fight and defeat the Goryeo people, killing more than a thousand people.

古文：将趣平壤，高元震惧，遣使执叛臣斛斯政，诣辽东城下，上表请降。
现代文：将要向平壤进军时，高元十分害怕，派使者押来隋朝叛将斛斯政，到辽东城下，上书请求投降，炀帝答应了。
English: When Gao Yuan was about to march to Pyongyang, he was very afraid. He sent an envoy to the Sui dynasty to bring the traitor Gong Sizheng to Liaodong city to submit a letter requesting surrender, and Emperor Gong agreed.

古文：帝许之，遣人持节诏护兒旋师。
现代文：炀帝派人拿符节召来护儿回师。
English: Emperor Qian sent someone to summon the tutor with a rune.

古文：护兒集众曰： 三度出兵，未能平贼，此还也，不可重来。
现代文：来护儿召集众人说： 三次出兵，都没能平定敌人，这一回去，不可能再来。
English: The caretaker called the crowd together and said, "Three times we have sent out troops, but we have not been able to subdue the enemy. If we go back now, it will be impossible to come back."

古文：今高丽困弊，野无青草，以我众战，不日克之。
现代文：现在高丽人困窘疲敝，原野都没有青草了，凭我的部队作战，不需多久就可战胜他们。
English: Koryo is now in a desperate situation. There is not even grass in the fields. With our large army, we can fight the enemy and win in a few days.

古文：吾欲进兵，径围平壤，取其伪主，献捷而归。 
现代文：我想发兵，直接围攻平壤，捉住他们的头领，好回去向皇上献捷。 
English: I want to send an army to besiege Pyongyang directly, capture their leader, and then return to present my victory to the emperor.

古文：答表请行，不肯奉诏。
现代文：来护儿上表请求出兵，不肯按皇上的旨意回师。
English: As a result, Emperor Gao requested to go to war and refused to return.

古文：长史崔君肃固争，不许。
现代文：长史崔君肃极力同来护儿争辩，来护儿不答应。
English: Cho Shi Choi Jun So tried his best to argue with the nanny, but the nanny did not agree.

古文：护兒曰： 贼势破矣，专以相任，自足办之。
现代文：来护儿说： 敌人的气势已被打垮，只要军队交由我指挥，就足以惩办他们。
English: The guardian said: The enemy's momentum has been broken, as long as the army is under my command, it is enough to punish them.

古文：吾在阃外，事合专决，岂容千里禀听成规！
现代文：我在朝庭之外，遇事可以独自决断，千里之外怎能受制于成规！
English: Outside the court, I can make my own decisions, but thousands of miles away, how can I be bound by rules!

古文：弘第整，武贲郎将、右光禄大夫。
现代文：顷刻之间就失掉机会，劳而无功，所以应当白忙乎。
English: In an instant, the opportunity is lost, the effort is in vain, so we should be busy in vain.

古文：整尤骁勇，善抚士众，讨击群盗，所向皆捷。
现代文：我宁愿征服高元，回去以后受责备，要我舍弃将要获得的大功，我办不到。 崔君肃对众人说： 你们如跟随元帅，违抗圣旨，我一定告知圣上，你们都要获罪。 
English: I would rather conquer Gao Yuan and be reproached when I return, and I can't do it if I give up the great achievement I am about to gain.Cui Junsu said to the crowd, "If you follow the marshal and defy the sacred will, I will surely tell the saint that you will all be punished.

古文：诸贼甚惮之，为作歌曰： 长白山头百战场，十十五五把长枪，不畏官军十万众，只畏荣公第六郎。 
现代文：众将领都害怕了，劝说来护儿回去，来护儿才奉旨回朝。大业十三年，改任左翊卫大将军，提升为开府仪同三司，皇上对他的委任更多，前后的赏赐不可胜数。
English: All the generals were afraid, so they persuaded him to come and take care of the child, and only then did he return to the imperial court. In the thirteenth year of the Taiei era, he was appointed General of the Left Division of the Imperial Guards, and promoted to the third secretary of the Imperial Household Agency. The emperor appointed him more, and the rewards before and after were countless.

古文：化及反，皆遇害，唯少子恆、济获免。○鱼俱罗
现代文：江都变乱中，宇文化及因忌恨他而谋害了他。○鱼俱罗
English: In the chaos of the Jiangdu Incident, Yu Wenhua and his wife conspired to kill him out of hatred for him.

古文：鱼俱罗，冯翊下邦人也。
现代文：鱼俱罗，冯翊下圭阝人。
English: Fish Club, starring Feng Ye's younger brother Gui Ye.

古文：身长八尺，膂力绝人，声气雄壮，言闻数百步。
现代文：身高八尺，膂力过人，声气雄壮，一开口说话，其声音可传到几百步之外。
English: He is eight feet tall, has incredible physical strength, a majestic voice, and his voice can be heard hundreds of paces away.

古文：弱冠为亲卫，累迁大都督。
现代文：二十岁当亲卫。累次升迁，当到大都督。
English: At the age of twenty, he became a bodyguard. He was promoted several times and eventually became the grand governor.

古文：从晋王广平陈，以功拜开府，赐物一千五百段。
现代文：随晋王杨广平定陈国，因军功拜授开府，赐缣纟采一千五百段。
English: Yang Guang, the king of Jin, conquered and settled Chen Province, and was awarded the title of Kaifu for his military exploits. He was also awarded 1,500 dan.

古文：未几，沈玄懀、高智慧等作乱江南，杨素以俱罗壮勇，请与同行。
现代文：不久，沈玄忄会、高智慧等作乱于江南，杨素因俱罗壮勇，请他与之同去江南破敌。
English: Soon after, Shen Xuanxuan, Gao Zhizhi, and others wreaked havoc in the south of the Yangtze River. Yang Su, who was very brave, asked him to go to the south of the Yangtze River to defeat the enemy.

古文：每战有功，加上开府、高唐县公，拜叠州总管。
现代文：俱罗每次作战都有功勋，加授上开府、高唐县公爵、叠州总管。
English: The club has won merits in every battle, and has been awarded the title of Shangkaifu, the Duke of Gaotang County, and the Governor of Meizhou.

古文：以母忧去职。
现代文：因遭母丧离职。
English: Xie Chan left his job because of his mother's death.

古文：还至扶风，会杨素率兵将出灵州道击突厥，路逢俱罗，大悦，遂奏与同行。
现代文：回家时走到扶风，碰上杨素率人马将出灵州道打击突厥，路遇俱罗，很高兴，于是奏明朝廷，与他同行。
English: When going home, he walked to Fu Feng and met Yang Su and his men marching out of Lingzhou Road to fight the Turks. He was very happy to meet the club on the way, so he went to the court to accompany him.

古文：及遇贼，俱罗与数骑奔击，瞋目大呼，所当皆披靡，出左入右，往返若飞。
现代文：遇上贼人后，俱罗与几个骑兵突击，怒目圆睁，大声呼叫，所向披靡，左冲右突，往返如飞。
English: After encountering the thief, the club and several cavalry charge, glaring, shouting loudly, overwhelming, left and right, flying back and forth.

古文：以功进位柱国，拜丰州总管。
现代文：俱罗因功升任柱国，拜授丰州总管。
English: He was promoted to the position of pillar state for his achievements, and was appointed as the general manager of Fuzhou.

古文：初，突厥数入境为寇，俱罗辄擒斩之，自是突厥畏惧屏迹，不敢畜牧于塞上。
现代文：起初，突厥几次入境为寇，俱罗就抓了他们斩了，从此突厥畏惧屏迹，不敢来塞上牧马。
English: At first, the Turks entered the country several times as invaders, and the club caught them and beheaded them. From then on, the Turks were afraid of being caught, and did not dare to come to tame the horses.

古文：初，炀帝在籓，俱罗弟赞以左右从，累迁大都督。
现代文：起初，炀帝为藩王时，鱼俱罗的弟弟鱼赞，跟随在炀帝左右，累次升迁，到当大都督。
English: At first, when Emperor Sui was the king of the Han Dynasty, Yuanzan, the younger brother of the fish club, was promoted to the grand governor many times because he served alongside Emperor Sui.

古文：及帝嗣位，拜车骑将军。
现代文：炀帝继位后，拜授鱼赞为车骑将军。
English: After Emperor Shun succeeded to the throne, Yuzan became the general of chariots and cavalry.

古文：赞性凶暴，虐其部下，令左右炙肉，遇不中意，以签刺瞎其眼。
现代文：鱼赞生性凶残，虐待其部下，令左右炙肉，碰上不中意，就用竹签刺瞎左右的眼睛。
English: Yuanzan was vicious, abused his subordinates, ordered his subordinates to roast meat, and when he was displeased, he used a bamboo stick to blind his right and left eyes.

古文：有温酒不适者，立断其舌。
现代文：有温酒而温度不合适的，立即割断人家的舌头。
English: If there is warm wine and the temperature is not suitable, immediately cut off the person's tongue.

古文：帝以赞籓邸之旧，不忍加诛，谓近臣曰： 弟既如此，兄亦可知。 
现代文：炀帝因鱼赞是自己在藩国时的旧交，不忍心杀他，就对近臣们说： 弟弟既然如此，兄长也可想见。 
English: Emperor Zou, who had an old friend named Yuuzan when he was a feudal lord, did not have the heart to kill him, so he said to his close vassals, "Since you are my younger brother, you might as well see your elder brother."

古文：因召俱罗，谴责之，出赞于狱，令自为计。
现代文：因而召来鱼俱罗，指责他，把鱼赞从牢里放出来，让他带回去自己处理。
English: So he called in the Fish Club, accused him, and had him released from prison, letting him take the fish home and deal with it himself.

古文：赞至家，饮药而死。
现代文：鱼赞回到家里，喝毒药死了。
English: Uozuman returned home, took the poison and died.

古文：帝恐俱罗不自安，虑生边患，转为安州刺史。
现代文：炀帝恐鱼俱罗心中不安，怕他搞起边患来，调他当安州刺史。
English: The Emperor Cormorant is uneasy in his heart, afraid that he will get into trouble, and he is transferred to Anzhou.

古文：岁馀，迁赵郡太守。
现代文：过了一年多，调任赵郡太守。
English: After more than a year, he was transferred to the post of Zhao County Governor.

古文：后因朝集，至东都，与将军梁伯隐有旧，数相往来。
现代文：后入朝拜见炀帝，与大臣们相聚。俱罗到了东都洛阳，与将军梁伯隐有旧交，二人于是几次来往。
English: After entering the imperial court, he paid homage to Emperor Xizong and met with ministers. He then went to the eastern capital Luoyang, where he had an old friendship with General Liang Boyin, and the two men met several times.

古文：又从郡多将杂物以贡献，帝不受，因遗权贵。
现代文：俱罗又从赵郡带回了许多杂物，献给炀帝，炀帝不要，他就转送给权贵们。
English: The fish club also brought many special products from the county as tribute, but Emperor Xuan did not accept them, so they were given to the nobility.

古文：御史劾俱罗以郡将交通内臣，帝大怒，与伯隐俱坐除名。
现代文：御史弹劾鱼俱罗以郡将身份交结朝中大臣。炀帝大怒，俱罗与伯隐都坐罪除名。
English: Emperor Go-Shi impeached the Fisherman's Club for associating with the Minister of the Middle Kingdom of Korea in the capacity of a prefectural general. Emperor Go-Shi was furious and removed the Fisherman's Club and Liang Bo-Yin from the Imperial Family.

古文：未几，越巂飞山蛮作乱，侵掠郡境。
现代文：不久，越辒的飞山蛮造反作乱，侵略郡里。
English: Soon after, the Feishan of Yueyuan rebelled violently and invaded the county.

古文：诏俱罗白衣领将，并率蜀郡都尉段钟葵讨平之。
现代文：有诏让鱼俱罗以白衣身份权作将军，并率蜀郡都尉段钟葵讨平叛军。
English: An edict gave the Fish Club the right to act as a general in the capacity of a white coat, and it led Shu County Lieutenant Duan Zhongkui to defeat the rebels.

古文：大业九年，重征高丽，以俱罗为碣石道军将。
现代文：大业九年，炀帝重新征讨高丽，以鱼俱罗为碣石道的军将。
English: In the ninth year of the Taiei era, he once again went to Koryo, appointing the Fish Club as the commander of the Shinshido Army.

古文：及还，江南刘元进作乱，诏俱罗将兵向会稽诸郡逐捕之。
现代文：回朝后，江南人刘元进造反作乱，有诏让鱼俱罗带兵到会稽等郡追剿叛军。
English: After returning to his division, Liu Yuanjin in the south of the Yangtze River rioted again, and ordered the Fish Club to lead soldiers to the counties of the auditors to quell the rebellion and catch the thieves.

古文：于时百姓思乱，从盗如市，俱罗击贼帅硃燮、管崇等，战无不捷。
现代文：那时百姓思乱，从盗如市。俱罗进攻反贼头子朱燮、管崇等，战无不胜。
English: At that time, the people were in turmoil, from theft to the city. The club attacked the anti-thief leaders Zhu Xi, Guanzhong, etc., and the battle was invincible.

古文：然贼势浸盛，败而复聚。
现代文：但反贼势力蔓延开来，越来越大，你打败了他们，他们又聚集拢来了。
English: However, the forces of the robber soldiers slowly grew stronger, failed and regrouped.

古文：俱罗度贼非岁月可平，诸子并在京、洛，又见天下渐乱，终恐道路隔绝。
现代文：鱼俱罗估计，反贼不是几年几月可以平定的，自己的几个儿子都在京师长安和洛阳，又见天下渐渐大乱，担心以后道路隔绝，父子难以再见。
English: The Fish Club estimates that the power of the bandits cannot be quelled in a short period of time. Your sons are in Beijing and Luoyang, and the world is becoming more and more chaotic. I am afraid that the road will eventually be blocked.

古文：于时东都饥馑，谷食踊贵，俱罗遣家仆将船米至东都粜之，益市财货，潜迎诸子。
现代文：那时东都洛阳闹饥荒，粮价飞涨，俱罗于是派家奴用船把米运到东都卖了，又买了财货，偷偷地接回几个儿子。
English: At that time, there was a famine in Luoyang, the eastern capital, and grain prices were soaring. Therefore, Qiu Luo sent his slaves to ship rice to the eastern capital, sold it, bought more goods, and secretly brought back several sons.

古文：朝廷微知之，恐其有异志，发使案验。
现代文：朝廷略略知道此事，怕他有异心，派使者去调查。
English: The imperial court was vaguely aware of the matter and, fearing that he had ulterior motives, sent an envoy to investigate.

古文：使者至，前后察问，不得其罪。
现代文：使者到了，前后察问，找不到罪证。
English: When the messenger arrived, he investigated back and forth, but could not find any incriminating evidence.

古文：帝复令大理司直梁敬真就锁将诣东都。
现代文：炀帝又令大理司直梁敬真去把他抓起来，送到东都。
English: Emperor Xuan also ordered the Chief of the Division of Justice, Zhiliang Jingzhen, to arrest him and send him to the Eastern Capital.

古文：俱罗相表异人，目有重瞳，阴为帝之所忌。
现代文：鱼俱罗相貌异于常人，眼睛里各有两个瞳孔，有帝王之像，被炀帝私下里猜忌。
English: The appearance of the fish club is different from that of ordinary people. There are two pupils in each eye. It has the image of an emperor, and is secretly suspected by the emperor.

古文：敬真希旨，奏俱罗师徒败衄，于是斩东都市，家口籍没。
现代文：梁敬真揣摩圣旨，上告鱼俱罗的部队白白地打败仗，于是斩俱罗于东都街市，其家财被登记没收。
English: Liang Jingzhen pondered the will, appealed to the troops of the fish club and lost the battle in vain, so he killed the club in Dongdu Street Market, and his family wealth was registered and confiscated.

