古文：上智不教而成，下愚虽教无益，中庸之人，不教不知也。
现代文：上智的人不用教育也能成才，下愚的人即使教育也没什么用，只有智力中等的平常人要教育，如果不接受教育就不能明事理。
English: The wisest people can become talented without education, the stupid people are of little use even if they are educated. Only ordinary people with average intelligence need education. If they do not receive education, they will not be able to reason.

古文：古者，圣王有胎教之法：怀子三月，出居别宫，目不邪视，耳不妄听，音声滋味，以礼节之。
现代文：古时候的圣王，有所谓 胎教 的做法，妃后怀孕三个月的时候，就要住到专门的宫殿，不看不该看的东西，不听不该听的声音，平时吃的跟听的音乐，都要按照礼义加以节制。
English: In ancient times, the holy kings had the practice of so-called prenatal education. When the queen was three months pregnant, she had to live in a special palace. She was not allowed to see things she shouldn't see, listen to sounds she shouldn't listen to, or eat or listen to music in her daily life, all of which had to be restricted according to the rules of etiquette.

古文：书之玉版，藏诸金匮。
现代文：这些胎教的方法都写在玉版上，藏进铜柜里。
English: These methods of prenatal education are written on jade plates and hidden in copper cabinets.

古文：生子咳提，师保固明，孝仁礼义，导习之矣。
现代文：等胎儿出生还在幼儿时，担任 师 和 保 的人，就要开始对他讲解孝、仁、礼、义，引导孩子学习。
English: When the fetus is born and is still in its infancy, those who serve as teachers and guardians should begin to explain filial piety, benevolence, courtesy, and righteousness to it, and guide the child to study.

古文：凡庶纵不能尔，当及婴稚，识人颜色，知人喜怒，便加教诲，使为则为，使止则止。比及数岁，可省笞罚。
现代文：普通人家纵使不能如此，也应在婴儿识人脸色、懂得喜怒时，就及时加以教诲，让他知道该做的就要及时去做，不该做的就绝对不能去做。等长大几岁后，就可省去鞭打惩罚。
English: Even if ordinary people can't do this, they should also teach the baby in time when he can recognize people's faces and understand emotions. Let him know that he should do what he should do in time, and that he should never do what he shouldn't do. When he is a few years old, he can avoid the punishment of whipping.

古文：父母威严而有慈，则子女畏慎而生孝矣。
现代文：只要父母既威严又慈爱，子女自然就会敬畏谨慎而有孝行了。
English: As long as parents are both dignified and loving, children will naturally be reverent, cautious and filial.

古文：吾见世间，无教而有爱，每不能然；饮食运为，恣其所欲，宜诫翻奖，应呵反笑，至有识知，谓法当尔。
现代文：我见到世上很多父母对孩子不讲教育只是一味的溺爱子女，常常无法做到这些。对待子女的吃喝玩乐，任意放纵，不加管制，该训诫时反而夸奖，该训斥责骂时反而欢笑赞赏。等孩子懂事的时候，就会认为这些道理本应如此。
English: I see many parents in the world who do not care about their children's education, but only indulge their children, and often fail to do so. They treat their children's eating and drinking, indulge them at will, without control, praise them when they are disciplined, and laugh and appreciate them when they are scolded. When children are sensible, they will think that these principles should be so.

古文：骄慢已习，方复制之，捶挞至死而无威，忿怒日隆而增怨，逮于成长，终为败德。
现代文：等到骄傲怠慢已经成为习惯，才去加以制止，那纵使鞭打至死也无法树立威信，父母越来越愤怒，子女的怨恨也渐渐增多，直到长大成人，最终成为品德败坏的人。
English: Until pride and negligence have become habitual, it is not possible to stop them. Even if they are whipped to death, they cannot establish prestige. Parents become more and more angry, and children's resentment gradually increases until they become adults and eventually become corrupt.

古文：孔子云： 少成若天性，习惯如自然 是也。
现代文：孔子说： 从小养成的就像天性，习惯了的也就成为自然。 是非常有道理的。
English: Confucius said: "What is cultivated from childhood is like nature, and what is habituated becomes natural. It is very reasonable."

古文：俗谚曰： 教妇初来，教儿婴孩。 
现代文：俗谚说： 教媳妇要在初来时，教儿女要在婴孩时。 
English: A proverb says: A daughter-in-law should come when she is a toddler, and a son-in-law should come when he is a baby.

古文：诚哉斯语！
现代文：这话确实有道理。
English: This really makes sense.

古文：凡人不能教子女者，亦非欲陷其罪恶；但重于呵怒，伤其颜色，不忍楚挞惨其肌肤耳。
现代文：普通人不能教育好子女，并不是想让子女陷入罪恶的境地，只是不愿意看到子女受责骂训斥时沮丧的神色，不忍心让子女因挨打而受皮肉之苦。
English: Ordinary people cannot educate their children well. It is not that they want their children to fall into a criminal situation, but they do not want to see their children look depressed when they are scolded and reprimanded, and they cannot bear to let their children suffer physical pain due to being beaten.

古文：当以疾病为谕，安得不用汤药针艾救之哉？
现代文：这可以用生病来作比喻，生病时难道能不用汤药、针艾来救治就能好吗？
English: This can be used as a metaphor for illness. When you are sick, can you cure yourself without using decoctions and acupuncture needles?

古文：又宜思勤督训者，可愿苛虐于骨肉乎？
现代文：再想一想那些经常认真督促训诫子女的父母，难道愿意对亲骨肉刻薄凌虐吗？
English: Again, think of those parents who often earnestly urge their children to be disciplined, are they willing to be mean and abusive to their own flesh and blood?

古文：诚不得已也！
现代文：实在是不得已啊！
English: It was really a last resort!

古文：王大司马母魏夫人，性甚严正；王在湓城时，为三千人将，年逾四十，少不如意，犹捶挞之，故能成其勋业。
现代文：大司马王僧辩的母亲魏老夫人，品行严谨端正。王大司马在湓城的时候，已经是三千士卒的统领，年纪也已经过了四十了，但只要稍微不称魏老夫人的意，老夫人还用棍棒教训他，正因为这样，王僧辩才能建立功业。
English: Old Mrs. Wei, the mother of Grand Master Ma Wang Sofen, was a strict and upright person. When Wang Da Sima was in Shicheng, he was already the commander of three thousand soldiers, and he was over forty years old. However, as long as he did not meet the wishes of Old Mrs. Wei, the old lady would use a club to teach him. It was precisely because of this that Wang Sofen was able to establish his career.

古文：梁元帝时，有一学士，聪敏有才，为父所宠，失于教义：一言之是，遍于行路，终年誉之；一行之非，掩藏文饰，冀其自改。
现代文：梁元帝的时候，有一位学士，聪明富有才气，从小父亲就对他过于宠爱，疏于管教。他要是有一句话说得漂亮，他的父亲就恨不得让过往行人全都知道，一年到头都挂在嘴上；他如果有什么事情没有做好，他的父亲就百般遮掩粉饰，只在心里希望他悄悄改掉。
English: In the time of Emperor Liang Yuan, there was a scholar who was clever and talented. From childhood, his father was too fond of him and neglected to discipline him. If he had a beautiful saying, his father would like to let all passers-by know, and it would be on his lips all year round. If he did not do something well, his father would cover it up in various ways, only in his heart hoping that he would quietly change it.

古文：年登婚宦，暴慢日滋，竟以言语不择，为周逖抽肠衅鼓云。
现代文：这个学士成年以后，凶暴傲慢的习气日益增长，终究因为口不择言，被周逖杀掉，死后肠子被抽出，血被拿去涂抹战鼓。
English: After this bachelor came of age, his habit of violent arrogance grew day by day. Eventually, because he did not choose his words, he was killed by Zhou Qi. After his death, his intestines were taken out and his blood was used to smear the war drums.

古文：父子之严，不可以狎；骨肉之爱，不可以简。
现代文：父子之间要讲严肃，不能过分亲近不庄重；亲人之间互相友爱，但不可以简慢、不拘礼节。
English: Fathers and sons should be serious with each other, they should not be too close and solemn; relatives should be friendly with each other, but they should not be curt and informal.

古文：简则慈孝不接，狎则怠慢生焉。
现代文：简慢、不拘礼节就无法父慈子孝，过分亲近了怠慢就会产生。
English: It is not possible to be a father and a filial son if you are careless and informal. If you are too close, negligence will occur.

古文：由命士以上，父子异宫，此不狎之道也；抑搔痒痛，悬衾箧枕，此不简之教也。
现代文：古来那些在朝堂上封官拜爵的人，都是分开住，正是为了不过分亲昵；晚辈替长辈抓搔，之后要把被子捆好悬挂起来，把枕头放进箱子里，这就是讲究礼节的教导。
English: In ancient times, those who were knighted in the imperial court lived separately, precisely in order not to be too intimate; the younger generation grabbed the cocoon for the elders, and then they had to tie up the quilt and hang it up, and put the pillow in the box. This is the teaching of etiquette.

古文：齐武成帝子琅邪王，太子母弟也，生而聪慧，帝及后并笃爱之，衣服饮食，与东宫相准。
现代文：有人问： 陈亢听说孔子与自己的孩子保持较远的距离之后很高兴，这是为什么呢？ 齐武成帝的三儿子琅邪王高俨，是太子高纬同母所生的亲弟弟，他天性聪慧，武成帝和明皇后都非常喜欢他，吃穿用度和太子一模一样。
English: Some people asked: Chen Yao was happy after hearing that Confucius kept a relatively long distance from his children. Why was this? Qi Wucheng's third son, Ruan Ziyao Wang Gao Yao, was the prince's younger brother, born of the same mother. He was naturally intelligent. Emperor Wucheng and Empress Ming were very fond of him. He had the same need for food and clothing as the prince.

古文：帝每面称之曰： 此黠儿也，当有所成。 
现代文：武成帝常常当面赞美他： 这真是个聪明的孩子啊，将来必成大器。 
English: Emperor Wucheng often praised him to his face: "This is really a clever child, he will become a great man in the future."

古文：及太子即位，王居别宫，礼数优僭，不与诸王等；太后犹谓不足，常以为言。
现代文：等到太子即位以后，琅邪王迁到北宫去住，他所受的待遇太过优厚，甚至越过礼数，与他的兄弟们都不一样；即使这样，太后仍是觉得优待不够，常常念叨。
English: After the enthronement of the Crown Prince, the Evil King moved to the North Palace to live. The treatment he received was too generous, even exceeding the number of courtesies, and was different from his brothers; even so, the empress dowager still felt that the preferential treatment was not enough, and often complained.

古文：年十许岁，骄恣无节，器服玩好，必拟乘舆；常朝南殿，见典御进新冰，钩盾献早李，还索不得，遂大怒，訽曰： 至尊已有，我何意无？ 
现代文：琅邪王十几岁的时候，骄横放肆没有节制，吃穿用度，一定要和皇帝哥哥一样。有一次他到南殿觐见皇帝，正好碰到典御官和钩盾令把刚刚从地窖里取出的冰块以及早熟的李子进献给皇帝，就派人去要，没有得到就大发脾气，骂道： 皇帝有的，我凭什么没有？ 
English: Once, when he went to the South Hall to see the emperor, he happened to meet the regent and the hooked shield, who ordered him to present the emperor with ice cubes and early-ripening plums that had just been taken from the cellar. He sent someone to get them, but when he didn't get them, he lost his temper and cursed: "The emperor has them, why don't I have them?"

古文：不知分齐，率皆如此。
现代文：一点不懂君臣有别，他的其他行为大抵都是这样放肆。
English: He doesn't know the difference between a prince and a minister at all, and his other actions are usually so impudent.

古文：识者多有叔段、州吁之讥。
现代文：有识之士多指责他是古代叔段、州吁之类人。
English: Many people with insight accuse him of being a person like ancient Shudan and Shuzhou Xu.

古文：后嫌宰相，遂矫诏斩之，又惧有救，乃勒麾下军士，防守殿门；既无反心，受劳而罢，后竟坐此幽薨。
现代文：后来，琅邪王厌恶宰相和士开，假传圣旨将其杀害，又怕有人来救，竟然下令手下的军士严守皇帝殿门。其实他并没有造反之心，得到安抚之后就撤了兵，但皇帝还是因为这件事情将他抓了起来，后来也因此获罪而被处死。
English: Later, the evil king hated the prime minister and Shikai, killed them with a false edict, and was afraid that someone would come to save him, so he ordered his soldiers to guard the emperor's palace gate. In fact, he did not have a rebellious heart, and withdrew after being appeased, but the emperor still arrested him for this matter, and was later sentenced to death for it.

古文：人之爱子，罕亦能均；自古及今，此弊多矣。
现代文：人们爱孩子，却很少能做到一视同仁，从古到今，这种弊病一直都很多。
English: People love their children, but rarely are they able to treat them equally, and from ancient times to the present, this malady has always been abundant.

古文：贤俊者自可赏爱，顽鲁者亦当矜怜，有偏宠者，虽欲以厚之，更所以祸之。
现代文：聪明俊秀孩子固然惹人喜爱，那顽皮愚笨的孩子也应该加以怜悯。那种有偏爱的家长，即使是想对他好，反而会给他招致祸殃。
English: Though a clever and handsome child is to be loved, the naughty and stupid child is to be pitied. The partial parent, even if he wants to be kind to him, will bring him misfortune.

古文：共叔之死，母实为之。
现代文：共叔段的死，实际是他母亲造成的。
English: His uncle's death was actually caused by his mother.

古文：赵王之戮，父实使之。
现代文：赵王如意被杀，实际是他父亲刘邦造成的。
English: The murder of Zhao Wangruyi was actually caused by his father, Liu Bang.

古文：刘表之倾宗覆族，袁绍之地裂兵亡，可为灵龟明鉴也。
现代文：其他像刘表的宗族倾覆，袁绍的兵败地失，这些事例都像灵龟、明镜一样可供借鉴啊。
English: Other examples, such as the overthrow of Liu Biao's clan and Yuan Shao's military defeat, are like a turtle and a mirror for reference.

古文：齐朝有一士大夫，尝谓吾曰： 我有一儿，年已十七，颇晓书疏。教其鲜卑语及弹琵琶，稍欲通解，以此伏事公卿，无不宠爱，亦要事也。 
现代文：北齐有一位士大夫，曾对我说： 我有个儿子，已有十七岁，很会写奏札，我教他讲鲜卑语、弹奏琵琶，渐渐地都掌握了，凭借这些特长去服侍三公九卿，一定会被宠爱的，这也是紧要的事情。 
English: A magistrate in North Qi once said to me: I have a son, who is seventeen years old, and is very good at writing music. I taught him to speak Xingbiao and play the lute, and he gradually mastered them. With these special skills to serve the three princes and nine lords, he will certainly be favored, which is also an important matter.

古文：吾时俛而不答。
现代文：我当时低头没有回答。
English: I looked down and didn't answer.

古文：异哉，此人之教子也！
现代文：真是奇怪，这个人用这样的方式来教育儿子！
English: What a strange way for this man to bring up his son!

古文：若由此业，自致卿相，亦不愿汝曹为之。
现代文：如果通过这种办法就能做到卿相，我也不愿让你们去干的。
English: If this is the way to become a high-ranking official, I won't let you do it.

