古文：夫 文心 者，言为文之用心也。
现代文：这部书所以称为 文心 ，因为是说明在写作文章时的用心的。
English: This book is called "Wenshin" (文心) because it shows how to be careful when writing an article.

古文：昔涓子《琴心》，王孙《巧心》，心哉美矣，故用之焉。
现代文：从前涓子曾写过一部《琴心》，王孙子也曾写过一部《巧心》，可见 心 这个词好得很，所以用做这部书的书名。
English: Once upon a time, Zou Zi had written a book called "The Heart of the Piano," and Wang Sun Zi had also written a book called "The Artful Heart." It can be seen that the word "heart" is very good, so it was used as the title of this book.

古文：古来文章，以雕缛成体，岂取驺奭之群言雕龙也。
现代文：自古以来的文章都是用繁丽的文采写成的；现在用 雕龙 二字来称这部书，并不仅仅是由于前人曾用以称赞过驺奭富有文采的缘故。
English: Since ancient times, articles have been written in colorful prose; the word "dragon" is now used to refer to this book, not only because the ancients used it to praise the richness of literature.

古文：夫宇宙绵邈，黎献纷杂，拔萃出类，智术而已。
现代文：宇宙是无穷无尽的，人才则代代都有；他们所以能超出别人，也无非由于具有过人的才智罢了。
English: From ancient times to the present, from time immemorial, the world has been a mixture of mediocrities and sages. Those who stand out from the crowd rely solely on their talent and cunning.

古文：岁月飘忽，性灵不居，腾声飞实，制作而已。
现代文：但是时光是一闪即逝的，人的智慧却不能永远存在；如果要把声名和事业留传下来，主要就依靠写作了。
English: The years go by so quickly, and no man's wit lasts forever, that he can't depend on his writing to carry on his name and his career.

古文：夫有肖貌天地，禀性五才，拟耳目于日月，方声气乎风雷，其超出万物，亦已灵矣。
现代文：人类的形貌象征着大地，又从五行里取得自己的天性；耳目好比日月，声气好比风雷。他们能超过一切生物，可算是灵异不过的了。
English: The shape of human beings symbolizes the earth, and they obtain their nature from the five elements; the ears and eyes are like the sun and moon, and the voice is like the wind and thunder. They can surpass all living things, which is nothing short of a miracle.

古文：形同草木之脆，名逾金石之坚，是以君子处世，树德建言，岂好辩哉？
现代文：但是人的肉体同草木一样脆弱，而流传久远的声名却比金石还要坚固，所以一个理想的人活在世上，应该做到树立功德，进行著作。
English: But the human body is as frail as a plant, while a long-standing reputation is stronger than gold and stone. Therefore, an ideal person should live in the world, establish merits, and write books.

古文：不得已也！
现代文：我难道是喜欢发议论吗，实在是不得已呀。
English: Do I like to talk about it? It's a necessity.

古文：予生七龄，乃梦彩云若锦，则攀而采之。
现代文：我在七岁的时候，曾经梦见一片像织绵似的云彩，就攀上去采取它。
English: When I was seven years old, I had a dream about a cloud that was like a tapestry, and I climbed up to get it.

古文：齿在逾立，则尝夜梦执丹漆之礼器，随仲尼而南行。
现代文：到了三十多岁的时候，又梦见自己捧着红漆的祭器，跟着孔子向南方走；早上醒来，心里感到非常高兴。
English: When he was in his thirties, he dreamed that he was holding a red-lacquered sacrificial vessel and following Confucius to the south. When he woke up in the morning, he felt very happy.

古文：旦而寤，乃怡然而喜，大哉！
现代文：伟大的圣人是多么不容易见到，他居然托梦给我这个无名小卒！
English: How hard it is to see a great sage, and he dreams about me, a nobody!

古文：圣人之难见哉，乃小子之垂梦欤！
现代文：自从有人类以来，从没有像孔子这样的圣人。
English: Since the dawn of mankind, there has never been a sage like Confucius.

古文：自生人以来，未有如夫子者也。敷赞圣旨，莫若注经，而马郑诸儒，弘之已精，就有深解，未足立家。
现代文：因此我想到，要阐明圣人的思想，最好是给经书作注解，但是马融、郑玄这些前代学者，在这方面的发挥已很精当，即使我再有什么深入的见解，也不足以自成一家。
English: Therefore, I thought that in order to clarify the thoughts of saints, it is best to make annotations to scriptures, but the scholars of the previous generation, such as Ma Rong and Zheng Xuan, have been very skillful in this regard. Even if I had any further insights, it would not be enough to form a family.

古文：唯文章之用，实经典枝条，五礼资之以成，六典因之致用，君臣所以炳焕，军国所以昭明，详其本源，莫非经典。而去圣久远，文体解散，辞人爱奇，言贵浮诡，饰羽尚画，文绣鞶帨，离本弥甚，将遂讹滥。盖《周书》论辞，贵乎体要，尼父陈训，恶乎异端，辞训之异，宜体于要。
现代文：可是后世离开圣人太远了，文章体制逐渐败坏。有些作家只是喜欢新奇，一味追求浮浅怪异的文辞，就像在已经华丽的羽毛上再加文饰，在巾带上再绣以花纹一样，使文章越来越离开根本，最后就会走向错误而漫无节制的道路。《尚书·毕命》中讲到文辞问题，曾经说过应该抓住要点；孔子教育学生，也曾说过不要去搞不正确的学说。《尚书》和孔子的说法有所不同，但应该注意领会其主要精神。
English: However, posterity is too far away from the sage, and the article system is gradually deteriorating. Some writers just like novelty, and blindly pursue shallow and strange words, just like adding decoration to the already gorgeous feathers and embroidering patterns on the scarf, making the article more and more off-base, and finally it will go to the wrong and unrestrained path. "Shang Shu Bi Sheng" talked about the issue of rhetoric, and once said that the main point should be grasped; Confucius educated students, and also said not to engage in incorrect doctrine. "Shang Shu" and Confucius's statement are different, but we should pay attention to understand its main spirit

古文：于是搦笔和墨，乃始论文。
现代文：于是我就提笔和墨，本着这种精神来论文。
English: So I sharpened my pen and began my thesis.

古文：详观近代之论文者多矣∶至如魏文述典，陈思序书，应瑒文论，陆机《文赋》，仲洽《流别》，弘范《翰林》，各照隅隙，鲜观衢路，或臧否当时之才，或铨品前修之文，或泛举雅俗之旨，或撮题篇章之意。
现代文：细读近来讨论文章的著作，那是很不少的：如曹丕的《典论·论文》，曹植的《与杨德祖书》，应玚的《文论》，陆机的《文赋》，挚虞的《文章流别论》，李充的《翰林论》等，大都只接触到文章的某些方面，而很少能从大处著眼。他们有的赞美或指责当代的作家，有的评论前人的作品，有的泛泛指出文章意旨的雅正和庸俗，有的对某些作品的内容作了简括的叙述。
English: There are quite a few books that have been carefully read recently to discuss articles: for example, Cao Zhi's "Classical Theory · Thesis," Cao Zhi's "With Yang Dezu," Ying Zhi's "Literary Theory," Lu Ji's "Wen Fu," Zhi Yu's "Theory of the Passing of Articles," Li Chong's "Theory of Hanlin," etc. Most of them only touch certain aspects of the article, but rarely can focus on the big picture. Some of them praise or criticize contemporary writers, some comment on the works of predecessors, some generally point out the elegance and vulgarity of the meaning of the article, and

古文：魏典密而不周，陈书辩而无当，应论华而疏略，陆赋巧而碎乱，《流别》精而少功，《翰林》浅而寡要。
现代文：曹丕的《论文》比较细密，但不完备；曹植的《与杨德祖书》颇见辩才，不过不一定恰当；应玚的《文论》是华丽的，可是比较空疏简略；陆机的《文赋》讲的虽巧妙，却又嫌它琐碎杂乱；《文章流别论》的内容是精湛的，可惜用处不大；《翰林论》比较浅薄，不得要领。
English: Cao Zhi's "Essay" is more detailed, but incomplete; Cao Zhi's "Conversation with Yang Dezu" is quite eloquent, but not necessarily appropriate; Ying Zhi's "Literature" is gorgeous, but relatively empty and simple; Lu Jian's "Literature" is clever, but it seems to be trivial and messy; The content of "Articles of Farewell" is exquisite, but it is not very useful; "Hanlin" is relatively shallow and lacks essentials.

古文：又君山、公干之徒，吉甫、士龙之辈，泛议文意，往往间出，并未能振叶以寻根，观澜而索源。
现代文：此外像桓谭、刘桢、应贞、陆云等人，也泛论过文章的意义，有时或许有较好的意见提出来。但他们都没有能从树木的枝叶寻找到根本，从水的波澜追溯到发源的地方。
English: In addition, people like Kuan Tan, Liu Wei, Ying Zhen, Lu Yun and others have also discussed the meaning of the article, and sometimes they may have better opinions. But they have not been able to find the root from the branches and leaves of trees, and trace the place of origin from the waves of water.

古文：不述先哲之诰，无益后生之虑。
现代文：由于他们未能很好地继承过去圣贤的教导，因此对后代的人也不能给予多少帮助。
English: Since they did not inherit well the teachings of the sages of the past, they cannot be of much help to future generations.

古文：盖《文心》之作也，本乎道，师乎圣，体乎经，酌乎纬，变乎骚：文之枢纽，亦云极矣。
现代文：这部《文心雕龙》的写作，是从自然之道出发，以圣人为师，根据经典，参考纬书，并且寻究《楚辞》以下的变化。
English: The writing of this "Wenxin Jiaolong" is from the natural way, with the sage as the teacher, according to the classics, reference books, and to explore the changes below the "Chu Ci."

古文：若乃论文叙笔，则囿别区分，原始以表末，释名以章义，选文以定篇，敷理以举统：上篇以上，纲领明矣。
现代文：这样对于文章的主要关键，是可以搞透彻的。至于各种文章的体裁，有属于 文 的，有属于 笔 的，都分别指出它们的异同。
English: In this way, the main key to the article can be thoroughly done. As for the various genres of articles, both those belonging to the text and those belonging to the pen, all point out their differences and similarities separately.

古文：至于剖情析采，笼圈条贯，攡《神》、《性》，图《风》、《势》，苞《会》、《通》，阅《声》、《字》，崇替于《时序》，褒贬于《才略》，怊怅于《知音》，耿介于《程器》，长怀《序志》，以驭群篇：下篇以下，毛目显矣。
现代文：对于每种文体，都追溯它的起源，叙述它的演变，说明体裁名称的意义，并举几篇代表作品加以评论，从阐述写作道理中总结各种文体的基本特点。
English: For each style, it traces its origin, describes its evolution, explains the meaning of the genre name, and cites several representative works to comment on, summarizing the basic characteristics of various styles from the exposition of writing principles.

古文：位理定名，彰乎大易之数，其为文用，四十九篇而已。
现代文：按照这样，在本书的上篇里边已经把文章的主要类别都说清楚了。
English: Accordingly, in the last chapter of this book, the main categories of articles have been made clear.

古文：夫铨序一文为易，弥纶群言为难，虽复轻采毛发，深极骨髓，或有曲意密源，似近而远，辞所不载，亦不可胜数矣。及其品列成文，有同乎旧谈者，非雷同也，势自不可异也；有异乎前论者，非苟异也，理自不可同也。
现代文：下面再从分析作品的内容和形式方面，概括出理论的体系：陈述了 神思 和 体性 问题，说明了 风骨 和 定势 问题，包括了 附会 以上、 通变 以下的一系列问题，还考察了从 声律 到 练字 等具体问题；此外，又以《时序》篇论述了不同时代文章的盛衰，以《才略》篇指出历代作家文学才华的高低，在《知音》篇十分感慨地说明正确的文学评论之不易，在《程器》提出道德品质和政治修养对作家的重要；最后，用《序志》篇叙述自己的志趣，作为全书的总结。
English: The following is a summary of the theoretical system from the aspect of analyzing the content and form of the work: the problems of the mind and body were stated, the problems of the spirit and posture were explained, and a series of problems were included, including the above-mentioned "subsidiary meeting" and the following "transformational change," and specific problems were also examined, from the vocal rhythm to the practice of words. In addition, the "Timeline" article discussed the rise and fall of articles in different eras, the "Talent" article pointed out the level of literary talent of writers throughout the ages, the "Knowledge" article explained with great emotion the difficulty of correct literary criticism, and the "

古文：同之与异，不屑古今，擘肌分理，唯务折衷。
现代文：这样，就在本书下篇里边，把文学创作和评论的种种具体问题都大致讲到了。
English: Some sayings are the same, some sayings are different. It is not necessary to consider whether these sayings are ancient or modern. The main thing is to analyze the structure of the article and strive to be fair and appropriate.

古文：按辔文雅之场，环络藻绘之府，亦几乎备矣。
现代文：安排内容，确定篇名，一共写了五十篇，恰好符合 大衍 的数目；其中讨论文章本身的，只有四十九篇。
English: After arranging the content and deciding on the title, a total of fifty articles were written, just in line with the number of Daiyan; of which, only forty-nine articles discussed the article itself.

古文：但言不尽意，圣人所难，识在瓶管，何能矩矱。
现代文：评论一篇作品，那是比较容易的，但要综合评论许多作品，就比较困难了。
English: Even though words cannot fully express one's heart, and sages have been deeply troubled by this, with my shallow understanding, how can I establish rules and regulations for others?

古文：茫茫往代，既沉予闻；眇眇来世，倘尘彼观也。
现代文：从历代的著作中，我已深受教益；对于未来的读者，这部书也许能供他们参考。总结：
English: I have learned a great deal from the writings of the past; for future readers, this book may serve as a reference.

古文：赞曰∶生也有涯，无涯惟智。
现代文：人生有限，学问却无边无际。
English: Life is limited, but knowledge is boundless.

古文：逐物实难，凭性良易。傲岸泉石，咀嚼文义。
现代文：要理解事物的真象，的确是有困难的；凭着自然的天性去客观地接触事物，那就比较容易了。
English: It is indeed difficult to understand the truth of things; it is easier to objectively contact things with natural instincts.

古文：文果载心，余心有寄。
现代文：如果这部书能够表达自己的心意，我的思想也就有所寄托了。
English: If this book can express my heart, then my thoughts will have something to rest on.

