古文：郑玄在马融门下，三年不得相见，高足弟子传授而已。
现代文：郑玄在马融门下求学，过了三年也没见着马融，只是由高才弟子为他讲授罢了。
English: Zheng Xuan studied under Ma Rong. Three years later, he still hadn't seen Ma Rong, but the talented disciple was teaching him.

古文：尝算浑天不合，诸弟子莫能解。
现代文：马融曾用浑天算法演算，结果不相符，弟子们也没有谁能理解。
English: Ma Rong once used the algorithm of the sky to calculate, but the results did not match, and none of his disciples could understand it.

古文：或言玄能者，融召令算，一转便决，众咸骇服。
现代文：有人说郑玄能演算，马融便叫他来，要他演算，郑玄一算就解决了，大家都很惊奇，佩服。
English: Someone said that Zheng Xuan could calculate. Ma Rong called him and asked him to do the calculation. Zheng Xuan solved the problem immediately. Everyone was surprised and impressed.

古文：及玄业成辞归，既而融有 礼乐皆东 之叹。恐玄擅名而心忌焉。
现代文：等到郑玄学业完成，辞别回家，马融随即慨叹礼和乐的中心都将要转移到东方去了，担心郑玄会独亨盛名，心里很忌恨他。
English: When Zheng Xuan finished his studies and left for home, Ma Rong immediately wanted to move the center of lamentation and music to the East. He was worried that Zheng Xuan would become the sole owner of fame, and he hated him in his heart.

古文：玄亦疑有追，乃坐桥下，在水上据屐。
现代文：郑玄也猜测马融会来追赶，便走到桥底下，在水里垫着木板鞋坐着。
English: Zheng Xuan also guessed that Ma Rong would catch up, so he went under the bridge and sat in the water with wooden shoes.

古文：融果转式逐之，告左右曰： 玄在土下水上而据木，此必死矣。 
现代文：马融果然旋转式盘占卜郑玄踪迹，然后告诉身边的人说： 郑玄在土下、水上，靠着木头，这表明一定是死了。 
English: Ma Rong divined Zheng Xuan's whereabouts with a spinning disk, and then told the people around him: Zheng Xuan is under the ground, on the water, and leaning against a tree, which indicates that he must be dead.

古文：遂罢追，玄竟以得免。
现代文：便决定不去追赶。郑玄终于因此得免一死。
English: He decided not to pursue. Zheng Xuan was finally spared from death.

古文：郑玄欲注春秋传，尚未成时，行与服子慎遇宿客舍，先未相识，服在外车上与人说己注传意。
现代文：郑玄想要注释《左传》，还没有完成。这时有事到外地去，和服子慎相遇，住在同一个客店里，起初两人并不认识。服子慎在店外的车子上，和别人谈到自己注《左传》的想法；郑玄听了很久。
English: Zheng Xuan wanted to annotate "Zhuan," which had not yet been completed. At that time, he had to go out of town for some reason, and he met Fu Zi Shen, who lived in the same inn. At first, the two did not know each other. Fu Zi Shen was in a car outside the store, talking to others about his idea of annotating "Zhuan"; Zheng Xuan listened for a long time.

古文：玄听之良久，多与己同。
现代文：听出服子愎的见解多数和自己相同。
English: I found out that most of the opinions expressed by Ms. Hanziko were the same as my own.

古文：玄就车与语曰： 吾久欲注，尚未了。听君向言，多与吾同。今当尽以所注与君。 
现代文：郑玄就走到车前对服子慎说道： 我早就想要注《左传》，还没有完成；听了您刚才的谈论，大多和我相同，现在应该把我作的注全部送给您。 
English: Zheng Xuan walked to the front of the car and said to Fuxishen: I have long wanted to annotate "Zhuan," but I haven't finished it yet; after listening to your talk just now, I mostly agree with you, and now I should give you all the annotations I have made.

古文：遂为服氏注。
现代文：终于成了服氏注。
English: It finally became a hit with Mr. Fuchu.

古文：郑玄家奴婢皆读书。
现代文：郑玄家里的奴婢都读书。
English: The servants in Zheng Xuan's family all study.

古文：尝使一婢，不称旨，将挞之。
现代文：一次曾使唤一个婢女，事情干得不称心，郑玄要打她。
English: Once, Zheng Xuan wanted to beat a maidservant who had done an unsatisfactory job.

古文：方自陈说，玄怒，使人曳箸泥中。
现代文：她刚要分辩，郑玄生气了，叫人把她拉到泥里。
English: Just as she was about to make her opening statement, Zheng Xuan became angry and ordered someone to drag her into the mud.

古文：须臾，复有一婢来，问曰： 胡为乎泥中？ 
现代文：一会儿又有一个婢女走来，问她： 胡为乎泥中？ 
English: After a while, another servant girl came and asked her, "Is the pig stuck in the mud?"

古文：答曰： 薄言往愬，逢彼之怒。 
现代文：她回答说： 薄言往诉，逢彼之怒。 
English: She replied: "He gets angry if you don't say anything.

古文：服虔既善春秋，将为注，欲参考同异；闻崔烈集门生讲传，遂匿姓名，为烈门人赁作食。
现代文：服虔已经对《左传》很有研究，将要给它做注释，想参考各家的异同。他听说崔烈召集学生讲授《左传》，便隐姓埋名，去给崔烈的学生当佣人做饭。
English: He had heard that Cui Rong had called for students to give lectures on "Zhuan," so he went incognito and cooked for Cui Rong's students as a servant.

古文：每当至讲时，辄窃听户壁间。
现代文：每当到讲授的时候，他就躲在门外偷听。
English: Whenever there was a lecture, he would hide outside the door and eavesdrop.

古文：既知不能踰己，稍共诸生叙其短长。
现代文：等他了解到崔烈超不过自己以后，便渐渐地和那些学生谈论崔烈的得失。
English: After he realized that Cui Rongchao was just himself, he gradually talked to those students about Cui Rongchao's merits and demerits.

古文：烈闻，不测何人，然素闻虔名，意疑之。
现代文：崔烈听说后，猜不出是什么人，可是一向听到过服虔的名声，猜想是他。
English: After hearing about it, Cui Lie couldn't guess who it was, but she had always heard of his reputation for piety and assumed it was him.

古文：明蚤往，及未寤，便呼： 子慎！子慎！ 
现代文：第二天一大早就去拜访，趁服虔还没睡醒的时候，便突然叫： 子慎！子慎！ 
English: The next day, early in the morning, he went to pay a visit. Taking advantage of the fact that Zhu Qian had not yet woken up, he suddenly shouted: "Be careful! Be careful!"

古文：虔不觉惊应，遂相与友善。
现代文：服虔不觉惊醒答应，从此两人就结为好友。
English: Obediently, he agreed, and the two have been friends ever since.

古文：钟会撰四本论，始毕，甚欲使嵇公一见。
现代文：钟会撰著《四本论》刚刚完成，很想让嵇康看一看。
English: Zhong Hui has just finished writing "The Four Treatises" and would like to show it to Yan Kang.

古文：置怀中，既定，畏其难，怀不敢出，于户外遥掷，便回急走。
现代文：便揣在怀里，揣好以后，又怕嵇康质疑问难，揣着不敢拿出，走到门外远远地扔进去，便转身急急忙忙地跑了。
English: He held it in his arms, and when he had finished holding it, he was afraid to take it out for fear that the quality would be questionable, and he did not dare to take it out, so he went outside the door and threw it in from a distance, then he turned around and ran away in a hurry.

古文：何晏为吏部尚书，有位望，时谈客盈坐，王弼未弱冠往见之。
现代文：何晏任吏部尚书时，很有地位声望，当时清谈的宾客常常满座，王弼年龄不到二十岁时，去拜会他。
English: When he was an official of the Ministry of Education, he had a very high status and reputation. At that time, the guests who had a clear talk were often full of seats. When Wang Yao was less than twenty years old, he went to visit him.

古文：晏闻弼名，因条向者胜理语弼曰： 此理仆以为极，可得复难不？ 
现代文：何晏听到过王弼的名声，便分条列出以前那些精妙的玄理来告诉王弼说： 这些道理我认为是谈得最透彻的了，还能再反驳吗？ 
English: When he heard of Wang Xuan's reputation, he told Wang Xuan, "I think these are the most thoroughly discussed truths. Can you refute them again?"

古文：弼便作难，一坐人便以为屈，于是弼自为客主数番，皆一坐所不及。
现代文：王弼便提出反驳，满座的人都觉得何晏理屈。于是王弼反复自问自答，所谈玄理都晕存摩的人赶不上的。
English: Wang Yao then put forward a rebuttal, and everyone in the audience felt that it was nonsense. Therefore, Wang Yao repeatedly asked himself and answered, and those who were dazed and confused could not catch up with the metaphysics he talked about.

古文：何平叔注老子，始成，诣王辅嗣。见王注精奇，迺神伏曰： 若斯人，可与论天人之际矣！ 
现代文：何平叔注释《老子》才完成，就去拜会王辅嗣；看见王辅嗣的《老子注》见解精微独到，于是非常佩服。说： 像这个人，可以和他讨论天人关系的问题了！ 
English: When Uncle He Ping finished annotating "Lao Zi," he went to visit Wang Suozhi. Seeing Wang Suozhi's "Lao Zi Annotation" with its subtle and unique insights, he was very impressed. He said: "Like this man, I can discuss the issue of the relationship between heaven and man with him!"

古文：因以所注为道德二论。
现代文：于是把自己所注的改写成《道论》《德论》两篇。
English: Therefore, he rewrote his notes into two articles, "On Taoism" and "On Virtue."

古文：王辅嗣弱冠诣裴徽，徽问曰： 夫无者，诚万物之所资，圣人莫肯致言，而老子申之无已，何邪？ 
现代文：王弼年轻时去拜访裴徽，裴徽问他： 无，确实是万物的根源，可是圣人不肯对它发表意见，老子却反复地陈述它，这是为什么？ 
English: When Wang Yao was young, he went to visit Pei Hui. Pei Hui asked him, "Nothing, indeed, is the root of all things. However, the sage refused to express an opinion on it, while Lao Tzu repeatedly stated it. Why is this?

古文：弼曰： 圣人体无，无又不可以训，故言必及有；老、庄未免于有，恒训其所不足。 
现代文：王弼说： 圣人认为无是本体，可是无又不能解释清楚，所以言谈间必定涉及有；老子、庄子不能去掉有，所以要经常去解释那个还掌握得不充分的无。 
English: Wang Yao said: The sage believes that nothing is the essence, but nothing cannot be explained clearly, so there must be something involved in the conversation; Lao Zi and Zhuo Zi cannot remove something, so they should always explain the nothing that they still do not fully grasp.

古文：傅嘏善言虚胜，荀粲谈尚玄远。
现代文：傅嘏擅长谈论虚胜，荀粲清谈崇尚玄远。
English: Fu Hao is good at talking about vanity, and Zou Qing talks about advocating the profound.

古文：每至共语，有争而不相喻。
现代文：每当两人到一起谈论的时候，发生争论，却又互不理解。
English: Whenever two people come together to talk, there is an argument, but they don't understand each other.

古文：裴冀州释二家之义，通彼我之怀，常使两情皆得，彼此俱畅。
现代文：冀州刺史裴徽能够解释清楚两家的道理，沟通彼此的心意，常使双方都感满意，彼此都能通晓。
English: Jizhou Zishi Peihui can clearly explain the truth of the two families, communicate each other's intentions, and often make both sides feel satisfied and understand each other.

古文：何晏注老子未毕，见王弼自说注老子旨。何意多所短，不复得作声，但应诺诺。
现代文：何晏注释《老子》还没完成时，一次听王弼谈起自己注释《老子》的意旨，对比之下，何晏的见解很多地方有欠缺，何晏不敢再开口，只是连声答应 是是 。
English: When He Yao was annotating "Lao Zi" before it was completed, he once heard Wang Yao talk about his intention to annotate "Lao Zi." In contrast, He Yao's opinions were lacking in many places. He Yao did not dare to open his mouth again, but he just said yes and yes.

古文：遂不复注，因作道德论。
现代文：于是不再注释下去，便另写《道德论》。
English: Therefore, he did not continue with the commentary, but wrote another "Theory of Morals."

古文：中朝时，有怀道之流，有诣王夷甫咨疑者。值王昨已语多，小极，不复相酬答，乃谓客曰： 身今少恶，裴逸民亦近在此，君可往问。 
现代文：西晋时，有一班倾慕道家学说的人，其中有人登门向王夷甫请教疑难，正碰上王夷甫前一天已经谈论了很久，有点疲乏，不想再和客人应对，便对客人说： 我现在有点不舒服，裴逸民也在我附近住，您可以去问他。 
English: In the Western Jin Dynasty, there was a group of people who admired Taoist teachings. One of them went to Wang Yifu's house to ask for advice. Wang Yifu, who had been talking for a long time the day before, was a little tired and didn't want to deal with the guest anymore, so he said to the guest, "I'm a little uncomfortable right now. Pei Yimin also lives near me. You can go and ask him."

古文：裴成公作崇有论，时人攻难之，莫能折。
现代文：裴逸民作《崇有论》，当时的人责难他，可是没有谁能驳倒他。
English: When Pei Yimin wrote "Theory of Reverence," people at the time criticized him, but no one could refute him.

古文：唯王夷甫来，如小屈。
现代文：只有王夷甫来和他辩论，他才有点理亏。
English: It was only when Wang Yifu came to argue with him that he lost his reason.

古文：时人即以王理难裴，理还复申。
现代文：当时的人就用王夷甫的理论来驳他，可是这时他的理论又显得头头是道了。
English: At that time, people used Wang Yifu's theory to refute him, but at that time his theory appeared to be nonsense.

古文：诸葛宏年少不肯学问。始与王夷甫谈，便已超诣。
现代文：诸葛龙少年时不肯学习求教，可是一开始和王夷甫清谈，便已经显示出他的造诣很深。
English: As a young boy, Zhuge Long refused to study or seek instruction, but from the very beginning, when he had a clear discussion with Wang Yifu, he had already shown that he was very accomplished.

古文：王叹曰： 卿天才卓出，若复小加研寻，一无所愧。 
现代文：王夷甫感叹他说： 你的聪明才智很出众，如果再稍加研讨，就丝毫也不会比当代名流差了。 
English: Wang Yifu sighed and said, "Your intelligence is outstanding. If you do a little more research, you will not be any worse than contemporary celebrities."

古文：宏后看庄、老，更与王语，便足相抗衡。
现代文：诸葛厷后来阅读了《庄子》《老子》，再和王夷甫清谈，便完全可以和他旗鼓相当了。
English: Later, Zhuge Liang read "Zhuang Zi" and "Lao Zi" and had a clear talk with Wang Yifu, so he could completely match his level.

古文：卫玠总角时问乐令 梦 ，乐云 是想 。
现代文：卫玠幼年时，问尚书令乐广为什么会做梦，乐广说是因为心有所想。
English: When Wei Wei was a child, he asked Shang Shuling why Le Guang had dreams. Le Guang said it was because he had something on his mind.

古文：卫曰： 形神所不接而梦，岂是想邪？ 
现代文：卫玠说： 身体和精神都不曾接触过的却在梦里出现，这哪里是心有所想呢？ 
English: Wei Wei said: The body and spirit have never been in contact, but they appear in dreams. Where is the mind thinking?

古文：乐云： 因也。
现代文：乐广说： 是沿袭做过的事。
English: Le Guang said: It's something that has been done for generations.

古文：未尝梦乘车入鼠穴，捣齑啖铁杵，皆无想无因故也。 
现代文：人们不曾梦见坐车进老鼠洞，或者捣碎姜蒜去喂铁杵，这都是因为没有这些想法，没有这些可模仿的先例。 
English: People did not dream of driving a car into a rat hole, or mashing ginger and garlic to feed a spade, because there were no such ideas, no such precedents to imitate.

古文：卫思 因 ，经日不得，遂成病。
现代文：卫玠便思索沿袭问题，成天思索也得不出答案，终于想得生了病。
English: Wei Wei then pondered the question of lineage, and after thinking all day, he could not find an answer. Finally, he got sick.

古文：乐闻，故命驾为剖析之。
现代文：乐广听说后，特意坐车去给他分析这个问题。
English: After Le Guang heard about it, he deliberately took a car to analyze the problem for him.

古文：卫既小差。乐叹曰： 此儿胸中当必无膏肓之疾！ 
现代文：卫玠的病有了起色以后，乐广感慨他说： 这孩子心里一定不会得无法医治的病！ 
English: After Wei Xuan's illness improved, Le Guang sighed and said, "This child will definitely not have an incurable disease in his heart!

古文：庾子嵩读庄子，开卷一尺许便放去，曰： 了不异人意。 
现代文：庾子嵩读《庄子》，打开书读了一尺左右的篇幅就放下了，说道： 和我的想法完全相同。 
English: Zou Zi Song read "Zhuang Zi," opened the book, read about a foot of the book and put it down, saying: "My thoughts are exactly the same."

古文：客问乐令 旨不至 者，乐亦不复剖析文句，直以麈尾柄确几曰： 至不？ 
现代文：有位客人问尚书令乐广， 旨不至 这句话是什么意思，乐广也不再分析这句话的词句，径直用拂尘柄敲着小桌子说： 达到了没有？ 
English: A guest asked Shang Shuling and Le Guang what this sentence meant. Le Guang no longer analyzed the words and phrases of this sentence, but directly knocked the small table with a dustpan handle and said: Has it been achieved?

古文：客曰： 至！ 
现代文：客人回答说： 达到了。 
English: The guest replied, "It's done."

古文：乐因又举麈尾曰： 若至者，那得去？ 
现代文：乐广于是又举起拂尘说： 如果达到了，怎么能离开呢？ 
English: Le Guang then raised his whisk again and said: If you have reached it, how can you leave?

古文：于是客乃悟服。
现代文：这时客人才醒悟过来，表示信服。
English: Only then did the guest come to his senses and express his conviction.

古文：乐辞约而旨达，皆此类。
现代文：乐广解释问题时言辞简明扼要，可是意思很透彻，都是像上面这个例子一样
English: When explaining the problem, LeGuang's words are concise and concise, but the meaning is very thorough, just like the above example

古文：初，注庄子者数十家，莫能究其旨要。
现代文：起初，注《庄子》的有几十家，可是没有一家能探索到它的要领。
English: At first, there were dozens of publishers of Zhuangzi, but none of them were able to explore its essence.

古文：向秀于旧注外为解义，妙析奇致，大畅玄风。
现代文：向秀推开旧注，另求新解，精到的分析，美妙的意趣，使《庄子》玄奥的意旨大为畅达。
English: Xiang Xiu pushed aside the old notes, and sought new solutions, sophisticated analysis, and wonderful meaning, so that the profound meaning of "Zhuang Zi" was greatly smooth.

古文：唯秋水、至乐二篇未竟而秀卒。
现代文：其中只有《秋水》《至乐》两篇的注还没有完成，向秀就死了。
English: Among them, only the notes of "Autumn Water" and "Happiness" have not been completed, and Xiang Xiu died.

古文：秀子幼，义遂零落，然犹有别本。
现代文：向秀的儿子还很小，不能完成父业，这两篇的注释便脱落了，可是还留有一个副本。
English: Xiangxiu's son is still too young to complete his father's work, and the two commentaries have fallen off, but a copy remains.

古文：郭象者，为人薄行，有俊才。
现代文：郭象这个人，为人品行不好，却是才智出众。
English: Guo Xiang is a person with a bad moral character, but his intelligence is outstanding.

古文：见秀义不传于世，遂窃以为己注。
现代文：他看到向秀所释新义在当时没有流传开，便偷来当做自己的注。
English: He saw that Xiang Xiu's interpretation of the new meaning was not widely spread at the time, so he stole it as his own note.

古文：乃自注秋水、至乐二篇，又易马蹄一篇，其余众篇，或定点文句而已。
现代文：于是自己注释了《秋水》《至乐》两篇，又改换了《马蹄》一篇的注，其余各篇的注，有的只是改正一下文句罢了。
English: As a result, he annotated two articles of "Autumn Water" and "Happiness," and changed the annotation of one article of "Horseshoe," and the annotation of the remaining articles, some of which were just to correct the words.

古文：后秀义别本出，故今有向、郭二庄，其义一也。
现代文：后来向秀释义的副本发现了，所以现在有向秀、郭象两本《庄子注》，其中的内容是一样的。
English: Later, a copy of Xiang Xiu's commentary was found, so now there are two "Zhuang Zi Notes" by Xiang Xiu and Guo Xiang, the content of which is the same.

古文：阮宣子有令闻，太尉王夷甫见而问曰： 老、庄与圣教同异？ 
现代文：阮宣子很有名望，太尉王夷甫见到他时间道： 老子、庄子和儒家有什么异同？ 
English: Ruan Xuan Zi is very famous. When Lieutenant Wang Yifu saw him, he asked, "What are the differences and similarities between Lao Zi, Zhuang Zi and Confucianism?"

古文：对曰： 将无同？ 
现代文：阮宣子回答说： 将无同。 
English: "It will not be the same," Ms. Nguyen said.

古文：太尉善其言，辟之为掾。世谓 三语掾 。
现代文：太尉很赞赏他的回答，调他来做下属。世人称他为 三语椽 。
English: The captain appreciated his answer very much and transferred him to be a subordinate. The world called him a trilingual.

古文：卫玠嘲之曰： 一言可辟，何假于三？ 
现代文：卫玠嘲讽他说： 只说一个字就可以调用，何必要借助三个字！ 
English: Wei Wei scoffed at him and said, "You can invoke it just by saying one word, why do you need to use three words!

古文：宣子曰： 苟是天下人望，亦可无言而辟，复何假一？ 
现代文：宣子说： 如果是天下所仰望的人，也可以不说话就能调用，又何必要惜助一个字呢！ 
English: Nobuko said, "If it is someone whom the world looks up to, they can be summoned without speaking, so why should we spare a single word?"

古文：遂相与为友。
现代文：于是两人就结为朋友。
English: The two became friends.

古文：裴散骑娶王太尉女。
现代文：散骑郎裴逻娶太尉王夷甫的女儿为妻。
English: Pei Luo, a horseman, married the daughter of Captain Wang Yifu.

古文：婚后三日，诸婿大会，当时名士，王、裴子弟悉集。
现代文：婚后三天，王家邀请诸女婿聚会，当时的名士和王、裴两家子弟齐集王家。
English: Three days after the wedding, the royal family invited all the sons-in-law to a gathering. The celebrities of the time and the two sons of Wang and Pei gathered together in the royal family.

古文：郭子玄在坐，挑与裴谈。
现代文：郭子玄也在座，他领头和裴遐谈玄。
English: Guo Zixuan was also present, and he led the discussion with Pei Xuan.

古文：子玄才甚丰赡，始数交未快。
现代文：子玄才识很渊博，刚交锋几个回合，还觉得不痛快。
English: Zi Xuan's knowledge is very profound, just after a few rounds of confrontation, I still feel uncomfortable.

古文：郭陈张甚盛，裴徐理前语，理致甚微，四坐咨嗟称快。
现代文：郭子玄把玄理铺陈得很充分；裴遐却慢条斯理地梳理前面的议论、义理情趣都很精微，满座的大部赞叹不已，表示痛快。
English: Guo Zixuan fully expounded the metaphysics; Pei Xuan, however, slowly combed through the preceding discussion, and the sense of logic was very subtle. Most of the audience was full of admiration and expressed delight.

古文：王亦以为奇，谓诸人曰： 君辈勿为尔，将受困寡人女婿！ 
现代文：王夷甫也以为新奇罕见，于是对大家说： 你们不要再辩论了，不然就要被我女婿困住了。 
English: Wang Yifu also thought that the novelty was rare, so he said to everyone: Don't debate anymore, otherwise you will be trapped by my son-in-law.

古文：卫玠始度江，见王大将军。
现代文：卫玠避乱渡江之初，去拜见大将军王敦。
English: At the beginning of crossing the river to escape the turmoil, he went to see the great general Wang Dun.

古文：因夜坐，大将军命谢幼舆。
现代文：由于夜坐清谈，大将军便邀来谢幼舆。
English: As they sat and talked at night, the general invited Xie Youmou.

古文：玠见谢，甚说之，都不复顾王，遂达旦微言。王永夕不得豫。
现代文：卫玠见到谢幼舆，非常喜欢他，再也不理会王敦，两人便一直清谈到第二天早晨，王敦整夜也插不上嘴。
English: Wei Wei saw Xie Yunwu, liked him very much, and no longer paid attention to Wang Dun. The two of them kept talking about the next morning, and Wang Dun couldn't open his mouth all night.

古文：玠体素羸，恒为母所禁。尔夕忽极，于此病笃，遂不起。
现代文：卫玠向来体质虚弱，常常被他母亲管束住，不让他多谈论；这一夜突然感到疲乏，从此病情加重，终于去世。
English: Wei Wei, who had always been frail and was often restrained by his mother from talking too much, suddenly felt tired that night, his condition worsened, and he eventually died.

古文：旧云：王丞相过江左，止道声无哀乐、养生、言尽意，三理而已。然宛转关生，无所不入。
现代文：过去有种说法，说丞相王导到江南以后，也只是谈论声无哀乐、养生和言尽意这三方面的道理而已，可是这已间接关系到人的一生，是能渗透到每一个方面的。
English: In the past, there was a saying that after Wang Chengdu was sent to the south of the Yangtze River, he only talked about the three aspects of soundness, health and sincerity, but this was indirectly related to a person's life and could penetrate into every aspect.

古文：殷中军为庾公长史，下都，王丞相为之集，桓公、王长史、王蓝田、谢镇西并在。
现代文：中军将军殷浩任庾亮属下的长史时，有一次进京，丞相王导为他把大家聚在一起，桓温、左长史王濛、蓝田侯王述、镇西将军谢尚都在座。
English: When the Chinese general Yin Hao, under the command of Long Shih Liang, once entered Beijing, the chancellor Wang Du gathered everyone together for him, including Kuan Wen, Left Long Shih Wang Qi, Lantian Hou Wang Xiu, and Zhenxi general Xie Shang.

古文：丞相自起解帐带麈尾，语殷曰： 身今日当与君共谈析理。 
现代文：丞相离座亲自去解下挂在帐带上的拂尘，对殷浩说： 我今天要和您一起谈论、辨析玄理。 
English: The prime minister left his seat to remove the whisk from his belt and said to Yin Hao, "Today, I want to discuss and analyze metaphysics with you."

古文：既共清言，遂达三更。
现代文：两人一起清谈完后，已到三更时分。
English: After the two of them had a clear talk together, it was time for the third period.

古文：丞相与殷共相往反，其余诸贤，略无所关。
现代文：丞相和殷浩来回辩难，其他贤达丝毫也没有牵涉进去。
English: It was difficult for the prime minister and Yin Hao to argue back and forth, and other sages were not involved at all.

古文：既彼我相尽，丞相乃叹曰： 向来语，乃竟未知理源所归，至于辞喻不相负。正始之音，正当尔耳！ 
现代文：彼此尽情辩论以后，丞相便叹道： 一向谈沦玄理，竟然还不知道玄理的本源在什么地方。至于旨趣和比喻不能互相违背，正始年间的清谈，正是这样的呀！ 
English: After they had debated each other to their heart's content, the prime minister lamented, "We have been talking about occultism all the time, but we still don't know where the origin of occultism lies. As for the idea and the metaphor not contradicting each other, that's exactly what we were talking about at the beginning of the year!"

古文：明旦，桓宣武语人曰： 昨夜听殷、王清言甚佳，仁祖亦不寂寞，我亦时复造心，顾看两王掾，辄翣如生母狗馨。 
现代文：第二天早上，桓温告诉别人说： 昨夜听殷、王两人清谈，非常美妙。仁祖也不感到寂寞，我也时时心有所得；回头看那两位王属官，就活像身上插着漂亮羽毛扇的母狗一样。 
English: The next morning, Kuan Wen told others, "It was very wonderful to listen to Yin and Wang's clear talk last night. Renzo didn't feel lonely, and I also gained something from time to time. Looking back at the two royal officials, I felt like a female dog with a beautiful feather fan on my body.

古文：殷中军见佛经云： 理亦应阿堵上。 
现代文：中军将军殷浩看了佛经，说： 玄理也应当在这里面。 
English: The Chinese general Yin Hao looked at the sutra and said, "The occult should also be included here."

古文：谢安年少时，请阮光禄道白马论。
现代文：谢安年轻时候，请光禄大夫阮裕讲解《白马论》，阮裕写了一篇论说文给谢安看。
English: When Xie An was young, he asked Guanglu doctor Ruan Yu to explain "The Story of the White Horse." Ruan Yu wrote an essay for Xie An to read.

古文：为论以示谢，于时谢不即解阮语，重相咨尽。阮乃叹曰： 非但能言人不可得，正索解人亦不可得！ 
现代文：当时谢安不能马上理解阮裕的话，就反复请教以求全都理解。阮裕于是赞叹道： 不但能够解释明白的人难得，就是寻求透彻了解的入也难得！ 
English: At that time, Xie An could not immediately understand the words of Ruan Yu, so he repeatedly asked for advice in order to understand everything. Ruan Yu then praised: Not only is it rare to be able to explain what is clear, but it is also rare to seek a thorough understanding!

古文：褚季野语孙安国云： 北人学问，渊综广博。 
现代文：诸季野对孙安国说： 北方人做学问，深厚广博而且融会贯通。 
English: Zhu Qino said to Sun Anguo, "Northerners are good at learning. They are profound, broad-minded and well-integrated.

古文：孙答曰： 南人学问，清通简要。 
现代文：孙安国回答说： 南方人做学问，清新通达而且简明扼要。 
English: Sun An Guo replied: Nanfang people are good at learning, they are fresh, knowledgeable and concise.

古文：支道林闻之曰： 圣贤固所忘言。自中人以还，北人看书，如显处视月；南人学问，如牖中窥日。 
现代文：支道林听到后，说； 对圣贤，自然不用说了，从中等才质以下的人来说，北方人读书，像是在敞亮处看月亮；南方人做学问，像是从窗户里看太阳。 
English: Upon hearing this, Shidolin said, "Of course, it goes without saying that for sages and sages, as well as for people with less than average talent, for a northerner to read is like looking at the moon in broad daylight; for a southerner to study is like looking at the sun through a window.

古文：刘真长与殷渊源谈，刘理如小屈，殷曰： 恶，卿不欲作将善云梯仰攻。 
现代文：刘真长和殷渊源谈玄，刘真长似乎有点理亏，殷渊源便说： 怎么你下想造一架好云梯来仰攻呢？ 
English: Liu Zhengang and Yin Yuanyuan talked about the mystery, Liu Zhenlong seemed to be a bit unreasonable, and Yin Yuanyuan said: How do you want to build a good ladder to attack?

古文：殷中军云： 康伯未得我牙后慧。 
现代文：中军将军殷浩说： 康伯还没有学到我牙缝里的一点聪明。 
English: Chinese General Yin Hao said: "Comber hasn't learned a single bit of wisdom from me.

古文：谢镇西少时，闻殷浩能清言，故往造之。
现代文：镇西将军谢尚年轻时，听说殷浩擅长清谈，特意去拜访他。
English: When Zhenxi General Xie Shang was young, he heard that Yin Hao was good at talking, so he went to visit him.

古文：殷未过有所通，为谢标榜诸义，作数百语。既有佳致，兼辞条丰蔚，甚足以动心骇听。
现代文：殷浩没有做过多的阐发，只是给谢尚提示好些道理，说了几百句话；不但谈吐举止有风致，加以辞藻丰富多采，很能动人心弦，使入震惊。
English: Yin Hao didn't do much elaboration, he just pointed out some truths to Xie Shang and said a few hundred words. He not only spoke and behaved with style, but also used rich and colorful words, which was very moving and shocking.

古文：谢注神倾意，不觉流汗交面。
现代文：谢尚全神贯注，倾心向往，不觉汗流满面。
English: Xie Shang was engrossed, yearning, and sweating profusely.

古文：殷徐语左右： 取手巾与谢郎拭面。 
现代文：殷浩从容地吩咐手下人： 拿手巾来给谢郎擦擦脸。 
English: Yin Hao calmly ordered his subordinates: Take a hand towel to wipe Xie Lang's face.

古文：宣武集诸名胜讲易，日说一卦。
现代文：桓温聚集许多著名人士讲解《周易》，每天解释一卦。
English: Kanwen gathered many famous people to explain "Zhou Yi" and explain one story every day.

古文：简文欲听，闻此便还。曰： 义自当有难易，其以一卦为限邪？ 
现代文：简文帝本想去听，一听说是这样讲就回来了，说： 卦的内容自然是有难有易，怎么能限定每天讲一卦呢！ 
English: Emperor Jianwen originally wanted to listen to it, but as soon as he heard that this was the way it was told, he came back and said: the content of the story is naturally difficult and easy, how can you limit yourself to telling one story every day!

古文：有北来道人好才理，与林公相遇于瓦官寺，讲小品。
现代文：有位从北方过江来的和尚很有才思，他们支道林和尚在瓦官寺相遇，两人一起研讨《小品》。
English: A monk who came from the north across the river was very talented. They met at the Wakan Temple, and the two of them discussed the "skit" together.

古文：于时竺法深、孙兴公悉共听。
现代文：当时竺法深和尚、孙兴公等人都去听。
English: At that time, Zou Fazhen Monk, Sun Xinggong and others all went to listen.

古文：此道人语，屡设疑难，林公辩答清析，辞气俱爽。
现代文：这位和尚的谈论，屡次都设下疑难问题，支道林的答辩分析透彻，言辞气概都很爽朗。
English: The discussion of this monk repeatedly posed difficult questions, the defense analysis of the tributary forest was thorough, and the rhetoric was very cheerful.

古文：此道人每辄摧屈。
现代文：这位和尚总是被驳倒。
English: The monk was always overruled.

古文：孙问深公： 上人当是逆风家，向来何以都不言？ 
现代文：孙兴公就问竺法深说： 上人应该是顶风上的人士，刚才为什么一句话也不说？ 
English: Sun Xingguo then asked Gong Fazhen: "Supreme Master should be the person at the top of the wind. Why didn't you say a word just now?

古文：深公笑而不答。
现代文：竺法深笑笑，没有回答。
English: Hao Fa chuckled and did not answer.

古文：林公曰： 白旃檀非不馥，焉能逆风？ 
现代文：支道林接口说： 白檀香并不是不香，但逆风怎能闻到香呢！ 
English: The tributary forest interface said: White sandalwood is not fragrant, but how can the headwind smell the fragrance!

古文：深公得此义，夷然不屑。
现代文：竺法深体会到这话的含义，坦然自若。置之不理。
English: Hao Fa deeply understood the meaning of these words and calmly ignored them.

古文：孙安国往殷中军许共论，往反精苦，客主无闲。
现代文：孙安国到中军将军殷浩处一起清谈，两人来回辩驳，精心竭力，宾主都无懈可击。
English: Sun An Guo went to the Chinese General Yin Hao's place to have a clear talk. The two men argued back and forth and made every effort. The guests were impeccable.

古文：左右进食，冷而复暖者数四。
现代文：侍候的人端上饭菜也顾不得吃，饭菜凉了又热，热了又凉，这样已经好几遍了。
English: The waiters don't care if you eat the food. The food is cold and hot, hot and cold, and this has happened several times.

古文：彼我奋掷麈尾，悉脱落，满餐饭中。
现代文：双方奋力甩动着拂尘，以致拂尘的毛全部脱落，饭菜上都落满了。
English: Both sides struggled to shake the dustpan, so that all the hair of the dustpan fell off, and the meal was full.

古文：宾主遂至莫忘食。
现代文：宾主竟然到傍晚也没想起吃饭。
English: The guest did not even think about eating until the evening.

古文：殷乃语孙曰： 卿莫作强口马，我当穿卿鼻。 
现代文：殷浩便对孙安国说： 你不要做硬嘴马，我就要穿你鼻子了！ 
English: Yin Hao then said to Sun An Guo: Don't be a hard-mouthed horse, I'm going to pierce your nose!

古文：孙曰： 卿不见决鼻牛，人当穿卿颊。 
现代文：孙安国接口说： 你没见挣破鼻子的牛吗，当心人家会穿你的腮帮子！ 
English: Sun Anguo said: "Have you not seen the cow that broke its nose? Beware that people will wear your beards!"

古文：庄子逍遥篇，旧是难处，诸名贤所可钻味，也而不能拔理于郭、向之外。
现代文：《庄子·逍遥游》一篇，历来是个难点，名流们全部可以钻研、玩味，可是对它的义理的阐述却不能超出郭象和向秀。
English: "Zhuang Zi·Walking Tour" has always been a difficult point, celebrities can all study and play, but the exposition of its meaning can not exceed Guo Xiang and Xiang Xiu.

古文：支道林在白马寺中，将冯太常共语，因及逍遥。
现代文：有一次，支道林在白马寺里，和太常冯怀一起谈论，便谈到《逍遥游》。
English: On one occasion, when Shidolin was at the White Horse Temple, he was talking with Tai Chang Feng Huai, and they talked about "Wanderlust."

古文：支卓然标新理于二家之表，立异义于众贤之外，皆是诸名贤寻味之所不得。
现代文：支道林在郭、向两家的见解之外，卓越地揭示出新颖的义理，在众名流之外提出了特异的见解，这都是诸名流探求、玩味中没能得到的。
English: In addition to the views of Guo and Xiang, Shidolin brilliantly revealed a novel meaning, and put forward a unique view in addition to many celebrities, which was not obtained in the exploration and play of many celebrities.

古文：后遂用支理。
现代文：后来解释《逍遥游》便采用支道林阐明的义理。
English: Later, the interpretation of "Walkabout" adopted the principles expounded by Shidolin.

古文：殷中军尝至刘尹所清言。良久，殷理小屈，游辞不已，刘亦不复答。
现代文：中军将军殷浩曾到丹阳尹刘惔那里去清谈，谈了很久，殷浩有点理亏，就不住地用些浮辞来应对，刘淡也不再答辩。
English: The Chinese general Yin Hao once went to Danyang to have a clear talk with Yin Liu Yao, and the talk lasted for a long time. Yin Hao was a bit unreasonable, so he couldn't help but use some flattering words to respond, and Liu Tan no longer replied.

古文：殷去后，乃云： 田舍儿，强学人作尔馨语。 
现代文：殷浩走了以后，刘惔就说： 乡巴佬，硬要学别人发这样的议论！ 
English: After Yin Hao left, Liu Yao said: Country bumpkin, you must learn from others to make such a discussion!

古文：殷中军虽思虑通长，然于才性偏精。
现代文：中军将军殷浩虽然才思精深广阔，可是独对才性问题最为精到。
English: Although the Chinese general Yin Hao's talent is profound and broad, he is the most proficient in dealing with talent issues.

古文：忽言及四本，便苦汤池铁城，无可攻之势。
现代文：他随便地谈到《四本论》，便像汤他铁城，使人找不到可以进攻的机会。
English: When he casually talked about the Four Treatises, he was like a tower of steel, making people unable to find opportunities to attack.

古文：支道林造即色论，论成，示王中郎。
现代文：支道林和尚写了《即色论》，写好了，拿给北中郎将王坦之看。
English: Shidolin Monk wrote "Theory of Immediate Color," and when it was finished, he showed it to Kitanakura, who read it aloud.

古文：中郎都无言。
现代文：王坦之一句话也没说。
English: Wang Tan did not say a single word.

古文：支曰： 默而识之乎？ 
现代文：支道林说： 你是默记在心吧？ 
English: Shidolin said, "You memorized it, didn't you?

古文：王曰： 既无文殊，谁能见赏？ 
现代文：王坦之说： 既然没有文殊菩萨在这里、谁能赏识我的用意呢！ 
English: Wang Tianzhi said, "Since there is no Manjusri Bodhisattva here, who can appreciate my intention?"

古文：王逸少作会稽，初至，支道林在焉。
现代文：王逸少出任会稽内史，初到任，支道林也在郡里。
English: Wang Yishao has served as the auditor of the internal history of the association, the first to arrive, and the branch forest is also in the county.

古文：孙兴公谓王曰： 支道林拔新领异，胸怀所及，乃自佳，卿欲见不？ 
现代文：孙兴公对王逸少说： 支道林的见解新颖，对问题有独到的体会，心里所考虑的实在美妙，你想见见他吗？ 
English: Sun Xinggong said to Wang Yishao: Shidolin's insights are novel, he has a unique understanding of the problem, and what he has in mind is really wonderful. Do you want to meet him?

古文：王本自有一往隽气，殊自轻之。后孙与支共载往王许，王都领域，不与交言。
现代文：王逸少本来就有超人的气质，很轻视支道林，后来孙兴公和支道林一起坐车到王逸少那里，王总是着意矜持，不和他交谈。
English: Wang Yishao originally had a superhuman temperament and despised the tributary forest. Later, Sun Xinggong and the tributary forest took a car together to go to Wang Yishao. Wang was always deliberately reserved and did not talk to him.

古文：须臾支退，后正值王当行，车已在门。支语王曰： 君未可去，贫道与君小语。 
现代文：不一会儿支道林就告退了。后来有一次正碰上王逸少要外出，车子已经在门外等着，支道林对王逸少说： 您还不能走，我想和您稍微谈论一下。 
English: After a while, the branch road forest retreated. Later, there was a time when Wang Yishao was about to go out, and the car was already waiting outside the door. The branch road forest said to Wang Yishao: You can't go yet, I want to talk to you a little.

古文：因论庄子逍遥游。
现代文：于是就谈论到《庄子·逍遥游》。
English: This led to a discussion of "Zhuang Zi·Walkabout."

古文：支作数千言，才藻新奇，花烂映发。
现代文：支道林一谈起来，洋洋数千言，才气不凡，辞藻新奇，像繁花灿烂，交映生辉。
English: When it comes to branch roads, there are thousands of words, extraordinary talent, new words, like brilliant flowers, and brilliant interplay.

古文：王遂披襟解带，留连不能已。
现代文：王逸少终于脱下外衣不再出门，并且留恋不止。
English: Wang Yishao finally took off his coat and stopped going out, and he has never stopped missing her.

古文：三乘佛家滞义，支道林分判，使三乘炳然。
现代文：三乘的教义是佛教中很难讲解的，支道林登座宣讲，详加辨析，使三乘内容显豁。
English: The doctrine of the Three Meridians is difficult to explain in Buddhism. Shidolin preached from the pulpit and made a detailed analysis to make the content of the Three Meridians clear.

古文：诸人在下坐听，皆云可通。
现代文：大家在下座听讲，都说能够理解。
English: Everyone in the audience said they could understand it.

古文：支下坐，自共说，正当得两，入三便乱。
现代文：支道林离开讲坛后，大家自己互相说解，又只能解通两乘，进入三乘便混乱了。
English: After Shidolin left the pulpit, everyone explained things to each other on their own. They were only able to decipher the two-way street, and when they entered the three-way street, they were confused.

古文：今义弟子虽传，犹不尽得。
现代文：现在的三乘教义，弟子们虽然传习，仍然不能全部理解。
English: The current doctrine of the Three Jewels, although taught by disciples, is still not fully understood.

古文：许掾年少时，人以比王苟子，许大不平。
现代文：司徒掾许询年轻时，人们拿他和王苟子并列，许询非常不服气。
English: When he was young, people put him on the same level as Wang Guozi. Xu Xu was very disappointed.

古文：时诸人士及于法师并在会稽西寺讲，王亦在焉。
现代文：当时许多名上和支道林法师一起在会稽的西寺讲沦，王苟子也在那里。
English: At that time, there were many famous people who were preaching together with Shidolin Mage in the West Temple of the Association, and Wang Guozi was also there.

古文：许意甚忿，便往西寺与王论理，共决优劣。
现代文：许询心里很不平，便到西寺去和王苟子辩论玄理，要一决胜负。
English: Uneasy in his heart, Xu En went to the West Temple to debate the metaphysics with Wang Guozi, hoping to win in a showdown.

古文：苦相折挫，王遂大屈。
现代文：许询极力要挫败对方，结果王苟子被彻底驳倒。
English: Xu Enquirer tried his best to frustrate the other side, and as a result, Wang Guozi was thoroughly refuted.

古文：许复执王理，王执许理，更相覆疏；王复屈。
现代文：接着许询又反过来用王苟子的义理，王苟子用许询的义理，再度互相反复陈说，王苟子又被驳倒。
English: Next, Xu Enquirer in turn used Wang Gongzi's theory of justice, Wang Gongzi used Xu Enquirer's theory of justice, and they repeated each other again, Wang Gongzi was refuted again.

古文：许谓支法师曰： 弟子向语何似？ 
现代文：许询就问支法师说： 弟子刚才的谈论怎么样？ 
English: Upon further inquiry, the sorcerer said, "What about what your disciple just said?

古文：支从容曰： 君语佳则佳矣，何至相苦邪？
现代文：支道林从容地回答说： 你的谈论好是好，但是何至于要互相困辱呢？
English: Shidolin calmly replied, "It's all right for you to talk, but why do you have to humiliate each other?

古文：岂是求理中之谈哉！ 
现代文：这哪里是探求真理的谈法啊！ 
English: What a way to talk about the search for truth!

古文：林道人诣谢公，东阳时始总角，新病起，体未堪劳。与林公讲论，遂至相苦。
现代文：支道林和尚去拜访谢安。当时东阳太守谢朗还年幼，病刚好，身体还禁不起劳累，和支道林一起研讨、辩论玄理，终于弄到互相困辱的地步。
English: At that time, Dongyang Daju Xie Lang was still young, just ill, and his body could not withstand the fatigue, and he and Shidu Lin discussed and debated the metaphysics together, and finally got to the point of mutual embarrassment.

古文：母王夫人在壁后听之，再遣信令还，而太傅留之。
现代文：他母亲王夫人在隔壁房中听见这样，就一再派人叫他进去，可是太傅谢安把他留住。
English: His mother, Mrs. Wang, who was in the next room, heard this and repeatedly sent someone to call him in, but Taifu Xie'an stopped him.

古文：王夫人因自出云： 新妇少遭家难，一生所寄，唯在此儿。 
现代文：王夫人便只好亲自出来，说： 我早年寡居，一辈子的寄托，只在这孩子身上。 
English: Mrs. Wang had no choice but to come out in person and say: I was widowed at an early age, and I have relied on this child my entire life.

古文：因流涕抱儿以归。
现代文：于是流着泪把儿子抱回去了。
English: With tears streaming down her face, she took her son back.

古文：谢公语同坐曰： 家嫂辞情慷慨，致可传述，恨不使朝士见。 
现代文：谢安告诉同座的人说： 家嫂言辞情意部很激愤，很值得传诵，可惜没能让朝官听见！ 
English: Xie An told the audience: My sister-in-law's words and sentiments were very angry and worth reciting, but unfortunately she couldn't make the imperial officials hear!

古文：支道林、许掾诸人共在会稽王斋头。支为法师，许为都讲。
现代文：支道林和司徒椽许询等人一同在会稽王的书房里讲解佛经，支道林为主讲法师，许询做都讲。
English: Shidolin and Stutzon Hsuan, along with others, explained Buddhist scriptures in the auditor's study. Shidolin was the main lecturer, while Hsuan did all the talking.

古文：支通一义，四坐莫不厌心。许送一难，众人莫不抃舞。
现代文：支道林每阐明一个义理，满座的人没有不满意的；许询每提出一个疑难，大家也无不高兴得手舞足蹈。
English: Every time Shidolin expounded a principle, the audience was not dissatisfied; every time Xu Ying raised a problem, everyone was happy to dance.

古文：但共嗟咏二家之美，不辩其理之所在。
现代文：大家只是一齐赞扬两家辞采的精妙，并不去辨别两家义理表现在什么地方。
English: Everyone just praises the sophistication of the rhetoric of the two schools, and does not distinguish where the two schools of righteousness are manifested.

古文：谢车骑在安西艰中，林道人往就语，将夕乃退。有人道上见者，问云： 公何处来？ 
现代文：车骑将军谢玄还在服父丧期间，支道林和尚就去他家和他谈玄，太阳快下山了才告辞出来。有人在路上碰见支道林，问道： 林公从哪里来呀？ 
English: During the period when General Xie Xuan was still in mourning for his father, a monk from Shidolin went to his house to talk to him about Xuan. The sun was about to set before he said goodbye. Someone met Shidolin on the road and asked: Where did Lin Gong come from?

古文：答云： 今日与谢孝剧谈一出来。 
现代文：支道林回答说： 今天和谢孝畅谈了一番呢。 
English: Shidolin replied, "I had a good talk with Xie Xiaolu today.

古文：支道林初从东出，住东安寺中。
现代文：支道林刚从会稽来到建康时，住在东安寺里。
English: When Shidolin first came to Jiankang from the Association, he lived in Dongan Temple.

古文：王长史宿构精理，并撰其才藻，往与支语，不大当对。
现代文：左长史王濛事先想好精微的义理，并且想好富有才情、文采的言辞，去和支道林清谈，可是和支道林的谈论不大相称。
English: Zuochang Shi Wangyao thought about the subtle principles of righteousness in advance, and thought about the talented and literary words to talk with the branch forest, but the discussion with the branch forest was not appropriate.

古文：王叙致作数百语，自谓是名理奇藻。
现代文：王濛作长篇论述，自以为讲的是至理名言，用的是奇丽辞藻。
English: Wang Hui made a long exposition, thinking that he was talking about wise sayings, using fancy words.

古文：支徐徐谓曰： 身与君别多年，君义言了不长进。 
现代文：支道林听后，慢吞吞地对他说： 我和您分别多年，看来你在义理、言辞两方面全都没有长进。 
English: After listening, Shidolin slowly said to him, "I have been separated from you for many years. It seems that you have not progressed at all in terms of righteousness and words.

古文：王大惭而退。
现代文：王濛非常惭愧地告辞走了。
English: Wang Yao resigned with great shame and left.

古文：殷中军读小品，下二百签，皆是精微，世之幽滞。
现代文：中军将军殷浩读佛经《小品》，很多地方有疑难，加了二百张字条标明，这些都是精深奥妙的地方，是当时隐晦难明的。
English: When the Chinese general Yin Hao read the Buddhist sutra "Small Piece," he added two hundred notes to indicate that there were difficulties in many places. These were profound and mysterious places, which were obscure at the time.

古文：尝欲与支道林辩之，竟不得。
现代文：殷浩曾经想和支道林辩明这些问题，终究不能如愿。
English: Yin Hao once wanted to clarify these issues with the branch line forest, but in the end he couldn't.

古文：今小品犹存。
现代文：现在《小品》还保存下来。
English: Now the "skit" has been preserved.

古文：佛经以为袪练神明，则圣人可致。
现代文：佛经认为摆脱烦恼、修练智慧，就可以成佛。
English: Buddhist scriptures believe that if you get rid of your worries and cultivate wisdom, you can become a Buddha.

古文：简文云： 不知便可登峰造极不？
现代文：简文帝说： 不知是否就可以达到最高的境界？
English: Emperor Jianwen said: I wonder if it is possible to reach the highest level?

古文：然陶练之功，尚不可诬。 
现代文：然而，道家陶冶锻炼的功效，还是不可以抹杀的。 
English: However, the effectiveness of Taoist training cannot be denied.

古文：于法开始与支公争名，后精渐归支，意甚不忿，遂遁迹剡下。
现代文：于法开和尚起初和支道林争名，后来大家的心意逐渐倾向于支道林，他心里非常不服气，便到剡县隐居起来。
English: At first, Yu Fakai, the monk, disputed the name with the tributary forest. Later, everyone's mind gradually inclined to the tributary forest. He was very unconvinced and went to live in seclusion in Jixian.

古文：遣弟子出都，语使过会稽。于时支公正讲小品。
现代文：有一次，于怯开派弟子到京都去，吩咐弟子经过会稽山阴县，那时支道林正在那里宣讲佛经例、品》。
English: On one occasion, Yu Qiaokai sent a disciple to Kyoto and ordered him to go through Shanyin County, where Shidolin was preaching the sutras at the time.

古文：开戒弟子： 道林讲，比汝至，当在某品中。 因示语攻难数十番，云： 旧此中不可复通。 
现代文：于法开提醒他的弟子说： 道林开讲《小品》，等你到达时，就该讲某品了 于是给弟子示范，告诉他来回数十次的攻洁辩难，并且说： 过去这里面的问题不可能比我讲的更明白了。 
English: Yu Fakai reminded his disciple, "Dawlin is starting to talk about "Small Pieces," and by the time you arrive, it's time to talk about a certain piece." So he gave his disciple a demonstration, telling him to go back and forth dozens of times, and said, "In the past, the problems in this couldn't have been more clear than what I said.

古文：弟子如言诣支公。
现代文：弟子照他的嘱咐去拜访支道林。
English: The disciple followed his instructions and went to visit the branch forest.

古文：正值讲，因谨述开意。往反多时，林公遂屈。
现代文：正好碰上支道林宣讲，便小心地陈述于法开的见解，两人来回辨论了很久，支道林终于辩输了。
English: Just as he came across the branch road forest propaganda, he carefully stated his views on the law. The two argued back and forth for a long time, and the branch road forest finally lost the argument.

古文：厉声曰： 君何足复受人寄载！ 
现代文：于是厉声说： 您何苦又给人托运呢！ 
English: Then he snapped: "Why do you go to the trouble of shipping it to someone!

古文：殷中军问： 自然无心于禀受。何以正善人少，恶人多？ 
现代文：中军将军殷浩问道： 大自然赋予人类什么样的天性，本来是无心的，为什么世上恰恰好人少，坏人多？ 
English: Yin Hao, a Chinese general, asked: What kind of nature does nature give to human beings, which was originally unintentional? Why are there fewer good people and more bad people in the world?

古文：诸人莫有言者。
现代文：在座的人没有谁回答得了。
English: No one in the room could answer.

古文：刘尹答曰： 譬如写水著地，正自纵横流漫，略无正方圆者。 
现代文：只有丹阳尹刘淡回答说： 这好比把水倾泻地上，水只是四处流淌、绝没有恰好流成方形或圆形的。 
English: Only Danyang Yin Liu Tan replied: "It's like pouring water on the ground, the water just flows around, it never just flows into a square or a circle.

古文：一时绝叹，以为名通。
现代文：当时大家非常赞赏，认为是名言通论。
English: At that time, everyone was very appreciative and considered it to be a famous saying.

古文：康僧渊初过江，未有知者，恒周旋市肆，乞索以自营。
现代文：康僧渊刚到江南的时候，还没有人了解他、经常在街市商场上徘徊，靠乞讨来养活自己。
English: When Kang Sooyuan first arrived in the south of the Yangtze River, no one knew anything about him. He often wandered the streets and shopping malls, and supported himself by begging.

古文：忽往殷渊源许，值盛有宾客，殷使坐，粗与寒温，遂及义理。
现代文：一次，他突然到殷渊源家去，正碰上有很多宾客在座，殷渊源让他坐下，和他稍为寒暄了几句，便谈及义理。
English: On one occasion, he suddenly went to Yin Yuan Yuan's home, where he found many guests present. Yin Yuan Yuan asked him to sit down, exchanged a few words of greeting with him, and then talked about Giri.

古文：语言辞旨，曾无愧色。领略粗举，一往参诣。
现代文：康僧渊的言谈意趣，竟然毫无愧色；不管是有深刻领会的，还是粗略提出的义理，都是他一向深入钻研过的。
English: There is no shame in Kang Sangyuan's words and meaning; whether he has a profound understanding or a rough understanding, he has always studied in depth.

古文：由是知之。
现代文：正是由于这次清谈，大家才了解了他。
English: It was because of this frank talk that everyone got to know him.

古文：殷、谢诸人共集。
现代文：殷浩、谢安等人聚会在一起。
English: Yin Hao, Xie An and others gather together.

古文：谢因问殷： 眼往属万形，万形来入眼不？ 
现代文：谢安便问殷浩： 人们用眼睛去看一切物象，一切物象是否就会进入眼睛呢？ 
English: Xie An then asked Yin Hao: People use their eyes to see all objects, do all objects enter the eyes?

古文：人有问殷中军： 何以将得位而梦棺器，将得财而梦矢秽？ 
现代文：有人间中军将军殷浩： 为什么将要得到官爵就梦见棺材，将要得到钱财就梦见粪便？ 
English: Some people said to the Chinese general Yin Hao: Why is it that when you want to get a peerage, you dream of a coffin, and when you want to get money, you dream of excrement?

古文：殷曰： 官本是臭腐，所以将得而梦棺尸；财本是粪土，所以将得而梦秽污。 
现代文：殷浩回答说： 官爵本来就是腐臭的东西，因此将要得到它时就梦见棺材尸体；钱财本来就是粪土，因此将要得到它时就梦见肮脏的东西。 
English: Yin Hao replied, "A peerage is a rancid thing by nature, so when you are about to receive it, you dream of a coffin corpse; money is a filthy thing by nature, so when you are about to receive it, you dream of a filthy thing.

古文：时人以为名通。
现代文：当时的人认为这是名言通论。
English: People at the time thought it was a common saying.

古文：殷中军被废东阳，始看佛经。
现代文：中军将军殷浩被免职，迁到东阳郡，这才看佛经。
English: The Chinese general Yin Hao was removed from his post and moved to Dongyang County.

古文：初视维摩诘，疑般若波罗密太多，后见小品，恨此语少。
现代文：开始看《维摩诘经》，怀疑 般若波罗密 这句话大多了；后来看《小品》，已经了解了这句话的意旨，又可惜这样的话太少了。
English: At first, I read "Vima Sutra" and doubted "Pranya Paramita," which was the most common sentence; later, I read "Sketch" and understood the meaning of this sentence, but unfortunately, there were too few such words.

古文：支道林、殷渊源俱在相王许。相王谓二人： 可试一交言。
现代文：支道林、殷渊源都在相王府中，相王对两人说道： 你们可以试着辩论一下。
English: Both the branch road forest and the Yinyuan source are in the king's palace, and the king said to the two: You can try to debate.

古文：而才性殆是渊源崤、函之固，君其慎焉！ 
现代文：可是才性关系问题恐怕是渊源的坚固堡垒，您可要谨慎啊！ 
English: But I'm afraid that the talent relationship issue is a strong fortress of the source. You have to be careful!

古文：支初作，改辙远之，数四交，不觉入其玄中。
现代文：支道林开始论述问题时，便改变方向，远远辟开才性问题；可是论辩了几个回合，便不觉进入了渊源的玄理之中。
English: When Shidolin began to discuss the problem, he changed direction and moved far away from the talent problem; however, after several rounds of discussion, he unconsciously entered the source of the mystery.

古文：相王抚肩笑曰： 此自是其胜场，安可争锋！ 
现代文：相王拍着肩膀笑道： 这本来是他的特长，你怎么可以和他争胜呢！ 
English: Ai Wang patted his shoulder and smiled, "This was originally his specialty, how can you compete with him!"

古文：谢公因子弟集聚，问毛诗何句最佳？
现代文：谢安趁子侄们聚会在一起的时候，问道： 《诗经》里面哪一句最好？ 
English: Taking advantage of the time when his nephews and nieces were gathered together, Xie An asked: "Which sentence in the Book of Songs is the best?"

古文：遏称曰： 昔我往矣，杨柳依依；今我来思，雨雪霏霏。 
现代文：谢玄称赞说： 最好的是 昔我往矣，杨柳依依；今我来思，雨雪霏霏。  
English: Xie Xuan praised and said: The best thing is that I used to go to the willow tree; now I come to think that it is raining and snowing.

古文：公曰： 訏谟定命，远猷辰告。 
现代文：谢安说： 应该是 訏谟定命，远猷辰告 最好。 
English: Xie An said, "It is best to be certain of one's fate, and announce it at an early hour.

古文：谓此句偏有雅人深致。
现代文：他认为这一句特别有高雅之土的深远意趣。
English: He believes that this sentence has a particularly profound meaning of "elegant soil."

古文：张凭举孝廉出都，负其才气，谓必参时彦。
现代文：张凭察举为孝廉后，到京都去，他仗着自己有才气，认为必定能厕身名流。
English: After Zhang Bincha was awarded the title of filial piety, he went to Kyoto. He took advantage of his talent and believed that he would be able to become a celebrity.

古文：欲诣刘尹，乡里及同举者共笑之。
现代文：想去拜访丹阳尹刘真长，他的同乡和一同察举的入都笑话他。
English: He wanted to visit Danyang's Yin Liu Zhenchang, but his fellow townspeople and fellow inspectors laughed at him.

古文：张遂诣刘。刘洗濯料事，处之下坐，唯通寒暑，神意不接。
现代文：张凭终于去拜访刘真长，这时刘真长正在洗谬和处理一些事务，就把他安排到下座，只是和他寒暄一下，神态心意都没有注意他。
English: Zhang Biao finally went to visit Liu Zhenlong. At this time, Liu Zhenlong was purging and dealing with some affairs, so he arranged him to the next seat. He only exchanged greetings with him, but did not pay attention to him.

古文：张欲自发无端。
现代文：张凭想自己开个头谈谈，又找下到个话题。
English: Zhang wanted to start a conversation on his own and found a topic.

古文：顷之，长史诸贤来清言。客主有不通处，张乃遥于末坐判之，言约旨远，足畅彼我之怀，一坐皆惊。
现代文：不久，长史王濛等名流来清谈，主客间有不能沟通的地方，张凭便远远地在未座上给他们分析评判，言辞精炼而内容深刻，能够把彼此心意表述明白，满座的人都很惊奇。
English: Not long after, celebrities such as Changshi Wang Yao and others came to have a clear talk. There were places that could not be communicated between the hosts and guests, and Zhang Biao gave them analysis and judgment far away from the table. The words were refined and profound, and they were able to express each other's thoughts clearly. People in the full house were very surprised.

古文：真长延之上坐，清言弥日，因留宿至晓。
现代文：刘真长就请他坐到上座，和他清谈了一整天。于是留他住了一夜。
English: Liu Zhenlong invited him to sit in the upper seat and had a clear conversation with him for the whole day. So he stayed with him for one night.

古文：张退，刘曰： 卿且去，正当取卿共诣抚军。 
现代文：第二天，张凭告辞对，刘真长说： 你暂时回去，我将邀你一起去谒见抚军。 
English: The next day, Zhang said goodbye, and Liu Zhenlong said, "If you go back for a while, I will invite you to go and meet the Fuzhou army."

古文：张还船，同侣问何处宿？张笑而不答。
现代文：张凭回到船上，同伴问他在哪里过夜，张凭笑笑，没有回答。
English: Zhang Biao returned to the ship, his companions asked him where he spent the night, Zhang Biao smiled and did not answer.

古文：须臾，真长遣传教觅张孝廉船，同侣惋愕。
现代文：不一会儿，刘真长派郡吏来找张争廉坐的船，同伴们很惊愕。
English: Soon after, Liu Zhenlong sent county officials to find the boat that Zhang Shenglian was on. His companions were stunned.

古文：即同载诣抚军。
现代文：刘真长当即和他一起坐车去谒见抚军。
English: Liu Zhenlong immediately took a car with him to see the army.

古文：至门，刘前进谓抚军曰： 下官今日为公得一太常博士妙选！ 
现代文：到了大问口，刘真长先进去对抚军说： 下官今天给您找到一个大常博士的最佳人选。 
English: When it came to the big question, Liu Zhenlong went to Fuzhun first and said: "Lower-ranking officer, today I will find you the best candidate for Dr. Dasheng.

古文：既前，抚军与之话言，咨嗟称善曰： 张凭勃窣为理窟。 
现代文：张凭进见后，抚军和他谈话，不住赞叹，连声说好，并说： 张凭才华横溢，是义理篓革之所。 
English: After Zhang Biao's visit, Fuzhuan talked with him, and he kept praising him, and said in unison, "Zhang Biao is full of talent, and is the place where giri is made."

古文：即用为太常博士。
现代文：于是就任用他做太常博士。
English: As a result, he was appointed to the post of Doctor of Philosophy.

古文：汰法师云：  六通 、 三明 同归，正异名耳。 
现代文：汰法师说： 六通和三明同一指归，只是名称不同罢了。 
English: The sorcerer said, "Rikutsu and Sanmei are the same, but their names are different.

古文：支道林、许、谢盛德，共集王家。
现代文：支道林、许询、谢安诸位品德高尚人士，一起到王濛家聚会。
English: Shidolin, Xu Enquiry, and Xie An, all persons of high moral character, gathered together at Wang Xuan's house.

古文：谢顾谓诸人： 今日可谓彦会，时既不可留，此集固亦难常。当共言咏，以写其怀。 
现代文：谢安环顾左右对大家说： 今天可以说是贤士雅会。时光既不可挽留，这样的聚会当然也难常有，我们应该一起谈论吟咏，来抒发我们的情怀。 
English: Looking around, Xie An said to everyone: Today can be said to be a wise and elegant meeting. Time is irreplaceable, of course, such a gathering is rare, we should talk about the Jing'an together to express our feelings.

古文：许便问主人有庄子不？正得渔父一篇。
现代文：许询便问主人有没有《庄子》这部书，主人只找到《渔父》一篇。
English: Xu Enquiry then asked the owner if there was a "Zhuang Zi" book. The owner only found a copy of "The Fisherman."

古文：谢看题，便各使四坐通。
现代文：谢安看了题目，便叫大家一个个讲解其义理。
English: Xie An read the topic and asked everyone to explain its meaning one by one.

古文：支道林先通，作七百许语，叙致精丽，才藻奇拔，众咸称善。
现代文：支道林先讲解，说了七百来句后，说解义理精妙优美，才情辞藻新奇拔俗，大家全都赞好。
English: Shidolin explained first, and after speaking seven hundred sentences, the explanation of the meaning was exquisite and beautiful, and the words were novel and unconventional, and everyone was pleased.

古文：于是四坐各言怀毕。
现代文：于是在座的人各自谈完了自己的体会。
English: So everyone here has finished talking about their own experiences.

古文：谢问曰： 卿等尽不？ 
现代文：这时谢安问道： 你们说完了没有？ 
English: At this time, Xie An asked: Have you finished talking?

古文：皆曰： 今日之言，少不自竭。 
现代文：都说： 今天的谈论，很少有保留，没有不尽意的了。 
English: They all said: Today's discussion, with few reservations, is not unsatisfactory.

古文：谢后粗难，因自叙其意，作万余语，才峰秀逸。既自难干，加意气拟托，萧然自得，四坐莫不厌心。
现代文：谢安然后大致提出，一些疑问，便畅谈自己的意见，洋洋万余言，才思敏锐高妙，特异超俗，这已经是难以企及了，加上情意有所比拟、寄托，潇洒自如，满座的人无下心悦诚服。
English: Xie An then roughly put forward some doubts, and then talked about his own opinions freely, with a lot of words, his mind was sharp and brilliant, and he was unique and extraordinary, which was already difficult to achieve. In addition, he had a feeling of comparison and trust, he was cool and at ease, and everyone in the audience was deeply impressed and convinced.

古文：支谓谢曰： 君一往奔诣，故复自佳耳。 
现代文：支道林对谢安说： 您一向抓紧钻研，自然很优异呀！ 
English: Shidolin said to Xie An: You have always paid close attention to your studies, so naturally you are very excellent!

古文：殷中军、孙安国、王、谢能言诸贤，悉在会稽王许。
现代文：中军将军殷浩、孙安国、王濛、谢尚等擅长清谈的名士，全在会稽王官邸聚会。
English: Chinese military generals Yin Hao, Sun An Guo, Wang Qi, Xie Shang and other famous people who are good at talking, all gathered at the official residence of King He.

古文：殷与孙共论易象妙于见形。孙语道合，意气干云。
现代文：殷浩和孙安国两人一起辩论《易象妙于见形论》一文，孙安国把它和道家思想结合起来谈论时，显得意气高昂。
English: Together, Yin Hao and Sun Anguo debated the article "It is easier to imagine than to see," and when Sun Anguo discussed it in combination with Taoist thought, he appeared high-spirited.

古文：一坐咸不安孙理，而辞不能屈。
现代文：满座的人都觉得孙安国的道理不妥，可是又不能驳倒他。
English: A full house of people felt that Sun An Guo's reasoning was not appropriate, but they could not refute him.

古文：会稽王慨然叹曰： 使真长来，故应有以制彼。 
现代文：会稽王很有感慨地叹息道： 如果刘真长来了，自然会有办法制服他。 
English: The auditor sighed with great emotion, "If Liu Zhenlong comes, there will naturally be a way to subdue him."

古文：既迎真长，孙意己不如。
现代文：随即派人去接刘真长，这时孙安国料到自己会辩不过。
English: He immediately sent someone to pick up Liu Zhenlong, at which time Sun Anguo anticipated that he would have an argument.

古文：真长既至，先令孙自叙本理。
现代文：刘真长来后，先叫孙安国谈谈自己原先的道理。
English: After Liu Zhenlong came, he first asked Sun Anguo to talk about his original reason.

古文：孙粗说己语，亦觉殊不及向。
现代文：孙安国大致复述一下自己的言论，也觉得很不如刚才所讲的。
English: Sun Anguo roughly retold his own remarks, and also felt that it was not as good as what he had just said.

古文：刘便作二百许语，辞难简切，孙理遂屈。
现代文：刘真长便发表了二百来句话，论述和质疑都很简明、贴切，孙安国的道理便被驳倒了。
English: Liu Zhenlong then published two hundred sentences, the discussion and questioning were very concise and appropriate, and Sun An Guo's theory was refuted.

古文：一坐同时拊掌而笑，称美良久。
现代文：满座的入同时拍手欢笑，赞美不已。
English: The full house clapped, laughed and applauded.

古文：僧意在瓦官寺中，王苟子来，与共语，便使其唱理。
现代文：僧意住在瓦官寺，王苟子到来，和他一起谈玄理，便让他先开个头。
English: The monk wanted to stay at the Wakan Temple, but when Wang Gouzi arrived, he wanted to talk about metaphysics with him, so he let him go first.

古文：意谓王曰： 圣人有情不？ 
现代文：僧意问王苟子： 佛有感情没有？ 
English: A monk asked Wang Guozi: Does the Buddha have feelings?

古文：王曰： 无。 
现代文：王说： 没有 。
English: And the king said, Nay.

古文：重问曰： 圣人如柱邪？ 
现代文：僧意又问道： 那么佛像柱子一样吗？ 
English: The monk then asked, "So, is a Buddha statue the same as a pillar?"

古文：王曰： 如筹算，虽无情，运之者有情。 
现代文：王说： 像筹码，虽然没有感情，可是使用它的入有感情。 
English: Wang said: Like a chip, although there is no emotion, there is emotion in using it.

古文：僧意云： 谁运圣人邪？ 
现代文：僧意又问： 谁来使用佛呢？ 
English: The monk then asked, "Who will use the Buddha?"

古文：苟子不得答而去。
现代文：王苟子回答不了就走了。
English: Wang Gongzi could not answer and left.

古文：司马太傅问谢车骑： 惠子其书五车，何以无一言入玄？ 
现代文：太傅司马道于问车骑将军谢玄： 惠子所著的书有五车之多，为什么没有一句话涉及玄言？ 
English: Daifu Sima asked the chariot and cavalry general Xie Xuan: There are as many as five chariots in the book written by Keiko, why is there not a single sentence involving gossip?

古文：谢曰： 故当是其妙处不传。 
现代文：谢玄回答说： 这当然是因为玄言的精微处难以言传。 
English: Xie Xuan replied: Of course, this is because the subtleties of the secret speech are difficult to tell.

古文：殷中军被废，徙东阳，大读佛经，皆精解。唯至 事数 处不解。
现代文：中军将军殷浩被罢官后，迁居东阳，大读佛经，都能精通其义理，只有读到事数处理解不了、便用字条标上。
English: After the Chinese general Yin Hao was dismissed from his post, he moved to Dongyang and read Buddhist scriptures extensively. He was able to master their principles, but when he read that he could not understand the number of events, he marked them with a note.

古文：遇见一道人，问所签，便释然。
现代文：后来碰见一个和尚，就把标出的问题拿来请教，便都解决了。
English: Later, when he met a monk, he asked him for advice on the problems he had marked, and they were all solved.

古文：殷仲堪精核玄论，人谓莫不研究。
现代文：殷仲堪深入地考究了道家的学说，人们认为他没有哪方面不研究的。
English: Yin Zhongkan deeply studied the teachings of Taoism, and it is believed that there is nothing that he has not studied.

古文：殷乃叹曰： 使我解四本，谈不翅尔。 
现代文：殷仲堪却叹息说： 如果我能解说《四本论》，言谈就不只是现在这样了！ 
English: However, Yin Zhongkan sighed and said, "If I could explain the Four Treatises, the discussion would not be just like this!

古文：殷荆州曾问远公： 易以何为体？ 
现代文：荆州刺史殷仲堪问惠远和尚： 《周易》用什么做本体？ 
English: Huiyuan Monk: What is the body of "Zhou Yi" made of?

古文：答曰： 易以感为体。 
现代文：惠远回答说： 《周易》用感应做本体。 
English: Huiyuan replied: "Zhou Yi" uses induction to make the body.

古文：殷曰： 铜山西崩，灵钟东应，便是易耶？ 
现代文：殷又问： 西边的铜山崩塌了，东边的灵钟就有感应，这就是《周易》吗？ 
English: Yin also asked: The copper mountain in the west has collapsed, and the bell in the east has been activated. Is this "Zhou Yi"?

古文：远公笑而不答。
现代文：惠远笑着没有回答。
English: Huiyuan smiled and did not answer.

古文：羊孚弟娶王永言女。
现代文：羊孚的弟弟羊辅娶王永言的女儿为妻。
English: Yang Fu's brother, Yang Fu, married Wang Yongyan's daughter.

古文：及王家见婿，孚送弟俱往。
现代文：当王家要接待女婿的时候，羊孚亲自送他弟弟到王家。
English: When the royal family wanted to receive the son-in-law, Yang Fu personally sent his brother to the royal family.

古文：时永言父东阳尚在，殷仲堪是东阳女婿，亦在坐。
现代文：这时王永言的父亲王临之还活着，殷仲堪是王临之的女婿，也在座。
English: At this time, Wang Yongyan's father Wang Linzhi was still alive, and Yin Zhongkan, Wang Linzhi's son-in-law, was also present.

古文：孚雅善理义，乃与仲堪道齐物。
现代文：羊孚很擅长名理，便和殷仲堪谈论《庄子·齐物论》。
English: Yang Fu is very good at name theory, so he and Yin Zhongkang talked about "Zhuangzi · Qi Materialism."

古文：殷难之，羊云： 君四番后，当得见同。 
现代文：殷仲堪反驳了羊孚的见解，羊孚说： 您经过四个回合后将要见到彼此的见解相同。 
English: Yin Zhongkang refuted Yang Fu's opinion, and Yang Fu said: You will see that after four rounds, you will have the same opinion as each other.

古文：殷笑曰： 乃可得尽，何必相同？ 
现代文：殷仲堪笑着说： 只能说尽，为什么一定会相同！ 
English: Yin Zhongkan said with a smile: I can only say why it must be the same!

古文：乃至四番后一通。
现代文：等到四个回合后两人见解竟然相通了。
English: After four rounds, the two men's opinions actually converged.

古文：殷咨嗟曰： 仆便无以相异。 
现代文：殷仲堪感慨他说： 这样，我就没有什么见解跟你不同了！ 
English: Yin Zhongkan said with emotion, "In this way, I don't have any different opinions from you!

古文：叹为新拔者久之。
现代文：并且久久地赞叹羊孚是后起之秀。
English: And he has been praising Yang Fu as a rising star for a long time.

古文：殷仲堪云： 三日不读道德经，便觉舌本闲强。 
现代文：殷仲堪说： 三天下读《道德经，就会觉得舌根发硬。 
English: Yin Zhongkan said, "If you read the Tao Te Ching for three days, you will feel that your tongue is hard.

古文：提婆初至，为东亭第讲阿毗昙。
现代文：提婆刚到京都不久，就被请到东亭侯工地家讲解《阿毗昙经。
English: Shortly after arriving in Kyoto, Deva was invited to the Higashiteiho construction site to give a lecture on the Abhidharma Sutra.

古文：始发讲，坐裁半，僧弥便云： 都已晓。 
现代文：刚第一次开讲，僧弥坐到中途就说： 我已经全都懂了。 
English: At the very beginning of the first lecture, the monk said, "I already understand everything," when he was halfway through.

古文：即于坐分数四有意道人更就余屋自讲。
现代文：随即在座中分出几个有见解的和尚，另外到别的房间里自己讲解。
English: He then separated a few monks who had opinions from the rest of the audience, and went to another room to explain himself.

古文：提婆讲竟，东亭问法冈道人曰： 弟子都未解，阿弥那得已解？
现代文：提婆讲完后，王珣法冈和尚道： 弟子还一点也没有理解，阿弥哪能已经理解了呢？
English: After Deva finished speaking, Wang Xi Fa Gang Monk said, "The disciple has not understood at all, how could Ami have understood?

古文：所得云何？ 
现代文：他的心得怎么样？ 
English: How does he feel?

古文：曰： 大略全是，故当小未精核耳。 
现代文：法冈说： 大体上都领会得对，只是稍为不够精密翔实就是了。 
English: Fagaoka said, "In general, I understood everything correctly, but it was just a little bit not precise and detailed enough.

古文：桓南郡与殷荆州共谈，每相攻难。年余后，但一两番。
现代文：南郡公桓玄和荆州刺史殷仲堪在一起谈玄，每每互相辩驳，一年多以后，辩驳少了，只有一两次。
English: Nan County's Gong Huan Xuan and Jing State's Zhi Shi Yin Zhong Kan talked about the occult together and argued with each other. After more than a year, there were fewer arguments, only once or twice.

古文：桓自叹才思转退。殷云： 此乃是君转解。 
现代文：桓玄自己慨叹才思越来越倒退了，殷仲堪说： 这其实是您便加领悟了。 
English: Huan Xuan himself lamented that his thinking had become more and more backward, and Yin Zhongkan said, "Actually, it is you who have come to understand.

古文：文帝尝令东阿王七步中作诗，不成者行大法。
现代文：魏文帝曹丕曾经命令东阿王曹植在七步之内作成一首诗，作不出的话，就要动用死刑。
English: Wei Emperor Cao Pi once ordered Donga King Cao Zhi to compose a poem within seven steps. If he failed to do so, he would be sentenced to death.

古文：应声便为诗曰： 煮豆持作羹，漉菽以为汁。
现代文：曹植应声便作成一诗： 煮豆持作羹，漉菽以为汁。
English: Cao Zhe responded by writing a poem: Boiled beans are used to make soup, and bean paste is used to make soup.

古文：萁在釜下然，豆在釜中泣。本自同根生，相煎何太急？ 
现代文：箕在釜下燃，豆在釜中泣；本自同根生，相煎何太急！ 
English: The stalks are burning under the kettle, the beans are crying in the kettle; they are originally from the same root, what is the hurry to fry them together!

古文：帝深有惭色。
现代文：魏文帝听了深感惭愧。
English: Emperor Wei was deeply ashamed to hear this.

古文：魏朝封晋文王为公，备礼九锡，文王固让不受。
现代文：魏朝封晋文王司马昭为晋公，准备好了加九锡的礼物，司马昭坚决推辞，不肯受命。
English: In the Wei Dynasty, Jinwen King Sima Zhao was enthroned as the new emperor. He had prepared a gift of nine hundred taels of silver. Sima Zhao firmly refused to accept the gift.

古文：公卿将校当诣府敦喻。司空郑冲驰遣信就阮籍求文。
现代文：朝中文武官员将要前往司马昭府第恭请接受，这时司空郑冲赶紧派人到阮籍那里求写劝进文。
English: When the Chinese military officials of the DPRK were about to go to Sima Zhaofu to accept the invitation, Sikyong Zhengchong hurriedly sent someone to Nguyen Quoc to ask him to write a letter of recommendation.

古文：籍时在袁孝尼家，宿醉扶起，书札为之，无所点定，乃写付使。
现代文：阮籍当时在袁孝尼家，隔宿酒醉未醒，被人扶起来，在木札上打草稿，写完，无所改动，就抄好交给了来人。
English: At that time, Ruan Zi was staying at Yuan Xiaoni's house. He was passed out drunk. He was helped to his feet, made a rough draft on a wooden board, wrote it down and handed it over to the visitor without any changes.

古文：时人以为神笔。
现代文：当时人们称他为神笔。
English: At the time, people called him a genius.

古文：左太冲作三都赋初成，时人互有讥訾，思意不惬。
现代文：左恩写《三都赋，刚写完，当时的人交相讥笑非难，左思心里很不舒服。
English: Zuo En wrote "Sandu Fu," and just after he finished writing it, people at the time were mocking and criticizing each other. Zuo En felt very uncomfortable.

古文：后示张公。张曰： 此二京可三，然君文未重于世，宜以经高名之士。 
现代文：后来他把文章拿给张华看，张华说： 这可以和《两都》《二京》鼎足而三。可是您的文章还没有受到世人重视，应当拿去通过名士推荐。 
English: Later, he showed the article to Zhang Hua. Zhang Hua said, "This can be on a par with "Two Cities" and "Two Peking." However, your article has not yet been valued by the world, and it should be recommended by celebrities."

古文：思乃询求于皇甫谧。
现代文：左思便拿去请教并恳求皇甫谧。
English: Zuo Si then took it to seek advice and pleaded with the emperor.

古文：谧见之嗟叹，遂为作叙。
现代文：皇甫谧看了这篇赋，很赞赏，就给赋写了一篇叙文。
English: Emperor Fuxi read this Fu and appreciated it so much that he wrote a narrative for Fu.

古文：于是先相非贰者，莫不敛衽赞述焉。
现代文：干旱先前非难、怀疑这篇赋的人，又都怀着敬意赞扬它了。
English: Those who had previously criticised and doubted the work were now praising it with respect.

古文：刘伶著酒德颂，意气所寄。
现代文：刘伶写了一篇酒德颂》，这是他自己心意情趣的寄托。
English: Liu Wei has written an ode to the virtues of wine, which is the inspiration for his own thoughts and feelings.

古文：乐令善于清言，而不长于手笔。
现代文：尚书令乐广擅长清谈，可是不擅长写文章。
English: Shang Shuling Leguang is good at talking, but not good at writing articles.

古文：将让河南尹，请潘岳为表。
现代文：他想辞去河南尹职务，便请潘岳替他写奏章。
English: When he wanted to resign from the post of Henan Yin, he asked Pan Yue to write a musical composition for him.

古文：潘云： 可作耳。要当得君意。 
现代文：潘岳说： 我可以写呀，不过必须知道您的意图。 
English: Pan Yue said: I can write, but I must know your intention.

古文：乐为述己所以为让，标位二百许语。
现代文：乐广便给他说明自己决定让位的原因，说了二百来句话。
English: Le Guang then explained to him the reasons for his decision to give up his seat, and said two hundred words.

古文：潘直取错综，便成名笔。
现代文：潘岳把他的话径直拿来重新编排一番，便成了一篇名作。
English: Pan Yue took his words directly and rearranged them, and it became a masterpiece.

古文：时人咸云： 若乐不假潘之文，潘不取乐之旨，则无以成斯矣。 
现代文：当时的人都说： 如果乐广不借重潘岳的文辞，潘岳不甲乐广的意思，就无法写成这样优美的文章了。 
English: People at that time said: If Leguang did not borrow the words of Pan Yue, Pan Yue did not mean Leguang, it would not be possible to write such a beautiful article.

古文：夏侯湛作周诗成，示潘安仁。安仁曰： 此非徒温雅，乃别见孝悌之性。 
现代文：夏侯湛写成了《周诗》，拿去给潘安仁看，潘安仁说： 这些诗不但写得温煦高雅，另外也能见出孝顺友爱的情性。 
English: Xia Houtan wrote "Weekly Poetry" and showed it to Pan Anren. Pan Anren said, "These poems are not only written with gentleness and elegance, but also show the sentiments of filial piety and friendship.

古文：潘因此遂作家风诗。
现代文：潘安仁也因此写了《家风诗》。
English: Pan Anren also wrote "Family Style Poem" for this reason.

古文：孙子荆除妇服，作诗以示王武子。
现代文：孙子荆为妻子服丧期满后，作了一首悼亡诗，拿给王武子看。
English: After Grandson Jing completed the mourning period for his wife, he composed a poem to mourn her death and showed it to Wang Wuxi.

古文：王曰： 未知文生于情，情生于文。
现代文：王武子看后说： 真不知是文由情生，还是情由文生！
English: Wang Wu Zi looked at it and said, "I really don't know whether Wen Yu is a lover or a lover!

古文：览之凄然，增伉俪之重。 
现代文：看了你的诗感到悲伤，也增加了我对夫妻精义的珍重。 
English: When I read your poem, I felt sad, and it also increased my preciousness for the essence of husband and wife.

古文：太叔广甚辩给，而挚仲治长于翰墨，俱为列卿。
现代文：大叔广很有口才，挚仲治却擅长写作，两人都但任卿的官职。
English: Uncle Guang was very eloquent, but Zhongzhi was good at writing. Both of them were appointed to high-ranking government posts.

古文：每至公坐，广谈，仲治不能对。退著笔难广，广又不能答。
现代文：每当官府聚会，太叔广谈论，仲治不能对答；仲治回去写成文章来反驳，太叔广也不能对答。
English: Whenever there was a meeting of the government, if Uncle Tai talked about it, Zhongzhi could not answer; if Uncle Zhongzhi went back and wrote an article to refute it, Uncle Tai could not answer.

古文：江左殷太常父子，并能言理，亦有辩讷之异。
现代文：东晋时、太常殷融和侄儿殷浩都擅长谈玄理，但是两人也有能言善辩和不善于言谈之别。
English: In the Eastern Jin Dynasty, Tai Chang Yin Rong and his nephew Yin Hao Rong were both good at talking about the occult, but there was a difference between them being good at talking and not.

古文：扬州口谈至剧，太常辄云： 汝更思吾论。 庾子嵩作意赋成，从子文康见，问曰： 若有意邪？
现代文：扬州刺史殷浩的口头辩论是最厉害的，殷融辩不过他的时候总说： 你再想想我的道理。 庾子嵩写成了《意赋》。他的侄儿庾亮看见了，问道： 如果有那样的心意呢。
English: Yangzhou poet Yinhao's oral arguments are the most powerful, but he always says: "Think about my reason" when he is arguing. Zou Zixong wrote "Ideas." His nephew Zou Liang saw it and asked: "What if there is such a mind?"

古文：非赋之所尽；若无意邪？
现代文：那不是赋体能说尽的；如果没有那样的心意呢，又写赋做什么？ 
English: That's not all there is to say about fu; if you don't have that spirit, what's the point of writing about fu?

古文：复何所赋？ 答曰： 正在有意无意之间。 
现代文：庾子嵩回答说： 正是在有意和无意之间。 
English: Zou Zi Song replied: It is between intentional and unintentional.

古文：郭景纯诗云： 林无静树，川无停流。 
现代文：郭景纯有两句诗： 林无静树，川无停流。 
English: Guo Jingshun has two poems: The forest has no quiet trees, and the river has no stagnant flow.

古文：阮孚云： 泓峥萧瑟，实不可言。
现代文：阮孚评价说： 川流汹汹，山风呼啸，的确不可言传。
English: Nguyen Phu said: "The river was raging and the mountain wind was howling. It's really indescribable.

古文：每读此文，辄觉神超形越。 
现代文：每当读到这两句，总觉得心身都超尘脱俗了。 
English: Whenever I read these two sentences, I always feel that my mind and body are beyond the ordinary.

古文：庾阐始作扬都赋，道温、庾云： 温挺义之标，庾作民之望。
现代文：庾阐当初写《扬都赋》，赋中称赞温峤和庾亮说： 温氏树立起道义的准则，庾氏成了人们仰慕的对象。
English: Zou Yan originally wrote "Yangdu Fu," in which he praised Wen Xuan and Zou Liang, saying, "Wen established the moral standard, and Zou became the object of people's admiration.

古文：方响则金声，比德则玉亮。 
现代文：比拟其声音，那就像铜钟的音响那样铿锵；比拟其品德，那就像宝玉一样晶莹发亮。 
English: Compared with his voice, it is as quiet as the sound of a brass bell; compared with his character, it is as bright as a jewel.

古文：庾公闻赋成，求看，兼赠贶之。
现代文：庾亮听说赋已经写好了，就要求看看，同时希望送给自己。
English: When Hao Liang heard that Fu had been written, he asked to see it and hoped to give it to himself.

古文：阐更改 望 为 俊 ，以 亮 为 润 云。
现代文：于是庾阐又把其中的 望 字改为 俊 字，把 亮 字改为 润 字等等。
English: As a result, Zou Yan changed "望" to "俊," "亮" to "润" and so on.

古文：孙兴公作庾公诔。袁羊曰： 见此张缓。 
现代文：孙兴公写了《庾公诔》，袁羊看了以后说： 从文章中能看出这种一张一弛的治国之道。 
English: Sun Xinggong wrote "The Way of the Kingdom," and after reading it, Yuan Yang said, "From the article, you can see this kind of one-size-fits-all way of governing the country.

古文：于时以为名赏。
现代文：在当时，人们认为这是著名的鉴赏评语。
English: At the time, people thought it was a famous food review.

古文：庾仲初作扬都赋成，以呈庾亮。亮以亲族之怀，大为其名价云： 可三二京，四三都。 
现代文：庾仲初写完了《扬都赋，把它呈迭给庾亮，庾亮出于同宗的情分，大力抬高这篇赋的声价，说它可以和《两都赋》《二京赋》《三都赋》等名篇比美。
English: At the beginning of the year, Zou Zhong finished writing "Yangdu Fu" and presented it to Zou Liang. Zou Liang, out of the same sentiment, vigorously raised the voice value of this Fu, saying that it could be compared with "Two Fu," "Two Beijing Fu," "Three Fu" and other famous pieces.

古文：于此人人竞写，都下纸为之贵。
现代文：从此人人争着传抄，京都建康的纸张也因此涨价了。
English: Since then, everyone has been competing to copy it, and the price of Kyoto Jiankang's paper has risen as a result.

古文：谢太傅云： 不得尔。此是屋下架屋耳，事事拟学，而不免俭狭。 
现代文：太傅谢安说： 不能这样写，这是屋上架屋呀，如果写文章处处都模仿别人，就免不了内容贫乏，视野狭窄了。 
English: Tai Fu Xie'an said, "You can't write like this, it's a roof rack. If you write articles imitating others everywhere, the content will inevitably be poor and your vision will be narrow."

古文：习凿齿史才不常，宣武甚器之，未三十，便用为荆州治中。
现代文：习凿齿冶史的才学很下寻常，桓温非常看重他，还没到三十岁，就任用他为荆州治中。
English: His ability to learn the history of chiseling teeth is very unusual. Kuan Wen thinks highly of him. Before he was thirty years old, he was appointed as a junior high school teacher in Jingzhou.

古文：凿齿谢笺亦云： 不遇明公，荆州老从事耳！ 
现代文：凿齿在给桓温的答谢信里也说： 如果不是受到阁下的赏识，我只是荆州的一个老从事罢了！ 
English: In his letter of thanks to Kuan Wen, Chisel Tooth also said: If it were not for your appreciation, I would just be an old hand in Jingzhou!

古文：后至都见简文，返命，宣武问 见相王何如？ 
现代文：后来桓温派他到京都去见丞相，回来报告的时候，桓温问： 你见了相王，觉得他怎么样？ 
English: Later, Kuan-Wen sent him to Kyoto to meet the prime minister. When he returned to report, Kuan-Wen asked: Did you see King So-Won, what did you think of him?

古文：答云： 一生不曾见此人！ 
现代文：凿齿回答说： 从来不曾见过这样的人 由此触犯了桓温。
English: Chisel-tooth replied, "I've never seen such a person. This has offended Kuan-Wen."

古文：从此忤旨，出为衡阳郡，性理遂错。
现代文：被降职出任衡阳郡太守，从此神志就错乱了。
English: He was demoted to serve as the governor of Hengyang County, and since then his mind has been deranged.

古文：于病中犹作汉晋春秋，品评卓逸。
现代文：他在病中还坚持写《汉晋春秋》，品评人物、史实，见解卓越。
English: During his illness, he still insisted on writing "Han Jin Spring and Autumn," commenting on characters, historical facts, and excellent opinions.

古文：孙兴公云： 三都、二京，五经鼓吹。 
现代文：孙兴公说： 《三都赋和《二京赋》是五经的翅膀。 
English: Sun Xinggong said: "The Three Capital Fu and the Two Capital Fu are the wings of the Five Classics.

古文：谢太傅问主簿陆退 张凭何以作母诔，而不作父诔？ 
现代文：太傅谢安问主簿陆退： 张凭为什么作悼念母亲的诔文，而不作悼念父亲的？ 
English: Tai Fu Xie'an asked the bookkeeper Lu Wei: Why did Zhang Rong write a memorial for his mother, but not for his father?

古文：退答曰： 故当是丈夫之德，表于事行；妇人之美，非诔不显。 
现代文：陆返回答说： 这自然是因为男子的品德已经在他的事迹中表现出来；而妇女的美德，那就非诔文不能显扬了。 
English: Lu Fa replied, "This is naturally because a man's virtue has already been shown in his deeds; while a woman's virtue cannot be shown unless it is written down."

古文：王敬仁年十三，作贤人论。长史送示真长，真长答云： 见敬仁所作论，便足参微言。 
现代文：王敬仁十三岁写了《贤人论》一文，他父亲王濛送去给刘真长看，刘真长看后答复说： 看了敬仁所写的论文，就知道他能够参悟玄言了。 
English: At the age of thirteen, Wang Jingren wrote an article entitled "On the Wise Men." His father, Wang Yao, sent it to Liu Zhenang for him to read. After reading it, Liu Zhenang replied, "After reading the paper written by Jingren, I knew that he was able to understand the hidden meaning."

古文：孙兴公云： 潘文烂若披锦，无处不善；陆文若排沙简金，往往见宝。 
现代文：孙兴公说： 潘岳的文章好像摊开锦绣一样文采斑斓，没有一处不好；陆机的文章好像披沙拣金，常常能发现瑰宝。 
English: Sun Xinggong said: Pan Yue's articles are like opening up brocade, they are colorful and colorful, and none of them are bad; Lu Jie's articles are like sifting through sand, and you can often find treasures.

古文：简文称许掾云： 玄度五言诗，可谓妙绝时人。 
现代文：简文帝称赞司徒掾许玄度说： 玄度的五言诗。可以说精妙过人。 
English: Emperor Jianwen praised the five-character poem of Xundu, saying: Xundu's five-character poem. It can be said to be exquisite.

古文：孙兴公作天台赋成，以示范荣期，云： 卿试掷地，要作金石声。 
现代文：孙兴公写成了《天台赋》，拿去给范荣期看，并且说： 你试把它扔到地上，定会发出金石般的声音。 
English: Sun Xinggong wrote "Tiantai Fu" and showed it to Fan Rongji, saying, "If you try to throw it on the ground, it will make a sound like a stone."

古文：范曰： 恐子之金石，非宫商中声！ 
现代文：范荣期说： 恐怕您的金石声，是不成曲调的金石声。 
English: Fan Rongji said, "I'm afraid that your golden voice is not a melody.

古文：然每至佳句，辄云： 应是我辈语。 
现代文：可是每当看到优美的句子，总是说： 这正该是我们这些人的语言。 
English: But whenever I see a beautiful sentence, I always say: This is exactly the language we should speak.

古文：桓公见谢安石作简文谥议，看竟，掷与坐上诸客曰： 此是安石碎金。 
现代文：桓温看见谢安石所作的给简文帝谥号的奏议，看完了，扔给座上的宾客说： 这是安石的零碎金子。 
English: Kuan Wen saw Xie Anshi's petition to the Emperor Jianwen, and after reading it, he threw it to the guests at the table and said, "This is the fragmentary gold of Anshi."

古文：袁虎少贫，尝为人佣载运租。
现代文：袁虎年轻时家里很穷，曾经受雇替人运送租粮。
English: Yuan Hu's family was very poor when he was young, and he was once hired to deliver grain on behalf of others.

古文：谢镇西经船行，其夜清风朗月，闻江渚闲估客船上有咏诗声，甚有情致。所诵五言，又其所未尝闻，叹美不能已。
现代文：这时，镇西将军谢尚坐船出游，那一夜风清月明，忽然听见江边商船上有人吟诗，很有情味；所吟诵的五言诗，又是自己过去未曾听过的，不禁赞叹不绝。
English: At this time, Zhenxi General Xie Shang went on a boat trip. That night, when the wind was clear and the moon was bright, he suddenly heard someone singing a poem on a merchant ship along the river, which was very sentimental. The five-character poem he recited was something he had never heard before, and he couldn't help but admire it.

古文：即遣委曲讯问，乃是袁自咏其所作咏史诗。
现代文：随即派人去打听底细，原来是袁虎吟咏自作的《咏史诗》。
English: They immediately sent someone to inquire about the details. It turned out to be Yuan Hu Yingyao's self-penned "The Epic of the Dragonfly."

古文：因此相要，大相赏得。
现代文：因此便邀请袁虎过来，对他非常赞赏，彼此十分投合。
English: Therefore, he invited Yuan Hu to come over. He was very much appreciated, and they were very compatible with each other.

古文：孙兴公云： 潘文浅而净，陆文深而芜。 
现代文：孙兴公说： 潘岳的文章浅显，可是纯净，陆机的文章深刻，可是芜杂。 
English: Sun Xinggong said: Pan Yue's article is shallow, but pure, and Lu Ji's article is profound, but mixed.

古文：裴郎作语林，始出，大为远近所传。
现代文：裴启写了《语林》一书。刚拿出来，远近的人广为传看。
English: Pei Qi wrote the book "Language Forest." As soon as it was published, it was widely read by people near and far.

古文：时流年少，无不传写，各有一通。
现代文：当时名流和后生年少，没有谁不传抄，人人手执一卷。
English: At that time, celebrities and children were young, no one did not copy, everyone held a volume.

古文：载王东亭作经王公酒垆下赋，甚有才情。
现代文：其中记载东亭侯王珣作《经王公酒沪下赋一事，很有才情。
English: Among them, it is recorded that Dongting Hou Wang Xi's "The Story of Jing Wang Gong's Sake Exporting to Shanghai" is very talented.

古文：谢万作八贤论，与孙兴公往反，小有利钝。
现代文：谢万写了《八贤论》，并就其内容和孙兴公来回辩论，稍有胜负。
English: Xie Wan wrote "Eight Virtues" and had a back-and-forth debate with Sun Xinggong over its content, which resulted in a slight victory.

古文：谢后出以示顾君齐，顾曰： 我亦作，知卿当无所名。 
现代文：谢万后来把文章拿出来给顾君齐看，顾君齐说： 如果我也写这几个人，料你一定会标不出题目来。 
English: Xie Wan later took the article out for Gu Junqi to read. Gu Junqi said: If I also write these people, you will not be able to mark the title.

古文：桓宣武命袁彦伯作北征赋，既成，公与时贤共看，咸嗟叹之。
现代文：桓温叫袁彦伯作一篇《北征赋》，赋写好以后，桓温和在座的贤士一起阅读，大家都赞叹写得好。
English: Kuan Wen asked Yuan Yanbo to write a "Northern Expedition." After the assignment was completed, Kuan Wen and the sages present read it together. Everyone was amazed at how well it was written.

古文：时王珣在坐云： 恨少一句，得 写 字足韵，当佳。 
现代文：当时王珣也在座，说： 遗憾的是少了一句。如果用 写 字足韵，就会更好。 
English: Wang Yao, who was also present at the time, said, "Unfortunately, one sentence is missing. It would have been better if it had been written in calligraphy."

古文：袁即于坐揽笔益云： 感不绝于余心，泝流风而独写。 
现代文：袁彦伯立刻即席拿笔增加了一句： 感不绝于余心，溯流风而独写。 
English: Yuan Yanbo immediately took a pen and added a sentence: "I feel more than I can express, and I write by following the flow of the wind."

古文：公谓王曰： 当今不得不以此事推袁。 
现代文：桓温对王珣说： 从这件事看，当今不能不推重袁氏。 
English: Kuan Wen said to Wang Yao: From this matter, it is imperative to give more weight to the Yuan Dynasty.

古文：孙兴公道： 曹辅佐才如白地明光锦，裁为负版裤，非无文采，酷无裁制。 
现代文：孙兴公谈论到曹辅佐时说： 他的文才就像一幅白底子的明光锦，裁成了差役穿的裤子，这不是没有文采，只是太没个剪裁了。 
English: When talking about Cao Yuxa, Sun Xinggong said: His literary talent is like a bright brocade with a white background, cut into trousers worn by officials. It's not that there is no literary talent, but it's just that there is no tailoring.

古文：袁伯彦作名士传成，见谢公。公笑曰： 我尝与诸人道江北事，特作狡狯耳！彦伯遂以箸书。 
现代文：袁彦伯写成了，带去见谢安，谢安笑着说： 我曾经和大家讲过江北时期的事，那不过是说着好玩罢了，彦伯竟拿来写书！ 
English: Yuan Yanbo finished writing it and brought it to Xie An. Xie An smiled and said, "I once told you about the Jiangbei period, but it was just for fun, and now Yanbo is using it to write a book!"

古文：王东亭到桓公吏，既伏阁下，桓令人窃取其白事。
现代文：东亭侯王珣到任所就任桓温的属官，已经到了官署里，桓温叫人偷偷拿走了他的报告。
English: Dongting marquis Wang Qi arrived at his post as a subordinate officer of Kuan Wen. He had already arrived at the government office, and Kuan Wen ordered someone to secretly take away his report.

古文：东亭即于阁下更作，无复向一字。
现代文：王珣立即在官署里重新写，没有一个字和前一报告重复。
English: Wang Yao immediately rewrote it in the government office, without repeating a single word of the previous report.

古文：桓宣武北征，袁虎时从，被责免官。
现代文：桓温率师北伐、当时袁虎也随从出征，因事受到桓温的责备，罢了官。
English: At that time, Yuan Hu also went to the Northern Expedition led by Kuan Wen. He was reprimanded by Kuan Wen for this and was dismissed from his post.

古文：会须露布文，唤袁倚马前令作。手不辍笔，俄得七纸，殊可观。
现代文：正好急需写一份告捷公文，桓温便叫袁虎起草。袁虎靠在马旁，手不停挥，一会儿就写了七张纸，写得很好。
English: Just when there was an urgent need to write a proclamation of victory, Huan Wen asked Yuan Hu to draft it. Yuan Hu leaned against the horse, waved his hand incessantly, and in a moment wrote seven pieces of paper, and wrote very well.

古文：东亭在侧，极叹其才。
现代文：当时东亭侯王地在旁边，极力赞赏他的才华。
English: At the time, Prince Higashitei was by his side, enthusiastically applauding his talent.

古文：袁虎云： 当令齿舌闲得利。 
现代文：袁虎说： 也该让我从齿舌中得点好处。 
English: Yuan Hu said: I should also get some benefit from the tongue.

古文：袁宏始作东征赋，都不道陶公。
现代文：袁宏起初写《东征赋》的时候，没有一句话说到陶侃。
English: When Yuan Hong initially wrote "Eastern Expedition," there was not a single word about Tao Kan.

古文：胡奴诱之狭室中，临以白刃，曰： 先公勋业如是！君作东征赋，云何相忽略？ 
现代文：陶侃的儿子胡奴就把他骗到一个密室里，拔出刀来指着他，问道： 先父的劝勋业绩这样大、您写《东征赋》，为什么忽略了他？ 
English: Tao Kan's son, Hu Nu, tricked him into a secret room, pulled out a knife and pointed it at him, asking: Your father's persuasive performance was so great, you wrote "Eastern Expedition," why did you ignore him?

古文：宏窘蹙无计，便答： 我大道公，何以云无？ 
现代文：袁宏很窘急，无计可施，便回答说： 我大大地称道陶公一番，怎么说没有写呢？ 
English: Yuan Hong was very distressed and had nothing to do, so he replied: I greatly praised Tao Gong, how can I say that I didn't write it?

古文：因诵曰： 精金百炼，在割能断。
现代文：于是就朗诵道： 精金百炼，在割能断。
English: So he recited: "Pure gold is refined, but when it is cut, it is broken."

古文：功则治人，职思靖乱。
现代文：功则治人、职思靖乱。
English: Merit is what governs people, duty is what pacifies chaos.

古文：长沙之勋，为史所赞。 
现代文：长沙之勋，为史所赞。 
English: The hero of Changsha, praised by history.

古文：或问顾长康： 君筝赋何如嵇康琴赋？ 
现代文：有人问顾长康： 您的《筝赋》和嵇康的《琴赋》相比，哪一篇更好？ 
English: Someone asked Gu Changkang: Compared to your "Kite Fu" and Gongkang's "Qin Fu," which one is better?

古文：顾曰： 不赏者，作后出相遗。深识者，亦以高奇见贵。 
现代文：顾长康回答说： 不会鉴赏的人认为我的后出就遗弃它，鉴赏力强的人也会因为高妙新奇而推许我。 
English: Gu Changkang replied, "People who can't appreciate my work will think that I abandoned it, and people with strong appreciation will also recommend me because of the wonderful novelty.

古文：殷仲文天才宏瞻，而读书不甚广，博亮叹曰： 若使殷仲文读书半袁豹，才不减班固。 
现代文：殷仲文天赋甚高，可是读书不甚广博。傅亮感叹说： 如果殷仲文读的书能有袁豹的一半，才华就不次于班固。 
English: Yin Zhongwen's talent in literature is very high, but his reading is not very extensive. Fu Liang sighed: If Yin Zhongwen could read half as many books as Yuan Pan, his talent would not be inferior to that of Ban Gu.

古文：羊孚作雪赞云： 资清以化，乘气以霏。
现代文：羊孚写了一篇《雪赞》，其中说： 资清以比，乘气以霏。
English: Yang Fu wrote an article, "Snow Praise," in which he said, "Clarity is better than proportion, and the wind is better than the hail."

古文：遇象能鲜，即洁成辉。 
现代文：遇象能鲜，即洁成辉。 
English: If you meet the elephant, you will be able to be fresh, that is, clean and bright.

古文：桓胤遂以书扇。
现代文：桓胤便把这两句写在扇子上。
English: Kanetane then wrote these two sentences on a fan.

古文：王孝伯在京行散，至其弟王睹户前，问： 古诗中何句为最？ 
现代文：王孝伯在京的时候，一次行散到他弟弟王睹门前，问王睹古诗里头哪一句最好。
English: When Wang Xiao Bo was in Beijing, he once went to the door of his brother Wang Jian and asked Wang Jian which sentence in the ancient poem was the best.

古文：睹思未答。
现代文：王睹工考虑，还没有回答。
English: Wang Jigong considered, but did not answer.

古文：孝伯咏  所遇无故物，焉得不速老？ 此句为佳。 
现代文：孝伯吟 所遇无故物，焉得不速老！ 说： 这句是最好的。 
English: Xiaobogin said, "This sentence is the best.

古文：桓玄尝登江陵城南楼云： 我今欲为王孝伯作诔。 
现代文：桓玄有一次登上江陵城城墙的南楼，说道： 我现在想给王孝伯写一篇诛文。 
English: Once, Kuan Xuan went up to the south tower of the city wall of Gangneung and said, "I now want to write an obituary for Wang Xiaobo."

古文：因吟啸良久，随而下笔。
现代文：于是长时间吟咏歌啸，接着就动笔。
English: So he sang for a long time and then began to write.

古文：一坐之闲，诔以之成。
现代文：只坐一会儿的功夫，诔文便写成了。
English: After only a short amount of effort, the essay was written.

古文：桓玄初并西夏，领荆、江二州，二府一国。
现代文：桓玄刚同时管辖西部一带，兼任荆、江两州刺史，任两个府的长官，还袭封了一个侯国。
English: At the same time, Kuan Xuan Gang governed the western region, and also served as the governor of Jing and Jiang Provinces, the governor of two prefectures, and the governor of a princely state.

古文：于时始雪，五处俱贺，五版并入。
现代文：这年初次下雪，五处官府都来祝贺，五封贺信一起送到。
English: This year, the first time it snowed, five government offices came to congratulate, and five congratulatory letters were sent together.

古文：玄在听事上，版至即答。版后皆粲然成章，不相揉杂。
现代文：桓玄在官厅上，贺信一到，就在信后起草复信，每封信都下笔成章，文采斑斓，而且不相混同。
English: When Huan Xuan was in the government office, as soon as the congratulatory letter arrived, he drafted a reply letter after the letter. Each letter was written into a chapter, the writing was colorful, and they were not confused.

古文：桓玄下都，羊孚时为兖州别驾，从京来诣门，笺云： 自顷世故睽离，心事沦蕰。明公启晨光于积晦，澄百流以一源。 
现代文：桓玄东下京都，当时羊孚任充州别驾，从京都来登门拜访，他给桓玄的求见信上说： 自从不久前因为战乱分别，我也意志消沉，心情郁结，明公给漫漫长夜迭来晨光，用一源澄清百流。 
English: Kuan Xuan went east to Kyoto. At that time, Yang Fu came from Kyoto to visit, he said in his letter of request to Kuan Xuan: "Since we separated not long ago due to the war, I have also been depressed and depressed. Ming Gong has brought morning light to the long night, clarifying the hundred streams with one source.

古文：桓见笺，驰唤前，云： 子道，子道，来何迟？ 
现代文：桓玄见到信，赶紧把他请上前来，对他说： 子道，子道，你怎么来得这么晚啊！ 
English: When Huan Xuan saw the letter, he quickly invited him to come forward and said to him: "Zidou, Zidou, how come you are so late!

古文：即用为记室参军。
现代文：立即任他做记室参军。
English: He was immediately sent to the army as a clerk.

古文：孟昶为刘牢之主簿，诣门谢，见云： 羊侯，羊侯，百口赖卿！ 
现代文：当时孟昶在刘牢之手下任主簿，来登门向羊孚告辞，见面就说： 羊侯，羊侯，我一家百口就托付你了。 
English: At that time, Meng Wei was the chief accountant under Liu Diao, and he came to the door to say goodbye to Yang Fu. When he met him, he said: Yang Hou, Yang Hou, I have entrusted you with a hundred families.

