古文：世信虚妄之书，以为载於竹帛上者，皆贤圣所传，无不然之事，故信而是之，讽而读之；睹真是之传，与虚妄之书相违，则并谓短书不可信用。
现代文：社会上一般人相信无根据胡说八道的书，认为竹简和丝织品上记载的，都是贤圣传下来的，没有不对的事，所以相信它，认为它是对的，并且读它、背诵它。看见真实正确的一般书与他们所相信的那些毫无根据胡说八道的书不一致，就一起说前面的书是价值不大的短书，不能相信。
English: The common people in the society believe in baseless nonsense books. They think that everything written on bamboo strips and silk fabrics is handed down by sages, and there is nothing wrong with it. Therefore, they believe in it, think it is right, and read it and recite it. When they see that a true and correct common book is inconsistent with the baseless nonsense books they believe in, they all say that the previous book is a short book of little value and cannot be believed.

古文：夫幽冥之实尚可知，沈隐之情尚可定，显文露书，是非易见，笼总并传，非实事，用精不专，无思於事也。
现代文：其实，背地里的事情尚且能知道，深沉隐晦的实情尚且可以判定，何况明明白白的文字，清清楚楚的记载，是非对错显而易见，却要笼统地一致传说它们不符合事实，这是因为用心不专一，对事情没有认真思考的缘故。
English: In fact, the things in the background can still be known, the deep and obscure facts can still be judged, not to mention the plain and clear words, the clear and clear records, the right and wrong are obvious, but it is necessary to generally and consistently say that they do not conform to the facts, this is because the intention is not specific, and there is no serious thinking about the matter.

古文：夫世间传书诸子之语，多欲立奇造异，作惊目之论，以骇世俗之人；为谲诡之书，以著殊异之名。
现代文：社会上传书解释先秦到汉诸子的话，大多想标新立异，作惊人之论，用来吓唬社会上一般人，作为希奇古怪的书，以标榜特殊奇异而闻名。
English: Most of the pre-Qin-to-Han scholars who submitted their books to the society wanted to set a new standard and make a surprising theory, which was used to scare ordinary people in the society. As a strange and eccentric book, it was famous for flaunting its special strangeness.

古文：传书言：延陵季子出游，见路有遗金。
现代文：传书上说：延陵季子出去游玩，看见路上有丢失的金子。
English: The letter said: "Yanling Jizi went out to play and saw some lost gold on the road.

古文：当夏五月，有披裘而薪者，季子呼薪者曰： 取彼地金来。 
现代文：正当夏天五月，有个穿皮衣砍柴的人。季子喊砍柴的： 把地上的金子拿过来！ 
English: In the summer of May, there was a man in a fur coat chopping wood. Ji Zi called out to the woodcutter: "Bring me the gold from the ground!"

古文：薪者投镰於地，瞋目拂手而言曰： 何子居之高，视之下，仪貌之壮，语言之野也！
现代文：砍柴的把镰刀往地上一扔，瞪着眼睛将手一甩，说： 为什么你处在高位，眼光短浅，仪表相貌堂堂，说话却如此粗野？
English: The wood-cutter threw his scythe to the ground and, staring, flung out his hand and said: "Why are you in a high position, with short-sightedness, a dignified appearance, and yet you speak so crudely?

古文：吾当夏五月，披裘而薪，岂取金者哉？ 
现代文：我正当夏天五月穿着皮衣来砍柴，难道是为你来拣丢失的金子！ 
English: I'm wearing a fur coat in the summer of May to chop wood, is it for you to pick up lost gold!

古文：季子谢之，请问姓字。
现代文：季子向他道了歉，请问他姓名。
English: Ji Zi apologized to him. Please ask him his name.

古文：薪者曰： 子皮相之士也！何足语姓字！ 
现代文：砍柴的说： 你是个以貌取人的人，怎么值得我把姓名告诉你！ 
English: The woodcutter said: "You are a man who judges people by their appearance. How is it worth it for me to tell you their names?

古文：遂去不顾。
现代文：于是走开不理睬季子。
English: Ignore it and go.

古文：世以为然，殆虚言也。
现代文：社会上的一般人认为果真是如此，依我看恐怕这是句假话。
English: If that's what the general public thinks, I'm afraid it's a lie.

古文：夫季子耻吴之乱，吴欲共立以为主，终不肯受，去之延陵，终身不还，廉让之行，终始若一。
现代文：因为季子以吴国君王争权夺利的 吴之乱 为可耻，所以吴公子们想立他作为君主，他始终不肯接受，便离开京都去延陵，终身不回，廉洁谦让的操行始终如一。
English: Because it was shameful for Ji Zi to take advantage of the Wu Rebellion, in which the kings of the State of Wu fought for power, the princes of the State of Wu wanted to install him as the monarch, but he refused to accept it. He left Kyoto for Yanling, never to return, and his behavior of integrity and modesty remained the same.

古文：许由让天下，不嫌贪封侯。
现代文：许由谦让君位，因此不被嫌疑贪图封侯。
English: Xu Yuqian abdicated the throne, so he was not suspected of coveting the crown.

古文：伯夷委国饥死，不嫌贪刀钩。
现代文：伯夷放弃君位饥饿而死，因此不被嫌疑贪图小便宜。
English: Bo Yi gave up his throne and died of starvation, so he was not suspected of being greedy.

古文：廉让之行，大可以况小，小难以况大。
现代文：廉洁谦让的操行，大事可能说明小事，小事却难得比喻大事。
English: Honest and humble behavior, big things may explain small things, but small things are rarely a metaphor for big things.

古文：季子能让吴位，何嫌贪地遗金？
现代文：季子能谦让吴国的君位，怎么能怀疑他贪图地上丢失的金子呢？
English: If Ji Zi could humbly abdicate the throne of the State of Wu, how could anyone doubt that he coveted the gold lost on earth?

古文：季子使於上国，道过徐。
现代文：季子出使中原各国，路过徐国。
English: Ji Zi sent envoys to the Central Plains countries, and they passed through Hsu Province.

古文：徐君好其宝剑，未之即予。
现代文：徐国君主喜欢他的宝剑，他没有立即送给徐君。
English: Emperor Xu liked his sword and did not immediately give it to Xu Jun.

古文：还而徐君死，解剑带冢树而去。
现代文：等回来的时候，这位徐国的君主已经死了，他解下宝剑挂在其墓旁的树上才离去。
English: When he returned, the ruler of the State of Xu was already dead, and he left his sword hanging on the tree next to his grave.

古文：廉让之心，耻负其前志也。
现代文：那高尚廉洁谦让的心，使他认为背弃自己以前许下的心愿是可耻的。
English: That noble, incorruptible, and forbearing spirit made him think it shameful to betray the wishes he had previously made.

古文：季子不负死者，弃其宝剑，何嫌一叱生人取金於地？
现代文：季子不背弃死者，能舍弃自己的宝剑，怎么要被怀疑呵叱一个陌生人为他在地上去拣丢失的金子呢？
English: Since Ji Zi did not betray the dead and was able to give up his sword, how could he be suspected of scolding a stranger for picking up lost gold for him on the ground?

古文：季子未去吴乎？公子也；已去吴乎，延陵君也。
现代文：季子没有离开吴国时，是个公子；已经离开吴国，也是延陵的统治者。
English: When Ji Zi did not leave Wu, he was a nobleman; when he left Wu, he was also the ruler of Yanling.

古文：公子与君，出有前後，车有附从，不能空行於涂，明矣。
现代文：公子与地方统治者，外出时前后都有护卫，车的前后还有随从的车，不会仅仅一辆车在路上走，这是明摆着的。
English: When the prince and the local ruler go out, there are guards in front and behind, and the car is accompanied by a car in front and behind. There will not be just one car on the road, this is obvious.

古文：既不耻取金，何难使左右？而烦披裘者？世称柳下惠之行，言其能以幽冥自修洁也。
现代文：既然不以得到别人丢失的金子为耻辱，派左右随从去拣有什么困难，而偏要烦劳那个穿皮衣的人呢，世人都称颂柳下惠的操行，说他能够在暗地里自己修身保持清白。
English: Since she did not regard it as a disgrace to get the gold that others had lost, and did not find it difficult to send her right and left attendants to collect it, but rather wanted to bother the man in the fur coat, the world praised Liu Shih-hui's conduct, saying that he was able to improve himself in secret and maintain his innocence.

古文：贤者同操，故千岁交志。
现代文：贤良的人都具有相同的操行，所以虽隔千年其心意是相通的。
English: Virtuous people all have the same behavior, so even though they are thousands of years apart, their minds are connected.

古文：置季子於冥昧之处，尚不取金，况以白日，前後备具，取金於路，非季子之操也。
现代文：即使把季子放在暗处，尚且不会拣取丢失的金子，何况是在大白天，前前后后都具备随从的人。拣取路上丢失的金子，这不是季子的操行。
English: Even if the qizi is placed in the dark, it will not pick up the lost gold, not to mention that in broad daylight, there are people around. Picking up the gold lost on the road is not the behavior of the qizi.

古文：或时季子实见遗金，怜披裘薪者，欲以益之；或时言取彼地金，欲以予薪者，不自取也。
现代文：关于这件事，或许是季子果真见到丢失的金子，可怜芽皮衣的砍柴人，想使他从中得到好处；或许是说要拣取那地上丢失的金子，想给砍柴的，又不愿意亲自去拾取。
English: Regarding this matter, it may be that Ji Zi really saw the lost gold and felt sorry for the woodcutter in bud skin, and wanted him to benefit from it; it may be that he wanted to pick up the lost gold on the ground, and wanted to give it to the woodcutter, but did not want to pick it up himself.

古文：世俗传言，则言季子取遗金也。
现代文：这样社会上传言，就说季子要拾取别人丢失在地上的金子。
English: In this way, society is told that Ji Zi wants to pick up the gold that others have lost on the ground.

古文：传书或言：颜渊与孔子俱上鲁太山，孔子东南望，吴阊门外有系白马，引颜渊指以示之曰： 若见吴昌门乎？ 
现代文：传书上有人说：颜渊和孔子一起上鲁国的泰山。孔子向东南方远望，看见吴都昌门外栓着一匹白马，于是就指给颜渊看，说： 你看见吴都的昌门了吗？ 
English: Someone said in the biography: Yan Yuan and Confucius went to Mount Tai in Lu together. Confucius looked to the southeast and saw a white horse tied outside the gate of Wuduchang, so he pointed it out to Yan Yuan and said: Have you seen the gate of Wuduchang?

古文：颜渊曰： 见之。 
现代文：颜渊回答： 看见了。 
English: Yan Yuan replied: I saw it.

古文：孔子曰： 门外何有？ 
现代文：孔子又问： 门外有什么？ 
English: Confucius also asked: What is outside the door?

古文：曰 有如系练之状。 孔子抚其目而正之，因与俱下。
现代文：颜渊接着回答： 好像栓着一条白绸子样的东西。 
English: Yan Yuan went on to answer: It looks like something like a piece of white silk.

古文：下而颜渊发白齿落，遂以病死。
现代文：孔子揉了揉他的眼睛，纠正了他的说法。
English: Confucius rubbed his eyes and corrected his statement.

古文：盖以精神不能若孔子，强力自极，精华竭尽，故早夭死。
现代文：于是就与他一同下山。下山之后颜渊头发白了，牙齿落了，终于因病死去。大概精神不如孔子，勉强使眼力到了自己的极限，精华用尽，所以早早死去。
English: So he went down the mountain with him. After going down the mountain, Yan Yuan's hair turned white, his teeth fell out, and he finally died of illness. His spirit was probably not as good as Confucius, and he barely pushed his eyes to their limits and exhausted the essence, so he died early.

古文：世俗闻之，皆以为然。
现代文：社会上一般人听到这事，都以为真是如此。
English: When the general public hears about it, they think it's true.

古文：如实论之，殆虚言也。
现代文：要是真实评论起来，大概是假话。
English: If it's a true comment, it's probably a lie.

古文：案《论语》之文，不见此言。
现代文：考察《论语》上的文章，不见这段话。
English: An examination of the article in the Analects does not reveal this passage.

古文：考《六经》之传，亦无此语。
现代文：考察六经上的解释，也没有这段话。
English: Examining the explanation in the six sutras, there is no such passage.

古文：夫颜渊能见千里之外，与圣人同，孔子、诸子，何讳不言？
现代文：颜渊能看见千里之外，与圣人一样，孔子和诸子为什么回避不说呢？
English: Yan Yuan can see thousands of miles away, just like a sage. Why do Confucius and his followers avoid talking about it?

古文：盖人目之所见，不过十里。
现代文：大概人的眼睛能看见的范围，不过十里。
English: About as far as the human eye can see, but ten miles.

古文：过此不见，非所明察，远也。
现代文：超过这个范围就看不见。不是人的视力所能看清楚，因为太远了。
English: Beyond this range you can't see. It's not human vision that can see clearly, because it's too far away.

古文：传曰： 太山之高巍然，去之百里，不见垂，远也。 
现代文：传书上说： 泰山很高大，但离开它一百里，就看不见土块大小的东西，因为太远了。 
English: The letter said: Mount Tai is very tall, but if you are a hundred miles away from it, you can't see anything the size of a clod, because it's too far away.

古文：案鲁去吴，千有余里，使离硃望之，终不能见，况使颜渊，何能审之？
现代文：考察鲁国离吴国，有一千多里，假使让离朱来看，最终还是不能看见，何况是叫颜渊，他怎么能看清楚呢？
English: Lu is more than a thousand miles away from Wu. Even if Zhu were allowed to see it, he would still not be able to see it, let alone Yan Yuan. How could he see it clearly?

古文：如才庶几者，明目异於人，则世宜称亚圣，不宜言离硃。
现代文：如果才能和孔子差不多的人，眼力与众不同，那么世人就应该称他为亚圣，而不应该说是离朱。
English: If a person with a talent similar to that of Confucius, but whose eyesight is different from that of others, then the world should call him Yasheng, not Zhu.

古文：人目之视也，物大者易察，小者难审。
现代文：人的眼睛看东西，东西大的容易看清楚，东西小的就很难看清楚。
English: Human eyes see things, big things are easy to see clearly, small things are hard to see clearly.

古文：使颜渊处昌门之外，望太山之形，终不能见。
现代文：即使颜渊在昌门外，看泰山的形状，始终不能看见。
English: Even if Yan Yuan is outside Changmen, looking at the shape of Mount Tai, he still can't see it.

古文：况从太山之上，察白马之色，色不能见，明矣。
现代文：何况从泰山上，观察白马的颜色，颜色肯定是看不见，这很清楚。
English: Moreover, from Mount Tai, observing the color of the white horse, the color must be invisible, this is very clear.

古文：非颜渊不能见，孔子亦不能见也。
现代文：不只颜渊不能看见，就连孔子也不能看见。
English: Not only Yan Yuan can't see, even Confucius can't see.

古文：何以验之？
现代文：用什么来证明呢？
English: What proof do you have?

古文：耳目之用，均也。
现代文：人耳朵和眼睛的本领是相同的。
English: The power of the human ear and eye is the same.

古文：目不能见百里，则耳亦不能闻也。
现代文：耳朵不能听清百里外的声音，那眼晴也不能看见百里外的东西。
English: The ear cannot hear a sound a hundred miles away, and the eye cannot see a thing a hundred miles away.

古文：陆贾曰： 离娄之明，不能察帷薄之内；师旷之聪，不能闻百里之外。 
现代文：陆贾说： 离娄的视力好，不能看清帐子和帘子后边的东西；师旷的听觉灵敏，不能听到百里以外的声音。 
English: Lu Jia said: The eyesight of a hermit is good, but he can't see the things behind the curtains and blinds; the hearing of a scholar is sensitive, but he can't hear the sounds from a hundred miles away.

古文：昌门之与太山，非直帷薄之内、百里之外也。
现代文：昌门与泰山，不只是帐子和帘子后面，或百里以外的东西。
English: Changmen and Mount Tai are not just things behind curtains and blinds, or a hundred miles away.

古文：秦武王与孟说举鼎不任，绝脉而死。
现代文：秦武王跟孟说比举鼎，不能胜任，筋脉崩断而死。
English: King Qinwu told Meng that he was too incompetent and died of a ruptured artery.

古文：举鼎用力，力由筋脉，筋脉不堪，绝伤而死，道理宜也。
现代文：举鼎用力，力由筋脉产生，筋脉承受不住，断绝受伤而死，道理是合适的。
English: Lifting the head with force, the force is generated by the sinew, the sinew is unbearable, the reason is appropriate.

古文：今颜渊用目望远，望远目睛不任，宜盲眇，发白齿落，非其致也。
现代文：如今颜渊用眼睛看远处，看很远的地方眼睛不能胜任，应该变成瞎子，可见他头发变白，牙齿脱落，不是由于 望远 导致的。
English: Now Yan Yuan uses his eyes to see far away, to see far away places, his eyes are not competent, he should become blind, it can be seen that his hair turns white, his teeth fall out, not caused by the long distance.

古文：发白齿落，用精於学，勤力不休，气力竭尽，故至於死。
现代文：头发白牙齿落，是对学习过分用心，勤奋努力没有好好休息，气力用尽，所以到最后死去。
English: White hair and teeth fall, is to study too hard, diligent efforts without a good rest, exhausted, so finally die.

古文：伯奇放流，首发早白。
现代文：伯奇被放逐，头发早早地白了。
English: Birch was banished and his hair turned prematurely white.

古文：《诗》云： 惟忧用老。 
现代文：《诗经·小雅·小弁》中说： 忧伤因而使人衰老。 
English: In the "Poetic Classic, Xiao Ya, Xiao Ben," it says: "Sadness causes people to grow old."

古文：伯奇用忧，而颜渊用睛，暂望仓卒，安能致此？
现代文：伯奇是因为忧伤，而颜渊是用眼睛，短暂远望时间仓促，怎么会导致这样的后果呢？
English: Birch is because of sadness, while Yan Yuan uses the eyes, short-sighted and hasty, how can it lead to such consequences?

古文：儒书言：舜葬於苍梧、禹葬於会稽者，巡狩年老，道死边土。
现代文：儒者的书上说： 舜葬在苍梧，禹葬在会稽，由于他们视察诸侯防地年纪老了，中途死在边远的地方。
English: The book of the Confucians said: "He was buried in Gorgo, and Yu was buried in Hefei. Because they were too old to inspect the provincial defense sites, they died in the middle of the road in a remote place.

古文：圣人以天下为家，不别远近，不殊内外，故遂止葬。
现代文：圣人以天下为家，不管远近，不分内外，所以死了就留在当地埋葬。
English: The saint regarded the whole world as his home, no matter how far or near, inside or outside, so when he died, he was buried there.

古文：夫言舜、禹，实也；言其巡狩，虚也。
现代文：说舜葬在苍梧、禹葬在会稽是事实；至于说他们因为视察诸侯防地而死，是没有根据的。
English: It is true to say that Gong was buried in Cangwu and Yu was buried in Huizhong, but there is no basis for saying that they died because they were inspecting the provincial defense sites.

古文：舜之与尧，俱帝者也，共五千里之境，同四海之内；二帝之道，相因不殊。
现代文：舜和尧同是帝王，一道治理着方圆五千里的地方，一样管理着全国。二个帝王治理国家的方法，共同承袭没有差异。
English: Emperor Xuan and Empress Dowager Cixi were both emperors, and together they governed a five-thousand-mile radius, as well as the whole country. There was no difference in the way the two emperors governed the country.

古文：《尧典》之篇，舜巡狩东至岱宗，南至霍山，西至太华，北至恆山。
现代文：《尚书·尧典》记载，舜巡视东到泰山，南到霍山，西到华山，北到恒山。
English: "Shangshu·Shanxi" records that Shao inspected the east to Mount Tai, the south to Mount Huo, the west to Mount Huashan, and the north to Mount Hengshan.

古文：以为四岳者，四方之中，诸侯之来，并会岳下，幽深远近，无不见者，圣人举事，求其宜适也。
现代文：认为四岳各自在东、南、西、北四方的中心，诸侯们来，就会按各自情况聚会在不同的岳下，这样不论是偏僻地区的，离得远的，离得近的，都没有不便来朝见的。因为圣人办事总是力求恰到好处。
English: It is believed that the four mountains are in the center of the four directions of east, south, west and north, and when the princes come, they will gather under different mountains according to their own circumstances, so whether it is in a remote area, far away, or close by, there is no inconvenience to come to the imperial court. Because the sage always strives to do things just right.

古文：禹王如舜，事无所改，巡狩所至，以复如舜。
现代文：禹王像舜一样，办事的方法没有什么改动，巡视所到的地方，也应该和舜一样。
English: Yu Wang is like Zhai, there is no change in the way of doing things, and the places visited should also be the same as Zhai.

古文：舜至苍梧，禹到会稽，非其实也。
现代文：说舜巡视到苍梧，禹巡视到会稽，不是事实。
English: It is not true to say that Zhai inspected Cangwu and Yu inspected Huiyu.

古文：实舜、禹之时，鸿水未治，尧传於舜，舜受为帝，与禹分部，行治鸿水。
现代文：真实的情况是舜、禹的时候，洪水还没有治理好。尧传位给舜，舜接受禅让作了帝王，于是与禹划分区域，分头到各处去治理洪水。
English: The real situation is that at the time of Yu and Yu, the flood had not yet been well managed. Yu passed the throne to Yu, and Yu accepted Zen and became the emperor, so he and Yu divided the area and went to different places to manage the flood.

古文：尧崩之後，舜老，亦以传於禹。
现代文：尧死了之后，舜已经老了，也就把帝位传给了禹。
English: After Xuan died, Yao, who was already old, passed the imperial throne to Yu.

古文：舜南治水，死於苍梧；禹东治水，死於会嵇。
现代文：这样舜去南方治水，死在苍梧；禹去东方治水，死在会稽。
English: In this way, Yu went to the south to control the water and died in Cangwu; Yu went to the east to control the water and died in Hefei.

古文：贤圣家天下，故因葬焉。
现代文：贤人圣人以天下为家，因此被埋葬在那里。
English: Wise men and sages regard the whole world as their home, so they are buried there.

古文：吴君高说：会稽本山名，夏禹巡守，会计於此山，因以名郡，故曰会稽。
现代文：吴君高说： 会稽本来是山的名称，由于夏禹巡视诸侯，在这座山大会诸侯，计功行赏，于是就用它作为郡的名称，所以叫会稽。 
English: Wu Jungao said: Cui Jing was originally the name of the mountain, because Xia Yu inspected the provinces, and the provinces gathered on this mountain to reward themselves, so they used it as the name of the county, so it was called Cui Jing.

古文：夫言因山名郡可也，言禹巡狩会计於此山，虚也。
现代文：说用山名作郡名，是可以的，但说禹巡视诸侯在此山大会诸侯，计功行赏，则没有根据。
English: It is possible to say that the name of the mountain is used as the name of the county, but there is no basis for saying that Yu inspected the vassals in this mountain assembly of vassals and rewarded them.

古文：巡狩本不至会稽，安得会计於此山？
现代文：禹巡视诸侯本来不会到会稽，怎么会在会稽山会诸侯计功行赏呢？
English: Yu's inspection of the provinces would not have come to the audit, so how could he reward the provinces for their hard work in the audit?

古文：宜听君高之说，诚会稽为会计，禹到南方，何所会计？
现代文：姑且听君高说的，的确会稽是他会诸侯计功行赏的地方，那么禹去南方巡视，又在什么地方大会诸侯，计功行赏呢？
English: Let alone listen to what Jun Gao said, it is indeed the place where he will reward the provinces for their efforts, so Yu went to the south to inspect, and where will the provinces gather to reward their efforts?

古文：如禹始东死於会稽，舜亦巡狩，至於苍梧，安所会计？
现代文：再假设禹开始就往东巡视死在会稽，没有去南方巡视，那么舜也曾经巡视过南方，到过苍梧，又在什么地方会诸侯计功行赏呢？
English: Let's also assume that Yu started his inspection to the east and died at the meeting, and did not go to the south to inspect, then Zou has also inspected the south and has been to Gorgo, and where will the princes reward his efforts?

古文：百王治定则出巡，巡则辄会计，是则四方之山皆会计也。
现代文：历代帝王治定了社会就要出去巡视，出巡就总要会诸侯计功行赏，那么四方到处的大山都成了会诸侯计功行赏的地方了。
English: The emperors of all times decided that the society should go out for inspection, and when they went out for inspection, they should always be rewarded by the lords, so the mountains all over the country have become a place to reward the lords.

古文：百王太平，升封太山。
现代文：历代帝王当社会太平，就要登上泰山顶筑坛祭天。
English: When the society is peaceful, the emperors of all ages must climb to the top of Mount Tai to build an altar to the heavens.

古文：太山之上，封可见者七十有二，纷纶湮灭者，不可胜数。
现代文：光泰山顶上，祭天的遗迹可以看清楚的就有七十二处，至于乱七八糟被湮没的那就数不清了。
English: On the top of Mount Guangtai, there are seventy-two clearly visible relics of the Festival of the Heavens, but there are countless others that have been destroyed in disarray.

古文：如审帝王巡狩辄会计，会计之地如太山封者，四方宜多。
现代文：假使考察一下帝王们巡视总要会诸侯计功行赏的地点，那么像泰山顶祭天遗址一样会诸侯计功行赏的地方，全国各处大概多得很。
English: If we take a look at the places where emperors made their rounds and were always rewarded for their feats, then there are probably many places throughout the country where they were rewarded for their feats, just like the Taishan Peak Festival site.

古文：夫郡国成名，犹万物之名，不可说也。独为会稽立欤？
现代文：郡和诸侯国有名称，就像万物的名称一样，是无法解释的，怎么会单独为会稽郡取名称呢？
English: The names of counties and vassal states, like the names of all things, are inexplicable. How is it possible to name a county of auditors?

古文：周时旧名吴、越也，为吴、越立名，从何往哉？
现代文：会稽郡周代原来的名称叫吴越，为吴越取名称，以前又根据什么呢？
English: The original name of Caijing County in the Zhou Dynasty was Wu Yue. What was the basis for naming it Wu Yue?

古文：六国立名，状当如何？
现代文：为齐、楚、燕、韩、赵、魏六国取名称，情况又该怎么样呢？
English: How should the situation be if the six countries of Qi, Chu, Yan, Han, Zhao, and Wei were to be named?

古文：天下郡国且百余，县邑出万，乡亭聚里，皆有号名，贤圣之才莫能说。
现代文：全国的郡和诸侯国将近一百多，县城超出万座，乡亭村里，都有名称，即使有圣贤的才能也不可能把它们解释清楚。
English: There are nearly a hundred counties and principalities in the country, more than ten thousand county seats, and townships and villages, all of which have names. Even if you have the talent of a sage, it is impossible to explain them clearly.

古文：君高能说会稽，不能辨定方名。会计之说，未可从也。
现代文：君高能解释会稽的名称，但不能辨别判定各地方的名称，因此 会计 的说法不可信。
English: Jun Gao could explain the name of the auditor, but could not distinguish the names of the places of judgment, so the accountant's statement was not credible.

古文：巡狩考正法度，禹时吴为裸国，断发文身，考之无用，会计如何？
现代文：帝王巡视是为了考察，修正地方的法度，那么，禹的时代，吴是个不穿衣服的国家，人们剪短头发，身刺花纹，考察这样的地方，没有丝毫用处，那又为什么要在这里大会诸侯，讨功行赏呢？
English: The emperor's inspection is to inspect and amend the local laws, so, in Yu's time, Wu was a country without clothes. People cut their hair short and had tattoos on their bodies. There is no use in inspecting such a place. So why should the princes gather here to seek rewards?

古文：传书言：舜葬於苍梧，象为之耕；禹葬会稽，鸟为之田。
现代文：传书上说：舜葬在苍梧，象为他耕地；禹葬在会稽，鸟为他耕田。
English: The epitaph says: "He was buried in Gorgo, as if he had ploughed the land for him; he was buried in Hefei, and birds ploughed the fields for him."

古文：盖以圣德所致，天使鸟兽报佑之也。
现代文：大概因为圣人德操导致的缘故，天让鸟兽来报答他们，佑助他们。
English: Probably because of the saint's virtuous conduct, heaven allowed the birds and beasts to reward them and help them.

古文：世莫不然。
现代文：世人对这件事没有不相信是如此的。
English: The world did not believe in this matter, and so it is.

古文：考实之，殆虚言也。
现代文：如果考察一下实际情况，恐怕不真实。
English: If you look at the reality, I'm afraid that's not true.

古文：夫舜、禹之德不能过尧，尧葬於冀州，或言葬於崇山，冀州鸟兽不耕，而鸟兽独为舜、禹耕，何天恩之偏驳也？
现代文：舜和禹的德操不会超过尧。尧葬在冀州，有人说葬在嵩山。冀州的鸟和兽都不为尧耕种，而鸟和兽唯独为舜与禹耕种，为什么天恩这样不公平呢？
English: The virtue of Gong and Yu will not exceed that of Gong. Gong is buried in Jizhou, and some people say that it is buried in Songshan. Birds and beasts in Jizhou are not cultivated for Gong, but birds and beasts are cultivated only for Gong and Yu. Why is it so unfair?

古文：或曰： 舜、禹治水，不得宁处，故舜死於苍梧，禹死於会稽。
现代文：有人说： 因为舜和禹治水，不能安稳地住下来，所以舜死在苍梧，禹死在会稽。
English: Some people said: Because Yu and Zou can't live down safely, Zou died in Cangwu, and Yu died in Hefei.

古文：勤苦有功，故天报之；远离中国，故天痛之。 
现代文：因为勤苦有功，所以天报答他们；由于他们远离中原，所以天怜惜他们。 
English: Because of their hard work and merits, Heaven rewarded them; because they were far away from the Central Plains, Heaven took pity on them.

古文：夫天报舜、禹，使鸟田象耕，何益舜、禹？
现代文：天报答舜和禹，让象为舜耕地，鸟为禹种田，这对舜和禹有什么好处呢？
English: The heavens will reward Zou and Yu. Let the elephants plow the land and the birds cultivate the fields for Yu. What good will this do for Zou and Yu?

古文：天欲报舜、禹，宜使苍梧、会稽常祭祀之。
现代文：天要是想报答舜和禹，就应该使苍梧和会稽的人们经常祭祀他们。
English: If the heavens want to reward Yu and Yu, they should make the people of Cangwu and Huihua worship them regularly.

古文：使鸟兽田耕，不能使人祭。
现代文：让鸟兽为他们种田耕地，不会使人们去祭祀他们。
English: Let the birds and beasts cultivate the land for them, and they will not cause people to sacrifice them.

古文：祭加舜、禹之墓，田施人民之家，天之报佑圣人，何其拙也，且无益哉！
现代文：祭祀供奉的贡品可以放在舜与禹的坟上，而种田只能给当地百姓人家有好处，天要报答佑助圣人，怎么这样苯拙，对舜和禹没有丝毫好处呢！
English: The sacrificial tribute can be placed on the graves of Gong and Yu, while the farmland can only benefit the local people. Heaven must reward the saints, how can it be so bad, it has no benefit to Gong and Yu!

古文：由此言之，鸟田象耕，报佑舜、禹，非其实也。
现代文：由此说来，象耕地鸟种田，天以此来报答舜和禹，并不是事实。
English: Therefore, it is not true that, like a bird that ploughs a field, the heavens use it to reward the virtuous.

古文：实者，苍梧多象之地，会稽众鸟所居。
现代文：事情的真实情况是，苍梧是多象的地方，会稽是众鸟栖息的地方。
English: The truth of the matter is that Cangwu is a place where there are many elephants, and Huizhou is a place where many birds roost.

古文：《禹贡》曰： 彭蠡既潴，阳鸟攸居。 
现代文：《尚书·禹贡》上说： 彭蠡积满了水，就成了候鸟栖息的地方。 
English: "Shangshu Yugong" said: Penghu is full of water and has become a place for migratory birds to roost.

古文：天地之情，鸟兽之行也。
现代文：这是天地间的自然现象，也是鸟兽行动的规律。
English: This is a natural phenomenon between heaven and earth, and it is also the law of the movement of birds and beasts.

古文：象自蹈土，鸟自食苹。
现代文：象自然踩地，鸟自然吃草，土被象踩翻，草被鸟吃尽，就好像田上被耕过的样子。
English: The elephant naturally steps on the ground, the bird naturally eats the grass, the soil is trampled by the elephant, and the grass is eaten up by the bird, just as if the field had been ploughed.

古文：土蹶草尽，若耕田状，壤靡泥易，人随种之，世俗则谓为舜、禹田。
现代文：土壤松碎了，泥块扒平了，人们随之来栽种，社会上一般人就说它是舜田、禹田。
English: The soil is loosely broken, the mud is flattened, people come to plant it, and the average person in the society says that it is Putian and Uda.

古文：海陵麋田，若象耕状，何尝帝王葬海陵者邪？
现代文：海陵麋鹿掘松的田土，好像被耕过一样，又何曾有帝王葬在海陵呢？
English: The land of pine trees dug by elk in Haile is as if it has been ploughed, and how many emperors have been buried in Haile?

古文：传书言：吴王夫差杀伍子胥，煮之於镬，乃以鸱夷橐投之於江。
现代文：传书上说：吴王夫差杀了伍子胥，放在镬里煮，然后用皮口袋装了丢到江里。
English: The letter said: "Wu Wangfu nearly killed Wu Zi Yao, boiled it in a pot, then put it in a leather bag and threw it into the river.

古文：子胥恚恨，驱水为涛，以溺杀人。
现代文：伍子胥很愤恨，于是搅动江水成为波涛，把人淹死。
English: Wu Zixuan was very angry, so he stirred up the river water to become a wave, drowning people.

古文：今时会稽丹徒大江、钱塘浙江，皆立子胥之庙。
现代文：如今会稽，沿丹徒的长江，钱唐的浙江，都建了伍子胥的庙。
English: Nowadays, along the Yangtze River in Dantu and Zhejiang in Qiantang, Wu Zixuan's temples have been built.

古文：盖欲慰其恨心，止其猛涛也。
现代文：大概想安慰他怨恨的心，止住那凶猛的波涛。
English: Perhaps he wanted to soothe his resentful heart and stop the ferocious waves.

古文：夫言吴王杀子胥投之於江，实也；言其恨恚驱水为涛者，虚也。
现代文：说吴王杀死伍子胥，把他丢在江里，有这事；但说他怨恨愤怒搅动江水成为波涛，就没有其事。
English: It is true to say that King Wu killed Wu Zixuan and threw him into the river, but it is not true to say that he resented his anger and stirred up the river into waves.

古文：屈原怀恨，自投湘江，湘江不为涛；申徒狄蹈河而死，河水不为涛。
现代文：屈原怀着怨恨，自投湘江，而湘江没有波涛；申徒狄跳河而死，河水也没有波涛。
English: With resentment, Qu Yuan threw himself into the Hunan River, but there were no waves in the Hunan River; Shentudi jumped into the river and died, but there were no waves in the river.

古文：世人必曰： 屈原、申徒狄不能勇猛，力怒不如子胥。 
现代文：世人一定要说屈原、申徒狄不够勇猛，力量和怒气都不如伍子胥。
English: The world must say that Qu Yuan and Shentu Di are not brave enough, and their strength and anger are not as good as Wu Zixuan.

古文：夫卫菹子路而汉烹彭越，子胥勇猛不过子路、彭越。然二士不能发怒於鼎镬之中，以烹汤菹汁渖漎旁人。
现代文：卫国把子路剁成肉酱，汉高祖把彭越煮成肉汤，伍子胥勇猛不会超过子路和彭越，然而他二人在鼎镬中没有发怒，用煮成的沸汤或肉汁溅击旁边的人。
English: Wei Guo pounded Zilu into meat sauce, and Han Gaozhu boiled Peng Yue into broth. Wu Zilu's bravery would not exceed that of Zilu and Peng Yue. However, the two of them did not get angry in the din, and splashed the people next to them with boiled soup or gravy.

古文：子胥亦自先入镬，後乃入江；在镬中之时，其神安居？
现代文：伍子胥也是开始时先放入镬里，后来才被投到江中。在镬中的时候。他的神魂又在什么地方去了呢？
English: In the beginning, Wu Zi Yao was also put into a cocoon, and later he was thrown into the river. When he was in the cocoon, where did his spirit go?

古文：岂怯於镬汤，勇於江水哉！
现代文：难道他在镬里的开水中胆怯，在江水中就勇猛？
English: Is he timid in the boiling water of the caldron, but brave in the river?

古文：何其怒气前後不相副也？
现代文：为什么他的怒气前后不相符合呢！
English: Why is there no consistency in his anger?

古文：且投於江中，何江也？
现代文：再说投在江中，是哪条江呢？
English: Besides, if you invest in the middle of a river, which river is the source?

古文：有丹徒大江，有钱唐浙江，有吴通陵江。
现代文：是丹徒的长江，钱唐的浙江，还是吴县的通陵江。
English: Is it the Yangtze River in Dantu, Zhejiang in Qiantang, or the Tongling River in Wuxian.

古文：或言投於丹徒大江，无涛，欲言投於钱唐浙江。浙江、山阴江、上虞江皆有涛，三江有涛，岂分橐中之体，散置三江中乎？
现代文：有人说丢在丹徒的长江，但长江中却没汹涌的波涛，想说投在钱唐的浙江，可是浙江、山阴江、上虞江都有汹涌的波涛。三条江都有汹涌的波涛，难道是把皮口袋中的尸体分割开，分别丢入三条江中吗？
English: Some people say that they were thrown into the Yangtze River in Dantu, but there are no turbulent waves in the Yangtze River. They want to say that they were thrown into the Qiantang River in Zhejiang, but there are turbulent waves in Zhejiang, Shanyin River and Shangyu River. There are turbulent waves in the three rivers. Was the corpse in the leather bag separated and thrown into the three rivers separately?

古文：人若恨恚也，仇雠未死，子孙遗在，可也。
现代文：一个人如果怀恨愤怒想报仇，仇敌没有死，或者仇敌的子孙还在，这是可以的。
English: If a man hates and is angry and wants to take revenge, and his enemy is not dead, or his enemy's children are still alive, he may do so.

古文：今吴国已灭，夫差无类，吴为会稽，立置太守，子胥之神，复何怨苦，为涛不止，欲何求索？
现代文：如今吴国已经灭亡，夫差没有后代，吴国已成会稽郡，设置了太守，伍子胥的神魂，还怨恨什么呢？兴起波涛不停止，是想索取什么呢？
English: Now that the State of Wu has perished, and Husbands have no descendants, and the State of Wu has become a county of auditors, and has set up an eunuch, the spirit of Wu Zixuan, what do you still resent? What do you want to claim when the waves rise and do not stop?

古文：吴、越在时，分会稽郡，越治山阴，吴都今吴，馀暨以南属越，钱唐以北属吴。
现代文：吴国和越国存在的时候，分占了今天的会稽郡，越国建都在山阴，吴国建都在今天的吴县，余暨县以南属于越国，钱唐县以北属于吴国。
English: When Wu and Yue existed, they occupied today's Hui County, Yue was built in Shanyin, Wu was built in today's Wuxian, south of Yu Ji County belonged to Yue, and north of Qiantang County belonged to Wuxian.

古文：钱唐之江，两国界也。
现代文：钱唐的江面，是两国的界限。
English: The Qiantang River is the border between the two countries.

古文：山阴、上虞在越界中，子胥入吴之江为涛，当自上吴界中，何为入越之地？
现代文：山阴县和上虞县在越国的界限以内，伍子胥被丢在吴国的江中，兴起的波涛就应该终止在吴国界内，为什么会进入越国的地方？
English: Sanyin County and Shangyu County are within the boundaries of Yue Guo, Wu Zi Yao was thrown into the river of Wu Guo, and the rising waves should have ended within the borders of Wu Guo. Why did they enter the place of Yue Guo?

古文：怨恚吴王、发怒越江，违失道理，无神之验也。
现代文：怀恨愤怒吴王，却在越国的江中发怒，违反了一般的道理，这是伍子胥死后没有神灵的证明。
English: Wu Wang, who harbored hatred and anger, was angry in the middle of the Yue River, violating the general principle. This is proof that there is no god after Wu Zixuan's death.

古文：且夫水难驱，而人易从也。
现代文：况且水难驱使，人容易驱使。
English: Moreover, it is difficult to drive by water, but easy to drive by people.

古文：生任筋力，死用精魂。
现代文：人活着凭的是筋和力，死了靠的是神和魂。
English: A man lives by sinew and strength, and dies by God and soul.

古文：子胥之生，不能从生人营卫其身，自令身死，筋力消绝，精魂飞散，安能为涛？
现代文：伍子胥活着的时候，不能驱使活人营救和保护他自己，自己让自己死去，筋力消灭，神魂飞散，怎么能掀起波涛？
English: When Wu Zixuan was alive, he could not drive the living to rescue and protect himself. He let himself die, his strength was destroyed, and his spirit was scattered. How could he make waves?

古文：使子胥之类数百千人，乘船渡江，不能越水。
现代文：即使像伍子胥这样的人有数百千人之多，他们也只能坐船渡江，不会只身越过江水。
English: Even if there are hundreds of thousands of people like Wu Zixuan, they can only cross the river by boat, and will not cross the river by themselves.

古文：一子胥之身，煮汤镬之中，骨肉糜烂，成为羹菹，何能有害也？
现代文：伍子胥的整个身体，在镬中被开水煮，骨肉被煮得稀烂，成为肉汤，怎么能掀起波涛危害人呢？
English: How can the whole body of Wu Zi Yao, which was boiled in boiling water in the crucible, and the bones and meat were boiled thinly to become broth, set off waves to harm people?

古文：周宣王杀其臣杜伯，燕简公杀其臣庄子义。
现代文：周宣王杀了他的大臣杜伯，燕简公杀了他的大臣庄子义。
English: Zhou Xuan Wang killed his minister Du Bo, Yan Jian Gong killed his minister Zhuo Ziyi.

古文：其後杜伯射宣王，庄子义害简公，事理似然，犹为虚言。
现代文：后来杜伯的阴魂射死了宣王，庄子义的阴魂打死了简公。事理好像是这样，但仍然是假话。
English: Later, the ghost of Du Bo shot and killed Xuan Wang, and the ghost of Zhuo Ziyi shot and killed Jian Gong. This seems to be the case, but it is still a lie.

古文：今子胥不能完体，为杜伯、子义之事以报吴王，而驱水往来，岂报仇之义、有知之验哉？
现代文：如今伍子胥不能使身体保持完整，像杜伯和庄子义做的那样去报复吴王，而是来回地驱赶着水，那点有报仇的意思，这是有知识的证明吗！
English: Now Wu Zixuan can't keep his body intact and take revenge on King Wu like Du Bo and Zhuo Zixuan did. Instead, he chases the water back and forth. That has the meaning of revenge. Is this a proof of knowledge?

古文：俗语不实，成为丹青；丹青之文，贤圣惑焉。
现代文：社会上流传的不真实的话，变成了历史记载。而记载历史的文章，圣贤看后也会被迷惑。
English: The untrue words circulating in society have become historical records, and the sages will also be confused after reading the articles that record history.

古文：夫地之有百川也，犹人之有血脉也。
现代文：地上有众多的河流，如同人有血脉一样。
English: There are as many rivers on the earth as there are human bloodlines.

古文：血脉流行，泛扬动静，自有节度。
现代文：血在血管中流动，脉搏显得一张一驰，自然而有节奏。
English: Blood flows in the blood vessels, and the pulse appears to be racing, natural and rhythmic.

古文：百川亦然，其朝夕往来，犹人之呼吸气出入也。
现代文：众多的河流也一样，它们的早潮和晚潮一来一去，就像人的呼吸出气和进气一样。
English: So are many rivers; their morning and evening tides come and go, just as a man's breath comes and goes.

古文：天地之性，上古有之，《经》曰： 江、汉朝宗於海。 
现代文：这些天地的本性，上古的时候也是有的。
English: These heavenly and earthly natures also existed in ancient times.

古文：唐、虞之前也，其发海中之时，漾驰而已；入三江之中，殆小浅狭，水激沸起，故腾为涛。
现代文：经书上说： 长江和汉水的潮水都来源于大海，尧、舜以前，它们从大海中出发的时候，水面宽阔、平缓；一流进三江里，大概因为江小，江床浅，江面狭窄，于是水急浪起，所以腾涌成为波涛。
English: The sutra says: The tidal waters of the Yangtze River and the Han River both originate from the sea. Before the Yangtze and Han Rivers, when they set out from the sea, the water surface was broad and smooth; when they entered the three rivers, probably because the river was small, the river bed was shallow, and the river surface was narrow, the water surged, so the surging became waves.

古文：广陵曲江有涛，文人赋之。
现代文：广陵的曲江有汹涌的波涛，文人曾作赋描述它。
English: The Qujiang River in Guangling has turbulent waves, and literati have written about it.

古文：大江浩洋，曲江有涛，竟以隘狭也。
现代文：大江浩浩荡荡，而曲江却有波涛，到底是由于它江面狭窄的缘故。
English: The Dajiang River is vast and turbulent, while the Qujiang River has waves, ultimately due to the narrowness of its surface.

古文：吴杀其身，为涛广陵，子胥之神，竟无知也。
现代文：伍子胥在吴都被杀身，却在广陵驱水成为波涛，可见他的神灵到底是无知的。
English: Wu Zixuan was killed in Wu, but he drove the water to become waves in Guangling, which shows that his god is ignorant.

古文：溪谷之深，流者安洋，浅多沙石，激扬为濑。
现代文：溪谷本来很深，水流是平静的，后来流经的地方由于河床浅沙石多，激荡成为急流。
English: Originally, the valley was very deep, and the water flow was calm. Later, because the riverbed was shallow and rocky, the place it flowed through became a rapid.

古文：夫涛濑，一也。
现代文：看来波涛的形成跟山间急流形成的道理是相同的。
English: It seems that the formation of waves is the same as the formation of mountain rapids.

古文：谓子胥为涛，谁居溪谷为濑者乎？
现代文：要说是伍子胥驱水成为波涛，那么又是谁在溪谷里制造急流呢？
English: If Wu Zixuan drives water to become waves, then who creates rapids in the valley?

古文：案涛入三江，岸沸踊，中央无声。
现代文：考察一下波涛涌进三江，江岸被汹涌波涛拍打，江心却没有涛声。
English: Take a look at the waves surging into the Sanjiang River. The riverbank is being beaten by the surging waves, but there is no sound of waves in the middle of the river.

古文：必以子胥为涛，子胥之身，聚岸涯也？
现代文：如果一定要认为是伍子胥驱水成为波涛，那么他的尸体就该聚集在岸边。
English: If it must be thought that Wu Zixuan drove the water to become a wave, then his body should be gathered on the shore.

古文：涛之起也，随月盛衰，小大满损不齐同。
现代文：波涛的发生，随着月亮的圆缺而变化，其大小也随月亮的圆缺而不一样。
English: The occurrence of waves varies with the phase of the moon, and their size also varies with the phase of the moon.

古文：如子胥为涛，子胥之怒，以月为节也？
现代文：如果是伍子胥驱水成为波涛，那么他的怒气也会因月亮的圆缺变化而成为他的节度。
English: If Wu Zixuan drives water to become waves, then his anger will also become his measure due to the lack of the moon.

古文：三江时风，扬疾之波亦溺杀人，子胥之神，复为风也？
现代文：三江有时刮风，扬起迅猛的波涛也淹死过人，这样说来伍子胥的神灵，又成为风了。
English: The wind sometimes blows in the Sanjiang River, and the swift and violent waves have drowned people. In this way, the god of Wu Zixuan has become the wind again.

古文：秦始皇渡湘水，遭风，问湘山何祠。左右对曰： 尧之女，舜之妻也。 
现代文：秦始皇过湘水，碰上大风，就问湘山祭祀的是什么神，左右的人回答说： 是尧的女儿，舜的妻子。 
English: When Qin Shihuang crossed the Xiangshui River and encountered a strong wind, he asked what god was worshipped in the Xiangshan Mountains. The people around him replied, "She is the daughter of Yao, the wife of Yao."

古文：始皇太怒，使刑徒三千人，斩湘山之树而履之。
现代文：秦始皇大怒，于是叫三千从事苦役的罪犯砍掉湘山上的树木并且践踏它们。
English: Enraged, Qin Shi Huang ordered three thousand convicts to cut down the trees on Mount Xiang and trample them.

古文：夫谓子胥之神为涛，犹谓二女之精为风也。
现代文：那么说伍子胥的神灵驱水成为波涛，就像说尧的二个女儿的精灵变成风一样。
English: So to say that the god of Wu Zixuan drove the water to become a wave is like saying that the spirits of Wu Zixuan's two daughters became the wind.

古文：传书言：孔子当泗水而葬，泗水为之却流。
现代文：传书上说：孔子对着泗水而葬，泗水为之倒流。
English: According to the biography, Confucius was buried facing the stream, and the stream flowed backwards.

古文：此言孔子之德，能使水却，不湍其墓也。
现代文：这是说孔子的圣贤德操，能够使水回流，不去冲坏他的坟墓。
English: This is to say that the wisdom and virtue of Confucius can make the water flow back and not ruin his grave.

古文：世人信之。
现代文：世人也就相信它。
English: And the world believes it.

古文：是故儒者称论，皆言孔子之後当封，以泗水却流为证。如原省之，殆虚言也。
现代文：于是儒者称颂评论，都说孔子的后代应该封爵，并拿泗水回流作为证明，假如推究考查一下这件事，恐怕是句假话。
English: As a result, Confucianists praised and commented that the descendants of Confucius should be knighted, and took the backflow of Surabaya as proof. If you investigate and examine this matter, I am afraid it is a lie.

古文：夫孔子死，孰与其生？
现代文：孔子死后，比他生前怎么样？
English: After the death of Confucius, how is it better than when he was alive?

古文：生能操行，慎道应天，死，操行绝，天佑至德，故五帝、三王招致瑞应，皆以生存，不以死亡。
现代文：生前能修养操行，谨慎地遵循先王之道，顺应天意，死后操行也就断绝了。天祐助他道德最高尚，所以五帝、三王为他招来吉兆，都应该在他活着的时候，不应该在死后。
English: During his lifetime, he was able to cultivate his behavior, prudently follow the path of the previous kings, and comply with the will of heaven. After his death, his behavior was cut off. Heaven help him, his morality is the highest, so the five emperors and three kings should bring him good omens while he is alive, not after his death.

古文：孔子生时，推排不容，故叹曰： 凤鸟不至，河不出图，吾已矣夫！ 
现代文：孔子生前被拒绝排斥，不被容纳，所以叹息说： 凤凰不飞来，黄河没有图出现，我这辈子已经完了！ 
English: During his lifetime, Confucius was rejected, ostracized, and not accepted, so he sighed and said, "If the phoenix does not fly and the Yellow River does not appear, then my life is over!"

古文：生时无佑，死反有报乎？
现代文：孔子生前没有得到天的祐助，死后反而得到天的回报？
English: Confucius did not receive divine assistance during his lifetime, but was rewarded by heaven after his death?

古文：孔子之死，五帝、三王，之死也。
现代文：孔子死，跟五帝、三王死一样。
English: Confucius died, as did the Five Emperors and the Three Kings.

古文：五帝、三王无佑，孔子之死独有天报，是孔子之魂圣，五帝之精不能神也。
现代文：五帝、三王死后都没有得到天的祐助，唯独孔子死后得到天的祐助，这岂不是孔子的魂魄圣灵，而五帝、三王的精灵不那么神明了。
English: After the death of the Five Emperors and Three Kings, none of them received divine assistance. Only Confucius received divine assistance after his death. Wasn't it the Holy Spirit that was the soul of Confucius, while the spirits of the Five Emperors and Three Kings were not so godly?

古文：泗水无知，为孔子却流，天神使之。然则，孔子生时，天神不使人尊敬。
现代文：泗水无知，它为孔子回流，是天的神灵让它这样做的活，那么孔子生前，天的神灵为什么不叫人们尊敬他呢？
English: Ignorance is like water, it flows back to Confucius, it is the work of the gods of heaven to make it do so. So why didn't the gods of heaven make people respect Confucius when he was alive?

古文：如泗水却流，天欲封孔子之後，孔子生时，功德应天，天不封其身，乃欲封其後乎？是盖水偶自却流。
现代文：如果泗水回流是天想封孔子后代的征兆，那么孔子生前，功德应该符合天意，天却不封他本人，竟要封他的后代呢，这大概是河水碰巧自然回流。
English: If the return of the floodwaters is a sign that heaven wants to seal the descendants of Confucius, then when Confucius was alive, his merits should have been in line with the will of heaven. However, heaven did not seal him personally, but wanted to seal his descendants. This is probably a natural return of the river by chance.

古文：江河之流，有回复之处；百川之行，或易道更路，与却流无以异。
现代文：江河中的流水，有其迂回的地方，众多江河的流向，有时也会改变河道，这跟河水回流没有什么不同。
English: Flowing water in rivers has its detours, the flow direction of many rivers, sometimes changing the river channel, which is no different from the return flow of river water.

古文：则泗水却流，不为神怪也。
现代文：可见泗水回流，算不上神奇的事。
English: It can be seen that the backflow of salty water is not a magical thing.

古文：传书称：魏公子之德，仁惠下士，兼及鸟兽。
现代文：传书上称颂：魏公子贤德，能仁爱对待士人，并施及鸟兽。
English: According to the biography, he was praised as a wise and virtuous Wei prince who was able to treat scholars with benevolence and love, and was kind to birds and beasts.

古文：方与客饮，有鹯击鸠。
现代文：他正在跟客人喝酒，看见有只鹯追击一只斑鸠。
English: He was drinking with guests when he saw a badger chasing a tawny owl.

古文：鸠走，巡於公子案下。
现代文：斑鸠逃跑，在魏公子的几案下转来转去。
English: Tachibana ran away and went back and forth between several of Wei Gongzi's cases.

古文：追击，杀於公子之前，公子耻之，即使人多设罗，得鹯数十枚，责让以击鸠之罪。
现代文：鹯继续追击斑鸠，终于在魏公子面前把它啄死。魏公子以自己不能保护这只斑鸠为耻辱，立即叫人多设罗网捕鹯，捕到了数十只鹯，并以击杀斑鸠的罪过进行谴责。
English: The baboon continued to chase the turtle dove, and finally strangled it to death in front of Wei Gongzi. Wei Gongzi took the shame of not being able to protect the turtle dove as his own, and immediately called for more people to set up nets to catch turtles. Dozens of turtles were caught, and they were condemned for the crime of killing turtle doves.

古文：击鸠之鹯，低头不敢仰视，公子乃杀之。
现代文：追击斑鸠的那只鹯，低着头不敢仰视，魏公子于是杀了它。
English: The dragonfly that chased the turtledove kept its head down, not daring to look up, so Wei Gongzi killed it.

古文：鹯世称之曰： 魏公子为鸠报仇。 
现代文：世人称颂魏公子说： 魏公子为斑鸠报仇。 
English: The world praised Wei Gongzi and said: "Wei Gongzi took revenge for the turtledove."

古文：此虚言也。
现代文：这是句假话。
English: That's a lie.

古文：夫鹯，物也，情心不同，音语不通。圣人不能使鸟兽为义理之行，公子何人，能使鹯低头自责？
现代文：鹯是动物，与人的心情不同，语音不通，圣人尚且不可能叫鸟兽按道义公理去办，魏公子是什么人，能使鹯低下头自我责备？
English: The dragonfly is an animal, its mood is different from that of humans, its voice is not clear, and it is impossible for a saint to call the birds and beasts to act according to moral justice. What kind of person is Wei Gongzi, who can make the dragonfly lower its head and blame itself?

古文：鸟为者以千万数，向击鸠蜚去，安可复得？
现代文：鸟属于鹯的用千万数，以前它们攻击了斑鸠之后就飞离远去，怎么能再捉到？
English: Tens of millions of birds belong to the cormorant family. In the past, when they attacked the pied cormorant, they flew away. How could they be caught again?

古文：能低头自责，是圣鸟也。
现代文：能够低下头自我责备的，这是圣鸟。
English: It is a sacred bird that can lower its head and reproach itself.

古文：晓公子之言，则知公子之行矣。知公子之行，则不击鸠於其前。
现代文：知道魏公子的说话，就知道魏公子的所作所为，知道了魏公子的所作所为，就不会在他的面前攻击斑鸠。
English: If you know Wei Gongzi's words, you will know Wei Gongzi's deeds. If you know Wei Gongzi's deeds, you will not attack Tachibanao in front of him.

古文：人犹不能改过，鸟与人异，谓之能悔，世俗之语，失物类之实也。
现代文：人尚且不会悔改过错，鸟与人不同，却说它们能知过悔改。可见，社会上一般人的话，违背了物类的实际情况。
English: People still do not repent of their mistakes, but birds, unlike people, say they can know repentance. It can be seen that the words of ordinary people in society are contrary to the actual situation of the species.

古文：或时公子实捕鹯，鹯得。人持其头，变折其颈，疾痛低垂，不能仰视。缘公子惠义之人，则因褒称，言鹯服过。
现代文：或许是魏公子确实捕捉到了鹯，鹯被捉到，人抓着它的头，扭折它颈子，痛得垂下头，不能仰视，于是有人顺着魏公子是个仁爱的人，就以此赞扬他，说鹯认了错。
English: Perhaps it was Wei Gongzi who actually caught the toad, the toad was caught, the person grasped its head, twisted its neck, hung his head in pain and could not look up, so someone followed Wei Gongzi as a benevolent person, praised him with this and said that the toad admitted the mistake.

古文：盖言语之次，空生虚妄之美；功名之下，常有非实之加。
现代文：这恐怕是言谈话语之间，凭空捏造出来的没有根据的美言；在一个人有功业盛名的情况下，往往会有不符合事实的虚夸。
English: I'm afraid that this is an unfounded saying fabricated out of thin air between conversations; in the case of a person with a distinguished career, there are often false boasts that do not correspond to the facts.

古文：传书言：齐桓公妻姑姊妹七人。
现代文：传书上说：齐桓公娶了他的姑姊妹七人为妻。
English: The biography said: Prince Qi Huan married seven of his sisters-in-law.

古文：此言虚也。
现代文：这是句假话。
English: This allegation is false.

古文：夫乱骨肉，犯亲戚，无上下之序者，禽兽之性，则乱不知伦理。
现代文：淫乱骨肉，冒犯亲戚，不讲尊卑、长幼，禽兽的本性，就是没有秩序，不知道伦理。
English: Fornication, offending relatives, not caring about superiority and inferiority, the nature of animals, there is no order, and they do not know ethics.

古文：案桓公九合诸侯，一匡天下，道之以德，将之以威，以故诸侯服从，莫敢不率，非内乱怀鸟兽之性者所能为也。
现代文：考察齐桓公多次召集诸侯会盟，匡正天下诸侯，用道德引导他们，以威望统率他们，所以诸侯服从，没有谁敢不恭顺，这并非在家中胡作非为，心怀鸟兽本性的人所能做到的。
English: According to the investigation, Prince Qi Huan repeatedly convened the association of lords, upheld the lords of the world, guided them with morality, and led them with prestige. Therefore, the lords obeyed, and no one dared to disobey. This is not something that can be done by people who behave badly at home and have the nature of birds and beasts.

古文：夫率诸侯朝事王室，耻上无势而下无礼也。
现代文：率领诸侯为周王室办事，以周天子无权势而诸侯无礼为耻辱。
English: He led the lords to work for the Zhou royal family. It was a disgrace that Zhou Tianzi had no power and the lords were rude.

古文：外耻礼之不存，内何犯礼而自坏？
现代文：在家庭之外尚且因礼制被废弃而感到可耻，在家庭之内怎么会冒犯礼教而自己败坏道德呢？
English: Outside the home, one may feel ashamed because the etiquette has been abandoned, but inside the home, how can one offend etiquette and corrupt morality?

古文：外内不相副，则功无成而威不立矣。
现代文：家庭内外不相符合，就会功业不成而威望不立。
English: If the inside and outside of the family do not match, then achievements will not be made and prestige will not be established.

古文：世称桀、纣之恶，不言淫於亲戚。
现代文：世人诉说夏桀、商纣的罪恶，没有说他淫乱亲戚。
English: The world tells of the sins of Hsia-tung and Shang-tung, but not of his adulterous relatives.

古文：实论者谓夫桀、纣恶微於亡秦，亡秦过泊於王莽，无淫乱之言。
现代文：据实论事的人认为夏桀、商纣的罪恶比被灭亡的秦朝小，被灭秦朝的罪过比王莽篡权轻，但对他们都没有淫乱的说法。
English: According to the truth-tellers, the sins of the Xia and Shang dynasties were smaller than those of the Qin dynasty, and the sins of the Qin dynasty were lighter than Wang Mang's usurpation of power, but there was no word of fornication for them.

古文：桓公妻姑姊七人，恶浮於桀、纣，而过重於秦、莽也。
现代文：齐桓公娶姑姊妹七个人，罪恶超过夏桀、商纣，罪过比胡亥使秦灭国和王莽篡权还严重。
English: Prince Qi Huan married seven of his sister-in-law's sisters. His crime exceeded that of Xia Yao and Shang Yao, and his crime was even more serious than that of Hu Hai, who caused Qin to destroy the country and Wang Mang to usurp power.

古文：《春秋》采毫毛之美，贬纤芥之恶。
现代文：《春秋》 表彰细小的美德，贬斥细微的罪过。 
English: "Spring and Autumn" praises small virtues and condemns small sins.

古文：桓公恶大，不贬何哉？
现代文：齐桓公罪恶如此之大，为什么不受贬斥呢？
English: The evil of Prince Qi Huan is so great, why is he not condemned?

古文：鲁文姜，齐襄公之妹也，襄公通焉。
现代文：鲁文姜是齐襄公的妹妹，襄公与她通奸。
English: Lu Wenjiang was the sister of Qi Xiangong, with whom Xiangong committed adultery.

古文：《春秋》经曰： 庄二年冬，夫人姜氏会齐侯於郜。 
现代文：《春秋》经上说： 鲁庄公二年冬天，鲁桓公的夫人姜氏在郜会见齐襄公。 
English: "Spring and Autumn" scripture says: In the winter of the second year of Lu Zhuang Gong, Lu Huan Gong's wife Jiang met with Qi Xiang Gong in Handan.

古文：《春秋》何尤於襄公，而书其奸？何宥於桓公，隐而不讥？
现代文：《春秋》为什么要责备齐襄公，并记录他的奸情；为什么又要宽恕齐桓公，隐藏其淫乱之情而不指责呢？
English: Why does "Spring and Autumn" blame Prince Qi Xiang and record his adultery; why should it forgive Prince Qi Huan and hide his adultery and not blame him?

古文：如经失之，传家左丘明、公羊、谷梁何讳不言？
现代文：如果是《春秋》记载有遗漏，那解释《春秋》的左丘明、公羊、谷梁为什么要回避不说呢？
English: If "Spring and Autumn" contains omissions, then why avoid mentioning Zuo Quming, Ram and Gu Liang, who explain "Spring and Autumn"?

古文：案桓公之过，多内宠，内嬖如夫人者六。有五公子争立，齐乱，公薨三月乃讣。
现代文：考察一下齐桓公的过失是宠爱的女人过多，像夫人一样受宠爱的女人有六个，有五个儿子争夺君位，致使齐国混乱，齐桓公死后三个月才公布死讯。
English: Let's take a look at the fault of Prince Qi Huan: he loved too many women. There were six women who were loved as much as his wife, and five sons competed for the throne, leading to chaos in Qi. It took three months after Prince Qi Huan's death for the news of his death to be announced.

古文：世闻内嬖六人，嫡庶无别，则言乱於姑姊妹七人矣。
现代文：世人听见他有六个像夫人样受宠的女人，妻妾无别，就说他淫乱于姑姊妹七个人。
English: When the world heard that he had six beloved wives and concubines, it was said that he had committed fornication with seven of his sisters.

古文：传书言：齐桓公负妇人而朝诸侯，此言桓公之淫乱无礼甚也。
现代文：传书上说： 齐桓公背着妇人来接受诸侯朝见。这是说齐桓公淫乱和无礼到了极点。
English: According to the biography: "Qi Kuan Gong carried his wife on his back to meet the princes. This means that Qi Kuan Gong was extremely promiscuous and impolite.

古文：夫桓公大朝之时，负妇人於背，其游宴之时，何以加此？
现代文：齐桓公在举行盛大朝会的时候，背上背着个女人，那游乐的时候，还有什么能超过这种做法呢？
English: When Prince Qi Huan held a grand imperial court banquet, he carried a woman on his back. But when it comes to having fun, what could be better than this?

古文：方修士礼，崇历肃敬，负妇人於背，何以能率诸侯朝事王室？
现代文：正当要整治诸侯礼节，推崇和鼓励庄重、恭敬的时候，背上背着个女人，怎么能率领诸侯替周王室办事？
English: When it was time to rectify the etiquette of the princes, to promote and encourage solemnity and respect, how could he lead the princes to do things for the Zhou royal family with a woman on his back?

古文：葵丘之会，桓公骄矜，当时诸侯畔者九国。
现代文：在葵丘会盟上，齐桓公骄傲自大，当时诸侯背离他的就有九个国家。
English: At the Kwai Chuk Association, Prince Qi Huan was proud and arrogant. At that time, there were nine countries whose lords had turned their backs on him.

古文：睚眦不得，九国畔去，况负妇人，淫乱之行，何以肯留？
现代文：怒目而视，礼貌不当。有九国背离，何况是背着女人这种淫乱行为，他们怎么肯留下呢？
English: With glaring eyes and improper manners, how can they stay when nine nations have turned away, not to mention this lewd behavior behind a woman's back?

古文：或曰： 管仲告诸侯：吾君背有疽创，不得妇人，疮不衰愈。
现代文：有人说： 管仲告诉诸侯说，我的君主背上有个毒疮，没有女人伏在背上，疮病就不会减轻、痊愈。
English: Some people said: Guanzhong told the princes that my lord had a poisonous sore on his back, and without a woman lying on his back, the sore would not be alleviated and healed.

古文：诸侯信管仲，故无畔者。 
现代文：诸侯们相信了管仲的话，所以没有背离的。
English: The lords believed Guanzhong's words, so they did not deviate.

古文：夫十室之邑，必有忠信若孔子。
现代文：其实，有十户人家的地方，一定有像孔子一样忠诚遵循礼制的。
English: In fact, where there are ten households, there must be someone who faithfully follows the etiquette like Confucius.

古文：当时诸侯千人以上，必知方术治疽，不用妇人。
现代文：当时在场的诸侯和各国官史有千人以上，肯定有知道医术，治疗毒疮不用女人伏在背上的，而是管仲在为他的君王掩饰淫乱行为。
English: At that time, there were more than a thousand princes and officials from various countries present, and they must have known the medical skills to treat poisonous sores without a woman lying on her back. Instead, Guanzhong was covering up adulterous behavior for his king.

古文：管仲为君讳也，诸侯知仲为君讳而欺己，必恚怒而畔去，何以能久统会诸侯，成功於霸？
现代文：诸侯们要是知道了在为他的君王掩饰淫乱行为而欺骗自已，必然会愤怒而背离，那么齐桓公又怎么能长期地统率、会盟诸侯，成就霸业呢？
English: If the lords knew that they were deceiving themselves by covering up for their king's adulterous behavior, they would inevitably become angry and turn away, so how could King Qi Kuan lead the lords for a long time and achieve hegemony?

古文：或曰： 桓公实无道，任贤相管仲，故能霸天下。 
现代文：有人说： 齐桓公确实没有道义，因为任用了贤能的宰相管仲，所以才能够称霸天下。 
English: Some people said: Qi Kuan Gong really has no morality, because he appointed a virtuous prime minister Guan Zhong, so he was able to dominate the world.

古文：夫无道之人，与狂无异，信谗远贤，反害仁义，安能任管仲，能养人令之成事：桀杀关龙逢，纣杀王子比干，无道之君莫能用贤。
现代文：其实，没有道义的人，跟狂人没有差别，听信谗言，疏远贤人，违反和损害仁义，怎么能任用管仲，怎么能养一班人，并支配他们呢？以往的事例是：夏桀杀关龙逢，商纣杀王子比干，说明没有道义的君主，不会任用贤人。
English: In fact, there is no difference between a person without morality and a madman, who listens to advice, alienates the wise, violates and damages benevolence, how can he appoint a middle man, how can he raise a group of people and control them? The previous examples are: Xia Yao killed Guan Longfeng, Shang Yao killed Prince Bi Gan, indicating that a monarch without morality will not appoint a wise man.

古文：使管仲贤，桓公不能用；用管仲，故知桓公无乱行也。
现代文：即使管仲贤能，齐桓公也不会任用他；重用管仲，所以知道齐桓公没有淫乱行为。
English: Even if Guanzhong was a virtuous man, King Qi Huan would not have appointed him; he reused Guanzhong, so he knew that King Qi Huan did not commit adultery.

古文：有贤明之君，故有贞良之臣。
现代文：有贤明的君主，必定有忠贞贤良的臣子。
English: If there is a wise monarch, there must be loyal and virtuous vassals.

古文：臣贤，君明之验，奈何谓之有乱？
现代文：臣子贤能，是君主贤明的证明，怎么能说齐桓公有淫乱的行为呢？
English: The ability of a vassal is proof of the wisdom of the monarch. How can it be said that Prince Qi Huan had sexual misconduct?

古文：难曰： 卫灵公无道之君，时知贤臣。
现代文：有人责难说： 卫灵公是个没有道义的君主，当时也知道任用贤臣。
English: Some people reproached: "Wei Ling Gong is a monarch without morality. He also knew how to appoint wise men at that time.

古文：管仲为辅，何明桓公不为乱也？ 
现代文：管仲做齐桓公辅佐，怎么就能证明齐桓公不做淫乱的事？
English: How can Guanzhong, as the assistant of Prince Qihuan, prove that Prince Qihuan does not do lewd things?

古文：夫灵公无道，任用三臣，仅以不丧，非有功行也。
现代文：其实，卫灵公没有道义，任用仲叔圄等三位大臣，只是做到不亡国，并没有任何功绩和作为。
English: In fact, Wei Ling Gong did not have any morality. He only appointed three ministers, including Zhong Shuxuan, to ensure that the country would not be destroyed. He did not have any achievements or deeds.

古文：桓公尊九九之人，拔宁戚於车下，责苞茅不贡，运兵功楚，九合诸侯，一匡天下，千世一出之主也。而云负妇人於背，虚矣。
现代文：齐桓公能尊重懂算术的人，能把给人赶车地位低下的宁戚提拔起来，能指责楚国不向周室进贡芭茅而载兵去攻打楚国，能多次召集诸侯会盟，匡正天下诸侯，这是一千代才出现一个的君主，却说他把女人背在背上，可见不真实。
English: King Qi Kuan could respect a person who understood arithmetic, could promote a lower-ranking relative to a person who drove a car, could accuse the State of Chu of attacking the State of Chu without paying tribute to the Zhou Dynasty, could repeatedly convene the Princes' Alliance, and was the ruler of all princes in the world. It took a thousand generations for a monarch to appear, but it is not true to say that he carried a woman on his back.

古文：说《尚书》者曰： 周公居摄，带天子之绶，戴天子之冠，负扆南面而朝诸侯。 
现代文：解释《尚书》的人说： 周公处于摄政地位，掌握天子的大印，戴着天子的帽子，背靠屏风，面朝南边，接受诸侯朝拜。 
English: The person who explained "Shangshu" said: Zhou Gong is in the position of regent, grasping the great seal of the heavenly son, wearing the heavenly son's hat, with his back against the screen, facing south, accepting the worship of the princes.

古文：户牖之间曰扆，南面之坐位也。
现代文：门窗之间叫 扆 ，是面朝南的座位。
English: Between the doors and windows is called, which is a south-facing seat.

古文：负南面乡坐，扆在後也。
现代文：背靠屏风，面朝南坐，屏风在人的身后。
English: Sit with your back against the screen, facing south, with the screen behind you.

古文：桓公朝诸侯之时，或南面坐，妇人立於後也。
现代文：齐桓公接受诸侯朝拜的时候，也许是面朝南坐着，女人在他身后站着。
English: When Lord Qi Huan accepted the prostration of the lords, he may have sat facing south, with the woman standing behind him.

古文：世俗传云，则曰负妇人於背矣。
现代文：于是社会上流传，就说他背上背着个女人。
English: As a result, it was said in society that he was carrying a woman on his back.

古文：此则夔一足、宋丁公凿井得一人之语也。
现代文：这就像夔只有一只脚，宋国的丁老头挖井得到一个人的传说一样。
English: This is just like the legend that the dragonfly only has one foot and that the old man Ding dug a well in Song Dynasty to get a human being.

古文：唐、虞时，夔为大夫，性知音乐，调声悲善。
现代文：尧、舜的时候，夔当大夫，生性通晓音乐，奏乐的声音非常动听。
English: When it's time to play the gong, the gong is the doctor. By nature, the gong understands music, and the sound of the music is very beautiful.

古文：当时人曰： 调乐如夔一足矣。 
现代文：当时的人说： 像夔这样擅长演奏乐曲的人，有一个就够了。 
English: People at the time said: One person who is as good at playing music as Gong is enough.

古文：世俗传言： 夔一足。 
现代文：可是社会上却流传说： 夔只有一只脚。 
English: However, there is a legend circulating in the community: Toads only have one foot.

古文：案秩宗官缺，帝舜博求，众称伯夷，伯夷稽首让於夔龙。
现代文：据考察舜时秩宗官缺人，帝舜广泛地寻求适当人选，众人推举伯夷，伯夷叩头致谢一定要让给夔和龙。
English: According to the investigation, there was a shortage of officials of the Chichibu sect at that time, and the imperial court extensively searched for suitable candidates. The people voted for Bo Yi, and Bo Yi's kowtow to express gratitude must be given to Zou and Long.

古文：秩宗卿官，汉之宗正也。
现代文：秩宗是卿之类的官，相当于汉朝的宗正。
English: Chichizong is a kind of official, equivalent to the Han Dynasty's Zongzheng.

古文：断足，非其理也。
现代文：说夔断了一只脚，这不符合当秩宗的常理。
English: Saying that he broke a foot does not conform to the common sense of being a Chichibu.

古文：且一足之人，何用行也？
现代文：况且只有一只脚的人，靠什么走路？
English: Besides, what does a one-legged man rely on to walk?

古文：夏後孔甲，田於东蓂山，天雨晦冥，入於民家，主人方乳。
现代文：夏王孔甲在东蓂山打猎，遇雨天色昏暗，走进一个老百姓家，主人正在生孩子。
English: Xia Wang Kongjia went hunting in the East Lushan Mountains. When it rained, the sky was dark. He walked into an ordinary people's home. The owner was giving birth to a child.

古文：或曰： 後来之子必贵。 
现代文：有人说： 君王来到，这个孩子一定富贵。 
English: Some people say: When the king comes, this child must be rich.

古文：或曰： 不胜，之子必贱。 
现代文：有人又说： 受不了这福分，这孩子必定卑贱。 
English: Someone else said, "If he can't stand this blessing, he must be a lowly child."

古文：孔甲曰： 为余子，孰能贱之？ 
现代文：孔甲说： 做我的儿子，谁能使他卑贱？ 
English: Kongjia said, "Being my son, who can humble him?"

古文：遂载以归，析缭，斧斩其足，卒为守者。
现代文：于是把孩子放在车上带回去了。后来孩子长大劈柴，斧子砍断了他一只脚，终于只当了个看门人。
English: So he put the child in the car and took him back. Later, the child grew up to chop wood, and the axe cut off one of his feet, and finally he only worked as a janitor.

古文：孔甲之欲贵之子，有余力矣，断足无宜，故为守者。
现代文：孔甲想使这孩子富贵，他有富余的力量，孩子断了一只脚，没有适宜的官做，所以只好当了看门人。
English: Kong Jia wanted to make the child rich, he had surplus power, the child broke a foot, there was no suitable official, so he had to be a janitor.

古文：今夔一足，无因趋步，坐调音乐，可也；秩宗之官，不宜一足，犹守者断足，不可贵也。
现代文：如今说夔只有一只脚，无法快步走，坐着演奏音乐，是可以的。当秩宗官，不宜只有一只脚，像看门人断了脚，就不能富贵一样。
English: Nowadays, it is possible to say that a baboon has only one foot and cannot walk quickly or sit and play music. It is not appropriate to have only one foot when you are a chancellor, just as a janitor cannot be rich if he has a broken foot.

古文：孔甲不得贵之子，伯夷不得让於夔焉。
现代文：孔甲不能使孩子富贵，伯夷也不会把秩宗让给夔。
English: Kong Jia can't make his children rich, and Bo Yi won't give Chizong to Zhou.

古文：宋丁公者，宋人也。
现代文：宋国的丁老头是宋国人。
English: Ding Lao Tou of the Song Dynasty was a native of the Song Dynasty.

古文：未凿井时，常有寄汲，计之，日去一人作。
现代文：自己没有挖井的时候，常去别人家打水，计算起来，每天要花去一个人的劳动。
English: When he is not digging a well, he often goes to other people's homes to fetch water. It is calculated that it takes one person's labor every day.

古文：自凿井後，不复寄汲，计之，日得一人之作。故曰： 宋丁公凿井得一人。 
现代文：自从自己挖井以后，就不再去别人家打水，计算一下，每天能得到一个人劳动，因此说： 宋国的丁老头挖井每天得到一个人劳动。 
English: Since he had dug his own well, he no longer went to other people's homes to fetch water. Calculate that he can get one person's labor every day. Therefore, he said: The old man Ding dug a well in Song Dynasty and got one person's labor every day.

古文：俗传言曰： 丁公凿井得一人於井中。 夫人生於人，非生於土也。穿土凿井，无为得人。
现代文：社会上于是流传说： 丁老头挖井在井中得到一个人。 其实，人是人生的，又不在土里出生。破土挖井，不会得到人。
English: So a legend spread in the community: Ding Lao Tou dug a well and got a person in the well. In fact, people are made of life and are not born in the soil. If you dig a well, you will not get a person.

古文：推此以论，负妇人之语，犹此类也。
现代文：以此推论，齐桓公背女人的传说，就像上面说的这类情况。
English: By this reasoning, the legend of King Qi turning his back on a woman is like the above-mentioned situation.

古文：负妇人而坐，则云妇人在背。
现代文：背对着女人而坐，就说有女人伏在他背上。
English: If he sits with his back to a woman, he says a woman is lying on his back.

古文：知妇人在背非道，则生管仲以妇人治疽之言矣。
现代文：知道女人伏在他背上不合情理，就造出管仲用女人治疗毒疮的说法。
English: Knowing that it was unreasonable for a woman to lie on his back, he invented the idea of using a woman to treat poisonous sores.

古文：使桓公用妇人彻胤服，妇人於背；女气疮可去，以妇人治疽。
现代文：假使齐桓公让女人去掉胸前衣服，女人伏在他的背上，利用女人之气治愈疮病，那才可以说用女人治疗毒疮。
English: If Lord Qi Huan had a woman remove the clothes from her chest and lie on his back, using her feminine energy to heal the sores, then it could be said that a woman was used to treat the poisonous sores.

古文：方朝诸侯，桓公重衣，妇人袭裳，女气分隔，负之何益？
现代文：正在接见诸侯朝拜，齐桓公穿着好几层衣服，女人也穿着好几层衣服，女人之气被分隔开，背着她有什么好处？
English: He is receiving the princes for worship. Prince Qi Huan is wearing several layers of clothing. The woman is also wearing several layers of clothing. The woman's spirit is separated. What is the benefit of carrying her?

古文：桓公思士，作庭燎而夜坐，以思致士，反以白日负妇人见诸侯乎？
现代文：齐桓公仰慕贤士，点燃庭院中的火炬，夜色中静坐，在想招致贤士的事，怎么反而认为他会白天背着女人会见诸侯呢？
English: King Qi Huan admired the Magi, lit a torch in the courtyard, and sat in the middle of the night, thinking of inviting the Magi, but how could he think that he would meet the princes during the day with a woman behind him?

古文：传书言聂正为严翁仲刺杀韩王，此虚也。
现代文：传书上说：聂政为严翁仲刺杀韩王。这不是事实。
English: The biography said: "Yan Zheng stabbed and killed Han Wang for Yan Wenzhong. This is not true.

古文：夫聂政之时，韩列侯也。
现代文：其实，聂政生活的年代，是韩烈侯的时侯。
English: As a matter of fact, the era of his political life was the time of Han Ronghou.

古文：列侯之三年，聂政刺韩相侠累。
现代文：韩烈侯三年，聂政刺杀韩相侠累。
English: Three years after the death of Han Liu Hou, Yan Zheng assassinated Han Xiangxia.

古文：十二年列侯卒。与聂政杀侠累，相去十七年。
现代文：十二年，韩烈侯死，跟聂政刺杀侠累相隔十年。
English: Twelve years later, Han Lieh Hou died, ten years after the assassination of Han Zheng.

古文：而言聂政刺杀韩王，短书小传，竟虚不可信也。
现代文：却说聂政刺韩烈侯，那些价值不大的短书小传，毕竟没有根据不能相信。
English: However, those short biographies of little value that say that He Zheng stabbed Han Ronghou have no basis and cannot be believed.

古文：传书又言：燕太子丹使刺客荆轲刺秦王，不得，诛死。
现代文：传书上又说：燕太子丹派刺客荆轲刺杀秦始皇未成，被杀。
English: The letter also said: Yan Taizi Dan sent the assassin Jing Qi to assassinate Qin Shi Huang and was killed.

古文：後高渐丽复以击筑见秦王，秦王说之；知燕太子之客，乃冒其眼，使之击筑。
现代文：过后高渐丽又以演奏筑被秦始皇接见，秦始皇见到他很高兴，当知道他是燕太子丹的门客，就弄瞎了他的眼睛，让他演奏筑。
English: Later, Gao Qianli was also received by the First Emperor of Qin for playing the cymbals. The First Emperor of Qin was very happy to see him. When he learned that Gao Qianli was a guest of the Prince of Yan, he blinded his eyes and had him play the cymbals.

古文：渐丽乃置铅於筑中以为重，当击筑，秦王膝进，不能自禁。
现代文：高渐丽于是在筑中放上铅以增加重量。在他演奏筑的时候，秦始皇听得入迷用膝挪动身体，已不能自我克制。
English: Gao Yanli then put lead in the cymbals to increase the weight. When he played the cymbals, Qin Shi Huang could not restrain himself from moving his body with his knees.

古文：渐丽以筑击秦王颡，秦王病伤，三月而死。
现代文：这时高渐丽就用筑敲秦始皇的前额，秦始皇被击伤生病三个月就死去。
English: At this time, Gao Qianli knocked the forehead of Qin Shi Huang with a chisel. Qin Shi Huang was injured and became ill and died three months later.

古文：夫言高渐丽以筑击秦王，实也；言中秦王病伤三月而死，虚也。
现代文：那说高渐丽用筑打秦始皇，是事实；但说打中秦始皇，秦始皇受伤生病三个月就死去，这不符合事实。
English: It is true that Gao Qianli hit Qin Shi Huang with a chisel, but it is not true that Qin Shi Huang was injured and died after three months of illness.

古文：夫秦王者，秦始皇帝也。
现代文：秦王就是秦始皇帝。
English: King Qin is Emperor Qin Shi Huang.

古文：始皇二十年，燕太子丹使荆轲刺始皇，始皇杀轲，明矣。
现代文：始皇二十年，燕国太子丹派荆轲刺杀秦始皇，秦始皇杀掉荆轲，这是大家清楚的。
English: In the 20th year of the First Emperor, Prince Dan of Yan dispatched Jing Jiao to assassinate the First Emperor of Qin, and the First Emperor of Qin killed Jing Jiao. This is clear to everyone.

古文：二十一年，使将军王翦功燕，得太子首；二十五年，遂伐燕，而虏燕王嘉。
现代文：始皇二十一年，派将军王翦攻打燕国，得到燕太子丹的首级。始皇二十五年，终于攻破燕国俘虏了燕王喜。
English: In the twenty-first year of the First Emperor, he sent the general Wang Xi to attack Yan Province, and obtained the head rank of Yan Prince Dan. In the twenty-fifth year of the First Emperor, he finally defeated Yan Province and captured Yan Wangxi.

古文：後不审何年，高渐丽以筑击始皇，不中，诸渐丽。
现代文：后来不清楚是那年，高渐丽用筑打秦始皇不中，渐丽被杀。
English: Later, it was not clear whether that was the year when Gao Qianli used a chisel to beat Qin Shi Huang and Qianli was killed.

古文：当二十七年，游天下，到会稽，至琅邪，北至劳、盛山，并海，西至平原津而病，到沙丘平台，始皇崩。
现代文：正值始皇三十七年，秦始皇游历全国，到会稽，去琅邪，北边至劳山和盛山，及沿海，西边达平原津就生了病，等到沙丘平台，秦始皇就死了。
English: In the thirty-seventh year of the First Emperor, the First Emperor of Qin traveled all over the country, went to the audit, went to fight evil, in the north to Mount Lao and Mount Sheng, and along the coast, in the west to the plain of Tsu, he fell ill, and when he reached the sand dune platform, the First Emperor of Qin died.

古文：夫谶书言始皇还，到沙丘而亡；传书又言病筑疮三月而死於秦。
现代文：谶书上说秦始皇是回来，到沙丘时死的；传书上又说他是因被筑打伤得病三个月在秦死的。
English: The imperial edict said that Qin Shihuang died when he came back to the sand dunes; the letter also said that he died in Qin after three months of illness caused by being beaten.

古文：一始皇之身，世或言死於沙丘，或言死於秦，其死言恆病疮。
现代文：一个秦始皇的身体，世人有的说死在沙丘，有的说死在秦地，关于他的死因则说是长期创伤造成的。
English: The body of a Qin Shihuang Emperor, some say he died in the sand dunes, some say he died in Qin land, but the cause of his death is said to have been caused by a long-term trauma.

古文：传书之言，多失其实，世俗之人，不能定也。
现代文：传书上的说法大多不真实，可是社会上的一般人又都无法判定其真伪。
English: Most of the statements in the letters are untrue, but ordinary people in society are unable to determine their authenticity.

