古文：桓公将东游，问于管仲曰：我游犹轴转斛，南至瑯邪。
现代文：桓公准备东游，就向管仲问道： 我这次出游，想要由芝罘，南至琅邪。
English: When King Kan was preparing to travel east, he asked Guanzhong, "This time, I want to travel from Zhishan in the south to Zhangye in the east.

古文：司马曰： 亦先王之游已。 
现代文：司马却提出意见说：也要像先王的出游一样。
English: Sima, however, suggested that it should be like the previous king's outing.

古文：何谓也？
现代文：这是什么意思？ 
English: What does that mean?

古文：管仲对曰： 先王之游也，春出，原农事之不本者，谓之游。秋出，补人之不足者，谓之夕。
现代文：管仲回答说： 先王的出游，春天外出，调查农事上经营有困难的，叫作 游 ；秋天外出，补助居民中生活有不足的，叫做 夕 。
English: Guanzhong replied: The king's outing, going out in the spring to investigate difficulties in agricultural management, is called "outing"; going out in the autumn to subsidize residents who have insufficient living conditions is called "evening."

古文：夫师行而粮食其民者，谓之亡。从乐而不反者，谓之荒。
现代文：那种人马出行而吃喝老百姓粮食的，则叫作 亡 ；尽情游乐而不肯回来的，则叫作 荒 。
English: Those who go out to eat and drink the people's grain are called dead; those who enjoy themselves and do not want to come back are called barren.

古文：先王有游夕之业于人，无亡荒之行于身。 
现代文：先王对人民有游、夕的事务，却没有没有荒、亡的行为。 
English: The former king had affairs of travel and entertainment for the people, but there was no act of desolation and death.

古文：桓公退再拜命曰： 宝法也。 
现代文：桓公退后拜谢说： 这是宝贵的法度。 
English: Kuan Kung stepped back and said to Bai Xie, "This is a precious law."

古文：管仲复于桓公曰： 无翼而飞者声也，无根而固者情也，无方而富者生也，公亦固情谨声，以严尊生。
现代文：管仲又对桓公说： 没有羽翼而能飞行的，是声音；没有根基能够巩固而牢靠的，是人的情感；不用什么方法就能全备的，是人的生命。您应当巩固感情，谨慎言语，以严守尊贵的心性。
English: Guanzhong also said to Kuan Gong, "It is the voice that can fly without wings; it is the human emotion that can be consolidated and reliable without a foundation; it is the human life that can be complete without any means. You should consolidate your feelings, be careful with your words, and strictly guard your noble heart.

古文：此谓道之荣。
现代文：这就叫道的发扬。 
English: This is called the development of the Tao.

古文：桓公退。再拜，请若此言。
现代文：桓公退而表示感谢说； 愿从此教。 
English: "I would like to retire from teaching," he said, expressing his gratitude.

古文：管仲复于桓公曰： 任之重者莫如身，涂之畏者莫如口，期而远者莫如年。
现代文：管仲又对桓公说： 负担重莫如身体，经历险莫如口舌，时间再长莫如年代久远。
English: Guanzhong also said to Huan Gong: The burden is as heavy as the body, the experience is as dangerous as the tongue, and the time is as long as the ages.

古文：以重任行畏涂至远期。唯君子乃能矣。 
现代文：肩负重任，行经险途并长久坚持的，只有真正的君子才能做到。 
English: Only a true gentleman can shoulder heavy responsibilities, go through perilous roads and persist for a long time.

古文：桓公退，再拜之曰： 夫子数以此言者教寡人。 
现代文：桓公退后再拜说： 夫子快把这方面的言论教给我。 
English: Huan Gong stepped back and said, "Fu Zi, quickly teach me what you said in this regard."

古文：管仲对曰： 滋味动静，生之养也。好恶喜怒哀乐，生之变也。聪明当物，生之德也。
现代文：管仲回答说： 饮食作息，是心性的保养；好恶、喜怒、哀乐，是心性的变化；聪明处事，是心性的德能。
English: Guanzhong replied, "Diet and exercise are the maintenance of the mind; likes and dislikes, emotions, and sorrows are the changes of the mind; doing things wisely is the virtue of the mind.

古文：是故圣人齐滋味而时动静，御正六气之变。禁止声色之淫。邪行亡乎体，违言不存口。静无定生，圣也。
现代文：因此，圣人总是调节饮食而安排作息，控制六气的变化，禁止声色的侵蚀，身上没有邪僻的行为，口中没有背理的言论，静静地安定着心性，这就是所谓圣人。
English: Therefore, a sage always regulates his diet and arranges his schedule, controls the changes of the six qi, prohibits the erosion of the voice color, has no perverse behavior on his body, has no contradictory speech in his mouth, and quietly stabilizes his mind. This is the so-called sage.

古文：仁从中出，义从外作。
现代文：仁是从心里发出的，义是在外面实行的。
English: Benevolence emanates from the heart, while righteousness is practiced externally.

古文：仁故不以天下为利，义故不以天下为名。
现代文：仁，所以不利用天下谋私利；义，所以不利用天下猎私名。
English: Benevolence, therefore, does not use the world to seek personal gain; righteousness, therefore, does not use the world to seek personal gain.

古文：仁故不代王，义故七十而致政。
现代文：仁，所以不肯取代他人而自立为王；义，所以年到七十而交出政务。
English: Ren, therefore, refused to replace others and became king on his own; Righteousness, therefore, handed over government affairs when he was seventy years old.

古文：是故圣人上德而下功，尊道而贱物。
现代文：因此，圣人总是以德为上而功业在下，重视道而贱视物利。
English: Therefore, sages always regard virtue as superior and merit as inferior. They value virtue and despise material gain.

古文：道德当身故不以物惑。
现代文：道德在身，所以不被物利所诱惑。
English: Morality is in the body, so it is not tempted by material gain.

古文：是故，身在草茅之中，而无慑意，南面听天下，而无骄色。
现代文：因此，即使身在茅舍之中，也毫无惧色；坐南面而治天下，也没有骄傲之态。
English: Therefore, even if you are in a hut, there is no fear; sitting in the south and ruling the world, there is no pride.

古文：如此，而后可以为天下王。
现代文：这然后才可以成为天下之王者。
English: Only then can you become the king of the world.

古文：所以谓德者。不动而疾，不相告而知，不为而成，不召而至，是德也。
现代文：其所以叫作有德，就是不必发动，人们也知有所努力；不用言语，人们也能够理解；不自为，事情也能成；不召唤，人们也能到。这就是德的作用。
English: That is why it is called having virtue, that is, without having to initiate, people also know how to make efforts; without words, people can also understand; without doing, things can also be done; without summoning, people can also arrive. This is the role of virtue.

古文：故天不动，四时云下，而万物化；君不动，政令陈下，而万功成；心不动，使四肢耳目，而万物情。
现代文：所以，天不用动，经过四时的运行，下面就万物化育；君不用动，经过政令的发布，下面就万事成功；心不用动，经过四肢耳目的使用，万事万物都感知其意图。
English: Therefore, the heavens do not need to move, after the four-hour run, everything below will be transformed; you do not need to move, after the release of the government order, everything below will be successful; the heart does not need to move, after the use of limbs, ears and eyes, everything and everything will perceive its intention.

古文：寡交多亲，谓之知人。
现代文：交游少而亲者多的，叫作知人。
English: Those who have few friends but many relatives are called acquaintances.

古文：寡事成功，谓之知用。
现代文：用力少而成效好的，叫作会办事。
English: Less effort, but better results, is called a "meeting."

古文：闻一言以贯万物，谓之知道。
现代文：听一言就能够贯通万物的，叫作懂得道。
English: Listening to a single word can penetrate all things, which is called the path of understanding.

古文：多言而不当，不如其寡也。博学而不自反，必有邪。
现代文：多言而不得当，不如少言；博学而不会反省，一定产生邪恶。
English: It is better to say little than to say much, and to be thoughtless than to be erudite.

古文：孝弟者，仁之祖也。
现代文：孝悌是仁的根本，忠信是交游的凭借。
English: Filial piety is the foundation of benevolence, and loyalty is the basis of friendship.

古文：忠信者，交之庆也。内不考孝弟，外不正忠信，泽其四经而诵学者，是亡其身者也。 
现代文：内不思考孝悌，外不正行忠信，离开这四条原则而空谈学问，是会自亡其身的。 第二天，桓公在米仓附近射猎，管仲、隰朋一起前来朝见。
English: If you don't think about filial piety inside, if you don't act loyally outside, and if you leave these four principles and talk about learning, you will die.The next day, Prince Kan went hunting near Yonekura, and Guanzhong and his friends came to see the emperor.

古文：桓公明日弋在廪，管仲隰朋朝，公望二子，弛弓脱釬，而迎之曰： 今夫槛鹄春北而秋南，而不失其时，夫唯有羽翼以通其意于天下乎？
现代文：桓公看到两人后，就收弓脱铠而迎上去说： 那些鸿鹄，春天北飞秋天南去而不误时令，还不是因为两只翅膀的帮助才能在天下畅意飞翔么？
English: When King Huan saw the two of them, he drew back his bow and said, "Those giants, who fly north in spring and south in autumn without missing a beat, are they not able to fly freely in the world with the help of their two wings?

古文：今孤之不得意于天下，非皆二子之忧也。 
现代文：现在我不得意于天下，难道不是你们两位的忧虑么？ 
English: Now that I've lost all interest in the world, aren't you both worried?

古文：桓公再言，二子不对，桓公曰： 孤既言矣，二子何不对乎？ 
现代文：桓公又说一遍，两人都没有回答。桓公说： 我既说了，两位怎么不回答呢？ 
English: Lord Huan spoke again, but neither of them answered. Lord Huan said, "Since I have spoken, why don't you two answer?"

古文：管仲对曰： 今夫人患劳，而上使不时，人患饥，而上重敛焉。
现代文：管仲回答说： 现在人民忧虑劳苦，而国君却不断的使役他们；人民忧虑饥饿，而国君却加重他们的赋税；人民忧虑死，而国君却加紧用刑。
English: Guanzhong replied, "At present, the people are worried about labor, but the sovereign is constantly making them work; the people are worried about hunger, but the sovereign is increasing their taxes; the people are worried about death, but the sovereign is intensifying the use of punishment.

古文：人患死，而上急刑焉，如此，而又近有色，而远有德。虽槛鹄之有翼，济大水之有舟楫也，其将若君何？ 
现代文：这样，再加上亲近女色，疏远有德之士，虽然像鸿鹄之有双翼，过河之有舟揖，对国君能有什么作用呢？ 
English: In this way, coupled with the closeness of women and the alienation of virtuous people, although it is like a dragonfly with wings and a boat crossing the river, what effect can it have on the sovereign?

古文：桓公蹙然逡遁。
现代文：桓公谦恭局促不知所措。
English: Emperor Kan's Office of Humility and Courtesy was at a loss for what to do.

古文：管仲曰： 昔先王之理人也，盖人患劳，而上使之以时，则人不患劳也。人患饥，而上薄敛焉，则人不患饥矣。人患死，而上宽刑焉，则人不患死矣。
现代文：管仲说： 从前先壬治理人民，看人民忧虑劳苦，国君就限定时间使役，人们就不忧虑劳苦了；见人民忧虑饥饿，国君就轻收赋税，人民就不忧虑饥饿了；见人民忧虑死，国君就宽缓用刑，人民就不忧虑死了。
English: Guanzhong said, "In the past, when the Jins governed the people, if the people were worried and worked hard, the sovereign would limit the time of service, and the people would not worry and work hard; if the people were worried and hungry, the sovereign would lightly collect taxes, and the people would not worry and be hungry; if the people were worried and died, the sovereign would give a reprieve, and the people would not worry and die.

古文：如此，而近有德而远有色，则四封之内，视君其犹父母邪，四方之外，归君其犹流水乎。
现代文：这样，再加上亲近有德行的人而远女色，那么，四境之内，对待君主就像父母一样；四境之外，归附君就象流水一般了！ 
English: In this way, coupled with the fact that virtuous people are close to you, but women are far away, then, within the four realms, treat the monarch like a parent; outside the four realms, it is like water flowing to the monarch!

古文：公辍射援绥而乘，自御，管仲为左，隰朋参乘，朔月三日，进二子于里官。再拜顿首曰： 孤之闻二子之言也，耳加聪而视加明，于孤不敢独听之，荐之先祖。 
现代文：桓公立刻中止打猎，拉着车绳上车了。他亲自驾车，管仲坐在左边，隰朋在右边陪乘。他斋戒三天以后，把两人接进供俸祖先的庙堂里，顿首拜谢说： 我听到你们两值的话，耳更加聪，目更加明了，我不敢自己独听这些话，要同时推荐给先祖也听到。 
English: After fasting for three days, he took the two of them to the temple that was used to pay tribute to the ancestors. At once, he said, "I have heard your valuable words. My ears are more sensitive and my eyes are more clear. I dare not listen to these words alone. I want to recommend them to the ancestors and hear them at the same time."

古文：管仲隰朋再拜顿首曰： 如君之王也，此非臣之言也，君之教也。 
现代文：管仲、隰朋顿首拜谢说： 有像您这样的国君，这些话不能算是我们的言论，而应该归之于您的教导。 
English: Guanzhong and Zhaopentong chief Bai Xie said: With a sovereign like you, these words cannot be regarded as our speech, but should be attributed to your teaching.

古文：于是管仲与桓公盟誓为令曰： 老弱勿刑。
现代文：于是，管仲与桓公宣誓下令说： 老弱不处刑，犯罪者经过三次宽赦以后再治罪。
English: As a result, Guan Zhong and Huan Gong swore an oath and ordered: The old and the weak will not be punished, and the criminals will be punished again after three amnesties.

古文：参宥而后弊，关箭而不正市正而不布。山林梁泽，以时禁发，而不正也。 
现代文：关卡只稽查而不征税，市场只设官而不收钱，山林水泽，按时封禁和开放而不征赋税。 
English: Checkpoints only inspect but do not tax, markets only have officials but do not collect money, and mountains, forests, lakes, and rivers are closed and opened on time but do not levy taxes.

古文：草封泽盐者之归之也譬若市人。
现代文：结果垦草成封，就泽而盐的人们，其归附之众，象集市一样。
English: As a result, the weeds are sealed, and the people who are salted and salted, and the people who belong to them, are like a market.

古文：三年教人，四年选贤以为长，五年始兴车践乘，遂南伐楚，门傅施城。
现代文：用三年训练人民，第四年，选拔贤能以配备官吏，第五年开始出动兵车。南伐楚国，靠近方城。
English: It took three years to train the people, in the fourth year, the selection of talents to equip officials, and in the fifth year, military vehicles began to be dispatched. Nanfahu Chuo, near Fangcheng.

古文：北伐山戎，出冬葱与戎叔，布之天下，果三匡天子而九合诸侯。
现代文：又北伐山戎，拿出冬葱与胡豆等物，播于天下。果然成就了三次匡扶天子而九次召集诸侯的霸业。
English: He also razed the mountains in the north, brought out winter onions and broad beans, and planted them all over the country. He successfully accomplished the three times of supporting the emperor and the nine times of summoning the overlords.

古文：桓公外舍，而不鼎馈。中妇诸子谓宫人盍不出从乎？
现代文：桓公曾在外面住宿而没有列鼎进食，内官中妇诸子对宫女说： 你们还不出来侍从么？
English: Prince Kan stayed outside the palace and did not eat in the dining hall. The wives and children of the palace officials said to the ladies-in-waiting, "Aren't you coming out to wait on us?"

古文：君将有行，宫人皆出从。
现代文：君王将要外出了。 宫女们都出来侍从桓公。
English: The king is about to go out, and all the maids of honour have come out to serve him.

古文：公怒曰： 庸谓我有行者？ 
现代文：桓公发怒说： 谁说我要外出的？ 
English: Prince Kan said angrily, "Who said I wanted to go out?"

古文：宫人曰： 贱妾闻之中妇诸子。 
现代文：宫女们说： 我们是听中妇诸子讲的。 
English: And the daughters of the king's wives said, We have heard the daughters of the king's wives speak.

古文：公召中妇诸子曰： 女焉闻吾有行也？ 
现代文：桓公把中妇诸子召来说： 你怎么知道我要外出呢？ 
English: Lord Huan called all the sons of the middle wife and said, "How did you know I was going out?"

古文：此非吾所与女及也。而言乃至焉，吾是以语女。
现代文：回答说： 据我所知，您凡出宿于外而不列鼎进食，不是有内忧，就是有外患。
English: He replied, "As far as I know, if you go out of the house and don't eat, it's either because of internal worries or external diseases.

古文：吾欲致诸侯而不至，为之奈何？ 
现代文：现在您出宿外舍而不列鼎进食，既然没有内忧，所以我知道您一定将要外出了。 
English: Now that you are going out to eat instead of staying at a guest house, I know that you will definitely go out since you have no worries.

古文：中妇诸子曰： 自妾之身之不为人持接也，未尝得人之布织也。
现代文：桓公说： 好，这本来不是我要说给你的，但你的话却说到这里了，所以我就告诉你吧。我想召集各国诸侯，而人家不到，该怎么办呢？ 中妇诸子回答说： 我本人不去作服侍别人的事，别人也就不会给我做衣服。
English: Prince Huan said, "Well, this is not what I wanted to tell you, but your words have come to this, so I'll tell you. I want to gather the princes of all countries, but no one will come, what should I do?" The middle wife and sons replied, "If I don't serve others, others won't make clothes for me."

古文：意者更容不审耶？ 
现代文：是不是您还有使诸侯不至的原由在内呢？ 
English: Could it be that you also have a reason for the princes not to come?

古文：明日，管仲朝，公告之，管仲曰： 此圣人之言也，君必行也。 
现代文：第二天，管仲上朝，桓公把这事告诉了他。管仲说： 这真是圣人的话，您必须照着办。 
English: The next day, when Guan Zhong came to the court, Emperor Kan told him about this. Guan Zhong said, "This is truly a sage's words, you must act according to them."

古文：管仲寝疾，桓公往问之曰： 仲父之疾甚矣，若不可讳也不幸而不起此疾，彼政我将安移之？ 
现代文：管仲卧病，桓公去慰问，说： 仲父的病很重了，这是无需讳言的。设不幸而此病不愈，国家大政我将转托给谁呢？ 
English: When Guan Zhong lay ill, Emperor Kuan went to console him, saying, "It is no need to hide the fact that Zhong's father is seriously ill. Even if it is unfortunate that this illness does not get better, to whom will I entrust the great affairs of state?

古文：管仲未对。
现代文：管仲没有回答。
English: Guanzhong did not answer.

古文：桓公曰： 鲍叔之为人何如？ 
现代文：桓公说： 鲍叔的为人怎样？ 
English: Prince Kan said, "What kind of person is Uncle Bao?

古文：管子对曰： 鲍叔君子也，千乘之国，不以其道，予之，不受也。
现代文：管仲回答说： 鲍叔是个君子。即使千辆兵车的大国，不以其道送给他，他都不会接受的。
English: Guanzhong replied, "Uncle Bao is a gentleman. Even if a big country with a thousand chariots were to give him a gift, he would not accept it.

古文：虽然，不可以为政，其为人也，好善而恶恶已甚，见一恶终身不忘。 
现代文：但是，他不可托以国家大政。他为人好善，但憎恶恶人太过分，见一恶终身不忘。 
English: However, he should not be entrusted with the country's major policy. He is a good person, but he hates evil people too much, and he will never forget seeing evil.

古文：桓公曰： 然则庸可？ 
现代文：桓公说： 那么谁行？ 
English: Kan said, "Then who can do it?"

古文：管仲对曰： 隰朋可，朋之为人，好上识而下问，臣闻之，以德予人者，谓之仁；以财予人者，谓之良；以善胜人者，未有能服人者也。以善养人者，未有不服人者也。
现代文：管仲回答说： 隰朋行。隰朋的为人，有远大眼光而又虚心下问。我认为，给人恩惠叫作仁，给人财物叫作良。用做好事来压服人，人们也不会心服；用做好事来薰陶人，人们没有不心服的。
English: Guanzhong replied, "You are right. I am a person with a broad vision and a humble heart. I believe that giving people favors is called benevolence, and giving people wealth is called goodness. If you use good deeds to persuade people, people will not be convinced; if you use good deeds to inspire people, people will not be convinced.

古文：于国有所不知政，于家有所不知事，则必朋乎。
现代文：治国有有所不管的政务，治家有有所不知的家事，这只有隰朋能做到。
English: Ruling a country is a matter of government affairs, and ruling a family is a matter of household chores, which can only be done by friends.

古文：且朋之为人也，居其家不忘公门，居公门不忘其家，事君不二其心，亦不忘其身，举齐国之币。握路家五十室，其人不知也，大仁也哉，其朋乎！ 
现代文：而且，隰朋为人，在家不忘公事，在公也不忘私事；事君没有二心，也不忘其自身。他曾用齐国的钱，救济过路难民五十多户，而受惠者不知道是他。称得上大仁的，还不是隰朋么？ 
English: Moreover, he is a person who does not forget business at home, nor does he forget private affairs in public; he has no second thoughts, nor does he forget himself. He once used the money of Qi country to provide relief to more than fifty households of passing refugees, and the beneficiaries did not know it was him. Is it not Zou Peng who can be called a great benefactor?

古文：公又问曰： 不幸而失仲父也，二三大夫者，其犹能以国宁乎？ 
现代文：桓公又问说： 我不幸而失去仲父，各位大夫还能使国家安宁么？ 
English: Prince Kan also asked, "I have unfortunately lost my stepfather, can you doctors still bring peace to the country?"

古文：管仲对曰： 君请矍已乎，鲍叔牙之为人也好直，宾胥无之为人也好善，宁戚之为人也能事，孙在之为人也善言。 
现代文：管仲回答说： 请您衡量一下本国吧！鲍叔牙的为人，好直；宾胥无的为人，好善；宁戚的为人，能干；曹孙宿的为人，能说。 
English: Guanzhong replied, "Please measure your own country. Baozhuagang's people are honest; Binzhuamou's people are kind; Ningzhi's people are capable; Cao Sunjuan's people are able to speak.

古文：公曰： 此四子者，其庸能一人之上也？
现代文：桓公说： 这四人，谁能得到一个？他们都是上等人材。
English: Kanko said, "Of these four, who can get one? They are all top-class people."

古文：寡人并而臣之，则其不以国宁，何也。 
现代文：现在我全都使用，还不能使国家安宁，那是什么原故呢？ 
English: Now that I have used them all, I have not been able to pacify the country. What is the reason for this?

古文：对曰： 鲍叔之为人也好直，而不能以国诎，宾胥无之为人也好善，而不能以国诎。宁戚之为人也能事，而不能以足息。
现代文：回答说： 鲍叔的为人好直，但不能为国家而牺牲其好直；宾胥无的为人好善，但不能为国家而牺牲其好善；宁戚的为人能干，但不能适可而止；曹孙宿的为人能说，但不能取信以后就及时沉默。
English: He replied, "Uncle Bao is a straightforward person, but he cannot sacrifice his straightforwardness for the sake of the country; Bin Zhu Meng is a straightforward person, but he cannot sacrifice his straightforwardness for the sake of the country; Ning Qi is a capable person, but he cannot stop there; Cao Sunjuan is a person who can speak, but he will be silent in time after he cannot get a letter.

古文：孙在之为人也善言，而不能以信默臣闻之，消息盈虚，与百姓诎信，然后能以国宁，勿已者，朋其可乎！朋之为人也，动必量力，举必量技。 
现代文：据我所知，按照消长盈亏的形势，与百姓共屈伸，然后能使国家安宁长久的，还不是隰朋才行么？隰朋为人，行动一定估计力量，举事一定考虑能力。 
English: As far as I know, according to the situation of ebb and flow of profits and losses, it is not enough to work with the people to expand and contract, and then make the country peaceful for a long time. As a person, the action must estimate the strength, and the ability to consider things must be considered.

古文：言终，喟然而叹曰： 天之生朋，以为夷吾舌也，其身死，舌焉得生哉？ 
现代文：管仲讲完话，深叹一气说： 上天生下隰朋，本是为我作 舌 的，我身子死了，舌还能活着么？ 
English: After finishing his speech, Guanzhong said with a deep sigh, "God gave birth to my friends, and He made my tongue for me. My body is dead, but can my tongue still live?

古文：管仲曰： 夫江黄之国近于楚，为臣死乎，君必归之楚而寄之。
现代文：管仲还说： 江、黄两个国家，离楚很近，如我死了，您一定要把它们归还给楚国。
English: Guanzhong also said: Jiang and Huang are two countries that are very close to Chu. If I die, you must return them to Chu.

古文：君不归，楚必私之，私之而不救也，则不可，救之，则乱自此始矣。 桓公曰： 诺。 
现代文：您如不归还，楚国一定要吞并。他吞并而我不救，那不对；要去救，祸乱就从此开始了。 桓公说： 好。 
English: If you don't return it, Chu must annex it. If he annexes it and I don't save it, that's not right; if I try to save it, then the disaster will begin.

古文：管仲又言曰： 东郭有狗啀啀，旦暮欲啮我，猳而不使也，今夫易牙，子之不能爱，将安能爱君？
现代文：管仲又说道： 东城有一只狗，动唇露齿，一天到晚，准备咬人，是我用木枷枷住而没有使它得逞。现在的易牙，自己的儿子都不爱，怎么能爱君？
English: Guanzhong also said, "There was a dog in Dongcheng that moved its lips and bared its teeth, ready to bite people all day long. I used wooden shackles to restrain it, but it didn't succeed. Now Yiga doesn't love his own son, so how can he love you?"

古文：君必去之。 公曰： 诺。 
现代文：您一定要去掉他。 桓公说： 好。 
English: You must get rid of him.Kanko said, "Okay."

古文：管子又言曰： 北郭有狗啀啀，旦暮欲啮我，猳而不使也，今夫竖刁，其身之不爱，焉能爱君，君必去之。 公曰： 诺。 
现代文：管子又说道： 北城有一只狗，动唇露齿，一天到晚准备咬人，是我用木枷枷住而没有使之得逞。现在的竖刁，自己的身体都不爱，怎能爱君？您一定要去掉他。 桓公说： 好。 
English: The pipe also said: There is a dog in the northern city, moving its lips and baring its teeth, ready to bite people all day long. I used a wooden yoke to restrain it, but it did not succeed. The present Jianzhong does not love his own body, how can he love you? You must get rid of him. Huan Gong said: Good.

古文：管子又言曰： 西郭有狗啀啀，旦暮欲啮我，猳而不使也，今夫卫公子开方，去其千乘之太子，而臣事君，是所愿也得于君者，将欲过其千乘也，君必去之。 桓公曰： 诺。 
现代文：管子又说道： 西城有一只狗，动唇露齿，一天到晚准备咬人，是我用木枷枷住而没有使它得逞。现在的卫公子开方，弃掉千乘之国的太子来臣事于您。这就说明他的欲望是：从您身上得到的，将远超过一个千乘的国家。您一定去掉他。 桓公说： 好。 
English: The pipe also said: There is a dog in the west city, moving its lips and showing its teeth, ready to bite people all day long. I used a wooden yoke to restrain it, but it did not succeed. The current lord of the castle, the prince who abandoned the country of the Thousand Buddhas, has come to serve you. This shows that his desire is: What I get from you will be far more than a country of the Thousand Buddhas. You must get rid of him. Lord Huan said: Good.

古文：管子遂卒。
现代文：管子死了。
English: The pipe is dead.

古文：卒十月，隰朋亦卒。
现代文：死后十个月，隰朋也死了。
English: Ten months after his death, his friend also died.

古文：桓公去易牙竖刁卫公子开方。
现代文：桓公免去易牙、竖刁和卫公子开方。
English: Kan was exempted from opening Iga, Shizuko, and Eikoji.

古文：五味不至，于是乎复反易牙。宫中乱，复反竖刁。利言卑辞不在侧，复反卫公子开方。
现代文：但由于吃东西五味不佳，于是又把易牙召回来；由于宫中乱，又召回竖刁；由于没有甘言蜜语在身边，又召回卫公子开方。
English: However, because the food did not taste good, he recalled Iga again; because of the turmoil in the palace, he recalled Shizuku; because there was no sweet talk around him, he recalled Eikoji to open the recipe.

古文：桓公内不量力，外不量交，而力伐四邻。
现代文：桓公内不量国力，外不计国交，而征伐四邻。
English: Kanko did not measure national strength internally, and did not count diplomatic relations externally, but conquered his four neighbors.

古文：公薨，六子皆求立，易牙与卫公子，内与竖刁，因共杀群吏而立公子无亏，故公死七日不敛，九月不葬，孝公奔宋，宋襄公率诸侯以伐齐，战于甗，大败齐师，杀公子无亏，立孝公而还。
现代文：桓公死后，六子都求立为君。易牙和开方勾结竖刁，共杀百官，拥立公子无亏。所以，桓公死后六十七天没有入殓，九个月没有安葬。齐孝公跑到宋国，宋襄公率诸侯伐齐，战于甗地，大败齐军，杀掉公子无亏，立了齐孝公而回。
English: After the death of King Kuan, his six sons all sought to become the king. Yi Ya and Kaifang colluded to kill hundreds of officials, and there was no harm in supporting the prince. Therefore, sixty-seven days after the death of King Kuan, there was no burial, and there was no burial for nine months. King Qi Xiaogong ran to Song, and King Song Xiang led the princes to fight against the Qi, and fought in Shantian, defeated the Qi army, killed the prince without loss, and set up King Qi Xiaogong and returned.

古文：襄公立十三年，桓公立四十二年。
现代文：宋襄公共立十三年，齐桓公立四十二年。
English: It has been 13 years since the Song and Xiang Dynasties were founded, and 42 years since the Qi and Huan Dynasties.

