古文：十有五年春，王正月，成叛。
现代文：十五年春季，周历正月，成地背叛孟氏而投靠齐国。
English: In the spring of the fifteenth year, the first month of the lunar calendar, Chengdi betrayed Meng and sided with Qi.

古文：夏五月，齐高无丕出奔北燕。
现代文：夏季五月，齐国的高无丕逃到北燕。
English: In the summer of May, Gao Wusheng of Qi fled to Beiyan.

古文：郑伯伐宋。
现代文：郑伯出兵攻打宋国。
English: Zheng Bo sent troops to attack Song.

古文：秋八月，大雩。
现代文：秋季八月，鲁国举行大的求雨祭祀活动。
English: In August, the festival of praying for rain is held.

古文：晋赵鞅帅师伐卫。
现代文：晋国的赵鞅率领军队攻打卫国。
English: Zhao Jun of Jin led an army to attack and defend the country.

古文：冬，晋侯伐郑。
现代文：冬季，晋侯出兵攻打郑国。
English: In winter, Jin sent troops to attack Zheng.

古文：及齐平。
现代文：和齐国讲和。
English: He made peace with Qi.

古文：卫公孟彄出奔齐。
现代文：卫国的公孟彄逃到齐国。
English: Meng Yao, the public defender of the country, fled to Qi.

古文：十五年春，成叛于齐。
现代文：十五年春季，成地背叛孟氏而投靠齐国。
English: In the spring of the fifteenth year, Chengdi betrayed Meng and sided with Qi.

古文：武伯伐成，不克，遂城输。
现代文：孟武伯攻打成地，没有攻下，于是就在输地筑城。
English: Meng Wubo attacked the land, but did not conquer it, so he built a city on the lost land.

古文：夏，楚子西、子期伐吴，及桐汭。陈侯使公孙贞子吊焉，及良而卒，将以尸入。
现代文：夏季，楚国的子西、子期攻打吴国，到达桐汭，陈闵公派公孙贞子去吴国慰问，到达良地就死了，副使准备把灵柩运进城里。
English: In the summer, Zixi, the son of Chu, attacked Wuzhong and reached Tonglu. Chen Yigong sent Gongsun Sadako to Wuzhong to offer condolences, but she died after reaching Liangdi. The deputy envoy was preparing to carry the coffin into the city.

古文：吴子使大宰嚭劳，且辞曰： 以水潦之不时，无乃廪然陨大夫之尸，以重寡君之忧。寡君敢辞上介。 
现代文：吴王派太宰嚭慰劳，而且辞谢说： 由于雨水不调和，恐怕大水泛滥而毁坏大夫的灵柩，增加寡君的忧虑，寡君谨此辞谢。 
English: The king of Wu sent the grand vizier to offer consolation, but he also declined to offer thanks, saying, "Since the rain is incongruous, I am afraid that the flood will destroy the doctor's coffin and increase the anxiety of the nobles. The nobles respectfully decline to offer thanks."

古文：芋尹盖对曰： 寡君闻楚为不道，荐伐吴国，灭厥民人。寡君使盖备使，吊君之下吏。
现代文：第一副使芋尹盖回答说： 寡君听说楚国无道，屡次攻打吴国，消灭你们百姓，寡君派盖备充使臣的行列，向贵君的下级官吏慰问。
English: The first deputy envoy, Imo Yin Gai, replied: "You have heard that there is no way out for the State of Chu. You have repeatedly attacked the State of Wu and annihilated your people. You have sent Gai to fill the ranks of envoys and offer condolences to the lower-ranking officials of your lord.

古文：无禄，使人逢天之慼，大命陨队，绝世于良，废日共积，一日迁次。今君命逆使人曰： 无以尸造于门。 
现代文：不幸，使臣正逢上天的忧戚，丧了性命，在良地去世。我们耗费时间积聚殡敛的财物，又怕耽误使命，每天变换住地，加紧赶路。
English: Unfortunately, the envoy was in the presence of God's grieving relatives, lost his life, and died in a good place. We spent time accumulating the wealth of the funeral, but we were afraid of delaying the mission, changing the place of residence every day, and speeding up the journey.

古文：是我寡君之命委于草莽也。
现代文：现在您命令迎接使臣说 不要让灵柩到城门上来 ，这就把寡君的命令，丢弃在杂草丛中了。
English: Now you order the ushers not to let the coffin come up to the gate, which throws the oligarch's order into the weeds.

古文：且臣闻之曰，事死如生，礼也。于是乎有朝聘而终，以尸将事之礼，又有朝聘而遭丧之礼。
现代文：而且下臣听说， 事奉死人像事奉活人一样，这是礼 ，因此而有了在朝聘过程中使臣死去、奉着灵柩完成使命的礼仪，同时又有在进聘过程中，遇到受聘国家发生丧事的礼仪。
English: Moreover, the vassal heard that it was a ritual to serve the dead as if they were alive, and thus there was a ritual for the vassal to die in the process of being appointed to the imperial court, and for the coffin to be used to complete the mission, and at the same time, there was a ritual for the funeral of the appointed country in the process of being appointed to the imperial court.

古文：若不以尸将命，是遭丧而还也，无乃不可乎！
现代文：如果不奉灵柩完成使命，这就像是遇到受聘国家发生丧事而回国一样了，恐怕不可以吧！
English: If you don't complete your mission with a coffin, it's like returning to your country after a funeral in the country you were hired in. I'm afraid that's not possible!

古文：以礼防民，犹或逾之。今大夫曰，死而弃之，是弃礼也。其何以为诸侯主？
现代文：用礼仪来防止百姓，还恐怕有所逾越，现在您说 死了就丢弃他 ，这是丢掉礼仪，还怎么能当诸侯的盟主？
English: Using etiquette to prevent the people, I'm afraid you've overstepped the mark. Now you're saying you'll discard him when he's dead. That's abandoning etiquette. How can you still be the ruler of the lords?

古文：先民有言曰，无秽虐士。
现代文：从前的人有话说： 不要把死者看成污秽。 
English: The ancients said, "Do not regard the dead as unclean."

古文：备使奉尸将命，苟我寡君之命达于君所，虽陨于深渊，则天命也。非君与涉人之过也。 
现代文：我奉着灵柩完成使命，如果我们寡君的命令能上达于贵君那里，即使坠入深渊，那么也是上天的意志，不是贵君和划船人的过错。 
English: With the coffin, I have fulfilled my mission. If the order of our nobles can reach the nobles, even if we fall into the abyss, then it is the will of heaven, not the fault of the nobles and rowers.

古文：吴人内之。
现代文：吴国人接纳了他们和灵柩。
English: The people of Wu accepted them and the coffin.

古文：秋，齐陈瓘如楚。过卫，仲由见之，曰： 天或者以陈氏为斧斤，既斫丧公室，而他人有之，不可知也。其使终飨之，亦不可知也。
现代文：秋季，齐国的陈瓘到楚国去，经过卫国，仲由拜见他，说： 上天或许是用陈氏作为斧子，把公室砍削以后又为别人所有，现在不能知道，可能让陈氏最后享有，现在也不能知道。
English: In the autumn, Chen Xi from Qi went to Chu, and after passing through Wei, Zhong Yu paid homage to him, saying: Heaven may have used Chen as an axe, and after cutting down the office, it was owned by others. It is impossible to know now. It may be that Chen finally enjoyed it. It is also impossible to know now.

古文：若善鲁以待时，不亦可乎？
现代文：如果和鲁国友好以等待时机，不也是可以的吗？
English: If we are friendly with Russia and wait for the right time, isn't that also okay?

古文：何必恶焉？ 
现代文：何必搞坏关系呢？ 
English: Why ruin the relationship?

古文：子玉曰： 然，吾受命矣，子使告我弟。 
现代文：陈瓘说： 对。
English: Chen Yao said: That's right.

古文：冬，及齐平。
现代文：我接受您的命令了。
English: I've accepted your order.

古文：子服景伯如齐，子赣为介，见公孙成，曰： 人皆臣人，而有背人之心。
现代文：您派人去告诉我的弟弟。 
English: You sent someone to tell my brother.

古文：况齐人虽为子役，其有不贰乎？子，周公之孙也。
现代文：冬季，鲁国和齐国讲和。子服景伯到齐国去，子赣做副使，会见公孙成，说： 人们都是别人的臣下，有人还有背叛别人的念头，何况齐国人，虽然为您服役，能没有二心吗？
English: In the winter, peace was declared between Lu and Qi. Zifu Jingbo went to Qi, and Zifu, as deputy envoy, met with Gongsuncheng and said: People are all other people's vassals. Some people still have the idea of betraying others. What's more, the people of Qi, although they serve you, can they not be double-minded?

古文：多飨大利，犹思不义。
现代文：您，是周公的后代，享受到巨大的利益，还想做不义的事情。
English: You, a descendant of Zhou Gong, have enjoyed great benefits, yet you still want to do unjust things.

古文：利不可得，而丧宗国，将焉用之？ 
现代文：利益不能得到，反而失掉了祖国，何必这样？ 
English: They can't get benefits, but they lost their homeland. Why is that?

古文：成曰： 善哉，吾不早闻命。 
现代文：公孙成说： 对啊！我没有早听到您的命令。 
English: Gongsun Cheng said: That's right! I didn't hear your order earlier.

古文：陈成子馆客，曰： 寡君使恒告曰，寡人愿事君如事卫君。 
现代文：陈成子在宾馆会见客人，说： 寡君派恒报告您说： 我愿意事奉贵君就像事奉卫君一样。  
English: Chen Cheng Zi met with guests at the hotel and said, "Oligarchs always report that you said, 'I am willing to serve you just as I would serve Wei.

古文：景伯揖子赣而进之。
现代文：景伯向子赣作揖请他走上一步。
English: Jingbo gestured to his son and asked him to step forward.

古文：对曰： 寡君之愿也。
现代文：让子赣回答说： 这正是寡君的愿望。
English: Zhang Zixuan replied, "This is exactly what the oligarchs want.

古文：昔晋人伐卫，齐为卫故，伐晋冠氏，丧车五百，因与卫地，自济以西，禚、媚、杏以南，书社五百。
现代文：从前晋国人进攻卫国，齐国为了卫国的缘故，进攻晋国的冠氏，丧失了五百辆战车。由于这样就给了卫国土地，从济水以西和禚地、媚地、杏地以南，一共五百个村子。
English: In the past, the Jin people attacked the defense of the country, and the Qin attacked the Kuan clan of Jin for the sake of defending the country, and lost five hundred chariots. As a result, the land of the defense of the country was given, from west of Jishui, and south of Shunde, Meidi and Anhui, a total of five hundred villages.

古文：吴人加敝邑以乱。齐因其病，取讙与阐。寡君是以寒心。若得视卫君之事君也，则固所愿也。 
现代文：吴国人把动乱加于敝邑，齐国乘敝邑的困难，占取了瓘地和阐地，寡君因此而寒心，如果能像卫君那样事奉贵君，那本来就是我们所希望的。 
English: The people of Wu took advantage of the turmoil in Weiyu, and the people of Qi took advantage of the difficulties in Weiyu to occupy the Yunnan and Yunnan provinces. As a result, few princes were cold-hearted. If we could serve the noble prince like the prince of Wei, that is what we hoped for.

古文：成子病之，乃归成。
现代文：陈成子感到愧恨，就把成地归还给鲁国。
English: Chen Chengzi felt remorse and returned Chengdi to Lu.

古文：公孙宿以其兵甲入于嬴。
现代文：公孙宿带了他的武器装备进入嬴地。
English: Gongsunju took his weapons and equipment into the Badlands.

古文：卫孔圉取大子蒯聩之姊，生悝。
现代文：卫国的孔圉娶了太子蒯聩的姐姐，生了悝。
English: Kong Xi, the patron saint of the country, married the sister of the crown prince Xi, and gave birth to Xi.

古文：孔氏之竖浑良夫，长而美，孔文子卒，通于内。
现代文：孔氏的童仆浑良夫个子高，并且长得漂亮，孔圉死后，就和孔姬私通。
English: Mr. Kong's servant boy, Hun Liang, was tall and handsome. After Kong Yao's death, he had an affair with Kong Ji.

古文：大子在戚，孔姬使之焉。大子与之言曰： 苟使我入获国，服冕乘轩，三死无与。 
现代文：太子在戚地，孔姬派浑良夫前去，太子对他说： 如果让我回国即位，给你大夫的冠服、车子，赦免死罪三次。 
English: The prince was at his relatives' place, and Kong Ji sent Hun Ryong to him. The prince said to him, "If I am allowed to return to my country and ascend to the throne, I will give you the doctor's ceremonial robes, a car, and pardon the death penalty three times."

古文：与之盟。为请于伯姬。
现代文：浑良夫和太子盟誓，为他向孔姬请求。
English: Hunryaf and the prince swore an oath and asked Kongji for him.

古文：闰月，良夫与大子入，舍于孔氏之外圃。
现代文：闰十二月，浑良夫和太子回到国都，住在孔氏家外面菜园子里。
English: In late December, Hunryav and the prince returned to the capital and lived in the vegetable garden outside Kong's house.

古文：昏，二人蒙衣而乘，寺人罗御，如孔氏。
现代文：天黑以后，两个人用头巾盖住脸，寺人罗为他们驾车，到了孔氏家里。
English: After dark, the two men covered their faces with headscarves. Temple member Luo drove them to Kong's home.

古文：孔氏之老栾宁问之，称姻妾以告。
现代文：孔氏的家臣之长栾宁问他们，他们说是姻戚家的侍妾，就进了门。
English: Mr. Kong's chief retainer, Huning, asked them if they were the concubines of their in-laws, and they entered the door.

古文：遂入，適伯姬氏。既食，孔伯姬杖戈而先，大子与五人介，舆豭从之。迫孔悝于厕，强盟之，遂劫以登台。
现代文：到了孔姬那里，吃完饭，孔姬手拿着戈走在前面，太子和五个人身披皮甲，用车装上公猪跟着，把孔悝逼到墙边，强迫他盟誓，于是就劫持他登上台去。
English: When they arrived at Kong Ji's place, after finishing their meal, Kong Ji walked in front of them with a go in his hand. The prince and five people dressed in leather armor, followed by a boar in a cart, drove Kong Ji to the wall, forced him to swear an oath, and then kidnapped him to go on stage.

古文：栾宁将饮酒，炙未熟，闻乱，使告季子。召获驾乘车，行爵食炙，奉卫侯辄来奔。
现代文：栾宁正要喝酒，肉没有烤熟，听说有动乱，派人告诉子路，召唤获驾上坐车，在车上喝酒吃肉，事奉卫出公辄逃亡到鲁国来。
English: Huning was about to drink, the meat was not cooked, he heard that there was a disturbance, he sent someone to tell him the way, summoned him to get on the car, drank and ate meat in the car, served as a guard, and fled to Lu.

古文：季子将入，遇子羔将出，曰： 门已闭矣。 
现代文：子路正要进入国都，碰上子羔正要出来，说： 城门已经关上了。 
English: And as he was about to enter the city, a Lamb met him coming out, saying, "The city is shut up!"

古文：季子曰： 吾姑至焉。 
现代文：子路说： 我还是去一下。 
English: Zi Lu said: I'll go anyway.

古文：子羔曰： 弗及，不践其难。 
现代文：子羔说： 来不及了，不要去遭受祸难！ 
English: And he said, It is too late; do not be a partaker of this evil.

古文：季子曰： 食焉，不辟其难。 
现代文：子路说： 吃了他的俸禄，不应躲避祸难。 
English: Zilu said, "If you have eaten his salary, you should not avoid the calamity."

古文：子羔遂出。
现代文：子羔就出去，子路进入。
English: So the lamb ran away.

古文：子路入，及门，公孙敢门焉，曰： 无入为也。 
现代文：到达孔氏大门口；公孙敢在那里守门，说： 不要进去干什么了。 
English: They arrived at Kong's front door; Gongsun dared to guard the door and said, "Don't go in.

古文：季子曰： 是公孙也，求利焉而逃其难。
现代文：子路说： 这是公孙，在这里谋求利益而躲避祸难。
English: Zilu said, "This is the grandson of my father-in-law, here he seeks profit and avoids misfortune.

古文：由不然，利其禄，必救其患。 
现代文：我不是这样，以他的俸禄为利益，就一定要救援他的患难。 
English: I can't do this, enjoy someone else's salary, and save someone else's peril.

古文：有使者出，乃入。曰： 大子焉用孔悝，虽杀之，必或继之。 
现代文：有使者从门里出来，子路就乘机进去，说： 太子哪里用得着孔悝作帮手？即使杀了他，一定有人接替他。 
English: An emissary came out of the door, and Zilu took the opportunity to go in, saying: Where does the prince need Kong Yao as a helper? Even if you kill him, there must be someone to replace him.

古文：且曰： 大子无勇，若燔台半，必舍孔叔。 
现代文：而且说： 太子没有勇气，如果放火烧台，烧到一半，必然会释放孔叔。 
English: Moreover, he said: The prince lacks courage. If he sets fire to the platform and burns it halfway, he will inevitably release Uncle Kong.

古文：大子闻之惧，下石乞、盂黡敌子路。以戈击之，断缨。
现代文：太子听到了，很害怕，让石乞、盂黡下台和子路搏斗，用戈击中子路，把帽带也斩断了。
English: When the prince heard this, he was very afraid. He made Shijie and Xing step down from the stage and fight with Zilu. He hit Zilu with a club and cut off his hatband.

古文：子路曰： 君子死，冠不免。 
现代文：子路说： 君子死，帽子也不能除掉。 
English: Zilu said: When a gentleman dies, his hat must not fall to the ground.

古文：结缨而死。
现代文：于是子路结好帽带子就死了。
English: Saying this, he tied his bonnets and died.

古文：孔子闻卫乱，曰： 柴也其来，由也死矣。 
现代文：孔子听到卫国发生动乱，说 柴能回来，可是由死去了。 
English: When Confucius heard that there was turmoil in the motherland, he said that Chai could come back, but he died.

古文：孔悝立庄公。
现代文：孔悝立了卫庄公。
English: Kong erected the Weizhuang Palace.

古文：庄公害故政，欲尽去之。先谓司徒瞒成曰： 寡人离病于外久矣，子请亦尝之。 
现代文：庄公认为原来的大臣都靠不住，想要全部去掉他们，就先对司徒瞒成说： 我在外边遭遇忧患很久了，请您也尝一尝。 
English: Zhuang Gong thought that the original ministers were all unreliable, and wanted to get rid of them all, so he first said to Szeto: I have been suffering from sorrow for a long time, please try it.

古文：归告褚师比，欲与之伐公，不果。
现代文：瞒成回去告诉褚师比，想要和他攻打庄公，没能实现。
English: He went back to Zou Cheng and told Zou Shi Bi that he wanted to fight Zhuang Gong with him, but it didn't work out.

