古文：司马穰苴者，田完之苗裔也。
现代文：司马穰苴，是田完的后代。
English: Sima Ye is a descendant of Tian Wan.

古文：齐景公时，晋伐阿、甄，而燕侵河上，齐师败绩。
现代文：齐景公时期，晋国出兵攻打齐国的东阿和甄城，燕国进犯齐国黄河南岸的领土。
English: During the reign of King Qi Jing, Jin dispatched troops to attack East Awa and Zhencheng in Qi, and Yan invaded the territory on the south bank of the Yellow River in Qi.

古文：景公患之。
现代文：齐国的军队都被打败了。
English: The armies of Qi were all defeated.

古文：晏婴乃荐田穰苴曰： 穰苴虽田氏庶孽，然其人文能附众，武能威敌，原君试之。 
现代文：齐景公为此非常忧虑。于是晏婴就向齐景公推荐田穰苴，说： 穰苴虽说是田家的庶子，可是他的文才能使众人归附；武略能使敌人畏惧。希望君王能试试他。 
English: Lord Qi Jing was very worried about this. Therefore, Xun Ying recommended Tian Qi to Lord Qi Jing, saying: Although Xun is an illegitimate son of the Tian family, his writing ability can make everyone follow him; his military strategy can make enemies fear him. I hope the king can try him.

古文：景公召穰苴，与语兵事，大说之，以为将军，将兵扞燕晋之师。
现代文：于是齐景公召见了穰苴，跟他共同议论军国大事，和他讨论之后齐景公非常高兴，立即任命他做了将军，命他率兵去抵抗燕、晋两国的军队。
English: As a result, Qi Jing Gong was summoned to see Yao and discuss military and national affairs with him. After discussing with him, Qi Jing Gong was very happy and immediately appointed him as a general and ordered him to lead the troops to resist the armies of Yan and Jin.

古文：穰苴曰： 臣素卑贱，君擢之闾伍之中，加之大夫之上，士卒未附，百姓不信，人微权轻，原得君之宠臣，国之所尊，以监军，乃可。 
现代文：穰苴说： 我身份卑微，君王把我从平民中提拔起来，置于大夫之上，士兵们不会服从，百姓也不会信任，人的资望轻微，权威就树立不起来，希望国君能派一位受到国君宠爱并且国人尊敬的大臣，来做监军，就可以了。 
English: Zou said, "I am a lowly person. The king promoted me from a commoner and placed me above a doctor. The soldiers will not obey and the people will not trust. People's prestige is low and authority cannot be established. I hope that the king can send a minister who is loved by the king and respected by the people to supervise the army. That's enough."

古文：於是景公许之，使庄贾往。
现代文：于是齐景公就答应了他的要求，派庄贾去做监军。
English: So Lord Qi Jing agreed to his request and sent Zhuang Jia to supervise the troops.

古文：穰苴既辞，与庄贾约曰： 旦日日中会於军门。 
现代文：穰苴向景公辞行后，便和庄贾约定说： 明天正午在营门会齐。 
English: After Gong Xiangjing's departure, he and Zhuang Jia agreed to meet at the camp gate at noon the next day.

古文：穰苴先驰至军，立表下漏待贾。
现代文：第二天，穰苴率先赶到军门，立起了计时的木表和漏壶，等待庄贾。
English: The next day, Zou was the first to arrive at the military gate. He set up a wooden timer and a leaking kettle, and waited for Zhuang Jia.

古文：贾素骄贵，以为将己之军而己为监，不甚急；亲戚左右送之，留饮。
现代文：但庄贾一向骄盈显贵，认为率领的是自己的军队，自己又做监军，就不特别着急；亲戚朋友为他饯行，挽留他喝酒。
English: However, Zhuang Jia has always been proud and dignified, believing that he is leading his own army, and he is also a supervisor of the army, he is not particularly anxious; relatives and friends walk for him and keep him drinking.

古文：日中而贾不至。
现代文：已经等到了正午，庄贾还没到来。
English: We have waited until noon, but Zhuang Jia still hasn't arrived.

古文：穰苴则仆表决漏，入，行军勒兵，申明约束。
现代文：穰苴就打倒木表，摔破漏壶，进入军营，巡视营地，整饬军队，宣布了各种规章号令。
English: He knocked down the wooden watch, broke the leaking pot, entered the military camp, inspected the camp, rectified the army, and announced various rules and orders.

古文：约束既定，夕时，庄贾乃至。
现代文：等他布署完毕，已是日暮时分，庄贾这才到来。
English: By the time he had finished his deployment, it was already dusk, and Zhuang Jia had just arrived.

古文：穰苴曰： 何後期为？ 
现代文：穰苴说： 为什么约定了时刻还迟到？ 
English: Zou said, "Why are you late for the appointed time?

古文：贾谢曰： 不佞大夫亲戚送之，故留。 
现代文：庄贾表示歉意地解释说： 朋友亲戚们给我送行，所以耽搁了。 
English: Zhuang Jia apologetically explained: My friends and relatives came to see me off, so I was delayed.

古文：穰苴曰： 将受命之日则忘其家，临军约束则忘其亲，援枹鼓之急则忘其身。
现代文：穰苴说： 身为将领，从接受命令的那一刻起，就应当忘掉自己的家庭，来到军队宣布规定号令后，就应忘掉私人的交情，擂鼓进军，战况紧急的时刻，就应当忘掉自己的生命。
English: Zou said: As a general, from the moment you receive an order, you should forget your family. When you come to the army to announce the regulations, you should forget your personal friendship. When you march into the army, you should forget your life.

古文：今敌国深侵，邦内骚动，士卒暴露於境，君寝不安席，食不甘味，百姓之命皆悬於君，何谓相送乎！ 
现代文：如今敌人侵略已经深入国境，国内骚乱不安，战士们已在前线战场暴露，无所隐蔽，国君睡不安稳，吃不香甜，全国百姓的生命都维系在你的身上，还谈什么送行呢！ 
English: Now that the enemy's invasion has penetrated deep into the national borders, domestic unrest is unsettled, soldiers have been exposed on the frontline battlefield, there is nowhere to hide, the country's ruler sleeps uneasily, does not eat sweet, and the lives of the people of the whole country are attached to you, what else to say about seeing you off!

古文：召军正问曰： 军法期而後至者云何？ 对曰： 当斩。 
现代文：于是把军法官叫来，问道： 军法上，对约定时刻迟到的人是怎么说的？ 回答说： 应当斩首。 
English: Then the military judge was called in and asked: What does military law say about a man who is late for an appointment? He replied: He should be beheaded.

古文：庄贾惧，使人驰报景公，请救。
现代文：庄贾很害怕，派人飞马报告齐景公，请他搭救。
English: Zhuang Jia was very scared. He sent someone on a flying horse to report to Qi Jing Gong and ask him to rescue him.

古文：既往，未及反，於是遂斩庄贾以徇三军。三军之士皆振栗。
现代文：报信的人去后不久，还没来得及返回，庄贾就被斩首，向三军巡行示众，全军将士都震惊害怕。
English: Not long after the person who reported the letter left, before he could return, Zhuang Jia was beheaded and paraded in front of the three armies. All the soldiers were shocked and afraid.

古文：久之，景公遣使者持节赦贾，驰入军中。
现代文：过了好长时间，齐景公派的使者才拿着节符来赦免庄贾。车马飞奔直入军营。
English: After a long time, the envoys of the Qi Jing public faction took the festival symbols to pardon Zhuang Jia. The chariots and horses rushed straight into the military camp.

古文：穰苴曰： 将在军，君令有所不受。 
现代文：穰苴说： 将领在军队里，国君的命令有的可以不接受。 
English: Zou said: Generals are in the army, and some orders from the sovereign may not be accepted.

古文：问军正曰： 驰三军法何？ 正曰： 当斩。 
现代文：又问军法官说： 驾着车马在军营里奔驰，军法上是怎么规定的？ 军法官说： 应当斩首。 
English: He also asked the military judge: "How is it stipulated in military law to drive a horse-drawn carriage in a military camp?" The military judge said: "He should be beheaded."

古文：使者大惧。
现代文：使者异常恐惧。
English: The messenger was terrified.

古文：穰苴曰： 君之使不可杀之。 
现代文：穰苴说： 国君的使者不能斩首。 
English: Zou said: The emissary of the sovereign cannot be beheaded.

古文：乃斩其仆，车之左驸，马之左骖，以徇三军。
现代文：就斩了使者的仆从，砍断了左边的夹车木，杀死了左边驾车的马，向三军巡行示众。
English: So he beheaded the messenger's servant, cut down the wood of the cart on the left, killed the horse driving the cart on the left, and paraded to the three armies.

古文：遣使者还报，然後行。
现代文：又让使者回去向齐景公报告，然后就出发了。
English: He also asked the emissary to go back and report to Qi Jing Gong, and then set off.

古文：士卒次舍井灶饮食问疾医药，身自拊循之。
现代文：土兵们安营扎寨，掘井立灶，饮水吃饭，探问疾病，安排医药，田穰苴都亲自过问并抚尉他们。
English: The local soldiers set up camp, dug wells, set up stoves, drank water and ate, inquired about diseases, arranged medicine, and Tian Yu personally questioned and guided them.

古文：悉取将军之资粮享士卒，身与士卒平分粮食。
现代文：还把自己作为将军专用的物资粮食全部拿出来款待士兵。自己和士兵一样平分粮食。
English: He also treated the soldiers to all of his own food, which he used exclusively as a general. He divided the food equally between himself and the soldiers.

古文：最比其羸弱者，三日而後勒兵。
现代文：把体弱有病的统计出来。三天后重新整训军队，准备出战。
English: The sick and infirm were counted. Three days later, the army was re-trained and ready to go to war.

古文：病者皆求行，争奋出为之赴战。
现代文：病弱的士兵也都要求一同奔赴战场，争先奋勇地为他战斗。
English: Weak soldiers also asked to rush to the battlefield together and fight bravely for him.

古文：晋师闻之，为罢去。
现代文：晋国军队知道了这种情况，就把军队撤回去了。
English: When the Jin forces learned of the situation, they withdrew their forces.

古文：燕师闻之，度水而解。於是追击之，遂取所亡封内故境而引兵归。
现代文：燕国军队知道了这种情况，因渡黄河向北撤退而分散松懈，于是齐国的军队趁势追击他们，收复了所有沦陷的领土，然后率兵凯旋。
English: Yan's army knew the situation, and because of crossing the Yellow River and retreating to the north, they were dispersed and slack, so Qi's army took advantage of the situation to pursue them, recovered all the fallen territories, and then led the soldiers to a triumphant return.

古文：未至国，释兵旅，解约束，誓盟而後入邑。
现代文：还没到国都，就解除了战备，取消了战时规定号令。宣誓立盟而后才进入国都。
English: Before arriving at the national capital, they lifted the alert and cancelled the wartime regulations. They only entered the national capital after swearing an oath to establish an alliance.

古文：景公与诸大夫郊迎，劳师成礼，然後反归寝。
现代文：齐景公率领文武百官到城外来迎接，按照礼仪慰劳将士后，才回到寝宫。
English: Prince Qi Jing led hundreds of military and civilian officials to the outskirts of the city to greet them. After consoling the soldiers in accordance with etiquette, he returned to his bedchamber.

古文：既见穰苴，尊为大司马。
现代文：齐景公接见了田穰苴，敬重、推崇地任命他做大司马。
English: Qi Jing Gong received Tian Yao and respectfully and reverently appointed him as the grand steward.

古文：田氏日以益尊於齐。
现代文：从此，田氏在齐国的地位就一天天地显贵起来。
English: Since then, Tian's status in Qi has become increasingly prominent.

古文：已而大夫鲍氏、高、国之属害之，谮於景公。
现代文：后来，大夫鲍氏、高氏、国氏一班人忌妒他，在齐景公面前中伤、诬陷他。
English: Later, a group of doctors including Bao, Gao and Guo were jealous of him and slandered and framed him in front of Lord Qi Jing.

古文：景公退穰苴，苴发疾而死。
现代文：齐景公就解除了他的官职，穰苴不久因病去世。
English: Lord Qi Jing dismissed him from his official post, and he died of illness soon after.

古文：田乞、田豹之徒由此怨高、国等。
现代文：田乞、田豹等人因此怨恨高氏、国氏家族的人。
English: As a result, Tian Qian, Tian Bao and others resented people from the Gao and Guo families.

古文：其後及田常杀简公，尽灭高子、国子之族。
现代文：此后，等到田常杀死齐简公，就把高氏、国氏家族全部诛灭了。
English: After that, when Tian Chang killed Qi Jian Gong, he annihilated the entire Gao and Guo families.

古文：至常曾孙和，因自立为齐威王，用兵行威，大放穰苴之法，而诸侯朝齐。
现代文：到了田常的曾孙田和，便自立为君，号为齐威王。他率兵打仗施使权威，都广泛地模仿穰苴的做法，各国诸侯都到齐国朝拜。
English: When Tian Chang's great-grandson Tian He arrived, he established himself as the ruler and called himself King Qi Wei. He led the troops to war and exercised authority, widely imitating the practice of Qi. Princes from all over the world came to Qi to pay homage.

古文：齐威王使大夫追论古者司马兵法而附穰苴於其中，因号曰司马穰苴兵法。
现代文：齐威王派大夫研究讨论古代的《司马兵法》，而且把大司马田穰苴的兵法也附在里边，故而定名叫《司马穰苴兵法》。
English: King Qiwei sent a doctor to study and discuss the ancient "Sima Heiho," and also attached the war method of the great Sima Tianyao to it, so it was named "Sima Heiho."

古文：太史公曰：余读司马兵法，闳廓深远，虽三代征伐，未能竟其义，如其文也，亦少襃矣。
现代文：太史公说：我读《司马兵法》，感到宏大广博，深远不可测度。即使是夏、商、周三代的战争，也未能完全发挥出它的内蕴，像现在把《司马穰苴兵法》的文字附在里边，也未免推许的过份了。
English: Taishigong said, "When I read "Sima Heiho," I felt that it was vast and far-reaching, and its depth was immeasurable. Even the wars of Xia, Shang and San dynasties could not fully bring out its innermost essence. To attach the text of "Sima Heiho" to it now would be too much to recommend.

古文：若夫穰苴，区区为小国行师，何暇及司马兵法之揖让乎？
现代文：至于说到田穰苴，不过是为小小的诸侯国带兵打仗，怎么能和《司马兵法》相提并论呢？
English: As far as Tianyu is concerned, it is nothing more than leading soldiers to fight for a small vassal state. How can it be compared to the Sima Heiho?

古文：世既多司马兵法，以故不论，著穰苴之列传焉。
现代文：世间既然留传着许多《司马兵法》，因此不再评论，只写这篇《司马穰苴列传》。
English: Since there are many "Sima Heiho" left in the world, I will no longer comment on it, but only write this "Sima Heihei biography."

