古文：起旃蒙大荒落二月，尽强圉协洽，凡二年有奇。
现代文：起旃蒙大荒落二月，尽强圉协洽，凡二年有奇。
English: In February, when the Mongolian people were in a state of great desolation, they tried their best to cooperate with each other, which is unusual in two years.

古文：中宗大和大圣大昭孝皇帝中
现代文：中宗大和大圣大昭孝皇帝中
English: Zhongzong University and Da Sheng Da Zhaoxiao Emperor Middle School

古文：神龙元年乙巳，公元七零五年
现代文：唐中宗神龙元年
English: The First Year of Shenlong of the Tang Dynasty

古文：二月，辛亥，帝帅百官诣上阳宫问太后起居；自是每十日一往。
现代文：二月，辛亥，唐中宗带领文武百官到上阳宫向武则天请安，问候她的日常生活状况；从此唐中宗每十天前来问候一次。
English: In February, Xinhai, Tang Zhongzong led hundreds of civil and military officials to Shangyang Palace to greet Wu Zetian and ask her about her daily life; from then on, Tang Zhongzong came to greet her once every ten days.

古文：甲寅，复国号曰唐。郊庙、社稷、陵寝、百官、旗帜、服色、文字皆如永淳以前故事。复以神都为东都，北都为并州，老君为玄元皇帝。
现代文：甲寅，唐中宗下诏恢复大唐国号，并规定郊庙、社稷、陵寝、百官、旗帜、服色、文字等都恢复唐高宗永淳年间以前的旧制，神都又恢复东都旧名，北都恢复并州旧名，老君仍称为玄元皇帝。
English: According to the edict of Emperor Gaozong of the Tang Dynasty, the name of the Great Tang Dynasty was restored, and the suburb temples, shrines, mausoleums, officials, flags, clothing colors, and characters were all restored to the old system before the Yongjun era of Emperor Gaozong of the Tang Dynasty. The gods were restored to the old name of Dongdu, the north was restored to the old name of the province, and the old man was still called Emperor Xuanyuan.

古文：乙卯，凤阁侍郎、同平章事韦承庆贬高要尉；正谏大夫、同平章事房融除名，流高州；司礼卿崔神庆流钦州。
现代文：乙卯，唐中宗将凤阁侍郎、同平章事韦承庆贬为高要尉；将正谏大夫、同平章事房融除名并流放到高州；将司礼卿崔神庆流放到钦州。
English: Second, Tang Zhongzong demoted Fengge's waiter, Tongping Zhangji Wei Chengqing, to the rank of high-ranking lieutenant; removed Zhengqi's doctor, Tongping Zhangji Fu Rong, and exiled him to Gaozhou; and exiled Sirei Cui Shenqing to Qinzhou.

古文：杨再思为户部尚书、同中书门下三品、西京留守。
现代文：唐中宗又任命杨再思为户部尚书、同中书门下三品、西京留守。
English: Tang Zhongzong also appointed Yang Zaisi as the head of the household of Shang Shu, the third grade of the school of Tang Zhongzong, and he stayed in West Beijing.

古文：太后之迁上阳宫也，太仆卿、同中书门下三品姚元之独呜咽流涕。
现代文：在武则天被迁到上阳宫时，只有太仆卿、同中书门下三品姚元之一人痛哭流涕。
English: When Wu Zetian was moved to Shangyang Palace, only Taiboqing, one of the three Yao Yuan under the book gate of the same school, cried bitterly.

古文：桓彦范、张柬之谓曰： 今日岂公涕泣时邪！
现代文：桓彦范、张柬之对他说： 今天哪里是您悲哀哭泣的日子！
English: Kanehiko Fan and Zhang Kamizhi said to him, "Where is today, the day of your sorrow and weeping?"

古文：恐公祸由此始。 
现代文：恐怕从今以后您就要大祸临头了。 
English: That's going to get you in trouble.

古文：元之曰： 元之事则天皇帝久，乍此辞违，悲不能忍。
现代文：姚元之回答说： 元之侍奉则天皇帝的时间很长，现在突然要分手了，感到悲痛难忍。
English: Yao Yuanzhi replied: Yuanzhi has served the Zetian Emperor for a long time, and now he suddenly wants to break up, feeling sad and unbearable.

古文：且元之前日从公诛奸逆，人臣之义也；今日别旧君，亦人臣之义也，虽获罪，实所甘心。 
现代文：况且元之前几天追随诸公诛灭恶逆之徒，是尽作臣子的本分；今天辞别旧主，也同样是在尽作臣子的本分。即使因此而受到惩罚，我也心甘情愿。 
English: Moreover, just a few days ago, it was my duty as a vassal to follow the public call to eliminate evil and traitors; today, when I bid farewell to my former master, it is also my duty as a vassal. Even if I am punished for this, I am willing.

古文：是日，出为亳州刺史。
现代文：在这一天，姚元之被任命为毫州刺史。
English: On this day, Yao Yuanzhi was appointed as the miller of the milling state.

古文：甲子，立妃韦氏为皇后，赦天下。追赠后父玄贞为上洛王、母崔氏为妃。
现代文：甲子，唐中宗将他的妃子韦氏立为皇后，大赦天下；又追赠韦后之父韦玄贞为上洛王，追赠韦后之母崔氏为上洛王妃。
English: As the eldest son, Tang Zhongzong made his concubine Wei Xuan the empress and pardoned the world. He also posthumously made Wei Xuan Zhen, the father of Queen Wei, the king of Shangluo, and posthumously made Wei Xuan Zhen, the mother of Queen Wei, the queen of Shangluo.

古文：左拾遗贾虚己上疏，以为： 异姓不王，古今通制。
现代文：左拾遗贾虚己上疏认为： 异姓之人不得封为王，是从古至今的定制。
English: Zuo Zhi Yi, Jia Hui and Shang Shu believed that people with different surnames should not be made kings, which is a custom from ancient times to the present.

古文：今中兴之始，万姓喁喁以观陛下之政；而先王后族，非所以广德美于天下也。
现代文：现在中兴刚刚开始，黎民百姓无不钦慕向往，观看陛下如何治理这个国家。而陛下却首先追赠皇后的父亲为王，这不是用来在全国扩大陛下贤德的办法。
English: Now that ZTE has just begun, the people of Li have nothing but admiration and yearning to see how His Majesty governs the country. But His Majesty first posthumously made the queen's father king. This is not a way to expand His Majesty's virtue throughout the country.

古文：且先朝赠后父太原王，殷鉴不远，须防其渐。
现代文：况且高宗时期追赠皇后的父亲武士为太原王，这个教训离现在并不遥远，陛下必须从一点一滴进行预防。
English: Moreover, during the reign of Emperor Gaozong, the father of the queen's posthumous gift was the warrior King Taiyuan. This lesson is not far away from now, and His Majesty must prevent it bit by bit.

古文：若以恩制已行，宜令皇后固让，则益增谦冲之德矣。 
现代文：如果认为命令已经发布无法收回，陛下应该让皇后坚决推辞，这样更能增加皇后谦虚守礼的美德。 
English: If you think that the order has been issued and cannot be withdrawn, your majesty should have the queen firmly refuse, which will further increase the virtue of the queen's modesty and propriety.

古文：不听。
现代文：唐中宗没有采纳他的建议。
English: The emperor does not allow it.

古文：初，韦后生邵王重润、长宁、安乐二公主，上之迁房陵也，安乐公主生于道中，上特爱之。
现代文：先前，韦后共生育了邵王李重润以及长宁和安乐两公主，在唐中宗被放逐到房陵去的时候，安乐公主在路上出生，所以唐中宗特别喜欢她。
English: Previously, Empress Wei had given birth to Shao Wang, Li Chongrun, and two princesses, Changning and Anle. When Tang Zhongzong was exiled to Fangling, Princess Anle was born on the road, so Tang Zhongzong was particularly fond of her.

古文：上在房陵与后同幽闭，备尝艰危，情爱甚笃。
现代文：中宗与韦后在房陵被幽禁期间，共同经历了各种艰难困苦的生活，因而两个人的感情十分深厚。
English: During the confinement of Fang Ling, Zhong Zong and Wei Hou experienced all kinds of hardships together, so the feelings of the two people are very deep.

古文：上每闻敕使至，辄惶恐欲自杀，后止之曰： 祸福无常，宁失一死，何遽如是！ 
现代文：中宗每当听到武则天派使者前来的消息，就惊惶失措地想要自杀，韦后制止他说： 祸福并非一成不变，最多不过一死，您何必这么着急呢！ 
English: Whenever Zhongzong heard the news that Wu Zetian had sent an envoy, he panicked and wanted to commit suicide. Wei Hou stopped him and said, "Bad fortune is not immutable, at most it is only one death. Why are you in such a hurry?

古文：上尝与后私誓曰： 异时幸复见天日，当惟卿所欲，不相禁御。 
现代文：中宗曾经私下对韦后发誓： 如果日后我能重见天日，一定会让你随心所欲，不加任何限制。 
English: Zhongzong once privately swore to Wei Hou: If I can see the light of day again in the future, I will definitely let you do whatever you want, without any restrictions.

古文：及再为皇后，遂干预朝政，如武后在高宗之世。
现代文：所以在韦氏重新成为皇后以后，便像武则天在高宗朝那样干预起朝政来了。
English: Therefore, after the Wei clan became empress again, she intervened in court politics, just as Wu Zetian did in the Gao Zong Dynasty.

古文：桓彦范上表，以为： 《易》称 无攸遂，在中馈，贞吉 ，《书》称 牝鸡之辰，惟家之索 ，伏见陛下每临朝，皇后必施帷幔坐殿上，预闻政事。
现代文：桓彦范上表，认为： 《周易》说： 妇女没有什么错失，在家中主持家务，就是吉利。 ，《尚书》说： 如果母鸡司晨打鸣，这个家庭就要败落了 。我发现陛下每次临朝，皇后总是坐在帷帐后面参预对军国大事的处理。
English: "Zhou Yi" said: "A woman has nothing to lose, if she presides over housework at home, it is good luck.", "Shang Shu" said: "If the hen crows in the morning, the family will fall." I found that every time His Majesty visits the imperial court, the empress always sits behind the curtain to participate in the handling of military affairs.

古文：臣窃观自古帝王，未有与妇人共政而不破国亡身者也。
现代文：臣观察历朝帝王，没有哪一个与妇人共同执政而不导致国破身亡的。
English: Vassals observed the emperors of all dynasties, and there was not a single one who ruled together with a woman without leading to the ruin of the country.

古文：且以阴乘阳，违天也；以妇陵夫，违人也。
现代文：再说阴凌驾于阳之上，是违背自然法则的；妇人欺凌丈夫，是违背人伦之道的。
English: Moreover, it is against the laws of nature for the yin to dominate the yang; it is against human ethics for a woman to bully her husband.

古文：伏愿陛下览古今之戒，以社稷苍生为念，令皇后专居中宫，治阴教，勿出外朝干国政。 
现代文：希望陛下观察古今治乱兴衰的经验教训，时刻想着社稷与百姓，敦促皇后严守皇后的本分，一心一意地致力于女子的教化，不要到外朝来干预国家政事。 
English: It is hoped that His Majesty will observe the lessons learned from the ups and downs of ancient and modern times, keep the society and the people in mind at all times, and urge the Empress to strictly abide by the duties of the Empress, single-mindedly devote herself to the enlightenment of women, and not interfere in the country's political affairs outside the country.

古文：先是，胡僧慧范以妖妄游权贵之门，与张易之兄弟善，韦后亦重之。
现代文：在此之前，胡僧慧范凭借虚妄的邪说结交权贵，与张易之、张昌宗兄弟等人相处得很好，韦后也很看重他。
English: Prior to this, Hu Monk Hui Fan had made friends with powerful people by virtue of false heresies, and got along well with Zhang Yizhi, Zhang Changzong brothers, etc. Wei Hou also valued him.

古文：及易之诛，复称慧范预其谋，以功加银青光禄大夫，赐爵上庸县公，出入宫掖，上数微行幸其舍。
现代文：等到张易之被诛灭以后，韦后又称慧范也参预了诛杀张易之等人的谋划，于是慧范因功被授为银青光禄大夫，并赐爵为上庸县公，使他得以出入皇宫，唐中宗也多次穿便衣到他所居住的地方。
English: After Zhang Yi was killed, Empress Dowager Wei also said that Hui Fan also participated in the premeditated plan to kill Zhang Yi and others. Therefore, Hui Fan was awarded the title of silver Qingguanglu doctor for his service, and was given the title of Shangyong County official, which allowed him to enter and leave the imperial palace. Tang Zhongzong also wore plainclothes many times to the place where he lived.

古文：彦范复表言慧范执左道以乱政，请诛之。
现代文：桓彦范又上表指控慧范用邪门歪道紊乱朝政，请求将他处死。
English: Kuan Yan Fan also accused Hui Fan of using evil and crooked means to disrupt the imperial government, and requested that he be put to death.

古文：上皆不听。
现代文：唐中宗对这些建议都没有采纳。
English: Tang Zhongzong did not accept any of the above suggestions.

古文：初，武后诛唐宗室，有才德者先死，惟吴王恪之子郁林侯千里褊躁无才，又数献符瑞，故独得免。
现代文：当初，武则天在铲除李唐宗室的时候，最先杀掉的是那些有道德才能的人，只有吴王李恪的儿子郁林侯李千里，心地狭窄性情浮躁，没有才能，再加上一次又一次地向武则天进献祥瑞，因而得以幸免。
English: At first, when Wu Zetian eradicated Li Tang's family, the first to be killed were those with moral ability. Only Wu Wang Li Ke's son, Yu Lin Hou Li Qianli, who was narrow-minded, impetuous, and had no ability, and who repeatedly offered Xiang Rui to Wu Zetian, was spared.

古文：上即位，立为成王，拜左金吾大将军。
现代文：唐中宗即位之后，封李千里为成王，任命他为左金吾大将军。
English: After Emperor Tang Zhongzong ascended to the throne, Li Qianli was given the title of Chengwang and appointed as General Zuo Kingu.

古文：武后所诛唐诸王、妃、主、驸马等，皆无人葬埋，子孙或流窜岭表，或拘囚历年，或逃匿民间，为人佣保。
现代文：武则天所诛杀的李唐诸王、王妃、公主、驸马等都无人加以埋葬，这些人的子孙有的被流放到岭南地区，有的已经在监狱中拘禁了数年之久，有的躲藏在民间成为富人的雇工。
English: The kings, queens, princesses and horses of Li Tang who were killed by Wu Zetian had no one to bury them. Some of the descendants of these people were exiled to the Lingnan region, some had been detained in prison for several years, and some hid among the people and became employees of the rich.

古文：至是，制州县求访其柩，以礼改葬，追复官爵，召其子孙，使之承袭，无子孙者为择后置之。
现代文：到这时候，唐中宗颁下制书，命令各州县寻访这些死去的宗室贵族的灵柩，根据死者的身份依礼改葬；并且给这些死者恢复原任官爵；召回他们的子孙，让他们承袭父辈的爵位；对那些没有子孙的人，则替他们选择后嗣以续其香火。
English: At this time, Tang Zhongzong issued an edict, ordering all prefectures and counties to search for the coffins of these dead aristocrats, according to the identity of the deceased according to the rite of burial; and to restore these dead to the original official title; to recall their descendants, so that they inherit the titles of their fathers; for those who do not have grandchildren, they choose heirs for them to continue their incense.

古文：既而宗室子孙相继而至，皆召见，涕泣舞蹈，各以亲疏袭爵拜官有差。
现代文：不久，散落各地的宗室子孙相继来到东都，唐中宗全都召见了他们。大家流着泪向中宗行了舞拜礼。
English: Not long after, the descendants of the patriarchs scattered all over the country came to Dongdu one after another, and Tang Zhongzong summoned them all. Everyone danced and worshiped the patriarch with tears streaming down their faces.

古文：二张之诛也，洛州长史薛季昶谓张柬之、敬晖曰： 二凶虽除，产、禄犹在，去草不去根，终当复生。 
现代文：中宗各根据血缘关系的亲疏远近赐给了他们大小不等的官职、爵位。张易之、张昌宗被诛灭后，洛州长史薛季昶对张柬之和敬晖说： 张易之、张昌宗这两个元凶虽然已被铲除，但吕产、吕禄这样人还在朝中任职，锄草时不铲掉草根，终究还会长出草来。 
English: After the annihilation of Zhang Yizhi and Zhang Changzong, the governor of Luo Province, Shi Xuejian, said to Zhang Kamizhi and Jingqi: Although Zhang Yizhi and Zhang Changzong, the two culprits, have been eradicated, people like Lvang and Lulu are still serving in the imperial court. When cutting grass, do not cut the roots, and eventually grass will grow.

古文：二人曰： 大事已定，彼犹机上肉耳，夫何能为！
现代文：张柬之、敬晖回答说： 现在大局已定，你说的那些人不过是案板上的肉罢了，还能有什么作为！
English: Zhang Kamizhi and Jing Yong replied: Now the overall situation has been decided, those people you mentioned are just meat on the board, what else can they do!

古文：所诛已多，不可复益也。 
现代文：现在杀的人已经够多的了，不能再多杀了。 
English: We've killed enough people now, we can't kill any more.

古文：季昶叹曰： 吾不知死所矣！ 
现代文：薛季昶叹口气说： 我不知道将死在哪里了。 
English: "I don't know where I'm going to die," Xue said with a sigh.

古文：朝邑尉武强刘幽求亦谓桓彦范、敬晖曰： 武三思尚存，公辈终无葬地；若不早图，噬脐无及。 
现代文：朝邑尉武强人刘幽求也对桓彦范和敬晖说： 武三思还没有受到惩处，你们这些人终究会死无葬身之地；如果现在不及早作准备，等到大祸临头再后悔就来不及了。 
English: Liu Yuxu, the military strongman of the Morning Town, also said to Huan Yan Fan and Jing Qi: Wu San Si has not yet been punished, you people will eventually die without a burial place; if you do not prepare early now, it will be too late to regret it when the disaster is imminent.

古文：不从。上女安乐公主适三思子崇训。
现代文：桓彦范和敬晖也没有采纳他的建议。唐中宗的女儿安乐公主嫁给了武三思的儿子武崇训。
English: Kanehiko Fan and Kinjo also did not accept his suggestion. Princess Anle, the daughter of Tang Zhongzong, married the son of Wu Sansi, Wu Chongxun.

古文：上官婉儿者，仪之女孙也，仪死，没入掖庭，辩慧善属文，明习吏事。
现代文：上官婉儿是上官仪的孙女，上官仪被杀后，她被没入后宫。上官婉儿聪明伶俐，能言善辩，写得一手好文章，又熟悉官府事务。
English: Shangguan Wan'er was the granddaughter of Shangguan Rong. After Shangguan Rong was killed, she was absorbed into the harem. Shangguan Wan'er was clever, eloquent, a good writer, and familiar with government affairs.

古文：则天爱之，自圣历以后，百司表奏多令参决；及上即位，又使专掌制命，益委任之，拜为婕妤，用事于中。
现代文：武则天十分喜欢她，自圣历年间以后，经常让她参予对各衙门所上表章奏疏的处理；唐中宗即位后，更加信任她，又让她专门负责草拟皇帝的命令，封她为婕妤，让她执掌宫中事务。
English: Wu Zetian liked her very much, and since the year of the calendar, he often let her participate in the handling of the records of the records of the records of the records of the records of the records of the records of the records of the records of the records of the records of the records of the records of the records of the records of the records of the records of the records of the records of the records of the records of the records of the records of the records of the records of the records of the records of the records of the records of the records of the records of the records of the records of the records of the records of the records of the records of the records of the records of the records of the records

古文：三思通焉，故党于武氏，又荐三思于韦后，引入禁中，上遂与三思图议政事，张柬之等皆受制于三思矣。
现代文：上官婉儿与武三思私通，所以偏袒武氏，她又向韦后推荐武三思，将武三思领进宫中，唐中宗于是开始与武三思商议政事，张柬之等人从此都受到了武三思的遏制。
English: Shangguan Wan'er had a personal relationship with Wu Sansi, so she favored Wu. She also recommended Wu Sansi to Wei and brought Wu Sansi into the palace. Tang Zhongzong then began to discuss political affairs with Wu Sansi. Zhang Khamzhi and others have been restrained by Wu Sansi ever since.

古文：上使韦后与三思双陆，而自居旁为之点筹；三思遂与后通，由是武氏之势复振。
现代文：唐中宗让韦后与武三思一起玩一种叫作双陆的游戏，自己则坐在一旁为他们数筹码；武三思于是又开始与韦后私通，武氏的势力因此又强大起来。
English: Tang Zhongzong let Wei Hou and Wu Sanxi play a game called double land together, while he sat aside and counted the chips for them; Wu Sanxi then began to fornicate with Wei Hou again, and the power of the Wu clan became strong again.

古文：张柬之等数劝上诛诸武，上不听。
现代文：张柬之等人屡次劝告唐中宗诛灭武氏集团，唐中宗都不听。
English: Zhang Khamzhi and others repeatedly advised Tang Zhongzong to exterminate the Wu clan group, but Tang Zhongzong did not listen.

古文：柬之等曰： 革命之际，宗室诸李，诛夷略尽；今赖天地之灵，陛下返正，而武氏滥官僭爵，按堵如故，岂远近所望邪！
现代文：张柬之等人说： 武则天改唐为周的时候，李唐宗室被诛杀殆尽；现在多亏天地神灵的庇佑，陛下又重登帝位，但武氏却像以往一样安稳地把持着他们所窃取的官爵职位，这种情形难道是朝野之士所希望看到的吗？
English: Zhang Khamzhi and others said: When Wu Zetian changed Tang to Zhou, Li Tang's family was wiped out; now, thanks to the protection of the gods and spirits of heaven and earth, His Majesty has returned to the throne, but the Wu clan is as stable as ever, holding the noble position they stole. Is this the situation that the people of the court and the country would like to see?

古文：愿颇抑损其禄位以慰天下！ 
现代文：希望陛下减少他们的俸禄，削夺他们的官爵，以告慰天下之人！ 
English: I hope that His Majesty will reduce their salaries and strip them of their titles to appease everyone!

古文：又不听。
现代文：唐中宗仍然没有采纳他们的建议。
English: Saburo doesn't listen, and soon a fierce wind blows.

古文：柬之等或抚床叹愤，或弹指出血，曰： 主上昔为英王，时称勇烈，吾所以不诛诸武者，欲使上自诛之，以张天子之威耳。
现代文：张柬之等人有的拍着几案叹息，有的弹击手指以致出血，纷纷说： 皇上过去作英王时，在人们眼里是一个勇武刚烈的人，我们之所以没有诛灭武氏集团，是为了让皇上能亲自诛杀他们以扩大天子的声威。
English: Zhang Khamzhi and the others, some of them sighing over several cases, some of them snapping their fingers until they bled, said one after another: When the emperor used to be king, he was a brave and strong man in the eyes of the people. The reason why we did not annihilate the Wu clan was so that the emperor could personally kill them in order to expand the prestige of the emperor.

古文：今反如此，事势已去，知复奈何！ 
现代文：现在皇上却反过头来重用武氏集团成员，大势已去，谁知以后又会怎么样呢！ 
English: Now, however, the Emperor has turned around and reused members of the Takeshi group. The tide has turned, and who knows what will happen in the future!

古文：上数微服幸武三思第，监察微史清河崔皎密疏谏曰： 国命初复，则天皇帝在西宫，人心犹有附会；周之旧臣，列居朝廷，陛下奈何轻有外游，不察豫且之祸！ 
现代文：唐中宗屡次身着便服到武三思的家里去，监察御史清河人崔皎秘密上疏说： 陛下的权力刚刚恢复，则天皇帝还住在西边的上阳宫里，还有人想依附她；武周时期的旧臣，仍然在朝廷供职，陛下怎么能轻易地外出游幸，没看到白龙身着鱼服而被打鱼的豫且射中的灾祸吗！ 
English: Tang Zhongzong repeatedly dressed in civilian clothes to go to Wu Sansi's home, and the inspector of the history of the Qing River, Cui Yan, secretly said: His Majesty's power has just been restored, then the Emperor still lives in the Shangyang Palace in the west, and there are still people who want to attach her; the old minister of the Wuzhou period, still serving at the court, how can His Majesty easily go out for pleasure, did not see the disaster of the white dragon dressed in a fish suit and being hit by a fish!

古文：上泄之，三思之党切齿。
现代文：唐中宗把密疏的内容泄露了出去，武三思和他的党羽们对崔皎恨之入骨。
English: Tang Zhongzong leaked the secret contents to the public, and Wu Sansi and his followers hated Cui Xuan to the bone.

古文：丙寅，以太子宾客武三思为司空、同中书门下三品。
现代文：丙寅，唐中宗任命太子宾客武三思为司空、同中书门下三品。
English: Cui Yin, Tang Zhongzong appointed the prince's guest Wu Sansi as the secretary of the sky, and the three products under the door of the book.

古文：左散骑常侍谯王重福，上之庶子也；其妃，张易之之甥。
现代文：左散骑常侍谯王李重福，是唐中宗的庶子；他的妃子，是张易之的外甥女。
English: On the left is Li Shifu, the bastard son of Tang Zhongzong; his concubine is the niece of Zhang Yizhi.

古文：韦后恶之，谮于上曰： 重润之死，重福为之也。 
现代文：韦后讨厌李重福，便在中宗面前诬陷他说： 李重润被迫自杀，是李重福在武则天面前诬陷所致。 
English: Wei Hou hated Li Chungfu, so he framed him in front of Zhong Zong. He said: Li Chungrun was forced to commit suicide because Li Chungfu framed him in front of Wu Zetian.

古文：由是贬濮州员外刺史，又改均州刺史，常令州司防守之。
现代文：唐中宗因此将李重福贬为濮州员外刺史，不久又改任他为均州刺史，并且常常命令州官对他严加防范。
English: As a result, Tang Zhongzong relegated Li Chungfu to the status of an outsider of the Zhang Prefecture, and soon he was appointed as an outsider of the Jun Prefecture, and often ordered the prefectural officials to take strict precautions against him.

古文：丁卯，以右散骑常侍安定王武攸暨为司徒、定王。
现代文：丁卯，唐中宗任命右散骑常侍、安定王武攸暨为司徒、定王。
English: Dingwu, Tang Zhongzong appointed the right knight errant, the stable king Wuyue-cum to be the steward, and the fixed king.

古文：辛未，相王固让太尉及知政事，许之；又立为皇太弟，相王固辞而止。
现代文：辛未，相王李旦坚决要求辞去太尉及宰相职务，唐中宗同意了他的辞职请求；唐中宗又想立相王李旦为皇太弟，因相王坚决推辞而作罢。
English: Soon after, Prince Li Dan, the minister of foreign affairs, insisted on resigning from the posts of captain and prime minister, and Tang Zhongzong agreed to his resignation request; Tang Zhongzong also wanted to appoint Prince Li Dan as the emperor's younger brother, but gave up because the minister of foreign affairs firmly refused to resign.

古文：甲戌，以国子祭酒始平祝钦明同中书门下三品，黄门侍郎、知侍中事韦安石为刑部尚书，罢知政事。
现代文：甲戌，唐中宗任命国子祭酒始平人祝钦明为同中书门下三品；任命黄门侍郎、知侍中事韦安石为刑部尚书，同时免去他的宰相职务。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, Emperor Gaozong appointed Zhu Qinming, the founder of the National Children's Wine Festival, to be the Third Rank of the Third Rank of the Second Rank of the Second Rank of the Second Rank of the Second Rank of the Second Rank of the Second Rank of the Second Rank of the Second Rank of the Second Rank of the Second Rank of the Second Rank of the Second Rank of the Second Rank of the Second Rank of the First Rank of the Second Rank of the First Rank of the Second Rank of the Second Rank of the First Rank of the Second Rank of the First Rank of the First Rank of the Second Rank of the First Rank of the Second Rank of the First Rank of the First Rank of

古文：丁丑，武三思、武攸暨固辞新官爵及政事，许之，并加开府仪同三司。
现代文：丁丑，武三思和武攸暨坚决推辞刚被任命的新职务和爵位，唐中宗同意了他们的请求，并且加封他们为开府仪同三司。
English: Ding Gou, Wu Sansi and Wu Youcai resolutely refused the newly appointed new posts and titles. Tang Zhongzong agreed to their request and added them to the Kaifu ceremony and the three departments.

古文：立皇子义兴王重俊为卫王，北海王重茂为温王，仍以重俊为洛州牧。
现代文：唐中宗立皇子义兴王李重俊为卫王，北海王李重茂为温王；仍然让李重俊担任洛州牧。
English: Li Chongjun, the son of Emperor Zongli of the Tang Dynasty, Yixing Wang, became the King of Wei, while the King of the North Sea, Li Chongmao, became the King of Wen; Li Chongjun was still allowed to serve as the Patriarch of Luozhou.

古文：三月，甲申，制： 文明已来破家子孙皆复旧资廕，唯徐敬业、裴炎不在免限。 
现代文：三月，甲申，唐中宗颁下制书： 文明年间以来因获罪而破败了的家族的子孙都可以恢复原来的地位与荫庇，只有徐敬业、裴炎不在赦免之列。 
English: In March, in Jiaxing, Tang Zhongzong issued the following edict: The descendants of families that have been ruined by crime since the beginning of civilization can restore their original status and shade. Only Xu Jingye and Pei Yan are not included in the pardon.

古文：丁亥，制： 酷吏周兴、来俊臣等，已死者追夺官爵，存者皆流岭南恶地。 
现代文：丁亥，唐中宗颁下制书： 酷吏周兴、来俊臣等人，已经死去的要追夺官爵，现在还活着的都要流放到岭南的偏僻之地。 
English: Dinghai, Tang Zhongzong issued the book: the cruel officials Zhou Xing, Lai Junchen and others, who have died to pursue the official title, and those who are still alive are exiled to the remote places of Lingnan.

古文：己丑，以袁恕己为中书令。
现代文：己丑，唐中宗任命袁恕己为中书令。
English: As a result, Yuan Shuxi was appointed by the Tang Dynasty's Central Government to be the chief of the Chinese Calligraphy.

古文：以安车征安平王武攸绪于嵩山，既至，除太子宾客；固请还山，许之。
现代文：唐中宗下令用可以坐乘的安车到嵩山征召安平王武攸绪，武攸绪一来到京师，就被任命为太子宾客；他坚决要求再回到嵩山，唐中宗答应了他。
English: Emperor Tang Zhongzong ordered that Anping King Wu Yuexiu be summoned to Songshan by a suitable carriage. As soon as Wu Yuexiu arrived in Beijing, he was appointed as a guest of the crown prince. He insisted on returning to Songshan, and Emperor Tang Zhongzong agreed.

古文：制： 枭氏、蟒氏皆复旧姓。 
现代文：唐中宗颁下制书： 枭氏、蟒氏都恢复为原来的萧氏、王氏。 
English: Book production under the Tang and Middle Dynasties: both the Min and Min clans were restored to the original Xiao and Wang clans.

古文：术士郑普思、尚衣奉御叶静能皆以妖妄为上所信重，夏，四月，墨敕以普思为秘书监，静能为国子祭酒。
现代文：江湖术士郑普思和尚衣奉御叶静能都凭借虚妄的邪说得到唐中宗的信任和重用，夏季，四月，唐中宗没有通过外廷，亲笔书写敕书任命郑普思为秘书监，叶静能为国子祭酒。
English: Both the charlatan warlock Zheng Pu Si and the monk Yi Feng Mi Ye Jing Neng obtained the trust and re-use of Tang Zhong Zong by virtue of false heresies. In the summer, in April, Tang Zhong Zong did not pass the outer court, but personally wrote a letter to appoint Zheng Pu Si as the secretary supervisor, and Ye Jing Neng could offer wine to the son of the state.

古文：桓彦范、崔玄固执不可，上曰： 已用之，无容遽改。 
现代文：桓彦范和崔玄坚持认为不能这样做，唐中宗道： 我已经任命了他们，不能这样快就改变任命。 
English: Kuan Yan Fan and Cui Xuan insisted that this could not be done, Tang Zhongzong said: I have appointed them, I cannot change the appointment so quickly.

古文：彦范曰： 陛下初即位，下制云： 政令皆依贞观故事。 
现代文：桓彦范说： 陛下在刚刚即位时，曾颁下制书说： 国家的各项行政措施与法令都将完全依照贞观时期的定制 。
English: Kuan Yan Fan said: When His Majesty ascended to the throne, he issued a document saying: All administrative measures and laws of the country will be fully in accordance with the custom of the Zhenguan period.

古文：贞观中，魏征、虞世南、颜师古为秘书监，孔颖达为国子祭酒，岂普思、静能之比乎！ 
现代文：贞观时期，担任秘书监职务的是魏徵、虞世南和颜师古，担任国子祭酒职务的是孔颖达，这些人的道德才能是现在的郑普思和叶静能所能比拟的吗？ 
English: During the Zhenguan period, Wei Zheng, Yu Shennan and Yan Shigu served as secretaries and overseers, and Kong Yingda served as the son of the country's sacrificial wine. Are the moral talents of these people comparable to the current Zheng Pu Si and Ye Jing Neng?

古文：庚戌，左拾遗李邕上疏，以为： 《诗》三百，一言以蔽之，曰 思无邪 。
现代文：庚戌，左拾遗李邕上疏认为： 《诗经》三百篇，用一句话来概括，叫做 思想纯正。 
English: Geng Zheng, Zuo Zhi Yi, Li Xuan and Shang Shu believed that: "Three hundred poems in the "Song of Songs" can be summarized in one sentence, which is called "pure thoughts."

古文：若有神仙能令人不死，则秦始皇、汉武帝得之矣；佛能为人福利，则梁武帝得之矣。
现代文：如果真有能让人长生不老的神仙，那么秦始皇和汉武帝早就找到了；如果佛祖真能为人谋利造福，那么梁武帝也早就如愿以偿了。
English: If there really were immortals who could make people live forever, then the First Emperor of Qin and Emperor Wu of Han would have found them long ago; if Buddha could really benefit people, then Emperor Wu of Liang would have fulfilled his wish long ago.

古文：尧、舜所以为帝王首者，亦修人事而已。
现代文：唐尧、虞舜之所以能够成为历代帝王的典范，也不过是由于他们努力修治世上各种的事情罢了。
English: The reason why Tang Xuan and Yu Xuan were able to become a model for emperors throughout the ages is simply because of their efforts to improve various things in the world.

古文：尊宠此属，何补于国！ 
现代文：陛下对郑普思和叶静能这样的人尊宠有加，对于治理国家有什么用处！ 
English: His Majesty has a lot of respect for people like Zheng Pu Si and Ye Jing Neng, but what use is that for governing the country!

古文：上皆不听。
现代文：唐中宗对上述建议都没有接受。
English: Tang Zhongzong did not accept any of the above suggestions.

古文：上即位之日，驿召魏元忠于高要；丁卯，至都，拜卫尉卿、同平章事。
现代文：唐中宗即位那一天，用驿车从高要县召回魏元忠；丁卯，魏元忠抵达东都，唐中宗任命他为卫尉卿、同平章事。
English: On the day of the enthronement of Tang Zhongzong, Wei Yuanzhong was called back from Gaoyao County with a carriage; Dingwu, Wei Yuanzhong arrived in Dongdu, and Tang Zhongzong appointed him as Wei Fuxing and Tongping Zhangji.

古文：甲戌，以魏元忠为兵部尚书，韦安石为吏部尚书，李怀远为右散骑常侍，唐休璟为辅国大将军，崔玄检校益府长史，杨再思检校杨府长史，祝钦明为刑部尚书，并同中书门下三品。
现代文：甲戌，唐中宗任命魏元忠为兵部尚书，韦安石为吏部尚书，李怀远为右散骑常侍，唐休为辅国大将军，崔玄为检校益府长史，杨再思为检校杨府长史，祝钦明为刑部尚书，上述人等都同时兼任同中书门下三品。
English: In Jiajing, Tang Zhongzong appointed Wei Yuanzhong as the inspector of the military department, Wei Anshi as the inspector of the personnel department, Li Huaiyuan as the right cavalryman, Tang Xiu as the assistant general, Cui Xuan as the inspector of the Yifu prefecture, Yang Zaisi as the inspector of the Yang prefecture, Zhu Qinming as the inspector of the criminal department, and the above-mentioned people all concurrently served as the three products under the Chinese school.

古文：元忠等皆以东宫旧僚褒之也。
现代文：魏元忠等人都是由于曾在中宗作太子时作过东宫僚属的缘故，而得到这样的褒奖。
English: Wei Yuanzhong and others received such an award because they had served as a member of the Eastern Court when Zhongzong was crown prince.

古文：乙亥，以张柬之为中书令。
现代文：乙亥，唐中宗任命张柬之为中书令。
English: In the second year of the Heian period, the Tang Dynasty Central Government appointed Zhang Kamming as the Censer.

古文：戊寅，追赠故邵王重润为懿德太子。
现代文：戊寅，唐中宗下诏追赠已经死去的邵王李重润为懿德太子。
English: Wu Yin, Tang Zhongzong issued an imperial edict to posthumously award the deceased Shao Wang Li Chungrun as the crown prince of Shunde.

古文：五月，壬午，迁周庙七主于西京崇尊庙。制： 武氏三代讳，奏事者皆不得犯。 
现代文：五月，壬午，唐中宗将武周七庙的神主迁到西京崇尊庙，并颁下制书： 对于武太后及其父、祖的名讳，上奏言事的臣民都不得触犯。 
English: In May, at noon, Tang Zhongzong moved the deities of the seven temples of Wu Zhou to the Suzon Temple in Xijing, and issued a document: For the names of the Empress Dowager Wu and her father and ancestor, the subjects who report the matter are not allowed to offend.

古文：乙酉，立太庙、社稷于东都。
现代文：乙酉，唐中宗在东都设立太庙及社稷。
English: On the 7th day of the 7th month, the Chinese sect built the Great Temple and the Altar of the Valley of Earthly Gods in Dongdu.

古文：以张柬之等及武攸暨、武三思、郑普思等十六人皆为立功之人，赐以铁券，自非反逆，各恕十死。
现代文：唐中宗把张柬之等人以及武攸暨、武三思、郑普思等十六人都当作为国家立下功劳的人，赐给他们铁券，并规定如果这些人所犯的不是谋反叛逆之罪，每个人都可以宽恕十次死罪。
English: Tang Zhongzong considered Zhang Khamzhi and others, as well as Wu Youcai, Wu Sanxi, Zheng Pu Si and other sixteen people, as people who have made contributions to the country, and gave them iron coupons, and stipulated that if these people did not commit the crime of plotting rebellion, each person can forgive ten times the death penalty.

古文：癸巳，敬晖等帅百官上表，以为： 五运迭兴，事不两大。
现代文：癸巳，敬晖等人率领文武百官上表唐中宗，认为： 五德之运轮流兴起，没有两德同时盛大的事情。
English: Xun Si, Jing Xi and others, leading hundreds of civil and military officials to the table of Tang Zhongzong, believed that: the five virtues take turns to rise, and there is no grand event of two virtues at the same time.

古文：天授革命之际，宗室诛窜殆尽，岂得与诸武并封！
现代文：天授年间改朝换代之际，李唐宗室被诛杀流徙殆尽，哪里有与武氏同殿受封的权利！
English: On the occasion of the change of dynasty in the year of the Consecration of Heaven, Li Tang's family was killed and exiled, and there is no right to receive the same title as the Takeshi clan!

古文：今天命惟新，而诸武封建如旧，并居京师，开辟以来未有斯理。
现代文：现在上天又重新眷顾李姓，但武氏仍然像以往那样受封为王，与李姓宗室一起居住在京师，开天辟地以来从未有过这样的道理。
English: Now, heaven has once again favored the surname of Li, but the Wu clan is still crowned as kings as in the past, and they live together with the family of the surname of Li in Beijing, which has never been the case since the heavens and earth were created.

古文：愿陛下为社稷计，顺遐迩心，降其王爵，以安内外。 
现代文：希望陛下为大唐江山着想，顺从朝野士民的心愿，削夺他们的王爵以安定人心。 
English: I hope that for the sake of the Great Tang Dynasty, His Majesty will comply with the wishes of the court and country officials, deprive them of their peerage to stabilize the hearts of the people.

古文：上不许。
现代文：唐中宗没有同意他们的建议。
English: The Emperor did not give his permission.

古文：敬晖等畏武三思之谗，以考功员外郎崔湜为耳目，伺其动静。
现代文：敬晖等人害怕武三思的谗言陷害，便把考功员外郎崔当作自己的耳目，以便随时刺探武三思的消息。
English: Fearful of Wu Sanxi's insinuation and frame-up, Jing Yu and the others took the gong examiner, Wai Lang Cui, as their own eyes and ears, so that they could spy on Wu Sanxi's message at any time.

古文：湜见上亲三思而忌晖等，乃悉以晖等谋告三思，反为三思用；三思引为中书舍人。
现代文：崔见中宗亲近武三思而猜忌敬晖等人，便把敬晖等人的全部打算告诉了武三思，反而成了为武三思效劳的人。武三思推荐崔作了中书舍人。
English: When Cui saw that Zhongzong was close to Wu Sanshi and was suspicious of Jing Ye and others, he told Wu Sanshi all the plans of Jing Ye and others, but instead became a person who served Wu Sanshi. Wu Sanshi recommended Cui to become a Chinese scholar.

古文：湜，仁师之孙也。
现代文：崔是崔仁师的孙子。
English: Cui is the grandson of Cui Ren.

古文：先是，殿中侍御史南皮郑愔谄事二张，二张败，贬宣州司士参军，坐赃，亡入东都，私谒武三思。
现代文：在这以前，殿中侍御史南皮县人郑巴结张易之和张昌宗，二张败死之后，被贬为宣州司士参军，又因犯贪赃罪的缘故，逃到东都，私下拜见武三思。
English: Prior to this, Zheng Ba Jie Zhang Yizhi and Zhang Changzong, both of whom were from Nanpi County, served as attendants in the palace. After Zhang Yizhi was defeated and died, he was demoted to the position of Xuanzhou magistrate to join the army. He also fled to Dongdu for committing the crime of corruption, and privately visited Wu Sanshi.

古文：初见三思，哭甚哀，既而大笑。
现代文：郑刚见到武三思时，哭得很悲哀，一会儿又放声大笑。
English: When Zheng Gang saw Wu Sanshi, he cried very sadly, and laughed loudly for a while.

古文：三思素贵重，甚怪之，愔曰： 始见大王而哭，哀大王将戮死而灭族也。
现代文：武三思向来位尊任重，对郑的悲喜无常感到非常奇怪。郑解释道： 我在刚刚见到大王时之所以痛哭失声，是在为大王将被戮尸灭族而感到悲哀。
English: Wu Sansi has always been a dignified person and felt very strange about Zheng's sadness and mood swings.Zheng explained: When I just saw the great king, the reason why I cried and lost my voice was because I was sad that the great king would be killed.

古文：后乃大笑，喜大王之得愔也。
现代文：悲哀之后又放声大笑，是在为大王能得到郑的帮助从而得以免祸而感到高兴。
English: After the sadness, he burst into laughter, happy that the great king could get Zheng's help and avoid the disaster.

古文：大王虽得天子之意，彼五人皆据将相之权，胆略过人，废太后如反掌。
现代文：大王您虽然深得天子的欢心，但张柬之、敬晖、桓彦范、崔玄和袁恕己五人手中都掌握着将相大权，并且个个胆略过人，以至于废掉太后的帝位都易如反掌。
English: Although you, the great king, have won the favor of the Son of Heaven, Zhang Kamizhi, Jing Xi, Huan Yan Fan, Cui Xuan, and Yuan Shuxi, all five of whom hold the great power of generalship in their hands, and each of them dares to surpass others, so that it is easy to abolish the empress dowager's imperial throne.

古文：大王自视势位与太后孰重？
现代文：大王您自己考虑您与太后相比哪一个权势地位更重一些？
English: Your Majesty, have you considered which position of power is more important to you than that of the Empress Dowager?

古文：彼五人日夜切齿，欲噬大王之肉，非尽大王之族不足以快其志。
现代文：那五个人对您恨之入骨，日夜都想吃下您的肉，如果不能把大王灭族，他们是不会称心如意的。
English: Those five people hate you to the bone and want to eat your flesh day and night. If they can't exterminate you, they won't be satisfied.

古文：大王不去此五人，危如朝露，而晏然尚自以为泰山之安，此愔所以为大王寒心。 
现代文：大王您如果不尽快除掉这五个人，您的生命安全就会像早晨的露水一样没有保障，可是您却还是怡然自乐，自以为像泰山一样安然无羔，这就是我郑为大王您感到痛心的原因。 
English: Great King, if you do not get rid of these five people as soon as possible, your life safety will be as insecure as the morning dew, but you still enjoy yourself and think that you are as safe as Mount Tai, which is why I feel sorry for you.

古文：三思大悦，与之登楼，问自安之策，引为中书舍人，与崔湜皆为三思谋主。
现代文：武三思十分高兴，与郑一起上楼，向他请教使自己平安无祸的办法，并荐举他作了中书舍人，与崔一道成为自己的谋主。
English: Wu Sanxi was very happy, and went upstairs with Zheng to ask him for advice on how to keep himself safe and sound, and recommended him to become a middle school student, and become his mentor together with Cui.

古文：三思与韦后日夜谮晖等，云 恃功专权，将不利于社稷。 
现代文：武三思与韦后天天在唐中宗面前诬陷敬晖等人，说他们 倚仗功劳专擅朝政，将对大唐的江山社稷不利。 
English: Wu Sansi and Wei Hou slandered Jing Xi and others in front of Tang Zhongzong every day, saying that they were only good at court politics because of their merits, which would be unfavorable to the country and society of the Great Tang Dynasty.

古文：上信之。
现代文：中宗相信了他们两人的谗言。
English: Emperor Hanwu believed his words.

古文：三思等因为上画策： 不若封晖等为王，罢其政事，外不失尊宠功臣，内实夺之权。 
现代文：武三思等人趁机为中宗出谋划策， 不如封敬晖等人为王，同时罢免他们所担任的职务，这样的话，表面不失为尊宠功臣，而实际上又能剥夺他们的权力。 
English: Wu Sansi and others took the opportunity to come up with a plan for Zhong Zong. It would be better to appoint Jing Xi and others as kings, and at the same time remove them from their positions. In this case, they would appear to be favored heroes, but in fact they could be deprived of their power.

古文：上以为然。
现代文：唐中宗认为这样做很好。
English: Tenshi thinks it makes sense.

古文：甲午，以侍中齐公敬晖为平阳王，谯公桓彦范为扶阳王，中书令汉阳公张柬之为汉阳王，南阳公袁恕己为南阳王，特进、同中书门下三品博陵公崔玄为博陵王，罢知政事，赐金帛鞍马，令朝朔望；仍赐彦范姓韦氏，与皇后同籍。
现代文：甲午，唐中宗封侍中、齐公敬晖为平阳王，谯公桓彦范为扶阳王，中书令、汉阳公张柬之为汉阳王，南阳公袁恕己为南阳王，特进、同中书门下三品、博陵公崔玄为博陵王，同时免去他们的宰相职务，赏赐上述五人金帛鞍马，只要求他们于每月初一、十五朝见天子；又赐桓彦范姓韦氏，让他与韦后同族。
English: In the afternoon of the 1st day of the 1st month of the 1st year of the 1st month of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year

古文：寻又以玄检校益州长史、知都督事，又改梁州刺史。
现代文：不久唐中宗又任命崔玄为检校益州长史、知都督事，后来又改任他为梁州刺史。
English: Soon after, Tang Zhongzong also appointed Cui Xuan as the governor of Guanzhong and the governor of Zhidu, and later he was appointed as the governor of Liangzhou.

古文：三思令百官复修则天之政，不附武氏者斥之。为五王所逐者复之，大权尽归三思矣。
现代文：随后武三思便下令文武百官重新恢复执行武则天时期的政策，凡是拒不趋附武氏集团的人都被排斥去位，那些被张柬之、桓彦范等人贬逐的人又重新得到起用，朝政大权全部落入武三思之手。
English: Subsequently, Wu Sansi ordered the civil and military officials to resume the implementation of the policies of the Wu Zetian period. All those who refused to join the Wu group were ousted, and those who were disparaged by Zhang Khamzhi, Kuan Yan Fan and others were re-appointed. The supreme political power of the dynasty all fell into the hands of Wu Sansi.

古文：五王之请削武氏诸王也，求人为表，众莫肯为。
现代文：张柬之等五王请求中宗削去武氏集团成员的王爵时，曾找人为他们拟表，众位朝臣中没有人敢于出头。
English: When the Five Kings, including Zhang Khamzhi, requested the Central Patriarchate to reduce the peerage of the members of the Wu clan group, they asked someone to draw up a list for them. None of the courtiers dared to come forward.

古文：中书舍人岑羲为之，语甚激切；中书舍人偃师毕构次当读表，辞色明厉。
现代文：中书舍人岑羲代他们草拟了表章，遣辞用语十分激切；中书舍人偃师人毕构正轮到负责宣读这一表章，言语和神态显得非常严厉。
English: Chinese calligraphers drafted the frontispiece on their behalf, and the wording of the words was very fierce; Chinese calligraphers were responsible for reading out the frontispiece, and the words and demeanor were very severe.

古文：三思既得志，羲改秘书少监，出构为润州刺史。
现代文：武三思得志以后，便改任岑羲为秘书少监，外放毕构为润州刺史。
English: After Wu San thought his way to success, he was reassigned to the position of secretary and junior superintendent of schools, and he was assigned to the position of secretary and junior superintendent of schools.

古文：易州刺史赵履温，桓彦范之妻兄也。
现代文：易州刺史赵履温，是桓彦范的妻兄。
English: Yizhou poet Zhao Liwen is the brother-in-law of Kuan Yan Fan.

古文：彦范之诛二张，称履温预其谋，召为司农少卿，履温以二婢遗彦范；及彦范罢政事，履温复夺其婢。
现代文：桓彦范诛杀张易之、张昌宗等人之后，声称赵履温也参预了诛除逆党的策划，唐中宗召他入京任司农少卿，赵履温把两个婢女送给了桓彦范；等到桓彦范被免去宰相职务以后，赵履温又夺回了两个婢女。
English: After Kuan Yan Fan killed Zhang Yizhi, Zhang Changzong and others, he claimed that Zhao Ruiwen was also involved in the plan to eliminate the traitorous party. Tang Zhongzong called him to Beijing to serve as Sino-Minor Secretary of Agriculture. Zhao Ruiwen gave two maids to Kuan Yan Fan; after Kuan Yan Fan was removed from the post of prime minister, Zhao Ruiwen won back two maids.

古文：上嘉宋璟忠直，屡迁黄门侍郎。
现代文：唐中宗赞赏宋忠诚正直，连续把他提拔到黄门侍郎的高位。
English: Tang Zhongzong appreciated Song's loyalty and honesty, and continuously promoted him to the high position of Huangmen waiter.

古文：武三思尝为事属璟，璟正色拒之曰： 今太后既复子明辟，王当以侯就第，何得尚干朝政！
现代文：武三思曾嘱托宋替他办一件事，宋义正辞严地拒绝他说： 现在太后都已经将帝位传给了太子，大王你就应当以侯爵的身份回到自己家里去，怎么还可以干预朝政呢！
English: Wu Sansi once asked Song to do something for him, but Song Yi Rong sternly refused, saying, "Now that the empress dowager has passed the imperial throne to the prince, the great king should return to his home as a marquis. How can you still interfere in imperial politics?"

古文：独不见产、禄之事乎？ 
现代文：你难道不知道吕产、吕禄两人的结局吗！ 
English: Don't you know the end of Lyu Sang and Lulu!

古文：以韦安石兼检校中书令，魏元忠兼检校侍中，又以李湛为右散骑常侍，赵承恩为光禄卿，杨元琰为卫尉卿。
现代文：唐中宗任命韦安石兼任检校中书令，魏元忠兼任检校侍中，又任命李湛为右散骑常侍，赵承恩为光禄卿，杨元琰为卫尉卿。
English: Tang Zhongzong also appointed Wei Anshi as the inspector of the school, Wei Yuanzhong as the inspector of the school, Li Zhan as the right cavalryman, Zhao Cheng'en as Guangluqing, and Yang Yuanqi as the guard lieutenant.

古文：先是，元琰知三思浸用事，请弃官为僧，上不许。
现代文：在此之前，杨元琰知武三思日益专擅朝政，便向唐中宗请求允许他辞去官位，削发为僧。唐中宗没有同意。
English: Prior to this, Yang Yuanzhang asked Tang Zhongzong to allow him to resign his official position and become a monk. Tang Zhongzong did not agree.

古文：敬晖闻之，笑曰： 使我早知，劝上许之，髡去胡头，岂不妙哉！ 
现代文：敬晖听说这件事后，对杨元琰打趣说： 要是我早一点得知此事，我就去劝陛下同意你的要求，剃光你这胡人的脑袋，岂不是太妙了！ 
English: After hearing about this, Jingyao quipped to Yang Yuanxuan: "If I had known about this a little earlier, I would have gone to persuade His Majesty to agree to your request and shave your bearded head. Wouldn't that be wonderful!"

古文：元琰多须，类胡，故晖戏之。
现代文：杨元琰长了一脸的络腮胡子，看上去像胡人，所以敬晖拿他开这样的玩笑。
English: Yang Yuanzhang has grown a full beard and looks like a goatee, so Jingyao plays a joke on him.

古文：元琰曰： 功成名遂，不退将危。
现代文：杨元琰回答说： 人在功成名就以后，如果不激流勇退，就会遇到危险。
English: Yang Yuanzhang replied, "After a person achieves success and fame, if he does not brave the torrent, he will be in danger.

古文：此乃由衷之请，非徒然也。 晖知其意，瞿然不悦。
现代文：我的确是从心眼里想辞官出家当和尚的，不仅仅是做个样子。 
English: I really wanted to quit my job and become a monk from the bottom of my heart, not just to look like one.

古文：及晖等得罪，元琰独免。
现代文：敬晖知道他的真实想法之后非常吃惊，感到很不高兴。
English: After knowing his true thoughts, Jingyao was very surprised and felt very unhappy.

古文：上官婕妤劝韦后袭则天故事，上表请天下士庶为出母服丧三年，又请百姓年二十三为丁，五十九免役，改易制度以收时望。
现代文：在敬晖等人因武三思的诬陷而被杀后，只有杨元琰一人得以幸免。上官婕妤劝韦后承袭武则天时期的旧制，向中宗上表请求规定全国士民百姓一律为被父亲休弃的母亲服丧三年。又请求规定天下百姓二十三岁时才算成丁，到五十九年就免除劳役，她要求作这一改变的目的是收买人心。
English: After Jing Xi and others were killed due to the false accusation of Wu San Si, only Yang Yuanqi was spared. Shangguan Zang advised Wei Hou to inherit the old system of the Wuzetian period, and requested the Chinese Patriarchate to stipulate that all the people in the country should pay three years of mourning for the mother who was abandoned by her father. She also requested that the people of the world should be counted as ding when they were 23 years old, and be exempted from labor service in 59. The purpose of her request for this change was to buy hearts and minds.

古文：制皆许之。
现代文：唐中宗对她的所有建议都同意。
English: Tang Zhongzong agreed to all of her suggestions.

古文：癸卯，制：降诸武，梁王三思为德静王，定王攸暨为乐寿王，河内王懿宗等十二人皆降为公，以厌人心。
现代文：癸卯，唐中宗颁下制书，下令降低武氏集团成员的爵位，将梁王武三思降为德静县王，将定王武攸暨降为乐寿县王，将河内王武懿宗等十二人降封为公爵，以此满足天下臣民的心愿。
English: At the same time, Emperor Taizong of the Tang Dynasty issued a decree to lower the titles of the members of the Wu clan group, reducing Liang Wang Wusanshi to the king of Dejing County, Ding Wang Wuyuan to the king of Leju County, and reducing the titles of twelve people such as Hanoi King Wuyanzong to the duke, in order to meet the wishes of the subjects of the world.

古文：甲辰，以唐休璟为左仆射，同中书门下三品如故，豆卢钦望为右仆射。
现代文：甲辰，唐中宗任命唐休为尚书左仆射，依旧任同中书门下三品；又任命豆卢钦望为尚书右仆射。
English: At the time of Jia Chen, Tang Zhongzong appointed Tang Xiu as Shang Shuxu's left-hand retainer, and still appointed Tong Zhongshu as the third grade; he also appointed Doulu Qinwang as Shang Shuxu's right-hand retainer.

古文：六月，壬子，以左骁卫大将军裴思说充灵武军大总管，以备突厥。
现代文：六月，壬子，唐中宗任命左骁卫大将军裴思说为灵武军大总管，目的是为了防备突厥兵的侵扰。
English: In June, Emperor Jinsi of the Tang Dynasty appointed General Zuo Jianwei Peisi as the commander-in-chief of the Lingwu army, in order to prevent the intrusion of the Turkish soldiers.

古文：癸亥，命右仆射豆卢钦望，有军国重事，中书门下可共平章。
现代文：癸亥，唐中宗命令尚书右仆射豆卢钦望遇有军政大事时，可到宰相议事的地方，与宰相们共同商议处理意见。
English: In the year of the Rooster, Tang Zhongzong ordered Shang Shu's right-hand man, Shozu Luqin, to go to the prime minister's place of deliberation and discuss the handling opinions with the prime ministers in the event of a military and political event.

古文：先是，仆射为正宰相，其后多兼中书门下之职，午前决朝政，午后决省事。
现代文：在此之前，仆射就是正宰相，后来仆射大多兼任中书门下之职，每次上朝都是在上午商议处理朝廷大事，下午处理尚书省的事务。
English: Prior to this, he was the Prime Minister. Later, he mostly held the position of the Vice-Chancellor. Every morning, he would discuss and deal with the important matters of the Imperial Court, and in the afternoon, he would deal with the affairs of the Ministry of Education.

古文：至是，钦望专为仆射，不敢预政事，故有是命。
现代文：到这时，豆卢钦望专任右仆射一职，不敢参预宰相们对于军政大事的讨论，所以唐中宗下达了这样的命令。
English: At this time, Zhu Luqin wanted to be a full-time right-hand man and did not dare to participate in the pre-prime ministers' discussion of military and political events, so Tang Zhongzong issued such an order.

古文：是后专拜仆射者，不复为宰相矣。
现代文：此后专任尚书仆射的人，便不再是宰相了。
English: Since then, the man who was a full-time calligrapher and actor is no longer the prime minister.

古文：又以韦安石为中书令，魏元忠为侍中，杨再思检校为中书令。
现代文：唐中宗又任命韦安石为中书令，魏元忠为侍中，杨再思为检校中书令。
English: Tang Zhongzong also appointed Wei Anshi as the middle school secretary, Wei Yuanzhong as the attendant, and Yang Zaisi as the inspecting middle school secretary.

古文：丁卯，祔孝敬皇帝于太庙，号义宗。
现代文：丁卯，唐中宗将其兄孝敬皇帝李弘的神主迁入太庙，庙号为义宗。
English: Dingwu, Tang Zhongzong moved the god of his brother, Emperor Li Hong, into the Great Temple, and the temple name was Yizong.

古文：戊辰，洛水溢，流二千馀家。
现代文：戊辰，洛水泛滥，冲走二千多户人家。
English: In Boshin, floods in Luo swept away more than 2,000 homes.

古文：秋，七月，辛巳，以太子宾客韦巨源同中书门下三品，西京留守如故。
现代文：秋季，七月，辛巳，唐中宗任命太子宾客韦巨源为同中书门下三品，仍保留他原任的西京留守职务。
English: In the autumn, in July, Xin Si, Tang Zhongzong appointed the prince guest Wei Jiuyuan as the third grade of the same middle school, still retaining his original position in West Beijing.

古文：特进汉阳王张柬之表请归襄州养疾；乙未，以柬之为襄州刺史，不知州事，给全俸。
现代文：特进、汉阳王张柬之上表请求回到襄州养病；乙未，唐中宗任命张柬之为襄州刺史，但不主管该州事务而领取全额俸禄。
English: Zhang Kam, the king of Hanyang, requested to return to Xiangzhou to recuperate; Tang Zhongzong appointed Zhang Kam as the governor of Xiangzhou, but he was not in charge of the affairs of the state and received a full salary.

古文：河南、北十七州大水。
现代文：黄河南北十七个州发大水。
English: Seventeen states in the north and south of the Yellow River have been affected by the floods.

古文：八月，戊申，以水灾求直言。
现代文：八月，戊申，唐中宗因发生水灾的缘故而下诏要求臣下直言规谏自己的过失。
English: In August, Wushin, Tang Zhongzong issued an edict demanding that his vassals speak frankly about their own faults due to the floods.

古文：右卫骑曹参军西河宋务光上疏，以为： 水阴类，臣妾之象，恐后庭有干外朝之政者，宜杜绝其萌。今霖雨不止，乃闭坊门以禳之，至使里巷谓坊门为宰相，言朝廷使之燮理阴阳也。
现代文：右卫骑曹参军西河县人宋务光上疏认为： 水属阴类，是臣下、女人之象，恐怕是后宫有干预外朝政事的，陛下应当设法防患于未然；现在连日大雨不止，朝廷于是关闭坊市北门来祈求晴天，以至于使民间称坊门为宰相，说是朝廷让它来调解阴阳的。
English: Song Wuguang Shangsuo, a man from Xihe County, who was a right guard and cavalry officer in Cao's army, believed that: Water belongs to the yin class, is a subject, a woman's elephant, I am afraid that the harem has intervened in the political affairs of the foreign court, and His Majesty should try to prevent the problem in advance; now it has been raining for days, so the court closed the north gate of Fang City to pray for a fine day, so that the people called Fang Gate the prime minister, saying that the court let it mediate the yin and yang.

古文：又，太子国本，宜早择贤能而立之。又，外戚太盛，如武三思等，宜解其机要，厚以禄赐。又，郑普思、叶静能以小技窃大位，亦朝政之蠹也。 
现代文：再者，太子乃是立国的根本，应当及早选择贤良而有才能的王子，将他立为太子；此外，外戚势力太大，像武三思等人，应当解除他们所担任的重要职务，再多给他们一些俸禄；最后一点，郑普思、叶静能仅凭一些雕虫小技就窃据高位，他们也是败坏朝政的蛀虫。 
English: Furthermore, the prince is the foundation of the country, and it is necessary to choose a good and talented prince as soon as possible and make him the prince. In addition, if the relatives are too powerful, like Wu Sansi and others, they should be relieved of their important positions and give them more salary. Finally, Zheng Pu Si and Ye Jing can steal high positions with only some small skills of carving insects. They are also maggots that corrupt the imperial government.

古文：疏奏，不省。
现代文：这篇奏疏呈上来之后，唐中宗根本不审阅。
English: There's no chorus.

古文：壬戌，追立妃赵氏为恭皇后，孝敬皇帝妃裴氏为哀皇后。
现代文：壬戌，唐中宗将妃子赵氏追立为恭皇后，将孝敬皇帝李弘的妃子裴氏追立为哀皇后。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, Emperor Zhao's consort Zhao Jian was named Empress Gong, and Emperor Li Hong's consort Pei Jian was named Empress Miao.

古文：九月，壬午，上祀昊天上帝、皇地礻氏于明堂，以高宗配。
现代文：九月，壬午，唐中宗在明堂祭祀昊天上帝、皇地，以唐高宗李治配享。
English: In September, at Renpo, Tang Zhongzong offered sacrifices to Haotian God and the imperial land in Ming Hall, with Tang Gaozong Li Zhi as the officiant.

古文：初，上在房陵，州司制约甚急；刺史河东张知謇、灵昌崔敬嗣独待遇以礼，供给丰赡，上德之，擢知謇自贝州刺史为左卫将军，赐爵范阳公。
现代文：当初，唐中宗被贬到房陵时，地方官府对他的限制约束十分严格，只有刺史河东县人张知謇和灵昌县人崔敬嗣两人对他以礼相待，供给的物品十分丰富。唐中宗很感激他们两人，于是将张知謇由贝州刺史提拔为左卫将军，并赐爵为范阳公。
English: At first, when Tang Zhongzong was relegated to the mausoleum, the local government had very strict restrictions on him. Only Zhang Zhisheng from Zhishi Hedong County and Cui Jingzhi from Lingchang County treated him with courtesy and provided him with a wealth of goods. Tang Zhongzong was very grateful to them both, so he promoted Zhang Zhisheng from Baizhou Zhisheng to Zuo Wei General and gave him a knighthood as Fan Yanggong.

古文：敬嗣已卒，求得其子汪，嗜酒，不堪厘职，除五品散官。
现代文：崔敬嗣已经去世，唐中宗找到他的儿子崔汪。但由于崔汪嗜酒如命，实在不能胜任任何实际职务，只好让他当五品散官。
English: Cui Jingzhi had already passed away, and Tang Zhongzong found his son Cui Wang. However, since Cui Wang was an inveterate drinker, he was unable to perform any practical duties, so he had to make him the fifth grade civil servant.

古文：改葬上洛王韦玄贞，其仪皆如太原王故事。
现代文：唐中宗为韦后的父亲上洛王韦玄贞改葬，其礼仪都依照武则天之父太原王的先例。
English: Emperor Taizong of the Tang Dynasty had Emperor Wei's father, Shangluo King Wei Xuanzhen, reburied here, and the etiquette followed the precedent of King Taiyuan, the father of Emperor Wuzetian.

古文：癸巳，太子宾客、同中书门下三品韦巨源罢为礼部尚书，以其从父安石为中书令故也。
现代文：癸巳，太子宾客、同中书门下三品韦巨源被免去相职，改任礼部尚书，这是因为他的叔父韦安石被任命为中书令的缘故。
English: Soon after, the prince's guest, Wei Jiuyuan, who was one of the three princes under the tutelage of Zhongshu, was removed from the position of official photographer and was appointed as the ceremonial secretary, because his uncle, Wei Anshi, was appointed as the secretary of Zhongshu.

古文：以左卫将军上邽纪处讷兼检校太府卿，处讷娶武三思之妻姊故也。
现代文：唐中宗任命左卫将军上人纪处讷兼任检校太府卿，这是由于纪处讷娶了武三思之妻的姐姐的缘故。
English: Emperor Tang Zhongzong appointed General Zuo Wei's superior, Ji Dian Neng, to also serve as the superintendent of schools. This was because Ji Dian Neng married the sister of Wu San Si's wife.

古文：冬，十月，命唐休璟留守京师。
现代文：冬季，十月，唐中宗命令唐休留守京师。
English: In the winter, in October, Tang Zhongzong ordered Tang Xiu to stay in Beijing.

古文：癸亥，上幸龙门；乙丑，猎于新安而还。
现代文：癸亥，唐中宗巡幸龙门；乙丑，唐中宗在新安狩猎之后又返回东都。
English: In the Year of the Rooster, Tang Zhongzong visited Longmen; in the Year of the Ox, Tang Zhongzong returned to Dongdu after hunting in Xin'an.

古文：辛未，以魏元忠为中书令，杨再思为侍中。
现代文：辛未，唐中宗任命魏元忠为中书令，杨再思为侍中。
English: Soon after, Emperor Taizong of Tang appointed Wei Yuanzhong as the secretary and Yang Zaisi as the chamberlain.

古文：十一月，戊寅，群臣上皇帝尊号曰应天皇帝，皇后曰顺天皇后。
现代文：十一月，戊寅，群臣给唐中宗上尊号为应天皇帝，为韦后上尊号为顺天皇后。
English: In November, Wu Yin, a group of courtiers gave Tang Zhongzong the honorific title of Emperor Ying Tian, and Wei Hou the honorific title of Empress Shun.

古文：壬午，上与后谒谢太庙，赦天下；相王、太平公主加实封，皆满万户。
现代文：壬午，中宗与韦后一同到太庙拜谢列祖列宗，并下诏赦免天下罪囚；同时下诏将相王李旦和太平公主的实封户都加至一万户。
English: In the morning of the third day of the third month, Zhong Zong and Wei Hou went to the Imperial Temple together to pay homage to the ancestors, and issued an edict to pardon all the criminals in the world; at the same time, the edict added the sealed households of King Li Dan and Princess Taiping to ten thousand households.

古文：己丑，上御洛城南楼，观泼寒胡戏。
现代文：己丑，唐中宗登上洛城门南楼观看泼寒胡戏。
English: Ugly, Tang Zhongzong boarded the South Tower of the Los Angeles Gate to watch the cold play.

古文：清源尉吕元泰上疏，以为 谋时寒若，何必裸身挥水，鼓舞衢路以索之！ 
现代文：清源尉吕元泰上疏认为： 君主善于谋划，则四时寒暑自然顺畅，何必赤身裸体，泼水为乐，在大街上击鼓起舞以乞求寒冬的到来呢？ 
English: Luyuan Tai Shangsuo, an officer of the Qing Dynasty, said: The monarch is good at planning, so the cold and hot weather is naturally smooth at four o'clock. Why do you have to be naked, splash water for fun, and drum and dance on the street to beg for the arrival of cold winter?

古文：疏奏，不纳。
现代文：奏疏呈上以后，中宗没有采纳他的建议。
English: However, Emperor Taizong did not accept his accession to the throne.

古文：壬寅，则天崩于上阳宫，年八十二。
现代文：壬寅，武则天在上阳宫驾崩，终年八十二岁。
English: Ren Yin, Wu Zetian passed away in Shangyang Palace at the age of eighty-two.

古文：遗制： 去帝号，称则天大圣皇后。
现代文：临死时武则天留下遗命： 去掉皇帝称号，以后称为则天大圣皇后。
English: At the time of his death, Wu Zetian left a last will and testament: to remove the title of emperor, later to be known as Zetian the Great Holy Empress.

古文：王、萧二族及褚遂良、韩瑗、柳奭亲属皆赦之。 
现代文：高宗的后妃王氏和萧氏二族以及褚遂良、韩瑗、柳三人的亲属都全部赦免。 
English: The two clans of Wang and Xiao, Gao Zong's concubines, as well as the relatives of the three people, Sui Liang, Han Zang and Liu, were all pardoned.

古文：上居谅阴，以魏元忠摄冢宰三日。
现代文：唐中宗在为武则天居丧守制期间，派魏元忠代理三天冢宰职务。
English: Tang Zhongzong sent Wei Yuanzhong to act as three-day regent during the mourning period for Wu Zetianju.

古文：元忠素负忠直之望，中外赖之；武三思惮之，矫太后遗制，慰谕元忠，赐实封百户。
现代文：魏元忠向来就有忠诚正直的声望，因而深得朝野倚重。武三思对此很是担忧，于是伪造武则天的遗命，对魏元忠好言劝慰，并赐给魏元忠封户一百。
English: Wei Yuanzhong always had the reputation of being loyal and honest, so he was held in high esteem by both the emperor and the people. Wu Sanshi was very worried about this, so he forged Wu Zetian's last will and testament, spoke kindly to Wei Yuanzhong, and gave Wei Yuanzhong one hundred households.

古文：元忠捧制，感咽涕泗，见者曰： 事去矣！ 
现代文：魏元忠手捧 太后遗制 涕泪纵横，看见这一情景的人说： 魏元忠再也不会有所作为了！ 
English: Wei Yuanzhong held the empress dowager's relic in his hand with tears streaming down his face. People who saw this scene said, "Wei Yuanzhong will never do anything again!"

古文：十二月，丁卯，上始御同明殿见群臣。
现代文：十二月，丁卯，唐中宗才亲临同明殿接见群臣。
English: In December, Dingwu, Tang Zhongzong came to the Tongming Palace to receive the group of ministers.

古文：太后将合葬乾陵，给事中严善思上疏，以为： 乾陵玄宫以石为门，铁锢其缝，今启其门，必须镌凿。
现代文：武则天的灵柩将要与唐高宗李治合葬于乾陵，给事中严善思上疏认为： 乾陵墓穴的门是用石头做成的，石门的门缝又用熔化的铁水密封，如果想打开石门，就必须使用钻凿一类的工具。
English: Wu Zetian's coffin will be buried together with Tang Gaozong's Li Zhi in the Qianling Mausoleum. In the matter, Yan Shan thought that: The door of the Qianling Mausoleum is made of stone, and the cracks of the stone door are sealed with molten iron. If you want to open the stone door, you must use a tool such as a drill.

古文：神明之道，体尚幽玄，动众加功，恐多惊黩。
现代文：供奉神之道，重在保持幽静玄远的气氛，倘若兴师动众地打开石门，恐怕对神多有惊动亵。
English: The way to worship God is to maintain an atmosphere of seclusion and mystery. If Rev. Xing opened the stone door to the public, I am afraid that it would be shocking and insulting to God.

古文：况合葬非古，汉时诸陵，皇后多不合陵，魏、晋已降，始有合者。
现代文：况且夫妻合葬并非古制，汉代皇帝的陵墓，大多数都没有皇后合葬，从魏晋以来，才有合葬的。
English: Moreover, the joint burial of husband and wife is not an ancient system. Most of the mausoleums of the Han Dynasty emperors do not have a queen buried together. Since the Wei and Jin Dynasties, they have only been buried together.

古文：望于乾陵之傍更择吉地为陵，若神道有知，幽涂自当通会；若其无知，合之何益！ 
现代文：希望陛下能在乾陵旁边另外选择风水好的地方修建陵墓，假如帝后神灵有知，两人在阴间自然会相聚；如果无知，合葬又有什么用处呢！ 
English: It is hoped that His Majesty will be able to build a mausoleum next to the dry mausoleum in another place with good feng shui. If the empress deities have knowledge, the two will naturally meet in the underworld; if they are ignorant, what is the use of a joint burial!

古文：不从。
现代文：唐中宗没有听从他的劝告。
English: Le Zhu Rong did not listen.

古文：是岁，户部奏天下户六百一十五万，口三千七百一十四万有畸。
现代文：这一年，户部上报唐中宗说，全国共有六百一十五万户，总计三千七百一十四万多人。
English: In that year, the Household Department reported to Tang Zhongzong that there were a total of 6.15 million households in the country, with a total of more than 37.14 million people.

古文：神龙二年丙午，公元七零六年春，正月，戊戌，以吏部尚书李峤同中书门下三品，中书侍郎于惟谦同平章事。
现代文：二年春季，正月，戊戌，唐中宗任命吏部尚书李峤为同中书门下三品，任命中书侍郎于惟谦为同平章事。
English: In the spring of the second year, in the first month of the year, in the middle of the month of Wu, Tang Zhongzong appointed the official Shangshu Li Wei as the third grade of the same middle school, and appointed the middle school waiter Yu Wei Qian as the same grade.

古文：闰月，丙午，制： 太平、长安、安乐、宜城、新都、定安、金城公主并开府，置官属。 
现代文：闰月，丙午，唐中宗颁下制书： 太平公主、长宁公主、安乐公主、宜城公主、新都公主、定安公主和金城公主都可以开建官署，设置僚属。 
English: In the leap month, on the afternoon of the 3rd day of the 4th month, Tang Zhongzong issued the following book: Taiping Princess, Changning Princess, Anle Princess, Yicheng Princess, Xindu Princess, Ding'an Princess and Jincheng Princess can all build government offices and set up subordinates.

古文：武三思以敬晖、桓彦范、袁恕己尚在京师，忌之，乙卯，出为滑、洺、豫三州刺史。
现代文：因为敬晖、桓彦范和袁恕己三人仍在京师，武三思忌恨他们，乙卯，武三思将三人分别外放为滑州、州和豫州刺史。
English: Because the three of them, Jing Yi, Kan Yan Fan, and Yuan Shouqi, were still studying in Beijing, Wu Sanxi hated them, and therefore, Wu Sanxi sent the three of them to study in the provinces of Nanzhou, Suzhou, and Yuzhou.

古文：赐閺乡僧万回号法云公。
现代文：唐中宗赐予乡和尚万回法云公的称号。
English: The Tang and Middle Dynasties gave the title of "Fa Yun Gong" to the village monk Wanfei.

古文：甲戌，以突骑施酋长乌质勒为怀德郡王。
现代文：甲戌，唐中宗封突骑施酋长乌质勒为怀德郡王。
English: Jia Jiao, the Tang Dynasty's Hunyun riding Shi chieftain Wu Qile as the king of Huai De County.

古文：二月，乙未，以刑部尚书韦巨源同中书门下三品，仍与皇后叙宗族。
现代文：二月，乙未，唐中宗任命刑部尚书韦巨源为同中书门下三品，还让他列入韦皇后的宗族之中。
English: In February of the same year, Emperor Wu of the Tang Dynasty appointed the head of the Department of Criminal Law, Shang Shu Wei Jiuyuan, to be the third in line to the throne, and also included him in the clan of Queen Wei.

古文：丙申，僧慧范等九人并加五品阶，赐爵郡、县公；道士史崇恩等三人加五品阶，除国子祭酒，同正；叶静能加金紫光禄大夫。
现代文：丙申，唐中宗将胡僧慧范等九人各加授五品官阶，并且分别赐予郡公或县公的爵位；将道士史崇恩等人各加授五品官阶，并且任命他们为国子祭酒员外置同正员；给叶静能加金紫光禄大夫衔。
English: According to Bixin, the Tang Dynasty added five official ranks to each of the nine people, including Hu Monk Hui Fan, and gave them the title of county magistrate or county magistrate respectively; added five official ranks to each of the Taoist Shi Chong'en and others, and appointed them as the national son's festival wine attendants, with the same official rank; and gave Ye Jingneng the title of gold and purple doctor.

古文：选左、右台及内外五品以上官二十人为十道巡察使，委之察吏抚人，荐贤直狱，二年一代，考其功罪而进退之。
现代文：唐中宗下诏选拔左、右台及朝廷内外五品以上官员共二十人任十道巡察使，让他们负责考察官吏政绩、安抚黎民百姓、举荐贤才和复核平反冤狱。
English: Under the edict of Tang Zhongzong, a total of 20 officials from the Left and Right Divisions and five or more officials from inside and outside the imperial court were selected to serve as the Ten-District Inspection Envoys. They were responsible for inspecting the performance of officials, pacifying the people, recommending talents, and reviewing and rehabilitating unjust imprisonment.

古文：易州刺史魏人姜师度、礼部员外郎马怀素、殿中侍御史临漳源乾曜、监察御史灵昌卢怀慎、卫尉少卿滏阳李杰皆预焉。
现代文：巡察使每两年轮换一次，根据他们的功绩与过失来决定其官职的升降。易州刺史魏县人姜师度、礼部员外郎马怀素、殿中侍御史临漳县人源乾曜、监察御史灵昌县人卢怀慎和卫尉少卿滏阳县人李杰都被选中。
English: The inspectors are rotated every two years, and their promotions and demotions are decided according to their merits and faults. Jiang Shidu from Yizhou County, Wai Lang Ma Huai Su from Linyi County, Ren Yuan Qian You from Linyi County, Lu Huai Shen from Lingchang County and Li Jie from Shenyang County have all been selected.

古文：三月，甲辰，中书令韦安石罢为户部尚书；户部尚书苏瑰为侍中、西京留守。
现代文：三月，甲辰，中书令韦安石被免去相职，改任户部尚书；户部尚书苏担任侍中、西京留守。
English: In March, Jia Chen, Wei Anshi was removed from the position of the official photographer by the order of the Chinese Academy of Letters, and was appointed as the official photographer of the household; the official photographer of the household served as a chamberlain and stayed in West Beijing.

古文：瑰，颋之父也。
现代文：苏是苏的父亲。
English: Sue is Sue's father.

古文：唐休璟致仕。
现代文：唐休因年老退休。
English: Tang Xiu retired due to old age.

古文：初，少府监丞弘农宋之问及弟兗州司仓之逊皆坐附会张易之贬岭南，逃归东都，匿于友人光禄卿、驸马都尉王同皎家。
现代文：先前，少府监丞弘农县人宋之问和他的弟弟兖州司仓宋之逊都因依附张易之而获罪被贬往岭南。两人逃回东都后，藏在友人光禄卿、驸马都尉王同皎家中。
English: Previously, Song Zhifan, a person from Hongnong County, and his younger brother, Song Zhisong, a Cangzhou official, were both convicted of adhering to Zhang Yizhi and were banished to Lingnan. After the two fled back to Dongdu, they hid in the home of their friend, Guanglu Qing, and Wang Tongyuan, a Cangzhou official.

古文：同皎疾武三思及韦后所为，每与所亲言之，辄切齿。
现代文：王同皎痛恨武三思和韦后的所作所为，每当他同亲近的人谈起他们做的事时，都对武三思和韦后恨之入骨。
English: Wang Tongyao hated what Wu Sanxi and Wei Hou had done. Whenever he talked to people close to him about what they had done, he hated Wu Sanxi and Wei Hou to the core.

古文：之逊于帘下闻之，密遣其子昙及甥校书郎李悛告三思，欲以自赎。
现代文：宋之逊在门帘外听到了王同皎所说的话，便秘密地派他的儿子宋昙和他的外甥校书郎李悛告诉了武三思，希望通过这样做来将功赎罪。
English: Song Zhixun heard Wang Tonglu's words outside the door curtain, and secretly sent his son, Song Jun, and his nephew, school teacher Li Jun, to tell Wu Sansi, hoping to atone for the sin by doing so.

古文：三思使昙、悛及抚州司仓冉祖雍上书告同皎与洛阳人张仲之、祖延庆、武当丞寿春周憬等潜结壮士，谋杀三思，因勒兵诣阙，废皇后。
现代文：武三思让宋昙、李悛及抚州司仓冉祖雍上书，控告王同皎伙同洛阳人张仲之、祖延庆、武当丞寿春县人周憬等秘密勾结壮士，计划杀掉武三思，并趁机带兵闯入皇宫，废掉韦皇后。
English: Wusansi asked Song Tao, Li Wei and Ran Zuyong, the secretary of Fuzhou, to write a letter, accusing Wang Tongyi and his gang of secretly colluding with Luoyang people Zhang Zhongzhi, Zu Yanqing, Wudang Zheng and Shuchun County people Zhou Jing and other strong men, planning to kill Wusansi, and taking advantage of the opportunity to lead soldiers to break into the imperial palace and abolish Queen Wei.

古文：上命御史大夫李承嘉、监察御史姚绍之按其事，又命杨再思、李峤、韦巨源参验。
现代文：中宗指派御史大夫李承嘉和监察御史姚绍之审理这件案子，又让杨再思、李峤和韦巨源参与此案的审理。
English: Dr. Li Chengjia and Supervisor Yao Shao were assigned to the case, and Yang Zaisi, Li Wei and Wei Jiuyuan were also involved in the case.

古文：仲之言三思罪状，事连宫壸。再思、巨源阳寐不听；峤与绍之命反接送狱。
现代文：张仲之历数武三思的罪状，涉及武三思与韦后的私情，杨再思和韦巨源假装睡觉，根本不予理睬。李峤和姚绍之命令手下人将张仲之反绑双手，送到监狱中关押。
English: Zhang Zhongzhi's accusation against Wu Sansi involved Wu Sansi's personal relationship with Wei Guo. Yang Zaisi and Wei Juguang pretended to be asleep and ignored Zhang Zhongzhi's accusation. Li Yu and Yao Shao ordered their subordinates to bind Zhang Zhongzhi's hands and send him to prison.

古文：仲之还顾，言不已。绍之命挝之，折其臂。
现代文：张仲之挣扎着回过头来，嘴里还在不停地诉说武三思的罪状，姚绍之下令用棍子揍他，打断了他的手臂。
English: Zhang Zhongzhi struggled to turn his head back, his mouth still talking about Wu Sanshi's crime. Yao Shao ordered him to beat him with a stick, breaking his arm.

古文：仲之大呼曰： 吾已负汝，死当讼汝于天！ 
现代文：张仲之大声呼喊着说： 现在我输给了你，我死了一定要到上天那里去告你！ 
English: Zhang Zhongzhi shouted loudly, "Now that I have lost to you, I am sure to go to heaven to sue you!"

古文：庚戌，同皎等皆坐斩，籍没其家。
现代文：庚戌，王同皎等人都被判处斩刑，家产也都被官府没收。
English: Geng Yao, Wang Tongyao and others were all sentenced to beheading, and their property was confiscated by the government.

古文：周憬亡入比干庙中，大言曰： 比干古之忠臣，知吾此心！
现代文：周憬逃到比干庙中，对着比干的灵位高声说道： 您比干是上古有名的忠臣，一定能知道我对大唐朝廷的忠心。
English: Zhou Jing fled to the temple of Bigan, and said loudly to the spirit of Bigan: You Bigan are a famous loyal subject in ancient times, you must know my loyalty to the Great Tang Dynasty.

古文：三思与皇后淫乱，倾危国家，行当枭首都市，恨不及见耳！ 
现代文：武三思与韦皇后乱，企图颠覆大唐的江山，迟早会在闹市上被枭首示众，只可惜我见不到这一天了！ 
English: Sooner or later, Wu Sansi and Queen Wei's rebellion and attempt to subvert the country of Datang will be shown to the public in the bustling city. It's just a pity that I won't see this day!

古文：遂自刭。
现代文：说完之后即自杀而死。
English: On the due date, she committed suicide and died.

古文：之问、之逊、昙、悛、祖雍并除京官，加朝散大夫。
现代文：宋之问、宋之逊、宋昙、李悛、冉祖雍等人都被任命为京官，加封为朝散大夫。
English: Song Zhi Qian, Song Zi Xun, Song Zheng, Li Zheng, Ran Zu Yong and others were appointed as Beijing officials, and were also appointed as Choshan doctors.

古文：武三思与韦后日夜谮敬晖等不已，复左迁晖为朗州刺史，崔玄为均州刺史，桓彦范为亳州刺史，袁恕己为郢州刺史；与晖等同立功者谢思行等皆以为党与，坐贬。
现代文：武三思和韦后日夜不停地诬陷敬晖等人，于是唐中宗又将敬晖降职为郎州刺史，将崔玄降职为均州刺史，将桓彦范降职为毫州刺史，将袁恕己降职为郢州刺史；当时与敬晖等一起诛灭张易之、张昌宗而立下功勋的人都被当作敬晖等人的同党而受到贬职处分。
English: Wu Sansi and Wei Guo kept framing Jing Xi and others day and night, so Tang Zhongzong also demoted Jing Xi to the post of Lanzhou historian, demoted Cui Xuan to the post of Junzhou historian, demoted Huan Yan Fan to the post of Wanzhou historian, and demoted Yuan Shuji to the post of Zhangzhou historian. At that time, those who made great achievements together with Jing Xi and others to annihilate Zhang Yizhi and Zhang Changzong were treated as the same party as Jing Xi and others and were punished by demotion.

古文：大置员外官，自京司及诸州凡二千馀人，宦官超迁七品以上员外官者又将千人。
现代文：唐中宗大量增置员外官，从在京各部门直到地方各州总共增置员外官二千余人，此外，还破格提升近千名宦官为七品以上员外官。
English: Tang Zhongzong added a large number of foreign officials, from the departments in Beijing to the local states, a total of more than two thousand foreign officials were added. In addition, nearly a thousand eunuchs were upgraded to foreign officials above the seventh grade.

古文：魏元忠自端州还，为相，不复强谏，惟与时俯仰，中外失望。
现代文：魏元忠从端州回京并被任命为宰相后，就不再犯颜直谏了，遇事只是随波逐流；朝野人士对他十分失望。
English: After Wei Yuanzhong returned to Beijing from Danzhou and was appointed as prime minister, he no longer behaved arrogantly, but just went with the flow when things happened; people in and out of power were very disappointed with him.

古文：酸枣尉袁楚客致书元忠，以为： 主上新服厥命，惟新厥德，当进君子，退小人，以兴大化，岂可安其荣宠，循默而已！
现代文：酸枣县尉袁楚客写信给魏元忠说： 现在皇帝刚刚即位，只应使德政日新，您应当引荐君子，斥退小人，以振兴深远的教化，怎么能安于恩宠，对一切都缄默无言呢？
English: Yuan Chuk, the lieutenant of Zhudao County, wrote to Wei Yuanzhong, saying: Now that the emperor has just ascended the throne, it is only necessary to make the German government more and more new. You should introduce gentlemen, repel villains, and revitalize far-reaching enlightenment. How can you be satisfied with grace and be silent about everything?

古文：今不早建太子，择师傅而辅之，一失也。
现代文：现在还不早定太子之位，并选择师傅对他加以辅导教诲，是第一个过失。
English: It is the first mistake not to have appointed a crown prince and chosen a master to guide and instruct him.

古文：公主开府置僚属，二失也。
现代文：允许公主开建官署设置僚属，是第二个过失。
English: Allowing the princess to set up a government office and set up subordinates is the second mistake.

古文：崇长缁衣，使游走权门，借势纳赂，三失也。
现代文：尊崇僧人，使得他们奔走游说于权贵之家，借助权势广收钱物，是第三个过失。
English: Revering monks, making them run around lobbying powerful families, and using their power to collect money and goods from them, is the third fault.

古文：俳优小人，盗窃品秩，四失也。
现代文：表演乐舞杂戏的卑贱小人窃取朝廷的官位俸禄，是第四个过失。
English: The fourth offense is the theft of the official salary of the imperial court by the lowly villain of the performing music, dance and vaudeville.

古文：有司选进贤才，皆以货取势求，五失也。
现代文：每当有关部门选拔贤才的时候，应选的人都要靠行贿或者依附于权贵之门才能受到任用，是第五个过失。
English: Whenever the relevant department selects a talented person, the person to be selected must rely on bribery or attachment to the gate of power and wealth in order to be appointed, which is the fifth fault.

古文：宠进宦者，殆满千人，为长乱之阶，六失也。
现代文：皇帝宠爱提拔宦官近千人之多，从而埋下变乱的祸根，是第六个过失。
English: The emperor's fondness for promoting nearly a thousand eunuchs, thereby sowing the seeds of chaos, is the sixth fault.

古文：王公贵戚，赏赐无度，竞为侈靡，七失也。
现代文：对王公贵戚的赏赐毫无节制，以至使这些人奢侈成风，互相攀比，是第七个过失。
English: It is the seventh fault to reward the relatives of princes without restraint, so that these people become extravagant and compare themselves with each other.

古文：广置员外官，伤财害民，八失也。
现代文：大量增置正员以外的员外官，耗费钱财坑害百姓，是第八个过失。
English: Adding a large number of non-officials other than regular officials, wasting money and harming the people, is the eighth mistake.

古文：先朝宫女，得自便居外，出入无禁，交通请谒，九失也。
现代文：先朝的宫女可以在宫外居住，并且不受限制地出入宫门，与外人交往勾结，大行请托之风，是第九个过夫。
English: The imperial concubine of the previous dynasty could live outside the palace, and could enter and leave the palace gates without restriction, socialize and collude with outsiders, and indulge in extravagant behavior. She was the ninth concubine.

古文：左道之人，荧惑主听，盗窃禄位，十失也。
现代文：旁门左道之徒蛊惑皇帝的视听，从而得以窃取俸禄职位，是第十个过失。
English: It is the 10th fault of the sleight-of-hand to deceive the emperor's audio-visual, thus being able to steal the salary position.

古文：凡此十失，君侯不正，谁正之哉！ 
现代文：当今朝政有这十大过失，您不去尽力匡正，谁还能匡正它呢？ 
English: Today's imperial government has these ten faults. If you don't do your best to rectify them, who else can rectify them?

古文：元忠得书，愧谢而已。
现代文：魏元忠读罢来信，只是羞惭地致歉而已。
English: Wei Yuanzhong read the letter, but only apologized with shame.

古文：夏，四月，改赠后父韦玄贞为酆王，后四弟皆赠郡王。
现代文：夏季，四月，唐中宗改赠韦后之父上洛王韦玄贞为酆王，韦后的四个弟弟韦洵、韦浩、韦洞、韦都被追赠为郡王。
English: In the summer, in April, Emperor Taizong of the Tang Dynasty bestowed the crown of Shangluo to Queen Wei's father, King Wei Xuanzhen, as the king of Shandong. Queen Wei's four brothers, King Wei Jun, King Wei Hao, King Wei Dong, and King Wei, were all posthumously awarded the crown of Shandong.

古文：己丑，左散骑常侍、同中书门下三品李怀远致仕。
现代文：己丑，左散骑常侍、同中书门下三品李怀远退休。
English: Li Huaiyuan, who was ugly, a left-handed riding attendant, and a junior high school student of the same school, retired.

古文：处士京兆韦月将上书告武三思潜通宫掖，必为逆乱；上大怒，命斩之。
现代文：处士韦月将上书控告武三思暗地里与韦皇后通奸，日后必将谋乱叛逆；唐中宗勃然不怒，下令将韦月将斩首。
English: The official Wei Yue accused Wu Sanshi secretly of adultery with the Queen of Wei in a letter, and in the future he would certainly plot rebellion; Tang Zhongzong was not angry and ordered Wei Yue to be beheaded.

古文：黄门侍郎宋璟奏请推按，上益怒，不及整巾，屣履出侧门，谓璟曰： 朕谓已斩，乃犹未邪！ 
现代文：黄门侍郎宋上奏请求依法推究审问，中宗越发愤怒，顾不上穿戴整齐，拖着便鞋走出洛阳宫的侧门对宋说： 朕还以为早就把韦月将斩首了呢，难道到现在还没有执行吗？ 
English: Huangmen waiter Song Shangso requested to investigate and interrogate according to the law. Zhongzong became more and more angry. He did not care about being neatly dressed. He dragged his slippers out of the side door of Luoyang Palace and said to Song: I thought I had already beheaded Wei Yue. Hasn't it been carried out yet?

古文：命趋斩之。
现代文：接着下令赶紧将韦月将处斩。
English: He then ordered Wei Yuejun to be executed immediately.

古文：璟曰： 人言中宫私于三思，陛下不问而诛之，臣恐天下必有窃议。 
现代文：宋说： 有人上书揭发皇后与武三思有私情，陛下不问，就要杀掉上书的人，我担心天下臣民一定会对此事窃窃私议。 
English: Song said, "Someone wrote a letter exposing that the empress and Wu Sanxi had a personal relationship. Your majesty will kill the person who wrote the letter without asking. I'm worried that the subjects of the world will certainly whisper about this matter.

古文：固请按之，上不许。璟曰： 必欲斩月将，请先斩臣！
现代文：仍然坚决地请求先进行审问，唐中宗坚决不答应，宋于是对中宗说： 如果陛下一定要将韦月将斩首，那就先将我斩首好了！
English: Still resolutely requesting that the interrogation be conducted first, Tang Zhongzong resolutely refused to agree, so Song said to Zhongzong: If Your Majesty must behead Wei Yue, then behead me first!

古文：不然，臣终不敢奉诏！ 
现代文：否则我终不敢按照您的指令行事。 
English: Otherwise I won't dare to follow your orders.

古文：上怒少解。
现代文：唐中宗的怒气这才渐渐地平息了一些。
English: Tang Zhongzong's anger gradually calmed down.

古文：左御史大夫苏珦、给事中徐坚、大理卿长安尹思贞皆以为方夏行戮，有违时令。
现代文：左御史大夫苏、给事中徐坚和大理卿长安人尹思贞都认为刚入夏季便杀戮罪人，与按季节制定的政令相违背。
English: Zuo Wishi Daifu Su, Genshizhong Xu Jian and Daliqing Chang'an Yin Sizhen all believed that killing criminals just after the summer was contrary to the government order made according to the season.

古文：上乃命与杖，流岭南。
现代文：唐中宗于是下令将韦月将处以杖刑，并把他流放到岭南。
English: Tang Zhongzong then ordered Wei Yue to be punished with a cane and exiled to Lingnan.

古文：过秋分一日，平晓，广州都督周仁轨斩之。
现代文：在这一年秋分的第二天天刚破晓，广州都督周仁轨将韦月将斩首。
English: On the second day of the autumnal equinox of this year, just after dawn, the governor of Guangzhou, Zhou Renlu, beheaded Wei Yue.

古文：御史大夫李承嘉附武三思，诋尹思贞于朝，思贞曰： 公附会奸臣，将图不轨，先除忠臣邪！ 
现代文：御史大夫李承嘉依附武三思，在朝廷上诋毁尹思贞，尹思贞说： 您依附奸臣，将图谋不轨，竟然要首先铲除忠臣吗！ 
English: Li Chengjia, the chief historian, slandered Yin Sizhen in the imperial court, saying that she had attached herself to Wu Sansi. Yin Sizhen said, "You have attached yourself to a traitorous minister, and you are plotting to do something wrong, and you want to get rid of a loyal minister first!

古文：承嘉怒，劾奏思贞，出为青州刺史。
现代文：李承嘉十分生气，便上奏中宗弹劾尹思贞，将他外放为青州刺史。
English: Li Chengjia was very angry, so he had the Zhongzong impeach Yin Sizhen and banish him to the history of Qingzhou.

古文：或谓思贞曰： 公平日讷于言，及廷折承嘉，何其敏邪？ 
现代文：有人问尹思贞： 您平日不善言辞，但在当廷驳斥李承嘉时，为什么思路如此敏捷？ 
English: Someone asked Yin Sizhen: You are not good at words on weekdays, but when the court refuted Li Chengjia, why was your thinking so quick?

古文：思贞曰： 物不能鸣者，激之则鸣。
现代文：尹思贞回答说： 大凡不能发出声响的东西，刺激它就会发出声响。
English: Yin Sizhen replied, "Anything that can't make a sound will make a sound when stimulated.

古文：承嘉恃威权相陵，仆义不受屈，亦不知言之从何而至也。 
现代文：李承嘉仗势欺压我，我只是激于义愤不屈服，也不清楚那些话是从哪里想出来的。 
English: Li Chengjia bullied and oppressed me. I was only motivated by righteous indignation and did not give in. I do not know where those words came from.

古文：武三思恶宋璟，出之检校贝州刺史。
现代文：武三思憎恶宋，将他外放为检校贝州刺史。
English: Wu Sansi detested Song and exiled him to serve as the inspector of the Beizhou school.

古文：五月，庚申，葬则天大圣皇后于乾陵。
现代文：五月，庚申，唐中宗将则天大圣皇后安葬于唐高宗乾陵。
English: In May, Goshun, the Tang Dynasty general Zetian Daxing was buried in the Qianling Mausoleum of the Tang Dynasty Gaozong.

古文：武三思使郑愔告朗州刺史敬晖、亳州刺史韦彦范、襄州刺史张柬之、郢州刺史袁恕己、均州刺史崔玄与王同皎通谋。
现代文：武三思指使郑控告郎州刺史敬晖、毫州刺史韦彦范、襄州刺史张柬之、郢州刺史袁恕己和均州刺史崔玄与王同皎合谋废掉韦后。
English: Wu Sansi instructed Zheng to sue the Lanzhou magistrate Jing Qi, the Millizhou magistrate Wei Yan Fan, the Xiangzhou magistrate Zhang Kamsi, the Zhangzhou magistrate Yuan Shuxi and the Junzhou magistrate Cui Xuan for conspiring with Wang Tongyi to depose Wei Guo.

古文：六月，戊寅，贬晖崖州司马，彦范泷州司马，柬之新州司马，恕己窦州司马，玄白州司马，并员外置，仍长任，削其勋封；复彦范姓桓氏。
现代文：六月，戊寅，唐中宗将敬晖贬为崖州司马，将韦彦范贬为泷州司马，将张柬之贬为新州司马，将袁恕己贬为窦州司马，将崔玄贬为白州司马，一律为员外官，并长期留任，又削夺他们的封爵；此外，还将韦彦范的赐姓夺回，恢复他原来的桓姓。
English: In June, Wu Yin and Tang Zhongzong demoted Jing Xi to Jiaozhou Sima, demoted Wei Yan Fan to Zhangzhou Sima, demoted Zhang Han to Xinzhou Sima, demoted Yuan Shuji to Douzhou Sima, demoted Cui Xuan to Baizhou Sima, and all of them to Foreign Minister, and kept them in office for a long time, and deprived them of their titles; in addition, they also reclaimed Wei Yan Fan's given surname and restored his original surname.

古文：初，韦玄贞流钦州而卒，蛮酋宁承基兄弟逼取其女，妻崔氏不与，承基等杀之，及其四男洵、浩、洞、泚，上命广州都督周仁轨使将兵二万讨之。
现代文：先前，韦玄贞被流放到钦州后去世，蛮人部落酋长宁承基兄弟前来相逼，要娶韦玄贞的女儿，他的妻子崔氏不同意把女儿嫁给宁承基，宁承基兄弟便杀了她，韦玄贞的四个儿子韦洵、韦浩、韦洞和韦也同时被杀。
English: Previously, after Wei Xuanzheng was exiled to Qinzhou and died, the barbarian tribal chieftain Ning Chengji's brothers came to force him to marry Wei Xuanzheng's daughter. His wife, Cui, did not agree to marry her daughter to Ning Chengji, and the Ning Chengji brothers killed her. Wei Xuanzheng's four sons, Wei Jun, Wei Hao, Wei Dong and Wei, were also killed at the same time.

古文：承基等亡入海，仁轨追斩之，以其首祭崔氏墓，杀掠其部众殆尽。
现代文：现在唐中宗命令广州都督周仁轨率领两万人马去征讨宁承基兄弟，宁承基等人逃到海上，周仁轨率军追击，将他们斩首，并用砍下来的头颅祭奠崔氏的坟墓，还几乎将宁承基兄弟的部落杀戮抢掠一空。
English: Now, Tang Zhongzong ordered the governor of Guangzhou, Zhou Renlu, to lead 20,000 horsemen to recruit the brothers of Ning Chengji. Ning Chengji and others fled to the sea. Zhou Renlu led the army to chase them, behead them, and use the severed heads to commemorate the grave of the Cui clan. He also almost robbed the tribal killing of the brothers of Ning Chengji.

古文：上喜，加仁轨镇国大将军，充五府大使，赐爵汝南郡公。
现代文：唐中宗对此十分满意，加封周仁轨为镇国大将军，并派他充任广、桂、邕、容、琼五府大使，还赐予他汝南郡公的爵位。
English: Tang Zhongzong was very satisfied with this, and appointed Zhou Renluo as Zhenguodao general, and sent him to serve as the ambassador of Guang, Gui, Lu, Rong and Qiong five provinces, and also gave him the title of Runan County.

古文：韦后隔帘拜仁轨，以父事之。
现代文：周仁轨入朝参见皇帝时，韦后隔着帘子对他行礼，像对待父亲那样对待他。
English: When Zhou Renzhong entered the court to see the emperor, Wei Hou bowed to him through the curtain and treated him like his father.

古文：及韦后败，仁轨以党与诛。
现代文：等到后来韦后谋逆败亡，周仁轨作为韦后的同党而被杀。
English: Later, when Wei Hou's plot was defeated, Zhou Renlu was killed as Wei Hou's accomplice.

古文：秋，七月，戊申，立卫王重俊为皇太子。
现代文：秋季，七月，戊申，唐中宗立卫王李重俊为太子。
English: In the autumn, in July, in Boushen, Li Chongjun, the King of Wei of the Middle Tang Dynasty, became the crown prince.

古文：太子性明果，而官属率贵游子弟，所为多不法；左庶子姚珽屡谏，不听，珽，璹之弟也。
现代文：太子生性聪明果决，但太子的官属都是王公贵族子弟，这些人平常所做的大多是违法的事情。左庶子姚屡次进谏，太子都不听从他的劝告。
English: The prince's nature is clever and decisive, but the prince's officials are all sons of princes and aristocrats, and most of the things these people usually do are illegal. Yao, the left-hand bastard, repeatedly entered the palace, and the prince did not listen to his advice.

古文：丙寅，以李峤为中书令。
现代文：姚，是姚的弟弟。丙寅，唐中宗任命李峤为中书令。
English: Yao, is Yao's younger brother. Cui Yin, Tang Zhongzong appointed Li Yu to be the chief of Chinese calligraphy.

古文：上将还西京，辛未，左散骑常侍李怀远同中书门下三品，充东都留守。
现代文：唐中宗即将回到西京长安，便于辛未任命左散骑常侍李怀远为同中书门下三品，充任东都留守。
English: Tang Zhongzong was about to return to West Beijing Chang'an, so Xin Wei appointed the left rider, Li Huaiyuan, as the third grade of the same middle school, and he stayed in Dongdu.

古文：武三思阴令人疏皇后秽行，榜于天津桥，请加废黜。
现代文：武三思暗地里派人分条列出韦后的肮赃行为，将这些文字张贴在东都洛阳的天津桥上，文中还请求中宗下诏废黜韦后。
English: Wu Sanshi secretly sent someone to itemize Wei's dirty deeds, and posted these words on the Tianjin Bridge in Luoyang, the eastern capital. The text also requested the Chinese government to depose Wei.

古文：上大怒，命御史大夫李承嘉穷核其事。
现代文：唐中宗勃然大怒，下令御史大夫李承嘉彻底追查此事。
English: Tang Zhongzong flew into a rage and ordered the chief historian, Li Chengjia, to thoroughly investigate the matter.

古文：承嘉奏言： 敬晖、桓彦范、张柬之、袁恕己、崔玄使人为之，虽云废后，实谋大逆，请族诛之。 
现代文：李承嘉上奏说： 这些文字是敬晖、桓彦范、张柬之、袁恕己和崔玄派人书写和张贴的，虽然上面所写的只是请求废黜皇后，但他们实际上是图谋叛逆，请陛下允许将这五个人灭族。 
English: Li Chengjia said, "These words were written and posted by the following people: Jing Jun, Huan Yan Fan, Zhang Kamzhi, Yuan Shujie and Cui Xuan. Although what is written above is only a request to depose the empress, they are actually plotting to rebel. Please allow Your Majesty to exterminate these five people."

古文：三思又使安乐公主谮之于内，侍御史郑愔言之于外，上命法司结竟。
现代文：武三思又指使安乐公主在宫中对五人横加诬陷，还指使侍御史郑在外朝对五人大加弹劾，唐中宗于是下令司法部门将他们结案判刑。
English: Wu Sansi also ordered Princess Anle to frame the five people in the palace, and also ordered the attendant Shi Zheng to impeach the five people in the foreign court. Tang Zhongzong then ordered the judicial department to close the case and sentence them.

古文：大理丞三原李朝隐奏称： 晖等未经推鞫，不可遽就诛夷。 
现代文：大理丞三原人李朝隐上奏说： 敬晖等人还没有经过详细审讯，不能急于将他们处死。 
English: Li Chaoying, the Grand Prior of the Three Primitives, said in his report: Jing Xi and others have not yet undergone detailed interrogation, and we cannot rush to put them to death.

古文：大理丞裴谈奏称： 晖等宜据制书处斩籍没，不应更加推鞫。 
现代文：大理丞裴谈上奏说： 对敬晖等人应当按照皇帝的制命处以斩刑，没收财产，不需要再经过审讯了。 
English: Speaking at the meeting, Dali Zhengpei said, "Jing Xi and others should be sentenced to beheading and confiscation of property in accordance with the emperor's order, and there is no need to go through another trial.

古文：上以晖等尝赐铁券，许以不死，乃长流晖于琼州，彦范于瀼州，柬之于泷州，恕己于环州，玄于古州，子弟年十六以上，皆流岭外。
现代文：唐中宗考虑到曾赐给敬晖等人铁券，许诺过不对他们处以死刑，便下令对他们处以长期流刑，将敬晖流放到琼州，将桓彦范流放到州，将张柬之流放到泷州，将袁恕己流放到环州，将崔玄流放到古州，五人的子弟中凡十六岁以上的都流放到岭外。
English: Tang Zhongzong, taking into account that he had given iron certificates to Jing Xi and others and promised not to impose the death penalty on them, ordered them to be sentenced to long-term exile. Jing Xi was exiled to Qiongzhou, Huan Yan Fan was exiled to Zhouzhou, Zhang Xizhi was exiled to Zhangzhou, Yuan Shuji was exiled to Huanzhou, Cui Xuan was exiled to Guzhou, and all five children over the age of sixteen were exiled to Lingwu.

古文：擢承嘉为金紫光禄大夫，进爵襄武郡公，谈为刑部尚书；出李朝隐为闻喜令。
现代文：中宗提升李承嘉为金紫光禄大夫，将其爵位晋升为襄武郡公，大理丞裴谈也被提拔为刑部尚书，又将李朝隐外放为闻喜令。
English: Zhongzong promoted Li Chengjia to Jin Zi Guanglu Doctor, promoted his title to Xiangwu County Governor, promoted Dali Zhe Pei Dan to Criminal Investigation Department, and promoted Li Chaoying to Wen Xi Ling.

古文：三思又讽太子上表，请夷晖等三族，上不许。
现代文：武三思又暗示太子李重俊上表，请求将敬晖等人夷三族，唐中宗没有同意。
English: Wu Sanxi also hinted that Prince Li Chungjun should present a petition to expel the three clans, including Jing Yi, but Tang Zhongzong did not agree.

古文：中书舍人崔湜说三思曰： 晖等异日北归，终为后患，不如遣使矫制杀之。 
现代文：中书舍人崔对武三思说： 日后如果敬晖等人又回到朝中，最终还是要成为祸患，您不如派使者诈称皇帝的命令把他们杀掉。 
English: Cui, the scribe, said to Wu Sanshi, "In the future, if Jing Xi and others return to the imperial court, they will eventually become a disaster. You might as well send an envoy to kill them on the orders of the emperor."

古文：三思问谁可使者，湜荐大理正周利用。
现代文：武三思问他谁可以作使者去完成这一使命，崔向他推荐了大理正周利用。
English: Wu Sanxi asked him who could serve as an emissary to complete this mission, and Cui recommended Dali Zhengzhou to him.

古文：利用先为五王所恶，贬嘉州司马，乃以利用摄右台侍御史，奉使岭外。比至，柬之、玄已死，遇彦范于贵州，令左右缚之，曳于竹槎之上，肉尽至骨，然后杖杀。得晖，呙而杀之。恕己素服黄金，利用逼之使饮野葛汁，尽数升不死，不胜毒愤，掊地，爪甲殆尽，仍捶杀之。利用还，擢拜御史中丞。
现代文：在这以前周利用因受到敬晖等人的憎厌，被贬为嘉州司马。武三思于是让周利用代理右台侍御史职务，奉命出使岭外，等到周利用到达岭外时，张柬之和崔玄已经去世，周利用在贵州遇到桓彦范，便命令手下人将桓彦范捆绑起来，放倒在竹筏子上拖着走，直到身上的肉被磨掉露出骨头时，才将他用杖打死；在抓住敬晖后，便将他剐死；袁恕己平素服食丹药，周利用硬逼着他喝有毒的野葛汁，袁恕己喝下好几升之后还没有被毒死，但毒性发作难以忍受，疼得他用手扒土，几乎把手上的指甲都磨掉，然后周利用才用棍棒将他活活打死。周利用回朝后，唐中宗将他提升为御史中丞。
English: Prior to this, Zhou Yi was despised as the Jiazhou Sima because he was hated by Jing Yi and others. Wu Sansi then asked Zhou Yi to act as the right-hand man of the Emperor and was ordered to send the envoy out of the Ling. By the time Zhou Yi arrived outside the Ling, Zhang Kamizhi and Cui Xuan had died. Zhou Yi met Huan Yan Fan in Guizhou, and ordered his subordinates to tie up Huan Yan Fan, put him down on a bamboo raft and drag him along until the flesh on his body was worn away to reveal the bones, and then beat him to death with a cane; after catching Jing Yi

古文：薛季昶累贬儋州司马。
现代文：薛季昶多次被贬，一直到被贬为儋州司马时服毒自杀。
English: Xue Jizhe was demoted many times, until he was demoted to the position of Zhangzhou Sima, when he took poison and committed suicide.

古文：饮药死。三思既杀五王，权倾人主，常言： 我不知代间何者谓之善人，何者谓之恶人；但于我善者则为善人，于我恶者则为恶人耳。 
现代文：武三思杀死张柬之、敬晖、桓彦范等五人之后，权势已经超过唐中宗，他常常说： 我不知道世上什么样的人是善人，什么样的人是恶人；我只知道只要是对我好的人就是善人，对我不好的人就是恶人罢了。 
English: After Wu Sansi killed five people, including Zhang Kammanzhi, Jing Xi, and Kuan Yan Fan, his power had already surpassed that of Tang Zhongzong. He often said, "I don't know what kind of person in the world is a good person and what kind of person is an evil person; I only know that a person who is good to me is a good person, and a person who is bad to me is an evil person."

古文：时兵部尚书宗禁客、将作大匠宗晋卿、太府卿纪处讷、鸿胪卿甘元柬皆为三思羽翼。
现代文：当时，兵部尚书宗楚客、将作大匠宗晋卿、太府卿纪处讷和鸿胪卿甘元柬都是武三思的党羽。
English: At that time, the military commander Shang Shuzong Chu, the future great craftsman Zong Jin, the prefectural governor Ji Duan Nai, and the Hongwu warlord Gan Yuan Kam were all followers of Wu Sansi.

古文：御史中丞周利用、侍御史冉祖雍、太仆丞李俊、光禄丞宋之逊、监察御史姚绍之皆为三思耳目，时人谓之五狗。
现代文：御史中丞周利用、侍御史冉祖雍、太仆丞李俊、光禄丞宋之逊、监察御史姚绍之五人都是武三思的耳目，当时人们称这五人为五狗。
English: The five people who were Wu San Si's eyes and ears were the Grand Historian Zhou Rong, the Attendant Grand Historian Ran Zu Yong, the Grand Servant Grand Historian Li Jun, the Servant Grand Historian Guang Luo Zheng, the Subordinate Grand Historian Song Zhixun, and the Supervisor Grand Historian Yao Shao. At that time, people called these five people the Five Dogs.

古文：九月，戊午，左散骑常侍、同中书门下三品李怀远薨。
现代文：九月，戊午，左散骑常侍、同中书门下三品李怀远去世。
English: In September, at noon, Li Huaiyuan, a regular attendant of Zuo Sanzhong and a member of the Third Class of the Middle School of the same school, passed away.

古文：初，李峤为吏部侍郎，欲树私恩，再求入相，奏大置员外官，广引贵势亲识。
现代文：起初，李峤任吏部侍郎，想要树立自己私人的恩惠以求再次出任宰相，于是奏请大量增置员外官，广泛举荐高官显贵的亲属、相识充任员外官。
English: At first, Li Xi served as an attendant of the cadre department, and wanted to establish his own private favor in order to serve as prime minister again, so he requested a large number of additional foreign ministers, and widely recommended the relatives and acquaintances of high-ranking officials to serve as foreign ministers.

古文：既而为相，铨衡失序，府库减耗，乃更表言滥官之弊，且请逊位；上慰谕不许。
现代文：不久后他又作了宰相，由于吏部选授官吏制度混乱以及官员数量大量增加国库资财减少的缘故，他于是又上表指出任官太滥的弊端，并且请求辞去宰相的职位。
English: Soon after, he became prime minister again. Due to the confusion of the system of selecting and awarding officials by the Ministry of Personnel and the large increase in the number of officials and the decrease in state treasury funds, he then pointed out the drawbacks of appointing officials too much, and requested to resign from the post of prime minister.

古文：冬，十月，己卯，车驾发东都，以前检校并州长史张仁愿检校左屯卫大将军兼洛州长史。
现代文：唐中宗对他好言相劝，没有答应他辞去相位的请求。冬季，十月，己卯，唐中宗从东都出发，又任命前任检校并州长史张仁愿为检校左屯卫大将军兼洛州长史。
English: In the winter, October, Jiwu, Tang Zhongzong set out from Dongdu, and appointed the former school inspector and governor Zhang Renzhong as the school inspector General of the Left Tun Guards and governor of Luo.

古文：戊戌，车驾至西京。
现代文：戊戌，唐中宗抵达西京长安。
English: Wu Xi, Tang Zhongzong arrived in West Beijing Chang'an.

古文：十一月，乙巳，赦天下。
现代文：十一月，乙巳，唐中宗下诏赦免全国罪犯。
English: In November, Emperor Taizong issued an edict to pardon all criminals in the country.

古文：丙辰，以蒲州刺史窦从一为雍州刺史。
现代文：丙辰，唐中宗任命蒲州刺史窦从一为雍州刺史。
English: Xing Chen, Tang Zhongzong appointed Puzhou Sashishi Dou from one to Yongzhou Sashishi.

古文：从一，德玄之子也，初名怀贞，避皇后父讳，更名从一，多谄附权贵。
现代文：窦从一是窦德玄的儿子，原名窦怀贞，为避韦皇后之父韦玄贞的名讳，才改名为窦从一。他为人一向阿谀依附权贵。
English: Dou Congyi was the son of Dou Dexuan. His original name was Dou Huai Zhen, which was the nickname of Wei Xuan Zhen, the father of the Empress Wei, before he changed his name to Dou Congyi. He has always been attached to power and nobility.

古文：太平公主与僧寺争碾硙，雍州司户李元纮判归僧寺。
现代文：太平公主与佛寺为争夺一座利用水力加工米面的碾而打官司，雍州司户李元判决佛寺胜诉。
English: Princess Taiping and a Buddhist temple fought a lawsuit to win a mill that uses hydraulic processing of rice noodles. The Yongzhou chief steward Li Yuan ruled in favor of the Buddhist temple.

古文：从一大惧，亟命元纮改判。
现代文：窦从一非常害怕，急忙下令李元改判太平公主胜诉。
English: Dou was very scared and hurriedly ordered Li Yuan to change the verdict so that Taiping Princess would win the case.

古文：元纮大署判后曰： 南山可移，此判无动！ 
现代文：李元在判决书最后用大字写道： 南山可以移动，这个判决不能更改！ 
English: Li Yuan wrote in capital letters at the end of the verdict: Nanshan can be moved, this verdict cannot be changed!

古文：从一不能夺。
现代文：窦从一无法使他改变决定。
English: Dou was never able to get him to change his mind.

古文：元纮，道广之子也。
现代文：李元，是李道广的儿子。
English: Li Yuan is the son of Li Daoguang.

古文：初，秘书监郑普思纳其女于后宫，监察御史灵昌崔日用劾奏之，上不听。
现代文：先前，秘书监郑普思把他自己的女儿送入后宫，监察御史灵昌县人崔日用曾上奏弹劾他，中宗没有听从崔日用的意见。
English: Previously, the secretary-supervisor Zheng Pu Si sent his own daughter into the harem, and the inspector-general of Lingchang County, Cui Rinyi, appealed to impeach him. Zhongzong did not listen to Cui Rinyi's opinion.

古文：普思聚党于雍、岐二州，谋作乱。
现代文：后来郑普思在雍州和歧州两地聚集党羽阴谋作乱。
English: Later, Zheng Pu Si gathered party members in Yongzhou and Qizhou to conspire and create turmoil.

古文：事觉，西京留守苏瑰收系，穷治之。
现代文：事发后西京留守苏逮捕了郑普思，穷究其罪。
English: After the incident, Su, who stayed in West Beijing, arrested Zheng Pu Si and investigated his crime.

古文：普思妻第五氏以鬼道得幸于皇后，上敕瑰勿治。
现代文：郑普思的妻子第五氏凭借鬼神邪说得到韦后的宠爱，唐中宗因此而敕令苏不要对郑普思治罪。
English: Zheng Pu Si's wife, the Fifth Clan, won Wei Guo's favor by virtue of her belief in ghosts and gods. As a result, Tang Zhongzong ordered Su not to punish Zheng Pu Si.

古文：及车驾还西京，瑰廷争之，上抑瑰而佑普思；侍御史范献忠进曰： 请斩苏瑰！ 
现代文：等到唐中宗从东都回到西京长安之后，苏在朝廷之上争辩此事，唐中宗压制苏而庇护郑普思；侍御史范献忠对中宗说： 请陛下下令将苏斩首！ 中宗问道： 为什么？ 
English: After Tang Zhongzong returned to Chang'an in West Beijing from Dongdu, Su disputed the matter at the imperial court. Tang Zhongzong suppressed Su and sheltered Zheng Pu Si. His attendant, Shi Fan Xianzhong, said to Tang Zhongzong, "Please, Your Majesty, order that Su be beheaded!"

古文：上曰： 何故？ 对曰： 瑰为留守大臣，不能先斩普思，然后奏闻，使之荧惑圣听，其罪大矣。
现代文：范献忠回答说： 苏身为留守大臣，却不能先将郑普思处斩，然后再报告陛下，以致于让他眩惑陛下，苏所犯的罪过可大啦。
English: Fan Xianzhong replied, "Su, as the minister-in-residence, was unable to execute Zheng Pu Si first, and then report to Your Majesty, so that he blinded Your Majesty. The sin committed by Su is great.

古文：且普思反状明白，而陛下曲为申理。
现代文：况且郑普思谋反的情节清楚明白，但陛下却偏袒他，为他辨解。
English: Moreover, the plot of Zheng Pu's rebellion was clear and understandable, but His Majesty favored him and explained it for him.

古文：臣闻王者不死，殆谓是乎！
现代文：我听说将称王于天下的人不会死，大概就是说的这种情况吧！
English: I've heard that the man who will be king of the world never dies, and that's pretty much it!

古文：臣愿先赐死，不能北面事普思。 
现代文：臣希望陛下先将臣赐死，臣不能面朝北向郑普思称臣。 
English: The vassal hoped that His Majesty would give the vassal death first, and the vassal could not face north to Zheng Pu Si to praise the vassal.

古文：魏元忠曰： 苏瑰长者，用刑不枉。
现代文：魏元忠说： 苏是一个严谨忠厚的人，他并没有枉法用刑。
English: Wei Yuanzhong said: Su is a strict and loyal person, he did not use the punishment in vain.

古文：普思法当死。 
现代文：郑普思谋反属实，依法应处死刑。 
English: Zheng Pu Si's conspiracy is true, and he should be sentenced to death according to law.

古文：上不得已，戊午，流普思于儋州，馀党皆伏诛。
现代文：唐中宗无奈，戊午，下令将郑普思流放到儋州，他的手下党羽都被判处死刑。
English: In desperation, Tang Zhongzong ordered Zheng Pu Si to be exiled to Ganzhou, and all of his subordinates were sentenced to death.

古文：十二月，己卯，突厥默啜寇鸣沙，灵武军大总管沙吒忠义与战，军败，死者六千馀人。
现代文：十二月，己卯，突厥阿史那默啜进犯鸣沙，唐灵武军大总管沙吒忠义与突厥兵交战，唐军战败，阵亡六千余人。
English: In December, the Turk Ashinamö invaded Mingsha, and the general manager of the Tangling armed forces, Shaju Zhongyi, fought with the Turk soldiers. The Tang army was defeated, and more than six thousand people were killed.

古文：丁巳，突厥进寇原、会等州，掠陇右牧马万馀匹而去。
现代文：丁巳，突厥兵进犯原州和会州等地，抢掠了陇右的军马一万多匹之后撤走。
English: Soon after, the Turkish soldiers invaded the Yuan and Huizhou Provinces and other places, looted more than ten thousand horses of the Han Dynasty, and then withdrew.

古文：免忠义官。
现代文：唐中宗免去了沙吒忠义的职务。
English: Tang Zhongzong removed Shajian Zhongyi from his post.

古文：安西大都护郭元振诣突骑施乌质勒牙帐议军事，天大风雪，元振立于帐前，与乌质勒语。
现代文：安西大都护郭元振到突骑施乌质勒的牙帐中商议军事时，正赶上天降大雪，风也很大，郭元振在牙帐前与乌质勒对面站着谈了很长时间，地上的雪积了很深。
English: When Guo Yuan Zhen, the protector of the Anxi Capital, came to consult the military in the dentition of the horse rider Shi Wujile, the heavy snow was falling and the wind was very strong. Guo Yuan Zhen stood in front of the dentition and talked with Wujile for a long time. The snow on the ground was very deep.

古文：久之，雪深，元振不移足；乌质勒老，不胜寒，会罢而卒。
现代文：郭元振连脚都没移动，但乌质勒年高体弱，耐不住严寒，在这次会面之后就死去了。
English: Guo Yuan Zhen did not even move his feet, but Wu Jule, who was old and weak, could not bear the cold, and died after this meeting.

古文：其子娑葛勒兵将攻元振，副使御之中丞解琬知之，劝元振夜逃去。元振曰： 吾以诚心待人，何所疑惧！
现代文：乌质勒的儿子娑葛聚集军队，打算进攻郭元振，副使、御名中丞解琬得知这一消息后，劝郭元振趁着黑夜逃离此地，郭元振说： 我以诚心对待他们，又有什么可以怀疑和害怕的呢！
English: Guo Yuanzhen said: I treat them with sincerity, so what is there to doubt or fear? Guo Yuanzhen said: I treat them with sincerity, so what is there to doubt or fear?

古文：且深在寇庭，逃将安适！ 
现代文：再说我们这些人都在他们的势力范围之内，就算是想逃走，又能逃到哪里去呢？ 
English: Besides, we are all within their sphere of influence. Even if we wanted to escape, where could we go?

古文：安卧不动。
现代文：于是十分镇静地躺在床上。
English: So I lay down on the bed very calmly.

古文：明旦，入哭，甚哀。娑葛感其义，待元振如初。
现代文：第二天早上，郭元振来到乌质勒的牙帐吊唁，放声痛哭，非常悲伤，乌质勒的儿子娑葛被郭无振的义气所感动，便又像以前那样善待他。
English: The next morning, Guo Yuanzhen came to Ujile's dental office to offer condolences. He cried loudly and was very sad. Ujile's son, Zangge, was moved by Guo Wuzhen's loyalty and treated him kindly as before.

古文：戊戌，以娑葛袭嗢鹿州都督、怀德王。
现代文：戊戌，唐中宗册命娑葛承袭鹿州都督、怀德王。
English: According to the records of the Tang Dynasty, Emperor Wu of the State of Guizhou and King Huai of the State of Huai of the State of Guizhou.

古文：安乐公主恃宠骄恣，卖官鬻狱，势倾朝野。或自为制敕，掩其文，令上署之；上笑而从之，竟不视也。
现代文：安乐公主倚仗着中宗的宠爱骄横放纵，卖官鬻爵，贪赃枉法，权势压过朝廷内外的人，甚至自己起草制书敕令，将内容覆盖后让唐中宗在下面签名。
English: Relying on the favor of the Tang Dynasty, Princess Anle indulged in arrogance and debauchery, sold officials and peerages, abused power, and oppressed people inside and outside the imperial court. She even drafted the imperial edict on book production herself, and after covering the content, asked the Tang Dynasty to sign below.

古文：自请为皇太女，上虽不从，亦不谴责。
现代文：唐中宗笑着为她签字画押，竟连敕文的内容都不看。
English: With a smile, Tang Zhongzong signed and stamped for her, not even looking at the content of the letter.

古文：景龙元年丁未，公元七零七年春，正月，庚戌，制以突厥默啜寇边，命内外官各进平突厥之策。
现代文：安乐公主自己请求唐中宗将她立为皇太女，中宗虽然没有照她说的去做，却也没有责怪她。
English: Princess Anle herself asked Tang Zhongzong to make her the crown princess, and although he did not do as she said, he did not blame her.

古文：右补阙卢俌上疏，以为： 郤谷悦礼乐，敦诗书，为晋元帅；杜预射不穿礼，建平吴之勋。
现代文：景龙元年春季，正月，庚戌，由于突厥阿史那默啜侵扰边境的缘故，唐中宗颁下制书，命令朝廷内外官员进献平定突厥的计策。右补厥卢上疏认为： 晋大夫喜欢礼乐，笃好《诗经》、《尚书》，后来被任命为中军元帅；西晋大臣杜预连铠甲都射不穿，却立下了平定东吴的功勋。
English: In the spring of the first month of the first year of Jinglong, in the year of the Heian period, due to the invasion of the border by the Turk Ashinamoku, Tang Zhongzong issued a book and ordered officials inside and outside the court to submit a plan to pacify the Turks. The right-supplemented Turk, Lu Shangsuo, believed that: the Jin doctor liked ceremonial music, liked "The Book of Songs" and "The Book of Songs," and was later appointed as a Chinese military marshal; the West Jin minister Du Yulian could not wear armor, but he made a great contribution to the pacification of East Wu.

古文：是知中权制谋，不取一夫之勇。
现代文：由此可知主将必须制定谋略，不选择只有匹夫之勇的人担任。
English: From this, it can be seen that the master will have to formulate a strategy, and will not choose a person who only has the courage of a peacock.

古文：如沙吒忠义，骁将之材，本不足以当大任。
现代文：像沙吒忠义只是一员勇将，本来就不足以担当大任。
English: Just being a brave general, like Shajian Zhongyi, is not enough to take on a big job.

古文：又，鸣沙之役，主将先逃，宜正邦宪；赏罚既明，敌无不服。
现代文：再说，鸣沙一仗，沙吒忠义作为主将却率先脱逃，陛下应按国家法律将其治罪，朝廷赏罚严明，就没有不可征服的敌人。
English: Moreover, there was a battle in the Ming Sha, but Shajian Zhongyi, as the commander, was the first to escape. His Majesty should punish him according to the laws of the country, and the court should reward and punish him severely. There is no unconquerable enemy.

古文：又，边州刺史，宜精择其人，使之蒐卒乘，积资粮，来则御史，去则备之。
现代文：另外，边疆各州的刺史，应当精选合适的人担任，让他们检阅兵马，积存粮草，敌人来则抵御，去则作预防。
English: In addition, the history of the frontier states should be carefully selected by the right people, so that they can review the soldiers and horses, accumulate grain and grass, resist the enemy's coming, and prevent the enemy's going.

古文：去岁四方旱灾，未易兴师。当理内以及外，绥近以来远，俟仓廪实，士卒练，然后大举以讨之。 
现代文：上一年各地发生旱灾，不便计伐突厥，应当治理国内而后推及国外，安定近处以使远方诸国前来朝贡。等到国家府库充实、兵士训练好的时候，再大举发兵讨伐突厥。 
English: In the previous year, droughts occurred in various parts of the country, and it was inconvenient to attack the Turks. It was necessary to control the situation at home and then push it abroad, stabilize nearby areas so that distant countries would come to pay tribute. When the national treasury was enriched and the soldiers were well trained, they would send more troops to fight the Turks.

古文：上善之。
现代文：唐中宗认为他的建议很好。
English: The emperor thought Sima Xiangru spoke very well.

古文：二月，丙戌，上遣武攸暨、武三思诣乾陵祈雨。
现代文：二月，丙戌，唐中宗派遣武攸暨、武三思到乾陵求雨。
English: In February, Tang Zhongzong sent Wu Youcai and Wu Sanshi to Qianling to pray for rain.

古文：既而雨降，上喜，制复武氏崇恩庙及昊陵、顺陵，因名酆王庙曰褒德，陵曰荣先；又制崇恩庙斋郎取五品子充。
现代文：时间不长就下起了雨，唐中宗十分高兴，便发布制命恢复武氏的崇恩庙和昊陵、顺陵，同时将韦后之父酆王韦玄贞的酆王庙改称为褒德庙，并将他的陵墓改称为荣先陵，比外唐中宗还下诏规定崇恩庙的斋郎一律由五品官的儿子充任。
English: Not long after, it began to rain. Tang Zhongzong was very happy and issued an order to restore the Chong'en Temple, Hao Mausoleum and Shun Mausoleum of the Wu clan. At the same time, he renamed the King of Wei's father, King Wei Xuanzheng, as Baode Temple, and his mausoleum as Rongxian Mausoleum. In addition, Tang Zhongzong also issued an edict stipulating that the Jairo of Chong'en Temple would be filled by the sons of the five officials.

古文：太常博士杨孚曰： 太庙皆取七品已下子为斋郎，今崇恩庙取五品子，未知太庙当如何？ 
现代文：太常博士杨孚说： 太庙的斋郎都是由七品以下官员的儿子充任的，现在崇恩庙取五品官的儿子作斋郎，不知太庙应该取几品官的儿子担任斋郎？ 
English: Dr. Yang Fu said: The priests of the Great Temple were all the sons of officials below the seventh grade. Now, the Chong En Temple takes the sons of officials of the fifth grade to serve as priests. I wonder how many sons of officials should the Great Temple take to serve as priests?

古文：上命太庙亦准崇恩庙。
现代文：唐中宗下令太庙也依照崇恩庙的标准。
English: Emperor Taizong of the Tang Dynasty ordered that the Great Temple also follow the standards of the Chong'en Temple.

古文：孚曰： 以臣准君，犹为僭逆，况以君准臣乎！ 
现代文：杨孚又说： 臣子仿照君主的标准，就已经是逾越本分大逆不道了，何况要君主仿照臣子的标准呢！ 
English: Yang Fu also said, "If a vassal follows the standard of the monarch, he has already overstepped his bounds and committed an act of high treason. How much more should the monarch follow the standard of a vassal!"

古文：上乃止。
现代文：唐中宗这才取消了这项命令。
English: The Emperor finally stopped.

古文：庚寅，敕改诸州中兴寺、观为龙兴，自今奏事不得言中兴。
现代文：庚寅，唐中宗发布敕命，将各州的中兴寺和中兴观一律改名为龙兴寺和龙兴观，并且规定从今以后臣民上奏言事不得再提到中兴二字。
English: Geng Yin and Tang Zhongzong issued an order to rename all the state's Zhongxing Temple and Zhongxing Confucianism as Longxing Temple and Longxing Confucianism, and stipulated that from now on, the two words of Zhongxing should not be mentioned in the speeches of the subjects.

古文：右补阙权若讷上疏，以为： 天、地、日、月等字皆则天能事，贼臣敬晖等轻紊前规；今削之无益于淳化，存之有光于孝理。
现代文：右补阙权若讷上疏认为： 改造天、地、日、月等字，是则天皇后特别擅长的事，贼臣敬晖等人随心所欲地紊乱前朝规矩；现在废除这些字无助于淳厚的教化，保存这些字却有助于使孝顺母亲的美德发扬光大。
English: The right to amend the imperial edict, if it is not raised, is that: the transformation of heaven, earth, sun, moon and other characters is a thing that the empress is particularly good at, and the thief-vassal Keisuke and others are free to disrupt the rules of the former dynasty; the abolition of these characters now will not help to enlighten the virtuous, but the preservation of these characters will help to make the virtue of the filial mother flourish.

古文：又，神龙元年制书，一事以上，并依贞观故事，岂可近舍母仪，远尊祖德！ 
现代文：再者，陛下在神龙元年的制书中说，处理任何事情都要遵循贞观时期的制度，陛下怎么可以近舍母亲的仪范而远尊祖的功德呢！ 
English: Furthermore, His Majesty said in the book of the first year of the Dragon God that the system of the chastity period should be followed in dealing with anything. How can His Majesty abandon the mother's ritual and honor the father's merits?

古文：疏奏，手制褒美。
现代文：这篇奏疏呈上之后，唐中宗亲笔书写诏令予以褒奖赞美。
English: After this report was submitted, Tang Zhongzong personally wrote a decree to praise it.

古文：三月，庚子，吐蕃遣其大臣悉薰热入贡。
现代文：三月，庚子，吐蕃派遣大臣悉薰热入朝进贡品。
English: In March, Geng Zi, the minister dispatched by Tubo, was so enthusiastic that he brought in the tribute from the North.

古文：夏，四月，辛巳，以上所养雍王守礼女金城公主妻吐蕃赞普。
现代文：夏季，四月，辛巳，唐中宗把自己收养的雍王李守礼的女儿金城公主嫁给吐蕃赞普作妻子。
English: In the summer, in April, Tang Zhongzong married his adopted daughter Jincheng Princess, the daughter of Yong Wang Li Shouli, to Tubo Zampu as his wife.

古文：五月，戊戌，以右屯卫大将军张仁愿为朔方道大总管，以备突厥。
现代文：五月，戊戌，唐中宗任命左屯卫大将军张仁愿为朔方道大总管，目的是为了防备突厥兵的侵扰。
English: In May, in Wuyi, Tang Zhongzong appointed the General of the Left Tun Guards, Zhang Ren Rong, as the chief administrator of Shuo Fang Dao, in order to prevent the intrusion of Turkish soldiers.

古文：上以岁旱谷贵，召太府卿纪处讷谋之。
现代文：由于今年大旱，粮食价钱很贵，唐中宗召见太府卿纪处讷商议缓解这一状况的办法。
English: As a result of this year's drought, grain prices are very expensive. Tang Zhongzong summoned the Taifuqing Discipline Inspection Office to discuss ways to alleviate this situation.

古文：明日，武三思使知太史事迦叶志忠奏： 是夜，摄提入太微宫，至帝座，主大臣宴见纳忠于天子。 
现代文：第二天，武三思让知太史事迦叶志忠上奏说： 昨天晚上，摄提星进入太微宫，一直到达太帝星座，所主之事是大臣在皇帝闲宴召见时向天子进献忠言。 
English: The next day, Wu Sansi had the historical events of Emperor Zhaozhong read aloud by Ka Ye Zhizhong: Yesterday evening, the shooting star Titus entered the Palace of Heaven and Earth and reached the constellation of the Great Emperor. The matter at hand was the minister's offering of loyal advice to the Son of Heaven at the Emperor's invitation to a banquet.

古文：上以为然，敕称处讷忠诚，彻于玄象，赐衣一袭，帛六十段。
现代文：唐中宗认为他说得对，于是降下敕命，称赞纪处讷忠诚，通于天象，并赏赐他一套衣服和六十段帛。
English: Tang Zhongzong thought that he was right, so he gave him his life, praised him for his loyalty, and gave him a set of clothes and sixty pieces of money.

古文：六月，丁卯朔，日有食之。
现代文：六月，丁卯朔，出现日食。
English: In June, a solar eclipse occurred.

古文：姚巂道讨击使、监察御史晋昌唐九征击姚州叛蛮，破之，斩获三千馀人。
现代文：姚道讨击使、监察御史晋昌县人唐九徵攻打背叛朝廷的姚州蛮族部落，打败了他们，共斩杀和俘获敌人三千多人。
English: Tang Jiu enlisted Yaozhou barbarian tribes, who had betrayed the imperial court, and defeated them, killing and capturing more than 3,000 of the enemy.

古文：皇后以太子重俊非其所生，恶之；特进德静王武三思尤忌太子。
现代文：韦后认为太子李重俊不是她自己亲生的，所以很讨厌他；特进、德静王武三思尤其忌恨太子李重俊。
English: Wei Hou thought that Prince Li Chunjun was not her own, so she hated him very much; Tejin and De Jing Wang Wu especially hated Prince Li Chunjun.

古文：上官婕妤以三思故，每下制敕，推尊武氏。
现代文：上官婕妤因为与武三思私通的缘故，在她所拟定的制书敕令中，常常推崇武氏集团。
English: Because of her personal relationship with Wu San, Shangguan Yu often praised the Wu clan group in her edict on book production.

古文：安乐公主与驸马左卫将军武崇训常陵侮太子，或呼为奴。
现代文：安乐公主与驸马、左卫将军武崇训经常欺凌侮辱太子，甚至有时称太子为奴才。
English: Princess Anle and her steed, the left guard general Wu Chongxun, often bullied and insulted the prince, and even sometimes called the prince a slave.

古文：崇训又教公主言于上，请废太子，立己为皇太女。
现代文：武崇训还唆使安乐公主向唐中宗建议废掉太子，立她自己为皇太女。
English: Wu Chongxun also instigated Princess Anle to propose to Tang Zhongzong to abolish the crown prince and establish herself as the crown princess.

古文：太子积不能平。
现代文：太子心中积愤已久，无法平静。
English: The Prince has been angry for a long time and cannot be calmed down.

古文：秋，七月，辛丑，太子与左羽林大将军李多祚、将军李思冲、李承况、独孤祎之、沙吒忠义等，矫制发羽林千骑兵三百馀人，杀三思、崇训于其第，并亲党十馀人。又使左金吾大将军成王千里及其子天水王禧分兵守宫城诸门，太子与多祚引兵自肃章门斩关而入，叩阁索上官婕妤。
现代文：秋季，七月，辛丑，太子李重俊会同左羽林大将军李多祚、将军李思冲、李承况、独狐、沙吒忠义等人，假传皇帝的命令调集羽林千骑兵三百余人，将武三思、武崇训父子及其亲属十余人杀死在武三思家中；又让左金吾大将军成王李千里和他的儿子天水王李禧分头带兵把守宫城各门，太子和李多祚带领兵马从肃章门砍断门栓冲入宫中，四处登门搜寻上官婕妤。
English: In the autumn, in July, at Xinwuxi, the prince Li Chongjun, together with the general of the left feather forest, Li Doran, the general Li Sichong, Li Chengzhang, Duxu, Shajian Zhongyi and others, mobilized more than three hundred thousand cavalrymen of the left feather forest by the order of the fake emperor, and killed more than ten people of Wu Sanxi, Wu Chongxun and his relatives in the home of Wu Sanxi; and let the general of the left feather forest, Chengwang Li Qili, and his son, Tianshui Wang Li Xiibun, lead the soldiers to guard the gates of the palace

古文：婕妤大言曰： 观其意欲先索婉儿，次索皇后，次及大家。 
现代文：上官婕妤大声喊道： 看起来他们是想先抓住我上官婉儿，其次抓住皇后，最后是要抓住皇帝。 
English: Shangguan Zou shouted loudly, "It looks like they want to catch me first, Shangguan Wan'er, then the empress, and finally the emperor.

古文：上乃与韦后、安乐公主、上官婕妤登玄武门楼以避兵锋，使左羽林大将军刘景仁帅飞骑百馀人屯于楼下以自卫。
现代文：唐中宗便与韦后、安乐公主、上官婕妤一起爬上玄武门门楼躲避，同时派右羽林大将军刘景仁率领羽林飞骑一百多人聚集在门楼之下以保护自己。
English: Tang Zhongzong climbed onto the gate tower of Xuanwu Gate with Wei Hou, Princess Anle, and Shangguan Zang to escape, and at the same time, he sent General Liu Jingren to lead more than a hundred people gathered under the gate tower to protect themselves.

古文：杨再思、苏瑰、李峤与兵部尚书宗楚客、左卫将军纪处讷拥兵二千馀人屯太极殿前，闭门自守。
现代文：杨再思、苏、李峤与兵部尚书宗楚客、左卫将军纪处讷拥兵二千余人聚集在太极殿前闭门坚守。
English: More than two thousand people gathered in front of the Taiji Hall, including Yang Zaisi, Su, Li Qian, the military commander Shang Shuzong Chu, and the general Zuo Wei.

古文：多祚先至玄武楼下，欲升楼，宿卫拒之。
现代文：李多祚率先来到玄武楼下，想要上楼，但受到警卫士兵的拦阻。
English: Li Doran was the first to arrive at the bottom of the Xuanwu Building. He wanted to go upstairs, but was blocked by the guard soldiers.

古文：多祚与太子狐疑，按兵不战，冀上问之。
现代文：李多祚和太子都有些犹豫不决，勒住兵马，没有立即攻打玄武楼，而是希望唐中宗能出来询问他们起兵的原因。
English: Li Duoxuan and the prince were a bit indecisive, holding back the soldiers and horses, and did not immediately attack the Xuanwu Tower, but hoped that Tang Zhongzong could come out to inquire about the reason for their army.

古文：宫闱令石城杨思勖在上侧，请击之。
现代文：宫闱令石城县人杨思勖站在唐中宗身旁，请求皇帝允许他带兵出击。
English: Gong Li ordered Yang Sijun, a native of Shicheng County, to stand next to Tang Zhongzong and ask the emperor to allow him to lead the troops to attack.

古文：多祚婿羽林中郎将野呼利为前锋总管，思勖挺刃斩之，多祚军夺气。
现代文：李多祚的女婿羽林中郎将野呼利当时担任前锋总管，杨思勖拔剑将他斩首，李多祚手下军士当时就丧失了胆气。
English: Li Duoxuan's son-in-law, Ulin Zhongro, was in charge of the forwarding at the time, and Yang Siyu beheaded him with a sword. Li Duoxuan's sergeant lost his courage at that time.

古文：上据槛俯谓多祚所将千骑曰： 汝辈皆朕宿卫之士，何为从多祚反？
现代文：唐中宗手扶玄武楼上的栏杆，俯身对楼下李多祚所带领的千骑兵们说： 你们这些人都是朕的卫士，为什么要跟着李多祚谋反呢！
English: Tang Zhongzong put his hand on the railing of the Xuanwu Building, leaned over and said to the thousand cavalrymen led by Li Duoxuan downstairs: You people are all my guards, why do you want to rebel with Li Duoxuan!

古文：苟能斩反者，勿患不富贵。 
现代文：如果你们能杀掉谋反的人，不必担心没有荣华富贵。 
English: If you can kill the rebels, you don't have to worry about not being rich.

古文：于是千骑斩多祚、承况、祎之、忠义，馀众皆溃。
现代文：于是千骑兵们将李多祚、李承况、独狐之、沙吒忠义斩首，其他的人都四散溃逃。
English: As a result, the thousand cavalrymen beheaded Li Duojuan, Li Chengzheng, Duoxizhi and Shajing Zhongyi, and the others fled in all directions.

古文：成王千里、天水王禧攻右延明门，将杀宗楚客、纪处讷，不克而死。
现代文：成王李千里、天水王李禧父子攻打太极宫右延明门，打算杀死宗楚客和纪处讷，但未能攻下反而战死。
English: Cheng Wang Li Qianli and Tianshui Wang Li Xi, father and son, attacked the Taiji Palace Uyenming Gate, intending to kill Zong Chu and Ji Jianna, but failed to capture and instead died in battle.

古文：太子以百骑走终南山，至鄠西，能属者才数人，憩于林下，为左右所杀。
现代文：太子李重俊带着一百多骑兵逃往终南山，到达西时，能够跟得上的只有几个人了，当他在树林里歇息时，被手下人杀死。
English: Prince Li Chongjun fled with more than a hundred cavalrymen to Zhunan Mountain. When he reached the west, there were only a few people who could follow him. When he was resting in the woods, he was killed by his men.

古文：上以其首献太庙及祭三思、崇训之柩，然后枭之朝堂。
现代文：唐中宗将太子李重俊的首级献到太庙，然后又用它祭奠武三思和武崇训的灵柩，最后在朝堂悬首示众。
English: Tang Zhongzong dedicated the head of Prince Li Chongjun to the Imperial Temple, and then used it to dedicate the casket of Wu Sanshi and Wu Chongxun, and finally hung the head in the imperial hall.

古文：更成王千里姓曰蝮氏，同党皆伏诛。
现代文：此外，中宗又将成王李千里的姓改为蝮氏，太子的同党都被处以死刑。
English: In addition, Zhongzong also changed the surname of Chengwang Li Qianli to Yi, and all of the prince's fellow party members were sentenced to death.

古文：东宫僚属无敢近太子尸者，唯永和县丞宁嘉勖解衣裹太子首号哭，贬兴平丞。
现代文：东宫的僚属中没有人敢于靠近太子的尸体。只有永和县丞宁嘉勖脱下衣服裹住太子的头颅放声痛哭，他因此而被贬为兴平丞。
English: None of his colleagues in the Eastern Court dared to approach the prince's body. Only Yonghe County official Ning Jiayu took off his clothes, wrapped the prince's head around his neck and burst into tears. As a result, he was demoted to Xingping County official.

古文：太子兵所经诸门守者皆坐流；韦氏之党奏请悉诛之，上更命法司推断。
现代文：太子起兵时所通过的各个宫门的守卫者都被判处流刑。韦后集团的成员奏请将这些人全部处死，唐中宗下令司法部门重新审理推问此案。
English: The guards of the various palace gates that the prince passed through when he raised an army were sentenced to exile. Members of the Weihou Group petitioned to have all of these people executed, and Tang Zhongzong ordered the judicial department to re-examine the case.

古文：大理卿宋城郑惟忠曰： 大狱始决，人心未安，若复有改推，则反仄者众矣。 
现代文：大理卿宋城县人郑惟忠说： 现在这件大案刚刚判决，人心尚未安定下来，如果再重新改判的话，那么因此而辗转不安的人就太多了。 
English: Zheng Weizhong, a resident of Songcheng County, Daliqing, said: Now that this big case has just been decided, people's hearts have not yet settled down. If the verdict is changed again, there will be too many people who are worried about it.

古文：上乃止。
现代文：唐中宗这才放弃了这个想法。
English: The Emperor finally stopped.

古文：以杨思勖为银青光禄大夫，行内常侍。
现代文：唐中宗任命杨思勖为银青光禄大夫，行内常侍。
English: Tang Zhongzong appointed Yang Sijie as the silver Qingguanglu doctor, the highest-ranking official in the line.

古文：癸卯，赦天下。
现代文：癸卯，唐中宗下诏大赦天下。
English: Therefore, I declare a general amnesty for all prisoners.

古文：赠武三思太尉、梁宣王，武崇训开府仪同三司、鲁忠王。
现代文：唐中宗追赠武三思为太尉、梁宣王，追赠武崇训为开府仪同三司、鲁忠王。
English: Tang Zhongzong posthumously awarded Wu Sanshi as Tai Lai and Liang Xuan Wang, and posthumously awarded Wu Chongxun as Kaifu Yi, Tong San Shi and Lu Zhong Wang.

古文：安乐公主请用永泰公主故事，以崇训墓为陵。给事中卢粲驳之，以为： 永泰事出特恩，今鲁王主婿，不可为比。 
现代文：安乐公主请求依永泰公主的先例称武崇训的坟墓为陵，给事中卢粲反驳她说： 永泰公主的事情属于特意降恩。
English: Princess Anle requested that Wu Chongxun's tomb be called a mausoleum in accordance with the precedent of Princess Yongtai, but Lu Ye countered her by saying: The matter of Princess Yongtai is a special act of grace.

古文：上手敕曰： 安乐与永泰无异，同穴之义，今古不殊。 
现代文：现在鲁王武崇训只是皇帝的女婿，不能与永泰公主相提并论。 唐中宗给他亲手写下的敕令说： 安乐公主与永泰公主没有不同，合葬的道理，古今没有区别。 
English: Now, King Wuzongxun of Lu is only the emperor's son-in-law, and cannot be compared to Princess Yongtai. Tang Zhongzong wrote the imperial edict to him in his own handwriting, saying: Princess Anle is no different from Princess Yongtai, and there is no difference between the principle of joint burial from ancient times to the present.

古文：粲又奏，以为： 陛下以膝下之爱施及其夫，岂可使上下无辨，君臣一贯哉！ 
现代文：卢粲又上奏道： 陛下将自己对女儿的慈爱推及女婿，怎么可以使得君臣上下没有尊卑贵贱之分呢！ 
English: Lu Xun also made a speech: His Majesty pushed his love for his daughter to his son-in-law, how could he make there be no distinction between the high and the low among the princes and ministers!

古文：上乃从之。
现代文：唐中宗这才听从了他的意见。
English: The emperor listened to Jia Dongzhi's opinion.

古文：公主怒，出粲为陈州刺史。
现代文：安乐公主十分生气，将卢粲外放为陈州刺史。
English: Princess Anle was very angry and banished Lu Yao to Chenzhou.

古文：襄邑尉襄阳席豫闻安乐公主求为太女，叹曰： 梅福讥切王氏，独何人哉！ 
现代文：襄邑县尉襄阳人席豫听说安乐公主请求中宗立她为皇太女，慨叹道： 汉代梅福指斥汉成帝冤杀王章，这是一个多么无畏的人哪！ 
English: Hearing that Princess Anle had petitioned Emperor Zhongzong to make her the empress dowager, Xiangyi County Lieutenant Xiangyang Shi Yu sighed: Han Dynasty Meifu rebuked Emperor Han for unjustly killing Wangzhang, what a fearless person!

古文：乃上书请立太子，言甚深切。
现代文：便上书请求唐中宗及早选立太子，话十分深切诚恳。
English: He then wrote to Tang Zhongzong to request that he choose a crown prince as soon as possible, and his words were very sincere.

古文：太平公主欲表为谏官。豫耻之，逃去。
现代文：太平公主打算上表请求任命席豫作朝廷谏官，席豫以此为耻，便逃离了。
English: Princess Taiping planned to petition for the appointment of Shi Yu as an imperial eunuch, but Shi Yu was ashamed of this and fled.

古文：八月，戊寅，皇后及王公已下表上尊号曰应天神龙皇帝，改玄武门为神武门，楼为制胜楼。
现代文：八月，戊寅，韦皇后及王公们已经下表，向唐中宗进上应天神龙皇帝的尊号，请求将玄武门改名为神武门，将玄武楼改名为制胜楼。
English: In August, Wu Yin, Empress Wei and the princes submitted a petition to Tang Zhongzong, requesting that the Xuanwu Gate be renamed the Shenwu Gate and the Xuanwu Building be renamed the Victory Building.

古文：宗楚客又帅百官表请加皇后尊号曰顺天翊圣皇后。
现代文：宗楚客又率领文武百官上表请求加封韦皇后的尊号为顺天翊圣皇后。
English: Zong Chuk led hundreds of civil and military officials in a petition to add the honorary title of Empress Wei as the Queen of Heaven.

古文：上并许之。
现代文：唐中宗全部同意。
English: Tang Zhongzong fully agreed.

古文：初，右台大夫苏珦治太子重俊之党，囚有引相王者，珦密为之申理，上乃不问。
现代文：当初，右台大夫苏负责审问太子李重俊的党羽，罪犯中有人牵扯上相王李旦，苏秘密地为相王申辩，唐中宗才不再追究此事。
English: At first, Su, the doctor of the Right Division, was in charge of interrogating Prince Li Chongjun's party members, and some of the criminals were involved with King Li Dan. Su secretly pleaded for King Li Dan, and Tang Zhongzong no longer investigated the matter.

古文：自是安乐公主及兵部尚书宗楚客日夜谋谮相王，使侍御史冉祖雍等诬奏相王及太平公主，云 与重俊通谋，请收付制狱。 
现代文：从此安乐公主和兵部尚书宗楚客就日夜策划诬陷相王李旦，他们指使侍御史冉祖雍上奏诬陷相王李旦及太平公主，说他们两人 与李重俊合谋造反，请将他们逮捕审讯。 
English: From then on, Princess Anle and the leading members of the Shoshu Sect of the Ministry of War plotted day and night to frame King Litan, and they ordered the attendant historian Ran Zuyong to play the role of framing King Litan and Princess Taiping, saying that the two of them had conspired with Li Chongjun to rebel, and that they should be arrested and tried.

古文：上召吏部侍郎兼御史中丞萧至忠，使鞫之。至忠泣曰： 陛下富有四海，不能容一弟一妹，而使人罗织害之乎！
现代文：唐中宗于是派吏部侍郎兼御史中丞萧至忠负责审理此案，萧至忠流着眼泪说： 陛下富贵已极，拥有整个天下，却不能容纳一弟一妹，难道还要让人罗织罪名，把他们陷害至死吗？
English: Tang Zhongzong then sent Xiao Zhizhong, the attendant of the cadre department and the assistant secretary of the history department, to be responsible for the trial of the case. Xiao Zhizhong shed tears and said: His Majesty is extremely rich, has the whole world, but cannot accommodate a brother and a sister. Do you want people to fabricate charges and frame them to death?

古文：相王昔为皇嗣，固请于则天，以天下让陛下，累日不食，此海内所知。
现代文：相王当初做皇太子时，曾坚决地请求则天皇后允许他把天下让给陛下，为此多日吃不下饭，这是海内外臣民人所共知的事情。
English: When Prince So was crown prince, he once firmly requested the Empress Dowager to allow him to cede the world to His Majesty. As a result, he was unable to eat for several days. This is a well-known fact among subjects at home and abroad.

古文：奈何以祖雍一言而疑之！ 
现代文：陛下现在为什么仅凭冉祖雍的一句话就怀疑相王呢？ 
English: Your Majesty, why are you now doubting the king on the basis of a single word from Ran Zu Yong?

古文：上素友爱，遂寝其事。
现代文：唐中宗对相王李旦及太平公主一向友爱，听了这番话以后也就把这件事放下不问了。
English: Tang Zhongzong had always been friendly to King Lidan and Princess Taiping, and after hearing these words, he put the matter aside.

古文：右补阙浚仪吴兢闻祖雍之谋，上疏，以为： 自文明以来，国之祚胤，不绝如线，陛下龙兴，恩及九族，求之瘴海，升之阙庭。
现代文：右补阙浚仪人吴兢听到了冉祖雍的打算以后，上疏认为： 自从文明年间以来，大唐朝的后嗣，几乎断绝，陛下重登帝位之后，恩泽遍及皇室九族，访求流散于烟瘴之地的皇族子孙，让他们重回朝庭。
English: After hearing of Ran Zuyong's plan, Wu Jing, the right-hand man of the imperial eunuch, thought: Since the civilized years, the heirs of the Great Tang Dynasty have almost been cut off. After His Majesty's return to the throne, the grace has spread throughout the nine royal families, visiting the descendants of the royal family scattered in the land of smog, so that they can return to the imperial court.

古文：况相王同气至亲，六合无贰，而贼臣日夜连谋，乃欲陷之极法；祸乱之根，将由此始。
现代文：况且相王与陛下乃手足至亲，普天之下再也没有第二个这样的人，但乱臣贼子日夜策划，竟想置之于死地；国家日后发生祸乱的根子，将会从这里铸成。
English: Moreover, the king and his majesty are as close as brothers. There is no other such person in the whole world, but the ruffians and thieves are plotting day and night to put him to death; the root of the country's future disaster will be cast from here.

古文：夫任以权则虽疏必重，夺其势则虽亲必轻。
现代文：一般说来，如果交给权力，那么即使是非亲非故的人也必然会举足轻重，若是夺走权力，即使是骨肉至亲也一定会无关紧要。
English: Generally speaking, if power is handed over, then even relatives will inevitably be important, and if power is taken away, even flesh-and-blood relatives will certainly be irrelevant.

古文：自古委信异姓，猜忌骨肉，以覆国亡家者，几何人矣！
现代文：自古以来，君主因信任异姓之人和猜忌骨肉至亲而亡国破家的，已经多得数不清了。
English: Since ancient times, there have been countless monarchs who have lost their countries and families because they trusted people with different surnames and were suspicious of their closest relatives.

古文：况国家枝叶无几，陛下登极未久，而一子以弄兵受诛，一子以愆违远窜，惟馀一弟朝夕左右，尺布斗粟之讥，不可不慎，《青蝇》之诗，良可畏也！ 
现代文：况且现在大唐宗室子弟所剩无几，陛下重登帝位时间也还不长，但竟然已有一个儿子因兴兵起事而被杀，另一个儿子因违背父命而流落远方，只剩下相王这么一个弟弟可以朝夕相处，讥刺汉文帝容不下淮南王的民谣，陛下不能不慎重考虑，《青蝇》诗中所阐发的道理，实在是值得陛下多加注意呀！ 
English: Moreover, there are only a few remaining brothers and sisters of the Great Tang Dynasty, and the time for His Majesty to return to the throne is not long, but one son has been killed for raising an army, and another son has been sent far away for violating his father's order. Only a brother like King Soo can get along day and night. His Majesty cannot but carefully consider the folk songs of King Huainan that the Emperor of China cannot tolerate. The truth expounded in the poem "The Blue Fly" is really worthy of His Majesty's attention!

古文：相王宽厚恭谨，安恬好让，故经武、韦之世，竟免于难。
现代文：相王李旦为人宽和仁厚，谦恭谨慎，而且淡于名利，从不作非分之争，因而度过武则天、韦后专权的时代，竟能幸免于难。
English: King Li Dan was a generous and benevolent person, modest and prudent, and was less concerned with fame and fortune, and never fought for rights and wrongs. As a result, he was able to survive the era of the dictatorship of Wu Zetian and Wei Hou.

古文：初，右仆射、中书令魏元忠以武三思擅权，意常愤郁。
现代文：起初，由于武三思专擅朝廷大权，右仆射、中书令魏元忠心中常常愤懑忧郁。
English: At first, Wei Yuanzhong was often angry and depressed because Wu Sanxi was expert at wielding the supreme power of the imperial court, and Wei Yuanzhong's right-hand man, Shao, was in charge of official documents.

古文：及太子重俊起兵，遇元忠子太仆少卿升于永安门，胁以自随，太子死，升为乱兵所杀。
现代文：太子李重俊兴兵诛杀武三思的时候，正好在永安门与魏元忠的儿子太仆少卿魏升相遇，顺便裹胁他一起入宫；太子一死，魏升也被乱兵所杀。
English: When the prince Li Chung Jun Xing was thinking about killing Wu San, he happened to meet Wei Yuanzhong's son Wei Sheng at the Yongan Gate, and he threatened him to enter the palace with him. When the prince died, Wei Sheng was also killed by the soldiers.

古文：元忠扬言曰： 元恶已死，虽鼎镬何伤！
现代文：事后魏元忠扬言说： 最大的恶人武三思已经被杀，即使我的儿子被处以鼎镬的酷刑，又有什么关系！
English: Afterwards, Wei Yuanzhong threatened: "The biggest villain Wu Sanshi has been killed, even if my son is tortured to death, what does it matter!

古文：但惜太子陨没耳！ 
现代文：只可惜太子因此而死罢了。 
English: It's just a pity that the crown prince died as a result.

古文：上以其有功，且为高宗、武后所重，故释不问。
现代文：唐中宗因为魏元忠立有大功，并且被高宗和武后所看重，所以没有追究他这件事。
English: Tang Zhongzong did not investigate Wei Yuanzhong because Wei Yuanzhong had made great contributions and was valued by Gao Zong and Wu Wu.

古文：兵部尚书宗楚客、太府卿纪处讷等共证元忠，云 与太子通谋，请夷其三族。 
现代文：但兵部尚书宗楚客、太府卿纪处讷等人一起向唐中宗证明他说过上面的话，并且声称他 与太子合谋造反，请诛灭魏元忠三族。 
English: However, the military commander, Shang Shuzong Chu, and the prefectural governor, Ji Zhendongna, together with others, proved to Tang Zhongzong that he had said the above words, and claimed that he had conspired with the prince to rebel, and asked him to exterminate Wei Yuanzhong's three tribes.

古文：制不许。
现代文：唐中宗没有同意。
English: Tang Zhongzong did not agree.

古文：元忠惧，表请解官爵，以散秩还第。
现代文：魏元忠非常恐惧，上表请求解除自己的官职和爵位，让他回家当一个没有具体职守的闲散官员。
English: Wei Yuanzhong was very afraid, and he asked the upper table to relieve him of his official position and knighthood, and let him go home as an idle official with no specific duties.

古文：丙戌，上手敕听解仆射，以特进、齐公致仕，仍朝朔望。
现代文：丙戌，唐中宗亲笔书写敕命，同意魏元忠辞去仆射之职，以特进、齐公的身份退休，每月在初一、十五两个日子入朝参见。
English: According to records, Tang Zhongzong personally wrote the imperial edict and agreed to Wei Yuanzhong's resignation from the post of imperial aide-de-camp and his retirement as a special envoy and imperial equerry, and he entered the imperial court on the first day and the fifteenth day of every month.

古文：九月，丁卯，以吏部侍郎萧至忠为黄门侍郎，兵部尚书宗楚客为左卫将军，兼太府卿纪处讷为太府卿，并同中书门下三品；中书侍郎、同中书门下三品于惟谦罢为国子祭酒。
现代文：九月，丁卯，唐中宗任命吏部侍郎萧至忠为黄门侍郎，兵部尚书宗楚客为左卫将军，兼太府卿纪处讷为太府卿，三人都任同中书门下三品；中书侍郎、同中书门下三品于惟谦被免去相职，改国子祭酒。
English: In September of Dingwu, Tang Zhongzong appointed Xiao Zhizhong, the steward of the cadre department, as the steward of the Yellow Gate, Shang Shuzong, the general of the military department, as the general of the left guard, and Dafuqing, the secretary of discipline, as the secretary of Dafuqing. All three were appointed as the third grade of the same middle school; the steward of the middle school and the third grade of the same middle school were removed from the position and changed to the national son sacrifice wine.

古文：庚子，赦天下，改元。
现代文：庚子，唐中宗下诏大赦天下，改年号为景龙。
English: Geng Zi, who was pardoned by Emperor Taizong of Tang, changed his era name to Jinglong.

古文：宗楚客等引右卫郎将姚廷筠为御史中丞，使劾奏魏元忠，以为： 侯君集社稷元勋，及其谋反，太宗就群臣乞其命而不得，竟流涕斩之。
现代文：宗楚客等人举荐右卫郎将姚廷筠为御史中丞，指使他上奏疏弹劾魏元忠说： 侯君集是开国元勋，在他因谋反而即将被处死之际，太宗皇帝请求诸位大臣宽宥他的死罪，大臣们没有同意，终于挥泪将其斩首。
English: Zong Chuk and others recommended that the Right Guard should make Yao Tingtao the Grand Historian, and instruct him to report the impeachment of Wei Yuanzhong, saying: Hou Junji was the founding father of the country. When he was about to be executed for conspiracy, Emperor Taizong asked the ministers to pardon his capital crime. The ministers did not agree, and finally beheaded him in tears.

古文：其后房遗爱、薛万彻、齐王祐等为逆，虽复懿亲，皆从国法。
现代文：此后的房遗爱、薛万彻、齐王李犯上作乱，虽然都是皇亲国戚，但最终也被依法处死。
English: After that, Fusa's surviving loved ones, Xue Wancher and Qi Wang Li, were also executed according to the law, although they were all relatives of the emperor.

古文：元忠功不逮君集，身又非国戚，与李多祚等谋反，男入逆徒，是宜赤族污宫。
现代文：魏元忠功劳比不上侯君集，又不是皇亲国戚，他与李多祚等人阴谋造反，他的儿子魏升又亲身参加叛乱，这就应当被抄家灭门。
English: Wei Yuanzhong's achievements were not as great as those of the princes and princes, and he was not a relative of the emperor. He conspired with Li Duoxuan and others to rebel, and his son Wei Sheng personally participated in the rebellion. This should have led to his house being raided.

古文：但有朋党饰辞营救，以惑圣听，陛下仁恩，欲掩其过。
现代文：但有同党营救，为他百般粉饰辩解，迷惑陛下，陛下仁爱，也想掩盖他的罪行。
English: However, a comrade-in-arms came to his rescue and tried to whitewash and excuse him in various ways, confusing His Majesty, His Majesty's benevolence, and also trying to cover up his crimes.

古文：臣所以犯龙鳞、忤圣意者，正以事关宗社耳。 
现代文：现在臣之所以不惜冒触犯圣上旨意的危险请求陛下依法严惩魏元忠，是因为这件事关系到大唐的宗庙社稷呀。 
English: Now, the reason why the minister asked His Majesty to severely punish Wei Yuanzhong in accordance with the law, regardless of the risk of offending the sacred will, is because this matter is related to the Great Tang Dynasty's ancestral temple.

古文：上颇然之。
现代文：唐中宗认为他讲得很正确。
English: Taizong was quite impressed.

古文：元忠坐系大理，贬渠州司马。
现代文：于是魏元忠被关进大理寺监狱，并被贬为渠州司马。
English: As a result, Wei Yuanzhong was imprisoned in Dali Temple Prison and demoted to the status of Quzhou Sima.

古文：宗楚客令给事中冉祖雍奏言： 元忠既犯大逆，不应出佐渠州。 
现代文：宗楚客让给事中冉祖雍上奏说： 魏元忠既然已经犯有大逆之罪，就不应该到渠州担任州佐。 
English: Zong Chu's guest gave the matter to Ran Zuyong, who said: Since Wei Yuanzhong has committed the crime of high treason, he should not go to Quzhou to serve as a provincial deputy.

古文：杨再思、李峤亦赞之。
现代文：杨再思、李峤也跟着随声附和。
English: Yang Zaisi and Li Xi also joined in the chorus.

古文：上谓再思等曰： 元忠驱使日久，朕特矜容，制命已行，岂宜数改！
现代文：唐中宗对杨再思等人道： 魏元忠为朝廷效力多年，朕因而对他特意从轻发落，现在制命已经颁行，哪里能够屡次更改！
English: Tang Zhongzong to Yang Zhaisi and others: Wei Yuanzhong served the imperial court for many years, so I deliberately treated him lightly. Now that the order has been issued, where can it be changed repeatedly!

古文：轻重之权，应自朕出。卿等频奏，殊非朕意！ 
现代文：再说对魏元忠的处理是轻还是重，应当由朕自己来决定，你们屡次上奏请求严加惩处，严重违背了朕的旨意！ 
English: Furthermore, whether the treatment of Wei Yuanzhong is light or heavy should be decided by myself. Your repeated requests for severe punishment have seriously violated my will!

古文：再思等惶惧拜谢。
现代文：杨再思等听罢惶恐害怕，连忙向中宗跪拜谢罪。
English: Hearing this, Yang Zai Si panicked and got scared. He quickly knelt down to thank Zhong Zong.

古文：监察御史袁守一复表弹元忠曰： 重俊乃陛下之子，犹如昭宪；元忠非勋非戚，焉得独漏严刑！ 
现代文：监察御史袁守一又上表弹劾魏元忠说： 李重俊是陛下的儿子，陛下仍将他明正典刑；魏元忠既无大功勋又非皇亲国戚，为什么唯独他可以逍遥法外！ 
English: Yuan Shouyi, the inspector of imperial history, once again went to the table to impeach Wei Yuanzhong, saying: Li Chongjun is the son of His Majesty, and His Majesty still punished him; Wei Yuanzhong neither has great merits nor is a relative of the emperor, why is he the only one who can get away with it!

古文：甲辰，又贬元忠务川尉。
现代文：甲辰，唐中宗又将魏元忠贬为务川尉。
English: At the same time, Emperor Taizong of the Tang Dynasty demoted Wei Yuanzhong to the rank of Muxuan lieutenant.

古文：顷之，楚客又令袁守一奏言： 则天昔在三阳宫不豫，狄仁杰奏请陛下监国，元忠密奏以为不可，此则元忠怀逆日久，请加严诛！ 
现代文：过了不久，宗楚客又让袁守一上奏说： 当时则天太后在三阳宫患病，狄仁杰上奏请求让陛下以太子身份总揽朝政，魏元忠却秘密上奏认为不合适。这说明他很久以来一直对陛下怀有二心，请陛下对他处以严刑！ 
English: Not long after, Zong Chu's guest asked Yuan Shou to recite the following: At that time, Empress Dowager Tian was ill at Sanyang Palace. Di Renjie recited a request to allow His Majesty to take over the government as the Emperor's son, but Wei Yuanzhong secretly recited that it was not appropriate. This shows that he has been harboring a double-minded attitude toward His Majesty for a long time. I ask Your Majesty to punish him severely!

古文：上谓杨再思等曰： 以朕思之，人臣事主，必在一心；岂有主上小疾，遽请太子知事！
现代文：唐中宗对杨再思等人说： 朕自己觉得，作臣子的侍奉君主，必须一心一意，哪有君主刚刚有一点小病，就马上把太子请出来主持政务的呢！
English: Tang Zhongzong said to Yang Zaisi and others: I myself feel that as a courtier serving the monarch, I must be single-minded. Which monarch has just had a little illness, and immediately invited the prince to preside over government affairs!

古文：此乃仁杰欲树私恩，未见元忠有失。
现代文：这一定是狄仁杰想树立他自己的私恩，魏元忠阻止其事，没有什么过失。
English: It must be that Di Renjie wanted to establish his own personal favor, and Wei Yuanzhong stopped it. There is no fault.

古文：守一欲借前事以陷元忠，其可乎！ 
现代文：袁守一想借助以前的事情来陷害魏元忠，这怎么可以呢！ 
English: Yuan Shouyi wants to frame Wei Yuanzhong with the help of previous events, how can this be!

古文：楚客乃止。
现代文：宗楚客这才停止了陷害魏元忠的行动。
English: It was only then that Zong Chuk stopped the action of framing Wei Yuanzhong.

古文：元忠行至涪陵而卒。
现代文：魏元忠在被贬职后赴任的路上，死在涪陵。
English: Wei Yuanzhong died in Fuling on his way to work after being demoted.

古文：银青光禄大夫、上庸公、圣善、中天、西明三寺主慧范于东都作圣善寺，长乐坡作大像，府库为之虚耗。
现代文：银青光禄大夫、上庸公和圣善、中天、西明三寺住持慧范在东都修建圣善寺，又在长乐坡建造大佛像，官府储备由于这两项工程耗资巨大而空虚。
English: Dr. Yin Qing Guanglu, Shang Yong Gong and Sheng Zhen, Zhong Tian and Ximing three temple abbot Hui Fan built Sheng Zhen Temple in Dongdu, and built a large Buddha statue in Changlepo. The government reserve was empty due to the huge cost of these two projects.

古文：上及韦后皆重之，势倾内外，无敢指目者。
现代文：唐中宗和韦皇后都很器重慧范，因而他的权势极大，以至于朝廷内外大小官吏中没有人敢对他有丝毫非议。
English: Tang Zhongzong and Empress Wei were both highly intelligent, so his power was so great that no one in the court or among the officials dared to criticize him in the slightest.

古文：戊申，侍御史魏传弓发其奸赃四十馀万，请置极法。
现代文：戊申，侍御史魏传弓揭发出慧范贪赃四十余万，请求将他处以极刑。
English: Wushin, the attendant of Shi Wei Chuanyu, revealed that Hui Fan had embezzled more than 400,000 yuan and requested that he be sentenced to capital punishment.

古文：上欲宥之，传弓曰： 刑赏国之大事，陛下赏已妄加，岂宜刑所不及！ 
现代文：唐中宗打算宽宥慧范，魏传弓说： 刑罚与赏赐是国家的大事，陛下对慧范的赏赐已经属于妄给了，又怎么可以对他的罪行不施加任何惩罚呢！ 
English: Tang Zhongzong intended to pardon Hui Fan, while Wei Chuangyu said: "Punishment and reward are important matters of the state. Your majesty's reward to Hui Fan has already fallen into the category of being unreasonable, so how can you not impose any punishment on his crime?"

古文：上乃削黜慧范，放于家。
现代文：唐中宗只好免去他的职务，削夺他的爵位，将他放逐回家。
English: Tang Zhongzong had no choice but to relieve him of his post, strip him of his title, and banish him back home.

古文：宦官左监门大将军薛思简等有庞于安乐公主，纵暴不法，传弓奏请诛之，御史大夫窦从一惧，固止之。
现代文：宦官左监门大将军薛思简等人倚仗自己深得安乐公主的宠爱而暴虐放纵，不守法纪，魏传弓上奏请求将他们依法处死，御史大夫窦从一十分害怕，坚决制止魏传弓这样做。
English: General Xue Sijian, the eunuch of the Left Jailer's Gate, and others, who relied on the fact that they were deeply loved by Princess Anle, were tyrannical and indulgent, and did not abide by the law. Wei Chuanyu requested that they be put to death according to the law. Goshi Doctor Dou was afraid from the first minute, and resolutely stopped Wei Chuanyu from doing so.

古文：时宦官用事，从一为雍州刺史及御史大夫，误见讼者无须，必曲加承接。
现代文：当时宦官掌权，窦从一担任雍州刺史及御史大夫期间，每当发现诉讼人没有胡须常误以为是宦官，都要曲意逢迎。
English: At that time, eunuchs were in power. During Dou's tenure as Yongzhou chief historian and chief historian, whenever he found a litigant without a beard, he often mistook him for a eunuch.

古文：以杨再思为中书令，韦巨源、纪处讷并为侍中。
现代文：唐中宗任命杨再思为中书令，任命韦巨源、纪处讷两人为侍中。
English: Tang Zhongzong appointed Yang Zhaisi as the scribe, and appointed Wei Jiuyuan and Guizhongna as attendants.

古文：壬戌，改左、右羽林千骑为万骑。
现代文：壬戌，唐中宗下令将左、右羽林千骑兵改名为万骑兵。
English: At the same time, Tang Zhongzong ordered that the Left and Right Feather Forest Thousand Cavalrymen be renamed as Thousand Cavalrymen.

古文：冬，十月，丁丑，命左屯卫将军张仁愿充朔方道大总管，以击突厥。比至，虏已退，追击，大破之。
现代文：冬季，十月，丁丑，唐中宗任命左屯卫将军张仁愿为朔方道大总管，以进攻突厥；等张仁愿率部赶到时，突厥已经退走，张仁愿率军追击，将敌人打得大败。
English: In the winter, October, Dingwuxi, Tang Zhongzong appointed the General of the Left Tunwei, Zhang Renzhong, as the General Manager of Shuo Fang Road to attack the Turks; when Zhang Renzhong's party arrived, the Turks had already retreated, and Zhang Renzhong led the army to pursue and defeat the enemy.

古文：习艺馆内教苏安恒，矜高好奇，太子重俊之诛武三思也，安恒自言 此我之谋 。
现代文：习艺馆内教苏安恒，常自我夸耀，又好发奇言。太子李重俊诛杀武三思之后，苏安恒自己说： 这是我出的主意。 
English: Su Anheng, a teacher in the art school, often boasted about himself and was fond of making strange remarks. After thinking about Prince Li Chunjun's killing of Wu, Su Anheng himself said: This is my idea.

古文：太子败，或告之；戊寅，伏诛。
现代文：太子失败后，有人告发了苏安恒；戊寅，苏安恒被杀。
English: After the failure of the crown prince, someone denounced Su Anheng; in Wuyin, Su Anheng was killed.

古文：十二月，乙丑朔，日有食之。
现代文：十二月，乙丑朔，出现日食。
English: In December, the second lunar month, a solar eclipse occurs.

古文：是岁，上遣使者分道诣江、淮赎生。
现代文：这一年，唐中宗派遣使者分道到江、淮流域用钱物赎买鱼鳖用来放生。
English: In this year, Tang Zhongzong sent emissaries to the Jiang and Huai river basins to buy fish hooks with money and goods to release them.

古文：中书舍人房子李又上疏谏曰： 江南乡人采捕为业，鱼鳖之利，黎元所资。
现代文：中书舍人房子县人李上疏进谏道： 江南各州的百姓，一向以捕涝鱼鳖为业，而由此所得之利，也正是黎民百姓的生活来源。
English: Li Shangxo, a villager from the county of Zhongshu, who lives in the house, said: The people of all the states in the south of the Yangtze River have always been engaged in catching catfish, and the profits from this are also the source of livelihood for the people of Lai.

古文：虽云雨之私有沾于末类；而生成之惠未洽于平人。
现代文：虽然天子的私恩使不从事农的百姓受惠，但天子抚育人民的恩惠却不能遍及平民百姓。
English: Although the grace of the Son of Heaven benefited the people who were not engaged in agriculture, the grace of the Son of Heaven nurturing the people could not reach the common people.

古文：何则？
现代文：为什么这样说呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：江湖之饶，生育无限，府库之用，支供易殚。
现代文：江湖之多，生养的鱼鳖无限；而国家府库里的财物，支用易尽。
English: There are an infinite number of rivers and lakes, and an infinite number of fish ponds. However, the state treasury is easily depleted.

古文：费之若少，则所济何成！
现代文：假如官府用来赎买鱼鳖的钱物不多，那又能办得成什么事！
English: If the amount of money and goods used by the government to redeem the bait is not much, then what can be done!

古文：用之倘多，则常支有阙。
现代文：若用的钱物多，则国家的日常支出就会发生困难。
English: If more money and goods are used, the country's day-to-day expenditure will be difficult.

古文：在于拯物，岂若忧人！
现代文：与其拯救鱼鳖，不如照顾百姓的生活！
English: Rather than saving the fish, it is better to take care of the people's lives!

古文：且鬻生之徒，唯利斯视，钱刀日至，网罟年滋，施之一朝，营之百倍。
现代文：况且那些出卖鱼鳖的人所关心的只是利，只要钱天天到手，捕鱼的网就会一年比一年增多。陛下一时赎买鱼鳖放生，他们就会百倍地努力捕捞鱼鳖。
English: Moreover, those who sell the bait are only interested in profit. As long as they get money every day, the fishing nets will increase year by year. If you redeem the bait and release it, they will make a hundred times more efforts to catch the bait.

古文：未若回救赎之钱物，减贫无之徭赋，活国爱人，其福胜彼。 
现代文：陛下不如抽回那些用于放生的钱物，以此减轻贫苦百姓的赋税、徭役负担，这样做既能救助国家，又是真正爱护百姓，所得的福佑当超过赎买鱼鳖放生。 
English: It would be better for His Majesty to withdraw the money and goods used for the release of the fish, so as to reduce the burden of taxation and corvee service on the poor people. Doing so can not only save the country, but also truly love the people. The blessing of the income should exceed the redemption of the fish bait release.

