古文：邓芝字伯苗，义阳新野人，汉司徒禹之后也。
现代文：邓芝，字伯苗，是益阳郡新野县人，汉朝司徒邓禹的后人。
English: Deng Zhi, also known as Bo Miao, was a native of Nino County, Yiyang County, and a descendant of the Han Dynasty's Stu Deng Yu.

古文：汉末入蜀，未见知待。时益州从事张裕善相，芝往从之，裕谓芝曰： 君年过七十，位至大将军，封侯。 
现代文：汉代末年进入蜀地，当时没有人了解和任用他，当时益州从事张裕善于相面，邓芝前去请他看相，张裕对邓芝说： 您年过七十，之后将会位至大将军，封侯。 
English: At the end of the Han Dynasty, when he entered Shu, no one understood or appointed him. At that time, Zhang Yu, who was good at facial expressions, was engaged in Yizhou. Deng Zhi went to ask him to look at his face. Zhang Yu said to Deng Zhi: You are over seventy years old, and after that you will be a grand general and a feudal lord.

古文：芝闻巴西太守庞羲好士，往依焉。
现代文：邓芝得知巴西太守庞曦喜好贤士，就前去投靠他。
English: When Deng Zhi learned that Pang Xi, the governor of Brazil, liked the sage, he went to him for help.

古文：先主定益州，芝为郫邸阁督。
现代文：刘备平定益州后，邓芝担任郫邸阁督。
English: After Liu Bei subdued Dingyizhou, Deng Zhi served as the governor of the imperial court.

古文：先主出至郫，与语，大奇之，擢为郫令，迁广汉太守。
现代文：刘备出兵到郫县，与邓芝交谈，非常惊奇，提拔他为郫县县令，又升任为广汉太守。
English: Liu Bei sent troops to Jixian, talked with Deng Zhi, was very surprised, promoted him to the county magistrate of Jixian, and promoted him to the governor of Guanghan.

古文：所在清严有治绩，入为尚书。
现代文：邓芝所在的地方，清廉严整很有政绩，又入朝担任尚书。
English: In the place where Deng Zhi was located, the clean, honest, and rigorous system had a lot of political achievements, and he entered the imperial court to serve as a courtier.

古文：先主薨於永安。
现代文：刘备在永安去世。
English: Liu Bei died in Yongan.

古文：先是，吴王孙权请和，先主累遣宋玮、费祎等与相报答。
现代文：之前，吴王孙权请求讲和，刘备多次派遣宋玮、费祎等人相继去回复丞相诸葛亮。
English: Previously, Wu Wang Sun Quan requested to declare peace, and Liu Bei repeatedly sent Song Tao, Fei Yao and others to reply to the prime minister Zhuge Liang.

古文：丞相诸葛亮深虑权闻先主殂陨，恐有异计，未知所如。
现代文：丞相考虑到孙权得知刘备崩逝，担心他们有怀有二心，不知怎么处理。
English: Taking into account that Sun Quan learned of Liu Bei's death, the prime minister worried that they had second thoughts and did not know how to deal with it.

古文：芝见亮曰： 今主上幼弱，初在位，宜遣大使重申吴好。 
现代文：邓芝拜见诸葛亮说： 现在后主年幼，刚刚登基，应该派遣使者重新跟吴国交好。 
English: Deng Zhi paid a visit to Zhuge Liang and said: Now that the Empress Dowager is young and has just ascended to the throne, we should send an envoy to renew our friendship with the State of Wu.

古文：亮答之曰： 吾思之久矣，未得其人耳，今日始得之。 
现代文：诸葛亮回复说： 我考虑这件事很久了，只是找不到人罢了，现在才得到了。 
English: Zhuge Liang replied, "I've been thinking about this for a long time, but I can't find anyone. I just got it now."

古文：芝问其人为谁？
现代文：邓芝问这个人是谁？
English: Deng Zhi asked, "Who is this person?"

古文：亮曰： 即使君也。 
现代文：诸葛亮说： 就是你呀。 
English: Zhuge Liang said, "It's you."

古文：乃遣芝脩好於权。
现代文：于是派邓芝前去东吴与孙权交好。
English: So he sent Deng Zhi to Dongwu to make peace with Sun Quan.

古文：权果狐疑，不时见芝，芝乃自表请见权曰： 臣今来亦欲为吴，非但为蜀也。 权乃见之，语芝曰： 孤诚愿与蜀和亲，然恐蜀主幼弱，国小势偪，为魏所乘，不自保全，以此犹豫耳。 
现代文：孙权果然产生疑虑，没有及时接见邓芝，邓芝就自己上表请求拜见孙权说： 我现在来也是为了吴国，不只是为了蜀国。 孙权才接见他，对邓芝说： 我实在愿意与蜀国和亲，但是担心蜀国后主年幼，国力弱小而形势逼迫，被魏国乘势进攻，不能自我保全，所以才犹豫罢了。 
English: Sun Quan did indeed have misgivings. He did not receive Deng Zhi in time. Deng Zhi made his own request to see Sun Quan and said, "I have come now for the sake of the State of Wu, not just for the sake of the State of Shu." Sun Quan received him and said to Deng Zhi, "I really want to be close to the State of Shu, but I am worried that the empress of the State of Shu is young, the national strength is weak and the situation is being persecuted, and it is being attacked by the State of Wei, and I cannot protect myself, so I hesitated.

古文：芝对曰： 吴、蜀二国四州之地，大王命世之英，诸葛亮亦一时之杰也。蜀有重险之固，吴有三江之阻，合此二长，共为唇齿，进可并兼天下，退可鼎足而立，此理之自然也。
现代文：邓芝回答说： 吴蜀两国有四州之地，大王您是当世英杰，诸葛亮也是一时的豪杰，蜀国有重重天险的坚守，吴国有三江阻隔，联合这两个长处，共为唇齿，进攻就可以兼并天下，退守也可以鼎足而立，这是自然的道理。
English: Deng Zhi replied: The two countries of Wushu have four provinces. Your Majesty is a contemporary hero. Zhuge Liang is also a one-time hero. The State of Shu has persevered in the face of many natural perils. The State of Wushu is separated by three rivers. Combining these two strengths, they are a match made in heaven. If you attack, you can annex the whole world. If you retreat, you can stand on your own feet. This is a natural reason.

古文：大王今若委质於魏，魏必上望大王之入朝，下求太子之内侍，若不从命，则奉辞伐叛，蜀必顺流见可而进，如此，江南之地非复大王之有也。 
现代文：大王现在如果去投靠魏国，魏朝一定会要求您去入朝参见，也要求太子到朝内做人质，如果不从命，他们就有借口征讨叛乱，蜀国也会顺势出兵，这样江南之地就不再是大王能控制的了。 
English: If the great king now goes to the Wei state to seek help, the Wei dynasty will certainly ask you to go to the imperial court to see it, and also ask the prince to be a hostage in the imperial court. If they do not comply with the order, they will have an excuse to wage a rebellion, and Shu will also send troops, so the land south of the Yangtze River will no longer be under the control of the great king.

古文：权默然良久曰： 君言是也。 
现代文：孙权沉默了很久，说： 您说的很对。 
English: Sun Quan was silent for a long time and said, "You are quite right.

古文：遂自绝魏，与蜀连和，遣张温报聘於蜀。
现代文：于是与魏国断绝了联系，与蜀国联合，派张温出访蜀国。
English: As a result, he broke off ties with Wei, allied with Shu, and sent Zhang Wen to visit Shu.

古文：蜀复令芝重往，权谓芝曰： 若天下太平，二主分治，不亦乐乎！ 
现代文：蜀国又令邓芝前往东吴，孙权对邓芝说： 如果天下太平，两位主君分治天下不也很好吗？ 
English: Shu also ordered Deng Zhi to go to Dongwu. Sun Quan said to Deng Zhi: If the world is peaceful, wouldn't it be nice if two masters ruled the world?

古文：芝对曰： 夫天无二日，土无二王，如并魏之后，大王未深识天命者也，君各茂其德，臣各尽其忠，将提枹鼓，则战争方始耳。 权大笑曰： 君之诚款，乃当尔邪！ 
现代文：邓芝回答说： 天无二日国无二君，如果吞并魏朝之后，大王也不知道天命顾念的是谁，为君者就各自发扬自己的德行，臣子各自尽忠职守，身为将领就拿起其武器，战争这才开始。 孙权大笑说： 您确实很诚实！ 
English: Deng Zhi replied: There is no second day, there is no second prince in the country, if after the annexation of the Wei Dynasty, the great king does not know who the destiny is concerned about, for the prince, they will each carry out their own virtues, the courtiers will each perform their duties faithfully, as a general, they will pick up their weapons, and the war will begin. Sun Quan laughed loudly and said: You are indeed very honest!

古文：权与亮书曰： 丁厷掞张，阴化不尽；和合二国，唯有邓芝。 
现代文：孙权在给诸葛亮的信中说： 丁厷浅薄阴险，不够诚实，使两国交好只有邓芝可以。 
English: In his letter to Zhuge Liang, Sun Quan said: Ding Xi is shallow, insidious, and not honest enough. Only Deng Zhi can make the two countries friendly.

古文：及亮北住汉中，以芝为中监军、扬武将军。
现代文：等到诸葛亮往北驻守汉中，任命邓芝为中监军、扬武将军。
English: When Zhuge Liang went north to garrison Hanzhong, he appointed Deng Zhi as the Central Supervisor and General Yang Wu.

古文：亮卒，迁前军师前将军，领衮州刺史，封阳武亭侯，顷之为督江州。
现代文：诸葛亮去世后，升任他为前军师前将军，兼任衮州刺史，封为阳武亭侯，不久又都领江州。
English: After the death of Zhuge Liang, he was promoted to be the former general of the former military division, concurrently served as the governor of Zhangzhou, was named Yangwuting, and soon became the governor of Jiangzhou.

古文：权数与芝相闻，馈遗优渥。
现代文：孙权多次跟邓芝互相慰问，他给予邓芝的馈赠非常优厚。
English: Sun Quan repeatedly exchanged condolences with Deng Zhi, and the gifts he gave to Deng Zhi were very generous.

古文：延熙六年，就迁为车骑将军，后假节。
现代文：延熙六年，邓芝就地被提拔为车骑将军，后来又持符节。
English: In the sixth year of Yanxi, Deng Zhi was promoted to General of Cavalry and Cavalry on the spot, and later he held the Fu Festival.

古文：十一年，涪陵国人杀都尉反叛，芝率军征讨，即枭其渠帅，百姓安堵，十四年卒。
现代文：延熙十一年，涪陵国有人杀害都尉反叛，邓芝率军征讨，随即将叛军首领枭首，百姓安居如故，延熙十四年邓芝去世。
English: In the eleventh year of Yanxi, someone in Fuling Province killed a rebel captain. Deng Zhi led the army to subjugate the rebels, and then killed the rebel leader. The people lived in peace. Deng Zhi died in the fourteenth year of Yanxi.

古文：芝为将军二十馀年，赏罚明断，善恤卒伍。
现代文：邓芝担任将军二十多年，赏罚分明，体恤士兵。
English: Deng Zhi served as a general for more than 20 years, with clear rewards and punishments, and sympathized with soldiers.

古文：身之衣食资仰於官，不苟素俭，然终不治私产，妻子不免饥寒，死之日家无馀财。
现代文：他的衣食都是由官府提供，生活朴素节俭，终身没有置办产业，家属也没有免于饥寒，他去世时家中没有多余的财产。
English: His food and clothing were provided by the government, his life was simple and frugal, he never bought property, his family members were not spared from hunger and cold, and when he died, there was no extra property in the family.

古文：性刚简，不饰意气，不得士类之和。
现代文：他正直，性情刚烈简洁，不掩饰自己的情绪，所以和士人们关系不好。
English: He is honest, has a strong and concise temperament, and does not hide his emotions, so he does not have a good relationship with the scholars.

古文：於时人少所敬贵，唯器异姜维云。
现代文：当时有很少有受他敬重的，他只看重姜维。
English: At that time, there were very few people he respected. He only valued Jiang Wei.

古文：子良，袭爵，景耀中为尚书左选郎，晋朝广汉太守。
现代文：邓芝的儿子邓良承袭爵位，景耀年间担任尚书左选郎，晋朝时担任广汉太守。
English: Deng Zhi's son, Deng Liang, inherited the title. During the reign of Emperor Jingyao, Deng Liang served as Shang Shuxi's left-hand man, and during the reign of Emperor Jin, Deng Liang served as the governor of Guanghan.

古文：张翼字伯恭，犍为武阳人也。
现代文：张翼，字伯恭，犍为郡武阳县人。
English: Zhang Ying, also known as Bo Qiong, is a native of Wuyang County.

古文：高祖父司空浩，曾祖父广陵太守纲，皆有名迹。
现代文：他的高祖父张浩，曾担任过汉朝的司空，曾祖父是广陵太守张纲，都很有名望。
English: His great-great-grandfather Zhang Hao, who once served as the Han Dynasty's Sikuo, and his great-grandfather Zhang Gang, the governor of Guangling, were both famous.

古文：先主定益州，领牧，翼为书佐。
现代文：刘备平定益州后，兼任益州牧，张翼作为书佐。
English: After Liu Bei had subdued Yizhou, he also served as the herdsman of Yizhou, with Zhang Ying as his assistant.

古文：建安末，举孝廉，为江阳长，徙涪陵令，迁梓潼太守，累迁至广汉、蜀郡太守。
现代文：建安末年，被推举为孝廉，担任江阳县县长，又转任为涪陵县令，升任为梓潼太守，多次升官到广汉、蜀郡太守。
English: At the end of the Jian'an era, he was promoted to Xiaolian, served as Jiangyang County Governor, and was transferred to Fuling County, promoted to Zizhi County Governor, and promoted to Guanghan and Shu County Governor several times.

古文：建兴九年，为庲降都督、绥南中郎将。
现代文：建兴九年，他担任来降都督、绥南中郎将。
English: In the ninth year of Jianxing, he served as the governor of the capital and the general of the Southern Song Dynasty.

古文：翼性持法严，不得殊俗之欢心。
现代文：张翼性情执法严明，得不到当地少数民族的欢心。
English: Zhang Ying's strict enforcement of the law did not win the favor of the local ethnic minorities.

古文：耆率刘胄背叛作乱，翼举兵讨胄。
现代文：当地首领刘昼背叛蜀国作乱，商议出兵征讨他。
English: The local leader Liu Rong betrayed the State of Shu and started a riot, and they discussed sending troops to recruit him.

古文：胄未破，会被徵当还，群下咸以为宜便驰骑即罪，翼曰： 不然。吾以蛮夷蠢动，不称职故还耳，然代人未至，吾方临战场，当运粮积谷，为灭贼之资，岂可以黜退之故而废公家之务乎？ 於是统摄不懈，代到乃发。
现代文：刘胄没有被攻破，适逢张翼征召回朝，部下都认为他应该快马赶回朝中谢罪，张翼说： 不可，我因为少数民族叛乱，没有尽忠职守，才被召回罢了，但是接替我的人还没到，我正面临着战场，应当储备粮草，作为攻破敌人的资源，又怎么能因为撤职的原因而耽误了国家的大事呢？ 于是统帅军队没有松懈，等到接替人来到才出发。
English: Liu Bei had not been defeated, when Zhang Ying was called back to the North, his subordinates all thought that he should hurry back to the North to apologize, Zhang Ying said: No, I was only recalled because of the minority rebellion and did not perform my duties faithfully, but my replacement has not yet arrived, I am facing the battlefield, I should reserve grain and grass as a resource for defeating the enemy, and how can I delay the important affairs of the country because of the reason for dismissal? So the commander of the army did not slacken, and did not leave until the replacement came.

古文：马忠因其成基以破殄胄，丞相亮闻而善之。
现代文：马忠后来依靠他的物资攻破了刘昼，丞相诸葛亮得知后很赞扬张翼。
English: Later, Ma Zhong relied on his materials to defeat Liu Rong, and the prime minister Zhuge Liang praised Zhang Ying after learning about it.

古文：亮出武功，以翼为前军都督，领扶风太守。
现代文：诸葛亮出兵武功，让张翼作为前军都督，兼任扶风太守。
English: Zhuge Liang displayed military prowess, allowing Zhang Ying, as the former military governor, to also serve as the governor of Fufeng.

古文：亮卒，拜前领军，追论讨刘胄功，赐爵关内侯。
现代文：诸葛亮去世后，张翼被任命为前领军，追溯征讨刘胄的功劳，被赐爵为关内侯。
English: After the death of Zhuge Liang, Zhang Ying was appointed as the former leader of the army, retrospectively solicited the merits of Liu Ye, and was given the title of Guan Nei Hou.

古文：延熙元年，入为尚书，稍迁督建威，假节，进封都亭侯，征西大将军。
现代文：延熙元年，张翼入朝担任尚书，渐渐升迁为都领建威，持符节，进封爵位为都亭侯、征西大将军。
English: In the first year of the Yanxi Dynasty, Zhang Ying entered the imperial court to serve as Shang Shu, and was gradually promoted to the position of the capital leader, holding the title of Fu Jie, and was awarded the title of the prince of the capital and the general of the Western Expedition.

古文：十八年，与卫将军姜维俱还成都。
现代文：延熙十八年，张翼和卫将军姜维一起返回成都。
English: In the 18th year of Yanxi, Zhang Ying and Wei general Jiang Wei returned to Chengdu together.

古文：维议复出军，唯翼廷争，以为国小民劳，不宜黩武。
现代文：姜维建议再次出兵，只有张翼在庭上争论，认为国家弱小而百姓疲敝，不应该穷兵黩武。
English: Jiang Wei proposed to send troops again, only Zhang Ying argued in court, arguing that the country is weak and the people are tired, and should not fight.

古文：维不听，将翼等行，进翼位镇南大将军。
现代文：姜维不听，率领张翼等人出征，升任张翼为镇南大将军。
English: Jiang Wei did not listen, and led Zhang Ying and others to go to war. Zhang Ying was promoted to Zhenan Grand General.

古文：维至狄道，大破魏雍州刺史王经，经众死於洮水者以万计。
现代文：姜维率兵到了狄道，攻破魏朝雍州刺史王经，王经的部众死在洮水中的士兵数以万计。
English: Jiang Wei led the troops to Dido, and broke through the Wei Dynasty's attack on the state of Yongzhou. Tens of thousands of soldiers died in the flood.

古文：翼曰： 可止矣，不宜复进，进或毁此大功。 
现代文：张翼说： 可以停下了，不应再继续前进，前进可能会毁了这样的功劳。 
English: Zhang Ying said: It is possible to stop, it is not necessary to continue moving forward, moving forward may ruin such a merit.

古文：维大怒。曰： 为蛇画足。 
现代文：姜维大怒说： 画蛇添足。 
English: Jiang Wei said angrily, "Painting snakes and adding feet.

古文：维竟围经於狄道，城不能克。
现代文：姜维最终在狄道将王经包围，狄道城不能攻克。
English: Jiang Wei eventually encircled Wang Jing in Dido, and the city of Dido could not be conquered.

古文：自翼建异论，维心与翼不善，然常牵率同行，翼亦不得已而往。
现代文：自从张翼提出出兵的反对意见，姜维心中就对张翼很不满意，但是经常带着他一同出行，张翼也是不得已而前往。
English: Ever since Zhang Ying raised his objection to the dispatch of troops, Jiang Wei has been very dissatisfied with Zhang Ying in his heart, but he often travels with him, and Zhang Ying has no choice but to go.

古文：景耀二年，迁左车骑将军，领冀州刺史。
现代文：景耀二年，张翼升任为左车骑将军，兼任冀州刺史。
English: In the second year of Jingyao, Zhang Ying was promoted to the left chariot cavalry general, and also served as the historian of Jizhou.

古文：六年，与维咸在剑阁，共诣降锺会于涪。
现代文：景耀六年，张翼和姜维都在剑阁，一起到涪县去向钟会投降。
English: In the sixth year of Jingyao, Zhang Ying and Jiang Wei were both in Jiange, and together they went to Handan County to surrender to the Bell Association.

古文：明年正月，随会至成都，为乱兵所杀。
现代文：第二年正月，跟随钟会到了成都，被乱兵杀害。
English: In the first month of the second year, he followed the bell association to Chengdu and was killed by the soldiers.

古文：宗预字德艳，南阳安众人也。
现代文：宗预，字德艳，南阳郡安众人。
English: Zong Yueh, Zi Deyan, Nanyang County An everyone.

古文：建安中，随张飞入蜀。
现代文：建安年间，跟随张飞进入蜀地。
English: During the Jianan era, he followed Zhang Fei into Shu.

古文：建兴初，丞相亮以为主簿，迁参军右中郎将。
现代文：建兴初年，丞相诸葛亮任用他为主簿，又升任为参军右中郎将。
English: In the first year of Jianxing, the chancellor Zhuge Liang appointed him as the main book, and he was promoted to the general of the right middle rank.

古文：及亮卒，吴虑魏或承衰取蜀，增巴丘守兵万人，一欲以为救援，二欲以事分割也。
现代文：等到诸葛亮去世，吴国考虑到魏国可能会趁着蜀国衰微而攻取，就在巴丘增加守兵一万多人，一是想要作为救援，二也想要和魏国分割蜀国土地。
English: After Zhuge Liang's death, the State of Wu, considering that the State of Wei might take advantage of the decline of the State of Shu and invade it, increased the number of guards at Bachu by more than ten thousand. On the one hand, they wanted to act as a rescue, and on the other hand, they wanted to divide the land of Shu with the State of Wei.

古文：蜀闻之，亦益永安之守，以防非常。
现代文：蜀国得知后也增加了永安的防守，以防备非常之事。
English: After learning of this, Shu Province also increased the defense of Yongan in order to be prepared for emergencies.

古文：预将命使吴，孙权问预曰： 东之与西，譬犹一家，而闻西更增白帝之守，何也？ 
现代文：宗预派人出使吴国，孙权问宗预说： 东面的吴国和蜀国就像一家，而我听说你们增加了白帝城的守卫，为什么呢？ 
English: Zong Yu sent an envoy to Wu. Sun Quan asked Zong Yu, "Wu and Shu in the east are like a family, and I heard that you have increased the number of guards at Baidicheng. Why?

古文：预对曰： 臣以为东益巴丘之戍，西增白帝之守，皆事势宜然，俱不足以相问也。 
现代文：宗预回答说： 我认为在东面增添巴丘的守卫，西蜀才增加白帝城的守卫，这都是事情和形势应该这样，不值得过问。 
English: Zong Yu replied: I think that the guards of Bachu were added in the east, and the guards of Baidicheng were added in the west. These are all things and the situation should be like this, and it is not worth asking.

古文：权大笑，嘉其抗直，甚爱待之，见敬亚於邓芝、费祎。
现代文：孙权大笑，赞赏他的耿直，对他特别礼待，他在东吴所受到的敬重和礼遇仅次于邓芝和费祎。
English: Sun Quan laughed loudly, appreciated his straightforwardness, and treated him with special courtesy. The respect and courtesy he received in East Wu was second only to Deng Zhi and Fei Yao.

古文：迁为侍中，徙尚书。
现代文：后来宗预被提升为侍中，调任尚书。
English: Later, Sohyo was promoted to Samurai Junior Officer and transferred to Shosho.

古文：延熙十年，为屯骑校尉。
现代文：延熙十年，宗裕担任屯骑校尉。
English: In the tenth year of Yanxi, Zongyu served as a cadet.

古文：时车骑将军邓芝自江州还，来朝，谓预曰： 礼，六十不服戎，而卿甫受兵，何也？ 
现代文：当时车骑将军邓芝从江州回朝，前来朝见，对宗预说： 周礼中规定六十岁不出兵打仗，而您刚接受带兵打仗的任命，为什么呢？ 
English: At that time, the cavalry general Deng Zhi returned to the DPRK from Jiangzhou and came to see the emperor. He said to the emperor: According to the weekly ritual, soldiers should not fight at the age of sixty, but you have just accepted the appointment of leading soldiers to fight. Why?

古文：预答曰： 卿七十不还兵，我六十何为不受邪？ 
现代文：宗预说： 您已经七十却没有率兵回朝，我六十岁为什么不能接受呢？ 
English: Zong Yu said, "You are already seventy years old, yet you have not returned to the North with an army. Why can't I, who am sixty years old, accept this?"

古文：芝性刚简，自大将军费祎等皆避下之，而预独不为屈。
现代文：邓之性情高傲，从大将军费祎等人，都回避他的傲气，只有宗预不屈服。
English: Deng's disposition was haughty, and everyone from the great general Fei Yao and others shunned his arrogance, only Zong Xuan refused to give in.

古文：预复东聘吴，孙权捉预手，涕泣而别曰： 君每衔命结二国之好。今君年长，孤亦衰老，恐不复相见！ 
现代文：宗预再次出使东吴，回国时，孙权抓着宗预的手流泪告别说： 您总是背负使命来结交两国友好关系，现在你年长，我也已经衰老，恐怕不能相见了。 
English: When he returned to China, Sun Quan held Zong Yu's hand and bade him farewell with tears, saying, "You have always shouldered the mission of establishing friendly relations between the two countries. Now that you are older, and I am also getting old, I am afraid we will not be able to meet."

古文：遗预大珠一斛，乃还。
现代文：赠送给宗预一斛大珍珠才返回。
English: He only returned after presenting a large pearl to Zong Yu.

古文：迁后将军，督永安，就拜征西大将军，赐爵关内侯。
现代文：后来宗预升为后将军，都督永安，就地被封为征西大将军，赐爵为关内侯。
English: Later, Zong was pre-promoted to the post of general, and Yongan, the governor of the capital, was named the general of the Western Expedition on the spot, and he was given a peerage as the lord of Guanai.

古文：景耀元年，以疾徵还成都。后为镇军大将军，领兖州刺史。
现代文：景耀元年，宗预因病被征召返回成都，后来担任镇军大将军，兼任衮州刺史。
English: In the first year of Jingyao, Zong Yue was called back to Chengdu due to illness, and later served as the general of the town army, and also served as the chief historian of Zhangzhou.

古文：时都护诸葛瞻初统朝事，廖化过预，欲与预共诣瞻许。
现代文：当时都护诸葛瞻统领朝中政事，廖化去拜访宗预，想和他一起去拜见诸葛瞻。
English: At that time, Zhuge Zhan, the tutelary of Zhuge Zhan, led the political affairs of the dynasty. Liao Hua went to visit Zong Yu and wanted to go with him to see Zhuge Zhan.

古文：预曰： 吾等年逾七十，所窃已过，但少一死耳，何求於年少辈而屑屑造门邪？ 
现代文：宗预说： 我们都已经年过七十了，超过自己所认为的年纪，现在只少一死了，有什么要向年少之辈请求而小心翼翼的登门拜访呢？ 
English: Zong Yueh said: We are all over seventy years old, older than we think, and now we are only one death away. What should we ask the younger generation and carefully visit their homes?

古文：遂不往。
现代文：于是没有前往。
English: So they didn't go.

古文：廖化字元俭，本名淳，襄阳人也。
现代文：廖化字元俭，本名廖成，襄阳人。
English: Liao Hua character Yuan Jian, real name Liao Cheng, from Xiangyang.

古文：为前将军关羽主簿，羽败，属吴。
现代文：他是前将军关羽的主簿，关羽战败后，他归附东吴。
English: He was the master of the former general Guan Yu. After Guan Yu's defeat, he was attached to Dongwu.

古文：思归先主，乃诈死，时人谓为信然，因携持老母昼夜西行。
现代文：廖化心中想着归附刘备，就诈死，当时的人都相信了，他就带着母亲昼夜西行。
English: In his heart, Liao Hua wanted to join Liu Bei, so he cheated death. People at the time believed him, and he went west with his mother day and night.

古文：会先主东征，遇於秭归。
现代文：适逢刘备东征，他在秭归和廖化相遇。
English: It coincided with Liu Bei's eastward expedition, and he met Lu Gui and Liao Hua.

古文：先主大悦，以化为宜都太守。
现代文：刘备大悦，让廖化担任宜州太守。
English: Liu Bei was greatly pleased and let Liao Hua serve as the governor of Yizhou.

古文：先主薨，为丞相参军，后为督广武，稍迁至右车骑将军，假节，领并州刺史，封中乡侯，以果烈称。
现代文：刘备去世后，他担任丞相参军，后来为广武都督，渐渐升迁到右车骑将军，持符节，兼任并州刺史，封为中乡侯，以果敢刚烈著称。
English: After Liu Bei's death, he served as the prime minister to join the army, and later as the governor of Guangwu, gradually promoted to the right chariot and cavalry general, holding the sign section, concurrently serving as the governor of the state, and was awarded the title of Zhongxiang Hou. He was famous for his courage and bravery.

古文：官位与张翼齐，而在宗预之右。
现代文：廖化的官职与张翼相等，而在宗预之上。
English: Liao's official position was equal to Zhang Ying's, but higher than that of Zong Yu.

古文：咸熙元年春，化、预俱内徙洛阳，道病卒。
现代文：咸熙元年春，廖化、宗预都迁到洛阳，在路上就病逝了。
English: In the spring of 1861, Liao Hua and Zong Yu both moved to Luoyang and died of illness on the way.

古文：杨戏字文然，犍为武阳人也。
现代文：杨戏，字文然，犍为郡武阳县人。
English: Yang Cai, the characters Wenran and Zou are from Wuyang County.

古文：少与巴西程祁公弘、巴郡杨汰季儒、蜀郡张表伯达并知名。
现代文：年少时与巴西郡的程祈字公弘，巴郡人杨汰字季儒，蜀郡人张表字伯达一同出名。
English: When he was young, he was famous with Cheng Qi Zi Gonghong from Brazil County, Yang Ta Zi Ji Ru from Ba County, and Zhang Biao Zi Boda from Shu County.

古文：戏每推祁以为冠首，丞相亮深识之。
现代文：杨戏经常认为程祈是他们这群人中的首位，丞相诸葛亮很赏识他。
English: Yang Xiu often thought that Cheng Qi was the first among this group of people, and Prime Minister Zhuge Liang appreciated him very much.

古文：戏年二十馀，从州书佐为督军从事，职典刑狱，论法决疑，号为平当，府辟为属主簿。
现代文：杨戏二十岁时，跟随州中的书佐担任督军从事，掌管刑狱之事，按律法解决疑难案件，人人都称赞他处置公允，州府征召他为主簿。
English: At the age of twenty, Yang Ying served as the inspector of the army, took charge of the prison affairs, and solved difficult cases according to the law. Everyone praised his fair treatment, and the state government called him to be the chief bookkeeper.

古文：亮卒，为尚书右选部郎，刺史蒋琬请为治中从事史。
现代文：诸葛亮去世后，杨戏担任尚书右选部郎，刺史蒋琬请任他为治中从事史。
English: After Zhuge Liang's death, Yang Xiu served as Shang Shuxu's right-hand man, and Jiang Xi asked him to serve as the middle-ranking official in charge of history.

古文：琬以大将军开府，又辟为东曹掾，迁南中郎参军，副贰庲降都督，领建宁太守。
现代文：蒋琬以大将军的身份建立府衙，又征召杨戏为东曹掾，升任为南中郎将参军，是来降都督的副将，兼任建宁太守。
English: Chiang Kai-shek established the prefectural government with the status of a general, and conscripted Yang Xiu as the Eastern Cao Pi, promoted him to the position of the Southern Vice Admiral to join the army, he was the vice admiral of the deposed governor, and also served as the governor of Jianning.

古文：以疾徵还成都，拜护军监军，出领梓潼太守，入为射声校尉，所在清约不烦。
现代文：杨戏因为生病被征召返回成都，受命为护军将军，又出京兼任梓潼太守，入朝担任射声校尉，他所在的地方，政事都清明简约不繁琐。
English: Because of his illness, Yang Xiu was called back to Chengdu, and was appointed as the general of the escort. He also went to Beijing to serve as the governor of Zizhou, and entered the imperial court as the lieutenant of Yixing. Where he was, the government affairs were clear, simple and not complicated.

古文：延熙二十年，随大将军姜维出军至芒水。
现代文：延熙二十年，杨戏跟随大将军姜维出征倒到芒水。
English: In the 20th year of Yanxi, Yang Xiu followed the general Jiang Wei on a military expedition to Mangshui.

古文：戏素心不服维，酒后言笑，每有傲弄之辞。
现代文：杨戏心中向来不服姜维，酒后谈笑经常有傲慢戏弄之词。
English: Yang Ye's heart has always been dissatisfied with Jiang Wei, and there are often words of arrogance and teasing in their conversations after drinking.

古文：维外宽内忌，意不能堪，军还，有司承旨奏戏，免为庶人。
现代文：姜维外表宽和内心记恨，心中不能忍受，大军返回后，有关官员奉旨弹劾杨戏，杨戏被免为庶人。
English: Jiang Wei, outwardly broad and inwardly resentful, could not bear it in his heart. After the return of the army, the relevant officials ordered the impeachment of Yang Xue, and Yang Xue was dismissed as a commoner.

古文：后景耀四年卒。
现代文：后来在景耀四年去世。
English: He died four years later in Jingyao.

古文：戏性虽简惰省略，未尝以甘言加人，过情接物。
现代文：杨系性情简薄懒惰不喜装饰，对他人没有好话，与他人交往也没有阿谀奉承。
English: Yang people are simple, lazy and do not like decoration. They do not have kind words for others, nor do they flatter others in their interactions.

古文：书符指事，希有盈纸。
现代文：他的书信文字命令等很少有写满一张纸的。
English: His letters, written orders, etc. rarely fill a sheet of paper.

古文：然笃於旧故，居诚存厚。
现代文：但他对于朋友的感情就很坚定，非常的忠诚厚道。
English: But his feelings for his friend are very firm, very loyal and kind.

古文：与巴西韩俨、黎韬童幼相亲厚，后俨痼疾废顿，韬无行见捐，戏经纪振恤，恩好如初。
现代文：他与巴西人韩俨、黎韬从小就十分亲厚，后来韩俨因病没有被重用，黎韬因为品行不端而被免职，杨旭经常帮他们经营产业，赈济他们的生活，他们的交情友好如初。
English: He has been very close to the Brazilians Han Xuan and Li Xuan since childhood. Later, Han Xuan was not re-employed due to illness, and Li Xuan was dismissed for misconduct. Yang Xu often helps them run their businesses and make their lives easier. Their friendship is as good as ever.

古文：又时人谓谯周无当世才，少归敬者，唯戏重之，尝称曰： 吾等后世，终自不如此长儿也。 
现代文：当时又有人说谯周没有济世的才干，很少有人尊敬他，只有杨戏很敬重他，曾经说： 我们这些后辈，终究不如这个大个子。 
English: At that time, it was also said that Hao Zhou did not have the ability to make a living, few people respected him, only Yang Xiu respected him. He once said: We, the younger generation, are ultimately not as good as this big man.

古文：有识以此贵戏。
现代文：有见识的人都因为这件事而看重杨戏。
English: People with insight value Yang play because of this matter.

古文：张表有威仪风观，始名位与戏齐，后至尚书，督庲降后将军，先戏没。
现代文：张表很有威仪风度，刚开始时，名望地位与杨戏相同，后来官至尚书，督领来降后将军，在杨戏之前去世。
English: Zhang Biao had a very dignified demeanor. At the beginning, his fame status was the same as that of Yang Xiu. Later, he became a high-ranking official and was promoted to the rank of general. He died before Yang Xiu.

古文：祁、汰各早死。
现代文：程祈和杨汰都早已去世了。
English: Cheng Qi and Yang Ta have both passed away long ago.

古文：戏以延熙四年著季汉辅臣赞，其所颂述，今多载于蜀书，是以记之於左。
现代文：杨戏在延熙四年撰写了《季汉辅臣赞》，其中所称述赞颂的人，现在大多都记载在蜀书中，所以这些都记载在前面。
English: In the fourth year of Yanxi, Yang Xiu wrote "The Praise of Ji Han, the Assistant Minister," and most of the people mentioned in the praise are now recorded in the Shu Shu, so these are recorded in the front.

古文：自此之后卒者，则不追谥，故或有应见称纪而不在乎篇者也。
现代文：从那以后去世的就没有追加谥号，所以其中的人应该加以记叙，而不在这一书中。
English: There are no additional surnames for those who have died since then, so some of them should be described, but not in this book.

古文：其戏之所赞而今不作传者，余皆注疏本末於其辞下，可以觕知其仿佛云尔。
现代文：杨戏对他们有赞颂，而现在没有做传的，我都在这些文字下就写了本末，可以粗略的了解这些人的事迹。
English: Yang play has a eulogy for them, and now there is no biography, I have written the basics under these words, you can roughly understand the deeds of these people.

古文：昔文王歌德，武王歌兴，夫命世之主，树身行道，非唯一时，亦由开基植绪，光于来世者也。
现代文：过去周文王歌颂德行，周武王称赞兴盛，承天受命的主君立身行道，不是只在一时间，也是为了开创历代延续的基业，在来世得以光大。
English: In the past, King Zhou Wen sang the praises of virtue, King Zhou Wu praised prosperity, and the lord who received the order of heaven stood on the road, not only for a time, but also to create a foundation that would continue through the ages, and to be glorified in the afterlife.

古文：自我中汉之末，王纲弃柄，雄豪并起，役殷难结，生人涂地。
现代文：从我中汉末年，朝纲废弛，天下群雄并起，劳役繁重，生灵涂炭。
English: From the end of the Han Dynasty in the Middle Ages, the imperial family was weak and wasteful, the world's great powers were rising at the same time, labor was heavy, and people were living in squalor.

古文：於是世主感而虑之，初自燕、代则仁声洽著，行自齐、鲁则英风播流，寄业荆、郢则臣主归心，顾援吴、越则贤愚赖风，奋威巴、蜀则万里肃震，厉师庸、汉则元寇敛迹，故能承高祖之始兆，复皇汉之宗祀也。
现代文：所以先帝感慨而忧虑，当初在燕、代时便有很好的德行名声，到了齐鲁之地就名声远扬，寄住在荆州郢州时，君臣同心，联合吴国越国时贤人和愚陋之人都望风归附，在巴蜀之地征战，万里肃清，出兵庸汉时敌寇就消声销声匿迹，所以能继承高祖皇帝开创的基业，恢复刘汉皇朝的宗庙祭祀。
English: Therefore, the former emperor was moved and worried. He had a good reputation for virtue in the Yan and Zhu dynasties. When he came to the land of Qilu, his reputation was far-reaching. When he stayed in Bozhou, Jing Province, the monarchs and ministers were of the same mind. When he united the Wu and Yue Dynasties, the wise men and the foolish people all followed the wind. When he went to fight in the land of Bashu, he cleared thousands of miles. When he sent troops to the Han Dynasty, the enemy crows disappeared, so he could inherit the foundation created by Emperor Gao Zu and restore the ancestral temple worship of the Liu Han Dynasty.

古文：──赞董幼宰安远强志，允休允烈，轻财果壮，当难不惑，以少御多，殊方保业。
现代文：但是艰险凶徒阴险残暴，上天的惩罚还未降下，就像武王在孟津班师回朝，还是又要在鸣条再次出征。但人的寿命有限，无法预料。虽然天下已经统一，万国来朝，当时天下豪杰，扶持朝政，是明德之主所招致的，英才济济，实在是值得一观。
English: However, the perilous villains are insidious and cruel, and the punishment of heaven has not yet come down. Just as King Wu returned to the dynasty in Mengjin, he still has to go to war again in Mingtai. However, human life is limited and cannot be predicted. Although the world has been unified and all nations have come to the dynasty, at that time, the heroes of the world, supporting the dynasty, were invited by the master of wisdom and virtue, and their talents were abundant. It is really worth seeing.

古文：──赞邓孔山
现代文：于是将他们的风范一同记叙，以流传后世。
English: Therefore, their manners were recorded together to be passed down to future generations.

古文：孔山名方，南郡人也。
现代文：邓孔山，名方，南郡人。
English: Deng Kongshan, from Nafang, a native of Nan County.

古文：以荆州从事随先主入蜀。蜀既定，为犍为属国都尉，因易郡名，为朱提太守，选为安远将军、庲降都督，住南昌县。
现代文：以荆州从事的身份跟随刘备进入蜀地，蜀地平定以后，担任犍为属国的都尉，因为改换了郡名称，又改为朱提太守，被选为安远将军、来降都督，驻守南昌县。
English: He followed Liu Bei into Shu as a person engaged in Jingzhou. After Shu was settled, he served as the captain of the state of Shu. Because the name of the county was changed, he was also changed to the governor of Jutian. He was elected as the general of Anyuan and the governor of the capital, stationed in Nanchang County.

古文：──赞费宾伯宾伯名观，江夏鄳人也。
现代文：他在章武二年去世，因失去了他的行事记录，所以没有做传。费宾伯，名观，江夏郡杨县人。
English: He died in the second year of Zhangwu, and because of the loss of his records, there was no biography.Febinbo, a famous person, from Yang County, Jiangxia County.

古文：刘璋母，观之族姑，璋又以女妻观。
现代文：刘璋的母亲是费观的族中的姑姑，刘璋又将女儿嫁给费观。
English: Liu Yao's mother was Feiguan's aunt, and Liu Yao married his daughter to Feiguan.

古文：观建安十八年参李严军，拒先主於绵竹，与严俱降，先主既定益州，拜为裨将军，后为巴郡太守、江州都督，建兴元年封都亭侯，加振威将军。
现代文：被关在建安十八年加入李炎的军队，在绵竹抗击刘备，与李严一同投降，刘备平定益州后，任命他为禆将军，后来担任巴郡太守，江州都督，在建兴元年被封为都亭侯，加官振威将军。
English: He was imprisoned in the 18th year of Jianan and joined Li Yan's army. He fought against Liu Bei in Mianzhu and surrendered together with Li Yan. After Liu Bei conquered Dingyizhou, he was appointed as the general of Zou. Later, he served as the governor of Ba County and the governor of Jiangzhou. In the first year of Jianxing, he was named the governor of Dueting and promoted to the general of Zhenwei.

古文：观为人善於交接。
现代文：费观为人善于和人来往。
English: Feikan is a person who is good at dealing with people.

古文：少府修慎，鸿胪明真，谏议隐行，儒林天文。
现代文：都护李严性情骄矜高傲，护军辅匡等人的年资地位仅在与李严之下，但李严不和他们亲近，费观比李严年小二十多岁，却与李严来往亲近，像同辈人一样。
English: Li Yan, the tutor of the capital, is proud and haughty. The seniority status of the tutors and other people is only under Li Yan, but Li Yan is not close to them. Fei Guan is more than 20 years younger than Li Yan, but he is close to Li Yan, just like his peers.

古文：宣班大化，或首或林。
现代文：他三十七岁的时候去世。
English: He died at the age of thirty-seven.

古文：──赞王元泰、何彦英、杜辅国、周仲直王元泰名谋，汉嘉人也。
现代文：因为失去他的行事记录，所以不作传。王元泰名谋，汉嘉郡人。
English: Because of the loss of his records, Wang Yuan Tai, a famous strategist and a native of Hanga County, will not be written about.

古文：有容止操行。
现代文：他有仪容节操。
English: He's got the manners.

古文：刘璋时，为巴郡太守，还为州治中从事。
现代文：刘璋时期，他担任巴郡太守，还朝担任州治中从事。
English: During the time of Liu Bei, he served as the governor of Ba County, and also served as the governor of the state.

古文：先主定益州，领牧，以为别驾。
现代文：刘备平定益州后，他兼任益州牧，任命王谋为别驾。
English: After Liu Bei had subdued Yizhou, he also served as the governor of Yizhou and appointed Wang Mu as his second-in-command.

古文：先主为汉中王，用荆楚宿士零陵赖恭为太常，南阳黄柱为光禄勋，谋为少府；建兴初，赐爵关内侯，后代赖恭为太常。
现代文：刘备自立为汉中王，任命荆楚故旧零陵人赖恭为太常，南阳人黄柱为光禄勋，王谋为少府。建兴初年，刘备给他赐爵关内侯，后来代替赖恭担任太常。
English: Liu Bei established himself as the king of the Middle Han Dynasty, appointing Jing Chu's former Ziling man, Lai Gong, as the Grand Steward, Nanyang's Huang Zhu as the Grand Steward, and Wang Mu as the Junior Steward. In the first year of construction, Liu Bei gave him the title of Guan Nei Hou, and later replaced Lai Gong as the Grand Steward.

古文：恭、柱、谋皆失其行事，故不为传。
现代文：赖恭、黄柱、王谋等都失去行事记录，所以没有做传。
English: Lai Gong, Huang Zhu, Wang Mu, etc. all lost their records, so they did not pass them on.

古文：恭子厷，为丞相西曹令史，随诸葛亮於汉中，早夭，亮甚惜之，与留府长史参军张裔、蒋琬书曰： 令史失赖厷，掾属丧杨颙，为朝中损益多矣。 颙亦荆州人也。
现代文：赖恭的儿子赖厷是丞相西曹令史，跟随诸葛亮到汉中，早年去世，诸葛亮非常痛惜，给刘府长史参军张裔、蒋琬写信说： 令史中失去赖厷，掾属中失去杨颙，这都是朝廷很大的损失。 杨颙也是荆州人。
English: Lai Qiong, the son of Lai Qiong, was the chancellor of Western Cao, Lingshi, who followed Zhuge Liang to the Han Dynasty and died at an early age. Zhuge Liang was very sorry and wrote a letter to the governor of Liu who joined the army, Zhang Zi and Jiang Qi, saying: The loss of Lai Qiong in the history of Lingshi, and the loss of Yang Qiong in the family of Lingshi, are all great losses to the imperial court. Yang Qiong is also a native of Jingzhou.

古文：后大将军蒋琬问张休曰： 汉嘉前辈有王元泰，今谁继者？ 休对曰： 至於元泰，州里无继，况鄙郡乎！ 其见重如此。
现代文：后来大将军蒋琬问张休说： 汉家前辈中有一个王元泰，现在谁能继承他呢？ 张休回答说： 至于王元泰，州中无人能继承他，更何况是我们小小的汉嘉郡呢！ 
English: Later, General Chiang Kai-shek asked Zhang Xiu, "Among the predecessors of the Han family, there was a Wang Yuan-tai, who can succeed him now?" Zhang Xiu replied, "As for Wang Yuan-tai, no one in the state can succeed him, let alone our small Hanga County!

古文：何彦英名宗，蜀郡郫人也。
现代文：他被看重到如此地步。何彦英，名宗，蜀郡郫县人。
English: He was valued to such an extent. He Yanying, Meizong, Shu County, Minxian County.

古文：事广汉任安学，精究安术，与杜琼同师而名问过之。
现代文：他跟随广汉的仁安求学，精深钻研仁安的学术，跟杜琼同师但名声却超过他。
English: He studied with Yan'an of Guanghan and studied Yan'an's scholarship in depth. He was a classmate of Du Qiong, but his reputation surpassed him.

古文：刘璋时，为犍为太守。先主定益州，领牧，辟为从事祭酒。后援引图、谶，劝先主即尊号。
现代文：刘璋时期，何宗担任犍为太守，刘备平定益州后，兼任益州牧，又征召他担任从事祭酒，后来他援引图谶劝刘备登基称帝。
English: During Liu Bei's reign, He Zong served as the eunuch, and after Liu Bei conquered Yizhou, he also served as the eunuch of Yizhou, and he also conscripted him to serve as a sacrificial wine. Later, he invoked Tu Wei to persuade Liu Bei to ascend to the throne.

古文：践阼之后，迁为大鸿胪。
现代文：刘备登基后升迁他为大鸿胪。
English: After Liu Bei ascended to the throne, he was promoted to the position of "great nobleman."

古文：建兴中卒。
现代文：他在建兴年间去世。
English: He died during the reconstruction.

古文：失其行事，故不为传。
现代文：因为失去了行事记录，所以没有做传。
English: Due to the loss of the minutes, there was no handover.

古文：车骑高劲，惟其泛爱，以弱制强，不陷危坠。
现代文：何宗的儿子何双，字汉偶。他幽默诙谐，好谈笑，有淳于髡、东方朔的风范。
English: He is a humorous and witty person, good at talking and laughing, and has the demeanor of Junyu and Dongfangshuo.

古文：──赞吴子远子远名壹，陈留人也。
现代文：他做过双柏县县长，很早就去世了。吴子远，名壹，是陈留郡人。
English: He was once the governor of Shuangbo County, but he passed away a long time ago. Wu Ziyuan, first and foremost, was from Chenliu County.

古文：随刘焉入蜀。
现代文：跟随刘焉到蜀地。
English: Follow Liu Yan to Shu Di.

古文：刘璋时，为中郎将，将兵拒先主於涪，诣降。
现代文：刘璋时期，他担任中郎将，率兵在涪县抗击刘备，后来到刘备处投降。
English: During Liu Bei's reign, he served as a middle-ranking general and led his troops to fight against Liu Bei in Handan County. Later, he surrendered to Liu Bei.

古文：先主定益州，以壹为护军讨逆将军，纳壹妹为夫人。
现代文：刘备平定益州后，任命吴壹为护军，讨逆将军，并聘娶吴壹的妹妹为夫人。
English: After Liu Bei had subdued Yizhou, he appointed Wu Yi as a general to protect the army and fight against the rebels, and he married Wu Yi's sister.

古文：章武元年，为关中都督。
现代文：章武元年，吴壹为关中都督。
English: In the first year of Zhangwu, Wu Yi became the governor of Guanzhong.

古文：建兴八年，与魏延入南安界，破魏将费瑶，徙亭侯，进封高阳乡侯，迁左将军。
现代文：建兴八年，他跟魏延一同进入南安境内，攻破魏国将领费瑶，升为亭侯，进封为高阳乡侯，升任为左将军。
English: In the eighth year of Jianxing, he entered the territory of Nan'an together with Wei Yan, defeated the Wei general Feiyu, was promoted to the prince, was promoted to Gaoyang Township, and was promoted to the left general.

古文：十二年，丞相亮卒，以壹督汉中，车骑将军，假节，领雍州刺史，进封济阳侯。
现代文：建兴十二年，丞相诸葛亮去世，让吴壹督守汉中，车骑将军，持符节兼任雍州刺史，晋封为济阳侯。
English: In the twelfth year of Jianxing, the chancellor Zhuge Liang died, leaving Wu Yidu to guard Hanzhong, the general of chariots and cavalry, holding the festival of symbols and also serving as the governor of Yongzhou, and promoted to Jiyang.

古文：十五年卒。
现代文：建兴十五年去世。
English: Jian Xing died fifteen years ago.

古文：失其行事，故不为传。
现代文：因为失去行事记录，所以没有做传。
English: Due to the loss of the minutes, there was no handover.

古文：壹族弟班，字元雄，大将军何进官属吴匡之子也。
现代文：吴壹的族弟吴班，字元雄，是大将军何进属官吴匡的儿子。
English: Wu Yi's younger brother Wu Ban, alias Yuanxiong, was the son of General He Jin's subordinate Wu Kuanglu.

古文：以豪侠称，官位常与壹相亚。
现代文：他以豪气侠义著称，他的官位经常与吴壹相近。
English: He was known for his bravery and chivalry, and his official rank was often close to that of Wu Yi.

古文：建兴初，官至永安都督、征西将军，封亭侯。
现代文：刘备时期，他担任领军。在刘后主刘禅时渐渐升迁至骠骑将军，持符节，被封为绵竹侯。陈叔至，名到，汝南人。
English: During the Liu Bei period, he served as the leader of the army. During the reign of Liu's successor, Liu Zhen, he was gradually promoted to the general of the cavalry, held the festival of symbols, and was given the title of Mianzhu Hou.

古文：镇南粗强，监军尚笃，并豫戎任，任自封裔。──赞辅元弼、刘南和辅元弼名匡，襄阳人也。
现代文：在豫州时就跟随刘备，他的身份地位仅次于赵云，两人都以忠勇果敢著称。建兴初年，陈到官至永安都督、征西将军，被封为亭侯。辅元弼，名匡，襄阳人。
English: He followed Liu Bei when he was in Yuzhou. His status was second only to that of Zhao Yun. Both of them were famous for their loyalty, courage and determination. In the first year of Jianxing, Chen became the governor of Yongan, the general of the Western Expedition, and was named the prince. Fuyuan, Ming Kuang, Xiangyang people.

古文：随先主入蜀。
现代文：跟随刘备进入蜀地。
English: Follow Liu Bei to Shunde.

古文：益州既定，为巴郡太守。
现代文：益州平定后，为巴郡太守。
English: After Yishu was pacified, he became the governor of Ba County.

古文：建兴中，徙镇南，为右将军，封中乡侯。
现代文：建兴年间，他调任到镇南，担任右将军，封为中乡侯。
English: During the Jianxing period, he was transferred to the south of the town, served as the right general, and was given the title of middle township.

古文：刘南和名邕，义阳人也。
现代文：刘南和，名邕，义阳郡人。
English: Liu Nanhe is a famous poet and a native of Yiyang County.

古文：随先主入蜀。
现代文：跟随刘备到蜀地。
English: Follow Liu Bei to Shunde.

古文：益州既定，为江阳太守。
现代文：益州平定后，为江阳太守。
English: After Yizhou was pacified, he became the supreme governor of Jiangyang.

古文：建兴中，稍迁至监军后将军，赐爵关内侯，卒。子式嗣。
现代文：建兴年间，渐渐升迁至监军后将军，被赐爵关内侯，去世后，他的儿子刘嗣继承爵位。
English: During the Jianxing period, he was gradually promoted to the post of general supervising the army, and was given the title of Lord of Guanai. After his death, his son Liu Xi inherited the title.

古文：少子武，有文，与樊建齐名，官亦至尚书。
现代文：他的小儿子刘武很有文采，与樊建齐名，也官至尚书。
English: His younger son, Liu Wu, was very literate, and was as famous as Xing Jian. He was also an official of Shangshu.

古文：司农性才，敷述允章，藻丽辞理，斐斐有光。
现代文：张处仁，名存，南阳郡人。以荆州从事的身份跟随刘备到蜀地，南行到了雒县，被任命为广汉太守。
English: Zhang Zhenren, also known as Zheng, was from Nanyang County. He followed Liu Bei to Shudi in his capacity as an official of Jingzhou, and traveled south to Min County, where he was appointed the governor of Guanghan.

古文：──赞秦子敕正方受遗，豫闻后纲，不陈不佥，造此异端，斥逐当时，任业以丧。
现代文：张存向来不服庞统，庞统中箭去世，刘备经常出言感叹嘉赏他，张存说： 庞统虽然因尽忠去世很可惜，但是违背了大雅之义。 刘备愤怒的说： 庞统杀身成仁，难道是错的吗？ 
English: Zhang Cun has always disapproved of Pang Tong. When Pang Tong died, Liu Bei often made a speech to commend him. Zhang Cun said: Although it is a pity that Pang Tong died because of his loyalty, he violated the principles of elegance. Liu Bei said angrily: Is it wrong for Pang Tong to kill himself?

古文：──赞李正方
现代文：潘，字承明，武陵人。
English: Pan, the character Chengming, is from Wuling.

