古文：崔恕何瑚陈遗王虚之河南妇人岑文本郑鲜张楚金罗道悰陵空观皇甫氏田仁会徐州军士唐宣宗李彦佐胡生刘行者王法朗郗法遵王晖李梦旗孟熙
现代文：崔恕何瑚陈遗王虚之河南妇人岑文本郑鲜张楚金罗道悰陵空观皇甫氏田仁会徐州军士唐宣宗李彦佐胡生刘行者王法朗郗法遵王晖李梦旗孟熙
English: Cui Shun He Hui Chen Yi Wang Qizhi Henan Woman Text Zheng Xiang Zhang Chu Jin Luo Dao Jie Mausoleum Aerial Viewing Emperor Fu's Family Tian Ren Association Xuzhou Sergeant Tang Xuan Zong Li Yan Zuo Hu Sheng Liu Walker Wang Farang Jie Fa Zun Wang Jie Li Mengqi Meng Xi

古文：崔恕
现代文：崔恕
English: Choe Son

古文：谯郡有功曹涧，天统中，济南来府君，出除谯郡。
现代文：谯郡有个地方叫功曹涧。北齐后主天统年间，济南来太守到谯郡任职。
English: There is a place in Handan County called Gong Cao. During the Northern Qi Emperor's reign, Jinan came to serve as the governor of Handan County.

古文：功曹清河崔恕，弱冠有令德于人。时春夏积旱，送别者千余人。
现代文：清河的崔恕是本郡功曹，也同时调任，因为他从年青的时候就有美好的品德，所以前来送行的有一千多人。
English: Qinghe's Cui Shao is the county's meritorious person, and was also transferred at the same time, because he has had a good character since he was young, so there are more than a thousand people who came to see him off.

古文：至此涧上，众渴甚，来公有思水之色。恕独见一青鸟，于涧中乍飞乍止。
现代文：当地从春到夏连续干旱了很长时间，他们走到一个山涧上，众人感到口渴，都想喝一口水。崔恕独自看见一只青鸟一会飞起，一会落下。
English: There had been a long drought in the area from spring to summer. They walked up to a ridge. Everyone was thirsty and wanted to drink a sip of water. Cui Shou alone saw a blue bird fly up and fall down.

古文：怪而就焉。鸟起，见一石，方五六寸。以鞭拨之，清泉涌注。
现代文：他感到奇怪便追了过去，在青鸟飞起的地方发现一块直径有五六寸的石头，他用鞭子一拨，石头底下冒出一股泉水。
English: Puzzled, he ran after it, and at the place where the bluebird flew up, he found a stone with a diameter of five or six inches. With a stroke of his whip, a spring emerged from under the stone.

古文：盛以银瓶，瓶满，水立竭。
现代文：他立刻用银瓶接水，刚将银瓶装满，泉水立即就没有了。
English: He immediately filled a silver flask with water. As soon as he had filled the flask, the spring water immediately disappeared.

古文：惟来公与恕供饮而已。
现代文：接到的一瓶水，刚好够来公和崔恕饮用的。
English: The bottle of water they received was just enough for Gong and Cui Shun to drink.

古文：议者以为德感所致焉。时人异之，故以为目。
现代文：有人议论说这件事是由于崔怒的品德感动了天地神灵的结果，当地人对这件事都感到很怪，所以称这个山涧为 功曹涧 。
English: Some people said that this incident was the result of Cui Ruan's virtue moving the gods of heaven and earth. The local people felt very strange about this incident, so they called this mountain a "Gong Cao Yao."

古文：何瑚
现代文：何瑚
English: Ho Hoo

古文：梁何瑚字重宝，为北征咨议。
现代文：梁朝有个人的名叫何瑚，字叫重宝，官职是北征咨郎。
English: In the Liang Dynasty, there was a person named He Hu, his Chinese name was Jubao, and his official title was Bei Zhe Zi Rong.

古文：博问强学，幼有令名。性淳深，事亲恭谨。
现代文：何瑚博学多才，从小就品德高尚，性格忠厚淳朴，侍奉双亲恭敬严谨。
English: Erudite and multi-talented, He Hui has been of high moral character since childhood. His character is loyal and simple, and he serves his parents with respect and rigor.

古文：母病求医，不乘车马。
现代文：他的母亲病了，他不乘车马，亲自去请医生。
English: When his mother fell ill, he went to fetch a doctor in person, not by horse and carriage.

古文：忽感圣僧，体质殊异，手执香炉，来求斋食，而至无早晚。
现代文：他的行为感动了一位已经修成圣果的高僧，这个和尚手持香炉来到何瑚家要斋饭吃，连续来了十多天，每天来都没有固定的时间，何瑚已经感觉到他不是一个普通的和尚。
English: His actions moved a high-ranking monk who had already cultivated into a holy fruit. This monk came to He Hu's home with an incense burner in hand to have a meal. He came for more than ten days in a row, and there was no fixed time for each day. He Hu already felt that he was not an ordinary monk.

古文：如此十余日，母病有瘳，僧便辞去。留素书般若经一卷。因执手曰： 贫道是二十七贤圣，不近相人。感檀越至心，故来看。
现代文：等到何瑚母亲的病好了，这个和尚向何瑚告辞，并送给他一卷《般若经》握着何瑚的手对他说： 贫僧我是二十七位圣僧其中的一个，平时不接近普通人，被施主的孝心所感动，所以来为你母亲治病。
English: When He Hu's mother's illness was over, this monk bade farewell to He Hu and gave him a volume of the Prajnaparamita Sutra. Holding He Hu's hand, he said to him, "Poor monk, I am one of the twenty-seven holy monks. I usually do not get close to ordinary people. I was moved by the donor's filial piety, so I came to treat your mother's illness."

古文：病者已瘥，贫道宜还。 
现代文：现在你母亲的病已经好了，我要回去了。 
English: Now that your mother's illness is over, I'm going back.

古文：言讫前行，忽不见，而炉烟香气，一旬方歇。
现代文：说完就往前走，突然就不见了。但是和尚香炉冒出的香气，十多天以后才飘散。
English: After saying this, he walked forward and suddenly disappeared. However, the aroma from the monk's incense burner did not dissipate until more than ten days later.

古文：精诚所感，朝野叹嗟。
现代文：何瑚的孝心感动圣僧的事，传遍了朝廷内外。
English: The story of the holy monk, who was moved by He Hu's filial piety, spread throughout the imperial court and beyond.

古文：因舍别宅为目爱寺也。
现代文：何瑚还施舍出一所别墅，因为他崇敬佛教。
English: He Hu also gave away a villa because he reveres Buddhism.

古文：陈遗
现代文：陈遗
English: Chen Zhe

古文：吴人陈遗少为郡吏。母好食焦饭。
现代文：吴国人陈遗年轻的时候在郡署衙门里当厨师，他的母亲愿意吃锅巴。
English: When Chen Yu, a native of Wu, was young and working as a cook at the county government office, his mother was willing to eat hotpot noodles.

古文：遗在役，恒带囊，每煮食，漉其焦以献母。
现代文：陈遗在官署里总随身带着一个口袋，做饭的时候将锅巴装进口袋，留着给母亲吃。
English: Chen Yue always carries a bag with her in the government office. When she cooks, she puts the pots and pans in her bag and leaves them for her mother to eat.

古文：孙恩作乱，遗随例奔逃。
现代文：孙恩作乱的时候，陈遗随着官署人员一齐撤退。
English: When Sun En started a riot, Chen Yu retreated together with the government officials.

古文：母忆遗，昼夜哭泣，遂失明。
现代文：他母亲在家想念他，昼夜哭泣，把眼睛哭瞎了。
English: His mother misses him at home and cries day and night, crying her eyes out.

古文：遗脱难还家，入门见母，再拜号泣，母目忽然开朗。
现代文：陈遗躲过灾难回家，一进门看见母亲，跪下就哭，他母亲的眼睛忽然好了。
English: Chen Yue escaped the disaster and went home. As soon as he saw his mother at the door, he knelt down and cried. His mother's eyes suddenly got better.

古文：王虚之
现代文：王虚之
English: Wang Xizhi

古文：王虚之，庐陵西昌人。年十三，丧父母。
现代文：王虚之是庐陵西昌的人，他十三岁的时候父母就去世了。
English: Wang Xizhi is from Fuling, Xichang. His parents died when he was 13.

古文：二十年盐酢不入口。
现代文：从那以后二十年的时间，他一口食盐和醋都没有吃过。
English: Since then, he hasn't had a sip of salt or vinegar for twenty years.

古文：后得重病。忽有一人来诣，谓之曰： 君病寻瘥。 
现代文：后来他得了重病，忽然来了一个人对他说： 你的病很快就会好。 
English: Later, when he fell seriously ill, a man suddenly came to him and said, "Your illness will soon be over."

古文：俄而不见。
现代文：说完那人就不见了。
English: After saying this, the man disappeared.

古文：又所住屋室，夜有异光，庭中橘树，隆冬三实。病果寻愈。
现代文：晚上他发现住的屋里有奇异的光芒，院子里的橘子树在严冬季节，竟连续结了三个果实，他的病也好了。
English: In the evening, he found that the room he lived in had a strange glow, and the orange tree in the yard had borne three fruits in a row during the severe winter season, and his illness was cured.

古文：咸以至孝所感。
现代文：这些都是因为他孝敬父母所感应出来的结果。
English: All of this is the result of his filial piety to his parents.

古文：河南妇人
现代文：河南妇人
English: Henan Woman Sings

古文：隋大业中，河南妇人养姑不孝。
现代文：隋炀帝大业年间，河南有一个媳妇奉养婆婆很不孝顺。
English: During the reign of Emperor Sui, there was a daughter-in-law in Henan who was very unfilial to her mother-in-law.

古文：姑两目盲，妇以蚯蚓为羹以食之。
现代文：她婆母的两只眼睛都瞎了她就将蚯蚓当作饭给她婆母吃。
English: Her mother-in-law was blind in both eyes, so she used the toad as food for her mother-in-law.

古文：姑怪其味，窃藏其一脔，留示儿。
现代文：她婆母感到味道很奇怪，就偷偷地藏起来一小块，留着给儿子看。
English: Her mother-in-law thought the taste was strange, so she secretly hid a small piece and left it for her son to see.

古文：儿见之号泣，将录妇送县。俄而雷雨暴作，失妇所在。寻见妇自空堕地，身及服玩如故，而首变为白狗，言语如恒。
现代文：儿子看到后大声哭喊，气愤地扭送媳妇去县衙，走到路上下起大雷雨，突然失去了媳妇的踪迹，紧接着又从天空中掉了下来，身体和穿的衣服和以前一样，但是脑袋却变成了一只白狗的头，说话声音也和从前一样。
English: When his son saw it, he cried loudly and angrily dragged his daughter-in-law to the county magistrate's office. When he reached the road, there was a heavy thunderstorm. Suddenly, he lost track of his daughter-in-law, and then he fell from the sky. His body and clothes were the same as before, but his head turned into the head of a white dog, and his voice was the same as before.

古文：自云： 不孝于姑，为天神所罚。 
现代文：她自己说： 不孝顺婆母，遭到了天神的惩罚。 
English: She said: "I disobeyed my grandmother and was punished by the gods.

古文：夫乃斥去之。后乞食于道，不知所在。
现代文：他的丈夫就赶走了她，她只好到处讨饭，后来就不知道哪里去了。
English: Her husband chased her away, she had to beg for food everywhere, and then she didn't know where she was.

古文：岑文本
现代文：岑文本
English: Text from

古文：唐中书令岑文本，江陵人。少信佛，常念诵法华经普门品。
现代文：唐朝中书令岑文本是江陵人，他从小信奉佛教，经常念诵佛经法华经普门品。
English: The Tang Dynasty's imperial edict was written by a man from Gangneung. He had been a believer in Buddhism since he was a child, and often recited Buddhist scriptures such as the Lotus Sutra and the Book of Common Prayer.

古文：曾乘船于巨江中，船坏，人尽死，文本没有水中，闻有人言： 但念佛，必不死也。 
现代文：曾经有一次他坐船在一条大江之中，船坏了，乘船的人都淹死了。他也沉到了水中，在水里听到有人说： 只要是念佛，必然不会死。 
English: Once he was on a boat in the middle of a large river. The boat broke down and everyone on board drowned. He also sank into the water. In the water he heard someone say: "As long as you chant the Buddha's name, you will certainly not die."

古文：如是三言之。既而随波涌出，已着北岸，遂免死。
现代文：连续说了三遍，随即他随着波浪涌出水面，发现自己已经到了北岸，免除了死亡的灾难。
English: He said it three times in succession, and then he came up out of the water with the waves and found himself on the north shore, safe from death.

古文：后于江陵设斋，僧徒集其家。有一客僧独后去，谓文本曰： 天下方乱，君幸不预其灾，终逢太平，致富贵也。 
现代文：后来他在江陵准备了很多斋饭，和尚们都集结到他们家吃饭，一个和尚单独等到最后才走，临走时对他说： 天下正处在混乱之中，你幸运得没有遭受灾难，一定能够赶上太平时节，最后发财致富。 
English: Later, he prepared a lot of meals in Gangneung. The monks all gathered at their homes to eat. One monk waited alone until the end to leave. As he was leaving, he said to him, "The world is in turmoil. You are lucky not to have suffered a disaster. You will definitely be able to catch up with the peaceful time and finally get rich."

古文：言讫，趋出外不见。既而文本就斋，于自食碗中得舍利二枚。后果如其言。
现代文：说完话走出门外就不见了，岑文本送走和尚也开始吃斋饭，从饭碗里得到了两枚佛宝。 舍利子 ，后来他的命运果然同和尚所说的一样。
English: After he finished speaking, he walked out of the door and disappeared. The monk also began to eat rice, and got two Buddha treasures from the rice bowl. Later, his fate was indeed the same as the monk said.

古文：郑鲜
现代文：郑鲜
English: Zheng Xian

古文：唐郑鲜字道子，善相法，自知命短，念无以可延。
现代文：唐朝有个人名叫郑鲜，字叫道子。他善于通过观察人的相貌来推测别人的命运。他知道自己的寿命短，但没有办法可以延长。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, there was a man named Zheng Xian, also known as Tao Zi. He was good at observing people's appearance to predict the fate of others. He knew that his life was short, but there was no way to extend it.

古文：梦见沙门问之： 须延命耶？
现代文：有一天，他在梦中问和尚如何才能延长寿命？
English: One day, in a dream, he asked a monk how he could prolong his life.

古文：可大斋日，放生念善，持斋奉戒，可以延龄得福。 鲜因奉法，遂获长年。
现代文：和尚对他说： 如果想要延长寿命，可以选定日期做很多的斋饭给和尚们吃；还应该将人们饲养或抓获的动物放回大自然，还给它们生的道路；还必须吃斋并遵守佛教的戒律，这样就可以延长寿命并得到幸福。郑鲜按照和尚所说的去做，于是得到了长寿。
English: The monk said to him, "If you want to prolong your life, you can choose a date to make a lot of fast food for the monks to eat; you should also release the animals raised or captured by people back to nature and return them to the way they were born; you must also fast and abide by the Buddhist precepts, so you can prolong your life and be happy." Zheng Xian did as the monk said, so he got a long life.

古文：张楚金
现代文：张楚金
English: Zhang Chukin

古文：唐则天朝，刑部尚书张楚金为酷吏周兴构陷。将刑，乃仰叹曰： 皇天后土，岂不察忠孝乎？
现代文：唐朝武则天当皇帝的时候，刑部尚书张楚金被残酷迫害忠臣的奸臣周兴定计陷害，将要被杀头的时候，他仰天长叹说： 老天爷和土地神啊！你们难道不查看谁是忠臣孝子吗？
English: When Emperor Wu Zetian of the Tang Dynasty, Zhang Chujin was cruelly persecuted and framed by Zhou Xingding, the treacherous vassal of the loyal vassal. When he was about to be beheaded, he looked up to heaven and sighed: "Lord God and God of the land! Don't you check who is a loyal vassal?

古文：奈何以无辜获罪。 
现代文：为什么让没有罪的人去死？ 
English: Why let an innocent man die?

古文：因泣下数行，市人皆为觑欷。
现代文：说着流下了几行眼泪，围观的老百姓都哭了。
English: As he spoke, he shed a few tears, and the people around him began to cry.

古文：须臾，阴云四塞，若有所感。旋降敕释罪。
现代文：不一会儿，阴云四布，似乎苍天有了感应，随后皇帝降旨免除了张楚金的罪名。
English: In a short while, all was dark and gloomy. It seemed as if the heavens had responded, and then the emperor issued an edict absolving Zhang Chujin of his crime.

古文：宣示讫，天地开朗，庆云纷紏。
现代文：刚刚宣布完这个消息，天上的阴云立刻散去，出现了吉祥的彩云。
English: Just after the announcement of this news, the clouds in the sky immediately dispersed, and auspicious clouds appeared.

古文：时议言其忠正所致也。
现代文：当时的人们都议论说： 这是由于张楚金的忠心和正直感动了天地的结果。 
English: People at the time all commented: This is the result of the heavens and earth being moved by Zhang Chukin's loyalty and honesty.

古文：罗道悰
现代文：罗道悰
English: Luo Daojun

古文：唐司竹园罗道悰上书忤旨，配流。
现代文：唐朝司竹园的罗道悰，在写给皇帝的报告中违背了皇帝的意思，被定罪后押送到边远的地方服劳役。
English: Luo Daojuan of the Bamboo Garden of the Tang Dynasty, who violated the emperor's will in his report to the emperor, was convicted and sent to a remote place for forced labor.

古文：时有同流者道病卒，泣曰： 所恨委骨异壤。 
现代文：同伴中有一个人病死了，这个人在临死的时候哭着说： 所悔恨的是将尸骨扔到了远离家乡的地方！ 
English: One of his companions died of illness, and as he was dying, the man wept and said, "What I regret is that I threw his bones away from home!"

古文：退悰曰： 吾若生还，当取同归。 
现代文：罗道悰说： 我如果能活着回去，一定将你的尸体带回家乡安葬。 
English: Luo Daojun said, "If I can go back alive, I will definitely take your body back to my hometown and bury it."

古文：遂瘗之而去。
现代文：这个人死后，罗道悰将他掩埋了。
English: When the man died, Luo Daojun buried him.

古文：及还，为大水漂荡，失其所在。
现代文：他又说： 如果真是在这下面，请水面再翻涌一次。 
English: He added: "If it's really down here, let the water come up again."

古文：道悰哭告之，请示其灵。俄而水际沸涌，又咒曰： 如真在此下，更请一沸。 又然，遂得之，志铭可验，负之还乡。
现代文：果然水面又翻涌起来。于是他在这块水面的下面，将同伴的尸体捞取上来，还有墓上的志铭可以验证，于是背上这尸首回了家乡。
English: Sure enough, the surface of the water surged again. So he fished out the body of his companion under this water surface, and there was also the inscription on the grave to verify, so he returned home with the corpse on his back.

古文：陵空观
现代文：陵空观
English: Lingshouguan

古文：唐景龙四年，洛州陵空观失火，万物并尽。惟有一真人，岿然独存，乃泥塑为之。乃改为圣真观。
现代文：唐中宗景龙四年，洛州的陵空观发生火灾，所有的东西全都烧光了，只有一个 真人 的泥塑像没有损伤，以后陵空观就改名为 圣真观 。
English: In the fourth year of the reign of Emperor Jingsong of the Tang Dynasty, a fire broke out in the Mausoleum of Confucius in Loushou, and everything was burned to the ground. Only one clay statue of a real person was not damaged. Later, the Mausoleum of Confucius was renamed the Mausoleum of Confucius.

古文：皇甫氏
现代文：皇甫氏
English: The Imperial Family

古文：唐仆射裴遵庆，母皇甫氏，少时常持经。
现代文：唐朝仆射裴遵庆母亲姓皇甫，她从年轻的时候，就开始经常手持经卷念诵。
English: Tang dynasty retainer Zhaibei Zunqing, whose mother's surname was Huangfu, often began to recite scriptures from a young age.

古文：经函中有小珊瑚树。异时，忽有小龙骨一具，立于树侧。
现代文：她的藏经匣里有一棵小珊瑚树，不知道什么时候，忽然小珊瑚树的旁边出现一具立着的小龙骨。
English: She had a small coral tree in her prayer book, and I don't know when, suddenly a small keel appeared next to the small coral tree.

古文：时人以为裴氏休祥，上元中，遵庆遂居宰辅云尔。田仁会
现代文：人们认为这是她吉祥如意的兆头，果然到了上元年间，她的儿子裴遵庆当上了宰相。田仁会
English: People thought that this was an auspicious sign for her, and sure enough, in the first year of the new year, her son, Pei Zunqing, became prime minister.

古文：唐田仁会为郢州刺史，自暴得雨。
现代文：唐朝的郢州刺史在闹旱灾的时候，自己曝晒在太阳底下，为老百姓求来了雨。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, when there was a drought in Zhangzhou, he exposed himself to the sun and begged for rain for the people.

古文：人歌曰： 父母育我田使君，精诚为人上天闻。田中致雨山出云，但愿常在不患贫。 
现代文：人们编了一首歌来赞颂他说： 像父母养育了我们一样的田刺史，他一心为了老百姓感动了老天爷，田里求来雨解除了旱灾，但愿他永远在这里使我们不再遭受贫穷。 
English: People have composed a song to praise him: "Like our parents raised us, Tian Zashi Shi, he single-mindedly moved heaven and earth for the people, and prayed for rain in the fields to relieve the drought, I hope he will always be here so that we will no longer suffer from poverty."

古文：徐州军士
现代文：徐州军士
English: Sergeant Xuzhou

古文：唐王智兴在徐州，法令甚严。
现代文：唐朝的时候王智兴镇守徐州，法非常严格。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, Wang Zhixing guarded Xuzhou, and the law was very strict.

古文：有防秋官健交代归，其妹婿于家中设馔以贺，自于厨中磨刀，将就坐割羊脚。磨讫，持之疾行。妻兄自堂走入厨，仓卒相值，锋正中妻兄心，即死。
现代文：有一个秋季防守边防的官员完成任务归来，他的妹夫在家中准备酒菜为他庆贺。他妹夫在厨房里磨刀，准备割羊的蹄子，刀磨好以后手里端着刀快步往外走，恰巧他的大舅哥从堂屋往厨房里来，两个人在仓卒中相撞，他手中的刀尖正刺在他大舅哥的心脏上，当时就死了。
English: An official of the autumn defense of the border returned after completing his mission. His brother-in-law was preparing wine and vegetables at home to celebrate his return. His brother-in-law was sharpening a knife in the kitchen, preparing to cut the sheep's hooves. After sharpening the knife, he quickly walked out with the knife in his hand. It happened that his big brother came from the courtyard to the kitchen. The two collided in a hurry. The tip of the knife in his hand was stabbing his big brother's heart. He died at that time.

古文：所由擒以告。
现代文：他被人扭送到州衙门，王智兴亲自审问。
English: He was dragged to the State Council, and Wang Zhixing personally interrogated him.

古文：智兴讯问，但称过误，本无恶意。
现代文：他说自己是误伤，本来并没有恶意。
English: He said that he was injured by mistake and that there was no malicious intent.

古文：智兴不之信，命斩之。
现代文：王智兴不信，命令将他杀头。
English: Wang Zhixing did not believe him and ordered him to be beheaded.

古文：刀辄自刑者手中跃出，径没于地。三换皆然。智兴异之，乃不杀。
现代文：行刑时，刽子手的刀从手中自己跳出来插入地下，连换了三把刀都是一样，王智兴感到奇怪，便决定不杀他了。
English: During the execution, the executioner's knife jumped out of his hand and plunged into the ground. Even after changing three knives, it was the same. Wang Zhixing felt strange and decided not to kill him.

古文：唐宣宗
现代文：唐宣宗
English: Tang Xuan Zong

古文：唐大中初，京师尝淫雨涉月，将害粢盛。分命祷告，百无一应。
现代文：唐朝的大中初年，京城曾经连续下了一个多月的雨，将要威胁即将丰收的庄稼，皇帝命令对天祈祷，盼望早点天晴，但是多次祷告也没起作用。
English: In the first year of the Tang Dynasty, it rained in Beijing for more than a month in a row, threatening the upcoming harvest. The emperor ordered to pray to the heavens, hoping for an early sunny day, but many prayers did not work.

古文：宣宗一日在内殿，顾左右曰： 昔汤以六事自责，以身代牺牲。虽甚旱，卒不为灾。
现代文：宣宗一天在皇宫内殿对左右的人说： 当初商汤王以六事自责，以身代牺牲，虽然天旱，但没有造成灾害。
English: One day, Xuanzong said to the people around him in the inner hall of the imperial palace: At the beginning, Shang Tang Wang blamed himself for six things and sacrificed himself. Although it was a drought, it did not cause any disasters.

古文：我今万姓主，远惭汤德。而灾若是，兆人谓我何？ 
现代文：我今天身为天下所有老百姓的主人，非常惭愧远远赶不上汤的功德，而灾难若是，人们会怎样评价我呢？ 
English: Today, as the master of all the people in the world, I am very ashamed that I am far from being able to catch up with the merits of soup, and if it is a disaster, how will people evaluate me?

古文：乃执炉，降阶践泥，焚香仰视，若自责者。
现代文：于是他手里拿着香炉，站在台阶下的泥水里，点燃香炉，仰头面向苍天，忏悔责备自己的过失。
English: So he stood in the muddy water at the bottom of the steps with an incense burner in his hand, lit the incense burner, and looked up to the sky, repenting and blaming himself for his mistakes.

古文：久之，御服沾湿，感动左右。
现代文：过了很久，身上穿的龙袍都被雨水浇湿了，左右的人都非常感动。
English: After a long time, the dragon robes worn on the body were all wet with rain, and people on both sides were very moved.

古文：旋踵而急雨止，翌日而凝阴开，比秋而大有年。
现代文：一会儿，大雨就不下了，第二天，多日积聚的阴云也散开了，到了秋天获得了丰收。
English: After a while, the heavy rain stopped. The next day, the dark clouds that had been gathering for several days dispersed, and the autumn harvest was in full swing.

古文：李彦佐
现代文：李彦佐
English: Rihonzo

古文：李彦佐在沧景。唐太和九年，有诏诏浮阳兵北渡黄河。
现代文：李彦佐镇守沧景，在唐朝的太和九年，皇帝发出的公文命令将浮阳的兵马调到黄河以北。
English: In the ninth year of the Taihe era of the Tang Dynasty, Emperor Li Yanzao issued an official order to transfer the soldiers and horses of the Floating Sun to the north of the Yellow River.

古文：时冬十二月。至济南，郡使击冰进舟，冰触舟，舟覆诏失。
现代文：当时正是冬天的十二月份，队伍到了济南，郡府的官员敲打浮冰引导船只向前行驶，船碰到坚冰上产生倾覆。将皇帝的诏书掉到河里。
English: At that time, it was winter in December, the team arrived in Jinan, the county officials beat the ice floes to guide the ship forward, the ship hit the ice and capsized, dropping the emperor's edict into the river.

古文：彦佐惊惧，不寝食六日，鬓发白，至貌侵肤削，从事亦谬其仪形也。
现代文：李彦佐又惊又怕，连续六天没有吃饭喝水，头发变白了，相貌变得衰老削瘦，参谋助手们也都说他的相貌发生了变化。
English: Li Yanzu was shocked and afraid. He did not eat or drink for six days in a row. His hair turned white, his appearance became old and thin, and his staff assistants also said that his appearance had changed.

古文：乃令津吏，不得诏尽死。
现代文：李彦佐命令管理渡口的官员，不把文书捞上来就杀头。
English: Li Yanzu ordered the officials in charge of the ferry port to kill him if he did not retrieve the documents.

古文：吏惧，且请一祝祷于河，吏凭公诚明，以死索之。
现代文：官员害怕，请李彦佐向黄河祈祷，想要借助李彦佐的虔诚感动神灵帮忙，然后再拼死打捞。
English: The officials were afraid, so they asked Li Yanzu to pray to the Yellow River. They wanted to use Li Yanzu's piety to move the gods to help, and then do their best to salvage.

古文：彦佐乃令具爵酒，及祝传语诘河。其旨，明天子在上，川渎山岳，祝史咸秩。
现代文：李彦佐命令拿酒洒到河里，对着黄河祈祷说： 圣明的天子在上，河流高山。祝史咸秩，是我们这里的声望。
English: Li Yanzu ordered the wine to be poured into the river and prayed to the Yellow River, saying: "Holy Son of Heaven above, rivers are high mountains. I wish Shi Xianchong, our reputation here.

古文：予境之望，祀未尝匮，而河伯洎鳞介之长，当卫天子诏，何反溺之乎？
现代文：我们定期祭祀未曾欠缺。然而水神河伯你是黄河里鱼虾水族的首领，应当护卫天子的诏书，为什么反而将它淹没了呢？
English: We have never lacked regular sacrifices. However, you are the leader of the fish and shrimp aquatic tribe in the Yellow River, and should guard the edict of the heavenly son. Why did you drown it instead?

古文：或不获，予将斋告于天，天将谪尔。
现代文：如果你不把它还给我，我在吃斋后祭祀的时候将要告诉上天，天将处罚你。 
English: If you don't give it back to me, I will tell God during the post-lunch sacrifice, and God will punish you.

古文：吏酹冰辞已，忽有声如震，河冰中断，可三十丈。
现代文：祭祀结束，忽然河里发生震动伴随着巨大的响声，河上的坚冰一下子断裂了三十丈远。
English: At the end of the ritual, there was a sudden tremor in the river, accompanied by a loud noise. The hard ice on the river suddenly broke thirty meters away.

古文：吏知彦佐精诚已达，乃沉钩索而出。
现代文：官员们知道李彦佐的虔诚和心愿已经感应到河伯那里，便将钩子伸到水中一下子就将诏书钩了出来。
English: The officials knew that Li Yanzu's piety and wishes had been sensed by Hebe, so they put the hook into the water and immediately hooked out the edict.

古文：封角如旧，惟篆印微湿耳。
现代文：见诏书完好，封口如旧，只是上面的印章湿了一点。
English: The imperial decree is intact, the seal is the same as before, but the seal on top is a little wet.

古文：彦佐所至，令严务简，推诚于物，著声于官。
现代文：李彦佐管理政务，令出必行，办事简练，以诚处事，名显赫。
English: Li Yanzu managed the government affairs, issued necessary orders, worked concisely, dealt with matters with sincerity, and had a distinguished reputation.

古文：如河水色浑驶流，大木与纤芥，顷刻千里矣，安有舟覆六日，一酹而坚冰陷，一钩而沉诏获，得非诚之至乎？
现代文：这难道不是李彦佐的精诚感应的结果吗？
English: Isn't this the result of Ri's sincerity?

古文：胡生
现代文：胡生
English: Hu Sheng

古文：列子终于郑，今墓在效薮。谓贤者之迹，而或禁其樵采焉。
现代文：列子死在郑国，现在他的坟墓还在效外野草丛中，成为名人贤士留下的遗迹，禁止人们在这里砍柴。
English: Letsi died in Zheng Guo, and now his grave is still in the weeds outside the school. It has become a relic left by a famous sage, and people are forbidden to cut firewood here.

古文：里有胡生者，家贫，少为洗镜镀钉之业。
现代文：附近有个叫胡生的人，家里很贫穷，年轻的时候以为别人磨洗铜镜为职业。
English: There was a man named Hu Sheng in the neighborhood. His family was very poor, and when he was young, he thought that someone else's job was to polish bronze mirrors.

古文：遇甘果名茶美酝，辄祭于御寇之垄，似求聪慧而思学道。
现代文：他得到水果、好茶或者是美酒，总要供奉到列子的墓前，好像祈求列子能够赐给他聪明和学问。
English: When he gets fruit, good tea or fine wine, he always goes to the grave of his son-in-law to offer it, as if praying that his son-in-law will give him wisdom and knowledge.

古文：历稔，忽梦一人，刀划其腹开，以一卷之书，置于心腑。及觉，而吟咏之意，皆绮美之词，所得不由于师友也。
现代文：一年以后，他梦见一个人，拿着刀子将他的肚子剖开，把一本书放到了他的心脏里面，睡醒以后，他想要吟诗，朗诵出来的都是非常美妙的词句，但却不是从老师和朋友那里学来的。
English: A year later, he dreamed that a man with a knife cut open his stomach and put a book in his heart. When he woke up, he wanted to recite poetry. The words were very beautiful, but he did not learn them from his teachers and friends.

古文：既成卷轴，尚不弃于猥贱之业，真隐者之风。
现代文：虽然有了学问，但是他还不放弃磨洗铜镜的低贱职业，真是有隐士的风格。
English: Although he has acquired knowledge, he still does not give up the lowly profession of polishing bronze mirrors. He really has the style of a recluse.

古文：或有遗赂，必见拒也。或持茗酒而来，则忻然接奉。其文略说数篇，喜圃田韩少府见访云： 忽闻梅福来相访，笑著荷衣出草堂。
现代文：现在介绍他作的几首诗，一首是高兴地迎接圃田县韩少府来访：忽闻梅福来相访，笑著荷衣出草堂。
English: Now I would like to introduce a few of his poems, one of which is a happy greeting for the visit of Han Shoufu from Putian County: Suddenly hearing that Meifu is coming for a mutual visit, laughing at the sight of the grass.

古文：儿童不惯见车马，争入芦花深处藏。 
现代文：儿童不惯见车马。争入芦花深处藏。 
English: Children are not used to seeing chariots and horses. They scramble to hide in the depths of the reeds.

古文：又观郑州崔郎中诸妓绣样云： 日暮堂前花蕊娇，争拈小笔上床描。
现代文：还有看郑州崔郎中家的女郎们绣的花： 日暮堂前花蕊娇，争拈小笔上床描。
English: There is also a look at the flowers embroidered by the girls of the Zhengzhou Cui Lang family: Higurashi-dōmae Hanatsuri-jiao, competing small brushstrokes on bedspreads.

古文：绣成安向春园里，引得黄莺下柳条。 
现代文：绣成安向春园里，引得黄莺下柳条。 
English: In the embroidered spring garden of Cheng An Xiang, the wicker strips under the yellow ribbon attracted attention.

古文：江际小儿垂钓云： 蓬头稚子学垂纶，侧坐苍苔草映身。
现代文：另有一首题目是，江际小儿垂钓： 蓬头稚子学垂纶，侧坐苍苔草映身。
English: Another song is about children fishing in the estuary: the puffy-headed children learn to salivate, and sit side-by-side in the reflection of the moss.

古文：路人借问遥招手，恐畏鱼惊不应人。 
现代文：路人借问遥招手，恐畏鱼惊不应人。 
English: Passers-by wave their hands in the distance, startled by the fish.

古文：刘行者
现代文：刘行者
English: Liu Xingya

古文：唐庐陵阛阓中，有一刘行者。以钉铰为业。
现代文：唐朝庐陵的街市中，有一个姓刘的以修金属器物为职业的人。
English: In the city market of Fuling in the Tang Dynasty, there was a man surnamed Liu who repaired metal utensils as his profession.

古文：性至孝。母亲患眼二十余年，行者恳苦救疗。
现代文：他非常孝顺，母亲患眼病二十多年，他多方寻求治疗的方法。
English: He is very dutiful. His mother has suffered from an eye disease for more than 20 years, and he has sought treatment in many ways.

古文：一日，忽有衲僧，携净水铜瓶子，觅行者磨洗，出百金为酬，行者不受。
现代文：一天，忽然来了一个和尚，拿着一装净水的瓶子，找到他让他磨洗，并说要给他一百两银子作为酬谢。
English: One day, a monk suddenly came to him with a bottle of purified water, asked him to grind it, and said that he would give him one hundred and two silver coins as a reward.

古文：告云： 家有母亲患眼多年，和尚莫能有药疗否？ 
现代文：他不要，对和尚说： 我家里有老母亲患眼病多年，和尚你能治疗吗？ 
English: He did not want to, and said to the monk: In my family, there is an old mother who has had an eye disease for many years. Monk, can you treat her?

古文：僧云： 待磨洗瓶子了，与医。 
现代文：和尚说： 等你磨洗完瓶子再去医治。 
English: The monk said, "Wait until you have finished polishing the bottle before you go to heal it."

古文：磨洗毕，便出门，而行者随问之，僧云： 但归去，已与医了。 
现代文：磨洗完了，和尚拿起瓶子就走出门去，他追上去问，和尚说： 你回家去吧，我已经医治完。 
English: After polishing, the monk picked up the bottle and walked out the door. He chased after him and asked. The monk said, "You can go home, I'm cured."

古文：言讫，失僧所在。
现代文：说完和尚就不见了。
English: After saying this, the monk disappeared.

古文：行者奔还家，见母亲忽自床坠地，双目豁开。
现代文：他跑回家去，看见母亲忽然从床上掉到地下，双眼忽然好了。
English: He ran home and saw his mother suddenly fall from the bed to the ground, and his eyes suddenly got better.

古文：阖家惊喜，方知向者僧是罗汉。遂画其形影供养。至今存焉。
现代文：全家人又惊又喜，这才知道和尚是个修行成罗汉的高僧，于是画了这个罗汉的图像供奉起来，这张画像现在还保存着。
English: The whole family was surprised and delighted to learn that the monk was a high priest who had trained to become an arhat, so he painted this image of an arhat and offered it up. This image is still preserved.

古文：王法朗
现代文：王法朗
English: King Farang

古文：唐夔州道士王法朗，舌大而长，呼文字不甚典切，常以为恨。
现代文：唐朝夔州的道士王法朗的舌头又大又长，说话吐字不清楚，经常为此感到伤心。
English: The Tongue of the Taoist King Farang of Bozhou in the Tang Dynasty was large and long, and he could not speak clearly. He often felt sad about this.

古文：因发愿读道德经。梦老君与剪其舌。觉而言词轻利，精诵五千言，颇有征验。
现代文：他因此而许下愿望学习《道德经》，梦见道教的创始人《道德经》的作者老子用剪刀修剪他的舌头，睡觉醒了以后感觉说话流利，吐字清晰了，精读五千字的《道德经》。
English: As a result, he made a wish to study the Tao Te Ching. He dreamed that Lao Tzu, the founder of Taoism and the author of the Tao Te Ching, trimmed his tongue with scissors. After he woke up, he felt fluent and could speak clearly. He read the five-thousand-word Tao Te Ching carefully.

古文：郗法遵
现代文：郗法遵
English: 法遵

古文：唐道士郗法遵居庐山简寂观，道行精确。独力检校，已历数年，全无徒弟。
现代文：唐朝的道士郗法遵居住在庐山简寂观，道行很精深，独自抄写经卷并校对已经许多年了，没有收一个徒弟。
English: The Tang Dynasty Taoist priest Zou Fa Zun lived in Jian Jia Guan, Lushan. He was a very profound practitioner of Taoism. He had been copying and proofreading scriptures for many years on his own, and had not taken on a single apprentice.

古文：忽梦玄中法师谓之曰： 汝无人力，甚见勤劳。
现代文：一天他忽然梦见玄中法师对他说： 你没有人帮助，还非常勤劳。
English: One day, he suddenly dreamed that the sorcerer Xuanzhong said to him, "You have no one to help you, and you are still very hardworking.

古文：今有二童子，所恨年小耳。 
现代文：现在有两个小孩可以作你的徒弟，只是太小了。 
English: Now there are two children who can be your apprentices, but they are too young.

古文：既觉，话于众。
现代文：睡醒以后，他把这件事讲给别人听了。
English: When he woke up, he told others about it.

古文：出山过民王家，有孩子，年才一晬。见法遵，抱其足不肯舍。
现代文：一天他出山走过一户姓王的人家，这家有个刚刚一岁的小孩看见他，抱着他的腿不让他走。
English: One day he went out of the mountain and walked past a family with the surname Wang. A one-year-old child saw him and held his leg to prevent him from leaving.

古文：遵去，昼夜啼号不息。
现代文：郗法遵走了以后，这小孩昼夜啼哭不停。
English: The child cried non-stop day and night after the gong ceremony.

古文：遵复至则欣然。
现代文：郗法遵再去，他又不哭了。
English: He didn't cry again.

古文：后数年，父母即舍为童子。
现代文：过了几年，他的父母将他交给郗法遵做了道童。
English: A few years later, his parents handed him over to Zou Fa and he became a Taoist disciple.

古文：又一小儿姓刘，眼有五色光，父母疑其怪异，因灸眼屋，其光遂绝。
现代文：还有一个小孩姓刘，眼睛里向外放射五彩光芒。他的父母怀疑是怪异，用艾蒿点着后烧灸他的眼睛尾角，光芒就消失了。
English: Another child, surnamed Liu, had a multicolored glow radiating from his eyes. His parents suspected it was strange, so they burned the corner of his eyes with moxa after lighting them with mugwort, and the glow disappeared.

古文：已四五岁，亦舍在观中，相次入道。
现代文：已经四五岁了，也被父母送到观里。
English: He is already four or five years old, and his parents have sent him to the observation room.

古文：果符玄中梦授之语矣。
现代文：两个孩子相继当了道童，果然符合玄中法师梦中所说的话。
English: The two children successively became Taoist children, which was in line with the words spoken by the sorcerer in his dream.

古文：王晖
现代文：王晖
English: Wang Yao

古文：西蜀将王晖尝任集州刺史。集州城中无水泉，民皆汲于野外。
现代文：西蜀将军王晖曾经担任过集州刺史，集州城里没有水源，老百姓都到城外取水。
English: The Western Shu general Wang Qian once served as the chief historian of Jizhou. There was no water source in Jizhou, and the common people had to fetch water from outside the city.

古文：值岐兵急攻州城，且绝其水路，城内焦渴。
现代文：有一次，岐兵攻打集州，并且切断了城外取水的道路。城里的人没有水喝，十多天里，渴死了一些人。
English: On one occasion, soldiers from Qi attacked Jizhou and cut off the water supply from outside the city. People in the city had no water to drink for more than ten days, and some people died of thirst.

古文：旬日之间，颇有死者。
现代文：王晖便在半夜的时候祈祷神灵帮助。
English: Wang Yao prayed to the gods for help in the middle of the night.

古文：王公乃中夜有所祈请，哀告神祗。
现代文：当晚睡觉梦见一个老头告诉他说： 州城监狱的底下，有泉水。 
English: When he went to bed that night, he had a dream in which an old man told him: There is a spring underneath the state prison.

古文：迟明，且命畚锸，于所指之处掘数丈，乃有泉流。
现代文：说完就走了。王晖也惊醒了，天亮以后，他命令人拿着工具在老人所指示的地方挖下去几丈深，果然有水。
English: After saying this, he left. Wang Yao also woke up with a start. After dawn, he ordered someone to take a tool and dig several feet deep in the place indicated by the old man. Sure enough, there was water.

古文：居人饮之，蒙活甚众。岐兵比知城中无水，意将坐俟其毙。
现代文：城里的人喝了以后，救活了许多人，岐兵早就知道城内没有水源，所以想等着他们渴死。
English: After the people in the city drank it, they saved many lives. The soldiers of Qi had long known that there was no water source in the city, so they wanted to wait for them to die of thirst.

古文：王公命汲泉水数十罂，于城上扬而示之，其寇乃去。
现代文：王晖命令取来泉水几十瓶，从城墙上洒下去给岐兵看。
English: Wang Qian ordered to fetch dozens of bottles of spring water and sprinkle them down from the city wall for the soldiers to see.

古文：是日神泉亦竭。
现代文：岐兵见城内有水，便退走了。
English: When the soldiers from Qi saw that there was water in the city, they withdrew.

古文：岂王公精诚之所感耶？
现代文：这难道不是王晖的虔诚所感动神灵的结果吗？
English: Isn't this the result of the gods being moved by Wang Yao's piety?

古文：勒拜井之事，固不虚耳。
现代文：勒拜井求水的传说，果然不是虚构的。
English: The legend of the begging for water at the Qulebai Well is definitely not a fiction.

古文：王后致仕，家于雍州，尝言之，故记耳。
现代文：王晖后来调离集州，迁到雍州，曾经提起这件事，所以记录下来。
English: Wang Qi was later transferred out of Jizhou and moved to Yongzhou. He had mentioned this matter before, so he wrote it down.

古文：李梦旗
现代文：李梦旗
English: Li Mengqi

古文：伪蜀拔山军卒李梦旗经敌擒归岐阳，老母悲泣，因瞽双目。
现代文：伪蜀拔山军卒李梦旗被敌方抓住押到岐阳，老母亲在家中悲伤哭泣双目失明。
English: Li Mengqi, a soldier of the pseudo-Shushan Balshan Army, was caught by the enemy and pushed to Qiyang. His old mother was crying with grief at home and was blinded in both eyes.

古文：梦旗在岐阳，虔祈切至，愿见慈母，三载方还。
现代文：李梦旗在岐阳虔诚地祈祷，希望早日回家去看母亲。
English: Li Mengqi piously prayed in Qiyang, hoping to return home to see his mother as soon as possible.

古文：梦旗刺股血点母眼，即时如故。
现代文：三年之后才回家，他刺破大腿，将血滴在母亲的眼睛里，一会儿，他母亲的眼睛又像当初一样能看见东西了。
English: Three years later, he returned home, cut his thigh, dripped blood into his mother's eyes, and for a moment, his mother's eyes were able to see again as they had before.

古文：乃知孝道感通，其昭然耳。孟熙
现代文：这很明显是他的孝顺感应的结果。孟熙
English: This is clearly the result of his filial piety.

古文：蜀孟熙，贩果实养父母，承颜顺旨，温清定省，出告反面，不惮苦辛。
现代文：蜀郡的孟熙靠贩卖水果奉养父母，按照父母的眼色和吩咐办事，每天早晚请安出门要告诉去向，回来要面见父母。孝顺周到，不辞辛苦。
English: Meng Xi from Shu County supported his parents by selling fruit. He did everything according to his parents' wishes and orders. Every morning and evening, he asked An to go out to tell him where to go, and to come back to meet his parents. He was dutiful and thoughtful, and worked hard.

古文：父常云： 我虽贫，养得一曾参。 
现代文：他的父亲常说： 我虽贫穷，但养了一个像曾参一样的孝子。 
English: His father often said: Although I am poor, I have raised a filial son like Zeng Zhen.

古文：及父亡，绝浆哀号，几至灭性。
现代文：他父亲死了，他不吃不喝整日哭喊，悲伤过度好几次危及生命。
English: His father died, he doesn't eat or drink, he cries all day long, and his grief has been so overwhelming that it has put his life in danger several times.

古文：布苫于地，寝处其上。三年不食盐酪。远近叹服。
现代文：他在地上铺上草垫子，睡在上面，三年不吃盐和醋，远近的人们全都叹服。
English: He spread a straw mat on the ground, slept on it, and did not eat salt and vinegar for three years. People near and far were all impressed.

古文：因见鼠掘地，得黄金数千两，自此巨富焉。
现代文：后来他看见老鼠在地上挖土，得到了好几千两黄金，从此大富。
English: Later, he saw a mouse digging in the ground. He got several thousand taels of gold and became very rich.

