古文：吴祥周翁仲田畴文颖王樊秦巨伯宗岱郑奇钟繇夏侯玄嵇康倪彦思沈季糜竺王弼陈仙胡熙鲁肃
现代文：吴祥周翁仲田畴文颖王樊秦巨伯宗岱郑奇钟繇夏侯玄嵇康倪彦思沈季糜竺王弼陈仙胡熙鲁肃
English: Wu Xiang, Zhou, Weng, Zhongtian, Wen, Ying, Wang, Qin, Zong, Zheng, Qi, Zhong, Xia, Hou, Xu, Kang, Ni, Yan, Si, Shen, Ji, Wang, Chen, Xian, Hu, Lu, Su

古文：吴祥
现代文：吴祥
English: Wu Xiang

古文：汉诸暨县吏吴祥者，惮役委顿。将投窜深山，行至一溪。
现代文：汉代诸暨县有个衙役吴祥，有一次为了逃避一趟苦差事，想到深山里躲几天。
English: In Zhuji County during the Han Dynasty, there was a magistrate, Wu Xiang. Once, in order to escape a trip of drudgery, he thought of hiding in the mountains for a few days.

古文：日欲暮，见年少女子。
现代文：走到一条河边，天快黑了，遇见一个衣着华丽的少年女子。
English: I walked to the edge of a river, it was getting dark, and I met a young man and woman in gorgeous clothes.

古文：采衣甚美，云：我一身独居，又无乡里，唯有一孤妪，相去十余步耳。
现代文：女子说，我自己一个人住，周围也没有邻居，只有一个孤老太太，离我家有十几步。
English: The woman said, "I live alone. I don't have any neighbors around me. There is only one lonely old lady who lives a dozen steps away from my house."

古文：祥闻甚悦，便既随去。
现代文：吴祥挺高兴，就随女子去了。
English: Wu Xiang was very happy and went with the girl.

古文：行一里余。
现代文：一看女子家很穷，但还是给吴祥做了饭。
English: At first glance, the woman's family was very poor, but she still cooked for Wu Xiang.

古文：即至女家。家甚贫陋。
现代文：到了一更天时，听见外面一个老妇喊道：张姑娘！
English: At one o'clock in the morning, I heard an old woman outside shouting: "Miss Zhang!

古文：祥问是谁，答云：向所道孤妪也。
现代文：吴祥问是谁，女子说，就是我给你说的那个孤老婆子。
English: Wu Xiang asked who it was, and the woman said, "It's the lonely old woman I told you about."

古文：二人共寝至晓，鸡鸣祥去。二情相恋，女以紫巾赠祥，祥以布手巾报。
现代文：二人睡到天亮，鸡叫时吴祥和女子恋恋不舍地分别，女子送吴祥一条紫巾，吴祥也回赠给女子一条布巾。
English: The two of them slept until dawn, and when the rooster crowed, Wu Xiang and the woman parted ways with great reluctance. The woman gave Wu Xiang a purple scarf, and Wu Xiang gave the woman a cloth scarf in return.

古文：乃回向女家，都不见昨处。但有一塚耳。
现代文：吴祥往回走到那条河边时，由于河水夜里暴涨，没法过去，只好回转去找那女子家，然而一看，那里不过是一座荒坟而已。
English: When Wu Xiang walked back to the river, he couldn't get across because the water had risen sharply in the night, so he had to go back to find the woman's house. However, at first glance, it was nothing more than an abandoned grave.

古文：周翁仲
现代文：周翁仲
English: Zhou Wenzhong

古文：汝南周翁仲，初为太尉掾。妇产男。及为北海相。
现代文：汝南人周翁仲，最初当太尉掾，妻子生了个男孩，后来周翁仲当上了北海相。
English: Zhou Wenzhong, a man from the south of Ryukyu, was initially a naval lieutenant, and his wife gave birth to a boy. Later, Zhou Wenzhong became the minister of the North Sea.

古文：吏周光能见鬼，署为主簿。
现代文：府里有个官叫周光，能和鬼来住，被阴间任为主簿，并让他回阳间向本郡本县的官员致意。
English: There is an official in the government called Zhou Guang, who can live with ghosts. He was appointed by the underworld to be the master of the book, and let him return to the sun to greet the officials of this county.

古文：使还致敬于本郡县，因告之曰：事讫，腊日可与小儿俱侍祠。
现代文：周翁仲就对周光说，你再回阴间去办完事后，十二月祭神时我将带我的小儿一起在庙里等你，你看看我儿子阴运如何。
English: Zhou Wenzhong said to Zhou Guanglu, "After you go back to the underworld to deal with the matter, I will take my child to wait for you in the temple during the December ritual, and you can see how my son's yin fortune is."

古文：主簿事讫还，翁仲问之，对曰：但见屠人。弊衣蠡髻而踞神坐，持刀割肉。
现代文：周光从阴间回来后，周翁仲问他，他说，我在阴间看见你儿子是个屠夫，穿着破衣头上挽着瓢形的发髻坐在神位上，拿着刀在割肉。
English: After Zhou Guang returned from the underworld, Zhou Wenzhong asked him about it. He said, "I saw your son in the underworld as a butcher, wearing a tattered robe and sitting on a god's throne with a skull-shaped hairpin around his head, holding a knife and cutting meat.

古文：有衣冠青墨绶数人，彷徨堂东西厢，不进，不知何故。
现代文：还有几个穿青衣坠黑流苏的人在大堂东西厢房里不进去，不知是为什么。
English: There are also a few people in blue suits with black tassels who can't get into the lobby's east and west rooms. I don't know why.

古文：翁仲因持剑上堂，谓妪曰：汝何故养此子？
现代文：周翁仲就手持宝剑对自己的老夫人说，你为什么生了这么个儿子？
English: Holding a sword in his hand, Zhou Wenzhong said to his old lady, "Why did you give birth to such a son?

古文：妪大怒曰：君常言，儿体貌声气喜学似我。
现代文：老夫人大怒说，你不是说，你儿子的长相性格都象你吗？
English: The old lady said angrily, "Didn't you say that your son's looks and personality are just like you?"

古文：老翁欲死，作为狂语。
现代文：你个老不死的，说什么疯话？
English: You immortal, what madness are you talking about?

古文：翁仲具告之，祠祭如此，不具服，子母立截。
现代文：周翁仲就把儿子的事说了，并说这是阴间已定了的，如果不服气，母子的感情就立刻断绝。
English: Zhou Wenzhong told her about her son and said that it was already decided in the underworld. If she was not convinced, the mother-son relationship would be broken off immediately.

古文：妪涕泣言：昔以年长无男。不自安。实以女易屠者之男。
现代文：这时老夫人才哭着说，当年因为我们年纪大了没有男孩心里不安，我就偷偷把新生的女孩和一个屠夫换了个男孩，并给了那屠夫一万钱。
English: At this time, the old lady began to cry and said, "Back then, because we were too old and didn't have a boy to worry about, I secretly exchanged a newborn girl with a butcher for a boy, and gave the butcher ten thousand dollars."

古文：畀钱一万，此子年已十八。遣归其家。
现代文：现在这孩子已经十八了，就把他又送还给屠户家，把女儿重新接了回来。
English: Now that the boy is eighteen, they sent him back to the butcher's house and brought their daughter back.

古文：迎其女，已嫁卖饼者妻。
现代文：女儿已嫁给了一个卖饼的做老婆，就让她改嫁给西平的李文思。
English: Her daughter had already married a cake-seller's wife, so she let her marry Li Wensi from Xiping.

古文：后适西平李之思，文思官至南阳太守。
现代文：后来李文思作了南阳太守。
English: Later, Li Wensi became the governor of Nanyang.

古文：田畴
现代文：田畴
English: Township

古文：田畴，北平人也。
现代文：田畴是北平人。
English: The farmland belongs to the Beiping people.

古文：刘虞为公孙瓒所害，畴追慕无已，往虞墓，设鸡酒之礼哭之。
现代文：当时刘虞被公孙瓒杀害，田畴知道后，由于对刘虞特别敬慕，就备了酒和鸡肉到刘虞的墓上去祭奠痛哭。
English: At that time, Liu Yu was killed by Gongsun Yao. After Tian Zhen knew about it, he prepared wine and chicken to go to Liu Yu's grave to pay tribute and weep bitterly because of his special admiration for Liu Yu.

古文：音动林野，翔乌为之凑鸣，走兽为之悲吟。
现代文：哭声震动了山林和田野，群鸟都被感动得哀鸣，走兽也被感动得悲号。
English: The cries shook the mountains, forests and fields, the birds were moved to wail, and the animals were moved to mourn.

古文：畴卧于草间，忽有人通云：刘幽州来，欲与田子泰言生平之事。
现代文：田畴躺在草丛里，忽然有人通报说，刘虞已经来了，想和田畴说说生平的事。
English: Tian Zeng was lying in the grass when someone suddenly announced that Liu Yu had arrived and wanted to talk to Tian Zeng about his life.

古文：畴神悟远识。知是刘虞之魂，既进而拜。
现代文：田畴本来就是个十分聪明有见识的人，知道是刘虞的鬼魂现形，就参见跪拜，仍然痛哭不止。
English: Tian Zang was originally a very clever and knowledgeable person. When he knew that it was Liu Yu's ghost, he knelt down and wept.

古文：畴泣不自止，因相与进鸡进酒。畴醉。虞曰：公孙瓒购求子甚急，宜窜伏避害。
现代文：刘虞就和田畴一起喝酒吃鸡肉。田畴喝醉了，刘虞说，现在公孙瓒悬赏捉拿你，你应该赶快躲起来以免被害。
English: Liu Yu drank wine and ate chicken with Tian Zhen. Tian Zhen was drunk, Liu Yu said, now Gongsun Yao is offering a reward to catch you, you should quickly hide to avoid being harmed.

古文：畴对曰：君臣之道，生则尽其义。今见君之灵，愿得同归九泉。
现代文：田畴说，自古君臣的大理就是为臣在活着时对君王尽忠尽义，现在见到君王的魂灵，我也愿意一同魂归九泉。
English: Tian Zang said that since ancient times, the principle of a prince was to be loyal to the king when he was alive. Now that I have seen the king's soul, I would like to return to Nine Springs with him.

古文：骨且不朽，安可逃乎？
现代文：尸骨尚且不朽，我怎么可以逃走呢？
English: How can I escape when the bones are immortal?

古文：虞曰：子万古之高士也，深慎尔仪。
现代文：刘虞说，你真是千古少有的仁人志士，愿你永远保持你的气节吧。
English: Liu Yu said, "You are truly a rare benevolent person in the ages. May you always keep your temper."

古文：奄然不见，而畴醉亦醒。
现代文：说完消失不见，田畴也醒过来了。
English: After saying that, he disappeared, and Tianzheng woke up.

古文：文颖
现代文：文颖
English: Wen Ying

古文：汉南阳文颖，字叔长，建安中，为甘陵府丞。
现代文：汉南阳人文颖。字叔长。建安年间。任甘陵府丞。
English: Hannan Yang Renmin Ying, nicknamed "Uncle Chief," served as Kanling prefectural governor during the Jianan era.

古文：过界止宿，夜三鼓时，梦见一人跪前曰：昔我先人，葬我于此。
现代文：有一次到外地去，晚上住下后，夜里三鼓时。梦见一个人跪在他面前说，过去我祖上把我埋在这里。
English: Once when I was out of town, after I had settled down for the night, at three o'clock in the morning, I dreamed of a man kneeling before me and saying, "In the past, my ancestors buried me here."

古文：水来湍墓，棺木溺，渍水处半，然无以自温。
现代文：现在我的墓被水淹了，棺木一半浸在水里，我自己没有办法。
English: Now my grave is flooded, the coffin is half-submerged, and I can't do anything.

古文：闻君在此。故来相依。
现代文：听说你在这里，所以来求你。
English: I heard you were here, so please come.

古文：欲屈明日，暂住须臾。
现代文：希望你明天不要走，再停留一阵。
English: I hope you don't leave tomorrow and stay a while longer.

古文：幸为相迁高燥处。
现代文：望能约我迁移到高处干燥的地方。
English: I hope to be able to relocate to a higher, drier place.

古文：鬼披衣示颖，而皆沾湿。颖心怆然，即寤。
现代文：鬼让文颖看自己的衣服，果然都湿了，文颖心里很难过，就醒了。
English: The ghost asked Wen Ying to look at her clothes, and sure enough, they were all wet. Wen Ying felt very sad and woke up.

古文：访诸左右，曰：梦为虚耳，何是怪？
现代文：醒后问旁边睡的人们，都说，梦都是假的，有什么奇怪的。
English: When I woke up and asked the people sleeping next to me, they all said that the dreams were all fake and that there was something strange about them.

古文：颖乃还眠，向晨，复梦见，谓颖曰：我以穷苦告君，奈何不相愍悼乎？
现代文：文颖就接着睡。睡到拂晓，又梦见那鬼来说，我把我的困苦告诉你，你怎么不可怜我呢？
English: Wen Ying then went to sleep. She slept until dawn, and dreamed of the ghost, saying, "I'll tell you about my hardships, why don't you have pity on me?"

古文：颖梦中问曰：子为谁？
现代文：文颖在梦中问，你是谁？
English: Wen Ying asked in her dream, who are you?

古文：对曰：吾本赵人。今属河芒氏之神。
现代文：鬼说，我本来是赵地的人，现在归河芒神管。
English: The ghost said, I used to be a person from Zhao Di, but now I belong to He Mang Shenguan.

古文：颖曰：子棺今何所在？
现代文：文颖问，你的棺木现在何处？
English: Wen Ying asked, where is your coffin now?

古文：对曰：近在君帐北十数步，水侧枯杨树下，即是吾也。
现代文：鬼说，只离你住地北面十几步远，水边的一根枯杨树下，我就在那里。
English: The ghost said, "I am just a dozen steps north of where you live, under a dead poplar tree by the water's edge. I am there."

古文：天将明，不复得见，君必念之。
现代文：天快亮了，我该走了，请你别忘了。
English: It's getting light. I should go. Please don't forget.

古文：颖答曰：诺。
现代文：文颖答应后就醒了。
English: After Wen Ying agreed, she woke up.

古文：忽然便寤。天明可发，颖曰：虽云梦不足怪，此何太过。
现代文：天亮后要出发时，文颖说，虽然梦不足怪，我这梦做的也太过分真实了。
English: When it was time to leave after dawn, Wen Ying said that although the dream was not strange, my dream was too real.

古文：左右曰：亦何惜须臾，不验之耶？
现代文：朋友们说，也用不了多少时间，何不去验一验呢。
English: Friends said it wouldn't take much time, so why not have a test.

古文：颖即起，率十数人将导，顺水上，果得一枯杨。
现代文：文颖就领着十几个人，顺河上行，果然看见一棵枯杨树。
English: Wen Ying led more than a dozen people up the river and saw a dead poplar tree.

古文：曰：是矣。
现代文：说，就是这儿。
English: It's right here.

古文：掘其下，未几，果得棺，棺甚朽坏，没半水中。
现代文：往下挖，没一会就看见一个棺木。已经朽坏，被水淹了一半。
English: Digging down, it didn't take long to see a coffin, decayed and half-submerged.

古文：颖谓左右曰：向闻于人，谓之虚矣。世俗所传，不可无验。
现代文：文颖就对大家说，都说梦是虚的，人们的传说，得检验后才能证明啊。
English: Wen Ying said to everyone that they all said that dreams are false, and people's legends can only be proved after examination.

古文：为移其棺，葬之而去。
现代文：于是把棺材挪了，埋葬以后才离去。
English: So he moved the coffin and buried it before leaving.

古文：王樊
现代文：王樊
English: Wang Yao

古文：《敦煌实录》云，王樊卒，有盗开其塚。见樊与人樗蒲，以酒赐盗者。
现代文：《敦煌实录》上说：王樊死后，有盗墓人挖开他的坟，看见王樊在墓中和人用樗蒲玩赌博的游戏。
English: "Dunhuang Record" said: After Wang Qian's death, a grave robber dug up his grave and saw Wang Qian in the grave playing a gambling game with a man with an iris.

古文：盗者惶怖，饮之。
现代文：看见盗贼，王樊请他喝酒。
English: Seeing the thief, Wang Yao invited him to drink.

古文：见有人牵铜马出塚者。
现代文：盗贼惊慌害怕，就喝了酒。然后就看见一个人牵墓中的一匹铜马走了。
English: Panicked and afraid, the thieves drank the wine and then saw a man leading a bronze horse out of the tomb.

古文：夜有神人至城门，自云：我王樊之使，今有发塚者。
现代文：当天夜里有位神人来到城门前说，我是王樊派来的。
English: That night, a man of God came to the city gate and said, "I have been sent by Wang Yao."

古文：以酒墨其唇讫。旦至。可以验而擒之。
现代文：有一个人盗墓，王樊用酒染黑了盗贼的嘴唇，天亮后请你查验抓住他。
English: There was a man who robbed a grave. Wang Yao used wine to blacken the lips of the thief. After dawn, please check and catch him.

古文：盗即入城，城门者乃缚诘之，如神所言。
现代文：盗墓贼进城时，果然被守城门的人认出，绑起来一审，果然像那神说的一样。
English: When the grave robber entered the city, he was indeed recognized by the person guarding the city gate, tied up and brought to trial, just as the god had said.

古文：秦巨伯
现代文：秦巨伯
English: Qin Jubei

古文：琅邪秦巨伯，年六十。
现代文：琅邪县的秦巨伯，六十岁。
English: Qin Jubei, 60, from Yuya County.

古文：尝夜行饮酒，道经蓬山庙。忽见其两孙迎之，扶持百余步，便捽伯颈着地骂：老奴，汝某日捶我，我今当杀汝。
现代文：有一次夜里出去喝酒，经过蓬山庙时，看见他的两个孙子迎上前来，扶他走了一百多步，忽然把他的脖子揪住往地上按，还骂道：老东西，你那天打我，我今天就该杀了你！
English: Once, when he was out drinking at night and passing by the Pengshan Temple, he saw his two grandsons come to meet him, help him walk more than a hundred steps, and suddenly put his neck on the ground and curse him: "Old man, you hit me that day, I should kill you today!"

古文：伯思惟：某时信捶此孙。
现代文：秦巨伯一想，前几天真是揍过孙子，就装死躺下。
English: Qin Jubei thought for a moment, the other day I really did hit my grandson, so I pretended to be dead and lay down.

古文：伯乃佯死，乃置伯去。
现代文：两个孙子就扔下他走了。
English: His two grandsons left him behind.

古文：伯归家，欲治两孙。
现代文：回到家后，就要收拾两个孙子。
English: When I get home, I have to tidy up after my two grandchildren.

古文：孙惊惧叩头，言为子孙，宁可有此，恐是鬼魅。
现代文：孙子又奇怪又害怕，不住磕头说，我们作孙子的怎么敢作出这种事呢？是不是鬼怪作崇呀。
English: The grandson was both surprised and frightened, and kept saying, "How dare we grandchildren do such a thing? Isn't it the work of a ghost?"

古文：乞更试之，伯意悟。
现代文：您再试试看。秦巨伯心里就明白了。
English: Try it again. Qin Jubei understood it in his heart.

古文：数日，乃诈醉，行此庙间。复见两孙来扶持伯。
现代文：几天后，他又装醉来到庙前，果然又见两个孙子迎上来搀扶。
English: A few days later, he pretended to be drunk again and came to the front of the temple. Sure enough, he saw his two grandsons coming up to help him.

古文：伯乃急持。动作不得。达家，乃是两人也。伯著火灸之，腹背俱焦坼，出著庭中，夜皆亡去，伯恨不得之。
现代文：秦巨伯狠狠抓住他们，一个也动弹不了，拖到家里一看，还是那两个人，就用火来烧烤，直烧得他们肚子后背全都胡焦了，才扔到院子里，结果还是都逃掉了，秦巨伯后悔万分。
English: Qin Jubei grabbed them hard, and one of them couldn't move. When he dragged them to his home, he saw that it was still those two people, so he used fire to grill them, until their stomachs and backs were all charred, and then threw them into the yard. As a result, they all escaped. Qin Jubei regretted it very much.

古文：后月，又佯酒醉夜行，怀刀以去，家不知也。
现代文：一个月后，他又假装喝醉了，怀揣着刀夜晚出去。家里人不知道他那里去了，夜深还不回。
English: A month later, he pretended to be drunk again and went out at night with a knife. His family didn't know where he had gone, and he didn't return until late at night.

古文：极夜不还，其孙又恐为此鬼所困，仍俱往迎之，伯乃刺杀之。
现代文：他的两个孙子也担心再遇上鬼怪，就一块出去迎他，结果被他全给杀死。
English: His two grandsons were also worried about encountering the ghost again, so they went out together to meet him, but he ended up killing them all.

古文：宗岱
现代文：宗岱
English: 宗

古文：宗岱为青州刺史，禁淫祀，著《无鬼论》。甚精，无能屈者。邻州咸化之。
现代文：宗禁百姓胡乱敬神，还写了《无鬼论》，道理讲得很精辟，没人能驳倒他，连邻州的人们也被他说服。
English: Zong Zong forbade the people to worship God in a disorderly manner. He also wrote "On the Absence of Ghosts," and his reasoning was very incisive. No one could refute him, and even people from neighboring states were convinced by him.

古文：后有一书生。葛巾，修刺诣岱。与之谈甚久，岱理未屈。
现代文：后来有个书生递了名贴来见宗岱，两个人谈了很久，宗岱始终坚持自己的论点。
English: Later, a student came to see Zonglu with a name tag, and the two had a long talk. Zonglu always insisted on his point of view.

古文：辞或未畅，书生辄为申之。
现代文：有时候宗岱用辞不当，书生就替他引申提醒。
English: Sometimes Zonglu's words are inappropriate, and the students remind him of this.

古文：次及无鬼论，便苦难岱，岱理欲屈。书生乃振衣而起曰：君绝我辈血食二十余年。君有青牛髯奴，未得相困耳。
现代文：后来谈到无鬼论，书生就一再地驳斥，宗岱有点说不过了，书生就整整衣服站起来说，你断了我们的祭祀供奉二十多年，你有青牛和长须仆人，保护你不受困扰。
English: Later, when it came to the ghost-free theory, Shousei repeatedly refuted it. Zonglu was a bit speechless. Shousei stood up with his clothes in order and said, "You have interrupted our sacrificial services for more than twenty years. You have young cattle and long-haired servants to protect you from being troubled."

古文：今奴已叛，牛已死，令日得相制矣。
现代文：你到现在奴仆叛逃，青牛已死；今天我们也要制一制你了。
English: Even now your slave has defected, and the young bull is dead; today we will make an end of you.

古文：言绝，遂失书生，明日而岱亡。
现代文：说完书生就不见了。第二天，宗岱也死了。
English: After saying this, the student disappeared. The next day, Zong Yao also died.

古文：郑奇
现代文：郑奇
English: Zheng Qi

古文：后汉时，汝南汝阳西门亭有鬼魅，宾客宿止多死亡。或亡发失精。
现代文：后汉时，汝南汝阳的西门亭馆舍闹鬼。宾客住这馆舍的很多人死去，或者头发突然被鬼剃光，或者精神失常。
English: In the late Han Dynasty, the Ximen Pavilion Hall in Ruyang, Yunnan Province, was haunted. Many of the guests who lived in this hall died, or their hair was suddenly shaved off by ghosts, or they went insane.

古文：郡侍奉掾宜禄郑奇休，去亭六七里，有美妇人乞寄载，奇初难之。然后上车。
现代文：有个当郡侍奉掾的宜禄人郑奇到西门亭去，离亭六七里遇见一个美丽的女子要求搭他的车，郑奇起初不允，后来就让她上了车。
English: Zheng Qi, a man from Yilu who worked as a county servant, went to Ximen Pavilion. Six or seven miles from the pavilion, he met a beautiful woman who asked for a ride in his car. At first, Zheng Qi did not agree, but later he let her get on the car.

古文：入亭，趋至楼下，吏卒白楼不可上。
现代文：到了西门亭，和女人一块到了楼下并要送女人上楼。吏卒说楼上常闹鬼，劝郑奇别上楼。
English: When he arrived at the West Gate Pavilion, he and the woman went downstairs together and wanted to take the woman upstairs. The official said that there were often ghosts upstairs, and advised Zheng Qi not to go upstairs.

古文：奇曰：恶也。
现代文：郑奇说，我不怕。
English: Zheng Qi said, I am not afraid.

古文：亦昏冥，遂上楼。
现代文：当时天已经黑了，就和那女人一齐上楼，并和她同宿了。
English: It was already dark, so I went upstairs with the woman and slept with her.

古文：与妇人接宿，未明发去。亭卒上楼扫除，见死妇，大惊，走白亭长。击鼓会诸庐吏，共集诊之，乃享西北八里吴氏妇，新亡，夜临殡火灭，及火至失之。
现代文：天没亮郑奇就走了。亭卒上楼打扫，看见那女人已死去，大吃一惊，赶快去报告亭长，并敲鼓召集周围村庄的管事的一齐来看那个死女人，才认出女人是亭西北八里的吴家女子，刚刚死去还没埋。夜晚，女人尸体前的长明灯突然灭了，等再点上灯才发现女尸不见了。
English: At dusk, Zheng Qi left. The pavilion attendant went upstairs to clean, saw that the woman had died, was taken aback, quickly went to report to the pavilion manager, and beat the drum to summon the stewards of the surrounding villages to come and see the dead woman together. Only then did he recognize the woman as a woman from the Wu family, eight miles northwest of the pavilion, who had just died and had not yet been buried. At night, the long light in front of the woman's body suddenly went out, and when the light was turned on again, the woman's body was gone.

古文：其家即持去。
现代文：于是女子他家把她的尸体领回去。
English: So the woman's family took her body back.

古文：奇发，行数里，腹痛。
现代文：郑奇上路后，走了几里地突然肚子痛。
English: After Zheng Qi went on the road, he suddenly had a stomachache after walking for several miles.

古文：到南顿利阳亭，加剧物故。
现代文：走到南顿的利阳亭，肚子痛得更厉害了，很快就死去。
English: When he walked to the Liyang Pavilion in Nantong, his stomach pain became more severe, and he soon died.

古文：楼遂无敢复上。
现代文：后来那楼就再也没人敢上去了。
English: Later, no one dared to go up to that floor.

古文：钟繇
现代文：钟繇
English: The Bell Tower

古文：钟繇忽不复朝会，意性有异于常。
现代文：钟繇有一阵忽然不去上朝了。性情也和过去不一样。
English: For a while, Zhong Qi suddenly did not want to go to the palace. His disposition was also different from the past.

古文：寮友问其故，云：常有妇人来，美丽非凡间者。
现代文：同僚朋友问他怎么回事，钟繇说他常和一个美丽非凡的女人幽会。
English: When a colleague and friend asked him what was going on, Zhong Qi said that he often had trysts with a beautiful and extraordinary woman.

古文：曰：必是鬼物，可杀之。
现代文：朋友说那一定是个鬼怪，应该杀了她。
English: Friends said it must be a ghost and that she should be killed.

古文：后来止户外，曰：何以有相杀意？
现代文：后来那女人来会钟繇时站在门外质问道，为什么起了杀我的意思？
English: Later, when the woman came to the bell tower, she stood outside the door and asked, "Why did you want to kill me?"

古文：元常曰：无此。
现代文：钟繇像平时那样说，那有这事？
English: "What's the matter with that?" said Zhong Yao, as usual.

古文：殷勤呼入。
现代文：还是非常亲切地把那女人叫进屋来。
English: Again, very kindly, he called the woman into the room.

古文：意亦有不忍，乃微伤之，便出去，以新绵拭血，竟路。
现代文：钟繇举刀要杀实在不忍心，就用刀砍伤了她。女人逃出屋，用新棉花边跑边擦身上的血，血滴到路上。
English: The woman ran out of the house and used fresh cotton to wipe the blood off her body as she ran. The blood dripped onto the road.

古文：明日，使人寻迹，至一大塚，棺中一妇人。形体如生，白练衫，丹繍裲裆。
现代文：第二天，叫人顺着血迹找到一个大坟墓，棺才里躺着个女人，象活人似的，穿着白绸衫红繍坎肩。
English: The next day, the blood trail was followed to a large grave where a woman lay lifelike in a white silk blouse with a red embroidered cape.

古文：伤一髀，以裲裆中绵拭血。
现代文：一看，是伤在大腿上，用坎肩里的棉花擦的血。
English: At first glance, it was blood from a wound on her thigh, wiped with cotton wool from her shoulder.

古文：自此便绝。
现代文：从此那女人再也没有来。
English: The woman never came back.

古文：夏侯玄
现代文：夏侯玄
English: Xia Houxuan

古文：夏侯玄被司马景王所诛，宗人为设祭。
现代文：夏侯玄被司马景王杀了以后，族人为他设酒肉祭奠。
English: After Xia Hou Xuan was killed by Sima Jing Wang, the tribesmen held a wine and meat festival for him.

古文：忽玄来灵座，脱头于边，悉敛果鱼酒肉之属，以内颈中毕，还自安其头。既而言曰：吾得请于帝矣。
现代文：看见他来到灵牌的座上，把自己的头摘下来放在一边，把供桌上的鱼果酒肉往脖腔里塞，塞完自己又把头安上说，我已经上请于天帝了。
English: Seeing him come to the seat of the spirit card, he took off his head and put it to one side. He stuffed the flesh of the fish, fruit and wine on the table into his neck cavity. After stuffing himself, he rested his head and said, "I have been invited to the Heavenly Emperor."

古文：子元无嗣也。
现代文：世宗将没有后人。
English: Sejong will have no descendants.

古文：寻有永嘉之役，军还，世宗殂而无子。
现代文：不久就发生了永嘉之战。军队回来后世宗死了，没有儿子。
English: Soon after, the Battle of Yongjia took place. After the army returned, Shizong died without a son.

古文：稽康
现代文：稽康
English: 稽康

古文：稽康灯下弹琴，忽有一人，长丈余，著黑单衣，革带。
现代文：稽康有一次在灯下弹琴。忽然有个妖怪进屋，高一丈多，穿黑衣服，腰扎皮带。
English: On one occasion, Cheikang was playing the piano under the lamp. Suddenly, a monster entered the house, taller than he was, wearing black clothes and a leather belt around his waist.

古文：康熟视之，乃吹火灭之曰：耻与魑魅争光。
现代文：稽康盯着妖怪看了一会儿，一口吹灭了灯说，和你这样的妖怪同在灯光下，我真感到羞耻！
English: Jingkang stared at the monster for a while, blew out the lamp and said, "I'm really ashamed to be with a monster like you under the light!"

古文：尝行，去路数十里，有亭名月华。
现代文：还有一次，他出门远行，走到离洛阳几十里的地方，住在月华亭里。
English: Another time, he went on a long journey, walked to a place dozens of miles away from Luoyang, and lived in Yuehua Pavilion.

古文：投此亭，由来杀人，中散心神萧散，了无惧意。
现代文：有人告诉他，这里过去常杀人。稽康为人潇洒旷达，一点也不怕。
English: Someone told him that people used to kill people here in the past. Ji Kang is a dashing and outgoing person, and he is not afraid at all.

古文：至一更操琴，先作诸弄。
现代文：一更时他在亭中弹琴，弹了好几个曲子，琴声悠扬动听。
English: One day, he was playing the piano in the pavilion. He played several pieces, and the sound of the piano was melodious.

古文：雅声逸奏，空中称善。
现代文：忽听到空中有人叫好。
English: Suddenly I heard someone shout hello in the air.

古文：中散抚琴而呼之：君是何人？
现代文：稽康边弹边问：你是谁呀？
English: While playing, Jingkang asked, "Who are you?"

古文：答云：身是故人，幽没于此。闻君弹琴，音曲清和，昔所好。故来听耳。
现代文：回答说，我是一个古代幽灵，死在这里，听你的琴弹得清新悠扬，我以前爱好琴所以来欣赏。
English: He answered, I am an ancient ghost, who died here, listening to your piano playing so fresh and melodious, I used to love the piano, so I came to enjoy it.

古文：身不幸非理就终，形体残毁，不宜接见君子。
现代文：我生前没得到妥善的安葬，形象损毁了，不便现形和你见面。
English: I didn't get a proper burial when I was alive, my image was ruined, and it's inconvenient to meet you now.

古文：然爱君之琴，要当相见，君勿怪恶之。
现代文：然而我十分喜欢你的琴艺。如果我现形，你不要害怕讨厌。
English: However, I'm very fond of your playing. If I appear, don't be afraid to hate me.

古文：君可更作数曲。
现代文：你再弹几只曲子吧。
English: Play a few more tunes.

古文：中散复为抚琴，击节。
现代文：稽康就又为鬼魂弹琴，鬼魂就合着琴声打拍子。
English: Cheikang then played the piano for the ghost, and the ghost matched the sound of the piano to the beat.

古文：曰：夜已久。何不来也？
现代文：稽康说，夜已深了，你怎么还不现形见我，你的形象再可怕我也不会在意的。
English: Jingkang said, "It's already late at night, how come you haven't appeared to see me? I wouldn't care if your image was terrible."

古文：形骸之间。复何足计？乃手挈其头曰：闻君奏琴。不觉心开神悟。
现代文：鬼魂就现了形，用手捂着自己的头说，听你弹琴，我感到心情舒畅，仿佛又复活了。
English: The ghost appeared, put his hands on his head and said, "Listening to you play the piano, I feel at ease, as if I have come back to life."

古文：恍若暂生。遂与共论音声之趣，辞甚清辩。谓中散曰：君试以琴见与。乃弹《广陵散》。
现代文：于是就和稽康谈论琴艺方面的理论，谈得很有道理，并向稽康要过琴来，自己弹了一首著名的古典《广陵散》。
English: So he talked with Jikang about the theory of piano art, which made a lot of sense, and asked Jikang to play the piano, and he played a famous classic "Guangling San."

古文：便从受之。果悉得。
现代文：稽康要求鬼魂把这首曲子教给他，鬼魂就教了。
English: He asked the ghost to teach him the tune, and the ghost did.

古文：中散先所受引，殊不及。
现代文：稽康过去曾学过，但学得远远不如鬼魂弹得好。
English: Jingkang had studied in the past, but his learning was far from as good as the ghost's.

古文：与中散誓，不得教人。
现代文：鬼魂教完后，让稽康发誓决不再教给别人。
English: After he finished teaching the ghost, he made Jingkang swear never to teach it to anyone else.

古文：天明，语中散。相与虽一遇于今夕，可以远同千载，于此长绝。
现代文：天亮时鬼魂告别说，虽然我们只交往了一夜，但友情可以胜过千年啊！现在我们永远分别了。
English: At dawn the ghost bade farewell, saying, "Though we have only known each other for one night, friendship can last a thousand years! Now we are parted forever."

古文：不胜怅然。
现代文：两个心里都十分悲伤。
English: Both of their hearts are very sad.

古文：倪彦思
现代文：倪彦思
English: Ni Yanshi

古文：吴时。嘉兴倪彦思。居县西埏里。有鬼魅在其家。
现代文：吴时嘉兴有个倪彦思，住在县城西边墓道边上，有个鬼住在他家。
English: Wu Shijiaxing has a Ni Yan Si, living in the west of the county seat on the edge of the cemetery road, there is a ghost living in his home.

古文：与人语。饮食如人，唯不见形。
现代文：鬼能吃能喝能跟人说话，只是不现形。
English: Ghosts can eat, drink and talk to people, but they don't appear.

古文：彦思奴婢，有窃骂大家者，云今当以语。
现代文：倪彦思的仆人婢女有时背后骂主人，鬼就说，我告诉你们主人。
English: Ni Yanshi's servants and handmaidens sometimes cursed their masters behind their backs, and the ghost said, "I'll tell your masters."

古文：彦思治之，无敢詈之者。
现代文：倪彦思就处罚仆人，仆人再不敢偷骂了。
English: Ni Yanshi punished the servant, and the servant no longer dared to curse.

古文：彦思有小妻，魅从求之。彦思乃迎道士逐之。
现代文：鬼还总纠缠彦思的小老婆，彦思就请了道士来撵鬼。
English: The ghost also always pestered Yansi's little wife, so Yansi invited a Taoist priest to chase the ghost.

古文：酒肴即设，鬼乃取厕中草粪，布著其上。
现代文：道士摆好酒肉正要祭神，鬼却弄来厕所的粪洒在酒肉上。
English: The Taoist priest had laid out the wine and meat and was about to offer it to the god, but the ghost caused the excrement from the toilet to spill on the wine and meat.

古文：道士便盛击鼓，召请著神。魁乃取虎伏，于神座上吹作角声音。
现代文：道士就使劲敲鼓召请诸神，鬼就拿便器跳到神座上吹出军中画角的声音。
English: The Taoist priest beat the drum hard to summon the gods, and the ghost took the urinal and jumped onto the god's throne to blow out the sound of the military horn.

古文：有顷。道士忽觉背上冷，惊起解衣，乃虎伏也。于是道士罢去。
现代文：不大会儿道士觉得背上发凉，脱了衣服一看是那便器钻到衣服里，道士只好逃掉。
English: The not-so-young Taoist felt cold on his back, and when he took off his clothes, he saw that the toilet had drilled into his clothes, and the Taoist had to escape.

古文：彦思夜于被中，窃于妪语，共患此魅。魅即屋梁上，谓彦思曰：汝与妇道吾，吾今当截汝屋梁。
现代文：夜里彦思和老婆在被窝里商量除鬼的事，鬼就在屋梁上说，你敢和你老婆讲究我，我就断你的房梁。
English: At night, Yan Si and his wife discussed the matter of exorcism under the covers. The ghost said on the roof beam, "If you dare to be particular about me with your wife, I will break the beam of your house."

古文：即隆隆有声。
现代文：接着就听见忽隆隆的截梁声。
English: Then I heard the sudden rumble of the girders being cut.

古文：彦思惧梁断，取火照视，魅即灭火，截梁声愈急。
现代文：彦思怕梁断就点上灯看，鬼把灯吹灭，梁声就更大了。
English: Yan Si was afraid that the beam would break, so he turned on the lamp to see. The ghost blew out the lamp, and the beam became louder.

古文：彦思惧屋坏。
现代文：彦思怕屋子塌，就让家中老小都躲出去。
English: Afraid of the house collapsing, Yanshi let all the children in the family go into hiding.

古文：大小悉遣出，更取火，视梁如故。魁大笑，问彦思：复道吾不？
现代文：再点上灯看，房梁却好好的。这时鬼大笑说，还敢不敢讲究我了？
English: When I turned on the light again, I saw that the beams of the house were fine. At this time, the ghost laughed loudly and said, "How dare you pay attention to me?

古文：郡中典农闻之曰：此神正当是狸物耳！
现代文：郡里的典农官听说后对人说，这个鬼一定是狐狸变的。
English: When the county's agricultural inspector heard about it, he said that the ghost must have been turned into a fox.

古文：此魅即往谓典农曰：汝取官若千百斛谷，藏著某处，为吏污秽，而敢论吾。
现代文：鬼就跑去对典农官说，你偷了官仓里几百斗谷子藏在某地了，当官的贪污，还有脸议论我。
English: The ghost ran to the official and said, "You have stolen hundreds of bushels of grain from the official storehouse and hidden them somewhere. The official is corrupt and has the cheek to talk about me."

古文：今当白于官，将人取汝所盗谷。
现代文：看我不把你的丑事告官，让官府搜出你藏的粮食！
English: See if I don't report your dirty deeds to the authorities, and let them search out your hidden grain!

古文：典农大怖而谢之，自后无敢道。
现代文：典农官吓坏了，忙向鬼道歉赔罪，以后再也不敢讲鬼的事了。
English: The agronomist was terrified, and he was busy apologizing to the ghost for his sins. He never dared to talk about the ghost again.

古文：三年后去，不知所在。
现代文：过了三年后，这鬼就没了，也不知去了那里。
English: After three years, the ghost disappeared, and I don't know where it went.

古文：沈季
现代文：沈季
English: Shen Ji

古文：吴兴沈季，吴天纪二年，为豫章太守。
现代文：吴兴人沈季在吴天纪二年当豫章的太守。
English: Wu Xingren Shen Ji became the governor of Yuanzhang in the second year of Wu Tianji.

古文：白日，于厅上见一人，著黄巾练衣，自称汝南平兴许子将，求改葬，悠然不见。
现代文：大白天在厅上看见一个人头戴黄巾身穿白绸衣，自称是汝南平兴许子将，要求给他迁坟，说完就不见了。
English: During the day, I saw a person wearing a yellow scarf on his head and a white silk robe in the hall. He claimed to be Runan Ping Xing Xuzong, and asked to move his grave. After saying this, he disappeared.

古文：季求其丧，不知所在，遂招魂葬之。
现代文：沈季找他的坟，找不到，只好祭奠招魂作了安葬礼。
English: Shen Ji looked for his grave, but couldn't find it, so he had to hold a memorial service for him.

古文：糜竺
现代文：糜竺
English: 

古文：糜竺用陶朱公计术，日益亿万之利，赀拟王侯。有宝库千间。
现代文：糜竺像陶朱公那样精于计算经商有道，获得了亿万的利润，光库房就上千间。
English: He was as good at calculation as Tao Zhu Gong, and he was a shrewd businessman. He made hundreds of millions in profits and owned thousands of warehouses.

古文：竺性能振生死，家马厩屋侧，有古塚，中有伏尸。
现代文：比得上王侯的豪富，他的声名震动了阴阳两界。他家马圈旁边有一座古墓，里面有一副尸骨。
English: Comparable to the wealthy princes, his fame has shaken both the yin and yang worlds. There is an ancient tomb next to his stables, which contains a pair of bones.

古文：竺夜闻其泣声，忽见一妇人，袒背而来，云：昔汉末为赤眉所发，扣棺见剥，今袒肉在地，垂二百余年，就将军求更深埋，并乞弊衣自掩。
现代文：有天夜里糜竺听见哭声就出去找，只见一个光着上身的女人向他走来说，汉代末年赤眉造反，挖了我的墓，砸了棺材剥去我的衣服。我光着身子躺在地下已二百年了，请将军把我深葬，并给我件衣服遮身子。
English: One night he heard crying and went out to look for her. He saw a bare-breasted woman approaching him and saying, "In the last years of the Han Dynasty, the Red Eyebrows rebelled, dug up my grave, smashed the coffin and stripped off my clothes. I have been lying naked in the ground for two hundred years. Please have the general bury me deep and give me a piece of clothing to cover myself."

古文：竺即令为石椁瓦棺。设祭既毕，以青布衫裙，置于塚上。经一年。
现代文：麻竺就命人做了一石椁和瓦棺材，设祭礼把那女人安葬，并在她墓上放了一套青布衫裙。
English: Mahao ordered someone to make a stone coffin and a tile coffin, hold a ceremony to bury the woman, and put a blue shirt and skirt on her grave.

古文：行于路曲，忽见前妇人葬所，青气如龙蛇之形。
现代文：一年后，糜竺走路时忽然见到那女人坟上缭绕着像龙蛇般的青气。
English: A year later, he was walking along when he suddenly saw the woman's grave surrounded by a dragon-like green haze.

古文：或有人问竺曰：将非龙怪耶？
现代文：有人问他是不是龙怪，他自己也很奇怪，就问他的僮仆。
English: Someone asked him if he was a dragon monster, and he himself was very strange, so he asked his servant.

古文：竺乃疑此异，乃问其家僮，曰：时见一青芦杖，自然出入于门，疑其神也，不敢言。
现代文：僮仆说，常常看见一根青芦杖从墓门出出进进，也怀疑是神，没敢说。糜竺为人好忌多疑，好听信谗言拷打杀人，所以僮仆不敢多说话。
English: The servant said that he often saw a reed coming and going from the door of the tomb, and he also suspected that it was a god, but he did not dare to say anything.

古文：竺为性多忌，信厌求之士，有言中忤，即加刑戮，故家童不言。竺赀贷如丘山，不可算记，内以方诸为具。
现代文：糜竺家里的财物堆积如山。
English: The family's belongings piled up like a mountain.

古文：及大珠如卵，散满于庭，故谓之宝庭，而外人不得窥。
现代文：无法计数。家里拿在月下承露取水的大盘装满了鸡蛋大小的珍珠，放了一院子，所以他家叫宝庭，不许外人看。
English: He can't count them. At home, he keeps a large dish full of egg-sized pearls on which he collects water from the dew under the moon. It covers a whole yard, so his home is called the treasure garden, and no outsiders are allowed to look at it.

古文：数日，忽见有青衣童子数人来曰：糜竺家当有火厄，万不遗一。
现代文：有天忽然有几个青衣童子来说，糜竺家将发生火灾，一切都将烧尽。
English: One day, several boys in blue suddenly said that there would be a fire in their family and everything would be burned down.

古文：赖君能恻愍枯骨，天道不辜君德，故来禳却此火，当使君财物不尽。
现代文：由于你能可怜无主的枯骨，上天念你的功德，派我们来救火，使你的财物不至于全毁于大火。
English: Since you are able to have pity on the dead bones of the ownerless, may the heavens recite your merits and send us to put out the fire, so that your belongings will not be completely destroyed by the fire.

古文：竺乃掘沟渠，周绕其库内。
现代文：从现在起，你自己也要想想办法。
English: From now on, you're on your own.

古文：旬日，火从库内起，烧其珠玉，十分得一。
现代文：糜竺就让人把库房周围都挖了沟渠防火。然而十天后火从库房内着起来。
English: So they had a ditch dug around the warehouse to prevent a fire. However, ten days later, the fire spread from inside the warehouse.

古文：皆是阳燧得旱烁，自能烧物也。
现代文：这是因为太阳太毒，天长日久的旱晒东西本身就能自燃，珠玉珍宝烧得只剩下十分之一。
English: This is because the sun is too toxic, and things that have been dry for a long time can spontaneously combust. Only one-tenth of the jewels and treasures are left.

古文：火盛时，见数十青衣童子来扑火，有青气如云，复火上即灭。
现代文：大火旺时，看见几十个青衣童子前来救火，有像云似的青气盖在火上火就灭了。
English: When the fire was raging, he saw dozens of boys in blue uniforms come to put out the fire. A cloud of blue gas covered the fire and the fire was extinguished.

古文：童子又云，多聚鹳鸟之类以禳灾，鹳能聚水巢上也。
现代文：童子又让糜竺多养些鹳鸟之类，因为鹳鸟能把水存在窝里。
English: The boy also asked the stork to raise more ostriches and the like, because ostriches can store water in their nests.

古文：家人乃收集鶄数千头，养于池渠之中，厌火也。竺叹曰：人生财运有限，不得盈溢。
现代文：糜竺就让仆人收养了几千只鶄养在水池里以防火。失火后，糜竺感叹地说，看来人的财运是有限度的，不能聚财无度，不然财富就会招来祸害。
English: Toad let his servants adopt several thousand toads and keep them in a pond to prevent fire. After the fire, Toad lamented that it seems that people's wealth is limited, and they cannot accumulate wealth without limit. Otherwise, wealth will bring disaster.

古文：竺惧为身之患，时三国交兵，军用万倍。乃输其珍宝车服，以助先主。黄金一亿斤，锦绮繍耗罽，积如丘山，骏马千匹。
现代文：后来三国交战，需要大量财物。糜竺就向刘备献了大量的珍宝车马衣物，黄金一亿斤，还有数不尽的绫罗绸缎绵繍毡毯，堆得像山，还献了一千匹骏马。
English: Later, when the three countries were at war, a large amount of wealth was needed. Zou presented Liu Bei with a large number of precious chariots and horses, clothing, 100 million catties of gold, countless embroidered silk and embroidered silk carpets, piled up like a mountain, and a thousand horses.

古文：及蜀破后。无所有。饮恨而终。
现代文：后来蜀国亡了，糜竺变得一无所有，含恨而死。
English: Later, after the death of Shu, Yao became penniless and died with a grudge.

古文：王弼
现代文：王弼
English: Wang Yao

古文：王弼注《易》，辄笑郑玄为儒，云：老奴无意。
现代文：王弼给《易经》作注解时，常嘲笑已死去的也曾注过《易经》的郑玄说，那老东西一点也没懂得《易经》的真意。
English: When Wang Xi was annotating the I Ching, he often mocked the deceased Zheng Xuan, who had also annotated the I Ching, saying that the old man did not understand the true meaning of the I Ching at all.

古文：于时夜分，忽闻外阁有著屐声，须臾便进，自云郑玄，责之曰：君年少，何以轻穿凿文句，而妄讥诋老子也。
现代文：一天夜里忽然听见外面有脚步声，片刻进来一个人，自称是郑玄，并斥责说，你这样年轻，做学问只不过是穿凿附会而已，怎么竟敢嘲笑挖苦老子呢？
English: One night, he suddenly heard footsteps outside. After a while, a man came in, claiming to be Zheng Xuan, and scolded him, saying, "You are so young, and your studies are nothing more than a social club. How dare you mock and ridicule Lao Zi?"

古文：极有忿色，言竟便退。
现代文：说完就气呼呼地走了。
English: After saying that, he stormed off.

古文：弼恶之，后遇疠而卒。
现代文：王弼十分厌恶，后来得了瘰疠而死。
English: Wang Yao was very disgusted. Later, he got ringworm and died.

古文：陈仙
现代文：陈仙
English: Chen Xian

古文：吴时，陈仙以商贾为事。驱驴行，忽过一空宅，广厦朱门，都不见人。
现代文：吴时陈仙在外面经商，赶着头驴经过一个空宅，这宅子高屋大院朱红门，但不见里面有人。
English: Chen Xian was out doing business in Wuxi at the time. He drove his donkey past an empty house, the Zhuhongmen high-rise compound, but did not see anyone inside.

古文：仙牵驴入宿，至夜，闻有语声：小人无畏，敢见行灾。
现代文：陈仙牵着驴进去住下了，半夜听见有人说：这小子胆真不小，不怕摊上灾祸。
English: Chen Xian led his donkey inside and settled down. In the middle of the night, he heard someone say: "This boy is really brave, he's not afraid to expose the evil."

古文：便有一人，迳到仙前，叱之曰：汝敢辄入官舍。
现代文：只见一个人来到面前喝斥道：你怎么敢私闯我的官舍？
English: I only saw one person who came to me and shouted: "How dare you break into my official residence?

古文：时笼月暧昧，见其面上黡深，目无瞳子，唇褰齿露，手执黄丝。
现代文：当时月色迷蒙，见那人脸上黑乎乎的，眼眶里没有眼珠子，豁嘴唇外露着牙齿，手里拿着黄绳子。
English: At that time, the moonlight was fading, and I saw that the man's face was dark, with no eyeballs in his eyelids, his teeth were exposed outside his lips, and he was holding a yellow rope in his hand.

古文：仙既奔走后村，具说事状。
现代文：王仙吓得一气跑到后村，对村人说了这事。
English: Wang Xian was so scared that he ran to Houcun and told the villagers about it.

古文：父老云：旧有恶鬼。
现代文：村里人说那里原来就有恶鬼。
English: Villagers say there used to be evil spirits there.

古文：明日，看所见屋宅处，并高坟深塚。
现代文：第二天陈仙再去看昨晚住的地方，只见一片高高的坟墓中有深深下落的地方而已。
English: The next day, Chen Xian went to see the place where he had stayed the night before, only to find a high grave with a deep sinkhole.

古文：胡熙
现代文：胡熙
English: Hu Xilong

古文：吴左中郎广陵相胡熙，字元光。女名中，许嫁当出。而歘有身。女亦不自觉。
现代文：吴时当左中郎广陵相的胡熙字元光，有个女儿叫胡中，已经许给了人等待出嫁时，忽然有了身孕，连自己都不知道是怎么回事。
English: At the time of Wu, when Zuozhonglang Guangling phase of Hu Xizhong Yuan Guang, there was a daughter named Hu Zhong, who had already promised to wait for someone to get married, suddenly became pregnant, even she did not know what was going on.

古文：熙父信，严而有法，乃遣熙妻丁氏杀之，歘有鬼语腹中，音声啧啧曰：何故杀我母，我某月某日当出。
现代文：胡熙的父亲胡信治家很严，就命令胡熙的妻子丁氏杀掉女儿。突然听见女儿肚子里有鬼在吱吱地叫着说，为什么要杀我妈？我某年某月某日就要出生了。
English: Hu Xilai's father, Hu Xunji, was a strict disciplinarian, so he ordered Hu Xilai's wife, Ding, to kill her daughter. Suddenly, he heard a ghost in his daughter's stomach screaming, "Why kill my mother? I'm going to be born in a certain year, in a certain month, on a certain day."

古文：左右惊怪，以白信。信自往听，乃舍之。
现代文：左右又惊又怪，就告诉了胡信，胡信来一听，果然如此，就没有杀。
English: Shocked and puzzled, he told Hu Xin. Hu Xin came to listen, and sure enough, there was no killing.

古文：在于左右。及长大，音语亦如人，熙妻别为施帐。
现代文：后来婴儿生下后，只能听到小孩的声音却不见形。稍大以后，也能说人话。胡熙的妻子为这鬼孩另设了床帐。
English: Later, after the baby was born, he could only hear the child's voice but could not see the shape. When he was a little older, he could also speak human words. Hu Xi's wife set up another bed for this ghost child.

古文：时自言，当见形，使姥见。
现代文：有一天鬼孩说，我将现一次形让姥姥看看。
English: One day, the ghost child said, "I will make a doll for grandma to look at."

古文：熙妻视之，在丹帷裹，前后钉金钗，好手臂，善弹琴。
现代文：胡妻一看，鬼孩在一块红布里包着，衣服前后缀着金钗，手臂长得很好，善于弹琴。
English: At the sight of his wife, the ghost child was wrapped in a piece of red cloth, with gold embroidery on the front and back of his clothes. His arms were well grown, and he was good at playing the piano.

古文：时问姥及母嗜欲，为得酒脯枣之属以还。
现代文：鬼孩常问姥和娘爱吃什么，就弄来些果脯酒枣之类孝敬。
English: The ghost children often ask grandma and daughter what they like to eat, so they get some filial piety such as dates.

古文：母坐作衣，儿来抱膝缘背数戏，中不耐之，意窃怒曰：人家岂与鬼子相随。
现代文：鬼孩的娘坐着缝衣，鬼孩就来抱母亲的腿，攀爬母亲的后背玩耍了几次，胡中不耐烦了，就说：人真是不能和鬼的儿子在一起。
English: The ghost child's daughter sat sewing clothes, and the ghost child came to hug his mother's legs, climbed on his mother's back and played a few times. When Hu Zhong got impatient, he said: "One really cannot be with the son of a ghost."

古文：即于旁怒曰：就母戏耳。乃骂作鬼子。
现代文：鬼孩就在旁边生气的说，我不过和娘玩玩，就骂我是鬼儿子。
English: The ghost child said angrily from the side, "If I just play with my daughter, they'll call me a ghost son."

古文：今当从母指中，入于母腹，使母知之。
现代文：我现在要从你手指里进到你肚里去，让你知道知道。
English: I'm going to go from your fingers to your stomach right now and let you know.

古文：中指即直而痛，渐渐上入臂髀，若有贯刺之者。
现代文：胡中立刻就觉得手指强直而且很痛，像有个东西从指甲里钻进去，慢慢从手臂钻进大腿里，像刺一样痛得要死。
English: Hu Zhong immediately felt that his fingers were stiff and painful, as if something had penetrated through the nail, slowly penetrating from the arm into the thigh, and it hurt like a thorn.

古文：须臾欲死，熙妻乃设馔，祝请之，有顷而止。
现代文：鬼孩的姥姥赶快摆上祭品求告，过了一会儿，痛终于止住了。
English: The ghost child's grandmother quickly put up an offering and called for help. After a while, the pain finally stopped.

古文：鲁肃
现代文：鲁肃
English: Luzhou

古文：孙权病，巫启云：有鬼著绢巾，似是故将相，呵叱初不顾，径进入宫。
现代文：孙权得了病。一个巫师报告说，有个鬼戴着绢的头巾，像是已经故去的将相。门卫喊他他也不理，一直走进宫来。
English: Sun Quan fell ill. A sorcerer reported that there was a ghost wearing a skull and crossbones headscarf, looking like the deceased general. He ignored the doorman's shouts and kept walking into the palace.

古文：其夜，权见鲁肃来。衣巾悉如其言。
现代文：当夜，孙权果然看见已死的鲁肃来拜见，衣服头巾和巫师说的完全一样。
English: That night, Sun Quan really saw the dead Lu Su come to visit, and the clothes and headscarf were exactly the same as the sorcerer said.

