古文：圣人有以见天下之赜，而拟诸其形容，像其物宜，是故谓之象。
现代文：圣人见天下万事万物的繁杂，因而拟测万事万物的形态，而归纳为八个基本卦，以象征万事万物所适宜的物象，所以叫做 象 。
English: The sage saw the complexity of all things in the world, and thus proposed to measure the form of all things, and summarized it into eight basic hexagrams to symbolize the appropriate image of all things, so it is called "elephant."

古文：圣人有以见天下之动，而观其会通，以行其典礼，系辞焉以断其吉凶，是故谓之爻。
现代文：圣人见天下一切动作营为的千变万化，而观察其可以会而通之之道，制成六十四卦三百八十四爻，以显现一切动作营为的常体，复合系之以辞，而断定它的吉凶，因此就成为 爻 。
English: The sage sees the multitude of all actions and deeds in the world, and observes the ways in which it can be carried out, in order to formulate its regular norms, set up three hundred and eighty-four dynamic rules, and use words to determine its good or bad, so it is called.

古文：言天下之至赜而不可恶也。
现代文：有了八卦所代表万事万物的象征，故天下最繁杂的万事万物，也不致嫌其厌恶了。
English: With the symbol of all things and all things represented by the Eight Trigrams, the world's most complicated things and things are not repugnant.

古文：言天下之至动而不可乱也。拟之而后言，议之而后动，拟议以成其变化。
现代文：有了三百八十四爻以拟像天下一切的动作营为，故天下最动荡不安的事情，观察易爻，也不致繁乱了。
English: With the Three Hundred and Eighty-Four Theses as the model for all actions in the world, it is easy to observe the most turbulent and unstable things in the world, and it will not be complicated.

古文： 鸣鹤在阴，其子和之。我有好爵，吾与尔靡之。 子曰： 君子居其室，出其言善，则千里之外应之，况其迩者乎？
现代文：八卦之象，三百八十四爻之辞既是从拟议而得，吾人于人世间处事应物亦当拟测揆度之后，才可发为言论，议论探讨周详后，方可有所动作，言行能如此拟测揆度、议论探讨，斯能成就变化如神的事业。中孚九二的爻辞说： 鹤鸣于阴暗之处，其子即能和声响应，我有好的爵位，我将与你共同治理。 孔子申论之云： 君子住在家里，发出善美的言论，则千里之外的人也会闻风响应兴起，何况是接近他的人呢？
English: According to the Eight Trigrams of the Eight Trigrams, the three hundred and eighty-four syllables of speech are not only obtained from the proposal, but also the things that people should do in the world should be measured and measured before they can be made into speech, and the action should be made after the discussion is thoroughly discussed. If words and deeds can be measured and discussed in this way, it can achieve the cause of change like God. The syllables of the Ninety-two Caliphs said: The crane sings in the dark, and its son can respond in harmony. I have a good title, and I will govern with you. The cloud of Confucius's

古文：居其室，出其言不善，则千里之外违之，况其迩者乎？
现代文：如发出不善的言论，则千里之外的人也会违背他，而不以为是，何况是接近他的人呢？
English: If he utters bad words, people thousands of miles away will also disobey him and not think it is true, let alone those who are close to him?

古文：言出乎身，加乎民；行发乎迩，见乎远。
现代文：言语是从本身发出，而能影响于百姓，行为是从近处着手，而显现于远处。
English: Words are uttered from oneself, but can affect the people; actions are started from nearby, but appear in the distance.

古文：言行，君子之枢机。枢机之发，荣辱之主也。
现代文：言行是君子的关键要枢，关键的发起，是光荣或受辱的主宰。
English: Words and deeds are the key to a gentleman, the key to initiation, and the master of glory or humiliation.

古文：言行，君子之所以动天地也，可不慎乎！ 
现代文：言行正是君子感动天地之由，可以不谨慎吗？ 
English: A gentleman's words and deeds are what move heaven and earth. Can we not be prudent?

古文：《同人》：先号啕而后笑。子曰： 君子之道，或出或处，或默或语。二人同心，其利断金。
现代文： 同人九五，在居尊得位，在天下和同之先，本有艰难，故号咷大哭，以至诚感人，终至天下和同，故后快乐而笑。 孔子申论之，言： 君子之道，或出而服务天下，或隐处而独善其身，或沉默，或言语，如二人同心，其锋利足断坚硬的金属。
English: Confucius said, "The way of a gentleman is either to go out and serve the world, or to be secluded and be content with himself, or to be silent, or to speak, as if the two of them were of one mind, and their sharp feet would cut through hard metal.

古文：同心之言，其臭如兰。 
现代文：同心的意思，是说二人精诚团结，心意齐同，其气味的相投。犹如兰蕙的芳薰。 
English: The meaning of "same heart" is that the two people are sincerely united, have the same mind, and their smell is congenial. It is like the fragrance of orchids.

古文：初六，藉用白茅，无咎。
现代文： 大过初六谓：藉用白茅承垫祭祀品，这是无咎的。 
English: Greater than the first six sayings: the use of whitewash to support the sacrificial offerings is blameless.

古文：子曰： 苟错诸地而可矣，藉之用茅，何咎之有？
现代文：孔子申论之言： 祭祀品如放置于地上即可以了，而又承垫之以白茅，又何有灾咎呢？
English: Confucius's objection: If the sacrificial object is placed on the ground, then it is fine, but if it is supported by white maypole, then what is the reason for the disaster?

古文：慎之至也。
现代文：是谨慎到极点了呀。
English: That's extreme caution.

古文：夫茅之为物薄，而用可重也。
现代文：茅草之为物本来很纤薄不贵重的呀，而可用于承垫祭祀品，则其用处很重大的了。
English: As a material, thatch is very thin and not very valuable, but if it can be used to support sacrificial objects, then its use is very important.

古文：慎斯术也以往，其无所失矣。 
现代文：人如能以此谨慎之道以行，必能无所错失了。 
English: If one can follow this prudent path, one will not miss anything.

古文：劳谦，君子有终，吉。
现代文：谦卦九三说： 劳苦功高而又谦虚的君子，最终是吉利的。 
English: Qian Gua Jiu San said: A gentleman who is hard-working and modest is ultimately lucky.

古文：子曰： 劳而不伐，有功而不德，厚之至也。
现代文：孔子说： 有功劳而不夸耀，有功绩而不自以为德，是敦厚到极点了。
English: Confucius said: To have merits without boasting, to have merits without arrogance, is to be extremely courageous.

古文：语以其功下人者也。
现代文：是说以其功劳犹谦下于人呀。
English: That is to say, he humbles himself before others for his merits.

古文：德言盛，礼言恭；谦也者，致恭以存其位者也。 
现代文：德是称其有盛明的德行，礼是说其恭敬，谦虚就是表现恭敬以保存他的职位的了。 
English: Virtue is to say that he has great virtue, courtesy is to say that he is respectful, and modesty is to show respect to preserve his position.

古文：亢龙有悔。子曰： 贵而无位，高而无民，贤人在下位而无辅，是以动而有悔也。 不出户庭，无咎。
现代文：本卦的爻位到了上九，以六爻的爻位而言，已位至极点，再无更高的位置可占，孤高在上，犹如一条乘云升高的龙，它升到了最亢、最干净的地方，四顾茫然，既无再上进的位置，又不能下降，所以它反而有了忧郁悔闷了。节卦初九谓： 不出门庭，是没有灾咎的。 
English: As far as the position of this hexagram is concerned, it has reached the top nine, and as far as the position of the six hexagrams is concerned, it has reached the extreme point, there is no higher position to occupy, it is lonely and high above, just like a dragon that has been elevated by clouds, it has risen to the highest and cleanest place, it looks around in a daze, there is no further position to advance, and it cannot fall, so it has melancholy and regret instead.

古文：子曰： 乱之所生也，则言语以为阶。
现代文：孔子说： 扰乱的生起，是言语以为阶梯，国君不保密，则失去臣自。
English: Confucius said, "Confusion arises when words become a ladder. If the sovereign does not keep secrets, he will lose his subjects."

古文：君不密则失臣，臣不密则失身，几事不密则害成。
现代文：臣自不保密，则失去身命，机密的事情不保密，则造成灾害。
English: If a minister does not keep a secret, he will lose his life, and if a confidential matter is not kept confidential, it will cause a disaster.

古文：是以君子慎密而不出也。 
现代文：所以君子是谨慎守密而不泄漏机密呀。 
English: That's why a gentleman is careful to keep secrets and not divulge them.

古文：子曰： 作《易》者，其知盗乎？
现代文：孔子说： 作《易经》的人，大概知道盗之所起吧？
English: Confucius said, "The person who wrote the I Ching probably knows the origin of the theft, right?

古文：《易》曰 负且乘，致寇至。 
现代文：《易经》解卦六三说： 背负着东西，又且乘在车上，势必招致盗寇的来临呀。 
English: "I Ching" commentary 63: "Carrying things on one's back and riding in a car is bound to invite the arrival of thieves."

古文：负也者，小人之事也。乘也者，君子之器也。小人而乘君子之器，盗思夺之矣。
现代文：负着东西，本是小人之事，乘的车子，本是君子治国平天下乘坐的器具，今小人而窃乘君子的器具，必无能匡济，大盗必思强夺它了。
English: Carrying things used to be a small person's business. The carriage used to be a tool for a gentleman to rule the country. Now a small person steals a gentleman's tool. He will not be able to help, and the thief will try to take it.

古文：上慢下暴，盗思伐之矣。
现代文：君上傲慢，臣下暴敛，大盗必思侵犯其国了。
English: The prince is arrogant, the vassal is violent, and the thief is determined to invade his country.

古文：慢藏诲盗，冶容诲淫。
现代文：漫藏财富，就教诲盗寇的偷盗，女人妖冶其容貌，必招坏人之淫辱。
English: He that hideth riches teacheth a thief to steal, and a woman that maketh a lie appear, and bringeth forth iniquity.

古文：《易》曰： 负且乘，致寇至。 
现代文：《易经》说： 负且乘，致寇至。 
English: "I Ching" says, "If you are negative and take advantage of others, you will attract thieves."

古文：盗之招也。 
现代文：原是说自己招致寇盗之意呀。 
English: He meant to say that he had caused the robbery.

