古文：起重光大渊献，尽阏逢摄提格，凡四年。
现代文：起，止，一共四年。
English: A total of four years.

古文：孝宗穆皇帝中之上永和七年
现代文：晋穆帝永和七年
English: Jin Mudiayong and seven years

古文：春，正月，丁酉，日有食之。
现代文：春季，正月，丁酉，出现日食。
English: Spring, the first month of the year, Ding Xi, the appearance of a solar eclipse.

古文：苻健左长史贾玄硕等请依刘备称汉中王故事，表健为都督关中诸军事、大将军、大单于、秦王。
现代文：苻健的左长史贾玄硕等人想要向东晋朝廷上表，请求依据刘备号称汉中王的做法，任命苻健为都督关中诸军事、大将军、大单于、秦王。
English: Jia Xuanshuo and others wanted to appeal to the East Jin Dynasty court, requesting that, according to Liu Bei's practice of calling Han Zhongwang, Jia Jian be appointed as the military governor of Guanzhong, grand general, great general, and King of Qin.

古文：健怒曰： 吾岂堪为秦王邪！
现代文：苻健愤怒地说： 我怎么能胜任秦王呢！
English: Hao Jian said angrily, "How can I be qualified to be the Qin King!"

古文：且晋使未返，我之官爵，非汝曹所知也。 
现代文：况且晋朝的使臣尚未返回，我的官职爵位，不是你们所知道的。 
English: Moreover, the envoys of the Jin Dynasty have not yet returned, and my official position and title are not known to you.

古文：既而密使梁安讽玄硕等上尊号，健辞让再三，然后许之。
现代文：然而紧接着他却悄悄地让梁安暗示贾玄硕等人向他进献尊号，经过表面上的再三推辞，然后就接受了。
English: Immediately afterwards, however, he quietly asked Liang Anwu to suggest that Jia Xuanshuo and others offer him the title of honor. After repeated refusals on the surface, he then accepted.

古文：丙辰，健即天王、大单于位，国号大秦，大赦，改元皇始。
现代文：丙辰，苻健即天王位、大单于位，立国号为大秦，实行大赦，改年号为皇始。
English: Bichen, Jianjian, that is, the throne of heaven, and Datan on the throne, the founding of the country was the Great Qin, an amnesty was implemented, and the year was changed to the beginning of the emperor.

古文：追尊父洪为武惠皇帝，庙号太祖；立妻强氏为天王后，子苌为太子，靓为平原公，生为淮南公，觌为长乐公，方为高阳公，硕为北平公，腾为淮阳公，柳为晋公，桐为汝南公，廋为魏公，武为燕公，幼为赵公。
现代文：追尊父亲苻洪为武惠皇帝，庙号为太祖。立妻子强氏为天王后，儿子苻苌为太子。封儿子苻靓为平原公，苻生为淮南公，苻觌为长乐公，苻方为高阳公，苻硕为北平公，苻腾为淮阳公，苻柳为晋公，苻桐为汝南公，苻为魏公，苻武为燕公，苻幼为赵公。
English: His father, Su Hong, was the Emperor Wu Hui, and his temple name was Taizu. His wife, Qiang, was the Queen of Heaven, and his son, Zou, was the Crown Prince. His sons were named Pingyuan Gong, Huainan Gong, Changle Gong, Gaoyang Gong, Peiping Gong, Huateng Gong, Huaiyang Gong, Jinyu Gong, Runan Gong, Wei Gong, Yan Gong, and Zhao Gong.

古文：以苻雄为都督中外诸军事、丞相、领车骑大将军、雍州牧、东海公；苻菁为卫大将军、平昌公，宿卫二宫；雷弱儿为太尉，毛贵为司空，略阳姜伯周为尚书令，梁楞为左仆射，王堕为右仆射，鱼遵为太子太师，强平为太傅，段纯为太保，吕婆楼为散骑常侍。
现代文：任命苻雄为都督中外诸军事、丞相、兼任车骑大将军、雍州牧、东海公。任命苻菁为卫大将军、平昌公，负责警卫苻健及苻苌所居住的两座宫殿。任命雷弱儿为太尉，毛贵为司空，略阳人姜伯周为尚书令，梁楞为左仆射，王堕为右仆射，鱼遵为太子太师，强平为太傅，段纯为太保，吕婆楼为散骑常侍。
English: He appointed Gongxiong as the military governor of the Middle and Outer Provinces, the chancellor of the Joseon Dynasty, and the general of chariots and cavalry, the governor of Yongzhou, and the governor of the East China Sea; appointed Yu Jing as the general of the Wei Dynasty and the governor of the Pyeongchang Dynasty, and was responsible for guarding the two palaces where Yu Jian and Puyi lived; appointed Lei Weak Son as the first lieutenant, Mao Gui as the second lieutenant, Jiang Bo Zhou, who was from Liaoyang, as the secretary, Liang Jian as the left assistant, Wang Po as the right assistant, Yu Zun as the prince

古文：伯周，健之舅；平，王后之弟；婆楼，本略阳氐酋也。
现代文：姜伯周是苻健的舅舅；强平是王后的弟弟；吕婆楼本来是略阳氐族的酋长。
English: Jiang Bo Zhou was the uncle of Jian Jian; Qiang Ping was the younger brother of the queen; Luba Lou was originally the chief of the Liaoyang Yi people.

古文：段龛请以青州内附；二月，戊寅，以龛为镇北将军，封齐公。
现代文：段龛请求以所据的青州归附东晋。二月，戊寅，东晋朝廷任命段龛为镇北将军，封为齐公。
English: In February, Wu Yin, the Eastern Jin Dynasty court appointed Duan Yu as the general of Zhenbei and he was given the title of Qi Gong.

古文：魏主闵攻围襄国百馀日，赵主祗危急，乃去皇帝之号，称赵王；遣太尉张举乞师于燕，许送传国玺，中军将军张春乞师于姚弋仲。
现代文：魏国主冉闵攻打包围襄国一百多天。后赵主石祗境况危急，便去掉了皇帝的称号，改称为赵王，派遣太尉张举到前燕国请求援军，并承诺送去传国印玺。派遣中军将军张春向姚弋仲请求援军。
English: After more than a hundred days of attacking and encircling Xiangguo, the ruler of Wei, Ran Zheng, was in a critical situation. He removed the title of emperor and changed his name to King Zhao. He sent the captain Zhang He to the former Yan Guo to request reinforcements and promised to send the imperial seal. He sent the Chinese general Zhang Chun to request reinforcements from Yao Shizhong.

古文：弋仲遣其子襄帅骑二万八千救赵，诫之曰： 冉闵弃仁背义，屠灭石氏。
现代文：姚弋仲派他的儿子姚襄率领骑兵二万八千人援救后赵。他告诫姚襄说： 冉闵抛弃仁爱，背离道义，屠杀消灭了石氏。
English: Yao Yizhong sent his son Yao Xiang to lead twenty-eight thousand cavalrymen to rescue Hou Zhao. He admonished Yao Xiang, saying: Ran Yizhong abandoned benevolence, deviated from morality, and slaughtered the Shi clan.

古文：我受人厚遇，当为复仇，老病不能自行；汝才十倍于闵，若不枭擒以来，不必复见我也！ 
现代文：我受到过石虎宽厚的待遇，应当为他复仇，但因为既老且病，不能亲自出征。你的才能高出冉闵十倍，如果不能把他的头颅带回来，就不必再来见我了！ 
English: I have been treated generously by the stone tiger, and I should avenge him, but because I am old and sick, I cannot go to war in person. Your talent is ten times higher than Ran Yan, if you can't bring his head back, you don't have to see me again!

古文：弋仲亦遣使告于燕，燕主俊遣御难将军悦绾将兵三万往会之。
现代文：姚弋仲也派使者到前燕报告。前燕王慕容俊派御难将军悦绾统领三万士兵前去与姚襄会师。
English: Yao Xizhong also sent an envoy to report to the former Yan. The former Yan king, Mu Rongjun, sent the tribulation general, Yue Xuan, to lead 30,000 soldiers to join the division with Yao Xiang.

古文：冉闵闻俊欲救赵，遣大司马从事中郎广宁常炜使于燕。
现代文：冉闵听说慕容俊想要救援后赵，便派大司马从事中郎广宁人常炜出使前燕国。
English: After Zhao heard that Murongjun wanted to rescue Zhao, he sent the grand steed to engage in the middlemen Guangning people often sent envoys to the former Yan country.

古文：俊使封裕诘之曰： 冉闵，石氏养息，负恩作逆，何敢辄称大号？ 
现代文：慕容俊派封裕责问常炜说： 冉闵是石氏的养子，他背弃养育之恩而为叛逆之举，怎么胆敢狂妄地自称国王大号呢？ 
English: Murong Jun sent Feng Yu to interrogate Chang Juan, saying: "Ran Juan is the adopted son of Shi. He abandoned his upbringing as an act of rebellion. How dare he arrogantly call himself the king's great trumpet?"

古文：炜曰： 汤放桀，武王伐纣，以兴商、周之业；曹孟德养于宦官，莫知所出，卒立魏氏之基。
现代文：常炜说： 商汤放逐夏桀，周武王讨伐商纣，以此而振兴了商、周的大业；曹操被宦官养育，没有谁知道他的出身，最终奠定了魏氏的基础。
English: Chang Kui said: Shang Tang banished Xia Kui, Zhou Wu Wang fought against Shang Kui, thus reviving the great cause of Shang and Zhou; Cao Cao was raised by eunuchs, no one knows his origin, and finally laid the foundation of the Wei clan.

古文：苟非天命，安能成功！
现代文：如果不是顺应了上天之命，他们怎么能够成功！
English: How could they have succeeded if they had not obeyed God's command?

古文：推此而言，何必致问！ 
现代文：由此推理，何必还要来责问我呢！ 
English: From this reasoning, why do you even need to come and scold me!

古文：裕曰： 人言冉闵初立，铸金为己像，以卜成败，而像不成，信乎？ 
现代文：封裕说： 听人说冉闵初立的时候，曾经用金子铸造自己的形像来占卜成败，然而像却没有铸成，这是真事吗？ 
English: Feng Yu said, "It is said that when Ran Xuan first stood up, he used to cast his own image in gold to foretell success or failure, but the image was not cast. Is this true?

古文：炜曰： 不闻。 
现代文：常炜说： 没有听说过。 
English: Tsuneyuki said, "I haven't heard of it."

古文：裕曰： 南来者皆云如是，何故隐之？ 
现代文：封裕说： 从南方来的人都说确实是这样，你为什么要隐瞒呢？ 
English: Feng Yu said, "People from the south all say that this is indeed the case. Why are you trying to hide it?

古文：炜曰： 奸伪之人欲矫天命以惑人者，乃假符瑞、托蓍龟以自重，魏主握符玺，据中州，受命何疑；而更反真为伪，取决于金像乎！ 
现代文：常炜说： 奸伪之人凡是想假传天命以迷惑人心的，就要假借祥瑞的征兆，伪托占卜的结果，用来显示自己所说的份量。魏国主握有传国印玺，占据中州，受之于天命，这还有什么疑问？难道还要改变事实，变真为伪，取决于金像吗！ 
English: Chang Juan said: Those who want to misrepresent the fate of heaven in order to confuse people should use the signs of auspiciousness, the results of divination, to show the weight of what they have said. The ruler of Wei has the seal of the country, occupies Zhongzhou, and is subject to the fate of heaven. Is there any doubt about this? Is it necessary to change the facts and turn the truth into falsehood, depending on the gold statue?

古文：裕曰： 传国玺果安在？ 
现代文：封裕说： 传国印玺在哪里呢？ 
English: Feng Yu said: Where is the Chuan Guo Ying Bao?

古文：炜曰： 在鄴 。
现代文：常炜说： 在邺城。 
English: Tsuneyuki said, "It's in Utsunomiya.

古文：裕曰： 张举言在襄国。 
现代文：封裕说： 张举说在襄国。 
English: Feng Yu said: Zhang Jiu said that he was in Xiangguo.

古文：炜曰： 杀胡之日，在鄴者殆无孑遗；时有迸漏者，皆潜伏沟渎中耳，彼安知玺之所在乎！
现代文：常炜说： 诛杀胡人的时候，在邺城的人几乎一网打尽，当时有逃脱漏网的，也全都是潜伏在水渠水沟中的，他们怎么知道传国印玺在什么地方！
English: Changyu said: When the Hu people were killed, the people in Lucheng were almost completely wiped out. At that time, those who escaped the net were all lurking in the canals and ditches. How did they know where the imperial seal was!

古文：彼求救者，为妄诞之辞，无所不可，况一玺乎！ 
现代文：他们那些求救的人，说起荒诞谎言来，没有什么不可以编织进去的，何况一个传国印玺呢！ 
English: There is nothing that their supplicants cannot weave into the fabric of their fantastic lies, not to mention a national seal!

古文：俊犹以张举之言为信，乃积柴其旁，使裕以其私诱之，曰： 君更熟思，无为徒取灰灭！ 
现代文：慕容俊依然认为张举所说的是真话，于是就在常炜身边堆上木柴，派封裕用关系他个人生命的话劝诱道： 请您再仔细考虑一下，没必要白白地化为灰烬！ 
English: Mur Rongjun still thought that what Zhang Qiu said was the truth, so he piled up firewood around Chang Yao, and persuaded Paifeng Yu with words related to his personal life: Please reconsider carefully, there is no need to turn into ashes in vain!

古文：炜正色曰： 石氏贪暴，亲帅大兵攻燕国都。虽不克而返，然志在必取。
现代文：常炜厉言正色地说： 石氏贪婪残暴，曾经亲自率领大军进攻燕国的国都，虽然没有攻克而返回，但其志在必取。
English: "The Stone Clan is greedy and cruel. They once led a large army to attack the capital of Yan Province. Although they did not conquer it and returned, they are determined to take it.

古文：故运资粮、聚器械于东北者，非以相资，乃欲相灭也。
现代文：所以他们此后往东北地区运送钱财粮饷，聚集武器装备的目的，并不是要拿这些东西帮助你们，而是想消灭你们。
English: Therefore, the reason why they have been sending money, grain and food to the northeast region and amassing weapons and equipment is not to help you with these things, but to destroy you.

古文：魏主诛剪石氏，虽不为燕，臣子之心，闻仇雠之灭，义当如何？
现代文：魏国主讨伐镇压石氏，虽然不是为了燕国，但作为臣子之心，听到仇敌被消灭的消息，从道义上说又该如何呢？
English: The Wei sovereign fought against and suppressed the Shi clan, although not for the sake of Yan, but as the heart of a vassal, when he heard the news that the enemy had been eliminated, morally speaking, what should he do?

古文：而更为彼责我，不亦异乎！
现代文：如今你反而替石氏来责问我，岂不是怪事！
English: Isn't it strange that you've come to scold me on behalf of Mr. Shi!

古文：吾闻死者骨肉下于土，精魂升于天。
现代文：我听说死去的人虽然骨肉埋在土下，而灵魂却升到天上。
English: I've heard that when a person dies, even though the body is buried in the ground, the soul goes up to heaven.

古文：蒙君之惠，速益薪纵火，使仆得上诉于帝足矣！ 
现代文：蒙您惠赐，请赶快加柴点火，使我能到天帝那里去诉说冤屈就满足了！ 
English: With your blessing, please quickly add wood to light the fire so that I can go to the Heavenly Emperor to tell him about my grievances, and then I will be satisfied!

古文：左右请杀之，俊曰： 彼不惮杀身而徇其主，忠臣也！
现代文：周围的人都请求焚杀常炜。幕容俊说： 他不怕牺牲生命来为他的君主殉葬，确实是忠臣。
English: People around him begged him to burn down Jangho. Mak Rongjun said, "He is not afraid to sacrifice his life to die for his monarch. He is truly a loyal subject."

古文：且冉闵有罪，使臣何预焉！ 
现代文：况且冉闵有罪，与他的使臣有什么关系呢！ 
English: Besides, if Ran Yan is guilty, what does it have to do with his envoys!

古文：使出就馆。
现代文：于是就让常炜离开此地，住进了馆舍。
English: As a result, Tsuneaki was allowed to leave the area and live in a guesthouse.

古文：夜，使其乡人赵瞻往劳之，且曰： 君何不以实言？
现代文：入夜，幕容俊派常炜的同乡赵瞻去慰劳常炜，并且对他说： 您为什么不以真话相告呢！
English: At nightfall, Mak Rongjun sent Zhao Zhan, a fellow villager of Chang Rong, to comfort Chang Rong, and said to him: Why didn't you tell the truth?

古文：王怒，欲处君于辽、碣之表，奈何？ 
现代文：如果大王发怒，要把您流放到辽海、碣石山以外，您有什么办法呢？ 
English: If the great king is angry and wants to banish you beyond the Liao Sea and Zhushi Mountain, what can you do?

古文：炜曰： 吾结发以来，尚不欺布衣，况人主乎！
现代文：常炜说： 我自从结发成年以来，连布衣百姓都不曾欺骗，何况是君主呢！
English: Changyu said, "Since I came of age, I have never deceived even the common people, let alone the sovereign!

古文：曲意苟合，性所不能。直情尽言，虽沉东海，不敢避也！ 
现代文：违心地苟且迎合，这是我本性所不能做的事；尽情直言，就是被沉于东海，也不敢逃避！ 
English: It is against my nature to pander to them; to be honest, I wouldn't dare to escape being sunk in the East China Sea!

古文：遂卧向壁，不复与瞻言。瞻具以白俊，俊乃囚炜于龙城。
现代文：说完就面朝墙一躺，不再和赵瞻搭括了，赵瞻把这些情况全都告诉了慕容俊，慕容俊便把常炜囚禁在龙城。
English: After saying this, he lay face down against the wall and no longer kept company with Zhao Zhan. Zhao Zhan told Murong Jun all of this, and Murong Jun then imprisoned Chang Juan in Longcheng.

古文：赵并州刺史张平遣使降秦，秦王以平为大将军、冀州牧。
现代文：后赵国并州刺史张平派使者去向前秦投降，前秦王任命张平为大将军、冀州牧。
English: After Zhao's annexation of the state, Zhang Ping sent an envoy to the former Qin to surrender, and the former Qin king appointed Zhang Ping as general and Jizhou herdsman.

古文：燕王逡还蓟。
现代文：前燕王慕容俊回到蓟城。
English: Former Yan Wang Murongjun returns to Handan.

古文：三月，姚襄及赵汝阴王琨各引兵救襄国。
现代文：三月，姚襄及后赵汝阴王石琨分别率兵救援襄国。
English: In March, Yao Xiang and later Zhao Ruyin Wang Shijun separately led soldiers to rescue Xiang Guo.

古文：冉闵遣车骑将军胡睦拒襄于长芦，将军孙威拒琨于黄丘，皆败还，士卒略尽。
现代文：冉闵派车骑将军胡睦在长芦阻击姚襄，派将军孙威在黄丘阻击石琨，但全都失败而返，士兵死亡殆尽。
English: Ran Zheng sent the cavalry general Humo to resist Yao Xiang in Changlu, and sent the general Sun Wei to resist Shijie in Huangqiu, but they all failed and returned, and the soldiers were all dead.

古文：闵欲自出击之，卫将军王泰谏曰： 今襄国未下，外救云集，若我出战，必覆背受敌，此危道也。
现代文：冉闵想要亲自出马攻打姚襄及石琨，卫将军王泰劝谏说： 如今襄国城尚未攻下，外边援救的部队云集而至，如果我们再外出征战，一定会腹背受敌，这是极其危险的做法。
English: Ranzhang wanted to personally attack Yao Xiang and Shijiazhuang. Guard General Wang Tai advised Ranzhang that: Today, the city of Xianguo has not yet been conquered, and foreign rescue forces are gathering. If we go out to fight again, we will certainly suffer from the enemy, which is an extremely dangerous approach.

古文：不若固垒以挫其锐，徐观其衅而击之。
现代文：不如坚固堡垒以挫伤他们的锐气，慢慢地看着他们之间出现裂痕后再去攻击。
English: It is better to build a strong fortress to frustrate their spirit, slowly watch the cracks appear between them, and then attack.

古文：且陛下亲临行陈，如失万全，则大事去矣。 
现代文：况且陛下亲自上阵，如果一旦出危险，宏图大业就全完了。 
English: Moreover, His Majesty himself will go into battle, and if there is any danger, the grand plan will be completely over.

古文：闵将止，道士法饶进曰： 陛下围襄国经年，无尺寸之功，今贼至，又避不击，将何以使将士乎！
现代文：冉闵听了劝谏后正想不再出征，而道士法饶却进言说： 陛下包围襄国已有一年之久，然而没有取得丝毫的胜利。如今敌人来了，却避而不攻，今后将怎样调动将士呢！
English: After listening to the exhortation, Ran Xuan was thinking of not going out again, but the Taoist Fa Rao said: "Your Majesty has been besieging Xiangguo for a year, but has not achieved the slightest victory. Now that the enemy has come, but avoids attacking, how will you mobilize soldiers in the future?"

古文：且太白入昴，当杀胡王，百战百克，不可失也！ 
现代文：况且启明星进入昂宿，正是诛杀胡王的征兆，一定会百战百胜，绝不可错失良机！ 
English: Moreover, the star of the opening ceremony entering the Aung Shuk is a sign of the killing of King Hu. There will definitely be a hundred victories, and we must not miss the opportunity!

古文：闵攘袂大言曰： 吾战决矣，敢沮众者斩！ 
现代文：听了这话，冉闵挽起袖子大声说： 我决定要出发征战了。胆敢出言使兵众士气沮丧者杀头！ 
English: Hearing this, Ran Yan rolled up his sleeves and said loudly, "I've decided to go to war. If you dare to speak out and depress the morale of the soldiers, I'll kill you!"

古文：乃悉众出，与襄、琨战。
现代文：于是就率领全部兵众出发，与姚襄、石琨决战。
English: So he led all the soldiers to set out and fought a decisive battle with Yao Xiang and Shijie.

古文：悦绾适以燕兵至，去魏兵数里，疏布骑卒，曳柴扬尘，魏人望之恟惧，襄、琨、绾三面击之，赵王祗自后冲之，魏兵大败，闵与十馀骑走还鄴。
现代文：这时悦绾恰好率领燕兵来到，离魏兵约有几里地的距离，他将骑兵稀疏地布开，拖着树枝扬起漫天尘土，魏国兵众一看见这阵势便骚动不安、惊恐万状。姚襄、石琨、悦绾三面夹击，后赵王石祗则从后面发起冲锋，魏兵大败，冉闵和十多个骑兵逃回邺城。
English: At this time, Yue Huan just happened to lead the Yan soldiers to come, about a few miles away from the Wei soldiers. He sparsely spread the cavalry and dragged the branches to raise the dust all over the sky. The Wei soldiers were disturbed and frightened when they saw this situation. Yao Xiang, Shijie and Yue Huan clamped down on three sides, and then Zhao Wang Shijie launched a charge from behind. The Wei soldiers were defeated, and Ran Huan and more than ten cavalrymen fled back to Lucheng.

古文：降胡栗特康等执大单于胤及左仆射刘琦以降赵，赵王祗杀之。
现代文：以前投降冉闵的胡人栗特康等人挟持着大单于石冉及左仆射刘琦投降了后赵，后赵王石祗把石冉、刘琦杀掉了。
English: After Zhao Zhao Wang Shi Yan killed Shi Ran and Liu Ye, after Zhao Wang Shi Yan surrendered to Shi Ran and Liu Ye, who had been held hostage by the Wu people Li Te Kang and others who had previously surrendered to Shi Ran.

古文：胡睦及司空石璞、尚书令徐机、中书监卢谌等并将士死者凡十馀万人。
现代文：冉闵的众将士再加上胡睦及司空石璞、尚书令徐机、中书监卢谌等，死亡的人总共达十多万。
English: The total number of people who died was more than one hundred thousand, including the generals of Ran Zheng, as well as Humut and Sikuo Shicheng, Shang Shuling Xu Jie, and Lu Yao, the supervisor of the Central Library.

古文：闵潜还，人无知者。
现代文：冉闵偷偷地回到邺城，无人知晓。
English: Ran Yan secretly returned to Lucheng, and no one knew about it.

古文：鄴另震恐，讹言闵已没。
现代文：邺城里的人都感到震惊害怕，讹传冉闵已死。
English: The people in the city were shocked and afraid. It was rumored that Ran Xuan had died.

古文：射声校尉张艾请闵亲郊以安众心。闵从之，讹言乃息。
现代文：射声校尉张艾请求冉闵露面去参加一次郊祀祭天活动，以安定民心，冉闵听从了，讹传才平息下来。
English: Zhang Ai, the captain of the firing squad, asked Ran Jie to appear and participate in a suburb worship event to stabilize the people's hearts. Ran Jie obeyed, and the rumor died down.

古文：闵支解法饶父子，赠韦謏大司徒。
现代文：冉闵肢解了法饶父子，追封韦为大司徒。
English: Ran Yan dismembered the father and son of Harao, and pursued Wei to be the chief disciple.

古文：姚襄还还滠头，姚弋仲怒其不擒闵，杖之一百。
现代文：姚襄回到滠头，姚弋仲对他没能擒获冉闵十分气愤，打了他一百杖。
English: When Yao Xiang returned to Shantou, Yao Yizhong was very angry that he couldn't capture Ran Yu and beat him with a hundred canes.

古文：初，闵之为赵相也，悉散仓库以树私恩，与羌、胡相攻，无月不战。
现代文：当初，冉闵任后赵国丞相的时候，把国家仓库里的粮食财物全都散发给人们，以此树立个人的恩誉，和羌族、胡族没有一个月不进行战争。
English: At first, when Ran Rong was appointed as the minister of Zhao Guo Rong, he distributed all the grain and wealth in the state warehouse to the people, in order to establish a personal reputation, and did not go a month without war with the Yi and Hu.

古文：赵所徙青、雍、幽、荆四州人民及氐、羌、胡蛮数百万口，以赵法禁不行，各还本土；道路交错，互相杀掠，其能达者什有二、三。
现代文：后赵国所迁徙来的青、雍、幽、荆四州的百姓，以及氐、羌、胡、蛮的数百万人，都因为后赵国不能执行法令，分别返归本土。但这些人归途交错，又互相掠夺残杀，最终能回到目的地的仅十之二、三。
English: The people from the four states of Qing, Yong, Yu, and Jing, as well as the millions of people from the states of Yao, Shao, Hu, and Man, who migrated to the Later Zhao Kingdom, all returned to the mainland separately because the Later Zhao Kingdom could not enforce the law. However, these people's return routes were intertwined, and they plundered and killed each other. In the end, they could only return to their destination two or three times out of ten.

古文：中原大乱。因以饥疫，人相食，无复耕者。
现代文：中原地区大乱，因此导致了饥荒遍野，瘟疫流行，人相残食，再也没有人耕田种地了。
English: The Central Plains region was in turmoil, which led to widespread famine, plague, and cannibalism. No one farmed anymore.

古文：赵王祗使其将刘显帅众七万攻鄴，军于明光宫，去鄴二十三里。
现代文：后赵王石祗派他的将领刘显率领七万兵众攻打邺城，驻扎在明光宫，距离邺城二十三里远。
English: Later, Zhao Wang Shihong sent his general Liu Xian to lead 70,000 soldiers to attack Shicheng, stationed in the Mingguang Palace, 23 miles away from Shicheng.

古文：魏主闵恐，召王泰，欲与之谋。
现代文：魏国主冉闵十分恐惧，征召王泰来和他商量对策。
English: The ruler of Wei, Ran Yu, was very afraid and summoned Wang Tai to discuss countermeasures with him.

古文：泰恚前言之不从，辞以疮甚。
现代文：王泰对冉闵以前不听从他的劝告十分气愤，便以伤势严重为由加以拒绝。
English: Wang Tai was very angry with Ran Xuan for not listening to his advice before, so he refused on the grounds that the injury was serious.

古文：闵亲临问之，泰固称疾笃。
现代文：冉闵亲自前往询问，王泰仍然坚持说伤势严重。
English: Ran Zheng went to inquire in person, but Wang Tai still insisted that the injury was serious.

古文：闵怒，还宫，谓左右曰： 巴奴，乃公岂假汝为命邪！
现代文：冉闵十分愤怒，返回王宫，对周围的人说： 巴蛮奴才，我难道还要靠你活命吗！
English: Enraged, Ran Xuan returned to the palace and said to the people around him: Barbarian slave, do I still have to depend on you for my survival?

古文：要将先灭群胡，却斩王泰。 
现代文：我要先消灭掉群胡，然后杀王泰。 
English: I want to wipe out the wildebeest first, and then kill Wang Tai.

古文：乃悉众出战，大破显军，追奔至阳平，斩首三万馀级。
现代文：于是就率领全部兵众出战，重创刘显的军队，一直追击到阳平，斩杀三万多人。
English: As a result, he led all the soldiers into battle, heavily damaged Liu Xian's army, pursued it all the way to Yangping, and killed more than thirty thousand people.

古文：显惧，密使请降，求杀祗以自效，闵乃引归。
现代文：刘显十分害怕，秘密地派人去向冉闵请求投降，并请求杀掉石祗以表示自己的效忠，冉闵这才带领兵众撤回。
English: Liu Xian was so scared that he secretly sent someone to ask Ran to surrender, and asked him to kill Shijie to show his loyalty. Only then did Ran lead the troops back.

古文：会有告王泰欲叛入秦者，闵杀之，夷其三族。
现代文：有人报告说王泰想背叛归附前秦，冉闵便杀掉王泰，还灭掉了他的三族。
English: Someone reported that Wang Tai wanted to betray and join the former Qin, so Ran Xuan killed Wang Tai and wiped out his three clans.

古文：秦王健分遣使者问民疾苦，搜罗俊异，宽重敛之税，弛离宫之禁，罢无用之器，去侈靡之服，凡赵之苛政不便于民者皆除之。
现代文：前秦王苻健分别派遣使者访问百姓的疾苦，搜罗杰出人才，放宽了横征暴敛的赋税，开放了为修建离宫划定的禁区，撤掉了没有用处的事务和器具，更换了华丽奢侈的服装，凡是后赵国制定的不利于百姓的繁琐苛刻的政令，全都予以废除。
English: Former Qin King He Jian separately sent emissaries to visit the sufferings of the people, collected outstanding talents, relaxed the exorbitant taxation, opened the restricted areas designated for the construction of the palace, removed the useless affairs and appliances, replaced the gorgeous and luxurious clothing, and abolished all the cumbersome and harsh decrees that were unfavorable to the people.

古文：杜洪、张琚遣使召梁州刺史司马勋。
现代文：杜洪、张琚派遣使者征召梁州刺史司马勋。
English: Du Hong and Zhang Ye dispatched envoys to recruit Liangzhou assassin Sima Xun.

古文：夏，四月，勋帅步骑三万赴之，秦王健御之于五丈原。
现代文：夏季，四月，司马勋率领步、骑兵三万人前往，在五丈原遇上了前秦王苻健的阻击。
English: In the summer, in April, Sima Xun led the march with 30,000 cavalry, and met the resistance of the former Qin King Jian Jian in Wuzhongyuan.

古文：勋屡战皆败，退归南郑。
现代文：司马勋多次战斗都失败了，只好退回南郑。
English: Sima Xun failed in many battles and had to return to Nan Zheng.

古文：健以中书令贾玄硕始者不上尊号，衔之，使人告玄硕与司马勋通，并其诸子皆杀之。
现代文：苻健因为中书令贾玄硕在当初没有主动进上尊号，对他耿耿于怀，便指使人诬告他与司马勋相勾结，借此把他和他的几个儿子一起杀掉了。
English: Hao Jian was angry with Jia Xuanshuo because he did not take the initiative to enter the honorary title at the beginning, so he ordered people to falsely accuse him of colluding with Sima Xun, thereby killing him and several of his sons.

古文：渤海人逄约因赵乱，拥众数千家附于魏，魏以约为渤海太守。
现代文：渤海人逄约乘后赵国大乱之机，带领数千家民众，归附魏国。魏国任命逄约为勃海太守。
English: The Bohai people took advantage of the opportunity after the Zhao Rebellion and led thousands of people to join the State of Wei. The State of Wei appointed Zhuoyu as the governor of Bohai.

古文：故太守刘准，隗之兄子也，土豪封放，弈之从弟也；别聚众自守。
现代文：原来的太守刘准，是刘隗哥哥的儿子；地方豪强封放，是封奕的族弟。他们则另外聚集部众自守。
English: The original governor, Liu Jun, was the son of Liu Yao's brother; the local strongman, Fufang, was the younger brother of Fong Yi. They gathered together to defend themselves.

古文：闵以准为幽州刺史，与约中分渤海。
现代文：冉闵任命刘准为幽州刺史，把渤海一分为二，让逄约和刘准分地而治。
English: Ran appointed Liu Jun as the governor of Yuzhou, divided the Bohai Sea into two parts, and let Zhaoyo and Liu Jun rule separately.

古文：燕王俊使封弈讨约，使昌黎太守高开讨准、放。
现代文：前燕王慕容俊派封奕讨伐逄约，派昌黎太守高开讨伐刘准、封放。
English: Former Yan Wang Murongjun sent Feng Yi to fight against the treaty, and sent Chang Li Taishu Gao Kai to fight against Liu Zheng and free him.

古文：开，瞻之子也。
现代文：高开是高瞻的儿子。
English: Gao Kai is the son of Gao Zhan.

古文：弈引兵直抵约垒，遣人谓约曰： 相与乡里，隔绝日久，会遇甚难。
现代文：封奕率兵直接抵达逄约的营垒，派人告诉逄约说： 你我本是乡里乡亲，离别日久，很难见面。
English: Feng Yi and his soldiers arrived directly at the camp of Xinyo, and sent someone to tell Xinyo: You and I are originally from the countryside, and it is hard to meet after such a long separation.

古文：时事利害，人各有心，非所论也。
现代文：眼下事情的利害得失，人人心里都有数，不必多说。
English: Everyone has an idea of what is at stake in the current situation. There is no need to say more.

古文：愿单出一相见，以写伫结之情。 
现代文：希望你自己单独出来见见面，以倾诉聚集于心头的思念之情。 
English: I hope you'll come out to meet me alone to talk about the feelings of longing that have gathered in your heart.

古文：约素信重弈，即出，见弈于门外。
现代文：逄约历来信任敬重封奕，随即出来，在营垒门外与封奕见面。
English: He had always trusted and respected Feng Yi, so he went out to meet him outside the camp gate.

古文：各屏骑卒，单马交语。
现代文：他们各自都没带骑兵卫士，只是单独骑着马交谈。
English: Neither of them had mounted guards with them, and they rode alone, talking.

古文：弈与论叙平生毕，因说之曰： 与君累世同乡，情相爱重，诚欲君享祚无穷；今既获展奉，不可不尽所怀。
现代文：封奕和他叙说完各自经历后，接着劝他说： 我和你几代同乡，情义深重，确实希望你永远享受魏国的国土。如今既然得以见面承教，我就不能不尽吐肺腑之言了。
English: After describing their respective experiences to him, Feng Yi went on to persuade him: "I and your generations of fellow countrymen have deep feelings, and I really hope that you will always enjoy the land of Wei. Now that we can meet and learn, I can't help but speak my heart out.

古文：冉闵乘石氏之乱，奄有成资，是宜天下服其强矣，而祸乱方始，固知天命不可力争也。
现代文：冉闵乘石氏大乱之机，囊括了其已有的成果，是应该让天下人佩服其强大的力量，然而战祸动乱也从此开始，这就知道天命本来不是靠力量强大争夺来的。
English: Taking advantage of the opportunity of Shi's great turmoil, Ran Xuan took the opportunity to summarize his existing achievements, which should make people around the world admire his powerful power. However, the calamity of war and turmoil also began from this time, which shows that the destiny of heaven was not originally won by strong power.

古文：燕王弈也载德，奉义讨乱，所征无敌。
现代文：燕王几代人都具有德行，崇奉道义，讨伐祸乱，所向无敌。
English: For several generations, Yan Wang people have been virtuous, advocating morality, fighting against evil, and invincible.

古文：今已都蓟，南临赵、魏，远近之民，襁负归之。
现代文：如今已经定都蓟城，南视赵、魏，远近的百姓，纷纷拖儿带女，前来归附。
English: Now that the capital, Handan, has been established, people from as far away as Zhao and Wei in the south have come to annex the city, bringing their children and wives with them.

古文：民厌荼毒，咸思有道。
现代文：百姓厌恶茶毒之苦，都思念有道德的人。
English: The people abhor the bitterness of poisoned tea and yearn for a virtuous person.

古文：冉闵之亡，匪朝伊夕，成败之形，昭然易见。
现代文：冉闵的灭亡，非早即晚，成败的形势，显而易见。
English: Sooner or later, Ran Wei's demise is inevitable, and the situation of success or failure is obvious.

古文：且燕王肇开王业，虚心贤俊，君能翻然改图，则功参绛、灌，庆流苗裔，孰与为亡国将，守孤城以待必至之祸哉！ 
现代文：况且燕王刚刚开创帝王大业，虚心对待俊贤之士，如果您能翻然悔悟，改变图谋，则功劳可与周勃、灌婴相比，福祉可流传子孙后代，何必做亡国之将，困守孤城，等待必然要到来的灾祸呢！ 
English: Moreover, King Yan has just started the great cause of emperors, treating the talented and wise men with modesty. If you can suddenly repent and change your plans, then the merit can be compared with Zhou Bo and the baby, and the welfare can be passed on to future generations. Why do you have to be the leader of a dying country, defend a lonely city, and wait for the inevitable disaster to come?

古文：约闻之，怅然不言。
现代文：逄约听了这番话，心情悲怅，默不作声。
English: Hearing these words, Yao Yuan was saddened and fell silent.

古文：弈给使张安，有勇力；弈豫戒之，俟约气下，安突前持其马鞚，因挟之而驰。
现代文：封奕左右的使者张安，勇气与力量俱佳，封奕事先对他作了布置，等到逄约气势低落时，张安突然冲上前去，抓住他的马缰，顺势挟持着他急驰而返。
English: Zhang An, the emissary around Feng Yi, was both courageous and strong. Feng Yi had made arrangements for him in advance. When he was at a low ebb, Zhang An suddenly rushed forward, grabbed his horse's bridle, and rushed back with him.

古文：至营，弈与坐，谓曰： 君计不能自决，故相为决之，非欲取君以邀功，乃欲全君以安民也。 
现代文：回到营地，封奕与他坐在一起，对他说： 您不能自己决定大计，所以我帮您一起决定，不是想要拿您去邀功请赏，而是想保全您以安抚百姓。 
English: Back at the camp, Feng Yi sat with him and said to him, "You can't decide the grand plan on your own, so I'll help you decide together. I don't want to take you to ask for a reward, but I want to protect you to appease the people."

古文：高开至渤海，准、放迎降。
现代文：高开抵达渤海，刘准、封放出来迎接并投降。
English: Gao Kai arrived in the Bohai Sea, and Liu Jun and Fang Fang were released to meet and surrender.

古文：俊以放为渤海太守，准为左司马，约参军事。以约诱于人而遇获，更其名曰钓。
现代文：慕容俊任命封放为渤海太守，刘准为左司马，逄约为参军事，因为逄约是受人劝诱才归附投降的，所以慕容俊把他的名字改为逄钓。
English: Murongjun appointed Huanhuang as the governor of the Bohai Sea, Liu Jun as the left secretary of the horse, and Gongyou as the military, because Gongyou was persuaded to surrender, so Murongjun changed his name to Gongying.

古文：刘显弑赵王祗及其丞相安乐王炳、太宰赵庶等十馀人，传首于鄴。
现代文：刘显杀掉了后赵王石祗及其丞相乐安王石炳、太宰赵庶等十多人，并将首级传送到邺城。
English: Liu Xian killed more than a dozen people, including the Empress Zhao Wang Shijun, her chancellor Le'an Wang Shijun, and the grand vizier Zhao Shizhe, and sent their heads to Lucheng.

古文：骠骑将军石宁奔柏人。
现代文：骠骑将军石宁逃奔到柏人县。
English: The cavalry general, Shi Ning, fled to Bairen County.

古文：魏主闵焚祗首于通衢，拜显上大将军、大单于、冀州牧。
现代文：魏国主冉闵在邺城的通衢大道上焚烧了石祗的首级，授予刘显上大将军、大单于、冀州牧的官职。
English: The ruler of Wei, Ran Yu, burned the head of Shijie on Tonglu Avenue in Handan City, and awarded Liu Xian the official positions of General, Datan Yu, and Jizhou Patriarch.

古文：五月，赵兗州刺史刘启自鄄城来奔。
现代文：五月，后赵国兖州刺史刘启从鄄城来投奔东晋。
English: In May, Liu Qi, the late Zhao Guozhou statesman, left Shicheng to join the Eastern Jin Dynasty.

古文：秋，七月，刘显复引兵攻鄴，魏主闵击败之。
现代文：秋季，七月，刘显再次率兵攻打邺城，被魏国主冉闵击败。
English: In the autumn, in July, Liu Xian once again led an army to attack Lucheng, and was defeated by the ruler of Wei, Ran Yu.

古文：显还，称帝于襄国。
现代文：刘显返回，在襄国称帝。
English: Liu Xian returned and proclaimed himself emperor in Xiang.

古文：八月，魏徐州刺史周成、兗州刺史魏统、荆州刺史乐弘、豫州牧张遇以廪丘、许昌等诸城来降；平南将军高崇、征虏将军吕护执洛州刺史郑系，以其地来降。
现代文：八月，魏国徐州刺史周成、兖州刺史魏统、荆州刺史乐弘、豫州刺史张遇前来向东晋投降，献出了他们所占据的廪丘、许昌等城邑。平南将军高崇、征虏将军吕护挟持着洛州刺史郑系也前来向东晋投降，献出了他们所占据的地方。
English: In August, the Wei generals of Xuzhou, Zhoucheng, Bozhou, Wei Tong, Jingzhou, Le Hong, and Yuzhou, Zhang Rong, came to East Jin to surrender and offered the towns they occupied, such as Mengqiu and Xuchang. The Pingnan general Gaozong and the conscript general Lvong, holding the Lozhou general Zheng, also came to East Jin to surrender and offered the places they occupied.

古文：燕王俊遣慕容恪攻中山，慕容评攻王午于鲁口，魏中山太守上谷侯龛闭城拒守。
现代文：前燕王慕容俊派慕容恪攻打中山，派慕容评在鲁口攻打王午，魏国中山太守上谷人侯龛紧闭城门，抵抗固守。
English: Former Yan King Murong Jun sent Murong Gu to attack Zhongshan, and sent Murong Gu to attack Wang Wu in Lukou. The governor of Zhongshan in Wei, Shangguan man Hou Yi, closed the city gate tightly and resisted.

古文：恪南徇常山，军于九门，魏赵郡太守辽西李邽举郡降，恪厚抚之，将邽还围中山，侯龛乃降。
现代文：慕容恪率兵南巡常山，驻扎在九门，魏国赵郡太守辽西人李带领全郡投降，慕容恪给他以丰厚的抚慰，统领李的军队返回去包围中山，于是侯龛投降。
English: Murong Ke led his troops south to patrol Changshan and stationed in Jiumen. Li, the governor of Zhao County in Wei and a native of Liaoxi, led the entire county to surrender. Murong Ke gave him rich consolation and led Li's army back to encircle Zhongshan, whereupon Hou Yi surrendered.

古文：恪入中山，迁其将帅、土豪数十家诣蓟，馀皆安堵；军令严明，秋豪不犯。
现代文：慕容烙进入中山，将侯龛手下的数十家将帅、地方豪强迁徙到蓟城，其余的则让他们全都就地安居。部队纪律严明，秋毫无犯。
English: Murong entered Zhongshan and moved dozens of generals and local strongmen under Hou Yi to Lucheng, while the rest let them all live in peace. The troops were strictly disciplined and committed no crimes.

古文：慕容评至南安，王午遣其将郑生拒战，评击斩之。
现代文：慕容评抵达南安，王午派他的部将郑生抵抗，慕容评发起攻击，斩杀了郑生。
English: When Murong Han arrived in Nan'an, Wang Wu sent his general Zheng Sheng to resist, and Murong Han launched an attack and killed Zheng Sheng.

古文：悦绾还自襄国，俊乃知张举之妄而杀之。
现代文：悦绾从襄国返回，慕容俊才知道张举所说的送传国印玺是荒诞之辞，于是就杀了他。
English: When Yue Yao returned from Xiang Province, Murong Jun only found out that Zhang Ji's words about sending the seal of the country were absurd, so he killed him.

古文：常炜有四男二女在中山，俊释炜之囚，使诸子就见之。
现代文：常炜有四男二女在中山，慕容俊解除了对他的囚禁，让他的儿子们前来见他。
English: Changchun had four sons and two daughters in Zhongshan. Murong Jun released his captives and let his sons come to see him.

古文：炜上疏谢恩，俊手令答曰： 卿本不为生计，孤以州里相存耳。
现代文：常炜上疏谢恩，慕容俊亲手复信回答说： 你的行动本来不是为了活命谋生考虑，但我与你是大同乡，所以加以保全。
English: Murongjun replied to the letter with his own hand: "Your action was not originally intended to earn a living, but I am a fellow villager with you, so I saved it.

古文：今大乱之中，诸子尽至，岂非天所念邪！
现代文：在当今大乱的形势下，你的儿子们全都来到了这里，这难道不是上天对你的关怀吗？
English: In today's turbulent situation, your sons have all come here. Isn't this God's concern for you?

古文：天且念卿，况于孤乎！ 
现代文：上天都关怀你，何况我呢！ 
English: Heaven cares for you, how much more for me!

古文：赐妾一人，谷三百斛，使居凡城。
现代文：慕容俊赐给常炜妾一人，粮食三百斛，让他居住在凡城。
English: Murongjun gave one of Changshu's concubines 300 mu of grain and let him live in Van.

古文：以北平太守孙兴为中山太守。
现代文：任命北平太守孙兴为中山太守。
English: Sun Xing, the governor of Beiping, was appointed governor of Zhongshan.

古文：兴善于绥抚，中山遂安。
现代文：孙兴长于安抚之道，于是中山就安定下来了。
English: Sun Xing was good at appeasement, so Zhongshan settled down.

古文：库傉官伟帅部众自上党降燕。
现代文：库官伟率领他的部众从上党来投降前燕。
English: Ku Guanwei led his subordinates from the upper party to surrender to Zeng Yan.

古文：姚弋仲遣使来请降。
现代文：姚弋仲派遣使者前来向东晋请求投降。
English: Yao Yuzhong sent an envoy to East Jin to ask them to surrender.

古文：冬，十一月，以弋仲为使持节、六夷大都督、督江北诸军事、车骑大将军、开府仪同三司、大单于、高陵郡公，又以其子襄为持节、平北将军、都督并州诸军事、并州刺史、平乡县公。
现代文：冬季，十一月，东晋朝廷任命姚弋仲为使持节、六夷大都督、督淮北诸军事、车骑大将军、天府仪同三司、大单于、高陵郡公。又任命他的儿子姚襄为持节、平北将军、都督并州诸军事、并州刺史、平乡县公。
English: In the winter, in November, the Eastern Jin Dynasty court appointed Yao Xizhong as the envoy of Jizhi, the governor of Liwei, the governor of Huaibei, the military, the cavalry general, the three departments of Tianfu, Datan and Gaoling. He also appointed his son Yao Xiang as the envoy of Jizhong, the general of Pingbei, the governor and the military of the state, the governor and the history of the state, and the governor of Pingxiang County.

古文：逄钓亡归渤海，招集旧众以叛燕。
现代文：逄钓逃亡回渤海，召集起过去的旧部兵众背叛了前燕。
English: Yao Ying fled back to the Bohai Sea, gathered up the old soldiers of the past and betrayed the former Yan.

古文：乐陵太守贾坚使人告谕乡人，示以成败，钓部众稍散，遂来奔。
现代文：乐陵太守贾坚派人劝谕百姓，给他们分析成败大势，逄钓的旧部逐渐离散，于是逄钓来投奔东晋。
English: Jia Jian, the governor of Le Ling, sent a person to advise the people and give them an analysis of the general trend of success and failure. The old part of the eel fishing gradually dispersed, so the eel fishing came to the East Jin.

古文：吐谷浑叶延卒，子碎妥立。
现代文：吐谷浑的首领叶延去世，儿子碎奚继位。
English: The chieftain of the Tugu Hun, Ye Yan, died, and his son, Jiao Tong, succeeded him.

古文：初，桓温闻石氏乱，上疏请出师经略中原，事久不报。
现代文：当初，桓温听说石氏大乱，便向朝廷上疏，请求出兵整治中原地区，但过了许久也没有回音。
English: At first, when Kan-Wen heard about the Shi Rebellion, he petitioned the imperial court to send troops to rectify the Central Plains region, but after a long time there was no response.

古文：温知朝廷仗殷浩以抗己，甚忿之；然素知浩之为人，亦不之惮也。
现代文：桓温知道朝廷倚仗殷浩来对抗自己，对此十分愤怒。然而他也一向知道殷浩的为人，所以对此也不惧怕。
English: Knowing that the imperial court relied on Yin Hao to oppose him, Kuan Wen was very angry. However, he had always known Yin Hao as a person, so he was not afraid of this.

古文：以国无他衅，遂得相持弥年，虽有君臣之迹，羁縻而已，八州士众资调殆不为国家用。
现代文：因为国家没有什么其他灾祸变故，也就得以相持共处了一年多，但不过是一般性的联系、应付而已。桓温管辖的八州之内民众的资财赋税，几乎不给朝廷使用。
English: Because there were no other calamities in the country, they were able to coexist for more than a year, but it was just a general connection and coping. The wealth tax of the people in the eight states under the jurisdiction of Huanwen was hardly used by the imperial court.

古文：屡求北伐，诏书不听。
现代文：桓温多次请求北伐，朝廷下达诏书不予同意。
English: Kan'en repeatedly requested the Northern Expedition, but the Imperial Court issued an edict not to agree.

古文：十二月，辛未，温拜表辄行，帅众四五万顺流而下，军于武昌，朝廷大惧。
现代文：十二月，辛未，桓温上奏章后就立即行动，率领四五万人顺江而下，驻扎在武昌。朝廷十分恐惧。
English: In December, Xinwei, Kuan-Wen immediately took action after the performance of the anthem, leading 450,000 people down the river and stationed in Wuchang. The imperial court was very afraid.

古文：殷浩欲去位以避温，又欲以驺虞幡驻温军。
现代文：殷浩想用辞职来躲避桓温，又想用出示标有驺虞的旗帜的办法，使桓温的部队不再继续前进。
English: Yin Hao wanted to use his resignation to evade Kuan Wen, and also wanted to use the method of displaying a flag marked with a swastika, so that Kuan Wen's troops would not continue to advance.

古文：吏部尚书王彪之言于会稽王昱曰： 此属皆自为计，非能保社稷，为殿下计也。
现代文：吏部尚书王彪之对会稽王司马昱进言说： 这些举动全都是为自己考虑，并不能保全江山，不是替殿下考虑。
English: Shangshu Wang Biao, the head of the personnel department, said to Wang Simaqi, the auditor of the association: These actions are all for their own consideration, and can not protect the country, not for the consideration of His Royal Highness.

古文：若殷浩去职，人情离骇，天子独坐，当此之际，必有任其责者，非殿下而谁乎！ 
现代文：如果殷浩辞职，必将导致人心分离混乱，天子独坐天下，在这种时候，一定要有人出来承担责任，这人不是殿下还能是谁呢！ 
English: If Yin Hao resigns, it will surely lead to the separation and confusion of people's hearts, and the Son of Heaven will sit alone in the world. At this time, someone must come out to take responsibility. This person is not His Royal Highness, who else could it be?

古文：又谓浩曰： 彼若抗表问罪，卿为之首。
现代文：王彪之又对殷浩说： 如果桓温上表直言，兴师问罪，首当其冲的是您。
English: Wang Biao Zhi also said to Yin Hao: If Kanwen speaks out and accuses Xing Shi, you will be the first to bear the brunt.

古文：事任如此，猜衅已成，欲作匹夫，岂有全地邪！
现代文：您在朝廷任此职务，猜忌隔阂已经形成，这时想成为一般百姓，难道还能保全自己吗！
English: You hold this position in the imperial court, suspicion and estrangement have already formed, and at this time you want to become an ordinary citizen, can you still protect yourself?

古文：且当静以待之。
现代文：应该暂且静观不动地等待桓温。
English: You should wait for Kanen without moving for the time being.

古文：令相王与手书，示以款诚，为陈成败，彼必旋师；若不从，则遣中诏；又不从，乃当以正义相裁。
现代文：可以先让宰相给他写一封亲笔信，向他表示恳切的诚意，为他分析成败趋势，他就一定会率兵返回了；如果不听，那就由皇上亲自下达手诏；再不听，就应当用正义之师去制裁他。
English: First, let the prime minister write a personal letter to him, express his earnest sincerity to him, and analyze the trend of success and failure for him, and he will certainly return with his troops; if he does not listen, then the emperor will personally issue a decree; if he does not listen, he should be sanctioned by the teacher of justice.

古文：奈何无故匆匆，先自猖獗乎！ 
现代文：为什么您要平白无故地匆匆行事，先自我倾覆呢！ 
English: Why do you want to act in haste for no reason at all and topple yourself first!

古文：浩曰： 决大事正自难，顷日来欲使人闷。闻卿此谋，意始得了。 
现代文：殷浩说： 面临大事的我正难以决策，近日一直使我感到烦闷，听到你这个计谋，主意才得以决定了。 
English: Yin Hao said, "I am facing a big event and it is difficult for me to make a decision. Recently, I have been feeling bored. It was only after hearing your strategy that I was able to make up my mind.

古文：彪之，彬之子也。
现代文：王彪之是王彬的儿子。
English: Wang Biao is the son of Wang Bin.

古文：抚军司马高崧言于昱曰： 王宜致书，谕以祸福，自当返旆。
现代文：抚军司马高崧对司马昱说： 您应该致信桓温，向他说明利害得失，他自己就应当率兵返回了。
English: The military governor, Sima Gaoqi, said to Sima Yu: You should send a letter to Huan Wen, explain to him the advantages and disadvantages, and he should return with his soldiers.

古文：如其不尔，便六军整驾，逆顺于兹判矣！ 
现代文：如果他不这样做，就整理六军人马出征，正义叛逆从此判明！ 
English: If he does not do so, he will organize six soldiers to go to war, and the righteous rebellion will be revealed from now on!

古文：乃于坐为昱草书曰： 寇难宜平，时会宜接。
现代文：于是他就坐下来替司马昱起草书信说： 寇贼发难，应该平定，时运到来，应该应接。
English: So he sat down and drafted a letter for Sima Yu, saying, "When the bandits attack, it is necessary to quell them; when the time comes, it is necessary to respond.

古文：此实为国远图，经略大算，能弘斯会，非足下而谁？
现代文：这确实是为国家着想的长谋远虑、夺取天下的宏图大略，能够弘扬光大这种时运的人，除了足下还能有谁！
English: This is indeed a long-term foresight for the sake of the country, a grand plan to seize the world, and who can carry forward this kind of fortune, except the foot!

古文：但以比兴师动众，要当以资实为本；运转之艰，古人所难，不可易之于始而不熟虑。
现代文：但兴师动众，重要的是应该以雄厚的财力物力为基础，辗转运输的艰难，正是古人最头疼的事，不能从一开始就认为它容易而不加以认真地考虑。
English: However, it is important to have strong financial and material resources as a basis for motivating teachers. The difficulty of transportation is the most troublesome thing for the ancients. It is impossible to think that it is easy from the beginning without seriously considering it.

古文：顷所以深用为疑，惟在此耳。
现代文：近来我之所以对你的举动深以为疑，原因就在这里。
English: That's why I've been so suspicious of your actions lately.

古文：然异常之举，众之所骇，游声噂𠴲，想足下亦少闻之。
现代文：对于出乎寻常的举动，人们都感到惊骇，所以近来各种议论说法，纷至沓来，想足下也稍有耳闻。
English: People have been horrified by the unusual move, so there has been a flurry of speculation recently.

古文：苟患失之，无所不至，或能望风振扰，一时崩散。
现代文：假若生怕得到的东西再失去，就会无所不用其极，也许有些人就会震恐惊忧，甚至会顷刻崩溃逃散。
English: If you are afraid of losing what you have gained, you will go to great lengths. Some people may be shocked and worried, and may even collapse and flee in an instant.

古文：如此则望实并丧，社稷之事去矣。
现代文：如此则宏大的愿望和已有的成果全都会丧失，国家的大业也就完了。
English: In this way, the great aspirations and achievements will all be lost, and the great cause of the country will come to an end.

古文：皆由吾暗弱，德信不著，不能镇静群庶，保固维城，所以内愧于心，外惭良友。
现代文：全都是由于我昏庸懦弱，没有表现出崇高的道德和信誉，才没能使众百姓沉着安定，凭借险势连城固守，以保卫国家。这就是我于内问心有愧，于外对不起好友的原因。
English: It was all due to my stupidity and cowardice, and my failure to demonstrate lofty morals and credibility, that I was unable to keep the people calm and stable, and to defend the country by relying on dangerous situations. This is the reason why I feel guilty inside and sorry for my friends outside.

古文：吾与足下，虽职有内外，安社稷，保家国，其致一也。
现代文：我与足下，虽然任职有内外之分，但安定国家，保卫皇帝，这个目标是一致的。
English: I share the goal of stabilizing the country and protecting the emperor with my successors, although there are internal and external factors.

古文：天下安危，系之明德。当先思宁国而后图其外，使王基克隆，大义弘著，所望于足下。
现代文：天下的安危，与完美的德行相联系，应当先考虑使国家安宁，然后再图谋向外扩展，以使帝王的基业兴隆昌盛，道义弘扬彰著，这就是我对阁下的期望。
English: The safety of the world is connected with the perfection of virtue, and we should first consider the tranquility of the country, and then try to expand outwardly, so that the emperor's inheritance will flourish and flourish, and morality will be promoted, which is what I expect from you.

古文：区区诚怀，岂可复顾嫌而不尽哉！ 
现代文：区区一点心意，难道还能再顾虑疑忌而不坦诚尽言吗！ 
English: If you are a bit distracted, can you still have doubts and not speak frankly?

古文：温即上疏惶恐致谢，回军还镇。
现代文：桓温见信后立即上书，诚惶诚恐地表示谢罪，率军返回了原来镇守的地方。
English: After seeing the letter, Kan-Wen immediately wrote a letter, sincerely and sincerely expressed his gratitude, and led the army back to the original town guard.

古文：朝廷将行郊祀。
现代文：东晋朝廷将要在郊外举行祭祀天地的仪式。
English: The Eastern Jin Dynasty court will hold a ceremony to worship heaven and earth in the suburbs.

古文：会稽王昱问于王彪之曰： 郊祀应有赦否？ 
现代文：会稽王司马昱问王彪之说： 举行郊祀是否应该有大赦？ 
English: The Auditor-General, Wang Sima, asked Wang Biao: "Should there be an amnesty for holding suburban religious services?"

古文：彪之曰： 自中兴以来，郊祀往往有赦，愚意常谓非宜；凶愚之人，以为郊必有赦，将生心于徼幸矣！ 
现代文：王彪之回答： 自从朝廷中兴以来，举行郊祀时往往实行大赦。我的意见是，如果经常这样做，是不合适的。凶残愚顽之人，以为一举行郊祀必定会实行大赦，那他们必将产生侥幸心理！ 
English: Wang Biao's answer: Since the rise of the imperial court, amnesty has often been carried out when holding suburban religious services. My opinion is that it is not appropriate to do this often. If cruel and stupid people think that an amnesty will definitely be carried out once a suburban religious service is held, then they will certainly have a sense of luck!

古文：昱从之。
现代文：司马昱听从了他的意见。
English: Sima Ye listened to his advice.

古文：燕王俊如龙城。
现代文：前燕国主慕容俊到龙城。
English: Former Yan Guozhong Mu Rongjun went to Longcheng.

古文：丁零翟鼠帅所部降燕，封为归义王。
现代文：丁零人翟鼠率领兵众投降了前燕，被封为归义王。
English: Ding Zi Ren Weasel led the troops to surrender to Qian Yan and was crowned as the King of Guiyi.

古文：孝宗穆皇帝中之上永和八年
现代文：永和八年春季，正月，辛卯，出现日食。
English: In the spring of the eighth year of Yonghe, the first month, Xinwu, a solar eclipse occurred.

古文：春，正月，辛卯，日有食之。秦丞相雄等请秦王健正尊号，依汉、晋之旧，不必效石氏之初。
现代文：前秦丞相苻雄等人请求秦王苻健正式称皇帝的尊号，依从汉朝、晋朝的旧制，而不必效法石氏最初先称天王的做法。
English: Former Qin chancellor Shao Xiong and others requested that Qin Wang Shujian officially call the emperor's honorific, in accordance with the old system of the Han Dynasty and the Jin Dynasty, without having to follow the practice of the Fa Shi clan initially calling him Tian Wang.

古文：健从之，即皇帝位，大赦。
现代文：苻健听从了这一请求，即皇帝位，实行大赦。
English: Sui Jian complied with this request, i.e. to abdicate the throne and grant an amnesty.

古文：诸公皆进爵为王。
现代文：诸公全都晋升爵位为王。
English: All princes were promoted to the rank of nobility and became kings.

古文：且言单于所以统壹百蛮，非天子所宜领，以授太子苌。
现代文：苻雄等人还说，单于用来统治百蛮的种种措施、办法，不宜由天子亲自掌管。所以苻健把这方面的权力授予太子苻苌。
English: Hao Xiong and others also said that the various measures and methods used to rule the barbarians alone were not suitable for the emperor to personally control. Therefore, He Jian granted this power to the prince.

古文：司马勋既还汉中，杜洪、张琚屯宜秋。
现代文：司马勋已经回到汉中，杜洪、张琚驻扎在宜秋。
English: Sima Xun has returned to Hanzhong, Du Hong and Zhang Ye are stationed in Yixiu.

古文：洪自以右族，轻琚，琚遂杀洪，自立为秦王，改元建昌。
现代文：杜洪自以为出身名门望族而轻视张琚，张琚于是就杀掉了杜洪，自立为秦王，改年号为建昌。
English: Du Hong thought that he was from a prestigious family and despised Zhang Ye. Zhang Ye then killed Du Hong, established himself as the King of Qin, and changed his name to Jianchang.

古文：刘显攻常山，魏主闵留大将军蒋干使辅太子智守鄴，自将八千骑救之。
现代文：刘显进攻常山，魏国主冉闵留下大将军蒋辅佐太子冉智守卫邺城，自己统率八千骑兵前去救援。
English: Liu Xian attacked Changshan, and the ruler of Wei, Ran Xi, left the great general, Chiang Kai-shek, and the crown prince, Ran Zhi, to guard the city of Handan. He himself led eight thousand cavalry to the rescue.

古文：显大司马清河王宁以枣强降魏。
现代文：刘显的大司马清河人王宁投降了魏国，将枣强县拱手交出。
English: Liu Xian's general secretary, Ma Qinghe's man Wang Ning, surrendered Wei and handed over Zaoqiang County.

古文：闵击显，败之，追奔至襄国。
现代文：冉闵攻击刘显，打败了他，追击到襄国。
English: Ran Yu attacked Liu Xian, defeated him, and chased him to Xiangguo.

古文：显大将军曹伏驹开门纳闵。闵杀显及其公卿己下百馀人，焚襄国宫室，迁其民于鄴。
现代文：刘显的大将军曹伏驹打开城门让石闵进入，石闵杀掉了刘显及其公卿以下的官吏一百多人，焚烧了襄国的宫室，将襄国的百姓迁徙到邺城。
English: Cao Fuxi, Liu Xian's general, opened the city gate to let Shijiazhuang enter. Shijiazhuang killed Liu Xian and more than a hundred officials below the nobility, burned the palace of Xiangguo, and moved the people of Xiangguo to Shicheng.

古文：赵汝阴王琨以其妻妾来奔，斩于建康市，石氏遂绝。
现代文：后赵汝阴王石琨带着他的妻妾前来东晋投降，被斩杀在建康街头，于是石氏被彻底根绝了。
English: Later, Zhao Ruyin's king Shijie brought his wife and concubine to East Jin to surrender and was beheaded on the streets of Jiankang. As a result, the Shijie clan was completely eradicated.

古文：尚书左丞孔严言于殷浩曰： 比来众情，良可寒心，不知使君当何以镇之。
现代文：尚书左丞孔严向殷浩进言说： 近来人们的情绪，真令人心寒，不知您将用什么办法使其安定。
English: "Recently, the mood of the people is really chilling. I don't know what measures you will use to stabilize it.

古文：愚谓宜明受任之方，韩、彭专征伐，萧、曹守管籥，内外之任，各有攸司；深思廉、蔺屈身之义，平、勃交欢之谋，令穆然无间，然后可以保大定功也。
现代文：我认为应该明确官吏的职责，韩信、彭越专事征伐，萧何、曹参留守理财，对内对外的职责，各有所司；还应该深思廉颇、蔺相如为国家利益而捐弃前嫌的道理，陈平、周勃为制止吕氏专权而结为至交的谋略，让人们和睦无间，然后就可以保有天下，成就功业了。
English: In my opinion, the duties of officials should be made clear. Han Xin and Peng Yue should be dedicated to the campaign, while Xiao He and Cao Zhan should stay behind to manage the finances. Each of them should be responsible for their internal and external duties. It is also necessary to think deeply about the principles of being honest and selfless, and abandoning past grudges for the benefit of the country. Chen Ping and Zhou Bo formed a friendly strategy to stop the Lv's autocracy, so that people could live in harmony. Then they could preserve the world, and their work would be accomplished.

古文：观顷日降附之徒，皆人面兽心，贪而无亲，恐难以义感也。 
现代文：看看近来投降归附的那些人，全都是人面兽心，贪婪之极而且六亲不认，恐怕难以用道义感化他们。 
English: If you look at the people who have recently surrendered and joined the CCP, they are all human-like and animal-like, extremely greedy and do not recognize their parents, so I am afraid it is difficult to influence them with morality.

古文：浩不从。
现代文：殷浩没有听从孔严的意见。
English: Yin Hao did not listen to Kong Yan's advice.

古文：严，愉之从子也。
现代文：孔严是孔愉的侄子。
English: Kong Yan is Kong Yu's nephew.

古文：浩上疏请北出许、洛，诏许之。以安西将军谢尚、北中郎奖荀羡为督统，进屯寿春。
现代文：殷浩上疏请求北上许昌、洛阳，穆帝复诏同意，于是任命安西将军谢尚、北中郎将荀羡为督统，进军驻扎于寿春。
English: At the request of Yin Hao Shang Su, Kitakami Xu Chang and Luoyang, Mu Di agreed to the reply, so he appointed Anxi General Xie Shang and Kitanakagura General Zou En as governors, and marched into Shuchun.

古文：谢尚不能抚尉张遇，遇怒，据许昌叛，使其将上官恩据洛阳，乐弘攻督护戴施于仓垣，浩军不能进。
现代文：谢尚没能抚慰张遇，张遇非常愤怒，便占据许昌反叛，并派他的将领上官恩占据洛阳，乐弘在仓垣攻打督护戴施，殷浩的军队无法前进。
English: Xie Shang failed to appease Zhang Rong, Zhang Rong was very angry, so he occupied Xu Chang and rebelled, and sent his generals to Guan En to occupy Luoyang, Le Hong to attack and defend Dai Shi in Kuragaki, and Yin Hao's army could not advance.

古文：三月，命荀羡镇准阴，寻加监青州诸军事，又领兗州刺史，镇下邳。
现代文：三月，命令荀羡镇守淮阴，不久加任监青州诸军事，又兼任兖州刺史，镇守下邳。
English: In March, he was ordered to be the town guard of Huaiyin, and soon he was assigned to the military of Qingzhou, and also served as the town guard of Zhangzhou.

古文：乙巳，燕王俊还蓟，稍徙军中文武兵民家属于蓟。
现代文：乙巳，前燕王慕容俊回到蓟城，并将少量的军队文武官员、士兵的家属迁徙到蓟城。
English: At this time, the former Yan Wang Murongjun returned to Handan, and moved a small number of military officials and soldiers' families to Handan.

古文：姚弋仲有子四十二人，及病，谓诸子曰： 石氏待吾厚，吾本欲为之尽力。
现代文：姚弋仲有儿子四十二人，等到他病重时，对儿子们说： 石氏对待我很优厚，我本想为他们尽力。
English: Yao Yuzhong had forty-two sons. When he fell seriously ill, he said to his sons: Shi treated me very well. I wanted to do my best for them.

古文：今石氏已灭，中原无主；我死，汝亟自归于晋，当固执臣节，无为不义也！ 
现代文：如今石氏已被消灭，中原混战无主，我死了以后，你们赶快自己归附晋朝，应当固守作为臣下的气节，不要干不义的事情！ 
English: Now that the Shishi clan has been wiped out, there is no one left to fight in the Central Plains. After my death, you should quickly attach yourselves to the Jin Dynasty. You should adhere to the spirit of being a subject, and not do anything unjust!

古文：弋仲卒，子襄秘不发丧，帅户六万南攻阳平、元城、发干，破之，屯于碻磝津，以太原王亮为长史，天水尹赤为司马，太原薛瓚、略阳权翼为参军。
现代文：姚弋仲去世，其子姚襄隐瞒消息，不告诉别人，率领六万家的兵众南进，攻打阳平、元城、发干，全部攻克，兵众驻扎在津。任命太原人王亮为长史，天水人尹赤为司马，太原人薛瓒、略阳人权翼为参军。
English: After the death of Yao Shuzhong, his son Yao Xiang concealed the news and did not tell others. He led 60,000 soldiers southward to attack Yangping, Yuancheng, and Fanggan, all of which were defeated, and the soldiers were stationed in Tianjin. He appointed Wang Liang from Taiyuan as Changshi, Yin Chia from Tianshui as Sima, and Xue Yao from Taiyuan and Liangyang Human Rights Wing as members of the army.

古文：襄与秦兵战，败，亡三万馀户，南至荥阳，始发丧。
现代文：姚襄与前秦的军队交战，被打败，死亡、溃散了三万多家的兵众。南进抵达荥阳，才公开了父亲死亡的消息。
English: Yao Xiang fought with the former Qin army, was defeated, died, and scattered more than 30,000 soldiers. Nanjin arrived in Fenyang, and only then disclosed the news of his father's death.

古文：又与秦将高昌、李历战于麻田，马中流矢而毙。
现代文：又与前秦将领高昌、李历在麻田交战，他的战马因中了流箭而死。
English: He also fought against the former Qin generals Gaochang and Li Li in Asada. His horse was hit by a stray arrow and died.

古文：弟苌以马授襄，襄曰： 汝何以自免？ 
现代文：姚襄的弟弟姚苌给了他一匹马，姚襄说： 你自己如何脱身？ 
English: Yao Xiang's younger brother, Yao Yao, gave him a horse. Yao Xiang said, "How can you escape?

古文：苌曰： 但令兄济，竖子必不敢害苌！ 
现代文：姚苌说： 只要哥哥平安，那帮小子就不敢伤害我！ 
English: Yao Yao said, "As long as my brother is safe, those kids won't dare to hurt me!"

古文：会救至，俱免。
现代文：恰好这时援兵到达，他们全都幸免于难。
English: Just in time, reinforcements arrived and they all survived.

古文：尹赤奔秦，秦以赤为并州刺史，镇蒲阪。
现代文：尹赤投奔前秦，前秦任命尹赤为并州刺史，镇守蒲阪。
English: Yin Chia joined the former Qin Dynasty, and the former Qin Dynasty appointed Yin Chia as the governor of Busan.

古文：襄遂帅众归晋，送其五弟为质。
现代文：姚襄于是率领兵众归附东晋，并把他的五个弟弟送去作为人质。
English: Yao Xiang then led the troops to annex East Jin and sent his five younger brothers as hostages.

古文：诏襄屯谯城，襄单骑渡淮，见谢尚于寿春。
现代文：东晋朝廷诏令姚襄屯戍谯城。姚襄单人匹马渡过淮河，在寿春见到了谢尚。
English: The East Jin Dynasty imperial court ordered Yao Xiang to set up a capital city. Yao Xiang crossed the Huai River single-handedly and met Xie Shang in Shuchun.

古文：尚闻其名，命去仗卫，幅巾待之，欢若平生。
现代文：谢尚久闻其名，命令撤掉仪仗侍卫，自己摘掉帽子，只以绢丝束发，热情地招待他，就像见故友一样。
English: Xie Shang has known his name for a long time, ordered to remove the ceremonial guards, took off his hat, only with a bunch of silk, and warmly invited him, just like meeting an old friend.

古文：襄博学，善谈论，江东人士皆重之。
现代文：姚襄很博学，善于言谈，江东的人士都很推重他。
English: Yao Xiang is very erudite and good at talking, and people in Jiangdong are very impressed with him.

古文：魏主闵既克襄国，因游食常山、中山诸郡。
现代文：魏国主冉闵既已攻克襄国，因此就在常山、中山等地周游吃喝。
English: The ruler of Wei, Ran Zheng, had already conquered Xiang, so he traveled around Changshan, Zhongshan and other places to eat and drink.

古文：赵立义将军段勤聚胡、羯万馀人保据绎幕，自称赵帝。
现代文：后赵国立义将军段勤聚集了胡族、羯族一万多人保卫据守绎幕，自称为赵帝。
English: Later, Zhao Guozhongyi's general Duan Qin gathered more than 10,000 people from the Hu and Yao ethnic groups to defend the curtain, and called himself Zhao Di.

古文：夏，四月，甲子，燕王俊遣慕容恪击魏，慕容霸等击勤。
现代文：夏季，四月，甲子，前燕王慕容俊派慕容恪等人率兵攻击魏国，派慕容霸等人率兵攻击段勤。
English: In the summer, in April, the former Yan King Murong Jun sent Murong Gu and others to attack Wei, and sent Murong Ba and others to attack Duan Qin.

古文：魏主闵将与燕战，大将军董闰、车骑将军张温谏曰： 鲜卑乘胜锋锐，且彼众我寡，请且避之，俟其骄惰，然后益兵以击之， 闵怒曰： 吾欲以此众平幽州，斩慕容俊；今遇恪而避之，人谓我何！ 
现代文：冉闵愤怒地说： 我要用这些兵众平定幽州，斩杀慕容俊。
English: Ran Yan said angrily: I will use these soldiers to pacify Yuzhou and kill Murong Jun.

古文：司徒刘茂、特进郎闿相谓曰： 吾君此行，必不还矣，吾等何为坐待戮辱！ 
现代文：如今遇上了慕容恪而躲避他，人们该说我什么呢！ 司徒刘茂、特进郎互相说： 我们的国君此次出征，一定是有去无回，我们为什么要坐等被杀戮的耻辱！ 
English: Now that they have met Murong Ke and are avoiding him, what should people say about me? Liu Shao and Te Jin Lang said to each other: Our sovereign must have gone to war this time, there is no going back, why should we have to wait for the shame of being killed!

古文：皆自杀。
现代文：于是他们俩都自杀了。
English: So they both committed suicide.

古文：闵军于安喜，慕容恪引兵从之。
现代文：冉闵驻军于安喜，慕容恪率兵跟随。
English: Ran Rong stationed troops in Anxi, and Murong Ke led the troops to follow.

古文：闵趣常山，恪追之，丙子，及于魏昌之廉台。
现代文：冉闵向常山开进，慕容恪紧追不舍，一直追到魏昌县的廉台。
English: Ran Rong headed for Changshan, while Murong Ke chased him relentlessly all the way to Liantai in Weichang County.

古文：闵与燕兵十战，燕兵皆不胜。
现代文：冉闵与前燕兵交战十次，前燕兵全都没有获胜。
English: Ran Wei fought against the former Yan soldiers ten times, but the former Yan soldiers never won.

古文：闵素有勇名，所将兵精锐，燕人惮之。
现代文：冉闵历来有勇猛的名声，所统领的士兵精良，前燕人很惧怕他。
English: Ran Xuan has always had a reputation for bravery, and the soldiers he led were excellent. Former Yan people were very afraid of him.

古文：慕容恪巡陈，谓将士曰： 冉闵勇而无谋，一夫敌耳！
现代文：慕容恪巡视兵阵，对他的将士们说： 冉闵有勇无谋，只能以一当一而已！
English: Murong Gu inspected the line of troops and said to his soldiers: "Ran Xuan has no courage and no strategy, he can only fight one on one!

古文：其士卒饥疲，甲兵虽精，其实难用，不足破也！ 
现代文：他的士兵饥饿疲惫，武器装备虽然精良，但实际上难以为用，不难打败他们！ 
English: His soldiers are hungry and tired, their weapons and equipment, though excellent, are practically useless, it is not difficult to defeat them!

古文：闵以所将多步卒，而燕皆骑兵，引兵将趣林中。
现代文：冉闵认为自己所统领的多是步兵，而前燕全是骑兵，于是就率领兵众向丛林开进。
English: Ranzhang thought that most of the soldiers he was leading were infantry, while Qianyan were all cavalry, so he led the soldiers into the jungle.

古文：恪参军高开曰： 吾骑兵利平地，若闵得入林，不可复制。
现代文：慕容恪的参军高开说： 我们骑兵在平坦地域作战有利，如果冉闵得以进入丛森，就无法再控制他了。
English: Gao Kai, who joined the army with Murong Ke, said: It is advantageous for our cavalry to fight in flat areas. If Ran Rong is able to enter the jungle, we will no longer be able to control him.

古文：宜亟遣轻骑邀之，既合而阳走，诱致平地，然后可击也 。
现代文：应该火速派轻装的骑兵去拦截他，等到交战以后再假装逃跑，诱使他来到平坦地域，然后便能进行攻击了。 
English: Light cavalry should be sent at once to intercept him, wait until after the engagement, then feign flight, lure him to the plain, and then be able to attack.

古文：恪从之。
现代文：慕容恪听从了这一意见。
English: Murong Ke listened to this opinion.

古文：魏兵还就平地，恪分军为三部，谓诸将曰： 闵性轻锐，又自以众少，必致死于我。
现代文：魏兵回师追到平坦的地域，慕容恪把军队分为三部分，对将领们说： 冉闵生性轻敌，锐气十足，又自认为兵众较少，一定会拼死与我们作战。
English: The Wei soldiers chased back the division to a flat area. Murong Ke divided the army into three parts and said to the generals: "Ran Xuan is a natural light enemy, full of sharpness, and he thinks that the number of soldiers is small, so he will fight with us to the death."

古文：我厚集中军之陈以待之，俟其合战，卿等从旁击之，无不克矣。 
现代文：我要在中军的阵地上集中优势兵力等着他，等到交战以后，你们从两翼发起攻击，攻无不克。 
English: I want to concentrate superior forces in the Chinese army's position to wait for him, and wait until after the war, you launch an attack from both wings, and attack everything.

古文：乃择鲜卑善射者五千人，以铁锁连其马，为方陈而前。
现代文：于是他就选择五千名善于射箭的鲜卑人，用铁链把他们的马匹联结起来，形成方阵，布置在前面。
English: So he chose five thousand of his best archers and chained their horses together to form a phalanx in front of him.

古文：闵所乘骏马曰硃龙，日行千里。
现代文：冉闵所骑的骏马名叫朱龙，日行千里。
English: The horse that Ran Yan was riding was named Zhu Long, and it could travel a thousand miles in a day.

古文：闵左操双刃矛，右执钩戟，以击燕兵，斩首三百馀级。
现代文：只见他左手持有两刃矛，右手拿着钩戟，用来攻击前燕兵，杀掉了三百多人。
English: He was seen holding a two-edged spear in his left hand and a hooked spear in his right hand, which he used to attack the former Yan soldiers, killing more than three hundred people.

古文：望见大幢，知其为中军，直冲之；燕两军从旁夹击，大破之。
现代文：当他望见宽大的仪仗旗帜后，知道这便是中军，就径直发起冲击。这时，前燕军的其他两部分从两翼夹击，彻底攻破了冉闵的部队。
English: When he saw the large ceremonial banner and knew that it was the Chinese army, he launched a direct attack. At this time, the other two parts of the former Yan army clamped down from both wings and completely broke through Ran Yan's troops.

古文：围闵数重，闵溃围东走二十馀里，硃龙忽毙，为燕兵所执。
现代文：他们把冉闵团团围住，冉闵突破重围向东逃窜了二十多里，不巧骏马朱龙突然死亡，冉闵被前燕兵俘获。
English: They encircled Ran Zhe, Ran Zhe broke through the encirclement and fled eastward for more than twenty miles. Unfortunately, Ma Zhulong suddenly died, and Ran Zhe was captured by the former Yan soldiers.

古文：燕人杀魏仆射刘群，执董闵、张温，及闵皆送于蓟。
现代文：前燕兵杀掉了魏国仆射刘群，抓到了董闵、张温及冉闵，把他们全都送往蓟城。
English: The former Yan soldiers killed the Wei vassal Liu Qun, captured Dong Xuan, Zhang Wen and Ran Xuan, and sent them all to Lucheng.

古文：闵子操奔鲁口。
现代文：冉闵的儿子冉操逃到鲁口。
English: Ran's son Ran Ju fled to Lukou.

古文：高开被创而卒。
现代文：高开负伤而死。
English: Gao Kai was injured and died.

古文：慕容恪进屯常山，俊命恪镇中山。
现代文：慕容恪进军驻扎于常山，慕容俊命令他镇守中山。
English: Murong Ke marched into the army and was stationed in Changshan. Murong Jun ordered him to guard Zhongshan.

古文：己卯，冉闵至蓟。
现代文：己卯，冉闵被押送到蓟城。
English: At the same time, Ran Yan was escorted to Lucheng.

古文：俊大赦，立闵而责之曰： 汝奴仆下才，何得妄称帝？ 
现代文：慕容俊实行大赦。慕容俊让冉闵站在那里斥责他说： 你不过是才能低下的奴仆，怎么能妄自称帝？ 
English: Murong Jun pardoned him. Murong Jun let Ran Rong stand there and scolded him, saying, "You are nothing but a low-level servant, how can you arrogantly claim to be an emperor?

古文：闵曰： 天下大乱，尔曹夷狄禽兽之类犹称帝，况我中土英雄，何为不得称帝邪！ 
现代文：冉闵说： 天下大乱，你们夷狄禽兽之类尚可称帝，何况我中原英雄，为什么不能称帝呢！ 
English: Ran said: The world is in turmoil. You animals and beasts can still be called emperors. What's more, I am a hero of the Central Plains. Why can't I be called an emperor?

古文：俊怒，鞭之三百，送于龙城。
现代文：慕容俊大怒，打了他三百鞭，把他送到龙城。
English: Murong Jun flew into a rage, beat him with three hundred lashes, and sent him to Longcheng.

古文：慕容霸军至绎幕，段勤与弟思陪举城降。
现代文：慕容霸的军队抵达绎幕，段勤和他的弟弟段思聪投降，举城投降。
English: Murongba's army arrived at the curtain call, Duan Qin and his brother Duan Sicong surrendered, and the city surrendered.

古文：甲申，俊遣慕容评及中尉侯龛帅精骑万人攻鄴。
现代文：甲申，慕容俊派慕容评及中尉侯龛率领精锐骑兵一万人进攻邺城。
English: Gao Shen, Murong Jun sent Murong Guan and Lieutenant Hou Yi to lead 10,000 elite cavalry to attack Shicheng.

古文：癸巳，至鄴，魏蒋干及太子智闭城拒守。
现代文：癸已，抵达邺城，魏国的蒋及太子冉智紧闭城门抵抗固守，城外的兵众全都投降了前燕军。
English: When Yan arrived at Yancheng, Jiang of Wei and Prince Ran Zhi of Wei closed the city gate tightly to resist and hold fast. The soldiers outside the city all surrendered to the former Yan army.

古文：城外皆降于燕，刘宁及弟崇帅胡骑三千奔晋阳。
现代文：刘宁及他的弟弟刘崇率领三千胡人骑兵逃奔晋阳。
English: Liu Ning and his brother Liu Chong led three thousand Hu cavalry to flee to Jinyang.

古文：秦以张遇为征东大将军、豫州牧。
现代文：前秦任命张遇为征东大将军、豫州牧。
English: The former Qin Dynasty appointed Zhang Yu as the General of the Expedition to the East and the Governor of Yuzhou.

古文：五月，秦主健攻张琚于宜秋，斩之。
现代文：五月，前秦国主苻健在宜秋攻打张琚，将其斩杀。
English: In May, the former ruler of Qin, Qian Jian, attacked Zhang Ye in Yixiu and killed him.

古文：鄴中大饥，人相食，故赵时宫人被食略尽。
现代文：邺中地区发生严重饥荒，人们互相残食，过去后赵的宫人被残食殆尽。
English: A severe famine occurred in the Central Yunnan region, and people left food for each other. After the famine, Zhao's palace people were completely exhausted by leftover food.

古文：蒋干遗侍中缪嵩、詹事刘猗奉表请降，且求救于谢尚。
现代文：蒋派侍中缪嵩、詹事刘猗向东晋朝廷进奉降表，请求投降，并且向谢尚求救。
English: Chiang sent his aides-de-camp, Miao Song and Zhan Zhi Liu Qi, to the East Jin court to present a surrender form, request surrender, and ask Xie Shang for help.

古文：庚寅，燕王俊遣广威将军慕容军、殿中将军慕舆根、右司马皇甫真等帅步骑二万助慕容评攻鄴。
现代文：庚寅，前燕王慕容俊派广威将军慕容军、殿中将军慕舆根、右司马皇甫真等人率领步、骑兵二万人协助慕容评攻打邺城。
English: Geng Yin, the former Yan King Murong Jun sent the Guangwei General Murong Army, the palace general Murong Gen, the right secretary Ma Huang Fuzhen and others to lead the way, and 20,000 cavalrymen assisted Murong Huan to attack Shicheng.

古文：辛卯，燕人斩冉闵于龙城。
现代文：辛卯，前燕人在龙城斩杀了冉闵。
English: Unbelievably, the former Yan people killed Ran Zheng in Longcheng.

古文：会大旱，蝗，燕王俊谓闵为祟，遣使祀之，谥曰悼武天王。
现代文：恰好这时发生了严重的旱灾、蝗灾，前燕王慕容俊说这是冉闵在作祟，便派使臣去祭祀他，给他追封谥号为悼武天王。
English: Just at that time, a severe drought and locust plague occurred. The former Yan King, Murongjun, said that this was the work of Ran, and he sent his envoys to sacrifice him and give him a posthumous name to mourn the King of Heaven.

古文：初，谢尚使戴施据枋头，施闻蒋干求救，乃自仓垣徙屯棘津，止干使者求传国玺。
现代文：当初，谢尚派戴施据守枋头，戴施听说蒋派人前来求救，就从仓垣移师到棘津驻扎，阻拦了蒋派出的使者，索要传国印玺。
English: At first, Xie Shang sent Dai Shi to guard Shantou. When Dai Shi heard that Jiang had sent someone to ask for help, he moved his division from Kuragaki and stationed it in Acanthus. He blocked the envoy sent by Jiang and demanded the delivery of the imperial seal.

古文：刘猗使缪嵩还鄴白干，干疑尚不能救，沈吟未决。
现代文：刘猗让缪嵩返回邺城禀报蒋。蒋怀疑谢尚不能前来援救。犹豫不决。
English: Liu Bei asked Miao Song to return to Shicheng and report to Chiang. Chiang suspected that Xie Shang could not come to the rescue. He hesitated.

古文：六月，施帅壮士百馀人入鄴，助守三台，绐之曰： 今燕寇在外，道路不通，玺未敢送也。
现代文：六月，戴施率领一百多名勇士进入邺城，帮助守卫三台，并哄骗蒋说： 如今燕寇陈兵城外，道路不通，传国印玺还不敢送走。
English: In June, Daishi led more than a hundred warriors into Lucheng to help guard Sandai, and tricked Jiang into saying, "Today, Yankou Chen Bing is outside the city, the roads are impassable, and Chuan Guo Yin still does not dare to leave."

古文：卿且出以付我，我当驰白天子。
现代文：你姑且把它拿出来交给我，我将策马迅速禀报天子。
English: Just take it out and give it to me, and I'll quickly report it to the emperor.

古文：天子闻玺在吾所，信卿至诚，必多发兵粮以相救饷。 
现代文：天子听到传国印玺在我们这里，会真诚地相信你，一定会多多地下发兵粮以救助你的困难。 
English: Heaven's Son will sincerely believe you when he hears that the imperial seal has been passed down to us, and will surely send more and more grain to help you with your difficulties.

古文：干以为然，出玺付之。
现代文：蒋认为他说得有道理，就拿出传国印玺交给了他。
English: Jiang thought he was right, so he took out the imperial seal and handed it to him.

古文：施宣言使督护何融迎粮，阴令怀玺送于枋头。
现代文：戴施公开宣称派督护何融去迎接兵粮，暗地里却怀揣传国印玺送到了枋头。
English: Daishi publicly announced that he had sent his overseer He Rong to receive the grain, but secretly he sent the imperial seal to Shantou.

古文：甲子，蒋干帅锐卒五千及晋兵出战，慕容评大破之，斩首四千级，干脱走入城。
现代文：甲子，蒋率领精锐部卒五千人及东晋的士兵出城战斗，被慕容评彻底打败，四千多人被斩首，蒋逃回邺城。
English: Gao Zi, Jiang led 5,000 elite soldiers and soldiers from the Eastern Jin Dynasty out of the city to fight. They were completely defeated by Murong Han, more than 4,000 people were beheaded, and Jiang fled back to Lucheng.

古文：甲申，秦主健还长安。
现代文：甲申，前秦国主苻健返回长安。
English: Jiaxun, the former Qin Emperor, returned to Chang'an.

古文：谢尚、姚襄共攻张遇于许昌。
现代文：谢尚、姚襄一起在许昌攻打张遇。
English: Xie Shang and Yao Xiang attack Zhang Rong together in Xu Chang.

古文：秦主健遣丞相东海王雄、卫大将军平昌王菁略地关东，帅步骑二万救之。
现代文：前秦国主苻健派丞相东海王苻雄、卫大将军平昌王苻菁攻占关东地区，率领二万步、骑兵去援救张遇。
English: The former Qin sovereign Yu Jian sent the chancellor Donghai Wang Shuxiong and the grand marshal of Wei, Pyeongchang Wang Shujing, to conquer the Kanto region, leading 20,000 troops and cavalry to rescue Zhang Rong.

古文：丁亥，战于颍水之诚桥，尚等大败，死者万五千人。
现代文：丁亥，双方在颍水的诫桥交战，谢尚等大败，死亡一万五千人。
English: Dinghai, the two sides fought at the Command Bridge in Surabaya, Xie Shang and others were defeated, and fifteen thousand people died.

古文：尚奔还淮南，襄弃辎重，送尚于芍陂；尚悉以后事付襄。
现代文：谢尚逃回淮南，姚襄扔掉了军用物资，护送谢尚到了芍陂。谢尚把自己的后事全托付给了姚襄。
English: Xie Shang fled back to Huainan, Yao Xiang threw away the military supplies, and escorted Xie Shang to the coffin. Xie Shang entrusted his aftercare to Yao Xiang.

古文：殷浩闻尚败，退屯寿春。
现代文：殷浩听到谢尚失败的消息，退到寿春驻扎。
English: Yin Hao heard the news of Xie Shang's defeat and retreated to Shouchun.

古文：秋，七月，秦丞相雄徙张遇及陈、颍、许、洛之民五万馀户于关中，以右卫将军杨群为豫州刺史，镇许昌。
现代文：秋季，七月，前秦丞相苻雄把张遇及陈郡、颍川、许昌、洛阳的百姓五万多户迁徙到关中，任命右卫将军杨群为豫州刺史，镇守许昌。
English: In the autumn, in July, the former Minister of the Qin Dynasty, Yan Xiong, moved more than 50,000 households from Zhangyuan, Chen County, Luochuan, Xuchang and Luoyang to Guanzhong, and appointed the right guard general Yang Qun as the governor of Henan Province and the town guard of Xuchang.

古文：谢尚降，号建威将军。
现代文：谢尚贬降名号为建威将军。
English: Xie Shang demoted his title to General Jian Wei.

古文：赵故西中郎将王擢遣使请降；拜擢秦州刺史。
现代文：后赵国过去的西中郎将王擢派遣使者向东晋请求投降，朝廷授予王擢秦州刺史职务。
English: Later, Zhao Guo's former West Middle Lord Wang Yang sent an envoy to East Jin to request surrender, and the imperial court awarded Wang Yang the post of Qin State chief historian.

古文：丁酉，以武陵王晞为太宰。
现代文：丁酉，东晋朝廷任命武陵王司马为太宰。
English: The Eastern Jin Dynasty court appointed Wuling Wang Sima as Dazai.

古文：丙辰，燕王俊如中山。
现代文：丙辰，前燕王慕容俊到中山。
English: Bing Chen, the former Yan Wang Murongjun to Zhongshan.

古文：王午闻魏败，时邓恒已死，午自称安国王。
现代文：王午听说了魏国失败的消息，当时邓恒已经死去，王午自称安国王。
English: When Wang Wu heard the news of Wei's defeat, Deng Heng had already died. Wang Wu called himself King An.

古文：八月，戊辰，燕王俊遣慕容恪、封弈、阳骛攻之，午闭城自守，送冉操诣燕军；燕人掠其禾稼而还。
现代文：八月，戊辰，前燕王慕容俊派慕容恪、封奕、阳鹜攻打他，王午紧闭城门自守，把冉操送给燕军，燕人把他们的庄稼砍掠一空后返回去了。
English: In August, Wu Chen, the former Yan King Murong Jun sent Murong Cui, Feng Yi, and Yang Zi to attack him. Wang Wu closed the city gate to defend himself and gave Ran Du to the Yan army. The Yan people plundered their crops and went back.

古文：庚午，魏长水校尉马愿等开鄴城纳燕兵，戴施、蒋干悬缒而下，奔于仓垣。
现代文：庚午，魏国长水校尉马愿等人打开邺城城门，让前燕军队进入，戴施、蒋系着绳子从城墙上滑下来，逃奔到仓垣。
English: In the afternoon of the 7th day of the 7th month, Wei Governor Changshui's lieutenant Ma Jian and others opened the gate of Lucheng to let the former Yan army enter. Dai Shi and Jiang tied a rope to slide down from the city wall and fled to Cangyuan.

古文：慕容评送魏后董氏、太子智、太尉申钟、司空条攸等及乘舆服御于蓟。
现代文：慕容评把魏后董氏、太子冉智、太尉申钟、司空条攸以及王宫车乘服饰送至蓟城。
English: Mu Rongping sent Wei Hou Dong, Prince Ran Zhi, Lieutenant Shen Zhong, Secretary Kuo Jiao You and the royal carriage to Lucheng.

古文：尚书令王简、左仆射张乾、右仆射郎肃皆自杀。
现代文：尚书令王简、左仆射张乾、右仆射郎萧全都自杀。
English: Shang Shuling ordered Wang Jian, his left-hand man Zhang Jian and his right-hand man Xiao Shiro to all commit suicide.

古文：燕王俊诈云董氏得传国玺献之，赐号奉玺君，赐冉智爵海宾侯。
现代文：前燕王慕容俊谎称董氏得到了传国印玺，并献给了他，因此赐董后号为奉玺君，赐封冉智以海宾侯爵位。
English: Former Yan Wang Murongjun falsely claimed that Mr. Dong had received the imperial seal and dedicated it to him. Therefore, he gave Mr. Dong's posthumous name as Feng Rongjun, and gave Mr. Ran Zhi the marquisate of Haibin.

古文：以申钟为大将军右长史。
现代文：任命申钟为大将军右长史。
English: Appointed Shen Zhong as General U Changshi.

古文：命慕容评镇鄴。
现代文：命令慕容评镇守邺城。
English: He ordered Murong Huan to keep watch over the city.

古文：桓温使司马勋助周抚讨萧敬文于涪城，斩之。
现代文：桓温派司马勋帮助周抚在涪城讨伐萧敬文，杀掉了他。
English: Kuan Wen sent Sima Xun to help Zhou Fu to fight Xiao Jingwen in Licheng and killed him.

古文：谢尚自枋头迎传国玺至建康，百僚毕贺。
现代文：谢尚从枋头迎接传国印玺抵达建康，朝廷百官，一同庆贺。
English: Xie Shang arrived in Jiankang from Shantou to receive the imperial seal, and hundreds of officials from the imperial court came to celebrate together.

古文：秦以雷弱儿为大司马，毛贵为太尉，张遇为司空。
现代文：前秦任命雷弱儿为大司马，毛贵为太尉，张遇为司空。
English: Former Qin appointed Lei Weak'er as the grand steward, Mao Gui as the captain, and Zhang Yu as the steward.

古文：殷浩之北伐也，中军将军王羲之以书止之，不听。
现代文：殷浩北伐的时候，中军将军王羲之写信劝他不要去，他没有听从。
English: When Yinhao was on the Northern Expedition, the Chinese general Wang Xizhong wrote to him to advise him not to go, but he did not listen.

古文：既而无功，复谋再举。
现代文：此后无功而返，他便图谋再一次出征。
English: After that, without success, he tried to go to war again.

古文：羲之遗浩书曰： 今以区区江左，天下寒心，固已久矣。
现代文：王羲之给殷浩写信说： 如今我们占据着区区江左之地，天下人为之心寒，本来已经很久了。
English: Wang Shanzhi wrote to Yin Hao: "Nowadays, we occupy a place far away from the river, and the world is cold to the human heart. It has been a long time.

古文：力争武功，非所当作。
现代文：力争战功，不是现在该干的事情。
English: It's not the right thing to do right now.

古文：自顷处内外之任者，未有深谋远虑，而疲竭根本，各从所志，竟无一功可论，遂令天下将有土崩之势。
现代文：近来在朝廷内外任职的官员们，没有深谋远虑，却任意挥霍摧残国家的根基，每个人都追求实现自己的志向，最终却没有一桩战功可言，于是使天下大有土崩瓦解的趋势。
English: The officials who have recently held office both inside and outside the imperial court, without forethought, have squandered at will and destroyed the foundation of the country. Everyone pursues the realization of their own ambitions, but in the end there is not a single war achievement to speak of, thus causing the world to have a great tendency to collapse.

古文：任其事者，岂得辞四海之责哉！
现代文：干这种事情的人，岂能让他推卸掉天下人的责怪！
English: How can a man who does such things be allowed to escape the blame of the world?

古文：今军破于外，资竭于内，保淮之志，非所复及，莫若还保长江，督将各处复旧镇。自长江以外，羁縻而已。
现代文：如今在外边军队被攻破，在国内资财被耗尽，保全淮南的志向，已经不再是力所能及的了，不如回来确保长江，督将们再各自镇守旧地，长江以远的地区，保持着联系就可以了。
English: Now that the foreign troops have been defeated and the domestic resources have been exhausted, the preservation of Huainan's aspirations is no longer within our reach. It is better to come back to ensure that the Yangtze River, the governors and generals will continue to defend the old land, the areas far from the Yangtze River, and maintain contact.

古文：引咎责躬，更为善治，省其赋役，与民更始，庶可以救倒悬之急也！
现代文：官员们引咎自责，重新实施良好的治理方法，减免赋税徭役，与百姓一起从头奋斗，或许还可以解救千钧一发的危急局势。
English: Officials should blame themselves, re-implement good governance methods, reduce and exempt taxes, and work together with the people to fight from scratch, and may also be able to save the critical situation.

古文：使君起于布衣，任天下之重，当董统之任，而败丧至此，恐阖朝群贤未有与人分其谤者。
现代文：您出身于布衣百姓，承担着天下的重任，掌管着督察统管之责，然而却失败落魄到如此地步，恐怕满朝廷的那些贤士没有一个会愿意为别人分担责任。
English: You come from the clothed people, bear the heavy responsibility of the world, and are in charge of the supervision of the supervision, but you have failed and fallen to such a degree, I am afraid that none of those sages full of the court will be willing to share the responsibility for others.

古文：若犹以前事为未工，故复求之分外，宇宙虽广，自容何所！
现代文：如果您还觉得以前的事情考虑得不周到、细致，所以应该再去追求分外之功，那么虽说宇宙广大，恐怕也容不下您！
English: If you still feel that the previous things were not well thought out and meticulous, so you should pursue extraordinary merit, then although the universe is vast, I'm afraid it can't accommodate you!

古文：此愚智所不解也。 
现代文：这就是我愚钝的头脑所不能理解的。 
English: That's what I can't get my stupid head around.

古文：又与会稽王昱笺曰： 为人臣者谁不愿尊其主比隆前世！
现代文：王羲之又给会稽王司马昱去信说： 作为臣下，谁不愿意尊奉自己的君主，希望他的事业和前代一样兴隆昌盛呢？
English: Wang Xizhi also sent a letter to the auditor Wang Sima, saying: As a vassal, who does not want to respect his sovereign and hope that his career will be as prosperous as that of his predecessors?

古文：况遇难得之运哉！
现代文：况且是在遇到了难得的时运的时候。
English: Moreover, it was at a time of rare good fortune.

古文：顾力有所不及，岂不可不权轻重而处之也！
现代文：只不过在力量有所不及的情况下，难道能不权衡轻重而随意行事吗！
English: It's just that in a situation where one's strength falls short, can one act arbitrarily without weighing the pros and cons?

古文：今虽有可喜之会，内求诸己，而所忧乃重于所喜。
现代文：如今虽然有令人可喜的机会，但看看自身的情况，令人担忧的事情仍然多于令人可喜的事情。
English: Today, while there are exciting opportunities, if you look at our own situation, there is still more to worry about than to be excited about.

古文：功未可期，遗黎歼尽，劳役无时，征求日重，以区区吴、越经纬天下十分之九，不亡何待！
现代文：成功未可预期，遗民损失殆尽，劳役毫无时限，征敛日益繁重，以区区吴、越之地去征服统治天下十分之九的广阔地区，不灭亡又会怎样呢！
English: Success cannot be expected, the losses of the survivors are exhausted, the labor service has no time limit, the collection is increasingly burdensome, and it is necessary to conquer the vast areas that rule nine-tenths of the world with the land of Wu and Yue. What will happen if you do not perish!

古文：而不度德量力，不弊不己，此封内所痛心叹悼而莫敢吐诚者也。 往者不可谏，来者犹可追。 
现代文：不权衡自己的德行与力量，不彻底失败就不善罢某休，这就是国内人士所痛心疾首而又不敢直说的话。 过去的已经无法挽回，但未来的还可以补救。 
English: Without weighing one's own virtue and strength, without a complete failure, it is not good to give up. This is what people in China are painfully afraid to say. The past has been irrevocable, but the future can still be remedied.

古文：愿殿下更垂三思，先为不可胜之基，须根立势举，谋之未晚。
现代文：希望殿下再度三思，先奠定不可战胜的根基，等到根基牢固、势力强大时再作图谋，那也为时不晚。
English: I hope that Your Royal Highness will think twice, lay an invincible foundation first, and wait until the foundation is solid and the power is strong before making plans. It is not too late.

古文：若不行，恐糜鹿之游，将不止林薮而已！
现代文：如果不这样做，恐怕危险就会降临到我们江南！
English: If we don't do this, I'm afraid danger will come to us south of the Yangtze River!

古文：愿殿下暂废虚远之怀，以救倒悬之急，可谓以亡为存，转祸为福也。 
现代文：希望殿下能暂时放弃虚华高远的想法，以挽救眼前千钧一发的危急局势，这才可以说是以亡图存，转祸为福。 
English: I hope that His Royal Highness can temporarily give up his unrealistic and far-fetched ideas in order to save the immediate critical situation, which can be said to be a blessing in disguise.

古文：不从。
现代文：司马昱没有听从王羲之的劝告。
English: Le Zhu Rong did not listen.

古文：九月，浩屯泗口，遣河南太守戴施据石门，荥阳太守刘遯据仓垣。
现代文：九月，殷浩驻扎在泗口，派河南太守戴施占据石门，荥阳太守刘遁占据仓垣。
English: In September, Yin Hao stationed in Shigou and sent the Henan governor Dai Shi to occupy Shimen, and the Shiyang governor Liu Xi to occupy Kuragaki.

古文：浩以军兴，罢遣太学生徒，学校由此遂废。
现代文：殷浩以征集财物供军用为由，停止了太学学生的学习，并将他们遣散回去，学校从此也就关闭了。
English: On the grounds that Yin Hao was collecting money and materials for the military, he stopped the study of the students of Taigaku and sent them home. The school has been closed since then.

古文：冬，十月，谢尚遣冠军将军王侠攻许昌，克之。
现代文：冬季，十月，谢尚派冠军将军王侠攻克了许昌。
English: In winter, in October, Xie Shang sent the champion general Wang Xiaorong to conquer Xu Chang.

古文：秦豫州刺史杨群退屯弘农。
现代文：前秦的豫州刺史杨群撤退驻扎在弘农。
English: Before the Qin Dynasty, Yang Qun, the governor of Yuzhou, retreated and settled in Hongnong.

古文：征尚为给事中，戍石头。
现代文：东晋朝廷征召谢尚为给事中，戍卫石头。
English: The East Jin Dynasty court conscripted Xie Shang to defend the stone.

古文：丁卯，燕王俊还蓟。
现代文：丁卯，前燕王慕容俊回到蓟城。
English: Dingwu, the former Yan Wang Murongjun returned to Lucheng.

古文：故赵将拥兵据州郡者，各遣使降燕；燕王俊以王擢为益州刺史，夔逸为秦州刺史，张平为并州刺史，李历为兗州刺史，高昌为安西将军，刘宁为车骑将军。
现代文：过去后赵国的将领中带领士兵占据州郡的人，各自都派使者向前燕投降，前燕王慕容俊任命王擢为益州刺史，夔逸为秦州刺史，张平为并州刺史，李历为兖州刺史，高昌为安西将军，刘宁为车骑将军。
English: In the past, each of the generals of Zhao who led soldiers to occupy the prefectures and counties sent envoys to surrender to the former Yan. The former Yan King Murongjun appointed Wang Zhan as the prefect of Yizhou, Zhou Yiyi as the prefect of Qin, Zhang Ping as the prefect of the annexed prefectures, Li Li as the prefect of Zhangzhou, Gaochang as the prefect of Anxi, and Liu Ning as the prefect of the cavalry.

古文：慕容恪屯安平，积粮，治攻具，将讨王午。
现代文：慕容恪驻扎在安平，储备粮食，准备进攻的武器装备，将要讨伐王午。
English: Murong Ke stationed in Anping, reserve grain, prepare offensive weapons and equipment, will fight Wang Wu.

古文：丙戌，中山苏林起兵于无极，自称天子；恪自鲁口还讨林。
现代文：丙戌，中山人苏林在无极起兵，自称天子。慕容恪从鲁口返回讨伐苏林。
English: Pro-Shan, mid-mountain people of Surin raised an army in Wuji, claiming to be the son of heaven. Murong Ke returned from Lukou to fight Surin.

古文：闰月，戊子，燕王俊遣广威将军慕舆根助恪攻林，斩之。
现代文：闰十月，戊子，前燕王慕容俊派广威将军慕舆根帮助慕容恪攻打苏林，把他杀掉了。
English: In leap October, Wu Zi, the former Yan King Murong Jun sent Guang Wei General Mu Yugen to help Murong Ke attack Surin and killed him.

古文：王午为其将秦兴所杀。吕护杀兴，复自称安国王。
现代文：王午被他的将领秦兴杀掉，吕护杀了秦兴，又自称安国王。
English: Wang Hao was killed by his general Qin Xing, Lv You killed Qin Xing, and claimed to be the king of An.

古文：燕群僚共上尊号于燕王俊，俊许之。
现代文：前燕国的官员们共同给前燕王慕容俊进上皇帝尊号，慕容俊同意了。
English: The officials of the former Yan state jointly gave the former Yan king Murong Jun the title of emperor, and Murong Jun agreed.

古文：十一月，丁卯，始置百官，以国相封弈为太尉，左长史阳骛为尚书令，右司马皇甫真为尚书左仆射，典书令张悕为右仆射；其馀文武，拜授有差。
现代文：十一月，丁卯，开始设置百官，任命国相封奕为太尉，左长史阳鹜为尚书令，右司马皇甫真为尚书左仆射,典书令张为右仆射。其余的文武官员，授予的官职各有等差。
English: In November, Dingwu began to set up a hundred officials, appointing Guo Xiangfeng Yi as the first lieutenant, the left commander Shi Yangjun as Shang Shurong, the right secretary Ma Huangfuzhen as Shang Shurong, the right secretary Zhang as the right secretary. The remaining civil and military officials, the official positions awarded are unequal.

古文：戊辰，俊即皇帝位，大赦。
现代文：戊辰，慕容俊即皇帝位，实行大赦。
English: Wuchen, Murongjun, that is, the emperor, implemented an amnesty.

古文：自谓获传国玺，改元元玺。
现代文：自称获得了传国印玺，改年号为元玺。
English: He claimed to have obtained the "Chuan Guo Yin" and changed the year name to "Yuan Wei."

古文：追尊武宣王为高祖武宣皇帝，文明王为太祖文明皇帝。
现代文：追尊武宣王慕容为高祖武宣皇帝，文明王慕容为太祖文明皇帝。
English: King Mu Rong of Wu Xuan was the great-grandfather of Emperor Wu Xuan, and King Mu Rong of Civilization was the great-grandfather of Emperor Civilization.

古文：时晋使适至燕，俊谓曰： 汝还，白汝天子：我承人乏，为中国所推，已为帝矣！ 
现代文：这时东晋的使者恰好抵达前燕，慕容俊对他说： 你回去禀报你的天子，我趁着天下无人才的时机，被中原地区推举，已经成为皇帝了！ 
English: At this time, an envoy from the Eastern Jin Dynasty happened to arrive in Qianyan. Murong Jun said to him, "You should go back and report to your heavenly son. I took advantage of the opportunity when there was no talent in the world, was elected by the Central Plains region, and have become the emperor!"

古文：改司州为中州，建留台于龙都，以玄菟太守乙逸为尚书，专委留务。
现代文：慕容俊将司州改为中州，在当初的国都龙城建立了留台。任命玄菟太守乙逸为尚书，专门委任他掌管留台事务。
English: Murongjun changed the name of Sizhou to Zhongzhou, and established a station in the former national capital Longcheng. He appointed Xuanzang's father-in-law, Yi Yi, as Shangshu, specifically appointing him to be in charge of station affairs.

古文：秦丞相雄攻王擢于陇西，擢奔凉州，雄还屯陇东。
现代文：前秦丞相苻雄在陇西攻打王擢，王擢逃奔到凉州，苻雄返回，驻扎在陇东。
English: Former Qin chancellor Yao Xiong attacked Wang Zhan in the west of Shandong. Wang Zhan fled to Liangzhou, while Yao Xiong returned and was stationed in the east of Shandong.

古文：张重华以擢为征虏将军、秦州刺史，特宠待之。
现代文：张重华任命王擢为征虏将军、秦州刺史，特别宠待他。
English: Zhang Chonghua appointed Wang Yuanzhang as a conscript general, Qinzhou stabbing history, and treated him with special favor.

古文：孝宗穆皇帝中之上永和九年春，正月，乙卯朔，大赦。
现代文：永和九年春季，正月，乙卯朔，东晋实行大赦。
English: In the spring of the ninth year of Yonghe, the first month, the second month, and the Eastern Jin implemented amnesty.

古文：二月，庚子，燕王俊立其妃可足浑氏为皇后，世子晔为皇太子，皆自龙城迁于蓟宫。
现代文：二月，庚子，前燕国主慕容俊立他的后妃可足浑氏为皇后，立长子慕容晔为皇太子，他们全都从龙城迁至蓟城王宫。
English: In February, Geng Zi, the former ruler of Yan, Murong Jun, appointed his concubine, Kofun, as empress, and his eldest son, Murong Yao, as crown prince. They all moved from Longcheng to the Lucheng Royal Palace.

古文：张重华遣将军张弘、宋修会王擢帅骑万五千伐秦。秦丞相雄、卫将军菁拒之，大败凉兵于龙黎，斩首万二千级，虏张弘、宋修，王擢弃秦州，奔姑臧。
现代文：张重华派将军张弘、宋修会合王擢率领步、骑兵一万五千人讨伐前秦，前秦丞相苻雄、卫将军苻菁率兵抵抗，凉兵在龙黎被彻底打败，一万二千人被斩首，张弘、宋修被俘。王擢放弃了秦州，逃到姑臧。
English: Zhang Chonghua sent general Zhang Hong and Song Xiu association Wang Zhan to lead the way, and 15,000 cavalrymen to fight against the former Qin Dynasty. Former Qin Dynasty prime minister Zhao Xiong and Wei general Zou Jing led the resistance. The Liang soldiers were completely defeated in Long Li, 12,000 people were beheaded, and Zhang Hong and Song Xiu were captured. Wang Zhan abandoned Qin Province and fled to Gushan.

古文：秦主健以领军将军苻愿为秦州刺史，镇上邽。
现代文：前秦国主苻健任命领军将军苻愿为秦州刺史，镇守上。
English: Former Qin sovereign Yu Jian appointed the leading general Yu Xian to write the history of Qin and become the town's governor.

古文：三月，交州刺史阮敷讨林邑，破五十馀垒。
现代文：三月，东晋交州刺史阮敷讨伐林邑国，攻破了五十多座营垒。
English: In March, Dongjin Jiaozhou stabbed Shi Ruanji to fight against logging in the country, and broke through more than fifty camps.

古文：赵故卫尉常山李犊聚众数千人叛燕。
现代文：后赵国原来的卫尉常山人李犊聚集兵众数千人背叛了前燕。
English: After Zhao Guo's original sentinel, the Changshan man Li Qian, gathered thousands of soldiers and betrayed Qian Yan.

古文：西域胡刘康诈称刘曜子，聚众于平阳，自称晋王；夏，四月，秦左卫将军苻飞讨擒之。
现代文：西域胡人刘康谎称自己是刘曜的儿子，在平阳聚集兵众，自称晋王。夏季，四月，前秦左卫将军苻飞讨伐并擒获了他。
English: Liu Kang, a Western Wu, falsely claimed to be the son of Liu You, gathered soldiers in Pingyang and called himself Jin Wang. In the summer, in April, the former Qin Zuwei general Zou Fei fought and captured him.

古文：以安西将军谢尚为尚书仆射。
现代文：东晋朝廷任命安西将军谢尚为尚书仆射。
English: The Eastern Jin Dynasty court appointed Anxi General Xie Shang as Shang Shufu.

古文：五月，张重华复使王擢帅众二万伐上邽，秦州郡县多应之；苻愿战败，奔长安。
现代文：五月，张重华再次派王擢率领兵众二万人讨伐上，秦州的郡县大多都响应他们。苻愿被打败，逃至长安。
English: In May, Zhang Chonghua once again sent Wang Zhanzhang to lead 20,000 soldiers in a crusade, and most counties in Qinzhou responded to them. He wanted to be defeated and fled to Chang'an.

古文：重华因上疏请伐秦。
现代文：张重华于是就向东晋朝廷上疏，请求讨伐前秦。
English: Zhang Chonghua then petitioned the court of the Eastern Jin Dynasty, requesting a crusade against the Western Qin.

古文：诏进重华凉州牧。
现代文：朝廷下诏，晋升张重华为凉州牧。
English: The imperial court issued an edict, and Zhang Chonghua was promoted to the position of Liangzhou herdsman.

古文：燕主俊遣卫将军恪讨李犊，犊降，遂东击吕护于鲁口。
现代文：前燕国主慕容俊派卫将军慕容恪讨伐李犊，李犊投降。于是慕容恪东进，到鲁口攻打吕护。
English: The former lord of Yan Province, Murong Jun, sent Wei General Murong Ke to fight against Li Xi, and Li Xi surrendered. Therefore, Murong Ke marched east to Lukou to attack Lvgu.

古文：六月，秦苻飞攻氐王杨初于仇池，为初所败。
现代文：六月，前秦苻飞在仇池攻打氐王杨初，但被杨初打败。
English: In June, the former Qin Yu Fei attacked the king of Qi, Yang Chu, in Qiu Chi, but was defeated by Yang Chu.

古文：丞相雄、平昌王菁帅步骑四万屯于陇东。
现代文：丞相苻雄、平昌王苻菁率领四万步、骑兵驻扎在陇东。
English: The chancellor Jiao Xiong and the king of Pyeongchang, Jiao Jing, led 40,000 troops, and the cavalry was stationed in the east of Shandong.

古文：秦主健纳张遇继母韩氏为昭仪，数于众中谓遇曰： 卿，吾假子也。 
现代文：前秦国主苻健纳娶张遇的继母韩氏为昭仪，他多次在人们当中对张遇说： 你是我的养子！ 
English: Former Qin Emperor Jian Jian married Zhang Rong's stepmother Han as Zhao Yi. He repeatedly said to Zhang Rong among the people: You are my adopted son!

古文：遇耻之，因雄等精兵在外，阴结关中豪杰，欲灭苻氏，以其地来降。
现代文：张遇对此感到耻辱，便趁着苻雄等精兵在外征战的机会，暗中联络关中的豪杰，想灭掉苻氏，把他所占据的地方降附东晋。
English: Zhang Rong felt humiliated by this, so he took advantage of the opportunity for elite soldiers such as Shao Rong to fight abroad, secretly contacted the heroes in Guan, wanted to exterminate the Shao clan, and subordinate the place he occupied to the Eastern Jin.

古文：秋，七月，遇与黄门刘晁谋夜袭健，晃约开门以待之。
现代文：秋季，七月，张遇和黄门刘晃密谋夜袭苻健，刘晃约定到时开门等待。
English: In the autumn, in July, Zhang Yu and Huangmen Liu Huan conspired to attack Shujian at night, and Liu Huan agreed to open the door and wait.

古文：会健使晃出外，晃固辞，不得已而行。
现代文：恰巧苻健派刘晃外出，他再三推辞，不得已只好去了。
English: It so happened that Hao Jian sent Liu Xiao out, but he repeatedly refused and had no choice but to go.

古文：遇不知，引兵至门，门不开。
现代文：而张遇不知道此事，当他带领士兵来到门前时，门没有打开。
English: However, Zhang Rong did not know this, and when he led the soldiers to the front door, the door did not open.

古文：事觉，伏诛。
现代文：事情败露，张遇被杀。
English: The affair was exposed, and Zhang Yu was killed.

古文：于是孔持起池阳，刘珍、夏侯显起鄠，乔秉起雍，胡阳赤起司竹，呼延毒起灞城，众数万人，各遣使来请兵。
现代文：这时，孔持在池阳起事，刘珍、夏侯显在县起事，乔秉在雍县起事，胡阳赤在司竹起事，呼延毒在灞城起事，参加者达数万人，他们各自都派遣使者来向东晋请求援兵。
English: At this time, Kong Zhi rebelled in Chiyang, Liu Zhen and Xia Houxian rebelled in Long County, Qiaobing rebelled in Yong County, Hu Yanghong rebelled in Sizhu, and Huyan poison rebelled in Handan City, with tens of thousands of participants. Each of them sent envoys to East Jin to request reinforcements.

古文：秦以左仆射鱼遵为司空。
现代文：前秦任命左仆射鱼遵为司空。
English: Former Qin appointed his left-hand man, Shoyu Zun, as his subordinate.

古文：九月，秦丞相雄帅众二万还长安，遣平昌王菁略定上洛，置荆州于丰阳川，以步兵校尉金城郭敬为刺史。
现代文：九月，前秦丞相苻雄率领兵众二万人回到长安，派平昌王苻菁平定治理上洛，在丰阳川设置荆州，任命步兵校尉金城人郭敬为刺史。
English: In September, the former Minister of the Qin Dynasty, Huan Xiong, led 20,000 soldiers back to Chang'an. He sent the King of PyeongChang, Huan Jing, to subdue and govern Luo, set up Jingzhou in the Fengyang River, and appointed the infantry lieutenant Guo Jing from Jincheng as the chief of staff.

古文：雄与清河王法、苻飞分讨孔持等。
现代文：苻雄与清河王苻法、苻飞分别讨伐孔持等人。
English: Hao Xiong and Qinghe Wang Hao Fa and Hao Fei separately fought against Kong Zhi and others.

古文：姚襄屯历阳，以燕、秦方强，未有北伐之志，乃夹淮广兴屯田，训厉将士。
现代文：姚襄驻扎在历阳，考虑到前燕、前秦势力正强，所以没有北伐的念头，就沿淮河两岸广泛开垦屯田，训练勉励将士。
English: Yao Xiang was stationed in Liyang. Considering that the former Yan Dynasty and the former Qin Dynasty were strong, he did not have the idea of the Northern Expedition, so he extensively reclaimed the fields along both sides of the Huai River to train and encourage his soldiers.

古文：殷浩在寿春，恶其强盛，囚襄诸弟，屡遣刺客刺之，刺客皆以情告襄。
现代文：殷浩在寿春，讨厌姚襄的日益强盛，于是就囚禁了他的弟弟们，并多次派遣刺客刺杀他。然而刺客们却全都把实情告诉了姚襄。
English: In Shuchun, Yin Hao hated Yao Xiang's growing power, so he imprisoned his brothers and repeatedly sent assassins to kill him. However, the assassins all told Yao Xiang the truth.

古文：安北将军魏统卒，弟憬代领部曲。
现代文：安北将军魏统去世，弟弟魏憬代替他统领部曲家兵。
English: Anbei General Wei Tong died, and his younger brother Wei Jing replaced him as the leader of the Qu family soldiers.

古文：浩潜遣憬帅众五千袭之，襄斩憬，并其众。
现代文：殷浩偷偷地派魏憬率领五千兵众袭击姚襄，但姚襄杀掉了魏憬，其兵众也被兼并。
English: Yin Hao secretly sent Wei Jing to lead five thousand soldiers to attack Yao Xiang, but Yao Xiang killed Wei Jing, and his soldiers were also annexed.

古文：浩愈恶之，使龙骧将军刘启守谯，迁襄于梁国蠡台，表授梁国内史。
现代文：殷浩因此越发讨厌姚襄，派龙骧将军刘启守卫谯郡，把姚襄调到梁国的蠡台，上表请求授予姚襄梁国内史职务。
English: As a result, Yin Hao hated Yao Xiang more and more. He sent the Longjing general Liu Qi to guard Weiwu County, transferred Yao Xiang to Xingtai in Liang Province, and requested that Yao Xiang Liang be granted the domestic history position.

古文：魏憬子弟数往来寿春，襄益疑惧，遣参军权翼使于浩。
现代文：魏憬的子弟们多次往来寿春，姚襄越发怀疑、担心，就派参军权翼出使殷浩处。
English: Wei Jia's sons visited Shuchun many times, and Yao Xiang became more and more suspicious and worried, so he sent an envoy to Yin Hao's office.

古文：浩曰： 身与姚平北共为王臣，休戚同之。
现代文：殷浩对他说： 我本人与姚襄同是君主的臣下，休戚与共。
English: Yin Hao said to him: I myself and Yao Xiang are vassals of the monarch, and we are in solidarity.

古文：平北每举动自专，甚失辅车之理，岂所望也！ 
现代文：然而姚襄经常独断专行，有失辅车相依的道理，这难道是我所希望的事情吗！ 
English: However, Yao Xiang often acts arbitrarily, there is a reason for the loss of auxiliary vehicles, is this what I hope for?

古文：翼曰： 平北英姿绝世，拥兵数万而远归晋室者，以朝廷有道，宰辅明哲故也。
现代文：权翼说： 姚襄英俊的风姿堪称绝世，他之所以带领数万兵将不辞遥远归附晋朝王室，是因为朝廷具有道义，大臣们贤明智慧的缘故。
English: Quan Ying said: Yao Xiang's handsome appearance is unparalleled. The reason why he led tens of thousands of soldiers to surrender to the royal family of Jin Dynasty is because the imperial court is moral and the ministers are wise.

古文：今将军轻信谗慝之言，与平北有隙，愚谓猜嫌之端，在此不在彼也。 
现代文：如今将军轻信谗言匿语，与姚襄有了隔阂，我认为产生猜忌的根源，在您这里而不在姚襄那里。 
English: Now that the general's credulity has caused a rift between him and Yao Xiang, I believe that the source of suspicion lies with you, not Yao Xiang.

古文：浩曰： 平北姿性豪迈，生杀自由，又纵小人掠夺吾马。王臣之体，固若是乎？ 
现代文：殷浩说： 姚襄生性豪放不羁，随意生杀，又纵容小人抢夺我的马匹，君王臣下的行为，原本是这样的吗！ 
English: Yin Hao said: Yao Xiang's sexual behavior is unbridled, killing at will, and conniving villains to snatch my horses, the behavior of kings and vassals, was it originally like this!

古文：翼曰： 平北归命圣朝，岂肯妄杀无辜！
现代文：权翼说： 姚襄归附听命于圣哲王朝，怎么肯滥杀无辜！
English: The power wing said: Yao Xiang is subordinate to the orders of the Sage Dynasty, how dare he kill innocent people!

古文：奸宄之人，亦王法所不容也，杀之何害！ 
现代文：邪恶作乱之徒，就是帝王的法律也不能容忍，杀了他们有什么害处！ 
English: The emperor's law cannot tolerate evil troublemakers, so what's the harm in killing them?

古文：浩曰： 然则掠马何也？ 
现代文：殷浩说： 那么，为什么抢夺我的马匹呢？ 
English: Yin Hao said, "Then why did you rob my horses?

古文：翼曰： 将军谓平北雄武难制，终将讨之，故取马欲以自卫耳。 
现代文：权翼说： 将军您认为姚襄雄勇刚健，难以控制，最终也要讨伐他，所以他才夺取您的马匹想用来自卫呵。 
English: Quan Ying said: General, you think that Yao Xiangxiong is very brave and tough, difficult to control, and eventually you will have to fight him, so he just wanted to seize your horses to use for self-defense.

古文：浩笑曰： 何至是也！ 
现代文：殷浩笑着说： 哪里到这种地步呢！ 
English: Yin Hao said with a smile, "How did things get to this point?

古文：初，浩阴遣人诱秦梁安、雷弱儿，使杀秦主健，许以关右之任，弱儿伪许之，且请兵应接。
现代文：当初，殷浩暗地里派人劝诱梁安、雷弱儿，让他们去刺杀前秦国主苻健，许诺把关右地区的官职封给他们。雷弱儿表面上答应了，而且请求派兵接应。
English: At first, Yin Hao secretly sent someone to entice Liang An and Lei Weijie to assassinate the former Qin ruler Qian Jian, promising to give them official posts in Guan Yu. Lei Weijie ostensibly agreed, and requested that soldiers be sent to meet him.

古文：浩闻张遇作乱，健兄子辅国将军黄眉自洛阳西奔，以为安等事已成。
现代文：殷浩听说张遇夜袭苻健，苻健哥哥的儿子辅国将军苻黄眉从洛阳向西逃奔，以为梁安等人的事情已经大功告成。
English: Yin Hao heard that Zhang attacked Su Jian at night, and Su Jian's brother's son, General of the Auxiliary Army Su Huang Mei, fled from Luoyang to the west, thinking that Liang An's and other people's affairs had been accomplished.

古文：冬，十月，浩自寿春帅众七万北伐，欲进据洛阳，修复园陵。
现代文：冬季，十月，殷浩从寿春出发，率领兵众七万人北伐，想进攻占据洛阳，以修复帝王的陵墓。
English: In the winter, in October, Yin Hao set out from Shuchun, leading 70,000 soldiers in the Northern Expedition, hoping to attack and occupy Luoyang to repair the emperor's tomb.

古文：吏部尚书王彪之上会稽王昱笺，以为： 弱儿等容有诈伪，浩未应轻进。 
现代文：吏部尚书王彪之给会稽王司马昱上书认为： 雷弱儿等人会有诈伪，殷浩不应该轻举妄动。 
English: Shangshu Wang Biao of the Personnel Department wrote a letter to Wang Simak, the auditor of the meeting, saying: There will be fraud among the weak, and Yinhao should not act rashly.

古文：不从。
现代文：司马昱对此未加理会。
English: Le Zhu Rong did not listen.

古文：浩以姚襄为前驱。
现代文：殷浩以姚襄作为北伐的前驱。
English: Yin Hao regards Yao Xiang as the forerunner of the Northern Expedition.

古文：襄引兵北行，度浩将至，诈令部众夜遁，阴伏甲以邀之。
现代文：姚襄率兵北进，当预计殷浩将要抵达时，假装让士兵趁夜逃散，实际上却悄悄地埋伏起来等候阻击殷浩。
English: Yao Xiang led his soldiers northward, and when Yin Hao was expected to arrive, he pretended to let the soldiers escape during the night, but in fact they quietly ambushed and waited to block Yin Hao.

古文：浩闻而追襄至山桑。
现代文：殷浩听说姚襄的士兵逃散，追赶姚襄来到山桑。
English: Hearing that Yao Xiang's soldiers had fled, Yin Hao chased Yao Xiang and came to Shan San.

古文：襄纵兵击之，浩大败，弃辎重，走保谯城。
现代文：这时，姚襄突然发兵攻击，殷浩大败，丢弃了轻重装备，逃回去固守谯城。
English: At this time, Yao Xiang suddenly sent troops to attack, Yinhao was defeated, abandoned heavy and light equipment, and fled back to defend Lucheng.

古文：襄俘斩万馀，悉收其资仗，使兄益守山桑，襄复加淮南。
现代文：姚襄俘虏斩杀了一万多人，全部收缴了他们的资财武器，派他的哥哥姚益镇守山桑，姚襄又回到了淮南。
English: Yao Xiang's captors killed more than ten thousand people, confiscated all their assets and weapons, and sent his brother Yao Yizhen to guard the mountains. Yao Xiang returned to Huainan.

古文：会稽王昱谓王彪之曰： 君言无不中，张、陈无以过也！ 
现代文：会稽王司马昱对王彪之说： 你言无不中，张良、陈平也无法超过你呵！ 
English: Wang Simaqi, the auditor of the meeting, said to Wang Biao, "You can say anything, and Zhang Liang and Chen Ping can't surpass you!"

古文：西平敬烈公张重华有疾，子曜灵才十岁，立为世子，赦其境内。
现代文：西平敬烈公张重华患病，儿子张曜灵才十岁，被立为太子，在境内实行大赦。
English: Xiping Jingli Gong Zhang Chonghua fell ill, and his son Zhang Yoling, who was only ten years old, was made crown prince, and an amnesty was implemented in the territory.

古文：重华庶兄长宁侯祚，有勇力、吏干，而倾巧善事内外，与重华嬖臣赵长、尉缉等结异姓兄弟。
现代文：张重华的庶兄长宁侯张祚，力气很大，具有果敢勇猛的禀性和当官的才干，然而为人狡诈，善于看风行事，左右逢源，和张重华的宠臣赵长、尉缉等人结拜为异姓兄弟。
English: Zhang Chonghua's elder half-brother, Ning Hou Zhang Qi, was very strong, had the courage and tenacity of a warrior and the talent of a government official. However, he was cunning, good at seeing the wind and acting according to the source. He and Zhang Chonghua's favorite vassals, Zhao Chang and Fong Ji, were brothers with different surnames.

古文：都尉常据请出之，重华曰： 吾方以祚为周公，使辅幼子，君是何言也！ 
现代文：都尉常据请求把他调离，张重华说： 我正要把张祚当作周公，让他辅佐幼子，你这是说的什么话呢！ 
English: Zhang Chonghua said, "I was about to appoint Zhang Ye as Zhou Gong and let him assist the young son, what are you talking about!

古文：谢艾以枹罕之功有宠于重华，左右疾之，谮艾，出为酒泉太守。
现代文：谢艾因为罕之战的功劳，在张重华面前很受宠，周围的人对此很妒忌，就说坏话诬陷他。张重华因此把他调离出去，任酒泉太守。
English: Xie Ai was favored by Zhang Chonghua because of his merits in the Battle of Han, and the people around him were jealous of this, so they slandered and framed him. Zhang Chonghua therefore transferred him out and made him the governor of Jiuquan.

古文：艾上疏言： 权幸用事，公室将危，乞听臣入侍。 
现代文：谢艾上疏说： 有权势而得宠的人当政，君王的政权将有危险，请求您接受我入宫侍奉。 
English: Xie Ai Shangsuo said: Powerful and favored people are in power, the monarch's regime will be in danger, I ask you to accept me into the palace to serve.

古文：且言： 长宁侯祚及赵长等将为乱，宜尽逐之。 
现代文：而且还说： 长宁侯张祚及赵长等人将要作乱，应该把他们全都赶走。 
English: He also said: Changning marquis Zhang Qian and Zhao Chang and others are going to make trouble, they should all be driven away.

古文：十一月，己未，重华疾甚，手令征艾为卫将军，监中外诸军事，辅政；祚、长等匿而不宜。
现代文：十一月，己未，张重华病重，亲手写下命令征召谢艾任卫将军，监察中外诸军事，辅佐朝政。张祚、赵长等人将手令隐藏起来而不加以公布。
English: In November, Zhang Chonghua fell seriously ill and personally wrote down an order to conscript Xie Ai as a general to supervise the military in China and abroad and assist the government. Zhang Xi, Zhao Chang and others hid the order and did not publish it.

古文：丁卯，重华卒，世子曜灵立，称大司马、凉州刺史、西平公。
现代文：丁卯，张重华去世，太子张曜灵即位，称为大司马、凉州刺史、西平公。
English: Dingwu, Zhang Chonghua died, Prince Zhang Yoling ascended to the throne, known as the Grand Sima, Liangzhou Sishi, Xiping Gong.

古文：赵长等矫重华遗令，以长宁侯祚为都督中外诸军事、抚军大将军，辅政。
现代文：赵长等人假传张重华的遗令，让长宁侯张祚出任都督中外诸军事、抚军大将军，辅佐朝政。
English: Zhao Chang and others falsely transmitted Zhang Chonghua's posthumous order, allowing Changning marquis Zhang Xi to serve as the governor of foreign countries, the military, the general of the army, and the assistant to the government.

古文：殷浩使部将刘启、王彬之攻姚益于山桑。姚襄自淮南击之，启、彬之皆败死。
现代文：殷浩派部将刘启、王彬之在山桑攻打姚益，姚襄从淮南出兵反击，刘启、王彬之全都战败死亡。
English: Yin Hao sent Liu Qizhi and Wang Binzhi to attack Yao Yizhi in Shan San, and Yao Xiang sent troops from Huainan to fight back. Liu Qizhi and Wang Binzhi were all defeated and died.

古文：襄进据芍陂。
现代文：姚襄继续前进，占据了芍陂。
English: Yao Xiang continued to advance and took the lead.

古文：赵末，乐陵硃秃、平原杜能、清河丁娆、阳平孙元各拥兵分据城邑，至是皆请降于燕；燕主俊以秃为青州刺史，能为平原太守，娆为立节将军，元为兗州刺史，各留抚其营。
现代文：后赵末年，乐陵人朱秃、平原人杜能、清河人丁娆、阳平人孙元各自拥兵，分别占据了所在的城邑，到这时，他们全都向前燕国请求投降。前燕国主慕容俊任命朱秃为青州刺史，杜能为平原太守，丁娆为立节将军，孙元为兖州刺史，各自都留下来镇抚他们的营地。
English: At the end of Zhao's life, Zhu Zhao from Leling, Du Neng from Pingyuan, Ding Rong from Qinghe, and Sun Yuan from Yangpyeong each took soldiers and occupied their respective towns. At this time, they all asked the former Yan country to surrender. The former Yan country lord Murong Jun appointed Zhu Zhao as the governor of Qingzhou, Du Neng as the governor of Pingyuan, Ding Rong as the general of Lixi, and Sun Yuan as the governor of Zhangzhou. Each of them stayed to pacify their camp.

古文：秦丞相雄克池阳，斩孔特。
现代文：前秦苻雄攻克池阳，斩杀了孔持。
English: Former Qin Shi Xiong conquered Chiyang and killed Kongzhi.

古文：十二月，清河王法、苻飞克鄠，斩刘珍、夏侯显。
现代文：十二月，清河王苻法、苻飞攻克县，斩杀了刘珍、夏侯显。
English: In December, the Qing Dynasty kings Gongfa and Gongfei invaded Ke County and killed Liu Zhen and Xia Houxian.

古文：姚襄济淮，屯盱眙，招掠流民，众至七万，分置守宰，劝课农桑；遣使诣建康罪状殷浩，并自陈谢。
现代文：姚襄渡过淮河，驻所在盱眙，招募掳掠流民，人数多达七万，分别设置地方长官，勉励督促他们从事农耕蚕桑。姚襄还派遣使者到建康报告殷浩的罪行，并且陈述自己的谢意。
English: Yao Xiang crossed the Huai River, stationed in Jiankang, recruited as many as seventy thousand captives and refugees, set up local governors separately, and encouraged and urged them to engage in sericulture. Yao Xiang also sent an envoy to Jiankang to report Yinhao's crimes and express his gratitude.

古文：诏以谢尚都督江西、淮南诸军事、豫州刺史，镇历阳。
现代文：东晋朝廷下诏，任命谢尚为都督江西、淮南诸军事、豫州刺史、镇守历阳。
English: The East Jin Dynasty court issued a decree, appointing Xie Shang as the governor of Jiangxi, Huainan, military, Yuzhou, and Liyang.

古文：凉右长史赵长等建议，以为： 时难未夷，宜立长君，曜灵冲幼，请立长宁侯祚。 
现代文：前凉右长史赵长等人提出建议，认为 目前的灾难尚未平定，应该立年长者为君王。张曜灵年龄幼小，请求立长宁侯张祚。 
English: Zhao Chang and others of the former Liang Yu Changshi suggested that the current disaster had not yet been quelled, and that the elderly should be appointed as monarchs. Zhang Youling was young, and requested the appointment of Chang Ning Hou Zhang Ye.

古文：张祚先得幸于重华之母马氏，马氏许之，乃废张曜灵为凉宁侯，立祚为大都督、大将军、凉州牧、凉公。
现代文：张祚原先很得张重华的母亲马氏的宠幸，马氏同意了，于是就将张曜灵废黜为凉宁侯，立张祚为大都督、大将军、凉州牧、凉公。
English: Zhang Yao was originally very favored by Zhang Chonghua's mother Ma. Ma agreed, so he dethroned Zhang Youling as Liang Ning Hou, and established Zhang Yao as Grand Governor, Grand General, Liang Zhou Mu, and Liang Gong.

古文：祚既得志，恣为淫虐，杀重华妃裴氏及谢艾。
现代文：张祚达到目的以后，肆无忌惮地施展淫威暴虐，杀掉了张重华的妃裴氏及谢艾。
English: After Zhang Xuan achieved his goal, he brazenly carried out violence and brutality, killing Zhang Chonghua's wife Pei Shi and Xie Ai.

古文：燕卫将军恪、抚军将军军、左将军彪等屡荐给事黄门侍郎霸有命世之才，宜总大任。
现代文：前燕卫将军慕容恪、抚军将军慕容军、左将军慕容彪等人曾经屡次荐举给事黄门侍郎慕容霸，说他有显赫于世的才能，应该总揽重任。
English: Former Yanwei General Murong Ke, Fuzhun General Murong Jun, Zuo General Murong Biao and others had repeatedly recommended the appointment of Huangmen waiter Murong Ba, saying that he had outstanding talent in the world and should always take on important tasks.

古文：是岁，燕主俊以霸为使持节、安东将军、北冀州剌史，镇常山。
现代文：这一年，前燕国主慕容俊任命慕容霸为使持节、安东将军、北冀州刺史、镇守常山。
English: In that year, the former ruler of Yan Province, Mu Rongjun, appointed Mu Rongba as the envoy of the festival, General Anton, the governor of North Hebei Province, and the town guard of Changshan.

古文：孝宗穆皇帝中之上永和十年春，正月，张祚自称凉王，改建兴四十二年为和平元年。
现代文：永和十年春季，正月，张祚自称凉王，改建兴四十二年为和平元年。
English: In the spring of the 10th year of the Yonghe era, in the first month of the year, Zhang Ye claimed to be the king of cool, and changed the 42nd year of reconstruction to the 1st year of the Heian era.

古文：立妻辛氏为王后，子太和为太子，封弟天锡为长宁侯，子庭坚为建康侯，曜灵弟玄靓为凉武侯。
现代文：立妻子辛氏为王后，儿子张太和为太子。封弟弟张天锡为长宁侯，儿子张庭坚为建康侯，张曜灵的弟弟张玄靓为凉武侯。
English: He made his wife Xin the queen, his son Zhang Tahe the crown prince, his younger brother Zhang Tianxi the prince of Changning, his son Zhang Tingjian the prince of Jiankang, and Zhang Youling's younger brother Zhang Xuanzang the prince of Liangwu.

古文：置百官，郊祀天地，用天子礼乐。
现代文：设置了百官，在郊外祭祀天地，使用天子的礼节器乐。
English: Hundreds of officials have been set up to offer sacrifices to heaven and earth in the suburbs, using the etiquette and instrumental music of the heavenly son.

古文：尚书马岌切谏，坐免官。
现代文：尚书马岌恳切地加以劝谏，被加罪免官。
English: Shang Shuma earnestly tried to dissuade him, but was convicted and removed from office.

古文：郎中丁琪复谏曰： 我自武公以来，世守臣节，抱忠履谦五十馀年，故能以一州大众，抗举世之虏，师徒岁起，民不告疲。
现代文：郎中丁琪又劝谏他说： 我们自从武公张轨以来，历代谨守臣下的节义，胸怀忠诚，行事谦恭五十多年，所以才能用区区一州的兵众抵抗整个天下的敌人，虽然士兵连年征战，但百姓并不诉说困倦。
English: His retainer Ding Qi also advised him to say: "Since the Wukong issued the edict, we have been carefully observing the principles of our subjects, cherishing loyalty and acting humbly for more than 50 years. Therefore, we can only use the soldiers of a single state to resist the enemies of the whole world. Although soldiers have been fighting for years, the people do not complain of sleepiness.

古文：殿下勋德未高于先公，而亟谋革命，臣未见其可也。
现代文：殿下的功勋与德行并没有高出先公，然而却迫不及待地谋求改变命运，臣下没见过这样做能行得通的。
English: His Imperial Highness's merits and virtues are no higher than those of his father-in-law, yet he cannot wait to seek a change in his fate. His subjects have never seen anything like it.

古文：彼士民所以用命，四远所以归向者，以吾能奉晋室故也。
现代文：那些士兵百姓之所以能够听命，远方的部族之所以能归附向往，就是因为我们能尊奉晋皇室的缘故。
English: The reason why those soldiers and commoners were able to obey orders, and why distant tribes were able to return to their roots, was because we were able to honor the Jin royal family.

古文：今而自尊，则中外离心，安能以一隅之地，拒天下之强敌乎！ 
现代文：如今您自尊为帝，则会内外离心，还怎么能够靠一隅之地抗拒天下的强敌呢！ 
English: Now that your self-esteem is the emperor, you will be internally and externally centrifugal, and how can you rely on a corner to resist the world's strong enemy!

古文：祚大怒，斩之于阙下。
现代文：张祚勃然大怒，在宫殿前把丁琪杀掉了。
English: Zhang Ye flew into a rage and killed Ding Qi in front of the palace.

古文：故魏降将周成反，自宛袭洛阳。
现代文：过去魏国投降过来的将领周成造反，从宛县出发袭击洛阳。
English: In the past, Zhou Cheng, a general who had surrendered from Wei, rebelled and attacked Luoyang from Wan County.

古文：辛酉，河南太守戴施奔鲔渚。
现代文：辛酉，河南太守戴施逃奔到鲔渚。
English: On the day of Xin Rong, the governor of Henan Province, Dai Shibeng, arrived.

古文：秦丞相雄克司竹。
现代文：前秦丞相苻雄攻克司竹。
English: Former Qin chancellor Shao Xiong defeats Shizhu.

古文：胡阳赤奔霸城，依呼延毒。
现代文：胡阳赤逃奔到霸城，依附了呼延毒。
English: Hu Yang Chia fled to Baicheng and became addicted to Huyan poison.

古文：中军将军、扬州刺史殷浩连年北伐，师徒屡败，粮械都尽。
现代文：中军将军、扬州刺史殷浩连年北伐，士兵屡屡被打败，粮饷武器全都消耗殆尽。
English: The general of the Chinese army, Yangzhou Zhi Shi Yin Hao, led the Northern Expedition for many years. The soldiers were repeatedly defeated, and the grain and weapons were all exhausted.

古文：征西将军桓温因朝野之怨，上疏数浩之罪，请废之。
现代文：征西将军桓温借朝野上下对殷浩的怨愤，上书列举殷浩的罪行，请求将他黜免。
English: The general of the Western Expedition, Kan-Wen, took advantage of the resentment of the court and the country against Yin Hao to write a letter listing Yin Hao's crimes and requesting that he be pardoned.

古文：朝廷不得已，免浩为庶人，徙东阳之信安。
现代文：朝廷不得已，将殷浩免官，贬为庶人，流放到东阳郡的信安县。
English: As a last resort, the imperial court dismissed Yin Hao from his post, reduced him to a commoner, and exiled him to Shinyan County, Dongyang County.

古文：自此内外大权一归于温矣。
现代文：从此，朝廷内外的大权统统集中在桓温手里了。
English: From then on, all the power inside and outside the imperial court was concentrated in the hands of Huan Wen.

古文：浩少与温齐名，而心竞不相下，温常轻之。
现代文：殷浩年轻时就和桓温齐名，双方暗自争胜，不相上下，但桓温经常轻视他。
English: When Yin Hao was young, he was as famous as Huan Wen. Both sides secretly competed to be as good as each other, but Huan Wen often despised him.

古文：浩既废黜，虽愁怨，不形辞色，常书空作 咄咄怪事 字。
现代文：殷浩被废黜以后，虽然忧愁怨愤之情不形于色，但常常用手在空中书写 咄咄怪事 四个字。
English: After Yin Hao was deposed, although the feelings of sadness, resentment and indignation were not visible, he often wrote four words in the air with his hand.

古文：久之，温谓掾郗超曰： 浩有德有言，向为令仆，足以仪刑百揆，朝廷用违其才耳。 
现代文：过了很久，桓温对手下的属官郗超说： 殷浩有德行，善言辞，假如以前让他出任尚书令或仆射，足以成为百官的楷模，朝廷对他的任用，配不上他本身的才能。 
English: After a long time, Zou Chao, a subordinate official of Kuan Wen's opponent, said: Yin Hao is virtuous and eloquent. If he had been appointed as Shang Shuling or Hubei in the past, it would be enough to become a model for hundreds of officials. The court's appointment of him is not worthy of his own talent.

古文：将以浩为尚书令，以书告之。
现代文：桓温准备任命殷浩为尚书令，写信告诉了他。
English: Kuan Wen told Yin Hao in a letter that he was going to appoint him as Shang Shuling.

古文：浩欣然许焉，将答书，虑有谬误，开闭者十数，竟达空函。
现代文：殷浩对此欣然应允，在准备送出复信时，担心信中还有不妥之处，便拆开封检查了十多次，最后忙中出错，送达桓温手里的竟然只是一个空信封。
English: Yin Hao readily agreed to this. When preparing to send the reply letter, he was worried that there was something wrong with the letter, so he opened the envelope and checked it more than ten times. Finally, he made a mistake in his haste, and what arrived in Kanwen's hand was just an empty envelope.

古文：温大怒，由是遂绝，卒于徙所。
现代文：桓温勃然大怒，从此断绝了启用殷浩的想法，殷浩死于流放之地。
English: Kan-Wen flew into a rage and broke off the idea of reinstating Yin Hao. Yin Hao died in exile.

古文：以前会稽内史王述为扬州刺史。
现代文：任命以前的会稽内史王述为扬州刺史。
English: Wang Shu, the auditor of the association before his appointment, became the Yangzhou chief auditor.

古文：二月，乙丑，桓温统步骑四万发江陵。
现代文：二月，乙丑，桓温统领步兵和骑兵四万人从江陵出发。
English: In February, in the second month of the Ugly, Kuan Wen led 40,000 infantry and cavalry from Gangneung.

古文：水军自襄阳入均口，至南乡，步兵自淅川趣武关，命司马勋出子午道以伐秦。
现代文：水军从襄阳进入均口，抵达南乡；步兵从淅川直奔武关。命令司马勋出子午道去讨伐前秦。
English: The naval forces entered the Junction from Xiangyang and arrived at Nanxiang; the infantry marched straight to Wuguan from Beichuan. Sima Xun was ordered to march out of Zibo Road to fight against Qin.

古文：燕卫将军恪围鲁口，三月，拔之。
现代文：前燕国卫将军慕容恪包围了鲁口。三月，攻下了该地。
English: The former Yan Kuo Wei general Murong Ke encircled Lukou and captured the area in March.

古文：吕护奔野王，遣弟奉表谢罪于燕，燕以护为河内太守。
现代文：吕护逃奔到野王，派弟弟上表向前燕谢罪，前燕任命吕护为河内太守。
English: Lü Gu fled to the Wild King and sent his younger brother to Yan Xie to apologize. Yan appointed Lü Gu as the new governor of Hanoi.

古文：姚襄遣使降燕。
现代文：姚襄派遣使者向前燕投降。
English: Yao Xiang sent an envoy to Yan Xuan to surrender.

古文：燕主俊以慕容评为镇南将军，都督秦、雍、益、梁、江、扬、荆、徐、兗、豫十州诸军事，权镇洛水；以慕容强为前锋都督，督荆、徐二州、缘淮诸军事，进据河南。
现代文：前燕国主慕容俊任命慕容评为镇南将军，都督秦、雍、益、梁、江、扬、荆、徐、兖、豫十州诸军事，权且镇守洛水。任命慕容强为前锋都督，督察荆、徐二州，缘淮诸军事，他率兵前进，占据了黄河以南。
English: Mu Rongjun, the former ruler of Yan Province, appointed Mu Rong as the general of Zhennan, the military governor of Qin, Yong, Yi, Liang, Jiang, Yang, Jing, Xu, Min, and Yu ten states, and the power to guard Luoshui. Appointed Mu Rong Qiang as the vanguard governor, the inspector of Jing, Xu two states, and Zhenhuai military, he led the troops forward and occupied the south of the Yellow River.

古文：桓温将攻上洛，获秦荆州刺史郭敬；进击青泥，破之。
现代文：桓温的另一位将领攻打上洛，俘获了前秦荆州刺史郭敬，继续前进，又攻破了青泥。
English: Another general of Kuanwen attacked Shangluo, captured the former Qin Jingzhou chief Guo Jing, continued to advance, and broke through the Qing mud.

古文：司马勋掠秦西鄙，凉秦州刺史王擢攻陈仓以应温。
现代文：司马勋夺取了前秦的西部边陲地带，前凉秦州刺史王擢攻打陈仓以接应桓温。
English: Sima Xun conquered the western borderlands of the former Qin Dynasty, and the former Qin State of Liangshan sent Wang Zhishi to attack Chencang in response to Kuanwen.

古文：秦主健遣太子苌、丞相雄、淮南王生、平昌王菁、北平王硕帅众五万军于峣柳以拒温。
现代文：前秦国主苻健派太子苻苌、丞相苻雄、淮南王苻生、平昌王苻菁、北平王苻硕率领五万兵众驻扎在柳，以阻击桓温。
English: The former Qin sovereign, Jian Jian, dispatched Prince Zijian, the chancellor Jiao Xiong, the king of Huainan, the king of Pyeongchang, Jie Jing, and the king of Beiping, Jiao Shuo, with a total of 50,000 soldiers stationed in Liu to block Guanwen.

古文：夏，四月，已亥，温与秦兵战于蓝田。
现代文：夏季，四月，己亥，桓温与前秦军队在蓝田交战。
English: In the summer, in April, Ji Hai, Huan Wen and the former Qin army fought in Lantian.

古文：秦淮南王生单骑突陈，出入以十数，杀伤晋将士甚众。
现代文：前秦淮南王苻生单枪匹马冲入敌阵，往返十多次，杀死杀伤了众多的东晋将士。
English: Former Qin Huainan Wang Shansheng single-handedly rushed into the enemy lines, and went back and forth more than ten times, killing and injuring many Eastern Jin soldiers.

古文：温督众力战，秦兵大败；将军桓冲又败秦丞相雄于白鹿原。冲，温之弟也。
现代文：桓温督促兵众奋力拼搏，前秦军队终于被打得大败。将军桓冲又在白鹿原打败了前秦丞相苻雄。桓冲是桓温的弟弟。
English: General Kuan Weng urged the troops to fight hard, and the former Qin army was finally defeated. General Kuan Chong also defeated the former Qin chancellor Shao Xiong in Bai Luyuan. Kuan Chong was Kuan Weng's younger brother.

古文：温转战而前，壬寅，进至灞上。
现代文：桓温转战前进，壬寅，到达灞上。
English: Kuan-Wen turns and advances, Ren-In, arrives on the raft.

古文：秦太子苌等退屯城南，秦主健与老弱六千固守长安小城，悉发精兵三万，遣大司马雷弱儿等与苌合兵以拒温。
现代文：前秦太子苻苌等退守驻扎在城南，前秦国主苻健与六千老弱民众固守长安小城，把三万精锐兵士全部派出，让大司马雷弱儿等人与苻苌会合兵力，以抵抗桓温。
English: Former Qin Crown Prince Yao and others retreated and were stationed in the south of the city. Former Qin sovereign Yao Jian and six thousand old and weak people defended the small city of Chang'an, dispatched all thirty thousand elite soldiers, and let the commander Ma Lei Weak and others join forces with Yao to resist Kanwen.

古文：三辅郡县皆来降，温抚谕居民，使安堵复业。
现代文：三辅地区的郡县全都投降。
English: All counties in the Sanfu area surrendered.

古文：民争持牛酒迎劳，男女夹路观之，耆老有垂泣者，曰： 不图今日复睹官军！ 
现代文：桓温安抚告谕当地居民，让他们安居复业，当地的百姓争先恐后地带着酒肉迎接慰劳桓温的部队，男男女女夹道围观，有些老年人还激动地流下了眼泪，说： 没想到今天又见到了朝廷的军队！ 
English: Huan Wen appeased and advised the local residents to let them live and resume their business in peace. The local people scrambled to welcome Huan Wen's troops with wine and meat. Men and women crowded around to watch. Some elderly people also shed tears with excitement, saying, "I didn't expect to see the imperial army again today!"

古文：秦丞相雄帅骑七千袭司马勋于子午谷，破之，勋退屯女娲堡。
现代文：前秦丞相苻雄率领骑兵七千人在子午谷袭击司马勋，司马勋的部队被攻破，退守女娲堡。
English: Former Qin chancellor Yan Xiong led seven thousand cavalrymen to attack Sima Xun in Zihu Valley. Sima Xun's troops were defeated and retreated to the female bunker.

古文：戊申，燕主俊封抚军将军军为襄阳王，左将军彭为武昌王；以卫将军恪为大司马、侍中、大都督、录尚书事，封太原王；镇南将军评为司徒、骠骑将军，封上庸王；封安东将军霸为吴王，左贤王友为范阳王，散骑常侍厉为下邳王，散骑常侍宜为庐江王，宁北将军度为乐浪王；又封弟桓为宜都王，逮为临贺王，徽为河间王，龙为历阳王，纳为北海王，秀为兰陵王，岳为安丰王，德为梁公，默为始安公，偻为南康公；子咸为乐安王，亮为勃海王，温为带方王，涉为渔阳王，暐为中山王；以尚书令阳骛为司空，仍守尚书令。
现代文：戊申，前燕国主慕容俊封抚军将军慕容军为襄阳王，左将军慕容彭为武昌王。任命卫将军慕容恪为大司马、侍中、大都督、录尚书事，并封为太原王。任命镇南将军慕容评为司徒、骠骑将军，并封为上庸王。封安东将军慕容霸为吴王，左贤王慕容友为范阳王，散骑常侍慕容厉为下邳王，散骑常侍慕容宜为庐江王，宁北将军慕容度为乐浪王。还对他的弟弟们进行了赐封：慕容桓为宜都王，慕容逮为临贺王，慕容徽为河间王，慕容龙为历阳王，慕容纳为北海王，慕容秀为兰陵王，慕容岳为安丰王，慕容德为梁公，慕容默为始安公，慕容偻为南康公。封儿子慕容臧为乐安王，慕容亮为勃海王，慕容温为带方王，慕容涉为渔阳王，慕容为中山王。任命尚书令阳鹜为司空，仍旧职守尚书令。
English: Wushin, the former lord of Yan Province, Murong Jun, appointed General Murong Jun as Yangyang King, Left General Murong Peng as Wuchang King, appointed General of the Guards Murong Kak as the chief steward, chamberlain, grand governor, recorded in the records, and crowned as the King of Taiyuan, appointed General Zhenan Murong as the officer, general of the cavalry, and crowned as the King of Shangyong, crowned General Andong Murong Ba as the King of Wu, King Zuoxian Murong You as the King of Fanyang, the knight-errant Murong Li as the King of Lower Yunnan, the

古文：命冀州刺史吴王霸徙治信都。
现代文：慕容俊命令冀州刺史、吴王慕容霸把治所迁到信都。
English: Murongjun ordered the governor of Jizhou and the king of Wu, Murongba, to move the government office to Xindu.

古文：初，燕王皝奇霸之才，故名之曰霸，将以为世子，群臣谏而止，然宠遇犹逾于世子。
现代文：当初，前燕王慕容认为慕容霸才能卓越，所以给他起名叫 霸 ，准备以他作为太子。因为群臣的劝谏，最终没这样做，然而对他的宠爱程度仍然超过了太子。
English: At first, the former Yan King Murong thought that Murong Ba's talent was outstanding, so he named him Ba and prepared to use him as the crown prince. Because of the persuasion of the courtiers, he did not do so in the end, but his favorability still exceeded that of the prince.

古文：由是俊恶之，以其尝坠马折齿，更名曰缺；寻以其应谶文，更名曰垂；迁侍中，录留台事，徙镇龙城。
现代文：因此慕容俊很嫉妒，便以慕容霸曾经从马背上摔下来摔坏了牙齿为由，把他的名字改为  。不久又以他应验了谶文中的谶语为由，改其名为 垂 。慕容垂升迁为侍中，总领留台事务，被调动去镇守龙城。
English: Therefore, Murong Jun was very jealous and changed his name to Murong Ba on the grounds that he once fell from horseback and broke his teeth. Soon, he changed his name to Dangdang on the grounds that he fulfilled the slang in the poem. Murong Dangdang was promoted to the chamberlain, the head of the table affairs, and was transferred to the town guard of Longcheng.

古文：垂大得东北之和，俊愈恶之，复召还。
现代文：慕容垂深得东北民众的拥戴，慕容俊对他越发嫉妒，又召他返回。
English: Murong was deeply loved by the people of Northeast China. Murong Jun became increasingly jealous of him and called him to return.

古文：五月，江西流民郭敞等千馀人执陈留内史刘仕，降于姚襄。
现代文：五月，江西的流民郭敞等一千多人挟持着陈留内史刘仕投降了姚襄。
English: In May, more than a thousand people, including Guo Zhang, a refugee from Jiangxi Province, held Chen Ruinshi Liu Si hostage and surrendered to Yao Xiang.

古文：建康震骇，以吏部尚书周闵为中军将军，屯中堂，豫州刺史谢尚自历阳还卫京师，固江备守。
现代文：东晋朝廷十分震惊，任命吏部尚书周闵为中军将军，驻扎宫中，豫州刺史谢尚从历阳返回，戍卫京师，加固长江防线，严密守备。
English: The Eastern Jin Dynasty court was very shocked, and appointed the head of the personnel department, Shangshu Zhou, as the general of the Chinese army. He was stationed in the palace, Yuzhou sent Shi Xie Shang back from Liyang, defended the Beijing division, strengthened the Yangtze River defense line, and closely guarded.

古文：王擢拔陈仓，杀秦扶风内史毛难。
现代文：王擢攻克陈仓，杀掉了前秦的扶风内史毛难。
English: Wang Yuanzhang defeated Chen Cang and killed the former Qin general Fu Feng.

古文：北海王猛，少好学，倜傥有大志，不屑细务，人皆轻之。
现代文：北海人王猛，从小好学，才能卓越，胸怀大志，不屑于琐碎事务，人们都轻视他。
English: Wang Meng, a man from the North Sea, has been eager to learn since he was a child, his talent is outstanding, he has great aspirations, he does not disdain trivial matters, and people despise him.

古文：猛悠然自得，隐居华阴。
现代文：王猛却悠然自得，隐居于华阴。
English: Wang Meng, however, lived in seclusion in Huayin.

古文：闻桓温入关，披褐诣之，扪虱而谈当世之务，旁若无人。
现代文：当他听说桓温入关后，便披着粗布衣服去拜访他，边摸着虱子边谈论当时的大事，旁若无人。
English: When he heard that Kanen had been sent to prison, he went to visit him dressed in a coarse cloth, and talked about the important events of the time while playing dice, as if no one was around.

古文：温异之，问曰： 吾奉天子之命，将锐兵十万为百姓除残贼，而三秦豪杰未有至者，何也？ 
现代文：桓温觉得他与众不同，便问道： 我奉天子之命，统帅十万精兵为百姓消灭残存的寇贼，然而三秦的豪杰之士至今没有人前来归附，这是为什么呢？ 
English: Kuan Wen felt that he was different from the others and asked, "I was ordered by the Son of Heaven to lead 100,000 soldiers to wipe out the remaining bandits for the people, but so far, none of the heroes of the Three Qin States have come to join us. Why is that?"

古文：猛曰： 公不远数千里，深入敌境。今长安咫尺，而不渡灞水，百姓未知公心，所以不至。 
现代文：王猛说： 您不远数千里，深入敌土，如今长安近在咫尺而您却不横渡灞水，百姓们不知道您的意图，所以不来。 
English: Wang Meng said: You are not thousands of miles away, you have gone deep into the enemy's land. Now, Chang'an is close at hand, but you do not cross the water. The people do not know your intention, so they do not come.

古文：温嘿然无以应，徐曰： 江东无卿比也！ 
现代文：桓温沉默不语，无以应答，过了一会儿说： 长江以南没有人能和你相比！ 
English: Kanwen was silent, unable to answer, and after a while said: No one south of the Yangtze River can compare with you!

古文：乃署猛军谋祭酒。
现代文：于是就安排王猛暂任军谋祭酒。
English: So they arranged for Wang Meng to temporarily serve as the military commander of the sacrificial wine.

古文：温与秦丞相雄等战于白鹿原，温兵不利，死者万馀人。
现代文：桓温与前秦丞相苻雄等在白鹿原交战，桓温的军队失利，死亡一万多人。
English: Kuan-Wen and the former Qin chancellor Shao Xiong fought in Bailuyuan. Kuan-Wen's army was defeated, and more than ten thousand people died.

古文：初，温指秦麦以为粮，既而秦人悉芟麦，清野以待之，温军乏食。六月，丁丑，徙关中三千馀户而归。
现代文：当初，桓温指望以前秦地区的麦子来作军粮，后来前秦人把麦子全都收割了，等待桓温的只有经过清理的空旷农田，所以桓温的军队军粮匮乏，六月，丁丑，桓温裹挟关中的三千多户人家开始撤返。
English: At first, Kuanwen hoped that the wheat in the former Qin region would be used as military rations. Later, the former Qin people harvested all the wheat, and only the cleared open farmland was waiting for Kuanwen. Therefore, Kuanwen's army was short of military rations. In June, Dingwuxi, more than three thousand households in Kuanwen's encirclement began to withdraw.

古文：以王猛为高官督护，欲与俱还，猛辞不就。
现代文：任命王猛为高官督护，想让他和自己一同返回，王猛坚决推辞，不予接受。
English: Wang Meng was appointed as a high-ranking official and overseer, and wanted him to return with him. Wang Meng firmly refused and did not accept.

古文：呼延毒帅众一万从温还。
现代文：呼延毒率领兵众一万人跟随桓温撤返。
English: Huyan Guo led ten thousand soldiers to follow Kan'en and withdraw.

古文：秦太子苌等随温击之，比至潼关，温军屡败，失亡以万数。
现代文：前秦太子苻苌等人则紧紧追击桓温，一路上桓温的军队屡战屡败，等到抵达潼关时，兵士损失死亡已数以万计。
English: Former Qin Crown Prince Yao and others closely pursued Kuan Wen. Along the way, Kuan Wen's army repeatedly lost battles. By the time they arrived at Shaoguan, tens of thousands of soldiers had died.

古文：温之屯灞上也，顺阳太守薛珍劝温径进逼长安，温弗从。
现代文：桓温驻扎在灞上的时候，顺阳太守薛珍劝说桓温直接进逼长安，桓温没有听从。
English: When Kuan Wen was stationed on the raft, Shunyang Governor Xue Zhen persuaded Kuan Wen to go directly to Chang'an, but Kuan Wen did not listen.

古文：珍以偏师独济，颇有所获。
现代文：薛珍就带领一部分军队独自渡过灞水，很有收获。
English: Xue Zhen led a part of the army to cross Surabaya alone, which was very fruitful.

古文：及温退，乃还，显言于众，自矜其勇而咎温之持重；温杀之。
现代文：等到桓温撤退时，他返了回来，向兵众大肆炫耀，自夸他的勇敢果断而责怪桓温的谨小慎微。桓温把他杀掉了。
English: When Kuan-Wen retreated, he came back, showing off to the soldiers, boasting of his bravery and decisiveness and blaming Kuan-Wen's caution. Kuan-Wen killed him.

古文：秦丞相雄击司马勋、王擢于陈仓，勋奔汉中，擢奔略阳。
现代文：前秦丞相苻雄在陈仓攻击司马勋、王擢，司马勋逃奔汉中，王擢逃奔略阳。
English: Former Qin chancellor Yan Xiong attacked Sima Xun and Wang Yang in Chen Cang. Sima Xun fled to Han, and Wang Yang ran to Liangyang.

古文：秦以光禄大夫赵俱为洛阳刺史，镇宜阳。
现代文：前秦任命光禄大夫赵俱为洛州刺史，镇守宜阳。
English: Former Qin appointed Guanglu doctor Zhao Gu as the governor of Luozhou and the town guard of Yiyang.

古文：秦东海敬武王雄攻乔秉于雍；丙申，卒。
现代文：前秦东海敬武王苻雄在雍县攻打乔秉。丙申，苻雄去世。
English: Former Qin Donghai King Jingwu Shuxiong attacked Qiaobing in Yong County. According to legend, Shuxiong died.

古文：秦主健哭之呕血，曰： 天不欲吾平四海邪？
现代文：前秦国主苻健哭他哭得吐了血，说： 上天不想让我平定四海呀！
English: The former ruler of Qin, Qian Jian, cried so much that he vomited blood, saying: "Heaven does not want me to pacify the four seas!

古文：何夺吾元才之速也！ 
现代文：要不为什么这么快就夺去了我的苻雄呢？ 
English: Why else would it have snatched my hero away so quickly?

古文：赠魏王，葬礼依晋安平献王故事。
现代文：追赠苻雄为魏王，葬礼依据过去晋朝安平献王的遗规。
English: He was posthumously awarded the title of Wei King, and the funeral was held according to the rules of the Anping King Offering in the Jin Dynasty.

古文：雄以佐命无勋，位兼将相，权侔人主，而谦恭泛爱，遵奉法度，故健重之，常曰： 元才，吾之周公也。 
现代文：苻雄虽然具有辅国元勋的身份，权力近于君主，然而却态度谦恭，泛爱民众，遵奉法度，所以苻健非常看重他，经常说： 苻雄是我的周公。 
English: Although Hao Xiong has the status of an auxiliary national founder and his power is close to that of the monarch, he is humble, loves the people and obeys the law. Therefore, Hao Jian values him very much and often says: Hao Xiong is my Zhou Gong.

古文：子坚袭爵。
现代文：苻雄的儿子苻坚继承了爵位。
English: Hao Xiong's son, Hao Jian, inherited the title.

古文：坚性至孝，幼有志度，博学多能，交结英豪，吕婆楼、强汪及略阳梁平老皆与之善。
现代文：苻坚生性极其孝顺，从小就有远大的志向和不凡的气度，博学多能，结交英豪，吕婆楼、强汪及略阳人梁平老全都和他关系很好。
English: Zou Jian is extremely filial, from childhood he had great aspirations and extraordinary temperament, erudite and capable, making friends with heroes, Luba Lou, Qiang Wang and Liang Pinglao, who is slightly younger, all have a good relationship with him.

古文：燕乐陵太守慕容钩，翰之子也，与青州刺史硃秃共治厌次。
现代文：前燕乐陵太守慕容钩，是慕容翰的儿子，和青州刺史朱秃共同治理厌次。
English: Muronghu, the former eunuch of Yanle Mausoleum, is the son of Muronghan, and Zhu Zhao, the governor of Qingzhou, jointly governs the province.

古文：钩自恃宗室，每陵侮秃。
现代文：慕容钩自恃是宗室嫡传，经常欺负侮辱朱秃。
English: Muronghu is a direct descendant of the family, and often bullies and insults Zhu Zhao.

古文：秃不胜忿，秋，七月，袭钩，杀之，南奔段龛。
现代文：朱秃按捺不住愤怒，秋季，七月，袭击慕容钩，并杀掉了他，然后南逃，投奔段龛。
English: Unable to contain his anger, Zhu Zhao attacked Muronghu in the autumn, in July, and killed him, and then fled south to join Duan Zhou.

古文：秦太子苌攻乔秉于雍，八月，斩之，关中悉平。
现代文：前秦太子苻苌在雍县攻打乔秉，八月，将他斩杀，关中全部平定。
English: In August, the former Qin Prince Zang attacked Qiaobing in Yongxian and killed him. The whole of Guanzhong was pacified.

古文：秦主健赏拒桓温之功，以雷弱儿为丞相，毛贵为太傅，鱼遵为太尉，淮南王生为中军大将军，平昌王菁为司空。
现代文：前秦国主苻健封赏抵御桓温的功臣，任命雷弱儿为丞相，毛贵为太傅，鱼遵为太尉，淮南王苻生为中军大将军，平昌王苻菁为司空。
English: Former Qin sovereign Yu Jian rewarded the heroes who resisted Kan-Wen by appointing Lei Weak-er as chancellor, Mao Gui as taifu, Yu Zun as taifu, Huainan Wang Shansheng as general of the Chinese army, and Pyeongchang Wang Shujing as Siku.

古文：健勤于政事，数延公卿咨讲治道，承赵人苛虐奢侈之后，易以宽简节俭，崇儒礼士，由是秦人悦之。
现代文：苻健勤于政事，经常邀请手下大臣，询问讨论治国之道。继后赵人的苛刻残暴、奢侈浪费之后，他改行宽容简略、节约勤俭、尊重懦士的政策，因此前秦人非常喜欢他。
English: Hao Jian was diligent in politics, often inviting his subordinate ministers to inquire about and discuss the way of governing the country. After the harsh brutality and extravagant waste of the Zhao people, he changed to a policy of tolerance and simplicity, thrift and frugality, and respect for cowards, so the former Qin people liked him very much.

古文：燕大调兵众，因发诏之日，号曰： 丙戌举。 
现代文：前燕大规模地征调兵众，根据发布诏令的日期，这次征调称为 丙戌举 。
English: Qianyan massively conscripted and transferred soldiers. According to the date of the issuance of the edict, this conscription was called 丙举.

古文：九月，桓温还自伐秦，帝遣侍中、黄门劳温于襄阳。
现代文：九月，桓温从伐秦前线返回，东晋穆帝派侍中、黄门侍郎在襄阳慰劳桓温。
English: In September, Kuanwen returned from the front line of the Qin Dynasty, and Emperor Mu of the Eastern Jin Dynasty sent a chamberlain and a Yellow Gate chamberlain to comfort Kuanwen in Yangyang.

古文：或告燕黄门侍郎宋斌等谋奉冉智为主而反，皆伏诛。
现代文：有人向东晋朝廷报告，说前燕的黄门侍郎宋斌等人谋划尊奉冉智为主造反。他们全都被杀。
English: Someone reported to the East Jin Dynasty court that Song Bin, the Yellow Gate attendant of the former Yan, and others were plotting to rebel. They were all killed.

古文：斌，烛之子也。
现代文：宋斌是宋烛的儿子。
English: Song Bin is the son of Song Zheng.

古文：秦太子苌之拒桓温也，为流矢所中，冬，十月，卒，谥曰献哀。
现代文：前秦太子苻苌抵御桓温进攻的时候，被流箭射中，冬季，十月，去世，追封谥号为献哀。
English: When the former Qin prince Yao resisted the attack of Kuanwen, he was shot by a stray arrow, and died in winter, October, and his posthumous name was changed to mourning.

古文：桓温之入关也，王擢遣使告凉王祚，言温善用兵，其志难测。
现代文：桓温入关的时候，王擢派遣使者向前凉王张祚报告，说桓温善于用兵，他的志向难以猜测。
English: When Kuan-Wen entered the pass, Wang Yang sent an envoy to report to Liang-Wang Zhang Rong, saying that Kuan-Wen was good at using soldiers, and his intentions were difficult to guess.

古文：祚惧，且畏擢之叛己，遣人刺之。
现代文：张祚十分害怕，而且担心王擢背叛自己，于是就派人去刺杀王擢。
English: Zhang Ye was very scared and worried that Wang Yang would betray him, so he sent someone to assassinate Wang Yang.

古文：事泄，祚益惧，大发兵，声言东伐，实欲西保敦煌，会温还而止。
现代文：事情败露，张祚更加害怕，于是大举出兵，声称要去东伐，实则想西退保全敦煌，恰好这时桓温撤兵返回，他才停止了行动。
English: When the affair was exposed, Zhang Ye was even more afraid, so he sent out troops in a big way, claiming to go to the east, but in fact he wanted to retreat to the west to preserve Dunhuang. It was just at this time that Huan Wen withdrew his troops and returned, and he stopped the action.

古文：既而遣秦州刺史牛霸等帅兵三千击擢，破之。
现代文：接着又派秦州刺史牛霸等人率领三千士兵攻打王擢，王擢被打败。
English: Next, he sent Qinzhou Zishi Niuba and others to lead three thousand soldiers to attack Wang Zanglong. Wang Zanglong was defeated.

古文：十一月，擢帅众降秦，秦以擢为尚书，以上将军啖铁为秦州刺史。
现代文：十一月，王擢率领兵众投降了前秦，前秦任命他为尚书，任命上将军啖铁为秦州刺史。
English: In November, Wang Yuanzhang led the troops to surrender to the former Qin Dynasty. The former Qin Dynasty appointed Wang Yuanzhang as Shangshu, and the former Qin Dynasty appointed Shang General Qian Tie as Shangshi.

古文：秦王健叔父武都王安自晋还，为姚襄所虏，以为洛州刺史。
现代文：前秦国主苻健的叔父武都王苻安从东晋返回时，被姚襄俘虏，任命他为洛州刺史。
English: When the uncle of the former Qin Emperor Jian Jian, Wudu Wang Jian, returned from the Eastern Jin Dynasty, he was captured by Yao Xiang and appointed as the first governor of Luozhou.

古文：十二月，安亡归秦，健以安为大司马、骠骑大将军、并州刺史，镇蒲坂。
现代文：十二月，苻安逃回到了前秦，苻健任命他为大司马、骠骑大将军、并州刺史，镇守蒲阪。
English: In December, Yan Anfei returned to the former Qin Dynasty, and Yan Jian appointed him as the grand steed, the cavalry general, and the prefectural governor of Busan.

古文：是岁，秦大饥，米一升直布一匹。
现代文：这一年，前秦发生严重饥荒，一升米价值一匹布。
English: In this year, severe famine occurred in the former Qin Dynasty, and one liter of rice was worth one horse of cloth.

