古文：成王将崩，命召公、毕公率诸侯相康王，作《顾命》。
现代文：成王即将病逝时，下令召公、毕公率领各诸侯辅佐康王，史官作《顾命》。
English: When King Cheng was about to die of illness, he ordered the summoning of Gong and Bi Gong to lead the princes to assist King Sukang, and the historian to write "Gu Mui."

古文：惟四月，哉生魄，王不怿。
现代文：四月，月亮新现光明，成王生了病。
English: In April, when the moon was newly bright, Cheng Wang fell ill.

古文：甲子，王乃洮颒水。相被冕服，凭玉几。
现代文：甲子这天，成王洗了头发洗了脸，太仆给王戴上王冠，披上朝服，王靠着玉几。
English: On the day of the first son, Chengwang washed his hair and face, and the servant put a crown on the king, put on the imperial robe, and the king leaned on the jade table.

古文：乃同，召太保奭、芮伯、彤伯、毕公、卫侯、毛公、师氏、虎臣、百尹、御事。
现代文：于是会见朝臣。成王召见太保奭、芮伯、彤伯、毕公、卫侯、毛公、师氏、虎臣、百官的首长以及办事官员。
English: So he met with the courtiers. Cheng Wang summoned Taibo Jun, Zibo, Zibo, Bi Gong, Wei Hou, Mao Gong, Shiji, Hu Min, the heads of the hundred officials and the officials.

古文：王曰： 呜呼！
现代文：王说： 啊！
English: And the king said, Alas!

古文：疾大渐，惟几，病日臻。
现代文：我的病很厉害，有危险，疾病一天比一天重。
English: I'm very ill, I'm in danger, I'm getting sicker by the day.

古文：既弥留，恐不获誓言嗣，兹予审训命汝。
现代文：已经是临终时刻，恐怕不能郑重地讲后嗣的事了，现在，我详细地训告你们。
English: I am afraid that it is too late for me to talk seriously about the issue of succession. Now, I will tell you in detail.

古文：昔君文王、武王宣重光，奠丽陈教，则肄肄不违，用克达殷集大命。
现代文：过去，我们的先君文王、武王，放出日月般的光辉，制定法律，发布教令，臣民都努力奉行，不敢违背，因而能够讨伐殷商，成就我周国的大命。
English: In the past, our forefathers, King Wen and King Wu, shone like the sun and moon, enacted laws and issued edicts, which their subjects diligently followed and did not dare to disobey. As a result, they were able to fight against the Shang merchants and fulfill the great destiny of our Zhou Kingdom.

古文：在后之侗，敬迓天威，嗣守文、武大训，无敢昏逾。
现代文：后来，幼稚的我，认真奉行天威，继续遵守文王、武王的伟大教导，不敢昏乱越轨。
English: Later, as a child, I earnestly followed the will of heaven, continued to abide by the great teachings of King Wen and King Wu, and did not dare to go astray.

古文：今天降疾，殆弗兴弗悟。
现代文：如今上天降下重病，几乎不能起床不能说话了。
English: Now he is seriously ill, can hardly get out of bed and can't speak.

古文：尔尚明时朕言，用敬保元子钊弘济于艰难，柔远能迩，安劝小大庶邦。
现代文：你们要勉力接受我的话，认真保护我的大儿子姬钊大渡艰难，要柔服远方，亲善近邻，安定、教导大小各国。
English: You must strive to accept my words, conscientiously protect my eldest son, Hime Dato, in the face of difficulties, be submissive to distant countries, friendly to neighbors, stable, and teach countries large and small.

古文：思夫人自乱于威仪。尔无以钊冒贡于非几。 
现代文：我想众人要用礼法自治，你们不可使姬钊冒犯以至陷于非法啊！ 
English: I think everyone should use etiquette and self-governance. You must not offend the Empress Dowager to the point of illegality!

古文：兹既受命，还出缀衣于庭。
现代文：群臣已经接受教命，就退回来，拿出成王的朝服放在王庭。
English: The group of courtiers had already accepted the order, so they retreated and took out Emperor Chengwang's imperial robes and placed them in the royal court.

古文：越翼日乙丑，王崩。
现代文：到了明天乙丑日，成王逝世了。
English: On the morning of the second day of the second lunar month, Cheng Wang passed away.

古文：太保命仲桓、南宫毛俾爰齐侯吕伋，以二干戈、虎贲百人逆子钊于南门之外。
现代文：太保命令仲桓和南宫毛跟从齐侯吕伋，二人分别拿着干戈，率领一百名勇士，在南门外迎接太子钊。
English: Taibao ordered Zhonghuan and Nan Gongmao to follow Qi Hou Lvun, and the two of them separately led a hundred warriors to meet the crown prince outside the south gate.

古文：延入翼室，恤宅宗。丁卯，命作册度。
现代文：请太子钊进入侧室，作忧居的主人，丁卯这天，命令作册制定丧礼。
English: Ask the crown prince to enter the side room and act as the master of the house of mourning. On this day, Dingwu ordered the book to formulate the funeral.

古文：越七日癸酉，伯相命士须材。
现代文：到了第七天癸酉，召公命令官员布置各种器物。
English: On the seventh day of the mourning period, officials were ordered to arrange various objects.

古文：狄设黼扆、缀衣。
现代文：狄人陈设斧纹屏风和先王的礼服。
English: Di Ren displayed an axe-patterned screen and the former king's ceremonial dress.

古文：牖间南向，敷重篾席，黼纯，华玉，仍几。
现代文：门窗间朝南的位置，铺设着双层竹席，饰着黑白相间的丝织花边，陈设彩玉，用无饰的几案。
English: In the south-facing position between the doors and windows, double-layered bamboo seats are laid, decorated with black and white silk lace, decorated with colored beads, and several unadorned cases.

古文：西序东向，敷重厎席，缀纯，文贝，仍几。
现代文：在西墙朝东的位置，铺设双层细竹篾席，饰着彩色的花边，陈设花贝壳，用无饰的几案。
English: In the east-facing position of the west wall, a double-layered fine bamboo table was laid, decorated with colored lace, decorated with flower shells, and several unadorned cases.

古文：东序西向，敷重丰席，画纯，雕玉，仍几。
现代文：在东墙朝西的位置，铺设双层莞席，饰着绘有云气的花边，陈设雕刻的玉器，用无饰的几案。
English: In the west-facing position of the east wall, double-layered wicker seats are laid, decorated with lace painted with clouds, decorated with carved jade, and with several unadorned cases.

古文：西夹南向，敷重笋席，玄纷纯，漆，仍几。
现代文：在堂的西边夹室朝南的位置，铺设双层青竹蔑席，饰着黑丝绳连缀的花边，陈设漆器，用无饰的几案。
English: In the south-facing position of the room on the west side of the hall, a double-layered green bamboo seat was laid, decorated with lace decorated with black silk rope, lacquerware was set up, and several unadorned cases were used.

古文：越玉五重，陈宝，赤刀、大训、弘璧、琬琰、在西序。
现代文：越玉五种，宝刀、赤刀、大训，大璧、琬、琰，陈列在西墙向东的席前。
English: Five types of yue jade, including treasure sword, red sword, grand sword, big gem, dragonfly and dragonfly, are displayed in front of the seat facing east on the west wall.

古文：大玉、夷玉、天球、河图，在东序。
现代文：大玉、夷玉、天球、河图，陈列在东墙向西的席前。
English: Large balls, jade balls, celestial spheres, and river maps are displayed in front of the seats facing west on the east wall.

古文：胤之舞衣、大贝、鼖鼓，在西房；兑之戈、和之弓、垂之竹矢，在东房。
现代文：胤制作的舞衣、大贝壳、大军鼓，陈列在西房。兑制作的戈、和制作的弓、垂制作的竹矢，陈列在东房。
English: The dancing costumes, large shells, and large drums made by 胤 are displayed in the west room. The bows and arrows made by 兑, and the bamboo arrows made by 垂 are displayed in the east room.

古文：大辂在宾阶面，缀辂在阼阶面，先辂在左塾之前，次辂在右塾之前。
现代文：王的玉车放置在宾客们所走的台阶前，金车放置在主人走的台阶前，象车放在门左侧堂屋的前面，木车放在门右侧堂屋的前面。
English: The king's jade chariot is placed in front of the steps taken by the guests, the gold chariot is placed in front of the steps taken by the host, the elephant chariot is placed in front of the hall on the left side of the door, and the wooden chariot is placed in front of the hall on the right side of the door.

古文：二人雀弁，执惠，立于毕门之内。
现代文：二人戴着赤黑色的礼帽，执三角矛，站在祖庙门里边。
English: Two people wearing red and black ceremonial hats, holding triangular spears, stood inside the ancestral temple gate.

古文：四人綦弁，执戈上刃，夹两阶戺。
现代文：四人戴着青黑色的礼帽，执着戈，戈刃向前，夹着台阶，对面站在台阶两旁。
English: Four people wearing blue and black ceremonial hats, clinging to Go, Go blade forward, holding the steps, standing on both sides of the steps opposite.

古文：一人冕，执刘，立于东堂，一人冕，执钺，立于西堂。
现代文：一人戴着礼帽，拿着大斧，站立在东堂的前面。一人戴着礼帽，拿着大斧，站立在西堂的前面。
English: One person wearing a ceremonial hat and holding a large axe stood in front of the East Hall, and one person wearing a ceremonial hat and holding a large axe stood in front of the West Hall.

古文：一人冕，执戣，立于东垂。
现代文：一人戴着礼帽，拿着三锋矛，站立在东堂外边。
English: One man, wearing a ceremonial hat and holding a three-pronged spear, stood outside the East Hall.

古文：一人冕，执瞿，立于西垂。
现代文：一人戴着礼帽，拿着三锋矛，站立在西堂外边。
English: A man wearing a ceremonial hat and holding a three-pronged spear stood outside the West Hall.

古文：一人冕，执锐，立于侧阶。
现代文：还有一人戴着礼帽，拿着矛，站立在北堂北面的台阶上。
English: Another man, wearing a ceremonial hat and holding a spear, stood on the steps on the north side of the north hall.

古文：王麻冕黼裳，由宾阶隮。
现代文：王戴着麻制的礼帽，穿着绣有斧形花纹的礼服，从西阶上来。
English: Wang, wearing a hemp hat and a dress with an embroidered axe pattern, came up from the west steps.

古文：卿士邦君麻冕蚁裳，入即位。
现代文：卿士和众诸侯戴着麻制的礼帽，穿着黑色礼服，进入中庭，各人站在规定的位置上。
English: The nobles and lords, wearing hemp caps and black robes, entered the courtyard and stood in their assigned positions.

古文：太保、太史、太宗皆麻冕彤裳。
现代文：太保、太史、太宗都戴着麻制的礼帽，穿着红色礼服。
English: Taeho, Taishi and Taizong all wore hemp caps and red dresses.

古文：太保承介圭，上宗奉同瑁，由阼阶隮。
现代文：太保捧着大圭，太宗捧着酒杯和瑁，从东阶上来。
English: Taiho holding daegui, Taizong holding wine glass and gourd, coming up from the east steps.

古文：太史秉书，由宾阶隮，御王册命。
现代文：太史拿着策书，从西阶走上来，进献策书给康王。
English: Taishi came up from the west steps, holding the strategy book, and presented the strategy book to King Kang.

古文：曰： 皇后凭玉几，道扬末命，命汝嗣训，临君周邦，率循大卞，燮和天下，用答扬文、武之光训。 
现代文：太史说： 大王靠着玉几，宣布他临终的教命，命令您继承文王、武王的大训，治理领导周国，遵守大法，协和天下，以宣扬文王、武王的光明教训。 
English: Taishi said: The great king, leaning on the gong, announced his dying mission, ordering you to inherit the great teachings of King Wen and King Wu, to govern and lead Zhou, to abide by the Great Law, and to reconcile the world, in order to promote the bright lessons of King Wen and King Wu.

古文：王再拜，兴，答曰： 眇眇予末小子，其能而乱四方以敬忌天威。 
现代文：王再拜，然后起来，回答说： 我这个微末的小子，怎么能协和治理天下以敬畏天威啊？ 
English: The king bowed again, then stood up and answered: "How can I, a puny child, rule the world in harmony with the fear of heaven?

古文：乃受同瑁，王三宿，三祭，三吒。
现代文：王接受了酒杯和瑁。前进三次，祭酒三次，奠酒三次。
English: The king took the cup and the ladle, and went forward three times, and gave the drink offering three times, and the drink offering three times.

古文：上宗曰： 飨！ 
现代文：太宗说： 请喝酒！ 
English: Taizong said, "Drink, please!"

古文：太保受同，降，盥，以异同秉璋以酢。授宗人同，拜。王答拜。
现代文：王喝酒后，太保接过酒杯，走下堂，洗手，又登上堂，用另外一种酒杯自斟自饮作答，然后把酒杯交给宗人，对王下拜，王也回拜。
English: After the king had drunk, the eunuch took the cup, went down the hall, washed his hands, went up the hall again, and used another cup to pour himself a drink to answer, and then handed the cup to his father-in-law. He bowed to the king, and the king bowed back.

古文：太保受同，祭，哜，宅，授宗人同，拜。
现代文：太保又从宗人那里接过酒杯，祭酒，尝酒，奠酒，然后把酒杯交给宗人，又拜。
English: The deacon also received the chalice from the patriarch, offered wine, tasted the wine, and made a libation, and then handed the chalice to the patriarch and bowed.

古文：王答拜。
现代文：王又回拜。
English: The king bowed again.

古文：太保降，收。诸侯出庙门俟。
现代文：太保走下堂，行礼结束，诸侯卿士们都走出祖庙门，恭候康王视朝。
English: Taibo walked down the hall, the salute ended, and the princes and nobles all walked out of the ancestral temple gate, waiting for King Kang to come.

