古文：孙复，字明复，晋州平阳人。举进士不第，退居泰山。
现代文：孙复，字明复，晋州平阳人，因举进士不中而退居泰山。
English: Sun Fu, also known as Ming Fu, a native of Pingyang, Jinzhou, withdrew to Mount Tai because he was not selected as a scholar.

古文：学《春秋》，著《尊王发微》十二篇，大约本于陆淳，而增新意。
现代文：他一生研究《春秋》，著有《尊王发微》十二篇，其学大抵源于陆淳，但有不少创新之意。
English: He studied "Spring and Autumn" all his life, and wrote twelve chapters of "Son of the King," most of which originated from Lu Jun, but with a lot of innovation.

古文：石介有名山东，自介而下皆以先生事复。
现代文：石介在山东有名望，但包括石介在内的许多人皆视孙复为先生。
English: Shi Jie is well-known in Shandong, but many people, including Shi Jie, regard Sun Fu as their teacher.

古文：年四十不娶。李迪知其贤，以其弟之子妻之。
现代文：孙复四十岁的时候还未娶妻，李迪深知孙复贤能，故欲将弟之女嫁给他。
English: When Sun Fu was forty years old, he had not yet married a wife. Li Di, who was well aware of Sun Fu's virtue, wanted to marry his brother's daughter to him.

古文：复初犹豫，石介与诸弟子请曰： 公卿不下士久矣，今丞相不以先生贫贱，欲托以子，宜因以成丞相之贤名。 复乃听。
现代文：孙复起初对此事犹豫不决，石介与其他弟子劝请孙复说： 公卿不礼贤下士已很久了，现在丞相李迪不嫌先生贫贱，打算以其弟之女许配先生，先生应该答应这件婚事，以成丞相之贤名。 
English: At first, Sun Fu was hesitant about the matter. Shi Jie and other disciples urged Sun Fu to say: "It has been a long time since the Kugyo disrespected the Corporal. Now the Prime Minister, Mr. Li Di, who is poor, intends to marry his brother's daughter, Mr. Xu. He should agree to the marriage and become the Prime Minister's good name."

古文：孔道辅闻复之贤，就见之，介执杖屦立侍复左右，升降拜则扶之，其往谢亦然。
现代文：孙复接受了弟子们的意见。孔道辅闻知孙复贤德，就去拜见孙复，石介执杖立于孙复身旁，且恭敬搀扶不离左右。石介任学官后，对他人说： 孙先生并非隐者。 
English: Sun Fu accepted the opinions of his disciples. Kong Daozhu, having heard of Sun Fu's virtue, went to pay homage to Sun Fu. Shi Jie held a cane and stood next to Sun Fu, and respectfully supported him from side to side. After serving as an academic, Shi Jie said to others: Mr. Sun is not a recluse.

古文：介既为学官，语人曰： 孙先生非隐者也。 于是范仲淹、富弼皆言复有经术，宜在朝廷。
现代文：于是，范仲淹、富弼等人皆言孙复有经术，适宜在朝廷任职。
English: As a result, Fan Zhongyun, Fuxi and others all said that Sun Fu had the ability to read and write and was suitable to serve in the imperial court.

古文：除秘书省校书郎、国子监直讲。
现代文：孙复因而得以出任秘书省校书郎、国子监直讲。
English: As a result, Sun Fu was able to serve as secretary, provincial school scribe, and provincial student supervisor.

古文：车驾幸太学，赐绯衣银鱼，召为迩英阁祗候说书。
现代文：皇帝车驾亲幸太学巡视，赐孙复绯衣银鱼，并召孙复为迩英阁祗候说书。
English: The emperor drove his chauffeur to inspect the school, gave Sun Fu the silver fish, and summoned Sun Fu to attend the lecture.

古文：杨安国言其讲说多异先儒，罢之。
现代文：杨安国说孙复之讲解多异于先儒之学，遂将孙复罢免。
English: Yang An Guo said that Sun Fu's explanation was much different from the previous Confucianism, so he dismissed Sun Fu.

古文：孔直温败，得所遗复诗，坐贬虔州监税，徙泗州，又知长水县，签书应天府判官事。
现代文：孔直温事败后，在其家中抄得他写给孙复的诗作，孙复因此被贬为虔州盐税，并迁往泗州，不久任长水知县、签书应天府判官事。
English: After the defeat of Kong Zhiwen, he was able to copy the poem he wrote to Sun Fu at his home. As a result, Sun Fu was reduced to the salt tax of Qianzhou, and moved to Zhangzhou. He was soon appointed as the governor of Shuichi County, and signed the document as the judge of Tianfu.

古文：通判陵州，未行，翰林学士赵概等十余人言复经为人师，不宜使佐州县。留为直讲，稍迁殿中丞，卒，赐钱十万。
现代文：后又被任命为陵州通判，孙复还未赴任，因翰林学士赵概等十余人言孙复精通经术，向为人师，不宜使佐州县做官，孙复因得以留于朝廷做直讲，稍后又升迁为殿中丞。去世时，皇帝赐钱十万于其家。
English: Later, he was appointed as the Lingzhou magistrate. However, more than ten people, including the scholar of Hanlin Zhao Zhou, said that Sun Fu was proficient in the study of Chinese classics and was a good teacher, so it was not appropriate for him to become an official in Zhouzhou County. Sun Fu was able to stay in the imperial court to give lectures, and later he was promoted to the position of palace middle-ranking official. When he died, the emperor gave 100,000 yuan to his family.

古文：复与胡瑗不合，在太学常相避。
现代文：孙复与胡瑗素不合，两人在太学相互避见。
English: Sun Fu didn't get along with Hu Jiaxin, and the two avoided each other at school.

古文：介家故贫，妻子几冻馁，富弼、韩琦共分奉买田以赡养之。有《徂徕集》行于世。
现代文：胡瑗治经不如孙复，但教养诸生强于孙复。孙复患病后，韩琦向仁宗禀报，并选书吏，给纸笔，命孙复门生祖无择就孙复家得书十五万字，誊录后藏于秘书阁。
English: After Sun Fu fell ill, Han Zheng reported to the Rinzong, and selected a scribe to give him a pen and paper. He ordered Sun Fu's disciple and progenitor to write 150,000 words for Sun Fu's family, which was recorded and then hidden in the secretary's cabinet.

古文：胡瑗，字翼之，泰州海陵人。
现代文：朝廷还特将孙复一子录用为官，以示恩宠。胡瑗字翼之，泰州海陵人。
English: The imperial court also specially appointed one of Sun Fu's sons as an official to show its favor. Hu Yao Zhi Ying Zhi, a native of Hailing, Taizhou.

古文：以经术教授吴中，年四十余。
现代文：以经术教授于吴地，达四十余年。
English: He has been teaching in Wudi for more than forty years.

古文：景祐初，更定雅乐，诏求知音者。
现代文：景祐初年，朝廷改定雅乐，下诏求通晓音律之人。
English: In the first year of the reign of King Gyeongsoo, the Imperial Court changed the definition of courtly music, and issued an edict calling for people who knew the musical notation.

古文：范仲淹荐瑗，白衣对崇政殿。
现代文：范仲淹特荐举胡瑗，胡瑗以平民的身份在崇政殿回答皇上的咨询。
English: Fan Zhongran was specially recommended to raise Hu Yao, and Hu Yao answered the emperor's inquiry in his capacity as a commoner at the Palace of Supreme State Power.

古文：与镇东军节度推官阮逸同较钟律，分造钟磬各一虡。
现代文：之后，和镇东军节度推官阮逸一同校定音律，分别铸造钟和磬各一。
English: After that, he and the commander of the Eastern Military Command, Nguyn Hi, checked the tuning and separately cast a bell and a gong.

古文：以一黍之广为分，以制尺，律径三分四厘六毫四丝，围十分三厘九毫三丝。
现代文：他以一粒黍子的长度为一分，从而制成尺，律的长度为三分四厘六毫四丝，围的直径为十分三厘九毫三丝。
English: He measured the length of a piece of dice as one minute, thus creating a ruler with a regular length of three minutes, four minutes, six milliseconds, and a circumference of one tenth of a millisecond.

古文：又以大黍累尺，小黍实龠。
现代文：又以大黍之长累而成尺，小黍之长实龠。
English: Also, the length of the big shovel is used to make a shaku, and the length of the small shovel is used to make a real shovel.

古文：丁度等以为非古制，罢之，授瑗试秘书省校书郎。
现代文：丁度等人认为胡瑗所做不合古制，故罢之不用。后授胡瑗为秘书省校书郎。
English: Just then, others thought that what Hu Yao had done was not in accordance with the old system, so it was unnecessary. Later, Hu Yao was awarded the title of secretary and provincial school scribe.

古文：范仲淹经略陕西，辟丹州推官。
现代文：当时范仲淹任陕西经略安抚副史，任胡瑗为丹丹推官。
English: At that time, Fan Zhongyan was appointed deputy governor of Shaanxi Province, and Hu Yao was appointed deputy governor of Dandan.

古文：以保宁节度推官教授湖州。瑗教人有法，科条纤悉备具，以身先之。
现代文：不久胡瑗任保宁节度推官、教授湖州，胡瑗教导学生颇有方法，制定了完备的规章制度，并能以身作则。
English: Soon, Hu Yao was appointed as the Boryeong Festival Supervisor and Professor of Huzhou. Hu Yao taught students in a very methodical way, formulated a complete set of rules and regulations, and was able to lead by example.

古文：虽盛暑，必公服坐堂上，严师弟子之礼。
现代文：即使在盛暑天也一定身着公服坐于堂上。师徒之礼甚严。
English: Even in the heat of the day, they always sit in the hall dressed in their official uniforms.

古文：视诸生如其子弟，诸生亦信爱如其父兄，从之游者常数百人。
现代文：胡瑗视学生如子弟，学生们也信任爱戴他如父兄一般。跟随他学习的常常有数百人。
English: Hu Rong regards his students as his children, and the students trust and love him as their father and brother. There are often hundreds of people studying with him.

古文：庆历中，兴太学，下湖州取其法，著为令。
现代文：庆历年间朝廷兴办太学，派人到湖州学习胡瑗教学之法，并因之制成学规。
English: During the Qing Dynasty, the imperial court set up the Taixue, sent people to Huzhou to learn the method of teaching Hu Xi, and made the school regulations accordingly.

古文：召为诸王宫教授，辞疾不行。
现代文：又召胡瑗为诸王宫教授，胡瑗称病不上任。
English: He also called Hu Yao to be the professor of Zhuo Wang Gong, but Hu Yao said that he would not take up the post due to illness.

古文：为太子中舍，以殿中丞致仕。
现代文：后做太子中舍，以殿中丞辞职。
English: Later, he became the Prince's Junior Secretary and resigned from the position of Junior Secretary.

古文：皇祐中，更铸太常钟磬，驿召瑗、逸，与近臣、太常官议于秘阁，遂典作乐事。
现代文：皇祐中期，朝廷又铸太常钟磬，派人召胡瑗、阮逸和近臣、太常官议事于秘阁，于是经常做乐事。
English: In the middle of the reign of Emperor Yu, the imperial court also created the position of Taizhong Zhongxuan, and sent people to summon Hu Yao, Ruan Yat, and close ministers and officials to discuss in the secret cabinet, so they often did fun things.

古文：复以大理评事兼太常寺主簿，辞不就。
现代文：后又以之为大理寺评事，兼任太常寺主簿，胡瑗推辞不上任。
English: Later, he was appointed as the commentator of Dali Temple, and concurrently served as the chief bookkeeper of Taiji Temple, but he did not take up the post after Hu Yao's resignation.

古文：岁余，授光禄寺丞、国子监直讲。
现代文：一年以后，授胡瑗光禄寺丞、国子监直讲。
English: A year later, he was awarded the title of Hu Yingguangluji cheng and the title of Guozhizong zhongliao.

古文：乐成，迁大理寺丞，赐绯衣银鱼。
现代文：太常钟磬铸成后，胡瑗升迁为大理寺丞，皇上赐之以绣着银鱼的红袍。
English: After the Tai Chang bell was cast, Hu Yao was promoted to Dali Temple, and the emperor gave him a red robe embroidered with silver fish.

古文：瑗既居太学，其徒益众，太学至不能容，取旁官舍处之。
现代文：胡瑗就住在太学，这时他的学生更多了，太学住不下，就租太学近旁的官舍安顿。
English: Hu Yao lived in Taixue. At that time, there were more students than he could accommodate, so he rented an official residence near Taixue and settled down.

古文：礼部所得士，瑗弟子十常居四五，随材高下，喜自修饬，衣服容止，往往相类，人遇之虽不识，皆知其瑗弟子也。
现代文：礼部所录的官员中，胡瑗的弟子常占十之四五，无论才能高下，他们皆注意修身养性，严谨自律。穿戴举止，也往往相似。别人遇见他们，即使不认识，也都知道他们是胡瑗的弟子。
English: Among the officials recorded by the Ministry of Etiquette, disciples of Hu Jia often account for 45 out of 10. Regardless of their ability, they all pay attention to physical fitness and strict self-discipline. They often dress and behave similarly. When others meet them, even if they don't know them, they know that they are disciples of Hu Jia.

古文：嘉祐初，擢太子中允、天章阁侍讲，仍治太学。
现代文：嘉初年，胡瑗擢升为太子中允、天章阁侍讲，这时他仍然管理太学。
English: In the first year of the Jia Dynasty, Hu Rong was promoted to the position of the Prince's Vice-Minister and the Assistant Lecturer of Tian Zhang Ge. At that time, he was still in charge of the Taixue.

古文：既而疾不能朝，以太常博士致仕，归老于家。诸生与朝士祖饯东门外，时以为荣。
现代文：不久，胡瑗染病不能上朝，以太常博士而辞官，告老还家，众弟子和朝廷官员在城东门外为胡瑗饯行，当时将此事传为佳话。
English: Soon after, Hu Jia fell ill and was unable to go to the imperial court. He resigned from his post and returned home at an old age. Many disciples and officials of the imperial court were waiting for Hu Jia outside the east gate of the city. At that time, the matter was passed down as a fairy tale.

古文：既卒，诏赙其家。
现代文：不久，胡瑗病终，皇上下诏厚赏其家，并帮助办理了胡瑗丧事。
English: Soon after, when Hu Yao was terminally ill, the emperor rewarded his family generously and helped to arrange Hu Yao's funeral.

