古文：天福五年春正月丁卯朔，帝御崇元殿受朝贺，仗卫如式。
现代文：天福五年春一月一日，高祖驾临崇元殿接受朝贺，仪仗侍卫按礼行事。
English: On the first day of January in the spring of the fifth year of Tianfu, Gao Zu drove to the Chongyuan Hall to receive morning greetings, and the guards of honor acted according to protocol.

古文：降德音： 应天福三年终，公私债欠，一切除放。 壬申，蜀人寇西鄙，群盗张达、任康等劫清水德铁之城以应之。
现代文：六日，蜀人侵扰西部边境，群盗张达、任康等抢劫清水德铁城相呼应。
English: On the 6th, the Shu people invaded the western border, and the bandits Zhang Da, Ren Kang and others robbed Qingshui De Tiecheng.

古文：癸酉，湖南奏，闽人杀王昶，夷其族，王延羲因民之欲而定之。
现代文：七日，湖南上奏，闽人杀死王昶，诛灭了他家族，王延羲按照人民的要求，平定了动乱。
English: On the seventh day, Hunan was at war. The Jurchens killed Wang Yao and wiped out his family. Wang Yanzhong, in accordance with the demands of the people, quelled the turmoil.

古文：甲戌，遣宣徽使杨彦询使于契丹。
现代文：八日，派宣徽使杨彦询出使契丹。
English: On the 8th, he sent Xuan Hui to ask Yang Yan to send the envoy Qidan.

古文：辛巳，皇子开封尹、郑王重贵加检校太尉。
现代文：十五日，皇子开封尹、郑王石重贵加封检校太尉。
English: On the 15th, the prince Kaifeng Yin and Zheng Wangshi Chonggui were promoted to the rank of lieutenant.

古文：己丑，回鹘可汗仁美遣使贡良马白玉，谢册命也。
现代文：二十三日，回鹘可汗杨仁美派遣使臣进贡良马白玉，是为了感谢高祖的册封。
English: On the 23rd, Hui Khan Yang Renmei sent an envoy to pay tribute to Liangma Baiyu, in order to thank Gao Zu for his investiture.

古文：窃惟礼例，有所未安。今欲请宰臣仍旧跪炉，百僚依班序立。 诏可之，仍令行香之后饭僧百人，永为定制。
现代文：二十四日，任命二王后代原右赞善大夫、承袭阝国公爵位的杨延寿为太子左谕德，三恪汝州襄城县县令、承袭介国公爵位的宇文颉加赐领地三千户。二十五日，把降州升格为防御州。三十日，河中节度使安审信上奏： 军校康从受、李崇、孙大裕、张崇、于千等率领所属军队发动叛乱，不久，平定了叛乱，杀死了近五百人。 
English: On the 24th, Yang Yan Shou, a descendant of the two emperors, was appointed as the prince's left-hand man. On the 3rd, the county magistrate of Yangcheng County, Yuzhou Province, and the duke of Yunnan Province, Uwen Xiga, were appointed as the prince's right-hand man. On the 25th, the relegated province was upgraded to a defensive province. On the 30th, the Henan Provincial Party Committee sent a letter to the Supreme People's Procuratorate of the People's Republic of China: The military school of Kangzhongju, Li Chong, Sun Dayu, Zhang Chong

古文：庚戌，北京留守安彦威来朝，帝慰接甚厚，赐上樽酒。
现代文：二月一日，沙州归义军节度使曹义金去世，追赠为太师，让他儿子曹元德承袭他的职位。十四日，北京留守安彦威来京朝拜，高祖慰问接待非常丰厚，赏赐上等酒。
English: On February 1, the Day of the Return of Shazhou to the Allies, Cao Yijin passed away and was posthumously awarded the title of Grand Master, and his son Cao Yuande succeeded him. On the 14th, An Yanwei, who had stayed in Beijing, came to Beijing to pay homage. Gao Zu received a very rich condolence reception and was rewarded with fine wine.

古文：壬子，升中书门下平章事为正二品。
现代文：十六日，把中书门下平章事提升为正二品官。
English: On the 16th, he promoted Zhongshumen Shimo Pingzhang to Senior Second Rank Officer.

古文：丁巳，青州节度使、东平王王建立来朝。
现代文：二十一日，清州节度使、东平王王建立进京朝拜。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, the Qingzhou Festival envoy, Dongping Wang Wang, arrived in Beijing to pay homage.

古文：己未，以中书门下侍郎为清望正三品，谏议大夫、御史中丞为清望正四品。
现代文：二十三日，把中书门下侍郎定为清望正三品，谏议大夫、御史中丞定为清望正四品。
English: On the 23rd, the junior attendant of the chushomon gate was designated as Seibo Shosanbon, and the doctor of the imperial court and the junior secretary of the imperial court were designated as Seibo Shosanbon.

古文：甲戌，以给事中李光廷为左散骑常侍，亳州团练使李式为给事中。乙亥，相州节度使桑维翰加检校司徒，改兗州节度使。许州节度使杜重威改郓州节度使，河中节度使安审信改许州节度使。
现代文：三月六日，颁令在朝官员看望父母，按照后唐明宗天成年间体例颁赐茶药。七日，任命青州节度使王建立为昭义军节度使，进封为韩王，又割辽、泌二州为昭义附属郡，是因为王建立本是辽州人，以此成就他衣锦回乡之美。这天，容州节度使马存去世。
English: On March 6th, an order was issued for officials to visit their parents in the DPRK, and tea medicine was given in accordance with the practice of the adult age of the post-Tang Ming Zong Tian. On the 7th, the Qingzhou Festival appointed Wang Jian as the festival envoy of the Shouyi Army, Jinfeng as the Han King, and divided Liao and Jie two counties as Shouyi affiliated counties, because Wang Jian was originally from Liaozhou, thus achieving the beauty of his homecoming. On this day, the Yongzhou Festival caused Ma Cun to pass away.

古文：是以大朝会宰臣承旨，草制诏学士承旨，若无区别，何表等威？
现代文：十一日，长安公主嫁给驸马都尉杨承祚。十五日，湖南派牙将刘京力率领军队大破溪流山峒各少数民族，收复溪、锦、奖三州。二十四日，高祖驾临明德楼，为昭义军节度使王建立饯别送行，赏给他玉斧、蜀马。
English: On the 11th day, Princess Chang'an was married to Lieutenant Yang Chengyao. On the 15th day, Hunan sent Liu Jingli to lead the army to break the streams, mountains and ethnic minorities to recover the streams, brocades and prizes of the three states. On the 24th day, Gao Zu drove to the Linmingde Building to see Wang Jianwei off for the Shouyi Army Festival, and awarded him a jade axe and a Shuma horse.

古文：除翰林承旨外，殿前承旨宜改为殿直；密院承旨宜改为承宣；御史台、三司、阁门、客省所有承旨，并令别定其名。 
现代文：夏四月一日，高祖在永福殿宴请百官。三日，曹州防御使石晖去世，他是高祖堂弟。四日，废止洛阳、京兆进献苑囿瓜菜果品，是为了爱惜劳动人民。
English: On the third day, the defense of Caozhou led to the death of Shi Yan, who was Gao Zu's cousin. On the fourth day, Luoyang and Jingzhaojin were abolished in order to spare the working people.

古文：庚戌，以沧州节度使马全节为安州节度使。
现代文：七日，以右仆射辞官退隐的裴白皋去世，追赠为太子太保。
English: On the seventh day, Pei Baekhyun, who had retired from the priesthood after shooting his right-hand man, died and was posthumously given the title of crown prince.

古文：礼部侍郎张允奏，请废明经、童子科。
现代文：十五日，礼部侍郎张允上奏，请求废除明经童子科。
English: On the 15th, Zhang Yun, the attendant of the Ministry of Ceremonies, made a speech, requesting the abolition of the Mingjing Children's Department.

古文：从之。
现代文：高祖应允了。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：因诏宏词、拔萃、明算、道举、百篇等科并停之。
现代文：因此下令让宏词、拔萃、明算、道举、百篇等科一起停考。
English: Therefore, it was ordered to suspend the examination of the subjects such as "Hong Ci," "Be outstanding," "Ming Calculation," "Dao Zhu" and "Hundred Essays."

古文：五月癸酉，宋州贡瑞麦两歧。
现代文：五月八日，宋州进献吉祥的双头穗麦。
English: On May 8th, Songzhou presented the auspicious double-headed ears of wheat.

古文：甲申，以前徐州节度使苌从简为右金吾卫上将军。丙戌，安州节度使李金全叛，诏新授安州节度使马全节以洛、汴、汝、郑、单、宋、陈、蔡、曹、濮十州之兵讨之。
现代文：二十一日，安州节度使李金全叛乱，诏令新任安州节度使马全节率领洛、汴、汝、郑、单、宋、陈、蔡、曹、濮州的军队讨伐李金全。
English: On the twenty-first day of the year, the Anzhou Sect rebelled against Li Jinquan, and ordered the newly appointed Anzhou Sect to send Ma Quanse to lead the armies of Luo, Yao, Ru, Zheng, Shan, Song, Chen, Cai, Cao, and Zhangzhou to fight against Li Jinquan.

古文：以前鄜州节度使安审晖为副，以内客省使李守贞为都监，仍遣供奉官刘彦瑶奉诏以谕金全。
现代文：任命原鹿阝州节度使安审晖为副帅，任命内客省使李守贞为都监，又派供奉官刘彦瑶奉高祖诏书去明示李金全。
English: He appointed the former Luye Prefecture governor to be the vice-commander, the provincial governor of Neihu to be the inspector of the capital, and sent the official Liu Yanyan to send the imperial rescript to Li Jinquan.

古文：命麾下齐谦以诏送于淮夷，云梦人齐岘斩谦，归其诏于阙。
现代文：李金全命部下齐谦把诏书送往淮夷，云梦人齐岘斩杀了齐谦，把诏书送回了朝廷。
English: Li Jinquan ordered his subordinate Qi Qian to send the edict to Huaiyi, and the dreamer Qi Jun killed Qi Qian and sent the edict back to the imperial court.

古文：壬寅，壬寅上疑脱 六月 二字。少府监致仕尹玉羽卒。
现代文：二十六日，昭义节度使韩王王建立去世，停止上朝二天，册赠为尚书令。六月八日，以少府监辞官退隐的尹玉羽去世。
English: On the 26th, the Shouyi Festival caused the death of Han Wang Wang, stopping the ascension to the throne for two days, and the book was presented as an imperial edict. On June 8, Yin Yuyu, who retired as a minor prefectural magistrate, died.

古文：癸卯，淮南使李承裕代李金全，金全南走，承裕以淮兵二千守其城。
现代文：九日，淮南派李承裕取代李金全，李金全向南逃奔，李承裕率二千淮兵护守城池。
English: On the 9th, Huainan sent Li Chengyu to replace Li Jinquan, Li Jinquan fled to the south, and Li Chengyu led two thousand Huai soldiers to guard the city.

古文：甲辰，马全节自应山县进军于大化镇。
现代文：十日，马全节从应山县进攻到大化镇。
English: On the 10th, Ma Quanzhong attacked from Yingshan County to Dahua Town.

古文：戊申，与鄂州贼军阵于安陆之南，三战而后克之，斩首三千级，生擒千余人。
现代文：十四日，与鄂州叛军在安陆的南边摆开阵式，经过三场战斗后打败了叛军，斩杀叛军三千多人，活捉一千多人。
English: On the 14th, he and the Huzhou rebels set up a formation on the south side of Anlu. After three battles, they defeated the rebels, killed more than 3,000 rebels, and captured more than 1,000 alive.

古文：供奉官安友谦登锋力战，奋不顾身。全节赏其忠勇，使驰献捷书，暍死于路。
现代文：供奉官安友谦冒着刀锋箭矢，尽力作战，奋不顾身，马全节赞赏他的忠诚勇敢，派快马进京告捷，马中暑死在路上。
English: The offering official, An Youqian, braved the sword and arrow, fought as hard as he could, and risked his life. Ma Quanzhong appreciated his loyalty and bravery, sent a fast horse to Beijing and achieved success, and the horse died of heatstroke on the way.

古文：是日，削夺李金全官爵。
现代文：这天，朝廷削除剥夺了李金全的官职爵位。
English: On this day, the imperial court stripped Li Jinquan of his official title and knighthood.

古文：丁巳，淮夷伪校李承裕率众掠城中资货而遁，马全节入城抚其遗民，遣安审晖率兵以逐承裕，擒而斩之。
现代文：二十三日，淮夷伪将李承裕带领叛军抢劫城里钱财后逃出城外，马全节入城安抚留下的百姓，派遣安审晖率领军队追击李承裕，抓获并斩杀了他。
English: On the 23rd, after Huaiyipo Li Chengyu led the rebels to rob the city's money and fled outside the city, Ma Quanzhong entered the city to appease the people left behind, dispatched An Ji and led the army to pursue Li Chengyu, captured and killed him.

古文：执其伪都监杜光鄴，及淮南军五百余人，露布献于阙下。
现代文：抓住他的都监杜光邺以及淮南士兵五百多人，随捷报献于朝廷。
English: Du Guangyao, the governor of the capital, and more than 500 soldiers from Huainan captured him and presented him to the imperial court.

古文：帝曰：此辈何罪，皆厚给放还。
现代文：高祖说： 这些人有何罪过，都发给丰厚的盘缠放归故里。 
English: Gao Zu said: What are the sins of these people, they are all given a rich dish to wrap up and return to their hometowns.

古文：癸亥，道士崇真大师张荐明赐号通元先生。
现代文：二十九日，道士崇真大师张荐明被封赐名号叫通玄先生。
English: On the 29th, the Taoist Master Chongzhen Zhang Jiaming was given the title of Mr. Tong Xuan.

古文：是时帝好《道德经》，尝召荐明讲说其义，帝悦，故有是命。
现代文：这时，高祖爱好《道德经》，曾经传召张荐明讲解阐释它的意义，高祖高兴，所以有此敕令。
English: At this time, Gaozu was fond of the Tao Te Ching and had summoned Zhang Ximing to explain and interpret its meaning. Gaozu was pleased, so there was this edict.

古文：寻令荐明以《道》、《德》二经雕上印版，命学士和凝别撰新序，冠于卷首，俾颁行天下。
现代文：不久，又让张荐明把《道》、《德》二经雕刻在印板上，让学士和凝另外撰写新的序言，放在书的开头，使它在全国颁布流行。
English: Not long after, he also asked Zhang Riminming to engrave the "Tao" and "De" sutras on the printing plate, and let the bachelor He Jian separately write a new preface and put it at the beginning of the book, so that it could be promulgated and popular throughout the country.

古文：秋七月甲子朔，降安州为防御使额，以申州隶许州。
现代文：秋七月一日，把安州降格为防御使级别，把申州归属许州。
English: On the first day of autumn in July, Anzhou was downgraded to the level of defense, and Shenzhou was assigned to Huzhou.

古文：丙寅，安州节度使马全节加检校太尉，改昭义军节度使。
现代文：三日，安州节度使马全节加封检校太尉，调任昭义军节度使。
English: On the third day, the Anzhou Festival envoy Ma Quanzhong was awarded the rank of lieutenant and transferred to the Shao Yi Army Festival envoy.

古文：前鄜州节度使安审晖加检校太傅，为威胜军节度使。
现代文：原鹿阝州节度使安审晖加封检校太傅，任威胜军节度使。
English: Formerly, the Lugu County Festival Committee was in charge of security inspection, seal inspection and inspection, and was appointed as the festival committee of the victorious army.

古文：己亥，详定院以先奉诏详定冬正朝会礼节、乐章、二舞行列等事上之，事具《乐志》。
现代文：四日，湖南上奏：已派遣天策府步骑兵将领张少敌率领五万军队，一百艘战船，驻扎在岳阳，准备进击讨伐淮夷。十二日，以户部尚书辞官退隐的郑韬光去世，追赠为右仆射。
English: On the 4th, Hunan reported: Zhang Shaoqi, the leader of the Tianzefu infantry cavalry, had been dispatched to lead 50,000 troops and 100 warships, stationed in Yueyang, ready to attack Huaiyi. On the 12th, Zheng Bingguang, who had retired as the official of the household department, passed away, and was posthumously awarded the title of right-hand man.

古文：庚子，以前金州防御使田武为金州怀德军节度使。
现代文：十五日，福州王延羲派遣商人抄小路纳贡上表述职。
English: On the fifteenth day, Fuzhou Wang Yanqi sent merchants to collect road tolls and report their duties.

古文：辛丑，升复、郢二郡为防御使额。
现代文：八月四日，高祖到西郊考察庄稼情况。
English: On August 4, Gaozu went to the western suburbs to inspect the crop situation.

古文：戊午，左龙武统军相里金卒，废朝一日，赠太师。
现代文：六日，详定院把先前奉旨详密审定的冬正朝会礼节、乐章、二舞行列等事上奉高祖，事情全部记载在《乐志》里。八日，把复、郢二郡升格为防御使级别。
English: On the 6th, the Detailed Decision-Making Institute honored Gao Zu in matters such as the etiquette, music, and two-dance procession of the Winter Zheng Dynasty Reunion, which had been previously approved in detail by order, and all matters were recorded in the "Music History." On the 8th, Fuzhou and Handan two counties were upgraded to the level of defense.

古文：己未，太子太师致仕范延光卒于河阳，废朝二日，赠太师。
现代文：二十五日，左龙武统军相里金去世，停止上朝一天，追赠为太师。二十六日，以太子太师辞官退隐的范延光在河阳去世，停止上朝二天，追赠为太师。
English: On the 25th, Li Jin, the minister of the Left Dragon Military Unification Army, passed away, and the enthronement ceremony was suspended for one day, and he was posthumously awarded the title of grandmaster. On the 26th, Fan Yanguang, the retired grandmaster, passed away in Heyang, and the enthronement ceremony was suspended for two days, and he was posthumously awarded the title of grandmaster.

古文：丁卯，宰臣李崧加集贤殿大学士，以翰林学士承旨、户部侍郎和凝为中书侍郎、平章事。
现代文：九月五日，宰相李崧加封集贤殿大学士，任命翰林学士承旨、户部侍郎和凝为中书侍郎平章事。
English: On September 5th, the Prime Minister Li Yifeng gathered the scholars of Xianden University and appointed the scholar Hanlin Zongji, the attendant of the household and the attendant of the middle school, the attendant of the household, and the attendant of the middle school, the attendant of the household, and the attendant of the middle school, the attendant of the household.

古文：冬十月丁酉，制：天下兵马元帅、镇海镇东浙江东西等道节度使、中书令、吴越王钱元瓘加守中书令，充天下兵马都元帅。
现代文：九月十四日，废除翰林学士院，所属事务全并归于中书舍人。冬十月五日，高祖下令：天下兵马元帅、镇海、镇东、浙江、东西等道节度使，中书令、吴越王钱元馞加任尚书令，担任天下兵马总元帅。
English: On September 14th, the Hanlin Academy was abolished, and all of its affairs were transferred to the General Secretary of the CPC Central Committee. On October 5th, Gaozu issued an order: the General Secretary of the CPC Central Committee, the General Secretary of the CPC Central Committee, the General Secretary of the CPC Central Committee, the General Secretary of the CPC Central Committee, the General Secretary of the CPC Central Committee, the General Secretary of the CPC Central Committee, the General Secretary of the CPC Central Committee, the General Secretary of the CPC Central Committee, the General Secretary of the CPC Central Committee, the General Secretary of the CPC Central Committee, the General Secretary of the CPC Central Committee, and the General Secretary of the CPC Central Committee

古文：戊戌，户部尚书姚顗卒，废朝一日，赠右仆射。
现代文：六日，户部尚书姚岂页去世，停止上朝一天，追赠为仆射。
English: On the sixth day, the head of the household, Shangshu Yao, passed away, and stopped being the emperor for one day. He was posthumously awarded the title of minstrel.

古文：癸卯，湖南上言：福建王延义与弟延政互起干戈，内相侵伐。
现代文：十一日，湖南上奏：福建王延羲与他弟弟王延政发生战争，内部互相进攻讨伐。
English: On the 11th day, Hunan reported: Fujian Wang Yanjun and his brother Wang Yanzheng had a war, and they attacked each other internally.

古文：甲辰，升莱州为防御使额，以汝州防御使杨承贵领之。
现代文：十二日，把莱州升格为防御使级别，任命汝州防御使杨承贵统领它。
English: On the 12th, he upgraded Laizhou to the level of defense, and appointed Yang Chenggui, the defense minister of Ruzhou, to lead it.

古文：以新授莱州刺史段希尧为怀州刺史。
现代文：以新任命的莱州刺史段希尧为怀州刺史。
English: The newly-appointed Laizhou magistrate Xiyu will serve as the chief magistrate of Waizhou.

古文：丙子，冬至，帝御崇元殿受朝贺，始用二舞。
现代文：追赠为太子太傅。十五日，是冬至日，高祖驾临崇元殿接受朝贺，开始使用二舞仪礼。
English: On the fifteenth day, which was the winter solstice, Gao Zu came to the Chongyuan Hall to receive morning greetings and began to use the two-dance ritual.

古文：帝举觞，奏《元同之乐》；登歌，奏《文同之乐》；举食，文舞奏《昭德之舞》，武舞奏《成功之舞》。
现代文：高祖举杯，演奏《玄同之乐》；升堂奏歌，演奏《文同之乐》；开始进食，文舞歌唱《昭德之舞》，武舞歌唱《成功之舞》。
English: Gao Zu raised his glass and played "The Music of Xuan Tong"; sang songs in the hall and played "The Music of Wen Tong"; began to eat, singing "The Dance of Zhao De" in the Wen dance and "The Dance of Success" in the Wu dance.

古文：典礼久废，至是复兴，观者悦之。
现代文：典章礼制长久废弃，到这时又复起，观看的人都高兴愉快。
English: The ceremonial system, long abandoned, was revived at this time, and everyone watching was happy and joyful.

古文：丁丑，吴越国进奉使陈元亮进《冬日观仗诗》一首，帝览之称善，赐服马器币。
现代文：十六日，吴越国进奉使陈元亮进献一首《冬日观仗诗》，高祖看后称赞写得好，赏赐给他服饰、马匹、器用、钱币。
English: On the 16th, Wu Yue Guo Jin sent Chen Yuanliang to present a poem "Winter View of the War," Gao Zu praised it as well written after reading it, and rewarded him with clothing, horses, dexterity, and coins.

古文：丙申，诏：故静海军兼东南面安抚制置使、检校太傅、温州刺史钱宏巽赠太子太傅，故吴越两军节度副使、检校太尉钱宏僔赠太子太师。
现代文：二十二日，迁移德州长河县，是因为洪水泛滥的缘故。二十三日，诏令任命闽国王延羲为检校太师、兼中书令、福州威武军节度使，册封为闽国王。二十六日，划出卫州黎阳县归入滑州。
English: On the 22nd, the relocation of Dezhou to Changhe County was due to flooding. On the 23rd, the imperial edict appointed the king of Wei, Yan Xuan, as the inspector of schools, and also the secretary of Chinese calligraphy, and the festival envoy of the Fuzhou Weiwu army, and he was canonized as the king of Wei. On the 26th, the county of Weizhou, Liyang County, was transferred to Luzhou.

古文：天福六年春正月辛酉朔，帝御崇元殿受朝贺，仗卫如式。
现代文：天福六年春正月一日，高祖驾临崇元殿接受朝贺，仪仗侍卫按礼行事。
English: On the first day of the first month of spring in the sixth year of Tianfu, Gao Zu drove to the Chongyuan Hall to receive morning greetings, and the guards of honor acted according to etiquette.

古文：刑部员外郎李象上《二舞赋》，帝览而嘉之，命编诸史册。
现代文：刑部员外郎李象上呈《二舞赋》，高祖看后给予赞赏，诏令编入史册。
English: Gaozu's younger brother Li Xiang, a member of the criminal investigation department, presented Gaozu with "Two Dances," which Gaozu appreciated, and the edict went down in history.

古文：甲子，同州指挥使成殷谋乱，事泄伏诛。
现代文：六日，同州指挥使成殷密谋叛乱的事情败露，被诛杀。
English: On the 6th day of the month, the commander of the same prefecture revealed that Cheng Yin was plotting a rebellion and was beaten to death.

古文：时节度使宋彦筠御下无恩，既贪且鄙，故殷与子彦璋阴构部下为乱，会有告者，遂灭其党。
现代文：当时，节度使宋彦筠统治同州不施恩惠，既贪婪又鄙陋，所以成殷与他的儿子暗地里勾结部下，准备叛乱，碰上有人告密，于是消灭了他的徒党。
English: At that time, Song Yanxuan ruled the same state without favor, both greedy and despicable, so Cheng Yin and his son secretly colluded with his subordinates to prepare a rebellion. When someone informed him, he eliminated his clique.

古文：乙丑，青州奏，海冻百余里。
现代文：五日，青州上奏，海面冰冻一百多里。
English: On the fifth day, Qingzhou played the first game, and the sea was frozen for more than a hundred miles.

古文：丙寅，遣供奉官张澄等领兵二千，发并、镇、忻、代四州山谷吐浑，令还旧地。
现代文：四月，派遣供奉官张澄等率领二千士兵，遣送并、镇、忻、代四州山谷间的吐谷浑，让他们回到原来的地方去。
English: In April, 2,000 soldiers led by Zhang Cheng, a tributary official, were sent to Tuyagun, which is located in the valley of Nian, Zhen, Handan, and Dayi in Shizhou, to let them return to their original places.

古文：壬申，以左司郎中赵上交为谏议大夫。戊寅，封唐叔虞为兴安王，台骀神为昌宁公，差给事中张彖、户部郎中张守素就行册礼。
现代文：在此之前，吐谷浑苦于契丹的暴虐，受镇州安重荣的诱降召示，叛变契丹向南迁移，进入常山、太原二府境内，高祖因契丹是友好国家，所以派人送他们回去。十八日，册封唐叔虞为兴安王，台骀神为昌宁公，派给事中张蠪、户部郎中张守素举行册封礼仪。
English: Prior to this, Tugu had been suffering from the tyranny of the Khitan, and had been lured and summoned by Zhenzhou An Chongrong. The renegade Khitan had migrated south and entered the territory of Changshan and Taiyuan two provinces. Gao Zu sent people to send them back because the Khitan was a friendly country. On the 18th, Tang Shugu was named King of Xingan, and the god of Taizhou was named Lord of Changning. He sent Zhang Ye and the head of the household, Zhang Shousu, to hold the ceremony.

古文：又诏：岳镇海渎等庙宇，并令崇饰，仍禁樵采。
现代文：又诏令：山海州镇等处寺庙，均令装饰修葺，并禁止在附近打柴采摘。
English: It was also decreed that all temples in Shanhaizhou Town and other places should be decorated and repaired, and it was forbidden to collect firewood in the vicinity.

古文：丙戌，故皇第二叔检校司徒万友赠太师，皇第三叔检校司空万铨赠太尉，皇兄故检校左仆射敬儒赠太傅。
现代文：二十六日，高祖二叔、检校司徒石万友追赠为太师，三叔、检校司空石万铨追赠为太尉，哥哥、原检校左仆射石敬儒追赠为太傅。
English: On the 26th, Gao Zu's second uncle, school inspector Shishi Wanyu, was posthumously awarded the title of grandmaster, his third uncle, school inspector Kuishi Wanyu, was posthumously awarded the title of lieutenant, and his older brother, former school inspector Saishi Keiju, was posthumously awarded the title of grandmaster.

古文：二月辛卯，诏： 天下郡县，不得以天和节禁屠宰，辄滞刑狱。 
现代文：二月一日，高祖下令： 天下郡治县衙，不得因天和节禁止屠宰牲畜，擅自停滞行刑断案。 
English: On February 1st, Gaozu issued an order: All counties in the country shall be governed by the county magistrate. It is not allowed to prohibit the slaughter of livestock because of Tianhe Festival, and it is not allowed to arbitrarily suspend the execution of the case.

古文：臣今搜访遗闻及耆旧传说，编成六十五卷，目为《唐朝补遗录》，以备将来史馆修述。 
现代文：二日，在德胜口设置浮桥。四日，高祖又颁令： 各禁卫上将军每月薪俸原是三十千，现增加到五十千。 九日，诏令户部侍郎张昭远、超居郎贾纬、秘书少监赵熙、吏部郎中郑受益、左司员外郎李为光等共同编修《唐史》，又命宰臣赵莹监修。
English: On the second day, a floating bridge was set up at Deshengkou. On the fourth day, Gao Zu also issued an order: the monthly salary of each general of the imperial guards was originally thirty thousand, but has now been increased to fifty thousand. On the ninth day, he ordered the household servant Zhang Zhaoyuan, the super-custodian Jia Wei, the secretary and junior supervisor Zhao Xi, the clerk's son-in-law Zheng Benefici, and the left-hand clerk's son-in-law Li Weiguang to jointly edit "Tang History," and also ordered the vice-minister Zhao Ying to supervise.

古文：癸丑，长安公主薨，帝之长女也，笄年降于驸马杨承祚。
现代文：十八日，诏令侯伯们进京朝拜，君臣相见，凡赐宴进贡，以后应当废止。
English: On the 18th, the imperial edict decreed that courtiers should enter the capital to pay homage, that princes and ministers should meet, and that anyone who gave a banquet should pay tribute.

古文：帝悼惜之甚，辍视朝二日，追赠秦国公主。
现代文：起居郎贾玮把他编撰的《唐年补录》六十五卷上呈高祖，高祖阅览后深为赞叹，赐给器具布币，又交给史馆保存。
English: On the sixty-fifth volume of the "Tang Year Supplement" compiled by Kijiro Jiaqi, Gao Zu was presented. After reading, Gao Zu was deeply impressed, gave cloth coins to the utensils, and handed them over to the history museum for preservation.

古文：三月甲子，河中节度使康福进封许国公。
现代文：二十三日，长安公主去世，她是高祖的大女儿，成年时嫁给了驸马杨承祚，高祖非常悲痛悼惜，停止上朝二天，追赠为秦国公主。
English: On the 23rd, Princess Chang'an passed away. She was the eldest daughter of Emperor Gaozu. She was married to Prince Yangcheng when she was an adult. Emperor Gaozu was very sad and mourned her death. She was posthumously awarded the title of Princess of Qin for two days.

古文：乙丑，左骁卫上将军李承约卒。
现代文：三月五日，左骁卫上将军李承约去世。
English: On March 5, General of the Left Division of the National Guard Li Chengyo passed away.

古文：癸酉，诏天福四年终已前，百姓所欠夏秋租税，一切除放。
现代文：十三日诏令： 凡天福四年底以前，老百姓所欠交的夏秋两季的租税，全部免除。 
English: Decree on the 13th: Before the end of the fourth year of Tianfu, all taxes owed by the common people for the summer and autumn seasons will be completely exempted.

古文：夏四月庚寅朔，湖南奏，溪州刺史彭士愁、五溪酋长等乞降，已立铜柱于溪州，铸誓状于其上，以《五溪铜柱图》上之。
现代文：夏四月一日，湖南上奏，溪州刺史彭士愁、五溪酋长等请求投降，并在溪州建立了铜柱，上面铸刻了誓词，把玉溪铜柱图上呈给高祖。
English: On the first day of April in summer, when Hunan was at war, the chiefs of Wuxi and Pengshicou in Xizhou asked for surrender, and set up a bronze pillar in Xizhou, engraved the oath on it, and presented the bronze pillar map of Yuxi to Gaozu.

古文：辛丑，宰臣监修国史赵莹奏： 奉诏差张昭远等五人同修唐史，内起居郎贾纬丁忧去官，请以刑部侍郎吕琦、侍御史尹拙同与编修。 
现代文：七日，下令显义军指挥使刘康把他手下的五百士兵放回淮海，这些士兵就是在安州俘获的。十二日，宰臣监修国史赵莹上奏 ：奉旨派遣张昭远等五人共同修编《唐史》，内起居郎贾纬碰上丧事离官，请任命刑部侍郎吕琦、侍御史尹拙一起参与编修。 
English: On the 7th, the commander of the Xianyi Army ordered Liu Kang to release the 500 soldiers under his command back to Huaihai. These soldiers were captured in Anzhou. On the 12th, Zhao Ying, the vice-minister supervising the national history, made the following announcement: On instructions, he sent Zhang Zhaoyuan and five other people to jointly edit the "History of Tang Dynasty." When Jia Wei, a member of the imperial court, died and left his post, he asked for the appointment of Lv Ying, an attendant of the criminal department, and Yin Zhuo, an attendant of the imperial court, to participate in the editing.

古文：乙巳，齐、鲁民饥，诏兗、郓、青三州发廪赈贷。
现代文：又上奏 ：史馆所缺少的唐朝实录，请求下令采购索求。 
English: Another announcement was made: the Tang Dynasty's actual records, which were missing from the history museum, were found, and a request was made to purchase them.

古文：五月庚申朔，以前邢州节度使丁审琪为延州节度使，延州节度使刘景严为邠州节度使。故皇子杲册赠太尉，进封陈王。
现代文：高祖一并应允了。十六日，齐、鲁一带百姓碰上饥荒，诏令兖、郓、青三州打开粮仓赈济灾民。五月一日，已故皇子石杲册封追赠为太尉，进爵封为陈王。
English: On the 16th, the people in the Qi and Lu regions were hit by famine, and the emperor ordered the three states of Qi, Qi, and Qing to open grain silos to help the victims. On May 1, the late prince Shisheng was posthumously awarded the title of captain, and the title of knight was awarded to King Chen.

古文：庚午，泾州奏，雨雹，川水大溢，坏州郡镇戍二十四城。
现代文：十一日，泾州上奏，下了冰雹，川谷河流暴涨溢出堤外，冲坏泾州郡镇二十四座城池。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Luzhou was hit by hailstorms, and the valley river overflowed its banks, destroying 24 cities and towns in Luzhou County.

古文：六月丙申，以前卫尉卿赵延乂为司天监。丁酉，诏： 今后籓侯郡守，凡有善政，委倅贰官条件闻奏，百姓官吏等不必远诣京阙。 
现代文：十五日，北京派牙将刘从带领吐谷浑大头领白承福、念庞里、赫连功德来京朝拜。邢州上奏：吐谷浑把他的部族迁徙到镇州领地。六月八日，诏令： 今后藩、郡主管，凡有善政，委派副职条列上奏，百姓官吏等不准远赴京城。 
English: On the 15th, Beijing sent Liu Zha to Beijing to pay homage to Bai Chengfu, Nian Pangli, and Helian Gongde, led by the head of the Tuyuan Hun clan. Zhengzhou report: Tuyuan Hun moved his tribe to the territory of Zhenzhou. On June 8th, the imperial decree: In the future, the heads of the clan and county, if there is good governance, will appoint deputy positions to report, and the people and officials will not be allowed to go far to Beijing.

古文：壬寅，右领卫上将军李顷卒，赠太师。
现代文：十三日，右领卫上将军李顷去世，追赠为太师。
English: On the 13th, the right wing guard, General Li Hao, passed away and was posthumously awarded the title of Grand Master.

古文：甲辰，迦叶弥陀国僧室哩以佛牙泛海而至。
现代文：十五日，迦叶弥陀国僧人口室哩带着佛牙渡海来到朝廷。
English: On the fifteenth day of the month, the chief priest of the nation of Kāyāmīdā went across the sea to the imperial court with the Buddha's tooth.

古文：丙午，高丽国王王建加开府仪同三司、检校太师，食邑一万户。
现代文：十七日，高丽国王建增授开府仪同三司、检校太师，赏赐领地一万户。
English: On the 17th, King Jian Zeng of Goryeo bestowed the title of Kaifu, the title of Sanji, and the title of Kengyo Taishi, and awarded 10,000 households with territory.

古文：戊午，镇州节度使安重荣执契丹使伊喇，遣轻骑掠幽州南境之民，处于博野。仍贡表及驰书天下，述契丹援天子父事之礼，贪傲无厌，困耗中国，已缮治甲兵，将与决战。
现代文：二十九日，镇州节度使安重荣抓获契丹使臣拽刺，并派遣轻捷骑兵抢劫幽州南部的老百姓，驻扎在博野，又上表并传书布告天下，陈述契丹援引天子统治天下的礼仪，贪婪傲慢没有满足，困扰亏耗中原，已修缮了甲胄兵器，将与中原展开决战。
English: On the 29th, the Zhenzhou Festival enabled An Chong Rong to capture the Khitan envoys, and dispatched light cavalry to rob the people in the south of Yuzhou, stationed in Bono. He also issued and sent a book to announce to the world, stating that the Khitan invoked the etiquette of ruling the world, greed and arrogance were not satisfied, plagued the loss of the Central Plains, had repaired the armor and weapons, and would launch a decisive battle with the Central Plains.

古文：帝发谕止之。重荣跋扈愈甚，由是与襄州节度使安从进潜相构谋为不轨。
现代文：高祖发出诏谕去阻止安重荣，安重荣专横跋扈更加厉害，因此，与襄州节度使安从进暗地里相互勾结图谋不轨。
English: Gaozu issued an edict to stop An Chongrong, and An Chongrong's tyranny became even more severe. Therefore, he and Xiangzhou Jiedu made An Zong secretly collude with each other to plot.

