古文：缅国为西南夷，不知何种。
现代文：缅国为西南夷，不知何人种。
English: I don't know how many kinds of cucumbers there are in Myanmar.

古文：其地有接大理及去成都不远者，又不知其方几里也。
现代文：其地接近大理，离成都不远，但不知其整个面积有多大。
English: It is close to Dali and not far from Chengdu, but I don't know how big its entire area is.

古文：其人有城郭屋庐以居，有象马以乘，舟筏以济。
现代文：缅有城郭屋庐可住，有象马、舟筏可乘。
English: There are castle houses to live in, elephants and horses, and boats to ride.

古文：其文字进上者，用金叶写之，次用纸，又次用槟榔叶，盖腾译而后通也。
现代文：其奏表有用金叶写的，也有用纸、槟榔叶写的，需翻译以后，才能看懂。
English: Its musical score is written in gold leaf, as well as in paper and betel leaf, and needs to be translated before it can be understood.

古文：世祖至元八年，大理、鄯阐等路宣慰司都元帅府遣乞脱因等使缅国，招谕其主内附。
现代文：世祖至元八年，大理、鄯阐等路宣慰司都元帅府遣乞脱因等出使缅国，欲说服缅国国王归附元朝。
English: In the eighth year of the Yuan Dynasty, Dali, Zou Ying and other emissaries were sent to Burma by the Consolation Division of the Generalissimo's Office to persuade the King of Burma to join the Yuan Dynasty.

古文：四月，乞脱因等导其使价博来，以闻。
现代文：四月，据都元帅府给朝廷的报告，乞脱因导引缅国使臣价博来朝。
English: In April, according to a report from the Marshal's Office to the Imperial Court, Kudato was accused of leading the Burmese envoy, Quai Bo, to come to Korea.

古文：十年二月，遣勘马剌失里、乞脱因等使其国，持诏谕之曰： 间者大理、鄯阐等路宣慰司都元帅府差乞脱因导王国使价博诣京师，且言向至王国，但见其臣下，未尝见王，又欲观吾大国舍利。
现代文：至元十年二月，世祖遣勘马剌失里、乞脱因等出使缅国，诏书说： 前者大理鄯阐等路宣慰司都元帅府派乞脱因导引缅国使价博到京师，且言过去至我国，只见臣下，未见国王。又欲瞻仰我国的佛祖骨灰。
English: In February of the 10th year of the 1st century, the patriarch sent envoys to Burma, including Kankanma, Shuri, and Kyotokuin, and the imperial edict said: The former sent envoys to Burma, including Dairi, Shuri, and Kyotokuin, and the former sent envoys to Kyoto, and the former sent envoys to Kyoto, and the former sent envoys to Kyoto, and the former sent envoys to Kyoto, and the former sent envoys to Kyoto, and the imperial edict said: The former sent envoys to Burma, including Dairi, Shuri, and Kyotokuin, and

古文：朕矜悯远来，即使来使觐见，又令纵观舍利。
现代文：朕怜悯你们远道来朝，故亲自接见你国使者，并使瞻仰佛祖骨灰。
English: I pity you for coming all the way to the DPRK, so I personally received the envoys from your country and allowed them to view the Buddha's ashes.

古文：益询其所来，乃知王有内附意。
现代文：后来，经过进一步的交谈，乃知缅王有归顺我朝之意。
English: Later, through further conversation, I learned that the Burmese king intended to submit to my government.

古文：国虽云远，一视同仁。
现代文：你国虽远，我朝仍一视同仁。
English: Although your country is far away, we still treat everyone equally.

古文：今再遣勘马剌失里及礼部郎中国信使乞脱因、工部郎中国信副使卜云失往谕王国。诚能谨事大之礼，遣其子弟若贵近臣僚一来，以彰我国家无外之义，用敦永好，时乃之休。
现代文：今再遣勘马剌失里及礼部郎中国信使乞脱因、工部郎中国信副使小云失告尔缅王，如真能称臣纳贡，派子弟或贵近臣僚来朝，以表明我国没有把你们当作外人，两国永结和好，长期幸福。
English: Now, I would like to send another message to the King of Burma, if he is really able to pay tribute to his vassals, and send his sons and grandsons or close vassals to the DPRK, to show that our country does not regard you as foreigners, and that the two countries will forever be at peace and enjoy long-term happiness.

古文：至若用兵，夫谁所好，王其思之。 
现代文：王若用兵，就不知谁会高兴。请缅王三思。 
English: If the king uses soldiers, I don't know who will be happy. Please think about it.

古文：十二年四月，建宁路安抚使贺天爵言得金齿头目阿郭之言曰： 乞脱因之使缅，乃故父阿必所指也。
现代文：至元十二年四月，建宁路安抚使贺天爵听得金齿族首领阿郭宣称： 乞脱因之使缅，是阿郭已故父亲阿必所提示的。
English: In April of the twelfth year of the Yuan Dynasty, He Tianjie, the pacifying envoy of Jianning Road, was heard by the leader of the Jingu tribe, Agua, who declared: The envoy of begging was suggested by Agua's late father, Abi.

古文：至元九年三月，缅王恨父阿必，故领兵数万来侵，执父阿必而去。
现代文：早在至元九年三月，缅王恨阿必，乃率兵数万来侵，虏阿必而去。
English: As early as March of the ninth year of the Yuan Dynasty, the Burmese king hated Abi, but led tens of thousands of soldiers to invade, and took Abi away.

古文：不得已厚献其国，乃得释之。
现代文：我金齿不得已乃献缅重金，缅始释阿必。
English: My gold tooth had no choice but to donate a lot of money, so I had to release Abi.

古文：因知缅中部落之人犹群狗耳。
现代文：我金齿人深知，缅中部落之人犹群狗耳。
English: I, a gold-toothed person, am well aware that the people of the Burmese-Chinese tribe are a pack of dogs.

古文：比者缅遣阿的八等九人至，乃候视国家动静也。
现代文：过去缅国曾遣阿的八等九人来，是为了窥视我国之动静的。
English: In the past, Myanmar had sent eight or nine people from Afghanistan to spy on our country.

古文：今白衣头目是阿郭亲戚，与缅为邻。尝谓入缅有三道，一由天部马，一由骠甸，一由阿郭地界，俱会缅之江头城。
现代文：今白衣族首领是阿郭的亲戚，和缅国为邻，曾称进入缅国有三条路：一由天部马，一由骠甸，一由阿郭地界，都可会合于缅国之江头城。
English: Now the leader of the Baiyi tribe is a relative of Agua, and is a neighbor of Myanmar. He once said that there are three ways to enter Myanmar: one from Tianbuma, one from Xidian, and one from the border of Agua. They can all meet at the city of Jiangtou in Myanmar.

古文：又阿郭亲戚阿提犯在缅掌五甸，户各万余，欲内附。
现代文：又阿郭有亲戚阿提犯，在缅国领有城郊外五甸之地，控制居民万户，欲归附元朝。
English: In addition, Aguo had a relative, Atifan, who owned the land of Wudian on the outskirts of the city in Burma, controlled thousands of residents, and wanted to join the Yuan Dynasty.

古文：阿郭愿先招阿提犯及金齿之未降者，以为引道。 
现代文：阿郭愿先招阿提犯来降并要他们将来作为征缅的向导。 
English: Aguo is willing to first recruit Atti criminals to come down and ask them to serve as guides for the conquest of Burma in the future.

古文：云南省因言缅王无降心，去使不返，必须征讨。
现代文：云南省也说： 缅王无降心，使臣去后便没有再回来，必须征讨之。 
English: Yunnan Province also said: "The Burmese king has no intention of surrendering. After the envoys left, they never came back. They must be defeated."

古文：六月，枢密院以闻。帝曰： 姑缓之。 
现代文：六月，枢密院将云南省的意思奏请世祖忽必烈，忽必烈说： 姑且缓办。 
English: In June, the Privy Council asked the founder of the dynasty, Kublai Khan, to convey the will of Yunnan Province. Kublai Khan said: Let it be delayed.

古文：十一月，云南省始报： 差人探伺国使消息，而蒲贼阻道。
现代文：十一月，云南省始报告说： 差人探听我国使者去缅的消息，遇蒲贼阻道。
English: In November, Yunnan Province initially reported: "When we sent people to listen to the news of our envoys going to Myanmar, they were thwarted by bandits.

古文：今蒲人多降，道已通，遣金齿千额总管阿禾探得国使达缅俱安。 
现代文：今蒲人多已降，去缅之道已通，遣金齿千额总管阿禾再探，得知国使已安抵缅国了。 
English: Now, the number of envoys has decreased, the route to Myanmar has been cleared, and Ah Wo, the chief administrator of the Thousand-Dollar Remittance, has learned that the envoy has arrived safely in Myanmar.

古文：十四年三月，缅人以阿禾内附，怨之，攻其地，欲立寨腾越、永昌之间。
现代文：至元十四年三月，缅人埋怨阿禾归附元朝，攻阿禾之地，并欲在腾越、永昌之间立寨。
English: In March of the 14th year of the Yuan Dynasty, the Burmese complained that Ahwa had been annexed to the Yuan Dynasty, attacked Ahwa's land, and wanted to build a camp between Tengyue and Yongchang.

古文：时大理路蒙古千户忽都、大理路总管信苴日、总把千户脱罗脱孩奉命伐永昌之西腾越、蒲、骠、阿昌、金齿未降部族，驻札南甸。
现代文：时大理路蒙古千户忽都、大理路总管信苴日、总把千户脱罗脱孩奉命讨伐永昌以西的腾越、蒲、骠、阿昌、金齿等的未降部族，驻军南甸。
English: At that time, Dali Road was the capital of Mongolia, and on the day of the general manager of Dali Road, Nobuyuki, he was ordered to fight the non-subjugated tribes such as Tengyue, Pu, Yao, Achang, and Jinzu west of Yongchang, and stationed troops in Nandian.

古文：阿禾告急，忽都等昼夜行，与缅军遇一河边，其众约四五万，象八百，马万匹。忽都等军仅七百人。
现代文：阿禾告急，忽都等昼夜驰援，在一河边遇缅军。时缅军有众四五万，象八百只，马近万匹，而忽都等军队只七百人。
English: Ah Wo was in a hurry. He waited day and night for reinforcements and met the Burmese army at the edge of a river. At that time, the Burmese army numbered 450,000 men, 800 elephants, and nearly 10,000 horses, while the army waiting for him was only 700 men.

古文：缅人前乘马，次象，次步卒；象被甲，背负战楼，两旁挟大竹筩，置短枪数十于其中，乘象者取以击刺。
现代文：缅人出阵时，先是马队，再是象队，再次才是步兵队。象身被甲，背负战楼，楼的两旁挟大竹筒，筒内置短枪数十，乘象者可取以击刺。
English: When the Burmese go into battle, it is first the horse team, then the elephant team, and then the infantry team. The elephant is covered in armor, carrying a battle tower, with a large bamboo tube on both sides of the building, and dozens of short guns built into the tube. Those who ride the elephant can take a stab.

古文：忽都下令： 贼众我寡，当先冲河北军。 
现代文：忽都下令说： 敌众我寡，当先冲河北之军。 
English: All of a sudden, he gave an order: "Since we have few enemies, let's attack the Hebei army first."

古文：明日，追之，至千额，不及而还。捕虏甚众，军中以一帽或一两靴一毡衣易一生口。
现代文：乃与信苴日、脱罗脱孩各率一队，与缅军交战良久，缅军败走，攻破十七寨，追至窄山口，转战三十余里，缅军及象马自相践踏而死者满三巨沟。缅军被俘者甚多，元军有以一帽或毡衣换一俘虏为奴隶的。
English: However, he led a team of children with each of Nobunaga and Taro, and fought with the Burmese army for a long time. The Burmese army was defeated, broke through seventeen villages, chased to a narrow mountain pass, and fought for more than thirty miles. The Burmese army and elephants trampled each other and the dead filled three huge ditches. The Burmese army captured a lot of people, and the Yuan army exchanged a hat or a robe for a prisoner as a slave.

古文：其脱者又为阿禾、阿昌邀杀，归者无几。
现代文：逃脱的缅军又多为阿禾、阿昌所追杀。故归者无几。
English: Most of the fleeing Burmese troops were chased and killed by Ahwo and Achang, so few returned.

古文：官军负伤者虽多，惟一蒙古军获一象不得其性被击而毙，余无死者。十月，云南省遣云南诸路宣慰使都元帅纳速剌丁率蒙古、爨、僰、摩些军三千八百四十余人征缅，至江头，深蹂酋首细安立寨之所，招降其磨欲等三百余寨，土官曲蜡蒲折户四千、孟磨爱吕户一千、磨柰蒙匡里答八剌户二万、蒙忙甸土官甫禄堡户一万、木都弹秃户二百，凡三万五千二百户，以天热还师。
现代文：十月，云南省遣云南诸路宣慰使都元帅纳速剌丁率蒙古、爨？摩些之军共三千八百四十余人征缅国，至江头，踏平缅首领细安立寨之地，招降所部各族人户共三万五千二百户。因天热才班师。
English: In October, Yunnan Province sent Marshal Nahao Ding to Yunnan to preach and comfort, and the Mongolian and Mongolian-Mongolian armies, with a total of more than 3,840 people, invaded Burma. They reached the head of the river and trampled down the place where the Burmese leader Xian had established a village. A total of 35,200 households of all ethnic groups in the province were recruited and demobilized. Due to the heat of the day, there was no teacher.

古文：十七年二月，纳速剌丁等上言： 缅国舆地形势皆在臣目中矣。
现代文：至元十七年二月，纳速剌丁等上书世祖说： 缅国地势尽在我眼中。
English: In February of the seventeenth year of the Yuan Dynasty, Naso Ding and others wrote to the patriarch saying, "I have seen all the landforms of Burma.

古文：先奉旨，若重庆诸郡平，然后有事缅国。
现代文：以前奉旨，重庆诸郡平定后，再征讨缅国。
English: In the past, after Chongqing counties were pacified, he was ordered to invade Burma again.

古文：今四川已底宁，请益兵征之。 
现代文：今四川已定，请增兵讨缅。 
English: Now that Sichuan has been decided, please send more troops to fight against Burma.

古文：帝以问丞相脱里夺海，脱里夺海曰： 陛下初命发合剌章及四川与阿里海牙麾下士卒六万人征缅，今纳速剌丁止欲得万人。 
现代文：帝征求丞相脱里夺海的意见。脱里夺海说 ：皇上初命派遣合剌章及四川与阿里海牙手下士卒六万人征缅，今纳速剌丁只要求发万人而已。 
English: The emperor solicited the opinion of the chancellor, Delizhou Hai. Delizhou Hai said: The emperor first ordered the dispatch of 60,000 soldiers from Hecheng and Sichuan and Ali Haiga to conquer Burma, but Imna Hao Ding only asked for 10,000.

古文：帝曰： 是矣。 
现代文：帝说 ：是这样。 
English: The emperor said, "That's it.

古文：即命枢密缮甲兵，修武备，议选将出师。
现代文：便下令加强战备，准备选将出师。
English: He then ordered to strengthen combat readiness and prepare to select a general to lead the division.

古文：五月，诏云南行省发四川军万人，命药剌海领之，与前所遣将同征缅。
现代文：五月，皇上诏云南行省调四川军万人，令药剌海率领，与以前所遣将同征缅国。
English: In May, Emperor Zhao sent 10,000 soldiers from Sichuan Province to Yunnan Province, and ordered them to be led by Yao Bohai, and they were sent to Burma together with the previously dispatched generals.

古文：十九年二月，诏思、播、叙诸郡及亦奚不薛诸蛮夷等处发士卒征缅。
现代文：至元十九年二月，又诏思、播、叙诸郡及亦奚不薛诸族动员士卒征缅。
English: In February of the 19th year of the Yuan Dynasty, Zhao Si, Bao, Su Zhu and other ethnic groups were mobilized to go to Burma.

古文：二十年十一月，官军伐缅，克之。
现代文：至元二十年十一月，元军伐缅，克之。
English: In November of the 20th year of the Yuan Dynasty, the Yuan army went to fight against the Burmese and defeated them.

古文：先是，诏宗王相吾答儿、右丞太卜、参知政事也罕的斤将兵征缅。
现代文：先是诏宗王相吾答儿、右丞太卜、参知政事也罕的斤带兵征缅。
English: First, Emperor Zhao Zong Wang, the son of Emperor Xiangwu, the son of Empress Dowager Yu, the son of Emperor Xizong, the son of Empress Dowager Zhou, the son of Emperor Xizong, the son of Emperor Xizong, the son of Emperor Xizong, the son of Emperor Xizong, the son of Emperor Xizong, the son of Emperor Xizong, the son of Emperor Xizong, the son of Emperor Xizong, the son of Emperor Xizong, the son of Emperor Xizong, the son of Emperor Xizong, the son of Emperor Xizong, the son of Emperor Xizong

古文：是年九月，大军发中庆。
现代文：二十年九月，自中庆发兵。
English: In September 20th, troops were dispatched from Zhongqing.

古文：十月，至南甸，太卜由罗必甸进军。
现代文：十月进至南甸，太卜由罗必甸进军。
English: In October, they marched to Nandian, and Dabo marched from Lopudian.

古文：十一月，相吾答儿命也罕的斤取道于阿昔江，达镇西阿禾江，造舟二百，下流至江头城，断缅人水路；自将一军从骠甸径抵其国，与太卜军会。
现代文：十一月，相吾答儿命也罕的斤沿阿昔江到达镇西阿禾江。造船二百艘，顺流而下至江头城。截断缅人水路。相吾答儿又自带一军从骠甸直抵缅国，与太卜会师。
English: In November, he made a desperate journey along the Axi River to the town of Xiahou River. He built two hundred ships and sailed down the river to Jiangtou City. He cut off the Burmese waterway. He also brought an army from Putian straight to Burma to meet with Taib.

古文：二十三年十月，以招讨使张万为征缅副都元帅，也先铁木儿征缅招讨司达鲁花赤，千户张成征缅招讨使，并虎符。
现代文：然后命诸将分头出击，破江头城，杀万余人。另令都元帅袁世安以兵守其地，遣使持地图向皇帝报捷。至元二十二年十一月，缅王遣盐井大官阿必立相至太公城，欲来投诚，并乞求上报朝廷，请降旨许其悔过，然后准备派大官到京师。元朝乃遣镇西平缅宣抚司达鲁花赤兼招讨使怯烈出使缅国。
English: Then he ordered the generals to attack separately, break the city at the head of the river, and kill more than ten thousand people. In addition, he ordered the capital marshal Yuan Shian to guard his land with soldiers and sent an envoy with a map to report to the emperor. In November of the 22nd year of the Yuan Dynasty, the Burmese king sent Abiritso, a high-ranking official from Yanjing, to Taigong City. He wanted to surrender and begged to report to the imperial court. Please lower the order to allow him to repent, and then prepare to send a high-ranking official to Beijing. The Yuan Dynasty sent the town of Xiping to Burma to

古文：敕造战船，将兵六千人征缅，俾秃满带为都元帅总之。云南王以行省右丞爱鲁奉旨征收金齿、察罕迭吉连地，拨军一千人。
现代文：至元二十三年十月，以秃满带为都元帅，招讨使张万为副都元帅、也先铁木儿为招讨司达鲁花赤、千户张成为招讨使，给虎符，造战船，带兵六千征缅。云南王以行省右丞爱鲁征收金齿、察罕迭吉连地，拨军一千人，自中庆府出发，至永昌府，与征缅省官会合。
English: By October 23rd, Bald Man was appointed as the marshal of the capital, Zhang Wan was appointed as the vice-marshal of the capital, Tiemu Er was appointed as the marshal of the capital, Siddaru Hua Chia was appointed as the marshal of the capital, Qianhu Zhang was appointed as the marshal of the capital, he was given a tiger emblem, built a warship, and led 6,000 soldiers to conquer the Burmese. Yunnan King Elu, acting as the governor of the province, collected the gold teeth and the land of Chahan Diejian, and dispatched a thousand soldiers from Zhongqing Prefecture to Yongchang Prefecture to meet with the governor of the

古文：是月，发中庆府，继至永昌府，与征缅省官会，经阿昔甸，差军五百人护送招缅使怯烈至太公城。
现代文：再经阿昔甸，差兵五百人，护送招缅使怯烈至太公城。
English: After passing through Ashidian, 500 soldiers were sent to escort the envoy to Taigong City.

古文：二十四年正月，至忙乃甸。
现代文：至元二十四年正月，怯烈至忙乃甸。
English: In the first month of the twenty-fourth year of the Yuan Dynasty, he was frantically busy.

古文：缅王为其庶子不速速古里所执，囚于昔里怯答剌之地，又害其嫡子三人，与大官木浪周等四人为逆，云南王所命官阿难答等亦受害。
现代文：时缅王为庶子不速速古里所囚，缅王之嫡子三人亦遇害，云南王所命之官阿难答亦被害。
English: At that time, King Myeongdong was a prisoner of his son-in-law, Bao Myeongdong, three of King Myeongdong's legitimate sons were also killed, and Ananda, an official appointed by the king of Yunnan, was also killed.

古文：大德元年二月，以缅王的立普哇拿阿迪提牙尝遣其子信合八的奉表入朝，请岁输银二千五百两、帛千匹、驯象二十、粮万石，诏封的立普哇拿阿迪提牙为缅王，赐银印，子信合八的为缅国世子，赐以虎符。三年三月，缅复遣其世子奉表入谢，自陈部民为金齿杀掠，率皆贫乏，以致上供金币不能如期输纳。
现代文：二月，怯烈自忙乃甸登舟，留护送自己的五百元兵于忙乃甸。既而云南王与诸王进征，至蒲甘，损失士卒七千余，始征服缅国，并规定缅定期向元朝贡。大德元年二月，元成宗诏封的立普哇拿阿迪提牙为缅王，赐银印；并封其子信合八的为缅国世子，赐虎符，因为缅王曾派其子奉表入朝，表示愿岁纳贡品银二千五百两，帛千匹，驯象二十只，粮万石。大德三年三月，缅王又派其世子奉表入朝，自称其属民为金齿掠夺，破坏严重，以致不能如期交纳金币。
English: In February, the king of Yunnan and other kings marched to Bagan, losing more than seven thousand soldiers, and began to conquer Burma, and stipulated that Burma should pay regular tribute to the Yuan Dynasty. In February of the first year of the Great German Empire, Li Puwan of the Yuan Dynasty was given the title of King of Burma, and given a silver seal; and his eight-year-old son was given the title of Heir of Burma, and given a tiger emblem, because the King of Burma had sent his son to the court, expressing his wish to pay a yearly tribute of twenty-five hundred taels of silver, twenty thousand horses, twenty tame elephants, and ten thousand tons of grain

古文：帝悯之，止命间岁贡象，仍赐衣遣还。
现代文：元帝悯之，只命间岁贡象，并赐衣遣还。
English: The Yuan Emperor took pity on him and only gave him a few years of tribute. He also gave him his clothes and sent him back.

古文：四年四月，遣使进白象。
现代文：大德四年四月，遣使贡白象。
English: In April of the 4th year of the Great Tokugawa Shogunate, he sent an envoy to pay tribute to the white elephant.

古文：五月，的立普哇拿阿迪提牙为其弟阿散哥也等所杀，其子窟麻剌哥撒八逃诣京师。
现代文：五月，缅王的立普哇拿阿迪提牙为其弟阿散哥也所杀，其子窟麻剌哥撒八逃到京师。
English: In May, the Burmese king, Lipwana Aditya, was killed by his brother, Asanga, and his son, Mahakala Sahak, fled to Beijing.

古文：令忙完秃鲁迷失率师往问其罪。蛮贼与八百媳妇国通，其势张甚。
现代文：朝廷令忙完秃鲁迷失率军征讨阿散哥也，阿散哥也与八百媳妇国通好，势甚嚣张。
English: The imperial court also ordered the army to enlist Asanko after Baldur lost his army, and Asanko also made friends with the 800 daughters-in-law of the country, which was very arrogant.

古文：秋七月，缅贼阿散哥也弟者苏等九十一人各奉方物入朝，命余人置中庆，遣者苏等来上都。八月，缅国阿散吉牙等昆弟赴阙，自言杀主之罪，罢征缅兵。
现代文：忙完秃鲁迷失请增兵，朝廷又命薛超兀而带兵一万二千人前往征讨，并令诸王阔阔节制之。六月，诏立窟麻剌哥撒八为王，赐以银印。秋七月，阿散哥也之弟者苏等来京师，奉方物入朝。八月，缅国阿散吉牙等兄弟来京师，自言杀主之罪，乃罢征缅之兵。
English: After losing Baldur's Gate, the imperial court ordered Xue Chaozhou to bring 12,000 soldiers to the capital to fight, and ordered the kings to restrain themselves. In June, Wu Makao's brother Saba was crowned king and given the Silver Seal. In autumn and July, Asanga's younger brother Su and others came to Beijing to fight, and sent troops to the imperial court. In August, brothers such as the Burmese Asanga Jiga came to Beijing to fight, and said that it was a sin to kill the Lord, but to enlist Burmese soldiers.

古文：五年九月，云南参知政事高庆、宣抚使察罕不花伏诛。初，庆等从薛超兀而围缅两月，城中薪食俱尽，势将出降，庆等受其重赂，以炎暑瘴疫为辞，辄引兵还。故诛之。
现代文：大德五年九月，元成宗处死云南参知政事高庆、宣抚使察罕不花，因为二人随从薛超兀而围缅两个月后，在缅城柴尽粮绝，势将出降之际，接受缅人重贿，托辞炎暑瘴疫，擅自引兵还云南，故杀之。
English: In September of the fifth year of the German era, Yuan Chengzong executed Gao Qing, the political advisor of Yunnan, and Ca Han, the propaganda envoy of Yunnan, because two months after the two of them had surrounded Burma with Xue Chaojun, they had accepted heavy bribes from the Burmese on the verge of surrendering because they had run out of food and fuel in Burma. They had used the excuse of the heat and the epidemic to bring troops back to Yunnan without authorization, and they were killed.

古文：十月，缅遣使入贡。
现代文：十月，缅遣使入贡。
English: In October, the Ming envoys came to pay tribute.

古文：占城占城近琼州，顺风舟行一日可抵其国。
现代文：占城近琼州，顺风舟行一天可至。
English: Zhancheng is close to Qiongzhou, and can be reached in one day by boat.

古文：世祖至元间广南西道宣慰使马成旺尝请兵三千人、马三百匹征之。
现代文：世祖至元年间、广南西道宣慰使马成旺曾请兵三千、马三百匹前往征讨。
English: During the reign of King Sejong and the first year of the 21st century, Ma Chengwang, the consul of Guangnan West Road, invited three thousand soldiers and three hundred horses to go to the battlefield.

古文：十五年，左丞唆都以宋平遣人至占城，还言其王失里咱牙信合八剌麻哈迭瓦有内附意，诏降虎符，授荣禄大夫，封占城郡王。
现代文：十五年，左丞唆都因宋已平定，乃遣人至占城，回来报告说：占城王失里咱牙信合八麻哈迭瓦有归顺之意。世祖诏赐占城王虎符，授荣禄大夫，封占城郡王。
English: In the fifteenth year of the Joseon Dynasty, the capital of the Song Dynasty had been pacified, and a messenger was sent to Zhancheng. He returned with a report: "The king of Zhancheng has been defeated, and we have received a letter of surrender from Emperor Hadiwa. The patriarch has given the king of Zhancheng the Tiger Emblem, conferred the title of doctor of honor, and sealed the king of Zhancheng County.

古文：十六年十二月，遣兵部侍郎教化的、总管孟庆元、万户孙胜夫与唆都等使占城，谕其王入朝。
现代文：十六年十二月，遣兵部侍郎教化的、总管孟庆元、万户孙胜夫与唆都等使占城，告谕占城王来京朝拜中国皇帝。
English: In December of the 16th year, the general manager Meng Qingyuan, the general manager of the general staff Meng Qingyuan, the general manager of the general staff Meng Qingyuan, the general manager of the general staff Meng Qingyuan, the general manager of the general staff Meng Qingyuan, the general manager of the general staff Meng Qingyuan, the general manager of the general staff Meng Qingyuan, the general manager of the general staff Meng Qingyuan, the general manager of the general staff Meng Qingyuan, the general manager of the general staff Meng Qingyuan, the general manager of the general staff Meng Qingyuan, and

古文：十七年二月，占城国王保宝旦拏啰耶邛南詙占把地罗耶遣使贡方物，奉表降。
现代文：十七年二月，占城王保宝旦拿罗耶邛南占把地罗耶遣使贡方物，奉表归顺。
English: In February of the seventeenth year, the king of the city of Luoyang, Bao Baotan, sent a tribute to Luoyang from the south. Luoyang submitted to the tribute.

古文：十九年十月，朝廷以占城国主孛由补剌者吾曩岁遣使来朝，称臣内属，遂命右丞唆都等即其地立省以抚安之。
现代文：十九年十月，朝廷以占城国王孛由补剌者吾前曾遣使来朝，称臣内附，遂命右丞唆都等至其地成立行省以安抚之。
English: In October of the 19th year, the imperial court sent an envoy to the court with the request of the king of Zhancheng, who had previously sent an envoy to the court with the request of the king of Zhancheng, who had previously sent an envoy to the court with the request of the king of Zhancheng, who had previously sent an envoy to the court with the request of the king of Zhancheng, who had previously sent an envoy to the court with the request of the king of Zhancheng, who had previously sent an envoy to the court with the request of the king of Zhancheng.

古文：既而其子补的专国，负固弗服，万户何子志、千户皇甫杰使暹国，宣慰使尤永贤、亚阑等使马八儿国，舟经占城，皆被执，故遣兵征之。
现代文：不久，其子补的专权，负险固守，不服元朝。万户何子志、千户皇甫杰出使暹国，宣慰使尤永贤、亚兰等出使马八儿国，均舟经占城，皆被拘留。
English: Soon, the Yuan Dynasty was dissatisfied with the exclusive power of his son Fu, who held fast to it at all costs. Wanhu He Zizhi, Qianhu Huobing, and other emissaries sent to Siam, as well as the consoling envoys You Yongxian and Aran to Malatya, were all detained when they occupied the city.

古文：帝曰： 老王无罪，逆命者乃其子与一蛮人耳。苟获此两人，当依曹彬故事，百姓不戮一人。 
现代文：于是朝廷遣兵征讨，世祖说： 老王无罪，违抗王命的只是老王之子与一蛮人而已，如能抓到此二人，当依曹彬故事，不杀一个百姓。 
English: Therefore, the imperial court sent soldiers to investigate. The patriarch said, "The old king is not guilty. The only ones who defied the king's order were the old king's son and a barbarian. If you can catch these two, you should follow Cao Bin's story and not kill a single commoner."

古文：十一月，占城行省官率兵自广州航海至占城港。
现代文：十一月，占城行省官员率兵自广州航海至占城港口。
English: In November, officials of Zhancheng Shipping Province led soldiers from Guangzhou to sail to the port of Zhancheng.

古文：港口北连海，海旁有小港五，通其国大州，东南止山，西旁木城。官军依海岸屯驻。
现代文：该港口北连大海，海旁有五个小港，通占城国的大州，东南止于山，西边有木城，元军依海岸驻扎。
English: The port is connected to the sea to the north, and there are five small ports along the coast, including Dazhou in the city-state, Shan in the southeast, Mucheng in the west, and the former military stationed along the coast.

古文：占城兵治木城，四面约二十余里，起楼棚，立回回三梢炮百余座。
现代文：占城兵驻守木城，四面约二十余里，城上有楼栅，有回回三梢炮百余座。
English: The Zhancheng soldiers garrisoned Mucheng, about twenty miles on all sides, with towers and towers on the city, and more than a hundred three-pronged cannons.

古文：又木城西十里建行宫，孛由补剌者吾亲率重兵屯守应援。
现代文：在木城西有占城国王行宫，孛由补刺者吾亲率重兵驻守，以应援木城。
English: In the west of Mucheng, there is the palace of the king of Zhancheng. My father and I, who are the repairers, are stationed with heavy troops to support Mucheng.

古文：行省遣都镇抚李天祐、总把贾甫招之，七往，终不服。
现代文：行省遣都镇抚李天、总把贾甫前往招降，七次去劝降，终不屈服。
English: The provincial government sent Li Tian, the prefect of the capital, to invite Jia Fu to surrender, and went to persuade him to surrender seven times, but he did not give in.

古文：十二月，招真腊国使速鲁蛮请往招谕，复与天祐、甫偕行，得其回书云： 已修木城，备甲兵，刻期请战。 
现代文：十二月，元朝招真腊国使速鲁蛮前往招降，又使天与贾甫同往，得到占城国主的回信，说： 已修木城，备甲兵，请定期决战。 
English: In December, the Yuan Dynasty invited the Zhenla Kingdom to send Hailu to invite and surrender, and also sent Tian to go with Jia Fu, and received a reply from the lord of the occupied city, saying: Have built a wooden city, prepare armored soldiers, and ask for a regular decisive battle.

古文：二十年正月，行省传令军中，以十五日夜半发船攻城。
现代文：二十年正月，行省传令军中，十五日夜半发船攻城。
English: In the first month of the 20th year, the provincial army was summoned, and a ship was sent to attack the city at midnight on the 15th day.

古文：至期，分遣琼州安抚使陈仲达、总管刘金、总把栗全以兵千六百人由水路攻木城北面；总把张斌、百户赵达以三百人攻东面沙觜；省官三千人分三道攻南面。
现代文：攻城时，遣琼州安抚使陈仲达、总管刘金、总把栗全率兵一千六百人由水路攻木城北面，遣总把张斌、百户赵达率兵三百人攻东面沙角。行省官员率兵三千分三路进攻南面。
English: During the siege of the city, Chen Zhongda, the general manager Liu Jin and the general commander Li Quan, who were sent by Qiongzhou to pacify the city, led 1,600 soldiers to attack the north side of the city from the waterway. The general commander Zhang Bin and the general commander Baihu Zhao Da led 300 soldiers to attack the east side of Shajing. The provincial officials led the soldiers to attack the south side in three thousand and three ways.

古文：舟行至天明泊岸，为风涛所碎者十七八。
现代文：舟行至天明泊岸，但有十之七八已为风涛击破。
English: The boat made it to the Tenmei anchorage, but seven out of ten were already broken by the wind and waves.

古文：贼开木城南门，建旗鼓，出万余人，乘象者数十，亦分三队迎敌，矢石交下。
现代文：占城兵开木城南门，竖旗擂鼓出兵万余人，还有乘象者数十人，矢石交加，分三路迎敌元军。
English: The besieging soldiers opened the south gate of the wooden city, and more than 10,000 soldiers with banners and drums were sent out, and there were also dozens of elephants, and arrows and stones were exchanged, and the enemy Yuan army was met in three ways.

古文：自卯至午，贼败北，官军入木城，复与东北二军合击之，杀溺死者数千人。守城供饷馈者数万人悉溃散。
现代文：战斗自卯时进行到午时。占城兵败北，元军乃入木城，复与东北二军合击，杀死溺死占城兵数千人，在城内供守兵粮饷的数万百姓都逃散。
English: The battle went on from dusk until noon. The besieging soldiers were defeated in the north, and the Yuan army entered Mucheng, and then clashed with the Northeast Second Army, killing and drowning thousands of besieging soldiers, and tens of thousands of people who were in the city to provide food and water for the soldiers fled.

古文：国主弃行宫，烧仓廪，杀永贤、亚阑等，与其臣逃入山。
现代文：国王弃行宫、烧仓库，杀永贤、亚兰等，与臣下一道逃入山中。
English: The king abandoned the palace, burned the warehouse, killed Yongxian and Aram, and fled into the mountains with his vassals.

古文：十七日，整兵攻大州。
现代文：十七日，元兵又整顿队伍进攻大州。
English: On the 17th, the Yuan soldiers reorganized and attacked Dazhou.

古文：十九日，国主使报答者来求降。
现代文：十九日，占城国遣使报答者来求降。
English: On the 19th, Zhancheng sent Recompense to ask for surrender.

古文：二十日，兵至大州东南，遣报答者回，许其降，免罪。
现代文：二十日，元兵至大州东南，遣报答者回占城国主，许其投降，并答应免予治罪。
English: On the 20th, the Yuan soldiers came to the southeast of Dazhou, sent the returnees back to the lord of the city, allowed them to surrender, and promised to exempt them from punishment.

古文：二十一日，入大州。
现代文：二十一日，元军入大州。
English: On the 21st, the Yuan army entered Dazhou.

古文：又遣博思兀鲁班者来言： 奉王命，国主、太子后当自来。 
现代文：占城国又遣博思兀鲁班者来称： 奉王命来降，国王、太子随后当自来。 
English: Zhancheng also sent Bo Xiluban to say: "I have come to surrender by order of the king. The king and the prince should come later."

古文：行省传檄召之，官军复驻城外。
现代文：行省又传令召见。官兵驻扎城外。
English: The governor was summoned by a summons. The officers and soldiers were stationed outside the city.

古文：二十三日，遣其舅宝脱秃花等三十余人，奉国王信物杂布二百匹、大银三锭、小银五十七锭、碎银一瓮为质，来归款。
现代文：二十三日，占城国王使其舅宝脱秃花等三十余人，奉国王信物杂布二百匹、大银三锭、小银五十七锭、碎银一瓮为抵押，表示愿来归顺元朝。
English: On the 23rd, the king of Zhancheng invited more than 30 people, including his uncle Bao De Bald Flower, to pledge 200 horses, 3 ounces of large silver, 57 ounces of small silver, and 1 ounce of broken silver as a pledge of the king's trust. They expressed their wish to return to Shun Yuan Dynasty.

古文：又献金叶九节标枪曰： 国主欲来，病未能进，先使持其枪来，以见诚意。
现代文：接着，又献金叶九节标枪，并说 ：国王想来，但因病未能成行，故先使人持其枪来，以示其诚意。
English: Then he presented a gold-leaf nine-pointed javelin and said, "The king wanted to come, but he was too ill to travel, so he had his gun brought first to show his sincerity."

古文：长子补的期三日请见。 
现代文：长子补的预定在三日之内来拜见。 
English: The eldest son is scheduled to visit within three days.

古文：省官却其物。
现代文：行省官员拒收此物。
English: Provincial officials refused to accept it.

古文：宝脱秃花曰： 不受，是薄之也。 
现代文：宝脱秃花说： 不受此物，是薄待占城的一种表现。 
English: Bao Du Bald Flower said: "Not accepting this thing is a manifestation of treating the occupied city with contempt.

古文：行省度不可却，姑令收置，乃以上闻。
现代文：行省官员估计不能拒绝，暂时收下，并将此情上奏皇帝。
English: The provincial officials did not think they could refuse, so they temporarily accepted and reported the situation to the emperor.

古文：宝脱秃花复令其主第四子利世麻八都八德剌、第五子世利印德剌来见，且言： 先有兵十万，故求战。今皆败散。
现代文：宝脱秃花又令其国王的第四子利世麻八都八德剌、第五子世利印德刺来拜见行省官员，且说： 我占城先有兵十万，故求战，而现在都已逃散。
English: Bao Du Bald Flower also ordered the fourth son of his king, Li Shima Badu Badetong, and the fifth son, Li Yindu Zi, to visit the provincial officials, and said: I have a hundred thousand soldiers in front of the city, so I asked for war, and now they have all fled.

古文：闻败兵言，补的被伤已死。
现代文：听败兵们说：补的受伤已死。
English: Listen to the defeated soldiers say: the injured horse is dead.

古文：国主颊中箭，今小愈，愧惧未能见也，故先遣二子来议赴阙进见事。 
现代文：国王面颊中箭，今稍愈，但愧惧不敢见，故先遣二子来议赴元朝京师进见皇上之事。 
English: The king was hit in the cheek by an arrow. He is a little better now, but he is too ashamed to see it, so he sent his two sons ahead of him to discuss the matter of going to the Yuan Dynasty in Beijing to see the emperor.

古文：省官疑其非真子，听其还。
现代文：行省官员怀疑他们不是国王的真正的儿子，便在见面后听任他们回去了。
English: Provincial officials suspected they were not the king's real sons and allowed them to go home after the meeting.

古文：谕国主早降，且以问疾为辞，遣千户林子全、总把栗全、李德坚偕往觇之。
现代文：并让他们告诉其国王早日投降。且以问疾为借口，遣千户林子全，总把栗全、李德坚同往窥探实情。
English: He also asked them to tell their king to surrender as soon as possible. On the pretext of inquiring about illness, he sent thousands of households to Lin Zi Quan, and always sent Li Quan and Li De Jian to spy on the truth.

古文：二子在途先归。子全等入山两程，国主遣人来拒，不果见。
现代文：二子在路上先回，子全等入山二程后，国王就遣人来阻止，使子全等未能见到国王。
English: The two sons were the first to turn back on the road, and after the sons had all gone two miles into the mountains, the king sent someone to stop them. The messengers were all unable to see the king.

古文：宝脱秃花谓子全曰： 国主迁延不肯出降，今反扬言欲杀我，可归告省官，来则来，不来，我当执以往。 
现代文：宝脱秃花对子全等说 ：国王拖延不肯出降，今又扬言要杀我，望归告行省官员，你们如想来就来，你们不来，我就将国王捉拿到你们那里去。 
English: "The king has delayed his surrender, and now he threatens to kill me. I want to go back and tell the provincial officials, if you want to come, come. If you don't come, I will capture the king and bring him to you."

古文：子全等回营。
现代文：子全等便转回军营。
English: All the children were transferred back to the military camp.

古文：是日，又杀何子志、皇甫杰等百余人。
现代文：此日占城人又杀何子志、皇甫杰等人。
English: On this day, the people of Zhancheng also killed He Zizhi, Huang Fu Jie and others.

古文：二月八日，宝脱秃花又至，自言： 吾祖父、伯、叔，前皆为国主，至吾兄，今孛由补剌者吾杀而夺其位，斩我左右二大指。我实怨之。
现代文：二月八日，宝脱秃花又至，自称 ：我祖父、伯、叔以前皆是国王。到我兄长时，今国王孛由补剌者吾杀死我兄长，并夺去了王位，还砍掉我左右两个大拇指，我实在恨他。
English: On the eighth day of the second month, Bald-flower came again, and said, "My grandfather, my great-grandfather, and my great-uncle were all kings before me; but when my brother, who is now the king, was killed by me, the king's cupbearer, I killed my brother, and took the throne, and cut off my two thumbs on the right hand and on the left. I really hate him."

古文：愿禽孛由补剌者吾、补的父子，及大拔撒机儿以献。请给大元服色。 
现代文：愿擒拿孛由补刺者吾、补的父子及大拔撒机儿献给元军，但请大元赐给相应品级的服饰。 
English: I would like to take the scissors to be donated to the Yuan Army by the mending person, the mending father and son, and the large-scale scatterers, but please give the corresponding grade of clothing to the great Yuan.

古文：行省赐衣冠，抚谕以行。
现代文：行省乃赐以衣冠加以抚慰。
English: He was given a robe and a crown to comfort him.

古文：十三日，居占城唐人曾延等来言： 国主逃于大州西北鸦候山，聚兵三千余，并招集他郡兵未至，不日将与官军交战。
现代文：十三日，寓居占城的唐人曾延等来报告 ：国王逃于大州西北鸦候山，拥兵三千余并召集他郡兵，但他郡兵未至。估计不日国王军将与元朝官军作战。
English: On the 13th, Zeng Yan, a Chinese who lived in Zhangcheng, came to report that the king had fled to Rauhu Mountain in the northwest of Dazhou, gathered more than three thousand soldiers and summoned his county soldiers, but his county soldiers had not yet arrived. It was estimated that the king's army would not fight against the Yuan Dynasty official army.

古文：惧唐人泄其事，将尽杀之。延等觉而逃来。 
现代文：国王惧怕唐人泄漏其机密，想全部加以杀害，延等发觉而逃了出来。 
English: The king was afraid that the Chinese would divulge his secret and wanted to kill them all. He waited until he was discovered and escaped.

古文：十五日，宝脱秃花偕宰相报孙达儿及撮及大师等五人来降。
现代文：十五日，宝脱秃花同宰相报孙达儿及撮及大师等五人来降。
English: On the fifteenth day, five people including Bao Du Bald Flower, together with the Prime Minister, reported to Sun Daer and the master of photography.

古文：行省官引曾延等见，宝脱秃花诘之，曰： 延等奸细人也，请系缧之。
现代文：行省官员让他们与曾延等见面，宝脱秃花对曾延进行一番盘问后对行省官员说： 曾延等是奸细，请将他拘押起来。
English: The provincial officials asked them to meet with Zeng Yan and others. After questioning Zeng Yan, Bao Du Bald Flower said to the provincial officials: Zeng Yan and others are spies, please detain him.

古文：国主军皆溃散，安敢复战。 
现代文：我国王之军都已溃散，怎敢还来与元军作战？ 
English: My king's army has all been dispersed. How dare they come back to fight the Yuan army?

古文：又言： 今未附州郡凡十二处，每州遣一人招之。
现代文：又说： 现在，没有归顺元朝的州郡有十二处，每州可遣一人前去招降。
English: He also said: At present, there are twelve states and counties that have not surrendered to the Yuan Dynasty. Each state can send one person to invite the Yuan Dynasty to surrender.

古文：旧州水路，乞行省与陈安抚及宝脱秃花各遣一人乘舟招谕攻取。
现代文：旧州水路，请行省与陈安抚及宝脱秃花各遣一人乘船前往招降或攻取。
English: Old State Waterway, please go to the province and send one person each to Chen Anju and Baodu Bald Flower by boat to bid for surrender or capture.

古文：陆路则乞行省官陈安抚与己往禽国主、补的及攻其城。 
现代文：陆路则请行省官员陈安抚与宝脱秃花自己往前擒拿国王补的并攻占其城。 
English: On the land route, provincial officials Chen Anju and Bao Du Bald Flower were asked to go forward to capture the king and capture his city.

古文：行省犹信其言，调兵一千屯半山塔，遣子全、德坚等领军百人，与宝脱秃花同赴大州进讨，约有急则报半山军。
现代文：行省官员相信了他的话，调兵一千驻半山塔，又派子全、德坚等领兵百人与宝脱秃花一同进讨大州，约定遇有急事，便通报半山塔驻军。
English: The provincial officials believed his words and dispatched a thousand soldiers to be stationed at the mid-mountain tower. They also sent Zi Quan, De Jian and a hundred other soldiers led by Bao Du Bald Flower to attack Dazhou. They agreed that in the event of an emergency, they would notify the mid-mountain tower garrison.

古文：子全等比至城西，宝脱秃花背约间行，自北门乘象遁入山。
现代文：子全等及至城西，宝脱秃花违背约言，抄小路自北门乘象遁入山中。
English: As far as the west of the city, Baodu Bald Flower violated the agreement and took a small path from the north gate to the mountain by elephant raft.

古文：官军获谍者曰： 国主实在鸦候山立寨，聚兵约二万余，遣使交趾、真腊、阇婆等国借兵，及征宾多龙、旧州等军未至。 
现代文：官军俘获的占城探子说 ：国王实是在鸦候山立寨，聚兵约两万余，并已遣使向交趾、真腊、婆等国借兵，还有宾多龙、旧州等地的兵，尚未到达。 
English: A scout of the besieged city, who was captured by the government army, said, "The king is actually building a fortress in the mountains of Jiuhu, gathering about twenty thousand soldiers, and has sent soldiers to borrow from the countries of Jiaozi, Zhenla, and Bao, as well as soldiers from Binduolong, the old state, and other places, but they have not yet arrived.

古文：十六日，遣万户张颙等领兵赴国主所楼之境。
现代文：十六日，元军遣万户张禺页等领兵直扑国王所在地。
English: On the 16th, the Yuan army sent 10,000 troops led by Zhang Xizhe and others to directly attack the king's residence.

古文：十九日，颙兵近木城二十里。
现代文：十九日，禺页兵距木城二十里。
English: On the 19th, the Lushan soldiers were 20 miles away from Kucheng.

古文：贼浚濠堑，拒以大木，官军斩刈超距奋击，破其二千余众。
现代文：占城军深挖濠堑，立大木拦阻。禺页兵跳跃障碍，砍杀奋击，击败占城兵二千余众。
English: The besieging army dug trenches deep and erected large trees to obstruct them. The besieging soldiers jumped obstacles, slashed and fought, and defeated more than two thousand besieging soldiers.

古文：转战至木城下，山林阻隘不能进，贼旁出截归路，军皆殊死战，遂得解还营。
现代文：转战至木城下，山林阻碍不能前进，占城军出城切断禺页军后路，元军皆殊死战，才得冲出重围回营。
English: When the battle turned to Mucheng, the mountains and forests prevented them from moving forward. The Zhancheng army went out of the city to cut off the back way of the Guzheng army. The Yuan army all fought to the death before they had to rush out of the encirclement and return to the camp.

古文：行省遂整军聚粮，创木城，遣总管刘金，千户刘涓、岳荣守御。
现代文：行省便整顿队伍、积聚粮草，建立木城，遣总管刘金，千户刘涓、岳荣守御。
English: After the province was established, the troops were reorganized, grain and grass were accumulated, and a wooden city was built, with Liu Jin as the commander-in-chief, and Liu Ye and Yue Rong as the guardians of the thousand households.

古文：二十一年三月六日，唆都领军回。
现代文：二十一年三月六日，唆都领兵回国。
English: On March 6, 2011, he returned to the capital to lead the troops home.

古文：十五日，江淮省所遣助唆都军万户忽都虎等至占城唆都旧制行省舒眉莲港，见营舍烧尽，始知官军已回。
现代文：十五日，江淮行省派出协助唆都军的万户忽都虎等，至占城的唆都旧制行省舒眉莲港，见营房尽烧，始知官军已回。
English: On the fifteenth day, the troops from Jianghuai Province sent to assist the imperial army arrived at the former imperial capital of Shu Meiliang Port in Shichifang Province. The barracks were burned to the ground and the imperial army had already returned.

古文：二十日，忽都虎令百户陈奎招其国主来降。
现代文：二十日，忽都虎令百户陈奎招其国王来降。
English: On the 20th day, the tiger suddenly ordered the hundred households of Chen Kui to summon their king to come down.

古文：二十七日，占城主遣王通事者来称纳降。忽都虎等谕令其父子奉表进献。
现代文：二十七日，占城国王遣王通事来忽都虎营地表示愿纳贡投降，忽都虎等便通知其父子奉表进贡。
English: On the 27th, King Zhancheng sent Wang Tongji to the Hutu Tiger camp to express his willingness to pay tribute and surrender. Hutu Tiger then notified his father and son to pay tribute.

古文：国主遣文劳邛大巴南等来称，唆都除荡其国，贫无以献，来年当备礼物，令嫡子入朝。
现代文：国王又遣文劳邛大巴南等来说：唆都扫荡占城，以致民穷财尽，无以为献。来年当备礼物，令嫡子入朝。
English: The king also sent a messenger to Dabanan, the grand vizier, and others, saying, "Let's sweep the capital and occupy the city, so that the people run out of money and have nothing to offer. Next year, let's prepare a gift and have the legitimate son enter the imperial court."

古文：四月十二日，国主令其孙济目理勒蛰、文劳邛大巴南等奉表归款。
现代文：四月十二日，国王令其孙济目理勒蛰、文劳邛大巴南等奉表归附。
English: On April 12th, the king ordered his grandsons, Jime Leroy and Wenlaojing Dabanan, to submit their certificates of accession.

古文：是年，命平章政事阿里海牙奉镇南王脱欢发兵，假道交趾伐占城，不果行。
现代文：是年，命平章政事阿里海牙奉镇南王脱欢发兵，准备借道交趾往攻占城，但没有实现。
English: In that year, the political officer Ali Haiga, who was the governor of Pingzhang, sent troops to the south of the town to prepare for the capture of the city, but it did not materialize.

古文：暹暹国，当成宗元贞元年，进金字表，欲朝廷遣使至其国。
现代文：暹国在成宗元贞元年，向元朝进金字表，要求朝廷派使臣去暹国。
English: In the first year of Chengzong Yuanzheng, Siam presented the Yuan Dynasty with a gold certificate, requesting the court to send an envoy to Siam.

古文：比其表至，已先遣使，盖彼未之知也。
现代文：但及暹国表到达时，元朝已先遣使去暹国，因为它不知元朝会先已派出使者。
English: However, when the Siamese watch arrived, the Yuan Dynasty had already sent an envoy to Siam, because it did not know that the Yuan Dynasty would have sent an envoy first.

古文：赐来使素金符佩之，使急追诏使同往。
现代文：成宗见暹使送表来时，便以素金符赠来使佩带，并让他速速去追赶已动身去暹的元使，以便同行。
English: When Chengzong saw the Siamese envoy coming to deliver the watch, he presented him with a plain gold badge to wear, and asked him to quickly catch up with the former envoy who had set off for Siam, so that they could travel together.

古文：以暹人与麻里予儿旧相仇杀，至是皆归顺，有旨谕暹人 勿伤麻里予儿，以践尔言 。
现代文：因为暹人与麻里予儿人一向互相仇杀，现在都归顺元朝，故皇帝告诉暹人说： 不要伤害麻里予儿，以履行你们的诺言。 
English: Since the Siamese and the Mari people had always been enemies and were now both subject to the Yuan Dynasty, the emperor told the Siamese, "Don't hurt the Mari to fulfill your promise."

古文：大德三年，暹国主上言，其父在位时，朝廷尝赐鞍辔、白马及金缕衣，乞循旧例以赐。
现代文：大德三年，暹国王上书说，其父在位的时候，朝廷曾赐给他鞍辔、白马及金缕衣。现在，要求按旧例也将这些礼品赐给当朝国王。
English: Three years ago, the King of Siam wrote in a letter that when his father was on the throne, the court had given him a saddle, a white horse and a golden robe. Now, according to the old custom, these gifts should also be given to the king of the day.

古文：帝以丞相完泽答剌罕言 彼小国而赐以马，恐其邻忻都辈讥议朝廷 ，仍赐金缕衣，不赐以马。
现代文：丞相完泽答刂剌罕说 ：彼小国赐马，恐其邻忻都辈会讥议朝廷。 因此皇帝只赐金缕衣，而不赐马。
English: The prime minister, Kanazawa, replied to Shikan, "A small country gives a horse, fearing that its neighbors will ridicule the imperial court. Therefore, the emperor only gives gold clothes, but not a horse."

古文：爪哇爪哇在海外，视占城益远。
现代文：爪哇在海外，比占城更远。
English: Java is overseas, further away than Chengdu.

古文：自泉南登舟海行者，先至占城而后至其国。
现代文：自泉州之南登舟下海的人，总是先至占城，再到爪哇。
English: People who go to sea by boat from the south of Quanzhou always go to Zhancheng first, and then to Java.

古文：其风俗土产不可考，大率海外诸蕃国多出奇宝，取贵于中国，而其人则丑怪，情性语言与中国不能相通。
现代文：爪哇风俗土产不可考，但大致和海外诸蕃国相似，多出奇宝，在中国很受欢迎。但其人则丑怪，性情语言与中国不能相通。
English: Javanese customs and local products cannot be examined, but they are roughly similar to those of overseas countries, and there are many wonders, which are very popular in China. However, their people are ugly, and the temperament language cannot communicate with China.

古文：世祖抚有四夷，其出师海外诸蕃者，惟爪哇之役为大。
现代文：元世祖时，四周的小国归附，在需出兵征讨的诸蕃中，唯有爪哇的作战规模最大。
English: At the time of Yuan Shizuo, the small countries around him were annexed. Among the states that needed to send troops to fight, only Java had the largest scale of operations.

古文：至元二十九年二月，诏福建行省除史弼、亦黑迷失、高兴平章政事，征爪哇；会福建、江西、湖广三行省兵凡二万，设左右军都元帅府二、征行上万户四，发舟千艘，给粮一年、钞四万锭，降虎符十、金符四十、银符百、金衣段百端，用备功赏。
现代文：至元二十九年二月，皇帝诏告福建行省，授史弼、亦黑迷失、高兴等平章政事，出征爪哇。又会合福建、江西、湖广三行省士兵二万，设左右军都元帅府二，征行上万户四，发舟千艘，给粮一年、钞四万锭，又给虎符十、金符四十、银符百、金衣缎百段，以备赏有功之人。
English: In February of the 29th year of the Yuan Dynasty, the emperor issued an imperial edict to march to Fujian Province, confer the title of "Grand Marshal" to the three provinces of Fujian, Jiangxi and Hubei, gather 20,000 soldiers, set up two marshal's headquarters for the left and right armies, conscript 10,000 households, send 1,000 boats, give grain for one year, 40,000 baht in banknotes, and give 10 tiger charms, 40 gold charms, 100 silver charms, and 100 gold clothes to reward the meritorious.

古文：亦黑迷失等陛辞。
现代文：亦黑迷失等到殿前辞行。
English: Yihong lost his way and resigned in front of the palace.

古文：帝曰： 卿等至爪哇，明告其国军民，朝廷初与爪哇通使往来交好，后刺诏使孟右丞之面，以此进讨。 
现代文：皇帝对他们说 ：你等到爪哇，明告其国军民，我元朝起初与爪哇通使，关系很好。但后来，你们有人刺伤我朝使者孟右丞之脸面，所以才来讨伐你们。 
English: The emperor said to them, "Wait until you get to Java, and then inform the soldiers and people of your country. At the beginning of my reign, I had a very good relationship with the envoys from Java, but later, some of you stabbed the face of Meng Yujo, my envoy to Japan, and that is why I came to fight you.

古文：九月，军会庆元。
现代文：九月，兵会庆元。
English: In September, the soldiers' meeting celebrated the founding of the new year.

古文：弼、亦黑迷失领省事，赴泉州；兴率辎重自庆元登舟涉海。
现代文：弼与亦黑迷失领行省事，前往泉州。高兴则率辎重自庆元登舟渡海。
English: Zhai and Yihe lost their way and headed for Quanzhou. Happily, they were led by Zhai Chong from Qingyuan to cross the sea in a boat.

古文：十一月，福建、江西、湖广三省军会泉州。
现代文：十一月，福建、江西、湖广三省之军会于泉州。
English: In November, the armies of the three provinces of Fujian, Jiangxi and Hunan will gather in Quanzhou.

古文：十二月，自后渚启行。
现代文：十二月，自后渚启行。
English: In December, it set sail from Hougenzhu.

古文：三十年正月，至构栏山议方略。
现代文：三十年正月，至构栏山讨论征爪哇的战略策略。
English: In the first month of the 30th year, the strategic strategy of conquering Java was discussed on the mountain.

古文：二月，亦黑迷失、孙参政先领本省幕官并招谕爪哇等处宣慰司官曲出海牙、杨梓、全忠祖，万户张塔剌赤等五百余人，船十艘，先往招谕之。
现代文：二月，亦黑迷失、孙参政先领本省幕官以及招谕爪哇等处的宣慰司官员曲出海牙、杨梓、全忠祖、万户张塔剌赤等五百余人，乘船十艘，先往爪哇招降。
English: In February, more than five hundred people, including The Hague, Yang Zi, Quanzhong Zu, and Wanyu Zhang Taqi, including Sun Sangzheng, who was the first to lead the provincial shogun, and the officials of the Consolation Division who invited Java and other places, took ten ships to Java.

古文：大军继进于吉利门。
现代文：接着，大军便继续前进，达吉利门。
English: The army then marched on to the Dakhili Gate.

古文：弼、兴进至爪哇之杜并足，与亦黑迷失等议，分军下岸，水陆并进。
现代文：弼与兴进入爪哇的杜并足，与亦黑迷失商议，决定分兵登岸，水陆并进。
English: Zhai and Xing entered Java's Du at the same time, and discussed with Yihe, deciding to split the army and go ashore, marching on land and sea together.

古文：弼与孙参政帅都元帅那海、万户宁居仁等水军，自杜并足由戎牙路港口至八节涧。
现代文：弼与孙参政率领都元帅那海、万户居仁等水军自杜并足经戎牙路巷口至八节涧。
English: Zhai and Sun Sangzhi led the naval forces of Marshal Naha, Wanyu Jiren and other naval forces from Du and walked through the intersection of Eunosha Road to Hachijuban.

古文：兴与亦黑迷失帅都元帅郑镇国、万户脱欢等马步军，自杜并足陆行。
现代文：兴与亦黑迷失率都元帅郑镇国、万户脱欢等马步兵自杜并足走陆路前进。
English: Both Xing and Yi Hei lost their horses, and the horse infantrymen, including Marshal Zheng Zhenguo and Wanhu Deguan, marched forward on foot by land.

古文：以万户申元为前锋。
现代文：陆路以万户申元为前锋。
English: The overland route is headed by 10,000 households.

古文：遣副元帅土虎登哥，万户褚怀远、李忠等乘钻锋船，由戎牙路，于麻喏巴歇浮梁前进，赴八节涧期会。
现代文：又派副元帅土虎登哥、万户褚怀远与李忠等乘钅赞锋船，由戎牙路，在麻喏巴歇搭浮桥前进，约定在八节涧会合。
English: He also sent Vice-Marshals Tuhu Dengguo, Wanyu Yao Huaiyuan and Li Zhong to set out from Eulsa Road on a floating bridge in Ma'anshan Bay, and agreed to meet at eight o'clock.

古文：招谕爪哇宣抚司官言：爪哇主婿土罕必阇耶举国纳降，土罕必阇耶不能离军，先令杨梓、甘州不花、全忠祖引其宰相昔剌难答吒耶等五十余人来迎。
现代文：招谕爪哇的宣慰司官员说 ：爪哇国王的女婿土罕必耶想带领全国向元朝纳贡投降，但他不能离开爪哇军队，故宣慰司先令杨梓、甘州不花、全忠祖引其宰相昔剌难答吒耶等五十余人来迎接元军。
English: The official of the Consolation Division, who invited Java, said: The son-in-law of the king of Java, Tu Han Biye, wanted to lead the whole country to pay tribute to the Yuan Dynasty, but he could not leave the Java army. Therefore, the Consolation Division, Shilling Yang Zi, Ganzhou Nian Hua, Quanzhong Zu, led more than 50 people, including their prime ministers, to meet the Yuan Army.

古文：三月一日，会军八节涧。
现代文：三月一日，元军水陆两路在八节涧会师。
English: On March 1st, the former army, navy, and army marched together in eight sections.

古文：涧上接杜马班王府，下通莆奔大海，乃爪哇咽喉必争之地。
现代文：此涧上接杜马班王府，下通莆奔大海。它是爪哇的咽喉，是军事上的必争之地。
English: It is the throat of Java and a military battleground.

古文：又其谋臣希宁官沿河泊舟，观望成败，再三招谕不降。
现代文：又爪哇谋臣希宁官沿河泊舟，似在观望成败。元军再三招谕，也不投降。
English: In addition, Java's strategist, Sineng Guan, moored a boat along the river, as if waiting for success or failure. The Yuan army repeatedly called for reinforcements, but did not surrender.

古文：行省于涧边设偃月营，留万户王天祥守河津，土虎登哥、李忠等领水军，郑镇国、省都镇抚伦信等领马步军水陆并进。希宁官惧，弃船宵遁，获鬼头大船百余艘。令都元帅那海、万户宁居仁、郑珪、高德诚、张受等镇八节涧海口。
现代文：元行省在涧边设偃月营，留万户王天祥在此镇守。土虎登哥及李忠等带领水军，郑镇国、省都镇抚伦信等率领马步军水陆并进，希宁官害怕，连夜弃船逃走，元军缴获鬼头大船百余艘，行省又令都元帅那海、万户居仁、郑王圭、高德诚、张受等镇守八节涧海口。
English: Wang Tianxiang of Wanyu set up a lunar camp at the edge of the Yunnan province, and left Wanyu to guard the town. Tu Togo Dengge and Li Zhong led the navy, and Zheng Zhenguo and the provincial capital Zhen Fulunxin led the horse army to march on land and sea. The Xining officials were afraid and abandoned the ship overnight. The Yuan army captured more than a hundred ghost ships. The provincial government also ordered the town guards such as Marshal Naha, Wanyu Jiren, Zheng Wang Gui, Gao Decheng, and Zhang Shou to guard the eight sections of the Yunnan coast.

古文：大军方进，土罕必阇耶遣使来告，葛郎王追杀至麻喏巴歇，请官军救之。
现代文：元军刚刚进发，土罕必耶便遣使来告，葛郎王已追至麻喏巴歇，请求元军援救。
English: The Yuan army had just marched in, when Tu Han Biye sent an envoy to report that King Ge Lang had been chased to Ma'an Bache and had requested the Yuan army to come to his rescue.

古文：亦黑迷失、张参政先往安慰土罕必阇耶，郑镇国引军赴章孤接援。
现代文：于是，亦黑迷失、张参政先往安慰土罕必耶，郑镇国引兵到章孤救援。
English: As a result, Yihong was lost, Zhang Sangzheng went first to comfort Tu Hanbiye, and Zheng Zhenguo led soldiers to rescue Zhang Kuo.

古文：兴进至麻喏巴歇，却称葛郎兵未知远近，兴回八节涧。
现代文：及兴进至麻喏巴歇，土罕必耶又说还不知葛郎兵在什么地方，兴又返回八节涧。
English: And Xing went to Ma'an Baxi, but Tu Hanbiye said that he did not know where Ge Langhe was, and Xing returned to Hachijie.

古文：亦黑迷失寻报贼兵今夜当至，召兴赴麻喏巴歇。
现代文：接着亦黑迷失称爪哇军今夜将至，又要兴带兵到麻喏巴歇。
English: Next, he said that the Javanese army would arrive tonight, and that he would like to take soldiers to Matsu Baxi.

古文：七日，葛郎兵三路攻土罕必阇耶。
现代文：七日，葛郎兵分三路进攻土罕必耶。
English: On the seventh day, Ge Lang's soldiers launched a three-pronged attack.

古文：八日黎明，亦黑迷失、孙参政率万户李明迎贼于西南，不遇。
现代文：八日黎明，亦黑迷失、孙参政率万户李明迎战于西南，未见葛郎兵。
English: At the dawn of the 8th day, also lost in the darkness, Sun Zhengyi led 10,000 households of Li Ming to fight in the southwest, and no Ge Lang soldiers were seen.

古文：兴与脱欢由东南路与贼战，杀数百人，余奔溃山谷。
现代文：兴与脱欢由东南路与爪哇军战，杀数百人，其余奔溃于山谷之中。
English: Xing and Deguan fought with the Javanese army from the southeast road, killing hundreds of people, and the rest were crushed in the valley.

古文：日中，西南路贼又至，兴再战至晡，又败之。
现代文：日中，西南路的爪哇军又至，兴再战至黄昏，又击败爪哇军。
English: In the middle of the day, the Javanese army on the southwest road came again, and Xing fought again until dusk, and defeated the Javanese army.

古文：十五日，分军为三道伐葛郎，期十九日会答哈，听炮声接战。
现代文：十五日，分军三路围剿葛郎，约定在十九日在答哈会合，以炮声为号接战。
English: On the 15th, the detachments surrounded Ge Lang in three directions, and agreed to meet in Ata on the 19th to engage in battle under the banner of the sound of cannons.

古文：土虎登哥等水军溯流而上，亦黑迷失等由西道，兴等由东道进，士罕必阇耶军继其后。
现代文：土虎登哥等水军溯流而上，亦黑迷失等由西道，兴等由东道前进，土罕必耶之军继后。
English: The navy of the local tiger Dengge and others followed the stream upstream, the black and black lost and so on advanced from the west road, the Xing and so on advanced from the host, and the army of the local tiger Biye followed.

古文：十九日，至答哈。
现代文：十九日，至答哈。
English: On the 19th, the answer came.

古文：葛郎国主以兵十余万交战，自卯至未，连三战，贼败奔溃，拥入河死者数万人，杀五千余人。
现代文：葛郎国主以兵十万来战，自卯时战到未时，连续三次战斗，葛郎军败散，拥入河中淹死的达数万人，被杀的约五千余人。
English: Guro, the lord of the country, came to fight with a hundred thousand soldiers. From the time of the battle to the end of the war, there were three consecutive battles. Guro's army was defeated, and tens of thousands of people drowned in the river, and more than five thousand people were killed.

古文：国主入内城拒守，官军围之，且招其降。
现代文：国主退入城中拒守，官军包围此城，且招其来降。
English: The sovereign retreated into the city and refused to defend it. The government army encircled the city and invited it to surrender.

古文：是夕，国主哈只葛当出降，抚谕令还。
现代文：此夜，国主哈只葛当出降。
English: On this night, the lord of the country, Hatsugetsu, should surrender.

古文：四月二日，遣土罕必阇耶还其地，具入贡礼，以万户捏只不丁、甘州不花率兵二百护送。
现代文：四月二日，元遣土罕必耶还本地，使其准备入贡礼物，并令万户捏只不丁、甘州不花率兵两百护送。
English: On April 2nd, the former envoy, Tu Han Biye, returned to the local area to prepare tribute gifts, and was escorted by ten thousand households and two hundred soldiers from Ganzhou.

古文：十九日，土罕必阇耶背叛逃去，留军拒战。
现代文：十九日，土罕必耶背叛逃走，留军抗拒护送他的元军。
English: On the 19th, Tu Han Biye betrayed and fled, and the remaining troops refused to escort his former army.

古文：捏只不丁、甘州不花、省掾冯祥皆遇害。
现代文：捏只不丁、甘州不花、省掾冯祥皆遇害。
English: Pinch Dabuding, Ganzhou Nifa, and provincial governor Feng Xianglu were all killed.

古文：二十四日，军还。
现代文：二十四日，元军还。
English: On the 24th, the former soldiers returned.

古文：得哈只葛当妻子官属百余人，及地图户籍、所上金字表以还。
现代文：俘哈只葛当妻子官属百余人及地图、户籍与所上金字表返。
English: More than a hundred people, including the wife of the official, as well as maps, household registrations and the gold-lettered list were returned to the captives.

古文：事见史弼、高兴传。
现代文：此事见《史弼》、《高兴传》。
English: This matter can be found in "History" and "Happy Story."

古文：琉求琉求，在南海之东。漳、泉、兴、福四州界内彭湖诸岛，与琉求相对，亦素不通。
现代文：琉求在南海之东，与漳、泉、兴、福四州界内澎湖列岛相对，但素不相通。
English: Ryukyu is in the east of the South China Sea, opposite the Penghu Islands within the borders of the four states of Min, Quan, Xing and Fu, but they are not connected.

古文：天气清明时，望之隐约若烟若雾，其远不知几千里也。
现代文：天气晴朗时，若烟若雾，隐约可望，其远不知几千里也。
English: When the weather is fine, if it's smoky and foggy, it's vaguely possible, but it's thousands of miles away.

古文：西南北岸皆水，至彭湖渐低，近琉求则谓之落漈，漈者，水趋下而不回也。
现代文：西南北岸皆水，至澎湖，地势渐低，接近琉求的地方，有海底深陷处，是为落氵祭。
English: The north-west and south coasts are all water, up to Penghu, the terrain is gradually low, close to the place of Ryukyu, there is a deep depression in the seabed, it is a sacrificial offering.

古文：凡西岸渔舟到彭湖已下，遇飓风发作，漂流落漈，回者百一。
现代文：氵祭的意思，是海水下趋而不回。凡西岸渔船到澎湖以下，如遇飓风发作，漂流落氵祭，能平安脱险而回者，百中之一。
English: The meaning of "sacrifice" is to go under the sea and not return. If a fishing boat from the west coast sails below Penghu, in the event of a hurricane, it will drift to the sacrifice, and one in a hundred will be able to escape safely and return.

古文：琉求，在外夷最小而险者也。
现代文：琉求在诸外夷中可说是最小而又是最危险的地方。
English: Ryukyu is the smallest and most dangerous place in the world.

古文：汉、唐以来，史所不载，近代诸蕃市舶不闻至其国。
现代文：汉唐以来，史书中未见记载，近代诸国商船，也未听说有至此国的。
English: Since the Han and Tang Dynasties, there is no record in the history books, and it is not known that modern merchant ships from other countries have come to this country.

古文：世祖至元二十八年九月，海船副万户杨祥请以六千军往降之，不听命则遂伐之，朝廷从其请。
现代文：元世祖至元二十八年九月，海船副万户杨祥请求率六千军前往招降，如不请降便以武力征讨。朝廷采纳了这意见。
English: From Yuan Shizhu to September 28, Yuan Dynasty, Yang Xiang, the vice-commander of 10,000 households, requested 6,000 troops to go to invite surrender, and if they were not invited to surrender, they would be recruited by force. The imperial court adopted this opinion.

古文：继有书生吴志斗者上言生长福建，熟知海道利病，以为若欲收附，且就彭湖发船往谕，相水势地利，然后兴兵未晚也。
现代文：接着，有书生吴志斗者对朝廷说，自己生长福建，熟知海道利弊，若欲招降琉求，宜就澎湖发船前往劝说，同时观察水势地利，然后兴兵为妥。
English: Next, a scholar named Wu Zhidou told the imperial court that he had grown up in Fujian and was familiar with the advantages and disadvantages of the sea route. If he wanted to persuade the Ryukyus to surrender, he should send a ship to Penghu to persuade them, observe the water potential at the same time, and then raise an army.

古文：冬十月，乃命杨祥充宣抚使，给金符，吴志斗礼部员外郎，阮鉴兵部员外郎，并给银符，往使琉求。
现代文：冬十月，乃命杨祥充宣抚使，给金符，命吴志斗为礼部员外郎，阮鉴为兵部员外郎，都给银符，作为朝廷使臣往琉求。
English: In the winter of October, he was appointed Yang Xiangcheng's envoy and given a gold badge, and he was appointed Wu Zhidou as the ceremonial officer's brother-in-law, and Ruan Jian as the military officer's brother-in-law, and they were both given silver badges, as imperial envoys to Ryukyu.

古文：诏曰： 收抚江南已十七年，海外诸蕃罔不臣属。
现代文：他们带去皇帝给琉求王的诏书说 ：我朝廷抚江南已十七年，海外诸蕃无不臣属。
English: They brought the Emperor's edict to the Ryukyuan king, which said: "It has been seventeen years since the imperial court moved south of the Yangtze River.

古文：惟琉求迩闽境，未曾归附。
现代文：惟琉求近邻福建，未曾归附。
English: However, Ryukyu has been looking for a closer neighbor, Fujian, and has not yet been annexed.

古文：议者请即加兵。朕惟祖宗立法，凡不庭之国，先遣使招谕，来则按堵如故，否则必致征讨。
现代文：有人要求立即派兵征伐，朕认为，依据祖宗立法，凡不来朝的国家，先派使臣前往招谕，如来，则安居无患；否则将派兵征讨。
English: Some people have called for the immediate dispatch of conscripts. I believe that, in accordance with the ancestral legislation, any country that does not come to the DPRK should first send envoys to the invitation, and if they come, they will live safely; otherwise, they will send conscripts.

古文：今止其兵，命杨祥、阮鉴往谕汝国。
现代文：现在，朝廷还不对你们用兵，命杨祥、阮鉴等前往你国说明此意。
English: Right now, the imperial court has not ordered Yang Xiang, Ruan Jian and others to go to your country to explain this to you.

古文：果能慕义来朝，存尔国祀，保尔黎庶；若不效顺，自恃险阻，舟师奄及，恐贻后悔。
现代文：如能慕义归降，便保存你国王位，保护你国生灵；若自恃险阻，拒不降顺，则水军大至，恐怕那时后悔也来不及了。
English: If you can surrender, you will preserve your throne and protect the lives of your country; if you refuse to surrender, the navy will be so large that I am afraid it will be too late to regret it.

古文：尔其慎择之。 
现代文：望你慎重选择！ 
English: Choose carefully!

古文：二十九年三月二十九日，自汀路尾澳舟行，至是日巳时，海洋中正东望见有山长而低者，约去五十里。
现代文：二十九年三月二十九日，自汀路尾澳发船，在此日巳时，海洋中正东，望见有山长而低，相距约五十里。
English: On the 29th of March, 1929, the ship departed from Ting Road, Ou'ao. At that time of the day, the ocean was due east, and there was a long and low mountain in sight, about fifty miles away.

古文：祥称是琉求国，鉴称不知的否。
现代文：祥说就是琉求国；鉴说还不一定。
English: Xiang said that Ryukyu was seeking a country; Jing said that it was not necessarily.

古文：祥乘小舟至低山下，以其人众，不亲上，令军官刘闰等二百余人以小舟十一艘，载军器，领三屿人陈辉者登岸。
现代文：祥乘小船到低山之下，因其人多，没有亲自上岸，只令军官刘润等二百余人乘小船十一艘，携带武器，领三屿人陈火军登岸。
English: Xiang took a small boat to the foot of a low mountain. Due to the large number of people, he did not go ashore in person. He only ordered more than 200 people, including the officer Liu Run, to take 11 small boats, carry weapons, and lead the Chen Hui army from Sanyu to the shore.

古文：岸上人众不晓三屿人语，为其杀死者三人，遂还。
现代文：岸上之人不懂三屿人的话，杀死登岸元军三人，刘润等便退还。
English: The people on the shore did not understand the words of the people of Sanyu, killed three of the former soldiers ashore, and Liu Run and others were returned.

古文：四月二日，至彭湖。祥责鉴、志斗 已至琉求 文字，二人不从。
现代文：四月二日，至澎湖，祥责成鉴与志斗写出 已到琉求 的文字上报，二人不从。
English: On April 2, in Penghu, Xiang Rongcheng and Zhi Dou wrote the words "I have arrived in Ryukyu" and reported it to the authorities, but the two men did not comply.

古文：明日，不见志斗踪迹，觅之无有也。
现代文：次日，志斗失踪，后来也没有寻找到。
English: The next day, Shido went missing and was never found.

古文：先，志斗尝斥言祥生事要功，欲取富贵，其言诞妄难信，至是，疑祥害之。
现代文：起初，志斗曾斥责祥，说祥虚报邀功，想猎取富贵，说祥讲的话荒诞难信。到现在，志斗可能是怀疑祥要借故陷害自己，才暗地逃走。
English: At first, Zhidou had rebuked Xiang, saying that Xiang falsely claimed credit, wanted to hunt for riches, and that Xiang's words were absurd and hard to believe. Up to now, Zhidou may have suspected that Xiang was trying to frame himself, and then secretly fled.

古文：祥顾称志斗初言琉求不可往，今祥已至琉求而还，志斗惧罪逃去。
现代文：祥则说，志斗在前此就说过琉求不可往的话，现在见祥已到琉求并从琉求回国，所以，志斗是畏罪逃走的。
English: Xiang said that Zhidou had previously said that it was not possible to go to Ryukyu, but now that Xiang had gone to Ryukyu and returned from Ryukyu, Zhidou was afraid of crime and fled.

古文：志斗妻子诉于官。有旨，发祥、鉴还福建置对。
现代文：祥等回元后，志斗的妻子向朝廷控诉祥，于是皇帝下令要祥与鉴返福建对质。
English: After Xiang and others returned to Yuan, Zhidou's wife complained to the imperial court about Xiang, so the emperor ordered that Xiang be confronted with Ji's return to Fujian.

古文：后遇赦，不竟其事。
现代文：后来遇到国家大赦，此案便不了了之。
English: The case was later dropped after a national amnesty.

古文：成宗元贞三年，福建省平章政事高兴言，今立省泉州，距琉求为近，可伺其消息，或宜招宜伐，不必它调兵力，兴请就近试之。
现代文：成宗元贞三年，福建省平章政事高兴说，今在泉州成立行省，距琉求近，可窥探琉求的消息。宜招抚、宜征伐，不必调动他处兵力，兴请就近试试看。
English: In the third year of the reign of Chengzong Yuanzhen, the political leader of Fujian Province, Pingzhang, was pleased to say that the province was now established in Quanzhou, and it was close to the Ryukyus, and it was possible to spy on the news of the Ryukyus. It was appropriate to invite, it was appropriate to conquer, it was not necessary to mobilize troops from other places, please try it.

古文：九月，高兴遣省都镇抚张浩、福州新军万户张进赴琉求国，禽生口一百三十余人。三屿三屿国，近琉求。
现代文：九月，高兴遣省镇抚张浩、福州新军万户张进至琉求国，生擒一百三十多人。三屿国，靠近王留求。
English: In September, it was a pleasure to send Zhang Hao, the provincial commander of the Fuzhou New Army, and Wanyu Zhang to Ryukyu Province. More than 130 people were rescued. Sanyu Province, near Wangruqiu.

古文：世祖至元三十年，命选人招诱之。
现代文：世祖至元三十年，下令择人前往招降。
English: Thirty years after the death of the founder, he ordered a selection of people to go to recruit.

古文：平章政事伯颜等言： 臣等与识者议，此国之民不及二百户，时有至泉州为商贾者。
现代文：平章政事伯颜等说 ：臣等与了解此地情况的人商议，此国之民，不及二百户，有时还有人到泉州来经商。
English: Heizhang's political advisor, Bo Yan, said: "Our ministers and others consulted with people who know the situation here. There are less than two hundred households in this country, and sometimes people come to Quanzhou to do business.

古文：去年入琉求，军船过其国，国人饷以粮食，馆我将校，无它志也。乞不遣使。 
现代文：去年官军进入王留求，军船经过此国时，此国之人还为之提供粮食，提供住所，说明他们对我朝无异心，请不要遣招降之使。 
English: Last year, the government army entered Wangluqiu, and when warships passed through this country, the people of this country also provided them with food and shelter, indicating that they have no ill will towards my dynasty. Please do not send envoys to surrender.

古文：帝从之。
现代文：皇帝采纳了这个建议。
English: The emperor obeyed.

古文：马八儿等国海外诸蕃国，惟马八儿与俱蓝足以纲领诸国，而俱蓝又为马八儿后障，自泉州至其国约十万里。其国至阿不合大王城，水路得便风，约十五日可到，比余国最大。
现代文：海外诸藩国，唯有马八儿与俱蓝足为诸国之首，而俱蓝又是马八儿的靠山。自泉州至俱蓝约十万里。俱蓝至阿不合大王城，水路如得顺风，约十五日可到，它是诸国中之最大国。
English: Among the overseas feudal states, only Magpie and Bluefoot are the first among the states, and Bluefoot is the support of Magpie. It is about 100,000 miles from Quanzhou to Bluefoot. Bluefoot to Aba Great King City, the waterway can be reached in about 15 days if the wind is favorable, and it is the largest country among the states.

古文：世祖至元间，行中书省左丞唆都等奉玺书十通，招谕诸蕃。
现代文：世祖至元年间，行中书省左丞唆都发诏书十道，招谕诸藩归顺。
English: During the reign of King Sejong to the first year of the new year, the governor of Shandong Province, Zuo Zhao, issued an imperial edict to all ten provinces, inviting all the domains to submit.

古文：未几，占城、马八儿国俱奉表称藩，余俱蓝诸国未下。
现代文：不久，占城、马八儿国都奉表称藩，而俱蓝等国则未表示归附。
English: Before long, the provinces of Zhancheng and Ma Bailu were officially designated as domains, while the provinces of Gu Lan and others did not declare their affiliation.

古文：行省议遣使十五人往谕之。帝曰： 非唆都等所可专也，若无朕命，不得擅遣使。 
现代文：行省商议再派十五人前往说明招抚之意，世祖说： 此事不是唆都所能专断的，若无朕命，不得擅自派出使者。 
English: After the provincial consultation, he sent another fifteen people to explain the intention of the invitation, and the patriarch said: This matter is not arbitrarily decided by the emperor. If you do not have my permission, you must not send an envoy without my permission.

古文：十六年十二月，遣广东招讨司达鲁花赤杨庭璧招俱蓝。
现代文：十六年十二月，世祖遣广东招讨司达鲁花赤杨庭璧往俱蓝招降。
English: In December of the 16th year, the ancestor sent a letter to Guangdong to invite the Siddarushka Red Poplar Garden to bid farewell.

古文：十七年三月，至其国。国主必纳的令其弟肯那却不剌木省书回回字降表，附庭璧以进，言来岁遣使入贡。
现代文：十七年三月，至俱蓝国，国王必纳的令其弟肯那却不剌木省写回回文降表，请庭璧进呈皇帝，说来年将遣使入贡。
English: In March of the seventeenth year, in the blue country, King Bina ordered his younger brother, Kenna, to write back a reply form, and asked the court to present it to the emperor, saying that he would send tribute the next year.

古文：十月，授哈撒儿海牙俱蓝国宣慰使，偕庭璧再往招谕。
现代文：十月授哈撒儿海牙为俱蓝国宣慰使，偕同庭璧再次前往招降。
English: In October, Hassall Hague was appointed as the club's ambassador to the United States, and he and the court once again went to recruit.

古文：十八年正月，自泉州入海，行三月，抵僧伽耶山，舟人郑震等以阻风乏粮，劝往马八儿国，或可假陆路以达俱蓝国，从之。
现代文：十八年正月，自泉州入海，行三个月，抵僧伽耶山，水手郑震等举出风向不顺及缺乏粮食等困难，建议开往马八儿国，或许可以从马八儿国借陆路到达俱蓝国，哈撒儿海牙等采纳了这意见。
English: In the first month of the 18th year, after sailing from Quanzhou for three months and arriving at Mount Sangaya, the sailor Zheng Zhen and others pointed out the difficulties of the wind direction and the lack of grain, and suggested that they should go to Malabar country, and perhaps they could borrow a land route from Malabar country to reach the Blue Country. Hassal The Hague and others adopted this opinion.

古文：四月，至马八儿国新村马头，登岸。
现代文：四月，到达马八儿国新村码头，乃登岸。
English: In April, they arrived at the pier in Xincun, Malay Peninsula, and disembarked.

古文：其国宰相马因的谓： 官人此来甚善，本国船到泉州时官司亦尝慰劳，无以为报。
现代文：马八儿国宰相马因的说： 官人来此很好，我国船到泉州时，当局也曾加以慰劳。
English: "It's good that officials come here," said Ma Ying-jeou, the prime minister of Ma Biao. "When our ship arrived in Quanzhou, the authorities also consoled us.

古文：今以何事至此？ 
现代文：我们正无以报答上国，但不知你们现在到此所为何事？ 
English: We are going to the country for nothing in return, but I don't know why you are here now.

古文：庭璧等告其故，因及假道之事，马因的乃托以不通为辞。
现代文：庭璧等告以此次出洋的目的，并谈及想借道去俱蓝之事，马因的却推脱说自己与俱蓝并无交往。
English: Ting Bi and others announced the purpose of this overseas trip, and talked about wanting to go to the club blue, but Ma Ying said that he had no contact with the club blue.

古文：与其宰相不阿里相见，又言假道。不阿里亦以它事辞。
现代文：和马八儿国另一宰相不阿里会见时，庭璧等又提借道之事，不阿里也以他故推辞。
English: When he met with Bu Ali, another prime minister of the country of Mahbala, Ting Bi and others also mentioned the matter of taking a back route, and Bu Ali also declined on his own.

古文：五月，二人蚤至馆，屏人，令其官者为通情实： 乞为达朝廷，我一心愿为皇帝奴。我使札马里丁入朝，我大必阇赤赴算弹告变，算弹籍我金银田产妻孥，又欲杀我，我诡辞得免。
现代文：五月，马因的和不阿里二人很早来到元使臣住所，撇开众人，令其官者为通实情说 ：望贵使为我转达朝廷，我们一心愿为大元皇帝的奴仆，我国曾派使臣札马里丁入朝，但我大必赤赴算弹突然改变态度，没收了我们的金银田产及妻室儿女，又要杀我们，我们说了许多假话，才得免于死。
English: In May, Main's and Bo Ali's two men came to the former envoy's residence very early, leaving everyone else aside, so that their officials could tell the truth: the envoy conveyed to the court for me, we are willing to be the emperor's slaves, our country had sent the envoy Zamaridin to the imperial court, but I must go to the calculation bomb to suddenly change my attitude, confiscate our gold and silver crops and wives and children, and kill us, we said a lot of lies to avoid death.

古文：今算弹兄弟五人皆聚加一之地，议与俱蓝交兵；及闻天使来，对众称本国贫陋。此是妄言。
现代文：现在，国王兄弟五人都集于加一之地，商议与俱蓝开战。及听说天使到来，便对众说本国贫困，其实这是假话。
English: Now all five of the king's brothers were gathered together in the land of Canaan, discussing with one another about going to war, and when they heard that the angel had come, they said to the people that the land was poor, which was a lie.

古文：凡回回国金珠宝贝尽出本国，其余回回尽来商贾。
现代文：凡回回国的金珠宝贝，尽是我国出产的。其余的回回都来做生意。
English: All the gold and pearl treasures that come back to China are produced in our country. The rest come back to do business.

古文：此间诸国皆有降心，若马八儿既下，我使人持书招之，可使尽降。 
现代文：这里的许多国家，都有归附元朝之心，若马八儿一旦归附，我便使人持书招诱，可使诸国尽降。 
English: Many countries here have the heart to return to the Yuan Dynasty. If Ma Bale once returns, I will make people hold books to entice them, so that all countries can surrender as much as possible.

古文：时哈撒儿海牙与庭璧以阻风不至俱蓝，遂还。
现代文：此时哈撒儿海牙与庭璧因见风向不顺，便不去俱蓝而返。
English: At this time, Hazare, Hague and Tebi, seeing that the wind was not favorable, did not go to the club and returned.

古文：哈撒儿海牙入朝计事，期以十一月俟北风再举。
现代文：哈撒儿海牙入朝议事时，约定十一月刮北风时二人再去。
English: When Hassal entered the Hague for the morning deliberation, the two agreed to go again when the north wind blew in November.

古文：至期，朝廷遣使令庭璧独往。
现代文：但至十一月后，朝廷只令庭璧一人独往。
English: However, after November, the imperial court only allowed Ting Bi to go alone.

古文：十九年二月，抵俱蓝国。
现代文：十九年二月，抵俱蓝国。
English: In February 1919, he arrived in the Blue Country.

古文：国主及其相马合麻等迎拜玺书。
现代文：国王及宰相马合麻等迎拜大元皇帝玺书。
English: The king and the prime minister, Ma Haoma, etc. bowed to the great Yuan Emperor's imperial edict.

古文：三月，遣其臣祝阿里沙忙里告愿纳岁币，遣使入觐。
现代文：三月，遣使臣祝阿里沙忙里八的入贡。
English: In March, he sent an envoy to wish Alisha Shahri eight years of tribute.

古文：会苏木达国亦遣人因俱蓝主乞降，庭璧皆从其请。
现代文：当时，也里可温兀咱儿撒里马及木速蛮王马合麻等也在俱蓝，听说元朝使者到来，皆相率来告，愿纳岁币并遣使入朝。
English: At that time, Wenqiao's son Salima and Mihai's son Ma Haoma were also in the club. When they heard that the Yuan Dynasty's envoy had arrived, they all came forward to announce that they would accept the money and send it to the dynasty.

古文：四月，还至那旺国。庭璧复说下其主忙昂比。
现代文：恰好此时苏木达国亦派人通过俱蓝国王向元朝乞降，庭璧都同意了他们的请求。四月，庭璧回至那旺国，又说服其国王忙昂比归附。
English: At the same time, Sumida also sent people to the Yuan Dynasty to beg for surrender through King Gu Lan, and Ting Bi agreed to their request. In April, Ting Bi returned to Nawang and convinced its king, Busan Bi, to accede.

古文：至苏木都剌国，国主土汉八的迎使者。
现代文：至苏木都剌国，国王土汉八的迎接元使。
English: To Suzhou, the capital of Shandong Province, King Tutankhamun welcomed the envoy.

古文：庭璧因喻以大意，土汉八的即日纳款称藩，遣其臣哈散、速里蛮二人入朝。
现代文：庭璧劝说他们归附元朝，土汉八的当天就纳款称藩，欣然归附，并遣其臣哈散、速里蛮二人入朝。
English: Niibiki persuaded them to join the Yuan Dynasty, and on the same day that Tu Hanpachi came to power, he called it a domain, gladly joined it, and sent his vassals Hasan and Hayasato to the imperial court.

古文：二十年，马八儿国遣僧撮及班入朝；五月，将至上京，帝即遣使迓诸途。
现代文：二十年，马八儿国遣僧人撮及班入朝。五月，将至上京，世祖遣使到中途迎接。
English: Twenty years have passed since the monks sent by Ma Ba'er's state arrived in Korea. In May, they will go to Beijing, and the patriarch will send an envoy to meet them halfway.

古文：二十三年，海外诸蕃国以杨庭璧奉诏招谕，至是皆来降。
现代文：二十三年，海外诸蕃国因杨庭璧奉诏书劝降而皆来附。
English: In 233, due to Yang Tingbi's imperial edict of persuasion and surrender, all of the foreign countries followed suit.

古文：诸国凡十：曰马八儿，曰须门那，曰僧急里，曰南无力，曰马兰丹，曰那旺，曰丁呵儿，曰来来，曰急兰亦曈，曰苏木都剌，皆遣使贡方物。
现代文：这些国家共有十个，即马八儿、须门那、僧急里、南无力、马兰丹、那旺、丁呵儿、来来、急兰亦、苏木都剌等，都遣使入贡。
English: A total of ten of these countries, namely, Mabara, Sumena, Monkyururi, Nanweili, Marandan, Nawang, Dingor, Lailai, Kyuranyi, Sumi, and others, all sent tribute.

