古文：纥石烈良弼，本名娄室，回怕川人也。
现代文：纥石烈良弼，本名叫娄室，是回怕川人。
English: Shizukuishi Ryoryaku, whose real name was Shishitsu, was a returnee from the Ikawa River.

古文：曾祖忽懒。
现代文：他的曾祖父是忽懒。
English: His great-grandfather was an idler.

古文：祖忒不鲁。
现代文：他的祖父叫忒不鲁。
English: His grandfather's name was Zou Boru.

古文：父太宇，世袭蒲辇，徙宣宁。
现代文：他的父亲太宇，世袭蒲辇，将家迁徙到宣宁。
English: His father, Tai Yu, a hereditary pooh-pooh, moved the family to Xuanning.

古文：天会中，选诸路女直字学生送京师，良弼与纳合椿年皆童丱，俱在选中。
现代文：天会中，朝廷下令选诸路女真籍学生送到京师，良弼和纳合椿年都正值童年，都在中选之列。
English: In the heavenly meeting, the imperial court ordered the selection of female students from all walks of life to be sent to the Beijing division. Both Liang Wei and Na Hecun are in their childhood, and are among the selected.

古文：是时，希尹为丞相，以事如外郡，良弼遇之途中，望见之，叹曰： 吾辈学丞相文字，千里来京师，固当一见。 
现代文：在那时候，希尹是丞相，因有事到外郡，良弼在进京途中遇到他，希望能见到他。良弼感叹地说 ：我辈学的是丞相的文字，从千里之外来京师，本来应当见一面。 
English: At that time, Hiiin was the prime minister, and due to an emergency, he was out of the county. On his way to Beijing, Yoshitaka ran into him, hoping to see him. Yoshitaka said with a sigh, "My generation studied the prime minister's writings, and coming from thousands of miles away to teach in Beijing, I should have seen him."

古文：乃入传舍求见，拜于堂下。
现代文：于是到旅舍求见，拜在堂下。
English: So I went to the hostel to see him, and bowed down before him.

古文：希尹问曰： 此何儿也？ 
现代文：希尹问道： 这是哪来的小孩？ 
English: Xi Yin asked: Where did this child come from?

古文：良弼自赞曰： 有司所荐学丞相文字者也。 
现代文：良弼自我介绍说 ：我是有司所推荐来学习丞相文字的学生。 
English: Introducing himself, Ryosuke said, "I am a student who was recommended by Yushisho to study Josho characters.

古文：希尹大喜，问所学，良弼应对，无惧色。
现代文：希尹听了非常高兴，问关于学问的事，良弼应对自如，一点儿也不害怕。
English: Xi Yin was very happy to hear this. When he asked about learning, Liang Yao was at ease and not afraid at all.

古文：希尹曰： 此子他日必为国之令器。 
现代文：希尹说： 这个学生他日一定会成为国家的美材。 
English: Xi Yin said: This student will surely become the country's top beauty one day.

古文：留之数日。
现代文：希尹留良弼住了几天。
English: Xi Yin Liu Liang stayed there for a few days.

古文：年十四，为北京教授，学徒常二百人。时人为之语曰： 前有谷神，后有娄室。 
现代文：良弼十四岁，就做了北京教授，学徒常常是二百人，当时人们对这件事评价说： 前有谷神，后有娄室。 
English: At the age of fourteen, Liang Zhen became a professor in Beijing, and there were often two hundred apprentices. At that time, people commented on this matter, saying: "There is a valley god in front, and a sickroom behind."

古文：其从学者，后皆成名。
现代文：跟他学习的人，后来都成了名。
English: People who studied with him later became famous.

古文：年十七，补尚书省令史。
现代文：良弼十七岁，补尚书省令史。
English: At the age of seventeen, he supplemented the history of the Ministry of Education and Culture.

古文：簿书过目，辄得其隐奥。
现代文：簿书一旦经他过目，他则能得到其中隐藏的奥妙。
English: Once the book has passed through his eyes, he can get the secret hidden in it.

古文：虽大文牒，口占立成，词理皆到。
现代文：即使是大文章，口占立成，词理都很到家。
English: Even if it's a big article, it's well-written, and the words are well-reasoned.

古文：时学希尹之业者称为第一。
现代文：良弼在当时学习希尹文字的人中称为第一名。
English: At that time, Liang Kun was said to be the first among those who studied Xi Yin characters.

古文：除吏部主事。
现代文：后来出任吏部主事。
English: He was given the post of the head of the personnel department.

古文：天德初，累官吏部郎中，改右司郎中，借秘书少监为宋主岁元使。
现代文：天德初年，良弼官升到吏部郎中，又改任右司郎中，借秘书少监之名为宋主岁元使。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Tenmu, Ryoseikan was promoted to Junior Secretary of the Ministry of Internal Affairs, and then he was transferred to Junior Secretary of the Ministry of the Right, with the title of Junior Secretary of the Ministry of the Song Dynasty.

古文：是时，纳合椿年为参知政事，荐良弼才出己右，用是为刑部尚书，赐今名。
现代文：当时，纳合椿年是参知政事，推荐良弼才能胜过自己，于是良弼被委任刑部尚书。
English: At that time, Nahua Tsubinen was a member of the prefectural government, and he recommended Yoshitaka to surpass himself. As a result, Yoshitaka was appointed as the head of the criminal investigation department.

古文：丁父忧，以本官起复。
现代文：并被赐予 纥石烈良弼 这个名字。遭逢父亲丧事，良弼以本官应召任职。
English: He was given the name "Shi Rong Liang" (石烈良). When his father passed away, Liang was called to serve in his position.

古文：海陵尝曰： 左丞相张浩练达事务，而颇不实。
现代文：海陵王完颜亮曾经说过： 左丞相张浩处事练达，但很不务实。
English: Hailing Wang Canyanliang once said: "Sojo Minister Zhang Hao is well-practiced, but he is not very pragmatic.

古文：刑部尚书娄室言行端正，无所阿谄。 
现代文：刑部尚书娄室言行端正，一点儿也不阿谀谄媚。 
English: The head of the criminal investigation department, Shang Shuxu, is a man of upright words and deeds, and is not at all a sycophant.

古文：因谓椿年曰： 卿可谓举能矣。
现代文：他还对椿年说 ：卿可以说是善举能人。
English: He also said to Tsubakinen, "Sir can be said to be a capable person.

古文：常人多嫉胜己者，卿举胜于己者，贤于人远矣。 
现代文：常人多数嫉妒胜过自己的人，卿却推荐胜过自己的人，比一般人贤明多了！ 
English: Most ordinary people envy those who are better than themselves, but Sir recommends those who are better than themselves, who are much wiser than ordinary people!

古文：改侍卫亲军马步军都指挥使。
现代文：于是改授椿年卫亲军马步军都指挥使的职务。
English: As a result, he was re-assigned to the post of commander-in-chief of the Tsubakien Imperial Guards and the Horse Guards.

古文：良弼音吐清亮，海陵诏谕臣下，必令良弼传旨，闻者莫不耸动，以故常被召问。
现代文：良弼讲话吐音清亮，海陵王诏谕臣下，一定要让良弼传旨，听他读诏书的人没有不受到惊动的，因为这个缘故良弼常常被海陵召见问话。
English: Liang Jie's speech was clear and lucid, and the king of Hailing ordered his subjects to let Liang Jie deliver his message. No one who listened to him read the edict was not shocked, because for this reason Liang Jie was often summoned by Hailing for questioning.

古文：不逾年，拜参知政事，进尚书右丞，赐佩刀入宫，转左丞。
现代文：不过一年，良弼又拜参知政事的官职，升为尚书右丞，海陵王赐他享有佩刀进宫的特权，后又转任左丞。
English: However, one year later, he was promoted to the official position of Sangchong and was promoted to Shangshu Ujo. King Hailing granted him the privilege of entering the palace with a sword, after which he was transferred to Zuojo.

古文：海陵伐宋，良弼谏不听，以为右领军大都督。
现代文：海陵攻伐宋国，良弼劝谏他不听，任命良弼为右领军大都督。
English: Hailing invaded Song, but Liang Pi persuaded him not to listen, and appointed Liang Pi as the right leader of the army and the grand governor.

古文：海陵在淮南，诏良弼与监军徒单贞抚定上京、辽右。
现代文：海陵在淮南，下诏命令良弼和监军徒单贞安抚平定上京、辽右。
English: Hailing from Huainan, he issued an imperial edict ordering Liang Xuan and the military overseers to pacify Shan Zhen and subdue Shangjing and Liao Yu.

古文：既而，诸军往往道亡北归，而世宗即位于辽阳，良弼乃还汴京。
现代文：不久之后，诸军往往半路上向北方逃跑，世宗在辽阳即位，良弼于是也回到汴京。
English: Soon after, the armies often fled halfway to the north. Shizong ascended to the throne in Liaoyang, and Liang Kun also returned to Beijing.

古文：海陵死，世宗就以良弼为南京留守兼开封尹，再兼河南都统，召拜尚书右丞。
现代文：海陵死后，世宗就让良弼做南京留守兼开封府尹，又兼河南都统，召拜他为尚书右丞。
English: After Hailing's death, King Sejong asked Yang Jiong to stay in Nanjing and serve as both the governor of Hebei Province and the governor of Henan Province, calling him Shang Shujo.

古文：世宗谓良弼曰： 卿尝谏正隆伐宋，不用卿言，以至废殒。
现代文：世宗对良弼说 ：卿曾经谏议正隆攻打宋国，不采纳卿的意见，以至于衰亡了。
English: Shizong said to Liang Qi: "Your Excellency once proposed that Zhenglong attack Song, but he did not accept your advice, so he fell into decline.

古文：当时怀禄偷安之人，朕皆黜之矣。
现代文：当时领着薪水却苟且偷安的人，朕都将他们罢黜了。
English: At that time, those who received a salary but stole from the people, I dismissed them all.

古文：今复用卿，凡于国家之事，当尽言，无复顾忌也。 
现代文：今天又起用卿，凡是关系到国家的事，卿应当知无不言，言无不尽，不要有什么顾忌。 
English: Today, he has been appointed as a minister again. In all matters related to the country, the minister should know everything and say everything, and should not have any scruples.

古文：良弼顿首谢。
现代文：良弼顿首谢恩。
English: Good luck, and thank you.

古文：窝斡败于陷泉，入奚中，诏良弼佩金牌及银牌四，往北京招抚奚、契丹。
现代文：窝斡在陷泉打了败仗，进入奚中，皇上诏令良弼佩带四枚金牌和银牌，前往北京去招抚奚和契丹人。
English: After Wo Tao lost the battle in Jiequan and entered Shandong Province, the emperor ordered Liang Tao to wear four gold medals and silver medals and go to Beijing to appease Shandong and the Khitan people.

古文：还，拜尚书左丞。
现代文：事毕归来，良弼出任尚书左丞。
English: After returning home, Yoshitaka took up the post of Shoshu-zojo.

古文：上言： 祖宗以来未录功赏者，臣考按得凡三十二人，宜差第封赏。 
现代文：良弼上书说 ：祖宗以来没有记录因功得赏的人，臣考核共有三十二人，应该对他们论功大小排列，分封奖赏。 
English: "Since the time of our ancestors, there has been no record of people who have received awards for their merits. There are a total of thirty-two people who have been appraised by the vassals. They should be ranked according to the size of their merits and given awards," said the letter from Liang Zhen.

古文：诏曰： 已有五品以上官者，闻奏。
现代文：皇帝下诏说 ：已有五品以上官职的，听奏。
English: The emperor issued an edict saying, "Those who have five or more official ranks should listen to music."

古文：六品以下及无官者，尚书省约量迁除。 
现代文：六品以下以及没有官职的，由尚书省衡量予以迁升委任。 
English: Those who are below the sixth grade and have no official post shall be promoted and appointed by the Ministry of Education and Culture.

古文：自是功劳毕赏矣。
现代文：自然是有功劳的全部得到了奖赏。
English: Naturally, all who were meritorious were rewarded.

古文：进拜平章政事，封宗国公。
现代文：良弼则进拜平章政事，被封为宗国公。
English: Yoshitaka, on the other hand, was given the title of sokoku no kimi.

古文：初，山东两路猛安谋克与百姓杂居，诏良弼度宜易置，使与百姓异聚，与民田互相犬牙者，皆以官田对易之，自是无复争诉。
现代文：当初，山东两路猛安谋克和百姓混在一起居住，皇帝诏令良弼看情况适当予以调整安置，让猛安谋克与百姓分开居住。良弼让那些与百姓田地互相交叉的，都拿官田和他们对换，从此没有再争论打官司的。
English: At first, the Meng'an Moke and the common people of Shandong were living together. The emperor ordered Liang Zhao to adjust and resettle the Meng'an Moke and the common people according to the situation. Liang Zhao allowed the Meng'an Moke and the common people to live separately. The Meng'an Moke and the common people who crossed each other's fields were exchanged for the official fields. Since then, there have been no disputes or lawsuits.

古文：六年十一月，皇太子生日，上置酒于东宫，良弼、志宁同赐酒。
现代文：大定六年十一月，是皇太子的生日，皇上在东宫设置酒席，良弼、志宁一同被赐参加宴会。
English: In November of the 6th year of the Taisho era, which was the birthday of the crown prince, the emperor set up a banquet in the East Palace, and Yoshitaka and Shining were given the opportunity to attend the banquet.

古文：上曰： 边境无事，中外晏然，将相之力也。 
现代文：皇帝说： 边境平安无事，中外和谐安宁，这是将相们的功劳啊！ 
English: The emperor said: The border is safe and sound, and there is harmony and tranquility between China and other countries. This is the merit of the generals!

古文：良弼奏曰： 臣等不才，备位宰相，敢不竭犬马之力。 
现代文：良弼答道： 臣等不才，充当宰相，怎么敢不竭尽犬马之力。 
English: Liang Kun replied: "As a minister, I am not good enough. How dare I not do my best as the prime minister?"

古文：上悦。
现代文：皇上喜悦。
English: The second generation is very happy.

古文：进拜右丞相，监修国史。
现代文：良弼进拜右丞相、监修国史。
English: Ryosuke Jinbei became the Minister of the Right and supervised the revision of the national history.

古文：世宗谓良弼曰： 海陵时，记注皆不完。
现代文：世宗对良弼说： 海陵在位的时候，国事记载注释都不完全。
English: Sejong said to Ryosei: When Haering was on the throne, the national affairs records and commentaries were incomplete.

古文：人君善恶，为万世劝戒，记注遗逸，后世何观？
现代文：作为人君善还是恶，对万世子孙都是鉴借，记载注释有遗漏，后世怎么看？
English: As a human being, whether he is good or evil, he is a reference for all future generations. There are omissions in the notes, so how will future generations view him?

古文：其令史官旁求书之。 
现代文：这些地方要让史官从侧面调查出来写上它。 
English: These are places for historians to investigate from the side and write about it.

古文：又曰： 五从以上宗室在省祗候者，才有可用，具名闻奏。
现代文：又说 ：五从以上宗室在省祗等候的，才可以用，要写上姓名听上报。
English: He also said, "Only those who have been waiting in the provincial capital for five generations can use it. They should write down their names and listen to the report."

古文：其猥冗不足莅官者，亦闻奏罢去。 
现代文：其中猥琐繁冗不够做官条件的，也要听上报以便罢免。 
English: Among them, the filthiness and tediousness are not enough to do the official conditions, but also to listen to the report in order to be dismissed.

古文：左丞完颜守道奏： 近都两猛安，父子兄弟往往析居，其所得之地不能赡，日益困乏。 
现代文：左丞完颜守道奏道 ：临近都城的两猛安，父子兄弟往往分居，他们所得的田地不能赡养老小，生活日益困乏。 
English: Zuojo kanyanshu doso doso: Near the capital city of Dammuan, father and son brothers often live separately, the fields they earn can not support the elderly, and life is increasingly poor.

古文：上以问宰臣，良弼对曰： 必欲父兄聚居，宜以所分之地与土民相换易。
现代文：皇上问宰臣这件事怎么处理，良弼回答： 一定要让他们父兄居住在一起，应当拿他们所分得的田地与当地居民调换。
English: The emperor asked Zaisen how to handle the matter, and Ryosuke replied, "We must let their parents and brothers live together, and they should exchange the land they share with the local residents."

古文：虽暂扰，然经久甚便。 
现代文：虽然暂时看起来扰乱了秩序，然而从长久看很是方便。 
English: Although it seems to disturb the order temporarily, it is very convenient in the long run.

古文：右丞石琚曰： 百姓各安其业，不若依旧便。 
现代文：右丞相石琚说： 百姓各自安居乐业，不如维持原来的布局方便。 
English: Right-wing Minister Shi Hao said: It is better to maintain the original layout and convenience for the people to live and work in peace.

古文：上竟从良弼议。
现代文：皇上竟然听从了良弼的建议。
English: The emperor actually followed Ryoma's advice.

古文：《太宗实录》成，赐良弼金带、重彩二十端，同修国史张景仁、曹望之、刘仲渊以下赐有差。
现代文：《太宗实录》编撰完成，皇上赐给良弼金带、彩绸二十端，一同修订国史的张景仁、曹望之、刘仲渊也都受到不同层次的赏赐。
English: The compilation of the "Taisong Record" was completed, and the emperor gave the emperor a gold band and 20 pieces of colored silk to the emperor. Zhang Jingren, Cao Wangzhi, and Liu Zhongyuan, who revised the national history together, were also rewarded at different levels.

古文：世宗与侍臣论古今为臣孰贤不肖，因谓宰相曰： 皇统、正隆多杀臣僚，往往死非其罪。
现代文：世宗与侍臣在一起议论从古至今的大臣谁贤谁不肖，就这个话题对宰相说： 皇统、正隆杀了不少臣僚，但他们并不是死于犯了罪。
English: Sejong and his retainers were discussing the merits and demerits of ministers from ancient times to the present. On this topic, he said to the prime minister: Emperor and Zhenglong killed many ministers, but they did not die of a crime.

古文：朕委卿等以大政，毋违道以自陷，毋曲从以误朕。
现代文：朕委任卿等以大政，不要背离正道而自己陷进泥坑，不要委曲服从而误了朕的大事。
English: I appoint my ministers to carry out great policies. Don't deviate from the right path and get yourself into a quagmire. Don't make mistakes and miss my important tasks.

古文：惟忠惟孝，匡救辅益，期致太平。 
现代文：只有忠只有孝，匡救辅益，以期望达到太平盛世。 
English: Only loyalty, only filial piety, only benevolence, and only hope for a peaceful and prosperous world.

古文：良弼对曰： 臣等过蒙嘉惠，虽谫薄，敢不尽心。
现代文：良弼回答说： 臣等过分承蒙皇上最好的待遇，虽然自己浅薄，怎么敢不尽心？
English: Liang Yao replied, "Our vassals have received the best treatment from the emperor. Although they are shallow, how dare they not do their best?

古文：圣谕谆谆，臣等不胜万幸。 
现代文：圣上谆谆教诲，臣等不胜万幸。 
English: According to the teachings of His Holiness the Dalai Lama, it is better to be lucky than good.

古文：良弼请于榷场市马，毋拘牝牡， 今官马甚少，一旦边境有警，乃调于民，不亦晚乎。 
现代文：良弼请求在榷场买马，不拘牝牡。现在官马很少，一旦边境发生警报，才去从民间征调，不就晚了吗？
English: Liang Qi requested to buy horses at the market, and he was allowed to do so. Nowadays, there are very few official horses. As soon as there is an alarm at the border, it is necessary to recruit horses from the private sector. Isn't it too late?

古文：上从之。
现代文：皇上听从了他的意见。
English: Emperor Dezong accepted his suggestion.

古文：八年，选侍卫亲军，世宗闻其中多不能弓矢，诏使习射。
现代文：八年，国家挑选侍卫亲军，世宗听说许多人不能拉弓射箭，便诏令他们练习射箭。
English: In the eighth year, the state selected the bodyguards to be close to the army. Sejong heard that many people could not draw a bow and shoot arrows, so he ordered them to practice archery.

古文：顷之，问良弼及平章政事思敬曰： 女直人习射尚未行耶？ 
现代文：过后，又问良弼及平章政事思敬说： 女真人训练射箭还未施行吗？ 
English: Afterward, he also asked Liang Jun and Ping Zhang about political affairs and said: Hasn't the archery training for women been implemented yet?

古文：良弼对曰： 已行之矣。 
现代文：良弼回答说 ：已经施行了。 
English: Liang Juan replied: It has already been implemented.

古文：同知清州防御事常德晖上书言： 吏部格法，止叙年劳，虽有材能，拘滞下位。
现代文：同知清州防御事常德晖上书写道： 吏部规定的法令，仅停止在叙说年头苦劳，虽然有才能，却拘限滞留在下位。
English: Tong Zhi Qingshou Defense Affairs Decrees wrote: The decree stipulated by the cadre department only stopped the hard work at the beginning of the year, although talented, but the detention limit remained in the lower position.

古文：刺史、县令，多不得人。
现代文：刺史、县令，大多选不出人。
English: Historians and prefectural governors, for the most part, cannot be elected.

古文：乞密加访察，然后廉问。
现代文：请允许秘密加强访察，然后廉问。
English: Please allow me to secretly strengthen the inspection and then ask questions.

古文：今酒税使尚选能吏，县令可不择人才，乞以能吏当任酒税使者，任亲民之职。 
现代文：现在酒税使尚且要选能干的官员，县令可以不择人才，请求让担任酒税使的能干的官员，出任亲近人民的官职。 
English: At present, the liquor tax authorities still need to select competent officials, and the county magistrate may, regardless of talent, request that the competent officials serving as liquor tax authorities be appointed to positions close to the people.

古文：上是其言，谓宰相曰： 朕思庶职多不得人，中夜而寤，或达旦不能寐。
现代文：皇上同意他的话，对宰相说： 朕考虑普通的官职大多得不到人才，半夜睡醒，有时到天明还睡不着。
English: The emperor agreed with his words and said to the prime minister: "I consider that most of the ordinary official positions do not get talent, I wake up in the middle of the night, and sometimes I can't sleep until dawn.

古文：卿等注意选择，朕亦密加体察。 
现代文：卿等注意选择，朕也暗中加强体察。 
English: Sir, please pay attention to the selection, I will also secretly strengthen my observation.

古文：良弼对曰： 女直、契丹人，须是曾习汉人文字，然后可。
现代文：良弼回答说： 女真、契丹人，必须是曾经学习过汉人文字，然后可以考虑入选。
English: Liang Zhen replied: Nianzhen and Khitan people must have studied Chinese characters before they can be considered for selection.

古文：方今大率多为党与，或称誉于此，或见毁于彼，所以难也。 上曰： 朕所以密令体察也。 
现代文：当今大概许多人结成党派，有的人在这里有声誉，有的人在那里诋毁我朝，这是难选人才的原因。 皇上说 ：朕所以才密令体察。 
English: Nowadays, many people have formed political parties, some people have a good reputation here, and some people have slandered our dynasty there, which is why it is difficult to choose talent.

古文：上谓良弼曰： 猛安谋克牛头税粟，本以备凶年，凡水旱乏粮处就赈给之。 
现代文：皇上对良弼说 ：猛安谋克的牛头税粮，本来是拿它防备荒年的，现在凡是水灾旱灾造成缺粮的地方，就赈济发给那里。 
English: The emperor said to Liang Qi: "The tax grain from the cattle in Meng'an Moke was originally used to prepare for the bad years. Now, wherever there is a shortage of grain due to floods and droughts, it will be distributed there.

古文：进拜左丞相，监修国史如故。
现代文：良弼进拜左丞相，监修国史依然如故。
English: Yoshitaka Yoshihata became the left-wing prime minister, and the supervision of national history remained the same.

古文：良弼为相既久，练达朝政，上所询访尽诚开奏，垂绅正笏不动声气，议政多称上意。
现代文：良弼做宰相，时间已经很久了，对朝政干练通达，对皇上所询问的，他完全是诚恳开奏，垂绅正笏不动声气，议政所说多数称皇上的心意。
English: It's been a long time since Ryosuke has been prime minister. He's well-versed in court politics, and he answered the emperor's questions with sincerity and a calm demeanor. Most of what the prime minister said was in the emperor's best interest.

古文：以母忧去，起复旧职。
现代文：因为母丧离开朝廷，丧期未满，受召回来后仍任旧职。
English: Because of his mother's death, he left the imperial court before the period of mourning was over, but he still held his old post after he was recalled.

古文：是时，夏国王李仁孝乞分国之半，以封其臣任得敬。
现代文：当时，西夏国王李仁孝请求允许分出国家一半，拿来封给他的大臣任得敬。
English: At that time, the king of Western Xia, Li Renxiao, asked for permission to divide half of the country and give it to his minister, Ren Derqing.

古文：上以问群臣，群臣多言此外国事，从之可也。
现代文：皇上问群臣这件事怎么回答，群臣中多数人说这是外国的事，可以答应他。
English: The Emperor asked the courtiers how they would answer this matter, and most of them said that it was a foreign matter and that they could agree with him.

古文：上曰： 此非是仁孝本心，不可从。 
现代文：皇上说； 这不是出于仁孝本心，不能听从。 
English: The emperor said, "This is not out of benevolence and filial piety, I cannot obey.

古文：良弼议与上意合。
现代文：良弼的意见与皇上的意见相一致。
English: Yoshitaka's opinion coincided with the Emperor's.

古文：既而，夏国果诛任得敬，上表来谢。
现代文：事后，夏国果然杀死任得敬，上表来告知。
English: After the fact, Xia Guo did indeed kill Ren Desheng, as the table above tells us.

古文：参知政事宗叙请置沿边壕堑，良弼曰： 敌国果来伐，此岂可御哉？ 
现代文：参知政事宗叙申请沿边境设置壕堑，良弼说； 敌国如果真的来侵略，这壕堑怎能御敌？ 
English: "If the enemy country really invades, how can this trench resist the enemy?

古文：上曰： 卿言是也。 
现代文：皇上说 ：卿说得对。 
English: The emperor said: Your words are right.

古文：高丽国王王晛表让国于其弟皓，上疑之，以问宰相良弼。
现代文：高丽国王王日见上表说，要把国家大权让给他的弟弟鰑，皇上对此怀疑，便问宰相良弼的看法。
English: When the King of Goryeo, Wang Nichin, saw the above table and said that he wanted to cede state power to his brother Ye, the emperor doubted this and asked the opinion of the prime minister, Yeongyeong.

古文：良弼策以为让国非王见本心。
现代文：良弼分析认为让位不是出于王日见的本心。
English: According to Liang Qi's analysis, the abdication was not due to Wang Ritchie's true intentions.

古文：其后赵位宠求以四十州来附，其表果言王皓弑其兄晛，如良弼策，语在《高丽传》中。
现代文：后来赵位宠请求拿四十个州来归附我朝，他的表奏果然说王鰑杀了他的兄长王日见，正如良弼所分析的那样，这些记载在《高丽传》中。
English: Later, Zhao Yidong asked for forty states to be added to our dynasty, and his manifesto did indeed say that Wang Xi had killed his elder brother, Wang Rimin, as analyzed by Liang Jun. These records are in "Goryeo Biography."

古文：世宗罢采访官，谓宰臣曰： 官吏之善恶，何由知之？ 
现代文：世宗罢免了采访官，对宰相大臣们说 ：官吏的好与坏，从哪里可以了解呢？ 
English: Sejong dismissed the interviewer and said to the prime ministers and ministers, "How can we know whether a government official is good or bad?

古文：良弼对曰： 臣等当为陛下访察之。 
现代文：良弼回答说 ：臣等正为陛下访问考察他们。 
English: Yoshitaka replied, "Our ministers are inspecting them for His Majesty's visit."

古文：以进《睿宗实录》，赐通犀带、重彩二十端。
现代文：这些写进了《睿宗实录》，赐给良弼通犀带、彩绸二十端。
English: These were recorded in the "True Record of the Ruizong" and given to Liang Xun Tong as a rhinoceros ribbon and 20 pieces of colored silk.

古文：是年，有事南郊，良弼为大礼使。
现代文：当年，南郊有事，良弼任大礼使。
English: In that year, there was an incident in the southern suburbs, and Yoshitaka was appointed as a grand envoy.

古文：自收国以来，未尝讲行是礼，历代典故又多不同，良弼讨论损益，各合其宜，人服其能。
现代文：自从太宗收国以来，不曾讲究施行正确的礼节，历代关于礼仪方面的典故又多有不同，良弼研究各种礼仪的缺点和优点，有害的还是有益的，用在不同场合都很适宜，人们都佩服他的才能。
English: Since Emperor Taizong took over the country, he did not pay attention to the correct etiquette, and the allusions to etiquette in previous generations are often different. Liang Qi studied the shortcomings and advantages of various etiquettes, whether harmful or beneficial, and used them in different occasions. People admire his talent.

古文：上与良弼、守道论猛安谋克官多年幼，不习教训，无长幼之礼。
现代文：皇上和良弼、守道一起谈论猛安谋克官员中年幼的多，如果不对他们教育训练，他们不懂长幼之礼。
English: The Emperor, together with Ryosei and Shodo, talked about the fact that many Meng'an officials were young and middle-aged, and if they were not educated and trained, they would not understand the rites of elders and children.

古文：曩时乡里老者辄教导之。
现代文：向来，是乡里老年人教导他们。
English: Traditionally, it was the village elders who taught them.

古文：今乡里中耆老有能教导者，或谓事不在己而不问，或非其职而人不从。
现代文：现在，乡里中老年能教导他们的人，有的认为责任不在自己而不过问，有的没有职务而别人不服。
English: Now, the middle-aged and elderly people in the countryside who can teach them, some think that the responsibility is not their own and do not ask, some do not have positions and others are not satisfied.

古文：可依汉制置乡老，选廉洁正直可为师范者，使教导之。
现代文：可以依照汉代的制度设置乡老，选拔廉洁正直可以做师表模范的，让他来教导那些年幼的猛安谋克。
English: Town elders can be set up according to the Han Dynasty system, and those who are incorruptible and honest can be selected to be role models, so that they can teach those young people.

古文：良弼奏曰： 圣虑及此，亿兆之福也。 
现代文：良弼上奏说 ：圣上考虑到这些，是亿兆人民的福份。 
English: Yoshitaka Josho said, "Holy Father, considering these things, this is a blessing for billions of people.

古文：他日，上问曰： 朕观前史，有在下位而存心国家，直言为民者。
现代文：又一天，皇上又问道： 朕看前朝历史，有的人身居下位而关心国家大事，敢于为民直言。
English: The next day, the Emperor asked again, "Looking at the history of the previous dynasty, I saw that some people who were lower-ranking were concerned about national affairs and dared to speak out for the people.

古文：今无其人，何也？ 
现代文：现在没有这样的人，为什么呢？ 
English: There are no such people now, why?

古文：良弼曰： 今岂无其人哉。
现代文：良弼说： 现在怎么没有这种人呢？
English: "Why aren't there people like that now?" said Liang Juan.

古文：盖以直道而行，反被谤毁，祸及其身，是以不为也。 
现代文：都是因为按正直道理做事，则被毁谤，祸及其身，所以不再有人这样做。 
English: It's all because if you do things honestly, you're vilified, you're a scourge, so nobody does it anymore.

古文：大定十四年，岁在甲午，大兴尹璋为贺宋正旦使，宋人就馆夺其国书，诏梁肃详问。
现代文：大定十四年，是甲午年，大兴府尹璋任贺宋国正旦使，宋人到旅馆夺了他带的国书，皇上诏令梁肃去了解详情。
English: In the 14th year of Dading, it was the year of Jiawu, Daxingfu's Yin Xuan was appointed as the envoy of He Song Guozhengtan, Song people went to the hotel and took away the national book he brought with him, the emperor ordered Liang Su to find out the details.

古文：众议纷纷，谓凡午年必用兵，上以问良弼，对曰： 太祖皇帝以甲午年伐辽，太宗皇帝以丙午年克宋，今兹宋人夺我国书，而适在午年，故有此语，未必然也。 
现代文：朝中众人议论纷纷，说凡是午年一定要打仗。皇上问良弼这件事，良弼回答说 ：太祖皇帝在甲午年攻打辽国，太宗皇帝在丙午年攻克宋国，现在有宋人夺了我朝国书，而正巧在午年，所以人们有这种议论，但事情未必就是这样。 
English: The Emperor asked Ryosuke about this, and Ryosuke replied, "Emperor Taizu attacked Liao Province in the year A, Emperor Taizong attacked Song Province in the year B, and now the Song people have taken over my imperial rescript, and it just so happens to be the year A, so people have this kind of discussion, but things are not necessarily like that."

古文：既而，梁肃至宋，宋主起立授受国书，如旧仪。
现代文：不久，梁肃到了宋国，宋国君主起立接受我朝使臣授予的国书，一切遵循旧的礼仪。
English: Soon, Liang Su arrived in Song, and the monarch of Song stood up to receive the imperial edict granted by the envoy of my dynasty. Everything followed the old etiquette.

古文：梁肃既还，宋主遣工部尚书张子颜、知阁门事刘灊来祈请，其书曰： 言念眇躬，夙承大统。
现代文：梁肃还朝，宋主派工部尚书张子颜、知阁门事刘宗山来乞求请示，国书上写道： 言念眇躬，夙承大统。
English: In the reign of Liang Su, the Song ruler sent Zhang Ziyan from the Ministry of Industry and Commerce and Liu Zongshan from the Ministry of Education and Culture to beg for instructions. On the imperial edict, it was written:

古文：荷上国照临之惠，寻盟遂阅于十年。
现代文：承蒙上国关照降临之恩惠，追寻盟约阅办已十年。
English: Thanks to the benevolence of the care of the host country, it has been ten years to pursue the reading of the covenant.

古文：修两朝聘问之勤，继好靡忘于一日。
现代文：维护两朝聘问之勤，继承友好没忘记一天。
English: He has been diligent in maintaining the friendship between the two Koreas and has not forgotten a single day since inheriting the friendship.

古文：惟是函书之受，当新宾接之仪。
现代文：惟有这接受函书的方法，应当采用新的礼仪。
English: But this method of receiving letters calls for a new etiquette.

古文：尝空臆以屡陈，饬行人而再请。
现代文：曾经空想臆定而屡次陈述，整顿行人而后再请示。
English: Once imagined and repeatedly stated, rectify pedestrians and then ask for instructions.

古文：仰祈眷顾，俯赐矜从。 
现代文：仰祈眷念照顾，俯赐同情依从。 
English: Look up, pray for the bereaved, care for them, bestow compassion on them, and obey them.

古文：上与大臣议，良弼奏曰： 宋国免称臣为侄，免奉表为书，恩赐亦已多矣。
现代文：皇上和大臣商议，良弼奏道： 对宋国免去了称臣为侄，免去了奉表为书，恩赐已经是很多了。
English: The emperor and the minister deliberated, and Liang Jiao said: Song was spared from being called the nephew of a minister, and was spared from being written as a book. The gift was already a lot.

古文：今又乞免亲接国书，是无厌也，必不可从。 
现代文：现在又乞求免去宋主亲接国书，这样没有止境，一定不能听从他们。 
English: Now they are begging to be excused from receiving the imperial edict from Emperor Song. There is no end to this. We must not listen to them.

古文：平章政事完颜守道、参知政事移剌道与良弼议合。
现代文：平章政事完颜守道、参知政事移剌道附和良弼的意见。
English: The opinions of Pingzhang Zhengji, Yan Shou Dao, and Sanchi Zhengji, are attached.

古文：左丞石琚、右丞唐括安礼以为不从所请，必至于用兵。
现代文：左丞石琚、右丞唐括安礼认为不依从宋国的乞请，一定会导致动兵。
English: Zuo Cheng Shi and Zuo Cheng Tang Buanli believed that if they did not follow Song's entreaty, it would surely lead to the mobilization of troops.

古文：上谓琚等曰： 卿等所言，非也。
现代文：皇上对石琚等人说 ：卿等所说的话，不对。
English: The emperor said to Ishizaki and the others, "What your lordship and the others said is not right.

古文：所请有大于此者，更欲从之乎。 
现代文：他们所请示的事有比这件更大的，更要依从他们吗？ 
English: And what greater thing is there than these, that we should obey them?

古文：遂从良弼议，答其书，略曰： 弗循定分之常，复有授书之请。谓承大统，愈见自尊。
现代文：于是听从良弼的意见，回答了宋国书，大致说： 不遵循议定的分等级的常规，又有不亲自接受授书的请示，说是承受大统，却愈来愈表现自尊。
English: So, heeding the advice of Liang Zheng, he answered Song Guoshu, saying roughly: "If you do not follow the agreed-upon grading routine, and do not personally accept the request for awarding a book, and say that you are the bearer of the Great Unification, but increasingly show self-respect.

古文：奈何以若所为，尚求其欲。
现代文：奈何拿这样的所作所为，还要再求得到你们的非分之想。
English: How can you do such a thing and still expect to get your comeuppance?

古文：矧曰已行之礼，靡得而更。 
现代文：况且已施行多年的礼规，不得变更。 
English: Moreover, the etiquette that has been in place for many years must not be changed.

古文：其授受礼仪，终不复改。
现代文：关于授受国书的礼仪，终于没有再更改。
English: As for the etiquette of presenting and receiving the state seal, it has finally not been changed.

古文：上问宰臣： 尝求内外官举贤能，未闻有举者，何也？ 
现代文：皇上问宰相大臣 ：曾经要求朝内外官员推举贤能，没听说有推举出来的人，为什么？ 
English: The Emperor asked the Prime Minister: I once asked officials inside and outside the government to nominate people of merit. I have not heard of anyone being nominated. Why?

古文：参政魏子平请当举者每任须举一人，视其当不，以为赏罚。
现代文：参政魏子平请示，应当推举者每任期内必须推举一人，看他推荐的人是否得当，作为赏罚的条件。
English: Wei Ziping, a politician, requested that the nominator should nominate one person during each term of office to see if the person he recommended was appropriate, as a condition for reward and punishment.

古文：上曰： 宋制荐举，其人犯私罪者，举主虽至宰执，亦坐降罚。
现代文：皇上说： 宋朝制度规定荐举人才，如果被荐的人是犯贿赂罪的，举主虽然官至宰执，也要牵连降职处罚。
English: The emperor said, "The Song Dynasty system stipulates that talents should be recommended and promoted. If the person recommended is guilty of bribery, he or she will be punished by demotion, even if he or she is the head of the promotion.

古文：人心有恒者鲜，财利怵于前，或丧其所守。
现代文：人心坚定不移的少，往往在财利面前被诱惑而动心，有的人甚至丧失了他所应该遵守的气节。
English: The steadfastness of the human heart is rare, and it is often tempted by money and interests. Some people have even lost the principles that they should abide by.

古文：宰臣任大责重，岂坐是以为升黜邪？ 
现代文：宰相大臣职务大责任重，难道能牵连其中而成为升迁或者罢黜的条件吗？ 
English: The post of prime minister is a position of great responsibility. Can one be entangled in it and become a condition for promotion or dismissal?

古文：良弼曰： 前诏朝官六品以上，外官五品以上，各举所知，盍申明前诏？ 
现代文：良弼说 ：以前诏令当朝六品以上的官员，在外地任职的五品以上的官员，各自要举荐所了解的贤能之人。
English: Liang Qi said: Previously, the imperial edict required officials with six or more pins at the time of taking office, and officials with five or more pins serving in other places, to each recommend a person of merit they knew.

古文：从之。
现代文：为什么不重申前诏？ 
English: I followed his advice.

古文：上曰： 朕欲周知官吏善恶，若寻常遣官采访，恐用非其人。
现代文：皇上采纳了他的建议。皇上说 ：朕想公布官吏的善与恶，如果像寻常那样派官员去采访，恐怕用人不当。
English: The emperor accepted his suggestion, saying, "I want to make public the good and evil of officials. If I send officials to interview them as usual, I'm afraid I won't be employing the right people."

古文：然则官吏善恶，何以知之？ 
现代文：如果这样，那么官吏善恶怎样才能知道呢？ 
English: If this is the case, then how can officials know good from evil?

古文：良弼曰： 臣等当为陛下访察。 
现代文：良弼说 ：臣等一定为陛下访察。 
English: Yoshitaka said, "His Majesty will certainly be visited by his ministers."

古文：上曰： 然，但勿使名实混淆耳。 
现代文：皇上说： 这样可以，但不要让名实混淆就行了。 
English: The emperor said, "That's fine, but don't let the names be confused with the reality."

古文：上欲徙窝斡逆党，分散置之辽东。
现代文：皇上想把窝斡逆党分散迁徙到辽东。
English: The emperor wanted to disperse and relocate the rebels to Liaodong.

古文：良弼奏： 此辈已经赦宥，徙之生怨望。 
现代文：良弼上奏道 ：这些人已经免罪释放，让他们迁徙他们会生出怨恨和欲望。 
English: "These people have been released without charge, so if they are forced to migrate, they will develop resentment and desire," Yoshitane said.

古文：上曰： 此目前利害，朕为子孙后世虑耳。 
现代文：皇上说 ：这是眼前的利害，朕是替子孙后世着想。 
English: The emperor said: This is the immediate interest, I am thinking of future generations.

古文：良弼曰： 非臣等所及也。 
现代文：良弼说； 不是臣等所能考虑到的。 
English: "It's not something we can take into consideration," said Ryosuke.

古文：于是以尝预乱者徙居乌古里石垒部。
现代文：于是，让曾经与谋作乱的人，迁居乌古里石垒部。
English: As a result, people who had been involved in the conspiracy were allowed to move to the Uguri Stone Fortress.

古文：上问宰臣曰： 尧有九年之水，汤有七年之旱，而民不病饥。
现代文：皇上问宰相大臣说 ：尧帝的时候有九年发大水，汤帝的时候有七年大旱，而平民百姓没有疾病、没有饥饿。
English: When the emperor asked the prime minister, he said, "In the time of Emperor Shun, there were nine years of great floods, and in the time of Emperor Tang, there were seven years of great droughts, but the common people did not suffer from disease or hunger.

古文：今一二岁不登，而人民乏食，何也？ 
现代文：现在一、二年五谷不丰收，人民就缺吃的，为什么呢？ 
English: One or two years from now, if the grain harvest is not good, the people will not have enough to eat. Why is that?

古文：良弼对曰： 古者地广人淳，崇尚节俭，而又惟农是务，故蓄积多，而无饥馑之患也。
现代文：良弼回答说 ：古代土地广阔人民淳厚，崇尚节俭，而又只以务农为业，所以积蓄的粮物比较多，而没有饥饿的忧患。
English: Liang Yao replied, "In ancient times, the land was vast, the people were honest and generous, and they advocated frugality. However, they were only engaged in farming, so they accumulated more grain and did not have to worry about starvation.

古文：今地狭民众，又多弃本逐末，耕之者少，食之者众，故一遇凶岁而民已病矣。 
现代文：现今土地狭窄人口增多，多数人又丢弃农业这一根本而去追求别业，舍本求末，耕种的人少，吃饭的人多，所以一旦遇到灾年百姓就贫病交加了。 
English: Nowadays, the land is narrow, the population is increasing, and most people are abandoning agriculture as the foundation and pursuing other businesses. There are fewer people who cultivate and more people who eat. Therefore, once they encounter a disaster year, the people will suffer from poverty and disease.

古文：上深然之，于是命有司惩戒荒纵不务生业者。
现代文：皇帝深深感到是这样的，于是命令有司惩罚劝诫那些荒淫放纵不务正业的人。
English: The emperor deeply felt that this was the case, so he ordered the imperial court to punish and admonish those who indulged in debauchery and were not engaged in their duties.

古文：十七年，以疾辞相位，不许。
现代文：十七年，良弼因有病要求辞去丞相职位，没获准许。
English: In 1917, due to illness, Yoshitaka asked to resign from the position of chancellor, but was not allowed to do so.

古文：告满百日，诏赐告，遣太医诊视，屡使中使问疾。
现代文：休假满一百天时，皇帝诏令赐继续休假，并派太医前去诊视，并屡次使中使去询问病情。
English: When his leave of absence reached one hundred days, the emperor issued a decree to continue his leave of absence, and sent the imperial physician to examine him, and repeatedly sent the middle envoy to inquire about his condition.

古文：良弼在告既久，省多滞事，上以问宰相、参政，张汝弼对曰： 无之。 
现代文：良弼休病假时间长了，尚书省耽误了许多事，皇上问宰相、参政，张汝弼回答说 ：没有事。 
English: Liang Hui has been on sick leave for a long time, and the Ministry of Education and Culture has delayed many things. The emperor asked the prime minister to participate in politics, and Zhang Rong replied, "No problem."

古文：上曰： 岂曰无之。
现代文：皇上说 ：怎么说无事？
English: The emperor said, "How can I say it's nothing?"

古文：自今疑事久不能决者，当具以闻。 
现代文：现今问题久拖不能决断的，应当全部报告我知道。 
English: I know that the current issue has been dragging on for a long time and cannot be resolved, so it should be reported in full.

古文：十八年，表乞致仕归田里，上遣使慰谕之曰： 卿比以疾在告，朕甚忧之。
现代文：十八年，良弼上表辞官要归回故里，皇上派使臣安慰他并晓谕他说： 卿因疾病一直在休假，朕很为这事担忧。
English: In the 18th year of the Emperor's reign, the Emperor sent an envoy to comfort him and told him: "Your Excellency has been on leave due to illness, and I am very worried about this.

古文：今闻卿将往西京养疾，彼中风土，非老疾所宜。
现代文：现在听说卿打算去西京养病，那里的水土风俗，不是适合老病将养的地方。
English: Now I have heard that Sir plans to go to Saikyo to recover from his illness. The water and soil customs there are not suitable for a place to raise an old sick person.

古文：京师中倦于人事，若就近都佳郡居处，待疾少间，速令朕知之。 
现代文：京师中对人事厌倦了，如果就近在都城外找个侍郡居住，等待疾病好转，尽快让朕知道。 
English: If you are tired of dealing with people in Beijing, find a place to live outside the capital, wait for your illness to get better, and let me know as soon as possible.

古文：良弼奏曰： 臣遭遇圣明，滥膺大任，夙夜忧惧，以至成疾。
现代文：良弼奏道： 臣幸遇圣上贤明，我得以荣任重任，却日夜担忧害怕，以致得了病。
English: Liang Yao said, "It was my good fortune to meet Sheng Shang Xianming. I was given an honorable and important position, but I was worried and afraid day and night, so much so that I got sick.

古文：比蒙圣恩，数遣使存问，赐以医药，臣之苟活至今，皆陛下之赐也。
现代文：近来承蒙圣上恩泽，多次派人前来安慰探问，赐给医药，臣能够苟且活到现在，都是陛下的恩赐。
English: Recently, thanks to the grace of His Holiness, His Majesty has repeatedly sent people to comfort and inquire, given medicine, and allowed me to live until now. These are all gifts from His Majesty.

古文：臣岂敢望到乡里，便可愈疾。
现代文：臣怎么敢企望回到乡里便可以痊愈？
English: How dare the minister hope that he can recover by returning to the countryside?

古文：臣去乡岁久，亲识多已亡没，惟老臣独在，乡土之恋，诚不能忘。
现代文：臣离开家乡年岁久了，亲戚朋友多数已经亡故，只有老臣独自活着，对乡土的眷恋，实在不能忘记。
English: My father-in-law has been away from his hometown for a long time. Most of his relatives and friends have passed away. Only my father-in-law is still alive. I can't forget my attachment to my hometown.

古文：臣窃惟自来人臣受知人主，无逾臣者，臣虽粉骨碎身无以图报。
现代文：臣私下想到，自古以来为人臣的受到君主知遇之恩的，没有超过臣的人了，臣即使粉身碎骨也不能报答圣上恩德。
English: Privately, it occurred to the vassal that since ancient times, no vassal has been more favored by the sovereign than the vassal. Even if the vassal were to be crushed to a pulp, he would not be able to repay the grace of the saint.

古文：若使一还乡社，得见亲旧，则死无恨矣。 
现代文：如果让我最后回到乡社，得以会见亲戚旧友，那么我死也没有什么遗恨了。 
English: If I can finally return to my hometown and be able to meet my relatives and old friends, then I won't have anything to regret when I die.

古文：上问宰相曰： 丞相良弼必欲归乡里，朕以世袭猛安封其子符宝曷答，俾之侍行，何如？ 
现代文：皇上问宰相： 丞相良弼一定要回归乡里，朕封他的儿子符宝曷答为世袭猛安，让他侍候良弼，如何？ 
English: The emperor asked the prime minister, "Josho Ryoma must return to the countryside. How about appointing his son, Fubo Ryoma, as the heir to the throne and having him wait on Ryoma?"

古文：右丞相完颜守道曰： 不若以猛安授良弼，使其子摄事。 
现代文：右丞相完颜守道说： 不如把猛安授给良弼，让他的儿子代他理事。 
English: The Minister of the Right, Kanyan Shodo, said, "It would be better to bestow Meng'an to Ryosei, and let his son take his place as director."

古文：上从之。
现代文：皇上听从了这个建议。
English: Emperor Dezong accepted his suggestion.

古文：于是授胡论宋葛猛安，给丞相俸傔，良弼乃致仕归。
现代文：于是授胡论宋葛猛安，给丞相当侍从，良弼才辞官还乡。
English: As a result, Song Ge Meng'an was awarded the title of Hu, and he was given the title of an attendant, and it was only after he left the post that he returned to his hometown.

古文：上谓宰相曰： 卿等非不尽心，但才力不及良弼，所以惜其去也。 
现代文：皇上对宰相说： 卿等不是不尽心，但你们的才能赶不上良弼，所以可惜他离去了。 
English: The emperor said to the prime minister, "Sir, you are not unsatisfied, but your talent is not as good as Yoshitaka's, so it is a pity that he left.

古文：其后，尚书省奏差除，上曰： 丞相良弼拟注差除，未尝苟与不当得者，而荐举往往得人。
现代文：良弼辞官以后，尚书省上奏挑选官员，皇上说： 丞相良弼拟注差除名单，不曾随便给予不应该得到的，而荐举的往往是可用之才。
English: After the appointment of the Minister of Education and Culture, the Ministry of Education and Culture made a report on the selection of officials, and the emperor said: The Minister of Education and Culture did not arbitrarily give out the list of those who should not be appointed, and the recommended candidates were often those who could be used.

古文：粘割斡特剌、移剌綎、裴满余庆，皆其所举。
现代文：粘割斡特剌、移剌訸、裴满余庆，都是他举荐的。
English: He is the one who recommended the films "Gekiwari" (粘割斡特), "Shift" (移) and "Pei Man Yu Qing" (裴满余庆).

古文：至于私门请托，绝然无之。 
现代文：至于私人请他帮忙委托他的，绝对没有。 
English: As for private individuals asking him for help and entrusting him, absolutely not.

古文：尝问良弼： 每旦暮日色皆赤，何也？ 
现代文：皇上曾经问良弼： 每天早晨、黄昏日色都是红的，为什么呢？ 
English: The emperor once asked Liang Xuan: Every morning and at dusk, the sun is red. Why?

古文：良弼曰： 旦而色赤应在东，高丽当之。暮而色赤应在西，夏国当之。
现代文：良弼说： 早晨太阳呈赤色应在东方，高丽国对着它；黄昏太阳呈赤色应在西方，夏国向着它。
English: "In the morning, the sun should be red in the east, with Goryeo facing it; in the evening, the sun should be red in the west, with Xia Province facing it," said Liangqi.

古文：愿陛下修德以应天，则灾变自弭矣。 
现代文：愿陛下修德以报苍天，那么灾变自然就消除了。 
English: May His Majesty reward the heavens with the cultivation of virtue, and then the calamity will naturally be eliminated.

古文：既而夏国有任德敬之乱，高丽有赵位宠之难，其言皆验云。
现代文：不久，夏国发生了任德敬叛乱，高丽人赵位宠发难，良弼的话都应验了。
English: Not long after, the Ren Dejong Rebellion occurred in Xia Province, and the Goryeoese Zhao Yidong was in trouble. The words of the virtuous woman were fulfilled.

古文：是岁，薨。年六十。
现代文：这一年，良弼逝世，享年六十岁。
English: In the same year, Yoshitaka passed away at the age of 60.

古文：上悼惜之，遣太府监移剌綎、同知西京留守王佐为敕葬祭奠使，赙白金、彩币加等，丧葬皆从官给。
现代文：皇上哀悼痛惜他，派遣太府监移剌訸、同知西京留守王佐作为敕葬祭奠使，赐给帮办丧事的白金、彩币加倍，丧葬费用都从官府中支出。
English: The emperor mourned and pitied him, dispatched the Taifu Jianzhong and Wang Zuo, who had been exiled to the Western Capital and was a friend of the emperor, to serve as the funeral eulogists, and gave the funeral assistant double the amount of platinum and colored coins. The funeral expenses were all paid by the government.

古文：追封金源郡王，命翰林待制移剌履勒铭墓碑，谥诚敏。
现代文：皇上追封良弼为金源郡王，命令翰林待制移剌履勒铭墓碑，谥号 诚敏 。
English: The emperor posthumously crowned Liangqi as the king of Jinyuan County and ordered Hanlin to prepare a tombstone inscribed with the epitaph of Zhu Ruller, alias Chengmin.

古文：明昌四年卒，年七十四。
现代文：良弼生性聪明、敏锐、忠实、正直，遇事善于决断，言论、器度、见识都出人意表。
English: Good-natured, intelligent, sharp, loyal, honest, good at making decisions in times of need, speech, poise, insight are unexpected.

古文：上闻之震悼，遣其弟点检司判官蒲带致祭，赙银千两、重彩五十端、绢五百疋。
现代文：虽然从寒素处起步，做官直到宰相高位，一直朝夕谨慎尽心为国家，深谋远虑，举荐人才，常常好像自己不及人家。
English: Although he started from humble beginnings and worked his way up to the high position of prime minister, he has always been cautious and dedicated to the country, foresight, and recommending talents, he often seems to be inferior to others.

古文：太常议谥曰简宪，上改曰简靖，盖重其能全终始云。
现代文：治家清廉节俭，对亲戚朋友中的贫困乏顿的人常常周济，与人交往时间长了别人愈发敬重他。他居官二十几年，以使国家安宁太平的功劳，得到 贤相 的称号。
English: He was a clean and frugal ruler, and often gave alms to the poor and destitute among his relatives and friends. As he spent more time with people, others respected him more and more. He stayed in office for twenty years, and received the title of "Wisdom" for his contribution to the peace and tranquility of the country.

古文：石琚，字子美，定州人。
现代文：明昌五年，皇帝诏令分配他享世宗庙廷。石琚，字子美，定州人。
English: In the 5th year of the Ming Dynasty, the emperor issued a decree to assign him to the imperial court. Shi Zang, Zizi Mei, Dingzhou people.

古文：沉厚好学。
现代文：石琚沉稳厚重好学。
English: The stalagmites are stable, thick and good at learning.

古文：父皋，补郡吏，廉洁自将，称为长者。
现代文：他的父亲叫皋，做郡吏，廉洁自重，可以称为长者。
English: His father is called Zou, a county official, honest and self-respecting, and can be called an elder.

古文：从鲁王阇母攻青州，州人坚守不降。
现代文：皋随从鲁王母攻打青州，青州人坚持守卫不投降。
English: He followed Lu Wangmu to attack Qingzhou, and the Qingzhou people insisted on guarding and not surrendering.

古文：阇母怒之，及城破，命皋计州民之数，将使诸军分掠有之，皋缓其事。
现代文：母对此很是恼怒，等到破了城，命令皋统计城内百姓人数，打算让诸军士分别掠夺他们中富有的人。皋设法延缓这件事。
English: My mother was very angry about this, and when the city was broken, she ordered me to count the number of people in the city, intending to let the soldiers separately plunder the rich among them. I tried to delay this.

古文：阇母让之，皋曰： 大王将为朝廷抚定郡县，当使百姓按堵，无或侵苦之。
现代文：母责备他，皋说： 大王将要代表朝廷安抚平定郡县，应当让百姓安居，没有必要去侵害使他们痛苦。
English: His mother reproached him, saying, "The great king is going to pacify counties and counties on behalf of the imperial court. He should let the people live in peace. There is no need to infringe upon them and make them suffer.

古文：若取城邑而残其民，则未下者必死守以拒我。
现代文：如果攻取了城邑而又去残害城中的人民，那末尚未攻下的城中百姓必然拼死守卫来抗拒我们。
English: If we capture a city and go on to massacre the people in it, then the people in the city that has not yet been captured will certainly defend themselves to the death to resist us.

古文：皋之稽缓，安敢逃罪。 
现代文：皋延缓执行命令，怎么敢逃脱罪责。 
English: How dare they get away with delaying the execution of the order.

古文：阇母感悟，乃下令曰： 敢有犯州人者，以军法论。 
现代文：母感悟了，于是下令说： 胆敢有侵犯城中百姓的人，以军法论处。 
English: My mother was impressed, so she issued an order: Anyone who dares to violate the people in the city will be dealt with according to military law.

古文：指其坐谓皋曰： 汝之子孙必有居此坐者。 
现代文：母又指着自己的座位对皋说 ：你的子孙中一定有居此座位的。 
English: The mother pointed to her own seat and said to the stork, "One of your offspring must occupy this seat."

古文：皋随守定州，唐县人王八谋为乱，书其县人姓名于籍，无虑数千人，其党持其籍诣州发之，皋主鞫治。
现代文：皋随后据守定州，唐县人王八阴谋作乱，把唐县人姓名都登记注册，有数千人，他的同党拿着名册去到各州散发，皋主持调查处治这件事。
English: Subsequently, according to the governor of Dingzhou, Wang Badu, a person from Tang County, plotted to create a disturbance and registered the names of people from Tang County. There were thousands of people, and his party members went to various states to distribute the list. He presided over the investigation and handled the matter.

古文：是时冬月，皋抱籍上厅事，佯为顿仆，覆其籍炉火中，尽焚之，不可复得其姓名，止坐为首者，余皆得释。
现代文：当时已是冬天，皋抱着册籍上厅回话，佯装是拜伏在王八之下，却把册籍倒在炉火中，全部焚烧，让王八不能再得到这些人的姓名，只是把为首的关押起来，其余的都释放了。
English: At that time, it was already winter, and the stork returned to the hall with the books in its arms, pretending to bow down to Wang Ba. However, it threw the books into the fire and burned them all, so that Wang Ba could no longer get the names of these people. He only imprisoned the leader, and released the rest.

古文：琚生七岁，读书过目即成诵。既长，博通经史，工词章。
现代文：石琚长到七岁，读书过目就能背诵，已经以博通经史见长，并会写词章。
English: Shi Yao grew up to seven years old, he could recite books by sight, he was already good at reading and writing, and he could write lyrics.

古文：天眷二年，中进士第一，再调弘政、邢台县令。
现代文：天眷二年，石琚考中进士第一名，先后任弘政、邢台县令。
English: Two years later, he won the first place in the middle school entrance examination of Shichifuku, and successively served as the county magistrate of Hongsei and Xingtai.

古文：邢守贪暴属县，掊取民财，以奉所欲，琚独一物无所与。
现代文：邢台太守的亲属在县里贪暴无度，搜刮民财，以献给太守满足他的欲望，独有石琚一样东西也没给他。
English: The relatives of the governor of Xingtai were extremely greedy in the county. They scrounged for people's money to give to the governor to satisfy his desires. They didn't give him a single thing.

古文：既而守以赃败，他令佐皆坐累，琚以廉办，改秀容令。复擢行台礼部主事，召为左司都事。累迁吏部郎中。
现代文：不久，太守因贪赃倒台，使他的副职都牵累治罪，石琚秉公办事，被命改任秀容县令，后又被提升为行台礼部主事，奉召做左司都事，连续升到吏部郎中。
English: Soon after, the daimyō fell from power due to corruption, and his vice-ministers were all implicated in criminal activities. Ishizaki, who was appointed to be the governor of Shurong County, was promoted to be the head of the ceremonial department, and was called to be the left-hand secretary of the capital, and was continuously promoted to the middle of the administrative department.

古文：贞元三年，以父丧去官，寻起复为本部侍郎。
现代文：贞元三年，石琚因父亲丧事离职，丧期未满又任命为本部侍郎。
English: In the third year of the Jōgen era, Ishizaki resigned from his post due to his father's death, and was appointed as the head chamberlain before the period of mourning was over.

古文：世宗旧闻其名，大定二年，擢左谏议大夫，侍郎如故。
现代文：世宗以前就听说他的名气。大定二年，提升他为左谏议大夫，仍然保留本部侍郎职务。
English: Sejong had heard of his reputation before. In the 2nd year of the Taisho era, he was promoted to doctor of the Left Division of the Council of Elders, but he still retained his position as head chamberlain.

古文：奉命详定制度，琚上疏六事，大概言正纪纲，明赏罚，近忠直，远邪佞，省不急之务，罢无名之役。
现代文：石琚奉命详细制定典章制度，石琚上疏六件事，大概内容是严正纪纲，严明赏罚，亲近忠直，疏远邪佞，节省不急之务，废除无名之役。
English: Shih Kui was ordered to work out a detailed code system. Six things were omitted from Shih Kui, the approximate contents of which were strict discipline, strict rewards and punishments, closeness and loyalty, alienation of evil spirits, saving on non-urgent tasks, and abolishing the nameless war.

古文：上嘉纳之。
现代文：皇上赞许并采纳了这些意见。
English: The Emperor approved and adopted his opinion.

古文：迁吏部尚书。
现代文：石琚于是迁升吏部尚书。
English: He was also promoted to the post of secretary.

古文：琚自员外郎至尚书，未尝去吏部，且十年。
现代文：石琚从员外郎干到尚书，不曾去吏部，有十年时间。
English: It has been ten years since Ishizaki went from being a member of the Foreign Affairs Office to the Ministry of Justice, without ever going to the Ministry of Justice.

古文：典选久，凡宋、齐换授官格，南北通注铨法，能偻指而次第之，当时号为详明。
现代文：选择编纂典章时间长了，凡是宋国、齐国更换授受官职的规格，石琚能做到南北通注解释，能逐一屈指而数出官职的等次，当时号称是详明。
English: It took a long time to select the codification code, and whenever the Song and Qi dynasties changed the specifications for conferring and accepting official positions, Shi Yan could do the north-south annotation explanation, and could count the ranks of official positions one by one. At that time, it was said to be detailed.

古文：顷之，拜参知政事，琚辞让再三，上曰： 卿之材望，无不可者，何以辞为。 
现代文：不久，石琚拜参知政事，石琚再三辞让，皇上说 ：依卿的才能声望没有人认为不可以的，你为什么要推辞呢？ 
English: Soon after, Shih Ch'ien offered to take part in the political affairs of the governor. Shih Ch'ien repeatedly declined, and the emperor said, "No one thinks that Yixing's talent and reputation are unacceptable. Why do you refuse?"

古文：右丞苏保衡监护十六位工役，诏共典其事，给银牌二十四，许从宜规画。
现代文：右丞相苏保衡监护十六位工役，皇上诏令苏保衡和石琚共同管理要办的事，并赐给二十四面银牌，允许他们合理规划。
English: The imperial edict ordered Su Baoheng, the minister of the right, to supervise the 16 workers, and ordered Su Baoheng and Shijie to jointly manage the work to be done, and gave them a 24-sided silver medal to allow them to plan reasonably.

古文：上谓琚曰： 此役不欲烦民，丁匠皆给雇直，毋使贪吏夤缘为奸利，以兴民怨。
现代文：皇上对石琚说 ：这项工程不要再给百姓添麻烦，工匠都要给雇金，不要让贪官污吏趁机谋取私利，以引起民怨。
English: The emperor said to Shizuka, "This project should not cause any more trouble for the people. The craftsmen should all be paid, and corrupt officials should not be allowed to take advantage of the opportunity to seek personal gain and cause public resentment."

古文：卿等勉力，称朕意焉。 
现代文：卿等要尽心竭力，这才称朕的心意。 
English: Sirs, we must do our best. This is my heart's desire.

古文：徒单合喜定陕西，琚请曲赦秦、陇，以安百姓，上从之。
现代文：徒单合喜平定陕西，石琚奏请绕过秦、陇两地，以便安抚百姓，皇上听从了他的意见。
English: The Emperor listened to his advice to pacify the people by bypassing Qin and Shandong in order to pacify the people.

古文：丁母忧，寻起复，进拜尚书右丞。
现代文：石琚母亲丧事，不等丧满又任职，进拜尚书右丞。
English: After the death of Ishizaki's mother, he was appointed to the post, and went on to become the second-in-command of the Imperial Household Agency.

古文：天长观灾，诏有司营缮，有司辟民居以广大之，费钱三十万贯。
现代文：天长观遭灾，皇帝诏令有司修缮，有司毁掉百姓居室而扩大天长观，费钱三十万贯。
English: Tian Chang Guan suffered a disaster, the emperor issued a decree to have a division to repair, and a division destroyed the people's living room and expanded the Tian Chang Guan, costing 300,000 yuan.

古文：蔚州采地蕈，役数百千人。
现代文：蔚州采地蕈，服役的一千几百人。
English: In Ulsan, more than a thousand people served in the minesweeping corps.

古文：琚奏之，上曰： 自今凡称御前者，皆禀奏。 
现代文：石琚向皇上汇报了这些事，皇上说： 从今天起凡是号称御前侍候的人，都要禀报情况。 
English: Ishizaki reported these matters to the emperor, who said, "From today on, all those who claim to serve the emperor must report the situation."

古文：琚与孟浩对曰： 圣训及此，百姓之福也。 
现代文：石琚和孟浩回答说： 圣上如此训教，真是百姓的福分啊。 
English: Shi Yao and Meng Hao replied, "It is truly a blessing for the people to be taught by such a saint.

古文：是时，议禁网捕狐、兔等野物，累计其获，或至徒罪，琚奏曰： 捕禽兽而罪至徒，恐非陛下意，杖而释之可也。 上曰： 然。 
现代文：当时，朝中讨论禁止张网猎捕狐狸、兔子等野物，计算猎捕的数目，要治捕猎之徒的罪。石琚上奏说 ：因捕猎禽兽而治这些人的罪，恐怕不是陛下的愿望，对他们打一顿棍子然后释放也就可以了。 皇上说： 是这样。 
English: At that time, there was a discussion between the imperial court and the Chinese government about prohibiting the use of nets to hunt foxes, rabbits, and other wild animals, calculating the number of hunts, and punishing the hunters. The stone tablet said, "I'm afraid it's not Your Majesty's wish to punish these people for the crime of hunting animals. You can just beat them with a stick and then release them." The emperor said, "That's right."

古文：久之，进拜左丞，兼太子少师。
现代文：时间长了，石琚又进拜左丞，兼太子少师。
English: As time went on, Ishizaki entered the service of Sojo, who was also the younger brother of the crown prince.

古文：上问宰相： 古有居下位能忧国为民直言无忌者，今何以无之？ 
现代文：皇上问宰相 ：古代有身居下位而关心国家大事，敢于为百姓进言而没有顾忌的人，现在为什么没有这样的人了呢？ 
English: The emperor asked the prime minister, "In ancient times, there were people who held low-ranking positions and were concerned about national affairs, who dared to speak up for the people and had no scruples. Why are there no such people now?"

古文：琚对曰： 是岂无之，但未得上达耳。 
现代文：石琚回答说 ：怎么能没有这样的人呢？只是没有得到上报罢了。 
English: Ishizuchi replied, "How can there not be such a person? It just hasn't been reported."

古文：上曰： 宜尽心采擢之。 
现代文：皇上说： 应该尽心寻访推举他们。 
English: The emperor said, "We should do our best to find and select them."

古文：世宗将行郊祀，议配享，琚曰： 配者，侑神作主也。
现代文：世宗将要到郊外去祭祀，讨论配享问题，石琚说： 配享的事，归神明做主。
English: Sejong will go to the suburbs to offer sacrifices and discuss the issue of distribution, Shijun said: The matter of distribution is up to the gods.

古文：自外至者无主不止，故推祖考以配天，同尊之也。
现代文：从外边来的无主不止，所以推论祖考来配天，同样尊贵他们。
English: There are more and more masters coming from the outside, so it can be inferred that the ancestors came to match the heavens, and they are equally honored.

古文：《孝经》曰： 郊祀后稷以配天。 
现代文：《孝经》上说： 郊祀后稷以配天。 
English: "The Filial Piety Sutra" says, "After worshipping in the suburbs, it is best to pray to match the sky."

古文：汉、魏、晋皆以一帝配之。
现代文：汉、魏、晋都是以一位皇帝与天相配。
English: The Han, Wei and Jin dynasties all had an emperor to match the heavens.

古文：唐高宗始以高祖、太宗崇配。
现代文：唐高宗开始尊崇高祖、太宗两位皇帝与天相配。
English: Emperor Gaozong of Tang Dynasty began to venerate Gaozhu and Emperor Taizong as the two emperors who were compatible with Heaven.

古文：垂拱初，以高祖、太宗、高宗并配。
现代文：唐垂拱初年，以高祖、太宗、高宗并列与天配。
English: In the first year of the Tang Tuigu Arch, Gaozu, Taizong and Gaozong were ranked as the match made in heaven.

古文：玄宗开元十一年，罢同配之礼，以高祖配。
现代文：唐玄宗开元十一年，废除几位皇帝同配的礼规，单以高祖配天。
English: In the eleventh year of the first year of the Tang Dynasty, Emperor Xuanzong abolished the etiquette of matching several emperors with each other, and only matched the emperor with Gao Zu.

古文：宋太宗时，以宣祖、太祖配。
现代文：宋太宗时，以宣祖、太祖配天。
English: During the Song Dynasty, Emperor Taizong worshipped Emperor Xuanzu and Emperor Taizu.

古文：真宗时以太祖、太宗配。
现代文：宋真宗时以太祖、太宗配。
English: At the time of Song Zhenzong, Tai Zu and Tai Zong Bi followed.

古文：仁宗时，有司请以三帝并侑，遂以太祖、太宗、真宗并配。
现代文：宋仁宗时，有司请求以三帝并配，于是以太祖、太宗、真宗三位皇帝并配。
English: At the time of Song Renzong, there was a request to have three emperors concurrently, so the three emperors of Taizu, Taizong, and Zhenzong were concurrently appointed.

古文：其后礼院议对越天地、神无二主，当以太祖配。
现代文：在此之后礼院讨论与天、地要相对应，神无二主，应当以太祖一人去相配。
English: After this, the ceremonial court discussed the need to correspond with heaven and earth, that there are no two gods, and that there should be only one ancestor to match.

古文：此唐、宋变古以三帝配天，终竟依古以一祖配也。
现代文：这是唐、宋改变古代规矩以三位帝王配天，而终于最后还是依照古代规矩以一位皇祖与天相配。
English: This is because the Tang and Song dynasties changed the ancient rules to match three emperors with heaven, and finally, in accordance with the ancient rules, one imperial ancestor was matched with heaven.

古文：将来亲郊合依古礼，以一祖配之。 
现代文：将来到郊外祭祀应该与古代礼规相符合，以一位皇祖配天。 
English: If you come to the suburbs, the ritual should be in accordance with ancient etiquette, with an imperial ancestor as the matchmaker.

古文：上曰： 唐、宋不足为法，止当奉太祖皇帝配之。 
现代文：皇上说： 唐、宋的做法不足以作为法典，我朝只尊奉太祖皇帝配天。 
English: The emperor said, "The practices of the Tang and Song Dynasties are not enough to serve as a legal code. My dynasty only reveres the great-grandfather emperor Baotian.

古文：琚尝请命太子习政事，或谮之曰： 琚希恩东宫。 
现代文：石琚曾经请求皇上命令太子学习政事，有人诬陷他说： 石琚企图用恩惠讨好东宫。 
English: Shi Hao once asked the emperor to order the prince to study politics. Some people falsely accused him of saying, "Shi Hao is trying to curry favor with the East Palace."

古文：世宗察其无他，以此言告之，琚对曰： 臣本孤生，蒙陛下拔擢，备位执政，兼师保之任。
现代文：世宗观察石琚并没有别的企图，就把这话对他说了，石琚对皇上说： 臣本来是个孤儿，承蒙陛下提拔，任职执政，兼有师保的责任。
English: Sejong observed that Shi Yan had no other intention, so he said this to him. Shi Yan said to the emperor: The minister was originally an orphan, promoted by His Majesty, served in government, and also had the responsibility of mentoring.

古文：臣愚以为太子天下之本，当使知民事，遂言及之。 
现代文：臣有愚见认为太子是天下的根本，应当让他知道民政的事，于是才那样建议。 
English: The vassal foolishly thought that the crown prince was the foundation of the world and that he should be made aware of civil affairs, so he made that suggestion.

古文：因乞解少师。
现代文：因此请求解除少师的任命。
English: He therefore requests that the appointment of the junior teacher be revoked.

古文：十年二月，祭社，有司奏请御署祝版，上问琚曰： 当署乎？ 
现代文：十年二月，祭土地神，有司上奏请求皇帝在祝版上签名，皇上问石琚： 应当署名吗？ 
English: In February of the 10th year, a ceremony was held in honor of the land god, and a high-ranking official requested the emperor to sign the congratulatory plate. The emperor asked Shi Yan, "Should I sign it?"

古文：琚曰： 故事有之。 
现代文：石琚说 ：过去有这种先例。 
English: Ishizaki said, "There was such a precedent in the past.

古文：上曰： 祭祀典礼，卿等慎之，无使后世讥诮。
现代文：皇上说 ：祭祀典礼，卿等要慎重对待这件事，不要让后世讥笑。
English: The emperor said, "Sacrificial rites, my lord, you should treat this matter carefully and not let posterity laugh at you.

古文：熙宗尊谥太祖，宇文虚中定礼仪，以常朝服行事。
现代文：熙宗尊谥太祖，宇文虚中制定礼仪，以使朝廷按常规礼仪行事。
English: Emperor Xizong revered Emperor Xizong's great-grandfather, and the etiquette was established in the Wuwenhu Middle School, so that the imperial court would act according to the regular etiquette.

古文：当时朕虽童稚，犹觉其非。 
现代文：当时朕虽然年少幼稚，也觉察到其中不对的地方。 
English: At that time, although I was young and naive, I was also aware of what was wrong.

古文：琚曰： 祭祀，大事也，非故事不敢行。 
现代文：石琚说： 祭祀是大事，不是过去有先例不敢任意行事。 
English: Ishizaki said, "Sacrifices are an important matter, and it is not because there were precedents in the past that we dare not act arbitrarily.

古文：上谓琚曰： 女直人往往径居要达，不知闾阎疾苦。
现代文：皇上对石琚说 ：女真人往往居住四通八达的地方，不理解居住在里巷中人的苦处。
English: The emperor said to Shi Yan, "Females often live in far-flung places, and don't understand the hardships of people who live in the middle of nowhere.

古文：卿尝为丞簿，民间何事不知，凡利害极陈之。 
现代文：卿曾经做过丞簿，对民间什么事不知道？凡关系到利害的事要积极汇报。 
English: Sir, you once made a record book, what do you not know about the people? Anything that is of interest should be actively reported.

古文：上与宰臣议铸钱，或以铸钱工费数倍，欲采金银坑冶，上曰： 山泽之利可以与民，惟钱币不当私铸。
现代文：皇上与宰相大臣讨论铸造钱币的事，有人认为铸钱费工数倍，想采取坑冶金银的办法，皇上说： 山河的利益可以交给百姓，只有钱币不能让民间私自铸造。
English: The emperor and the prime minister discussed the issue of minting coins. Some people thought that the cost of minting money was several times more expensive and wanted to take the method of mining gold and silver. The emperor said: The interests of mountains and rivers can be handed over to the people, only coins cannot be minted by the people.

古文：若财货流布四方，与在官何异。 
现代文：如果财产货款流布四方，与在官府有什么不同？ 
English: If property and money are scattered in all directions, how is that different from what happens in government?

古文：琚进曰： 臣闻天子之富藏于天下，正如泉源欲其流通耳。 
现代文：石琚进言道 ：臣听说天子的财富藏在天下，正像泉源的流通罢了。 
English: Ishizaki said, "I have heard that the wealth of the Son of Heaven is hidden in the world, just like the circulation of springs.

古文：上问琚曰： 古亦有百姓铸钱者乎？ 
现代文：皇上问石琚 ：古代也有百姓铸钱的事吗？ 
English: The emperor asked Shi Yan: Did people mint money in ancient times?

古文：对曰： 使百姓自铸，则小人图厚利，钱愈薄恶，古所以禁也。 
现代文：石琚回答说： 让百姓自己铸钱，那么小人贪图厚利，钱越发轻微令人讨厌，古代所以禁止百姓自己铸钱。 
English: Shi Hao replied: Let the people mint their own money, then the villains will be greedy for profits, and the money will become more and more annoying. That is why the ancients forbade the people to mint their own money.

古文：时民间往往造作妖言，相为党与谋不轨，事觉伏诛。
现代文：当时在民间往往有人造谣惑众，这些人互相勾结图谋不轨，事发之后都伏法被杀了。
English: At that time, people often fabricated rumors to mislead the public. These people colluded with each other to plot, and all of them were killed after the incident.

古文：上问宰臣曰： 南方尚多反侧，何也？ 
现代文：皇上问宰相大臣说 ：南方还有许多人不顺从，这是为什么呢？ 
English: The Emperor asked the Prime Minister, "There are still many people in the south who do not obey. Why is that?"

古文：琚对曰： 南方无赖之徒，假托释道，以妖幻惑人。
现代文：石琚回答说 ：南方的无赖之徒，假托解释宣扬道教，拿妖术幻术来迷惑人。
English: Shi Hao replied, "The scoundrels in the south are promoting Taoism under the guise of explanation, and using magic and illusion to deceive people."

古文：愚民无知，遂至犯法。 
现代文：愚民无知，于是触犯法律。 
English: Ignorant fools break the law.

古文：上曰： 如僧智究是也。
现代文：皇上说： 如僧人智究就是这样的。
English: The emperor said, "This is what happens when a monk pursues wisdom.

古文：此辈不足恤，但军士讨捕，利取民财，害及良民，不若杜之以渐也。 
现代文：此辈不足以对他们怜悯，但由军士去追捕，劳民伤财，危害到良民，不如杜绝在萌芽状态。 
English: This generation is not enough to have pity on them, but it is better to nip it in the bud if the sergeant-at-arms pursues them, hurts the laborers and the people, and harms the good people.

古文：智究，大名府僧，同寺僧苑智义与智究言，《莲华经》中载五浊恶世佛出魏地，《心经》有梦想究竟涅槃之语，汝法名智究，正应经文，先师藏瓶和尚知汝有是福分，亦作颂子付汝。
现代文：智究，是大名府僧人，同寺僧人苑智义对智究说，《莲华经》中记载五浊恶世佛出在魏地，《心经》中有 梦想究竟涅 的话。你的法名叫智究，正巧照应了经文，先师藏瓶和尚知道你有这个福分，也做了颂子给你。
English: Zhi Qian is a famous prefectural monk. Yuan Zhi Yi, a monk from the same temple, said to Zhi Qian, "In the Lotus Sutra, it is recorded that the five evil Buddhas came from the land of Wei, and in the Heart Sutra, there is a dream of ultimate nirvana. Your Dharma name is Zhi Qian, which coincidentally corresponds to the scriptures. The previous teacher, Zangbin Monk, knew that you had this blessing and also made an ode to you.

古文：智究信其言，遂谋作乱，历大名、东平州郡，假托抄化，诱惑愚民，潜结奸党，议以十一年十二月十七日先取兖州，会徒峄山，以 应天时 三字为号，分取东平诸州府。
现代文：智究相信了他的话，于是图谋作乱，遍游大名、东平州郡，假托化缘，诱骗迷惑愚昧的民众，暗中结成奸党，议定将在十一年十二月十七日先拿下兖州，在峄山聚会，以 应天时 三字作为旗号，分别去攻取东平各州府。
English: The wise men believed his words, so they plotted to create turmoil, traveled to daimyo (feudal lords) and the county of Dongpingzhou, pretended to be good friends, tricked and deceived the ignorant people, secretly formed a traitor party, and agreed to first capture Zhangzhou on December 17th, 2011, and then gather in Shaoshan, with the three characters of the time of the year as the banner, to separately capture the provincial capitals of Dongping.

古文：及期向夜，使逆党胡智爱等，劫旁近军寨，掠取甲仗，军士击败之。
现代文：到了那一天半夜，智究派同党胡智爱等人，去到旁近军营抢劫甲仗，军士击败了他们。
English: In the middle of the night of that day, Zhiyuan sent Hu Zhiyi and others of the same party to go to the nearby military camp to rob the armor, and the sergeant defeated them.

古文：会傅戩、刘宣亦于阳谷、东平上变。
现代文：当时还有傅戬、刘宣也在阳谷、东平叛变。
English: At that time, Fu Xi and Liu Xuan also rebelled in Yanggu and Dongping.

古文：皆伏诛，连坐者四百五十余人。
现代文：这些人都伏法被杀，同案牵连的有四百五十多人。
English: All of these people were killed under false pretenses, and more than 450 people were implicated in the same case.

古文：宗室子或不胜任官事，世宗欲授散官，量与廪禄，以赡足之，以问宰臣曰： 于前代何如？ 
现代文：宗室子弟中有的人不胜任当官做事，世宗想授给他们闲散官职，按职位发给俸禄，以赡养使他们自足，拿这想法问宰相大臣说 ：比前代怎么样？ 
English: One of the sons of the family was not qualified to be a government official. The Sejong wanted to give them a sinecure, pay them a salary according to their position, and make them self-sufficient with support. He asked the Prime Minister about this idea and said, "How is it different from the previous generation?"

古文：琚对曰： 尧亲九族，周家内睦九族，皆帝王盛事也。 
现代文：石琚回答说 ：尧帝亲近九族，周代皇家九族和睦，都是帝王盛事啊！ 
English: Shi Hao replied: Emperor Qian's closeness to the nine ethnic groups and Zhou Dynasty's reconciliation of the nine royal ethnic groups are all great events for the emperor!

古文：琚之将顺，多此类。
现代文：石琚对这类事多是持顺从态度。
English: Shi Hao is mostly submissive to such things.

古文：十三年，上表乞致仕。
现代文：十三年，石琚上表请求辞去官职。
English: Thirteen years later, Shi Hao submitted a request to resign from his post.

古文：十六年，再表乞致仕。
现代文：十六年，石琚再次上表乞请辞职。
English: Sixteen years later, Shi Hao again went to the table to beg for resignation.

古文：皆不许。
现代文：皇帝都没答应。
English: The emperor did not agree.

古文：参知政事唐括安礼忤上意，出为横海军节度使，数年不复召。
现代文：参知政事唐括安礼违背皇上旨意，出任横海军节度使，数年皇帝不再召见他。
English: In violation of the emperor's will, the councillor and statesman Tang Buanli served as the envoy of the imperial navy, and the emperor did not call on him again for several years.

古文：琚对便殿，从容进曰： 唐括安礼忠直，久在外官。 
现代文：石琚在偏殿从容地对皇上劝谏道： 唐括安礼忠诚正直，久在外地任职。 
English: Shi Yan calmly advised the emperor in the hallway: "Tang Buanliu is loyal and honest, and has long served in other places.

古文：世宗深然之，遂自南京留守召为尚书右丞。
现代文：世宗深深感到是这样，于是将唐括安礼从南京留守任上召进京任尚书右丞。
English: Sejong deeply felt this was the case, and so he called Tang Buanli from Nanjing to Beijing to serve as Shoshu Ujo.

古文：琚尝举室绍先以为右司员外郎，绍先中风暴卒，上甚惜之，谓琚曰： 卿之所举也。 
现代文：石琚曾举荐室绍先作为右司员外郎，绍先中风暴死，皇上很是惋惜，对石琚说： 这是卿推举的人才啊！ 
English: Ishizaki had recommended Shosen to the Imperial Household Agency as the second son of the right secretary. Shosen died in a storm. The Emperor was very sorry and said to Ishizaki, "This is a talented person recommended by the Lord!"

古文：感叹者再三。
现代文：再三感叹这件事。
English: Repeatedly lamenting the matter.

古文：十七年，拜平章政事，封莘国公。
现代文：十七年，石琚拜平章政事，被封莘国公。
English: In the seventeenth year of his reign, Shi Zhe was given the title of Prince of the State.

古文：明年，拜右丞相。
现代文：第二年，又拜右丞相。
English: The following year, he was appointed to the post of the Minister of the Right.

古文：修起居注移剌杰上书言： 朝奏屏人议事，史官亦不与闻，无由纪录。 
现代文：整理《起居注》的移剌杰上书说 ：朝廷上奏议事把一般官员隔离在外，史官也不能听，没办法记录。 
English: Zhi Xuanjie, who compiled the "Resident's Note," said in his letter: The imperial court isolated the general officials from the proceedings, the historians could not listen, and there was no way to record.

古文：上以问宰相，琚与右丞唐括安礼对曰： 古者史官，天子言动必书，以儆戒人君，庶几有畏也。
现代文：皇上问宰相这件事，石琚和右丞相唐括安礼回答说 ：古代的史官，对天子的一言一行必须记录，用来儆戒人君，没有谁不敬畏。
English: When the emperor asked the prime minister about this matter, Shi Yan and the chancellor of the right, Tang Kuanli, replied: "Ancient historians must record every word and deed to the Son of Heaven, and use it to rebuke people. There is no one who does not revere him."

古文：周成王剪桐叶为圭，戏封叔虞，史佚曰： 天子不可戏言，言则史书之。 
现代文：周成王剪桐叶当作圭，戏封叔虞，史佚说 ：天子说话不能开玩笑，说话就要记入史书。 
English: Zhou Cheng Wang cut the tung leaf as the key, the play sealed the uncle, Shi Yu said: the heavenly son can not joke when he speaks, and his speech will be recorded in the history book.

古文：以此知人君言动，史官皆得记录，不可避也。 
现代文：从这件事看出做人君的一言一行，史官都得记录，不能回避啊！ 
English: From this incident, it can be seen that the historian must record every word and deed of the prince, and cannot avoid it!

古文：上曰： 朕观《贞观政要》，唐太宗与臣下议论，始议如何，后竟如何，此政史臣在侧记而书之耳。
现代文：皇上说： 朕看《贞观政要》，唐太宗与臣下讨论事情，开始议了什么，后来结果怎么样，这可以证明史臣在旁记下来而写在史书上的。
English: The emperor said, "I have read "Important Personages of the Zhenguan Dynasty" and Tang Taizong discussed things with his vassals. What was discussed at the beginning and what was the result later, this can prove that the historian wrote it down and wrote it in the history book.

古文：若恐漏泄几事，则择慎密者任之。 
现代文：如果恐怕遗漏什么事，那么可以选出谨慎守密的人担任这件事。 
English: If you're worried about leaving something out, then you can choose a discreet person to handle it.

古文：朝奏屏人议事，记注官不避自此始。
现代文：上朝奏事议事回避一般官员，而不回避记注官从这时开始。
English: It was at this time that the shogunate began to avoid ordinary officials, but not the notetakers, in its correspondence with the emperor.

古文：以年老衰病固辞，上曰： 朕知卿年老，勉为朕留，俟一二年，朕将思之。 
现代文：石琚以年老体衰多病为理由坚决要求辞职，皇上说： 朕知道卿年纪老了，勉强为了朕而留职，再等一、二年，朕将考虑这件事。 
English: Shi Hao firmly demanded his resignation on the grounds that he was old, frail and ill, and the emperor said, "I know that you are old, and I reluctantly stay on for my sake. Wait another year or two, and I will consider the matter."

古文：上谓宰臣曰： 朕为天子，未尝敢专行独断，每事遍问卿等，可行则行之，不可则止也。 
现代文：皇上对宰相大臣说 ：朕是天子，从来不敢专行独断，每件事情都要广泛征求卿等的意见，可行的就行，不可行的就禁止。 
English: The Emperor said to the Prime Minister, "I am the Son of Heaven, and I would never dare to make arbitrary decisions. In every matter, I must widely solicit the opinions of the lords and others. What is feasible is allowed, and what is not feasible is forbidden."

古文：琚与平章政事唐括安礼奏曰： 好问则裕，自用则小，陛下行之，天下幸甚。 
现代文：石琚和平章政事唐括安礼上奏说： 好问，思路就开阔；自己说了算，思路就狭小，陛下这样做，是天下极大的幸运。 
English: Shi Zheng, He Pingzhang, Zheng Zhi Tang and An Li said at the beginning of the ceremony: If you ask good questions, your thinking will be broad; if you make your own decisions, your thinking will be narrow. Your Majesty is very lucky to do so.

古文：居一年，复表致仕，乃许。
现代文：石琚留职一年，又上表辞职，皇上才准许了。
English: Ishizuchi remained in office for a year, and then resigned, but the emperor only allowed him to return.

古文：诏以一孙为阁门祗候。
现代文：皇帝诏令石琚的一个孙子做门祗候。
English: Emperor Zhao ordered one of Shijie's grandsons to serve as concubine.

古文：即命驾归乡里。
现代文：石琚当即遵命动身回归乡里。
English: Shi Hao immediately obeyed the order to return to the countryside.

古文：久之，世宗谓宰臣： 知人最为难事，近来左选多不得人。
现代文：许久之后，世宗对宰相大臣说： 了解一个人是最难的事，近来文职官员的选用大多不得其人。
English: After a long time, Sejong said to the Prime Minister, "It is the most difficult thing to get to know a person. Recently, the selection of officials has been very poor.

古文：惟石琚为相时，往往举能其官，左丞移剌道、参政粘割斡特剌举右选，颇得之。
现代文：只有石琚当丞相时，往往推举出能胜任的官员，左丞移剌道、参政粘割斡特剌推举提升的武职候选人，其中很有一些人才。
English: Only when Shi Jie was the prime minister, competent officials were often promoted, and military candidates who were promoted by the left jie and promoted by the right jie and promoted by the right jie and promoted by the left jie and promoted by the right jie were often promoted, and there were many talents among them.

古文：朕常以不能遍识人材为不足。
现代文：朕常常因为不能遍识人才而不满足。
English: I'm often dissatisfied because I can't know everyone.

古文：此宰相事也，左右近侍虽常有言，朕未敢轻信。 
现代文：这是宰相的职责，左右近侍虽然常有人举荐，朕不敢轻易相信。 
English: This is the prime minister's responsibility. Although close aides are often recommended, I can't easily believe it.

古文：又曰： 近日刺史县令多阙员，当择干济者除之，资级不到庸何伤。 
现代文：又说； 近来刺史、县令许多缺员，应当选择精明干练的人任命，资历级别不到任用有什么害处呢？ 
English: He also said: Recently, there have been many vacancies in the posts of county magistrate and county magistrate. It is necessary to choose a shrewd and capable person to be appointed. What is the harm of not being appointed according to the seniority level?

古文：又曰： 惟石琚最为知人。 
现代文：又说 ：只有石琚最知人善任。 
English: He also said, "Only Ishizaki is the most knowledgeable person about Zenrin."

古文：唐括鼎为定武军节度使，上谓鼎曰： 久不见石琚，精力比旧何如？
现代文：唐括鼎任定武军节度使，皇上对他说 ：好久不见石琚了，他的精力比以往如何？
English: The Emperor told him, "I haven't seen Shi Yan for a long time. How is his energy?

古文：汝到官往视之。 
现代文：你到任后要去探望他。 
English: You're going to visit him when you get there.

古文：显宗亦思之，因琚生日，寄诗以见意。
现代文：显宗也惦念着石琚，在石琚生日的时候，显宗寄诗来表达自己的心意。
English: Hentong also thinks about Shih Chung. On Shih Chung's birthday, Hentong sent a poem to express his thoughts.

古文：二十二年，以疾薨于家，年七十二。
现代文：二十二年，因病在家里逝世，享年七十二岁。
English: In 1922, he died of illness at home at the age of 72.

古文：谥文宪。
现代文：他的谥号是 文宪 。
English: His nickname is Wenxin.

古文：泰和元年，图像衍庆宫，配享世宗庙廷。
现代文：泰和元年，衍庆宫挂上了他的画像，诏令配享世宗庙廷。
English: In the first year of the Taihe era, his portrait was hung in the Yanqing Palace, and the imperial edict was displayed in the temple court of King Sejong.

古文：唐括安礼，本名斡鲁古，字子敬。
现代文：唐括安礼，本名唐括斡鲁古，字子敬。
English: Tang Paoanli, real name Tang Paoanlu Gu, honorific title.

古文：好学，通经史，工词章，知为政大体。
现代文：他好学，精通经籍史志，擅长做词为文，知晓为政的根本宗旨。
English: He is eager to learn, well-versed in classics and history, good at making words into text, and knows the fundamental purpose of politics.

古文：贞元中，累官临海军节度使，入为翰林侍读学士，改浚州防御使、彰化军节度使。
现代文：贞元年间，唐括安礼官任临海军节度使，进朝廷后为翰林侍读学士，后改任浚州防御使、彰化军节度使。
English: In the first year of the Zhengyuan era, Tang Buanliang served as the naval envoy of the Qing Dynasty, and after entering the imperial court, Hanlin served as a bachelor, and later he was appointed as the defense envoy of Danzhou and the military envoy of the Qing Dynasty of Changhua.

古文：大定初，迁益都尹，召为大兴尹，上曰： 京师好讹言。
现代文：大定初年，升为益都尹，皇帝召见任命他为大兴尹，皇帝说： 京城中喜好造谣。
English: In the first year of Dading, promoted to Yidu Yin, the emperor summoned and appointed him as Daxing Yin. The emperor said: Beijing likes to spread rumors.

古文：府中奸吏为民患。
现代文：官府中的奸吏是百姓的祸患。
English: Crooked officials in government offices are a scourge to the people.

古文：卿虽年少，有治才，去其宿弊，毋为因仍。 
现代文：你虽然年轻，但有治理的才能，你要解除世上的这些旧弊病，不要让它再发生。 
English: Although you are young, you have the ability to govern, and you must remove these old ills from the world and not let them happen again.

古文：察廉入第一等，进阶荣禄大夫。
现代文：唐括安礼监察廉政成绩一等，进官为荣禄大夫。
English: Tang Buanli, Inspector of Integrity, first-class achievement, promoted to the position of honorable doctor.

古文：七年五月，大兴府狱空，诏锡宴劳之。
现代文：大定七年五月，大兴府的监狱空了，皇帝下诏赐宴慰劳唐括安礼。
English: In May of the seventh year of Dading, the prison of Daxingfu was empty, and the emperor issued an edict to give a banquet to comfort the labor of the Tang Dynasty.

古文：凡州郡有狱空者，皆赐钱为锡宴费，大兴府锡宴钱三百贯，其余有差。
现代文：凡是有空监狱的州郡，都赐钱作为宴费，大兴府赐三百贯宴费，其余的州郡有区别。
English: All the states and counties with vacant prisons have given money as banquet fees, and the Daxing government has given three hundred yuan banquet fees. The rest of the states and counties have differences.

古文：久之，拜参知政事，罢为横海军节度使，历河间尹、南京留守。
现代文：很久以后，唐括安礼官拜参知政事，免此职后任横海军节度使，历任河间尹、南京留守。
English: After a long time had passed, the Tang general An Lijian became the political advisor to the governor, and after he was relieved of this post, he became the naval governor. Successive governors, including Kawama Yin and Nanjing, stayed behind.

古文：以丧去官，起复尚书右丞。
现代文：因为家中有丧事，唐括安礼辞了官，复出后任尚书右丞。
English: Because there was a death in the family, Tang Buan Anli resigned from his post, and after his comeback, he was appointed to the post of Shangshu Yu Rong.

古文：诏曰： 南路女直户颇有贫者，汉户租佃田土，所得无几，费用不给，不习骑射，不任军旅。
现代文：皇帝下诏说 ：南路女真住户有很多贫困的，汉人住户租种土地的，收获没多少，入不敷出，不练习骑马射箭，不服兵役。
English: The emperor issued an edict saying: There are many impoverished residents of Nanlu Nanzhen, and Chinese residents who rent land for planting, have little harvest, can't make ends meet, don't practice horseback archery, and don't do military service.

古文：凡成丁者签入军籍，月给钱米，山东路沿边安置。
现代文：凡是成年男人都要加入军籍，按月供应钱粮，沿山东路边疆安置他们。
English: All adult men are required to join the military, they are provided with money and grain on a monthly basis, and they are resettled along the Shandong Road border.

古文：其议以闻。 
现代文：其他的建议再报告给我。 
English: Report back to me with any other suggestions.

古文：浃旬，上问曰： 宰臣议山东猛安贫户如之何？ 
现代文：十天后，皇帝问： 宰臣议论山东猛安的贫困住户怎么办？ 
English: Ten days later, the emperor asked: What should be done about the poor households in Meng'an, Shandong Province, about which the vice-consul had spoken?

古文：奏曰： 未也。 
现代文：宰臣上奏说 ：还没有议论。 
English: The Vice-Minister reported: There has been no discussion yet.

古文：乃问安礼曰： 于卿意如何？ 
现代文：于是皇帝问唐括安礼 ：你的意见是什么？ 
English: So the emperor asked Tang Biao Anli: What is your opinion?

古文：对曰： 猛安人与汉户，今皆一家，彼耕此种，皆是国人，即日签军，恐妨农作。 
现代文：唐括安礼回答说 ：猛安人与汉人住户，现在都是一家，他耕我种，同是国人，最近都让他们参军，恐怕妨碍农业耕作。 
English: Tang Buanli replied: Meng'an people and Chinese residents are now one family. He is a farmer and I am a citizen. Recently, they have both joined the army. I am afraid that this will hinder agricultural farming.

古文：上责安礼曰： 朕谓卿有知识，每事专效汉人。若无事之际可务农作，度宋人之意且起争端，国家有事，农作奚暇？
现代文：皇帝责备唐括安礼说 ：朕以为你有见识，而你每件事都效法汉人，如无事的时候可以进行农耕，现估计宋朝人有挑起争端的意思，国家有事，农业耕作哪里有空闲？
English: The emperor reproached Tang Buanli and said, "I thought you had insight, but you imitated the Han people in everything. If there is nothing wrong, you can carry out farming. Now it is estimated that the Song Dynasty people have the intention of provoking disputes. The country is in trouble. Where is there leisure for agricultural farming?

古文：卿习汉字，读《诗》、《书》，姑置此以讲本朝之法。
现代文：你熟习汉语，读过《诗经》、《尚书》，姑且放下它们来讲本朝的法规。
English: You are familiar with Chinese, you have read "The Book of Songs" and "The Book of Songs," so let's put them aside and talk about the regulations of this dynasty.

古文：前日宰臣皆女直拜，卿独汉人拜，是邪非邪？所谓一家者，皆一类也，女直、汉人，其实则二。
现代文：以前的宰臣都是授予女真人，只有你是汉人，这是是还是非，所谓一家应都是一个种类，女真人、汉人，实则是两个种类。
English: In the past, the title of vice-minister was awarded to female real people, and only if you were Han. Whether this is true or not, the so-called family should all be of one kind, while female real people and Han people are actually of two kinds.

古文：朕即位东京，契丹、汉人皆不往，惟女直人偕来，此可谓一类乎？ 
现代文：朕在东京即皇帝位，契丹人、汉人都不前去祝贺，只有女真人一起去祝贺，这可以说是一类吗？ 
English: In Tokyo, I am the emperor, and the Khitan and Han people do not go to congratulate, only the Jurchens go to congratulate, can this be said to be the same?

古文：又曰： 朕夙夜思念，使太祖皇帝功业不坠，传及万世，女直人物力不困。
现代文：又说 ：朕常常夜里考虑，要让太祖皇帝创立的功业不灭，传到万世，使女真人不缺乏物质财富。
English: He also said, "I often think about it at night. I want to make sure that the work created by my great-grandfather, the emperor, will not die out and will be passed down to all generations, so that Jurchen people will not lack material wealth."

古文：卿等悉之。 
现代文：你们要了解这一点。 
English: You have to understand that.

古文：因以有益贫穷猛安人数事，诏左司郎中粘割斡特剌使书之，百官集议于尚书省。
现代文：因此列举贫穷的猛安人的几件事，诏令左司郎中粘割斡特剌写下它，百官在尚书省集中议论。
English: Therefore, he enumerated a few things about the poor Meng'an people, ordered Zuo to write it down, and hundreds of officials gathered in Shangshu to discuss it.

古文：十七年，诏遣监察御史完颜觌古速行边，从行契丹押剌四人，挼剌、招得、雅鲁、斡列阿，自边亡归大石。
现代文：大定十七年，世宗皇帝下诏派监察御史完颜觌古速巡视边疆，随从有契丹押剌四人，扌妥剌、招得、雅鲁、斡列阿，从边疆逃回大石。
English: In the seventeenth year of Dading, Emperor Sejong sent the inspector of the imperial history to complete the inspection of the frontier, followed by four people of the Qidan Oshu, Zhaotong, Zhaode, Yalu and Yuliya, who fled from the frontier back to Dashi.

古文：上闻之，诏曰： 大石在夏国西北。
现代文：皇帝听说后，下诏说 ：大石在夏国的西北方。
English: When the emperor heard about it, he issued an edict saying: Daishi is in the northwest of Xia.

古文：昔窝斡为乱，契丹等响应，朕释其罪，俾复旧业，遣使安辑之，反侧之心犹未已。
现代文：往昔窝斡作乱，契丹等响应，朕赦免了他的罪，使他仍做以前的工作，派使臣去安抚他，他的反叛之心还未泯灭。
English: In the past, there was a riot in his hometown, and the Khitan and others responded. I forgave his sin, let him still do his previous work, and sent an envoy to appease him. His rebellious heart has not yet been extinguished.

古文：若大石使人间诱，必生边患。
现代文：如果大石地方有人离间诱惑，边疆一定会发生灾祸。
English: If someone in the Daishi region is tempted to break away, a disaster will surely occur on the border.

古文：遣使徙之，俾与女直人杂居，男婚女聘，渐化成俗，长久之策也。 
现代文：派使臣去迁移他们，使他们与女真人杂居，男婚女嫁，使之逐渐成俗，这是长远的策略。 
English: It is a long-term strategy to send envoys to relocate them, make them live with women and men, marry men and women, and gradually make it commonplace.

古文：于是遣同签枢密院事纥石烈奥也、吏部郎中裴满余庆、翰林修撰移剌杰，徙西北路契丹人尝预窝斡乱者上京、济、利等路安置。
现代文：于是派遣同签枢密院事纥石烈奥也、吏部郎中裴满余庆、翰林修撰移剌杰，前去把曾经参与窝斡叛乱的西北路的契丹人迁置到上京、济、利等路。
English: Therefore, he dispatched the co-signed Privy Council Secretary Shi Leoya, the Vice-Minister of the General Staff Pei Man Yuqing, and the Vice-Minister of the General Staff Han Lin Xiu Xizhi Qian Jie, to relocate the Khitan people from the Northwest Road, who had once participated in the Wo Yeung rebellion, to Shangjing, Ji, Li and other roads.

古文：以兵部郎中移剌子元为西北路招讨都监，诏子元曰： 卿可省谕徙上京、济州契丹人，彼地土肥饶，可以生殖，与女直人相为婚姻，亦汝等久安之计也。
现代文：用兵部郎中移剌子元为西北路招讨都监，皇帝诏令移剌子元说： 你可告诉迁往上京、济州的契丹人，那里土地肥沃富饶，可以繁衍生殖，同女真人互相通婚，这也是他们长远的安居计划。
English: The emperor issued an imperial edict saying: "You can tell the Khitan people who have moved to Shangjing and Jeju that the land there is fertile and rich, and they can reproduce and intermarry with real women. This is also their long-term plan for a safe life."

古文：卿与奥也同催发徙之。仍遣猛安一员以兵护送而东，所经道路勿令与群牧相近，脱或有变，即便讨灭。
现代文：你同纥石烈奥也一同催促他们迁移，仍然要派一员猛安领兵护送他们向东迁移，沿途经过的道路不要让他们同群牧接近，如果有叛乱，便于平定。
English: You and Zhaishi Leo also urge them to move together. Still, you should send a member of the Meng'an Leading Corps to escort them to move east. Do not let them get close to the herdsmen along the road. If there is a rebellion, it will be easier to quell.

古文：俟其过岭，卿即还镇。 
现代文：等到他们过了秦岭，你就返回。 
English: Wait until they have passed Qinling before you return.

古文：上已遣奥也、子元等，谓宰臣曰： 海陵时，契丹人尤被信任，终为叛乱，群牧使鹤寿、驸马都尉赛一、昭武大将军术鲁古、金吾卫上将军蒲都皆被害。
现代文：皇帝派遣了纥石烈奥也、移剌子元等，又对宰臣说： 海陵王时，契丹人尤其被信任，最后他们叛乱，群牧使鹤寿、驸马都尉赛一、昭武大将军术鲁古、金吾卫上将军蒲都都被杀害。
English: The emperor dispatched Zou Shi Leo Ya, Zibo Zi Yuan and others, and also said to the vice-minister: When Hailing was king, the Khitan people were especially trusted, and finally they rebelled, and the herdsman He Shou, the horse captain Sai I, the Shouwu general Shulugu, and the Jinwu general Putu were all killed.

古文：赛一等皆功臣之后，在官时未尝与契丹有怨，彼之野心，亦足见也。 
现代文：赛一等都是功臣的后代，做官时不曾与契丹有怨恨，他们的野心，足可以显现。 
English: Sai I and others are descendants of heroes. When they were in office, they had no grudge against the Khitans. Their ambition can be seen in their feet.

古文：安礼对曰： 圣主溥爱天下，子育万国，不宜有分别。 
现代文：唐括安礼回答说 ：圣主广爱天下，养育万国，不应有分别。 
English: Tang Buxuanli replied: The Holy Lord loves the whole world and nurtures all nations, there should be no difference.

古文：上曰： 朕非有分别，但善善恶恶，所以为治。
现代文：皇帝说： 朕不是有分别，只是善善恶恶，所以能治理好。
English: The emperor said, "I am not different, I am just good and evil, so I can govern well."

古文：异时或有边衅，契丹岂肯与我一心也哉。 
现代文：以后的日子边疆或者有灾祸，契丹难道会同我们一心？ 
English: In the days to come, whether there is a border or a disaster, will the Khitan side with us?

古文：他日，上又曰： 荐举，大臣之职。
现代文：他日，皇帝又说： 推荐人才是大臣的职责。
English: The other day, the emperor said again: It is the duty of the minister to recommend talent.

古文：外官五品犹得举人，宰相无所举，何也？ 
现代文：朝廷外面五品的官员尚且还推荐人才，宰相却没有推荐，什么原因？ 
English: Five-star officials outside the imperial court still recommend talents, but the prime minister did not recommend, what is the reason?

古文：安礼对曰： 孔子称才难。贤人君子，世不多有。
现代文：唐括安礼回答说： 孔子称推荐人才很困难，贤人君子，世上不多。
English: Tang Buanli replied: Confucius said that it is very difficult to recommend talents, and there are not many wise men and gentlemen in the world.

古文：陛下必欲得人，当广取士之路，区别器使之，斯得人矣。 
现代文：陛下一定想得到人才，应当广开发现人才之路，区别才能的长短而器重使用他们，这样就能得到人才。 
English: His Majesty must want to get talent, and should open up the way to discover talent, distinguish the length of talent and use them carefully, so that talent can be obtained.

古文：上曰： 除授格法不伦。
现代文：皇帝说 ：人才选拔任用的法规没有条理。
English: The emperor said: The regulations for the selection and appointment of talents are not systematic.

古文：奉职皆阀阅子孙，朕所知识，有资考出身月日。
现代文：奉职者都是有权势有地位人的子孙，朕要知道他们有资格考出身的年月。
English: Those who hold the posts are all the descendants of powerful and well-placed people. I want to know the age at which they are qualified to take the examination.

古文：亲军不以门第收补，无荫者不至武义不得出职。但以女直人有超迁官资，故出职反在奉职上。
现代文：亲军不能以门第来招人，没有荫庇特权的人不到武义不得出职，只是认为女真人有升迁做官的资格，所以出职反而在奉职之上。
English: The pro-army cannot recruit people based on their lineage, and those who do not have the privilege of patronage are not allowed to take office without martial law. However, it is believed that women have the qualifications to be promoted to official positions, so taking office is on top of their duties.

古文：天下一家，独女直有超迁格，何也？ 
现代文：天下一家，唯独女真人有升迁做官的资格，什么原因？ 
English: All over the world, only female real people have the qualifications to be promoted to official positions. What is the reason?

古文：安礼对曰： 祖宗以来立此格，恐难辄改。 
现代文：唐括安礼回答说： 这是祖宗们立下的规矩，恐怕很难立即改变。 
English: Tang Buanli replied, "This is a rule established by our ancestors, and I'm afraid it will be difficult to change immediately.

古文：转左丞，与右丞蒲察通同日拜，上谓之曰： 朕今年五十有五，若过六十，必倦于政事。
现代文：唐括安礼转任左丞，与右丞蒲察通同日被任命，皇帝对他说： 我今年五十五岁，如果过了六十岁，对政事一定会厌倦。
English: Tang Bin'anli was transferred to the post of left-hand senator, and he was appointed on the same day as the right-hand senator Pu Zha Tong. The emperor said to him: I am fifty-five years old this year. If I am over sixty years old, I will surely get tired of politics.

古文：宜及朕之康强，凡女直猛安谋克当修举政事，改定法令。
现代文：应该趁着朕身强健康时，凡是女真猛安谋克应当研习政事，修改重定法令。
English: When I am strong and healthy, I should take advantage of the opportunity to study politics and revise the revised laws.

古文：宗族中鲜有及朕之寿者，朕颇习女直旧风，子孙岂能知之，况政事乎。卿等宜悉此意。 
现代文：宗族中很少有人达到朕这样的寿限，朕很熟悉女真的旧俗，子孙怎么能知道它，况且是政事，你们应该了解朕的意思。 
English: Very few people in my family have lived as long as I have. I am very familiar with the old customs of the Jurchens. How can my children and grandchildren know it? Moreover, it is a political matter. You should understand what I mean.

古文：上又曰： 大理寺事多留滞，宰执不督责之，何也？ 
现代文：皇帝又说： 大理寺的政事大多积压滞留，宰执不督察斥责他，为什么？ 
English: The emperor also said: Most of the political affairs of Dali Temple are backlogged, and the abbot does not inspect and reprimand him. Why?

古文：安礼对曰： 案牍疑难者旧例给限。 
现代文：唐括安礼回答说 ：很棘手的文书旧例是给以期限完成。 
English: Tang Buanli replied, "In the old days, very difficult documents were given a deadline to be completed.

古文：上曰： 旧例是邪非邪，今不究其事，辄给以限邪？ 
现代文：皇帝说： 旧例是 是 是 非 ，今天不加以考虑，就给你们期限吗？ 
English: The emperor said, "Do you give a deadline without considering whether it is right or wrong according to the old rules?

古文：参政移剌道曰： 臣在大理时，未尝有滞事。 
现代文：参政移剌道说： 我在大理寺时，未曾有滞留的事情。 
English: "When I was at Dali Temple, I never stayed there," said the politician.

古文：上曰： 卿在大理无滞事，为宰执而不能检治，何也？ 
现代文：皇帝说 ：你在大理寺时没有滞留的事，如今作为宰执却不能检查治理，为什么？ 
English: The emperor said, "When you were at Dali Temple, you didn't have any issues with overstaying, but now that you are the head priest, you can't check on the governance. Why is that?"

古文：道无以对而退。
现代文：移剌道无言以对而退。
English: Without saying a word, Shifeng Dao retreated to the right.

古文：上问宰臣曰： 御史台官，亦与亲知往来否？ 
现代文：皇帝问宰臣说： 御史台官，也与亲族朋友往来吗？ 
English: The Emperor asked the Vice-Minister, "Does the Grand Historian also have dealings with relatives and friends?

古文：皆曰： 往来殊少。 
现代文：宰臣们都说 ：很少往来。 
English: The vice-ministers all said: there is very little contact.

古文：上曰： 台官当尽绝人事。
现代文：皇帝说 ：御史台官应当全部断绝人事关系。
English: The emperor said, "All officials of the Imperial Historian's Office should sever all personal relationships."

古文：谏官、记注官与闻议论，亦不可与人游从。 
现代文：谏官、记注官耳闻目睹重大国策的议定，也不可以同人交往。 
English: Eunuchs and notetakers who have witnessed the approval of major national policies by word of mouth are also not allowed to associate with others.

古文：安礼对曰： 亲知之间，恐不可尽绝也。 
现代文：唐括安礼回答说： 亲族朋友之间，恐怕不可能全部断绝来往。 
English: Tang Buanli replied: Between relatives and friends, I am afraid it is impossible to cut off all contacts.

古文：上曰： 职任如是，何恤人之言。 
现代文：皇帝说： 职责所限，何必担忧别人怎么说。 
English: The emperor said, "Your duties are limited, so don't worry about what others say.

古文：进拜平章政事，封芮国公，授世袭谋克。
现代文：唐括安礼进升平章政事，封为芮国公，授予世袭谋克。
English: Tang Buxuanli was promoted to Shangpingzhang for political affairs, was named the Duke of Shandong, and was awarded a hereditary title.

古文：上谕安礼，前代史书详备，今祖宗实录太简略。
现代文：世宗皇帝告诉唐括安礼，以前朝代的史书很详细完备，今天我们对祖宗的实录太简略。
English: Emperor Shizong told Tang Bu'anli that in the past, the history books of the dynasty were very detailed and complete, but today, the actual records of our ancestors are too brief.

古文：对曰： 前代史皆成书，有帝纪、列传。
现代文：唐括安礼回答说 ：以前朝代的历史都已成书，有帝纪、列传。
English: Tang Bu'anli replied, "In the past, the history of the dynasties has been written down in books, with imperial chronicles and biographies.

古文：他日修史时，亦有帝纪、列传，其详自见于列传也。 
现代文：他日修史时，也有帝纪、列传，其详细程度可在列传中表现。 
English: When the history was compiled in other days, there were also imperial chronicles and enumerated biographies, and their level of detail could be shown in the enumerated biographies.

古文：安礼尝议科目，言于上曰： 臣观近日士人不以策论为意。今若诗赋策论各场考试，文理俱优者为中选，以时务策观其器识，庶得人也。 
现代文：唐括安礼曾经议论过科举考试科目，他对皇帝说： 我观察现代的读书人不把策略当回事，今天如果把诗、赋、策略都安排场次考试，文理都优秀的人作为中选人，再考察他们对时事的认识，可能会得到人才。 
English: Tang Buanli once discussed the subjects of the imperial examinations. He said to the emperor: I have observed that modern readers do not take strategy seriously. Today, if poetry, fu, and strategy are all arranged as examinations, and people who are excellent in literature and science are selected as winners, and then their understanding of current affairs is examined, it may be possible to get talent.

古文：上曰： 卿等议之。 
现代文：皇帝说 ：你们讨论这件事。 
English: The emperor said, "Let's discuss the matter."

古文：上谓宰臣曰： 赏有功不可缓，缓赏无以劝善。 
现代文：皇帝对宰臣说 ：赏奖有功的人不能拖延，拖延奖赏不能勉励他们的斗志。 
English: The Emperor said to the Vice-Minister, "The rewarding of meritorious people cannot be delayed, and delaying the reward cannot encourage their fighting spirit."

古文：安礼对曰： 古所谓赏不逾时者，正谓此也。 
现代文：唐括安礼回答说 ：古代所谓的奖赏不能超过时间，说的正是这种情况。 
English: Tang Buanli replied, "In ancient times, the so-called reward could not exceed the time, which is exactly what was said.

古文：二十一年，拜右丞相，进封申国公，固辞曰： 臣备位宰相，无补于国家，夙夜忧惧，惟恐得罪，上负陛下，下负百姓。
现代文：大定二十一年，唐括安礼官拜右丞相，进封申国公，他坚持推辞说： 我在宰相位上，对国家没有帮助，整夜担忧害怕，惟恐有罪，上负陛下，下负百姓。
English: In the twenty-first year of Dading, Tang Hui'an, the ceremonial officer, bowed to the minister of the right, and bowed to the prince of the country. He insisted on his resignation, saying: I am in the position of prime minister, I am of no help to the country, I am worried and afraid all night long, I am afraid of being guilty, I am inferior to your majesty and inferior to the people.

古文：臣实不敢受丞相位，惟陛下择贤于臣者用之。 
现代文：我实在不敢接受丞相的职位，请陛下选择贤臣任用。 
English: I really don't dare to accept the post of chancellor. I would like to ask His Majesty to choose a worthy successor.

古文：上曰： 朕知卿正直，与左丞相习显无异。
现代文：皇帝说 ：我知道你正直，与左丞相习显没有两样。
English: The emperor said, "I know that you are honest, and that you are no different from Xi Xian, the Minister of the Left."

古文：且练习政事，无出卿之右者。
现代文：且熟悉政事，没有人比你的才能强。
English: and familiar with political affairs, no one is more talented than you.

古文：其毋多让。 
现代文：你不要谦让。 
English: You don't have to be humble.

古文：安礼顿首谢。
现代文：唐括安礼叩头致谢。
English: Tang Hui saluted and bowed his head in thanks.

古文：是岁，薨。
现代文：这一年，唐括安礼死去。
English: He died that year.

古文：泰和元年，配享世宗庙廷。
现代文：泰和元年，唐括安礼配享世宗庙廷祭祀。
English: In the first year of the Taihe era, the Tang Anli ceremony was combined with the Shosei Sect temple and court rituals.

