古文：王茂曹景宗柳庆远
现代文：王茂字休远，太原祁人。
English: Wang Maozi, Xueyuan, Taiyuan Xingren.

古文：王茂，字休远，太原祁人也。祖深，北中郎司马。
现代文：祖父王深，北中郎司马。
English: His grandfather was Wang Sheng, and his great-grandfather was Kitanaka Sima.

古文：父天生，宋末为列将，于石头克司徒袁粲，以勋至巴西、梓潼二郡太守，上黄县男。
现代文：父亲天生，宋末做列将，在石头打败了司徒袁粲，凭军功做官到巴西、梓潼二郡太守，上黄县男。
English: His father was born, he was a general at the end of the Song Dynasty, he defeated the scholar Yuan Qi in the stone, he became an official in Brazil by virtue of his military service, he was the governor of the second county of Zizhou, and he was the man of Shanghuang County.

古文：茂年数岁，为大父深所异，常谓亲识曰： 此吾家之千里驹，成门户者必此儿也。 
现代文：王茂几岁时，就被祖父王深看重，常常对亲友说： 这孩子是我家的千里马，立门户的人一定是这个孩子。 
English: When Wang Mao was just a few years old, he was highly valued by his grandfather Wang Shenglu. He often said to his relatives and friends: This child is the pacesetter of my family. This child must be the one to build the gateway.

古文：及长，好读兵书，驳略究其大旨。
现代文：等到长大，他喜欢读兵书，笼统简略地探究书中大义。
English: When he grows up, he likes to read military books and explore the meaning of the book in a general and simple way.

古文：性沈隐，不妄交游，身长八尺，洁白美容观。
现代文：生性沉稳含蓄，不乱交际，身高八尺，面容洁白美观。
English: His nature is calm, steady and reserved, he is not sociable, he is eight feet tall, and his face is clean, white and beautiful.

古文：齐武帝布衣时，见之叹曰： 王茂年少，堂堂如此，必为公辅之器。 
现代文：齐武帝还是平民时，见了他就感叹说： 王茂年纪轻轻，就这样仪容轩昂，一定会成为辅佐帝王的人才。 
English: When Emperor Qiwu was still a commoner, when he saw him, he sighed and said, "Wang Mao is so young, with such an elegant appearance, he will surely become a talented person to assist the emperor."

古文：宋升明末，起家奉朝请，历后军行参军，司空骑兵，太尉中兵参军。
现代文：宋升明末，从家中起用王茂任奉朝请，历任后军行参军，司空骑兵，太尉中兵参军。
English: At the end of Song Shengming, Wang Mao was appointed to serve the imperial court from his home. After his successive appointments, he joined the army, became an officer of the air cavalry, and a lieutenant of the army.

古文：魏将李乌奴寇汉中，茂受诏西讨。
现代文：魏将领李乌奴侵犯漠中，王茂受皇命西征。
English: The Wei general Li Wunu invaded the middle of the desert, and Wang Mao was ordered by the emperor to march west.

古文：魏军退，还为镇南司马，带临湘令。
现代文：魏军退兵后，他回来任镇南司马，带临湘令。
English: After the retreat of the Wei army, he returned to serve as the town's Southern Sima and brought the Xiangling order.

古文：入为越骑校尉。
现代文：入京任越骑校尉。
English: Entered the capital as a captain of the Viet cavalry.

古文：魏寇兗州，茂时以宁朔将军长史镇援北境，入为前军将军江夏王司马。
现代文：魏军侵犯兖州，王茂这时正担任宁朔将军长史镇守增援北部边境，调回后任前军将军江夏王司马。
English: The Wei army invaded Bozhou. At that time, Wang Mao was serving as the Ningshuo General Changshi Town Guard to reinforce the northern border. He was later transferred back to the former army general Jiangxia Wang Sima.

古文：又迁宁朔将军、江夏内史。
现代文：又升为宁朔将军、江夏内史。
English: He was also promoted to Ningshuo General and Jiangxia Inner Historian.

古文：建武初，魏围司州，茂以郢州之师救焉。
现代文：建武初年，魏军围攻司州，王茂率领郢州的军队去救援。
English: In the first year of Jianwu, the Wei army besieged Sizhou, and Wang Mao led the army of Ganzhou to the rescue.

古文：高祖率众先登贤首山，魏将王肃、刘昶来战，茂从高祖拒之，大破肃等。
现代文：高祖率领兵众先登上了贤首山，魏将领王肃、刘昶来交战，王茂跟随高祖抵御敌军，大败王虫等人的军队。
English: Gao Zu led the troops to the top of the Xianshou Mountain, the Wei generals Wang Su and Liu Ye came to fight, and Wang Mao followed Gao Zu to resist the enemy army and defeated the army of Wang Zi and others.

古文：魏军退，茂还郢，仍迁辅国长史、襄阳太守。
现代文：魏军退兵后，王茂回到郢州，又任辅国长史、襄阳太守。
English: After the retreat of the Wei army, Wang Mao returned to Zhangzhou, and was also appointed as the assistant governor of the country and the governor of Xiangyang.

古文：高祖义师起，茂私与张弘策劝高祖迎和帝，高祖以为不然，语在《高祖纪》。
现代文：高祖兴起义师，王茂私下舆张弘策商议，劝高祖迎立和帝，高祖不同意这样做。这些话记在《高祖纪》中。
English: Gaozu raised up a righteous teacher, Wang Mao privately made public policy deliberations, and advised Gaozu to usher in a peaceful emperor. Gaozu did not agree to do so. These words are recorded in the "Gaozu Chronicle."

古文：高祖发雍部，每遣茂为前驱。
现代文：高祖派遣雍军进发，常常派王茂作先锋。
English: Gaozu dispatched the Yongjun army and often sent Wangmao as the vanguard.

古文：师次郢城，茂进平加湖，破光子衿、吴子阳等，斩馘万计，还献捷于汉川。
现代文：军队临时驻扎在郢城，王茂进攻并平定了加湖，打败了光子衿、吴子阳等，斩首割耳敷以万计，回来到汉川报捷。
English: The army was temporarily stationed in Lucheng. Wang Mao attacked and leveled Jiahu, defeated Guang Zi Yao, Wu Ziyang, and others, beheaded, cut ears, and killed tens of thousands of people, and returned to Hanchuan to report success.

古文：郢、鲁既平，从高祖东下，复为军锋。
现代文：郢、鲁都已平定，他就跟随高祖柬下，又当军队的先锋。
English: He followed Gaozhu Khmer and became the vanguard of the army.

古文：师次秣陵，东昏遣大将王珍国，盛兵硃雀门，众号二十万，度航请战。
现代文：军队驻扎在秣陵，束昏侯派大将王珍国，集结大军在朱雀门，兵众号称二十万，渡过航来讨战。
English: The army was stationed in Fuling, and Sokou sent the general Wang Zhenguo to assemble a large army at Suzakmen. The soldiers, said to be 200,000, sailed across the sea to fight.

古文：茂与曹景宗等会击，大破之。
现代文：王茂和曹景宗等人共同去攻打，大败敌军。
English: Wang Mao and Cao Jingzong and others jointly attacked and defeated the enemy army.

古文：纵兵追奔，积尸与航栏等，其赴淮死者，不可胜算。
现代文：放任军队追杀败逃的敌人，敌军尸体堆积舆航的栅栏齐高，那些跳淮水死的，无法计算。
English: The army was allowed to chase and kill the defeated enemy, the bodies of the enemy were piled up against the high fence, and those who died jumping into the water could not be counted.

古文：长驱至宣阳门。
现代文：一直追杀到宣阳门。
English: They chased him all the way to Xuanyang Gate.

古文：建康城平，以茂为护军将军，俄迁侍中、领军将军。
现代文：建康城平定后，委派王茂作护军将军，不久升职为侍中、领军将军。
English: After Jiankang City was pacified, Wang Mao was appointed as the general of the escorting army, and was soon promoted to the position of the general of the leading army.

古文：群盗之烧神虎门也，茂率所领到东掖门应赴，为盗所射，茂跃马而进，群盗反走。
现代文：众盗贼火烧神虎门，王茂率他的军队到东掖门接应救援，被盗贼放箭来射，王茂扬鞭跃马前进，众盗贼逃跑回去了。
English: The thieves set fire to the Gate of the Divine Tiger. Wang Mao led his army to the Gate of the Eastern Dragonfly for rescue. The thieves shot arrows at him. Wang Mao whipped his horse and galloped forward. The thieves fled back.

古文：茂以不能式遏奸盗，自表解职，优诏不许。
现代文：王茂认为自己没能控制住奸贼为非作歹，自己上表要求解除职务，皇帝宽厚的韶令没有同意。
English: Wang Mao thought that he had failed to control the traitors and that he had committed a crime. He asked to be relieved of his duties, but the emperor's generous edict did not agree.

古文：加镇军将军，封望蔡县公，邑二千三百户。
现代文：还加他的官衔为镇军将军，封为望蔡县公，食邑二千三百户。
English: He was also given the official title of Town Army General and the title of Wang Cai County official, with 2,300 households in the food village.

古文：是岁，江州刺史陈伯之举兵叛，茂出为使持节、散骑常侍、都督江州诸军事、征南将军、江州刺史，给鼓吹一部，南讨伯之。
现代文：逭一年，江州刺史陈伯之兴兵反叛，王茂出任使持节、散骑常侍、都督江州诸军事、征南将军、江州刺史，赐给他鼓吹乐一套，去南征陈伯之。
English: In the following year, the rebel soldiers of Chen Bo, the governor of Jiangsu Province, rebelled, and Wang Mao was appointed as the envoy, horseman, military governor of Jiangsu Province, general of the Southern Expedition, and governor of Jiangsu Province. He was given a set of propaganda music and went to the Southern Expedition of Chen Bo.

古文：伯之奔于魏。
现代文：伯之投奔魏。
English: He went to Wei.

古文：时九江新罹军寇，民思反业，茂务农省役，百姓安之。
现代文：当时九江刚遭受兵乱，百姓都想复归务农，王茂大抓农耕减轻民役，于是百姓安于农业生产。
English: At that time, Jiujiang had just suffered from the war, and the people all wanted to return to farming. Wang Maoda focused on farming to reduce the civil service, so the people were satisfied with agricultural production.

古文：四年，魏侵汉中，茂受诏西讨，魏乃班师。
现代文：四年，魏又侵犯漠中，王茂受皇帝韶令西征，魏才退兵。
English: In the fourth year, Wei invaded the middle of the desert again. Wang Mao was ordered by the emperor to go to the west, and Wei finally withdrew.

古文：六年，迁尚书右仆射，常侍如故。
现代文：六年，升职为尚书右仆射，仍旧作常侍。
English: In the sixth year, he was promoted to the position of Shoshu's right-hand man, and continued to serve as a regular attendant.

古文：固辞不拜，改授侍中、中卫将军，领太子詹事。
现代文：但他坚辞不去就职，于是改任侍中、中卫将军，领太子詹事。
English: However, he steadfastly refused to take up the post, so he was reassigned to the position of an aide-de-camp and a general of the middle guard, leading the Crown Prince Zhanzhi.

古文：七年，拜车骑将军，太子詹事如故。
现代文：七年，委任他为车骑将军，仍任太子詹事。
English: Seven years later, he was appointed as the general of chariot and cavalry. He still held the title of Prince Zhanji.

古文：八年，以本号开府仪同三司、丹阳尹，侍中如故。
现代文：八年，以本号为开府仪同三司、丹阳尹，仍旧做诗中。
English: In the eighth year, with this name as the Kaifu ceremony, along with the three departments and Danyang Yin, he was still doing poetry.

古文：时天下无事，高祖方信仗文雅，茂心颇怏怏，侍宴醉后，每见言色，高祖常宥而不之责也。
现代文：当时天下太平，高祖正信赖文雅之士，王茂心情不愉快，陪皇帝宴饮醉酒后，常在话语神情上表现出来，高祖常原谅而不责备他。
English: At that time, the world was peaceful. Gaozu was trusting the gentry. Wang Maozhu was in an unhappy mood. After accompanying the emperor to a banquet and getting drunk, he often showed it in his words and demeanor. Gaozu often forgave him without blaming him.

古文：十一年，进位司空，侍中、尹如故。
现代文：十一年，进职任司空，侍中、尹的职位照旧。
English: In the eleventh year, he was promoted to the post of Siku, while the posts of Samurai and Yin remained unchanged.

古文：茂辞京尹，改领中权将军。
现代文：王茂辞去京尹，改领中权将军。
English: Wang Mao resigned from the post of Jingyin and was assigned to the post of General of the Central Powers.

古文：茂性宽厚，居官虽无誉，亦为吏民所安。
现代文：王茂性情宽厚，当官虽然没有大声誉，但也逞能安定下级吏士和百姓。
English: Wang Mao had a generous disposition. Although he was not a high-ranking official, he was able to stabilize the lower-ranking officials and the people.

古文：居处方正，在一室衣冠俨然，虽仆妾莫见其惰容。
现代文：起居处事公平正直，即使在室内穿衣戴帽也很认真，连奴仆和小妾都看不到他懒惰的样子。
English: He is fair and honest in his dealings at home. Even when he is indoors, he is very serious about dressing and wearing a hat. Even his servants and concubines can't see his lazy appearance.

古文：姿表瑰丽，须眉如画。出入朝会，每为众所瞻望。
现代文：姿态仪表奇特又华美，胡须眉毛如画，进出朝会，常常为众人所敬仰瞩目。
English: His posture and appearance are peculiar and gorgeous, his whiskers and eyebrows are picturesque, and he often enters and leaves the imperial court, attracting the attention of many people.

古文：明年，出为使持节、散骑常侍、骠骑将军、开府同三司之仪、都督江州诸军事、江州刺史。
现代文：第二年，出任使持节、散骑常侍、骠骑将军、开府同三司之仪、都督江州诸军事、江州刺史。
English: In the second year, he served as the envoy, horseback riding attendant, cavalry general, the ceremony of opening the capital and the three departments, the military governor of Jiangsu Province and the historian of Jiangsu Province.

古文：视事三年，薨于州，时年六十。
现代文：办公三年，在州中去世，时年六十岁。
English: After three years in office, he died in the middle of the state, at the age of sixty.

古文：高祖甚悼惜之，赙钱三十万，布三百匹。
现代文：高祖很痛惜他，赐给三十万钱、三百匹布办丧事。
English: Gao Zu felt very sorry for him and gave him 300,000 yuan and 300 horses to carry out the funeral.

古文：诏曰： 旌德纪勋，哲王令轨；念终追远，前典明诰。
现代文：皇诏说： 表彰德行记载功勋，这是圣明帝王的法令；缅怀死者追念往事，是前代制度明定的皇命。
English: The imperial edict said: It is the decree of Emperor Shengming to commend the virtues and record the merits; it is the imperial mission of the previous system to commemorate the dead and remember the past.

古文：故使持节、散骑常侍、骠骑将军、开府仪同三司、江州刺史茂，识度淹广，器宇凝正。
现代文：原使持节、散骑常侍、骠骑将军、开府仪同三司、江州刺史王茂，见识气度深广，器宇风貌端正。
English: The original envoys, Jixie, Zangjie, Zoujie, Kaifu, Wang Shih, Wang Shih, have a deep and broad knowledge and a neat style.

古文：爰初草昧，尽诚宣力，绸缪休戚，契阔屯夷。
现代文：从最初开创的时代起，就竭力尽责，情意殷切地不论离合与聚散、艰危与平定都与我悲喜舆共。
English: From the time of its inception, it has done its best to fulfill its responsibilities, and has ardently participated in the joys and sorrows of the public, regardless of clustering and dispersion, difficulties and pacification.

古文：方赖谋猷，永隆朝寄；奄至薨殒，朕用恸于厥心。
现代文：刚开始依靠他出谋划策来辅助，将朝廷重托给他以使长久兴隆；他却突然至于薨逝，我那颗心啊真是充满了悲痛。
English: In the beginning, I relied on him for advice and assistance, entrusting the imperial court to him for long-term prosperity; but he suddenly passed away, and my heart was really filled with grief.

古文：宜增礼数，式昭盛烈。
现代文：应该增加礼仪的等级，用来彰扬他的大功绩。
English: He should be elevated to a higher level of etiquette to celebrate his great achievement.

古文：可赠侍中、太尉，加班剑二十人，鼓吹一部。
现代文：可追封为侍中、太尉，加二十个佩有纹饰木剑的人，鼓吹乐一套。
English: He can be posthumously appointed as a chamberlain, captain, plus twenty people wearing decorated wooden swords, and a set of music.

古文：谥曰忠烈。 
现代文：谧号忠烈。 
English: His nickname was Zhongre.

古文：初，茂以元勋，高祖赐以钟磬之乐。
现代文：当初，王茎因为是开国元勋，高祖赐给他乐器钟和磬。
English: At first, because Wang Zhi was a founding father, Gao Zu gave him the musical instruments bell and gong.

古文：茂在江州，梦钟磬在格，无故自堕，心恶之。
现代文：王茂在江州时，梦见钟磬在架子上，无缘无故自己堕落下来，心裹很厌恶逭事。
English: When Wang Mao was in Jiangzhou, he dreamed that the bell was on the shelf, and he fell down for no reason. He was disgusted with the anecdote.

古文：及觉，命奏乐。
现代文：等到醒来，叫人奏乐。
English: Wait until you wake up and have someone play music.

古文：既成列，钟磬在格，果无故编皆绝，堕地。
现代文：乐人已经排成行了，钟磬在架上，果然无缘无故地断了绳子，堕落地上。
English: The musicians were already lined up, the bell was on the stand, and for no reason the rope broke and fell to the ground.

古文：茂谓长史江诠曰： 此乐，天子所以惠劳臣也。
现代文：王茂对长史辽诠说： 逭乐，是天子用来赏赐给功臣的恩惠啊。
English: Wang Mao explained to Changshi Liao: "Enjoyment is a grace that the Son of Heaven uses to reward the meritorious.

古文：乐既极矣，能无忧乎！ 
现代文：欢乐已到了极点，能没有忧患吗! 
English: The joy has reached its climax, can there be no sorrow!

古文：俄而病，少日卒。
现代文：不久就病了，没几天就去世了。
English: He soon fell ill and died a few days later.

古文：子贞秀嗣，以居丧无礼，为有司奏，徙越州。后有诏留广州，乃潜结仁威府中兵参军杜景，欲袭州城，刺史萧昂讨之。
现代文：儿子贞昼继承，因为居丧时不守礼法，被有司奏报，调职到越，后来有皇命留职卢业，他就暗地勾结仁威府中兵参军杜景，打算袭击州城，刺史盖显征伐他们。
English: His son Zhengrong succeeded him, but because he did not observe the etiquette when he was in mourning, he was transferred to Yue by the secretary of the newspaper, and later he was transferred to Lüye by the order of the emperor. He secretly colluded with the soldiers of the Renwei Prefecture to join the army of Duqing, intending to attack the state capital and attack them.

古文：景，魏降人，与贞秀同戮。
现代文：丝量是从魏投降过来的，与贞秀一同被杀。
English: She was killed together with Zhenxiu, who had surrendered from Wei.

古文：曹景宗，字子震，新野人也。
现代文：曹景宗字子震，新野人。
English: Cao Jingsong's character Zi Zhen, the new wild man.

古文：父欣之，为宋将，位至征虏将军、徐州刺史。
现代文：父亲名欣之，是宋朝武将，官做到征虏将军、徐州刺史。
English: His father, Meixin, was a military commander of the Song Dynasty, a conscript general, and a historian of Xuzhou.

古文：景宗幼善骑射，好畋猎。常与少年数十人泽中逐麞鹿，每众骑赴鹿，鹿马相乱，景宗于众中射之，人皆惧中马足，鹿应弦辄毙，以此为乐。
现代文：曹景宗少年时善于骑马射箭，喜爱围猎，经常会同几十个少年到大草泽里去追逐獐子野鹿，每当众多骑手驱赶野鹿时，野鹿和人马混杂在一起，曹景宗在众人中放箭射鹿，人们都怕射中马腿，野鹿却随着弓弦一响就被射倒，曹景宗就以此当作乐趣。
English: When he was a boy, Cao Jingzong was good at riding horses and shooting arrows. He loved hunting. He would often go with dozens of boys to the meadow to chase the wild deer. Whenever a large number of riders drove the wild deer, the wild deer mixed with people and horses. Cao Jingzong shot arrows at the deer in the crowd. People were afraid of hitting the horse's leg, but the wild deer was shot down with the sound of the bowstring. Cao Jingzong took this as fun.

古文：未弱冠，欣之于新野遣出州，以匹马将数人，于中路卒逢蛮贼数百围之。
现代文：刚到二十岁时，曹欣之在新野派曹景宗出州去办事，他单身匹马只带几个从人，半路上意外地遇到几百蛮人的包围。
English: When he was just twenty years old, Cao Xinzhi sent Cao Jingzong out of the state to do business in Shino. He was a single horse with only a few followers, and he unexpectedly encountered several hundred barbarians on the way.

古文：景宗带百余箭，乃驰骑四射，每箭杀一蛮，蛮遂散走，因是以胆勇知名。
现代文：曹景宗带上百多支箭，便驰马向四面射箭，每发一箭就射死一个蛮人，蛮人四散逃走，因此他凭自己的胆量和勇气获得了名声。
English: Cao Jingzong took more than a hundred arrows with him and rode on horseback to shoot arrows in all directions. With each shot, he killed a barbarian, and the barbarians scattered and fled. Therefore, he gained fame for his courage and bravery.

古文：颇爱史书，每读《穰苴》、《乐毅传》，辄放卷叹息曰： 丈夫当如是！ 
现代文：他很喜爱读史书，每次读《穰苴》、《乐毅传》，便放下书卷感叹说： 男儿应当做这样的人！ 
English: He loves to read history books, and every time he reads "Dragonfly" and "Legend of Leyi," he puts down the book and laments: "Men should be like this!"

古文：辟西曹不就。
现代文：被征召任西曹官职，没去受任。
English: He was called up to serve as a sergeant, but did not take up the post.

古文：宋元徽中，随父出京师，为奉朝请、员外，迁尚书左民郎。
现代文：宋朝后废帝元徽年间，随同父亲离开本州去京城建康，任奉朝请、员外郎，调任尚书左民郎。
English: After the Song Dynasty, during the reign of the deposed Emperor Yuan Hui, he left Honshu with his father to go to the capital Jiankang, and was appointed as a guest of the Emperor, a member of the outer court, and a member of the inner court.

古文：寻以父忧去职，还乡里。
现代文：不久因父亲去世离职，回到故乡。
English: Shortly after his father's death, he left his job and returned to his hometown.

古文：服阕，刺史萧赤斧板为冠军中兵参军，领天水太守。
现代文：服丧期满后，刺史萧赤斧任命他做冠军中兵参军，兼任天水太守。
English: After the expiration of the mourning period, Zhang Shi Xiao Chiaxue appointed him as a champion soldier to join the army, and also served as the governor of Tianshui.

古文：时建元初，蛮寇群动，景宗东西讨击，多所擒破。
现代文：当南齐高祖建元初年，蛮人聚众暴乱，曹景宗东征西讨，战斗中多次擒贼破敌。
English: When Nanqi Gaozhu was founded in the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, the barbarians rioted, Cao Jingzong marched east and west, and the bandits repeatedly defeated the enemy in battle.

古文：齐鄱阳王锵为雍州，复以为征虏中兵参军，带冯翊太守督岘南诸军事，除屯骑校尉。
现代文：齐鄱阳王萧锵做雍州刺史，又用他做征虏中兵参军，兼任冯翊太守，督岘南诸军事，又授官做屯骑校尉。
English: Qishan Yang Wang Xiaohui was the historian of Yongzhou, and he was also used to recruit soldiers to join the army, concurrently served as the governor of Fengyuan, the military governor of Nan Province, and was also awarded the post of the cavalry captain.

古文：少与州里张道门厚善。
现代文：年少时和同乡张道门友谊情深。
English: When he was young, he had a deep friendship with his fellow countryman Zhang Daomen.

古文：道门，齐车骑将军敬儿少子也，为武陵太守。
现代文：张道门是南齐车骑将军张敬儿的小儿子，做武陵太守。
English: Zhang Daomen was the youngest son of Zhang Jing'er, the general of the Southern Qi cavalry, and the governor of Wuling.

古文：敬儿诛，道门于郡伏法，亲属故吏莫敢收，景宗自襄阳遣人船到武陵，收其尸骸，迎还殡葬，乡里以此义之。
现代文：张敬儿被杀，张道门在郡中也被株连处死，亲属故吏没有敢前来收尸，曹景宗从襄阳派遣人员船只到武陵，收取张道门的尸体，接回来加以殡葬，同乡人都因此认为曹景宗重义气。
English: Zhang Jing'er was killed, Zhang Daomen was also executed in Zhu Lian in the county, relatives and officials did not dare to come to collect the body, Cao Jingzong sent personnel ships from Yangyang to Wuling to collect Zhang Daomen's body and bring it back for burial. The villagers all thought that Cao Jingzong was very righteous.

古文：建武二年，魏主托跋宏寇赭阳，景宗为偏将，每冲坚陷阵，辄有斩获，以勋除游击将军。
现代文：南齐明帝建武二年，北魏国主拓跋宏进攻赭阳，曹景宗任偏将，每次冲击强敌攻陷敌阵，总是有所斩杀和俘获，因为有功勋授官做游击将军。
English: In the second year of the reign of Emperor Jianwu of the Southern Qi Dynasty, Tuoba Hong, the head of the Northern Wei Dynasty, led an attack on Fenyang. Cao Jingzong was appointed as a partial general. Every time he attacked a strong enemy and captured the enemy, he always killed and captured something, because he was awarded the title of guerrilla general for meritorious service.

古文：四年，太尉陈显达督众军北围马圈，景宗从之，以甲士二千设伏，破魏援托跋英四万人。
现代文：四年，太尉陈显达统率众军北上围攻马圈，曹景宗随军出征，带领甲士二千人设埋伏，击破北魏拓跋英带领的四万援兵。
English: In the fourth year, Lieutenant Chen Xianda led the army northward to besiege Maqiu, Cao Jingzong went out with the army, led two thousand soldiers to set up an ambush, and defeated forty thousand reinforcements led by Northern Wei Tuoba Ying.

古文：及克马圈，显达论功，以景宗为后，景宗退无怨言。
现代文：攻克马圈之后，陈显达论功行赏，把曹景宗排在最后，曹景宗退兵回来毫无怨言。
English: After conquering the horse circle, Chen Xianda ranked Cao Jingzong at the bottom of the list in terms of merit and performance, and Cao Jingzong returned from the retreat without complaint.

古文：魏主率众大至，显达宵奔，景宗导入山道，故显达父子获全。
现代文：北魏国主又率大军来进攻，陈显达在夜里逃跑，曹景宗引导他进入山道，因此陈显达父子得以安全脱险。
English: The Northern Wei sovereign again led a large army to attack, Chen Xianda fled in the night, Cao Jingzong led him into the mountain road, so Chen Xianda and his son were able to escape safely.

古文：五年，高祖为雍州刺史，景宗深自结附，数请高祖临其宅。
现代文：五年，梁武帝萧衍做雍州刺史，曹景宗同他深相结交，多次邀请他来自己家中做客。
English: In the fifth year of Emperor Liangwu's reign, Xiao Yan was appointed as the governor of Yongzhou. Cao Jingzong had a deep friendship with Xiao Yan and invited him to his home many times.

古文：时天下方乱，高祖亦厚加意焉。
现代文：当时天下正处在动乱之中，梁武帝也有意重视曹景宗。
English: At that time, the world was in turmoil, and Emperor Liang Wu also intentionally paid attention to Cao Jingzong.

古文：永元初，表为冠军将军、竟陵太守。
现代文：南齐东昏侯永元初年，梁武帝上表请任曹景宗做冠军将军、竟陵太守。
English: In the first year of Yongyuan, Emperor Liangwu invited Cao Jingzong to be the champion general and the governor of the imperial mausoleum.

古文：及义师起，景宗聚众，遣亲人杜思冲劝先迎南康王于襄阳即帝位，然后出师，为万全计。
现代文：当梁武帝起兵东下，曹景宗集聚兵力，派亲信杜思冲劝梁武帝先迎接南康王萧伟在襄阳即皇帝位，然后再出兵，这是万全的计策。
English: When Emperor Liangwu marched eastward, Cao Jingzong gathered troops and sent Du Si Chong, a close confidant, to persuade Emperor Liangwu to first welcome King Nankang Xiaowei in Xiangyang, i.e. the emperor's throne, and then send troops. This was a perfect strategy.

古文：高祖不从，语在《高祖纪》。
现代文：梁武帝没采纳这意见，事情记载在《高祖纪》中。
English: Emperor Liangwu did not accept this opinion, and the matter is recorded in the "Ancestral Records."

古文：高祖至竟陵，以景宗与冠军将军王茂济江，围郢城，自二月至于七月，城乃降。
现代文：梁武帝率兵到竟陵，派曹景宗会同冠军将军王茂渡过长江，围攻郢城，从二月到七月郢城守军才投降。
English: Emperor Liangwu led the troops to Jingling, and sent Cao Jingzong to cross the Yangtze River with the champion general Wang Mao to besiege Fucheng. From February to July, the defenders of Fucheng surrendered.

古文：复帅众前驱至南州，领马步军取建康。
现代文：又统领众军为前锋挺进到南州，率领马步军取道向建康前进。
English: He also led the army to advance to Nanzhou as the vanguard, and led the horse-marching army to advance to Jiankang.

古文：道次江宁，东昏将李居士以重兵屯新亭，是日选精骑一千至江宁行顿，景宗始至，安营未立；且师行日久，器甲穿弊，居士望而轻之，因鼓噪前薄景宗。
现代文：中途驻军在江宁，东昏侯的部将李居士带重兵驻扎在新亭，这天选出一千精锐的骑兵到江宁暂驻。曹景宗的部队刚刚到达，营垒还没能建造起来，况且部队行军日久，兵器铠甲破损穿漏。李居士看到曹景宗队伍的状况便轻敌大意，于是趁势击鼓呐喊前来攻逼曹景宗。
English: Halfway through the journey, the troops were stationed in Jiangning. Li Jiushi, the commander of the Eastern Dismissal Division, was stationed in Xinting with heavy troops. On this day, a thousand elite cavalrymen were selected to temporarily stay in Jiangning. Cao Jingzong's troops had just arrived, the camp had not yet been built, and the troops had been marching for a long time, and the armor was damaged and leaking. When Li Jiushi saw the condition of Cao Jingzong's team, he thought less of the enemy, so he took advantage of the situation to beat drums and shout to attack Cao Jingzong.

古文：景宗被甲驰战，短兵裁接，居士弃甲奔走，景宗皆获之，因鼓而前，径至皁荚桥筑垒。景宗又与王茂、吕僧珍掎角，破王珍国于大航。
现代文：曹景宗披甲上马驰驱迎战，短兵刚一交战，李居士便弃甲败逃，曹景宗把李居士的兵马全部俘获，顺势乘胜击鼓追敌，一直前进到皂英桥筑起营垒，曹景宗又和王茂、吕僧珍分兵合击，在大航打败王国珍。
English: Cao Jingzong put on his armor and rode out to meet the battle. As soon as the short soldiers fought, Li Jingshi abandoned his armor and fled. Cao Jingzong captured all of Li Jingshi's soldiers and horses, took advantage of the situation to beat the drums and chase the enemy, and advanced all the way to So Ying Bridge to build a camp. Cao Jingzong also fought with Wang Mao and Lu Sonzhen, and defeated Wang Guozhen.

古文：茂冲其中坚，应时而陷，景宗纵兵乘之。
现代文：王茂攻击王国珍的主力，立刻冲垮敌阵，曹景宗乘势纵兵进击。
English: Wang Mao attacked the main force of Wang Guozhen and immediately broke the enemy line. Cao Jingzong took advantage of the situation to attack.

古文：景宗军士皆桀黠无赖，御道左右，莫非富室，抄掠财物，略夺子女，景宗不能禁。
现代文：曹景宗的部队的军士都是凶暴狡猾的无赖汉，御街两侧的住户，全都是富贵之家，军士抢夺财物，掠取子女，曹景宗制止不住。
English: The sergeants of Cao Jingzong's troops were all vicious and cunning scoundrels. The residents on both sides of the main street were all rich families. The sergeants robbed property and plundered children. Cao Jingzong could not stop them.

古文：及高祖入顿新城，严申号令，然后稍息。
现代文：当梁武帝进驻到新城，严肃申明军纪，此后掠夺事件才稍有收敛。
English: When Emperor Liangwu stationed in Xincheng and solemnly affirmed military discipline, the looting only abated slightly.

古文：复与众军长围六门。
现代文：曹景宗又会同众军长围攻六门。
English: Cao Jingzong, together with all the army commanders, besieged the Six Gates.

古文：城平，拜散骑常侍、右卫将军，封湘西县侯，食邑一千六百户。
现代文：破城之后，授官做散骑常侍、右卫将军，封湘西县侯，食邑一千六百户。
English: After breaking through the city, he was awarded the posts of straggler, general of the Right Division, and fief of Xiangxi County, with 1,600 households.

古文：仍迁持节、都督郢、司二州诸军事、左将军、郢州刺史。
现代文：于是又迁为持节、都督郢、司二州诸军事、左将军、郢州刺史。
English: As a result, it was moved again to Jisetsu-gome, Tudoku-gome, Shishu-gome, Sasho-gome, and Shishu-gome.

古文：天监元年，进号平西将军，改封竟陵县侯。
现代文：梁高祖天监元年，进号平西将军，改封为竟陵县侯。
English: In the first year of Liang Gao's tutelage, Liang Gao's title was promoted to Pingxi General, and he was given the title of the Prince of Qiongling County.

古文：景宗在州，鬻货聚敛。于城南起宅，长堤以东，夏口以北，开街列门，东西数里，而部曲残横，民颇厌之。
现代文：曹景宗在郢州，买卖货物聚敛钱财，在城南修建住宅，自长堤以东，到夏口以北，开辟街道排列门户，东西长几里，而部队凶残横暴，百姓极为厌恶。
English: In Zhangzhou, Cao Jingzong traded goods and collected money, built houses in the south of the city, from the east of the long embankment to the north of Xiakou, and opened streets with portals, several miles long from east to west, while the troops were ferocious and violent, and the people were extremely disgusted.

古文：二年十月，魏寇司州，围刺史蔡道恭。
现代文：天监二年十月，北魏入侵司州，包围刺史蔡道恭。
English: In October of the second year of Tianjing, the Northern Wei Dynasty invaded Shizhou and besieged Zhang Shi Cai Daogong.

古文：时魏攻日苦，城中负板而汲，景宗望门不出，但耀军游猎而已。
现代文：当时北魏的攻势一天天严重，城里的人要背着门板防箭去汲水，曹景宗却坐在家里观望而不出兵援救，只是耀武扬威地出游打猎而已。
English: At that time, the offensive of the Northern Wei Dynasty was getting more serious day by day. People in the city had to carry the door board to collect water. Cao Jingzong, however, sat at home and watched, but did not send troops to rescue. He only went out to hunt.

古文：及司州城陷，为御史中丞任昉所奏。高祖以功臣寝而不治，征为护军。
现代文：司州城被攻陷之后，曹景宗受到御史中丞任日方奏本弹劾，武帝因为曹景宗是功臣便压下这事不予制裁，反而召回曹景宗任护军。
English: After the fall of Sizhou City, Cao Jingzong was impeached by the Japanese side of the impeachment report, and Emperor Wu did not sanction this because Cao Jingzong was a meritorious subject, but recalled Cao Jingzong to serve as a guard.

古文：既至，复拜散骑常侍、右卫将军。
现代文：曹景宗到京之后，又拜官任散骑常侍、右卫将军。
English: After Cao Jingzong arrived in Beijing, he was also appointed as a non-commissioned officer, a cavalryman and a general of the right guard.

古文：五年，魏托跋英寇钟离，围徐州刺史昌义之。高祖诏景宗督众军援义之，豫州刺史韦睿亦预焉，而受景宗节度。
现代文：五年，北魏拓跋英入侵钟离，围攻徐州刺史昌义之，武帝下诏命令曹景宗统率众军援救昌义之，豫州刺史韦睿也参加了这次军事行动，并且受曹景宗的节制。
English: In the fifth year of the Northern Wei Dynasty, Tuobao Ying invaded Zhongli and besieged the Xuzhou general Shishi Changyi. Emperor Wu issued an edict ordering Cao Jingzong to lead the army to rescue Changyi. The Yuzhou general Shiveri also participated in this military operation and was restrained by Cao Jingzong.

古文：诏景宗顿道人洲，待众军齐集俱进。
现代文：诏命曹景宗驻屯在道人洲，等候各军集齐之后一同进发。
English: The imperial edict ordered Cao Jingzong to stay in Dojinshou and wait for all the armies to assemble before marching out together.

古文：景宗固启，求先据邵阳洲尾，高祖不听。
现代文：曹景宗一再启奏，要求允许他的部队首先占据邵阳洲尾，武帝不准许。
English: Cao Jingzong repeatedly made overtures, demanding that his troops be allowed to occupy Shaoyang Zhouwei first, but Emperor Wu did not allow this.

古文：景宗欲专其功，乃违诏而进，值暴风卒起，颇有淹溺，复还守先顿。
现代文：曹景宗打算独得这次战功，便违抗诏命向前开进，恰好突然刮起暴风，很多士兵落水淹死，不得已又回兵据守先前的驻地。
English: Cao Jingzong planned to win this battle alone, so he disobeyed the imperial edict and marched forward, just as a sudden storm blew up, many soldiers fell into the water and drowned, and they had no choice but to return to their previous garrison.

古文：高祖闻之，曰： 此所以破贼也。景宗不进，盖天意乎！
现代文：高祖知道这消息后，说： 这是能够破贼的条件，曹景宗不能前进，原来是天意安排吧！
English: After Gaozu learned this news, he said, "This is the condition for defeating the bandits. Cao Jingzong cannot advance. It was originally arranged by providence!"

古文：若孤军独往，城不时立，必见狼狈。
现代文：假如曹景宗孤军独往，营垒不能及时修筑起来，一定遭到狼狈的惨败。
English: If Cao Jingzong's army was alone and the camp could not be built in time, it would surely suffer a disastrous defeat.

古文：今得待众军同进，始大捷矣。 
现代文：如今能够等待众军同时前进，这样就能大获全胜了。 
English: Now you can wait for multiple armies to advance at the same time, and you'll win big.

古文：及韦睿至，与景宗进顿邵阳洲，立垒去魏城百余步。
现代文：当韦睿到来，和曹景宗前进屯兵在邵阳洲，在距离魏城百多步远的地方构筑营垒。
English: When Wei Rui arrived, he and Cao Jingzong advanced the garrison in Shaoyangzhou and built a camp more than a hundred paces away from Weicheng.

古文：魏连战不能却，杀伤者十二三，自是魏军不敢逼。
现代文：魏军接连出战不能打退南军，被杀伤的人数有十分之二三，从此魏军不敢逼近南军作战。
English: The Wei army couldn't beat back the Southern army in successive battles. The number of people who were killed and injured was two-thirds out of ten. From then on, the Wei army dared not approach the Southern army to fight.

古文：景宗等器甲精新，军仪甚盛，魏人望之夺气。
现代文：曹景宗等各部分军队的兵器甲胄精良新美，军容盛大，魏军见到后感到气馁。
English: Cao Jingzong and other parts of the army's weapons and armor were exquisite and new, and the army was large. The Wei army was discouraged after seeing it.

古文：魏大将杨大眼对桥北岸立城，以通粮运，每牧人过岸伐刍藁，皆为大眼所略。
现代文：魏大将杨大眼面对桥在北岸筑城，使运粮道路通畅，每当南边牧人过岸来打畜草，皆被杨大眼俘虏去。
English: The Wei general Yang Dajian built a city on the north bank of the bridge to make the grain transportation road smooth. Whenever the southern herdsmen crossed the river to graze, they were all captured by Yang Dajian.

古文：景宗乃募勇敢士千余人，径渡大眼城南数里筑垒，亲自举筑。
现代文：曹景宗便召募一千多勇敢的军士，一直渡河在离杨大眼城南面几里远的地方修筑营垒，曹景宗亲自举筑打夯。
English: Cao Jingzong then recruited more than a thousand brave soldiers to cross the river and build a camp a few miles away from the south of Yangdajian City. Cao Jingzong personally raised and lowered the anchor.

古文：大眼率众来攻，景宗与战破之，因得垒成。
现代文：杨大眼率部队来进攻，曹景宗迎战并把他击败，因此能够把营垒筑成。
English: Yang Dazhong led the troops to attack, Cao Jingzong fought and defeated him, so he was able to build the camp.

古文：使别将赵草守之，因谓为赵草城，是后恣刍牧焉。
现代文：曹景宗派遣将领赵草据守新垒，便把这座军垒叫做赵草城，从这以后牧人便可以随意在这里打草放牧。
English: Cao Jingzong dispatched the general Zhao Cao to defend the new fortress, and called this fortress Zhao Cao City. From then on, herdsmen could graze and graze here at will.

古文：大眼时遣抄掠，辄反为赵草所获。
现代文：杨大眼不时地派兵来抢掠，每每反被赵草俘获。
English: From time to time, Yang Dajian sent soldiers to loot, but they were always captured by Zhao Cao.

古文：先是，高祖诏景宗等逆装高舰，使与魏桥等，为火攻计。
现代文：在这之前，武帝曾诏命曹景宗等预先建造高大的战船，使船上的高楼和桥一般高，目的是用来实现火攻的计划。
English: Prior to this, Emperor Wu had ordered Cao Jingzong and others to build tall warships in advance, so that the tall buildings and bridges on the ships were generally high, with the aim of being used to implement the fire attack plan.

古文：令景宗与睿各攻一桥，睿攻其南，景宗攻其北。
现代文：命令曹景宗和韦睿各攻一座敌桥，韦睿攻打魏军的南桥，曹景宗攻击北面的桥。
English: He ordered Cao Jingzong and Wei Rui to each attack an enemy bridge. Wei Rui attacked the south bridge of the Wei army, and Cao Jingzong attacked the north bridge.

古文：六年三月，春水生，淮水暴长六七尺。
现代文：六年三月，春水涨起来，淮河水暴涨六七尺高。
English: In March of the sixth year, the spring water rose, and the water of the Huaihe River soared sixty-seven feet high.

古文：睿遣所督将冯道根、李文钊、裴邃、韦寂等乘舰登岸，击魏洲上军尽殪。
现代文：韦睿派出由他统领的将军冯道根、李文钊、裴邃、韦寂等乘战船登岸，进攻北魏在洲岸上的驻军并把他们全部歼灭。
English: Wei Rui sent his generals, including Feng Dogen, Li Wenjuan, Pei Jun, and Wei Zhang, ashore on warships to attack the Northern Wei garrison on the mainland and annihilate them all.

古文：景宗因使众军皆鼓噪乱登诸城，呼声震天地，大眼于西岸烧营，英自东岸弃城走。
现代文：曹景宗乘机下令众军一齐击鼓呐喊，混乱中登上魏军的营垒，杀声震动天地，杨大眼在西岸烧掉营垒，拓跋英在东岸弃城逃走。
English: Cao Jingzong took the opportunity to order all the troops to beat drums and shout together. In the chaos, they boarded the Wei army's camp, and the killing sound shook the world. Yang Dajian burned the camp on the west coast, and Tuoba Ying abandoned the city on the east coast and fled.

古文：诸垒相次土崩，悉弃其器甲，争投水死，淮水为之不流。
现代文：魏军各个营垒接连崩溃，全都丢弃了他们的兵器铠甲，争着跳进河里淹死，淮水都被堵塞不能流通。
English: The Wei army's various camps collapsed one after another, all abandoned their weapons and armor, and jumped into the river to drown. The water was blocked and could not be circulated.

古文：景宗令军主马广，蹑大眼至濊水上，四十余里，伏尸相枕。
现代文：曹景宗下令军主马广跟踪追击杨大眼直到氵岁水岸边，在四十多里的路上，倒毙的敌尸枕压在一起。
English: Cao Jingzong ordered the military commander Ma Guang to track and pursue Yang Dajian to the shore of the Xinyi River. On the road of more than forty miles, the fallen enemy bodies were pressed together.

古文：义之出逐英至洛口，英以匹马入梁城。
现代文：昌义之出兵追击拓跋英到洛口，拓跋英单人匹马逃进梁城。
English: Changyi dispatched troops to pursue Tuoba Ying to Lokou. Tuoba Ying escaped into Liangcheng on a single horse.

古文：缘淮百余里，尸骸枕藉，生擒五万余人，收其军粮器械，积如山岳，牛马驴骡，不可胜计。
现代文：沿着淮河百多里，遍地死尸叠压，活捉五万多魏兵，缴获魏军的粮食器械，堆积起来如同山岳，牛马驴骡，更不计其数。
English: Along more than a hundred miles of the Huai River, dead bodies were piled up everywhere, more than fifty thousand Wei soldiers were captured alive, the Wei army's grain equipment was captured, and they piled up like mountains.

古文：景宗乃搜军所得生口万余人，马千匹，遣献捷，高祖诏还本军，景宗振旅凯入，增封四百，并前为二千户，进爵为公。
现代文：曹景宗于是搜集所俘虏的活口有一万多人，战马千匹，派人押送去京城献捷。高祖下诏命令曹景宗还归本军，曹景宗的部队排着队列得胜回朝，增赐四百户，连同以前赐的共为二千户，晋爵为公。
English: Cao Jingzong then collected more than ten thousand prisoners, a thousand horses, and sent someone to escort them to the capital to offer victory. Gao Zu issued an edict ordering Cao Jingzong to return to his own army, Cao Jingzong's troops lined up to win back to the government, awarding an additional four hundred households, together with the previously awarded a total of two thousand households, and promotion to nobility.

古文：诏拜侍中、领军将军，给鼓吹一部。
现代文：诏命拜官侍中、领军将军，赐给鼓吹乐队一部。
English: The imperial edict ordered the courtier, the leading general, to give a part of the propaganda band to the chorus.

古文：景宗为人自恃尚胜，每作书，字有不解，不以问人，皆以意造焉。
现代文：曹景宗为人自恃有功好胜，每次写信，有不会写的字，也不去问别人，都按自己的臆想生造。
English: Cao Jingzong believed himself to be a man of merit and success. Every time he wrote a letter, whether he could write or not, he did not ask others, but created it according to his own imagination.

古文：虽公卿无所推揖；惟韦睿年长，且州里胜流，特相敬重，同宴御筵，亦曲躬谦逊，高祖以此嘉之。
现代文：即使对待公卿高官也从不谨敬谦让；惟独韦睿比他年长，而且是同州里中的名流人物，曹景宗对他加意敬重，一同参加御赐的宴会，曹景宗也能尽礼谦逊，武帝也因此称赞他。
English: Even when dealing with nobles and high-ranking officials, Cao Jingzong never treated them with respect and humility; however, Wei Rui was older than him and was a famous person in the same province. Cao Jingzong treated him with respect and attended the banquet together. Cao Jingzong was also able to be polite and humble, and Emperor Wu praised him for this.

古文：景宗好内，妓妾至数百，穷极锦绣。
现代文：曹景宗好女色，家中歌妓妻妾有几百人，穿着都是极其华贵的锦绣。
English: Cao Jingzong had a penchant for women. There were several hundred prostitute wives and concubines in his family, all dressed in extremely expensive brocade.

古文：性躁动，不能沈默，出行常欲褰车帷幔，左右辄谏以位望隆重，人所具瞻，不宜然。
现代文：他性格急躁好动，不能沉默安静，每次外出时总想挑开车上的帷幔向外观望，左右从人总是拿地位声望隆重加以劝告，说让所有的人都看到他，这是不合适的。
English: His character is impetuous and active, he cannot be silent and quiet, every time he goes out, he always wants to pick up the curtains on the car to look outside, and people around him always take his status and reputation and solemnly advise him that it is not appropriate for everyone to see him.

古文：景宗谓所亲曰： 我昔在乡里，骑快马如龙，与年少辈数十骑，拓弓弦作霹雳声，箭如饿鸱叫。
现代文：曹景宗对他亲近的人说： 我过去在乡里，骑快马有如龙腾，会同年少朋友几十个骑手，弓弦弹出霹雷般声响，急箭发出饿鹰一样的尖啸。
English: Cao Jingzong said to those close to him: I used to ride a fast horse like a dragon in the countryside, and I would have dozens of riders in the same year. The bow string would make a thunderous sound, and the rapid arrow would make a scream like a hungry eagle.

古文：平泽中逐麞，数肋射之，渴饮其血，饥食其肉，甜如甘露浆。
现代文：在平野大泽中追射獐子，数着肋条射它，渴了喝它的血，饿了吃它的肉，味道甜美有如甘露琼浆。
English: In the plains of Ozawa, chase the pike, count the ribs and shoot it, thirsty to drink its blood, hungry to eat its meat, the taste is sweet like nectar.

古文：觉耳后风生，鼻头出火，此乐使人忘死，不知老之将至。
现代文：只觉得耳后生风，鼻头冒火，这样的快乐让人不知道会死，更不知道老年还会到来。
English: I just feel a breeze behind my ears, my nose is on fire, such happiness makes people not know that they will die, let alone know that old age will come.

古文：今来扬州作贵人，动转不得，路行开车幔，小人辄言不可。
现代文：如今来扬州成了贵人，行动不得自由，走在路上打开车幔，小人便说不行。
English: Nowadays, if you come to Yangzhou and become a nobleman, you are not allowed to move freely. If you walk on the road and open the turnstile, the villain will say you can't.

古文：闭置车中，如三日新妇。
现代文：憋闷闭坐在车里，如同三天不许见人的新媳妇。
English: She sat in the car, sullenly, like a new daughter-in-law who had not been allowed to see anyone for three days.

古文：遭此邑邑，使人无气。 
现代文：遭到这种郁闷，让人不得顺气。 
English: It's depressing, it's depressing.

古文：为人嗜酒好乐，腊月于宅中，使作野虖逐除，遍往人家乞酒食。
现代文：曹景宗为人嗜酒好乐，腊月在自己的宅院里，让人们呼喊着驱病除鬼，还到所有的人家去乞讨酒饭。
English: Cao Jingzong was fond of drinking and merrymaking. He had the waxing moon in his courtyard, had people shout to drive away illness and exorcise ghosts, and went to everyone's home to beg for food and drink.

古文：本以为戏，而部下多剽轻，因弄人妇女，夺人财货。
现代文：本来这样做是为了戏耍取乐，但是他的部下大多是剽悍轻薄之辈，就趁机调戏人家妇女，抢夺人家的财宝。
English: Originally, this was done for playful fun, but most of his subordinates were tough and frivolous, taking advantage of the opportunity to flirt with other women and rob other people's treasures.

古文：高祖颇知之，景宗乃止。
现代文：武帝非常清楚这些情况，曹景宗知道后便停止这种取乐。
English: Emperor Wu was very aware of these circumstances, and Cao Jingzong stopped this kind of entertainment after he knew about it.

古文：高祖数宴见功臣，共道故旧，景宗醉后谬忘，或误称下官，高祖故纵之，以为笑乐。
现代文：高祖曾经多次设宴席会见功臣，一同叙谈昔日的交情，曹景宗醉了之后，总是说些谬言妄语，或有时对皇帝误称自己是下官，高祖也是有意让他胡来以此取笑作乐。
English: Gaozu had many times set up a banquet to meet with heroes and discuss past friendships. After Cao Jingzong got drunk, he always said some nonsense, or sometimes mistakenly called himself a subordinate officer to the emperor. Gaozu also intended to make fun of him by making fun of him.

古文：七年，迁侍中、中卫将军、江州刺史。
现代文：七年，曹景宗转任侍中、中卫将军、江州刺史。
English: In the seventh year, Cao Jingzong was transferred to the posts of Vice Admiral, General of the Middle Guard, and Governor of Jiangsu Province.

古文：赴任卒于道，时年五十二。
现代文：赴任时死在路上，当年五十二岁。
English: He died on the way to his new post, at the age of fifty-two.

古文：诏赙钱二十万，布三百匹，追赠征北将军、雍州刺史、开府仪同三司。谥曰壮。
现代文：皇帝下诏赐丧葬钱二十万、布三百匹，追赠做征北将军、雍州刺史、开府仪同三司，谥号为壮。
English: The emperor issued an edict to give 200,000 yuan in funeral money and 300 horses of cloth, and posthumously made him the general of the Northern Expeditionary Force, the governor of Yongzhou Province, the governor of Kaifu, and three other officials. His posthumous name was Zhuang.

古文：子皎嗣。
现代文：曹景宗的儿子曹皎继任父亲的爵位。
English: Cao Jingzong's son Cao Wei succeeded to his father's title.

古文：柳庆远，字文和，河东解人也。
现代文：柳庆远字文和，河东解人。
English: Liu Qingyuan wrote the characters "文和" and "河東解人."

古文：伯父元景，宋太尉。
现代文：伯父元景，是宋的太尉。
English: His uncle, Yuan Jie, was the first lieutenant of Song.

古文：庆远起家郢州主簿，齐初为尚书都官郎、大司马中兵参军、建武将军、魏兴太守。
现代文：庆远从家中被起用任郢州的主簿，齐的初年任尚书都官郎、大司马中兵参军、建武将军、魏兴太守。
English: Qingyuan was appointed as the chief accountant of Zhangzhou from his home, and in the first year of Qi, he was appointed as the official of Shangshu, the general of Ma Zhongfei, the general of Jianwu, and the governor of Wei Xing.

古文：郡遭暴水，流漂居民，吏请徙民祀城。
现代文：郡遭受洪水，漂流冲走居民，下级吏士们请求迁移百姓祭祀城。
English: The county suffered from floods, and residents were washed away by drifts. Lower-level officials requested the relocation of the people to the sacrificial city.

古文：庆远曰： 天降雨水，岂城之所知。
现代文：庆远说： 天降雨水，哪里是城可以预知的呢。
English: Qingyuan said: Where can a city predict the weather and rainfall?

古文：吾闻江河长不过三日，斯亦何虑。 
现代文：我听说江河涨水超不过三天，这又有什么可忧虑的。 
English: I've heard that the rivers have only been overflowing for three days, so there's nothing to worry about.

古文：命筑土而已。
现代文：他仅仅命捣土使之坚实。
English: He just had to pound the ground to make it solid.

古文：俄而水过，百姓服之。
现代文：不久洪水过去，百姓们钦服他。
English: The flood soon passed, and the people admired him.

古文：入为长水校尉，出为平北录事参军、襄阳令。
现代文：他入京任长水校尉，又出任平北绿事参军、襄阳令。
English: He entered Beijing as a captain of the Changshui School, and also served as the commander of the Pingbei Green Army and the Yangyang Army.

古文：高祖之临雍州，问京兆人杜恽求州纲，恽举庆远。
现代文：高祖到雍州，向京兆人杜惮询问想寻找一个可担任州主管的官员，杜惮推举庆远。
English: Gao Zu went to Yongzhou and asked Du Shuo, an official of the Beijing and Shanghai Municipal Government, if he wanted to find an official who could serve as the head of the state. Du Shuo recommended Qingyuan.

古文：高祖曰： 文和吾已知之，所问未知者耳。 
现代文：高祖说： 文和我已了解他，我问的是别的我不了解的人。 
English: Gao Zu said, "Wen and I already know him, I'm asking about someone else I don't know.

古文：因辟别驾从事史。
现代文：于是就征召他为别驾从事史。
English: So he was called up to do history as a second career.

古文：齐方多难，庆远谓所亲曰： 方今天下将乱，英雄必起，庇民定霸，其吾君乎？ 
现代文：此时齐正祸难重重，庆远对他的亲近的人说： 当今天下要乱，英雄一定会兴起，保护百姓奠定霸业的人，恐怕就是我们的君主吧? 
English: At this time, Qingyuan said to those close to him: "When there is chaos, a hero will surely arise. The person who protects the people and lays the foundation for hegemony is probably our monarch, right?

古文：因尽诚协赞。
现代文：因而竭尽忠诚地协助高祖。
English: Therefore, he loyally assisted Gaozu to the best of his ability.

古文：及义兵起，庆远常居帷幄为谋主。
现代文：到高祖的义军兴起时，庆远常常运筹帷幄成为主谋者。
English: By the time Gaozu's rebel army arose, Qingyuan often became the mastermind.

古文：中兴元年，西台选为黄门郎，迁冠军将军、征东长史。
现代文：中兴元年，西台挑选他任黄门郎，升职为冠军将军、征东长史。
English: In the first year of Zhongxing, Xidai selected him as Huangmenro, promoted him to champion general, and made a long history of conquering the East.

古文：从军东下，身先士卒。
现代文：他随军东下，作战身先士卒。
English: He followed the army to the east and was at the forefront of the battle.

古文：高祖行营垒，见庆远顿舍严整，每叹曰： 人人若是，吾又何忧。 
现代文：高祖在营垒间行走，看见庆远歇宿的房舍很严整，就常感叹说： 如果人人都像他这样，我又有什么可忧虑的呢? 
English: Gao Zu walked between the camps, and when he saw that the buildings of Qingyuan's resting place were very neat, he often sighed and said: If everyone is like him, what do I have to worry about?

古文：建康城平，入为侍中，领前军将军，带淮陵、齐昌二郡太守。
现代文：建康城平定后，入京任侍中，领前军将军，带淮陵、齐昌二郡太守。
English: After Jiankang was pacified, he entered Beijing as an attendant, led the generals of the former army, and became the governor of Huairing and Qichang counties.

古文：城内尝夜失火，禁中惊惧，高祖时居宫中，悉敛诸钥，问 柳侍中何在 。庆远至，悉付之。
现代文：城内夜间曾经失火，宫中惊恐不安，当时高祖住在宫中，收了所有的锁钥，问大家 柳侍中在哪里 ，庆远来了，就把锁钥全交给他。
English: There was a fire in the city at night, and the palace was terrified. At that time, Gaozu lived in the palace, received all the keys, asked everyone where Liu Zizhong was, and when Qingyuan came, he gave him all the keys.

古文：其见任如此。
现代文：他就是这样被高祖所信任。
English: This is how he was trusted by Gaozu.

古文：霸府建，以为太尉从事中郎。
现代文：高祖霸府建立后，用他任太尉从事中郎。
English: After the establishment of Gao Zu Bafu, he was appointed as a lieutenant to serve as a middle-ranking official.

古文：高祖受禅，迁散骑常侍、右卫将军，加征虏将军，封重安侯，食邑千户。
现代文：高祖接受禅让即位，升他的官职为散骑常侍、右卫将军，加为征虏将军，封为重安侯，封地一千户。
English: Gao Zu accepted Zenzhen's accession to the throne, and was promoted to his official position as a cavalryman, general of the right guard, as well as a general of the conscript army, and was given the title of Chong'an Hou, with a fief of one thousand households.

古文：母忧去职，以本官起之，固辞不拜。
现代文：因母亲逝世而离职，后来按原先的官职又起用他，他坚持拒绝不就职。
English: Due to the death of his mother, he resigned from his post. Later, he was reappointed to his previous post, but he refused to resign.

古文：天监二年，迁中领军，改封云杜侯。
现代文：天监二年，升职为中领军，改封为云杜侯。
English: Two years later, he was promoted to middle leader and changed his title to Yun Du Hou.

古文：四年，出为使持节、都督雍、梁、南、北秦四州诸军事、征虏将军、宁蛮校尉、雍州刺史。
现代文：四年，出任使持节、都督壅、梁、南、北秦四州诸军事、征虏将军、宁蛮校尉、雍州刺史。
English: In four years, he served as the envoy of Jizhi Festival, the governor of Shandong, Liang, South and North Qin Provinces, the military, the conscript general, the Ningban lieutenant, and the Yongzhou historian.

古文：高祖饯于新亭，谓曰： 卿衣锦还乡，朕无西顾之忧矣。 
现代文：高祖在新亭设宴送行，对他说： 你衣锦还乡，我没有西望的忧虑了。 
English: Gao Zu held a banquet at the new pavilion to see him off, and said to him: You have returned to your hometown, I have no worries about looking west.

古文：七年，征为护军将军，领太子庶子。
现代文：七年，征召他为护军将军，领太子庶子。
English: In the seventh year, he was conscripted as a military escort general, leading the prince's illegitimate son.

古文：未赴职，仍迁通直散骑常侍、右卫将军，领右骁骑将军。
现代文：他没有去任职，屡次升职为通直散骑常侍、右卫将军，领右骁骑将军。
English: He did not take up his post, but was repeatedly promoted to the position of a regular attendant on horseback, a general of the right guard, and a leading general of the right cavalry.

古文：至京都，值魏宿预城请降，受诏为援，于是假节守淮阴。
现代文：到了京都，正值魏宿预城请求投降，他受皇命作为援助，于是持节守淮阴。
English: When he arrived in Kyoto, it was the time of the request for the surrender of Wei Shuku, and he was ordered by the emperor to help, so he kept a strict watch on Huaiyin.

古文：魏军退。
现代文：魏军退兵。
English: The Wei army withdrew.

古文：八年，还京师，迁散骑常侍、太子詹事、雍州大中正。
现代文：八年，回到京都，升职散骑常侍、太子詹事、雍州大中正。
English: Eight years later, he returned to Kyoto and was promoted to sanshaku (free-rider) regular attendant, prince Zhanji, and Yongzhou University junior high school vice-president.

古文：十年，迁侍中、领军将军，给扶，并鼓吹一部。
现代文：十年，升职侍中、领军将军，赐给他扶持之人，并赐鼓吹乐一套。
English: Ten years later, he was promoted to attendant and leading general, given someone to support him, and given a set of trumpet music.

古文：十二年，迁安北将军、宁蛮校尉、雍州刺史。
现代文：十二年，升职安北将军、宁蛮校尉、雍州刺史。
English: In the twelfth year, he was promoted to General Anbei, Lieutenant Ningman, and Yongzhou Sashih.

古文：庆远重为本州，颇历清节，士庶怀之。
现代文：庆远又在本州任职，他更为砥砺清白的操守，士人平民的心都归附他。
English: Qingyuan served in Honshu again. He was more scrupulously clean, and the hearts of the common people and scholars were attached to him.

古文：明年春，卒，时年五十七。
现代文：第二年春，去世，时年五十七岁。
English: He died in the spring of the following year, at the age of fifty-seven.

古文：诏曰： 念往笃终，前王令则；式隆宠数，列代恒规。
现代文：皇诏说： 追思怀念过去忠心耿耿直到生命终结的人，是先王时就有的法令制度；帝王隆重地给予下臣礼遇，是历代都有的常规。
English: The imperial edict said: "To remember those who have been loyal until the end of their lives is a legal system that existed when I was king; emperors grandly giving courteous treatment to subordinates is a routine that has existed throughout the ages.

古文：使持节、都督雍、梁、南、北秦四州郢州之竟陵司州之随郡诸军事、安北将军、宁蛮校尉、雍州刺史、云杜县开国侯柳庆远，器识淹旷，思怀通雅。
现代文：使持节，都督雍、梁、南秦、北秦四州和郢州之竟陵及司州之随郡诸军事，安北将军，宁蛮校尉，雍州刺史，云杜县开国侯柳庆远，气度见识深广，思想胸怀畅通高雅。
English: On the occasion of the auspicious festival, the mausoleums of the governors of Yong, Liang, South Qin, North Qin and the four provinces of Quzhou and Zhangzhou, as well as those of the military commanders of the following counties in Shizhou, Anbei General, Ningban Lieutenant, Yongzhou Historian, and Liu Qingyuan, the founder of Yundu County, were built. They had a broad vision and a clear and elegant mind.

古文：爰初草昧，预属经纶；远自升平，契阔禁旅。
现代文：从最初开创的时代起，就参预追随着筹划治理国家大事；远从天下承平时起，就辛勤操劳于禁旅之中。
English: From the time it was first created, it has been involved in the preparation and follow-up of national affairs as well as the planning and governance of national affairs; from the time when the world was at peace, it has been hard at work in the travel ban.

古文：重牧西籓，方弘治道，奄至殒丧，伤恸于怀。
现代文：如今重新统治西藩，刚要弘扬治政的主张，却突然至于辞世，让我心中无比悲痛。
English: Now that I am back in charge of the Western Han, I just wanted to promote the idea of governance, but suddenly, as for my death, my heart is extremely sad.

古文：宜追荣命，以彰茂勋。
现代文：应该追加给他光荣的任命，用来表彰他的极大的功勋。
English: He should be given an additional honorary appointment in recognition of his great service.

古文：可赠侍中、中军将军、开府仪同三司，鼓吹、侯如故。
现代文：可追封为侍中、中军将军、开府仪同三司，鼓吹乐、侯的仪式和爵位舆原先所赐的相同。
English: He can be posthumously appointed as a chamberlain, a general of the Chinese army, the same as the Kaifu ceremony and the three offices, the trumpet music, the lord's ceremony and the knighthood originally given.

古文：谥曰忠惠。
现代文：谧号忠惠。
English: His posthumous name was Zhonghui.

古文：赙钱二十万，布二百匹。 
现代文：赐给二十万钱、二百匹布办丧事。 
English: Two hundred thousand dollars and two hundred horses were given to pay for the funeral.

古文：及丧还京师，高祖出临哭。
现代文：等到死者的遗体运回京都，高祖出宫哭吊。
English: When the body of the deceased was transported back to Kyoto, Takasu left the palace in tears.

古文：子津嗣。
现代文：儿子柳津继承。
English: His son, Yanagitsu, succeeded him.

古文：初，庆远从父兄卫将军世隆尝谓庆远曰： 吾昔梦太尉以褥席见赐，吾遂亚台司，适又梦以吾褥席与汝，汝必光我公族。 
现代文：当初，庆远的堂兄卫将军世隆曾经对庆远说： 我昔日梦见太尉拿垫褥赐给我，我地位就仅次于台司；后来恰好又梦见拿我的垫褥给你，看来你必定要光宗耀祖。 
English: At first, Qingyuan's cousin, General Wei Shilong, once said to Qingyuan: I once dreamed that the captain gave me a cushion, and my position was second only to the stage manager; later, I happened to dream of giving you my cushion, it seems that you must want to glorify your ancestors.

古文：至是，庆远亦继世隆焉。
现代文：到这时，庆远也就是继承了世隆所拥有的荣誉。
English: By this time, Qingyuan had also inherited the honor held by Shilong.

古文：陈吏部尚书姚察曰：王茂、曹景宗、柳庆远虽世为将家，然未显奇节。
现代文：陈的吏部尚书姚察说：王茂、曹景宗：柳庆远虽然世代相承是带兵之家，但他们也并没有显出突出的节操。
English: Chen's cadre, Shangshu Yao, said: Wang Maotong, Cao Jingzong: Although Liu Qingyuan has been a family of soldiers for generations, they have not shown outstanding discipline.

古文：梁兴，因日月末光，以成所志，配迹方、邵，勒勋钟鼎，伟哉！
现代文：梁兴起，他们就凭藉着日月的末光，来成就了个人怀抱的志向。配留遗迹在方、邵等地，在钟鼎上记载下了他们的功勋，真是伟大啊!
English: With the rise of Liang, they relied on the twilight of the sun and the moon to achieve the ambition of personal embrace. They left relics in Fang, Shao and other places, and recorded their feats on the bell, which is really great!

古文：昔汉光武全爱功臣，不过朝请、特进，寇、邓、耿、贾咸不尽其器力。
现代文：过去汉光武帝保全爱护功臣，也不过只授给朝请、特进等官职，寇、邓、耿、买都不能将自己的才能力量全部施展出来。
English: In the past, Emperor Han Guangwu preserved and protected meritorious vassals, but only conferred official posts such as Chosen and Special Advancement. Kou, Deng, Geng and Buy could not fully display their talents and abilities.

古文：茂等迭据方岳，位终上将，君臣之际，迈于前代矣。
现代文：王茂等人却能轮流作地方长宫，官位终于上将，君臣彼此之间的关系，超过前代了。
English: Wang Mao and others, however, were able to take turns as local chancery chiefs, and the official rank eventually became admiral, and the relationship between monarch and vassal surpassed that of previous generations.

