古文：张仪之楚，贫。
现代文：张仪到了楚国后，生活贫困，他的随从很不高兴，想要回去。
English: After Zhang Yi arrived in Chu, he lived in poverty, and his retinue was very unhappy and wanted to go back.

古文：舍人怒而归。张仪曰： 子必以衣冠之敝，故欲归。
现代文：张仪说： 你一定是因为衣冠破烂，才要回去吧。
English: Zhang Yi said: You must be going back because your clothes are tattered.

古文：子待我为子见楚王。 
现代文：你等着，让我替你去拜见楚王。 
English: Wait, let me go and see King Chu for you.

古文：当是之时，南后、郑袖贵于楚。张子见楚王，楚王不说。
现代文：这个时候，南后和郑袖正受楚王宠爱，在楚国地位尊贵。张仪前去拜见楚王，楚王不高兴。
English: At this time, Empress Dowager Nan and Zheng So-Ren were favored by King Chu and held a high position in the State of Chu. Zhang Yi went to meet King Chu, but King Chu was not happy.

古文：张子曰： 王无所用臣。臣请北见晋君。 
现代文：张仪说： 大王不用我，我就到北方去见晋王。 
English: Zhang Yi said: If the great king does not need me, I will go to the north to see the king of Jin.

古文：楚王曰： 诺。 
现代文：楚王说： 好吧！ 
English: Chu Wang said: Okay!

古文：张子曰： 王无求于晋国乎? 
现代文：张仪说： 难道大王对晋国没有什么想要的吗？ 
English: Zhang Yi said: Doesn't the great king have anything he wants for Jin?

古文：王曰： 黄金珠玑犀象出于楚，寡人无求于晋国， 张子曰： 王徒不好色耳? 
现代文：楚王说： 黄金、珍珠、玑珠、犀革、象牙都出自楚国，我对晋国没有什么想要的。 张仪说： 大王不喜欢美色吗？ 
English: King Chu said, "Gold, pearls, jade beads, rhinoceros leather, and ivory all come from the State of Chu, and I have nothing I want from the State of Jin." Zhang Yi said, "Doesn't the Great King like beauty?"

古文：王曰： 何也? 
现代文：楚王说： 什么意思？ 
English: Chu Huai Wangzi: Why?

古文：张子曰； 彼郑、周之女，粉白墨黑，立于衢闾，非知而见之者，以为神。 
现代文：张仪说： 那郑国和周国的女子，打扮的十分漂亮，站在大街巷口，如果不知道，初次见还以为是仙女下凡。 
English: Zhang Yi said: That woman from Zhengguo and Zhouguo, dressed up very beautiful, standing at the corner of the street, if you don't know, the first time I saw her, I thought she was a fairy.

古文：楚王曰： 楚，僻陋之国也，未尝见中国之女如此其美也。寡人之独何为不好色也? 
现代文：楚王说： 楚国是一个偏僻的国家，从来没有见过有中原女子这么美丽，我怎么就不喜欢美色呢？ 
English: King Chu said, "Chu is a remote country. I have never seen a Central Plains woman so beautiful. Why don't I like beautiful women?"

古文：乃资之以珠玉。
现代文：于是赠送给张仪珍珠、玉器，让他去寻找美丽的中原女子。
English: So he presented Zhang Yi with pearls and jade, and asked him to look for a beautiful Central Plains woman.

古文：南后、郑袖闻之大恐，令人谓张子曰： 妾闻将军之晋国，偶有金千斤，进之左右，以供刍秣。 
现代文：南后和郑袖知道此事，大为吃惊，就派人对张仪说： 我们听说将军要到晋国去，我这里有金千斤，送给您左右的人，作为酒食饭钱。 
English: When the Empress Dowager Nan and Emperor Zheng were surprised to learn of this, they sent someone to Zhang Yi to say, "We have heard that the general is going to Jin Province. I have a thousand pounds of gold here to give to the people around you as money for food and drink.

古文：郑袖亦以金五百斤。
现代文：郑袖也给了张仪五百金。
English: Zheng Sood also gave Zhang Yi five hundred gold coins.

古文：张子辞楚王曰： 天下关闭不通，未知见日也，愿王赐之觞。 王曰： 诺。 
现代文：张仪辞别楚王时，说： 各国诸侯互相隔绝，不知哪天才能再见到大王，请大王赐酒辞行。 楚王说： 很好。 
English: When Zhang Yi said goodbye to King Chu, he said: Princes of various countries are isolated from each other, I don't know when I can see the great king again, I would like to ask the great king to give me wine and resign.

古文：乃觞之。
现代文：于是设宴与张仪对饮。
English: As a result, a banquet was set up for drinking with Zhang Yi.

古文：张子中饮，再拜而请曰： 非有他人于此也，愿王召所便习而觞之。 王曰： 诺。 
现代文：酒至半酣，张仪一拜再拜，请求说： 这里没有外人，希望大王邀集左右亲近一块畅饮。 楚王说： 好。 
English: When the wine was half gone, Zhang Yi bowed again and again, and requested, "There are no outsiders here. I hope the king will invite everyone to gather around and have a good drink." King Chu said, "Good."

古文：乃召南后、郑袖而觞之。
现代文：于是找来南后和郑袖，一起饮酒。
English: So Nanhou and Zheng Sood were invited to drink together.

古文：张子再拜而请曰： 仪有死罪于大王。 
现代文：张仪又再拜请罪，说： 我对大王犯有死罪。 楚王说： 这是为什么？ 
English: Zhang Yi again pleaded guilty, saying, "I have committed a capital crime against the Great King." King Chu said, "Why is that?

古文：王国： 何也? 曰： 仪行天下遍矣，未尝见人如此其美也。而仪言得美人，是欺王也。 
现代文：张仪说： 我走遍天下，从来没有见过像南后、郑袖二位这样的美人，我却说要为您找美人，这简直是欺骗大王啊！ 
English: Zhang Yi said, "I have traveled all over the world and have never seen such beautiful women as Empress Dowager Nan and Empress Zheng, but I said that I would find a beautiful woman for you. This is a great deception!"

古文：王曰： 子释之。
现代文：楚王说： 您就不必挂心了。
English: King Chu said, "You don't have to worry about it.

古文：吾固以为天下莫若是两人也。 
现代文：我本来就认为天下的美女谁也比不上她们两人。 
English: I originally thought that none of the world's beautiful women could match the two of them.

