古文：颜渊问仁，子曰： 克己复礼为仁。
现代文：颜渊问什么是仁。孔子说： 约束自己，一切都照着礼的要求去做，这就是仁。
English: Yan Yuan asked what is benevolence. Confucius said: To discipline oneself and do everything according to the requirements of etiquette is benevolence.

古文：一日克己复礼，天下归仁焉。
现代文：一旦做到了这些，天下的人都会称许你有仁德。
English: Once you have done these things, people all over the world will praise you for your kindness.

古文：为仁由己，而由人乎哉？ 
现代文：实行仁德要靠自己，难道是靠别人吗？ 
English: Is it up to oneself to practice benevolence, or is it up to others?

古文：颜渊曰： 请问其目？ 
现代文：颜渊说： 请问实行仁的途径是什么。 
English: Yan Yuan said: What is the way to practice benevolence?

古文：子曰： 非礼勿视，非礼勿听，非礼勿言，非礼勿动。 
现代文：孔子说： 违反礼的事不看，违反礼的事不听，违反礼的事不说，违反礼的事不做。 
English: Confucius said: Do not look at things that violate etiquette, do not listen to things that violate etiquette, do not say things that violate etiquette, and do not do things that violate etiquette.

古文：颜渊曰： 回虽不敏，请事斯语矣。 
现代文：颜渊说： 我虽然愚笨，请让我照这些话去做。 
English: Yan Yuan said: Although I am stupid, please let me follow these words.

古文：仲弓问仁，子曰： 出门如见大宾，使民如承大祭。己所不欲，勿施于人。
现代文：仲弓问孔子如何处世才能合乎仁道。孔子回答说： 出门与同仁行礼如见贵客一般，对百姓如大祭一样凝重，自己不喜欢的事不要强加给别人。
English: Chukyu asked Confucius how to behave in the world in order to conform to the way of benevolence. Confucius replied, "When you go out with your colleagues, you should behave as if you were a distinguished guest, and you should be as dignified as if you were attending a grand festival. Don't impose on others what you don't like.

古文：在邦无怨，在家无怨。 
现代文：如此在朝上就不会招致怨恨，在家中私下的交往也不会招致怨恨。 
English: In this way, no one will resent you for serving in the feudal country of the princes, and no one will resent you for serving in the hometown of the noble doctor.

古文：仲弓曰： 雍虽不敏，请事斯语矣。 
现代文：仲弓说： 我虽然不聪敏，但肯定会照着老师的话去做。 
English: Zhongyun said: Although I am not smart, I will definitely do what the teacher says.

古文：司马牛问仁，子曰： 仁者，其言也讱。 
现代文：司马牛问怎样做才是仁。孔子说： 仁人，他的言语显得谨慎。 
English: Sima Niu asked how to be a benevolent person. Confucius said: A benevolent person, his words are cautious.

古文：曰： 其言也讱，斯谓之仁已乎？ 
现代文：司马牛说： 言语谨慎，这就可以称作仁了吗？ 
English: Sima Niu said: Be careful with your words, can this be called benevolence?

古文：子曰： 为之难，言之得无讱乎？ 
现代文：孔子说： 做起来很困难，说起来能不慎重吗？ 
English: Confucius said, "It is very difficult to do, but can it be said carelessly?"

古文：司马牛问君子，子曰： 君子不忧不惧。 
现代文：司马牛问怎样做一个君子。孔子说： 君子不忧愁，不恐惧。 
English: Sima Niu asked how to be a gentleman. Confucius said: A gentleman does not grieve, does not fear.

古文：曰： 不忧不惧，斯谓之君子已乎？ 
现代文：司马牛说： 不忧愁，不恐惧，这样就可以叫做君子了吗？ 
English: Sima Niu said, "Without sorrow and fear, can one be called a gentleman?"

古文：子曰： 内省不疚，夫何忧何惧？ 
现代文：孔子说： 自己问心无愧，那还有什么忧愁和恐惧呢？ 
English: Confucius said, "If one's conscience is clear, what need is there for sorrow and fear?

古文：司马牛忧曰： 人皆有兄弟，我独亡。 
现代文：司马牛忧愁地说： 人人都有兄弟，只有我没有。
English: Sima Niu said sadly: Everyone has brothers, only I don't.

古文：子夏曰： 商闻之矣：死生有命，富贵在天。
现代文：兄弟们死的死，逃的逃，全都失散了。 子夏说： 我听说过： 死生有命，富贵在天。 
English: The brothers died, fled, fled, and were all scattered. Zixia said, "I have heard that death is life, and wealth is in the sky.

古文：君子敬而无失，与人恭而有礼，四海之内皆兄弟也。
现代文：不是人能强求的，应该接受上天安排。君子做事肃敬认真，不出差错，对人恭敬，合乎礼仪，那四海之内，都是兄弟了。
English: A gentleman does things seriously, does not make mistakes, treats people with respect, and follows etiquette. Within those four seas, they are all brothers.

古文：君子何患乎无兄弟也？ 
现代文：君子为什么担心没有兄弟呢？ 
English: Why should a gentleman worry about not having a brother?

古文：子张问明，子曰： 浸润之谮，肤受之愬，不行焉，可谓明也已矣；浸润之谮、肤受之愬不行焉，可谓远也已矣。 
现代文：子张问怎样做才算是明智的。孔子说： 暗中传播的谗言，切身感受的诽谤，在你这儿都行不通，就可以称得上明智了。暗中传播的谗言，切身感受的诽谤，在你这里都行不通，就可以说是有远见了。 
English: Zi Zhang asked how to be wise. Confucius said, "If you can't handle insinuations and slanders that you feel personally, then you can be called wise. If you can't handle insinuations and slanders that you feel personally, then you can be called far-sighted."

古文：子贡问政，子曰： 足食，足兵，民信之矣。 子贡曰： 必不得已而去，于斯三者何先？ 曰： 去兵。 
现代文：子贡问怎样治理国家。孔子回答道： 粮食储备充足，军备充足及人民的信服 子贡又问道： 如果不得已要去掉其中的一项，应该去掉哪一项呢？ 
English: Zigong asked how to govern the country. Confucius replied: Sufficient grain reserves, sufficient armaments and the people's conviction Zigong also asked: If you have to remove one of them, which one should you remove?

古文：子贡曰： 必不得已而去，于斯二者何先？ 
现代文：孔子说： 去掉军备充足这一项。 子贡接着又问： 如果不得已还要取舍，剩下的两项中应该先舍掉哪一个呢？ 
English: Confucius said, "Remove the item of sufficient armament." Zigong then asked, "If you have to make a choice, which of the two remaining items should you give up first?"

古文：曰： 去食。自古皆有死，民无信不立。 
现代文：孔子回答： 舍掉粮食储备充足这一项，人生自古谁无死，君主失去了民众的信任也就失去了立国之本。 
English: Confucius replied, "If you give up the matter of sufficient grain reserves, since ancient times, no one will die. If the monarch loses the trust of the people, he will also lose the foundation of the country."

古文：棘子成曰： 君子质而已矣，何以文为？ 
现代文：棘子成说： 君子只要具有好的品质就行了，为什么要有文采呢？ 
English: Sheng Zicheng said: It is enough for a gentleman to have good qualities, why should he have literary talent?

古文：子贡曰： 惜乎，夫子之说君子也！
现代文：子贡说： 真遗憾，夫子您这样谈论君子。
English: Zigong said, "It's a pity, Master, that you talk about a gentleman like that.

古文：驷不及舌。
现代文：一言既出，驷马难追。
English: Once the word is out, it's hard to chase.

古文：文犹质也，质犹文也。
现代文：本质就像文采，文采就像本质，都是同等重要的。
English: Essence is like poetry, and poetry is like essence, both are equally important.

古文：虎豹之鞟犹犬羊之鞟。 
现代文：去掉了毛的虎、豹皮，就如同去掉了毛的犬、羊皮一样。 
English: The skins of tigers and leopards, stripped of their fur, are like the skins of dogs and sheep, stripped of their fur.

古文：哀公问于有若曰： 年饥，用不足，如之何？ 
现代文：鲁哀公问有若说： 遇上闹饥荒的时候，国家的备用不足，怎么办？ 
English: Lu Aigong asked: What if there is a famine and the country's reserves are insufficient?

古文：有若对曰： 盍彻乎？ 
现代文：有若回答说： 何不实行彻法，只抽取十分之一的税呢？ 
English: But some of them said, "Why not just pay the whole tax, and take only a tenth?"

古文：曰： 二，吾犹不足，如之何其彻也？ 
现代文：哀公说： 现在抽十分之二都不够用，怎么能实行彻法呢？ 
English: Aiko said, "Nowadays, drawing two-tenths of a point is not enough. How can we implement the complete law?"

古文：对曰： 百姓足，君孰与不足？
现代文：有若说： 如果百姓的用度足够，您怎么会不够呢？
English: If there is a saying: If the people have enough, how can you not have enough?

古文：百姓不足，君孰与足？ 
现代文：如果百姓的用度不够，您怎么又会够呢？ 
English: If the people do not have enough, how will you have enough?

古文：子张问崇德辨惑，子曰： 主忠信，徙义，崇德也。
现代文：子张问如何崇德和辨惑。孔子说： 以忠信为主，能闻义即迁而从之，这就可以算崇德了。
English: Zi Zhang asked how to cultivate virtue and discernment. Confucius said, "To be loyal to the Lord, to be able to hear the truth and immediately follow it, this can be regarded as cultivating virtue."

古文：爱之欲其生，恶之欲其死；既欲其生又欲其死，是惑也。 诚不以富，亦只以异。  
现代文：喜爱一个人，就希望他活下去，厌恶起来就恨不得他立刻死去。既想要他活，又想要他死，这就是迷惑。正如《诗经》上所说的： 不是她家比我富，是你变心的缘故。  
English: If you love someone, you want him to live. If you hate him, you want him to die immediately. If you want him to live and die at the same time, it's confusion. As it says in the Book of Songs: "It's not because her family is richer than mine, it's because of your change of heart."

古文：齐景公问政于孔子，孔子对曰： 君君，臣臣，父父，子子。 
现代文：齐景公问孔子如何治理国家。孔子说： 做君主的要像君的样子，做臣子的要像臣的样子，做父亲的要像父亲的样子，做儿子的要像儿子的样子。 
English: Confucius said: "A prince should be like a prince, a vassal like a vassal, a father like a father, and a son like a son."

古文：公曰： 善哉！
现代文：齐景公说： 好哇！
English: That's what a saint is.

古文：信如君不君、臣不臣、父不父、子不子，虽有粟，吾得而食诸？ 
现代文：如果真的国君不像国君，臣子不像臣子，父亲不像父亲，儿子不像儿子，即使有粮食，我能够吃得着吗？ 
English: If the real sovereign is not like the sovereign, the vassal is not like the vassal, the father is not like the father, and the son is not like the son, even if there is grain, can I eat it?

古文：子曰： 片言可以折狱者，其由也与？ 
现代文：孔子说： 根据单面的供词就可以判决诉讼案件的，大概只有仲由吧。 
English: Confucius said: If a lawsuit can be decided on the basis of a one-sided confession, there must be a reason.

古文：子路无宿诺。
现代文：子路没有说话不算话的时候。
English: When Zi Lu didn't say anything, it didn't count.

古文：子曰： 听讼，吾犹人也。
现代文：孔子说： 审理诉讼案件，我也和别人一样。
English: Confucius said, "I am just like everyone else when it comes to hearing lawsuits.

古文：必也使无讼乎。 
现代文：目的在于使诉讼不再发生！ 
English: The aim is to make litigation a thing of the past!

古文：子张问政，子曰： 居之无倦，行之以忠。 
现代文：子张问如何治理政事。孔子说： 身居官位不懈怠，执行君令时忠实不欺瞒。 
English: Zhang Zi asked how to govern the government. Confucius said: Do not slack off when you are in an official position, and do not deceive when you are carrying out the king's orders.

古文：子曰： 博学于文，约之以礼，亦可以弗畔矣夫。 
现代文：孔子说： 君子广泛地学习文献典籍，再用礼来加以约束，这样也就不会离经叛道了。 
English: Confucius said: A gentleman should extensively study literature and classics, and then use etiquette to restrain himself, so that he will not deviate from the Tao.

古文：子曰： 君子成人之美，不成人之恶；小人反是。 
现代文：孔子说： 君子通常成全他人的好事，而不促成别人的坏事。小人则与此相反。 
English: Confucius said: A gentleman usually accomplishes the good deeds of others without contributing to the bad deeds of others. A villain does the opposite.

古文：季康子问政于孔子，孔子对曰： 政者，正也。子帅以正，孰敢不正？ 
现代文：季康子问孔子如何治理国家。孔子回答说：  政 的意思就是端正，您自己先做到端正，谁还敢不端正？ 
English: Ji Kangzi asked Confucius how to govern the country. Confucius replied: "The meaning of politics is to be correct. You should be correct yourself first. Who would dare not to be correct?"

古文：季康子患盗，问于孔子。
现代文：季康子担忧盗窃，来向孔子请教。
English: Ji Kangzi was worried about the theft and came to ask Confucius for advice.

古文：孔子对曰： 苟子之不欲，虽赏之不窃。 
现代文：孔子回答说： 如果您不贪求太多的财物，即使奖励他们去偷，他们也不会干。 
English: Confucius replied, "If you do not covet too much property, even if you reward them to steal, they will not do it."

古文：季康子问政于孔子曰： 如杀无道以就有道，何如？ 
现代文：季康子向孔子问政事，说： 假如杀掉坏人，以此来亲近好人，怎么样？ 
English: Ji Kangzi asked Confucius about politics and said, "What if we killed the bad guys to get closer to the good guys?

古文：孔子对曰： 子为政，焉用杀？
现代文：孔子说： 您治理国家，怎么想到用杀戮的方法呢？
English: Confucius said: How can you govern a country and think of killing people?

古文：子欲善而民善矣。
现代文：您要是好好治国，百姓也就会好起来。
English: If you govern the country well, the people will be better off.

古文：君子之德风，小人之德草，草上之风必偃。 
现代文：君子的品如风，小人的品如草。草上刮起风，草一定会倒。 
English: A gentleman's character is like the wind, a villain's character is like the grass. If the wind blows over the grass, the grass will surely fall.

古文：子张问： 士何如斯可谓之达矣？ 
现代文：子张问： 士要怎么样才可说是通达了？ 
English: Zi Zhang asked: What should readers do before they can be called "tongda"?

古文：子曰： 何哉尔所谓达者？ 
现代文：孔子说： 你所说的通达是什么呢？ 
English: Confucius said, "What do you mean by attainment?

古文：子张对曰： 在邦必闻，在家必闻。 
现代文：子张回答说： 在诸侯的国家一定有名声，在大夫的封地一定有名声。 
English: Zi Zhang replied: It must be famous in the countries of princes, and it must be famous in the fiefdoms of doctors.

古文：子曰： 是闻也，非达也。
现代文：孔子说： 这是有名声，不是通达。
English: Confucius said, "It is fame, not attainment.

古文：夫达也者，质直而好义，察言而观色，虑以下人。
现代文：通达的人，本质正直而喜爱道义，体会别人的话语，观察别人的脸色，时常想到对别人谦让。
English: A person who is open-minded, honest by nature and loves morality, appreciates other people's words, observes other people's faces, and often thinks of being humble to others.

古文：在邦必达，在家必达。
现代文：这样的人在诸侯的国家一定通达，在大夫的封地也一定通达。
English: Such a person is sure to succeed in a vassal state, and in a doctor's fiefdom.

古文：夫闻也者，色取仁而行违，居之不疑。
现代文：有名声的人，表面上要实行仁德而行动上却相反，以仁人自居而毫不迟疑。
English: People of repute, on the surface, want to practice benevolence, but on the contrary, they do not hesitate to act like a benevolent person.

古文：在邦必闻，在家必闻。 
现代文：他们在诸侯的国家一定虚有其名，在大夫的封地也一定虚有其名。 
English: They must have assumed false names in the countries of the princes, and false names in the fiefdoms of the doctors.

古文：樊迟从游于舞雩之下，曰： 敢问崇德、修慝、辨惑。 
现代文：樊迟陪着孔子在舞雩台下游览，说： 请问如何提高自己的品德修养，改正过失，辨别是非？ 
English: Zou Bi accompanied Confucius on a tour under the dance hall stage and said: How can I improve my moral cultivation, correct my mistakes, and distinguish right from wrong?

古文：子曰： 善哉问！
现代文：孔子说： 问得好啊！
English: Confucius said: What a good question!

古文：先事后得，非崇德与？
现代文：辛劳在先，享乐在后，这不就可以提高自己的品德修养吗？
English: Toil first, pleasure later, isn't this the way to improve one's moral cultivation?

古文：攻其恶，无攻人之恶，非修慝与？
现代文：检查自己的错误，不去指责别人的缺点，这不就消除潜在的怨恨了吗？
English: Doesn't examining one's own mistakes, rather than blaming others for one's shortcomings, remove the potential for resentment?

古文：一朝之忿，忘其身，以及其亲，非惑与？ 
现代文：因为一时气愤，而不顾自身和自己的双亲，这不就是迷惑吗？ 
English: Isn't it just confusing to be angry all of a sudden and not care about yourself or your parents?

古文：樊迟问仁，子曰： 爱人。 
现代文：樊迟问什么是仁，孔子说： 爱人。 
English: When asked what is benevolence, Confucius said: Love all people!

古文：问知，子曰： 知人。 
现代文：樊迟问什么是智，孔子说： 了解人。 
English: When asked what wisdom is, Confucius said, "Understanding people."

古文：樊迟未达，子曰： 举直错诸枉，能使枉者直。 
现代文：樊迟还是不明白。孔子说： 选拔正直的人，罢黜各种奸邪之人，这样就能使邪者归正。 
English: Confucius said: "Select honest people, and dismiss all kinds of evil-doers. In this way, the evil-doers will be corrected."

古文：樊迟退，见子夏，曰： 乡也吾见于夫子而问知，子曰： 举直错诸枉，能使枉者直 ，何谓也？ 
现代文：樊迟退出来，见到子夏说： 刚才我见到老师，问他什么是 智 ，老师说： 选拔正直的人，罢黜各种奸邪之人，这样就能使邪者归正。 这是什么意思？ 
English: When she saw Zixia, she said, "Just now, I saw a teacher and asked him what wisdom was. The teacher said, 'Select honest people and remove all kinds of evil-doers, and in this way, you will be able to make the evil-doers become righteous.' What does this mean?"

古文：子夏曰： 富哉言乎！
现代文：子夏说： 这话说得多么深刻呀！
English: Zixia said, "How profound this saying is!

古文：舜有天下，选于众，举皋陶，不仁者远矣。
现代文：舜管理天下，在众人中选拔人才，选了皋陶，不仁的人就被疏远了。
English: manages the world, selects talent from the masses, and selects  Tao, and those who are not kind are alienated.

古文：汤有天下，选于众，举伊尹，不仁者远矣。 
现代文：汤管理天下，在众人中选拔人才，选了伊尹，不仁的人就被疏远了。 
English: Tang manages the world, selects talent from the masses, chooses Yi Yin, and alienates those who are not benevolent.

古文：子贡问友，子曰： 忠告而善道之，不可则止，毋自辱焉。 
现代文：子贡问应该怎样对待朋友。孔子说： 忠言相告，好话对导，他不听就算了，不要自取其辱。 
English: Zigong asked how he should treat his friends. Confucius said, "Tell your friends what you think, and if they don't listen, don't humiliate yourself."

古文：曾子曰： 君子以文会友，以友辅仁。 
现代文：曾子说： 高尚的人凭借文才聚会朋友，凭借朋友辅助仁爱。 
English: Zengzi said: Noble people gather friends by virtue of literary talent, and support benevolence by virtue of friends.

