古文：裴叔业夏侯道迁李元护席法友王世弼江悦之淳于诞李苗共参经略。
现代文：裴叔业，河东闻喜人。
English: Pei Shuhei, the hero of the Hedong Legend.

古文：时衍益州刺史萧渊猷遣将樊文炽、萧世澄等率众数万围小剑戍，益州刺史邴虬令子建拒之。
现代文：曹魏冀州刺史裴徽的后人。五代祖裴苞，晋朝任秦州刺史。祖裴邕，从河东迁居襄阳。父顺宗、兄叔宝仕官萧道成，都有名位。
English: He was a descendant of Cao Wei and Jizhou statesman Pei Hui. The fifth generation of his ancestor Pei Xuan was appointed as a statesman of Qin in the Jin Dynasty. His ancestor Pei Xuan moved from Hedong to Xiangyang. His father, Shun Zong, and his brother, Baoshi official Xiao Daocheng, all held prestigious positions.

古文：因转营，为文炽所掩，统军胡小虎、崔珍宝并见俘执。子建遣诞助讨之。
现代文：裴叔业少有气度才干，颇以将略自许。出仕萧赜，历任右军将军、东中郎将谘议参军。萧鸾见到叔业便大为惊奇，对他说： 卿有如此有志之相，何怕不大富贵。应该不断努力。 
English: Pei Shuhei was a man of few talents, and he was rather self-centered. When he became a general, Xiao Wei, the successive right-wing generals and Dong Zhong Lang would advise him to join the army. Xiao Wei was very surprised to see Shuhei, and said to him: Sir, you have such ambition, why not be rich. You should keep working hard.

古文：诞勒兵驰赴，相对月余，未能摧殄。
现代文：萧鸾任职豫州，引荐他为司马，带领陈留太守。
English: Xiao Yao was appointed to the post of Yuzhou, and he was recommended to be the Sima, leading Chen Liu Taizhou.

古文：文炽军行之谷，东峰名龙须山，置栅其上以防归路。
现代文：萧鸾入朝辅政，裴叔业经常埋伏壮士数百人于建业。
English: When Xiao Rong entered the government as an aide-de-camp of the emperor, Baizhuye often ambushed hundreds of strong men in Jianye.

古文：诞以贼众难可角力，乃密募壮士二百余人，令夜登山攻其栅。
现代文：等到萧鸾废除昭文帝，叔业率众前去支援。萧鸾自立为帝，任命裴叔业为给事黄门侍郎，封为武昌县开国伯，食邑五百户。高祖南巡，车驾停驻钟离。
English: When Xiao Yu abolished Emperor Shouwen, Shuhe led the crowd to support him. Xiao Yu became the emperor independently, appointed Pei Shuhe as the attendant of the Yellow Gate, was named the founding father of Wuchang County, and had 500 households in food villages. Gao Zu went on a southern tour, and parked his car in Zhongli.

古文：及时火起，烟焰涨天。
现代文：萧鸾拜叔业为持节、冠军将军、徐州刺史，率水军进到淮河边。
English: Xiao Rongbai, the champion general of Xuzhou, led the navy into the Huaihe River.

古文：贼以还途不守，连营震怖。
现代文：离魏王军马十里，魏高祖令尚书郎中裴聿前去与他交谈。
English: Ten miles away from the Wei King's army, Wei Gaozu ordered Shang Shulang to go and talk to him.

古文：诞率诸军鸣鼓攻击，文炽大败，俘斩万计，擒世澄等十一人。
现代文：裴叔业盛饰左右衣服玩好对裴聿夸口说： 我在南方富贵正如你现在所看到的，哪像你在那边这种简陋的样子呢。 裴聿说： 伯父仪服的确很华美，但是惟恨不能白日出游耳。 
English: Uncle Pei, who was good at playing dress-up, boasted to Pei Yao: I am rich and famous in the south, as you can see now, but what is your humble appearance like over there?Pei Yao said: Uncle's ceremonial dress is indeed very gorgeous, but I wish I could go out in the daytime.

古文：文炽为元帅，先走获免。
现代文：迁为辅国将军、豫州刺史，屯军寿阳。
English: He was transferred to the General of the Auxiliary Province, Yuzhou Jishi, and Shouyang of the Tun Army.

古文：孝昌初，子建以诞行华阳郡，带白马戍。
现代文：萧鸾死，子宝卷自立，迁任裴叔业本将军、南兖州刺史。
English: After Xiao Xi's death, his son Bao Quan became independent and was transferred to the posts of General Pei Shuben and Governor of Nanluozhou.

古文：二年，复以诞行巴州刺史。
现代文：江悦之把家财全部赏给士兵，身冒箭刃，昼夜督战。
English: Jiang Yuezhi gave all of his family's wealth to the soldiers, risked his life, and fought day and night.

古文：三年，朝议以梁州安康郡阻带江山，要害之所，分置东梁州，仍以诞为镇远将军、梁州刺史。永安二年四月卒，时年六十。
现代文：恰逢武兴援军到来，天宝败逃。
English: When reinforcements from Wu Xing arrived, Tianbao was defeated and fled.

古文：赠安西将军、益州刺史，谥曰庄。
现代文：道迁能够全功归诚，江悦之实在出了大力。
English: Douqian can make full efforts to return to sincerity, and Jiang Yue really made great efforts.

古文：长子亢。亢弟胤，字□馆。
现代文：正始二年夏天，和夏侯道迁一起到洛阳。
English: At the beginning of the summer of the second year, he moved to Luoyang together with Xia Hou.

古文：武定末，梁州骠骑府司马。李苗，字子宣，梓潼涪人。
现代文：江悦之有两个儿子江文遥、江文远。李苗，字子宣，梓潼涪人。
English: Jiang Yuezhi had two sons, Jiang Wenyao and Jiang Wenyuan. Li Miao, Zi Xuan, Zi Xunren.

古文：父膺，萧衍尚书郎、太仆卿。
现代文：父李膺，为官萧衍尚书郎、太仆卿。
English: His father, Li Yao, was the official Xiao Yan Shang Shulang, the servant of the Emperor.

古文：苗出后叔父略。
现代文：李苗出生后过继给叔父李略。
English: After Li Miao was born, he was adopted by his uncle Li Li.

古文：略为萧衍宁州刺史，大著威名。
现代文：李略任萧衍宁州刺史，大显威名。
English: Li Li slightly appointed Xiao Yan as the history of Ningzhou, showing great prestige.

古文：王足伐蜀也，衍命略拒足于涪，许其益州。
现代文：王足讨伐蜀地，萧衍命李略在涪州抵抗王足，许任官益州。
English: Wangfei fought against Shu, Xiao Yan ordered Li Li to resist Wangfei in Bozhou, and Xu was appointed as the official of Yizhou.

古文：及足还退，衍遂改授。
现代文：等到王足退还之后，萧衍却改授其任。
English: However, after Wang Qi returned, Xiao Yan reassigned him.

古文：略怒，将有异图，衍使人害之。
现代文：李略大怒，准备图谋不轨，萧衍派人害死了他。
English: Li Liang was furious and prepared to plot, but Xiao Yan sent someone to kill him.

古文：苗年十五，有报雪之心，延昌中遂归阙。
现代文：李苗年十五，心生报仇雪恨之心，延昌年间归顺朝廷。
English: In the fifteenth year of Li Miao's reign, he had the heart to avenge his father's death. During the Yanchang reign, he surrendered to the imperial court.

古文：仍陈图蜀之计。
现代文：仍陈述图谋蜀地之计。
English: He still stated that he would try to succeed in Shu.

古文：于是大将军高肇西伐，诏假苗龙骧将军、乡导统军。
现代文：于是，大将军高肇西伐，帝诏假李苗为龙骧将军、向导统军。
English: As a result, the general Gao Zhao went to the west, and the emperor made Li Miao the general and guide of the united army.

古文：师次晋寿，世宗晏驾，班师。
现代文：军队进至晋寿，世宗逝世，班师回朝。
English: The army marched to Jinju, Shizong died, and the team returned to the imperial court.

古文：后以客例，除员外散骑侍郎，加襄威将军。
现代文：后以投诚人员惯例，除授员外散骑侍郎，加襄威将军。
English: Afterward, in accordance with the practice of those who had surrendered, in addition to the conferring officers, there were also horsemen and attendants, including General Gao Xiangwei.

古文：苗有文武才干，以大功不就，家耻未雪，常怀慷慨。
现代文：李苗有文武才干，以大功不就，家耻未雪，常怀慷慨。
English: Li Miao has talent in literature and martial arts, is not satisfied with great achievements, has never been disgraced, and is always generous.

古文：乃上书曰： 昔晋室数否，华戎鼎沸，三燕两秦，咆勃中夏，九服分崩，五方圮裂。
现代文：于是上书说： 过去晋室数有乱生，华戎鼎沸，三燕两秦，咆哮中原，四海分崩，五方颓裂。
English: Therefore, the petition said: In the past, the number of Jin chambers has been chaotic, the Hua Rong has been boiling, the three Yan and two Qin, the Central Plains have been roaring, the four seas have been divided, and the five sides have been split.

古文：皇祚承历，自北而南，诛灭奸雄，定鼎河洛，唯独荆扬，尚阻声教。
现代文：皇魏承历，自北而南，诛灭奸雄，定鼎河洛，惟独荆、扬，尚阻声教。
English: The emperors of Wei and Sui dynasties, from the north to the south, annihilated the traitors, and dinged the river Luo, but the Jing and Yang dynasties still resisted the voice teaching.

古文：今令德广被于江汉，威风远振于吴楚，国富兵强，家给人足。以九居八之形，有兼弱攻昧之势，而欲逸豫，遗疾子孙，违高祖之本图，非社稷之深虑。
现代文：而今令皇德广被于江汉，威风远振于吴楚，国富兵强，家家丰足，皇魏以九分居八之形，有兼弱攻昧之势，却欲安逸，既遗患子孙，又违背高祖的本来意图，这不是为社稷前途深谋远虑所应当的。
English: However, today, the Emperor is widely known in Jianghan, the prestige is far and wide in Wuchu, the country is rich and strong, and the family is rich. The Emperor Wei is divided into nine and eight, and has a weak offensive potential, but wants to be at ease. Not only does it leave a legacy of suffering children and grandchildren, but also violates the original intention of Gao Zu. This is not what should be done for the future of the society.

古文：诚宜商度东西戍防轻重之要，计量疆场险易安危之理，探测南人攻守窥觎之情，筹算卒乘器械征讨之备，然后去我所短，避彼所长，释其至难，攻其甚易，夺其险要，割其膏壤，数年之内，荆扬可并。
现代文：实在应该考虑东西戍防轻重缓急，计量疆场险易安危之理，探测南人攻守窥觎之情，筹算卒乘器械征讨装备，然后去我所短，避敌所长，弃其至难，攻其甚易，夺其险要，割其膏土，数年之内，荆州、扬州即可并归我魏。
English: It is really necessary to consider the importance of prevention and control of the East and the West, measure the risks and dangers of the frontier, detect the feelings of the South to attack and defend, collect equipment by means of equipment, and then go to my short, avoid the enemy's long, abandon it is difficult, attack it is very easy, capture its dangerous, cut its mortar, within a few years, Jingzhou and Yangzhou can also belong to me Wei.

古文：若舍舟楫，即平原，敛后疏前，则江淮之所短；弃车马，游飞浪，乘流驰逐，非中国之所长。
现代文：如若舍舟船，就平原，敛后疏前，这正是江、淮士兵之所短；弃车马、游飞浪、乘流驱逐，这不是中国之所长。
English: If you give up the boat and ship, you will be on the plain, and if you hold back, you will lose the battle. This is exactly what the soldiers of the Jiang and Huai Dynasties lacked. Abandoning the chariot and horse, swimming in the waves, and riding the current to expel, this is not what China is good at.

古文：彼不敢入平陆而争衡，犹我不能越巨川而趣利。
现代文：他们不敢入平原而争衡，正如我们不能越巨川而趋利一样。
English: They do not dare to enter the plain and compete, just as we cannot cross the great river and seek profits.

古文：若俱去其短，各恃其长，则东南未见可灭之机，而淮沔方有相持之势。
现代文：如双方都去其短，各方都恃其长，则东南政权未见可灭之机，而淮、沔正有相持之势。
English: If both sides play to their strengths, and all sides play to their weaknesses, then the Southeast regime will not see an opportunity to be destroyed, and Huai and Zheng will have the potential to hold on to each other.

古文：且夫满昃相倾，阴阳恆理；盛衰递袭，五德常运。
现代文：况且满仄相转、阴阳恒理；盛衰递袭，五德常运。
English: Moreover, they are all interrelated, and yin and yang are constant; the rise and fall are successive, and the five virtues are constant.

古文：今以至强攻至弱，必见吞并之理；如以至弱御至强，焉有全济之术？
现代文：现在以我至强攻彼至弱，必有吞并之理；如以至弱御敌至强，哪有全济之术？
English: Now, if I, who am stronger, attack him, who is weaker, there must be a reason for annexation; if I, who am weaker, oppose the enemy, who is stronger, is there a way to make the best of it?

古文：故明王圣主，皆欲及时立功，为万世之业。
现代文：所以明王圣主，都欲及时立功，以营万世之业。
English: Therefore, the King of Light and the Lord of Light both want to make meritorious deeds in a timely manner, in order to do the work of all ages.

古文：去高而就下，百川以之常流；取易而避难，兵家以之恆胜。
现代文：离高而就下，百川以此常流；取易而避难，兵家以之常胜。
English: From high to low, a hundred rivers flow this way; from easy to difficult, soldiers are always victorious.

古文：今巴蜀孤悬，去建鄴辽远，偏兵独戍，氵斥流十千，牧守无良，专行劫剥，官由财进，狱以货成，士民思化，十室而九，延颈北望，日觊王师。
现代文：现在巴、蜀孤悬，离建业辽远，偏兵独守，逆流十千，牧守无良，专行劫夺，官职由纳财而选，狱讼以货贿而成，士民思慕教化，十室就有九家，百姓伸颈北望，日夜盼望王师。
English: At present, Ba and Shu are isolated, far away from Jianye, partial soldiers only guard, ten thousand counter-currents, herdsmen are not good, special looting, official positions are selected by money, prison lawsuits are made by goods and bribes, scholars and the people yearn for enlightenment, and there are nine families in ten rooms. The people crane their necks to the north, day and night looking forward to Wang Shi.

古文：若命一偏将，吊民伐罪，风尘不接，可传檄而定。
现代文：如命一褊将抚民伐罪，风尘不接，可传檄文而定此境。
English: If it is a matter of life and death, the people will be punished for the crime of felling, and the wind and dust will not be received, and the situation can be determined by the transmission of the letter.

古文：守白帝之厄，据上流之险，循士治之迹，荡建鄴之逋，然后偃武修文，制礼作乐，天下幸甚，岂不盛哉！ 
现代文：皇魏派将据守白帝城，据上流之险，遵循士治之迹，荡尽建业之余敌，然后息武修文，制礼作乐，天下百姓便大福将至，岂不是隆盛之事吗？ 
English: The Emperor Wei faction will defend the White Emperor City, take advantage of the danger of the upper stream, follow the path of the scholar-ruler, eliminate the remaining enemies of the construction industry, and then suppress the martial arts, revise the text, make the rites and music, and the people of the world will be blessed, is it not a matter of prosperity?

古文：于时肃宗幼冲，无远略之意，竟不能纳。
现代文：当时肃宗年幼，没有远略大志，终不能接纳他的意见。
English: At that time, Su Zong was young and did not have any long-term ambitions, so he could not accept his opinion.

古文：正光末，二秦反叛，侵及三辅。
现代文：正光末年，二秦反叛，侵及京城郊区。
English: At the end of Zheng Guang's life, the Second Qin Dynasty rebelled and invaded the suburbs of Beijing.

古文：时承平既久，民不习战。
现代文：当时太平已久，百姓已不习惯作战。
English: At that time, there had been peace for a long time, and the people were not used to fighting.

古文：苗以陇兵强悍，且群聚无资，乃上书曰： 臣闻食少兵精，利于速战；粮多卒众，事宜持久。
现代文：李苗以陇兵强悍，而群贼却无多少资粮，于是上书说： 臣听说食少兵精，有利于速战速决；粮多兵众，事宜持久。
English: Li Miao said in his letter that he was strong because he had many soldiers, but the bandits did not have much resources and grain, so he wrote: The minister heard that eating less soldiers is conducive to a quick war; more grain and more soldiers means a long-term matter.

古文：今陇贼猖狂，非有素蓄，虽据两城，本无德义。
现代文：而今陇州敌贼猖狂，却无多少积蓄，虽然据有两城，他们却无德行礼义。
English: But now, the enemy bandits in Zhangzhou are rampant, but they have little savings. Although they have two cities, they have no virtue or courtesy.

古文：其势在于疾攻，日有降纳，迟则人情离阻，坐受崩溃。
现代文：所以对于他们来说，其势在于疾攻，日有降纳，迟缓则人情离散，坐受灭亡之果。
English: Therefore, for them, their potential lies in a sudden attack, daily acceptance, slowness, disunity, and suffering the consequences of destruction.

古文：夫飚至风起，逆者求万一之功；高壁深垒，王师有全制之策。
现代文：夫飚至风起，叛逆者便铤而走险，以求万一之功；我们若高垒深沟，王师便有全数制敌之策。
English: When the wind picks up, the rebels will be on the alert and take risks in order to seek a work in case of emergency; if we build a high wall and a deep ditch, Wang Shi will have a strategy to completely control the enemy.

古文：但天下久泰，人不晓兵，奔利不相待，逃难不相顾，将无法令，士非教习。
现代文：但因天下和平已久，人不知战，奔利争先恐后，而逃难则不复相顾，将无法令，兵没训练。
English: However, because the world has been at peace for a long time, people don't know how to fight, and they are scrambling to get ahead, and they no longer care about escaping, they will not be able to order, and the soldiers have not been trained.

古文：以骄将御惰卒，不思长久之计，务奇正之通，必有莫敖轻敌之志，恐无充国持重之规。
现代文：用骄将统惰兵，不考虑长久之计，务以奇术获胜，这便必有莫敖轻敌之志，恐无充国持重之规。
English: To use arrogance to unite the lazy soldiers, not to consider the long-term strategy, and to win with magic, this will surely have the ambition of a light enemy, and there is no fear of fulfilling the rules of the country.

古文：如今陇东不守，汧军败散，则二秦遂强，三辅危弱，国之右臂，于斯废矣。
现代文：如今陇东失守，军败散，而二秦渐强，京郊危弱，国家右臂，由此废了。
English: Now, Shandong has lost its defense, the army has been defeated and dispersed, while the Second Qin Dynasty is getting stronger, the suburbs of Beijing are in danger, and the country's right arm has been scrapped.

古文：今且宜勒大将，深沟高垒，坚守勿战。
现代文：而今必须勒示大将，深挖壕沟，高筑壁垒，坚守不战。
English: But now it is necessary to show the general, dig deep trenches, build high barriers, and stick to not fighting.

古文：别命偏师精兵数千，出麦积崖以袭其后，则汧岐之下，群妖自散。 
现代文：另命偏师精兵数千人，出麦积崖以袭敌后，则水岐山之下，群妖必定自散。 
English: In addition, thousands of elite soldiers were dispatched to attack behind the enemy from the cliff of wheat and barley, then under Mount Mizuki, the demons must disperse.

古文：于是诏苗为统军，与别将淳于诞俱出梁益，隶行台魏子建。
现代文：于是帝诏李苗为统军，与别将淳于诞俱出梁、益，隶属行台魏子建。
English: As a result, Emperor Li Miao was the unifying force, and the other generals, Jun, were born, and they were subordinated to Wei Zi Jian of Xingtai.

古文：子建以苗为郎中，仍领军，深见知待。
现代文：子建以李苗为郎中，仍领军，李苗深深被其赏识。
English: Zi Jian took Li Miao as his disciple, still leading the army, and Li Miao was deeply appreciated by him.

古文：孝昌中，还朝，镇远将军、步兵校尉。
现代文：孝昌年间，李苗还朝，被除授为镇远将军、步兵校尉。
English: During the reign of Xiaochang, Li Miao was still in the imperial court and was stripped of his titles of Zhenyuan General and Infantry Lieutenant.

古文：俄兼尚书右丞，为西北道行台，与大都督宗正珍孙讨汾、绛蜀贼，平之。
现代文：不久兼尚书右丞，为西北道行台，与大都督宗正珍孙讨伐汾州、绛州敌贼，平定了。
English: Soon, he was concurrently appointed to the post of Shang Shuyujo (尚書右丞) of the Northwest Daoguangdai (西西北道行台) and fought with the grand duke Zong Zheng Jinsun (大都督宗正珍孙) against the enemies and bandits of Bozhou (州).

古文：还除司徒司马，转太府少卿，加龙骧将军。
现代文：回来后除授司徒司马，转太府少卿，加授龙骧将军。
English: After returning, in addition to conferring the title of Sima, he was promoted to Taifu Shaoqing, and additionally conferred the title of Longjing General.

古文：于时萧衍巴西民何难尉等豪姓，相率请讨巴蜀之间，诏苗为通直散骑常侍、冠军将军、西南道慰劳大使。
现代文：当时萧衍巴西百姓何难尉等豪姓，相继请求朝廷征讨巴蜀，帝诏李苗为通直散骑常侍、冠军将军、西南道慰劳大使。
English: At that time, Xiao Yan's Brazilian compatriots, such as Lieutenant Ho, successively requested the imperial court to solicit Bashu, and the emperor decreed that Li Miao would be a regular attendant, a champion general, and a consolation ambassador of Southwest Province.

古文：未发，会杀尔朱荣，荣从弟世隆拥荣部曲屯据河桥，还逼都邑。
现代文：还没出发，正逢尔朱荣被杀，尔朱荣堂弟尔朱世隆拥尔朱荣部下屯据河桥，还逼京都。
English: Before they set off, Zhu Rong was killed. Zhu Rong's cousin, Zhu Shilong, had Zhu Rong's subordinates camped in Heqiao and even forced them to move to Kyoto.

古文：孝庄亲幸大夏门，集群臣博议。
现代文：孝庄帝亲临大夏门，召集群臣博议。
English: Emperor Xiaozhuang came to Daxia Gate in person to convene a group of courtiers for discussion.

古文：百僚恇惧，计无所出。
现代文：百官忧怕，计无所出。
English: A hundred officials are worried, and there is no way out.

古文：苗独奋衣而起曰： 今小贼唐突如此，朝廷有不测之危，正是忠臣烈士效节之日！
现代文：李苗独独奋衣而起说： 现在小贼如此唐突无礼，朝廷有不测之危，正是忠臣烈士效节之日。
English: Li Miao stood up and said, "Nowadays, petty thieves are so impudent that the imperial court is in danger of accidents. It is the day of the Loyalist Martyrs' Memorial Day.

古文：臣虽不武，窃所庶几。
现代文：为臣虽说不上英武，但有尽节之意。
English: Although it cannot be said that he is a great warrior, he has the meaning of the end of the story.

古文：请以一旅之众，为陛下径断河梁！ 
现代文：臣请求率一旅人马，为陛下切断河、梁。 
English: The minister requested the ratio of one traveller to one horse, to cut the river and beams for his majesty.

古文：城阳王徽、中尉高道穆赞成其计。
现代文：城阳王元徽、中尉高道穆赞成他的计策。
English: King Yuanhui of Chengyang and Lieutenant Gao Daomu approved of his strategy.

古文：庄帝壮而许焉。
现代文：庄帝以之为壮，同意他这样做。
English: Zhuang Di, being a strong man, agreed to let him do so.

古文：苗乃募人于马渚上流以舟师夜下，去桥数里便放火船，河流既驶，倏忽而至。
现代文：李苗于是招募人马从马渚上游以舟师夜下黄河，在离桥数里的地方便放火船，船顺水下，顷刻就到桥边。
English: Li Miao then recruited people and horses from the upper reaches of the Mazhu River to go down the Yellow River by boat at night. A few miles from the bridge, they set fire to the boat. The boat went underwater and immediately reached the edge of the bridge.

古文：贼于南岸望见火下，相蹙争桥，俄然桥绝，没水死者甚众。
现代文：敌人在南岸看见火船直冲而来，争先恐后争桥过河，不一会桥被烧断，淹死的人很多。
English: On the south bank, the enemy saw the fireboat coming straight at them, and they scrambled for the bridge to cross the river. The bridge was burned down in no time, and many people drowned.

古文：苗身率士卒百许人泊于小渚以待南援。
现代文：李苗身率士卒百余人停泊在浅滩边等待南援。
English: Li Miao and more than a hundred people anchored at the edge of the shoal waiting for southern aid.

古文：既而官军不至，贼乃涉水，与苗死斗。
现代文：既而官军不至，敌人涉水过河，与李苗展开殊死搏斗。
English: Even though the government army did not arrive, the enemy waded across the river and fought a desperate battle with Li Miao.

古文：众寡不敌，左右死尽，苗浮河而殁，时年四十六。
现代文：终因寡不敌众，左右士兵死尽，李苗因渡而死，时年四十六岁。
English: In the end, due to being outnumbered, the left and right soldiers died out, and Li Miao died as a result of crossing the river, at the age of 46.

古文：帝闻苗死，哀伤久之，曰： 苗若不死，当应更立奇功。 
现代文：孝庄帝听说李苗死了，哀伤了很久，说： 苗若不死，当应更立奇功。 
English: When Emperor Xiaozhuang heard that Li Miao had died, he grieved for a long time and said, "If Miao did not die, he should have done more miracles."

古文：赠使持节、都督梁益巴东梁四州诸军事、车骑大将军、仪同三司、梁州刺史、河阳县开国侯、邑一千户，赗帛五百匹、粟五百石。
现代文：赠使持节，都督梁、益、巴、东梁四州诸军事，车骑大将军，仪同三司，梁州刺史，河阳县开国侯。食邑一千户，赠帛五百匹，粟五百担。
English: The military of the four prefectures of Liang, Yixi, Ba and Dongliang, the general of cavalry and cavalry, the three departments of ceremony and etiquette, the history of Liangzhou, and the founding of Kheyang County were presented with gifts. A thousand households received gifts of 500 yaks and 500 cows.

古文：谥忠烈侯。
现代文：谥称忠烈侯。
English: He was nicknamed the "loyal martyr."

古文：苗少有节操，志尚功名。
现代文：李苗少有节操，立志功名。
English: He then stationed a lone army outside the city and joined forces with Yuan Shao to attack the Southern Army, constantly winning battles.

古文：每读蜀书，见魏延请出长安，诸葛不许，常叹息谓亮无奇计。
现代文：每次读《蜀书》，见魏延请求出击长安，诸葛不许，常叹息说诸葛亮无奇妙计策。
English: Every time I read "Shu Shu," I see Wei Yan request to attack Chang'an, Zhuge does not allow, often sighing that Zhuge Liang has no wonderful strategy.

古文：及览《周瑜传》，未曾不咨嗟绝倒。
现代文：到看《周瑜传》，未曾不嗟叹赞许，为之绝倒。
English: When I saw "Zhou Yu Biography," I was overwhelmed with admiration.

古文：太保、城阳王徽，司徒、临淮王彧重之，二王颇或不穆，苗每谏之。
现代文：太保、城阳王元徽、临淮王元都很看重他，二王很是不和，李苗每每劝说。
English: Tai Po, Chengyang Wang Yuanhui, Lin Huai Wang Yuan all valued him. The two kings were at odds with each other, and Li Miao had to persuade them.

古文：及徽宠势隆极，猜忌弥甚。
现代文：等到元徽大红大紫，猜忌元更厉害了。
English: Wait until the Yuan Hui is in full bloom, guessing the Yuan is even more powerful.

古文：苗谓人曰： 城阳蜂目先见，豺声今转彰矣。 
现代文：李苗对人说： 城阳蜂目先见，豺声现在更转厉害了。 
English: Li Miao said to people: Chengyang bee foresight, beeping is now more severe.

古文：解鼓琴，好文咏，尺牍之敏，当世罕及。
现代文：李苗懂音乐，好文咏，尺牍文章的敏捷程度，当世罕比。
English: Li Miao understands music, is a good writer, and his writing agility is unparalleled.

古文：死之日，朝野悲壮之。
现代文：死的那天，朝野人士无不十分悲痛，以之为壮。
English: On the day of his death, people in both the government and the opposition were overcome with grief.

古文：及庄帝幽崩，世隆入洛，主者追苗赠封，以白世隆。
现代文：等庄帝幽崩，尔朱世隆进入洛阳，有人主张追夺李苗赠封，禀请尔朱世隆。
English: After Zhuang Emperor's death, Er Zhu Shilong entered Luoyang. Some people advocated that Li Miao should be awarded the seal and that Er Zhu Shilong should be invited.

古文：世隆曰： 吾尔时群议，更一二日便欲大纵兵士焚烧都邑，任其采掠。
现代文：世隆说： 我那时讨论，过一两天便要大纵兵士焚烧京城，任其掠抢。
English: Shilong said: At that time, I discussed that in a day or two, I would have the soldiers of the Great Long March burn the capital and let them loot it.

古文：赖苗京师获全。
现代文：全赖李苗京师才得以保全。
English: It was all thanks to Li Miao Jingshi that it was preserved.

古文：天下之善士也，不宜追之。 
现代文：天下的善行都是一致的。不应追夺赠封。 
English: All the good deeds in the world are the same. You should not chase the bestowal.

