古文：国失其次，则社稷大匡。
现代文：为政治国如果失去正常的法则，天下就会不安定。
English: If normal rules are lost for a political country, the world will be unstable.

古文：夺而无予，国不遂亡。
现代文：攻夺他国之地而不进行分封，便不能真正灭亡其国并长久地占有它。
English: If you conquer the land of another country without partitioning it, you cannot really destroy the country and occupy it for a long time.

古文：不尽天极，衰者复昌。诛禁不当，反受其殃。
现代文：在征伐他国时，如果不能最终达到天道所限定的准度，则经过征伐本已衰落的国家会重新振兴起来。
English: When conquering other countries, if the accuracy specified by heaven and earth cannot be finally achieved, the country that has already declined after the conquest will be revitalized.

古文：禁伐当罪当亡，必虚其国，兼之而勿擅，是谓天功。
现代文：在讨伐乱逆禁止暴虐时如果未达到准度，反而会招惹祸患。在诛禁理当治罪理当灭亡的国家时，必须一鼓作气，使其成为废墟。
English: In the crusade against tyranny, if it does not reach the accuracy, it will cause trouble. In the suppression of crime, when the country should be destroyed, it is necessary to work hard to make it a ruin.

古文：天地无私，四时不息。天地立，圣人故载。
现代文：兼并了其他国家但不能独自占有，因为这是冥冥天道所促成的功绩。
English: It has annexed other countries, but it cannot occupy them alone, because this is a merit brought about by the providence of heaven.

古文：过极失当，天将降殃。
现代文：由于天地的公正无私，才有了四季、昼夜、存亡、生死等现象的正常循环。
English: Due to the fairness and selflessness of heaven and earth, there is a normal cycle of four seasons, day and night, survival, life and death and other phenomena.

古文：人强胜天，慎避勿当。
现代文：因为万物各当其位，圣人才能够成就万物。
English: For all things must be in their proper place, and only a holy man can accomplish all things.

古文：天反胜人，因与俱行。
现代文：任何事情如果超过了天道所限定的准度，都会受到天降祸患的惩罚。
English: If anything exceeds the accuracy limit set by heaven, it will be punished by natural disasters.

古文：先屈后伸，必尽天极，而毋擅天功。
现代文：在敌国尚处于强盛时，要谨慎地避开它。
English: When the enemy is still strong, it is prudent to avoid it.

古文：兼人之国，修其国郭，处其廊庙，听其钟鼓，利其资财，妻其子女，是谓重逆以荒，国危破亡。
现代文：当敌国由强转弱时，就应该乘机去征讨它，这便是先屈后伸的道理，而这也是由天道所决定的；由于受到天道的指导，所以一切功德人都不能独自占有。兼并他国后，便修治它的城郭，占据其宫室，享用其钟鼓音乐，贪取其资财，霸占其子女，这些做法是大逆天道的取败之道，必然导致国家危殆而最终灭亡。
English: When an enemy country is going from strength to weakness, one should seize the opportunity to conquer it. This is the principle of first yielding and then extending, and this is also determined by the heavenly way. Because it is guided by the heavenly way, all merits cannot be possessed by one person alone. After annexing another country, they will repair its castle, occupy its palace, enjoy its bell and drum music, covet its wealth, and occupy its children. These practices are the way to defeat the heavenly way, and will inevitably lead to the country's crisis and ultimate demise.

古文：故唯圣人能尽天极，能用天当。
现代文：所以说，只有圣人在治国用兵时能够合于天道。
English: Therefore, only a sage can conform to the heavenly way when governing the country and using the military.

古文：天地之道，不过三功。
现代文：天地间的道理概括起来不过是 三功 而已。
English: The reason between heaven and earth can be summed up in three words.

古文：功成而不止，身危有殃。
现代文：如果成就此三功再觊觎其他，那么就难免有祸殃之危了。
English: If you accomplish these three feats and then do something else, then you will inevitably be in danger of disaster.

古文：故圣人之伐也，兼人之国，堕其城郭，焚其钟鼓，布其资财，散其子女，裂其地土，以封贤者。是谓天功。
现代文：所以圣人的征伐之道是，兼并他国后，要拆毁它的城郭，焚毁它的钟鼓，均分它的资财，散居其子女后代，分割其土地赏赐有贤能之人，总之不能独自占有，因为这功绩是天道促成的。
English: Therefore, the saint's way of conquering was, after annexing another country, to demolish its city walls, burn its bells and drums, divide its wealth equally, scatter its children and descendants, and divide its land to reward those who were capable. In short, they could not occupy it alone, because this achievement was made possible by heaven.

古文：功成不废，后不逢殃。
现代文：这样才能功成而不去，然后方能没有患祸。
English: This is the only way to succeed and not go, and then there will be no disaster.

古文：毋阳窃，毋阴窃，毋土敝，毋故执，毋党别。
现代文：在诛伐征讨敌国时，不应从护生存继对方的角度去审度问题，而在务耕农桑，不要从刑虐死杀的角度去审视问题。
English: When conquering and conquering an enemy country, we should not examine the issue from the perspective of protecting the survival of the other side, but when cultivating agricultural mulberry, we should not examine the issue from the perspective of torture and killing.

古文：阳窃者天夺其光，阴窃者土地荒，土敝者天加之以兵，人执者流之四方，党别者外内相攻。
现代文：不要过度地使用地力而使土地凋敝，为政治民，不可偏执一己之私。治臣驭下，不使其拉帮结派。
English: Do not make excessive use of land power and cause the land to wither. As a political citizen, you must not be paranoid and selfish. Under the control of the vassal, do not let it pull the gang.

古文：阳窃者疾，阴窃者饥；土敝者亡地，人执者失民，党别者乱，此谓五逆。
现代文：征伐敌国不尽天极而空怀存继之心，则天反夺其名，劝农而有刑虐之意，则必导致土地荒芜，过度使用地力庄稼没有收成。国力贫弱，则必有外兵侵侮。人主偏执一己之私，强奸民意，必被人民逐放而流徒四方。
English: If the conquest of an enemy country does not exhaust the power of heaven, but is carried out with a spirit of succession, then heaven will take away its name; if the purpose of persuading the peasants is to inflict torture and cruelty, then the land will become barren; if the use of land power is excessive, then the crops will not be harvested; if the national strength is weak, then foreign soldiers will invade and oppress. If the ruler is self-centered and selfish, and rapes the people's will, he will be expelled by the people and will be exiled in all directions.

古文：五逆皆成，乱天之经，逆地之纲，变故乱常，擅制更爽，心欲是行，身危有殃。
现代文：君主驭下无术，臣下结帮营私，党派纷争，则必有内外相攻之患。违逆诛伐之道，必受其殃。违反耕种之宜，必导致饥馑年荒。
English: If the monarch is out of control, his vassals are plotting against him, and parties are at loggerheads, there is sure to be trouble at home and abroad. If you go against the grain, you will suffer the consequences. If you go against the grain, you will suffer famine.

古文：是谓过极失当。
现代文：用地失度，必被侵失土。
English: If the land-use is out of control, the soil will be encroached upon.

