古文：孟子见梁惠王。
现代文：孟子谒见梁惠王。
English: Mencius went to see Liang Hui Wang.

古文：王立于沼上，顾鸿雁麋鹿，曰： 贤者亦乐此乎？ 
现代文：惠王正站在池塘边上，观赏着那些奔跑飞翔着的鸿雁麋鹿，孟子走进来后，惠王问道： 你们这些才德高尚的贤人也爱享受这种乐趣吗？ 
English: Hui Wang was standing on the edge of the pond, watching the wild geese and elk running and flying. After Mencius walked in, Hui Wang asked: Do you highly talented sages also enjoy this kind of fun?

古文：孟子对曰： 贤者而后乐此，不贤者虽有此，不乐也。
现代文：孟子回答说： 只有有德行的人才能体会到这种快乐，没有德行的人即使有这一切，也没法享受。
English: Mencius replied, "Only a virtuous person can experience this kind of happiness, and a person without virtue, even if he has all these things, cannot enjoy them.

古文：《诗》云： 经始灵台，经之营之，庶民攻之，不日成之。
现代文：《诗经》说： 当文王开始规划造灵台，仔细营造巧安排。天下百姓都来干，没有几天就建成了。
English: "The Book of Songs" says: When King Wen began to plan the construction of the spiritual platform, he carefully made a skillful arrangement. People from all over the world came to do it, and it was built in a few days.

古文：经始勿亟，庶民子来。王在灵囿，麀鹿攸伏，麀鹿濯濯，白鸟翯翯。
现代文：建台本来不着急，但老百姓却如子女为父母做事一样自愿，文王游览灵园中，母鹿伏在深草丛。母鹿肥大毛色润，白鸟洁净羽毛丰。
English: Originally, there was no hurry to build the platform, but the common people volunteered as if their children were doing something for their parents. When King Wen visited the spiritual garden, the doe was lying in the deep grass. The doe's fat and large fur was rich in color, and the white bird was clean and had plentiful feathers.

古文：王在灵沼，于牣鱼跃。 
现代文：文王国王游览到灵沼，池里鱼儿蹦得欢。 
English: King Wen Wang visited Lingnuma, and the fish in the pond were jumping for joy.

古文：文王以民力为台为沼，而民欢乐之，谓其台曰： 灵台 ，谓其沼曰 灵沼 乐其有麋鹿鱼鳖。
现代文：周文王虽然用了老百姓的劳力来修建高台深池，可是老百姓非常高兴，把那个台叫做 灵台 ，把那个池叫做 灵沼 ，以园中有麋鹿鱼鳖等珍禽异兽为乐。
English: Although Zhou Wenwang used the labor of the common people to build a high-level deep pond, the common people were very happy. They called that platform "Lingdai" and that pond "Lingnuma," enjoying the rare birds and beasts such as elk, fish and cormorants in the garden.

古文：古之人与民偕乐，故能乐也。
现代文：古代的君王与民同乐，所以能感受到真正的快乐。
English: In ancient times, kings and people enjoyed the same things, so they could feel true happiness.

古文：《汤誓》曰： 时日曷丧，予及女偕亡。 
现代文：相反，《汤誓》中说： 太阳啊，你什么时候灭亡呢？
English: On the contrary, the "Oath of the Soup" says: O sun, when will you perish?

古文：民欲与之偕亡，虽有台池鸟兽，岂能独乐哉？ 
现代文：我宁肯和你一道去死！ 老百姓恨不得与他同归于尽，即使有高台深池，珍禽异兽，他又如何能独自享受呢？ 
English: I'd rather die with you! The common people can't wait to die with him, even if there are high places, deep pools, rare birds and animals, how can he enjoy it alone?

