古文：孔子为鲁司寇，摄行相事，有喜色。
现代文：孔子担任鲁国的大司寇，代理宰相之职，表现出高兴的神色。
English: Confucius assumed the post of grand secretary and acting prime minister of the State of Lu, and showed a happy expression.

古文：仲由问曰： 由闻君子祸至不惧，福至不喜，今夫子得位而喜，何也？ 
现代文：弟子仲由问他： 我听说君子祸患来临不恐惧，福禄降临也不欢喜。现在您得到高位而流露出欢喜的神色，这是为什么呢？ 
English: Disciple Zhong Yu asked him: I have heard that a gentleman does not fear when calamity comes, nor does he rejoice when good fortune comes. Now that you have obtained a high position, why do you look so happy?

古文：孔子曰： 然，有是言也。
现代文：孔子回答说： 对，确实有这样的说法。
English: Confucius replied, "Yes, there is such a saying.

古文：不曰 乐以贵下人 乎？ 
现代文：但不是有 显贵了而仍以谦恭待人为乐事 的说法吗？ 
English: But isn't there a saying about being a dignitary and still treating people with humility?

古文：于是朝政七日而诛乱政大夫少正卯，戮之于两观之下，尸于朝三日。
现代文：就这样，孔子执掌朝政七天就诛杀了扰乱朝政的大夫少正卯，在宫殿门外的两座高台上行刑，并在朝廷暴尸三日。
English: In this way, Confucius, who was in charge of the imperial government for seven days, killed the doctor who disrupted the imperial government, Shosho, and executed him on two high platforms outside the palace gate, and on the third day he killed the corpse in the imperial court.

古文：子贡进曰： 夫少正卯，鲁之闻人也。今夫子为政而始诛之，或者为失乎？ 
现代文：孔子弟子子贡向孔子进言： 少正卯在鲁国非常有名，现在老师您执掌朝政首先就杀掉他，或许有些不恰当吧？ 
English: Zi Gong, a disciple of Confucius, suggested to Confucius: Shao Zhengwu is very famous in the State of Lu. Now that you are in charge of the imperial government, you should kill him first. Isn't that a little inappropriate?

古文：孔子曰： 居，吾语汝以其故。
现代文：孔子回答说： 坐下来，我告诉你杀他的缘由。
English: Confucius replied, "Sit down, and I will tell you the reason for killing him."

古文：天下有大恶者五，而窃盗不与焉。
现代文：天下称得上大恶的有五种，连盗窃的行为也不包括在内。
English: There are five great evils in the world, not including theft.

古文：一曰心逆而险，二曰行僻而坚，三曰言伪而辩，四曰记丑而博，五曰顺非而泽。
现代文：一是通达事理却又心存险恶，二是行为邪僻而固执，三是言语虚伪却又能言善辩，四是对怪异的事知道得过多，五是言行不端还要广施恩惠。
English: On the one hand, there are those who are well-versed in matters of reason, but have evil in their hearts; on the other hand, there are those whose actions are perverse and obstinate; on the third hand, there are those whose words are hypocritical, but who are also eloquent; on the fourth hand, there are those who know too much about strange things; and on the fifth hand, there are those whose words and deeds are improper, but who still want to do a lot of favors.

古文：此五者，有一于人，则不免君子之诛，而少正卯皆兼有之。
现代文：这五种大恶，人只要有其中之一恶，就免不了受正人君子的诛杀，而少正卯则是每样都具备。
English: These five great evils, as long as a person has one of the evils, he will inevitably be killed by a righteous person, while a less righteous person has everything.

古文：其居处足以撮徒成党，其谈说足以饰褒莹众，其强御足以反是独立，此乃人之奸雄者也，不可以不除。
现代文：他身居一定的权位就足以聚集起自己的势力结党营私，他的言论也足以迷惑众人伪饰自己而得到声望，他积蓄的强大力量足以叛逆礼制成为异端。这就是人中的奸雄啊！不可不及早除掉。
English: If he occupies a certain position of power, it is enough for him to gather his own power to form a party and become a private individual; his speech is also enough to confuse everyone, to disguise himself and gain fame; the strong power he has accumulated is enough to rebel against the etiquette and become a heretic. This is the villain among men! It must not be removed too early.

古文：夫殷汤诛尹谐，文王诛潘正，周公诛管蔡，太公诛华士，管仲诛付乙，子产诛史何，是此七子皆异世而同诛者，以七子异世而同恶，故不可赦也。
现代文：历史上，殷汤杀掉尹谐，文王杀掉潘正，周公杀掉管叔、蔡叔，姜太公杀掉华士，管仲杀掉付乙，子产杀掉史何，这七个人生于不同时代但都被杀了头，原因是七个人尽管所处时代不同，但具有的恶行是一样的，所以对他们不能放过。
English: In history, Yin Tang killed Yin Hani, King Wen killed Pan Zheng, Zhou Gong killed Guan Shiu and Cai Shiu, Jiang Taigong killed Hua Shi, Guan Zhong killed Fu Bi, and Zi Bao killed Shi He. These seven people were born in different eras, but they were all beheaded. The reason is that although the seven people were in different eras, they had the same evil deeds, so they could not be spared.

古文：《诗》云： 忧心悄悄，愠于群小。 
现代文：《诗经》中所说的： 忧亡心如焚，被群小所憎恶。 
English: In the "Book of Songs," it says: "The heart of sorrow and death is like fire, and is hated by the little flocks."

古文：小人成群，斯足忧矣。 
现代文：如果小人成群，那就足以令人担忧了。 
English: If the villains are swarming, that's worrisome enough.

古文：孔子为鲁大司寇，有父子讼者，夫子同狴执之，三月不别。
现代文：孔子做鲁国的大司寇，有一对父子来打官司，孔子把他们羁押在同一间牢房里，过了三个月也不判决。
English: When Confucius was the grand steward of the State of Lu, there was a father and son who came to sue. Confucius detained them in the same cell, and after three months there was still no verdict.

古文：其父请止，夫子赦之焉。
现代文：后来，其中的父亲请求撤回诉讼，孔子就把父子二人都放了。
English: Later, the father of one of them asked to withdraw the lawsuit, and Confucius released both father and son.

古文：季孙闻之不悦，曰： 司寇欺余，曩告余曰： 国家必先以孝 ，余今戮一不孝以教民孝，不亦可乎？
现代文：季孙氏听到这件事，很不高兴，说： 司寇欺骗我，从前他曾对我说过： 治理国家一定要以提倡孝道为先。 现在我要杀掉一个不孝的人来教导百姓遵守孝道，不也可以吗？
English: When Mr. Ji Sun heard about this, he was very unhappy and said, "Sikoh has deceived me. He once told me, "To govern the country, we must first promote filial piety." Now I want to kill a person who is not filial to teach the people to observe filial piety. Isn't that okay?

古文：而又赦，何哉？ 
现代文：司寇却又赦免了他们，这是为什么呢？ 
English: But the governor pardoned them. Why?

古文：冉有以告孔子，子喟然叹曰： 呜呼！
现代文：冉有把季孙氏的话告诉了孔子，孔子叹息说： 唉！
English: Ran You told the words of Ji Sun to Confucius. Confucius sighed and said, "Alas!

古文：上失其道而杀其下，非理也。
现代文：身居上位不遵守治国之道，却要杀掉有过失的黎民百姓。
English: Those at the top do not abide by the way of governing the country, but they want to kill the Li people who are at fault.

古文：不教以孝而听其狱，是杀不辜。
现代文：不用孝道来教化民众而随意判决官司，这是滥杀无辜。
English: To arbitrarily adjudicate a lawsuit without using filial piety to educate the public is to indiscriminately kill the innocent.

古文：三军大败，不可斩也。狱犴不治，不可刑也。
现代文：军队打了败仗，是不能用斩杀士卒来解决问题的；刑事案件不断发生，是不能用严酷的刑罚来制止的。
English: If the army loses a battle, it cannot solve the problem by killing soldiers; if criminal cases continue to occur, they cannot be stopped by severe punishment.

古文：何者？
现代文：为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：上教之不行，罪不在民故也。
现代文：统治者的教化没有起到作用，罪责不在于百姓。
English: The rulers' indoctrination has not worked, and the blame does not lie with the people.

古文：夫慢令谨诛，贼也。征敛无时，暴也。不试责成，虐也。
现代文：法律松弛而刑杀严酷，是在残害百姓；随意横征暴敛，是凶恶残酷的暴政；不加以教化而苛求百姓遵守礼法，是残暴的行为。
English: If the laws are lax but the punishments are harsh, it is to brutalize the people; if the people are arbitrarily levied and collected, it is a vicious and cruel tyranny; if the people are not educated but are required to abide by the rules of etiquette, it is an act of brutality.

古文：政无此三者，然后刑可即也。
现代文：施政中没有这三种弊害，才能使用刑罚。
English: Only when there are none of these three evils in the governance can the punishment be used.

古文：《书》云： 义刑义杀，勿庸以即汝心，惟曰未有慎事。 
现代文：《尚书》说： 刑杀要符合正义，不能随心所欲，断案难免会出现不顺心之事。 
English: "Shangshu" said: The execution must be in accordance with justice, it cannot be arbitrary, and it is inevitable that there will be unpleasant things when the case is decided.

古文：言必教而后刑也，既陈道德以先服之。
现代文：说的是先施教化后用刑罚，先陈说道理使百姓明白敬服。
English: It is said that the first thing to do is to educate and then use punishment, and the first thing to do is to explain and reason so that the people understand and respect.

古文：而犹不可，尚贤以劝之；又不可，即废之；又不可，而后以威惮之。
现代文：如果还不行，就应该以贤良的人为表率引导鼓励他们；还不行，才放弃种种说教；还不行，才可以用威势震慑他们。
English: If not, they should be guided and encouraged by the example of virtuous people; if not, they should give up all kinds of preaching; if not, they should be deterred by intimidation.

古文：若是三年，而百姓正矣。
现代文：这样做三年，百姓就会走上正道。
English: If they do this for three years, the people will be on the right track.

古文：其有邪民不从化者，然后待之以刑，则民咸知罪矣。
现代文：其中有些不从教化的顽劣之徒，可以用刑罚来惩治他们。
English: Some of them are miscreants who refuse to be reformed, and they can be punished with a fine.

古文：《诗》云： 天子是毗，俾民不迷。 
现代文：这样一来百姓都知道什么是犯罪了。《诗经》说： 辅佐天子，使百姓不迷惑。 
English: In this way, the people all know what a crime is. "The Book of Songs" says: "Help the Son of Heaven, so that the people are not confused."

古文：是以威厉而不试，刑错而不用。
现代文：能做到这些，就不必用严刑峻法，刑法也可搁置不用了。
English: If we can do these things, we don't have to use harsh punishments, and the criminal law can be set aside.

古文：今世则不然，乱其教，繁其刑，使民迷惑而陷焉，又从而制之，故刑弥繁而盗不胜也。
现代文：当今之世却不是这样，教化紊乱，刑法繁多，使民众迷惑而随时会陷入牢狱。官吏又用繁多的刑律来控制约束，所以刑罚越繁盗贼越多。
English: In today's world, however, this is not the case. Indoctrination is disorderly, and there are many criminal laws that confuse the public and lead to imprisonment at any time. Officials also use a variety of criminal laws to control and restrict, so the more punishments, the more thieves.

古文：夫三尺之限，空车不能登者，何哉？
现代文：三尺高的门槛，即使空车也不能越过，为什么呢？
English: Why is there a three-foot-high barrier that even an empty train can't cross?

古文：峻故也。
现代文：是因为门槛高的缘故。
English: It's because of the high threshold.

古文：百仞之山，重载陟焉，何哉？
现代文：一座百仞高的山，负载极重的车子也能登上去，为什么呢？
English: A hundred-meter-high mountain can be climbed by a car with a very heavy load. Why?

古文：陵迟故也。今世俗之陵迟久矣，虽有刑法，民能勿逾乎？ 
现代文：因为山是由低到高缓缓升上去的，车就会慢慢登上去。当前的社会风气已经败坏很久了，即使有严刑苛法，百姓又怎么不违反呢？ 
English: Because the mountain rises slowly from low to high, the car will slowly climb up. The current social atmosphere has been corrupted for a long time, even if there are severe punishments, how do people not violate it?

