古文：起屠维赤奋若，尽著雍阉茂，凡十年。
现代文：起，止，一共十年。
English: From start to finish, a total of ten years.

古文：孝成皇帝上之上建始元年
现代文：汉成帝建始元年
English: In the first year after the founding of the Han Dynasty

古文：春，正月，乙丑，悼考庙灾。
现代文：春季，正月，乙丑，史皇孙刘进的祭庙发生火灾。
English: In spring, the first month of the year, the second month of the year, a fire broke out in the temple of Liu Jin.

古文：石显迁长信中太仆，秩中二千石。
现代文：石显调任长信中太仆，官秩为中二千石。
English: Ishi Hsien was transferred to the position of Choshin's middle servant, with an official rank of middle two thousand koku.

古文：显既失倚，离权，于是丞相、御史条奏显旧恶；及其党牢梁、陈顺皆免官，显与妻子徙归故郡，忧懑不食，道死。
现代文：石显已失去了靠山，又被调离中枢要职，于是丞相、御史上奏成帝，列数石显过去的罪恶。石显及其党羽牢梁、陈顺均被免官，石显与妻子儿女也被逐归原郡。石显忧郁愤懑，不进饮食，死在途中。
English: Shi Xian had lost his patron, and was transferred from the central important position. Therefore, the prime minister, the emperor, listed the sins of Shi Xian in the past. Shi Xian and his party leader, Chen Shun, were removed from office, and Shi Xian and his wife and children were also expelled to the original county. Shi Xian was depressed and angry, did not eat, and died on the way.

古文：诸所交结以显为官者，皆废罢；少府五鹿充宗左迁玄菟太守，御史中丞伊嘉为雁门都尉。
现代文：那些因结交石显而得到官位的人，全部被罢黜。少府五鹿充宗被贬为玄菟郡太守，御史中丞伊嘉被谪调雁门都尉。
English: Those who received official positions because of their friendship with Shihsien were all ousted. Shofu Goka Mitsumune was demoted to the governor of Xuanzang County, and Goshi Chujo Ika was demoted to the captain of the Wild Goose Gate.

古文：司隶校尉涿郡王尊劾奏： 丞相衡、御史大夫谭，知显等颛权擅势，大作威福，为海内患害，不以时白奏行罚，而阿谀曲从，附下罔上，怀邪迷国，无大臣辅政之义，皆不道！
现代文：司隶校尉、涿郡人王尊上书弹劾： 丞相匡衡，御史大夫张谭，明知石显等专权擅势，作威作福，是海内祸害，却不及时奏报皇上，予以惩罚，反而百般谄媚，曲意奉承，攀附臣下，欺瞒主上，心怀邪恶，迷惑君王，丧失大臣辅政的原则，都为大逆不道！
English: Captain Sisli and Wang Renzhong of Jixian County wrote a letter of impeachment: The prime minister, Kuangheng, and the chief historian, Zhang Tan, knowing that the autocratic power of Shixian and others was a scourge at sea, but did not report to the emperor in time to be punished, but instead were all kinds of flattering, flattering, clinging to their subjects, deceiving the lord, harboring evil, confusing the king, and losing the principle of ministerial assistance, were all treasonous!

古文：在赦令前。
现代文：这些罪恶发生在大赦之前，尚可不究。
English: These crimes occurred before the amnesty and cannot be ignored.

古文：赦后，衡、谭举奏显，不自陈不忠之罪，而反扬著先帝任用倾覆之徒，妄言 百官畏之，甚于主上 ；卑君尊臣，非所宜称，失大臣体！ 
现代文：然而，在大赦之后，匡衡、张谭指控石显时，不自责不忠之罪，反而故意宣扬突出先帝任用倾覆小人的失误。妄言什么 文武百官畏惧石显，超过了皇上 。这种卑君尊臣的言论，是不该说的，有失大臣体统！ 
English: However, after the amnesty, when Kuangheng and Zhang Tan accused Shixian, they did not reproach themselves for the crime of disloyalty, but deliberately promoted the mistake of highlighting the previous emperor's appointment of a subversive villain. What kind of nonsense did the literary and military officials fear Shixian more than the emperor? This kind of speech by a low-ranking dignitary should not be said, it is unbecoming of a minister!

古文：于是衡渐惧，免冠谢罪，上丞相、侯印绶。
现代文：于是匡衡惭愧恐惧，脱掉官帽谢罪，缴还丞相、侯爵的印信、绶带。
English: As a result, Kuangheng was ashamed and afraid, took off his official hat to apologize, and returned the seal letter and umbilical cord of the prime minister and marquis.

古文：天子以新即位，重伤大臣，乃左迁尊为高陵令。
现代文：成帝因新即位，不愿伤害大臣，就下令贬王尊为高陵县令。
English: As Emperor Cheng was newly enthroned and did not want to hurt the minister, he ordered Wang Zun to be demoted to the position of Goryeong County Governor.

古文：然群下多是尊者。
现代文：可是百官中很多人都认为王尊之言有道理。
English: However, many of the hundred officials thought that Wang Zun's words were reasonable.

古文：衡嘿嘿不自安，每有水旱，连乞骸骨让位。
现代文：匡衡沉默而心不自安，每逢遇到水旱天灾，都接连请求退休让位。
English: Kuangheng is silent and uneasy. Whenever he encounters floods, droughts, and natural disasters, he successively requests to retire and give up his position.

古文：上辄以诏书慰抚，不许。
现代文：而皇上则下诏安抚慰留，不批准他辞职。
English: The emperor always used the imperial rescript to comfort and encourage, and did not allow Kuangheng to abdicate.

古文：立故河间王元弟上郡库令良为河间王。
现代文：汉成帝封已故河间王刘元的弟弟、上郡库令刘良为河间王。
English: Emperor Hancheng appointed Liu Liang, the younger brother of the late King Liu Yuan, as the King of Kawama.

古文：有星孛于营室。
现代文：有异星出现于营、室二星旁。
English: A strange star appears in the camp, next to the two stars in the room.

古文：赦天下。
现代文：大赦天下。
English: Pardons all around.

古文：壬子，封舅诸吏、光禄大夫、关内侯王崇为安成侯；赐舅谭、商、立、根、逢时爵关内侯。
现代文：壬子，成帝封舅父诸吏、光禄大夫、关内侯王崇为安成侯；赐舅父王谭、王商、王立、王根、王逢时为关内侯。
English: Jinshi, Emperor Chengfu appointed his uncles Zhu Li, Guanglu Daifu, and Guanai Marquis Wang Chong as Ancheng Marquis; his uncles Wang Tan, Wang Shang, Wang Li, Wang Gen, and Wang Fengshi as Guanai Marquis.

古文：夏，四月，黄雾四塞，诏博问公卿大夫，无有所讳。
现代文：夏季，四月，黄雾四起，遮天盖日。成帝下诏广泛地征求公卿大夫的意见，希望大臣们各谈因由，不得隐讳。
English: In the summer, in April, when the yellow fog was everywhere and the sky was overcast, Emperor Cheng issued an edict to widely solicit the opinions of court nobles and doctors, hoping that the ministers would talk about the reasons and not hide them.

古文：谏大夫杨兴、博士驷胜等对，皆以为 阴盛侵阳之气也。
现代文：谏大夫杨兴、博士驷胜等都认为： 是阴气太盛，侵抑阳气的缘故。
English: Dr. Zou Yangxing, Dr. Zou Sheng, etc. all believe that: it is because the yin is too strong and the yang is suppressed.

古文：高祖之约，非功臣不侯。
现代文：高祖曾立约：臣属非功臣不得封侯。
English: Gaozu had made an agreement: A vassal who was not a meritorious vassal was not allowed to be a vassal.

古文：今太后诸弟皆以无功为侯，外戚未曾有也，故天为见异。 
现代文：如今太后诸弟全都无功而封侯，如此施恩外戚，是从未有先例的。因而上天为示警而显现异象。 
English: Now all of the empress dowager's younger brothers have been knighted without merit, and there has never been a precedent for being so generous to a maternal relative. As a result, a vision appeared in the sky as a warning.

古文：于是大将军凤惧，上书乞骸骨，辞职。
现代文：大将军王凤闻奏恐惧，上书请求退休，辞去官职。
English: General Wang Feng was so frightened that he wrote a letter requesting retirement and resigned from his post.

古文：上优诏不许。
现代文：成帝不准，下诏慰留。
English: He was not allowed to become emperor, but he was allowed to stay.

古文：御史中丞东海薛宣上疏曰： 陛下至德仁厚，而嘉气尚凝，阴阳不和，殆吏多苛政。
现代文：御史中丞、东海人薛宣上书说： 陛下至德仁厚，然而祥和之气仍然未通，阴阳不和，大概是因为官吏多实行苛政的缘故。
English: Xue Xuan, the Grand Historian and a native of the East China Sea, wrote: Your Majesty is a man of great virtue and benevolence, but the spirit of peace is still lacking, and the yin and yang are at odds, probably because many government officials are implementing harsh policies.

古文：部刺史或不循守条职，举错各以其意，多与郡县事，至开私门，听谗佞，以求吏民过，谴呵及细微，责义不量力；群县相迫促，亦内相刻，流至众庶。
现代文：严辞呵责，对细微的过错也不放过；苛求吏民，而不考虑他们是否力所能及。郡县在压力的逼迫下，也不得不互相采取严厉苛刻的手段，流毒祸及百姓。
English: They severely reprimanded and did not let go of minor mistakes; they demanded officials and people without considering whether they were able to do so. Under pressure, counties and counties also had to take harsh and harsh measures against each other, spreading poison and harm to the people.

古文：是故乡党阙于嘉宾之欢，九族忘其亲亲之恩，饮食周急之厚弥衰，送往劳来之礼不行。
现代文：因此，乡党邻里缺少和睦交往的欢悦，家族亲属也忘了血缘之间的亲情。互相帮助、周济急难的淳厚风俗衰落了，送往迎来的礼节也不再实行。
English: Therefore, the joy of receiving distinguished guests is lacking in the countryside, the people of the nine ethnic groups have forgotten the feelings of their relatives, the loyal character of offering food and assistance to those in crisis has further declined, and the etiquette of sending away those who have left and comforting those who have returned is no longer enforced.

古文：夫人道不通则阴阳否隔，和气不兴，未必不由此也。
现代文：人情不通，那么阴阳自然阻隔，和气不通，未必不是由此而引起！
English: The yin and yang are naturally separated, and the qi and qi are not connected, which is not necessarily caused by this!

古文：《诗》云： 民之失德，乾侯以愆。 
现代文：《诗经》说： 百姓失德，因小犯过。 
English: "The Book of Songs" says: "The people have lost their virtue and have committed minor offenses.

古文：鄙语曰： 苛政不亲，烦苦伤恩。 
现代文：俚语说： 苛政之下无亲情，烦苦之中伤恩义。 
English: Slang says: Under the harsh government, there is no kinship, and in the midst of hardships, gratitude is hurt.

古文：方刺史奏事时，宜明申敕，使昭然知本朝之要务。 
现代文：陛下在刺史奏事时，应明确敕告他们，使他们明了本朝施政的切要所在。 
English: His Majesty should clearly inform them when he records the history of the assassination, so that they understand the essence of the administration of this government.

古文：上嘉纳之。
现代文：成帝欣然采纳。
English: The Emperor approved and adopted his opinion.

古文：八月，有两月相承，晨见东方。
现代文：八月，清晨时，东方一上一下出现两个月亮。
English: In August, there will be two moons in conjunction, appearing in the east in the morning.

古文：冬，十二月，作长安南、北郊，罢甘泉、汾阴祠，及紫坛伪饰、女乐、鸾路、骍驹、龙马、石坛之属。
现代文：冬季，十二月，汉成帝在长安南郊、北郊兴建祭天、祭地之所。下令撤除甘泉和汾阴两地的祭祀之所，以及甘泉泰紫坛的装饰、女子歌乐、鸾路、驹、龙马、石坛等。
English: In the winter, in December, Emperor Hancheng ordered the removal of the places of worship in the two places of Ganquan and Suyin, as well as the decoration of the Ganquan and Taiji altars, women's singing, Kushiro, Zou, Longma, stone altars, etc.

古文：孝成皇帝上之上建始二年
现代文：建始二年
English: Two years in the making

古文：春，正月，罢雍五畤及陈宝祠，皆从匡衡之请也。
现代文：春季、正月，撤除位于雍城的五帝祭坛及陈宝祠。这都是听从了匡衡建议的举动。
English: In the spring and the first month of the year, the Five Emperors Altar and the Chen Bao Ancestral Hall in Yongcheng were removed. This was a move that followed the suggestion of Kuang Heng.

古文：辛巳，上始郊祀长安南郊。
现代文：辛巳，成帝初次到长安南郊祭天。
English: Soon after, Emperor Cheng Rong went to the southern suburb of Chang'an for the first time.

古文：赦奉郊县及中都官耐罪徒；减天下赋钱，算四十。
现代文：赦免侍奉郊祀之县及在京师诸官府的保留鬓发的轻罪刑徒。减天下赋钱，原一百二十钱为一算，现每一算减少四十钱。
English: Pardoning misdemeanor convicts who have served in counties with suburban shrines and those who have been retained by various government offices in Beijing. The amount of money given to the country was reduced from one hundred and twenty yuan to forty yuan.

古文：闰月，以渭城延陵亭部为初陵。
现代文：闰正月，成帝下令在渭城延陵亭兴建自己的陵墓。
English: In leap year, Yanling Pavilion in Fucheng was designated as the first mausoleum.

古文：三月，辛丑，上始祠后土于北郊。
现代文：三月，辛丑，成帝初次在长安北郊祭祀后土。
English: In March, in Xinwuxi, Emperor Cheng Rong for the first time held a memorial service in the northern suburb of Changan.

古文：丙午，立皇后许氏。
现代文：丙午，成帝立许氏为皇后。
English: In the afternoon of the third day, Emperor Chengli crowned Lady Xu as empress.

古文：后，车骑将军嘉之女也。
现代文：许后是车骑将军许嘉的女儿。
English: Xu Hou is the daughter of the cavalry general Xu Jia.

古文：元帝伤母恭哀后居位日浅而遭霍氏之辜，故选嘉女以配太子。
现代文：汉元帝哀悼母亲恭哀后在位时间很短而惨遭霍氏毒手，因此特选许嘉之女婚配太子。
English: Emperor Hanyuan mourned his mother's death, but his reign was short and he was cruelly attacked by the Huo clan. Therefore, the daughter of Xu Jia was specially chosen to marry the crown prince.

古文：上自为太子时，以好色闻；及即位，皇太后诏采良家女以备后宫。
现代文：成帝从当太子时，就以好色出名。等到即位后，皇太后诏令挑选良家女子充实后宫。
English: From the time he was crown prince, Emperor Chengdu was famous for his lechery. After he ascended the throne, the empress dowager issued an edict to select women from good families to enrich the harem.

古文：大将军武库令杜钦说王凤曰： 礼，一娶九女，所以广嗣重祖也。
现代文：大将军、武库令杜钦劝王凤说： 按古礼，天子大婚，一次就娶九个女子，是为了让她们多生儿子，以对得起祖宗。
English: Du Qin, the great general and commander of the arsenal, advised Wang Feng, "According to the ancient rite, the Son of Heaven marries nine women at a time, so that they can have more sons and be worthy of their ancestors.

古文：娣侄虽缺不复补，所以养寿塞争也。
现代文：其中有人死亡，虽空缺其位，也不再补充，为的是使君王保养长寿，也避免后宫争宠。
English: Some of them died, and although their places were vacant, they were not replaced, in order to preserve the longevity of the monarch and to avoid competition for favour in the harem.

古文：故后妃有贞淑之行，则胤嗣有贤圣之君；制度有威仪之节，则人君有寿考之福。
现代文：因此皇后嫔妃有贞洁贤淑的德行，而子孙后裔就有圣贤之君。制度有严格的节制，君王就会有高寿之福。
English: If the empress is virtuous, the successor will be a virtuous and holy monarch; if a dignified system of etiquette is established, the monarch will have the blessing of a long life.

古文：废而不由，则女德不厌；女德不厌，则寿命不究于高年。
现代文：废弃而不采用这些古礼，君王就会沉湎于女色；沉湎于女色，就崐不会享有高寿。
English: Abandon etiquette and do not use it, and you will become an insatiable womanizer; if you are an insatiable womanizer, you will not live to a ripe old age.

古文：男子五十，好色未衰；妇人四十，容貌改前；以改前之容侍于未衰之年，而不以礼为制，则其原不可救而后徠异态；后徠异态，则正后自疑，而支庶有间適之心。
现代文：男子到了五十岁，好色之心仍未衰退；可是妇人到了四十岁，容貌便不同从前。以变丑了的容貌，去侍奉处在好色之心未衰年龄的君王，而不以古礼去约束克制，就不能挽救君王本来的好色，而后还要发生不正常的变化。
English: When a man reaches the age of fifty, his lustful heart has not yet faded; but when a woman reaches the age of forty, her appearance is not the same as before. To serve a king who is in the age of lustful heart with an ugly appearance, and not to restrain and restrain with ancient etiquette, can not save the king's original lust, and then abnormal changes will occur.

古文：是以晋献被纳谗之谤，申生蒙无罪之辜。
现代文：发生不正常变化的结果是，正宫皇后自我猜疑，恐怕后位不稳，而庶妻宠妃产生夺嫡的野心。
English: As a result, Shinken accepted the slanderous insinuation and Shen Sheng was found not guilty.

古文：今圣主富于春秋，未有適嗣，方乡术入学，未亲后妃之议。
现代文：这正是晋献公被人指责采纳谗言，使申生无罪而蒙受冤死的原因。现在圣主还很年轻，没有嫡子，刚刚开始研习学问，还没有因亲近后妃而受到批评。
English: The current patron saint is young, has no legitimate heir, is pursuing an academic career, and has no intention of becoming a consort.

古文：将军辅政，宜因始初之隆，建九女之制，详择有行义之家，求淑女之质，毋必有声色技能，为万世大法。
现代文：将军身为辅政大臣，应该趁着本朝初期的隆盛，建立九妻制度。仔细选择德行高尚的仁义之家，物色品貌端庄的淑女，不一定要有声色技能。把这个制度定为万世不改之法。
English: The general, as an assistant minister, should take advantage of the prosperity of the early days of this dynasty to establish a nine-wife system. Carefully select a virtuous and noble family of benevolence and righteousness, find a lady with a dignified appearance, and do not necessarily have vocal skills. Make this system an eternal law.

古文：夫少戒之在色，《小卞》之作，可为寒心。
现代文：年轻人要戒色。《诗经·小卞》这首诗，就是讽刺周幽王废申后立褒姒，哀伤太子被放逐，使人听了十分寒心。
English: Young people should abstain from sexual activity. The poem "Shijing · Xiaojun" is a satire of Zhou Yu Wang's resignation after the establishment of Baojun, and the sad prince was banished, which made people feel very cold.

古文：唯将军常以为忧！ 
现代文：请将军常以此为忧！ 
English: The general should always be concerned about this!

古文：凤白之太后，太后以为故事无有；凤不能自立法度，循故事而已。
现代文：王凤将杜钦之言转告皇太后，太后认为九妻之制，汉朝没有前例。王凤不能自立法度，只是因循惯例而已。
English: Wang Feng relayed Du Qin's words to the empress dowager. The empress dowager believed that the nine-wife system was unprecedented in the Han Dynasty. Wang Feng could not make laws on his own, but only follow the practice.

古文：凤素重钦，故置之莫府，国家政谋常与钦虑之，数称达名士，裨正阙失；当世善政多出于钦者。
现代文：王凤一向器重杜钦，因此把他安置在幕府作官，国家的政治大计，常与他一起研究考虑。杜钦多次称赞推荐有名望的士人，使他们补救改正政治上的欠缺和失误。当世的善政，多出于杜钦的建议和筹划。
English: Wang Feng always valued Duqin, so he placed him in the shogunate as an official, and the country's political plans were often studied and considered with him. Duqin repeatedly praised the recommendation of famous scholars, so that they could remedy and correct political shortcomings and mistakes. Contemporary good governance is mostly due to Duqin's advice and planning.

古文：夏，大旱。
现代文：夏季，大旱。
English: Summer, drought.

古文：匈奴呼韩邪单于嬖左伊秩訾兄女二人；长女颛渠阏氏生二子，长曰且莫车，次曰囊知牙斯；少女为大阏氏，生四子，长曰雕陶莫皋，次曰且麋胥，皆长于且莫车，少子咸、乐二人，皆小于囊知牙斯。
现代文：匈奴呼韩邪单于宠爱左伊秩訾的两位侄女。长女为颛渠阏氏，生二子：长子且莫车、幼子囊知牙斯。幼女为大阏氏，生四子：长子雕陶莫皋，次子且麋胥，二人都比且莫车年长。三子咸，四子乐，都比囊知牙斯年幼。
English: The two nieces of Zuo Yicheng, the favorite of the Xiongnu, were called Han Yanshan. The eldest daughter was from the Shuguang clan, and she gave birth to two sons: the eldest son, Kimo Che, and the younger son, Zacchi Das. The younger daughter was from the Daxi clan, and she gave birth to four sons: the eldest son, Zhaotao Mo Che, and the second son, Ketsuo, both of whom were older than Kimo Che. The third son, Xian, and the fourth son, Le, were younger than Zacchi Das.

古文：又它阏氏子十馀人。
现代文：此外还有其他阏氏所生的儿子十余人。
English: In addition, there are more than ten other sons born to the Min clan.

古文：颛渠阏氏贵，且莫车爱，呼韩邪病且死，欲立且莫车。
现代文：颛渠阏氏的地位最高，长子且莫车也深受单于喜爱。呼韩邪病危将死，打算立且莫车为继承人。
English: He was the highest-ranking member of the Minjoo clan, and his eldest son, Kechimochae, was also loved by everyone. He was dying of an incurable disease and planned to make Kechimochae his heir.

古文：颛渠阏氏曰： 匈奴乱十馀年，不绝如发，赖蒙汉力，故得复安。
现代文：颛渠阏氏说： 匈奴内乱十余年，国家命脉象发丝一样勉强维持，依赖汉朝的力量，才重新转危为安。
English: He said: After more than ten years of the Hunnic civil war, the lifeblood of the country was barely maintained like hair, relying on the strength of the Han Dynasty to turn the corner.

古文：今平定未久，人民创艾战斗。
现代文：如今平定未久，人民畏惧战争。
English: Now, peace is not long in coming, and the people are afraid of war.

古文：且莫车年少，百姓未附，恐复危国。
现代文：且莫车年少，不能令百姓心服归附，立他恐怕又会给国家带来危险。
English: Moreover, he is too young to win the people's loyalty, and appointing him would bring danger to the country.

古文：我与大阏氏一家共子，不如立雕陶莫皋。 
现代文：我与大阏氏是亲姐妹，他的儿子，也就是我的儿子，不如立雕陶莫皋。 
English: I and Zuo Tiebin are sisters, and we have the same son. It's better to be alone than to be alone.

古文：大阏氏曰： 且莫车虽少，大臣共持国事。
现代文：大阏氏说： 且莫车虽年幼，但可由大臣们共同主持国事。
English: Mr. Otsuki said, "Although Mochie is young, the ministers can jointly preside over state affairs.

古文：今舍贵立贱，后世必乱。 
现代文：如今舍弃高贵的嫡子，而立低贱的庶子，后世必然要发生内乱。 
English: Now abandoning the noble legitimate son, and setting up a lowly illegitimate son, civil strife is bound to occur in future generations.

古文：单于卒从颛渠阏氏计，立雕陶莫皋，约令传国与弟。
现代文：单于最后采纳了颛渠阏氏的建议，立雕陶莫皋为继承人，并立约，命令雕陶莫皋将来传位给弟弟且莫车。
English: In the end, Huo Han and Xidan still followed the advice of Xuan Quanban. They set up a statue of Tao Mopu for Xuan Yu, and made a covenant for him to pass the country to his brother in the future.

古文：呼韩邪死，雕陶莫皋立，为复株累若鞮单于。
现代文：呼韩邪死，雕陶莫皋即位，称复株累若单于。
English: After the death of Huan Zi, the sculptor Tao Miao ascended to the throne, known as the replanting case.

古文：复株累若鞮单于以且麋胥为左贤王，且莫车为左谷蠡王，囊知牙斯为右贤王。
现代文：他任命且麋胥为左贤王，且莫车为左谷蠡王，囊知牙斯为右贤王。
English: He appointed Katsushika as the king of the left sages, Mochika as the king of the left valley sages, and Tsuchigas as the king of the right sages.

古文：复株累单于复妻王昭君，生二女，长女云为须卜居次，小女为当于居次。
现代文：复株累单于按照匈奴的习俗，再娶王昭君为妻，生下二女：长女云公主，嫁匈奴贵族须卜氏；小女嫁匈奴贵族当于氏。
English: In the case of reincarnation, Yu also married a donkey and gave birth to two daughters. The eldest daughter, Yun, was second to Subu, and the second daughter was second to Yu.

古文：孝成皇帝上之上建始三年春，三月，赦天下徒。秋，关内大雨四十馀日。
现代文：建始三年春季，三月，赦免天下囚犯。秋季，关内大雨连绵四十余日。
English: In the spring of the third year, in March, prisoners were pardoned all over the world. In the autumn, it rained heavily for more than forty days.

古文：京师民相惊，言大水至；百姓奔走相蹂躏，老弱号呼，长安中大乱。
现代文：京师百姓惊恐相告，传言洪水就要来到。百姓纷纷奔逃，混乱中互相践踏，老弱呼号，长安城中大乱。
English: The people of Beijing reported to each other in horror that a flood was coming. People fled in droves, trampling each other in the chaos, the old and the weak crying out, and the city of Chang'an in turmoil.

古文：天子亲御前殿，召公卿议。
现代文：成帝亲临前崐殿，召集公卿商议。
English: The emperor himself came to the front hall to convene the nobles and ministers to discuss the matter.

古文：大将军凤以为： 太后与上及后宫可御船，令吏民上长安城以避水。 
现代文：大将军王凤认为： 太后跟皇上以及后宫嫔妃可以登上御船。命令官吏百姓登上长安城墙，以避洪水。 
English: The great general Wang Feng thought: The empress dowager, the emperor and the concubines can board the royal ship. He ordered the officials and the people to board the Chang'an city wall to avoid the flood.

古文：君臣皆从凤议。左将军王商独曰： 自古无道之国，水犹不冒城郭；今政治和平，世无兵革，上下相安，何因当有大水一日暴至，此必讹言也！
现代文：群臣都附合王凤的意见，只有左将军王商说： 自古以来，即令是无道的王朝，大水都没有淹没过城郭。如今政治和平，世上没有战争，上下相安，凭什么会有洪水一天内突然涌来？
English: The courtiers all agreed with Wang Feng's opinion, only the left general Wang Shang said: Since ancient times, even if it is a roadless dynasty, the great water has not flooded the castle. Nowadays, there is political peace, there is no war in the world, and there is peace between the upper and lower levels. Why would the flood suddenly come in one day?

古文：不宜令上城，重惊百姓。 
现代文：这一定是谣言！不应该下令让官吏百姓登城墙，那样会更增加百姓的惊恐。 
English: This must be a rumor! They shouldn't have ordered the officials and people to climb the city wall, that would have increased the fear of the people.

古文：上乃止。
现代文：成帝于是作罢。
English: The Emperor finally stopped.

古文：有顷，长安中稍定；问之，果讹言。
现代文：不久，长安城中逐渐平定下来，经查问，果然是谣言。
English: Soon, the situation in Chang'an City gradually calmed down. After investigation, it turned out to be a rumor.

古文：上于是美壮商之固守，数称其议；而凤大惭，自恨失言。
现代文：成帝因而对王商固守不动的建议十分赞赏，多次称赞。而王凤则大感惭愧，自恨失言。
English: Emperor Cheng therefore highly appreciated and repeatedly praised Wang Shang's advice to remain steadfast, while Wang Feng felt greatly ashamed and hated himself for his slip of the tongue.

古文：上欲专委任王凤，八月，策免车骑将军许嘉，以特进侯就朝位。
现代文：成帝打算把国家大事完全委托给王凤。八月，下策书免去车骑将军许嘉的官职，命他以特进侯的身分参加朝见。
English: Emperor Cheng planned to fully entrust state affairs to Wang Feng. In August, the next policy document removed the official post of the cavalry general Xu Jia and ordered him to attend the imperial court as a special envoy.

古文：张谭坐选举不实，免。
现代文：张谭因举荐人才不真实而获罪，被免去官职。
English: Zhang Tan was found guilty of falsely recommending talent and was removed from office.

古文：冬，十月，光禄大夫尹忠为御史大夫。
现代文：冬季，十月，擢升光禄大夫尹忠为御史大夫。
English: In the winter, in October, Dr. Yin Zhong, the doctor of Guanglu, was promoted to the doctor of history.

古文：十二月，戊申朔，日有食之。
现代文：十二月，戊申朔，出现日食。
English: In December, a solar eclipse occurred.

古文：其夜，地震未央宫殿中。
现代文：当夜，未央宫殿中发生地震。
English: That night, there was an earthquake in the palace.

古文：诏举贤良方正能直言极谏之士。
现代文：成帝下诏，要求举荐贤良、方正和能直言规谏的人士。
English: Emperor Chengzong issued an edict, asking for the recommendation of virtuous, upright and forthright people.

古文：杜钦及太常丞谷永上对，皆以为后宫女宠太盛，嫉妒专上，将害继嗣之咎。
现代文：杜钦及太常丞谷永上书，都认为： 发生日食地震，都是因为后宫美女太盛，有人心怀嫉妒，使皇帝专宠自己。
English: Du Qin and Emperor Taizhong's grandson, Gu Yongzheng, both believed that: The eclipse earthquake occurred because the beauty of the harem was too strong, and some people were jealous and made the emperor pamper himself.

古文：越巂山崩。
现代文：这样下去，将会有危害皇位继承人的灾祸。 
English: Zhao Yao's Mountain Collapse.

古文：丁丑，匡衡坐多取封邑四百顷，监临盗所主守直十金以上，免为庶人。
现代文：越发生山崩。丁丑，匡衡因多取封邑土地四百顷，及手下属官盗取所主管的财物价值十金以上而获罪，免官，贬为平民。
English: More and more landslides occurred. Ding Gou and Kuang Heng were found guilty of taking more than four hundred hectares of fief land and stealing more than ten gold coins worth of property from their subordinate officials. They were removed from office and reduced to civilians.

古文：孝成皇帝上之上建始四年春，正月，癸卯，陨石于亳四，陨于肥累二。
现代文：建始四年春季，正月，癸卯，有四颗陨石在亳县坠落，有两颗陨石在肥累坠落。
English: In the spring of the fourth year of the founding of the People's Republic of China, four meteorites fell in Jixian County in the first month of the year, and two meteorites fell in Feiyu County.

古文：罢中书宦官。
现代文：撤销中书宦官。
English: The revocation of the post of the eunuch of the Chinese Academy of Letters.

古文：初置尚书员五人。
现代文：初次规定尚书定员为五人。
English: The initial stipulation was to have a maximum of five members.

古文：三月，甲申，以左将军乐昌侯王商为丞相。
现代文：三月，甲申，任用左将军、乐昌侯王商为丞相。
English: In March, Jia Sheng appointed General Zuo and Lechang Hou Wang Shang as chancellor.

古文：夏，上悉召前所举直言之士，诣白虎殿对策。
现代文：夏季，皇上把前些时候被举荐的直言之士，都召集到白虎殿，进行考试，回答皇帝的策问。
English: In the summer, the emperor summoned all the outspoken scholars who had been recommended earlier to the White Tiger Palace to take an exam and answer the emperor's questions.

古文：是时上委政王凤，议者多归咎焉。
现代文：此时，成帝把国家大事都委托给王凤，直言之士在回答策问时，很多人将天变归咎于王凤。
English: At this time, Emperor Chengdu entrusted the major national events to Wang Feng. To put it bluntly, when answering questions, many people blamed Wang Feng for the changes in the heavens.

古文：谷永知凤方见柄用，阴欲自托，乃曰： 方今四夷宾服，皆为臣妾，北无熏荤、冒顿之患，南无赵佗、吕嘉之难，三垂晏然，靡有兵革之警。
现代文：谷永知道王凤正受信用，掌握权柄，想暗中投靠，于是上书说： 而今四方外族都已降服，均成为汉朝的臣属。北方没有匈奴荤粥、冒顿那样的祸害，南方也没有赵佗、吕嘉的发难，三边晏然，没有战争的警报。
English: Gu Yong knew that Wang Feng was trusted and in power, and wanted to secretly support him, so he sent a letter saying: Nowadays, all foreign ethnic groups in the four directions have surrendered, and all have become the subjects of the Han Dynasty. In the north, there is no such scourge as the Xiongnu's porridge and storming, and in the south, there is no trouble caused by Zhao Wei and Lujia. The three sides are calm, and there is no warning of war.

古文：诸侯大者乃食数县，汉吏制其权柄，不得有为，无吴、楚、燕、梁之势。
现代文：大的诸侯国食邑不过数县，由朝廷委派的官吏控制那里的权柄，使诸侯王不能有所作为，不会形成当年吴、楚、燕、梁等诸侯国尾大不掉的局势。
English: There were only a few counties in the large feudal states, and the officials appointed by the imperial court controlled the power there, so that the feudal kings could not do anything, and the situation of Wu, Chu, Yan, Liang and other feudal states could not be eliminated.

古文：百官盘互，亲疏相错，骨肉大臣有申伯之忠，洞洞属属，小心畏忌，无重合、安阳、博陆之乱。
现代文：文武百官互相交结制衡，与皇帝有亲戚关系的官员与没有亲戚关系的官员互相掺杂。皇亲国戚中有象申伯那样的忠臣，他们恭敬谨慎、小心翼翼，没崐有重合侯莽通、安阳侯上官桀、博陆侯霍禹那样的阴谋。
English: The bureaucrats are entangled and intertwined, and they are all distantly related to each other. The Minister of Flesh and Blood has the same loyalty as Shen Bo, is pious and respectful, and is cautious and fearful. There are no overlapping, Anyang, Bolu and other rebellions.

古文：三者无毛发之辜，窃恐陛下舍昭昭之白过，忽天地之明戒，听晻昧之瞽说，归咎乎无辜，倚异乎政事，重失天心，不可之大者也。
现代文：以上三种人都没有丝毫的罪行，我担心陛下放过明显的错误，忽略天地的明显警告，听信愚昧盲目之言，归罪于无辜，把政事托附给不可靠的人，那将大失上天之心，是太不应该了。
English: There is not the slightest sin in any of these three, and I am afraid that Your Majesty will lose the heart of heaven if you let go of obvious mistakes, ignore the obvious warnings of heaven and earth, listen to the words of ignorance and blindness, blame the innocent, and entrust the government to unreliable people.

古文：陛下诚深察愚臣之言，抗湛溺之意，解偏驳之爱，奋乾刚之威，平天覆之施，使列妾得人人更进，益纳宜子妇人，毋择好丑，毋避尝字，毋论年齿。
现代文：陛下如果能深思我的建议，抗拒沉溺之心，解除专宠之爱，振奋起阳刚之威，将天子之恩平均施布，使后宫各位嫔妃得以人人轮流侍奉君王。增添选纳能生男孩的妇人，不挑剔美丑，不在意曾否嫁过人，也不论年龄。
English: Your Majesty, if you can think deeply about my suggestion, resist the indulgence of the heart, release the love of the exclusive pet, invigorate the power of the masculine, and distribute the grace of the heavenly son evenly, so that all the concubines in the harem can take turns to serve the king. Add the selection of women who can give birth to boys, not picky about beauty and ugliness, do not care if they have been married, regardless of age.

古文：推法言之，陛下得继嗣于微贱之间，乃反为福；得继嗣而已，母非有贱也。
现代文：照古法推算来说，陛下若能使身份微贱的人生下皇嗣，则反而为福。目的只是要得到皇位继承人，勿论其母的贵贱。
English: According to the calculation of the ancient law, if His Majesty can make a person of low status become the heir to the throne, it is actually a blessing. The aim is only to get the heir to the throne, regardless of the nobility of his mother.

古文：后宫女史、使令有直意者，广求于微贱之间，以遇天所开右，慰释皇太后之忧愠，解谢上帝之谴怒，则继嗣蕃滋，灾异讫息！ 
现代文：后宫女史、使令中若有皇上中意的女子，也可选纳，广泛地求嗣于微贱者之中，遇上天保佑，生下皇子，皇太后的忧虑和烦恼，因得到安慰而解除，上天的谴责和愤怒也会平息化解，后代繁衍，灾异自然消除。 
English: A harem maiden or a woman of the emperor's choice among the envoys can also be accepted, and she can widely seek an heir among the lowly. If she is blessed by heaven and gives birth to a prince, the worries and troubles of the empress dowager will be relieved by being comforted, and the condemnation and anger of heaven will subside and dissolve. Offspring will multiply, and disasters will be eliminated naturally.

古文：杜钦亦仿此意。
现代文：杜钦也仿效谷永的意思上书。
English: Duchin also followed Gu Yong's example and submitted a letter.

古文：上皆以其书示后宫，擢永为光禄大夫。
现代文：成帝把他们两人的奏书都拿给后宫看，擢升谷永为光禄大夫。
English: Emperor Cheng showed the harem the transcripts of both of them, and promoted Gu Yong to the post of doctor of Guanglu.

古文：夏，四月，雨雪。
现代文：夏季，四月，降雪。
English: Summer, April, snow.

古文：秋，桃、李实。
现代文：秋季，桃树、李树结果。
English: In autumn, peaches and plums are firm.

古文：大雨水十馀日，河决东郡金堤。
现代文：大雨连下十余日，黄河在东郡金堤决口。
English: After more than ten consecutive days of heavy rain, the Yellow River has broken through the Jinti in Dong County.

古文：先是清河都尉冯逡奏言： 郡承河下流，土壤轻脆易伤，顷所以阔无大害者，以屯氏河通两川分流也。
现代文：在此之前，清河郡都尉冯逡奏报说： 清河郡位于黄河下游，土壤松脆，容易崩塌。暂时没有发生大灾害，是由于屯氏河通畅，可以两河分流。
English: Prior to this, the Qinghe County captain Feng Lingsao said: Qinghe County is located in the lower reaches of the Yellow River, the soil is brittle and easy to collapse. There was no major disaster for the time being, due to the smooth flow of the Tunxi River, the two rivers can be diverted.

古文：今屯氏河塞，灵鸣犊口又益不利，独一川兼受数河之任，虽高增堤防，终不能泄。如有霖雨，旬日不霁，必盈溢。
现代文：如今屯氏河已经淤塞，灵鸣犊口也越来越不通畅，只有一条河，却要兼容数条河流的水量，虽然加高堤防，最终却无法使它顺畅宣泄，若有大雨，十日不停，河水必然满盈泛滥。
English: Nowadays, the Tunxi River has been silted up, and the Lingming estuary is increasingly impassable. There is only one river, but it has to be compatible with the water volume of several rivers. Although the embankment is raised, it is ultimately unable to make it flow smoothly. If there is heavy rain for ten days, the river will inevitably overflow and flood.

古文：九河故迹，今既灭难明，屯氏河新绝未久，其处易浚；又其口所居高，于以分杀水力，道里便宜，可复浚以助大河，泄暴水，备非常。
现代文：夏禹时代的九河故道，如今既已湮没难寻，而屯氏河刚刚淤塞不久，容易疏通。再有，黄河与屯氏河分流的叉口处地势较高，实施分减水力的工程，施工起来也方便。可重新疏通屯氏河，以帮助黄河宣泄洪水，防备非常情况的发生。
English: The old course of the Jiuhe River in Xayu's time is now no longer difficult to find, and the Tunzi River has just been silted up for a short time, so it is easy to dredge. In addition, the fork of the Yellow River and the Tunzi River is at a higher elevation, so it is convenient to carry out the project of reducing the hydraulic force. The Tunzi River can be re-dredged to help the Yellow River discharge floodwaters and prevent the occurrence of emergency situations.

古文：不豫修治，北决病四、五郡，南决病十馀郡，然后忧之，晚矣！ 
现代文：如果不预先修治，黄河一旦在北岸决口，将危害四、五郡；在南岸决口，将危害十余郡。事后再忧虑，就晚了！ 
English: If it is not repaired in advance, once the Yellow River breaks through the north bank, it will harm four or five counties; at the south bank break, it will harm more than ten counties. Worry about it later, it's too late!

古文：事下丞相、御史，白遣博士许商行视，以为 方用度不足，可且勿浚。 
现代文：成帝将冯逡的奏章交给丞相和御史去处理，他们奏请派遣博士许商去巡视那一地区。根据许商视察的结果，他们认为： 现在国家经费不足，可暂且不疏通。 
English: Emperor Cheng gave the report of Feng Xuan to the prime minister and the imperial historian to deal with, and they requested to send Dr. Xu Shang to inspect the area. According to the results of Xu Shang's inspection, they believed: Now the state funds are insufficient, and it can not be cleared for the time being.

古文：后三岁，河果决于馆陶及东郡金堤，泛滥兗、豫，入平原、千乘、济南，凡灌四郡、三十二县，水居地十五万馀顷，深者三丈；坏败官亭、室庐且四万所。
现代文：三年后，黄河果然在馆陶及东郡金堤决口，洪水泛滥兖州、豫州以及平原郡、千乘郡、济南郡，共淹了四郡三十二县，十五万余顷土地变为泽国，水深的地方达三丈。冲毁官署驿站及民间房舍近四万所。
English: Three years later, the Yellow River did indeed break through the Jintai in Juntao and Dong County, flooding Bozhou, Yuzhou as well as Pingyuan County, Qianjiang County and Jinan County, flooding a total of thirty-two counties in four counties. More than 150,000 hectares of land became Zeku, and the water depth reached three meters. Nearly forty thousand government stations and private houses were destroyed.

古文：冬，十一月，御史大夫尹忠以对方略疏阔，上切责其不忧职，自杀。
现代文：冬季，十一月，由于御史大夫尹忠的救灾方案疏漏而不切实际，成帝严厉斥责他不尽心职守，尹忠自杀。
English: In winter, in November, due to the omissions and impracticality of the disaster relief plan of the Imperial Historian Yin Zhong, Chengdi severely reprimanded him for not fulfilling his duties, and Yin Zhong committed suicide.

古文：遣大司农非调调均钱谷河决所灌之郡，谒者二人发河南以东船五百叟，徙民避水居丘陵九万七千馀口。
现代文：成帝派大司农非调调拨均平钱谷救济受淹各郡，又派两名谒者向河南以东地区征调船舶五百艘，从洪灌区中抢救灾民九万七千余人，把他们迁移到丘陵高地。
English: Emperor Cheng dispatched the director-general of the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs to allocate 500 ships to the east of Henan Province to rescue more than 97,000 flood victims and relocate them to the hilly highlands.

古文：壬戌，以少府张忠为御史大夫。
现代文：壬戌，任命少府张忠为御史大夫。
English: Imho, appointed Shofu Zhang Zhong as goshi taifu.

古文：南山群盗傰宗等数百人为吏民害。
现代文：南山一带盗匪宗等数百人在地方作乱，使官吏百姓受害。
English: In the Nanshan area, hundreds of bandits, including Zong, rioted in the local area, causing harm to government officials and the public.

古文：诏发兵千人逐捕，岁馀不能禽。
现代文：成帝诏令发兵一千人剿捕，费时一年多，仍不能擒灭。
English: Emperor Cheng Dalang ordered to send a thousand soldiers to arrest them, it took more than a year, but they still could not be eliminated.

古文：或说大将军凤，以 贼数百人在毂下，讨不能得，难以示四夷；独选贤京兆尹乃可。 
现代文：有人向大将军王凤建议说： 盗匪数百人在天子脚下作乱，而讨伐不能奏效，难以向四边蛮族显示汉朝之威。
English: Someone suggested to the great general Wang Feng: Hundreds of bandits are making trouble at the feet of the Son of Heaven, and the crusade cannot be effective. It is difficult to show the might of the Han Dynasty to the barbarians on all sides.

古文：于是凤荐故高陵令王尊，征为谏大夫，守京辅都尉，行京兆尹事。
现代文：崐只有选任贤明能干的京兆尹才行。 于是王凤推荐前高陵令王尊，征召入京任命为谏大夫，署理京辅都尉，代行京兆尹的职责。
English: Therefore, Wang Feng recommended Wang Zun, the former Gaoling commander, to be conscripted into Beijing and appointed as the doctor of Zou, the acting lieutenant of the Beijing auxiliary, and to perform the duties of Jing Zhaoyun.

古文：旬月间，盗贼清；后拜为京兆尹。
现代文：他上任不到一个月，盗匪肃清。而后正式擢升王尊为京兆尹。
English: Less than a month after he took office, the bandits were purged, and Wang Zun was officially promoted to the rank of Jing Zhaoyun.

古文：上即位之初，丞相匡衡复奏： 射声校尉陈汤以吏二千石奉使，颛命蛮夷中，不正身以先下，而盗所收康居财物，戒官属曰： 绝域事不覆校。 
现代文：成帝即位初期，丞相匡衡再次上奏说： 射声校尉陈汤，以二千石官员的身份出使西域，专门负责西域蛮夷事务，他不能持身以正，做部下的表率，反而盗取所没收的康居王国财物，并告诫下属官员说： 远在外域发生的事，不会核察追究。 
English: In the early days of Emperor Cheng's accession to the throne, the minister of justice, Kuangheng, once again made a report, saying: Lieutenant Chen Tang, who was sent to the western region as an official of 2,000 koku, was specifically responsible for the barbarian affairs of the western region. He could not hold himself up as a leader and set an example for his subordinates, but instead stole the confiscated property of the Kangju Kingdom, and warned his subordinate officials that: Things that happen far away will not be investigated.

古文：虽在赦前，不宜处位。 
现代文：此事虽发生在大赦之前，但他已不适宜再担任官职。 
English: Even before the pardon, he was unfit for office.

古文：汤坐免。
现代文：陈汤获罪被免官。
English: As a result, Chen Tang was removed from his post.

古文：后汤上言： 康居王侍子，非王子。 
现代文：后来，陈汤上书说： 康居王送来当人质的王子，并不是真王子。 
English: Later, Chen Tang wrote: The prince sent as a hostage by King Kangju is not a real prince.

古文：按验，实王子也。
现代文：然而经过查验，确实是真王子。
English: After review and verification, it is indeed a prince.

古文：汤下狱当死。
现代文：陈汤被捕入狱，依罪应被处死。
English: Chen Tang should be put to death.

古文：太中大夫谷永上疏讼汤曰： 臣闻楚有子玉得臣，文公为之仄席而坐；赵有廉颇、马服，强秦不敢窥兵井陉；近汉有郅都、魏尚，匈奴不敢南乡沙幕。
现代文：太中大夫谷永上书为陈汤辩护说： 我听说楚国因为有子玉、得臣，晋文公因此坐不安席；赵国有廉颇和马服君赵奢，强大的秦国便不敢进犯井陉；近代汉朝有郅都、魏尚，匈奴则不敢从沙漠南下。
English: The Tai Zhong Daifu, Gu Yong Shang, wrote a report to defend Chen Tang's grievances, saying: "The vassals heard that the son of the state of Chu won the throne, and because of him, the prince of Jinwen did not feel secure; the state of Chu was not rich, and the state of Qin was not rich, and the powerful Qin did not dare to plot a coup; the modern Han Dynasty had the capital of Wei and Shang, and the Xiongnu did not dare to cross the desert to the south.

古文：由是言之，战克之将，国之爪牙，不可不重也。
现代文：因此可说，能征善战、克敌制胜的将领，是国家的爪牙，不可以不重视他们。
English: Judging from these circumstances, the victorious generals are the country's most powerful warriors, and must be valued.

古文：盖君子闻鼓鼙之声，则思将帅之臣。
现代文：这正是：君子听到战鼓之声，则思念将帅之臣。
English: It's just like this: when a gentleman hears the sound of the war drums, he thinks of the general's handsome retainer.

古文：窃见关内侯陈汤，前斩郅支，威震百蛮，武畅西海，汉元以来，征伐方外之将，未尝有也。
现代文：我看关内侯陈汤，从前击斩郅支单于，威震蛮夷各国，所向披靡，一直打到西海。自汉朝开国以来，在疆域之外作战的将领，还从未有过这样的战功！
English: I think that Chen Tang, the lord of Guanzhong, once defeated and defeated all the barbarians in all the barbarian countries, and defeated them all the way to the West Sea. Since the founding of the Han Dynasty, the generals who fought outside the territory have never had such military achievements!

古文：今汤坐言事非是，幽囚久系，历时不决，执宪之吏欲致之大辟。
现代文：如今，陈汤因报告失实而获罪，长期囚禁监狱，历时这么久仍不能结案，执掌刑法的官吏意欲致他死罪。
English: Now Chen Tang has been in prison for a long time because he broke the law by making a mistake in what he said. He has not been able to be sentenced for a long time, and the law enforcement officials want to use the harsh criminal law against him.

古文：昔白起为秦将，南拔郢都，北坑赵括，以纤介之过，赐死杜邮；秦民怜之，莫不陨涕。
现代文：从前，白起为秦国的大将，南伐楚，攻陷郢都；北击赵国，坑杀赵括降卒四十万，却因极微小的过失，在杜邮被赐死。秦国百姓怜惜他，无不流涕。
English: Once upon a time, Bai Qi was the general of Qin. He attacked Chu in the south and captured Shantou; he attacked Zhao in the north and killed 400,000 soldiers, but because of a very small mistake, he was sentenced to death in Duyou. The people of Qin took pity on him and mourned for him.

古文：今汤亲秉钺席卷，喋血万里之外，荐功祖庙，告类上帝，介胄之士靡不慕义。
现代文：而今陈汤亲执武器，席卷匈奴，喋血于万里之外。把战功呈献在皇家祖庙，向上天禀告，天下武士无不思慕。
English: Now, Chen Tang personally wields weapons, sweeps the Xiongnu, and chats blood from thousands of miles away. He presents his war exploits at the royal ancestral temple, and announces to the heavens. All the samurai in the world are full of admiration.

古文：以言事为罪，无赫赫之恶。
现代文：他不过因为说错话而获罪，并不是什么严重的罪恶。
English: There is no great evil in committing a crime because of a rumor.

古文：《周书》曰： 记人之功，忘人之过，宜为君者也。 
现代文：《周书》说： 记人之功，忘人之过，这才适合当人君。 
English: "Zhou Shu" said: "To remember the merits of others and forget the faults of others is suitable for being a monarch.

古文：夫犬马有劳于人，尚加帷盖之报，况国之功臣者哉！
现代文：犬马对人有劳苦之功，死后尚且要用车帷伞盖将它们好好埋葬，作为回报，何况是国家的功臣呢！
English: Moreover, dogs and horses have worked hard for people, and they can also get the reward of building shelters for them, not to mention the meritorious ministers of the country!

古文：窃恐陛下忽于鼙鼓之声，不察《周书》之意，而忘帷盖之施，庸臣遇汤，卒从吏议，使百姓介然有秦民之恨，非所以厉死难之臣也！ 
现代文：我恐怕陛下忽略了战鼓的声者，不领会《周书》的深意，忘记报答功臣的效劳，象对待平庸臣子那样对待陈汤，终于听从掌刑官吏的建议，将他处死，使百姓心中耿耿，有秦民那样的遗恨。这不是勉励大臣为国赴难效死的作法！ 
English: I am afraid that His Majesty ignored the voice of the war drums, did not understand the deep meaning of the "Weekly Book," forgot to reward the services of meritorious ministers, treated Chen Tang as if he were a mediocre minister, and finally heeded the advice of the officials in charge of punishment and put him to death, making the hearts of the people bitter, with a legacy of hatred like that of the Qin people. This is not the way to encourage the minister to die for the country!

古文：书奏，天子出汤，夺爵为士伍。
现代文：奏章上去后，天子下令释放陈汤，但剥夺爵位，贬为士伍。
English: After the report was submitted, Tianzi released Chen Tang, revoked his title and became an ordinary soldier.

古文：会西域都护段会宗为乌孙兵所围，驿骑上书，愿发城郭、敦煌兵以自救；丞相商、大将军凤及百寮议数日不决。
现代文：正好，西域都护段会宗被乌孙王国的军队围困，段会宗用驿马上书，请求成帝征发西域诸国军队，以及汉朝在敦煌的军队救援。丞相王商、大将军王凤崐以及百官会议数天也作不出决定。
English: Just at that time, the Western Capital Guard, Duan Huizong, was besieged by the army of the Wusun Kingdom. Duan Huizong wrote a letter to the emperor, requesting the emperor to conscript the armies of the Western Regions, as well as the Han Dynasty army in Dunhuang for rescue. The prime minister, Wang Shang, the great general, Wang Fengyao, and the meeting of the hundred officials could not make a decision for several days.

古文：凤言： 陈汤多筹策，习外国事，可问。 
现代文：王凤说： 陈汤富于谋略，又熟悉外国的情况，可以询问他。 
English: Wang Feng said: Chen Tang is a good strategist and is familiar with the situation in foreign countries. You can ask him.

古文：上召汤见宣室。
现代文：成帝在宣室殿召见陈汤。
English: The emperor summoned Chen Tang to the throne room.

古文：汤击郅支时中寒，病两臂不屈申；汤入见，有诏毋拜，示以会宗奏。
现代文：陈汤在进攻郅支单于时，中了风寒，两臂不能屈伸，入见时，成帝下诏准许他不必跪拜，把段会宗的奏书拿给他看。
English: When Chen Tang attacked Zou Shizhanzhong, he caught cold and his arms could not be stretched. When he entered the court, Emperor Chengdi gave him permission not to kneel and showed him the playbook of the Duan sect.

古文：汤对曰： 臣以为此必无可忧也。 
现代文：陈汤回答说： 我认为这件事一定没什么可忧虑的。 
English: Chen Tang replied, "I think there is nothing to worry about.

古文：上曰： 何以言之？ 
现代文：成帝说： 你为什么这样讲？ 
English: The emperor asked: Why do you say that?

古文：汤曰： 夫胡兵五而当汉兵一，何者？
现代文：陈汤说： 五个胡兵才能抵挡一名汉兵，为什么呢？
English: Chen Tang said: Only five Hu soldiers can match the strength of one Han soldier. Why?

古文：兵刃朴钝，弓弩不利。
现代文：因为他们的刀剑不锋利，弓弩也不强。
English: Because the primitive weapons of the Hu people are not sharp, and the bows and arrows are not sharp.

古文：今闻颇得汉巧，然犹三而当一。
现代文：最近听说颇学得一些汉人制作兵器的技巧，然而仍是三个胡兵抵挡一个汉兵。
English: Now I hear that they have learned a lot of Chinese skills, but it still takes three people to fend off a Chinese soldier.

古文：又《兵法》曰： 客倍而主人半，然后敌。 
现代文：再说，《兵法》上说： 客兵必须是守军人数的两倍，才能对敌。 
English: Moreover, the "Law of War" says: the number of guest soldiers must be twice the number of defenders in order to confront the enemy.

古文：今围会宗者人众不足以胜会宗。唯陛下勿忧！
现代文：现在围困段会宗的敌兵人数不足以战胜他，请陛下不必忧虑！
English: The number of enemy soldiers besieging him is not enough to defeat him, so please do not worry, Your Majesty!

古文：且兵轻行五十里，重行三十里，今会宗欲发城郭、敦煌，历时乃至，所谓报雠之兵，非救急之用也。 
现代文：况且军队轻装日行五十里，重装备则日行三十里。现在段会宗打算征发西域诸国和敦煌的军队，部队行军需较长时间才能赶到，这成了所谓报仇之军，而不是救急之兵了。 
English: Moreover, the lightly armed troops were marching fifty miles a day, while the heavily armed ones were marching thirty miles a day. Now the Section Council planned to conscript the armies of the Western Regions and Dunhuang, and the troops would take a long time to arrive. This became the so-called army of revenge, rather than the army of first aid.

古文：上曰： 奈何？
现代文：成帝说： 那怎么办呢？
English: The emperor said: What about that?

古文：其解可必乎？
现代文：围困一定可以解除吗？
English: Can the siege ever be lifted?

古文：度何时解？ 
现代文：你估计什么时候可以解围？ 
English: When do you expect the siege to be lifted?

古文：汤知乌孙瓦合，不能久攻，故事不过数日，因对曰： 已解矣！ 
现代文：陈汤知道乌孙之兵，不过是乌合之众，不能久攻，以经验推测，不过数日。因此回答说： 现在已经解围了！ 
English: Chen Tang knew that the Wusun soldiers were just a rabble, and could not attack for a long time, but only for a few days based on experience. Therefore, he replied: Now the siege has been lifted!

古文：屈指计其日，曰： 不出五日，当有吉语闻。 
现代文：又屈指计算日期，然后说： 不出五日，就会听到好消息。 
English: He also pointed to the date and said, "In less than five days, you will hear the good news."

古文：居四日，军书到，言已解。
现代文：过了四天，军书到，声称已经解围。
English: Four days later, a military letter arrived saying that the siege had been lifted.

古文：大将军凤奏以为从事中郎，莫府事壹决于汤。
现代文：大将军王凤上奏，要求任命陈汤为从事中郎。从此大将军幕府的大事，均由陈汤一人决定。
English: The great general Wang Feng demanded that Chen Tang be appointed to act as middle man. From then on, all important matters of the shogunate were decided by Chen Tang alone.

古文：孝成皇帝上之上河平元年
现代文：河平元年
English: in the first year of Heping

古文：春，杜钦荐犍为王延世于王凤，使塞决河。
现代文：春季，杜钦向王凤推荐犍为人王延世，让他负责堵塞黄河决口的工程。
English: In the spring, Duchin recommended Zou to Wang Feng as the successor to Wang Yanshi, and put him in charge of the project to block the mouth of the Yellow River.

古文：凤以延世为河堤使者。
现代文：王凤任命王延世为河堤使者。
English: Wang Feng appointed Wang Yonsei as the emissary of the river embankment.

古文：延世以竹落长四丈，大九围，盛以小石，两船夹载而下之。
现代文：王延世命人用竹子编成长四丈，九人合抱那么大的竹笼，里面装上小石头，用两条船夹着搬运，沉入决口处。
English: Wang Yanshi ordered people to use bamboo to weave a rope four meters high. Nine people hugged such a large bamboo cage, which was loaded with small stones, carried with two boats, and sank into the breach.

古文：三十六日，河堤成。
现代文：三十六天后，河堤修好。
English: Thirty-six days later, the Yellow River dike was formed.

古文：三月，诏以延世为光禄大夫，秩中二千石，赐爵关内侯、黄金百斤。
现代文：三月，成帝下诏任命王延世为光禄大夫，官秩为中二千石，封为关内侯，赐黄金一百斤。
English: In March, Emperor Chengzong issued an edict appointing Wang Yanshi as the doctor of Guanglu, with an official rank of middle two thousand koku, the title of Guan Nei Hou, and one hundred jin of gold.

古文：夏，四月，己亥晦，日有食之。
现代文：夏季，四月，己亥晦，出现日食。
English: In summer, in April, after the winter solstice, there is a solar eclipse.

古文：诏公卿百僚陈过失，无有所讳。
现代文：成帝下诏要求公卿百官指陈过失，不得有所隐讳。
English: Emperor Chengzong issued an edict demanding that the nobles and officials should not conceal their wrongdoings.

古文：大赦天下。
现代文：又传命大赦天下。
English: Amnesty for the whole world.

古文：光禄大夫刘向对曰： 四月交于五月，月同孝惠，日同孝昭，其占恐害继嗣。 
现代文：光禄大夫刘向上书说： 四月衔接五月，出现日食的月份与孝惠帝时相同，出现日食的日子与孝昭帝时相同，孝惠、孝昭二帝均无嗣，这种巧合，预示不利于继嗣。 
English: Liu, the doctor of Guanglu, said in his letter to the emperor: April follows May, the month of the solar eclipse is the same as that of Emperor Xiao Hui, and the day of the solar eclipse is the same as that of Emperor Xiaozhao. Both Emperor Xiao Hui and Emperor Xiaozhao II have no heirs. This coincidence is not conducive to succession.

古文：是时许皇后专宠，后宫希得进见，中外皆忧上无继嗣，故杜钦、谷永及向所对皆及之。
现代文：此时成帝专宠许皇后，后宫其他美女很少有机会进见皇帝，朝廷内外都为皇上没有继承人而忧愁，所以杜钦、谷永以及刘向的上书都提及这个问题。
English: At this time, Emperor Chengdu was especially fond of Empress Xu, and other beautiful women in the harem rarely had the opportunity to see the emperor. Both inside and outside the court were saddened that the emperor had no heir, so Du Qin, Gu Yong and Liu Xiang's letters all mentioned this problem.

古文：上于是减省椒房、掖廷用度，服御、舆驾所发诸官署及所造作，遗赐外家、群臣妾，皆如竟宁以前故事。
现代文：成帝于是削减皇后椒房殿和妃嫔掖庭的开支，由各官署征调及制作的衣服用具、轿舆车马等，以及给皇后的亲属和众嫔妃的赏赐，与竟宁元年以前的旧例完全相同。
English: Emperor Cheng therefore reduced the expenses of the Empress Jiaofang palace and the concubine's court, and the clothing and equipment, cars, horses, etc. requisitioned and produced by various government departments, as well as the rewards given to the queen's relatives and concubines, were exactly the same as the old cases before the first year of King Ning.

古文：皇后上疏自陈，以为： 时世异制，长短相补，不出汉制而已，纤微之间未必可同。
现代文：皇后上书为自己辩解说： 时代不同，制度也不一样，有长有短，互相补充，只要不超出汉家的制度就行，细微之间不一定要求一致。
English: The empress wrote a letter to justify herself, saying: Different times, different systems, different strengths and weaknesses, complement each other, as long as it does not exceed the Han system, it is not necessary to require consistency between subtleties.

古文：若竟宁前与黄龙前，岂相放哉！
现代文：比如元帝竟宁年之前与宣帝黄龙年之前，难道是一样的吗？
English: For example, are the years before the Yuan Emperor Jingting and the years before the Xuan Emperor Huanglong the same?

古文：家吏不晓，今壹受诏如此，且使妾摇手不得。
现代文：主管后宫的官吏并不了解这个道理，如今一旦接受这样的诏书，将使我连摇手都不成了。
English: The officials in charge of the harem did not understand this principle, and now if I accept such an edict, I will not even be able to shake hands.

古文：设妾欲作某屏风张于某所，曰： 故事无有。 
现代文：比如我想做个屏风摆放在某个地方，他们就会说： 没有这种先例。 
English: For example, if I wanted to make a screen and put it somewhere, they would say: There is no such precedent.

古文：或不能得，则必绳妾以诏书矣。
现代文：我有所需要，他们不肯备办，就一定会拿诏书来限制我。
English: If they don't want to provide for my needs, they will definitely restrict me with an edict.

古文：此诚不可行，唯陛下省察！
现代文：这种办法实在不可行，请陛下明察！
English: This method is completely impractical. Your Majesty, please take a closer look!

古文：故事，以特牛祠大父母，戴侯、敬侯皆得蒙恩以太牢祠，今当率如故事，唯陛下哀之！
现代文：按照原先的规定，祖父母是用特牛一只牛来祭祀的，而我的祖父戴侯、敬侯都蒙恩准许用太牢一牛一猪一羊祭祀。而今要一律依照旧例，两位祖父就只能用特牛祭祀了，请陛下哀怜！
English: According to the original regulations, my grandparents used a special ox to sacrifice a cow, while my grandfathers Dai Hou and Jing Hou were graciously allowed to use a special ox, a pig and a sheep for sacrifice. Now, according to the old rules, my two grandfathers can only use a special ox for sacrifice. Please have pity on Your Majesty!

古文：今吏甫受诏读记，直豫言使后知之，非可复若私府有所取也。
现代文：现在宫廷官吏刚刚接受诏书，宣读完毕，就径直来预先崐告诫我，让我知道，以后对宫廷财物不可再象对私家财物一样随意索取。
English: Now, officials have just received the imperial edict, and they are threatening to let the empress know about this, so that they can no longer take property from private households as they did in the past.

古文：其萌牙所以约制妾者，恐失人理。
现代文：这些规定的初始用意，就是要约束限制我，恐怕会失去人情常理。
English: They wanted to control me from the start, and I'm afraid it's normal for me not to fit in.

古文：唯陛下深察焉！ 
现代文：请陛下明察！ 
English: Your Majesty, please take a closer look!

古文：上于是采谷永、刘向所言灾异咎验皆在后宫之意以报之，且曰： 吏拘于法，亦安足过！
现代文：成帝于是将谷永、刘向奏章所说灾异责任全在后宫的意思，转告给皇后，并且说： 官吏按照法制行事，又怎么可以怪罪呢！
English: Emperor Cheng then conveyed to the empress the meaning of Gu Yong's and Liu Xuzhang's saying that the responsibility for disasters and accidents was entirely in the harem, and said: How can officials act in accordance with the legal system?

古文：盖矫枉者过直，古今同之。
现代文：要矫枉，就要过正，古今同理。
English: This has been the case since time immemorial.

古文：且财币之省，特牛之祠，其于皇后，所以扶助德美，为华宠也。
现代文：况且节省钱财，改用特牛祭祀，对于皇后而言，正有助于发扬美德，为你博得更多的赞誉。
English: Moreover, for the empress, reducing the cost and switching to bull sacrifice is to help you achieve a good moral character and gain favor.

古文：咎根不除，灾变相袭，祖宗且不血食，何戴侯也！
现代文：如果不铲除祸根，灾变接连发生，祖宗的祭祀尚且不保，还谈什么你的祖父戴侯呢！
English: Without eliminating the root of the evil, disasters will follow one after another, and the ancestors will not be able to enjoy the sacrificial offerings, not to mention the long-suffering?

古文：传不云乎： 以约失之者鲜 ，审皇后欲从其奢与？
现代文：经传上不是说： 俭约之人，犯过失的很少。 皇后果真要追求奢侈吗？
English: Isn't it said in the scriptures that those who live frugally commit few offenses, and is it really necessary for the emperor to pursue luxury?

古文：朕亦当法孝武皇帝也。如此，则甘泉、建章可复兴矣。
现代文：那我也该效法孝武皇帝了，这样的话，甘泉宫、建章宫可就要重新兴建了。
English: Then I should follow the example of Emperor Xiaowu. In this case, Ganquan Palace and Jianzhang Palace would have to be rebuilt.

古文：孝文皇帝，朕之师也。
现代文：不过，节俭的孝文皇帝才是我的老师。
English: Emperor Xiaowen is my role model.

古文：皇太后，皇后成法也。
现代文：皇太后、皇后的待遇都有成文规定。
English: The empress dowager is the standard for the empress to follow.

古文：假使太后在彼时不如职，今见亲厚，又恶可以逾乎！
现代文：假使皇太后在当年做皇后时，不能达到规定的标准，而你如今受到宠爱，又怎么可以超过她呢！
English: Even if the empress dowager did not follow the common sense in the past because she did not want to, and now the empress is treated well by the empress dowager, how can she surpass the system of the empress dowager!

古文：皇后其刻心秉德，谦约为右，垂则列妾，使有法焉！ 
现代文：皇后应当着意修德，以谦和节俭为上。这样才能做诸妃的榜样，使她们得以效法！ 
English: Empresses should cultivate virtue, modesty and frugality, so that they can set an example for other empresses to follow.

古文：给事中平陵平当上言： 太上皇，汉之始祖，废其寝庙园，非是。 
现代文：给事中、平陵人平当上奏说： 太上皇是汉王朝的始祖，废除他的祭庙墓园是不对的。 
English: During the event, Ping Ling's son, Ping Dang, said: The emperor is the founder of the Han Dynasty, and it is wrong to abolish his temple and cemetery.

古文：上亦以无继嗣，遂纳当言。
现代文：成帝也正在为没有继嗣而忧愁，就采纳了平当的建议。
English: Emperor Cheng, who was also grieving over not having an heir, accepted Pingdan's suggestion.

古文：秋，九月，复太上皇寝庙园。
现代文：秋季，九月，恢复了太上皇的墓园、祭庙。
English: In the autumn, in September, the Emperor's cemetery and temple were restored.

古文：诏曰： 今大辟之刑千有馀条，律令烦多，百有馀万言；奇请，它比，日以益滋。
现代文：成帝下诏说： 如今，关于死刑的规定有千余条。律令繁多，有百余万言。条文之外的 奇请 、 他比 等附加条文，日益增多。
English: Emperor Cheng issued an edict saying, "Today, there are more than a thousand regulations on the death penalty. There are a large number of laws and regulations, with more than a million words. In addition to the regulations, there are an increasing number of additional regulations such as strange requests and discrimination.

古文：自明习者不知所由，欲以晓喻众庶，不亦难乎！
现代文：即使专门研究和熟悉法律的官吏，都弄不清头绪，想让天下百姓都知晓，不是太难了吗！
English: Even if officials who specialize in research and are familiar with the law cannot figure it out, isn't it too difficult to let people all over the world know?

古文：于以罗元元之民，夭绝亡辜，岂不哀哉！
现代文：用这么繁琐的刑律，去对付善良的百姓，斩杀无辜之人，岂不可悲！
English: Isn't it a sad thing to use it to control good-hearted people and cause innocent people who know no wrongdoing to perish!

古文：其议减死刑及可蠲除约省者，令较然易知，条奏！ 
现代文：主管机关应讨论减少死刑，及可以取消或省略的法令，使法律条文简明易懂。具体回奏！ 
English: The competent authorities should discuss the reduction of the death penalty, as well as the decrees that can be cancelled or omitted, so that the legal provisions are concise and easy to understand.

古文：时有司不能广宣上意，徒钩摭微细，毛举数事，以塞诏而已。
现代文：当时主管官吏不能弘扬皇上的旨意，只是在细微枝节上，举出数件毫毛般的小事，以敷衍诏书而已。
English: At that time, the officials in charge could not carry forward the emperor's will, but only mentioned a few minor things in order to embellish the edict.

古文：匈奴单于遣右皋林王伊邪莫演等奉献，朝正月。
现代文：匈奴单于派右皋林王伊邪莫演等来朝进贡，并参加元旦的朝贺大典。
English: The Xiongnu alone sent Yulin King Yizhimen to pay tribute to the North, and participated in the New Year's Day morning greeting ceremony.

古文：孝成皇帝上之上河平二年
现代文：河平二年
English: in the second year of Heping

古文：春，伊邪莫演罢归，自言欲降： 即不受我，我自杀，终不敢还归。 
现代文：春季，伊邪莫演朝贡完毕，回国前，自称想归降汉朝，说： 如果汉朝不接受我归降，我就自杀，我至死不敢回匈奴。 
English: In the spring, after Yizhimo's performance of the imperial tribute, before returning to China, he said that he wanted to surrender to the Han Dynasty, saying: If the Han Dynasty does not accept my surrender, I will commit suicide. I dare not return to the Huns until I die.

古文：使者以闻，下公卿议。
现代文：使者据实奏报。成帝让公卿讨论。
English: According to the envoy's report, Emperor Cheng allowed the nobles to discuss the matter.

古文：议者或言： 宜如故事，受其降。 
现代文：有人说： 应该按照旧例，接受他归降。 
English: Some people said: We should follow the old practice and accept his surrender.

古文：光禄大夫谷永、议郎杜钦以为： 汉兴，匈奴数为边害，故设金爵之赏以待降者。
现代文：光禄大夫谷永、议郎杜钦则认为： 自汉王朝兴起以来，匈奴多次为害边疆，因此才设立黄金、爵位的赏赐，以优待归降者。
English: Since the establishment of the Han Dynasty, the Xiongnu have repeatedly crossed the border into harm's way, so we set up a knighthood to reward money and invite the surrendering Xiongnu.

古文：今单于屈体称臣，列为北籓，遣使朝贺，无有二心。
现代文：如今单于低头称臣，匈奴成为中国北方的藩国，派遣使崐者朝贺进贡，没有二心。
English: Nowadays, the Huns have become a feudal state in the north of China, sending envoys to pay tribute to Asaga, and there is no second thoughts.

古文：汉家接之，宜异于往时。
现代文：汉朝对待匈奴的政策，就应与过去不同。
English: The policy of the Han Dynasty towards the Xiongnu should be different from the past.

古文：今既享单于聘贡之质，而更受其逋逃之臣，是贪一夫之得而失一国之心，拥有罪之臣而绝慕义之君也。
现代文：如今既然接受了单于朝贡的诚意，却又收纳他的反叛逃亡之臣，为了贪图得到一个人，而将失却一国之心；为了拥有一个有罪之臣，而与一位仰慕仁义的君王绝交。
English: Now that we have accepted the tribute and tribute of the loyal alone, and have received the ministers of their defection, it is a case of coveting a man, and losing the loyalty of a nation; of favouring the guilty subjects, and abandoning the king to the mercy of justice.

古文：假令单于初立，欲委身中国，未知利害，私使伊邪莫演诈降以卜吉凶，受之，亏德沮善，令单于自疏，不亲边吏；或者设为反间，欲因而生隙，受之，适合其策，使得归曲而责直。
现代文：此外，还可作这样的假设；单于新即位，想依靠中国，但不知这样做的利害，暗中指使伊邪莫演诈降，以占卜吉凶。中国如果接受，便有亏道义，败坏美德，使单于同中国疏远，不与中国边疆的官员友好相处。或许是单于故意设下的反间计，想借此生仇，如果中国接纳他的归降，正好中了单于的计策，使匈奴可以把过错归到中国头上，从而理直气壮地责备我们。
English: In addition, we can also make the following assumption: Zang Rong, newly ascended to the throne, wants to rely on China, but he does not know the interests of doing so, secretly instructing the Yizhong not to play down, and divining good fortune. If China accepts, it will be immoral, corrupt virtue, and alienate Zang Rong from China, and will not be friendly with Chinese border officials. Perhaps it is a deliberate counter-strategy by Zang Rong, who wants to take advantage of this life. If China accepts his return, it is precisely Zang Rong's strategy, so that the Xiongnu can attribute the fault to China, and

古文：此诚边境安危之原，师旅动静之首，不可不详也。
现代文：此事实在是边境安危的本源，是战争与和平的关键，不可以不慎重。
English: This is indeed the root cause of whether our border is safe or not, and the beginning of whether or not the military will be dispatched cannot be taken lightly.

古文：不如勿受，以昭日月之信，抑诈谖之谋，怀附亲之心，便！ 
现代文：我的意见，不如不接受，以显示我们光明磊落的信义，抑制欺诈的阴谋，安抚单于的归附亲善之心，这样才有利！ 
English: My opinion, it is better not to accept, in order to show our honesty and sincerity, to suppress fraudulent schemes, and to appease the affinity of attachment to the single, so that it is advantageous!

古文：对奏，天子从之。
现代文：他们将此意见上奏，被采纳。
English: Tianzi listened to their answers and followed their advice.

古文：遣中郎将王舜往问降状，伊邪莫演曰： 我病狂，妄言耳。 
现代文：派中郎将王舜去查问归降的情况，伊邪莫演说： 我有发狂的病，只是胡说罢了。 
English: He sent a middle-man to inquire about Wang Yao's surrender, and he said, "I have a maddening disease, I'm just talking nonsense."

古文：遣去。
现代文：汉朝遣送他回国。
English: The Han Dynasty sent him back home.

古文：归到，官位如故，不肯令见汉使。
现代文：回到匈奴后，他的官职仍和从前一样，但单于不再准许他会见汉朝的使者。
English: After Yizhimo returned to the Xiongnu, his official position was the same as before, and he refused to let him see the Han Dynasty emissary again.

古文：夏，四月，楚国雨雹，大如釜。
现代文：夏季，四月，楚国降下冰雹，大的如同饭锅。
English: In the summer, in April, hailstones as big as rice cookers fall in Chu.

古文：徙山阳王康为定陶王。
现代文：改封山阳王刘康为定陶王。
English: Liu Kang, the king of Shanyang, was renamed the king of Dingtao.

古文：六月，上悉封诸舅：王谭为平阿侯，商为成都侯，立为红阳侯，根为曲阳侯，逢时为高平侯。
现代文：六月，成帝给他的舅父们全部封侯：王谭封为平阿侯；王商封为成都侯；王立封为红阳侯；王根封为曲阳侯；王逢时封为高平侯。
English: In June, Emperor Cheng gave all of his uncles the title of marquess: Wang Tanfu was named Ping Ahou; Wang Shangfu was named Chengdu marquess; Wang Lifu was named Hongyang marquess; Wang Genfu was named Quyang marquess; and Wang Fengshi was named Gaoping marquess.

古文：五人同日封，故世谓之 五侯 。
现代文：五人同日封侯，因此世人称他们为 五侯 。
English: Five people were knighted on the same day, so people called them the Five Knights.

古文：太后母李氏更嫁为河内苟宾妻，生子参；太后欲以田分为比而封之。
现代文：皇太后的母亲李氏，改嫁给河内人苟宾为妻，生子叫苟参。太后想比照田的先例封苟参为侯爵。
English: The mother of the empress dowager, the Li clan, married a man from Hanoi named Gohbin, and had a son named Gohsan. The empress dowager wanted to follow Tian's example and make Gohsan a marquis.

古文：上曰： 封田氏，非正也。 
现代文：成帝说： 封田，并不合正理！ 
English: Emperor Cheng said, "It is incorrect to say that the emperor once rewarded the Tian clan.

古文：以参为侍中、水衡都尉。
现代文：只任命苟参为侍中、水衡都尉。
English: He only appointed Gosan as a chamberlain and Mizuhira as a captain.

古文：御史大夫张忠奏京兆尹王尊暴虐倨慢，尊坐免官；吏民多称惜之。
现代文：御史大夫张忠上奏，弹劾京兆尹王尊残暴傲慢。王尊获罪被免官，官吏百姓多称惋惜。
English: Grand Historian Zhang Zhong made a report and impeached Emperor Jingzhao of Yin for brutality and arrogance. Emperor Jingzhao was found guilty and removed from office, which was regretted by many officials and commoners.

古文：湖三老公乘兴等上书讼： 尊治京兆，拨剧整乱，诛暴禁邪，皆前所稀有，名将所不及；虽拜为真，未有殊绝褒赏加于尊身。
现代文：湖县三老公乘兴等上书，为王尊辩护说： 王尊治理京师，清理繁难的事务，整顿混乱的局面，诛灭凶暴，禁止邪恶，这都是前所罕见的功绩，很多有名的郡太守都比不上。
English: The three old men of Huxian County, including Jianxing, wrote a letter to defend Wang Zun, saying: Wang Zun's governance of Beijing, clearing up difficult affairs, rectifying the chaotic situation, extinguishing violence, and prohibiting evil are all rare achievements. Many famous county governors are no match.

古文：今御史大夫奏尊 伤害阴阳，为国家忧，无承用诏书意， 靖言庸违，象龚滔天。  
现代文：虽然被正式任命为京兆尹，却并没有受到特别的奖赏。如今御史大夫指控王尊 伤害阴阳，令国家忧愁，没有接受执行皇帝诏令的心意，如《书经》所说： 托言治理，实际上行为违拗；外表恭敬，实际上傲慢欺天。  
English: Although he was officially appointed as Jing Zhaoyun, he did not receive any special reward. Nowadays, the imperial historian accused Wang Zun of harming the yin and yang, causing sorrow to the country, and not accepting the intention of implementing the emperor's edict. As the "Book of Books" said: "Promise to govern, but actually act contrary; outwardly respectful, but actually arrogant and deceitful."

古文：源其所以，出御史丞杨辅，素与尊有私怨，外依公事建画为此议，傅致奏文，浸润加诬，臣等窃痛伤。
现代文：究其来源，这些攻击是出自御史丞杨辅。杨辅一向与王尊有私人怨恨，利用职权，策划这一指控，罗织罪名，写成弹劾的奏章，逐步对王尊加以诬陷，使我们十分痛心。
English: Investigating the source, these attacks came from the chief historian Yang Shuo. Yang Shuo has always had a personal grudge against Wang Zun, and he used his authority to plan this accusation, fabricate charges, write an impeachment report, and gradually frame Wang Zun, which made us very sad.

古文：尊修身洁己，砥节首公，刺讥不惮将相，诛恶不避豪强，诛不制之贼，解国家之忧，功著职修，威信不废，诚国家爪牙之吏，折冲之臣。
现代文：王尊廉洁自爱，砥砺节操，一心为公。讥刺过失，不畏将相；诛除邪恶，不避豪强。消灭了难以制服的盗匪，解除了国家之忧，功勋卓著，忠于职守，维护了朝廷的威信，他实在是国家的锐利爪牙和御敌之臣。
English: Wang Rong is honest, self-loving, scrupulously disciplined, and devoted to justice. He ridicules faults and is not afraid to confront them; he eradicates evil and does not shy away from the powerful. He has eliminated the bandits who are difficult to subdue, relieved the country's worries, distinguished himself, been loyal to his duties, and upheld the prestige of the imperial court. He is truly a sharp minion of the country and a vassal of the enemy.

古文：今一旦无辜制于仇人之手，伤于诋欺之文，上不得以功除罪，下不得蒙棘木之听，独掩怨雠之偏奏，被共工之大恶，无所陈冤诉罪。
现代文：而今一旦无辜陷入仇人之手，被诬陷不实的奏文中伤，上不能以功赎罪，下不能在公堂上为自己辩冤，只能独自蒙受仇家的片面之辞的诬陷崐，背上共工那样的恶名，无处陈诉冤屈。
English: Today, however, once an innocent person falls into the hands of the enemy and is slandered with a false report, he or she cannot atone for his or her sins with merit, cannot defend himself or herself in a court of law, can only suffer the one-sided slander of the enemy, and has the bad name of a co-worker on his or her back, and has nowhere to file a complaint.

古文：尊以京师废乱，群盗并兴，选贤征用，起家为卿。
现代文：王尊在京师秩序混乱、法令不行、盗匪蜂起之时，被推选为贤才，受到征召，担任重要官职。
English: At a time when order in Beijing was in disarray, laws and regulations were invalid, and bandits were on the rise, Wang Zun was elected as a wise man, was conscripted, and held an important official post.

古文：贼乱既除，豪猾伏辜，即以佞巧废黜。
现代文：盗匪叛乱既已铲除，大奸巨猾也都伏罪，他却随即被指控奸佞狡猾而遭罢黜。
English: Once the bandit rebellion had been eradicated, and the great traitor and cunning had also been framed, he was immediately accused of treachery and cunning and was ousted.

古文：一尊之身，三期之间，乍贤乍佞，岂不甚哉！
现代文：同是一个王尊，三年之间，一会儿被称赞贤能，一会儿被指斥奸佞，岂不是太过份了！
English: Isn't it strange that the same prince, three years apart, was at one time a wise official and at another a vassal?

古文：孔子曰： 爱之欲其生，恶之欲其死，是惑也。 
现代文：孔子说： 爱他时，要他活下去；恨他时，希望他死。这便是迷惑。 
English: Confucius said, "If you love him, let him live; if you hate him, let him die.

古文： 浸润之谮不行焉，可谓明矣。 
现代文：孔子又说： 使如水般渗透的谗言无法奏效，那就可称得上是明智了。 
English: Confucius also said, "It is wisdom to make water-permeable criticism ineffective."

古文：愿下公卿、大夫、博士、议郎定尊素行！
现代文：请陛下下令让公卿、大夫、博士、议郎审定王尊平素的行为！
English: Please, Your Majesty, order the nobles, doctors, doctors, and councilors to judge His Majesty's behavior!

古文：夫人臣而 伤害阴阳 ，死诛之罪也； 靖言庸违 ，放殛之刑也。
现代文：作为人臣，如果 伤害阴阳 是诛杀之罪， 托言治理，实际上行动违拗 ，则应放逐诛杀。
English: As a vassal, if harming yin and yang is the crime of killing and killing, if the government is governed by pretexts, but the actions are actually insubordinate, then killing and killing should be banished.

古文：审如御史章，尊乃当伏观阙之诛，放于无人之域，不得苟免；及任举尊者，当获选举之辜，不可但已。
现代文：果真如御史奏章所指控，王尊就应伏诛示众，或流放蛮荒绝域，不能让他侥幸免刑。至于保荐王尊的人，则应获举荐不实之罪，不可原谅。
English: If it is true, as accused in the historical record, Wang Zun should be put on public display, or banished to the wilderness, he cannot be spared from punishment. As for those who sponsor Wang Zun, they should be charged with the crime of false recommendation, which is unforgivable.

古文：即不如章，饰文深诋以诉无罪，亦宜有诛，以惩谗贼之口，绝诈欺之路。
现代文：假如查出奏章与事实不符，是在巧饰文字，着意诬蔑陷害无辜，也应对诬陷者予以处罚，以惩诫好进谗言的贼人之口，断绝欺诈之路。
English: Even if it is not as good as written in the playbook, but to modify the wording and deepen the slander to accuse an innocent person, there should also be a fight to punish the mouth of the frame-up and eliminate the road of fraud.

古文：唯明主参详，使白黑分别！ 
现代文：请求明主详细考虑，使黑白分明。 
English: Request the owner to consider in detail, so that the black and white is clear.

古文：书奏，天子复以尊为徐州刺史。
现代文：奏章呈上，成帝就又任命王尊为徐州刺史。
English: After the report was submitted, Emperor Chengdu appointed Wang Zun as the historian of Xuzhou.

古文：夜郎王兴、钅句町王禹、漏卧侯俞更举兵相攻。
现代文：夜郎王兴、钩町王禹、漏卧侯俞，先后起兵互相攻击。
English: Yelang Wangxing, Hook Town Wang Yu, Leakage Hou Yao, successively attacked each other.

古文：牂柯太守请发兵诛兴等。
现代文：柯太守请求朝廷发兵讨伐兴等。
English: Ke Taishu requested the Imperial Court to send troops to suppress the rebellion.

古文：议者以为道远不可击，乃遣太中大夫蜀郡张匡持节和解。
现代文：朝廷会议时，发言的人认为路途太远，不可以动兵讨伐，于是派遣太中大夫、蜀郡人张匡持符节前往，劝说他们和解。
English: At the time of the imperial court meeting, the speakers thought that the road was too far and it was not possible to mobilize the army, so they sent the Taizhong doctor and the person from Shu County, Zhang Kuang, to hold the festival to persuade them to reconcile.

古文：兴等不从命，刻木象汉吏，立道旁，射之。
现代文：兴等不听从命令，还用木头雕刻成汉朝官吏的形象，树立道旁，用箭射击。
English: Xing et al. disobeyed the order, and also carved the image of Han Dynasty officials with wood, set up roadsides, and shot them with arrows.

古文：杜钦说大将军王凤曰： 蛮夷王侯轻易汉使，不惮国威，恐议者选耎，复守和解；太守察动静有变，乃以闻。
现代文：杜钦向大将军王凤献策说： 蛮夷王侯轻视汉使，不惧怕朝廷的权威，我担心参议这个问题的人胆小怯懦，仍然坚持和解之策。
English: Duqin offered his advice to the great general Wang Feng, saying: "The barbarian princes despise the Han envoys and do not fear the authority of the imperial court. I am afraid that those who advise on this issue are timid and cowardly, and still insist on the policy of reconciliation.

古文：如此，则复旷一时，王侯得收猎其众，申固其谋，党助众多，各不胜忿，必相殄灭。
现代文：等太守觉察情况有变，呈报上来，则又要耽搁三个月的时间。蛮夷王侯利用这段时间，可以集结部众，宣布并完善他们的计划。蛮夷各国党羽众多，各不相容，定会互相残杀。
English: In this way, there will be a few more months of delay, and the barbarian princes will be able to tidy up and rectify their subordinates, stubbornly adhere to their own strategy, their party members are numerous, and they are all extremely angry, and they will certainly kill and destroy each other.

古文：自知罪成，狂犯守尉，远臧温暑毒草之地；虽有孙、吴将，贲、育士，若入水火，往必焦没，智勇亡所施。
现代文：他们自知罪恶已经铸成，便疯狂地进攻郡守尉，并远远地藏身于暑热毒草地区，即令军事家孙武、吴起为将，古代勇士孟贲、夏育为兵，也会如入火坑深潭，被烧焦淹没，智慧和勇敢都无处施展。
English: They knew that the evil had already been cast, so they frantically attacked the county guard lieutenant, and hid far away in the hot poisonous grass area. Even if the military scholars Sun Wu and Wu Qi were the generals, and the ancient warriors Meng Xuan and Xia Yu were the soldiers, they would fall into the fire pit and be scorched and submerged, and their wisdom and bravery would have nowhere to show.

古文：屯田守之，费不可胜量。
现代文：而如果屯田戍守，费用将会大得无法计算。
English: The cost of defending them in Tonden was too great.

古文：宜因其罪恶未成，未疑汉家加诛，阴敕旁郡守尉练士马，大司农豫调谷积要害处，选任职太守往。以秋凉时入，诛其王侯尤不轨者。
现代文：应当趁他们还未铸成大错，还没疑心朝廷会对他们进行讨伐，暗中命令邻近各郡守尉操练兵马。大司农预先征调军粮，储积在要害地点。遴选胜任的太守前往，在秋凉时节进兵，诛杀蛮夷王侯中特别横暴的人。
English: They should take advantage of the fact that they have not yet made a big mistake and do not yet suspect that the imperial court will carry out a crusade against them, secretly order the guards of the neighboring counties to practice soldiers and horses. The chief farmer conscripted military rations in advance and stored them in key locations. Select a competent governor to go, march into the army in the cool autumn season, and kill the barbarian princes who are particularly violent.

古文：即以为不毛之地，无用之民，圣王不以劳中国，宜罢郡，放弃其民，绝其王侯勿复通。
现代文：倘若认为这是不毛之地，无用之民，那么圣王就不必因此而劳动中国，应撤销郡县，放弃当地的人民，与蛮夷王侯断交，不再来往。
English: If they think that this is a barren land and useless people, then the holy king does not have to labor in China for this. He should revoke the counties and counties, abandon the local people, break off diplomatic relations with the barbarian princes, and no longer come and go.

古文：如以先帝所立累世之功不可堕坏，亦宜因其萌牙，早断绝之。
现代文：如果认为是先帝所建立的累世功业，不可毁坏，也应该趁变乱处在萌芽之时，及早扑灭。
English: If it is considered that the accumulated merits established by the former emperor cannot be destroyed, it should also be extinguished as early as possible while the turmoil is in its infancy.

古文：及已成形然后战师，则万姓被害。 
现代文：等到变乱已经形成，然后再劳师作战，则万民要蒙受战祸。 
English: If we wait until the turmoil has already formed, and then struggle to fight, then all the people will suffer the scourge of war.

古文：大将军凤于是荐金城司马临邛陈立为牂柯太守。
现代文：于是王凤推荐金城司马、临邛人陈立为柯太守。
English: As a result, Wang Feng recommended Jincheng Sima and Linfen Chen Li for Ke Taishu.

古文：立至牂柯，谕告夜郎王兴，兴不从命；立请诛之，未报。
现代文：陈立到达柯郡，下令给夜郎王兴，兴不从命。陈立请求朝廷准许他诛杀兴，没有得到答复。
English: Chen Li arrived in Dake County and ordered Wang Xing, the night watchman, to be killed, but Xing did not comply. Chen Li asked the court to allow him to kill Xing, but received no reply.

古文：乃从吏数十人出行县，至兴国且同亭，召兴。
现代文：于是他率领随从官吏数十人出巡属县，到达了夜郎王兴控制地区的且同亭，召兴面见。
English: As a result, he led dozens of officials out of the patrol county and arrived at the same pavilion in the area controlled by Yelang Wangxing, summoning Xing to meet.

古文：兴将数千人往至亭，从邑君数十人入见立。
现代文：兴率数千部众来到且同亭，由数十位部落王陪同，进见陈立。
English: Thousands of people came to the pavilion, accompanied by dozens of tribal kings, to see Chen Li.

古文：立数责，因断头。
现代文：陈立对他进行谴责，并乘机将他砍头。
English: Chen Li reprimanded and scolded them, and took the opportunity to kill Yelang Wang.

古文：邑君曰： 将军诛无状，为民除害，愿出晓士众！ 
现代文：部落王们说： 将军诛杀这种悖逆无行的人，是为民除害，我们愿出去告知部众！ 
English: The tribal chiefs said: "The general's decision to kill such a disobedient and inactive person is to eliminate harm for the people. We are willing to go out and inform our subordinates!"

古文：以兴头示之，皆释兵降。
现代文：他们把兴的人头拿给部众看，部众全都放下武器投降。
English: With Yelang Wangxing's head to show the crowd, Yelang Wangxing's subordinates all laid down their weapons and surrendered.

古文：钅句町王禹、漏卧侯俞震恐，入粟千斛、牛羊劳吏士。
现代文：钩町王禹、漏卧侯俞十分震惊恐惧，于是献上粟米千斛及牛羊来慰劳官吏将士。
English: Hook Town's Wang Yu and Loke Liang Hou Yao were very shocked and afraid, so they presented thousands of corns and cows and sheep to comfort the officials and soldiers.

古文：立还归郡。
现代文：陈立返回郡城。
English: Chen Li returned to the county seat.

古文：兴妻父翁指，与子邪务收馀兵，迫胁旁二十二邑反。
现代文：兴妻父翁指，与子邪务收余兵，迫胁旁二十二邑反。
English: Xing's father and father-in-law pointed out that he and his son had collected surplus soldiers and forced twenty-two counties to rebel.

古文：至冬，立奏募诸夷，与都尉、长史分将攻翁指等。
现代文：至冬，立奏募诸夷，与都尉、长史分将攻翁指等。
English: At the end of winter, all the barbarians were enlisted, with the captain and the chief historian leading the attack on Onshi.

古文：翁指据厄为垒，立使奇兵绝其饟道，纵反间以诱其众。
现代文：翁指据厄为垒，立使奇兵绝其饷道，纵反间以诱其众。
English: Weng pointed to Yue as a stronghold, set up a strange soldier to cut off his escape route, and enticed his people to attack.

古文：都尉万年曰： 兵久不决，费不可共。 
现代文：都尉万年曰： 兵久不决，费不可共。 
English: The captain said, "The army has been in a long-term indecisive war, and the cost supply cannot keep up.

古文：引兵独进。败走，趋立营。
现代文：引兵独进；败走，趋立营。
English: Lead the troops to advance alone; lose the way, tend to set up camp.

古文：立怒，叱戏下令格之。
现代文：立怒，叱戏下令格之。
English: Chen Li was furious and scolded him under the banner of the commander-in-chief, ordering him to resist the enemy.

古文：都尉复还战，立救之。
现代文：都尉复还战，立救之。
English: The captain fought back and rescued him.

古文：时天大旱，立攻绝其水道。
现代文：当时天正大旱，陈立攻占水源，断敌水道。
English: At this time, there was a severe drought, and Chen Li launched an attack to cut off its water supply.

古文：蛮夷共斩翁指，持首出降，西夷遂平。
现代文：蛮夷部众一同斩杀翁指，手持人头出来投降。于是西夷平定。
English: The barbaric barbarians cut off Weng's finger together and came out to surrender, holding the man's head in their hands. Thus, the Western Barbarians were subdued.

古文：孝成皇帝上之上河平三年
现代文：河平三年春季，正月，楚王刘嚣到长安朝见。
English: In the spring of the third year of the Heping era, in the first month of the year, Chu Wang Liu Lan went to Chang'an to see the emperor.

古文：春，正月，楚王嚣来朝。二月，乙亥，诏以嚣素行纯茂，特加显异，封其子勋为广戚侯。
现代文：二月，乙亥，成帝下诏，因刘嚣一向行为良好，特意给予特殊奖赏，封他的儿子刘勋为广戚侯。
English: In February, Yihai, Emperor Cheng issued an edict, because Liu Han had always behaved well, he specially gave a special reward, and named his son Liu Xun as a great relative.

古文：丙戌，犍为地震，山崩，壅江水，水逆流。
现代文：丙戌，犍为发生地震，引起山崩，壅塞了长江，使江水逆流。
English: An earthquake occurred, causing a landslide, blocking the Yangtze River and causing the river to back up.

古文：秋，八月，乙卯晦，日有食之。
现代文：秋季，八月，乙卯晦，出现日食。
English: In autumn, in August, at dusk, there is a solar eclipse.

古文：上以中秘书颇散亡，使谒者陈农求遗书于天下。
现代文：成帝因为皇宫藏书有许多已经散失，派谒者陈农到全国去搜求失传的书籍。
English: Because many of the books in the palace collection had been lost, Emperor Chengdu sent Chen Nong to the whole country to search for lost books.

古文：诏光禄大夫刘向校经传、诸子、诗赋，步兵校尉任宏校兵书，太史令尹咸校数术，侍医李柱国校方技。
现代文：诏令光禄大夫刘向校正经传、诸子、诗赋；步兵校尉任宏校正兵书；太史令尹咸校正占卜之书；侍医李柱国校正医药书。
English: Liu Xiang, the doctor of Guanglu, was ordered to proofread the Bible, the sons, and the poems; Ren Hong, the infantry lieutenant, was ordered to proofread the soldier's book; Yin Ham, the grand marshal, was ordered to proofread the divination book; and Li Zhuoguo, the attendant doctor, was ordered to proofread the medical book.

古文：每一书已，向辄条其篇目，撮其指意，录而奏之。
现代文：每一部书校正完毕，刘向就条列出它的篇目，写出内容摘要，呈报成帝。
English: After completing one book for each school, Liu Xiang catalogued it, summarized its gist, recorded it and submitted it to the emperor.

古文：刘向以王氏权位太盛，而上方向《诗》、《书》古文，向乃因《尚书·洪范》，集合上古以来，历春秋、六国至秦、汉符瑞、灾异之记，推迹行事，连傅祸福，著其占验，比类相从，各有条目，凡十一篇，号曰《洪范五行传论》，奏之。
现代文：刘向因外戚王氏权位太盛，而皇上现在正在留意《诗经》、《书经》等古书，就根据《尚书·洪范篇》，汇集自上古以来，历经春秋战国，直至秦汉，所有关于祥瑞、天灾、变异的记载，推测天象变迁的原因，联系比附人间的祸福，突出其占卜与应验，分门别类，各立条目，共十一篇，书名为《洪范五行传论》，呈献成帝。
English: Liu Xiang, because his maternal relative, the Wang clan, was too powerful, and the emperor was now paying attention to ancient books such as the "Book of Songs" and the "Book of Songs." Based on the "Shang Shu · Hong Fan Zhen," Liu Xiang collected all the records of auspiciousness, natural disasters, and mutations since ancient times, through the Spring and Autumn Period and the Warring States Period, until the Qin and Han Dynasties, speculated on the reasons for the changes in the celestial phenomena, compared and attached the misfortunes and blessings of human beings, and highlighted their divination and fulfillment, divided into categories, each item, a total of eleven articles, the book

古文：天子心知向忠精，故为凤兄弟起此论也；然终不能夺王氏权。
现代文：成帝心里明白刘向忠心耿耿，是因为王凤兄弟权势太盛，才著作此书。然而他到底不能剥夺王氏的权柄。
English: Emperor Cheng knew in his heart that Liu Xiang was loyal to him, because the Wang Feng brothers were too powerful to write this book. However, he could not deprive the Wang clan of power.

古文：河复决平原，流入济南、千乘，所坏败者半建始时。
现代文：黄河再次在平原郡决口，洪水灌入济南、千乘，所造成的损失是建始年间洪灾的一半。
English: The Yellow River has once again burst its banks in Pingyuan County, flooding Jinan and Qizhen. The losses caused by the floods are half of those in the first year of construction.

古文：复遣王延世与丞相史杨焉及将作大匠许商、谏大夫乘马延年同作治，六月乃成。
现代文：朝廷再次派遣王延世跟丞相史杨焉，以及将作大匠许商、谏大夫乘马延年，共同负责治理工程。
English: The imperial court once again dispatched Wang Yanshi and the prime minister Shi Yangyan, as well as the master craftsman Xu Shang and the doctor Zou Jianma, to jointly take charge of the governance project.

古文：复赐延世黄金百斤。
现代文：六个月后，工程才完工。再次赏赐王延世黄金百斤。
English: Six months later, the project was completed. Once again, Wang Yanshi was awarded 100 jin of gold.

古文：治河卒非受平贾者，为著外繇六月。
现代文：治河卒没有发给工钱的，都登记姓名在册，折合抵消徭戍六个月。
English: If the river dweller does not pay the wages, the names are registered in the register, which is equivalent to six months of compensation.

古文：孝成皇帝上之上河平四年春，正月，匈奴单于来朝。赦天下徒。
现代文：河平四年春季，正月，匈奴单于来长安朝见。赦免天下囚犯。
English: In the spring of the 4th year of Heping, in the first month, the Xiongnu Emperor came to Chang'an to meet the Emperor. He pardoned all the prisoners.

古文：三月，癸丑朔，日有食之。
现代文：三月，癸丑朔，出现日食。
English: In March, a solar eclipse occurs.

古文：琅邪太守杨肜与王凤连昏，其郡有灾害，丞相王商按问之。
现代文：琅邪太守杨肜与王凤连昏，其郡有灾害，丞相王商按问之。
English: Yang Jie and Wang Feng, emperors of the State Council, were both in a coma, and there was a disaster in their county. The prime minister, Wang Shangnang, asked them about it.

古文：凤以为请，商不听，竟奏免肜，奏果寝不下。
现代文：凤以为请，商不听，竟奏免肜，奏果寝不下。
English: The phoenix thought it was a request, but the merchant did not listen, and the phoenix ended up playing the flute. As a result, she could not sleep.

古文：凤以是怨商，阴求其短，使频阳耿定上书，言 商与父傅婢通；及女弟淫乱，奴杀其私夫，疑商教使。 
现代文：凤以是怨商，阴求其短，使频阳耿定上书，言 商与父傅婢通；及女弟乱，奴杀其私夫，疑商教使。 
English: The phoenix complains about the merchant, the yin is short-sighted, causing the phoenix and the yang to write a letter to Geng Ding, saying that the merchant and his father Fu and his wife have a common language; and the girl's brother runs amok, slaughters her husband, and doubts the merchant's envoy.

古文：天子以为暗昧之过，不足以伤大臣。
现代文：天子以为暗昧之过，不足以伤大臣。
English: The son of heaven thought that the fault of obscurity was not enough to hurt the minister.

古文：凤固争，下其事司隶。
现代文：凤固争，下其事司隶。
English: If the phoenix and the cedar quarrel, it is time for the magistrate to intervene.

古文：太中大夫蜀郡张匡，素佞巧，复上书极言诋毁商。
现代文：太中大夫蜀郡张匡，素佞巧，复上书极言诋毁商。
English: Zhang Kuang, the medical superintendent of Shuxi County, was so clever that he wrote a strongly worded letter to slander the merchants.

古文：有司奏请召商诣诏狱。上素重商，知匡言多险，制曰： 勿治！ 
现代文：有司奏请召商诣诏狱，上素重商，知匡言多险，制曰： 勿治！ 
English: There is a sitar player to invite the merchants to the imperial prison, the upper class to the merchants, the wise to the dangerous, and the system to say: Do not rule!

古文：凤固争之。
现代文：凤固争之。
English: The phoenix and the dragon fight it out.

古文：夏，四月，壬寅，诏收商丞相印绶。
现代文：夏，四月，壬寅，诏收商丞相印绶。
English: Summer, April, July, and August are the best times to collect stamps.

古文：商免相三日，发病，欧血薨，谥曰戾侯。
现代文：商免相三日，发病，欧血薨，谥曰戾侯。
English: Merchants are exempted from the third day, the onset of the disease, the blood of Europe, and the day of death.

古文：而商子弟亲属为驸马都尉、侍中、中常侍、诸曹、大夫、郎吏者，皆出补吏，莫得留给事、宿卫者。有司奏请除国邑；有诏： 长子安嗣爵为乐昌侯。 
现代文：王商被免相三天后，发病，吐血而死。谥号为戾侯。而王商的子弟亲属担任驸马都尉、侍中、中常侍、诸曹、大夫、郎吏等官职的，全部被调出宫廷补任其他官职，不许留在给事、宿卫等可接近皇帝的位置上。主管官员还上奏，要求撤销王商的封地。成帝却下诏说： 王商长子王安继承爵位为乐昌侯。 
English: Three days after Wang Shang was pardoned, he fell ill, vomited blood and died. His posthumous name was Wang Shang. Wang Shang's younger relatives, who held official positions such as lieutenant of the imperial horse, chamberlain, middle attendant, imperial secretary, doctor, and steward, were all transferred out of the court to fill other official positions, and were not allowed to remain in positions that were close to the emperor, such as secretary and bodyguard. The officials in charge also petitioned to revoke Wang Shang's fief. However, Emperor Cheng issued an edict saying: Wang Shang's eldest son Wang An would inherit the title of prince of Lechang.

古文：上之为太子也，受《论语》于莲勺张禹，及即位，赐爵关内侯，拜为诸吏、光禄大夫，秩中二千石，给事中，领尚书事。
现代文：成帝当太子时，由莲勺人张禹教授《论语》，及至即位，赐张禹为关内侯，拜为诸吏、光禄大夫，官秩中二千石，兼任给事中，主管尚书事务。
English: When Emperor Cheng was crown prince, Zhang Yu, a man with a lotus spoon, taught him the Analects of Confucius, and when he ascended the throne, Zhang Yu was given the title of Guan Nei Hou (the lord of Guan, Guanzhong, Guanzhong, Guanzhong, Guanzhong, Guanzhong, Guanzhong, Guanzhong, Guanzhong, Guanzhong, Guanzhong, Guanzhong, Guanzhong, Guanzhong, Guanzhong, Guanzhong, Guanzhong, Guanzhong, Guanzhong, Guanz

古文：禹与王凤并领尚书，内不自安，数病，上书乞骸骨，欲退避凤；上不许，抚待愈厚。
现代文：张禹与王凤共同主管尚书事务，张禹内心不自安，多次称病，上书请求退休，想退让避开王凤。成帝不准，反而待他愈加优厚。
English: Zhang Yu and Wang Feng were jointly in charge of Shangshu affairs. Zhang Yu was not at ease in his heart, repeatedly said he was ill, submitted a letter requesting retirement, and wanted to withdraw and avoid Wang Feng. He was not allowed to become emperor, but he was treated more generously.

古文：六月，丙戌，以禹为丞相，封安昌侯。
现代文：六月，丙戌，成帝任命张禹为丞相，封安昌侯。
English: In June, Emperor Goryeo appointed Zhang Yu as chancellor of the Joseon Dynasty, with the title of Prince of Anchang.

古文：庚戌，楚孝王嚣薨。
现代文：庚戌，楚孝王刘嚣去世。
English: Geng Zheng, Chu Xiao Wang Liu Han died.

古文：初，武帝通西域，罽宾自以绝远，汉兵不能至，独不服，数剽杀汉使。
现代文：当初，汉武帝通西域，宾国自以为地处绝远，汉兵不能到达，因此只有宾一国不归顺汉朝，还多次劫杀汉使。
English: At first, Emperor Hanwu passed through the western region, and the guest country thought that it was far away and the Chinese soldiers could not reach it. Therefore, only the guest country did not return to the Han Dynasty, and also kidnapped and killed the Han envoy many times.

古文：久之，汉使者文忠与容屈王子阴末赴合谋攻杀其王；立阴末赴为罽宾王。
现代文：很久以后，汉朝使者文忠与容屈国王的儿子阴末赴合谋攻杀了宾王，于是立阴末赴为宾王。
English: A long time later, the Han Dynasty emissary Wen Zhong and the son of King Yongqu went to Yingbei to conspire to kill King Bin, so he went to Yingbei to become King Bin.

古文：后军候赵德使罽宾，与阴末赴相失；阴末赴锁琅当德，杀副已下七十馀人，遣使者上书谢。
现代文：后来，军候赵德出使宾国，与阴末赴失和，阴末赴用铁链把赵德锁起来，又诛杀汉副使及以下七十余人，然后派使者赴长安上书谢罪。
English: Later, the military officer Zhao De sent an envoy to the guest country, and lost the peace with the late Yin. The late Yin went to lock Zhao De up with a chain, and killed the Han vice-envoy and more than seventy people below, and then sent an envoy to Chang'an to write a letter of thanksgiving.

古文：孝元帝以其绝域，不录，放其使者于县度，绝而不通。
现代文：孝元帝因宾远在域外，无法审核此案，就把使节放逐到县度，断绝与宾的来往。
English: Emperor Xiaoyuan, unable to review the case because the envoy was far away from the region, banished the envoy to the county government and cut off contact with the envoy.

古文：及帝即位，复遣使献谢罪。
现代文：等到成帝即位后，宾王再次派遣使节到长安谢罪。
English: After the enthronement of Emperor Cheng, King Bin once again sent an envoy to Chang'an to apologize.

古文：汉欲遣使者报送其使。
现代文：汉朝打算派使者护送宾使节回国，作为答礼。
English: The Han Dynasty planned to send an envoy to escort the guest envoy back to China as a return gift.

古文：杜钦说王凤曰： 前罽宾王阴末赴，本汉所立，后卒畔逆。夫德莫大于有国子民，罪莫大于执杀使者，所以不报恩，不惧诛者，自知绝远，兵不至也。
现代文：杜钦劝王凤说： 从前，宾王阴末赴本是汉朝所立，后来却突然反叛，世上最大的恩德，莫过于使其拥有王位和人民；而最大的罪恶，莫过于拘杀使者。阴末赴之所以不肯报恩，也不怕讨伐，是由于自知离中国遥远，汉兵无法到达。
English: Du Qin advised Wang Feng: Once upon a time, King Bin's late journey was originally established by the Han Dynasty, but later he suddenly rebelled. The greatest blessing in the world is nothing more than letting him have the throne and the people; and the greatest evil is nothing more than killing the messenger. The reason why he did not want to return the favor and was not afraid to fight was because he knew that he was far away from China and the Chinese soldiers could not reach him.

古文：有求则卑辞，无欲则骄嫚，终不可怀服。
现代文：他有求于汉朝时，就卑辞谦恭；无求时，就骄横傲慢，始终无法使他降服。
English: When he had a request for the Han Dynasty, he was humble and courteous; when he did not have a request, he was arrogant and arrogant, and it was always impossible to make him surrender.

古文：凡中国所以为通厚蛮夷，惬快其求者，为壤比而为寇。
现代文：中国之所以交往厚待周边蛮夷，满足他们的要求，是因为疆土相邻，他们易于入境劫掠。
English: The reason why China treats the surrounding barbarians kindly and satisfies their demands is because the territory is adjacent, and they are easy to enter and plunder.

古文：今县度之厄，非罽宾所能越也；其乡慕，不足以安西域；虽不附，不能危城郭。
现代文：如今县度的险阻，宾军队不能越过。他们即使仰慕归顺，对整个西域的安定也起不了太大作用；即令不归顺汉朝，也不能威胁西域诸国的安全。
English: Today, the county-level obstacle cannot be surmounted by the guest army. Even if they admire and submit, they cannot play a great role in the stability of the entire western region; even if they do not submit to the Han Dynasty, they cannot threaten the security of the countries in the western region.

古文：前亲逆节，恶暴西域，故绝而不通；今悔过来，而无亲属、贵人，奉献者皆行贾贱人，欲通货市买，以献为名，故烦使者送至县度，恐失实见欺。
现代文：从前，宾王亲自冒犯汉朝使节，罪恶暴露在西域各国面前，中国因此断绝与其来往。如今他们宣称悔过来朝，但所派之人，不是国王的亲属和重要官员，奉献者全是从事商业的贱人，他们是想通商贸易，而以进贡为名，因此本朝烦劳使者护送他们到县度，恐怕不符合他们实际低微的身份，受了他们的欺骗。
English: Once upon a time, King Bin personally offended the envoys of the Han Dynasty, and the evil was exposed to the countries of the Western Regions, so China cut off its dealings with them. Now they claim to have repented and returned to the North, but the people they sent were not the relatives of the king and important officials, but the devotees were all prostitutes engaged in commerce. They wanted to trade and trade, and in the name of tribute, so the troublesome envoys of this dynasty escorted them to the county. I am afraid that they did not meet their actual low status and were deceived by them.

古文：凡遣使送客者，欲为防护寇害也。
现代文：凡派使者护送客使，目的是保护他们不受盗匪伤害。
English: The great Central Plains dynasties sent emissaries to bring guests, all in order to prevent the guests from being plundered.

古文：起皮山，南更不属汉之国四、五，斥候士百馀人，五分夜击刁斗自守，尚时为所侵盗。
现代文：自皮山国往南走，要经过四、五个不受汉朝管辖的王国。护送的汉军士兵有一百余名，入夜后轮班五次击打刁斗警戒守卫，仍然时常遭到劫掠。
English: To go south from the Pishan Kingdom, one has to pass through four or five kingdoms that are not under the jurisdiction of the Han Dynasty. There are more than a hundred Chinese soldiers escorting them. After nightfall, they beat the guards five times in shifts, and they are still often robbed.

古文：驴畜负粮，须诸国禀食，得以自赡。
现代文：用驴子驮载口粮，须由沿途诸国供给食物，才能满足。
English: The donkeys and horses that transport grain also need to be fed by countries along the way.

古文：国或贫小不能食，或桀黠不肯给，拥强汉之节，馁山谷之间，乞匄无所得，离一、二旬，则人畜弃捐旷野而不反。
现代文：有些王国又小又贫穷，无法供应食物；有些王国奸猾不肯供给。使者带着强大的汉朝的符节，在山谷之间忍受着饥饿的煎熬，乞讨无门，缺粮一二十天，人畜就会倒毙旷野，不得生还。
English: Some kingdoms are small and poor, unable to supply food; some kingdoms cunningly refuse to supply. Envoys with powerful Han Dynasty symbols endure the torment of hunger between the valleys, begging without a door, lacking food for ten or twenty days, people and animals will die in the wilderness and will not survive.

古文：又历大头痛、小头痛之山，赤土、身热之阪，令人身热无色，头痛呕吐，驴畜尽然。
现代文：沿途还要经过大头痛山、小头痛山、赤土坂、身热坂。走到这里，会让人浑身发烧，面无人色，头痛呕吐，驴畜也都如此。
English: You also have to pass the Big Headache Mountain, the Small Headache Mountain, the Red Earth, and the Body Heat Mountain. These places will make people's body heat up, and they will have no color, headache, and vomiting. Donkeys, horses, and livestock are all like this.

古文：又有三池盘、石阪道，狭者尺六七寸，长者径三十里，临峥嵘不测之深，行者骑步相持，绳索相引，二千馀里，乃到县度。
现代文：又有三池盘、石坂道，窄的地方只有一尺六、七寸宽，而长度却有三十里。山径旁是陡峭不测的深谷，马匹与行人互相扶持，用绳索前后牵引。走二千余里，才能到达县度。
English: There are also three ponds and a stone slope. The narrow part is only one foot six or seven inches wide, but the length is thirty miles. Next to the mountain path is a steep and unpredictable deep valley. Horses and pedestrians support each other and are pulled back and forth by ropes. It takes more than two thousand miles to reach the county seat.

古文：畜坠，未半坑谷尽靡碎；人堕，势不得相收视；险阻危害，不可胜言。
现代文：牲畜失足坠落，在离谷底还不到一半距离时，就已粉身碎骨；人坠落，便不能为他收殓尸体。艰难险阻，无法尽言。
English: If an animal falls and is less than half way to the bottom of the valley, it is already crushed; if a person falls, it is not possible to recover the body.

古文：圣王分九州，制五服，务盛内，不求外；今遣使者承至尊之命，送蛮夷之贾，劳吏士之众，涉危难之路，罢敝所恃以事无用，非久长计也。
现代文：古代圣王将天下分为九州，又制定五服，是务求本国的强盛，而不管域外之事。如今派遣使者，奉天子之命，护送外族商贾，劳动众多中国官员士兵，跋涉危险艰难的路程，使所倚赖的中国人罢惫，去为无用的外族效劳，这不是长久之计。
English: The ancient holy king divided the world into Kyushu, and established the Five Services, in order to ensure the prosperity of his country, regardless of matters outside the region. Today, it is not a long-term solution to send envoys, on the orders of the Son of Heaven, to escort foreign merchants, to labor many Chinese officials and soldiers, to trek dangerous and difficult routes, to exhaust the Chinese who rely on them, and to serve useless foreigners.

古文：使者业已受节，可至皮山而还。 
现代文：既然使者已经派定，可以护送到皮山国就回来。 
English: Now that the emissary has accepted the emperor's dispatch, he can be sent to Pishan and come back.

古文：于是凤白从钦言。
现代文：于是王凤将杜钦的建议转告成帝，被成帝采纳。
English: Wang Feng reported to the Queen Mother and accepted Du Qin's suggestion.

古文：孝成皇帝上之上阳朔元年
现代文：宾国实际上是贪图中国的赏赐，和想跟中国通商，它的使者数年来中国一次。阳朔元年
English: The guest country is actually greedy for China's reward, and wants to trade with China. Its envoy has been to China once in several years.

古文：春，二月，丁未晦，日有食之。
现代文：春季，二月，丁未晦，出现日食。
English: Spring, February, spring equinox, solar eclipse.

古文：三月，赦天下徒。
现代文：三月，赦免天下囚犯。
English: In March, all prisoners were pardoned.

古文：冬，京兆尹泰山王章下狱，死。
现代文：冬季，京兆尹、泰山人王章被捕入狱，处死。
English: In winter, Jing Zhaoyun and Taishan man Wang Zhang were arrested, imprisoned and executed.

古文：时大将军凤用事，上谦让无所颛。
现代文：当时，大将军王凤掌握国家大权，成帝谦让软弱，没有实权。
English: At that time, the great general Wang Feng held the power of the state, but Emperor Chengxian was weak and had no real power.

古文：左右尝荐光禄大夫刘向少子歆通达有异材，上召见歆，诵读诗赋，甚悦之，欲以为中常侍；召取衣冠，临当拜，左右皆曰： 未晓大将军。 上曰： 此小事，何须关大将军！ 
现代文：成帝身边的侍臣，曾向他推荐光禄大夫刘向的幼子刘歆，说他博学卓识有奇才。成帝召见刘歆，刘歆为他诵读诗赋。成帝非常喜欢他，想任命他为中常侍，命左右取来中常侍的衣冠，正准备行拜官礼时，左右侍从之人都说： 还没有让大将军知道。 成帝说： 这是小事，何必通报大将军！ 
English: A courtier around Emperor Cheng once recommended Liu Xuan, the young son of the Guanglu doctor Liu Xiang, to him, saying that he was knowledgeable and witty. Emperor Cheng summoned Liu Xuan, and Liu Xuan read poetry for him. Emperor Cheng liked him very much and wanted to appoint him as a middle attendant. He ordered to take the crown of the middle attendant. When they were preparing to perform the official ceremony, the attendants on both sides said: They have not yet let the general know. Emperor Cheng said: This is a small matter, why not inform the general!

古文：左右叩头争之，上于是语凤，凤以为不可，乃止。
现代文：左右之人叩头力争，于是成帝便告诉了王凤。王凤认为不可以，此事便作罢。
English: People on both sides tried to kowtow, so Emperor Cheng told Wang Feng. Wang Feng thought it was unacceptable, and the matter was dropped.

古文：王氏子弟皆卿、大夫、侍中、诸曹，分据势官，满朝廷。
现代文：王氏子弟全都当上卿、大夫、侍中、诸曹，分别占据显官要职，达官显贵充满朝廷。
English: The sons and daughters of the Wang clan all became high-ranking officials, such as lords, doctors, chamberlains, and officials, and filled the imperial court with dignitaries.

古文：杜钦见凤专政泰重，戒之曰： 愿将军由周公之谦惧，损穰侯之威，放武安之欲，毋使范雎之徒得间其说。 
现代文：杜钦见王凤过于专权，告诫他说： 我希望将军采取周公的谦恭谨慎态度，减少穰侯魏冉的威风，放弃武安侯田的贪欲，不要使范睢之流得以从中挑拨离间！ 
English: Du Qin saw that Wang Feng was too authoritarian and warned him: I hope that the general will adopt the courteous and cautious attitude of Zhou Gong, reduce the prestige of Wei Ran, give up the greed of Wuan Hou Tian, and do not allow Fan Ye and others to sow discord!

古文：凤不听。
现代文：王凤不听。
English: Wang Feng did not listen.

古文：时上无继嗣，体常不平。
现代文：这时，成帝没有继嗣，身体又常患病。
English: At this time, Emperor Cheng had no heir and was often ill.

古文：定陶共王来朝，太后与上承先帝意，遇共王甚厚，赏赐十倍于它王，不以往事为纤介；留之京师，不遣归国。
现代文：定陶王刘康来朝见，太后与成帝禀承先帝的遗愿，待他十分优厚，给予的赏赐是其他诸侯王的十倍，对当初夺嫡之事，也不存丝毫芥蒂。
English: Liu Kang, the king of Dingtao, came to see the emperor. The empress dowager and Emperor Cheng followed the last wishes of the former emperor and treated him very generously. The reward he gave was ten times that of other princes. There was not the slightest bit of bitterness about the fact that he had been usurped.

古文：上谓共王： 我未有子，人命不讳。一朝有它，且不复相见，尔长留侍我矣！ 
现代文：成帝把他留在京师，不让他归国，还对他说： 我没有儿子，人命无常，不必避讳，一旦有别的变化，将再也看不见你了。你就长期留在京师，随侍在我身边吧！ 
English: Emperor Cheng kept him in Beijing Division and did not allow him to return to China. He also told him, "I don't have a son. Human life is fickle. You don't have to be shy. If there are any other changes, I will never see you again. You should stay in Beijing Division for a long time and stay by my side."

古文：其后天子疾益有瘳，共王因留国邸，旦夕侍上。上甚亲重之。
现代文：后来，成帝病情渐渐减轻，刘康于是留居在封国驻京府邸，日夜进宫服侍成帝，成帝对他十分亲近看重。
English: Later, Emperor Cheng's illness gradually eased, so Liu Kang stayed at the imperial residence in Beijing, entering the palace day and night to serve Emperor Cheng, who was very close to him.

古文：大将军凤心不便共王在京师，会日食，凤因言： 日食，阴盛之象。
现代文：大将军王凤对刘康留居京师感到不方便，恰好发生日食，王凤就乘机说： 发生日食，是阴气过盛的征象。
English: The great general Wang Feng felt uncomfortable with Liu Kang's staying in Beijing as a teacher. A solar eclipse happened to occur, and Wang Feng took the opportunity to say: The occurrence of a solar eclipse is a sign of excessively gloomy weather.

古文：定陶王虽亲，于礼当奉籓在国；今留侍京师，诡正非常，故天见戒，宜遣王之国。 
现代文：定陶王虽亲，按礼应当在自己的封国当藩王。如今留在京师侍奉天子，是不正常的，因此天现异象发出警告。
English: Although King Jento is a relative, according to the rite, he should be the king of his own fief. It is not normal for him to stay in Kyoto to serve the Son of Heaven, so the heavenly appearance warning was issued.

古文：上不得已于凤而许之。
现代文：陛下应遣送定陶王返回封国！ 成帝无法违抗王凤，只好同意。
English: Emperor Cheng had no choice but to agree.

古文：共王辞去，上与相对涕泣而决。
现代文：刘康辞行，成帝和他相对流泪而别。
English: When the co-emperor was about to leave, Emperor Chengdu broke up with him face-to-face in tears.

古文：王章素刚直敢言，虽为凤所举，非凤专权，不亲附凤，乃奏封事，言： 日食之咎，皆凤专权蔽主之过。 
现代文：王章一向刚直敢言，他虽由王凤举荐，但不赞成王凤专权，不亲近依附王凤。他上密封奏书说： 发生日食，都应归咎于王凤专权，蒙蔽主上。 
English: Wang Zhang has always been forthright and dared to say that although he was recommended by Wang Feng, he did not approve of Wang Feng's monopoly and did not closely rely on Wang Feng. He said in his sealed report: The occurrence of solar eclipses should be blamed on Wang Feng's monopoly and blinded on the Lord.

古文：上召见章，延问以事。
现代文：成帝召见王章，进一步询问。
English: Emperor Cheng summoned Wang Zheng for further inquiry.

古文：章对曰： 天道聪明，佑善而灾恶，以瑞异为符效。
现代文：王章回答说： 上天行事，耳聪目明，保佑善良，惩罚邪恶，用祥瑞或灾异作为效验的征兆。
English: Wang Zhang replied: "Heaven acts, ears are sharp, eyes are clear, blesses the good, punishes the evil, and uses auspiciousness or calamity as a sign of effectiveness.

古文：今陛下以未有继嗣，引近定陶王，所以承宗庙，重社稷，上顺天心，下安百姓，此正议善事，当有祥瑞，何故致灾异！
现代文：如今陛下因为没有亲子，而召见亲近定陶王，这是为了承接宗庙，以国家为重，上顺天意，下安民心，这是正确的决定和善事，上天应当报以祥瑞，怎么会招致灾异！
English: Now, because His Majesty does not have a son, he has summoned King Ding Tao to be close to him. This is in order to take over the ancestral temple, with the country as the most important thing, to follow the will of heaven, and to secure the people's hearts. This is the right decision and a good deed. Heaven should reward it with auspiciousness. How can it lead to disaster!

古文：灾异之发，为大臣颛政者也。
现代文：灾异的发生，是因为大臣专权的缘故。
English: The emergence of the disaster is due to the ministerial dictatorship.

古文：今闻大将军猥归日食之咎于定陶王，建遣之国，苟欲使天子孤立于上，颛擅朝事以便其私，非忠臣也。
现代文：现在听说大将军错将日食的发生归咎于定陶王，建议遣送他回封国。假如是想使天子在上面孤立，而由他专擅朝政，以便实现私欲，那他就不是忠臣了。
English: Now I heard that the general mistakenly blamed the occurrence of the solar eclipse on King Ding Tao and suggested that he be sent back to the feudal country. If he wanted to isolate the heavenly son above and let him dominate the government in order to realize his selfish desires, then he would not be a loyal subject.

古文：且日食，阴侵阳，臣颛君之咎。
现代文：而且发生日食，是阴气侵抑阳气，应归咎于臣下专权而压抑君王。
English: Moreover, when a solar eclipse occurs, it is the yin that invades and suppresses the yang, which should be blamed on the absolute power of the vassal and the oppression of the monarch.

古文：今政事大小皆自凤出，天子曾不壹举手，凤不内省责，反归咎善人，推远定陶王。
现代文：如今大小政事都由王凤决定，天子连手都没有举过一次，王凤不从内心反省自责，反而归咎于善良的人，把定陶王排挤到远方。
English: Today, Wang Feng decides all matters of state, large and small. Tianzi has not even raised his hand once. Wang Feng does not reflect on himself from the bottom of his heart, but instead blames good-hearted people and pushes Ding Tao Wang far away.

古文：且凤诬罔不忠，非一事也。
现代文：而且王凤诬陷欺骗不忠之事，不止一件。
English: Moreover, Wang Feng slandering others, being unfaithful and unjust, is not a trivial matter.

古文：前丞相乐昌侯商，本以先帝外属，内行笃，有威重，位历将相，国家柱石臣也，其人守正，不肯屈节随凤委曲；卒用闺门之事为凤所罢，身以忧死，众庶愍之。
现代文：前丞相、乐昌侯王商，本是先帝的亲戚，品行敦厚，威望很高，历任将相，是国家栋梁之臣。他坚持正义，不肯违心地屈膝追随王凤。最后被王凤用闺房阴私之事而致罪罢黜，忧伤而死，百姓都怜惜他。
English: Wang Shang, the former prime minister and prince of Lechang, was originally a relative of the former emperor. He had a strong moral character and high prestige. Successive generals and ministers were the pillars of the state. He insisted on justice and refused to follow Wang Feng against his will. Finally, he was deposed by Wang Feng for the sin of using a maid's private affairs. He died sad, and the people all pitied him.

古文：又凤知其小妇弟张美人已尝适人，于礼不宜配御至尊，托以为宜子，内之后宫，苟以私其妻弟；闻张美人未尝任身就馆也。
现代文：又如，王凤明知他小妾的妹妹张美人已嫁过人，按礼不适宜上配至尊的皇帝，王凤却托言张美人适宜生男孩，将她献入后宫，用不正当的手段为小妾的妹妹谋取私利。
English: For another example, Wang Feng knew that his concubine's younger sister Zhang Bijin had already married someone, and was not suitable for the supreme emperor according to the etiquette. However, Wang Feng used the excuse that Zhang Bijin was suitable for giving birth to a boy, presented her to the harem, and used improper means to seek personal gain for the concubine's younger sister.

古文：且羌、胡尚杀首子以荡肠正世，况于天子，而近已出之女也！
现代文：然而，听说到现在张美人也未曾怀孕。而且，即使是羌人、胡人，还要杀死头胎婴儿，以洗女人的肠肚，使未来所生之子血统纯正。何况是天子，怎能亲近已嫁过人的女子！
English: However, it is said that up to now, Zhang Mei has never been pregnant. Moreover, even if it is a man with a beard or mustache, the first-born baby must be killed in order to wash the woman's bowels and make the future son's lineage pure. Besides, how can the Son of Heaven get close to a woman who has been married before!

古文：此三者皆大事，陛下所自见，足以知其馀及它所不见者。
现代文：以上所说的三件都是大事，是陛下亲眼所见到的，根据它们，崐足以推知其余和另外那些所看不到的事情。
English: These three are the great things, which your majesty has seen with his own eyes, from which you may infer the rest, and the things which you do not see.

古文：凤不可令久典事，宜退使就第，选忠贤以代之！ 
现代文：陛下不可让王凤长期主持国事，应让他退官回到府第，另选忠诚贤能的人代替他！ 
English: Your Majesty should not allow Wang Feng to preside over state affairs for a long time, he should retire and return to the capital, and another loyal and capable person should be elected to replace him!

古文：自凤之白罢商，后遣定陶王也，上不能平；及闻章言，天子感寤，纳之，谓章曰： 微京兆尹直言，吾不闻社稷计。
现代文：自从因王凤的弹劾，王商被罢黜，到后来遣送定陶王归国，成帝心里一直郁愤不平，此时听了王章的话，有所感触而醒悟，打算采纳他的建议。成帝对王章说： 若不是京兆尹直言，我听不到国家大计。
English: Since Wang Shang was deposed due to Wang Feng's impeachment, and later King Ding Tao was sent back to the country, Emperor Cheng had been feeling resentful. At this time, after listening to Wang Zhang's words, he was moved and awakened, and planned to adopt his suggestion. Emperor Cheng said to Wang Zhang: If it wasn't for Jing Zhaoyin's straightforward speech, I wouldn't be able to hear the national plan.

古文：上自为太子时，数闻野王先帝名卿，声誉出凤远甚，方倚欲以代凤。
现代文：况且只有贤能者才了解贤能者，请你试为朕找一位能够辅政的人。 于是王章再上密封奏书，举荐信都王刘兴的舅父、琅邪太守冯野王，说他忠诚正直，又富于谋略。成帝从当太子时，就多次听说冯野王的声名，于是准备依靠他代替王凤。
English: Moreover, only a wise man can understand a wise man, please try to find a person who can assist me in politics. Therefore, Wang Zhang again sealed the record and recommended a letter to Liu Xing's uncle, the evil ruler Feng Ye Wang, saying that he was loyal and honest, and rich in strategy. Emperor Cheng had heard of Feng Ye Wang's reputation many times since he was crown prince, so he was ready to rely on him to replace Wang Feng.

古文：章每召见，上辄辟左右。
现代文：王章每次进见，成帝都命左右随从退出。
English: Every time Wang Zhang made an advance, Chengdi was forced to withdraw.

古文：时太后从弟子侍中音独侧听，具知章言，以语凤。
现代文：但当时太后堂弟之子、侍中王音独自窃听，全部了解王章谈话的内容，并报告了王凤。
English: However, at that time, the son of the Empress Dowager's cousin, the chamberlain Wang Yin, alone eavesdropped, understood all the contents of Wang Zhang's conversation, and reported Wang Feng.

古文：凤闻之，甚忧惧。
现代文：王凤听了甚为忧虑恐惧。
English: Wang Feng was very worried and frightened.

古文：杜钦令凤称病出就第，上疏乞骸骨，其辞指甚哀。
现代文：杜钦劝王凤搬出大将军府，回到原来的侯府，上书请求辞职退休，措词十分哀痛。
English: Duqin advised Wang Feng to move out of the general's residence and return to the former governor's residence, and sent a letter requesting resignation and retirement. The wording was very sad.

古文：太后闻之，为垂涕，不御食。
现代文：太后闻讯，为王凤流下眼泪，不肯进食。
English: When the Empress Dowager heard the news, she shed tears for Wang Feng and refused to eat.

古文：上少而亲倚凤，弗忍废，乃优诏报凤，强起之；于是凤起视事。
现代文：成帝从小就亲近倚靠王凤，不忍心罢黜他，就下诏优礼安抚，勉强他继续任职。于是王凤复行视事。
English: Emperor Cheng had been close to and relied on Wang Feng since he was a child. He couldn't bear to dismiss him, so he issued an edict to appease him and forced him to continue in office. Wang Feng then resumed his duties.

古文：上使尚书劾奏章： 知野王前以王舅出补吏，而私荐之，欲令在朝，阿附诸侯；又知张美人体御至尊，而妄称引羌胡杀子荡肠，非所宜言。 
现代文：成帝让尚书弹劾王章，说： 王章明知冯野王先前因为是诸侯王的舅父，而外放补官，而却因私心，违制推荐，想让他在朝中任职，以阿谀攀附诸侯。又明知张美人已入宫侍奉皇帝，却狂妄地引述羌胡杀子肠的风俗，这不是所应说的话。 
English: Emperor Cheng asked Shang Shu to impeach Wang Zhang, saying: Wang Zhang, knowing that Feng Ye Wang had previously been appointed as a supplementary official because he was the uncle of the princes, but because of selfishness and violation of the recommendation, wanted to let him serve in the court and cling to the princes. And knowing that Zhang Bijin had entered the palace to serve the emperor, but arrogantly quoted the custom of shaving the mustache, this is not what should be said.

古文：下章吏。
现代文：把王章交付司法官吏处理。
English: Wang Zhang was handed over to judicial officials.

古文：廷尉致其大逆罪，以为 比上夷狄，欲绝继嗣之端，背畔天子，私为定陶王。 
现代文：廷尉罗织成大逆罪，认为： 把皇帝比做羌胡蛮族，想使皇上绝嗣，背叛天子，私心为定陶王打算。 
English: The courtier Luo was guilty of high treason, he thought: Comparing the emperor to the barbarian barbarians, wanting to make the emperor disinherited, betraying the heavenly son, and selfishly plotting for King Ding Tao.

古文：章竟死狱中，妻子徙合浦。
现代文：王章终于死在狱中，妻子儿女流放到合浦。
English: Wang Zhang finally died in prison, and his wife and children were exiled to Hapu.

古文：自是公卿见凤，侧目而视。
现代文：从此，公卿见到王凤，都侧目而视。
English: From then on, when the nobles saw Wang Feng, they all looked sideways.

古文：冯野王惧不自安，遂病；满三月，赐告，与妻子归杜陵就医药。
现代文：冯野王恐惧不自安，就得了疾病。病假满三个月后，成帝批准他带职养病，他就跟妻子回到故乡杜陵就医。
English: After three months of sick leave, Emperor Cheng approved him to take sick leave, and he and his wife returned to their hometown of Duling to seek medical treatment.

古文：大将军凤风御史中丞劾奏 野王赐告养病而私自便，持虎符出界归家，奉诏不敬。 
现代文：大将军王凤暗示御史中丞弹劾他说： 冯野王被皇上赐准带职养病，却私自趁便拿着虎符越过郡界回家，犯了奉诏不敬之罪。 
English: The great general Wang Feng suggested that the Grand Historian Zhongzheng impeach him, saying: Feng Ye Wang was given permission by the emperor to take a job to recover from illness, but he took the opportunity to take the tiger flag across the county border to go home, committing the crime of disrespecting the imperial edict.

古文：杜钦奏记于凤曰： 二千石病，赐告得归，有故事；不得去郡，亡著令。
现代文：杜钦给王凤上书说： 官秩为二千石的官员得了病，被批准带职养病而就此回家的，有前例可援。法令中并没有不许离郡的条文。
English: Duchin wrote to Wang Feng, saying: "There is a precedent for an official with a rank of two thousand koku falling ill and being allowed to go home to recuperate. There is no provision in the law that prohibits leaving the county.

古文：《传》曰： 赏疑从予， 所以广恩劝功也； 罚疑从去， 所以慎刑，阙难知也。
现代文：经传上说： 拿不准该不该赏赐的，姑且给予赏赐。 目的在于广施恩德，勉励有功之人。还说： 拿不准该不该惩罚的，姑且赦免。 目的在于谨慎刑罚，免生差错。
English: According to legend, it was said: "If it is not allowed to reward those who should not be rewarded, let them be rewarded." The purpose was to spread kindness and encourage those who had meritorious deeds. It was also said: "If it is not allowed to punish those who should not be punished, let them be pardoned." The purpose was to be prudent in punishment and avoid mistakes in life.

古文：今释令与故事而假不敬之法，甚违 阙疑从去 之意。
现代文：现在，不顾法令和前例，而以不敬的法条治罪，完全违背了 拿不准该不该惩罚的，姑且赦免 的古训。
English: Now, in defiance of laws and precedents, they are punishing crimes with disrespectful legal provisions, completely violating the ancient teaching of "don't take what you are not allowed to take, don't punish what you shouldn't punish, and pardon what you should pardon."

古文：即以二千石守千里之地，任兵马之重，不宜去郡，将以制刑为后法者，则野王之罪在未制令前也。
现代文：即使认为二千石的高级官员管辖千里之地，负有军事上的重任，不应轻易离开辖郡，准备制定律条作为以后的法令，那么冯野王的罪过也在新的条文制定之前。
English: Even if it is thought that a high-ranking official of two thousand koku, who has jurisdiction over a thousand miles of land, has a heavy military responsibility, and should not easily leave the county under his jurisdiction, and is preparing to formulate rules as a future decree, then Feng Ye Wang's crime is also before the new provisions are formulated.

古文：刑赏大信，不可不慎。 
现代文：刑罚和赏赐，关系国家的重大信誉，不可不慎重！ 
English: Penalty awards should be credible, not imprudent.

古文：凤不听，竟免野王官。
现代文：王凤不听，竟然罢免了冯野王的官职。
English: Wang Feng did not listen, and even dismissed Feng Ye Wang from his post.

古文：时众庶多冤王章讥朝廷者，钦欲救其过，复说凤曰： 京兆尹章，所坐事密，自京师不晓，况于远方！
现代文：当时百姓大多认为王章冤枉而讽刺朝廷。杜钦为了挽救王凤的过错，再次崐劝王凤说： 京兆尹王章，被指控的罪状密不外传，连京师的人都不知道，何况远方的人呢！
English: At that time, most of the people thought that Wang Zhang had wronged and satirized the imperial court. Du Qin, in order to save Wang Feng's fault, once again urged Wang Feng to say: Jing Zhaoying Wang Zhang, the charges against him are secret, even people in Beijing do not know, let alone people far away!

古文：恐天下不知章实有罪，而以为坐言事。
现代文：恐怕天下人不了解王章确实有罪，而以为他直言规谏才蒙祸下狱。
English: I'm afraid that people around the world don't understand that Wang Zhang is indeed guilty, and think that he was punished by going to prison for speaking his mind.

古文：如是，塞争引之原，损宽明之德。
现代文：这样的话，就会堵塞谏争的言路，有损宽容贤明的圣德。
English: In this way, the real cause of the dispute is covered up, and the sacred virtue of magnanimity is damaged.

古文：钦愚以为宜因章事举直言极谏，并见郎从官，展尽其意，加于往前，以明示四方，使天下咸知主上圣明，不以言罪下也。
现代文：我认为，应该借王章这件事，命令举荐直言极谏之士，加上现有的郎、从官，也让他们尽量发表意见，使朝廷的言路比前加宽，以向四方显示，使天下都知道主上圣明，不会因直言而责罚臣下。
English: In my opinion, we should take advantage of the Wangzhang incident to order the recommendation of the most outspoken people, together with the existing vassals and officials, and also let them express their opinions as much as possible, so that the words of the imperial court are wider than before, so as to show the four directions, so that the whole world knows that the Lord is holy and will not punish his subjects for speaking out.

古文：若此，则流言消释，疑惑著明。 
现代文：若能如此，则流言便会消释，疑惑之心也会明白。 
English: In this way, rumours are dispelled and doubts are resolved.

古文：凤白行其策焉。
现代文：王凤将杜钦的意见报告成帝，并施行了他的建议。
English: Wang Feng reported Du Qin's opinion to the emperor and implemented his suggestion.

古文：是岁，陈留太守薛宣为左冯翊。
现代文：本年，任用陈留太守薛宣为左冯翊。
English: This year, Xue Xuan, the governor of Chenlu, was appointed as Zuo Fengye.

古文：宣为郡，所至有声迹。
现代文：薛宣担任郡长官，所到之处有治绩政声。
English: Xue Xuan served as the county magistrate, and everywhere he went, he was praised for his achievements.

古文：宣子惠为彭城令，宣尝过其县，心知惠不能，不问以吏事。
现代文：薛宣的儿子薛惠当彭城令，薛宣曾经过彭城，他心里清楚儿子没有才干，便不问他行政方面的事。
English: Xue Xuan's son, Xue Hui, was the governor of Pengcheng. Xue Xuan had been to Pengcheng before. He knew in his heart that his son was not talented, so he did not ask him about administrative matters.

古文：或问宣： 何不教戒惠以吏职？ 
现代文：有人问薛宣说： 你为何不指教、告诫儿子官吏的职责？ 
English: Someone asked Xue Xuan: "Why don't you instruct and warn your son about the duties of an official?"

古文：宣笑曰： 吏道以法令为师，可问而知；及能与不能，自有资材，何可学也！ 
现代文：薛宣笑着说： 为吏之道，以法令为师，可向法令讨教而学会。至于能干不能干，自有天分，怎么能够学呢？ 
English: Xue Xuan said with a smile: Being a bureaucrat, using laws as a teacher, you can learn from laws. As for ability, how can you learn if you have talent?

古文：众人传称，以宣言为然。
现代文：众人传播称赞他的这番话，认为他的见解正确。
English: Many people spread the propaganda and thought that Xue Xuan's words were right.

古文：孝成皇帝上之上阳朔二年春，三月，大赦天下。
现代文：阳朔二年春季，三月，大赦天下。
English: In the spring of the second year of Yangshuo, in March, there was a general amnesty.

古文：御史大夫张忠卒。
现代文：御史大夫张忠去世。
English: Chief Historian Zhang Zhong passed away.

古文：夏，四月，丁卯，以侍中、太仆王音为御史大夫。
现代文：夏季，四月，丁卯，任命侍中、太仆王音为御史大夫。
English: In the summer, in April, Emperor Wu appointed Wang Yin, a chamberlain and courtier, to the post of Grand Historian.

古文：于是王氏愈盛，郡国守相、刺史皆出其门下。
现代文：当时王氏家族的权势越来越盛，郡和封国的太守、国相及州刺史都出自王氏门下。
English: At that time, the power of the Wang family was becoming more and more prosperous, and the county and fief dynasties, the minister of state and the state chief secretary all came from the Wang family.

古文：五侯群弟争为奢侈，赂遗珍宝，四面而至，皆通敏人事，好士养贤，倾财施予以相高尚；宾客满门，竞为之声誉。
现代文：五侯的弟弟们竞争奢华，行贿之人呈献的珍宝，从四面八方涌来。五侯全都通达人事，好士人，养贤才，倾财施予，互相攀比，以此为荣。宾客满门，崐竞相为王氏家族传播声誉。
English: The brothers of the five towns compete in luxury, and the treasures presented by the bribe-givers come from all directions. The five towns are all proud of their personnel, good men, nurturing talents, pouring wealth and giving gifts, and competing with each other. The guests are full of doors, and they compete to spread the reputation of the Wang family.

古文：刘向谓陈汤曰： 今灾异如此，而外家日盛，其渐必危刘氏。
现代文：刘向对陈汤说： 如今灾异如此严重，而外戚权势日盛，发展下去，必然危害刘氏。
English: Liu Xiang said to Chen Tang, "Nowadays, the calamity is so serious, and the foreign relative's influence is increasing day by day. If it continues to develop, it will inevitably harm Liu Xiang.

古文：吾幸得以同姓末属，累世蒙汉厚恩，身为宗室遗老，历事三主。
现代文：我有幸是刘姓皇族的后裔，几代蒙受汉朝的厚恩，身为宗室遗老，前后侍奉过三位天子。
English: I am fortunate to be a descendant of the imperial family with the surname of Liu. For several generations, I have been favored by the Han Dynasty. As the eldest son of the family, I have served three heavenly sons before and after.

古文：上以我先帝旧臣，每进见，常加优礼。
现代文：皇上因为我是先帝旧臣，每次进见，总以优礼待我。
English: The Emperor, because I am a former emperor and a former vassal, always treats me with courtesy every time he sees me.

古文：吾而不言，孰当言者！ 
现代文：我若不说，还有谁应当说呢！ 
English: For if I do not speak, who will?

古文：遂上封事极谏曰： 臣闻人君莫不欲安，然而常危；莫不欲存，然而常亡；失御臣之术也。
现代文：于是上密封奏书，极力劝谏成帝说： 我听说，君王没有不希望国家安定的，然而却常常出现危机；没有不希望国家长存的，然而却常常亡国。这是由于君王失去了驾驭臣下的手段。
English: Therefore, he sealed the record and strongly advised Emperor Gongcheng to say: I have heard that there is no monarch who does not want the country to be stable, yet crises often occur; there is no monarch who does not want the country to survive, yet the country often collapses. This is because the monarch has lost the means to control his subjects.

古文：夫大臣操权柄，持国政，未有不为害者也。
现代文：大臣掌握权柄，主持国政，没有不危害君王的。
English: There is no way for a minister to hold power and preside over state affairs without becoming a scourge.

古文：故《书》曰： 臣之有作威作福，害于而家，凶于而国。 
现代文：因此《书经》说： 臣子作威作福，就会危害家族，给国家带来凶险。 
English: Therefore, the "Book" said: If a minister is arrogant and self-righteous, it will be harmful to your family and unfavorable to your country.

古文：孔子曰： 禄去公室，政逮大夫， 危亡之兆也。
现代文：孔子说： 皇家不能支配俸禄，政事都由大夫主持， 这是危亡的征兆啊！
English: Confucius said: The royal family cannot command a salary, and government affairs are presided over by a doctor. This is a sign of peril!

古文：今王氏一姓，乘硃轮华毂者二十三人，青、紫、貂、蝉充盈幄内，鱼鳞左右。
现代文：如今王氏一姓，乘坐红色车轮彩色车毂的华车的，就有二十三人。佩青色、紫色绶带，帽上有貂尾跟绣蝉的，充满朝廷，象鱼鳞一样排列左右。
English: Today, there are twenty-three members of the Wang family, riding in a Chinese carriage with red wheels and colorful ruts. Wearing blue and purple ribbons, caps with appendages and embroidered cicadas, they fill the court and are arranged like fish scales.

古文：大将军秉事用权，五侯骄奢僭盛，并作威福，击断自恣，行污而寄治，身私而托公，依东宫之尊，假甥舅之亲，以为威重。
现代文：尚书、九卿、州牧、郡守全都出自王氏的门下，主管掌握国家中枢机要部门，结党营私。受他们夸奖的，得以拜官高升；被他们憎恨的，受到诛杀伤害。帮闲者帮他们宣传；掌权者为他们说话。
English: Shangshu, Jiuqing, state pastors, and county governors all came from the Wang clan. The leaders controlled the most important departments in the country and formed parties. Those who were praised by them were promoted to higher positions; those who were hated by them were killed and injured. Helpers helped them to propagandize; those in power spoke for them.

古文：尚书、九卿、州牧、郡守皆出其门，管执枢机，朋党比周；称誉者登进，忤恨者诛伤；游谈者助之说，执政者为之言，排摈宗室，孤弱公族，其有智能者，尤非毁而不进，远绝宗室之任，不令得给事朝省，恐其与己分权；数称燕王、盖主以疑上心，避讳吕、霍而弗肯称。
现代文：排斥宗室，使刘氏皇族孤立、削弱，对皇族中有智慧才干的人，尤其非要进行诋毁不可，决不使他们得到提升，让他们同宗室的责任远远隔绝，不让他们在朝廷和宫中任职，生怕他们与自己分权。多次提起昭帝时发生的燕王、盖主之乱，使天子对宗室产生疑心，但却避讳吕氏、霍光等外戚擅权之事，不肯涉及。
English: He excluded the imperial family, isolating and weakening the Liu royal family, especially denigrating the wise and talented members of the imperial family, never allowing them to be promoted, keeping them far away from the responsibilities of the imperial family, not allowing them to serve in the imperial court and palace, and fearing that they would share power with him. Repeatedly mentioning the Yan Wang and Gaishu Rebellion that occurred during the reign of Emperor Zhao, made Tianzi suspicious of the imperial family, but he shunned the Lv clan, Huo Guang and other foreign relatives, and refused to be involved.

古文：内有管、蔡之萌，外假周公之论，兄弟据重，宗族磐互，历上古至秦、汉，外戚僭贵未有如王氏者也。
现代文：内心如管叔、蔡叔那样，反叛企图已经萌芽，外表却借用周公的言论。王氏兄弟占据重要位置，家族盘根错节，从上古至秦汉，外戚越分尊贵没有象王氏这样严重的。
English: Inwardly, like Uncle Guan and Uncle Cai, the attempt to rebel has already sprouted, but outwardly, they borrow the words of Zhou Gong. The Wang brothers occupy an important position, and the family is intertwined. From ancient times to the Qin and Han dynasties, the relative is not as serious as the Wang clan.

古文：物盛必有非常之变先见，为其人微象。
现代文：物忌太盛，太盛则必然会有非常的变异先行显现，成为预示其人将要衰微的征兆。
English: There must be a great change in the prosperity of things first, as a subtle appearance of its people.

古文：孝昭帝时，冠石立于泰山，仆柳起于上林，而孝宣帝即位。
现代文：孝昭帝时，泰山上忽然有大石矗立，上林苑枯倒的柳树复苏而起，接着昭帝驾崩，宣帝即位。
English: During the reign of Emperor Xiao Zhaoyi, a large boulder suddenly appeared on Mount Tai, the withered willow trees in Shanglin Court were revived, Emperor Zhaoyi died, and Emperor Xuan ascended to the throne.

古文：今王氏先祖坟墓在济南者，其梓柱生枝叶，扶疏上出屋，根地中，虽立石起柳，无以过此之明也。
现代文：而今王氏在济南的先祖坟墓，木柱生出枝叶，枝叶茂盛上出屋顶，根扎地中。这种异象，即使是大石起立，枯柳复活，也没有比这更明显了。
English: But now, in the graves of Wang's ancestors in Jinan, the wooden pillars are sprouting branches and leaves, the branches and leaves are flourishing on the roof, and the roots are in the ground. This vision, even if it is a large rock standing up and a dead willow reviving, is not more obvious than this.

古文：事势不两大，王氏与刘氏亦且不并立，如下有泰山之安，则上有累卵之危。
现代文：根据事物的规律，两大势不共存。王氏与刘氏也不能并立。如果王氏家族有泰山那样的安稳，则皇上就有累卵那样的危险。
English: The potential of things cannot be both great, and Wang and Shengbu cannot be both great. If those at the bottom have the stability of Mount Tai, those at the top are in danger of being overburdened.

古文：陛下为人子孙，守持宗庙，而令国祚移于外亲，降为皁隶，纵不为身，奈宗庙何！
现代文：陛下身为刘姓子孙，有守持宗庙的责任，而让国统转移到外戚手中，反使刘姓皇族降为卑贱的皂隶，陛下纵然不为自身打算，又怎样对待宗庙！
English: His Majesty, as the descendant of Liu, has the responsibility to maintain the ancestral temple, and let the national unification be transferred to the hands of his relatives, but instead reduced the Liu royal family to a lowly subordinate. Even if His Majesty does not plan for himself, how should he treat the ancestral temple!

古文：妇人内夫家而外父母家，此亦非皇太后之福也。
现代文：妇人本应亲近夫家，而疏远父母家。今天的状况，也不是皇太后的福气。
English: A woman should be close to her husband's family and distant from her parents' family. Today's situation is not a blessing for the empress dowager.

古文：孝宣皇帝不与舅平昌侯权，所以全安之也。
现代文：孝宣皇帝不把权柄交给舅父平昌侯，目的是为了保全他。
English: Emperor Xiaoxuan did not hand over power to his uncle, the Prince of Pyeongchang, in order to protect him.

古文：夫明者起福于无形，销患于未然，宜发明诏，吐德音，援近宗室，亲而纳信，黜远外戚，毋授以政，皆罢令就弟，以则效先帝之所行，厚安外戚，全其宗族，诚东宫之意，外家之福也。
现代文：因此，明智的人，造福于幸福还未形成之时，消灾于灾祸还未发生之前。陛下应公开下诏，作出有德于祖宗天下的决定，引进任用宗室为左右辅臣，亲近信任他们，采纳他们建议。罢黜疏远外戚，不把国家的权柄授予他们，全部罢免他们的官职，让他们回到府邸，以效法先帝的作法，厚待外戚，保全他们的宗族，这才真正是太后的本意，外戚的福份。
English: Therefore, a wise person should benefit when happiness is not yet formed, and eliminate the disaster before the disaster occurs. His Majesty should publicly issue an edict, make a decision worthy of the ancestors, introduce and appoint the family to be the right and left aides, trust them closely, and accept their suggestions. Dismiss alienated relatives, do not grant them the power of the state, remove all their official positions, let them return to the mansion, follow the practice of the former emperor, treat relatives well, and preserve their family. This is truly the intention of the empress dowager, the blessing of relatives.

古文：王氏永存，保其爵禄，刘氏长安，不失社稷，所以褒睦外内之姓，子子孙孙无疆之计也。
现代文：王氏可以永存，保持爵位和俸禄；刘氏可以长安，不失国家社稷。这正是褒美和睦内外亲属，使刘氏皇统子子孙孙绵延不绝的办法。
English: The Wang clan will always exist, and it will be a blessing to keep its title, and the Liu clan will be stable for a long time without losing its social status. This is a never-ending plan to harmonize the family name and the children and grandchildren.

古文：如不行此策，田氏复见于今，六卿必起于汉，为后嗣忧，昭昭甚明。
现代文：如果不实行此策，春秋时田氏篡齐的事件会再次出现于今世，六卿必崛起于汉代，给后世子孙带来忧患。
English: If this policy is not implemented, the events of the Spring and Autumn Eruption of the Tian Clan will occur again in this world, and the Six Lords will rise in the Han Dynasty, bringing sorrow to future generations.

古文：唯陛下深留圣思！ 
现代文：事情已十分明显，请陛下留意三思。 
English: The matter has become very clear. Your Majesty, please pay attention and think twice.

古文：书奏，天子召见向，叹息悲伤其意，谓曰： 君且休矣，吾将思之。 
现代文：奏章上去后，成帝召见刘向，为刘向的心意叹息悲伤。他对刘向说： 你暂时不必再说了，我会考虑的！ 
English: After the performance of the book, the heavenly son summoned Liu Xiang, sighed with sadness, and said to him: You should take a break for the time being, I will consider this matter.

古文：然终不能用其言。
现代文：然而最终仍不能采用刘向的建议。
English: However, Liu Xiang's suggestion could not be adopted in the end.

古文：秋，关东大水。
现代文：秋季，关东大水泛滥成灾。
English: In autumn, the Kanto region was hit by widespread flooding.

古文：八月，甲申，定陶共王康薨。
现代文：八月，甲申，定陶王刘康去世。
English: In August, Liu Kang, the king of Dingtao in Jiaxing, passed away.

古文：是岁，徙信都王兴为中山王。
现代文：本年，改封信都王刘兴为中山王。
English: This year, Liu Xing, the king of the capital, was changed to the king of Zhongshan.

