古文：洪武三年追封郢国公，肖像功臣庙，位第八。
现代文：冯胜，定远人。初名国胜，后改。与兄长冯国用都爱读书，通晓兵法，元末筑寨自保。
English: Feng Sheng, from Dingyuan. His first name was Guosheng, later changed. He and his older brother Feng Guoying both loved reading, were well versed in military law, and built a self-defense camp at the end of the Yuan Dynasty.

古文：国用之卒，子诚幼，胜先已积功为元帅，遂命袭兄职，典亲军。
现代文：太祖攻战至妙山时，冯胜随兄长一同归附，受到重用。国用累立军功，升至亲军都指挥使，去世后由冯胜袭其官职，典掌亲军。
English: When the great-grandfather attacked Jimei Mountain, Feng Sheng, together with his elder brother, was attached to it and received heavy use. He made military achievements for the country and rose to the commanding officer of the pro-army, and after his death, Feng Sheng took over his official position and became the pro-army.

古文：陈友谅逼龙湾。
现代文：陈友谅进逼龙湾。
English: Chen Youxuan enters the Dragon Bay.

古文：太祖御之，战石灰山。
现代文：太祖率军抵御，战于石灰山。
English: Taizu led the army to resist and fought in the Lime Mountain.

古文：胜攻其中坚，大破之，又追究破之采石，遂复太平。
现代文：冯胜攻其中坚，大败敌军，又继续追击，败敌于采石，于是收复太平。
English: Feng successfully attacked one of the strongholds, defeated the enemy army, continued to pursue, defeated the enemy in the quarry, and then restored peace.

古文：从征友谅，破安庆水寨，长驱至江州，走友谅。进亲军都护。
现代文：冯胜随军征讨陈友谅，攻克安庆水寨，长驱直入江州，赶走陈友谅，晋升为亲军都护。
English: Feng Sheng followed the army to recruit Chen Youyuan, conquered Anqing Water Town, drove straight into Jiangzhou, drove away Chen Youyuan, and was promoted to pro-army tutelage.

古文：从解安丰围，迁同知枢密院事。
现代文：冯胜又随军解安丰之围，迁升同知枢密院事。
English: Feng Sheng also followed the army to lift the siege of Anfeng and moved to Tongzhi Privy Council.

古文：从战鄱阳，下武昌，克庐州，移兵取江西诸路。
现代文：冯胜随军激战鄱阳，下武昌，克庐州，然后调兵攻取江西诸路。
English: Feng Sheng and his army fought fiercely in Poyang, Lower Wuchang, Kezhu, and then transferred troops to capture the roads in Jiangxi Province.

古文：与诸将收淮东，克海安壩，取泰州。
现代文：又与诸将收复淮东，克海安坝，取泰州。
English: He will also work with other generals to recover Huadong, block Hai'anba, and take Taizhou.

古文：徐达围高邮未下，还师援宜兴，以胜督军。
现代文：徐达围攻高邮不下，回军支援宜兴，而命冯胜督率所留军队。
English: Xu Da besieged Gaoyou, the returning troops supported Yixing, and Feng Sheng Guo led the remaining troops.

古文：高邮守将诈降，胜令指挥康泰帅数百人先入城，敌闭门尽杀之。
现代文：高邮守将诈降，冯胜命指挥康泰率数百人先行入城，敌军关闭城门，将他们全部杀害。
English: Gao Pochu was about to abdicate, and Feng Sheng ordered hundreds of people led by Kang Tai to enter the city ahead of him. The enemy closed the city gate and killed them all.

古文：太祖怒，召胜决大杖十，令步诣高邮。
现代文：太祖大怒，将冯胜召回，责罚十大杖，然后命他步行回高邮。
English: The great-grandfather flew into a rage, called Feng Sheng back, punished him with ten rods, and then ordered him to walk back to Gaoyou.

古文：胜惭愤，攻甚力。
现代文：冯胜既惭愧又气愤，拼力进攻。
English: Both ashamed and angry, Feng Sheng attacked with all his might.

古文：达亦自宜兴还，益兵攻克之，遂取淮安。
现代文：徐达也自宜兴返回，增兵攻克高邮，然后攻取淮安。
English: Xu Da also returned from Yixing, and increased the number of troops to conquer Gaoyou, and then conquered Huai'an.

古文：安丰破，擒吴将吕珍于旧馆。
现代文：安丰城陷，在旧馆擒获吴将吕珍。
English: The Anfeng Castle fell, and Wu general Lü Zhen was captured in the old hall.

古文：下湖州，克平江，功次平章常遇春，再迁右都督。
现代文：下湖州，克平江，冯胜功劳仅次于平章常遇春，再升为右都督。
English: In Lower Huzhou, Keping River, Feng Sheng's merit was second only to that of Pingzhang Changchun, and he was promoted to the right-hand governor.

古文：从大将军达北征，下山东诸州郡。
现代文：冯胜跟随大将军徐达北征，攻下山东诸州郡。
English: Feng Sheng followed the Northern Expedition of General Xu Da and conquered Zhouzhou County in Shandong Province.

古文：洪武元年兼太子右詹事。
现代文：洪武元年，冯胜兼任太子右詹事。
English: In the first year of Hongwu, Feng Sheng also served as the Crown Prince U Zhanji.

古文：坐小法贬一官，为都督同知。
现代文：因犯小法而被贬官，任都督同知。
English: He was demoted for breaking petty laws, and was appointed governor of the same province.

古文：引兵溯河，取汴、洛，下陕州，趋潼关。
现代文：冯胜率军逆河而上，取汴、洛，下陕州，直趋潼关。
English: Feng Sheng led the army upstream, taking Yunnan, Luo, lower Shaanxi, and straight to Shaoguan.

古文：守将宵遁，遂夺关，取华州。
现代文：守将夜逃，于是夺潼关，取华州。
English: The guard will flee at night, so he will seize Shouguan and take Huazhou.

古文：还汴，谒帝行在。授征虏右副将军，留守汴梁。
现代文：返汴之后，前往太祖行在谒见，被授为征虏右副将军，留守汴梁。
English: After returning to Jilin, he went to Taizhong in Jilin and was awarded the title of Vice-Commander of the Right Division of the Conscript Army. He stayed in Jilin.

古文：寻从大将军征山西，由武陟取怀庆，逾太行，克碗子城，取泽、潞，擒元右丞贾成于猗氏。
现代文：随即跟随大将军征伐山西，由武陟攻取怀庆，越过太行山，克碗子城，取泽、潞，于猗氏擒获元右丞贾成。
English: He immediately followed the general to conquer Shanxi, from Wuyi to capture Huaiqing, crossed Taihang Mountain, conquered Wanzi City, took Zhejiang and Handan, and won the Yuan Rongcheng in Handan.

古文：克平阳、绛州，擒元左丞田保保等，获将士五百余人。
现代文：又克平阳、绛州，擒获元左丞田保保等，俘获将士五百余人。
English: He also captured Pingyang and Zhangzhou, and captured Yuan Zuo Tian Baobao, and captured more than 500 soldiers.

古文：帝悦，诏右副将军胜居常遇春下，偏将军汤和居胜下，偏将军杨璟居和下。
现代文：太祖大悦，下诏命右副将军冯胜位居常遇春之下，偏将军汤和位居冯胜之下，偏将军杨王景位居汤和之下。
English: The great-grandfather Daye ordered the right-hand vice-general Feng Sheng to be in the first place, the general Tang He was in the second place, and the general Yang Wangjing was in the third place.

古文：二年渡河趋陕西，克凤翔。
现代文：二年，冯胜率军渡过黄河，直趋陕西，攻克凤翔。
English: Two years later, Feng Sheng led his army across the Yellow River, headed straight for Shaanxi, and conquered Fengxiang.

古文：遂渡陇，取巩昌，进逼临洮，降李思齐。
现代文：然后渡过陇水，攻取巩昌，进逼临洮，降服李思齐。
English: Then he crossed the Surabaya River, captured Gongchang, forced his way into Linyi, and surrendered to Li Siqi.

古文：还从大将军围庆阳。
现代文：又回军跟随大将军徐达围攻庆阳。
English: The returning troops followed the general Xu Da and besieged Qingyang.

古文：扩廓遣将攻原州，为庆阳声援。
现代文：扩廓遣将进攻原州，声援庆阳。
English: He sent an extended detachment to attack Wonju in solidarity with Qingyang.

古文：胜扼驿马关败其将，遂克庆阳，执张良臣。
现代文：冯胜扼守驿马关，打败其将，于是攻克庆阳，捉住张良臣。
English: Feng Sheng kept a tight grip on Qumaguan and defeated its general. He then conquered Qingyang and captured Zhang Liangcheng.

古文：陕西悉平。
现代文：陕西全部平定。
English: All of Shaanxi has been pacified.

古文：九月，帝召大将军还，命胜驻庆阳，节制诸军。
现代文：九月，太祖召大将军回京，命冯胜驻守庆阳，节制诸军。
English: In September, Emperor Taizu called the general back to Beijing, and ordered Feng Sheng to stay in Qingyang and restrain the troops.

古文：胜以关陕既定，辄引兵还。
现代文：而冯胜却认为关陕已定，擅自率领全军返回。
English: However, Feng Sheng thought that Guan Shan had already been decided and led the whole army back without authorization.

古文：帝怒，切责之。
现代文：太祖大怒，对冯胜加以切责。
English: The great-grandfather was furious and held Feng Sheng responsible.

古文：念其功大，赦勿治。
现代文：念其功大，赦免了他，未予治罪。
English: He pardoned him and did not punish him.

古文：而赏赉金币，不能半大将军。
现代文：但所赏金币，未及大将军的一半。
English: However, the bounty was less than half of the general's.

古文：明年正月复以右副将军同大将军出西安，捣定西，破扩廓帖木儿，获士马数万。
现代文：第二年正月，冯胜以右副将军的身份与大将军一起出西安，直捣定西，击败扩廓帖木儿，俘获兵马数万。
English: In the first month of the second year, Feng Sheng, as the right vice-general, went out of Xi'an with the general and went straight to the west, defeated the expanded Timur and captured tens of thousands of soldiers and horses.

古文：分兵自徽州南出一百八渡，徇略阳，擒元平章蔡琳，遂入沔州。
现代文：又分兵自徽州往南出一百八渡，巡行略阳，擒获平章蔡琳，然后进入沔州。
English: Another detachment of soldiers went south from Huizhou for one hundred and eight miles, marched through Liangyang, captured Pingzhang Cailin, and then entered Ganzhou.

古文：遣别将自连云栈取兴元，移兵吐番，征哨极于西北。
现代文：另外派遣其他将领自连云栈攻取兴元，调兵吐番，在西北征讨哨极。
English: In addition, other generals were dispatched from Lianyungang to capture Xingyuan, the troops were transferred to Tuban, and sentries were recruited in the northwest.

古文：凯旋，论功授开国辅运推诚宣力武臣、特进荣禄大夫、右柱国、同参军国事，封宋国公，食禄三千石，予世券。
现代文：凯旋之后，论功时，冯胜被授为开国辅运推诚宣力武臣、特进荣禄大夫、右柱国，参与军国大事，并封为宋国公，年禄三千石，并被授予世袭凭证。
English: After the triumphant return, when discussing the merits, Feng Sheng was awarded the title of the founding of the country, the auxiliary movement, the promotion of sincerity and propaganda, the warrior, the special promotion, the honorary doctor, the right pillar of the country, participated in the military affairs, and was awarded the title of Song Guogong, the annual salary of 3,000 koku, and was awarded the hereditary certificate.

古文：诰词谓胜兄弟亲同骨肉，十余年间，除肘腑之患，建爪牙之功，平定中原，佐成混一。
现代文：诰词中谓冯胜兄弟亲同骨肉，十余年间，除肘腋之患，建爪牙之功，平定中原，佐成天下。
English: In the eulogy, it was said that the Feng Sheng brothers were flesh and blood. In more than ten years, they eliminated the disease of elbow spasm, built the work of minions, pacified the Central Plains, and became the world.

古文：所以称扬之者甚至。
现代文：所以对冯胜称赞备至。
English: That's why I have nothing but praise for Feng Sheng.

古文：五年，以胜宣力四方，与魏国公达、曹国公文忠各赐彤弓。
现代文：五年，因冯胜效力四方，因而与魏国公徐达、曹国公李文忠分别被赐给彤弓。
English: In the fifth year, because of Feng Sheng's effectiveness in four directions, he and Wei Guogong Xu Da and Cao Guogong Li Wenzhong were given the bow and arrow respectively.

古文：扩廓在和林，数扰边。
现代文：扩廓居于和林，多次骚扰明朝边境。
English: He lived in Warim and repeatedly harassed the Ming-Dynasty border.

古文：帝患之，大发兵三道出塞。
现代文：太祖以此为患，派出大军三路出塞。
English: The great-grandfather took advantage of this and sent a large army to break out of the blockage in three ways.

古文：命胜为征西将军，帅副将军陈德、傅友德等出西道，取甘肃。
现代文：命冯胜为征西将军，率副将军陈德、傅友德等从西路出击，攻取甘肃。
English: Feng Sheng was appointed as the general to conquer the west, and he led the deputy generals Chen De and Fu Youde to attack from the west and capture Gansu.

古文：至兰州，友德以骁骑前驱，再败元兵，胜复败之扫林山。
现代文：到兰州时，傅友德率领骁骑为前锋，再败元军，冯胜复败之于扫林山。
English: When he arrived in Lanzhou, Fu Youde led the cavalry as a forward, defeated the Yuan army again, and Feng Sheng was defeated again in the forest.

古文：至甘肃，元将上都驴迎降。
现代文：到达甘肃，元将上都驴出迎投降。
English: Arriving in Gansu, the general surrendered.

古文：至亦集乃路，守将卜颜帖木儿亦降。
现代文：到达亦集乃路时，守将卜颜帖木儿也降。
English: When they arrived at Ichinoe-ro, the captain, Buyan Timur, was also demoted.

古文：次别笃山，岐王朵儿只班遁去，追获其平章长加奴等二十七人及马驼牛羊十余万。
现代文：冯胜军驻扎别笃山，岐王朵儿只班逃走，冯胜率军追击并俘获其平章长加奴等二十七人及马驼牛羊十余万。
English: Feng Sheng's army was stationed at Mount Beidou. Qi Wang Du'er fled at the first opportunity. Feng Sheng led his army to chase and capture 27 people, including his subordinate Zhang Chang Kanu, as well as more than 100,000 horses, camels, cattle and sheep.

古文：是役也，大将军达军不利，左副将军文忠杀伤相当，独胜斩获甚众，全师而还。
现代文：这场战役中，大将军徐达出师不利，左副将军李文忠军与敌军死伤相当，唯独冯胜斩俘甚多，全胜而返。
English: In this battle, the great general Xu Da's division was unfavorable, and the left deputy general Li Wenzhong's army suffered the same number of deaths and injuries as the enemy army, but Feng Sheng took many prisoners and returned victorious.

古文：会有言其私匿驼马者，赏不行。
现代文：但当时有人说他私藏驼马，因而未获赏赐。
English: At the time, however, it was said that he had hidden a camel and was therefore not rewarded.

古文：自后数出练兵临清、北平，出大同征元遗众，镇陕西及河南。
现代文：此后，冯胜多次前往临清、北平练兵，率军出大同征讨元朝遗部，镇守陕西及河南。
English: After that, Feng Sheng repeatedly went to Linqing and Beiping to train soldiers, and led the army out of Datong to conquer the remnants of the Yuan Dynasty, and garrisoned Shaanxi and Henan.

古文：册其女为周王妃。
现代文：其女被册封为周王妃。
English: His daughter was named Princess Zhou.

古文：久之，大将军达、左副将军文忠皆卒，而元太尉纳哈出拥众数十万屯金山，数为辽东边害。
现代文：时间一久，大将军徐达、左副将军李文忠都已去世，而元太尉纳哈出拥兵数十万驻扎金山，成为辽东边患。
English: After a long time, General Xu Da and Left Vice-General Li Wenzhong have both passed away, while former Lieutenant Naha has stationed hundreds of thousands of soldiers in Jinshan, becoming a problem on the eastern border of Liaoning Province.

古文：二十年命胜为征虏大将军，颖国公傅友德、永昌侯蓝玉为左右副将军，帅南雄侯赵庸等以步骑二十万征之。
现代文：二十年，太祖命冯胜为征虏大将军，颍国公傅友德、永昌侯蓝玉为左右副将军，率南雄侯赵庸等以步兵、骑兵共二十万前去征讨。
English: For twenty years, Grandfather Feng Sheng was the conscript general, and the statesmen Fu Youde and Yongchang Hou Lan Yu were the left and right vice-generals, and led the South Xiong Hou Zhao Yong with a total of 200,000 infantry and cavalry to go to the conquest.

古文：郑国公常茂、曹国公李景隆、申国公邓镇等皆从。
现代文：郑国公常茂、曹国公李景隆、申国公邓镇等都随行。
English: Zheng Guo Gong Changmao, Cao Guo Gong Li Jinglong, Shen Guo Gong Deng Zhen and others are accompanying.

古文：帝复遣故所获纳哈出部将乃剌吾者奉玺书往谕降。
现代文：太祖又派所俘纳哈出部将乃剌吾携带玺书前去谕降。
English: The great-grandfather also sent his captive Naha Izube to bring Naosuke to him with an imperial edict to surrender.

古文：胜出松亭关，分筑大宁、宽河、会州、富峪四城。
现代文：冯胜军出松亭关，分别修筑大宁、宽河、会州、富峪四城。
English: Feng Shengjun set out from Songting Pass and built the four cities of Daning, Kuanhe, Hezhou and Fuxi.

古文：驻大宁逾两月，留兵五万守之，而以全师压金山。
现代文：在大宁驻扎两个多月后，冯胜留下五万军队驻守，而率全军进逼金山。
English: After being stationed in Danying for more than two months, Feng Sheng left 50,000 troops stationed there, and led the whole army into Jinshan Mountain.

古文：纳哈出见乃剌吾惊曰： 尔尚存乎！ 
现代文：纳哈出见到乃剌吾后大惊道： 你还活着吗？ 
English: When Naha came out and saw Naosuke, she was shocked and said, "Are you still alive?

古文：乃剌吾述帝恩德。
现代文：乃剌吾向他述说太祖的恩德。
English: I told him about my grandfather's kindness.

古文：纳哈出喜，遣其左丞、探马赤等献马，且觇胜军。
现代文：纳哈出很高兴，便派遣其左丞探马赤等前来献马，并且侦察冯胜军军情。
English: Naha was very pleased, so he sent his left-hand man, the inspector Ma Chieh, and others to come and offer horses, and to reconnoiter the military situation of Feng Sheng's army.

古文：胜已深入，逾金山，至女直苦屯，降纳哈出之将全国公观童。
现代文：此时，冯胜军已经深入，翻越金山，到达女直苦屯，降服纳哈出部将全国公观童。
English: At this time, Feng Shengjun had already gone deep, climbed over the Jinshan Mountain, reached Mianzhongkutun, and subdued the Naha branch to become the national public watchdog.

古文：大军奄至，纳哈出度不敌，因乃剌吾请降。
现代文：大军突至，纳哈出感到寡不敌众，便按乃剌吾所说，请求投降。
English: A large army rushed in, and Naha felt that he was outnumbered, so he asked for surrender as Nao Shingo had said.

古文：胜使蓝玉轻骑受之。
现代文：冯胜派蓝玉率轻骑前往受降。
English: Feng Sheng sent Lanyu to ride lightly to accept the surrender.

古文：玉饮纳哈出酒，欢甚，解衣衣之。
现代文：蓝玉用酒招待纳哈出，饮得正欢时，蓝玉脱下衣服给纳哈出穿。
English: Blue Jade used wine to invite Naha out, and when she was drunk, Blue Jade took off her clothes to dress Naha.

古文：纳哈出不肯服，顾左右咄咄语，谋遁去。
现代文：纳哈出不肯穿，并对左右咄咄而语，企图逃跑。
English: Naha refused to put it on and tried to run away, shouting aggressively to the left and right.

古文：胜之婿常茂在坐，遽起砍其臂。
现代文：冯胜的女婿常茂当时在座，他突然跃起向纳哈出的手臂砍去。
English: Feng Sheng's son-in-law Chang Mao was present at the time, and he suddenly jumped up and chopped Naha's outstretched arm.

古文：都督耿忠拥以见胜。
现代文：都督耿忠将他拥去见冯胜。
English: Governor Geng Zhong took him to see Feng Sheng.

古文：纳哈出将士妻子十余万屯松花河，闻纳哈出伤，惊溃。
现代文：纳哈出的将士及妻子儿女十余万人驻扎在松花河，听说纳哈出受伤，大惊而溃。
English: More than 100,000 soldiers, wives and children from Naha were stationed in Songhua River. When they heard that Naha was injured, they were shocked.

古文：胜遣观童谕之乃降，得所部二十余万人，牛羊马驼辎重互百余里。
现代文：冯胜派遣观童将他们招降，获得二十余万人，牛羊马驼及辎重绵亘百余里。
English: Feng Sheng sent out scouts to recruit them, and gained more than two hundred thousand people. Cattle, sheep, horses, camels and donkeys stretched for more than a hundred miles.

古文：还至亦迷河，复收其残卒二万余、车马五万。
现代文：冯胜军回至亦迷河时，又俘获其残兵二万余人、车马五万。
English: When Feng Sheng's army returned to Yilihe, they captured more than 20,000 of his remaining soldiers and 50,000 horses and chariots.

古文：而都督濮英殿后，为敌所杀。
现代文：而都督濮英殿后，被敌人所杀。
English: However, he was killed by the enemy after he left the palace.

古文：师还，以捷闻，并奏常茂激变状，尽将降众二十万人入关。
现代文：师还之时，冯胜将捷报上奏，并将常茂激变的情形也一起奏上，率领投降的二十万人全部入关。
English: While the division was still there, Feng Sheng reported the victory, and also reported the situation of the Changmao cataclysm, leading all 200,000 people who surrendered into the customs.

古文：帝大悦，使使者迎劳胜等，械系茂。
现代文：太祖大悦，派遣使者前去迎接慰劳冯胜等，而将常茂套上械锁。
English: Great-grandfather Daye sent an envoy to meet Feng Sheng, the consoler, and put Changmao under lock and key.

古文：会有言胜多匿良马，使阍者行酒于纳哈出之妻求大珠异宝，王子死二日强娶其女，失降附心，又失濮英三千骑，而茂亦讦胜过。
现代文：当时有人揭发冯胜藏匿了许多良马，派门人向纳哈出之妻依次酌酒，以求大珠异宝，王子才死二天便强娶其女，因而丧失降、附之心，又损失濮英三千骑兵，而常茂也趁机攻讠干冯胜之过。
English: At that time, it was revealed that Feng Sheng had hidden many fine horses. He sent his servants to Naha's wife to drink wine one after another in order to obtain precious pearls. The prince died only two days before he forced his daughter to marry. As a result, he lost his heart of submission and attachment, and also lost 3,000 cavalrymen, and Changmo also took the opportunity to attack and defeat Feng Sheng.

古文：帝怒，收胜大将军印，命就第凤阳，奉朝请，诸将士亦无赏。
现代文：太祖大怒，没收冯胜的大将军印，命他在凤阳建宅居住，定期上京朝见，诸将士也无赏赐。
English: The great-grandfather was furious, confiscated Feng Sheng's general's seal, ordered him to build a house in Fengyang and live there, and regularly went to Beijing to see the emperor. The generals were not rewarded.

古文：胜自是不复将大兵矣。二十一年奉诏调东昌番兵征曲靖。
现代文：冯胜从此以后再也没有统率过大军。二十一年，冯胜奉诏调遣东昌番兵征讨曲靖。
English: Feng Sheng never led a large army again after that. In the 21st year, Feng Sheng sent Dongchang's soldiers to recruit Qujing.

古文：番兵中道叛，胜镇永宁抚安之。
现代文：番兵中途反叛，冯胜镇守永宁，进行安抚。
English: The guards rebelled halfway through, and Feng Sheng, the town guard of Yongning, came to pacify them.

古文：二十五年命籍太原、平阳民为军，立卫屯田。
现代文：二十五年，太祖命冯胜在太原、平阳招民为兵，立卫屯田。
English: In 25 years, Grandfather Feng Sheng recruited soldiers in Taiyuan and Pingyang and set up a garrison.

古文：皇太孙立，加太子太师，偕颍国公友德练军山西、河南，诸公、侯皆听节制。
现代文：皇太孙册立后，冯胜被加封太子太师，偕同颍国公傅友德前往山西、河南练兵，诸公、侯均听其节制。
English: After the Emperor's grandson was enthroned, Feng Sheng was given the title of Crown Prince and Grand Master, and he went to Shanxi and Henan to train soldiers with Fu Youde, the Duke of Yunnan. All princes and lords obeyed his restraint.

古文：时诏列勋臣望重者八人，胜居第三。
现代文：当时所诏列的德隆望重的勋臣有八人，冯胜居第三位。
English: At that time, there were eight of Delong's respected courtiers listed in the imperial edict, with Feng Sheng ranking third.

古文：太祖春秋高，多猜忌。
现代文：太祖年事已高，对人猜忌甚多。
English: My great-grandfather was very old, and he was very suspicious of people.

古文：胜功最多，数以细故失帝意。
现代文：冯胜功劳最多，多次因小事违背了太祖的心意。
English: Feng Sheng deserves the most credit. He repeatedly violated his grandfather's will for minor reasons.

古文：蓝玉诛之月，召还京。
现代文：追封为郢国公，在肖像功臣庙中位列第八。
English: He was posthumously awarded the title of Duke of Shandong Province and ranked eighth in the portrait hero temple.

古文：逾二年，赐死，诸子皆不得嗣。而国用子诚积战功云南，累官至右军左都督。
现代文：冯国用死时，其子冯诚尚年幼，而弟冯胜已积功升为元帅，于是朱元璋便命冯胜接任冯国用之职，统领亲军。
English: When Feng Guoying died, his son Feng Cheng was still young, and his brother Feng Sheng had already been promoted to marshal, so Zhu Yuanzhang ordered Feng Sheng to take over Feng Guoying's post and lead the family army.

古文：纳哈出者，元木华黎裔孙，为太平路万户。
现代文：纳哈出是元朝木华黎的嫡孙，为太平路万户。
English: Naha is the great-grandson of the founder of the dynasty, Miharu Hari, and is the ancestor of tens of thousands of Taihei households.

古文：太祖克太平被执，以名臣后，待之厚。
现代文：太祖攻克太平时被捉，太祖因他是名臣之后而给予厚待。
English: The great-grandfather was captured at the time of conquering Taiping, and the great-grandfather was treated well because he was a famous minister.

古文：知其不忘元，资遣北归。
现代文：又知道他不能忘记元朝，便给钱让他北归。
English: He also knew that he could not forget the Yuan Dynasty, so he gave him money to return to the north.

古文：元既亡，纳哈出聚兵金山，畜牧蕃盛。
现代文：元朝已亡，纳哈出便聚兵金山，畜牧繁盛。
English: The Yuan Dynasty had already passed away, and when Naha came out, it gathered soldiers from Jinshan and prospered in animal husbandry.

古文：帝遣使招谕之，终不报。
现代文：太祖派遣使臣前去招降，纳哈出始终未服。
English: The great-grandfather sent envoys to invite the surrender, but Naha was not satisfied.

古文：数犯辽东，为叶旺所败。
现代文：屡次侵犯辽东，被叶旺所败。
English: Repeatedly invaded Liaodong and was defeated by Ye Wang.

古文：胜等大兵临之，乃降，封海西侯。
现代文：冯胜等大军压境，纳哈出才投降，被封为海西侯。
English: Feng Sheng and other large armies pressed the border, Naha surrendered, and was named the West Sea Marquis.

古文：从傅友德征云南，道卒。
现代文：后跟随傅友德征讨云南，途中去世。
English: Later, he followed Fu Youde to Yunnan and died on the way.

古文：子察罕，改封沈阳侯，坐蓝玉党死。
现代文：其子察罕，改封为沈阳侯，因系蓝玉党人牵连而死。
English: His son, Cahan, changed his name to Shenyang Hou, and died because he was implicated by the Blue Jade Party.

古文：傅友德，其先宿州人，后徙砀山。
现代文：傅友德，其祖先是宿州人，后来迁至砀山。
English: Fu Youde, whose ancestors were from Suzhou, later moved to Shaoshan.

古文：元末从刘福通党李喜喜入蜀。
现代文：元末随刘福通党羽李喜喜入蜀。
English: At the end of the Yuan Dynasty, Li Xixi, a member of Liu Fortong's faction, entered Shu.

古文：喜喜败，从明玉珍，玉珍珍不能用。
现代文：李喜喜失败后，傅友德改随明玉珍，然而未获明玉珍重用。
English: After the failure of Li Xixi, Fu Youde changed to follow Ming Yuzhen, but was not reused by Ming Yuzhen.

古文：走武昌，从陈友谅，无所知名。
现代文：傅友德又去武昌，跟随陈友谅，也不受重视。
English: Fu Youde also went to Wuchang to follow Chen You Rong, but he was not taken seriously.

古文：太祖攻江州，至小孤山，友德帅所部降。
现代文：太祖进攻江州，至小孤山，傅友德率所部投降。
English: Taizu attacked Jiangzhou, to a small lonely mountain, Fu Youde led his troops to surrender.

古文：帝与语，奇之，用为将。
现代文：太祖与他交谈，觉得他非同寻常，便任他为将。
English: The great-grandfather talked to him, thought he was extraordinary, and made him captain.

古文：从常遇春援安丰，略庐州。
现代文：傅友德跟随常遇春支援安丰，夺取庐州。
English: Fu Youde followed Changyu Chun in supporting Anfeng to capture Zhangzhou.

古文：还，从战鄱阳湖，轻舟挫友谅前锋。
现代文：回来后，参加鄱阳湖大战，驾轻舟挫败陈友谅军前锋。
English: After returning, he took part in the Battle of Poyang Lake, driving a light boat to defeat Chen Youjun's army.

古文：被数创，战益力，复与诸将邀击于泾江口，友谅败死。
现代文：傅友德多处受伤，却愈战愈猛，又在泾江口拦击敌军，陈友谅战败而死。
English: Fu Youde was injured in many places, but the more fierce the battle, and he stopped the enemy at the mouth of the Minjiang River. Chen Youjun was defeated and died.

古文：从征武昌，城东南高冠山下瞰城中，汉兵据之，诸将相顾莫前。
现代文：随征武昌，诸将从城东南的高冠山可俯视城中，却被汉兵占据，诸将相互观望，不愿前进。
English: As they march to Wuchang, they will look down on the city from Gaoguan Mountain in the southeast of the city, but it will be occupied by Chinese soldiers. They will look at each other, unwilling to move forward.

古文：友德帅数百人，一鼓夺之。
现代文：傅友德率领数百人，一鼓夺之。
English: Fu Youde led hundreds of people and won it with one drum.

古文：流矢中颊洞胁，不为沮。
现代文：飞箭射中面颊，穿透两腮，傅友德毫不丧气。
English: The flying arrow hit his cheek and penetrated his cheekbones. Fu Youde was not discouraged.

古文：武昌平，授雄武卫指挥使。
现代文：武昌平定，他被授为雄武卫指挥使。
English: Wuchang was pacified, and he was awarded the title of Grand Marshal of the Imperial Guards.

古文：从徐达拔庐州，别将克夷陵、衡州、襄阳。
现代文：跟随徐达攻取庐州，另外率军攻克夷陵、衡州、襄阳。
English: He followed Xu Da in conquering Bozhou, and led another army to conquer Yiling, Hengzhou, and Yangyang.

古文：攻安陆，被九创，破擒其将任亮。
现代文：进攻安陆时，傅友德九处受伤，最终攻克安陆，并擒获敌将任亮。
English: When attacking Anlu, Fu Youde was injured in nine places. He finally defeated Anlu and captured the enemy general Ren Liang.

古文：从大军下淮东，破张士诚援兵于马骡港，获战艘千，复大破元将竹贞于安丰。
现代文：又随大军下淮东，在马骡港击败张士诚援兵，获战船千艘，又在安丰大败元将竹贞。
English: He also followed the great army to Huadong, defeated Zhang Shicheng's reinforcements in Malang Port, won a thousand warships, and defeated the former general Zhu Zhen in Anfeng.

古文：同陆聚守徐州，扩廓遣将李二来攻，次陵子村。
现代文：与陆聚驻守徐州，扩廓遣将李二来攻，驻扎陵子村。
English: He was stationed in Xuzhou with Lu Jiu and sent Li Er to attack and stationed in Lingzi Village.

古文：友德度兵寡不敌，遂坚壁不战。
现代文：傅友德估计寡不敌众，于是坚守不战。
English: Fu Youde estimated that he was outnumbered, so he insisted on not fighting.

古文：诇其众方散掠，以二千人溯河至吕梁，登陆击之，单骑奋槊刺其将韩乙。
现代文：当探知敌军正四散抢掠时，便率领二千人逆河而上到达吕梁，登陆进击，傅友德独自骑着战马，持槊奋力刺向敌将韩乙。
English: When he detected that the enemy army was scattering and looting, he led two thousand people upstream to Luliang and landed to attack. Fu Youde alone rode a warhorse, holding a scepter and struggling to stab the enemy general Han Yi.

古文：敌败去。
现代文：敌军败退。
English: The enemy retreated in defeat.

古文：度且复至，亟还，开城门而阵于野，卧戈以待，约闻鼓即起。
现代文：傅友德料到敌军还会再来，便迅速返回，打开城门，列阵野外，横戈以待，约定闻鼓即起。
English: Fu Youde expected that the enemy would come again, so he quickly returned, opened the gate, lined up in the field, waited for the battle, and agreed to hear the drum immediately.

古文：李二果至，鸣鼓，士腾跃搏战，破擒二。
现代文：李二果然来了，傅友德立即下令鸣鼓，士兵腾跃搏击，破擒李二。
English: Li Er did indeed come, Fu Youde immediately ordered the drums to be beaten, the soldiers pranced and fought, breaking Li Er's shackles.

古文：渡河取卫辉、彰德，至临清，获元将为向导，取德州、沧州。
现代文：傅友德应召回京，晋升为江淮行省参知政事，太祖撤掉御前麾盖，命人敲鼓吹号将他送回府宅。第二年，傅友德随大将军北征，破沂州，下青州。
English: Fu Youde was called back to Beijing and was promoted to the post of political adviser to the governor of Jianghuai Province. The great-grandfather removed the imperial seal and ordered people to beat drums to send him back to the residence. In the following year, Fu Youde followed the great general on the Northern Expedition, defeating Zhangzhou and Lower Qingzhou.

古文：既克元都，侦逻古北隘口，守卢沟桥，略大同，还下保定、真定，守定州。
现代文：元丞相也速来援，傅友德以轻骑诱敌进入伏击点，然后奋力追杀敌军，于是攻取德州、沧州。攻克元都后，傅友德巡察古北隘口，驻守卢沟桥，攻取大同，回军攻下保定、真定，驻守定州。
English: The Yuan chancellor also quickly came to the rescue. Fu Youde rode on horseback to lure the enemy into the ambush point, and then fought hard to chase down the enemy army, thus capturing Texas and Cangzhou. After conquering the Yuan capital, Fu Youde inspected the Gubei Pass, stationed at Lugou Bridge, captured Datong, and the returning army captured Baoding, Zhending, and stationed at Dingzhou.

古文：从攻山西，克太原。
现代文：随后攻山西，攻克太原。
English: Subsequently, they attacked the western part of the mountains and conquered Taiyuan.

古文：扩廓自保安来援，万骑突至。
现代文：扩廓自保安来援，万名骑兵突然而至。
English: Security guards came to the rescue, and ten thousand cavalry suddenly arrived.

古文：友德以五十骑冲却之，因夜袭其营。
现代文：傅友德率领五十名骑兵将敌军冲退，并趁机夜袭敌营。
English: Fu Youde led fifty cavalrymen to drive the enemy troops back, and took the opportunity to attack the enemy camp at night.

古文：扩廓仓卒遁去，追至土门关，获其士马万计。
现代文：扩廓仓促逃遁，傅友德率军追至土门关，俘获兵马数以万计。
English: Yan Guo hastily fled, and Fu Youde led the army to chase him to Dumen Pass, capturing tens of thousands of soldiers and horses.

古文：复败贺宗哲于石州，败脱列伯于宣府，遂西会大将军，围庆阳，以偏师驻灵州，遏其援兵，遂克庆阳。
现代文：又在石州击败贺宗哲，在宣府击败脱列伯，然后往西会合大将军，围攻庆阳，以一部队军队驻扎灵州，遏制敌军援兵，于是攻克庆阳。
English: He also defeated He Zongzhe in Shizhou, defeated De Liebo in Xuanwu, and then went west to meet the general, besieged Qingyang, stationed a troop of troops in Lingzhou, deterred enemy reinforcements, and then conquered Qingyang.

古文：还，赐白金文绮。
现代文：回京后，被赐白金、文绮。
English: After returning to Kyoto, he was awarded platinum and a medal.

古文：洪武三年从大将军捣定西，大破扩廓。
现代文：洪武三年，傅友德跟随大将军直捣定西，大败扩廓。
English: In the third year of Hongwu, Fu Youde followed the general straight to Dingxi, and was defeated.

古文：移兵伐蜀，领前锋出一百八渡，夺略阳关，遂入沔。
现代文：然后调兵伐蜀，傅友德率领前锋出一百八渡，夺取略阳关，于是进入沔。
English: Then the troops were transferred to attack Shuxu. Fu Youde led the vanguard to go one hundred and eight furlongs to capture Liaoyang Pass, and then entered Luoyang.

古文：分兵自连云栈合攻汉中，克之。
现代文：又分兵自连云栈合攻汉中，将它攻克。
English: Another detachment of soldiers from Lianyungang entered Hanzhong and conquered it.

古文：以馈饷不继，还军西安。
现代文：因粮饷不继，回军西安。
English: Due to lack of food, he returned to Xi'an.

古文：蜀将吴友仁寇汉中。友德以三千骑救之，攻斗山寨，令军中人燃十炬布山上，蜀兵惊遁。
现代文：蜀将吴友仁侵犯汉中，傅友德率三千骑兵前去援救，进攻斗山寨，命军中士兵燃起十个火把分布山上，蜀兵见此惊逃。
English: Shu general Wu Youren invaded Han Zhong, Fu Youde led three thousand cavalrymen to rescue and attack Dooshan Village. He ordered soldiers in the army to light ten torches and distribute them on the mountain. Shu soldiers saw this and fled in surprise.

古文：是冬，论功授开国辅运推诚宣力武臣、荣禄大夫、柱国、同知大都督府事，封颍川侯，食禄千五百石，予世券。
现代文：这年冬天，朝廷论功，傅友德被授为开国辅运推诚宣力武臣、荣禄大夫、柱国、同知大都督府事，封为颍川侯，年禄一千五百石，并被授予世袭凭证。
English: In the winter of that year, Fu Youde was honored by the imperial court as a vassal, honorary doctor, pillar of the state, and grand governor of the same province. He was given the title of Shichuan marquis, with an annual salary of 1,500 koku, and was awarded a hereditary certificate.

古文：明年充征虏前将军，与征西将军汤和分道伐蜀。
现代文：第二年，傅友德担任征虏前将军，与征西将军汤和分道伐蜀。
English: In the second year, Fu Youde served as the former general of the conquest, and he and Tang He, the general of the conquest of the West, went their separate ways to conquer Shu.

古文：和帅廖永忠等以舟师攻瞿塘，友德帅顾时等以步骑出秦、陇。
现代文：汤和率廖永忠等以水师进攻瞿塘，傅友德率顾时等以步兵、骑兵出秦、陇。
English: Tang He led by Liao Yongzhong and others attacked Shantang with sailors, Fu Youde led by Gu Shi and others led by infantry and cavalry out of Qin and Shandong.

古文：太祖谕友德曰： 蜀人闻我西伐，必悉精锐东守瞿塘，北阻金牛，以抗我师。
现代文：太祖对傅友德说： 蜀人听说我军西伐，必定将其全部精锐部分东守瞿塘，北阻金牛，抵抗我军。
English: The great-grandfather said to Fu Youde: Shu people have heard that our army is advancing westward, so they will definitely send all their elite troops to the east to defend Shantang, and to the north to defend Jinniu, to resist our army.

古文：若出不意，直捣阶、文，门户既隳，腹心自溃。
现代文：如果出其不意，直捣阶、文，门户已毁，腹心自溃。
English: If it comes out of the blue, the doorway has been destroyed and the confidant has self-destructed.

古文：兵贵神速，患不勇耳。 
现代文：兵贵神速，只怕军队不勇猛啊。 
English: The soldiers are very fast, but I'm afraid the army is not brave.

古文：友德疾驰至陕，集诸军声言出金牛，而潜引兵趋陈仓，攀援岩谷，昼夜行。
现代文：傅友德疾驰至陕，召集诸军声言兵出金牛，而暗地里却率军直趋陈仓，攀援岩石，昼夜行进。
English: Fu Youde hurried to Shaanxi, called up the army and said that the soldiers should come out of the gold bull, but secretly he led the army straight to Chencang, climbed the rock, and marched day and night.

古文：抵阶州，败蜀将丁世珍，克其城。
现代文：抵达阶州，击败蜀将丁世珍，攻克此城。
English: Arrived at Chaozhou, defeated the Shu general Ding Shizhen, and conquered the city.

古文：蜀人断白龙江桥。
现代文：蜀人弄断白龙江桥。
English: Shu people broke the bridge of the White Dragon River.

古文：友德修桥以渡，破五里关，遂拔文州。
现代文：傅友德军修桥渡江，攻破五里关，于是攻克文州。
English: Fu You and the German army repaired the bridge to cross the river, broke through the five-mile pass, and then attacked Wenzhou.

古文：渡白水江，趋绵州。
现代文：然后渡过白水江，直趋绵州。
English: It then crossed the Baishuijiang River and headed straight for Mianzhou.

古文：时汉江水涨，不得渡，伐木造战舰。
现代文：当时汉江水涨，不能渡江，傅友德军为此伐木营造战舰。
English: At that time, the water level of the Han River was too high to cross the river, so Fu You and the German army cut down trees to build warships.

古文：欲以军声通瞿塘，乃削木为牌为千，书克阶、文、绵日月，投汉水，顺流下。
现代文：为将军威通达瞿塘，于是便削成数千木牌，将攻克阶、文、绵的日期刻上，投入汉水，让它们顺流而下。
English: When he reached Qutang for General Wei Tong, he cut thousands of wooden plaques, engraved the dates of conquering the steps, documents and moss, and threw them into the Han River to let them flow down the river.

古文：蜀守者见之，皆解体。
现代文：蜀守军见后，全部解体。
English: After meeting the Shu defenders, they all disbanded.

古文：初，蜀人闻大军西征，丞相戴寿等果悉众守瞿塘。
现代文：当初，蜀人获悉大军西征，丞相戴寿等果然聚集所有部众防守瞿塘。
English: At first, the people of Shu learned that a large army was marching westward, and the prime minister Dai Shou and others successfully gathered all the troops to defend Shantang.

古文：及闻友德破阶、文，捣江油，始分兵援汉州，以保成都。
现代文：等到听说傅友德攻克阶、文，直捣江油，才分兵支援汉州，以保成都。
English: It wasn't until they heard that Fu Youde had conquered Shifu and Wenzhou and drained the oil from the Yangtze River that they sent troops to support Hanzhou in order to protect Chengdu.

古文：未至，友德已破其守将向大亨于城下，谓将士曰： 援师远来，闻大亨破，己胆落，无能为也。 
现代文：还未到达时，傅友德军已经在城下打败其守将向大亨，并对将士说道： 援军远道而来，听说向大亨兵败，便已经丧胆，无能为力了。 
English: Before Fuyou arrived, the German army had already defeated its garrison under the castle and said to the soldiers: "The reinforcements came from far away, and when they heard that they had been defeated by the tycoons, they were already discouraged and powerless.

古文：迎击，大败之。
现代文：然后加以迎击，大败蜀人。
English: Then they counterattacked and defeated the Shu people.

古文：遂拔汉州，进围成都。
现代文：遂拔汉州，进围成都。
English: Won the bid for Hanzhou and advanced to Chengdu.

古文：寿等以象战。
现代文：戴寿等驱象来战。
English: Dai Shou and others drove the elephants into battle.

古文：友德令强弩火器冲之，身中流矢不退，将士殊死战。
现代文：傅友德下令以强弩火器冲击，身中飞箭却毫不后退，将士也殊死作战。
English: Fu Youde gave the order to attack with high-powered firearms, but the arrows did not retreat, and the soldiers fought to the death.

古文：象反走，躏藉死者甚众。
现代文：大象调头而跑，踩死许多蜀人。
English: The elephant turned around and ran, trampling many Shu people to death.

古文：寿等闻其主明升已降，乃籍府库仓廪面缚诣军门。
现代文：戴寿等获悉其主明升已降，才登记府库、仓廪钱粮，反绑双手到军门投降。
English: When Dai Shou and others learned that their master, Ming Sheng, had been demoted, they registered with the government treasury and the granary for money and grain, then tied their hands and went to the military gate to surrender.

古文：成都平。
现代文：成都平定。
English: Chengdu is pacified.

古文：分兵徇州邑未下者，克保宁，执吴友仁送京师，蜀地悉定。
现代文：然后分兵巡行未下州县，攻克保宁，将吴友仁捉拿押送京城，蜀地全部平定。
English: Then, the detachment marched through Wuzhou County, conquered Boryeong, captured and escorted Wu Youren to the capital, and completely subdued Shu.

古文：友德之攻汉州也，汤和尚顿军大溪口。
现代文：傅友德进攻汉州时，汤和还屯军于大溪口。
English: When Fu Youde attacked Hanzhou, Tang He also set up his army at the mouth of Daxi.

古文：既于江流得木牌，乃进师。
现代文：在江流中得到木牌后，这才进兵。
English: He only joined the army after receiving a wooden badge in the middle of a river.

古文：而戴寿等撤其精兵西救汉州，留老弱守瞿塘，故永忠等得乘胜捣重庆，降明升，于是太祖制《平西蜀文》，盛称友德功为第一，廖永忠次之。
现代文：而戴寿等此时已撤其精兵西救汉州，留下老弱防守瞿塘，所以廖永忠等才得以乘胜直捣重庆，降服明升。因为这样，太祖写作《平西蜀文》，盛赞傅友德功劳第一，廖永忠次之。
English: At this time, Dai Shou and others had withdrawn their elite soldiers to the west to save Hanzhou, leaving the old and weak to defend Shantang, so Liao Yongzhong and others were able to take advantage of the victory to attack Chongqing and surrender. Because of this, Taizu wrote "Pingxi Shuwen," praising Fu Youde's merit first, and Liao Yongzhong second.

古文：师还，受上赏。
现代文：回师之后，傅友德受到皇帝的赏赐。
English: After returning to his teacher, Fu Youde was rewarded by the emperor.

古文：五年副征西将军冯胜征沙漠，败失剌罕于西凉，至永昌，败太尉朵儿只巴，获马牛羊十余万。
现代文：五年，傅友德协助征西将军冯胜远征沙漠，在西凉击败失剌罕，至永昌，击败太尉朵儿只巴，俘获马牛羊十余万。
English: In the fifth year, Fu Youde assisted the general of the Western Expedition, Feng Sheng, in the expedition to the desert. In Xiliang, he defeated the Shushi Han, and in Yongchang, he defeated the captain Douerduba, and captured more than 100,000 horses, cattle and sheep.

古文：略甘肃，射杀平章不花，降太尉锁纳儿等。
现代文：攻取甘肃，射杀平章不花，降服太尉锁纳儿等。
English: The capture of Gansu, the shooting of Ping Zhang, the surrender of Lieutenant Lockner, and so on.

古文：至瓜沙州，获金银印及杂畜二万而还。
现代文：至瓜沙州，俘获金银印及各种牲畜二万而返。
English: He went to the state of Guasa, captured 20,000 gold and silver seals and all kinds of livestock, and then returned.

古文：是时师出三道，独友德全胜。
现代文：这时兵出三路，唯独傅友德大获全胜。
English: At this time, soldiers came from three directions, but Fu Youde won a complete victory.

古文：以主将胜坐小法，赏不行。
现代文：因主将冯胜因小过获罪，未获奖赏。
English: As the captain, Feng Sheng, was found guilty of negligence, he did not receive the award.

古文：明年复出雁门，为前锋，获平章邓孛罗帖木儿。
现代文：第二年复出雁门，傅友德为前锋，俘获平章邓孛罗帖木儿。
English: The next year, he returned to the Wild Goose Gate, with Fu Youde as the striker, and captured Pingzhang Deng Rong Luo Tsmuer.

古文：还镇北平，陈便宜五事。
现代文：然后回军镇守北平，陈述五件对国家有利之事。
English: Then, he went back to the garrison of Peiping and stated five things that were beneficial to the country.

古文：皆从之。
现代文：太祖都加以采纳。
English: The emperor obeyed.

古文：召还，从太子讲武于荆山，益岁禄千石。
现代文：傅友德应召回京，跟随太子在荆山讲武，增加年禄千石。
English: Fu Youde was called back to Beijing, followed the prince to preach martial arts in Jingshan, and increased his annual salary by a thousand koku.

古文：九年破擒伯颜帖木儿于延安，降其众。
现代文：九年，傅友德在延安击败并擒获伯颜帖木儿，降服其部众。
English: In the ninth year, Fu Youde defeated and captured Bo Yan Timur in Yan'an, and subdued his subordinates.

古文：帝将征云南，命友德巡行川、蜀、雅、播之境，修城郭，缮关梁，因兵威降金筑、普定诸山寨。
现代文：太祖准备征讨云南，命傅友德巡行川、蜀、雅、播之境，修城郭，补关梁，并以兵威降服金筑、普定诸山寨。
English: The great-grandfather was preparing to conquer Yunnan. He ordered Fu Youde to march through the provinces of Sichuan, Shu, Ya and Han, to repair the city walls, and to conquer the villages of Jinzhu and Puting with military might.

古文：十四年副大将军达出塞，讨乃儿不花，渡北黄河，袭灰山，斩获甚众。
现代文：十四年，傅友德辅佐大将军徐达出塞，征讨乃儿不花，北渡黄河，袭击灰山，斩俘甚众。
English: In the 14th year, Fu Youde Fu Zi's general Xu Da marched out of the citadel to fight, crossed the Yellow River to the north, attacked Huishan, and killed and captured many people.

古文：其年秋充征南将军，帅左副将军蓝玉、右副将军沐英，将步骑三十万征云南。
现代文：其年秋天，傅友德担任征南将军，率左副将军蓝玉、右副将军沐英，统领步兵、骑兵三十万征讨云南。
English: In the autumn of that year, Fu Youde served as the general of the Southern Expedition, led the left deputy general Lan Yu and the right deputy general Mu Ying, and led 300,000 infantry and cavalry to conquer Yunnan.

古文：至湖广，分遣都督胡海等将兵五万由永宁趋乌撒，而自帅大军由辰、沅趋贵州。
现代文：至湖广，傅友德分派都督胡海等率军五万由永宁直趋乌撒，而自己则率大军由辰、沅直趋贵州。
English: As far as Hukang, Fu Youde dispatched the governor Hu Hai and others to lead an army of fifty thousand from Yongning straight to Wusa, while he led a large army from Chen and Handan straight to Guizhou.

古文：克普定、普安，降诸苗蛮。
现代文：攻克普定、普安，降服诸苗蛮。
English: Conquered Puding and Pu'an, and subdued Zhu Miao.

古文：进攻曲靖，大战白石江，擒元平章达里麻。
现代文：进攻曲靖，大战白石江，擒获元平章达里麻。
English: The attack on Qujing, the great battle of Baishijiang, and the capture of Yuanping Zhang Darima.

古文：遂击乌撒，循格孤山而南，以通永宁之兵，遣两将军趋云南。
现代文：然后进攻乌撒，沿格孤山向南，与永宁驻军打通联系，派遣两将军直趋云南。
English: Then they attacked Usa, headed south along the Ge Lone Mountain, established contact with the Yongning garrison, and dispatched two generals straight to Yunnan.

古文：元梁王走死。
现代文：元梁王在逃跑途中死去。
English: Yuan Liang Wang died on the way to escape.

古文：友德城乌撒，群蛮来争，奋击破之，得七星关以通毕节。
现代文：傅友德在乌撒筑城，群蛮来争，其军奋力击败群蛮，取得七星关，以通达毕节。
English: Fu Youde was building a city in Wusha when the barbarians came to fight. His army fought hard to defeat the barbarians and obtained the seven-star pass to reach Bijie.

古文：又克可渡河，降东川、乌蒙、芒部诸蛮。
现代文：又攻克可渡河，降服东川、乌蒙、芒部诸蛮。
English: In addition, they were able to cross the river and subjugate the Dongchuan, Umong, and Mangbe barbarians.

古文：乌撒诸蛮复叛，讨之，斩首三万余级，获牛马十余万，水西诸部皆降。
现代文：乌撒诸蛮复叛，傅友德率军征讨，斩首三万余人，缴获牛马十余万，水西诸部全部投降。
English: Usa and other barbarians rebelled, Fu Youde led the army to fight, beheaded more than thirty thousand people, captured more than one hundred thousand cattle and horses, and all parts of Western Shu surrendered.

古文：十七年论功进封颍国公，食禄三千石，予世券。
现代文：十七年，论功时，傅友德进封为颍国公，年禄三千石，并被授予世袭凭证。
English: In the seventeenth year, Fu Youde was awarded the title of Duke of Shandong Province, with an annual salary of 3,000 koku, and was awarded a hereditary certificate.

古文：十九年帅师讨平云南蛮。
现代文：十九年，傅友德率军讨平云南蛮族。
English: In the 19th year, Fu Youde led an army to subdue the Yunnan barbarians.

古文：二十年副大将军冯胜，征纳哈出于金山。
现代文：二十年，协助大将军冯胜，在金山征讨纳哈出。
English: For twenty years, he assisted General Feng Sheng in the conquest of Naha in Jinshan.

古文：二十一年，东川蛮叛，复为征南将军，帅师讨平之。
现代文：二十一年，东川蛮族叛乱，傅友德又任征南将军，率军将其讨平。
English: In 1921, the Dongchuan barbarians rebelled, and Fu Youde was appointed as the Southern Expeditionary General and led the army to pacify them.

古文：移兵讨越州叛酋阿资，明年破之于普安。
现代文：然后调兵征讨越州叛酋阿资，第二年在普安将其打败。
English: Then the army was mobilized to fight the traitor chief of Viet Chau, Azi, and defeated him at Pu'an in the following year.

古文：二十三年从晋王、燕王征沙漠，擒乃儿不花，还驻开平，复征宁夏。
现代文：二十三年，傅友德跟随晋王、燕王征讨沙漠，擒获乃儿不花，回军驻守开平，并再征宁夏。
English: In 233, Fu Youde followed Jin Wang and Yan Wang to conquer the desert, captured Nai Er but did not spend, returned to the army stationed in Kaiping, and conquered Ningxia again.

古文：明年为征虏将军，备边北平。
现代文：第二年，担任征虏将军，防备北平边境。
English: In the second year, he served as a conscript general, guarding the Beiping border.

古文：复从燕王征哈者舍利，追元辽王。
现代文：又跟随燕王征讨哈者舍利，追击元辽王。
English: He also followed Yan Wang to conquer the Ha people of Sheli and pursued Yuan Liao Wang.

古文：军甫行，遽令班师。
现代文：军队刚刚出发，却突然受命班师。
English: The army had just set out, when suddenly they were ordered to form a squadron.

古文：敌不设备，因潜师深入至黑岭，大破敌众而还。
现代文：敌军未做防备，便趁机偷偷深入至黑岭，大败敌军而返。
English: The enemy did not take precautions, but took advantage of the opportunity to sneak deep into Heiling, defeated the enemy and returned.

古文：再出，练兵山、陕，总屯田事。
现代文：傅友德再次出外任职，练兵于山、陕，总管屯田事务。
English: Fu Youde served abroad again, trained soldiers in Shan and Shaanxi, and became the general manager of the field affairs.

古文：加太子太师，寻遣还乡。
现代文：加封为太子太师，不久被遣还乡。
English: Kaifeng was crowned prince and soon sent back to his hometown.

古文：友德喑哑跳荡，身冒百死。
现代文：傅友德怒声呼喝，陷坚突阵，身冒百死。
English: Fu Youde shouted angrily, jumped into the fray, and risked his life.

古文：自偏裨至大将，每战必先士卒。
现代文：从偏将升至大将，每战必定身先士卒。
English: From the rank of general to the rank of general, every battle must be fought by the vanguard.

古文：虽被创，战益力，以故所至立功，帝屡敕奖劳。
现代文：虽伤多处，作战却更勇猛，因而屡立战功，太祖多次下诏奖励慰劳。
English: Although he was wounded in many places, he fought more bravely. As a result, he repeatedly distinguished himself in battle, and his great-grandfather repeatedly gave him rewards for his efforts.

古文：子忠，尚寿春公主，女为晋世子济熺妃。
现代文：其子傅忠，娶寿春公主为妻，其女是晋王世子济火喜之妃。
English: His son, Fu Zhong, married Princess Shuchun, and his daughter became the wife of Prince Jin's descendant, Ji Huaxi.

古文：二十五年，友德请怀远田千亩。
现代文：二十五年，傅友德请求获得千亩怀远民田。
English: In 2005, Fu Youde requested to obtain 1,000 mu of Huaiyuan people's farmland.

古文：帝不悦曰： 禄赐不薄矣，复侵民利何居？
现代文：太祖不高兴地说 ：我给你的年禄、赏赐不薄，你为什么还要去侵犯百姓的利益呢？
English: Unhappy, the great-grandfather said, "I have given you a generous pension and reward. Why do you want to encroach on the people's interests?"

古文：尔不闻公仪休事耶？ 
现代文：你没有听说过公仪休的事吗？ 
English: Haven't you heard of a public holiday?

古文：寻副宋国公胜分行山西，屯田于大同、东胜，立十六卫。
现代文：不久，傅友德协助宋国公冯胜分兵山西，在大同、东胜一带屯田，并设立十六卫。
English: Not long after, Fu Youde assisted Feng Shengbin, the ruler of Song, in setting up military garrisons in the western part of Shanxi Province, in the areas of Datong and Dongsheng, and established the Sixteen Guards.

古文：是冬再练军山西、河南。
现代文：这年冬天，又在山西、河东练兵。
English: This winter, soldiers were also trained in Shanxi and Hedong.

古文：明年，偕召还。
现代文：第二年，一起应召回京。
English: The following year, they were called back to Kyoto together.

古文：又明年赐死。
现代文：又过了一年，傅友德被赐死。
English: Another year passed, and Fu Youde was sentenced to death.

古文：以公主故，录其孙彦名为金吾卫千户。
现代文：因公主的缘故，其孙傅彦名被任为金吾卫千户。
English: For the sake of the princess, his grandson Fuyuhiko was appointed as the King of a thousand households.

古文：弘治中，晋王为友德五世孙瑛援六王例，求袭封。下礼官议，不许。
现代文：弘治年中，晋王为傅友德五世孙傅瑛援用六王旧例，请求袭封，被下到礼官商议，未获允许。
English: In the middle of the Hongzhi era, Sun Fu Ying, the fifth generation of the Fu Youde dynasty, invoked the old six kings and requested to succeed to the throne. He was sent to the etiquette officer for discussion, but was not allowed.

古文：嘉靖元年，云南巡抚都御史何孟春请立祠祀友德。
现代文：嘉靖元年，云南巡抚都御史何孟春请求立祠祭祀傅友德。
English: In the first year of Jiajing, the Yunnan governor, He Mengchun, requested the establishment of a small shrine to worship Fu Youde.

古文：诏可，名曰 报功 。
现代文：皇帝下诏许可，祠名 报功 。
English: The emperor issued an imperial edict to grant permission, and the name of the ancestral hall was announced.

古文：廖永忠，巢人，楚国公永安弟也。
现代文：廖永忠，巢县人，楚国公廖永安之弟。
English: Liao Yongzhong, a native of Chaoxian, is the younger brother of Liao Yongan, the Prince of Chu.

古文：从永安迎太祖于巢湖，年最少。
现代文：跟随廖永安在巢湖迎接太祖时，年纪最小。
English: He was the youngest when he followed Liao Yong'an to meet the great-grandfather in Chaohu.

古文：太祖曰： 汝亦欲富贵乎？ 
现代文：太祖问道 ：你也想富贵吗？ 
English: Grandfather asked: Do you want to be rich too?

古文：永忠曰： 获事明主，扫除寇乱，垂名竹帛，是所愿耳。 
现代文：廖永忠答 ：能为明主效力，扫除寇乱，垂名史册，正是我的愿望。 
English: Liao Yongzhong replied: It is my wish to be able to serve the Lord, sweep away the invasion, and go down in history.

古文：太祖嘉焉。
现代文：太祖听后称赞不已。
English: The great-grandfather was full of praise after listening.

古文：副永安将水军渡江，拔采石、太平，擒陈野先，破蛮子海牙及陈兆先，定集庆，克镇江、常州、池州，讨江阴海寇，皆有功。
现代文：廖永忠协助廖永安率水师渡江之后，攻取采石、太平，擒获陈野先，打败蛮子海牙及陈兆先，平定集庆，攻克镇江、常州、池州，征讨江阴海盗，都有功劳。
English: After Liao Yongzhong assisted Liao Yongan and his sailors to cross the Yangtze River, Liao Yongzhong won the battles of Quarry and Taiping, captured Chen Yansian, defeated the barbarians Hague and Chen Zhaoxian, pacified Jiqing, conquered Zhenjiang, Changzhou and Chizhou, and defeated the Jiangyin pirates.

古文：永安陷于吴，以永忠袭兄职，为枢密佥院，总其军。
现代文：廖永安在吴地遇害，廖永忠接替兄长之职，任枢密佥院，统领其军。
English: Liao Yong'an was killed in Wudi, and Liao Yongzhong took over his brother's position as Privy Councillor and led his army.

古文：攻赵普胜栅江营，复池州。
现代文：率军进攻赵普胜江营栅栏，收复池州。
English: He led the army to attack Zhao Pushengjiang Camp Fence and recover Chizhou.

古文：陈友谅犯龙江，大呼突阵，诸军从其后，大败之。
现代文：陈友谅进犯龙江，廖永忠大声呼喊着突入敌阵，诸军紧随其后，大败敌军。
English: Chen Youjun invaded the Longjiang River, Liao Yongzhong shouted loudly and rushed into the enemy lines. The troops followed closely behind and defeated the enemy troops.

古文：从伐友谅，至安庆，破其水寨，遂克安庆。
现代文：随军征讨陈友谅，至安庆，克其水寨，于是攻克安庆。
English: He followed the army to recruit Chen Youyong, to Anqing, to Kechi Water Village, and then to Anqing.

古文：从攻江州，州城临江，守备甚固。
现代文：又随军进攻江州，江州城濒临长江，守备甚严。
English: They also followed the army to attack Jiangzhou. Jiangzhou City is on the edge of the Yangtze River and is heavily guarded.

古文：永忠度城高下，造桥于船尾，名曰天桥，以船乘风倒行，桥傅于城，遂克之。
现代文：廖永忠揣度城的高度后，在船尾造桥，取名天桥，然后驾船乘风倒行，使天桥与城相接，于是攻克江州。
English: After calculating the height of the city, Liao Yongzhong built a bridge at the stern of the ship, named it a flyover, and then drove the ship backwards by the wind, so that the flyover was connected to the city, thus conquering Jiangzhou.

古文：进中书省右丞。
现代文：廖永忠晋升为中书省右丞。
English: Liao Yongzhong was promoted to the vice-premier of the Ministry of Education.

古文：从下南昌，援安丰，战鄱阳湖，决围殊死战。
现代文：廖永忠随军攻下南昌，支援安丰，战于鄱阳湖，突围殊死作战。
English: Liao Yongzhong conquered Nanchang with the army, supported Anfeng, fought in Poyang Lake, and broke through in a desperate battle.

古文：敌将张定边直犯太祖舟，常遇春射走之。
现代文：敌将张定边直冲太祖坐船，常遇春将其射跑。
English: Zhang Dingbian, the enemy general, would sail directly towards Taizu, and often shoot him in the spring.

古文：永忠乘飞舸追且射，定边被百余矢，汉卒多死伤。
现代文：廖永忠驾快船边追边射，张定边身中百余箭，汉兵死伤很多。
English: Liao Yongzhong drove a fast boat, chasing and shooting, Zhang Dingbian shot more than a hundred arrows, and many Han soldiers were killed and injured.

古文：明日，复与俞通海等以七舟载苇荻，乘风纵火，焚敌楼船数百。
现代文：第二天，廖永忠又与俞通海等驾着七艘满载芦荻的船，乘风纵火，焚烧了敌军楼船数百艘。
English: The next day, Liao Yongzhong, together with Zou Tonghai and others, drove seven boats loaded with reeds, and set fire to the wind, burning hundreds of enemy warships.

古文：又以六舟深入搏战，复旋绕而出，敌惊为神。
现代文：又率六艘战船深入敌阵搏击，然后迅速绕出，敌军大惊，以为遇到了神兵。
English: He also led six warships deep into the enemy lines to fight, and then quickly circled out. The enemy troops were shocked and thought they had encountered divine soldiers.

古文：又邀击之泾江口，友谅死。从征陈理，分兵栅四门，于江中连舟为长寨，绝其出入，理降。
现代文：又在泾江口拦截陈友谅，陈友谅死去后，廖永忠随军征讨陈理，分兵在四门设立栅栏，又在江中将船只连成长寨，断绝其出入之路，陈理只得投降。
English: He also intercepted Chen Youzong at the mouth of the Li River. After Chen Youzong's death, Liao Yongzhong followed the army to recruit Chen Li. The detachment set up a fence at the four gates, and the ships were lined up in the middle of the river to cut off their way in and out. Chen Li had to surrender.

古文：还京，太祖以漆牌书 功超群将，智迈雄师 八字赐之，悬于门。
现代文：廖永忠回京后，太祖将写有 功超群将，智迈雄师 八字的漆牌赐给他，悬于家门外。
English: After Liao Yongzhong returned to Beijing, the great-grandfather gave him a lacquer plate with the words "Gong Chaoqun" (功超群将) and "Chimai" (智迈雄師) written on it, which hangs outside the door of his house.

古文：已，从徐达取淮东，张士诚遣舟师薄海安，太祖令永忠还兵水寨御之，达遂克淮东诸郡。
现代文：不久，跟随徐达攻取淮东，张士诚派水师进逼海安，太祖命廖永忠回军水寨抵御，徐达于是攻克淮东诸郡。
English: Soon, following Xu Da's conquest of Huai Dong, Zhang Shicheng sent a sailor to enforce maritime security. The great-grandfather ordered Liao Yongzhong to return to the military camp to resist. Xu Da then conquered the counties of Huai Dong.

古文：从伐士诚，取德清，进克平江，拜中书平章政事。
现代文：廖永忠又随军征伐张士诚，攻取德清，进克平江，被授为中书平章政事。
English: Liao Yongzhong also followed the army to conquer Zhang Shicheng, capture Deqing, and enter the Pingjiang River, and was awarded the title of the Central Government.

古文：寻充征南副将军，帅舟师自海道会汤和，讨降方国珍，进克福州。
现代文：廖永忠随即担任征南副将军，率水师由海路会合汤和，征讨并降服方国珍，进克福州。
English: Liao Yongzhong immediately served as the vice-general of the Southern Expedition, and led the naval division to join Tangwa by sea, conquer and defeat Fang Guozhen, and enter Fuzhou.

古文：洪武元年兼同知詹事院事。
现代文：洪武元年，兼任同知詹事院事。
English: In the first year of Hongwu, he also served as a scholar of the same name.

古文：略定闽中诸郡，至延平，破执陈友定。
现代文：率军平定闽中诸郡，至延平，击败并俘捉陈友定。
English: He led the army to subdue the counties in Central Yunnan and Yanping, defeating and capturing Chen Youding.

古文：寻拜征南将军，以朱亮祖为副，由海道取广东。
现代文：随即被授为征南将军，以朱亮祖为副将，由海路攻取广东。
English: He was immediately awarded the title of "Southern Expeditionary General," with Zhu Liangzu as his vice-general, to conquer Guangdong by sea.

古文：永忠先发书谕元左丞何真，晓譬利害。
现代文：廖永忠事先写信给元左丞何真，对他晓以利害。
English: Liao Yongzhong wrote a letter to the former left-hand man He Zhen in advance, knowing his interests.

古文：真即奉表请降。
现代文：何真马上奉书请降。
English: Why don't you hand in your resignation immediately.

古文：至东莞，真帅官属出迎。
现代文：廖永忠至东莞，何真率领属官出迎。
English: When Liao Yongzhong arrived in Dongguan, He Zhen led his subordinates to welcome him.

古文：至广州，降卢左丞。
现代文：至广州，降服卢左丞。
English: He went to Guangzhou and surrendered to Lu Zu Rong.

古文：擒海寇邵宗愚，数其残暴斩之。广人大悦。
现代文：擒获海寇邵宗愚，列举其残暴行径，然后将其斩首，广东百姓十分高兴。
English: Guangdong people are very happy that the sea pirate Shao Zongwu has been captured, his atrocities enumerated, and then beheaded.

古文：驰谕九真、日南、朱崖、儋耳三十余城，皆纳印请吏。
现代文：廖永忠又迅速传谕九真、日南、朱、儋耳三十余城，守官纷纷纳印请命。
English: Liao Yongzhong also quickly spread the news to more than 30 cities in Jiu Zhen, Nichinan, Zhu and Jiu'er, and the officers of the city's garrisons came out one after another to beg for his life.

古文：进取广西，至梧州，降元达鲁花赤拜住，浔、柳诸路皆下。
现代文：然后进取广西，至梧州，降服元达鲁花赤拜住，浔、柳诸路皆下。
English: Then he advanced to Guangxi, to Wuzhou, surrendered to the Yuan Dynasty, worshipped the red flowers, and went down all the roads.

古文：遣亮祖会杨璟收未下州郡。
现代文：又派遣朱亮祖会合杨王景收复未下州郡。
English: Zhu Liang also dispatched Yang Wangjing of the Zhu Liang Ancestors' Association to recover Wuzhou County.

古文：永忠引兵克南宁，降象州。
现代文：廖永忠引兵攻克南宁，降服象州。
English: Liao Yongzhong led an army to conquer Nanning, and Xiangzhou surrendered.

古文：两广悉平。
现代文：两广全部平定。
English: The two regions have been completely pacified.

古文：永忠善抚绥，民怀其惠，为之立祠。
现代文：廖永忠善于安抚，百姓念其恩德，为其立祠。
English: Liao Yongzhong was good at appeasing, and the people remembered his kindness and built a shrine for him.

古文：明年九月还京师，帝命太子帅百官迎劳于龙江。
现代文：第二年九月返回京城，太祖命太子率朝廷百官在龙江迎接慰劳。
English: In September of the following year, he returned to the capital, where he was greeted by hundreds of officials from the imperial court in the Longjiang River, led by his grandfather, the Crown Prince.

古文：入见，仍命太子送还第。
现代文：廖永忠入朝觐见，太祖又命太子送他返回府宅。
English: Liao Yongzhong entered the imperial court, and the great-grandfather ordered the prince to escort him back to the palace.

古文：复出，抚定泉、漳。
现代文：廖永忠再出任职，安抚泉、漳。
English: Liao Yongzhong re-emerged from office, appeasing Quan and Zou.

古文：三年从大将军徐达北征，克察罕脑儿。
现代文：三年，随大将军徐达北征，攻克察罕脑儿。
English: Three years later, he accompanied the great general Xu Da to the Northern Expedition to conquer Cahan.

古文：还，封德庆侯，食禄一千五百石，予世券。
现代文：回京后，封为德庆侯，年禄一千五百石，并被授予世袭凭证。
English: After returning to Beijing, he was given the title of Deqing Hou, with a yearly salary of 1,500 koku, and was awarded a hereditary certificate.

古文：明年，以征西副将军从汤和帅舟师伐蜀。
现代文：第二年，廖永忠以征西副将军的身份随汤和率水师伐蜀。
English: In the second year, Liao Yongzhong, as the vice-general of the Western Expedition, accompanied Tang He and the water division to cut down the Shu.

古文：和驻大溪口，永忠先发。
现代文：汤和驻守大溪口，廖永忠先行。
English: Tang He was stationed at Daxigou, with Liao Yongzhong leading the way.

古文：及旧夔府，破守将邹兴等兵。
现代文：到达旧夔府，击败守将邹兴等兵。
English: Arriving at the old Yefu, defeating the guards will be the soldiers such as He Xing.

古文：进至瞿塘关，山峻水急，蜀人设铁锁桥，横据关口，舟不得进。
现代文：进至瞿塘关，这里山峻水急，蜀人铺设铁锁桥，横据关口，船不能前进。
English: Entering the Qutang Pass, where the mountains are steep and the water is swift, the Shu people laid an iron lock bridge across the pass, and the ship could not move forward.

古文：永忠密遣数百人持糗粮水筒，舁小舟逾山渡关，出其上流。
现代文：廖永忠密派数百人携带干粮水筒，抬着小船翻山渡关，到达上游。
English: Liao Yongzhong sent hundreds of people to carry dry grain water bottles and carry small boats across the mountain pass to reach the upstream.

古文：蜀山多草木，令将士皆衣青蓑衣，鱼贯走崖石间。
现代文：蜀山草木繁多，廖永忠下令将士都穿上青蓑衣，在崖石间鱼贯而行。
English: Shu Mountain has a wide variety of plants and trees. Liao Yongzhong ordered his soldiers to put on green jackets and walk along the cliffs and rocks.

古文：度已至，帅精锐出墨叶渡，夜五鼓，分两军攻其水陆寨。
现代文：估计已到，便率领精锐出墨叶渡，五更时分，兵分两路攻其水、陆寨。
English: Estimating that he had arrived, he led the elite out of Moji Yadu, and at five o'clock, the soldiers were divided into two ways to attack the water and the village.

古文：水军皆以铁裹船头，置火器而前。
现代文：水师都以铁裹住船头，设置火器而前进。
English: The sailors all wrapped the bow of the ship in iron, set up their firearms and moved forward.

古文：黎明，蜀人始觉，尽锐来拒。
现代文：黎明时分，蜀人才发觉，派出全部精锐前来抵抗。
English: At dawn, the Shu people found out and sent all their elite troops to fight back.

古文：永忠已破其陆寨，会将士舁舟出江者，一时并发，上下夹攻，大破之，邹兴死。
现代文：但此时廖永忠已破其陆寨，会合抬船出江的将士，一并齐发，上下夹攻，大破蜀人，邹兴战死。
English: However, by this time, Liao Yongzhong had broken through his encampment, and the soldiers who had gathered to carry the ship out of the river were sent out together, attacking from above and below, destroying the Shu people, and dying in the battle.

古文：遂焚三桥，断横江铁索，擒同佥蒋达等八十余人。
现代文：廖永忠然后焚毁三桥，弄断横江铁索，擒获同佥蒋达等八十余人。
English: Liao Yongzhong then burned three bridges, broke the cross-river iron cable, and captured more than eighty people including his comrade Jiang Da.

古文：飞天张、铁头张等皆遁去，遂入夔府。
现代文：飞天张、铁头张等都逃走了，廖永忠于是进入夔府。
English: Fei Tian Zhang, Tie Tou Zhang and others all fled, and Liao Yongzhong then entered the capital.

古文：明日，和始至，乃与和分道进，期会于重庆。
现代文：第二天，汤和才到达，于是与汤和分道前进，相约于重庆会合。
English: The next day, Tang He did not arrive, so he and Tang He went their separate ways and agreed to meet in Chongqing.

古文：永忠帅舟师直捣重庆，次铜锣峡。
现代文：廖永忠率水师直捣重庆，驻扎铜锣峡。
English: Liao Yongzhong led the sailors to Chongqing and stationed in Tonglu Gorge.

古文：蜀主明升请降，永忠以和未至辞。
现代文：蜀主明升请降，廖永忠以汤和还未到为由推辞不受。
English: Shu master Ming Sheng asked for a reduction, but Liao Yongzhong did not accept the refusal on the grounds that Tang He had not yet arrived.

古文：俟和至，乃受降，承制抚慰。
现代文：等汤和到达后才接受投降，承旨抚慰。
English: He waited until Tang He arrived before accepting the surrender and consoling him.

古文：下令禁侵掠。卒取民七茄，立斩之。
现代文：下令严禁侵扰百姓，一士兵拿了百姓七只茄子，立即斩首。
English: A soldier took seven eggplants from a civilian and immediately beheaded him.

古文：慰安戴寿、向大享等家，令其子弟持书往成都招谕。
现代文：又慰抚戴寿、向大亨等的家人，命其子弟携信前往成都招降。
English: He also consoled the families of Dai Shou, Xiang Tycoon and others, and ordered his son to take a letter to Chengdu to offer surrender.

古文：寿等已为傅友德所败，及得书，遂降。
现代文：戴寿等已被傅友德所败，收到信后，便投降了。
English: Dai Shou and others had been defeated by Fu Youde. After receiving the letter, they surrendered.

古文：蜀地悉平。
现代文：蜀地全部平定。
English: All of Shu was pacified.

古文：帝制《平蜀文》旌其功，有 傅一廖二 之语，褒赉甚厚。
现代文：太祖写成《平蜀文》表彰其功，其中有 傅一廖二 之语，对廖永忠奖赏甚厚。
English: The great-grandfather wrote "Ping Shouwen" in recognition of his service, including Fu Yiliu's speech, which was a great reward for Liao Yongzhong.

古文：明年北征，至和林。
现代文：第二年，廖永忠北征，至和林。
English: In the second year, Liao Yongzhong went on the Northern Expedition to the Warring States.

古文：六年督舟师出海捕倭，寻还京。
现代文：六年，督率水师出海追捕倭寇，随即回京。
English: In the sixth year, he went out to sea to hunt wako with the captain and immediately returned to Kyoto.

古文：初，韩林儿在滁州，太祖遣永忠迎归应天，至瓜步覆其舟死，帝以咎永忠。
现代文：当初，韩林儿在滁州，太祖派廖永忠前去将他迎回应天，至瓜步时船翻而死，太祖因此归罪廖永忠。
English: At the beginning, Han Lin Er was in Zhangzhou, and the great-grandfather sent Liao Yongzhong to meet him, but the boat capsized and he died. Therefore, the great-grandfather blamed Liao Yongzhong.

古文：及大封功臣，谕诸将曰： 永忠战鄱阳时，忘躯拒敌，可谓奇男子。
现代文：到大封功臣时，太祖对诸将说道 ：廖永忠在鄱阳湖作战时，忘我抗敌，可谓奇男子。
English: When it came time to confer the title of Great Hero, the great-grandfather said to the generals: "When Liao Yongzhong was fighting at Poyang Lake, he was selfless in his resistance to the enemy. He was an extraordinary man.

古文：然使所善儒生窥朕意，徼封爵，故止封侯而不公。 
现代文：但却派与他要好的儒生窥探朕意，所以封爵时，只封侯而不封为公。 
English: However, the Confucians, who wanted to be on good terms with him, spied on his intentions, so when he was ennobled, he was only ennobled as a prince, not as a duke.

古文：及杨宪为相，永忠与相比。
现代文：当杨宪为丞相时，廖永忠与他关系密切。
English: When Yang Xian was chancellor, Liao Yongzhong had a close relationship with him.

古文：宪诛，永忠以功大得免。
现代文：杨宪被杀，廖永忠因功大幸免。
English: Yang Xian was killed, but Liao Yongzhong was spared due to his great contribution.

古文：八年三月坐僣用龙凤诸不法事，赐死，年五十三。
现代文：八年三月，因僭用龙凤等违法之事被赐死，终年五十三岁。
English: In March of the eighth year, he was sentenced to death at the age of fifty-three for illegal activities such as using the dragon and phoenix as a weapon.

古文：子权，十三年嗣侯，从傅友德征云南，守毕节及泸州，召还。
现代文：其子廖权，十三年继嗣侯爵，随傅友德征云南，驻守毕节及泸州，应召回京。
English: His son Liao Quan, marquis in succession for 13 years, accompanied Fu Youde to conquer Yunnan, stationed in Bijie and Zhangzhou, and was recalled to Beijing.

古文：十七年卒。
现代文：十七年去世。
English: He died 17 years later.

古文：子镛不得嗣，以嫡子为散骑舍人，累官都督。
现代文：其子廖镛未能继嗣，而以嫡子为散骑舍人，累升为都督。
English: His son, Liao Yan, was not able to succeed him, and his legitimate son, who was a free rider, was promoted to the post of governor-general.

古文：建文时与议兵事，宿卫殿廷。
现代文：建文帝时参与商议兵事，宿卫殿廷。
English: During the reign of Emperor Jianwen, he took part in military negotiations and served as a palace guard.

古文：与弟铭皆尝受学于方孝孺。
现代文：与弟廖铭都曾从师于方孝孺。
English: He and his brother Liao Ming both studied under Fang Xiaojun.

古文：孝孺死，镛、铭收其遗骸，葬到处宝门外山上。
现代文：方孝孺死后，廖镛、廖铭收其遗骸，葬于聚宝门外山上。
English: After the death of Fang Xiaojuan, Liao Wei and Liao Ming collected his remains and buried them on the mountain outside the Jubao Gate.

古文：杨璟，合肥人。本儒家子。
现代文：杨璟，合肥人，本为儒家子。
English: Yang Hui, a native of Hefei, was originally a Confucian.

古文：以管军万户从太祖下集庆，进总管。
现代文：以管军万户的身份跟随太祖攻下集庆被晋升为总管。
English: As the person in charge of the army of 10,000 households, he followed his great-grandfather in conquering Jieqing and was promoted to the position of general manager.

古文：下常州，进亲军副都指挥使。
现代文：攻下常州，被晋升为亲军副都指挥使。
English: He captured Changzhou and was promoted to vice-commander of the pro-army.

古文：从下婺州，迁枢密院判官。
现代文：随军攻下婺州，迁升枢密院判官。
English: Following the army's conquest of Bozhou, he was promoted to judge of the Privy Council.

古文：再从伐汉，以功擢湖广行省参政，移镇江陵。
现代文：又随军伐汉，因功提升为湖广行省参政，移守江陵。
English: He also followed the army to cut down trees in Han, and was promoted to participate in the politics of Huguang Province for his merits, and moved to Jiangling.

古文：进攻湖南蛮寇，驻师三江口。
现代文：进攻湖南蛮寇，驻军三江口。
English: Hunan barbarian invaders attack, troops stationed at Sanjiangkou.

古文：复以招讨功迁行省平章政事。
现代文：又因招降、征讨之功迁升为行省平章政事。
English: In addition, he was promoted to the post of governor of Pingzhang Province for his achievements in recruiting and conscripting soldiers.

古文：帅左丞周德兴、参政张彬将武昌诸卫军，取广西。
现代文：率左丞周德兴、参政张彬统领武昌诸卫军，攻取广西。
English: Led by Zhou Dexing, a left-wing general, and Zhang Bin, a politician, they led the Wuchang guards and conquered Guangxi.

古文：洪武元年春进攻永州。守将邓祖胜迎战败，敛兵固守。
现代文：洪武元年春，明军进攻永州，守将邓祖胜迎战失败，收兵固守。
English: In the spring of the first year of Hongwu, the Ming army attacked Yongzhou. The defender, Deng Zu, failed to win the battle, but gathered troops and held on.

古文：璟进围之。
现代文：杨璟率军进围永州。
English: Yang Hui led an army to encircle Yongzhou.

古文：元兵来援，驻东乡，倚湘水列七营，军势甚盛。
现代文：元兵来援，驻扎东乡，倚着湘水排列七营，势头极盛。
English: Yuan soldiers came to the rescue, stationed in Dongxiang, and lined up seven battalions leaning on the Xiangshui River, with great momentum.

古文：璟击败之，俘获千余人。
现代文：杨璟将其击败，俘获千余人。
English: Yang Hui defeated them and captured more than a thousand people.

古文：全州守将平章阿思兰及周文贵再以兵来援，辄遣德兴击败之。遣千户王廷取宝庆，德兴、彬取全州，略定道州、蓝山、桂阳、武冈诸州县。
现代文：全州守将平章阿思兰及周文贵又以兵来援，杨璟立即派周德兴将其击败，然后派千户王廷攻取宝庆，周德兴、张彬攻取全州，平定道州、蓝山、桂阳、武冈诸州县。
English: Zhengzhou's garrison commanders, Pingzhang Aslan and Zhou Wengui, also came to their aid with soldiers. Yang Pi immediately sent Zhou Dexing to defeat them, and then sent Qianhu Wangting to capture Baoqing, Zhou Dexing and Zhang Bin to capture Zhengzhou, and to pacify the provinces of Dingdao, Lanshan, Guiyang and Wugang.

古文：而永州久不下，令裨将分营诸门，筑垒困之，造浮桥西江上，急攻之。
现代文：而永州却久攻不下，杨璟便命裨将分别扎营诸门，筑垒围攻，又在西江上搭造浮桥，发动猛攻。
English: However, Yongzhou could not be conquered for a long time, so Yang Pi used his life to encamp the gates, build a siege, build a pontoon bridge on the West River, and launch a fierce attack.

古文：祖胜力尽，仰药死。
现代文：邓祖胜精疲力竭，服毒自杀。
English: Exhausted, Deng Zusheng took poison and committed suicide.

古文：百户夏升约降。
现代文：百户夏升约请投降。
English: Hundred households, please surrender to Xia Sheng.

古文：璟兵逾城入，参政张子贤巷战，军溃被执，遂克永州。
现代文：杨璟军越城而入，参政张子贤展开巷战，兵溃被捉，于是攻克永州。
English: Yang Hui's army entered the city from the other side, and Zhang Zixian, a politician, started a street battle. He was captured and went on to conquer Yongzhou.

古文：而征南将军廖永忠、参政朱亮祖亦自广东取梧州，定浔、贵、郁林。
现代文：而征南将军廖永忠、参政朱高祖也自广东攻取梧州，平定浔、贵、郁林。
English: However, the Southern Expeditionary General Liao Yongzhong and the politician Zhu Gaozu also conquered Wuzhou from Guangdong, subduing Yan, Gui and Yulin.

古文：亮祖以兵来会。进攻靖江不下，璟谓诸将曰： 彼所恃西濠水耳。
现代文：朱亮祖率军前来会合，进攻靖江不下，杨璟对诸将说道 ：他们所依赖的是西濠之水。
English: Zhu Liangzu led the army to come to the meeting and attack the Jingjiang River. Yang Hui said to the generals: They rely on the water from Xidi.

古文：决其堤岸，破之必矣。 
现代文：若决其堤岸，必能破之。 
English: If you break its bank, you will break it.

古文：乃遣指挥丘广攻叚口关，杀守堤兵，尽决濠水，筑土堤五道，傅于城。
现代文：于是派遣指挥丘广进攻闸口关，杀死守堤兵，将濠水全部放出，筑起五道土堤，一直连至城墙。
English: So he sent commander Qiu Guang to attack the sluice gate, kill the soldiers guarding the dike, release all the water, and build five earthen dikes, all the way to the city wall.

古文：城中犹固守。
现代文：城中仍然固守。
English: The city is still holding out.

古文：急攻二月，克之，执平章也儿吉尼。
现代文：明军猛攻二个月，攻克，捉住平章也儿吉尼。
English: The Ming army stormed for two months, conquered and captured Pingzhangyaerjini.

古文：先是张彬攻南关，为守城者所诟，怒欲屠其民。
现代文：在此之前，张彬进攻南关，被守城者所骂，大怒，要屠杀城中百姓。
English: Prior to this, Zhang Bin attacked Nankuan, was scolded by the defenders, was furious, and wanted to massacre the people in the city.

古文：璟甫入，立下令禁止之，民乃安。
现代文：杨璟刚到，立即下令禁止，百姓才得安全。
English: As soon as Yang Hui arrived, he immediately ordered a ban, so that the people could be safe.

古文：复移师徇郴州，降两江土官黄英岑、伯颜等，而永忠亦定南宁、象州。
现代文：杨璟又移军巡行彬州，降服两江土官黄英岑、伯颜等，而廖永忠也平定了南宁、象州。
English: Yang Hui also moved his army to patrol Binshu and subjugated the local officials of the two rivers, Huang Yingqian and Bo Yan, while Liao Yongzhong also pacified Nanning and Xiangzhou.

古文：广西悉平。
现代文：广西全部平定。
English: Guangxi has been completely pacified.

古文：还，与偏将军汤和从徐达取山西，至泽州，及元平章韩紥儿战于韩店，败绩。
现代文：回京后，杨璟与偏将军汤和一起随徐达攻取山西，至峄州，与元平章韩扎儿战于韩店，战败。
English: After returning to Beijing, Yang Hui and the partial general Tang He together with Xu Darong conquered Shanxi and went to Zhangzhou, and fought with Yuan Pingzhang and Hanzar in Hanten, and were defeated.

古文：还，捕唐州乱卒，留镇南阳。
现代文：回军，追捕唐州乱兵，留守南阳。
English: He returned to the army, hunted down the rebels in Tangzhou, and stayed in Nanyang.

古文：未几，诏璟往使于夏。
现代文：不久，杨璟奉诏出使夏。
English: Soon after, Yang Hui sent an envoy to Xia.

古文：是时夏主升幼，母彭及诸大臣用事。
现代文：当时夏主明升年幼，其母彭氏及诸大臣掌握大权。
English: At that time, Xia Lord Ming Sheng was young, and his mother Peng and the ministers held great power.

古文：璟既至。数谕升以祸福，俾从入觐。
现代文：杨璟到后，多次向明升晓以祸福，让明升随他入朝觐见太祖。
English: After Yang Xuan arrived, he repeatedly asked Ming Shengxiao for blessings and curses, so that Ming Sheng would accompany him to the imperial court to meet the great ancestor.

古文：升集其下共议。
现代文：明升召集属下商议。
English: Ming Sheng called his subordinates together for discussion.

古文：太祖遣使让璟。璟督战，士力攻，贼乃遁。
现代文：而诸大臣正放纵专横，认为明升归附明朝不利，都坚持说不行，明升也不能做出决定。杨璟回来后，又写信劝说明升，明升始终不听。二年之后，夏亡。
English: However, the ministers were indulging in high-handedness, believing that it was unfavorable for Ming Sheng to be annexed to the Ming Dynasty. They all insisted that it was not possible, and Ming Sheng could not make a decision. After Yang Hui returned, he also wrote a letter to persuade Ming Sheng, but Ming Sheng still did not listen. Two years later, Xia died.

古文：三年大封功臣，封璟营阳侯，禄千五百石，予世券。
现代文：杨璟迁升湖广行省平章。三年，太祖大封功臣，封杨璟为营阳侯，年禄一千五百石，并授予世袭凭证。
English: Yang Hui was transferred to Pingzhang, Shenghu Guangxing Province. Three years later, the great-grandfather was awarded the title of meritorious vassal, Yang Hui was awarded the title of Yingyang marquis, the annual salary was 1,500 koku, and he was awarded a hereditary certificate.

古文：四年从汤和伐夏，战于瞿塘，不利。
现代文：四年，杨璟随汤和伐夏，战于瞿塘，失利。
English: In four years, Yang Hui followed Tang and Laxia, fought in Qutang, and lost.

古文：明年充副将军，从邓愈讨定辰、沅蛮寇。
现代文：第二年，杨璟为副将军，随邓愈讨平辰、沅蛮寇。
English: In the second year, Yang Hui was promoted to vice-general and followed Deng Yu to fight against Pingchen and the barbarian invaders.

古文：再从大将军徐达镇北平，练兵辽东。
现代文：又随大将军徐达镇守北平，并练兵辽东。
English: He also accompanied the great general Xu Dazhen to defend Beiping, and trained soldiers in Liaodong.

古文：十五年八月卒，追封芮国公，谥武信。
现代文：十五年八月，杨璟去世，追封为芮国公，谥号武信。
English: In August of the fifteenth year, Yang Hui passed away and was posthumously named the Duke of Shandong, with the posthumous name of Wuxin.

古文：子通嗣，二十年帅降军戍云南，多道亡，降普定指挥使。
现代文：其子杨通继嗣，二十年，率降兵戍守云南，可降兵大多途中逃亡，投降普定指挥使。
English: His son Yang Tong Heir, twenty years old, led the troops to defend Yunnan, but most of the troops fled on the way and surrendered to the commanding envoy of Puting.

古文：二十三年，诏书坐璟胡惟庸党，谓以瞿塘之败被责，有异谋云。
现代文：二十三年，诏书中追论杨璟为胡惟庸党，并说他因瞿塘失败被责，而企图谋反等。
English: In the 23rd year of his reign, the imperial edict accused Yang Jie of being a member of Hu Wei Yong's party, and said that he was blamed for the defeat in Shantang and attempted to rebel.

古文：胡美，沔阳人。初名廷瑞，避太祖字，易名美。
现代文：胡美，沔阳人，初名胡廷瑞，因避太祖字讳，改名胡美。
English: Hu Mei, a native of Shenyang, whose original name was Hu Tingrui, changed her name to Hu Mei to avoid her great-grandfather's reputation.

古文：初仕陈友谅，为江西行省丞相，守龙兴。
现代文：开始为陈友谅属官，任江西行省丞相，驻守龙兴。
English: He began as a subordinate official of Chen Youyuan, serving as the provincial chancellor of Jiangxi Province, stationed in Longxing.

古文：太祖既下江州，遣使招谕美。
现代文：太祖攻下江州后，派使者前去招降胡美。
English: After the great-grandfather conquered Jiangzhou, he sent an envoy to recruit Hu Mei.

古文：美遣使郑仁杰诣九江请降，且请无散部曲。
现代文：胡美便派使者郑仁杰到九江请降，并请求不要解散其部众。
English: Hu Mei then sent an envoy, Zheng Renjie, to Jiujiang to ask the rebels to surrender and to request that they not disband their troops.

古文：太祖初难之，刘基蹴所坐胡床。太祖悟，赐书报曰： 郑仁杰至，言足下有效顺之诚，此足下明达也；又恐分散所部，此足下过虑也。
现代文：太祖开始予以指责，刘基用脚踏其所坐胡床，太祖这才醒悟，赐信答复说 ：郑仁杰到这儿来，说明足下有效力、顺从我的诚意，这是足下的明达啊；又担心分散部众，这便是足下过虑了。
English: The great-grandfather began to make accusations. Liu Ji stepped on the wooden bed he was sitting on. Only then did the great-grandfather come to his senses. He sent a letter in reply, saying: Zheng Renjie came here to demonstrate his effectiveness and his sincerity in obeying me. This was the wisdom of his feet. He was also worried about scattering his subordinates. This was the carelessness of his feet.

古文：吾起兵十年，奇才英士，得之四方多矣。
现代文：我起兵十年，奇才英士，在四处获取颇多。
English: I've been in the army for ten years, and I've gained a lot of experience from all over.

古文：有能审天时，料事机，不待交兵，挺然委身来者，尝推赤心以待，随其才任使之，兵少则益之以兵，位卑则隆之以爵，财乏则厚之以赏，安肯散其部曲，使人自危疑，负来归之心哉？
现代文：有人能审察天时，料定事机，不待交兵，断然委身前来归附，我对他们诚心相待，按其才能加以任用，兵少则为其增兵，地位卑微则封其爵位，财物缺乏则予以厚赏，我怎么肯解散其部曲，而使人感到自危，辜负其前来归附之心呢？
English: I treat them with sincerity, appoint them according to their ability, increase their number if they have few soldiers, give them a knighthood if they are of low rank, and reward them generously if they are destitute. How can I dissolve their troops without making people feel insecure and betray their desire to join?

古文：且以陈氏诸将观之，如赵普胜骁勇善战，以疑见戮。
现代文：而且可以看看陈氏诸将，如赵普胜骁勇善战，因疑心被杀。
English: Moreover, you can look at the Chen generals, such as Zhao Pusheng, who fought bravely and well, and was killed because of suspicion.

古文：猜忌若此，竟何所成。
现代文：如此猜忌别人，会有何成就呢？
English: What can be achieved by being so suspicious of others?

古文：近建康龙湾之役，予所获长张、梁铉、彭指挥诸人，用之如故，视吾诸将，恩均义一。
现代文：近日建康龙湾之役，我所得长张、梁铉、彭指挥等人，作用依旧，与我部将相比，恩义均等。
English: In the recent Battle of Jiankang Longwan, the roles of Changzhang, Liang Jun, Peng Duan and others, who were assigned to me, are still the same. Compared with my subordinates, the gratitude is equal.

古文：长张破安庆水寨，梁铉等攻江北，并膺厚赏。
现代文：长张攻破安庆水寨，梁铉等进攻江北，都受重赏。
English: Changzhang's attack on Anqing Water Town and Liang Kun's attack on the north of the Yangtze River were both highly commended.

古文：此数人者，其自视无复生理，尚待之如此，况如足下不劳一卒，以完城来归者耶？
现代文：这几个人，他们自视无再活之理，我尚能如此相待，何况像足下这样不劳一卒，而以整城来归附的人呢？
English: How can I do this to these people, who see no reason to live any longer, let alone someone like me, who doesn't have to do a single thing, but has the whole city behind him?

古文：得失之机，间不容发，足下当早为计。 
现代文：得失之机，刻不容缓，足下应当早下决定。 
English: The opportunity for gains and losses cannot be delayed, and a decision should be made as soon as possible.

古文：美得书，乃遣康泰至九江来降。
现代文：胡美收到信后，便派康泰到九江来降。
English: After Hu Mei received the letter, she sent Kang Tai to Jiujiang to come down.

古文：太祖遂如龙兴，至樵舍。
现代文：太祖于是前往龙兴，至樵舍。
English: So the great-grandfather went to Longxing, to the outhouse.

古文：美以陈氏所授丞相印及军民粮储之数来献，迎谒于新城门。
现代文：胡美以陈氏所授丞相印及军民、储粮之数来献，迎见于新城门。
English: Hu Mei presented the emperor's seal and the number of soldiers and civilians and grain reserves awarded by the Chen clan, and was welcomed at the new city gate.

古文：太祖慰劳之，俾仍旧官。
现代文：太祖加以慰劳，命他仍担任旧官职。
English: The great-grandfather consoled him and ordered him to still hold the old official post.

古文：美之降也，同佥康泰、平章祝宗不欲从，美微言于太祖。
现代文：胡美投降，同佥康泰、平章祝宗不想跟从，胡美向太祖暗示此事。
English: Humi surrendered, but his peers Kangtai and Pingzhang Zhouzong did not want to follow. Humi hinted this to his grandfather.

古文：太祖命将其兵，从徐达征武昌。
现代文：太祖命二人率领其军，随徐达征讨武昌。
English: The great-grandfather ordered the two men to lead his army and follow Xu Da to conquer Wuchang.

古文：二人果叛，攻陷洪都。
现代文：二人果然反叛，攻陷洪都。
English: The two men rebelled and captured Hongdu.

古文：达等还兵击定之。
现代文：徐达等回军平定叛兵。
English: Xu Da and other Hui troops subdued the rebels.

古文：祝宗走死，执康泰归于建康。
现代文：祝宗逃跑时死去，康泰被捉押回建康。
English: Zhuzong died while escaping, and Kangtai was captured and returned to Jiankang.

古文：太祖以泰为美甥，赦勿诛。
现代文：太祖因康泰是胡美的外甥，赦免其死罪。
English: The great-grandfather pardoned Kangtai's death sentence because he was the nephew of Hume.

古文：美从征武昌，复与达等帅马步舟师取淮东，进伐张士诚，下湖州，围平江，别将取无锡，降莫天祐。
现代文：胡美随征武昌，又与徐达等率骑兵、步兵及水师攻取淮东，进而讨伐张士诚，攻下湖州，围攻平江，另又率军攻取无锡，降服莫天。
English: Hu Mei followed the conquest of Wuchang, and together with Xu Da and others, led cavalry, infantry and sailors to conquer Huaidong, and then fought against Zhang Shicheng, conquered Huzhou, besieged Pingjiang, and also led the army to conquer Wuxi, and surrendered.

古文：师还，加荣禄大夫。
现代文：班师回朝后，胡美被加封为荣禄大夫。
English: After the class teacher returned to the imperial court, Hu Mei was given the additional title of honorary doctor.

古文：其冬，命为征南将军，帅师由江西取福建，谕之曰： 汝以陈氏丞相来归，事吾数年，忠实无过，故命汝总兵取闽。
现代文：这年冬天，太祖命胡美为征南将军，率军由江西攻取福建，对他说道： 你以陈氏丞相的身份前来归附，为我效力多年，忠实无过，所以我命你统领军队攻取福建。
English: This winter, the great-grandfather ordered Hu Mei to become the general to conquer the south and lead the army from Jiangxi to conquer Fujian. He said to him: You came to annex as the prime minister of the Chen clan, you have served me for many years, and you have been faithful, so I order you to lead the army to conquer Fujian.

古文：左丞何文辉为尔副，参政戴德听调发，二人虽皆吾亲近，勿以其故废军法。
现代文：左丞何文辉为你的副将，参政戴德也听你调遣，这二人虽然都是我的亲信，但不要因为这个缘故而废弃军法。
English: Zuo Rong He Wenhui is your vice-commander, and Sanzheng Dede is also at your disposal. Although these two are my close friends, don't abandon military law for this reason.

古文：闻汝尝攻闽中，宜深知其地利险易。
现代文：听说你曾攻打过闽中，应当深知其地利险易。
English: I've heard that you once fought in Yuzhong, so you should know that it's a dangerous place.

古文：今总大军攻围城邑，必择便宜可否为进退，无失机宜。 
现代文：现在你统领大军围攻城邑，一定要按是否有利而决定进退，莫失良机。 
English: Now that you are leading a large army to besiege the city, you must decide whether to advance or retreat according to whether it is advantageous. Don't miss the opportunity.

古文：美遂渡杉关，下光泽，邵武守将李宗茂以城降。
现代文：胡美于是渡杉关，下光泽，邵武守将李宗茂以城投降。
English: Hu Mei then went to Sugiguan, and Shao Wuzhong surrendered to Li Zongmao.

古文：次建阳，守将曹复畴亦降。
现代文：胡美驻扎建阳，守将曹复畴也降。
English: Hu Mei was stationed in Jianyang, and the commander Cao Fuzhong was also demoted.

古文：进围建宁，守将同佥达里麻、参政陈子琦谋坚守以老我师。
现代文：进围建宁，守将同佥达里麻、参政陈子琦企图坚守，使我军疲竭。
English: In the encirclement of Jianning, the defenders tried to hold on with the help of the comrade Darima and the politician Chen Zixuan, which exhausted our army.

古文：美数挑战，不出，急攻之，乃降。
现代文：胡美多次挑战，守军不出，于是猛攻，这才投降。
English: Hu Mei challenged many times, the defenders did not come out, so they stormed, only to surrender.

古文：整军入城，秋毫无所犯。
现代文：整军入城，秋毫无犯。
English: The whole army entered the city and did not commit any crimes in the autumn.

古文：执子琦等送京师，获将士九千七百余人，粮糗马畜称是。
现代文：捉拿陈子琦等押送京城，俘获将士九千七百余人，干粮、马匹牲畜甚多。
English: Chen Zixuan and others were captured and taken to the capital, and more than 9,700 soldiers were captured, along with a great deal of dry grain, horses, and livestock.

古文：会汤和等亦取福州、延平、兴化，美遂遣降将谕降汀、泉诸郡。
现代文：恰逢汤和等也攻取了福州、延平、兴化，胡美于是派遣降将谕降汀、泉诸郡。
English: At the same time, Tang He and others also captured Fuzhou, Yanping, and Xinghua. Therefore, Hu Mei dispatched the generals to the counties of Ding and Quan.

古文：福建悉平。
现代文：福建全部平定。
English: All of Fujian has been pacified.

古文：美留守其地。
现代文：胡美留守其地。
English: Hu Mei stayed behind.

古文：寻召还，从幸汴梁。
现代文：不久应召返回，随太祖巡幸汴梁。
English: He was soon called back and accompanied his great-grandfather on a tour of happiness.

古文：太祖即位，以美为中书平章、同知詹事院事。
现代文：太祖即位后，以胡美为中书平章、同知詹事院事。
English: After the great-grandfather ascended to the throne, Hu Mei was appointed as the Chinese scholar Pingzhang, and his friend Zhanji was appointed as an academician.

古文：洪武三年命赴河南，招集扩廓故部曲。
现代文：洪武三年，胡美受命前往河南招集扩廓的旧部众。
English: In the third year of Hongwu's reign, Hu Mei was ordered to go to Henan to recruit the old members of the extended family.

古文：是年冬论功，封豫章侯，食禄千五百石，予世券，诰词以窦融归汉为比。
现代文：这年冬天，论功时，太祖封胡美为豫章侯，年禄一千五百石，给予世袭凭证，诰词中以窦融归汉一事相比。
English: This winter, when discussing the merits, the great-great-grandfather named Hu Mei as the Prince of Yuzhang, with a year's salary of 1,500 koku, and gave him a certificate of inheritance. In his eulogy, he compared it to Dou Rong's return to Han.

古文：十三年改封临川侯，董建潭漂府于长沙。
现代文：十三年，胡美被改封为临川侯，在长沙监督建造潭府。
English: In the thirteenth year, Hu Mei was changed to the lord of Linchuan and supervised the construction of Tanfu in Changsha.

古文：太祖榜列勋臣，谓持兵两雄间，可观望而不观望来归者七人。
现代文：太祖榜列勋臣时，谓掌兵两雄之间，可观望而不观望，前来归附者有七人。
English: When the great-great-grandfather was enlisting his honored vassals, there were seven people who came to join him.

古文：七人者，韩政、曹良臣、杨璟、陆聚、梅思祖、黄彬及美，皆封侯。
现代文：这七人就是：韩政、曹良臣、杨璟、陆聚、梅思祖、黄彬及胡美，都封为侯。
English: These seven people are: Han Zheng, Cao Liang Zhen, Yang Hui, Lu Ju, Mei Szu, Huang Bin and Hu Mei, all of whom are vassals.

古文：美与璟有方面勋，帝遇之尤厚。
现代文：胡美与杨璟有独挡一面之功勋，太祖尤其予以厚待。
English: Hu Mei and Yang Hui have their own merits, and the great-great-grandfather is treated especially well.

古文：十七年坐法死。
现代文：十七年，胡美因犯法获罪下狱。
English: Seventeen years later, Hu Mei was released from prison after being convicted of a crime.

古文：二十三年，李善长败，帝手诏条列奸党，言美因长女为贵妃，偕其子婿入乱宫禁，事觉，子婿刑死，美赐自尽云。
现代文：二十三年，李善长事发，太祖亲自下诏列举奸党，说胡美因长女为贵妃，偕同其女婿扰乱宫禁，事情败露，其女婿受刑而死，胡美则被赐自尽。
English: In 233, an incident occurred in the reign of Li Shanzhong. The great-grandfather personally issued an edict listing the traitors, saying that because his eldest daughter was a noble consort, Humi and his son-in-law violated the palace ban, and the matter was revealed. His son-in-law was punished and died, and Humi was given the power to commit suicide.

