古文：《四时类要》：治牛疫方：取人参一两细切，水煮汁五升，灌口中，差。
现代文：《四时类要》：治牛疫方：将一两人参切细，用五升水煮汁，灌入口中，即愈。
English: "Four-hour class essentials": Cattle epidemic treatment: cut one or two ginsengs finely, boil the juice with five liters of water, pour it into the mouth, and it will be better.

古文：又方：真安息香于牛栏中烧，如烧香法。
现代文：另有一方：像平时烧香那样，在牛栏中烧真安息香。
English: On the other hand, they burn genuine incense in the corral, just as they burn incense at other times.

古文：如初觉有一头至两头是疫，即牵出，以鼻吸之，立愈。
现代文：如发觉有一头或两头牛感染上牛疫，随即牵出来，让它用鼻吸入香烟，立刻便愈。
English: If one or two cows are found to be infected with rinderpest, they are immediately taken out and made to inhale a cigarette through their noses. They immediately recover.

古文：又方：十二月兔头烧作灰，和水五升，灌口中，良。
现代文：还有一方：用十二月间的兔头烧化成灰，用五升水拌和灌入口中，此法亦好。
English: On the other hand, it is also good to use the rabbit's head from December to burn it into ashes, mix it with five liters of water and pour it into the mouth.

古文：牛欲死腹胀方：研麻子汁五升，温令热，灌口中，愈。
现代文：治牛欲死腹胀方：研磨麻子汁五升，加温使热，灌入口中，即愈。
English: How to cure bloating: Grind five liters of linseed juice, heat it up, pour it into the mouth, and drink it.

古文：此治食生豆，腹胀垂死者，甚良。
现代文：此法治疗牛吃生豆腹胀垂死，甚好。
English: This method is very good for treating bloating and death caused by eating raw soybeans.

古文：牛鼻胀方：以醋灌耳中，立差。
现代文：治牛鼻胀方：用醋灌入牛耳中，立刻便能痊愈。
English: How to cure a runny nose: Pour vinegar into a cow's ear and it will be cured immediately.

古文：牛疥方：煮乌豆汁，热洗五度，差。
现代文：治牛疥方：煮乌豆汁，趁热洗过五次，即愈。
English: How to cure beef jerky: Boil the mung bean juice, wash it five times while it's still hot, and it will get better.

古文：一本作乌头汁。
现代文：有一个版本作 乌头汁 。
English: There is a version called "Utoujiru."

古文：牛肚胀及嗽方取榆白皮、水煮令熟，甚滑，以三五升灌之，即差。
现代文：治牛肚胀及嗽方：将榆树的白韧皮，放在水中煮熟，汁甚滑，用三五升灌入牛腹，即愈。
English: How to treat bloated and swollen stomachs: Boil the white bast of eucalyptus in water until the juice is very smooth. Pour three to five liters of the juice into the stomach of the cow, and it will be instantly absorbed.

古文：牛虱方：以胡麻油涂之，即愈。
现代文：治牛虱方：用胡麻油涂抹，即愈。
English: How to cure beef jerky: Rub it with sesame oil and it will instantly cure.

古文：猪脂亦得。
现代文：用猪脂涂抹也可以。
English: It can also be smeared with lard.

古文：六畜虱，涂之亦愈。
现代文：其他各种家畜生虱，用此方涂抹皆可治愈。
English: Various other domestic animals have ringworm, which can be cured by applying this remedy.

古文：《博闻录》：牛瘴疫方：用真茶二两，和水五升灌之。
现代文：《博闻录》：治牛瘴疫法：用二两真茶叶，与五升水调和在一起，灌服。
English: "Houwen Lu": the best way to treat rinderpest: use two or two real tea leaves, mix with five liters of water, and drink it.

古文：又：治牛猝疫而动头打胁：急用巴豆七个，去壳、细研出油、和灌之，即愈。
现代文：又方：治牛猝疫而动头打胁方：赶快用七个巴豆，砸去硬壳，细细地研磨使其出油，调和灌下，立即便愈。
English: Another way: to cure the cattle sudden epidemic and start to fight the threatening side: quickly use seven beans, smash the hard shell, finely grind to make it oil, mix and pour, and immediately it will be gone.

古文：又：烧苍术，令牛鼻吸其香，止。
现代文：又方：烧苍术，让牛鼻吸进香气，疫病便可止住。
English: Another method: the art of burning the dead, so that the cow's nose can inhale the aroma, and the plague can be stopped.

古文：牛尿血方：川当归、红花，为细末，以酒二升半，煎取二升，冷灌之。
现代文：治牛尿血方：将川当归、红花，研成细末，用二升半酒，煎汁二升，候冷，灌下。
English: Cattle Urine and Blood Treatment: Mix the chuan donggui and safflower into a fine powder, mix with two and a half liters of liquor, two liters of broth, chill, and pour.

古文：又法：豉汁调食盐灌。
现代文：又法：用豆豉汁，调食盐灌服。
English: Another method: use cardamom juice and season with salt.

古文：牛患白膜遮眼：用炒盐并竹节烧存性，细研，一钱贴膜，效。
现代文：治牛患白膜遮眼方：用炒盐烧竹节存性，合并研成细末，每次用一钱贴在白膜上，甚效。
English: How to cure a sick cow with a white film to cover the eyes: stir-fried salt is used to burn the bamboo to preserve it, and it is combined to form a fine powder. It is very effective to stick it on the white film with a coin each time.

古文：牛气噎方：牛有茅根噎，以皂角末吹鼻中，更以鞋底拍尾停骨下，效。
现代文：治牛气噎方：牛患有茅根噎，用皂角末往鼻中吹，另外并用鞋底拍打尾椎骨的下方，甚效。
English: How to cure bovine flatulence: If a cow is suffering from bovine flatulence, blow into its nose with a bar of soap and pat the underside of the tail vertebrae with the sole of a shoe. This is very effective.

古文：牛腹胀方：牛吃着杂虫，致腹胀。
现代文：治牛腹胀方：牛吃了各种杂虫，会导致腹胀。
English: Cattle bloating treatment: Cows have eaten all kinds of insects, which will lead to bloating.

古文：用燕屎一合，浆水二升，调灌之，效。
现代文：用燕子屎一合，浆水二升，调和灌之，极效。
English: Swallow droppings are mixed with two liters of starched water, mixed and poured, and it is very effective.

古文：牛触人方：牛颠走，逢人即触，是胆大也。
现代文：治牛触人方：牛狂奔，逢人便触，是因为胆子太大。
English: How to treat a cow that touches someone: If a cow runs wild and touches everyone, it's because it's too bold.

古文：黄连、大黄末、鸡子、酒调灌之。
现代文：可用黄连、大黄末、鸡蛋，用酒调和灌下。
English: You can use huanglian, rhubarb powder, eggs, mix with wine and pour.

古文：牛尾焦，不食水草：以大黄、黄连、白芷末、鸡子、酒调灌之。
现代文：治牛尾焦、不食不饮方：用大黄、黄连、白芷末、鸡蛋和酒调匀灌下。
English: How to cure oxtail scorching, do not eat or drink: mix with rhubarb, huanglian, chalk powder, egg and wine and pour.

古文：牛气胀方：净水洗汗袜，取汁一升，好醋半升许，灌之，愈。
现代文：治牛气胀方：用清水洗穿过的脏汗袜，取污汁一升，拌和好醋半升左右灌下，马上便好。
English: Cattle flatulence cure: wash the dirty socks with clean water, take one liter of sewage juice, mix with half a liter of vinegar and pour it down, and it will be good immediately.

古文：牛肩烂方：旧绵絮三两，烧存性，麻油调抹。忌水五日，愈。
现代文：治牛肩烂方：旧棉花三两烧存性，用麻油调拌涂抹患处，五天以内不要见水，自愈。
English: How to cure cow's shoulder rot: old cotton with three or two burns, mix with hemp oil and apply to the affected area, do not see water within five days, self-healing.

古文：牛漏蹄方：紫矿为末，猪脂和，纳入蹄中，烧铁篦烙之，愈。
现代文：治牛漏蹄方：将紫矿研成细末，用猪油调和，抹进蹄内，用烧红的铁篦子烙烫，便愈。
English: How to cure leaky hooves: grind purple ore into a fine powder, mix it with lard, rub it into the hoof, burn it with red-hot tongs, and the stool will be gone.

古文：牛沙疥方：荞麦随多寡，烧灰淋汁；入绿礬一合，和涂，愈。
现代文：治牛沙疥法：看皮肤症状来定用多少荞麦，烧灰淋汁，倒入绿礬一合，拌和涂抹，便愈。
English: Treatment of psoriasis: depending on the skin symptoms, how much buckwheat should be used, how much lye should be used, how much lye should be used, how much lye should be used, how much lye should be used, how much lye should be used, how much lye should be used.

古文：《韩氏直说》：喂养牛法：农隙时，入暖屋，用场上诸糠穰铺牛脚下，谓之 牛铺 ，牛粪其上。
现代文：《韩氏直说》：喂牛养牛的方法：农闲的时候，应当把牛拴入暖房，用打谷场的糠皮、穰草铺在牛脚下，叫做 牛铺 ，牛的粪尿皆便溺在上面。
English: "Han Shi Zhizhi" said: The method of feeding cattle and raising cattle: when the farmer is idle, the cattle should be put into the heating, and the bran and alfalfa of the threshing floor should be spread under the feet of the cattle, which is called the cow shop, and the cow's feces and urine are drowned on it.

古文：次日又覆糠穰。
现代文：第二天，再铺盖一层糠穰。
English: The next day, cover with another layer of straw.

古文：每日一覆，十日除一次。
现代文：每天铺一次，每十天清除一次。
English: It is paved once a day and cleared once every ten days.

古文：牛一具三只，每日前后饷，约饲草三束，豆料八升。
现代文：牛一具是三头，每日上半天和下半天，大约要用饲草三束，豆子八升。
English: A cow has three heads, the first half of the day and the second half of the day, about three bunches of fodder grass and eight liters of beans.

古文：或用蚕沙、干桑叶，水三桶浸之。
现代文：也可以用蚕屎、干桑叶，加水三桶，浸过后喂。
English: You can also use silkworm droppings, dried mulberry leaves, add three buckets of water, soak and then feed.

古文：牛下饷，噍透，刷铯、饮毕，辰巳时间上槽。
现代文：牛下槽，反刍毕，刷梳干净、饮过水，到辰巳时间再上槽。
English: The cow goes into the trough, after chewing the cud, brushing the comb clean, drinking water, and then it's time to go back into the trough.

古文：一顿可分三和，皆水拌。
现代文：一顿可分作三次添草，皆须用水拌和。
English: One meal can be divided into three additions, all of which must be mixed with water.

古文：第一和，草多料少；第二，比前草减半，少加料；第三，草比第二又减半，所有料全缴拌。
现代文：第一次，草宜多，料宜少；第二次，草减少一半，少许加些料；第三次，草要比第二次减少一半，剩下的料全部搅拌进去。
English: The first time, the grass should be more, and the ingredients should be less; the second time, the grass should be reduced by half, and some ingredients should be added; the third time, the grass should be reduced by half compared to the second time, and all the remaining ingredients should be stirred in.

古文：食尽即往使耕；噍了，牛无力。
现代文：草料吃完了，便可牵去耕地；不要等反刍后耕，牛会没有力气。
English: After eating the grass, you can take it to the farmland; don't wait to plow after plowing, the cow will have no strength.

古文：夜喂牛，各带一铃，草尽，牛不食，则铃无声，即拌之。
现代文：夜间喂牛，每头牛都要带上一个响铃，草吃完后，牛停止吃草，便听不见铃的响声，应赶快再拌草。
English: Feeding cattle at night, each cow should bring a bell. After eating the grass, the cow stops eating the grass, so it can't hear the ringing of the bell. It should quickly mix the grass again.

古文：饱，使耕。
现代文：牛吃饱后，便要上套耕田。
English: After the cows have had enough to eat, they have to go to the fields.

古文：俗谚云： 三和一缴，须管要饱；不要噍了，使去最好。 
现代文：民间谚语说： 三和草、一加料，须要管它吃得饱；莫等反刍使用最好。 
English: A folk proverb says: "Three herbs, one seasoning, must be eaten to the full; don't wait to use the cud."

古文：水牛：饮饲与黄牛同。
现代文：水牛，饮水饲喂的方法和黄牛相同。
English: Water buffaloes are fed the same way as cattle.

古文：夏须得水池，冬须得暖厂、牛衣。
现代文：夏天要有水池，冬天要有暖房、牛衣。
English: In summer, there should be a pool, and in winter, there should be heating and a cow costume.

