古文：历阳媪孙权高颖神尧唐高祖太行山桑条歌突厥盐封中岳杨柳谣黄獐歌苾挈儿安乐寺乌鹊窠鲤鱼儿挽天枢黄犊子骆宾王天后阎知微长孙无忌魏王武媚娘孝和魏叔麟武三思孙佺张易之饮酒令白马寺李蒙李进周志公词李怀光王铎木成文草重生唐国闰竹骝
现代文：历阳媪孙权高颖神尧唐高祖太行山桑条歌突厥盐封中岳杨柳谣黄獐歌苾挈儿安乐寺乌鹊窠鲤鱼儿挽天枢黄犊子骆宾王天后阎知微长孙无忌魏王武媚娘孝和魏叔麟武三思孙佺张易之饮酒令白马寺李蒙李进周志公词李怀光王铎木成文草重生唐国闰竹骝
English: Lianyang Sun King Quan Gao Ying Shen Tang Gao Ancestor Taigang Mountain Mulberry Song Turkic Salt Seal Middle Mountain Yang Liu Folk Song Huangdi Song  Children's Anle Temple Black Egret Fish  Heaven's Anchor Yellow Egret King Lopin Tin Hau Yan Zhi Weak Eldest Grandson Guileless Wei King Wu Charming Daughter Xiao He Wei Shu Lin Wu San Si Grandson  Zhang Yi's Drinking  White Horse Temple Li Meng Li Jin Zhou Zhi Gong Ci Li Huai Guang Wang  Wood into Paper Grass Rebirth of Tang Country  Bamboo

古文：历阳媪
现代文：历阳媪
English: Liyang Zhen

古文：历阳县有一媪，常为善。
现代文：历阳县有一个老太太，经常行善。
English: There is an old lady in Liyang County who often does good deeds.

古文：忽有少年过门求食，媪待之甚恭。临去谓媪曰： 时往县门，见门阃有血可登山避难。 
现代文：一天，忽然有一个少年来要饭吃，老太太对他很客气，临走的时候他对老太太说： 经常去县衙门前，如果看见门坎上有血，可要到山上去避难。 
English: One day, a young man suddenly came to ask for food. The old lady was very polite to him. As he was about to leave, he said to the old lady, "I often go to the front of the county government building. If you see blood on the doorknob, you can take refuge in the mountains."

古文：自是媪日往之，门吏问其状，媪具以少年所教答之。
现代文：从此以后，老太太每天都去县衙门前看一看。守门的差人问她干什么？老太太讲了少年告诉他的话。
English: From then on, the old lady went to the county gate every day to take a look. What did the gatekeeper ask her? The old lady told the boy what he had told him.

古文：吏即戏以鸡血，涂门阃。
现代文：差人同她开玩笑，将鸡血涂在门坎上。
English: The policeman joked with her and smeared chicken blood on the door handle.

古文：明日，媪见有血，乃携鸡笼走上山。
现代文：第二天，老太太见门坎上有血，便拎着鸡笼子躲上山去。
English: The next day, the old lady saw blood on the doorknob, so she took the chicken cage and hid in the mountains.

古文：其夕，县陷为湖，今和州历阳湖是也。
现代文：当天晚上，县城陷落成为一个湖泊，就是如今和州的历阳湖。孙权
English: In the evening of the same day, the county seat fell into a lake, which is now Lake Liyang in Hezhou. Sun Quan

古文：孙权湓口城，汉高祖六年灌婴所筑。
现代文：湓口城是汉高祖六年的时候灌婴所筑的。
English: Hukou Castle was built by Emperor Gaozu when he was six years old.

古文：建安中，孙权经住此城，自标作井地，遂得故井。
现代文：汉献帝建安时期，孙权曾经住在这座城里，他选定一块地方打井，竟挖出了一口古井。
English: During the Han Dynasty, Sun Quan once lived in this city. He chose a place to dig a well and dug out an old well.

古文：井中有铭石云： 汉六年，颍阴侯开此井。
现代文：井里有一块石碑，上面刻着： 汉高祖六年，颖阴侯灌婴打了这眼井。
English: There is a stone tablet in the well, on which is engraved: "In the sixth year of the reign of Emperor Gaozhu, Yingying Guanzhong drilled this well."

古文：卜云，三百年当塞，塞后不度百年，当为应运者所开。 
现代文：有人预言，三百年以后这口井会淤积埋没，然后再过不到一百年，会被顺应时代，有运气的人重新挖掘出来。 
English: Some people predicted that after three hundred years, the well would be silted up and buried, and then, in less than a hundred years, it would be dug up again by someone who was lucky and in tune with the times.

古文：权见铭欣悦，以为己瑞。
现代文：孙权看见碑上的铭文后非常高兴，认为这是自己吉祥预兆。
English: When Sun Quan saw the inscription on the monument, he was very happy and thought it was an auspicious omen.

古文：人咸异之。
现代文：人们对这件事也都感到很惊奇。
English: People were also very surprised by this.

古文：高颖
现代文：高颖
English: Gao Ying

古文：西京朝堂北头有大槐树，隋曰唐兴村门首。
现代文：西京长安百官议事的朝堂北头有一棵大槐树，从隋朝开始就长在唐兴村的村口。
English: There is a large banyan tree at the north end of the morning hall of the West Beijing Chang'an Hundred Officials' Meeting. It has been growing at the entrance to Tangxing Village since the Sui Dynasty.

古文：文皇帝移长安城，将作木匠高颖常坐此树下检校。
现代文：文皇帝移都到长安以后，兴修土木高颖经常坐在这棵树下监督指挥。
English: After Emperor Wen moved the capital to Chang'an, Gao Ying, a civil engineer, often sat under this tree to supervise and command.

古文：后栽树行不正，欲去之。
现代文：后来栽树的时候觉得它同新栽的树排在一起不整齐，想把它砍倒。
English: Later, when planting a tree, he felt that it was not neatly lined up with the newly planted tree and wanted to cut it down.

古文：帝曰： 高颖坐此树下，不须杀之。 
现代文：皇帝说： 高颖曾坐在这棵树下，不要砍倒。 
English: The emperor said: Gao Ying once sat under this tree, don't cut it down.

古文：至今先天一百三十年，其树尚在。
现代文：到现在这棵树已经有一百三十多岁，仍然存在。
English: The tree is now more than 130 years old and still stands.

古文：柯叶森竦，根株盘石礴，与诸树不同。承天门正当唐兴村门首，今唐家居焉。
现代文：它枝叶繁茂，树根盘曲坚固，与别的树不同，高入云天立在唐兴庄的树口，村里住着姓唐的村民。
English: Its branches and leaves are luxuriant, the roots of the tree are firmly bent, and unlike other trees, it stands high into the sky at the mouth of the tree of Tang Xingzhuang. Villagers with the surname Tang live in the village.

古文：神尧
现代文：神尧
English: Shennong

古文：隋炀帝与神尧高祖俱是独孤外家。然则神尧与炀帝常悔吝。
现代文：隋炀帝和神尧的远祖外家都姓独孤，然而神尧经常对隋炀帝抱有戒心。
English: The distant ancestors of Emperor Sui and Emperor Shen were both surnamed Zhuo Guo. However, Emperor Shen was often wary of Emperor Sui.

古文：每朝谒退，炀帝背有词然。
现代文：每次上朝以后，隋炀帝背后都有说词。
English: Sui and Qin emperors always had a saying behind them after ascending to the throne.

古文：后因赐宴，炀帝于众，因戏神尧。神尧高颜面皱，帝目为阿婆面，神尧忿恚不乐。洎归就第，怏怅不已。
现代文：一次隋炀帝举行宴会，他当着大家的面同神尧开玩笑，他见神尧长得高额头，满脸皱纹，就说神尧是老婆脸。神尧心中愤恨不乐，等到回到家里，仍然不高兴。
English: One time, Emperor Sui held a banquet. In front of everyone, he joked with Shen Kuo. When he saw that Shen Kuo had a high forehead and a wrinkled face, he said that Shen Kuo had a wife's face. Shen Kuo was resentful and unhappy in his heart. When he returned home, he was still unhappy.

古文：见文皇已下，告文皇皆无言。
现代文：见文皇已下，告文皇皆无言。
English: Seeing that Emperor Wen had already stepped down, everyone was speechless.

古文：次告窦皇后曰： 某身世可悲，今日更被上显毁云阿婆面，据是儿孙不免饥冻矣。 
现代文：第二天他告诉窦皇后说： 我的身世本来就可悲，现在皇帝又贬低我为老太婆脸，看来我的儿孙免不了要挨饿受冻了！ 
English: The next day, he told Empress Dou, "My life was miserable to begin with, and now the emperor has reduced me to the status of an old woman. It seems that my children and grandchildren will inevitably starve and freeze to death!"

古文：窦后欣跃曰： 此言可以室家相贺。 
现代文：窦皇后高兴地说： 这句话应该全家庆贺呀！ 
English: Empress Dou said happily: This sentence should be celebrated by the whole family!

古文：神尧不喻，谓是解免之词。
现代文：神尧不理解，说她是安慰他。
English: The deity did not understand and said that she was consoling him.

古文：后曰： 公封于唐，阿婆乃是堂主，堂者唐也。 
现代文：窦皇后说： 你被封为唐王，老太太则是堂主，堂主就是唐主呀！ 
English: Empress Dou said, "You have been named the King of Tang, but the old lady is the Dowager, and the Dowager is the King of Tang!"

古文：神尧涣然冰释。喜悦，与秦齐诸王，私相贺焉。唐高祖
现代文：神尧立刻解除了疑虑，高兴起来，与齐王、秦王等王爷私下里庆贺！唐高祖
English: Shen Yao immediately relieved his doubts, became happy, and privately celebrated with King Qi, King Qin, and other princes!

古文：唐北京受瑞坛，隋大业十三年，高祖令齐王元吉留守。辛丑，获青石，若龙形，文有丹书四字，曰 李渊万吉 。齐王献之，文字映澈，宛若龟形。帝乃令水渍磨以验之。数日，其字愈明。内外毕贺，帝曰： 上天明命，贶以万吉。宜以少牢祀石龟，而爵龟人。 
现代文：并给献龟的人以封爵。
English: And the person who donated the turtle was knighted.

古文：因立受瑞坛。
现代文：因此修建了这座受瑞坛。
English: That's why this shrine was built.

古文：太行山
现代文：太行山
English: Taihang Mountain

古文：唐武德初，太行山大声曰：唐国兴，理万年。
现代文：唐高祖武德初年，太行山大声喊： 唐朝国家兴盛，理应延续万年。 
English: In the first year of Tang Gao Zuwude, Taihang Mountain shouted loudly: The prosperity of the Tang Dynasty should continue for ten thousand years.

古文：桑条歌
现代文：桑条歌
English: Mulberry Song

古文：唐永徽年以后，人唱桑条歌云：桑条莴女韦也乐。
现代文：唐高宗永徽年以后，民间流传一首歌谣说： 桑条莴女韦也乐。 
English: After the Yonghui Year of Emperor Gaozong of Tang Dynasty, a folk song was circulated saying: "The mulberry-striped maiden Wei Ya Le."

古文：至神龙年中，逆韦应之。
现代文：到了中宗神龙年间，韦后应验这首歌谣得到了权势。
English: In the years of the Shennong of the Middle Sect, Wei Hou's fulfillment of this song and ballad gained power.

古文：谄佞者郑愔，作桑条乐词十余首进之。
现代文：有个花言巧语谄媚的小人叫郑愔，他作了十多首以桑条为题目的乐词献给韦后。
English: There was a flamboyant and charming little man called Zheng Qi, who composed more than ten pieces of music dedicated to the Queen of Wei with the theme of mulberry.

古文：逆韦大喜，擢为吏部侍郎，赏缣百匹。突厥盐
现代文：韦后非常高兴，提拔他为吏部侍郎。突厥盐
English: Empress Dowager Wei was very pleased, and promoted him to the position of an attendant of the cadre department.

古文：唐龙朔已来，人唱歌名突厥盐。
现代文：唐高宗龙朔改元以来，民间流传一首名谣的名字叫 突厥盐 。
English: Ever since the Tang Dynasty Emperor Gaozong Longshuo reformed the Yuan Dynasty, the name of a famous folk tale called "Turkic Salt" has been circulating.

古文：后周圣历年中，差阎知微和匈奴，授三品春官尚书，送武延秀娶成默啜女，送金银器物锦彩衣裳以为礼聘，不可胜纪。
现代文：后来到了武则天的周朝圣历年间，朝廷派阎知微去和匈奴修好，任命他为三品春官尚书，同时护送武延秀去娶突厥成默啜的女儿，带去了数不清的金银绸缎和衣裳作为聘礼。
English: Later, during the Zhou pilgrimage of Wuzetian, the imperial court sent Yan Zhiwei to make peace with the Xiongnu and appointed him as the third grade of the Spring Official Shang Shu. At the same time, he escorted Wu Yanxiu to marry the silent daughter of the Turk, and brought countless gold and silver silk brocades and clothes as a betrothal gift.

古文：突厥翻动，汉使并没，立知微为可汗。突厥盐之应。
现代文：后来突厥又和中原对立，派去的汉族使臣都投降了突厥。突厥人推举阎知微作为他们的可汗， 突厥盐 得到了验证。
English: Later, the Turks again opposed the Central Plains, and all the Han envoys sent there surrendered to the Turks. The Turks elected Yan Zhiwei as their khan, and the Turkic salt was verified.

古文：封中岳
现代文：封中岳
English: Mount Fuzhongyue

古文：唐调露中，大帝欲封中岳，属突厥叛而止。
现代文：唐高宗调露年间，皇帝想要给嵩山封号，由于突厥叛乱而停止。
English: During the Tang Gaozong dynasty, the emperor wanted to seal the name of Songshan, but stopped due to the Turkish rebellion.

古文：后又欲封，土蕃入寇又停。
现代文：后来又要封，又因为土蕃入侵而停止。
English: Later, it was closed again, and then it was closed again because of the invasion of the mound.

古文：至永淳年，又驾幸嵩岳。谣云： 嵩山凡几层，不畏登不得，只畏不得登。三度征兵马，傍道打腾腾。 
现代文：到了永淳年，皇帝来到嵩山，当时流传一首民谣说： 嵩山高有几层，不怕登不上去，就怕得不到机会攀登，三次兵马调动打仗，别的道路上车马不断。 
English: In the Yongjun year, the emperor came to Songshan. At that time, a folk song was circulated saying: Songshan is several stories high. If you are not afraid of not being able to climb, you are afraid of not getting the opportunity to climb. Three times the soldiers and horses were mobilized to fight, and other roads were constantly used by horses and chariots.

古文：岳下遘疫，不愈，回至宫而崩。
现代文：皇帝在山下就得了病，没医治好，回到宫里就死了。
English: The emperor fell ill at the foot of the mountain, but was not cured, and died after returning to the palace.

古文：杨柳谣
现代文：杨柳谣
English: Poplars and Willows

古文：唐永淳之后，天下皆唱 杨柳杨柳漫头驼 。
现代文：唐中宗永淳年以后，天下的老百姓都唱一句流传的歌谣： 杨柳杨柳漫头驼 。
English: After the Yongjun Year of Emperor Zong of the Tang Dynasty, the common people all over the world sang a well-known ballad: Yang Liu Yang Liu Man Tou Camel.

古文：后徐敬业犯事，出柳州司马，遂作伪敕，自授扬州司马，杀长史陈敬之，据江淮反。
现代文：后来徐敬业出事，先是他出任柳州司马，接着他伪造皇帝的文书，自己任命自己为杨州司马，把长史陈敬之杀了，依据江淮一带造反。
English: Later, Xu Jingye had an accident. First, he was appointed as Liuzhou Sima, then he forged the emperor's document, appointed himself as Yangzhou Sima, killed Changshi Chen Jing, and rebelled according to the Jianghuai region.

古文：使李孝逸讨之，斩业首。驿马驮入洛，杨柳杨柳漫头驼，此其应也。
现代文：朝廷派李孝逸去讨伐，砍下了徐敬业的脑袋，用马驮到洛阳， 杨柳杨柳漫头驼 ，这件事正是这句话的验证。
English: The imperial court sent Li Xiaoying to fight, chopped off the head of Xu Jingdian, and used horse-drawn carriages to Luoyang to transport the head camel Yang Liu Yang Liu. This incident is the proof of this sentence.

古文：黄獐歌
现代文：黄獐歌
English: Huang Yingge

古文：周如意年已来，始唱黄獐歌。其词曰： 黄獐黄獐草里藏，弯弓射你伤。 
现代文：武则天周朝如意年以来，民间开始流传唱一首 黄獐歌 ，歌词是 黄獐黄獐草里藏，弯弓射你伤 。
English: Since the Wu Zetian, Zhou Dynasty and Ruyi years, the folk began to spread and sing a Huang Xing song, the lyrics of which are "Huang Xing, Huang Xing, Huang Xing, Huang Xing, Huang Xing, Huang Xing, Huang Xing."

古文：俄而契丹反叛，杀都督赵翙，营府陷没。
现代文：不久契丹族反叛，杀了都督赵翙，营房和都督府都被契丹人占领。
English: Soon after, the Khitans rebelled and killed the governor, Zhao Wei, and the barracks and governor's office were occupied by the Khitans.

古文：差总管曹仁师、张玄遇、麻仁节、王孝杰前后百万众，被贼败于黄獐谷。
现代文：朝廷命令总管曹仁师、张玄遇、麻仁节、王孝杰四人，前后带领一百多万兵马前去征讨，全都被契丹人给打败了。
English: The imperial court ordered the four generals, Cao Renshi, Zhang Xuan Yu, Ma Renshi, and Wang Xiaojie, to lead more than one million soldiers and horses to fight, and they were all defeated by the Khitan.

古文：诸军并没，罔有孑遗。黄獐之歌，斯为验矣。
现代文：他们带领军队败退到黄獐谷，被契丹人彻底消灭，没有逃脱一支人马。 黄獐之歌 得到了验证。
English: They led their defeated army to the Huangpi Valley, where they were completely annihilated by the Khitans, and not a single man or horse escaped.

古文：苾挈儿
现代文：苾挈儿
English: 兒

古文：周垂拱已来，京都唱苾挈儿歌词，皆是邪曲。后张易之小名苾挈。
现代文：武则天的垂拱年间，京城里人们唱一种叫做苾挈儿小调的歌词，全都是低俗的邪词，后来武则天的佞臣张易之的小名叫做苾挈。
English: During the years of Wu Zetian's hanging arch, people in the capital sang a kind of song called "Fu Er Minor," all of which were vulgar and evil words. Later, Wu Zetian's vassal Zhang Yizhi's nickname was "Fu."

古文：安乐寺
现代文：安乐寺
English: Anrakuji Temple

古文：唐景龙年，安乐公主于洛州道光坊造安乐寺，用钱数百万。
现代文：唐中宗景龙年间，安乐公主在洛州道光坊修建安乐寺，花费白银几百万两。
English: During the reign of King Jinglong of the Tang Dynasty, Princess Anle spent several million taels of silver to build Anle Temple in Daoguangfang, Lozhou.

古文：童谣曰： 可怜安乐寺，了了树头县。 
现代文：当时流传的童谣说： 可怜安乐寺，了了树头县。 
English: A nursery rhyme that circulated at the time said: "Poor Anle Temple, it's all over for Shuto County."

古文：后诛逆韦，并杀安乐，斩首悬于竿上，改为悖逆庶人。
现代文：后来唐玄宗诛杀韦后一党，同时将安乐公主杀了，并将头悬挂在高竿上，将它贬为 悖逆庶人 。
English: Later, Emperor Xuanzong of the Tang Dynasty ordered the killing of Wei Hou's party, and at the same time killed Princess Anle, and hung her head on a pole, denigrating her as a "rebellious commoner."

古文：乌鹊窠
现代文：乌鹊窠
English: Wuzhen

古文：唐神龙已后，谣曰： 山南乌鹊窠，山北金骆驼。
现代文：唐中宗神龙以后，民谣说： 山南乌鹊窠，山北金骆驼。
English: After the Tang Dynasty in China, the folk song said: Shannan wuxia, Shanbei golden camel.

古文：镰柯不凿孔，斧子不施柯。 
现代文：镰柯不凿孔，斧子不施柯。 
English: A hammer does not cut a hole, nor does an axe.

古文：此突厥强盛，百姓不得斫桑养蚕种禾刈穀之应也。
现代文：这是突厥强盛，侵犯中原，老百姓无法栽桑养蚕、种庄稼、割麦子的征兆。
English: This is a sign that the Turks are strong and invading the Central Plains, and the common people are unable to plant mulberry trees, raise silkworms, grow crops, and cut wheat.

古文：鲤鱼儿
现代文：鲤鱼儿
English: Trout roam

古文：唐景龙中谣曰： 可怜圣善寺，身着绿毛衣。牵来河里饮，踏杀鲤鱼儿。 
现代文：唐朝景龙年间的民谣说： 可怜圣善寺，身着绿毛衣，牵来河里饮，踏杀鲤鱼儿。 
English: A folk song from the Tang Dynasty said: "Poor Shenzenji, dressed in a green sweater, dragged to the river to drink and trampled to death by eels."

古文：至景云中，谯王从均州入都作乱，败走，投洛川而死。
现代文：到了景云年间，谯王从均州进入京城叛乱，失败后逃走，跳进洛河里自杀了。
English: In the Jingyun period, King Gong rebelled from Junzhou into the capital, fled after his defeat, and committed suicide by jumping into the Luo River.

古文：挽天枢
现代文：挽天枢
English: Turn to the heavens

古文：唐景云中谣曰： 一条麻线挽天枢，绝去也。 
现代文：唐朝景云年间民谣说： 一条麻线挽天枢，绝去也。 
English: During the Jingyun period of the Tang Dynasty, a folk song said: "A single strand of twine can bend the axis of heaven, and it will never be broken."

古文：神武即位，敕令推倒天枢，收铜并入尚方，此其应验。
现代文：等到神武皇帝即位，命令推倒天枢，将制造天枢的铜存放到为皇宫制造刀剑等金属器物的尚方官署。这件事就是民谣的应验。
English: When Emperor Jimmu ascended to the throne, he ordered to tear down the heavenly pivot, and the copper used to make the heavenly pivot was stored in the Shangfang Government Office, which made swords and other metal objects for the Imperial Palace. This was the fulfillment of the folk song.

古文：黄犊子
现代文：黄犊子
English: Yellow braids

古文：唐景龙中谣云： 黄柏犊子挽纼断，两脚踏地鞋纼断。 
现代文：唐景龙年间民谣说： 黄柏犊子挽纼断，两脚踏地鞋纼断。 
English: During the Tang Dynasty, a folk song said: "The Huangbo braid is broken, the two-footed shoe is broken."

古文：六月平王诛逆韦。挽纼断者，韦欲作乱，鞋纼断者，事不成。
现代文：六月平王便诛杀了韦后一党。 挽纼断 ，是韦后要造反作乱， 鞋纼断 ，是说造反不会成功。
English: In June, Ping Wang killed one of Wei Hou's party members, saying that Wei Hou wanted to rebel and create turmoil, and that the rebellion would not succeed.

古文：阿韦是黄犊之后也。
现代文：韦后是黄犊子的后人。
English: Wei Hou is the descendant of Huang Zangzi.

古文：骆宾王
现代文：骆宾王
English: The king of camellias

古文：唐明堂主簿骆宾王，帝京篇曰： 倏忽搏风生羽翼，须臾失浪委泥沙。 
现代文：唐明堂的主簿骆宾王所做的文章《帝京篇》里说： 生出翅膀飞快地乘风飞起，突然间掉进波浪沉入泥沙。 
English: Luo Bin Wang, the head librarian of Tangming Hall, said in his article "Imperial Capital" that: "If you sprout wings, you will quickly fly up with the wind, and suddenly fall into the waves and sink into the sand.

古文：宾王后与徐敬业兴兵扬州，大败，投江水而死。
现代文：骆宾王后来和徐敬业在扬州起兵反对武则天，失败后跳到江中淹死，这两句诗就是预言。
English: Luo Bin Wang and Xu Jingye later took up arms against Wu Zetian in Yangzhou, and after failing, jumped into the river and drowned. These two poems are prophecies.

古文：此其谶也。天后
现代文：天后
English: Tin Hau

古文：唐太宗之代，有秘记云： 唐三代之后，即女主武王代有天下。 
现代文：唐太宗的年代，有秘密的记载上写着： 唐朝开国三代以后，将会有一个姓武的女王代替李家统治天下。 
English: During the reign of Emperor Taizong of Tang, there was a secret record that read: After the third generation of the founding of the Tang Dynasty, there will be a queen named Wu to rule the world in place of the Li family.

古文：太宗密召李淳风以询其事，淳风对曰： 臣据玄象推算，其兆已成。
现代文：唐太宗秘密地将李淳风找来，商量如何处理这件事。李淳风说： 我根据玄学推测得出结论，这种征兆已经形成。
English: Tang Taizong secretly brought Li Chunfeng to discuss how to deal with this matter. Li Chunfeng said: I concluded from the metaphysical speculation that this sign has been formed.

古文：然其人已生在陛下宫内，从今不逾四十年，当有天下，诛杀唐氏子孙，殆将歼尽。 
现代文：这个女王已经出现在陛下的皇宫里，从现在起不超过四十年，她可以取得天下的统治权，并且开始诛杀皇帝的子孙，几乎杀光。 
English: This queen has appeared in your majesty's palace, and in less than forty years from now, she can take over the rule of the world and begin to kill the emperor's children, almost all of them.

古文：帝曰： 求而杀之如何？ 
现代文：太宗皇帝说： 把她找出来杀了怎么样？ 
English: Emperor Taizong said, "How about finding her and killing her?"

古文：淳风曰： 天之所命，不可废也。
现代文：李淳风说： 这是上天的安排，不应该进行破坏。
English: Li Junfeng said: This is God's arrangement, and it should not be destroyed.

古文：王者不死，虽求恐不可得。且据占已长成，复在宫内，已是陛下眷属，更四十年，又当衰老。老则仁慈，其余陛下子孙，或不甚损。
现代文：皇帝的子孙即使不死，也不一定能争到皇位，况且据我推算这个女子已经长大，就在宫里，已经成为陛下的家属。再过四十年，她也会衰老，老了会变得仁慈，不至于将陛下的子孙斩尽杀绝。
English: Even if the emperor's descendants do not die, they will not necessarily be able to compete for the throne. Moreover, according to my calculation, this woman has grown up, is in the palace, and has become a member of His Majesty's family. In another forty years, she will also grow old, and when she is old, she will become merciful, so that she will not kill all of His Majesty's descendants.

古文：今若杀之，即当复生，更四十年，亦堪御天下矣。少壮严毒，杀之为血仇，即陛下子孙无遗类矣。 
现代文：现在如果杀了她，她还会托生复活，再过四十年，也会取得天下的统治权，那时候她年轻毒辣，现在杀了她所结下仇恨，到时候她会把陛下的子孙杀得一个也不剩。 
English: If you kill her now, she will come back to life. In another forty years, she will gain the right to rule the world. When she was young, she was venomous. If you kill her now, she will kill all of your descendants.

古文：阎知微
现代文：阎知微
English: Yan Zhiwei

古文：唐麟德已来，百姓饮酒唱歌，由终而不尽者，号为族盐。
现代文：唐高宗麟德年间以来，老百姓喝酒的时候经常唱歌，歌唱完了而酒还未喝光的，管他叫号为 族盐 。
English: Since the time of Tang Gao Zonglinde, the common people often sing while drinking. When the singing is over but the wine has not been drunk, they call it "tribal salt."

古文：后阎知微从突厥领贼破赵定。后知微来，则天大怒，磔于西市，命百官射之。
现代文：后来阎知微带领突厥的军队攻破了赵定，最后阎知微被抓来，武则天大怒，将他绑到西市，命令百官用箭射他。
English: Later, Yan Zhiwei led the Turkic army to break through Zhao Ding, and finally Yan Zhiwei was arrested. Wu Zetian was furious, tied him to Xi Shi, and ordered a hundred officials to shoot him with arrows.

古文：河内王武懿宗去七步，射三发，皆不中，其怯懦也如此。
现代文：河内王武懿宗走到距离阎知微七步远的地方，连发三箭，都没有射中，软弱胆小到如此地步。
English: The king of Hanoi, Wu Xizong, went to a place seven paces away from Yan Zhi, and even fired three arrows, but none of them hit the target. He was so weak and timid.

古文：知微身上箭如猬毛，锉其骨肉，夷其九族。疏亲先不相识者，皆斩之。
现代文：阎知微身上被射得像刺猬的毛一样，并且还割下了他的骨肉，诛杀了他的九族，就连远亲中互相不认识的也都被抓来杀掉。
English: Yan Zhiwei's body was shot like a hedgehog's hair, and his bones and flesh were cut off, his nine clans were killed, and even distant relatives who did not know each other were arrested and killed.

古文：小儿年七八岁，驱抱向西市。百姓哀之，掷饼果与者，仍相争夺，以为戏笑。
现代文：孩子才七八岁，也被抱到西市，老百姓可怜孩子，给他们一些糖果，孩子们互相抢夺，觉得很好玩。
English: The child was only seven or eight years old, and was also carried to the West City. The people felt sorry for the child and gave them some candy. The children snatched it from each other and thought it was very funny.

古文：监刑御史不忍害，奏舍之。
现代文：监刑御史不忍杀害孩子，请示武则天留下孩子不杀。
English: Imprisonment history does not tolerate the killing of children, please show Wu Zetian to leave the children not to kill.

古文：其族盐之言，于斯应矣。
现代文：当初唱的 族盐 ，也就是诛杀姓阎的意思的歌词，到这个时候得到了应验。
English: By this time, the lyrics of the song originally sung as "Zi Yan," meaning "Kill Yan," had come to fruition.

古文：长孙无忌
现代文：长孙无忌
English: The eldest grandson of Mubi

古文：唐赵公长孙无忌，以乌羊毛为浑脱毡帽，天下慕之，其帽为赵公浑脱。
现代文：唐朝被封为赵公的长孙无忌用黑羊毛做成浑脱毡帽，天下的人都认为好看，将这种式样的帽子叫做赵公浑脱。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, the eldest grandson of Zhao Gong, who was awarded the title of Zhao Gong, used black wool to make a straw hat. People all over the world thought it was beautiful, and called this style of hat the Zhao Gong straw hat.

古文：后坐事长流岭南。深脱之言，于是效焉。
现代文：后来他因事获罪被长期流放在岭南，用不着再戴毡帽，浑脱这句说得到了应验。
English: Later, he was exiled to Lingnan for a long time for his crime. He no longer had to wear the skullcap, and his words came true.

古文：魏王
现代文：魏王
English: The Wei King

古文：唐魏王为巾子，向前踣，天下欣欣慕之，名为魏王踣。
现代文：唐朝魏王的头巾，式样高而朝下折，天下的人都非常喜欢，称这种式样的头巾为 魏王踣 。
English: The headscarf of the Tang Dynasty's King Wei, with a high style and folded downwards, is very popular with people all over the world. This style of headscarf is called the "Wei Wangyu."

古文：后坐死。
现代文：不久，魏王被处死了。
English: Soon after, the Wei king was executed.

古文：至孝和时，陆颂亦为巾子，同此样，时人又名为陆颂踣。未一年而陆颂殒。
现代文：到了年号为孝和的时候，陆颂也将头巾折成这种高而且向前倒的样式，人们又称这样的头巾为 陆颂踣 ，不出一年，陆颂也死了。
English: When the era of filial piety came, Lu Soong also folded his turban into this tall and forward-facing style, and people also called such a turban Lu Soong, and within a year, Lu Soong also died.

古文：武媚娘
现代文：武媚娘
English: Wu Mei's Daughter

古文：唐永徽后，天下唱武媚娘歌。后立武氏为皇后。大帝崩，则天临朝，改号大周。
现代文：唐中宗永徽年代，民间流传一首叫《武媚娘》的歌，后来皇帝立武媚娘为皇后，皇帝死了以后，武媚娘上朝主持朝政，改国号为大周。
English: In the Yonghui era of the Tang Dynasty, a folk song called "Wu Mei Niang" was circulated. Later, the emperor appointed Wu Mei Niang as empress. After the emperor died, Wu Mei Niang presided over the imperial court and changed the country's name to Dazhou.

古文：二十余年，武氏强盛。武氏三王：梁、魏、定等并开府。自余郡五。十余人。几迁鼎矣。
现代文：武氏家族兴盛了二十多年，武氏家族的梁王、魏王、定王同时开建府署，成立办事机构，还封了五十多个郡王，几乎全部篡夺了唐朝的江山。
English: The Wu family flourished for more than 20 years. The Liang Wang, Wei Wang, and Ding Wang of the Wu family also built government offices, established offices, and also sealed more than 50 county kings, almost all of which usurped the country of the Tang Dynasty.

古文：孝和
现代文：孝和
English: Takakazu

古文：唐咸亨已后，人皆云： 莫浪语，阿婆嗔，三叔闻时笑杀人。 
现代文：唐高宗咸亨以后，人们都说： 不要随便说话，小心阿婆怪罪，三叔听到时笑死人。 
English: After Emperor Tang Gaozong's death, people said, "Don't speak casually. Be careful not to blame your grandmother. Your third uncle will die of laughter when he hears you say that."

古文：后果则天即位，至孝和嗣之。
现代文：后来果然武则天即位，最后孝和继承了皇位。
English: Later, Emperor Wu Zetian succeeded to the throne, and finally Emperor Xiaowa succeeded to the throne.

古文：阿婆者，则天也；三叔者，孝和为第三也。
现代文：阿婆是指武则天，三叔是指孝和，因为他排行第三。
English: The grandmother refers to Wu Zetian, and the third uncle refers to Xiao He, because he ranks third.

古文：魏叔麟
现代文：魏叔麟
English: Wei Shulin

古文：唐魏仆射子名叔麟。识者曰： 叔麟反语身戮也。 
现代文：唐朝魏仆射儿子的名字叫叔麟，有明白人说叔麟的反语就是身戮。
English: The name of the son of the Tang Dynasty Wei minion was called Shulin, and some people said that the antonym of Shulin is body slaughter.

古文：后果被罗织而杀之。
现代文：后来叔麟果然被编造罪名而杀害。
English: Later, Shulin was indeed killed on trumped-up charges.

古文：武三思
现代文：武三思
English: Wu Sansi

古文：梁王武三思，唐神龙初，改封德靖王。识者言： 德靖鼎贼也。 
现代文：梁王武三思在唐朝的神龙初年被改封为德靖王，有明白的人说： 德靖鼎贼也 。
English: Liang Wang Wusan Si was renamed De Jing Wang in the first year of the Tang Dynasty. Some people said, "De Jing is also a thief."

古文：果有窥鼎之志，被郑克等斩之。
现代文：后来他果然有篡权当皇帝的想法，被郑克等人杀了。
English: Later, he did indeed have the idea of usurping power to become emperor, and was killed by Zheng Ke and others.

古文：孙佺
现代文：孙佺
English: Sun Yat-sen

古文：唐孙佺为幽州都督，五月北征。
现代文：唐朝的孙佺为幽州的都督。五月的时候，他带领军队向北进攻。
English: Sun Yat-sen of the Tang Dynasty was the governor of Yuzhou. In May, he led the army to attack the north.

古文：时军师李处郁谏： 五月南方火，北方水，火入水必灭。 
现代文：军师李处郁反对说： 五月的时候，南方属火，北方属水，火入水必然熄灭。 
English: The military strategist Li Shuanyu objected: "In May, the south is fire, the north is water, and fire into water is bound to be extinguished.

古文：佺不从，果没八万人。
现代文：孙佺不听，结果损失了八万人马。
English: Sun Yat-sen did not listen, and as a result, 80,000 horses were lost.

古文：昔窦建德救王世充于牛口谷。时谓窦入牛口，岂有还期？
现代文：当年窦建德进入牛口谷救王世充，当时有人说： 窦入牛口，怎么还能回来。 
English: At that time, Dou Jiande entered the Niukou Valley to save Wang Shichong. At that time, some people said: Dou entered the Niukou Valley, how can he still come back?

古文：果被秦王所擒。
现代文：果然被秦王李世民抓住了。
English: He was indeed caught by the Qin King Li Shimin.

古文：其孙佺之北也，处郁曰： 飧若入咽，百无一全。 
现代文：这次孙佺往北进军，李处郁说： 飧如果进入咽喉，不会再保持完整。 
English: This time, when Sun Yat-sen marched north, Li Shuangyu said, "If radon enters the throat, it will no longer remain intact.

古文：山东人谓湿饭为飧，幽州以北，并为燕地，故云。
现代文：山东人将粥饭叫做飧，幽州以北是当年燕国的土地，所以李处郁这么说。
English: People in Shandong call congee rice gruel, and north of Yuzhou is the land of Yan Guo, so Li Shuanyu said so.

古文：张易之
现代文：张易之
English: Zhang Yizhi

古文：天后时，谣言曰： 张公吃酒李公醉。 
现代文：天后时，谣言曰： 张公吃酒李公醉。 
English: At the time of the Empress Dowager, the rumor said: Zhang Gong drank wine and Li Gong got drunk.

古文：张公者，斥易之兄弟也，李公者，言李氏太盛也之的弟弟，李公是说李氏家族太兴盛了。
现代文：张公者，斥易之兄弟也，李公者，言李氏太盛也之的弟弟，李公是说李氏家族太兴盛了。
English: Zhang Gongzhe, the brother of Guo Yi, Li Gongzhe, the younger brother of the brother who said that the Li family was too prosperous, Li Gong said that the Li family was too prosperous.

古文：饮酒令
现代文：饮酒令
English: Alcohol consumption orders

古文：唐龙朔年已来，百姓饮酒作令云： 子母相去离，连台拗倒。 
现代文：唐朝的龙朔年以来，老百姓喝酒的时候作酒令说： 子母相去离，连台拗倒。 
English: Since the Long Shuo era of the Tang Dynasty, when the common people drink wine, they make a wine order saying: "If the mother and the child are separated, the whole family will fall down."

古文：子母者，盏与盘也；连台者，连盘拗盏倒也。
现代文：子母是指杯子与盘子，连台是说盘子和杯子全都推倒。
English: Zi Mu refers to cups and plates, and Lian Tai means that the plates and cups are all pushed down.

古文：及天后永昌中，罗织事起。
现代文：等到武后永昌中年，罗织罪名陷害人的风气兴起。
English: By the time Wu Hou Yongchang was middle-aged, the culture of framing people on trumped-up charges had emerged.

古文：有宿卫十余人，于清化坊饮，为此令。此席人进状告之，十人皆弃市。
现代文：有十多个宫中的警卫人员在清化坊喝酒，说起了这个酒令，被同席的人告发，十个人全都被处死。
English: More than a dozen palace guards were drinking in the Seonghwa Pavilion, and when they mentioned the ban, they were denounced by those present, and all ten were put to death.

古文：自后庐陵徙均州，则子母相去离也；连台拗倒者，则天被废，诸武迁放之兆。
现代文：到后来，庐陵王迁移到均州，应验了母子分离。连台拗倒是预示着武则天被废，武氏家族的人被定罪流放到边远地区。
English: Later, King Fuling migrated to Gyeongju, and the separation of mother and son came to fruition. Lien Taiping foreshadowed the abolition of Wu Zetian, and the members of the Wu family were convicted and exiled to remote areas.

古文：白马寺
现代文：白马寺
English: Hakuba-dera Temple

古文：唐神武皇帝七月即位，东都白马寺铁像头，无故自落于殿门外。
现代文：唐朝的神武皇帝七月即位当皇帝，东都白马寺内的铁佛的头忽然无故自己掉下来落到了殿门外面的地上。
English: When Emperor Jimmu of the Tang Dynasty ascended to the throne in July, the head of the Iron Buddha in the Dongdu Baima Temple suddenly fell off and landed on the ground outside the temple gate.

古文：自后捉搦僧尼严急，令拜父母等。未成者并停革，后出者科决，还俗者十八九焉。
现代文：从这以后，朝廷开始捉拿和尚尼姑，命令他们和自己的父母家人相认回家，不允许再出家当和尚，新出家的捉住判刑，和尚们被迫还俗的达到百分之八九十。
English: From then on, the imperial court began to arrest monks and nuns, ordered them to return home with their parents and families, and did not allow them to become monks again. Newly ordained monks were arrested and sentenced, and the monks were forced to return to secular life to reach eighty or ninety percent.

古文：李蒙
现代文：李蒙
English: Li Meng

古文：开元五年春，司天奏玄象有谪见，其灾甚重。
现代文：唐朝开元五年的春天，司天监向皇帝报告说，日有星辰在天空形成的天象预示着一场严重的灾难。
English: In the spring of the fifth year of the first year of the Tang Dynasty, Siyuan reported to the emperor that the daily formation of stars in the sky foreshadowed a serious disaster.

古文：玄宗震惊，问曰： 何祥？ 
现代文：皇帝问： 预示着什么灾难？ 
English: The emperor asked: What kind of disaster does it portend?

古文：对曰： 当有名士三十人，同日冤死。今新及第进士，正应其数。 
现代文：回答说： 将会有知名人士三十人在同一天无故死亡，今年被录取的进士，正好等于这个数字。 
English: "There will be 30 famous people who will die on the same day for no reason, and this year's inductees will be just like that," he said.

古文：其年及第李蒙者，贵主家婿。
现代文：今年被录取的进士李蒙，是公主的女婿。
English: Li Meng, who was admitted this year, is the princess's son-in-law.

古文：上不言其事，密戒主曰： 每有大游宴，汝爱婿可闭留其家。 
现代文：皇帝没有说明事情的真相，只是秘密地告诉公主说： 每当遇到的游乐活动或宴会，你要将你的女婿关在家中，不要让他参加。 
English: The emperor did not reveal the truth of the matter, but secretly told the princess: Whenever you encounter an amusement or banquet, you should lock your son-in-law at home and do not let him participate.

古文：主居昭国里，时大合乐，音曲远畅，曲江涨水，联舟数艘，进士毕集。
现代文：公主家住在昭国里，一天在江上举行大型的音乐游玩活动，音乐声传得很远。当时曲江正涨大水，进士们集合在江边登上连接在一起的好几条船。
English: The princess's family lived in Zhaoguo. One day, a large-scale music festival was held on the river, and the sound of the music spread far and wide. At that time, the Qujiang River was flooding, and the soldiers gathered on the riverbank to board several boats that were connected together.

古文：蒙问，乃逾垣奔走，群众惬望。
现代文：李蒙听到音乐的声音，从家里跳过院墙跑了出来，进士们正等着他。
English: Li Meng heard the sound of music and ran out of his home, jumping over the courtyard wall. The soldiers were waiting for him.

古文：才登舟，移就水中，画舸平沉。
现代文：他刚上船，船就向江中心驶去。
English: As soon as he got on the boat, it sailed towards the centre of the river.

古文：声妓篙工，不知纪极，三十进士，无一生者。
现代文：不一会儿，游船沉没了，乐器演奏人员，歌女和船工不知道死了多少人，三十名进士全都淹死在江中，一个也没有救上来。
English: In a short time, the cruise ship sank. The musicians, singers and boatmen did not know how many people died. Thirty sailors all drowned in the river, and no one was saved.

古文：李进周
现代文：李进周
English: Li Jin Zhou

古文：天宝中，李进周颇有道术，多在禁署。
现代文：唐朝的天宝年间，李进周精通预测事物的方术，常在宫内院活动，后来搬到道观里。
English: During the Tang Dynasty's Tenpo era, Li Jin Zhou was well versed in the art of predicting things. He often worked at the Imperial Household Agency, and later moved to the Taoist Temple.

古文：徙居宫观，于所居院内，题诗不啻千言，皆预纪上皇幸蜀，禄山僭位之事。
现代文：他在他所住的院子里，题了不下一千句诗。全都预示着太上皇去蜀避难，安禄山叛乱的事。
English: In the courtyard where he lived, he wrote more than a thousand poems, all of which foreshadowed the Emperor's escape to Shu and the Anlu Mountain Rebellion.

古文：初亦不悟，后方豁然。略举一篇云： 燕市人皆去，函关马不归。
现代文：当初看了不理解，事后才明白了，这里仅举一首诗作为例子： 燕市人皆去，函关马不归。
English: At first, I didn't understand it, but later I understood. Here is just one poem as an example: Everyone goes to Yancheng, but no one returns from Hanzhongma.

古文：如逢山下鬼，环上系罗衣。 
现代文：如逢山下鬼，环上系罗衣。 
English: Like a ghost at the foot of the mountain, the ring has a robe on it.

古文：贵妃小字阿环，山下鬼嵬字也。
现代文：杨贵妃的小名叫阿环，山下鬼是个嵬字，预示着杨玉环被缢死在马嵬驿。
English: Yang Guifei's nickname was Ahuan, and the ghost under the mountain was a scarlet letter, foreshadowing that Yang Yuhuan was strangled to death on horseback.

古文：志公词
现代文：志公词
English: Words of aspiration

古文：刘禹锡曰： 逆胡之将乱中原，梁朝志公大师已赠词曰， 两角女子绿衣裳，却背太行邀君王，一止之月必消亡。 
现代文：刘禹锡说： 叛逆的胡人安禄山将扰乱中原，梁朝志公大师曾有一首词说： 两角女子绿衣裳，却背太行邀君主，一止之月必消亡。 
English: Liu Yuxi said: The rebellious Hu people of Anlu Mountain will disturb the Central Plains. Master Liang Chaozhi once had a saying: Two-cornered women in green clothes, but their backs are too straight to invite the monarch, will die in a month.

古文：两角女子安字也；绿者禄也；一止正月也。
现代文：两角女子是个安字，绿和禄在方言里同一个音，一和止字加在一起是个正月的正字。
English: "Two-cornered woman" is an "an" character, "green" and "rook" have the same sound in the dialect, and "one" and "stop" together are the Chinese characters for the first month of the year.

古文：果正月败亡。
现代文：安禄山叛乱果然在正月失败被杀死。
English: The Anlu Mountain Rebellion was indeed defeated and killed in the first month of the year.

古文：圣矣符志公之寓言也。 
现代文：事情的发展完全符合志公大师的寓言诗所作的预测。
English: The development of the situation is fully in line with the prediction made by the fable poem of Master Zhigong.

古文：李怀光
现代文：李怀光
English: Li Haiguang

古文：马燧讨李怀光，自太原引兵，至实鼎下营。
现代文：马燧讨伐李怀光，从太原带领兵马出发，走到实鼎一带准备宿营休息。
English: Ma Jun fought against Li Huaiguang, and led the soldiers and horses from Taiyuan to go to the Shiding area to prepare for camp rest.

古文：问其地，名埋怀村。乃大喜曰： 擒贼必矣。 
现代文：马燧问宿营地的名字，别人告诉他叫埋怀村，他高兴地说： 打败敌兵，擒获李怀光是必然的事情了！ 
English: When Ma Jun asked the name of the camp, he was told that it was called Xibai Village. He said happily, "Defeating the enemy soldiers and capturing Li Huaiguang is inevitable!"

古文：王铎
现代文：王铎
English: Wang Yao

古文：唐乾符中，荆州节度使晋公王铎，后为诸道都统。时木星入南斗，数夕不退。铎观之，问诸星者：吉凶安在？
现代文：唐僖宗乾符年间，荆州节度使后来当了诸道都统的晋公王铎，看到木星侵入南斗六星的位置，许多天也没有退回去，便问星象学家说： 这种现象是吉还是凶？ 
English: In the year of Emperor Qianfu of the Tang Dynasty, the Jingzhou Festival, which later led to the rise of the Jin Dynasty, saw Jupiter invade the position of the Southern Dipper and did not return for many days. He asked the astrologer: Is this phenomenon lucky or unlucky?

古文：咸曰： 金火土犯斗，即为灾；惟木当为福耳。 
现代文：大家说： 金星、火星、土星侵入南斗星的位置便是灾祸，惟独木星侵入是吉利的征兆。 王铎说： 原来如此。 
English: Everyone said: Venus, Mars and Saturn invading the position of the Southern Dipper is a disaster, but Jupiter's invasion is a sign of good luck.

古文：或然之。时有术士边冈，洞晓天文，精通历数。谓晋公曰： 惟斗帝王之宫宿，惟木为福神，当以帝王占之。
现代文：有个叫边冈的术士，精通利用星象和历数来推测事物的学问，他对晋公王铎说： 只有南斗是代表帝王的星宿，并且只有木星是代表吉祥的星宿，所以应当以他们的星象来推测帝王的命运。
English: A sorcerer named Yuigang, who was well versed in the use of stars and calendars to deduce things, said to the Prince of Jin: Only the Southern Cross is the star that represents the emperor, and only Jupiter represents the auspicious star, so the fate of the emperor should be deduced from their stars.

古文：然则非福于今，必当有验于后，未敢言之。 
现代文：但是这种星象不代表现在，而是代表将来的变化。只是不敢随便说出来。 
English: However, this constellation does not represent the present, but the changes of the future. However, I dare not say it casually.

古文：他日，晋公屏左右密问，冈曰：木星入斗，当王之兆。木在斗中，朱字也。
现代文：过了几天，晋公王铎叫左右的人退下去，单独秘密地问边冈。边冈说： 木星进入南斗六星，是有人要当皇帝的预兆，木在斗中，是个朱字。 
English: A few days later, Prince Jin called for everyone to step back and secretly asked Yuigang alone. Yuigang said, "Jupiter entering the Southern Dipper is a sign that someone wants to be emperor. Wood in the dipper is a Chinese character."

古文：识者言唐世尝有绯衣之谶，或言将来革运，或姓裴，或姓牛。以裴字为绯衣，牛字著人，即朱也。
现代文：还有明白的人说，唐朝曾经有过关于 绯衣 的预言，或者是说将来改朝换代，皇帝或是姓裴，或是姓牛，以绯衣代表裴字，牛字加个人字，就是朱字。
English: There are also clear people who say that the Tang Dynasty once had a prophecy about the Pei, or that in the future the dynasty would change, the emperor would either have the surname Pei or the surname Niu, and the Pei character would be represented by the Pei, and the Niu character plus the personal character would be the Zhu character.

古文：所以裴晋公主，牛相国僧孺，每罹此谤。
现代文：所以后来的晋公裴度，相国牛孺，都因为这种传说和预言遭受过陷害。
English: Therefore, the later Shingong Pei Du and Xiangguo Niu Du have all been framed because of this legend and prophecy.

古文：李卫公斥周秦行记，乃斯事也。
现代文：李卫公斥周秦行纪。也是因为这件事。
English: Li Weigong rebuked Zhou Qin Xingji. It was also because of this incident.

古文：安知钟于砀山之朱乎。
现代文：谁知道这是指砀山的朱温呢？
English: Who knows if this refers to Zhu Wen of Lushan?

古文：木成文
现代文：木成文
English: Wood carving

古文：梁开平二年，使其将李思安攻潞州，营于壶口关，伐木为栅。
现代文：后梁太祖开平二年，朝廷命令李思安将军攻打潞州。军队宿营在壶口关，伐木修造栅栏。
English: In the second year of Emperor Liang Taizu's reign, the imperial court ordered General Li Sian to attack Zhangzhou. The army camped at Hukou Pass, cutting trees and building fences.

古文：破一大木，木中朱书隶文六字，曰： 天十四载石进。 
现代文：士兵们破开一根树干时，木头当中有六个隶体红字： 天十四载石进 。
English: When the soldiers broke open a tree trunk, there were six red characters in the wood: 天十四载石进.

古文：思安表上之。其群臣皆贺，以为十四年必有远夷贡珍宝者。
现代文：李思安为这件事写了一个报告送给朝廷，大臣们都向皇帝祝贺，认为十四年必然有边远的国家向皇帝进贡珍宝。
English: Li Sian wrote a report on the matter and sent it to the imperial court. The ministers all congratulated the emperor, believing that in fourteen years, distant countries would inevitably pay tribute to the emperor.

古文：其司天少监徐鸿，谓所亲曰： 自古无一字为年号者，上天符命，岂阙文乎？
现代文：司天少监徐鸿暗地里对自己亲近的人说： 自古以来没有以一个字为年号的，天赐祥瑞与天子，作为受命的凭证，还会缺少文字？
English: Xu Hong secretly said to the people close to him: Since ancient times, there has not been a single word as the year number. Heaven has given Xiang Rui and Tianzi, as a proof of being ordered, will there still be a lack of words?

古文：吾以丙申之年，当有石氏王此地者。
现代文：我认为这预示丙申年，会有姓石的人当皇帝。
English: I think this indicates that in the Year of the Monkey, there will be a person with the surname Shi as emperor.

古文：移四字中两竖画，置天字左右，即丙字也；移四之外围，以十字贯之，即申字也。 
现代文：因为将四字的两竖移到天字的左右，就是个丙字，将四字的外框的十字贯穿就是个申字。 
English: Because moving the vertical and horizontal of the four-character to the right and left of the heavenly character is a C-character, and penetrating the cross of the outer frame of the four-character is a Shen character.

古文：后至丙申岁，晋高祖以石姓起并州，如鸿之言。
现代文：后来到了丙申年，后晋的高祖石敬瑭开始兴起当了皇帝，果然同徐鸿说的一样。
English: Later, in the Year of the Monkey, the high progenitor of the Later Jin Dynasty, Jing Kun, began to rise and became emperor, just as Xu Hong said.

古文：草重生
现代文：草重生
English: Grass reborn

古文：初人不晓其词，及昌败方悟：草重董字；日日昌字；素城越城，隋越国公杨素所筑也；诸侯者，猴乃钱镠，申生属也；白兔昌，卯生属也；夏满，六月也；镜湖者，越中也。
现代文：当初董昌没有失败的时候，有一个狂人在越中旗亭旅店的墙壁上题了四句诗： 日日草重生，悠悠傍素城。诸侯逐白兔，夏满镜湖平。当初人们不知道这句诗的意思，等到董昌失败了才明白。草重是个董字，日日是个昌字，素城代表越城，因为是隋越国公杨素所建造的。侯指猴是申生属，代表钱镠，白兔是卯生属。夏满代表六月，镜湖指的是越中。
English: At the beginning, when Dongchang did not fail, a madman inscribed four poems on the walls of the Yuezhong Qiting Hotel: Day by day, grass is reborn, Yu Yu by Su Cheng. Princes follow the white rabbit, Summer Man mirrors Lake Ping. At first, people did not know the meaning of this poem, until Dongchang failed. The weight of grass is a Dong character, day by day is a Chang character, Su Cheng represents Yue Cheng, because it was built by Yang Su, the Prince of Sui and Yue. Hou finger monkey is Shen Shen, representing Qian Ye, white rabbit is Usheng. Summer Man represents June, mirror Lake refers to Yuezh

古文：唐国闰
现代文：唐国闰
English: Tang Guo Yue

古文：伪蜀后主王衍，以唐袭宅建上清宫。于老君尊像殿中，列唐朝十八帝真。
现代文：伪蜀的后主王衍，在从唐朝世袭得来的宅院的位置修建上清宫，在供奉老君神灵的大殿里，悬挂了唐朝十八代皇帝的画像。
English: Wang Yan, the empress of pseudo-Shu, built the Upper Qing Palace in the location of the house inherited from the Tang Dynasty. In the hall dedicated to the gods of the old king, hung the images of the 18 emperors of the Tang Dynasty.

古文：乃备法驾竭之。识者以为拜唐，乃归命之先兆也。
现代文：有能看透事物的人说，供奉唐朝的皇帝，是归顺唐朝的先兆。
English: Some people who can see through things say that the emperor of the Tang Dynasty is a harbinger of the Tang Dynasty.

古文：先是司天监胡秀林进历，移闰在丙戌年正月。有向隐者亦进历，用宣明法，闰乙酉年十二月。
现代文：司天监的胡秀林编制日历报送给王衍审查批准，将闰月移到丙戌年正月，有个隐士也报送了一本日历，用宣明法计算，将闰月移到乙酉年十二月，由于出现分歧，两个人争论起来。
English: Hu Xiulin, the chief celestial inspector, submitted a calendar to Wang Yan for review and approval, and moved the leap month to the first month of the year of the Rooster. A hermit also submitted a calendar, calculated by the method of publicity, and moved the leap month to December of the year of the Rooster. Due to differences, the two people argued.

古文：既有异同，彼此纷诉，仍于界上取唐国历日。近臣曰： 宜用唐国闰月也。 
现代文：后来仍采用唐朝的历法，左右亲近的大臣对王衍说： 应该采用唐朝的闰月。 
English: Later, the calendar of the Tang Dynasty was still used, and the ministers close to Wang Yan said: The leap month of the Tang Dynasty should be used.

古文：因更改闰十二月。街衢卖历者云： 只有一月也。 
现代文：所以更改闰月到十二月，在街上卖日历的人说： 只有一个月 。
English: So they changed the leap month to December, and people selling calendars on the street said, "It's only one month."

古文：其年十二月二十八日国灭。
现代文：当年的十二月二十八日前蜀国灭亡。
English: On the 28th day of December of that year, the State of Shu was overthrown.

古文：胡秀林是唐朝司天少监，任蜀，别造永昌正象历，推步之妙，天下一人。然移闰之事不爽，历议常人不可轻知之。
现代文：胡秀林是唐朝的司天少监，后来到前蜀任职，他编制了永昌正象历，推算的精妙准确天下第一，但是在这次确定闰月的事上没有算准，因为朝代的变更不是平常人能够轻易推算出来的。
English: Hu Xiulin was a minor inspector of the Tang Dynasty, and later served in Qianshu. He compiled the Yongchang Zhengxiang Calendar, the most accurate in the world, but he was not accurate in this matter of determining the leap month, because the change of dynasties is not easy for ordinary people to calculate.

古文：竹骝
现代文：竹骝
English: Bamboo shoots

古文：竹骝者，食竹之鼠也。生于深山溪谷竹林之中无人之境，非竹不食，巨如野狸，其肉肥脆。山民重之，每发地取之甚艰。
现代文：竹骝是一种吃竹子的鼠类，生长在没有人烟的深山溪谷的竹林之中，不是竹子它不吃，竹骝的体型大如野猫，肉质肥脆，山里的居民非常喜欢吃，但是挖地抓竹骝很不容易。
English: The bamboo shoot is a kind of rodent that eats bamboo. It grows in the bamboo forest of the deep mountain valley where there is no smoke. It is not the bamboo that it does not eat. The bamboo shoot is as big as a wild cat, the meat is fat and crispy. Mountain residents like to eat it very much, but it is not easy to dig and catch the bamboo shoot.

古文：岐梁睚眦之年，秦陇之地，无远近岩谷之间，此物争出，投城隍及所在民家。
现代文：岐和梁发生冲突的那一年陕西和甘肃一带，不论是远近的山谷岸石之间，竹骝争先恐后地往外跑，跑到城墙下的壕沟里和附近的老百姓家里。
English: In the year of the conflict between Qi and Liang, in the vicinity of Shaanxi and Gansu, whether far or near, between the valley shore stones, bamboo shoots scrambled to the outside, ran to the ditch under the city wall and the nearby homes of the common people.

古文：或穿墉坏城，或自门阈而入，犬食不尽，则并入人家房内，秦民之口腹饫焉。
现代文：它们或是挖洞毁坏城墙，或是从门坎进入居民家里，狗无法吃尽它们，陕西的老百姓吃够了竹骝的肉。
English: They either dig holes to destroy the city walls, or enter residents' homes through the gate. Dogs can't eat them all, and the people of Shaanxi have had enough of bamboo shoots.

古文：忽有童谣曰： 骝骝引黑牛，天差不自由。
现代文：这时忽然流传一首童谣说： 骝引黑牛，天差不自由。
English: At this time, a nursery rhyme suddenly circulated, saying: "If you lead a black ox, the sky is not free."

古文：但看戊寅岁，杨在蜀江头。 
现代文：但看戊寅岁，杨在蜀江头。 
English: But look at the age of Wu Yin, Yang is at the head of the Shu River.

古文：智者不能议之。
现代文：有学问的聪明人也不理解童谣的意思。
English: Learned and intelligent people do not understand the meaning of nursery rhymes.

古文：庚午岁，大梁同州节度使刘知俊叛梁入秦，家于天水。
现代文：庚午年，大梁同州节度使刘知俊背叛大梁，带兵进入陕西，驻扎安家在天水。
English: In the year of the Heian and Wu Dynasties, Liang Tongzhou's festival made Liu Zhijun betray Liang, led soldiers into Shaanxi, and stationed his family in Tianshui.

古文：天水破，流入蜀。
现代文：天水被攻破以后，又流窜进入四川。
English: After Tianshui was breached, it flowed into Sichuan.

古文：居数年间，蜀人又谣曰： 黑牛无系绊，棕绳一时断。 
现代文：住了几年以后，四川又流传一首民谣说： 黑牛无系绊，棕绳一时断。 
English: After living there for a few years, another folk song was circulated in Sichuan, saying: "The black ox does not stumble, the brown rope is temporarily broken."

古文：伪蜀先主闻之，惧曰： 黑牛者，刘之小字；棕绳者，吾子孙之名也。盖前辈连宗字，后辈连承字为名，棕绳与宗承同音。
现代文：前蜀的先主王建听到后害怕地说： 黑牛是刘知俊的小名，而棕绳是我子孙的名字，是按照家谱继承和接续下去的叫宗然后是承字，棕绳与宗承同音。
English: After hearing this, Wang Jian, the patriarch of the former Shu, was afraid and said: "Hei Niu" is Liu Zhijun's nickname, while "Brown Rope" is the name of my descendants. According to the family tree, it is called "Zong" and then "Successor," and "Brown Rope" and "Successor" have the same sound.

古文：吾老矣，得不为子孙之患乎？ 
现代文：我老了，不能为子孙留下隐患。
English: I'm too old to be a danger to my children and grandchildren.

古文：于是害刘公以厌之。
现代文：于是王建将刘知俊杀了以消除隐患。
English: So Wang Jian killed Liu Zhijun to eliminate the hidden danger.

古文：明年，岁在戊寅，先主不豫，合眼刘公在目前。蜀人惧之，遂粉刘之骨，扬入于蜀江。
现代文：第二年是戊寅年，先主王建心情不好，一闭上眼睛就见刘知俊在眼前，他很害怕，命令人将刘知俊的骨头砸碎，扔到了蜀江里，不久先主王建死了，这时人们才知道，民谣里的骝是指刘，黑牛是刘知俊的小名， 但看戊寅岁，扬在蜀江头 是指在戊寅年将刘知俊的骨头扬到蜀江中。
English: The second year was the year of Wu Yin. The previous lord Wang Jian was in a bad mood. As soon as he closed his eyes, he saw Liu Zhijun in front of him. He was very scared and ordered Liu Zhijun's bones to be smashed and thrown into the Shu River. Not long after, the previous lord Wang Jian died. It was only then that people knew that the mink in the folk song refers to Liu, and the black cow is Liu Zhijun's nickname. However, looking at the age of Wu Yin, Yang in the head of the Shu River means that Liu Zhijun's bones were carried into the Shu River in the year of Wu Yin

