古文：孔子谓季氏： 八佾舞于庭，是可忍也，孰不可忍也？ 
现代文：孔子谈到季氏，说： 他用天子才能用的八佾在庭院中奏乐舞蹈，这样的事他都忍心去做，还有什么事情不可狠心做出来呢？ 
English: Confucius said of Ji, "He played music and danced in the courtyard with the eight-stringed zither, which only a son of heaven can use. He had the courage to do such things. What other things should he not do?

古文：三家者以《雍》彻，子曰：  相维辟公，天子穆穆 ，奚取于三家之堂？ 
现代文：孟孙氏、叔孙氏、季孙氏三家在祭祖的时候，命乐工唱着《雍》这篇诗歌来撤下祭品。孔子说： 《雍》诗中的 诸侯都来助祭，天子恭敬地主祭 这样的意思，怎么能够用在三家大夫的庙堂里呢？ 
English: When the Mengsuns, Unclesons, and Sons-in-law of the three clans offered sacrifices to their ancestors, the sacrificial workers sang the poem "Yong" to remove the offerings. Confucius said: "The princes in the poem "Yong" all come to assist the priest, and the heavenly son respects the main priest. How can this meaning be used in the temple of the three doctors?

古文：子曰： 人而不仁，如礼何？
现代文：孔子说： 一个人如果没有仁德，那他怎样遵守礼仪制度呢？
English: Confucius said: If a person does not have benevolence, how can he observe the etiquette system?

古文：人而不仁，如乐何？ 
现代文：一个人没有仁爱之心，礼乐有什么用？ 
English: If one does not have a heart of benevolence, what is the use of ceremonial music?

古文：林放问礼之本，子曰： 大哉问！
现代文：林放问什么是礼仪制度的根本。孔子回答说： 你问的问题意义重大。
English: Lin Fang asked what is the basis of the etiquette system. Confucius replied, "The question you have asked is of great significance.

古文：礼，与其奢也，宁俭；丧，与其易也，宁戚。 
现代文：礼，与其一味的寻求奢侈，不如节俭些；办理丧事，与其在仪式上办理得妥帖，不如内心真正悲伤。 
English: It is better to be thrifty in one's manners than to seek luxury in everything; better to be truly sad in one's heart than to be well-groomed at the funeral than well-groomed at the ceremony.

古文：子曰： 夷狄之有君，不如诸夏之亡也。 
现代文：孔子说： 那些不开化的地方有君主，还不如中原没有君主的地区讲礼节。 
English: Confucius said: Those non-pacifist places with monarchs are not as courteous as the areas without monarchs in the Central Plains.

古文：季氏旅于泰山。
现代文：季氏准备去祭祀泰山。
English: Mr. Ji prepares to go to worship Mount Tai.

古文：子谓冉有曰： 女弗能救与？ 
现代文：孔子对冉有说： 你不能阻止他吗？ 
English: Confucius said to Ran Yu: Can't you stop him?

古文：对曰： 不能。 
现代文：冉有说： 不能。 
English: And he said, I cannot.

古文：子曰： 呜呼！
现代文：孔子说： 唉！
English: Confucius said: Alas!

古文：曾谓泰山不如林放乎？ 
现代文：难道说泰山神还不如林放知礼吗？ 
English: Does this mean that the god of Mount Tai is not as good as the god of the forest?

古文：子曰： 君子无所争，必也射乎！
现代文：孔子说： 君子没有什么可以与人相争的事情。
English: Confucius said: A gentleman has nothing to quarrel with.

古文：揖让而升，下而饮。
现代文：如果有的话，那就一定是射箭。
English: If there is, it must be archery.

古文：其争也君子。 
现代文：比赛开始的时候，先相互作揖谦让，然后上场。
English: At the beginning of the game, first make concessions to each other, and then go on the court.

古文：子夏问曰：  巧笑倩兮，美目盼兮，素以为绚兮 何谓也？ 
现代文：比赛完后，又相互作揖再退下来，然后登堂喝酒。这就是君子之争。 子夏问孔子：  笑得真好看啊，黑白分明的眼睛多妩媚呀，好像在洁白的质地上画着美丽的图案。 这几句话是什么意思呢？ 
English: After the game, they made fun of each other and then retired, and then went to the hall to drink. This is a gentleman's dispute. Zixia asked Confucius: It's really beautiful to smile, and the black and white eyes are so charming, as if they were drawing beautiful patterns on the white texture. What do these words mean?

古文：子曰： 绘事后素。 
现代文：孔子说： 这是说绘画先有白底，然后再用色彩绘画。 
English: Confucius said: This means that the painting first has a white background, and then it is painted with color.

古文：曰： 礼后乎？ 
现代文：子夏又问： 这么说礼也是在有了仁德之心之后才产生的了？ 
English: Zixia also asked: Is it true that this kind of etiquette only came into being after people had a heart of benevolence?

古文：子曰： 起予者商也，始可与言《诗》已矣。 
现代文：孔子说： 卜商啊，你真是能够发挥我的思想，现在可以开始和你谈论《诗经》了。 
English: Confucius said, "Bu Shang, you are really able to make use of my thoughts. Now I can begin to talk to you about the Book of Songs."

古文：子曰： 夏礼吾能言之，杞不足征也；殷礼吾能言之，宋不足征也。
现代文：孔子说： 夏朝的礼仪制度，我可以说一说，但是它的后代杞国不足以证明我的话；殷朝的礼仪制度，我能说一说，但它的后代宋国不足以证明我的话。
English: Confucius said: I can say something about the etiquette system of the Xia Dynasty, but its descendants, the Song Dynasty, are not enough to prove my words; I can say something about the etiquette system of the Yin Dynasty, but its descendants, the Song Dynasty, are not enough to prove my words.

古文：文献不足故也，足则吾能征之矣。 
现代文：这是由于文字资料和熟悉夏礼和殷礼的人不足的缘故。如果有足够的历史资料和懂礼的人才，我就可以得到证明了。 
English: This is due to the lack of written materials and people who are familiar with the Summer Rite and Yin Rite. If there are enough historical materials and people who understand the etiquette, I can get proof.

古文：子曰： 禘自既灌而往者，吾不欲观之矣。 
现代文：孔子说： 对于行禘礼的仪式，从完成第一次献酒以后，我就不想再看了。 
English: Confucius said, "As for the ceremony of performing prostrations, I don't want to watch it after the first offering of wine.

古文：或问禘之说。
现代文：有人问孔子关于举行禘祭的规定。
English: Someone asked Confucius about the rules for holding a wreath-laying ceremony.

古文：子曰： 不知也。
现代文：孔子说： 我不知道。
English: Confucius said, "I don't know."

古文：知其说者之于天下也，其如示诸斯乎！ 
现代文：知道的人对治理天下的事，可能像把东西放在这里一样容易吧！ 
English: Who knows, governing the world might be as easy as putting things here!

古文：指其掌。
现代文：说着指了指自己的手掌。
English: He pointed to the palm of his hand.

古文：祭如在，祭神如神在。
现代文：祭祀祖先时，好像祖先真的就在前面；祭神的时候，好像神真的在面前。
English: When worshiping ancestors, it is as if the ancestors are really in front of us; when worshiping God, it is as if God is really in front of us.

古文：子曰： 吾不与祭，如不祭。 
现代文：孔子说： 我如果不自己去参加祭祀，祭祀了就跟没祭祀一样。 
English: Confucius said, "If I don't go to the sacrificial rites myself, it's the same as not having a sacrificial rite."

古文：王孙贾问曰：  与其媚于奥，宁媚于灶 ，何谓也？ 
现代文：王孙贾问道：  与其祈祷较尊贵的奥神的保佑，不如祈祷有实权的灶神的赐福。 
English: Wang Sunjia asked: "Instead of praying for the blessing of the more honorable gods, it is better to pray for the blessing of the stove gods who have real power."

古文：子曰： 不然，获罪于天，无所祷也。 
现代文：这话是什么意思？ 孔子说： 不是这样的。如果得罪了上天，到什么地方去祷告求情也是无用的。 
English: What does this mean? Confucius said, "It's not like that. If you sin against heaven, it's useless to go anywhere to pray and ask for forgiveness.

古文：子曰： 周监于二代，郁郁乎文哉！
现代文：孔子说： 周朝的礼仪制度借鉴于夏、商二朝，是多么丰富多彩啊。
English: Confucius said: The Zhou dynasty's etiquette system borrowed from the Xia and Shang dynasties, how rich and colorful it was.

古文：吾从周。 
现代文：我主张接受周朝的制度。 
English: I advocate accepting the system of the Zhou Dynasty.

古文：子入太庙，每事问。
现代文：孔子到了太庙，每件事都要问。
English: When Confucius arrived at the Imperial Temple, he had to ask about everything.

古文：或曰： 孰谓鄹人之子知礼乎？
现代文：有人说： 谁说鄹邑大夫的儿子懂得礼仪呀？
English: Some people said: Who said that the son of Dr. Zouyi understood etiquette?

古文：入太庙，每事问。 
现代文：他进到太庙里，每件事都要问人。 
English: When he went into the Imperial Temple, he had to ask people about everything.

古文：子闻之，曰： 是礼也。 
现代文：孔子听到此话后说： 这就是礼呀！ 
English: When Confucius heard this, he said, "This is what courtesy is!

古文：子曰： 射不主皮，为力不同科，古之道也。 
现代文：孔子说： 射箭，不在于穿透靶子，因为人的力气有大有小。这是古人的道理呀。 
English: Confucius said: "The glory of archery does not lie in penetrating the target, because human strength varies greatly. This is the truth of the ancients."

古文：子贡欲去告朔之饩羊，子曰： 赐也！尔爱其羊，我爱其礼。 
现代文：子贡提出去掉每月初一日告祭祖庙用的活羊。孔子说： 赐，你爱惜那只羊，我却爱惜那种礼。 
English: Zigong proposed to remove the live sheep used for the sacrifice to the ancestral temple on the first day of each month. Confucius said: Granted, you cherish that sheep, but I cherish that ritual.

古文：子曰： 事君尽礼，人以为谄也。 
现代文：孔子说： 我按照周礼的规定去侍奉君主，别人却认为这是在讨好君主。 
English: Confucius said: I serve the sovereign in accordance with the regulations of the weekly ritual, but others think that this is to please the sovereign.

古文：定公问： 君使臣，臣事君，如之何？ 
现代文：鲁定公问孔子： 君主差使臣子，臣子侍奉君主，各自应该怎么做？ 
English: Lu Ding Gong asked Confucius: Monarchs send their vassals, and vassals serve their monarchs. What should each of them do?

古文：孔子对曰： 君使臣以礼，臣事君以忠。 
现代文：孔子回答说： 君主差使臣子以礼相待，臣子应该以忠来侍奉君主。 
English: Confucius replied, "A prince should treat his vassal with courtesy, and a vassal should serve the prince with loyalty.

古文：子曰： 《关雎》，乐而不淫，哀而不伤。 
现代文：孔子说： 《关睢》这首诗，快乐却不是毫无节制，悲哀而不过于悲伤。 
English: Confucius said, "In the poem Guanzhong, happiness is not unrestrained, and sadness is not too sad.

古文：哀公问社于宰我，宰我对曰： 夏后氏以松，殷人以柏，周人以栗，曰使民战栗。 
现代文：鲁哀公问宰我，做土地神的神位应该用什么木材，宰我回答： 夏朝时用松树，商朝时用柏树，周朝时用栗子树。用栗子树的意思是说：使老百姓战战栗栗。 
English: Lu Aikong asked Zhai Miao what kind of wood should be used for the earth god's throne. Zhai Miao replied: Pine trees should be used in the summer, cypress trees in the merchant era, and chestnut trees in the Zhou era. The meaning of using chestnut trees is to make the people tremble.

古文：子闻之，曰： 成事不说，遂事不谏，既往不咎。 
现代文：孔子听到后说： 已经做过的事不用提了，已经完成的事不用再去劝谏了，已经过去的事也不必再追究了。 
English: Upon hearing this, Confucius said, "There is no need to mention what has already been done, there is no need to discuss what has already been accomplished, and there is no need to investigate what has already passed.

古文：子曰： 管仲之器小哉！ 
现代文：孔子说： 管仲的气量真小啊！ 
English: Confucius said: Guanzhong's stamina is so small!

古文：或曰： 管仲俭乎？ 
现代文：有人说： 管仲节俭吗？ 
English: Some people say: Is it necessary to be frugal?

古文：曰： 管氏有三归，官事不摄，焉得俭？ 
现代文：孔子说： 他有三处豪华的房屋，他家里的管事也是一人一职而不兼任，怎么谈得上节俭呢？ 
English: Confucius said, "He has three luxurious houses, and the steward of his house is also a one-person post without a concurrent post. How can we talk about frugality?

古文： 然则管仲知礼乎？ 
现代文：那人又问： 那么管仲懂礼吗？ 
English: The man then asked, "So, does Guanzhong know how to be polite?"

古文：曰： 邦君树塞门，管氏亦树塞门；邦君为两君之好，有反坫。管氏亦有反坫，管氏而知礼，孰不知礼？ 
现代文：孔子回答： 国君在宫门前立了一道影壁，管仲也在自家门口立了影壁；国君设宴招待别国君主、举行友好会见时，在堂上设有放置空酒杯的土台，管仲宴客也就有这样的土台。如果说管仲知礼，那还有谁不知礼呢？ 
English: Confucius replied: The sovereign sets up a shadow wall in front of the palace gate, and the steward also sets up a shadow wall in front of his house. When the sovereign hosts a banquet to invite the monarchs of other countries and hold friendly meetings, there is a base for placing empty wine glasses in the hall, and the steward's guests also have such a base. If it is said that the steward knows the etiquette, then who does not know the etiquette?

古文：子语鲁大师乐，曰： 乐其可知也。
现代文：孔子给鲁国乐官讲奏乐过程，说： 演奏的原理是可以知道的。
English: Confucius lectured on the process of playing music to a Lu music official, saying: The principle of performance can be known.

古文：始作，翕如也；从之，纯如也，皦如也，绎如也，以成。 
现代文：开始演奏时，各种乐器合奏，声音宏亮优美；乐曲继续展开下去，悠扬悦耳，节奏分明，如流水绵绵流淌，直至演奏结束。 
English: At the beginning of the performance, various musical instruments were played, the sound was bright and beautiful; the music continued to unfold, melodious and melodious, with a clear rhythm, flowing like water, until the end of the performance.

古文：仪封人请见，曰： 君子之至于斯也，吾未尝不得见也。 
现代文：仪地的一个小官请求会见孔子，说： 凡是到这个地方的君子，我没有不求见的。 
English: A minor official of the ceremonial court requested to see Confucius, saying, "I do not fail to see every gentleman who comes to this place.

古文：从者见之。
现代文：孔子的学生们领他去见孔子。
English: Confucius' students took him to see Confucius.

古文：出曰： 二三子何患于丧乎？
现代文：出来以后，他说： 诸位何必为孔子丧失官位担忧呢？
English: After coming out, he said: "Why should you worry about Confucius losing his position?

古文：天下之无道也久矣，天将以夫子为木铎。 
现代文：天下无道已经很久了，因此上天将以孔夫子为圣人来教化天下。 
English: It has been a long time since the world has been without a way, so God will use Confucius as a saint to enlighten the world.

古文：子谓《韶》： 尽美矣，又尽善也。 
现代文：孔子评价《韶》，说： 乐曲很美，内容也非常好。 
English: Confucius commented on the "Dragonfly," saying: "The music is very beautiful, and the content is also very good.

古文：谓《武》： 尽美矣，未尽善也。 
现代文：评价《武》，说： 乐曲很美，内容却差一些。 
English: Evaluating "Wu," he said: "The music is beautiful, but the content is poor.

古文：子曰： 居上不宽，为礼不敬，临丧不哀，吾何以观之哉？ 
现代文：孔子说： 居于统治地位的人，不能宽厚待人，行礼的时候不恭敬，参加丧礼时也不悲哀，这种情况我怎么能看得下去呢？ 
English: Confucius said, "How can I bear to see that a person in a position of authority does not treat others with kindness, does not show respect when bowing, and does not mourn when attending funerals?

