古文：吴玠每战，选劲弩，命诸将分番迭射，号 驻队矢 ，连发不绝，繁如雨注，敌不能当。
现代文：原文宋朝人吴玠每次作战之前，挑选强劲的ō弩，然后再命令诸将轮流举射，称之为 驻队矢 。这种 驻队矢 能够连续不断地发射，箭一发射出来就好像是倾盆大雨，敌人根本没有任何招架还击之力。
English: Before every battle, the Song Dynasty's Wu Xi would select a strong arrow and then order the generals to take turns firing it, calling it a "stationing arrow." This kind of "stationing arrow" can be fired continuously. Once the arrow is fired, it looks like a downpour of rain, and the enemy has no ability to fight back.

古文：吴璘仿车战余意，立 叠阵法 ，每战以长枪居前，坐不得起；次最强弓，次强弩跪膝俟，次神臂弓。
现代文：吴璘仿效古代车战方法，研究出了一种 叠阵法 ，每次作战的时候，列在兵阵最前排的是长枪兵，坐下之后就不允许再站起来；第二排是射程最远的强弩；第三排则是次强弩，都必须以跪姿等待敌人的进攻；然后就是神臂弓。
English: Wu Gan imitated the ancient method of chariot warfare and developed a method of stacked formations. In every battle, the soldiers in the front row of the formation were the pikemen, who were not allowed to stand up after sitting down; the second row was the strongest bow with the longest range; the third row was the second strongest bow, who had to kneel and wait for the enemy to attack; and then there was the divine bow.

古文：约贼相搏，至百步内，则神臂先发，七十步，强弓并发。
现代文：和敌人肉搏交战时，百步之内由神臂弓先射箭，七十步之内则由所有的ō弩一起发射。
English: When engaging in hand-to-hand combat with an enemy, arrows should be fired within a hundred paces from the shinbai bow, and within seventy paces from all ō together.

古文：次阵如之。
现代文：第二重阵也一样。
English: The same applies to the second group.

古文：凡阵，以拒马为限，铁钩相连。
现代文：每次布阵，阵前设置有拒马、铁钩。
English: Each time a formation is set up, there is a bucking horse and an iron hook in front of the formation.

古文：伤则更代之，遇更代则以鼓为节。
现代文：如果有人受伤，就要更代，以鼓声为信号进行更代，这时两翼的骑兵都要上前掩护。
English: If someone is injured, there must be a replacement, with the sound of the drum as the signal for the replacement. At this time, the cavalry on both wings must move forward to cover.

古文：骑为两翼蔽于前，阵成而骑退，谓之叠阵。
现代文：完成更代以后骑兵才退下，这就是 叠阵 。
English: The cavalry only withdraws after the replacement is complete, which is the formation formation.

古文：战士心定，则能持满④，敌虽锐，不能当也。
现代文：由于战士对这阵法深具信心，所以和敌人交战的时候都是张满弓待敌，敌人再精锐，也不能抵挡。
English: Since warriors have deep confidence in this method, they always keep their bows wide open when engaging the enemy. No matter how elite the enemy is, they cannot resist.

古文：璘著《兵法》二篇，大略谓，金人有四长，我有四短。
现代文：吴璘曾著有《兵法》两篇，大意是说，金人有四个长处，我军有四个短处。
English: Wu Xi once wrote two articles of "Law of War," to the effect that the Chinese people have four strengths, and our army has four weaknesses.

古文：当反我之短，制彼之长。
现代文：因此我军应该弥补自己的四个短处来反制金人的四个长处。
English: Therefore, our army should make up for its four shortcomings to counter the four strengths of the gold miners.

古文：四长曰骑兵，曰坚忍，曰重甲，曰弓矢。
现代文：所谓的四个长处是：骑兵、坚忍、重甲、弓矢。
English: The so-called four strengths are: cavalry, endurance, heavy armor, and bows and arrows.

古文：吾集番、汉所长，兼收而用之：以分队制其骑兵，以番休迭战制其坚忍，以劲弓强弩制其重甲，以远克近、强制弱制其弓矢。布阵之法，则以步军为阵心，翼以马军，为左右肋，而拒马布两肋之间。
现代文：我军应该兼采敌我双方的优点，加以灵活运用。例如将部队分散来牵制敌人的骑兵，让士兵轮番交替休息，上阵以消耗敌人坚忍的意志，使用劲弓强弩来对付敌人的盔甲，以远攻近，以强制弱使敌人的弓矢没有办法发挥威力，布阵的方法，则是以步兵为兵阵的核心，以骑兵为其两翼，就好像是人的左右肋骨一样，最后再把拒马设置在两肋中间。
English: Our army should take the advantages of both the enemy and ourselves and make flexible use of them. For example, the troops should be dispersed to hold back the enemy's cavalry, let the soldiers take turns to rest, go into battle to consume the enemy's persevering will, use the bow and arrow to deal with the enemy's armor, attack from a distance, and make the enemy's bow and arrow unable to exert power by forcing it to be weak. The method of setting up a formation is to use the infantry as the core of the formation, with the cavalry as the two wings, as if it were the left and right ribs of a person, and finally set the rejecting horse in

