古文：李晟，字良器，陇右临洮人。
现代文：李晟的字叫良器，是陇右道临洮县人。
English: Li Wei's Chinese character is "良器" which means "good tool." He is from Linyi County, Shandong Province.

古文：祖思恭，父钦，代居陇右为裨将。
现代文：祖父是李思恭，父亲是李钦，世代在陇右任偏将。
English: His grandfather was Li Sikyong and his father was Li Qin, both of whom were generals in the Song Dynasty.

古文：晟生数岁而孤，事母孝谨，性雄烈，有才，善骑射。
现代文：李晟出生几年后父亲就去世了，他侍奉母亲行孝恭谨，性格刚强，有才干，擅长骑马射箭。
English: A few years after Li Yao was born, his father died. He served his mother with filial piety, strong character, talent, good at riding and archery.

古文：年十八从军，身长六尺，勇敢绝伦。
现代文：十八岁参军，身高六尺，勇猛果断没人比得上。
English: He joined the army at the age of eighteen. He was six feet tall, and his bravery and determination were second to none.

古文：时河西节度使王忠嗣击吐蕃，有骁将乘城拒斗，颇伤士卒，忠嗣募军中能射者射之。
现代文：当时河西节度使王忠嗣攻打吐蕃军，敌军有位勇将凭借城墙抵抗，杀伤不少兵将，王忠嗣悬赏军队中善射的人射他。
English: At that time, the Hexi Festival made Wang Zhongzhi attack the Tuobao army. The enemy army had a brave general who resisted with the help of the city wall and killed and injured many soldiers. Wang Zhongzhi offered a reward to those in the army who were good at shooting to shoot him.

古文：晟引弓一发而毙，三军皆大呼，忠嗣厚赏之，因抚其背曰： 此万人敌也。 
现代文：李晟拉弓一箭就把他射倒了。全军都大喊称赞，王忠嗣称赞他，并拍着他的背说： 这是能对抗万人的人。 
English: The whole army shouted in praise. Wang Zhongzi praised him and patted him on the back, saying, "This is a man who can fight against ten thousand men."

古文：凤翔节度使高升雅闻其名，召补列将。
现代文：凤翔节度使高升常听说他的名字，召去封为将领。
English: The Fengxiang Festival made Gao Sheng often hear his name and call him to be a general.

古文：尝击叠州叛羌于高当川，又击宕州连狂羌于罕山，皆破之，累迁左羽林大将军同正。
现代文：他曾在高当川攻打叠州反叛的羌人，又在罕山攻打宕州连狂羌，都得胜了，多次提升后任左羽林大将军同正员。
English: He once fought against the rebels of Jiaozhou in Gaotang River, and also fought against the rebels of Jiaozhou Company in Han Mountain. He won both battles, and was promoted to the rank of General and member of the Left Feathered Lin Clan several times.

古文：广德初，凤翔节度使孙志直署晟总游兵，击破党项羌高玉等，以功授特进、试光禄卿，转试太常卿。
现代文：广德初年，凤翔节度使孙志直任命李晟统领游军，打败了党项羌高玉等，因功授特进官、光禄卿，后调任太常卿。
English: In the first year of Guangde, the Fengxiang Festival made Sun Zhizhong appoint Li Xuan as the leader of the marching army, defeated the party's Xuan Gaoyu and others, and was awarded the special promotion officer, Guangluqing, and later transferred to the permanent secretary.

古文：大历初，李抱玉镇凤翔，署晟为右军都将。
现代文：大历初年，李抱玉任凤翔节度使，任命李晟为右军都将。
English: In the first year of the Great Calendar, Li Baoyu was appointed as Fengxiang's envoy to the festival, and Li Xi was appointed as the commander of the right army.

古文：四年，吐蕃围灵州，抱玉遣晟将兵五千以击吐蕃，晟辞曰： 以众则不足，以谋则太多。 
现代文：大历四年，吐蕃包围灵州，李抱玉派李晟率五千人马进攻吐蕃，李晟推辞说： 靠兵力太少了，靠计谋又太多了。 
English: In the fourth year of the lunar calendar, Tubo besieged Lingshou. Li Baoyu sent 5,000 soldiers under the command of Li Jun to attack Tubo. Li Jun said, "Relying on troops is too little, and relying on stratagems is too much."

古文：乃请将兵千人疾出大震关，至临洮，屠定秦堡，焚其积聚，虏堡帅慕容谷钟而还，吐蕃因解灵州之围而去。
现代文：于是请求率一千兵马急出大震关，到临洮，攻破定秦堡，烧毁堡内屯积物，俘虏堡中首领慕容谷钟而归，吐蕃因此解除了对灵州的包围撤退了。
English: As a result, a thousand soldiers and horses were requested to rush out of the Great Earthquake Pass, to Linyi, to break through the Dingqin Fort, to burn the settlements in the fort, and the leader of the captive fort, Muronggu Zhong, returned. As a result, Tubo lifted the siege on Lingzhou and retreated.

古文：拜开府仪同三司。
现代文：官拜开府仪同三司。
English: The ceremony of the opening of the government and the three departments were held.

古文：无几，兼左金吾卫大将军、泾原四镇北庭都知兵马使，并总游兵。
现代文：不久，兼任右金吾卫大将军，泾原、四镇、北庭都知兵马使，总领游军。
English: Soon, he also served as the grand general of the Right King Wuwei, and the commander of the general tour of the troops in the provinces of Yuyuan, Shizhen and Beiting.

古文：无何，节度使马璘与吐蕃战于盐仓，兵败，晟率所部横击之，拔璘出乱兵之中，以功封合川郡王。
现代文：没多久，节度使马王与吐蕃在盐仓作战，战败，李晟率部下冲上去，将马王从乱军中救出，因功封合川郡王。
English: Not long after, King Ma and King Tu were defeated in the Battle of Yanakura, and Li Xi and his subordinates rushed to rescue King Ma from the rebels and became the king of Hechuan County.

古文：璘忌晟威名，又遇之不以礼，令朝京师，代宗留居宿卫，为右神策都将。
现代文：马王忌妒李晟的名声，加上对他礼节不周，命李晟去京城朝拜，唐代宗将李晟留在禁军里，任右神策军都将。
English: Ma Wang was jealous of Li Qian's reputation, coupled with his poor etiquette, and ordered Li Qian to go to the capital to worship. The Tang Dynasty left Li Qian in the forbidden army, and appointed him as the right god to lead the army.

古文：德宗即位，吐蕃寇剑南，时节度使崔宁朝京师，三川震恐，乃诏晟将神策兵救之，授太子宾客。
现代文：唐德宗即位，吐蕃进犯剑南道，当时节度使崔宁在京城朝拜，三川地区惊恐不安，于是下诏令李晟率神策兵救援，授官太子宾客。
English: When Emperor Tang Dezong ascended to the throne and Emperor Puyi invaded Southern Jian Province, the festivities at the time caused Emperor Cui Ning to worship in Beijing, and the Sanchuan region was alarmed and uneasy. Therefore, Emperor Puyi ordered Li Xi to lead God's army to rescue the guests of the crown prince.

古文：晟乃逾漏天，拔飞越，廓清肃宁三城，绝大渡河，获首虏千余级，虏乃引退，因留成都数月而还。
现代文：于是李晟到了蜀地，攻下飞越，收复了肃宁三城，渡过大渡河，杀头千余颗，吐蕃就退兵了，因此在成都停留了几个月才回京。
English: So Li Gan went to Shudi, overran and recaptured the three cities of Suning, crossed the Dadu River, and killed more than a thousand people. Tu Gan then withdrew from the army, so he stayed in Chengdu for several months before returning to Beijing.

古文：建中二年，魏博田悦反，将兵围临洺、邢州，诏以晟为神策先锋都知兵马使，与河东节度使马燧、昭义节度使李抱真合兵救临洺。
现代文：建中二年，魏博节度使田悦反叛，率军包围了临氵名、邢州，有诏命李晟任神策军先锋都知兵马使，率军和河东节度使马燧、昭义节度使李抱真会合援救临氵名。
English: In the second year of Jianzhong, Wei Bo Jiedu caused Tian Yue to rebel, and led the army to encircle Linyi, Shanzhou. Li Qian was ordered by the imperial edict to serve as the vanguard of the Shen Zhao Army, the vanguard of the Du Zhi soldiers and horses, and led the army and the Hedong Jiedu to help Ma Qian, and the Shouyi Jiedu to help Li Baozhen to rescue Linyi.

古文：寻加兼御史中丞。
现代文：不久加封兼任御史中丞。
English: He was soon given the additional post of Goshi chujo.

古文：河东、昭义军攻杨朝光于临洺南，晟与河东骑将李自良、李奉国击悦于双冈，悦兵却，遂斩朝光。
现代文：河东军、昭义军在临氵名南边进攻杨朝光，李晟和河东军骑兵将领李自良、李奉国在双冈进攻田悦，田悦败退，于是杀死了杨朝光。
English: The Hedong Army and the Shouyi Army attacked Yang Chaoguang on the south side of Linyi, and Li Xi and the cavalry generals of the Hedong Army, Li Ziliang and Li Fengguo, attacked Tian Yue in Shuanggang. Tian Yue was defeated and retreated, and then killed Yang Chaoguang.

古文：战于临洺，诸军皆却。
现代文：后又在临氵名会战，唐各军都败退了。
English: Later, in the Battle of Linyi, all the Tang armies were defeated.

古文：晟引兵渡洺水，乘冰而济，横击悦军，王师复振，击悦，大破之。
现代文：李晟率军来到氵名水，乘河结冰过了河，突然攻击田悦军，唐军又振作起来，进攻田悦，大败其军。
English: Li Lan led his army to the water of Yunnan, crossed the river on the icy river, and suddenly attacked the army of Tian Yue. The Tang army took heart again, attacked Tian Yue, and defeated his army.

古文：三年正月，复以诸道军击败悦军于洹水，遂进攻魏州，以功加检校左散骑常侍，实封百户。
现代文：建中三年正月，又和各路军一起在洹水打败了田悦军，于是进军攻打魏州，因功加封为检校左散骑常侍、食实封一百户。
English: In the first month of the third year of middle school, he defeated Tian Yue's army in Surabaya together with the various armies, and then marched into and attacked Weizhou. Because of his achievement, he was awarded the title of "school inspection left horseback riding attendant" and was rewarded with 100 households.

古文：李抱真分兵二千人守邢州，马燧大怒，欲班师。
现代文：不久，兼任魏府左司马。当时朱滔、王武俊配合田悦，就派兵在赵州包围了康日知。李抱真分出两千兵驻守邢州，马燧因此很生气，想撤军。
English: At that time, Zhu Tao and Wang Wujun, in cooperation with Tian Yue, sent troops to encircle Kangrizhi in Zhao Prefecture. Li Bozhen stationed two thousand soldiers in Zhangzhou, and Ma Jun was very angry and wanted to withdraw.

古文：晟谓燧曰： 初奉诏进讨，三帅齐进。
现代文：李晟对马燧说： 当初奉旨讨贼，三将一同进军。
English: Li Yao said to Ma Yao: At first, I was ordered to hunt down the thieves, and the three generals marched out together.

古文：李尚书以邢州与赵州接圵，分兵守之，诚未为害，其精卒锐将皆在于此，令公遽自引去，奈王事何？ 
现代文：李抱真尚书因邢州与赵州相邻，分兵守城，也不是坏事，他的精兵强将都在这里，您突然率军离去，皇上托付的事怎么办？ 
English: Li Bozhen Shangshu, because Bozhou is adjacent to Zhaozhou, sent troops to defend the city, which is not a bad thing. His elite soldiers and generals are all here. If you suddenly leave with the army, what about the things entrusted by the emperor?

古文：燧释然谢晟，燧乃自造抱真垒，与之交欢如初。
现代文：马燧想通了，向李晟道了歉，又自己到李抱真军营，和他交好如同以前一样。
English: Ma Yao figured it out, apologized to Li Yao, and went to Li Baozhen's military camp to make friends with him as before.

古文：王武俊攻赵州，晟乃献状请解赵州之围，欲引兵赴定州与张孝忠合势，欲图范阳，德宗壮之，加晟御史大夫，俾禁军将军莫仁擢、赵光铣、杜季泚皆隶焉。
现代文：王武俊攻打赵州，李晟就奏本请求去赵州解围，想然后率军去定州和张孝忠会合，谋攻范阳。唐德宗赞赏他，加封他为御史大夫，使禁军将军莫仁擢、赵光铣、杜季氵此都隶属他。
English: When Wang Wujun attacked Zhaozhou, Li Jun requested to go to Zhaozhou to relieve the siege, and then he wanted to lead the army to Dingzhou and Zhang Xiaozhong to meet and plot to attack Fanyang. Tang Dezong appreciated him, and made him a goshi taifu, so that the general of the forbidden army, Mo Ren, Zhao Guangyao, and Du Jiyao were all subordinate to him.

古文：晟自魏州引军而北，径趋赵州，武俊闻之，解围而去。
现代文：李晟从魏州率军北进，直指赵州，王武俊听说后，撤除包围离去。
English: Li Qian led the army northward from Weizhou, straight to Zhaozhou. After hearing this, Wang Wujun withdrew from the encirclement.

古文：晟留赵州三日，与孝忠兵合，北略恆州，围硃滔将郑景济于清苑，决水以灌之。
现代文：李晟在赵州停留了三天，和张孝忠军会合后，北征恒州，在清苑包围了朱滔部将郑景济，决堤灌水攻城。
English: Li Yu stayed in Zhaozhou for three days. After meeting with Zhang Xiaozhong's army, he marched north to Hengzhou, surrounded Zhu Daobu's general Zheng Jingji in Qingyuan, broke through the dike and attacked the city.

古文：田悦、王武俊皆遣兵来救，战于白楼。
现代文：田悦、王武俊都派兵来救援，在白楼会战。
English: Tian Yue and Wang Wujun both sent soldiers to the rescue and fought at Bai Lou.

古文：贼犯义武军，稍却，晟引步骑击破之，晟所乘马连中流矢。
现代文：叛军攻击张孝忠军，张孝忠略后退，李晟率步骑兵击溃了敌军，李晟的马接连被流箭射中。
English: The rebels attacked Zhang Xiaozhong's army, Zhang Xiaozhong retreated slightly, Li Yu led the infantry and cavalry to defeat the enemy army, and Li Yu's horse was shot by a stream of arrows.

古文：逾月，城中益急，滔、武俊大惧，乃悉收魏博之众而来，复围晟军。
现代文：一个月后，城中更吃紧了，朱滔、王武俊很担心，就把魏博的军队全调来，又包围了李晟的军队。
English: A month later, the situation in the city became even more tense. Zhu Tao and Wang Wujun were very worried, so they fully mobilized Wei Bo's army and encircled Li Xi's army.

古文：晟内围景济，外与滔等拒战，日数合，自正月至于五月。
现代文：李晟向内围攻郑景济，在外与朱滔等作战，一天几仗，从正月直到五月。
English: Li Gan besieged Zheng Jingji inside and fought with Zhu Tao and others outside, several battles a day, from the first month until May.

古文：会晟病甚，不知人者数焉。军吏合谋，乃以马舆还定州，贼不敢逼。
现代文：遇到李晟得了重病，几次不省人事，部将共同商议，就用马把他运回了定州，叛军不敢追击。
English: When Li Xuan fell seriously ill and lost consciousness several times, the generals consulted together and transported him back to Dingzhou by horse. The rebels did not dare to chase him.

古文：晟疾间，复将进师，会京城变起，德宗在奉天，诏晟赴难。
现代文：李晟病稍好，又要进军，遇上京城发生事变，唐德宗逃到奉天，传令李晟勤王。
English: Li Qiye's illness was slightly better, and he wanted to march into the army again. When there was an incident in Beijing, Tang Dezong fled to Fengtian and ordered Li Qiye to be loyal to the king.

古文：晟承诏泣下，即日欲赴关辅。
现代文：李晟接到命令流下了眼泪，当天就想回师长安。
English: After receiving the order, Li Yao shed tears and wanted to return to his master Chang'an that day.

古文：义武军间于硃滔、王武俊，倚晟为轻重，不欲晟去，数谋沮止晟军。
现代文：张孝忠处在朱滔、王武俊之间，以李晟为依靠，不想让李晟离去，几次想要阻止李晟的军队。
English: Zhang Xiaotong was between Zhu Tao and Wang Wujun. He relied on Li Qiye for support. He did not want Li Qiye to leave, and tried several times to stop Li Qiye's army.

古文：晟谓将吏曰： 天子播越于外，人臣当百舍一息，死而后已。
现代文：李晟对部将说： 皇上在外避难，臣下应一路不停地去勤王，哪怕累死。
English: Li Yan said to the commander: The emperor is taking refuge outside, his vassals should go all the way to the king, even if they are tired to death.

古文：张义武欲沮吾行，吾当以爱子为质，选良马以啖其意。 
现代文：张孝忠想不要我去，我将用心爱的儿子做抵押，并送好马安慰他。 
English: If Zhang Xiaozhong does not want me to go, I will pledge my beloved son as collateral and send a good horse to comfort him.

古文：乃留子凭以为婚。
现代文：于是留下儿子李凭和张孝忠结为亲家。
English: As a result, he left behind his son, Li Biao, and Zhang Xiaotong married into a family.

古文：义武军有大将为孝忠委信者谒晟，晟乃解玉带以遗之，因曰： 吾欲西行，愿以为别。 
现代文：张孝忠军中有位被张孝忠信任的大将请求见李晟，李晟就解下玉带送给他，并说： 我想西去，希望用这做道别礼物。 
English: One of the generals in Zhang Xiaotong's army, who was trusted by Zhang Xiaotong, asked to see Li Yao. Li Yao untied the jade belt and gave it to him, saying, "I want to go west, and I hope to use this as a farewell gift."

古文：陈赴难之意，受带者果德晟，乃谏孝忠勿止晟。
现代文：并述说了救国难的心意，接受玉带的人果然感激李晟，就劝张孝忠不要阻止李晟。
English: He also described his intention to save the country, and the person who received the jade band was really grateful to Li Xi, so he advised Zhang Xiaozhong not to stop Li Xi.

古文：晟得引军逾飞狐，师次代州，诏加晟检校工部尚书、神策行营节度使，实封二百户。
现代文：李晟这样才能率军通过了飞狐口，部队抵达代州，皇帝降诏加封李晟为检校工部尚书、神策行营节度使，食实封两百户。
English: In this way, Li Qian led the army through the Flying Fox's Mouth, the troops arrived in Daizhou, the emperor issued an edict and sealed Li Qian as the inspector of the school construction department and the inspector of the festival, and the food was sealed for two hundred households.

古文：晟军令严肃，所过樵采无犯。
现代文：李晟军队纪律严明，经过处秋毫无犯。
English: The Li Rong army was well-disciplined and did not commit any crimes.

古文：自河中由蒲津而军渭北，壁东渭桥以逼泚。
现代文：从河中经过蒲津进军渭北，在东渭桥扎营威逼朱氵此。
English: From the middle of the river, they marched through Puting to the north of Handan, and camped at the East Handan Bridge to force Zhu Xi to come here.

古文：时刘德信将子弟军救襄城，败于扈涧，闻难，率余军先次渭南，与晟合军。
现代文：当时刘德信率亲兵救襄城，在扈涧被打败，听说天子蒙难，率领残部先抵达渭南，和李晟会合。
English: At that time, Liu Dexin led his soldiers to rescue Xiangcheng, was defeated in Handan, heard that Tianzi was in distress, led the remnants to arrive in southern Handan first, and met with Li Xi.

古文：军无统一，晟不能制，因德信入晟军，乃数其罪斩之。晟以数骑驰入德信军，抚劳其众，无敢动者。
现代文：军队没有统一号令，李晟不能控制，就乘刘德信到李晟军营时，宣布罪状把他杀了，李晟率几名骑兵跑进刘德信的军营，安抚他的军队，没有人敢妄动。
English: The army did not have a unified order, and Li Gan could not control it, so he took Liu Dexin to Li Gan's military camp and killed him. Li Gan and several cavalrymen ran into Liu Dexin's military camp to pacify his army, and no one dared to move.

古文：既亻并德信军，军益振。
现代文：合并了刘德信的军队后，军威更盛了。
English: After the merger of Liu Dexin's army, the military power has become more prosperous.

古文：时朔方节度使李怀光亦自河北赴难，军于咸阳，不欲晟独当一面以分己功，乃奏请与晟兵合，乃诏晟移军合怀光军。
现代文：当时朔方节度使李怀光也从河北来勤王，驻扎在咸阳，不想要李晟独当一面分自己的功劳，就奏本请求和李晟会合，皇帝降诏李晟军移到李怀光军处驻扎。
English: At that time, the Shuo Festival made Li Huaguang also come from Hebei to worship the king and was stationed in Xianyang. He did not want Li Xuan to be the only one to share his credit, so he wrote a request to meet with Li Xuan, and the emperor ordered Li Xuan's army to move to Li Huaguang's military station.

古文：晟奉诏引军至陈涛斜，军垒未成，贼兵遽至，晟乃出阵，且言于怀光曰： 贼坚保宫苑，攻之未必克；今离其窟穴，敢出索战，此殆天以贼赐明公也！ 
现代文：李晟接令后率军到了陈涛斜，营垒还没筑好，叛军突然来了，李晟就出营列阵，并对李怀光说： 叛军坚守宫城，攻打他们不一定能取胜；现他们离开营地，敢来挑战，这大概是上天将叛贼赐给您了！ 
English: After receiving the order, Li Lan led the army to Chen Tao Xiang. The camp was not yet built, and the rebels suddenly arrived. Li Lan went to the camp and said to Li Huai Guang: The rebels held on to Miyagi, and they may not be able to win the battle. Now they have left the camp and dare to challenge. This is probably God's gift to you, the traitor!

古文：怀光恐晟立功，乃曰： 召军适至，马未秣，士未饭，讵可战耶？
现代文：李怀光怕李晟立功，就说： 我军才到，马未喂食，兵将没吃饭，怎能作战？
English: Li Huaiguang was afraid of Li Yu's exploits, so he said: Our army has just arrived, the horses have not been fed, the soldiers have not eaten, how can they fight?

古文：不如蓄锐养威，俟时而举。 
现代文：不如养精蓄锐，等待时机决战。 
English: It's better to keep your spirits up and wait for the decisive moment.

古文：晟知其意，遂收军入垒，时兴元元年正月也。
现代文：李晟知道他的用意，就收兵回营了，当时是兴元元年正月。
English: Li Gan knew his intention and withdrew his troops back to the camp. It was the first month of the first year of the Xingyuan.

古文：每将合战，必自异，衣锦裘、绣帽前行，亲自指导。
现代文：后每次要会战，李晟必定穿着不同，穿锦绣皮衣、戴绣彩帽走在前面，并亲自指路。
English: After that, every time he wanted to fight, Li Yao would wear different clothes. He would wear a brocade embroidered fur coat and an embroidered cap, walk in front of him, and personally show him the way.

古文：怀光望见恶之，乃谓晟曰： 将帅当持重，岂宜自表饰以啖贼也！ 
现代文：李怀光远远看见了讨厌这样，就对李晟说： 将领应稳重，怎能自设标志给敌人当靶子！ 
English: Li Huaiguang saw the unpleasant scene from far away and said to Li Yao: Generals should be steady, how can you set up a sign to be used as a target by the enemy!

古文：晟曰： 晟久在泾原，军士颇相畏服，故欲令其先识以夺其心耳。 
现代文：李晟说： 我长期在泾原，兵将较敬畏我，我就是想让他们先认出来叫他们害怕。 
English: Li Yao said: I have been in the Plain of Jars for a long time. The soldiers will be more afraid of me. I just want them to recognize me first so that they will be afraid.

古文：怀光益不悦，阴有异志，迁延不进。
现代文：李怀光更不高兴了，暗地有叛意，拖延不进军。
English: Li Huaiguang was even more displeased. He secretly had a rebellious attitude and delayed going into the army.

古文：晟因人说怀光曰： 寇贼窃据京邑，天子出居近甸，兵柄庙略，属在明公。
现代文：李晟派人劝李怀光说： 叛贼占据京城，皇帝逃出呆在外边，兵权指挥，都交给了您。
English: Li Yu sent someone to persuade Li Huai Guang, saying: "The traitors occupy the capital, the emperor escapes and stays outside, and the command of military power is all handed over to you.

古文：公宜观兵速进，晟愿以所部得奉严令，为公前驱，虽死不悔。 
现代文：您应指挥军队快速进兵，我愿率部下听从将令，做您的先锋，死而无悔。 
English: You should command the army to rapidly recruit soldiers. I am willing to lead my subordinates to obey the general's order, to be your vanguard, and to die without regret.

古文：怀光益拒之。
现代文：李怀光对他更抵触了。
English: Li Haiguang was even more opposed to him.

古文：晟兵军于朔方军北，每晟与怀光同至城下，怀光军辄虏驱牛马，吾姓苦之；晟军无所犯。
现代文：李晟军驻扎在朔方军北面，每次李晟和李怀光一起进军到长安城下，李怀光军就掳掠牛马，老百姓痛恨他们，李晟军秋毫无犯。
English: Li Lan's army was stationed to the north of Shuo Fang's army. Every time Li Lan and Li Huai Guang marched together to the foot of Chang'an City, Li Huai Guang's army would plunder cattle and horses. The common people hated them, but Li Lan's army did not commit any crimes.

古文：怀光军恶其独善，乃分所获与之，晟军不敢受。
现代文：李怀光军不愿李晟军独有好名声，就将抢来的东西分给他们，李晟军不肯接受。
English: Li Huai-guang's army did not want to give the unique good reputation of Li Shijun's army, so he distributed the stolen goods to them. Li Shijun's army refused to accept it.

古文：久之，怀光将谋沮晟军，计未有所出。
现代文：过了一阵，李怀光想算计李晟的军队，没有找到机会。
English: After a while, Li Huaiguang tried to calculate the strength of Li Xuan's army, but did not find an opportunity.

古文：时神策军以旧例给赐厚于诸军，怀光奏曰： 贼寇未平，军中给赐，咸宜均一。
现代文：当时神策军按惯例比各军待遇高，李怀光奏本说： 叛贼尚未讨平，军队待遇，都应一样。
English: At that time, the treatment of the Shen Zhe Army was higher than that of the other armies according to the usual practice. Li Huai Guang wrote: The traitors have not been leveled, and the treatment of the army should be the same.

古文：今神策独厚，诸军皆以为言，臣无以止之，惟陛下裁处。 
现代文：现单单神策军待遇高，各军都有怨言，我无法制止，请皇上处理。 
English: At present, the Shinsengumi and the Shinsengumi alone receive high treatment, and each army has complaints. I cannot stop this, so I ask the Emperor to deal with it.

古文：怀光计欲因是令晟自署侵削己军，以挠破之。德宗忧之，欲以诸军同神策，则财赋不给，无可奈何，乃遣翰林学士陆贽往怀光军宣谕，仍令怀光与晟参议所宜以闻。
现代文：李怀光的用意是想让李晟自己同意削减自己军队的待遇，以打击分化他的部队，唐德宗担忧此事，想让各军待遇和神策军一样，国家财力又不够，没办法，就派翰林学士陆贽去李怀光军营中宣读谕旨，命李怀光和李晟商量出办法再奏报。
English: Li Huai Guang's intention was to get Li Huai Guang himself to agree to reduce the treatment of his army in order to fight against the differentiation of his troops. Tang Dezong was worried about this matter and wanted to make the treatment of each army the same as that of the Shen Zhe army. The country's financial resources were not enough, and there was no way. He sent Hanlin Scholar Lu Yao to Li Huai Guang's military camp to read the edict and ordered Li Huai Guang and Li Yao to discuss a way to resubmit the report.

古文：贽、晟俱会于怀光军，怀光言曰： 军士禀赐不均，何以令战？ 
现代文：陆贽、李晟都到李怀光军营商议，李怀光说： 兵将待遇不同，怎么打仗？ 
English: Lu Wei and Li Wei both went to Li Huaiguang's military camp to discuss. Li Huaiguang said: soldiers will be treated differently, how to fight a war?

古文：贽未有言，数顾晟。
现代文：陆贽不说话，多次看着李晟。
English: Lu Yao did not speak, but repeatedly looked at Li Yao.

古文：晟曰： 公为元帅，弛张号令，皆得专之。
现代文：李晟说： 您是主将，一切命令，一人说了算。
English: Li Yao said: You are the captain, and you have the final say on all orders.

古文：晟当将一军，唯公所指，以效死命。
现代文：我只管一支军队，听从您的命令，以死报效。
English: I am in charge of an army, and I will follow your orders to the death.

古文：至于增损衣食，公当裁之。 
现代文：至于增减待遇，应由您决断。 
English: As for the increase or decrease in treatment, it is up to you to decide.

古文：怀光默然，无以难晟，又不欲侵刻神策军发于自己，乃止。
现代文：李怀光无话可说，没办法为难李晟，又不想自己承担克扣神策军待遇的责任，就不提了。
English: Li Huaiguang had nothing to say, he couldn't do anything to embarrass Li Yao, and he didn't want to take on the responsibility of compromising the treatment of God's army, so he didn't mention it.

古文：怀光屯咸阳，坚壁八十余日，不肯出军，德宗忧之，屡降中使，促以收复之期。
现代文：李怀光驻军咸阳，扎营八十多天，不肯进军，唐德宗担心，多次派出宫中使者，催问出兵日期。
English: Li Huai Guang garrisoned Xianyang, camped for more than eighty days, and refused to march. Tang Dezong was worried and repeatedly sent emissaries from the palace to inquire about the date of dispatch.

古文：怀光托以卒疲，更请休息，以伺其便，然阴与硃泚交通，其迹渐露。
现代文：李怀光借口兵将劳累，不断请求休整，以等待时机，但偷偷与朱氵此往来，逐渐被人知道了。
English: Li Huaguang used the excuse that the soldiers would be overworked and constantly asked for a break to wait for the right time, but his secret dealings with Zhu Xi gradually became known.

古文：晟惧为所亻并，乃密疏请移军东渭桥，以分贼势。
现代文：李晟怕被他吞并，就秘密奏本请求移驻东渭桥以分散叛军兵力。
English: Fearing that it would be annexed by him, Li Qiye secretly requested to be moved to Dongluqiao to disperse the rebel forces.

古文：上初未之许。
现代文：皇帝开始不同意。
English: The emperor began to disagree.

古文：晟以怀光反状已明，缓急宜有所备。蜀、汉之路，不可壅也，请以裨将赵光铣为洋州刺史，唐良臣为利州刺史，晟子婿张彧为剑州刺史，各将兵五百以防未然。
现代文：李晟因李怀光反叛迹象已经明显，应有应急准备，通往蜀地、汉中的道路，不能堵塞，请求派部将赵光铣任洋州刺史、唐良臣任利州刺史、李晟女婿张任剑州刺史，各率兵五百防患于未然。
English: Since the signs of Li Huai-kuang's rebellion were already obvious, Li Hongzhi should have made emergency preparations. The roads leading to Shu and Hanzhong should not be blocked. He requested the faction to appoint Zhao Guangyong as the governor of Yangzhou, Tang Liangcheng as the governor of Lishu, and Li Hongzhi's son-in-law Zhang Ren as the governor of Jianzhou. Each faction should lead 500 soldiers to prevent problems in advance.

古文：上初纳之，未果行。
现代文：皇帝开始答应了，但没实施。
English: The emperor initially agreed, but did not go through with it.

古文：无何，吐蕃请以兵佐诛泚，上欲亲总六师，移幸咸阳，以促诸军进讨。
现代文：不久，吐蕃请求派兵帮助讨平朱氵此，皇帝想亲率唐军，驾临咸阳，以催促各军进击。
English: Soon, Tubo requested to send troops to help pacify Zhu Xi. Therefore, the emperor wanted to personally lead the Tang army to Xianyang to urge the army to attack.

古文：怀光闻之大骇，疑上夺其军，谋乱益急。
现代文：李怀光得知后大惊，怀疑皇帝要夺他的兵权，就加速谋反。
English: When Li Huai Guang learned of this, he was shocked. Suspecting that the emperor wanted to seize his military power, he hastened to rebel.

古文：时鄜坊节度李建徽、神策将杨惠元及晟，并与怀光联营，晟以事迫，会有中使过晟军，晟乃宣令云： 奉诏徙屯渭桥。 
现代文：当时坊节度李建徽、神策军将领阳惠元和李晟，都和李怀光一起扎营，李晟因形势紧急，碰到有宫中使者从军中路过，李晟就宣布说： 奉旨移驻渭桥。 
English: At that time, Li Jianhui, the commander of the Fang Festival, Yang Huiyuan, the general of the Shen Zhe Army, and Li Xuan, all camped together with Li Huai Guang. Li Xuan, due to the urgent situation, encountered a messenger from the palace passing through the army. Li Xuan announced, "I have been ordered to move to Longqiao."

古文：乃结阵而行，至渭桥。
现代文：于是列阵而去，到了渭桥。
English: So they marched in formation and arrived at the bridge.

古文：不数日，怀光果劫建徽、惠元而亻并其兵，建徽遁免，惠元为怀光所害。
现代文：没过几天，李怀光果然劫持李建徽、阳惠元并吞并了他们的军队，李建徽逃了出来，阳惠元被李怀光杀害了。
English: A few days later, Li Huaiguang kidnapped Li Jianhui and Yang Huiyuan and annexed their armies. Li Jianhui escaped and Yang Huiyuan was killed by Li Huaiguang.

古文：是日，车驾幸梁州。
现代文：这天，皇帝逃向梁州。
English: On this day, the emperor fled to Liangzhou.

古文：时变生仓卒，百官扈从者十二三，骆谷道路险阻，储供无素，从官乏食，上叹曰： 早从李晟之言，三蜀可坐致也。 
现代文：当时事变发生突然，跟随皇帝的大臣只有十分之二三，骆谷路险难行，供给没有保障，随从官员缺粮，皇帝叹气说： 早听李晟的话，蜀地可轻松抵达。 
English: At that time, the incident occurred suddenly, only two-thirds of the ministers followed the emperor, the Luogu Road was dangerous and difficult to travel, the supply was not guaranteed, and the officials followed by the officials were short of grain. The emperor sighed and said, "Listening to Li Qian's words, Shu can be easily reached."

古文：晟大将张少弘自行在传口诏授晟尚书左仆射、同中书门下平章事，以安众心。
现代文：李晟大将张少弘从皇帝驻地传口头命令任命李晟为尚书左仆射、同中书门下平章事，以使部队安心。
English: In order to make the troops feel at ease, the Emperor sent a verbal order to the Generalissimo Zhang Shaohong to appoint Li Qian as the left-hand man of Shangshu and the right-hand man of Dongzhong in order to reassure the troops.

古文：晟拜哭受命，且曰： 长安宗庙所在，为天下本，若皆执羁靮，谁复京师？ 
现代文：李晟哭着跪拜接受任命，并说： 长安是皇帝祖庙所在地，是天下的根本，如果都跟皇上去了，谁收复京城呢？ 
English: Li Wei cried and kneeled to accept the appointment, and said: Chang'an is the location of the emperor's ancestral temple, and is the foundation of the world. If everyone followed the emperor, who would recover the capital?

古文：乃浚城隍，缮兵甲，以图收复。
现代文：于是疏浚护城河，修理兵器甲胄，为收复京城做准备。
English: As a result, the moat was dredged, armour was repaired, and preparations were made for the recapture of the capital.

古文：晟以孤军独当强寇，恐为二贼之所亻并，乃卑词厚币，伪致诚于怀光，外示推崇，内为之备。
现代文：李晟因孤军与强敌对垒，怕两支敌军合力进攻，就用好话重礼，假装和李怀光拉关系，表面崇敬，暗地戒备。
English: Because of the isolated army and the strong enemy barrier, Li Yu was afraid that the two enemy armies would attack together, so he used good words to repay the compliment, pretended to have a relationship with Li Huai Guang, respected on the surface, and was secretly on guard.

古文：时刍粟未集，乃令检校户部郎中张彧假京兆少尹，择官吏以赋渭北畿县。
现代文：当时粮草不多，他就命令检校户部郎中张代理京兆少尹，选拔官吏在渭北郊县收赋税。
English: At that time, there was not much grain and grass, so he ordered Zhang Langzhong, the deputy of the Household Inspection Department, and Jing Zhaoshao Yin, the elected official, to collect taxes in the northern suburbs of Handan.

古文：不旬日，刍粮皆足，晟乃大陈三军，令之曰： 国家多难，乱逆继兴，属车驾西幸，关中无主。
现代文：不到十天，粮草都备足了，李晟就集合军队，对他们说： 国家多次蒙难，叛乱接连发生，眼下皇上避难西去，关中无人主持。
English: In less than ten days, the grain and grass were all ready, and Li Lan gathered the army and said to them: The country has suffered many hardships, rebellions have occurred one after another, and now the emperor has fled to the west, and there is no one to preside over the gate.

古文：予代受国恩，见危死节，臣子之分，况当此时，不能诛灭凶渠，以取富贵，非人豪也。
现代文：我世代受国家恩典，在危难时献身，是臣子的本份，何况在这种时候，如不能杀死贼首，以建功名，不是英雄。
English: My generation has been blessed by the state, and it is the duty of a courtier to sacrifice himself in times of danger. Moreover, in such times, if you cannot kill a thief's head, it is to build a reputation, not to be a hero.

古文：渭桥横跨大川，断贼首尾，吾与公等戮力勤王，择利而进，兴复大业，建不世之功，能从我乎？ 
现代文：渭桥横跨大江，隔断叛贼，我愿和你们合力报效皇上，选择有利时机进军，复兴唐朝，建立少有的大功，你们愿意听从我吗？ 
English: To build a bridge across the Yangtze River and cut off the traitors, I am willing to work with you to repay the emperor, choose a favorable time to march, revive the Tang Dynasty, and establish a rare great achievement. Will you listen to me?

古文：三军无不泣下，曰： 唯公所使。 
现代文：全军都振奋流泪，说道： 听您吩咐。 
English: The whole army was moved to tears and said, "Do as you say."

古文：晟亦歔欷流涕。
现代文：李晟也哽咽流泪。
English: Li Yan also choked back tears.

古文：是时，硃泚盗据京城，怀光图为反噬，河朔僭伪者三，李纳虎视于河南，希烈鸱张于汴、郑。
现代文：这时，朱氵此占据长安，李怀光阴谋吞并李晟，河北有三处叛贼，李纳盘踞河南，李希烈割据汴州、郑州。
English: At this time, Zhu Rong occupied Chang'an, Li Huaiguang plotted to annex Li Gan, there were three traitors in Hebei, Li Na occupied Henan, and Li Xilai occupied Ganzhou and Zhengzhou.

古文：晟内无货财，外无转输，以孤军而抗剧贼，而锐气不衰，徒以忠义感于人心，故英豪归向。
现代文：李晟内无财宝，外无供给，率孤军抗强敌，斗志不减，全靠忠义感动人心，所以英雄豪杰都归附他。
English: Li Hongzhi had no treasure at home and no supplies abroad, he led a lone army against a strong enemy, his fighting spirit did not diminish, and he moved people's hearts entirely by his loyalty. Therefore, heroes and heroines all belonged to him.

古文：戴休颜率奉天之众，韩游瑰治邠宁之师，骆元光以华州之兵守潼关，尚可孤以神策之旅屯七盘，皆禀晟节度，晟军大振。
现代文：戴休颜率领奉天军队，韩游腢统率宁军队，骆元光率领华州军队把守潼关，尚可孤率神策军驻守七盘，都听李晟指挥，李晟军威很盛。
English: Dai Xiuyan led the army of Feng Tian, Han Yu Shun led the army of Ning, Luo Yuanguang led the army of Huazhou to guard Shuguang, Shang Ke alone led the army of Shen Zhao to garrison Qipan, all under the command of Li Qian, Li Qian's military prestige was very prosperous.

古文：怀光以休颜、游瑰从晟，益惧。
现代文：李怀光因戴休颜、韩游腢服从李晟，更害怕了。
English: Li Huaiguang was even more afraid because he was wearing a mourning face and Han Youjun was obeying Li Xuan.

古文：晟又致书于怀光，谕以祸福，令破贼迎銮，以掩前过。
现代文：李晟又送信给李怀光，以祸福相劝，要他打败朱氵此接回皇帝，将功抵过。
English: Li Yu also sent a letter to Li Huai Guang, urging him to defeat Zhu Xi and take back the emperor.

古文：怀光卒不悟，军众渐多离散，糗粮且竭，虏剽无所得，惧为晟所袭。
现代文：李怀光最终不肯改变，军队逃散的渐渐多了，军粮也快光了。掳掠不到粮食，又怕遭到李晟的袭击。
English: In the end, Li Huaiguang refused to change, the army gradually dispersed more and more, and the army rations were running out. There was no food to loot, and they were afraid of being attacked by Li Yao.

古文：三月，怀光自三原、富平东抵奉天，所至焚掠，乃自冯翊入据河中。
现代文：这年三月，李怀光从三原、富平东行开往奉先，所到处放火抢劫，又从冯翊进占河中。
English: In March of this year, Li Huaiguang drove from Mihara and Fuping eastward to Fengxian, where he set fire and robbed everywhere, and from Fengxian to Zhanhe.

古文：怀光将孟涉、段威勇者，本神策将，恶怀光之不臣，既至富平，结阵于军中，外向大呼而去，怀光不能制。
现代文：李怀光部将孟涉、段威勇，本是神策军将领，对李怀光反叛不满，到富平后，在军营中列阵，高喊着向外离去，李怀光不能制止。
English: Meng Wanzhou and Duan Weiyong from Li Huai Guang's department, who were originally the generals of the Shen Zhe Army, were dissatisfied with Li Huai Guang's rebellion. After arriving in Fuping, they lined up in the military camp, shouting and leaving, and Li Huai Guang could not stop them.

古文：涉、威勇以数千人归晟，乃陈兵受涉等降卒，乃奏授涉检校工部尚书，威勇兼御史大夫。
现代文：孟涉、段威勇率几千人归附李晟，李晟列阵接受孟涉等人的降军，于是奏本封孟涉为检校工部尚书，段威勇兼任御史大夫。
English: Meng Zhan and Duan Weiyong led several thousand people to join Li Gan, and Li Gan accepted the withdrawal of Meng Zhan and others. Therefore, Meng Zhan was appointed as the inspector of the inspection department, and Duan Weiyong also served as the chief historian.

古文：德宗之幸山南，既入骆谷，谓浑瑊曰： 渭桥在贼腹内，兵势悬隔，李晟可办事乎？ 
现代文：唐德宗向山南进发，已进入骆谷，对浑王咸说： 渭桥在叛军腹地，兵力悬殊，李晟能成功吗？ 
English: Tang Dezong marched to the south of Shanshan and entered Luogu. He said to Hun Wang Xian, "Fengqiao is in the heartland of the rebels. There is a great disparity in the number of soldiers. Can Li Jun succeed?

古文：瑊对曰： 李晟秉义执志，临事不可夺，以臣计之，破贼必矣。 
现代文：浑王咸答道： 李晟忠诚坚毅，遇事有主见，依我看来，一定能打败叛军。 
English: Hun Wang Xian replied, "Li Qian is loyal and steadfast, and has his own opinions in times of trouble. In my opinion, he will surely defeat the rebels.

古文：帝意始安。
现代文：皇帝心里才安稳了。
English: Only then did the emperor feel at ease.

古文：是月，浑瑊步将上官望自间道怀诏书加晟检校右仆射，兼河中尹、河中晋绛慈隰节度使，益实封三百户，又兼京畿、渭北、鄜坊丹延节度招讨使。
现代文：这月里，浑王咸的步兵将领上官望从小路带诏令加封李晟为检校右仆射、兼任河中府尹、河中晋绛慈隰节度使，增食实封三百户，又兼任京畿、渭北、坊丹延节度招讨使。
English: In this month, the infantry general led by Hun Wang Xian ordered the superior officer Wang Conglu to appoint Li Qian as the right-hand man of the school inspection, and also served as the festival envoy of Yin of Hechu Prefecture, Jinqian of Hechu Province, Cixi of Hechu Province, increased the food supply of 300 households, and also served as the festival envoy of Gyeonggi Province, North Gyeongsang Province, and Danyang Province.

古文：晟承诏流涕。
现代文：李晟接诏流下了眼泪。
English: Li Xizhe shed tears after the performance.

古文：时帝欲移幸西川，晟上表： 请驻跸梁汉，系亿兆之心，图翦灭之势。
现代文：当时皇帝想转移到西川去，李晟奏本说： 请坐镇梁州汉中，维持天下百姓的信心，摆出收复京城的态势。
English: At that time, the emperor wanted to move to Xichuan. Li Shuxuan said: Please sit in the town of Liangzhou, Hanzhong, maintain the confidence of the people around the world, and set up a situation to recover the capital.

古文：若规小舍大，作都岷峨，即人心失望，武士谋臣无所施矣。 
现代文：如偏居一角放弃全局，建都蜀地，就会使民心失望，武将谋臣无法施展了。 
English: If one side abandons the overall situation and builds the capital in Shu, it will disappoint the people's hearts, and the generals and advisors will not be able to exert themselves.

古文：四月，有诏加晟京畿、渭北、鄜坊、商华兵马副元帅。
现代文：这年四月，有诏加封李晟为京畿、渭北、坊、商、华兵马副元帅。
English: In April of that year, an imperial edict was issued to promote Li Jun to vice marshal of the Gyeonggi, North Gyeongsang, Fong, Shang, and Chinese armies and horses.

古文：时京兆府司录李敬仲自京城来，谏议大夫郑云逵自奉天至，晟以京兆少尹张彧为副使，郑云逵为行军司马，李敬仲为节度判官，俾同主军画。
现代文：当时京兆府司录李敬仲从长安逃来，谏议大夫郑云逵从奉天到来，李晟任命京兆少尹张任副使，郑云逵任行军司马，李敬仲任节度判官，让他们一同决定军事谋略。
English: At that time, Li Jingzhong, the secretary of the Beijing Zhao Prefecture, fled from Chang'an, and Zheng Yunxuan, the doctor of consultation, came from Mingtian. Li Jing appointed Jing Zhao Shao Yin Zhang as the deputy envoy, Zheng Yunxuan as the marshal, and Li Jingzhong as the judge of the festival, so that they could decide the military strategy together.

古文：又请以怀光旧将唐良臣保潼关，以河中节度授之；戴休颜守奉天，请以鄜坊节度授之；上皆从之。
现代文：又请求安排过去李怀光的部将唐良臣驻守潼关，封为河中节度使，戴休颜驻守奉天，请求封为坊节度使，皇帝都采纳了。
English: He also requested to arrange for Li Huai Guang's former minister, Tang Liangchen, to be stationed in Shaoguan, to be appointed as the envoy to the Mid-Hebei Festival, and for Dai Xiuyan to be stationed in Fengtian, and to be appointed as the envoy to the Mid-Hebei Festival. The emperor accepted all of these requests.

古文：渭桥旧有粟十余万斛，度支先馈怀光军欲尽，晟又奏曰： 近畿虽乘兵乱，犹可赋敛，傥寇贼未灭，宿兵旷时，人废耕桑，又无储蓄，非防微制胜之术也。 
现代文：渭桥过去有十多万斛粮食，度支郎中以前供应李怀光军快用完了，李晟又奏本说： 京畿道虽遭兵祸，还能收赋税，如叛贼一时不能消灭，长期用兵，人民不能耕耘，又没积蓄，这不是防患取胜的办法。 
English: There used to be more than one hundred thousand baht of grain in Jianqiao. Before the middle of Duji Lang, the supply of Li Huai Guang's army was almost exhausted. Li Jian also wrote: Although Gyeonggi Province has suffered a military disaster, it can still collect taxes. If the traitors cannot be eliminated for a while and soldiers are used for a long time, the people cannot cultivate and have no savings, this is not a way to prevent trouble and win.

古文：上纳之。
现代文：皇帝采纳了这意见。
English: The Emperor accepted their suggestion.

古文：晟乃于畿甸率聚征赋，吏民乐输，守御益固，由是军不乏食。
现代文：李晟就在京畿道所有村邑征收赋税，官吏百姓都乐意交纳，这样防御就更稳固，从此军队不缺粮食了。
English: Ri Son levied taxes on all villages and towns in Gyeonggi Province, and the officials and people were willing to pay, so the defense was more stable, and the army was no longer short of food.

古文：神策军家族多陷于泚，晟家亦百口在贼中，左右或有言及家者，晟因泣下曰： 乘舆何在，而敢恤家乎！ 
现代文：神策军的家人多陷在朱氵此控制地区，李晟家里也有一百人在敌占区，侍从有谈到家的，李晟就流泪说： 皇上蒙难，我们还敢顾家吗？ 
English: Most of the Shenshejun's family members were trapped in Zhu Xi's area of control. Li Qiye's family also had a hundred people in the enemy-occupied area. When the attendant talked about home, Li Qiye shed tears and said: The emperor is in trouble, do we still dare to take care of our home?

古文：泚又使晟小吏王无忌之婿诣晟军，且曰： 公家无恙，城中有书闻。 
现代文：朱氵此又派李晟手下小官王无忌的女婿到李晟军中，并对李晟说： 你家没事，城中有信来。 
English: Zhu Xi also sent the son-in-law of Li Xi's subordinate minor official Wang Mujing to Li Xi's army, and said to Li Xi: Your family is fine, there is a letter from the city.

古文：晟曰： 尔敢与贼为间！ 
现代文：李晟说： 你敢为叛贼做奸细！ 
English: Li Yan said, "You dare to be a traitor's spy!

古文：遽命斩之。
现代文：立刻下令杀了他。
English: He immediately gave the order to kill him.

古文：时转输不至，盛夏军士或衣裘褐，晟亦同劳苦，每以大义奋激士心，卒无离叛者。
现代文：当时补给未到，盛夏兵将有的还穿着厚衣，李晟也和他们同样辛劳艰苦，常用忠义激励军心，故始终无人叛离。
English: At that time, supplies had not arrived, and some of the Midsummer soldiers were still wearing heavy coats. Li Xi also worked just as hard as they did, and often used loyalty to inspire the military spirit, so no one ever defected.

古文：会将吏数辈自贼中逃来，言泚众携离可灭之状，士心益奋。
现代文：有几个将领和官员从叛贼中逃出，说朱氵此军队分裂可以消灭的情况，军心更加振奋。
English: Several generals and officials escaped from the traitors, saying that Zhu Xi's situation that the division of the army can be eliminated, the military spirit is more excited.

古文：先是，贼将姚令言及伪中丞崔宣咸使谍觇我军，为逻骑所得，拘送于晟，晟解缚，食而遣之，诫之曰： 尔报崔宣，善为贼守，诸人勉力自固，勿不忠于贼也！ 
现代文：此前叛军将领姚令言和叛贼中丞崔宣都派探子刺探唐军情况，被巡逻骑兵抓获，押送给李晟，李晟解开捆绑他们的绳索，供饭吃后打发他们走，对他们说： 你们告诉崔宣，好好给叛贼防守，其他人也应努力坚守，不要不忠于叛贼！ 
English: Previously, the rebel general Yao Lingyan and the renegade lieutenant general Cui Xuan both sent spies to spy on the situation of the Tang army. They were captured by the patrol cavalry and escorted to Li Qian. Li Qian untied the ropes binding them, fed them and sent them away, saying to them: You tell Cui Xian to defend the traitors well, and the others should also work hard to stick to it, and not be disloyal to the traitors!

古文：五月三日，晟引军抵通化门，耀武而还，贼不敢出。
现代文：五月三日，李晟率军抵达通化门，显示兵力后返回，叛军不敢出击。
English: On May 3, Li Lan and his army arrived at Tonghua Gate, showed their strength and then returned. The rebels did not dare to attack.

古文：晨集将佐，图兵所向，诸将曰： 先拔外城，既有市里，然后北清宫阙。 
现代文：次日召集将领，商量军队进攻方向，众将说： 先攻外城，占有街市，然后北攻宫殿。 
English: The next day, the generals were summoned to discuss the direction of the army's attack. The generals said: First attack the outer city, occupy the streets, and then attack the palace to the north.

古文：晟曰： 若先收坊市，巷陌隘狭，间以居人，若贼设伏格斗，百姓嚣溃，非计也。
现代文：李晟说： 如先攻街市，街巷狭窄，中有居民，叛军如埋伏巷战，居民哭乱，这不是好办法。
English: Li Wei said: If you attack the streets first, the streets are narrow, there are residents, the rebels will ambush the street battle, and the residents will cry, this is not a good way.

古文：且贼重兵坚甲，皆在苑中，若自苑击其心腹，彼将图走不暇，如此则宫阙保安，市不易肆，计之上也。 诸将曰： 善 。
现代文：叛军的精兵强将，都在宫苑，如从宫苑攻击他们的心脏，他们将只顾逃跑，这样宫殿能保全，街市无破坏，这是上策。 众将都说： 好主意。 
English: The best generals of the rebel army are in the palace, and if their hearts are attacked from the palace, they will only run away, so that the palace can be preserved and the streets can not be destroyed, which is the best strategy.

古文：乃移书瑊、骆元光、尚可孤，克期进军于城下。
现代文：于是送信给浑王咸、骆元光、尚可孤，约期进兵长安城下。
English: Therefore, they sent letters to Hun Wang Xian, Luo Yuan Guang, and Shang Ke Guo to make an appointment to march into Chang'an City.

古文：其月二十五日夜，晟自东渭桥移军于光泰门外米仓村，以薄京城。
现代文：这月二十五日夜里，李晟从东渭桥进兵到光泰门外的米仓村，威逼长安。
English: On the night of the 25th day of this month, Li Yu marched from Donglu Bridge to Yicang Village outside Guangtai Gate, threatening Chang'an.

古文：晟临高指麾，令设壕栅以候贼军。
现代文：李晟登高指挥，命挖壕沟设栅栏防备敌军进攻。
English: Li Yu ascended to the high command, dug a trench and set up a fence to prevent the enemy from attacking.

古文：俄而贼众大至，贼骁将张庭芝、李希倩逼栅求战，晟谓诸将曰： 吾恐贼不出，今冒死而来，天赞我也！ 
现代文：不久大批叛军涌来，叛军猛将张庭芝、李希倩逼近营垒挑战，李晟对众将说： 我担心叛贼不出来，现送死前来，是上天助我！ 
English: Soon, a large number of rebels poured in. The rebels forced Zhang Tianzhi and Li Xizhe to approach the camp and challenge them. Li Xizhe said to the generals: "I'm afraid the traitors won't come out, so I'm coming here to die. Heaven help me!"

古文：勒吴诜、康英俊、史万顷、孟涉等纵兵击之。
现代文：于是指挥吴诜、康英俊、史万顷、孟涉等出兵攻击敌军。
English: Therefore, commanders Wu Xi, Kang Yingjun, Shi Wanhao, Meng Wanzhong and others sent troops to attack the enemy.

古文：时华州营在北，兵少，贼亻并力攻之，晟遣李演、孟华以精卒救之。
现代文：当时华州军营在北面，军队少，叛军合力进攻他们，李晟派李演、孟华率精兵援救他们。
English: At that time, the Huazhou army camp was in the north, the army was small, and the rebels attacked them together. Li Lan sent Li Yuan and Meng Hua to rescue them.

古文：中军鼓噪，演力战，大破之，乘胜入光泰门；再战，又败之，僵尸蔽地，余众走入白华，夜闻恸哭之声。
现代文：大营击鼓呐喊，李演奋力拼杀，大败叛军，乘胜攻进光泰门；叛军再来接战，又被打败，叛军死尸遍地，残兵逃进白华，夜里还听见痛哭声。
English: The battalion drums and shouts, Li Yan fights hard, defeats the rebels, and takes advantage of the victory to attack Guangtaimen; the rebels fight again, and are defeated again, the rebels' dead bodies are all over the place, the remnants of the soldiers escape into Baihua, and in the night they still hear the cries of pain.

古文：翌日，将复出师，诸将请待西军至，则左右夹攻。
现代文：第二天，李晟想再出兵，众将请求等待西边军队到来，可以左右夹攻。
English: The next day, when Li Qiye wanted to send troops again, the people would ask him to wait for the western army to arrive, so that they could attack from both sides.

古文：晟曰： 贼既伤败，须乘胜扑灭，若俟其有备，岂王师之利耶！
现代文：李晟说： 叛军已被打败，应乘胜消灭，如等他们做好准备，难道对我军有利吗！
English: Li Wei said: The rebels have been defeated and should be wiped out by taking advantage of the victory. If they wait until they are ready, will it be beneficial to our army?

古文：如待西军，恐失机便。 
现代文：如等待西边的军队，怕失掉战机。 
English: If you wait for the army in the west, you may lose your fighter plane.

古文：二十八日，晟大集诸将骆元光、尚可孤，兵马使吴诜、王佖，都虞候邢君牙、李演、史万顷，神策将孟涉、康英俊，华州将郭审金、权文成，商州将彭元俊等，号令誓师毕，陈兵于光泰门外。
现代文：二十八日，李晟召集众将骆元光、尚可孤，兵马使吴诜、王亻必，都虞候邢君牙、李演、史万顷，神策将孟涉、康英俊，华州将领郭审金、权文成，商州将领彭元俊等，发令宣誓完毕，在光泰门外列阵。
English: On the 28th, Li Qiye called together generals Luo Yuanguang and Shang Keqiao, soldiers and envoys Wu Gan and Wang Qibing, governors Wu Junya, Li Yuan and Shi Wanhao, strategists Meng Zhan and Kang Yingjun, Huazhou generals Guo Si Jin and Quan Wencheng, and Shangzhou general Peng Yingjun, etc. After issuing the oath, they lined up outside the Guang Tai Gate.

古文：乃使王佖、李演率骑军，史万顷领步卒，直抵苑墙神麚村。
现代文：派王亻必、李演带骑兵，史万顷领步兵。直冲神颭村宫苑墙。
English: He sent Wang Zhibi and Li Yuan with cavalry, and Shi Wanhao with infantry. They charged straight at the palace wall of Shenshan Village.

古文：晟先是夜使人开苑墙二百余步，至是贼已树木栅之，贼倚栅拒战。
现代文：李晟此前夜里已派人拆开苑墙两百多步宽，到这时叛军已设木栅拦死了，叛军依靠木栅抵抗。
English: The night before, Li Qiye had sent someone to tear down the garden wall more than two hundred paces wide. By this time, the rebels had set up a wooden grate to stop them. The rebels relied on the wooden grate to resist.

古文：晟叱军士曰： 安得纵贼如此，当先斩公等！ 
现代文：李晟训斥军官说： 怎能让叛军这样，我要先杀了你们！ 
English: Li Lan reprimanded the officers and said, "How can you let the rebels leave like this, I'll kill you first!"

古文：万顷惧，先登，拔栅而入，王佖骑军继进，贼即奔溃，获贼将段诚谏，大军分道并入，鼓噪雷动。
现代文：史万顷害怕了，抢先攀登，拆除栅栏冲了进去，王亻必率骑兵跟进，叛军立刻溃逃，抓获了叛军将领段诚谏，大部队分路同时攻入，击鼓呐喊声像打雷一样。
English: Shi Wanhao was scared, climbed ahead of time, dismantled the fence and rushed in, Wang Xi led the cavalry to follow, the rebels immediately fled, captured the rebel general Duan Chengyao, the large force broke into the road at the same time, and the drumming and shouting sounded like thunder.

古文：姚令言、张庭芝、李希倩犹力捍官军，晟令决胜军使唐良臣、兵马使赵光铣、杨万荣、孟日华等步骑齐进，贼军阵成而屡北。
现代文：姚令言、张庭芝、李希倩还拼命抵抗唐军，李晟命决胜军使唐良臣，兵马使赵光铣、杨万荣、孟日华等步骑兵一起进攻，叛军列阵后屡次战败。
English: Yao Lingyan, Zhang Tingzhi, and Li Xizhe also desperately resisted the Tang army. Li Xizhe's decisive army made Tang Liangcheng, soldiers and horses made Zhao Guangya, Yang Wanrong, Meng Rihwa and other infantry cavalry attack together. The rebels were repeatedly defeated after lining up.

古文：战十余合，乘胜驱蹙，至于白华。
现代文：接战十多次，李晟乘胜紧追，直到白华。
English: They fought more than ten times, and Li Shujing won and followed closely until Baihua.

古文：忽有贼骑千余出于官军之背，晟以麾下百余骑驰之，左右呼曰： 相公来！ 
现代文：突然有千余敌骑从唐军背后杀出，李晟率帐下百余骑兵冲去，侍卫喊道： 相爷来了！ 
English: Suddenly, more than a thousand enemy cavalrymen rode out from behind the Tang army. Li Xi led more than a hundred cavalrymen under his charge and rushed to the scene. The bodyguard shouted, "My father-in-law is coming!"

古文：贼闻之惊溃，官军追斩，不可胜计。
现代文：叛军听说吓得跑散了，唐军追击，杀敌无数。
English: The rebels were said to have run away in fright. The Tang army chased them down and killed countless of them.

古文：硃泚、姚令言、张庭芝尚有众万人，相率遁走，晟遣田子奇追之，其余凶党相率来降。
现代文：朱氵此、姚令言、张庭芝还有万余军队，相继逃跑，李晟派田子奇追击他们，他们的余党纷纷投降。
English: Zhu Rongguo, Yao Lingyan, Zhang Tingzhi, and more than ten thousand troops fled one after another, Li Qiye sent Tian Ziqi to chase them, and the rest of their party surrendered one after another.

古文：是日，晟军入京城，勒兵屯于含元殿前，晟舍于右金吾仗，仍号令诸军曰 晟实不武，上凭睿算，下赖士心，幸得歼厥凶渠，肃清宫禁，皆三军之力也。
现代文：这天，李晟的部队进入了长安，他指挥军队驻扎在含元殿前面，自己驻右金吾仗，又对驻扎各军发令说： 我其实无武德，上赖皇帝英明，下靠将士忠心，侥幸打败了叛贼，夺回了皇宫，这都是各军将士的功劳。
English: On this day, Li Xi's troops entered Chang'an. He commanded the troops stationed in front of the Hall of Han Yuan. He himself was stationed on the right to fight against King Wu. He also issued orders to the troops stationed there, saying: I actually have no martial virtues, I rely on the emperor's wisdom, I rely on the soldiers' loyalty, I defeated the traitor by chance, and I recaptured the imperial palace. This is all the merit of the soldiers.

古文：长安士庶，久陷贼庭，若小有震惊，则非伐罪吊人之义也。
现代文：京城的百姓，长期受叛贼欺压，如稍有惊扰，就背离了讨伐叛贼拯救人民的宗旨。
English: The people of Beijing, who have long been oppressed by the traitors, have deviated from the purpose of fighting the traitors and saving the people if they are slightly disturbed.

古文：晟与公等各有家室，离别数年，今已成功，相见非晚，五日内不得辄通家信，违命者斩。 
现代文：我和诸位都有家庭，分别几年了，现已胜利，见面不会很远了，五天内不能擅自与家里人联系，违令者斩首。 
English: I and all of you have families. We have been separated for several years, and now we are victorious. We will meet not far away. Within five days, you cannot contact your family members without permission. Violators will be beheaded.

古文：乃遣京兆尹李齐运、摄长安令陈元众、摄万年令韦上亻及告喻百姓，居人安堵，秋毫无所犯。
现代文：又派京兆尹李齐运、代理长安令陈元众、代理万年令韦上亻及安抚居民，因此百姓安居，秋毫无犯。
English: He also sent Jing Zhao, Yin Li, Qi Yun, acting Chang An, Chen Yuanzhu, acting Wan Nian, Wei Shangtao and pacified the residents, so the people lived in peace and did not commit any crimes.

古文：尚可孤军人有擅取贼马者，晟大将高明曜虏贼女妓一人，司马伷取贼马二匹，晟皆立斩之，莫敢忤视。
现代文：尚可孤士兵有擅自掳获敌人马匹的，李晟大将高明曜抢叛贼的乐妓一名，司马亻由抢叛贼的马两匹，李晟马上将他们斩首，没有人敢不满。
English: Some soldiers captured the enemy's horses without permission. General Li Qiye robbed a traitor's prostitute, Sima Qiye robbed two traitor's horses. Li Qiye immediately beheaded them. No one dared to be dissatisfied.

古文：士庶无不感悦，咸歔欷流涕，远坊居人，亦有经宿方知者。
现代文：官吏民众都感动喜悦，赞叹落泪，住在偏街的居民，有的隔天才知道光复了。
English: Government officials and the public were moved to joy, admiration and tears, and residents living in side streets only learned of the liberation the next day.

古文：二十九日，令孟涉屯于白华，尚可孤屯望仙门，骆元光屯章敬寺，晟自屯于安国寺。
现代文：二十九日，李晟命孟涉驻军白华，尚可孤驻军望仙门，骆元光驻军章敬寺，自己驻军安国寺。
English: On the 29th, Li Yanmei Meng waded into the Baihua garrison, but he could only garrison the Wuxianmen, Luo Yuanguang garrisoned the Zhangjing Temple, and he himself garrisoned the Anguo Temple.

古文：是日，斩贼将李希倩等八人，徇于市。
现代文：这天，他将叛军将领李希倩等八人斩首，在街上示众。
English: On this day, he beheaded eight people, including the rebel general Li Xiju, and paraded them in the streets.

古文：六月四日，晟破贼露布至梁州，上览之感泣，群臣无不陨涕，因上寿称万岁，奏曰： 李晟虔奉圣谟，荡涤凶丑。
现代文：六月四日，李晟打败叛军的报告送到了梁州，皇帝看后感动落泪，百官没有不哭的，都贺喜高呼万岁，并上奏说： 李晟听从皇帝命令，歼灭了叛贼。
English: On June 4, Li Hongzhi's report on defeating the rebels was sent to Liangzhou. The emperor was moved to tears after reading it. There was not a single official who did not cry. They all shouted "Long live Li Hongzhi" and recited: Li Hongzhi obeyed the emperor's order and annihilated the traitors.

古文：然古之树勋，力复都邑者，往往有之；至于不惊宗庙，不易市肆，长安人不识旗鼓，安堵如初，自三代以来，未之有也。 
现代文：古代建立功勋、收复京城的，不断有人；但不惊动皇帝宗庙，不扰集市，京城人民不遭战乱安居如旧，从夏、商、周以来还没有这样的事。 
English: In ancient times, people were constantly making efforts to establish meritorious deeds and recover the capital city. However, they did not disturb the emperor's ancestral temple, did not disturb the market, and the people of the capital city did not suffer from war and lived peacefully as before. There has not been such a thing since the summer, merchants, and Zhou.

古文：上曰： 天生李晟，为社稷万人，不为朕也。 
现代文：皇帝说： 上天降生李晟，是为了国家人民，不光为我。 
English: The emperor said, "God gave birth to Li Qiming for the sake of the people of the country, not just for me.

古文：百官拜贺而退。
现代文：群臣跪拜祝贺后退下。
English: The courtiers kneeled in congratulation and retreated.

古文：是日，晟斩伪相李忠臣、张光晟、蒋镇、乔琳、洪经纶、崔宣等，又表守臣节不屈于贼者程镇之、刘乃、蒋沇、赵晔、薛岌等。
现代文：这天，李晟将叛贼宰相李忠臣、张光晟、蒋镇、乔琳、洪经纶、崔宣等斩首，又表彰谨守臣子节操不向叛贼屈服的程镇之、刘、蒋氵允、赵晔、薛岌等人。
English: On this day, Li Qiye beheaded the renegade prime ministers Li Zhongcheng, Zhang Guangyao, Jiang Zhen, Qiaolin, Hong Jingyao, Cui Xuan and others, and also commended Cheng Zhenzhi, Liu, Jiang Qiyun, Zhao Zhen, Xue Bi and others who respected the vassals' discipline and did not give in to the traitors.

古文：晟初屯渭桥时，荧惑守岁，久之方退，宾介或劝曰： 今荧惑已退，皇家之利也，可速用兵。 
现代文：李晟当初驻兵东渭桥时，火星出现在岁星附近，很久才移开，有幕僚将佐劝道： 现火星已经移开，天象对国家有利，可赶快进军。 
English: When Li Qiye was stationed at Dongluo Bridge, Mars appeared near the year star, and it took a long time to move away. A staff member advised the vice marshal: Now that Mars has moved away, the celestial phenomenon is beneficial to the country, and you can quickly march into the army.

古文：晟曰： 天子外次，人臣但当死节，垂象玄远，吾安知天道耶！ 
现代文：李晟说： 皇上蒙难出京，臣下只应尽忠，天象莫测，我怎知天象规律呢？ 
English: Li Wei said: If the emperor is forced to leave Beijing, his vassals should only be loyal. The heavenly bodies are unpredictable. How can I know the laws of the heavenly bodies?

古文：至是，谓参佐曰： 前者士大夫劝晟出兵，非敢拒也，且军可用之，不可使知之。
现代文：到这时，他对部下说： 以前诸位劝我进兵，不是胆敢拒谏，军队可以指挥，但不能让他们知道得太多。
English: At this time, he said to his subordinates: In the past, you all advised me to join the army, but I did not dare to refuse. You can command the army, but you cannot let them know too much.

古文：尝闻五纬盈缩无准，晟惧复来守岁，则我军不战而自溃。 
现代文：曾听说五个行星运行周期增减不定，我怕火星又出现在岁星附近，那么我军会不战自败。 
English: I have heard that the five planets have irregular periods of increase and decrease. I am afraid that Mars will appear again near the year star, and then our army will be defeated without a fight.

古文：参佐叹服，皆曰： 非所及也。 
现代文：部下赞叹佩服，都说： 这不是我们能想到的。 
English: His subordinates were full of praise and admiration, saying: "This is not something we could have imagined.

古文：寻拜晟司徒，兼中书令，实封一千户。
现代文：不久封李晟为司徒，兼任中书令，封爵食实封一千户。
English: Soon after, Li Qian was made a scholar, concurrently serving as a middle-ranking magistrate, and a thousand households were knighted.

古文：晟综理以备百司，令大将吴诜将兵三千至宝鸡清道，晟又请至凤翔迎扈，不许。
现代文：李晟清理各处为百官做准备，命大将吴诜率兵三千到宝鸡警戒，又请求到凤翔迎接，皇帝不同意。
English: Li Xi cleaned up everywhere to prepare for hundreds of officials. General Wu Xi led three thousand soldiers to Baoji to be on alert, and requested to meet Fengxiang. The emperor did not agree.

古文：七月十三日，德宗至自兴元，浑瑊、韩游瑰、戴休颜以其兵扈从，晟与骆元光、尚可孤以其兵奉迎。时元从禁军及山南、陇州、凤翔之众，步骑凡十余万，旌旗连亘数十里，倾城士庶，夹道欢呼。
现代文：七月十三日，唐德宗从兴元回京，浑王咸、韩游腢、戴休颜率他们的军队迎接。当时原来随驾的禁军和山南、陇州、凤翔的军队，步骑兵共十几万，军旗连绵几十里，全城官民，夹道欢呼。
English: On July 13, Tang Dezong returned to Beijing from Xingyuan with Hun Wangxian, Han Youjun, and Dai Xiuyan leading their armies to welcome him. At that time, the imperial army and the armies of Shannan, Zhangzhou, and Fengxiang, which had originally accompanied him, had a total of more than 100,000 infantry and cavalry, and the military flag stretched for dozens of miles. The whole city, both officials and citizens, cheered.

古文：晟以戎服谒见于三桥，上驻马劳之。
现代文：李晟穿军服在三桥拜见，皇帝停下慰劳他。
English: Wearing his military uniform, Li Qiye paid his respects at Sanqiao. The emperor paused to console him.

古文：晟再拜稽首，初贺元恶殄灭，宗庙再清，宫闱咸肃，抃舞感涕，跪而言曰： 臣忝备爪牙之任，不能早诛妖逆，至銮舆再迁。
现代文：李晟跪拜行礼，先祝贺消灭了叛贼，收复了皇帝宗庙和宫殿，喜极泪下，接着跪着说： 我身为武官，不能早日打败叛贼，致使皇上两次避难。
English: Li Qiye knelt down and bowed before the emperor. First, he congratulated him on eliminating the traitors and recovering the emperor's ancestral temple and palace. With tears of joy, he knelt down and said, "As a military attaché, I could not defeat the traitors as soon as I wanted, so the emperor had to take refuge twice."

古文：及师于城隅，累月方殄贼寇，皆臣庸懦不任职之责，敢请死罪。 
现代文：兵临城下，过几个月才打败叛贼，这都是我无能软弱不称职的过错，请求判处死罪。 
English: I pleaded guilty to the death penalty, saying it was all my fault for being incompetent, weak and incapable of defeating the traitors months after the soldiers entered the city.

古文：伏于路左。
现代文：说完跪伏路边。
English: After that, kneel down by the roadside.

古文：上为之掩涕，命给事中齐映宣旨，令左右起晟于马前。
现代文：皇帝被他感动得落泪，命给事中齐映传令，令侍从在马前扶起李晟。
English: The emperor was moved to tears by him, and ordered the attendant to lift Li Qian in front of the horse.

古文：是月，御殿大赦，赠晟父钦太子太保，母王氏赠代国夫人，赐永崇里第及泾阳上田、延平门之林园、女乐八人。
现代文：这月，皇帝上朝并大赦，封李晟的父亲李钦为太子少保，母亲王氏为代国夫人，赏给永崇里宅院和泾阳的良田、延平门的园林和女乐师八人。
English: This month, the emperor ascended to the throne and granted an amnesty, naming Li Qin, the father of Li Yan, as the youngest prince, and Wang Shi, the mother, as the acting wife of the country. Eight people were awarded to Yongzhongli Residence, Liangyang's Liangtao and Yanpingmen's gardens and female musicians.

古文：入第之日，京兆府供帐酒馔，赐教坊乐具，鼓吹迎导，宰臣节将送之，京师以为荣观。
现代文：住进宅院的那天，京兆府为他陈设摆酒，派出教坊乐队，奏乐迎接开路，宰相大将也去送他，京城认为荣耀。
English: On the day he moved into the mansion, Beijing Zhao Prefecture set up a wine display for him, sent a school band to play music to welcome him, and the Prime Minister also went to see him off. Beijing considered it an honor.

古文：上思晟勋力，制纪功碑，俾皇太子书之，刊石立于东渭桥，与天地悠久，又令太子书碑词以赐晟。
现代文：皇帝怀念李晟的功勋，做了纪功碑，让皇太子写碑文，刻好树在东渭桥，使事迹流传千古，又命皇太子抄写碑词送给李晟。
English: The emperor made a monument to commemorate the exploits of Li Qiye, asked the crown prince to write an inscription and carve a tree on the Donglu Bridge, so that the deeds would be passed down for thousands of years. He also ordered the crown prince to copy the inscription and send it to Li Qiye.

古文：晟以泾州倚边，屡害戎帅，数为乱阶，乃上书请理不用命者，兼备耕以积粟，攘却西蕃，上皆从之。
现代文：李晟因泾州靠近边境，多次杀害主帅、发生兵变，就上书请求追查不服从命令的人，同时屯田储粮，抵御吐蕃，皇帝都批准了。
English: Because Bozhou was close to the border, and there had been repeated killings of commanders and mutinies, Emperor Li Yong approved Li Yong's written request to track down those who disobeyed orders, as well as his request to store grain in remote areas to fend off the Tujia.

古文：诏以晟兼凤翔尹、凤翔陇右节度使，仍充陇右泾原节度，兼管内诸军及四镇、北庭行营兵马副元帅，改封西平郡王。
现代文：下诏任命李晟兼任凤翔尹、凤翔和陇右节度使，并仍任陇右和泾原节度，兼管内储军和四镇、北庭行营兵马副元帅，改封西平郡王。
English: The following edict appointed Li Qian to concurrently serve as Feng Xiangyin, Feng Xiang and Xiang Yu's regent, and still serve as Xiang Yu's and Xiang Yu's regent, and also be in charge of the internal reserve army and the deputy marshal of the four towns and Beiting camp, and changed his title to Xiping County King.

古文：初，帝在奉天，凤翔军乱，杀其帅张镒，立小将李楚琳。
现代文：先前，皇帝在奉天时，凤翔发生兵变，杀了他们的节度使张镒，拥立偏将李楚琳。
English: Previously, when the emperor was in the service of heaven, Fengxiang mutinied, killed their commander Zhang Qian, and supported the general Li Chulin.

古文：至是楚琳在朝，晟请以楚琳俱往凤翔，将诛之，上以初复京师，方安反侧，不许。
现代文：这时李楚琳在朝中，李晟请求押李楚琳同去凤翔，要杀了他，皇帝因为刚收复京城，要让担心的人安心，不批准。
English: At this time, Li Chuling was in the middle of the court. Li Yao requested to arrest Li Chuling and take him to Fengxiang to kill him. The emperor did not approve because he had just recovered the capital and wanted to reassure those who were worried.

古文：八月，晟至凤翔，理杀张镒之罪，斩王斌等十余人。
现代文：八月，李晟到了凤翔，追查杀张镒的罪责，将王斌等十多人斩首。
English: In August, Li Xuan arrived in Fengxiang to investigate the culpability of Zhang Ye's murder, and beheaded more than ten people including Wang Bin.

古文：初，硃泚乱时，泾州亦杀其帅冯河清，立别将田希鉴，方属播迁，不遑讨伐，以泾帅授之。
现代文：早先，朱氵此叛乱时，泾州军也杀了他们的节度使冯河清，拥立另一将领田希鉴，当时皇帝避难，顾不上征讨，就任命他为泾州节度使。
English: Earlier, at the time of Zhu Xi's rebellion, the Zhangzhou army also killed their commander-in-chief, Feng Heqing, and supported another general, Tian Xijian. At that time, the emperor took refuge and appointed him as the Zhangzhou commander-in-chief.

古文：至是，晟奏曰： 近者中原兵祸，皆起泾州，且其地逼西戎，易为反覆。
现代文：到这时，李晟奏本说： 最近关中战乱，都起于泾州，而且它的地域靠近吐蕃，容易反叛。
English: At this time, Li Yongsobon said: The recent Guanzhong war and turmoil all originated in Zhangzhou, and its area is close to Tubo, which is prone to rebellion.

古文：希鉴凶徒，将校骄逆，若不惩革，终为后患。 
现代文：田希鉴凶狠，手下将领骄横不忠，如不惩处改任，最终是今后的祸患。 
English: Tian Xijian is ferocious, his subordinate generals are arrogant and disloyal, and if they are not punished and transferred, it will eventually be a future disaster.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇帝答应了他。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：晟至凤翔，托以巡边，至泾州，希鉴迎谒，于坐执而诛之，并诛害河清者石奇等三十余人，具事以闻。
现代文：李晟到了凤翔，假托巡边，到了泾州，田希鉴迎接拜见，就在帐中把他抓住杀了，又处死杀害冯河清的石奇等三十多人，并详细记录此事汇报。
English: When Li Qian arrived at Fengxiang, he pretended to patrol the border, and when he arrived at Luzhou, Tian Xijian greeted him, and he caught and killed him in the account, and executed more than 30 people including Shiqi, who killed Feng Heqing, and recorded the matter in detail.

古文：上曰： 泾州乱逆泉薮，非晟莫能理之。 
现代文：皇帝说： 泾州是叛逆的源头和巢穴，除李晟没人能肃清！ 
English: The emperor said, "Changzhou is the source and lair of rebellion, and no one can cleanse it but Li Xi!

古文：还镇，表右龙武将军李观为泾原节度使，吐蕃深畏之。
现代文：李晟回到凤翔，上表举荐右龙武将军李观任泾原节度使，吐蕃很怕他。
English: When Li Lan returned to Fengxiang, he recommended the Right Dragon Wu General Li Guanzhong, the former imperial envoy, to the table. Tu Wei was very afraid of him.

古文：晟常曰； 河、陇之陷也，岂吐蕃力取之，皆因将帅贪暴，种落携贰，人不得耕稼，展转东徙，自弃之耳。
现代文：李晟常说： 河州、陇州地区的丢失，并非是吐蕃用军队夺取的，都因我们将领贪婪残暴，部族不安，人民不能安心耕种，陆续东迁，自己丢弃了那里。
English: Li Yizhong said: "The loss of the Hezhou and Zhangzhou regions was not caused by the military conquest of Tibet. It was all due to our leaders' greed and brutality, tribal unrest, and the people's inability to cultivate with peace of mind. They moved eastward one after another and abandoned the regions.

古文：且土无丝絮，人苦征役，思唐之心，岂有已乎！ 
现代文：而且那里不产丝，人们害怕兵役，东归的念头，就无法遏止！ 
English: Moreover, there is no silk production there, people are afraid of military service, and the idea of returning to the East cannot be stopped!

古文：乃倾家财以赏降者，以怀来之。
现代文：于是用全部私财赏赐归降的人，以招抚当地部族。
English: He then used all of his personal wealth to reward those who surrendered, in order to appease the local tribes.

古文：降虏浪息曩，晟奏封王，每蕃使至，晟必置息曩于坐，衣以锦袍、金带以宠异之。
现代文：归降的吐蕃人浪息曩，被李晟奏本封王，每次吐蕃使者来，李晟一定请浪息曩一同会见，让他穿着锦袍、系着金腰带来表示宠爱。
English: The returnee from Tubo, Nausicaä, was played by Li Qiye as a prince. Every time a messenger from Tubo came, Li Qiye would certainly invite Nausicaä to meet with him, and make him wear a brocade robe and a golden sash to show his favor.

古文：蕃人皆相指目，荣羡息曩。
现代文：吐蕃人都互相传告，羡慕浪息曩。
English: The people of Tubo are telling each other that they are envious of the waves.

古文：蕃相尚结赞颇多诈谋，尤恶晟，乃相与议云： 唐之名将，李晟与马燧、浑瑊耳。
现代文：吐蕃宰相尚结赞会设奸计，尤其讨厌李晟，和其他人商量说： 唐朝著名的将领是李晟和马燧、浑王咸。
English: The prime minister of Tubo, Shang Jizan, would plot treachery, and especially hated Li Xi, and discussed with others, saying: The famous generals of the Tang Dynasty were Li Xi, Ma Xi, and Hun Wang Xian.

古文：不去三人，必为我忧。 
现代文：不除掉这三人，必定是我们的祸害。 
English: If we don't get rid of these three, it will be our doom.

古文：乃行反间，遣使因马燧以请和，既和，即请盟，复因盟以虏瑊，因以卖燧。
现代文：于是采用反间计，派使者通过马燧求和，和议达成，就请求结盟，又借结盟之机劫持浑王咸，用这让马燧丢脸。
English: As a result, he resorted to a counter-strategy, sending an envoy to seek peace through Ma Xuan, reaching a peace agreement, requesting an alliance, and using the alliance as an opportunity to kidnap Hun Wang Xian, using this to make Ma Xuan lose face.

古文：贞元二年九月，吐蕃用尚结赞之计，乃大兴兵入陇州，抵凤翔，无所虏掠，且曰： 召我来，何不以牛酒犒劳？ 
现代文：贞元二年九月，吐蕃采用尚结赞的计策，就调大批部队进入陇州，抵达凤翔，并不掳掠，还说： 请我们来，怎么不用酒肉犒劳？ 
English: In September of the second year of Zhengyuan, Tubo, using the strategy of Shang Jizan, sent a large number of troops into Zhangzhou, arrived at Fengxiang, but did not kidnap and plunder, and said: Please come to us, why not use wine and meat?

古文：徐乃引去，持是间晟也。
现代文：慢慢才退兵，用这来离间李晟。
English: Only slowly did he leave the army, and he used this to drive a wedge between Li Yao.

古文：是役也，晟先令衙将王佖选锐兵三千，设伏于汧阳，诫之曰： 蕃军过城下，勿击首尾，首尾纵败，中军力全，若合势攻汝，必受其弊。
现代文：这一次，李晟先派衙将王亻必选精兵三千人，埋伏在氵开阳，告诫他说： 吐蕃兵经过城下时，不要攻前后军，前后军虽被打败，但中军无损，如果他们再合力进攻你，你必然被他们打败。
English: This time, Li Yuxian sent three thousand of Wang Yibei's best soldiers to lie in wait for him in Luo Kaiyang, and warned him: "When the Tu Han soldiers pass under the city, do not attack the front and rear armies. Although the front and rear armies were defeated, the Chinese army was not damaged. If they attack you again, you will certainly be defeated by them.

古文：但俟其前军已过，见五方旗、武豹衣，则其中军也，突其不意，可建奇功。 
现代文：你等他们前军过后，看见举五方旗、穿武豹衣的，就是他们的中军，出其不意，可以立大功。 
English: When you wait for their vanguard to pass, you will see that the ones holding the pentagonal flags and wearing the panther jackets are their middle army. If you catch them by surprise, you can make great achievements.

古文：佖如晟节度，果遇结赞。
现代文：王亻必按李晟的部署，果然和尚结赞遭遇。
English: Wang Yao had to follow Li Yao's plan, and the monk was indeed praised.

古文：及出奋击，贼皆披靡，佖军不识结赞，故结赞仅而获免。
现代文：他出城袭击，吐蕃兵都败逃了，他的兵将不认识尚结赞，因此尚结赞侥幸逃脱了。
English: He went out of the city to attack, and all the soldiers of Tubo were defeated and fled. His soldiers did not know Shang Jizan, so Shang Jizan had a lucky escape.

古文：十月，晟出师袭吐蕃摧沙堡，拔之，斩其堡使扈屈律悉蒙等，自是结赞数遣使乞和。
现代文：十月份，李晟出兵袭击吐蕃摧沙堡，攻克了此地，杀死了守堡将领扈屈律悉蒙等人，从此尚结赞多次派使者求和。
English: In October, Li Yu sent troops to attack the Tuyun Sand Castle, conquered the place, killed the castle's general, Yu QuLu Xi Meng, and others. Since then, Shang Jizan repeatedly sent envoys to sue for peace.

古文：十二月，晟朝京师，奏曰： 戎狄无信，不可许。 
现代文：十二月份，李晟到京城朝拜，上奏说： 吐蕃不讲信用，不能答应。 
English: In December, Li Rong paid a visit to Beijing. He said: "Tu Rong is not trustworthy and cannot be trusted.

古文：宰相韩滉又扶晟议，请调军食以给晟，命将击之。
现代文：宰相韩氵晃也赞同李晟的意见，请求调军队粮食给李晟，派兵进攻吐蕃。
English: Prime Minister Han Kuo-kang also agreed with Li Kuo's opinion and requested that the army's grain be transferred to Li Kuo and that troops be sent to attack Tu Tu.

古文：上方厌兵，疑将帅生事邀功。
现代文：皇帝正不想用兵，怀疑将领贪功惹事。
English: The emperor did not want to use troops, suspecting that the generals were greedy and wanted to cause trouble.

古文：会滉卒，张延赏秉政，与晟有隙，屡于上前间晟，言不可久令典兵。
现代文：碰上韩氵晃去世了，张延赏当权，和李晟有矛盾，多次在皇帝面前说李晟的坏话，并说不能让他长期带兵。
English: When Han Shao-kang died, Zhang Yan appreciated the power, and had a conflict with Li Shao. He repeatedly spoke ill of Li Shao in front of the emperor, and said that he could not let him lead soldiers for a long time.

古文：延赏欲用刘玄佐、李抱真，委以西北边事，俾立功以压晟，德宗竟纳延赏之言，罢晟兵柄。
现代文：张延赏想任命刘玄佐、李抱真，负责西北边境，让他们立功来压倒李晟，唐德宗听了张延赏的话，罢免了李晟的军职。
English: Zhang Yanbo wanted to appoint Liu Xuanzuo and Li Baozhen to be in charge of the northwest border, so that they could make great contributions to overpower Li Jie. Tang Dezong listened to Zhang Yanbo and dismissed Li Jie from his military post.

古文：三年三月，册拜晟为太尉、中书令，奉朝请而已。
现代文：贞元三年三月，封李晟为太尉、中书令，只是上朝请安。
English: In March of the third year of the Zhengyuan era, Li Yao was appointed to the rank of lieutenant general and the position of general secretary of the CPC Central Committee, but he only went to the imperial court to ask for peace.

古文：其年闰五月，浑瑊与尚结赞同盟于平凉，果为蕃兵所劫，瑊单马仅免，将吏皆陷。
现代文：这年闰五月，浑王咸和尚结赞在平凉盟誓，吐蕃果然来劫盟，浑王咸单骑逃脱，同行的将领官员都被抓去了。
English: In leap May of this year, Hun Wang Xian and his monk Jie Zhan swore an oath in Pingliang. However, Tubo actually came to rob the alliance. Hun Wang Xian escaped on a single horse, and his fellow generals and officials were all arrested.

古文：六月，罢河东节度使马燧为司徒，尽中尚结赞之谋。
现代文：六月份，又罢免了河东节度使马燧的军职任命为司徒，全中了尚结赞的计。
English: In June, the Hedong Festival was cancelled again, so that Ma Jun's military post was appointed as a tutor, a plan that was praised by all.

古文：晟既罢兵权，朝谒之外，罕所过从。
现代文：李晟免军职后，上朝之外，很少与人来往。
English: After Li Gan was discharged from the military, he rarely interacted with people outside the Shang Dynasty.

古文：有通王府长史丁琼者，亦为张延赏所排，心怀怨望，乃求见晟言事，且曰： 太尉功业至大，犹罢兵权，自古功高，无有保全者。
现代文：通王府长史丁琼，也遭张延赏排挤，心里怨恨，就请求见面谈话，说道： 您功劳这么大，还被免去了军职，古来功大的人，没能活命的。
English: The governor of Tongwang, Shi Dingqiong, was also ousted by Zhang Yanbo. With resentment in his heart, he asked to meet and talk. He said: You have done such a great service that you have been relieved of your military duties. People who have done great service in the past have not survived.

古文：国家倘有变故，琼愿备左右，狡兔三穴，盍早图之。 
现代文：国家如有变乱，我愿跟随您，狡猾的兔子有多处洞穴，为什么不早做准备？ 
English: If there is turmoil in the country, I would like to follow you, the cunning rabbit has many caves, why not prepare early?

古文：晟怒曰： 尔安得不祥之言！ 
现代文：李晟发怒说： 你哪里听来这不吉利的话！ 
English: Li Yao said angrily, "Where did you hear such unlucky words!

古文：遽执琼以闻。
现代文：马上把丁琼抓起来报告了这事。
English: They immediately arrested Ding Qiong and reported the matter.

古文：四年三月，诏为晟立五庙，以晟高祖芝赠陇州刺史，曾祖嵩赠泽州刺史，祖思恭赠幽州大都督。
现代文：贞元四年三月，下诏给李晟建立五代家祠，追封李晟高祖父李芝为陇州刺史，曾祖父李嵩为泽州刺史，祖父李思恭为幽州大都督。
English: In March of the 4th year of Zhengyuan, he issued an edict to establish a five-generation family shrine for Li Shigao. Li Shigao's grandfather, Li Zhi, was posthumously awarded the title of Zhangzhou Grand Historian, his great-grandfather, Li Song, was awarded the title of Zhezhou Grand Historian, and his grandfather, Li Sijong, was awarded the title of Yuzhou Grand Governor.

古文：庙成，官给牲牢、祭器、床帐，礼官相仪以祔焉。
现代文：祠建成后，命官府供应祭品、用具、陈设，掌礼仪的官员做司仪举行祭礼。
English: After the completion of the ancestral hall, the government ordered the supply of offerings, utensils, and furnishings, and the officials of the palm ceremony to preside over the ceremony.

古文：五年九月，晟与侍中马燧见于延英殿，上嘉其勋力，诏曰： 昔我列祖，乘乾坤之荡涤，扫隋季之荒屯，体元御极，作人父母；则亦有熊罴之士，不二心之臣，左右经纶，参翊缔构，昭文德，恢武功，威不若，康不乂，用端命于上帝，付畀四方。
现代文：贞元五年九月，李晟和侍中马燧在延英殿被召见，皇帝嘉奖他们的功劳，降诏说： 过去我的祖先，在天下动荡的时候，清除隋末的寇盗，登上帝位，保护人民；也有善战的将领，忠心的大臣，辅佐筹划，参与帮助，施行仁政，打败敌寇，威武不屈，平定动乱，秉承上天的仁德，施行于海内。
English: In September of the fifth year of the Zhengyuan era, Li Qian and Ma Qian, the middle-ranking attendant, were summoned to the Yan Ying palace. The emperor commended their merits and issued a decree saying: In the past, my ancestors, when the world was in turmoil, cleared the bandits at the end of the Sui Dynasty, ascended to the throne, and protected the people; there were also generals who were good at war, loyal ministers, assistant assistants planning, participating in helping, implementing benevolent government, defeating enemy bandits, unyielding, calming unrest, adhering to the benevolence of heaven, and implemented at sea.

古文：宇宙既清，日月既贞，王业既成，太阶既平；乃图厥容，列于斯阁，懋昭绩效，式表仪形，一以不忘于朝夕，一以永垂乎来裔，君臣之义，厚莫重焉。
现代文：到天下平定、年号确立、帝业稳固、大臣就位；于是画好功臣的容貌，排列在凌烟阁上，宣扬他们的功绩，录下他们的仪表，一来当时不忘，二来传给后人，君臣情谊，非常深厚。
English: When the country was pacified, the era was established, the empire was stable, and the ministers were in place; then they painted the faces of the heroes and heroines, arranged them on the Lingyaku Pavilion, publicized their achievements, and recorded their appearance. On the one hand, they did not forget it at the time, and on the other hand, they passed it on to future generations. The friendship between monarchs and subjects is very deep.

古文：贞元己巳岁秋九月，我行西宫，瞻宏阁崇构，见老臣遗象，颙然肃然，和敬在色，想云龙之叶应，感致来之艰难。
现代文：贞元五年秋天九月，我到西宫去，远望高阁雄伟，近看功臣遗容，庄严肃穆、和气恭敬，想到辅佐的功勋，更感创业的艰辛。
English: In the autumn and September of the fifth year of the Zhengyuan era, I went to the West Palace, looking at the magnificent Takakura from afar, looking at the remains of the hero, solemn and serious, and respectful, thinking about the merits of the assistant, and feeling the hardships of starting a business.

古文：睹往思今，取类非远。
现代文：看往昔想今天，时代相近。
English: Looking at the past and thinking about today, the times are similar.

古文：且功与时并，才为代生，苟蕴其才，遇其时，尊主庇人，何代不有？
现代文：况且功勋人才各代都有，只要才能优异，生逢其时，使皇帝尊荣人民安宁，贤臣哪朝没有？
English: Moreover, there are meritorious talents in all generations. As long as the talent is excellent, it is born at the right time to make the emperor honor the people's tranquility. Which dynasty does not have wise men?

古文：在中宗，则桓彦范等著其辅戴之绩；在玄宗，则刘幽求等申翼奉之勋；在肃宗，则郭子仪扫殄氛昆；今则李晟等保宁朕躬。
现代文：中宗皇帝时，有桓彦范等立辅佐大功；肃宗皇帝时，郭子仪平定叛乱；现在李晟等保卫我。都勤勉尽力，为国平叛，与开国名臣比，哪里差多少？
English: In the time of Emperor Zhongzong, there was great merit in the establishment of the vice-advisors such as Huan Yan Fan; in the time of Emperor Su Zong, Guo Zi Yi quelled the rebellion; now Li Xi and others are defending me. They are all diligent and do their best for the country's pacification and rebellion, and compared with the famous minister of the founding of the country, what is the difference?

古文：有司宜叙年代先后，各图其像于旧臣之次，仍令皇太子书朕是命，纪于壁焉。庶播嘉庸，式昭于下，俾后来者尚揖清颜，知元勋之不朽。 
现代文：不录功绩，不算表彰贤臣。何况纪功颂德，是圣祖开创的，我怎敢荒怠！有关部门应排列年代先后，画好他们各人的像排在原有名臣的后边，再命皇太子书写我这命令，刻在墙上。颂扬大功，做臣民的榜样，使后人能瞻仰容颜，知道大功臣的不朽业绩。 
English: The relevant departments should arrange the years successively, draw the portraits of each of them and line them up behind the original famous ministers, and then order the crown prince to write this order and engrave it on the wall. Celebrate great achievements, set an example for the subjects, so that future generations can look up and know the immortal achievements of great heroes.

古文：复命皇太子书其文以赐晟，晟刻石于门左。
现代文：又令皇太子抄录这命令赐给李晟，李晟把它刻在碑上树在大门左边。
English: He also ordered the crown prince to transcribe the order and give it to Li Qiye, who engraved it on the monument on the tree to the left of the gate.

古文：初，晟在凤翔，谓宾介曰： 魏征能直言极谏，致太宗于尧、舜之上，真忠臣也，仆所慕之。 
现代文：当初，李晟在凤翔时，对幕僚说： 魏征能直说强谏，使太宗皇帝超过尧、舜，是真正的忠臣，我敬仰他。 
English: At the beginning, when Li Qiye was in Fengxiang, he said to his staff: Wei Zheng can directly say that he is strong, so that the Emperor Taizong can surpass him, he is a true loyal subject, I admire him.

古文：行军司马李叔度对曰： 此搢绅儒者之事，非勋德所宜。 
现代文：行军司马李叔度说： 这是文臣谏官的事，不适合您做。 
English: Marching Sima Li Shudu said: This is a matter for the civil eunuchs, it is not for you to do.

古文：晟敛容曰： 行军失言。 
现代文：李晟严肃地说： 司马说错了。
English: Li Yan said seriously: Sima was wrong.

古文：传称 邦有道，危言危行 。
现代文：经传说： 国家政治清明，实话直说。 
English: According to legend: the national politics is clear, and the truth is straight.

古文：今休明之期，晟幸得备位将相，心有不可，忍而不言，岂可谓有犯无隐，知无不为者耶！
现代文：现在是清明时期，我侥幸被任命为将相，心里认为不对，瞒着不说，怎能算得上敢谏不瞒、知无不言的人呢！
English: Now is a period of clarity. I was appointed to be the next prime minister by a fluke. In my heart, I thought it was wrong, but I kept it to myself. How can I be considered a person who dares not to hide, who knows nothing and says nothing?

古文：是非在人主所择耳。 
现代文：说得对错供皇上判定。 
English: It is up to the Emperor to decide what is right and wrong.

古文：叔度惭而退。
现代文：李叔度惭愧地退了出去。
English: Li Shudu bowed out in shame.

古文：故晟为相，每当上所顾问，必极言匪躬。尽大臣之节。
现代文：因此李晟任宰相时，每当皇帝问事，他一定说出所有的意见而不阿谀奉迎，尽大臣的职责。
English: Therefore, when Li Qiye was appointed as prime minister, whenever the emperor asked questions, he must express all his opinions without flattery and fulfill his duties as a minister.

古文：性沉默，未尝泄于所亲。
现代文：他生性不多说话，不曾对亲近者泄露过政情。
English: He is by nature a man of few words and has never divulged the political situation to those close to him.

古文：临下明察，每理军，必曰某有劳，某能其事，虽厮养小善，必记姓名。
现代文：他了解部下情况，每次治军，都说某人有功劳，某人办事能干，即使是当差的小功劳，他也一定记下姓名。
English: He knows the situation of his subordinates. Every time he leads the army, he says that someone has merit, someone is capable of doing things. Even if it is a small merit of the duty, he will definitely write down the name.

古文：尤恶下为朋党相构，好善嫉恶，出于天性。
现代文：他尤其讨厌部下结党倾轧，喜欢善良痛恨邪恶，是他的本性。
English: He especially hates his subordinates to be partisan, and it is his nature to love goodness and hate evil.

古文：尝有恩者，厚报之。
现代文：对曾有恩情的人，厚予报答。
English: For those who have been kind, reward them well.

古文：初，谭元澄为岚州刺史，尝有恩于晟，后坐贬于岳州；比晟贵，上疏理之，诏赠元澄宁州刺史。
现代文：当初，谭元澄任岚州刺史时曾对李晟有恩情，后因罪贬到岳州，到李晟显贵了，奏本重审昭雪，皇上下诏追赠谭元澄为宁州刺史。
English: At first, when Tan Yuancheng was appointed as the governor of Bozhou, he was kind to Li Xuan. Later, because of his crime, he was demoted to Yuezhou. When Li Xuan became eminent, the record of the re-trial came to light, and the emperor posthumously awarded Tan Yuancheng as the governor of Ningzhou.

古文：元澄三子，晟抚待勤至，皆为成就宦学，人皆义之。
现代文：谭元澄有三个儿子，李晟抚养照顾殷勤周到，使他们在从政学问上都有成就，当时人都推崇他。
English: Tan Yuancheng had three sons, and Li Lan raised and cared for them diligently and thoughtfully, so that they all had achievements in politics and culture. At that time, everyone respected him.

古文：理家以严称，诸子侄非晨昏不得谒见，言不及公事，视王氏甥如己子。
现代文：他治家以严闻名，众儿子侄儿不是早晚不能拜见他，谈话不涉及公事，他待王氏外甥和自己的儿子一样。
English: His family management is known for its strictness. His sons and nephews cannot visit him sooner or later. The conversation does not involve official business. He treats Wang's nephew the same as his own son.

古文：尝正岁，崔氏女归省，未及阶，晟却之曰： 尔有家，况姑在堂，妇当奉酒醴从馈，以待宾客。 
现代文：有年正月，嫁到崔家的女儿回家探亲，还没上台阶，李晟拦住她说： 你有家庭，婆婆健在，媳妇应在家办酒做菜、接待客人。 
English: In the first month of the year, a daughter who had married into the Cui family came home to visit relatives. Before she stepped on the steps, Li Yao stopped her and said: You have a family, your mother-in-law is still alive, your daughter-in-law should be at home making wine, cooking and receiving guests.

古文：遂不视而遣还家，其达礼敦教如此。
现代文：就不见她而打发她回家，懂礼节重家教到了这样的地步。
English: He didn't see her and sent her home, knowing the etiquette his family had taught him.

古文：贞元九年八月薨，时年六十七。
现代文：他贞元九年八月去世，享年六十七岁。
English: He passed away in August of the ninth year of Zhen Yuan, at the age of sixty-seven.

古文：上震悼出涕，废朝五日，令百官就第临吊，命京兆尹李充监护丧事，官给葬具，赗赙加等。
现代文：皇帝为这悲痛流泪，停止上朝五天，命群臣到他家里去哀悼，令京兆尹李充监督保护办丧事，官府供应丧葬用具，丧礼加厚。
English: The emperor shed tears for this grief, suspended the imperial court for five days, ordered a group of ministers to go to his home to mourn, ordered Jing Zhaoyun Lichong to supervise the protection of the funeral, the government provided funeral equipment, and the funeral was thicker.

古文：比大敛，上手书致意，送柩前，曰：
现代文：到入殓时，皇帝亲笔写信慰问，送到灵柩前，上写：
English: At the time of burial, the emperor personally wrote a letter of condolence and sent it to the casket, writing:

古文：皇帝遣宫闱令第五守进致旨于故太尉、中书令、西平郡王、赠太师之灵曰： 天祚我邦，是生才杰，禀阴阳之粹气，实山岳之降灵。
现代文： 皇帝派第五守进对已故太尉、中书令、西平郡王、赠官太傅的灵位说：上天降福我国，降生您这人才，这是阴阳造化、山岳显灵。
English: The emperor sent the fifth Shoujin to say to the spiritual position of the late Tai Lai, Zhong Shuling, Xiping County King, and Gifu Taifu: Heaven has blessed our country and given birth to this talent of yours. This is the creation of yin and yang and the manifestation of mountain spirits.

古文：弘济患难，保佐王室：扫荡氛昆，廓清上京。
现代文：您力平叛乱，保护了皇朝；消灭了叛军、收复了京城。
English: You quelled the rebellion and protected the imperial dynasty; you eliminated the rebels and recovered the capital city.

古文：忠诚感于人神，功业施于社稷，匡时定乱，实赖元勋。洎领上台，克谐中外，訏谟帝道，叶赞皇猷。
现代文：忠心使人民和神仙感动，为国家建立功勋，救时局平叛乱，靠您这大功臣，位至三公，使中外和谐，为皇帝谋划，辅佐扶助。
English: Loyalty has moved the people and the gods, established merits for the country, saved the situation and quelled the rebellion, and relied on you, this great hero, to be promoted to the three princes, to make China and foreign countries harmonious, to plan for the emperor, and to assist and support.

古文：常竭嘉言，以匡不迨，情所亲重，义无间然。
现代文：常尽力劝谏，拾遗补阙，情意深厚，君臣无间。
English: He always tried his best to persuade, collect and make amends, and had a deep affection for all the princes and ministers.

古文：方期与国同休，永为邦翰。
现代文：正希望共享国家盛世，让您永做国家栋梁。
English: We are hoping to share the prosperity of the country, so that you will always be the pillar of the country.

古文：比婴疾恙，虽历旬时，日冀痊除，重期相见，弼予在位，终致和平。
现代文：您生病后，十多天来，我每天都希望能够痊愈，好再次相见，佐我皇位，争取太平。
English: For more than ten days after you fell ill, I hoped every day that I would be able to recover, so that we could meet again, reclaim my throne, and strive for peace.

古文：岂图药饵无征，奄至薨逝，丧我贤哲，亏我股肱，天不慭遗，痛惜何极，呜呼！
现代文：哪知医药无效，突然去世，夺去了我的贤臣和辅佐，天不留情，多么可惜！啊！
English: Who knew that medicine is not effective, suddenly passed away, took away my wise men and assistants, God has no mercy, what a pity! Ah!

古文：大厦方构，旋失栋梁；巨川未济，遂亡舟楫。
现代文：大楼正建，却丢失了栋梁；大江未渡，却失去了船桨。
English: The building is under construction, but has lost its beams; the river has not been crossed, but has lost its oars.

古文：君臣之义，追恸益深，循省遗章，倍增感切。
现代文：君臣情谊，追念更增悲伤，看了您临终的奏章，倍添感慨。
English: Your loyalty to your subjects, the memory of which is even more saddening, made me feel doubly moved when I saw your death certificate.

古文：卿一门胤嗣，朕必终始保持。
现代文：您一家后代，我一定始终保护。
English: I will always protect your descendants.

古文：况愿等弟兄，承卿教训，朕之志义，岂忘平生？
现代文：何况李愿和弟弟们，受您教导得好；我知恩图报，怎能忘了您的功勋？
English: What's more, Li Zhen and his brothers have been well taught by you; I know your kindness, how can I forget your merits?

古文：纵卿不言，朕亦存信。
现代文：即使您不说，我也牢记在心。
English: Even if you don't say it, I'll keep it in mind.

古文：比者卿在之日，却未见朕深心，今卿与朕长乖，方冀知朕诚志。
现代文：以前您活着时，没能感受到我的深情，现在与我长辞，将能知道我的厚谊。
English: Previously, when you were alive, you could not feel my deep affection. Now that you have been with me for a long time, you will be able to know my friendship.

古文：无以为念，发言涕零，是用躬述数行，贵写所怀得尽。临纸遣使，不能饰词，魂而有知，当体朕意。
现代文：没什么能表达我的怀念，说这话时泪流满面，因此亲笔写这几行字，主要表达我的怀念，为了早点派人送来，词句没有润色，忠魂有灵，将能体察我的心意。 
English: Nothing can express my nostalgia, I was in tears when I said this, so I wrote these lines with my own hand, mainly to express my nostalgia, in order to send someone early, the words have no polish, the soul has spirit, will be able to experience my heart.

古文：册赠太师，谥曰忠武。
现代文：又颁文追赠为太师，赐谥号叫忠武。
English: He was also posthumously awarded the title of Grand Master and given the posthumous title of Zhongwu.

古文：晟薨后，城盐州，复盐池，上赐宰臣新盐，恻然思晟，乃令致盐于灵座。
现代文：李晟死后，朝廷在盐州筑城，修复了盐池，皇帝赏赐宰相新盐，难过地想到了李晟，就命把盐送到他的灵前。
English: After Li Xuan's death, the imperial court built a city in Yanzhou and restored the salt ponds. The emperor rewarded the prime minister with new salt. Thinking of Li Xuan with sadness, he ordered the salt to be sent to his grave.

古文：又时遣中使至晟第存抚诸子，教戒备至，闻愿等有一善，上喜形于色。眷遇终始，无与晟比。
现代文：又常派宫中使者到李晟家问候照顾他的儿女们，教导告诫无微不至。听说李愿等有一点功绩，皇帝就喜笑颜开，自始至终受到宠爱，没有人比得上李晟。
English: He also frequently sent emissaries from the court to Li Xuan's home to greet and take care of his children, and to teach and admonish them. When he heard that Li Xuan had a little merit, the emperor smiled and was loved from beginning to end. There was no one like Li Xuan.

古文：元和四年，诏曰： 夫能定社稷，济生人，存不朽之名，垂可久之业者，必报以殊常之宠，待以亲比之恩，与国无穷，时惟茂典。
现代文：元和四年，唐宪宗下诏说： 能使国家安定，人民安宁，扬名千古，建不朽功业的人，我一定用特别的宠遇、亲切的眷念报答他，国存荣存，载入典册。
English: In the 4th year of the Yuan Dynasty, Emperor Xianzong of the Tang Dynasty issued the following edict: Those who can make the country stable and the people peaceful, who can make a name for thousands of years, and who can build an immortal career, I will surely reward them with special favors and kind thoughts, and the country will be preserved and recorded in the register.

古文：故奉天定难功臣、太尉、兼中书令、上柱国、西平郡王、食实封一千五百户、赠太师李晟，间代英贤，自天忠义，迈济时之宏算，抱经武之长材，贯以至诚，协于一德，尝遭屯难之际，实著戡定之功。
现代文：已故为国平叛的功臣、太尉、兼中书令、上柱国、西平郡王、食实封一千五百户、追赠太师的李晟，是不常有的英雄，天生忠诚，有扭转乾坤的韬略、用兵的才干，用自己的忠贞，使军队齐心，在国家遭难之时，立平叛之功。
English: The late Li Qian, who was a meritorious vassal of the Nationalists, a captain, a member of the Central Military Commission, the head of Shangzhu Province, the king of Xiping County, the ruler of 1,500 households, and the posthumous conferment of the title of Grand Master, is a rare hero. He was loyal by nature, had the strategy to turn things around, the ability to use soldiers, and used his loyalty to keep the army united. At a time when the country was in distress, he achieved the feat of defeating the Nationalists.

古文：鲸鲵既歼，宫庙斯复，眷兹勋伐，则既褒崇。
现代文：叛贼歼灭，宫殿收复，怀念这功绩，虽已经褒奖过。
English: The rebels were annihilated, the palace was recaptured, and I miss this achievement, although it has already been commended.

古文：永言天步之夷，载怀邦杰之功，思加崇于往烈，爰协比于后昆，睦以宗亲，将予厚意。
现代文：要使国家永远太平，应永记贤臣的功绩，想增加对昔日功臣的褒奖，将他家和皇室后代并列，成为皇室亲族，来表达一片心意。
English: In order to keep the country at peace forever, it is necessary to remember the merits of the sages forever, and to increase the praise for the heroes of the past, and to rank his family and the descendants of the royal family, and to become the royal relatives, to express one's heart.

古文：宝应元年六月卒，赠司徒。
现代文：他的家族应编入皇室名册，李晟灵位应放进德宗皇帝祠庙享受祭祀。 
English: His family should be included in the royal roster, and Li Xun's spirit should be placed in the Emperor Dezong's ancestral temple to enjoy sacrifices.

古文：愬以父廕起家，授太常寺协律郎，迁卫尉少卿。愬早丧所出，保养于晋国夫人王氏，及卒，晟以本非正室，令服缌，号哭不忍，晟感之，因许服缞。
现代文：李晟的十五个儿子：李侗、李亻由、李偕，无官早逝；以下李愿、李聪、李兑、李訹、李凭、李恕、李宪、李訫、李懿、李听、李、李之中，李聪、李兑，任小官去世；而李愿、李訫、李听最出名。李愬因父亲的功劳封官，任太常寺协律郎，后升任卫尉少卿。他的生母早逝，由晋国夫人王氏抚养，到王氏去世，李晟因为他不是王氏亲生儿子，命他穿纟思麻丧服服丧，他哭叫着不愿意，李晟被他感动了，因此让他穿对亲生母亲的齐衰丧服服丧。
English: The fifteen sons of Li Hongzhi: Li Hongzhi, Li Hongzhi Yu, Li Hongzhi, died without official rank; the following Li Zhan, Li Cong, Li Dui, Li Zhan, Li Bian, Li Xun, Li Xuan, Li Xuan, Li Zhou, Li Zhong, Li Cong, Li Dui, died as minor officials; and Li Zhan, Li Hongzhi, Li Dui is the most famous. Li Hongzhi, because of his father's merits, was appointed as a vassal of the Tai Chang Temple, and later he was promoted to the junior secretary of the guards. His birth mother died early, he was raised by

古文：既练，丁父忧，愬与仲弟宪庐于墓侧，德宗不许，诏令归第。
现代文：长大后，父亲去世了，他和二弟李宪在墓边搭棚住着守孝，唐德宗怕伤身体不让，下诏书命他们回家。
English: After he grew up, his father passed away, and he and his second brother Li Xian set up a tent at the edge of the grave to live in filial piety. Tang Dezong was afraid of injuring his body and ordered them to go home.

古文：居一宿，徒跣复往，上知不可夺，遂许终制。
现代文：过了一夜，他光着脚又去了，皇帝知道不能改变他的意愿，就允许他服满丧期。
English: After one night, he went barefoot again, and the emperor, knowing that he could not change his will, allowed him to complete the mourning period.

古文：服阕，授右庶子，转少府监、左庶子。
现代文：服丧期满，任命他为右庶子，后调任少府监、左庶子。
English: At the end of the mourning period, he was appointed as the right illegitimate son, and later he was transferred to the position of Junior Prefect and the left illegitimate son.

古文：出为坊、晋二州刺史。
现代文：又出京任坊、晋二州刺史。
English: He also appeared in Beijing Renbo and Jin Erzhou Shishi.

古文：以理行殊异，加金紫光禄大夫。
现代文：因政绩优异，加封金紫光禄大夫。
English: Due to his outstanding political performance, he was awarded the title of Jin Zi Guanglu Doctor.

古文：复为庶子，累迁至太子詹事，宫苑闲廊使。
现代文：又任庶子，多次升官后任太子詹事、宫苑闲厩使。
English: He also served as an illegitimate son, and was promoted several times, and later served as Prince Zhan's secretary and the palace's idle stable servant.

古文：愬有筹略，善骑射。
现代文：他有谋略，擅长骑马射箭。
English: He has a strategy, is good at horseback riding and archery.

古文：元和十一年，用兵讨蔡州吴元济。
现代文：元和十一年，朝廷出兵讨伐蔡州吴元济。
English: In the eleventh year of the Yuan Dynasty, the imperial court sent troops to fight against Caizhou Wu Yuanji.

古文：七月，唐邓节度使高霞寓战败，又命袁滋为帅，滋亦无功。
现代文：七月份，唐邓节度使高霞寓打了败仗，又命袁滋挂帅，袁滋也没战功。
English: In July, Tang Deng Jiedu defeated Gao Xiaofei and ordered Yuan Zhi to take the lead, but Yuan Zhi did not win any battle.

古文：愬抗表自陈，愿于军前自效。
现代文：李訫奏本自荐，愿到前线效力。
English: Li Yuxuan recommended himself and was willing to serve on the front line.

古文：宰相李逢吉亦以愬才可用，遂检校左散骑常侍，兼邓州刺史、御史大夫，充随、唐、邓节度使。
现代文：宰相李逢吉也认为他的才能可以任用，于是任命他为左散骑常侍，兼任邓州刺史、御史大夫、随唐邓节度使。
English: Prime Minister Li Fengji also thought that his talent could be used, so he appointed him as the left rider's attendant, concurrently serving as the secretary of Dangzhou, the secretary of history, and the secretary of the festival with Tang Deng.

古文：兵士摧败之余，气势伤沮，愬揣知其情，乃不肃军阵，不齐部伍。
现代文：当时兵将战败之后，士气低落，他了解到这情况，就不整理训练军队。
English: At that time, after the defeat of the generals, the morale was low, and when he learned this, he did not organize the training of the army.

古文：或以不肃为言，愬曰： 贼方安袁尚书之宽易，吾不欲使其改备。 
现代文：有人说部队涣散，他说： 叛军正对袁尚书的无所作为感到放心，我不想让他们加强戒备。 
English: Some people say that the troops are scattered, he said: the rebels are reassured by Yuan Shangshu's inaction, I don't want them to be on high alert.

古文：乃绐告三军曰； 天子知愬柔而忍耻，故令抚养尔辈。
现代文：于是假装告诉各军说： 皇帝知道我慈爱并忍耐心强，所以让我来安抚调养你们。
English: So he pretended to tell the troops: "The emperor knows that I am kind and patient, so let me pacify and pacify you."

古文：战者，非吾事也。 
现代文：至于作战，不是我的事。 
English: As for fighting, that's not my business.

古文：军众信而乐之。
现代文：兵将们相信了并很高兴。
English: The captains believed and were happy.

古文：愬又散其优乐，未尝宴乐，士卒伤痍者，亲自抚之。
现代文：他又遣散他的乐妓，不曾设宴奏乐，兵将受伤的，他亲自去探望。
English: He also dismissed his courtesan, did not set up a banquet to play music, and he personally went to visit the wounded soldiers.

古文：贼以尝败高、袁二帅，又以愬名位非所畏惮者，不甚增其备。
现代文：叛军因曾打败高霞寓、袁滋两位将军，又因李訫的名声地位都不能使叛军害怕，因此叛军没有增加戒备。
English: Because the rebels had defeated two generals, Gao Xiaye and Yuan Zi, and because Li Gan's fame and status could not make the rebels afraid, the rebels did not increase their vigilance.

古文：愬沉勇长算，推诚待士，故能用其卑弱之势，出贼不意。
现代文：李訫沉着勇敢擅长谋略，对部下真诚，因此能利用这不利形势，出敌不意进行袭击。
English: Calm, brave, good at strategizing, and sincere to his subordinates, Li Xuan was able to take advantage of the unfavorable situation and attack the enemy unexpectedly.

古文：居半岁，知人可用，乃谋袭蔡，表请济师。
现代文：过了半年，他知道兵将可以任用了，就计划袭击蔡州，上表请求派兵增援。
English: After half a year, he knew that soldiers would be available, so he planned to attack Caizhou and requested reinforcements from the table above.

古文：诏河中、鄜坊骑兵二千人益之，由是完缉器械，阴计戎事。
现代文：皇帝下诏调河中、坊的两千名骑兵增援他。他从此修整军中器械，暗中筹划军事行动。
English: The emperor dispatched two thousand cavalrymen from the provinces to reinforce him. From then on, he repaired the equipment of the army and secretly planned military operations.

古文：尝获贼将丁士良，召入与语，辞气不挠，愬异之，因释其缚，置为捉生将。
现代文：先前抓获了叛军将领丁士良，他就把丁士良召来谈话，丁士良毫不畏惧，李訫看重他，就给他松绑，任命他为捉生将。
English: Having previously captured the rebel general Ting Shiliang, he summoned Ting Shiliang for a talk. Ting Shiliang was undaunted. Li Qiye valued him, let him off the leash, and appointed him as a survivalist.

古文：士良感之，乃曰： 贼将吴秀琳总众数千，不可遽破者，用陈光洽之谋也。
现代文：丁士良感激他，就说： 叛军将领吴秀琳率兵几千人，一时无法打败的原因，是因为陈光洽为他出谋划策。
English: Ding Shiliang thanked him and said: The reason why the rebel general Wu Xiulin led thousands of soldiers and could not be defeated for a while was because Chen Guangchao made suggestions for him.

古文：士良能擒光洽以降秀琳。 
现代文：我能抓住陈光洽并使吴秀琳投降。 
English: I can capture Chen Guangchao and force Wu Xiulin to surrender.

古文：愬从之，果擒光洽。
现代文：李訫听从了他的办法，果然抓住了陈光洽。
English: Li Yao followed his advice and caught Chen Guangchao.

古文：十二月，吴秀琳以文成栅兵三千降。
现代文：十二月份，吴秀琳率文成栅的军队三千人投降。
English: In December, Wu Xiulin and Wen Chengzhao's army of 3,000 surrendered.

古文：醖乃径徙之新兴栅，遂以秀琳之众攻吴房县，收其外城。
现代文：李訫就直接移驻新兴栅，派吴秀琳的军队攻打吴房县城，攻下了外城。
English: Li Kun directly moved to Xinxingzha and sent Wu Xiulin's army to attack the county seat of Wufang, capturing the outer city.

古文：初，将攻吴房，军吏曰： 往亡日，请避之。 
现代文：事前，将要攻打吴房县城时，军中官员说： 这天是凶日，请避开这天。 
English: In advance, when the city of Wufang County was about to be attacked, the military officials said: This day is a bad day, please avoid this day.

古文：愬曰： 贼以往亡谓吾不来，正可击也。 
现代文：他说： 叛军因为凶日认为我们不会去，正好可以进攻。 
English: He said: "The rebels think we won't go because of the bad weather, so they can just attack.

古文：及战，胜捷而归。
现代文：仗打起来，得胜归来。
English: You go to war, you come back victorious.

古文：贼以骁骑五百追愬，愬下马据胡床，令众悉力赴战，射杀贼将孙忠宪，乃退。
现代文：叛军派五百名精锐骑兵追击他，他下马坐在折叠椅上，命军队全力作战，射死了叛军将领孙忠宪，叛军才败退了。
English: The rebels sent five hundred elite cavalry to chase him, he dismounted and sat on a folding chair, ordered the army to fight at full strength, shot dead the rebel general Sun Zhongxian, and the rebels were defeated.

古文：或劝愬遂拔吴房，愬曰： 取之则合势而固其穴，不如留之以分其力。 
现代文：有人劝他乘机攻下吴房县城，他说： 如攻占此城就使叛军合兵去巩固他们的巢穴，不如留着它分散叛军的力量。 
English: Someone advised him to seize the opportunity to capture the city of Wufang County, and he said: If you capture this city, let the rebels join forces to consolidate their lair, it is better to keep it to disperse the power of the rebels.

古文：初，吴秀琳之降，愬单骑至栅下与之语，亲释其缚，署为衙将。
现代文：当初，吴秀琳投降时，李訫独自骑马到寨门和他谈话，亲手给他松绑，任命他为衙将。
English: At the beginning, when Wu Xiulin surrendered, Li Yao rode alone to Zhaimen to talk to him, untied him with his own hands, and appointed him as the commander of the garrison.

古文：秀琳感恩，期于效报，谓愬曰： 若欲破贼，须得李祐，某无能为也。 
现代文：吴秀琳感激他的恩德，希望效力报答，对他说： 如想打败吴元济，只要抓到李，他就没有能耐了。 
English: Wu Xiuling was grateful for his kindness and hoped that his efforts would be rewarded. She said to him, "If you want to defeat Wu Yuanji, as long as you catch Li, he won't be able to resist.

古文：祐者，贼之骑将，有胆略，守兴桥栅，常侮易官军，去来不可备。
现代文：李是吴元济的骑兵将领，有胆量谋略，驻守兴桥栅，常常侮辱轻视唐军，来去无法防备。
English: Li was the cavalry general of Wu Yuanji. He had the courage to strategize, stationed at the Xing Bridge, often insulted and belittled the Tang army, and was unable to defend himself.

古文：愬召其将史用诚诫之曰： 今祐以众获麦于张柴，尔可以三百骑伏旁林中，又使摇旆于前，示将焚麦者。
现代文：李訫把部将史用诚喊来对他说： 现李率兵在张柴收麦子，你可以率三百名骑兵埋伏在附近树林中，再派人打着旗帜，装作要烧麦子。
English: Li Qiye's superior general Shi shouted to him, "Right now, Li Qiye is leading an army to collect wheat in Zhangchai. You can lead three hundred horsemen to lie in ambush in the nearby woods, and then send someone with a flag to pretend to burn wheat.

古文：祐素易我军，必轻而来逐，尔以轻骑搏之，必获祐。 
现代文：李一贯轻视我军，一定轻易来驱赶，你率轻骑冲出，一定能抓住李。 
English: Li has always despised our army, so it must be easy to drive them away. If you ride lightly and rush out, you will surely be able to catch Li.

古文：用诚等如其料，果擒祐而还。
现代文：史用诚按他说的做了，果然抓回了李。
English: Shi Yucheng did as he said and caught Li.

古文：官军常苦祐，皆请杀之，愬不听，解缚而客礼之。
现代文：唐军常遭李欺侮，都要求杀死他，李訫不同意，给他松绑并用对宾客的礼节对待他。
English: The Tang army was often bullied by Li, and they all demanded that he be killed. Li Yao disagreed, released him and treated him with the courtesy of a guest.

古文：愬乘间常召祐及李忠义，屏人而语，或至夜分。
现代文：空闲时常叫李和李忠义去，支开仆人和侍卫谈话，有时谈到半夜。
English: In his free time, he often called Li and Li Zhongyi to go and talk with the servants and the guards, sometimes talking about midnight.

古文：忠义，亦降将也，本名宪，愬致之。
现代文：李忠义也是投降的将领，本来叫李宪，是李訫召来的。
English: Li Zhongyi was also a general who surrendered. Originally called Li Xian, he was summoned by Li Yong.

古文：军中多谏愬，愬益宠祐。
现代文：军队中很多人劝李訫，他却更加宠信李。
English: Many people in the army advised Li Yao, but he trusted Li even more.

古文：始募敢死者三千人以为突将，醖自教习之。
现代文：他着手招募了三千不怕死的士兵做突击队，亲自训练他们。
English: He set out to recruit three thousand fearless soldiers as commandos, training them himself.

古文：愬将袭元济，会雨水，自五月至七月不止，沟塍溃溢，不可出师。
现代文：他想要袭击吴元济，碰到雨天，从五月到七月下个不停，沟堤都溃决溢出，不能出兵。
English: He wanted to attack Wu Yuanji, but when it rained, from May to July, the dikes broke and overflowed, preventing him from sending troops.

古文：军吏咸以不杀祐为言，简翰日至，且言得贼谍者具言其事。
现代文：兵将官吏都说这是不杀李造成的，每天都有书信要求杀李，并且说抓到叛军的探子都供说李诈降。
English: The generals and officials all said that this was caused by not killing Li. Every day there were letters demanding that Li be killed, and that the spies who caught the rebels all confessed that Li had surrendered fraudulently.

古文：愬无以止之，乃持祐泣曰： 岂天意不欲平此贼，何尔一身见夺于众口！ 
现代文：他没法制止他们，就拉着李的手哭着说： 难道是天意不想讨平这叛贼吗？为什么这么多人都要夺去你的生命！ 
English: Unable to stop them, he took Li's hand and wept, saying, "Is it the will of heaven not to appease this traitor? Why do so many people want to take your life?"

古文：愬又虑诸军先以谤闻，则不能全祐，乃械送京师，先表请释，且言： 必杀祐，则无以成功者。 
现代文：他又担心各军先奏报流言，就无法保全李，于是用刑具把李送到京城，事先上奏要求释放他，并说： 一定要杀死李，就不能成功地袭击吴元济。 
English: He was also worried that the various armies would not be able to protect Li if they reported the rumor first, so he sent Li to Beijing with torture equipment, demanded his release in advance, and said: If you must kill Li, you cannot successfully attack Wu Yuanji.

古文：比祐至京，诏释以还愬，乃署为散兵马使，令佩刀巡警，出入帐中，略无猜闲。
现代文：等李到了京城，皇帝下诏把他释放还给李訫，他于是任命李为散兵马使，命他带刀巡查，进出营帐，毫不怀疑。
English: When Li arrived in Beijing, the emperor issued an edict to release him and return him to Li Yong. He then appointed Li as a scout and ordered him to patrol with a sword and enter and leave the camp, without any doubt.

古文：又改为六院兵马使。
现代文：又改任他为六院兵马使。
English: He was also reappointed as the Sixth Courtyard's envoy.

古文：旧军令，有舍贼谍者屠其家，愬除其令，因使厚之，谍反以情告愬，愬益知贼中虚实。
现代文：过去有军令，谁放了敌人探子就抄斩满门，李訫废除了这命令，并对敌人探子很好，他们反而将敌人情况告诉了他，他对敌人情况就更加了解了。
English: In the past, there was a military order that whoever released an enemy scout would be beheaded. Li Gan abolished this order and was kind to the enemy scout. Instead, they told him about the enemy situation, and he understood more about the enemy situation.

古文：陈许节度使李光颜勇冠诸军，贼悉以精卒抗光颜。由是愬乘其无备，十月，将袭蔡州。
现代文：陈许节度使李光颜在各军中勇敢称第一，叛军用全部精兵抵抗李光颜，这时李訫乘叛军没有戒备，十月份，准备袭击蔡州。
English: Chen Xu Jiedu made Li Guangyan the bravest in the army, and the rebel army all the elite soldiers resisted Li Guangyan. At this time, Li Xuancheng took the rebels off guard and prepared to attack Caizhou in October.

古文：其月七日，使判官郑澥告师期于裴度。
现代文：这月七日，派判官郑氵解把出兵日期报告了裴度。
English: On the seventh day of this month, the judge Zheng Bingde reported the date of dispatch of troops to Pei Du.

古文：十日夜，以李祐率突将三千为先锋，李忠义副之，愬自帅中军三千，田进诚以后军三千殿而行。
现代文：十日夜晚，派李率突击队三千人做前锋，李忠义做副手，他亲自率领中军三千人，田进诚率后军三千人做后卫出兵了。
English: On the evening of the tenth day, Li led a commando of three thousand people as a forward, Li Zhongyi as a deputy, he personally led the Chinese army of three thousand people, and Tian Jincheng led the rear army of three thousand people as a guard.

古文：初出文成栅，众请所向，愬曰： 东六十里止。 
现代文：刚出文成栅，众将请示进军方位，他说： 向东推进六十里扎营。 
English: As soon as he had finished his speech, the crowd asked him to take a military position. He said, "Move sixty li to the east and set up camp."

古文：至贼境，曰张柴砦，尽杀其戍卒，令军士少息，缮羁靮甲胄，发刃彀弓，复建旆而出。是日，阴晦雨雪，大风裂旗旆，马栗而不能跃，士卒苦寒，抱戈僵仆者道路相望。
现代文：到了叛军境内，一个叫张柴砦的地方，杀死了全部防守士兵，命兵将略事休息，修整马具甲胄，磨刀修弓后，又打着旗帜出发了，这天天色阴暗并下着雪，大风把旗帜都吹破了，军马全身战抖不能跳跃，兵将都冻坏了，抱着戈倒在地上冻僵了的一路都有。
English: When they reached the rebel territory, a place called Zhangchai Fort, they killed all the defending soldiers. The soldiers took a short break, trimmed their horse armor, sharpened their knives and bowed, and then set off with their flags. It was a dark and snowy day, the wind had blown the flags apart, the horses were shivering and unable to jump, the soldiers were frozen, and they all fell to the ground holding their horses.

古文：其川泽梁迳险夷，张柴已东，师人未尝蹈其境，皆谓投身不测。初至张柴，诸将请所止，愬曰： 入蔡州取吴元济也。 
现代文：那里河流湖泊堤岸道路是险阻还是平坦，张柴砦的东边，是唐军没有到过的地方，他们都认为是到极危险的地方去。刚到张柴砦，众将请示扎营地点，他说： 到蔡州去捉吴元济。 
English: Whether the rivers, lakes and embankment roads there are dangerous or flat, the east side of Zhangchai Fort is a place that the Tang army has not been to, and they all think it is a very dangerous place to go. Just after arriving at Zhangchai Fort, the crowd will ask for the camp location, he said: Go to Caizhou to catch Wu Yuanji.

古文：诸将失色。监军使哭而言曰： 果落李祐计中！ 
现代文：众将吓得脸色都变了，监军使哭着说： 果然中了李的计！ 
English: The generals were so scared that their faces turned pale. The overseer cried and said, "Li's plan was a success!

古文：愬不听，促令进军，皆谓必不生还，然已从愬之令，无敢为身计者。
现代文：李訫不听他的，催促出发，众将都认为肯定不能活着回来了；但已经跟着出来了，没有人敢为自己考虑。
English: Li Qiye did not listen to him and urged them to leave. The generals all thought that they would definitely not be able to return alive. However, they had already followed him out, and no one dared to think for themselves.

古文：醖道分五百人断洄曲路桥，其夜冻死者十二三。
现代文：李訫在路上分兵五百人驻守通往洄曲道路的桥梁，这天夜里这批人冻死了十分之二三。
English: On the way, Li Yao stationed a detachment of 500 soldiers to guard the bridge leading to the Xingqu Road. That night, this group of people froze to death.

古文：又分五百人断朗山路。
现代文：他又分兵五百人切断通往朗山的道路。
English: He sent another 500 soldiers to cut off the road to Langshan.

古文：自张柴行七十里，比至悬瓠城，夜半，雪愈甚。
现代文：从张柴砦走了七十里路，等到了悬瓠城，已是半夜了，雪下得更大。
English: I walked seventy miles from Zhangchai Fort and waited until I reached the Hanging City. It was already midnight, and the snow was getting heavier.

古文：近城有鹅鸭池，愬令惊击之，以杂其声。
现代文：城边有养鹅鸭的池塘，他命令赶打鹅鸭，以遮掩军队行进的声音。
English: There was a pond on the edge of the city where geese and ducks were kept, and he ordered geese and ducks to be driven to cover the sound of the army marching.

古文：贼恃吴房、朗山之固，晏然无一人知者。
现代文：叛军仗恃吴房、朗山的坚固城墙，戒备松弛没有一个人发现。
English: The rebel army fought against the solid city walls of Wufang and Langshan, and no one noticed the slackness of the guard.

古文：李祐、李忠义坎墉而先登，敢锐者从之，尽杀守门卒而登其门，留击柝者。
现代文：李、李忠义在城墙上挖坑先爬上城去，勇敢强壮的士兵跟着爬了上去，杀死了守门的敌兵并占领了城门，只留下打更的。
English: Li and Li Zhongyi dug a pit on the city wall and climbed up to the city first. The brave and strong soldiers climbed up after them, killed the enemy soldiers guarding the gate and occupied the gate, leaving only those who fought harder.

古文：黎明，雪亦止，愬入，止元济外宅。
现代文：天亮了，雪也停了，李訫进了城，驻扎在吴元济牙城外的宅院里。
English: It was dawn and the snow had stopped. Li Yao entered the city and was stationed in a courtyard outside the city of Wuyuan.

古文：蔡吏告元济曰： 城已陷矣。 
现代文：蔡州官吏报告吴元济说： 外城已被唐军攻占了。 
English: Caizhou officials report Wu Yuanji said: The outer city has been captured by the Tang army.

古文：元济曰： 是洄曲子弟归求寒衣耳。 
现代文：吴元济说： 那是泗曲士兵回来要冬装的。 
English: Wu Yuanji said, "It was the soldiers who came back for winter clothing.

古文：俄闻愬军号令将士云： 常侍传语。 
现代文：不久听到唐军对兵将下令说： 常侍有命令。 
English: Soon after, the Tang soldiers were heard to say to the commander: "The attendants have orders.

古文：乃曰： 何常侍得至于此？ 
现代文：他就说： 哪个常侍能到这里来呢？ 
English: He said: "What kind of waiter would come here?

古文：遂驱率左右乘子城拒捍。
现代文：于是率领部下登上内城抵御。
English: He then led his men up to the inner city to defend it.

古文：田进诚以兵环而攻之。愬计元济犹望董重质来救，乃令访重质家安恤之，使其家人持书召重质。
现代文：田进诚率兵包围并进攻内城，李訫估计吴元济还希望董重质来救援他，就命找到了董重质的家并安抚他的家人，要他们送信去招降董重质。
English: Tian Jincheng led the troops to encircle and attack the inner city. Li Tong estimated that Wu Yuanji also hoped that Dong Chongqing would come to rescue him. He ordered to find Dong Chongqing's home and appease his family, and asked them to send a letter to recruit and demote Dong Chongqing.

古文：重质单骑而归愬，白衣泥首，愬以客礼待之。
现代文：董重质只身骑马来投降，穿着白色服装头上涂着泥，李訫用对待宾客的礼节接待他。
English: Dong Chongqing came to surrender on horseback alone, wearing a white garment with mud on his head. Li Yao received him with the courtesy of a guest.

古文：田进诚焚子城南门，元济城上请罪，进诚梯而下之，乃槛送京师。
现代文：田进诚点火烧内城的南门，吴元济在城上请求投降，田进诚放梯子让他从城上下来，于是把他用囚车装着送到京城去了。
English: Tian Jincheng set fire to the south gate of the inner city, Wu Yuanji went up to the city to ask for surrender, Tian Jincheng let him down from the city with a ladder, so he was taken to the capital in a prison van.

古文：其申、光二州及诸镇兵尚二万余人，相次来降。
现代文：他占据的申州、光州和各地的军队还有两万多人，相继来投降了。
English: More than 20,000 troops from Shenzhou, Gwangju and other regions he occupied surrendered one after another.

古文：自元济就擒，愬不戮一人，其为元济执事帐下厨厩之间者，皆复其职，使之不疑。
现代文：吴元济被抓获后，李訫没有杀一个人，那些给吴元济管事带兵和管理膳食马匹的人，他都恢复了他们的职务，让他们安心。
English: After Wu Yuanji was captured, Li Gan did not kill anyone. He restored the positions of those who had been in charge of leading soldiers and managing horses for Wu Yuanji, giving them peace of mind.

古文：乃屯兵鞠场以待裴度。
现代文：他把军队驻扎在球场等待裴度。
English: He stationed troops at the stadium to await Pele's arrival.

古文：翌日，度至，愬具櫜鞬候度马首。
现代文：第二天，裴度来了，李訫全副戎装在裴度的马前侍候。
English: The next day, Pei Du came. Li Yao, dressed in full military attire, waited in front of Pei Du's horse.

古文：度将避之，愬曰： 此方不识上下等威之分久矣，请公因以示之。 
现代文：裴度想要谦让，他说： 这儿的人不懂得上下级威严的不同已经很久了，请求您借这次机会做给他们看看。 
English: "It's been a long time that people here don't understand the difference between the authority of a superior and that of a subordinate, so I'd like to ask you to take this opportunity to show them.

古文：度以宰相礼受愬迎谒，众皆耸观。
现代文：裴度用宰相的礼节接受他的迎接和拜见，众人都恭敬地观看。
English: Baidu used the prime minister's etiquette to receive his greeting and visit, and everyone watched respectfully.

古文：明日，愬军还于文成栅。
现代文：第二天，他的军队回到文成栅。
English: The next day, his army returned to Wenchengzao.

古文：十一月，诏以愬检校尚书左仆射，兼襄州刺史、山南东道节度、襄邓随唐复郢均房等州观察等使、上柱国，封凉国公，食邑三千户，食实封五百户，一子五品正员。
现代文：十一月份，皇帝下诏书任命他为检校尚书左仆射，兼任襄州刺史，山南东道节度，襄、邓、随、唐、复、郢、均、房等州观察等使，上柱国，封为凉国公，食邑三千户，食实封五百户，一个儿子封五品正员官。
English: In November, the emperor issued an imperial rescript appointing him as the inspector of the school, Shangshu Zuofu Jiao, and also as the inspector of the state of Xiangzhou, the host of the Shannan Festival, the state observer of Xiang, Deng, Sui, Tang, Fuxi, Jia, Fang and other states, and the official of Shangzhu Province, the official of Liang Province, the official of 3,000 households in Zhiyou, the official of 500 households in Zhizhi, and the official of five products for one son.

古文：宪宗有意复陇右故地，元和十三年五月，授愬凤翔陇右节度使，仍诏路由阙下。
现代文：唐宪宗想要收复陇右过去的国土，元和十三年五月，任命他为凤翔、陇右节度使，诏书要求他从京城经过。
English: Emperor Xianzong of the Tang Dynasty wanted to recover the land of the past, and in May of the Yuan Dynasty and the thirteenth year, he appointed him as Fengxiang, the festival envoy of the right, and the edict required him to pass through the capital.

古文：愬未发，属李师道再叛，诏田弘正、义成、宣武等军讨之，乃移愬为徐州刺史、武宁军节度使，代其兄愿。
现代文：他还没上路，碰到李师道再次叛变，皇帝下诏田弘正、义成、宣武等军征讨李师道，于是调他任徐州刺史、武宁军节度使，取代他的哥哥李愿。
English: He had not yet set out on his journey when he encountered Li Shidao's second rebellion. The emperor sent the armies of Tian Hongzheng, Yicheng, and Xuanwu to recruit Li Shidao, and he was transferred to be the military envoy of the Xuzhou and Wu Ning armies to replace his brother Li Zhen.

古文：兄弟交换岐、徐二镇，旬日间再践父兄之任。
现代文：兄弟俩交换凤翔和徐州两处节镇，他十天以内接连担任父亲和哥哥的职务。
English: The two brothers exchanged the two festival towns of Fengxiang and Xuzhou, and he served as the father and brother in succession within ten days.

古文：愬至徐方，理兵有方略。
现代文：他到了徐州，治军有计谋策略。
English: When he arrived in Xuzhou, he had a cunning strategy for governing the army.

古文：时蔡将董重质贬春州司户，愬上表请恕重质赐之，堪于军前驱使，即诏征还送武宁军，愬乃署为牙将。
现代文：当时蔡州将领董重质被贬为春州司户，他上奏请求宽恕董重质并赐给他，以便在军中任用，皇帝立即下诏书把董重质征调回来派到武宁军，他任命为牙将。
English: At that time, the general of Caizhou, Dong Jiaojie, was degraded to the status of the Chunzhou steward. He appealed for forgiveness for Dong Jiaojie and gave it to him so that he could be appointed in the army. The emperor immediately issued an edict to transfer Dong Jiaojie back and sent him to the Wuning Army. He was appointed as a tooth captain.

古文：愬破贼金乡，凡十一战，擒贼将五十，俘斩万计。
现代文：李訫在金乡打败了叛军，共接战十一次，俘获叛军将领五十名，俘虏杀死叛军上万名。
English: Li Gan defeated the rebels in Jinxiang, and engaged in a total of eleven battles. He captured fifty rebel generals, and the captives killed tens of thousands of rebels.

古文：淄青平，将有事燕、赵。
现代文：淄青平定了，又准备征讨燕、赵。
English: The indigo has been leveled, and they are also preparing to recruit Yan and Zhao.

古文：元和十五年九月，以愬检校左仆射、同中书门下平章事、潞州大都督府长史、昭义节度使，仍赐兴宁里第。
现代文：元和十五年九月份，任命他为检校左仆射、同中书门下平章事、潞州大都督府长史、昭义节度使，赐给他兴宁里宅院一处。
English: In September of the 15th year of the Yuan and the 15th year of the Heian period, he was appointed as the left attendant of the inspection of the school, the subordinate of the book gate of the same school, the governor of Zhangzhou, the governor of the governor of Zhangzhou, and the deputy of the governor of the festival, and he was given a place in the Xingningli mansion.

古文：十月，王承宗卒，魏博田弘正移任镇州。
现代文：十月份，王承宗去世了，魏博田弘正移任镇守镇州。
English: In October, Wang Chengzong passed away, and Wei Bo Tianhong was transferred to the position of the town guard of Zhenzhou.

古文：愬至潞州，四月，迁魏州大都督府长史、魏博节度使。
现代文：李訫到了潞州，四月份，改任魏州大都督府长史、魏博节度使。
English: Li Jun arrived in Ganzhou, and in April, he was reappointed as the governor of the Grand Duchy of Weizhou and the chief of the Wei Bo Festival.

古文：长庆元年，幽、镇复乱，愬闻之，素服以令三军曰： 魏人所以富庶而能通知圣化者，由田公故也。
现代文：长庆元年，幽州、镇州又发生了叛乱，李訫听说这事后，穿白色服装对全军发命令说： 魏博人民之所以富裕人多而且能服从皇帝管辖，是田公治理得好。
English: In the first year of Changqing, there was another rebellion in Yuzhou and Zhenzhou. After hearing about this, Li Qian, wearing white clothing, issued an order to the whole army, saying: The reason why the people of Weibo are rich and can obey the jurisdiction of the emperor is that Tian Gong is well governed.

古文：天子以其仁而爱人，使理镇、冀。
现代文：皇帝因为他仁德又爱护人民，派他去治理镇州。
English: The emperor sent him to govern Zhenzhou because of his benevolence and love for the people.

古文：且田公出于魏，抚师七年，一旦镇人不道，敢兹残害，以魏为无人也。
现代文：田公是从魏博去的，治军七年，镇州军人一时胡来，就敢于这样残害，他们认为魏博没有勇士了吗？
English: Tian Gong went from Weibo. He had been in charge of the army for seven years. The soldiers from the town and the state were fooled for a moment, and they dared to commit such atrocities. Did they think that Weibo had no warriors?

古文：若父兄子弟食田公恩者，其何以报？ 
现代文：你们父亲哥哥儿子们受田公恩惠的，应怎样报答呢？ 
English: Your fathers, your brothers, and your sons, who have been favored by the Lord of the Field, how will you repay them?

古文：众皆恸哭。
现代文：众人都痛哭。
English: Everyone was crying.

古文：又以玉带、宝剑与牛元翼，遣使谓之曰： 吾先人常以此剑立大勋，吾又以此剑平蔡寇，今镇人叛逆，公以此翦之。 
现代文：他又将玉带、宝剑交给牛元翼，并派使者对他说： 我父亲曾用这把宝剑立下大功，我又用这把宝剑讨平了蔡州叛贼，现镇州人叛乱，您也用这把宝剑讨平他们。 
English: He also gave the jade belt and the sword to Niu Yuanyi, and sent an envoy to him saying, "My father used this sword to accomplish great feats. I also used this sword to subdue the rebels in Caizhou. Now the people of Zhenzhou are rebelling. You should also use this sword to subdue them."

古文：元翼承命感激，乃以剑及带令于军中，报之曰： 愿以众从，竭其死力 。
现代文：牛元翼接受命令后感情激动，就用这宝剑和玉带在军中动员，并禀报他说： 愿率军听令，竭尽我的所有力量。 
English: After receiving the order, Niu Yuan Ying became emotional and used the sword and jade belt to mobilize the army, and reported to him: "I am willing to lead the army according to the order, and do my best."

古文：方有制置，会疾作，不能治军，人违纪律，功遂无成。
现代文：正准备出兵，碰上李訫疾病发作，不能处理军务，兵将违反军纪，于是没能建功。
English: He was preparing to send troops, but when Li Qian fell ill, he couldn't handle military affairs, and the soldiers would violate military discipline, so he couldn't do any good.

古文：朝廷以田布代之，除太子少保，归东都。
现代文：皇帝派田布接替他，任命他为太子少保，回到了洛阳。
English: The emperor sent Tianbu to replace him, appointed him as the prince minor protector, and returned to Luoyang.

古文：是年十月，卒于洛阳，时年四十九。
现代文：这年十月，他在洛阳去世，享年四十九岁。
English: In October of that year, he died in Luoyang at the age of forty-nine.

古文：穆宗闻之震悼，赗赙加等，赠太尉。
现代文：唐穆宗听说这消息非常悲痛，命助丧礼物增加一等，赠官为太尉。
English: Tang Muzong was very sad to hear this news. He was promoted to the first grade and promoted to the rank of second lieutenant.

