古文：才名上官仪东方虬苏颋李邕李华李白
现代文：才名上官仪东方虬苏颋李邕李华李白
English: It is only in the name of officialdom that the Orient, the Su, the Li, the Li Hua, and the Bai come to the fore.

古文：好尚房琯韩愈李约陆鸿渐独孤及杜兼李德裕潘彦宋之愻朱前疑
现代文：好尚房琯韩愈李约陆鸿渐独孤及杜兼李德裕潘彦宋之愻朱前疑
English: Han Yu, Li Yo, Lu Hong, Du Kan, Li Deyu, Pan Yan, Song Zi, Zhu Qian,

古文：鲜于叔明权长孺
现代文：鲜于叔明权长孺
English: Fewer than Shumei Quanchangjun

古文：才名
现代文：才名
English: Name of talent

古文：上官仪
现代文：上官仪
English: Shangguan ceremony is over

古文：高宗承贞观之后，天下无事，上官仪独持国政。
现代文：唐高宗李治继承太宗皇位后，天下太平无事，宰相上官仪独掌朝政。
English: After Emperor Gaozong of Tang Dynasty Li Zhi succeeded the throne of Emperor Taizong, there was peace and tranquility in the country, and the prime minister was in sole charge of the government.

古文：音韵清亮，群公望之若神仙。
现代文：一次，上官仪于拂晓前在皇城外等候上朝时，手中牵着马缰绳，骑马踏着月光沿着洛水河堤缓缓而行，边走边口中吟诗一首：脉脉广川流，驱马历长洲。鹊飞山月曙，蝉噪野风秋。声音清亮，音韵铿锵。等候上朝的文武百官望着边行边吟诗的上官仪，心中暗暗赞叹道：真如上界的神仙降临到凡世上啊！
English: Once, when Shangguan Yi was waiting for Shangchong outside the imperial city before dawn, he took the reins of the horse in his hands and rode slowly along the Luoshui River embankment under the moonlight. While walking, he recited a poem: the pulse of the Guangchuan River, driving the horse to Changzhou. The mountain and the moon were flying, the cicadas were noisy, and the wind was blowing. The voice was clear and the music was beautiful. The hundreds of civil and military officials who were waiting for Shangchong looked at Shangguan Yi, who was chanting poems while walking, and secretly praised in their hearts: It is as if the

古文：东方虬
现代文：东方虬
English: Dongfangyao

古文：左史东方虬每云：二百年后，乞与西门豹作对。
现代文：左史东方虬常说：二百年以后，请求跟西门豹作对句。
English: Zuo Shi Dongfang Yao often said: After two hundred years, please make a counter-sentence with Ximen leopard.

古文：尤工诗。
现代文：虬尤其善于作诗。
English: Zou is particularly good at writing poetry.

古文：沈佺期以工诗著名，燕公张说尝谓之曰：沈三兄诗，直须还他第一。
现代文：跟他同时代的诗人沈佺期以擅长作诗闻名。燕国公张说曾说过：跟沈三兄的诗比较，还应是东方虬的诗为第一。
English: His contemporary, the poet Shen Xizhi, was known to be good at writing poems. Yan Guo Gong Zhang said that he once said: Compared with the poems of Shen San's brother, the poems of Dongfang Yao should be the first.

古文：苏颋
现代文：苏颋
English: Su Shi

古文：苏颋少聪俊，一览千言。
现代文：苏颋小时候聪明俊秀，读书的速度特快，扫一眼能读千言。
English: When Su Shi was a child, he was smart and handsome. He could read very fast and could read a thousand words at a glance.

古文：景龙二年六月二日，初定内难，准颋为中书舍人，在太极后阁。
现代文：唐中宗景龙二年六月二日，内乱初定，苏颋被提升为中书舍人，在太极殿后阁任职。
English: On June 2nd, the second year of the reign of King Jinglong of the Tang Dynasty, when the civil war was initially determined, Su Xi was promoted to the position of the secretary of the Chinese Academy of Letters, and served in the back office of the Taiji Palace.

古文：时颋尚年少，初当剧任，文诏填委，动以万计，时或忧其不济。
现代文：当时苏颋还年轻，刚刚担当这项重任，各种文告诏书都让他草拟，动则上万件，有人担心他胜任不了。
English: At that time, Su Shi was still young and had just taken on this important task. He was asked to draft all kinds of proclamations and edicts, and there were tens of thousands of motions. Some people were worried that he was not competent.

古文：而颋手操口对，无毫厘差失。
现代文：然而苏颋手写口说，没有一丝一毫的差错。
English: However, Su Shi's handwriting said that there was not the slightest error.

古文：主书韩礼、谭子阳转书诏草，屡谓颋曰：乞公稍迟，礼等书不及，恐手腕将废。
现代文：后来，主管文书的韩礼、谭子阳担任抄写诏书这项工作，屡屡对苏颋说：请你口述得稍慢一些，口述快了我们记不下来，恐怕会将我们的手腕子累坏了的。
English: Later, Han Li and Tan Ziyang, the clerks in charge of the work of copying the edict, repeatedly said to Su Shi: "Please dictate a little slower, we can't remember fast dictation, I'm afraid it will wear out our wrists."

古文：中书令李峤见之，叹曰：舍人思若涌泉。峤等所不测也。
现代文：中书令李峤看到这种情形，感叹地说：苏颋文思若泉涌，是我们这些人所想不到的啊！
English: When Li Yao, the editor-in-chief of the People's Daily, saw this situation, he said with a sigh: "Su Yao Wenshu is like a spring, which is unimaginable to us!"

古文：李邕
现代文：李邕
English: Lee Min Ho

古文：李邕自刺史入计京师。
现代文：李邕自刺史入京听候考核升迁。
English: Li Wei has been in Beijing since he was assassinated, waiting for the examination and promotion.

古文：邕素负才名，频被贬斥。
现代文：邕一向负有才名，却屡遭贬斥。
English: Zou has always had a reputation for talent, but he has been repeatedly disparaged.

古文：皆以邕能文养士，贾生、信陵之流。
现代文：都认为他既能写一手好漂亮的文章，又广为交朋结友，是汉时贾谊、战国时的信陵君。
English: They all think that he can not only write a beautiful article, but also make friends and make friends widely. He is the Han Dynasty's Jia Yi and the Warring States Period's Xinling Jun.

古文：执事忌胜，剥落在外。人间素有声称，后进不识。
现代文：因此，朝内主事的达官贵人都忌恨李邕，使他被免去官职流落京师之外，一向有很大的名声，朝中庸碌无识之辈却不赏识他。
English: Therefore, the high-ranking officials and dignitaries who were in charge of the internal affairs of the dynasty all hated Li Qiye, so that he was exempted from the official stream and fell outside the Beijing division. He always had a great reputation, but the mediocre and ignorant people in the dynasty did not appreciate him.

古文：京洛阡陌聚看，以为古人，或将眉目有异，衣冠望风，寻访门巷。又中使临问，索其新文，复为人阴中，竟不得进改。
现代文：李邕入京后每在路上行走，受到很多人的围观，以为他是前朝古人，或者认为他相貌不凡。一些士子争相结纳，登门拜访，或者求人打探，索求李邕新写的文章，暗中为科考试卷，竟然不能改动。
English: After Li Qian entered Beijing, whenever he walked on the road, he was surrounded by many people, who thought he was an ancient person of the previous dynasty, or thought he was extraordinary. Some scholars competed to be admitted, visited the door, or asked someone to investigate, and asked for Li Qian's newly written article, secretly as a subject examination paper, which could not be changed.

古文：天宝初，为汲郡北海太守。
现代文：天宝初年，李邕被升为北海太守。
English: In the first year of Tianbao, Li Xi was promoted to the governor of the North Sea.

古文：性豪侈，不拘细行，驰猎纵逸。
现代文：他性情豪放好侈华，不拘小节，喜欢骑马狩猎，纵情享乐。
English: He was a man of extravagant tastes, unconstrained by rules, fond of horseback hunting, and indulgent with pleasure.

古文：后柳绩下狱，吉温令绩引邕，议及休咎。
现代文：稍后，柳绩获罪被关入牢狱，宰相吉温令柳绩诬陷李邕，朝内对他的功过争议很大。
English: Later, Liu Jie was convicted and sent to prison. Premier Ji Wen ordered Liu Jie to frame Li Qian, and there was a great controversy within the imperial court over his merits and demerits.

古文：厚相赂遗，词状连引，敕初顺之。
现代文：吉温用重金贿赂柳绩，使其连续诉状诬陷李邕，终于使皇帝颁发诏书赐李邕死。
English: Jiwen bribed Liu Jie with a large sum of money, so that he continuously filed a complaint to frame Li Xuan, and finally the emperor issued an edict to sentence Li Xuan to death.

古文：罗希奭驰往，就郡决杀之。
现代文：罗希奭携带诏书驰往北海郡，就地处死李邕。
English: Luo Xizhao drove to Beihai County with the edict and executed Li Xizhao on the spot.

古文：邕早擅才名，尤长碑记。
现代文：李邕很早就远播才名，尤其擅长撰写碑石记文。
English: Li Yao was famous for his writing very early on. He was especially good at writing stone inscriptions.

古文：前后所制，凡数百首；受纳馈送，亦至钜万。
现代文：他一生为人撰写碑石记文几百篇，接受馈送达许多万。
English: Throughout his life, he wrote hundreds of epitaphs for people and received many thousands of contributions.

古文：自古鬻文获财，未有如邕者。
现代文：自古以来靠卖文致富发财的，没有人象李邕这样的啊。
English: Since ancient times, no one has made a fortune by selling literature like Li Yao.

古文：李华
现代文：李华
English: Li Hua

古文：李华以文学名重於天宝末。
现代文：李华以他文学上的才华闻名于天宝末年。
English: Li Hua was famous for his literary talent in the last years of Tianbao.

古文：至德中，自前司封员外，起为相国李梁公岘从事，检校吏部员外。
现代文：到至德年间，自前司升为员外，起用为宰相梁国公李岘的幕僚，任检校吏部员外郎。
English: During the Zhi De period, he was promoted from the former secretary to a non-member, appointed as the chief of staff of the Prime Minister Liang Guogong Li Wei, and appointed as a member of the inspection department of the school.

古文：时陈少游镇维扬，尤仰其名。
现代文：当时，陈少游镇守维扬，尤其仰慕李华的才名。
English: At that time, Chen Shaoyou, the town guard of Wiyang, especially admired Li Hua's talent.

古文：一旦，城门吏报华入府。
现代文：一日，城门吏报告说李华已来维扬。
English: One day, the gatekeeper reported that Li Hua had come to Wiyang.

古文：少游大喜，簪笏待之。
现代文：陈少游大喜，返回到府上以簪笏之礼接待。
English: Chen Shaoyou was overjoyed and returned to the residence to receive a warm welcome.

古文：少顷，复白云：已访萧功曹矣。
现代文：稍许，城门吏又报告说：李华已去拜访功曹萧参军了啊。
English: A little later, the gatekeeper reported again: Li Hua has gone to visit Gong Cao Xiao to join the army.

古文：颖、功曹士也。李白
现代文：颖、功曹是跟李华一样的有才学的人啊。李白
English: Ying and Gong Cao are just as talented as Li Hua. Li Bai

古文：李太白初自蜀至京师，舍于逆旅。贺监知章闻其名，首访之。
现代文：李白初次自巴蜀到京都长安，住在旅店里，秘书监贺知章闻其大名，首先拜访了他。
English: For the first time, Li Bai traveled from Bashu to Kyoto Chang'an and stayed at an inn. His secretary, Guan He Zhizhang, heard of his daimyo and visited him first.

古文：既奇其姿，又请所为文，白出《蜀道难》以示之。
现代文：见李白相貌不凡，并请李白拿出诗作拜读。李白取出《蜀道难》给贺知章。
English: Seeing Li Bai's extraordinary appearance, he asked Li Bai to take out a poem to read. Li Bai took out "Shu Dao Nang" to give to He Zhizhang.

古文：读未竟，称叹数四，号为谪仙人。
现代文：贺还没有读完，就赞叹了几次，送李白一个雅号为谪仙人。
English: He hadn't finished reading it yet, so he praised it several times, and gave Li Bai a nickname as the Fairy Godmother.

古文：白酷好酒，知章因解金龟换酒，与倾尽醉，期不间日，由是称誉光赫。
现代文：李白酷爱饮酒，贺知章为此曾解下身边所系的金龟作抵押换酒与李白对饮，两人常常喝得一同醉倒，几乎没有间断过，由此，他们豪饮的声誉日益烜赫。
English: Li Bai loved to drink, so He Zhizhang used to borrow money from the golden turtles around him as collateral in exchange for drinking with Li Bai. The two of them would often get drunk together, almost without a break. As a result, their reputation for drinking became more and more prominent.

古文：贺又见其《乌牺曲》，叹赏苦吟曰：此诗可以泣鬼神矣。
现代文：贺知章又拜读了李白的《乌栖曲》，一边仔细吟咏品味一边赞赏地说：这首《乌栖曲》可以让鬼神哭泣啊！
English: He Zhizhang also read Li Bai's "Usuqi" and said with appreciation: "This "Usuqi" can make ghosts and gods cry!"

古文：曲曰：姑苏台上乌栖时，吴王宫里醉西施。
现代文：《乌栖曲》诗如下：姑苏台上乌栖时，吴王宫里醉西施。
English: The poem of "Wu Sui" is as follows: When Gu Su was on the stage of Wu Sui, he was drunk in the palace of King Wu.

古文：吴歌楚舞欢未毕，西山犹衔半边日。
现代文：吴歌楚舞欢未毕，西山犹衔半边日。
English: Wu's song and dance festival is not yet over, and the West Mountain is still in the middle of the day.

古文：金壶丁丁漏水多，起看秋月坠江波，东方渐高奈乐何。
现代文：金壶丁丁漏水多，起看秋月坠江波，东方渐高奈乐何。
English: The pot of gold is leaking more and more, the autumn moon is falling, and the east is getting higher and higher.

古文：或言是《乌夜啼》，二篇未知孰是。
现代文：有人说这首诗又叫《乌夜啼》，世上有李白两首这样的诗流传，不知哪篇是真的。
English: Some people say that this poem is also called "Black Nightingale." There are two such poems by Li Bai circulating in the world, and I don't know which one is true.

古文：又《乌夜啼》曰：黄云城边乌欲栖，归飞哑哑枝上啼。
现代文：另一篇《乌夜啼》是这样写的：黄云城边乌欲栖，归飞哑哑枝上啼。
English: Another "Black Nightingale" is written like this: "On the edge of Huangyun City, the black nightingale wants to roost, but it flies back to the upper branches.

古文：机中织锦秦川女，碧纱如烟隔窗语。
现代文：机中织锦秦川女，碧纱如烟隔窗语。
English: The brocade Qinchuan Girl is woven in the machine, and the blue yarn is like smoke separating the windows.

古文：停梭向人问故夫，欲说辽西泪如雨。
现代文：停梭向人问故夫，欲说辽西泪如雨。
English: She stopped to ask people about her late husband, wanting to say that Liao Xi was in tears.

古文：白才逸气高，与陈拾遗子昂齐名，先后合德。
现代文：李白才华飘逸、性情高傲，与任右拾遗的陈子昂齐名，一先一后，两人志向相同。
English: Li Bai's talent is ethereal and his temperament is proud. He is on a par with Chen Zi'an, Ren Yu's successor, and the two share the same aspirations.

古文：其论诗云：梁陈已来，艳薄斯极。
现代文：李白论及诗歌的发展时说：梁陈以来，诗风绮丽艳薄已达极点。
English: Commenting on the development of poetry, Li Bai said: Since Liang Chen, the poetic style has reached its peak.

古文：沈休文又尚以声律，将复古道，非我而谁欤！
现代文：初唐诗人沈佺期又只崇尚声律。能够光复古人为诗之道的，非我李白莫属啊！
English: In his twilight years, the poet of the early Tang Dynasty only advocated the vocal melody. If you want to be a poet, you have to be Li Bai!

古文：玄宗闻之，召入翰林。
现代文：唐玄宗听说李白的诗名，下诏书召他入翰林院。
English: When Tang Xuan Zong heard of Li Bai's poem title, he issued an imperial edict summoning him to enter Hanlin Academy.

古文：以其才藻绝人，器识兼茂，便以上位处之，故未命以官。
现代文：并因李白才华横溢超绝人上，仪表非凡，才识过人，而给他以优厚的待遇，没有敕封他具体的官职。
English: And because of Li Bai's extraordinary talent, extraordinary appearance, and extraordinary talent, he was given generous treatment and did not seal his specific official position.

古文：尝因宫人行乐。谓高力士曰：对此良辰美景，岂可独以声伎为娱。
现代文：一次宫人要演奏声律，玄宗对高力士说：面对良辰美景，怎么可以只用乐伎奏乐为娱乐呢？
English: Once, when the palace attendants wanted to play the melody, Xuanzong said to Gao Lixi, "In the face of the beautiful scenery, how can you only play music for entertainment?

古文：倘时得逸才词人吟咏之。可以夸耀于后。遂命召白。
现代文：倘若能有天才的词人当场吟诗填词，既增添乐趣又可向后世夸耀。于是命宫人召见李白入宫。
English: If a gifted lyricist could chant and fill in the lyrics on the spot, it would not only add fun but also boast to future generations. Therefore, the palace people summoned Li Bai to enter the palace.

古文：时宁王邀白饮酒，已醉。
现代文：是时，宁王邀请李白饮酒。
English: At that time, Ning Wang invited Li Bai to drink.

古文：既至，拜舞颓然。
现代文：李白已喝得酩酊大醉，来到宫中，飘飘摇摇地拜见玄宗。
English: Li Bai had drunk too much and came to the palace to visit Xuanzong.

古文：上知其薄声律，谓非所长。命为宫中行乐五言律诗十首。
现代文：玄宗知道李白不谙声律，认为他不擅长，就命他为宫中的乐师作五言律诗十首。
English: Xuanzong knew that Li Bai did not know how to play the melody and thought that he was not good at it, so he ordered him to compose ten poems of the five-syllable melody for the musician in the palace.

古文：白顿首曰：宁王赐臣酒，今已醉。
现代文：李白叩拜后说：宁王赏赐臣酒喝，现在已经喝醉了。
English: After bowing, Li Bai said, "Ning Wang rewarded his vassal with wine, and now he is drunk.

古文：倘陛下赐臣无畏，始可尽臣薄技。
现代文：倘若陛下赐臣喝醉了也不要畏惧，臣才尽献薄技。
English: If your majesty gives a drunk to a vassal, do not be afraid, the vassal will do his best.

古文：上曰：可。
现代文：玄宗说：可以。
English: Wu Shuzhong and Sun Quan said to each other: You can do this.

古文：既遣二内臣掖扶之，命研墨濡笔以授之。
现代文：立刻命两位内臣搀扶着李白，命人为李白研墨。
English: He immediately ordered two vassals to support Li Bai and ordered someone to study Li Bai's ink.

古文：又命二人张朱丝栏于其前。
现代文：将笔醮好墨，又命两个内臣张开朱色丝绢摆在李白面前。
English: He dipped the pen in good ink, and ordered two vassals to open the vermilion silk cocoon and place it in front of Li Bai.

古文：白取笔抒思，略不停缀，十篇立就。
现代文：李白握笔疾书，一点也不停顿，十篇五言律诗立等可取。
English: Li Bai's writing is fast, without a single pause. Ten five-syllable poems are recommended.

古文：更无加点，笔迹遒利，凤跱龙拿，律度对属，无不精绝。
现代文：而且一点不用改动，字迹遒劲锋利，如龙舞凤飞；律度对仗，没有不精绝的。
English: Moreover, it does not need to be changed at all. The handwriting is crisp and sharp, like a dragon dancing with a phoenix; the rhythm is perfect.

古文：其首篇曰：柳色黄金嫩，梨花白雪香。
现代文：其首篇是这样写的：柳色黄金嫩，梨花白雪香。
English: Its first article was written like this: Willow-colored cucumbers are tender and golden, pear blossoms are fragrant and white.

古文：玉楼巢翡翠，珠殿宿鸳鸯。
现代文：玉楼巢翡翠，珠殿宿鸳鸯。
English: The Jade Palace's lair is emerald, and the Pearl Palace's inn is emerald.

古文：选妓随雕辇，徵歌出洞房。
现代文：选妓随雕辇，徵歌出洞房。
English: The selected prostitutes follow the carved urns and sing the song of the bride and groom.

古文：宫中谁第一，飞燕在昭阳。
现代文：宫中谁第一，飞燕在昭阳。
English: Who is the first in the palace, Feiyan in Zhaoyang.

古文：玄宗恩礼极厚，而白才行不羁，放旷坦率，乞归故山。
现代文：玄宗给李白以极厚重的礼遇，然而李白为文为人都落拓不羁，率直坦荡，请求回归故里。
English: Xuanzong treated Li Bai with great courtesy. However, Li Bai was a free-spirited person, open and frank, and asked to return to his hometown.

古文：玄宗亦以非廊庙器，优诏许之。
现代文：玄宗也认为李白不是长守朝政的栋梁之材，因此下诏书允许他归山并赐以重金。
English: Xuanzong also believed that Li Bai was not a pillar of the long-serving dynasty, so the next imperial edict allowed him to return to the mountains and gave him a large sum of money.

古文：尝有醉吟诗曰：天若不爱酒，酒星不在天。
现代文：李白曾有一次醉酒吟诗：天若不爱酒，酒星不在天。
English: Li Bai once recited a drunken poem: If the heavens do not love wine, the wine star is not in the heavens.

古文：地若不爱酒，地应无酒泉。
现代文：地若不爱酒，地应无酒泉。
English: If the land does not love wine, the land should have no wine springs.

古文：天地既爱酒，爱酒胡愧焉。
现代文：天地既爱酒，爱酒胡愧焉。
English: Heaven and earth both love wine, but love of wine is shameless.

古文：三杯通大道，五斗合自然。
现代文：三杯通大道，五斗合自然。
English: Three cups pass through the avenue, five doos are natural.

古文：但得酒中趣。
现代文：但得酒中趣。
English: But it's an interesting drink.

古文：勿为醒者传。
现代文：勿为醒者传。
English: Don't preach to the converted.

古文：更忆贺监知章诗曰：欲向东南去，定将谁举杯。
现代文：李白还有一首忆贺知章的诗：欲向东南去，定将谁举杯。
English: Li Bai also has a poem that recalls He Zhizhang: If you want to go to the southeast, be sure to raise a glass.

古文：稽山无贺老，却棹酒船回。
现代文：稽山无贺老，却棹酒船回。
English: There is no old man on the mountain, but there is a wine boat coming back.

古文：后在浔阳，复为永王璘延接，累谪夜郎。
现代文：后来，李白漫游到浔阳，又为永王璘聘请为幕僚。
English: Later, Li Bai roamed to Shenyang and was hired by Yong Wangjun as a staff member.

古文：时杜甫赠白诗二十韵，多叙其事。
现代文：永王璘反兵失败，李白受牵连被发配到夜郎。
English: Yong Wang's counterattack failed, and Li Bai was implicated and sent to Yelang.

古文：白后放还，游赏江表山水。
现代文：这段事情在李白同时代的大诗人杜甫所作的诗《赠李白诗二十韻》，作了详尽的记述。
English: This episode was described in detail in the poem "Twenty rhymes for Li Bai," written by Du Fu, a great poet who was Li Bai's contemporary.

古文：卒于宣城之采石，葬于谢公青山。
现代文：李白在去往夜郎途中得到玄宗的敕书返还，继续在江南一带赏山玩水，病死于宣城的采石，埋葬在谢公山上。
English: On his way to Yelang, Li Bai received the return of the imperial edict from Xuanzong and continued to enjoy the mountains and water in the south of the Yangtze River. He died of illness in the quarry of Xuancheng and was buried on Xie Gong Mountain.

古文：范传正为宣歙观察使，为之立碑，以旌其隧。
现代文：范传正任宣歙观察使时，为李白立一碑，用来表彰李白的盖世英才。
English: When Fan Chuan was serving as the Xuanwu observation envoy, he erected a monument for Li Bai to commend Li Bai's world-class talent.

古文：初白自幼好酒，於兖州习业，平居多饮。又于任城县构酒楼，日与同志荒宴其上，少有醒时。
现代文：李白年幼时就喜饮酒，在兖州学习时就经常饮酒，并在任城县建造一座酒楼，每天与好友纵酒，很少有不喝醉的时候。
English: Li Bai liked to drink alcohol when he was young, he often drank alcohol when he was studying in Zhangzhou, and he built a restaurant in Rencheng County. He drank alcohol with his friends every day, and there was rarely a time when he was not drunk.

古文：邑人皆以白重名，望其重而加敬焉。
现代文：当地人都知道李白能喝酒，随着李白豪饮的名声越来越大更加敬重他。
English: Local people all know that Li Bai can drink alcohol, and they respect him more and more as Li Bai's reputation for drinking alcohol grows.

古文：好尚
现代文：好尚
English: Nice one.

古文：房琯
现代文：房琯
English: Chestnut

古文：苏州洞庭，杭州兴德寺。
现代文：苏州有洞庭，杭州有兴德寺。
English: Suzhou has Dongting, Hangzhou has Xingde Temple.

古文：房太尉琯云，不游兴德洞庭。未见佳处。
现代文：太尉房琯说：不游兴德寺与洞庭，你就没有见到过最美的景致。
English: "Without visiting Xingde Temple and Dongting, you would not have seen the most beautiful scenery," said Lieutenant Fang Yao.

古文：寿安县有喷玉泉石溪，皆山水之胜绝者也。
现代文：寿安县境内有一条喷水的石溪，是景致超绝的旅游胜地。
English: There is a water-spouting stone stream in Shou'an County, which is a tourist resort with superb scenery.

古文：贞元中，琯以宾客辞为县令，乃铲翳荟，开径隧，人闻而异焉。
现代文：贞元年间，房琯为了游客能顺利观赏这个绝妙的风景胜地，辞去县令，带人去铲除林木，凿通隧道，开通去石溪的道路。
English: During the reign of Emperor Zhengyuan, in order for tourists to be able to enjoy this wonderful scenic spot, Fangyuan resigned from the county government and took people to uproot trees, dig tunnels, and open the road to Shixi.

古文：太和初，博陵崔蒙为主簿，标准于道周，人方造而游焉。
现代文：人们听说此事大为惊异。太和初年，博陵崔蒙任寿安县主簿。他测量好道路标好路标，重新修筑好这条道路，人们才能去石溪游观。
English: People were very surprised to hear about this. In the first year of the Taihe era, Boling Cui Meng was appointed as the main bookkeeper of Shouan County. He measured the road, marked the road, and rebuilt the road, so that people could go to Shixi for sightseeing.

古文：又颜太师真卿刻姓名於石，或置之高山之上，或沉之大洲之底，而云，安知不有陵谷之变耶。
现代文：又有太师颜真卿在石块上刻上自己的姓名，有的放在高山顶上，有的埋在谷底，并说：怎么知道就没有高山变峡谷、峡谷变高山的时候呢？
English: There was also the great teacher Yan Zhenqing, who carved his own name on stones, some placed on the top of high mountains, some buried at the bottom of the valley, and said: How do you know that there is no time when high mountains become canyons and canyons become high mountains?

古文：韩愈
现代文：韩愈
English: Han Yu

古文：韩愈好奇，与客登华山绝峰。
现代文：韩愈好奇，与客人一起攀登华山绝顶。
English: Han Yu is curious and climbs to the top of Mount Hua with his guests.

古文：度不能返，发狂恸哭，为书遗华阴令。
现代文：登上绝顶后，回头望来路险绝异常，认为无法返回山下，惊急得放声大哭。写封信抛下山给华阴县令。
English: After climbing to the top of the mountain, he looked back and thought that the way back was extremely dangerous. He thought that he could not return to the bottom of the mountain. He was so surprised that he burst into tears. He wrote a letter and threw it down the mountain to the Huayin County magistrate.

古文：令百计取之，乃下。
现代文：县令拾到信后千方百计设法接他返回山下，终于成功了。
English: After the county magistrate found the letter, he tried his best to get him back down the mountain, and finally succeeded.

古文：又李氏子为千牛，与其侪类登慈恩寺浮图。穷危极险，跃出槛外，失身而坠，赖腰带挂钉，为风所摇，久而未落。
现代文：有个叫李千牛的孩子，同他的伙伴们一块儿登慈恩寺塔，危险极了，跃出寺塔栏栅外，失足坠入塔下，偏巧腰带挂在塔身钉子上悬在空中，风吹身摇，久久没坠下地来。
English: A child named Li Qian Niu, together with his friends, climbed the tower of Zi'en Temple. It was extremely dangerous. He jumped out of the temple tower railing, lost his footing and fell under the tower. By chance, his belt was hanging in the air on the nail of the tower body. The wind was blowing and he was shaking. It had been a long time since he had fallen to the ground.

古文：同登者惊倒槛中，不能复起。
现代文：同千牛一块儿登上寺塔的孩子惊恐得瘫倒在塔栏栅内，吓得爬不起来。
English: The child who climbed the temple tower with the thousand cows was so terrified that he collapsed into the tower railing and was too scared to get up.

古文：院僧遥望急呼，一寺悉出以救之，乃连衣为绳，久之取下。
现代文：寺院里的僧人远远地看见千牛悬垂在塔身半空，大声疾呼，惊动了寺内所有的僧人，都出来设法救援千牛。
English: The monks in the temple saw the thousand cows hanging in the middle of the tower from a distance and shouted loudly, alerting all the monks in the temple. They all came out to try to rescue the thousand cows.

古文：经宿而苏。
现代文：最后想出个将僧衣连结成绳的办法，由塔上垂送给千牛，让他握住衣绳，好长时间才慢慢将他拉上塔来。李千牛惊吓得昏死过去，昏睡了一宿才苏醒过来。
English: Finally, he came up with a way to tie the monk's robe into a rope and hang it from the tower for Qian Niu, letting him hold the rope and slowly pulling him up the tower for a long time. Li Qian Niu was so scared that he fainted and slept for a night before waking up.

古文：李约
现代文：李约
English: Li You

古文：兵部员外郎李约，汧公之子也。以近属宰相子，而雅爱玄机。
现代文：兵部员外郎李约，汧国公的儿子，接近于宰相儿子的地位。
English: Li Yao, the son of the son of the son of the son of the son, is close to the position of the son of the prime minister.

古文：萧萧冲远，德行既优。
现代文：李约有个雅好，他非常喜爱深奥微妙的义理。李约声名远播，品德操行都很优秀。
English: Li Yao has a good character, he is very fond of profound and subtle principles. Li Yao's reputation has spread far and wide, and his moral conduct is excellent.

古文：又有山林之致，琴道酒德词调，皆高绝一时。
现代文：他酷爱山林，琴艺、酒量、词道，都高绝一时，终生不接近女色。
English: He loved the mountains and forests, his piano playing, drinking, and poetry were all at an all-time high, and he never went near a woman.

古文：一生不近女色，性喜接引人物，而不好俗谈。
现代文：李约生性喜欢结交名人，而不爱谈论日常生活琐事。
English: Li Yangsheng likes to make friends with celebrities, but does not like to talk about daily life trivia.

古文：晨起草裹头，对客蹙融，便过一日。
现代文：他早晨起来随便收拾一下头脸，跟客人下下五道便是一天。
English: He wakes up in the morning and casually tidies up his face, and it's a day when he's had five conversations with guests.

古文：多蓄古器，在润州尝得古铁一片，击之精越。
现代文：李约收藏许多古器。他在润州曾得到一片古铁，敲击它发出的响声精越不凡，非同一般。
English: Li You collects a lot of ancient tools. He once got a piece of ancient iron in Runzhou, and the more extraordinary the ringing it emits, the more extraordinary it is.

古文：又养一猨名生公，常以之随。
现代文：他又豢养一猨名叫生公，经常让它陪伴在身边。
English: He also has a pet toad called his father-in-law, which often accompanies him.

古文：逐月夜泛江，登金山，击铁鼓琴，猨必啸和。倾壶达夕，不俟外宾，醉而后已。
现代文：有时趁着月色好的时候登舟游江，弃舟登金山，敲击古铁，弹拨琴弦，身边的爱猨长啸和鸣，一壶接一壶地饮酒达通宵，不等候宾客，直到喝醉了方休。
English: Sometimes, when the moon is bright, they take advantage of the boat to travel the river, abandon the boat to climb the mountain, knock on the ancient iron, play the strings, the love gongs around them sing and chant, drink pot after pot all night long, and do not wait for guests until they are drunk.

古文：约曾佐李庶人锜浙西幕。约初至金陵，于府主庶人锜坐，屡赞招隐寺标致。
现代文：李约曾佐助李锜为浙西幕僚，他初到金陵，与李锜闲谈，多次说到招隐寺建筑宏大，风光不凡。
English: Li Youzeng, the assistant of Li Jie, was the staff officer of West Zhejiang Province. He first came to Jinling, chatted with Li Jie, and repeatedly said that the Zhaoying Temple was a magnificent building with extraordinary scenery.

古文：一日，庶人宴于寺中。
现代文：一天，李锜于招隐寺内宴请李约。
English: One day, Li Yao invited Li Yao to a banquet at Zhaoying Temple.

古文：明日，谓约曰：十郎尝夸招隐寺，昨游宴细看，何殊州中？
现代文：第二天，对约说：十郎你曾经夸赞招隐寺不凡，昨天宴游我仔细地观看，也没有什么特殊的地方。
English: The next day, I said to him, "Juro, you once praised Zhaoying Temple as extraordinary. I watched the party yesterday carefully, and there was nothing special about it.

古文：李笑曰：某所赏者疏野耳，若远山将翠幕遮，古松用彩物裹，腥膻涴鹿掊泉，音乐乱山鸟声，此则实不如在叔父大厅也。
现代文：李约笑着说：我所赞赏的是自然界粗犷的美。如果将远山用翠幕遮起，将古松用彩带裹住，在清泉中剖洗腥膻的鹿肉，用人工发出的乐声扰乱山鸟的婉转鸣唱。倘若这样，还不如老老实实地呆在叔父你的大厅里呢。
English: Li You smiled and said, "What I appreciate is the rugged beauty of the natural world. If you cover the distant mountains with a cedar curtain, wrap the ancient pines with colored ribbons, dissect the venison in the clear spring, and disturb the gentle singing of the mountain birds with artificial music. If so, it would be better to honestly stay in your uncle's hall.

古文：庶人大笑。
现代文：李锜大笑。
English: Li Yan laughed loudly.

古文：约性又嗜茶。能自煎。
现代文：李约爱好饮茶品茗，能够自己制茶。
English: Li You likes to drink and taste tea, and can make tea by himself.

古文：谓人曰：茶须缓火灸，活火煎。
现代文：常对人说：茶必须用温火炙，活火煎。
English: It is often said that tea must be roasted at a warm temperature and then stir-fried.

古文：活火谓炭火焰火也。
现代文：所谓活火就是炭火燃出的焰火啊。
English: The so-called live fire is a firework from a charcoal fire.

古文：客至，不限瓯数，竟日执持茶器不倦。
现代文：来了客人，品起茶来不限杯数，随你饮。李约终日操持茶具为客人斟茶，不知疲倦。
English: When guests arrive, you can make an unlimited number of cups of tea and drink as much as you like. Li Guo has been tirelessly pouring tea for guests all day long.

古文：曾奉使行硖石县东，爱渠水清流，旬日忘发。
现代文：李约曾奉命去硖石县东，因喜爱硖石县东的清沏溪流，流连其间十多天忘了出发。
English: Li You had been ordered to go to the east of Shishi County. Because he liked the clear stream in the east of Shishi County, he lingered there for more than ten days and forgot to leave.

古文：陆鸿渐
现代文：陆鸿渐
English: Lu Hongzhan

古文：太子文学陆鸿渐，名羽。其生不知何许人。
现代文：太子文学陪读陆鸿渐，名羽，不知他的生身父母是何人。
English: Lu Hongqian, the prince's literary companion, and Mei Yu, I do not know who his biological parents are.

古文：竟陵龙盖寺僧姓陆，于堤上得一初生儿，收育之，遂以陆为氏。
现代文：竟陵龙盖寺有一僧人姓陆，在河堤上拾到一个刚刚生下的婴儿，抱回寺院将他收养，这样就以陆为这个孩子的姓氏。
English: In fact, a monk surnamed Lu from Linglong Temple picked up a newborn baby on the riverbank, carried him back to the temple and adopted him, thus giving Lu as the child's surname.

古文：及长，聪俊多闻，学赡辞逸，诙谐谈辩，若东方曼倩之俦。
现代文：待到鸿渐长大成人，聪明俊秀，广见博识，学问丰富，言辞飘逸，而且诙谐善辩，如同东方曼倩一样。
English: By the time Hung Chien grew up, he was smart, handsome, well-known, knowledgeable, learned, eloquent, witty and eloquent, just like an oriental mandala.

古文：鸿渐性嗜茶，始创煎茶法。
现代文：陆鸿渐酷爱饮茶，头一个开创制茶的方法。
English: Lu Hongqian loved drinking tea and was the first to create a method for making tea.

古文：至今鬻茶之家，陶为其像，置于锡器之间，云宜茶足利。
现代文：至今卖茶的人家，用陶土烧制他的像，放在锡器间供奉，说陆羽能保佑他们茶好获大利。
English: To this day, tea sellers burn his image in clay and place it between pewter vessels as an offering, saying that Lu Yu can bless their tea with a good harvest.

古文：至太和，复州有一老僧，云是陆僧弟子，常讽歌云：不羡黄金垒，不羡白玉杯，不羡朝入省，不羡暮入台。
现代文：到太和年间，复州有一个年老僧人自称是陆姓僧人的弟子，常吟一首讽喻世人的诗歌：不羡黄金垒，不羡白玉杯，不羡朝入省，不羡暮入台。
English: During the Tahe years, there was an old monk in Fuzhou who claimed to be a disciple of a monk surnamed Lu. He often recited a poem that was a metaphor for the world: "I don't envy the golden fortress, I don't envy the jade cup, I don't envy entering the province in the morning, I don't envy entering Taiwan in the evening."

古文：唯羡西江水，曾向晋陵城下来。
现代文：唯羡西江水，曾向晋陵城下来。
English: Envious of the water of the West River, he once went to Jinling City.

古文：鸿渐又撰《茶经》二卷，行于代。
现代文：陆鸿渐还撰写了《茶经》二卷，流传世代。
English: Lu Hongyan also wrote two volumes of the "Tea Sutra," which has been passed down for generations.

古文：今为鸿渐形者，因目为茶神。
现代文：今天的卖茶人为陆鸿渐制像塑身供奉他，是将他看作茶神啊。
English: Today's tea sellers have gradually sculpted themselves into the likeness of Lu Hong to worship him, viewing him as the god of tea.

古文：有交易则茶祭之，无以釜汤沃之。
现代文：做生意时用茶祭奠陆鸿渐，不做生意时，用壶中水供奉他。
English: When doing business, use the tea ceremony to pay tribute to Lu Hongqian, and when not doing business, use the water in the pot to worship him.

古文：独孤及
现代文：独孤及
English: Alone and isolated

古文：常州独孤及，末年尤嗜鼓琴，得眼病不理，意欲专听。
现代文：常州有个叫独孤及的人，晚年特别嗜好鼓琴，眼睛患病也不去治疗，其用意是不分散精力专门聆听琴音。
English: There is a man in Changzhou called "Solitary" who, in his later years, was particularly fond of the drum and harp. He did not seek treatment for his eye disease. His intention was not to divert his energy into listening exclusively to the sound of the harp.

古文：杜兼
现代文：杜兼
English: Du Qian

古文：杜兼尝聚书万卷，每卷后必自题云，倩俸写来手自校，汝曹读之知圣道，坠之鬻之为不孝。
现代文：有个叫杜兼的人曾收聚到万卷书，每卷书读后都亲自题词说：花钱请人代笔抄写来的书我亲手校对的，你们读它是为了知晓圣人的道理，抛弃它卖了它都是不孝。
English: A man named Du Kuan once collected ten thousand volumes of books, and after reading each volume of books, he personally inscribed: "I personally proofread the book that I paid someone to copy. You read it in order to know the truth of the saint. It is not filial to abandon it and sell it.

古文：李德裕
现代文：李德裕
English: Li Deyu

古文：李德裕与同列款曲。
现代文：李德裕与同期好友一块儿细诉衷情。
English: Li Deyu and his friends of the same period of time, together with each other, expressed their heartfelt feelings in detail.

古文：或有徵所好者，德裕言：己喜见未闻新书策。
现代文：有人询问他喜爱什么物事？德裕说：我喜欢从未见过的新书。
English: When asked what he likes, Deyu said, "I like new books that I haven't seen before.

古文：崔魏公铉好食新馄头，以为珍美。
现代文：魏公崔铉喜欢吃新煮的馄头，认为这种食物最珍美。
English: Wei Gong Cui Yao likes to eat freshly cooked steamed buns and thinks that this kind of food is the most precious.

古文：从事开筵，先一日前，必到使院索新煮馄头也。
现代文：奉事他的人开宴前必提前一天到使院讨要新煮的馄头。
English: Those who serve him must go to the palace one day in advance to ask for freshly cooked steamed buns before the banquet.

古文：杜豳公悰每早食饙饭乾脯。
现代文：豳公杜悰每餐早饭爱吃蒸饭肉干。
English: Gong Dudu likes to eat steamed rice with dried meat for breakfast every day.

古文：崔侍中安潜好看斗牛。
现代文：侍中崔安潜愿意偷偷地看斗牛。
English: Choi Ahn-hyun, a chamberlain, is willing to secretly watch a bullfight.

古文：虽各有所美，而非近利。
现代文：虽然这些人都各有所好，然而他们都不贪图钱财。
English: Although each of these people is good at something, none of them are greedy for money.

古文：与夫牙筹金埒，钱癖谷堆，不其远乎！
现代文：跟那些喜欢象牙筹码、用金垒墙、嗜钱如命、囤谷成山的贪婪者，岂不是相去甚远吗！
English: Are they not a far cry from the greedy who love bricks of ivory and walls of gold, who are greedy as hell for money and make mountains out of molehills?

古文：潘彦
现代文：潘彦
English: Pan Yan

古文：咸亨中，贝州潘彦好双陆，每有所诣，局不离身。曾泛海，遇风船破。彦右手挟一板，左手抱双陆局，口衔双陆骰子。二日一夜至岸，两手见骨，局终不舍，骰子亦在口。
现代文：一次出海，风急浪大把船撞破了。潘彦右手挟着一块船板，左手死死抱住双陆赌具，口中衔着玩双陆用的骰子，在海上飘流了二天一夜才到达岸边。两手磨损得露出指骨，却始终没有丢弃双陆，玩双陆用的骰子也始终衔在口中。
English: One time when he was out at sea, a large wave broke through the boat. Pan Yan held a board in his right hand, held a double-land gambling device in his left hand, and held a double-land dice in his mouth. He drifted on the sea for two days and one night before reaching the shore. His fingertips were worn out, but he never threw away the double-land, and the double-land dice were always in his mouth.

古文：宋之愻
现代文：宋之愻
English: Song Zhiyao

古文：洛阳县丞宋之愻性好唱歌，出为连州参军。刺史陈希古者，庸人也。令之愻教婢歌，每日端笏立于庭中，呦呦而唱。
现代文：洛阳县丞宋之愻喜爱唱歌。他出任连州参军时，连州刺史陈希古是个庸人，让宋之愻教他家的婢女唱歌，又怕他偷看婢女。
English: Luoyang County magistrate Song Zhixuan likes to sing. When he served as Lianzhou's envoy to join the army, Lianzhou's magistrate Chen Xigu was a mediocrity. He asked Song Zhixuan to teach his maid to sing, but he was afraid that he would peep at the maid.

古文：其婢隔窗从而和之，闻者无不大笑。
现代文：因此每日让宋之愻手捧版笏掩面，站在庭院中呦呦地唱，让他的婢女站在屋里隔着窗户跟着学唱。听者没有一个人不大笑的。
English: Therefore, every day, he asked Song Zhiya to cover his face with a hand-held cymbal and stand in the courtyard to sing loudly, and let his maid stand in the house across the window to learn to sing. There was no one in the audience who did not laugh.

古文：朱前疑
现代文：朱前疑
English: Zhu Qianxuan

古文：兵部郎中朱前疑貌丑，其妻有美色。
现代文：兵部郎中朱前疑其貌丑陋，他妻子貌美。
English: Zhu Qian, Hyobu's son-in-law, suspected that he was ugly, while his wife was beautiful.

古文：天后时，洛中殖业坊西门酒家，有婢蓬头垢面，伛肩皤腹，寝恶之状，举世所无。
现代文：武则天执政时，洛阳城内殖业坊有个西门酒家，有一婢女蓬头垢面，伛偻肩，大腹便便，她睡觉时丑恶的样子，世上再也找不出。
English: When Wu Zetian was in power, there was a Ximen wine house in Luoyang's Inner City Breeding Workshop. There was a maid with an unkempt face, hunched shoulders, and a potbelly. She was so ugly when she slept that she could no longer be found in the world.

古文：而前疑大悦之，殆忘寝食。
现代文：但是朱前疑见到这个丑婢女却异常喜爱，跟这个丑女人承欢交往达到废寝忘食的地步。
English: However, Zhu Qian suspected that he was extremely fond of this ugly handmaid, and he had sexual intercourse with this ugly woman to the point of losing sleep and forgetting to eat.

古文：乃知前世言宿瘤蒙爱，信不虚也。
现代文：由此才知道，前人讲的有个叫宿瘤的女人，项上长个大瘤，她丈夫非常喜爱她，不是没有的事。唉！
English: From this, we know that the ancients spoke of a woman named Canker, who had a large tumor on her neck, and that her husband loved her very much, which was not without reason. Alas!

古文：夫人世嗜欲，一何殊性。
现代文：人世间的各种嗜欲怪癖，怎么这样不同啊！
English: All the eccentricities of the human world, how are they so different!

古文：前闻文王嗜昌，楚王嗜芹菹，屈到嗜芰，曾皙嗜羊枣，宋刘雍嗜疮痂。
现代文：从前听说周文王喜爱食昌，楚王喜爱吃芹菹，屈原爱吃芰，曾皙爱吃羊枣，宋时的刘雍爱食疮痂。
English: In the past, it was heard that King Zhou Wen loved to eat chang qi, King Chu loved to eat cinnamon, Qu Yuan loved to eat ginger, Zeng Yao loved to eat jujube, and Liu Yong in the Song Dynasty loved to eat sorrel.

古文：本传曰：雍诣前吴兴太守孟灵休，灵休脱袜，粘炙疮痂坠地，雍俯而取之飡焉。
现代文：《本传》上说：刘雍前往吴兴太守孟灵休处，孟灵休脱袜时，粘在袜子上的疮痂掉落在地上，刘雍弯腰拣起来就吃啊。
English: "The Legend" says: Liu Yong went to Wu Xingtao to guard Meng Ling's resting place. When Meng Ling was taking off his socks, the sores stuck to his socks fell to the ground. Liu Yong bent down to pick them up and eat them.

古文：宋明帝嗜蜜渍蠩蛦，每啖数升。
现代文：宋明帝喜爱吃蜜渍的蠩蛦，每次吃数升。
English: Emperor Song Ming liked to eat honey-stained goji berries, several liters at a time.

古文：是知海上逐臭之谈，陈君爱丑之说，何其怪欤？天与其癖也。
现代文：此乃上天赋于他们的怪癖啊！
English: It's a quirk they were born with!

古文：鲜于叔明
现代文：鲜于叔明
English: Fewer than Shumei

古文：剑南东川节度鲜于叔明好食臭虫，时人谓之蟠虫。
现代文：剑南东川节度使鲜于叔明喜爱吃臭虫。现时的人叫它蟠虫。
English: The Jian'nan Dongchuan Festival made Sheng Yu Shuming like to eat bedbugs. Nowadays, people call it aphids.

古文：每散，令人采拾得三五升，即浮之微热水中，以抽其气尽。以酥及五味熬之，卷饼而啖，云其味实佳。
现代文：每次散朝后，都让仆人们采集三五升臭虫，立刻将它们用温水浸泡，用这种方法抽尽它们的秽气，用酥油和各种调料放进锅里熬煎，卷饼吃，他说味道实在是好。
English: After every luncheon, he asked the servants to collect three to five liters of bedbugs, immediately soak them in warm water, use this method to exhaust their foul breath, boil them in a pot with ghee and various seasonings, and eat the rolls. He said the taste was really good.

古文：权长孺
现代文：权长孺
English: The power chiefs stood up.

