古文：汉顺帝时，西羌叛，遣征西将军马贤将十万人讨之。
现代文：汉顺帝时，西羌反叛，朝廷派征西将军马贤率领十万人马征讨。
English: During the reign of Emperor Han Shun, Xicheng rebelled, and the imperial court sent the general Ma Xian, who led a hundred thousand people, to subjugate Xicheng.

古文：武都太守马融上疏曰： 贤处处留滞，必有溃叛之变。
现代文：武都太守马融上书说： 马贤处处停留，军队必定会发生叛乱。
English: Wu Du Taishou Ma Rong wrote: Ma Xian stays everywhere, the army will certainly revolt.

古文：臣愿请贤所不用关东兵五千，裁假部队之号，尽力率厉，三旬之中必克破之。 
现代文：我愿用马贤所不用的五千名关东兵，给我一个部队上的名号，我尽力鼓励他们，三十天以内，一定能击溃他们。 
English: I am willing to use the five thousand Guandong soldiers that Ma Xian does not need, and give me a name in the army. I will do my best to encourage them. Within thirty days, I will surely be able to defeat them.

古文：不从。贤果与羌战败，父子皆没，羌遂寇三辅，烧园陵。
现代文：朝廷不听，马贤果然被羌人打败，父子都死了。西羌开始扰乱关中地区，焚烧汉朝的陵园。
English: The court did not listen, and Ma Xian was defeated by the Xiongnu, and both father and son died. Xiongnu began to disturb the Guanzhong area and burn the Han Dynasty cemetery.

古文：诏武都太守赵冲督河西四郡兵追击。
现代文：顺帝下诏让武都太守赵冲率领河西四郡的兵马追击。
English: Emperor Shun issued an edict to let the military governor Zhao Chong lead the pursuit of the soldiers and horses of the four counties in Hexi.

古文：安定上计掾皇甫规上疏曰： 臣比年以来，数陈便宜：羌戎未动，策其将反；马贤始出，知其必败。
现代文：安定郡到京呈上年案收支账目的椽属皇甫规上疏说： 臣近年以来，多次陈奏有利于对付羌人的策略；羌人还未发动叛乱，就料到他们会叛乱；马贤刚出发，就知道他必然战败。
English: Anding County went to Beijing to submit the previous year's income and expenditure account, and Zou Zhenhu, a member of the Imperial Household Agency, said: In recent years, the minister has repeatedly played a strategy that is conducive to dealing with the Xiong people; the Xiong people have not yet launched a rebellion, and it is expected that they will rebel; Ma Xian has just set out, and he knows that he will inevitably be defeated.

古文：愿假臣屯列坐食之兵五千，出其不意，与冲共相首尾。
现代文：情让臣率领屯守不战的兵士五千人，出其不意，与赵冲前后夹击它。
English: Zhaozhen let the minister lead five thousand soldiers who did not fight, and unexpectedly clashed with Zhao Chong.

古文：土地山谷，臣所晓习，可不烦方寸之印，尺帛之赐，可以涤患。 
现代文：这一代的山川情况，我都熟悉，不用给我印绶和布帛，我就可以清除边患。 
English: I am familiar with the mountain and river situation of this generation, and I can remove the border problems without giving me a seal and cloth.

古文：帝不能用。
现代文：顺帝不听从。
English: Emperor Shun disobeyed.

古文：赵冲击羌不利，羌寇充斥，凉部震恐，冲战死，累年然后定。
现代文：赵冲战争失利，羌人充斥，西凉受到震动，赵冲结果战死。经过几年西羌才被平定。
English: Zhao Chong lost the war, Xian was full of people, Xilang was shaken, and Zhao Chong died as a result. It took several years for Xian to be pacified.

古文：按马融、皇甫规之言晓然易见，而所请兵皆不过五千，然讫不肯从，乃知宣帝纳用赵充国之册为不易得，所谓明主可为忠言也。
现代文：马融、皇甫规的话明白好理解，他们要的兵又都不超过五千，然而却始终不被答应，我才知道汉宣帝采用赵充国的计策，实在难得，这就是说，只有英明的皇帝，才能够向他进献忠言啊！
English: The words of Ma Rong and Emperor Fu Jie are clear and easy to understand. The number of soldiers they wanted did not exceed five thousand, but they were still not allowed. I only knew that Emperor Han Xuan used the strategy of Zhao Chongguo, which is really rare. That is to say, only a wise emperor can offer him loyal advice!

