古文：萧陶苏斡耶律阿息保萧乙薛萧胡笃
现代文：萧陶苏斡，字乙辛隐，突吕不部人。
English: Xiao Tao Su Yu, Zhe Yi Xin Yin, Tu Lu Bu Ren.

古文：萧陶苏斡，字乙辛隐，突吕不部人。四世祖因吉，发长五尺，时呼为 长发因吉 。
现代文：四世祖因吉，发长五尺，时人称之 长发因吉 。
English: Zuyingji, the fourth, had hair five feet long, and was known as Changfayingji.

古文：祖里拔，奥隗部节度使。
现代文：祖父里拔，奥隗部节度使。
English: His grandfather, Ribat, was the governor of the Okanabe Province.

古文：陶苏斡谨愿，不妄交。
现代文：陶苏斡生性诚实，不妄交友。
English: Tao Su is honest by nature and does not make friends under false pretenses.

古文：伯父留哥坐事免官，闻重元乱，挈家赴行在。
现代文：伯父留哥因犯罪被免官，得知重元叛乱，带着家属赶赴行宫。
English: His uncle, Ryuko, was dismissed from his post for committing a crime, and when he learned about the rebellion in Chongyuan, he rushed to the imperial palace with his family.

古文：时陶苏斡虽幼，已如成人，补笔砚小底。
现代文：当时陶苏斡尽管年幼，已显得像个成人，补为笔砚小吏。
English: At that time, despite her young age, Tao Suyu already looked like an adult, filling in as a pen pusher.

古文：累迁祗候郎君，转枢密院侍御。
现代文：累迁祗候郎君，转任枢密院侍御。
English: He was successively transferred to the position of Privy Council Chamberlain.

古文：咸雍五年，迁崇德宫使。
现代文：咸雍五年，迁任崇德宫使。
English: In the fifth year of the reign of Emperor Xianyang, he was transferred to the position of the envoy of the Chongde Palace.

古文：会有诉北南院听讼不直者，事下，陶苏斡悉改正之，为耶律阿思所忌。
现代文：适逢有人上诉称北南院审案不公，事情交待下来，陶苏斡全部加以改正，遭到耶律阿思忌恨。
English: When someone appealed that the North-South Intermediate People's Court's trial was unfair, the matter was handed over to the court, and all the corrections were made by Tao Soo Ye, which was hated by Yeludo Ah Si.

古文：帝欲召用，辄为所沮。
现代文：道宗想征召他重用，便为阿思阻止。
English: When Dao Zong wanted to recruit him for a second term, he was stopped by Ashi.

古文：八年，历漠北滑水马群太保，数年不调，尝曰： 用才未尽，不若闲。 
现代文：八年，历任漠北滑水马群太保，多年不再调动，曾经说： 才能得不到完全的发挥，还不如闲着。 
English: For eight years, successive leaders of the Mubei Water Skiing Horse Group Tai Bao, no longer mobilized for many years, once said: If you can't get full play, it's better to be idle.

古文：乾统中，迁漠南马群太保，以大风伤草，马多死，鞭之三百，免官。
现代文：乾统年间，迁任漠南马群太保，因大风吹坏了草料，马匹很多饿死了，被鞭打三百，免去官职。
English: During the reign of Emperor Qianlong, he was transferred to the post of horse herdsman in the south of the desert. Due to the high winds, the grass was damaged, and many horses died of starvation. He was whipped 300 times and removed from his official post.

古文：九年，徙天齐殿宿卫。
现代文：九年，改任天齐殿宿卫。
English: In the ninth year, he was reassigned to be the guardian of Tianqi Palace.

古文：明年，谷价翔踊，宿卫士多不给，陶苏斡出私廪赒之，召同知南院枢密使事。
现代文：次年，谷价猛涨，宿卫之士兵大多不能自给，陶苏斡取出私仓之米加以周济，召任同知南院枢密使事。
English: The following year, grain prices soared, and most of the guards' soldiers were unable to provide for themselves. Taosu arranged for rice from his private storehouse to be distributed, and he was appointed as a confidential envoy to the Southern Yuan.

古文：天庆四年，为汉人行宫副部署。
现代文：天庆四年，担任汉人行宫副部署。
English: In the fourth year of Tianqing, he served as deputy director of the Han People's Palace.

古文：时金兵初起，攻陷宁江州。
现代文：当时金兵刚刚起事，攻陷宁江州。
English: At that time, the Jin soldiers had just risen up and invaded Ningjiang Province.

古文：天祚召群臣议，陶苏斡曰： 女直国虽小，其人勇而善射。
现代文：天祚召集群臣商议，陶苏斡说： 女真国土虽小，其国人均勇敢且擅长射箭。
English: Tianyao convened a group of ministers to discuss, and Tao Su said: Although the land of Nanzhen is small, its people are brave and good at archery.

古文：自执我叛人萧海里，势益张。
现代文：自从拘执我国叛臣萧海里，气焰更加嚣张。
English: Since the detention of our traitor Xiao Hai, the arrogance has become even more arrogant.

古文：我兵久不练，若遇强敌，稍有不利，诸部离心，不可制矣。
现代文：我国士兵久不操练，如果遇到强敌，稍有失利，诸部就会离心离德，再难制伏了。
English: Our soldiers have not practiced for a long time. If they encounter a strong enemy and suffer a slight defeat, the various departments will be alienated from Germany, and it will be difficult to subdue them.

古文：为今之计，莫若大发诸道兵，以威压之，庶可服也。 
现代文：为今之计，不如大举征发诸道兵马，以声威气势压迫之，大抵可以使之畏服。 
English: For now, it is better to conscript soldiers and horses from all sects in a big way, and to oppress them with power and might, which can usually make them cower.

古文：北院枢密使萧得里底曰： 如陶苏斡之谋，徒示弱耳。
现代文：北院枢密使萧得里底说 ：按照陶苏斡所说的谋划，只不过是向敌人示弱罢了。
English: Shoudlidi, the Northern Court's confidential envoy, said: According to the plan proposed by Tao Sooyu, it was just to show weakness to the enemy.

古文：但发滑水以北兵，足以拒之。 
现代文：只需征发滑水以北的军队，就足以抵挡住敌人。 
English: It is enough to conscript the army north of Suizhou to fend off the enemy.

古文：遂不用其计。
现代文：于是不用其谋划。
English: So you don't have to plan it.

古文：数月间，边兵屡北，人益不安。
现代文：几个月之间，边兵屡次败北，人心更加不安。
English: In the space of a few months, the border soldiers were repeatedly defeated by the North, and the people became even more anxious.

古文：饶州渤海结构头下城以叛，有步骑三万余，招之不下。
现代文：饶州渤海构筑头下城反叛，拥有步兵骑兵共三万余人，招抚之而不肯降服。
English: Raozhou Bohai organized a rebellion in the lower part of the city, with a total of more than thirty thousand infantry and cavalry, and they did not want to surrender.

古文：陶苏斡帅兵往讨，擒其渠魁，斩首数千级，得所掠物，悉还其主。
现代文：陶苏斡率兵前往讨伐，擒获其首领，斩首数千人，获得叛贼所掠取的财物，全部归还原主。
English: Tao Suyu led the troops to go to the crusade, captured their leader, beheaded thousands of people, obtained the property plundered by the traitors, and returned it all to the original owner.

古文：及耶律章奴叛，陶苏斡与留守耶律大悲奴为守御。
现代文：及至耶律章奴反叛，陶苏斡与留守耶律大悲奴担当防守任务。
English: When Yelu Zhangnu rebelled, Tao Su Rong and the remaining Yelu Dabi Nu took on the defensive mission.

古文：章奴既平，陶苏斡请曰： 今边兵懈弛，若清暑岭西，则汉人啸聚，民心益摇。
现代文：章奴之乱平定之后，陶苏斡向皇上请求说 ：现在边兵懈怠，如果到岭西去消夏，那么汉人将会结伙为盗，人心更加动摇。
English: After the suppression of the Zhangnu Disturbance, Tao Su Rong pleaded with the emperor: Now the frontier soldiers are slack, if they go to Lingxi to spend the summer, then the Han people will band together to steal, and the hearts of the people will be even more shaken.

古文：臣愚以为宜罢此行。 
现代文：我私下认为皇上应该停止这次出行。 
English: Privately, I think the emperor should stop this trip.

古文：不纳，乃命陶苏斡控扼东路，招集散卒。
现代文：没有采纳。于是命令陶苏斡扼守东路，招集失散的士兵。
English: It was not accepted. Therefore, he ordered Tao Suyu to guard the east road and call up the dispersed soldiers.

古文：后以太子太傅致仕，卒。
现代文：后来在太子太傅任上辞官，去世。
English: Later, he resigned from the post of Crown Prince Taifu and passed away.

古文：耶律阿息保，字特里典，五院部人。
现代文：耶律阿息保，字特里典，五院部人。
English: Yeru Ashiho, lexicographer, member of the Fifth Ward.

古文：祖胡劣，太祖时徙居西北部，世为招讨司吏。
现代文：祖父胡劣，在太祖时迁居西北部，世代担任招讨司吏。
English: His grandfather, Hu Rong, moved to the northwest at the time of his great-grandfather, and served as a recruiting official for generations.

古文：阿息保慷慨有大志，年十六，以才干补内史。
现代文：阿息保为人慷慨，志向远大，十六岁时，因办事才能补为内史。
English: Ashiho was a generous person with high aspirations. At the age of sixteen, he became an intern due to his administrative skills.

古文：天庆初，转枢密院侍御。
现代文：天庆初，转任枢密院侍御。
English: At the beginning of the Qing Dynasty, he was transferred to the position of Privy Council Chamberlain.

古文：金人起兵，城境上，遣阿息保问之，金人曰： 若归阿疏，敢不听命。 
现代文：金人起兵，在边境上筑城，皇上派遣阿息保责问，金人说： 如能归还阿疏，怎么会不从命呢。 
English: The goldsmith raised an army and built a city on the border. The emperor sent Ah Xiu to ask for a guarantee. The goldsmith said, "If I can return Ah Xiu, why would I not give my life?"

古文：阿息保具以闻。
现代文：阿息保详细奏闻皇上。
English: Ashiho made a detailed report to the Emperor.

古文：金兵陷宁江州，边兵屡败，遣阿息保与耶律章奴等赍书而东，冀以胁降。
现代文：金兵攻陷宁江州，边兵屡次败绩，皇上派遣阿息保与耶律章奴等人挟带书信东下，希望能胁迫金人降服。
English: The gold soldiers invaded Ningjiang Prefecture, the frontier soldiers suffered repeated defeats, and the emperor sent Ahibao and Yeluchangnu and others to the east with secret letters, hoping to coerce the gold people to surrender.

古文：阿息保曰： 臣前使，依诏开谕，略无所屈。
现代文：阿息保说 ：我上次出使，依诏开言晓谕，金人丝毫没有屈服之意。
English: Ashiho said, "The last time I was on a mission, I began my speech in accordance with the imperial edict, and the goldsmith had no intention of giving in.

古文：将还，谓臣曰： 若所请不遂，无相见。 
现代文：我将回国时，金人对我说： 如果所请求的不能如愿，就不要再来相见了。 
English: When I was about to return to my country, the goldsmith said to me, "If what you have asked for is not what you want, then don't come to see me again."

古文：今臣请独往。 
现代文：这次我请求让我独自前往。 
English: This time I asked to go alone.

古文：不听。
现代文：皇上不听。
English: The emperor does not allow it.

古文：将行，别萧得里底曰： 不肖适异国，必无生还，愿公善辅国家。 
现代文：将要动身时，辞别萧得里底说： 我这次到敌国去，必定不能活着回来了，希望您能够把国家辅助治理好。 
English: As he was about to leave, he bade farewell to Shoudlidi, saying: "This time when I go to the enemy country, I will not be able to return alive. I hope you will be able to administer the country well."

古文：既至，阿息保见执。久乃遁归。
现代文：到金国之后，阿息保被扣留，过了很久才逃回。
English: After arriving in China, Ashiho was detained, and it took him a long time to escape.

古文：及天祚败绩，迁都巡捕使。
现代文：及至天祚兵败，阿息保迁任都巡捕使。
English: After the defeat of Tianyao, Ashi Bao Qian was appointed as the capital's patrol envoy.

古文：六年，从阿疏讨耶律章奴，加领军卫大将军。
现代文：六年，随阿疏攻讨耶律章奴，加领军卫大将军。
English: In the sixth year, he followed Ah Shu to attack and subdue Yelu Zhangnu, and became the leader of the army.

古文：阿疏将兵而东，阿息保送至军，乃还。
现代文：阿疏率兵东进，阿息保送至军中，才回来。
English: Aso led the soldiers eastward, and sent Ashiho to the middle of the army, only to come back.

古文：天祚怒其专，鞭之三百。
现代文：天祚恼怒他专断，鞭打三百。
English: Enraged by the gods, he arbitrarily whipped him 300 times.

古文：寻为奚六部秃里太尉。
现代文：不久任奚六部秃里太尉。
English: He was soon promoted to lieutenant of the 6th Division of the Imperial Japanese Army.

古文：后阿疏反，阿息保以偏师进击，临阵坠马，被擒。
现代文：后来阿疏反叛，阿息保率偏师进击，临阵时坠马，被擒获。
English: Later, Ahsho rebelled, and Ahshi Bao led a partial division to attack, fell off his horse at the time of the battle, and was captured.

古文：因阿疏有旧得免。
现代文：因与阿疏有交情得以免死。
English: He was spared death due to his friendship with Aso.

古文：时阿疏颇好杀，阿息保谓曰： 欲举大事，何以杀为！ 
现代文：当时阿疏非常喜欢杀人，阿息保对他说： 想要成就大事，怎么能杀人呢？ 
English: At that time, Aso was very fond of killing people. Ashiho said to him, "If you want to achieve great things, how can you kill people?

古文：由是全活者众。
现代文：很多人因此保全了性命。
English: Many lives were saved as a result.

古文：会阿疏败，乃还。
现代文：适逢阿疏失败，阿息保便回来。
English: When Aso failed, Ashiho came back.

古文：以战失利，囚中京数岁。
现代文：因为作战失利，囚禁于中京数年。
English: He was imprisoned in Chukyo for several years because of his defeat in battle.

古文：保大二年，金兵至中京，始出狱。
现代文：保大二年，金兵到中京，阿息保这才被放出。
English: In the second year of Bao Dai, Jinbei went to Zhongjing, and only then was Ashi Bao released.

古文：寻为敌烈皮室详稳。
现代文：不久任敌烈皮室详稳。
English: Soon after, the enemy stronghold was secured.

古文：是时，魏王淳僣号，屡遣人以书来招。
现代文：当时，魏王耶律淳僭号称帝，屡次派人带着书信前来招揽他。
English: At that time, the Wei king, Yelu Junya, proclaimed himself emperor and repeatedly sent people with letters to come and recruit him.

古文：阿息保封书以献，因谏曰： 东兵甚锐，未可轻敌。 
现代文：阿息保封好书信进献给天祚帝，乘机劝谏说： 东国兵锋十分锐利，不可轻敌。 
English: Ashiho sealed the letter and dedicated it to Emperor Tenmu, taking the opportunity to persuade him that the Eastern soldiers were very sharp and should not be taken lightly.

古文：及石辇铎之败，天祚奔窜，召阿息保，不时至，疑有贰心，并怒为淳所招，杀之。
现代文：及至石辇铎兵败，天祚逃窜，征召阿息保，没能按时前去，天祚怀疑他有二心，且又恼怒他曾为耶律淳所招请，杀了他。
English: When Shi Yan was defeated, Tianzhu fled and summoned Ah Si Bao, but he did not go in time. Tianzhu suspected that he was double-minded, and he was angry that he had been invited by Jeruchun and killed him.

古文：初，阿息保知国将亡，前后谏甚切。
现代文：当初，阿息保知道国家快要灭亡了，前后上谏言十分痛切。
English: At first, Ashiho knew that the country was on the brink of extinction, and his criticisms were very bitter.

古文：及死以非罪，人尤惜之。
现代文：及至无罪而死，国人格外怜惜。
English: and died without guilt, the people of the country are extremely sorry.

