古文：童贯，少出李宪之门。
现代文：童贯，少年时在宦官李宪门下。
English: When he was a boy, he was under the eunuch Li Xian.

古文：性巧媚，自给事宫掖，即善策人主微指，先事顺承。
现代文：性情乖巧，从做给事宫掖时起，就善于揣度皇上的意旨，预先做出顺承的事。
English: He is good-natured, and from the time of the imperial edict, he is good at guessing the emperor's will and making obedient things in advance.

古文：微宗立，置明金局于杭，贯以供奉官主之，始与蔡京游。
现代文：徽宗即位，在杭州置金明局，童贯以供奉官的身份主管此事，开始和蔡京交往。
English: When Huizong ascended to the throne, he set up the Jinming Bureau in Hangzhou, and Tongran, as the official in charge of the matter, began to interact with Cai Jing.

古文：京进，贯力也。
现代文：蔡京进京任官，得力于童贯。
English: Cai Jing entered Beijing as an official, thanks to Tong Run.

古文：京既相，赞策取青唐，因言贯尝十使陕右，审五路事宜与诸将之能否为最悉，力荐之。
现代文：蔡京任相后，赞成攻取青唐，并对皇上说童贯曾十次出使陕右，熟悉那五路的情况与各将帅的才能，竭力推荐他。
English: After Cai Jing was appointed as minister, he was in favor of conquering Qing Tang, and told the emperor that Tong Ran had sent ten times to Shaanxi and Shandong, was familiar with the situation in those five provinces and the talents of the generals, and tried his best to recommend him.

古文：合兵十万，命王厚专阃寄，而贯用李宪故事监其军。
现代文：宋合兵十万，命王厚为统帅。童贯像李宪那样为监军。
English: Song Heping had 100,000 soldiers and appointed Wang Hou as commander. Tong Quan, like Li Xian, was in charge of supervising the troops.

古文：至湟川，适禁中火，帝下手札，驿止贯毋西兵。
现代文：军至湟州，恰好宫中失火，皇上下手谕，由驿马传达诏令禁止童贯出兵。
English: When the army arrived in Zhangzhou, there happened to be a fire in the palace, and the emperor issued a decree prohibiting Tongran from sending troops.

古文：贯发视，遽纳鞾中。
现代文：童贯打开看后就收入靴中。
English: Tong Quan opened it and looked at it and then put it in his shoes.

古文：厚问故，贯曰： 上趣成功耳。 师竟出，复四州。
现代文：王厚问他为何，童贯答： 皇上希望出兵成功。 
English: Wang Hou asked him why, and Tong Guan replied, "The emperor hopes that the dispatch of troops will be successful."

古文：擢景福殿使、襄州观察使，内侍寄资转两使自兹始。
现代文：竟出兵交战，收复四州，提升为景福殿使、襄州观察使，内侍凭资历任两使是从童贯开始的。
English: He actually sent troops to fight, recovered four states, and was promoted to the Gingfu Palace Envoy and the Xiangzhou Observation Envoy. The seniority of the two envoys began with Tongran.

古文：未几，为熙河兰湟、秦凤路经略安抚制置使，累迁武康军节度使。
现代文：不久，童贯为熙河兰湟、秦凤路经略安抚制置使，连续升官至武康军节度使。
English: Soon after, Tong Rong was appointed as an envoy of the He River Lanxi and the Qin and Feng Road via a slight pacification system, and was successively promoted to the festival envoy of the Wu Kang Army.

古文：讨溪哥臧征，复积石军、洮州，加检校司空。
现代文：讨伐溪哥臧征，收复积石军、洮州，被加官为检校司空。
English: He fought against the invaders of Jishi, and recovered the Jishi army and Zhangzhou. He was promoted to the post of inspector of schools.

古文：颇恃功骄恣，选置将吏，皆捷取中旨，不复关朝廷，浸咈京意。
现代文：童贯恃功而骄横跋扈，选拔将领官吏，都直接奏明皇上，完全撇开政府，这就渐渐违背了蔡京的意愿。
English: Tong Guanzhong was arrogant and arrogant, and the selection of generals and officials were directly reported to the emperor, completely leaving aside the government, which gradually violated Cai Jing's wishes.

古文：除开府仪同三司，京曰： 使相岂应授宦官？ 不奉诏。
现代文：皇上又拜他为开府仪同三司，蔡京说： 使相的官职怎能授给宦官？ 不奉行诏命。
English: The emperor also gave him the title of Kaifu Yi Tong San Si, and Cai Jing said: How can the official post of envoy be conferred on a eunuch?

古文：政和元年，进检校太尉，使契丹。
现代文：政和元年，童贯又升为检校太尉，出使契丹。
English: In the first year of the Meiji Restoration, Tongran was promoted to the rank of lieutenant inspector and dispatched Khitan.

古文：或言： 以宦官为上介，国无人乎？ 帝曰： 契丹闻贯破羌，故欲见之，因使觇国，策之善者也。 使还，益展奋，庙谟兵柄皆属焉。
现代文：有人说： 用宦官为使臣，难道国家没人了吗？ 皇上说： 契丹听说童贯打败羌人，因此想见他，以他为使臣，察看敌国，也是良策。 童贯使辽回来，权势更大，握有朝廷内外军政大权。
English: Some people said, "Using a eunuch as an envoy, isn't the country empty?" The emperor said, "The Khitan heard that Tongcang defeated the Xiongnu, so he wanted to see him. Using him as an envoy to inspect the enemy country is also a good strategy. Tongcang sent Liao back, with greater power, holding great military and political power inside and outside the court.

古文：遂请进筑夏国横山，以太尉为陕西、河东、河北宣抚使。
现代文：于是请求出兵进驻夏国横山，朝廷命他以太尉的身份为陕西、河东、河北宣抚使。
English: He then requested to send troops to be stationed in Yokoyama, Xia Province, and the imperial court ordered him to serve as the envoy to Shaanxi, Hedong, and Hebei as a lieutenant.

古文：俄开府仪同三司，签书枢密院河西北两房。
现代文：不久，为开府仪同三司，签书枢密院河西、北两房。
English: Soon, the two chambers of the Privy Council in the west and north of the country signed a letter to the Kaifu ceremony and the three departments.

古文：不三岁，领院事。
现代文：不到三年，他主管枢密院事。
English: Within three years he was in charge of the Privy Council.

古文：更武信、武宁、护国、河东、山南东道、剑南、东川等九镇、太傅、泾国公。
现代文：另外统领武信、武宁、护国、河东、山南东道、剑南东川等九镇，为太傅、泾国公。
English: In addition, he was the commander-in-chief of nine towns, including Wuxin, Wu Ning, Gongguo, Hedong, Shannan Host, and Jianan Dongchuan, and was the Taifu and the Duke of Shandong.

古文：时人称蔡京为公相，因称贯为媪相。
现代文：当时人称蔡京为公相，童贯为媪相。
English: At that time, people called Cai Jing the minister of public affairs, and Tong Rong the minister of propaganda.

古文：将秦、晋锐师深入河、陇，薄于萧关古骨龙，谓可制夏人死命。
现代文：童贯率秦、晋的精锐部队深入河、陇，派少数兵马驻守萧关古骨龙，认为可制夏人于死命。
English: Tong Guan led the elite troops of Qin and Jin deep into Hebei and Fujian, and sent a small number of soldiers and horses to guard Xiaoguan Guozhenlong, believing that he could save Xia people from death.

古文：遣大将刘法取朔方，法不可，贯逼之曰： 君在京师时，亲授命于王所，自言必成功，今难之，何也？ 法不得已出塞，遇伏而死。
现代文：派大将刘法攻取朔方，刘法认为不行，童贯逼他说： 你在京城时，亲自领命，说一定能成功，现在认为难以成功，为什么？ 刘法不得已出塞，遇敌伏击而死。
English: He sent General Liu Fa to attack the Shuo side, but Liu Fa thought it was not possible, so Tong Ran forced him to say: When you were in Beijing, you personally received orders and said that you would succeed, but now you think it is difficult to succeed, why? Liu Fa had no choice but to leave the city and was ambushed by the enemy and died.

古文：法，西州名将，既死，诸军恟惧。
现代文：刘法，是西州名将，他死，宋军各部都震动恐惧。
English: Liu Fa was a famous general in Xizhou. When he died, all the departments of the Song Army were shocked with fear.

古文：贯隐其败，以捷闻，百官入贺，皆切齿，然莫敢言。
现代文：童贯隐瞒失败，向朝廷报捷，百官入宫庆贺，都对他咬牙切齿，但不敢说什么。
English: Tong Quan concealed his failure, reported his success to the imperial court, and all the officials entered the palace to celebrate. They gritted their teeth at him, but dared not say anything.

古文：关右既困，夏人亦不能支，乃因辽人进誓表纳款。
现代文：关右已困敝，西夏兵马也难支撑，童贯就通过辽人向夏进誓表讲和。
English: Guan Yu was already in trouble, the Western Xia soldiers and horses were hard to support, and Tong Ran declared peace through the Liao people's oath to Xia Jin.

古文：使至，授以誓诏，辞不取，贯强馆伴使固与之，还及境，弃诸道上。
现代文：夏使到，给他誓书，夏使不接受，童贯强迫馆伴使一定要他接受，夏使刚回国境，就把誓书扔在路上。
English: Xia envoy arrived, gave him the oath, Xia envoy did not accept, Tongyuan forced the envoy to accept, Xia envoy just returned to the border, he threw the oath on the road.

古文：旧制，熟羌不授汉官，贯故引拔之，有至节度使者。
现代文：宋原来规定，汉人的官职不授给熟羌，童贯故意提拔他们，有的官至节度使。
English: Song originally stipulated that the official posts of the Han people would not be awarded to the familiar eunuchs, but Tong Quan deliberately promoted them, and some officials were even appointed to the post of the chief eunuch.

古文：弓箭手失其分地而使守新疆，禁卒逃亡不死而得改隶他籍，军政尽坏。
现代文：弓箭手失去属于他们的土地而派他们守卫新的地方，禁军逃亡者不处死而可改隶其他军籍。军政全被破坏了。
English: Archers lost their lands and were sent to guard new territories, fugitives from the forbidden army were allowed to change their military ranks without being put to death, and the military government was completely destroyed.

古文：政和元年，副郑允中使于辽，得燕人马植，归荐诸朝，遂造平燕之谋，选健将劲卒，刻日发命。
现代文：政和元年，童贯作为郑允中的副手出使辽朝，得到燕人马植，归来后把马植引荐给皇上，于是就制定平燕的计划，选精兵良将，很快将命令出兵平燕。
English: In the first year of Zheng He's reign, Tong Ran, as Zheng Yunzhong's deputy, sent an envoy to the Liao Dynasty, and obtained Yan Ren Ma Zhi. After returning, he introduced Ma Zhi to the emperor. Therefore, he made a plan for Ping Yan, selected excellent soldiers, and soon ordered the dispatch of soldiers to Ping Yan.

古文：会方腊起睦州，势甚张，改江、浙、淮南宣抚使，即以所聚兵帅诸将讨平之。
现代文：正赶上方腊在睦州起义，义军威势很大，改任童贯为江、浙、淮南宣抚使，立即率准备平燕之兵前去征讨方腊。
English: He was just in time for the uprising of Fangla in Muzhou. The rebel army was very powerful. Tongran was appointed as the envoy of Jiangsu, Zhejiang and Huainan, and immediately led the soldiers of Pingyan to go to conquer Fangla.

古文：方腊者，睦州青溪人也。
现代文：方腊是睦州青溪县人。
English: Fang La is from Qingxi County, Mutsu Province.

古文：世居县堨村，托左道以惑众。
现代文：世代居住在青溪县土曷村，借用邪道惑众。
English: For generations, they have lived in Dousheng Village, Qingxi County, and used the evil way to deceive the public.

古文：初，唐永徽中，睦州女子陈硕真反，自称文佳皇帝，故其地相传有天子基、万年楼，腊益得凭籍以自信。县境梓桐、帮源诸峒皆落山谷幽险处，民物繁夥，有漆楮、杉材之饶，富商巨贾多往来。
现代文：从前，在唐永徽中，睦州女子陈硕真起义，自称文佳皇帝，故在此地相传有天子基、万年楼，方腊因此更加自信，县中梓桐、帮源各峒都在深山幽谷的险要处，物产丰富，盛产漆楮、杉材等，富商大贾多往来此处。
English: Once upon a time, in Yonghui, Tang Dynasty, a woman from Mutsu Province, Chen Shuozhen, revolted and called herself Emperor Wenjia. Therefore, it is said that there are Tianziji and Wanrenlou in this place. As a result, Fangla is more confident. Zidong and Banyuan in the county are located in the dangerous areas of deep mountains and valleys. There are abundant products, rich in lacquer ware, cedar wood, etc. Rich merchants often come and go here.

古文：时吴中困于朱勔花石之扰，比屋致怨，腊因民不忍，阴聚贫乏游手之徒。
现代文：当时东南深受朱面力花石纲之害，百姓愤怨，方腊趁百姓不满之机，暗中把贫困失业的人组织起来。
English: At that time, the southeast was deeply affected by the Zhu Mian Li Huaxia Shi Gang, the people were resentful, and Fang La took the opportunity of the people's dissatisfaction to secretly organize the poor and unemployed.

古文：宣和二年十月，起为乱，自号圣公，建元永乐，置官吏将帅，以巾饰为别，自红巾而上凡六等。
现代文：宣和二年十月，方腊率众起义，自称圣公，建元永乐，设置官吏将帅，以头巾区别等级，从红巾往上分六等。
English: In October of the second year of the declaration of peace, Fang La led the people in an uprising, claiming to be Shingong, Jianyuan Yongle, setting up officials as generals, distinguishing grades with headscarves, and dividing them into six grades from the red scarf.

古文：无弓矢、介胄，唯以鬼神诡秘事相扇訹，焚室庐，掠金帛子女，诱胁良民为兵。
现代文：义军无弓箭、盔甲，只以鬼神那些隐秘难测的事互相煽动，烧房舍，掠金帛子女，诱逼良民加入起义军。
English: The rebels had no bows, arrows, or armor. They only incited each other with secret and unfathomable things from ghosts and gods. They burned houses, plundered gold, kidnapped children, and forced good people to join the rebel army.

古文：人安于太平，不识兵革，闻金鼓声即敛手听命，不旬日聚众至数万，破杀将官蔡遵于息坑。
现代文：人们安于太平，不识兵革，听到金鼓声就束手听命，不到十天就有数万人参加义军，在息坑打败并杀死宋将蔡遵。
English: People were at peace, unaware of the military situation, and when they heard the sound of the golden drum, they clenched their fists and obeyed. In less than ten days, tens of thousands of people joined the rebel army and defeated and killed Song general Cai Zun in his resting place.

古文：十一月陷青溪，十二月陷睦、歙二州。
现代文：十一月攻占青溪，十二月攻占睦、歙二州。
English: In November, Qingxi was conquered, and in December, Mutsu and Shandong were conquered.

古文：南陷衢，杀郡守彭汝方；北掠新城、桐庐、富阳诸县，进逼杭州。
现代文：南面攻克衢州，杀死郡守彭汝方；北面横扫新城、桐庐、富阳各县，进逼杭州。
English: In the south, they conquered Bozhou and killed the county governor Peng Ru; in the north, they swept through the counties of Xincheng, Tonglu and Fuyang and forced their way into Hangzhou.

古文：郡守弃城走，州即陷，杀制置使陈建、廉访使赵约，纵火六日，死者不可计。
现代文：杭州郡守弃城逃走，义军占领杭州，杀制置使陈建、廉访使赵约，放火烧了六天，死者不计其数。
English: Hangzhou County abandoned the city and fled. The rebels occupied Hangzhou, killed Chen Jian and Zhao You, and set fire to the city for six days. The dead are countless.

古文：凡得官吏，必断脔支体，探其肺肠，或熬以膏油，丛镝乱射，备尽楚毒，以偿怨心。
现代文：义军凡是抓住宋的官吏，定要割其肉，断其体，取其肺肠，或者熬成膏油，乱箭穿身，用各种办法折磨他们，讨还血债，以解心头恨。
English: Whenever the rebels seized Song officials, they were bound to cut their flesh, sever their bodies, take their lungs and intestines, or boil them into ointment, pierce them with arrows, and torture them in various ways to pay off their blood debts and resolve their hatred.

古文：警奏至京师，王黼匿不以闻，于是凶焰日炽。
现代文：方腊起义的警报上奏到京师，王黼藏起来不报告皇上，义军力量得以日益发展壮大。
English: The alarm of the Fangla Uprising was sounded to the Beijing division, Wang Yao hid and did not report to the emperor, and the rebel forces were able to grow stronger and stronger.

古文：兰溪灵山贼朱言吴邦、剡县仇道人、仙居吕师囊、方岩山陈十四、苏州石生、归安陆行儿皆合党应之，东南大震。
现代文：兰溪灵山的朱言、吴邦，剡县的仇道人，仙居的吕师囊，方岩山的陈十四，苏州的石生，归安的陆行儿都率众响应起义，东南大震。
English: Zhu Yan and Wu Bang of Lingshan in Lanxi, Qu Tao people in Jixian County, Liushi Zuo of Xianju, Chen XIV of Fangyan Mountain, Shisheng of Suzhou, and Lu Xing'er of Guian all led the masses in response to the uprising and the Southeastern Great Earthquake.

古文：发运使陈亨伯请调京畿兵及鼎、澧枪牌手兼程以来，使不至滋蔓。
现代文：发运使陈亨伯请求朝廷调禁兵及鼎、澧的枪牌手兼程赶往镇压，防止义军势力扩大。
English: The dispatch made Chen Hunbo request the imperial court to transfer the banned soldiers and the high-ranking and low-ranking gunmen to the suppression, to prevent the expansion of the rebel forces.

古文：徽宗始大惊，亟遣童贯、谭稹为宣抚制置使，率禁旅及秦、晋蕃汉兵十五万以东，且谕贯使作诏罢应奉局。
现代文：徽宗才十分惊慌，赶紧派童贯、谭稹为宣抚制置使，率禁军及秦、晋二地蕃、汉兵共十五万前往东南，并命童贯草诏罢去应奉局。
English: Huizong was so alarmed that he hurriedly dispatched Tongran and Tan Yu to the south-east, leading a total of 150,000 soldiers from the Forbidden Army, Qin, Jin, and Han armies. He also ordered Tongran Cao Zhao to be removed from his post.

古文：三年正月，腊将方七佛引众六万攻秀州，统军王子武乘城固守，已而大军至，合击贼，斩首九千，筑京观五，贼还据杭。
现代文：宣和三年正月，方腊部将方七佛率六万人攻打秀州，统军王子武据城固守，不久，宋大兵到来，合兵一处攻打义军，杀义军九千人，筑起五座高台，义军退守杭州。
English: In the first month of the third year of the Xuanhe era, Fang La Bu led 60,000 people to attack Xiuzhou, and the Prince Wu of the United Army defended the city. Soon, the Song Dynasty soldiers arrived, and together they attacked the rebels, killed 9,000 rebels, built five high-rises, and the rebels retreated to Hangzhou.

古文：二月，贯、稹前锋至清河堰，水陆并进，腊复焚官舍、府库、民居，乃宵遁。
现代文：二月，童贯、谭稹的前锋到达清河堰，宋军水陆并进，方腊又放火烧官舍、府库、民宅，并趁夜逃离杭州。
English: In February, the vanguard of Tongran and Tan Rong reached the Qinghe Weir, the Song army marched on land and sea, and the Fangla set fire to government buildings, the government treasury, and private homes, and took advantage of the night to flee Hangzhou.

古文：诸将刘延庆、王禀、王涣、杨惟忠、辛兴宗相继至，尽复所失城。
现代文：宋将刘延庆、王禀、王涣、王惟忠、辛兴忠相继率兵赶来，收复了所有被义军占领的城池。
English: Song successively led Liu Yanqing, Wang Hui, Wang Hui, Wang Weizhong and Xin Xingzhong to recover all the cities occupied by the rebels.

古文：四月，生擒腊及妻邵、子毫二太子、伪相方肥等五十二人于梓桐石穴中，杀贼七万。
现代文：四月，方腊及妻子邵氏、儿子方毫、宰相方肥等五十二人在梓桐峒的石涧中被俘，义军七万人被杀。
English: In April, Fang La, his wife Shao, his son Fang Zhao, Prime Minister Fang Hui, and fifty-two others were captured in the quarry at Zui Tonglu, and seventy thousand rebels were killed.

古文：四年三月，余党悉平。
现代文：宣和四年三月，方腊余部都被平灭。
English: In March of the fourth year after the declaration of peace, the rest of Fangla was completely destroyed.

古文：进贯太师，徙国楚。
现代文：童贯升为太师，改封为楚国公。
English: Tong Guanzhong was promoted to Grand Master and given the title of Duke of Chu.

古文：腊之起，破六州五十二县，戕平民二百万，所掠妇女自贼峒逃出，倮而缢于林中者，由汤岩、椔岭八十五里间，九村山谷相望。
现代文：方腊起义，攻占了六州五十二县，杀百姓二百万，被掠去的妇女从峒中逃出，在林中裸体吊死者，从汤岩、木甾岭的八十五里之间，九个村的山谷中随处可见。
English: Fangla Uprising, occupied fifty-two counties in six states, killed two million people, the plundered women escaped from the cocoon, hanged the dead naked in the forest, from Tangyan, Muxiling's eighty-five miles, can be seen everywhere in the valley of nine villages.

古文：王师自出至凯旋，四百五十日。
现代文：宋军从出兵镇压到凯旋归来，前后用四百五十天。
English: It took 450 days for the Song Army to return from the suppression of the invasion to the triumphant return.

古文：腊虽平，而北伐之役遂起。
现代文：平定方腊后，又兴师北伐。
English: After the defeat of the Qing Dynasty, the Northern Expedition was launched again.

古文：既而以复燕山功，诏解节钺为真三公，加封徐、豫两国。
现代文：不久，皇上因童贯收复燕山有功，下诏解除他的兵权而为真三公，加封他为徐、豫两国公。
English: Not long after, the emperor issued an imperial edict relieving Tong Cong of his military powers for his contribution to the recapture of Yanshan, and made him the third prince of the True Three Kingdoms, and also made him the second prince of Xu and Yu.

古文：越两月，命致仕，而代以谭稹。
现代文：过了两月，命他退休，由谭稹代替他。
English: Two months later, he was ordered to retire and replaced by Tan Yu.

古文：明年复起，领枢密院，宣抚河北、燕山。
现代文：第二年又起用他，领枢密院，宣抚河北、燕山。
English: In the following year, he was appointed to lead the Privy Council, and to preach in Hebei and Yanshan.

古文：宣和七年，诏用神宗遗训，能复全燕之境者胙本邦，疏王爵，遂封广阳郡王。
现代文：宣和七年，遵神宗能收复全燕之地者赏以封地、给以王爵的遗训，下诏封他为广阳郡王。
English: Seven years after the declaration of peace, those who were able to recover all of Yan's lands from the Zunjin sect were rewarded with fiefs, given the last rites of Wang Jie, and given the title of Guangyang County King.

古文：是年，粘罕南侵，贯在太原，遣马扩、辛兴宗往聘以尝金，金人以纳张觉为责，且遣使告兴兵，贯厚礼之，谓曰： 如此大事，何不素告我？ 使者劝贯速割两河以谢，贯气褫不能应，谋遁归。
现代文：同年，粘罕南侵，童贯在太原，派马扩、辛兴宗以访问为名去试探金人意图，金人指责宋收留张觉，并派使下战书，童贯对金使厚礼相待，并说： 这么大的事，怎不先告诉我呢？ 金使劝童贯马上割两河之地向金人谢罪，童贯垂头丧气无以应对，打算逃回京城。
English: In the same year, when China invaded the south, Tongran was in Taiyuan, and sent Ma Zhan and Xin Xingzong to probe the intentions of the Jin people in the name of a visit. The Jin people accused Song of receiving Zhang Jue, and sent an envoy to make a war report. Tongran treated the Jin people with courtesy, and said, "Why don't you tell me about such a big thing first?" The Jin people advised Tongran to immediately cut the land of the two rivers to apologize to the Jin people. Tongran bowed his head in despair, unable to respond, and planned to flee back to Beijing.

古文：太原守张孝纯诮之曰： 金人渝盟，王当令天下兵悉力枝梧，今委之而去，是弃河东与敌也。
现代文：太原守将张孝纯谴责他说： 金人背盟，大王应号令天下兵马全力抵抗，现在弃之而去，是把河东丢给敌人啊。
English: Zhang Xiaochun, the governor of Taiyuan, denounced him, saying, "The Jin people have reneged on their alliance, and the great king should order the soldiers and horses of the world to resist with all their might. To abandon it now is to abandon Hedong to the enemy."

古文：河东入敌手，奈河北乎？ 贯怒叱之曰： 贯受命宣抚，非守土也。
现代文：河东一入敌手，河北怎么办？ 童贯怒斥他说： 我童贯受命为宣抚，不是来守疆土的。
English: Once Hedong fell into the enemy's hands, what should Hebei do? Tong Rong angrily rebuked him, saying: My Tong Rong was ordered to be a messenger, not to defend the territory.

古文：君必欲留贯，置帅何为？ 孝纯拊掌叹曰： 平生童太师作几许威望，及临事乃蓄缩畏慑，奉头鼠窜，何面目复见天子乎？ 
现代文：你定要留我，还设将帅有何用？ 张孝纯拍手叹道 ：童太师一生威望甚高，事到临头却畏缩恐惧，抱头鼠窜，有何面目再见天子呢？ 
English: Zhang Xiaochun clapped his hands and sighed, "Todaiji had a very high prestige in his lifetime, but when the time came, he cowered in fear and put his head in his hands. What kind of face will he have when he sees the Son of Heaven again?"

古文：贯奔入都，钦宗已受禅，下诏亲征，以贯为东京留守，贯不受命而奉上皇南巡。
现代文：童贯逃回京城，钦宗已即位，下诏亲征，以童贯为东京留守，童贯没接受而是同徽宗南逃。
English: Tong Quan fled back to Beijing. Qin Zong had already ascended to the throne and issued an edict to personally enlist. Tong Quan remained in Tokyo. However, Tong Quan did not accept the order and fled south with Huizong.

古文：贯在西边募长大少年号胜捷军，几万人，以为亲军，环列第舍，至是拥之自随。
现代文：童贯在西部边境曾招募青少年组成胜捷军，有近万人，他把他们作为亲军，守卫他的住所，这时又让这支军队跟着他。
English: On the western border, Tong Rong had recruited teenagers to form a victorious Chechen army, with nearly ten thousand people. He treated them as his own troops, guarding his residence, and then let this army follow him.

古文：上皇过浮桥，卫士攀望号恸，贯唯恐行不速，使亲军射之，中矢而踣者百余人，道路流涕，于是谏官、御史与国人议者蜂起。
现代文：徽宗过浮桥出城时，卫士们紧随他的后面，有往桥上爬的，有抱怨的，有号哭的，生怕被丢下。童贯怕走得慢，命亲军射箭，有一百多人中箭而死，一路哭声，于是谏官、御史和人们议论纷纷，说童贯的罪恶。
English: When Huizong crossed the pontoon bridge to leave the city, the guards followed closely behind him. Some climbed onto the bridge, some complained, some cried, for fear of being left behind. Tong Quan was afraid to walk slowly, so he shot arrows at the soldiers, and more than a hundred people died from the arrows, crying all the way, so the eunuchs, the governor and the people talked about it and talked about the sins of Tong Quan.

古文：初贬左卫上将军，连谪昭化军节度副使，窜之英州、吉阳军。
现代文：起初贬童贯为左卫上将军，连续降官，谪为昭化军节度副使，发配到英州、吉阳军。
English: At first, he was demoted to the rank of General of the Left Division of the Imperial Guards, and was successively demoted to the rank of Vice-Minister of Defense of the Shouhua Army, and sent to the Yingzhou and Jiyang Armies.

古文：行未至，诏数其十大罪，命监察御史张澂迹其所至，莅斩之，及于南雄。
现代文：还没到地方，又下诏历数他十大罪状，命监察御史张澄沿他所走路线，到途中斩掉他，在南雄斩童贯。
English: Before he got to the place, he made a list of his ten major crimes, and ordered the inspector of history, Zhang Cheng, to follow the route he took, cut him off on the way, and cut off the child in Nanxiong.

古文：既诛，函首赴阙，枭于都市。
现代文：童贯被杀，他的头被带回京城悬首示众。
English: Tongran was killed and his head was brought back to Beijing to be displayed.

古文：贯握兵二十年，权倾一时，奔走期会过于制敕。
现代文：童贯握兵权二十年，权倾一时，发号施令超过了皇帝的制敕。
English: Tong Quan held military power for twenty years, and when the power was tilted, he issued orders that exceeded the emperor's control.

古文：尝有论其过者，诏方劭往察，劭一动一息，贯悉侦得之，先密以白，且陷以他事，劭反得罪，逐死。
现代文：曾有人弹劾他，皇上命方劭去调察，方劭的一举一动都被童贯侦得，他先到皇上那告状，并陷害方劭，方劭反而获罪被处死。
English: Someone had impeached him, the emperor ordered Fang Xuan to investigate, and Fang Xuan's every move was detected by Tong Jun. He first went to the emperor to file a complaint, and framed Fang Xuan, but Fang Xuan was convicted and executed.

古文：贯状魁梧，伟观视，颐下生须十数，皮骨劲如铁，不类阉人。
现代文：童贯体貌魁梧，穿戴讲究，腮下生有胡须，皮骨坚硬如铁，不像宦官。
English: Tongran is a burly, well-dressed man with a beard under his arm. His skin and bones are as hard as iron, unlike eunuchs.

古文：有度量，能疏财。
现代文：他有度量，能散发财物。
English: He is a man of means, able to distribute wealth.

古文：后宫自妃嫔以下皆献饷结内，左右妇寺誉言日闻。
现代文：后宫中从妃嫔以下他都用财物结纳，每天都能听到后宫中人称赞他的话。
English: From the concubine on down in the harem, he used his wealth to buy off everyone, and every day he could hear people in the harem praising him.

古文：宠煽翕赫，庭户杂遝成市，岳牧、辅弼多出其门，厮养、仆圉官诸使者至数百辈。
现代文：他恩宠显赫，门庭若市，岳牧、辅弼多出自他的门下，厮养、仆圉官诸使者达数百人。
English: His grace was eminent, his court was large, his father-in-laws and aides-de-camp were mostly from his entourage, and there were hundreds of courtiers, servants, and envoys.

古文：穷奸稔祸，流毒四海，虽菹醢不偿责也。
现代文：他极尽邪恶，招致祸乱，天下遭殃，即使把他剁成肉酱也不能抵偿他的罪责。
English: Even if he were to be chopped into pieces, he would not be able to compensate for his guilt.

古文：梁师成，字守道，慧黠习文法，稍知书。初隶贾详书艺局，详死，得领睿思殿文字外库，主出外传道上旨。
现代文：梁师成字守道，聪慧狡黠熟习文法，稍稍知道一点写作，开始隶属于贾详的书艺局，贾详死，他得以管理睿思殿文字外库，负责出外传道上旨。
English: Liang Shizhong kept the word, was clever and cunning, was familiar with grammar, and knew a little bit about writing. He began to be affiliated with Jia Jie's Book Art Bureau. After Jia Jie's death, he was able to manage the external library of Ruisi Temple and was responsible for preaching abroad.

古文：政和间，得君贵幸，至窜名进士籍中，积迁晋州观察使、兴德军留后。
现代文：政和间，受皇帝恩宠，把名字写入进士的名籍中，逐渐升为晋州观察使、兴德军留后。
English: During the political peace, by the grace of the emperor, he wrote his name into the name book of the new recruits, and gradually rose to the position of the Jinzhou observation envoy, and remained behind the Xingde Army.

古文：建明堂，为都监，既成，拜节度使、加中太一、神霄宫使。
现代文：朝廷建明堂，他为都监，明堂修成后，拜为节度使，并任中太一、神霄宫使。
English: When the Imperial Court built Myeongdong, he was the city supervisor. After the Myeongdong was completed, he served as the Festival Commissioner, as well as the Junior Taichi and the Shinshoryo Palace Commissioner.

古文：历护国、镇东、河东三节度，至检校太傅，遂拜太尉、开府仪同三司，换节淮南。
现代文：历任护国、镇东、河东三节度使，官至检校太傅，被拜为太尉、开府仪同三司，调任淮南节度。
English: He was successively appointed as the national protector, Zhendong, and Hedong of the three sections, and the official was promoted to the school inspection taifu, was worshiped as the taifu, the Kaifu ceremony and the three departments, and transferred to Huainan section.

古文：时中外泰宁，徽宗留意礼文符瑞之事，师成善逢迎，希恩宠。
现代文：当时中外泰宁，徽宗留意于礼文符瑞的事，梁师成善于逢迎，希图恩宠。
English: At that time, both at home and abroad, Huizong paid attention to the matter of the blessing, Liang Shicheng was good at meeting and greeting, and he wanted to be favored.

古文：帝本以隶人畜之，命入处殿中，凡御书号令皆出其手，多择善书吏习仿帝书，杂诏旨以出，外廷莫能辨。
现代文：徽宗本来是把他作为下等奴仆的，却因此提拔他为近臣，凡是皇帝诏令都出自他的手，他选那些擅长书法的小官练习模仿徽宗的字体，掺杂在诏书中颁布，朝官不能辨别真伪。
English: Emperor Huizong originally treated him as a low-ranking servant, but promoted him to a close retainer. All imperial edicts came from his hand. He selected those minor officials who were good at calligraphy to practice imitating the fonts of Emperor Huizong, and published them in the edicts. The imperial officials could not distinguish between the true and the false.

古文：师成实不能文，而高自标榜，自言苏轼出子。
现代文：梁师成实无文才，但却自我标榜，自称是苏轼流落在外的儿子。
English: Liang Shicheng has no literary talent, but he advertises himself, claiming to be the son of Su Shi who has been exiled.

古文：是时，天下禁诵轼文，其尺牍在人间者皆毁去，师成诉于帝曰： 先臣何罪？ 自是，轼之文乃稍出。
现代文：当时，苏轼的文章被禁，他的文章在民间的都被毁去，梁师成向皇帝诉委屈说： 我的先辈有何罪？ 此后，苏轼的文章才慢慢流行。
English: At that time, Su Shi's articles were banned, and his articles were destroyed by the people. Liang Shicheng complained to the emperor and said, "What is the sin of my ancestors?" After that, Su Shi's articles slowly became popular.

古文：以翰墨为己任，四方俊秀名士必招致门下，往往遭点污。
现代文：他以翰墨为己任，广招天下才能之士，这些名人往往被他玷污。
English: He took it as his duty to recruit talented people from all over the world. These celebrities were often tarnished by him.

古文：多置书画卷轴于外舍，邀宾客纵观，得其题识合意者，辄密加汲引，执政、侍从可阶而升。
现代文：他在厅堂放了很多书画，请宾客参观，得到某人题识符合己意的，就秘密提拔，执政、侍从也可由此而升任。
English: He placed a lot of calligraphy and paintings in the hall, invited guests to visit, and secretly promoted anyone whose title was in line with his own wishes. Rulers and attendants could also be promoted as a result.

古文：王黼父事之，虽蔡京父子亦谄附焉，都人目为 隐相 ，所领职局至数十百。
现代文：王黼待之如父，即使蔡京父子对他也要献媚攀附，京城人视他为 隐相 ，他兼任百十个官职。
English: Wang Xizhi is treated like a father, even if Cai Jing and his son want to flatter and cling to him, the people of Beijing regard him as a hidden face, he also holds a hundred official positions.

古文：黼造伐燕议，师成始犹依违，卒乃赞决，又荐谭稹为宣抚。
现代文：王黼提出伐燕的计划，梁师成开始还反对，最终还是赞同了，并推荐谭稹为宣抚使。
English: Wang Qian proposed the plan of felling Yan, Liang Shicheng initially opposed it, but eventually agreed, and recommended Tan Qian as the envoy.

古文：燕山平，策勋进少保。
现代文：平定燕山后，他因功升为少保。
English: After he subdued Yanshan, he was promoted to Junior Security Officer for his achievements.

古文：益通贿谢，人士入钱数百万，以献颂上书为名，令赴廷试，唱第之日，侍于帝前，嗫嚅升降。
现代文：更是广收贿赂，有人给他送钱数百万，他就让此人以歌颂皇帝书法为名，让他参加廷试，唱第那天，他侍立于皇帝身边，小声控制某某人的升降。
English: What's more, he was a prolific bribe-taker. If someone gave him millions of dollars, he would let that person take part in a court trial in the name of praising the emperor's calligraphy. On the first day, he stood at the emperor's side, quietly controlling the promotion and demotion of so-and-so.

古文：其小吏储宏亦豫科甲，而执厮养之役如初。
现代文：他手下的小吏储宏也有科举功名，但却仍与当初一样为厮役。
English: His subordinate, the minor official, Sukehiro, also made a name for himself in the imperial examinations, but he still served as a magistrate, just as he had in the beginning.

古文：李彦括民田于京东、西，所至倨坐堂上，监司、郡守不敢抗礼。
现代文：李彦在京东、京西搜括民田，所到之处飞扬跋扈，监司、郡守不敢与之抗礼。
English: Li Yan searched for people's fields in the east and west of Beijing, and everywhere he went, the thunderstorms were so strong that supervisors and county governors did not dare to resist them.

古文：有言于帝，师成适在旁，抗声曰： 王人虽微，序于诸侯之上，岂足为过？ 言者惧而止。
现代文：有人对皇上说，梁师成恰在帝旁，厉声说 ：皇上的仆人地位虽低，次序也在诸侯之上，难道能把这看成过失吗？ 上言者害怕而不再说话。
English: Someone said to the emperor that Liang Shicheng was right next to the emperor, and snapped: Although the status of the emperor's servant is low, the order is also above the princes, can this be regarded as a mistake? The speaker was afraid and stopped speaking.

古文：师成貌若不能言，然阴贼险鸷，遇间即发。
现代文：梁师成貌似不善言谈，但十分阴险，一有机会就会害人。
English: Liang Shicheng does not seem to be good at talking, but he is very insidious and will harm people at the first opportunity.

古文：家居与黼邻，帝幸黼第，见其交通状，已怒，朱勔又以应奉与黼轧，因乘隙攻之。
现代文：梁师成与王黼是邻居，皇上到王黼家，见他们交往十分密切，已生气，朱面力又因应奉局的事与王黼有矛盾，于是趁机攻击王黼。
English: Liang Shicheng and Wang Qian are neighbors. When the emperor came to Wang Qian's home and saw that they were very close, he was angry. Zhu Mianli also had a conflict with Wang Qian because of the matter of obeying the bureau, so he took the opportunity to attack Wang Qian.

古文：帝罢黼相，师成由是益绌。
现代文：皇上罢去王黼相位，梁师成也因此遭贬。
English: The emperor removed Wang Xi from his position, and Liang Shicheng was also demoted as a result.

古文：郓王楷宠盛，有动摇东宫意，师成能力保护。
现代文：当时郓王赵楷最得宠，有意夺太子位，梁师成竭力保护太子。
English: At that time, Zhao Kai, the king of Qi, was the most favored and intended to win the crown prince. Liang Shicheng tried his best to protect the crown prince.

古文：钦宗立，嬖臣多从上皇东下，师成以旧恩留京师。
现代文：钦宗即位后，宠臣多随徽宗东下，梁师成因旧恩留在京城。
English: After Emperor Qinzong ascended to the throne, most of his favorite vassals followed Emperor Huizong to the east, while Liang Shicheng stayed in Beijing due to an old favor.

古文：于是太学生陈东、布衣张炳力疏其罪。
现代文：于是太学生陈东、布衣张炳上书指斥梁师成。
English: As a result, the students Chen Dong and Buyi Zhang Rong wrote a letter to Liang Shicheng.

古文：炳指之为李辅国，且言宦官表里相应，变恐不测。
现代文：张炳指出梁师成就是李辅国，并说宦官里外相应，恐有不测。
English: Zhang Qian pointed out that Liang Shicheng is Li Yu's country, and said that the eunuchs inside and outside are corresponding, and there may be accidents.

古文：东复论其有异志，攘定策功，当正典刑。
现代文：陈东又说梁师成有异心，窃取定策之功，应该依法惩处。
English: Chen Dong also said that Liang Shicheng had ulterior motives and stole the credit for the decision-making, and should be punished according to law.

古文：帝迫于公议，犹未诵言逐之。师成疑之，寝食不离帝所，虽奏厕亦侍于外，久未有以发。
现代文：皇上迫于公议，还没有下达驱逐他的命令，梁师成疑心重重，寝食不离钦宗，即使钦宗上厕所，他也侍立于外，很长时间都没有发布命令。
English: The emperor was forced by public opinion, but had not yet issued an order to expel him. Liang Shicheng was so anxious that he did not leave Qinzong to sleep or eat. Even when Qinzong went to the toilet, he stood outside and did not issue an order for a long time.

古文：会郑望之使金营还，帝命师成及望之以宣和殿珠玉器玩复往。
现代文：正赶上郑望之出使金营回来，钦宗命梁师成和郑望之带着宣和殿中的珠玉器玩再去金营。
English: Just in time for Zheng Wang's return from the Golden Encampment, Emperor Qin ordered Liang Shicheng and Zheng Wang to take the gems from the Xuanhe Hall to play with before going to the Golden Encampment.

古文：先令望之诣中书谕宰相，至则留之，始诏暴其罪，责为彰化军节度副使。
现代文：皇上先命郑望之到中书省去告谕宰相，梁师成到后就扣留他，并开始下诏历数他的罪状，贬他为彰化军节度副使。
English: The emperor first ordered Zheng Wangzhi to go to Zhongshu to inform the prime minister. When Liang Shicheng arrived, he detained him and began to count his crimes, demoting him to the vice-envoy of the Changhua Army.

古文：开封吏护至贬所，行次八角镇，缢杀之，以暴死闻，籍其家。
现代文：开封府吏押送他到贬所，走到八角镇，把梁师成缢杀，报告朝廷说他是暴死的，他家被抄。
English: Kaifeng government officials escorted him to the detention center, walked to Bajiao Town, killed Liang Shi in a fight, reported to the court that he died violently, and his home was confiscated.

古文：杨戩，少给事掖庭，主掌后苑，善测伺人主意。
现代文：杨戬，年轻时在后宫做事，主管后花园，善于揣测皇上的意思。
English: Yang Xuan, who worked in the harem when he was young and was in charge of the back garden, was good at guessing the emperor's intentions.

古文：自崇宁后，日有宠，知入内内侍省。
现代文：自崇宁以后，日益受宠，担任知入内内侍省。
English: Since the time of Chongning, she has been increasingly favored to serve as the Minister of the Imperial Household.

古文：立明堂，铸鼎鼐、起大晟府、龙德宫，皆为提举。
现代文：朝廷立明堂，铸九鼎，修大晟府、龙德宫，他都担任提举官。
English: He served as the official in charge of raising funds for the construction of the Imperial Palace, the Great Hall of the People, the Great Hall of the People and the Longde Palace.

古文：政和四年，拜彰化军节度使，首建期门行幸事以固其权，势与梁师成埒。
现代文：政和四年，被任命为彰化军节度使，首倡设皇帝出行的护卫军，以此来巩固他的权力，他的权势与梁师成相等。
English: In the fourth year of Zheng He's reign, he was appointed as the envoy of the Changhua Military Festival, and was the first to advocate the establishment of an escort army for the emperor to travel, in order to consolidate his power. His power was equal to that of Liang Shicheng.

古文：历镇安、清海、镇东三镇，由检校少保至太傅，遂谋撼东宫。
现代文：杨戬历任镇安、清海、镇东三镇节度使，由检校少保升至太傅，于是阴谋动摇太子。
English: Yang Hui successively served as the three towns of Zhen'an, Qinghai, and Zhendong, and rose from the school inspector to the Taifu, so he plotted to shake the prince.

古文：有胥吏杜公才者献策于戩，立法索民田契，自甲之乙，乙之丙，展转究寻，至无可证，则度地所出，增立赋租。
现代文：有个叫杜公才的胥吏向杨戬献计，制定法令求取老百姓的田契，从甲到乙，从乙到丙，辗转追究，直到没有证据，就推测土地的产量，增加租赋。
English: A magistrate named Du Gongcai proposed a plan to Yang Hui, enacting a decree to obtain the land lease of the common people, from A to B, from B to C, and investigating until there was no evidence, he estimated the output of land and increased the rent.

古文：始于汝州，浸淫于京东西、淮西北，括废堤、弃堰、荒山、退滩及大河淤流之处，皆勒民主佃。
现代文：从汝州开始，慢慢地扩展到京东、京西、淮西、淮北，搜求废堤、弃堰、荒山、退滩及大河淤塞的地方，都勒令百姓租佃。
English: Starting from Ruzhou, it gradually expanded to Jingdong, West Beijing, West Huai and North Huai, searching for waste dikes, abandoned weirs, barren mountains, beaching and silted rivers, and ordering people to rent rafts.

古文：额一定后，虽冲荡回复不可减，号为 西城所 。
现代文：租额确定后，土地虽被河水冲荡，不能耕种时，租额也不减免，号称 西城所 。
English: After the rent is determined, if the land is washed away by the river and cannot be cultivated, the rent will not be reduced or waived. It is known as the West Town.

古文：筑山泺古钜野泽，绵亘数百里，济、郓数州，赖其蒲鱼之利，立租算船纳直，犯者盗执之。
现代文：筑山泺是古时的钜野泽，绵亘数百里，济、郓数州百姓，在这里依靠捕鱼为生，杨戬也按船定租税，有违犯的，就以盗窃罪抓起来。
English: The Tsukiyama estuary is an ancient wetland, stretching for hundreds of miles, where the people of several prefectures depend on fishing for their livelihood. The Yang estuary is also taxed according to the ship. If there is a violation, they will be arrested for theft.

古文：一邑率于常赋外增租钱至十余万缗，水旱蠲税，此不得免。
现代文：一县一般在常赋之外又增加租钱达十多万缗，按规定，遭水旱灾害时可免税，这里不能免。
English: Generally, a county will increase the rent by more than 100,000 baht in addition to the regular rent. According to regulations, it can be exempted from taxes when it is affected by floods and droughts. This cannot be exempted.

古文：擢公才为观察使。
现代文：杜公才被提升为观察使。
English: Du Gongcai was promoted to the observation post.

古文：宣和三年，戩死，赠太师、吴国公，而李彦继其职。
现代文：宣和三年，杨戬去世，被追赠为太师、吴国公，李彦接替他的官职。
English: Three years after the declaration of peace, Yang Xuan died and was posthumously given the title of Grand Master and Wu Guogong. Li Yan took over his official position.

古文：彦天资狠愎，密与王黼表里，置局汝州，临事愈剧。
现代文：李彦天性凶狠刚愎，暗中与王黼相表里，在汝州设置官署，对百姓更刻薄。
English: Li Yan was naturally ferocious and obstinate. He was secretly on a par with Wang Xi, setting up a government office in Ruzhou and being even meaner to the common people.

古文：凡民间美田，使他人投牒告陈，皆指为天荒，虽执印券皆不省。
现代文：凡是百姓的良田，李彦就指使别人投书告发，都说成是无主荒地，田主虽拿出田契也不被承认。
English: All the people's good fields, Li Yan instructed others to write and report, were said to be ownerless wastelands. Although the landlord took out a field lease, it was not recognized.

古文：鲁山阖县尽括为公田，焚民故券，使田主输租佃本业，诉者辄加威刑，致死者千万。
现代文：鲁山全县的土地都被括为公田，烧了百姓的田契，让田主耕佃本属自己的土地，投诉的人往往被施以酷刑，因此而死的成千上万。
English: The land in the whole county of Lushan was classified as public land, the people's field deeds were burned, and the owners were allowed to cultivate their own land. The complainants were often tortured, and thousands of people died as a result.

古文：公田既无二税，转运使亦不为奏除，悉均诸别州。
现代文：公田没有二税，转运使也不上奏请求除去，原来鲁山县的二税都被摊派给别的州。
English: There is no double tax on public land, nor is the transporter required to file a request for removal. Originally, the double tax in Luzhan County was apportioned to other prefectures.

古文：京西提举官及京东州县吏刘寄、任辉彦、李士渔、王浒、毛孝立、王随、江惇、吕坯、钱棫、宋宪皆助彦为虐，如奴事主，民不胜忿痛。
现代文：京西提举官及京东州县吏刘寄、任辉彦、李士渔、王浒、毛孝立、王随、江、吕坯、钱木或、宋宪都助李彦为虐，对李彦犹如奴才侍奉主人，百姓十分痛恨。
English: Liu Ying, Ren Hui Yan, Li Shiyu, Wang Hui, Mao Xiaoling, Wang Zui, Jiang, Lu Yuet, Qian Mu or Song Xian, officials of the Beijing and Western Regions and officials of the Jingdong Prefecture, all helped Li Yan to commit atrocities. The people hated Li Yan as if he was a slave serving his master.

古文：前执政冠带操笏，迎谒马首献媚，花朝夕造请，宾客径趍谒舍，不敢对之上马，而彦处之自如。
现代文：从前的执政官穿着朝服，在马前对他拜迎献媚，早晚都请他赴宴，宾客们径直去他的住处拜见他，不敢当着他的面骑马，而李彦对这些泰然处之。
English: The former consul, dressed in imperial robes, courted him in front of his horse, invited him to dinner morning and night, and the guests went straight to his residence to meet him, not daring to ride a horse in front of him, but Li Yan dealt with them calmly.

古文：发物供奉，大抵类朱勔，凡竹数竿用一大车、牛驴数十头，其数无极，皆责办于民，经时阅月，无休息期。
现代文：李彦向皇上所献的贡奉品，和朱面力差不多，竹数竿装在一辆大车上，用牛驴数十头拉车，车、牛、驴的数目无限，都出自百姓，经年累月，无休无止。
English: The tribute offered by Li Yan to the emperor was almost the same as that of Zhu Mianli. The bamboo pole was mounted on a large cart, with dozens of oxen and donkeys pulling the cart. The number of carts, oxen, and donkeys was unlimited, all from the people, over the years, without end.

古文：农不得之田，牛不得耕垦，殚财靡刍，力竭饿死，或自缢辕轭间。
现代文：百姓不能种田，牛不能耕地，最后百姓用尽财力，喂牲畜的草料也用光了，筋疲力尽地饿死了，有的就在车上上吊自杀。
English: The people can't farm, the cattle can't farm, and eventually the people run out of money and the grass to feed the cattle runs out, and they starve to death from exhaustion. Some even hang themselves in their cars.

古文：如龙鳞薜荔一本，辇致之费逾百万。喜赏怒刑，祸福转手，因之得美官者甚众。
现代文：如一棵龙鳞薜荔，运费超过百万。李彦高兴时就奖赏，生气时就用刑，祸福就在他的转手之间，因此得到好官职的很多。
English: For example, a dragon scale costs more than a million to ship. When Li Yan is happy, he rewards, when he is angry, he punishes, and misfortune and good fortune are in his hands. Therefore, there are many people who have obtained good official positions.

古文：颍昌兵马钤辖范寥不为取竹，诬刊苏轼诗文于石为十恶，朝廷察其捃摭，亦令勒停。
现代文：颍昌兵马钤辖范寥不替他搜取好竹子，他就诬陷范寥在石头上刊刻苏轼的诗文，是十恶罪，朝廷察明他取竹的事，也下令停止。
English: Fan Liao, commander of the Quchang Terracotta Warriors and Horses, did not search for good bamboo for him, and he framed Fan Liao for publishing Su Shi's poem on the stone, which is a ten-evil crime. The court noticed that he was taking bamboo and ordered him to stop.

古文：当时谓朱勔结怨于东南，李彦结怨于西北。
现代文：当时人认为朱面力在东南同百姓结怨，李彦在西北同百姓结怨。
English: At that time, it was believed that Zhu Mianli had grievances with the people in the southeast, and Li Yan had grievances with the people in the northwest.

古文：靖康初，诏追戩所赠官爵，彦削官赐死，籍其家；刘寄以下十人皆停废；复范寥官。
现代文：靖康初年，皇上下诏追夺对杨戬所赠的官爵；削去李彦的官职，赐死他，籍没他家；刘寄以下十人都罢官；恢复范寥的官职。
English: In the first year of Jingkang, the emperor issued an imperial edict to seize the official title presented to Yang Xuan; Li Yan's official position was eliminated, he was given death, and his family was deprived of citizenship; ten people from Liu He and below were dismissed; and Fan Liao's official position was restored.

