古文：保寿寺先天菩萨王宰杨炎顾况周昉范长寿程修己边鸾张萱王墨李仲和刘商厉归真圣画廉广范山人韦叔文
现代文：保寿寺先天菩萨王宰杨炎顾况周昉范长寿程修己边鸾张萱王墨李仲和刘商厉归真圣画廉广范山人韦叔文
English: Ancestral Bodhisattva Wang Zai Yang Yan, Gu Gu Zhou, Fan Longevity, Self-cultivation, Zhang Zhou, Wang Mo, Li Zhong, Liu Shangli, Guizhen, Sacred Painting, Guang Fan, Mountain Man, Wei Shuwen

古文：保寿寺
现代文：保寿寺
English: Hoju-ji Temple

古文：保寿寺本高力士宅。天宝九载，舍为寺。
现代文：保寿寺本是宦官高力士的旧宅，唐玄宗天宝九年，舍为寺院。
English: Hoju-ji Temple was originally the former residence of the eunuch Goryeo, and was converted into a temple in the ninth year of the reign of Emperor Xuanzong of the Tang Dynasty.

古文：初铸钟成，力士设斋庆之，举朝毕至。
现代文：寺钟刚铸成时，高力士设斋祭仪表示庆贺，满朝文武大臣都来参加。
English: When the bell of the temple was just cast, Goryeo set up a fasting ceremony to celebrate, and all the ministers of literature and military affairs came to participate.

古文：一击百千。
现代文：击一下钟捐施钱成百上千。
English: At the stroke of a clock, hundreds of thousands of dollars are donated.

古文：有规其意，连击二十杵。
现代文：有窥测到高力士用意的，连击二十杆。
English: There was a sneak peek of the 20-shot rally that Koryoshi had planned.

古文：经藏阁规构危巧，二塔火珠授十余斛。
现代文：寺内的经藏阁构造高峻精巧，二塔接受火齐球十多斛。
English: The storage pavilion inside the temple has a high and delicate structure, with the two towers receiving more than ten fireballs.

古文：河阳从事李涿性好奇古，与僧善，尝俱至此寺观库中旧物。
现代文：河阳从事李涿禀性喜好珍奇古玩，跟寺里的僧人关系很好。
English: Heyang has a penchant for rare and antique antiques, and has a good relationship with the monks in the temple.

古文：忽于破瓮中得物如被，幅裂汙坌，触而尘起。
现代文：一次，他跟寺里的僧人一块儿到寺观库中翻拣旧物，忽然在一只破瓮中发现一件象被子一样的东西，破败污秽，布满尘垢，一触碰它立即尘埃四起。
English: On one occasion, he and the monks from the temple went to the temple viewing room to look through the old things, and suddenly found something like a quilt in a broken cocoon. It was dilapidated, filthy, and covered with dirt. Dust immediately sprung up when he touched it.

古文：涿徐视之，乃画也。
现代文：李涿慢慢仔细察看着，发现原来是幅古画。
English: Li Yan slowly and carefully looked at it and found that it was an ancient painting.

古文：因以州县图三及缣三十换之。令家人装治，大十余幅。
现代文：他用三幅州县图和双丝细绢三十匹跟僧人换来这幅古画，让家人进行装表处治，有十余幅那么大。
English: He exchanged three maps of prefectures and counties and 30 pairs of silk stockings with the monk for this ancient painting, and let his family decorate it. There are more than ten paintings of this size.

古文：访于常侍柳公权。方知张萱所画《石桥图》也。
现代文：李涿求教常侍柳公权，才知道是张萱画的《石桥图》啊。
English: Li Wei asked Liu Gongquan, a frequent attendant, for advice, only to find out that it was Zhang Ye's "Stone Bridge" painting.

古文：玄宗赐力士，因留寺中。
现代文：当年，唐玄宗赏赐给高力士，因此留在寺内库中。
English: In that year, Tang Xuan Zong gave the award to Gao Lixi, so it remained in the temple library.

古文：后为鬻画人宗牧言于左军。
现代文：后来，卖画人宗牧言将这件事告诉了左宝贵将军。
English: Later, the seller of the painting, Zong Muyan, told General Zuo Rui about this.

古文：寻有小使领军卒数十人至宅，宣敕取之。
现代文：过了不久，有一小使领着几十个兵卒来到李涿家，宣读敕书来取这幅画。
English: Soon after, a small envoy led by dozens of soldiers came to Li Xuan's house, read out the imperial edict and took the painting.

古文：即日进入。
现代文：当天，左宝贵就将这幅画进献给皇上。
English: On the same day, Zuo Precious presented the painting to the emperor.

古文：帝好古，见之大悦，命张于云韶院。
现代文：肃宗皇帝也非常喜爱古物、古玩，看到这幅画特别高兴，让人将它张挂在云韶院。
English: Emperor Suzong was also very fond of antiques and curiosities. He was particularly pleased to see this painting, and had it hung in Unhyeon-in.

古文：先天菩萨
现代文：先天菩萨
English: Ancestral Bodhisattvas

古文：有先天菩萨嶝，本起成都妙积寺。
现代文：有帧先天菩萨图。绘画这幅画的缘由起自成都的妙积寺。
English: There is a framed Ancestral Bodhisattva. The painting of this painting originates from the Myoju Temple in Chengdu.

古文：开元初，有尼魏八师者常念大悲咒。
现代文：开元初年。妙积寺中有个尼姑叫魏八师，常常念大悲咒。
English: In the first year of the founding of the Yuan Dynasty, there was a nun in Myojoji Temple named Wei Baxi, who often recited the Great Compassion Mantra.

古文：双流县百姓刘乙名意儿，年十一，自欲事魏尼。尼遣之不去。
现代文：双流县普通百姓刘乙名意儿，这年十一岁，自愿以师徒之礼事奉魏八师，赶他也不走。
English: Liu Yiming, an ordinary citizen of Shuangliu County, who was eleven years old at the time, volunteered to serve Wei Baxter as a teacher and apprentice, and he would not leave.

古文：尝于奥室禅。
现代文：刘乙在内室参禅。
English: Liu Yi is meditating in the inner room.

古文：尝白魏云：先天菩萨见身此地。
现代文：一次，他对魏八师说：先天菩萨现身在这块地方。
English: On one occasion, he said to Wei Baishi, "The Bodhisattva appeared in this place."

古文：遂筛灰于庭。
现代文：于是就在寺内庭院洒上柴灰。
English: So they sprinkled wood ash in the courtyard of the temple.

古文：一夕，有巨迹数尺，轮理成就。因谒画工，随意设色，悉不如意。有僧杨法成自言能画。意儿常合掌仰祝，然后指授之，以近十稔。
现代文：僧人杨法成说他能画。刘乙双手合什仰祝上天，然后告诉如何画。杨法成画了近十年，才画成先天菩萨的形象，最后涂上白色，才完成了这幅画。
English: The monk Yang Farcheng said that he could draw. Liu Yi raised his hands to heaven and then told him how to draw. It took Yang Farcheng nearly ten years to draw the image of the innate bodhisattva, and finally painted it white to complete the painting.

古文：工方后素。先天菩萨凡二百四十二首。首如塔势，分臂如蔓。
现代文：刘乙、杨法成绘画的先天菩萨共有二百四十二个头，排列如塔形，手臂分开向外伸，如蔓。
English: The innate bodhisattvas depicted by Liu B. and Yang Facheng have a total of 242 heads, arranged in a tower-like pattern, with their arms stretched out like tendrils.

古文：画样十五卷。
现代文：画样共十五卷。
English: There are a total of fifteen volumes of illustrations.

古文：柳七师者崔宁之甥，分三卷，往上都流行。
现代文：崔宁的外甥柳七师分去三卷，带往京都长安去传播。
English: Cui Ning's nephew, Liu Qishi, divided it into three volumes and took it to Kyoto Chang'an to disseminate it.

古文：时魏奉古为长史，进之。
现代文：当时，魏奉古为长史，见到画卷后进献给皇上。
English: At that time, Wei Bonggu was a long history, and when he saw the picture scroll, he dedicated it to the emperor.

古文：后因四月八日赐高力士。
现代文：后来就在四月八日这天，玄宗皇帝将它赏赐给高力士。
English: Later, on April 8th, Emperor Xuanzong presented it to Gao Lixi.

古文：今成都者是其次本。
现代文：现在成都收存的是它的次本。
English: What is now stored in Chengdu is its second edition.

古文：王宰
现代文：王宰
English: Wang Zai

古文：唐王宰者家于西蜀。
现代文：唐朝人王宰，他家住在西蜀。
English: He was the crown prince of the Tang Dynasty, and his family lived in West Shu.

古文：贞之中，韦皋以客礼待之。
现代文：唐德宗贞元年间，韦皋用接待宾客的礼节将王宰请到家中。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Dezong of Tang, Wei Zheng invited Wang Zai to his home with the etiquette of receiving guests.

古文：画山水树石，出于象外。
现代文：王宰画的山水树石，跟一般人不一样。
English: Wang Zai's paintings of landscapes, trees and rocks are different from those of ordinary people.

古文：故杜甫赠歌云：十日画一松。
现代文：因此，杜甫在《戏题王宰画山水图歌》一诗中，说他十日画一松。
English: Therefore, Du Fu said in his poem "The Theme of Wang Zai's Landscape Painting" that he painted a pine tree in ten days.

古文：五日画一石。
现代文：五日画一石。
English: One stone in five days.

古文：能事不受相促迫，王宰始肯留真迹。
现代文：能事不受相促迫。王宰始肯留真迹。
English: Wang Zai Shi was determined to leave his mark.

古文：又尝于席夔厅见图一障。临江双松一柏，古藤萦绕。
现代文：又曾经在席夔厅看到过王宰的一轴画：临江画有一株柏树、两株松树。
English: In addition, I once saw a scroll painting by Wang Zai in the Seating Hall: the painting of Linjiang features a cypress tree and two pine trees.

古文：上盘半空，下著水面。
现代文：松柏树上缠绕着古藤。上边遮蔽半面天空，下边紧挨水面。
English: Old wisteria wraps around the pine trees. The upper side covers half the sky, while the lower side is right next to the water.

古文：千枝万叶，交查屈曲，分布不杂。
现代文：千枝万叶，交叉盘曲。
English: A thousand branches and leaves, a crossover melody.

古文：或枯或茂，或垂或直。
现代文：有的树枝枯死了，有的欣欣向荣；有的垂向水面，有的直插天空。
English: Some branches are withered, some are flourishing; some are hanging down to the water, some are sticking straight up into the sky.

古文：叶叠千重，枝分四面。
现代文：布局匀称，一点也不杂乱。而且，树枝向四面伸展，树叶重重叠叠。
English: The layout is well-proportioned, not at all cluttered. Moreover, the branches stretch out in all directions, and the leaves overlap.

古文：精人所难，凡目莫辨。
现代文：画得这样精致，确实是一般的画师画不出来的，一般人也很难辨识出是画上去的。
English: Painted so delicately, it is indeed impossible for an ordinary painter to paint it, and it is difficult for an ordinary person to identify it as a painting.

古文：又于兴善寺见画四时屏风，若移造化。
现代文：又在兴善寺见到过王宰画的一幅四时屏风，就象将自然界的四时景物移到屏风上来似的。
English: I also saw a four o'clock screen painted by Wang Zai at Xingzen Temple. It was as if a four o'clock scene from the natural world had been moved onto the screen.

古文：风候云物，八节四时，于一座之内，妙之至也。
现代文：画家凭借对风、云、物象的精当表现，将一年中的八节四时准确无误地再现在屏风上面，真是妙到极点了。
English: By virtue of the artist's skillful representation of wind, clouds and objects, the eight quarters of the year at four o'clock are accurately reproduced on the screen, which is really wonderful.

古文：山水松石。并上上品。
现代文：王宰的画以山木火石著称于世，这是他画中的珍品。
English: Wang Zai's paintings are famous for their mountain, wood and flint motifs, which are rare in his paintings.

古文：杨炎
现代文：杨炎
English: Yang Yan

古文：杨炎，唐贞元中宰相。
现代文：杨炎，唐朝贞元年间官至宰相。
English: Yang Yan, who rose to the position of prime minister during the reign of Emperor Zhengyuan in the Tang Dynasty.

古文：气标王韩，文敌扬马。
现代文：他的气节，可以做王维、韩愈的榜样；他的文章，可以敌扬雄、司马迁。
English: His temperament can serve as a role model for Wang Wei and Han Yu; his articles can be read by the young and the old.

古文：画松石山水，出于人之表。
现代文：他画的松石山水，高出一般人。
English: His paintings of pine and stone landscapes are above average.

古文：初称处士，谒卢黄门，馆之甚厚。
现代文：杨炎起初只是位隐士。虽然很有才学，却没有参加科举考试，也没有出来为官。
English: At first, Yang Yan was just a recluse. Although he was very talented, he did not take part in the imperial examinations, nor did he become an official.

古文：知有丹青之能，意欲求之，未敢发言。
现代文：他曾经拜见过在宫内任给事的卢黄门，受到优厚的款待。卢给事知道他擅长绘画，有心求他给绘一幅画，又不好意思开口。
English: He once met Lu Huangmen, who was in charge of the palace, and received generous hospitality. Lu knew that he was good at painting, and he wanted to ask him to paint a picture, but he was too shy to speak.

古文：杨恳辞去，复苦留之。
现代文：杨炎要告辞回家，卢给事诚恳地苦苦挽留他。
English: Yang Yan wanted to go home, but Lu earnestly and painstakingly tried to keep him.

古文：知其家累洛中，衣食乏少，心所不安。
现代文：得知杨炎家在洛阳，生活很困顿，缺衣少食，卢给事心中很不安。
English: Learning that Yang Yan's family is in Luoyang, where life is very difficult, with a lack of clothing and food, Lu is very uneasy.

古文：乃潜令人将数百千至洛供给。取其家书回，以示揭公。
现代文：他暗中派人带着几百千钱去洛阳杨炎家，供给他家人的日常用度，并带回一封家书给杨炎。
English: He secretly sent someone with hundreds of thousands of money to Luoyang Yangyan's home to provide for his family's daily needs, and brought back a letter to Yangyan.

古文：公感之。未知所报。
现代文：杨炎非常感动，不知道怎样去报答。
English: Yang Yan was very moved and didn't know how to repay him.

古文：卢因从容，乃言欲一踪，以子孙宝之，意尚难之。
现代文：卢黄门这时才说他想请杨炎画张画，传给后代子孙很好的珍藏，但是始终不好意思说。杨炎听了后，立即答应下来。
English: At this time, Lu Huangmen said that he wanted to ask Yang Yan to paint a painting, to pass on to future generations a very good collection, but he was always embarrassed to say. After listening to Yang Yan, he immediately agreed.

古文：遂月余图一障。
现代文：用了一个多月的时间为卢黄门画了幅山水。
English: It took more than a month to draw the landscape for Luhuangmen.

古文：松石云物，移动造化，世莫覩之。
现代文：画上的松石云等物像，就象将大自然中的真景实物移到画上来似的，人们从未见过这么好的山水画。
English: The images of the pine-rock clouds and other objects on the painting are as if the real scenes in nature were transferred to the painting. People have never seen such a good landscape painting.

古文：其迹妙上上品。
现代文：这幅山水画，堪称稀世珍品。
English: This landscape painting is a rare treasure.

古文：顾况
现代文：顾况
English: Status Quo

古文：唐顾况字逋翁。文词之暇，兼攻小笔。
现代文：唐朝人顾况，字逋翁，每在写文章、词赋之余，还练习画小品。
English: People in the Tang Dynasty paid close attention to the situation and used the character 翁. In addition to writing articles and poems, they also practiced drawing sketches.

古文：尝求知新亭监。人或诘之。谓曰：余要写貌海中山耳。
现代文：顾况曾有一次请求让他担任新亭监有的人询问他，他说：我要画海中的山而已！
English: Once, someone who asked him to be the curator of the new pavilion asked him, he said: I just want to paint the mountains in the sea!

古文：仍辟画者王默为副。
现代文：后来，还是举荐他给擅长绘画的王默作副手。
English: Later, he recommended him to Wang Miao, who was good at painting, as his deputy.

古文：周昉
现代文：周昉
English: Zhou Ying

古文：唐周昉字景玄，京兆人也。
现代文：唐朝人周昉，字景玄，是京都地区人。
English: Zhou Qi, also known as Jing Xuan, was a Tang Dynasty official from the Kyoto area.

古文：节制之后，好属学，画穷丹青之妙。
现代文：官任节度使后，继续好字，在绘画方面，他将所有的技艺都学到手了。
English: After he was appointed as the official of the festival, he continued to be good at writing, and in painting, he learned all the skills.

古文：游卿相间，贵公子也。
现代文：他交往于达官贵人之间，是位高贵的公子哥。
English: He mingled with high-ranking dignitaries and was a noble nobleman.

古文：长兄晧善骑射，随哥舒往征吐蕃。收石堡城，以功授执金吾。
现代文：周昉的哥哥周晧擅长骑马射箭，曾随同大将哥舒翰远征吐蕃收回石堡城，因战功归来后官授执金吾，掌管京都的治安。
English: Zhou Qi's elder brother Zhou Qi was good at horse riding and archery. He once accompanied the general Brother Shu Han on an expedition to Tuyun to recover the Stone Castle. After returning from the war, he was awarded the post of Kingu and was in charge of the security of Kyoto.

古文：时德宗修章敬寺，召晧谓曰：卿弟昉善画，朕欲请画章敬寺神，卿特言之。
现代文：当时，唐德宗正修章敬寺，召见周晧说：爱卿，你的弟弟周昉擅长绘画，我想请他画章敬寺神像，请你告诉他。
English: At that time, Tang Dezong was repairing the statues of the deities at Keiji Temple and summoned Zhou Jun to say: "Your brother Zhou Jun is good at painting, I want to ask him to paint the statues of the deities at Keiji Temple. Please tell him."

古文：经数日，帝又请之，方乃下手。
现代文：过了一些天，德宗又让周晧请了一次，周昉才开始画。
English: A few days later, Dezong asked Zhou Qi to come again, and Zhou Qi began to paint.

古文：初如障蔽，都人观览。
现代文：最初画出来的神像，周昉将它象屏风一样地放在寺院里，整个京都的人都可以去看。
English: Zhou Ye placed the originally drawn statue of the god in the temple like a screen, so that everyone in Kyoto could see it.

古文：寺抵国门，贤愚必至。
现代文：章敬寺就在皇宫门前，不论是贤良的人，还是愚鲁的人，都去看画像。
English: Zhangjing Temple is right in front of the Imperial Palace, and both the wise and the foolish come to see the paintings.

古文：或有言其妙者，指其瑕者，随日改之。
现代文：有的人说画得好，有的人说画得不好。有人挑出毛病来，周昉随时进行修改。
English: Some people say that the painting is good, some people say that the painting is bad. Some people pick out the problems, and Zhou Qi will modify them at any time.

古文：经月余，是非语绝，无不叹其妙。
现代文：历经一个多月，评论好坏的人没有了，人们都赞叹这幅神像画得太好了！
English: After more than a month, there are no more people commenting on whether it is good or bad, and people are all praising this statue for being so well drawn!

古文：遂下笔成之。为当代第一。
现代文：最后，画完稿了，在当时世上数第一。
English: In the end, the draft was finished, which was the first in the world at that time.

古文：又郭令公女婿赵纵侍郎尝令韩干写真，众皆赞美。
现代文：郭子仪的姑爷侍郎赵纵，曾经让韩干画过一幅画像，大家都称赞画得好。
English: Guo Ziyi's great-uncle's butler, Zhao Zheng, once had Han Gan draw a picture, which everyone praised as a good drawing.

古文：后又请昉写真，二人皆有能名。
现代文：后来，他又请周昉画像。韩、周都是当时最有名气的画家。
English: Han and Zhou were the most famous painters at the time.

古文：令公尝列二画于座，未能定其优劣。
现代文：一次，郭令公将这两张画像并放在一块儿，让人们评品优劣，谁也评定不出来。
English: At one time, Guo Linggong put these two images together and let people evaluate the merits and demerits, and no one could evaluate them.

古文：因赵夫人归省，令公问云：此何人？
现代文：正赶上他女儿赵夫人回来探亲，令公问：这两副像画的是谁？
English: Just in time for his daughter, Mrs. Zhao, to return from a family visit, Ling Gong asked: Who are these two portraits?

古文：对曰：赵郎。
现代文：回答说：是我的赵郎君子。
English: He answered, "It is my Zhao Langjunzi."

古文：何者最似？
现代文：问：哪幅画像最象？
English: Q: Which image stands out the most?

古文：云：两画惚似，后画者佳。
现代文：答：两幅画像都很象。但是，后一幅最好。
English: A: Both images are very similar, but the last one is the best.

古文：又问：何以言之？
现代文：问：为什么这样说呢？
English: Q: Why do you say that?

古文：前画空得赵郎状貌，后画兼移其神思情性笑言之姿。
现代文：答：前一幅画像空得赵郎的容貌画得象，后一幅神态、表情、说笑的姿态都画出来了。
English: A: The previous picture is blank and Zhao Lang's appearance is like a painting, while the latter one shows his demeanor, facial expression, and joking posture.

古文：令公问：后画者何人？
现代文：令公问：后一幅是谁画的？
English: Which begs the question: who painted the latter?

古文：乃云：周晧。
现代文：有人回答说：是周昉画的。
English: Someone answered: It was painted by Zhou Xuan.

古文：是日定二画之优劣，令送锦綵数百疋。
现代文：当天定出两幅画像的优劣，郭子仪让人给周昉送去锦綵几百疋，以表谢意。
English: On the same day, the pros and cons of the two images were determined, and Guo Ziyi had someone send several hundred baht worth of brocade to Zhou Yi as a token of gratitude.

古文：今上都有观自在菩萨，时人云水月，大云西佛殿前行道僧，广福寺佛殿前面两神，皆殊妙也。
现代文：京都长安的一座道观里的水月观音画像，大云西佛殿前的行道僧画像，广福寺佛殿前的两面神画像，都奇特绝妙。
English: The image of the Water Moon Goddess of Mercy in a Taoist temple in Kyoto's Chang'an, the image of a monk walking in front of the Daun West Buddha Hall, and the image of the Two-Faced God in front of the Gwangfu Temple Buddha Hall are all unique and wonderful.

古文：后任宣州别驾，于禅定寺画北方天王。
现代文：这些画像，都是周昉的作品。周昉后来官任宣州别驾。在任期间，他为禅定寺画过一幅北方天王象。
English: These images are all the work of Zhou Qi, who later became the governor of Xuanzhou. During his term of office, he painted an elephant of the king of the north for the meditation temple.

古文：常于梦中见其形像。
现代文：画定后，他常常在梦中见到这位天王到他这儿来。
English: After the painting was finished, he often saw the king of heaven come to him in his dreams.

古文：画子女为古今之冠。
现代文：周昉画人世间的男人和女人，可称得上是古今第一圣手。
English: Zhou Ye's paintings of men and women in the human world can be said to be the best of all time.

古文：有《浑侍中宴会图》、《刘宣武按舞图》、《独孤妃按曲粉本》。
现代文：这类画有：《浑侍中宴会图》、《刘宣武按舞图》、《独孤妃按曲粉本》。
English: Such paintings include: "Hunzhu middle banquet picture," "Liu Xuanwu dance picture," "Dokoi dance picture."

古文：又《仲尼问礼图》、《降真图》、《五星图》、《扑蝶图》，兼写诸真人、文宣王十弟子，卷轴至多。
现代文：还有《仲尼问礼图》、《降真图》、《五星图》、《扑蝶图》，以及诸位真人、文宣王十弟子的画像等等，共有许多幅。
English: There are also "Zhongni Qianli Map," "Degraded Truth Map," "Five Star Map," "Butterfly Map," as well as the images of real people, the ten disciples of King Wenxuan, and so on, a total of many panels.

古文：贞元末，新罗国有人于江淮，尽以善价收市数十卷。
现代文：唐德宗贞元末年，有一位从新罗回来的人，在江淮一带，用很高的价码收买几十卷周昉的画。
English: At the end of the 19th century, there was a man who came back from Silla to buy dozens of volumes of Zhou Ye's paintings at a high price in the Jianghuai area.

古文：将去，其画佛像真仙人物子女，皆神也。
现代文：他将要离去时，发现他买的这些画上的仙人，真人、和男人、女人都成仙而去，不见了。
English: When he was about to leave, he discovered that the faeries, real people, and men and women on the paintings he had bought had all become faeries and disappeared.

古文：唯鞍马鸟兽，竹石草木，不穷其状也。
现代文：只有鞍马鸟兽、竹石草木，还在画上面。
English: Only the pommel horse, birds and beasts, and bamboo and stone plants and trees are still on the painting.

古文：范长寿
现代文：范长寿
English: Fan Changshou

古文：唐范长寿善风俗田家景候人物之状。
现代文：唐朝人范长寿擅长画风俗画，农家的景物、人物及风情，是他绘画的主要对象。
English: Fan Longevity of the Tang Dynasty was good at painting folk paintings. The scenery, characters and customs of farmers were the main subjects of his paintings.

古文：人间多有月令屏风，是其制也。
现代文：民间有许多月令屏风都是范长寿画的。
English: Many folk paintings of the lunar calendar were painted by Fan Changshou.

古文：凡山川水石，牛马畜类，屈曲远近，牧放闲野，皆得其妙，各尽其趣。
现代文：范长寿画的一山一水、一木一石、都具有地域所特有的风情。他画的牛马等家畜，或远或近、或盘或卧、或散牧在山野河边，都妙笔生花，各尽其趣。
English: Fan Changshou's paintings of a mountain, water, a tree and a stone, all have the unique customs of the region. His paintings of cattle and horses, whether far or near, or on a plate, or lying down, or grazing in the mountains and rivers, are all beautifully painted flowers, each with its own interest.

古文：梁张僧繇之次也。
现代文：他的画作可称得上是南梁张僧繇第二。
English: His paintings can be said to be the second most famous in Nanliang.

古文：僧彦悰《续画品》云：博瞻繁多。未见其能也。其画并妙品上。
现代文：僧人彦悰在《续画品》上说：我博览过古今繁多的绘画作品，没有见到过能跟范长寿的画相媲美的。
English: Monk Hikone said in "Continuation of Paintings": I have read a wide variety of paintings from ancient times to the present, and I have never seen anything comparable to Fan Changshu's paintings.

古文：又时号何长寿齐名，次之。
现代文：范长寿的画都可称为妙品上。又：当时有位叫何长寿的人，跟范长寿并列画坛。
English: Fan Changshou's paintings can all be called masterpieces. Also: At that time, there was a man named He Changshou, who was on the same level as Fan Changshou.

古文：程修己
现代文：实际，不如范长寿。程修己
English: In fact, his longevity is not as good as Fan's. Cheng Xiuqi

古文：唐程修己，其先冀州人。
现代文：唐朝人程修己，他的先祖是冀州人氏。
English: Cheng Shuxi was born in the Tang Dynasty. His ancestors were from the Jizhou people.

古文：性好学。时周昉任赵州长史，遂师事焉，二十年。
现代文：程修己禀性好学，在周昉任赵州长史时，他拜周昉为老师，跟周昉学画二十年。
English: Cheng Xiuqin was very eager to learn. When Zhou Jun served as the governor of Zhao, he worshiped Zhou Jun as a teacher and studied painting with Zhou Jun for twenty years.

古文：凡画之六十病，一一口授，以传其妙。
现代文：在这二十年的时间里，周昉将自己积毕生作画的经验，所总结出来的《绘画六十病》，一一亲口传授给他，使他全部学到了周昉绘画的功夫。
English: During these twenty years, Zhou Jun personally taught him the "Sixty Diseases of Painting" that he had learned from his life-long experience in painting, so that he learned all the skills of Zhou Jun's painting.

古文：宝历中，修己应明经举，以昉所授付之。
现代文：唐敬宗宝历年间，程修己参加明经射第取士，就是用周昉传授给他的绘画技艺应举的。
English: During the Tang and Jing Dynasties, when Cheng Xiu himself participated in the Ming and Jing Dynasties, he used the painting skills taught to him by Zhou Qi.

古文：太和中，文宗好古重道。以晋明帝卫协画《毛诗图》，草木鸟兽贤士忠臣之象，不得其真。
现代文：唐元宗太和年间，皇上好古重道，认为晋朝明帝时的卫协绘画的《毛诗图》，草木鸟兽贤士忠臣的形象都不真实。
English: During the reign of Empress Dowager Tangyuan Zongtao, the emperor had a change of heart and decided that the "Mao Shitu" (Mao's poem) painted by Wei Xie during the reign of Emperor Ming during the Jin Dynasty, and the images of the sage and loyal vassals in plants, birds, and beasts were not real.

古文：遂召修己图之。
现代文：就召程修己再画一幅。
English: At the urging of Cheng Xiu, he decided to paint another picture.

古文：皆据经定名，任土采拾。由是冠冕之制，生植之姿，远无不审，幽无不显矣。又尝画竹障于文思殿。帝赐歌云：良工运精思，巧极似有神。
现代文：就是每一个细微的地方，也都精心绘画、一丝不苟。程修己还曾给文思殿画一副竹屏风。皇上为他题诗说：良工运精思，巧极似有神。
English: Even every little detail was meticulously painted. Cheng Shuxiu also once painted a pair of bamboo screens for the Palace of Literature. The emperor wrote a poem for him, saying: "Good work and careful thought, skillful as a god."

古文：临窗乍覩繁阴合，再盼真假殊未分。
现代文：临窗乍覩繁阴合，再盼真假殊未分。
English: In front of the window, the yin and yang are intertwined, and the true and false are inseparable.

古文：当时学士，皆奉诏继和。
现代文：当时的翰林院的学士们，都奉皇上的诏示，写诗来奉和。
English: The scholars of the Hanlin Academy at that time all obeyed the emperor's edict and wrote poems to serve the emperor.

古文：自贞元后，以艺进身。承恩称旨，一人而已。
现代文：从唐德宗贞元以后，因为才艺而进身仕途、承受圣恩符合上意的，仅程修己一人罢了。
English: After the Tang and De Zong Zhenyuan, because of talent and career advancement, to receive the grace is in line with the above, only one person can cultivate himself.

古文：尤精山水竹石，花鸟人物，古贤功德异兽等。
现代文：程修己尤其擅长画山水竹石、花鸟人物、古代圣贤、佛道经事、怪异野兽等。
English: Cheng Xiuqi is particularly good at painting landscapes, bamboo and stone, flowers and birds, ancient sages, Buddhist scriptures, and strange beasts.

古文：并入妙上品。
现代文：他的这类题材的作品，都是精妙已极的艺术佳品。
English: His works on this subject are exquisite works of art.

古文：边鸾
现代文：边鸾
English: Bentham

古文：唐边鸾，京兆人。
现代文：唐朝边鸾，是京都长安人。
English: He was born in Chang'an, Kyoto, in the Tang Dynasty.

古文：攻丹青，最长于花鸟折枝之妙，古所未有。
现代文：边鸾能画画，最擅长画花鸟折枝这种画法，是从来未有过的。
English: Bentham was able to paint, and he excelled at painting flowers, birds and twigs in a way that had never been seen before.

古文：观其下笔轻利，善用色。穷羽毛之变态，奋春华之芳丽。
现代文：你看边鸾下笔轻松利落，善用颜色，能得心应手地表现鸟雀羽毛的万态变化，春花绽放的千种姿容。
English: You can see that the pen under the rim is easy to sharpen, makes good use of color, and can skillfully express the metamorphosis of the feathers of birds and finches, and the thousands of shapes of spring flowers.

古文：贞元中，新罗国献孔雀，解舞。德宗召于玄武门写貌。
现代文：唐德宗贞元年间，新罗国进献来一对孔雀，能舞，皇上宣召边鸾在玄武门画孔雀。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Dezong of Tang, Silla offered a pair of peacocks that could dance, and the emperor called upon Benjo to paint peacocks at the Xuanwu Gate.

古文：一正一背。
现代文：一只孔雀画的是正面，一只画的是侧背。
English: One peacock is painted on the front, one on the back.

古文：翠彩生动，金钿遗妍。
现代文：翠绿的孔雀羽毛灿烂生辉，孔雀的尾羽仿佛是一只只华美的金、翠首饰。
English: The emerald green peacock feathers shine brightly, and the peacock's tail feathers seem to be one gorgeous piece of gold and emerald jewelry.

古文：若运清声，宛应繁节。
现代文：两只孔雀象在轻声鸣唱，又象在用礼仪迎接贵宾的到来。
English: Two peacocks are singing softly, as if greeting the arrival of distinguished guests with etiquette.

古文：后以困穷，于泽潞貌五参连根，精妙之极也。
现代文：边鸾后来生活困顿穷苦，曾在潞水岸边的沼泽地带将五棵长在一起的人参画在画上，画得好极了。
English: Later, Bentham lived in poverty and hardship. He once painted five ginseng plants growing together in a swamp area on the shore of Surabaya. The painting was excellent.

古文：近代折枝花，居其首也。
现代文：在近代折枝画法中，边鸾位居魁首。
English: In the modern method of folding branch painting, the border wreath is at the top.

古文：折枝花卉蜂蝶并雀等，妙品上。
现代文：边鸾的折枝花卉蜂蝶鸟雀画，都堪称在妙品以上。
English: The folded branches, flowers, hummingbirds, butterflies and finches painted on the border are all more than wonderful.

古文：张萱
现代文：张萱
English: Zhang Ye

古文：唐张萱，京兆人。
现代文：唐朝张萱，京都长安地区人。
English: Zhang Ye of the Tang Dynasty, a native of the Chang'an area of Kyoto.

古文：尝画贵公子鞍马屏帷宫苑子女等，名冠于时。
现代文：张萱经常画骑在马上的达官贵人，以及屏风、帷幛、宫苑男女等画，在当时名冠众画师之首。
English: Zhang Ye often painted dignitaries on horseback, as well as screens, curtains, men and women in the palace, etc. At that time, he was the first of many famous painters.

古文：善起草，点簇位置。
现代文：张萱擅长勾画草图。
English: Zhang Ye is good at sketching.

古文：亭台竹树，花鸟仆使，皆极其态。
现代文：他画的草图结构匀称、布局精当。亭台竹树、花鸟仆使，都各尽其态、各得其位，意境幽远、传神。
English: The sketches he drew have a well-balanced structure and a precise layout. The pavilion, the bamboo trees, the flowers and birds are all in their own way, each in its place, the artistic mood is remote and inspiring.

古文：画《长门怨》，约词虑思，曲尽其旨。
现代文：他画的《长门怨》，按照李白原诗的每一句提供的意境，精心地去构思。
English: His painting "Long-Door Grudge" is elaborately conceived in accordance with the artistic conception provided by each sentence of Li Baiyuan's poem.

古文：即金井梧桐秋叶黄也。
现代文：运用景物，氛围等绘画表现手法，将诗的意韫含蓄地表现出来。
English: Using landscape, atmosphere and other painting expression methods, the meaning of the poem is implicitly expressed.

古文：粉本画《贵公子夜游图》、《宫中七夕乞巧图》、《望月图》，皆绡上幽闲多思，意逾于象。
现代文：用一句话来说，即在画中充分运用金井梧桐和飘落的秋叶，点染出一片肃杀凄凉，从而表现出宫中旷女的哀怨与凄愁。张萱的画稿：《贵公子夜游图》、《宫中七夕乞巧图》、《望月图》等，都是在白绢上精心表现那些贵家公子、宫中怨女的闲适、幽思。意蕴幽远，远远超过画面上的物象。
English: To put it in a nutshell, the painting makes full use of the Chinese sycamore and the falling autumn leaves, dyeing a scene of desolation and desolation, thus showing the grief and sadness of the court maiden. Zhang Ye's paintings: "Important Gentleman's Night Journey," "Important Court Maiden's Night Journey," "Moon View" and so on, are all carefully expressing the idleness and melancholy of those noble gentlemen and court maiden on the egret. The meaning is far away, far more than the image on the screen.

古文：其画子女，周昉之难伦也。
现代文：张萱画男人、女人，周昉很难跟他相以伦比。
English: Zhang Ye painted men and women, and Zhou Ye could hardly be compared to him.

古文：贵公子鞍马等，妙品上。王墨
现代文：他画的贵家公子骑马游逸的画，是最精妙的艺术作品。王墨
English: His painting of a nobleman on horseback is the most exquisite work of art.

古文：唐王墨，不知何许人，名洽。
现代文：唐朝人王墨，不知道他是什么地方的人，名字叫王洽。
English: Wang Mo, a man from the Tang Dynasty, does not know where he comes from. His name is Wang Ciao.

古文：善泼墨，时人谓之王墨。
现代文：他擅长泼墨，当时人都称他为王墨。
English: He was good at throwing ink, and at that time people called him the king of ink.

古文：多游江湖。
现代文：王墨多数时间都在江湖上游走。
English: Wang Mo spent most of his time in the upper reaches of the country.

古文：善画山水松柏杂树。
现代文：他性情疏懒狂野，喜好饮酒。
English: He has a lazy and wild temperament and likes to drink alcohol.

古文：性疏野好酒。每欲图障，兴酣之后，先已泼墨。
现代文：每当他要作画时，酒须喝到兴奋时，先将墨泼在画布上。
English: Whenever he wanted to paint, he would splash ink on the canvas when he was drunk.

古文：或叫或吟。
现代文：或者大声孔叫，或者浅吟低唱。
English: Or shout loudly, or sing in a low voice.

古文：脚蹙手抹。
现代文：这时候，他手脚并用，又拂又抹，又蹭又踹。
English: At this time, he used his hands and feet together, and whisked and wiped, and rubbed and rubbed.

古文：或拂或干，随其形象。
现代文：出现的物象，或山或石，或水或树，随着心意涂抹。
English: The objects that appear, whether mountains or rocks, or water or trees, are painted according to the mind.

古文：为山为石，为水为树。
现代文：这些景物，仿佛是转瞬间自然生出来的一样。
English: These scenes seem to have sprung up spontaneously.

古文：应心随意，倏若造化。图成。云霞澹之，风雨扫之。不见其墨污之迹也。李仲和
现代文：成画后，你看整幅画就象让云霞淡淡的浸染过、让风雨涤荡过似的，不见些许的墨污痕迹。李仲和
English: After the painting is completed, when you look at the whole painting, it is as if it has been lightly dyed by the clouds and washed by the wind and rain, and there are no traces of ink.

古文：唐李仲和，渐之子。
现代文：唐朝人李仲和，李渐的儿子。
English: Li Zhonghe of the Tang Dynasty, the son of Li Qian.

古文：渐尝任忻州刺史，善画番人马。
现代文：他的父亲李渐曾经担任过忻州刺史，擅长画西北部边疆一带少数民族骑马行猎的画。
English: His father, Li Qian, once served as the chief historian of Luzhou, and excelled at painting pictures of ethnic minorities riding horses and hunting in the northwestern frontier.

古文：仲和能继其艺，而笔力不及其父。
现代文：李仲和承继了父亲的绘画技艺，但是他的笔力不及父亲。
English: Li Zhonghe inherited his father's painting skills, but his penmanship is not as good as his father's.

古文：相国令孤绹，奕代为相，家富图画。
现代文：宰相令狐绹，他家世代官任宰相，藏有许多名画。
English: The prime minister was a fox, and his family's generations of officials served as prime ministers. There are many famous paintings in the collection.

古文：即忻州外孙。
现代文：令狐绹就是李渐的外孙。
English: Ling Xuxuan is the grandson of Li Qian.

古文：家有小画人马障，是尤得意者。
现代文：令狐家收藏的画中，有一组屏风人马小品，是最得意的。
English: Among the paintings in the fox family's collection, there is a group of small screen horse and man sketches, which is the most gratifying.

古文：会宪宗取置禁中。后却赐还。
现代文：曾经进献给宪宗收藏在宫中，后来又赐还给令孤家。
English: It was once donated to the Emperor's collection in the Imperial Palace, and later given back to the Emperor's orphanage.

古文：刘商
现代文：刘商
English: Liu Shang

古文：唐刘商，官至检校礼部郎中汴州观察判官。
现代文：唐朝人刘商，官至检校礼部郎中汴州观察判官。
English: Liu Shang, a Tang Dynasty official, was a proctor of the proctor of the proctor of the proctor of the proctor of the proctor.

古文：少年有篇咏高情。
现代文：年少时就写过一篇赞美高尚情操的诗。
English: When he was young, he wrote a poem in praise of noble sentiments.

古文：攻山水树石。
现代文：刘商专门学画山水树石。
English: Liu Shang specialized in painting landscapes, trees and rocks.

古文：初师张藻，以造真为意。
现代文：最初，他拜张藻为老师，专门画写实的作品。
English: At first, he followed Zhang Mo as his teacher, specializing in realistic paintings.

古文：自张贬窜后，惆怅赋诗云：苔石苍苍临涧水，溪风袅袅动松枝。
现代文：自张藻遭贬职离开京城后，他深为教师的被贬谪感到惆怅。曾为这件事写过一首诗：苔石苍苍临涧水，溪风袅袅动松枝。
English: Ever since Zhang Mo was demoted and left Beijing, he has been deeply pained by being demoted as a teacher. He once wrote a poem about this: "Moss and stones cover the water, stream winds stir the pine branches."

古文：世间唯有张通会，流向衡阳哪得知。
现代文：世间唯有张通会，流向衡阳哪得知。
English: Zhang Tonghui is the only one in the world who knows the flow to Hengyang.

古文：厉归真
现代文：厉归真
English: Li Guizhen

古文：唐末，江南有道士历归真者，不知何许人也。
现代文：唐朝末年，江南有个道士叫厉归真。不知道他是什么地方的人。
English: At the end of the Tang Dynasty, there was a Taoist priest in the south of the Yangtze River named Li Guizhen. No one knew where he was from.

古文：曾游洪州信果观。见三官殿内功德塑像，是玄宗时夹纾，制作甚妙。
现代文：他曾经云游到洪州的信果观，看见三官殿里的神灵塑像，还是唐玄宗时期用麻脱泥胎塑成的，塑得精妙绝伦。
English: He once traveled to Hongzhou to visit the Confucius Temple, and saw the statues of deities in the Hall of the Three Officials, which were still made of mud during the Tang and Xuanzong dynasties, and were exquisitely crafted.

古文：多被雀鸽粪秽其上。
现代文：但是却被栖宿在屋梁上的鸽、雀的粪便污秽得不像样子。
English: However, it was filthy with the feces of pigeons and sparrows that roosted on the roof beams.

古文：归真遂于殿壁画一鹞，笔迹奇绝。
现代文：于是，厉归真便执笔在殿内墙壁上画一只鹞鹰，笔力奇绝。
English: As a result, Liguizhen then drew a bald eagle on the walls of the hall, with amazing penmanship.

古文：其画至今尚存。
现代文：从这以后，鸽雀等再也不敢在梁上栖息了。
English: From then on, pigeons and other birds no longer dared to perch on the beams.

古文：归真尤能画折竹野鹊。
现代文：这幅鹞鹰现在还在。厉归真道士尤其擅长画折竹、野鹊。
English: This painting of the eagle is still there. Rigguizhen Taoist is particularly good at painting bamboo and wild grasshopper.

古文：后有人传。
现代文：后来有人承继了他的这种画法。
English: Later, others followed his example.

古文：归真于罗浮山上升。
现代文：厉归真死在罗浮山。圣画
English: Liguizhen died on Mt. Luofu.

古文：圣画云花寺有圣画殿。长安中谓之《七圣画》。
现代文：云花寺有圣画殿，长安城里的人称它为七圣画。
English: Yunhua Temple has a sacred painting hall, and people in Chang'an City call it the Seven Sacred Paintings.

古文：初殿宇既制，寺僧召画工。将命施彩饰。
现代文：殿堂刚建成时，寺里的僧人将画工们请来，让他们给殿堂彩绘雕饰。
English: When the hall of fame was first built, the monks of the temple invited the painters to come and let them paint and carve the hall of fame.

古文：会贵其直，不合寺僧祈酬。
现代文：但是，这些画工要的工钱太贵了，寺里的僧人没有求化到这么多的钱款。
English: However, the work of these painters is too expensive, and the monks in the temple have not been able to raise so much money.

古文：亦竟去。
现代文：这些画工竟然不给彩绘而走了。
English: These painters actually left without painting.

古文：后数日，有二少年诣寺来谒曰：某善画者也，今闻此寺将命画工，某不敢利其价。愿输功可乎？
现代文：这以后过了几天，有两位少年来到寺里拜访僧人说：我是个擅长绘画的人，听说你们寺里要请画工。我不敢挣你们的钱，情愿献工给你们可以吗？
English: A few days later, two young men came to the temple to visit the monks and said, "I am good at painting, and I heard that your temple is looking for a painter. I don't dare to earn your money, but would you mind if I worked for you?"

古文：寺僧欲先阅其迹。少年曰：某弟兄凡七人，未尝画于长安中，宁有迹乎？
现代文：寺里的僧人想先看看他们的作品，少年说：我们兄弟七人，没有在长安绘过画，怎么可以在长安看到我们的作品呢？
English: The monks in the temple wanted to see their works first. The boy said, "We are seven brothers and have never painted in Chang'an. How can we see our works in Chang'an?"

古文：寺僧以为妄。稍难之。
现代文：寺里的僧人认为这个少年是在这胡说，又提出几个问题刁难他。
English: The monks at the temple thought the boy was talking nonsense and asked him several questions.

古文：少年曰：某既不纳师之直。苟不可师意，即命圬其壁，未为晚也。
现代文：少年说：我们既然不收师父的工钱，如果我们绘制的不合乎师父们的心意，就让我们用抹子将它抹掉也不晚吧。
English: The boy said, "Since we don't take the master's wages, if what we draw doesn't meet the master's wishes, let's erase it with a trowel."

古文：寺僧利其无直，遂许之。
现代文：寺里的僧人图他们不要工钱，于是就答应下来了。
English: The monks at the temple thought they didn't want to be paid, so they agreed.

古文：后一日，七人果至。各挈彩绘，将入其殿。
现代文：第三天，二位少年果然领着他的五位兄弟来到寺院里，每个人手中都拿着彩绘的所需用品。
English: On the third day, the two boys did indeed lead his five brothers to the temple, each holding the supplies needed for the painting.

古文：且为僧曰：从此去七日，慎勿启吾之门，亦不劳饮食。
现代文：进殿之前，少年对僧人说：从今天算起，七天之内请不要打开进入殿堂的这道门，也不用你们给我们送饮食。
English: Before entering the temple, the boy said to the monk: "From today, for the next seven days, please do not open this gate to enter the temple, and you do not have to bring us food.

古文：盖以畏风日所侵铄也。
现代文：我们绘制的彩绘没绘完前怕风日的侵蚀。最好用泥将门缝也抹死。
English: The painting we have done is not finished, we are afraid of wind and sun erosion. It is best to use mud to erase the cracks in the door.

古文：可以泥固吾门，无使有纤隙。
现代文：不这样做，则不能得到最佳的效果。
English: If you don't, you won't get the best results.

古文：不然，则不能施其妙矣。
现代文：僧人听从了他们的要求，用泥将门封死。
English: The monk complied with their request and sealed the door with mud.

古文：僧从其语。
现代文：已经过了六天了，殿堂里一点动静也没有。
English: It's been six days and there's been no movement in the temple.

古文：如是凡六日，閴无有闻。僧相语曰：此必他怪也，且不可果其约。
现代文：寺里的僧人互相议论说：这些人一定是什么妖怪变的，我们再也不能按他们约定的期限不打开门了。
English: The monks in the temple argued with each other, saying, "These people must have turned into monsters. We can no longer not open the door by the deadline they set.

古文：遂相与发其封。
现代文：于是，僧人一齐动手拆掉泥封打开殿堂的大门。
English: As a result, the monks all set to work to remove the mud seal and open the gate to the main hall.

古文：户既启，有七鸽翩翩，望空飞去。
现代文：门刚一打开，只见有七只鸽子从殿堂里面飞出来，一直飞出寺外。
English: As soon as the door was opened, seven doves were seen flying out of the hall and out of the temple.

古文：其殿中彩绘。
现代文：僧人们急忙进到殿堂里去看。
English: The monks hurried into the hall to see.

古文：俨若四隅，唯西北墉未尽其饰焉。
现代文：只见殿堂里的四面墙壁几乎都彩绘完了，只乘下西北边的墙壁还没有全绘制完。
English: You can see that the four walls of the hall are almost completely painted, but the walls on the lower northwest side are not completely painted.

古文：后画工来见之，大惊曰：真神妙之笔也。
现代文：后来，画工们听说了这件事都来寺里观看这些彩绘，非常吃惊地说：真是神妙的大手笔啊！
English: Later, when the painters heard about this, they all came to the temple to look at the paintings and said in amazement, "What a wonderful masterpiece!"

古文：于是无敢继其色者。
现代文：于是，没有那个画工敢将北墙壁没绘完的那部分接着绘制完。
English: As a result, no painter dared to finish the unfinished part of the northern wall.

古文：廉广
现代文：廉广
English: Lian Guang

古文：廉广者，鲁人也。
现代文：廉广，鲁人。
English: Lian Guang, Lu Ren.

古文：因采药，于泰山遇风雨，止于大树下。
现代文：因为采药，在泰山遇到风雨，在大树下避雨。
English: Because of the mining of medicines, he encountered wind and rain in Mount Tai and took shelter under a big tree.

古文：及夜半雨晴。信步而行。
现代文：到半夜雨过天晴，廉广信步而行。
English: By midnight, the rain had passed and the sky was clear, and Lian Guangxin was walking.

古文：俄逢一人，有若隐士。
现代文：走了不一会儿，遇到一个人，象一位隐士。
English: After walking for a while, I met a man who looked like a hermit.

古文：问广曰：君何深夜在此？
现代文：这个人问廉广：你因为什么深夜在这里？
English: This person asked Liang Guang: Why are you here late at night?

古文：仍林下共坐。
现代文：并邀请廉广一同坐在树下面。
English: And invited Lian Guang to sit together under the tree.

古文：语移时，忽谓广曰：我能画，可奉君法。
现代文：两人说了一会儿话，这个人忽然对廉广说：我会绘画，可以教你绘画的方法。
English: The two talked for a while, and the man suddenly said to Lian Guang: "I can paint, I can teach you how to paint."

古文：广唯唯。
现代文：廉广连说可以。
English: Lian Guanglian said yes.

古文：乃曰：我与君一笔，但密藏焉。
现代文：这个人又说：我送给你一支笔，但是请你一定要保守这个密秘。
English: The man said, "I'll give you a pen, but please keep it a secret.

古文：即随意而画，当通灵。
现代文：你用这支笔，随意画些什么，都能具有灵气。
English: With this pen, you can draw anything you like and it will have a spiritual aura.

古文：因怀中取一五色笔以授之。
现代文：说着，从怀中取出一支五彩笔交给廉广。
English: Saying this, he took out a multicolored pen from his pocket and handed it to Lian Guang.

古文：广拜谢讫，此人忽不见。
现代文：廉广接笔拜谢，这个人却忽然没有了。
English: Lian Guang took the pen and said thank you, but this person suddenly disappeared.

古文：尔后颇有验。但秘其事，不敢轻画。
现代文：这之后，真的象这个人说的那样，这支笔确实很有灵验。但是，廉广遵嘱保守这个密秘，轻易不敢用这支笔画什么。
English: After that, as the man said, the pen was indeed very effective. However, Liang Guang obeyed the order to keep this secret and did not dare to draw anything with this pen.

古文：后因至中都县。
现代文：后来，有事来到中都县。
English: Later, something came to Zhongdu County.

古文：李令者性好画，又知其事，命广至。饮酒从容问之。广秘而不言。
现代文：县令姓李，喜爱绘画，他知道廉广也会绘画，将廉广请来，一边饮酒一边让廉广给他画一幅。
English: The county magistrate, surnamed Li, loved painting. He knew that Lian Guang could also paint, so he invited Lian Guang and let Lian Guang paint a picture for him while drinking.

古文：李苦告之。
现代文：廉广严守密秘，一句话也不说。
English: Lian Guang kept it a closely guarded secret and didn't say a word.

古文：广不得已，乃于壁上画鬼兵百余，状若赴敌。
现代文：李县令苦苦恳求他，廉广万不得已，才在墙壁上画了一百多个鬼兵，气势象去杀敌。
English: The Li County magistrate pleaded with him to spare his life, and as a last resort, he painted more than a hundred ghost soldiers on the walls, as if they were going to kill the enemy.

古文：其尉赵知之，亦坚命之。
现代文：这个县的赵县尉知道这件事后，也恳请廉广给他画幅画。
English: After Lieutenant Zhao of this county learned about this, he also implored Liang Guang to draw him a picture.

古文：广又于赵廨中壁上，画鬼兵百余，状若拟战。
现代文：廉广又在赵县尉的官署墙壁上也画了一百多个鬼兵，气势若准备打仗。
English: Lian Guang also painted more than a hundred ghost soldiers on the walls of the Zhao County magistrate's office, as if preparing for war.

古文：其夕，两处所画之鬼兵俱出战。
现代文：这天夜里，两个地方所画的鬼兵都出来打仗。
English: That night, the ghost soldiers depicted in both places came out to fight.

古文：李及赵既见此异，不敢留。遂皆毁所画鬼兵。
现代文：李县令与赵县尉都亲眼看见了这件事，吓得他们再也不敢挽留廉广住在县里了，并将墙上所画的鬼兵全都毁掉了。
English: Both the Li County magistrate and the Zhao County lieutenant saw the incident with their own eyes, which scared them so much that they no longer dared to keep Lian Guang living in the county, and they destroyed all the ghost soldiers painted on the wall.

古文：广亦惧而逃往下邳。
现代文：廉广也因惧怕获罪而逃到下邳县。
English: For fear of being charged with a crime, Lian Guang also fled to Xiamen County.

古文：下邳令知其事，又切请广画。
现代文：下邳县令得知廉广会画后，也恳请他为自己画一幅。
English: After learning that Lian Guang was going to paint, the county magistrate of Jiaozuo County also implored him to paint one for himself.

古文：广因告曰：余偶夜遇一神灵，传得画法，每不敢下笔。
现代文：廉广告诉他：我在一天夜里偶然遇到一位神人，传给我绘画的方法。但是我每每不敢下笔。
English: Lian Guang told him: "I met a godman by chance one night, who taught me how to paint. But I didn't dare to start painting.

古文：其如往往为妖。幸察之。
现代文：因为如果下笔绘画，画出来的东西往往会兴妖作怪，幸好我察觉了这一点。
English: Because when you start painting, what you end up with tends to be a bit ghoulish, and luckily I've noticed that.

古文：其宰不听。谓广曰：画鬼兵即战，画物必不战也。
现代文：下邳县令不听，对廉广说：你在中都县画鬼兵走下墙来战斗撕杀，你要是画物一定不会打仗吧。
English: He didn't listen to the order of the Lower Min County, and said to Lian Guang: You are painting ghost soldiers in Zhongdu County, come down from the wall to fight and tear them to death. If you are a painting, you won't fight.

古文：因命画一龙。
现代文：于是让廉广为他画一条龙。
English: So he asked Lian Guang to draw a dragon for him.

古文：广勉而画之。
现代文：廉广勉强答应给他画。
English: Liang Guang reluctantly agreed to paint for him.

古文：笔才绝，云蒸雾起，飘风倏至。
现代文：刚画完，只见画龙的地方开始升出云雾，大风也随后刮起来。
English: Just after finishing the painting, clouds began to rise in the area where the dragon was painted, and a strong wind began to blow.

古文：画龙忽乘云而上。至滂沱之雨，连日不止。
现代文：画上的那条龙乘云驾雾飞上天空，紧接着就下起了滂沱大雨，一连下了好几天也不停止。
English: The dragon in the painting flew into the sky on a cloud of mist, immediately followed by torrential rain, which continued for several days.

古文：令忧漂坏邑居。
现代文：下邳县令担忧雨水淹毁市区居民的住宅，又怀疑廉广会妖术。
English: The order of Xiamen County is worried about rainwater flooding the homes of residents in the urban area, and suspects that the corrupt officials are involved in witchcraft.

古文：复疑广有妖术，乃收广下狱，穷诘之。广称无妖术。
现代文：于是让人将廉广抓起来关到牢狱里，一再审问他会不会使妖术？廉广一再说他不会使什么妖术。
English: As a result, someone arrested Liang Guang and put him in prison. He was repeatedly interrogated as to whether he could perform magic. Liang Guang repeatedly said that he could not perform any magic.

古文：以雨犹未止，令怒甚。
现代文：但是，雨还是下个没完，下邳县令更加发怒了，继续将廉广关押在牢狱里。
English: However, the rain did not stop, and the county magistrate became even angrier and continued to keep Lian Guang in prison.

古文：广于狱内号泣，追告山神。
现代文：廉广在狱中大哭不止，哀告山神快来解救他。
English: While in prison, Lian Guang cried endlessly, imploring the mountain gods to come and rescue him.

古文：其夜，梦神人言曰：君当画一大鸟，叱而乘之飞，即免矣。
现代文：这天夜里，廉广梦见那位神人告诉他：你当画一只大鸟，呵叱它，乘着这只大鸟飞出牢狱，就可以免除这场祸患。
English: That night, Lian Guang dreamed that the man of God told him: You should draw a big bird, scold it, and fly out of the prison on this big bird, you can avoid this disaster.

古文：广及曙，乃密画一大鸟。
现代文：廉广从梦中醒来，等到天亮后，密秘画了一只大鸟。
English: Lian Guang woke up from a dream and waited until after dawn to secretly draw a big bird.

古文：试叱之，果展翅。
现代文：画完后，试着呵叱它，大鸟果然展翅欲飞。
English: After finishing the drawing, try to scold it, and the big bird will indeed spread its wings and want to fly.

古文：广乘之，飞远而去。
现代文：于是廉广乘上大鸟飞出牢狱。
English: As a result, Lian Guang took the big bird and flew out of prison.

古文：直至泰山而下。
现代文：大鸟载着廉广一直飞到泰山顶上才落下来。
English: The big bird carried Liang Guang all the way to the top of Mount Tai before falling down.

古文：寻复见神。谓广曰：君言泄于人间，固有难厄也。
现代文：过了一会儿，避雨那个夜晚遇见的那位神人又出现在廉广面前。神人对廉广说：你将密秘泄露在人间了，因此遭到了灾难。
English: After a while, the man of God he had met that night when he was sheltering from the rain appeared again in front of him. The man of God said to him, "You have revealed your secret to the world, and as a result, you have suffered a disaster."

古文：本与君一小笔，欲为君致福，君反自致祸，君当见还。
现代文：我给你一支小笔本意是想给你带来福气，现在反尔使你遇到祸患。
English: I gave you a small coin to bring you good luck, but now I have brought you bad luck.

古文：广乃怀中探笔还之。
现代文：你还是将这支笔还给我吧。
English: You might as well give me back this pen.

古文：神寻不见。
现代文：于是，廉广从怀中取出笔还给了这位神人。
English: As a result, Lian Guang took the pen from his bosom and gave it back to the holy man.

古文：广因不复能画。
现代文：过了一会儿，神人又不见了。廉广也由此不会绘画了。
English: After a while, the godman disappeared again. As a result, Lian Guang could no longer paint.

古文：下邳画龙，竟为泥壁。
现代文：下邳县他画龙的地方，重新还原成泥壁。
English: The place where he painted the dragon in Shimotsuke County has been restored to a mud wall.

古文：范山人
现代文：范山人
English: Fan Shanren

古文：李叔詹常识一范山人，停于私第。
现代文：李叔詹曾经认识一位范山人，请他到家中来。
English: Li Shuzhan once knew a man from Fanshan and invited him to his home.

古文：时语休咎必中。
现代文：这位范山人预告出来的吉凶福祸，后来都能一一得到验证。
English: The auspicious, inauspicious and fortuitous calamities foretold by this Fan Shan person were later verified one by one.

古文：兼善推步禁呪。止半年。
现代文：他还会推算天文历法和算命，用真气、符咒治邪病、克异物、禳除灾害。
English: He will also calculate the astronomical calendar and fortune-telling, and use true qi and spells to cure evil diseases, fight foreign objects, and eliminate disasters.

古文：忽谓李曰：某将去，有一艺，欲以为别。所谓水画也。
现代文：范山人在李家住了半年，忽然有一天对李叔詹说：我要离开这里了。我有一种技艺，想用它来作为我临别时的赠礼，就是水画呀。
English: Fan Shanzhong lived in Li's house for half a year, and suddenly one day he said to Li Shuzhan: "I'm leaving here. I have a skill that I want to use as a parting gift, which is water painting."

古文：乃请后厅上掘地为池方丈，深尺余。泥以麻灰。
现代文：于是请人在后厅地上挖一个池子，长宽各约一丈，深一尺多，用麻灰抹好。
English: So he asked someone to dig a pool on the floor behind the hall, about a foot deep and a foot long and wide, and plaster it with linseed oil.

古文：日汲水满之。
现代文：每天都将它灌满水。
English: Fill it with water every day.

古文：候水不耗，具丹青墨砚。
现代文：等到水再不往下渗了，将颜色墨砚准备好。
English: Wait until the water does not seep down any further and prepare the colour inks.

古文：先援笔叩齿良久，乃纵毫水上。
现代文：范山人先握笔叩齿好一阵子，才纵笔在水中涂划。
English: Fan Shanren first held the pen and tapped his teeth for a long time before drawing with the pen in the water.

古文：就视，但见水色浑浑耳。
现代文：再看看池水，只见水色浑浑的。
English: Take another look at the water in the pool and you will see that it is muddy.

古文：经二日，搨以细绢四幅。食顷，举出观之。
现代文：过了两天，将四幅素白细绢放在池水中拓，约有一顿饭工夫，再将四幅细绢取出来，举过头顶观看。
English: After two days, four plain white fine reeds were placed in the pool water by the cormorants. It took about one meal time to dig them out, and then the four fine reeds were taken out and held above the head for viewing.

古文：古松怪石，人物屋木，无不备也。
现代文：只见细绢上古松怪石，人物、房屋、树木俱全，象真画一样。
English: You can just see the ancient pine trees and strange rocks on the thin ridge, and the figures, houses, and trees are all there, just like a real painting.

古文：李惊异，苦诘之，唯言善能禁彩色。不令沉散而已。
现代文：李叔詹深感惊异，再三询问范山人，他才告诉说：我能够禁管住颜色，不让它随便沈散罢了！
English: Li Shuzhan was deeply surprised and repeatedly asked Fan Shanren about it, only to be told by him: I can control the color and prevent it from dissipating!

古文：韦叔文
现代文：韦叔文
English: Wei Shouwen

古文：唐进士韦叔文善画马。
现代文：唐朝时，进士李叔文擅长画马。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, the scholar Li Shuwen was good at painting horses.

古文：暇曰，偶画二马札绢而未设色。赴举，过华岳庙前。怳然如梦。
现代文：一天闲暇，李叔文在札绢上画了二匹马没有着色，这天，他去参加科举考试，路过华山寺庙前，恍惚中好象作了一个梦。
English: On a day of leisure, Li Shouwen drew two horses on a paperweight without coloring. On this day, he went to take the imperial examination, passed Huashan Temple, and seemed to have a dream in a trance.

古文：见庙前人谒己云：金天王奉召。
现代文：见到庙前有人参拜他，说：奉金天王的命令召你前去见他。
English: When he saw some people worshipping him in front of the temple, he said, "By the order of the King of Heaven, I summon you to come and see him."

古文：叔文不觉下马而入，升殿见王。
现代文：李叔文不觉间下马进去，升殿拜见金天王。
English: Li Shouwen unknowingly dismounted and went inside, ascending to the palace to meet the King of Heaven.

古文：王曰：知君有二马甚佳，今将求之，来春改名而第矣。
现代文：天王说：得知你有两匹良马，现在我请你将它们送给我。明年春天，请你改换个名字再参加科举考试，一定会考中的。
English: The Heavenly King said, "Now that I know you have two good horses, I ask you to give them to me. Next spring, please change your name and take the imperial examinations. You will surely pass.

古文：叔文曰：己但有所乘者尔。
现代文：李叔文说：我只有现在所骑的这匹马呀。
English: Li Shouwen said: I only have the horse I am riding now.

古文：王曰：有，试思之。
现代文：天王说：请你再想想。
English: The heavenly king said, "Please reconsider."

古文：叔文暗思有二画马，即对曰：有马，毛色未就。
现代文：李叔文暗暗想到自己在家画的那两匹马，现在就带在身边。立即回答说：是的，我有两匹马。只是，还没有涂上颜色呢。
English: Li Shuwen secretly thought of the two horses he had drawn at home and now carried with him. He immediately replied, "Yes, I have two horses. However, they haven't been painted yet."

古文：曰：可以为惠。
现代文：天王说：可以马上绘上色嘛。
English: The king said, "You can paint it right away."

古文：叔文曰：诺。
现代文：李叔文说：是的。
English: Li Shouwen said: Yes.

古文：出庙，急于店中添色以献之。
现代文：李叔文走出庙门。急忙骑马来到店中，取出来在家画的那两匹马，赶忙涂上颜色献给天王。
English: Li Shuwen walked out of the temple gate. He hurriedly rode to the shop, took out the two horses he had painted at home, and quickly painted them with colors dedicated to the heavenly king.

古文：来春改名而第。
现代文：第二年春天，李叔文改名参加科举考试，果然考中了。
English: In the spring of the following year, Li Shouwen changed his name to participate in the imperial examinations, and he passed.

