古文：著雍执徐，一年。
现代文：著雍执徐，一年。
English: It's been a year.

古文：高祖武皇帝十七太清二年
现代文：梁武帝太清二年
English: Emperor Liangwu in the second year of the Taiqing Dynasty

古文：春，正月，己亥，慕容绍宗以铁骑五千夹击侯景，景诳其众曰： 汝辈家属已为高澄所杀。 
现代文：春季，正月，已亥，东魏慕容绍宗带领五千精锐骑兵前后夹击侯景的军队。侯景欺骗他的士兵们说： 你们这些人的家属，已经被高澄杀掉了。 
English: In the spring, in the first month, already in the winter, the Eastern Wei Murong Shaosong led five thousand elite cavalry to attack the army of Hou Jing. Hou Jing deceived his soldiers and said: You, the families of these people, have been killed by Gao Cheng.

古文：众信之。
现代文：侯景手下的士兵都相信了他的话。
English: The soldiers under Hou Jing believed his words.

古文：绍宗遥呼曰： 汝辈家属并完，若归，官勋如旧。 
现代文：慕容绍宗从远方高喊着： 你们的家属都平安无事，如果你们回归，官职和勋爵会象从前一样封给你们。 
English: Murong Shaosong shouted from afar: Your families are safe and sound. If you return, you will be given official posts and lordships as before.

古文：被发向北斗为誓。
现代文：说完，他披散着头发面向北斗星发誓。
English: With that, he tousled his hair and swore in front of the Big Dipper.

古文：景士卒不乐南渡，其将暴显等各帅所部降于绍宗。
现代文：侯景的士兵们不愿意南渡，他的将领暴显等人各自统率自己的部队投降了慕容绍宗。
English: Hou Jing's soldiers did not want to go south, and his generals, such as Wu Xian, each led their own troops and surrendered to Murong Shaosong.

古文：景众大溃，争赴涡水，水为之不流。
现代文：侯景的人马全面溃败，士兵们争相抢渡涡水，河水都被败兵们阻断、不再奔流了。
English: Houjing's men and horses were completely routed, the soldiers scrambled to cross the swirling water, the river was blocked by the defeated soldiers, and it no longer flowed.

古文：景与腹心数骑自硖石济淮，稍收散卒，得步骑八百人，南过小城，人登陴诟之曰： 跛奴！
现代文：侯景与自己的几个心腹之人骑马从硖石渡过了淮河。他们逐渐收集了一些溃散的士兵，步兵、骑兵共有八百人。他们向南经过一座小城时，有人登上了城墙上面呈凸凹形的短墙对侯景谩骂道： 跛脚的奴才，看你还想做什么！ 
English: Hou Jing and several of his confidants crossed the Huai River on horseback from Shanshi. They gradually gathered some scattered soldiers, infantry and cavalry, a total of eight hundred people. As they passed a small town to the south, someone climbed onto the concave-shaped short wall above the city wall and scolded Hou Jingyao: Lame minion, see what else you want to do!

古文：欲何为邪！ 景怒，破城，杀诟者而去。
现代文：侯景听完恼羞成怒，攻破了这座小城，杀掉了骂他的人之后带兵离去。
English: After listening to this, Hou Jing's irritation turned into anger. He broke through the small town, killed the person who cursed him, and then led his soldiers away.

古文：昼夜兼行，追军不敢逼。
现代文：他们昼夜兼行，追击他们的东魏军队不敢逼近。
English: They marched both day and night, not daring to approach the pursuing army.

古文：使谓绍宗曰： 景若就擒，公复何用！ 
现代文：侯景派人对慕容绍宗说： 侯景如果被抓去，您还有什么用呢？ 
English: Hou Jing sent a person to Murong Shaosong to say: Hou Jing, if you are arrested, what use are you?

古文：绍宗乃纵之。
现代文：慕容绍宗于是便放过了他。
English: Shaosong then deliberately let him escape.

古文：辛丑，以尚书仆射谢举为尚书令，守吏部尚书王克为仆射。
现代文：辛丑，梁武帝任命尚书仆射谢举为尚书令，守吏部尚书王克为仆射。
English: In a cruel twist of fate, Emperor Liangwu appointed Shang Shuxi's servant Sha Xiejun as Shang Shuling, and Shang Shuling's deputy Wang Ke as Shuling.

古文：甲辰，豫州刺史羊鸦仁以东魏军渐逼，称粮运不继，弃悬瓠，还义阳；殷州刺史羊思达亦弃项城走；东魏人皆据之。
现代文：甲辰，豫州刺史羊鸦仁因东魏军队逐渐逼近，声称粮草运输接济不上，舍弃了悬瓠城，回到了义阳；殷州刺史羊思达也丢弃了项城逃走。这些地方都被东魏军队占领了。
English: In Jia Chen, Yang Shida of Yinzhou abandoned Xiangcheng and fled to Yiyang, claiming that the transportation of grain and grass could not be sustained due to the approaching Eastern Wei army. These places were all occupied by the Eastern Wei army.

古文：上怒，责让鸦仁。鸦仁惧，启申后期，顿军淮上。
现代文：梁武帝十分恼怒，斥责了羊鸦仁，羊鸦仁很害怕，启奏梁武帝申请宽限一段时期，并把军队驻扎在淮河上游。
English: Emperor Liangwu was very angry and reprimanded Guo Rongren. Guo Rongren was very scared and asked Emperor Liangwu to apply for a grace period and station the army in the upper reaches of the Huai River.

古文：侯景既败，不知所适，时鄱阳王范除南豫州刺史，未至。
现代文：侯景战败后，不知道该投奔哪里。这时鄱阳王萧范被任命为南豫州刺史，还没有上任。
English: After the defeat of Hou Jing, he did not know where to go. At this time, King Xiao Fan of Poyang was appointed as the governor of South Yuzhou, but he had not yet taken office.

古文：马头戍主刘神茂，素为监州事韦黯所不容，闻景至，故往候之，景问曰： 寿阳去此不远，城池险固，欲往投之，韦黯其纳我乎？ 
现代文：马头戍主刘神茂，平素不被监州事韦黯所容。当他听说侯景来到，便前去迎候侯景。侯景问他： 寿阳离这个地方路途不远，城池险要、坚固。我想要前往投奔，韦黯他能接纳我吗？ 
English: Liu Shenmao, the master of the horse-drawn carriage, was not always tolerated by Wei Qian, the supervisor of state affairs. When he heard that Hou Jing was coming, he went to meet Hou Jing. Hou Jing asked him: Shouyang is not far from this place, the city is dangerous and strong. I want to go to the capital, can Wei Qian accept me?

古文：神茂曰： 黯虽据城，是监州耳。
现代文：刘神茂回答说： 韦黯虽然占据着寿阳城，但他只是监州官罢了。
English: Liu Shenmao replied: Although Wei Qian occupies Shouyang City, he is only a state supervisor.

古文：王若驰至近郊，彼必出迎，因而执之，可以集事。
现代文：如果您率兵到了寿阳近郊，韦黯一定会出来迎接，趁此机会拘捕他，事情就可以成功。
English: If you lead your soldiers to the suburbs of Shouyang, Wei Ying will certainly come out to meet you, take this opportunity to arrest him, and things can be successful.

古文：得城之后，徐以启闻，朝廷喜王南归，必不责也。 
现代文：得到寿阳城之后，再慢慢地启奏皇上，让皇上知道此事。朝廷对大王南来归顺很高兴，一定不会责怪你的。 
English: After obtaining Shouyang City, he then slowly informed the emperor, so that the emperor knew about the matter. The court was very pleased with the surrender of the great king Nanlai, and would certainly not blame you.

古文：景执其手曰： 天教也！ 
现代文：崐侯景听完握住刘神茂的手说： 真是天教我也。 
English: After listening, Yan Houjing grasped Liu Shenmao's hand and said, "It's just as I was taught.

古文：神茂请帅步骑百人先为乡导。
现代文：刘神茂请求率领一百名步兵和骑兵先去做向导。
English: Liu Shenmao requested to lead a hundred infantry and cavalry first to be a guide.

古文：壬子，景夜至寿阳城下；韦黯以为贼也，授甲登陴。
现代文：壬子。侯景夜间来到了寿阳城下。韦黯以为是贼盗来了，披上铠甲登上了城墙。
English: In the night, Hou Jing arrived at the foot of Shouyang Castle. Wei Ying thought it was a thief who had come to steal, so he put on armor and climbed the city wall.

古文：景遣其徒告曰： 河南王战败来投此镇，愿速开门。 
现代文：侯景派手下人告诉韦黯说： 河南王侯景战败前来投奔此镇，希望赶快打开城门！ 
English: Hou Jing sent his subordinates to tell Wei Ying: The defeated King of Henan, Hou Jing, came to this town, hoping to quickly open the gates!

古文：黯曰： 既不奉敕，不敢闻命。 
现代文：韦黯说： 我因为没有接到皇帝的圣旨，不敢听从你的命令。 
English: Wei Qian said: Because I have not received the emperor's edict, I dare not obey your order.

古文：景谓神茂曰： 事不谐矣。 
现代文：侯景对刘神茂说： 事情不妙了。 
English: Hou Jing said to Shenmao, "The matter can't be done."

古文：神茂曰： 黯懦而寡智，可说下也。 
现代文：刘神茂回答说： 韦黯懦弱并且缺少智谋，可以让人劝说他改变主意。 
English: Liu Shenmao replied: Wei Ying is weak and lacks wisdom, and can be persuaded to change his mind.

古文：乃遣寿阳徐思玉入见黯曰： 河南王为朝廷所重，君所知也。
现代文：于是，侯景派寿阳人徐思玉进城拜见韦黯说： 河南王是朝廷所器重的人，您是知道的。
English: As a result, Xu Siyu, who was sent to Shouyang by Hou Jing, went to the city to visit Wei Qian and said: "The king of Henan is a person of great importance to the imperial court, as you know.

古文：今失利来投，何得不受？ 
现代文：现在他失利前来投奔你，怎么能不接纳他呢？ 
English: Now that he has come to you in defeat, how can you not accept him?

古文：黯曰： 吾之受命，唯知守城；河南自败，何预吾事！ 
现代文：韦黯说： 我所接受的命令，只知道要守卫寿阳城，河南王战败了，与我有什么相干！ 
English: Wei Qian said: The only order I received was to guard Shouyang City. The king of Henan was defeated, what does that have to do with me?

古文：思玉曰： 国家付君以阃外之略，今君不肯开城，若魏追兵来至，河南为魏所杀，君岂能独存！纵使或存，何颜以见朝廷？ 黯然之。思玉出报，景大悦曰： 活我者，卿也！ 
现代文：不久，侯景又拍手放声大笑起来，摆出酒宴，尽情欢乐。
English: Not long after, Hou Jing clapped his hands and laughed loudly, set up a wine banquet, and had a good time.

古文：癸丑，黯开门纳景，景遣其将分守四门，诘责黯，将斩之；既而抚手大笑，置酒极欢。黯，睿之子也。
现代文：韦黯是韦睿的儿子。
English: Wei Qian is the son of Wei Rui.

古文：朝廷闻景败，未得审问；或云： 景与将士尽没。 
现代文：朝廷听说侯景战败，没有能详细地查问。有人说： 侯景与他的将士全军覆没了。 
English: The imperial court heard of Hou Jing's defeat, but failed to inquire in detail. Someone said: "Hou Jing and his entire army perished."

古文：上下咸以为忧。
现代文：朝廷上上下下都为此而担忧。
English: Everyone in the Imperial Court was worried about this.

古文：侍中、太子詹事何敬容诣东宫，太子曰： 淮北始更有信，侯景定得身免，不如所传。 
现代文：侍中、太子詹事何敬容来到东宫，太子说： 淮河北面又有消息了，侯景一定会免于身亡，并不象人们所传说的那样。 
English: Prince Zhan Zhi He Jing Rong, a chamberlain, came to the East Palace, and the prince said, "There is news from the north side of the Huai River that Hou Jing will certainly be spared from death, and it is not as people have been saying.

古文：敬容对曰： 得景遂死，深为朝廷之福。 
现代文：何敬容说： 得知侯景终于死了，这实在是朝廷的福分啊。 太子听完大惊失色。
English: He Jing Rong said, "It is truly a blessing for the imperial court to learn that Hou Jing has finally died.

古文：太子失色，问其故，敬容曰： 景翻覆叛臣，终当乱国。 
现代文：问他为什么这样说。何敬容说： 侯景是个反复无常的叛臣，他将会使国家大乱。 
English: When asked why he said this, He Jingrong said, "Hou Jing is a capricious traitor, he will bring chaos to the country."

古文：太子于玄圃自讲《老》、《庄》，敬容谓学士吴孜曰： 昔西晋祖尚玄虚，使中原沦于胡、羯。
现代文：太子在玄圃亲自讲读《老子》、《庄子》，何敬容对学士吴孜说： 昔日，西晋始祖崇尚玄妙、虚无之说，结果使中原沦丧在胡人、羯人手中。
English: The prince himself read "Lao Zi" and "Zhuang Zi" in the garden, and He Jing Rong said to the scholar Wu Ze: In the past, the West Jin ancestors advocated mysticism and nothingness. As a result, the Central Plains fell into the hands of the Hu people and the Han people.

古文：今东宫复尔，江南亦将为戎乎！ 
现代文：现在东宫太子又这样做，江南恐怕也将成为胡人的天下了吧！ 
English: Now that the Crown Prince of the Eastern Court is doing the same, I'm afraid that the southern part of the Yangtze River will also become the land of the Hu people!

古文：甲寅，景遣仪同三司于子悦驰以败闻，并自求贬削；优诏不许。
现代文：甲寅，侯景派遣仪同三司于子悦飞马返回建康，把自己战败的事启奏朝廷，并且自己请求革职贬官。
English: A Yin, Hou Jing dispatched Yi and the three departments to return to Jiankang on the winged horse of Yu Ziyue, to disclose the matter of his defeat to the imperial court, and to request dismissal and demotion.

古文：景复求资给，上以景兵新破，未忍移易。
现代文：梁武帝下诏没有答应。侯景又请求为他补充财物和给养，梁武帝因为侯景的军队刚刚被打败，没有忍心把他调动。
English: Emperor Liangwu did not agree to the edict. Houjing also asked the emperor to supplement his wealth and supplies. Emperor Liangwu did not have the heart to transfer Houjing because his army had just been defeated.

古文：乙卯，即以景为南豫州牧，本官如故；更以鄱阳王范为合州刺史，镇合肥。
现代文：乙卯，梁武帝就让侯景担任南豫州牧，他原来的官职还依然保持；又任命鄱阳王萧范为合州刺史，镇守合肥。
English: Second, Emperor Liangwu allowed Hou Jing to serve as the governor of South Henan Province, and he still retained his original official position; he also appointed King Xiao Fan of Poyang as the governor of Henan Province and the town guard of Hefei.

古文：光禄大夫萧介上表谏曰： 窃闻侯景以涡阳败绩，只马归命，陛下不悔前祸，复敕容纳。
现代文：光禄大夫萧介上表进谏说： 我私下听说侯景在涡阳打了败仗，单枪匹马前来归顺。陛下您不追悔他从前造成的灾难，又敕免并容纳了他。
English: Guanglu doctor Xiao Jie said on the table: I have heard privately that Hou Jing lost the battle in the whirlwind and came to surrender single-handedly. Your Majesty, you do not regret the disaster he caused in the past, but also forgave and accommodated him.

古文：臣闻凶人之性不移，天下之恶一也。
现代文：我听说恶人的秉性不会改变，天下的恶人是一样的。
English: I've heard it said that the nature of the wicked never changes, that the wicked are always the same.

古文：昔吕布杀丁原以事董卓，终诛董而为贼；刘牢反王恭以归晋，还背晋以构妖。
现代文：昔日吕布杀死了丁原，来侍奉董卓，而最终又杀死了董卓，成为叛贼。刘牢反叛王恭，归附晋朝，但又背弃了晋朝，制造邪恶事端。
English: In the past, Lü Bu killed Ding Yuan for defecting to Dong Zhuo, and finally killed Dong Zhuo to become a traitor; Liu Du betrayed Wang Gong to the Shun Jin Dynasty, and then betrayed the Jin Dynasty to create a disaster.

古文：何者？
现代文：为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：狼子野心，终无驯狎之性，养虎之喻，必见饥噬之祸。
现代文：因为狼子野心，最终也不会有驯服、顺从的秉性，以喂养老虎为例，一定会出现被饥饿的老虎吃掉的祸患。
English: Because of the ambition of the wolf cub, it will eventually not have the tame and obedient nature. Taking the feeding of the old tiger as an example, the scourge of being eaten by the hungry tiger will certainly occur.

古文：侯景以凶狡之才，荷高欢卵翼之遇，位忝台司，任居方伯，然而高欢坟土未干，即还反噬。
现代文：侯景凭借着他的凶狠与狡猾的才能，受高欢的豢养和保护，身居高位独据一方，然而，高欢死后坟土还未干，他就反叛了高氏。
English: Hou Jing, with his ferocious and cunning talent, was nurtured and protected by Gao Huan and held a high position. However, after Gao Huan's death, before the grave was dry, he rebelled against Gao.

古文：逆力不逮，乃复逃死关西；宇文不容，故复投身于我。
现代文：只是因为叛逆的力量还不足，他才又逃奔到了关西。宇文泰没有收容他，所以他崐才投靠了我们。
English: The strength of the rebellion was insufficient, so he fled to Kansai to save his life. Uwen did not accept him, so he turned to us.

古文：陛下前者所以不逆细流，正欲比属国降胡以讨匈奴，冀获一战之效耳；今既亡师失地，直是境上之匹夫，陛下爱匹夫而弃与国，臣窃不取也。
现代文：陛下您以往这所以不拒细流，接纳了侯景，正是为了象汉代在边境上设置属国安投降的胡人来对会匈奴那样，欲让侯景来对付东魏，希望他同东魏打一仗；而现在侯景既然亡师失地，吃了败仗，那么他便只是边境上的一个平常之人，陛下您舍不得区区一个侯景，却失去了与友好国家的和睦，如果国家还等待他自新之时，晚年效力，我私下认为侯景必定不是晚年效力的臣子。
English: Your Majesty, this is why you did not resist the trickle and accepted Hou Jing in the past. It was precisely because you wanted to let Hou Jing deal with the Eastern Wei Dynasty and hoped that he would fight a war with the Eastern Wei Dynasty, just as the Han Dynasty set up a subordinate national security and surrendering Hu people on the border to meet the Xiongnu. But now that Hou Jing has lost his land and suffered a defeat, he is just an ordinary person on the border. Your Majesty, you do not want to separate a Hou Jing, but you have lost harmony with a friendly country. If the country is still waiting for him to renew himself and be effective in his later years, I privately believe

古文：若国家犹待其更鸣之辰，岁暮之效，臣窃惟侯景必非岁暮之臣；弃乡国如脱屣，背君亲如遗芥，岂知远慕圣德，为江、淮之纯臣乎！
现代文：他抛弃家国象脱掉鞋一样轻率，背弃国君、亲人象丢掉草芥一样容易，他怎么会懂得远慕圣德而来，做我们梁朝纯贞的臣子呢！
English: He abandons his home country as easily as he abandons his shoes, he abandons his sovereign and his relatives as easily as he abandons a mustard seed. How could he come to admire virtue and be a chaste vassal of our Liang Dynasty?

古文：事迹显然，无可致惑。
现代文：他的所作所为很明显，没有人会感到迷惑不解。
English: There are clear signs of foul play, there is nothing to doubt.

古文：臣朽老疾侵，不应干预朝政；但楚囊将死，有城郢之忠，卫鱼临亡，亦有尸谏之节。
现代文：我已经衰老，又受疾病侵扰，本不应该干预朝廷政事。但是楚国令尹子囊在临死时，还叮嘱子庚修筑郢都的城墙，不忘保护社稷。
English: I am old and have been plagued by illness, and I should not have interfered in the affairs of the imperial court. However, when the ruler of Chu, Yin Zizang, was about to die, he also told Zi Geng to build the city wall of the capital, and not to forget to protect the community.

古文：臣忝为宗室遗老，敢忘刘向之心！ 
现代文：卫国的史鱼将死之时，尚有让儿子置尸窗下进谏卫灵公之举。我身为皇族遗老，怎么敢忘记刘向的一片忠心！ 
English: When the historical fish that defended the country was about to die, there was still a move to have his son place the corpse under the window to protect the spirit. As an old member of the imperial family, how dare I forget Liu Xiang's loyalty!

古文：上叹息其忠，然不能用。
现代文：梁武帝魏很赞赏萧介的一片忠心，但是却不能听从他的忠告。
English: Emperor Wei appreciated Shaosuke's loyalty, but could not follow his advice.

古文：介，思话之孙也。
现代文：萧介是萧思话的孙子。
English: Xiao Jie is the grandson of Xiao Siwa.

古文：己未，东魏大将军澄朝于鄴。
现代文：己未，东魏大将军高澄来到邺城朝拜国主。
English: Not long after, the Eastern Wei general Gao Cheng came to Lucheng to pay homage to the lord of the country.

古文：魏以开府仪同三司赵贵为司空。
现代文：西魏任命开府仪同三司赵贵为司空。
English: The Western Wei Dynasty appointed Kaifu Yi and the third secretary Zhao Gui as the secretary.

古文：魏皇孙生，大赦。
现代文：西魏文帝的孙子降生，大赦天下。
English: The grandson of the West Wei Emperor Wen was born, and he was pardoned by the world.

古文：二月，东魏杀其南兗州刺史石长宣，讨侯景之党也；其馀为景所胁从者，皆赦之。
现代文：二月，东魏杀掉了南兖州刺史石长宣，这是讨伐侯景的同党。其余被侯景所威胁，迫不得已随从他反叛的人都被赦免了。
English: In February, the Eastern Wei Dynasty killed Nanluozhou cadet Shi Changxuan, a member of the same party who fought against Houjing. The rest of the people who were threatened by Houjing and were forced to rebel with him were pardoned.

古文：东魏既得悬瓠、项城，悉复旧境。
现代文：东魏得到了悬瓠、项城后，完全恢复了有的疆土区域。
English: After the Eastern Wei Dynasty gained the cities of Xuancheng and Xiangcheng, it completely restored some of its territory.

古文：大将军澄数遣书移，复求通好；朝廷未之许。
现代文：大将军高澄多次派人送交国书，再次请求与梁朝通和、友好。朝廷没有允许。
English: General Takasumi repeatedly sent people to submit documents of state, and once again asked for peace and friendship with Liang. The imperial court did not allow this.

古文：澄谓贞阳侯渊明曰： 先王与梁主和好，十有馀年。
现代文：高澄对贞阳侯萧渊明说： 先王与梁主和睦相处，有十多年了。
English: Gao Cheng said to Zhengyang Hou Xiao Yuanming: The former king and the ruler of Liang have been living in harmony for more than ten years.

古文：闻彼礼佛文云： 奉为魏主，并及先王。 
现代文：听说他拜佛的文字中写着，为魏国国主奉佛，同时也提到先王。
English: I heard that in the text of his worship of Buddha, it was written that he worshipped Buddha as the head of the state of Wei, and also mentioned the former king.

古文：此乃梁主厚意；不谓一朝失信，致此纷扰，知非梁主本心，当是侯景扇动耳，宜遣使咨论。
现代文：这是梁主的真情厚意，没想到一朝失信，竟导致如此纷乱。我知道这并不是梁主的本意，一定是侯景煽动罢了。
English: This was the true and kind intention of Master Liang. I didn't expect that a breach of trust would lead to such chaos. I know that this was not Master Liang's intention, but it must have been instigated by Houjing.

古文：若梁主不忘旧好，吾亦不敢违先王之意，诸人并即遣还，侯景家属亦当同遣。 
现代文：我们应该派遣使者去商讨一下，如果梁主没有忘记旧日两国这间的友好关系，我也不敢违背先王的意愿与梁朝为敌。我会立即遣返留在北方的人，侯景的家属也会同时得到遣返。 
English: We should send an envoy to discuss this. If the Lord of Liang hadn't forgotten the friendly relations between the two countries in the old days, I wouldn't dare to go against the wishes of the former king and become an enemy of the Liang Dynasty. I would immediately repatriate those who remained in the north, and Hou Jing's family members would also be repatriated at the same time.

古文：渊明乃遣省事夏侯僧辩奉启于上，称 勃海王弘厚长者，若更通好，当听渊明还。 
现代文：萧渊明于是派遣省事夏侯僧辩向梁武帝呈递了奏书，声称： 勃海王高澄是宽宏大量、十分厚道的长者，如果梁朝再次与东魏关系友好的话，高澄会允许我回到梁朝的。 
English: Xiao Yuanming then dispatched the provincial governor Xia Hou Sangye to submit a report to Emperor Liang Wu, claiming: King Bo Hai Gao Cheng is a magnanimous and very virtuous elder. If the Liang Dynasty is once again on friendly terms with the Eastern Wei Dynasty, Gao Cheng will allow me to return to the Liang Dynasty.

古文：上得启，流涕，与朝臣议之。
现代文：梁武帝看到萧渊明的启奏后，流下了眼泪。便与朝中大臣们共同商议此事。
English: Emperor Liangwu shed tears when he saw Xiao Yuanming's opening performance, and then discussed the matter with the ministers of the DPRK and China.

古文：右卫将军硃异、御史中丞张绾等皆曰： 静寇息民，和实为便。 
现代文：右卫将军朱异、御史中丞张绾等人都说： 平息敌寇，安息百姓，讲和对于我们来说确实很好。 
English: The Right Guard General Zhu Yi, the Grand Historian Zhang Ye and others all said, "Quell the enemy raiders, rest the people, and talk about peace is really good for us."

古文：司农卿傅岐独曰： 高澄何事须和？
现代文：只有司农卿傅岐认为； 高澄为什么要和我们讲和？
English: Only Minister of Agriculture Fu Qi thought, "Why does Gao Cheng want to make peace with us?"

古文：必是设间，故命贞阳遣使，欲令侯景自疑。
现代文：这一定是他设下的离间计，之所以让贞阳侯萧渊明派来使者，目的是想让侯景自己产生猜疑。
English: This must have been a ruse set up by him. The reason why Zhengyang Hou Xiao Yuanming sent the envoy was to make Hou Jing himself suspicious.

古文：景意不安，必图祸乱。
现代文：侯景的心神不定，心里不安宁，就一定会图谋叛乱引起灾祸。
English: Hou Jing was uneasy in his heart and was sure to plot a rebellion.

古文：若许通好，正堕其计中。 
现代文：如果您答应与东魏友好往来，就正好堕入了高澄的圈套，中了他的奸计。 
English: If you agree to have friendly relations with the Eastern Wei Dynasty, you will fall right into Gao Cheng's trap and fall for his trick.

古文：异等固执宜和，上亦厌用兵，乃从异言，赐渊明书曰： 知高大将军礼汝不薄，省启，甚以慰怀。
现代文：朱异等人固执地主张应该与东魏和好，梁武帝也厌倦了战争，于是便同意了朱异的意见，赐给萧渊明一封信，信上说： 知道高大将军待你不错，我看了你的奏折，心里感到很宽慰。
English: Zhu Yixing and others stubbornly advocated that there should be peace with the Eastern Wei Dynasty. Emperor Liang Wu was also tired of the war, so he agreed with Zhu Yixing's opinion and gave Xiao Yuanming a letter, which said: Knowing that General Gao Da treated you well, I read your report and felt very relieved.

古文：当别遣行人，重敦邻睦。 
现代文：自当另外派遣使者到魏国，以便重新建立两国之间的和睦友好关系。 
English: At the same time, he dispatched another envoy to Wei in order to re-establish the harmonious and friendly relations between the two countries.

古文：僧辩还，过寿阳，侯景窃访知之，摄问，具服。
现代文：夏侯僧辩返回东魏，路过寿阳城。侯景私下查访知道了这件事，便拘捕了他，向他寻问情况。
English: When Xia Hou Sangye returned to the Eastern Wei Dynasty, he passed Shouyang City. When Hou Jing learned about this from a private visit, he arrested him and asked him about the situation.

古文：乃写答渊明之书，陈启于上曰： 高氏心怀鸩毒，怨盈北土，人愿天从，欢身殒越。
现代文：夏侯僧辩把一切都告诉了侯景。侯景于是写了一封回复萧渊明的书信向梁武帝陈述启奏说： 高氏内心象毒酒一样狠毒，北方人民对怨恨至极。天从人愿，高欢终于死去。
English: Xia Hou Sangye told everything to Hou Jing. Hou Jing then wrote a reply to Xiao Yuanming's letter to Emperor Liangwu, stating the following: Gao's heart is as poisonous as poisoned wine, and the people of the north are extremely resentful. God willing, Gao Huan finally died.

古文：子澄嗣恶，计灭待时，所以昧此一胜者，盖大荡澄心以盈凶毒耳。
现代文：他的儿子高澄继承了他父亲的恶毒，灭亡的时间已经不长了。高澄侥幸打胜了涡汤战役的原因，大概是上天要动荡其心，好让他恶贯满盈吧。
English: His son, Takasumi, has inherited his father's viciousness, and the time of his demise is not long. The reason why Takasumi won the Battle of Whirlpool Soup by chance is probably that God wanted to shake his heart, so that he would be full of evil.

古文：澄苟行合天心，腹心无疾，又何急急奉璧求和？
现代文：高澄的行为如果合乎上天的意愿，心腹要害如果没有毛病，又为什么要急急忙忙地捧璧求和呢？
English: If Gao Cheng's behavior is in accordance with the will of heaven, if there is nothing wrong with his subordinates, why should he be in a hurry to make peace?

古文：岂不以秦兵扼其喉，胡骑迫其背，故甘辞厚币，取安大国。
现代文：还不是因为关中的军队卡住了他的咽喉，柔然的军队在他的背后步步逼的缘故，所以他才用甜言蜜语，丰厚的钱财，来换取同我朝之间关系的安定。
English: It was not because Guanzhong's army was choking his throat and the meek army was advancing behind him that he had to exchange sweet words and abundant money for the stability of relations with our country.

古文：臣闻 一日纵敌，数世之患 ，何惜高澄一竖，以弃亿兆之心！
现代文：我听说 一天放纵敌人，就会成为几代人的祸患 ，您何必要怜悯高澄这小子，而背弃亿万人民的心愿呢！
English: I heard that if you indulge the enemy for one day, it will become the scourge of several generations. Why do you need to pity this boy, Takecho, and betray the wishes of hundreds of millions of people?

古文：窃以北魏安强，莫过天监之始，钟离之役，匹马不归。
现代文：我私下认为北魏安定强大的时期，莫过于天监初年，但钟离战役，北魏却片甲未回。
English: Privately, I think that the period of stability and strength of the Northern Wei Dynasty was nothing more than the first year of the Heaven's Guardianship. However, the Northern Wei Dynasty did not return from the war.

古文：当其强也，陛下尚伐而取之；及其弱也，反虑而和之。
现代文：当其强大之时，陛下尚且还讨伐并战胜了它，现在东魏力量薄弱了，您反而顾虑重重与它讲和。
English: When it was strong, Your Majesty fought against it and defeated it. Now that the Eastern Wei Dynasty is weak, you are hesitant to make peace with it.

古文：舍已成之功，纵垂死之虏，使其假命强梁，以遗后世，非直愚臣扼腕，实亦志士痛心。
现代文：舍弃已经成就的功业，去放纵东魏这个濒临死亡的人，使它能托命强梁，把祸患留给后世。这不仅让我扼腕叹息，也让有志之士感到痛心啊。
English: To abandon the work that has already been accomplished, to indulge the East Wei Dynasty, which is on the verge of death, so that it can support life and leave the scourge to future generations. This not only makes me sigh, but also makes the aspirants feel sad.

古文：昔伍相奔吴，楚邦卒灭；陈平去项，刘氏用兴。
现代文：以前，楚国的伍了胥投奔了吴国，楚国终于被吴国灭掉；陈平离开项羽，刘邦任用了他从而使国家兴盛起来。
English: In the past, Zhu's vassals went to the State of Wu, and the State of Chu was finally destroyed by the State of Wu; Chen Ping left Xiang Yu, and Liu Bang appointed him to make the country prosperous.

古文：臣虽才劣古人，心同往事。
现代文：我虽然比古人才疏学浅，但是，我的忠心却和他们一样。
English: Though I am less learned than the ancients, my loyalty is equal to theirs.

古文：诚知高澄忌贾在翟，恶会居秦，求盟请和，冀除其患。
现代文：我知道高澄是忌恨我投奔梁朝，就象忌恨贾季投翟，随会投奔秦一样。他请求讲和结成盟国，只是希望除掉他的心腹之患。
English: I know that Gao Cheng hated me for going to the Liang Dynasty, just as he hated Jia Ji for going to the Qin Dynasty. He asked to talk and form an alliance, just hoping to get rid of his henchman.

古文：若臣死有益，万殒无辞。
现代文：如果我死了能对国家有益，我万死不辞。
English: If my death can benefit the country, I will do my best.

古文：唯恐千载，有秽良史。 
现代文：只恐怕千百年后，在史册上留下陛下的污点。 
English: I'm just afraid that thousands of years later, it will leave a stain on His Majesty in the annals of history.

古文：景又致书于硃异，饷金三百两；异纳金而不通其启。
现代文：侯景又写信给朱异，并赠给朱异三百两黄金。朱异收下了侯景的钱财却没有把侯景的奏折向梁武帝呈递。
English: Hou Jing also wrote a letter to Zhu Yi, and presented Zhu Yi with three hundred taels of gold. Zhu Yi received Hou Jing's money but did not present Hou Jing's report to Emperor Liangwu.

古文：己卯，上遣使吊澄。
现代文：己卯，梁武帝派遣使者去慰问高澄，吊唁高欢。
English: At the same time, Emperor Liangwu sent an envoy to pay condolences to Gao Cheng and offer condolences to Gao Huan.

古文：景又启曰： 臣与高氏，衅隙已深，仰凭威灵，期雪仇耻；今陛下复与高氏连和，使臣何地自处！
现代文：侯景又向梁武帝奏说： 我与高氏父子之间的嫌隙和仇恨已经很深，我仰仗您的威灵，期待着报仇雪耻。现在陛下又与高氏修好讲和，让我何处安身呢？
English: Hou Jing also said to Emperor Liang Wudi: The rift and hatred between me and Gao's father and son is already very deep. I rely on your blessing and look forward to revenge. Now that Your Majesty has made peace with Gao, where should I live?

古文：乞申后战，宣畅皇威！ 
现代文：请求您让我再次与高澄交战，来显示梁朝的皇威！ 
English: I beg you to let me fight with Gaocheng again to show the imperial power of the Liang Dynasty!

古文：上报之曰： 朕与公大义已定，岂有成而相纳，败而相弃乎！
现代文：梁武帝写信回答侯景说： 我与你之间君臣大义已定，怎会有你打了胜仗就接纳你，打了败仗就抛弃你的道理呢？
English: Emperor Liangwu wrote a letter in reply to Hou Jing, saying, "Between you and me, the principles of kingship and submission have been established. How can there be a principle that if you win a battle, you will be accepted, but if you lose a battle, you will be discarded?"

古文：今高氏有使求和，朕亦更思偃武。
现代文：现在，高澄派遣使者来求和，我也想停止干戈。
English: Now that Gaocho is sending an envoy to sue for peace, I want to stop fighting.

古文：进退之宜，国有常制。公但清静自居，无劳虑也！ 
现代文：应该进还是应该退，国家有正常的制度，你只管清静自居就行了，无需费心去考虑这些！ 
English: Whether you should advance or retreat, the country has a normal system, you just have to behave yourself quietly, don't bother to think about it!

古文：景又启曰： 臣今蓄粮聚众，秣马潜戈，指日计期，克清赵、魏，不容军出无名，故愿以陛下为主耳。
现代文：侯景又向梁武帝启奏说： 我现在已贮备了粮草，聚集了士兵，喂了战马，藏好了武器，不日便可收复北方。我不能出师无名，所以希望陛下您能为我做主。
English: Hou Jing also sent a message to Emperor Liang Wu, saying: I have now stored grain and grass, gathered soldiers, fed horses, and hidden weapons, and will soon be able to recover the north. I can't go into battle without a name, so I hope that Your Majesty can make the decision for me.

古文：今陛下弃臣遐外，南北复通，将恐微臣之身，不免高氏之手。 
现代文：现在陛下把我弃这在外，南北双方又开始互相沟通，只怕微臣的性命，将难免死在高澄之手。 
English: Now that His Majesty has left me out here, and the two sides of the North and South have begun to communicate with each other again, I am afraid that I will inevitably die at the hands of Gao Cheng.

古文：上又报曰： 朕为万乘之主，岂可失信于一物！
现代文：梁武帝又写信给侯景说： 我是大国这君，怎么可以失信于人呢！
English: Emperor Liangwu also wrote a letter to Hou Jing, saying: I am the ruler of a great country, how can I betray the trust of others!

古文：想公深得此心，不劳复有启也。 
现代文：我想你深深知道我的这番心，你不必再启奏了。 
English: I think you know my heart so well, you don't have to play it again.

古文：景乃诈为鄴中书，求以贞阳侯易景；上将许之。
现代文：侯景于是假造了一封来自东魏都城邺城的书信，信中写道要用贞阳侯崐萧渊明交换侯景。
English: Hou Jing then forged a letter from Shicheng, the capital of the Eastern Wei Dynasty, in which he wrote that he wanted to exchange Hou Jing for Zhengyang Hou and Xiao Yuanming.

古文：舍人傅岐曰： 侯景以穷归义，弃之不祥；且百战之馀，宁肯束手受絷！ 
现代文：梁武帝打算答应这一要求。舍人傅岐说： 侯景顺为山穷水尽才归至正道，投奔梁朝，舍弃了他是不吉祥的。况且侯景也身经百战，他怎么肯束手就擒呢！ 
English: Emperor Liangwu was going to agree to this request. Fu Qi, a layman, said: "Hou Jingshun only came back to the right path when he was at the end of his rope. It is not auspicious for him to abandon Liang Dynasty. Moreover, Hou Jingshun had been through hundreds of battles. How could he give up?

古文：谢举、硃异曰： 景奔败之将，一使之力耳。 
现代文：谢举、朱异说： 侯景是败军之将，用一个使者就会把他召回来。 
English: Xie Qiu and Zhu Yiyi said, "Hou Jing is the general of the defeated army, and a messenger will call him back."

古文：上从之，复书曰： 贞阳旦至，侯景夕返。 
现代文：梁武帝听从了谢举、朱异的话，给邺城回信说： 贞阳侯早一到，侯景晚上会押送回去。 
English: Emperor Liangwu listened to the words of Xie Jiu and Zhu Yizhong and wrote back to Lucheng, saying, "Once Zhengyang Hou arrives in the morning, Houjing will escort him back in the evening.

古文：景谓左右曰： 我固知吴老公薄心肠！ 
现代文：侯景对左右的人说： 我就知道这个老家伙是个薄情寡义之人！ 
English: Hou Jing said to the people around: I knew this old guy was a heartless person!

古文：王伟说景曰： 今坐听亦死，举大事亦死，唯王图之！ 
现代文：王伟对侯景劝说道： 现在，我们等着听候梁国安排也是死，图谋大业也不过一死，希望大王您考虑一下这件事！ 
English: Wang Wei said to Hou Jing's persuasion: Now, we are waiting to hear whether Liang Guo's arrangement is also death, and planning a great cause is also death. I hope you will consider this matter!

古文：于是始为反计，属城居民，悉召募为军士，辄停责市估及田租，百姓子女，悉以配将士。
现代文：于是侯景才开始有把叛之计：将寿阳城内所有的居民，都招募为军队的士兵。立即停止收取市场税及田租。百姓之女，都被分派给将士们。
English: As a result, Hou Jing only began to devise a plan of rebellion: to recruit all the residents of Shouyang City as soldiers of the army. Immediately stop collecting market tax and field rent. The women of the people were all assigned to the soldiers.

古文：三月，癸巳，东魏以太尉襄城王旭为大司马，开府仪同三司高岳为太尉。
现代文：三月，癸巳，东魏任命太尉襄城王旭为大司马，任命开府仪同三司高岳为太尉。
English: In March, the Eastern Wei Dynasty appointed Lieutenant Xiangcheng Wang Xu as the chief secretary, and appointed Kaifu Yi and Sanshi Gao Yue as the lieutenant.

古文：辛亥，大将军澄南临黎阳，自虎牢济河至洛阳。
现代文：辛亥，大将军高澄南巡至黎阳，从虎牢渡过黄河到达了洛阳。
English: In Xinhai, General Gao Cheng made a southern tour to Liyang, and crossed the Yellow River from the Tiger's Lair to Luoyang.

古文：魏同轨防长史裴宽与东魏将彭乐等战，为乐所擒，澄礼遇甚厚，宽得间逃归。
现代文：西魏同轨防长史裴宽与东魏乐等人交战，被彭乐抓获，高澄以礼相待，待他很优厚，裴宽找了个机会逃回了西魏。
English: Western Wei Defense Minister Shi Pei Kuan, who was on the same track, fought with Eastern Wei Le and others, and was captured by Peng Le. Gao Cheng treated him with courtesy, and treated him very generously. Pei Kuan found an opportunity to escape back to Western Wei.

古文：澄由太行返晋阳。
现代文：高澄由太行出发，返回了晋阳。
English: Gao Cheng started from Taihang and returned to Jinyang.

古文：屈獠洞斩李贲，传首建康。
现代文：在屈獠洞有人将李贲斩杀了，他的首级被送到建康城。
English: Someone beheaded Li Gan in Quyu Dong, and his head was sent to Jiankang City.

古文：贲兄天宝遁入九真，收馀兵二万围爱州，交州司马陈霸先帅众讨平之。
现代文：李贲的哥哥李天宝逃到了九真郡，收聚剩余的二万人马包围了爱州，交州司马陈霸先率领军队讨伐并扫平了李天宝。
English: Li Yao's brother Li Tianbao fled to Jiu Zhen County, gathered the remaining twenty thousand horses and surrounded Aizhou. Jiaozhou Sima Chen Baxi led the army to fight and wiped out Li Tianbao.

古文：诏以霸先为西江督护、高要太守、督七郡诸军事。
现代文：梁武帝下诏任命陈霸先为西江督护、高要太守、督七郡诸军事。
English: Emperor Liangwu issued an edict appointing Chen Baxian as the governor of the Xijiang River, the high-ranking governor, and the military governor of seven counties.

古文：夏，四月，甲子，东魏吏部令史张永和等伪假人官，事觉，纠检、首者六万馀人。
现代文：夏季四月，甲子，东魏吏部令史张永和等人伪造任官文书授人官职，事情败露之后，由别人纠查、检举出的人以及自首的人达六万多。
English: In the summer of April, Zhang Yonghe and others of the East Wei cadre department ordered Zhang Yonghe and others to forge official documents to confer official positions. After the matter was revealed, more than 60,000 people were investigated and reported by others and surrendered.

古文：甲戌，东魏遣太尉高岳、行台慕容绍宗、大都督刘丰生等将步骑十万攻魏王思政于颍川。
现代文：甲戌，东魏派遣太尉高岳、行台慕容绍宗、大都督刘丰生等人，率领十万步兵和骑后到颍川攻打西魏王思政的军队。
English: The Eastern Wei Dynasty dispatched Lieutenant Gao Yue, Governor of Xingtai Murong Shaozong, and Grand Governor Liu Fengsheng, leading 100,000 infantrymen and cavalry, to attack the army of West Wei King Sisi in Luochuan.

古文：思政命卧鼓偃旗，若无人者。
现代文：王思政命令部队把战鼓和军旗都放倒在地，好象没有人一样。
English: Wang Sizheng ordered the troops to lower the war drums and flags to the ground, as if no one was there.

古文：岳恃其众，四面陵城。
现代文：高岳自恃人马众多，从四个方向攻打颍川城。
English: Gao Yue personally led a large number of men and horses to attack Beichuan City from four directions.

古文：思政选骁勇开门出战，岳兵败走。
现代文：王思政挑选了一些骁勇善战的将士打开城门出去应战，高岳的军队被打败逃走了。
English: Wang Sizheng selected some brave and skillful soldiers to open the city gate and go out to fight. Gao Yue's army was defeated and fled.

古文：岳更筑土山，昼夜攻之，思政随方拒守，夺其土山，置楼堞以助防守。
现代文：高岳改变了战术，又修筑了一座土山，日夜不停地攻城。王思政随机应变守卫颍川城，并且夺取了土山，在土山上修筑了岗楼和低矮的城墙来辅助颍川的防守。
English: Gao Yue changed his tactics and built a mound of earth, attacking the city day and night. Wang Sizheng took it upon himself to guard the city of Liuchuan, and captured the mound of earth, building a watchtower and a low wall on the mound of earth to assist in the defense of Liuchuan.

古文：五月，魏以丞相泰为太师，广陵王欣为太傅，李弼为大宗伯，赵贵为大司寇，于谨为大司空。
现代文：五月，西魏文帝任命丞相宇文泰为太师，任命广陵王元欣为太傅，任命李弼为大宗伯，任命赵贵为大司寇，任命于谨为大司空。
English: In May, Emperor Wen of the Western Wei Dynasty appointed the chancellor Wu Wentai as the Grand Master, appointed Guangling Wang Yuanxin as the Grand Master, appointed Li Xi as the Grand Uncle, appointed Zhao Gui as the Grand Secretary, and appointed Yu Ji as the Grand Secretary.

古文：太师泰奉太子巡抚西境，登陇，至原州，历北长城，东趣五原，至蒲州，闻魏主不豫而还。
现代文：太师宇文泰侍奉太子巡抚西部边境地区。他们选进入陇地，然后到达了原州，经过了北长城。向东至五原，至达了蒲州。后来他们听说西魏文帝身体不适就返回了国都。
English: Grand Master U Wentai served as the prince's inspector of the western border region. They chose to enter Handan, then reached Wonju, passed the Northern Great Wall, went east to Wuhuan, and reached Puzhou. Later, they heard that West Wei Emperor Wen was unwell and returned to the capital.

古文：及至，已愈，泰还华州。
现代文：等回到都城后，西魏文帝的身体已经痊愈了。宇文泰便返回了华州。
English: After returning to the capital, Emperor Wen of Western Wei's body had already recovered. Wu Wentai then returned to Huazhou.

古文：上遣建康令谢挺、散骑常侍徐陵等聘于东魏，复修前好。
现代文：梁武帝派遣建康令谢挺、散骑常侍徐陵等人到东魏去聘问。
English: Emperor Liangwu sent Jiankang's deputy, Xie Ting, and roving equerry, Xu Ling, to the Eastern Wei Dynasty to ask questions.

古文：陵，扌离之子也。
现代文：恢复从前的友好关系。徐陵是徐的儿子。
English: The former friendly relations were restored. Xu Ling is the son of Xu Zang.

古文：六月，东魏大将军澄巡北边。
现代文：六月，东魏大将军高澄到北部边境地区巡视。
English: In June, General Gao Cheng of the Eastern Wei Dynasty inspected the northern border areas.

古文：秋，七月，庚寅朔，日有食之。
现代文：秋季七月，庚寅朔，这一天有日食现象。
English: In autumn in July, Geng Yin Shuo, there is a solar eclipse on this day.

古文：乙卯，东魏大将军澄朝于鄴。
现代文：乙卯，东魏大将军高澄到邺城上朝。
English: Second, the Eastern Wei Dynasty general Gao Cheng went to Shicheng for the imperial court.

古文：以道士多伪滥，始罢南郊道坛。
现代文：因为道士中有许多是假冒的，东魏便将南郊的道坛废除了。
English: Because many of the Taoist priests were counterfeit, the Eastern Wei Dynasty abolished the Southern Suburbs Taoist Altar.

古文：八月，庚寅，澄还晋阳，遣尚书辛术帅诸将略江、淮之北，凡获二十三州。
现代文：八月，庚寅，高澄返回晋阳，他派尚书辛术统率诸将夺取长江、淮河以北的地区，一共占领了二十三个州。
English: In August, Geng Yin and Gao Cheng returned to Jinyang. He sent Shang Shuxin and other generals to seize the areas north of the Yangtze River and the Huai River, occupying a total of 23 states.

古文：侯景自至寿阳，征求无已，朝廷未尝拒绝。
现代文：侯景自从来到寿阳，就不断地提出要求，朝廷都未曾拒绝过他。
English: Ever since Hou Jing came to Shouyang, he has constantly made requests, and the imperial court has never rejected him.

古文：景请娶于王、谢，上曰： 王、谢门高非偶，可于硃、张以下访之。 
现代文：侯景请求梁武帝，要娶王家或谢家的女子为妻。梁武帝说： 王和谢家门第高贵，你与他们不相配，你可以从朱、张以下的家族中寻访、聘娶。 
English: Houjing asked Emperor Liangwu to marry a woman from the Wang family or the Xie family. Emperor Liangwu said, "The Wang and Xie families are the most noble. You are not a good match with them. You can look for and marry someone from the Zhu and Zhang families."

古文：景恚曰： 会将吴儿女配奴！ 
现代文：侯景为此心中十分怨恨梁武帝，说： 将来，我要让吴人的女儿许配给奴仆！ 
English: Hou Jing was very resentful of Emperor Liang Wudi for this, saying: In the future, I will let Wu's daughter marry a slave!

古文：又启求锦万匹为军人作袍，中领军硃异议以青布给之。
现代文：他又向梁武帝启奏，要求朝廷赐给他一成匹锦缎，给官兵制作战袍。中领军朱异建议给侯景青布。
English: He also appealed to Emperor Liangwu, asking the court to give him a pair of brocade horses to make battle robes for officers and soldiers. Zhu Yixing, the middle leader of the army, suggested cloth for Hou Jingqing.

古文：又以台所给仗多不能精，启请东冶锻工，欲更营造，敕并给之。
现代文：侯景又以武器不精良为理由，向梁武帝启奏请求派来东治的锻造工人，打算再营造一些武器。
English: On the grounds that the weapons were not well-made, Hou Jing asked Emperor Liangwu to send forging workers from Tongzhi to build more weapons.

古文：景以安北将军夏侯夔之子譒为长史，徐思玉为司马，譒遂去 夏 称 侯 ，托为族子。
现代文：侯景任命安北将军夏侯夔的儿子夏侯为长史，任命徐思玉为司马。夏侯于是去掉了姓氏中的 夏 字，只称 侯 字，假托是侯景的同族子孙。
English: Hou Jing appointed Xia Hou, the son of the Anbei general Xia Houyi, as Chang Shi, and appointed Xu Siyu as Sima. Xia Hou then removed the Xia character from the surname, only called the Hou character, pretending to be the descendants of Hou Jing's compatriots.

古文：上既不用景言，与东魏和亲，是后景表疏稍稍悖慢；又闻徐陵等使魏，反谋益甚。
现代文：梁武帝既然没有采纳侯景的意见，与东魏友好往来，和睦相亲，这以后，侯景写给梁武帝的奏折态度渐渐不恭傲慢起来。后来他又听说徐陵等人出使东魏，心里反叛的念头就更强烈了。
English: Since Emperor Liangwu did not adopt the opinion of Houjing, and had friendly relations with the Eastern Wei Dynasty, and was on friendly terms with them, after that, the attitude of Houjing's letter to Emperor Liangwu gradually became disrespectful and arrogant. Later, when he heard that Xu Ling and others were dispatched to the Eastern Wei Dynasty, the idea of rebellion in his heart became even stronger.

古文：元贞知景有异志，累启还朝。
现代文：元贞知道侯景对梁朝有异心，多次向侯景请求返回朝廷。
English: Yuan Zhen knew that Hou Jing had a grudge against the Liang Dynasty, and she repeatedly asked Hou Jing to return to the imperial court.

古文：景谓曰： 河北事虽不果，江南何虑失之，何不小忍！ 
现代文：侯景对元贞说： 黄河北边的事虽然没有成功，长江南又何必担心会失掉呢，何不稍稍忍耐一下！ 
English: Hou Jing said to Yuan Zhen: Although the north side of the Yellow River has not been successful, why worry about losing the south side of the Yangtze River? Why not be a little patient!

古文：贞惧，逃归建康，具以事闻；上以贞为始兴内史，亦不问景。
现代文：元贞听后十分恐惧，逃回了建康城，把这些事都告诉了梁武帝。梁武帝任命元贞为始兴内史，也没有再追问侯景这些事。
English: After hearing this, Yuanzheng was very afraid, fled back to Jiankang City, and told Emperor Liangwu all of these things. Emperor Liangwu appointed Yuanzheng as the first emperor of Inner History, and did not ask Houjing about these things.

古文：临贺王正德，所至贪暴不法，屡得罪于上，由是愤恨，阴养死士，储米积货，幸国家有变；景知之。
现代文：临贺王萧正德，无论到哪里都贪婪残暴，不遵守法令，多次受到梁武帝的怪罪。因为这些萧正德心里对梁武帝十分愤恨。他暗中豢养一批肯为他效忠的敢死之人，储存粮食，积攒财物，希望家发生意外事变。侯景知道萧正德的心意。
English: Lin He Wang Xiao Zhengde, no matter where he went, was greedy and cruel, did not abide by laws and regulations, and was repeatedly blamed by Emperor Liangwu. Because of these, Xiao Zhengde was very angry with Emperor Liangwu. He secretly raised a group of people who were willing to die for his loyalty, stored grain, accumulated property, and hoped that an accident would happen at home. Houjing knew Xiao Zhengde's mind.

古文：正德在北与徐思玉相知，景遣思玉致笺于正德曰： 今天子年尊，奸臣乱国。
现代文：萧正德在北方时与徐思玉是知己，侯景于是便派徐思玉给萧正德送去了一封书信。信上说： 现在天子上纪已大。
English: When Xiao Zhengde was in the north, he was a friend of Xu Siyu, so Hou Jing sent Xu Siyu to send a letter to Xiao Zhengde. The letter said: Now Tian Zhe is old.

古文：以景观之，计日祸败。
现代文：奸臣乱国，依我看梁朝没有多少日子就会出现灾祸，遭到失败。
English: In my opinion, the Liang Dynasty will face disaster and defeat in a few days if its treacherous vassals ruin the country.

古文：大王属当储贰，中被废黜，四海业业，归心大王。
现代文：大王你实属是君位的继承人，中途却被废黜，四海之人都归心于您。
English: Great King, you are indeed the heir to the throne, but you were deposed in the middle of your reign. People from all over the world have fallen in love with you.

古文：景虽不敏，实思自效。愿王允副苍生，鉴斯诚款！ 
现代文：侯景虽不聪敏，实在想亲自为您效劳，希望大王您答应百姓的要求，上天可鉴我的诚心！ 
English: Although Hou Jing is not intelligent, I really want to serve you in person. I hope you will agree to the people's request. Heaven can judge my sincerity!

古文：正德大喜曰： 侯公之意，暗与吾同，天授我也！ 
现代文：萧正德喜形于色地说： 侯公的心愿，正好与我相同，这真是天授我也！ 
English: Xiao Zhengde was beaming with joy and said, "The lord of the manor's wishes are exactly the same as mine. This is truly a gift from heaven!

古文：报之曰： 朝廷之事，如公所言。仆之有心，为日久矣。
现代文：于是给侯景回信说： 朝廷中的事，正如你所讲的那样，我有这个打算已很久了。
English: So he wrote back to Hou Jing and said: As you said, I have been planning this for a long time.

古文：今仆为其内，公为其外，何有不济！机事在速，今其时矣。 
现代文：今天，我在朝廷里面，你在朝廷外面，我们相互呼应，一定会成功！事不宜迟，现在正是好时机。 
English: Today, I am inside the imperial court, you are outside the imperial court, we echo each other, we will succeed! It is not too late, now is a good time.

古文：鄱阳王范密启景谋反。
现代文：鄱阳王萧范秘密启奏梁武帝，告诉他侯景要密谋反叛。
English: Xiao Fan, the king of Shenyang, secretly sent a message to Emperor Liangwu, telling him that Houjing was plotting to rebel.

古文：时上以边事专委硃异，动静皆关之，异以为必无此理。
现代文：当时，梁武帝把有关边境方面的事全都委托给了朱异，边境有什么动静都直通朱异。朱异认为萧范所说的一定没有道理。
English: At that time, Emperor Liangwu entrusted all matters related to the border to Zhu Rong, and any movement on the border went straight to Zhu Rong. Zhu Rong thought that what Xiao Fan said was certainly unreasonable.

古文：上报范曰： 景孤危寄命，譬如婴儿仰人乳哺，以此事势，安能反乎！ 
现代文：梁武帝于是给萧写回信说： 侯景孤单一人，境况危险才寄身于我们。这好象是刚出生的婴儿要仰仗人的乳汁来哺育一样。由此看来，他怎么能反叛呢！ 
English: Emperor Liangwu then wrote a reply to Xiao, saying: "Houjing is all alone, and it is only us who are in a dangerous situation. It is as if a newborn baby had to rely on human milk to nurse. From this perspective, how could he rebel!

古文：范重陈之曰： 不早剪扑，祸及生民。 
现代文：萧范再次向梁武帝陈术说： 如果不早些把他消灭就崐会给百姓带来灾祸。 
English: Xiao Fan once again said to Emperor Liangwu: If you don't eliminate him sooner, you will bring disaster to the people.

古文：上曰： 朝廷自有处分，不须汝深忧也。 
现代文：梁武帝回答说： 朝廷对这件事自有处置，你不必再过多忧虑此事了。 
English: Liang Wudi replied: The imperial court will handle this matter on its own. You don't need to worry too much about it.

古文：范复请自以合肥之众讨之，上不许。
现代文：萧范又请求梁武帝动用合肥的军队去讨伐侯景，梁武帝没有同意。
English: Xiao Fan also asked Emperor Liangwu to use troops from Hefei to fight against Houjing. Emperor Liangwu did not agree.

古文：硃异谓范使曰： 鄱阳王遂不许朝廷有一客！ 
现代文：朱异对萧范的使者说： 鄱阳王竟不允许朝廷养一个食客！ 
English: Zhu Yi said to Xiao Fan's emissary: King Fenyang actually did not allow the court to raise a diner!

古文：自是范启，异不复为通。
现代文：从此以后，萧范给梁武帝的奏表，朱异便不再为他呈递梁武帝了。
English: From then on, Xiao Fan's report card to Liang Wu Di was no longer presented to Liang Wu Di by Zhu Yi.

古文：景邀羊鸦仁同反，鸦仁执其使以闻。
现代文：侯景邀羊鸦仁一同反叛梁朝，羊雅仁拘捕了侯景派劝他反叛的信使，并把这件事报告了朝廷。
English: Hou Jing invited Yang Guoren to rebel against the Liang Dynasty together. Yang Yaren arrested the messenger sent by Hou Jing to persuade him to rebel, and reported the matter to the imperial court.

古文：异曰： 景数百叛虏，何能为！ 
现代文：朱异说： 侯景的反叛军队只有几百人，能有什么作为！ 
English: Zhu Ying said: Hou Jing's rebel army is only a few hundred people, what can they do!

古文：敕以使者付建康狱，俄解遣之。
现代文：梁武帝命令把侯景的信使送到建康的监狱里，不久，又释放了他。
English: Emperor Liangwu ordered that Houjing's messenger be sent to Jiankang's prison, and he was soon released.

古文：景益无所惮，启上曰： 若臣事是实，应罹国宪；如蒙照察，请戮鸦仁！ 
现代文：侯景更加肆无忌惮，向梁武帝启奏说： 如果我的事是事实，我应该受到国家法律的制裁。如果我能承蒙你的关照和详察，请您杀掉羊鸦仁！ 
English: Hou Jing was even more unscrupulous and sent a message to Emperor Liang Wu, saying: "If what happened to me is true, I should be subject to the sanctions of the national law. If I can accept your care and detailed observation, please kill Yang Rongren!"

古文：景又上言： 高澄狡猾，宁可全信！
现代文：侯景又启奏说： 高澄为人十分狡猾，怎么可以完全相信他的话！
English: Hou Jing also said: Gao Cheng is a very cunning person, how can you completely believe his words!

古文：陛下纳其诡语，求与连和，臣亦窃所笑也。
现代文：陛下听信了他的谎言，力求与他和好，我在私下里对这件事也感到魏可笑。
English: I find it ridiculous that his majesty should listen to his lies in order to make peace with him.

古文：臣宁堪粉骨，投命仇门，乞江西一境，受臣控督。
现代文：我怎敢冒粉身碎骨的危险，投身我的仇人高澄呢，请求您将长江西部的一块地区，划归我控制。
English: How dare I risk my life and limb by throwing myself into the arms of my enemy, Gao Cheng, and ask you to place an area west of the Yangtze River under my control.

古文：如其不许，即帅甲骑，临江上，向闽、越。
现代文：如果您不答应我一这要求，我就统率兵马，来到长江之上，杀向闽、越地区。
English: If you do not agree to this request, I will lead the soldiers and horses to the Yangtze River and attack the Min and Yue regions.

古文：非唯朝廷自耻，亦是三公旰食。 
现代文：这样，不仅朝廷蒙受耻辱，也会使三公大臣们顾不上吃饭。 
English: In this way, not only will the imperial court suffer humiliation, but also the three ministers will not be able to eat.

古文：上使硃异宣语答景使曰： 譬如贫家，畜十客、五客，尚能得意；朕唯有一客，致有忿言，亦朕之失也。 
现代文：梁武帝让朱异代替他向侯景的信使回答说： 比如一个贫寒的家庭，蓄着了十个、五个食客，还有让他们满意，我只有一个客人，就招致了你这些愤慨的话，这也是我的过失啊！ 
English: Emperor Liangwu asked Zhu Rong to reply to Hou Jing's messenger on his behalf: "For example, if a poor family has ten or five diners, and they are satisfied, and I only have one guest, then I have incurred your indignation. This is also my fault!"

古文：益加赏赐锦彩钱布，信使相望。
现代文：这之后，梁武帝对侯景的赏赐更多了，赏给了他许多鲜艳华美的彩帛及钱币，信使往来不断，道路相望。
English: After that, Emperor Liangwu gave more rewards to Houjing. He gave him many bright and beautiful colored enamel and coins. The messengers kept coming and going, and the roads looked the same.

古文：戊戌，景反于寿阳，以诛中领军硃异、少府卿徐驎、太子右卫率陆验、制局监周石珍为名。
现代文：戊戌，侯景在寿阳反叛。他以杀掉中领军朱异、少府卿徐、太子右卫率陆验、制局监周石珍为借口反叛了梁朝。
English: He rebelled against the Liang Dynasty on the pretext of killing the central leader Zhu Rong, the minor prefect Xu, the prince Uwei who led the land inspection, and the inspector of the Bureau of Statistics Zhou Shizhen.

古文：异等皆以奸佞骄贪，蔽主弄权，为时人所疾，故景托以兴兵。
现代文：朱异等人由于为人奸诈、善于花言语阿谀奉承，骄奢淫逸而又贪婪，欺骗梁武帝、玩弄权术，被当时的人所痛恨，因此侯景以此为借口起兵叛乱。
English: Zhu Rong and others were hated by the people at that time because they were treacherous, good at flattering, arrogant, lascivious and greedy, deceived Emperor Liangwu, and played power games. Therefore, Hou Jing used this as an excuse to start a rebellion.

古文：驎、验，吴郡人；石珍，丹杨人。
现代文：因为他们做事苛刻，商人们都他恨他们。
English: Businessmen hated them because they were tough.

古文：驎、验迭为少府丞，以苛刻为务，百贾怨之，异尤与之昵，世人谓之 三蠹 。
现代文：朱异与他俩的关系尤其亲昵，因此，世上的人都称他们三个是 三蠹 。司农卿傅岐，是个为人耿直的官吏。
English: Zhu Rong's relationship with the two of them was especially close, so people around the world called the three of them the Three Emperors. The Minister of Agriculture, Fu Qi, was an upright official.

古文：司农卿傅岐，梗直士也，尝谓异曰： 卿任参国钧，荣宠如此。
现代文：他曾对朱异说： 你掌握朝政大权，得到的荣誉和受到的宠幸如此多。
English: He once said to Zhu Yi: You hold the supreme political power of the dynasty, and you have received so many honors and favors.

古文：比日所闻，鄙秽狼藉，若使圣主发悟，欲免得乎！ 
现代文：近来传闻都是些污秽、狼藉之事。如果让圣明的君主发现以后明白过来，你能免于罪责吗！ 
English: Lately, the rumors are all about something dirty and rotten. If you let the prince of light find out and understand, will you be free from guilt!

古文：异曰： 外间谤黩，知之久矣。心苟无愧，何恤人言！ 
现代文：朱异回答说： 外面对我的诽谤和玷污，我很久以前就知道了，如果我心里没有惭愧，又何必忧虑别人讲些什么呢！ 
English: Zhu Ying replied: I have known for a long time that I would be slandered and defiled in the outside world. If I am not ashamed in my heart, why should I worry about what others say?

古文：岐谓人曰： 硃彦和将死矣。
现代文：傅岐事后对别人说： 朱异快要完了。
English: Fu Qi said to others afterwards: Zhu Yi is about to finish.

古文：恃谄以求容，肆辩以拒谏，闻难而不惧，知恶而不改，天夺其鉴，其能久乎！ 
现代文：他仗着自己能巴结奉承来求得欢心，肆意为自己狡辩，拒绝别人的劝告，他听到灾难要降临而不怕，知道自己的罪恶，却不思改悔，上天要惩罚他，他还能活得长么！ 
English: He relies on his ability to flatter and flatter in order to gain favor, he arbitrarily argues for himself, he rejects the advice of others, he hears that disaster is coming and is not afraid, he knows his sins, but does not want to repent, heaven will punish him, how long can he live!

古文：景西攻马头，遣其将宋子仙东攻木栅，执戍主曹璆等，上闻之，笑曰： 是何能为！
现代文：侯景向西进攻马头，派遣他的将领宋子仙向东去攻打木栅，并捉住了戍主曹等人。梁武帝听说这件事以后，笑着说： 这些人能干出什么！
English: Hou Jing attacked Ma Tou in the west, and sent his general Song Zixian to attack Muzha in the east, and captured Master Zou and others. When Emperor Wu heard about this, he smiled and said, "What can these people do!"

古文：吾折棰笞之。 
现代文：我折断一根木棍就把能鞭打他。 
English: I can whip him with a broken stick.

古文：敕购斩景者，封三千户公，除州刺史。
现代文：梁武帝下令悬赏，能杀掉侯景的人，封为三千户公并授崐予州刺史之职。
English: Emperor Liangwu ordered a reward to be offered to anyone who could kill Houjing, and he was made the ruler of three thousand households and given the post of state historian.

古文：甲辰，诏以合州刺史鄱阳王范为南道都督，北徐州刺史封山侯正表为北道都督，司州刺史柳仲礼为西道都督，通直散骑常侍裴之高为东道都督，以侍中、开府仪同三司邵陵王纶持节董督众军以讨景。
现代文：甲辰，梁武帝下诏，任命合州刺史鄱阳王萧范为南道都督，北徐州刺史封山侯萧正表为北道都督，司州刺史柳仲礼为西道都督，通直散骑常侍裴之高为东道都督，侍中开府仪同三司、邵陵王萧纶持节监督各路军队以讨伐侯景。
English: At that time, Emperor Liangwu issued an edict, appointing the governor of South Hebei Province, the governor of South Hebei Province, the governor of North Hebei Province, the governor of North Hebei Province, the governor of North Hebei Province, the governor of North Hebei Province, the governor of North Hebei Province, the governor of North Hebei Province, the governor of North Hebei Province, the governor of North Hebei Province, the governor of North Hebei Province, the governor of North Hebei Province, the governor of North Hebei Province, the governor of North Hebei Province, the governor of North Hebe

古文：正表，宏之子；仲礼，庆远之孙；之高，邃之兄子也。
现代文：萧正表是萧宏的儿子。柳仲礼是柳庆远的孙子，裴之高是裴邃哥哥的儿子。
English: Xiao Zhengbo is the son of Xiao Hong, Liu Zhongli is the grandson of Liu Qingyuan, and Pei Zhigao is the son of Pei Yao's brother.

古文：九月，东魏濮阳武公娄昭卒。
现代文：九月，东魏濮阳武公娄昭去世。
English: In September, Gong Zhao, the Eastern Wei ruler of Shenyang, died.

古文：侯景闻台军讨之，问策于王伟。伟曰： 邵陵若至，彼众我寡，必为所困。
现代文：侯景听说官军前讨伐他，便向王伟询问策略，王伟说： 邵陵王的军队如果到来，他们人多，我们人少，一定会被他的军队所围困。
English: When Hou Jing heard that the government army was about to attack him, he asked Wang Wei about the strategy. Wang Wei said, "If King Shao Ling's army comes, they are more numerous and we are fewer, we will definitely be besieged by his army.

古文：不如弃淮南，决志东向，帅轻骑直掩建康；临贺反其内，大王攻其外，天下不足定也。
现代文：我们不如放弃淮南，专心一意向东进军，统率轻装骑兵直袭建康。临贺王萧正德在建康内部反叛，大王你在建康城外发动攻势，天下不难平定！
English: We might as well give up Huainan, concentrate on marching east with one intention, and lead the light cavalry in a direct attack on Jiankang. Lin He Wang Xiao Zhengde rebelled inside Jiankang, great king you launched an offensive outside Jiankang, the world is not difficult to pacify!

古文：兵贵拙速，宜即进路。 
现代文：军队贵在行动速迅，您应该马上上路。 
English: Your army is moving fast, you should be on your way now.

古文：景乃留外弟中军大都督王显贵守寿阳；癸未，诈称游猎，出寿阳，人不之觉。
现代文：侯景于是让自己的表弟中军大都督王显贵守卫寿阳城。癸未，侯景诈称出外巡游、打猎，出了寿阳城，人们都没有发觉这件事。
English: Hou Jing then asked his cousin, the Chinese military governor Wang Xiangui, to guard Shouyang City. Recently, Hou Jing fraudulently claimed to go out for a cruise and hunting, and left Shouyang City. People did not notice this.

古文：冬，十月，庚寅，景扬声趣合肥，而实袭谯州，助防董绍先开城降之。
现代文：冬季，十月，庚寅，侯景杨言要到合肥，便实际上却袭击谯州。谯州助防先打开城门，投降了侯景。
English: In the winter, in October, when Geng Yin and Hou Jing Yang said that they wanted to go to Hefei, they actually attacked Zhangzhou. Zhangzhou first opened the city gate and surrendered to Hou Jing.

古文：执刺史丰城侯泰。
现代文：侯景拘捕了史丰城侯萧泰。
English: Hou Jing arrested Shi Fengcheng Hou Xiao Tai.

古文：泰，范之弟也，先为中书舍人，倾财以事时要，超授谯州刺史。
现代文：萧泰是萧范的弟弟。他以前曾担任中书舍人，花费了大量钱财贿赂当时的达官贵人，被破格提拔为谯州刺史。
English: Xiao Tai is the younger brother of Xiao Fan. He had previously worked as a Chinese scholar, spent a lot of money to bribe the dignitaries of the time, and was promoted to the history of Zhangzhou.

古文：至州，遍发民丁，使担腰舆、扇、繖等物，不限士庶；耻为之者，重加杖责，多输财者，即纵免之，由是人皆思乱。及侯景至，人无战心，故败。
现代文：到了谯州，他到处征发民夫，为他抬着高到人腰部的轿子，手持障尘蔽日的扇，以及雨伞等器物，不论是土族还是庶族，如果谁耻于做这些事，就会遭到木棍的加重毒打。谁多送给他钱财，就免除谁的劳役。由于这些，人们都希望天下大乱，等到侯景来到谯州时，人人都没有作战的愿望。所以战败了。
English: When he arrived in Zhangzhou, he sent out messengers everywhere, carrying for him a palanquin as high as a man's waist, holding a fan to block the sun, as well as umbrellas and other utensils. Whether they were Turks or commoners, if anyone was ashamed to do these things, they would be severely beaten with a wooden stick. Whoever gave him more money and wealth would be exempted from labor service. Because of this, people hoped for chaos in the world. When Houjing came to Zhangzhou, no one had the desire to fight. So the war was lost.

古文：庚子，诏遣宁远将军王质帅众三千巡江防遏。
现代文：庚子，梁武帝下诏派遣宁远将军王质统率三千人马沿长江防卫和阻止侯景的进攻。
English: Geng Zi, Emperor Liang Wu issued an edict to dispatch Ningyuan General Wang Quotient to lead three thousand horses along the Yangtze River to defend and stop Hou Jing's attack.

古文：景攻历阳太守庄铁，丁未，铁以城降，因说景曰： 国家承平岁久，人不习战，闻大王举兵，内外震骇。
现代文：侯景向历阳太守庄铁的军队发动了进攻。
English: Hou Jing launched an attack on the army of Zhuang Tie, the governor of Liyang.

古文：宜乘此际速趋建康，可兵不血刃而成大功。
现代文：丁未庆铁率全城军民投降了侯景。并对侯景说： 国家连续安定许多年了，人们都已不习惯作战，听说大王您起兵，朝廷内外都感到很震惊和害怕。
English: Ding Weiqing led the whole city's army and people to surrender to Hou Jing. He said to Hou Jing: The country has been stable for many years. People are not used to fighting. When I heard that you, the king, had raised an army, both inside and outside the court were shocked and afraid.

古文：若使朝廷徐得为备，内外小安，遣羸兵千人直据采石，大王虽有精甲百万，不得济矣。 
现代文：应该乘机迅速逼近建康，那样，不经过流血打仗就能取得成功。如果让朝廷渐渐有所防备，朝廷内外也稍稍安定一些，只要派遗一千名瘦弱的士兵径直占据采石的话，大王虽然有百万精锐军队，也不会成功。 
English: They should take the opportunity to quickly approach Jiankang, so that they can achieve success without bloodshed. If the imperial court is gradually prepared, and both inside and outside the imperial court are slightly more stable, as long as a thousand weak soldiers are sent to occupy the quarry directly, the great king will not succeed, even though he has a million elite troops.

古文：景乃留仪同三司田英、郭骆守历阳，以铁为导，引兵临江。
现代文：侯景于是留下了仪同三司国英以及郭骆守卫历阳，让庄铁担任向导，带领军队来到了长江边上。
English: Hou Jing then left Yitong Sanji Guoying and Guo Luo to guard Wei Liyang, let Zhuang Tie serve as a guide, and led the army to the edge of the Yangtze River.

古文：江上镇戍相次启闻。
现代文：防卫长江的官员相继依次把侯景反叛的近事启奏给了梁武帝。
English: The Yangtze River defense officials successively informed Emperor Liangwu of the recent events of Houjing's rebellion.

古文：上问讨景之策于都官尚书羊侃，侃请 以二千人急据采石，令邵陵王袭取寿阳；使景进不得前，退失巢穴，乌合之众，自然瓦解。 
现代文：梁武帝向都官尚书羊侃寻问讨伐侯景的计策。羊侃则请求： 派二千人马快速占据采石，并命令邵陵王袭击、夺取寿阳，让侯景不能前进，退又失去巢穴。这些乌合之众，自然也就土崩瓦解了。 
English: Emperor Liangwu asked the magistrate Shangshu Yangkan for a strategy to fight Houjing. Yangkan requested: Send two thousand horses to quickly occupy the quarry, and order King Shao Ling to attack and capture Shouyang, so that Houjing could not advance, retreat and lose its nest. These ragtag people naturally collapsed.

古文：硃异曰： 景必无渡江之志。 
现代文：朱异却说： 侯景一定没有渡过长江的打算。 
English: Zhu Yi, however, said: Hou Jing must not have intended to cross the Yangtze River.

古文：遂寝其议。侃曰： 今兹败矣！ 
现代文：于是，没有采纳羊侃的建议，羊侃说： 现在梁朝就要败亡了。 
English: As a result, Yang Kan's suggestion was not adopted, and Yang Kan said: Now the Liang Dynasty is about to fall.

古文：戊申，以临贺王正德为平北将军、都督京师诸军事，屯丹杨郡。
现代文：戊申，梁武帝任命临贺王萧正德为平北将军、都督京师诸军事，把军队驻扎在丹杨郡。
English: Wushin, Emperor Liangwu appointed Lin He Wang Xiao Zhengde as the general of Pingbei and the governor of Beijing, and stationed the army in Danyang County.

古文：正德遣大船数十艘，诈称载荻，密以济景。
现代文：萧正德派遣了几十艘大船，欺骗别人说这些船是用来运芦苇的，而暗中却用来载侯景的军队过江。
English: Xiao Zhengde dispatched dozens of large ships, deceiving others that these ships were used to transport reeds, but they were secretly used to carry Houjing's army across the river.

古文：景将济，虑王质为梗，使谍视之。
现代文：侯景将要渡过江时，担心王质从中作梗，便派间谍观察监视他。
English: When Hou Jing was about to cross the river, he was worried that the royal hostage would interfere, so he sent spies to observe and monitor him.

古文：会临川大守陈昕启称： 采石急须重镇，王质水军轻弱，恐不能济。 
现代文：正好这时临川太守陈昕向梁武帝启奏说： 采石急需重兵把守，王质的水军力量薄弱，恐怕不能顶事。 
English: It was at this time that Linchuan's grand marshal, Chen Zhe, sent a message to Emperor Liangwu: "Quarrying is in urgent need of a heavy guard, the royal navy is weak, and I'm afraid we won't be able to hold out.

古文：上以昕为云旗将军，代质戍采石，征质知丹杨尹事。
现代文：梁武帝于是任命陈昕为云旗将军，代替王质守卫采石。征调王质到丹杨任丹杨尹。
English: Emperor Liangwu then appointed Chen Qi as the general of the cloud banner, replacing the royal guard guarding the quarry. The royal guard was transferred to Danyang to serve as Danyang Yin.

古文：昕，庆之之子也。
现代文：陈昕，是陈庆之的儿子。
English: Chen Yao is the son of Chen Qingzhu.

古文：质去采石，而昕犹未下渚。
现代文：王质离开了采石，而陈昕还没有去采石就任。
English: The royal hostage left the quarry, but Chen Xi has not yet gone to the quarry to take office.

古文：谍告景云： 质已退。 
现代文：间谍把这一情况告诉了侯景： 王质已经离开采石。 
English: The spy relayed the situation to Hou Jing: The hostage had left the quarry.

古文：景使折江东树枝为验，谍如言而返，景大喜曰： 吾事办矣！ 
现代文：侯景让间谍把长江东岸的树枝折断进行验证，间谍按照他的吩咐做了之后返回。侯景非常高兴地说： 我的事能成了！ 
English: Hou Jing asked the spy to break the branches on the east bank of the Yangtze River for verification. The spy did as he was told and then returned. Hou Jing said with great pleasure: My work can be done!

古文：己酉，自横江济于采石，有马数百匹，兵八千人。
现代文：己酉，侯景从横江渡过长江到达采石，一共有几百匹马和八千士兵。
English: In total, several hundred horses and eight thousand soldiers were used by Hou Jing to cross the Yangtze River from the Hengjiang River to the quarry.

古文：是夕，朝廷始命戒严。
现代文：这天夜里，朝廷才下令实行戒严。
English: Only that night did the imperial court order the imposition of martial law.

古文：景分兵袭姑孰，执淮南太守文成侯宁。
现代文：侯景分几路人马袭击姑孰城，抓住了淮南太守文侯萧宁。
English: Hou Jing sent several men and horses to attack Guye City and captured Xiaoning, the governor of Huainan Province.

古文：南津校尉江子一帅舟师千馀人，欲于下流邀景；其副董桃生，家在江北，与其徒先溃走。
现代文：南津校尉江子一统率千余水军，想在长江下流拦击侯景的军队。江子一的副将董桃生，家住在长江北面，他与手下人率先溃败逃走。
English: Nanjin Lieutenant Jiang Zi led more than a thousand sailors in an attempt to intercept Hou Jing's army in the lower reaches of the Yangtze River. Jiang Zi's second-in-command, Vice Admiral Dong Taosheng, whose family lived north of the Yangtze River, was the first to flee in defeat with his men.

古文：子一收馀众，步还建康。
现代文：江子一聚集了剩下的人马，徒步回到了建康。
English: As soon as Jiang Zi gathered the remaining men and horses, he returned to Jiankang on foot.

古文：子一，子四之兄也。
现代文：江子一是江子四的哥哥。
English: Jiang Zi I was the elder brother of Jiang Zi IV.

古文：太子见事急，戎服入见上，禀受方略，上曰： 此自汝事，何更问为！
现代文：太子见情况紧急，便身穿戎装进入皇宫见梁武帝，领受梁武帝的指示，梁武帝对他说： 这些事是你自己的事，又何必问我呢？
English: Seeing the urgency of the situation, the prince, dressed in military attire, entered the imperial palace to see Emperor Liangwu and receive instructions from him. Emperor Liangwu said to him, "These matters are your own business, so why do you need to ask me?"

古文：内外军悉以付汝。 
现代文：朝廷内外的军政事务，我全都交给你了。 
English: I have entrusted you with all military and political affairs inside and outside the court.

古文：太子乃停中书省，指授军事，物情惶骇，莫有应募者。
现代文：太子于是进驻中书省，指挥布置军事事务。人们情绪惶惶不安，没有人敢应募出征。
English: Therefore, the prince was stationed in the Ministry of Literature, directing the arrangement of military affairs. People were panicked and anxious, and no one dared to enlist in the army.

古文：朝廷犹不知临贺王正德之情，命正德屯硃雀门，宁国公大临屯新亭，太府卿韦黯屯六门，缮修宫城，为受敌之备。
现代文：朝廷还不知道临贺王萧正德已暗中投降了侯景这一情况，仍命令萧正德驻兵把守朱雀门，命宁国公萧大临驻守新亭，大府卿韦黯率兵驻守六个城门、修缮皇宫的城墙，为一旦遭受敌人进攻做好准备。
English: The imperial court did not yet know that Lin He's King Xiao Zhengde had secretly surrendered to Hou Jing, but still ordered Xiao Zhengde to station soldiers to guard the Suzak Gate, ordered Ning Guogong Xiao Dairin to guard the Xinting, and Da Fuqing Wei Qian led soldiers to guard six gates and repair the walls of the imperial palace to prepare for an enemy attack.

古文：大临，大器之弟也。
现代文：萧大临是萧大器的弟弟。
English: Xiao Dairin is the younger brother of Xiao Dachi.

古文：己酉，景至慈湖。
现代文：己酉，侯景的军队到达了慈湖。
English: At Ji'an, Hou Jing's army reached Cixi Lake.

古文：建康大骇，御街人更相劫掠，不复通行。
现代文：建康全城都非常惊恐，御街上人们互相抢夺虏掠，街道已不能通行。
English: Jiankang and the whole city were very frightened. People were robbing and looting each other on the main street. The streets were impassable.

古文：赦东、西冶、尚方钱署及建康系囚，以扬州刺史宣城王大器都督城内诸军事，以羊侃为军师将军副之，南浦侯推守东府，西丰公大春守石头，轻车长史谢禧、始兴太守元贞守白下，韦黯与右卫将军柳津等分守宫城诸门及朝堂。
现代文：朝廷敕免了东西冶、尚方钱署以及建康城拘押的囚犯。任命扬州刺史宣城王萧大器为都督城内诸军事，任命羊侃担任军师将军，辅助萧大器。命南浦侯萧推守卫东府，命西丰公萧大春守卫石头，命轻车长史谢禧、始兴太守元贞守卫白下，命韦黯与右卫将军柳津等人分别守卫宫城的各个城门以及朝廷的殿堂。
English: The imperial court pardoned the prisoners detained by the East and West Ye, the Shangfang Finance Department and Jiankang City. Yangzhou appointed Wang Xiao Daqi of Zhishi Xuancheng as the military governor of the city, and appointed Yang Kan as the general of the military division to assist Xiao Daqi. Nanpu Hou Xiao pushed to guard the East Palace, Xi Fenggong Xiao Dachun guarded the stone, Light Car Chief Shi Xie Xiyi, Shi Xing Taizhu Yuan Zhengu Wei Baixian, Wei Qian and Right Guard General Liu Jin guarded the palace gates and the palace hall respectively.

古文：推，秀之子；大春，大临之弟；津，仲礼之父也。
现代文：萧推是萧秀的儿子。萧大春是萧大临的弟弟，柳津是柳仲礼的父亲。
English: Xiao Du is the son of Xiao Xiu, Xiao Dachun is the younger brother of Xiao Da Lin, and Liu Jin is the father of Liu Zhongli.

古文：担诸寺库公藏钱，聚之德阳堂，以充军实。
现代文：梁武帝把各官署仓库里贮藏的钱财聚集起来，集中在德阳堂，用来补充军需。
English: Emperor Liangwu gathered the money and wealth stored in the warehouses of various government departments and concentrated them in Deyang Hall to supplement the military supply.

古文：庚戌，侯景至板桥，遣徐思玉来求见上，实欲观城中虚实。
现代文：庚戌，侯景的军队到达了板桥。他派遣徐思玉前来拜见梁武帝，实际上是想探听一下建康城里的虚实。
English: He sent Xu Siyu (徐思玉) to visit Emperor Liangwu (梁武帝) and actually wanted to find out the truth about Jiankang.

古文：上召问之。
现代文：梁武帝召见了他并问了他一些事。
English: Emperor Liangwu summoned him and asked him some questions.

古文：思玉诈称叛景请间陈事，上将屏左右，舍人高善宝曰： 思玉从贼中来，情伪难测，安可使独在殿上！ 
现代文：徐思玉假称他背叛了侯景，请求单独向梁武帝报告情况。梁武帝要屏退左右，舍人高善宝说； 徐思玉从叛贼那里来，真假难以推测，怎么可以让他单独崐留在殿堂之上！ 
English: Supposing that Xu Siyu betrayed Houjing, he asked to report the situation to Emperor Liangwu alone. Emperor Liangwu wanted to retreat to the right and left, but Gao Shanbao said; Xu Siyu came from the traitor, it is difficult to speculate whether it is true or not, how can he be left alone in the hall of fame!

古文：硃异侍坐，曰： 徐思玉岂刺客邪！ 
现代文：朱异正坐在梁武帝身边侍奉，他说： 徐思玉难道是刺客吗！ 
English: Zhu Yi, who was sitting at Emperor Liangwu's side, said: "Is Xu Siyu really an assassin?

古文：思玉出景启，言 异等弄权，乞带甲入朝，除君侧之恶。 
现代文：徐思玉拿出了侯景的启奏，上面写道： 朱异等人玩弄权术，我请求带兵入朝，除掉国君身边的坏人。 
English: Xu Siyu took out the prelude of Houjing, which read: Zhu Yiyi and others are playing power games, I ask you to bring soldiers to the North and get rid of the bad guys around the king.

古文：异甚惭悚。
现代文：朱异感到非常惭愧和恐惧。
English: Zhu Ying felt very ashamed and afraid.

古文：景又请遣了事舍人出相领解，上遣中书舍人贺季、主书郭宝亮随思玉劳景于板桥。
现代文：侯景又请求梁武帝派一名懂得事理的舍人出来总录侯景要说的事并且分辨是非。梁武帝于是派中书舍人贺季、主书郭宝亮跟随徐思玉一起到板桥来慰劳侯景，侯景面向北方承接了诏书。
English: Houjing also asked Emperor Liangwu to send a scholar who understood the facts to record what Houjing had to say and to distinguish right from wrong. Emperor Liangwu then sent the scholar He Ji and the chief scribe Guo Baoliang to follow Xu Siyu to Panqiao to comfort the laborer Houjing. Houjing received the edict facing north.

古文：景北面受敕，季曰： 今者之举何名？ 景曰： 欲为帝也！ 
现代文：贺季问： 你现在的举动到底要干什么？ 侯景回答说： 是想称皇帝。 
English: He Ji asked: What exactly do you want to do with your current move? Hou Jing replied: I want to be called emperor.

古文：王伟进曰： 硃异等乱政，除奸臣耳。 
现代文：王伟上前说道： 朱异等人搞乱了国家政务，我们是要除掉奸臣的。 
English: Wang Wei stepped forward and said: Zhu Rong and others have disrupted the country's political affairs, we want to get rid of the traitors.

古文：景既出恶言，遂留季，独遣宝亮还宫。
现代文：侯景已经说出了他的罪恶目的，于是便拘留了贺季，只打发郭宝亮返回皇宫。
English: Hou Jing had already revealed his evil purpose, so he detained He Ji and only sent Guo Baoliang back to the palace.

古文：百姓闻景至，竞入城，公私混乱，无复次第，羊侃区分防拟，皆以宗室间之。
现代文：百姓听说侯景的军队来到，争相逃入城里。官员与百姓混杂在一起，不再有秩序。羊侃布置防守计划，每处都安排皇室成员来监督。
English: When the common people heard that Hou Jing's army had arrived, they scrambled to escape into the city. Officials and common people mingled together, and there was no longer any order. Yang Kan laid out a defensive plan, and arranged members of the royal family to supervise everything.

古文：军人争入武库，自取器甲，所司不能禁，侃命斩数人，方止。
现代文：军队的官兵争相进入武器库，自己拿兵器和盔甲，掌管武器库的人不能禁止，羊侃下令斩杀了几个人，才制止了这种混乱。
English: The officers and soldiers of the army scrambled to enter the weapons depot, taking weapons and armor themselves. The person in charge of the weapons depot could not forbid it. Yang Kan ordered the killing of several people to stop this chaos.

古文：是时，梁兴四十七年，境内无事，公卿在位及闾里士大夫罕见兵甲，贼至猝迫，公私骇震。
现代文：这年，是梁朝建立后的第四十七年，国内一直平安无事，在职的公卿以及闾里士大夫都很少见到兵器和铠甲。现在，叛贼突然来到，形势紧迫，官员与百姓都很震惊。
English: This year, the forty-seventh year after the establishment of the Liang Dynasty, the country has always been safe and sound, and the incumbent court nobles and Dr. Zhili have rarely seen weapons and armor. Now, the traitors have suddenly arrived, the situation is urgent, and the officials and the people are shocked.

古文：宿将已尽，后进少年并出在外，军旅指㧑，一决于侃，侃胆力俱壮，太子深仗之。
现代文：朝廷中的老将已经没有了，后来晋升的青年将领都正在外面征战或防守边境，军队的指挥权，完全由羊侃一人决定。羊侃有胆有谋，太子深深地仰仗于他。
English: The veterans of the imperial court were no longer there, and the young generals who were later promoted were all fighting outside or defending the border. The command of the army was completely determined by Yang Kan alone. Yang Kan was bold and resourceful, and the prince deeply relied on him.

古文：辛亥，景至硃雀桁南，太子以临贺王正德守宣阳门，东宫学士新野庾信守硃雀门，帅宫中文武三千馀人营桁北。
现代文：辛亥，侯景来到朱雀门浮桥的南面，太子命临贺王萧正德把守宣阳门，命东宫学士新野人庾信把守朱雀门，统率皇宫中的三千多名文武官员在浮桥北面安营扎寨。
English: In Xinhai, Hou Jing came to the south side of the Suzaku Gate Floating Bridge. The Prince's life was entrusted to He Wang Xiao Zhengde to guard the Xuanyang Gate, and the East Palace's life was entrusted to the scholar and new wild man Yan Xin to guard the Suzaku Gate. He led more than three thousand literary and military officials in the imperial palace to camp on the north side of the floating bridge.

古文：太子命信开大桁以挫其锋，正德曰： 百姓见开桁，必大惊骇。可且安物情。 
现代文：太子命令庾信断开浮桥以挫折侯景部队的锋芒。萧正德说： 百姓看到断开浮桥，一定会非常惊恐，应该暂且先安抚百姓的情绪。 
English: The prince ordered Yuxin to cut off the floating bridge to frustrate the attacks of Houjing's troops. Xiao Zhengde said: When the people see the floating bridge cut off, they will certainly be very frightened. The mood of the people should be temporarily calmed.

古文：太子从之。
现代文：太子采纳了萧正德的意见。
English: The prince obeyed.

古文：俄而景至，信帅众开桁，始除一舶。
现代文：一会儿，侯景的部队来到。
English: A moment later, Hou Jing's troops arrived.

古文：见景军皆著铁面，退隐于门。信方食甘蔗，有飞箭中门柱，信手甘蔗，应弦而落，遂弃军走。
现代文：庾信率领人马断开了浮桥，刚除掉了一艘大船，看到侯景的士兵都戴着铁面具，于是便后退，隐藏到城门楼上。庚信正在吃甘蔗，一枝箭飞来射中了城门柱子。庚信手中的甘蔗随着弓弦的响声坠落到了地上。于是，他抛弃了军队逃走了。
English: Yuxin led the men and horses to break the pontoon bridge. He had just removed a large ship. When he saw that Houjing's soldiers were wearing iron masks, he retreated and hid on the gate tower. Hengxin was eating sugar cane, and an arrow flew and hit the gate pillar. The cane in Hengxin's hand fell to the ground with the sound of the bowstring. So he abandoned the army and fled.

古文：南塘游军沈子睦，临贺王正德之党也，复闭桁渡景。
现代文：王质的军队到了领军府，遭遇到了侯景的军队，王质的军队还没有摆开阵势就逃走了。萧正德率领他的人马在张侯桥迎接侯景。
English: The hostage-taker's army arrived at the leader's palace and encountered Hou Jing's army. The hostage-taker's army had not yet set up their positions when they fled. Xiao Zhengde led his men to meet Hou Jing at Zhang Hou Bridge.

古文：太子使王质将精兵三千援信，至领军府，遇贼，未陈而走。
现代文：他们在马上相互作揖。进入宣阳门后，萧正德面向后宫叩拜，哽咽流泪，跟随侯景一起渡过秦淮河。
English: After entering the Xuanyang Gate, Xiao Zhengde bowed to the harem, choked back tears, and crossed the Qinhuai River with Hou Jing.

古文：正德帅众于张侯桥迎景，马上交揖，既入宣阳门，望阙而拜，歔欷流涕，随景渡淮。景军皆著青袍，正德军并著绛袍，碧里，既与景合，悉反其袍。
现代文：侯景部队的士兵都穿青色战袍，萧正德部队的士兵都穿红色战袍，战袍里子是青绿色的。与侯景部队会合后，萧正德就命令他的士兵全部将战袍衬里朝外反过来穿。侯景乘胜进军来到城楼下面，城里的人十分恐惧。
English: The soldiers of Hou Jing's army all wore blue uniforms, while the soldiers of Xiao Zhengde's army all wore red uniforms, and the inside of the uniforms was green and blue. After meeting with Hou Jing's army, Xiao Zhengde ordered all of his soldiers to wear the lining of their uniforms inside out. Hou Jing took the victory and marched to the bottom of the city tower. The people in the city were very afraid.

古文：景乘胜至阙下，城中忷惧，羊侃诈称得射书云： 邵陵王、西昌侯援兵已至近路。 
现代文：羊侃谎称得到了一封射进来的书信，书信上说： 邵陵王和西昌侯的援兵已经到达附近 。
English: Yang Kan falsely claimed to have received an incoming letter, which said: The reinforcements of Shao Ling Wang and Xichang Hou have arrived nearby.

古文：众乃少安。
现代文：大家这才稍稍安定下来。
English: The talent pool is slightly smaller.

古文：西丰公大春弃石头，奔京口；谢禧、元贞弃白下走；津主彭文粲等以石头城降景，景遣其仪同三司于子悦守之。
现代文：西丰公萧大春放弃了石头，逃奔京口；谢禧、元贞等人放弃了白下逃走；津主彭文粲等人率石头城军民投降了侯景，侯景便派遣他的仪同三司于子悦来守卫石头城。
English: Xifeng Gong Xiao Dachun abandoned the stone and fled to the capital; Xie Xiyi, Yuan Zhen and others abandoned the white and fled; Tsu lord Peng Wenyi and others led the stone city's army and people to surrender to Houjing, and Houjing then sent his courtier and the three officers Yu Ziyue to guard the stone city.

古文：壬子，景列兵绕台城，幡旗皆黑，射启于城中曰： 硃异等蔑弄朝权，轻作威福，臣为所陷，欲加屠戮。
现代文：壬子，侯景让士兵列队围绕在台城周围，他的战旗都是黑色。他叫人向城内射去了一封书信，信上说： 朱异等人专权，作威作福，我被他所陷害，想杀掉我。
English: According to the legend, Hou Jing ordered his soldiers to form a line around Taicheng, and his battle flags were all black. He ordered a letter to be fired into the city. The letter said, "Ju Yiyi and others have absolute power, they are arrogant, and they want to kill me. I have been framed by him.

古文：陛下若诛硃异等，臣则敛辔北归。 
现代文：如果陛下您杀掉朱异等人，那么我就收兵回北方。 
English: If you, Your Majesty, kill Zhu Yixing and the others, then I will withdraw my troops back to the north.

古文：上问太子： 有是乎？ 
现代文：梁武帝问太子： 有这样的事吗？ 
English: Liang Wudi asked the crown prince: Is there such a thing?

古文：对曰： 然。 
现代文：太子回答说： 有 。
English: Zi Lu said: Yes.

古文：上将诛之。
现代文：梁武帝于是要斩杀朱异。
English: Emperor Liangwu then wanted to kill Zhu Rong.

古文：太子曰： 贼以异等为名耳；今日杀之，无救于急，适足贻笑将来，俟贼平，诛之未晚。 
现代文：太子对梁武帝说： 侯景这个叛贼只是以杀朱异等人为借口罢了，今天您即使杀掉了朱异，对当前的紧急情况也无济于事，只会被后人耻笑，等到平定侯景之后再来杀掉他也不晚！ 
English: The prince said to Emperor Liangwu, "Houjing, the traitor, is just using the killing of Zhu Rong and others as an excuse. Even if you kill Zhu Rong today, it will not help with the current emergency, but will only be ridiculed by future generations. It is not too late to kill him after Houjing is pacified!"

古文：上乃止。
现代文：梁武帝于是才没有杀掉朱异。
English: The Emperor finally stopped.

古文：景绕城既匝，百道俱攻，鸣鼓吹脣，喧声震地，纵火烧大司马、东、西华诸门。
现代文：侯景将城包围起来后，各处一齐攻城。他们敲着战鼓，吹起了口哨，喧嚣的声音震撼了大地。侯景叫人放火烧大司马、以及东华、西华等门。
English: After Hou Jing encircled the city, they besieged the city everywhere. They beat war drums and whistled, and the tumultuous sound shook the earth. Hou Jing ordered people to set fire to Dazhima, as well as Donghua, Xihua and other gates.

古文：羊侃使凿门上为窍，下水沃火；太子自捧银鞍，往赏战士；直阁将军硃思帅战士数人逾城出外洒水，久之方灭。
现代文：羊侃派人在门上凿出一些洞，用水灌入其中去浇灭火焰。太子亲自捧着银制的马鞍，前去犒赏那些勇敢杀敌的战士。直将军朱思率领几名士兵翻过宫墙到外面去洒水。过了很久火才被浇灭。
English: Yang Kan sent people to cut some holes in the door and pour water into them to extinguish the flames. The prince himself held a silver saddle and went to reward the soldiers who bravely killed the enemy. General Zhu Si led several soldiers over the palace wall to sprinkle water outside. It took a long time for the fire to be extinguished.

古文：贼又以长柯斧斫东掖门，门将开，羊侃凿扇为孔，以槊刺杀二人，斫者乃退。
现代文：侯景又让人用长柄斧子吹东掖门，门快要被砍开了，羊侃叫人在门扇上凿出小孔，用槊刺杀了两名敌人，砍门的士兵才退了回去。
English: Hou Jing also had someone blow open the east gate with a long-handled axe. The door was about to be cut open. Yang Kan ordered someone to cut a small hole in the door, stabbed two enemies with a pickaxe, and the soldier who cut the door retreated.

古文：景据公车府，正德据左卫府，景党宋子仙据东宫，范桃棒据同泰寺。
现代文：侯景占领了公车府，萧正德占领了左卫府，侯景的党羽宋子仙占领了东宫，范桃棒占领了同泰寺。
English: Hou Jing occupied the Bus Headquarters, Xiao Zhengde occupied the Left Guard Headquarters, Hou Jing's henchman Song Zixian occupied the East Palace, Fan Taobao occupied the Dongtai Temple.

古文：景取东宫妓数百，分给军士。
现代文：侯景把东宫里的几百名歌女分给了他手下的官兵。
English: Hou Jing divided the hundreds of female singers in the East Palace among his officers and soldiers.

古文：东宫近城，景众登其墙射城内。
现代文：东宫靠近台城，侯景的士兵登上了东宫城墙向台城内射箭。
English: Donggong was close to Taicheng. Houjing's soldiers climbed the wall of Donggong and fired arrows into Taicheng.

古文：至夜，景于东宫置酒奏乐，太子遣人焚之，台殿及所聚图书皆尽。
现代文：到了夜晚，侯景在东宫摆设酒宴，奏起音乐。太子叫人用火烧东宫，台殿以及殿内收藏的图书全部化为灰烬。
English: In the evening, Hou Jing held a wine banquet in the East Palace and played music. The prince ordered people to burn the East Palace, the throne hall and the books in the hall to ashes.

古文：景又烧乘黄厩、士林馆、太府寺。
现代文：侯景又派人去焚烧乘黄厩、士林馆以及太府寺。
English: Houjing also sent people to burn the Yellow Stables, the Shilin Hall and the Taifu Temple.

古文：癸丑，景作木驴数百攻城，城上投石碎之。
现代文：癸丑，侯景制作了几百个木驴用来攻打皇城，城上的人向木驴投掷石块它们击碎了。
English: Ugly, Hou Jing made hundreds of wooden donkeys to attack the imperial city, and the people on the city threw stones at the donkeys and broke them.

古文：景更作尖项木驴，石不能破。羊侃使作雉尾炬，灌以膏蜡，丛掷焚之，俄尽。
现代文：侯景又改制了一种尖颈的木驴，石头无法将它砸破，羊侃让人制作了一种象雉尾形状的火炬，点上火一起投向木驴，很快木驴就全部被烧掉了。
English: Houjing also modified a wooden donkey with a sharp neck, and the stone could not break it. Yang Kan had someone make a torch in the shape of an appendix, light it on fire and throw it at the donkey, and soon all the donkeys were burned.

古文：景又作登城楼，高十馀丈，欲临射城中。
现代文：侯景又制造了一种攀登城墙的高楼战车，高十多丈，想用它居高临下向城里射箭。
English: Hou Jing also made a kind of high-rise chariot climbing the city wall, more than ten meters high, and wanted to use it to shoot arrows into the city.

古文：侃曰： 车高堑虚，彼来必倒，可卧而观之。 
现代文：羊侃说： 战车很高，地上的壕沟土很虚，战车一来一定会倒下，我们可以埋伏起来观看它。 
English: Yang Kan said, "The carriage is too high and the trench is weak. When it comes, it will inevitably topple over. We can lie here and watch.

古文：及车动，果倒。
现代文：等到战车一动，果然倒下了。
English: When the chariot moved, it fell down.

古文：景攻既不克，士卒死伤多，乃筑长围以绝内外，又启求诛硃异等。
现代文：侯景既然攻城没有成功，死亡、受伤的士兵又很多，于是便修筑起一条长长的围子来隔断皇城内外，同时又向梁武帝启奏请求杀掉朱异等人。
English: Since the siege of the city was not successful, and there were many dead and injured soldiers, Hou Jing built a long fence to separate the inside and outside of the imperial city, and at the same time asked Emperor Liangwu to kill Zhu Yi and others.

古文：城中亦射赏格出外曰： 有能送景首者，授以景位，并钱一亿万，布绢各万匹。 
现代文：皇城里也向城外射出赏格，上面写道： 有能把侯景的首级送来的，就把侯景的爵位授与他，并赏赐一亿万钱，一万匹布，一万匹绢。 
English: The imperial city also sent rewards to the outside of the city, which read: If anyone can send the head of Houjing, he will be awarded the peerage of Houjing, and will be rewarded with one hundred million yuan, ten thousand pieces of cloth, and ten thousand horses.

古文：硃异、张绾议出兵击之，上问羊侃，侃曰： 不可。
现代文：朱异、张绾商议要出兵攻打侯景，征询羊侃的意见，羊侃说： 不可以。
English: Zhu Yi and Zhang Ye discussed sending troops to attack Houjing, and asked Yang Kan for his opinion. Yang Kan said, "No."

古文：今出人若少，不足破贼，徒挫锐气；若多，则一旦失利，门隘桥小，必大致失亡。 
现代文：现在，如果派出少量人马，不能攻破贼兵，只会白白挫伤自己的锐气；如果派出的人马很多，一旦失利，城门狭窄、浮桥又小，一定会导致重大伤亡！ 
English: Now, if you send a small number of men and horses and fail to break through the bandits, you will only frustrate your own spirit in vain; if you send a lot of men and horses, once you lose, the gate is narrow and the pontoon bridge is small, it will definitely lead to heavy casualties!

古文：异等不从，使千馀人出战。锋未及交，退走，争桥赴水死者大半。
现代文：朱异等人不听从羊侃的劝告，派遣一千多人出去与侯景的军队作战；还没交锋，就退了回来，在争着过桥时掉进水中淹死的人有半数以上。
English: Zhu Yiyi and others did not listen to Yang Kan's advice and sent more than a thousand people out to fight against Hou Jing's army; before the battle, they retreated back, and more than half of them fell into the water and drowned while fighting to cross the bridge.

古文：侃子鷟，为景所获，执至城下，以示侃，侃曰： 我倾宗报主，犹恨不足，岂计一子，幸早杀之！ 
现代文：羊侃的儿子羊被侯景俘获，侯景把他带到了城墙下面给羊侃看。羊侃说： 我羊氏豁出整个宗族报效君主，尚不够，怎么会在乎一个儿子，希望你早点杀掉他！ 
English: Yang Kan's son, Yang, was captured by Hou Jing. Hou Jing took him to the bottom of the city wall to show him to Yang Kan. Yang Kan said, "It's not enough for me to sacrifice my entire clan to serve the emperor. How could I care about one son? I hope you kill him as soon as possible!"

古文：数日，复持来，侃谓鷟曰： 久以汝为死矣，犹在邪！ 
现代文：几天以后，侯景又把羊侃的儿子押来。羊侃对羊说： 我还以为你早就死了，怎么还活着呢！ 
English: A few days later, Hou Jing brought Sheep Kan's son. Sheep Kan said to Sheep: "I thought you had died long ago, how are you still alive!"

古文：引弓射之。
现代文：于是使拉弓射羊。
English: So he made a bow to shoot the sheep.

古文：景以其忠义，亦不之杀。
现代文：侯景因羊侃是个忠义崐之人，也没有杀掉羊。
English: Hou Jing was a loyal person, and he did not kill the sheep.

古文：庄铁虑景不克，托称迎母，与左右数十人趣历阳。
现代文：庄铁担收侯景不能攻克皇城，便推托说要去迎接母亲，同手下几下人一起奔向历阳。
English: Zhuang Tie could not conquer the imperial city, so he said that he was going to meet his mother and ran to Liyang with a few of his subordinates.

古文：先遣书绐田英、郭骆曰： 侯王已为台军所杀，国家使我归镇。 
现代文：他先给田英、郭骆发了封信说： 侯王已经被官兵杀死，朝廷派我回来镇守历阳。 
English: He first sent a letter to Tian Ying and Guo Luo, saying: "Hou Wang has been killed by officers and soldiers. The imperial court has sent me back to Liyang to guard the town.

古文：骆等大惧，弃城奔寿阳，铁入城，不敢守，奉其母奔寻阳。
现代文：郭骆等人看到信后大惊失色，丢弃了历阳城逃奔寿阳。庄铁进入历阳城后，不敢据守，便侍奉他的母亲一起逃往寻阳。
English: Guo Luo and others were shocked when they saw the letter. They abandoned Liyang City and fled to Shouyang. After Zhuo Tie entered Liyang City, he did not dare to defend it, so he served his mother and fled to Shouyang.

古文：十一月，戊午朔，刑白马，祀蚩尤于太极殿前。
现代文：十一月，戊午朔，梁武帝让人杀死一匹白马，在太极殿前祭礼战神尤。
English: In November, Wu Wu Shuo, Emperor Liangwu had a white horse killed, especially in front of the Taiji Hall.

古文：临贺王正德即帝位于仪贤堂，下诏称： 普通已来，奸邪乱政，上久不豫，社稷将危。
现代文：临贺王萧正德在仪贤堂即皇帝位，下诏： 从普通年间以来，奸佞小人扰乱了朝政，皇上长期患病，国家危难将至。
English: Lin He Wang Xiao Zhengde in the hall of honor, that is, the emperor's throne, issued the following edict: Since the ordinary years, the villain has disrupted the imperial government, the emperor has been ill for a long time, and the country is in danger.

古文：河南王景，释位来朝，猥用朕躬，绍兹宝位，可大赦，改元正平。 
现代文：河南王侯景，离开自己的封邑来到朝廷，扶持我继承了皇位，今实行大赦，改年号为 正平 。 
English: Prince Jing of Henan, who left his fief to come to the imperial court and supported me to inherit the throne, has now been granted amnesty and changed his era name to Zhengping.

古文：立其世子见理为皇太子，以景为丞相，妻以女，并出家之宝货悉助军费。
现代文：萧正德立自己的长子萧见理为皇太子，任命侯景为丞相，把自己的女儿嫁给了侯景，并将家中财宝全部拿出来，资助军需。
English: Xiao Zhengde appointed his eldest son Xiao Simli as the crown prince, appointed Hou Jing as the prime minister, married his daughter to Hou Jing, and took all the family treasures to finance the military.

古文：于是景营于阙前，分其兵二千人攻东府；南浦侯推拒之，三日，不克。
现代文：于是，侯景在皇城前安营扎寨，分兵二千攻打东府；南浦侯萧推带兵抵抗侯景，侯景的部队进攻了三天，没有攻克东府。
English: As a result, Hou Jing set up camp in front of the imperial city, and a detachment of two thousand soldiers attacked Dongfu; Nanpu Hou Xiao led the troops to resist Hou Jing, and Hou Jing's troops attacked for three days, but did not conquer Dongfu.

古文：景自往攻之，矢石雨下，宣城王防閤许伯众潜引景众登城。
现代文：侯景便亲自带兵攻打东府，箭和石块象雨点一般地落下，宣城王防许伯众暗中引导侯景的军队登上了城墙。
English: Hou Jing then personally led the troops to attack Dongfu, arrows and stones fell like raindrops, and Xu Bo, the king of Xuancheng, secretly led Hou Jing's army onto the city wall.

古文：辛酉，克之；杀南浦侯推及城中战士三千人，载其尸聚于杜姥宅，遥语城中人曰： 若不早降，正当如此！ 
现代文：辛酉，攻克了东府。侯景杀死了南浦侯萧推以及守城战士三千人，把他们的尸体用车拉到杜姥宅堆积起来，从远处向城里的人喊道： 如果不早点投降，便是这样下场！ 
English: Hsin-tao conquered Dongfu. Hou Jing killed Nampo's warlord, Xiao Du, as well as 3,000 soldiers defending the city. He dragged their bodies by car to Du Bao's house, piled them up, and shouted to the people in the city from a distance: "If you don't surrender soon, this is what will happen!"

古文：景声言上已晏驾，虽城中亦以为然。
现代文：侯景声称梁武帝已经去世，就连城里的人也以为侯景的话是真的。
English: Hou Jing claimed that Emperor Liang Wu had died, and even the people in the city thought that Hou Jing's words were true.

古文：壬戌，太子请上巡城，上幸大司马门，城上闻跸声，皆鼓噪流涕，众心粗安。
现代文：壬戌，太子请梁武帝巡视全城，梁武帝巡幸到大司马门时，城上的守军听到皇帝来到，都喧噪起来，流下了眼泪。
English: After all, the prince asked Emperor Liangwu to inspect the whole city. When Emperor Liangwu's inspection came to Dashima Gate, the defenders of the city heard the emperor coming, and they all made noise and shed tears.

古文：江子一之败还也，上责之。
现代文：军心这才稍稍安定下来。江子一战败回到了朝廷，梁武帝责怪他。
English: It was only then that the military spirit settled down a little. After losing the first battle, Jiang Zi returned to the imperial court, where Emperor Liang Wu blamed him.

古文：子一拜谢曰： 臣以身许国，常恐不得其死；今所部皆弃臣去，臣以一夫安能击贼！
现代文：江子一向梁武帝叩拜谢罪说： 我以身许国，常担心不能为国尽忠而死，现在，我的下属都背弃我离去，我一个人怎么能迎战侯景！
English: Jiang Zi always bowed to Emperor Liang Wudi and said, "I am a loyal subject of the state, and I often worry that I cannot be loyal to the state and die. Now, my subordinates have all abandoned me and left. How can I face Houjing alone!

古文：若贼遂能至此，臣誓当碎身以赎前罪，不死阙前，当死阙后。 
现代文：如果侯景竟能攻打到这儿来的话，我发誓会粉身碎骨以赎前罪，我不死在皇宫前面，也会死在皇宫后面。 
English: If Hou Jing is able to attack here, I swear that I will shatter my bones to atone for my previous sins. I will not die in front of the palace, but I will die behind the palace.

古文：乙亥，子一启太子，与弟尚书左丞子四、东宫主帅子五帅所领百馀人开承明门出战。
现代文：乙亥，江了一向太子启奏，要求与他的弟弟尚书左丞江子四、东宫主帅江子五一起率领一百多人打开承明门出战贼兵。
English: Yihai, Jiang has always been the prince's initiation, asked his brother, Shang Shuzhong, Jiang Zi IV, and the East Palace commander, Jiang Zi V, to lead more than a hundred people to open the Chengming Gate and go out to fight the bandits.

古文：子一直抵贼营，贼伏兵不动。
现代文：江子一带领人马一直抵达到侯景的军营，贼兵按兵不动。
English: Jiang Zi led his men all the way to the military camp of Houjing, and the soldiers did not move.

古文：子一呼曰： 贼辈何不速出！ 
现代文：江子一高呼： 你们这些叛贼为什么不快些出来应战！ 
English: Jiang Zi shouted: Why don't you traitors come out to fight!

古文：久之，贼骑出，夹攻之。
现代文：过了很久，侯景的骑兵出来了，从两面夹击江子一。
English: After a long time, Hou Jing's cavalry came out and clamped down on Jiang Zi from both sides.

古文：子一径前，引槊刺贼；从者莫敢继，贼解其肩而死。
现代文：江子一径直向前冲，挥槊杀敌；随同江子一一起来的人不敢随他继续向前冲，敌人砍下了江子一的肩膀把他杀死了。
English: Jiang Zi rushed straight forward and killed the enemy with a sword. The people who came with Jiang Zi did not dare to continue to rush forward with him. The enemy cut off Jiang Zi's shoulder and killed him.

古文：子四、子五相谓曰： 与兄俱出，何面独旋！ 
现代文：江子四、江子五相互说道： 我们和哥哥一起出来，有什么脸面独自回去呢？ 
English: Jiang Zi IV and Jiang Zi V said to each other, "We came out with our brother, how can we go back alone?"

古文：皆免胄赴贼。
现代文：于是，他们俩都脱下甲胄冲向敌人。
English: So they both stripped off their armor and charged at the enemy.

古文：子四中槊，洞胸而死；子五伤脰，还至堑，一恸而绝。
现代文：江子四被敌人的长矛穿透了胸膛而死。江子五被刺伤了颈项，回到战壕时，大哭一场也死去了。
English: Jiang Zi IV was pierced through the chest by the enemy's spear and died. Jiang Zi V was stabbed in the neck, and when he returned to the trench, he cried and died.

古文：景初至建康，谓朝夕可拔，号令严整，士卒不敢侵暴。
现代文：侯景刚到建康时，以为很快就能攻克建康，所以当初他的军队号令严格，仪容整齐，士兵们不敢侵扰、陵暴百姓。
English: When Hou Jing first arrived in Jiankang, he thought that he would soon be able to conquer Jiankang, so at first his army had strict orders and neat appearance, and the soldiers did not dare to disturb and brutalize the people.

古文：及屡攻不克，人心离沮。
现代文：等到多次攻打建康城都没有攻克时，人心开始离散、沮丧。
English: When Jiankang City was repeatedly attacked but not conquered, the people's hearts began to disperse and become depressed.

古文：景恐援兵四集，一旦溃去；又食石头常平诸仓既尽，军中乏食；乃纵士卒掠夺民米及金帛子女。
现代文：侯景担心救援建康的军队从四面八方汇集到这里，迟早会有溃退的一天。另外，由于石头城备用粮仓的粮食已经吃完了，军队缺乏食物。于是，侯景便纵容他的士兵去掠夺百姓的米粮以及金银、丝织品和百姓的儿女。
English: Hou Jing was worried that the army of rescue and Jiankang had gathered here from all directions, and sooner or later there would be a day of retreat. In addition, since the grain in the reserve granary of Stone Town had been eaten, the army lacked food. Therefore, Hou Jing indulged his soldiers to plunder the people's rice, as well as gold, silver, silk and the people's children.

古文：是后米一升直七八万钱，人相食，饿死者什五六。
现代文：从这以后，大米的价格一升涨到七八万钱，以致造成人吃人的情况，被饿死的人达到十分之五六。
English: Since then, the price of rice has skyrocketed to as much as 780,000 yuan, leading to a situation of man-eating-man, with 56 out of every 10 people starving to death.

古文：乙丑，景于城东、西起土山，驱迫士民，不限贵贱，乱加殴捶，疲羸者因杀以填山，号哭动地。
现代文：太子、宣城王以下的人都亲自背土，手握簸箕与铁锹挖土和装土，在土山上筑起了几层芙蓉高楼。楼有四丈高，用彩帛和毳布装饰起来。
English: The crown prince, the king of Xuancheng, and their subordinates dug the soil themselves, dug and packed the soil with picks and shovels, and built several-story hibiscus high-rises on the mounds of soil. The buildings are four stories high and are decorated with colored felt and felt cloth.

古文：民不敢窜匿，并出从之，旬日间，众至数万。城中亦筑土山以应之。
现代文：朝廷又招募了二千名敢于拼死战斗的士兵，给他们穿上厚厚的战袍和铠甲，称之为 僧腾客 。
English: The imperial court recruited another two thousand soldiers who dared to fight to the death, dressed them in thick battle robes and armor, and called them "Monk Tenka."

古文：太子、宣城王已下，皆亲负土，执畚锸，于山上起芙蓉层楼，高四丈，饰以锦罽，募敢死士二千人，厚衣袍铠，谓之 僧腾客 ，分配二山，昼夜交战不息。
现代文：朝廷把这些战士分配在东土山和西土山上，他们日夜不停地与侯景的军队交战。这时，赶上大雨滂沱，城内的土山崩溃了，贼兵趁此机会，从高处往城内垂吊士兵。
English: The imperial court assigned these soldiers to the East and West Dushan Mountains, and they fought against Hou Jing's army day and night. At this time, the city's Dushan Mountains collapsed in the heavy rain, and the bandits took advantage of this opportunity to hang soldiers from a height into the city.

古文：会大雨，城内土山崩；贼乘之，垂入，苦战不能禁。
现代文：朝廷的士兵与贼兵浴血奋战，但也没有能拦住敌人。
English: The soldiers of the imperial court fought bloody battles with the robber soldiers, but they were unable to stop the enemy.

古文：羊侃令多掷火，为火城以断其路，徐于内筑城，贼不能进。
现代文：羊侃命令部队多多投掷火把，形成一道火墙以切断贼兵的来路，接着在城内筑起城墙，侯景的军队无法攻进来。
English: Yang Kan ordered the troops to throw more and more torches to form a wall of fire to cut off the path of the thieves, and then built a wall inside the city, so that the army of Hou Jing could not break in.

古文：景募人奴降者，悉免为良；得硃异奴，以为仪同三司，异家资产悉与之。
现代文：侯景招募那些身为奴仆而投降了他的人，免除了他们的奴仆身份，让他们成为平民。侯景得以朱异的奴仆后任命他为仪同三司，并把朱异家的资产都赏赐给了他。
English: Hou Jing recruited those who surrendered to him as slaves, exempted them from the status of slaves, and let them become civilians. Hou Jing was able to appoint Zhu Yixing's slave as the third secretary, and gave him all the assets of the Zhu Yixing family.

古文：奴乘良马，衣锦袍，于城下仰诟异曰： 汝五十年仕宦，方得中领军；我始事侯王，已为仪同矣！ 
现代文：这个奴仆骑着好马，穿着锦袍，在载墙下仰头骂朱异： 你做了五十年的官，才只作到中领军，我刚投降侯王，就已经担任仪同了。 
English: This servant rode a good horse, wore a brocade robe, and scolded Zhu Yiyi under the load-bearing wall: You have been an official for fifty years, only to be the leader of the army. I have just surrendered to the lord, and have already served as a gitong.

古文：于是三日之中，群奴出就景者以千数，景皆厚抚以配军，人人感恩，为之致死。
现代文：这样一来，三天之内，数以千计的奴仆都出城投奔了侯景。侯景都给予他们丰厚的赏赐，并把他们分配在自己的军队中。这些奴仆人人感激侯景的大恩，愿意为他拼死效力。
English: As a result, within three days, thousands of slaves left the city to join Hou Jing. Hou Jing gave them rich rewards and assigned them to his army. These slaves were all grateful for Hou Jing's great favor and were willing to work hard for him.

古文：荆州刺史湘东王绎闻景围台城，丙寅，戒严，移檄所督湘州刺史河东王誉、雍州刺史岳阳王詧、江州刺史当阳公大心、郢州刺史南平王恪等，发兵入援。
现代文：荆州刺史湘东王萧绎听说侯景包围了台城，丙寅，实行了戒严。他写了檄文派人送给他所管辖的湘州刺史河东王萧誉、雍州刺史岳阳王萧、江州刺史当阳公萧大心，郢州刺史南平王萧等人，让他们派遣军队进京救援。
English: He wrote a letter to send to the people under his jurisdiction in Hunan Province, Hebei Province, Yueyang Province, Jiangsu Province, Dangyang Province, Nanping Province, and so on, asking them to send troops to Beijing for rescue.

古文：大心，大器之弟；恪，伟之子也。
现代文：萧大心是萧大器的弟弟，萧是萧伟的儿子。
English: Xiao Daxin is the younger brother of Xiao Dachi, and Xiao is the son of Xiao Wei.

古文：硃异遗景书，为陈祸福。
现代文：朱异让人送给侯景一封书信，向侯景陈述了当前的祸福利害。
English: Zhu Rong sent a letter to Hou Jing, telling him about the current calamity.

古文：景报书，并告城中士民，以为： 梁自近岁以来，权幸用事，割剥齐民，以供嗜欲。
现代文：侯景给朱异回了信，并且告诉城中的官兵，信中说： 梁朝最近几年来，奸臣当权，搜刮平民，以满足他们自己的嗜好和欲望。
English: Hou Jing wrote back to Zhu Yiren and told the officers and soldiers in the city, saying in the letter: In recent years, the Liang Dynasty has betrayed its vassals in power and plundered civilians to satisfy their own hobbies and desires.

古文：如曰不然，公等试观：今日国家池苑，王公第宅，僧尼寺塔；及在位庶僚，姬姜百室，仆从数千，不耕不织，锦衣玉食；不夺百姓，从何得之！
现代文：如果你们认为不是这样，请你们来看看这些：今天国家的园林，王公贵族的住宅、僧侣尼姑的寺塔，还有那些在位的崐官员，他们妻妾成群、随从和仆人达几千人，他们既不耕作、又不织布，穿的却是锦绣衣服，吃的是珍贵食物。
English: If you don't think so, take a look at these: today's state gardens, the residences of princes and aristocrats, the temples of monks and nuns, as well as those of the reigning officials, their wives and concubines in droves, entourages and servants numbering thousands. They neither farm nor weave cloth, but wear exquisite clothes and eat precious food.

古文：仆所以趋赴阙庭，指诛权佞，非倾社稷。
现代文：如果他们不掠夺百姓，从哪儿会得到这些东西呢我之所以来到都城，是旨在杀掉掌权的奸佞之人，并不是想推翻国家。
English: If they don't plunder the people, where will they get these things from? I came to the capital to kill the traitors in power, not to overthrow the state.

古文：今城中指望四方入援，吾观王侯、诸将，志在全身，谁能竭力致死，与吾争胜负哉！
现代文：现在城中的人指望四方的援兵，我看这些王侯、诸将，他们的心意只在于保全自己，谁会竭尽全力、战斗到死，与我争夺胜负呢！
English: Now the people in the city are counting on reinforcements from the four directions. I see these princes and generals, whose only intention is to protect themselves. Who will do their best, fight to the death, and compete with me for victory?

古文：长江天险，二曹所叹，吾一苇航之，日明气净。
现代文：长江天险，连曹操、曹丕都感叹无能为力，我像用一根芦苇一样轻易渡过，扫除尘雾，重见光明。
English: The Yangtze River is so perilous that even Cao Cao and Cao Pi lament their powerlessness. I can cross it as easily as with a reed, sweep away the dust and fog, and see the light again.

古文：自非天人允协，何能如是！
现代文：如果不是上天保佑、百姓协助，怎会如此！
English: If it were not for God's blessing and the people's assistance, how could this have happened?

古文：幸各三思，自求元吉！ 
现代文：希望各位三思而行，自求吉祥。 
English: I hope that everyone will think twice and ask for good luck.

古文：景又奉启于东魏主，称： 臣进取寿春，暂欲停憩。
现代文：侯景又向东魏孝静帝启奏说： 我进攻并已夺取了寿春，想暂时停下来休息一下。
English: Hou Jing also sent a message to Emperor Xiao Jing of the Eastern Wei Dynasty, saying: I have attacked and captured Shuchun, and would like to stop for a while and take a break.

古文：而萧衍识此运终，自辞宝位；臣军未入其国，已投同泰舍身。
现代文：但萧衍知道他的气数已尽，自己辞掉了皇帝的宝座；我的军队没有进入梁都，他就已舍身同泰寺了。
English: But Xiao Yan knew that his strength was exhausted, and he resigned from the throne of the emperor; my army did not enter Liangdu, and he had already given up his life to the Dongtai Temple.

古文：去月二十九日，届此建康。
现代文：上月二十九日，我军来到建康。
English: On the 29th of last month, our army came to Jiankang.

古文：江海未苏，干戈暂止，永言故乡，人马同恋。
现代文：天下未平，战事暂停。谈起故乡，人、马都很依恋。
English: The world is not at peace, the war is suspended. When it comes to hometown, people and horses are very attached.

古文：寻当整辔，以奉圣颜。
现代文：不久，我就要整顿队伍，回到北方朝拜皇上。
English: Soon, I will have to reorganize the team and return to the north to worship the emperor.

古文：臣之母、弟，久谓屠灭，近奉明敕，始承犹在。
现代文：我的母亲和弟弟，很早就听人说被杀害了，最近收到皇上的诏书，才知道母亲和弟弟还在人间。
English: I had long heard that my mother and younger brother had been killed, but only recently, after receiving the imperial edict, did I learn that my mother and younger brother were still alive.

古文：斯乃陛下宽仁，大将军恩念，臣之弱劣，知何仰报！
现代文：这是因为陛下待人宽厚、仁慈，高大将军念日旧恩，我能力弱劣，不知道该如何报答！
English: This is because His Majesty is generous and kind to others, and the great general is longing for the old days, and I am weak and do not know how to repay!

古文：今辄赍启迎臣母、弟、妻、儿，伏愿圣慈，特赐裁放！ 
现代文：今天特地送去奏折想接我的母亲、弟弟、妻子、儿女，希望圣上大发慈悲，释放他们。 
English: Today, I specially sent my sonogram to pick up my mother, brother, wife, and children, hoping that the Almighty would have mercy and release them.

古文：己巳，湘东王绎遣司马吴晔、天门太守樊文皎等将兵发江陵。
现代文：乙巳，湘东王萧绎派遣司马吴晔、天门太守樊文皎等人率领军队从江陵出发。
English: At this time, Xiao Yu, the king of eastern Hunan, sent Sima Wu Xi, Tianmen Taishu Xi Wenqi and others to lead the army from Gangneung.

古文：陈昕为景所擒，景与之极饮，使昕收集部曲，欲用之。
现代文：陈昕被侯景抓获。侯景与陈昕一起畅饮，侯景想任用陈昕，让他聚集起部曲，陈昕没有答应。
English: Chen Yao was captured by Hou Jing. Hou Jing and Chen Yao had a drink together. Hou Jing wanted to appoint Chen Yao and have him gather the parts for the opening movement, but Chen Yao did not agree.

古文：昕不可，景使其仪同三司范桃棒囚之。
现代文：侯景便派他的仪同三司范桃棒把陈昕关押起来。
English: Hou Jing then sent his eunuch and the third secretary Fan Taobao to arrest Chen Qi.

古文：昕因说桃棒，使帅所部袭杀王伟、宋子仙，诣城降。
现代文：陈昕便趁机劝说范桃棒，让他率自己的部下袭击王伟、宋子仙并杀掉他们，然后到建康城去投降。
English: Chen Yao then took the opportunity to persuade Fan Taobao to let him lead his men to attack Wang Wei and Song Zixian and kill them, and then go to Jiankang City to surrender.

古文：桃棒从之，潜遣昕夜缒入城。
现代文：范桃棒听从了陈昕的劝说，夜间暗中将陈昕用绳子缒到建康城内。
English: Fan Taobao listened to Chen Yao's persuasion and secretly roped Chen Yao into Jiankang at night.

古文：上大喜，敕镌银券赐桃棒曰： 事定之日，封汝河南王，即有景众，并给金帛女乐。 
现代文：梁武帝知道了这一情况后非常高兴，下令赐给范桃棒银券，上面刻着： 事情成功的那天，封你为河南王，立即拥有侯景的人马，并且赐给你金银、绢帛以及歌伎！ 
English: After learning of this situation, Emperor Liangwu was very pleased and ordered to give Fan Taobao a silver certificate, inscribed with: "On the day of success, you will be crowned the king of Henan Province, you will immediately possess the people and horses of Houjing, and you will be given gold and silver, gongs and kabuki!"

古文：太子恐其诈，犹豫不决，上怒曰： 受降常理，何忽致疑！ 
现代文：太子担心陈昕欺骗梁武帝，对此事犹豫不决。
English: The prince was worried that Chen Xi had deceived Emperor Liangwu and hesitated over the matter.

古文：太子召公卿会议，硃异、傅岐曰： 桃棒降必非谬。桃棒既降，贼景必惊，乘此击之，可大破也。 
现代文：梁武帝生气地说： 接受对方投降是常理之中的事，你为什么突然又疑神疑鬼的！ 太子召集公卿大臣们开会商议此事，朱异、傅岐说： 范桃棒投降梁朝一定不是假的，范桃棒投降后，叛贼侯景一定会惊慌，乘此机会攻击他，可以大败叛贼。 
English: Emperor Liang Wu said angrily, "Accepting the other side's surrender is a matter of common sense. Why are you suddenly suspicious?" The prince called the noblemen and ministers to a meeting to discuss the matter. Zhu Yi and Fu Qi said, "The Liang Dynasty's surrender of Fan Taobao must not be a fake. After Fan Taobao's surrender, the traitor Hou Jing will surely panic. Take this opportunity to attack him, and you can defeat the traitor.

古文：太子曰： 吾坚城自守以俟外援，援兵既至，贼岂足平！
现代文：太子说： 我们坚守城池，等侯外面的援兵，援兵到来后，叛贼何悉不平！
English: The prince said: We will hold fast to the castle and wait for reinforcements from outside. When the reinforcements arrive, the traitors will have no complaints!

古文：此万全策也。
现代文：这才是万全之策。
English: This is the best solution.

古文：今开门纳桃棒，桃棒之情，何易可知！
现代文：现在如果打开城门接纳范桃棒，范桃棒的情况，怎么会那么容易就能知道！
English: Now, if you open the gate to accept Fan Momo, how can you know the situation of Fan Momo so easily!

古文：万一为变，悔无所及。社稷事重，须更详之。 
现代文：万一情况发生变故，后悔莫及；事关江山社稷，必须再仔细地考虑。 
English: In the unlikely event that the situation changes, there will be no way to regret it; it is a matter of national and social security, and must be carefully considered.

古文：异曰： 殿下若以社稷之急，宜纳桃棒；如其犹豫，非异所知。 
现代文：朱异说： 殿下若以国家危机为重就应该接纳范桃棒；如果您犹豫不决，我不知道结果会怎样。 
English: Zhu Yixing said, "Your highness, if the national crisis is your priority, you should accept Fan Taobao; if you hesitate, I don't know what the outcome will be.

古文：太子终不能决。桃棒又使昕启曰： 今止将所领五百人，若至城门，皆自脱甲，乞朝廷开门赐容。
现代文：太子始终不能下定决心，范桃棒又派陈昕启奏说： 现在，我只率领我的部下五百人前来，如果到达城门时，我们会全部自动脱下铠甲，请朝廷开门接纳我们。
English: The prince was still unable to make up his mind, and Fan Taobao sent Chen Qi again to say: Now, I only lead five hundred of my subordinates to come. If we reach the city gate, we will all automatically take off our armor. Please open the door for us.

古文：事济之后，保擒侯景。 
现代文：事情成功之后，我何证抓获侯景。 
English: After the success of the case, I caught Hou Jing.

古文：太子见其恳切，愈疑之。
现代文：太子看到范桃棒很恳切地要求进城，就更加怀疑他。
English: When the prince saw Fan Taobao's earnest request to enter the city, he was even more suspicious of him.

古文：硃异拊膺曰： 失此，社稷事去矣！ 
现代文：朱异捶胸感叹道： 失去这次机会，国家就完了！ 
English: Zhu Yixin sighed and said, "If we lose this opportunity, the country will be finished!"

古文：俄而桃棒为部下所告，景拉杀之。
现代文：不久，范桃棒被他的部下告发了，侯景把他吹去四肢杀掉了。
English: Soon after, Fan Taobao was denounced by his subordinates, and Hou Jing blew him limb from limb and killed him.

古文：陈昕不知，如期而出，景邀得之，逼使射书城中曰： 桃棒且轻将数十人先入。 
现代文：陈昕崐不知道范桃棒已经被杀死，仍按照原定日期从城内射一封书信，信上说： 范桃棒暂且轻装率领几十人先进入建康。 
English: Chen Yao did not know that Fan Taobao had been killed, but still sent a letter from the city according to the original date. The letter said: Fan Taobao is temporarily lightly dressed and led dozens of people to enter Jiankang first.

古文：景欲衷甲随之，昕不肯，期以必死，乃杀之。
现代文：侯景想把铠甲穿在里面跟随这些人进入建康城，陈昕不肯答应，决心一死，侯景就把他杀掉了。
English: Hou Jing wanted to wear the armor inside and follow these people into Jiankang City. Chen Yao refused to agree. Once he was determined to die, Hou Jing killed him.

古文：景使萧见理与仪同三司卢晖略戍东府。
现代文：侯景派遣萧见理和仪同三司卢晖略一起镇守东府。
English: Hou Jing dispatched Xiao Jianli and Yi Zong to defend the eastern capital together with the three divisions of Lu Xunli.

古文：见理凶险，夜，与群盗剽劫于大桁，中流矢而死。
现代文：萧见理为人凶恶、阴险。夜里，他与一群强盗一起到大桁去抢劫，被飞来的流箭射中死去。
English: In the night, he went with a group of robbers to rob a store and was shot dead by a flying arrow.

古文：邵陵王纶行至钟离，闻侯景已渡采石，纶昼夜兼道，旋军入援，济江，中流风起，人马溺者什一二。
现代文：邵陵王萧纶走到了钟离，听说侯景已经从采石渡过了长江，萧纶便日夜兼程，回军建康救援朝廷。渡过长江时，船到了江中心却刮起风来，落入水里淹死的人、马有十分之一二。
English: Shao Ling Wang Xiao Wei went to Zhongli, and heard that Hou Jing had crossed the Yangtze River from the quarry, Xiao Wei would travel day and night, returning to Jiankang to rescue the imperial court. When crossing the Yangtze River, the ship reached the center of the river but the wind blew, and two-tenths of the people and horses drowned in the water.

古文：遂帅宁远将军西丰公大春、新淦公大成、永安侯确、安南侯骏、前谯州刺史赵伯超、武州刺史萧弄璋等，步骑三万，自京口西上。
现代文：于是，萧纶便率领宁远将军西丰公萧大春、新涂公萧大成、永安侯萧确、安南侯萧骏、前谯州刺史赵伯超、武州刺史萧弄璋等人及三万步兵、骑兵从京口向西进军。
English: As a result, Xiao Wei led the Ningyuan generals Xi Feng Gong Xiao Dachun, Xin Tu Gong Xiao Dacheng, Yongan Hou Xiao Jia, Annan Hou Xiao Jia, former Zhangzhou general Zhao Bochao, Wuzhou general Xiao Nongyao and others, as well as 30,000 infantry and cavalry, to march westward from Jingkou.

古文：大成，大春之弟；确，纶之子；骏，懿之孙也。
现代文：萧大成是萧大春的弟弟。萧确是萧纶的儿子。萧骏是萧懿的孙子。
English: Xiao Dacheng is the younger brother of Xiao Dachun. Xiao is indeed the son of Xiao Yao. Xiao Yao is the grandson of Xiao Yao.

古文：景遣军至江乘拒纶军。
现代文：侯景派遣军队来到江乘阻击萧纶的军队。
English: Hou Jing sent an army to the Yangtze River to block Xiao Yu's army.

古文：赵伯超曰： 若从黄城大路，必与贼遇，不如径指钟山，突据广莫门。出贼不意，城围必解矣。 
现代文：赵伯超对萧纶说： 如果从黄城的大路上去，一定会与敌人相遇，我们不如径直进军钟山，突然占领广莫门，出其不意出现在敌人面前，建康城之围一定会解除。 
English: Zhao Bochao said to Xiao Yao: "If you go along the main road of Huangcheng, you will surely encounter the enemy. We should march straight into Zhongshan, suddenly occupy Guangmo Gate, and unexpectedly appear in front of the enemy. The siege of Jiankang City will surely be lifted."

古文：纶从之，夜行失道，迂二十馀里。
现代文：萧纶采纳了赵伯超的建议，夜间行军，迷失了道路，多走了二十多里地。
English: Xiao Yao accepted Zhao Bochao's suggestion, marched at night, lost his way, and walked more than twenty miles.

古文：庚辰旦，营于蒋山。
现代文：庚辰早上，在蒋山安营扎寨。
English: In the morning of Geng Chen, they set up camp in Jiangshan.

古文：景见之大骇，悉送所掠妇女、珍货于石头，具舟欲走。
现代文：侯景见到这种情况十分惊恐，把他所掠夺来的妇女和珍宝全部运送到石头城，他准备好了船只想逃走。
English: Horrified by the situation, Hou Jing transported all the women and treasures he had plundered to Stone Town. He prepared a boat to escape.

古文：分兵三道攻纶，纶与战，破之。
现代文：同时又分兵三路攻打萧纶，萧纶的军队与侯景把军队交战，打败了侯景的军队。
English: At the same time, a detachment of soldiers attacked Xiao Yao from three directions. Xiao Yao's army fought with Hou Jing's army and defeated Hou Jing's army.

古文：时山巅寒雪，乃引军下爱敬寺。
现代文：这时，山峰上还有寒冷的积雪，萧纶便把军队带到了爱敬寺。
English: At this time, there was still cold snow on the mountain peak, and Xiao Yu brought the army to Ai Jing Temple.

古文：景陈兵于覆舟山北，乙酉，纶进军玄武湖侧，与景对陈，不战。
现代文：侯景把军队布置在覆舟山北面。乙酉，萧纶进军到了玄武湖畔，与侯景对面地摆开战阵，但没有交战。
English: Hou Jing placed his army on the north side of the Zhoushan Mountains. At the same time, Xiao Wei marched to the shore of the Xuanwu Lake and set up a battle line opposite Hou Jing, but there was no battle.

古文：至暮，景更约明日会战，纶许之。
现代文：到了黄昏，侯景提出改到明天再交战，萧纶答应了。
English: At dusk, Hou Jing proposed to change the time of the battle to tomorrow, and Xiao Yao agreed.

古文：安南侯骏见景军退，以为走，即与壮士逐之；景旋军击之，骏败走，趣纶军。
现代文：安南萧骏看到侯景退兵了，以为他逃跑，就与精壮的士兵一起追赶侯景的军队。侯景回转军队攻击萧骏的人马，萧骏战败逃走，奔向萧纶的军营。
English: When Annan Xiaohui saw Houjing retreating, he thought he was running away, so he chased Houjing's army with his strong soldiers. Houjing's army attacked Xiaohui's men and horses, and Xiaohui was defeated and fled to Xiaohui's camp.

古文：赵伯超望见，亦引兵走，景乘胜追击之，诸军皆溃。
现代文：赵伯超看见了这一情况，也带领军队逃跑，侯景乘胜追击，梁军全部溃败。
English: Zhao Bochao saw this situation, and also led the army to flee, Hou Jing successfully pursued, and Liang's army was all defeated.

古文：纶收馀兵近千人，入天保寺；景追之，纵火烧寺。
现代文：萧纶收集了将近一千残兵，逃进了天保寺。侯景步步追。放火焚烧了天保寺。
English: Xiao Yao gathered nearly a thousand remnants and fled into the Temple of Heaven. Hou Jing chased after him. He set fire to the Temple of Heaven.

古文：纶奔硃方，士卒践冰雪，往往堕足。
现代文：萧纶逃往朱方，士兵们踩着冰雪前进，有很多人冻坏了脚。
English: Xiao Yao fled to Zhufang, the soldiers advanced on the ice and snow, and many people froze their feet.

古文：景悉收纶辎重，生擒西丰公大春、安前司马庄丘慧、主帅霍俊等而还。
现代文：侯景把萧纶的物资全部收缴，活捉了西丰公萧大春、安前司马庄丘慧和主帅霍俊等人返回原地。
English: Hou Jing confiscated all of Xiao Yao's materials, and captured Xi Feng Gong Xiao Dachun, An Qian Sima Zhuang Qiu Hui, and head coach Huo Jun alive and returned to the original place.

古文：丙戌，景陈所获纶军首虏铠仗及大春等于城下，使言曰： 邵陵王已为乱兵所杀。 
现代文：丙戌，侯景把他所抓获的俘虏和斩杀的首级、铠甲、武器以及萧大春等人带到建康城下向城内展示，并让人对城里人说： 邵陵王已经被乱兵杀死！ 
English: Hou Jing brought the heads, armor, weapons, and Xiao Dachun and others of the captives he captured and killed to Jiankang City to show them to the city, and let people in the city say: King Shao Ling has been killed by ruffians!

古文：霍俊独曰： 王小失利，已全军还京口。
现代文：只有霍俊反驳说： 邵陵王只是遇到了小小的挫折，他已经率领全部军队返回京口。
English: Only Huo Jun countered: Shao Ling Wang just encountered a small setback, he has led all the troops back to Beijing.

古文：城中但坚守，援军寻至。 
现代文：城中的士兵只要坚守城池，援军很快就会到来。 
English: As long as the soldiers in the city hold fast to the city, reinforcements will soon arrive.

古文：贼以刀殴其背，俊辞色弥厉；景义而释之，临贺王正德杀之。
现代文：贼兵用刀殴打霍俊的后背，霍的言辞更尖锐，脸色更严厉。侯景认为霍俊是位义士便释放了他，临贺王萧正德把他杀害了。
English: The bandits beat Huo Jun's back with a knife. Huo's words were sharper and his face was harsher. Hou Jing thought that Huo Jun was a righteous man and released him. Lin He Wang Xiao Zhengde killed him.

古文：是日晚，鄱阳王范遣其世子嗣与西豫州刺史裴之高、建安太守赵凤举各将兵入援，军于蔡洲，以待上流诸军，范以之高督江右援军事。
现代文：这天晚上，鄱阳王萧范派遣他的长子萧嗣与西豫州刺史裴之高、建安太守崐赵凤举等人各自率军救援建康，军队驻扎在蔡州，等待长江上游的各路人马。萧范让裴之高统领长江右边援军的军务。
English: In the evening of the same day, King Xiao Fan of Poyang dispatched his eldest son Xiao Zhi, together with the governor of West Henan Province, Shi Peizhigao, and the governor of Jian'an Province, Yan Zhao Fengju, to rescue Jiankang. The army was stationed in Caizhou, waiting for people from all over the upper reaches of the Yangtze River. Xiao Fan asked Peizhigao to lead the military affairs of the reinforcements on the right side of the Yangtze River.

古文：景悉驱南岸居民于水北，焚其庐舍，大街已西，扫地俱尽。
现代文：侯景把住在秦淮河南岸的居民全部赶到了秦淮河北岸，烧毁了他们的房屋，沿河大街以西的居民房产全部被清除掉了。
English: Hou Jing drove all the residents living on the south bank of the Qinhuai River to the north bank of the Qinhuai River, burned their houses, and all the residential properties west of the main street along the river were cleared away.

古文：北徐州刺史封山侯正表镇钟离，上召之入援，正表托以船粮未集，不进。
现代文：北徐州刺史封山侯萧正表镇守钟离。梁武帝征召他前来援救朝廷，萧正表推托说船只和粮草还没收集起来，不肯派兵前去。
English: Xiao Zhengbai, a feudal lord of a mountain village in North Xuzhou, summoned him to come to the aid of the imperial court. Xiao Zhengbai said that the ships and grain had not yet been collected, and refused to send troops.

古文：景以正表为南兗州刺史，封南郡王。
现代文：侯景任命萧正表为南兖州刺史，封他为南郡王。
English: Hou Jing appointed Xiao Zhengbo as the governor of Nanxizhou and named him the king of Nan County.

古文：正表乃于欧阳立栅以断援军，帅众一万，声言入援，实欲袭广陵。
现代文：萧正表于是在欧阳设立栅栏以阻断增援朝廷的军队。他率领一万人马，表面上声称是进兵援救建康，实际上想要偷袭广陵。
English: Xiao Zheng then set up a fence in Ouyang to block the reinforcement of the imperial army. He led ten thousand horses, ostensibly claiming to be entering the army to rescue Jiankang, but actually wanted to raid Guangling.

古文：密书诱广陵令刘询，使烧城为应，询以告南兗州刺史南康王会理。
现代文：他写了封密信引诱广陵县令刘询，让他烧毁广陵城作为内应。刘询把此事告诉了南兖州刺史南康王萧会理。
English: He wrote a secret letter to lure Liu Sheng, the governor of Guangling County, to let him burn down Guangling City as an inside job. Liu Sheng told this to Nan Kang Wang Xiao, the president of the Nan Kang Wang Xiao Association.

古文：十二月，会理使询帅步骑千人夜袭正表，大破之；正表走还钟离。
现代文：十二月，萧会理派遣刘询率领步兵、骑兵一千人夜间偷袭萧正表，把萧正表的军队打得一败涂地。萧正表逃回钟离。
English: In December, Xiao Huili dispatched Liu Enqu led a thousand infantry and cavalry to attack Xiao Zhengbo at night, and defeated Xiao Zhengbo's army. Xiao Zhengbo fled back to Zhongli.

古文：询收其兵粮，归就会理，与之入援。
现代文：刘询收集了萧正表残兵和粮食武器，把它们交给了萧会理，并和他一起率领军队去救援建康城。
English: Liu Zhen collected the remnants of Xiao Zheng's soldiers and grain weapons, handed them over to Xiao Huili, and led the army to rescue Jiankang City together with him.

古文：癸巳，侍中、都官尚书羊侃卒，城中益惧。
现代文：癸巳，侍中、都官尚书羊侃去世，建康城里更是人心惶恐。
English: Soon after, the chamberlain and official of the capital, Shang Shuyang, passed away, and the people in Jiankang City were even more terrified.

古文：侯景大造攻具，陈于阙前，大车高数丈，一车二十轮。
现代文：侯景大造攻城器具，并把这些器具陈列在城楼前。高大的占车高达几丈，一辆车有二十个车轮。
English: Houjing made large siege engines and displayed them in front of the city tower. The tall siege engines were several meters high, and one of them had twenty wheels.

古文：丁酉，复进攻城，以虾蟆车运土填堑。
现代文：丁酉，侯景又向皇城发动进攻，用蛤蟆车运土填平战壕。
English: Ding Rong and Hou Jing then launched an attack on the imperial city, using mule carts to transport soil to fill the trenches.

古文：湘东王绎遣世子方等将步骑一万入援建康，庚子，发公安。
现代文：湘东王萧绎派遣他的长子萧方等率领一万步兵、骑兵前来建康救援，庚子，援兵从公安出发。
English: Xiaoyan, the king of eastern Hunan, sent his eldest son, Xiao Fang, and others to lead ten thousand infantry and cavalry to Jiankang for rescue. Geng Zi and the reinforcements set out from the Public Security Bureau.

古文：绎又遣竟陵太守王僧辩将舟师万人，出自汉川，载粮东下。
现代文：萧绎又派遣竟陵太守王僧辩率领一万名水军，从汉川出发，用船运载粮食顺水东下。
English: Xiao Yuanzhong also dispatched Wang Sofen, the governor of Jingling, to lead ten thousand sailors from the Han River to carry grain eastward by boat.

古文：方等有俊才，善骑射，每战，亲犯矢石，以死节自任。
现代文：萧方等才智过人，擅长骑马射箭。每次与敌人交战，他都亲自冒着箭林石雨杀敌，以为节义而死为己任。
English: Xiao Fang and others were extremely intelligent and good at riding and archery. Every time he fought with the enemy, he personally risked the rain of arrows to kill the enemy, believing that it was his duty to die for righteousness.

古文：壬寅，侯景以火车焚台城东南楼。
现代文：壬寅，侯景用载有火种的车烧皇城东南楼。
English: Ren Yin and Hou Jing used a vehicle loaded with kindling to burn the southeast tower of the Imperial City.

古文：材官吴景有巧思，于城内构地为楼，火才灭，新楼即立，贼以为神。
现代文：材官吴景心灵手巧，他让人在皇城里面的地上建起一座楼。大火刚灭新建的楼就立起，贼兵认为是神助建立的楼。
English: The quartermaster Wu Jing was so clever that he had someone build a building on the ground inside the imperial city. The newly built building was erected as soon as the fire was extinguished, and the robber soldiers thought it was a building built by Shenzu.

古文：景因火起，潜遣人于其下穿城。
现代文：侯景趁大火燃烧起来的时候，偷偷派人从下面凿城挖洞。
English: Hou Jing took advantage of the fire to secretly send people to dig a hole underneath the city.

古文：城将崩，乃觉之；吴景于城内更筑迂城，状如却月以拟之，兼掷火，焚其攻具，贼乃退走。
现代文：城将要崩塌时，城内的人才发觉。吴景让人们在城内修造了迂回曲折的城墙，它的形状好似半圆形的月亮。同时，还向敌人扔掷火把，焚烧了他们的进攻器具。贼兵这才退兵。
English: When the city was about to collapse, the people in the city found out. Wu Jing had people build a winding wall inside the city, its shape resembling a half-circle of the moon. At the same time, he also threw torches at the enemy and burned their offensive equipment. The robber soldiers then withdrew.

古文：太子遣洗马元孟恭将千人自大司马门出荡，孟恭与左右奔降于景。
现代文：太子派遣洗马元孟恭率领一千人马从大司马门冲杀出去，元孟恭与随从人员主动投降了侯景。
English: The prince dispatched the horse-washing horse, Yuan Mengqiong, to lead a thousand horses to rush out from the big horse gate. Yuan Mengqiong and his entourage voluntarily surrendered to Houjing.

古文：己酉，景土山稍逼城楼，柳津命作地道以取其土，外山崩，压贼且尽。
现代文：己酉，侯景修筑的土山逐渐逼近皇城城楼。柳津命令土兵挖地道来掏空土山下面的土。
English: The earthen mound built by Ji Yan and Hou Jing gradually approached the castle tower of the imperial city. Liu Jin ordered the soldiers to dig a tunnel to hollow out the soil under the earthen mound.

古文：又于城内作飞桥，悬罩二土山上。
现代文：城外的土山崩塌了，山四周的敌人几乎全被压死了。柳津又让人在城内修筑了一座飞桥，飞桥悬空笼罩在两座土山上。
English: The earthen hill outside the city collapsed, and the enemies around the hill were almost all crushed to death. Liujin also had a flying bridge built inside the city, and the flying bridge hung over the two earthen hills.

古文：景众见飞桥迥出，崩腾而走；城内掷雉尾炬，焚其东山，楼栅荡尽，贼积死于城下，乃弃土山不复修，自焚其攻具。
现代文：侯景的人马一见有座飞桥远远地伸出，一片混乱，争着逃走了。城里的人又向城外投掷雉尾火炬，焚烧了东土山，东土山的楼和栅栏全部被烧尽。敌人尸体积压在城下。于是，侯景放弃了土山，不再修建它，并自己把进攻用的器具烧毁了。
English: At the sight of a flying bridge stretching out in the distance, Hou Jing's men and horses were in chaos and scrambled to escape. The people in the city also threw a burning torch outside the city and burned Dongtushan. The buildings and fences of Dongtushan were all burned out. The bodies of the enemy were piled up under the city. Therefore, Hou Jing abandoned Tsuchiyama, no longer built it, and burned the offensive equipment himself.

古文：材官将军宋嶷降于景，教之引玄武湖水以灌台城，阙前皆为洪流。
现代文：材官将军宋嶷投降了侯景，并出主意让他引玄湖水来淹灌台城，宫门前都是洪水。
English: General Song Jun, the quartermaster, surrendered to Houjing and proposed that he bring water from the Xuanhu Lake to flood Taicheng. The front of the palace gate was flooded.

古文：上征衡州刺史韦粲为散骑常侍，以都督长沙欧阳頠监州事。
现代文：梁武帝征调衡州刺史韦粲担任散骑常侍，任命都督长沙人欧阳为监州事。
English: Emperor Liangwu recruited and transferred the governor of Hengshui Province, Shi Weiqi, to serve as his equestrian attendant, and appointed the governor of Changsha Province, Ou Yang, as the supervisor of state affairs.

古文：粲，放之子也。
现代文：韦粲是韦放的儿子。
English: Wei Wei is the son of Wei Fang.

古文：还，至庐陵，闻侯景乱，粲简阅部下，得精兵五千，倍道赴援。
现代文：当韦粲回到庐陵时，听说侯景叛乱，韦粲简拔部下，率领五千精锐士兵，加倍赶路前去援救朝廷。
English: When Wei Xuan returned to Fuling, he heard of Hou Jing's rebellion. Wei Xuan pulled out his subordinates, led five thousand elite soldiers, and doubled his speed to rescue the imperial court.

古文：至豫章，闻景已出横江，粲就内史刘孝仪谋之，孝仪曰： 必如此，当有敕。
现代文：部队来到豫章，听说侯景已经出了横江，韦粲便到内史刘孝仪那里与他商议。刘孝仪说： 如果情况真的是这样的话，皇上应该有命令传达下来。
English: When the troops came to Yuanzhang and heard that Hou Jing had already left the Hengjiang River, Wei Wei went to the historian Liu Xiaoyi to discuss with him. Liu Xiaoyi said: If the situation is really like this, the emperor should have an order to convey.

古文：岂可轻信人言，妄相惊动！
现代文：怎么可以轻信别人说的话，轻率地行动起来自相惊扰呢！
English: How can you be so gullible as to believe what others say, and act so rashly that you startle each other!

古文：或恐不然。 
现代文：或许事情并不是这样。 
English: That may not be the case.

古文：时孝仪置酒，粲怒，以杯抵地曰： 贼已渡江，便逼宫阙，水陆俱断，何暇有报！
现代文：这时刘孝仪设置了洒宴，韦粲听完他的话勃然大怒，把酒杯摔在地上说： 叛贼已经渡过了长江，就要逼近皇宫了。水上、陆地的交通已全部被阻断，朝廷么会有空闲向我们通报情况呢？
English: At this time, Liu Xiaoyi set up a banquet. After listening to his words, Wei Wei flew into a rage, threw his wine glass on the ground and said: The traitor has already crossed the Yangtze River and is about to approach the imperial palace. Water and land transportation have all been blocked. Will the imperial court have time to inform us of the situation?

古文：假令无敕，岂得自安！
现代文：假如朝廷无法发出命令，难道我们自己能够安心么！
English: If the imperial court cannot issue an order, can we ourselves be at ease?

古文：韦粲今日何情饮酒！ 
现代文：韦粲今天哪儿有情绪饮酒！ 
English: I don't even want to drink right now!

古文：即驰马出部分。
现代文：于是，他就骑着马飞快地出去布置军事行运。
English: So he galloped out on horseback to organize a military expedition.

古文：将发，会江州刺史当阳公大心遣使邀粲，粲乃驰往见大心曰： 上游籓镇，江州去京最近，殿下情计诚宜在前。
现代文：韦粲于是骑着快马前去会见萧大心。他对萧大心说： 长江上游的藩镇，江州离京城最近，殿下按情理来说，应该行动在前面的。
English: Wei Wei then rode on a fast horse to meet Xiao Dashin. He said to Xiao Dashin: The town of the upper reaches of the Yangtze River, Jiangzhou is the closest to the capital, and your highness should act in front of it.

古文：但中流任重，当须应接，不可阙镇。
现代文：但您是中流砥柱，身负重任，应做后应，不能没有主将。
English: But you are the mainstay, you have a heavy responsibility, you should do what you should do, you can't do without the captain.

古文：今宜且张声势，移镇湓城，遣偏将赐随，于事便足。 
现代文：现在，我们应该暂且虚张声势，移军镇守湓城，派遗你的副将随我一同去，就足够了。 
English: Now, we should stop bluffing for the time being. It is enough to move our troops to defend Handan City and send your vice-admiral to accompany me.

古文：大心然之，遣中兵柳昕帅兵二千人随粲，粲至南洲，外弟司州刺史柳仲礼亦帅步骑万馀人至横江，粲即送粮仗赡给之，并散私金帛以赏其战士。
现代文：萧大心同意了他的建议，便派遣中兵柳昕率领二千人马跟随韦粲一同前去。韦粲到达南洲时，他的表弟司州刺史柳仲礼也率领一万多步兵、骑兵到了横江。韦粲于是把粮食、武器提供给柳仲礼，并且把自己的金银、绢帛散发给柳仲礼的士兵用来奖赏他们。
English: Xiao Daxin agreed to his suggestion, so he sent the middle-ranking soldier Liu Zhen, led by 2,000 horses, to follow Wei Zhen. When Wei Zhen arrived in Nanzhou, his cousin, the statesman Liu Zhongli, also led more than 10,000 infantry and cavalry to the Yokoe River. Wei Zhen then provided grain and weapons to Liu Zhongli, and distributed his gold, silver and money to Liu Zhongli's soldiers to reward them.

古文：西豫州刺史裴之高自张公洲遣船度仲礼，丙辰夜，粲、仲礼及宣猛将军李孝钦、前司州刺史羊鸦仁、南陵太守陈文彻，合军屯新林王游苑。
现代文：西豫州刺史裴之高自张公洲派出船只把柳仲礼的军队渡过江。丙辰夜里，韦粲、柳仲礼以及宣猛将军李孝钦、前司州刺史羊鸦仁、南陵太守陈文彻等人的军队会合在一起，驻扎在新林的王游苑。
English: In the evening of the 4th day of the 4th month, Wei Wei, Liu Zhongli, and the armies of the fierce general Li Xiaoqin, the former provincial governor Shi Yangren, the governor of Nanling Chen Wenche and others gathered together and stationed at Wang Youyuan in Xinlin.

古文：粲议推仲礼为大都督，报下流众军；裴之高自以年位，耻居其下，议累日不决。
现代文：韦粲提议推举柳仲礼担任大都督，告知下游的军队。裴之高自认为年龄和官位比别人高，耻于居柳仲礼之下，韦粲的提议多日没有决定下来。
English: Wei Wei proposed to nominate Liu Zhongli as the grand governor and inform the downstream army. Pei Zhigao thought that his age and official rank were higher than others, and he was ashamed to be below Liu Zhongli. Wei Wei's proposal was not decided for many days.

古文：粲抗言于众曰： 今者同赴国难，义在除贼。
现代文：韦粲高声对众人说： 今天我们共赴国难，为了铲除叛贼。
English: Wei Wei said to the crowd in a loud voice, "Today, we are all going to the national emergency in order to eradicate the traitors."

古文：所以推柳司州者，正以久捍边疆，先为侯景所惮；且士马精锐，无出其前。
现代文：我之所以推举柳司州，只是因为他长期守卫边疆，以前曾让侯景害怕。况且他的人马精锐，没有人能超过他。
English: The reason why I chose Liusizhou is because he has been guarding the border for a long time, and he used to scare Hou Jing. Moreover, his men are elite, and no one can surpass him.

古文：若论位次，柳在粲下，语其年齿，亦少于粲，直以社稷之计，不得复论。
现代文：如果论地位、资格，柳仲礼在我下面，如果论年龄大小，他也比我年少。只是为国家考虑才这样做，大家不要再争论了。
English: In terms of status and qualifications, Liu Zhongli is below me, and in terms of age, he is younger than me. This is only done for the sake of the country, so let's stop arguing.

古文：今日形势，贵在将和，若人心不同，大事去矣。
现代文：现在的形势，贵在将领团结。如果人心不统一，大事就完了。
English: In the current situation, it is important for generals to be united. If the hearts of the people are not unified, the great event will be over.

古文：裴公朝之旧德，岂应复挟私情以沮大计！
现代文：裴公是朝廷中的有德望的老臣，怎么能夹带个人情感，败坏国家大计呢！
English: Baigong was a respected senior official in the imperial court. How could he bring his personal feelings into the equation and ruin the country's grand plan?

古文：粲请为诸军解之。 
现代文：我韦粲请求为各路军队解决这件事。 
English: I hereby request that this matter be resolved for the benefit of all armed forces.

古文：乃单舸至之高营，切让之曰： 今二宫危逼，猾寇滔天，臣子当戮力同心，岂可自相矛盾！豫州必欲立异，锋镝便有所归。 
现代文：于是，韦粲一个人乘船来到裴之高的军营，他语重心长地责备裴之高道： 现在，皇上和太子危在旦夕，狡诈的敌人罪恶滔天，做臣子的应该齐心协力，怎么能自相矛盾，裴豫州一定要与大家离心异志的话，刀锋箭就要有所指了。 
English: As a result, Wei Wei alone took a boat to Peizhigao's military camp, and he earnestly reproached Peizhigao: Now, the emperor and the prince are in imminent danger, the cunning enemy's crime is monstrous, and the courtiers should work together. How can it be contradictory? If Peizhigao must be disassociated from everyone, the sword and arrow must be pointed.

古文：之高垂泣致谢。遂推仲礼为大都督。
现代文：裴之高流下了眼泪向韦粲谢罪，于是大家推举柳仲礼为大都督。
English: Pei Zhi Gao shed tears to thank Wei Zhen, so everyone nominated Liu Zhongli as the grand governor.

古文：宣城内史杨白华遣其子雄将郡兵继至，援军大集，众十馀万，缘淮树栅，景亦于北岸树栅以应之。
现代文：宣城内史杨白华派遣他的儿子杨雄率领郡里的士兵随后赶来，众多援军汇集在一起，达十万多人。他们沿着秦淮河竖立栅栏，侯景也在河北岸竖立栅栏来对付援军。
English: Shi Yang Baihua in Xuancheng sent his son Yang Xiong to lead the soldiers in the county and then arrived, and many reinforcements gathered together, reaching more than 100,000 people. They erected a fence along the Qin Huai River, and Hou Jing also erected a fence on the north bank of the river to deal with reinforcements.

古文：裴之高与弟之横以舟师一万屯张公洲。景囚之高弟、侄、子、孙、临水陈兵，连锁列于陈前，以鼎镬、刀锯随其后，谓曰： 裴公不降，今即烹之。 
现代文：裴之高与他的弟弟裴之横率一万水军驻扎在张公洲，侯景把裴之高的弟弟、侄子、儿子、孙子关押起来，临河水摆开了战阵，把裴之高的亲属锁在一起押在队列前面，将鼎镬、刀锯放在他们身后，然后对裴之高说： 裴公如果不投降，今天就把他们煮了。 
English: Peizhigao and his younger brother Peizhihang led ten thousand naval troops stationed in Zhang Gongzhou. Houjing detained Peizhigao's younger brother, nephew, son, and grandson, and set up battle lines along the river. He locked Peizhigao's relatives together and put them at the front of the queue. He placed the pickaxe and the hacksaw behind them, and then said to Peizhigao: "If Pei Gong does not surrender, I will cook them today."

古文：之高召善射者使射其子，再发，皆不中。
现代文：裴之高把善于射箭的人召来，让他用弓箭射中自己的儿子，射了两次，都没有射中。
English: Pei Zhigao called someone who was good at archery and asked him to shoot his son with a bow and arrow. He shot him twice, but missed.

古文：景帅步骑万人于后渚挑战，仲礼欲出击之。韦粲曰： 日晚我劳，未可战也。 
现代文：侯景率领一万名步兵骑兵在后渚向援军挑战，柳仲礼想带兵出去攻打他，韦粲劝他说： 天色已晚，我军又很疲劳，不能应战。 
English: Hou Jing led ten thousand infantry and cavalry to challenge the reinforcements at the back of the march. Liu Zhongli wanted to take soldiers to attack him. Wei Wei advised him: It's too late, our army is very tired and can't fight.

古文：仲礼乃坚壁不出，景亦引退。
现代文：柳仲礼于是坚守营垒不出来应战，侯景也领兵退了回去。
English: As a result, Liu Zhongli held fast to the camp and did not come out to fight, and Hou Jing also led the troops back.

古文：湘东王绎将锐卒三万发江陵，留其子绥宁侯方诸居守，咨议参军刘之迡等三上笺请留，答教不许。
现代文：湘东王萧绎率领三万名精锐的士兵从江陵出发，让他的儿子绥宁侯萧方诸留守江陵。谘议参军刘之等人多次向萧绎上书请求留下，萧绎不同意。
English: Xiao Yuanzhong, the king of eastern Hunan, led 30,000 elite soldiers from Gangneung, leaving his son, the warlord Xiao Fangzhu, to stay behind in Gangneung. Liu Zhi and others who had advised him to join the army repeatedly wrote to Xiao Yuanzhong to ask him to stay, but Xiao Yuanzhong did not agree.

古文：鄱阳王范遣其将梅伯龙攻王显贵于寿阳，克其罗城；攻中城，不克而退，范益其众，使复攻之。
现代文：鄱阳王萧范派遣他的将领梅伯龙在寿阳攻打王显贵的军队。攻克了外城，接着又攻打内城，没能攻克，便退了回来。萧范为他增加了军队，让他再次攻打寿阳。
English: Xiao Fan, the king of Shouyang, sent his general Meibailong to attack the army of Wang Xiangui in Shouyang. He conquered the outer city, then attacked the inner city, failed to conquer, and retreated. Xiao Fan increased his army for him, and let him attack Shouyang again.

古文：东魏大将军澄患民钱滥恶，议不禁民私铸，但悬称市门，钱不重五铢，毋得入市。
现代文：东魏大将军高澄担心民间货币太粗劣、分量不足，便考虑不禁止百姓自己铸造钱。但在市场门口挂上秤，凡是不够五铢重的钱，一律不能入市场流通。
English: The Eastern Wei general Gao Cheng was worried that the folk currency was too coarse and the weight was insufficient, so he considered not prohibiting the people from minting their own money. However, he hung a scale at the entrance to the market, and any money that was not five shekels in weight was not allowed to enter the market.

古文：朝议以为年谷不登，请俟它年，乃止。
现代文：朝廷官员商议后认为今年粮食欠收，请等其它年份再实行这一政策，高澄便没有实施此项措施。
English: After deliberation, officials of the imperial court thought that this year's grain harvest was insufficient, so please wait for other years to implement this policy, and Gaocho did not implement this measure.

古文：魏太师泰杀安定国臣王茂而非其罪。
现代文：西魏太师宇文泰要杀他的封地臣属王茂，但他并没有死罪。
English: The West Wei Grandmaster Wu Wentai wanted to kill his vassal Wang Shao, but he did not have the death penalty.

古文：尚书左丞柳庆谏，泰怒曰： 卿党罪人，亦当坐！ 
现代文：尚书左丞柳庆向宇文泰提出不同意见，宇文泰恼怒地说： 你偏袒罪人，也应当被治罪。 
English: Shangshu Zuoren Liuqing raised a dissenting opinion to Yu Wentai, and Yu Wentai said angrily: If you favor the guilty, you should also be punished.

古文：执庆于前。
现代文：便把柳庆拘捕起来。
English: Liu Qing was then arrested.

古文：庆辞色不挠，曰： 庆闻君蔽于事为不明，臣知而不争为不忠。
现代文：柳庆言语神色毫不屈服，他说道： 柳庆我听说，做国君的被事情的假象蒙蔽就是不明，做臣子的知道事情真相而不支争辩就是不忠。
English: Liu Qing's expression was unyielding, he said: Liu Qing, I have heard that if you are a sovereign who is blinded by the appearance of things, it is unclear, and if you are a courtier who knows the truth of the matter and does not support the argument, it is disloyal.

古文：庆既竭忠，不敢爱死，但惧公为不明耳。 
现代文：我然竭尽全力为国进忠了，不敢吝惜自己的生命，只是我怕你不明啊。 
English: I tried my best to be loyal to the country and did not dare to spare my own life, but I'm afraid you don't know.

古文：泰寤，亟使赦茂，不及，乃赐茂家钱帛，曰： 以旌吾过。 
现代文：宇文泰这才醒悟，急忙派人传令赦免王茂。结果没有得及。于是，宇文泰便赐给王茂的家属很多的钱帛说： 用它来表明我的过失吧。 
English: It was only then that Wu Wentai came to his senses. He hurriedly sent a messenger to pardon Wang Mao. The result was not in time. So, Wu Wentai gave Wang Mao's family members a lot of money and said, "Use it to show my fault."

古文：丙辰晦，柳仲礼夜入韦粲营，部分众军。
现代文：丙辰晦，柳仲礼夜间进入韦的军营，部署各路军队。
English: At dusk, Liu Zhongli entered Wei's military camp at night and deployed troops from all directions.

古文：旦日，会战，诸将各有据守，令粲顿青塘。
现代文：第二天早上，与侯景的军队交战。各个将领各有自己要把守的地方。柳仲礼命令韦粲屯驻在青塘。
English: The next morning, there was a battle with Hou Jing's army. Each general had his own place to defend. Liu Zhongli ordered Wei Xuanjun to stay in Qingtang.

古文：粲以青塘当石头中路，贼必争之，颇惮之。
现代文：由于青塘处于通往石头的道路正中，叛贼一定会争夺此地，韦粲很害怕屯驻在那里。
English: Because Qingtang is in the middle of the road leading to the stone, the rebels will certainly fight for this place, Wei Wei is very afraid to stay there.

古文：仲礼曰： 青塘要地，非兄不可；若疑兵少，当更遣军相助。 
现代文：柳仲礼对韦粲说： 青塘是战略要地，非得老兄你去不可。如果你担心兵力少的话，我会再派军队协助你。 
English: Liu Zhongli said to Wei Wei: Qingtang is a strategic place, you have to go there. If you are worried about the shortage of troops, I will send more troops to help you.

古文：乃使直阁将军刘叔胤助之。
现代文：于是，柳仲礼便派遣直将军刘叔胤协助韦粲。
English: As a result, Liu Zhongli dispatched General Liu Shuyun to assist Wei Wei.

