古文：钱唐韩宜可萧岐冯坚茹太素李仕鲁叶伯巨郑士利周敬心王朴钱唐，字惟明，象山人。
现代文：钱唐，字惟明，象山人。
English: Qiantang, the characters are clear, like mountain people.

古文：博学敦行。
现代文：他博学敦行。
English: He is a quick learner.

古文：洪武元年，举明经。
现代文：洪武元年，举明经。
English: In the first year of Hongwu, the Ming Dynasty was raised.

古文：对策称旨，特授刑部尚书。
现代文：对策甚合圣旨，被特授予刑部尚书。
English: The countermeasures are very much in line with the holy will, and it has been specially awarded the honor of the Criminal Law Department.

古文：二年诏孔庙春秋释奠，止行于曲阜，天下不必通祀。
现代文：二年诏令孔庙的春秋释奠，只在曲阜举行，天下就不必通祀。
English: In the second year of the imperial edict, the Spring and Autumn Festival of Confucius Temple was held only in Qufu, so there was no need for the whole country to worship together.

古文：唐伏阙上疏言： 孔子垂教万世，天下共尊其教，故天下得通祀孔子，报本之礼不可废。 
现代文：钱唐进宫上疏曰 ：孔子垂教万世，天下共尊其教，所以，天下应该通祀孔子，根本之礼不可废。 
English: When Qiantang entered the palace, the imperial edict said, "Confucius has taught for all ages, and his teachings are revered by the whole world. Therefore, the whole world should worship Confucius, and the fundamental ritual must not be abandoned."

古文：侍郎程徐亦疏言： 古今祀典，独社稷、三皇与孔子通祀。
现代文：侍郎程徐也上疏说 ：古今祀典，唯独社稷、三皇与孔子通祀。
English: His chamberlain Cheng Xu also said, "The ancient and modern sutras are the only ones commonly worshipped by the emperor, the three emperors and Confucius."

古文：天下民非社稷、三皇则无以生，非孔子之道则无以立。
现代文：天下的百姓没有社稷、三皇就没法生存，没有孔子之道则国不立。
English: The people of the world can not survive without Shifu and the three emperors, and without the way of Confucius, the country can not be established.

古文：尧、舜、禹、汤、文、武、周公，皆圣人也。然发挥三纲五常之道，载之于经，仪范百王，师表万世，使世愈降而人极不坠者，孔子力也。
现代文：尧、舜、禹、汤、文、武、周公都是圣人，然而对三纲五常之道发扬光大，记载于经典，百王效法，传至万世，使世代传递而人不堕落，这是孔子的力量。
English: Confucius was a great sage. However, he promoted the Three Courses and Five Precepts, which were recorded in the classics and passed down from generation to generation so that people would not fall. This is the power of Confucius.

古文：孔子以道设教，天下祀之，非祀其人，祀其教也，祀其道也。
现代文：孔子因道设教，天下都祭祀他，不是祭祀他这个人，而是祭祀他的教和道。
English: Confucius founded a religion because of his teachings, and the whole world worships him. They don't worship him as a person, but rather his teachings and his way.

古文：今使天下之人，读其书，由其教，行其道，而不得举其祀，非所以维人心、扶世教也。 
现代文：现在让天下之人，读他的书，从他的教，行他的道，但又不得举祀，这不是维系人心、扶植世教之举。 
English: Now, people all over the world are allowed to read his books, follow his teachings, and walk his path, but they are not allowed to worship him. This is not the way to maintain people's hearts and support world religions.

古文：皆不听。
现代文：然而这些都没被太祖采纳。
English: These kings of the sea don't listen.

古文：久之，乃用其言。
现代文：很久以后，还是采纳了他的建议。
English: After a long time, I took his advice.

古文：帝尝览《孟子》，至 草芥  寇仇 语，谓： 非臣子所宜言 ，议罢其配享。诏： 有谏者以大不敬论。 
现代文：太祖曾阅读《孟子》，看到 草芥 、 寇仇 之说，说这都不是臣子所适宜讲的，建议免去他的配享，诏令如有进谏者以大不敬论处。
English: The great-great-grandfather had read "Mencius" and saw that it said "herb mustard" and "plunder and revenge," saying that these were not appropriate for a courtier to say. He suggested that his share should be exempted, and the imperial edict said that if there was any interference, it would be dealt with with great disrespect.

古文：唐抗疏入谏曰： 臣为孟轲死，死有余荣。 
现代文：钱唐抗疏进谏说： 我为孟轲而死，虽死犹荣。 
English: Qian Tang protested against Zhuo Jinjun and said, "I died for Meng Rong, although I am proud of my death.

古文：时廷臣无不为唐危。
现代文：当时，廷臣无不为他担心。
English: At the time, courtiers were worried about him.

古文：帝鉴其诚恳，不之罪。
现代文：太祖鉴于他的诚恳没有问罪。
English: In view of his sincerity, the great-grandfather did not plead guilty.

古文：孟子配享亦旋复。
现代文：孟子的配享也得以恢复。
English: Mencius's share was also restored.

古文：然卒命儒臣修《孟子节文》云。
现代文：然而终于命儒臣编修了《孟子节文》。
English: However, he finally ordered Ju Chen to compile the "Mencius Festival Text."

古文：唐为人强直。
现代文：钱唐为人强直。
English: Qiantang is a strong and upright person.

古文：尝诏讲《虞书》，唐陛立而讲。
现代文：曾受命宣讲《虞书》，钱唐站立着宣讲。
English: Once ordered to preach "The Book of the State," Qiantang stood up to preach.

古文：授刑部侍郎，进尚书，卒。徐精勤通敏，工诗文，有集传于世。
现代文：太祖怒消，赐给他食物，即命令撤下图画。不久，钱唐被贬至寿州，去世。
English: The great-grandfather appeased his anger and gave him food, that is, ordered him to remove the picture. Soon, Qiantang was demoted to Shoushou and died.

古文：韩宜可，字伯时，浙江山阴人。
现代文：韩宜可，字伯时，浙江山阴人。
English: Han Yike, the character Bo Shi, is from Shanyin, Zhejiang Province.

古文：元至正中，行御史台辟为掾，不就。
现代文：元朝至正年间，行御史台征召其为属官，没有应征。
English: Between the Yuan and Zheng dynasties, he was called up by the Imperial Historian's Office as a subordinate official, but he did not enlist.

古文：洪武初，荐授山阴教谕，转楚府录事。
现代文：洪武初年，举荐授予山阴教谕，转任楚府录事。
English: In the first year of Hongwu, he was recommended to be awarded the title of Shanyin Zhao, and transferred to the post of Chu Prefecture Recorder.

古文：寻擢监察御史，弹劾不避权贵。
现代文：不久提升为监察御史，弹劾不回避权贵。
English: He was soon promoted to inspector general of history, and impeachment did not evade the powerful.

古文：时丞相胡惟庸、御史大夫陈宁、中丞涂节方有宠于帝，尝侍坐，从容燕语。
现代文：当时丞相胡惟庸、御史大夫陈宁、中丞涂节正得宠于皇上，曾侍坐，从容燕语。
English: At that time, the imperial secretary Hu Wei Yong, the imperial historian Chen Ning, and the junior imperial secretary Tu Jie were favored by the emperor, and they sat in attendance and spoke Yan language with ease.

古文：宜可直前，出怀中弹文，劾三人险恶似忠，奸佞似直，恃功怙宠，内怀反侧，擢置台端，擅作威福，乞斩其首以谢天下。
现代文：韩宜可直往前去，出示怀中弹文，弹劾他们三人险恶又好似忠臣，奸佞又好似正直，恃功怙宠，内怀反侧，擢置台端，擅作福威，请求斩首以谢天下。
English: Han Yi can go straight ahead, show the letter in his pocket, impeach the three of them for being sinister and loyal, treacherous and honest, covetous of success and favor, conceited, set up the table, do favors, and request beheading to thank the world.

古文：帝怒曰： 快口御史，敢排陷大臣耶！ 
现代文：太祖大怒说： 快口御史，胆敢排陷大臣啊！ 
English: The great-grandfather said angrily: "Hold your tongue, Mr. President, how dare you try to oust a minister!

古文：命下锦衣卫狱，寻释之。
现代文：命投入锦衣卫狱中，不久得以释放。
English: He spent the rest of his life in the brocade prison and was soon released.

古文：九年出为陕西按察司佥事。
现代文：九年出任陕西按察司佥事。
English: He has served as the Shaanxi Investigating Officer for nine years.

古文：时官吏有罪者，笞以上悉谪屯凤阳，至万数。
现代文：当时官吏犯罪的，笞刑以上都贬至凤阳屯田，数以万计。
English: At that time, tens of thousands of officials who committed crimes were punished with flogging or more and sent to Fengyang Tonden.

古文：宜可疏，争之曰： 刑以禁淫慝，一民轨，宜论其情之轻重，事之公私，罪之大小。
现代文：宜可上疏争辩说： 刑律禁止淫慝，一民犯罪，应视其情节轻重，犯罪是因公，还是因私，以及罪行的大小。
English: It is appropriate to argue that: adultery is prohibited by criminal law, and a crime committed by a citizen should be judged according to its seriousness, whether the crime was committed in the line of duty or for personal reasons, and the magnitude of the crime.

古文：今悉令谪屯，此小人之幸，君子殆矣。乞分别，以协众心。 
现代文：现全部命他们谪屯，这对小人而言便宜了他们，对君子而言则害了他们，请求区别对待以平衡众心。 
English: Now, they all live in the same place, which makes them cheaper for villains, but harms them for gentlemen, asking for different treatment to balance everyone's hearts.

古文：帝可之。
现代文：这一建议得到太祖的认可。
English: The emperor agreed to his request.

古文：已，入朝京师。会赐诸司没官男女，宜可独不受。
现代文：不久，入朝京师，遇上皇上赏赐籍没入官的男女给各衙门官吏，唯独宜可不接受。
English: Soon after he entered the imperial capital, the emperor met with men and women who had not been appointed to official posts and gave them official titles, but they were not accepted.

古文：且极论： 罪人不孥，古之制也。
现代文：并极力辩说 ：罪人不为奴，这是古代的制度。
English: And he argued forcefully: Sinners are not slaves, this is an ancient system.

古文：有事随坐，法之滥也。
现代文：犯罪随意株连，这是法制泛滥。
English: Crime is rampant, and so is lawlessness.

古文：况男女，人之大伦，婚姻逾时，尚伤和气。
现代文：何况男女，人之大伦，婚姻逾时，尚伤和气。
English: What's more, men and women are different, marriage is outdated, and it still hurts harmony.

古文：合门连坐，岂圣朝所宜！ 
现代文：合门连坐，怎么能与圣朝相适宜？ 
English: Sitting together, how can it be appropriate with the Holy Spirit?

古文：帝是其言。
现代文：太祖认为这是对的。
English: The emperor thought this was a very good idea.

古文：后坐事将刑，御谨身殿亲鞫之，获免。
现代文：后犯罪行将受刑，太祖亲临谨身殿讯问，得以释免。
English: After the crime, the perpetrator was sentenced, and the great-grandfather personally came to the hall of honor for questioning, and was released.

古文：复疏，陈二十余事，皆报可。
现代文：又上奏二十多件事，都得以认可。
English: In addition, more than 20 events were broadcast, all of which were recognized.

古文：未几，罢归。
现代文：不久，辞官归乡。
English: Soon after, the diplomat returned home.

古文：已，复征至。
现代文：不久，又征召他入京。
English: Soon after, he was called up again to go to Kyoto.

古文：命撰祀钟山、大江文；谕日本、征乌蛮诏，皆称旨，特授山西右布政使。
现代文：命撰写祭祀钟山、大江的祭文，晓谕日本、征讨乌蛮檄文，皆称圣意，特授山西右布政使。
English: He was ordered to write the ritual texts for the worship of Zhongshan and Dajiang, to preach to Japan, and to collect the texts of the barbarian invasions, all of which are known as sacred thoughts. He was specially awarded the title of Shanxi Ubu Political Envoy.

古文：帝察韶朴诚，从之。
现代文：不久因事安置于云南。
English: He was soon relocated to Yunnan due to the incident.

古文：未几，致仕，卒于家。萧岐，字尚仁，泰和人。
现代文：惠帝即位，检讨陈性善举荐，起任为云南参政，入宫任命为左副都御史，死于官任上，当天夜晚，大星陨落了，战马惊嘶，人们说宜可魂归西天了。萧岐，字尚仁，泰和人。
English: Emperor Hui ascended to the throne, reviewed and recommended Chen Xishen, and started to participate in politics in Yunnan. When he entered the palace, he was appointed as the left vice-governor of the capital, and died in office. On the evening of the same day, the great star fell, the warhorse was shocked, and people said that Yi Ke's soul had returned to the West. Xiao Qi, the character Shang Ren, Tai He Ren.

古文：五岁而孤，事祖父母以孝闻。
现代文：五岁时就成了孤儿，事奉祖父母以孝顺闻名。
English: He became an orphan at the age of five and is known for his filial piety in serving his grandparents.

古文：有司屡举不赴。
现代文：有司多次举荐而不就。
English: There were many times when the department would recommend someone and they wouldn't take it.

古文：洪武十七年，诏征贤良，强起之。
现代文：洪武十七年，诏令征召贤良，强制起用他。
English: In the seventeenth year of Hongwu, the imperial edict conscripted Xian Liang and forced him to serve.

古文：上十便书，大意谓：帝刑罚过中，讦告风炽。请禁止实封以杜诬罔；依律科狱以信诏令。凡万余言。
现代文：他上十便书，大意是说皇上的刑罚过重，讦告风炽，请求禁止实对以杜绝诬告，依法定刑，以忠实诏令，奏章长达万余言。
English: He wrote ten letters, to the effect that the emperor's punishment was too heavy, that the false accusation was incendiary, requesting a ban on the truth to stop the false accusation, according to the legal punishment, to be faithful to the edict, and the letter was more than ten thousand words long.

古文：召见，授潭王府长史。
现代文：皇上召见他，授予潭王府长史。
English: The emperor summoned him and awarded him the title of Tan Wang Fuchangshi.

古文：力辞，忤旨，谪云南楚雄训导。
现代文：极力推辞。违忤圣旨，贬为云南楚雄训导。
English: He rejected it as much as he could. In violation of God's will, he was relegated to Yunnan Chuxiong's teaching.

古文：岐即日行，遣骑追还。
现代文：萧岐当天即前往，皇上派快骑追回他。
English: Xiao Qi went there on the same day, and the emperor sent a cavalry to recover him.

古文：岁余，改授陕西平凉。
现代文：一年后，改授陕西平凉，一年后辞官。
English: A year later, he was transferred to Pingliang, Shaanxi Province, and retired a year later.

古文：再岁致仕。复召与钱宰等考定《书》传。赐币钞，给驿归。
现代文：朝廷再次征召他，令与钱宰等人考定书传，赐给币钞，赏赐驿马归乡。
English: The imperial court summoned him again, ordered him and Qianzai and others to judge the book, gave him coins and banknotes, and rewarded him with a horse to return to his hometown.

古文：尝辑《五经要义》；又取《刑统八韵赋》，引律令为之解，合为一集。
现代文：他曾编辑了《五经要义》，又取《刑统八韵赋》，引用律令作解，二者合而为一集。
English: He once edited the "Five Essentials of the Five Classics," and also took "The Eight Rhyme System of the Criminal Law" and quoted the ritsuryo for an explanation, and the two were combined into one episode.

古文：尝曰： 天下之理本一，出乎道必入乎刑。
现代文：他曾说 ：天下的理本为一体，违背道的就必定走入歧途。
English: He once said, "The foundation of the world is one, and anyone who goes against it is bound to go astray."

古文：吾合二书，使观者有所省也。 
现代文：我把二书合而为一，使读者能有所反省。 
English: I have combined the two books into one, so that the reader can reflect.

古文：至是克新以亮直见重。
现代文：学者称他为正固先生。
English: Scholars call him Mr. Zhenggu.

古文：不数年，擢礼部尚书。寻引疾，命太医给药物，不辍其奉。
现代文：当时，太祖的治理十分刚严，使中外深感凛凛，奉法救过毫不宽恕，而萧岐上书切中时弊，言语耿直，太祖并不以为忤逆。
English: At that time, the governance of the great-grandfather was very rigid, which made the Chinese and foreigners feel deeply saddened. He was saved by the law without any forgiveness, and Xiao Qi wrote about the shortcomings of the time, and his words were straightforward. The great-grandfather did not think that he was being rebellious.

古文：及卒，命有司护丧归葬。冯坚，不知何许人，为南丰典史。
现代文：这以后因提建议而破格提拔的，还有门克新。冯坚，不知何许人，为南丰典史。
English: After this, there was also Menke Xin, who was exceptionally promoted for making suggestions. Feng Jian, I don't know how many people, is the classic history of Nanfeng.

古文：洪武二十四年上书言九事： 一曰养圣躬。
现代文：洪武二十四年，上书谈九件事。一为养圣躬。
English: In the twenty-fourth year of Hongwu, he wrote a book about nine things. One was to raise a saint.

古文：请清心省事，不与细务，以为民社之福。
现代文：请求皇上清心省事，不干涉具体事务，给百姓造福。
English: He asked the emperor to be prudent, not to interfere in specific affairs, and to benefit the people.

古文：二曰择老成。
现代文：二为择老成。
English: The second is the choice of the old.

古文：诸王年方壮盛，左右辅导。愿择取老成之臣出为王官，使得直言正色，以图匡救。
现代文：诸王年方壮盛，左右的辅佐之臣，就要挑选老成的大臣担任王官，如有正直的建议，对治国有利。
English: When the kings are in the prime of their lives, and the subordinate vassals of the right and left are in the ascendant, it is necessary to select a veteran minister to serve as a royal official. If there is an honest suggestion, it is beneficial to the governance of the country.

古文：三曰攘要荒。
现代文：三为攘要荒。
English: Three is a bustle and three is a famine.

古文：请务农讲武，屯戍边圉，以备不虞。
现代文：请求务农讲武，在边疆屯戍，以防备不测。
English: Ask farmers to be prepared and stay in the border areas in case of emergency.

古文：四曰励有司。
现代文：四为励有司。
English: The fourth is the encouragement division.

古文：请得廉正有守之士，任以方面。旌别属吏，具实以闻而黜陟之。使人勇于自治。
现代文：请求任用廉正谨守之士，任以重职，甄别属吏，具实奏报而予以黜陟，这样可使官吏勇于自治。
English: Requesting the appointment of honest and conscientious people, appointing them to important positions, screening subordinate officials, and giving them a real report, so that officials can be brave in self-governance.

古文：五曰褒祀典。
现代文：五为褒祀典。
English: Five are awards ceremonies.

古文：请敕有司采历代忠烈诸臣，追加封谥，俾末俗有所兴劝。
现代文：请求敕令有司收集历代忠烈诸臣，追加封谥，使浇薄之俗有所兴劝。
English: Request that the imperial edict have a secretary collect the loyal retainers of the past generations and add additional seals, so that the custom of casting thin has some persuasion.

古文：六曰省宦寺。
现代文：六为省宦寺。
English: Six are provincial Taoist temples.

古文：晨夕密迩，其言易入，养成祸患而不自知。
现代文：晨夕密迩，他们的话容易听得进，养成祸患而自己却不知道。
English: In the morning and evening, their words are easy to listen to, but they do not know that they are causing trouble.

古文：请裁去冗员，可杜异日陵替之弊。
现代文：请求裁减冗员，可以杜绝异日陵替之弊。
English: Requesting redundancy can eliminate the drawbacks of sudden replacement.

古文：七曰易边将。
现代文：七为易边将。
English: Seven are alternate captains.

古文：假以兵柄，久在边圉，多致纵佚。
现代文：授予兵权，他们长久身处边疆，多有纵佚。
English: Granted the right to serve in the military, they have been on the frontier for a long time, and most of them have long hair.

古文：请时迁岁调，不使久居其任。
现代文：请求随时调动，每年调防，不使他们长久身居一职。
English: They ask to be transferred at any time, and they are transferred every year, so that they do not stay in the same position for a long time.

古文：不惟保全勋臣，实可防将骄卒惰、内轻外重之渐。
现代文：不仅仅为了保全勋臣，而实质上可以防止战将骄横、士兵懒惰，造成轻内重外的局面。
English: It is not only for the sake of preserving the honorable vassals, but in essence, it can prevent the generals from being arrogant and the soldiers from being lazy, resulting in a situation of less importance.

古文：八曰访吏治。
现代文：八为访吏治。
English: Eight are visiting officials.

古文：廉干之才，或为上官所忌，僚吏所嫉。上不加察，非激劝之道。
现代文：廉洁、干练之才，有的被上官和僚吏所忌妒，上级不加以考察，这不是激励官吏之道。
English: Some of them are envied by their superiors and colleagues for their honesty and ability, and are not examined by their superiors. This is not the way to motivate officials.

古文：请广布耳目，访察廉贪，以明黜陟。
现代文：请求广布耳目，访察廉贪，以明黜陟。
English: Ask for a wide range of ears and eyes, visit the corrupt, to be enlightened.

古文：九曰增关防。
现代文：九为增关防。
English: Nine is to increase customs protection.

古文：诸司以帖委胥吏，俾督所部，辄加箠楚，害及于民。
现代文：诸司以帖委任胥吏，但不加以督促，动辄加以瞂击，祸害百姓。
English: The various departments appointed officials with a lot of authority, but they did not urge them to do so, and they attacked them at every turn, causing harm to the people.

古文：请增置勘合以付诸司，听其填写差遣，事讫缴报，庶所司不轻发以病民，而庶务亦不致旷废。 
现代文：请求增设勘合以付诸司，让他们填写差遣，事情完了交报，这样所司就不敢轻易危害百姓，而庶政也不至于荒废。
English: Request the establishment of additional contact points to the departments, let them fill out the dispatch, and submit the report when the matter is completed. In this way, the department will not easily endanger the people, and the general affairs will not be wasted.

古文：书奏，帝嘉之，称其知时务，达事变。
现代文：奏书上后，太祖嘉奖他，称赞他知时务、达事变。
English: After the report was published, the great-grandfather commended him, praising his knowledge of current affairs and achievements.

古文：又谓侍臣曰： 坚言惟调易边将则未然。
现代文：又对侍臣说 ：冯坚所说的唯独调防边将一事，有点不妥。
English: He also said to the aide-de-camp: What Feng Jian said about only changing the defense commander is a bit wrong.

古文：边将数易，则兵力勇怯。敌情出没，出川形胜，无以备知。
现代文：边将多次调换，则兵力勇怯，敌情出没，山川地形，不可能完全熟悉。
English: If the generals are changed many times, the troops will be timid, there will be hostile situations, and the terrain of mountains and rivers will not be completely familiar.

古文：倘得赵充国、班超者，又何取数易为哉！ 
现代文：倘若有赵充国、班超之类的大将，又为什么一定要经常调换呢？ 
English: If there are generals like Zhao Chongguo and Banchao, why do they have to be changed so often?

古文：乃命吏部擢坚左佥都御史，在院颇持大体。
现代文：于是命吏部提升冯坚为左佥都御史。在都察院颇持大体。
English: As a result, the Ministry of Justice promoted Feng Jian to the position of Zuo Jian (左都御史).

古文：其明年，卒于任。
现代文：第二年，死于任上。
English: He died in office the following year.

古文：茹太素，泽州人。
现代文：茹太素，泽州人。
English: Rutaxin, a native of Zezhou.

古文：洪武三年，乡举，上书称旨，授监察御史。
现代文：洪武三年的乡试举人。上书合于皇上心意，被授予监察御史官职。
English: In the third year of Hongwu's reign, he held a township test to select people. The Emperor approved of his application, and he was awarded the post of inspector-historian.

古文：六年擢四川按察使，以平允称。
现代文：六年，提升为四川按察使，以公平著称。
English: In six years, he was promoted to Sichuan A-level inspector, known for his fairness.

古文：七年五月召为刑部侍郎，上言： 自中书省内外百司，听御史、按察使检举。而御史台未有定考，宜令守院御史一体察核。
现代文：七年五月应召为刑部侍郎。他向皇上写信说 ：中书省里里外外共有百余个官署，都接受御史、按察使的监督，但御史台却没有定期考核，应该命令守院御史一体考核。
English: In May of the seventh year, he was called to serve as a constable of the Criminal Investigation Department. He wrote a letter to the emperor saying, "There are more than a hundred government offices inside and outside the Chinese Literature Ministry, all of which are subject to the supervision of the Imperial Historian and the Inspector-General, but the Imperial Historian's Office does not have a regular assessment, and it should be ordered to conduct a comprehensive assessment of the Imperial Historian's Office.

古文：磨勘司官吏数少，难以检核天下钱粮，请增置若干员，各分为科。
现代文：磨勘司官员数量太少，难以胜任检查全国钱粮的任务，请求增加官员若干员，各分为不同的科目。
English: The number of officials of the Milling and Quarrying Department is too small to be competent in the task of inspecting the national money and grain. It is requested to increase the number of officials, each divided into different subjects.

古文：在外省卫，凡会议军民事，各不相合，致稽延。
现代文：在外省卫，凡讨论军队和老百姓的事务，大家意见有分歧，致使事情一直拖延。
English: In the Ministry of National Defense, when discussing the affairs of the military and the people, there are differences of opinion, causing things to be delayed.

古文：请用按察司一员纠正。 
现代文：请求选用按察司一人负责纠正。 
English: It is the sole responsibility of the Investigation Division to rectify the selection request.

古文：帝皆从之。
现代文：皇帝完全采纳了他的意见。
English: Taizong all adopted it.

古文：明年，坐累降刑部主事。
现代文：第二年，因受到牵连，降职刑部主事，他又陈述时事，达数万言。
English: The following year, he was implicated and demoted to the position of the head of the criminal investigation department. He also made a statement on current affairs, amounting to tens of thousands of words.

古文：陈时务累万言，太祖令中书郎王敏诵而听之。
现代文：太祖命令中书郎王敏读给他听。
English: The great-grandfather ordered the middle school teacher Wang Min to read it to him.

古文：中言： 才能之士，数年来幸存者百无一二，今所任率迂儒俗吏。 
现代文：其中说，几年来有才能的人，一百人中难得有一、二人幸存，当今任职的官吏都是迂腐文人和无能官吏。
English: It said that in the past few years, only one or two talented people out of a hundred have survived, and the officials currently in office are pedantic writers and incompetent officials.

古文：言多忤触。
现代文：其中有很多忤逆和触犯皇上的话语。
English: There are many words that are rebellious and offend the emperor.

古文：帝怒，召太素面诘，杖于朝。
现代文：皇帝大怒，召见茹太素当面责问，并在朝廷上杖打。
English: The emperor was furious, summoned Rutaso to face him for questioning, and beat him with a cane in the imperial court.

古文：次夕，复于宫中令人诵之，得其可行者四事。慨然曰： 为君难，为臣不易。
现代文：第二天傍晚，皇上再次在宫中令人朗读茹太素的信，从中体悟到了四条可行的建议，于是感叹说： 当皇帝难，做臣子也不容易。
English: In the evening of the next day, the emperor had Jutaso's letter read aloud again in the palace. From this, he realized that there were four feasible suggestions, so he sighed and said, "It is difficult to be an emperor, and it is not easy to be a courtier."

古文：朕所以求直言，欲其切于情事。
现代文：我之所以要求臣子直言，是希望他们能切中事理。
English: The reason I ask my ministers to speak frankly is that I hope they can get to the heart of the matter.

古文：文词太多，便至荧听。
现代文：文辞写得太多，便到了不知所云的地步。
English: Too many words are written, and it gets to the point where you don't know what to do.

古文：太素所陈，五百余言可尽耳。 
现代文：茹太素所呈意见，其实只要五百字就够了。 
English: In fact, only five hundred words are enough to express the opinion of Rutai Su.

古文：因令中书定奏对式，俾陈得失者无繁文。
现代文：因而下令中书制订上奏的格式，杜绝大臣呈述奏文繁琐冗长。
English: As a result, he ordered that the format of the opening statement be formulated in the middle of the letter, to prevent the minister from presenting a lengthy and cumbersome statement.

古文：摘太素疏中可行者下所司，帝自序其首，颁示中外。
现代文：同时摘抄茹太素上奏中可行的有关条文下发到有关部门。皇上亲自在前面作序，颁发朝廷内外。
English: At the same time, the relevant provisions that can be implemented in the Jutra Sutra were copied and sent to the relevant departments. The Emperor personally wrote the preface in front and issued it inside and outside the Imperial Court.

古文：十年，与同官曾秉正先后同出为参政，而太素往浙江。
现代文：十年，茹太素同官曾秉正先后担任参政，茹太素前往浙江。
English: In ten years, Ru Tai Su's colleague, Zeng Bingzheng, successively served as a politician, and Ru Tai Su went to Zhejiang.

古文：寻以侍亲赐还里。
现代文：后皇上以侍奉父母恩准他还乡。
English: The Empress Dowager graciously allowed him to return to his hometown to serve his parents.

古文：十六年召为刑部试郎中。居一月，迁都察院佥都御史。复降翰林院检讨。
现代文：十六年，茹太素应召为刑部试郎中，一个月后，晋升为都察院佥都御史，后又降职为翰林院检讨。
English: Sixteen years later, Ru Tai Su was called to serve as a probation officer in the Criminal Investigation Department, and a month later, he was promoted to the inspector general of the Capital Investigation Bureau, and then demoted to the inspector general of the Hanlin Investigation Bureau.

古文：十八年九月擢户部尚书。
现代文：十八年九月，晋升为户部尚书。
English: In September 2018, he was promoted to head of the Household Division.

古文：太素抗直不屈，屡濒于罪，帝时宥之。
现代文：茹太素刚正不阿，几次濒于治罪，皇上都宽容他。
English: Ruutai was very upright, and several times he was on the verge of committing a crime, but the emperor tolerated him.

古文：一日，宴便殿，赐之酒曰： 金杯同汝饮，白刃不相饶。 
现代文：有一天，皇上在便殿设宴，恩赐茹太素喝酒，说： 金杯同汝饮，白刃不相饶。 
English: One day, the emperor held a banquet in the hall, and bestowed the gift of wine to Rutaxu, saying, "Drink from the golden cup with thee, and spare not the white sword."

古文：太素叩首，即续韵对曰： 丹诚图报国，不避圣心焦。 
现代文：茹太素叩头称是，即而续韵对答说： 丹诚图报国，不避圣心焦。 
English: Rutherford's followers said yes, and the rhyme continued: Dan Chengtu reported to the country, and did not avoid the Sacred Heart.

古文：帝为恻然。
现代文：皇上闻此十分伤感。
English: The Emperor was very sad to hear this.

古文：寻竟以忤旨罢。
现代文：没多久，茹太素降职为御史。
English: It did not take long for Rutaso to be demoted to goshi.

古文：贫不能归，鬻其四岁女。
现代文：后因陷害詹徽之事牵连，茹太素和同官十二人都被送进监狱治罪。
English: After being implicated in the frame-up of Zhanhui, Ru Tai Su and twelve of his colleagues were all sent to prison to be punished.

古文：帝闻大怒，置腐刑，不知所终。李仕鲁，字宗孔，濮人。
现代文：后来茹太素因有罪被处死。李仕鲁，字宗孔，濮州人。
English: Later, Ruutai Su was executed for his crime. Li Shilu, also known as Zong Kong, was from Zhangzhou.

古文：少颖敏笃学，足不窥户外者三年。
现代文：他少年聪颖、好学，足不出户达三年之久。
English: He was a bright, studious boy who had not left home for three years.

古文：闻鄱阳朱公迁得宋朱熹之传，往从之游，尽受其学。
现代文：听说鄱阳朱公迁得到宋代朱熹的传记，就前往他处，学习朱熹的学说。
English: Hearing that Zhu Gongqian of Fenyang had obtained a biography of Zhu Xi of the Song Dynasty, he went to another place to study the teachings of Zhu Xi.

古文：太祖故知仕鲁名，洪武中，诏求能为朱氏学者，有司举仕鲁。入见，太祖喜曰： 吾求子久，何相见晚也！ 
现代文：太祖因此得知了仕鲁的姓名。洪武年间，诏令访求精于朱氏学说的学者，有司举荐李仕鲁，李仕鲁入宫拜见皇上，太祖高兴地说： 我找你已很久了，今日得见，相见恨晚。 
English: During the reign of Emperor Hongwu, scholars who were keen on Zhu's theory were invited by the emperor to pay a visit, and one of them recommended Li Shilu. Li Shilu entered the palace to meet the emperor, and Emperor Taizu said happily, "I've been looking for you for a long time, and I got to see you today. I'm so glad I got to meet you."

古文：除黄州同知。曰： 朕姑以民事试子，行召子矣。 
现代文：任命他为黄州同知，并说： 我姑且用民事来考核你，不久我会征召你的。 
English: He appointed him as Huangzhou Tongzhi, and said: I will use civil affairs to assess you, and I will conscript you soon.

古文：期年，治行闻。
现代文：当年，仕鲁的政绩显著。
English: At that time, Shilu's political achievements were remarkable.

古文：十四年，命为大理寺卿。
现代文：十四年，任命他为大理寺卿。
English: Fourteen years later, he was appointed as the Lord of Dali Temple.

古文：帝自践阼后，颇好释氏教。诏征东南戒德僧，数建法会于蒋山。应对称旨者辄赐金礻阑袈裟衣，召入禁中，赐坐与讲论。
现代文：太祖自登基后，就十分热衷于释氏之教，诏令征召东南戒德僧，多次于蒋山举行法会，应对称旨者动辄就得到金衤阑袈裟衣的赏赐，并召入禁中，赐坐并与其讲论。
English: After ascending to the throne, the great-grandfather was very keen on the teachings of the Shih clan. He issued an imperial edict to recruit monks from the southeast to be virtuous, held many pujas in Mount Jiang, and rewarded those who praised him with a golden robe. He also summoned them to the Forbidden City, gave them a seat, and lectured to them.

古文：吴印、华克勤之属，皆拔擢至大官，时时寄以耳目。
现代文：吴印、华克勤等人都得以提拔为大官，并把他们作为耳目。
English: Wu Ying, Hua Keqin and others were promoted to high-ranking officials, and they were used as eyes and ears.

古文：由是其徒横甚，谗毁大臣。
现代文：因此，他们横行霸道，谗毁大臣。
English: As a result, they are acting in a domineering manner and undermining the minister.

古文：举朝莫敢言，惟仕鲁与给事中陈汶辉相继争之。
现代文：全朝都没人敢说，唯独仕鲁和给事中陈汶辉相继争辩。
English: No one in the whole dynasty dared to say that only Shi Lu and Chen Wenhui were successively arguing.

古文：汶辉疏言： 古帝王以来，未闻缙绅缁流，杂居同事，可以相济者也。
现代文：汶辉上疏说 ：古帝王以来，没有听说过缙绅缁流，杂居同事，可以相济的。
English: Wenhui Shangsuo said: "Since the ancient emperors, we have not heard of the gentry and gentry, mixed-race colleagues, who can be reconciled.

古文：今勋旧耆德咸思辞禄去位，而缁流憸夫乃益以谗间。
现代文：现功勋元老都在考虑辞去官职，而缁流忄佥夫又乘机进谗言挑拨。
English: The current meritorious veterans are all considering resigning from their posts, while the turbulent widower is taking advantage of the opportunity to make provocative remarks.

古文：如刘基、徐达之见猜，李善长、周德兴之被谤，视萧何、韩信，其危疑相去几何哉？
现代文：如刘基、徐达受到怀疑，李善长、周德兴遭到诽谤，这和萧何、韩信遭受的猜疑又相差多远呢？
English: If Liu Ji and Xu Darong are suspected, and Li Shanchang and Zhou Dexing are slandered, how far is this from the suspicion suffered by Xiao He and Han Xin?

古文：伏望陛下于股肱心膂，悉取德行文章之彦，则太平可立致矣。 
现代文：希望陛下于股肱心膂，全部任用德行好、有才能的人，则天下的太平可以永保。 
English: It is my hope that His Majesty will have the courage to appoint all virtuous and talented people, and that peace in the world will be preserved forever.

古文：帝不听。
现代文：太祖没有采纳。
English: Emperor Xuan did not listen.

古文：诸僧怙宠者，遂请为释氏创立职官。
现代文：诸僧怙宠，请求为释氏创立职官。
English: The monks were so pleased that they asked for a post to be created for him.

古文：于是以先所置善世院为僧录司。设左、右善世、左、右阐教、左、右讲经觉义等官，皆高其品秩。
现代文：于是以先所置善世院为僧录司，设立左右善世、左右阐教、左右讲经觉义等官职，都提高其品佚。
English: As a result, he made the previously established Zensei-in Temple the head of the Department of Monastic Records, and established the offices of the Right and Left Zensei, the Right and Left Elucidation, and the Right and Left Elucidation, all of which enhanced his reputation.

古文：道教亦然。
现代文：道教也同样对待。
English: Taoism is treated in the same way.

古文：度僧尼道士至逾数万。
现代文：度僧尼道士超过万人。
English: There are more than ten thousand Buddhist monks and nuns.

古文：仕鲁疏言： 陛下方创业，凡意指所向，即示子孙万世法程，奈何舍圣学而崇异端乎！ 
现代文：仕鲁上疏说： 陛下刚刚创业，凡意旨所向都将成为子孙万世的法程，为什么舍弃圣学而崇尚异端呢？ 
English: Shilu Shangsuo said, "Your Majesty has just started a business, and whatever you want to do will become the law for all generations to come. Why do you abandon the sacred teachings and advocate heresy?

古文：章数十上，亦不听。
现代文：奏章几十次呈上，太祖仍不采纳。
English: The score was submitted dozens of times, but Taizu still did not adopt it.

古文：仕鲁性刚介，由儒术起，方欲推明朱氏学，以辟佛自任。
现代文：仕鲁性格刚介，缘起儒学，正想推崇朱氏学说，以排斥佛教为己任。
English: Shilou's character, Gansuke, is related to Confucianism, and he wants to promote Zhu's doctrine, and it is his duty to reject Buddhism.

古文：仕鲁与汶辉死数岁，帝渐知诸僧所为多不法，有诏清理释道二教云。
现代文：到了他的建议不被采纳以后，就请命于太祖前说 ：陛下已深溺于佛教，因而臣子的忠告听不进去了。我归还陛下的笏，请求恩准我弃职回家。 
English: When his suggestion was not accepted, he was ordered to say to his great-grandfather, "Your majesty has become so absorbed in Buddhism that he cannot listen to the advice of his vassals. I am returning your majesty's scepter and begging your grace to allow me to abandon my duties and return home."

古文：叶伯巨，字居升，宁海人。
现代文：太祖大怒，命武士把他抓起来，立即处死于阶下。叶伯巨，字居升，宁海人。
English: The great-grandfather was furious, ordered the samurai to arrest him, and he died immediately. Ye Bo Jiu, also known as Ju Sheng, was from Ninghai.

古文：通经术。以国子生授平遥训导。
现代文：以国子生的身份被授予平遥训导。
English: As a son of the country, he was awarded the title of Pingyao's tutor.

古文：洪武九年星变，诏求直言。伯巨上书，略曰：
现代文：洪武九年，星变，诏令希求直言，伯巨上书，大致是说：
English: In the ninth year of Hongwu, the stars changed, the imperial edict wanted to speak frankly, and Bo Jiu wrote a letter, saying roughly:

古文：臣观当今之事，太过者三：分封太侈也，用刑太繁也，求治太速也。
现代文： 我观察当今之事，太过者有三：分封太侈，用刑太繁，求治太速。
English: In my observation of current affairs, there are three things that are too much: the distribution of seals is too extravagant, the use of punishment is too complicated, and the cure is too fast.

古文：先王之制，大都不过三国之一，上下等差，各有定分，所以强干弱枝，遏乱源而崇治本耳。
现代文： 先王的制度，大都不过三国之一，上下等差，各有定分，所以能强干弱枝，遏止动乱的根源而崇治本。
English: The previous king's system was mostly just one of the three countries, with equal differences between the upper and lower levels, each with a certain score, so it could strengthen the weak branches, curb the root causes of turmoil, and solve the problems.

古文：今裂土分封，使诸王各有分地，盖惩宋、元孤立，宗室不竞之弊。
现代文：当今裂土分封，使诸王各有坐地，大概是出于对宋、元孤立，宗室势弱的弊端的考虑。
English: Today's division of fiefs by land division, so that the kings each have a seat, is probably out of consideration for the disadvantages of the Song and Yuan dynasties being isolated and the power of the dynasty being weak.

古文：而秦、晋、燕、齐、梁、楚、吴、蜀诸国，无不连邑数十。城郭宫室亚于天子之都，优之以甲兵卫士之盛。
现代文：而秦、晋、燕、齐、梁、楚、吴、蜀诸国，无一不连邑数十，城郭宫室近次于天子之都，拥有充足、强盛的甲兵卫士。
English: However, Qin, Jin, Yan, Qi, Liang, Chu, Wu and Shu all have dozens of townships, and the castle palace is almost second only to the capital of the Son of Heaven, with sufficient and powerful warriors.

古文：臣恐数世之后，尾大不掉，然后削其地而夺之权，则必生觖望。甚者缘间而起，防之无及矣。
现代文：我担心几代以后，尾大不掉，然后再削诸王的封地并收回权力，则引起众怨，更有甚者诸王可能会兵起伐主，到那时防范就晚了。
English: I'm worried that if, after a few generations, the tail of the great egret does not fall off, and then the fiefs of the kings are reduced and the power is taken back, it will cause public resentment. What's more, the kings may rise up against the master, and by then it will be too late to prevent it.

古文：议者曰： 诸王皆天子骨肉，分地虽广，立法虽侈，岂有抗衡之理？ 
现代文：或有不同意见的人会说，诸王都是天子的骨肉，分地虽广，立法虽侈，又怎么会有抗衡之理呢？
English: Or someone with a different opinion will say that all kings are the flesh and blood of the sons of heaven. Although the land is widely divided and the legislation is extravagant, how can there be a counterbalance?

古文：臣窃以为不然。
现代文：我认为不是这样。
English: I don't think so.

古文：何不观于汉、晋之事乎？
现代文：为何不看看汉、晋的历史呢？
English: Why not look at the history of the Han and Jin dynasties?

古文：孝景，高帝之孙也；七国诸王，皆景帝之同祖父兄弟子孙也。一削其地，则遽构兵西向。
现代文：孝景帝是高帝的孙子，七国的封王都是景帝同祖父兄弟的子孙，然而一旦削他们的分地，则纠集军队向朝廷进攻。
English: Emperor Xiaojing was the grandson of Emperor Gao, and the crowned kings of the Seven Kingdoms were all the sons and grandsons of Emperor Jing and their grandfathers. However, as soon as their territories were reduced, they gathered their armies to attack the imperial court.

古文：晋之诸王，皆武帝亲子孙也，易世之后，迭相攻伐，遂成刘、石之患。
现代文：晋代的诸王，都是武帝的亲生子孙，易世之后，相互倾轧，于是造成了刘、石之患。
English: The kings of the Jin Dynasty were all the natural sons and daughters of Emperor Wu. After he died, they quarreled with each other, which led to the Liu and Shi plagues.

古文：由此言之，分封逾制，祸患立生。援古证今，昭昭然矣。
现代文：由此可见，分封逾制，祸患立生，援古证今，就十分明确了。
English: From this, it can be seen that it is very clear that the subdivision is excessive, the scourge is alive, and the ancient evidence is now.

古文：此臣所以为太过者也。
现代文：此臣所以为太过者。
English: That's why this minister is such a loser.

古文：昔贾谊劝汉文帝，尽分诸国之地，空置之以待诸王子孙。
现代文：昔日贾谊劝说汉文帝，尽分诸国之地，空置之以待诸王子孙。
English: Once upon a time, Jia Yi persuaded Emperor Hanwen to allocate as much land as possible to various countries and leave it vacant for the princes' grandchildren.

古文：向使文帝早从谊言，则必无七国之祸。
现代文：假如文帝早采纳贾谊的建议，则必定无七国之祸。
English: If Emperor Wen had accepted Jia's suggestion earlier, there would have been no Seven Kingdoms disaster.

古文：愿及诸王未之国之先，节其都邑之制，减其卫兵，限其疆理，亦以待封诸王之子孙。
现代文：希望在诸王巩固统治之前，就限制其都邑的规模，减少其卫兵之数，限制他的疆界，此也可用以分封诸王之子孙。
English: It is hoped that before the kings consolidate their rule, they will limit the size of their capitals, reduce the number of their guards, and limit their borders. This can also be used to divide the sons and grandsons of the kings.

古文：此制一定，然后诸王有贤且才者入为辅相，其余世为藩屏，与国同休。
现代文：制度一制定，然后对诸王中有贤德、才华的召入任为辅相。其余的世代为藩屏，与朝廷共一体。
English: The system was first established, and then the most virtuous and talented of the kings were called in to serve as assistants. The rest of the generation were han-pins, who were one with the imperial court.

古文：割一时之恩，制万世之利，消天变而安社稷，莫先于此。
现代文：割舍一时之恩，制万世之利，消除叛乱而安定国家，无不从此着手。
English: To give up a momentary blessing, to gain eternal benefits, to eliminate rebellion and stabilize the country, we must start from here.

古文：臣又观历代开国之君，未有不以任德结民心，以任刑失民心者。
现代文： 我又观察历代开国之君，无一不以任德结民心，以任刑而失民心的。
English: I also observed that the founding monarchs of all generations have all won the hearts of the people by virtue of their positions and lost the hearts of the people by their punishments.

古文：国祚长短，悉由于此。
现代文：国运长短，都由此决定。
English: The length of the national fortune is determined by this.

古文：古者之断死刑也，天子撤乐减膳，诚以天生斯民，立之司牲，固欲其并生，非欲其即死。
现代文：古代的圣贤废除了死刑，天子撤乐减膳，确是因天生百姓，而设立官吏，本意是使百姓生存，不是想他们死。
English: The sages of ancient times abolished the death penalty, and the sons of heaven withdrew their joy and reduced their rations. It is indeed because they were born as commoners, and they established officials with the intention of enabling the commoners to survive, not wanting them to die.

古文：不幸有不率教者入于其中，则不得已而授之以刑耳。议者曰：宋、元中叶，专事姑息，赏罚无章，以致亡灭。
现代文：不幸有不听教化者犯罪，不得已而动用刑罚。持不同意见的人说，宋、元中叶，专事姑息，赏罚无章，以致灭亡。
English: Unfortunately, some people who did not listen to the indoctrination committed crimes and had no choice but to use the punishment. People with different opinions said that in the Song Dynasty and the middle of the Yuan Dynasty, there was a special tolerance, and there was no reward or punishment, so that they perished.

古文：主上痛惩其弊，故制不宥之刑，权神变之法，使人知惧而莫测其端也。
现代文：皇上吸取教训，所以制定了严厉的刑法，权衡神变之法，使人知道害怕而注意自己的行为。
English: The emperor learned a lesson, so he formulated a strict criminal law, weighing the law of transmutation, so that people know to be afraid and pay attention to their own behavior.

古文：臣又以为不然。
现代文：我又以为不然。
English: I didn't think so either.

古文：开基之主垂范百世，一动一静，必使子孙有所持守。
现代文：开国之主垂范百世，一动一静，必使子孙有所持守。
English: The founder of the country, Zhu Fan, lived a hundred lifetimes. He was a man of action and calmness, and he would make sure that his children and grandchildren would have something to hold on to.

古文：况刑者，民之司命，可不慎欤！
现代文：况且刑罚，关系着人民的生命，怎能不慎重呢？
English: Moreover, the punishment is related to people's lives, how can we not be prudent?

古文：夫笞、杖、徒、流、死，今之五刑也。
现代文：笞、杖、徒、流、死刑，是当今的五种刑罚。
English: Caning, caning, flogging, exile, and death penalty are the five kinds of punishments today.

古文：用此五刑，既无假贷，一出乎大公至正可也。
现代文：用此五刑，既无假贷，一出乎大公至正可也。
English: With this five-year sentence, there is no fake loan, and it is possible to get out of the grand duke.

古文：而用刑之际，多裁自圣衷，遂使治狱之吏务趋求意旨。深刻者多功，平反者得罪。欲求治狱之平，岂易得哉！
现代文：而用刑之际，大多是圣上的旨意。于是迫使掌管刑律的官吏务必趋附圣上的旨意，揣摸好的功劳就大，不合圣意的就得以犯罪，想寻求法律的公平，难道很容易吗？
English: Therefore, is it easy to compel the officials in charge of the criminal law to adhere to the holy will, to think that good deeds are great, and to commit crimes that are not in accordance with the holy will, and to seek the fairness of the law?

古文：近者特旨，杂犯死罪，免死充军。又删定旧律诸则，减宥有差矣。
现代文：近者特旨，杂犯死罪免死充军，又删定旧律诸则，减宥有差。
English: The recent special decree exempted minor criminals from the death penalty and conscripted them into the army, and also deleted the old laws and regulations, which is not enough to commute the sentence.

古文：然未闻有戒敕治狱者务从平恕之条。是以法司犹循故例。
现代文：然而没听说有戒敕治狱者务从平恕之条，这是法司因循了故例。
English: However, I have not heard that there is a rule that those who have been disciplined or sentenced to prison must be pardoned. This is the case law followed by the Department of Justice.

古文：虽闻宽宥之名，未见宽宥之实。
现代文：虽闻宽宥之名，未见宽宥之实。
English: Though they hear the name of forgiveness, they do not see the reality of forgiveness.

古文：所谓实者，诚在主上，不在臣下也。
现代文：所谓实者，诚在主上，不在臣下也。
English: The so-called real people are sincere to the Lord, not to their vassals.

古文：故必有罪疑惟轻之意，而后好生之德洽于民心，此非可以浅浅期也。
现代文：所以必有罪疑惟轻之意，而后好生之德治于民心，这不是件容易的事。
English: Therefore, it is not an easy matter for suspicion of guilt to prevail, and then the virtue of a good life to prevail in the hearts of the people.

古文：何以明其然也？
现代文： 怎么明察其所以然呢？
English: How do you know that?

古文：古之为士者，以登仕为荣，以罢职为辱。
现代文：古代为士者，以登仕为荣，以罢职为辱。
English: In ancient times, those who were judges were proud to serve, and humiliated to resign.

古文：今之为士者，以溷迹无闻为福，以受玷不录为幸，以屯田工役为必获之罪，以鞭笞捶楚为寻常之辱。
现代文：当今做官的，以默默无闻为福，以犯错误没受追究为幸，以屯田工役为必获之罪，以鞭笞捶楚为寻常之辱。
English: For today's officials, obscurity is a blessing, making mistakes without being investigated is a blessing, working as a farm laborer is a necessary crime, and being whipped is a common humiliation.

古文：其始也，朝廷取天下之士，网罗捃摭，务无余逸。有司敦迫上道，如捕重囚。
现代文：当初，朝廷取天下之士，四外张罗，务求遗漏，有司敦迫他们上道，就像捕捉重囚一般。
English: At first, the imperial court took the world's people and spread them out to make sure they were not omitted, but Stendon forced them to go on the road, just like catching prisoners.

古文：比到京师，而除官多以貌选。所学或非其所用，所用或非其所学。
现代文：到了京师，又多以貌任官，所学非所用，所用又非所学。
English: When they arrived in Beijing, many of them were appointed officials based on their appearance. What they learned was not what they used, and what they used was not what they learned.

古文：洎乎居官，一有差跌，苟免诛戮，则必在屯田工役之科。
现代文：担任官职后，一有差错，虽幸免杀戮，则必然在屯田工役之列。
English: After holding an official post, if there is a mistake, although they are spared killing, they will inevitably be in the ranks of the Tonden gongyaku.

古文：率是为常，不少顾惜，此岂陛下所乐为哉？
现代文：习以为常，不少顾惜，这难道是陛下乐意这么做的吗？
English: Is this something that His Majesty is happy to do?

古文：诚欲人之惧而不敢犯也。
现代文：诚然，这样的做的目的是希望人们惧怕而不敢犯。
English: Admittedly, this is done in the hope that people will be afraid and not dare to offend.

古文：窃见数年以来，诛杀亦可谓不少矣，而犯者相踵。
现代文：我观察这几年以来，诛杀可以说是不少的，而犯者却接踵而至。
English: As I have observed over the past few years, there have been quite a few murders, and the perpetrators have followed one after the other.

古文：良由激劝不明，善恶无别。议贤议能之法既废，人不自励，而为善者怠也。
现代文：原因是激劝不明，善恶无区别，议贤议能之法已废除，人不自励，而为善者则厌倦了。
English: The reason is that the motivation is unclear, there is no difference between good and evil, the law of deliberation and deliberation has been abolished, people do not encourage themselves, and those who are good are tired.

古文：有人于此，廉如夷、齐，智如良、平，少戾于法。上将录长弃短而用之乎？
现代文：有人如此，廉洁得如夷、齐，智慧又如良、平，很少受到法律追究，皇上能弃短取长使用他吗？
English: Is there anyone so virtuous, so virtuous, so virtuous, so virtuous, so virtuous, so virtuous, so virtuous, so virtuous, so virtuous, so virtuous, so virtuous, so virtuous, so virtuous, so virtuous, so virtuous, so virtuous, so virtuous, so virtuous, so virtuous?

古文：将舍其所长、苛其所短而置之法乎？
现代文：或者是舍其所长、苛求所短而置之于法呢？
English: Or is it giving up what it is good at, short of what it is demanding, and leaving it to the law?

古文：苟取其长而舍其短，则中庸之材争自奋于廉智。
现代文：如果取其长而舍其短，则中庸之材争自奋于廉智。
English: If you take the long and give up the short, then the mediocrity will compete with the wisdom.

古文：倘苛其短而弃其长，则为善之人皆曰：某廉若是，某智若是，朝廷不少贷之，吾属何所容其身乎！
现代文：倘若苛求其短而弃其长，则为善之人都会说某某如此廉洁，某某有如此高的智慧，以此来得到朝廷的宽恕，我辈又岂有安身之地呢！
English: If we insist on the short and discard the long, then good people will say that so-and-so is so incorruptible, so-and-so has such high wisdom, in order to obtain the forgiveness of the court, and our generation will not have a place to live!

古文：致使朝不谋夕，弃其廉耻，或事掊克，以备屯田工役之资者，率皆是也。
现代文：致使朝不谋夕，弃其廉耻，用苛捐杂税剥削人民，以预备屯田工役的资产，大都如此。
English: As a result, most of them have been working tirelessly, abandoning their shamelessness, and exploiting the people with heavy contributions and miscellaneous taxes in order to prepare the assets of the forced laborers.

古文：若是非用刑之烦者乎？
现代文：这是非用刑之烦吗？
English: Is this a non-penal nuisance?

古文：汉尝徙大族于山陵矣，未闻实之以罪人也。
现代文：汉朝曾把大族迁徙至山陵，但没有听说把他们作为罪人。
English: The Han Dynasty once moved large tribes to the mountains, but it was not known to regard them as sinners.

古文：今凤阳皇陵所在，龙兴之地，而率以罪人居之，怨嗟愁苦之声充斥园邑，殆非所以恭承宗庙意也。
现代文：当今的凤阳，本是皇陵所在，龙兴之地，但全部住的是罪人，怨嗟愁苦之声充斥园邑，这完全不是恭承宗庙之意。
English: Today's Fengyang is originally the place where the imperial mausoleum is located, the land of dragon breeding, but all the residents are sinners, and the voices of bitterness and sorrow fill the garden village. This is not at all the intention of honoring the ancestral temple.

古文：且夫强敌在前，则扬精鼓锐，攻之必克，擒之必获，可也。
现代文： 强敌在前，则扬精鼓锐，攻之必克，擒之必获，这是完全可以做到的。
English: When a strong enemy is in front of you, you have to be sharp. You have to attack, and you have to win. This is completely possible.

古文：今贼突窜山谷，以计求之，庶或可得。
现代文：今敌人在山谷中流窜，用计策攻敌，或许还能消灭。
English: Right now, the enemy is floundering in the valley. If we use strategies to attack the enemy, we may be able to eliminate them.

古文：顾劳重兵，彼方惊散，入不可踪迹之地。
现代文：但动用重兵，敌人就会惊散，进入不可寻踪之地。
English: But with the use of heavy troops, the enemy will scatter and enter an area where they cannot be traced.

古文：捕之数年，既无其方，而乃归咎于新附户籍之细民，而迁徙之。骚动数千里之地，室家不得休居，鸡犬不得宁息。
现代文：追捕数年，黔驴技穷，只好归咎于新附户籍的百姓，而把他们迁徙到远方，遥遥数千里，使他们不得安居，鸡犬不宁。
English: After several years of hunting, and poor hunting skills, they had no choice but to blame the newly registered people, and moved them to a distant place, thousands of miles away, so that they could not live in peace, and the chickens and dogs were restless.

古文：况新附之众，向者流移他所，朝廷许其复业。
现代文：况且新附之众，归顺时已移流他所，朝廷允许他们复业。
English: Moreover, the newly-attached people, who had been transferred to him when they surrendered, were allowed by the imperial court to resume their business.

古文：今附籍矣，而又复迁徙，是法不信于民也。
现代文：于今已附籍了，而又要再次迁徙，这是法令失信于民。
English: Now that they have been registered, they have to move again. This is a betrayal of the people by the law.

古文：夫户口盛而后田野辟，赋税增。
现代文：户口兴盛了，而后田地得以开垦，赋税得以增加。
English: The hukou system flourished, allowing fields to be reclaimed and taxes to rise.

古文：今责守令年增户口，正为是也。
现代文：今责令守令每年增加户口，也正是为此目的。
English: It is precisely for this purpose that I am now ordering you to increase your household registration every year.

古文：近者已纳税粮之家，虽承旨分释还家，而其心犹不自安。
现代文：近者已纳税粮之家，虽承旨分释还家，但心却十分不安。
English: The nearest one has been a tax-paying grain house, although he has been released and returned home, but his heart is very uneasy.

古文：已起户口，虽蒙怜恤，而犹见留开封祗候。讹言惊动，不知所出。
现代文：已起户口，虽蒙怜恤，而犹见留开封祗候，讹言惊动，不知所出。
English: The account has been opened, although he was pitied, but he still kept the seal open and waited. He was shocked by the words and did not know what to do.

古文：况太原诸郡，外界边境，民心如此，甚非安边之计也。
现代文：何况太原诸郡，正是边境所在，民心如此，这绝对不是安边之计。
English: What's more, Taiyuan and other counties are exactly where the border is, and the people's hearts are like this. This is definitely not an easy solution.

古文：臣愿自今朝廷宜存大体，赦小过。明诏天下，修举 八议 之法，严禁深刻之吏。
现代文：我希望从今以后，朝廷应存大体，赦免小过，明诏天下，修举 八议 之法，严禁深刻之吏。
English: I hope that from now on, the imperial court should abide by the general principle of pardoning minor offenses, and issue a clear edict to the whole world to amend the "law of eight opinions" and strictly prohibit serious offenses.

古文：断狱平允者超迁之，残酷裒敛者罢黜之。
现代文：断案公平的应越级提拔，残酷裒敛者罢免。
English: Those who solve cases fairly should be promoted to higher ranks, while those who are cruel and unruly should be dismissed.

古文：凤阳屯田之制，见在居屯者，听其耕种起科。
现代文：凤阳屯田之制，被留居屯种的，听凭他们耕种起科。
English: According to Fengyang's farm settlement system, those who were allowed to stay and grow crops were allowed to start farming at their discretion.

古文：已起户口、见留开封者，悉放复业。
现代文：已起户口的，被留在开封的，全部释放令他们复业。
English: Those who had opened an account, and those who had been left unopened, were all released and allowed to resume business.

古文：如此则足以隆好生之德，树国祚长久之福。而兆民自安，天变自消矣。
现代文：如此则足以升高皇上的好生之德，树国祚长久之福，而使百姓自安，天变自消。
English: This is enough to elevate the emperor's virtue of a good life, create long-term happiness for the country, and make the people feel safe.

古文：昔者周自文、武至于成、康，而教化大行；汉自高帝至于文、景，而始称富庶。
现代文： 古代的周朝自文、武王到成、康王，教化大行，汉朝自高帝到文、景帝才称得上富庶。
English: The ancient Zhou dynasty, from Wen, King Wu to Cheng and King Kang, was a great educator, while the Han dynasty, from Gao to Wen and King Jing, was rich.

古文：盖天下之治乱，气化之转移，人心之趋向，非一朝一夕故也。
现代文：天下的大治，气化的转移，人心的趋向，这不是一朝一夕的缘故。
English: The great rule of the world, the transfer of gasification, the trend of people's hearts, this is not the result of overnight.

古文：今国家纪元，九年于兹，偃兵息民，天下大定。纪纲大正，法令修明，可谓治矣。
现代文：今国家纪元，九年于兹，偃兵息民，天下大定，纪纲大正，法令修明，可以说天下大治了。
English: This is the era of the country. In the ninth year of the Zhou Dynasty, the soldiers were defeated and the people were saved. The country was stabilized, the discipline was reformed, and the laws and regulations were amended. It can be said that the country was in a state of great stability.

古文：而陛下切切以民俗浇漓，人不知惧，法出而奸生，令下而诈起。
现代文：而陛下切切以民俗浇漓，人不知道害怕，制定了法令，邪恶也就产生了，奸诈产生了。
English: However, His Majesty was eager to use folk customs to instill fear in people, and enacted laws and decrees. This gave rise to evil and treachery.

古文：故或朝信而幕猜者有之；昨日所进，今日被戮者有之。
现代文：所以，朝信而暮猜者有之，昨天才提拔的，今日却被杀的有之。
English: As a result, there are people who get promoted in the morning, but are killed in the evening, and there are people who were promoted yesterday, but are killed today.

古文：乃至令下而寻改，已赦而复收。天下臣民莫之适从。
现代文：致使命令下达后不久又更改，已经赦免了又收回，天下臣民无处适从。
English: As a result, soon after the order was issued, it was changed, pardoned and withdrawn, and the subjects of the world had nowhere to go.

古文：臣愚谓天下之趋于治，犹坚冰之泮也。
现代文：我认为天下趋向大治，就如坚冰的融化。
English: I think that the world is moving towards greater democracy, just like the melting of ice.

古文：冰之泮，非太阳所能骤致。阳气发生，土脉微动，然后得以融释。
现代文：冰的融化，不是太阳照射突然致使的，而是阳气发生土脉微动，然后才使坚冰得以融化。
English: The melting of ice is not suddenly caused by the sun's radiation, but by the earth's pulse being slightly moved by the yang, which then causes the solid ice to melt.

古文：圣人之治天下，亦犹是也。
现代文：圣人治理天下，也用同样的道理。
English: The saints rule the world by the same principle.

古文：刑以威之，礼以导之，渐民以仁，摩民以义，而后其化熙熙。孔子曰： 如有王者，必世而后仁。 此非空言也。
现代文：用刑威振，用礼疏导，给百姓以仁义，而后其化熙熙。孔子说： 如有王者，必世而后仁。 这不是一句空话。
English: Confucius said: "If there is a king, benevolence will follow him throughout his life. This is not an empty phrase.

古文：求治之道，莫先于正风俗；正风俗之道，莫先于守令知所务；使守令知所务，莫先于风宪知所重；使风宪知所重，莫先于朝廷知所尚。
现代文： 访求治国之道，不如先正风俗。正风俗之道，不如先于守令知所务。使守令知所务，不如先于风宪知所重。使风宪知所重，不如先于朝廷知所尚。
English: To seek the way of governing the country is not as good as to seek the correct customs. To seek the correct customs is not as good as to seek the correct orders. To seek the correct orders is not as good as to seek the correct customs. To seek the correct orders is not as good as to seek the correct customs. To seek the correct orders is not as good as to seek the correct customs. To seek the correct customs is not as good as to seek the correct customs.

古文：古郡守、县令，以正率下，以善导民，使化成俗美。
现代文：古郡守县令，都以正派做部下的表率，以善疏导百姓，使化成俗美。
English: The ancient county governors and county magistrates all set an example for their subordinates by being decent, and guided the people by being good, so that they could transform into secular beauty.

古文：征赋、期会、狱讼、簿书，固其末也。
现代文：征赋期会狱讼簿书，是巩固它的末。
English: The conscription period will be the end of consolidating it.

古文：今之守令以户口、钱粮、狱论为急务；至于农桑、学校，王政之本，乃视为虚文而置之，将何以教养斯民哉？
现代文：当今的守令以户口、钱粮、狱讼为急务，至于农桑学校，王政之本，被视为虚文而置之高阁，这又将如何教养百姓呢？
English: Today's guarding orders take the household registration, money and grain, and prison litigation as urgent tasks. As for the farmers' and mulberry schools, the foundation of the royal government, they are regarded as fictitious and placed on a high shelf. How will this educate the people?

古文：以农桑言之：方春州县下一白帖，里甲回申文状而已，守令未尝亲视种艺次第、旱涝戒备之道也。
现代文：以农桑为例，春天州县下发一白帖，里甲回报一文状，守令不曾亲自过问种艺次第、旱涝戒备之道。
English: Taking the agricultural mulberry as an example, in the spring, the prefectural government issued a white postcard, and the county government returned a letter, but the governor did not personally inquire about the breeding process and the way to be prepared for droughts and floods.

古文：以学校言之：廪膳诸生，国家资之以取人才之地也。
现代文：又如学校，廪膳诸生，国家资之用以培养人才的地方。
English: Another example is a school, a place for nurturing talent, funded by the state.

古文：今四方师生，缺员甚多。纵使具员，守令亦鲜有以礼让之实作其成器者。
现代文：当今四方师生，缺员很多，即使满员，守令也很少以礼让之实，做其成器者。
English: Today, teachers and students in Shifang, there are many vacancies, and even if they are full, they rarely keep the order with courtesy and sincerity, and do their best.

古文：朝廷切切于社学，屡行取勘师生姓名、所习课业。
现代文：朝廷对社学十分迫切，多次登记师生姓名和他们所学习的功课。
English: The imperial court was very keen on social studies, repeatedly registering the names of teachers and students and the subjects they were studying.

古文：乃今社镇城郭，或但置立门牌，远村僻处则又徒存其名，守令不过具文案、备照刷而已。
现代文：令社镇城郭，置立门牌，僻远的山村实徒存虚名，守令不过登记在案，备照刷而已。
English: Towns were fortified, house signs were erected, and true believers in remote mountain villages were given false names. However, the orders were only registered in the record, and were merely brushed aside.

古文：上官分部按临，亦但循习故常，依纸上照刷，未尝巡行点视也。
现代文：上面的官吏分部检查，也因循过去的常规，依据纸上的照刷，未曾巡行视察。
English: The above-mentioned official branch inspection also followed the past routine, according to the brush on the paper, and did not have a patrol inspection.

古文：兴废之实，上下视为虚文。
现代文：兴废之实，上下都视为虚文。
English: In fact, both the top and the bottom are regarded as fake.

古文：小民不知孝弟忠信为何物，而礼义廉耻扫地矣。
现代文：百姓不知孝弟忠信是何物，而礼义廉耻就扫地了。
English: The people do not know what filial piety and loyalty are, and courtesy and honesty are swept away.

古文：风纪之司，所以代朝廷宣导德化，访察善恶。
现代文：风纪之司，是用来代朝廷宣导德化，访察善恶的。
English: The Chief of the Bureau of Ethics and Discipline was used to promote virtue and investigate good and evil on behalf of the imperial court.

古文：听讼谳狱，其一事耳。
现代文：诉讼断案是它主要的一件职责。
English: One of its main responsibilities is to adjudicate cases.

古文：今专以狱讼为要。
现代文：当今专门以诉讼为重。
English: Today, the focus is exclusively on litigation.

古文：忠臣、孝子、义夫、节妇，视为末节而不暇举，所谓宣导风化者安在哉？
现代文：忠臣孝子义夫节妇，都被视为末节而不暇举，所谓的宣导风化又在什么地方呢？
English: The wife of a loyal subject, filial son, and righteous husband are all regarded as the last days and are not worth mentioning. Where does the so-called propaganda of manners come from?

古文：其始但知以去一赃吏、决一狱讼为治，而不知劝民成俗，使民迁善远罪，乃治之大者。
现代文：只知道铲除一赃吏，审理完一件案子为治，而不知劝民成俗，使百姓接近善而远离罪，这才是大治的根本。
English: They only know how to get rid of one official and handle one case, but they don't know how to persuade the people to become accustomed, so that the people are closer to goodness and away from sin. This is the foundation of great governance.

古文：此守令风宪未审轻重之失也。
现代文：这是守令没有掌握轻重的过失。
English: This is a serious fault that the guards did not grasp.

古文：《王制》论乡秀士升于司徒曰 选士 ，司徒论其秀士而升于太学曰 俊士 ，大乐正又论造士之秀升之司马曰 进士 ，司马辨论官材，论定，然后官之；任官，然后爵之。
现代文： 《王制》把乡秀士升于司徒的说成选士，司徒把秀士而升于太学的说成俊士，大乐正把造士之秀升之司马的说成进士，司马考察官才，考察好后再任命，任命以后再给爵位。
English: "Kingship" said that the hongxiu scholar who was promoted over the scholar was the selected scholar, the scholar who was promoted over the scholar who was promoted over the scholar was the young scholar, the scholar who was promoted over the scholar who was promoted over the scholar who was promoted over the scholar who was promoted over the scholar who was promoted over the scholar who was promoted over the scholar who was promoted over the scholar who was promoted over the scholar who was promoted over the scholar who was promoted over the scholar who was promoted over the scholar who was promoted over the scholar who was promoted over the scholar who was promoted over the scholar who was promoted over the scholar who was promoted over the scholar who was promoted over the scholar who

古文：其考之之详若此，故成周得人为盛。
现代文：考察如此详细。所以成周得到人才，十分强盛。
English: The investigation is so detailed. That's why Cheng Zhou got talent and is very strong.

古文：今使天下诸生考于礼部，升于太学，历练众职，任之以事，可以洗历代举选之陋，上法成周。
现代文：当今使天下诸生考于礼部，升于太学，历练众职，任之以事，可以清洗历代举选的陋习，可以效法成周。
English: Today, all beings in the world can be tested in the ceremonial department, promoted to the higher level of learning, experienced in many positions, and allowed to work hard. They can clean up the bad habits of the past generations and can follow the example of Zhou.

古文：然而升于太学者，或未数月，遽选入官，间或委以民社。
现代文：对于升入太学的，经过几个月，就选为官，或委任到民社。
English: For those promoted to Taixue, after a few months, they will be elected as officials or appointed to the people's association.

古文：臣恐其人未谙时务，未熟朝廷礼法，不能宣导德化，上乖国政，而下困黎民也。
现代文：我担心这样的人不熟悉时务，也不熟悉朝廷的礼法，根本不能宣导德化，对上违背国政，对下危害百姓。
English: I am worried that such a person is not familiar with the current affairs, nor is he familiar with the etiquette of the imperial court, and cannot promote virtue at all. On the one hand, he violates national politics, and on the other hand, he endangers the people.

古文：开国以来，选举秀才不为不多，所任名位不为不重，自今数之，在者有几？
现代文：开国以来，选举秀才可以说为数不少，所委任的名位不为不重，而今数一数，在任的又有多少？
English: Since the founding of the People's Republic of China, there have been quite a few election talents, and the positions they have been appointed to are not insignificant. Now, how many of them are in office?

古文：臣恐后之视今，亦犹今之视昔。昔年所举之人，岂不深可痛惜乎！
现代文：我担心后人观察今天，就如今天观察过去一样，当年所举之人，岂不深可痛惜吗？
English: I fear that future generations will observe today, just as we observe the past today, the people who were named that year, is it not deeply regrettable?

古文：凡此皆臣所为求治太速之过也。
现代文：这都是臣子所为，求治太速的过失！
English: This is all the fault of the courtiers, who are too quick to seek a cure!

古文：昔者宋有天下盖三百余年。
现代文： 过去宋朝拥有天下三百多年。
English: In the past, the Song Dynasty ruled the country for more than 300 years.

古文：其始，以礼义教其民，当其盛时，闾阎里巷皆有忠厚之风，至于耻言人之过失。
现代文：开国之初，用礼义教化百姓，当国家强盛时，闾阎里巷都有忠厚之风尚，甚至羞于谈论人的过失。
English: At the beginning of the founding of the country, the people were educated with courtesy and righteousness. When the country was strong, everyone in the country had a loyal style, and they were even ashamed to talk about people's mistakes.

古文：洎乎末年，忠臣义士视死如归，妇人女子羞被污辱，此皆教化之效也。
现代文：到了末年，忠臣义士视死如归，妇人女子以被污辱为羞耻，这都是教化的结果。
English: By the end of the year, loyal subjects and righteous men were as good as dead, and women and girls were ashamed of being insulted. All of this was the result of indoctrination.

古文：不数十年，弃城降敌者不可胜数，虽老儒硕臣甘心屈辱。此礼义廉耻不振之弊。
现代文：元朝的根本不立，破坏了礼义、廉耻。不过数十年，弃城降敌者不可胜数。就连老儒硕臣也甘心屈辱，这是礼义廉耻不振的弊病。
English: The Yuan Dynasty did not stand up at all, which destroyed courtesy, honesty, and modesty. However, for decades, there were countless people who abandoned the city and surrendered to the enemy. Even the old Confucian nobles were willing to be humiliated, which is a disease of poor courtesy, honesty, and modesty.

古文：遗风流俗至今未革，深可怪也。
现代文：遗风流俗至今仍没有革除，这也不足为怪了。
English: It is not surprising that the old customs have not yet been eradicated.

古文：臣谓：莫若敦仁义，尚廉耻。守令则责其以农桑、学校为急，风宪则责其先教化、审法律，以平狱缓刑为急。
现代文：我认为不如敦促仁义，崇尚廉耻，守令的职责是以农桑学校为急，风宪则责其先教化、审法律，以平狱缓刑为急。
English: I think that it is better to urge benevolence and righteousness, advocate shamelessness, and the duty of keeping orders is urgent for agricultural and mulberry schools, while the Constitution requires them to educate and review laws first, and urgent for suspended sentences.

古文：如此，则德泽下流，求治之道庶几得矣。
现代文：如此则德泽下流，求治之道就可以得到。
English: In this way, the lower stream of Dezawa can be obtained, and the way to seek treatment can be obtained.

古文：郡邑诸生升于太学者，须令在学肄业，或三年，或五年，精通一经，兼习一艺，然后入选。或宿卫，或办事，以观公卿大夫之能，而后任之以政，则其学识兼懋，庶无败事。
现代文：郡邑诸生升于太学者，必须令在学肄业，或者三年，或者五年，要求他们精通一经，兼学一艺，然后入选为官，或者宿卫，或者办事，以此观察公卿大夫之能，而后委任政务，则其学识兼懋，就几乎不做错什么。
English: In counties and towns, when people are promoted to the rank of scholar, they must be made to study for three years or five years, and they must be required to master a book and learn a skill at the same time, and then be elected as an official, or a night watchman, or a clerk, so as to observe the ability of the nobles and doctors, and then be appointed to government affairs. If their knowledge is concurrent, they will hardly do anything wrong.

古文：且使知禄位皆天之禄位，而可以塞凯觎之心也。
现代文：并且使他知道禄位都是天之禄位，而且可以杜绝觊觎之心。
English: And let him know that all good fortune is God's good fortune, and that it can put an end to covetousness.

古文：治道既得，陛下端拱穆清，待以岁月，则阴阳调而风雨时，诸福吉祥莫不毕至。尚何天变之不消哉？
现代文：治道得到以后，陛下就可以端拱穆清，待以数月，则阴阳调而风雨及时，诸福吉祥没有不来的，又何愁天变不消呢？ 
English: After obtaining the ruling way, His Majesty can end the arch and clear the mud. If it takes a few months, then the yin and yang will be adjusted and the wind and rain will be timely. The blessings and auspicious things will not fail to come, and what sorrow will not be eliminated?

古文：书上，帝大怒曰： 小子间吾骨肉，速逮来，吾手射之！ 
现代文：奏章陈上，太祖大怒说： 小子离间我骨肉，赶快抓来，我要亲手杀了他。 
English: When the play was performed, the great-grandfather flew into a rage and said: "The boy has torn my flesh from my bones. Catch him quickly. I will kill him with my own hands."

古文：既至，丞相乘帝喜以奏，下刑部狱。死狱中。
现代文：叶伯巨被带来后，丞相乘太祖高兴时上奏，伯巨被投入刑部的监狱，最终死在狱中。
English: After Ye Boqiu was brought in, the prime minister took advantage of the great-grandfather's good mood to play up. Boqiu was put into the prison of the criminal department, and eventually died in prison.

古文：先是，伯巨将上书，语其友曰： 今天下惟三事可患耳，其二事易见而患迟，其一事难见而患速。
现代文：最初，伯巨准备上书时，就对他朋友说 ：当今天下只有三件事令人忧患，有二件事容易见到但祸患来得迟，有一件事难以见到，但祸患来得迅速。
English: At the beginning, when Bo Jiu was preparing to publish his book, he said to his friend: Today, there are only three things that are worrying, two things are easy to see but the disaster comes late, and one thing is hard to see but the disaster comes quickly.

古文：纵无明诏，吾犹将言之，况求言乎。 
现代文：纵无明诏，我还将上书，何况访求言论呢！ 
English: Even if there is no clear edict, I will still submit a letter, not to mention a request for comment!

古文：其意盖谓分封也。
现代文：他的大意是指的分封。
English: His implication is that this refers to the division of territories.

古文：然是时诸王止建藩号，未曾裂土，不尽如伯巨所言。
现代文：然而当时的诸王只建藩号，未曾裂土，不完全像伯巨所说的。
English: However, the kings at that time only built the domain name, and did not break the soil, which is not exactly what Bo Jiu said.

古文：迨洪武末年，燕王屡奉命出塞，势始强。
现代文：到了洪武末年，燕王屡次奉命出塞，势力才开始强大。
English: In the last years of Hongwu's reign, Yan Wang was repeatedly ordered out of the country, and his power began to grow.

古文：后因削夺称兵，遂有天下，人乃以伯巨为先见云。
现代文：后因削夺而举兵，于是夺取天下，人们称伯巨有先见之明。
English: Later, he raised an army to conquer the country, and people said that Bo Jiu was prescient.

古文：郑士利，字好义，宁海人。
现代文：郑士利，字好义，宁海人。
English: Zheng Shili, the character of good righteousness, Ninghai people.

古文：兄士元，刚直有才学，由进士历官湖广按察使佥事。
现代文：兄长士元，刚直有才学，由进士历官至湖广按察使佥事。
English: My elder brother, Yuan, was a straight-shooter with a talent for learning, and he rose through the ranks from enlisted officer to inspector.

古文：荆、襄卒乘乱掠妇女，吏不敢问，士元立言于将领，还所掠。
现代文：荆、襄的士兵乘乱掠夺妇女，官吏不敢追问，郑士元立即言告将领，归还士兵所掠。
English: The soldiers of Jing and Xiang took advantage of the turmoil to plunder women, and the officials did not dare to ask questions. Zheng Shiyuan immediately told the generals to return the soldiers' plunder.

古文：安陆有冤狱，御史台已谳上，士元奏其冤，得白。
现代文：安陆有冤案，御史台已经审判定罪，士元上奏，冤案得以平反。
English: There was a case of injustice in Anlu, and the History Channel has judged and convicted, and the case has been reported, and the injustice has been rectified.

古文：会考校钱谷册书，空印事觉。凡主印者论死，佐贰以下榜一百，戍远方。
现代文：会考校钱谷册书，空印事件被发觉，凡主印者处以死刑，佐贰以下榜一百，戍守边疆。
English: Qiangu book of the college entrance examination, the case of blank printing was discovered, and all the main printers were sentenced to death, and the following 100 were from Zouqi, guarding the frontier.

古文：士元亦坐是系狱。
现代文：士元也因此入监牢。
English: As a result, Shi Yuan was also sent to prison.

古文：时帝方盛怒，以为欺罔，丞相御史莫敢谏。士利叹曰： 上不知，以空印为大罪。
现代文：当时太祖十分恼怒，认为这是欺罔行为，丞相御史没人敢进谏，士利叹道： 皇上不知，把空印定为大罪。
English: At that time, the great-grandfather was very angry, thinking that this was a bullying behavior, and no one dared to enter the imperial palace, Shili sighed: The emperor did not know, and the empty seal was considered a great sin.

古文：诚得人言之，上圣明，宁有不悟？ 
现代文：诚得人言之，皇上圣明，哪有不省悟的？ 
English: To be honest, Your Majesty, what is there not to understand?

古文：会星变求言。
现代文：遇上星变访求进言。
English: In the event of a sudden change in the weather, they would visit to ask for advice.

古文：士利曰： 可矣。 
现代文：士利说 ：可以。 
English: Shiri said, "Yes."

古文：既而读诏： 有假公言私者，罪。 
现代文：既而宣读诏令，有假公言私者罪。
English: Once the edict was read out, he was guilty of making a false public statement.

古文：士利曰： 吾所欲言，为天子杀无罪者耳。
现代文：士利说： 我想所说的，是天子杀害无罪的人。
English: Shiri said, "What I want to say is that the Son of Heaven killed an innocent person."

古文：吾兄非主印者，固当出。
现代文：我兄不是主印者，应当出狱。
English: My brother is not an imam and should be released.

古文：需吾兄杖出乃言，即死不恨。 
现代文：需等我兄受杖击出狱后我再说，就是杀头也不怨恨。 
English: I'll have to wait until my brother gets out of prison and is beaten with a cane before I can say that I don't hold a grudge against him for killing someone.

古文：士元出，士利乃为书数千言，言数事，而于空印事尤详。曰： 陛下欲深罪空印者，恐奸吏得挟空印纸，为文移以虐民耳。
现代文：士元出狱后，士利于是作书数千言，谈了好几件事，而对于空印事件谈得十分详细，他说： 陛下想重重地处罚持空印者，恐怕奸吏挟持空印纸，为文移以虞害万民。
English: After Shi Yuan was released from prison, Shi Li then wrote thousands of words and talked about several things, and he spoke in great detail about the airmail incident, saying: His Majesty wants to severely punish those who hold airmail, I am afraid that the ruffians hold the airmail paper and use it to harm the people.

古文：夫文移必完印乃可。
现代文：文移必须完全印好。
English: The document transfer must be completely printed.

古文：今考较书策，乃合两缝印，非一印一纸比。
现代文：今考较书策，较理想的是合两缝印，非一印一纸可比。
English: Now compared with the book strategy, the ideal is to print two seams, which is comparable to printing one piece of paper.

古文：纵得之，亦不能行，况不可得乎？
现代文：即使得到，也不能通行，更何况不能得到呢？
English: Even if they get it, they won't be able to pass, and what's more, they won't be able to get it?

古文：钱谷之数，府必合省，省必合部，数难悬决，至部乃定。
现代文：钱谷的数量，府必合省，省必合部，数难悬决，至部乃定。
English: The number of Qianya, the prefecture must be combined with the province, the province must be combined with the department, the number is difficult to be decided, and the department must be determined.

古文：省府去部远者六七千里，近亦三四千里，册成而后用印，往返非期年不可。
现代文：省府距离户部较远的有六、七千里，近的也有三、四千里，册成而后用印，往返非期年不可。
English: Provinces and prefectures that are far away from the head office are six or seven thousand miles away, and those that are close are also three or four thousand miles away. They are registered and then stamped, and it is not possible to go back and forth.

古文：以故先印而后书。此权宜之务，所从来久，何足深罪？
现代文：所以先印而后书，这是权宜之计，由来已久，又何以重罪。
English: Therefore, printing first and then writing is a stopgap measure that has been around for a long time, but it is not a serious crime.

古文：且国家立法，必先明示天下而后罪犯法者，以其故犯也。
现代文：况且国家立法，一定得先明示天下，此后犯法的，是故意犯罪。
English: Moreover, national legislation must first make it clear to the world that a crime committed thereafter is an intentional crime.

古文：自立国至今，未尝有空印之律。
现代文：自立国至今，未曾有空印之法律。
English: Since the independence of the country, there has never been a blank law.

古文：有司相承，不知其罪。
现代文：有司相承，不知其罪。
English: There is no way to know who is to blame.

古文：今一旦诛之，何以使受诛者无词？
现代文：今一旦诛之，又怎么能使受诛者无词？
English: Now, once someone is beaten, how can the victim be rendered speechless?

古文：朝廷求贤士，置庶位，得之甚难。
现代文：朝廷求贤士，置庶位，得到他们十分艰难。
English: The imperial court was looking for sages, and it was very difficult to get them.

古文：位至郡守，皆数十年所成就。
现代文：位至郡守，都是数十年的成就。
English: The position of county governor is the result of decades of achievements.

古文：通达廉明之士，非如草菅然，可刈而复生也。
现代文：通达廉明之士，不是草菅，可以割了而后又长。
English: A man of integrity, not a grass cutter, can cut and then grow.

古文：陛下奈何以不足罪之罪，而坏足用之材乎？
现代文：陛下又为什么对不足以判罪的判罪，而折损有用之才呢？
English: And why, sire, should the loss of a conviction, which is not enough to convict, be of any use?

古文：臣窃为陛下惜之。 
现代文：我为陛下感到惋惜。 
English: I feel sorry for His Majesty because of my selfishness.

古文：书成，闭门逆旅泣数日。
现代文：奏章写成，士利闭门哭泣数日。
English: After the score was written, Shiri cried for days behind closed doors.

古文：兄子问曰： 叔何所苦？ 
现代文：他的侄儿问他 ：叔叔为什么悲痛？ 
English: His nephew asked him: Why is uncle sad?

古文：士利曰： 吾有书欲上，触天子怒，必受祸。
现代文：士利回答说 ：我有奏章将要呈上，触犯天子发怒就一定会深罹其祸。
English: Shili replied, "I have a piece of music to present, and if I offend the Son of Heaven, I will surely suffer his wrath."

古文：然杀我，生数百人，我何所恨！ 
现代文：然而杀了我却能使数百人得以活命，我又有什么可以怨恨的呢？ 
English: But if killing me allows hundreds of people to live, what do I have to be angry about?

古文：遂入奏。
现代文：于是上奏。
English: And so the overture began.

古文：帝览书，大怒，下丞相御史杂问，究使者。
现代文：太祖看了奏章，大怒，下令丞相御史讯问，追究使者。
English: The great-grandfather read the record, was furious, and ordered the prime minister to interrogate and investigate the envoy.

古文：帝问罗织及多征赃罚者为谁，徵指河南佥事彭京以对。
现代文：士利笑道 ：看了我的奏章是否有用？我为了国家而谈事。自己感觉必死无疑，谁又为我设想了呢？ 
English: Shiri laughed, "Is it useful to read my transcript? I speak for the country. I feel like I'm going to die. Who thought of that for me?"

古文：贬沁阳驿丞。十三年，以事逮至京，卒。周敬心，山东人，太学生也。
现代文：案件审理完毕，和士元一道输作江浦，而空印者大多没有得到赦免。周敬心，山东人，是太学生。
English: After the trial of the case, he was deported to Jiangpu together with Shi Yuan, but most of the Kuo Yin were not pardoned. Zhou Jingxin, a Shandong native, was a student.

古文：洪武二十五年，诏求晓历数者，敬心上疏极谏，且及时政数事。
现代文：洪武二十五年诏令访求通晓历数者，敬心上疏进谏，谈及时政数事。
English: In the 25th year of Hongwu's reign, he issued an edict to those who knew the calendar and the numbers to visit him and respectfully enter the palace to talk about the current political situation.

古文：略曰：
现代文：大略为：
English: Roughly:

古文：臣闻国祚长短，在德厚薄，不在历数。
现代文： 我听说国祚长短，在于德的厚薄，不在于历数。
English: I heard that the length of the national anthem depends on the thickness of virtue, not on the number of years.

古文：三代尚矣，三代而下，最久莫如汉、唐、宋，最短莫如秦、隋、五代。其久也以有道，其短也以无道。
现代文：三代久矣，三代而下，朝代最长的莫过是汉、唐、宋，最短的莫过是秦、隋、五代，长久是因为有道，短命是因为无道。
English: Three generations are long, three generations down, the longest dynasties are Han, Tang and Song, the shortest are Qin, Sui and Fifth, long because there is a way, short-lived because there is no way.

古文：陛下膺天眷命，救乱诛暴。然神武威断则有余，宽大忠厚则不足。
现代文：陛下膺天眷命，救乱诛暴，然而神武威断有余，宽大忠厚则不足。
English: His majesty, by the grace of heaven, spares lives, rescues from chaos and suppresses violence. However, his divine power is more than enough, but his generosity and loyalty are not enough.

古文：陛下若效两汉之宽大，唐、宋之忠厚，讲三代所以有道之长，则帝王之祚可传万世，何必问诸小道之人耶？
现代文：陛下如果效法两汉的宽大，唐、宋的忠厚，讲三代所以有道之长，则帝王之运可以传至万世，又何必问诸小道之人呢？
English: Your Majesty, if you follow the example of the magnanimity of the Han Dynasty and the loyalty of the Tang Dynasty and the Song Dynasty, and say that three generations are the longest, then the emperor's fortune can be passed down to all eternity, and why do you have to ask people from all walks of life?

古文：臣又闻陛下连年远征，北出沙漠，为耻不得传国玺耳。
现代文： 我又听说陛下连年远征，北出沙漠，为的是为国玺失传而雪耻。
English: I also heard that His Majesty went on a year-long expedition to the north of the desert in order to shed light on the loss of the imperial seal.

古文：昔楚平王时，琢卞和之玉，至秦始名为 玺 ，历代递嬗，以讫后唐。
现代文：当年楚平王时，雕琢卞和之玉，到了秦代才命名为玺，历代相传至后唐。
English: When King Chu Ping was alive, he carved the Jade of Harmony. It was not until the Qin Dynasty that it was named the Jade of Harmony. It was passed down from generation to generation until the late Tang Dynasty.

古文：治乱兴废，皆不在此。
现代文：治乱兴废，都不在此。
English: It is not here to reignite chaos or promote waste.

古文：石敬瑭乱，潞王携以自焚，则秦玺固已毁矣。
现代文：石敬瑭叛乱，潞王携玉玺自焚，则秦玉玺确实毁灭了。
English: Shi Jianqian rebelled, and the King of Qi and the King of Yutu self-immolated. As a result, Qin Yutu was indeed destroyed.

古文：敬瑭入洛，更以玉制。晋亡入辽，辽亡遗于桑乾河。
现代文：敬瑭进入洛阳，更换了玉制，晋朝灭亡，进了辽朝，辽朝灭亡把玉玺遗失于桑干河。
English: Jing Yi entered Luoyang, changed the jade system, the Jin Dynasty perished, entered the Liao Dynasty, the Liao Dynasty perished and lost the jade bowl in the Sanggan River.

古文：元世祖时，札剌尔者渔而得之。
现代文：元世祖时，札剌尔捕鱼而得到玉玺。
English: At the time of the founder of the Yuan Dynasty, Zhaozhou was a fisherman and obtained the Jade Dragonfly.

古文：今元人所挟，石氏玺耳。
现代文：当今元人所拿的，是石氏玉玺。
English: It was Ishii Tamakazura that the current ex-employee took.

古文：昔者三代不知有玺，仁为之玺，故曰 圣人大宝曰位，何以守位曰仁。 
现代文：当年三代不知有玺，仁为玺，所以说： 圣人大宝曰位，怎么守位为仁。 
English: At that time, the three generations did not know that benevolence and benevolence were opposites, so they said, "If a great saint is enthroned, how can benevolence keep its place?"

古文：陛下奈何忽天下之大玺，而求汉、唐、宋之小玺也？
现代文：陛下为什么忽视天下的大玺，而求汉、唐、宋的小玺呢？
English: Why does your majesty ignore the world's great emperors, but seek the minor emperors of the Han, Tang, and Song dynasties?

古文：方今力役过烦，赋敛过厚。教化溥而民不悦；法度严而民不从。
现代文： 当今力役过烦，赋敛过重，教化薄而民不悦，法度严而百姓不依从。
English: Today, force is too cumbersome, restraint is too heavy, education is weak and the people are not happy, laws are strict and the people do not obey.

古文：昔汲黯言于武帝曰： 陛下内多欲而外施仁义，奈何欲效唐、虞之治乎？ 
现代文：当年汲黯对武帝说： 陛下对内多欲，对外施仁义，又怎么能效仿唐、虞之治呢？ 
English: That year, Ku Ying said to Emperor Wu, "Your Majesty has many desires at home, but he is kind and benevolent to the outside world. How can he follow the example of Tang and Yu?

古文：方今国则愿富，兵则愿强，城池则愿高深，宫室则愿壮丽，土地则愿广，人民则愿众。于是多取军卒，广籍资财，征伐不休，营造无极，如之何其可治也？
现代文：当今希望国家富强，兵力强大，城池高深，宫室壮丽，土地辽阔，人口众多。于是穷兵黩武，广籍资财，征伐不休，营造无限，如此这样又怎么能大治呢？
English: Today, it is hoped that the country will be rich and powerful, the military strong, the city deep and deep, the palace magnificent, the land vast and the population numerous. Therefore, how can there be great governance if the army is poor, the people rich, the resources plentiful, the conquest ceaseless, and the construction limitless?

古文：臣又见洪武四年录天下官吏，十三年连坐胡党，十九年逮官吏积年为民害者，二十三年罪妄言者。大戮官民，不分臧否。
现代文：我观察到洪武四年，任用天下官吏，十三年连坐胡惟庸余党，十九年逮捕多年危害百姓的官吏，二十三年对妄言者判罪，对官民大开杀戒，不分良莠。
English: I observed that in the four years of Hongwu, he appointed officials from all over the world, in the 13th year, he made Hu Wei Rong Yu a member of the Party, in the 19th year, he arrested officials who had harmed the people for many years, in the 23rd year, he convicted those who had spoken nonsense, and in the 24th year, he carried out mass executions of officials and the people, regardless of their merits.

古文：其中岂无忠臣、烈士、善人、君子？
现代文：他们当中难道没有忠臣烈士善人君子吗？
English: Are there no loyalists, martyrs, good men and gentlemen among them?

古文：于兹见陛下之薄德而任刑矣。
现代文：由此可以看出陛下薄德而任刑。
English: From this, it can be seen that His Majesty was punished for his lack of virtue.

古文：水旱连年，夫岂无故哉！
现代文：水旱连年，难道没有原因？ 
English: Year after year of drought, is there not a reason?

古文：言皆激切。
现代文：言辞激切。
English: The rhetoric is heated.

古文：报闻。
现代文：上报皇上。
English: The emperor said he understood.

古文：王朴，同州人。
现代文：王朴，同州人。
English: Wang Pak, a native of Tongzhou.

古文：洪武十八年进士。
现代文：洪武十八年的进士。
English: Hongwu is an 18-year-old trainee.

古文：本名权，帝为改焉。
现代文：原名权，太祖为他改的名。
English: He was originally named Kogen, but his great-grandfather changed his name.

古文：除吏科给事中，以直谏忤旨罢。
现代文：任命为吏科给事中，因直谏忤逆了圣旨而罢官。
English: He was dismissed from his post for disobeying the sacred edict while he was in the process of being appointed as an official.

古文：旋起御史。陈时事千余言。
现代文：不久起任为御史，陈奏时事几千言。
English: He was soon appointed Imperial Historian and wrote thousands of words on current affairs.

古文：性鲠直，数与帝辨是非，不肯屈。
现代文：他性格耿直，多次与太祖争辩是非，不肯屈服。
English: He has a straightforward personality and has repeatedly argued with his great-grandfather, refusing to give in.

古文：一日，遇事争之强。
现代文：一天，遇事争论十分激烈。
English: One day, a heated argument broke out.

古文：帝怒，命戮之。
现代文：太祖大怒，命令杀他。
English: The great-grandfather was furious and ordered him to be killed.

古文：及市，召还，谕之曰： 汝其改乎？ 
现代文：到了刑场，又被召回，对他说： 你更改观点了吗？ 
English: When he arrived at the place of execution, he was called back again and asked, "Have you changed your mind?"

古文：朴对曰： 陛下不以臣为不肖，擢官御史，奈何摧辱至此！
现代文：王朴回答说 ：陛下不认为我不肖，提拔我担任御史，又为什么把我摧辱至此呢？
English: Wang Pu replied, "Your Majesty doesn't think I'm handsome, you promoted me to the position of imperial historian, so why humiliate me like this?"

古文：使臣无罪，安得戮之？
现代文：我没有犯罪，又怎么要杀头呢？
English: I haven't committed a crime, so how can I be beheaded?

古文：有罪，又安用生之？
现代文：我犯了罪，又怎么能让我活着呢？
English: I have committed a crime, how can I be allowed to live?

古文：臣今日愿速死耳。 
现代文：我今日宁愿去死。 
English: I'd rather die today.

古文：帝大怒，趣命行刑。
现代文：太祖大怒，下令行刑。
English: The great-grandfather was furious and ordered the execution.

古文：过史馆，大呼曰： 学士刘三吾志之：某年月日，皇帝杀无罪御史朴也！ 
现代文：路过史馆，王朴大呼道 ：学士刘三吾记载：某年月日，皇帝杀害无罪御史王朴！ 
English: Passing by the History Museum, Wang Pak shouted loudly: "Bachelor Liu Samu recorded: On a certain date, the emperor killed the innocent Wang Pak!

古文：竟戮死。
现代文：终被杀害。
English: He was eventually killed.

古文：帝撰《大诰》，谓朴诽谤，犹列其名。
现代文：太祖撰写《大诰》，说他诽谤，还列举他的名字。
English: The great-great-grandfather wrote "The Great Calamity," saying that he slandered, and also listed his name.

