古文：武帝下永初元年夏六月丁卯，设坛于南郊，即皇帝位，柴燎告天。
现代文：永初元年夏六月丁卯，在南郊设立祭坛，登上皇帝位，烧柴祭告上天。
English: In the summer of the first year of Yongzheng, in June of Dingwu, he set up an altar in the southern suburb, ascended to the emperor's throne, and announced the wood-burning festival to the heavens.

古文：策曰：皇帝臣讳，敢用玄牡，昭告后天后帝。
现代文：策书说：皇帝臣刘裕，使用黑公畜，昭告皇天后土。
English: The policy book said: Emperor's vassal Liu Yu, using black cattle, told the Empress Dowager Earth.

古文：晋帝以卜世告终，历数有归，钦若景运，以命于讳。
现代文：晋朝国运告终，天命转移，谨奉天命，裕即帝位。
English: The Jin emperor learned from divination that the dynasty's auspicious number had ended, and that the auspiciousness of the new dynasty had returned, and ordered Liu Yu to respect the good fortune.

古文：夫树君宰世，天下为公，德充帝王，乐推攸集。
现代文：上天立君治民，天下为公，谁德可为帝，众人就推其为帝。
English: Heaven has set up a king to rule over the people, and the whole world is a commonwealth. Whoever can be an emperor, the people will push him to be an emperor.

古文：越俶唐、虞，降暨汉、魏，靡不以上哲格文祖，元勋陟帝位，故能大拯黔首，垂训无穷。
现代文：上自唐、虞，下至选、垦，开国之君无不以可比唐尧之圣明，由首功登上帝位，所以能够拯救百姓，留芳后世。
English: From Tang and Yu on up, to Zheng and Yao on down, the founder of the country was comparable to the saint of Tang and Yao. He ascended to the throne by virtue of his first merit, so he was able to save the people and leave a legacy for future generations.

古文：晋自东迁，四维不振，宰辅凭依，为日已久。
现代文：东晋以来，礼义廉耻不振，宰相辅臣无所依赖，时间已经很久了。
English: It has been a long time since the Eastern Jin Dynasty, when etiquette, honesty, and modesty were not in vogue, and the prime minister and his aides had nothing to rely on.

古文：难棘隆安，祸成元兴，遂至帝主迁播，宗礼堙灭。
现代文：艰难起于隆室年间，祸患养成于互垒年间，以至于君主流亡，宗庙祭祀断绝。
English: The hardships began during the Ryushitsu era, and the calamities developed during the Mutsui era, to the extent that the reigning monarch died and the rituals of the family temple were discontinued.

古文：讳虽地非齐、晋，众无一旅，仰愤时难，俯悼横流，投袂一援，则皇祀克复。
现代文：刘裕虽然没有齐、置之地，部不多，上愤时事危难，下伤心局势动荡，挺身而出则国家得以复兴。
English: Although Liu Yu did not have a unified position, there were not many departments, he was angry about the current crisis, saddened by the turbulent situation, and the country was able to recover when he stood up.

古文：及危而能持，颠而能扶，奸宄具歼，僭伪必灭。诚兴废有期，否终有数。
现代文：至危而不亡，颠覆而能扶正，奸猾的人全部歼灭，僭伪一定铲除，实在足因为兴衰有期，终结有定数。
English: It will not die until it is in danger, it will be able to support the righteous when it is subverted, all the treacherous people will be annihilated, and the falsehood will definitely be eradicated. It is enough because there is a period of rise and fall, and there is a fixed number for the end.

古文：至于大造晋室，拨乱济民，因藉时来，实尸其重。
现代文：至于创建晋室，治理乱世救济民众，凭藉时机，实在承受着重任。
English: As for the creation of the Jin dynasty, the governance of the chaotic times and the relief of the people, by virtue of the opportunity, it is really a heavy responsibility.

古文：加以殊俗慕义，重译来庭，正朔所暨，咸服声教。
现代文：加之荒远地带羡慕仁义，外邦来朝，国家历法所行之处，都服从教化。
English: In addition, the desolate area envies benevolence and righteousness, foreigners come to the DPRK, and the national calendar is subject to enlightenment.

古文：至乃三灵垂象，山川告祥，人神协祉，岁月滋著。
现代文：以致曰月星辰显示迹象，山川呈现祥瑞，民众神灵协合福祉，随岁月而昭著。
English: As a result, the moon and stars show signs, the mountains and rivers appear auspicious, and the gods and spirits of the people work together for the well-being of the people.

古文：是以群公卿士，亿兆夷人，佥曰皇灵降鉴于上，晋朝款诚于下，天命不可以久淹，宸极不可以暂旷。遂逼群议，恭兹大礼。
现代文：所以公卿百官，百姓夷人，都说天命在上，晋朝在下归附，天命不可久违，皇位不可一空缺。于是受众议所迫，恭敬实行这个大礼。
English: Therefore, hundreds of court nobles and officials, as well as commoners and barbarians, all said that the destiny of heaven is above, the Jin Dynasty is below, the destiny of heaven cannot be violated for a long time, and the imperial throne cannot be vacant. Therefore, they were forced by public opinion to respectfully perform this grand ritual.

古文：猥以寡德，托于兆民之上，虽仰畏天威，略是小节，顾深永怀，祗惧若霣。
现代文：愧以微薄的德行，托身于万民之上，虽然敬畏上天威严，忽略这一小节，但顾虑深重常在心怀，恭敬畏惧如坠深渊。
English: I am ashamed of my meager virtue, I place myself above all people, although I fear the majesty of heaven, I ignore this clause, but I often have deep concerns in my heart, reverence and fear are like falling into the abyss.

古文：敬简元辰，升坛受禅，告类上帝，用酬万国之情。克隆天保，永祚于有宋。
现代文：敬选吉利的时曰，登坛接受禅让，祭告上天，来报答万国的心愿隆盛国运，永远赐福于有宋。
English: When the auspicious time was chosen, he said that he would ascend the altar to accept the zen concession and preach to the heavens to repay the wishes of all nations for the prosperity of the country and forever bless the Song Dynasty.

古文：惟明灵是飨。
现代文：恭请神灵享受祭祀。
English: Only those who have the Holy Spirit can enjoy its worship.

古文：礼毕，备法驾幸建康宫，临太极前殿。
现代文：礼仪完毕，备齐车驾前往建康宫，到太极前殿。
English: After the etiquette was completed, we all drove to Jiankang Palace, to the front hall of Taiji.

古文：诏曰： 夫世代迭兴，承天统极。虽遭遇异途，因革殊事，若乃功济区宇，道振生民，兴废所阶，异世一揆。
现代文：下诏说： 世代更迭兴起，禀承天命统治天下，虽然经历不同，时代不同，但功济天下，拯救民众，有兴有废则历代都一样。
English: The following edict said: Generations come and go, and those who follow the Mandate of Heaven rule the world. Although their experiences are different and their times are different, they are still able to benefit the world and save the people.

古文：朕以寡薄，属当艰运，藉否终之期，因士民之力，用获拯溺，匡世揆乱，安国宁民，业未半古，功参曩烈。
现代文：我以微薄的德行才能，遇上艰难的时运，凭藉前代终结的期限，利用官吏民众的力量，而得以拯救落难的人，匡扶社会治理乱世，安定国家宁静民众，事业不及古人的一半，功绩和从前豪杰相等。
English: With my meager virtue and ability, I encountered a difficult time, with the help of the deadline for the end of the previous generation, using the power of officials and the people, I was able to save the people in distress, support the social governance of the chaotic world, stabilize the country and calm the people, the cause is less than half of the ancients, and the achievements are equal to the former heroes.

古文：晋氏以多难仍遘，历运已移，钦若前王，宪章令轨，用集大命于朕躬。
现代文：晋氏因众多灾难接连而至，天命已经转移，敬顺前代君王，效法美好的法则，聚集天命到我身上。
English: Due to many calamities, the Jin dynasty has come one after another, and the fate of the world has shifted. Respect the previous kings, follow the beautiful rules, and gather the fate of the world to me.

古文：惟德匪嗣，辞不获申，遂祗顺三灵，飨兹景祚，燔柴于南郊，受终于文祖。
现代文：自思德行不够，辞而不准，于是恭敬顺从天地人，接受逭一大运，在南郊烧柴祭天，在前朝宗庙中接受禅让的帝位。
English: Self-reflection and virtue are not enough, so they are not allowed to resign, so they respectfully obey heaven and earth, accept the great fortune, burn firewood in the southern suburbs and sacrifice to heaven, and accept the throne of Zen in the former imperial temple.

古文：猥当与能之期，爰集乐推之运，嘉祚肇开，隆庆惟始，思俾休嘉，惠兹兆庶。
现代文：愧处推举贤能的时期，汇聚乐意推举的时运，美好的赐福初起，大庆开始，思虑使这一喜事，恩惠施及百姓。
English: It is a time for the virtuous to be chosen, a time for the fortunate to be chosen, a time for blessings to be bestowed, a time for celebration, and a time for the people to benefit from this auspicious event.

古文：其大赦天下。
现代文：现大赦天下。
English: It is time for a general amnesty.

古文：改晋元熙二年为永初元年。
现代文：改置互感二年为丞匆元年。
English: The two-year mutual recognition period ended in the first year of Joseon Dynasty.

古文：赐民爵二级。
现代文：赐予民爵二级。
English: He was awarded the second-level title of "peoples peer."

古文：鳏寡孤独不能自存者，人谷五斛。
现代文：鳏寡孤独生计无着落者，每人赐谷五斛。
English: Widows and widowers who find it difficult to survive on their own will be given five mu of grain each.

古文：逋租宿债勿复收。
现代文：拖欠的田租旧债不再征收。
English: Old rents and debts will no longer be collected.

古文：其有犯乡论清议、赃污淫盗，一皆荡涤洗除，与之更始。
现代文：有违犯乡间公正的评论、贪污淫乱盗窃，全都免于治罪，让他们重新开始。
English: Comments that violate rural justice, corruption, prostitution and theft are all exempt from punishment, allowing them to start anew.

古文：长徒之身，特皆原遣。
现代文：长期服刑的人，特予宽恕释放。
English: A person who has served a long-term sentence shall be granted special pardon and release.

古文：亡官失爵，禁锢夺劳，一依旧准。 
现代文：失去官职爵位，勒令不准做官被剥夺劳绩者，全依旧日准则。 
English: The loss of official titles, orders not to be allowed to work as officials, and those who are deprived of performance are all still Japanese standards.

古文：封晋帝为零陵王，全食一郡。
现代文：封置壶为零堕王，给予一郡租税。
English: If the pot is sealed, the tax will be zero, and the county tax will be increased.

古文：载天子旌旗，乘五时副车，行晋正朔，郊祀天地礼乐制度，皆用晋典。
现代文：使用天子旌旗，乘五时副车，用晋朝历法，祭祀天地的礼乐制度，都按置塑法典。
English: The use of the flag of the heavenly son, the use of the five o'clock train, the use of the Jin Dynasty calendar, and the ritual music system for the worship of heaven and earth are all in accordance with the Code of the People's Republic of China.

古文：上书不为表，答表勿称诏。追尊皇考为孝穆皇帝，皇妣为穆皇后，尊王太后为皇太后。
现代文：给皇帝上书不称表，皇帝批覆表文不称诏追尊皇帝的父亲为孝穆皇帝，皇帝的母亲为穆皇后，尊崇王太后为皇太后。
English: The letter to the emperor is not a watch, and the emperor's approval form does not say that the emperor's father is the Emperor Xiaomu, the emperor's mother is the Empress Mu, and the Queen Mother is the Queen Mother.

古文：诏曰： 夫微禹之感，叹深后昆，盛德必祀，道隆百世。
现代文：韶令说： 圣人对杰出人物的感慨，深入后世人心，对大德之人必加祭祀，使道义隆盛于百代。
English: The imperial edict said: The saints' emotion for outstanding figures will go deep into the hearts of future generations, and sacrifices must be made for great people, so that morality will flourish for hundreds of generations.

古文：晋氏封爵，咸随运改，至于德参微管，勋济苍生，爱人怀树，犹或勿翦，虽在异代，义无泯绝。
现代文：置氐的封爵，都随国运改变，军于道德与卓绝人物相同，救济民众者，怀念行仁政者之树尚且不伐，即使朝代不同，按理不应泯灭。
English: The knighthoods of the emperors have changed with the national movement. The military is the same as the moral and outstanding figures. The tree of the people's relief and the memory of the benevolent politicians has not yet been cut down. Even if the dynasties are different, it should not be extinguished.

古文：降杀之仪，一依前典。
现代文：下降的事宜，一律依照前代法典。
English: All matters of reduction shall be governed by the previous Code.

古文：可降始兴公封始兴县公，庐陵公封柴桑县公，各千户；始安公封荔浦县侯，长沙公封醴陵县侯，康乐公可即封县侯，各五百户：以奉晋故丞相王导、太傅谢安、大将军温峤、大司马陶侃、车骑将军谢玄之祀。
现代文：可把始兴公降为始兴题公，庐陆公降为柴桑县公，各封一千户；始安公封为荔浦县侯，垦业公封为醴陵县侯，尘銮公可就地封为县侯，各五百户：让他们供奉晋朝前丞相王导、太傅谢安、大将军温崤、大司马陶侃、车骑将军谢玄的祭祀。
English: Shi Xing Gong can be downgraded to Shi Xing Zhi Gong, Huan Lu Gong can be downgraded to Chaisang County Gong, with 1,000 households each; Shi An Gong can be downgraded to Lippu County Hou, Xingye Gong can be downgraded to Fuling County Hou, and Ducheng Gong can be downgraded to County Hou, with 500 households each: Let them offer sacrifices to the former prime minister of the Jin Dynasty, Wang Du, Taifu Xie An, General Wen Xi, General Ma Tao Kan, and General Xie Xuan.

古文：其宣力义熙，豫同艰难者，一仍本秩，无所减降。 
现代文：凡在义熙年间效力，一同艰难起事的，一概因袭本来的品级，不予下降。 
English: All those who served during the Yixi era and worked hard together will not be downgraded because they have inherited the original rank.

古文：封晋临川王司马宝为西丰县侯，食邑千户。
现代文：封晋朝的临川王司马宝为西丰县侯，食邑一千户。
English: King Sima Bao of Linchuan, who was a vassal of the Jin Dynasty, was the lord of Xifeng County and had a thousand households.

古文：庚午，以司空道怜为太尉，封长沙王。
现代文：庚午，任命司空道怜为太尉，封长沙王。
English: In the afternoon of the 7th day of the 7th month, he appointed Sikyong Dorei as the first lieutenant and appointed him as the king of Changsha.

古文：追封司徒道规为临川王。
现代文：追封司徒道规为临川王。
English: He was crowned the King of Linchuan Province.

古文：尚书仆射徐羡之加镇军将军，右卫将军谢晦为中领军，宋国领军檀道济为护军将军，中领军刘义欣为青州刺史。
现代文：尚书仆射徐羡之加授镇军将军，右卫将军谢晦为中领军，宋国领军将军檀道济为护军将军，中领军刘义欣为青州刺史。
English: Shang Shuxu's servant Xu Enzhi was awarded the general of the town army, Right Guard General Xie Yu was the middle leader, Song Army leader General Dang Daoji was the general of the escort army, and middle leader Liu Yixin was the historian of Qingzhou.

古文：立南郡公义庆为临川王。
现代文：立南郡公义庆为临川王。
English: Rinnan County's Kuniyoshi is the king of Linchuan.

古文：又诏曰： 夫铭功纪劳，有国之要典，慎终追旧，在心之所隆。
现代文：又下诏说： 铭刻功勋记载劳绩，是国家的重要法典，慎重办理丧事追怀旧人，是内心的隆重事宜。
English: The next edict said: "To record merits and achievements is an important national code, and to carefully handle funerals and remember the elderly is a solemn matter of the heart."

古文：自大业创基，十有七载，世路迍邅，戎车岁动，自东徂西，靡有宁日。
现代文：自从大业创立，十七年了，世道艰难，战事逐年进行，自束到西，没有安宁的日子。
English: It's been seventeen years since the founding of Daya. The world is tough, war is going on year by year, self-imposed exile to the West, and there are no days of peace.

古文：实赖将帅竭心，文武尽效；宁内拓外，迄用有成。
现代文：实在依赖于将帅竭尽心力，文武官员拼死效命，安宁内部开拓境外，迄今有所成就。
English: It really depends on the commander-in-chief to do his best, the military and civilian officials to work hard, and the internal tranquility to explore abroad. So far, some achievements have been made.

古文：威灵远著，寇逆消荡，遂当揖让之礼，猥飨天人之祚。
现代文：声威远布，敌寇叛贼消灭荡除，我因此承受禅让的礼仪，愧获天人的福禄。
English: The prestige is far-reaching, the enemy invaders and traitors have been eliminated, and I have thus received the etiquette of Zen concession, and I am humbled to receive the blessings of heaven.

古文：念功简劳，无忘鉴寐，凡厥诚勤，宜同国庆。
现代文：思念功勋评定劳绩，日夜不忘，凡是忠诚辛勤的人，都应同享国家的庆典。
English: Think about the merits and appraise the performance, and do not forget day and night. All loyal and hard-working people should share the national celebration.

古文：其酬赏复除之科，以时论举。
现代文：赏赐和免除租税的条例，及时讨论确定。
English: The regulations on rewards and tax exemptions will be discussed and determined in a timely manner.

古文：战亡之身，厚加复赠。 
现代文：对战死的人，免除租税予以追赠。 
English: For those who died in the war, they will be exempted from tax and given a posthumous gift.

古文：乙亥，立桂阳公义真为庐陵王，彭城公义隆为宜都王，第四皇子义康为彭城王。
现代文：乙亥。立桂阳公盏真为庐陵王，堑越公盏隆为宣昼胆，第四个皇子义康为彭城王。
English: The fourth prince, Yikang, was the king of Pengcheng, the fourth prince, Guiyang, was the king of Huling, and the fourth prince, Yueyang, was the king of Xuanlian.

古文：丁丑，诏曰： 古之王者，巡狩省方，躬览民物，搜扬幽隐，拯灾恤患，用能风泽遐被，远至迩安。
现代文：丁丑，诏令说： 古代的君王，巡视各地，亲自观察人物，搜寻被埋没的人才，拯救灾难抚恤祸患，因此能恩泽远布，远处归附近处平安。
English: Ding Xi, the edict said: "Ancient emperors toured all over the country, personally observed people, searched for buried talents, saved disasters and pardoned misfortunes, so they could spread grace far and wide, and return peace to nearby areas.

古文：朕以寡暗，道谢前哲，因受终之期，托兆庶之上，鉴寐属虑，思求民瘼。
现代文：我以微德暗才，道义不及前代贤人，在受终之时，托身于万民之上，日夜思虑，想寻求民众的疾苦。
English: I, with my feeble virtue and less moral integrity than the sages of the previous generation, at the time of my death, leaned on all the people, thought day and night, and wanted to seek the sufferings of the people.

古文：才弱事艰，若无津济，夕惕永念，心驰遐域。
现代文：然而才能微小事情艰难，如无渡口可过，常怀恐惧之念，心中遥想远方区域。
English: However, it is the small things that are difficult, such as not having a ferry to cross, being fearful, and having distant regions in mind.

古文：可遣大使分行四方，旌贤举善，问所疾苦。
现代文：可派遣大员巡视四方，表彰贤明推举良善，询问民众疾苦。
English: It can dispatch officers to inspect the four directions, commend the wise and commend the good, and inquire about the hardships of the people.

古文：其有狱讼亏滥，政刑乖愆，伤化扰治，未允民听者，皆当具以事闻。
现代文：凡是案件判处不公，政策刑罚失误，损伤教化扰乱政治，不合民心者，都应该上奏。
English: All cases of unfair sentencing, policy and punishment errors, damage and indoctrination, disruption of politics, and those that do not conform to the people's will should be reported.

古文：万事之宜，无失厥中。暢朝迁乃眷之旨，宣下民壅隔之情。 
现代文：万事的合适标准，在于不失去中道，通畅朝廷眷顾的旨意，宣泄下民壅塞阻隔的心情。 
English: The appropriate standard in all matters lies in not losing the middle way, allowing the will of the imperial court to flow freely, and venting the mood of the people to obstruct and block.

古文：戊寅，诏曰： 百官事殷俸薄，禄不代耕。
现代文：戊寅，诏令说： 百官事多而俸禄少，不够生活之用。
English: In other words, the imperial edict said: officials have more responsibilities and less salary, which is not enough to live on.

古文：虽国储未丰，要令公私周济。
现代文：虽然国库并不充裕，仍以公私兼顾为好。
English: Although the state treasury is not sufficient, it is still better to combine public and private interests.

古文：诸供纳昔减半者，可悉复旧。
现代文：所有从前减半供给的，可全部恢复旧制。
English: All supplies that were previously halved can all be restored to the old system.

古文：六军见禄粗可，不在此例。
现代文：六军俸禄大致尚可，不在此例。
English: The salaries of the six armies are generally acceptable, but not in this case.

古文：其余官僚，或自本俸素少者，亦畴量增之。 
现代文：其余的官员，如俸禄一向很少的，也酌情增加。 
English: Remaining officials, whose salaries have always been small, will also receive increases as appropriate.

古文：乙卯，改晋《泰始历》为《永初历》。
现代文：己卯，改晋朝《泰始历》为《永初历》。
English: Therefore, the "Thai New Year's Calendar" was changed to the "Perpetual New Year's Calendar" in the Jin Dynasty.

古文：秋七月丁亥，原放劫贼余口没在台府者，诸徙家并听还本土。
现代文：秋七月丁亥，宽大释放被没台府的劫贼家属，所有迁徙者都可回原籍。
English: In the autumn and July of Dinghai, the robber's family members who were exiled from Taiwan were generously released, and all migrants could return to their hometowns.

古文：又运舟材及运船，不复下诸郡输出，悉委都水别量。
现代文：另外造船材料以及运输船，不再令各郡输出，都委托都水台另外筹备。
English: In addition, shipbuilding materials and transport vessels will no longer be exported to the counties, but will be commissioned to the Metropolitan Waterworks Bureau for additional preparation.

古文：台府所须，皆别遣主帅与民和市，即时裨直，不复责租民求办。
现代文：台府所需物品，都另外派遣主帅与民众公平交易，当即付钱，不再要求租民办理。
English: The items needed by Taifu will be sent separately by the head coach to make a fair deal with the public, pay immediately, and no longer require the tenant to handle.

古文：又停废虏车牛，不得以官威假借。
现代文：禁止抓车抓牛，不能凭官府之势强行征用。
English: It is forbidden to catch cattle by car, and they cannot be forcibly requisitioned by virtue of the power of the government.

古文：又以市税繁苦，优量减降。
现代文：又因市场税收繁重，予以减轻。
English: In addition, due to the heavy market tax, it will be reduced.

古文：从征关、洛，殒身战场，幽没不反者，赡赐其家。
现代文：随从征伐关中、洛阳，死在战场，尸体没运回的，赡养其家。
English: Those who followed the conquest of Guanzhong and Luoyang, died on the battlefield, and whose bodies were not transported back, supported their families.

古文：己丑，陈留王曹虔嗣薨。
现代文：己丑，陈留王曹虔嗣逝世。
English: Chen Rui Wang Cao Jianzi passed away.

古文：辛卯，复置五校三将官，增殿中将军员二十人，余在员外。
现代文：辛卯，又设置五校三将官，增加殿中将军名额二十人，其余的不算正式名额。
English: Xinwu also set up five schools and three generals, increasing the number of generals in the palace by twenty, and the rest are not official places.

古文：戊戌，后将军、雍州刺史赵伦之进号安北将军；征虏将军、北徐州刺史刘怀慎进号平北将军；征西大将军、开府仪同三司杨盛进号车骑大将军。
现代文：戊戌，后将军、雍州刺史赵伦之升为安北将军，征虏将军、北徐州刺史刘怀慎升为平北将军，征西大将军、开府仪同三司杨盛升军号为车骑大将军。
English: Wu Zheng, Hou Zheng, Yong Zhou Zhao Lunzhi were promoted to Anbei General, Zhaoju Zheng, North Xuzhou Zheng, Liu Huai Sheng were promoted to Pingbei General, Zhengxi Zheng, Kaifu Zheng and Yang Sheng Zheng were promoted to General of Cavalry and Cavalry.

古文：甲辰，镇西将军李歆进号征西将军，平西将军乞佛炽盘进号安西大将军，征东将军高句骊王高琏进号征东大将军，镇东将军百济王扶余映进号镇东大将军。
现代文：甲辰，镇西将军奎趑升军号为征西将军，平西将军乞佛图邀升单号为安西大将军，征束将军高句骊王产堕升军号为征束大将军，镇东将军百济王扶余迭升军号为镇束大将军。
English: At the time of Jia Chen, the Zhenxi general, Kuijun, was promoted to Zhenxi general, the Pingxi general, Qibutu, was promoted to Anxi general, the Zhenxu general, Gao Guozhong, was promoted to Zhenxu general, and the Zhendong general, Beiji Wang Fuyu, was promoted to Zhenxu general.

古文：置东宫冗从仆射、旅贲中郎将官。
现代文：设置东宫冗从仆射、旅贲中郎将宫。
English: The eastern palace is set up with a long line of attendants and servants, and the middle palace is set up with a long line of attendants and servants.

古文：戊申，迁神主于太庙，车驾亲奉。
现代文：戊申，把祖先牌位迁到太庙，皇帝亲自侍奉。
English: Wushin, moved the ancestor plaque to the Great Temple, and the emperor personally served.

古文：壬子，诏曰： 往者军国务殷，事有权制，劫科峻重，施之一时。
现代文：壬子，诏令说： 先前军国事多，事事有权宜之计，巧取豪夺，一时成风。
English: According to the imperial edict, the previous military leaders had too much to do with state affairs. They tried to do everything in their own way, taking advantage of others, and this became a fad.

古文：今王道维新，政和法简，可一除之，还遵旧条。反叛淫盗三犯补冶士，本谓一事三犯，终无悛革。
现代文：现在王道维新，政治清明法令宽简，严刑一律废除，仍遵旧例反叛、淫乱、盗窃三项同犯，充作铸工，本是指一种事三次犯法，终究不改过。
English: At present, Wang Dao Wei Xin, the political clearness decree is more lenient and concise, and all severe punishments are abolished, but the old cases of rebellion, fornication, and theft are still adhered to, and the three accomplices are used as foundry workers. Originally, it refers to one thing to break the law three times, and it will not be changed after all.

古文：主者顷多并数众事，合而为三，甚违立制之旨，普更申明。 
现代文：主管者近来多合并几种事，合而为三，很违背确立制度的旨意，特另外普遍地申明。 
English: The person in charge has recently combined several things into three, which is very contrary to the intention of establishing the system, and has been widely affirmed.

古文：八月戊午，西中郎将、荆州刺史宜都王讳进号镇西将军。
现代文：八月戊午，西中郎将、荆州刺史宜都王义隆升为镇西将军。
English: In the afternoon of August, Nishi Chungro, Jingzhou Zashi, and Yidu Wang Yilong were promoted to Zhenxi Generals.

古文：辛酉，开亡叛赦，限内首出，蠲租布二年。
现代文：辛酉，赦免逃亡叛变者，在期限内自首的，免二年的田租布帛。
English: Xin Rong pardoned the fugitive mutineers, and those who surrendered within the time limit were exempted from two years of rice rent.

古文：先有资状、黄籍犹存者，听复本注。
现代文：原先有案可查、户籍仍然保存的，恢复土地所有权。
English: If the original case can be investigated and the household registration is still preserved, the land ownership will be restored.

古文：诸旧郡县以北为名者，悉除；寓方于南者，听以南为号。
现代文：各郡县的名称中凡加了 北 字的一律去掉；侨立在南方的，准许以 南 为名。
English: In the names of counties and counties, the word "North" should be deleted; if the overseas Chinese are stationed in the south, they are allowed to be named "South."

古文：又制有无故自残伤者补冶士，实由政刑烦苛，民不堪命，可除此条。
现代文：又有无故自残者罚作铸工的规定，这实是由于政治苛刻，民不堪命所致，这一规定应予以废除。
English: There is also a provision that those who have self-harmed without reason should be punished as a foundry worker, which is really due to political harshness and people's unbearable lives. This provision should be abolished.

古文：罢青州并兗州。
现代文：罢除青州并入兖州。
English: Qingzhou was abolished and merged into Ganzhou.

古文：戊辰，诏曰： 彭、沛、下邳三郡，首事所基，情义缱绻，事由情奖，古今所同。
现代文：戊辰，诏令说： 彭、沛、下邳三郡，是首举义师之地，情谊深厚，诸事因情理而奖励，是古今相同的。
English: In Wuchen, the imperial edict said: the three counties of Peng, Pei, and Shimonoseki are the first places to nominate righteous teachers. The friendship is profound, and all things are rewarded according to reason, which is the same from ancient times to the present.

古文：彭城桑梓本乡，加隆攸在，优复之制，宜同丰、沛。
现代文：彭城是我的故乡，是施以重恩的地方，优待免税应该和丰县、沛县相同。
English: Pengcheng is my hometown. It is a place of great kindness. The preferential treatment and tax exemption should be the same as Fengxian and Peixian.

古文：其沛郡、下邳可复租布三十年。 
现代文：沛郡、下邳可免除田租布帛三十年。 
English: Pei County and Jiaozuo can be exempted from paddy rent for 30 years.

古文：辛未，追谥妃臧氏为敬皇后。
现代文：辛未，追谧妃子臧氏为敬皇后。
English: Xin Wei, the daughter of the Prince of the Chasing Dragon, became the Queen of Honor.

古文：癸酉，立王太子为皇太子。
现代文：癸酉，立王太子为皇太子。
English: Therefore, the crown prince was established as the crown prince.

古文：乙亥，诏曰： 朕承历受终，猥飨天命。
现代文：乙亥，诏令说： 我继承历运获取帝位，愧得天命。
English: In the Year of the Boar, the imperial edict said: I have inherited the historical movement to obtain the imperial throne, and I am worthy of the fate of heaven.

古文：荷积善之祚，藉士民之力，率由令范。
现代文：承积善之福，藉士民之力，七庙礼仪完备，都依美好的规范。
English: Accumulating the good fortune, with the help of scholars and the people, the etiquette of the seven temples is complete, all according to the beautiful standard.

古文：先后祗严宣训，七庙肇建，情敬无违。
现代文：先代皇后恭敬严明，得入宣训宫，祭祀初建，不失恩情敬意。
English: The previous empress respected Yanming, was admitted to the Xuanxun Palace, built the first sacrificial rites, and did not lose her gratitude and respect.

古文：加以储宫备礼，皇基弥固，国庆家礼，爰集旬日，岂予一人，独荷兹庆。
现代文：加上太子宫室礼仪完备，皇朝根基更加牢固，国家吉庆家族礼仪，都在十来天汇集，岂仅我一人，独享这一喜事。
English: In addition to the complete etiquette of the imperial nursery, the foundation of the imperial dynasty is more solid, and the national auspicious family etiquette has been gathered for ten days. I am the only one to enjoy this happy event.

古文：其见刑罪无轻重，可悉原赦。
现代文：现有罪犯不论轻重，全部赦免。
English: All existing criminals, no matter how serious, will be pardoned.

古文：限百日，以今为始。
现代文：限定一百天办理完毕，以今日为第一天。
English: Only one hundred days have been completed, with today being the first day.

古文：先因军事所发奴僮，各还本主；若死亡及勋劳破免，亦依限还直。 
现代文：原先因军队事务所调发的奴仆，各自归还给本来的主人；如果死亡以及因功免去奴仆身份的，也依例偿还价钱。 
English: Servants who had previously been transferred due to military affairs were each returned to their original masters; in the event of death and those who were exempted from the status of servant due to their merits, the price was also repaid according to the rules.

古文：闰月壬午朔，诏曰： 晋世帝后及籓王诸陵守卫，宜便置格。
现代文：闰月壬午初一，诏令说： 晋朝皇帝皇后以及藩王陵墓的守卫，应马上确立条例。
English: On the first day of the leap month at noon, the imperial edict said: The guards of the tombs of the emperors and queens of the Jin Dynasty and the lords of the domain should immediately establish regulations.

古文：其名贤先哲，见优前代，或立德著节，或宁乱庇民，坟茔未远，并宜洒扫。
现代文：著名贤士先代豪杰，在前代受优待，有的树立德行标举气节，有的平定叛乱庇护民众，坟墓不远，都应洒水扫除。
English: The famous sages and heroes of the previous generation received preferential treatment in the previous generation. Some of them set up moral standards and held festivals, while others quelled rebellions and sheltered the people. Their graves are not far away. All of them should be sprinkled with water.

古文：主者具条以闻。 
现代文：丰管者都列举上报。 
English: The fire chiefs are all listed in the report.

古文：丁酉，特进、左光禄大夫孔季恭加开府仪同三司。
现代文：丁酉，特进、左光禄大夫孔季恭加授开府仪同三司。
English: Ding Jun, Tejin, and Dr. Kong Jijong, the doctor of the Left Guanglu Hospital, were additionally awarded the ceremony of opening the hospital and the three departments.

古文：辛丑，诏曰： 主者处案虽多所谘详，若众官命议，宜令明审。
现代文：辛丑，诏令说： 主管部门处理文书虽然多方面咨询，如果众官员下令议论，应使文书明确精审。
English: However, the edict said: Although the competent department handles the document through multi-faceted consultation, if the officials order discussion, the document should be made clear and precise.

古文：自顷或总称参详，于文漫略。
现代文：近来有的统称详细，在文书中随意省略。
English: Some recent collective names are detailed and can be omitted at will in documents.

古文：自今有厝意者，皆当指名其人；所见不同，依旧继启。 
现代文：从现在起凡是着意之处，都应指出何人提出；见解不相同的，依旧继续咨询。 
English: From now on, wherever there is an idea, it should be pointed out who proposed it; if there are different opinions, the consultation will still continue.

古文：又诏曰： 诸处冬使，或遣或不，事役宜省，今可悉停。
现代文：又下诏说： 各地的冬季使者，有的派有的不派，事情宜少，现可全部停止。
English: He also issued the following edict: Winter envoys from all over the country, some sent and some not sent, should be few in number, and can now all be stopped.

古文：唯元正大庆，不在其例。
现代文：惟独正月初一的大庆，不在此例。
English: However, the big celebration on the first day of the first month of the year is not the case.

古文：郡县遣冬使诣州及都督府，亦停之。 
现代文：郡县派遣冬季使者前往州中和都督府，也要停止。 
English: Counties should also stop sending winter emissaries to prefectures and prefectural governments.

古文：九月壬子朔，置东宫殿中将军十人，员外二十人。
现代文：九月壬子初一，设东宫殿中将军十人，正员之外二十人。
English: On the first day of September, ten generals and twenty non-commissioned officers were stationed in the East Palace.

古文：壬申，置都官尚书。
现代文：壬申，设都官尚书。
English: Jinshin, set the capital official Shangshu.

古文：冬十月辛卯，改晋所用王肃祥禫二十六月仪，依郑玄二十七月而后除。
现代文：冬十一月辛卯，废止晋朝所用王肃的为父母服丧二十六个月之仪，实行郑玄的服丧二十七个月之礼。
English: In the winter of November, the twenty-six-month mourning ceremony for Wang Su's parents used by the Jin Dynasty was abolished, and the twenty-seven-month mourning ceremony for Zheng Xuan was implemented.

古文：十二月辛巳朔，车驾临延贤堂听讼。
现代文：十二月辛巳初一，皇帝到延贤堂听讼。
English: On the first day of the new year in December, the emperor went to Yan Xian Hall to hear the case.

古文：二年春正月辛酉，车驾祠南郊，大赦天下。
现代文：二年春正月辛酉，皇帝祭祀南郊，大赦天下。
English: In the first month of the second year of the Spring, the emperor made a sacrifice in the southern suburb and pardoned the whole country.

古文：丙寅，断金银涂。
现代文：丙寅，禁止用金银作涂料。
English: Cui Yin, it is forbidden to use gold and silver as paint.

古文：以扬州刺史庐陵王义真为司徒，以尚书仆射、镇军将军徐羡之为尚书令、扬州刺史。
现代文：任命扬州刺史庐盐工羞真为司徒，任命尚书仆射、镇军将军徐羞之为尚书令、扬州刺史。
English: Yangzhou Zhi Shi Yan Yan Gong Shizhen was appointed as the tutor, Yangzhou Zhi Shi Yan Yan Yan Gong Shizhen was appointed as the tutor, Yangzhou Zhi Shi Yan Yan Yan Gong Shizhen was appointed as the tutor, Yangzhou Zhi Shi Yan Yan Yan Gong Shizhen was appointed as the tutor, Yangzhou Zhi Shi Yan Yan Yan Gong Shizhen was appointed as the tutor, Yangzhou Zhi Shi Yan Yan Yan Yan Yan Gong Shizhen was appointed as the tutor.

古文：丙子，南康揭阳蛮反，郡县讨破之。
现代文：丙子，南康揭阳蛮反叛，郡县讨伐打败他们。
English: Bongzi, Nankang, Jieyang rebelled violently, and the county crusade defeated them.

古文：己卯，禁丧事用铜钉。
现代文：己卯，禁止丧葬中用铜钉。
English: It is prohibited to use copper nails in funerals.

古文：罢会稽郡府。
现代文：撤销会稽郡府。
English: Revocation of the county auditor's office.

古文：二月己丑，车驾幸延贤堂策试诸州郡秀才、孝廉。
现代文：二月己丑，皇帝前往延贤堂策试各州郡的秀才、孝廉。
English: In February, the emperor went to Yan Xiantang to test the talents of the states and counties.

古文：扬州秀才顾练、豫州秀才殷朗所对称旨，并以为著作佐郎。
现代文：曲 秀才顾练、豫州秀才殷朗的应对合乎旨意，都任命为著作佐郎。
English: Gu Ren, a talented composer from Guzheng, and Yan Lang, a talented composer from Yuzhou, were both appointed as "Written Saro" in accordance with the will.

古文：戊申，制中二千石加公田一顷。
现代文：戊申，规定中二千石官员增加一顷公田。
English: Wushin, stipulates that the middle-ranking officials of 2,000 koku increase one hectare of public land.

古文：三月乙丑，初限荆州府置将不得过二千人，吏不得过一万人；州置将不得过五百人，吏不得过五千人。
现代文：三月乙丑，开始限令荆州府设将官不得超过二千人，吏员不得超过一万人；州设将官不得超过五百人，吏员不得超过五千人。
English: In March, the first month of the year, the Jingzhou government began to limit the number of generals and officials to no more than 2,000 and the number of officials to no more than 10,000; the number of state generals and officials to no more than 500 and the number of officials to no more than 5,000.

古文：兵士不在此限。
现代文：兵士不受此限。
English: This does not apply to soldiers.

古文：夏四月己卯朔，诏曰： 淫祠惑民费财，前典所绝，可并下在所除诸房庙。
现代文：夏四月己卯初一，诏令说： 淫祠惑民伤财，向为前代所禁止，可下令各处拆除各祭庙。
English: On the first day of the fourth month of the summer, the imperial edict said: "It is forbidden for the previous generation to seduce the people and hurt their wealth, and it can be ordered to dismantle the temples everywhere.

古文：其先贤及以勋德立祠者，不在此例。 
现代文：先代贤人和因功勋德行立庙的，不在此例。 
English: This is not the case for the previous generation of sages and those who founded temples due to their merits and virtues.

古文：戊申，车驾于华林园听讼。
现代文：戊申，皇帝在茎挞厘听讼。
English: Wushin, the emperor heard the case in Shulingli.

古文：己亥，以左卫将军王仲德为冀州刺史。
现代文：己亥，任命左卫将军王仲德为冀州刺史。
English: Ji Hai, appointed the left guard general Wang Zhongde as the history of Jizhou.

古文：五月己酉，置东宫屯骑、步兵、翊军三校尉官。
现代文：五月己酉，设置束宫屯骑、步兵、翊军三个校尉官职。
English: In May of the same year, three official positions of Sokgong Tuen Keng, infantry, and Shanshan Army were established.

古文：甲戌，车驾又幸华林园听讼。
现代文：甲戌，皇帝又前往华林园听讼。
English: The emperor also went to the Waring Garden to hear the case.

古文：六月壬寅，诏曰： 杖罚虽有旧科，然职务殷碎，推坐相寻。
现代文：六月壬寅，诏令说： 杖刑虽列入旧的例条，然而职务琐碎，追查不断。
English: In June, the imperial edict said: Although the cane punishment is included in the old regulations, the duties are trivial and the investigation is continuous.

古文：若皆有其实，则体所不堪；文行而已，又非设罚之意。
现代文：如果真打，谁也受不了；如不认真，又违背杖刑的本意。
English: If it's a real beating, no one can stand it; if it's not serious, it's against the original intention of caning.

古文：可筹量觕为中否之格。 车驾又于华林园听讼。
现代文：可酌订适中的条例 皇帝又在华林园听讼。
English: The emperor also held a hearing in the Hualin Garden.

古文：甲辰，制诸署敕吏四品以下，又府署所得辄罚者，听统府寺行四十杖。
现代文：甲辰，规定四品以下官员，以及各府署所能自行责罚的，准许总管的官署责罚四十棒。
English: Jia Chen, stipulates that officials below the fourth grade, as well as those who can be punished by various departments on their own, are allowed to be punished by the general manager's office with forty sticks.

古文：秋七月己巳，地震。
现代文：秋七月己巳，发生地震。
English: In the autumn of July, an earthquake occurred.

古文：八月壬辰，车驾又于华林园听讼。
现代文：八月王辰，皇帝又在华林园听讼。
English: In August, Wang Chen, the emperor was once again in Hua Lin Yuan to hear the case.

古文：九月己丑，零陵王薨。
现代文：九月己丑，昼壁王逝世。
English: September was a bad month, and the king of the wall died in the afternoon.

古文：车驾三朝率百僚举哀于朝堂，一依魏明帝服山阳公故事。
现代文：皇帝三个早晨率领百官在朝堂举哀，一律依照曲胆壶为业坠公服丧的旧例。
English: On the morning of the third day, the emperor led hundreds of officials to mourn in the imperial hall, all in accordance with the old custom of mourning for the fallen emperor.

古文：太尉持节监护，葬以晋礼。
现代文：太尉持节护灵，采用晋朝丧礼。
English: The captain held a wreath-laying ceremony and adopted the Jin Dynasty funeral rites.

古文：冬十月丁酉，诏曰： 兵制峻重，务在得宜。
现代文：冬十月丁酉，诏令说： 兵制太严厉，应该使其适中。
English: In the winter of October, the imperial edict said: The military system is too strict, it should be moderated.

古文：役身死叛，辄考傍亲，流迁弥广，未见其极。
现代文：服役者叛逃，就拷问旁支亲属，牵扯广泛，没有限制。
English: When servicemen defected, they tortured their collateral relatives, involving a wide range of people without restriction.

古文：遂令冠带之伦，沦陷非所。
现代文：致使豪门大族，沦落到不该去的地方。
English: As a result, the big families have been relegated to places they shouldn't be.

古文：宜革以弘泰，去其密科。
现代文：应该以宽阔的胸怀加以革除，去掉苛刻的条文。
English: It should be removed with a broad mind, and the harsh provisions should be removed.

古文：自今犯罪充兵合举户从役者，便付营押领。
现代文：从现在起因犯罪当兵及全家服役的，交付军营管理。
English: From now on, soldiers who have committed crimes and whose entire families have served in the military will be transferred to the management of military camps.

古文：其有户统及谪止一身者，不得复侵滥服亲，以相连染。 
现代文：凡有户籍以及责罚仅一人的，不再牵连其亲属，以免互相牵连。 
English: Anyone who has a household registration and punishes only one person will no longer implicate his relatives, so as not to implicate each other.

古文：己亥，以凉州胡帅大沮渠蒙逊为镇军大将军、开府仪同三司、凉州刺史。
现代文：己亥，任命凉州胡人首领大沮渠蒙逊为镇军大将军、开府仪同三司、凉州刺史。
English: Ji Hai, appointed the leader of the Liangzhou Hu people, Dashuqiu Mengxun, as the general of the town army, Kaifu ceremony and three departments, and Liangzhou stabbing history.

古文：癸卯，车驾于延贤堂听讼。以员外散骑常侍应袭为宁州刺史。
现代文：癸卯，皇帝在延贤堂听讼，任命员外散骑常侍应袭为宁州刺史。
English: At this time, the emperor was holding a court hearing in Yan Xian Hall, appointing a non-commissioned officer to ride horseback to escort the procession to Ningzhou.

古文：三年春正月甲辰朔，诏刑罚无轻重，悉皆原降。
现代文：三年春正月甲辰初一，诏令刑罚无论轻重，均予以减轻。
English: On the first day of the first month of the third year of spring, the imperial edict decreed that all punishments, no matter how severe, would be reduced.

古文：壬子，以前冀州刺史王仲德为徐州刺史。
现代文：壬子，任命前冀州刺史王仲德为徐州刺史。
English: Jinsi, appointed the former Jizhou chief secretary Wang Zhongde as the Xuzhou chief secretary.

古文：癸丑，以尚书令、扬州刺史徐羡之为司空、录尚书事，刺史如故。
现代文：癸丑，任命尚书令、扬州刺史徐羡之为司空、绿尚书事，刺史照旧。
English: Zou Yuxiu, appointed Shang Shuling, Yangzhou Zhishi Xu Enjing Shi Kuo, Green Shang Shuling, Zhishi Zhou as before.

古文：抚军将军、江州刺史王弘进号卫将军、开府仪同三司，太子詹事傅亮为尚书仆射，中领军谢晦为领军将军。
现代文：抚军将军、江州刺史王弘升军号为卫将军、开府仪同三司，太子詹事垡袁为尚书仆射，中领军谢晦为领军将军。
English: The general of Fuzhou army, Wang Hongsheng, the commander of the Jiangzhou Zhishi army, was the general of Wei army, Kaifu Yi was the same as the three officers, the prince Zhan Shijian Yuan was the general of Shangshu, and the leader of the central army Xie Yu was the leader of the central army.

古文：乙卯，以辅国将军毛德祖为司州刺史。
现代文：乙卯，任命辅国将军毛德祖为司州刺史。
English: Second, Mao Zedzu, the general of the auxiliary state, was appointed as the chief historian of Shizhou.

古文：乙丑，诏曰： 古之建国，教学为先，弘风训世，莫尚于此；发蒙启滞，咸必由之。
现代文：乙丑，诏令说： 古代建国，以教育为先，弘扬风尚引导世人，没有比这更重要的，启蒙答疑，都一定经由这条途径。
English: Secondly, the imperial edict said: Since the founding of the country in ancient times, education has been the first priority, and the promotion of fashion has guided the world. There is nothing more important than this. Enlightenment and answers to doubts must all go through this path.

古文：故爰自盛王，迄于近代，莫不敦崇学艺，修建庠序。自昔多故，戎马在郊，旌旗卷舒，日不暇给。
现代文：所以自古代至近代，无不崇尚学术，修建学校。此前多故，战马遍及京郊，旌旗飞舞，事务繁多而时间不足。
English: Therefore, from ancient times to modern times, there has been no lack of admiration for academics and the construction of schools. Previously, for many reasons, war horses were everywhere in the suburbs of Beijing, flags were flying, there were many things to do and not enough time.

古文：遂令学校荒废，讲诵蔑闻，军旅日陈，俎豆藏器，训诱之风，将坠于地。
现代文：致使学校荒废，听不到读书声，军营遍地，祭器收起，教训诱导的风气，将要坠落于地。
English: As a result, schools will become desolate, the sound of reading will not be heard, military camps will spread all over the country, sacrificial vessels will be put away, and the teaching-induced culture will fall to the ground.

古文：后生大惧于墙面，故老窃叹于子衿。
现代文：后生以读书为苦，老者以学子为可叹。
English: Later generations find it hard to read, but the elderly find it hard to learn.

古文：此《国风》所以永思，《小雅》所以怀古。
现代文：造就是《国风》之所以咏叹，《小雅》之所以怀古的原因。
English: This is the reason why "Kokufu" is so nostalgic, and why "Koya" is nostalgic.

古文：今王略远届，华域载清，仰风之士，日月以冀。
现代文：现在国家政策达到遥远地区，华夏太平无事，仰慕风尚的士子，每每月期待着。
English: Now the national policy has reached far-away regions, China is peaceful, and people who admire fashion look forward to it every month.

古文：便宜博延胄子，陶奖童蒙，选备儒官，弘振国学。
现代文：应广聘国子学生，教育少年，选拔儒学官员，振兴学术。
English: It is necessary to widely recruit Chinese students, educate young people, select Confucianism officials, and revitalize academia.

古文：主者考详旧典，以时施行。 
现代文：主管部门详细查考旧章，及时施行 
English: The competent department will examine the old chapter in detail and implement it in a timely manner

古文：二月丁丑，诏曰： 豫州南临江浒，北接河、洛，民荒境旷，转输艰远，抚莅之宜，各有其便。
现代文：二月丁丑，诏令说： 邀丛南临昼辽，北连童回、渣丞，民少而疆域大，转运艰难遥远，治理的事宜，各有便利。
English: In February of Dingwuxi, the imperial edict said: "Invite Congnan to Linliao, North Lian Tonghuai, and Jiezheng, the population is small and the territory is large, the transportation is difficult and far away, and the governance affairs are convenient.

古文：淮西诸郡，可立为豫州；自淮以东，为南豫州。 
现代文：进以西各郡，可设辽州；进周以东，为直辽业。 
English: For counties to the west, Liaozhou can be set up; for counties to the east of Zhou, Zhilioye can be set up.

古文：以豫州刺史彭城王义康为南豫州刺史，征虏将军刘粹为豫州刺史。
现代文：任命邃业刺史室狸王义康为南豫州刺史，征虏将军刘粹为豫州刺史。
English: He appointed Wang Yikang, the chief historian of Minye, as the historian of South Henan Province, and Liu Qi, the conscript general, as the historian of Henan Province.

古文：又分荆州十郡还立湘州，左卫将军张纪为湘州刺史。
现代文：又分出荆州十郡另设湘州，左卫将军张邵任渔业刺史。
English: In addition, ten counties of Jingzhou were separated, and Hunan Province was set up, and the left guard general Zhang ShaoRen was appointed as the fishery chief.

古文：戊寅，以徐州之梁，还属豫州。
现代文：戊寅，将涂业的凿锂，仍划归逸业。
English: Wu Yin, the chisel lithium of the coating industry, is still assigned to the industry.

古文：三月，上不豫。
现代文：三月，皇帝患病。
English: In March, the Emperor fell seriously ill.

古文：太尉长沙王道怜、司空徐羡之、尚书仆射傅亮、领军将军谢晦、护军将军檀道济并入侍医药。
现代文：太尉长沙王道怜、司空徐羡之、尚书仆射傅亮、领军将军谢晦、护军将军檀道济都入宫侍奉。
English: First Lieutenant Changsha Wang Dao Rong, Secretary Kong Xu Enzhi, Senior Clerk Shao Fu Liang, Leading General Xie Yu, and Escort General Dang Dao Jizhi all entered the palace to serve.

古文：群臣请祈祷神祇，上不许，唯使侍中谢方明以疾告庙而已。
现代文：群臣请求求神祇，皇帝不准，仅派侍中谢方明将病情报告宗庙。
English: The courtiers requested to pray to the gods, but the emperor did not allow it. He only sent the chamberlain, Xie Fangming, to report the illness to the ancestral temple.

古文：丁未，以司徒庐陵王义真为车骑将军、开府仪同三司、南豫州刺史。
现代文：丁未，任命司徒庐陵王义真为车骑将军、开府仪同三司、南豫州刺史。
English: Ding Wei appointed King Yizhen of Stubingling as the general of chariot and cavalry, the third secretary of Kaifu Yi Tong, and the chief historian of South Yuzhou.

古文：上疾瘳，己未，大赦天下。
现代文：皇帝病愈。己未，大赦天下。
English: The emperor recovered from his illness. He was pardoned by the emperor.

古文：时秦雍流户悉南入梁州。
现代文：当时秦州、雍州的流民都南去梁州。
English: At that time, the exiles from Qinzhou and Yongzhou all went south to Liangzhou.

古文：庚申，送珝绢万匹，荆、雍州运米，委州刺史随宜赋给。
现代文：庚申，运送粗绢一万匹，荆州、雍州运送稻米，交给州中刺史依据情况赐子。
English: Goshun, to transport ten thousand yakitori, Jingzhou and Yongzhou to transport rice, to be given to Zhouzhong Zhishi according to the situation.

古文：辛酉，亡命刁弥攻京城，得入，太尉留府司马陆仲元讨斩之。
现代文：辛酉，亡命之徒刁弥攻打京城，得以进城，太尉留府司马陆仲元讨伐斩杀了他。
English: Xin Xuan, a fugitive, led the attack on the capital and was able to enter the city. He was defeated and killed by the Tai Liufu Sima Lu Zhongyuan.

古文：夏四月乙亥，封仇池公杨盛为武都王，平南将军杨抚进号安南将军。
现代文：夏四月乙亥，封仇迤公握盛为武垫王，平南将军扰翅升为安南将军。
English: In the summer of April in the year of the Rooster, the feudal warlord Shigemori was appointed as the King of Wudang, and General Pingnan Zhaoyi was promoted to General Annan.

古文：丁亥，以车骑司马徐琰为兗州刺史。
现代文：丁亥，任命车骑司马途茔为查州刺史。
English: Dinghai, appointed the chariot driver and horseback rider Ma Tuo as the history of Chazhou.

古文：庚寅，左光禄大夫、开府仪同三司孔季恭薨。
现代文：庚寅，左光禄大夫、开府仪同三司孔季茎逝世。
English: Geng Yin, Dr. Zuo Guanglu, Kaifu Yi, and Sanji Kong Qizhu passed away.

古文：五月，上疾甚，召太子诫之曰： 檀道济虽有干略，而无远志，非如兄韶有难御之气也。
现代文：五月，皇帝病重，召太子告诫他说： 檀道济虽然有才干谋略，而没有远大的志向。不如他的哥哥檀韶有气概。
English: In May, when the emperor was seriously ill, he summoned the crown prince to admonish him, saying, "Though Dang Daozhi has talent and strategy, he does not have lofty aspirations. He is not as spirited as his brother Dang Xi.

古文：徐羡之、傅亮当无异图。
现代文：徐羡之、傅亮应当没有二心。
English: Xu Enzhi and Fu Liang do not seem to have a different picture.

古文：谢晦数从征伐，颇识机变，若有同异，必此人也。
现代文：谢晦多次跟随我征伐，比较懂得权变，如有不顺从的人，必定是这个人。
English: Xie Yao has followed me to the battlefield many times, and is more familiar with the power changes. If there is someone who does not obey, it must be this person.

古文：小却，可以会稽、江州处之。 
现代文：稍过一段时间，可用盒稽、辽蛆来安置他。 
English: In order to reduce his influence, he can be placed in the party committee and Jiangzhou.

古文：又为手诏曰： 朝廷不须复有别府，宰相带扬州，可置甲士千人。
现代文：又写亲笔诏书说： 朝廷不必另设别府，宰相兼管扬州，可设兵士一千人。
English: He also wrote an imperial edict in his own handwriting, saying: The imperial court does not need to set up a separate government, the prime minister is also in charge of Yangzhou, and can set up a thousand soldiers.

古文：若大臣中任要，宜有爪牙以备不祥人者，可以台见队给之。
现代文：如果大臣中有人担任重要职事，应有壮士用以防备不测的，可用朝廷现有兵士供给。
English: If one of the ministers holds an important post, there should be able-bodied men to guard against unforeseen events, which can be supplied by the imperial court's existing soldiers.

古文：有征讨悉配以台见军队，行还复旧。
现代文：有外出征讨者都配备朝廷现有的军队，出征返回后恢复旧制。
English: Those who went out to fight were equipped with the existing army of the imperial court, and the old system was restored after returning from the expedition.

古文：后世若有幼主，朝事一委宰相，母后不烦临朝。
现代文：后世如有幼主即位，朝政一概交给宰相，母后不必临朝听政。
English: In future generations, if a young ruler ascends to the throne, the imperial government will be handed over to the prime minister, and the queen mother will not have to attend the imperial court to listen to the government.

古文：仗既不许入台殿门，要重人可详给班剑。 
现代文：仪仗不准进入朝廷殿门，重要人物可另赐予班剑。 
English: Ceremonial troops are not allowed to enter the palace gate, and important people can be given more swords.

古文：癸亥，上崩于西殿，时年六十。
现代文：癸亥，皇帝在西殿逝世，这年六十岁。
English: On the twenty-first, the Emperor died in the West Hall, at the age of sixty.

古文：秋七月己酉，葬丹阳建康县蒋山初宁陵。
现代文：秋七月己西，安葬在丹阳郡建康县蒋山的初宁陵。
English: In autumn and July, he was buried in the west, in the early Ning Mausoleum in Jiangshan, Jiankang County, Danyang County.

古文：上清简寡欲，严整有法度，未尝视珠玉舆马之饰，后庭无纨绮丝竹之音。
现代文：皇帝清静寡欲，严肃有法度，不曾注视珠玉车马的装饰，后宫不穿丝绸不用乐器。
English: Emperor Wu had a pure heart and few desires, his life was simple and plain, he had few desires, his style was strict and legal, he did not scrutinize the jewels, chariots and horses, and there was no music in the backyard.

古文：宁州尝献虎魄枕，光色甚丽。
现代文：宁州曾经贡奉琥珀枕，光彩艳丽。
English: Ningzhou once paid tribute to the amber pillow, the brilliance is gorgeous.

古文：时将北征，以虎魄治金创，上大悦，命捣碎分付诸将。
现代文：当时将要北征，因琥珀可治刀伤，皇帝很高兴，命令捣碎分交各将领。
English: At that time, the Northern Expedition was about to begin, and since amber could be used to treat sword wounds, the emperor was very pleased and ordered the amber to be smashed and distributed to the generals.

古文：平关中，得姚兴从女，有盛宠，以之废事。
现代文：平定关中，得到姚兴的侄女，很受宠爱，因之荒废了政务。
English: In Pingdingguan, Yao Xing's niece, who was very much loved, wasted government affairs.

古文：谢晦谏，即时遣出。
现代文：谢晦规劝，当即放她出去。
English: Thank you for your persuasion, let her out immediately.

古文：财帛皆在外府，内无私藏。
现代文：财货布帛都在外府，内室没有收藏。
English: Their belongings are all outside the prefecture, and there is not a single private collection inside.

古文：宋台既建，有司奏东西堂施局脚床、银涂钉，上不许；使用直脚床，钉用铁。
现代文：宋台建立，有关官员上奏东西堂放曲脚床、银涂钉，皇帝不准；使用直脚床，用铁钉子。
English: Song Dynasty was established, the relevant officials went to the East and West Hall to play the curved footbed, silver-coated nails, the emperor did not allow; use straight footbed, use iron nails.

古文：诸主出适，遣送不过二十万，无锦绣金玉。
现代文：公主出嫁，嫁妆费不超过二十万，没有锦绣金玉。
English: When a princess marries, the dowry does not exceed two hundred thousand, and there are no jewels.

古文：内外奉禁，莫不节俭。
现代文：内外奉行，无不节俭。
English: People from both inside and outside the court supplied the expenses of the court, all of which were frugal and economical.

古文：性尤简易，常著连齿木履，好出神虎门逍遥，左右从者不过十余人。
现代文：性格随便，经常穿连齿木屐，爱出神虎门闲逛，随从不过十多人。
English: He has a casual personality, often wears wooden clogs, likes to wander around the gate, and is accompanied by no more than ten people.

古文：时徐羡之住西州，尝思羡之，便步出西掖门；羽仪络绎追随，已出西明门矣。
现代文：当时徐羡之住在西州，曾前往羡之住处，步行而出西掖门，仪仗追赶上前，已经走出西明门了。
English: At that time, Xu Enzhi lived in Xizhou. He went to Enzhi's residence, walked out of Xicheng Gate, and had already walked out of Ximing Gate.

古文：诸子旦问起居，入皞，脱公服，止著裙帽，如家人之礼。
现代文：儿子们早晨请安，进门后脱去官服，衹戴裙帽，如同家人之礼。
English: Greet your sons in the morning, take off your official uniform after entering the door, and wear a skirt and hat, as a family gift.

古文：孝武大明中，坏上所居阴室，于其处起玉烛殿，与群臣观之。
现代文：孝武帝大明年间，拆除皇帝所住内室，在那个地方修建玉烛毖，和群臣观看。
English: During Emperor Xiaowu's birthday, he demolished the inner room where the emperor lived, built a jade candle holder in that place, and watched it with his courtiers.

古文：床头有土鄣，壁上挂葛灯笼、麻绳拂。
现代文：床头有土做的屏障，墙壁上挂着葛灯笼、麻绳掸子。
English: There is an earthen barrier at the head of the bed, and on the walls hang a kudzu lantern and twine.

古文：侍中袁鳷盛称上俭素之德。
现代文：侍中袁颉极力称赞皇帝勤俭朴素。
English: Yuan Qi, a chamberlain, praised the emperor's diligence, frugality and simplicity.

古文：孝武不答，独曰： 田舍公得此，以为过矣。 
现代文：孝武帝不回答，独自说： 种田的老头得到这些，以为过分了。 
English: Emperor Xiaowu did not answer, but only said, "The old farmer thought it was too much when he got these.

古文：故能光有天下，克成大业者焉。
现代文：所以能够拥有天下。成就大业。
English: That's why they can own the world. They have achieved great things.

古文：史臣曰：汉氏载祀四百，比胙隆周，虽复四海横溃，而民系刘氏，惵惵黔首，未有迁奉之心。
现代文：史臣曰：汉朝延续四百年，其兴盛可比周伐，即使四海大乱，而民心不改，民众虽然胆小怕事，也没有改变的意思。
English: Shichen said: The Han Dynasty lasted for four hundred years, and its prosperity was comparable to that of the Zhou Dynasty. Even if the four seas were in turmoil, the people's hearts would not change. Although the people were timid and afraid of things, they had no intention of changing.

古文：魏武直以兵威服众，故能坐移天历；鼎运虽改，而民未忘汉。
现代文：魏武帝仅以军威服众，所以能使权力转移，但朝代虽改，而民众不忘莲塑。
English: Emperor Weiwu only used military power to subdue the masses, so he was able to transfer power, but although the dynasty changed, the people did not forget the lotus.

古文：及魏室衰孤，怨非结下。
现代文：等到重睦衰微，怨仇不是同下层人结下。
English: Wait until the decline and fall, the grudge is not with the lower class.

古文：晋籍宰辅之柄，因皇族之微，世擅重权，用基王业。
现代文：司马氏凭藉宰辅的权柄，利用皇族的衰微，世代独揽大权，奠定了帝王基业。
English: The Sima clan took advantage of the decline of the imperial family by taking advantage of the power of the vice-emperor to monopolize power for generations, laying the foundation for the emperor.

古文：至于宋祖受命，义越前模。
现代文：至于宋祖接受禅让，道义超越前代。
English: As far as Song Zu's acceptance of Zen renunciation is concerned, his morality surpasses that of his predecessors.

古文：晋自社庙南迁，禄去王室，朝权国命，递归台辅。
现代文：自束晋以来，福禄离开王室，朝中权力国家命运，归于宰辅大臣。
English: Since Sokjin, Fulu has left the royal family, and the fate of the power country between the DPRK and China has fallen to the Vice-Minister.

古文：君道虽存，主威久谢。
现代文：君道虽然存在，威信早已失去。
English: Although the royal road still exists, its prestige has long been lost.

古文：桓温雄才盖世，勋高一时，移鼎之业已成，天人之望将改。
现代文：桓温雄才盖世，功高于一时，国运转移之势已经形成，神人的愿望将要改变。
English: With the emergence of the young talent of Kan-Wen, the merit is higher than the moment, the momentum of the national movement has been formed, and the desire of God's people will change.

古文：自斯以后，晋道弥昏，道子开其祸端，元显成其末衅，桓玄藉运乘时，加以先父之业，因基革命，人无异心。
现代文：从此以后，晋朝更加昏暗，道子开其祸端，五千更进一步，弦凭藉时机，加上先父的业绩，改朝换代，人们没有异议。
English: From then on, the Jin Dynasty became darker and darker, the Taoism became more and more evil, the Five Thousand became more and more advanced, and people had no objection to changing the dynasty by taking advantage of the opportunity and the performance of their forefathers.

古文：高祖地非桓、文，众无一旅，曾不浃旬，夷凶翦暴，祀晋配天，不失旧物，诛内清外，功格区宇。
现代文：高祖地位不及齐桓公、置一塞公，部众仅有数百人，十来天之间，平定元凶剪灭残暴，祭祀晋庙以配上天不改旧章，诛杀内奸肃清全境，功劳遍及天下。
English: Gao Zu's status was not as high as that of Qi Kuan Gong, or that of Jisei Gong, and there were only a few hundred followers. For about ten days, he subdued the culprits, eliminated the brutality, sacrificed the temple of Jin to match the old chapter of "God does not change," and fought and killed the mole to clean up the whole territory, and his achievements spread all over the world.

古文：至于钟石变声，柴天改物，民已去晋，异于延康之初，功实静乱，又殊咸熙之末。
现代文：至于改变钟磬声调，柴燎祭天，那是因为民心已经离开置曲，不同于延尘初年，功绩在于平定动乱，又不同于盛凰的末年。
English: As for changing the tone of the bell, the firecracker and the sacrifice, it is because the people's hearts have left the setting of the music, which is different from the first year of delaying the dust, the achievement is to quell the turmoil, and it is different from the last year of prosperity.

古文：所以恭皇高逊，殆均释负。
现代文：所以晋恭帝的惮让，几乎如释重负。
English: So Emperor Jinguang's concession was almost a relief.

古文：若夫乐推所归，讴歌所集，魏、晋采其名，高祖收其实矣。盛哉！
现代文：至于说民心所归，万众讽歌，那则是越、置得其名，塞直担得其实。可谓盛哉！
English: As for the people's hearts returning, and all the people singing ironic songs, that is the more it deserves its name, and the more it deserves to be supported. It can be said to be grand!

