古文：王粲字仲宣，山阳高平人也。
现代文：王粲，字仲宣，山阳郡高平县人。
English: Wang Qi, alias Zhong Xuan, from Gaoping County, Sanyang County.

古文：曾祖父龚，祖父畅，皆为汉三公。
现代文：曾祖父王龚，祖父王畅，都是汉朝时候的三公。
English: His great-grandfather Wang Qian and grandfather Wang Chang were the Three Princes during the Han Dynasty.

古文：父谦，为大将军何进长史。
现代文：父亲王谦，是大将军何进的长史。
English: His father, Wang Qian, has a long history as a general.

古文：进以谦名公之胄，欲与为婚，见其二子，使择焉。
现代文：何进因为王谦是名臣的后代，想要和他结为儿女亲家，将自己的两个儿子叫来见他，让他选择一个。
English: Since Wang Qian was the descendant of a famous minister, He Jin wanted to have a family with him, so he called his two sons to see him and asked him to choose one.

古文：谦弗许。
现代文：王谦没有答应。
English: Wang Qian did not agree.

古文：以疾免，卒于家。
现代文：后来因病免官，在家中去世。
English: He was later relieved of his duties due to illness and passed away at home.

古文：献帝西迁，粲徙长安，左中郎将蔡邕见而奇之。
现代文：汉献帝迁到西面，王璨迁移到长安，左中郎将蔡邕看到他就认为很惊异。
English: Han Xian Di moved to Ximen, Wang Xi moved to Chang'an, and Zuozhong Lang was surprised to see Cai Xi.

古文：时邕才学显著，贵重朝廷，常车骑填巷，宾客盈坐。
现代文：当时蔡邕文才学问都很著名，在朝廷中身份贵重，家门前经常来满了车驾，宾客满门。
English: At that time, Cai Qi's literary talent and learning were all famous, and his status was valuable in the imperial court. The front of his house was often full of cars and guests.

古文：闻粲在门，倒屣迎之。
现代文：得知王璨在门口，急忙出迎，把鞋子都穿倒了。
English: When he learned that Wang Yao was at the door, he hurried to meet him and put on his shoes.

古文：粲至，年既幼弱，容状短小，一坐尽惊。
现代文：王璨来到，年纪还小，身材很矮小，在座的人都很吃惊。
English: Wang Yao came, he is still young, his stature is very small, everyone present was very surprised.

古文：邕曰： 此王公孙也，有异才，吾不如也。
现代文：蔡邕说： 这是王畅的孙子，有奇才，我比不上他。
English: Cai Qi said, "This is Wang Chang's grandson. He is a prodigy, and I am no match for him."

古文：吾家书籍文章，尽当与之。 
现代文：我家中的典籍文章，全部都送给他。 
English: All the classic books and articles in my home were given to him.

古文：年十七，司徒辟，诏除黄门侍郎，以西京扰乱，皆不就。
现代文：王璨十七岁的时候，被司徒府征召，天子征召他担任黄门侍郎，因为当时长安动乱，王粲都没有赴任。
English: When Wang Yao was seventeen years old, he was conscripted by the Office of the Magistrate, and Tianzi conscripted him to serve as a Yellow Gate attendant, because at that time, Chang'an was in turmoil, and Wang Yao did not take up the post.

古文：乃之荆州依刘表。
现代文：随后王粲到荆州依附刘表。
English: Subsequently, Wang Qi went to Jingzhou to attach himself to Liu Bei.

古文：表以粲貌寝而体弱通侻，不甚重也。
现代文：刘表因为王粲相貌丑陋并且身材矮小并且不拘礼节，不是很看重他。
English: Liu He did not think much of Wang Yao because he was ugly, short and informal.

古文：表卒，粲劝表子琮，令归太祖。
现代文：刘表去世后，王粲劝说刘表的儿子刘琮，让他归附太祖。
English: After Liu Biao's death, Wang Yao persuaded Liu Biao's son Liu Yao to join his grandfather.

古文：太祖辟为丞相掾，赐爵关内侯。
现代文：太祖征召他担任丞相掾吏，赐封爵位为关内侯。
English: The great-grandfather conscripted him to serve as chancellor and secretary, and gave him the title of Guanai marquis.

古文：太祖置酒汉滨，粲奉觞贺曰： 方今袁绍起河北，仗大众，志兼天下，然好贤而不能用，故奇士去之。
现代文：太祖在汉水边上设置酒席，王粲举着酒杯祝贺说： 现在袁绍在河北骑兵，倚仗这人数众多，有兼并天下的志向，但是喜欢贤人却不能重用，所以有奇才的人士都离开他。
English: The great-grandfather set up a banquet on the edge of the Han River, and Wang Xi held up a wine glass to congratulate him and said: Now Yuan Shao is in the Hebei cavalry, relying on this large number of people, with the ambition of annexing the world, but he likes wise men but cannot reuse them, so people with extraordinary talents have left him.

古文：刘表雍容荆楚，坐观时变，自以为西伯可规。
现代文：刘表在荆楚之间从容不迫地观察时势变化，自认为可以仿效西伯周文王。
English: Liu table leisurely observed the changes in the situation between Jing Chu, and thought that he could emulate Xibe Zhouwen Wang.

古文：士之避乱荆州者，皆海内之俊杰也；表不知所任，故国危而无辅。
现代文：那些在荆州躲避战乱的士人，都是天下的英雄豪杰；刘表不知道任用他们，所以国家危难的时候没有辅佐的人。
English: Those scholars who escaped the war in Jingzhou are the world's heroes; Liu Biao did not know to appoint them, so there was no one to help when the country was in danger.

古文：明公定冀州之日，下车即缮其甲卒，收其豪杰而用之，以横行天下；及平江、汉，引其贤俊而置之列位，使海内回心，望风而愿治，文武并用，英雄毕力，此三王之举也。 
现代文：明公平定冀州的时候，刚下车就修缮加冰，招揽英雄豪杰而重用他们，得以所向披靡；等到平定江汉地区，又招揽这一地区的贤人俊杰并安排好他们的职位，使得天下归心，都顺着时势而归附，文治武功并行，豪杰们都竭尽全力，这是夏、商、周三代开国国君才能做到的事情啊！ 
English: When the Ming Dynasty conquered Jizhou, they repaired and iced it as soon as they got off the train, and recruited heroes and heroes to reuse them, so that they could be invincible; when they conquered the Jianghan region, they also recruited sages and heroes in this region and arranged their positions, so that the world would come to their senses, they all followed the trend of the times, and the literature and martial arts went hand in hand, and the heroes did their best. This is something that Xia, Shang and the third generation of the founding father of the country can do!

古文：后迁军谋祭酒。
现代文：后来，王粲被调任为参谋军事的军谋祭酒。
English: Later, Wang Yao was transferred to the staff officer of the military and the military officer of the sacrificial wine.

古文：魏国既建，拜侍中。
现代文：魏国建立之后，王粲被任命为侍中。
English: After the founding of the State of Wei, Wang Yao was appointed as a chamberlain.

古文：博物多识，问无不对。
现代文：王粲知识广博，见识深远，每次有问题没有回答不上来的。
English: Wang Yao's knowledge is extensive and his insight is far-reaching. Every time he has a question, he cannot answer it.

古文：时旧仪废弛，兴造制度，粲恒典之。
现代文：当时，旧时的礼节都已经荒废，朝廷要重新制定制度，王粲总是主持这件事。
English: At that time, the old-time etiquette had been abandoned, and the imperial court wanted to re-establish the system. Wang Xi always presided over this matter.

古文：初，粲与人共行，读道边碑，人问曰： 卿能闇诵乎？ 
现代文：当初，王粲和人同行，阅读路边的碑文，有人问说： 您能背诵出来吗？ 
English: At first, Wang Yao walked with others, reading the roadside inscriptions. Someone asked: Can you recite it?

古文：曰： 能。 
现代文：王粲说： 能。 
English: Liu Gen said he could summon him.

古文：因使背而诵之，不失一字。
现代文：于是就让他背向碑文并背诵出来，没有遗漏一个字。
English: So he asked him to turn his back to the inscription and recite it, without missing a word.

古文：观人围棋，局坏，粲为覆之。棋者不信，以帊盖局，使更以他局为之。用相比校，不误一道。
现代文：他观看人下围棋，棋盘上的棋被碰乱了，王粲为他们恢复棋局，下棋的人不相信，用手帕盖在棋盘山，让他在另外的棋盘山恢复，用两盘棋相比较，没有一道是错的。
English: He watched people playing Go. The pieces on the board were jumbled. Wang Yao resumed the game for them. The players didn't believe him. They covered the board with a handkerchief and let him resume on another board. When comparing the two games, none of them were wrong.

古文：其强记默识如此。
现代文：他的记忆力如此之强。
English: His memory is so strong.

古文：性善算，作算术，略尽其理。
现代文：王粲生性善于计算，所算术的时候，能简单地就得到其中的答案。
English: Wang Xinsheng is good at calculating. When doing arithmetic, he can simply get the answer.

古文：善属文，举笔便成，无所改定，时人常以为宿构；然正复精意覃思，亦不能加也。
现代文：他善于写文章，一拿起笔就能完成，没有需要修改的，当时的人经常认为他是准备了很久的；但是就算反复深入思考，也不能超过他。
English: He was good at writing articles, he could finish them as soon as he picked up the pen, there was nothing that needed to be revised, people at the time often thought he had been preparing for a long time; but even if he thought about it over and over again, he could not surpass him.

古文：著诗、赋、论、议垂六十篇。
现代文：王粲著写有诗、赋、论、议近六十篇。
English: Wang Xi wrote nearly sixty poems, essays, and discussions.

古文：建安二十一年，从征吴。
现代文：建安二十一年，王粲跟随太祖征讨吴国。
English: In the 21st year of Jianan, Wang Xi followed his great-grandfather to conquer Wu.

古文：二十二年春，道病卒，时年四十一。
现代文：二十二年春，他在路上病逝，当时四十一岁。
English: In the spring of 1922, he died of illness on the road, at the age of forty-one.

古文：粲二子，为魏讽所引，诛。
现代文：王粲有两个儿子，因为魏讽谋反作乱而受牵连被诛杀。
English: Wang Yao had two sons, who were implicated and beaten to death because Wei Yan was plotting a rebellion.

古文：后绝。
现代文：王粲的后代就断绝了。
English: Wang Yao's descendants were cut off.

古文：始文帝为五官将，及平原侯植皆好文学。
现代文：当初，文帝曹丕担任五官中郎将，和弟弟平原侯曹植都很爱好文学。
English: At the beginning, Emperor Wen Cao Pi served as the commander of the five officials, and he and his younger brother, Pingyuan Hou Cao Zhi, were both fond of literature.

古文：粲与北海徐幹字伟长、广陵陈琳字孔璋、陈留阮瑀字元瑜、汝南应玚字德琏、东平刘桢字公幹并见友善。
现代文：王粲与北海徐幹、广陵陈琳、陈留阮蠫、汝南应蠩、东平刘桢关系都很好。徐幹担任过司空军师祭酒、司空掾属，以及五官将文学。
English: Wang Qi has a good relationship with Beihai Xu Gan, Guangling Chen Lin, Chen Liu Ruan Qi, Runan Ying Qi, Dongping Liu Qi. Xu Gan served as the Air Force Master of Ceremonial Wine, the Air Force Master of Ceremonial Wine, and the Five Officers of Literature.

古文：幹为司空军谋祭酒掾属，五官将文学。琳前为何进主簿。进欲诛诸宦官，太后不听，进乃召四方猛将，并使引兵向京城，欲以劫恐太后。琳谏进曰： 易称 即鹿无虞 。
现代文：陈琳之前是何进的主簿。何进打算诛杀宦官们，太后没有允许，何进就召集各地的勇猛将士，让他们一起率军向京城进发，想要以此挟持恐吓太后。徐琳劝谏何进说： 《易经》中说 没有虞官相助，即使深入山林，也得不到鹿 。
English: Chen Lin used to be He Jin's master. He Jin planned to kill eunuchs, but the Empress Dowager did not allow it, so He Jin gathered brave soldiers from all over the country and let them march together to the capital, hoping to intimidate the Empress Dowager. Xu Lin advised He Jin to say: "In the I Ching, it is said that without the help of the magistrates, even if you go deep into the mountains, you will not get deer.

古文：谚有 掩目捕雀 。
现代文：谚语也说 遮住眼睛捕猎麻雀 。
English: The proverb also says, "Cover your eyes when hunting sparrows."

古文：夫微物尚不可欺以得志，况国之大事，其可以诈立乎？
现代文：那些微小的事物尚且不能欺压他们以满足自己，更何况是国家的大事，难道可以靠欺诈获得成功吗？
English: Those little things can not bully them to satisfy themselves, let alone the big things of the country, is it possible to succeed by fraud?

古文：今将军总皇威，握兵要，龙骧虎步，高下在心；以此行事，无异於鼓洪炉以燎毛发。
现代文：现在将军您总揽朝政，掌握军事大权，气势雄壮，随心行事。按照现在的权势做事，跟烧起大火炉以烧掉头发没有什么不同。
English: Now, General, you are in charge of the government, wield great military power, are very powerful, and act as you please. To do things according to the current power is no different from lighting a big furnace to burn your hair.

古文：但当速发雷霆，行权立断，违经合道，天人顺之；而反释其利器，更徵於他。
现代文：只应该迅速行动，行使权力，当机立断，虽然违背法则但合乎道义，上天和百姓都会顺应；但您却放弃了手中的有利武器，反而从其他地方征召士兵前来。
English: All you had to do was to act quickly, to use your power, to decide on the spur of the moment, to act contrary to the law, but in a moral way, and heaven and the people would have complied; but instead of giving up the advantageous weapon in your hands, you conscripted soldiers from elsewhere.

古文：大兵合聚，强者为雄，所谓倒持干戈，授人以柄；功必不成，祇为乱阶。 
现代文：大军聚集，强大的人称雄，这就是所说的倒拿着武器，将武器的的手柄交到别人手里；这样功业一定不会成功，只会成为祸乱的开端。 
English: A great host is gathered, and a strong man prevails: this is called taking up arms, and putting them in another man's hand: but it will not prosper, and this is the beginning of calamity.

古文：进不纳其言，竟以取祸。
现代文：何进没有采纳他的建议，最后招致杀身之祸。
English: He Jin didn't take his advice, and ended up committing suicide.

古文：琳避难冀州，袁绍使典文章。
现代文：陈琳到冀州躲避祸乱，袁绍让他主管文章书籍。
English: Chen Lin went to Jizhou to escape the calamity. Yuan Shao put him in charge of articles and books.

古文：袁氏败，琳归太祖。
现代文：袁氏落败后，陈琳归附太祖。
English: After the defeat of the Yuan Dynasty, Chen Lin became a vassal of Emperor Taizu.

古文：太祖谓曰： 卿昔为本初移书，但可罪状孤而已，恶恶止其身，何乃上及父祖邪？ 
现代文：太祖对他说： 你过去为袁本初起草文书，只要查明我的罪过就可以，将罪过在我身上停止，怎么还要往上涉及到我的父亲先祖呢？ 
English: The great-grandfather said to him, "You used to draft documents for Yuan Benchu in the past. As long as you can find out my sins, you can stop the sins from happening to me. How can you still involve my father and ancestors?

古文：琳谢罪，太祖爱其才而不咎。
现代文：陈琳为此谢罪，太祖爱惜他的才干而没有追责。
English: Chen Lin apologized for this. Grandfather cherished his talent and did not hold him accountable.

古文：瑀少受学於蔡邕。
现代文：阮瑀年少时向蔡邕求学。
English: When he was young, Nguyen Xuan studied under Cai Xuan.

古文：建安中都护曹洪欲使掌书记，瑀终不为屈。
现代文：建安中都护曹洪打算让他主管文书工作，他一直都没有屈从。
English: Cao Hong, the guardian of Jianan Zhongdu, planned to put him in charge of paperwork, but he never gave in.

古文：太祖并以琳、瑀为司空军谋祭酒，管记室，军国书檄，多琳、瑀所作也。
现代文：太祖让徐琳、阮瑀共同做为司空军谋祭酒，主管书记檄文。军事上或国家的文书，大多是徐琳、阮瑀所写的。
English: The great-grandfather had Xu Lin and Nguyn Gin jointly serve as the air force commander in charge of preparing the sacrificial wine, and the secretary in charge of the documents. Most of the military or national documents were written by Xu Lin and Nguyn Gin.

古文：琳徙门下督，瑀为仓曹掾属。
现代文：后来徐琳转任门下督，阮瑀做了仓曹掾属。
English: Later, Xu Lin was transferred to the position of subordinate governor, and Ruan Hui became Cang Cao's subordinate.

古文：玚、桢各被太祖辟为丞相掾属。
现代文：应玚、刘桢各自被太祖征召为丞相掾属。
English: Ying Zheng and Liu Zheng were each called up by their great-grandfathers to serve as imperial ministers.

古文：玚转为平原侯庶子，后为五官将文学。
现代文：后来应玚转而做为平原侯庶子，后来担任五官将文学。
English: Later, Ying Zhe became the illegitimate son of the Prince of the Plain, and later served as the five officials in charge of literature.

古文：桢以不敬被刑，刑竟署吏。
现代文：刘桢因为 不敬 的罪行被处以刑罚，刑罚结束后做了小官。
English: Liu Wei was punished for the crime of disrespect, and became a minor official after the punishment was over.

古文：咸著文赋数十篇。
现代文：两人都著写了数十篇文赋。
English: Both of them have written dozens of articles.

古文：瑀以十七年卒。
现代文：阮瑀在建安十七年去世。
English: Nguyen Xuan passed away in the 17th year of Jianan.

古文：幹、琳、玚、桢二十二年卒。
现代文：徐幹、陈琳、应玚、刘桢在建安二十二年去世。
English: Xu Gan, Chen Lin, Ying Yao and Liu Yao passed away in the 22nd year of Jianan.

古文：文帝书与元城令吴质曰： 昔年疾疫，亲故多离其灾，徐、陈、应、刘，一时俱逝。
现代文：文帝写信给元城县令吴质说： 过去出现疫病，亲人朋友大多都遭遇了这场灾祸，徐幹、陈琳、应玚、刘桢都在那时候一同去世。
English: Emperor Wen wrote to Wu Jian, the governor of Yuancheng County, saying: In the past, when there was an epidemic, most of the relatives and friends suffered from this disaster. Xu Gan, Chen Lin, Ying Qi, and Liu Qi all died together at that time.

古文：观古今文人，类不护细行，鲜能以名节自立。
现代文：看古今的文人，大多不拘小节，很少有人因为名誉节操而立身在世上的。
English: Judging from the literati of the past and the present, most of them are not particular about details, and few people are able to stand up in the world because of their honor.

古文：而伟长独怀文抱质，恬淡寡欲，有箕山之志，可谓彬彬君子矣。
现代文：而只有徐幹能胸怀文才，心存质朴，少欲无求，有像许由隐居箕山一样的志向，真可以说是文质兼备的君子。
English: However, only Xu Gan is able to cherish literary talent, keep a simple mind, have few desires and no demands, and have the same ambition as Xu Yu's seclusion in Shaoshan. He can truly be said to be a gentleman with both qualities.

古文：著中论二十馀篇，辞义典雅，足传于后。
现代文：撰写了《中论》二十多篇，文辞雅致，足以流传后世。
English: He wrote more than 20 articles of the "Middle Theory," and his elegant words are enough to be passed down to future generations.

古文：德琏常斐然有述作意，其才学足以著书，美志不遂，良可痛惜！
现代文：应玚经常有很好的创作想法，他的才干学问也足以撰写文章，但这美好的志向没有成功，实在是很痛惜啊！
English: Ying Yao often has good creative ideas, his talent and knowledge are also enough to write articles, but this beautiful ambition did not succeed, it is really a great pity!

古文：孔璋章表殊健，微为繁富。
现代文：陈琳的奏章写得很刚健有力，只是文辞有些繁琐。
English: Chen Lin's score is very vigorous and powerful, but the words are somewhat cumbersome.

古文：公幹有逸气，但未遒耳。
现代文：刘桢的文章有飘逸的感觉，但还不够遒劲。
English: Liu Wei's article has a flowing feeling, but it is not vigorous enough.

古文：元瑜书记翩翩，致足乐也。
现代文：阮瑀的文书写的洒脱灵敏，读起来让人心情愉悦。
English: Nguyn Th's writing is deft and sensitive, and a pleasure to read.

古文：仲宣独自善於辞赋，惜其体弱，不起其文；至於所善，古人无以远过也。
现代文：王粲自己擅长于辞赋自写作，只是文章气势微弱，不能撑起他的文章；至于他所擅长的，那古人也不会超过他太多。
English: Wang Qian himself is good at writing, but his writing is weak and cannot support his articles; as for what he is good at, the ancients will not surpass him too much.

古文：昔伯牙绝弦於锺期，仲尼覆醢于子路，痛知音之难遇，伤门人之莫逮也。
现代文：过去俞伯牙因为钟子期去世而摔断琴，仲尼因为子路去世而倒掉肉酱，是因为痛惜知音难以遇到，感伤弟子难以得到。
English: In the past, Zou Boya broke his harp when Zhong Zi Lu died, and Zhong Ni broke his meat sauce when Zi Lu died, because it was hard to meet a sympathetic friend and hard to get a sentimental disciple.

古文：诸子但为未及古人，自一时之俊也。 
现代文：这几位只是比不上古人，但也是一时的俊杰了。 
English: These few are just not as good as the ancients, but they are also momentary heroes.

古文：自颍川邯郸淳、繁钦、陈留路粹、沛国丁仪、丁廙、弘农杨脩、河内荀纬等，亦有文采，而不在此七人之例。
现代文：还有颍川的邯郸淳、繁钦，陈留的路粹，沛国的丁仪、丁廙、弘农的杨脩，河内的荀纬等人，也是有文采的，只是不再这七个人中。
English: There were also literary people such as Lu Chun, Han Qin and Lu Qi of Lu Chuan, Ding Yi and Ding Qi of Pei Province, Yang Qi of Hongnong, and Lu Wei of Hanoi, but they are no longer among these seven people.

古文：玚弟璩，璩子贞，咸以文章显。
现代文：应玚的弟弟应璩，应璩的儿子应贞，都因为文章写得好而闻名。
English: Ying Zhen's brother, Ying Zhen, and Ying Zhen's son, Ying Zhen, are both famous for their well-written articles.

古文：璩官至侍中。
现代文：应璩做官到侍中。
English: Ying Zheng became an official and became a chamberlain.

古文：贞咸熙中参相国军事。
现代文：应贞在咸熙年间担任过参相国军事
English: During the reign of Emperor Hanxi, Ying Zhen served as a military leader of a neighboring country.

古文：瑀子籍，才藻艳逸，而倜傥放荡，行己寡欲，以庄周为模则。
现代文：阮瑀的儿子阮籍，文采辞藻华丽飘逸，但他洒脱放荡，立身处世没有什么欲望，将庄周作为榜样。
English: Nguyn Quc, the son of Nguyn Th, was a brilliant and eloquent writer, but he was a libertine and had no desire to be in the world. He used Zhuang Zhou as a role model.

古文：官至步兵校尉。
现代文：做官到步兵校尉。
English: He rose through the ranks to infantry captain.

古文：时又有谯郡嵇康，文辞壮丽，好言老、庄，而尚奇任侠。
现代文：当时还有谯郡的嵇康，文章辞藻雄壮华丽，喜欢谈论老庄，并且崇尚侠气，乐于助人。
English: At that time, there was also Qiankang in Yuxian County. The articles were full of grand and gorgeous words, and they liked to talk about the old village. They also advocated chivalry and were willing to help others.

古文：至景元中，坐事诛。
现代文：到景元年间，因事获罪，被杀。
English: During the reign of King Gyeongbokgol, he was convicted of a crime and killed.

古文：景初中，下邳桓威出自孤微，年十八而著浑舆经，依道以见意。
现代文：景初年间，下邳县桓威出身低微，十八岁的时候就撰写了《浑舆经》，按照道家的思想，但也有自己的见解。
English: During the early years of Jing, he was from a humble background in Huanwei, Jiaozuo County. At the age of 18, he wrote "Hun Yuxing," in accordance with Taoist thought, but he also had his own opinions.

古文：从齐国门下书佐、司徒署吏，后为安成令。
现代文：曾做过魏王时齐国的门下书佐、司徒署吏，后来担任过安成县令。
English: He once worked as an aide to the king of Wei and Qi, and later served as the county magistrate of Ancheng County.

古文：吴质，济阴人，以文才为文帝所善，官至振威将军，假节都督河北诸军事，封列侯。
现代文：吴质，济阴人，因为文学才干被文帝赏识，做官到振威将军，被授予符节督领河北地区各项军事事务，封为列侯。
English: Wu Qian, a native of Jilin, was highly appreciated by Emperor Wen for his literary talent. He rose to the rank of General Zhenwei, and was awarded the post of Fuxi governor in charge of various military affairs in Hebei Province, and was made a vassal lord.

古文：卫觊字伯儒，河东安邑人也。
现代文：卫觊，字伯儒，河东郡安邑县人。
English: Wei Wei, also known as Bo Ru, was born in Anyi County, Hedong County.

古文：少夙成，以才学称。
现代文：年少时候就称名，以文学才能闻名。
English: He became famous at a young age and was known for his literary talent.

古文：太祖辟为司空掾属，除茂陵令、尚书郎。
现代文：太祖征召他为司空掾属，担任茂陵县令、尚书郎。
English: The great-grandfather conscripted him as a subordinate of Sikuo, and he served as the governor of Morye County and Sho Shuro.

古文：太祖征袁绍，而刘表为绍援，关中诸将又中立。
现代文：太祖讨伐袁绍，而刘表做为袁绍的援助，关中地区的将领又保持中立。
English: Emperor Taizu fought against Yuan Shao, while Liu Biao acted as Yuan Shao's aid, and the generals in the Guanzhong region remained neutral.

古文：益州牧刘璋与表有隙，觊以治书侍御史使益州，令璋下兵以缀表军。
现代文：益州牧刘璋和刘表又嫌隙，卫觊以治书侍御史的身份出使益州，让刘璋不要出兵以牵制刘表。
English: Liu Yao and Liu Biao, the governor of Yizhou, had another disagreement. Wei Yao sent an envoy to Yizhou in his capacity as the governor of Yizhou, and asked Liu Yao not to send troops to contain Liu Biao.

古文：至长安，道路不通，觊不得进，遂留镇关中。
现代文：到了长安，道路隔绝不通，卫觊不能前行，就留下镇守关中。
English: When they arrived in Chang'an, the road was cut off and impassable, and the garrison could not move forward, so they left the town to guard the pass.

古文：时四方大有还民，关中诸将多引为部曲，觊书与荀彧曰： 关中膏腴之地，顷遭荒乱，人民流入荆州者十万馀家，闻本土安宁，皆企望思归。
现代文：当时各地有很多流亡在外的百姓返回，关中的将领们大多招揽做为自己的部下，卫觊写信给荀彧说： 关中地区富庶，一下子遭遇饥荒动乱，百姓流亡到荆州的有十万多户，得知故土已经安定，都盼望着能够回来。
English: At that time, many people from various regions who had been in exile returned, and the generals of Guanzhong mostly recruited them as their own subordinates. Wei Zheng wrote to Zheng saying: Guanzhong region was rich and abundant, but suddenly suffered famine and turmoil. There were more than one hundred thousand households of people who had been exiled to Jingzhou. Knowing that their homeland had been stabilized, they were all looking forward to returning.

古文：而归者无以自业，诸将各竞招怀，以为部曲。
现代文：但回来的人不能自谋生计，将领们各自竞相招揽做为自己的部下。
English: But the returnees cannot make a living on their own, and the generals are competing to recruit them as their own subordinates.

古文：郡县贫弱，不能与争，兵家遂强。
现代文：郡县实力弱小，不能和他们竞争，所以将领们的势力更加强大。
English: The counties are weak and cannot compete with them, so the generals are more powerful.

古文：一旦变动，必有后忧。
现代文：一旦发生变故，一定会有后患。
English: Once a misfortune occurs, there will certainly be sequelae.

古文：夫盐，国之大宝也，自乱来散放，宜如旧置使者监卖，以其直益巿犁牛。
现代文：盐，是国家重要的宝藏，自从动乱以来，管理散漫，应该像过去一样安排使者监管买卖，用获得的利益买耕牛。
English: Salt, an important national treasure, has been mismanaged since the turmoil. As in the past, envoys should be sent to supervise the sale and purchase of salt, and the profits should be used to buy cattle.

古文：若有归民，以供给之。
现代文：如果有回来的百姓，就供应给他们。
English: If there are people coming back, we will provide for them.

古文：勤耕积粟，以丰殖关中。
现代文：让他们努力耕种，积累粮食，以使关中富足起来。
English: Let them work hard to cultivate and accumulate grain to make Guanzhong prosperous.

古文：远民闻之，必日夜竞还。
现代文：远处的百姓听说后，一定会日夜争相赶着回来。
English: After hearing the news, people living far away will rush back day and night.

古文：又使司隶校尉留治关中以为之主，则诸将日削，官民日盛，此强本弱敌之利也。 
现代文：又派司隶校尉留下治理关中，主持各项事务，那将领们就会渐渐被削弱，官府百姓渐渐兴盛，这是使自己强大使敌人弱小的好处啊。 
English: He also sent Lieutenant Sisli to stay behind to govern Guanzhong and preside over various affairs, then the generals would gradually be weakened, and the people of the government would gradually prosper. This is the benefit of making oneself strong and the enemy weak.

古文：彧以白太祖。
现代文：荀彧将这些话告诉太祖。
English: He told these words to his grandfather.

古文：太祖从之，始遣谒者仆射监盐官，司隶校尉治弘农。
现代文：太祖听从了他，才开始派遣谒者仆射监督盐官，派司隶校尉治理弘农郡。
English: The great-great-grandfather listened to him, and then began to send his son-in-law, Dosha, to supervise the salt officials, and his son-in-law, Shishi, to govern Hongnong County.

古文：关中服从，乃白召觊还，稍迁尚书。
现代文：关中地区都顺服，太祖就召卫觊回来，逐渐提升他为尚书。
English: The Guanzhong area obeyed, and the great-grandfather called Wei Xuan back and gradually promoted him to Shangshu.

古文：魏国既建，拜侍中，与王粲并典制度。
现代文：魏国建立以后，卫觊担任侍中，和王粲一起主持制度的修订。
English: After the establishment of the state of Wei, Wei Wei served as an attendant, and together with Wang Wei presided over the revision of the system.

古文：文帝即王位，徙为尚书。
现代文：文帝继位魏王后，他被任命为尚书。
English: When Emperor Wen succeeded Queen Wei, he was named Shangshu.

古文：顷之，还汉朝为侍郎，劝赞禅代之义，为文诰之诏。
现代文：不久，他返回汉朝担任侍郎，宣扬帝位禅让交替的大义，并拟写诏书。
English: Soon after, he returned to the Han Dynasty to serve as an attendant, propagating the virtue of imperial succession and preparing to write an imperial edict.

古文：文帝践阼，复为尚书，封阳吉亭侯。
现代文：文帝登基后，卫觊又担任尚书，被封为阳吉亭侯。
English: After Emperor Wen ascended to the throne, Wei Wei also served as Shang Shu and was named Yang Jiting Hou.

古文：明帝即位，进封閺乡侯，三百户。
现代文：明帝登基后，卫觊被进封爵位为閺乡侯，食邑三百户。
English: After Emperor Ming ascended to the throne, Wei Wei was given a title of nobility as the lord of the township of Zou, with 300 households in the township.

古文：觊奏曰： 九章之律，自古所传，断定刑罪，其意微妙。
现代文：卫觊上奏说： 九章的刑律，是古代就流传下来的，判断刑罚罪名，标准很细致。
English: Wei Wei said: The nine chapters of the Criminal Law have been handed down from ancient times. The standards for judging criminal offenses are very detailed.

古文：百里长吏，皆宜知律。
现代文：因此主管一方的官吏，应该都通晓刑律。
English: Therefore, the officials in charge of one side should be familiar with the criminal law.

古文：刑法者，国家之所贵重，而私议之所轻贱；狱吏者，百姓之所县命，而选用者之所卑下。
现代文：刑罚律法，是国家最重要的制度，却在私下的议论中被轻视；断决判案的官吏，是百姓的性命寄托的，但选拔任用的人却是比较低微的官职。
English: The penal law, the most important institution of the state, is despised in private discussions; the officials who decide cases are entrusted with the lives of the people, but the people who are selected and appointed are relatively low-ranking officials.

古文：王政之弊，未必不由此也。
现代文：国家政治的弊端，不一定不是从这里开始。
English: This was not necessarily the cause of the maladies of the monarchy.

古文：请置律博士，转相教授。 事遂施行。
现代文：希望能设置刑律博士，让他们向有关的官员教授刑律方面的知识。 这件事被执行了。
English: It was hoped that a doctor of criminal law would be appointed to teach the relevant officers about criminal law.

古文：时百姓凋匮而役务方殷，觊上疏曰： 夫变情厉性，强所不能，人臣言之既不易，人主受之又艰难。
现代文：当时百姓生活困苦，但各种徭役很多，卫觊上疏说： 改变一个人的性情，靠强迫是办不到的。做为臣子，要提出意见已经不容易了，做为君主，要接受意见也很艰难。
English: At that time, the people were living in hardship, but there were many kinds of eunuchs, and the eunuchs said: It is impossible to change a person's disposition by force. As a courtier, it is no longer easy to put forward opinions, and as a monarch, it is also difficult to accept opinions.

古文：且人之所乐者富贵显荣也，所恶者贫贱死亡也，然此四者，君上之所制也，君爱之则富贵显荣，君恶之则贫贱死亡；顺指者爱所由来，逆意者恶所从至也。
现代文：况且人所喜欢的，就是富贵显达，所厌恶的就是贫贱死亡，但这四种情况，是由君主所控制的，君主宠爱，就能享受荣名富贵，君主厌恶，就会陷入贫贱或死亡；顺从君主的想法，是得到恩宠的原因，违背君主的想法，是君主厌恶的原因。
English: Moreover, what people like is to be rich and famous, and what they dislike is to die poor, but these four situations are controlled by the monarch. If you are favored by the monarch, you can enjoy fame and wealth. If you are disliked by the monarch, you will fall into poverty or death. Obeying the monarch's thoughts is the reason for getting grace, and going against the monarch's thoughts is the reason for the monarch's disgust.

古文：故人臣皆争顺指而避逆意，非破家为国，杀身成君者，谁能犯颜色，触忌讳，建一言，开一说哉？
现代文：所以做为臣子，都争相顺从您的心意而避开会违背您想法的事情，不是那些为国家家破人亡，牺牲自己成全君主的人，谁能冒犯天威，触犯忌讳，提出建议，阐述自己的想法呢？ 
English: Therefore, as a courtier, they all strive to obey your will and avoid things that go against your thoughts. It is not those who sacrifice themselves for the country and sacrifice themselves to become a monarch. Who can offend heaven, break taboos, make suggestions, and explain their thoughts?

古文：陛下留意察之，则臣下之情可见矣。
现代文：陛下如果能留心观察这些情况，那我的心意就能了解了。
English: Your Majesty, if you would observe these things attentively, you would understand my meaning.

古文：今议者多好悦耳，其言政治则比陛下於尧舜，其言征伐则比二虏於貍鼠。
现代文：现在商议朝政的人大多喜欢好听的话，他们说到政治，就将陛下比作尧舜，说到军事征伐，就将吴国、蜀国比喻成貍鼠。
English: Now, most people who discuss the politics of the dynasty like to hear nice words. When they talk about politics, they compare His Majesty to a centipede, and when they talk about military conquest, they compare Wu and Shu to moles.

古文：臣以为不然。
现代文：臣认为不是这样。
English: The minister did not think so.

古文：昔汉文之时，诸侯强大，贾谊累息以为至危。
现代文：过去汉文帝时期，诸侯王势力强盛，贾谊担忧惊恐，认为国家情况危急。
English: In the past, during the reign of Emperor Hanwen, the influence of the princes and kings was strong, and Jia Yi was worried and frightened, believing that the country was in a critical situation.

古文：况今四海之内，分而为三，群士陈力，各为其主。
现代文：况且现在天下的形势，分成三部分，士人们竭尽全力，各自为自己的主君效力。
English: Moreover, the present situation of the world is divided into three parts, and the scholars are doing their best to serve their own masters.

古文：其来降者，未肯言舍邪就正，咸称迫於困急，是与六国分治，无以为异也。
现代文：那些前来投降的人，也不肯说是弃暗投明，都说是被紧急情况逼迫，这种情况，跟六国划分势力统治，没有什么区别。
English: Those who came to surrender would not say that they had given up hope, but that they were forced to do so by an emergency. This situation is no different from the six-nation division of power.

古文：当今千里无烟，遗民困苦，陛下不善留意，将遂凋弊不可复振。
现代文：现在国家人烟稀少，留下的百姓困苦不堪，陛下没有多加留心，国家就会凋敝，不能再振兴。
English: Now the country is sparsely populated, and the people left behind are in dire straits. If His Majesty does not pay more attention, the country will wither and cannot be revived.

古文：礼，天子之器必有金玉之饰，饮食之肴必有八珍之味，至於凶荒，则彻膳降服。
现代文：按照礼节，天子所用的器物一定有金玉的装饰，饮食的菜肴一定要有八珍等佳味。遇上饥荒战乱，就应减去佳肴和装饰。
English: According to the etiquette, the utensils used by the heavenly son must be decorated with gold and jewels, and the dishes for eating must have eight precious and other delicacies. In the event of famine and war, the delicacies and decorations should be subtracted.

古文：然则奢俭之节，必视世之丰约也。
现代文：但是奢侈还是节俭的程度，一定要看时代的富饶或贫困。
English: But the degree of extravagance or frugality must depend on the wealth or poverty of the times.

古文：武皇帝之时，后宫食不过一肉，衣不用锦绣，茵蓐不缘饰，器物无丹漆，用能平定天下，遗福子孙。
现代文：武皇帝的时代，后宫妃嫔每餐只能有一样肉食，服饰上没有锦绣，褥垫不加花边，器物不涂丹漆，因此能够平定天下，将福气留给子孙后代。
English: In the era of Emperor Wu, the harem concubines could only have one meat dish per meal, there was no brocade on the clothing, no lace on the cushion, and no lacquer on the utensils, so they could pacify the world and leave the blessing to future generations.

古文：此皆陛下之所亲览也。
现代文：这些都是陛下亲眼所见的。
English: His Majesty saw all this with his own eyes.

古文：当今之务，宜君臣上下，并用筹策，计校府库，量入为出。
现代文：现在的要事，应该是君臣上下，一起谋划，计算国库中的物资，根据收入来支出。
English: The important thing now is that the monarchs and the ministers should plan together, calculate the materials in the treasury, and spend according to the income.

古文：深思句践滋民之术，由恐不及，而尚方所造金银之物，渐更增广，工役不辍，侈靡日崇，帑藏日竭。
现代文：深入思考越王勾践增长百姓的方法，尚且担心比不上，而尚方所制造的金银器物，数量和范围渐渐扩大增长，工人们的工作没有停止，奢侈的风气越来越兴盛，国库日渐空虚。
English: The number and scope of the gold and silverware produced by Shangfang gradually expanded and grew, the work of the workers did not stop, the luxury culture became more and more prosperous, and the treasury became increasingly empty.

古文：昔汉武信求神仙之道，谓当得云表之露以餐玉屑，故立仙掌以承高露。
现代文：过去汉武帝相信并寻求成仙的方法，说是应该得到云上的露水，以能食用天上饮食的碎屑，所以建立高高的手掌以承接露水。
English: In the past, Emperor Hanwu believed in and sought the method of immortality, saying that he should get the dew from the clouds to be able to eat the crumbs of the heavenly diet, so he built a high palm to receive the dew.

古文：陛下通明，每所非笑。
现代文：陛下您通达圣明，经常嘲笑这件事。
English: Your Majesty, you are well-versed in the sacred, and you often laugh at this.

古文：汉武有求於露，而由尚见非，陛下无求於露而空设之；不益於好而糜费功夫，诚皆圣虑所宜裁制也。 
现代文：汉武帝对甘露有所指求，尚且被人指责，陛下对这些没有请求却白白建造这个；不能增加好处，反而花费很多功夫，实在是您应该好好考虑再决定的。 
English: Emperor Hanwu was accused of coveting the nectar, but His Majesty did not ask for this and built it in vain; instead of increasing the benefits, it took a lot of effort. You should really reconsider your decision.

古文：觊历汉、魏，时献忠言，率如此。
现代文：卫觊经历了汉魏两朝，经常进献忠言，大概都是这样的。
English: Wei Xuan experienced the Han and Wei dynasties, and often gave advice, which is probably the case.

古文：受诏典著作，又为魏官仪，凡所撰述数十篇。
现代文：卫觊接受诏令主持整理文章典籍，又撰写了《魏官仪》，所撰写的文章共有几十篇。
English: Wei Wei accepted the imperial edict to preside over the collation of articles and classics, and also wrote "Wei Guan Yi," a total of dozens of articles.

古文：好古文、鸟篆、隶草，无所不善。
现代文：他喜好古文、鸟篆、隶草，没有不擅长的。
English: He likes ancient literature, birds and grasses, and is good at everything.

古文：建安末，尚书右丞河南潘勖，黄初时，散骑常侍河内王象，亦与觊并以文章显。
现代文：建安末年，尚书右丞，河南人潘勖，黄初年间的散骑常使，河内人王象，也和卫觊一样因为文章而闻名。
English: In the last years of Jian'an, Shang Shuyujo, the Henan native Pan Zheng, the roving envoy in the early years of the Yellow Emperor, and the Hanoi native Wang Xiang, were also famous for their articles, just like Wei Zheng.

古文：觊薨，谥曰敬侯。
现代文：卫觊去世后，谥号为敬侯。
English: After Wei Xuan's death, his posthumous name was Jing Hou.

古文：子瓘嗣。
现代文：他的儿子卫瓘承袭爵位。
English: His son, Wei Xuan, inherited the title.

古文：瓘咸熙中为镇西将军。
现代文：卫瓘在咸熙年间担任过镇西将军。
English: Wei Wei served as the Zhenxi General during the Han Dynasty.

古文：刘廙字恭嗣，南阳安众人也。
现代文：刘廙字恭嗣，南阳郡安众县人。
English: Liu Yanzi, a native of Anzhu County, Nanyang County.

古文：年十岁，戏於讲堂上，颍川司马德操拊其头曰： 孺子，孺子， 黄中通理 ，宁自知不？ 
现代文：十岁的时候，在课堂上游戏，颍川的名士司马德操摸着他的头说： 小孩子，小孩子， 通晓事物的道理 ，你难道不知道吗？ 
English: When he was ten years old, during a game in class, Sima De, a famous scholar from Luochuan, touched his head and said, "Little child, little child, don't you know the meaning of things?"

古文：廙兄望之，有名於世，荆州牧刘表辟为从事。
现代文：刘廙的兄长刘望之，在当时很有名望，荆州牧刘表征召他担任从事。
English: Liu Wei's elder brother, Liu Wangzhi, was very famous at the time, and he was recruited by the Jingzhou Cattle Breeders' Association.

古文：而其友二人，皆以谗毁，为表所诛。
现代文：但他的两个友人，都因为他人的谗言诋毁，被刘表诛杀。
English: However, his two friends were both killed by Liu Biao because they were slandered by others.

古文：望之又以正谏不合，投传告归。
现代文：刘望之又因为直言规劝，和刘表不和，就弃官回家了。
English: Liu Wangzhi also resigned from his post and went home because he did not get along with Liu Biao due to his frank persuasion.

古文：廙谓望之曰： 赵杀鸣、犊，仲尼回轮。
现代文：刘廙对刘望之说： 从前赵简子杀犊准、铎鸣，孔子驾车返回。
English: Liu Wei said to Liu Wangzhi, "Once upon a time, Zhao Jianzi killed Zhaozhun and Gongming, and Confucius drove back.

古文：今兄既不能法柳下惠和光同尘於内，则宜模范蠡迁化於外。
现代文：现在兄长既然不能效法柳下惠的和光同尘，那就应该模仿范蠡迁居到远的地方。
English: Now that the elder brother can't follow the example of Liu Shih-hui's "harmony, light and dust," he should emulate Fan Kui and move to a faraway place.

古文：坐而自绝於时，殆不可也！ 
现代文：坐在这里等待死亡的时间，实在不可以啊！ 
English: You can't just sit here and wait for your time to die!

古文：望之不从，寻复见害。
现代文：刘望之没有听从，不久就被刘表杀害。
English: Liu Wangzhi did not obey, and was soon killed by Liu Biao.

古文：廙惧，奔扬州，遂归太祖。
现代文：刘廙心中恐惧，就逃奔向扬州投靠太祖。
English: Fearing for his life, Liu Bei fled to Yangzhou to seek help from his ancestor.

古文：太祖辟为丞相掾属，转五官将文学。
现代文：太祖征召他为丞相掾属，后转任五官将文学。
English: The great-great-grandfather conscripted him as chancellor of the imperial court, and later he was transferred to the office of the five officials in charge of literature.

古文：文帝器之，命廙通草书。
现代文：文帝很器重他，让他交接、起草文书。
English: Emperor Wen respected him very much and asked him to hand over and draft documents.

古文：廙答书曰： 初以尊卑有逾，礼之常分也。
现代文：刘廙上疏回答说： 臣刚开始身份尊卑之间界限，是礼节的规定。
English: Liu Yuxiang replied, "From the very beginning, the boundary between the superior and inferior status of a vassal is a rule of etiquette.

古文：是以贪守区区之节，不敢脩草。
现代文：所以一味固守小小的礼节，不敢草草下笔。
English: Therefore, I stick to the small etiquette and do not dare to write hastily.

古文：必如严命，诚知劳谦之素，不贵殊异若彼之高，而惇白屋如斯之好，苟使郭隗不轻於燕，九九不忽於齐，乐毅自至，霸业以隆。
现代文：一定都像接受到严肃的任命，了解辛劳谦和的本意，而不看重出身的高低贵贱，而看重虽然清贫但正直的士人，如果能像郭隗不为燕昭王所轻视，献九九小术的人不被齐桓公忽略，那像乐毅这样的人就会自己来到，霸业也会因此兴盛。
English: It must be like receiving a serious appointment, understanding the intention of hard work and modesty, and not valuing the high and low of birth, but valuing honest scholars although they are poor. If people like Guo Zheng are not despised by Yan Zhao Wang, and people who offer ninety-nine minor skills are not ignored by Qi Huan Gong, then people like Le Yi will come by themselves, and hegemony will flourish as a result.

古文：亏匹夫之节，成巍巍之美，虽愚不敏，何敢以辞？ 
现代文：损失一个普通人的节操，成就宏大的基业，我虽然愚陋不机敏，又怎么敢推辞呢？ 
English: The loss of an ordinary person's self-restraint, the achievement of a grand foundation, although I am stupid and not astute, how dare I refuse?

古文：魏国初建，为黄门侍郎。
现代文：魏国刚建立的时候，刘廙担任黄门侍郎。
English: When the State of Wei was first established, Liu Ye served as the Yellow Gate's chamberlain.

古文：太祖在长安，欲亲征蜀，廙上疏曰： 圣人不以智轻俗，王者不以人废言。
现代文：太祖在长安，想要亲自率军征讨蜀国，刘廙上疏说： 圣贤之人不会因为自己的智慧而看轻普通人，成就王业的人不会因为一个人而不听取建议。
English: In Chang'an, when the great-grandfather wanted to personally lead an army to invade Shu, Liu Yuxiang said: A sage will not despise an ordinary person because of his wisdom, and a person who has achieved a king's career will not ignore advice because of a person.

古文：故能成功於千载者，必以近察远，智周於独断者，不耻於下问，亦欲博采必尽於众也。
现代文：所以能成就流传千古基业的人，一定是从眼前的事物观察之后的事情，比独断专行的人考虑得更全面，向不如自己的人询问也不感到羞耻，也想要能广泛吸收他们的长处。
English: Therefore, those who can achieve the ancient foundation must observe things from the front, consider things more comprehensively than those who are arbitrary, and do not feel ashamed to ask people who are not as good as themselves, and also want to be able to absorb their strengths widely.

古文：且韦弦非能言之物，而圣贤引以自匡。
现代文：况且，皮带、弓弦虽然不是能说话的物品，但圣贤门都用这些来自比。
English: Moreover, although the belt and the bowstring are not objects that can speak, the sages used them to compare themselves.

古文：臣才智闇浅，愿自比於韦弦。
现代文：臣的才学智谋都很粗浅，希望能比作皮带、弓弦。
English: The minister's talent, learning and wisdom are very shallow, hoping to be compared to a belt and a bowstring.

古文：昔乐毅能以弱燕破大齐，而不能以轻兵定即墨者，夫自为计者虽弱必固，欲自溃者虽强必败也。
现代文：过去乐毅能依靠弱小的燕国战胜强大的齐国，却不能依靠精简的士兵平定即墨的原因，就是在于为自己谋划的，即使人弱小但也坚固，认为要溃败的，即使强大也会失败。
English: In the past, the reason why Le Yi could rely on the weak Yan country to defeat the powerful Qi country, but could not rely on the streamlined soldiers to defeat the ink, was that he planned for himself, even if he was weak but strong, and thought that if he wanted to be defeated, even if he was strong, he would fail.

古文：自殿下起军以来，三十馀年，敌无不破，强无不服。
现代文：自从殿下出兵以来，已经三十多年，没有敌军不被攻破，没有强敌最后不服从。
English: It has been more than thirty years since His Highness dispatched troops, and no enemy army has not been defeated, and no strong enemy has finally disobeyed.

古文：今以海内之兵，百胜之威，而孙权负险於吴，刘备不宾於蜀。
现代文：现在凭借天下的众多的士兵，百战百胜的威势，而孙权在吴国倚仗险要地势，刘备在蜀地仍旧不服从。
English: Now, with the help of numerous soldiers from all over the world, Sun Quan is victorious in a hundred battles, while Sun Quan is in a precarious position in the State of Wu. Liu Bei is still disobedient in the State of Shu.

古文：夫夷狄之臣，不当冀州之卒，权、备之籍，不比袁绍之业，然本初以亡，而二寇未捷，非闇弱於今而智武於昔也。
现代文：外族之臣，比不上冀州的一个小兵，孙权、刘备的身份，也比不上袁绍当时的基业，但袁绍已经消亡，而孙权、刘备还没有战胜，不是因为我们现在力量弱小且智谋比以前武断。
English: The status of a foreign retainer is not comparable to that of a minor soldier in Jizhou, Sun Quan and Liu Bei, nor is it comparable to the inheritance of Yuan Shao at that time. However, Yuan Shao has already died, and Sun Quan and Liu Bei have not yet won, not because our strength is weak and our wisdom is more arbitrary than before.

古文：斯自为计者，与欲自溃者异势耳。
现代文：只是因为自强者和自溃者的形势地位转换了罢了。
English: It's just because the status of the situation between the self-strengtheners and the self-defeaters has changed.

古文：故文王伐崇，三驾不下，归而脩德，然后服之。
现代文：所以周文王征讨崇侯虎，三次都没有能攻克，就回来修养自身德行，然后降服了崇侯虎。
English: Therefore, Zhou Wenzhong went to conquer the Chongwu Tiger three times, but failed to conquer it. He came back to cultivate his own virtue, and then conquered the Chongwu Tiger.

古文：秦为诸侯，所征必服，及兼天下，东向称帝，匹夫大呼而社稷用隳。
现代文：秦国做为诸侯的时候，所征讨的地方一定都会降服，等到他兼并填写，登上帝位，百姓们的喊声却导致国家倾颓。
English: When Qin was a vassal state, the conquered regions would always submit. However, when he completed the annexation and ascended to the throne, the cries of the people led to the downfall of the country.

古文：是力毙於外，而不恤民於内也。
现代文：这是将力量施加在外部，对内却不体恤百姓的原因。
English: This is the reason for exerting power externally, but not sympathizing with the people internally.

古文：臣恐边寇非六国之敌，而世不乏才，土崩之势，此不可不察也。
现代文：臣担心吴蜀两国虽然没有当时六国的实力，但是也不缺乏贤才，万一进攻会导致秦朝那样土崩瓦解的形势，这不能不深入思考啊。
English: The minister worried that although the two countries of Wuxu did not have the strength of the six countries at that time, they did not lack talent. In case the attack would lead to a situation of collapse like that of the Qin Dynasty, this could not but be deeply considered.

古文：天下有重得，有重失：势可得而我勤之，此重得也；势不可得而我勤之，此重失也。
现代文：天下之事，有重大的收获，也会有重大的损失：观察形势对我有利而我把握机会，这就是重大的收获；形势对我不利也要去做，就会有重大损失。
English: In the world of things, there will be significant gains and significant losses: observing the situation is beneficial to me and I seize the opportunity, this is a significant gain; if the situation is unfavorable to me, there will be significant losses.

古文：於今之计，莫若料四方之险，择要害之处而守之，选天下之甲卒，随方面而岁更焉。
现代文：现在的计策，没有比观察各地的险要地势，选择一个要害之处固守，精选天下的士兵，随着情况每年更换更好的了。
English: There is no better strategy now than to observe the critical situation in various places, choose a key point to stick to, select soldiers from all over the world, and change them every year according to the situation.

古文：殿下可高枕於广夏，潜思於治国；广农桑，事从节约，脩之旬年，则国富民安矣。 
现代文：这样，殿下就能在宫中高枕无忧，专心于治国理政；推广农桑，推崇节俭，这样整治十年之后，就会国家富裕，百姓安乐了。 
English: In this way, His Royal Highness will be able to sleep soundly in the palace and concentrate on governing the country and politics; promote agricultural mulberry, promote thrift, so that after ten years of rectification, the country will be rich and the people will be happy.

古文：太祖遂进前而报廙曰： 非但君当知臣，臣亦当知君。
现代文：太祖就走到刘廙前面回答说： 不只是君主应该了解臣下，臣子也应该了解君主。
English: The great-grandfather stepped in front of Liu Ye and replied, "Not only should the sovereign understand the vassal, but the vassal should also understand the sovereign."

古文：今欲使吾坐行西伯之德，恐非其人也。 
现代文：现在你想让我作者推行周文王那样的德政，恐怕我不是这样的人。 
English: Now you want me to be the author of the implementation of Zhou Wenzhong's German politics, I'm afraid I'm not that kind of person.

古文：魏讽反，廙弟伟为讽所引，当相坐诛。
现代文：魏讽反叛，刘廙的弟弟刘伟被魏讽牵连，应该一同被诛杀。
English: Wei Lian rebelled, Liu Ye's brother Liu Wei was implicated by Wei Lian and should have been killed together.

古文：太祖令曰： 叔向不坐弟虎，古之制也。 
现代文：太祖下令说： 叔向没有因为弟弟羊舌虎犯罪而受牵连，这是古时的制度。 
English: The great-grandfather ordered, "Uncle Xiang is not implicated in the crime committed by his younger brother, Sheep Tongue Tiger. This is an ancient system.

古文：特原不问，徙署丞相仓曹属。
现代文：就破例宽宥他，没有追责，还提升他为丞相仓曹属。
English: As an exception, he pardoned him without reprimanding him, and promoted him to the rank of chancellor.

古文：廙上疏谢曰： 臣罪应倾宗，祸应覆族。
现代文：刘廙上疏谢罪说： 臣所犯的罪，应该夷灭宗族。
English: Liu Xuan said, "The crime committed by a vassal should destroy the clan."

古文：遭乾坤之灵，值时来之运，扬汤止沸，使不燋烂；起烟於寒灰之上，生华於已枯之木。
现代文：但遇上天地英灵，碰上时气带来的好运，用不成功的方法来补救，使得宗族不至于灭亡；在冷掉的灰烬上生起烟火，枯死的树上生长出鲜花。
English: However, in the face of the heavens and the earth, and the good luck brought by the times, the unsuccessful methods were used to remedy the situation, so that the clan would not perish; fireworks would be born on the cold ashes, and flowers would grow on the dead trees.

古文：物不答施於天地，子不谢生於父母，可以死效，难用笔陈。 
现代文：万物不向天地表示回报，孩子不向父母表示生养的感谢，因为这些只能用生命证明，很那用笔陈述出来。 
English: All things do not show their return to heaven and earth, children do not show their gratitude to their parents for their upbringing, because these can only be proved by life, much less stated with a pen.

古文：廙著书数十篇，及与丁仪共论刑礼，皆传於世。
现代文：刘廙撰写了数十篇文章，还有他和丁仪共同讨论刑罚礼节，都流传到后世。
English: Liu Wei wrote dozens of articles, and he and Ding Yi jointly discussed penal etiquette, all of which have been passed down to future generations.

古文：文帝即王位，为侍中，赐爵关内侯。
现代文：文帝继位魏王，他担任侍中，赐封爵位为关内侯。
English: Emperor Wen succeeded to the throne of Wei. He served as an attendant and was given the title of Guan Nei Hou.

古文：黄初二年卒。
现代文：黄初二年，刘廙去世。
English: In the second year of the Yellow Emperor's reign, Liu Xi passed away.

古文：无子。
现代文：没有子嗣。
English: Wang Jun has no son.

古文：帝以弟子阜嗣。
现代文：文帝让他侄儿刘阜继承了他的爵位。
English: Emperor Wen allowed his nephew Liu Fu to inherit his title.

古文：刘劭字孔才，广平邯郸人也。
现代文：刘劭，字孔才，广平邯郸人。
English: Liu Xuan, the character Kong Cai, Guangping Xingren.

古文：建安中，为计吏，诣许。
现代文：建安时担任过计吏，到了许都。
English: He worked as a tax collector when he was in Jian'an and came to Xudu.

古文：太史上言： 正旦当日蚀。 劭时在尚书令荀彧所，坐者数十人，或云当废朝，或云宜卻会。
现代文：太史上奏说： 正月初一将有日蚀。 刘劭当时在尚书令荀彧的居所，在座的有几十人，有的人说应该停止朝会，有人说应该推辞机会。
English: There will be a solar eclipse on the first day of the first month of the year. At that time, Liu Ye was at the residence of Shang Shuling, and there were dozens of people present. Some people said that the imperial meeting should be stopped, and some people said that the opportunity should be postponed.

古文：劭曰： 梓慎、裨灶，古之良史，犹占水火，错失天时。
现代文：刘劭说： 梓慎、裨灶都是古代优秀的太史，但他们在占卜吉凶时，也会错过天时。
English: Liu Wei said: Zi Shen and Bu Zhao are both excellent ancient sages, but when they are divining auspicious and inauspicious, they will also miss the time of day.

古文：礼记曰诸侯旅见天子，及门不得终礼者四，日蚀在一。
现代文：《礼记》中说诸侯一同觐见天子，到了宫门却不能完成朝见的礼节，有四个原因，日蚀就是一个。
English: According to "The Book of Etiquette," there are four reasons why princes and queens can meet the emperor together, but cannot complete the etiquette of seeing the emperor at the palace gate. The solar eclipse is one of them.

古文：然则圣人垂制，不为变异豫废朝礼者，或灾消异伏，或推术谬误也。 
现代文：但是圣人制定法规，不因为异象而废止朝礼的，要么因为灾祸消除、转移，要么因为推测不正确。 
English: However, the system handed down by the sages does not cancel the ceremony of the imperial court meeting in advance because of a change or a vision. This is because sometimes the calamity disappears on its own and does not occur, and sometimes there is an error in the calculation.

古文：彧善其言。
现代文：荀彧认为他说得对。
English: I think he's right.

古文：敕朝会如旧，日亦不蚀。
现代文：下令照旧朝会，也没有出现日蚀。
English: The Imperial Diet met as usual, and there was no eclipse.

古文：御史大夫郗虑辟劭，会虑免，拜太子舍人，迁秘书郎。
现代文：御史大夫郗虑征召刘劭，经过郗虑的举荐，刘劭被任命为太子舍人，后来调任秘书郎。
English: After careful consideration, Liu Ye was appointed as the prince's secretary, and later he was transferred to the post of secretary.

古文：黄初中，为尚书郎、散骑侍郎。
现代文：黄初年间，他担任过尚书令、散骑侍郎。
English: During the early years of the Yellow Emperor, he served as Shang Shuling and Sanzhi Jirong.

古文：受诏集五经群书，以类相从，作皇览。
现代文：刘劭接受诏令汇集五经书籍，按照类别排序，编纂成《皇览》。
English: Liu Bei accepted the imperial edict to collect the books of the Five Classics, sort them according to categories, and compile them into the "Imperial Review."

古文：明帝即位，出为陈留太守，敦崇教化，百姓称之。
现代文：明帝登基后，刘劭出京担任陈留太守，在当地推崇教化，百姓都称赞他。
English: After the Ming Dynasty ascended to the throne, Liu Bei went to Beijing to serve as Chen Liu Taishu, and he was praised by the local people.

古文：徵拜骑都尉，与议郎庾嶷、荀诜等定科令，作新律十八篇，著律略论。
现代文：朝廷又征召他担任骑都尉，与议郎庾嶷、荀诜等制定法令条规，编写《新律》十八篇，撰写了《律略论》。
English: The imperial court also conscripted him to serve as a cavalry captain, to formulate laws and regulations with the leaders of the imperial court, and to write eighteen articles of the "New Law" and "Outline of the Law."

古文：迁散骑常侍。
现代文：后来升任散骑常侍。
English: Promoted to Sangetsu-no-Zenshi.

古文：时闻公孙渊受孙权燕王之号，议者欲留渊计吏，遣兵讨之，劭以为 昔袁尚兄弟归渊父康，康斩送其首，是渊先世之效忠也。
现代文：当时听说公孙渊接受了孙权赐封的燕王称号，商议的人想要将公孙渊的计吏扣留下来，并出兵讨伐他，刘劭认为 过去袁尚兄弟归附公孙渊的父亲公孙康，公孙康将他们斩了并将首级送给朝廷，是公孙渊的先祖对朝廷的中心。
English: At that time, it was heard that Gongsunyuan had accepted the title of Yan Wang conferred by Sun Quan, and the negotiators wanted to detain Gongsunyuan's accountant and send troops to fight him. Liu Wei believed that in the past, the Yuan Shang brothers were attached to Gongsunyuan's father Gongsun Kang, Gongsun Kang beheaded them and sent their heads to the imperial court, and was the center of Gongsunyuan's ancestors to the imperial court.

古文：又所闻虚实，未可审知。
现代文：另外，传言的真假，还不能断定。
English: In addition, the truth or falsity of the rumor cannot yet be determined.

古文：古者要荒未服，脩德而不征，重劳民也。
现代文：古时圣贤求取处女之地，只修德政而不事征伐，是担心劳民伤财。
English: In ancient times, sages and sages sought the land of virgins, only to build a virtuous government but not to conquer it. They were worried that laborers would hurt their wealth.

古文：宜加宽贷，使有以自新。 
现代文：应该对公孙渊表示宽宥，让他得以改过自新。 
English: Gongsun Yuan should be pardoned and rehabilitated.

古文：后渊果斩送权使张弥等首。
现代文：后来公孙渊果然斩杀了孙权的使者张弥等人并将首级送来。
English: Later, Gongsun Yuan did indeed kill Sun Quan's envoy Zhang Mi and others and sent their heads back.

古文：劭尝作赵都赋，明帝美之，诏劭作许都、洛都赋。
现代文：刘劭曾经撰写《赵都赋》，明帝很赞赏，下诏让他再写《许都赋》、《洛都赋》。
English: Liu Bei once wrote "Zhao Du Fu" and Emperor Ming appreciated it very much, and ordered him to write "Xu Du Fu" and "Luo Du Fu" again.

古文：时外兴军旅，内营宫室，劭作二赋，皆讽谏焉。
现代文：当时魏国对外大兴军事，在内营造宫殿，刘劭做的两篇赋，都是讥讽劝谏这些情况的，
English: At that time, the State of Wei was vigorously expanding its military and building palaces in the country. Liu Ye's two works are a mockery of these circumstances.

古文：青龙中，吴围合肥，时东方吏士皆分休，征东将军满宠表请中军兵，并召休将士，须集击之。
现代文：青龙年间，吴国包围了合肥，当时魏国将士都在分批休假，征东将军满宠上表请求中军派出援兵，并召集休假的将士，以集中兵力抵御吴军。
English: During the Qinglong Dynasty, Hefei was besieged by the State of Wu. At that time, the soldiers of the State of Wei were all on leave in batches. The general of the East Conquest requested the Chinese army to send reinforcements, and called up the soldiers on leave to resist the Wu army with concentrated forces.

古文：劭议以为 贼众新至，心专气锐。
现代文：刘劭在商议中认为 敌军刚来到，心志转移，士气旺盛。
English: During the discussion, Liu Yao thought that the enemy army had just arrived, the spirit had shifted, and morale was strong.

古文：宠以少人自战其地，若便进击，不必能制。
现代文：满宠带着较少的士兵在地区作战，如果立即进攻，不一定能取胜。
English: If you fight in an area with fewer soldiers, you may not be able to win if you attack immediately.

古文：宠求待兵，未有所失也。
现代文：满宠只要等待援兵，也不会有什么损失。
English: As long as they wait for reinforcements, they will not lose anything.

古文：以为可先遣步兵五千，精骑三千，军前发，扬声进道，震曜形势。
现代文：我认为可以先派五千步兵，三千精锐骑兵，在大军之前出发，一边宣扬气势一边前进，展现我军气势。
English: I think we can first send five thousand infantrymen and three thousand elite cavalrymen to set off ahead of the main army, advance while promoting momentum, and show our military momentum.

古文：骑到合肥，疏其行队，多其旌鼓，曜兵城下，引出贼后，拟其归路，要其粮道。
现代文：等骑兵到了合肥，就疏散队列，多加旌旗战鼓，在合肥城下展示兵力，将敌军引出来后，就断绝他们返回和运输粮食的道路。
English: When the cavalry arrived in Hefei, they would evacuate the queue, march with more banners and drums, show their strength under Hefei City, lead the enemy troops out, and cut off the road for them to return and transport grain.

古文：贼闻大军来，骑断其后，必震怖遁走，不战自破贼矣。 
现代文：敌军得知大军前来，又有骑兵截断他们的后路，一定震惊恐惧而逃走，那就不需要交战也能攻破敌军了。 
English: The enemy must have fled in shock and fear when they learned that a large army was approaching and that cavalry was cutting off their rear. Then they would have been able to break through the enemy army without engaging in battle.

古文：帝从之。
现代文：明帝听从了他的意见。
English: The emperor obeyed.

古文：兵比至合肥，贼果退还。
现代文：大军到合肥的时候，贼军果然撤退回去了。
English: When the large army arrived in Hefei, the bandits withdrew and went back.

古文：时诏书博求众贤。
现代文：当时明帝下诏，广泛地招揽众多贤人。
English: At that time, Emperor Ming issued an edict to widely recruit many sages.

古文：散骑侍郎夏侯惠荐劭曰： 伏见常侍刘劭，深忠笃思，体周於数，凡所错综，源流弘远，是以群才大小，咸取所同而斟酌焉。
现代文：散骑侍郎夏侯惠推荐刘劭说： 我见常侍刘劭，为人忠厚，思虑周全，做事情礼仪周全，凡是有各种行为，都是有根有据，所以官员们无论职位高低，他都能找出相似的地方自己加以斟酌学习。
English: Xia Houhui, the errand boy who recommended Liu Wei, said: I have seen Liu Wei, the regular attendant, who is a loyal person, thoughtful, and does things with perfect etiquette. All kinds of behaviors are well-founded, so no matter how high or low the officials are, he can find out similar places and study them on his own.

古文：故性实之士服其平和良正，清静之人慕其玄虚退让，文学之士嘉其推步详密，法理之士明其分数精比，意思之士知其沈深笃固，文章之士爱其著论属辞，制度之士贵其化略较要，策谋之士赞其明思通微，凡此诸论，皆取適己所长而举其支流者也。
现代文：所以性情朴实的人佩服他的平和正直，内心清净的人敬慕他的淡薄谦让，精通文史的人赞赏他推测周祥，思想深刻的人知道他的思想严密，讲求道义的人了解他的深沉坚定，文才出众的人喜欢他的辞论文章，精通法度的人看重他删繁就简，善于谋划的人赞赏他思想明白细致，这些评价，都是因为他能选取适合自己所擅长的和他的某些才能相比较。
English: Therefore, people with a simple temperament admire his peace and honesty, people with a pure heart admire his lightness and gentleness, people who are proficient in literary history appreciate his conjecture, people with deep thoughts know his rigorous thoughts, people who preach morality understand his deep firmness, people with outstanding literary talent like his rhetoric articles, people who are proficient in the law value his simplicity, and people who are good at planning appreciate his clear and detailed thoughts. These evaluations are all because he can choose what he is good at and compare some of his talents.

古文：臣数听其清谈，览其笃论，渐渍历年，服膺弥久，实为朝廷奇其器量。
现代文：臣多次听到他清谈，阅读他的著述，慢慢被他感染，佩服之情渐渐增长，实在是朝廷重要的人才啊。
English: The courtier heard him speak clearly many times, read his writings, and was slowly infected by him. His admiration gradually grew. He was truly an important talent for the imperial court.

古文：以为若此人者，宜辅翼机事，纳谋帏幄，当与国道俱隆，非世俗所常有也。
现代文：我认为像这样的人，应该辅佐机要大事，出谋划策，应该和国家的运势一起兴盛，这不是平常能见到的啊。
English: I think that people like this should be instrumental in major events, come up with plans and suggestions, and should prosper together with the country's fortune. This is not something you usually see.

古文：惟陛下垂优游之听，使劭承清闲之欢，得自尽於前，则德音上通，辉耀日新矣。 景初中，受诏作都官考课。
现代文：希望陛下采纳下层意见，让刘劭能得到您的欢心，在您面前展示他的才干，那么您的贤德之声就会上达上天，您的光辉也会更加耀眼。 景初年间，刘劭接受诏令制定《都官考课》。
English: I hope that Your Majesty will adopt the lower-level opinions, so that Liu Ye can get your favor, and show his talent in front of you, then your voice of virtue will reach the sky, and your brilliance will be more dazzling. During the first year of Jing, Liu Ye accepted the edict to formulate the "Civil Service Examination Course."

古文：劭上疏曰： 百官考课，王政之大较，然而历代弗务，是以治典阙而未补，能否混而相蒙。
现代文：刘劭上疏说： 官员们的考核，是国家重要的事情，但历代以来都不看重，所以国家法典有缺漏却没有弥补，因此官员的好坏和能力高低都混合在一起。
English: Liu Xuan Shangsu said: The appraisal of officials is an important matter for the country, but it has not been valued since time immemorial. Therefore, there are omissions in the national code but they have not been made up. Therefore, the quality and ability of officials are mixed.

古文：陛下以上圣之宏略，愍王纲之弛颓，神虑内鉴，明诏外发。
现代文：陛下以才智出众的宏伟谋略，感伤国家法度的废弛，心中思索，对外明发诏令。
English: His Majesty, with his superior wisdom and grand strategy, was saddened by the laxity of the country's laws, pondered in his heart, and issued an edict to the outside world.

古文：臣奉恩旷然，得以启蒙，辄作都官考课七十二条，又作说略一篇。
现代文：臣深受浩荡皇恩，得以开始这项工作，制定了《都官考课》七十二条，又撰写了一篇《说略》。
English: The vassal was greatly favored by the king and was able to start this work. He formulated the seventy-two articles of the "Civil Service Examination" and wrote a "Summary."

古文：臣学寡识浅，诚不足以宣畅圣旨，著定典制。 
现代文：臣才疏学浅，实在不足以明白地宣扬陛下旨意，编定这样的典章制度。 
English: It is really not enough for a lowly courtier to clearly proclaim His Majesty's will and compile such a system of ordinances.

古文：又以为宜制礼作乐，以移风俗，著乐论十四篇，事成未上，会明帝崩，不施行。
现代文：他又认为应该制定礼乐制度，以改变不好的风俗，并撰写了《乐论》十四篇，写完了还没来得及上呈，正赶上明帝驾崩，没有实行。
English: He also believed that a ritual music system should be developed in order to change bad customs, and wrote a "Music Theory" of fourteen pieces. After writing it, he did not have time to submit it. It was just in time for Emperor Ming's death, and it was not implemented.

古文：正始中，执经讲学，赐爵关内侯。
现代文：正始年间，刘劭讲解经典，被赐爵位关内侯。
English: At the beginning of the year, Liu Ye lectured on classics and was given the title of Guan Nei Hou.

古文：凡所撰述，法论、人物志之类百馀篇。
现代文：他所撰写的《法论》、《人物志》之类的，共有一百多篇。
English: He has written more than a hundred articles, such as "Legal Theory" and "Character Biography."

古文：卒，追赠光禄勋。
现代文：刘劭去世后，朝廷追赠他为光禄勋。
English: After Liu Bei's death, the imperial court posthumously awarded him the Order of the Rising Sun.

古文：子琳嗣。
现代文：儿子刘琳继承了爵位。
English: His son Liu Lin inherited the title.

古文：劭同时东海缪袭亦有才学，多所述叙，官至尚书、光禄勋。
现代文：跟刘劭同时期的东海郡的缪袭也很有才学，撰写了很多文章，做官到尚书、光禄勋。
English: Miao Sui of Donghai County, who lived at the same time as Liu Bei, was also very talented, wrote many articles, and served as an official in Shangshu and Guanglu.

古文：袭友人山阳仲长统，汉末为尚书郎，早卒。
现代文：缪袭的朋友，山阳郡的仲长统，汉朝末年担任过尚书郎，很早就去世了。
English: Miao Wei's friend, Sanyang County's Zhong Changtong, who served as Shang Shuro at the end of the Han Dynasty, passed away very early.

古文：著昌言，词佳可观省。
现代文：著写了《昌言》，作词很好，可以反复阅读。
English: He wrote "Changyan," the lyrics are very good and can be read repeatedly.

古文：散骑常侍陈留苏林、光禄大夫京兆韦诞、陈郡太守任城孙该、郎中令河东杜挚等亦著文赋，颇传於世。
现代文：散骑常侍，陈留人苏林、光禄大夫，京兆人韦诞、陈郡太守，任城人孙该、郎中令，河东郡的杜挚等人也著写了文章辞赋，有很多流传后世。
English: Zangjie's regular attendants, Chen's retainers Surin and Guanglu Dafu, Jinghao's Weixi, Chen County's governor, Rencheng's Sun Gai, Langzhongling, and Hedong County's Du Zhi also wrote articles, many of which have been passed down to future generations.

古文：傅嘏字兰石，北地泥阳人，傅介子之后也。
现代文：傅嘏，字兰石，北地郡泥阳县人，是傅介子的后代。
English: Fu Yao, also known as Lan Shi, was born in Dewang County, Beidi County, and was a descendant of Fu Yizi.

古文：伯父巽，黄初中为侍中尚书。
现代文：伯父傅巽，黄初年中任过侍中尚书。
English: Huang's uncle, Fu Xi, was a chamberlain in the early years of Huang's reign.

古文：嘏弱冠知名，司空陈群辟为掾。
现代文：傅嘏刚成年的时候就很出名，司空陈群征召他为掾吏。
English: Fu Yao was already famous when he was a young man, and Siku Chenqun recruited him to be a magistrate.

古文：时散骑常侍刘劭作考课法，事下三府。
现代文：当时散骑常侍刘劭正在制定《都官考课》，将事务布置到三府中。
English: At that time, Liu Wei, the errand boy, was in the process of formulating the "College Entrance Examination for Government Officials" and arranging affairs among the three prefectures.

古文：嘏难劭论曰： 盖闻帝制宏深，圣道奥远，苟非其才，则道不虚行，神而明之，存乎其人。
现代文：傅嘏质疑刘劭的言论说： 听说帝王制度广大深厚，圣贤的道义深奥玄远，如果不是这方面的人才，道理也不会无缘无故产生，神明了解这个情况，所以将它托付在人的身上。
English: Fu Ye questioned Liu Ye's remarks, saying, "I have heard that the imperial system is vast and profound, and the morality of the sages is profound and profound. If it were not for the talent in this area, reason would not arise without reason. The gods understand this situation, so they entrusted it to human beings.

古文：暨乎王略亏颓而旷载罔缀，微言既没，六籍泯玷。
现代文：如果出现国法倾颓并且很多年都没有恢复，下层民众的建议被淹没，经书典籍被损毁。为什么呢？
English: If there is a collapse of the national law and it has not been restored for many years, the suggestions of the lower-class people will be inundated, and the classics will be damaged. Why?

古文：何则？道弘致远而众才莫晞也。
现代文：是因为圣贤知道广大深远，而普通人的才能不能达到。
English: It is because the sages know the vast and far-reaching, and the talent of ordinary people can not be reached.

古文：案劭考课论，虽欲寻前代黜陟之文，然其制度略以阙亡。
现代文：刘劭的考核的说法，虽然想要按照前代对官员升降的条文，但这些制度很多已经缺失损毁。
English: According to Liu Wei's assessment, although they want to follow the provisions of the previous generation for the promotion and demotion of officials, many of these systems have been damaged and destroyed.

古文：礼之存者，惟有周典，外建侯伯，藩屏九服，内立列司，筦齐六职，土有恒贡，官有定则，百揆均任，四民殊业，故考绩可理而黜陟易通也。
现代文：留存下来的关于礼仪的记载，只有周典，里面对外封定侯伯，以护卫王室，在朝中设置百官，完善治﹑教﹑礼﹑政﹑刑﹑事六种职事，土地有一定的税赋，官员有一定的准则，百官各司其职，百姓各安其业，所以考核的成绩就能比较，那官员的升降任免也就简单了。
English: The only records of etiquette that have survived are the weekly etiquette, appointing Hou Bo from the inside to the outside to guard the royal family, setting up a hundred officials in the court and the middle, perfecting six kinds of duties of governance, teaching, etiquette, politics, punishment, land has a certain tax, officials have a certain standard, a hundred officials each perform their duties, and the people each secure their careers, so the assessment results can be compared, and the promotion and dismissal of that official is simple.

古文：大魏继百王之末，承秦、汉之烈，制度之流，靡所脩采。
现代文：大魏朝延续百王时代，继承秦朝、汉朝的威烈，各种制度没有不整理采纳的。
English: The Great Wei Dynasty continued the era of a hundred kings, inheriting the power of the Qin Dynasty and the Han Dynasty. Various systems have been adopted.

古文：自建安以来，至于青龙，神武拨乱，肇基皇祚，扫除凶逆，芟夷遗寇，旌旗卷舒，日不暇给。
现代文：自从建安年间以来，一直到青龙年间，帝王们拨乱反正，奠定基业，延续国运，扫除奸凶，消灭余寇，战旗飘扬，每天都很繁忙。
English: Since the Jianan era, all the way to the Qinglong era, the emperors have been busy every day, sorting out the chaos, laying the foundation, continuing the national movement, sweeping away the traitors, eliminating the remaining robbers, and flying the battle flag.

古文：及经邦治戎，权法并用，百官群司，军国通任，随时之宜，以应政机。
现代文：等到治理国家，平定外族，权术和律法一同使用，文武百官，军国大事的任免不拘小节，按照情况来安排，以符合政务安排。
English: When it comes to governing the country and pacifying foreigners, power and tactics should be used together with the law, and the appointment and removal of civil and military officials should be made according to the situation in order to conform to the government affairs arrangement.

古文：以古施今，事杂义殊，难得而通也。
现代文：用古代的制度放到现在来实行，事情繁多，内容不同，很难相通。
English: Putting the ancient system into practice now, there are many things, different contents, and it is difficult to communicate.

古文：所以然者，制宜经远，或不切近，法应时务，不足垂后。
现代文：之所以这样，是因为制度的建立应该考虑长远，也许并不贴近当前的现实，律法的制定应该符合实际情况，不一定能流传到后代。
English: The reason for this is that the establishment of the system should consider the long-term, and may not be close to the current reality. The formulation of the law should be in line with the actual situation, and may not be passed on to future generations.

古文：夫建官均职，清理民物，所以立本也；循名考实，纠励成规，所以治末也。
现代文：设置官职，调整职位，管理百姓，是建立根本；根据实际情况考察官员，纠正旧的规章制度，这是治理末梢。
English: The establishment of official posts, the adjustment of posts, and the management of the people are the foundation; the inspection of officials according to the actual situation and the correction of the old rules and regulations are the end of governance.

古文：本纲末举而造制未呈，国略不崇而考课是先，惧不足以料贤愚之分，精幽明之理也。
现代文：根本还没有建立却先治理末梢，制度还没有修订，治国政策还没有完善就先考核官员，担心不能分辨贤能和愚陋的区别，明确智愚或善恶的道理。
English: It has not been established at all, but the periphery has been governed first, the system has not been revised, and the policy of governing the country has not been perfected, so officials have been evaluated first. They are worried that they cannot distinguish the difference between wisdom and stupidity, and clarify the truth of wisdom and stupidity or good and evil.

古文：昔先王之择才，必本行於州闾，讲道於庠序，行具而谓之贤，道脩则谓之能。
现代文：过去先王们选拔人才，一定是要品德在州郡间有名，在学校中讲解道义，行为正直的称为贤人，道德修养好的称为能人。
English: In the past, the ancients selected talents, and they must be famous for their moral character in the state and county, and preach morality in the school. Those with honest behavior are called sages, and those with good moral cultivation are called able people.

古文：乡老献贤能于王，王拜受之，举其贤者，出使长之，科其能者，入使治之，此先王收才之义也。
现代文：然后百姓们将贤能之人举荐给先王，先王接纳他们，选取贤德的人，让他出京做官得以成长，选取能人，让他们入朝处理政事，这是先王招揽贤才的办法。
English: Then, the people would recommend a person of virtue to the king, and the king would accept them. The king would select a person of virtue and allow him to grow by sending him to Beijing to become an official. He would select a person of ability and allow them to enter the imperial court to deal with political affairs. This was the king's way of recruiting a person of virtue.

古文：方今九州之民，爰及京城，未有六乡之举，其选才之职，专任吏部。
现代文：现在天下的百姓，来到京城，但没有州郡的举荐，朝廷选拔人才的职务，专门委任给吏部。
English: Nowadays, people from all over the world come to Beijing, but there is no recommendation from the state or county, and the position of the imperial court to select talents is specially assigned to the personnel department.

古文：案品状则实才未必当，任薄伐则德行未为叙，如此则殿最之课，未尽人才。
现代文：按照德行，那不一定具有实际的才干，授予官职的高低也未必和他的德行相符，这样的话，那官吏的考核，也不能竭尽人才。
English: According to the virtue, it does not necessarily have the actual ability, and the level of the official post is not necessarily consistent with his virtue. In this case, the official's assessment cannot exhaust the talent.

古文：述综王度，敷赞国式，体深义广，难得而详也。 
现代文：纵观陈述国家律法制度，内容广，意义深，很难说得详细。 
English: A comprehensive presentation of the national legal system, the content is broad, the meaning is deep, and it is difficult to say in detail.

古文：正始初，除尚书郎，迁黄门侍郎。
现代文：正始初年，傅嘏担任尚书郎，又升任黄门侍郎。
English: At the beginning of the first year, Fu Xi served as Shang Shuro and was promoted to Huangmen Jiro.

古文：时曹爽秉政，何晏为吏部尚书，嘏谓爽弟羲曰： 何平叔外静而内銛巧，好利，不念务本。
现代文：当时曹爽主管政事，何晏担任吏部尚书，傅嘏对曹爽的弟弟曹羲说： 何晏为人表面清静，但内心钻营取巧，贪财好利，不想着致力于根本。
English: At that time, Cao Shuang was in charge of government affairs, and He Jie was in charge of the personnel department. Fu Jie said to Cao Shuang, Cao Shuang's younger brother: He Jie is a quiet person on the surface, but in his heart he is clever, greedy for money and profit, and does not want to devote himself to the fundamentals.

古文：吾恐必先惑子兄弟，仁人将远，而朝政废矣。 
现代文：我担心他一定会先迷惑你们星弟，那仁德的人就会远离，朝政也会被荒废了。 
English: I'm worried that he will first confuse your star brothers, then the benevolent people will stay away, and the imperial government will be abandoned.

古文：晏等遂与嘏不平，因微事以免嘏官。
现代文：何晏等人于是就和傅嘏产生了嫌隙，抓住一点小事就罢免了傅嘏的官职。
English: As a result, He Yao and others had a rift with Fu Yao, seized a small matter and dismissed Fu Yao's official post.

古文：起家拜荥阳太守，不行。
现代文：后来傅嘏在家中被起用为荥阳太守，他没有赴任。
English: Later, Fu Jun was appointed as the governor of Shenyang at home, but he did not take up the post.

古文：太傅司马宣王请为从事中郎。
现代文：太傅司马宣王延请他担任从事中郎。
English: Grand Master Sima Xuan Wang Yan asked him to serve as a middle-man.

古文：曹爽诛，为河南尹，迁尚书。
现代文：曹爽被诛杀后，傅嘏担任河南尹，又升任为尚书。
English: After Cao Shuang was killed, Fu Xi served as Henan Yin and was promoted to Shangshu.

古文：嘏常以为 秦始罢侯置守，设官分职，不与古同。汉、魏因循，以至于今。
现代文：傅嘏经常认为 秦朝开始废除诸侯制度，设置太守，按照官位设立职务，和古代不相同、汉朝、魏朝沿袭这一做法，一直到今天。
English: Fu Xi often thought that the Qin Dynasty began to abolish the vassal system, set up governors-general, and set up positions according to official ranks, which was different from the ancient times, and the Han Dynasty and the Wei Dynasty followed this practice until today.

古文：然儒生学士，咸欲错综以三代之礼，礼弘致远，不应时务，事与制违，名实未附，故历代而不至於治者，盖由是也。
现代文：但是儒生学者，都想要把夏商周三代的礼节综合起来，但是礼节制度宏大深远，不符合现在的形势，各种事情也会和制度相违背，名不副实，所以历代以来之所以没有能达到盛世的原因，大概就是这样了。
English: However, Confucian scholars all want to integrate the etiquette of the third generation of Xia merchants, but the etiquette system is grand and far-reaching, and does not conform to the current situation. Various things will also contradict the system, and the name does not match the reality. Therefore, this is probably the reason why it has not been able to achieve prosperity since ancient times.

古文：欲大改定官制，依古正本，今遇帝室多难，未能革易 。
现代文：想要大幅度更改官吏制度，应该按照古代的做法从根本上整顿，但现在王室多难，还没有能改变。 
English: If you want to drastically change the bureaucratic system, it should be fundamentally reorganized in accordance with the ancient practice, but now the royal family is difficult and has not been able to change.

古文：时论者议欲自伐吴，三征献策各不同。
现代文：当时有人商议想要征讨吴国，几次征求建言献策，都不一样。
English: At that time, some people discussed the idea of soliciting Wu Guo, and several times solicited suggestions, but they were all different.

古文：诏以访嘏，嘏对曰： 昔夫差陵齐胜晋，威行中国，终祸姑苏；齐闵兼土拓境，辟地千里，身蹈颠覆。
现代文：魏主诏令傅嘏谈论，傅嘏回答说： 过去吴王夫差讨伐齐国战胜晋国，威势横行中原地区，但最终还是在姑苏有了灾祸；齐闵王兼并土地，拓展疆界，开辟了千里的国土，但自己也最后身死。
English: The Wei emperor ordered Fu Xi to talk about it, and Fu Xi replied: In the past, Wu Wangfu had to fight against Qi and defeated Jin, and the Central Plains region was rampant, but in the end there was a disaster in Gusu; King Qi of Qi annexed land, expanded borders, and opened up thousands of miles of land, but he himself eventually died.

古文：有始不必善终，古之明效也。
现代文：所以有开始不一定有善终，是古代的明证。
English: Therefore, a good beginning does not necessarily lead to a good ending. This is clear evidence from ancient times.

古文：孙权自破关羽并荆州之后，志盈欲满，凶宄以极，是以宣文侯深建宏图大举之策。
现代文：孙权自从攻破关羽兼并荆州，志向远大，洋洋自得，穷凶极恶，所以宣文侯努力谋划宏图伟业。
English: Since Sun Quan defeated Guan Yu and annexed Jingzhou, he has been ambitious, self-satisfied, and extremely vicious. Therefore, Xuanwenhou has been working hard to plan a great career.

古文：今权以死，讬孤於诸葛恪。
现代文：现在孙权已经死了，将儿子托付给诸葛恪。
English: Now Sun Quan has died, entrusting his son to Zhuge Ke.

古文：若矫权苛暴，蠲其虐政，民免酷烈，偷安新惠，外内齐虑，有同舟之惧，虽不能终自保完，犹足以延期挺命於深江之外矣。
现代文：如果他矫正孙权的保证，废除他虐害百姓的政策，百姓免于水深火热，能在新政策之下生活，国内外一同考虑，怀有处在同一条船上的恐惧，即使不能最终保全自己，但也足以让吴国在长江以南继续存在了。
English: If he corrects Sun Quan's assurance and abolishes his policy of abusing and harming the people, the people will be spared the worst and will be able to live under the new policy, considering both at home and abroad, harboring the fear of being in the same boat, even if he cannot ultimately save himself, it will be enough for Wu to continue to exist south of the Yangtze River.

古文：而议者或欲汎舟径济，横行江表；或欲四道并进，攻其城垒；或欲大佃疆埸，观衅而动：诚皆取贼之常计也。
现代文：但商议的人有人想要乘船径直渡江，在水面上排列开来；有人想要兵分四路，一起进攻吴国的城池；有人想要大规模屯田，观察形势再行动：这些都是攻取敌军的通常的办法。
English: However, some of the negotiators wanted to take a boat straight across the river and line up on the water; some wanted to divide the troops into four groups and attack the cities and towns of Wuxi together; some wanted to occupy large areas of land, observe the situation and then act: these are the usual methods of capturing enemy troops.

古文：然自治兵以来，出入三载，非掩袭之军也。
现代文：但自从我治理军务以来，也有三年了，我军不是能趁人不备袭击的部队。
English: But since I have been in charge of the military affairs for three years, our army is not a force that can take advantage of an unprepared attack.

古文：贼之为寇，几六十年矣，君臣伪立，吉凶共患，又丧其元帅，上下忧危，设令列船津要，坚城据险，横行之计，其殆难捷。
现代文：而贼人做为敌寇，将近六十年了，君臣虽然是伪立的，但患难与共，又损失了将帅，上下都担忧危急，把战船排列在重要的渡口，凭借险要坚守城池，我军想要将战船排列在江面上的计策，还是很难成功的。
English: For nearly sixty years, the thief has been the enemy and the robber. Although the prince and the minister are false, they share the hardships and suffer the loss of the general. Everyone is worried about the crisis. The warships are lined up at important ferry ports. By virtue of the desperate need to hold the city, our army's strategy of lining up the warships on the river is still difficult to succeed.

古文：惟进军大佃，最差完牢。
现代文：只有在边境一边大规模屯田一边进军，使后方稳固。
English: Only in the border side of a large-scale tunden side of the march, so that the rear is stable.

古文：兵出民表，寇钞不犯；坐食积谷，不烦运士；乘衅讨袭，无远劳费：此军之急务也。
现代文：出兵时要先发布告示，表明进攻时不侵犯百姓；能安坐食用储备的多年的粮食，不需要运输的将士；抓住机会讨伐敌军，不需要花费原来的时间与精力：这是军事上的当务之急。
English: When sending out troops, it is necessary to issue a notice first, indicating that the attack will not infringe on the people; the grain that can be eaten for many years of reserve does not need to be transported; the opportunity to fight the enemy does not need to spend the original time and energy: this is a military imperative.

古文：昔樊哙愿以十万之众，横行匈奴，季布面折其短。
现代文：过去樊哙希望能带十万大军横行匈奴，季布当面指出他的不足。
English: In the past, he had hoped to lead 100,000 troops against the rampant Huns, but Qibout pointed out his shortcomings to his face.

古文：今欲越长江，涉虏庭，亦向时之喻也。
现代文：现在我军想要渡过长江，进入敌军的地盘，也像那时候一样。
English: Now our army wants to cross the Yangtze River and enter the enemy's territory, just as it did then.

古文：未若明法练士，错计於全胜之地，振长策以御敌之馀烬，斯必然之数也。 
现代文：不如先制定法规，操练士兵，在必胜的局面下制定计策，挥舞长鞭以抗击敌军余党，这是一定会成功的。 
English: It is better to first formulate laws and regulations, drill soldiers, formulate strategies in a win-win situation, and wield a long whip to resist the enemy's remnants. This will definitely be successful.

古文：后吴大将诸葛恪新破东关，乘胜扬声欲向青、徐，朝廷将为之备。
现代文：后来吴国的大将诸葛恪破东关后，乘着威势，宣称要进军青州、徐州，朝廷急忙做好准备。
English: Later, after Zhuge Ke, the general of Wu, broke through Dongguan, he took advantage of his power and declared that he would march into Qingzhou and Xuzhou, and the imperial court hurriedly prepared.

古文：嘏议以为 淮海非贼轻行之路，又昔孙权遣兵入海，漂浪沉溺，略无孑遗，恪岂敢倾根竭本，寄命洪流，以徼乾没乎？
现代文：傅嘏认为 淮海地区不是敌军轻易选择的路线，还有当年孙权派兵出海，遇上大浪，船只倾覆，几乎没有幸存者，诸葛恪怎么敢倾尽根本，将众多的将士性命交托在海上，以求侥幸不被淹没呢？
English: Fu Yao believed that the Huaihai region was not an easy route for the enemy to choose. There was also the time when Sun Quan sent troops to sea. They encountered big waves, the ship capsized, and there were almost no survivors. How could Zhuge Ke dare to do his best and entrust the lives of many soldiers to the sea in order to avoid being drowned?

古文：恪不过遣偏率小将素习水军者，乘海溯淮，示动青、徐，恪自并兵来向淮南耳 。
现代文：诸葛恪不过是派熟悉水军的偏将，带领小部分人马从海上沿着淮水逆流而上，表示要攻打青州、徐州，诸葛恪自己率军进攻淮南罢了。 
English: Zhuge Ke was just a partial general who was familiar with the navy and led a small number of men and horses from the sea along the Huai Shui upstream, saying that he wanted to attack Qingzhou and Xuzhou, Zhuge Ke himself led the army to attack Huainan.

古文：后恪果图新城，不克而归。
现代文：后来诸葛恪果然想要夺取新城，但没有能攻克，就撤退了。
English: Later, Zhuge really wanted to seize Xincheng, but he could not conquer it and withdrew.

古文：嘏常论才性同异，锺会集而论之。
现代文：傅嘏时常谈论才能与性格的关系，钟会把它们集中起来然后评论。
English: Fu Yao often talks about the relationship between talent and character, Bell will focus on them and then comment.

古文：嘉平末，赐爵关内侯。
现代文：嘉平末年，傅嘏被赐爵关内侯。
English: At the end of Jiaping's life, Fu Yao was given the title of Lord of Guanai.

古文：高贵乡公即尊位，进封武乡亭侯。
现代文：高贵乡公曹髦即位，他又被晋封为武乡亭侯。
English: Gao Guixiang Gong Cao Xiang ascended to the throne, and he was also promoted to the post of Wu Xiangting Hou.

古文：正元二年春，毌丘俭、文钦作乱。
现代文：正元二年春，毋丘俭、文钦作乱。
English: In the spring of the second year of the first century, however, Qiu Jian and Wen Qin started a riot.

古文：或以司马景王不宜自行，可遣太尉孚往，惟嘏及王肃劝之。
现代文：有人认为司马景王不应该自己率军征讨，可以派太尉曹孚前去，只有傅嘏和王肃劝说司马景王。
English: Some people thought that Sima Jing Wang should not lead the army himself, he could send Lieutenant Cao Fu to go. Only Fu Jun and Wang Su persuaded Sima Jing Wang.

古文：景王遂行。以嘏守尚书仆射，俱东。
现代文：司马景王就出发了，任命傅嘏为尚书仆射，留守京城。
English: Sima Jingwang set off, appointed Fu Xi as his aide-de-camp, and stayed in Beijing.

古文：俭、钦破败，嘏有谋焉。
现代文：后来毋丘俭、文钦之乱战败，傅嘏也有出谋划策。
English: Later, despite the defeat of Qiu Jian and the Wenqin Rebellion, Fu Yao also came up with a plan.

古文：及景王薨，嘏与司马文王径还洛阳，文王遂以辅政。
现代文：等到司马景王去世，傅嘏和司马文王径直返回洛阳，司马文王就让他辅佐朝政。
English: When Sima Jing Wang passed away, Fu Xi and Sima Wen Wang went straight back to Luoyang, and Sima Wen Wang asked him to assist the government.

古文：语在锺会传。
现代文：这件事在《钟会传》中另有记载。
English: This event is also recorded in the "Tale of the Bell."

古文：会由是有自矜色，嘏戒之曰： 子志大其量，而勋业难为也，可不慎哉！ 
现代文：钟会因此有自傲的神色，傅嘏告诫他说： 您的志向大于您的才能，所以功业难以成就，难道能够不慎重吗？ 
English: As a result, Zhong Hui had a proud look on his face. Fu Yao admonished him, "Your ambition is greater than your talent, so it is difficult to accomplish your work. Can you not be prudent?

古文：嘏以功进封阳乡侯，增邑六百户，并前千二百户。
现代文：傅嘏因为功劳被进封为阳乡侯，增加食邑六百户，连带以前的一共一千二百户。
English: Fu Xi was awarded the title of Yang Township because of his merits, increasing the number of food villages by 600, bringing the previous total to 1,200.

古文：是岁薨，时年四十七，追赠太常，谥曰元侯。
现代文：傅嘏在这一年去世，当时四十七岁，朝廷追赠为太常，谥号为元侯。
English: Fu Xi died in the same year, when he was forty-seven years old. The imperial court posthumously named him Taizang, and his posthumous name was Genghou.

古文：祗嗣。
现代文：他的儿子傅祗继承了他的爵位。
English: His son Fu Jun inherited his title.

古文：咸熙中开建五等，以嘏著勋前朝，改封祗泾原子。
现代文：咸熙年间，朝廷开始设立五等爵位制度，因为傅嘏在前朝有很大功劳，改封傅祗为泾原子。
English: During the reign of Emperor Hanxi, the imperial court began to establish a five-class nobility system, because Fu Xi had great merits in the previous dynasty, and changed Fu Xi's title to "Fu Xi atom."

古文：评曰：昔文帝、陈王以公子之尊，博好文采，同声相应，才士并出，惟粲等六人最见名目。
现代文：评曰：过去文帝、陈思王以公子的尊贵身份，喜好文学，跟他们相似的人都互相呼应，一时有才学的士人都涌现出来，至于王粲等六人最为著名。
English: The commentary said: In the past, Emperor Wen and King Chen Si had the noble status of nobles, and they liked literature. People who were similar to them echoed each other. At one time, talented scholars emerged. As for Wang Xi and other six people, they are the most famous.

古文：而粲特处常伯之官，兴一代之制，然其冲虚德宇，未若徐幹之粹也。
现代文：而王粲处在常伯的官位上，制定一代的规章制度，但他的恬淡虚静，为人的气量，还比不上徐幹那样纯粹。
English: But Wang Qian is in the official position of the uncle of the emperor, formulating the rules and regulations of a generation, but his calm and quietness is not as pure as that of Xu Gan.

古文：卫觊亦以多识典故，相时王之式。
现代文：卫觊也因为知道很多古代典故，而给当时的君主建立制度规章。
English: Because he knew a lot of ancient allusions, Emperor Wei also established rules and regulations for the monarchs of the time.

古文：刘劭该览学籍，文质周洽。
现代文：刘劭饱览群书，但文学才能比较普通。
English: Liu Wei reads a lot of books, but his literary talent is rather ordinary.

古文：刘廙以清鉴著，傅嘏用才达显云。
现代文：刘廙因为能明察事情而出名，傅嘏因为才能显达。
English: Liu Wei is famous for his ability to see things clearly, Fu Wei is famous for his ability to show up.

