古文：萧思话，南兰陵人，宋孝懿皇后弟子也。
现代文：萧思话，南兰陵人，是宋朝孝懿皇后弟弟的儿子。
English: Xiao Sizhe, a native of Nanlianling, was the son of the younger brother of Empress Xiaojun of the Song Dynasty.

古文：父源之字君流，历徐、兖二州刺史。
现代文：父亲萧源之字君流，历任徐、兖二州刺史。
English: His father, Xiao Yuan, belonged to the Zhaojun school, and his successors, Xu and Zou, were the heads of the two states.

古文：永初元年卒，赠前将军。
现代文：永初元年去世，赠为前将军。
English: He died in the first year of the Yongchu era and was presented as a former general.

古文：思话十许岁时，未知书，好骑屋栋，打细腰鼓，侵暴邻曲，莫不患毒之。
现代文：萧思话约十岁时，不懂书籍，好骑在屋梁上，打细腰鼓，侵害邻居，邻人无不怨恨。
English: When Xiao Siwei was about ten years old, he didn't understand books, liked to ride on the roof beam, played a thin waist drum, encroached on his neighbors, and resented his neighbors.

古文：自此折节，数年中遂有令誉。
现代文：从此自我克制，几年之中便有了美好的名声。
English: Since then, self-restraint has gained a good reputation in a few years.

古文：颇工隶书，善弹琴，能骑射。
现代文：他工于隶书，善于弹琴，能骑射。
English: He is good at calligraphy, good at playing the piano, and can ride and shoot.

古文：后袭爵封阳县侯。
现代文：后来承袭了封阳县侯的爵位。
English: Later, he inherited the title of Marquis of Fuyang County.

古文：元嘉中，爲青州刺史。
现代文：元嘉年间，担任青州刺史。
English: During the Yuan and Jia dynasties, he served as the chief historian of Qingzhou.

古文：亡命司马朗之兄弟聚党谋爲乱，思话遣北海太守萧汪之讨斩之。
现代文：亡命的司马朗之兄弟聚集党徒企图作乱，萧思话派遣北海太守萧汪之讨平并斩杀了他们。
English: The brothers of the exiled Sima Lang gathered the party members in an attempt to create a disturbance, and Xiao Siwei dispatched the North Sea governor Xiao Wangzhi to pacify and kill them.

古文：八年，魏军大至，乃弃镇奔平昌。
现代文：元嘉八年，魏军大规模攻来，他丢弃军镇逃奔平昌。
English: In the eighth year of Yuan Jia, the Wei army invaded on a large scale, and he abandoned the military town and fled to Pyeongchang.

古文：魏军定不至，由是征系尚方。
现代文：魏军驻守未到，因此他被征入京囚禁在尚方狱中。
English: The Wei army did not arrive, so he was conscripted to Beijing and imprisoned in Shangfang Prison.

古文：初在青州，常所用铜斗覆在药厨下，忽于斗下得二死雀。
现代文：起初在青州，平常所用的铜斗覆扣在药厨下面，忽然在斗下得到了两只死麻雀。
English: At first, in Qingzhou, the copper bucket usually used was covered under the medicine cabinet, and suddenly two dead sparrows were found under the bucket.

古文：思话叹曰： 斗覆而双雀殒，其不祥乎？ 
现代文：萧思话感叹说： 斗覆而双雀丧命，恐怕是不祥吧！ 
English: Xiao Si sighed and said, "It's ominous that the fight was overturned and the two birds were killed.

古文：既而被系。
现代文：然后就被囚禁起来。
English: He was soon arrested and jailed.

古文：及梁州刺史甄法护在任失和，氐帅杨难当因此寇汉中，乃自徒中起思话爲梁、南秦二州刺史，平汉中，悉收侵地，置戍葭萌水。
现代文：后来梁州刺史甄法护在任时丧失了亲和，氐人统帅杨难当因此侵犯汉中，于是便从刑徒中起用萧思话为梁、南秦二州刺史，平定了汉中，全部收复了被侵占的土地，在葭萌水设置了守军。
English: Later, when Liangzhou's governor, Zhenfa Guo, lost his affinity while in office, Yang Nantang, the commander of the Xiongnu, invaded Hanzhong as a result. Therefore, he used Xiao Si's words from among the prisoners to attack Liang and the two southern Qin states, leveled Hanzhong, recovered all the occupied land, and set up a defensive army in Qimengshui.

古文：思话迁镇南郑。
现代文：萧思话迁移军镇到南郑。
English: Xiao Si talks about moving the military town to Nan Zheng.

古文：法护，中山无极人也。
现代文：法护，是中山无极人。
English: Legal protection, is Zhongshan Wuji.

古文：过江，寓居南郡。
现代文：过江以后，寓居在南郡。
English: After crossing the river, he lived in Nan County.

古文：弟法崇自少府爲益州刺史。
现代文：他的弟弟法崇从少府升为益州刺史。
English: His younger brother, Fazong, was promoted from shofu (junior prefect) to yizhou shishi (senior prefect).

古文：法护委镇之罪，爲府所收，于狱赐死。
现代文：法护丢弃军镇犯下罪过，被府衙拘捕，在狱中赐他自杀。
English: He committed the crime of abandoning the military town, was arrested by the government, and committed suicide in prison.

古文：文帝以法崇受任一方，命言法护病卒。
现代文：文帝因为法崇是一方的长官，命令声言法护是病死。
English: Emperor Wen, because Fuchong was the superior of one side, ordered to say that Fuchong died of illness.

古文：文帝使思话上定汉中本末，下之史官。
现代文：文帝让萧思话上表说明汉中变故的始末，下达给史官。
English: Emperor Wen allowed Xiao Si to make a speech on the table to explain the beginning and end of the Han Dynasty, and issued it to the historian.

古文：十四年，迁临川王义庆平西长史、南蛮校尉。
现代文：元嘉十四年，调他担任临川王刘义庆的平西长史、南蛮校尉。
English: In the 14th year of the Yuan Jia, he was transferred to serve as the lieutenant of Pingxi Changshi and Nanban of Linchuan King Liu Yiqing.

古文：文帝赐以弓琴，手敕曰： 前得此琴，言是旧物，今以相借，并往桑弓一张，材理乃快。
现代文：文帝赐给他弓箭和琴，发给他的手令中说： 以前得到这张琴，已经是旧物，现在相借，并送桑弓一张，这是物品的幸运。
English: Emperor Wen gave him a bow and arrows and a qin, and said in the warrant issued to him: I got this qin before, it is already an old thing, now I borrow it, and send a mulberry bow, this is the luck of the item.

古文：良材美器，宜在尽用之地，丈人真无所与让也。 
现代文：良材美器，应该放在能够尽显功用的地方，这位老者实在是无可推让的人物。 
English: A fine piece of furniture should be placed in a place where it can perform its function to the full. This old man is truly a person who cannot be pushed around.

古文：尝从文帝登锺山北岭，中道有磐石清泉，上使于石上弹琴，因赐以银锺酒，谓曰： 相赏有松石间意。 
现代文：他曾随文帝登上钟山北岭，中途有巨石清泉，皇上让他在石上弹琴，于是赐给他银酒盅，对他说： 非常欣赏你有松石间的意趣。 
English: He once accompanied Emperor Wen to the north ridge of Zhongshan Mountain. There was a huge stone spring halfway up. The emperor asked him to play the piano on the stone, so he gave him a silver goblet and said to him, "I really appreciate your interest in the pines and stones."

古文：历甯蛮校尉，雍州刺史，监四州军事，征爲吏部尚书。
现代文：他历任宁蛮校尉、雍州刺史、监四州军事，征为吏部尚书。
English: He successively held the positions of Ningban lieutenant, Yongzhou military inspector, and four-state military inspector, and was recruited as a member of the cadre.

古文：思话以去州无复事力，倩府军身九人。
现代文：萧思话因为离开了州府，不再多用气力，工作交予府军九人。
English: Xiao Si said that because he had left the prefectural government, he would no longer use much energy, and the work was handed over to nine prefectural soldiers.

古文：文帝戏之曰： 丈人终不爲田父于闾里，何忧无人使邪？ 
现代文：文帝开玩笑说： 老者终于不在乡间做农夫，哪用忧虑没人可以支使呢？ 
English: Wen Di joked: Finally, the old man is no longer a farmer in the countryside. Why worry when no one can help him?

古文：未拜，迁护军将军。
现代文：还没有上任，又改任为护军将军。
English: Before he took office, he was reappointed as the general of the escorting army.

古文：是时，魏攻悬瓠，文帝将大举北侵，朝士佥同，思话固谏不从。
现代文：当时，魏军攻打悬瓠，文帝将要大举北侵，朝中士大夫全都表示同意，萧思话却坚持劝谏，不被采用。
English: At that time, the Wei army was attacking the Suspension Bridge, and Emperor Wen was going to invade the north in a big way. The sergeants and doctors in the North all agreed, but Xiao Si insisted on persuading them not to use it.

古文：魏军退，即代孝武爲徐、兖二州刺史，监四州军事。
现代文：魏军退走，他便代替孝武帝为徐、兖二州刺史，监四州军事。
English: When the Wei army retreated, he took the place of Emperor Xiaowu to record the history of the two states of Xu and Han, and to supervise the military affairs of the four states.

古文：后爲围碻磝城不拔，退师历下，爲江夏王义恭所奏免官。
现代文：后来因为围困郂城不能攻下，退军到历下，为江夏王刘义恭所举奏而免官。
English: Later, because the siege of Lucheng could not be conquered, the army retreated to Lijiang, and was dismissed for the performance of Jiangxia King Liu Yigong.

古文：元凶弑立，以爲徐、兖二州刺史，即起义以应孝武。
现代文：元凶刘劭杀父自立为皇帝，让他担任徐、兖二州刺史，他于是举行起义以响应孝武帝。
English: The main culprit, Liu Bei, killed his father and made himself emperor, making him the ruler of the two states of Xu and Han. He then staged an uprising in response to Emperor Xiaowu.

古文：孝武即位，征爲尚书左仆射，固辞，改爲中书令、丹阳尹、散骑常侍。
现代文：孝武帝即位，征他为尚书左仆射，他坚决推辞，改为中书令、丹阳尹、散骑常待。
English: When Emperor Xiaowu ascended to the throne, he was asked to be Shang Shuxi's right-hand man, but he firmly refused and changed his name to Zhong Shuling, Danyang Yin, and Sanzhijie.

古文：时都下多劫掠，二旬中十七发，引咎陈逊，不许。
现代文：当时京城中有很多抢劫事件，二十天当中发生了十七次，他引咎要求辞职，皇上不许。
English: At that time, there were many robberies in the capital, seventeen of which occurred in twenty days. He blamed himself and asked to resign, but the emperor would not allow it.

古文：后拜郢州刺史，加都督。
现代文：后来拜为郢州刺史，加任都督。
English: Later, he was appointed as the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：卒，赠征西将军、开府仪同三司，諡曰穆侯。
现代文：逝世后，赠他为征西将军、开府仪同三司，谥号为穆侯。
English: After his death, he gave him the titles of General of the Western Conquest, Kaifu Yi and Sanji, and his posthumous name was Mu Hou.

古文：思话外戚令望，早见任待，历十二州，杖节监督者九焉。
现代文：萧思话身为外戚，声望很好，很早就被重用，历任十二州长官，持节担任监督职务多达九次。
English: As a maternal relative, Xiao Sizhe has a good reputation and has been reused for a long time. He has served as governor for 12 consecutive terms and has held supervisory positions for as many as nine times.

古文：所至虽无皎皎清节，亦无秽黩之累。
现代文：所到之处虽然没有皎然清美的名节，但也没有秽乱黩职的污点。
English: Although the places I visited did not have the most beautiful festivals, they did not have the taint of profanity.

古文：爱才好士，人多归之。
现代文：爱人才，好贤士，很多人愿意归往。
English: Love talent, good sages, many people are willing to return.

