古文：十有四年春，王正月，公至自晋。
现代文：十四年春季，周历正月，鲁文公从晋国回来。
English: In the spring of the 14th year, the first month of the lunar calendar, Lu Wen Gong returned from Jin.

古文：邾人伐我南鄙。
现代文：邾国攻打我国南面边境。
English: China has attacked our southern border.

古文：叔彭生帅师伐邾。
现代文：叔彭生率领军队讨伐邾国。
English: Uncle Peng Sheng led an army to invade the country.

古文：夏五月乙亥，齐侯潘卒。
现代文：夏季五月乙亥日，齐侯潘去世。
English: In the summer of May, on the day of the Chinese lunar new year, Qi Houpan passed away.

古文：六月，公会宋公、陈侯、卫侯、郑伯、许男、曹伯、晋赵盾，癸酉，同盟于新城。
现代文：六月，鲁文公与宋公、陈侯、卫侯、郑伯、许男、曹伯、晋国的赵盾，在新城结盟。
English: In June, Lu Wen Gong allied with Song Gong, Chen Hou, Wei Hou, Zheng Bo, Xu Man, Cao Bo, and Zhao Dun of Jin Province in Xincheng.

古文：秋七月，有星孛入于北斗。
现代文：秋季七月，有彗星进入北斗。
English: In the autumn of July, a comet entered the Big Dipper.

古文：公至自会。
现代文：文公从新城回国。
English: Wen Gong returns from Xincheng.

古文：晋人纳捷菑于邾，弗克纳。九月甲申，公孙敖卒于齐。
现代文：晋国的赵盾率领诸侯联军，把捷菑送回邾国。九月甲申日，公孙敖在齐国去世。
English: Zhao Dun of Jin led the allied forces of the princes and sent Jie Zhen back to Qi. On September 6th, Gongsun Zhen died in Qi.

古文：齐公子商人弑其君舍。宋子哀来奔。
现代文：齐国公子商杀死舍。宋子哀逃到鲁国。
English: A nobleman and merchant from the State of Qi killed Shao, and Song Zi fled to the State of Lu.

古文：冬，单伯如齐。
现代文：冬季，单伯到齐国。
English: In winter, he went to Qi Province alone.

古文：齐人执单伯。
现代文：齐国人逮捕了单伯。
English: The people of Qi arrested Shanbo.

古文：齐人执子叔姬。
现代文：又逮捕了子叔姬。
English: Zi Shuhei was also arrested.

古文：十四年春，顷王崩。
现代文：十四年春季，周顷王逝世。
English: In the spring of 1914, King Zhou Hao passed away.

古文：周公阅与王孙苏争政，故不赴。
现代文：周公阅和王孙苏争夺政权，所以没有发布讣告。
English: Zhou Gonglian and Wang Sun Su competed for power, so there was no obituary.

古文：凡崩、薨，不赴则不书。
现代文：灾祸、喜庆，如果没有前来报告，也不加记载。
English: If there is no report, there will be no record.

古文：祸、福，不告亦不书。
现代文：那是为了惩诫那些不认真负责的人。
English: It was to discipline those who did not take their responsibilities seriously.

古文：惩不敬也。邾文公之卒也，公使吊焉，不敬。
现代文：邾文公死的时候，鲁文公派遣使者前去吊丧，礼仪不周到。
English: When Emperor Wen died, Emperor Lu sent an envoy to pay his respects, but he did not follow proper etiquette.

古文：邾人来讨，伐我南鄙，故惠伯伐邾。
现代文：邾国兴师问罪，攻打我国南部边境，所以惠伯领兵攻打邾国。
English: The Xing division of Shan State was accused of attacking the southern border of our country, so Huibo led the troops to attack Shan State.

古文：子叔姬妃齐昭公，生舍。
现代文：子叔姬嫁给齐昭公为夫人，生了儿子舍。
English: Zi Shujie married Qi Zhaogong and gave birth to a son, She.

古文：叔姬无宠，舍无威。
现代文：叔姬不受宠爱，舍没有威信。
English: Auntie is unloved and lacks prestige.

古文：公子商人骤施于国，而多聚士，尽其家，贷于公、有司以继之。
现代文：公子商人却多次在国内施舍财物，养着许多门客，把家产都用光了，又向掌管公室财物的官员借贷而继续施舍。
English: On the other hand, wealthy businessmen have repeatedly given away their wealth in China, nurturing many clients, using up their family assets, and continuing to give away money by borrowing from officials in charge of public housing and property.

古文：夏五月，昭公卒，舍即位。
现代文：夏季，五月，齐昭公去世，舍即国君位。
English: In the summer, in May, Qi Zhaogong passed away, leaving the throne vacant.

古文：邾文公元妃齐姜生定公，二妃晋姬生捷菑。
现代文：邾文公的第一夫人齐姜，生了定公；第二夫人晋姬，生了捷菑。
English: The first wife, Qi Jiang, gave birth to Ding Gong; the second wife, Jin Ji, gave birth to Jie Yao.

古文：文公卒，邾人立定公，捷菑奔晋。
现代文：邾文公去世后，邾国人立定公为君，捷菑逃亡到晋国。
English: After the death of King Gongwen, the people of Gong established King Ding as their ruler, and King Jie fled to Jin.

古文：六月，同盟于新城，从于楚者服，且谋邾也。
现代文：六月，鲁文公和宋昭公、陈灵公、卫成公、郑穆公、许男、曹文公、晋国赵盾一起在新城会盟，这是由于以前跟随楚国的国家都顺服，同时谋划攻打邾国。
English: In June, Lu Wen Gong, Song Zhao Gong, Chen Ling Gong, Wei Cheng Gong, Zheng Mu Gong, Xu Man, Cao Wen Gong, and Zhao Dun of Jin joined the league in Xincheng. This was due to the fact that the countries that had previously followed Chu were obedient, and at the same time they planned to attack Yan.

古文：秋七月乙卯夜，齐商人弑舍而让元。
现代文：秋季，七月某一天，夜里，齐公子商人杀死舍而让位给元。
English: In the autumn, on a certain day in July, in the evening, the merchant Qi Gongzi killed Xie and gave way to Yuan.

古文：元曰： 尔求之久矣。
现代文：元说： 你谋求这个君位已经很久了。
English: Yuan said, "You have been seeking this position for a long time.

古文：我能事尔，尔不可使多蓄憾。将免我乎？
现代文：我能够事奉你，你不能积下许多怨恨，要是这样，你会让我免于被杀吗？
English: I can serve you, you can't accumulate a lot of resentment, if so, will you spare me from being killed?

古文：尔为之。 
现代文：你去做国君吧！ 
English: You go and be king!

古文：有星孛入于北斗，周内史叔服曰： 不出七年，宋、齐、晋之君皆将死乱。 
现代文：有彗星进入北斗。成周的内史叔服说： 不出七年，宋国、齐国、晋国的国君，都将死于叛乱。 
English: A comet enters the Big Dipper. Cheng Zhou's Inner Historian Uncle Fu said: In less than seven years, the sovereigns of Song, Qi and Jin will all die in a rebellion.

古文：晋赵盾以诸侯之师八百乘纳捷菑于邾。
现代文：晋国的赵盾率领诸侯联军的八百辆战车，把捷菑送回邾国。
English: Zhao Dun of Jin led the 800 chariots of the allied forces of the princes and sent Jie Chen back to Shao.

古文：邾人辞曰： 齐出貜且长。 
现代文：邾国人辞谢说： 齐女生的貜且年长。 
English: The people of Yunnan said, "Qi girls are tall and old.

古文：宣子曰： 辞顺而弗从，不祥。 
现代文：赵宣子说： 说话合于情理而不听从，不吉祥。 
English: Zhao Xuanzi said: The reason is legitimate, if you do not obey, the consequences are not good.

古文：乃还。
现代文：于是就回去了。
English: So I came back.

古文：周公将与王孙苏讼于晋，王叛王孙苏，而使尹氏与聃启讼周公于晋。
现代文：周公阅打算和王孙苏在晋国争讼，周顷王违背了对王孙苏的诺言，而让尹氏和聃启在晋国替周公阅争讼。
English: Zhou Kuan Liang planned to litigate with Wang Sun Su in Jin Province, but Zhou He Wang broke his promise to Wang Sun Su and let Yin Shi and Zou Qi litigate for Zhou Kuan Liang in Jin Province.

古文：赵宣子平王室而复之。
现代文：赵宣子调停了王室之间的纠纷而使各人恢复了原来的职位。
English: Zhao Xuanzi mediated the dispute between the royal family and restored each person to their original position.

古文：楚庄王立，子孔、潘崇将袭群舒，使公子燮与子仪守，而伐舒蓼。
现代文：楚庄王即位，子孔、潘崇准备袭击舒族的那些部落或国家，派公子燮和子仪留守而进攻舒蓼。
English: When the king of Chu Zhuang ascended the throne, Zikong and Pan Chong prepared to attack those tribes or countries of the Shu people, and sent the nobles Zang and Ziyi to stay behind and attack Shu.

古文：二子作乱，城郢而使贼杀子孔，不克而还。
现代文：这两个人发动叛乱，加筑郢都城墙，又派贼人去刺死子孔，没有成功而返回郢城。
English: These two men launched a rebellion, built up the city wall of Hando, and sent thieves to stab holes in it, but they did not succeed and returned to Hando.

古文：八月，二子以楚子出，将如商密。庐戢棃及叔麇诱之，遂杀鬥克及公子燮。
现代文：八月，两个人挟持了楚庄王离开郢都，准备去商密，庐戢梨和叔麇设计引诱他们；于是就杀死了子仪和公子燮。
English: In August, the two men kidnapped the king of Chu Zhuang and took him away from Chengdu, intending to go into business together. Zou Li and Zhu Xi designed a plan to lure them, so they killed Ziyi and Gongzi Yao.

古文：初，鬥克囚于秦，秦有殽之败，而使归求成。
现代文：当初，子仪囚禁在秦国，秦国在殽地战败，派他回国求和。
English: At first, Ziyi was imprisoned in Qin. Qin was defeated in the Battle of Panji and sent him back to China to sue for peace.

古文：成而不得志，公子燮求令尹而不得，故二子作乱。
现代文：媾和以后，子仪的愿望没有得到满足，公子燮要求做令尹也没有得到手，所以两人就发动叛乱。
English: After the truce, Ziyi's wish was not satisfied, and Yin did not get the hand he asked for, so the two launched a rebellion.

古文：穆伯之从己氏也，鲁人立文伯。
现代文：穆伯跟随己氏的时候，鲁国人立了文伯做继承人。
English: When Mu Bo followed his master, the Lu people appointed Wen Bo as his successor.

古文：穆伯生二子于莒而求复，文伯以为请。
现代文：穆伯在莒国生了两个儿子，要求回国。文伯代替他申请。
English: Mu Bo gave birth to two sons in Shan State and asked to return to China. Wen Bo applied on his behalf.

古文：襄仲使无朝。
现代文：襄仲不让穆伯上朝参与政事。
English: Xiangzhong did not allow Mu Bo to participate in politics.

古文：听命，复而不出，三年而尽室以复適莒。
现代文：穆伯听从命令，回来以后也不外出，过了三年又将全家再次搬到莒国去。
English: Mubo obeyed the order and did not go out after returning. Three years later, he moved the whole family to Shandong again.

古文：文伯疾而请曰： 穀之子弱，请立难也。 
现代文：文伯生重病，请求说： 穀的儿子年纪太小，请立难吧。 
English: When Wen Bo fell seriously ill, he pleaded, "The son of Gu is too young, please stand up for him."

古文：许之。
现代文：大家同意了。
English: The customs officer allowed him to pass through.

古文：文伯卒，立惠叔。
现代文：文伯去世，立了惠叔。
English: Wen Bo passed away, and Uncle Hui was appointed.

古文：穆伯请重赂以求复，惠叔以为请，许之。
现代文：穆伯让惠叔给大家送重礼再次要求回国，惠叔代他请求，得到允许。
English: Mu Bo asked Uncle Hui to give everyone a heavy gift and asked him to return to China again. Uncle Hui asked on his behalf and was allowed.

古文：将来，九月卒于齐，告丧请葬，弗许。
现代文：穆伯将要回来，九月间，死在齐国。向鲁国报丧，请求归葬于鲁，没有得到允许。
English: Mu Bo was about to return, and in September, he died in Qi. He reported his death to Lu and requested to be buried in Lu, but he was not allowed.

古文：宋高哀为萧封人，以为卿，不义宋公而出，遂来奔。书曰： 宋子哀来奔。 
现代文：宋国的高哀担任萧地的守将，让他做卿，他认为宋公不义而离去，于是就逃亡到鲁国来。《春秋》记载 宋子哀来奔 ，这是表示对他的尊重。
English: Gao Ai of Song served as a guard of Xiaodi and made him a lord. He thought that Song Gong had left unjustly, so he fled to Lu. "Spring and Autumn" records that Song Zi Ai came running, which was a sign of respect for him.

古文：贵之也。齐人定懿公，使来告难，故书以九月。
现代文：齐国人安定了齐懿公的地位，才派人前来报告祸难，所以《春秋》把商人杀死舍这件事记为 九月 。
English: It was only after the people of Qi had stabilized the status of the Duke of Qi that they sent someone to report the calamity, so "Spring and Autumn" recorded the killing of the merchant as September.

古文：齐公子元不顺懿公之为政也，终不曰 公 ，曰 夫己氏 。
现代文：齐国的公子元不服懿公执政，始终不称他做 公 ，而称他做 那个人 。
English: Qigong's Prince Yuan disobeyed the Emperor's ruling, and never called him the Emperor, but called him that person.

古文：襄仲使告于王，请以王宠求昭姬于齐。曰： 杀其子，焉用其母？
现代文：襄仲派人报告周顷王，请用周天子的尊荣在齐国求取子叔姬，说： 杀了她的儿子，哪里还用得着他的母亲？
English: Xiangzhong sent a man to report to King Zhou He, asking him to use the honor of Zhou Tianzi to seek the son of Shu Qi in the State of Qi, saying, "If you killed her son, why do you still need his mother?

古文：请受而罪之。 
现代文：请求接纳她而惩办她。 
English: Punish her for asking to be admitted.

古文：冬，单伯如齐，请子叔姬。齐人执之。又执子叔姬。
现代文：冬季，单伯到齐国请求送回子叔姬，齐国人逮捕了他，同时又逮捕了子叔姬。
English: In the winter, Shanbo went to Qi to request the return of Zixu Ji. The people of Qi arrested him and Zixu Ji at the same time.

