古文：儒行刘献之卢景裕萧德言张楚金
现代文：儒行刘献之卢景裕萧德言张楚金
English: Lu Jingyu, Xiao Deyan, Zhang Chukin

古文：怜才沈约唐高宗天后源乾曜张建封李实韩愈杨敬之卢肇令狐绹
现代文：怜才沈约唐高宗天后源乾曜张建封李实韩愈杨敬之卢肇令狐绹
English: Tang Gaozong's Queen Dowager Yuan Qianyang Zhang Jianfeng's Li Si Han Yu Yang Jingzhi's Lu Zhaoling's Foxtrot

古文：崔铉
现代文：崔铉
English: Choi Min-soo

古文：高逸孔稚珪李元诚陶弘景田游岩朱桃椎卢鸿元结贺知章顾况陈琡孔拯
现代文：高逸孔稚珪李元诚陶弘景田游岩朱桃椎卢鸿元结贺知章顾况陈琡孔拯
English: Gao Yizhong, Confucius, Li Yuancheng, Tao Hong, Jing Tian, Yu Yan, Zhu Taoshi, Lu Hongyuan, Jie He, Zhizhang, Gu Jian, Chen Yu, Confucius

古文：儒行
现代文：儒行
English: Confucianism

古文：刘献之
现代文：刘献之
English: Liu Xianzhi

古文：后魏刘献之少好学，尤精诗传，泛观子史。
现代文：后魏时的刘献之少年时就好学，尤其精通《诗经》、《左传》，博览群书。
English: When Liu Xian was a boy in the late Wei Dynasty, he was eager to learn, especially proficient in "The Book of Songs" and "Zhuan," and was well-versed in books.

古文：见名法之言，掩卷而笑曰：若使杨墨之流，不为此书，千载谁知少也。
现代文：他见到名家、法家的著作，就合上书讥讽地笑着说：假如使杨朱、墨翟之流不作这种书，千年之后有谁认为缺少它呢。
English: When he saw the works of famous scholars and jurists, he closed the book with a sarcastic smile and said, "If Yang Zhu and Muxun didn't write this kind of book, who would think it was missing after a thousand years?"

古文：又谓所亲曰：观屈原《离骚》之作，自是狂人，死何足惜。
现代文：刘献之又对自己亲近的朋友说：我读了屈原的《离骚》之后，认为他本来就是个精神不正常的人，死了一点也不可惜。
English: Liu Xianzhi also said to his close friend: "After I read Qu Yuan's "Leaving Lover," I thought that he was originally a mentally abnormal person, and I do not regret his death at all.

古文：时人有从之学者，献之曰：立身虽百行殊途，准之四科，要以德行为首。
现代文：当时有人跟他学习，拜他为师，刘献之说：虽然立身之业有百行各不相同，但是最根本的有德行、言语、政事、文学四科。这四科中要以德行为首要的。
English: At that time, there were people who studied with him and worshipped him as a teacher. Liu Xianzhi said: Although there are hundreds of different careers, the most fundamental are the four disciplines of virtue, speech, politics and literature. Of these four disciplines, virtue should be the first.

古文：子若能入孝出悌。忠信仁让，不待出户，天下自知。
现代文：你如果能做到在家孝敬父母，在外关怀爱护你的兄弟姐妹、亲朋好友，能够对国家忠诚、为人办事守信誉、谦逊和蔼、礼让待人，不用你走出家门，你的名声就可以远播天下。
English: If you can show filial piety to your parents at home, care for and cherish your brothers and sisters, relatives and friends abroad, be loyal to the country, be trustworthy, humble, kind and courteous to others, you can spread your reputation far and wide without leaving home.

古文：倘不能然，虽复下帷针股，蹑履从师，止可博闻强识。
现代文：假如你不能向上面说的那样去做人，虽然你或闭门苦读、或恭恭敬敬地拜师学业，只能做到博览群书、增加你的知识。
English: If you can't do the above, even if you study hard behind closed doors or respectfully learn from your teacher, you can only read books and increase your knowledge.

古文：不过为土龙乞雨，眩惑将来。
现代文：不过是象堆个土龙乞求上天降雨一样，只是你幻想将来能功成名就。
English: It's just like a pile of dirt dragons begging the heavens for rain, only you fantasize about being successful in the future.

古文：其于立身之道何益乎？
现代文：其实这样做对你寻求成就事业之道有什么益处呢？
English: But how does that help you in your quest for career success?

古文：孔门之徒，初亦未悟。
现代文：孔子和他的门生们，起初也未悟到这个道理。
English: Confucius and his disciples did not understand this at first.

古文：见吾丘之叹，方乃归而养亲。
现代文：后来看到吾立子上荐父母下爱兄弟的行为，这才回到家里效仿吾立子去孝敬父母、抚养兄弟的啊。天那！
English: Later, when they saw how I stood up and recommended my parents and loved my brothers, they came back home and followed my example to honor their parents and raise their brothers. My God!

古文：呜呼！先达之人，何自学之晚也！
现代文：象孔老夫子和他的门生这样贤达的圣人，怎么在立身的道理上也觉悟得这么晚呢？
English: How is it that sages as wise as Confucius and his disciples were so late to realize the importance of self-improvement?

古文：由是四方学者慕之。
现代文：由此，四面八方的学者都慕名来拜刘献之为师。
English: As a result, scholars from all over the world have come to worship Liu as a teacher.

古文：叹曰：吾不如庄周樗散远矣。
现代文：刘献之对前来拜他为师的人感叹地说：在淡泊功名这方面我比庄周老夫子还差得远啦。
English: Liu Xianzhi lamented to the people who came to worship him as a teacher: I am still far behind Zhuang Zhou Lao Fuzi in terms of tianbo fame.

古文：固以疾辞。
现代文：坚持辞却来拜他为师的人。
English: A person who insists on quitting but comes to worship him as a teacher.

古文：卢景裕
现代文：卢景裕
English: Lu Jingyu

古文：范阳卢景裕，太常静之子，司空同之猶子。
现代文：范阳卢景裕，太常卢静的儿子，司空卢同的侄子。
English: Fan Yang Lu Jingyu, the son of Tai Chang Lu Jing, the nephew of Sikuo Lu Tong.

古文：少好闲默，驰骋经史。守道恭素，不以荣利居心，时号居士焉。
现代文：少年时就喜爱安静沉默，喜爱读经史一类的书，安贪乐道，从来不将名利二字挂在心上，时人送给一个居士的雅号。
English: When he was a young boy, he loved quiet and silence, liked to read books such as the Bible and history, enjoyed peace and happiness, and never attached the words fame and fortune to his heart. At that time, people gave a householder a posthumous name.

古文：初头生一丛白毛，数之四十九茎，故偏好老易。
现代文：卢景裕刚生下来时头上就生有一丛白发，共四十九根，由此小名叫白头。
English: When Lu Jingyu was just born, he was born with a cluster of white hair on his head, a total of forty-nine roots, hence the nickname Baotou.

古文：为注解。至四十九岁卒，故小字白头。
现代文：他特别偏爱《周易》、《庄子》，为这两部书作过注释，四十九岁那年去世。
English: He was particularly fond of "Zhou Yi" and "Zhuang Zi" and wrote annotations for these two books. He died at the age of 49.

古文：性端谨，虽在暗室，必矜庄自持。
现代文：卢景裕性格端方严谨，虽然置身于幽暗的屋子中，也是正襟危坐、端庄持重。
English: Lu Jingyu's character is very strict, although he is in a dark room, he is also sitting upright, dignified and dignified.

古文：盛暑之月，初不露袒。
现代文：炎热的夏日，从来不袒露肌肤。
English: On a hot summer day, I never expose my skin.

古文：妻子相对，有若严宾。
现代文：就是与自己的妻子相对而坐，也如跟贵客一样的恭谨严肃。
English: Even when he sits opposite his wife, he is as respectful and serious as a distinguished guest.

古文：历位中书侍郎。
现代文：卢景裕官至中书侍郎。
English: Lu Jingyu was promoted to the position of Chushushijiro.

古文：肖德言
现代文：肖德言
English: Xiao Deyan

古文：唐肖德言笃志于学，每开五经，必盥濯束带，危坐对之。
现代文：唐时有个人叫肖德言立志于学。每当他研读五经时，必须先洗漱更衣，然后正襟危坐地去读。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, there was a man named Xiao Deyan who was determined to study. Whenever he studied the Five Classics, he had to wash and change his clothes first, and then sit upright to read.

古文：妻子谓曰：终日如是，无乃劳乎？
现代文：他的妻子问他： 你每日都这样正襟危坐地看书，不累吗？ 
English: His wife asked him, "Aren't you tired of reading so hard every day?

古文：德言曰：敬先师之言，岂惮于此乎！
现代文：德言回答说： 对先师的著述要恭敬，怎么能畏惧劳累呢？ 
English: Degen replied, "We should respect the writings of our predecessors. How can we be afraid of fatigue?

古文：张楚金
现代文：张楚金
English: Zhang Chukin

古文：张楚金与越石同预乡贡进士，州司将罢越石而贡楚金。
现代文：张楚金和越石同期参加乡贡进士的选拔，州司想去掉越石而选拔楚金为乡贡进士。
English: At the same time, Zhang Chukin and Yueishi participated in the selection of the township tribute recipient. The State Department wanted to get rid of Yueishi and selected Chukin as the township tribute recipient.

古文：楚金辞曰：以顺即越石长，以才即楚金不如。固请俱退。
现代文：楚金得知后跟州司说：按顺序选拔，越石比我年长，按才能选拔我不如越石，我坚决请求不要选拔我为乡贡进士。
English: After Chu Jin learned of this, he said to the prefectural governor, "The selection will be made in order. Yue Shi is older than me. I am not as good as Yue Shi in terms of ability. I strongly request that you not select me as a township tribute recipient."

古文：李勣为都督，叹曰：贡士本求才行，相推如此，何嫌双举。
现代文：是时，李勣在这做都督。他听到这件事后赞叹地说： 这些贡生们原本追求的就是被选拔为进士，张楚金和越石这样相推让，把他们双双都荐举为进士有什么不可以的呢？ 
English: At that time, Li Qian was the governor here. After hearing this, he said with admiration: What these tributary students were originally seeking was to be selected as conscripts. Zhang Chukin and Yue Shi pushed and shoved each other in this way. What is wrong with recommending them both as conscripts?

古文：乃荐擢第。
现代文：于是荐举张楚金、越石二人都为乡贡进士。
English: As a result, Zhang Chukin and Yue Shi were both recommended as township tribute recipients.

古文：怜才
现代文：怜才
English: Pity me

古文：沈约
现代文：沈约
English: Shen You

古文：梁瑯玡王筠幼而清隶，文采逸艳，为沈约所赏。
现代文：梁瑯玡王筠幼年时面貌清秀，文彩隽逸艳丽，沈约很赏识他。
English: When he was a child, Liang Xuan Wang Yao had a handsome face, and his paintings were elegant and beautiful. Shen Yu appreciated him very much.

古文：及沈为尚书令，筠为郎。
现代文：待到沈约任尚书令时，王筠在他手下任尚书郎。
English: When Shen You was appointed as Shang Shuling, Wang Xi served under him as Shang Shuling.

古文：谓筠曰：仆昔与王谢诸贤，为文会之赏。
现代文：沈约对王筠说：我从前同王融、谢朓等贤人一块儿谈诗论文，很是惬意。
English: Shen Yu said to Wang Yao: I used to talk about poetry with Wang Rong, Xie Yao and other sages, and it was very pleasant.

古文：自零落以来，朽疾相继。平生玩好，殆欲都绝。
现代文：自经历离乱以来，疾病与衰老相继缠身，平生喜爱做的事情，十有八九都不想做了。
English: Since experiencing dislocation, illness and aging have successively plagued me. In nine out of ten cases, I don't want to do the things I like to do in my lifetime.

古文：而一文一咏，此事不衰。
现代文：然而一个吟诗，一个异文，却历尽劫难而不能罢手。
English: However, a chant, a different text, has gone through all the hardships and can't stop.

古文：不意疲暮，复遇盛德。
现代文：想不到到了衰朽的晚年又逢盛世啊。
English: I couldn't have imagined that in my old age, I would be in my prime again.

古文：都伯喈见王仲宣叹曰： 此王公之孙，吾家书籍万卷，必当相与。
现代文：从前，蔡伯喈一见王仲宣就赞叹地说： 这不是王公的孙子吗，我家有藏书上万卷，一定都送给你。
English: Once upon a time, upon seeing Wang Zhongxuan, Cai Boqin said with admiration, "Isn't this the grandson of Wang Gong? My family has a collection of tens of thousands of volumes, and I'm sure they'll all be given to you."

古文：仆虽不敏，请慕斯言。
现代文：虽然不勤勉，却愿意效仿先贤。
English: Though not diligent, they are willing to emulate the sages.

古文：每商确书史，流阅篇章，毕夜阑景，以为得志之赏。
现代文：此后，每当商讨书史时，王筠都一部接一部地翻阅着，不分白日和夜晚，以此来报赏沈约的知遇之恩。
English: Since then, whenever discussing the history of books, Wang Yao would flip through them one by one, regardless of the time of day or night, as a way of rewarding Shen Yao's kindness.

古文：筠历位司徒左长史度支尚书。
现代文：王筠为官，一直任到司徒左长史度支尚书。
English: Wang Qian was the official, and he was appointed to the post of Chief Historian of the Stuzhizhang.

古文：唐高宗
现代文：唐高宗
English: Tang Gaozong

古文：胡楚宾属文敏速，每饮酒半酣而后操笔。
现代文：胡楚宾写文章很快，每次都是酒饮到要醉时再提笔写。
English: Hu Chubin writes articles quickly. He drinks until he is drunk and then writes.

古文：高宗每令作文，必以金银杯盛酒。令饮，便以杯赐之。
现代文：唐高宗每次诏令他来写文章，必定用金杯或银杯盛酒让他喝，并将饮过酒的杯子赏赐给胡楚宾。
English: Every time Tang Gaozong ordered him to write an article, he would make him drink from a gold or silver cup, and give the cup to Hu Chubin.

古文：天后
现代文：天后
English: Tin Hau

古文：则天幸龙门，令从官赋诗。
现代文：武则天游龙门，命令随从的官员即景作诗。
English: Wu Zetian toured Longmen and ordered the officials accompanying him to compose poems.

古文：左史东方虬诗先成，则天以锦袍赐之。
现代文：左史东方虬先得一诗，武则天赏赐他一领锦袍。
English: Zuo Shi Dongfang Yao won a poem first, and Wu Zetian rewarded him with a necklace of brocade robes.

古文：及宋之问诗成，则天称词更高，夺袍以赐之。
现代文：待到宋之问的诗写出来，武则天称赞宋诗比东方诗高一筹，从东方手中夺回锦袍赏赐给宋之问。
English: After Song Zhiwen's poem was written, Wu Zetian praised Song poetry as superior to Oriental poetry, and won back the brocade robe from the East and gave it to Song Zhiwen.

古文：源乾曜
现代文：源乾曜
English: Genkenshō

古文：源乾曜因奏事称旨，上悦之。
现代文：源乾曜因为奏事符合玄宗皇帝的心意，玄宗喜爱他。
English: Yuan Qianyou loved Emperor Xuanzong because the report was in line with Emperor Xuanzong's wishes.

古文：于是骤拔用，历户部侍郎京兆尹以至宰相。
现代文：于是他迅速地被升迁，官历户部员外郎、京兆尹，以至当朝宰相。
English: As a result, he was quickly promoted, rising through the ranks to the position of cabinet secretary, member of the household department, and then prime minister.

古文：异日，上独与高力士语曰：汝知吾拔用乾曜之速乎？
现代文：有一天，玄宗独自跟高力士说：你知道我提升乾曜特别快吗？
English: One day, Xuanzong said to Gao Lixi alone, "Do you know that my promotion is particularly fast on Thursdays?

古文：曰：不知也。
现代文：高力士回答说：不知道啊。
English: "I don't know," replied Colossus.

古文：上曰：吾以容貌言语类萧至忠，故用之。
现代文：玄宗说：我认为他的相貌言谈很象肖至忠，因此拔用了他。
English: Xuanzong said: I think his appearance and speech are very similar to Xiao Zhizhong, so I used him.

古文：对曰：至忠不尝负陛下乎，陛下何念之深也。
现代文：高力士问道：肖至忠不是曾经有负于陛下吗？陛下为什么对他的怀念还这样深呢？
English: Goliath asked: Didn't Xiao Zhizhong once fail His Majesty? Why does His Majesty still miss him so deeply?

古文：上曰：至忠晚乃谬计耳，其初立朝，得不谓贤相乎？
现代文：玄宗说：肖至忠到了晚年时才有失误，刚任宰相时，不是人们都说我得一贤相吗？
English: Xuanzong said: Xiao Zhizhong only made mistakes when he was in his later years. When he first became prime minister, didn't people say that I would be a wise prime minister?

古文：上之爱才宥过，闻者莫不感悦。
现代文：玄宗惜爱有才华的人，同时能厚待犯过过失的人。这件事传出去后，听到的人无不感动高兴啊。
English: Xuanzong spares talented people, but at the same time is generous to those who have made mistakes. After this incident was reported, everyone who heard about it was moved and happy.

古文：张建封
现代文：张建封
English: Zhang Jianfeng

古文：崔膺性狂，张建封爱其文，以为客，随建封行营。
现代文：崔膺性情狂傲，张建封爱他的文采，接纳他为宾客，并随同自己去行营。
English: Cui Gan was arrogant, Zhang Jianfeng loved his writing, accepted him as a guest, and went camping with him.

古文：夜中大叫惊军，军士皆怒，欲食其肉，建封藏之。
现代文：睡到半夜，崔膺忽然大喊大叫惊动了军营。士兵们都大怒，非要斩杀他吃肉不可。张建封将他藏起来。
English: After sleeping until midnight, Cui Yao suddenly shouted loudly and alerted the camp. The soldiers were furious and had no choice but to kill him and eat his flesh. Zhang Jianfeng hid him.

古文：明日置宴，监军曰：某有与尚书约，彼此不得相违。建封曰：唯。
现代文：第二天聚宴，监军在宴席上说： 我有件事想与尚书你约定，一经约定你我都不能违背它。 张建封说： 可以。 
English: The next day at the banquet, the supervisor of the army said at the banquet: I have something I want to make an appointment with Shang Shu, and once I make an appointment with you, I can't break it. Zhang Jianfeng said: Yes.

古文：监军曰：某有请，请崔膺。
现代文：监军说： 我要请一个人，请的就是崔膺。 
English: The supervisor said, "I want to invite one person, and that person is Cui Yao."

古文：建封曰：如约。
现代文：张建封回答说： 可以按约定的办。 
English: Zhang Jianfeng replied: It can be done as agreed.

古文：逡巡。建封又曰：某亦有请，却请崔膺。
现代文：四处看了看，说： 我也要请一个人，请的也是崔膺。 
English: He looked around and said, "I also want to invite someone, and the person to invite is also Cui Zhuang.

古文：座中皆笑。
现代文：宴席上的人都哈哈大笑。
English: Everyone at the banquet burst into laughter.

古文：后乃得免。
现代文：此后崔膺才得免一死。
English: It was only after this that Cui Gan was spared from death.

古文：李实
现代文：李实
English: Li Si from

古文：李实为司农卿，促责官租。
现代文：李实官为司农卿，负责催收官租。
English: Li Shijian was the Secretary of Agriculture, responsible for collecting government rents.

古文：肖祐居丧，输不及期。
现代文：肖祐正居丧期，没有按期将官租运送来。
English: Xiao Yu was in the period of mourning, and did not bring the official rent as scheduled.

古文：实怒，召至。
现代文：李实大怒，召见肖祐。
English: Li Si flew into a rage and summoned Xiao Yu.

古文：租车亦至，故得不罪。
现代文：肖祐随同运送租车一块赶到，因此，李实没有处罚他。
English: Xiao Yu arrived with a taxi, so Li Si did not punish him.

古文：会有赐与，当为谢状。常秉笔者方有故，实急，乃曰：召衣齐衰者。
现代文：正赶上皇上对他有所奖赏，应当立即上表谢恩，而这时经常与李实执笔的人有事不在，秉笔常方有特殊情况不能书写，李实很着急，说： 召见服丧服的肖祐来见我。 
English: Just in time for the emperor to reward him, he should immediately express his gratitude, but at this time, the person who often wrote with Li Si was absent, and the person who usually wrote was unable to write under special circumstances. Li Si was very anxious and said: Summon Xiao Yu, who is in mourning, to see me.

古文：祐至，立为草状。
现代文：肖祐应召而来，立即为李实拟好草稿。
English: Xiao Yu was summoned and immediately prepared a draft for Li Si.

古文：实大喜，延英荐之。
现代文：李实大喜，将肖祐请来当成英才向朝廷举荐。
English: Li Si was overjoyed and invited Xiao Yu to come and recommend him to the imperial court as a great talent.

古文：德宗令问丧期，屈指以待，及释服之明日，自处士拜拾遗。
现代文：唐德宗诏令让李实问明居丧的日期，数着手指计算时间，到肖祐居丧期满脱去丧服的第二天，将他由一介布衣而官拜拾遗。
English: Emperor Dezong of Tang ordered Li Si to ask for the date of death, count his fingers to calculate the time, and on the second day after Xiao Yu's death, he would take off his mourning clothes.

古文：祐有文章，善画，好鼓琴，其拔擢乃偶然耳。
现代文：肖祐有文章遗留后世，善画，喜好鼓琴，他的被发现与提升纯属偶然啊。
English: Xiao Yu has left articles to posterity, is good at painting, and likes to play the tambourine. His discovery and promotion were purely accidental.

古文：韩愈
现代文：韩愈
English: Han Yu

古文：李贺字长吉，唐诸王孙也。
现代文：李贺字长吉，是唐室王孙。
English: Li He, also known as Changji, was the grandson of a Tang dynasty king.

古文：父瑨肃，边上从事。
现代文：他的父亲叫李瑨肃，在边上任从事。
English: His father's name is Li Shuxu, and he works as a side job.

古文：贺年七岁，以长短之歌名动京师。
现代文：李贺七岁时，就以能作长短句名声轰动京师。
English: When Li He was seven years old, he made a splash in Beijing with his reputation for being able to make long and short sentences.

古文：时韩愈与皇甫湜贤贺所业，奇之而未知其人。
现代文：当时在文坛上已负盛名的韩愈与湜赞赏李贺写的诗篇，十分惊奇但不知道这个人。
English: At that time, Han Yu and Zou, who were already famous in the literary world, appreciated the poem written by Li He. They were very surprised but did not know this person.

古文：因相谓曰：若是古人，吾曹不知者。若是今人，岂有不知之理。
现代文：互相说： 这个写一手好诗的人若是古人，我们不知道就罢了，若是同时代的人，我们怎能不知道呢。 
English: They said to one another, "If this man, who has written so well, is ancient, we do not know; but if he is contemporary, how can we not know?"

古文：会有以瑨肃行止言者，二公因连骑造门，请其子。
现代文：在文友们聚会时，有人将李贺的父亲李瑨肃的简单概况告诉了他们。于是，韩愈与皇甫湜相约结伴骑马前去登门拜访，请李瑨肃将李贺唤出来让他们看看。
English: At a gathering of literary friends, someone told them a brief overview of Li He's father, Li Xingsu. Therefore, Han Yu made an appointment with the Emperor Fuxun and rode on horseback to visit the door, asking Li Xingsu to call Li He out for them to see.

古文：既而总角荷衣而出。
现代文：不一会儿，从内室走出一位扎着两个爪髻披着衣裳的少年。
English: A short while later, a young boy with two talons in his clothes came out of the inner room.

古文：二公不之信，因面试一篇。
现代文：韩愈和皇甫湜不相信眼前这个孩子就是名动京师的诗人，请李贺当场作篇诗给他们看看。
English: Han Yu and Wang Fuxi did not believe that the child in front of them was a famous poet, so they asked Li He to write a poem on the spot.

古文：贺承命欣然，操觚染翰，旁若无人。
现代文：李贺欣然尊命，拿起写诗的木板，在墨池中醮好墨笔，旁若无人地挥笔疾书起来。
English: Li He gladly respected his life, picked up the wooden board on which he had written the poem, dipped his ink pen in the inkwell, and, as if no one was around, started writing.

古文：仍目曰《高轩过》。曰：华裙织翠青如葱，金环压辔摇玲珑。
现代文：诗题叫《高轩过》，内容是这样的：华裙织翠青如葱，金环压辔摇玲珑。
English: The title of the poem is "Gao Xuan Passed," and the content is as follows: The flowered skirt is as green as an onion, and the gold ring presses on the ruffles.

古文：马蹄隐隐声隆隆，入门下马气如虹，云是东京才子，文章巨公。
现代文：马蹄隐隐声隆隆，入门下马气如虹，云是东京才子，文章巨公。
English: The horse's hooves rumble faintly, the horse's breath is like a rainbow, the cloud is a Tokyo talent, and the article is a giant.

古文：二十八宿罗心胸，殿前作赋声磨空。
现代文：二十八宿罗心胸，展前作赋声磨空。
English: Twenty-eight quarters of the heart, the exhibition prelude to the sound of grinding.

古文：笔补造化天无功，元精耿耿贯当中。
现代文：笔补造化天无功，元精耿耿贯当中。
English: It is futile to try to make up for lost time, but the original spirit is still there.

古文：庞眉书客感愁蓬，谁知死草生华风。
现代文：庞眉书客感愁逢，谁知死草生华风。
English: Pang Mei's customers are sentimental, who knows if the grass is greener.

古文：我今垂翅负天鸿，他日不羞蛇作龙。
现代文：我今垂翅负天鸿，他日不羞蛇作龙。
English: I am now hanging my wings against Tianhong, and he is not ashamed to be a snake.

古文：二公大惊，遂以所乘马，命联镳而还所居，亲为束发。
现代文：韩愈与皇甫湜看罢大惊，于是他们将来时骑的马的嚼子连在一起，携李贺返回，亲手为他束发。
English: Han Yu and the Empress Dowager were shocked to see this, so they tied the reins of the horse they were riding in the future together and returned with Li He to tie his hair with their own hands.

古文：年未弱冠，丁内艰。
现代文：李贺尚未成年，就遭受艰难的生活。
English: Li He was not yet an adult when he suffered a difficult life.

古文：他日举进士，或谤贺不避家讳，文公时著辨讳一篇。
现代文：后来他想参加举拔乡贡进士的科考，又遭到世人诽谤他不避家讳。为此韩愈写了一篇辨讳的文章为他辩护。
English: Later, he wanted to take part in a scientific research to raise a tribute to his hometown, and was slandered by the world for not shunning his home. Therefore, Han Yu wrote an article to defend him.

古文：不幸未状室而终。
现代文：不幸的是，李贺二十六岁就去世了，未到壮年而夭折。
English: Unfortunately, Li He died at the age of twenty-six, before reaching his prime.

古文：又韩愈
现代文：又韩愈
English: Han Yu again

古文：韩愈引致后辈，为举科第，多有投书请益者。
现代文：韩愈引荐后辈，为他们荐举科第。因此有很多人投书韩愈，想以此晋身科第。
English: Han Yu introduced the younger generation and recommended a science class for them. Therefore, many people voted for Han Yu, hoping to advance to a science class.

古文：时人谓之韩门弟子。
现代文：当时人称这些人为韩门弟子。
English: At that time, these people were called Hanmen disciples.

古文：后官高，不复为也。
现代文：韩愈官位升高后，不再这样做了。
English: After Han Yu's promotion, he no longer did so.

古文：杨敬之
现代文：杨敬之
English: Yang Jingzhi

古文：杨敬之爱才公正。
现代文：杨敬之为人公正惜才。
English: Yang Jingwei is a just and generous person.

古文：尝知江表之士项斯，赠诗曰：处处见诗诗总好，及观标格过于诗。
现代文：他曾得知江表项斯很有才华，就送给他一首诗说：处处见诗诗总好，及观标格过于诗。
English: When he learned that Jiang Yobiao was very talented, he gave him a poem and said: "It is always good to see poetry everywhere, and the standard is too poetic."

古文：平生不解藏人善，到处相逢说项斯。
现代文：平生不解藏人善，到处相逢说项斯。
English: I have never been able to understand the kindness of Tibetans. Everywhere I go, I hear stories about them.

古文：因此遂登高科也。
现代文：因此，项斯就高科得中啦。
English: Therefore, Xiang Si got into high school.

古文：卢肇
现代文：卢肇
English: Lu Zhaozhou

古文：王镣富有才情，数举未捷。
现代文：王镣非常有才华，却数次参加科举考试都榜上无名。
English: Wang Yao is very talented, but he has participated in the imperial examinations several times, but he is not famous on the list.

古文：门生卢肇等，公荐于春官云，同盟不嗣，贤者受讥。相子负薪，优臣致诮。
现代文：他的学生卢肇等一齐在春试考官面前举荐王镣说：同盟者不相继承，贤达的人受讥讽，蔺相如这位贤相却要负薪去请罪，优秀的官员反而遭到打击，这些都正常吗？
English: His student Lu Zhaozhou and others all recommended Wang Yao in front of the spring examination examiners, saying: "Allies do not inherit each other, sages are ridiculed, such as this sage, but they have to pay to plead guilty, excellent officials have been hit, are these all normal?

古文：乃旌镣嘉句曰，击石易得火，扣人难动心。
现代文：同时，表扬王镣说： 击打石头容易迸出火花，打动人的心却非常难啊。
English: At the same time, praising Wang Yao, he said: "It is easy to strike sparks out of stones, but it is very difficult to touch people's hearts.

古文：今日朱门者，曾恨朱门深。
现代文：今天在朱门的为官者，当年也曾痛恨朱门深啊。 
English: The officials in Zhumen today also hated Zhumen deeply back then.

古文：声闻蔼然。果擢上第。
现代文：负责春试的考官听了后，态度变得亲切近人了。春试完了，王镣果然考中。
English: After listening to the examiner in charge of the spring examination, his attitude became friendly and approachable. After the spring examination, Wang Yao successfully passed the middle school examination.

古文：令狐绹
现代文：令狐绹
English: Ling Foxtrot

古文：宣皇坐朝，次对官趋至前，必待气息平匀，上然后问事。
现代文：唐宣宗坐朝，待对大臣们上殿跟皇帝讨论朝政，一定等待他们呼吸平息下来，皇上才询问事体。
English: Tang Xuan Zong sat in the morning, waiting for the ministers to go to the palace to discuss the imperial government with the emperor. He had to wait for their breathing to calm down before the emperor inquired about the matter.

古文：令狐绹进李远为杭州刺史，宣皇曰：我闻李远诗云， 长日唯销一局棋。
现代文：令狐绹向宣宗进荐李远作杭州刺史，宣宗问： 我听说李远有一句诗是这样的：长日唯销一局棋。
English: When Ling Xuxuan recommended Li Yuan to Xuan Zong to write a history of Hangzhou, Xuan Zong asked: I heard that Li Yuan had a poem that went like this: Long days can only sell one game of chess.

古文：岂可以临郡哉。
现代文：怎么可以让他任一郡之长呢？ 
English: How can he be allowed to become the head of any county?

古文：对曰：诗人之言，不足有实也。
现代文：令狐绹回答说： 诗人在诗中讲的事情，不可信实啊！ 
English: Ling Foxtrot replied, "The things that poets say in their poems cannot be trusted!

古文：仍荐远廉察可任，乃俞之。
现代文：仍然向宣宗进荐李远廉洁明察可以任用。
English: Li Yuanlian Jie, who still recommends Xuan Zong to Li Yuanlian, can be appointed.

古文：郑愚尚书，广州人。擢进士第，扬历清显。
现代文：于是宣宗皇帝就允许他的进荐，任用了李远。尚书郑愚，广州人氏，从进士步入仕途。
English: As a result, Emperor Xuanzong allowed his recommendation and appointed Li Yuan. Shangshu Zhengwu, a native of Guangzhou, entered his career as a scholar.

古文：声甚高而性好华，以锦为半臂。
现代文：该人喜爱宣扬自己的经历和高洁，名声很高又好浮华，在一边的胳臂上刺上锦纹。
English: The man likes to advertise his experience and refinement, his reputation is high and flashy, and he has a brocade tattoo on one of his arms.

古文：崔魏公铉镇荆南，郑授广南节制。路由渚宫，铉以常礼待之。
现代文：魏国公崔铉镇守荆南。郑愚被任命为广南节制，途经荆南，崔铉以通常的礼仪接待他。
English: Zheng Yu was appointed as the governor of Guangnan Province. He passed through Jingnan, and Cui Yu received him with the usual etiquette.

古文：郑为进士时，未尝以文章及魏公门，至是乃执所业。
现代文：郑愚为进士的时候，未曾将自己的文章给崔铉看过，这次才将它们给崔铉读。
English: When Zheng Yu was a trainee, he had never shown his articles to Cui Rong, but this time he read them to Cui Rong.

古文：魏公览之，深加叹赏曰：真销得半臂也。
现代文：崔铉读过后，深深地赞叹说：真可以在半边的胳臂上刺纹以显耀啊。
English: After reading it, Cui Yao was deeply impressed and said, "You can really show off the tattoo on half of your arm."

古文：高逸
现代文：高逸
English: Gao Yizhe

古文：孔稚珪
现代文：孔稚珪
English: Kong fried clams

古文：齐会稽孔稚珪，光禄灵产之子，侍中道隆之孙，张融之内弟。
现代文：孔稚珪，齐国会稽郡人氏，光禄大夫灵产的儿子，侍中道隆的孙子，张融的内弟。
English: He was the son of Kong Zhiqi, the county magistrate of Qi Province, the spiritual son of Guanglu Daifu, the grandson of Daolong, a chamberlain, and the younger brother of Zhang Rong.

古文：稚珪富学，与陆思晓、谢沦为君子之交。
现代文：孔稚珪很有才学，和陆思晓、谢沦是朋友。
English: Kong Zhiyao is very talented, and he is friends with Lu Xixiao and Xie Kun.

古文：珪不乐世务，宅中草没人。
现代文：孔稚珪不愿意干家务琐事。院子里的蒿草长得可以没人他也不铲除。
English: Kongzhi Yao does not like to do household chores. The rushes in the yard grow so long that no one can uproot them.

古文：南有山池，春日蛙鸣。
现代文：他家对面南山有一池塘，水中有蛙，每天春天蛙声鼓噪，直传入院中。
English: There is a pond in Nanshan across from his home. There are frogs in the water, and every spring the frogs make a lot of noise, which leads straight to the hospital.

古文：仆射王晏尝鸣笳鼓造之，闻群蛙鸣，晏曰：此殊聒人耳。
现代文：仆射王晏有一次吹着笳敲着鼓前来拜访他，听到蛙声鼓噪，对孔稚珪说： 这些蛙声真刺耳。 
English: On one occasion, his servant Sho Wangjun came to visit him, blowing a gong and beating a drum. When he heard the sound of frogs and drums, he said to Kong Zhiqin: "These frog sounds are really harsh.

古文：答曰：我听卿鼓吹，殆不及此。
现代文：孔稚珪回答说： 我听你吹笳敲鼓还赶不上我的蛙鸣呢！ 
English: Kongzhi replied, "I can't listen to you blow gongs and beat drums long enough to hear my frogs sing!"

古文：晏有愧色。
现代文：王晏听了后很难为情。
English: Wang Yao felt very embarrassed after listening to this.

古文：历位太子詹事。赠光禄大夫。
现代文：孔稚珪官历太子詹事，死后追封为光禄大夫。
English: After his death, Prince Zhan Zhi was posthumously awarded the title of Guanglu Doctor.

古文：李元诚
现代文：李元诚
English: Li Yuancheng

古文：北齐赵郡李元诚，钜鹿贞公恢之孙，钜鹿简介灵之曾孙。
现代文：北齐赵郡人李元诚，是巨鹿贞公李恢的孙子，简公李灵的曾孙。
English: Li Yuancheng, a resident of Zhao County, North Qi, is the grandson of the great-deer Zhenggong Li Guo and the great-grandson of the great-deer Jianggong Li Ling.

古文：性放诞，不好世务，以饮酒为务。
现代文：性情放荡怪诞，不愿意做家务事，把喝酒当成营生，官为太常卿。
English: He had a bizarre, dissolute temperament, did not want to do housework, drank alcohol for a living, and was a high-ranking official.

古文：为太常卿，太祖欲以为仆射，而疑其多酒。
现代文：太祖想任他为仆射，却疑虑他喝酒误事。李元诚儿子李骚劝说他少喝酒。
English: Li Yuancheng's son, Li Soo, advised him to drink less.

古文：子骚谏之，元诚曰：我言作仆射不如饮酒乐，尔爱仆射，宜勿饮酒。
现代文：他说：依我说作仆射不如喝酒快活。你爱仆射这个官职，应当不喝酒。
English: He said, "According to me, it is not as enjoyable to drink alcohol as it is to shoot arrows. If you love the office of archer, you should not drink alcohol."

古文：行台尚书司马子如及孙腾，尝诣元诚，其庭宇芜旷，环堵颓圯。
现代文：行台尚书司马子如和孙腾，曾到李元诚家。见到他家庭院荒芜空旷，周围的院墙已经坍塌。
English: The well-known writers Ma Ziru and Sun Teng once visited Li Yuancheng's home. They saw that his courtyard was deserted and empty, and the surrounding courtyard wall had collapsed.

古文：在树下，以被自拥，独对一壶，陶然乐矣。
现代文：李元诚披着被子独自一人在喝酒，自得其乐，他妻子穿着很短的衣裙。
English: Li Yuancheng, wearing a quilt, was drinking alone and enjoying himself. His wife was wearing a very short dress.

古文：因见其妻，衣不曳地。撒所坐在褥，质酒肉，以尽欢意焉。
现代文：李元诚看到他们进了院，忙招唤他妻子撤去他坐的褥子去换酒，来招待他们。
English: When Li Yuancheng saw them enter the courtyard, he hurriedly summoned his wife to remove the mule he was sitting on to exchange wine and invite them.

古文：二公嗟尚，各置饷馈，受之而不辞，散之亲故。
现代文：二人感叹李元诚这样好客，各自拿出自己的饷银送给他。李元诚欣然接受一点也不推辞，将这些银钱送给亲朋。
English: The two lamented Li Yuancheng's hospitality, and each took out his own money to give to him. Li Yuancheng gladly accepted and gave the money to his relatives and friends.

古文：元诚一名元忠。
现代文：李元诚还有一个名字叫元忠。
English: Li Yuancheng also had another name, Yuanzhong.

古文：拜仪同，领卫尉，封晋阳公。
现代文：他官任仪同，领卫尉，被封为晋阳公。
English: He was appointed to the same position, captain of the guard, and was given the title of Lord of Jinyang.

古文：卒赠司徒，谥曰文宣。
现代文：他去世后被皇上赠为司徒，追认为文宣。
English: After his death, he was given to the emperor as an apprentice and was later known as Wen Xuan.

古文：陶弘景
现代文：陶弘景
English: Tao Hongjing

古文：丹阳陶弘景幼而惠，博通经史。
现代文：丹阳陶弘景幼年聪慧，博览群书。
English: Danyang Tao Hongjing was intelligent and well-read as a child.

古文：覩葛洪《神仙传》，便有志于养生。
现代文：自从他阅读了葛洪的《神仙传》后，便产生了隐居山林、修仙养道的想法。
English: Ever since he read Ge Hong's "Legend of the Immortals," he had the idea of living in seclusion in the mountains and forests and cultivating the way of the immortals.

古文：每言仰视青云白日，不以为远。
现代文：他常常对人说：仰观青云白日所显现的天象，离我归隐山林修仙养道的时日不远了。
English: He often said to people: "Looking up at the celestial objects that appear in the daytime, the time is not far away for me to go into seclusion in the mountains and forests to cultivate myself.

古文：初为宜都王侍读，后迁奉朝请。永明中，谢职隐茅山。
现代文：陶弘景起初官拜宜都王侍读，后来改迁奉朝请，这是一个闲职，定期参加一些朝会了事。
English: At first, Tao Hongjing served as a courtier to the king, and later he was transferred to the imperial court. This was a part-time position, and he regularly attended some imperial court meetings.

古文：山是金陵洞穴，周回一百五十里，名曰华阳洞天。有三茅司命之府，故时号茅山。
现代文：齐武帝永明年间，陶弘景辞去官职归隐茅山。茅山有个金陵洞，洞长环回一百五十余里，又叫华阳洞天，内有三茅司命的府庙，因此当时人叫它茅山。
English: In the middle of the reign of Emperor Qiwu, Tao Hongjing resigned from his official post and returned to retreat to Mao Shan. Mao Shan has a Jinling cave, the length of the cave is more than one hundred and fifty miles, also known as Huayangdong. There are three temples of Mao Shi Min in it, so people called it Mao Shan at that time.

古文：由是自称华阳隐居，人间书疏，皆以此代名。
现代文：由这个洞名，陶弘景自号为华阳居士。此后，凡有记载他的书文，都用华阳居士这个称谓。
English: From this cave name, Tao Hongjing called himself Huayang layman. After that, all the writings that recorded him used the title of Huayang layman.

古文：亦士安之玄晏，稚川之抱朴也。
现代文：陶弘景隐居茅山，就象士大夫以能参加古代圣贤的礼教玄晏为荣、葛洪怀抱木皮守持本真一样。
English: Tao Hongjing lived in seclusion in Maoyan, just as Shidafu took pride in being able to participate in the rituals of ancient sages, and Ge Hong embraced the wood and kept the original.

古文：惟爱林泉，尤好著述。
现代文：陶弘景不但有林乐之好，而且尤为喜爱著书立说。
English: Tao Hongjing is not only good at forest music, but also especially likes to write and recite.

古文：缙绅士庶禀道伏膺，承流向风，千里而至。
现代文：晋绅庶士中仰敬他的人很多，有的不远千里来拜谒他求道。
English: There are a lot of people who admire him, some of whom have come thousands of miles to pay homage to him.

古文：先生尝曰：我读外书未满万卷，以内书兼之，乃当小出耳。
现代文：陶先生曾说：我读修炼以外的杂书不到万卷，同时也读有关修仙成道的书，权当小小的研究吧。
English: Mr. Tao once said: I read less than ten thousand volumes of miscellaneous books other than cultivation, and I also read books about cultivating immortality. A little research is a must.

古文：齐高祖问之曰：山中何所有？
现代文：齐高祖问询陶弘景：卿归隐泉林，山中有什么东西那么吸引着你啊？
English: Qi Gaozu asked Tao Hongjing: Sir, go back to the spring forest, what is it in the mountains that attracts you so much?

古文：弘景赋诗以答之，词曰：山中何所有？
现代文：陶弘景赋诗作答。诗中说：山中何所有？
English: Tao Hongjing replied with a poem, saying: What does the mountain have?

古文：岭上多白云。
现代文：岭上多白云。
English: There are many white clouds on the ridge.

古文：只可自怡悦，不堪持寄君。
现代文：只可自怡悦，不堪持寄君。
English: You can only be happy with yourself, but you can't be happy with your host.

古文：高祖赏之。
现代文：齐高祖读诗后，非常赞赏陶弘景。
English: After reading the poem, Qi Gaozu highly appreciated Tao Hongjing.

古文：田游岩
现代文：田游岩
English: Tian Youyan

古文：唐田游岩初以儒学累徵不起，侍其母隐嵩山。
现代文：唐朝人田游岩，起初想以儒学做为进身为官的道路，屡次参加科考都不得中。之后，隐居嵩山侍奉母亲。
English: At first, Tian Youyan, a Tang dynasty person, wanted to use Confucianism as a way to advance to official positions, but he was repeatedly rejected from taking part in scientific examinations. After that, he lived in seclusion on Mount Song to serve his mother.

古文：甘露中，中宗幸中狱，因访其居，游岩出拜。
现代文：甘露年间，中宗皇帝游五岳居中的嵩山，访问田游岩居所，田游岩出迎参拜。
English: During the years of the nectar of the rain, Emperor Zhongzong visited the residence of Tianyouyan in Songshan, the middle of the five mountains of Yu, and went to Tianyouyan to pay homage.

古文：诏命中书侍郎薛元超入问其母，御题其门曰，隐士田游岩宅，徵拜弘文学士。
现代文：中宗皇帝命令中书侍郎薛元超进内室问候田游岩的老母，亲自为田家居室门上题隐士田游岩宅六个大字，并且赐拜田游岩为弘文学士。
English: Emperor Zhongzong ordered the junior secretary Xue Yuanchao to go into the inner room to greet Tian Youyan's old mother, personally inscribed the hermit Tian Youyan's house on the door of Tian Youyan's home, and awarded Tian Youyan a bachelor of literature.

古文：朱桃椎
现代文：朱桃椎
English: Zhu Taoshei

古文：朱桃椎，蜀人也。
现代文：朱桃椎，巴蜀人士。
English: Zhu Taoshei, a person from Bashu.

古文：淡泊无为，隐居不仕。披裘带索，沈浮人间。
现代文：生性淡泊不求有所做为，始终隐居不出来作官，身披兽皮用藤索缠缚，浪迹在民间。
English: By nature, he is indifferent and does not seek to do anything, he always lives in seclusion and does not come out to work as an official, he is wrapped in animal skins and tied with cane ropes, and his wanderings are in the folk.

古文：窦轨为益州，闻而召之。遗以衣服，逼为乡正。
现代文：窦轨为益州长官时，听说这件事后让人将朱桃椎唤来询问他的生活状况，并送给他衣服让他穿上，同时强行让他做乡里的里正。
English: When Dou Liao was the governor of Yiwu, after hearing about this matter, Zhu Taoshi was summoned to inquire about his living conditions, and clothes were given to him to wear, and he was forced to be the village chief.

古文：桃椎不言而退，逃入山中。
现代文：朱桃椎一句话不说，转身逃亡深山中。
English: Zhu Taoshi did not say a word, but turned and fled deep into the mountains.

古文：夏则裸形，冬则以树皮自覆。
现代文：朱桃椎隐居深山里，夏天赤身裸体，冬天冷了就用树皮盖在身上取暖。
English: Zhu Taoshi lived in seclusion deep in the mountains, naked in the summer, and covered himself with tree bark to keep warm when it got cold in the winter.

古文：凡所赠遗，一无所受。
现代文：凡是别人赠送给他的一切物件，一律不接受。
English: He will not accept any objects given to him by others.

古文：织芒履，置之于路上。见者皆曰，朱居士之履也。
现代文：他将织好的芒鞋放在行人经过的道上，路人看见了，都说：这是朱桃椎编织的芒鞋啊！
English: He placed the knitted mens shoes on the road for pedestrians to pass by. When passers-by saw them, they all said, "These are mens shoes knitted by Zhu Taoshi!"

古文：为鬻取米，置之本处。
现代文：朱桃椎买米将对换的东西放在你家近前，你收取东西后也要将米放在原处。
English: Zhu Taoshii: When you buy rice, put the exchanged items near your home. After you collect the items, you should also put the rice in its original place.

古文：桃椎至夕取之，终不见人。高士廉下车，深加礼敬。
现代文：高士廉途经此地，听说这件事后，对朱桃椎非常敬重。他特意派人将朱桃椎请来，放下架子跟朱桃椎谈话。
English: Gao Shilian passed through this place, and after hearing about this matter, he had great respect for Zhu Taoshi. He specially sent someone to invite Zhu Taoshi and talk to Zhu Taoshi.

古文：召至，降阶与语。
现代文：朱桃椎答说完了转身离去。
English: Zhu Taoshi finished answering and turned to leave.

古文：桃椎一答，既而便去。
现代文：高士廉每每谈到此事，对朱桃椎都大加赞扬，称他为奇世异人。
English: Whenever Gao Shillian talked about this matter, he praised Zhu Taoshi, calling him an extraordinary person.

古文：士廉每加褒异，蜀人以为美谈。
现代文：蜀人都以出了个朱桃椎这样的人而感到荣幸。
English: The people of Shu are honored to have produced such a person as Zhu Taoshi.

古文：卢鸿
现代文：卢鸿
English: Lu Hong

古文：玄宗徵嵩山隐士卢鸿，三诏乃至。
现代文：唐玄宗徵召嵩山隐士卢鸿，下三次诏书卢鸿才应召入朝。
English: Emperor Xuanzong of the Tang Dynasty conscripted Lu Hong, a hermit from Songshan, and it was not until the third imperial edict that Lu Hong was summoned to the imperial court.

古文：及谒见，不拜，但磬折而已。
现代文：到拜见玄宗时，卢鸿不跪拜，只行鞠躬礼。
English: When visiting Xuanzong, Lu Hong did not kneel, but bowed.

古文：问其故，鸿对曰：臣闻老子云，礼者忠信之薄，不足可依。
现代文：玄宗问： 卿见了我为什么不依礼跪拜？ 卢鸿回答说： 臣听说老子聃曾经讲过：礼，不讲忠信，不可用它来表示人与人之间的关系。
English: Xuanzong asked, "Why didn't you kneel when you saw me?" Lu Hong replied, "I heard that Lao Zi Yao once said, "Rite, not loyalty, should not be used to express the relationship between people."

古文：山臣鸿，敢以忠信奉上。
现代文：山野之臣卢鸿，保证用忠信侍奉皇上。
English: Lu Hong, a retainer of Yamano, promised to serve the emperor loyally.

古文：玄宗异之，召入赐宴，拜谏议大夫，赐章服，并辞不受。
现代文：唐玄宗既惊异又高兴，赏赐卢鸿御宴，并下诏拜卢鸿为谏议大夫，赐给他官印、朝服。卢鸿一一辞谢不受。
English: Tang Xuan Zong was both surprised and pleased, and rewarded Lu Hong with a banquet. He also issued an edict praising Lu Hong as a scholar, and gave him an official seal and a royal robe. Lu Hong did not accept any words of thanks.

古文：给米百石，绢百疋，送还隐居之处。
现代文：玄宗得知后越发感到他是奇人，另赐给他米一百石，绢一百疋，命人将卢鸿送回嵩山他隐居的地方。
English: After learning of this, Xuanzong felt more and more that he was a strange man. He also gave him 100 koku of rice and 100 baht, and ordered Lu Hong to be sent back to his place of seclusion on Songshan Mountain.

古文：元结
现代文：元结
English: Conclusion

古文：天宝之乱，元结自汝濆，大率邻里南投襄汉，保全者千余家。
现代文：唐玄宗天宝之乱，元结从汝濆率领乡邻南投襄汉，保全了一千多家人的性命。
English: Tang Xuan Zong's Tianbao Rebellion, which was originally led by Ru Yi and his neighbors Nan Tou and Xiang Han, saved the lives of more than a thousand people.

古文：乃举义师宛叶之间，有婴城捍寇之力。
现代文：并且他在宛叶之间组织义军，立下了护卫城池抵御贼寇的功劳。
English: In addition, he organized the rebel army between the wan Ye and set up the guard of the city against the bandits.

古文：结天宝中师中行子。
现代文：结天宝中师中行子。
English: Knot Tianbao middle school teacher Zhong Xingzi.

古文：始在商於之山称元子，逃难入猗玗之山称猗玗子，或称浪士。
现代文：起初在商於山称元子，逃难进入猗玗山称猗玗子，或者称浪士。
English: At first, merchants in the mountains were called genshi, and those who escaped to Shaoshan were called shoshi, or roshi.

古文：渔者呼为聱叟。
现代文：打渔的人称呼元结为倔老翁。
English: The fishermen call the original knot the old man's fish hook.

古文：酒徒呼为漫叟。
现代文：酒徒们称元结为放荡的老翁。
English: Drinkers call Mr. Motoyuki a dissolute old man.

古文：及为官，呼漫郎。
现代文：等到元结当官以后，同僚们称他为漫郎。
English: After he became an official, his colleagues called him "Manguro."

古文：贺知章
现代文：贺知章
English: Chorus: "Hechizaki"

古文：贺知章性放旷，美谈笑，当时贤达咸倾慕。
现代文：贺知章性情豪放旷达，非常健谈，当时朝野的贤达人士都钦慕他。
English: He Zhizhang was a free-spirited and very talkative person. At that time, the sages of the court and the country all admired him.

古文：陆象先既知章姑子也，知章特相亲善。
现代文：陆象先是贺知章的姑表兄弟，知章对他非常亲密。
English: Lu Xiang was He Zhizhang's first cousin, and He Zhizhang was very close to him.

古文：象先谓人曰：贺兄言论调态，真可谓风流之士。
现代文：陆象先对人说： 贺大哥不论从文章词赋，还是从举止情态看，真真称得上是个风流才子啊！ 
English: Lu Xiang first said to the people: "Whether from the article's words or from the demeanor, Big Brother He is truly a flirtatious talent!

古文：晚年纵诞，无复规检。
现代文：贺知章晚年越发放纵怪诞，更加不约束自己，自称为四明狂客。
English: In his later years, He Zizhang became more and more bizarre, more and more unconstrained, and called himself the Four Bright Madmen.

古文：自号四明狂客，醉后属词，动成篇卷，文不加点，咸有可观。
现代文：他酷爱饮酒，而每次酒后必吟诗赋词，而且动辄成篇成卷，文不加点，佳作连篇，而且出类拔萃。
English: He loved to drink, and every time he drank, he had to chant the words of poetry, and it often turned into a volume, without adding points, a series of excellent works, and outstanding.

古文：又善草隶书，好事者共传宝之。
现代文：贺知章又善写草书。他的墨宝多被人索要当作珍贵的物品收藏。
English: Hechizhang is also good at writing cursive. His ink treasures are mostly requested as a collection of precious items.

古文：请为道士归乡，舍宅为观，上许之。
现代文：贺知章晚年请求还乡为道士，并将自家私宅舍出为道观。皇上准许了他。
English: In his later years, He Zhizhang requested to return to his hometown to become a Taoist priest, and offered his private home as a Taoist temple. The emperor granted his request.

古文：仍拜子为会稽郡司马。御制诗以赠行。
现代文：同时赐拜他的儿子为会稽郡司马，并亲手写诗为贺知章送行。
English: At the same time, he gave his son the title of county magistrate, and wrote a poem to see him off.

古文：顾况
现代文：顾况
English: Status Quo

古文：顾况志尚疏逸，近于方外。
现代文：顾况崇尚疏淡隐逸，接近在山野间修炼的术士。
English: Gukpo is a conjurer who worships sparseness and seclusion, and is close to those who practice in the mountains and fields.

古文：有时宰曾招致，将以好官命之。
现代文：有一次当朝宰相将他招见来，说要给他一个最好的官做。
English: Once, the prime minister of the time invited him to see him and said that he would give him the best official to do.

古文：况以诗答之曰：四海如今已太平，相公何事唤狂生。
现代文：顾况当场写诗一首回答这位宰相：四海如今已太平，相公何事唤狂生。
English: Gu Gu wrote a poem on the spot to reply to the prime minister: "The four seas are now peaceful, my lord, but something is stirring up trouble."

古文：此身还似笼中鹤，东望沧溟叫数声。
现代文：此身还似笼中鹤，东望沧溟叫数声。
English: This body is also like a crane in a cage. Dongwang Cang crows several times.

古文：后吴中皆言况得道解化去。
现代文：后来，在顾况的家乡吴中，乡人们都传说他到晚年已经羽化升仙了。
English: Later, in Gu Zheng's hometown of Wuzhong, the villagers all had a legend that he had become an immortal in his later years.

古文：陈琡
现代文：陈琡
English: Chen Yao

古文：陈琡，鸿之子也。
现代文：陈琡，陈鸿的儿子。
English: Chen Yu, son of Chen Hong.

古文：鸿与白傅传《长恨词》。文格极高，盖良史也。
现代文：陈鸿曾给太傅白居易的名诗《长恨词》作过注释，文章的品味极高，是个优秀的官员。
English: Chen Hong once annotated the famous poem "Long-Hated Words" by the poet Bai Juyi. The taste of the article is very high, and he is an excellent official.

古文：咸通中，佐廉使郭常侍铨之幕于徐。
现代文：唐懿宗咸通年间，陈琡辅佐廉使侍常郭铨之在徐州做幕僚。
English: During the reign of Emperor Xianzong of Tang Dynasty, Chen Shuxu and his aide-de-camp Guo Jizhi were sent to Xuzhou to work as staff members.

古文：性尤耿介，非其人不与之交。
现代文：这时的陈琡性情尤为耿介，不是跟他一样人品的人不能跟他做朋友。
English: At this time, Chen Xuan's temperament was particularly Geng Shu, and people who were not of the same character as him could not be friends with him.

古文：同院有小计姓武，亦元衡相国之后，盖汾阳之坦床也。
现代文：跟陈琡同院有个好耍小计谋的人姓武，是元衡宰相的后人，就是汾阳公主的乘龙快婿。
English: In the same court as Chen Xi, there was a scheming man surnamed Wu, a descendant of Prime Minister Yuan He, who was the son-in-law of Princess Puyang.

古文：乃心不平之，遂挈家居于茅山。
现代文：陈琡跟他共事心里很不是滋味儿，于是带领全家退居于茅山。
English: Chen Yao did not feel comfortable working with him, so he and his family moved back to Mao Shan.

古文：与妻子隔山而居，短褐束绦，焚香习禅而已。
现代文：陈琡跟妻子分居，隔一座山。他穿短褂，腰扎绦带，独自烧香习禅。
English: Chen Qi lives separately from his wife, separated by a mountain. He wears a short robe, ties a sash around his waist, and burns incense and practices Zen on his own.

古文：或一年半载，与妻子略相面焉。
现代文：或一年，或半载，才跟妻子草草地见上一面。
English: or a year, or half a year, only to see his wife casually.

古文：在职之时，唯流沟寺长老与之款接，亦具短褐相见。
现代文：陈琡在任幕僚期间，只有流沟寺的长老跟他有来往。他也是穿着短褂跟长老见面。
English: During Chen Yu's tenure as a staff member, only the elders of the Naguso Temple had dealings with him. He also met with the elders while wearing short socks.

古文：自述檀经三卷，今在藏中。
现代文：这期间，陈琡自述檀经三卷，现在还珍藏着呢。
English: During this period, Chen Qi wrote three volumes of the Book of the Dead, which are still treasured today.

古文：临行，留一章与其僧云：行若独车轮，常畏大道覆。
现代文：临走时，陈琡留一章经卷给长老，说： 行走时如独轮的车，经常畏惧道路倾覆。
English: When he was about to leave, Chen Xiliu read a chapter of the sutra to the elders and said: When walking, like a wheeled vehicle, I am often afraid of the road overturning.

古文：止若圆底器，常恐他物触。
现代文：不动时如圆底的器具，经常害怕别的物件触碰它。
English: When stationary, the round-bottomed device is often afraid of other objects touching it.

古文：行止既如此，安得不离俗。
现代文：动与不动都如此担惊受怕，怎么能不尽早远离俗世呢？ 
English: How can you not get away from the world as soon as possible when you are so worried and afraid of everything?

古文：乾符中，弟琏复佐薛能幕于徐，自丹阳棹小舟至于彭门，与弟相见。
现代文：唐僖宗乾符年间，陈琡的弟弟陈琏又去辅佐薛能在徐州做幕僚。陈琡从丹阳撑着小船到彭门去看弟弟。
English: During the reign of Emperor Qianfu of the Tang Dynasty, Chen Yao's younger brother Chen Yao went to Xuzhou to assist Xue Neng as a staff member. Chen Yao took a small boat from Danyang to Pengmen to see his younger brother.

古文：薛公重其为人，延请入城。
现代文：薛能敬重他的为人，请他入城小住。
English: Xue Neng respected him as a person and invited him to live in the city.

古文：遂坚拒之曰：某已有誓，不践公门矣。
现代文：陈琡坚决拒绝，说：我已立过誓，不踏入公门啊。
English: Chen Yao firmly refused, saying, "I have already taken an oath not to step into the public door."

古文：薛乃携舟造之，话道永日，不宿而去。
现代文：薛能就带船前往彭门拜访陈琡。两人谈话投机，谈了整整一天，到了晚上才返回。
English: Xue Neng took the boat to Pengmen to visit Chen Qi. The two had a chance conversation and talked for a whole day before returning in the evening.

古文：其志尚之介僻也如此。
现代文：陈琡这个人哪，他的孤介和怪僻就是如此。
English: Such is the loner and eccentric Chen Qi.

古文：孔拯
现代文：孔拯
English: Kong Zheng

古文：孔拯侍郎为遗补时，尝朝回值雨，而无雨备，乃于人家檐庑下避之。
现代文：侍郎孔拯为遗补时，有一次上朝回家遇雨，没有雨具，在一家房檐下避雨。
English: When the waiter, Kong Zheng, was making up for lost time, he once came home in the morning in the rain, without rain gear, sheltering from the rain under an eaves.

古文：过食时，雨益甚，其家乃延入厅事。
现代文：到吃饭时，雨下的越来越大了。
English: By dinnertime, the rain was getting heavier.

古文：有一叟出迎甚恭，备酒馔亦甚丰洁，公侯家不若也。
现代文：这家人将他请到客厅里，走出一位老者恭恭敬敬地迎候他，并送来丰盛洁净的酒菜让他吃，大概王公大臣家的酒菜也不一定有这丰盛。
English: The family invited him into the living room, and an old man came out to greet him respectfully, and brought him plentiful and clean food and drink to eat, which was probably not always the case with the minister Wang Gong's family.

古文：拯惭谢之，且假雨具。
现代文：孔拯不好意思地表示谢意，并向老人借雨具一用。
English: Embarrassed, Kong Zheng expressed his gratitude and borrowed rain gear from the old man.

古文：叟曰：某闲居，不预人事。寒暑风雨，未尝冒也。
现代文：老人说：我闲居这儿，不参与世上的事情，寒暑风雨我都不出去，准备雨具干什么呢？
English: The old man said, "I live here idly, I don't get involved in the affairs of the world, I don't go out in the cold, the heat, the wind, or the rain. Why should I prepare rain gear?

古文：置此欲安施乎？
现代文：就叫人到别家去借来雨具给他。
English: He asked someone to go to another house to borrow rain gear for him.

古文：令于他处假借以奉之。
现代文：孔拯离开这家人家，感慨得似乎忘却了自己是个官员。
English: Kong Zheng left the family's home, so emotional that he seemed to have forgotten that he was an official.

古文：拯退而嗟叹，若忘宦情。语人曰：斯大隐者也。
现代文：对人说：我避雨遇到的这位老人，一定是位大隐者啊！
English: To say to someone: This old man I met sheltering from the rain must be a great hermit!

