古文：智术之士，必远见而明察，不明察，不能烛私；能法之士，必强毅而劲直，不劲直，不能矫奸。
现代文：通晓统治策略的人，一定是识见高远并明察秋毫；不明察秋毫，就不能洞察隐私。能够推行法治的人，必定是坚决果断并刚强正直的；不刚强正直，就不能惩治奸邪。
English: Those who know the strategy of governing must be far-sighted and clear-sighted; those who are not clear-sighted cannot understand privacy; those who can enforce the rule of law must be resolute and honest; those who are not honest cannot punish adultery.

古文：人臣循令而从事，案法而治官，非谓重人也。
现代文：臣子遵循法令办理公事，按照法律履行职责，不叫 重臣 。
English: A vassal is not called a senior vassal if he or she handles public affairs in accordance with laws and regulations and performs his or her duties in accordance with laws.

古文：重人也者，无令而擅为，亏法以利私，耗国以便家，力能得其君，此所为重人也。
现代文：所谓重臣，就是无视法令而独断专行，破尔法律来为私家牟利，损害国家来便利自家，他的势力能够控住君主，这才叫做重臣。
English: The so-called chieftain, is to ignore the law and arbitrarily, break the law to make profit for the private, damage the country to facilitate their own, his power can control the monarch, this is called a chieftain.

古文：智术之士明察，听用，且烛重人之阴情；能法之士劲直，听用，矫重人之奸行。
现代文：懂得统治策略的人明察秋毫，他们的主张若被采纳，自身若被任用，将会洞察重臣的阴谋诡计；能够推行法治的人刚强正直，他们的主张若被采纳，自身若被任用，将会矫正重臣的不法行为。
English: Those who understand the strategy of governance will be able to see through the machinations of their superiors; those who are able to enforce the rule of law will be strong and honest; those who are able to implement the strategy of governance will be able to see through the machinations of their superiors; and those who can enforce the rule of law will be strong and honest.

古文：故智术能法之士用，则贵重之臣必在绳之外矣。
现代文：因此，懂得策略和善用法治的人若被任用，那么位尊权重之臣一定为法制所不容。
English: Therefore, if a person who understands strategy and makes good use of the rule of law is appointed, then a dignified and important minister must be unacceptable to the legal system.

古文：是智法之士与当涂之人，不可两存之仇也。
现代文：这样说来，懂法依法的人与当权的重臣，是不可并存的仇敌。
English: In this way, those who understand the law and act according to the law and the senior officials in power are inseparable enemies.

古文：当涂之人擅事要，则外内为之用矣。
现代文：当权的重臣独揽国家大权，那么外交和内政就要被他们利用。
English: If those in power monopolize the country's power, then foreign affairs and domestic affairs will be used by them.

古文：是以诸候不因，则事不应，故敌国为之讼；百官不因，则业不进，故群臣为之用；郎中不因，则不得近主，故左右为之匿；学士不因，则养禄薄礼卑，故学士为之谈也。
现代文：正因如此，列国诸侯不依靠他，事情就得不到照应，所以其他诸侯国就要为他们唱赞歌；各级官员不依靠他，自己的功业就得不到上报，所以各级官员都会为他们所用；君主的侍从官员不依靠他，就不能接近君主，所以他们为他隐瞒罪行；学士不依靠他，就会俸禄薄而待遇低，所以学士为他说好话。
English: It is for this reason that the princes of the nations do not rely on him, things are not taken care of, so other principalities will sing praises for them; officials at all levels do not rely on him, their own work is not reported, so officials at all levels will use them; the monarch's attendant officials do not rely on him, they cannot approach the monarch, so they hide crimes for him; the bachelor does not rely on him, he will be poorly paid and poorly treated, so the bachelor speaks well of him.

古文：此四助者，邪臣之所以自饰也。
现代文：这四种辅助势力，是奸臣用来粉饰自己的手段。
English: These four auxiliary forces are the means used by traitors to whitewash themselves.

古文：重人不能忠主而进其仇，人主不能越四助而烛察其臣，故人主愈弊而大臣愈重。
现代文：重臣不能忠于君主而推荐自己的政敌，君主不能越过四种帮凶来洞察他的臣下，所以君主越来越受蒙蔽，而重臣的权势越来越大。
English: The senior vassal cannot be loyal to the monarch and recommend his political opponent, and the monarch cannot look beyond the four kinds of accomplices to understand his vassal, so the monarch is more and more blinded, and the senior vassal's power is increasing.

古文：凡当涂者之于人主也，希不信爱也，又且习故。
现代文：很少不被信任和宠爱的，而且彼此又亲昵和熟悉。
English: They are rarely mistrusted or unloved, and are affectionate and familiar with each other.

古文：若夫即主心，同乎好恶，因其所自进也。
现代文：至于迎合君主的心理，投合君主的好恶，本来就是重臣得以进升的途径。
English: As for pandering to the monarch's psychology, conforming to the monarch's likes and dislikes, it was originally a way for senior vassals to advance.

古文：官爵贵重，朋党又众，而一国为之讼。
现代文：他们官职大，爵位高，党羽又多，全国都为他们唱赞歌。
English: They have high-ranking officials, high ranks, and many party members, and the whole country is singing their praises.

古文：则法术之士欲干上者，非有所信爱之亲，习故之泽也，又将以法术之言矫人主阿辟之心，是与人主相反也。
现代文：而法术之士想要求得君主重用，既没有受到信任和宠爱的亲近关系，也没有亲呢和熟悉的交情，还要用法术言论矫正君主的偏邪之心，这是与君主心意相反的。
English: But the conjurer, wishing to claim the favour of the sovereign, has neither the intimacy of the trusted and beloved, nor the familiarity and familiar acquaintance, but corrects the partiality of the sovereign's heart by magical speech, which is contrary to the mind of the sovereign.

古文：处势卑贱，无党孤特。
现代文：法术之士所处地位低下，没有同党孤立无援。
English: Spellcasters are in a lowly position, and they are not alone with the same party.

古文：夫以疏远与近爱信争，其数不胜也；以新旅与习故争，其数不胜也；以反主意与同好恶争，其数不胜也；以轻贱与贵重争，其数不胜也；以一口与一国争，其数不胜也。
现代文：拿关系疏远的和关系亲近、受到宠信的相争，在常理上不能取胜；拿新客和故旧相争，在常理上不能取胜；拿违背君主心意和投合君主好恶相争，在常理上不能取胜；拿地位低贱的和位尊权重的相争，在常理上不能取胜；拿一个人和一国人相争，在常理上不能取胜。
English: It is logically impossible to win a contest between a distant relation and a close relation or a favorite; it is logically impossible to win a contest between a newcomer and an old friend; it is logically impossible to win a contest between going against the monarch's will and conforming to the monarch's likes and dislikes; it is logically impossible to win a contest between a low-ranking person and a person of high rank and power; it is logically impossible to win a contest between a person and a citizen.

古文：法术之士操五不胜之势，以岁数而又不得见；当涂之人乘五胜之资，而旦暮独说于前。
现代文：法术之士处在 五不胜 的情形下，按年计算也不能晋见君主；当权重臣凭借 五胜 的条件，又日夜单独向君主进言。
English: If a spell caster is in a five-win situation, he or she will not be able to see the monarch on an annual basis; the senior officials in power will use the five-win condition to advise the monarch alone day and night.

古文：故法术之士奚道得进，而人主奚时得悟乎？
现代文：因此，法术之人由什么门路得到任用，而君主到什么时候才能醒悟呢？
English: So how does a conjurer get appointed, and when will the monarch wake up?

古文：故资必不胜而势不两存，法术之士焉得不危？
现代文：因此，凭借必定不能取胜的条件，又与重臣势不两立，法术之士怎会不危险？
English: So, with the odds stacked against them, and with their chiefs at loggerheads, how could the magicians not be in danger?

古文：其可以罪过诬者，以公法而诛之；其不可被以罪过者，以私剑而穷之。
现代文：重臣对那些可用罪状诬陷的，就用国家法律来诛杀；对那些不能强加罪名的，就用刺客来暗杀。
English: For those who can be framed, the bosses use the laws of the country to kill them; for those who cannot be framed, they use assassins to kill them.

古文：是明法术而逆主上者，不戮于吏诛，必死于私剑矣。
现代文：这样说来，精通法术而违背君主的人，不为官吏所诛杀，必定死在刺客手里了。
English: In this way, those who are skilled in magic and disobey the monarch, if they are not killed by officials, will certainly die at the hands of assassins.

古文：朋党比周以弊主，言曲以使私者，必信于重人矣。
现代文：而结党拉派串通一气来蒙蔽君主、花言巧语歪曲事实来便利私家的人，一定会受到重臣的信任。
English: On the other hand, those who conspire to hoodwink the monarch and use rhetoric and rhetoric to distort the facts to benefit their private interests will certainly be trusted by the senior officials.

古文：故其可以攻伐借者，以官爵贵之；其不可借以美名者，以外权重之之。
现代文：所以对那些可用功劳做借口的，就封官赐爵使他们显贵；对那些不可用好名声做借口的，就用外交职权重用他们。
English: Therefore, for those who can use merit as an excuse, they are knighted and ennobled; for those who cannot use good reputation as an excuse, they are reused with diplomatic powers.

古文：是以弊主上而趋于私门者，不显于官爵，必重于外权矣。今人主不合参验而行诛，不待见功而爵禄，故法术之士安能蒙死亡而进其说？
现代文：因此，蒙蔽君主而投奔私人门下的，不在官爵级别上显赫，必在外交职权上重用了∷械牡比ㄖ爻级杂诰骼此担如一今君主不验证核查就实行诛戮，不等建立功劳就授予爵禄，因此法术之士怎能冒死去陈述自己的主张？
English: Therefore, those who deceive the monarch and go under the private door are not distinguished at the level of official nobility, but must use heavy weapons in diplomatic duties. If the monarch does not verify the verification, he will carry out the killing. If he does not establish the credit, he will award the knighthood. Therefore, how can magicians risk death to state their own claims?

古文：奸邪之臣安肯乘利而退其身？
现代文：奸邪之臣又怎肖当着有利时机而自动引退？
English: How is it that the treacherous vassal retires in the face of a favorable opportunity?

古文：故主上愈卑，私门益尊。
现代文：所以君主地位就越来越低，重臣权势就越来越大。
English: Therefore, the status of the monarch is getting lower and lower, and the power of the chief minister is getting greater and greater.

古文：夫越虽国富兵强，中国之主皆知无益于己也，曰： 非吾所得制也。 今有国者虽地广人众，然而人主壅蔽，大臣专权，是国为越也。
现代文：越国虽然国富兵强，中原各国的君主都知道对自己没有什么好处。
English: Although Yue was a rich and powerful country, the monarchs of the Central Plains countries knew that they were not doing themselves any favors.

古文：智不类越，而不智不类其国，不察其类者也。
现代文：说： 不是我们所能控制的。 现在统治国家的君主虽然地广人众，然而君主闭塞，大臣专权，这样一来，国家也就变得和越国一样。
English: "It's not something we can control," he said, adding that although the current ruler of the country is very popular, the monarch is closed and ministers have absolute power, so the country has become like Vietnam.

古文：人之所以谓齐亡者，非地与城亡也，吕氏弗制而田氏用之；所以谓晋亡者，亦非地与城亡也，姬氏不制而六卿专之也。
现代文：知道自己的国家与越国不同，却不知道现在连自己的国家也变了样，这是不明察事物的类似性。人们之所以说齐国亡了，并不是指土地和城市丧失了，而是指吕氏不能控制它而为田氏所占有。之所以说晋国亡了，也不是指土地和城市丧失了，而是指姬氏不能控制它而为六卿所把持。
English: To know that one's own country is different from Yue, but not to know that one's own country has also changed, is to fail to see the similarity of things. When people say that Qi has fallen, they do not mean that the land and cities have been lost, but that the Lu clan cannot control it and it is occupied by the Tian clan. When they say that Jin has fallen, they do not mean that the land and cities have been lost, but that the Ji clan cannot control it and it is occupied by the Six Lords.

古文：今大臣执柄独断，而上弗知收，是人主不明也。
现代文：现在大臣掌权独断专行，而君主不知收回，这是君主不明智。
English: It is unwise for the monarch to take back power from a minister who is now in charge and acting arbitrarily.

古文：与死人同病者，不可生也；与亡国同事者，不可存也。
现代文：和死人症状相同，无法救药；和亡国行事相同，无法久存。
English: Like the symptoms of the dead, there is no cure; like the actions of the dead, there is no long-term survival.

古文：今袭迹于齐、晋，欲国安存，不可得也。
现代文：现在因袭着齐、晋的老路，想要国家安然存在，是不可能的。
English: Now, it is impossible for the country to exist safely because it is following the old path of Qi and Jin.

古文：凡法术之难行也，不独万乘，千乘亦然。
现代文：凡属法术难以推行的，不单是大国，中小国家也是这样。
English: All magic is difficult to implement, not only for big countries, but also for small and medium-sized countries.

古文：人主之左右不必智也，人主于人有所智而听之，因与左右论其言，是与愚人论智也；人主之左右不必贤也，人主于人有所贤而礼之，因与左右论其行，是与不肖论贤也。智者决策于愚人，贤士程行于不肖，则贤智之士羞而人主之论悖矣。
现代文：君主的近臣不一定有才智。君主认为某人有才智而听取他的意见，然后和近臣讨论该人的言谈，这是和愚蠢的人讨论才智。
English: It is not necessary that a minister of the sovereign should be intelligent; but for the sovereign to listen to a man whom he thinks to be intelligent, and then to discuss his conversation with his minister, is to discuss intelligence with an imbecile.

古文：人臣之欲得官者，其修士且以精洁固身，其智士且以治辩进业。
现代文：君主的近臣不一定品德好。君主认为某人有美德而礼遇他，然后和近臣讨论他的品行，这是和品德不好的人讨论美德。
English: It is not necessary that the subjects of a prince should be virtuous. If a prince thinks that a man is virtuous and treats him with courtesy, and then discusses his virtue with his subjects, it is like discussing virtue with a man who is not virtuous.

古文：其修士不能以货赂事人，恃其精洁而更不能以枉法为治，则修智之士不事左右、不听请谒矣。
现代文：智者的计谋由愚蠢的人来评判，贤者的品德由不贤的人来衡量，那么品德好、有才智的人就会感到耻辱而君主的论断也必然荒谬了。
English: The wit of the wise is judged by the foolish, and the virtue of the wise by the unwise, so that the virtuous and the wise are put to shame, and the precepts of princes are made foolish.

古文：人主之左右，行非伯夷也，求索不得，货赂不至，则精辩之功息，而毁诬之言起矣。治辩之功制于近习，精洁之行决于毁誉，则修智之吏废，则人主之明塞矣。
现代文：想谋得官职的臣子当中，那些品德好的人将用精纯廉洁来约束自己，那些才智高的人将用办好政事来推进事业。那些品德好的人不可能用财物贿赂侍奉别人，凭借精纯廉洁更不可能违法办事，那么品德好、才智高的人也就不会奉承君主近侍，不会理睬私下请托了。君主的近臣，品行不像伯夷那么好，索求的东西得不到，财物贿赂不上门，那么精明强干者的功业就要被压制，而诽谤诬陷的话也就出笼了。办好政事的功业受制于君主的近侍，精纯廉洁的品行取决于近侍的毁誉，那么品德好、才智高的官吏就要被废黜，君主的明察也就被阻塞了。
English: Among the courtiers who want to obtain official positions, those with good moral character will use purity and honesty to discipline themselves, and those with high intelligence will use good government affairs to promote the cause. Those with good moral character cannot bribe others with wealth to serve others, and with purity and honesty, it is even more impossible to do things illegally, so those with good moral character and high intelligence will not flatter the monarch's close attendants, and will not pay attention to private requests. The monarch's close attendants do not behave as well as the peasants, they do not get what they ask for, and financial bribery does not go through the door, so the work of the shrewd and

古文：不以功伐决智行，不以叁伍审罪过，而听左右近习之言，则无能之士在廷，而愚污之吏处官矣。
现代文：不按功劳裁决人的才智和品德，不通过事实的多方验证审处人的罪行和过错，却听从左右亲信的话，那么没有才能的人就会在朝廷中当政，愚蠢腐败的官吏就会窃居职位了。
English: If people's talents and virtues are not judged according to their merits, and if people's crimes and faults are not judged through the multi-party verification of facts, but they listen to the words of their right and left cronies, then people without talent will be in power in the imperial court, and stupid and corrupt officials will steal positions.

古文：万乘之患，大臣太重；千乘之患，左右太信；此人主之所公患也。
现代文：大国的祸害在于大臣权势太重，中小国家的祸害在于君主身边的近臣太受宠信：这是君主的通病。
English: The scourge of large states is that ministers wield too much power, and the scourge of small and medium-sized states is that the courtiers around the monarch are too well-liked: this is a common problem for monarchs.

古文：且人臣有大罪，人主有大失，臣主之利与相异者也。
现代文：再说臣下犯了大罪恶，君主有了大过失，臣下和君主的利益是相互不同的。
English: Furthermore, the vassal has committed a great evil, the monarch has committed a great fault, and the interests of the vassal and the monarch are different from each other.

古文：何以明之哉？
现代文：凭什么这样说呢？
English: On what basis do you say this?

古文：曰：主利在有能而任官，臣利在无能而得事；主利在有劳而爵禄，臣利在无功而富贵；主利在豪杰使能，臣利在朋党用私。
现代文：即：君主的利益在于具有才能而任以官职，臣下的利益在于没有才能而得到重用；君主的利益在于具有功劳而授以爵禄，臣下的利益在于没有功劳而得到富贵；君主的利益在于豪杰效力，臣下的利益在于结党营私。
English: That is to say, it is the interest of the sovereign to appoint officials with ability, and the interest of the vassals to make use of them without ability; it is the interest of the sovereign to award knighthoods with merit, and the interest of the vassals to be rich without merit; it is the interest of the sovereign to be effective, and the interest of the vassals to be partisan.

古文：是以国地削而私家富，主上卑而大臣重。
现代文：因此国土减少而私家更富，君主地位卑下而大臣权势更重。
English: As a result, the country's territory was reduced, but private individuals became richer, the monarch's status was lowered, but ministers became more powerful.

古文：故主失势而臣得国，主更称蕃臣，而相室剖符。
现代文：所以君主失去权势而大臣控制国家，君主改称藩臣，相臣行使君权。
English: Therefore, the monarch lost power and the minister controlled the country, the monarch was renamed as the vassal of the domain, and the vassal exercised the power of the monarch.

古文：此人臣之所以谲主便私也。
现代文：这就是大臣欺骗君主谋取私利的情形。
English: This is a case of a minister deceiving the sovereign for personal gain.

古文：故当也之重臣，主变势而得固宠者，十无二三。
现代文：所以当代的重臣，在君主改变政治情势而仍能保持宠信的，十个中还不到两三个。
English: As a result, fewer than two or three out of ten contemporary chief ministers are able to retain the trust of the monarch despite the change in the political situation.

古文：是其故何也？
现代文：这是什么原因呢？
English: What is the reason for this?

古文：人臣之罪大也。
现代文：是这些臣下的罪行太大了。
English: The crimes of these vassals are too great.

古文：臣有大罪者，其行欺主也，其罪当死亡也。
现代文：臣有大罪的，他的行为是欺骗君主的，他的罪行是当处死刑的。
English: If a vassal commits a serious crime, his act is to deceive the sovereign, and his crime is punishable by death.

古文：智士者远见而畏于死亡，必不从重人矣；贤士者修廉而羞与奸臣欺其主，必不从重臣矣，是当涂者徒属，非愚而不知患者，必污而不避奸者也。
现代文：聪时人看得深远，伯犯死罪，必定不会跟从重臣；品德好的人洁身自爱，耻于和奸臣共同欺骗君主，必定不会跟从重臣。这些当权者的门徒党羽，不是愚蠢而不知祸害的人，必是腐败而不避奸邪的人。
English: A man of fine moral character, who is chaste and self-respecting, and who is ashamed to deceive the sovereign together with a traitorous minister, will certainly not follow the chief minister. These disciples and followers of those in power are not stupid people who do not know evil, but must be corrupt people who do not shun evil.

古文：大臣挟愚污之人，上与之欺主，下与之收利侵渔，朋党比周，相与一口，惑主败法，以乱士民，使国家危削，主上劳辱，此大罪也。
现代文：大臣挟持愚蠢腐败的人，对上和他们一起欺骗君主，对下和他们一起掠夺财物，结帮拉派，串通一气，惑乱君主败坏法制，以此扰乱百姓，使国家危殆受侵、君主忧劳受辱，这是大罪行。
English: It is a great crime for a minister to hold stupid and corrupt people hostage, to deceive the monarch together with them at the top, to plunder property together with them at the bottom, to form gangs and factions, to collude, to confuse the monarch, to corrupt the legal system, and thus to disturb the people, to endanger the country, and to humiliate the monarch.

古文：臣有大罪而主弗禁，此大失也。
现代文：臣下有了大罪而君主却不禁止，这是大过失。
English: It is a great fault if a subject commits a great sin and the sovereign does not forbid it.

古文：使其主有大失于上，臣有大罪于下，索国之不亡者，不可得也。
现代文：假如君主在上面有大过失，臣子在下面有大罪行，还想要国家不灭亡，是不可能的。
English: It is impossible for a sovereign to have a great fault at the top and a vassal a great crime at the bottom, and still want the country not to perish.

