古文：《礼》云： 欲不可纵，志不可满。 
现代文：《礼记》上说： 欲望不可以放纵，志向不可以满盈。 
English: "Li Ji" said: Desire cannot be indulged, and aspiration cannot be overflowing.

古文：宇宙可臻其极，情性不知其穷，唯在少欲知止，为立涯限尔。
现代文：宇宙很大也可以到达它的边际，但是人的欲望是无穷无尽的。只有少欲知足，才能有一个界限。
English: The universe is big and can reach its edge, but human desires are endless. Only with a little contentment can there be a limit.

古文：先祖靖侯戒子侄曰： 汝家书生门户，世无富贵，自今仕宦不可过二千石，婚姻勿贪势家。 
现代文：先祖靖侯教诫子孙们说： 咱们家是书香门第，世代没有出现过大富大贵，从现在起你们为官，不可担任俸禄超过二千石的官职，婚姻不能攀附权势之家。 
English: The ancestors of Jing Hou taught and admonished their descendants, saying: Our family is descended from Shuxiang, and there has never been a generation of great wealth and nobility. From now on, if you are an official, you must not hold an official position with a salary of more than 2,000 koku, and you must not marry into a powerful family.

古文：吾终身服膺，以为名言也。
现代文：我衷心信服并牢记在心，把它当作至理名言。
English: I wholeheartedly believe and keep it in my heart as a wise saying.

古文：天地鬼神之道，皆恶满盈，谦虚冲损，可以免害。
现代文：天地鬼神之道，都厌恶满盈，谦虚淡泊，可以避免潜在的灾祸。
English: The ways of heaven and earth, ghosts and gods, all abhor fullness, modesty and indifference, can avoid potential disasters.

古文：人生衣趣以覆寒露，食趣以塞饥乏耳。
现代文：人穿衣服的目的是在覆盖身体以免寒冷，吃东西的目的在填饱肚子以免饥饿乏力。
English: The purpose of wearing clothes is to cover the body to avoid cold, and the purpose of eating is to fill the stomach to avoid hunger and fatigue.

古文：形骸之内，尚不得奢靡，己身之外，而欲穷骄泰邪？
现代文：形体之内，尚且不能奢侈浪费，自身之外，难道还要极尽骄傲放肆吗？
English: Within the body, it is not possible to be extravagant and wasteful, but outside of oneself, is it necessary to be extremely proud and presumptuous?

古文：周穆王、秦始皇、汉武帝富有四海，贵为天子，不知纪极，犹自败累，况士庶乎？
现代文：周穆王、秦始皇、汉武帝都富有四海，贵为天子，不懂得适可而止，尚且会遭到败损，何况是一般人呢？
English: King Zhou Mu, Emperor Qin Shi Huang, and Emperor Han Wu were all rich and noble, and they did not know what to do, and yet they would be defeated. What is more, what about ordinary people?

古文：常以二十口家，奴婢盛多，不可出二十人，良田十顷，堂室才蔽风雨，车马仅代杖策，蓄财数万，以拟吉凶急速。
现代文：我常认为二十口之家，奴婢最多不可超出二十人，只需良田十顷，堂室只求能够遮挡风雨，车马只要能代步就行。积蓄上几万钱财，用来准备婚丧急用。
English: I often think that a family of twenty people should have no more than twenty slaves and maids, and only need ten hectares of good farmland, and the courtyard should only be able to shelter from the wind and rain, and the car and horse should only be able to travel. It is enough to save tens of thousands of money to prepare for the wedding and funeral.

古文：不啻此者，以义散之；不至此者，勿非道求之。
现代文：超过这个数量，就要合乎道理地散掉；还不到这些，也切勿用不正当的办法来求取。
English: If you have more than this, you must dispose of it properly; if you have less than this, you must not use improper means to obtain it.

