古文：春申君者，楚人也，名歇，姓黄氏。
现代文：春申君是楚国人，名叫歇，姓黄。
English: Chun Shenjun is a native of Chu, named He and surnamed Huang.

古文：游学博闻，事楚顷襄王。
现代文：曾周游各地从师学习，知识渊博，奉事楚顷襄王。
English: He has traveled all over the country to learn from teachers, is knowledgeable, and serves as the king of Chu Yao.

古文：顷襄王以歇为辩，使於秦。
现代文：顷襄王认为黄歇有口才，让他出使秦国。
English: King Xiang suddenly thought that Huang Xie was eloquent, so he sent him to Qin.

古文：秦昭王使白起攻韩、魏，败之於华阳，禽魏将芒卯，韩、魏服而事秦。
现代文：当时秦昭王派白起进攻韩国和，在华阳打败了韩、魏两国，捕获了魏国将领芒卯，韩、魏两国向秦国臣服并事奉秦国。
English: At that time, Qin Zhao Wang sent Baiqi to attack South Korea and, in Huayang, defeated South Korea and Wei and captured Wei general Mengwu. South Korea and Wei submitted to Qin and served Qin.

古文：秦昭王方令白起与韩、魏共伐楚，未行，而楚使黄歇適至於秦，闻秦之计。
现代文：秦昭王已命令白起同韩国、魏国一起进攻楚国，但秦军还没有启程，这时楚王派黄歇恰巧来到秦国，听说了秦国的这个计划。
English: King Qin Zhao had ordered Bai to attack Chu together with Korea and Wei, but the Qin army had not yet set off. At this time, King Chu sent Huang Xie to come to Qin and heard about this plan of Qin.

古文：当是之时，秦已前使白起攻楚，取巫、黔中之郡，拔鄢郢，东至竟陵，楚顷襄王东徙治於陈县。
现代文：在这个时候，秦国已经占领了楚国大片领土，因为在这以前秦王曾派白起攻打楚国，夺取了巫郡、黔中郡，攻占了鄢城郢都，向东一直打到竟陵，楚顷襄王只好把都城向东迁到陈县。
English: At this time, the Qin State had already occupied a large territory of the Chu State, because before this, the Qin King had sent Baiqi to attack the Chu State, captured Wushun County and Yuzhong County, captured Shicheng Yidu, and fought eastward all the way to Chongling. King Xiang of Chu had to move the capital city eastward to Chen County.

古文：黄歇见楚怀王之为秦所诱而入朝，遂见欺，留死於秦。
现代文：黄歇见到楚怀王受到秦国引诱而到秦国的朝堂去商谈，结果上当受骗，被扣留并且死在秦国。
English: Huang Xie saw that King Chu Huai was lured by the Qin State and went to the Qin State court to negotiate. As a result, he was deceived, detained and died in the Qin State.

古文：顷襄王，其子也，秦轻之，恐壹举兵而灭楚。
现代文：顷襄王是楚怀王的儿子，秦国根本不把他看在眼里，黄歇担心一旦发动战争楚国就会灭亡。
English: Since King Xiang was the son of King Chu Huai, Qin did not take him seriously at all. Huang Xie was worried that if he started a war, Chu would perish.

古文：歇乃上书说秦昭王曰：
现代文：于是他上书劝说秦王道：
English: So he wrote to King Qin to persuade him:

古文：天下莫彊於秦、楚。
现代文：天下的诸侯没有谁比秦、楚两国更强大的。
English: None of the princes in the world were more powerful than Qin and Chu.

古文：今闻大王欲伐楚，此犹两虎相与斗。
现代文：现在我听说大王要征讨楚国，这就如同两个猛虎互相搏斗。
English: Now I hear that the king wants to conquer Chu, it's like two tigers fighting each other.

古文：两虎相与斗而驽犬受其弊，不如善楚。
现代文：两虎相斗而劣狗趁机得到好处，不如与楚国亲善。
English: If two tigers fight each other and the bad dog takes advantage of the opportunity to get benefits, it is better to be friendly with Chu.

古文：臣请言其说：臣闻物至则反，冬夏是也；致至则危，累釭是也。
现代文：请允许我陈述自己的看法：我听说事物发展到顶点就必定走向反面，冬季与夏季的变化就是这样；事物积累到极高处就会危险，堆叠棋子就是这样。
English: Allow me to state my opinion: I have heard it said that when things reach a climax, they must go into reverse, such is the change between winter and summer; when things accumulate to a very high point, they are dangerous, such is the stacking of pieces.

古文：今大国之地，遍天下有其二垂，此从生民已来，万乘之地未尝有也。
现代文：现在秦国的土地，占着天下西、北两方边地，这是从有人类以来，即使天子的领地也不曾有过的。
English: At present, the land of Qin occupies the western and northern edges of the world. This is something that has not been seen since the beginning of mankind, even in the realm of the Son of Heaven.

古文：先帝文王、庄王之身，三世不妄接地於齐，以绝从亲之要。
现代文：可是从先帝文王、庄王以及大王自身，三代不忘使秦国土地同齐国连接起来，借以切断各国合纵结盟的关键部位。
English: However, from the previous emperors, King Wen, King Zhuang and the great king himself, three generations did not forget to connect the land of Qin with that of Qi, thereby cutting off the key parts of the vertical alliance of various countries.

古文：今王使盛桥守事於韩，盛桥以其地入秦，是王不用甲，不信威，而得百里之地。
现代文：现在大王派盛桥到韩国驻守任职，盛桥把韩国的土地并入秦国，这是不动一兵一卒，不施展武力，而得到百里土地的好办法。
English: Now the king has sent Shengqiao to Korea to serve as a garrison. Shengqiao has merged the land of Korea into Qin. This is a good way to get a hundred miles of land without moving a single soldier or using force.

古文：王可谓能矣。
现代文：大王可以说是有才能了。
English: The great king can be said to have talent.

古文：王又举甲而攻魏，杜大梁之门，举河内，拔燕、酸枣、虚、桃，入邢，魏之兵云翔而不敢捄。
现代文：大王又发兵进攻魏国，堵塞了魏国都城大梁的出入通路，攻取河内，拿下燕、酸枣、虚、桃等地，进而攻入邢地，魏国军队如风吹白云四处逃散而不敢彼此相救。
English: The great king also sent troops to attack Wei, blocked the entrance and exit routes of the girders of the capital city of Wei, captured Hanoi, won the swallow, sour jujube, virtual, peach and other places, and then invaded Loudi. The Wei troops scattered like the wind blowing white clouds and did not dare to save each other.

古文：王之功亦多矣。
现代文：大王的功绩也算够多了。
English: The exploits of the great king are more than enough.

古文：王休甲息众，二年而後复之；又并蒲、衍、首、垣，以临仁、平丘，黄、济阳婴城而魏氏服；王又割濮之北，注齐秦之要，绝楚赵之脊，天下五合六聚而不敢救。
现代文：大王停止征战休整部队，两年之后再次发兵；又夺取了蒲、衍、首、垣等地，进而兵临仁、平丘，黄、济阳则退缩自守，结果魏国屈服降秦；大王又割取了濮磿以北的土地，打通了齐国、秦国的通道，截断了楚国、赵国联系的脊梁，天下经过五次联合而相集的六国诸侯，不敢互相救援。
English: The great king stopped conscripting the rest and recuperation troops, and sent troops again two years later; he also seized the places of Pu, Yan, Shou, and Qiao, and then the soldiers of Linren, Pingqiu, Huang, and Jiyang retreated to defend themselves, as a result of which the State of Wei succumbed to the Qin; the great king also cut off the land to the north of Zou, opened the channels of the State of Qi and the State of Qin, and cut off the backbone of the connection between the State of Chu and the State of Zhao. After five times of unification, the princes of the six countries gathered together, and

古文：王之威亦单矣。
现代文：大王的威势也可以说发挥到极点了。
English: The authority of the great king can also be said to have been brought to the extreme.

古文：王若能持功守威，绌攻取之心而肥仁义之地，使无後患，三王不足四，五伯不足六也。
现代文：大王如果保持功绩，掌握威势，去掉功伐之心，广施仁义之道，使得没有以后的祸患，您的事业可与三王并称，您的威势可与五霸并举。
English: Great King, if you maintain your merits, master your power, remove the heart of meritorious deeds, and widely practice the way of benevolence and righteousness, so that there will be no future disasters, your cause can be said to be the same as the Three Kings, and your power can be said to be the same as the Five Heroes.

古文：王若负人徒之众，仗兵革之彊，乘毁魏之威，而欲以力臣天下之主，臣恐其有後患也。
现代文：大王如果依仗壮丁的众多，凭靠军备的强大，趁着毁灭魏国的威势，而想以武力使天下的诸侯屈服，我恐怕您会有以后的祸患啊。
English: If the Great King, relying on the multitude of valiant men, on the strength of armaments, and taking advantage of the destruction of Wei, wants to use force to make the princes of the world submit, I am afraid you will have future disasters.

古文：诗曰 靡不有初，鲜克有终 。
现代文：《诗经》上说： 没有人不想有好的开头，却很少人能有好的终结 。
English: The Book of Songs says, "No one wants a bad beginning, but few want a good ending."

古文：易曰 狐涉水，濡其尾 。
现代文：《易经》上说： 小狐渡水将渡过时，却湿了尾巴 。
English: "I Ching" says: The little fox wades through the water, but his tail gets wet.

古文：此言始之易，终之难也。
现代文：这些话说的是开始容易，结尾难。
English: These words mean that the beginning is easy and the end is difficult.

古文：何以知其然也？
现代文：怎么才能知道是这样的呢？
English: How do you know that's the case?

古文：昔智氏见伐赵之利而不知榆次之祸，吴见伐齐之便而不知干隧之败。
现代文：从前，智伯只看见攻伐赵襄子的好处却没料到自己反在榆次遭到杀身之祸。吴王夫差只看到进攻齐国的利益却没有想到在干隧被越王勾践战败。
English: In the past, Zhi Bo only saw the benefits of attacking Zhao Xiangzi, but did not expect that he would be killed. Wu Wangfuba only saw the benefits of attacking Qi, but did not expect to be defeated by Yue Wang Gou in the dry tunnel.

古文：此二国者，非无大功也，没利於前而易患於後也。
现代文：这两个国家，不是没有建树过巨大功绩，由于贪图眼前的利益，结果换得了后来的祸患。
English: It is not without great achievements that these two countries have built, but due to the greed of immediate benefits, the result has been replaced by later disasters.

古文：吴之信越也，从而伐齐，既胜齐人於艾陵，还为越王禽三渚之浦。
现代文：因为吴王夫差相信了越国的恭维，所以才去攻打齐国，在艾陵战胜了齐国人之后，回来时却在三江水边被越王勾践擒获。
English: Because Wu Wangfuchai believed in the flattery of Yue, so he went to attack Qi. After defeating the Qi people in Ailing, he was captured by the Yue King at the water's edge of the Sanjiang River when he returned.

古文：智氏之信韩、魏也，从而伐赵，攻晋阳城，胜有日矣，韩、魏叛之，杀智伯瑶於凿台之下。
现代文：智伯相信韩氏、魏氏，因而攻伐赵氏，进攻晋阳城，胜利指日可待了，可是韩氏、魏氏背叛了他，在凿台杀死了智伯瑶。
English: Zhibo believed in Han and Wei, so he attacked Zhao and Jinyang, and victory was just around the corner. However, Han and Wei betrayed him and killed Zhibo at the chisel.

古文：今王妒楚之不毁也，而忘毁楚之彊韩、魏也，臣为王虑而不取也。
现代文：现在大王嫉恨楚国不毁灭，却忘掉毁灭楚国就会使韩、魏两国更加强大，我替大王考虑，认为不能这样做。
English: Now the great king is jealous of Chu without destroying it, but forgets that destroying Chu will make Han and Wei more powerful. I consider for the great king and think that this cannot be done.

古文：诗曰 大武远宅而不涉 。
现代文：有诗道： 大军不远离自家宅地长途跋涉 。
English: There is a poem: A large army does not trek far away from their homes.

古文：从此观之，楚国，援也；邻国，敌也。
现代文：从这种观点看，楚国是帮手，邻国才是敌人。
English: From this point of view, the state of Chu is a helper, and its neighbors are enemies.

古文：诗云 趯趯免，还犬获之。他人有心，余忖度之 。
现代文：《诗经》说： 狡兔又蹦又跳，遇到猎犬跑不掉；别人的心思，我能揣摩到 。
English: "The Book of Songs" says: "The cunning rabbit hops and skips, but cannot escape the hound; I can fathom the thoughts of others."

古文：今王中道而信韩、魏之善王也，此正吴之信越也。
现代文：现在大王中途相信韩、魏两国与您亲善，这正如同吴国相信越国啊。
English: Now the great king halfway believes that the two countries of Korea and Wei are friendly with you, just as he believes that the country of Yue is friendly with the country of Wu.

古文：臣闻之，敌不可假，时不可失。
现代文：我听到这样的说法，敌人不能宽容，时机不能错过。
English: I have heard it said that the enemy must not be tolerated and the opportunity must not be missed.

古文：臣恐韩、魏卑辞除患而实欲欺大国也。
现代文：我恐怕韩、魏两国低声下气要秦国消除祸患，实际是欺骗秦国。
English: I'm afraid that the two countries of Han and Wei are trying to trick Qin into eliminating the scourge.

古文：何则？
现代文：怎么见得呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：王无重世之德於韩、魏，而有累世之怨焉。
现代文：大王对韩国、魏国没有几世的恩德，却有几代的仇怨。
English: For Korea and Wei, the great king did not have several generations of grace, but several generations of grudge.

古文：夫韩、魏父子兄弟接踵而死於秦者将十世矣。
现代文：韩、魏国君的父子兄弟接连死在秦国刀下的将近十代了。
English: The father and son brothers of Han and Wei Guojun died one after another under the sword of Qin for nearly ten generations.

古文：本国残，社稷坏，宗庙毁。
现代文：他们国土残缺，国家破败，宗庙焚毁。
English: Their land is in ruins, their country is in ruins, and their ancestral temple has been burned.

古文：刳腹绝肠，折颈摺颐，首身分离，暴骸骨於草泽，头颅僵仆，相望於境，父子老弱系脰束手为群虏者相及於路。
现代文：上至将领下至士卒，剖腹断肠，砍头毁面，身首分离，枯骨暴露在荒野水泽之中，头颅僵挺，横尸遍野，国内到处可见。父子老弱被捆着脖子绑着手，成了任人凌辱的俘虏，一群接一群地走在路上。
English: From the highest to the lowest, from generals to soldiers, intestines were cut open, heads were chopped off, faces were disfigured, necks were separated, dead bones were exposed in the wilderness, skulls were stiff, corpses were everywhere, and they could be seen everywhere in the country. Fathers and sons, old and weak, were tied by the neck and hands, and became prisoners who were humiliated by everyone, walking on the road in groups.

古文：鬼神孤伤，无所血食。人民不聊生，族类离散，流亡为仆妾者，盈满海内矣。
现代文：百姓无法生活，亲族逃离，骨肉分散，流亡沦落为男仆女奴的，充满海内各国。
English: The people are unable to live, relatives have fled, flesh and blood have been scattered, and the exiles have been reduced to men and women slaves, filling every country in the world.

古文：故韩、魏之不亡，秦社稷之忧也，今王资之与攻楚，不亦过乎！
现代文：所以韩、魏两国不灭亡，这是秦国最大的忧患，如今大王却借助他们一起攻打楚国，不也太失当吗！
English: Therefore, Han and Wei will not perish, which is the biggest worry of Qin, but now the great king is using them to attack Chu, isn't it too inappropriate!

古文：且王攻楚将恶出兵？
现代文：再说大王进攻楚国怎么出兵呢？
English: Besides, how could the great king send troops to attack Chu?

古文：王将借路於仇雠之韩、魏乎？
现代文：大王将向仇敌韩国、魏国借路吗？
English: Will the great king borrow the road from the enemy Korea and Wei?

古文：兵出之日而王忧其不返也，是王以兵资於仇雠之韩、魏也。
现代文：若是，则出兵之日就是大王忧患他们不能返回之时，这是大王把自己的军队借给仇敌韩国、魏国啊。
English: If so, then the day of the dispatch of troops was the time when the great king was worried that they could not return. This was when the great king lent his army to the enemy Korea and Wei.

古文：王若不借路於仇雠之韩、魏，必攻随水右壤。
现代文：大王如果不从仇敌韩国、魏国借路，那就必定攻打随水右边的地区。
English: If the great king did not borrow the road from the enemy Korea and Wei, he would certainly attack the area to the right of the water.

古文：随水右壤，此皆广川大水，山林谿谷，不食之地也，王虽有之，不为得地。
现代文：而随水右边地区，都是大川大水，高山密林，深溪幽谷，这样一些无粮地区，大王即使占领了它，也等于没有得到土地。
English: But the areas on the right side of the water are all large rivers, dense forests, deep streams and valleys. Such grain-free areas, even if the great king occupied it, would be equivalent to not getting land.

古文：是王有毁楚之名而无得地之实也。
现代文：这是大王落个毁灭楚国的恶名声而没有得到占领土地的实惠啊。
English: This is the great king falling into the bad reputation of destroying the state of Chu and not getting the real benefits of occupying the land.

古文：且王攻楚之日，四国必悉起兵以应王。
现代文：再说大王从进攻楚国之日起，韩、赵、魏、齐四国必定全都发兵对付大王。
English: Moreover, from the day the emperor attacked Chu, the four countries of Han, Zhao, Wei, and Qi must have all sent troops to deal with the emperor.

古文：秦、楚之兵构而不离，魏氏将出而攻留、方与、铚、湖陵、砀、萧、相，故宋必尽。
现代文：秦、楚两国一旦交战便兵连祸结不会罢休，魏国将出兵攻打留、方与、铚、湖陵、砀、萧、相等城邑和地方，占领的原先宋国土地必定全都丧失。
English: Once the two countries of Qin and Chu are at war, the soldiers will not stop fighting. Wei will send troops to attack and hold cities and towns and places such as Fanghe, Luoyang, Huling, Handan, Xiao, etc. The land originally occupied by the Song Dynasty will all be lost.

古文：齐人南面攻楚，泗上必举。
现代文：齐国人向南攻击楚地，泗水地区必定攻克。
English: The people of Qi attacked Chu to the south, and the Surabaya region was definitely conquered.

古文：此皆平原四达，膏腴之地，而使独攻。
现代文：这些地方都是平坦开阔四通八达的肥沃土地，却让他们单独占领。
English: These places are flat, open, fertile lands, but they let them occupy them alone.

古文：王破楚以肥韩、魏於中国而劲齐。
现代文：大王击败楚国而使韩、魏两国在中原地区壮大起来，又使齐国更加强劲。
English: The Great King defeated the State of Chu, which made the two countries of Han and Wei grow stronger in the Central Plains, and made the State of Qi even stronger.

古文：韩、魏之彊，足以校於秦。
现代文：韩、魏两国强大了，完全能够同秦国抗衡。
English: Han and Wei became powerful and were fully able to compete with Qin.

古文：齐南以泗水为境，东负海，北倚河，而无後患，天下之国莫彊於齐、魏，齐、魏得地葆利而详事下吏，一年之後，为帝未能，其於禁王之为帝有馀矣。
现代文：齐国南面以泗水为边境，东面背靠大海，北面依恃黄河，便没有以后的祸患，天下的国家没有谁能比齐国、魏国更强大，齐、魏两国得到土地保持已得的利益，进而让下级官吏审慎治理，一年以后，即使不能称帝天下，但阻止大王称帝却是富富有余的。
English: The southern border of Qi was Surabaya, the eastern border was the sea, and the northern border was the Yellow River, so there was no future disaster. No country in the world could be more powerful than Qi and Wei. Qi and Wei obtained land to maintain the benefits they had already gained, and then let the lower-level officials carefully manage it. A year later, even if they could not be called the emperor of the world, it was more than enough to prevent the great king from being called the emperor.

古文：夫以王壤土之博，人徒之众，兵革之彊，壹举事而树怨於楚，迟令韩、魏归帝重於齐，是王失计也。
现代文：以大王土地的广大，人口的众多，军备的强大，一旦发兵而与楚国结下怨仇，就会让韩、魏两国尊齐称帝，这是大王计谋的失策啊！
English: With the vastness of the king's land, the large population, and the powerful armaments, once he sent troops and made a grudge with Chu, he would make Han and Wei countries jointly claim the throne. This was a blunder of the king's strategy!

古文：臣为王虑，莫若善楚。
现代文：我替大王考虑，没有比与楚国友好更好的办法了。
English: I think for the great king, there is no better way than to be friendly with Chu.

古文：秦、楚合而为一以临韩，韩必敛手。
现代文：秦、楚两国联合而成为一个整体进逼韩国，韩必定收敛不敢轻举妄动。
English: The two countries of Qin and Chu united as a whole to push South Korea, and South Korea must be restrained and dare not act rashly.

古文：王施以东山之险，带以曲河之利，韩必为关内之侯。
现代文：大王再经营设置东山的险要地势，利用黄河环绕的有利条件，韩国就必定成为秦国的臣属。
English: Daowang then set up the precarious position of Dongshan, and took advantage of the favorable conditions surrounding the Yellow River. South Korea would inevitably become a subject of Qin.

古文：若是而王以十万戍郑，梁氏寒心，许、鄢陵婴城，而上蔡、召陵不往来也，如此而魏亦关内侯矣。
现代文：如果造成了这种形势大王再用十万兵力驻守郑地，魏国则心惊胆战，许、鄢两地退缩固守不敢出击，那么上蔡、台陵与魏国的联系就被断绝，这样魏国也会成为秦国的臣属了。
English: If this situation caused the Great King to garrison Zheng again with a hundred thousand troops, and the State of Wei was scared and did not dare to attack, then the connection between Shang Cai and Tailing and the State of Wei would be severed, and the State of Wei would also become a subject of the State of Qin.

古文：王壹善楚，而关内两万乘之主注地於齐，齐右壤可拱手而取也。
现代文：大王一旦同楚国交好，那么函谷关以内两个万乘之国一一韩与魏就要向齐国割取土地，齐国右边济州一带广大地区便可轻而易举地得到。
English: Once the Great King made friends with the State of Chu, then Han and Wei, the two countries of Manchuria within the Hangeul Pass, would have to take land from the State of Qi, and the vast area around Jeju on the right side of the State of Qi could be easily obtained.

古文：王之地一经两海，要约天下，是燕、赵无齐、楚，齐、楚无燕、赵也。
现代文：大王的土地横贯东、西两海，约束天下诸侯，这样燕国、赵国没有齐国、楚国作依托，齐国、楚国没有燕国、赵国相依傍。
English: The Great King's land stretches across the East and West Seas, binding the princes of the world. Thus, Yan and Zhao were not supported by Qi and Chu, and Qi and Chu were not supported by Yan and Zhao.

古文：然後危动燕、赵，直摇齐、楚，此四国者不待痛而服矣。
现代文：然后大王用危亡震慑燕、赵两国，直接动摇齐、楚两国，那么这四个国家不须急攻便会向秦国臣服了。
English: Then the great king used the threat of death to deter the two countries of Yan and Zhao, and directly shake the two countries of Qi and Chu. Then these four countries would submit to Qin without a sudden attack.

古文：昭王曰： 善。 
现代文：昭王读了春申君的上书后说： 真好。 
English: After reading Chunshen's petition, King Zhao said, "It's really good.

古文：於是乃止白起而谢韩、魏。
现代文：于是阻止了白起出征并辞谢了韩、魏两国。
English: As a result, he prevented Baiqi from going to war and thanked both Korea and Wei.

古文：发使赂楚，约为与国。
现代文：同时派使臣给楚国送去了厚礼，秦楚盟约结为友好国家。
English: At the same time, he sent envoys to send gifts to Chu, and the Qin-Chu Alliance was formed as a friendly country.

古文：黄歇受约归楚，楚使歇与太子完入质於秦，秦留之数年。
现代文：黄歇接受了盟约返回楚国，楚王派黄歇与太子完到秦国作人质，秦国把他们扣留了几年之久。
English: Huang Xie accepted the covenant and returned to the State of Chu. The King of Chu sent Huang Xie and the crown prince to the State of Qin as hostages. The State of Qin detained them for several years.

古文：楚顷襄王病，太子不得归。
现代文：后来楚顷襄王病了，太子完却无法回到楚国。
English: Later, Prince Xiang of Chu fell ill, but the prince was unable to return to Chu.

古文：而楚太子与秦相应侯善，於是黄歇乃说应侯曰： 相国诚善楚太子乎？ 
现代文：但太子与秦国相国应侯私人关系很好，于是黄歇就劝说应侯道： 相国您确实对楚国的太子很好吗？ 
English: However, the prince and the prince of Qin had a good personal relationship with the prince of Yinghou, so Huang Xie persuaded the prince of Yinghou to say: My country, are you really good to the prince of Chu?

古文：应侯曰： 然。 
现代文：应侯说： 是啊。 
English: Ying Hou said, "Yes."

古文：歇曰： 今楚王恐不起疾，秦不如归其太子。
现代文：黄歇说： 如今楚王恐怕一病不起了，秦国不如让太子回去好。
English: Huang Xie said, "I'm afraid that King Chu is very ill now. It would be better for the State of Qin to let the crown prince go back."

古文：太子得立，其事秦必重而德相国无穷，是亲与国而得储万乘也。
现代文：如果太子能立为王，他事奉秦国一定厚重而感激相国的恩德将永不竭尽，这不仅是亲善友好国家的表示而且为将来保留了一个万乘大国的盟友。
English: If the prince can become king, he will serve the Qin state with a certain amount of weight and be grateful to the country's benevolence will never be exhausted. This is not only a sign of a friendly and friendly country, but also retains an ally of a great power for the future.

古文：若不归，则咸阳一布衣耳；楚更立太子，必不事秦。
现代文：如果不让他回去，那他充其量是个咸阳城里的百姓罢了；楚国将改立太子，到时肯定不会事奉秦国。
English: If he is not allowed to return, then he is at best a commoner in the city of Xianyang; the state of Chu will reinstate the crown prince, and he will certainly not serve the state of Qin.

古文：夫失与国而绝万乘之和，非计也。
现代文：那样就会失去友好国家的信任，又断绝了一个万乘大国的盟友，这不是上策。
English: That would lose the trust of friendly countries and cut off an ally of a great power, which is not the best strategy.

古文：原相国孰虑之。 
现代文：希望相国您仔细考虑这件事情。 
English: I hope that you will carefully consider this matter.

古文：应侯以闻秦王。
现代文：应侯范雎把黄歇说的意思报告给秦王。
English: At the request of Hou Fanqi, he reported Huang Xie's words to King Qin.

古文：秦王曰： 令楚太子之傅先往问楚王之疾，返而後图之。 
现代文：秦王说： 让楚国太子的老师先回去探问一下楚王的病情，等他回来后再作计议。 
English: Qin Wang said: Let the teacher of the Prince of Chu first go back and inquire about the condition of King Chu, and then make a plan after he returns.

古文：黄歇为楚太子计曰： 秦之留太子也，欲以求利也。
现代文：黄歇替楚国太子谋划说： 秦国扣留太子的目的，是要借此索取好处。
English: Huang Xie, who plotted for the crown prince of Chu, said: The purpose of Qin's detention of the crown prince is to take advantage of it.

古文：今太子力未能有以利秦也，歇忧之甚。
现代文：现在太子要使秦国得到好处是无能为力的，我很为您担忧。
English: Now the prince can do nothing to benefit Qin. I am very worried about you.

古文：而阳文君子二人在中，王若卒大命，太子不在，阳文君子必立为後，太子不得奉宗庙矣。
现代文：而且阳文君的两个儿子都在楚国国内，大王如果不幸辞世，太子又不在楚国，阳文君的儿子必定立为后继人，太子您就不能享有国家了。
English: Moreover, both of Yang Wenjun's sons are in the country of Chu. If the great king dies and the prince is not in the country of Chu, Yang Wenjun's son will certainly be appointed as the successor, and the prince will not be able to enjoy the country.

古文：不如亡秦，与使者俱出；臣请止，以死当之。 
现代文：不如逃离秦国，跟使臣一起出去；请让我留下来，拿我的性命来承担这件事的后果。 
English: It would be better for me to flee Qin and go with the envoys; please let me stay and bear the consequences of this with my life.

古文：楚太子因变衣服为楚使者御以出关，而黄歇守舍，常为谢病。
现代文：楚太子于是换了衣服扮成楚国使臣的车夫得以出关，而黄歇在客馆里留守，总是推托太子有病谢绝会客。
English: Prince Chu then changed his clothes and pretended to be the driver of the ambassador of the State of Chu to be able to leave the customs, while Huang Xie stayed behind in the guest house, always insisting that the prince was ill and would never be a guest.

古文：度太子已远，秦不能追，歇乃自言秦昭王曰： 楚太子已归，出远矣。
现代文：估计太子已经走远，秦国追不上了，黄歇就自动向秦昭王报告说： 楚国太子已经回去，离开很远了。
English: Estimating that the crown prince had already gone far away and Qin could not catch up, Huang Xie automatically reported to Qin Zhao Wang: The crown prince of Chu has already returned and is far away.

古文：歇当死，原赐死。 
现代文：我当死罪，愿您赐我一死。 
English: I deserve the death penalty. Please let me die.

古文：昭王大怒，欲听其自杀也。
现代文：昭王大为恼火，要准予黄歇自杀。
English: King Zhao was very angry and wanted to allow Huang Xie to commit suicide.

古文：应侯曰： 歇为人臣，出身以徇其主，太子立，必用歇，故不如无罪而归之，以亲楚。 
现代文：应侯进言道： 黄歇作为臣子，为了他的主人献出自己生命，太子如果立为楚王，肯定重用黄歇，所以不如免他死罪让他回国，来表示对楚国的亲善。 
English: Ying Hou Jin said: Huang Xie, as a vassal, sacrificed his life for his master, and if the prince were to become the king of Chu, he would certainly make heavy use of Huang Xie, so it would be better to let him return to the country without the death penalty to show his goodwill to Chu.

古文：秦因遣黄歇。
现代文：秦王听从了应侯的意见便把黄歇遣送回国。
English: King Qin listened to the opinion of Ying Hou and sent Huang Xie back to China.

古文：歇至楚三月，楚顷襄王卒，太子完立，是为考烈王。
现代文：黄歇回到楚国三个月，楚顷襄王去世，太子完被立为楚王，这就是考烈王。
English: Three months after Huang Xie returned to the State of Chu, King Xiang of Chu died, and the prince was finally appointed King of Chu. This was King Korai.

古文：考烈王元年，以黄歇为相，封为春申君，赐淮北地十二县。
现代文：考烈王元年，任命黄歇为宰相，封为春申君，赏赐淮北地区十二个县。
English: In the first year of the reign of King Koretsu, Huang Xie was appointed prime minister, given the title of Chunshenjun, and twelve counties in Huaibei region were rewarded.

古文：後十五岁，黄歇言之楚王曰： 淮北地边齐，其事急，请以为郡便。 
现代文：十五年以后，黄歇向楚王进言道： 淮河以北地区靠近齐国，那里情势紧急，请把这个地区划为郡让治理更加方便。 
English: Fifteen years later, Huang Xie made a suggestion to King Chu: The area north of the Huai River is close to Qi Province, where the situation is urgent. Please classify this area as a county to make governance more convenient.

古文：因并献淮北十二县。请封於江东。
现代文：并同时献出淮北十二个县，请求封到江东去。
English: At the same time, he offered twelve counties in Huaibei and asked to be sealed to the east of the river.

古文：考烈王许之。
现代文：考烈王答应了他的请求。
English: King Koretsu agreed to his request.

古文：春申君因城故吴墟，以自为都邑。
现代文：春申君就在吴国故都修建城池，把它们作为自己的都邑。
English: Chunshenjun built a castle in the ancient capital of Wu and made it his own capital city.

古文：春申君既相楚，是时齐有孟尝君，赵有平原君，魏有信陵君，方争下士，招致宾客，以相倾夺，辅国持权。
现代文：春申君已经担任了楚国宰相，这时齐国有孟尝君，赵国有平原君，魏国有信陵君，大家都正在竞相礼贤下士，招徕宾客，互相争夺贤士，辅助君王掌握国政。
English: Chun Shenjun had already served as the prime minister of Chu. At that time, Meng Yaojun of Qi, Pingyuan of Zhao, and Xinling of Wei were all competing for courtiers, inviting guests, competing with each other for sages, and assisting the monarch in mastering state affairs.

古文：春申君为楚相四年，秦破赵之长平军四十馀万。
现代文：春申君担任楚国宰相的第四年，秦国击败坑杀了赵国长平驻军四十多万人。
English: In the fourth year of Chun Shenjun's tenure as prime minister of Chu, Qin defeated and killed more than 400,000 soldiers stationed in Changping, Zhao.

古文：五年，围邯郸。
现代文：第五年，包围了赵国都城邯郸。
English: In the fifth year, the capital city of Zhao was besieged.

古文：邯郸告急於楚，楚使春申君将兵往救之，秦兵亦去，春申君归。
现代文：邯郸向楚国告急求援，楚国派春申君带兵去救援邯郸，秦军解围撤退后，春申君于是率兵返回楚国。
English: He urgently appealed to the State of Chu for help, and the State of Chu sent Chunshenjun to rescue him. After the Qin army withdrew, Chunshenjun led his soldiers back to the State of Chu.

古文：春申君相楚八年，为楚北伐灭鲁，以荀卿为兰陵令。
现代文：春申君担任楚国宰相的第八年，为楚国向北征伐，灭掉鲁国，任命荀卿担任兰陵县令。
English: In the eighth year of Chunshenjun's tenure as prime minister of the State of Chu, he led a campaign to the north for the State of Chu, annihilated the State of Lu, and appointed Gongqing as Lanling County Governor.

古文：当是时，楚复彊。
现代文：这个时候，楚国又兴盛强大起来。
English: At this time, the state of Chu became prosperous and powerful again.

古文：赵平原君使人於春申君，春申君舍之於上舍。
现代文：有一次，赵国平原君派使臣到春申君这里来访问，春申君把他们一行安排在上等客馆住下。
English: On one occasion, Zhao Pingyuan sent envoys to visit Chunshen, who arranged for them to stay at a high-class guest house.

古文：赵使欲夸楚，为玳瑁簪，刀剑室以珠玉饰之，请命春申君客。春申君客三千馀人，其上客皆蹑珠履以见赵使，赵使大惭。
现代文：赵国使臣想向楚国夸耀赵国的富有，特意用玳瑁簪子绾插冠髻，亮出用珠玉装饰的剑鞘，请求招来春申君的宾客会面，春申君的上等宾客都穿着宝珠做的鞋子来见赵国使臣，使赵国使臣自惭形秽。
English: Zhao's envoys wanted to show off Zhao's wealth to Chu, so they deliberately used a pair of tweezers to insert a crown, showed a sword sheath decorated with jewels, and asked to invite Chunshen's guests to meet. Chunshen's high-class guests all wore shoes made of precious stones to meet Zhao's envoys, making Zhao's envoys feel ashamed.

古文：春申君相十四年，秦庄襄王立，以吕不韦为相，封为文信侯。
现代文：春申君任宰相的第十四年，秦国的庄襄王即位，任命吕不韦为秦相，封为文信侯。
English: In the fourteenth year of Chunshenjun's tenure as prime minister, Zhuangxiang Wang of Qin ascended to the throne, appointed Lü Buwei as Qin minister, and was given the title of Wenxin Hou.

古文：取东周。
现代文：夺取了东周。
English: East Zhou captured.

古文：春申君相二十二年，诸侯患秦攻伐无已时，乃相与合从，西伐秦，而楚王为从长，春申君用事。
现代文：春申君任宰相的第二十二年，各国诸侯担忧秦国的攻战征伐无止无休不能遏制，就互相盟约联合起来向西讨伐秦国，而楚国国君担任六国盟约之长，让春申君当权主事。
English: In the 22nd year of Chunshenjun's tenure as prime minister, the princes of various countries were worried that the attack and conquest of Qin could not be contained, so they made a mutual alliance to fight Qin to the west, and the prince of Chu served as the head of the six-nation alliance, letting Chunshenjun take the lead.

古文：至函谷关，秦出兵攻，诸侯兵皆败走。
现代文：六国联军到达函谷关后，秦军出关应战，六国联军战败而逃。
English: After the allied forces of the six countries arrived at the Hanzhong Pass, the Qin army went out to fight, and the allied forces of the six countries were defeated and fled.

古文：楚考烈王以咎春申君，春申君以此益疏。
现代文：楚考烈王把作战失利归罪于春申君，春申君因此渐渐被疏远了。
English: King Chuko blamed the loss of the battle on Chunshenjun, and Chunshenjun was gradually alienated.

古文：客有观津人硃英，谓春申君曰： 人皆以楚为彊而君用之弱，其於英不然。
现代文：这时宾客中有个观津人朱英，对春申君说： 人们都认为楚国是个强大国家而您把它治理弱了，这种看法我认为不对。
English: At this time, one of the guests, Zhu Ying, a Guanzhong, said to Chunshenjun: People all think that Chu is a powerful country and that you are weak in governing it. I think this view is wrong.

古文：先君时善秦二十年而不攻楚，何也？
现代文：先王时与秦国交好二十年而秦国不攻打楚国，是为什么？
English: Qin did not attack Chu for twenty years, why?

古文：秦逾黾隘之塞而攻楚，不便；假道於两周，背韩、魏而攻楚，不可。
现代文：秦国要越过黾隘这个要塞进攻楚国，是很不方便的；要是从西周、东周借路的话，它背对着韩、魏两国进攻楚国，也是不行的。
English: It would be very inconvenient for Qin to attack Chu across the Narrow Isthmus, which is a fortress; it would also be impossible for it to attack Chu with its back to Korea and Wei if it had to take a route from the west or east of Zhou.

古文：今则不然，魏旦暮亡，不能爱许、鄢陵，其许魏割以与秦。
现代文：现在的形势就不是这样了，魏国危在旦夕，不能吝惜许和鄢陵了，答应把这两城邑割给秦国。
English: This is not the case in the current situation. As Wei was on the brink of collapse, it could no longer begrudge Xu and Fuling, and agreed to cede the two cities to Qin.

古文：秦兵去陈百六十里，臣之所观者，见秦、楚之日斗也。 
现代文：这样秦国军队离楚都陈只有一百六十里路，我将看到的是，秦、楚两国日甚一日的交兵了。 
English: In this way, the Qin army is only 160 miles away from Chu Du Chen. What I will see is that the two countries of Qin and Chu are engaged in a day-to-day battle.

古文：楚於是去陈徙寿春；而秦徙卫野王，作置东郡。
现代文：楚国当时就把都城从陈迁到了寿春；而秦国则把附庸卫元君从濮阳迁到了野王，设置了东郡。
English: At that time, the State of Chu moved its capital from Chen to Shuchun; while the State of Qin moved its vassal Wei Yuanjun from Poyang to Nio, setting up Dong County.

古文：春申君由此就封於吴，行相事。
现代文：春申君从此到了封地吴，同时执行宰相职务。
English: From then on, Chunshenjun went to the fiefdom of Wu, and at the same time performed the duties of prime minister.

古文：楚考烈王无子，春申君患之，求妇人宜子者进之，甚众，卒无子。
现代文：楚考烈王没有儿子，春申君为这件事发愁，就寻找宜于生育儿子的妇女进献给楚王，虽然进献了不少，却始终没生儿子。
English: King Chuko did not have a son, and Chunshen was worried about this, so he looked for a suitable woman to give birth to a son and offered her to King Chu. Although he offered a lot, he still did not have a son.

古文：赵人李园持其女弟，欲进之楚王，闻其不宜子，恐久毋宠。
现代文：赵国李园带着他的妹妹来，打算把他的妹妹进献给楚王，又听说楚王不宜于生育儿子，恐怕时间长了不能得到宠幸。
English: Li Yuan from Zhao brought his younger sister with him, intending to dedicate her to King Chu. It was also said that King Chu was not suitable for giving birth to a son, and I was afraid that he would not be able to receive the favor for a long time.

古文：李园求事春申君为舍人，已而谒归，故失期。
现代文：李园便寻找机会做了春申君的侍从，不久他请假回家，又故意延误了返回的时间。
English: Li Yuan then looked for an opportunity to become Chun Shen Jun's attendant, and soon he asked for leave to return home, and deliberately delayed his return time.

古文：还谒，春申君问之状，对曰： 齐王使使求臣之女弟，与其使者饮，故失期。 
现代文：回来后他去拜见春申君，春申君问他迟到的原因，他回答说： 齐王派使臣来求娶我的妹妹，由于我跟那个使臣饮酒，所以延误了返回的时间。 
English: After returning, he went to see Chunshenjun. Chunshenjun asked him why he was late. He replied, "King Qi sent an envoy to ask for my sister's hand in marriage. Since I had been drinking with that envoy, I delayed my return."

古文：春申君曰： 娉入乎？ 
现代文：春申君问道： 订婚礼物送来了吗？ 
English: Chunshen asked, "Did you get an engagement gift?"

古文：对曰： 未也。 
现代文：李园回答说： 没有。 
English: Li Yuan replied, "No."

古文：春申君曰： 可得见乎？ 
现代文：春申君又问道： 可以让我看看吗？ 
English: Chunshen also asked: Can I have a look?

古文：曰： 可。 
现代文：李园说： 可以。 
English: A: Yes.

古文：於是李园乃进其女弟，即幸於春申君。
现代文：于是李园就把他的妹妹献给春申君，并立即得到春申君的宠幸。
English: As a result, Li Yuan dedicated his younger sister to Chunshen and immediately became Chunshen's favorite.

古文：知其有身，李园乃与其女弟谋。
现代文：后来李园知道了他的妹妹怀了身孕，就同他妹妹商量了进一步的打算。
English: Later, Li Yuan learned that his sister was pregnant, and he discussed further plans with his sister.

古文：园女弟承间以说春申君曰： 楚王之贵幸君，虽兄弟不如也。
现代文：李园的妹妹找了个机会劝说春申君道： 楚王尊重宠信您，即使兄弟也不如。
English: Liyuan's sister took the opportunity to persuade Chunshen: King Chu respects and trusts you, even if you are a brother.

古文：今君相楚二十馀年，而王无子，即百岁後将更立兄弟，则楚更立君後，亦各贵其故所亲，君又安得长有宠乎？
现代文：如今您任楚国宰相已经二十多年，可是大王没有儿子，如果楚王寿终之后将要改立兄弟，那么楚国改立国君以后，也就会各自使原来所亲信的人显贵起来，您又怎么能长久地得到宠信呢？
English: Now you have been the prime minister of Chu for more than 20 years, but the great king does not have a son. If after the death of King Chu, brothers will be re-established, then after the re-establishment of the king of Chu, the people who were originally trusted will also be distinguished. How can you be trusted for a long time?

古文：非徒然也，君贵用事久，多失礼於王兄弟，兄弟诚立，祸且及身，何以保相印江东之封乎？
现代文：不仅如此，您身处尊位执掌政事多年，对楚王的兄弟们难免有许多失礼的地方，楚王兄弟果真立为国君，殃祸将落在您的身上，还怎么能保住宰相大印和江东封地呢？
English: Not only that, you have been holding the government for many years in your position of dignity, and there are inevitably many places of discourtesy to the brothers of King Chu. If the brothers of King Chu are really established as the king, the disaster will fall on you. How can you still keep Prime Minister Daying and the Jiangdong fiefdom?

古文：今妾自知有身矣，而人莫知。
现代文：现在我自己知道怀上身孕了，可是别人谁也不知道。
English: Now I know I'm pregnant, but no one else does.

古文：妾幸君未久，诚以君之重而进妾於楚王，王必幸妾；妾赖天有子男，则是君之子为王也，楚国尽可得，孰与身临不测之罪乎？ 
现代文：我得到您的宠幸时间不长，如果凭您的尊贵地位把我进献给楚王，楚王必定宠幸我；我仰赖上天的保佑生个儿子，这就是您的儿子做了楚王，楚国全为您所有，这与您身遭意想不到的殃祸相比，哪样好呢？ 
English: I have not been favored by you for a long time. If, by virtue of your noble position, you offer me to King Chu, King Chu will surely favor me. I rely on God's blessing to have a son. This is what your son has done for King Chu. You own all of Chu. How is this better than the unexpected misfortune that befell you?

古文：春申君大然之，乃出李园女弟，谨舍而言之楚王。
现代文：春申君认为这番话说得对极了，就把李园的妹妹送出家来，严密地安排在一个住所便向楚王称说要进献李园的妹妹。
English: Chun Shenjun thought that these words were absolutely right, so he sent Li Yuan's younger sister out of the house, arranged her in an apartment, and then told King Chu that he wanted to present Li Yuan's younger sister.

古文：楚王召入幸之，遂生子男，立为太子，以李园女弟为王后。
现代文：楚王把李园的妹妹召进宫来很是宠幸她，于是生了个儿子，立为太子，又把李园妹妹封为王后。
English: King Chu called Li Yuan's younger sister to the palace and was very pleased with her, so she gave birth to a son, who became the crown prince, and made Li Yuan's younger sister the queen.

古文：楚王贵李园，园用事。
现代文：楚王器重李园，于是李园参与朝政。
English: King Chu valued Li Yuan, so Li Yuan took part in court politics.

古文：李园既入其女弟，立为王后，子为太子，恐春申君语泄而益骄，阴养死士，欲杀春申君以灭口，而国人颇有知之者。
现代文：李园把他妹妹送进宫里，封为王后，生的儿子立为太子，便担心春申君说漏秘密而更加骄横，就暗中豢养了刺客。打算杀死春申君来灭口，这件事在国都有些人知道。
English: Li Yuan sent his younger sister to the palace to be crowned queen, and his son to be crowned prince. Fearing that Chunshenjun would be more arrogant if he revealed the secret, he secretly raised an assassin. He planned to kill Chunshenjun to silence him, and some people in the country knew about it.

古文：春申君相二十五年，楚考烈王病。
现代文：春申君任宰相的第二十五年，楚考烈王病重。
English: In the twenty-fifth year of Chunshenjun's tenure as prime minister, Chukaorei Wang fell seriously ill.

古文：硃英谓春申君曰： 世有毋望之福，又有毋望之祸。
现代文：朱英对春申君说： 世上有不期而至的福，又有不期而至的祸。
English: Zhu Ying said to Chunshenjun: There are unexpected blessings and unexpected disasters in the world.

古文：今君处毋望之世，事毋望之主，安可以无毋望之人乎？ 
现代文：如今您处在生死无常的世上，奉事喜怒无常的君主，又怎么能会没有不期而至的人呢？ 
English: Now you are in a fickle world, serving a fickle monarch, how can you not have a surprise visitor?

古文：春申君曰： 何谓毋望之福？ 
现代文：春申君问道： 什么叫不期而至的福？ 
English: Chun Shen asked: What is unexpected good fortune?

古文：曰： 君相楚二十馀年矣，虽名相国，实楚王也。
现代文：朱英回答说： 您任楚国宰相二十多年了，虽然名义上是宰相，实际上就是楚王。
English: Zhu Ying replied: You have been the prime minister of Chu for more than twenty years. Although you are nominally the prime minister, you are actually the king of Chu.

古文：今楚王病，旦暮且卒，而君相少主，因而代立当国，如伊尹、周公，王长而反政，不即遂南面称孤而有楚国？
现代文：现在楚王病重，死在旦夕，您辅佐年幼的国君，因而代他掌握国政，如同伊尹、周公一样，等君王长大再把大权交给他，不就是您南面称王而据有楚国？
English: Now that King Chu is seriously ill and died on the eve of the new year, you are assisting the young king and thus taking control of state affairs on his behalf. Just like Yi Yin and Zhou Gong, you will hand over power to the king when he grows up. Isn't it true that you are the king of the south and own the state of Chu?

古文：此所谓毋望之福也。 
现代文：这就是所说的不期而至的福。 
English: This is the so-called unexpected blessing.

古文：春申君曰： 何谓毋望之祸？ 
现代文：春申君又问道： 什么叫不期而至的祸？ 
English: Chunshen also asked: What do you call an unexpected disaster?

古文：曰： 李园不治国而君之仇也，不为兵而养死士之日久矣，楚王卒，李园必先入据权而杀君以灭口。
现代文：朱英回答道： 李园不执掌国政便是您的仇人，他不管兵事却豢养刺客为时已久了，楚王一下世，李园必定抢先入宫夺权并要杀掉您灭口。
English: Zhu Ying replied: Li Yuan is your enemy if he is not in charge of state affairs. It has been a long time since he has raised assassins regardless of military affairs. Once King Chu dies, Li Yuan will certainly enter the palace first to seize power and kill you.

古文：此所谓毋望之祸也。 
现代文：这就是所说的不期而至的祸。 
English: This is the so-called unexpected disaster.

古文：春申君曰： 何谓毋望之人？ 
现代文：春申君接着问道： 什么叫不期而至的人？ 
English: Chunshen then asked: What do you call someone who arrives unexpectedly?

古文：对曰： 君置臣郎中，楚王卒，李园必先入，臣为君杀李园。
现代文：朱英回答说： 您安排我做郎中，楚王一下世，李园必定抢先入宫，我替您杀掉李园。
English: Zhu Ying replied, "You arranged for me to be the second-in-command, when King Chu died, Li Yuan would be the first to enter the palace. I will kill Li Yuan for you."

古文：此所谓毋望之人也。 
现代文：这就是所说的不期而至的人。 
English: This is the proverbial unexpected guest.

古文：春申君曰： 足下置之，李园，弱人也，仆又善之，且又何至此！ 
现代文：春申君听了后说： 您要放弃这种打算。李园是个软弱的人，我对他很友好，况且又怎么能到这种地步！ 
English: After listening, Chun Shenjun said, "You should give up this plan. Li Yuan is a weak person, I am very friendly with him, and how could it get to this point!

古文：硃英知言不用，恐祸及身，乃亡去。
现代文：朱英知道自己的进言不被采用，恐怕祸患殃及自身，就逃离了。
English: Zhu Ying knew that his advice would not be accepted, and fearing that the calamity would befall himself, he fled.

古文：後十七日，楚考烈王卒，李园果先入，伏死士於棘门之内。
现代文：此后十七天，楚考烈王去世，李园果然抢先入宫，并在棘门埋伏下刺客。
English: Seventeen days later, King Chuko passed away, and Li Yuan entered the palace ahead of everyone else and ambushed the assassins at the Thorn Gate.

古文：春申君入棘门，园死士侠刺春申君，斩其头，投之棘门外。
现代文：春申君进入棘门，李园豢养的刺客从两侧夹住刺杀了春申君，斩下他的头，扔到棘门外边。
English: Chunshen entered the thorny gate. The assassin, who was raised by Li Yuantao, caught and stabbed Chunshen from both sides, cut off his head, and threw it outside the thorny gate.

古文：於是遂使吏尽灭春申君之家。
现代文：同时就派官吏把春申君家满门抄斩。
English: At the same time, officials were sent to chop down the entire door of Chunshenjun's house.

古文：而李园女弟初幸春申君有身而入之王所生子者遂立，是为楚幽王。
现代文：而李园的妹妹原先受春申君宠幸怀了孕又入宫得宠于楚考烈王后所生的那个儿子便立为楚王，这就是楚幽王。
English: However, Li Yuan's younger sister, who was originally favored by Chunshen, was lucky enough to become pregnant and enter the palace. The son born to Queen Chu Kalei, who was favored by her, became King Chu. This is King Chu You.

古文：是岁也，秦始皇帝立九年矣。
现代文：这一年，秦始皇即位已经九年了。
English: This year, it has been nine years since Qin Shi Huang ascended the throne.

古文：嫪毐亦为乱於秦，觉，夷其三族，而吕不韦废。
现代文：嫪毐也与秦国太后私乱，被发觉后，夷灭三族，而吕不韦因受牵连被废黜。
English: He also had a private quarrel with the Empress Dowager of Qin, and after it was discovered, he annihilated the three ethnic groups, while Lü Buwei was deposed because he was implicated.

古文：太史公曰：吾適楚，观春申君故城，宫室盛矣哉！
现代文：太公史说：我到楚地，观览了春申君的旧城，宫室建筑十分宏伟啊！
English: Taikongshi said, "I went to Chudi and saw the old city of Chunshenjun. The palace building is very grand!"

古文：初，春申君之说秦昭王，及出身遣楚太子归，何其智之明也！
现代文：当年，春申君劝说秦昭王，以及冒着生命危险派人把楚太子送回楚国，是多么聪慧的高明之举啊！
English: That year, Chunshenjun persuaded Qin Zhao Wang, and risked his life to send people to send Prince Chu back to Chu, what a clever and brilliant move!

古文：後制於李园，旄矣。
现代文：可是后来被李园控制，昏聩糊涂了。
English: But later he was controlled by Li Yuan and became confused.

古文：语曰： 当断不断，反受其乱。 
现代文：俗话说： 应当决断时不决断，反过来就要遭受祸患。 
English: As the saying goes: If you are indecisive when you should be decisive, you will suffer misfortune in return.

古文：春申君失硃英之谓邪？
现代文：说的就是春申君失却了朱英要击杀李园的机会吧？
English: What you are saying is that Chunshen has lost the opportunity to kill Li Yuan, right?

