古文：齐、韩、魏共攻燕，燕使太子请救于楚。
现代文：齐、韩、魏三国一起进攻燕国，燕国派太子向楚国求援。
English: Qi, Han, and Wei attacked Yan together, and Yan sent a prince to Chu for help.

古文：楚王使景阳将而救之。
现代文：楚王派景阳率兵救燕。
English: King Chu sent Jingyang and his soldiers to rescue Yan.

古文：暮舍，使左右司马各营壁地，已，稙表。
现代文：傍晚宿营，景陌命左右二司马各自选地扎营，安营完毕，树立军营标记。
English: In the evening of the camp, Jing Momo died, and the two horses on the left and right camped at their respective locations. After the camp was set up, the camp mark was set up.

古文：景阳怒曰： 女所营者，水皆至灭表。
现代文：景阳生气地说： 你们安营的地方，洪水可以淹没军营的标记，这里怎么能住宿呢？ 
English: Jingyang said angrily, "The place where you are camping is marked as a military camp that can be submerged by floods. How can you stay here?"

古文：此焉可以舍！ 
现代文：于是命令军队转移。
English: He then ordered the troops to move.

古文：乃令徙。明日大雨，山水大出，所营者水皆灭表，军吏乃服。
现代文：第二天下起了大雨，山洪咆哮而来，原来安营的地方，军营的标记全部被洪水淹没，将士们才信服。
English: The next day it rained heavily, the mountain torrents roared in, and the place where they had originally set up camp, the camp's markers, were all submerged by the flood. Only then were the soldiers convinced.

古文：于是遂不救燕，而攻魏雍丘，取之以与宋。
现代文：在这种情况下楚军没有去援救燕国，而是去进攻魏国的雍丘，攻下雍丘后把它送给宋国。
English: Under these circumstances, the Chu army did not go to save Yan, but attacked Yongqiu in Wei, and after capturing Yongqiu, gave it to Song.

古文：三国惧，乃罢兵。
现代文：齐、韩、魏三国都很恐惧，于是停止了进攻燕国。
English: The three countries of Qi, Han, and Wei were very afraid, so they stopped attacking Yan.

古文：魏军其西，齐军其东，楚军欲还不可得也。
现代文：魏国军队在西面，齐国军队在东面，楚国军队想要回国，没能成功。
English: The Wei army was in the west, the Qi army in the east, and the Chu army wanted to return home, but failed.

古文：景阳乃开西和门，昼以车骑，暮以烛见，通使于魏。
现代文：景阳就打开军营的西门，白天让车马来往，晚上用烛火照得通明，景阳还时常派使者到魏国军营。
English: Jingyang opened the west gate of the military camp, let the horses and chariots come and go during the day, and lit it with candlelight at night. Jingyang also often sent envoys to the Wei military camp.

古文：齐师怪之，以为燕、楚与魏谋之，乃引兵而去。
现代文：齐国军队感到奇怪，以为燕、楚两国与魏国图谋自己，就率兵离开了。
English: The Qi army felt strange and thought that Yan, Chu and Wei were plotting against them, so they left with their soldiers.

古文：齐兵已去，魏失其与国，无以共击楚，乃夜遁。
现代文：齐国军队撤离后，魏国失去联盟，没有人与它一起进攻楚国，于是在夜里逃跑了。
English: After the withdrawal of the Qi army, Wei lost its alliance, and no one attacked Chu with it, so it fled in the night.

