古文：谥曰威。子禽嗣。禽字子通，少慷慨，以胆略称。
现代文：韩禽，字子通，从小就慷慨大度，以胆略著称。
English: Han Ji, a wordsmith, has been generous from an early age and is known for his boldness.

古文：容貌魁岸，有雄杰之表。
现代文：容貌魁伟，有英雄豪杰的仪表。
English: He is handsome and has the appearance of a hero.

古文：性又好书，经史百家皆略知大旨。
现代文：又喜欢读书，博览经史子集，对各家的学说都能掌握大旨。
English: He also likes to read, is well-versed in a subset of the history of the classics, and is able to grasp the gist of each school's doctrine.

古文：开皇初，文帝潜有吞江南志，拜禽庐州总管，委以平陈之任，甚为敌人所惮。
现代文：宇文泰见到他很是惊异，命他与自己的儿子们在一起。他因建立军功迁任仪同三司，继承父爵为新义郡公。开皇初年，隋文帝暗怀吞并江南的雄心大志，命韩禽为庐州总管，把平定南陈的重任委托给他，敌人很惧怕他。
English: Yu Wentai was very surprised to see him, and ordered him to be with his sons. He was appointed to the same three divisions for establishing the military merit transfer ceremony, and succeeded his father as the governor of Sinui County. In the first year of the emperor, the Sui Emperor secretly harbored the ambition of annexing the south of the Yangtze River, and ordered Han Yan to be the general manager of Zhangzhou, entrusting him with the important task of pacifying the south of Chen. The enemy was very afraid of him.

古文：及大举伐陈，以禽为先锋。
现代文：隋军大举讨伐陈朝，朝廷命韩禽为先锋。
English: The Sui army launched a large-scale campaign against the Chen dynasty, and the imperial court ordered the Korean chicken to be the vanguard.

古文：禽领五百人宵济，袭采石，守者皆醉，遂取之。
现代文：他带领五百人晚上渡过长江，进攻采石。南陈守卫的兵士都喝醉了酒，他轻易攻下采石。
English: He led five hundred men across the Yangtze River at night to attack the quarry. The soldiers guarding Nan Chen were drunk, and he easily captured the quarry.

古文：进攻姑熟，半日而拔。
现代文：然后进攻姑苏，半天时间就已攻取。
English: Then they attacked Gusu, and captured it in half a day.

古文：次于新林。江南父老素闻其威信，来谒军门，昼夜不绝，其将樊巡、鲁世真、田瑞等相继降。
现代文：然后进军新林，江南父老平常听说过韩禽的威信，到军门拜谒他的人络绎不绝。陈朝的将领樊巡、鲁世真、田瑞等人相继投降。
English: Then he marched into Xinlin. Jiangnan's father had often heard about the prestige of the Korean chicken, and the people who came to pay homage to him at the military gate were endless. The generals of the Chen Dynasty, such as Gong Jun, Lu Shizhen, and Tian Rui, surrendered one after another.

古文：晋王遣行军总管杜彦与禽合军。
现代文：晋王派行军总管杜彦与他合军一处。
English: Jin Wang sent Du Yan, the general manager of the march, to join him.

古文：陈叔宝遣领军蔡征守硃雀航，闻禽将至，众惧而溃。
现代文：南陈后主陈叔宝派领军蔡征守卫朱雀门，听说韩禽率军将要到来，陈军畏惧溃逃。
English: South Chen's master, Chen Shubao, sent the leader of the army, Cai Zheng, to guard the Suzaku Gate. He heard that the Korean army would be coming, and Chen's army was afraid to flee.

古文：任蛮奴为贺若弼所败，弃军降禽。
现代文：陈将任蛮奴被贺若弼打败，丢弃军队向韩禽投降。
English: Chen Zhenmin, a barbarian, was defeated by He Ruoqi, abandoned his army and surrendered to Han Ji.

古文：禽以精骑直入硃雀门。陈人欲战，蛮奴捴之曰： 老夫尚降，诸君何事！ 
现代文：韩禽率精锐骑兵直入朱雀门，陈军想要抵抗，任蛮奴呵斥他们说： 我已投降，你们何必再战！ 
English: Han Yan and his elite cavalry marched straight into the Suzaku Gate. Chen's army wanted to resist, but the barbarians shouted at them: "I have surrendered, why do you have to fight again!"

古文：众皆散走。
现代文：陈军一哄而散。
English: Chen Jun left in a hurry.

古文：遂平金陵，执陈主叔宝。
现代文：金陵被平定，抓住了陈叔宝。
English: Jinling was pacified and Chen Shubao was captured.

古文：时贺若弼亦有功，乃下诏晋王曰： 此二公者，朕本委之，悉如朕意。
现代文：这时贺若弼也立有功劳，文帝下诏给晋王说 ：韩禽和贺若弼是我委派的，都符合我的心意。
English: At this time, He Ruojun also made contributions. Emperor Wen issued an edict to King Jin, saying, "I have appointed Han Yang and He Ruojun, and they are in line with my heart.

古文：以名臣之功，成太平之业，天下盛事，何用过此！ 
现代文：他们以名臣的功勋完成了统一天下，寻求太平的大业。天下最盛大的事情，哪还能超过这一件呢！ 
English: With the merits of famous ministers, they have accomplished the great cause of unifying the country and seeking peace. The grandest thing in the world, how can it surpass this one!

古文：及至京，弼与禽争功于上前，弼曰： 臣在蒋山死战，破其锐卒，禽其骁将，震扬威武，遂平陈国。
现代文：又给韩、贺二人下诏说： 你们伸张国威于万里之外，传播朝廷教化于东南一隅，使那里的百姓都从水深火热之中脱离出来，数百年的乱臣贼子旬日之间被摧毁廓清，这是你们独有的功劳。 回到京城，贺若弼与韩禽在文帝面前争夺功劳，贺若弼说： 我在蒋山死战，打破陈军的精锐部队，擒获他们勇猛的将领，弘扬了大隋的威武雄风才得以平定陈国。
English: He also issued an imperial edict to Han and He, saying, "Your unique achievement is that you have extended the national prestige thousands of miles away, spread the enlightenment of the imperial court to a corner of the southeast, and enabled the people there to break away from the depths of the sea and the heat of the fire. Hundreds of years of unruly vassals and thieves have been destroyed and cleared away in a matter of days. Back in Beijing, He Ruoqi and Han Ji competed for merit in front of Emperor Wen. He Ruoqi said, "I fought to the death on Mount Jiang, defeated the elite troops of the Chen army, captured their brave generals, and promoted the mighty and heroic style

古文：禽略不交阵，岂臣之比！ 
现代文：韩禽没有怎么与敌兵交战，功劳怎么能跟我相比！ 
English: Han Ji did not fight with the enemy soldiers, how can his merit be compared to mine!

古文：禽曰： 本奉明旨，令臣与弼同取伪都。
现代文：韩禽说 ：我奉陛下圣旨，让我与贺若弼一同攻取南陈首都。
English: Han Yan said, "In accordance with His Majesty's command, let me capture the capital of Nan Chen together with He Ruo Yao."

古文：弼乃敢先期，逢贼遂战，致将士伤死甚多。
现代文：贺若弼竟然先期出发。逢贼必战，不知变通，所以使得很多将士阵亡和受伤。
English: He Ruoqi actually set off ahead of schedule. It is necessary to fight against thieves, I do not know how to adapt, so many soldiers were killed and injured.

古文：臣以轻骑五百，兵不血刃，直取金陵，降任蛮奴，执陈叔宝，据其府库，倾其巢穴。
现代文：我率五百名轻骑，兵不血刃，直取金陵，降服任蛮奴，擒获陈叔宝，占据了陈国的府库，捣毁了他们的巢穴。
English: I led five hundred light cavalry, soldiers without blood, directly took Jinling, surrendered to the barbarians, captured Chen Shubao, occupied the treasury of Chen Guo, and destroyed their lair.

古文：弼至夕方扣北掖门，臣启关而纳之。
现代文：贺若弼到晚上才扣打金陵的北掖门，我开门让他进来。
English: He didn't knock on Jinling's Beilun Gate until the evening. I opened the door and let him in.

古文：斯乃救罪不暇，安得与臣为比！ 
现代文：他赎罪还来不及，怎么能与我相比呢！ 
English: He hasn't had time to atone for his sins, so how can he be compared to me!

古文：上曰： 二将俱合上勋。 
现代文：隋文帝说 ：你们二位都立有上等功勋。 
English: Sui Emperor Wen said: You both have made great achievements.

古文：于是进位上柱国，赐物八千段。
现代文：于是给他们晋位为上柱国，赏赐物品八千段。
English: As a result, they were promoted to the rank of Shangzhu country, and were rewarded with 8,000 pieces of goods.

古文：皆不知所谓。禽本名禽武，平陈之际，又乘青骢马，往返时节与歌相应，至是方悟。后突厥来朝，上谓曰： 汝闻江南有陈国天子乎？ 
现代文：有司劾奏韩禽放纵士卒在南陈宫中奸淫，他因此坐罪，不得被封为国公与食邑。后来突厥人来朝拜，隋文帝问他： 你听说江南陈国的天子吗？ 突厥人答道 ：听说过。 
English: Later, when the Turks came to pay homage, Emperor Wen of Sui asked him, "Have you heard about the heavenly son of the Southern Chen Kingdom?" The Turk replied, "I have heard about him."

古文：对曰： 闻之。 上命左右引突厥诣禽前，曰： 此是执得陈国天子者。 
现代文：文帝命人引突厥人到韩禽面前，说： 这就是活捉陈国天子的那个人。 
English: Emperor Wen ordered someone to bring the Turk to Han Yan and said, "This is the man who captured Chen Guotian's son alive."

古文：禽厉然顾之，突厥惶恐不敢仰视。
现代文：韩禽严厉地看了他一眼，突厥人惶恐不安，不敢仰视。
English: The Korean looked at him sternly, while the Turk was too scared to look up.

古文：其威容如此。
现代文：贺若弼，字辅伯，河南洛阳人，贺若敦之子。
English: He Ruoqian, the son of Luoyang, Henan Province, He Ruoqian, the son of Dun.

古文：别封寿光县公，真食千户。
现代文：他少年就胸怀大志，既英勇无比，弓马娴熟，又善于写作，博涉典籍，文武兼备，颇有声望。
English: He was a young man with a great ambition, both heroic, skilled in archery and horsemanship, and good at writing, rich in classics, both literary and military, and quite reputable.

古文：以行军总管屯金城，御备胡寇，即拜凉州总管。
现代文：周齐王宇文宪听说后对他十分钦佩，聘请他作记室。
English: When Zhou Qi heard of Wang Yuwenxian, he admired him very much and hired him to be his secretary.

古文：俄征还京，恩礼殊厚。
现代文：他与韦孝宽一起攻伐陈国，连克十余城，大多是出于他的计谋。
English: Together with Wei Xiaokuan, he attacked Chen Guo and captured more than ten cities, mostly due to his cunning.

古文：弼遗雄诗曰： 交河骠骑幕，合浦伏波营，勿使骐驎上，无我二人名。 献取陈十策，上称善，赐以宝刀。
现代文：杨坚代周立隋，决心平定江南，访察可以担当此任的将领。高赹推荐贺若弼有文韬武略，于是朝廷封他为吴州总管，把平定南陈的事委托给他。他欣然接受，以平陈为己任。
English: Yang Jian, the successor of Zhou Li Sui, was determined to pacify the south of the Yangtze River, and visited the generals who could be responsible for this. Gao Qi recommended He Ruoqi, who had a literary and military background, so the court appointed him as the chief administrator of Wuzhou and entrusted him with the matter of pacifying South Chen. He readily accepted and took Ping Chen as his own responsibility.

古文：开皇九年，大举伐陈，以弼为行车总管。
现代文：开皇九年，隋军大举进攻陈国，贺若弼被任命为行军总管。
English: In the ninth year of the emperor's reign, the Sui army launched a large-scale attack on Chen Guo, and He Ruoqi was appointed as the commander-in-chief.

古文：将渡江，酹酒祝曰： 弼亲承庙略，远振国威，若使福善祸淫，大军利涉；如事有乖违，得葬江鱼腹中，死且不恨。 
现代文：即将渡江，他用酒祭奠，并祝告说 ：我亲自接受朝廷的谋略，向远方弘扬大隋的国威。如果我传播福善制止祸害，请江神让大军顺利渡过；如果我的行为违背原来的心愿，让我葬身鱼腹，死且不悔。 
English: When he was about to cross the river, he offered a libation with wine and said, "I personally accept the strategy of the imperial court and promote the national prestige of the Great Sui Dynasty to the far away. If I spread good fortune and stop evil, I ask the river god to let the army pass smoothly; if my actions go against my original wishes, let me be buried in the belly of a fish and die without regret."

古文：先是，弼请缘江防人每交代际，必集历阳。
现代文：这之前，他让沿江防守的兵士每次换防的时候，一定要聚集在历阳。
English: Prior to this, he had ordered the soldiers defending along the Chuang River to gather in Liyang every time there was a change of defense.

古文：于是大列旗帜，营幕被野，陈人以为大兵至，悉发国中士马。
现代文：隋军于是到处遍插旌旗，营幕遍野都是。陈人认为隋朝的大批人马到来，便调集全国的人马。
English: As a result, the Sui army planted banners everywhere, and camp tents were everywhere. The Chen people thought that a large number of people from the Sui Dynasty had arrived, so they mobilized people from all over the country.

古文：既知防人交代，其众复散。
现代文：后来弄清楚是防守长江的士兵换防，陈军又被遣散驻防。
English: Later, it became clear that the soldiers defending the Yangtze River were changing their positions, and Chen Jun was demobilized again.

古文：后以为常，不复设备。
现代文：以后习以为常，不再防备。
English: After that, it's just a matter of getting used to it and not taking any precautions.

古文：及此，弼以大军济江，陈人弗觉。
现代文：这时，贺若弼突然率大军过江，陈人没有发觉。
English: At this time, He Ruoqi suddenly led a large army across the river, Chen people did not notice.

古文：袭陈南徐州，拔之，执其刺史黄恪。
现代文：隋军首先进攻陈国的南徐州，一举攻克，俘获刺史黄恪。
English: The Sui army first attacked the southern Xuzhou of Chen Guo, conquered it in one fell swoop, and captured the assassin Shi Huang Ke.

古文：军令严肃，秋毫不犯，有军士于人间酤酒者，弼立斩之。
现代文：隋军军令严肃，秋毫不犯。有一名军士到民间买酒，贺若弼立即将他斩首。
English: The military orders of the Sui army were serious and did not commit any crimes. There was a sergeant who went to the people to buy alcohol, and He Ruoqi immediately beheaded him.

古文：进屯蒋山之白土冈，陈将鲁广达、周智安、任蛮奴、田瑞、孔范、萧摩诃等以劲兵拒战。
现代文：大军进屯蒋山的白土冈，陈将鲁广达、周智安、任蛮奴、田瑞、孔范、萧摩诃等人率劲旅抵御。
English: A large army marched into Baidaioka on Mount Jiang, and Chen led Lu Guangda, Zhou Zhian, Ren Barbarian, Tian Rui, Kong Fan, Xiao Maqi and others on a strenuous journey to resist.

古文：麾下士开府员明禽麾诃至，弼命左右牵斩之。
现代文：田瑞首先向隋军进攻，将隋军击退。鲁广达等人挥军相继前进，隋军一再退却。
English: Tian Rui first attacked the Sui army and repulsed the Sui army. Lu Guangda and others waved the army forward one after another, and the Sui army repeatedly retreated.

古文：摩诃色自若，弼释而礼之。从北掖门入。时韩禽已执陈叔宝。
现代文：贺若弼估计陈将正志得意满，而他们的兵士却精疲力竭，于是督促隋军将士拼死奋战，把陈军打得大败。他率军从北掖门进入金陵，这时韩禽已抓获陈国后主陈叔宝。
English: He Ruoqi estimated that Chen Zhengzhi was satisfied, but their soldiers were exhausted, so he urged the Sui generals to fight to the death and defeated the Chen army. He led the army from Beilunmen into Jinling. At this time, Han Yan had captured Chen Shubao, the queen of Chen.

古文：弼至，呼叔宝视之。叔宝惶惧流汗，股栗再拜。
现代文：他到来后，喊陈叔宝出来见面，叔宝惶恐畏惧，汗流满面，双腿颤栗，一再叩拜。
English: After he arrived, he called Chen Shubao to come out to meet him. Shubao was terrified, sweating profusely, his legs were shaking, and he bowed repeatedly.

古文：弼谓曰： 小国之君当大国卿，拜，礼也。
现代文：贺若弼对他说 ：小国的国君对大国的公卿下拜，也符合礼节。
English: Horakado said to him, "It is also proper for the sovereign of a small country to bow to the nobles of a great country."

古文：入朝不失作归命侯，无劳恐惧。 
现代文：进入我朝也不失作一个归命侯，不要恐惧。 
English: Don't be afraid to enter my morning as a suitor.

古文：既而弼恚恨不获叔宝，于是与禽相訽，挺刃而出。
现代文：他忿恨自己没有亲自俘获陈叔宝，于是与韩禽相诟骂，并拔刀相见。
English: He resented that he did not personally capture Chen Shubao, so he and Han Yan exchanged insults and drew their swords.

古文：令蔡徵为叔宝作降笺，命乘骡车归己，事不果。
现代文：他命蔡征替陈叔宝起草投降诏书，命陈叔宝坐上骡车到自己营中来，事情没有成功。
English: He ordered Cai Zeng to draft a surrender edict for Chen Shubao, and ordered Chen Shubao to come to his camp in a horse-drawn carriage, but things did not work out.

古文：上闻弼有功，大悦，下诏褒扬之。
现代文：隋文帝听说他立有大功，十分高兴，下诏表扬。
English: Sui Emperor Wen heard that he had made great contributions, was very pleased, and issued a decree to commend him.

古文：晋王以弼先期决战，违军命，于是以弼属吏。
现代文：晋王杨广认为他提前与陈军决战，违抗了军令，于是把他交给主管军法的官吏去处治。
English: Yang Guang, the king of Jin, thought that he had fought a decisive battle with Chen Jun ahead of time and defied the military order, so he handed him over to the officials in charge of military law to be dealt with.

古文：上驿召之，及见。迎劳曰： 克定三吴，公之功也。 
现代文：隋文帝赶快召见他，见面后极尽欢迎和慰劳，说： 收复三吴，是你的功劳啊。 
English: Emperor Sui Wen quickly summoned him, and after the meeting, he welcomed and consoled him as much as possible, saying, "Recovering Sanwu is your achievement.

古文：弼家珍玩不可胜计，婢妾曳绮罗者数百，时人荣之。
现代文：让他登上御座，赏赐物品八千段，加封上柱国，晋爵为宋国公，赐给襄邑食邑三千户，又把陈叔宝的妹妹赐给他为妾，还封他为右领军大将军。
English: Let him ascend to the throne, reward him with eight thousand pieces of goods, add the seal of Shangzhuo, and give him the title of Prince of Song, give him three thousand households in Xiangyur food village, and give him Chen Shubao's sister as his concubine, and also make him the right leader of the army.

古文：弼自谓功名出朝臣之右，每以宰相自许。
现代文：他认为自己的功名在朝臣之上，常以宰相自诩。
English: He believed that his achievements were superior to those of his courtiers, and often referred to himself as the prime minister.

古文：既而杨素为右仆射，弼仍为将军，甚不平，形于言色，由是免官，弼怨望愈甚。
现代文：不久杨素任右仆射，他仍为将军，所以甚感不平，怒形于色，因此被免去官职，从此他的怨气更大。
English: Soon after, Yang Su, who was still a general, was relieved of his post, which made him even angrier.

古文：后数载，下弼狱，上谓曰： 我以高颎、杨素为宰相，汝每昌言此二人唯堪啖饭耳，是何意也？ 
现代文：以后数载，朝廷将他关进监狱。隋文帝问他： 我命高赹、杨素为宰相，你却经常宣扬说这两个人只会吃饭，是什么意思？ 
English: A few years later, the imperial court put him in prison. Sui Wen Di asked him: I have appointed Gao Wei and Yang Su as prime ministers, but you often preach that these two people can only eat, what do you mean?

古文：弼曰： 颎，臣之故人，素，臣之舅子，臣并知其为人，诚有此语。 
现代文：他答 ：高赹，是我的旧友；杨素，是我舅父的儿子。我都知道他们的为人，实在说过这些话。 
English: He replied: Gao Yao, is my old friend; Yang Su, is my uncle's son. I know who they are, and I really said those words.

古文：公卿奏弼怨望，罪当死，上曰： 臣下守法不移，公可自求活理。 
现代文：公卿大臣们奏报他怨恨朝廷，罪当处死。隋文帝对他说： 大臣们执法不移，你可自己寻求不死的办法。 
English: The ministers reported that he had a grudge against the imperial court and should be put to death. Emperor Sui Wen said to him: "The ministers are unswerving in enforcing the law. You can find a way to avoid death on your own."

古文：弼曰： 臣恃至尊威灵，将八千兵度江，即禽陈叔宝，窃以此望活。 
现代文：他说 ：我依靠您的神威，率领八千人马渡江，擒获陈叔宝，想依靠这点功劳求活。 
English: He said: I rely on your divine power, led eight thousand horses to cross the river, captured Chen Shubao, I want to rely on this merit to survive.

古文：上曰： 此已格外酬赏，何用追论！ 
现代文：文帝说： 这已格外赏赐过你，何必再谈起！ 
English: Emperor Wen said, "This has been a special reward for you, why do you need to talk about it again!

古文：弼曰： 平陈之日，诸公议不许臣行。
现代文：他说： 平陈的时候，朝臣们不同意我去。
English: He said: "During the Heian period, the courtiers did not approve of me going to the top.

古文：推心为国，已蒙格外重赏，今还格外望活。 
现代文：我却尽心报国，已蒙皇上格外给予重赏，现在还望格外给我活命。 
English: I, on the other hand, have devoted myself to serving my country. I have already received an extraordinary reward from the emperor, and now I am hoping for an extraordinary gift of life.

古文：既而上低徊者数日，惜其功，特令除名。
现代文：接着，文帝低头徘徊好几天，因爱惜他的功劳，特令将他除名免官。
English: Then, Emperor Wen bowed his head and lingered for several days, and because he cherished his merits, he was removed from his post.

古文：岁余，复其爵位。
现代文：一年多后，又恢复了他的爵位。
English: More than a year later, his knighthood was restored.

古文：上亦忌之，不复任使，然每宴赐，遇之甚厚。
现代文：文帝已忌讳他，不再任命他的职务，然而每次赐宴，对他仍礼遇甚厚。
English: Emperor Wen had already shunned him and no longer appointed him to positions, yet he was still treated with great courtesy at every banquet.

古文：十九年，上幸仁寿宫，宴王公，诏弼为五言诗，词意愤怨，帝览而容之。
现代文：开皇十九年，隋文帝在仁寿宫宴请王公大臣，命贺若弼写五言诗。他写的诗蕴含着怨愤，文帝看完后宽容了他。
English: In the 19th year of the Emperor's reign, Emperor Wen of the Sui Dynasty invited Wang Gong to a banquet at Renshou Palace. Wang Gong was ordered to write a five-character poem. The poem he wrote contained resentment, but Emperor Wen forgave him after reading it.

古文：明年春，弼又有罪，在禁所，咏诗自若。
现代文：第二年春，他又获罪，在被拘押的地方，依然吟诵诗词。
English: In the spring of the following year, he was convicted again and continued to recite poetry while in custody.

古文：上数之曰： 人有性善行恶者，公之为恶，及与行俱。
现代文：文帝斥责他说： 人有性情善良却行为恶劣的。贺若弼的作恶与善行一同出现。
English: Emperor Wen reprimanded him, saying, "People are good-natured but behave badly. Horatio's evil deeds appear together with his good deeds."

古文：有三太猛：嫉妒心太猛，自是非人心太猛，无上心太猛，昔在周朝，已教他兒子反，此心终不能改邪？ 
现代文：他有三太猛：嫉妒心太猛，自以为是而诽谤别人的心太猛，蔑视朝廷的心太猛。过去在北周时，就教他的儿子谋反，他的心难道始终不能改变吗？ 
English: There are three things that are too fierce for him: his jealousy is too fierce, his self-righteousness and slander of others is too fierce, and his contempt for the imperial court is too fierce. In the past, when he was in Northern Zhou, he taught his son to rebel. Can his heart never change?

古文：他日，上谓侍臣曰： 初欲平陈时，弼谓高颎曰： 陈叔宝可平。
现代文：一天，文帝对侍臣说： 刚准备平陈时，贺若弼对高赹说： 陈叔宝可以平定。
English: One day, Emperor Wen said to his vassal: "When we were just preparing to pacify Chen, He Ruoqi said to Gao Qi: Chen Shubao can be pacified.

古文：不作高鸟尽，良弓藏邪？ 
现代文：我会不会像俗语说的，高鸟尽，良弓藏呢？ 
English: Will I be, as the saying goes, as high as a bird, as good as a bow?

古文：颎云： 必不然。 
现代文：高赹说： 一定不会。 
English: Takatsuki said, "Definitely not."

古文：平陈后，便索内史，又索仆射。
现代文：平陈以后，他向朝廷索要内史的官职，又索要仆射。
English: After Ping Chen, he asked the imperial court for an official post in internal history, and also asked for a courier.

古文：我语颎曰： 功臣正宜授勋官，不可豫朝政。 
现代文：我对高赹说： 功臣适宜授给勋爵，不应参与朝政。 
English: I said to Gao Yao: A meritorious subject should be given the title of lord, and should not participate in court politics.

古文：上大悦，顾谓突厥曰： 此人天赐我也！ 
现代文：贺若弼后来对高赹说： 皇太子我说什么他听什么，没有不尽心的。
English: He Ruoqian later said to Gao Ruo: The crown prince did not listen to what I said.

古文：炀帝之在东宫，尝谓曰： 杨素、韩禽、史万岁三人，俱良将也，优劣如何？ 
现代文：你终久必定要得力于我的帮助，这是多么深厚的情谊啊！ 他想镇守广陵，又请求任荆州总管，都是他作乱的表现，真是始终不知悔改呀。 杨广为东宫太子，曾经问贺若弼： 杨素、韩禽、史万岁三人都是良将，他们谁优谁劣？ 
English: You must eventually be able to rely on my help, what a profound friendship! He wanted to guard Guangling, and he also asked to be appointed as the general manager of Jingzhou, all of which were manifestations of his unrest, and he really did not know how to repent. Yang Guang was the crown prince of the Eastern Palace, and he once asked He Ruoqi: Yang Su, Han Yan, and Shi Wanling are three good generals, who are they?

古文：弼曰： 杨素是猛将，非谋将；韩禽是斗将，非领将；史万岁是骑将，非大将。 
现代文：他答道： 杨素是员猛将，但不是有计谋的将领；韩禽是员战将，但不是统领千军万马的帅将；史万岁是员指挥骑兵的将军，不是指挥三军的大将。 
English: He replied: Yang Su was a fierce general, but not a strategic one; Han Yan was a warlord, but not a general in command of thousands of troops; Shi Wan Lian was a general in command of cavalry, but not a general in command of three armies.

古文：太子曰： 然则大将谁也 ？
现代文：杨广又问 ：那么谁是大将呢？ 
English: Yang Guang also asked: Then who is the general?

古文：弼拜曰： 唯殿下所择。 
现代文：他顿首而拜说 ：只有靠殿下您去选择了。 
English: He bowed his head and said, "It is up to Your Imperial Highness to choose."

古文：弼意自许为大将。
现代文：他的意思是以大将自诩。
English: What he means is that he wants to be a general.

古文：及炀帝嗣位，尤被疏忌。
现代文：炀帝杨广即位后，他更加被疏远和忌讳。
English: After Emperor Yang Guang ascended the throne, he became even more alienated and taboo.

古文：大业三年，从驾北巡至榆林。
现代文：大业三年，他跟随炀帝北巡到达榆林。
English: After three years of hard work, he followed Emperor Qian's northern tour and arrived in Yulin.

古文：时为大帐，下可坐数千人，召突厥启人可汗飨之。
现代文：当时炀帝命搭起很大的帐篷，下面可以坐下数千人。炀帝召来突厥的启人可汗以宴飨他。
English: At that time, Emperor Qian ordered a large tent to be set up, under which thousands of people could sit down. Emperor Qian summoned the Turkic Qijin Khan to entertain him.

古文：弼以为太侈，与高颎、宇文幹等私议得失，为人所告，竟坐诛，时年六十四。
现代文：贺若弼认为太奢侈，与高赹、宇文瞖等人私下议论这次行动的得失。被人告发，竟因此坐罪被杀，时年六十四岁。
English: He thought it was too extravagant, and privately discussed the pros and cons of this action with Gao Qi and Uwen Qi. He was accused of it, and was killed for it, at the age of sixty-four.

古文：妻子为官奴婢，群从徙边。
现代文：妻子沦为官府的奴婢，家中的其他人被流放到边远的地方。
English: His wife was reduced to a servant of the government, and the rest of the family was exiled to a remote place.

