古文：名之与实，犹形之与影也。
现代文：名与实的关系，就像形体和影子。
English: The relationship between name and reality is like that between form and shadow.

古文：德艺周厚，则名必善焉；容色姝丽，则影必美焉。
现代文：德艺周厚，名声就一定会好；容貌美丽，就一定会有美丽的影像。
English: If you are virtuous, your reputation will be good; if you are beautiful, your image will be beautiful.

古文：今不修身而求令名于世者，犹貌甚恶而责妍影于镜也。
现代文：如今有的人不修身而想在世上传好的名，就好比容貌很丑而要求镜子里现出美的影像。
English: Some people nowadays want to make a good name for themselves in the world, just as if they were ugly and wanted a beautiful image to appear in the mirror.

古文：上士忘名，中士立名，下士窃名。
现代文：德行高的人不顾名声，一般人努力扬名，没有德行的人竭力窃取名声。
English: A virtuous person does not care about fame, an ordinary person tries to make a name, and a person without virtue tries to steal a name.

古文：忘名者，体道合德，享鬼神之福祜，非所以求名也；立名者，修身慎行，惧荣观之不显，非所以让名也；窃名者，厚貌深奸，於浮华之虚称，非所以得名也。
现代文：忘掉名声，就是体道合德，享受鬼神的福祜，而不是用来求名的；立名，就是修身慎行，生怕荣誉会被湮没，而不是为了让名的；窃名，就是外朴内奸，谋求浮华的虚名，而不是真能得到名的。
English: To forget one's reputation is to be virtuous, and to enjoy the blessings of ghosts and gods, rather than to seek one's name; to establish one's name is to cultivate oneself and be prudent, and to be afraid that one's honor will be destroyed, rather than to make one's name; to steal one's name is to be a naive mole, and to seek a flashy false name, rather than to really be able to get one's name.

古文：吾见世人，清名登而金贝入，信誉显而然诺亏，不知后之矛戟，毁前之干橹也！虑子贱云： 诚于此者形於彼。 
现代文：我见世上有些人，在清白的名声树立之后，就开始聚敛钱财，在信誉显扬之后，就不再信守诺言，连自己说话自相矛盾都不知道了。虙子贱说： 诚于此者形于彼。 
English: I see some people in the world, after the reputation of innocence is established, they begin to accumulate money, after the credibility is prominent, they no longer keep their promises, and they don't even know that they are contradicting themselves.

古文：人之虚实真伪在乎心，无不见平迹，但察之未熟耳。
现代文：人的虚或实，真或伪固然在於心，但没有不在行动上表现出来的，只是观察得不仔细罢了。
English: A man's falsehood or truth, true or false, is indeed in his heart, but it does not manifest itself in his actions, it is only observed imperfectly.

古文：一为察之所鉴，巧伪不如拙诚，承之以羞大矣。
现代文：一旦观察得真切，那种巧於作伪就还不如拙而诚实，接著招来的羞辱也够大的。
English: Once observed, the art of the fake is not as good as the art of the honest, and the ensuing humiliation is great enough.

古文：伯石让卿，王莽辞政，当于尔时，自以巧密，后人书之，留传万代，可为骨寒毛竖也。
现代文：伯石曾经三次推却卿的册封，王莽也曾一再辞谢大司马的任命，当时，他们都自以为伪装得机巧缜密。后人把他俩的言行记载下来，留传万代，让人读后毛骨悚然。
English: At that time, both of them thought that they were cleverly disguised. Their words and deeds were recorded by later generations and passed down for generations, making people feel creepy after reading them.

古文：近有大贵，以孝著声，前后居丧，哀毁逾制，亦足以高於人矣；而尝於苫块之中，以巴豆涂脸，遂使成疮，表哭泣之过，左右童竖，不能掩之，益使外人谓其居处饮食皆为不信。
现代文：最近有位高官，以孝顺闻名，他前后两次服丧，都因为悲伤过度而伤了身体，其孝心可说是超乎常人了。但在守丧期间，他把巴豆涂在脸上，使脸上长出了疮疤，以此表示他哭泣得多么厉害。他身边的童仆，却没有对此事保密，使得外人对他各方面所表露的孝心都不相信了。
English: Recently, there was a high-ranking official who was known for his filial piety. He had two funerals before and after his death. Both times, his body was injured due to excessive grief. His filial piety was said to be beyond ordinary people. However, during the funeral, he smeared red bean paste on his face, causing scars to grow on his face to show how hard he was crying. The child servants around him did not keep the matter confidential, so that outsiders did not believe in his filial piety in all aspects.

古文：以一伪丧百诚者，乃贪名不已故也！
现代文：因为一件事情作假而使得一百件诚实的事情也失去别人的信任，这都是贪求名声、不知满足的缘故啊！
English: Because one thing is false and a hundred honest things lose the trust of others, this is all due to the greed for fame and not knowing how to be satisfied!

古文：有一士族，读书不过二三百卷，天才钝拙，而家世殷厚，雅自矜持，多以酒犊珍玩，交诸名士。
现代文：有一个世家子弟，读的书不过二三百卷，又天性迟钝笨拙，可家世殷实富裕，他骄矜自负，多用牛酒珍宝玩好来结交那些名士。
English: There was a scion of a noble family, who read no more than two or three hundred volumes, and was slow and clumsy by nature, but he came from a wealthy family. He was proud and conceited, and used cow's wine and precious treasures to make friends with celebrities.

古文：甘其饵者，递共吹嘘，朝廷以为文华，亦尝出境聘。
现代文：那些得到好处的人，就一个个接著吹捧他，朝廷就误以为他很有才华，曾经派他作为使节出访其他国家。
English: One by one, those who benefited praised him, and the imperial court mistakenly believed that he was very talented and sent him as an envoy to other countries.

古文：东莱王韩晋明笃好文学，疑彼制作，多非机杼，遂设宴言，面相讨试。
现代文：齐东莱三韩晋明深爱文学，对他的作品产生怀疑，怀疑大多数的情况都不是他本人所命意构思的，于是设宴与他交谈，当面试探一下他。
English: Qidong Lai San Han Jinming deeply loves literature, doubts his works, and suspects that most of the situations are not designed by himself, so he set up a banquet to talk to him and explore him during the interview.

古文：竟日欢谐，辞人满席，属音赋韵，命笔为诗，彼造次即成，了非向韵，众客各自沉吟，遂无觉者。
现代文：宴会那天欢乐和谐，文人满座，属音赋韵，提笔作诗，这个士族轻率问就写成，可一点也没有他以往的风格，好在客人们各自在沉思吟味，没有发觉。
English: On the day of the banquet, it was a day of joy and harmony. The room was full of writers, all of whom were devoted to music and rhyme, and all of whom were writing poetry. This scholar had written the poem on the spur of the moment, but it was nothing like his previous style. Fortunately, the guests were all lost in their own thoughts and did not notice.

古文：韩退叹曰： 果如所量。 
现代文：韩晋明宴会后叹息道： 果真像我们所估量的那样。 
English: After the banquet, Han Jinming sighed and said, "It really was as we expected.

古文：治点子弟文章，以为声价，大弊事也。
现代文：修改子弟的文章，用以抬高自己的名望，这是一件非常糟糕的事情。
English: It's a very bad thing to alter your son's article to boost your own reputation.

古文：一则不可常继，终露其情；二则学者有凭，益不精励。
现代文：一则不能经常如此，终究要透露出真情来；二则正在学习的子弟有了依赖，更加不肯专心努力。
English: On the one hand, you can't do this often, you have to reveal your true feelings eventually; on the other hand, the child who is studying has become dependent and is even more unwilling to concentrate on his efforts.

古文：邺下有一少年，出为襄国今，颇自勉笃，公事经怀，每加抚恤，以求声誉。
现代文：邺下有一个年轻的人，出任襄国县令，十分勤勉，对待公事尽心尽力，对下属体恤有加，以此来谋求声誉。
English: One of his subordinates was a young man who served as the county magistrate of Xiangguo County. He was very diligent, devoted to his work, and was kind to his subordinates, in order to gain reputation.

古文：凡遣兵役，握手送离，或齎梨枣饼饵，人人赠别，云： 上命相烦，情所不忍，道路饥渴，以此见思。 
现代文：每派遣兵差，都要握手相送，有时还拿出梨枣糕饼，并对每个人发表临别赠言说说： 上边有命令要麻烦你们，我感情上实在不忍，路上饥渴，送这些以表思念。 
English: Whenever soldiers were dispatched, they had to shake hands and send them on their way. Sometimes they brought out jujube cakes and gave everyone a parting gift, saying, "There is an order from above to trouble you. I really can't bear it emotionally. I'm hungry and thirsty on the way. I'm sending these as a token of my thoughts."

古文：民庶称之，不容於口。
现代文：民众对他称赞，不是口说所能说得完的。
English: The people's praise for him is beyond words.

古文：及迁为泗州别驾，此费日广，不可常周。
现代文：到迁任泗州别驾官时，这种费用就越来越多，无法常常做到。
English: When moving to be a driver in Zhangzhou, this kind of expense is more and more, and it can't be done often.

古文：一有伪情，触涂难继，功绩遂损败矣。
现代文：时间一长势必表现得虚情假意，难以相继，原先的功绩也随之而毁失。
English: With the passage of time, it is bound to show false sentiments, difficult to succeed, and the original achievements will also be destroyed.

