古文：竺惠庆卞悦之张畅王玄谟释道冏伏万寿彭子乔释慧和齐建安王毛德祖李儒俊沈甲张达孙敬德高荀史隽东山沙弥徐善才杜智楷张氏许俨僧道宪成珪王琦
现代文：竺惠庆卞悦之张畅王玄谟释道冏伏万寿彭子乔释慧和齐建安王毛德祖李儒俊沈甲张达孙敬德高荀史隽东山沙弥徐善才杜智楷张氏许俨僧道宪成珪王琦
English: Zhang Chang Wang Xuan Mo Xie Dao Fu Wan Shou Peng Zi Qiao Xie Hui and Qi Jian An Wang Mao De Zu Li Rujun Shen Jia Zhang Dasun Jing De Gao Jian Shi Dongshan Shami Xu Shencai Du Zhi Kai Zhang Clan Xu Zi Monk Dao Jian Cheng Zi Wang Zi

古文：竺惠庆
现代文：竺惠庆
English: Zou Huiqing

古文：宋沙门竺惠庆，广陵人也，经行修明。
现代文：南朝宋时僧人竺惠庆是广陵人，明经而修行。
English: During the Southern Song Dynasty, the monk Zou Huiqing was from Guangling and practiced according to the Ming Dynasty.

古文：元嘉十二年，荆扬大水，惠庆将入庐山。船至江而暴风忽起，同旅已得依浦，唯惠庆舫漂扬中江。风疾浪涌，唯待沦覆。
现代文：元嘉十二年，荆扬发大水，惠庆将要入庐山，船到江中暴风忽起，他的同旅已经靠岸了，只有惠庆的船飘荡在江中，风急浪涌，只等沉没。
English: In the twelfth year of the Yuan Jia Dynasty, Jing Yang sent out a large amount of water. Hui Qing was about to sail into Lushan. When the ship reached the middle of the river, a storm suddenly arose. His fellow traveler had already docked. Only Hui Qing's ship was floating in the river. The wind was blowing hard and the waves were surging. It was just waiting to sink.

古文：惠庆正心端意，诵观世音经。
现代文：惠庆正心正意，诵念观世音经。
English: Huiqing is sincere in heart and mind, chanting Guan Shiyin Jing.

古文：洲际之人，望见其舫，迎飙截流，如有数十人牵挽之者，径到其岸，一舫全济。
现代文：岸边的人，看见他的船。迎着暴风堵住急流，像有几十个人拉着似的，一直到岸边，一船的人全得救。
English: The man on the shore saw his boat, in the face of the storm, block the rapids, as if pulled by dozens of people, all the way to the shore, all the people in one boat were saved.

古文：妇为取妾，复积载不孕。
现代文：卞悦之南朝宋时的居士卞悦之，是济阴人，住在潮沟。年已五十岁，没有子女。
English: Gong Yuezhi, a layman of the Southern Dynasty and Song Dynasty, is from Jining and lives in Chaogou. He is 50 years old and has no children.

古文：将祈求继嗣，发愿诵观音经千遍。
现代文：妇人为他娶了妾，还是多年不孕，为求子嗣。发愿念观世音经一千遍。
English: The woman married a concubine for him, after years of infertility, in order to have a child.

古文：其数垂竟，妾即有娠，遂生一男。
现代文：等一千遍将念完，他的妾就有了身孕，于是就生下一男。
English: When he had finished reading it for the thousandth time, his concubine became pregnant and gave birth to a son.

古文：时即元嘉十四年也。
现代文：当时是元嘉十四年。
English: It was the 14th year of the Yuan Dynasty.

古文：张畅
现代文：张畅
English: Zhang Chang

古文：宋张畅，常奉持观音。
现代文：南朝宋时的张畅，常年供奉观世音。
English: Zhang Chang during the Southern Song Dynasty, and Guan Shiyin is worshipped throughout the year.

古文：南谯之构逆也，畅不从，王欲害之。夜梦观世音曰： 汝不可杀畅！ 
现代文：张畅不听从南谯的图谋叛逆。王想害他。夜里他梦见观世音说： 你不可以杀张畅。 
English: Zhang Chang did not listen to Nan Xun's plot to rebel. Wang wanted to harm him. At night, he dreamed of Guan Shiyin saying, "You must not kill Zhang Chang."

古文：遂不敢害。
现代文：于是不敢害畅。
English: So I didn't dare to do any harm.

古文：及王败，畅系狱，诵观世音经千遍，锁寸寸断，狱司易之复断。
现代文：等到王败了，张畅被捕入狱，诵一千遍观世音经，锁便一寸寸地断了。狱司给他换了又断。
English: After Wang's defeat, Zhang Chang was arrested and imprisoned. He recited the Guanyin Sutra a thousand times, and the lock was broken inch by inch. The warden changed it for him and broke it again.

古文：吏白曰： 释之。 
现代文：狱吏说： 放了他。 
English: The warden said, "Let him go."

古文：王玄谟
现代文：王玄谟
English: Wang Xuanmu

古文：宋太原王玄谟，爽迈不群。
现代文：南朝刘宋太原的王玄谟，爽直豪迈而不合群。
English: Wang Xuanmu of Taiyuan in the Southern Dynasty of Liu Song was forthright and courageous, and did not fit in with the crowd.

古文：北征失律，军法当死。
现代文：北征失利。按军法当处死。
English: The Northern Expedition failed. According to military law, he should be executed.

古文：梦人谓之曰： 汝诵观世音千遍，可得免祸。 
现代文：梦中看见一个人对他说： 你诵一千遍观世音经，可以免祸。 
English: In his dream, he saw a man saying to him, "If you recite the Avalokiteshvara Sutra a thousand times, you will be spared from evil."

古文：谟曰： 命悬旦夕，千遍何可得？ 
现代文：玄谟说： 命在旦夕，怎能念上千遍呢？ 
English: "How can I recite it a thousand times when my life is at stake?" said Han Mu.

古文：乃授云： 观世音，南无佛，与佛有因，与佛有缘，佛法相缘，常乐我情，朝念观世音，暮念观世音，念念从心起，念佛不离心。 
现代文：于是梦中人教他诵念： 观世音，南无佛，与佛有因，与佛有缘，佛法相缘，常乐我情。朝念观世音，暮念观世音。句句从心念，佛经不离心。 
English: So the dreamer taught him to chant: Guanyin in the morning, Nan without Buddha, with Buddha there is a cause, with Buddha there is an affinity, with Buddhism an affinity, Changle my feelings. Morning recitation of Guanyin, evening recitation of Guanyin. Sentences from the mind, Buddhist scriptures are not centrifugal.

古文：既而诵满千遍。
现代文：不久就念完了一千遍。
English: Before long, I had read it a thousand times.

古文：将就戮，将军沈庆之谏，遂免。
现代文：将要被杀的时候，将军沈庆之劝谏，才获免。
English: When he was about to be killed, he was only spared by the persuasion of General Shen Qingzhi.

古文：历位尚书金紫豫州刺史。
现代文：历任尚书金紫豫州刺史。
English: Successive Shangshu Jin Zi Yuzhou stabbed history.

古文：释道冏
现代文：释道冏
English: 释道

古文：姚秦沙门释道冏，弘始十八年，师道懿遣至河南霍山采钟乳，与同道道朗等四人共行。
现代文：姚秦僧人释道冏，弘始十八年，师道懿派他到河南霍山去采钟乳，和同道道朗等四人一同前往。
English: In the 18th year of the Hongshi era, the master Daojun sent him to the Hushan Mountain in Henan Province to collect bell milk. He went there together with four of his fellow monks, including Daolang.

古文：持炬深穴，入且三里，遇一深流，横木而过。
现代文：拿着火把进入深洞，入洞走了三里，遇到一条深水流，靠一横木渡水。
English: He took a torch into a deep cave, walked three miles into the cave, encountered a deep stream, and crossed the water by a crossbeam.

古文：冏最先济，后辈坠水而死。
现代文：道冏先渡过去了，后面的人都落水而死。
English: The barge went over first, and everyone behind it fell into the water and died.

古文：时火又灭，冥然昏暗。
现代文：当时火又熄灭了，漆黑一片。
English: Then the fire went out again and it was pitch black.

古文：冏生念已尽，恸哭而已，犹固一心呼观世音，誓愿若蒙出路，供百人会，表报威神。
现代文：道冏已没有活着的念头，只是痛哭，但还是坚持呼唤观世音，许愿如果能承蒙给予出路，将供奉百人的祭祀，来报达神的威力。
English: Daodejing no longer had any desire to live, but wept bitterly, but still insisted on calling for Guanyin, and made a wish that if he could be granted a way out, he would offer the sacrifice of a hundred people to repay the power of God.

古文：经一宿而见小光炯然，状若萤火，倏忽之间，穴中尽明。于是见路，得出岩下。
现代文：过了一宿忽然看见一个小光炯然，其形像萤火，倾刻之间，洞穴间便明亮起来，于是看见了路，才走出岩下。
English: After a night's sleep, he suddenly saw a small, bright light. Its shape resembled a firefly, and it lit up the cave in the twinkling of an eye. Only then did he see the path and walk out from under the rock.

古文：由此信悟弥深，屡睹灵异。
现代文：从此他信悟更深，多次目睹这样的灵异。
English: Since then, his faith has deepened, and he has witnessed such miracles many times.

古文：元嘉十九年，临川王作镇广陵，请冏供养。
现代文：元嘉十九年，临川王镇守广陵，请道冏在府里供事。
English: In the 19th year of the Yuan Jia, Linchuan Wang Zhen, the keeper of Guangling, invited Dousheng to serve in the government.

古文：其年九月，于西斋中作十日观世音斋。已得九日，夜四更尽，众僧皆眠，冏起礼拜谢，欲坐禅，忽见四壁有无数沙门，悉半身出见。
现代文：那年九月，在西斋中作十天观世音斋，已经过了九天，夜里过了四更天，众僧们都熟睡了，道冏起身施礼拜谢，刚要坐禅，忽然看见四下里有无数个僧人，都出现了半身。
English: In September of that year, nine days had passed since the ten-day sesshin, and four more days had passed during the night. All the monks were fast asleep. Daode stood up to offer thanksgiving. Just as he was about to sit down to meditate, he suddenly saw countless monks around him, all half-naked.

古文：一佛螺髻，分明了了。
现代文：一个佛梳螺旋形的发髻，十分分明。
English: A Buddha comb spiral hair bun, very distinct.

古文：有一长人，著平上帻，布裤褶，手把长刀，貌极雄异，捻香授道冏。
现代文：有一个高个子，戴着头巾，穿着布裤子，手中拿着一把长刀，相貌非常雄伟而奇异，捻着香给道冏，道冏当时不肯接受。
English: There was a tall man, wearing a turban, cloth trousers, holding a long knife in his hand, with a very majestic and strange appearance, twisting incense for Doudou, who did not want to accept it at that time.

古文：道冏时不肯受，壁中沙门语云： 冏公可为受香，以覆护主人。 俄而霍然，无所复见。当此之时，都不见众会诸僧，唯睹置释迦文行像而已。
现代文：四边的僧人说道： 道冏可以接受香，来保护主人。 不一会儿，就什么也看不见了，也不见聚会的众僧，只看见放着的释迦文行的像。
English: The monks on all sides said, "The wayfarer can receive incense to protect his master," and in a short time, they could not see anything, nor could they see the assembled monks, only the statue of Shakyamuni standing there.

古文：伏万寿
现代文：伏万寿
English: Fu Wanshou

古文：伏万寿，平昌人。
现代文：伏万寿，是平昌人。
English: Fuban Shou is from Pyeongchang.

古文：宋元嘉十九年在广陵为卫府参军，乞假返州。
现代文：南朝刘宋元嘉十九年在广陵做卫府参军，请假回州里。
English: In the 19th year of the Southern Dynasty, Liu Songyuanjia joined the army as a guard in Guangling and took a leave of absence to return to Shuzhou.

古文：四更初，涉江，长波安流，至中而风起如箭，时又夜，莫知所向。
现代文：四更初过江，风平浪静，等到到了江中风如箭起，当时又是深夜，不知去向。
English: At the beginning of the fourth month, they crossed the river, the wind was calm, and when they reached the middle of the river, the wind rose like an arrow. It was late at night, and they didn't know where to go.

古文：万寿光奉法，唯一心归命观世音，念无间。
现代文：万寿先信奉佛法，把唯一的希望归于观世音经，不停止地念。
English: Manshouxian believed in Buddhism and pinned his only hope on the Avalokiteshvara Sutra, reciting it incessantly.

古文：倏尔与船中数人，同睹北岸有光，状如村火，喜曰： 此必是阳火也。 
现代文：很快地和船上的几个人，都看见北岸上有光亮，像是村火，高兴地说： 这一定是人间的烟火。 
English: Soon, he and several people on the boat saw a bright light on the north shore, like a village fire, and said happily: This must be human fireworks.

古文：回船趋之，未旦而至，问彼人，皆云： 昨夜无燃火者。 
现代文：于是调回船头奔去，不到天亮就到了。问那地方的人，他们都说昨天夜里没有点燃火光的。
English: So they made haste and returned to the stern of the ship; and when they came before daybreak, they asked the men of that place, and they said, "The lamps were not lighted last night."

古文：于是方悟神力焉。
现代文：于是才明白了是神的力量。
English: Then I understood that it was the power of God.

古文：彭子乔宋彭子乔者，益陽县人也。
现代文：彭子乔宋彭子乔者，益阳县人也。
English: Peng Zi Qiao Song Peng Zi Qiao is also from Yiyang County.

古文：任本郡主薄，事太守沈文龙。
现代文：任本郡主薄，事太守沈文龙。
English: The appointment of the prince of this county is weak, and the deputy governor is Shen Wenlong.

古文：建元元年，以罪被系。
现代文：建元元年，以罪被系。
English: In the first year of the Jianyuan era, he was convicted of a crime.

古文：子乔少年尝出家，还俗后，常诵观世音经。
现代文：子乔少年尝出家，还俗后，常诵观世音经。
English: Zi Qiao tried to become a monk as a young boy, and after returning to the secular world, he often recited the Guanyin Sutra.

古文：时文龙盛怒，防械稍急，必欲杀之。
现代文：时文龙盛怒，防械稍急，必欲杀之。
English: When the dragon is in a rage, the defense mechanism is a bit hasty, and it is necessary to kill it.

古文：子乔忧惧，无复余计，唯至诚诵经，至百余遍，疲而昼寝。
现代文：子乔忧惧，无复余计，唯至诚诵经，至百余遍，疲而昼寝。
English: Xiao Qiao was worried and had no choice but to recite the sutra a hundred times. He was so tired that he took a nap.

古文：同系者有十许人，亦俱睡。
现代文：同系者有十许人，亦俱睡。
English: There are tens of people in the same family, and they also sleep together.

古文：有湘西县吏杜道荣，亦系在狱，乍寐乍寤，不甚得熟。
现代文：有湘西县吏杜道荣，亦系在狱，乍寐乍寤，不甚得熟。
English: Du Daorong, an official of Xiangxi County, is also in prison, but he is not well known.

古文：忽有双白鹤集子乔屏风上。
现代文：忽有双白鹤集子乔屏风上。
English: Suddenly, there are double white cranes on the screen.

古文：有顷，一鹤下至子乔边，时复觉如美丽人。
现代文：有顷，一鹤下至子乔边，时复觉如美丽人。
English: One day, a crane came down to my son's side, and I suddenly felt like a beautiful person.

古文：道荣起，见子乔双械脱在脚外，而械痕犹在焉。
现代文：道荣起，见子乔双械脱在脚外，而械痕犹在焉。
English: When Tao Rong stood up, he saw that the two pieces of machinery were off his feet, but the traces of the machinery were still there.

古文：道荣惊视，子乔亦寤，共视械咨嗟，问道荣曰： 有所梦不。 
现代文：道荣惊视，子乔亦寤，共视械咨嗟，问道荣曰： 有所梦不。 
English: Dao Rong stared in amazement, his son Qiao Yixuan asked Rong, "Do you have a dream?"

古文：答曰： 不梦。 
现代文：答曰： 不梦。 
English: The answer is: not a dream.

古文：道荣以所见说之，子乔虽知必己，尚虑狱家疑其欲叛，乃取械著之。
现代文：道荣把所看见的告诉他。子乔虽然知道究竟，却怕看守疑惑他想叛逃，他就又拿出刑械自己戴上。
English: Dou Rong told him what he had seen. Although Zi Qiao knew the truth, he was afraid that the guards would suspect that he wanted to defect, so he took out the torture device and put it on himself.

古文：经四五日而蒙释放。
现代文：经了四五天而被释放。
English: He was released after four or five days.

古文：释慧和
现代文：释慧和
English: Shie Hui and

古文：宋慧和沙门者，京师众造寺僧也。
现代文：南朝宋时的慧和僧人，是京城众造寺的和尚。
English: He was a Buddhist monk of the Southern Song Dynasty and was the founder of many temples in Beijing.

古文：元嘉之难，和犹为白衣，属刘胡部下。
现代文：元嘉年间劫难时，慧和还是平民，属刘胡的部下。
English: At the time of the disaster in the Yuan Jia era, Hui He was still a commoner and a subordinate of Liu Hu.

古文：胡常遣将士数十人作谍东，和亦预行，行至鹊渚，而值台军西上，谍众离散，各逃草泽。
现代文：刘胡常派将士几十人作间谍，慧和也准备去，走到鹊渚，正赶上台军西上。众间谍都离散了，各自逃到草泽中。
English: Liu Hu often sent dozens of soldiers to spy, and Hui He was also preparing to go. He walked to the foot of the mountain and was just catching up with the Taiwanese army in the west. All the spies dispersed and fled to the grass.

古文：和得窜，下至新林，见野老衣服缕弊，和乃以貌整裤褶易其衣，提篮负担，若类田人。
现代文：慧和得以逃窜，到了新林，看见一个野老衣衫褴褛，慧和就用自己看去还算齐整的衣裤换了他的衣服，提着篮子挑着担子。好像种田的人一样。
English: Hui He was able to escape, and when he arrived in Xinlin, he saw a wild old man with ragged clothes. Hui He changed his clothes with his pants, which he thought were still intact, and carried a basket and a load. He looked like a farmer.

古文：时诸游军捕此散谍，视和形色，疑而问之。和答对谬略。因被笞掠，登时见斩。
现代文：当时那些游军在这里追捕散离的那些间谍，看慧和的体型和面色，疑惑地查问他，慧和答对不上，于是就被拷打，立刻要被斩首。
English: At that time, the guerrillas chased the scattered spies here, looked at Hui He's body shape and face, questioned him suspiciously, Hui He could not answer correctly, so he was tortured and immediately beheaded.

古文：和自散走，便恒诵念观世音经，至将斩时，祈恳弥至。
现代文：慧和自从走散后，便坚持诵读观世音经，到了将要斩首的时候，祈祷的更加诚挚。
English: Ever since Huihe had been separated, she had insisted on reciting the Guanyin Sutra. When it was time to be beheaded, she prayed even more earnestly.

古文：既而军人挥刃屡跌，三举三折，并惊而释之。
现代文：军人挥刀砍他时屡次跌倒，三次举刀三次刀折，非常惊讶地放了他。
English: When the soldier swung the knife at him, he fell down several times, raised the knife three times and broke it three times. He was very surprised and let him go.

古文：和于是出家，遂成精业。
现代文：慧和于是出家，终于成就了他的修业。
English: So Hui He became a monk and finally completed his training.

古文：齐建安王
现代文：齐建安王
English: Qi Jianan Wang

古文：齐建安王患疮，念观音不息，夜梦见观音，手为傅药，明旦疮愈也。
现代文：齐朝建安王患了疮病，念观世音经不止，夜里梦见观世音。亲手为他傅药，第二天早晨疮就痊愈了。
English: King Jian'an of the Qi Dynasty suffered from an abscess. He kept reciting the Avalokiteshvara Sutra, and at night he dreamed of Avalokiteshvara. He personally prepared medicine for him, and the next morning the abscess was healed.

古文：毛德祖
现代文：毛德祖
English: Mao Zedong

古文：荥阳人毛德祖，初投江南，偷道而过。
现代文：荥阳人毛德祖，当初投奔江南，偷路而过。
English: Mao Tse-tung, a native of Shenyang, initially fled to the south of the Yangtze River.

古文：道逢虏骑所追，伏在路侧蓬蒿，半身犹露，分意受死。
现代文：道上正遇上敌人的骑兵追赶，就趴在路边的蓬蒿中，半截身子还露在外面，只等受死。
English: On the way, he was being chased by enemy cavalrymen, and he lay in the roadside thicket, half of his body still exposed, just waiting to die.

古文：合家念观世音，俄然云起雨注，得免死也。
现代文：当初全家念观世音经，突然天阴下起大雨来，他才能够免于死亡。
English: At first, the whole family was reciting the Sutra of Contemplation of the World, but suddenly the sky darkened and it rained heavily, and only then was he able to avoid death.

古文：李儒俊
现代文：李儒俊
English: Li Rujun

古文：队主李儒俊镇虎牢，为魏虏所围，危急欲降。
现代文：队主李儒俊镇守虎牢关，被魏兵所围，十分危急，打算投降。
English: The leader of the team, Li Rujun, was surrounded by Wei soldiers and was in a very critical situation. He was about to surrender.

古文：夜逾城出，见贼纵横并卧，儒俊乃一心念观世音，便过贼处，趋空泽。
现代文：李儒俊便连夜从城墙逃出，看见贼兵横躺竖卧，就一心念观世音经，便穿过贼兵处，到达空泽地。
English: Li Rujun escaped from the city wall during the night, and when he saw the bandits lying side by side, he recited the Guan Yin Jing with all his heart, and then passed through the bandits and reached the vacant land.

古文：贼即随来，儒俊便入草，未及藏伏，贼掩至。
现代文：贼兵就来了，儒俊便躲入草中，没等到藏好，贼兵赶到了。
English: The bandits came, and Ru Jun hid in the grass. Before he could hide, the bandits arrived.

古文：儒俊惊恐，一心专念观音经，忽得马驰去，因此遂得脱。
现代文：儒俊便惊慌害怕，一心专念观世音经，忽然得到一匹马奔驰而去，因此得以脱险。
English: Zhu Jun panicked and was afraid. He was engrossed in meditating on the Avalokiteshvara Sutra, when he suddenly saw a horse galloping away, so he was able to escape.

古文：沈甲
现代文：沈甲
English: Shen Jia

古文：吴郡人沈甲，被系处死。临刑市中日，诵观音名号，心口不息，刀刃自断，因而被放。
现代文：吴郡人沈甲，被抓将要处死，在市中临刑时，诵读观音名号，心口不停，刀刃便自断了，因而被释放。
English: Shen Jia, a resident of Wuxi County, was arrested and was about to be put to death. When he was about to be executed in the city, he recited the name of the Goddess of Mercy. His heart was pounding, and the blade of the knife cut itself, so he was released.

古文：一云，吴人陆晖系狱分死。乃令家人造观音像，冀得免死。
现代文：又有人说：吴郡人陆晖被抓入监狱等死，就让家人造观音像。希望能够免去一死。
English: Another said: "When Lu Yao, a resident of Wuxi County, was arrested and died in prison, he asked his family members to make a statue of Guanyin. I hope I can avoid death."

古文：临刑三刀，其刀皆折。
现代文：临刑时用了三把刀，刀都断了。
English: Three knives were used during the execution, and all of them were broken.

古文：官问之故，答云： 恐是观音慈力。 
现代文：官吏问他原因，答道： 恐怕是观音的慈悲之力。 
English: The official asked him why, and he replied, "I'm afraid it's the power of compassion of Guanyin."

古文：及看像项上，乃有三刀痕现，因奏获免。
现代文：等到看观音像的脖子上有三刀的痕迹。于是上奏赦免了他。
English: Wait until you see the statue of Guanyin with the marks of three swords on his neck. So Shangso pardoned him.

古文：张达
现代文：张达
English: Zhang Da

古文：张达有罪系狱，分当受死。
现代文：张达有罪被捕入狱，理当受死。
English: Zhang Da was arrested and jailed after being found guilty. He deserved to die.

古文：乃专念观世音，锁械自脱，因遂获免，终身斋戒。
现代文：于是他就专心念观世音经，而锁械自己脱落，因而就得以获免，此后他便终身斋戒。
English: So he concentrated on reciting the Sutra of Contemplation of the World, and the locks fell off by themselves, so he was released, and then he fasted for life.

古文：孙敬德
现代文：孙敬德
English: Sun Jingde

古文：东魏孙敬德，天平中，定州募士。
现代文：东魏的孙敬德，天平年中，是定州的募士。
English: Sun Jingde of the Eastern Wei Dynasty, in the middle of the Heian period, was a fundraiser in Dingzhou.

古文：奉释教，尝造观音像，自加礼敬。
现代文：信奉佛教，曾经造观音像。自己更加礼敬观音。
English: He believes in Buddhism and once made a statue of Guanyin. He respects Guanyin even more.

古文：后为劫贼所引，不胜拷楚，忽梦一沙门，令诵救生观世音千遍。
现代文：以后被劫贼强牵挽，受不住拷打痛苦，忽然梦见一个僧人让他诵观世音经一千遍来求救。
English: After that, he was forcibly dragged by robbers, could not bear the pain of torture, and suddenly dreamed of a monk asking him to chant the Avalokiteshvara Sutra a thousand times to seek help.

古文：执缚临刑，诵念数满，刀自折为三段，肤颈不伤。
现代文：被押赴刑场，临刑诵念完千遍，刑刀自己断为三截，而皮肤和脖子都没有伤。
English: He was taken to the execution site, and after being chanted a thousand times, the execution knife itself was broken into three pieces, but his skin and neck were not injured.

古文：三易其刀，终折如故。
现代文：三次换刀，始终像先前那样断为三截。
English: Three times the knife was changed, and it was always broken into three pieces as before.

古文：所司以状奏闻，丞相高欢表请免死。
现代文：主管就以状奏，丞相高欢奏表请求免死。
English: The supervisor played the situation, and the prime minister played the table to request to be spared from death.

古文：及归，睹其家观音像，项有刃迹三。
现代文：等到回家，看他家观世音的像，脖子上有三个刀痕。
English: When he got home, he looked at his family portrait of Guan Shiyin. There were three knife marks on his neck.

古文：敕写其经布于世，今谓 高王观世音经 。
现代文：皇上诏令让他写经书流传世间。今天叫做《高王观世音经》。
English: The Emperor's edict ordered him to write a sutra that would be passed down to the world. Today, it is called the "Kao Guanzhong Sheng Jing."

古文：自晋、宋、梁、陈、秦、赵国，观音、地藏、弥勒、弥陀，称名念诵，得救者不可胜纪。
现代文：在晋、宋、梁、陈、秦、赵国、观音、地藏、弥勒、弥陀，提名便能念诵，得救的人不可胜数。
English: In Jin, Song, Liang, Chen, Qin, Zhao, Guanyin, Jizang, Maitreya, and Mido, the nomination can be recited, and countless people can be saved.

古文：高荀
现代文：高荀
English: Takatsuki

古文：荥阳高荀，年已五十。
现代文：荥阳的高荀，年纪五十岁。
English: Gao Yao from Shenyang, aged 50.

古文：为杀人被收，锁顿地牢，分意必死，同牢人云： 努力共念观音。 
现代文：因为杀人被收监，锁进地牢，估计必死。同牢的人说： 努力共同念观世音经。 
English: Because the murderer was imprisoned, locked in a dungeon, and was expected to die. Fellow prisoners said, "Let's try to recite the Sutra of Contemplation of the World together."

古文：荀云： 我罪至重，甘心受诬，何由可免。 
现代文：高荀说： 我罪最重，甘心受刑，怎么可以免罪呢？ 
English: Gao Wei said: My crime is the most serious, I am willing to be punished, how can I be exonerated?

古文：同禁劝之，因始发心，誓当舍恶行善，专念观音，不离造次，若得免脱，愿起五层浮图，舍身作奴，供养众僧。
现代文：同囚禁的人劝他，因此才动心，并发誓要去恶行善，专心念观世音经，不再鲁莽，如果能够免罪，愿造五层浮图，舍身作奴，供养众僧。
English: His fellow prisoners persuaded him, and that's why his heart was moved, and he vowed to do evil and do good, to concentrate on reciting the Sutra of Contemplation of the World, to no longer be reckless, and if he could be absolved, to make a five-layer floating picture, to give up his life as a slave, and to provide for the monks.

古文：旬日用心，钳锁自解。监司惊惧，语荀云： 若佛神怜汝，斩应不死。 
现代文：用心读经十天，钳锁自然开解，监司惊惧，对高荀说： 如果神佛同情你，斩首时当不死。 
English: After reading the sutras for ten days, the latch was naturally loosened. The supervisor was alarmed and said to Gao Yao: "If the gods and Buddhas sympathize with you, you should not die when you are beheaded."

古文：临刑之日，举刀刃断，奏得原免。
现代文：临刑的那一天，举刀刀便折断，监司启奏后得以赦免。
English: On the day he was about to be sentenced, he raised his sword and it broke, and he was pardoned after the warden's speech.

古文：史隽
现代文：史隽
English: History Channel

古文：史隽有学识，奉道而慢佛，常语人云： 佛是小神，不足事也。 
现代文：史隽有学识，信奉道教而轻视佛教，常对人说： 佛是小神，不足以供奉。 
English: Shi Yan was a scholar. He believed in Taoism and despised Buddhism. He often said to people, "Buddha is a small god, not enough to worship."

古文：每见尊像，恒轻诮之。
现代文：每当看见佛像，总是轻视地讥诮他。
English: Whenever he sees a Buddha statue, he always sneers at it.

古文：后因病脚挛，种种祈福，都无效验。
现代文：以后因为得了脚痉挛病，各种各样的祈求护佑，都毫无效果。
English: Later, because I got athlete's foot, all kinds of prayers for protection had no effect.

古文：其友人赵文谓曰： 经道福中第一，可试造观音像。 
现代文：他的朋友赵问对他说： 读经信教是得到护佑的第一位，你可以试着造一个观世音像。 
English: His friend Zhao Qian said to him: "Reading the Bible and believing in God are the first to be blessed. You can try to create a world outlook audio-visual."

古文：隽以病急，如言铸像。
现代文：史隽因病重，就像朋友说的那样铸了观世音像。
English: As a result of her serious illness, Shi Yan, as a friend said, created a Guanyin image.

古文：像成，梦观音。果得差。
现代文：像铸成了，梦见观世音，果然病就好了。
English: As if cast, I dreamed of Guanyin, and my illness was cured.

古文：东山沙弥
现代文：东山沙弥
English: Higashiyama Shami

古文：隋开皇初，有扬州僧，忘其本名，诵通涅槃，自矜为业。
现代文：隋朝开皇年初，扬州有个和尚，忘了他的原名，诵读精通涅躄经，引以为自豪并作为自己的职业。
English: At the beginning of the reign of the Sui Dynasty, there was a monk in Yangzhou who had forgotten his original name. He was a proficient reciter of the Nirvana Sutra, which he was proud of and considered his profession.

古文：岐州东山下村中沙弥，诵观世音经。
现代文：岐州东山下村中的沙弥，诵读观世音经。
English: A priest in a village in the eastern mountains of Kishu, reciting the Guanyin Sutra.

古文：二俱暴死，同至阎罗王所。
现代文：两个人一起暴死，一同到阎罗王那里。
English: Two people died violently together and went to the King of Hell together.

古文：身口不净。于今验矣。 
现代文：于是对待沙弥是让他坐在金高座，非常敬重他，对待涅槃僧则是让坐在银高座，对他的敬重就稍微差一些。涅槃僧非常愤恨，问明沙弥的住处。已经复苏后，就从南来到岐州，找到了沙弥，问他原因。沙弥说： 每次诵观音经，在另外的地方穿着净衣，点上名香祝愿，然后再诵经。坚持不懈，再也没有别的本领。 涅槃僧谢罪说： 我的罪太深了，所诵的涅槃经，没有隆重的仪式，也不净口净身，如今才验证了 。
English: As a result, the treatment of the novice monk was to let him sit on the golden high seat and respect him very much, while the treatment of the nirvana monk was to let him sit on the silver high seat and respect him a little less. The nirvana monk was very angry and asked where the novice monk lived. After he had recovered, he came from the south to Qizhou, found the novice monk and asked him the reason. The novice monk said: Every time I chant the Guanyin Sutra, I wear a clean robe in another place, point the famous incense to make a wish, and then chant the sutra. Perseverance, there is no

古文：徐善才
现代文：徐善才
English: Xu Shancai

古文：唐武德中，醴泉县人徐善才，常修斋戒，诵观世音经，逾千遍。
现代文：唐朝武德年中，醴泉县人徐善才，常常修行斋戒，诵读观世音经，超千遍。
English: In the middle of the Wu De era of the Tang Dynasty, Xu Shencai, a man from Jiuquan County, often practiced fasting and recited the Guan Shiyin Classic more than a thousand times.

古文：曾往京城延兴寺，修营功德。
现代文：曾去京城延兴寺，修建功德。
English: He once went to Beijing's Yanxing Temple to build merit.

古文：及还家，道逢胡贼。贼所掠汉人千百，将向洪崖，次第杀之。
现代文：等到回来，道上遇到胡贼，贼人所抓汉人成千上百，将要推向洪崖，一个一个杀掉。
English: When he came back, he met the bandits on the road. The bandits had captured hundreds of Han Chinese and were about to push them to the cliff, killing them one by one.

古文：善才知不免，唯至心念观音经。
现代文：善才知道不能脱免，只诚心念观世音经。
English: Only the virtuous know that they cannot escape, and can only sincerely recite the Guan Yin Jing.

古文：当杀之时，了不自觉，至初夜方悟，身在深涧树枝上，去岸三百余尺。
现代文：当杀他时，突然失去知觉，一直到初夜才醒，身子挂在深涧的树枝上，离崖岸三百多尺。
English: When he was killed, he suddenly lost consciousness and did not wake up until the early hours of the morning, his body hanging from a deep tree branch, more than three hundred feet from the cliff.

古文：以手摩项，觉微痛而无伤。
现代文：用手去摸脖子，觉得稍有疼痛而没有损伤。
English: Touch your neck with your hand and feel a slight pain but no injury.

古文：渐下树。循涧南行，可五六十里，天渐晓，去贼已远，得官路，遂还家。琬法师尝说此事。
现代文：慢慢地下树，沿着山涧往南走，走了五六十里，天渐渐亮了，离贼已远，找到了官路，于是回家，琬法师曾经说这件事。
English: He slowly climbed down the tree and walked south along the ridge of the mountain. He walked for fifty or sixty miles. It was getting light and he was far away from the thief. He found the official road and went home.

古文：杜智楷
现代文：杜智楷
English: Du Zhikai

古文：杜智楷，曹州离狐人。
现代文：杜智楷是曹州离狐人。
English: Du Zhikai is a foxman from Caozhou.

古文：少好释典，不仕不娶，被僧衣，隐居太山，以读诵为事。
现代文：年少喜好经典，不求仕途不娶妻，穿着僧衣，隐居在泰山，以诵读经书为业。
English: He likes classics at a young age, does not seek a career, does not marry a wife, wears a monk's robe, lives in seclusion on Mount Tai, and reads scriptures for a living.

古文：唐贞观二十一年，于山中还，忽患疾垂死，以袈裟覆体，昏然如梦。
现代文：唐朝贞观二十一年，从山中回来忽然患病将死，用袈裟盖着身体。昏然像做梦一样。
English: In the twenty-first year of Zhenguan of the Tang Dynasty, she came back from the mountains and suddenly fell ill and was about to die. She covered her body with a cocoon. She was dazed like in a dream.

古文：见老母及美女十数屡来相扰，智楷端然不动。渐相逼斥，并云： 舆智楷掷置北涧里。 
现代文：看见老母和十几个女子多次来打扰，智楷端坐不动心，逐渐相逼呵叱，并说： 把智楷扔到北涧里去。 
English: Seeing his mother and more than a dozen women repeatedly interrupting him, Zhi Kai sat motionless and gradually scolded each other, saying, "Throw Zhi Kai into the Beilun River."

古文：遂总近前，同执捉，有揽著袈裟者。
现代文：于是都走近前来，一起捉他，有的抓住他穿的袈裟。
English: So they all came near and seized him, and some of them even seized the robe he was wearing.

古文：忽齐声念佛，却后忏悔，请为造阿弥陀佛，诵观音菩萨三十余遍。
现代文：忽然一齐念佛，后退并忏悔，请求给她们造阿弥陀佛，诵观世音经三十多遍。
English: All of a sudden, they all chanted Buddha's name, retreated and repented, asked for Amitabha Buddha to be made for them, and recited the Avalokiteshvara Sutra more than 30 times.

古文：少间，遂觉体上大汗，即愈。
现代文：不一会，智楷就感到身体出了一身大汗，就好了。
English: After a while, Zhi Kai felt that his body was sweating profusely, and he was fine.

古文：离狐今济阴也。
现代文：离狐是现在的济阴。
English: The fox is now the fox.

古文：张氏
现代文：张氏
English: Mr. Zhang

古文：陈玄范妻张氏，精心奉佛，恒愿自作一金像，终身供养。
现代文：陈玄范的妻子张氏，精心奉佛。常愿自作一个金像，终身供养它。
English: Chen Xuanfan's wife, Zhang, is a devoted Buddhist. She would like to make a gold statue of herself and keep it for life.

古文：有愿莫从，专心日久，忽有观世音金像，连光五尺，现高座上。
现代文：这个愿望没能实现，张氏仍久持这种心愿，忽然有一个观世音的金像，发出五尺多的毫光，出现在高座上。
English: This wish did not come true, Mr. Zhang still held this wish for a long time, suddenly a gold statue of Guanyin, emitting more than five feet of millimeter light, appeared on the high seat.

古文：众叹其精感所致。
现代文：大家赞叹说是她的诚心感动的结果。
English: Everyone said it was the result of her sincerity that moved them.

古文：许俨
现代文：许俨
English: Xu Yao

古文：唐龙朔麟德中，京师永兴坊许俨，取鱼为业。
现代文：唐朝龙朔麟德中，京城永兴坊的许俨，以打鱼为业。
English: In the Tang Dynasty's Longshuo Linde, Xu Han of Yongxingfang, Beijing, was a fisherman.

古文：后患疾，冥然若死，身赤如火，痛似火炙，自云： 但见火车来烧身，官府责取鱼多，遣生受罪。 
现代文：以后得病，迷迷糊糊像死了一样，身上红得像火，疼痛的像火烤的一样。他自己说： 只看见火车来烧身，官府责怪打的鱼太多，让自己活受罪。 
English: Later, he fell ill, dazed as if he were dead, his body red as if it were on fire, his pain searing. He said: I only saw the train coming to burn me. The government blamed me for catching too many fish, making me suffer.

古文：已经数日，乍生乍死。
现代文：过了几天了，半死半活的。
English: A few days later, he was half dead and half alive.

古文：亲戚劝作功德，遂造观音像两躯，仍令合家不食酒肉，病遂差。
现代文：亲戚们劝他作功德，于是造了两尊观世音像。并让全家不吃酒肉，病就好了。
English: His relatives advised him to do good deeds, so he built two statues of Guanyin. He also asked his whole family not to eat meat or drink alcohol, and his illness was cured.

古文：僧道宪
现代文：僧道宪
English: The monk Dao Xian

古文：唐圣善寺僧道宪，俗姓元氏。
现代文：唐朝圣善寺和尚道宪，俗姓元。
English: The monk Daoxian of the Tang Dynasty Pilgrimage Zen Temple, commonly known as Yuan.

古文：开元中，住持于江州大云寺，法侣称之。
现代文：开元年中，江州大云寺任住持，很受众僧称颂。
English: In the middle of the first year of the year, he was appointed abbot of Jiangzhou Dayun Temple, and was highly praised by the monks.

古文：时刺史元某，欲画观世音七铺，以宪练行，委之勾当。
现代文：当时的刺史元某，想要画七张观世音像，因道宪修炼有成，委托他去主管。
English: At that time, a certain Shih Yuan, who wanted to paint seven Guanyin paintings, was able to do so because of his cultivation of the Taoist Constitution, and he was entrusted to be the supervisor.

古文：宪令画工持斋洁己，诸彩色悉以乳头香代胶，备极清净。
现代文：道宪便让画工斋戒洁身，各种彩色都用乳头香代胶，准备的非常洁净。
English: Daoxian then asked the painter to fast and purify himself. All kinds of colors were prepared with nipple glue, which was very clean.

古文：元深嘉之。
现代文：元某很赞许他。
English: Mr. Moto highly approves of him.

古文：事毕，往预宁斫排，造文殊堂。
现代文：画完后，去预宁砍木做排，建造文殊堂。
English: After finishing the painting, he went to Anning to chop wood and make a row to build the Manjushri Hall.

古文：排成将还，忽然堕水，江流湍急，同侣求拯无由。
现代文：排砍成将要运回，忽然全排的人都落入水中，江流湍急，同伴无处求救。
English: The platoon was about to be transported back, when suddenly everyone in the platoon fell into the water. The river was rushing, and my companions had nowhere to call for help.

古文：宪堕水之际，便思念观世音。
现代文：道宪落水之时，便想念观世音经。
English: When the Constitution fell into the water, he missed the Guan Shiyin Jing.

古文：见水底有异光，久而视之，见所画七菩萨，立在左右，谓宪曰： 尔但念南无菩萨。 
现代文：只见水底下有奇异的光，过了很久再看它，是他所画的七位菩萨，站在左右，对道宪说： 你只念南无菩萨。 
English: He saw a strange light under the water. After a long time, he looked at it again. It was the seven bodhisattvas he had drawn, standing to the right and left. He said to Dao Xian, "You only think of Nan, there are no bodhisattvas."

古文：宪行李如昼。犹知在水底，惧未免死，乃思计云：念阿弥陀佛。
现代文：道宪往来就像白天一样知道在水底，害怕不能免死，于是想出一计：念阿弥陀佛。
English: As if it were daylight, Dogen knew that he was underwater and was afraid of dying, so he came up with a plan: to chant the Amitabha Buddha's name.

古文：又念阿弥佛，其七菩萨并来捧足，将至水上，衣服无所污染，与排相随，俱行四十余里。
现代文：于是又念阿弥佛，结果那七个菩萨一起来抬着他的脚，将他送到水上。衣服也没湿，和排一起行了四十多里。
English: Then he recited the Amitabha mantra again, and as a result, the seven bodhisattvas came together to lift his feet and carry him to the water. His clothes were not wet, and he walked more than forty miles with the group.

古文：宪天宝初灭度，今江州大云寺七菩萨见在，兼画落水事云耳。
现代文：通宪天宝年初死，现在江州大云寺的七菩萨像还在，又画了道宪落水的事。成珪
English: Tongxian Tianbao died at the beginning of the year, and now the seven bodhisattva statues of Jiangzhou Dayun Temple are still there, and they also painted the story of the fall of the Constitution.

古文：成珪成珪者，唐天宝初，为长沙尉。部送河南桥木，始至扬州，累遭风水，遗失差众。
现代文：唐朝天宝年初，成珪作了长沙尉，负责送桥木到河南，刚到扬州，多次遭到风雨，丢失了许多的桥木。
English: At the beginning of the Tang Dynasty's Tianbao year, Cheng Yao served as a Changsha lieutenant, responsible for sending bridge timbers to Henan. When he first arrived in Yangzhou, he was repeatedly battered by wind and rain and lost many bridge timbers.

古文：扬州所司谓珪盗卖其木，拷掠行夫，不胜楚痛，妄云破用。
现代文：扬州有司认为成珪盗卖了桥木，就严刑拷打运夫，运夫受不了酷刑，就屈招了。
English: Yangzhou You Si believed that Cheng Hao had stolen and sold the bridge timbers, so he severely tortured and beat the driver. The driver could not bear the torture, so he gave in.

古文：扬州转帖潭府，时班景倩为潭府，严察之吏也。
现代文：扬州有司上报潭府，当时班景倩掌管潭府，为严察官。
English: Yangzhou had an official in charge of the Tang Prefecture. At that time, Ban Jingyu was in charge of the Tang Prefecture and was a strict inspector.

古文：长沙府别将钱堂扬觐利其使，与景倩左右构成。
现代文：长沙府的别将钱堂、杨觐认为有利可图，就和景倩左右的人一起陷害成珪。
English: The authorities in Changsha thought it would be profitable to frame Qiantang and Yang Hui, so they set them up together with people around Jingyao.

古文：景倩使觐来收珪等。
现代文：景倩派杨觐来收捉成珪等人。
English: Jingyao sent Yang Hui to collect and capture Chengyu and others.

古文：觐至扬州，以小枷枷珪，陆路递行。
现代文：觐到了扬州，用小枷锁成珪，从陆路走。
English: When they arrived in Yangzhou, they were shackled with small chains and forced to walk overland.

古文：至宁江，方入船，乃以连锁锁枷，附于船梁，四面悉皆钉塞，唯开小孔，出入饭食等。
现代文：到了宁江，才上船，又用链锁锁枷，把他锁在船梁上，四面都钉死，只打一个小孔，送饭食用。
English: When he got to the Ningjiang River, he got on the boat, chained him with chains and shackles, and chained him to the boat's beam. He was nailed to the beam on all four sides, and only a small hole was drilled to give him food.

古文：珪意若至潭府必死，发扬州，便心念救苦观世音菩萨。恒一日一食，或时不食，但饮水清斋。
现代文：成珪认为如果到了潭府也一定死的，从扬州出发时，便诚心念救苦救难的观世音菩萨，常常一天吃一顿饭，有时一顿也不吃，只喝清水斋戒。
English: Chengyu believed that if he went to Tanfu, he would surely die. When he set out from Yangzhou, he sincerely remembered Guan Shiyin, the bodhisattva of salvation, often eating one meal a day, sometimes not eating at all, only drinking water and fasting.

古文：经十余日，至滁口，夕暮之际，念诵恳至。其枷及锁，忽然开解，形体萧然，无所累著。
现代文：过了十多天，到了滁口，正当傍晚之时，成珪念经更加恳切，那个枷和锁，忽然解开了，身体轻松，没有什么累赘。
English: After more than ten days, when I arrived at the entrance of the gate, just in the late afternoon, I recited the Sutra more earnestly. The shackles and locks were suddenly loosened, my body was relaxed, and there was no burden.

古文：伺夜深，舟人尽卧，珪乃拆所钉。拔除出船背。
现代文：等到夜深了，船上的人都睡了，成珪就拆掉钉子，从船上跳到船顶。
English: When it was late at night and everyone on board was asleep, Cheng Yao removed the nail and jumped from the boat to the top of the boat.

古文：至觐房上，呼曰： 杨觐，汝如我何！ 
现代文：到了杨觐的房上，喊道： 杨觐，你能把我怎么样！ 
English: When he arrived at Yang Hui's house, he shouted, "Yang Hui, what can you do to me!

古文：觐初惊起，问何得至此。
现代文：杨觐惊起，问他怎么到这里来的。
English: Yang Xuan was startled and asked him how he got here.

古文：珪曰： 当葬江鱼腹中，岂与汝辈成功耶？ 
现代文：成珪说： 我要葬到江中鱼腹，怎么能让你们成功呢？ 
English: Cheng Yu said, "I want to be buried in the belly of a fish in the river, how can I let you succeed?"

古文：因决意赴水。
现代文：因此决心跳水。
English: So he decided to take the plunge.

古文：初至潭底，须臾遇一浮木，中有竖枝，珪骑木抱，得至水面。
现代文：成珪刚到潭底，不一会就遇到一块浮木，当中有个竖的枝，珪就骑在木头上抱着枝子，浮到水面上。
English: As soon as Cheng Yao reached the bottom of the lake, he soon came across a piece of driftwood with a vertical branch in it. He rode on the tree, holding the branch, and floated to the water's surface.

古文：中夜黑暗，四顾茫然，木既至潭底，又复浮出。
现代文：半夜黑暗，四顾茫然，木已到了潭底又浮上水面。
English: It was dark in the middle of the night. Looking around, I was at a loss. The tree had already reached the bottom of the pond and then floated to the surface.

古文：珪意至心念观世音，乃漂然。忽尔翻转，随水中木而行。知已至岸，便芦中潜伏。
现代文：成珪更诚心念观世音经，于是就漂流而下，忽然又翻转，随着水中的木而行，知道已经到岸，便潜伏在芦苇中。
English: Cheng Yao was more sincere in his thoughts about the Guanyin Sutra, so he drifted down, suddenly turned over, followed the wood in the water, knew that he had reached the shore, and lurked in the reeds.

古文：又江边多猛兽，往来顾视，亦不相害。
现代文：江边又多有猛兽，往来看他，也都不伤害他。
English: There were also many wild beasts along the river. When they came to look at him, they did not hurt him.

古文：至明，投近村，村中为珪装束，送至滁州。
现代文：到了天亮，投进附近的村子，村中人为成珪换上衣服，送他到滁州。
English: At dawn, he was taken to a nearby village, where villagers changed his clothes and sent him to Ganzhou.

古文：州官寮叹美，为市驴马粮食等，珪便入京，于御史台申理。
现代文：州官惊叹他的美德，替他买驴马粮食等，成珪便到了京城，向御史台申诉。
English: State officials marveled at his virtue, bought donkey and horse food for him, and Cheng Rong went to Beijing to appeal to the Imperial Historian.

古文：初杨觐既失珪，一时溃散，觐因此亦出家焉。
现代文：当初杨觐已失去了成珪，一时溃散。他也因此出家了。
English: At the beginning, Yang Hui had lost his status as a monk and broke away. As a result, he also became a monk.

古文：王琦
现代文：王琦
English: Wang Yao

