古文：◎礼六
现代文：礼六
English: Reiroku chorus

古文：奉先殿奉慈殿献皇帝庙新王从飨功臣配飨王国宗庙群臣家庙
现代文：奉先殿奉慈殿献皇帝庙新王从飨功臣配飨王国宗庙群臣家庙
English: Bongsen-den, Bongji-den, Dedicated Emperor's Temple, The New King, His Generals, Meritorious Servants, Accompanying Servants, Kingdom's Patriarchal Temple, Group of Servants' Family Temple

古文：奉先殿
现代文：奉先殿
English: Bosen-dono Hall

古文：洪武三年，太祖以太庙时享，未足以展孝思，复建奉先殿于宫门内之东。
现代文：洪武三年，太祖认为太庙的四时祭祀，不足以展陈孝敬亲人的哀思，又在宫门内柬面建奉先殿。
English: In the third year of Hongwu, the great-grandfather thought that the four-hour sacrifice in the temple was not enough to show Chen Xiaoqi's sorrow for his relatives, and built a temple in the palace gate.

古文：以太庙象外朝，以奉先殿象内朝。
现代文：以太庙象征外朝，奉先殿象征内朝。
English: The Taimyo symbolizes the Outer Court, and the Bosen-den symbolizes the Inner Court.

古文：正殿五间，南向，深二丈五尺。
现代文：正殿五间，面向南，深二丈五尺。
English: There are five rooms in the main hall, facing south, with a depth of 2.5 meters.

古文：前轩五间，深半之。
现代文：前面的敞屋五问，深是正殿的一半。
English: The open house in front is five stories deep, half the depth of the main hall.

古文：制四代帝后神位、衣冠，定仪物、祝文。
现代文：制四代皇帝皇后的牌位、衣冠，规定礼仪物品、祭祝文章。
English: The plaques and crowns of the four emperors and empresses, the prescribed ceremonial items, and the articles for celebration and congratulation.

古文：每日朝晡，帝及皇太子诸王二次朝享。
现代文：每天早晚，皇帝以及皇太子、众王二次朝享。
English: Every morning and evening, the emperor, the crown prince, and the kings gather for the second imperial banquet.

古文：皇后率嫔妃日进膳羞，诸节致祭，月朔荐新，其品物视元年所定。
现代文：皇后率嫔妃每天进献美味菜肴。各个节日祭祀，每月朔日进献时鲜食品，物品比照元年制定的标准。
English: The empress and empress dowager presented delicious dishes every day. Various festivals and rituals, fresh food every month, and items according to the standards established in the first year.

古文：惟三月不用鮆鱼，四月减鲥鱼，益以王瓜彘，五月益以茄，九月减柿蟹，十月减木瓜芦菔，益以山药，十一月减天鹅鹚〈老鸟〉，益以獐。
现代文：只有三月不用鲎鱼，四月减去瓣鱼，增加王瓜及彘，五月增茄子，九月碱去柿蟹，十月碱去木瓜芦菔，增加山药，十一月减去天鹅鹳，增加獐。
English: Only in March, eel is not used. In April, lionfish is subtracted and king cucumber and ginger are added. In May, eggplant is added. In September, persimmon crab is removed, in October, papaya and aloe vera are removed, and yam is added. In November, swan ginger is removed and ginger is added.

古文：皆太常奏闻，送光禄寺供荐。
现代文：都是太常奏鞭，送光禄寺供奉进献。
English: All of them play the whip very often, and send it to Koroku-ji Temple for offerings.

古文：凡遇时新品物，太常供献。
现代文：凡是遇到时新的物品，由太常供献。
English: All items that are new at the time of the encounter are donated by Tai Chang.

古文：又录皇考妣忌日，岁时享祀以为常。
现代文：又记录皇父母忌日，每年一定季节举行太庙祭祀礼作为惯例。
English: It is also recorded that on the day of the death of the imperial parents, it is customary to hold a temple ritual in a certain season every year.

古文：成祖迁都北京，建如制。
现代文：成祖迁都北京，建造都按照南京规制。
English: Chengzu moved the capital to Beijing, and all buildings were built according to Nanjing regulations.

古文：宣德元年，奉太宗祔庙毕，复遣郑王瞻飐诣奉先殿，设酒果祭告，奉安神位。
现代文：宣德元年，奉太宗拊祭太庙礼毕，又派遣郑王朱瞻竣到奉先殿，陈设酒果祭告，安放神位。
English: In the first year of the Xuande era, after the Bongtaizong Yule Festival was held in the Great Temple, Zheng Wang Zhuzhan was sent to the Bongxian Hall to set up the wine and fruit festival and place the god's throne.

古文：天顺七年，奉孝恭皇后祔庙毕，帝还行奉安神位礼，略如祔庙仪。
现代文：天顺七年，供奉孝恭皇后柑祭太庙结束，皇帝返回举行供奉安放牌位礼，大略与拊祭太庙的礼仪相同。
English: In the seventh year of Tenshun, after the end of the celebration of the queen of filial piety, the emperor returned to hold the ceremony of dedication and placement of plaques, which is roughly the same as the ceremony of the imperial temple.

古文：弘治十七年，吏部尚书马文升言： 南京进鲜船，本为奉先殿设。
现代文：弘治十七年，吏部尚书马文升说： 南京进奉时鲜的船，本来是为奉先殿所设。
English: In the 17th year of the Hongzhi era, Shang Shuma Wensheng, an official of the Ministry of Civil Affairs, said: The ship of Nanjing Shibong Jishang was originally set up for Bongsendong.

古文：挽夫至千人，沿途悉索。
现代文：拉纤的人达到一千人，沿途都索要财物。
English: There are up to a thousand people pulling the fibers, and they all demand property along the way.

古文：今扬、徐荒旱，愿仿古凶年杀礼之意，减省以苏民困。 
现代文：现在扬、徐遭受旱灾饥荒，愿仿照古代灾年碱省礼仪的做法，以碱省来缓解人民的困苦。 
English: Now that Yang and Xu are suffering from drought and famine, they would like to follow the example of the ancient ritual of alkali-saving to alleviate the hardships of the people.

古文：命所司议行之。武宗即位，祧熙祖。
现代文：命令有关部门讨论实行。武宗即位，祧迁熙祖。
English: He ordered the relevant departments to discuss and implement it. Emperor Wuzong ascended the throne, and Emperor Xizong was exiled.

古文：奉先殿神位亦迁德祖之西，其衣冠、床幔、仪物贮于神库。
现代文：奉先殿神位也迁移到德祖的西面，他的衣冠、床帐、仪礼用物都贮放在神库里。
English: The seat of the patron deity was also moved to the west of Dezu, and his robe, bedspread, and ceremonial objects were stored in the shrine.

古文：嘉靖十四年，定内殿之祭并礼仪。
现代文：嘉靖十四年，制定内殿的祭祀及礼仪。
English: In the 14th year of the reign of Emperor Jiajing, the rituals and etiquette of the inner hall were established.

古文：清明、中元、圣诞、冬至、正旦，有祝文，乐如宴乐。
现代文：清明、中元节、皇上诞辰、冬至、正月旦日，祭祀有祝祷文，奏乐如同宴乐。
English: Qingming, Mid-Autumn Festival, the emperor's birthday, the winter solstice, the first day of the new year, the rituals have prayers, and the music is like a banquet.

古文：两宫寿旦，皇后并妃嫔生日，皆有祭，无祝文、乐。
现代文：两宫寿辰，皇后连同妃嫔的生辰，都有祭祀，没有祭文、音乐。
English: On the birthdays of the two palaces, and the birthdays of the empress and her consort, there are rituals, but no dedicatory texts or music.

古文：立春、元宵、四月八日、端阳、中秋、重阳、十二月八日，皆有祭，用时食。
现代文：立春、元宵、四月八日、端阳、中秋、重阳、十二月八日，都有祭祀，用四季应时食品。
English: The first day of spring, the Lantern Festival, April 8th, the Dragon Boat Festival, the Mid-Autumn Festival, the Double Ninth Day of the Moon, and December 8th, all have religious services, with seasonal foods for the four seasons.

古文：旧无祝文，今增告词。
现代文：旧时无祭祝文，现在增加祭告词。
English: In the past, there was no congratulatory message for the festival, but now a message is added.

古文：旧仪，但一室一拜，至中室跪祝毕，又四拜，焚祝帛。
现代文：按旧有礼仪，只是一室一拜，到中间房内跪着祝祷完毕，又拜四拜，焚烧祝文彩帛。
English: According to the old etiquette, there is only one prayer in a room, and after kneeling and praying in the middle room, there is another four prayers, and the prayer book is burned.

古文：今就位四拜，献帛爵，祝毕，后妃助亚献，执事终献，撤馔又四拜。
现代文：现在到拜位上拜四拜，献帛与爵，祭祀祝祷完毕，后妃辅助亚献，主持官终献，撤掉祭品后又拜四拜。
English: Now go to the place of worship, bow four times, offer the rooster and the rooster, complete the sacrifice and prayer, the empress assists the second offering, the presiding officer makes the final offering, and bow four times after removing the offerings.

古文：忌祭，旧具服作乐，今更浅色衣，去乐。
现代文：忌日的祭祀，原来是穿祭服奏乐，现在改穿浅色衣，去掉音乐。
English: The ritual on the day of the death of a deceased person used to be performed in ceremonial dress, but now it is performed in light-coloured clothing and without music.

古文：凡祭方泽、朝日夕月，出告、回参，及册封告祭，朔望行礼，皆在焉。
现代文：凡是在方泽祭祀地只、朝日夕月，外出祭告、返回参拜，以及册封告祭，朔曰望日举行祭礼，都在这里。
English: All the festivals held at the Fonze ritual site, including the morning sun, evening moon, going out to worship and returning to worship, as well as the festival held on the day of the canonization and the day of the new moon, are all held here.

古文：十五年，礼部尚书夏言等奏： 悼灵皇后神主，先因祔于所亲，暂祔奉慈殿孝惠太后之侧。
现代文：十五年，礼部尚书夏言等人奏报： 悼灵皇后牌位，以前因拊祭于所亲之人，暂且柑祭奉慈殿孝惠太后的旁边。
English: In the fifteenth year, Shoshu Natsugen et al. of the Ceremonial Department reported: The plaques of mourning for the empress, which had previously been dedicated to relatives as a burnt offering, were temporarily dedicated to the Empress Dowager Cixi as a mandarin orange offering.

古文：兹三后神主既拟迁于陵殿，则悼灵亦宜暂迁奉先殿旁室，享祀祭告，则一体设馔。 
现代文：这三后的牌位既然打算迁到陵殿，那么悼灵皇后神主也应暂时迁到奉先殿旁屋，享祀祭告，就一起设僎食。 
English: Since the latter three places are planned to be moved to the mausoleum, then the deity of the Empress of Mourning should also be temporarily moved to the side room of the Funzen hall, enjoy the ritual, and have a meal together.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇帝听从。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：隆庆元年，礼部言： 旧制，太庙一岁五享，而节序忌辰等祭，则行于奉先殿。
现代文：隆庆元年，礼部说： 旧有制度，太庙一年五次祭享，而节令忌辰等祭祀，就在奉先殿进行。
English: In the first year of the Longqing, the Ministry of Ceremonies said: The old system, the Imperial Temple is held five times a year, and festivals such as the Day of the Dead are held at the Funeral Hall.

古文：今孝洁皇后既祔太庙，则奉先殿亦宜奉安神位。 
现代文：现在孝洁皇后既已拊祭太庙，那么奉先殿也应供奉安放神位。 
English: Now that the Empress Xiaojie has been enshrined in the Imperial Temple, the Bonsen-den should also be dedicated to enshrining the deity.

古文：乃设神座、仪物于第九室，遣官祭告如仪。
现代文：于是设神座、仪礼物品在第九室，派遣官员按礼仪祭告。
English: As a result, a shrine and ceremonial objects were set up in the ninth room, and officials were dispatched to make a ritual announcement.

古文：万历三年，帝欲以孝烈、孝恪二后神位奉安于奉先殿。
现代文：万历三年，皇帝想把孝烈、孝恪两位皇后的神位，供奉安放在奉先殿。
English: In the third year of Wanli, the emperor wanted to place the deities of the two empresses, Xiaoling and Xiaokou, in the Hall of the Ancestors.

古文：礼官谓世宗时，议祔陵祭，不议祔内殿。
现代文：礼官说世宗时，议定拊祭于陵殿，不拊祭在内殿。
English: When the etiquette official told Sejong, it was agreed that the wreath-laying ceremony would take place in the mausoleum and not in the inner hall.

古文：帝曰： 奉先殿见有孝肃、孝穆、孝惠三后神位，俱皇祖所定，宜遵行祔安。 
现代文：皇帝说： 奉先殿现在有孝肃、孝穆、孝惠三位皇后的神位，都是皇祖父所定，应遵照执行拊祭使死者安宁。 
English: The emperor said, "At present, there are three empress deities, Xiao Sui, Xiao Mu, and Xiao Hui, in the Hall of the Ancestors. All of them were determined by the emperor's grandfather. It is necessary to carry out the burnt offering to appease the dead.

古文：盖当时三后既各祔陵庙，仍并祭于奉先殿，而外廷莫知也。
现代文：因为当时三皇后既各拊祭于陵庙，仍然在奉先殿一并祭祀，而朝廷大臣没有人知道。
English: Because at that time, the three empresses were still worshipped together in the Funasendo Hall, even though they were all enshrined separately in the mausoleum, and no one in the Imperial Court knew about it.

古文：命辅臣张居正等入视。
现代文：命令辅政大臣张居正等人入宫去看。
English: He ordered Vice-Minister of State Zhang Juzheng and others to enter the palace to watch the procession.

古文：居正等言： 奉先殿奉安列圣祖妣，凡推尊为后者，俱得祔享内殿，比之太庙一帝一后者不同，今亦宜奉安祔享。 
现代文：张居正等人说： 奉先殿供奉安放各位圣祖圣母，凡是推尊为后的，都能够在内殿供奉牌位祭享，与太庙的一帝一后不同，现在也应安置牌位祭献。 
English: Zhang Juzheng and others said: If the front hall is dedicated to place the holy ancestors and the holy mother, all those who have been promoted can enjoy the offering of plaques in the inner hall. Unlike the emperor and empress in the ancient temple, plaques should also be placed now.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇帝同意了。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：先是，册封告祭，以太常寺官执事，仍题请遣官。
现代文：此前，册封告祭，以太常寺官员为执事官，仍奏请派遣官员。
English: Previously, at the dedication ceremony, the officials of the Eternal Temple were deacons, but they still asked to send officials.

古文：到万历元年，帝亲行礼，而遣官之请废。
现代文：到万历元年，皇帝亲自行礼，而派官的请求被废除。
English: By the first year of the Wanli era, the emperor himself made the salute, and the request to send an officer was abolished.

古文：二年，太常寺以内殿在禁地，用内官供事便。
现代文：二年，太常寺认为内殿在宫禁之地，用太监主管方便。
English: Two years later, Taijo-ji Temple decided that since the inner hall was off-limits to the public, it would be convenient to appoint a chief eunuch.

古文：帝俞其请。
现代文：皇帝同意太常寺的请求。
English: The emperor agreed to the request of the Taiji Temple.

古文：凡圣节、中元、冬至、岁暮，嘉靖初俱告祭于奉先殿。
现代文：凡是皇帝生日、中元节、冬至、年终，嘉靖初年都在奉先殿告祭。
English: Every emperor's birthday, the Mid-Autumn Festival, the winter solstice, and the end of the year, the first year of Jiajing was held in the Huxian Hall.

古文：十五年，罢中元祭。
现代文：十五年，停止七月十五日的祭祀。
English: Fifteen years later, the July 15th ritual was discontinued.

古文：四十五年，罢岁暮祭。
现代文：四十五年罢除年终的祭祀。
English: Forty-five years after the abolition of the year-end ritual.

古文：隆庆元年，罢圣节、冬至祭。
现代文：隆庆元年，停止皇帝生日、冬至的祭祀。
English: In the first year of the Longqing, the emperor's birthday and winter solstice sacrifices were stopped.

古文：其方泽、朝日、夕月，出告、回参，嘉靖中行于景神殿。
现代文：在方泽祭祀地只、朝日、夕月，出外告祭、返回参拜的礼，嘉靖年间在景神殿举行。
English: At the Fonze ritual site, the morning sun, the evening moon, the outing ceremony, and the return visit ceremony were held at the Jing Shrine during the Jiajing period.

古文：隆庆元年，仍行于奉先殿。
现代文：隆庆元年仍在奉先殿举行。
English: In the first year of the Longqing era, it was still held at the Fuxian Hall.

古文：诸帝后忌辰，嘉靖以前行于奉先殿。
现代文：各位皇帝皇后忌辰祭祀，嘉靖以前在奉先殿举行。
English: Emperors and empresses, the memorial service for the death of emperors and empresses used to be held in the Funzen-den Hall before Jiajing.

古文：十八年，改高皇帝、后忌辰于景神殿，文皇帝、后以下于永孝殿。
现代文：嘉靖十八年，改高皇帝、高皇后的忌辰在景神殿举行祭祀，文皇帝、文皇后以下在永孝殿举行祭祀。
English: In the 18th year of Jiajing, on the anniversary of the death of Emperor Gao and Empress Gao, a memorial service was held at the Jing Temple, while Emperor Wen, Empress Wen and their descendants held a memorial service at Yongxiao Hall.

古文：二十四年，仍行于奉先殿。
现代文：嘉靖二十四年，仍在奉先殿举行。
English: In the twenty-fourth year of Jiajing, it was still held in the Fuxian Hall.

古文：凡内殿祭告，自万历二年后，亲祭则祭品告文执事，皆出内监。
现代文：凡是内殿祭告，从万历二年以后，皇帝亲自祭祀，则祭品、祭文、执事人员，都出白宫内太监。
English: Whenever the inner hall was dedicated, from the second year of Wanli onwards, the emperor himself would perform the sacrifice, and the offerings, texts, and deacons would come from the eunuchs in the White House.

古文：遣官代祭，则皆出太常。
现代文：派遣官员代替祭祀，那么都出于太常寺。
English: If officials are sent in place of religious services, then it all stems from Taijo-ji Temple.

古文：惟品用脯醢者，即亲祭亦皆出太常。
现代文：祇有祭品用脯醢的，就是亲祭也都出于太常寺。
English: Even the parents of those who have made offerings come from Taijo-ji Temple.

古文：万历十四年，礼臣言： 近年皇贵妃册封，祭告奉先殿，祝文执事出内庭，而祭品取之太常，事体不一。
现代文：万历十四年，礼臣说： 近年来，皇贵妃册封，在奉先殿祭告，祝文、执事出于宫禁以内，而祭品取于太常，事体不一。
English: In the 14th year of the Wanli era, the etiquette minister said: In recent years, the imperial concubines have been sealed and announced in the temple, the congratulatory letters and deacons have been banned from the palace, and the offerings have been taken from the emperor, and the matter is different.

古文：夫太常专主祀享，而光禄则主膳羞。
现代文：太常专门主管祭祀，而光禄则主管膳食。
English: Too often, the priest is in charge of the ritual, while the cook is in charge of the meal.

古文：内庭祭告，盖取象于食时上食之义也。
现代文：宫禁祭告，大体取象于食时、上食的义理。
English: The imperial edict forbidding the celebration of the festival is generally associated with the time of eating and the principle of serving food.

古文：宜遵旧制，凡祭告内殿，无论亲行、遣官，其祭品光禄寺供；惟告文执事人，亲行则办之内庭，遣官则暂用太常寺。 
现代文：应当遵循旧有制度，凡是在内殿祭告，无论是皇帝亲自举行，还是派遣官员，祭品由光禄寺供应；只有告文执事人，皇帝亲自举行则要宫禁备办，派遣官员则暂用太常寺。 
English: The old system should be followed. For all offerings made in the inner hall, whether made by the emperor himself or by dispatching officials, the offerings should be provided by Koroku-ji Temple. For offerings made by deacons only, those made by the emperor himself should be prohibited from being prepared by the palace, and those made by dispatching officials should be temporarily used by Taijo-ji Temple.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇帝听从其议。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：奉慈殿
现代文：奉慈殿
English: Fong Ci Palace

古文：孝宗即位，追上母妃孝穆太后纪氏谥，祔葬茂陵。
现代文：孝宗即位，追上母妃孝穆太后纪氏的谧号，在茂陵柑葬。
English: Takamune ascended to the throne, catching up with the posthumous name of his mother-in-law, the Empress Dowager Takamushi, and was buried in Muryo.

古文：以不得祔庙，遂于奉先殿右别建奉慈殿以祀。
现代文：因不能在太庙中拊祭，就在奉先殿右边，另建奉慈殿来祭祀。
English: As it was not possible to hold the sacrifice in the middle of the main temple, it was held on the right side of the Bosen hall, and a separate Boji hall was built for the sacrifice.

古文：一岁五享，荐新忌祭，俱如太庙奉先殿仪。
现代文：一年五次祭享，荐新祭、忌辰祭都如同太庙奉先殿的礼仪。
English: Five times a year, a new festival and a memorial festival are held, both of which are similar to the etiquette of the ancestral temple.

古文：弘治十七年，孝肃周太后崩。
现代文：弘治十七年，孝肃周太后崩。
English: In the 17th year of Hongzhi, Empress Dowager Zhou of Xiaoshu passed away.

古文：先是成化时，预定周太后祔葬、祔祭之议，至是召辅臣议祔庙礼。
现代文：此前，成化年问，预先已议定周太后合葬、拊祭，到这时召见辅政大臣讨论拊庙礼仪。
English: Previously, Chenghua New Year's Eve, it had been agreed in advance that Empress Dowager Zhou would have a joint funeral and a wreath-laying ceremony. At this time, the Vice-Minister of State was summoned to discuss the etiquette of the temple.

古文：刘健等言： 议诚有之，顾当年所引唐、宋故事，非汉以前制也。 
现代文：刘健等人说： 礼议确实有，只是当年所引唐、宋旧例，不是汉以前的制度。 
English: Liu Jian and others said: There is indeed a formal proposal, but the old cases of Tang and Song cited that year are not the system before the Han Dynasty.

古文：帝以事当师古，乃援孝穆太后别祭奉慈殿为言，而命廷臣议。
现代文：皇帝认为事情应该效法古人，于是援引孝穆太后另祭奉慈殿为理由，命令朝廷大臣商议。
English: The emperor thought that things should follow the example of the ancients, so he ordered the ministers of the imperial court to discuss the matter, citing the fact that the Empress Dowager Xiaomu had also dedicated the Fong Ci Hall.

古文：健退，复疏论其事，以坚帝心。
现代文：刘健退下，又上疏议论此事，想使皇帝坚定心意。
English: Liu Jian retreated and discussed the matter again, hoping to strengthen the emperor's will.

古文：于是英国公张懋、吏部尚书马文升等言： 宗庙之礼，乃天下公议，非子孙得以私之。
现代文：于是英国公张懋、吏部尚书马文升等人说： 宗庙礼仪，是由天下公众议定，不是子孙能够私意更改的。
English: As a result, the British official Zhang Xuan, the official Shangshu Ma Wensheng and others said: The ancestral temple etiquette is agreed upon by the public around the world, and is not something that can be changed by the descendants.

古文：殷、周七庙，父昭子穆，各有配座，一帝一后，礼之正仪。
现代文：殷、周七庙，父为昭，子为穆，各有配座，一帝一后，是礼的典范。
English: Yin, Zhou seven temples, father is Zhao, son is Mu, each has a matching seat, one emperor and one empress, is a model of etiquette.

古文：《春秋》书 考仲子之宫 ，胡安国《传》云： 孟子入惠公之庙，仲子无祭享之所。 
现代文：《春秋》记载 考仲子之宫 ，胡安国《传》说： 孟子进入惠公庙，仲子没有祭享的地方。 
English: "Spring and Autumn" records the examination of Zhongzi's palace, and Juan Guo's "Legend" says: Mencius entered the Huigong Temple, and Zhongzi had no place to celebrate.

古文：以此见鲁秉周礼，先王之制犹存，祖庙无二配故也。
现代文：以此可见鲁继承周礼，先王的制度仍然存在，是祖庙没有两个配位的缘故。
English: Thus, it can be seen that Lu inherited the weekly ritual, and the system of the previous king still exists, because the ancestral temple does not have two coordinates.

古文：伏睹宪宗敕谕，有曰 朕心终不自安 。
现代文：臣看宪宗的敕令，有 我的心始终不安宁 的话。
English: A vassal saw the edict of the Constitutionalist and said, "My heart is always restless."

古文：窃窥先帝至情，以重违慈意，因勉从并配之议。
现代文：臣私下见先帝的情意极重，以违背慈母的心意为难事，于是勉强依从共同配享的提议。
English: Seeing the former emperor in private, the vassal's feelings were so strong that he found it difficult to go against his mother's wishes, so he reluctantly agreed to the proposal of sharing.

古文：群臣欲权以济事，亦不得已而为此也。
现代文：群臣想权且用来成其事，也是不得已而这样做。
English: The courtiers wanted the power and used it to get what they wanted, and they did it out of necessity.

古文：据礼区处，上副先帝在天遗志，端有待于今日。
现代文：依礼处理，对上符合先帝在天遗志，实在有待于今天。
English: Dealing with them according to etiquette and in accordance with the wishes of the former emperor in heaven is something that really needs to be done today.

古文：稽之《周礼》，有祀先妣之文，《疏》云 姜嫄也 ，《诗》所谓 閟宫 是已。
现代文：考查《周礼》，有祭祀先妣的祭文，《疏》说 是姜螈 ，《诗》所说的 阖宫 就指此。
English: Examining the "Weekly Rituals," there is a sacrificial text that precedes the festival. "Soso" says that it is ginger, and "Poem" says that it refers to the palace.

古文：唐、宋推尊太后，不配食祖庙者，则别立殿以享之，亦得閟宫之义。
现代文：唐、宋推尊太后，不配食太庙的人，就另建殿来祭祀，也得到阐宫之义。
English: In Tang and Song dynasties, the empress dowager was revered, and those who were not worthy of eating at the imperial temple built a separate hall to offer sacrifices, and the meaning of the palace was also clarified.

古文：我朝祖宗迄今已溢九庙，配皆无二。
现代文：我朝祖宗至今已超过九庙，配享的都没有两个。
English: My ancestral lineage has more than nine temples so far, and there are no more than two.

古文：今宜于奉先殿外建一新庙，如《诗》之閟宫，宋之别殿，岁时荐享，仍称太皇太后，则情义两尽。 
现代文：现在应在奉先殿外建一座新庙，如同《诗》中的阖宫，宋代的别殿，每年的时节纵时鲜食物进献，仍然称为太皇太后，那么情与义便两全。 
English: Now, a new temple should be built outside the Bongxian Hall, just like the Summer Palace in the "Poem," the Bye-den in the Song Dynasty, the annual seasonal fresh food offering, still known as the Great Empress Dowager, then the feelings and righteousness will be complete.

古文：议上，复召健等至素幄，袖出《奉先殿图》，指西一区曰： 此奉慈殿也。 
现代文：提议上奏，皇帝又召见刘健等人到素幄之内，从袖子里拿出《奉先殿图》，指着西边的一个地方说： 这是奉慈殿。 
English: When it was proposed to begin the performance, the emperor also summoned Liu Jian and others to Suqian, took out the "Bongjian Hall Map" from his sleeve, pointed to a place on the west side and said, "This is Bongji Hall."

古文：又指东一区曰： 此神厨也。 
现代文：又指着东边的一个地方说： 这是神厨。
English: He also pointed to a place in the east and said, "This is God's kitchen."

古文：欲于此地别建庙，奉迁孝穆神主，并祭于此。
现代文：想在这里另外建庙，奉迁孝穆的牌位，一并在此祭祀。 
English: They want to build another temple here, and they want to relocate the memorial tablet of the filial piety, and they want to hold a religious service here.

古文：健等皆对曰： 最当。 
现代文：刘健等人都答道： 最合适。 
English: Liu Jian and others all replied: It is the most suitable.

古文：已而钦天监奏，年方有碍，廷议暂奉于奉慈殿正中，徙孝穆居左。
现代文：不久钦天监奏报，今年正有妨碍，朝廷建议暂时供奉在奉慈殿正中祭祀，将孝穆迁到左边。
English: Soon after, Qin Tianxuan reported that there was an obstacle this year, and the imperial court suggested temporarily holding the sacrifice at the middle school of Feng Ci Dian, and moving the filial piety to the left.

古文：及孝宗崩，武宗即位，礼部始进奉安孝肃神主仪。
现代文：等到孝宗去世，武宗即位，礼部开始进呈供奉安放孝肃牌位的礼仪。
English: After the death of Emperor Xiaozong and the enthronement of Emperor Wuzong, the etiquette department began to present the etiquette for the dedication and release of Emperor Xiaozong's nameplate.

古文：前期致斋三日，告奉先殿及孝宗几筵。
现代文：举行礼仪之前斋戒三天，告祭奉先殿以及孝宗灵座。
English: Before the ceremony, there will be a three-day fast, followed by the proclamation of the offering to the ancestral hall and the seat of the priest.

古文：是日早，帝具黑翼善冠、浅淡色服、黑犀带，告孝穆神座。
现代文：这天早上，皇帝戴黑翼善冠、穿浅淡色衣服、系黑犀带，祭告孝穆神主牌位。
English: On this morning, the emperor wore a black winged crown, light-colored clothes, and a black rhinoceros sash to announce the card rank of filial piety.

古文：礼毕，帝诣神座前，请神主降座。
现代文：礼仪结束，皇帝到神主牌位前，请求神主降座。
English: At the end of the ceremony, the emperor went to the seat of the deity and asked the deity to come down.

古文：帝捧主立，内执事移神座于殿左间。
现代文：皇帝捧着牌位站着，宫内执事将神主牌移到殿的左间。
English: The emperor stood holding a card, and the palace steward moved the god card to the left of the hall.

古文：帝奉安讫，行叩头礼，至午，帝诣清宁宫孝肃几筵，行礼毕，内侍进神主舆于殿前，衣冠舆于丹陛上。
现代文：皇帝供奉安放完，行叩头礼。至中午，皇帝到清宁官孝肃灵座拜祭，行礼结束，宫肉侍从将神主舆进献于殿前，衣冠舆进献于宫殿丹陛上。
English: At noon, the emperor went to the Xiaoshu spiritual seat in Qingning to worship. After the ceremony, the palace attendants presented the god to the front of the hall, and the crown to the palace.

古文：帝诣拜位，亲王吉服后随，四拜，兴。
现代文：皇帝到拜位，亲王穿着礼服随后，拜四拜，起身。
English: The emperor bowed, and the prince, dressed in ceremonial robes, bowed four times and then stood up.

古文：帝捧神主由殿中门出，奉安舆内。
现代文：皇帝捧着神主牌从殿中门出来，供奉安放在舆内。
English: The emperor came out of the middle door of the hall holding the Lord of the Gods tablet and placed the offering in the chancel.

古文：执事捧衣冠置舆后随。
现代文：主管官捧着衣冠放到舆上跟随在后。
English: The officer-in-charge put his cap on his head and followed behind.

古文：帝率亲王步从。
现代文：皇帝率领亲王步行跟从。
English: The emperor led the prince to follow on foot.

古文：至宝善门外，太皇太后、皇太后率宫妃迎于门内。
现代文：到宝善门外，太皇太后、皇太后率领宫妃在门内迎接。
English: When they arrived outside the Hozan Gate, the Grand Empress Dowager and the Empress Dowager led the Imperial Princesses to greet them inside the gate.

古文：先诣奉慈殿，序立于殿西。
现代文：先到奉慈殿，依次站在殿西。
English: First, go to the Honji-den, and then stand on the west side of the hall.

古文：神主舆至奉先殿门外，少驻。
现代文：神主舆到奉先殿门外，稍作停留。
English: The deity came to the outside of the front gate of the temple and stopped for a while.

古文：帝诣舆前跪，请神主诣奉先殿，俯伏，兴，捧神主由殿左门入，至殿内褥位，跪，置神主。
现代文：皇帝到舆前跪下，请神主到奉先殿，俯身伏地，起身，捧着神主牌从殿左门进入，到殿内的褥位，跪下，安放神主牌。
English: The emperor knelt down in front of the audience and invited the deity to come to the hall of worship. He bowed down and prostrated, stood up, and entered the hall from the left door, holding the god card. He went to the throne in the hall, knelt down, and placed the god card.

古文：帝行五拜三叩头礼毕，捧神主，仍由左门出，安舆内。
现代文：皇帝行五拜三叩头礼结束，捧着神主牌，仍然从左门出来，安放到舆内。
English: At the end of the emperor's five prostrations and three kowtows, he still came out of the left door holding the God card and placed it in the public.

古文：至奉慈殿门外，帝捧神主由中门入，奉安于神座讫，行安神礼，三献如常仪。
现代文：到奉慈殿门外，皇帝捧着牌位从中门进入，供奉安放到神座以后，行安神礼，造献三遍如同平常礼仪。
English: When he arrived outside the gate of the Fong Ci Hall, the emperor entered through the middle gate holding the plaques, and after placing the offering on the throne, he performed the An Shen Rite, making the offering three times as usual.

古文：太皇太后以下四拜。
现代文：太皇太后以下拜四拜。
English: The grand empress dowager and her entourage bowed four times.

古文：礼毕，内侍官设褥位于殿正中之南。
现代文：拜完后，内侍官在殿正中以南摆放褥位。
English: After the prayer, the inner chamberlains placed the throne in the south of the middle of the hall.

古文：帝诣孝穆皇太后神座前，跪请神主谒孝肃太皇太后，跪置于褥位上，俯伏，兴，行五拜三叩头礼。
现代文：皇帝到孝穆皇太后神主位前，跪请神主谒见孝肃太皇太匠，跪着放在褥位上，俯身伏地，站起来，行五拜三叩礼。
English: When the emperor came to the throne of the god of the Empress Dowager Xiaomu, he knelt down and asked the god to come to the throne of the Empress Dowager Xiaomu, kneeled down and placed it on the throne, bowed to the ground, stood up, and performed five prostrations and three prostrations.

古文：毕，帝捧主兴，仍安于神座讫，行安神礼如前，皇太后以下四拜。
现代文：结束以后，皇帝捧着神主牌起身，仍然安放在神座结束，如前面一样举行安神礼。皇太后以下拜四拜。
English: When it was over, the emperor stood up holding the shin shu pai and placed it on the end of the throne. As before, he held a ceremony to welcome the gods. The empress dowager bowed four times.

古文：嘉靖元年，世宗奉孝惠邵太后祔祀。
现代文：嘉靖元年，世宗供奉孝惠邵太后柑祀。
English: In the first year of the Jiajing era, the Sejong worshipped Xiao Hui Shao, the empress dowager.

古文：八年二月，礼部尚书方献夫等言： 悼灵皇后，礼宜祔享太庙，但今九庙之制已备。
现代文：八年二月，礼部尚书方献夫等人说： 悼灵皇后，按礼应在太庙拊祭，可是现在九庙的制度已具备。
English: In February of the eighth year, the ceremonial department Shangshu Fang Xianfu and others said: To mourn the queen, according to etiquette, it should be held in the imperial temple, but now the system of nine temples has been established.

古文：考唐、宋故事，后于太庙未有本室，则创别庙。
现代文：考寨唐、宋旧例，皇后在太庙，没有自己的祭室，就创建另外的庙堂。
English: In the old cases of the Tang and Song dynasties, the empress did not have her own hall of worship in the Great Temple, so she created another temple.

古文：故《曲台礼》有别庙皇后禘祫于太庙之文。
现代文：所以《曲台礼》有别庙皇后在太庙柿祭大合祭的记载。
English: Therefore, there is a record in "Kudai-Ri" that the Empress of Beidemo attended the grand closing ceremony of the Persimmon Festival in Taimyo.

古文：又《礼记·丧服小记》： 妇祔于祖姑，祖姑有三人，则祔于亲者。 
现代文：又《礼记·丧服小记》： 媳妇死后拊葬于丈夫的祖母之墓，如果有几个祖母，应该柑葬于关系最亲的祖母。 
English: Also, "Rituals and Funeral Etiquette: After the death of a daughter-in-law, she should be buried in the grave of her husband's grandmother. If there are several grandmothers, she should be buried next to the grandmother with whom she is most closely related.

古文：释之者曰： 亲者谓舅所生母也。 
现代文：注释的人说： 最亲的人是说丈夫之父的生身母亲。 
English: The commenter said: The closest person is the biological mother of said husband's father.

古文：今孝惠太皇太后实皇考献皇帝之生母，则悼灵皇后当祔于侧。 
现代文：现今孝惠太皇太后实际上是皇父献皇帝的生母，那么悼灵皇后应当拊祭在一侧。 
English: Nowadays, Empress Dowager Takehide is actually the real mother of the emperor's father, so the mourning queen should be on the side of the burnt offering.

古文：诏可。
现代文：下诏许可。
English: The royal decree was approved.

古文：三月，行祔庙礼。
现代文：三月，举行柑庙礼。
English: In March, the "Kangmiao" ceremony was held.

古文：先期祭告诸殿。
现代文：行礼前到各殿祭告。
English: Before the procession, a proclamation is made to all the temples.

古文：至期，请悼灵后主诣奉慈殿奉安。
现代文：到期，请悼灵后的神位到奉慈殿供奉安放。
English: At the end of the period, please go to Bongji Temple to offer and place the god's throne after the mourning.

古文：内侍捧神主、谥册、衣冠随帝至奉先殿谒见。
现代文：内侍捧牌位、谧册、衣冠随着皇帝到奉先殿拜见。
English: The imperial attendants, holding plaques, seals, and crowns, followed the emperor to the Hall of the Ancestors to pay their respects.

古文：帝就位，行五拜三叩头礼。
现代文：皇帝就位，行五拜三叩头礼。
English: The emperor took his seat and bowed five times.

古文：次诣崇先殿，次诣奉慈殿，谒三太后，内侍捧主安神座，皇妃以下四拜。
现代文：其次到崇先殿，再其次到奉慈殿，拜谒三太后，内侍捧着牌位安放在神座上，皇妃以下拜四拜。
English: Next came the Hall of the Forerunners, and then the Hall of the Benefactors, where the third empress dowager was worshipped, with the ladies-in-waiting holding the plaques and placing them on the divine throne, and the empress dowager following with four bows.

古文：十五年，帝以三太后别祀奉慈殿，不若奉于陵殿为宜，廷臣议： 古天子宗庙，惟一帝一后，所生母，荐于寝，身殁而已。
现代文：十五年，皇帝认为三太后在奉慈殿另外祭祀，不如供奉在陵殿祭祀合适。朝廷大臣议论： 古代天子宗庙，只是一帝一后，生母，在寝殿祭献，身死而止。
English: In the fifteenth year, the emperor thought that it would be more appropriate for the third empress dowager to be offered in the mausoleum than to be offered in the Bongji Temple. The minister of the Imperial Court commented: In ancient times, the Imperial Family Temple was only for the emperor and his mother, and they were offered in the mortuary temple until they died.

古文：孝宗奉慈殿之祭，盖子祀生母，以尽终身之孝焉耳。
现代文：孝宗奉慈殿的祭祀，是儿子祭祀生母，以此尽终身孝道而已。
English: The sacrifice of the filial piety of the filial piety is the sacrifice of the son to the birth mother, and this is the only way to fulfill the lifelong filial piety.

古文：然《礼》 妾母不世祭 ，《疏》曰： 不世祭者，谓子祭之，于孙则止。 
现代文：可是《礼》有 妾母不能世代祭祀 的说法，《疏》说： 不世代祭祀，是说儿子祭祀，到孙子就停止。 
English: However, there is a saying in "Ri" that a concubine mother cannot perform a generational sacrifice, and "Soso" says: If there is no generational sacrifice, it means that the son will perform the sacrifice, and it will stop when the grandchild is born.

古文：明继祖重，故不复顾其私祖母也。
现代文：表明继承祖宗的重要，因此不再考虑爱祖母的私情。
English: It shows that it is important to inherit the ancestry, so it is no longer considered to love the private feelings of the grandmother.

古文：今陛下于孝肃，曾孙也；孝穆，孙属也；孝惠，孙也。
现代文：现在陛下对于孝肃，是曾孙；孝穆，是孙子辈；孝惠，是孙子。
English: Now, His Majesty is the great-grandson of Takasu, the grandson of Takamu, and the grandson of Takehide.

古文：礼不世祭，议当祧。
现代文：按照礼法不世代祭祀，建议应当迁祧。
English: According to the etiquette of non-generational sacrifice, it is suggested that the urns should be moved.

古文：考宋熙宁罢奉慈庙故事，与今同。
现代文：考察宋代熙宁年问停止祭祀奉慈庙的旧例，与今天的情况相同。
English: An examination of the old cases of the Song Dynasty's Xining Year of the Dragon, when the worship of Feng Ci Temple was suspended, shows that the situation is the same as it is today.

古文：宜迁主陵庙，岁时祔享如故。 
现代文：应该迁祧神主牌位到陵庙，每年一定时节照旧拊享。 
English: The position of the chief god should be moved to the mausoleum, and it should be enjoyed as usual at a certain time every year.

古文：报可。
现代文：皇帝回复许可。
English: Reimbursement agreed.

古文：奉慈殿遂罢。
现代文：奉慈殿于是停止祭祀。
English: The temple then stopped the ritual.

古文：世宗孝烈后，隆庆时祀弘孝殿，万历三年迁祔奉先殿。
现代文：世宗孝烈后，在隆庆时，在弘孝殿祭祀，万历三年迁到奉先殿拊祭。
English: After the death of Sejong Takahito, at the time of the Grand Festival, the ceremony was held at Hongxiao Hall, but after three years, it was moved to Bongsendong Hall for the New Year's Eve ceremony.

古文：穆宗母孝恪皇太后，隆庆初祀神霄殿，又祔孝懿后于其侧。
现代文：穆宗母亲孝恪皇太后，隆庆初年，祭祀于神霄殿，又在神霄殿的一侧柑祭孝懿后。
English: In the first year of the Longqing Festival, Mu Zong's mother, the Empress Dowager Xiaoqi, was enshrined in the Hall of Divine Providence, and on the other side of the Hall of Divine Providence, there was a mandarin festival for the Empress Dowager Xiaoqi.

古文：六年，孝懿祔太庙，万历三年，孝恪迁祔奉先殿，二殿俱罢。
现代文：六年，孝懿拊祭于太庙，万历三年，孝恪迁到奉先殿柑祭，两殿祭祀都罢除。
English: In the sixth year, the festival of filial piety was held in the Great Temple, and in the third year of Wanli, the festival of filial piety was moved to the Fengxian Hall, and the sacrifices of both halls were abolished.

古文：献皇帝庙
现代文：献皇帝庙
English: A temple dedicated to the emperor

古文：嘉靖二年四月，始命兴献帝家庙亭祀，乐用八佾。
现代文：嘉靖二年四月，开始命令在象庙祭祀兴献帝，乐用八佾。
English: In April of the second year of Jiajing, he began to order the offering of offerings to the emperor in the elephant temple, with the use of eight gongs.

古文：初，礼官议庙制未决，监生何渊上书，请立世室于太庙东。
现代文：最初，礼官讨论庙制没有确定，监生何渊上书，请求在太庙东建世室。
English: At first, the etiquette officer discussed that the temple system had not been determined, and the inmate He Yuan wrote a letter requesting the establishment of the Seishitsu in the east of the Great Temple.

古文：礼部尚书汪俊等皆谓不可。
现代文：礼部尚书汪俊等人都认为不可以。
English: Wang Jun and others in the etiquette department think it is unacceptable.

古文：帝谕奉先殿侧别立一室，以尽孝思。
现代文：皇帝谕令在奉先殿一侧另建一房，来尽孝亲之思。
English: The emperor ordered another room to be built on the side of the front hall to fulfill filial piety.

古文：礼官集议言： 奉慈之建，礼臣据姜嫄特庙而言。
现代文：礼官集体议论说： 奉慈的建立，是礼臣根据姜螈特庙而说的。
English: The etiquette officials collectively discussed and said: The establishment of Feng Ci was said by the etiquette officials according to the Jiangye Temple.

古文：至为本生父立庙大内，古所未有，惟汉哀为定陶共王建庙京师，不可为法。 
现代文：至于在皇宫为亲生父亲立庙，是古代所没有的。只有汉哀帝为定陶共王在京城建庙，不可作为依据。 
English: As for building a temple for one's own father in the imperial palace, this was unheard of in ancient times. Only Emperor Han'ai built a temple for King Ding Tao in the capital, which cannot be used as a basis.

古文：詹事石珤等亦言不可。
现代文：詹事石瑶等人也认为不可。
English: Zhan Zhi Shi Rong and others also believe that it is impossible.

古文：不听。
现代文：皇帝不听。
English: The emperor does not allow it.

古文：葺奉慈殿后为观德殿以奉之。
现代文：修葺奉慈殿后建观德殿来供奉。
English: After renovating the Fong Ci Hall, the Guan De Hall was built for worship.

古文：四年四月，渊已授光禄寺署丞，复上书请立世室，崇祀皇考于太庙，礼部尚书席书等议： 天子七庙，周文、武并有功德，故立文、武世室于三昭穆之上。
现代文：四年四月，何渊已经授官为光禄寺署丞，又上书请求建立世室，在太庙尊崇奉祀皇考。礼部尚书席书等人提议： 天于有七庙，周文、武都有功德，所以建文、武世室在三昭三穆以上。
English: In April of the fourth year, He Yuan had already been appointed as the secretary of the Guanglu Temple, and he also submitted a letter requesting the establishment of a family, and worshiped the imperial examination in the Imperial Temple. The ceremonial department secretary and others proposed: Heaven has seven temples, Zhouwen and Wu have merits, so the family of Jianwen and Wuwen is more than three Zhao and three Mu.

古文：献皇帝追称帝号，未为天子。
现代文：献皇帝追称帝号，不是天于。
English: It is not by chance that the emperor was given the title of emperor.

古文：渊妄为谀词，乞寝其奏。 
现代文：何渊妄自提出阿谀言词，请求废止他的奏议。 
English: He Yuan presumptuously made an apology and requested that his petition be annulled.

古文：帝令再议，书等言： 将置主于武宗上。则武宗君也，分不可僣。
现代文：皇帝命令再次议论，席书等人说： 将要把神主牌位放在武宗之上，但是武宗是国君，按名分不可僭越。
English: The emperor ordered the discussion to be resumed, and the chairmen and others said, "We will place the position of God's Lord on top of Emperor Wuzong, but Emperor Wuzong is the sovereign of the country and cannot be surpassed in title."

古文：置武宗下，则献皇叔也，神终未安。 
现代文：放置在武宗之下，但是献皇是叔父，神始终会不安宁。 
English: Placed under Emperor Wu, but with Emperor Xian as an uncle, the god would always be restless.

古文：时廷臣于称考称伯，异同相半，至议祔庙，无一人以为可者。
现代文：当时朝廷大臣对于称父称伯，赞同或否定的各占一半，至于提议拊祭太庙，没有一人认为可以。
English: At that time, the ministers of the Imperial Court were equally divided into those who approved or disapproved of calling the father "grandfather" and those who approved or disapproved of calling the father "grandfather." As for the proposal to hold a memorial service at the Imperial Temple, no one thought it was acceptable.

古文：学士张璁、桂萼亦皆以为不可，书复密疏争之。
现代文：学士张璁、桂萼也都认为不可以，席书又上密疏谏诤。
English: Bachelors Zhang Xuan and Gui Cale also thought it was unacceptable, and the meeting was closely monitored.

古文：帝不听，复令会议。
现代文：皇帝不听，又命令会同议论。
English: The emperor did not listen, and ordered that they should discuss the matter together.

古文：乃准汉宣故事，于皇城内立一祢庙，如文华殿制。
现代文：于是依照汉宣帝的旧例，在皇城内建一座祭祀父亲的宗庙，如同文华殿的制式。
English: Therefore, in accordance with the old custom of Emperor Han Xuan, an ancestral temple was built in the imperial city to worship the father, similar to the system of the Wenhua Hall.

古文：笾豆乐舞，一用天子礼。
现代文：篷豆乐舞，全用天子的礼仪。
English: Dancing to the music of the taro, using all the etiquette of the heavenly son.

古文：帝亲定其名曰世庙。
现代文：皇帝亲自定名为世庙。
English: The emperor himself designated it as a world temple.

古文：五年七月，谕工部以观德殿窄隘，欲别建于奉天殿左。
现代文：五年七月，训谕工部，因观德殿狭窄，想在奉先殿左面另建。
English: In July of the fifth year, the Ministry of Works was instructed to build a separate building on the left side of the Bokusen-den due to the narrowness of the Kundera-den.

古文：尚书赵璜谓不可，不听。
现代文：尚书赵璜认为不可，皇帝不听。
English: Shangshu Zhao Yao thought it was impossible, but the emperor would not listen.

古文：乃建于奉先之东，曰崇先殿。
现代文：于是在奉先殿的东面建殿，叫做崇先殿。
English: Therefore, a hall was built to the east of the Bosen-den, called the Sosen-den.

古文：十三年，命易承天家庙曰隆庆殿。
现代文：十三年，命令改换承天家庙为隆庆殿。
English: In the thirteenth year, the order was given to change the temple of the Heung-tien family to the Longqing Hall.

古文：十五年，以避渠道，迁世庙，更号曰献皇帝庙，遂改旧世庙曰景神殿，寝殿曰永孝殿。
现代文：十五年，因为避开渠道，迁徙世庙，改称为献皇帝庙，于是改旧有的世庙焉景神殿，寝殿叫永孝殿。
English: In the fifteenth year, because of avoiding channels, the World Temple was relocated and renamed as the Emperor's Temple, so the old World Temple and the Scenery Temple were changed, and the sleeping hall was called Yongxiao Hall.

古文：十七年，以丰坊请，称宗以配明堂。
现代文：嘉靖十七年，因丰坊的请求，称宗以配享明堂。
English: In the seventeenth year of Jiajing, at the request of Fengfang, he said that he would share the Ming Hall with Zong.

古文：礼官不敢违，集议者久之，言： 古者父子异昭穆，兄弟同世数。
现代文：礼官不敢违抗，集体议论了很久，说： 古代父子昭穆不同，兄弟同算作一代。
English: The etiquette official did not dare to disobey, and the group discussed for a long time, saying: Unlike the ancient father and son, brothers are counted as one generation.

古文：故殷有四君一世而同庙，宋太祖、太宗同居昭位。
现代文：因此殷有四君一代而同庙，宋太祖、太宗同居昭位。
English: Therefore, there were four generations of emperors in the same temple, and Song Taizu and Taizong lived together.

古文：今皇考与孝宗当同一庙。 
现代文：现在皇考与孝宗应当在同一庙。 
English: Now the imperial examination and the filial piety examination should be held in the same temple.

古文：遂奉献皇帝祔太庙。
现代文：于是供奉献皇帝在太庙拊祭。
English: As a result, the emperor held a wreath-laying ceremony at the Imperial Temple.

古文：二十二年，更新太庙，廷议睿宗、孝宗并居一庙，同为昭。
现代文：二十二年，重新修建太庙，朝廷提议睿宗、孝宗同居一庙，同为昭。
English: Twenty-two years later, when the Great Temple was rebuilt, the imperial court proposed that Ruizong and Xiaozong live together in the same temple, and both of them became emperors.

古文：帝责诸臣不竭忠任事，寝其议。
现代文：皇帝责怪众臣不尽忠办事，搁置他们的建议。
English: The emperor accused his courtiers of being disloyal and put their suggestions on hold.

古文：已而左庶子江汝璧请迁皇考庙于穆庙首，以当将来世室，与成祖庙并峙。
现代文：随后，左庶子江汝璧请求将皇考庙迁到穆庙之首，以作将来的世室，与成祖庙并立。
English: Subsequently, the left illegitimate son, Jiang Rubei, requested that the imperial examination temple be moved to the head of the Mu Temple, to serve as the future family, and to stand alongside the Cheng Zu Temple.

古文：右赞善郭希颜又欲于太祖庙文世室外，止立四亲庙，而祧孝宗、武宗。
现代文：右赞善郭希颜又想在太祖庙文宗世室之外，只建四亲庙，而祧迁孝宗、武宗。
English: Guo Xiyan also wanted to build only the Temple of the Four Ancestors in addition to the Great Ancestor's Temple of Emperor Wenzong's family, and only relocate Emperor Xiaozong and Emperor Wuzong.

古文：以礼臣斥其妄而止。
现代文：因礼臣斥责他的虚妄而停止。
English: He stopped when a courtier scolded him for being untruthful.

古文：二十四年六月，新太庙成，遂奉睿宗于太庙之左第四，序跻武宗上，而罢特庙之祀。
现代文：二十四年六月，新太庙建成，于是在太庙左边第四窒供奉睿宗，位次超越武宗之上，而停止特庙的祭祀。
English: In June 1924, when the new Taimiao was completed, the fourth niche on the left of the Taimiao was dedicated to Ruizong, a higher rank than Buzong, and the sacrifices of the special temple were stopped.

古文：四十四年，以旧庙柱产芝，更号曰玉芝宫，定日供时享仪。
现代文：四十四年，因旧庙柱上生灵芝，更名为玉芝宫，确定日期供时享礼仪。
English: In 1944, due to the presence of Ganoderma lucidum on the old temple pillar, the name was changed to Jade Jade Palace, and the date was set for the ceremony.

古文：穆宗初，因礼臣请，乃罢时享及节序、忌辰、有事奉告之祭，但进日供而已。
现代文：穆宗初年，因礼臣的请求，于是罢除四时祭享和节序、忌辰、有事奉告的祭祀，只是进献每日供奉而已。
English: In the first year of Mu Zong's reign, at the request of courtiers, the four-hour offering and the offerings for festivals, death anniversaries, and anniversaries were abolished, and only the offering was offered daily.

古文：隆庆元年，礼科王治请罢献皇祔庙，而专祀之世庙，章下所司。
现代文：隆庆元年，礼科王治请求停止献皇拊庙祭祀，而专门在世庙祭祀，奏章下交有关部门。
English: In the first year of the Longqing Festival, Reiko Wangzhi requested that the offering of sacrifices to the Emperor's Ancestral Temple be stopped, and that the sacrifices be held exclusively at the World Temple, and the report was submitted to the relevant departments.

古文：万历九年，礼科丁汝谦请仍专祭玉芝宫，复奉宣宗帝后冠服于太庙。
现代文：万历九年，礼科丁汝谦请求仍然在玉芝宫专门祭祀，又在太庙祭奉宣宗皇帝、皇后的冠服。
English: In the ninth year of Wanli, Reiko Dingruqian requested that special sacrifices still be held at the Jade Palace, and that the crown robes of Emperor Xuanzong and Empress Dowager be offered at the Grand Temple Festival.

古文：帝责汝谦妄议，谪外任。
现代文：皇帝责怪丁汝谦妄自议论，贬到外地任官。
English: The emperor reproached Ding Ru Xian for his presumptuous self-talk and demoted him to a post outside the capital.

古文：天启元年，太常少卿李宗延奏祧庙宜议，言： 睿宗入庙，世宗无穷之孝思也，然以皇上视之，则远矣。
现代文：天启元年，太常少卿李宗延上奏桃庙应该议论，说： 睿宗进入太庙，是世宗无穷的孝亲之思，然而以皇上身份来看待，就差速了。
English: In the year of the first revelation of heaven, Li Zongyan, the minor general of the imperial court, said that it should be discussed whether or not to play the peach temple, saying: Ruizong's entry into the imperial temple is the endless filial piety of the world, but it is not as fast as the emperor's identity.

古文：俟光宗升祔时，或从旧祧，或从新议。
现代文：等光宗升入太庙拊祭的时候，或者依从旧的祧庙，或者依从新议。
English: When the Guangzong sect ascended to the grand temple, they either followed the old rules of the grand temple or the new rules.

古文：盖在孝子固以恩事亲，而在仁人当以义率祖。 
现代文：因为孝子本来就以恩侍奉亲人，而对仁人来说应以义来顺从祖先。 
English: Because filial sons originally serve their relatives with grace, and for the benevolent, they should obey their ancestors with righteousness.

古文：章下礼部，卒不能从。
现代文：奏章下交礼部，最终不能依从。
English: The rite of passage section at the end of the movement cannot be followed.

古文：亲王从飨
现代文：亲王从飨
English: Prince Zonglu

古文：洪武三年，定以皇伯考寿春王、王夫人刘氏为一坛；皇兄南昌王、霍丘王、下蔡王、安丰王、霍丘王夫人翟氏、安丰王夫人赵氏为一坛；皇兄蒙城王、盱眙王、临淮王、临淮王夫人刘氏为一坛，后定夫人皆改称妃；皇侄宝应王、六安王、来安王、都梁王、英山王、山阳王、昭信王为一坛，凡一十九位。
现代文：洪武三年，规定以皇伯考寿春王、王的夫人刘氏为一坛，皇兄南昌王、霍丘王、下蔡王、安鲎王、霍丘王夫人翟氏、安丰王夫人趟氏马一坛，皇兄蒙城王、盱眙王、临淮王、临淮王的夫人刘氏为一坛，后来规定夫人都改称妃，皇侄宝应王、六安王、来安王、都梁王、英山王、山阳王、昭信王为一坛，共十九位。
English: In the third year of the reign of Hongwu, it was stipulated that the imperial brothers Nanchang Wang, Huoqiu Wang, Lower Cai Wang, Anhui Wang, Huoqiu Wang's wife Sui Wang, and Anfeng King's wife Wanzhima Wang, and the imperial brothers Mengcheng Wang, Zhou Wang, Linhuai Wang, and Linhuai King's wife Liu Wang should be enshrined together. Later, it was stipulated that the wives should all change their surnames, and the imperial nephews Baoying Wang, Liuan Wang, Lai'an Wang, Du Liang Wang, Ying Shan Wang, Sanyang Wang,

古文：春夏于仁祖庙东庑，秋冬及岁除于德祖庙东庑，皇帝行初献礼，时献官诣神位分献。
现代文：春夏在仁祖庙束庶，秋冬及年终在德祖庙束糜祭祀，皇帝行初献礼，时献官到各神位分别祭献。
English: In spring and summer, there is a religious ceremony for the second son of the emperor at the Temple of the benevolent ancestors, and in autumn and winter, and at the end of the year, there is a religious ceremony for the third son of the emperor at the Temple of the benevolent ancestors.

古文：四年，进亲王于殿内东壁。
现代文：洪武四年，在殿内东壁进奉亲土牌位。
English: In the fourth year of Hongwu's reign, there was a plaque on the east wall of the hall honoring the local people.

古文：九年，新太庙成，增祀蒙城王妃田氏、盱眙王妃唐氏。
现代文：几年，新太庙建成，增加祭祀蒙城王妃田氏、盱眙王妃唐氏。
English: A few years later, a new grand temple was built, and the number of offerings to the Mengcheng Wangfei of the Tian clan and the Shao Wangfei of the Tang clan increased.

古文：正德中，御史徐文华言： 族有成人而无后者，祭终兄弟之孙之身。
现代文：正德年间，御史徐文华说： 族中有成人而没有后代的，祭祀终结于兄弟的孙子本身。
English: During the Zhengde era, the scholar Xu Wenhua said: If there are adults in the tribe but no descendants, the sacrifice ends with the grandson of the brother himself.

古文：诸王至今五六世矣，宜祧。 
现代文：诸王至今五六辈了，应该迁祧。 
English: There have been five or six generations of kings so far, and it is time to move.

古文：礼官议不可。
现代文：礼官议论认为不可。
English: The discussion of etiquette is considered unacceptable.

古文：嘉靖间，仍序列东庑。
现代文：嘉靖年间，仍依次在东糜陈列。
English: During the Jiajing period, they were still displayed one after another in the East Pavilion.

古文：二十四年，新建太庙成，复进列东壁，罢分献。
现代文：嘉靖二十四年，新建太庙成功，又将牌位列于束壁，罢止分别祭献。
English: In the 24th year of Jiajing, the newly built Great Temple was successfully built, and the plaques were placed on the bund wall, and the separate offerings were stopped.

古文：万历十四年，太常卿裴应章言： 诸王本从祖祔食。
现代文：万历十四年，太常卿裴应章说： 众王本来跟从祖宗配享祭品。
English: In the 14th year of Wanli, Tai Changqing Pei Yingzang said: The kings originally shared the sacrificial offerings with their ancestors.

古文：今四祖之庙已祧，而诸王无所于祔，宜罢享，而祔之祧庙。 礼部言： 祧以藏毁庙之主，为祖非为孙。
现代文：今四祖的祭庙已经祧迁，而诸王没有地方配祭，应停止祭献，而在祧庙拊祭 礼部说： 祧庙是用来藏毁庙的神主牌位的，是为了祖先丽不是为了子孙。
English: Now the four ancestral temples have been relocated, and the kings have no place to match the sacrifices, so they should stop the sacrifices, and the sacrificial rites department of the sacrificial rites department of the sacrificial rites department of the sacrificial rites department of the sacrificial rites department of the sacrificial rites department of the sacrificial rites department of the sacrificial rites department said: The sacrificial rites department of the sacrificial rites department of the sacrificial rites department of the sacrificial rites department of the sacrificial rites department of the sacrificial rites department of the sacrificial rites department said: The sacrificial rites department of the sacrificial rites

古文：礼有祧，不闻有配祧者。
现代文：礼有祧祭，没有听说有配祧的。
English: There is a wreath-laying ceremony, but I haven't heard of anyone matching wreaths.

古文：请仍遵初制，序列东庑为近礼。 
现代文：请求仍然遵循当初制度，依次列在柬庶为接近古礼。 
English: Requests still follow the original system, and are listed in order of precedence in Cambodia as close to ancient rites.

古文：报可。
现代文：皇帝回复许可。
English: Reimbursement agreed.

古文：功臣配飨
现代文：功臣配飨
English: The award for meritorious service

古文：洪武二年，享太庙，以廖永安、俞通海、张得胜、桑世杰、耿再成、胡大海、赵德胜配。
现代文：洪武二年，在太庙献祭，以廖永安、俞通海、张得胜、桑世杰、耿再成、胡大海、赵德胜配享。
English: In the second year of Hongwu, sacrifices were offered at the Great Temple, with Liao Yongan, Zou Tonghai, Zhang Desheng, Sang Shijie, Geng Zensheng, Hu Haichang, and Zhao Desheng sharing.

古文：设青布帏六于太庙庭中，遣官分献。
现代文：在太庙庭中设青布帏六个，派遣官员分别祭献。
English: In the courtyard of the Great Temple, there were six blue cloth urns set up, and officials were dispatched to make offerings.

古文：俟皇帝亚献将毕，行礼。
现代文：等皇帝亚献将要完成，行礼。
English: Wait until Emperor Ashen is about to finish, then salute.

古文：每岁春秋享庙，则配食于仁祖庙之东庑。
现代文：每年春秋在庙中祭献，就在仁祖庙的束庶配享。
English: Every spring and autumn, offerings are made in the temple, and the bundles are distributed at the Rinzai Temple.

古文：三年，定配享功臣常遇春以下凡八位。
现代文：三年，制定配享功臣常遇春以下共八位。
English: Three years later, the allocation of meritorious subjects was established for a total of eight people below the rank of general.

古文：春夏于仁祖庙西庑，秋冬于德祖庙西庑，设位东向，遂罢帏次之设。
现代文：春夏在仁祖庙西庶，秋冬在德祖庙西廉，设位面向东，于是停止设帏幕。
English: In the spring and summer, it was located in the west wing of the Nanzenji Temple, and in the autumn and winter, it was located in the west wing of the Dezuji Temple, facing east, so the curtain was no longer set up.

古文：更定三献礼，皇帝初献，时献官即分诣行礼，不拜。
现代文：更改规定三献礼，皇帝初献，时献官就分别去行礼，不拜。
English: Change the provisions of the three offerings, the emperor's first offering, and when offering officials, they will separately go to make a bow, not worship.

古文：四年，太祖谓中书省臣： 太庙之祭，以功臣配列庑间。
现代文：四年，太祖对巾书省大臣说： 太庙的祭祀，以功臣在庶间配享。
English: In the fourth year, the great-grandfather said to the minister of Jinshu Province: The sacrifices of the great-temple should be shared with meritorious vassals in the common room.

古文：今既定太庙合祭礼，朕以祖宗具在，使功臣故旧殁者得少依神灵，以同享祀，不独朝廷宗庙盛典，亦以寓朕不忘功臣之心。 于是礼官议： 凡合祭时，为黄布幄殿，中祖考神位，旁设两壁，以享亲王及功臣，令大臣分献。 
现代文：现在既然规定太庙合祭的礼仪，朕因祖宗都在，使功臣故旧战死的稍稍依附神灵，以便共同享受祭祀，不仅朝廷宗庙盛典，也以此寄托朕不忘功臣的心意 于是礼官议论： 凡是合祭时，建黄布帐殿，中间是祖父神位，旁边设两壁，以此祭享亲王以及功臣，命令大臣分别祭献。 
English: Now that the etiquette of the closing ceremony of the Imperial Temple has been stipulated, I, because of my ancestors, have made the heroes who died in the war slightly attached to the gods, so that we can enjoy the sacrifice together, not only the grand ceremony of the Imperial Family Temple, but also the intention of not forgetting the heroes. Then the etiquette officer discussed: Whenever the festival is over, build a yellow cloth tent, with the grandfather's throne in the middle and two walls next to it, in order to offer the prince and the heroes, and order the minister to offer separately.

古文：制可。
现代文：皇帝下制命说可以。
English: The post-Bukou system can work.

古文：已而命去布幄。
现代文：不久命令去掉布帐。
English: Soon the order came to remove the cloth.

古文：九年，新太庙成，以徐达、常遇春、李文忠、邓愈、汤和、沐英、俞通海、张德胜、胡大海、赵得胜、耿再成、桑世杰十二位配于西庑，罢廖永安。
现代文：洪武九年，新的太庙建成，以徐达、常遇春、李文忠、邓愈、汤和、沐英、俞通海、张德胜、胡大海、趟得胜、耿再成、桑世杰十二位在西庶配享，停止祭祀廖永安。
English: In the ninth year of Hongwu, a new Great Temple was built, with the 12 emperors Xu Da, Changyu Chun, Li Wenzhong, Deng Yu, Tang He, Mu Ying, Zou Tonghai, Zhang Desheng, Hu Haoai, Wato Desheng, Geng Zai Cheng, and Sang Shijie sharing the west wing, and the worship of Liao Yongan was stopped.

古文：建文时，礼部侍郎宋礼言： 功臣自有鸡笼山庙，请罢太庙配享。 
现代文：建文年间，礼部侍郎宋礼说： 功臣自有鸡笼山庙，请求停止在太庙配享。 
English: During the Jianwen era, Song Li, the attendant of the Ministry of Ceremonies, said: The meritorious subject has his own chicken coop temple, and requested to stop sharing it with the Great Temple.

古文：帝以先帝所定，不从。
现代文：皇帝以为是先帝所定，没有听从。
English: The emperor thought it was dictated by the previous emperor and did not obey.

古文：且令候太庙享毕，别遣官即其庙祭之。
现代文：而且命令等太庙祭享结束，另外派官员到功臣庙去祭祀。
English: Moreover, the order waited for the end of the temple festival, and officials were sent to the hero temple to make sacrifices.

古文：洪熙元年，以张玉、朱能、姚广孝配享太庙。
现代文：洪熙元年，以张玉、朱能、姚广孝在太庙配享。
English: In the first year of Hongxi, Zhang Yu, Zhu Neng, and Yao Guangxiao were allotted shares in the Great Temple.

古文：遣张辅、朱勇、王通及尚宝少卿姚继各祭其父。
现代文：派张辅、朱勇、王通以及尚宝少卿姚继各自祭祀自己的父亲。
English: Zhang Fu, Zhu Yong, Wang Tong and Shang Bao Shaoqing Yao successively sacrificed their own fathers.

古文：嘉靖九年，以廖道南言，罢姚广孝。
现代文：嘉靖九年，因为廖道南进言，停止祭祀姚广孝。
English: In the ninth year of Jiajing, because of Liao Daonan's advice, the worship of Yao Guangxiao was stopped.

古文：十年，以刑部郎中李瑜议，进刘基，位次六王。
现代文：十年，因刑部郎中李瑜的提议，进升刘基的位次于六王。
English: In ten years, due to the proposal of Li Yu, the vice-minister of the criminal department, Liu Ji was promoted to the second place after the six kings.

古文：十六年，以武定侯郭勋奏，进其祖英。
现代文：十六年，因武定侯郭勋的奏议，进升郭勋祖父郭英。
English: Sixteen years later, at the suggestion of Wu Ding Hou Guo Xun, Guo Xun's grandfather Guo Ying was promoted.

古文：初，二庙功臣，位各以爵，及进基位公侯上，至是复令礼官议合二庙功臣叙爵。
现代文：最初，二庙功臣，位次各以封爵为准，等到升刘基的官位在公侯之上，到这时又命令礼官讨论合二庙功臣评定爵位。
English: At first, the second temple meritorious person, the rank of each is subject to the knighthood, until the promotion of Liu Ji's official rank is above the prince, at this time, he ordered the etiquette officer to discuss the evaluation of the knighthood of the second temple meritorious person.

古文：于是列英于桑世杰上，张玉、朱能于沐英下，基于世杰下。
现代文：于是列郭英于桑世杰之上，张玉、朱能在沐英之下，刘基在桑世杰之下。
English: As a result, Lei Guoying is above Sang Shijie, Zhang Yu and Zhu Neng are below Mu Ying, and Liu Ji is below Sang Shijie.

古文：二十四年，进诸配位于新太庙西壁，罢分献。
现代文：二十四年，在新太庙西壁进奉各配享神位，停止分别祭献。
English: Twenty-four years later, on the west wall of the New Imperial Temple, the priests were assigned to share the divine position and stopped offering sacrifices separately.

古文：万历十四年，太常卿裴应章言： 庙中列后在上，异姓之臣礼当别嫌。
现代文：万历十四年，太常卿裴应章说： 庙中各王在上，异姓大臣按礼制应当避嫌。
English: In the 14th year of the Wanli era, Tai Changqing Pei Yingzang said: All kings in the temple are superior, and ministers with different surnames should be avoided according to the etiquette.

古文：且至尊拜俯于下，诸臣之灵亦必不安。 
现代文：而且皇上在下面拜俯，众臣的灵魂也必定不安。 
English: Moreover, the Emperor was bowing down, and the souls of all the courtiers must have been uneasy.

古文：命复改西庑，遣官分献。
现代文：皇帝命令重改在西糜，派官员分别祭献。
English: The emperor ordered the reformation in Xidi and sent officials to offer sacrifices separately.

古文：天启元年，太常少卿李宗延言： 前代文臣皆有从祀。我朝不宜独阙。 
现代文：天启元年，太常少卿李宗延说： 前代文臣都有随从祭祀，我朝不应该独缺。 
English: In the first year of the Apocalypse, Li Zongyan, the First Secretary of the Central Military Commission, said: The previous generation of civil servants had attendant sacrifices, and I should not be the only one.

古文：下礼部议，不行。
现代文：下交礼部议论，没有实行。
English: Referred to the Ministry of Ceremonies for discussion, but not implemented.

古文：王国宗庙
现代文：王国宗庙
English: Kingdom ancestral temple

古文：洪武四年，礼部尚书陶凯等议定，王国宫垣内，左宗庙，右社稷。
现代文：洪武四年，礼部尚书陶凯等人议定，诸侯国的宫城内，左边是宗庙，右边是社神与稷神。
English: In the fourth year of Hongwu, the ceremonial department Shangshu Tao Kai and others agreed that in the palace city of the principality, the left side is the ancestral temple, and the right side is the shrine god and the god.

古文：庙制，殿五间，寝殿如之，门三间。
现代文：宗庙的建制为殿五间，寝殿也相同，门三间。
English: The structure of the ancestral temple is five halls, the same for the sleeping hall, and three doors.

古文：永乐八年，建秦愍王享堂，命视晋恭王制，加高一尺。
现代文：永乐八年，建秦愍王祭堂，命令按晋恭王的制式，加高一尺。
English: In the eighth year of Yongle, the Qin Shi Wang Festival Hall was built, and the order was given to increase the height by one foot according to the standard of King Jinguang.

古文：因定享堂七间，广十丈九尺五寸，高二丈九尺，深四丈三尺五寸。
现代文：于是定祭享的殿堂七间，宽十丈九尺五寸，高二丈九尺，深四丈三尺五寸。
English: As a result, there are seven halls of worship, with a width of 10 feet 9 inches, a height of 2 feet 9 inches, and a depth of 4 feet 3 inches.

古文：弘治十三年，宁王宸濠奏庙祀礼乐未有定式，乞颁赐遵守。
现代文：弘治十三年，宁王朱宸濠上奏庙祀礼乐没有定式，请求颁布赐予遵守。
English: In the thirteenth year of the Hongzhi era, there was no set formula for the temple worship music played at the enthronement of King Zhu Xi of Ning, and he requested that it be promulgated and obeyed.

古文：礼部议： 洪武元年，学士宋濂等奏定诸王国祭祀礼乐，用清字，但有曲名，而无曲辞，请各王府稽考。
现代文：礼部议论： 洪武元年，学士宋濂等人上奏定诸王国祭祀礼乐，用清字，但是只有曲名，而没有曲辞，请求各王府考查。
English: Discussion of the Ministry of Rites and Ceremonies: In the first year of Hongwu, the scholar Song Xi and others submitted a set of ritual and ceremonial music of the kingdoms, using clear words, but only the name of the song, but no lyrics, requesting each royal palace to investigate.

古文：于是靖江王长史具上乐章，且言四孟上旬及除夕五祭所用品物、俎豆、佾舞，礼节悉遵国初定制。 
现代文：于是靖江王长史进献乐章，而且说每季首月上旬以及除夕五次祭祀所用物品、俎豆、佾舞，礼节全部遵照建国初定下的制度。 
English: As a result, the king of Jingjiang, Changshi, presented the music, and said that the items used for the first month of each season and the five New Year's Eve rituals, the peas, the gong dance, and the etiquette all follow the system established at the beginning of the founding of the country.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇帝听从其议。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：嘉靖八年，秦王充翟言： 代懿王当祔庙，而自始封至今，已盈五庙之数，请定祧庙之制。 
现代文：嘉靖八年，秦王朱充耀说： 代懿王应当在庙拊祭，而自开始封王至今，已超过五庙的数目，请求制定祧庙的制度。 
English: In the eighth year of the Jiajing Dynasty, the Qin King Zhu Chunyao said: "The successor of the emperor should be enshrined in a temple, and since the beginning of the emperor, there have been more than five temples, requesting the establishment of a temple system."

古文：礼臣言： 亲王祧庙，古制未闻，宜推太庙祧祔之礼而降杀之。
现代文：礼臣说： 亲王祧庙，古代制度没有听说，应该推尊太庙祧拊礼而递减。
English: The minister of etiquette said: Prince's temple, the ancient system has not been heard of, it is necessary to promote the reverence of the temple and gradually reduce it.

古文：始封居中，百世不迁，以下四世，亲尽而祧。
现代文：开始封王的居中，百代不祧迁，以下四代，亲人关系已尽而祧迁。
English: At the beginning of the enthronement of the king, one hundred generations did not move, and the following four generations, the family relationship was exhausted and moved.

古文：但诸侯无祧庙，祧主宜祔始祖之室，置椟藏之，每岁暮则出祧主合祭。 
现代文：只是诸侯没有祧庙，逮祖牌位应在始祖室拊祭，用盒子藏起来，每年年终就拿出远祖牌位合祭。 
English: However, the lords did not have a temple, so the ancestor card should be kept in the ancestor's room, hidden in a box, and the ancestor card should be taken out at the end of each year.

古文：诏如议。
现代文：下诏按议定的礼仪办。
English: The edict was issued in accordance with his wishes.

古文：群臣家庙
现代文：群臣家庙
English: Gunchonji Temple

古文：明初未有定制，权仿朱子祠堂之制，奉高曾祖祢四世神主，以四仲之月祭之，加腊月忌日之祭与岁时俗节之荐。
现代文：明朝初年没有固定的制度，权且仿照朱子祠堂的礼制，奉祭高曾祖父四代神主，在二月、五月、八月、十一月祭祀，加上腊月、忌日的祭祀与每年一定时节俗节的祭献。
English: In the first year of the Ming Dynasty, there was no fixed system, and it was decided to follow the ritual system of Zhu Zi's ancestral hall, offering sacrifices to the four great-grandfathers of the gods in February, May, August, and November, as well as the sacrifice of the waxing moon, the day of death, and the sacrifice of a certain time of the year.

古文：其庶人得奉祖父母、父母之祀，已著为令。
现代文：平民能供奉祖父母、父母的祭祀，已写进法令。
English: It has been written into the law that civilians can offer sacrifices to grandparents and parents.

古文：至时享于寝之礼，略同品官祠堂之制。
现代文：至于在寝殿四时祭祀的礼仪，略同于品级官祠堂的制度。
English: As for the etiquette of offering sacrifices at four o'clock in the sleeping hall, it is somewhat similar to the system of the ancestral hall for court officials.

古文：堂三间，两阶三级，中外为两门。
现代文：堂三间，两阶三级，中外是两门。
English: There are three halls, two tiers and three levels, and there are two doors in the middle and outside.

古文：堂设四龛，龛置一桌。
现代文：堂上设四宠，麄放在一张桌子上。
English: In the hall, there are four puppets, all of which are placed on a table.

古文：高祖居西，以次而东，藏主椟中。
现代文：高祖处在西面，依次向东，牌位藏在木盒中。
English: Gao Zu is located in the west, followed by the east, and the cards are hidden in a wooden box.

古文：两壁立柜，西藏遗书衣物，东藏祭器。
现代文：两壁设立柜，西边的藏着遣书衣物，束边的藏着祭器。
English: On the two walls there are cabinets, on the west side there are clothes for sending books, and on the hem there are sacred vessels.

古文：旁亲无后者，以其班附。
现代文：旁亲没有后人的，依其班次柑祭。
English: If there are no descendants of the next of kin, the next-of-kin will be sacrificed according to their order.

古文：庶人无祠堂，以二代神主置居室中间，无椟。
现代文：平民中无祠堂的，将两代神主牌位放置居室的中间，没有木盒。
English: If there is no ancestral hall among the common people, place the two-generation god card in the middle of the living room. There is no wooden box.

古文：洪武六年，定公侯以下家庙礼仪。
现代文：洪武六年，制定公侯以下家庙的礼仪。
English: In the sixth year of Hongwu, the etiquette of the family temple below the prince was formulated.

古文：凡公侯品官，别为祠屋三间于所居之东，以祀高曾祖考，并祔位。
现代文：凡是公侯以及有品级的官员，在所居房屋柬面另建祠堂三间，以祭祀高曾祖父，并且柑位。
English: Princes and dignitaries built three separate ancestral halls in their residences to pay tribute to their great-great-grandfathers.

古文：祠堂未备，奉主于中堂享祭。
现代文：祠堂没有具备的，在中堂供奉神主牌享祭。
English: What the ancestral hall does not have, is offered to the main god in the middle hall to enjoy the festival.

古文：二品以上，羊一豕一，五品以上，羊一，以下豕一，皆分四体熟荐。
现代文：二品以上，羊一只、猎一只，五品以上，羊一只，以下是猎一只，都分成四体煮熟祭献。
English: If there are more than two dishes, one lamb and one game, if there are more than five dishes, one lamb and one game, they are all divided into four cooked offerings.

古文：不能具牲者，设馔以享。
现代文：不能准备祭牲的，设饭菜来祭献。
English: If you can't prepare a sacrifice, prepare a meal as an offering.

古文：所用器皿，随官品第，称家有无。
现代文：所用器皿，随着官位品级高低，按照家中财产多少。
English: The utensils used increase with the official rank and grade, according to the amount of property in the family.

古文：前二日，主祭者闻于上，免朝参。
现代文：前两天，主祭者向皇上奏报，免去上朝参拜。
English: Two days ago, the head priest reported to the emperor, and was excused from visiting the emperor.

古文：凡祭，择四仲吉日，或春、秋分，冬、夏至。
现代文：凡是祭祀，选择二月、五月、八月、十一月的吉祥日，或者春分、秋分，或者冬至、夏至。
English: For all rituals, choose an auspicious day in February, May, August, or November, or the vernal or autumnal equinox, or the winter or summer solstice.

古文：前期一日，斋沐更衣，宿外舍。
现代文：前一天，斋戒沐浴更衣，在外面房子住宿。
English: The day before, fasting, bathing, changing clothes, and sleeping outside the house.

古文：质明，主祭者及妇率预祭者诣祠堂。
现代文：天刚亮，主祭者以及主妇率领参与祭祀的人到祠堂。
English: At first light, the officiating priest and his wife led the participants to the ancestral hall.

古文：主祭者捧正祔神主椟，置于盘，令子弟捧至祭所。
现代文：主祭者捧着正拊神主牌盒，放到盘上，命令子弟捧到祭祀地。
English: The main celebrant holds the main card box of the main god, places it on a plate, and orders his son to take it to the place of worship.

古文：主祭开椟，捧各祖妣神主，以序奉安。
现代文：主祭者打开木盒，捧着各自的祖父神主牌位，主妇打开盒子捧着各自的祖母神主牌位，依次供奉安置。
English: The officiating priest opened the wooden box and held up their respective grandfather god master cards, while the matron opened the box and held up their respective grandmother god master cards, offering and placing them in turn.

古文：子弟捧祔主，置东西壁。
现代文：子弟捧着柑祭神主牌位，放在东西壁上。
English: The child holds the main tablet of the god of the orange festival, and places it on the east and west walls.

古文：执事者进馔，读祝者一人，就赞礼，以子弟亲族为之。
现代文：执事者进献饭食，读祝者一人，行赞礼的，用子弟、亲人、族人担任。
English: The deacon brings in the meal offering, the celebrant reads a psalm, and the person giving the praise is a child, relative, or member of the tribe.

古文：陈设神位讫，各就位，主祭在东，伯叔诸兄立于其前稍东，诸亲立于其后，主妇在西，母及诸母立于其前稍西，妇女立于后。
现代文：陈设神主位完毕，各自就位，主祭者在束，伯叔众兄站在前面稍稍靠柬处，众亲人站在后面，主妇在西面，母亲以及诸母站在他前面稍偏西处，妇女立在后面。
English: After the installation of God's throne, everyone took their places. The main priest was in the middle, the uncles and brothers stood in front, slightly to the right, the relatives stood behind, the housewife stood to the west, the mother and mothers stood in front of him, slightly to the west, and the women stood behind.

古文：赞拜，皆再拜。
现代文：赞行拜礼，都行再拜礼。
English: If you perform a prayer, you can do it again.

古文：主祭者诣香案前跪，三上香，献酒奠酒，执事酌酒于祔位前。
现代文：主祭者到香案前跪下，上香三次，献酒奠酒，执事在拊位前斟酒。
English: The officiating priest kneels before the incense burner, raises the incense three times, offers wine as a libation, and the deacon pours the wine before the blessing.

古文：读祝者跪读讫，赞拜，主祭者复位，与主妇皆再拜。
现代文：渎祝者跪着读完。赞唱行拜礼，主祭者回到原位，与主妇都行再拜礼。
English: The celebrant kneels and finishes the reading. The hymn is sung and the service is performed. The officiant returns to his original position and both he and the hostess repeat the service.

古文：再献终献并如之，惟不读祝。
现代文：再献、终献也都像这样，祇是不读祝文。
English: The second offering and the final offering are also like this, except that the congratulatory letter is not read.

古文：每献，执事者亦献于祔位。
现代文：每次祭献，执事者也向拊位祭献。
English: At each offering, the deacon also offers a sacrifice to the throne.

古文：礼毕，再拜，焚祝并纸钱于中庭，安神主于椟。
现代文：行礼结束，行再拜礼，在庭中连同纸钱焚烧祝文，在木盒中安放神主牌位。
English: At the end of the procession, the prayers are repeated, the congratulatory letter is burned in the courtyard together with the paper money, and the god card is placed in a wooden box.

古文：成化十一年，祭酒周洪谟言： 臣庶祠堂神主，俱自西而东。
现代文：成化十一年，祭酒周洪谟说： 臣民的祠堂神主牌位，都从西到柬。
English: In the eleventh year of Chenghua, Zhou Hongmu said: "The ancestral halls of the subjects are from the West to Cambodia.

古文：古无神道尚右之说，惟我太祖庙制，合先王左昭右穆之义。
现代文：古代没有神道崇尚右边的说法，只有我太祖庙的制度，符合先王左昭右穆的义理。
English: In ancient times, there was no saying that Shinto worshiped the right side, only the system of I am too ancestral temple was in line with the principle of the previous king Zuo Zhao Yu Mu.

古文：宜令一品至九品，皆立一庙，以高卑广狭为杀。
现代文：厅该命令一品到九品官，都建立一庙，高低宽狭递次减少。
English: According to the order of the General Office of the Communist Party of China, officials from the first to the ninth grade should establish a temple, and the number of submissions should be reduced from high to low.

古文：神主则高祖居左，曾祖居右，祖居次左，考居次右。 
现代文：神主牌位则是高祖居左，曾祖居右，祖父居左边次位，父亲居右边次位。 
English: As for the position of the main god card, the high ancestor is on the left, the great-grandfather is on the right, the grandfather is second on the left, and the father is second on the right.

古文：帝下礼臣参酌更定。
现代文：皇帝下交礼臣商议修订。
English: The emperor sent his courtiers to discuss the revision.

古文：嘉靖十五年，礼部尚书夏言言： 按三代有五庙、三庙、二庙、一庙之制者，以其有诸侯、卿、大夫上中下之爵也。
现代文：嘉靖十五年，礼部尚书夏言说： 按照三代有五庙、三庙、二庙、一庙的制度，是因它们有诸侯、卿、上中下大夫的爵位。
English: In the fifteenth year of the Jiajing Dynasty, Shang Shuxian of the Ministry of Ceremonies said: According to the three-generation system, there are five temples, three temples, two temples, and one temple, because they have the titles of princes, lords, and doctors.

古文：后世官职既殊，无世封采邑，岂宜过泥于古。
现代文：后世官职已经相差很大，没有世代封给的封邑，怎能过分拘泥于古呢？
English: Later generations of officials have been very different, there is no generation of fiefs, how can it be too rigidly adhered to the past?

古文：至宋儒程颐乃始约之而归于四世，自公卿以及士庶，莫不皆然。
现代文：到宋儒程颐纔开始简约而归于四代。从公卿到士人百姓，没有不是这样的。
English: By the Song Dynasty, Zhu Chengxuan began to be simplified and attributed to four generations. From court nobles to commoners, nothing was different.

古文：谓五服之制，皆至高祖，则祭亦当如之。
现代文：所谓的五服制度，都到高祖，那么祭祀也应如此。
English: The so-called five-clothes system goes all the way back to Gaozu, and so should the sacrificial rites.

古文：今定官自三品以上立五庙，以下皆四庙。
现代文：现在规定三品官以上立五庙，以下官员都立四庙。
English: It is now stipulated that officials of three ranks and above shall establish five temples, and officials of lower ranks and below shall establish four temples.

古文：为五庙者，亦如唐制。
现代文：建五庙，也如同唐朝制度。
English: The construction of five temples is also similar to the Tang Dynasty system.

古文：五间九架，厦旁隔板为五室，中祔五世祖，旁四室，祔高曾祖祢。
现代文：五间九架，厦旁隔板成五室，中间一室拊祭五世祖，旁边四室，拊祭高祖、曾祖、祖父、父亲。
English: There are five rooms and nine shelves, and the partition next to the building is divided into five rooms. In the middle, there is a room dedicated to the fifth generation ancestor, and the four rooms next to it are dedicated to the great ancestor, great-grandfather, grandfather, and father.

古文：为四庙者，三间五架，中一室祔高曾，左右二室祔祖祢。
现代文：建四庙的，三间五架，中间一室拊祭高祖、曾祖，左右二室拊祭祖父、父亲。
English: Of the four temples built, three are five-storied, with a room in the middle dedicated to the founder and great-grandfather, and two rooms on the left and right dedicated to the grandfather and father.

古文：若当祀始祖，则如朱熹所云，临祭时，作纸牌，祭讫焚之。
现代文：如应祭祀始祖，就如同朱熹所说的临近祭祀时，作纸的神主牌位，祭祀完后焚烧。
English: If it is necessary to offer a sacrifice to the ancestors, as Zhu Xi said, when approaching the sacrifice, make a paper god card and burn it after the sacrifice is over.

古文：其三品以上者，至世数穷尽，则以今之得立庙者为世世奉祀之祖，而不迁焉。
现代文：三品以上官员，如后代已灭绝的，就以现在得以立庙的作为世代奉祭的祖先，而不迁移。
English: If the descendants of officials with three or more court ranks have died out, they will regard those who are now able to build temples as the ancestors of the sacrificial offering generation, and will not migrate.

古文：四品以下，四世递迁而已。 
现代文：四品以下官员，四代依次迁祧变化而已。 
English: For officials below the fourth grade, there are only four generations of succession.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇帝听从其言。
English: I followed his advice.

