古文：克修镇昭义，崇韬累典事务，以廉干称。
现代文：郭崇韬，字安时，代州雁门人。父亲郭弘正。郭崇韬多次掌管事务，以廉洁能干著称。
English: Guo Chongyao, also known as Anshi, was born in Ganmen, Daizhou. His father was Guo Hongzheng. Guo Chongyao was in charge of many affairs and was known for his integrity and ability.

古文：克修卒，武皇用为典谒，奉使凤翔称旨，署教练使。
现代文：李克修死，武皇用郭崇韬为典谒，奉命到凤翔，昭宗很满意，署为教练使。
English: After Li Kexiu's death, Emperor Wu used Guo Chongyi as his envoy, and he was ordered to Fengxiang. Zhaozong was very satisfied, and appointed him as his coach.

古文：崇韬临事机警，应对可观。庄宗嗣位，尤器重之。
现代文：崇韬遇事机警，应对如流，庄宗即位后，尤为器重他。
English: In the event of an emergency, Chongzhen was quick-witted and responded as usual. After Zhuangzong ascended the throne, he was especially important to him.

古文：天祐十四年，用为中门副使，与孟知祥、李绍宏俱参机要。
现代文：天十四年，任用为中门副使，和孟知祥、李绍宏一起参预机要大事。
English: In 1914, he was appointed as the vice-envoy of the Middle Gate, and participated in important events together with Meng Zhixiang and Li Shaohong.

古文：俄而绍宏出典幽州留事，知祥恳辞要职。
现代文：不久李绍宏出掌幽州留事一职，孟知祥恳切辞去要职。
English: Soon after, Li Shaohong was appointed to the post of governor of Yuzhou, and Meng Zhixiang earnestly resigned from the important post.

古文：先是，中门使吴珙、张虔厚忠而获罪。
现代文：在这以前，中门使吴珙、张虔厚因为忠诚却遭惩罚。
English: Prior to this, the Middle Gate Emissaries Wu Qi and Zhang Qianhuang were punished for their loyalty.

古文：知祥惧，求为外任，妻璚华公主泣请于贞简太后。
现代文：孟知祥害怕，求做外官，妻子华公主哭着请求贞简太后。
English: Meng Zhixiang was afraid and asked to be appointed foreign minister. His wife, Princess Hua, cried and begged Empress Dowager Zhengjian.

古文：庄宗谓知祥曰： 公欲避路，当举其代。 
现代文：庄宗对孟知祥说 ：你想让路，应当找一个代替你的人。 
English: Zhuang Zong said to Meng Zhixiang: If you want to give way, you should find someone to replace you.

古文：知祥因举崇韬。
现代文：孟知祥便举荐郭崇韬。
English: Meng Zhixiang then recommended Guo Chongyi.

古文：乃署知祥为太原军在城都虞候。
现代文：于是任孟知祥为太原军在城都虞候。
English: As a result, Ren Meng Zhixiang waited for the Taiyuan army in the city.

古文：自是崇韬专典机务，艰难战伐，靡所不从。
现代文：从此郭崇韬专管机要，凡是艰难战事，没有不参加的。
English: From that time on, Guo Chongyi's special administrative organ has never failed to participate in any difficult war.

古文：十八年，从征张文礼于镇州。
现代文：十八年，随从庄宗到镇州征讨张文礼。
English: In 18 years, he followed Zhuangzong to Zhenzhou to solicit Zhang Wenli.

古文：契丹引众至新乐，王师大恐，诸将咸请退还魏州，庄宗犹豫未决。崇韬曰： 安巴坚只为王都所诱，本利货财，非敦邻好，苟前锋小衄，遁走必矣。
现代文：契丹率众人到新乐，庄宗的军队大为恐慌，诸将都请求退回魏州，庄宗犹豫未决，郭崇韬说： 阿保机只是受王都诱惑，看重的是财物，并不是交结友邻，如果前锋交战小败，必定逃走。
English: Khitan led the people to Xinle, Zhuangzong's army panicked, all the generals asked to return to Weizhou, Zhuangzong hesitated, Guo Chongyi said: Ah Baoji was only tempted by Wangdu, he valued wealth, not friendship with neighbors. If the forward engagement was a small defeat, he would certainly flee.

古文：况我新破汴寇，威振北地，乘此驱攘，焉往不捷！
现代文：何况我军刚破汴梁贼寇，威振北方，乘势驱逐，无往而不胜！
English: What's more, our army has just defeated the bandits, intimidated the North, and expelled them by force. There is nowhere to go but up!

古文：且事之济否，亦有天命。 
现代文：再说事情是否成功，还要看运气。 
English: In addition, whether things are successful or not depends on luck.

古文：庄宗从之，王师果捷。
现代文：庄宗同意了，果然胜利。
English: Zhuangzong agreed, and the battle was won.

古文：明年，李存审收镇州，遣崇韬阅其府库，或以珍货赂遗，一无所取，但市书籍而已。
现代文：第二年，李存审收复镇州，派郭崇韬视察他的府库，有人用珍宝财物赠送他，他一无所取，只买书籍而已。
English: In the second year, Li Cunxin recovered Zhenzhou and sent Guo Chongyi to inspect his treasury. Someone presented him with precious treasures. He did not take anything, but only bought books.

古文：庄宗即位于魏州，崇韬加检校太保、守兵部尚书，充枢密使。
现代文：庄宗在魏州即位，郭崇韬加封为检校太保、守兵部尚书，充枢密使。
English: Zhuangzong ascended to the throne in Weizhou, and Guo Chongyi was appointed as the inspector of schools, the guard of the military department, and the imperial envoy.

古文：是时，卫州陷于梁，澶、相之间，寇钞日至，民流地削，军储不给，群情恟恟，以为霸业终不能就，崇韬寝不安席。
现代文：此时，卫州被梁军攻陷，澶州、相州之间，敌兵天天来抢掠，百姓流失，土地侵削，军队供应不足，群情愤愤不平，以为霸业终究不能实现，郭崇韬睡不好觉。
English: At this time, Weizhou was conquered by Liang's army, and between Zhangzhou and Xiangzhou, the enemy soldiers came to loot every day, the people were lost, the land was encroached upon, the army was under-supplied, and the crowd was indignant, thinking that hegemony could not be achieved after all. Guo Chongya did not sleep well.

古文：俄而王彦章陷德胜南城，敌势滋蔓，汴人急攻杨刘城。明宗在郓，音驿断绝。
现代文：不久王彦章攻陷德胜南城，敌人势力更加蔓延，梁军急攻杨刘城，明宗在郓州，消息断绝。
English: Wang Yanzhang soon captured the southern city of Desheng, and the enemy forces spread even more. Liang's army attacked Yang Liu's city in a hurry, and Mingzong was in Zhangzhou. The news was cut off.

古文：庄宗登城四望，计无所出。
现代文：庄宗登城四望，想不出主意。
English: Zhuo Zong went up to the city to look around, but he couldn't come up with an idea.

古文：崇韬启曰： 段凝阻绝津路，苟王师不南，郓州安能保守！
现代文：郭崇韬说： 段凝阻断水路，如果我们军队不往南，郓州怎么能保住！
English: Guo Chongyao said: Blocking the waterway with dikes, if our army does not go south, how can Zhangzhou be saved!

古文：臣请于博州东岸立栅，以固通津，但虑汴人侦知，径来薄我，请陛下募敢死之士，日以挑战，如三四日间。贼军未至，则栅垒成矣。 
现代文：我请求在博州东岸立栅营，以固守渡口，只是担心梁人侦察到情况，径直来逼近我们，请陛下召募敢死勇士，天天挑战，三四天内，如敌军没到，栅栏就做成了。 
English: I asked for a barricade to be set up on the east bank of the Boshu to secure the ferry, but I was worried that the Liang people would detect the situation and come straight to us. I asked His Majesty to recruit brave warriors and challenge them every day. Within three or four days, if the enemy army did not arrive, the fence would be completed.

古文：崇韬率毛璋等万人夜趋博州，视矛戟之端有光，崇韬曰： 吾闻火出兵刃，破贼之兆也。 
现代文：郭崇韬率领毛璋等一万人夜里奔往博州，看见矛戟尖上有光，郭崇韬说： 我听说兵刃冒火，是破灭敌军的兆头。 
English: Guo Chongzhen led ten thousand people, including Mao Jun, to rush to Bozhou in the middle of the night. Seeing a light on the tip of the spear, Guo Chongzhen said: I heard that the blade was on fire, which was a sign of destroying the enemy army.

古文：至博州，渡河版筑，昼夜不息。
现代文：到博州，渡过黄河修筑营垒，昼夜不息。
English: They went to Bozhou, crossed the Yellow River, and camped there day and night.

古文：崇韬于葭苇间据胡床假寝，觉裤中冷，左右视之，乃蛇也，其忘疲励力也如是。
现代文：郭崇韬在芦苇中间靠在胡床上打盹，觉得裤中冰冷，旁边人一看，原来是蛇爬进去了，他忘却疲劳努力工作到这种地步了。
English: In the middle of the reeds, Guo Chongyun was napping on a bed of rushes. He felt cold in his trousers. When the people next to him looked, it turned out to be a snake that had crawled in. He had forgotten the fatigue of working so hard.

古文：居三日，梁军果至，城垒低庳，沙土散恶，战具不完，汴将王彦章、杜晏球率众攻击，军不得休息。
现代文：过了三天，梁军果然到了，城垒低矮，沙土松散，战具不完备，梁将王彦章、杜彦球率众兵攻击，唐军不得休息。
English: After three days, Liang's army finally arrived. The fortress was low, the sand was loose, and the war equipment was incomplete. Liang led Wang Yanzhang and Du Yanqiu to attack the soldiers. The Tang army could not rest.

古文：崇韬身先督众，四面拒战，有急即应，城垂陷，俄报庄宗领亲军次西岸，梁军闻之退走，因解杨刘之围。
现代文：郭崇韬身先士卒，督促上阵，四面作战，哪里有急难便接应哪里。城垒将被攻陷，突然报告说庄宗领亲军到了西岸，梁军听说后便撤退，因而解除了杨刘之围。
English: Guo Chongzhen was at the vanguard, urging them to go to battle, to fight on all sides, and to respond to any emergency. The fortress would be captured, and suddenly it was reported that Zhuang Zong had led his relatives to the west coast, and Liang's army retreated after hearing this, thus lifting Yang Liu's siege.

古文：未几，汴将康延孝来奔，崇韬延于卧内，讯其军机。
现代文：没过多久，梁将康延孝来投奔，郭崇韬请他到卧室，问他军机大事。
English: Not long after, Liang sent Kang Yanxiao to take refuge, and Guo Chongyi invited him to his bedroom to ask him about military matters.

古文：延孝曰： 汴人将四道齐举，以困我军。 
现代文：康延孝说 ：梁人准备分四路一齐发兵，以包围我军。 
English: Kang Yanxiao said: Liang people are preparing to send troops in four directions to encircle our army.

古文：庄宗忧之，召诸将谋进取之策。
现代文：庄宗很忧虑，召诸将谋划进取计策。
English: Zhuangzong was very worried, and summoned Zhuge to devise a strategy.

古文：宣徽使李绍宏请弃郓州，与汴人盟，以河为界，无相侵寇。
现代文：宣徽使李绍宏说放弃郓州，与梁人结盟，以黄河为界互不侵犯。
English: The proclamation of the emblem made Li Shaohong say that he would give up Zhangzhou, make an alliance with Liang people, and use the Yellow River as a boundary for mutual non-aggression.

古文：庄宗不悦，独卧帐中，召崇韬谓曰： 计将安出？ 
现代文：庄宗不高兴，独自睡在帐中，叫来郭崇韬对他说： 能拿出什么计策？ 
English: Zhuang Zong was not happy, he was sleeping alone in his room. He called Guo Chongyao to say to him: What strategy can you come up with?

古文：对曰： 臣不知书，不能征比前古，请以时事言之。
现代文：郭崇韬说： 我不知书，不能引征古代的事例，请让我就现在的事说说。
English: Guo Chongyao said: I don't know books, I can't quote ancient cases, please let me talk about current affairs.

古文：自陛下十五年起义图霸，为雪家雠国耻，甲胄生虮虱，黎人困输挽。
现代文：陛下十五年起义图谋霸业，为报家仇雪国耻，甲胄里长出虮虱，百姓因输纳赋税而困苦。
English: His Majesty's 15-year uprising was an attempt to dominate the industry. He brought disgrace to the country by inciting hatred among his family members. Warts grew on his body armor, and the people suffered from the loss of tax revenue.

古文：今纂崇大号，河朔士庶，日望荡平，才得汶阳尺寸之地，不敢保守，况尽有中原乎！
现代文：现在继承国业，河朔间官员百姓，天天盼望荡平天下。才得到汶阳尺寸之地，都不能保守，何况能占有全部中原地区呢！
English: Now inheriting the national cause, officials and common people in the middle of the river are hoping to level the world every day. Only to get the land of the size of Benyang, they can not be preserved, let alone occupy the entire Central Plains!

古文：将来岁赋不充，物议咨怨，设若划河为界，谁为陛下守之？
现代文：将来每年赋税不足，议论埋怨之声不断，假设划黄河为界，谁来为陛下防守？
English: In the future, there will be a shortage of taxes every year, and there will be constant discussions and complaints. Assuming that the Yellow River is drawn as the boundary, who will defend His Majesty?

古文：臣自延孝言事以来，昼夜筹度，料我兵力，算贼事机，不出今年，雌雄必决。
现代文：我自从听了康延孝说的话，昼夜筹划，料算我们的兵力，预测敌人的动向，不出今年，敌我雌雄必然决出。
English: Ever since I heard Kang Yanxiao's words, I have been planning day and night, calculating our troop strength, and predicting the enemy's movement. If this year does not pass, the enemy and I will inevitably be decided.

古文：闻汴人决河，自滑至郓，非舟楫不能济。
现代文：听说梁人挖开黄河，从滑州到郓州，没有船不能过去。
English: It is said that Liang people dug up the Yellow River, and no ship can pass from Luzhou to Zhangzhou.

古文：又闻精兵尽在段凝麾下，王彦章日寇郓境，彼既以大军临我南鄙，又凭恃决河，谓我不能南渡，志在收复汶阳，此汴人之谋也。
现代文：又听说精锐部队都在段凝手下，王彦章每天侵犯郓州地界，他们既然以大军逼近我们南边，又凭据黄河决口这个条件，自以为我们不能南渡，想坚决收复汶阳，这是梁人的打算。
English: I also heard that the elite troops were all under the command of Duan Jie, and that Wang Yanzhang violated the land border of Zhangzhou every day. Since they approached our southern border with a large army, and based on the condition of the mouth of the Yellow River, they thought that we could not cross to the south and wanted to resolutely recover Wenyang. This was Liang's plan.

古文：臣谓段凝保据河需，苟欲持我，臣但请留兵守鄴，保固杨刘；陛下亲御六军，长驱倍道，直指大梁，汴城无兵，望风自溃。
现代文：我想段凝保据黄河岸边，可能是想牵制我们，我只请留兵守邺都，保住杨刘，陛下亲率六军，长驱直入，进抵大梁，汴城没有军队，将望风自然崩溃。
English: I think that Duan Jian is trying to keep us on the bank of the Yellow River, and may be trying to hold us back. I only ask the remaining soldiers to guard the capital, to keep Yang Liu. His Majesty personally led the six armies, drove straight in, and reached the girders. There is no army in Handan, and it will collapse naturally.

古文：若使伪主授首，贼将自然倒戈，半月之间，天下必定。
现代文：假如伪主投降，贼将自然倒戈，半月以内，天下必定。
English: If the false lord surrenders, the thief will naturally turn his back, and within half a month, the world will be certain.

古文：如不决此计，傍采浮谭，臣恐不能济也。
现代文：如不决断大计，只是听浮泛言谈，我以为是不管用的。
English: I didn't think it would work if I didn't make a decision and just listened to the chatter.

古文：今岁秋稼不登，军粮才支数月，决则成败未知，不决则坐见不济。
现代文：今年秋收不丰足，军粮只够几个月使用，下决断成败还不可知，不下决断就只能坐等不利。
English: This year's autumn harvest is not plentiful, the military grain is only enough for a few months of use, and the success or failure of the decision is still unknown. Without a decision, we can only wait.

古文：臣闻作舍道边，三年不成，帝王应运，必有天命，成败天也，在陛下独断。 
现代文：我听说在路边盖房，三年不成，帝王行事，必有天命，成败在于天，在于陛下独自决断。 
English: I have heard that it takes three years to build a house on the side of the road, and that the emperor must act according to the will of heaven. Success or failure depends on the heavens, and on His Majesty's own decision.

古文：庄宗蹶然而兴曰： 正合吾意。丈夫得则为王，失则为掳，行计决矣！ 
现代文：庄宗立即兴奋地说： 正合我的心意，大丈夫胜则为王，败则被掳，决定行动了！ 
English: Zhuangzong immediately said excitedly, "This is my heart's desire. If all goes well, victory will be king, defeat will be captivity. I have decided to act!"

古文：即日下令军中，家口并还魏州。
现代文：当天下令军中，家属全部回魏州。
English: On that day, all members of the imperial army and their families returned to Weizhou.

古文：庄宗送刘皇后与兴圣宫使继岌至朝城西野亭泣别，曰： 事势危蹙，今须一决，事苟不济，无复相见。 
现代文：庄宗送刘皇后和兴圣宫使李继岌到朝城西野亭相泣而别，说： 事情危急，现在必须决一死战，事情若不成功，不能再相见了。 
English: Zhuang Zong sent Empress Liu and Xing Sheng Gong to make Li Jidong leave crying to the West Field Pavilion in the morning, saying: Things are critical, now we must fight to the death, if things are not successful, we can not see each other again.

古文：乃留李绍宏及租庸使张宪守魏州，大军自杨刘济河。
现代文：留李绍宏和租庸使张宪守卫魏州，大军从杨刘渡黄河。
English: Li Shaohong and Zeng Yong left Zhang Xian to guard Weizhou, and a large army crossed the Yellow River from Yang Liu.

古文：是岁，擒王彦章，诛梁氏，降段凝，皆崇韬赞成其谋也。
现代文：这一年，擒获王彦章，灭梁氏，降伏段凝，都是郭崇韬出谋划策做成的。
English: In this year, Guo Chongyao came up with a plan to capture Wang Yanzhang, exterminate the Liang clan, and capitulate Duanjing.

古文：庄宗至汴州，宰相豆卢革在魏州，令崇韬权行中书事。俄拜侍中兼枢密使，及郊礼毕，以崇韬兼领镇、冀州节度使，进封赵郡公，邑二千户，赐铁券，恕十死。
现代文：庄宗到汴州，宰相豆卢革在魏州，令郭崇韬暂行中书事，不久拜为侍中兼枢密使，到郊礼结束，命郭崇韬兼领镇、冀州节度使，进封赵郡公，封邑二千户，赐铁券，可宽恕十次死罪。
English: Zhuang Zong went to Zhangzhou, and the prime minister, Zhu Ruge, was in Weizhou. He ordered Guo Chongya to temporarily handle the paperwork, and soon he was appointed as an attendant and a confidential envoy. At the end of the suburb ceremony, he ordered Guo Chongya, who was also the leader of the town and the Jizhou festival envoy, to enter the county of Zhao, the county of two thousand households, and give iron coupons, which could forgive ten times the death penalty.

古文：崇韬既位极人臣，权倾内外，谋猷献纳，必尽忠规，士族朝伦，颇亦收奖人物，内外翕然称之。
现代文：郭崇韬位极人臣，权倾内外，出谋划策，必尽忠诚，对士族阶层的人也颇有奖掖录用，朝廷内外都称赞他。
English: Guo Chongxuan was a highly respected courtier. He was power-hungry both at home and abroad. He was the one to make plans and suggestions, and he was loyal to the end. He was also highly awarded and recruited by the warrior class. He was praised both inside and outside the imperial court.

古文：初收汴、洛，稍通赂遗，亲友或规之，崇韬曰： 余备位将相，禄赐巨万，但伪梁之日，赂遗成风，今方面籓侯，多梁之旧将，皆吾君射钩斩祛之人也。一旦革面，化为吾人，坚拒其请，得无惧乎！
现代文：刚收复汴州、洛阳时，逐渐接受贿赂礼物，亲友规劝他，郭崇韬说 ：我身为将相，俸禄赏赐上万，但伪梁朝时代，贿赂送礼成风，现在的大官藩侯，多为梁时旧将，都是我们君王以前的强敌，一旦归顺，成为我们的人，坚决不收他们送的礼，他们不会害怕吗？
English: When he had just regained Bozhou and Luoyang, he gradually accepted bribes and gifts. His relatives and friends advised him against it. Guo Chongyao said: "As a general, I awarded tens of thousands in salary, but in the era of the false Liang Dynasty, bribes and gifts were common. Today's high officials and lords, mostly Liang Dynasty generals, were strong enemies of our monarchs before. Once they have surrendered and become our people, they will resolutely refuse to accept gifts from them. Won't they be afraid?

古文：藏余私室，无异公帑。 
现代文：收藏在我的私室，这和公家的财物没什么不同。 
English: I keep it in my private room, it's no different from public property.

古文：及郊禋，崇韬悉献家财，以助赏给。
现代文：到郊祭时，郭崇韬把家财全部献出来，以助朝廷赏赐。
English: When he came to the suburb festival, Guo Chongyao gave away all his family wealth to help the imperial court reward.

古文：时近臣劝庄宗以贡奉物为内库，珍货山积，公府赏军不足。
现代文：此时近臣劝庄宗以贡奉来的财物充实皇宫自家内库，珍宝堆成山，而国家仓库用来犒赏军队的财物却不够。
English: At this time, close vassals advised Zhuangzong to enrich the palace's own treasury with the property brought by tribute. Treasures piled up into mountains, but the national warehouse was not enough to reward the army.

古文：崇韬奏请出内库之财以助，庄宗沉吟有靳惜之意。
现代文：郭崇韬上奏请拿出内库财物以助赏军，庄宗沉吟支吾有吝惜的意思。
English: Guo Chongzhen said, "Please take out the treasury goods to help reward the troops." Zhuo Zong said, "I have a grudge against you."

古文：是时天下已定，寇仇外息，庄宗渐务华侈，以逞己欲。
现代文：这时天下已经安定，外面的敌寇也已平息，庄宗渐渐追求奢华，以满足自己的欲望。
English: By this time, the country had stabilized, the outside enemy had calmed down, and Zhuangzong gradually pursued luxury to satisfy his desires.

古文：洛阳大内宏敞，宫宇深邃，宦官阿意顺旨，以希恩宠，声言宫中夜见鬼物，不谋同辞。
现代文：洛阳的皇宫宽敞宏大，宫殿深远，宦官们迎合皇帝的心意，以求恩宠，扬言说宫中夜里见鬼，大家都异口同声这么说。
English: The imperial palace in Luoyang is spacious and grand, and the palace is far-reaching. The eunuchs cater to the emperor's wishes, seek favor, and threaten to see the devil in the palace at night. Everyone says so in unison.

古文：庄宗骇异其事，且问其故。
现代文：庄宗听说后很惊奇，问是什么原因。
English: Zhuangzong was surprised to hear this and asked what the reason was.

古文：宦者曰： 见本朝长安大内，六宫嫔御，殆及万人，椒房兰室，无不充牣。
现代文：宦官说： 以前唐朝在长安的皇宫，六宫嫔妃，将近万人，椒房兰室，无不住满了人。
English: The eunuch said: In the past, the Tang Dynasty's royal palace in Chang'an, the Sixth Palace of the Empress Dowager, had nearly ten thousand people, and the Pepper House and the Orchid Room were always full of people.

古文：今宫室大半空闲，鬼神尚幽，亦无所怪。 
现代文：现在宫室大半空闲着，鬼神喜欢幽静，所以没什么奇怪的。 
English: Now most of the palace is idle, and ghosts and gods like to be secluded, so there is nothing strange about it.

古文：由是景进、王允平等于诸道采择宫人，不择良贱，内之宫掖。
现代文：于是景进、王允平等到各地挑选宫人，不择良贱，都纳入内宫。
English: As a result, both Jingjin and Wang Yun went to various regions to select palace attendants, and no matter how good or bad they were, they were all included in the inner palace.

古文：三年夏，雨，河大水，坏天津桥。
现代文：三年夏，大雨，黄河涨大水，冲坏天津桥。
English: In the summer of the third year, heavy rain caused the Yellow River to flood, damaging the Tianjin Bridge.

古文：是时，酷暑尤甚。
现代文：此时尤显酷暑难熬。
English: At this time, the heat is particularly intense.

古文：庄宗常择高楼避暑，皆不称旨。
现代文：庄宗经常到高楼避暑，都不发布旨意。
English: Zhuangzong often went to high-rise buildings to spend the summer, but did not issue a will.

古文：宦官曰： 今大内楼观，不及旧时长安卿相之家，旧日大明、兴庆两宫，楼观百数，皆雕楹画栱，干云蔽日，今官家纳凉无可御者。 
现代文：宦官们说： 现在宫内楼台馆所，赶不上以前长安的卿相之家，旧日的大明、兴庆两宫，楼观上百，都是雕梁画栋，遮云蔽日，现在陛下纳凉几乎没有可去的地方。 
English: The eunuchs said, "Nowadays, the palace's kitchen and dining hall can't keep up with Chang'an's former House of the Courtier, and the old Daming Palace and Xingqing Palace, with hundreds of buildings, are all carved beams and paintings, obscuring the sun. Now, there is almost no place for His Majesty to cool off.

古文：庄宗曰： 予富有天下，岂不能办一楼！ 
现代文：庄宗说： 我富有天下，怎么不能建一座楼！ 
English: Zhuangzong said: I am rich, how can I not build a building!

古文：即令宫苑使经营之，犹虑崇韬有所谏止，使谓崇韬曰： 今年恶热，朕顷在河上，五六月中，与贼对垒，行宫卑湿，介马战贼，恆若清凉。
现代文：立即命令宫苑使经办此事，但又担心郭崇韬会谏言劝止，派人对郭崇韬说： 今年酷热，我前不久在黄河上，五六月中，与敌对阵，行营低湿，骑上带甲衣的战马与敌人作战，总觉得清凉。
English: He immediately ordered the palace to send an agent to handle the matter, but he was worried that Guo Chongyi would try to dissuade him. He sent a person to Guo Chongyi saying: This year is extremely hot. I was on the Yellow River not long ago, in the middle of May and June, with the enemy camp, camping in low humidity, riding a horse with armor to fight the enemy, I always feel cool.

古文：今晏然深宫，不耐暑毒，何也？ 
现代文：现在平安住在深宫中，忍耐不住暑热之苦，这是为什么呢？ 
English: Now he is safely living in the depths of the palace, unable to bear the heat and suffering. Why is this?

古文：崇韬奏： 陛下顷在河上，汴寇未平，废寝忘食，心在战阵，祁寒溽暑，不介圣怀。
现代文：郭崇韬上奏： 陛下以前在黄河边时，汴州敌寇没平定，废寝忘食，一心在作战，严寒酷暑，不在陛下意念中。
English: Guo Chongzhen: When Your Majesty was on the banks of the Yellow River in the past, the enemy raiders in Zhangzhou had not been pacified, and you were so focused on fighting that you forgot to eat and sleep. The cold and heat were not on Your Majesty's mind.

古文：今寇既平，中原无事，纵耳目之玩，不忧战阵，虽层台百尺，广殿九筵，未能忘热于今日也。
现代文：现在敌人既已战败，中原无事，纵情于声色玩物，不担心作战列阵，虽然是楼台高百尺，广殿重九檐，也不能不觉得暑热。
English: Now that the enemy has been defeated, the Central Plains have nothing to do, indulge in sound and color toys, and do not worry about the battle lines. Although the platform is a hundred feet high and the hall weighs nine tons, it is impossible not to feel hot.

古文：愿陛下思艰难创业之际，则今日之暑，坐变清凉。 
现代文：愿陛下想想艰难创业的时候，今天的暑热就会立即变为清凉。 
English: May His Majesty think about the difficulties of starting a business, and today's heat will immediately turn into coolness.

古文：庄宗默然。
现代文：庄宗默然无语。
English: Zhuang Zong was speechless.

古文：王允平等竟加营造，崇韬复奏曰： 内中营造，日有縻费，属当灾馑，且乞权停。 
现代文：王允平等人还是加以建造，郭崇韬再次上奏说 ：宫内营造，每天都有耗费，在这灾荒饥饿的年月里，请求暂且停止营造。 
English: Wang Yun and others still wanted to build it, but Guo Chongtao appealed again, saying, "It costs money to build the palace every day. In these years of famine and famine, I would like to ask you to temporarily stop building."

古文：不听。
现代文：庄宗没有理会他。
English: The emperor does not allow it.

古文：初，崇韬与李绍宏同为内职，及庄宗即位，崇韬以绍宏素在己上，旧人难制，即奏泽潞监军张居翰同掌枢密，以绍宏为宣徽使。
现代文：起初，郭崇韬与李绍宏一同为枢密使，到庄宗即皇帝位时，郭崇韬因为李绍宏地位一向在自己上面，旧人难以管制，便上奏请泽潞监军张居翰一同掌枢密，以李绍宏为宣徽使。
English: At the beginning, Guo Chongzhen was a privy councillor together with Li Shaohong. When Zhuangzong became emperor, Guo Chongzhen, because Li Shaohong's position had always been higher than his own, and the old man was difficult to control, asked Zhang Juhan, the inspector of the Zeyu army, to be a privy councillor together, with Li Shaohong as the herald.

古文：绍宏大失所望，泣涕愤郁。
现代文：李绍宏大失所望，哭泣愤郁。
English: Li Shaohong was greatly disappointed and wept bitterly.

古文：崇韬乃置内勾使，应三司财赋，皆令勾覆，令绍宏领之，冀塞其心。绍宏怏怅不已。
现代文：郭崇韬于是设置内勾使，凡是三司财赋，都归它管理复查，命李绍宏任此职，以弥补他的失望，李绍宏仍怏怅怨恨不已。
English: Guo Chongyao then set up an internal enticement, all the three departments of financial endowment were under its management and review, and ordered Li Shaohong to take this position to make up for his disappointment. Li Shaohong is still resentful.

古文：崇韬自以有大功，河、洛平定之后，权位熏灼，恐为人所倾夺，乃谓诸子曰： 吾佐主上，大事了矣，今为群邪排毁，吾欲避之，归镇常山，为菟裘之计。 
现代文：郭崇韬自以为有大功，河、洛平定之后，权位气势逼人，担心被人倾轧夺位，便对几个儿子说： 我辅佐君主，大事已完成了，现在被群邪排挤诋毁，我想避开他们，回到常山做镇守，这是退隐的办法。 
English: Guo Chongzhen thought he had done a great deed. After the rivers and towns were pacified, the power of the position was overwhelming. Worried that he would be overthrown, he said to his sons: I assisted the monarch, the great event has been completed, and now I am being slandered by the evil crowd. I want to avoid them and return to Changshan to be the town guard. This is the way to retreat.

古文：其子廷说等曰： 大人功名及此，一失其势，便是神龙去水，为蝼蚁所制，尤宜深察。 
现代文：他儿子郭廷说等人说 ：父亲大人功名到这个地步，一失其势，就是神龙离水，被蚂蚁制服，请您多加考虑。 
English: His son, Guo Ting, said that others said: "Your father's achievements have reached this level, and once he loses his momentum, he is a dragon out of the water, subdued by ants. Please give it more consideration."

古文：门人故吏又谓崇韬曰： 侍中勋业第一，虽群官侧目，必未能离间。
现代文：其门人故吏又对郭崇韬说： 侍中您功勋第一，虽然官员们有怨恨，必然不能离间。
English: Guo Chongyu was also told by his mentor, a veteran official, "You are the most meritorious of the chamberlains. Although officials have grudges, they must not be separated.

古文：宜于此时坚辞机务，上必不听，是有辞避之名，塞其谗慝之口。
现代文：应在这时坚决辞去机枢要职，皇上必不答应，这样您有辞避之名，可以堵住谗言邪语。
English: At this time, you should resolutely resign from the key position. The emperor will not agree, so that you have the name of resignation and can stop the evil words.

古文：魏国夫人刘氏有宠，中宫未正，宜赞成册礼，上心必悦。
现代文：魏国夫人刘氏受宠，皇后位置空着，应赞助册立刘氏，皇上必然高兴。
English: Empress Dowager Liu was favored, the position of empress was vacant, Liu should be appointed with the emperor's patronage, and the emperor would certainly be pleased.

古文：内得刘氏之助，群阉其如余何！ 
现代文：内有刘氏帮助，那些宦官们又能对您怎样呢！ 
English: With Liu's help, what can those eunuchs do to you?

古文：会客省使李严使西川回，言王衍可图之状，庄宗与崇韬议讨伐之谋，方择大将。
现代文：郭崇韬采纳此言，于是三次上表章坚决辞去枢密之位，皇上优诏不接受辞呈。郭崇韬便密奏请立魏国夫人为皇后，又奏时务利害二十五条，都是给人方便，取悦人心的，又请罢免枢密院事，各归本司，以减轻其权力，然而宦官仍然不停地诽谤他。
English: Guo Chongzhen accepted this advice, so he resigned from the privy council three times, and the emperor did not accept his resignation. Guo Chongzhen then secretly requested the appointment of the Empress of Wei as the empress, and played the 25 points of interest, all of which were convenient and pleasing to the people, and requested the dismissal of the privy council, each to his own department, to reduce his power, but the eunuchs still slandered him incessantly.

古文：时明宗为诸道兵马慈管当行，崇韬自以宦者相倾，欲立大功以制之，乃奏曰： 契丹犯边，北面须藉大臣，全倚总管镇御。
现代文：同光三年，坚决请求罢去兼领的节镇职位，庄宗同意。这时客省使李严出使西川回来，谈王衍可以攻灭的情况，庄宗与郭崇韬商议讨伐的计划，挑选大将。此时明宗为各道兵马总管，应当出征，郭崇韬认为宦官在倾陷自己，想立大功制住他们，便上奏说 ：契丹侵犯边地，北面需要大臣，全靠总管镇守。
English: In the third year of Tongguang's reign, Zhuangzong agreed to Mingzong's resolute request to remove him from the concurrently held position of Jiezhen. At this time, the guest province sent Li Yan to send Xichuan back to talk about the situation in which Wang Yan could be defeated. Zhuangzong and Guo Chongyi discussed the plan of the crusade and selected the general. At this time, Mingzong was the commander-in-chief of each province and should go to war. Guo Chongyi thought that the eunuchs were falling over themselves and wanted to do a great job to control them, so he sent a report saying: Khitan invaded

古文：臣伏念兴圣宫使继岌，德望日隆，大功未著，宜依故事，以亲王为元帅，付以讨伐之权，俾成其威望。 
现代文：我想兴圣宫使李继岌，德望日益增长，但大功未立，应依以前惯例，任亲王为元帅，交给讨伐之权，助成他的威望。 
English: I think that the Xing Sheng Gong has made Li Jie precarious, and his prestige is growing day by day, but he has not made great achievements. According to the previous practice, he should appoint the prince as a marshal, give him the right to fight, and support his prestige.

古文：庄宗方爱继岌，即曰： 小兒幼稚，安能独行，卿当择其副。 
现代文：庄宗正宠爱李继岌，便说： 小儿幼稚，怎么能独自带兵，你应当选择一个辅助他的。 
English: Zhuangzong was fond of Li Jizhe, and said: "Children are naïve. How can you lead an army alone? You should choose someone to help him."

古文：崇韬未奏，庄宗曰： 无逾于卿者。 
现代文：郭崇韬没说话，庄宗说 ：没有比你更合适的。 
English: Guo Chongzhen did not speak, and Zhuang Zong said, "There is no one more suitable than you."

古文：乃以继岌为都统，崇韬为招讨使。
现代文：于是任李继岌为都统，任郭崇韬为招讨使。
English: As a result, Li Jizhe was appointed as the general secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China, and Guo Chongya was appointed as the envoy.

古文：是岁九月十八日，率亲军六万，进讨蜀川。
现代文：这年九月十八日，率亲军六万，进讨蜀川。
English: On September 18 of that year, he led a pro-family army of sixty thousand into the Shu River.

古文：崇韬将发，奏曰： 臣以非才，谬当戎事，仗将士之忠力，凭陛下之威灵，庶几克捷。
现代文：郭崇韬将要出发，上奏说： 我是无才之人，被授以军权，依靠将士的忠诚武力，仰仗陛下的威严神灵，应该会打胜的。
English: Guo Chongzhen was about to set out, and he said, "I am a man of no talent. I have been given military power, and I should be able to win by relying on the soldiers' loyalty and strength, and by relying on Your Majesty's majesty and divinity.

古文：若西川平定，陛下择帅，如信厚善谋，事君有节，则孟知祥有焉，望以蜀帅授之。
现代文：如果西川平定，陛下选择主帅，要忠信宽厚善谋，事君有节义的，孟知祥是一个，希望能授他以蜀帅。
English: If the West River is pacified and His Majesty chooses a coach, he should be loyal, generous and good-natured. Meng Zhixiang is a man of integrity, and we hope to award him the title of Shu Shu.

古文：如宰辅阙人，张宪有披榛之劳，为人谨重而多识。
现代文：如果宰相缺人，张宪有创业之劳，为人谨慎而多识断。
English: If there is a shortage of prime ministers, Zhang Xian has the labor of starting a business, and is cautious and discerning.

古文：其次李琪、崔居俭，中朝士族，富有文学，可择而任之。 
现代文：其次如李琪、崔居俭，是中朝士族，富有文才学识，也可以选而任用。 
English: Secondly, such as Li Qi and Cui Juzhen, they belong to the Chinese and Korean dynasties, are rich in literary talent and knowledge, and can also be selected and appointed.

古文：庄宗御嘉庆殿，置酒宴征西诸将，举酒属崇韬曰： 继岌未习军政，卿久从吾战伐，西面之事，属之于卿。 
现代文：庄宗到嘉庆殿，设酒宴招待征西诸位将军，举酒敬郭崇韬说： 李继岌没有治理过军政，你久随战伐，西面之事，全托您了。 
English: Zhuangzong went to the Jiaqing Palace and held a banquet to invite the generals of the Western Expedition, and raised a toast to Guo Chongyi, saying: Li Jizhe did not govern the military and political affairs, you have been following the war for a long time, and you have been entrusted with the affairs of the West.

古文：军发，十月十九日入大散关，崇韬以马箠指山险谓魏王曰； 朝廷兴师十万，已入此中，傥不成功，安有归路？
现代文：大军出发，十月十九日入大散关，郭崇韬用马鞭指着山川险要对魏王说 ：朝廷发兵十万，已进入此口，倘若不成功，哪里还有归路？
English: The great army set out and entered the Great Sankuan Pass on October 19th. Guo Chongyi pointed to the mountains and rivers with a horsewhip and said to the Wei king: The imperial court has sent 100,000 soldiers and has entered this gate. If it is not successful, where is the way back?

古文：今岐下飞挽，才支旬日，必须先取凤州，收其储积，方济吾事。 
现代文：现在岐下飞车运来的粮食，才够供应十来天，必须先攻取凤州，收其储备，才能解决我们的问题。 
English: The grain that is now being transported by express train is only enough to supply us for about ten days. We must first capture Fengzhou and collect its reserves in order to solve our problem.

古文：乃令李严、康延孝先驰书檄，以谕伪凤州节度使王承捷。
现代文：于是令李严、康延孝先骑马送去檄文，告诉伪凤州节度使王承捷。
English: Therefore, Li Yan and Kang Yanxiao were ordered to ride to Xiwen first and tell the fake Fengzhou Festival to make Wang Chengjie.

古文：及大军至，承捷果以城降，得兵八千，军储四十万。
现代文：等大军到时，王承捷果然献城投降，得士兵八千，军粮四十万。
English: When the large army arrived, Wang Cheng Jie surrendered the city, gaining eight thousand soldiers and four hundred thousand military rations.

古文：次至故镇，伪命屯驻指挥使唐景思亦以城降，得兵四千。
现代文：接着到故镇，伪命屯驻指挥使唐景思也献城投降，得士兵四千。
English: Then he went to the old town. The fake commander of the garrison made Tang Jingshi also surrender the city, gaining four thousand soldiers.

古文：又下三泉，得军储三十余万。
现代文：又攻下三泉，得军粮三十多万。
English: They also captured Sanquan, gaining more than 300,000 tons of grain.

古文：自是师无匮乏，军声大振。
现代文：从此军中不缺粮，军声大振。
English: Since then, there has been no shortage of grain in the army, and the army's voice has been loud.

古文：其招怀制置，官吏补置，师行筹画，军书告谕，皆出于崇韬，继岌承命而已。
现代文：其中招抚安置，官吏补充任命，行军筹划，军书通告，都出自郭崇韬，李继岌只是顺承使命而已。
English: Among them, the recruitment and placement of officials, the appointment of additional officials, the planning of the march, and the announcement of the military book are all from Guo Chongyao, and Li Jide is just following the mission.

古文：庄宗令内官李廷安、李从袭、吕知柔为都统府纪纲，见崇韬幕府繁重，将吏辐辏，降人争先赂遗，都统府唯大将省谒，牙门索然，由是大为诟耻。
现代文：庄宗令内官李廷安、李从袭、吕知柔为都统府纪纲，看见郭崇韬幕府事务繁多，将吏聚集，投降的人争先贿赂送礼，而都统府只有大将进见，牙门冷清，因此很觉得耻辱。
English: Zhuangzong ordered the inner officials Li Ting'an, Li Cong'a, and Lv Zhirou to be the disciplinary program of the capital city. Seeing Guo Chongyi's many affairs of the shogunate, he gathered officials, and those who surrendered competed to bribe and give gifts. However, only the general of the capital city had foresight and was cold-hearted, so he felt very humiliated.

古文：及六军使王宗弼归款，行赂先招讨府。王衍以成都降，崇韬居王宗弼之第。宗弼选王衍之妓妾珍玩以奉崇韬，求为蜀帅，崇韬许之。
现代文：到六军使王宗弼归顺时，先行贿给招讨府，王衍献成都投降，郭崇韬住在王宗弼府第，王宗弼选王衍的妓妾珍宝献给郭崇韬，请求他当蜀帅，郭崇韬答应了。
English: When the six armies made Wang Zongya surrender, they first bribed Zhaotongfu, Wang Yan offered Chengdu to surrender, Guo Chongya lived in Wang Zongya's house, Wang Zongya selected Wang Yan's prostitute concubine precious treasure to offer to Guo Chongya, and asked him to be Shushu, Guo Chongya agreed.

古文：魏王曰： 此吾家之物，焉用献为！ 
现代文：王宗弼又和郭崇韬之子郭廷诲合谋，令蜀人上书见魏王，请奏郭崇韬为蜀帅。
English: Wang Zongyao also conspired with Guo Tingyao, the son of Guo Chongyao, to have the Shu people write to the Wei king, asking him to appoint Guo Chongyao as Shu commander.

古文：魏王入城，翼日，数其不忠之罪，并其子斩之于市。
现代文：李继岌看了蜀人上书后对郭崇韬说 ：皇上倚重侍中犹如宰相，怎么肯把元老丢弃在蛮夷之地，何况我更不敢有这打算。 
English: After Li Jizhong saw Shu's letter, he said to Guo Chongyao: "The emperor relies heavily on his attendants, just like the prime minister. How could he abandon the elder statesman in the wilderness, and what's more, I dare not have such a plan."

古文：李从袭等谓继岌曰： 郭公收蜀部人情，意在难测，王宜自备。 
现代文：李从袭等对李继岌说： 郭公收买蜀部人心，意图难测，王最好要防备。 
English: Li Conghai and others said to Li Jizhe: Guo Gong has bought the hearts of the Shu people. His intentions are hard to predict. Wang had better be on guard.

古文：由是两相猜察。
现代文：因此两家互相猜疑。
English: As a result, the two companies are suspicious of each other.

古文：庄宗令中官向延嗣赍诏至蜀，促班师，诏使至，崇韬不郊迎，延嗣愤愤。
现代文：庄宗令中官向延嗣带诏书到蜀，催促回师，诏使到时，郭崇韬不到郊外迎接，向延嗣愤愤不平。
English: Zhuang Zong ordered the middle officer to take the imperial rescript to Yan Zi to Shu and urge him to return. When the imperial rescript arrived, Guo Chongyao did not go to the suburbs to meet him, and was angry with Yan Zi.

古文：从袭谓之曰： 魏王，贵太子也，主上万福，郭公专弄威柄，旁若无人。
现代文：李从袭对他说： 魏王是贵太子，皇上万般喜爱，郭公专弄权柄，旁若无人。
English: Li Congyi said to him: Wei Wang is a noble prince, the emperor loves him very much, Guo Gong is a power-hungry person, no one likes him.

古文：昨令蜀人请己为帅，郭廷诲拥徒出入，贵拟王者，所与狎游，无非军中骁果，蜀中凶豪，昼夜妓乐欢宴，指天画地，父子如此，可见其心。
现代文：昨令蜀人请求任他为帅，郭廷诲进出前呼后拥，尊贵如同王者，在一起游玩的，都是军中勇将，蜀中凶豪，昼夜妓乐欢宴，指天划地，父子这样做可见其心。
English: Yesterday, the people of Shu asked him to be their champion. Guo Tingyi called them forward and backward, and the dignitaries were like kings. Those who played together were the brave generals in the army, the fierce heroes in Shu, and the day and night whore music and feasting, pointing to the heavens and the earth. The father and son could see their hearts in doing so.

古文：今诸军将校，无非郭氏之党，魏王悬军孤弱，一朝班师，必恐纷乱，吾属莫知暴骨之所！ 
现代文：现在各军将校，没有不是郭氏一党的，魏王架空，远征在外，孤单势弱，一旦回师，必致变乱，我们的尸骨将不知抛撒何处了！ 
English: At present, there is no general officer in the army who is not a member of the Guo clan. The Wei king is in the air, away on an expedition, alone and weak. Once he returns to his division, there will be chaos, and our bones will be scattered everywhere!

古文：因相向垂涕。
现代文：因而相对垂泪。
English: Hence the relative tears.

古文：延嗣使还具奏，皇后泣告庄宗，乞保全继岌。
现代文：向延嗣使命完成回宫报告，皇后哭着告诉庄宗，请求保全李继岌。
English: After reporting to Yan Zi that he had completed his mission and returned to the palace, the empress cried and told Zhuang Zong, requesting the preservation of Li Jizhe.

古文：庄宗复阅蜀簿曰： 人言蜀中珠玉金银，不知其数，何如是之微也！ 
现代文：庄宗再看蜀地账簿说 ：人们说蜀中珠玉金银不计其数，怎么如此之少？ 
English: Zhuang Zong then looked at the account book of Shu and said: People say that there are countless jewels, gold and silver in Shu, how can there be so few?

古文：延嗣奏曰： 臣问蜀人，知蜀中宝货皆入崇韬之门，言崇韬得金万两，银四十万，名马千匹，王衍爱妓六十，乐工百，犀玉带百。
现代文：向延嗣说： 我问蜀人，知道蜀中宝货全进入郭崇韬门下，传说郭崇韬获得黄金万两，银四十万，名马千匹，王衍爱妓六十，乐工上百，犀玉带上百。
English: Xiang Yanji said, "I asked the people of Shu and learned that the treasures of Shu all went to Guo Chongyi. Legend has it that Guo Chongyi obtained 10,000 taels of gold, 400,000 taels of silver, 1,000 famous horses, 60 prostitutes for Wang Yan, hundreds of musicians, and hundreds of jade necklaces.

古文：廷诲自有金银十万两，犀玉带五十，艺色绝妓七十，乐工七十，他财称是。魏王府，蜀人赂不过遣匹马而已。 
现代文：郭廷诲自己有金银十万两，犀玉带五十，艺色绝等的娼妓七十，乐工七十，还有其他财物，魏王府中，蜀人送礼只不过几匹马而已。 
English: Guo Tingyi himself had 100,000 taels of gold and silver, 50 jade belts, 70 prostitutes of the highest caliber, 70 musicians, and other property. In the Wei royal court, the Shu people sent only a few horses as gifts.

古文：庄宗初闻崇韬欲留蜀，心已不平，又闻全有蜀之妓乐珍玩，怒见颜色。
现代文：庄宗起初听说郭崇韬想留在蜀地，心中已不高兴，又听说他占有全部蜀地妓乐珍玩，怒形于色。
English: At first, Zhuangzong was not happy to hear that Guo Chongyao wanted to stay in Shudi. He was also angry to hear that he owned all the Shudi prostitutes.

古文：即令中官马彦珪驰入蜀视崇韬去就，如班师则已，如实迟留，则与继岌图之。
现代文：立即下令中官马彦王圭奔马到蜀地观察郭崇韬的行动，如回师就算了，如确实迟留蜀地，就和李继岌想办法对付他。
English: He immediately ordered Lieutenant Colonel Ma Yan Wang Gui to rush to Shudi to observe Guo Chongyi's actions. If Guo Chongyi returned to Shudi, he would be forgiven. If he did indeed stay in Shudi, he and Li Jie would have to find a way to deal with him.

古文：彦珪见皇后曰： 祸机之发，间不容发，何能数千里外复禀圣旨哉！ 
现代文：马彦王圭见皇后说： 祸乱一发生就十分紧急，哪里还能数千里外再传圣旨呢！ 
English: On seeing the empress, Ma Yan Wang Gui said: "Once the calamity occurs, it is very urgent. Where else can the sacred will be transmitted thousands of miles away?

古文：皇后再言之，庄宗曰： 未知事之实否，讵可便令果决？ 
现代文：皇后再对庄宗说此事，庄宗说： 不知道事情是否属实，岂可就下令处死？ 
English: The empress then told Zhuangzong about the matter. Zhuangzong said, "If you don't know if it's true, can you just order the death penalty?"

古文：皇后乃自为教与继岌，令杀崇韬。
现代文：皇后便自作主张传令给李继岌，要他杀郭崇韬。
English: The empress then sent a self-written order to Li Jizhe, asking him to kill Guo Chongyi.

古文：时蜀土初平，山林多盗，孟知祥未至，崇韬令任圜、张筠分道招抚，虑师还后，部曲不宁，故归期稍缓。
现代文：此时蜀地刚平定，山林间多有盗贼，孟知祥又没到，郭崇韬令任圜、张筠分路招抚，担心回师后，地方部队不能安宁，所以归期稍微延缓。
English: At this time, Shudi had just been pacified, there were many thieves in the mountains and forests, Meng Zhixiang did not arrive, Guo Chongyi ordered Ren Yao and Zhang Ye to go their separate ways, fearing that after returning to the division, the local troops would not be calm, so the return date was slightly delayed.

古文：四年正月六日，马彦珪至军，决取十二日发成都赴阙，令任圜权知留事，以俟知祥。
现代文：同光四年正月六日，马彦王圭到军中，决定在十二日从成都出发回师京城，令任圜临时掌管留守事务，等候孟知祥。
English: On the 6th day of the 1st month of the same year, Ma Yan Wang Gui went to the army and decided to leave Chengdu on the 12th day to return to the capital city of Shijiazhuang, and ordered Ren Yu to temporarily take charge of the affairs while he was away and wait for Meng Zhixiang.

古文：诸军部署已定，彦珪出皇后教以示继岌，继岌曰： 大军将发，他无衅端，安得为此负心事！
现代文：各军部署已定，马彦王圭拿出皇后命令给李继岌看，李继岌说： 大军即将出发，他又没起事端，怎么能做这负心事！
English: The deployment of each army has been decided, Ma Yan Wang Gui took out the queen's order and showed it to Li Jizhe. Li Jizhe said: The great army is about to set off, he has not caused any trouble, how can he do this negative thing!

古文：公辈勿复言。 
现代文：你们不要再说这种话。 
English: Don't you ever say that again.

古文：从袭等泣曰： 圣上既有口敕，王若不行，苟中途事泄，为患转深。 
现代文：李从袭等人哭着说 ：皇上既然有口令，王如不下手，假使中途事情泄露，造成的祸害更深。 
English: Li Conghai and the others cried and said, "Since the emperor has given the order, if the king does not take action, if the matter is leaked in the middle, the harm caused will be even deeper."

古文：继岌曰： 上无诏书，徒以皇后教令，安得杀招讨使！ 
现代文：李继岌说 ：皇上没有诏书，只凭皇后敕令，怎么能杀招讨使！ 
English: Li Jizhe said: The emperor has no imperial edict, only by the queen's edict, how can he kill the envoy!

古文：从袭等巧造事端以间之，继岌既英断，僶俛从之。
现代文：李从袭等人设计制造事端加以离间，李继岌没有英明果断之才，只得勉力从之。
English: Li Conghai and others designed and fabricated incidents to sow discord, but Li Jizhe did not have the ability to be wise and decisive, so he had to follow them.

古文：诘旦，从袭以继岌之命召崇韬计事，继岌登楼避之，崇韬入，左右楇杀之。
现代文：天亮时，李从袭以李继岌的命令召郭崇韬来商讨事情，李继岌上楼避开，郭崇韬进来，左右的人用乱棒打死了他。
English: At dawn, Li Zongqi summoned Guo Chongyao to discuss the matter with the order of Li Jide, Li Jide went upstairs to avoid, Guo Chongyao came in, and the people around him killed him with a random stick.

古文：崇韬有子五人，廷信、廷诲随父死于蜀，廷说诛于洛阳，廷让诛于魏州，廷议诛于太原，家产籍没。
现代文：郭崇韬有五个儿子，郭廷信、郭廷诲和父亲一起死在蜀地，郭廷说在洛阳被杀，郭廷让在魏州被杀，郭廷议在太原被杀，家产没收。
English: Guo Chongyao had five sons, Guo Tingxin, Guo Tingyu and his father died together in Shu, Guo Tingxin said he was killed in Luoyang, Guo Tingzhan was killed in Weizhou, Guo Tingli was killed in Taiyuan, and the family property was confiscated.

古文：明宗即位，诏令归葬，仍赐太原旧宅。
现代文：明宗即位后，下诏令归葬，又赐给太原旧宅。
English: After Emperor Mingzong ascended the throne, he issued an imperial edict to be buried, and also gave Taiyuan's old house to the emperor.

古文：延诲、廷让各有幼子一人，姻族保之获免，崇韬妻周氏，携养于太原。
现代文：郭廷诲、郭廷让各有一名幼子，被亲戚保护免遭杀害，郭崇韬妻周氏，把他们带到太原抚养。
English: Guo Tingyao and Guo Tingzang each had a young son, who was protected from being killed by relatives, and Guo Chongzhuo's wife, Zhou, brought them to Taiyuan to raise them.

古文：崇韬服勤尽节，佐佑王家，草昧艰难，功无与比，西平巴蜀，宣暢皇威，身死之日，夷夏冤之。
现代文：郭崇韬服事勤恳，尽节尽忠以辅佐李氏王朝，创业艰难，功劳盖世，西平巴蜀，宣扬皇威，死的时候，中外都认为他冤枉。
English: Guo Chongyong served diligently and devotedly to assist the Li dynasty, starting a business was difficult, his achievements were recognized by the world, Xi Pingba Shu, promoted the imperial authority, and when he died, both at home and abroad thought that he was wronged.

古文：然议者以崇韬功烈虽多，事权太重，不能处身量力，而听小人误计，欲取泰山之安，如急行避迹，其祸愈速。
现代文：然而有议论认为郭崇韬功劳虽多，掌权太大，不能身处重位量力行事，却听凭小人算计，想获取泰山似的安稳，而又急忙想退隐，祸害来得更快。
English: However, some people argue that although Guo Chongzhen has made a lot of merit, his power is too great to be able to act as he sees fit when he is in a high position, but he listens to the villain's calculation, wants to obtain stability like Mount Tai, but hastily wants to retire, and the disaster comes faster.

古文：性复刚戾，遇事便发，既不知前代之成败，又未体当时之物情，以天下为己任，孟浪之甚也。
现代文：性格又刚强暴烈，遇事便发脾气，既不知道前代的成败事例，又没能详察当前的人心，以管理天下为自己的重任，实在是太鲁莽了。
English: His character is also strong and violent, and he loses his temper in times of trouble. He does not know the success or failure cases of the previous generation, nor has he been able to scrutinize the current human heart. It is really too reckless to take the management of the world as his own responsibility.

古文：及权倾四海，车骑盈门，士人谄奉，渐别流品。
现代文：等到权力越来越大，车骑停满家门，士人谄媚趋奉，渐渐又分别门第流品。
English: Wait until the power is getting bigger and bigger, the car and bicycle are parked all over the house, the scholar is charming, and gradually they are separated.

古文：同列豆卢革谓崇韬曰： 汾阳王代北人，徙家华阴，侍中世在雁门，得非祖德欤？ 
现代文：同事豆卢革对郭崇韬说 ：汾阳王郭子仪是代北人，迁徙到华阴，侍中您世代在雁门，是不是和他同宗呢？ 
English: Colleague Doulu Ge said to Guo Chongyao: Guo Ziyi, the King of Shenyang, was a representative of the North, migrated to Huayin, and your generation of attendants was in the Wild Goose Gate, is it the same family as him?

古文：崇韬应曰： 经乱失谱牒，先人尝云去汾阳王四世。 
现代文：郭崇韬答道 ：经过战乱家谱已失散，先人常说离汾阳王有四代。 
English: Guo Chongyao replied: After the war, the family tree has been dispersed, and the ancestors often said that there were four generations from the King of Shenyang.

古文：革曰： 故祖德也。 
现代文：豆卢革说 ：正是世代有德！ 
English: Doulu Ge said: It is the generation that has virtue!

古文：因是旌别流品，援引薄徒，委之心腹；佐命勋旧，一切鄙弃。
现代文：因此便分别亲疏远近，提拔轻薄之徒，视为心腹，而鄙弃过去有功勋的旧臣。
English: As a result, they alienated relatives and friends, promoted frivolous people, regarded them as confidants, and despised former ministers who had meritorious deeds in the past.

古文：旧僚有干进者，崇韬谓之曰： 公虽代邸之旧，然家无门阀，深知公才技，不敢骤进者，虑名流嗤余故也。 
现代文：以前的部下有向他求官的，郭崇韬说 ：你虽然是代州官府旧部，然而出身不是高贵门户，我深知你的才能，但不敢立即提拔你，因为怕名流笑话我。 
English: Former subordinates have asked him for a position, Guo Chonglu said: Although you are the old department of the Daizhou government, you are not from a noble family. I am well aware of your talent, but I dare not promote you immediately, for fear of celebrities laughing at me.

古文：及征蜀之行，于兴平拜尚父子仪之墓。
现代文：到征伐蜀地时，在兴平拜谒尚父郭子仪之墓。
English: When he went to conquer Shu, he visited the tomb of his father Guo Ziyi in Xingping.

古文：尝从容白继岌曰： 蜀平之后，王为太子，待千秋万岁，神器在手，宜尽去宦官，优礼士族，不唯疏斥阉寺，骟马不可复乘。 
现代文：曾闲谈中对李继岌说： 蜀地平定以后，王是太子，等到皇上过世，太子即位，应该除去所有宦官，优待礼遇士族，不仅疏远排斥宦官，连骟马也不可以再骑用了。 
English: He once said to Li Jizhe in a casual conversation: After Shu was settled, the king was the crown prince. When the emperor died and the crown prince ascended to the throne, all eunuchs should be removed, and the eunuchs should be treated with preferential treatment. Not only should the eunuchs be alienated and excluded, but even the horses should no longer be ridden.

古文：内则伶官巷伯，怒目切齿；外则旧僚宿将，戟手痛心。
现代文：宫内的伶官宦官，对他怒目切齿；朝外的旧官宿将，对他痛心疾首。
English: The eunuchs in the imperial court glowered at him; the former officials outside the imperial court shook their heads at him.

古文：掇其族灭之祸，有自来矣。
现代文：造成他遭受灭族之祸，是有来由的。
English: There was a reason why he was subjected to the scourge of genocide.

古文：复以诸子骄纵不法，既定蜀川，辇运珍货，实于洛阳之第，籍没之日，泥封尚湿。
现代文：再加上几个儿子骄纵不守法，平定蜀川后，用车子运珍宝，充实洛阳自家府第，没收之日，珍宝上的封泥还是湿的。
English: In addition, a few sons were arrogant and did not abide by the law. After the Shu River was pacified, they used cars to transport treasures to enrich their own homes in Luoyang. On the day of confiscation, the sealing mud on the treasures was still wet.

古文：虽庄宗季年为群小所惑，致功臣不保其终，亦崇韬自贻其灾祸也。
现代文：虽说是庄宗末年为小人迷惑，致使功臣不能保其善终，但也是郭崇韬自己招来的灾祸。
English: Although it is said that the last years of Zhuangzong were confused by villains, resulting in the hero not being able to ensure his good end, it is also a disaster caused by Guo Chongyu himself.

