古文：梗阳人有狱，将不胜，请纳赂于魏献之，献子将许之。
现代文：有个梗阳人与别人打官司，眼看就要败讼，于是就向魏献子纳贿托情，魏献子打算答应下来。
English: There was a young man who was involved in a lawsuit with someone else. He was about to lose the case, so he offered Wei Xianzi a bribe. Wei Xianzi agreed.

古文：阎没谓叔宽曰： 与子谏乎！
现代文：他的下属阎没对叔宽说： 我与你一同去劝谏吧！
English: His subordinate Yan didn't say to Uncle Guang: Let me go with you to persuade him!

古文：吾主以不贿闻于诸侯，今以梗阳之贿殃之，不可。 
现代文：我们的主人一向以不受贿赂闻名于诸侯，现在因为梗阳人行贿而损害了名声，那是万万不可以的。 
English: Our master has always been famous among princes for not accepting bribes, but now he has damaged his reputation by accepting bribes from adulterers. That is absolutely unacceptable.

古文：二人朝，而不退。
现代文：两人朝见魏献子之后，留在那里不走。
English: After the two of them saw Wei Xianzi in the morning, they stayed there and did not leave.

古文：献子将食，问谁于庭，曰： 阎明、叔褒在。 
现代文：魏献子将要吃饭了，问谁还在庭院里，侍从回答说： 阎明、叔褒在。 
English: Wei Xianzi was about to eat, and asked who was still in the courtyard. The servant replied, "Yanming and Shubo are here."

古文：召之，使佐食。
现代文：魏献子叫他俩进来，让他们陪自己一起用膳。
English: Wei Xianzi called them both in and asked them to have dinner with him.

古文：比已食，三叹。
现代文：两人在吃饭之间，先后叹息了三次。
English: Between meals, the two men sighed three times.

古文：既饱，献子问焉，曰： 人有言曰： 唯食可以忘忧。 
现代文：吃完后，魏献子问起这件事，说： 人们常说： 只有吃东西可以忘记忧愁。 
English: After eating, Wei Xianzi asked about this matter and said: People often say: You can only forget sadness by eating.

古文：吾子一食之间而三叹，何也？ 
现代文：你们在吃一顿饭的时间里叹息了三次，是什么原因呢？ 
English: Why do you sigh three times during a meal?

古文：同辞对曰： 吾小人也，贪。
现代文：两人异口同声地答道： 我们都是小人，贪心不足。
English: They both replied in unison, "We are all villains, lacking in greed."

古文：馈之始至，惧其不足，故叹。
现代文：食物刚送上来的时候，担心不够吃，因此叹息。
English: When the food was just brought up, I was worried that I wouldn't have enough to eat, so I sighed.

古文：中食而自咎也，曰：岂主之食而有不足？
现代文：吃到一半，不禁私下责备自己：主人赐给我们食物，哪有不够吃的道理呢？
English: Halfway through the meal, I couldn't help but privately reproach myself: Our host gave us food, so how can there be a reason for not having enough to eat?

古文：是以再叹。
现代文：因此再次叹息。
English: So I sigh again.

古文：主之既已食，愿以小人之腹，为君子之心，属餍而已，是以三叹。 献子曰： 善。 
现代文：等到您吃完了，我们想到，但愿我们小人的胃口，也像君子的心思一样，只要吃饱也就知足了。因此第三次叹息。 魏献子说： 讲得好。 
English: When you had finished eating, we thought, "If only the appetite of us little people were like the heart of a gentleman, we would be satisfied as long as we had enough to eat," so we sighed for the third time. Wei Xianzi said, "Well said."

古文：乃辞梗阳人。
现代文：于是拒绝了梗阳人的贿赂。
English: So he refused the bribe from the adulterer.

