古文：凡与敌相攻，若雨雪不止，视敌不备，可潜兵击之，其势可破。
现代文：凡是与敌人相攻战，如果遇到下雪不止的天气，侦察确悉敌人麻痹不备时，就可以派兵偷袭。这样，敌人的阵势便可被我军打破。
English: Whenever we are engaged in a battle with the enemy, if we encounter snowy weather and the reconnaissance confirms that the enemy is paralyzed, we can send troops to make a surprise attack. In this way, the enemy's position can be broken by our army.

古文：法曰： 攻其所不戒。 
现代文：诚如兵法所说： 进攻敌人要乘其疏于防备之时。 
English: As stated in the Art of War: Attack the enemy when he is unprepared.

古文：唐遣唐邓节度使李愬讨吴元济。
现代文：唐宪宗元和十二年十月，朝廷派遣唐邓节度使李愬率军讨伐割据淮西称雄的吴元济。
English: Tang Xian Zongyuan and in October of the 12th year, the imperial court sent Tang Deng Jiedu to make Li Jun lead the army to fight and cut off Wu Yuanji, who was known as a hero in Huaixi.

古文：先是愬遣将将二千余骑巡逻，遇贼将丁士良，与战，擒之。
现代文：刚开始时，李愬派部将率千余骑兵巡逻，在途中遇到敌将丁士良所部，双方交战，丁士良被擒获。
English: At the beginning, the Li Yu faction led more than a thousand cavalry patrols. On the way, they encountered the enemy general Ting Shiliang's detachment, the two sides fought, and Ting Shiliang was captured.

古文：士良，元济骁将，常为东边患。众请刳其心，愬许之。
现代文：丁士良是吴元济的一员猛将，经常率兵东进为患，众将恨他而请求剜他的心，李愬同意了。
English: Ding Shiliang was one of Wu Yuanji's fierce generals. He often led his soldiers to the east. People hated him and asked to break his heart. Li Yao agreed.

古文：士良无惧色，遂命解其缚，士良请尽死以报其德，愬署为捉生将。
现代文：但丁士良面对死亡却毫无惧色，李愬为其精神所感便叫人给他松绑不杀。丁士良因此而表示愿以尽死效力来报答李愬的活命之恩。李愬则任命他为捉生将。
English: However, Dante Shiliang was fearless in the face of death. Li Qiye was moved by his spirit and told people to let him go and not to kill him. As a result, Dante Shiliang expressed his willingness to repay Li Qiye's gift of life with his death. Li Qiye appointed him as a lifeguard.

古文：士良言于愬曰： 吴秀琳据文城栅，为贼左臂，官军不敢近者，有陈光洽为之主谋也。
现代文：丁士良向李愬建议说： 吴秀琳现在据守文城栅，他所处的地位如同吴元济的一只左臂；朝廷军队之所以不敢靠近他那里，是因为有陈光洽为他出谋画策。
English: Ding Shiliang suggested to Li Qian that: Wu Xiulin is now holding the Wenzhong Gate, and his position is like a left arm of Wu Yuanji; the reason why the imperial army does not dare to approach him is because Chen Guangchao is scheming for him.

古文：然光洽勇而轻，好自出战，请为擒之，则秀琳自降矣。 
现代文：然而，陈光洽却是勇敢而轻率之将，喜欢孤军出战。请允许我前去把他抓来，这样，吴秀琳将会不战而自动投降。 
English: However, Chen Guangchao is a brave and reckless general who likes to fight alone. Please allow me to go ahead and capture him, so that Wu Xiulin will surrender without a fight.

古文：铁文及光洽被执，秀琳果降。
现代文：等到铁文和陈光洽被丁士良活捉以后，吴秀琳果然投降了唐军。
English: After Tiewen and Chen Guangchao were captured alive by Ding Shiliang, Wu Xiulin surrendered to the Tang army.

古文：愬延秀琳问计，秀琳答曰： 将军必欲破贼，非得李佑不可。 
现代文：李愬请来吴秀琳问以征服吴元济的计策，秀琳回答说： 将军如果一定要击破吴元济的话，非得李祏不可。 
English: Li Qiye invited Wu Xiulin to inquire about the strategy for conquering Wu Yuanji. Xiulin replied: If the general must defeat Wu Yuanji, Li Qiye is indispensable.

古文：佑，贼健将也，有勇略，守兴桥栅，每战常轻官军，时率众割麦于野。
现代文：李祏，是吴元济的一员健将，既勇敢又有谋略，他长期守卫在兴桥栅，每次作战总是轻视官军。
English: Li Qian, a member of Wu Yuanji, was both brave and strategic. He guarded the Xing Bridge for a long time, and always despised the government army in every battle.

古文：愬遣史用诚以壮士三百伏林中，用诚诱而擒之以归。
现代文：此时李祏正率兵于田野里收割小麦，李愬于是派遣部将史用诚带领三百名壮士埋伏在附近树林中，乘其不备，把李祏活捉而带回军营。
English: At this time, Li Gan was leading his soldiers to harvest wheat in the fields. Li Gan then dispatched his general Shi Yecheng to lead three hundred strong men to lie in ambush in the nearby woods. Taking advantage of the situation, he captured Li Gan alive and brought him back to the military camp.

古文：将士争请杀之，愬独待以客礼，时复与语，诸将不悦。
现代文：唐军将士都争着请求把李祏杀掉，但唯有李愬以待客之礼款待他，并经常与他交谈，其他将领对此都很不高兴。
English: The Tang generals were all clamoring to kill Li Xi, but only Li Xi treated him as a guest and often talked with him. The other generals were not happy about this.

古文：愬力不能独完，乃械送佑之京师。先密奏曰： 若杀佑，则无成功。 
现代文：李愬考虑到单凭个人力量无法保全李祏，于是便给李愬戴上刑具派人押送京师长安，此前先秘密写好奏表呈送宪宗说： 如果杀了李祏，平定淮西就无法获得成功。 
English: Li Yu considered that he could not save Li Yu solely by his own strength, so he put a torture device on Li Yu and sent someone to escort the Beijing division to Chang'an. After that, he secretly wrote a report form and sent it to Xianzong, saying: If you kill Li Yu, you will not succeed in pacifying Huaixi.

古文：诏以佑还愬，愬见大喜，署为兵马使，令佩刀出入帐中。
现代文：宪宗阅表后，立即下令将李祏送还李愬。李愬见李祏已经安全回来非常高兴，立即任命他为兵马使，并且准令他可以佩戴腰刀进出自己军帐。
English: After reading the form, Emperor Xianzong immediately ordered Li Xi to be sent back to Li Jun. Li Jun was very happy to see that Li Xi had returned safely. He immediately appointed him as an envoy, and allowed him to wear a waist knife to enter and exit his military account.

古文：始定破蔡之计，令佑以突将三千为前锋，李忠义副之；愬与监军将三千为中军；李进诚以三千殿为后军，令曰： 但东行！ 
现代文：才正式制定了奇袭蔡州的战略计划。于是，李愬命令李祏率领号称 突将 的敢死队三千人为前锋，李忠义为副将；李愬与监军率领三千人为中军主力；李进诚率领三千人为后军担任后卫。
English: It was only then that the strategic plan for the surprise attack on Caizhou was officially formulated. Therefore, Li Yu ordered Li Yu to lead a death squad of three thousand, known as the "surge," to be the forwards, Li Zhongyi to be the vice-general; Li Yu and the supervisors to lead three thousand to be the main force of the Chinese army; and Li Jincheng to lead three thousand to be the rear guard.

古文：六十里，夜，至张柴村，尽杀其戍卒。
现代文：部署停当以后，李愬下达命令说： 只管向东前进！ 
English: After the deployment was halted, Li Yao issued an order saying: Just advance eastward!

古文：敕士少休，令士卒食干粮，整羁靮、鞍铠、弓刃。
现代文：唐军东行六十里时天已黑了，进至张柴村，将该地守军全部歼灭，然后命令部队就地稍事休息，吃些干粮，整理好马笼头、马缰绳、马鞍子以及铠甲、弓箭，兵刃等武器装备。
English: When the Tang army was sixty miles east, it was already dark. They marched into Zhangchai village, annihilated all the defenders there, and then ordered the troops to take a short break on the spot, eat some dry food, and tidy up the horse's head, bridle, saddle, armor, bow and arrow, blade and other weapons and equipment.

古文：时大雪，旗旆折裂，人马冻死者相望，人人自谓必死。
现代文：当时，天正下着鹅毛大雪，凛冽刺骨的寒风刮得军旗破碎，冻死的人马随处可见，唐军人人都认为此番必死无疑。
English: At that time, the sky was covered with heavy snow, the biting cold wind blew the army flag to pieces, and frozen dead people could be seen everywhere. The Tang soldiers all thought that this was certain death.

古文：诸校请所之，愬曰： 入蔡州，取吴元济。 
现代文：这时，众将校请示下一步行军方向，李愬明确而坚定地说： 到蔡州去取吴元济的首级。 
English: At this time, the officers asked for the next direction of march, and Li Lan said clearly and firmly: Go to Caizhou to get the head of Wu Yuanji.

古文：众皆失色，相泣曰： 果落李佑奸计。 
现代文：众人听后惊惧失色，相对哭泣说： 咱们果然中了李祏的奸计了。 
English: After hearing this, everyone was shocked and lost their composure, crying to each other and saying, "We've really fallen for Li Lan's trick.

古文：然畏愬，莫敢违。
现代文：可是，由于大家都敬畏李愬，所以没有敢于违抗命令的。
English: However, since everyone was in awe of Li Qiye, no one dared to disobey the order.

古文：夜半，雪愈盛。
现代文：到了半夜时候，雪下得更大。
English: By midnight, the snow was falling harder.

古文：分轻兵断贼朗山之援，又断洄曲及诸道桥梁。
现代文：李愬这时一面派遣一支轻装部队南下切断朗山敌人的增援道路，一面出动部分兵力北上卡住洄曲和其它通往蔡州道路上的桥梁。
English: At this time, while dispatching a light-armed force to the south to cut off the enemy's reinforcement road from Langshan, Li Qian sent part of the force to the north to block the bridge on the road to Zouqu and other bridges leading to Caizhou.

古文：行七十里至悬瓠城。
现代文：唐军自张柴村折向东南，又走了七十里，进至蔡州城下。
English: The Tang army turned southeast from Zhangchai Village and walked another seventy miles to enter the city of Caizhou.

古文：城旁皆鹅鹜池，愬令击之以乱声。
现代文：该城旁边都是饲养鹅鸭的池塘，李愬叫士兵击打池中处于静止状态的鹅鸭，让它们发出叫声以掩盖唐军行进声响。
English: The city was surrounded by ponds where geese and ducks were kept. Li Yao ordered the soldiers to beat the geese and ducks that were at rest in the ponds and make them squawk to cover up the sound of the Tang army marching.

古文：初，蔡人拒命，官军凡三十余年不能至其城下，故蔡人皆不为备。
现代文：最初，从吴少诚雄据蔡州对抗朝廷命令以来，唐军已有三十多年不能进至蔡州城下，所以蔡州人一向不加防备。
English: In the beginning, since Wu Shao Chengxiong took the initiative to fight against the imperial court in Caizhou, the Tang army had not been able to enter the city of Caizhou for more than 30 years, so the people of Caizhou had always been unprepared.

古文：佑等攀城先登，众从之。杀守门者，而留击柝者，纳其众城中。
现代文：李祐等率军首先登上城墙，部队紧随其后，杀死了守卫城门的敌兵，只留下打更人继续敲梆报更，然后打开城门，唐军全部进入城中。
English: Li Yu and his army were the first to climb the city wall, and the troops followed closely behind, killing the enemy soldiers guarding the city gate, leaving only the guards to continue knocking on the gate, and then open the gate, and the Tang army all entered the city.

古文：鸡鸣雪止，遂执元济，槛送京师，而淮西悉平矣。
现代文：到鸡鸣天亮之时，雪已不下了，终于活捉了吴元济，并用囚车押往京师长安。淮西地区完全平定。
English: By the time of the dawn of the rooster's crowing, the snow had not fallen, and Wu Yuanji was finally captured alive, and pushed to the Beijing Division Chang'an with a prisoner car. The Huaixi region was completely pacified.

