古文：治獄治獄，能以書從其言，毋治諒而得人請為上；治諒為下；有恐為敗。
现代文：审理案件，能根据记录的口供，进行追查，不用拷打而察得犯人的真情，是最好的，施行拷打，不好，恐吓犯人，是失败。
English: It is best to try cases and conduct investigations on the basis of recorded confessions, and it is best to find out the true feelings of the criminal without torture. It is not good to torture, and it is a failure to intimidate the criminal.

古文：訊獄凡訊獄，必先盡聽其言而書之，各展其辭，雖智其訑，勿庸輒詰。其辭已盡書而毋解，乃以詰者詰之。詰之有盡聽書其解辭，有視其它毋解者以復詰之。詰之極而數訑，更言不服，其律當治諒者，乃治諒。治諒之必書曰：爰書：以某數更言，毋解辭，治訊某。
现代文：凡审讯案件，必须先听完口供并加以记录，使受讯者各自陈述，虽然明知是欺骗，也不要马上诘问，供辞已记录完毕而问题没有交代清楚，于是对应加诘问的问题进行诘问，诘问的时候，又把其辩解的话记录下来，再看看还有没有其他没有清楚的问题，继续进行诘问，诘问到犯人辞穷，多次的欺骗，还改变口供拒不服罪，依法应当拷打的，就施行拷打，拷打犯人必须记下，爰书：因某多次改变口供，无从辩解，对其拷打讯问。谨告某县负责人：男子某被审讯，供称： 是士伍，住在某里 。
English: In all cases of interrogation, it is necessary to first listen to the confession and record it, let the interrogated person make their own statement, although knowing that it is deception, do not immediately interrogate, the confession has been recorded and the question has not been clearly explained, then interrogate the question that should be interrogated. When interrogating, record the words of his defense, and then see if there are any other unclear questions. Continue the interrogation, interrogate until the prisoner quits, repeatedly cheat, and change the confession to refuse to admit guilt. If torture should be carried out according to law, torture should be carried out. Torture the prisoner must be recorded.

古文：有鞫敢告某縣主：男子某有鞫，辭曰：可定名事里，所坐論云可，可罪赦，或覆問毋有，遣識者以律封守，當騰，騰皆為報，敢告主。
现代文：请确定其姓名、身份、籍贯、曾犯有何罪，判过什么刑罚或经赦免，再查问还有什么别的问题，要派了解情况的人依法查封看守，确实写录，将所录全部回报，谨告负责人。
English: Please confirm their names, identities, places of origin, what crimes they have committed, what punishments they have been sentenced to or pardoned, and then ask any other questions. Send someone who knows the situation to seize the guards in accordance with the law, make sure to make a record, return all the records, and report to the person in charge.

古文：封守鄉某爰書：以某縣丞某書，封有鞫者某里士五甲家室、妻、子、臣妾、衣器、畜產。
现代文：乡某爰书：根据某县县丞某的文书，查封被审讯人某里士伍甲的房屋、妻、子、奴婢、衣物、畜牲。
English: According to a document issued by a county magistrate, the house, wife, son, slave, clothing and livestock of the person under investigation were sealed.

古文：甲室、人：一宇二內，各有戶，內室皆瓦蓋，木大具，門桑十木。妻曰某，亡，不會封。花板子大女子某，未有夫。子小男子某，高六尺五寸。臣某，妾小女子某。牡犬一。幾訊典某某、甲伍公士某某：某等皆言曰：即以甲封付某等，與里人更守之，侍令。
现代文：甲的房屋、家人计有：堂屋一间、卧室二间，都有门，房屋都用瓦盖、木构齐备，门前有桑树十株，妻名某，已逃亡，查封时不在场，女儿大女子某，没有丈夫，儿子小男子某，身高门尺五寸，奴某，婢小女子某，公狗一只，查问里典某某，甲的四邻公干某某： 甲是否还有其他应加查封而某等脱漏未加登记，如果有，将是有罪的。 
English: A's houses and family members include: a hall, two bedrooms, all have doors, the houses are all made of tiles and wood, there are ten mulberry trees in front of the door, his wife, surnamed A, has fled, was not present at the time of seizure, his daughter, eldest daughter, has no husband, his son, youngest son, height of the door is five inches, slave, maid, little girl, male dog, inquired Li Dian, A's four neighbors, Gong Gan, A: Is there anything else that should be sealed and some leakage is not registered, if there is, it will be guilty.

古文：覆敢告某縣主：男子某辭曰：可定名事里，所坐論云可，可罪赦，或覆問毋有，幾籍亡，亡及逋事各幾可日，遣識者當騰，騰皆為報，敢告主。
现代文：某等都说： 甲应查封的都是这里，没有其他应封的了。 
English: Some people said: A should seal everything here, there is nothing else that should be sealed.

古文：自告□□□爰書：某里公士甲自告曰：即令令史某往執丙。
现代文：当即将所封交付某等，要他们和同里的人轮流看守，等候命令。谨告某县负责人：男子某供称， 是士伍，住在某县某里，逃亡。 
English: When they are about to hand over the seal to a certain person, they and the people in the same village should take turns to guard and wait for orders.I would like to inform the person in charge of a certain county: A man confessed that he was Shifu, lived in a certain county, and fled.

古文：□捕爰書：男子甲縛詣男子丙，辭曰：□□爰書：某里士五甲、乙縛詣男子丙、丁及新錢百一十錢、容二合，告曰：
现代文：请确定其姓名、身份、籍贯、曾犯有何罪，判过什么刑罚或经赦免，再查问还有什么问题，有几次在簿籍中记录逃亡，逃亡和逋事各多少天，派遣了解情况的人确实记录，将所录全部回报，谨告负责人。爱书：某里公士甲自首说： 于五月末和同住一里的士伍丙盗窃了某里士伍丁一千钱，没有其他过犯，前来自首，并告发丙。 
English: Please confirm his name, identity, origin, what crime he has committed, what sentence he has been sentenced to or pardoned, and then ask what other questions. Several times he recorded escape in the book, how many days of escape and anecdote, send a person who understands the situation to make a true record, return all the records, and report to the person in charge. Love letter: A certain Li Gongshi A surrendered and said: At the end of May, he and Wu B, who lived together for a mile, stole a thousand dollars from a certain Li Wuding. There was no other offense. He surrendered and reported to C.

古文：馬爰書：市南街亭求才某里曰甲縛詣男子丙，及馬一匹，騅牝右剽；緹覆衣，帛裏莽緣領褎，及履，告曰：爭牛爰書：某里公士甲、士五乙詣牛一，黑牝曼有角，告曰：即令令史某齒牛，牛六歲矣。
现代文：当即命令史某前往将丙逮捕。爰书：男子甲捆送男子丙，供称， 甲本为士伍，住在某里，本年四月盗牛，逃亡，丙犯有杀伤人罪而逃亡，昨日白昼甲发现丙隐藏在市庸里面，于是将他捕获，前来自首，甲没有其他过犯。 爰书：某里士伍甲、乙捆送男子丙、丁及新钱一百一十个、钱范两套，控告说： 丙私铸这些钱，丁帮助他铸造。
English: He immediately ordered Shi to go and arrest C. Annotation: Man A bundled up and sent to Man C, who confessed that A was a soldier and lived in a certain village. In April of this year, he stole a cow and fled. C committed the crime of killing and fleeing. Yesterday in the daytime, A found C hiding in the market, so he captured him. He had previously turned himself in. A had no other offenses. Annotation: A certain soldier in the ranks of A and B bundled up and sent to Man C and D one hundred and ten new coins and two sets of money standards. The complaint said: C minted the money himself, and D helped him to mint

古文：群盗爰書：某亭校長甲、求才某里曰乙、丙縛詣男子丁，斬首一，具弩二、矢廿，告曰：訊丁，辭曰：?
现代文：甲乙将他们捕获并搜查其家，得到这里钱和钱范，一并送到。 爰书：市南街亭的求盗某里人甲捆送男子丙，还有马一匹，系苍白杂色的母马，右眼有病，丹色帛面夹皮，有帛里，领和袖有宽大的绿边，还有鞋子一双，控告说： 丙盗窃了这匹马和衣物，今天在亭旁发现，于是将丙捕获送到。 
English: A and B captured them and searched their homes, got the money and money van here, and sent them together. 書:市南街亭の求盗某里人甲捆送男子丙,还有馬一馬,系苍白杂色母馬,右眼病,丹色面夹皮,有里,領領和袖有宽大的绿邊,还有鞋 guda,起诉说: C stole this horse and clothes, found it today next to the pavilion, and then captured and sent C.

古文：診首毋診身可。奪首軍戲某爰書：某里士五甲縛詣男子丙，及斬首一，男子丁與偕。
现代文：爰书：某里公士甲和士伍乙一起带来牛一头、系黑色母牛，套有长套绳，有角，报告说： 这是甲、乙的牛，丢失了，甲、乙认为是自己的，一起带来争讼。 
English: An imperial edict: A certain nobleman A and a soldier B together brought a cow, a black cow, with a long rope and horns, and reported: This is the cow of A and B, it is lost, A and B think it is their own, together they bring a dispute.

古文：甲告曰：診首，已診丁，亦診其痍狀。
现代文：当即命令史某检查牛的牙齿，牛已六岁。
English: He immediately ordered Shi to check the cow's teeth. The cow was six years old.

古文：□□□□某爰書：某里士五甲、公士鄭才某里曰丙共詣斬首一，各告曰：診首□髮，其右角痏一所，袤五寸，深到骨，類劍；其頭所不齊然。
现代文：某亭校长甲、求盗者某里人乙、丙送男子丁、首级一个，具弩两具，箭二十支，报告说： 丁和这个被斩首人结伙抢劫，昨日白昼甲率领乙等巡逻到来某山，发现丁和这个被斩首的人，即行逮捕，这些弩箭是丁和被斩首的人，被斩首人用这弩箭乙，于是用剑斩取他的首级，因山险不能把他的躯体运出山来。 
English: The headmaster of a certain pavilion, A, and the suitors of a certain village, B and C, sent a man, Ding, with one head, two beaks, and twenty arrows, and reported: Ding and this beheaded man robbed in a gang. Yesterday in the daytime, A led B and other patrols to a certain mountain, and found Ding and this beheaded man, and immediately arrested them. These crossbows were Ding and the beheaded man. The beheaded man used this crossbow to attack B, so he cut off his head with a sword. Because of the mountain danger, his body could not be transported out of the mountain.

古文：以書讂首曰：告臣爰書：某里士五甲縛詣男子丙，告曰：?訊丙，辭曰：令令史某診丙，不病。令少內某、佐某以市正賈賈丙丞某前，丙中人，賈若干錢。
现代文：讯问丁，供称： 是士伍，住在某里，这个首级是某里士伍戊，和丁一起于某时与某里士伍已、庚、辛、结伙抢劫某里公士的某家，盗钱一万，逃亡，已等到前已被逮捕，丁和戊逃亡，四处漂流，无处寄居，昨日白昼在某山，甲等来捕丁、戊，戊用弩射乙，于是被杀，取了首级，丁、戊都没有其他过犯。 
English: Interrogating Ding, he confessed: "I am Shifu, I live in a certain village, this head is a certain Li Shifu, together with Ding, at a certain time, with a certain Li Shifu, I robbed a certain house of a certain Li Gongzhi, I stole ten thousand, I fled, I have been arrested before, Ding and E fled, I drifted around, I had nowhere to live, yesterday afternoon in a certain mountain, A and others came to catch Ding, E, E shot B with a crossbow, so I was killed, I took the head, Ding and E have no other offenses.

古文：丞某告某鄉主；男子丙有鞫，辭曰：其定名事里，所坐論云可，可罪赦，或覆問毋有，甲賞身免丙復臣之不？
现代文：可以只检验首级而不验躯体。军戏负责人某爰书：某士伍甲捆送男子丙，及首级一个，男子丁同来，甲报告说： 甲是尉某的私吏，参加邢丘城的战斗，今天在军戏驻地道路上看见，丙故意用剑砍伤丁，抢夺这个首级，于是将丙捕获送到。 
English: The person in charge of the military drama, a crane, wrote: A certain person, a soldier, A, bundled a man, C, and a head, a man, Ding, came along. A reported: A is a private officer of a lieutenant, participating in the battle of Shuangqiu City. Today, I saw him on the road of the military drama residence. C deliberately cut and injured Ding with a sword to snatch this head, and then captured C.

古文：以律封守之，到以書言。
现代文：检验首级，随即验视丁，并检验丁受伤情况。
English: Check the head, then check the eyesight and check the injuries.

古文：黥妾爰書：某里公士甲縛詣大女子丙，告曰：?訊丙，辭曰：?
现代文：某爰书：某里士伍甲、公士郑县某里人丙，一起送到首级一个，分别报告说： 甲、丙在邢丘城作战，这是甲、丙获得的首级，甲、丙互相争夺，把首级送到。 
English: An imperial edict: A certain number of soldiers under the command of A, and a certain number of people from Zheng County under the command of C, were sent together to the first level, and reported separately: A and C fought in Shuangqiu City. This is the first level obtained by A and C. A and C competed with each other to send the first level.

古文：丞某告某鄉主：某里五大夫乙家吏甲詣乙妾丙，曰：其問如言不然？
现代文：检验首级，小发，左额角上有剑伤一处，长五寸，深到骨，像是剑的痕迹，其被割断的颈部短而不整齐，用文书征求辩认首级说， 如有掉队迟到的，派来军戏驻地辩认。 
English: Examining the head, small hair, there is a sword wound on the left corner of the forehead, five inches long, deep to the bone, like the marks of a sword, its cut neck is short and irregular, using a document to solicit identification, the head said, If there is a latecomer, send to the military theater for identification.

古文：定名事里，所坐論云可，或覆問毋有，以書言。
现代文：爰书：某里士伍甲捆送男子丙，控告说： 丙是甲的奴隶，骄横强悍，不在田里干活，不听从甲的使唤，请求卖给官府，送去充当城旦，请官府给予价钱。 
English: According to the indictment, a certain rich man A tied up and sent a man C. The indictment said: C is A's slave, arrogant and strong, does not work in the fields, does not obey A's call, requests to be sold to the government, sent to serve as a city official, and asks the government to give a price.

古文：子爰書：某里士五甲告曰：告法丘主：士五咸陽才某里曰丙，坐父甲謁鋈其足，蜀邊縣，令終身毋得去所論之，丙如甲告，以律包。
现代文：审讯丙，供称： 是甲的奴隶，确系强悍，不听从甲，甲没有解职除过丙的奴隶身份，丙没有病，没有其他过犯。 命令吏某检验丙，没有病，命少内某、佐某按市场标准价格在县丞某前将丙买下，丙系常人，身价若干钱。
English: Interrogating C, he confessed: He is A's slave, he is really tough, he does not obey A, A did not dismiss him except for C's slave status, C is not sick, there is no other offense, ordered an official to inspect C, he is not sick, he is short of life, and he and Sa bought C in front of the county magistrate according to the market standard price, C is an ordinary person, worth a few money.

古文：今鋈丙足，令吏徒將傳及恒書一封詣令史，可受代吏徒，以縣次傳詣成都，成都上恒書太守處，以律食。
现代文：县丞某告某乡负责人：男子丙被审讯，供称： 是某里士伍甲的奴隶，请确定其姓名、籍贯、曾犯何罪，判过什么刑罚或经赦免，再查问还有什么问题，甲是否曾经解除过丙的奴隶身份，然后又去奴役他，请依法加以查封看守，本文书到后用书回报。
English: A county magistrate complained to the person in charge of a township: A man, C, was interrogated and confessed: He is a slave of a certain person, A. Please confirm his name, origin, what crime he has committed, what punishment he has been sentenced to or pardoned, and then ask what other questions, whether A has ever removed C's slave status and then enslaved him again, please seal it according to law, and return this document after arrival.

古文：法丘已傳，為報，敢告主。告子爰書：某里士五甲告曰：即令令史己往執。
现代文：爰书：某里公士甲捆送大女子丙，控告说： 本人是某里五大夫乙的家吏，丙是乙的婢女，乙派甲来说：丙强悍，请求对丙施加黥劓。 审讯丙，供称是乙的婢女，没有其他过犯。
English: An official document: A certain nobleman A tied up and sent a large woman C, the complaint said: I am a family member of a certain village of five husbands B, C is B's handmaid, B sent A to say: C is strong, request to impose discipline on C. Interrogation C, confessed to be B's handmaid, no other offense.

古文：令史己爰書：與牢隸臣某執丙，得某室。
现代文：县丞某告其乡负责人：某里五大夫乙的家吏甲送来乙的婢女说： 乙命甲来请求对丙施加黥劓。 
English: A county magistrate complained to the person in charge of his township: A family official of a certain village of five husbands B, A, sent B's handmaid to say: B has come to request A to impose discipline on C.

古文：丞某訊丙，辭曰：
现代文：请询问是否和所说的一样？
English: May I ask if it is as stated?

古文：爰書：某里典甲詣里人士五丙，告曰：令醫丁診之，丁言曰：
现代文：确定其姓名、身份、籍贯、曾犯有何罪，再察问还有什么问题，用书面回报。爰书：某士伍甲控告说： 请求将本人亲生子同里士伍丙断足，流放到蜀郡，叫他终生不得离开流放地点，谨告。 
English: Determine his name, identity, origin, and what crimes he has committed, and then ask what other questions, and return them in writing. 書:某士伍甲控告说: Request that his own son be cut off from the rich man Wu Bing and exiled to Shu County, so that he may not leave the place of exile for the rest of his life.

古文：賊死爰書：某亭求甲告曰：即令令史某往診。令史某爰書：與牢隸臣某即甲診，男子死在某室南首，正偃。
现代文：谨告废丘负责人：士伍咸阳某里人丙，因其父甲请求将他断足，流放到蜀郡，叫他终生不得离流放地点而定罪，按甲所告将丙流放，并依法命其家属同往，现将丙断足，命吏和徒隶携带通行凭证及恒书一封送交令吏，请更换吏和徒隶，逐县解方面军到成都，到成都将恒书上交太守，依法给予饮食，解到废丘，应回报，谨告负责人。
English: Please inform the person in charge of the waste mound: Shiwu Xianyang, a certain person named C, because of his father A's request to cut off his feet, was exiled to Shu County, so that he could not leave the place of exile for the rest of his life and was convicted. According to A's complaint, C was exiled, and his family members were ordered to go with him according to law. Now, C has been cut off his feet, and the officer and the disciple are carrying the pass certificate and a letter to the officer. Please change the officer and the disciple. Go to Chengdu to solve the front army by county. When you get to Chengdu

古文：某頭左角刃痏一所，北二所，皆從頭北，袤各四寸，相耎，廣各一寸，皆中類斧，腦角出皆血出，柀污頭北及地，皆不可為廣袤；它完。
现代文：爰书：某里士伍甲控告说： 甲的亲生子同里士伍丙不孝，请求处以死刑，谨告。 当即命令史已前往捉拿，命史已爰书：本人和牢隶臣某捉丙，在某家拿获，县丞审讯丙，供称：是甲的亲生子，确实对甲不孝，没有其他过犯。爰书：某里的里典甲送来该里士伍丙，报告说： 怀疑是麻疯病，将他送到。 讯问丙，供称： 在三岁时患有疮伤，眉毛脱落，不知道是什以病，没有其他过犯。 
English: An official complaint was filed against a certain Li Shiguang, saying that A's own son was not filial to Li Shiguang, requesting the death penalty and warning him. An order was immediately issued to arrest him, and his life history was recorded: I and my subordinate, a certain Li Shiguang, were arrested at a certain house, and the county magistrate interrogated C, who confessed that he was A's own son, that he was indeed not filial to A, and that he had committed no other crimes. An official complaint was filed against a certain Li Shiguang, requesting the death penalty and warning him. An order was immediately issued to arrest him, and his life history

古文：衣布禪、襦各一。其襦北直痏者，以刃夬二所，痏。
现代文：命医生丁进行检验，丁报告说： 丙没有眉毛，鼻梁断绝，鼻腔已坏，探刺到他的鼻孔，不打喷，臂肘和膝部两脚不能正常行走，有溃烂一处，手上没有汗毛，叫他呼喊，其声嘶哑，是麻风病。 
English: The doctor ordered Ding to carry out the examination, and Ding reported: C has no eyebrows, the bridge of his nose is broken, the nasal cavity is bad, the probe has reached his nostrils, he cannot walk normally without spraying, there is an ulcer on his elbow and knee, there is no hair on his hands, he shouts, his voice is hoarse, it is leprosy.

古文：襦北及中衽□污血。男子西有秦綦履一兩，去男子其一奇六步，一十步；以履履男子，利焉。
现代文：爰书：某亭的求盗甲报告说： 在辖地内某处发现被杀死的梳髻无名男子一人，前来报告。 
English: An anonymous man came to report that a dead cardinal was found somewhere in the jurisdiction.

古文：地堅，不可智賊。男子丁壯，析色，長七尺一寸，髮長二尺；其腹有久故瘢二所。男子死所到某亭百步，到某里士五丙田舍二百步。令甲以布貍男子某所，侍令。以襦、履詣廷。訊甲亭人及丙，智男子可日死，聞寇者不？
现代文：当即命令史某前往检验，令史某爰书：本人和牢隶臣某随甲前住检验，男子尸体在某家以南，仰身，某头上左额角有刃伤一处，背部有刃伤两处，都是纵向的，长各四寸，互相沾渍，宽各一寸，伤口都是中间陷下，像斧砍的痕迹，脑部、额角和眼眶下都出血，污染了头部，背部和地面，都不能量出长宽，其它部位完好无伤，身穿单布短衣和裙各一件，其短衣背部伤口相对处，有两处被刃砍破，与伤口位置符合，短衣背部和衣襟都染有污血，男子系壮年，皮色白，身长七尺一寸，发长二尺，腹部有灸疗旧疤两处，男子尸体距某亭一百步，距某里士伍丙的农舍二百步，命甲用布裙将男子掩埋在某处，等候命令，把短衣和履送到交县廷，讯问甲同亭人员和丙是否知道男子死在哪一天，有没有听到呼喊有贼的声音？
English: He immediately ordered Shi to go for an examination, and ordered Shi to write: I and my cellmate stayed with A for an examination. The man's body was south of a certain house. He was lying on his back. There was a knife wound on the left front corner of his head, and two knife wounds on his back. They were all longitudinal, four inches long, stained each other, and one inch wide. The wounds were all sunken in the middle, like axe marks. The brain, forehead and under the eyelids were bleeding, polluting the head, back and ground. They could not measure the length and width. The other parts were intact. He was wearing a single-

古文：經死爰書：某里典甲曰：里人士五丙經死其室，不智故，來告。
现代文：爰书：某里的里典甲说： 本里人士伍丙在家中吊死，不知道是什么原因，前来报告。 
English: Annotation: A villager named Li Dianjia said: A villager named Wu Bing hanged himself at home. I don't know what the reason was, so I came to report it.

古文：即令令史某往診。令史某爰書：與牢隸臣某即甲、丙妻、女診丙。丙死縣其室東內中北廦權，南鄉，以枲索大如大指，旋通繫頸，旋終在項。索上終權，再周結索，餘末袤二尺。頭上去權二尺，足不傅地二寸，頭北傅廦，舌出齊唇吻，下遺矢弱，污兩卻。解索，其口鼻氣出渭然。索鬱，不周項二寸。它度毋兵刃木索。
现代文：当即命令史某前往检验，令史某爰书：本人和牢隶臣某随甲同丙的妻和女儿对丙进行检验，丙的尸体悬挂在其家东侧卧室北墙的房梁上，用拇指粗的麻绳做成绳套，束在头上，绳套的系束处在头后部，绳在房檐上，绕檐两周后打结，留下了绳头长二尺，尸体的头上距房檐二尺，脚离地面二寸，头和背贴墙，舌吐出与嘴唇齐，流出屎溺，沾污了两脚，解开绳索，尸体的口鼻有气排出，象叹息的样子，绳索在尸体上留下淤血的痕迹，只差头后两寸不到一圈，其他部位经检查没有兵刃、木棒？绳索的痕迹。
English: Immediately ordered Shi to go to the inspection, and ordered Shi to write: I and the wife and daughter of a prison subordinate accompanied by A and C to inspect C. C's body was hung on the beam of the north wall of the bedroom on the east side of his home, with a thumb-thick hemp rope made into a rope cover, tied to the head, the rope cover's binding was at the back of the head, the rope was on the eaves, and after two weeks of winding, it was knotted, leaving the rope head two feet long, the head of the corpse was two feet from the eaves, the feet were two inches from the ground, the head and back were

古文：權大一圍，袤三尺，西去堪二尺，堪上可道終索。地堅，不可智人。索袤丈。衣絡禪襦、各一，踐□。即令甲、女載丙死詣廷。
现代文：房椽粗一围，长三尺，西距地上土台二尺，在土台上面可以悬挂绳索，地面坚硬，不能查知人的遗迹，绳长一丈，身穿络制的短衣和裙各一件，赤足，当即命甲和丙的女儿把丙的尸体运送县廷。
English: The coffin was thick and three feet long, with a two-foot platform on the ground to the west. A rope could be hung from the platform. The ground was hard, so no human remains could be found. The rope was a foot long. She was wearing a braided short dress and a skirt, and was barefoot. Immediately, the daughters of the deceased A and C transported C's body to the county court.

古文：診必先謹審視其，當獨抵死所，即視索終，終所黨有通，乃視舌出不出，頭足去終所及地各幾可，遺矢弱不？
现代文：检验时必须首先仔细观察痕迹，应独自到达尸体所在地点，观察束绳地方，束绳处如有绳套的痕迹，然后看舌是否吐出，头脚离束绳处及地面各有多远，有没有流出屎尿？
English: During the inspection, you must first carefully observe the traces. You should go to the place where the body is located alone, observe the place of the rope, if there are traces of the rope at the rope, then see if the tongue is spit out, how far are the head and feet from the rope and the ground, is there any excretion of feces and urine?

古文：乃解索，視口鼻渭然不？及視索鬱之狀。道索終所試脫頭；能脫，乃□其衣，盡視其身、頭髮中及篡。舌不出，口鼻不渭然，索不鬱，索終急不能脫，□死難審。節死久，口鼻或不能渭然者。自殺者必先有故，問其同居，以合其故。
现代文：然后解下绳索，看口鼻内有无叹气的样子，并看绳索痕迹瘀血的情况，试验尸体的头能否从束在头上的绳中脱出，如能脱出，便剥下衣服，彻底验看全身，头发内以及会阴部，舌不吐出，口鼻有没有叹气的样子，绳的痕迹不淤血，绳索紧系颈上不能把头脱出，就不能确定是自缢，如果死去已久，口鼻也有不能像叹气的样子的，自杀的人必须先有原因，要询问他的同居，使他们回答其原因。
English: Then untie the ropes, see if there is any sighing in the mouth and nose, and see if the rope traces are bloody. Test whether the head of the corpse can escape from the rope tied to the head. If it can escape, then peel off the clothes, thoroughly examine the whole body, in the hair and in the perineum. The tongue does not spit out. Is there any sighing in the mouth and nose? The rope traces are not congealed. If the rope is tightly tied around the neck and the head cannot escape, it cannot be determined to be self-strangulation. If it has been dead for a long time, the mouth and nose also have the appearance

古文：穴爰書：某里士五乙告曰：?即令令史某往診，求其。令史某爰書：與鄉□□隸臣某即乙、典丁診乙房內。房內在其大內東，比大內，南鄉有戶。
现代文：爰书：某里士伍乙报告说， 昨晚乙将本人的绵裾一件收在自己的居室侧房中，关好门，乙自己和妻丙夜间睡在正房，今早起来关门取衣，有人已在侧房挖洞直通房中，裾衣丢失，不知挖洞盗窍的是谁，有几个人，没有丢失其他东西，前来报告。 
English: Anecdote: A certain Mr. Wu B reported that last night B put away a piece of his petticoat in the side room of his bedroom and closed the door, B himself and his wife C slept in the main room at night, this morning they got up and closed the door to take clothes, someone had dug a hole in the side room, the petticoat was lost, I don't know who dug the hole and stole it, several people, without losing anything else, came to report.

古文：內後有小堂，內中央有新穴，穴內中。穴下齊小堂，上高二尺三寸，下廣二尺五寸，上如豬竇狀。其所以埱者類旁鑿，廣□寸大半寸。
现代文：当即命令史某前往查看，搜捕窃犯。令史爰书：本人和乡某，牢隶臣随乙及里典丁查看乙的侧房，侧房在其正房东南，与正房相连，朝南有门，房后有小堂，墙的中央有新挖的洞，洞通房中。洞下面与小堂地面齐，上高二尺三寸，下宽二五尺五寸，上面像猪洞形状，用来挖洞的工具像是宽刃的凿，凿的痕迹宽二又三分之二寸。
English: He immediately ordered Shi Mou to go there to investigate and search for the thief. Order of Shi Mou: I and Xiang Mou, the prisoner followed B and Li Dian Ding to inspect B's side room. The side room is southeast of the main room and is connected to the main room. There is a door facing south. There is a small hall behind the room. There is a newly dug hole in the center of the wall. The hole is in the middle of the room. The bottom of the hole is level with the ground of the small hall. The height is two feet and three inches, and the width is two feet and five inches. The top is shaped like a pig's hole. The tool used to

古文：其穴壤在小堂上，直穴播壤，柀入內中。內中及穴中外壤上有、手，、手各六所。外壤秦綦履四所，袤尺二寸。
现代文：挖下的土在小堂上，散布的土都对看洞，是由这里钻进房中的，房中和洞里外土上有膝部和手的印痕各六处，外面土上有秦綦履的印痕四处，长二尺二寸。
English: The excavated soil is on the small hall, and the scattered soil is all facing the hole, and it is from here that it drills into the room. There are six knee and hand marks on the soil in the room and outside the hole, and there are four footprints on the soil outside, which are two feet and two inches long.

古文：其前稠綦袤四寸，其中央稀者五寸，其稠者三寸。
现代文：履印前部花纹密，长四寸，中部花纹稀，长五寸，跟部花纹密，长三寸。
English: The front part of the tread is densely patterned, four inches long, the middle part is sparsely patterned, five inches long, and the heel part is densely patterned, three inches long.

古文：其履類故履。
现代文：履印像是旧履。
English: The treads are like old treads.

古文：內北有垣，垣高七尺，垣北即巷。垣北去小堂北唇丈，垣東去內五步，其上有新小壞，壞直中外，類足之之，皆不可為廣袤。小堂下及垣外地堅，不可。
现代文：房的北面有墙，墙高七尺，墙的北面就是街巷，北墙距小堂的北部边缘一丈，东墙距房五步的地方，墙上有不大的新缺口，缺口顺着内外的方向，好像人脚越墙的痕迹，都不能量定长宽，小堂下和墙外的地面坚硬，不能查知人的遗迹。
English: There is a wall on the north side of the room, the wall is seven feet high, the north side of the wall is the street, the north wall is one floor away from the northern edge of the small hall, the east wall is five steps away from the room, there is a small new gap on the wall, the gap follows the inside and outside direction, like the traces of human feet crossing the wall, can not measure the length and width, the ground under the small hall and outside the wall is hard, can not find out the remains of people.

古文：不智人數及之所。
现代文：不知道窃犯人数和到什么地方去了。
English: I don't know how many thieves there were or where they went.

古文：內中有竹，在內東北，東、北去廦各四尺，高一尺。乙曰：?訊乙、丙，皆言曰：?訊丁、乙伍人士五□，曰：以此直衣賈。
现代文：甲到家就患腹痛，昨夜胎儿流产。
English: A came home with abdominal pain and had a miscarriage last night.

古文：出子爰書：某里士五妻甲告曰：即令令史某往執丙。
现代文：现甲将胎儿包起，拿来自诉，并控告丙。 当即命令史某前往捉拿丙。
English: Now A wrapped up the fetus, took it to sue, and sued C. He immediately ordered Shi to go and arrest C.

古文：即診嬰兒男女、生髮及保之狀。
现代文：随即检验婴儿性别、头发的生长和胎衣的情况。
English: The baby's gender, hair growth and the condition of the placenta are then checked.

古文：有令隸妾數字者，診甲前血出及癰狀。
现代文：又命曾经多次生育的隶妾检验甲阴部的血和创伤情况。
English: He also ordered the concubine, who had given birth several times, to examine the blood and trauma in the pubic region.

古文：有訊甲室人甲到室居處及復痛子出狀。
现代文：再讯问甲的家属甲到家后生活和腹痛流产的情况。
English: They then questioned A's family members about A's home life and the circumstances of the miscarriage caused by abdominal pain.

古文：丞乙爰書：令令史某、隸臣某診甲所詣子，已前以布巾裹，如血狀，大如手，不可智子。
现代文：丞乙爰书：命令史某、隶臣某检验甲送来的胎儿，已先用布巾包裹，形如凝血，有从指到肘节长短，不能辨出是胎儿。
English: Zhao Yijun wrote: I ordered Shi and a subordinate to examine the fetus sent by A. It was wrapped in a cloth first, shaped like a blood clot, and had a length from the finger to the knuckle. It could not be identified as a fetus.

古文：即置盎水中榣之，血子。
现代文：当即放在一水盆里摇荡，凝血确系胎儿。
English: She was immediately placed in a basin of water and rocked. The blood clot was indeed a fetus.

古文：其頭、身、臂、手指、股以下到足、足指類人，而不可智目、耳、鼻、男女。
现代文：胎儿的头、身、臂、手指、大腿以下到脚、脚趾都已像人，但看不清眼睛、耳朵、鼻子和性别。
English: The fetus's head, body, arms, fingers, and thighs down to the feet and toes are already human-like, but the eyes, ears, nose, and gender are not clearly visible.

古文：出水中有血狀。
现代文：从水中取出，又成为凝血的形状。
English: Taken out of the water, it takes on the shape of a blood clot.

古文：其一式曰：令隸妾數字者某某診甲，皆言甲前旁有乾血，今尚血出而少，非朔事。
现代文：另一程式是：命曾多次生育的隶妾某某检验甲，都说甲阴部旁边有干血，现仍少量出血，并非月经。
English: Another formula is: the test A of the subordinate concubine who has given birth many times says that there is dry blood next to the genitals, and there is still a small amount of bleeding, but it is not menstruation.

古文：某賞懷子而變，其前及血出如甲□。
现代文：某人曾怀孕流产，其阴部及出血情况与甲相同。
English: A person had a miscarriage, and her vagina and bleeding were the same as A's.

古文：毒言爰書：某里公士甲等廿人詣里人士五丙，皆告曰：即疏書甲等名事關諜北。訊丙，辭曰：
现代文：里中如有祭祀，丙与同里的人和甲等聚会饮食，他们都不肯与丙共用饮食器具。甲等和同里弟兄以及其他认识丙的人，都不愿和丙一起饮食。丙并没有毒，没有其他过犯。 
English: If there was a religious service in the village, C would not share eating utensils with his fellow villagers and Class A members when they gathered to eat and drink. Class A members, his fellow villagers and other people who knew C would not eat and drink with him. C was not poisoned and had not committed any other crimes.

古文：奸爰書：某里士五甲詣男子乙、女子丙，告曰：乙、丙相與奸，自晝見某所，捕校上來詣之。
现代文：爰书：某里士伍甲送来男子乙、女子丙，报告说： 乙、丙通奸，昨日昼在某处被发现，将两个捕获并加木械，送到。 
English: An official document: A certain officer sent a man B and a woman C. The report said: B and C committed adultery. They were found yesterday afternoon in a certain place. The two were caught and brought to the police station.

古文：亡自出。鄉某爰書：男子甲自詣，辭曰：問之□名事定，以二月丙子將陽亡，三月中逋築宮廿日，四年三月丁未籍一亡五月十日，毋它坐，莫覆問。
现代文：乡某爰书：男子甲自行投到，供称： 是士伍，住在某里，于本年二月不知日期的一天逃亡，没有其他过犯，现来自首。 经讯问，其姓名、身份确实，于二月丙子日游荡逃亡，三月份逃避修筑宫室劳役二十天；四年三月丁未日簿籍记有他曾逃亡一次，共五个月零十天，没有其他过犯，无须再行查问。
English: Township official report: Man A voluntarily reported to the police station and confessed that: He was from Shifu, lived in a certain village, escaped on an unknown date in February of this year, committed no other offenses, and is now turning himself in. After interrogation, his name and identity are true, he wandered and escaped on February C day, and evaded labor service for 20 days in March to build a palace room; on March 4th, the day before Ting, the register recorded that he had once escaped, for a total of five months and ten days, there was no other offense, and there was no need for further investigation.

古文：以甲獻典乙相診，今令乙將之詣論，敢言之。
现代文：将甲送交里典乙验视，现命乙将甲押送论处，谨告。
English: I hereby inform you that A has been sent to the court for inspection by B, and B has now been ordered to send A for trial.

