古文：孔子在卫，冉求言于季孙曰： 国有圣人而不能用，欲以求治，是犹却步而欲求及前人，不可得已。
现代文：孔子在卫国的时候，冉求对季孙氏说： 国家有圣人却不任用，这样想治理好国家，就像倒着走而想追赶前面的人，是不可能达到的。
English: When Confucius was defending the country, Ran Kui said to the Ji Sun clan: The country has saints but does not appoint them. If you want to govern the country well in this way, it is like walking backwards and trying to catch up with the person in front. It is impossible to achieve.

古文：今孔子在卫，卫将用之。己有才而以资邻国，难以言智也，请以重币迎之。 
现代文：现在孔子在卫国，卫国将要任用他，我们自己有人才却去帮助邻国，难以说是明智之举。请您用丰厚的聘礼把他迎接回来。 
English: Now Confucius is in the Great Patriotic War, the Great Patriotic War is about to appoint him, and we have our own talented people to help the neighboring countries, which is hardly a wise move. Please welcome him back with a rich engagement gift.

古文：季孙以告哀公，公从之。
现代文：季孙氏把冉求的建议禀告了鲁哀公，鲁哀公听从了这一建议。
English: Ji Sun reported Ran Cuo's suggestion to Lu Aigong, and Lu Aigong heeded the suggestion.

古文：孔子既至，舍哀公馆焉。
现代文：孔子回到鲁国，住在鲁哀公招待客人的馆舍里。
English: Confucius returned to the State of Lu and lived in the guesthouse where Lord Lu invited guests.

古文：公自阼阶，孔子宾阶，升堂立侍。鲁哀公问于孔子曰： 夫子之服，其儒服与？ 
现代文：哀公从大堂东面的台阶走上来迎接孔子，孔子从大堂西面的台阶上来觐见哀公，然后到大堂里，孔子站着陪哀公说话。鲁哀公问： 先生，请问儒者的行为是什么样的呢？ 
English: Aiko came up from the steps on the east side of the lobby to meet Confucius. Confucius came up from the steps on the west side of the lobby to see Aiko. Then, in the lobby, Confucius stood with Aiko and spoke. Lu Aiko asked, "Sir, what is the behavior of Confucians like?"

古文：孔子对曰： 丘少居鲁，衣逢掖之衣，长居宋，冠章甫之冠。
现代文：孔子回答说： 粗略地讲讲，不能把儒者的行为讲完；如果详细地讲，讲到侍御的人侍奉以致疲倦也难以讲完。 孔子回答说： 我小时候住在鲁国，穿的是宽袖的衣服；长大后住在宋国，戴的是缁布做的礼冠。
English: Confucius replied, "Roughly speaking, it is impossible to describe the behavior of the Confucians; if you talk about it in detail, it is difficult to describe the attendants who serve so tired.Confucius replied, "When I was a child, I lived in the country of Lu and wore a dress with wide sleeves; when I grew up, I lived in the country of Song and wore a ceremonial crown made of embroidered cloth.

古文：丘闻之也：君子之学也博，其服也乡；丘不知儒服。 
现代文：我听说，君子学问要广博，穿衣服要入乡随俗。我不知道这是不是儒者的服装。 
English: I've heard that a gentleman should be well-educated and dress according to the local customs. I don't know if this is a Confucian costume.

古文：哀公命席。孔子侍曰： 儒有席上之珍以待聘，夙夜强学以待问，怀忠信以待举，力行以待取，其自立有如此者。
现代文：鲁哀公让人设席，孔子坐在旁侧陪侍，说： 儒者如同席上的珍品等待别人来采用，昼夜不停地学习等待别人来请教，心怀忠信等待别人举荐，努力做事等待别人录用。儒者自修立身就是这样的。 
English: Lu Aigong asked someone to set up a table, and Confucius sat next to him and accompanied him, saying: Confucians are like treasures on the table, waiting for others to adopt them, studying day and night without stopping, waiting for others to ask for advice, waiting for others to recommend them with loyalty, working hard and waiting for others to hire them. This is how Confucians cultivate themselves.

古文：儒有衣冠中，动作慎，其大让如慢，小让如伪，大则如威，小则如愧，其难进而易退也，粥粥若无能也。
现代文： 儒者的衣帽穿戴周正，行为从容谨慎，推让大事时好像很傲慢，推让小事时好像很虚伪。做大事时神态慎重像心怀畏惧，做小事时小心谨慎像不敢去做。难于进取而易于退让，柔弱谦恭像是很无能的样子。
English: Confucians dress modestly and behave cautiously, seeming arrogant when they concede big things, and seeming hypocritical when they concede small things. When they do big things, their cautious demeanor looks like they are afraid, and when they do small things, their cautious demeanor looks like they don't dare to do them. It is difficult to make progress and easy to concede, and being meek and humble looks like a sign of incompetence.

古文：其容貌有如此者。
现代文：儒者的容貌就是这样的。 
English: This is what a Confucian looks like.

古文：儒有居处齐难，其坐起恭敬，言必先信，行必中正，道涂不争险易之利，冬夏不争阴阳之和，爱其死以有待也，养其身以有为也。
现代文： 儒者的起居庄重谨慎，坐立行走恭敬，言语讲求诚信，行为必定中正。在道路上不与行人争夺平坦之路，冬夏之季不与人争冬暖夏凉的地方。不轻易赴死以等待值得牺牲生命的事情，修身养性以期待有所作为。
English: Confucians are solemn and prudent in their living, sit up and walk respectfully, speak with sincerity, and must be upright in their behavior. They do not compete with pedestrians for a smooth road on the road, and do not compete with people for warm and cool places in winter and summer. They do not easily go to death to wait for things worth sacrificing their lives, and cultivate themselves to expect something to be done.

古文：其备豫有如此者。
现代文：儒者就是这样为未来做准备的。
English: This is how Confucians prepare for the future.

古文：儒有不宝金玉，而忠信以为宝；不祈土地，立义以为土地；不祈多积，多文以为富。
现代文： 儒者宝贵的不是金玉而是忠诚信誉，不谋求占有土地而把仁义当做土地，不求积蓄很多财富而把学问广博作为财富。
English: For Confucians, it is not gold that is precious, but loyalty and credibility. They do not seek to occupy land, but regard benevolence and righteousness as land. They do not seek to accumulate a lot of wealth, but regard broad knowledge as wealth.

古文：难得而易禄也，易禄而难畜也，非时不见，不亦难得乎？
现代文：儒者难以得到却容易供养，容易供养却难以留住。不到适当的时候不会出现，不是很难得吗？
English: Confucians are hard to get but easy to support, easy to support but hard to keep. They won't appear until the right time, aren't they hard to get?

古文：非义不合，不亦难畜乎？
现代文：不正义的事情就不合作，不是很难留住他们吗？
English: If they don't cooperate when things are unjust, won't it be hard to keep them?

古文：先劳而后禄，不亦易禄乎？
现代文：先效力而后才要俸禄，不是很容易供养吗？
English: Isn't it easier to support yourself if you have to work first and get paid later?

古文：其近人有如此者。
现代文：错话不会说第二次，对流言蜚语不追根问底。
English: They don't say the wrong thing twice, and they don't go to the bottom of gossip.

古文：儒有委之以货财，淹之以乐好，见利不亏其义；劫之以众，沮之以兵，见死不更其守；鸷虫攫搏不程勇者，引重鼎不程其力；往者不悔，来者不豫；过言不再，流言不极；不断其威，不习其谋。
现代文：时常保持威严，不学习什么权谋。
English: Maintain dignity at all times, and do not learn any stratagems.

古文：其特立有如此者。
现代文：儒者的特立独行就是这样的。
English: This is what makes Confucians unique.

古文： 儒有可亲而不可劫也；可近而不可迫也；可杀而不可辱也。
现代文： 儒者可以亲近而不可以胁迫，可以接近而不可以威逼，可以杀害而不可侮辱。
English: Confucians can be close but not coerce, can be close but not intimidate, can kill but not insult.

古文：其居处不淫，其饮食不溽；其过失可微辨而不可面数也。
现代文：他们的居处不奢侈，他们的饮食不丰厚，他们的过失可以委婉地指出不可以当面数落。
English: Their quarters are not luxurious, their food is not plentiful, and their faults can be gently pointed out rather than pointed out.

古文：其刚毅有如此者。
现代文：儒者的刚强坚毅就是这样的。
English: This is what the strong perseverance of Confucians is all about.

古文：儒有忠信以为甲胄，礼义以为干橹；戴仁而行，抱义而处，虽有暴政，不更其所。
现代文： 儒者以忠信作为铠甲，以礼仪作为盾牌，心中想着仁去行动，怀抱着义来居处，即使遇到暴政，也不改变操守。
English: Confucians use loyalty as armor and etiquette as a shield. They act with benevolence in mind and live with righteousness in their hearts. Even if they encounter tyranny, they will not change their ethics.

古文：其自立有如此者。
现代文：儒者的自立就是这样的。
English: This is what Confucian independence looks like.

古文：儒有一亩之宫，环堵之室，筚门圭窬，蓬户瓮牖；易衣而出，并日而食，上答之不敢以疑，上不答不敢以谄。
现代文： 儒者有一亩地的宅院，居住着一丈见方的房间，荆竹编的院门狭小如洞，用蓬草编作房门，用破瓮口作为窗框。外出时才换件遮体的衣服，一天的饭并为一顿吃。君上采纳他的建议，不敢产生怀疑；君上不采纳他的建议，也不敢谄媚求进。
English: Confucians have a courtyard of one mu of land, living in a room with a height of one meter. The courtyard door made of wicker is as narrow as a hole, the door is made of puff grass, and the broken lintel is used as a window frame. When they go out, they only change their clothes to cover their body, and they eat one day's meal for one meal. The prince takes his advice and does not dare to have doubts; if the prince does not take his advice, he does not dare to flatter.

古文：其仕有如此者。
现代文：儒者做官的原则就是这样的。
English: This is the principle of Confucian officials.

古文： 儒有今人与居，古人与稽；今世行之，后世以为楷；适弗逢世，上弗援，下弗推，谗谄之民有比党而危之者，身可危也，而志不可夺也，虽危起居，竟信其志，犹将不忘百姓之病也。
现代文： 儒者与今人一起居住，而以古人的道德标准要求自己；儒者今世的行为，可以作为后世的楷模。如果生不逢时，上面没人援引，下面没人推荐，进谗谄媚的人又合伙来陷害他，只可危害他的身体，而不可剥夺他的志向。虽然能危害他的生活起居，最终他还要施展自己的志向抱负，仍将不忘百姓的痛苦。
English: The Confucianist lives with the people of today and holds himself to the moral standards of the ancients; the behavior of the Confucianist in this world can serve as a model for future generations. If he is born at an inopportune time, if no one quotes him from above and no one recommends him from below, and if flattering people conspire to frame him, it can only endanger his body, but cannot deprive him of his aspirations. Although he can endanger his life and live, in the end he will still have to exert his own aspirations, and will still not forget the suffering of the people.

古文：其忧思有如此者。
现代文：儒者的忧思就是这样的。
English: This is how the Confucians feel.

古文：儒有博学而不穷，笃行而不倦；幽居而不淫，上通而不困；礼之以和为贵，忠信之美，优游之法，举贤而容众，毁方而瓦合。
现代文： 儒者广博地学习而无休止，专意实行而不倦怠，独处时不放纵自己，通达于上时不离道义。遵循以和为贵的原则，悠然自得而有节制。仰慕贤人而容纳众人，有时可削减自己的棱角而依随众人。
English: Confucians study widely and endlessly, practice diligently without tiring, do not indulge themselves when they are alone, and do not depart from morality when they reach the top. They follow the principle of valuing harmony, are self-indulgent and restrained. They admire the wise and accommodate everyone, and sometimes can cut their own corners and follow everyone.

古文：其宽裕有如此者。
现代文：儒者的宽容大度就是这样的。
English: Such is the tolerance and generosity of Confucians.

古文： 儒有内称不辟亲，外举不辟怨，程功积事，推贤而进达之，不望其报；君得其志，苟利国家，不求富贵。
现代文： 儒者举荐人才，对内不避亲属，对外不避有仇怨的人。
English: Confucians recommend talents, do not avoid relatives internally, and do not avoid people with grudges externally.

古文：其举贤援能有如此者。
现代文：度量功绩，积累事实，不谋求更高的禄位。
English: Measure merit, accumulate facts, and do not seek a higher position.

古文：儒有闻善以相告也，见善以相示也；爵位相先也，患难相死也；久相待也，远相致也。
现代文：推荐贤能而进达于上，不祈望他们的报答。国君满足了用贤的愿望，百姓依仗他的仁德。
English: Recommending the virtuous and reaching the top, without hoping for their reward. The ruler satisfied the desire of the virtuous, and the people relied on his benevolence.

古文：其任举有如此者。
现代文：只要有利于国家，不贪图个人的富贵。
English: As long as it is beneficial to the country, do not covet personal wealth.

古文：儒有澡身而浴德，陈言而伏，静而正之，上弗知也；粗而翘之，又不急为也；不临深而为高，不加少而为多；世治不轻，世乱不沮；同弗与，异弗非也。
现代文：不和志向相同的人结党，也不诋毁和自己政见不同的人。
English: They do not form parties with like-minded people, nor do they denigrate those whose political views differ from their own.

古文：其特立独行有如此者。
现代文：儒者的特立独行就是这样的。
English: This is what makes Confucians unique.

古文： 儒有上不臣天子，下不事诸侯；慎静而尚宽，强毅以与人，博学以知服；近文章砥厉廉隅；虽分国如锱铢，不臣不仕。
现代文： 儒者中有这样一类人，对上不做天子的臣下，对下不事奉诸侯，谨慎安静而崇尚宽厚，磨炼自己端方正直的品格。待人接物刚强坚毅，广博地学习而又知所当行。即使把国家分给他，他也看做锱铢小事，不肯做别人的臣下和官吏。
English: Among the Confucians, there is a type of person who does not treat his superiors as his vassals, does not serve the vassals as his subordinates, is cautious, quiet, and generous, and has honed his character to be honest. He is strong and firm in dealing with others, studies extensively, and knows what to do. Even if the country were given to him, he would regard it as a trivial matter, and would not want to be someone else's vassal and official.

古文：其规为有如此者。
现代文：儒者规范自己的行为就是这样的。
English: This is how Confucians regulate their behavior.

古文：儒有合志同方，营道同术；并立则乐，相下不厌；久不相见，闻流言不信；其行本方立义，同而进，不同而退。
现代文： 儒者交朋友，要志趣相合，方向一致，营求道艺，路数相同。地位相等都高兴，地位互有上下彼此也不厌弃。久不相见，听到对方的流言飞语绝不相信。志向相同就进一步交往，志向不同就退避疏远。
English: To make friends, Confucians should have the same interests, the same direction, the same pursuit of Taoism, and the same number of roads. They are happy to have the same status, and they are not disgusted with each other. They have not seen each other for a long time, and they never believe each other's rumors. If they have the same aspirations, they will further interact, and if they have different aspirations, they will avoid alienation.

古文：其交友有如此者。
现代文：儒者交朋友的态度就是这样的。
English: This is how Confucians make friends.

古文：温良者，仁之本也；敬慎者，仁之地也；宽裕者，仁之作也；孙接者，仁之能也；礼节者，仁之貌也；言谈者，仁之文也；歌乐者，仁之和也；分散者，仁之施也；儒皆兼此而有之，犹且不敢言仁也。
现代文： 温和善良是仁的根本，恭敬谨慎是仁的基础，宽宏大量是仁的开始，谦逊待人是仁的功能，礼节是仁的外表，言谈是仁的文采，歌舞音乐是仁的和谐，分散财物是仁的施与。儒者兼有这几种美德，还不敢说已经做到仁了。
English: Gentleness and kindness are the foundation of benevolence, respect and caution are the foundation of benevolence, magnanimity is the beginning of benevolence, humble treatment is the function of benevolence, etiquette is the appearance of benevolence, speech is the literary style of benevolence, song and dance music is the harmony of benevolence, and the distribution of wealth is the donation of benevolence. Confucians have both of these virtues and dare not say that they have achieved benevolence.

古文：其尊让有如此者。
现代文：儒者的恭敬谦让就是这样的。
English: This is what Confucianism's deference and modesty is all about.

古文：儒有不陨获于贫贱，不充诎于富贵，不慁君王，不累长上，不闵有司，故曰儒。
现代文： 儒者不因贫贱而灰心丧气，不因富贵而得意忘形。不玷辱君王，不拖累长上，不给有关官吏带来困扰，因此叫做儒。
English: Confucians are not discouraged because they are poor, nor are they elated because they are rich. They do not insult the king, do not drag their superiors, and do not bring trouble to the relevant officials. That is why they are called Confucians.

古文：今众人之命儒也妄，常以儒相诟病。 
现代文：现今人们对儒这个名称的理解是虚妄不实的，经常被人称作儒来相互讥讽。 
English: Nowadays, people's understanding of the name "Confucius" is false, and people often call each other "Confucius" to make fun of each other.

古文：孔子至舍，哀公馆之，闻此言也，言加信，行加义： 终没吾世，不敢以儒为戏。 
现代文：孔子从国外返回鲁国，鲁哀公在公馆里接见了他，鲁哀公听到孔子的这些话后，自己说话更加守信，行为更加严肃，说： 直到我死，再不敢拿儒者开玩笑了。 
English: When Confucius returned to Lu from abroad, Lu Ye Gong received him at his residence. After hearing these words from Confucius, Lu Ye Gong himself spoke more faithfully and behaved more seriously, saying: Until I die, I will not dare to make fun of Confucians.

