古文：万章曰： 尧以天下与舜，有诸？ 
现代文：万章问： 尧把天下交给舜，有这回事吗？ 
English: Wan Zhang asked, "Is there such a thing as 'handing over the whole world to you'?

古文：孟子曰： 否。
现代文：孟子说： 不。
English: Mencius said: No.

古文：天子不能以天下与人。 
现代文：天子不能把天下交给他人。 
English: The Son of God cannot hand over the kingdom to others.

古文： 然则舜有天下也，孰与之？ 
现代文：万章说： 那么舜得到天下，是谁给他的呢？ 
English: Wanzhang said, "So, if the world belongs to the dragonfly, who gave it to the dragonfly?

古文：曰： 天与之。 
现代文：孟子说： 是上天给他的。 
English: Mencius said, "Heaven gave it to him."

古文： 天与之者，谆谆然命之乎？ 
现代文：万章说： 上天给他的，是上天谆谆教导命令他的吗？ 
English: Wanzhang said, "Heaven gave it to him, but did Heaven instruct and command him?"

古文：曰： 否。天不言，以行与事示之而已矣。 
现代文：孟子说： 不，上天不说话，是用行为和事实来示意而已。 
English: Mencius said, "No, God does not speak, but only indicates with deeds and facts.

古文：曰： 以行与事示之者如之何？ 
现代文：万章说： 用行为和事实来示意，是怎么回事呢？ 
English: Wan Zhang said: What's the matter with using actions and facts to indicate?

古文：曰： 天子能荐人于天，不能使天与之天下；诸侯能荐人于天子，不能使天子与之诸侯；大夫能荐人于诸侯，不能使诸侯与之大夫。
现代文：孟子说： 天子能向上天推荐人，却不能让天下把天下交给他人；诸侯能向天子推荐人，却不能让天子给他做诸侯；大夫能向诸侯推荐人，却不能让诸侯给他做大夫。
English: Mencius said, "The emperor can recommend people to the emperor, but he cannot have the emperor give the world to others; the princes can recommend people to the emperor, but they cannot have the emperor make them princes; the doctors can recommend people to the princes, but they cannot have the princes make them doctors.

古文：昔者尧荐舜于天而天受之，暴之于民而民受之，故曰：天不言，以行与事示之而已矣。 
现代文：从前，尧将舜推荐给天，天接受了；又将他公开向老百姓介绍，老百姓接受了；所以说，上天不说话，只是用行为和事实来示意而已。 
English: Once upon a time, Zhai recommended Zhai to Heaven, and Heaven accepted him; he also publicly introduced him to the common people, and the common people accepted him; therefore, Heaven does not speak, but only indicates with deeds and facts.

古文：曰： 敢问荐之于天而天受之，暴之于民而民受之，如何？ 
现代文：万章说： 冒昧地请问，向上天推荐，而上天接受了；介绍给老百姓，老百姓也接受了，这怎么样说？ 
English: Wan Zhang said, "If you have the audacity to ask, how about recommending it to heaven, and heaven accepted it; introducing it to the common people, and the common people accepted it?

古文：曰： 使之主祭而百神享之，是天受之；使之主事而事治，百姓安之，是民受之也。
现代文：孟子说： 尧派舜主持祭祀仪式，神灵都来享用了，这是上天接受了；派舜主持政事，而政事治理井井有条，百姓安居乐业，这就是民众接受了。
English: Mencius said, "God has accepted that when you send a priest to preside over a religious ceremony, the gods come to enjoy it; when you send a priest to preside over political affairs, the government is well organized, and the people live and work in peace.

古文：天与之，人与之，故曰：天子不能以天下与人。
现代文：是上天把天下交给舜，是百姓把天下交给舜，所以说，天子不能把天下交给他人。
English: It is God who gives the whole world to Yao, and it is the people who give the world to Yao. Therefore, the Son of Heaven cannot give the world to others.

古文：舜相尧二十有八载，非人之所能为也，天也。
现代文：舜辅佐尧二十八年，这不是单凭人力就能做到的，这有上天的力量。
English: This is not something that can be done by manpower alone, but by the power of God.

古文：尧崩，三年之丧毕，舜避尧之子于南河之南。天下诸侯朝觐者，不之尧之子而之舜；讼狱者，不之尧之子而之舜；讴歌者，不讴歌尧之子而讴歌舜，故曰天也。
现代文：尧去世，三年服丧后，舜避开尧的儿子一直到南河之南，天下诸侯朝拜天子，不去见尧的儿子而去拜见舜；打官司的人，不去见尧的儿子而去拜见舜；歌颂的人，不歌颂尧的儿子而歌颂舜，所以说，这是天意。
English: After his death, after three years of mourning, he avoided his son all the way to the south of the Nanhe River. The princes of the world worshipped the Son of Heaven, and did not go to see his son, but went to see him; the people who sued did not go to see his son, but went to see him; the people who sang praises, did not sing praises to his son, but sang praises to him, so they said, this is the will of heaven.

古文：夫然后之中国，践天子位焉。
现代文：这之后舜才回到中原，继承天子之位。
English: It was only after this that Yao returned to the Central Plains to take over the position of heavenly son.

古文：而居尧之宫，逼尧之子，是篡也，非天与也。
现代文：如果居住尧的宫殿，逼迫尧的儿子，就是篡夺，而不是上天给的了。
English: If you live in his palace and persecute his son, it is usurpation, not God-given.

古文：太誓曰： 天视自我民视，天听自我民听 ，此之谓也。 
现代文：《尚书·泰誓》上说： 上天所看见的来自于人民所看见的，上天所听见的来自于人民所听见的。 说的就是这个意思。 
English: This is what is meant when it is said in the Shangshu Taiyu: "What Heaven sees comes from what the people see, and what Heaven hears comes from what the people hear."

