古文：滍水出南阳鲁阳县西之尧山，尧之未孙刘累，以龙食帝孔甲，孔甲又求之，不得。
现代文：滍水发源于南阳郡每阳县西边的尧山，尧的后代子孙刘累，拿了龙肉给帝孔甲吃，孔甲又向他要龙，而龙却没有了；刘累害怕，就迁徙到鲁县去。
English: Surabaya originated in the Lushan Mountains on the west side of Nanyang County. Liu Lei, the descendant and descendant of Lushan, took dragon meat to Emperor Kongjia to eat. Kongjia asked him for a dragon, but the dragon was gone. Liu Lei was afraid and migrated to Lu County.

古文：累惧而迁于鲁县，立尧祠于西山，谓之尧山。故张衡《南部赋》曰：奉先帝而追孝，立唐祠于尧山。
现代文：他在西山建立尧祠，山就叫尧山。所以张衡《南都赋》说：遵循孝道，奉祀先帝，在尧山建立唐祠。
English: Therefore, Zhang Heng said in "Nandu Fu," "Follow the path of filial piety, worship the former emperor, and build a Tang ancestral shrine in Shaoshan."

古文：尧山在太和川大和城东北，溃水出焉。
现代文：尧山在太和川太和城东北，溃水就发源在这里。
English: Lushan is in the northeast of Taihe River and Taihe city, and the source of the burst water is here.

古文：张衡《南都赋》曰：其川读则滍、澧？浕，发源岩穴，布濩漫汗，漭沆洋溢，总括急趣，箭驰风疾者也。
现代文：张衡《南都赋》说：此处的水有溃、澄、涝、烬，发源于岩穴之间，分布很广，河阔水盛，汇成巨流，湍急奔腾，势如疾风飞箭。
English: Zhang Heng "Nandu Fu" said: The water here is turbid, clear, turbid, and ember. It originates from between the rock caves and is widely distributed. The river is wide and the water is abundant. It converges into a huge current, rushing and rushing, and has the power of a gale.

古文：滍水又历太和川，东，径小和川，又东，温泉水注之。
现代文：滍水又流过太和川，东经小和川；又往东流，有温泉水注入。
English: The brackish water also flows through the Taihe River and eastward through the Small River; it also flows eastward and is infused with hot spring water.

古文：水出北山阜，七源奇发，炎热特甚。
现代文：温泉水出自北山阜，水源很奇特，七道山泉一齐涌出，热不可挡。
English: The hot spring water comes from Kitasanshu, the water source is very peculiar, seven mountain springs gush out at once, the heat is unstoppable.

古文：阚駰曰：县有汤水，可以疗疾。
现代文：阐驹说：县里有汤水，可以治病。
English: Elucidate said: There is soup water in the county, which can be used to treat diseases.

古文：汤侧又有寒泉焉，地势不殊，而炎凉异致，虽隆火盛日，肃若冰谷矣，浑流同溪，南注滍水。
现代文：温泉旁边又有寒泉，地势并无不同，而一热一冷却迥然互异，虽然在赤日炎炎的酷暑，却寒气森然，有如冰谷一般。二泉混合同流于一溪，南流注入滍水。
English: There is also a cold spring next to the hot spring, the topography is no different, and the heat and cooling are very different. Although it is very hot in Akahi, it is very cold, like an ice valley. The two springs flow together in a stream, and the south stream injects salty water.

古文：滍水又东径胡木山，东流又会温泉口，水出北山阜，炎势奇毒。
现代文：滍水又东经胡木山，往东流，又在温泉口汇合一水。
English: Surabaya's water also flows eastward through Mt. Humi, flowing eastward, and merges with the water at the hot spring's mouth.

古文：腐疾之徒，无能澡其冲漂。救痒者咸去汤十许步别池，然后可入。
现代文：此水发源于北山阜，烫得出奇，有皮肤病的人去洗澡治疮，在滚烫的泉水涌出处是吃不消的，须到离温泉十来步的另一口池中，才能入水。
English: This water originates from the northern mountains. It is surprisingly hot. People with skin diseases go there to bathe and treat their sores. The gushing of the hot spring water is irresistible. You have to go to another pool about ten steps away from the hot spring to get into the water.

古文：汤侧有石铭云：皇女汤，可以疗万疾者也。故杜彦达云：然如沸汤，可以熟米，饮之，愈百病。
现代文：温泉旁有碑文说：皇女汤，可以治百病。所以杜彦达说：像火烧沸汤，煮得熟米饭，喝了能愈百病。
English: Next to the hot spring, there is an inscription saying: "The soup of the empress can cure all diseases." Therefore, Du Yanda said: "Like fire boils soup, cooks rice until it is ripe, and drinking it can cure all diseases."

古文：道士清身沐浴，一日三饮，多少自在。四十日后，身中万病愈，三虫死。
现代文：道士在这里清身沐浴，一日喝三次水―喝多少随各人心意―四十日后，身上百病俱愈，三虫死尽。
English: Here, the Taoist cleansed himself and took a bath. He drank water three times a day - how much he drank was up to each person - and after forty days, his body was completely healed and the three worms were dead.

古文：学道遭难逢危，终无悔心，可以牢神存志。即《南都赋》所谓汤谷涌其后者也。
现代文：温泉还能坚定人们的精神和意志，学道时碰到种种危难，也不会懊悔了。这就是《南都赋》中说的：后面有温泉在谷中腾涌。
English: Hot springs can also strengthen people's spirit and will, and they will not regret encountering various dangers when learning the Tao. This is what is said in "Nandu Fu": behind there is a hot spring surging in the valley.

古文：然宛县有紫山，山东有一水，东西十五里，南北二百步，湛然冲满，无所通会，冬夏常温，世亦谓之汤谷也。
现代文：但宛县有紫山，紫山东边有一条水，东西十五里，南北二百步，水静而满，没有别的支流汇合和相通，温度冬夏不变，人们也称为汤谷。
English: However, there is Mount Zi in Wuan County. On the east side of Mount Zi, there is a stretch of water. It is fifteen miles from east to west, and two hundred paces from north to south. The water is calm and full, and no other tributaries converge and connect with it. The temperature in winter and summer is constant. People also call it Tanggu.

古文：非鲁阳及南阳之县故也。
现代文：但这汤谷不在鲁阳，而是在南阳的属县宛县。
English: However, Yugu is not in Luyang, but in Wuan County, which belongs to Nanyang.

古文：张平子广言土地所苞，明非此矣。
现代文：张平子是浮泛地描述这地区所见的事物，显然指的不是这里。
English: Zhang Pingzi was vaguely describing what he had seen in the area, obviously not here.

古文：滍水又东，房阳川水注之。
现代文：滍水又往东流，有房阳川水注入。
English: Surabaya's water also flows eastward, with water from the Fangyang River being injected.

古文：水出南阳雉县西房阳川，北流注于滍。
现代文：房阳川水发源于南阳难县西面的房阳川，北流注入滍水。
English: The water of Foyang River originates from Foyang River in the west of Nanyangnan County, and the north stream is injected into Surabaya.

古文：滍水之北有积石焉，世谓女灵山。其山平地介立，不连冈以成高，峻石孤峙，不托势以自远，四面壁绝，极能灵举，远望亭亭，状若单楹插霄矣。
现代文：滍水以北有一座山，岩石层层叠叠，人们称为女灵山，此山在平地上孤峰屹立，不凭借连冈之助而巍然高入天际；峭峻的石峰孑然耸峙，不依托山势而独自远上重霄。石山四面都是绝壁，姿态极其轻灵地拔起，远望亭亭玉立，宛如一根擎天巨柱。
English: To the north of Surabaya, there is a mountain with layers of rock stacked on top of each other, known as the Girl's Soul Mountain. This mountain stands alone on the plain, soaring high into the sky without the help of a ridge; the steep stone peaks stand out, soaring high into the sky without relying on the mountain. The rock mountains are cliffs on all sides, and the posture is extremely light-hearted. The pavilion stands tall, like a pillar of heaven.

古文：北面有如颓落，劣得通步，好事者时有扳涉耳。
现代文：北面好像要崩塌似的，勉强才可侧足，喜欢冒险的人常有去攀登的。
English: The north face looks as if it is about to collapse, and it is only with great difficulty that one can stand on one's side. People who like to take risks often climb it.

古文：滍水又与波水合，水出霍阳西川，大岭东谷，俗谓之歇马岭，川曰广阳川，非也。
现代文：滍水又与波水汇合，波水发源于霍阳西川大岭东面的山谷，俗称此岭为歇马岭，称平原为广阳川，这都不对。
English: Surabaya water also merges with wave water. The wave water originates from the valley east of the Huoyang West River Ridge. This ridge is commonly known as the Hema Ridge, and the plain is called the Guangyang River, which is not correct.

古文：即应劭所谓孤山，波水所出也。
现代文：这座山岭即应肋所谓的孤山，波水就发源在这里。
English: This mountain range is the so-called lonely mountain in Yingli, and the wave water originates here.

古文：马融《广成颂》曰：浸以波、溠。
现代文：马融《广成颂》说：以波水的小港汉来浸灌。
English: Ma Rong's "Song of Guangcheng" said: "Dip small Ganghan with waves of water."

古文：其水又南径蛮城下，盖蛮别邑也，俗谓之麻城，非也。
现代文：水又往南流经蛮城下，这是蛮人的别邑，俗称麻城，其实不对。
English: The water also flows southward under the barbarian city, which is the barbarian's other city, commonly known as Ma City, which is actually wrong.

古文：波水又南，分三川于白亭东，而俱南入滍水。
现代文：波水又往南流，在白亭以东分为三条水流，往南注入溃水。
English: The wave water flows southward, and is divided into three streams to the east of Baiting, and the rushing water is injected to the south.

古文：溃水自下兼波水之通称也。
现代文：滍水自此以下也兼有波水的通称。
English: Since then, Surabaya has also been known as Surabaya.

古文：是故阚滍有东北至定陵入汝之文。
现代文：所以阐胭有往东北到定陵注入汝水这样的文句。
English: Therefore, there is such a phrase as "going to the northeast to Dingling to inject water."

古文：滍水又东径鲁阳县故城南，城即刘累之故邑也，有鲁山，县居其阳，故因名焉。王莽之鲁山也。
现代文：滍水又往东流，经过鲁阳县老城南边，此城就是刘累的旧城。有鲁山，鲁阳县就在山南，所以叫鲁阳，也就是王莽的鲁山县。
English: Surabaya also flows eastward, passing through the southern part of the old city of Luyang County, which is the old city of Liu Lei. There is Lu Mountain, Luyang County is in Shannan, so it is called Luyang, that is, Wang Mang's Lu Mountain County.

古文：昔在于楚，文子守之，与韩遘战，有返景之诚。
现代文：鲁阳从前在楚国境内，文子守城，与韩国交战，斗志昂扬，他挥舞干戈，竟使西斜的太阳返回中天。
English: Once upon a time, Luyang was in the territory of Chu. Fumiko guarded the city and fought with Korea. He was full of fighting spirit. He waved his sword and made the west-slanting sun return to the middle of the sky.

古文：内有《南阳都乡正卫为碑》。
现代文：城内有南阳都乡正卫为碑。
English: There is a monument to Nanyang Township's Zhengwei in the city.

古文：滍水右合鲁阳关水，水出鲁阳关外分头山横岭下夹谷，东北出入滍。
现代文：滍水在右边汇合了鲁阳关水，此水发源于鲁阳关外分头山横岭下的峡谷，往东北出谷，注入嗤水。
English: On the right, the Surabaya Water joins the Luyang Pass Water. This water originates from the canyon under the mountain ridge of the Bundou Mountain outside Luyang Pass and flows into the northeast valley, injecting the Surabaya Water.

古文：滍水又东北合牛兰水。
现代文：滍水又往东北流，汇合了牛兰水。
English: Surabaya water flows to the northeast, merging with Niulang water.

古文：水发县北牛兰山，东南径鲁阳城东，水侧有《汉阳侯焦立碑》。
现代文：牛兰水发源于县北的牛兰山，往东南流经鲁阳城东面，水边有汉阳侯焦立碑。
English: The Niu Lan Water originates from the Niu Lan Mountain in the north of the county, flows southeast through the east of Luyang City, and there is a monument to Hanyang Hou Jiao at the water's edge.

古文：牛兰水又东南，与柏树溪水合。
现代文：牛兰水又往东南流，与柏树溪水汇合。
English: The water of the Niu Lan River flows to the southeast and merges with the water of the Cypress Creek.

古文：水出鲁山北峡谷中，东南流径鲁山西，而南合牛兰水。
现代文：柏树溪水发源于鲁山北面的峡谷中，往东南流经鲁山西面，然后南流与牛兰水汇合。
English: The water of Cypress Creek originates in the canyon on the north side of Mount Rushmore, flows southeast through the west side of Mount Rushmore, and then the south stream merges with Cowland Water.

古文：又东南径鲁山南。
现代文：牛兰水又往东南流经鲁山南边。
English: The ox orchid water also flows southeast through the southern side of Mount Rushmore.

古文：阚駰曰：鲁阳县，今其地鲁山是也。
现代文：阐胭说：鲁阳县，地点就在今天的鲁山。
English: Elucidated: Luyang County, the location is in today's Lushan.

古文：水南注于滍。
现代文：水往南流，注入滍水。
English: The water flows south, injecting brackish water.

古文：滍水东径应城南，故应乡也，应侯之国。
现代文：溃水往东流经应城南面，就是旧时的应乡，应侯的封国。
English: The rushing water flows eastward through the south of Yingcheng, which is the old Yingxiang and Yinghou's fief.

古文：《诗》所谓应侯顺德者也。
现代文：《诗经》说的应侯顺德，就指这里。
English: It is here that the "Shisho" refers to Yinghou Shunde.

古文：彭水注之，俗谓之小滍水。水出鲁阳县南彭山蚁坞东麓，北流径彭山西，下有彭山庙，庙前有《彭山碑》，汉桓帝元嘉三年杜仲长立。
现代文：彭水在这里注入滍水，彭水俗称小滍水，发源于鲁阳县以南彭山蚁坞东麓，往北流经彭山西，山下有彭山庙，庙前有彭山碑，是汉桓帝元嘉三年杜仲长所立。
English: Pengshui is commonly known as Xiaoshuishui. It originates from the eastern foot of Pengshan Ant Docks in the south of Luyang County and flows northward through the west of Pengshan. There is a Pengshan Temple at the foot of the mountain and a Pengshan Monument in front of the temple. It was built by Du Zhonglong in the third year of the reign of Emperor Yuan Jia of the Han Dynasty.

古文：彭山径其西北，汉安邑长尹俭墓东。
现代文：彭水流经彭山庙西北边、汉安邑长尹俭墓东边。
English: The Pengshui River flows through the northwest side of the Pengshan Temple and the east side of the Chang Yin Jian Tomb in Han'an.

古文：冢西有石庙，庙前有两石阙，阙东有碑，阙南有二狮子相对，南有石碣二枚，石柱西南有两石羊，中平四年立。
现代文：墓西有石庙，庙前有两座石网，网东有碑，网南有两只石狮在两旁对坐，南面有石竭两块，石柱西南有两只石羊，是中平四年所立。
English: There is a stone temple on the west side of the tomb, two stone nets in front of the temple, a monument on the east side of the net, two stone lions on both sides of the south side of the net, two stones on the south side, and two stone sheep on the southwest side of the stone pillar. It was built by Zhongping in four years.

古文：彭水又东北流，直应城南而入滍。
现代文：彭水又往东北流，经过应城南注入滍水。
English: The Pengshui also flows to the northeast, passing through the southern part of Yingcheng and injecting the Xuanshui.

古文：滍水又左合桥水，水出鲁阳县北恃山，东南径应山北，又南径应城西。
现代文：溃水又在左边汇合了桥水。桥水发源于鲁阳县北面恃山，往东南流经应山北面，又往南流经应城西面。
English: On the left, the rushing water meets the bridge water. The bridge water originates from Lushan in the north of Luyang County, flows southeast through the north of Yingshan, and flows south through the west of Yingcheng.

古文：《地理志》曰：故父城县之应乡也。周武王封其弟为侯国。
现代文：《地理志》说：这就是从前父城县的应乡，周武王把这里封给他的弟弟，立为侯国。
English: "Geography" said: This is the hometown of the former Chicheng County. King Zhou Wu gave this place to his brother and established it as a princely state.

古文：应肋曰：《韩诗外传》称：周成王与弟戏，以桐叶为圭，曰：吾以封汝。
现代文：应肋说：《韩诗外传》里谈到周成王和弟弟做游戏，用桐叶作圭，说：我把它封给你。
English: Ying Li said: "In "The Foreign Biography of Korean Poetry," Zhou Cheng Wang and his younger brother are mentioned as playing a game, using a paulownia leaf as a key, saying: "I'll seal it for you."

古文：周公曰：天子无戏言。王乃应时而封，故曰应侯，乡亦曰应乡。
现代文：周公说：天子说话不能开玩笑，于是成王就应时而受封了，所以那地方就叫应侯乡，也叫应乡。
English: Zhou Gong said, "God's words cannot be taken lightly. Therefore, Chengwang Yinghuang was given the title, so that place was called Yinghou Township, and also Ying Township.

古文：按《吕氏春秋》云。成王以桐叶为圭，封叔虞，非应侯也。
现代文：按《吕氏春秋》说：成王以桐叶作圭，所封的是叔虞，而不是应侯。
English: According to "Lu's Spring and Autumn," it is said that Tongye was the key to becoming a king, and it was Shuyu, not Yinghou, who was crowned.

古文：《汲郡古文》殷时已有应国，非成王矣。
现代文：《汲郡古文》载，殷时就已有应国，那就不是成王时才有的了。
English: According to the "Kwugun Ancient Texts," Yin already had a country of his own, which was not the case when he became king.

古文：战国范雄所封邑也。谓之应水。
现代文：战国时这是范唯的封邑，水称应水。
English: During the Warring States period, this was Fan Wei's fief, and the water was called Yingshui.

古文：滍水又东径犨县故城北。
现代文：滍水又往东流经擎县老城北边。
English: Surabaya water also flows eastward through the northern side of the old city of Qingcheng County.

古文：《左传》昭公元年，冬，楚公子围使伯州犁城犨是也。
现代文：《左传》：昭公元年冬，楚公子围派伯州犁在擎建城，就是这地方。
English: "Left Biography": In the winter of the year of Zhao, Chu Gongzi surrounded and dispatched the Bozhou army to build a city in Jiancheng. This is the place.

古文：出于鱼齿山下。
现代文：水从鱼齿山下流出。
English: Water flows from the bottom of Fish Tooth Mountain.

古文：《春秋》襄公十八年，楚伐郑，次于鱼陵，涉于鱼齿之下，甚雨，楚师多冻，役徒几尽。
现代文：《春秋》：襄公十八年前,楚国讨伐郑国，在鱼陵歇宿，在鱼齿山下涉水过河。当时正下大雨，楚军很多人都冻坏了，民佚几乎死尽。
English: "Spring and Autumn": Eighteen years before Xiang Gong, Chu fought against Zheng, resting at the Fish Mausoleum and wading across the river under the Fish Tooth Mountain. At that time, it was raining heavily, many Chu soldiers froze to death, and the civilians were almost dead.

古文：晋人闻有楚师。师旷曰：不害。吾骤歌北风，又歌南风，南风不竞，多死声，楚必无功矣。
现代文：晋人听说楚军来了，师旷说：没关系，我蓦然唱起《北风》，接着又唱《南风》，《南风》不强劲，多含死声，楚军必定不会得手的。
English: When the Jin people heard that the Chu army had arrived, Shiguang said, "It doesn't matter, I will sing the "North Wind" and then the "South Wind." The "South Wind" is not strong and contains a lot of dead voices. The Chu army will definitely not succeed.

古文：所涉即滍水也。
现代文：当时楚军所涉的就是嗤水。
English: At that time, the Chu army was involved in the water fight.

古文：水南有汉中常侍、长乐太仆吉成侯州苞冢。冢前有碑，基西枕冈城，开四门，门有两石兽，坟倾墓毁，碑兽沦移。
现代文：水南有汉中常侍长乐太仆吉成侯州苞墓，墓前还留有墓碑，墓址西边靠着冈城，开了四座门，门口有两头石兽。墓已坍毁，墓碑和石兽也已沉埋或流失了。
English: In the south of China, there is the tomb of the Han dynasty's chief steward, Le Taibu, Jicheng Hozhou, with a tombstone left in front of the tomb. On the west side of the tomb site, near the city of Oka, there are four open doors and two stone beasts at the entrance. The tomb has collapsed, and the tombstone and stone beasts have also been buried or lost.

古文：人有掘出一兽，犹全不破，甚高壮，头去地减一丈许，作制甚工，左膊上刻作辟邪字。
现代文：有人曾掘出一头石兽，还完好无损，样子十分高大雄壮，头部离地大约不到一丈，雕得十分精致。石兽左前腿上刻了辟邪字样。
English: Someone once dug up a stone beast, still intact, looking very tall and majestic, the head is about a foot off the ground, very delicately carved. The stone beast has the words "Beware of evil" engraved on its left front leg.

古文：门表堑上起石桥，历时不毁。
现代文：墓门外壕堑上建了石桥，经历漫长的岁月未曾毁坏。
English: A stone bridge was built over the moat outside the tomb gate, which has not been destroyed over the years.

古文：其碑云：六帝四后，是咨是诹。
现代文：墓碑上说：六位皇帝，四位皇后，都来谐询，听取意见。
English: The tombstone said: "Six emperors, four queens, all came to consult and listen to opinions.

古文：盖仕自安帝，没于桓后。
现代文：从安帝时开始任职，到桓后时亡故。
English: He served from the time of Emperor An to the time of Emperor Kan's death.

古文：于时阍阉擅权，五侯暴世，割剥公私，以事生死。
现代文：当时宦官专权，五侯凌虐百姓，掠夺公私财物来满足自己在生或死后的贪欲。
English: At that time, the eunuchs had absolute power, the five lords abused the people, and plundered public and private property to satisfy their greed in life or after death.

古文：夫封者表有德，碑者颂有功，自非此徒，何用许为？
现代文：封侯为的是表彰有德，立碑是颂扬有功；如果不是这样的人，又哪里用得着这样做？
English: The purpose of a title of nobility is to commend virtue, and the purpose of erecting a monument is to praise meritorious deeds; if such people do not exist, why is it necessary to do so?

古文：石至十春，不若速朽，苞墓万古，只彰俏辱，呜呼！
现代文：这样的墓碑与其千载长存，倒不如早点毁掉的好。州苞墓保存到千秋万代，只不过更显得可笑可耻罢了。啊，真也太愚蠢了！
English: Such a tombstone, instead of lasting for thousands of years, would have been better to destroy it earlier. The Shuzhen Tomb has been preserved for thousands of generations, but it is even more ridiculous and shameful. Ah, it's so stupid!

古文：愚亦甚矣。滍水又东，滍水注之，俗谓之秋水，非也。
现代文：滍水继续往东流，汇合了毕水，俗称秋水，这是不对的。
English: It is not right that Surabaya's water continues to flow eastward, merging with Bi-shui, commonly known as Qiu-shui.

古文：水有二源，东源出其县西南践犊山东崖下，水方五十许步、不恻其深，东北流径犨县南，又东北屈径其县东，而北合西源水。
现代文：擎水有两个源头。东源出自县境西南践犊山东崖下面，水源方圆五十余步，深不可测，往东北流经擎县南，又往东北转弯流经县东，北流与西源水汇合。
English: There are two sources of Qingming water. The east source comes from the southwestern part of the county border under the east cliff of Zhulun Mountain. The water source is more than fifty paces in circumference and is unfathomable. It flows to the northeast through the south of Qingming County, and then turns to the northeast and flows through the east of the county. The north stream merges with the west source water.

古文：西源出县西南颇山北阜下，东北径犨城西，又屈径其县北，东合右水，乱流北注于滍。
现代文：西源则出自县境西南颇山北面的丘陵下，往东北流经擎城西，然后转弯流经县北，东流与右边的水汇合，乱流往北注入滍水。
English: Xiyuan originates from the hills to the north of Poshan Mountain in the southwestern part of the county, flows to the northeast through the west of Jingcheng, and then turns to flow through the north of the county. The eastward flow merges with the water on the right, and the turbulent flow flows northward into Surabaya.

古文：汉高祖入关，破南阳太守吕滍于犨东，即于是地，滍水之阴也。
现代文：汉高祖入关，在毕城东打败南阳太守吕崎，就是在这里，地点在滍水南岸。
English: It was here, on the southern shore of Surabaya, that Henkel's ancestor entered the pass and defeated the Nanyang Emperor Liusi in the east of the city.

古文：滍水又东南径昆阳县故城北。
现代文：溃水又往东南流，经过昆阳县老城北面。
English: The floodwaters also flowed to the southeast, passing north of the old city of Kunyang County.

古文：昔汉光武与王寻、王邑战于昆阳，败之。走者相腾践，奔殪百余里间。
现代文：从前汉光武帝在昆阳与王寻、王邑作战，打败了他们；败兵奔逃时互相践踏，百余里间尽是倒毙的兵卒。
English: In the past, Emperor Guangwu of the Han Dynasty fought against Wangxu and Wangyi in Kunyang and defeated them. The defeated soldiers trampled on each other as they fled, and there were dead soldiers within a hundred miles.

古文：会大雨如注，滍川盛溢，虎豹皆股战。士卒争赴，溺死者以万数，水为不流。
现代文：这时适逢大雨，滍水猛涨泛滥，连虎豹都怕得发抖，士兵争先恐后地奔向河里渡水，溺死了好几万人，把河水都堵塞了。
English: At this time, there was a heavy rain, the floodwaters surged and flooded, even the tigers and leopards were trembling with fear, the soldiers rushed to the river to cross the water, drowned tens of thousands of people, and blocked the river.

古文：王邑、严尤、陈茂轻骑，皆乘尸而度矣。
现代文：王邑、严尤、陈茂都是骑马踏着尸体过河的。
English: Wang Yip, Yan You and Chen Mao all crossed the river on horseback, stepping on the corpses.

古文：东北过颍川定陵县西北，又东过郾县南，东入于汝。
现代文：往东北流过颖川郡定陵县西北，又往东流过哪县南面，东流注人汝水。
English: To the northeast, it flows through the northwest of Dingling County, Yingchuan County, and to the east, it flows through the south of the county. The east stream is the source of the water.

古文：滍水东径西不羹亭南，亭北背汝水，于定陵城北，东入汝。
现代文：滍水往东流过西不羹亭南面，亭北濒汝水，在定陵城北边东流注入汝水。
English: Surabaya water flows eastward through the south side of Xibujunting, the north side of the pavilion is bordered by Ye water, and the north side of Dingling City is inundated with Ye water.

古文：郾县在南，不得过。
现代文：郾县在南边，不可能从那里流过。
English: Min County is in the south, and it is impossible for the river to flow through there.

古文：淯水出弘农卢氏县支离山，东南过南阳西鄂县西北，又东过宛县南，淯水导源，东流径郦县故城北。
现代文：淯水发源于弘农郡卢氏县支离山，往东南流过南阳郡西鄂县西北，又往东流过宛县南面。淯水发源后往东流，经过哪县老城北面。
English: The Ershui originates from the branching mountains of Lu County, Hongnong County, and flows southeastward through the northwest of Xi E County, Nanyang County, and eastward through the south of Wan County. After the source of the Ershui, it flows eastward, passing through the north of the old city of Wan County.

古文：郭仲产曰：郦县故城在支离山东南，郦旧县也。
现代文：郭仲产说：哪县老城在支离山东南，这是个旧县址。
English: Guo Zhongyan said: Which county's old city is in the southeast of Shiyan, this is an old county site.

古文：三仓曰樊、邓、郦。
现代文：《三仓》说：樊、邓、丽吓。
English: "Three storehouses" said: the stars are Zou, Deng, and Lige.

古文：郦有二城，北郦也。
现代文：丽肠有二城，这里说的是北哪。
English: There are two cities in Lixin, and we are talking about the north here.

古文：汉祖入关，下淅郦，即此县也。
现代文：汉高祖入关，攻下浙哪，就是此县。
English: It was in this county that Henkel's forefathers entered and conquered Zhejiang.

古文：淯水又东南流历雉县之衡山，东径百章郭北，又东，鲁阳关水注之。
现代文：淯水又往东南流，经过难县的衡山，往东流经百章郭北面，又往东流，鲁阳关水注入。
English: Surabaya water flows to the southeast, passing through Hengshan Mountain in Nanshan County, flows to the east through the north of Baizhangguo, and flows to the east, injecting Luyang Guan water.

古文：水出鲁阳县南分水岭，南水自岭南流，北水从岭北注，故世俗谓此岭为分头也。
现代文：鲁阳关水发源于鲁阳县以南的分水岭，南边的水从岭南流，北边的水从岭北流，所以民间把此岭称为分头。
English: The water of Luyang Pass originates from the watershed south of Luyang County. The water on the south side flows from the south ridge, and the water on the north side flows from the north ridge. Therefore, the people call this ridge the headwaters.

古文：其水南流径鲁阳关，左右连山插汉，秀木于云，是以张景阳诗云：朝登鲁阳关，峡路峭且深。
现代文：南流的水经过鲁阳关，两边峰峦连绵。高耸于天际，笼葱的树木上接云霄，所以张景阳的诗写道：清晨攀登鲁阳关，山峡小径陡又深。
English: The water of the South Stream passes through Luyang Pass, and the peaks on both sides are continuous. Towering in the sky, the tall trees touch the sky, so Zhang Jingyang's poem wrote: Climbing Luyang Pass in the morning, the mountain path is steep and deep.

古文：亦司马芝与母遇贼处也。
现代文：这也是司马芝和他的母亲碰到贼兵的地方。
English: This is also where Sima Zhi and his mother met the bandits.

古文：关水历雉衡山西南径皇后城西。
现代文：关水流过难衡山西南，流经皇后城西。
English: The Guan River flows through the southwest of Mount Nangang and flows through the west of Queen City.

古文：建武元年，世祖遣侍中傅俊，持节迎光烈皇后于清阳。
现代文：建武元年桓温与范汪等人的军队北征时屯驻过的地方。
English: This is the place where the armies of Kan-Wen, Fan-Wang and others were stationed during the Northern Expedition in the first year of Jianwu.

古文：俊发兵三百余人，宿卫皇后道路，归京师。
现代文：淯水又往西南流，经过晋蜀郡太守邓义山墓南面，又往南流经宛城东面。
English: Surabaya's water also flows to the southwest, passing south of the tomb of Tang Yishan, the eunuch of Jin Shu County, and southward to the east of Wancheng.

古文：盖税舍所在，故城得其名矣。
现代文：宛城是从前申伯的都城，楚文王灭申后设立为县。
English: Wancheng was the former capital of Shenbo. It was established as a county after the death of King Chuwen of Shenbo.

古文：秦昭襄王使白起为将，代楚取郢，即以此地为南阳郡，改县曰宛。王莽更名郡曰前队，县曰南阳。
现代文：秦昭襄王任命白起做大将，进攻楚国，夺取了邹都，就把这地方设立为南阳郡，改县名为宛。王莽改名，郡称前队，县名南阳。
English: Qin Zhaoxiang appointed Wang Bai to be a general, attacked Chu, captured the capital, and set up this place as Nanyang County, changing the name of the county. Wang Mang changed his name, the county was called the vanguard, and the county was named Nanyang.

古文：刘善曰：在中国之南而居阳地，故以为名。
现代文：刘善说：这地区在中原南部，地理上居阳位，所以叫南阳。
English: Liu Shan said: This area is in the southern Central Plains, and it is in the yang position geographically, so it is called Nanyang.

古文：大城西南隅，即古宛城也，荆州刺史治，故亦谓之荆州城。
现代文：大城西南角，就是古时的宛城；这是荆州刺史的治所，所以也叫荆州城。
English: The southwest corner of Dasheng is the ancient Wancheng; this is the seat of Jingzhou's history, so it is also called Jingzhou City.

古文：今南阳郡治大城，其东城内有旧殿基，周二百步，高八尺，陛阶皆砌以青石。大城西北隅有殿基，周百步，高五尺，盖更始所起也。
现代文：今天的南阳郡，治所在大城。东城内有旧殿遗址，周围二百步，高八尺，台阶都用青石砌成；大城西北角也有殿基，周围一百步，高五尺，是更始帝所造。
English: Today's Nanyang County is governed by Dacheng. In the east of the city, there is an old temple site, surrounded by two hundred paces, eight feet high, and the steps are made of bluestone; in the northwest corner of Dacheng, there is also a temple foundation, surrounded by one hundred paces, five feet high, which was built by Emperor Kangxi.

古文：城西三里，有古台，高三丈余，文帝黄初中南巡行所筑也。
现代文：城西三里有一座古台，高三丈余，是文帝黄初年间南巡时行宫的建筑。
English: In the west of the city, there is an ancient tower, three stories high, which was the palace of Emperor Wen during his southern inspection in the early years of the Yellow Emperor.

古文：淯水又屈而径其县南，故《南都赋》所言淯水荡其胸者也。
现代文：淯水又转弯流经县南，所以《南都赋》说：淯水涤荡它的胸怀。
English: Surabaya's water flows through the southern part of the county, so "Nandu Fu" said: Surabaya's water purifies its heart.

古文：王莽地皇二年，朱鲔等共于城南会诸将，设坛，燔燎，立圣公为天子于斯水上。
现代文：王莽地皇二年，朱鳍等人同在城南会见诸将，设坛焚柴祭天，在淯水上立圣公为天子。
English: In the second year of Wang Mangdi's reign, Zhu Xi and others met with the generals in the south of the city, set up an altar to burn firewood and sacrifice to heaven, and set up Shingong as the son of heaven on the floodplain.

古文：《世语》曰：张绣反，公与战败，子昂不能骑，迸马于公，而昂遇害。
现代文：《世语》说：张绣反，曹操同他作战，打了败仗。他的儿子昂不能骑马，把马献给曹操，他本人于是被杀。
English: "World Language" said: Zhang embroidered a rebellion, Cao Cao fought with him and lost the battle. His son Ang couldn't ride a horse, so he gave the horse to Cao Cao, and he himself was killed.

古文：《魏书》曰：公南征至宛，临淯水，祠阵亡将士，歔欷流涕，众皆哀恸。淯水又南，梅溪水注之。
现代文：《魏书》说：曹公南征至宛，到了淯水边，祭奠阵亡将士，呜咽涕泣，众人也都很悲坳，淯水又往南流，汇合了梅溪水。
English: "Weishu" said: Cao Gong marched south to Wanlu, and when he arrived at the edge of the Meishui River, he paid tribute to the fallen soldiers and wept. Everyone was also very sad. The Meishu River flowed south and merged with the Meixi River.

古文：水出县北紫山，南径百里奚故宅。
现代文：梅溪水发源于县北紫山，南流经百里奚故居。
English: The water of Meixi Creek originates from the county's northern Zishan, and flows south through the former residence of Bai Lijun.

古文：奚，宛人也。于秦为贤大夫，所谓迷虞智秦者也。
现代文：百里奚，宛人，在秦国是一位贤良的大夫，所谓在虞胡涂，在秦贤明。
English: Bai Lijun, the ancestor, was a wise doctor in Qin. He was known as Yu Hu Du and Qin Xianming.

古文：梅溪又径宛西吕城东。
现代文：梅溪又流经宛西吕城东。
English: Meixi also flows through Wanxi Lvcheng Dong.

古文：《史记》曰：吕尚先祖为四岳，佐禹治水，有功。虞、夏之际，受封于吕，故因氏为吕尚也。
现代文：《史记》说：吕尚的祖先是四岳，辅佐大禹治水有功，在虞、夏时受封于吕，因而作为姓氏，名叫吕尚。
English: "Historical Records" said: Lushang's ancestor was Shigu, who assisted Dayu in water control, and was given the title of Lv in the spring and summer. Therefore, his surname was Lv Shang.

古文：徐广《史记音义》曰：吕在宛县。
现代文：徐广《史记音义》说：吕在宛县。
English: Xu Guang's "History of Music" said: Lu is in Wan County.

古文：高后四年，封昆弟子吕忿为吕城侯，疑即此也。
现代文：高后四年前，封她兄弟的儿子吕忿为吕城侯，可能就是这地方。
English: Four years ago, after she graduated from high school, her brother's son, Lü Ren, was made the mayor of Lv, and this may have been the place.

古文：又案新蔡县有大吕、小吕亭，而未知所是也。
现代文：又按新蔡县有大吕亭和小吕亭，不知究竟该是哪一处。
English: According to Xin Cai County, there is a large Luting and a small Luting, I don't know which one it is.

古文：梅溪又南径杜衍县东，故城在西。
现代文：梅溪又往南流经杜衍县东边，老城在西边。
English: Meixi also flows south through the east of Duyan County, and the old city is in the west.

古文：汉高帝七年，封郎中王翳为侯国，工莽更之曰闰衍矣。
现代文：汉高帝七年前，以杜衍封给郎中王翁，立为侯国。王莽改名为闰衍。
English: Seven years before the Hango Emperor, Du Yan was given to his son Wang Weng as a fief and established as a vassal state. Wang Mang changed his name to Yue Yan.

古文：土地垫下，湍溪是注，古人于安众竭之，令游水是储，谓之安众港。
现代文：这一带土地低洼，湍急的溪水就向这里流。古人在安众筑堰截流，使流水在这里蓄积起来，叫安众港。
English: The land in this area is low-lying, and fast-flowing streams flow here. The ancients intercepted the flow at the Anzhuo weir, causing the flowing water to accumulate here. It is called Anzhuo Port.

古文：世祖建武三年，上自宛遣颍阳侯祭遵西击邓奉弟终，破之于杜衍，进兵涅阳者也。
现代文：世祖建武三年，皇上从宛派遣颖阳侯祭遵西进，攻打邓奉弟邓终，在杜衍把他打得大败，于是向涅阳进军。
English: In the third year of Emperor Jianwu's reign, the emperor sent Yingyang Hossai from Wan to Zunxi to attack Deng Bong's younger brother Deng Zhen. He defeated him in Duyan, and then marched to Neyang.

古文：梅溪又南，谓之石桥水，又谓之女溪，南流而左注淯水。
现代文：梅溪又往南流，称为石桥水，又叫女溪，在左边注入淯水。
English: Meixi also flows to the south, known as Shiqiao water, also known as Meixi, and is filled with turbid water on the left.

古文：淯水之南，又有南就聚，《郡国志》所谓南阳宛县有南就聚者也。
现代文：消水以南，又有南就聚，《郡国志》里所谓南阳宛县有南就聚，就是这地方。
English: To the south of the drainage, there is also a southward convergence. In the "County History," the so-called Nanyangwan County has a southward convergence, which is this place.

古文：郭仲产言：宛城南三十里，有一城，甚卑小，相承名三公城，汉时邓禹等归乡饯离处也。
现代文：郭仲产说：宛城南三十里有个非常卑陋的小城，相沿称为三公城，是汉时邓禹等回乡时饯别的地方。
English: Guo Zhongyan said, "Thirty miles south of Wancheng, there is a very humble small town, called San Gongcheng, which was a different place for Deng Yu when he returned to his hometown in Han Dynasty.

古文：盛弘之著《荆州记》以为三公置。
现代文：盛弘之著《荆州记》认为是三公所置。
English: The book "Jingzhou Ji" by Morihiro believed that it was placed by the Three Kingdoms.

古文：余案淯水左右，旧有二澨，所谓南澨、北澨者，水侧之濆。
现代文：我按淯水两岸旧时有二噬，即所谓南噬和北噬，都是水边高地。
English: According to my research, both sides of Surabaya's water used to have two estuaries, the so-called South Estuary and North Estuary, both of which were waterside highlands.

古文：聚在淯阳之东北，考古推地则近矣。
现代文：南就聚在清阳东北，查考古籍，推定地址，大致上相近。
English: Nan gathered in the northeast of Qingyang, checked the archaeological record, estimated the address, and roughly similar.

古文：城侧有范蠡祠，蠡，宛人，祠即故宅也。
现代文：城边有范蠢祠。范氢，宛人，祠就是他的故居。
English: On the edge of the city, there is Fan Yu's ancestral shrine. Fan Yu, the addressee, the ancestral shrine is his former residence.

古文：后汉未，有范曾，字子闵，为大将军司马，讨黄中贼，至此祠，为蠡立碑，文勒可寻。
现代文：后汉末年，有个范曾，字子阂，任大将军司马，他征讨黄巾贼时曾到过此祠，并为范氢立碑，文字还依稀可辨。
English: At the end of the Later Han Dynasty, there was a Fan Zeng, also known as General Sima, who had been to this ancestral shrine when he fought against the Yellow Turban Thieves. He also erected a monument to Fan Xue, the writing of which can still be faintly seen.

古文：夏侯湛之为南阳，又为立庙焉。
现代文：夏侯湛当南阳太守时，又为他立庙。
English: When Xia Houzhan was the Nanyang Daju, a temple was built for him.

古文：城东有大将军何进故宅，城西有孔嵩旧居。
现代文：城东有大将军何进故宅，城西有孔篙旧居。
English: In the east of the city, there is the former residence of General He Jin, and in the west of the city, there is the former residence of Kong Xi.

古文：嵩字仲山，宛人，与山阳范式有断金契。
现代文：孔篙字仲山，宛人，和山阳范式交谊很深。
English: Kong Yu Zi Zhongshan, the addressee, has a deep friendship with Sanyang Normal Style.

古文：贫无养亲，赁为阿街卒，遣迎式。
现代文：孔篙很穷，无力供养父母，被雇用为喝道的兵丁，派去迎接范式。
English: Poor and unable to provide for his parents, Kong Yao was hired as a drinking soldier and sent to greet the emperor.

古文：式下车把臂曰：子怀道卒伍，不亦痛乎！
现代文：范式下车挽着他的胳膊说：你心怀大道，却沦落与兵卒为伍，多么令人痛惜啊！
English: Paradigm got out of the car, took him by the arm, and said, "What a pity that you had your heart set on the high road, but ended up in the company of soldiers!"

古文：嵩曰：侯赢贱役，晨门，卑下之位，古人所不耻，何痛之有？
现代文：孔篙说：侯赢曾当监门的贱役，对于卑下的职位，古人不以为耻，有什么可痛惜的呢？
English: Confucius said: Hou Ying Rong was once a lowly servant of the prison gate. The ancients were not ashamed of the lowly position. What is there to regret?

古文：故其《赞》曰：仲山通达，卷舒无方，屈身厮役，挺秀含芳。
现代文：所以对孔篙的赞词说：仲山豁达不拘，为人能屈能伸；屈身甘当仆役，高风卓异不群。
English: Therefore, the praise for Confucius said: "Nakayama is open-minded and unconstrained, he is able to bend and stretch; he is willing to bend down and be a servant, and his high style is unique.

古文：又屈南过淯阳县东，淯水又南入县，径小长安。
现代文：又转弯往南流过淯阳县东边，淯水又南流，进入县境，流经小长安。
English: It turned south and flowed through the eastern edge of Poyang County, and the southern stream of Surabaya entered the county border and flowed through Xiaochang'an.

古文：司马彪《郡国志》曰：县有小长安聚。
现代文：司马彪《郡国志》说：县里有小长安聚。
English: Sima Biao, "County History," said: There are small Chang'an gatherings in the county.

古文：谢沈《汉书》称：光武攻清阳不下，引兵欲攻宛，至小长安，与甄阜战，败于此。
现代文：谢沈《汉书》说：光武帝进攻清阳却攻不进去，带兵想去攻宛，到了小长安，与甄阜交战，却打了败仗。
English: Xie Shen's "Hanshu" said: Emperor Guangwu attacked Qingyang but could not enter it. He led his soldiers to want to attack Wan. When he arrived at Xiaochang'an, he fought against Zhenfu, but was defeated.

古文：淯水又西南径其县故城南。
现代文：淯水又往西南流，经过清阳县老城南面。
English: Surabaya water also flows to the southwest, passing south of the old city of Qingyang County.

古文：桓帝延熹七年，封邓秉为侯国。
现代文：桓帝延熹七年，把清阳封给邓 秉，立为侯国。
English: Emperor Kuan extended his reign for seven years and assigned Qingyang to Deng Bing, establishing it as a vassal state.

古文：县故南阳典农治，后以为淯阳郡，省郡复县，避晋简文讳，更名云阳焉。
现代文：清阳县是旧时南阳典农的治所，后来改为清阳郡，接着又废郡复县，因避晋简文帝讳，改名云阳。
English: Qingyang County was the former Nanyang Fenyong's administrative center. Later, it was changed to Qingyang County, and then the county was abolished, and the county was renamed Yunyang to avoid the influence of Emperor Jianwen.

古文：淯水又径安乐郡北。
现代文：淯水又流经安乐郡北面。
English: Surabaya water also flows through the northern part of Anle County.

古文：汉桓帝建和元年，封司徒胡广为淯阳县安乐乡侯，今于其国立乐宅戍。
现代文：汉桓帝建和元年，封司徒胡广为清阳县安乐乡侯，现在就在当时的侯国设立乐宅戍。
English: In the first year of the Han Dynasty, Hu Guang, a scholar of Confucianism, was appointed as the governor of Anle Township, Qingyang County. Now, he has set up a pleasure house in the then-governor's country.

古文：郭仲产《襄阳记》曰：南阳城南九十里，有晋尚书令乐广故宅。
现代文：郭仲产《襄阳记》说：南阳城南九十里，有晋尚书令乐广故居。
English: Guo Zhongzang's "Diary of Xiangyang" said: Ninety miles south of Nanyang City, there is the former residence of Jinshang Shiling Leguang.

古文：广字彦辅，善清言，见重当时。
现代文：乐广字彦辅，善于清淡，当时很受人尊重。
English: Leguang Zhihanfu, good at lightness, was highly respected at that time.

古文：成都王，广女婿，长沙王猜之。
现代文：成都王是乐广女婿，长沙王对他颇为猜忌。
English: Chengdu Wang is the son-in-law of Le Guang, Changsha Wang is quite suspicious of him.

古文：广曰：宁以一女而易五男。
现代文：乐广说：难道我会用五个儿子来换一个女儿吗？
English: Le Guang said: "Would I trade five sons for one daughter?

古文：犹疑之，终以忧殒。
现代文：长沙王还是猜忌他，乐广终于在他的故居里愁忧而死。
English: The King of Changsha was still suspicious of him, and Le Guang finally died of sorrow in his former residence.

古文：其故居今置戍，因以为名。
现代文：现在设置边防城堡，因而就以乐宅命名。
English: Now there is a border castle, which is why it is named after the pleasure house.

古文：又南过新野县西，淯水又南入新野县，枝津分派，东南出，隰衍苞注，左积为陂，东西九里，南北十五里，陂水所溉，咸为良沃。
现代文：又往南流过新野县西边，淯水又往南流，进入新野县后，分出一条支流，向东南平坦的低地流去，在左边蓄积成破塘，东西宽九里，南北长十五里。塘水灌溉得到的田亩，都成为肥沃的良田。
English: It flows southward through the western part of Nino County, and the floodwaters flow southward again. After entering Nino County, a tributary is separated and flows to the flat lowlands in the southeast. On the left, it accumulates into a broken pond, nine miles wide from east to west and fifteen miles long from north to south. The fields irrigated by the pond water all become fertile good fields.

古文：淯水又南与湍水会，又南径新野县故城西。
现代文：淯水又往南流，与湍水汇合；又往南流经新野县老城西边。
English: Surabaya also flows southward, merging with Surabaya; it also flows southward through the west side of the old town of Nino County.

古文：世祖之败小长安也，姊元遇害。
现代文：世祖在小长安打了败仗，他的姐姐刘元被杀害了。
English: Shizu fought a losing battle in Xiaochang'an, and his sister Liu Yuan was killed.

古文：上即位，感悼姊没，追谥元为新野节义长公主，即此邑也。
现代文：他即位后，悼念姐姐的死，就追溢她为新野节义长公主；新野就是此城。
English: After he ascended to the throne, he mourned the death of his sister and remembered her as Nino-sai, the eldest princess; Nino is this city.

古文：晋咸宁二年，封大司马扶风武王少子歆为新野郡公，割南阳五属，棘阳、蔡阳、穰、邓、山都封焉。
现代文：晋咸宁二年，封大司马扶风武王的小儿子欲为新野郡公，划出南阳的五个属县―棘阳、蔡阳、攘、邓、山都封给他。
English: In the second year of Jin Xianning, the younger son of the Grand Master Ma Fufeng Wu Wang, who wanted to be the governor of Nino County, designated five counties belonging to Nanyang - Spineyang, Caiyang, Jiao, Deng and Shandu - to be assigned to him.

古文：王文舒更立中隔，西即郡治，东则民居，城西傍淯水。
现代文：王文舒又在中间另筑了一道隔城，把城中分成两部分：西部是郡治，东部是居民区；郡城西濒淯水。
English: Wang Wenshu also built another partition in the middle of the city, dividing the city into two parts: the west is the county seat, the east is the residential area; the west of the county seat is on the edge of Surabaya.

古文：又东与朝水合，水出西北赤石山，而东南径冠军县界，地名沙渠。又东南径穰县故城南，楚别邑也。秦拔鄢郢，即以为县，秦昭王封相魏冉为侯邑。王莽更名曰农穰也。魏荆州刺史治。
现代文：消水又往东流，与朝水汇合。朝水发源于西北方的赤石山，往东南流经冠军县边界，地名叫沙渠，又往东南流经攘县老城南面，这里原来是楚国的陪都，秦攻下郡郑，就设置为县，秦昭王把这地方封给他的宰相魏冉为侯邑，王莽改名为农攘，也是魏荆州刺史的治所。
English: The morning water originates from the northwest of the Red Rock Mountain, flows southeast through the border of Champion County, the place is called Sand Canal, and flows southeast through the south of the old city of Jingxian County. This was originally the capital of Chu. When the Qin conquered the county of Zheng, it was set up as a county. Qin Zhao Wang sealed this place to his prime minister Wei Ran for Houyun, Wang Mang was renamed as Nongyo, and it was also the seat of Wei Jingzhou.

古文：朝水又东南，分为二水，一水枝分东北为樊氏陂，陂东西十里，南北五里，俗谓之凡亭陂。
现代文：朝水又往东南流，分成两条水，一条向东北分流，成为樊氏殴。这片破塘东西长十里，南北宽五里，俗称凡亭破；破东有樊氏故居，樊氏灭绝后，庚氏取得他们的破塘。
English: The upstream water flows to the southeast, splitting into two streams, and one branching off to the northeast, becoming the Rui's Pool. This piece of broken pond is ten miles long from east to west and five miles wide from north to south, commonly known as the Fantei Pool; there is the Rui's former residence in the east of the pond. After the extinction of the Rui's, the Geng's family acquired their broken pond.

古文：陂东有樊氏故宅，樊氏既灭，庾氏取其陂，故谚曰：陂汪汪，下田良，樊子失业痰公昌。
现代文：所以民谚说：破塘一片汪洋，下边土肥田良。
English: Therefore, the people's proverb says: the broken pond is a vast ocean, and the soil and fertilizer fields below are good.

古文：昔在晋世，杜预继信臣之业，复六门陂，遏六门之水，下结二十九陂。诸陂散流，咸入朝水，事见《六门碑》。
现代文：樊子丢了产业，庚公于是兴旺。从前在晋时，杜预继承了信臣的产业，恢复了六门破。他堵住六门的水，在下游蓄积成二十九个破塘，这些破塘的水分散流泄，都注入朝水。这些情况在六门碑里都有记载。
English: Once upon a time in the Jin Dynasty, Du Yueh inherited the estate of a trusted vassal and restored the Six Gates. He blocked the water of the Six Gates and accumulated it in the downstream into twenty-nine broken ponds. The water of these broken ponds was dispersed and leaked, all of which was injected into the morning water. These conditions are recorded in the Six Gates Monument.

古文：六门既陂，诸陂遂断。
现代文：六门筑塘之后，诸破就都断水了。
English: After the construction of six reservoirs, water was cut off in all districts.

古文：朝水又东径朝阳县故城北，而东南注于淯水。又东南与棘水合，水上承堵水。
现代文：朝水又往东流经朝阳县老城北面，往东南注入淯水；淯水又往东南流，与棘水汇合。棘水上流承接堵水。
English: The morning water also flows eastward through the north side of the old city of Chaoyang County and injects the afternoon water to the southeast; the afternoon water also flows southeastward and merges with the afternoon water.

古文：堵水出棘阳县北山，数源并发，南流径小堵乡，谓之小堵水。
现代文：堵水发源于棘阳县北山，几个源头同时并发，往南流经小堵乡，叫小堵水。
English: The blocked water originates from Beishan, Spineyang County. Several sources are concurrent at the same time. It flows southward through Xiaotou Township and is called Xiaotou Water.

古文：世祖建武二年，成安侯臧宫从上击堵乡。
现代文：世祖建武二年，成安侯减宫跟随皇上攻击堵乡。
English: In the second year of Emperor Jianwu's reign, Cheng'an marquis Yan Gong followed the emperor to attack and block the township.

古文：东源方七八步，腾涌若沸，故世名之腾沸水。南流径于堵乡，谓之堵水。
现代文：东边的源头方圆七八步，翻腾上涌好像沸水一般，所以人们称为腾沸水；往南流经堵乡，名叫堵水。
English: The source on the east is seven or eight steps in a circle, and the churning upstream is like boiling water, so people call it boiling water; the southward flow through the township is called blocking water.

古文：建武三年，祭遵引兵南击董訢于堵乡。
现代文：建武三年，祭遵率兵南下，在堵乡进攻董诉。
English: In the third year of Jianwu, Zai Zun led his soldiers to the south and attacked Dong Sui in Tougou Township.

古文：以水氏县，故有堵阳之名也。
现代文：县以水命名，所以有堵阳之名。
English: The county was named after water, hence the name "Touyang."

古文：《地理志》曰：县有堵水，王莽曰阳城也。汉哀帝改为顺阳。
现代文：《地理志》说：县里有堵水，王莽称为阳城，汉哀帝时改名顺阳。
English: "Geography" said: There are water blockages in the county, Wang Mang is called Yangcheng, and Han Ai changed his name to Shunyang.

古文：建武二年，更封安阳侯朱佑为堵阳侯。
现代文：建武二年，改封安阳侯朱佑为堵阳侯。
English: In the second year of Jianwu, he changed his title from Anyang Hou Zhu You to Doyang Hou.

古文：堵水于县，竭以为陂，东西夹冈，水相去五六里，古今断冈两舌，都水潭涨，南北十余里，水决南溃，下注为湾。湾分为二，西为堵水，东为荣源。
现代文：堵水在县境内筑堰造破，破水东西两边都是山冈，两岸相距五六里；截断山冈两边的山舌，积水涨满以后，南北长十余里。破水冲出堤塘向南溃决，下注成为水湾，水湾又分成两部分，西边就是堵水，东边是荣源。
English: The water dam was built and broken in the county. The mountains and hills are on both sides of the water break, and the distance between the two sides is five or six miles. The mountains and hills on both sides were cut off, and after the accumulation of water was full, it was more than ten miles long from north to south. The water broke out of the dike to the south, and the dam became a water bay. The water bay was divided into two parts, the west side is the water dam, and the east side is the source of glory.

古文：堵水参差，流结两湖，故有东陂、西陂之名。
现代文：堵水水道凌乱不齐，水流汇聚成两个湖泊，所以有东破、西破之名。
English: The blockage of the water channel is messy and uneven, and the water flow converges into two lakes, so there are the names of Dongba and Xiba.

古文：二陂所导，其水枝分，东南至会口人比。是以《地理志》比水、堵水，皆言入蔡，互受通称故也。
现代文：从两个破塘引出的水流分成几条，往东南流到会口，注入比水，所以《地理志》提到比水和堵水，都说注入蔡水，那是相互通称的缘故。
English: The water flow from the two broken ponds is divided into several streams, flowing southeast to the junction, and injecting specific water. Therefore, "Geography" mentioned specific water and blocked water, and said that it was injected into Cai Shui. That is the reason for the mutual nickname.

古文：二湖流注，合为黄水、惟所受焉。径棘阳县之黄淳聚，又谓之为黄淳水者也。
现代文：二湖湖水外流，汇成黄水。黄水流经棘阳县的黄淳聚，又叫黄淳水。谢沈《后汉书》。
English: The outflow of the lake water of the two lakes converges into yellow water. The yellow water flows through Huang Chunju in Spineyang County, also known as Huang Chun water. Xie Shen "Hou Han Shu."

古文：谢沈《后汉书》，甄阜等败光武于小长安东、乘胜南渡黄淳水前营，背阻两川，谓临比水，绝后桥，示无还心。
现代文：甄阜等在小长安东打败光武帝后，就乘胜南渡黄淳水，先头部队背后隔了两条水，以为到了比水，断去背后的桥梁，表示决心死战，就可以取胜。
English: Zhenfu and others, after defeating Emperor Guangwu in Xiaochang and Dong, took advantage of the victory in the south to cross the Yellow and Blue Water. The leading troops were separated by two rivers behind them. They thought that if they reached the Yellow and Blue Water, they could win by breaking the bridge behind them and expressing their determination to fight to the death.

古文：汉兵击之，三军溃，溺死黄淳水者二万人。
现代文：汉兵发动进攻，三军溃败，溺死于黄淳水的达两万人。
English: Han soldiers launched an attack, the three armies were defeated, and up to twenty thousand people drowned in Huang Chunshui.

古文：又南径棘阳县故城西。
现代文：水又往南流经棘阳县老城西面。
English: The water also flowed southward to the west of the old city of Spineyang County.

古文：应劭曰：县在棘水之阳，是知斯水为棘水也。
现代文：应肋说：县在棘水之阳。由此可见这条水就是棘水。
English: Ying Li said: The county is in the sun of thorny water. It can be seen that this water is thorny water.

古文：汉高帝七年，封杜得臣为侯国。
现代文：汉高帝七年前的把棘阳封给杜得臣，立为侯国。
English: Seven years ago, Emperor Han Gao assigned Spindle Yang to Dudesen and established it as a vassal state.

古文：后汉兵起，击唐子乡，杀湖阳尉，进拔棘阳，邓晨将宾客会光武于此县也。
现代文：后汉起兵进攻唐子乡，杀了湖阳尉，往前推进，攻下棘阳。邓晨率领宾客，就在此县会见光武帝。
English: Later, Han soldiers attacked Tangzi Township, killed Lieutenant Hoyang, pushed forward, and conquered Spineyang. Deng Chen led the guests to meet Emperor Guangwu in this county.

古文：棘水又南径新野县，历黄邮聚。
现代文：棘水又往南流经新野县，流过黄邮聚。
English: The thorny water also flows south through Nino County and flows through Huangpu.

古文：世祖建武三年，傅俊、岑彭进击秦丰，先拨黄邮者也，谓之黄邮水。大司马吴汉破秦丰于斯水之上。
现代文：世祖建武三年，傅俊、岑彭进攻秦丰，首先攻下的就是黄邮，这条水就叫黄邮水；大司马吴汉也在这条水上大败秦丰。
English: In the third year of Emperor Jianwu's reign, Fu Jun and Zi Peng attacked Qin Feng. The first to be conquered was Huangpu, and this water was called Huangpu water; the commander Ma Wuhan also defeated Qin Feng on this water.

古文：其聚落悉为蛮居，犹名之为黄邮蛮。
现代文：那个地区的聚落都是蛮人所居，现在还叫黄邮蛮。
English: The settlements in that area were all inhabited by barbarians, and are still called Huangpu Barbarians.

古文：棘水自新野县东，而南流入于涓水，谓之为力口也。
现代文：棘水从新野县东边往南流，注入淯水，汇流处叫力口。
English: Thorny water flows south from the eastern edge of Nino County, injecting salty water, and the confluence is called the mouth of the river.

古文：棘、力声相近，当为棘口也。
现代文：棘、力二字因音近而误，原当称为棘口才对。
English: The two characters "棘" and "力" are misspelled because they are close to each other. They should have been called "棘口" instead.

古文：又是方俗之音，故字从读变，若世以棘子木为力子木是也。
现代文：民间照方言的读音，所以字也随音而变，正像民间把棘子木叫做力子木一样。
English: Folk pronounce it according to the dialect, so the character also changes with the sound, just as folk call the thorn tree the force tree.

古文：涓水又东南径士林东，戍名也，戍有邪阁。
现代文：淯水又往东南流经士林东边。士林是边防城堡名，内有仓库。
English: The Surabaya River flows southeast through the eastern part of Shilin. Shilin is the name of the border castle, which contains a warehouse.

古文：水左有豫章大肢，下灌良畴三千许顷也。
现代文：淯水左边有豫章大破，能灌溉下游良田三千余顷。
English: There is a large broken Yuzhang on the left side of the stream, which can irrigate more than three thousand hectares of downstream fields.

古文：南过邓县东，县故邓侯吾离之国也，楚文王灭之，秦以为县。
现代文：往南流过邓县东边，邓县，从前是邓侯吾离的封国，楚文王灭邓，秦时设置为县。
English: Flowing southward through the east side of Deng County, Deng County was once a fiefdom of Deng Houwu, Chu Wen Wang exterminated Deng, and was set up as a county in the Qin Dynasty.

古文：淯水右合浊水，俗谓之弱沟水。
现代文：淯水在右边汇合了浊水，俗称弱沟。
English: Surabaya joins Surabaya on the right, commonly known as Weak Ditch.

古文：上承白水于朝阳县，东南流径邓县故城南。
现代文：弱沟上流在朝阳县承接白水，往东南流经邓县老城南边。
English: The upstream of the weak ditch in Chaoyang County is connected to Baishui, and flows southeast through the southern part of the old city of Deng County.

古文：习凿齿《襄阳记》曰：楚王至邓之浊水，去襄阳二十里。
现代文：习凿齿《襄阳记》说：楚王到了邓的浊水，距襄阳二十里，说的就是这条水。
English: "The History of Xiangyang" said: King Chu arrived in Deng's Surabaya, twenty miles from Xiangyang, and it was this water that he was talking about.

古文：即此水也。
现代文：浊水又往东流经邓塞北边。
English: Surabaya water also flows eastward through the northern part of Dangse.

古文：浊水又东径邓塞北，即邓城东南小山也，方俗名之为邓塞，昔孙文台破黄祖于其下。
现代文：邓塞是当地的土名，就是邓城东南的小山，从前孙文台曾在山下击溃黄祖的兵。浊水又东流，注入淯水。
English: Dunsei is the local place name, which is a hill southeast of Dengcheng. Former Sun Yat-sen once defeated the soldiers of the Yellow Emperor at the foot of the hill. Surabaya also flows to the east, injecting Surabaya.

古文：浊水东流注于淯，淯水又南径邓塞东，又径城东，古子国也。盖邓之南鄙也。
现代文：俏水又往南流经邓塞东边，又流经郭城东边。郭城就是古时的郭子国，在邓县的南部边境。
English: Qiu Shui also flows south through the eastern side of Dangse, and flows through the eastern side of Guocheng. Guocheng is the ancient Guozi country, in the southern border of Deng County.

古文：昔巴子请楚与邓为好，人夺其币，即是邑也。司马彪以为邓之聚矣。
现代文：从前巴子请楚与邓修好，郭人夺取了他的钱币，就是此城；司马彪则以为就是邓县的郧聚。
English: Once upon a time, Bazi asked Chu to make peace with Deng, and Guo Ren seized his coins, which is this city; Sima Biao thought it was the gathering of Deng County.

古文：南入于沔。
现代文：往南流注人沔水。
English: The south-flowing water is used to irrigate crops.

古文：水出强县南泽中，东入颍。
现代文：氵隐水发源于氵隐强县南边的沼泽中，往东流注人颖水。
English: The water originates from a swamp in the southern part of the county and flows eastward into the Hitoyoshi River.

古文：水出颍川阳城县少室山，东流注于颖水，而乱流东南径临颍县西北，小水出焉。东径临颍县故城北。
现代文：氵隐水发源于颖川阳城县少室山，东流注入颖水。氵隐水往东南乱流，经过临颖县西北；小氵隐水发源在这里，往东流经临颖县老城北边。
English: The Yingchuan Hidden Water originates from Shomuroyama, Yangcheng County, Yingchuan, and the eastward flow injects the Yingchuan Hidden Water. The southeastward turbulent flow of the Yingchuan Hidden Water passes through the northwest of Linying County; the small hidden water originates here and flows eastward through the north of the old city of Linying County.

古文：水又东径阳城北又东径强县故城甫，建武二年，世祖封扬化将军坚镡为侯国。
现代文：氵隐水又往东流经氵隐阳城北边；又往东流过氵隐强县老城南边。建武二年，世祖把氵隐阳封给扬化将军坚谭，立为侯国。
English: In the second year of the Jianwu era, the ancestors gave the fief of Jianyang to the Yanghua general Jian Tan and established Jianyang as a principality.

古文：水东为陶枢陂，余按阳城在水南，然则此城正应为阴城，而有阳之名者，明在南犹有水，故此城以阳为名矣，颍水之南有二渎。
现代文：氵隐水往东流就是陶枢破。我按氵隐阳城在氵隐水以南，那么此城就应当叫氵隐阴城才对，可是却得了氵隐阳之名，这说明在南边还有一条氵隐水，所以此城就以阳为名了。
English: The eastward flow of the hidden water is the Tao Zhanba. I press the hidden water to the south of the hidden water, so this city should be called the hidden water, but it got the name of the hidden water. This shows that there is still a hidden water in the south, so this city is named after the sun.

古文：其南渎东南流，历临颍亭西，东南入汝，今无水也，疑即水之故渎矣。
现代文：颖水以南有两条水渠，南渠往东南流经颖亭西边，往东南注入汝水，现在无水了，想来可能就是氵隐水的旧渠道。
English: There are two canals to the south of Ying Shui. The south canal flows southeast through the west side of Ying Ting, and injects water to the southeast. Now there is no water, and it may be the old channel of hidden water.

古文：汝水于奇雒城西，别东派，时人谓之大水，东北流，枝渎右出，世谓之死汝也。
现代文：汝水在奇锥城西边分出东支，当时人们称为大氵隐水；大氵隐水往东北流，在右边分出一条支渠，人们称为死汝。
English: At that time, people called the eastern branch of the Zhishui River, which branched out from the west side of Qidong City, the Daxu Hidden Water. The Daxu Hidden Water flowed to the northeast, and a branch canal was formed on the right side, which was called the Zhishui River.

古文：别汝又东北，径召陵城北，练沟出焉。别汝又东，汾沟出焉。
现代文：别汝又往东北流经召陵城北边，练沟从那里分出；别汝又往东流，有汾沟流出。
English: The Beiru also flows to the northeast, passing through the northern side of Zhaoling City, from where the Liangou is separated; the Beiru also flows to the east, with a gully flowing out.

古文：别汝又东，径征羌城北。水南有汾陂，俗音粪。
现代文：别汝又往东流经征羌城北边，水南有汾破―汾，俗语读作粪。
English: Biryu also flows eastward through the north side of the city of Zhengzhou. In the south of the water, there is pus - pus, commonly read as excrement.

古文：汾水自别汝东注，而为此陂。水积征羌城北四五里，方三十里许。
现代文：汾水从别汝东流，形成这个破塘，水在征羌城北四五里处蓄积起来，方圆三十余里。
English: This broken pond was formed by the east-flowing water of the Beiru River. The water accumulated four or five miles north of the city of Zhengzhou, with a circumference of more than 30 miles.

古文：读左合小水，水上承狼陂南流，名曰巩水。青陵陂水自陂东注之。东回又谓之小水，而南流注于大水。
现代文：水渠在左边汇合了小氵隐水。小氵隐水上流承接狼破，往南流，名为巩水，青陵破水从阪东注入，转回东边，又称为小氵隐水了，然后南流注入大氵隐水。
English: On the left, the canals join the Xiaojing Water. The upstream flow of the Xiaojing Water is called the Gongshui, which flows southward, while the Qingling Water is injected from the east of the Bund, turned back to the east, and is also called the Xiaojing Water, and then the southward flow is injected into the Daxi Hidden Water.

古文：大水取称，盖藉沿注，而总受其目矣。
现代文：大氵隐水的取名，大概是依氵隐水沿途流注，给它冠以这个总名的。
English: The name of the Otsu Hidden Water is probably derived from the streams that flow along the path of the Otsu Hidden Water, giving it this common name.

古文：又东径西华县故城南，又东径汝阳县故城北，东注于颖。
现代文：又往东流经西华县老城南边；又往东流经汝阳县老城北边，东流注入颖水。
English: It also flows eastward through the south side of the old city of Xihua County; it also flows eastward through the north side of the old city of Ruyang County, and the east stream is injected into Yingshui.

古文：水出汝南吴房县西北奥山，东过其县，北入于汝。
现代文：灈水发源于汝南郡吴房县西北的奥山，往东流过县北，注人汝水。
English: The Yunnan River originates from the Okuyama Mountains in the northwest of Wufang County, Yunnan County. It flows eastward through the northern part of the county and discharges into the Yunnan River.

古文：县西北有棠溪城。故房子国。
现代文：吴房县西北有棠黔城，就是旧时的房子国。
English: In the northwest of Wufang County, there is Tanggu City, which was once a country of houses.

古文：《春秋》定公五年，吴王阖闾弟夫概奔楚，封之于棠溪，故曰吴房也。
现代文：《春秋》：定公五年前，吴王阖间弟夫栗逃奔到楚国，楚把棠黔封给他，所以叫吴房。
English: "Spring and Autumn": Ding Gong five years ago, Wu Wang Yao's younger brother, Li, fled to Chu, and Chu gave him Tang Yao, so he was called Wu Fang.

古文：汉高帝八年，封庄侯杨武为侯国。建武中，世祖封泗水王歙子为棠溪侯。
现代文：汉高祖八年前，把这地方封给庄侯杨武，立为侯国；建武年间一，世祖封泗水王刘款的儿子刘惮为棠黔侯。
English: Eight years ago, the founder of the Han Dynasty, Emperor Gaozong, granted this place to the village lord Yang Wu and established it as a vassal state. In the first year of the Jianwu era, the founder of the dynasty, Emperor Gaozong, granted Liu Shuo, the son of the water king Liu Xi, the title of vassal lord of the Tang Dynasty.

古文：山溪有白羊渊，渊水旧出山羊，汉武帝元封二年，白羊出此渊，畜牧者祷祀之。
现代文：山溪里有个白羊渊，渊水里从前现过山羊。汉武帝元封二年前，白羊从渊里出来，牧人都来向它祈祷和祭祀。
English: There is a white sheep abyss in the mountain stream, and goats once appeared in the water of the abyss. Two years before Emperor Hanwu's enthronement, a white sheep emerged from the abyss, and the shepherds came to pray and offer sacrifices to it.

古文：俗禁拍手，尝有羊出水，野母惊拍，自此绝焉。
现代文：这里的风俗禁止拍手。一次有羊从渊水中出现，有个乡下老太婆吃惊地拍手，从此白羊就绝迹了。
English: The custom here forbids clapping hands. Once a sheep emerged from the deep water, and an old woman from the countryside clapped her hands in surprise. From then on, the white sheep disappeared.

古文：渊水下合灈水，灈水东径灈阳县故城西，东流入灈水，乱流径其县南，世祖建武二十八年，封吴汉孙旦为侯国。
现代文：渊水下流与灈水汇合，灈水往东流经灈阳县老城西面，往东注入涂水，从县南乱流而过。光武帝建武二十八年，把灈阳封给吴汉孙吴旦，立为侯国。
English: In the 28th year of Emperor Jianwu, Emperor Guangwu assigned the fief of Fenyang to Wu Hansun Wudang and established it as a vassal state.

古文：其水又东入于汝水。
现代文：水又往东流，注入汝水。
English: The water also flows eastward, injecting the spring water.

古文：水出阴县东上界山，《山海经》谓之视水也。
现代文：瀙水发源于洗阴县东边的上界山，瀙水，《山海经》叫视水。
English: Surabaya originated from Shangjie Mountain in the eastern part of Shiyin County. Surabaya is called Shishimizu in the "Sanghaikyo" (Book of Mountains and Seas).

古文：郭景纯《注》：或曰，视宜为，出葴山。
现代文：郭景纯注，有人说视字应当是瀙字。
English: Guo Jingjun noted that some people said that the viewing word should be the swastika.

古文：许慎云：出中阳山。
现代文：瀙水发源于咸山，许慎却说发源于中阳山，这都是山的异名。
English: Surabaya originated from the Aral Mountains, but Xu Shen said that it originated from the Zhongyang Mountains, which are all different names of mountains.

古文：皆山之殊目也。
现代文：涂水往东流与泌水汇合。
English: The eastward flow of coating water converges with water seepage.

古文：而东与泌水合，水出阴县旱山，东北流注。
现代文：泌水发源于沃阴县的旱山，往东北流，注入涂水。
English: The water seepage originates from the Arid Mountains in Vo Yin County, flows to the northeast, and is injected with coated water.

古文：水又东北，杀水出西南大熟之山，东北流入于。
现代文：瀙水又往东北流，有杀水发源于西南的大熟之山，往东北流，注入涂水。
English: The floodwaters also flowed to the northeast, with floodwaters originating in the southwestern Daxu Mountain flowing to the northeast and injecting coated water.

古文：水又东，沦水注之，水出宣山，东南流注水。
现代文：瀙水又往东流，有沦水注入。沦水发源于宣山，往东南流，注入瀙水。
English: Surabaya water also flows to the east and is infused with rainwater. The rainwater originates from Mt. Xuan Shan and flows to the southeast, where it is infused with Surabaya water.

古文：水又东得奥水口，水西出奥山，东入于水也。
现代文：瀙水又往东流，到奥水口又接纳了一条水，此水发源于西方的奥山，东流注入瀙水。
English: Surabaya water also flows eastward, and another water is received at the Oku water outlet. This water originates from the western Oku Mountains, and the eastward flow injects Surabaya water.

古文：东过吴房县南，又东过灈阳县南，应劭曰：灈水出吴房县，东入，县之西北，即两川之交会也。
现代文：往东流过吴房县南面，又往东流过灈阳县南面，应劭说：灈水发源于吴房县，往东流注入瀙水。吴房县西北，就是两水汇合的地方。
English: It flows eastward through the southern part of Wufang County, and then eastward through the southern part of Puyang County. Ying Qi said: "Wufang Water originates from Wufang County, and flows eastward into Puyang Water. The northwest of Wufang County is where the two waters converge.

古文：又东过上蔡县南，东入汝。
现代文：又往东流过上蔡县南面，东流注人汝水。
English: It also flows eastward through the southern part of Shangcai County, and the eastern stream is the source of Renren water.

古文：水出阴县西北扶予山，东过其县南，《山海经》曰：朝歌之山，水出焉，东南流注于荣。
现代文：潕水发源于沃阴县西北方的扶予山，往东流过县南，《山海经》说：朝歌之山是潕水的发源地，往东南流，注入荥水。
English: Surabaya's water originates from Fuyoshan in the northwest of Voin County and flows eastward through the south of the county. "Sanghaikyo" says: "Mountain of Morning Song is the birthplace of Surabaya's water. It flows to the southeast and injects Surabaya's water."

古文：《经》书扶予者，其山之异名乎？
现代文：《水经》写作扶予，也许是山的别名吧？
English: "Water Sutra" was written by Fuyu, maybe it's another name for the mountain?

古文：荥水上承堵水，东流，左与西辽水合，又东，东辽水注之，俱导北山，而南流注于荣。
现代文：荣水上流承接堵水，往东流，在左边与西辽水汇合；又往东流，有东辽水注入。这两条水都出自北山，南流注入荥水。
English: The upper stream of Rongshui receives the blocked water, flows eastward, and merges with the west Liao water on the left; and flows eastward, with the east Liao water injected. Both of these waters come from the north mountain, and the south stream injects the water.

古文：荥水又东北，于阴县北左会水，其道稍西，不出其县南，其故城在山之阳，汉光武建武中，封岑彭为侯国，汉以为阳山县。
现代文：荥水又往东北流，在潕阴县以北向左汇合了潕水；水道稍偏西，并不流经县南，老城则在山南。东汉光武年间，把沃阴封给岑彭，立为侯国，汉时称为阳山县。
English: Surabaya also flows to the northeast, merging with Surabaya to the north and to the left of Surabaya County; the waterway is slightly west, and does not flow through the south of the county, and the old city is in the south of Shanshan. During the Eastern Han Dynasty Guangwu, Wo Yin was sealed to Shu Peng and established as a vassal state, and was called Yangshan County during the Han Dynasty.

古文：魏武与张绣战于宛，马名绝景，为流矢所中，公伤右臂，引还阴，即是地也。
现代文：魏武帝在宛与张绣作战，有一匹马名叫绝景，被乱箭射中，他的右臂也受了伤。只得率兵回到沈阴，就是这地方。
English: Emperor Wu of the Wei Dynasty fought against Zhang Xiu in Wan, and one horse named Juejing was shot by random arrows, and his right arm was also injured. He had to lead his soldiers back to Shenyin, which is this place.

古文：城之东有马仁陂。
现代文：城东有马仁破。
English: In the east of the city, there is a horse-drawn carriage.

古文：郭仲产曰：肢在比阳县西五十里，盖地百顷，其所周溉田万顷，随年变种，境无俭岁。
现代文：郭仲产说：破塘在比阳县以西五十里，占地百顷，周围受到灌溉的田亩达万顷，按年轮种，境内没有荒年。
English: Guo Zhongyan said: "Batang is located 50 miles west of Zhuang in Biyang County, covering an area of 100 hectares. The irrigated fields around it are up to 10,000 hectares, and are planted in rotation every year. There is no year of drought in the territory.

古文：陂水三周其隍，故渎自隍西南而会于比，水不得复径其南也。
现代文：破水三面围绕护城河，旧渠从护城河往西南流，汇合于比水。潕水是不可能又从它南面流过的。
English: The three sides of the breakwater surround the moat, and the old canal flows from the moat to the southwest, merging with the water. It is impossible for the water to flow south of it.

古文：且邑号阴，故无出南之理，出南则为阳也。非直不究，又不恩矣。
现代文：而且城名潕阴，所以也没有从南边流过的道理；如果从南边流过，那就该叫潕阳了，《水经》不但没有细究，而且也不动脑筋去想想。
English: Moreover, the name of the city is Shuyin, so there is no reason to flow from the south; if it flows from the south, it should be called Shuyang. "Water Sutra" is not only not meticulous, but also does not think about it.

古文：水又东北，澧水注之。
现代文：潕水又往东北流，有河水注入。
English: The floodwaters also flowed to the northeast, and river water was injected.

古文：水出雉衡山，东南径建城东，建当为卷，字读误耳。
现代文：澄水发源于难衡山，往东南流经建城东边。建字应当是卷字，是由千读音错误造成的。
English: The clear water originates from Mount Nangang and flows southeast through the eastern side of Jiancheng. Jianji should be a scroll, which is caused by a thousand pronunciation errors.

古文：《郡国志》云：叶县有卷城。
现代文：《郡国志》说：叶县有卷城。
English: "County History" said: Ye County has a wind-up city.

古文：其水又东流入干扰。
现代文：水又东流，注入潕水。
English: Water also flows to the east, injecting brackish water.

古文：水东北径于东山西，西流入。
现代文：潕水往东北流经东山西边，有溪水从山中流出，西流注入潕水。
English: Surabaya water flows to the northeast through the west side of Dongshan. Some streams flow out of the mountain, and the west stream injects Surabaya water.

古文：水之左，即黄城山也。有溪水出黄城山，东北径方城。
现代文：潕水左边是黄城山，有溪水发源于此山，往东北流经方城。
English: To the left of Surabaya is Huangcheng Mountain. A stream originates from this mountain and flows northeast through Fangcheng.

古文：《郡国志》曰：叶县有方城。
现代文：《郡国志》说：叶县有方城。
English: "County National History" said: Ye County has Fangcheng.

古文：郭仲产曰：苦菜、于东之间，有小城，名方城，东临溪水。
现代文：郭仲产说：在苦菜、于东之间有个小城，名叫方城，东濒溪水。
English: Guo Zhongyuan said: There is a small town between the Bitter Vegetable and the East, called Fangcheng, which is on the east side of the creek.

古文：寻此城致号之由，当因山以表名也。
现代文：探究这个小城得名的缘由，想当是按山命名的。
English: Investigate the origin of the name of this small town, thinking that it was named after the mountain.

古文：苦菜即黄城也，及于东，通为方城矣。世谓之方城山水，东流注水。
现代文：一苦菜山就是黄城山，由此直到于东，通称方城山，水就叫方城山水，往东流，注入沃水。
English: A mountain of bitter cabbage is Huangcheng Mountain, and from there to the east, commonly known as Fangcheng Mountain, the water is called Fangcheng Mountain Water, flowing eastward and injecting fertile water.

古文：故《圣贤冢墓记》曰：南阳叶邑方城西有黄城山，是长沮、桀溺耦耕之所，有东流水，则子路问津处。
现代文：所以《圣贤家墓记》说：南阳叶邑方城西有黄城山，是长沮、架溺两人一起耕田的地方；有东流水，则是子路问津之处。
English: Therefore, "The Epitaph of the Sage Family" says: To the west of Fangcheng in Nanyangye, there is Huangcheng Mountain, which is a place for two people to cultivate the fields together; if there is Dongliu Shui, it is a place to ask for help.

古文：《尸子》曰：楚狂接舆耕千方城。
现代文：尸子说：楚狂接舆在方城耕田，大概就是这里。
English: The corpse said, "Chu Yanqianmei is in the Fangcheng farmland, probably here."

古文：盖于此也。盛弘之云：叶东界有故城，始犨县，东至水，达比阳界，南北联联数百里，号为方城，一谓之长城，云郦县有故城一面，未详里数，号为长城，即此城之西隅。
现代文：盛弘之说：叶县东部边界有一道旧城，起于毕县东边，延至涂水，直达比阳边界，南北连绵数百里，称为方城，又叫长城。丽卜县有一道老城，号称长城，但里数不详，就是此城西端的一角。
English: Sheng Hongzhi said: There is an old city on the eastern border of Ye County, starting from the eastern side of Bi County, extending to Tuishui, reaching the border of Biyang, stretching hundreds of miles from north to south, known as Fangcheng, also known as the Great Wall. There is an old city in Libu County, known as the Great Wall, but the number of miles is unknown, which is a corner of the western end of this city.

古文：其间相去六百里，北面虽无基筑，皆连山相接，而汉水流其南，故屈完答齐桓公云楚国方城以为城，汉水以为池。
现代文：中间相距六百里；北面虽然没有城墙，但都有连山相接，汉水就在南面流过。所以屈完回答齐桓公说：楚国以方城为城墙，以汉水为护城河。
English: The distance between them is six hundred miles; although there is no city wall on the north side, there are mountains connected to each other, and Han water flows on the south side. Therefore, Quan answered Qi Kuan Gong, "Chu Province uses Fangcheng as a city wall, and Han water as a moat.

古文：《郡国志》曰：叶县有长山，曰方城。指此城也。
现代文：《郡国志》说：叶县有长山，称为方城，就指这道城。
English: "County History" said: Ye County has a long mountain, called Fangcheng, referring to this city.

古文：水又东北，历舞阳县故城南，汉高祖六年，封樊哙为侯国也。
现代文：潕水继续往东北流，经过舞阳县老城南边。汉高祖六年前，把舞阳封给樊啥，立为侯国。
English: Surabaya continued to flow to the northeast, passing through the south of the old city of Muyang County. Six years ago, the founder of the Han Dynasty, Emperor Gaozong, sealed Muyang to the Mongols and established it as a vassal state.

古文：又东过西平县北，县故柏国也。
现代文：又往东流过西平县北边，西平县就是从前的柏国。
English: It also flows eastward through the northern part of Xiping County, which was formerly known as Bao Guo.

古文：《春秋左传》所谓江、黄、道、柏，方睦于齐也。
现代文：《春秋左传》所谓江、黄、道、柏正与齐交好，就指这个柏国。
English: In "The Legend of Spring and Autumn," the so-called Jiang, Huang, Dao, and Bai Zheng are friends with Qi, referring to this Bai Guo.

古文：汉曰西平，其西吕墟，即西陵亭也。
现代文：汉时叫西平，西面的吕墟就是西陵亭。
English: At the time of the Han Dynasty, it was called Xiping, and the Lu Rui on the west side was Xiling Pavilion.

古文：西陵平夷，故曰西平。
现代文：西陵地势平坦，所以叫西平。
English: Xiling is flat, so it is called Xiping.

古文：汉宣帝甘露三年，封丞相于定国为侯国。王莽更之曰新亭。
现代文：汉宣帝甘露三年前，把西平封给承相于定国，立为侯国；王莽改名为新亭。
English: Three years ago, Emperor Han Xuan gave Xipingfei to Chengxiang of Ding and established it as a vassal state; Wang Mang changed his name to Xinting.

古文：《晋大康地记》曰：县有龙泉水，可以砥砺刀剑，特坚利，故有坚白之论矣。
现代文：《晋太康地记》说：县里有龙泉水，用来磨刀剑，刀剑就特别坚硬锋利，因此有坚白之论。
English: "Jin Tai Kang Di Ji" said: There is Longquan water in the county, which is used to sharpen swords. The swords are particularly hard and sharp, so there is a theory of hardness.

古文：是以龙泉之剑为楚宝也。
现代文：所以龙泉的剑是楚国的宝物。
English: Therefore, Longquan's sword is a treasure of Chu.

古文：县出名金，古有铁官。
现代文：县里出产优质的金属，古时有铁官。
English: The county produces high-quality metals. In ancient times, there was an iron official.

古文：又东过郾县南，郾县故城去此远矣，不得过。
现代文：又往东流过郾县南边，鄙县老城离这里很远，不可能经过。
English: It also flows eastward through the southern part of Handan County. The old town of Handan County is very far away from here, and it is impossible to pass.

古文：又东过定颍县北，东入于汝。
现代文：又往东流过定颖县北边，东流注人汝水。
English: It also flows eastward through the northern part of Dingying County, and the eastward flow of the river is called the Jinren River.

古文：汉安帝永初二年，分汝南郡之上蔡县，置定颖县。顺帝永建元年，以阳翟郭镇为尚书令，封定颍侯，即此邑也。
现代文：汉安帝永初二年，从汝南郡上蔡县分地设置定颖县，顺帝永建元年，任命阳翟郭镇为尚书令，封他为定颖侯，就是此城。
English: In the first two years of the Han Dynasty, Dingying County was set up from Shangcai County, Yunnan County, and in the first year of the Shun Dynasty, Yongjian, Yangzhaoguo Town was appointed as Shangshuling, and he was given the title of Dingying Town. This is the city.

古文：溳水出蔡阳县，溳水出县东南大洪山，山在随郡之西南，竟陵之东北，槃基所跨，广圆百余里。
现代文：溳水发源于蔡阳县，溳水发源于蔡阳县东南的大洪山。大洪山在随郡的西南、竟陵的东北。山脚盘踞的地面，方圆百余里。
English: Surabaya originated in Caiyang County, and Surabaya originated in Taihong Mountain in the southeast of Caiyang County. Taihong Mountain is in the southwest of Su County and the northeast of Jingling. The foot of the mountain is on the ground, with a radius of more than a hundred miles.

古文：峰曰悬钩，处平原众阜之中，为诸岭之秀，山下有石门，夹鄣层峻，岩高皆百许仞。
现代文：有一座高峰叫悬钩峰，在平原上许多丘陵中，显得分外秀丽突出。山下有石门，两边山崖层沓，极其险峻，岩高都有数百仍。
English: There is a peak called Hanging Hook Peak, which stands out beautifully among the many hills on the plain. There are stone gates at the bottom of the mountain, cliffs on both sides, extremely precipitous, and hundreds of rock heights.

古文：入石门，又得钟乳穴。穴上素崖壁立，非人迹所及。
现代文：进了石门，又有个钟乳石溶洞，山洞上方，断崖如壁，草木不生，不是人迹所能到达的。
English: After entering the stone gate, there is another stalactite cave. Above the cave, the cliff is like a wall, and no plants or trees grow. It cannot be reached by foot.

古文：穴中多钟乳，凝膏下垂，望齐冰雪。微律细液，滴沥不断。
现代文：洞中钟乳石很多，如膏汁凝结而成，自洞顶下垂，看来就像雪白的冰锥；岩中渗出的水，滴滴答答地滴个不停。
English: There are a lot of stalactites in the cave, like paste condensation, hanging from the top of the cave, it looks like a snow-white ice cone; water seeping out of the rock, drip by drip.

古文：幽穴潜远，行者不极穷深，以穴内常有风热，无能经久故也。
现代文：洞穴极深邃，没有人曾走到尽头，因为洞里常有强风，火把不久就会熄灭。
English: The cave is very deep, and no one has ever reached the end, because there are often strong winds in the cave, and the torches will soon go out.

古文：溳水出于其阴。初流浅狭，远乃广厚，可以浮舟袱巨川矣。
现代文：溳水发源于山北，开头水流浅而狭，流远后才渐阔渐深，可以撑船放筏，成为一条大河了。
English: Surabaya's water originates from the northern part of the mountain. At the beginning, the water flow is shallow and narrow. After the flow is far away, it gradually widens and deepens. It can be paddled, and it has become a big river.

古文：时人以损水所导，故亦谓之为溳山矣。
现代文：当时人们因溳水发源在这里，所以叫它溳山。
English: At that time, people called it Mount Lushan because the source of the Lushan River was here.

古文：溳水东北流合石水，石水出大洪山，东北流注于涢，谓之小涢水。
现代文：溳水往东北流，与石水汇合。石水发源于大洪山，往东北流，注入溳水，又叫小湿水，乱流往东北奔泻。
English: Surabaya water flows to the northeast and merges with stone water. The stone water originates from Dahong Mountain, flows to the northeast, infusing Surabaya water, also known as small wet water, and the turbulent flow rushes to the northeast.

古文：而乱流东北，径上唐县故城南。
现代文：经过上唐县老城南边。
English: Passing through the southern part of the old town of Shangtang County.

古文：本蔡阳之上唐乡，旧唐侯国。
现代文：上唐县本来是蔡阳的上唐乡，即旧时唐侯的封国。
English: Shangtang County was originally the Shangtang Township of Caiyang, which was the fief of Tang Hou in the old days.

古文：《春秋》定公三年，唐成公如楚，有两肃霜马，子常欲之，弗与，止之三年，唐人窃马而献之，子常归唐侯是也。
现代文：《春秋》：定公三年前，唐成公到楚国，他有两匹肃霜马，子常想要，但唐成公不肯给他，因而被扣留了三年。以后唐人偷了马献给子常，才放唐侯回去。
English: "Spring and Autumn": Three years before Ding Gong, Tang Chenggong came to Chu. He had two frost-beaten horses. Zichang wanted them, but Tang Chenggong refused to give them to him, so he was detained for three years. Later, Tang people stole the horses and gave them to Zichang, only to let Tang Hou go back.

古文：溳水又东，均水注之，水出大洪山，东北流径土山北，又东北流入于溃水。
现代文：溳水又往东流，有均水注入。均水发源于大洪山，往东北流经土山北，又往东北流，注入溳水。
English: Surabaya water also flows eastward, with average water being injected. The average water originates from Dahong Mountain, flows northeastward through the north of Doushan Mountain, and flows northeastward, injecting Surabaya water.

古文：溳水又屈而东南流。
现代文：溳水又转弯往东南流去。
English: Surabaya's waters have turned south-east again.

古文：东南过随县西，县故随国矣。
现代文：往东南流过随县西边，随县就是古时的随国。
English: To the southeast, it flows through the west side of Suixian, and Suixian is the ancient Suiguo.

古文：《春秋左传》所谓汉东之国，随为大者也。
现代文：《春秋左传》说，汉水以东各国，以随国为最大。
English: "Spring and Autumn Legend" says that the countries east of the Han River, with the country as the largest.

古文：楚灭之以为县。晋武帝太康中立为郡。
现代文：楚灭随，设立为县；晋武帝太康年间一，又设立为郡。
English: Chu Xizui was established as a county; Emperor Jinwu Taikang was established as a county one year later.

古文：有搓水出县西北黄山，南径西县西，又东南，水入焉。
现代文：有递水，发源于随县西北的黄山，往南流经撅西县西边，又往东流，有撅水注入。
English: There is a water supply, originating from the Huangshan Mountain in the northwest of the county, flowing south through the west of Shaanxi County, and flowing eastward, with radon water injected.

古文：水出桐柏山之阳。
现代文：撅水发源于桐柏山南麓。
English: Surabaya's water originates from the southern foot of Tongbai Mountain.

古文：吕忱曰：水在义阳。
现代文：吕忱说：水在义阳。
English: Lu Zhen said: The water is in Yiyang.

古文：水东南径西县西，又东南注于，水又东南径随县故城西。
现代文：撅水往东南流经撅西县西边，又往东南流注入搓水。搓水又往东南流，经过随县老城西边。
English: Surabaya water flows to the southeast through the west of Suixi County, and then flows to the southeast to inject Surabaya water. Surabaya water also flows to the southeast, passing through the west of Suixi Old Town.

古文：《春秋》鲁庄公四年，楚武王伐随。令尹斗祁、莫敖屈重，除道梁搓，军临于随，谓此水也。
现代文：《春秋》：鲁庄公四年前,楚武王攻打随国，令尹斗祁和莫敖屈重修筑道路，架桥于搓水上，把军队开到随，说的就是此水。
English: "Spring and Autumn": Four years before King Lu Zhuang, King Chu Wu attacked the Sui Kingdom, ordered Yin Douyu and Mo Jian to rebuild the road, build a bridge over the Sui River, and drive the army to the Sui River, which is the water.

古文：水侧有断蛇丘，随侯出而见大蛇中断，因举而药之，故谓之断蛇丘。
现代文：水边有断蛇丘。随侯出门，看见一条大蛇被拦腰砍断，就把它捧起来，给它敷药，所以叫断蛇丘。
English: At the water's edge there is a snake mound. A farmer went out and saw a large snake that had been cut off at the waist. He picked it up and put medicine on it. That's why it's called the snake mound.

古文：后蛇衔明珠报德，世谓之随侯珠，亦曰灵蛇珠。
现代文：后来蛇衔了明珠来报恩，世人称为随侯珠，又叫灵蛇珠。
English: Later, the snake took the pearl to repay the favor, and the world called it Sui Hou Zhu, and also called the spirit snake pearl.

古文：丘南有随季梁大夫池，其水又南与义井水合，水出随城东南，井泉尝涌溢而津注，冬夏不异，相承谓之义井，下流合溳。
现代文：山丘南有随季梁大夫池，池水南流与义井水汇合。义并水发源于随城东南，井泉上涌泛溢，源源不断地外流，冬夏无异，世代相传称为义井，下流与搓水汇合。
English: To the south of the hill, there is a pond called "Kiryandafu," the water of which flows south and merges with the water of Yui well. The water of Yui well originates in the southeast of the city, the spring of the well overflows, and flows out continuously. It is the same in winter and summer. It has been called Yui well for generations, and the downstream water merges with the water of Surabaya.

古文：溳水又南流注于溳。
现代文：递水又往南流，注入溳水。
English: The conveying water then flows southwards, injecting brackish water.

古文：溳水又会于支水，水溳亦出大洪山，而东流注于溳。
现代文：溳水又汇合了一条支水，水源也出自大洪山，东流注入溳水。
English: Surabaya also has a tributary confluence with Surabaya. The source of the water also comes from Dahong Mountain, and the east stream flows into Surabaya.

古文：溳水又径随县南，随城山北，而东南注。
现代文：溳水又流经随县以南、随城山北边，往东南流去。
English: Surabaya water also flows south of Suixian and north of Chengshan to the southeast.

古文：又南过江夏安陆县西，随水出随郡永阳县东石龙山，西北流，南回，径永阳县西，历横尾山，即《禹贡》之陪尾山也。
现代文：又往南流过江夏郡安陆县西边，随水发源于随郡永阳县东边的石龙山，往西北流，然后折回南边，流经永阳县西，流过横尾山，就是《禹贡》的陪尾山。
English: It also flows southward through the west side of Anlu County, Jiangxia County. The water originates from Shilong Mountain on the east side of Yongyang County, Suixian County, flows northwest, then turns back to the south, flows through the west of Yongyang County, and flows through Yokoo Mountain, which is "Yu Gong"'s Baio Mountain.

古文：随水又西南，至安陆县故城西，入于溳，故郧城也。
现代文：随水又往西南流到安陆县老城，西流注入溳水，古时的郧城就在那里。
English: The water flowed to the southwest to the old town of Anlu County, and the west flowed into Surabaya, where the ancient city of Surabaya was located.

古文：因冈为墉，峻不假筑。
现代文：郧城利用山冈作城墙，山极陡峻，用不着再筑城了。
English: Lucheng used the mountains and hills as city walls. The mountains are extremely steep, so there is no need to build the city again.

古文：溳水又南径石岩山北。昔张昌作乱，于其下笼彩凤以惑众。
现代文：溳水又往南流经石岩山北面，从前张昌作乱在山下，用笼子关了一只彩凤来蒙骗民众。
English: Surabaya also flows south through the northern side of Shiyan Mountain. In the past, Zhang Chang made a mess at the bottom of the mountain and locked a phoenix in a cage to deceive the public.

古文：晋太安二年，镇南将军刘弘遣牙门皮初与张昌战于清水，昌败，追斩于江涘。
现代文：晋太安二年，镇南将军刘弘派遣牙门皮初在清水与张昌作战，打败了张昌，追到江边把他杀了。
English: In the second year of the Jin and Tai'an dynasties, Liu Hong, the general of Zhenan, sent Fang Menpi to fight against Zhang Chang in Qingshui, defeated Zhang Chang, chased him to the river and killed him.

古文：即《春秋左传》定公四年，吴败楚于柏举，从之，及于清发，盖溳水兼清水之目矣。
现代文：《春秋左传》：定公四年前，吴在柏举打败了楚，紧跟在后面直追到清发水。看来溳水大概又兼有清水之名了。
English: "The Legend of Spring and Autumn": Ding Gong four years ago, Wu defeated Chu in the Baiju, and followed him straight to Qingfa Water. It seems that Surabaya probably also has the name of Clear Water.

古文：又东南流而右会富水，水出竟陵郡新市县东北大阳山。水有二源：大富水出山之阳，南流而左合小富水。水出山之东，而南径三王城东。
现代文：溳水又往东南流，在右边汇合了富水。富水发源于竟陵郡新市县东北的大阳山，有两个源头：大富水发源于山南，往南流，在左边汇合了刁 富水；小富水发源于山东，往南流经三王城东面。
English: The Lushui also flows to the southeast, merging with the Fushui on the right. The Fushui originates from Dayang Mountain in the northeast of Xinshi County, Qionglin County, and has two sources: the Great Fushui originates in Shannan, flows southward, and merges with the Lushui on the left; the Small Fushui originates in Shandong, and flows southward through the east of Sanwangcheng.

古文：前汉未，王匡、王凤、王常所屯，故谓之三王城。
现代文：西汉末年，王匡、王凤、王常曾屯兵于此，所以叫三王城。
English: At the end of the Western Han Dynasty, Wang Kuang, Wang Feng, and Wang Chang had stationed troops here, which is why it was called the City of the Three Kings.

古文：城中有故碑，文字阙落，不可复识。
现代文：城中有古碑，文字缺损剥落，不能再辨认了。
English: There is an ancient monument in the city, the writing defect peeled off, can no longer be identified.

古文：其水屈而西南流，右合大富水，俗渭之大泌水也。
现代文：小富水折向西南流，在右边汇合了大富水，俗称大泌水；又往西南流经杜城西边，这是新市县的治所。
English: Xiao Fushui turns to the southwest, and on the right side it merges with Da Fushui, commonly known as Da Xue Shui; it also flows to the southwest through the west of Ducheng, which is the administrative center of Xinshi County.

古文：又西南流径杜城西，新市县治也，《郡国志》以为南新市也。
现代文：《郡国志》里叫南新市，因为中山也有新市，所以称此城为南新市。
English: In the "County History," it is called Nanxin City, because there is also a new city in Zhongshan, so this city is called Nanxin City.

古文：中山有新市，故此加南，分安陆县立。又王匡中兴初，举兵于县，号曰新市兵者也。
现代文：新市县是从安陆县划分出来的。此外，王匡中兴的初期，也曾在此县起兵，号称新市兵。
English: Xincheng County was divided from Anlu County. In addition, in the early days of Wang Kuang Zhongxing, troops were also raised in this county, known as Xincheng soldiers.

古文：富水又东南流，于安陆界左合土山水，世谓之章水。
现代文：富水又往东南流，到了安陆边界，左边汇合了土山水，人们称为章水。
English: Rich water flows to the southeast, to the Anlu border, and the left side is the confluence of soil and landscape, which is called Zhangshui.

古文：水出土山，南径随郡平林县故城西，俗谓之将陂城，与新市接界，故中兴之始，兵有新市、平林之号。
现代文：章水发源于土山，往南流经随郡平林县老城西边―俗称将破城―与新市接界，所以中兴初期，兵有新市、平林的称号。
English: Zhangshui originated in Tsuchiyama and flowed south through the west side of the old city of Su-gun, Pinglin County - commonly known as the broken city - and the new city, so in the early days of ZTE, the soldiers had the title of the new city and Pinglin.

古文：又南流，右入富水，富水又东入于溳，溳水又径新城南。永和五年，晋大司马桓温筑。
现代文：又往南流，在右边注入富水。富水又往东流，注入溳水。溳水又流经新城南边，永和五年，晋大司马桓温筑。
English: It flowed to the south again, injecting rich water on the right. Rich water flowed to the east again, injecting salty water. Salty water also flowed through the southern side of the new city, and in the fifth year of the Yonghe period, Jin Daishi Ma Kan Wenchu.

古文：溳水又会温水，温水出竟陵之新阳县东泽中。
现代文：溳水又汇合了温水。
English: The salty water was joined by warm water.

古文：口径二丈五尺，垠岸重沙，端净可爱，靖以察之，则渊泉如镜，闻入声，则扬汤奋发，无所复见矣。
现代文：温水发源于竟陵新阳县东边的沼泽中，口径二丈五尺，水岸是一层层的沙，明净可爱；静立在岸边细看，深沉的泉水就像一面镜子似的；一听到人声就翻腾起浪，什么也看不到了。
English: The warm water originates from the swamp in the east of Xinyang County, Jingling, with a diameter of two feet and five feet, and the waterfront is a layer of sand, clear and lovely; standing quietly on the shore and looking closely, the deep spring water is like a mirror; as soon as you hear people's voices, the waves are churning, and you can't see anything.

古文：其热可以鸡，洪测百余步，冷若寒泉。
现代文：泉水极热，甚至可以煮鸡，而百余步外的清泉，却冷得像冰水一样。
English: The spring water is so hot that you can even boil a chicken in it, while the clear spring more than a hundred paces away is as cold as ice water.

古文：东南流注于溳水。
现代文：水往东南流，注入溳水。
English: The water flows to the southeast, injecting brackish water.

古文：又右得潼水，水出江夏郡之曲陵县西北潼山，东南流径其县南，县治石潼故城，城圆而不方。
现代文：溳水又在右边汇合了渔水。渔水发源于江夏郡曲陵县西北的渔山，往东南流经县南。县治在石撞旧城，城墙呈圆形而不方正。
English: Surabaya's waters also meet the fishing waters on the right. The fishing waters originate from the fishing mountains in the northwest of Quling County, Jiangxia County, and flow southeast through the south of the county. The county government is in the old city of Shihan, and the city wall is round rather than square.

古文：东入安陆，注于溳水。
现代文：渔水东流进入安陆境，注入溳水。
English: The eastward flow of the fishing water enters the An land and is injected into the Bohai Sea.

古文：又东南入于夏。
现代文：又往东南流注人夏水。
English: It also flows to the southeast and pours summer water.

古文：溳水又南，分为二水，东通滠水，西入于沔，谓之溳口也。
现代文：溳水又往南流，分成两条：东边的一条通摄水，西边的一条注入污水，汇流处叫溳口。
English: The salty water then flows south and divides into two streams: one in the east receives water and the other in the west injects sewage. The confluence is called the estuary.

