古文：葛从周，字通美，濮州鄄城人也。
现代文：葛从周，字通美，濮州鄄城人。
English: Ge is from Zhou, Zi is from Tongmei, and Zhangzhou is from Zhangcheng.

古文：曾祖阮，祖遇贤，父简，累赠兵部尚书。
现代文：曾祖父葛阮，祖父葛遇贤，父亲葛简，均被追赠为兵部尚书。
English: Ge Ruan's great-grandfather, Ge Jianxian's grandfather, and Ge Jian's father were all posthumously awarded the title of Military Commissar.

古文：从周少豁达，有智略，初入黄巢军，渐至军校。
现代文：葛从周小时候就豁达大度，有才智谋略，开始时加入黄巢军，逐渐提升为军校。
English: Ge has been open-minded and generous since he was a child in Zhou, and he has a talent for strategy. At the beginning, he joined the Yellow Nest Army and was gradually promoted to the military school.

古文：唐中和四年三月，太祖大破巢军于王满渡，从周与霍存、张归霸昆弟相率来降。
现代文：唐朝中和四年三月，梁太祖在王满渡大败黄巢军队，葛从周与霍存、张归霸兄弟相约一起投降。
English: In the middle of the Tang Dynasty and in March of the fourth year, Liang Taizu defeated the Yellow Nest army in Wang Mantu. Ge Cong Zhou agreed to surrender together with Huo Cun and Zhang Guiba.

古文：七月，从太祖屯兵于西华，破蔡贼王夏寨。
现代文：七月，跟随太祖驻兵在西华，进攻蔡州贼寇王夏寨。
English: In July, he followed his great-grandfather and stationed soldiers in West China to attack the Caizhou bandit Wang Xia Zhai.

古文：太祖临阵马踣，贼众来追甚急，从周扶太祖上马，与贼军格斗，伤面，矢中于肱，身被数枪，奋命以卫太祖。
现代文：太祖临阵指挥时战马跌倒，贼寇们追赶上来，非常危急，葛从周扶起太祖上马，与贼军格斗，脸上受伤，箭射中了手臂，身上挨了几枪，拼着性命来保卫太祖。
English: When the great-grandfather was in command of the front line, the war horse fell down, and the bandits chased after it, which was very dangerous. Ge picked up the great-grandfather from Zhou and mounted the horse to fight with the bandits. He was injured in the face, shot in the arm with an arrow, and received several shots on his body. He fought for his life to protect the great-grandfather.

古文：赖张延寿回马转斗，从周与太祖俱免，退军溵水。
现代文：靠着张延寿回头驱马上前接战，葛从周与太祖才一同免于遇难，军队撤退到氵殷水。
English: Relying on Zhang Yanshou to drive back and immediately advance to engage in battle, Ge Cong Zhou and Taizu were spared from death together, and the army retreated to Suiyanshui.

古文：诸将并削职，惟擢从周、延寿为大校。
现代文：诸位将领都被削职，仅仅擢升葛从周、张延寿为大校。
English: All generals were demoted, only Ge Zong Zhou and Zhang Yanshou were promoted to the rank of colonel.

古文：其从入长葛、灵井，大败蔡贼，至斤沟、淝河，杀铁林三千人，获九寨都虞候王涓。
现代文：他跟从太祖到长葛、灵井，大败蔡州贼寇，到斤沟、淝水，杀死铁林军三千人，俘获了九寨都虞候王涓。
English: He followed his great-grandfather to Changge and Lingjing, defeated the Caizhou bandits, went to Jingu and Surabaya, killed 3,000 soldiers of the Tielin Army, and captured the Jiuzhaigou Governor Wang Qian.

古文：太祖遣郭言募兵于陕州，有黄花子贼据于温谷，从周击破之。
现代文：太祖派遣郭言到陕州招募兵卒，有叫黄花子的贼寇盘踞在温谷，葛从周击败了他。
English: The great-grandfather sent Guo Yan to Shaanxi to recruit soldiers. There was a thief named Huanghua Zi in Wengu. Ge Zhou defeated him.

古文：又破秦贤之众于荥阳，寻佐硃珍收兵于淄、青间。
现代文：又在荥阳攻破秦贤一伙人，接着帮助朱珍在淄州、青州一带收聚兵马。
English: He also defeated Qin Xian's group in Shenyang, and then helped Zhu Zhen gather soldiers and horses in Shenzhou and Qingzhou.

古文：时兗州齐克护军于任城，从周败之，擒其将吕全真。
现代文：这时兖州齐克让的部队驻扎在任城，葛从周击败他们，抓获他的大将吕全真。
English: At this time, the troops of Zhangzhou Zikzang were stationed in Rencheng. Ge Zhou defeated them and captured his general Lü Quanzhen.

古文：淄人不受制，复与之战，获其骁将巩约。
现代文：淄州人不服从朱珍和葛从周，朱珍和葛从周又与他们交战，俘虏了他们的猛将巩约。
English: Zhangzhou people disobeyed Zhu Zhen and Ge Cong Zhou, Zhu Zhen and Ge Cong Zhou fought with them again and captured their fierce general Gong Yoyo.

古文：会青州以步骑万余人列三寨于金岭，以厄要害，从周与硃珍大歼其众，掳其将杨昭范五人而还。
现代文：又逢上青州人率领步卒、骑兵一万多在金岭排列成三座兵营，扼守着险要地势，葛从周与朱珍歼灭了他们大量的士兵，活捉他们的大将杨昭范等五人而回。
English: On another occasion, the Shang Qingzhou people led more than 10,000 infantry and cavalry to form three barracks in Jinling, holding a precarious situation. Ge Cong Zhou and Zhu Zhen annihilated a large number of their soldiers, captured their general Yang Zhaofan and five others alive, and returned.

古文：至大梁，不解甲，径至板桥击蔡贼，破卢瑭寨；瑭自溺而死，又于赤冈杀蔡军二万余人。
现代文：到大梁时，连铠甲都来不及解下，就直奔板桥攻击蔡州贼寇，攻破卢瑭军营，卢瑭投水自杀，又在赤岗杀死蔡州军队两万多人。
English: When he reached the girder, he couldn't even take off his armor, so he ran straight to the plate bridge to attack the Caizhou bandits, broke through the Luye military camp, Luye committed suicide by throwing himself into the water, and killed more than 20,000 Caizhou troops in Chekang.

古文：从讨谢殷于亳州，擒之。
现代文：又跟从到亳州讨伐谢殷，活捉了谢殷。
English: He also went to Zhangzhou to fight Xie Yin and captured him alive.

古文：回袭曹州，掳刺史丘宏礼以归。
现代文：回师袭击曹州，俘虏曹州刺史丘弘礼而归。
English: The returning division attacked Caozhou, and the prisoners of Caozhou stabbed Shiqiu Hongli and returned.

古文：与兗、郓军遇于临濮之刘桥，杀数万人，硃瑄、硃瑾仅以身免，擒都将邹务卿已下五十人。
现代文：在临濮的刘桥与兖州、郓州军队遭遇，杀死敌军数万人，朱王宣、朱瑾仅只身逃脱，活捉都将邹务卿及以下将领五十人。
English: In Linyi's Liuqiao, he encountered Zhangzhou and Zhangzhou troops, killing tens of thousands of enemy troops. Zhu Wangxuan and Zhu Yao were the only ones to escape, and they captured alive the Secretary of the State Council and 50 generals.

古文：从太祖至范县，复与硃瑄战，掳尹万荣等三人，遂平濮州。
现代文：跟随太祖到范县，又与朱蠧交战，俘虏了尹万荣等三人，于是平定了濮州。
English: He followed his great-grandfather to Fan County, fought with Zhu Xi again, captured three people including Yin Wan Rong, and then leveled Zhangzhou.

古文：未几，与硃珍击蔡贼于陈、亳间，获都将石璠。
现代文：不久，与朱珍在陈州、亳州之间攻击蔡州贼寇，抓获了都将石。
English: Soon after, he and Zhu Zhen attacked the Caizhou bandits between Chenzhou and Zhangzhou, and captured Mudu Shi.

古文：文德元年，魏博军乱，乐从训来告急，从太祖渡河，拔黎阳、李固、临河等镇，至内黄，破魏军万余众，获其将周儒等十人。
现代文：文德元年，魏博镇军队叛乱，乐从训来告急，葛从周跟随太祖渡过黄河，攻克黎阳、李固、临河等镇，直抵内黄，击破魏军一万多人，抓住魏军将领周儒等十人。
English: In the first year of the Wende era, the army of Weibo Town rebelled, Le Congxun came in haste, Ge Cong Zhou followed his great-grandfather across the Yellow River, conquered Liyang, Ligu, Linhe and other towns, and arrived in Inner Yellow, defeating more than 10,000 Wei troops and capturing ten people such as Wei army general Zhou Ru.

古文：李罕之引并人围张全义于河阳，从周与丁会、张存敬、牛存节率兵赴援，大破并军，杀蕃汉二万人，解河阳之围，以功表授检校工部尚书。
现代文：李罕之率领并州军队将张全义包围在河阳，葛从周与丁会、张存敬、牛存节率兵救援，大破并州军，杀死蕃族、汉族士兵两万人，解除了河阳之围，因功上报朝廷，授予检校工部尚书的官职。
English: Li Hanzhi led the unified state army to encircle Zhang Quanyi in Heyang. Ge Cong Zhou and Ding Hui, Zhang Cun Rong and Niu Cun Si led the soldiers to rescue, defeated the unified state army, killed twenty thousand soldiers of the Yi and Han ethnic groups, lifted the siege of Heyang, reported to the court for his service, and awarded the official post of Shang Shi to the inspection department of the school.

古文：从硃珍讨徐州，拨丰县，败时溥于吴康，得其辎重，加检校刑部尚书。
现代文：跟随朱珍讨伐徐州，攻克丰县，在吴康打败时溥，获得了他的器械、粮草、营帐等辎重，因功加封为检校刑部尚书。
English: He followed Zhu Zhen to fight against Xuzhou and conquered Feng County, and when he defeated Wu Kang, he gained his equipment, grain and grass, camp account and other valuable things, and was awarded the title of "school inspector" for his efforts.

古文：佐庞师古讨孙儒于淮南，略地至庐、寿、滁等州，下天长、高邮，破邵伯堰。
现代文：帮助庞师古在淮南讨伐孙儒，攻城夺地直到庐、寿、滁等州，占领天长、高邮，击破邵伯堰。
English: He helped Pang Shigu to fight against Sun Ru in Huainan, to capture the city and the land as far as the provinces of Zou, Shou and Zou, to occupy Tianchang and Gaoyou, and to break through the Shao Bo Weir.

古文：回军攻濠州，杀刺史魏勋，得饷船十艘。
现代文：回师进攻濠州，杀死濠州刺史魏勋，得到运送粮饷的船只十艘。
English: The returning division attacked Ganzhou, killed the Ganzhou assassin Shi Wei Xun, and obtained ten ships to transport grain and straw.

古文：大顺元年八月，并帅围潞州，太祖遣从周率敢死之士，夜衔枚犯围而入，会王师不利于马牢川，即弃上党而归。
现代文：大顺元年八月，并州统帅李克用包围了潞州，太祖派遣葛从周率领敢死队员，在夜晚勒着战马悄悄穿透包围进入潞州，恰逢皇室军队在马牢川失利，于是放弃上党撤回。
English: In August of the first year of Dashun, and the commander of the state, Li Ke, encircled Luzhou with horses. Taizu dispatched Ge from Zhou to lead the death-defying team, and quietly penetrated the encirclement into Luzhou at night with horses. It coincided with the defeat of the royal army in Ma牢 River, so he gave up the party and withdrew.

古文：其年十二月，与丁会诸将讨魏州，连收十邑。
现代文：同年十二月，与丁会等将领讨伐魏州，接连收复十座城邑。
English: In December of the same year, with the Ding Association and other generals to fight Wei Prefecture, successively recovered ten cities and towns.

古文：明年正月，大破魏军于永定桥，魏军五败，斩首万余级。
现代文：第二年正月，在永定桥大破魏军，魏军接连五次被打败，杀死魏军一万多人。
English: In the first month of the second year, the Wei army was defeated in Yongding Bridge. The Wei army was defeated five times in a row, killing more than 10,000 Wei soldiers.

古文：十月，佐丁会攻宿州，从周壅水灌其城，刺史张筠以郡降。
现代文：十月，协助丁会进攻宿州，葛从周堵塞河水淹灌宿州州城，宿州刺史张筠带领全郡投降。
English: In October, he assisted the Ding Association to attack Shuzhou, Ge Zhou blocked the river and flooded the city of Shuzhou, and Shuzhou chief Zhang Jun led the whole county to surrender.

古文：从讨兗州，破硃瑾之军于马沟。
现代文：跟从讨伐兖州，在马沟攻破朱瑾的军队。
English: He followed the crusade to Bozhou and defeated Zhu Xi's army in Magou.

古文：景福二年二月，与诸将大破徐、兗之兵于石佛山。
现代文：景福二年二月，与诸路将领在石佛山大破徐州、兖州的军队。
English: In February of the second year of King Fook's reign, he and his generals defeated the armies of Xuzhou and Ganzhou on Shifoshan Mountain.

古文：八月，与庞师古同攻兗州。
现代文：八月，与庞师古一同进攻兖州。
English: In August, he attacked Zhangzhou together with Pang Shigu.

古文：乾宁元年三月，军至新泰县，硃瑾令都将张约、李胡椒率三千人来拒战，师古遣从周、张存敬掩袭，生擒张约、李胡椒等都将数十人。
现代文：乾宁元年三月，葛从周率领军队到达新太县，朱瑾命令都将张约、李胡椒率领三千人前来抵拒迎战，庞师古派遣葛从周、张存敬全面攻袭，活捉了张约、李胡椒等都将几十人。
English: In March of the first year of the Qianning Dynasty, Ge Zhou led the army to arrive in Xintai County. Zhu Xi ordered Zhang You and Li Pepper to lead three thousand people to resist the war. Pang Shigu sent Ge Zhou and Zhang Cunjing to attack in an all-round way, and captured dozens of Zhang You and Li Pepper alive.

古文：二年十月，围兗州，兗人不出，从周诈扬言并人、郓人来救，即引军趋高吴，夜半却潜归寨。
现代文：二年十月，包围兖州，兖州人不敢出战，葛从周扬言欺骗兖州人说并州、郓州军队来援救兖州营寨。于是领兵奔向高吴，半夜再偷偷潜回兖州营寨。
English: In October of the second year, surrounded Bozhou, Bozhou people did not dare to go to war, Ge Zhou threatened to deceive the Bozhou people by saying that the Bozhou and Bozhou army would come to rescue the Bozhou camp. So the leader of the army ran to Gaowu, and then sneaked back to the Bozhou camp in the middle of the night.

古文：硃瑾果出兵攻外壕，我军士突出，掩杀千余人，生擒都将张汉筠。
现代文：朱瑾果然出兵进攻城外战壕，葛从周军士突然出击，一路杀死一千多人，活捉了都将孙汉筠。
English: Zhu Xi sent troops to attack the trenches outside the city, Ge Zhou made a sudden attack, killing more than a thousand people along the way, and captured Sun Han Rong alive.

古文：从周累立战功，自怀州刺史历曹、宿二州刺史，累迁检校左仆射。
现代文：葛从周接连立下战功，历任怀州刺史、曹州刺史和宿州刺史，接着升迁为检校左仆射。
English: Ge Zhou successively distinguished himself in the war, successively serving as the Waizhou chief, the Caozhou chief and the Suizhou chief, and then he was promoted to the school inspector Zuoying.

古文：三年五月，并帅以大军侵魏，遣其子落落率二千骑屯洹水，从周以马步二千人击之，杀戮殆尽，擒落落于阵，并帅号泣而去。
现代文：三年五月，并州统帅率领大军侵略魏州，派他儿子落落率两千骑兵屯驻洹水，葛从周带着骑兵、步兵两千人攻击他们，几乎将他们全部杀死，在阵前活捉了落落，并州统帅李克用悲号哭泣着撤回。
English: In May of the third year, and the state commander led a large army to invade Weizhou, sent his son Luo Luo with a rate of two thousand cavalry stationed in Surabaya, Ge from Zhou attacked them with two thousand cavalry and infantry, almost killed them all, captured Luo Luo alive before the battle, and the state commander Li Ke withdrew with a sad cry.

古文：遂自洹水与庞师古渡河击郓。
现代文：于是葛从周从洹水与庞师古渡过黄河攻击郓州。
English: As a result, Ge Zhou crossed the Yellow River from Surabaya with Pang Shigu to attack Luzhou.

古文：河北谚曰： 山东一条葛，无事可撩拨。 复领兵万余人渡淮讨杨行密，至濠州，闻庞师古清口之败，遽班师。
现代文：四年正月，攻克郓州。葛从周乘胜进攻兖州，恰逢朱瑾带领军队到徐州去了，他的大将康怀英率领兖城军民投降，葛从周因功被授与兖州留后、检校司空。又领兵一万多人渡过淮河讨伐杨行密，到濠州时，听说庞师古在清口战役中失败，于是立即回师。
English: In the first month of the fourth year, he conquered Bozhou. Ge attacked Bozhou from Zhou Rongcheng, which coincided with Zhu Xi leading the army to Xuzhou. His general Kang Huaiying led the army and people of Bozhou to surrender. Ge stayed in Bozhou after being awarded by Zhou for his service, and was absent from school. He also led more than 10,000 soldiers to cross the Huai River to fight Yang Xingmi. When he arrived in Bozhou, he heard that Pang Shigu had failed in the battle of Qingkou, so he immediately returned to his division.

古文：光化元年四月，率师经略山东，时并帅以大军屯邢、洺，从周至钜鹿与并军遇，大破之，并帅遁走。我军追袭至青山口，数日之内，邢、洺、磁三州连下，斩首二万级，获将吏一百五十人，即以从周兼领邢州留后。
现代文：光化元年四月，率领军队攻占山东，当时并州李克用率领大军驻扎在邢州、氵名州，葛从周到巨鹿与并州军队交战，大破并州军，李克用逃走，葛从周军追击到青山口，数天之内，接连攻下邢、氵名、磁三州，杀敌两万人，俘虏将帅军官一百五十人，于是又以葛从周兼任邢州留后。
English: In April of the first year of the Guanghua era, he led an army to occupy Shandong. At that time, he led a large army stationed in Zhangzhou and Annam, and Ge from Zhou to Julu fought with the annexed state army, defeated the annexed state army, Li Ke used to escape, and Ge from the Zhou army chased to Qingshankou. Within a few days, he successively captured the three states of Shan, Annam, and Jiaozhou, killed 20,000 enemies, and captured 150 generals and officers. Therefore, he also stayed in Zhangzhou with Ge from Zhou.

古文：十月，复破并军五千骑于张公桥。
现代文：十月，又在张公桥打败并州部队五千骑兵。
English: In October, it defeated and merged with the state troops of five thousand cavalry in Zhanggong Bridge.

古文：晋将李嗣昭急攻邢州，阵于城门外，从周大破之，擒蕃将贲金铁、慕容腾百余人。
现代文：晋将李嗣昭急攻邢州，在邢州城外摆起战阵，葛从周大败晋军，抓住蕃将贲金铁、慕容腾等一百多人。
English: Jin general Li Shizhao made a sudden attack on Bozhou and set up a battle line outside the city of Bozhou. Ge Cong Zhou defeated the Jin army and captured more than a hundred people including Jin general Zou Jintie and Murong Teng.

古文：二年春，幽州刘仁恭率军十万寇魏州，屠贝郡。
现代文：二年春天，幽州刘仁恭率领十万燕军进犯魏州，屠戮贝郡人民。
English: In the spring of the second year, Yuzhou Liu Renzhong led a hundred thousand Yan army to invade Weizhou and slaughter the people of Bei County.

古文：从周自邢台驰入魏州，燕军突上水关，攻馆陶门。从周与贺德伦率五百骑出战，谓门者曰： 前有敌，不可返顾！ 
现代文：葛从周从邢台奔赴魏州，幽州军队突破上水关，进攻馆陶门，葛从周与贺德伦率领五百骑兵出战，对守卫馆陶门的兵士说： 前有强敌，我们不会再活着回来了！ 
English: Ge Zhou rushed from Xingtai to Weizhou, the Yuzhou army broke through Shangshui Pass and attacked the Museum of Tao Gate, Ge Zhou and Hedren led five hundred cavalrymen to fight, and said to the soldiers guarding the Museum of Tao Gate: There is a strong enemy in front, we will not come back alive!

古文：命阖其门。
现代文：命令守门兵士在他们身后关上馆陶门。
English: They ordered the soldiers guarding the gate to close it behind them.

古文：从周等极力死战，大败燕人，擒都将薛突厥、王郃郎等。
现代文：葛从周等五百壮士破釜沉舟与敌军进行殊死决战，大败幽燕敌军，活捉了都将薛突厥、王郐郎等人。
English: Ge from Zhou and other five hundred strong men broke the pot and sank the boat and fought a desperate battle with the enemy army, defeated the enemy army of Yuyan, and captured both Xue Turk and Wang Yulang alive.

古文：翼日，破其八寨，追击至临清，刘仁恭走沧州，从周授宣义军行军司马。
现代文：第二天，攻破燕军八座营寨，一直追击到临清，刘仁恭逃奔沧州，葛从周任宣义军行军司马。
English: The next day, Yan's army broke through eight encampments and pursued them all the way to Linqing. Liu Rengong fled to Cangzhou, and Ge Zhouren led the march of the Xuanwu army.

古文：五月，并人讨李罕之于潞州，太祖以丁会代罕之，令从周驰入上党。
现代文：五月，并州人在潞州讨伐李罕之，太祖派丁会代替李罕之，命令葛从周奔赴上党。
English: In May, the people of Anhui Province fought against Li Hanzhi in Zhangzhou, and Taizu sent Dinghui to replace Li Hanzhi, and ordered Ge to go to the party from Zhou.

古文：七月，并人陷泽州，太祖召从周，令贺德伦守潞州，德伦等寻弃城而归。
现代文：七月，并州人攻陷泽州，太祖召回葛从周，命令贺德伦守卫潞州，贺德伦等旋即放弃潞州州城而回。
English: In July, when the Nianzhou people invaded and occupied Zhezhou, the great ancestor called back Ge Cong Zhou and ordered He Delun to guard Nianzhou. He Delun immediately abandoned the city of Nianzhou and returned.

古文：三年四月，领军讨沧州，先攻德州，下之。
现代文：三年四月，葛从周率领部队讨伐沧州，先进攻德州，攻下了它。
English: In April of the third year, Ge Cong Zhou led the troops to fight against Cangzhou, advanced to attack Dezhou, and captured it.

古文：及进攻浮阳，幽州刘仁恭大举来援。时都监蒋元晖谓诸将曰： 吾王命我护军，志在攻取，今燕帅来赴，不可迎战，当纵其入壁，聚食囷廪，力屈粮尽，必可取也。 
现代文：到进攻浮阳时，幽州刘仁恭率领大军前来救援，这时都监蒋玄日军对诸位将领们说： 我们君王命令我监护军队，目的在于攻击占领，现在燕军统帅赶来救援浮阳，我们不能在城外与他们进行野战，而应当把他们放进浮阳城，让他们一起分食仓库仅有的粮食，当他们的粮食吃完时，必定可以攻下浮阳。 
English: At the time of the attack on Fuyang, Liu Rengong of Yuzhou led a large army to come to the rescue. At this time, the Japanese generalissimo Jiang Xuan said to the generals: Our king ordered me to guard the army, with the aim of attacking the occupation. Now the commander of the Yan Army has come to rescue Fuyang. We cannot fight them outside the city, but should put them into Fuyang City. Let them share the only grain in the warehouse. When their grain is finished, they will surely be able to capture Fuyang.

古文：从周对曰： 兵在机，机在上将，非督护所言也。 
现代文：葛从周回答说 ：用兵在于掌握时机，掌握时机权在最高将领，并非像蒋都监所说的那样。 
English: Ge Cong Zhou replied: the use of troops is to seize the opportunity, and the right to seize the opportunity is in the highest generals, not as Jiang Duxuan said.

古文：乃令张存敬、氏叔琮守其寨。
现代文：于是命令张存敬、氏叔琮守住他们的营寨。
English: Therefore, he ordered Zhang Cunqian and his uncles to hold their encampment.

古文：从周逆战于乾宁军老鸦堤，大破燕军，斩首三万，获将佐马慎交已下百余人，夺马三千匹。
现代文：葛从周在老鸦堤迎战幽州的乾宁军，大破幽州军队，杀死敌人三万，俘获将佐马慎交以下一百多人，夺得战马三千匹。
English: Ge from Zhou met the Qian Ning army of Yuzhou at Laowadi, defeated the Yuzhou army, killed thirty thousand enemies, captured more than one hundred people under the command of Zoma Shenkou, and captured three thousand horses.

古文：八月，并人攻邢、洺，从太祖破之。从周追袭至青山口，斩首五千级，获其将王郃郎、杨师悦等，得马千匹，表授检校太保，兼徐州两使留后，寻为兗州节度使。
现代文：八月，并州人进攻邢州、氵名州，葛从周跟随太祖打败他们，葛从周追击直到青山口，杀敌五千人，俘获他们的将领王郎、杨师悦等人，获得战马一千匹，上表奏明皇上，授葛从周检校太保兼徐州两使留后，旋即任兖州节度使。
English: In August, the Nianzhou people attacked Zhangzhou and Annam, and Ge Zhou followed his great-grandfather to defeat them. Ge Zhou chased them all the way to Qingshankou, killed five thousand of the enemy, captured their generals Wang Lang, Yang Shiyue and others, and obtained a thousand horses. The above table was presented to Emperor Ming. After Ge Zhou was awarded the post of Zhou Inspection School Taibo and Xuzhou two envoys, he was immediately appointed as Zhangzhou Festival envoy.

古文：天复元年三月，与氏叔琮讨太原，从周以兗、郓之众，自土门路入，与诸军会于晋阳城下，以粮运不给，班师。
现代文：天复元年三月，葛从周与氏叔琮讨伐太原，葛从周率领兖州、郓州的军队，从土门道路进军，与其他诸路军队在晋阳城下会合，因为粮草供应不上，只能撤回部队。
English: In March of the first year of the Restoration of Heaven, Ge Cong Zhou and his uncle Yan fought in Taiyuan. Ge Cong Zhou led the troops of Luzhou and Luzhou, marched from the Tumen Road, and met with other armies at the foot of Jinyang City. Because grain and grass could not be supplied, the troops could only be withdrawn.

古文：顷之，从周染疾，会青州将刘鄩陷兗州，太祖命讨之，遂力疾临戎。
现代文：不久，葛从周染上疾病，这时青州将领刘寻阝攻陷兖州，太祖命令葛从周讨伐他，于是葛从周勉力带病出征。
English: Not long after, Ge Zhou contracted the disease. At that time, Liu Xunqi, the general of Qingzhou, attacked and conquered Zhangzhou. The great-grandfather ordered Ge Zhou to fight against him. Therefore, Ge Zhou tried his best to go to war with the disease.

古文：三年十一月，鄩举城降，以功授检校太傅。
现代文：三年十一月，刘寻阝率领全城投降，因功授任葛从周为检校太傅。
English: In November of the third year, Liu Huanqian led the whole city to surrender, and Ge Zhou was appointed as the inspector of the school.

古文：太祖以从周抱疾既久，命康怀英代之，授左金吾上将军，以风恙不任朝谒，改右卫上将军致仕。养疾偃师县亳邑乡之别墅。
现代文：太祖因为葛从周生病很久了，命令康怀英代替他，授予葛从周左金吾上将军，因为中风不能上朝拜谒，改授右卫上将军而辞官退隐，在偃师县亳邑乡的别墅疗养疾病。
English: The great-grandfather was ill for a long time because of Ge Zhou, ordered Kang Huaiying to replace him, awarded Ge Zhou Zuo Jingu Shangzheng, because of a stroke, he could not go to the court to pay homage to Zhou, he was awarded the title of Uwei Shangzheng and resigned from his post to retire and recuperate in a villa in Zouyi Township, Jinshi County.

古文：顷之，授太子太师，依前致仕。
现代文：不久，授予太子太师官职，依然像前次一样辞官退隐。
English: Soon after, the crown prince was granted the title of grandmaster, but he still retired as he had before.

古文：末帝即位，制授潞州节度使，令坐食其俸，加开府仪同三司、检校太师、兼侍中，封陈留郡王，累食邑至七千户，命近臣赉旌节就别墅以赐之。
现代文：梁末帝即位后，颁布诏令任葛从周为潞州节度使，令他坐享俸禄，又加封为开府仪同三司、检校太师、兼待中，封为陈留郡王，累增食邑到七千户，命令亲信臣子带着旌旗符节到别墅赐给葛从周。
English: After the enthronement of the last Emperor of the Liang Dynasty, the imperial edict was issued to appoint Ge Zhou as the festival envoy of Zhangzhou, and he was awarded a salary. He was also awarded the title of Kaifu Yi Tong Sanzhi, Jiankui Taishi, and concurrently, the title of Chen Liu Guo, and the number of food villages increased to seven thousand. He ordered his trusted vassals to take the banner festival to the villa and give it to Ge Zhou.

古文：贞明初，卒于家。册赠太尉。
现代文：贞明初年，在家中去世，追赠为太尉。
English: In the first year of Zhenming, he died at home and was posthumously promoted to first lieutenant.

古文：谢彦章，许州人。幼事从周为养父，从周怜其敏慧，教以兵法，常以千钱于大盘中，布其行阵偏伍之状，示以出没进退之节，彦章尽得其诀。
现代文：谢彦章，许州人，幼年拜葛从周为养父，从周喜爱他机敏聪明，教他兵法，经常把一千枚钱放在一个大盘子里，排列成战阵队伍的形状，教他出没进退的方法，彦章全部掌握了其中诀窍。
English: Xie Yanzhang, a native of Xuzhou, adopted Baige from Zhou when he was a child. Zhou loved Baige's cleverness and taught him the art of war. He often put a thousand coins on a large plate and arranged them in the shape of a battle line. He taught Baige how to enter and leave the battlefield. Yanzhang mastered all the tricks.

古文：及壮，事太祖为骑将。
现代文：到壮年，服事太祖为骑兵将领。
English: In his prime, he served his great-grandfather as a cavalry general.

古文：末帝嗣位，用为两京马军都军使，累与晋军接战有功，寻领河阳节度使。
现代文：梁末帝即位后，任他为两京马军总指挥使，多次与晋军交战有功，接着任河阳节度使。
English: After the enthronement of the last Emperor of the Liang Dynasty, he was appointed as the chief commander of the two Beijing-Ma armies, and fought with the Jin army many times, and then he was appointed as the chief envoy of the Kheyang Festival.

古文：及从周卒，临丧行服，躬预葬事，时人义之。
现代文：到葛从周去世，谢彦章送终服丧，亲自参与葬事，当时人认为他有德义。
English: At the time of Ge Zhou's death, Xie Yanzhang attended the funeral and personally participated in the funeral. At that time, people thought that he was virtuous.

古文：彦章后为许州节度使、检校太傅。
现代文：谢彦章后任许州节度使、检校太傅。
English: Xie Yanzhang was later appointed as the delegate of the Xuzhou Festival and the inspector of the school.

古文：贞明四年冬，滑州节度使贺瑰为北面招讨使，彦章为排阵使，同领大军，驻于行台寨，与晋人对垒。
现代文：贞明四年冬天，滑州节度使贺瑰任北面招讨使，谢彦章为排阵使，一同率领大军，驻扎在行台寨，与晋军对垒。
English: In the winter of the 4th year of the Zhenming Dynasty, He Rui was appointed as the north-facing summoning envoy and Xie Yanzhang as the lining-up envoy for the festival in Nanzhou. Together they led a large army, stationed in Xingdaizhai, and confronted the Jin army.

古文：彦章时领骑军与之挑战，晋人或望我军行阵整肃，则相谓曰： 必两京太傅在此也。 
现代文：谢彦章当时领骑军向晋人挑战，晋人只要望见梁军布阵整齐威严就互相传告说 ：一定是两京太傅在军中。 
English: At that time, Xie Yanzhang led the cavalry to challenge the Jin people. As soon as the Jin people saw the Liang army arrayed neatly and majestically, they told each other that the two capital taifu must be in the army.

古文：不敢以名呼，其为敌人所惮如此。
现代文：不敢直呼谢彦章的名字，他为敌人所害怕就像这样。
English: He did not dare to call Xie Yanzhang's name directly, as he was feared by the enemy.

古文：是时咸谓贺瑰能将步军，彦章能领骑士，既名声相轧，故瑰心忌之。一日，与瑰同设伏于郊外，瑰指一方地谓彦章曰： 此地冈阜隆起，中央坦夷，好列栅之所。 
现代文：这时都说贺瑰善于带领步军，谢彦章善于带领骑兵，因为名气相匹敌，所以贺瑰内心妒忌他，一天，谢彦章与贺瑰一同在郊外设置埋伏，贺瑰指着一处地方对谢彦章说： 这地方山岗隆起，中间平坦，正是列营的好地方。 
English: At this time, it was said that He Jiu was good at leading the infantry, and Xie Yan Zhang was good at leading the cavalry. Because the fame was comparable, He Jiu was jealous of him in his heart. One day, Xie Yan Zhang and He Jiu set up an ambush together in the suburbs. He Jiu pointed to a place and said to Xie Yan Zhang: This place is mountainous and flat in the middle, it is a good place to line up.

古文：寻而晋人舍之，故瑰疑彦章与晋人通；又瑰欲速战，彦章欲持重以老敌人，瑰益疑之。
现代文：接着却被晋人扎营，所以贺瑰怀疑谢彦章与晋人私通。又贺瑰想速战速决，谢彦章想按兵不动以拖垮敌人，贺瑰更加怀疑他。
English: However, he was encamped by the Jin people, so He Gui suspected Xie Yanzhang of having an affair with the Jin people. He Gui also wanted a quick war, Xie Yanzhang wanted to keep the troops still to defeat the enemy, and He Gui suspected him even more.

古文：会为行营马步都虞候硃珪所诬，瑰遂与珪邦协谋，因享士伏甲以杀彦章及濮州刺史孟审澄、别将侯温裕等于军，以谋叛闻。
现代文：恰好谢彦章被行营马步都虞候朱王圭诬告，贺瑰就与朱王圭合谋，于是款待士卒埋伏甲士，将谢彦章以及濮州刺史孟审澄、别将侯温裕等杀害在军中，以图谋反叛的罪行上报。
English: It just so happened that Xie Yanzhang was falsely accused by Zhu Wanggui, a member of Zhu Wanggui's entourage, and He Gui conspired with Zhu Wanggui. He then entertained the ambushed soldiers, killed Xie Yanzhang, as well as Zhangzhou assassin Meng Xuancheng, and petty officer Hou Wenyu in the army, and reported the crime of plotting rebellion.

古文：晋王闻之，喜曰： 彼将帅如是，亡无日矣。 
现代文：晋王闻讯后很高兴地说 ：他们将帅如此残杀，离灭亡就不远了。 
English: After hearing the news, Jin Wang said happily, "They killed Shuai so brutally, they are not far from perishing."

古文：审澄、温裕亦善将骑军，然所领不过三千骑；多而益办，惟彦章有焉。
现代文：孟审澄、侯温裕也善于带领骑军，但所率领不能超过三千骑兵；只有谢彦章多多益善。
English: Meng Xuncheng and Hou Wenyu were also good at leading cavalry, but they could not lead more than three thousand cavalry; only Xie Yanzhang was better.

古文：数年，征为右金吾卫大将军，俄拜宁远军节度使、容州刺史、检校太保。
现代文：在用兵打仗之外，爱优待礼遇读书人。与晋军对垒于黄河岸边，常宽衣博带，行为举止都按照礼仪，而攻击敌人统率士兵，则肃然有上将的威风。常督察整顿战阵军旅，左右驰骋，就是急风骤雨，也不能比拟他的迅速敏捷，所以当时的骑兵都乐于为他使用。
English: In addition to using soldiers to fight wars, he treated readers with preferential treatment. He opposed the Jin army on the banks of the Yellow River, often wearing a wide range of clothes and behaving in accordance with etiquette, while attacking the enemy and leading soldiers, he had the dignity of an admiral. The permanent inspector rectified the battle line of the army brigade, galloping left and right, that is, the sudden wind and rain, could not match his speed and agility, so the cavalry at that time were happy to use him.

古文：卒赠太傅。
现代文：到他遇害后，大家都痛惜他。
English: After he was killed, everyone felt sorry for him.

古文：张归霸，字正臣，清河人。
现代文：张归霸，字正臣，清河人。
English: Zhang Guihaba, surnamed Zhengxian, from Qinghe.

古文：祖进言，阳谷令。
现代文：祖父张进言任阳谷县令。
English: Zhang Jinyan's grandfather was appointed as the governor of Yanggu County.

古文：父实，亦有宦绪。
现代文：父亲张实，也做过官。
English: His father, Zhang Si, also served as an official.

古文：少倜傥，好兵术。
现代文：归霸小时潇洒不拘，爱好兵术。
English: He is a dashing young man who loves military arts.

古文：唐乾符中，寇盗蜂起，归霸率昆弟三人弃家投黄巢，颇以勇略闻。
现代文：唐朝乾符年间，盗寇蜂起，张归霸领着兄弟三人弃家投奔黄巢，很因勇敢机智闻名。
English: During the Qianfu era of the Tang Dynasty, thieves and robbers rose up, and Zhang Guiba led his three brothers to abandon their home and flee to the Yellow Nest. He was famous for his bravery and wit.

古文：巢陷长安，遂署为左番功臣。
现代文：黄巢攻陷长安，即授他以左番功臣名号。
English: When Huang Chao captured Chang'an, he was awarded the title of "Left-Handed Hero."

古文：中和中，巢领徒走宛丘。时太祖在汴，奉诏南讨，巢党日窘，归霸昆仲与葛从周、李谠等相率来降，寻补宣武军剧职。
现代文：中和年间，黄巢领着党徒奔到宛丘，当时太祖在汴州，奉诏南征，黄巢势力日益窘迫，张归霸兄弟与葛从周、李谠等人一起来投降朝廷，不久补任宣武军要职。
English: During the middle and middle years, Huang Chao led the party members to rush to Wanqiu. At that time, the great-grandfather was in Zhangzhou, following the Southern Expedition, and the Huang Chao forces were increasingly embarrassed. Zhang Guiba's brothers, together with Ge Cong Zhou, Li Wei and others, came to surrender to the imperial court, and soon filled the important position of the Xuanwu army.

古文：光启二年，与蔡将张存战于卢氏。
现代文：光启二年，张归霸与蔡州贼寇张存在卢氏交战。
English: In the second year of Guangqi, Zhang Guiba and the Caizhou bandit Zhang Sheng fought with the Lu clan.

古文：三年夏，又与蔡将卢瑭战于双丘，复与秦宗贤战于万胜，皆败而歼之。
现代文：三年夏天，又与蔡贼将领卢瑭在双丘作战，又与秦宗贤在万胜作战，都打败并歼灭了他们。
English: In the summer of the third year, he also fought with the Cai Kui general Lu Xi in Shuangqiu, and with Qin Zongxian in Wansheng, and defeated and annihilated them.

古文：翼日，宗权遣将张郅来寇，列寨于赤堈。
现代文：后来，秦宗权派将领张日至前来寇犯，在赤岗扎营。
English: Later, the generals of the Qin sectarian power faction led by Zhang Zhi came to the bandits and camped in Akagang.

古文：一日，出骑将较胜，归霸为飞戈所中。即拔马却逸，控弦一发，贼洞颈而坠，遂兼骑而还。太祖时于高丘下瞰，备见其状，面加赏激，厚以金帛及所获马锡之。
现代文：一天，各自派出骑兵将领以决胜负，张归霸被飞矢射中，他立即拔出箭矢，回马弯弓一射，贼人被射穿颈子坠下马来，张归霸于是缴获贼人战马而回，太祖当时在高丘上朝下观战，看见全部情况，当面加以奖赏鼓励，用金钱布帛以及他俘获的战马赐给他。
English: One day, both sides sent cavalry generals to decide the outcome of the battle. Zhang Guiba was shot by a flying arrow. He immediately pulled out an arrow and shot the horse back with a curved bow. The thief was shot through the neck and fell off the horse. Zhang Guiba then captured the thief's horse and returned. The great-grandfather was on the hill watching the battle, saw the whole situation, rewarded and encouraged him in person, and gave him a cloth of money and his captured horse.

古文：又尝被命以控弦之士五百人伏于壕内，太祖统数百骑稍逼其寨，蔡人果以锐士摩垒来追，归霸发伏兵，掩杀千余人，夺马数十匹，寻奏授检校左散骑常侍。
现代文：张归霸又曾经受命带领弓箭手五百人埋伏在战壕里，太祖带着数百骑兵慢慢逼近敌军营寨，蔡州贼寇果然派出精锐士兵开门出城前来追击，张归霸发起伏兵，掩杀千余人，夺得战马几十匹，不久上奏朝廷授与检校左散骑常侍。
English: Zhang Guiba was also once ordered to lead 500 archers to lie in ambush in the trenches. Taizu slowly approached the enemy camp with hundreds of cavalry. The Caizhou bandits indeed sent elite soldiers to open the door and come out of the city to pursue. Zhang Guiba launched an ambush, covered up more than a thousand people, captured dozens of horses, and soon reported to the court to award the inspection school to the left horseman.

古文：其后从太祖伐郓，副李唐宾渡淮，咸著奇绩。
现代文：后来跟随太祖攻伐郓州，辅助李唐宾渡过淮河，都立有大功。
English: Later, he followed his great-great-grandfather to conquer Bozhou and assisted Li Tangbin to cross the Huaihe River, both of which were great feats.

古文：文德初，大军临蔡州，贼将萧颢来斫寨，归霸于徐怀玉各以所领兵自东南二扉分出，合势杀贼，蔡人大败。
现代文：文德初年，大军逼近蔡州，贼将萧颢前来攻营，张归霸与徐怀玉各领部下士兵从东南两门分别出击，合并势力杀贼，蔡州贼人大败。
English: In the first year of Wende, the army approached Caizhou, the thieves brought Xiao Gan to attack the camp, Zhang Guiba and Xu Huayu's soldiers attacked separately from the southeast, the combined forces killed the thieves, and the Caizhou thieves were defeated.

古文：及太祖振众离营，寇尘已息。太祖召至，赏之曰： 昔耿弇不俟光武击张步，言不以贼遗君父，弇之功，尔其二焉。 
现代文：到太祖整顿部队出营时，战争已经结束，太祖召来张归霸，赞赏他说 ：以前耿不等光武帝下令就出击张步，说不能将贼寇留给君王，立下耿这样的功劳，你是第二个。 
English: By the time Emperor Taizu's rectification troops left the camp, the war had ended. Emperor Taizu summoned Zhang Guiha and praised him, saying: "Previously, Geng did not wait for Emperor Guangwu to give the order to attack Zhangpu. He said that he could not leave the bandits to the king. You are the second to do such a great service.

古文：大顺中，郭绍宾拔曹州，归霸率兵数千守之。
现代文：大顺年间，郭绍宾占领曹州后，张归霸领兵数千守卫曹州。
English: During the Dashun period, after Guo Shaobin occupied Caozhou, Zhang Guiba led thousands of soldiers to guard Caozhou.

古文：俄而硃瑾统大军自至，归霸与丁会逆击之于金乡，瑾大败，擒贼将宗江等七十余人，曹州以宁。
现代文：接着朱瑾带领大军来到，张归霸与丁会在金乡迎战朱瑾，朱瑾大败，擒获贼将宗江等七十多人，曹州得以安宁。
English: Next, Zhu Xi led a large army to come, Zhang Guiba and Ding Hui met Zhu Xi in Jinxiang, Zhu Xi was defeated, more than seventy people including the thief Zongjiang were captured, and Caozhou was peaceful.

古文：明年，破濮州，生擒刺史邵儒。
现代文：第二年，攻下濮州，活捉刺史邵儒。
English: In the second year, he captured Zhangzhou and captured the assassin Shao Ru alive.

古文：又佐葛从周与晋军战于洹水，生获克用爱子落落。
现代文：又辅助葛从周与晋军在洹水作战，活捉了李克用的爱子落落。
English: In addition, Ge assisted Zhou in fighting the Jin army in Surabaya and captured Li Ke's beloved son alive.

古文：复与燕人战于内黄，杀仁恭兵三万余众。
现代文：又与燕人在内黄交战，杀死刘仁恭士兵三万多人。
English: He also fought with Yan Zi in Neihuang, killing more than 30,000 soldiers of Liu Rengong.

古文：戎绩超特，居诸将之右，累官至检校左仆射。
现代文：战绩超群，居于众将之上，接连升官至检校左仆射。
English: His record is outstanding, he is above the generals, and he has been promoted successively to the position of school inspector and left-handed shooter.

古文：光化二年，权知邢州事。
现代文：光化二年，代理主持邢州事务。
English: In the second year of Gwanghwamun, he became the acting chairman of Jeonju affairs.

古文：明年春，李嗣昭以蕃汉五万来寇，归霸坚壁设备，晋军不敢顾其城，遂移军攻洺州，陷焉。
现代文：第二年春天，李嗣昭率领蕃族、汉族五万士兵来寇犯，张归霸坚守城墙做好准备，晋军不敢冒犯邢州城，于是调转军队进攻氵名州，氵名州陷落。
English: In the spring of the following year, Li Shizhao led 50,000 soldiers from the Yi and Han ethnic groups to invade, and Zhang Guiba prepared to defend the city wall. The Jin army did not dare to offend Zhangzhou City, so the army was diverted to attack Zhangming Prefecture, and Zhangming Province fell.

古文：时太祖在滑，颇虑邢之失守。
现代文：当时太祖在滑州，很担心邢州失守。
English: At that time, Taizu was in Slanting, and he was very worried about losing Zhangzhou.

古文：及葛从周复洺，嗣昭北遁，归霸出兵袭之，杀二万余众。
现代文：到葛从周收复氵名州时，李嗣昭向北逃走，张归霸出兵追击他，杀死二万多人。
English: When Ge returned from Zhou to recapture Renmeizhou, Li Shizhao fled to the north, and Zhang Guiba sent troops to chase him, killing more than 20,000 people.

古文：捷至，赏锡殊等，旋以功奏加检校司空。
现代文：捷报传来，赏赐非凡，立即因功上奏加封为检校司空。
English: When the winning report came, the award was extraordinary, and immediately, because of his achievement, he was awarded the title of the school inspector.

古文：天祐初，迁莱州刺史，秩满授左卫上将军，又除曹州刺史。
现代文：天初年，迁任莱州刺史，任满后授与左卫上将军，又任曹州刺史。
English: At the beginning of the year, he was transferred to the post of Laizhou chief historian, and after his term of office was awarded the title of General of the Left Division, and was also appointed the chief historian of Caozhou.

古文：其秋，加检校司徒，副刘知俊御邠、凤之寇，败之。
现代文：那年秋天，加封检校司徒，辅助刘知俊抵御州、凤翔的敌寇，打败了他们。
English: In the autumn of that year, the cadets of Jafeng Inspection School assisted Liu Zhijun in resisting the enemy raiders of Shuzhou and Fengxiang and defeated them.

古文：太祖受禅，拜右龙虎统军，改左骁卫上将军，充河阳诸军都指挥使。
现代文：太祖受禅让后，拜为右龙虎统军，改任左骁卫上将军，兼任河阳各军都指挥使。
English: After the great-grandfather was ceded by Zen, he became the right dragon and tiger united army, and was appointed as the left guardian general, and also served as the commander of all the armies in Heyang.

古文：明年夏六月，就除河阳节度使、检校太保，寻加同平章事。
现代文：第二年夏天六月，任河阳节度使、检校太保，接着加封为同平章事。
English: In the summer of June of the following year, he was appointed as Heyang's festival envoy and school inspector, and then he was awarded the title of Tongping.

古文：二年秋七月，卒于位。
现代文：同年秋天七月，死在任上。
English: He died in office in the autumn of the same year, in July.

古文：诏赠太傅。
现代文：诏令追赠为太傅。
English: He was posthumously awarded the title of Taifu.

