古文：窦炽字光成，扶风平陵人也。
现代文：窦炽字光成，是扶风平陵人。
English: Dou blazing word light into, is Fu Feng Pingling people.

古文：汉大鸿胪章十一世孙。
现代文：东汉大鸿胪窦章的十一世孙。
English: He was the 11th generation grandchild of Eastern Han Dynasty great general Zou Douzhang.

古文：章子统，灵帝时，为雁门太守，避窦武之难，亡奔匈奴，遂为部落大人。
现代文：窦章的儿子窦统，汉灵帝时担任雁门太守，因为躲避窦武的祸患，逃亡投奔到匈奴，就成为部落的首领。
English: Dou Tong, the son of Dou Zhang, served as the governor of the Wild Goose Gate during the Han Dynasty. He fled to the Xiongnu to escape the evil of Dou Wu, and became the leader of the tribe.

古文：后魏南徙，子孙因家于代，赐姓纥豆陵氏。
现代文：后魏南徙，子孙于是在代安家，被赐姓纥豆陵氏。
English: After Wei migrated to the south, his descendants settled in Daian and were given the surname of Peasling.

古文：累世仕魏，皆至大官。
现代文：世代在魏做官，都做到很大的官职。
English: Generations of officials served in Wei, and official positions are very important.

古文：父略，平远将军。
现代文：父亲宝略，担任平远将军。
English: His father, Baoliu, served as General Pingyuan.

古文：以炽着勋，赠少保、柱国大将军、建昌公。
现代文：因为宝炽功勋显著，被赠为少保、柱国大将军、建昌公。
English: Because of his outstanding merits, he was awarded the titles of Shao Bao, Zhu Guodao, and Jian Changgong.

古文：炽性严明，有谋略，美须髯，身长八尺二寸。
现代文：窦炽性格严肃而公正，很有计谋和策略，胡须长得很漂亮，身高八尺二寸。
English: Dou Blazing's disposition is serious and clear-sighted, and he has strategies and stratagems. Suzy Yingmei, who is eight feet two inches tall, has an extraordinary appearance.

古文：少从范阳祁忻受毛诗、左氏春秋，略通大义。
现代文：青年时跟随范阳祁忻学习《毛诗》、《左氏春秋》，粗通大义。
English: When he was young, he studied "Mao Poetry" and "The Spring and Autumn of Zuo Shi" with Fan Yangjun.

古文：善骑射，膂力过人。
现代文：善于骑马射箭，体力超人。
English: He is good at riding horses and shooting arrows, and his arm strength exceeds that of an ordinary person.

古文：魏正光末，北镇扰乱，炽乃随略避地定州，因没于葛荣。
现代文：魏正光末年，北方动荡混乱，窦炽就跟随窦略到定州避乱。因而沦没在葛荣手中。
English: In the last years of Wei Zhengguang, when the north was in turmoil, Dou Blazing followed Dou Li to Dingzhou to escape the turmoil. As a result, he fell into the hands of Ge Rong.

古文：荣欲官略，略不受。
现代文：葛荣想让宝略做官，窦略不肯接受。
English: Ge Rong wanted Dou Liao to become an official, but Dou Liao did not accept.

古文：荣疑其有异志，遂留略于冀州，将炽及炽兄善随军。
现代文：葛荣怀疑他有二心，就留下窦略在冀州，带着窦炽及他的哥哥窦善一起随军。
English: Ge Rong suspected that he was double-minded, so he left him in Jizhou and let Dou Blazing and Dou Shan follow the army.

古文：魏永安元年，尔朱荣破葛荣，炽乃将家随荣于并州。
现代文：魏永安元年，尔朱荣打败了葛荣，窦炽就带着家人跟随尔朱荣到了并州。
English: In the first year of Wei Yong'an, Er Zhu Rong defeated Ge Rong, and Dou Blaze took his family to follow Er Zhu Rong to Anhui Province.

古文：时葛荣别帅韩娄、郝长众数万人据蓟城不下，以炽为都督，从骠骑将军侯深讨之。
现代文：当时葛荣的别帅韩娄、郝长部下几万人占据蓟城不能攻下，于是以窦炽为都督，跟随骠骑将军侯深征讨他们。
English: At that time, Ge Rong's second-in-command Han Zheng and tens of thousands of his subordinates were unable to capture Lucheng, so he made Dou Blaze the governor and followed the cavalry general Hou Sheng to conquer them.

古文：炽手斩娄，以功拜扬烈将军。
现代文：宝炽亲手斩杀了韩娄，凭着功劳担任了扬烈将军。
English: He was awarded the title of General Yang Rong for his service.

古文：三年，除员外散骑侍郎，迁给事中。
现代文：永安三年，任员外散骑侍郎，升给事中。
English: In the third year of Yong'an, he was appointed as a non-commissioned officer riding horseback, and was promoted to the middle ranks.

古文：建明元年，加武厉将军。
现代文：建明元年，加授为武厉将军。
English: In the first year of the Jianming era, he was awarded the title of General Wu Li.

古文：魏孝武即位，茹茹等诸番并遣使朝贡，帝临轩宴之。
现代文：魏孝武帝即位，茹茹等诸番国一起派遣使者前来朝贡，孝武帝在殿堂前檐下的平台上宴请他们。
English: Emperor Wei Xiaowu ascended to the throne, and all the vassal states, including Ru Ru, sent envoys to pay tribute. Emperor Xiaowu invited them to a banquet on the platform in front of the Great Hall.

古文：有鸱飞鸣于殿前，帝素知炽善射，因欲示远人，乃给炽御箭两只，命射之。
现代文：有鹃乌在殿前飞翔呜叫，孝武帝一向知道窦炽善于射箭，就想演示给远道来的人看看，于是赐给窦炽御箭两枝，下令射击。
English: There was a cormorant flying and crying in front of the hall. Emperor Xiaowu had always known that Dou Blaze was good at archery, so he wanted to show it to people who came from far away. So he gave Dou Blaze two arrows and ordered him to shoot.

古文：鸱乃应弦而落，诸番人咸叹异焉。
现代文：鸱鸟随着拉弦射箭而落下，诸番国的人都对此赞叹惊异。
English: Ostriches fall with the pull of strings and arrows, and people from all over the world marvel at this.

古文：帝大悦，赐帛五十疋。
现代文：孝武帝非常高兴，赐帛五十匹。
English: Emperor Xiaowu was very pleased and gave him fifty yakitori.

古文：寻率兵随东南道行台樊子鹄追尔朱仲远，仲远奔梁。
现代文：不久带兵跟随东南道行台樊子鹄追击尔朱仲远，仲远逃奔梁朝。
English: Soon, he led his soldiers to pursue Er Zhu Zhongyuan along the southeast road of Xingdao, and Zhongyuan fled to the Liang Dynasty.

古文：时梁主又遣元树入寇，攻陷谯城，遂据之。
现代文：当时梁朝君主又派遣元树入侵，攻陷并占据谯城。
English: At that time, the monarch of the Liang Dynasty sent Yuan Shu to invade, conquer and occupy Lucheng.

古文：子鹄令炽率骑兵击破之，封行唐县子，邑五百户。
现代文：子鹄命令窦炽带领骑兵攻破谯城，封实炽为行唐县子，食邑五百户。
English: Zixuan ordered Dou Blaze to lead the cavalry to break through the city of Zengcheng, sealing Blaze as the son of Xingtang County, with five hundred households in food villages.

古文：寻拜直合将军、银青光禄大夫，领华骝令，进爵上洛县伯，邑一千户。
现代文：不久授任为直合将军、银青光禄大夫，兼华骊令，升任爵位为上洛县伯，食邑一千户。
English: He was soon appointed as the general of Zhouga, the doctor of the silver Qingguanglu, and the governor of Huayu. He was promoted to the peerage of Shangluo County, and served a thousand households.

古文：时帝与齐神武构隙，以炽有威重，堪处爪牙之任，拜合内大都督。迁抚军将军，朱衣直合，遂从帝西迁。
现代文：当时魏孝武帝与齐神武帝结怨，因为宝炽威严庄重，能够担当辅佐的重任，魏孝武帝就任命他为合内大都督，升为抚军将军、朱衣直合，就跟随皇上西迁。
English: At that time, Emperor Wei Xiaowu and Emperor Qi Shenwu had a grudge, because Baozhuang was dignified and solemn, and could take on the important role of assistant, Emperor Wei Xiaowu appointed him as the Grand Governor of Inner Mongolia, promoted him to the General of Fuzhou Army, and Zhu Yijiaogu, and he moved west with the emperor.

古文：仍与其兄善重至城下，与武卫将军高金龙战于千秋门，败之。
现代文：宝炽与他的哥哥窦善又来到城下，和武卫将军高金龙在千秋门交战，打败了他。
English: Baozhuang and his brother Dou Shan came to the city again and fought with the Wuwei general Gao Jinlong at the Qianqiu Gate, defeating him.

古文：因入宫城，取御马四十疋并鞍勒，进之行所。
现代文：于是进入宫城，取走御马四十匹和马鞍、马衔，送到皇上的住所。
English: He then entered Miyagi, took away forty imperial horses, their saddles and harness, and brought them to the emperor's residence.

古文：帝大悦，赐炽及善骏马各二疋、驽马十疋。
现代文：皇上非常高兴，赏赐宝炽和窦善每人骏马二匹、劣马十匹。
English: The emperor was very pleased and rewarded Baojing and Dou Sheng with two good horses and ten inferior horses each.

古文：大统元年，以从驾功，别封真定县公，除东豫州刺史，加卫将军。
现代文：大统元年，因为跟随皇上有功，另封为真定县公，授职束豫州刺史，加授卫将军。
English: In the first year of the Great Reunification, because of the merit of following the emperor, he was also appointed as the public official of Jinding County, and was given the post of the Governor of Yuzhou and the post of the General of the Imperial Guards.

古文：从擒窦泰，复弘农，破沙苑，皆有功，增邑八百户。
现代文：参战活捉了宝泰，收复了弘农，攻下了沙苑，都立下战功，增加食邑八百户。
English: Participated in the war, captured Baotai, recovered Hongnong, captured Shayuan, made outstanding achievements in the war, and increased the number of food villages by 800.

古文：河桥之战，诸将退走。
现代文：在河桥之战中，诸将退走。
English: In the Battle of the River Bridge, the generals retreated.

古文：炽时独从两骑为敌人所追，至邙山，炽乃下马背山抗之。
现代文：窦炽当时独自带领两名骑兵被敌人追赶，来到邙山，宝炽就下马背山抵抗敌人。
English: At that time, Dou Blaze was alone leading two cavalrymen who were chased by the enemy and came to Lushan. Bao Blaze went down to Ma Bei Mountain to resist the enemy.

古文：俄而敌众渐多，三面攻围，矢下如雨。
现代文：不久敌人逐渐增多，从三面进攻包围，箭下如雨一般密集。
English: Before long, the number of enemies gradually increased, and they were encircled from three sides, and the arrows rained down on them.

古文：炽骑士所执弓，并为敌人所射破，炽乃总收其箭以射之，所中人马皆应弦而倒。
现代文：宣继的骑士所持的弓，都被敌人射破，窦继就全部收集他们的箭用来射向敌军，射中的人马都随着开弓拉弦而倒下。
English: The bows held by the knights of Xuan Jie were all shot by the enemy, and Dou Jie collected all their arrows to shoot at the enemy, and the people who were shot fell down as they opened the bow and pulled the strings.

古文：敌以杀伤既多，乃相谓曰： 得此人未足为功。 
现代文：敌军因为杀伤已经很多，就互相告诉说： 抓到这些人不算有功。 
English: Because there were already so many killed and wounded, the enemy troops told each other: "It's not a great achievement to have captured these people.

古文：乃稍引退。
现代文：于是逐渐引兵退却。
English: He then retreated.

古文：炽因其怠，遂突围得出。
现代文：窦炽趁着敌军的懈怠，就突围而出。
English: Dou Blazing took the opportunity to break out of the encirclement.

古文：又从太保李弼讨白额稽胡，破之，除车骑将军。
现代文：又跟随太保李弼讨伐白额稽胡，打败了他们，授职车骑将军。
English: He also followed the imperial bodyguard Li Xi to fight against the white-faced Qi Hu, defeated them, and was awarded the post of general.

古文：高仲密以北豫州来附，炽率兵从太祖援之。
现代文：产健蜜以韭辽州前来归附，宣炽带兵跟随立担增援他。
English: Zang Jian Mei came to Liaozhou to annex it, and Xuan Hui led the soldiers to follow and reinforce him.

古文：至洛阳，会东魏人据邙山为阵，太祖命留辎重于瀍曲，率轻骑奋击，中军与右军大破之，悉虏其步卒。
现代文：到了盗区，适逢塞魏人占据垄山作为阵地，太担命令留下军用器械、粮草在渥曲，率领轻骑奋勇进击，中军与右军都攻破了，全部俘虏了那裹的步兵。
English: When they arrived at the pillage area, it was time for the Sebei people to occupy the ridges of the mountain as a position. Taisang ordered to leave military equipment, grain and grass in Wuchu, and led the light cavalry to advance bravely. The Chinese army and the right army broke through, and all the captured infantry were captured.

古文：炽独追至石济而还。
现代文：窦炽独自追到石济才回来。
English: Dou Blaze alone chased the enemy soldiers to Shiji before returning.

古文：迁车骑大将军、仪同三司、散骑常侍，增邑一千户。
现代文：加升为车骑大将军、仪同三司、散骑常侍，增加食邑一千户。
English: He was promoted to the general of chariot and cavalry, the third secretary of etiquette and etiquette, and the attendant of horseback riding, and the number of restaurants increased by one thousand.

古文：十三年，进使持节、骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司，加侍中，增邑通前三千九百户。
现代文：十三年，升任使持节、骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司，加授侍中，增加食邑通前三千九百户。
English: In the 13th year, he was promoted to envoy, cavalry general, Kaifu ceremony and three departments, and awarded the title of attendant, increasing the number of restaurants to 3,900.

古文：出为泾州刺史，莅职数年，政号清净。
现代文：出任泾史，任职数年，政务号称简明不烦。
English: He has been in office for several years, and his government affairs are said to be simple and easy.

古文：改封安县公，进授大将军。
现代文：改封安武县公，进授大将军。
English: He was given the title of Anwu County magistrate and promoted to major general.

古文：魏废帝元年，除大都督、原州刺史。
现代文：魏废帝元年，授任大都督、原州刺史。
English: In the first year of the Wei Dynasty, he was awarded the title of Grand Governor and Yuanzhou Sashihong.

古文：炽抑挫豪右，申理幽滞，每亲巡垄亩，劝民耕桑。
现代文：宝炽约束控制豪族，为隐沦不被擢用之士昭雪，往往亲自巡视农田，鼓励老百姓耕作种桑。
English: As a member of the Baozhuang Restraint and Control Hero Clan, who was not promoted due to his obscurity, Zhao Xue often personally inspected the farmland and encouraged the common people to cultivate and grow mulberry.

古文：在州十载，甚有政绩。
现代文：在原州十年，政绩显著。
English: In 10 years in Wonju, his political achievements are remarkable.

古文：州城之北，有泉水焉，炽屡经游践，尝与僚吏宴于泉侧，因酌水自饮曰： 吾在此州，唯当饮水而已。 及去职之后，人吏感其遗惠，每至此泉者，莫不怀之。
现代文：原州城的北面，有股泉水，宝炽多次前往游览，曾经在泉水旁边和同僚设下宴席，酌水白饮，说： 我在这个州，衹应当饮水罢了。 等他离职之后，当地百姓、官吏感谢他留下的恩惠，每一个来到这股泉水处的人，没有人不怀念他的。
English: On the north side of Wonju city, there is a spring, which Bao Yao has visited many times. He once held a banquet with his colleagues next to the spring, drank water and said, "I'm in this state, I should just drink water." After he left office, local people and officials thanked him for the grace he left behind. Everyone who came to this spring, no one misses him.

古文：魏恭帝元年，进爵广武郡公。
现代文：魏恭帝元年，升爵为广武郡公。
English: In the first year of Emperor Wei Gong, he was promoted to the rank of Guangwu County.

古文：属茹茹寇广武，炽率兵与柱国赵贵分路讨之。
现代文：适逢茹茹入侵广武，实炽带兵和柱国趟贵分路讨伐。
English: The invasion of Guangwu coincided with Zhu Ru, and he led the soldiers and the pillar country to go to Guizhou to fight.

古文：茹茹闻军至，引退。
现代文：茹茹听到大军来到，引兵退却。
English: When Zhu Ru heard that a large army was coming, he withdrew his troops.

古文：炽度河至曲伏川追及，与战，大破之，斩其酋帅郁久闾是发，获生口数千，及杂畜数万头。
现代文：窦炽渡过黄河到曲伏川追上了敌军，和他们交战，打败了他们，斩杀了他们的首领郁久问是发，俘获数千人，以及各种牲畜数万头。
English: Dou Blazing crossed the Yellow River to the Qufu River and caught up with the enemy army, fought with them, defeated them, killed their leader Yu Jiu Qianfa, captured thousands of people, and tens of thousands of livestock.

古文：孝闵帝践阼，增邑二千户。
现代文：孝闵帝登上皇位，增加食邑二千户。
English: Emperor Xiaozhun ascended the throne, increasing the number of food villages by two thousand.

古文：武成二年，拜柱国大将军。
现代文：武成二年，授任柱国大将军。
English: In the second year of the Northern Zhou Dynasty, he was named the general of the pillar country.

古文：世宗以炽前朝忠勋，望实兼重，欲独为造第。
现代文：世宗认为宝炽在前朝尽忠而有勋绩，名望实功都很高，想单独为他营造府第。
English: Sejong thought that Baochao was loyal to the previous government and had distinguished service, and his reputation and achievements were very high, and he wanted to build a palace for him alone.

古文：炽辞以天下未定，干戈未偃，不宜辄发徒役，世宗不许。
现代文：窦炽以天下尚未平定，战争没有停息，不宜动辄征发徒众服役，而加以推辞，世宗未准许。
English: However, the world had not yet been pacified, the war had not stopped, and it was not appropriate to recruit and send disciples to serve at any time, and to refuse to do so was not permitted by the Sejong.

古文：寻而帝崩，事方得寝。
现代文：不久皇帝去世，事情才得以停止。
English: Soon after, Emperor Ming died, and things came to a halt.

古文：保定元年，进封邓国公，邑一万户，别食资阳县一千户，收其租赋。
现代文：保定元年，进封为邓国公，食邑一万户，另外食邑资阳县一千户，收取他们的租赋。
English: In the first year of Baoding, the imperial court promoted him to the rank of Deng Guogong, and allocated 10,000 households in Zhiyang County and another 1,000 households in Ziyang County to him in order to collect their rent.

古文：四年，授大宗伯，随晋公护东征。
现代文：四年，任大宗伯，跟随晋公宇文护束征。
English: In the fourth year, he was appointed as the grand patriarch, and followed Jinkong Uwenguo to the conscription.

古文：天和五年，出为宜州刺史。
现代文：天和五年，出任为宜州刺史。
English: Ten and five years later, he was appointed as the chief historian of Yizhou.

古文：先是，太祖田于渭北，令炽与晋公护分射走兔，炽一日获十七头，护获十一头。
现代文：在此之前，太祖在渭水北岸打猎，下令窦炽和晋公宇文护分别射猎奔跑的兔子，窦炽一日猎获十七头，宇文护衹猎获十一头。
English: Prior to this, Emperor Taizu hunted rabbits on the north shore of Surabaya. He ordered Dou Blaze and Jin Gong Uwen Guo to shoot running rabbits separately. Dou Blaze caught 17 rabbits in one day, while Uwen Guo caught 11 rabbits.

古文：护耻其不及，因以为嫌。
现代文：宇文护以比不上窦炽为羞耻，因此结下了怨恨。
English: Uwen Guo was ashamed that he was not as good as Dou Blazing, so he developed a grudge.

古文：至是，炽又以高祖年长，有劝护归政之议，护恶之，故左迁焉。
现代文：到了天和五年，宝炽又因为高祖年纪大乙，有劝宇文护归还政务给高祖的提议，宇文护厌恶他，所以把他降职。
English: At the age of twenty-five, because Gaozu was too old, Baozhuang proposed to persuade Uwenuo to return the government affairs to Gaozu. Uwenuo detested him, so he demoted him.

古文：及护诛，征太傅。
现代文：等到宇文护被诛杀，窦炽被征为太傅。
English: When Uwenroo was killed in battle, Dou Blazing was enlisted as Taifu.

古文：炽既朝之元老，名位素隆，至于军国大谋，常与参议。
现代文：宝炽已是朝廷元老，名望地位向来很高，对于军队、国家的大计，经常参与议论。
English: Already a veteran of the imperial court, he has always been held in high esteem, and is often involved in discussions about the military and the country's plans.

古文：尝有疾，高祖至其第而问之，因赐金石之药。
现代文：有次他患病，高祖亲自来到他的府第慰问，赐给金石之药。
English: Once when he was ill, Gaozu himself came to his residence to offer his condolences and to give him the medicine.

古文：其见礼如此。
现代文：他受到这样的礼遇。
English: He was treated with such courtesy.

古文：帝于大德殿将谋伐齐，炽时年已衰老，乃扼腕曰： 臣虽朽迈，请执干橹，首启戎行。
现代文：皇帝在大德殿商议讨伐齐，窦炽当时已经年老力衰，却激动地说： 我虽然年纪老迈，请允许我手持兵器，带头出发。
English: The emperor was in the Great Hall of the Emperor, discussing how to settle the war, when Dou Yao, who was already old and feeble, said excitedly, "Although I am very old, please allow me to take up arms and lead the way.

古文：得一睹诛翦鲸鲵，廓清寰宇，省方观俗，登岳告成，然后归魂泉壤，无复余恨。 高祖壮其志节，遂以炽第二子武当公恭为左二军总管。
现代文：能够看到消灭敌人，平定天下，察看地方，观察风俗，登上山岳，祭告成功，然后魂归黄泉，也就不再有遣憾。 皇帝赞许他的志向气节，就以他的次子武当公窦恭为左二军总管。
English: If he could see the destruction of the enemy, the pacification of the world, the inspection of places, the observation of customs, the ascent of mountains, the proclamation of success, and then the return of his soul to the underworld, he would no longer have any regrets.The emperor praised his aspiration and appointed his second son Wu Dang Gong Dou Gong as the commander-in-chief of the Second Army.

古文：齐平之后，帝乃召炽历观相州宫殿。
现代文：齐平定之后，皇帝就召窦炽遍观相州宫殿。
English: After Qi was subdued, the emperor summoned Dou Zhiguo to visit the palace of Xiangzhou.

古文：炽拜贺曰： 陛下真不负先帝矣。 
现代文：宝炽拜贺说： 陛下真是没有辜负先帝了。 
English: "Your majesty has truly lived up to the expectations of the former emperor," said the ardent worshiper.

古文：帝大悦，赐奴婢三十人，及杂缯帛千疋，进位上柱国。
现代文：皇帝非常高兴。赐给他奴婢三十人，以及杂色丝帛一千匹，升位为上柱国。
English: The emperor was very pleased. He gave him thirty slaves and a thousand pigeons of mixed colors, and promoted him to the top pillar country.

古文：宣政元年，兼雍州牧。
现代文：宣政元年，兼任雍州刺史。
English: In the first year of Xuan Zheng, he also served as the Yongzhou chief historian.

古文：及宣帝营建东京，以炽为京洛营作大监。
现代文：到宣帝经营修建东京，以窦炽为京洛营作大监。
English: Emperor Xuan took over the management of the construction of Tokyo, with Dou Jia as the general superintendent of the Kyoto camp.

古文：宫苑制度，皆取决焉。
现代文：皇宫花园的体制法度，都由他决定。
English: The system and laws of the palace garden are all decided by him.

古文：大象初，改食乐陵县，邑户如旧。
现代文：大象初年，改食乐陵县，食邑的户数照旧。
English: In the first year of the elephant, the imperial court changed Leling County into his dining village, with the same number of households as in the past.

古文：隋文帝辅政，停洛阳宫作，炽请入朝。
现代文：隋文帝辅佐政务，停止洛阳宫的兴造，窦炽请求入朝。
English: Sui Emperor Sui assisted in government affairs, stopped the construction of Luoyang Palace, and asked Dou Yao to come to the imperial court.

古文：属尉迟迥举兵，炽乃移入金墉城，简练关中军士得数百人，与洛州刺史、平凉公元亨同心固守，仍权行洛州镇事。
现代文：适逢尉迟迥起兵，宝炽于是移入金墉城，挑选关中军士得到数百人，与洛州刺史、平凉公元亨同心固守，仍代理洛州镇政事。
English: When it was time for the soldiers to take up arms, Baozhuang then moved into Jinyuan City, selected hundreds of Guanzhong sergeants, and adhered to the same spirit as Lozhou Zhishi and Pingliang Jianheng, and still acted as the representative of Lozhou town government.

古文：相州平，炽方入朝。
现代文：相州平定，窦炽才入朝。
English: He returned to the imperial court only after Sengzhou was pacified.

古文：属隋文帝初为相国，百官皆劝进。
现代文：适逢隋文帝刚任相国，文武百官都劝说他做皇帝。
English: When Emperor Sui Wen was newly appointed as the emperor of the neighboring country, all the civil and military officials persuaded him to become the emperor.

古文：炽自以累代受恩，遂不肯署笺。
现代文：窦炽自己认为世代蒙受皇恩，就不肯在劝进表上署名。
English: Dou Zhao himself thought that the generation had been favored by the emperor, so he refused to sign the persuasion form.

古文：时人高其节。
现代文：当时人们认为他气节高尚。
English: At that time, people thought he was very noble.

古文：隋文帝践极，拜太傅，加殊礼，赞拜不名。
现代文：隋文帝登上皇位，任实炽为太傅，加以特殊的礼遇，朝拜皇帝时，赞礼的人不称他的名字。
English: When the Sui Emperor ascended to the throne, he was given the title of Taifu with special courtesies. When paying homage to the emperor, people did not call him by his name.

古文：开皇四年八月，薨，时年七十八。
现代文：开皇四年八月去世，终年七十八岁。
English: The emperor died in August of his fourth year, at the age of seventy-eight.

古文：赠本官、冀沧瀛赵卫贝魏洛八州诸军事、冀州刺史。
现代文：追赠本官、冀沧瀛赵卫贝魏洛八州诸军事、冀州刺史。
English: Afterward, I presented my official, Jizhou vicissitudes, Zhao Wei Bei Wei Luo, eight states of military, Jizhou stabbing history.

古文：谥曰恭。
现代文：谧号为苤。
English: 号恭.

古文：炽事亲孝，奉诸兄以悌顺闻。
现代文：窦炽事奉双亲很孝敬，对各位兄长以悌顺闻名。
English: Dou Zhao served his parents with great filial piety, and was known for his benevolence to his elder brothers.

古文：及其位望隆重，而子孙皆处列位，遂为当时盛族。
现代文：到他位高望重，子孙都处高位，就成为当时的豪门望族。
English: He was held in high esteem, and his children and grandchildren all held high positions, making him the most prominent member of a wealthy family at the time.

古文：子茂嗣。
现代文：儿子窦茂继嗣。
English: His son Dou Shigeru succeeded him.

古文：茂有弟十三人，恭、威最知名。
现代文：宝茂有弟弟十三人，其中宝恭、窦威最知名。
English: Bao Mao had thirteen younger brothers, of whom Bao Gong and Dou Wei were the most famous.

古文：恭位至大将军。
现代文：窦恭官位到大将军。
English: Dou Ying was promoted to the rank of general.

古文：从高祖平齐，封赞国公，除西兖州总管，以罪赐死。
现代文：跟随高祖平定查，封为赞厘公，任酉变业总管，后来因为犯罪被赐死。
English: He followed Gao Zu in suppressing Dingcha, was given the title of Zhanli Gong, and served as the general manager of the transformation industry. Later, he was sentenced to death for his crime.

古文：炽兄善，以中军大都督、南城公从魏孝武西迁。
现代文：窦炽的哥哥窦善，以中军大都督、南城公的身份跟随魏孝武帝西迁。
English: Dou Zhen, the elder brother of Dou Blaze, moved west with Emperor Wei Xiaowu as the Chinese military governor and Nancheng official.

古文：后仕至太仆、卫尉卿、汾北华瀛三州刺史、骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、永富县公。
现代文：后来官做到太仆、卫尉卿、汾北华瀛三州刺史、骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、永富县公。
English: Later, officials were made into servants, officers of the imperial guard, officials of the three states of North Hebei and South Hebei, cavalry generals, officials of the three prefectures of Kaifu and Yongfu.

古文：谥曰忠。
现代文：谧号为忠。
English: His nickname is Zhong.

古文：子荣定嗣。
现代文：儿子荣定继嗣。
English: His son, Rongding, became his successor.

古文：起家魏文帝千牛备身。
现代文：从家中征召出来担任魏文帝千牛备身。
English: He was conscripted from his home to serve as Wei Wen Di Qian Niu preparation.

古文：稍迁平东将军、大都督，进骠骑大将军、仪同三司。
现代文：逐渐升为平东将军、大都督，又升为骠骑大将军、仪同三司。
English: He was gradually promoted to the position of the General of Pingdong and the Grand Governor, and then to the General of Cavalry and the Third Secretary of the Ministry of Ceremonies.

古文：历佽飞中大夫、右司卫上大夫。
现代文：历任饮飞中大夫、右司卫上大夫。
English: Successive Dr. Jifei, Dr. West, and Dr. Right Division Wei Shang.

古文：大象中，位至大将军。
现代文：大象年问，位居大将军。
English: In the Year of the Elephant, the elephant is the general.

古文：炽兄子毅。
现代文：宝炽的侄子叫宝毅。
English: Baojing's nephew is called Bao Yi.

古文：毅字天武。
现代文：窦毅字天武。
English: Dou Yi and Tian Wu.

古文：父岳，早卒。
现代文：父亲窦岳，很早就去世了。
English: His father, Dou Yue, died a long time ago.

古文：及毅着勋，追赠大将军、冀州刺史。
现代文：等到实毅功勋显著，追赠宝岳为大将军、冀州刺史。
English: When the meritorious deeds of Jiyi were outstanding, Bao Yue was posthumously awarded the title of general and Jizhou made history.

古文：毅深沉有器度，事亲以孝闻。
现代文：窦毅为人沉着持重，很有器量风度，事奉父母以孝闻名。
English: Dou Yi is a self-possessed and serious person, with great poise and demeanor. He is famous for serving his parents with filial piety.

古文：魏孝武初，起家为员外散骑侍郎。
现代文：魏孝武帝初年，从家中征召出来任员外散骑侍郎。
English: In the first year of Emperor Wei Xiaowu, he was recruited from his family to serve as a non-commissioned officer.

古文：时齐神武擅朝，毅慨然有殉主之志。
现代文：当时齐神武帝独揽朝政，窦毅愤激地有为君主而死的志向。
English: At that time, Emperor Qishenwu was the sole ruler of the court, and Dou Yi was furious and had the ambition to die for the monarch.

古文：及孝武西迁，遂从入关，封奉高县子，邑六百户，除符玺郎。
现代文：到孝武帝西迁，就跟随入关，封为奉高县子，食邑六百户，授符玺郎。
English: When Emperor Xiaowu moved to the west, he was followed by Niu Guan, who was given the title of Fenggao County Son, 600 households in the county, and the title of Fu Yulang.

古文：从擒窦泰，复弘农，战沙苑，皆有功。
现代文：跟随孝武帝活捉窦泰，收复弘农，在沙苑作战，都立有战功。
English: Following Emperor Xiaowu, he captured Dou Tai alive, recovered Hong Nong, and fought in Sha Yuan, all of which were distinguished war feats.

古文：拜右将军、太中大夫，进爵为侯，增邑一千户。
现代文：授右将军、太中大夫，进封爵位为侯，增加食邑一千户。
English: He was awarded the titles of General of the Right and Grand Physician of the Middle Court, and received the title of Lord of the Manor, increasing the number of households by a thousand.

古文：累迁持节、抚军将军、通直散骑常侍。
现代文：多次升迁任持节、抚军将军、通直散骑常侍。
English: He was promoted several times to the positions of Jisetsu, Fushun Shogun, and Tsuchida Sanzhiyori Tsuneishi.

古文：魏废帝二年，授车骑大将军、仪同三司、大都督，进爵安武县公，增邑一千四百户。
现代文：魏废帝二年，授任车骑大将军、仪同三司、大都督，进封爵位为安武县公，增加食邑一千四百户。
English: In the second year of the Wei Dynasty, he was awarded the title of General of Chariot and Cavalry, the title of Third Secretary of the Ministry of Ceremonies, and the title of Grand Governor. He was awarded the title of Anwu County official, and the number of food villages increased by 1,400.

古文：魏恭帝元年，进授骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、大都督，改封永安县公，出为幽州刺史。
现代文：魏恭帝元年，升任骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、大都督，改封为永安县公，出任为幽州刺史。
English: In the first year of the Wei Gong Emperor, he was promoted to the general of the imperial cavalry, the third secretary of the Kaifu Rites and Decrees, and the grand governor, and changed his title to the Yong'an County official, and served as the Yuzhou scribe.

古文：孝闵帝践阼，进爵神武郡公，增邑通前五千户。
现代文：孝闵帝登上皂位，进封爵位为神武郡公，增加食邑通前五千户。
English: Emperor Xiaozhun ascended to the throne and was given the title of Lord of Jinwu County, increasing the number of households in the first five thousand households in the county.

古文：保定三年，征还朝，治左宫伯，转小宗伯，寻拜大将军。
现代文：保定三年，征调还朝，管理左宫伯，改任小宗伯，不久任大将军。
English: After three years in Baoding, he was transferred back to the court, managed the left palace, and was appointed as a minor zongbo, and soon became a general.

古文：时与齐人争衡，戎车岁动，并交结突厥，以为外援。
现代文：当时周与齐争强斗胜，战争每年都发生，两国都和突厥结交，作为外援。
English: At that time, Zhou and Qi were competing with each other for power and victory. The war occurred every year, and both countries made friends with the Turks as foreign aid.

古文：在太祖之时，突厥已许纳女于我，齐人亦甘言重币，遣使求婚。
现代文：在太祖的时候，突厥已答应嫁女给周，齐人也用甜言蜜语和贵重的礼品，派遣使者向突厥求婚。
English: At the time of the great-grandfather, the Turk had already agreed to marry his daughter to Zhou, and the Qi also sent envoys to the Turk to propose marriage with sweet words and valuable gifts.

古文：狄固贪婪，便欲有悔。
现代文：狄人本来贪婪无厌，就想悔婚。
English: Di people are greedy and insatiable, they want to repent.

古文：朝廷乃令杨荐等累使结之，往反十余，方复前好。
现代文：朝廷就命令杨荐等人多次出使以结交突厥，往返十多次，才恢复以前的友好关系。
English: The imperial court ordered Yang Ruiqi and others to send envoys several times to make friends with the Turks, and they went back and forth more than ten times before restoring the previous friendly relations.

古文：至是，虽期往逆，犹惧改图。
现代文：到此时，虽然期望前往迎娶，还是害怕对方另作打算。
English: At this point, although they are looking forward to getting married, they are still afraid that the other party will make other plans.

古文：以毅地兼勋戚，素有威重，乃命为使。
现代文：因为实毅地位是兼有功勋的皇族亲戚，一向威严庄重，就任命他为使节。
English: Because he was a relative of the royal family with both merit and dignity, he was appointed as an envoy.

古文：及毅之至，齐使亦在焉。
现代文：窦毅到了突厥，齐的使者也在那裹。
English: Dou Yi arrived in Turkey, and Qi's emissaries were also there.

古文：突厥君臣，犹有贰志。
现代文：突厥的君臣，还是有叛逆之心。
English: Turkic princes and ministers still have a rebellious heart.

古文：毅抗言正色，以大义责之，累旬乃定，卒以皇后归。
现代文：窦毅高声而言，表情端庄严肃，用大义责备他们，经过数十日才得以决定，终于迎奉皇后回到朝廷。
English: Dou Yi spoke in a loud voice, with a dignified and serious expression, and reproached them with great righteousness. After dozens of days, he was able to make a decision, and finally welcomed the empress back to the imperial court.

古文：朝议嘉之，别封成都县公，邑一千户，进位柱国。
现代文：朝廷评议嘉奖他，另封成都县公，食邑一千户，升位柱国。
English: The imperial court commended and rewarded him, and he was awarded the title of Chengdu county official, a thousand households in the food village, and promoted to the pillar country.

古文：出为同州刺史，迁蒲州总管，徙金州总管，加授上柱国，入为大司马。
现代文：出任同州刺史，升蒲州总管，调金州总管，加授上柱国，召入为大司马。
English: He was appointed as the chief historian of the same province, promoted to the chief administrator of Puzhou Province, transferred to the chief administrator of Jin Province, conferred the title of Shangzhu Province, and was called in as the grand steward.

古文：隋开皇初，拜定州总管。累居藩镇，咸得民和。
现代文：隋开皇初年，任定州总管，多次居官藩镇，都能使百姓和睦。
English: In the first year of the Sui Dynasty, he was appointed as the governor of Dingzhou and resided in the town for many times. He was able to bring harmony to the people.

古文：二年，薨于州，年六十四。
现代文：二年，在州去世，终年六十四岁。
English: Two years later, he died in the state, at the age of 64.

古文：赠襄郢等六州刺史，谥曰肃。
现代文：追赠襄、郢等六州刺史，谧号为肃。
English: He was posthumously awarded the titles of "Xiang" and "Jie" in six states, and his posthumous name was "Shu."

古文：毅性温和，每以谨慎自守，又尚太祖第五女襄阳公主，特为朝廷所委信。
现代文：窦毅性格温和，经常谨慎从事自守节操，又娶太祖第五女襄阳公主为妻，特别被朝廷所委任信赖。
English: Dou Yi had a gentle personality, he was always careful to practice self-preservation and self-discipline, and he married Princess Xiangyang, the fifth daughter of his great-grandfather. He was especially trusted by the imperial court.

古文：虽任兼出入，未尝有矜惰之容，时人以此称焉。
现代文：虽然任职兼有朝廷内外，但是未曾有骄矜懈怠的神色，当时的人因此称赞他。
English: Although he held positions both inside and outside the imperial court, he never had a haughty, slack attitude, and people at the time praised him for this.

古文：子贤嗣。
现代文：儿子窦贤继嗣。
English: His son Dou Xian became his successor.

古文：贤字托贤，志业通敏，少知名。
现代文：窦贤字托贤，志向和学业通达聪敏，年轻时就很知名。
English: Dou Xian, also known as To Xian, was well-known at a young age for his ambition and academic acumen.

古文：天和二年，策拜神武国世子。
现代文：天和二年，策拜为神武国世子。
English: Two years later, Tsebai became the heir of Jinmu Province.

古文：宣政元年，授使持节仪同大将军。
现代文：宣政元年，授使持节仪同大将军。
English: In the first year of the proclamation of the Republic of China, he was awarded the title of General.

古文：隋开皇中，袭爵神武公，除迁州刺史。
现代文：隋开皇年间，袭爵神武公。任迁州刺史。
English: During the reign of Emperor Sui, he succeeded to the title of Lord Shenwu. He was appointed as the governor of the state.

古文：二女即唐太穆皇后。
现代文：窦毅第二女即唐太穆皇后。
English: Dou Yi's second daughter, the Empress Dowager Tang Taimu.

古文：武德元年，诏赠司空、穆总管荆郢硖夔复沔岳沅鄂十州诸军事、荆州刺史，封杞国公。
现代文：武德元年，下诏赠司空、总管荆郢硖夔复沔岳沅澧鄂十州诸军事、荆州刺史，封杞国公。
English: In the first year of the Wude era, the following edict was issued to give Siku, the general manager of the military of the ten states of Jingzhou, the history of Jingzhou, and the seal of the Duke of Jingzhou.

古文：并追赠贤，金迁房直均五州诸军事、金州刺史，袭杞国公。
现代文：并追赠窦贤金迁房直均五州诸军事、金州刺史，袭杞国公。
English: He also posthumously presented Dou Xian with the Gold Relocation House, which was equal to the military of the five states and the history of the Golden State, and became the ruler of the country.

古文：又追赠贤子绍宣秦州刺史，并袭贤爵。
现代文：又追赠窦贤的儿子窦绍宣为秦州刺史，并继承窦贤的爵位。
English: He also posthumously granted Dou Xian's son Dou Shao Xuan the title of Qin State Historian, and inherited Dou Xian's title.

古文：绍宣无子，仍以绍宣兄孝宣子德藏为嗣。
现代文：绍宣没有儿子，就以绍宣兄长孝宣的儿子德藏作为继嗣。
English: Shaoxuan did not have a son, so he chose De Zang, the son of Shaoxuan's older brother Chang Xiaoxuan, as his successor.

古文：于翼字文若，太师、燕公谨之子。
现代文：于翼字文若，是太师、燕公于谨的儿子。
English: Yu Ying Zi Wen Rong is the son of Daishi and Yan Gong Yu Ji.

古文：美风仪，有识度。
现代文：风度和仪容很美好，有见识和器度。
English: She has a beautiful demeanor and appearance, and is knowledgeable and well-mannered.

古文：年十一，尚太祖女平原公主，拜员外散骑常侍，封安平县公，邑一千户。
现代文：十一岁，娶太祖女儿平原公主为妻，任员外散骑常侍，封安平县公，食邑一千户。
English: At the age of eleven, he married Princess Hirahara, the daughter of his great-great-grandfather, and served as a non-commissioned officer in the Imperial Household Cavalry. He was awarded the title of Anping County official and served a thousand households in the county.

古文：大统十六年，进爵郡公，加大都督，领太祖帐下左右，禁中宿卫。
现代文：大统十六年，进封爵位为郡公，加授大都督，统领太祖身边的人，在宫中值宿，担任警卫。
English: In the 16th year of the Great Reunification, he was awarded the title of county magistrate, and was also given the title of grand governor, leading the people around the great grandfather, staying on duty in the palace, and serving as a guard.

古文：迁镇南将军、金紫光禄大夫、散骑常侍、武卫将军。
现代文：迁任镇南将军、金紫光禄大夫、散骑常侍、武卫将军。
English: He was transferred to the posts of Zhenan General, Jin Zi Guanglu Doctor, Sanzhiyi Regular Attendant, and Wuwei General.

古文：谨平江陵，所赠得军实，分给诸子。
现代文：于谨平定江陵，把作战中的俘获分给各位儿子。
English: Yu Jianding subdued Jiangling and distributed the prisoners of war to his sons.

古文：翼一无所取，唯简赏口内名望子弟有士风者，别待遇之。
现代文：于翼一件也不要，衹挑选赏给的人当中名望子弟有士人风度的，另外接待他们。
English: Do not ask for anything from Yu Ying. Among the people selected to receive the award, there are famous children with a gentlemanly demeanor, and they will be received separately.

古文：太祖闻之，特赐奴婢二百口，翼固辞不受。
现代文：太祖听到这个消息，特地赏赐奴婢二百人，于翼坚决推辞不肯接受。
English: When the great-grandfather heard this news, he specially rewarded two hundred slaves and maidservants, but Yu Ying resolutely refused to accept.

古文：寻授车骑大将军、仪同三司，加侍中、骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司。
现代文：不久任车骑大将军、仪同三司，加侍中、骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司。
English: He was soon appointed as the grand marshal of chariot and cavalry, and the third secretary of ceremony and etiquette, as well as the second-in-command of attendants, the grand marshal of horse and rider, and the third secretary of ceremony and etiquette.

古文：六官建，除左宫伯。
现代文：六卿之官设立，任左宫伯。
English: The post of Rikkyo no kan was established, with the post of Sagiyaku haku.

古文：孝闵帝践阼，出为渭州刺史。
现代文：孝闵帝登上皇位，出任渭州刺史。
English: Emperor Xiaojun ascended the throne and served as the crown prince of Zhangzhou.

古文：翼兄寔先莅此州，颇有惠政。
现代文：于翼的哥哥于禀先前曾任职此州，施政颇为仁惠。
English: Yu Ying's brother, Yu Ye, had previously served in this state, and his administration was quite benevolent.

古文：翼又推诚布信，事存宽简，夷夏感悦，比之大小冯君焉。
现代文：于翼又以诚意相待，展示信用，政事注重宽容简便，夷夏都很感动喜悦，将他兄弟俩比作大小冯君。
English: Yu Ying also treated each other with sincerity, demonstrated trust, focused on tolerance and simplicity in political affairs, and Yi Xia was very moved and happy, comparing his two brothers to Feng Jun.

古文：时吐谷浑入寇河右，凉鄯河三州咸被攻围，使来告急。
现代文：当时吐谷浑进犯黄河右岸，凉鄯河三州都被围攻，使者前来告急。
English: At that time, the Tuyuhun invaded the right bank of the Yellow River, and the three states of the Liangyu River were besieged. The envoys came to express their concern.

古文：秦州都督遣翼赴援，不从。
现代文：秦州都督派遣于翼前往增援，于翼不听从。
English: The governor of Qin State dispatched reinforcements to Yu Ying, but Yu Ying did not obey.

古文：寮属咸以为言。
现代文：同僚们都为此议论纷纷。
English: Colleagues are talking about it.

古文：翼曰： 攻取之术，非夷俗所长。
现代文：于翼说： 进攻取城的方法，不是夷人的特长。
English: Yu Ying said: The method of attacking and taking a city is not a specialty of the barbarians.

古文：此寇之来，不过抄掠边牧耳。
现代文：这次入侵，不过抢掠边界的牲畜罢了。
English: This incursion is nothing more than a cattle raid on the border.

古文：安能顿兵城下，久事攻围！
现代文：哪能屯兵于城下，长期从事进攻包围呢!
English: How can troops be garrisoned at the foot of the city, engaged in a long-term offensive to encircle it!

古文：掠而无获，势将自走。
现代文：抢掠而没有收获，势必自己撤走。
English: If there is no gain from looting, they are bound to withdraw on their own.

古文：劳师以往，亦无所及。
现代文：我军兴师动众前往，也不能赶上。
English: Our army could not catch up with the large number of rioting teachers.

古文：翼揣之已了，幸勿复言。 居数日问至，果如翼所策。
现代文：我猜想已经了结此事，请不必再说。 过了数日音信传到，果然像于翼所预料的那样。
English: I guess the matter is over, so please don't say anything more. A few days later, the message arrived, just as Yu Ying had expected.

古文：贺兰祥讨吐谷浑，翼率州兵先锋深入。
现代文：贺兰祥讨伐吐谷浑，于翼带领州兵作先锋深入敌军。
English: He Lanxiang fought against Tugu Hun and led the National Guard as a vanguard into the enemy army.

古文：以功增邑一千二百户。
现代文：以功增加食邑一千二百户。
English: Increase the number of restaurants by 1,200 households.

古文：寻征拜右宫伯。
现代文：不久召入任右宫伯。
English: He was soon appointed to the post of Ugu-haku.

古文：世宗雅爱文，立麟趾学，在朝有艺业者，不限贵贱，皆预听焉。
现代文：世宗非常喜爱文史，设立麟趾学，在朝廷中有技艺学业的人，不论尊贵卑贱，都参与听讲。
English: King Sejong was very fond of literature and history, and set up a scholarly academy. People who had studied arts and crafts at the imperial court, both high and low, participated in the lectures.

古文：乃至萧撝、王褒等与卑鄙之徒同为学士。
现代文：以至萧揭、王褒等人和地位低下、见识浅陋的一班人同为学士。
English: Even Xiao Jie, Wang Bao and others, as well as a group of people with low status and poor insight, are all bachelors.

古文：翼言于帝曰： 萧撝，梁之宗子；王褒，梁之公卿。
现代文：于翼向皇帝上奏说： 萧构，是梁的贵族子弟；王褒，是梁的高级官员。
English: Yu Ying reported to the emperor: Xiao Jie is Liang's noble son; Wang Bao is Liang's high-ranking official.

古文：今与趋走同侪，恐非尚贤贵爵之义。 帝纳之，诏翼定其班次，于是有等差矣。
现代文：现在他们与奔走执役者混同一类，恐怕不合尊贤、贵爵的道理。 皇帝采纳了他的建议，下诏由于翼排定生员的等级次序，从此就有等级次第了。
English: Now they are lumped together with the runaway executives, which I'm afraid is not in keeping with the principle of honourable men and noblemen. The emperor accepted his suggestion, and decreed that since the wings had arranged the rank order of the cadets, there would henceforth be a hierarchy.

古文：世宗崩，翼与晋公护同受遗诏，立高祖。
现代文：世宗驾崩，于翼与晋公宇文护共同接受遣诏，拥立高祖。
English: After the death of Shizong, Yu Ying and Jin Gong Yu Wenju jointly accepted the imperial edict and supported Gao Zu.

古文：保定元年，徙军司马。
现代文：保定元年，调任军司马。
English: In the first year of Baoding, he was transferred to the post of military secretary.

古文：三年，改封常山公，邑二千九百户。
现代文：三年，改封常山郡公，食邑二千九百户。
English: Three years later, it was renamed Changshan County, with 2,900 households.

古文：天和初，迁司会中大夫，增邑通前三千七百户。
现代文：天和初年，升司会中大夫，增加食邑通前三千七百户。
English: In the first year of Tianhe, the first 3,700 households in the food town were added.

古文：三年，皇后阿史那氏至自突厥，高祖行亲迎之礼，命翼总司仪制。
现代文：三年，皇后阿史那氏从突厥来到，高祖行亲迎之礼仪，命令于翼总理司仪的礼制。
English: Three years later, when the Empress Ashena came from Turkey, Gao Zu performed the welcome ceremony and ordered the Prime Minister Yu Yu to preside over the ceremony.

古文：狄人虽蹲踞无节，然咸惮翼之礼法，莫敢违犯。
现代文：狄人虽然蹲坐没有礼节，但是都害怕于翼的礼法，没有人敢违犯。
English: Although Di people do not have the etiquette of squatting, they are afraid of the etiquette of the wings, and no one dares to violate it.

古文：遭父忧去职，居丧过礼，为时辈所称。
现代文：于翼遇父亲去世守丧离职，居丧超过礼节，受到当时人们的称赞。
English: On the occasion of his father's death, he resigned from his post to attend the funeral, which exceeded the etiquette and was praised by the people at the time.

古文：寻有诏，起令视事。
现代文：不久皇上下诏，起用他就职治事。
English: Soon after, the emperor issued an imperial edict appointing him to the post of regent.

古文：高祖又以翼有人伦之鉴，皇太子及诸王等相傅以下，并委翼选置。
现代文：高祖又因为于翼善于鉴别人才，皇太子及诸王等人的相、傅以下官员，都委托于翼挑选设置。
English: Because Gaozu was good at judging other people's talents, the crown prince and other officials, such as the king's consort and tutor, entrusted the selection and establishment of the crown prince and other officials to the wing.

古文：其所擢用，皆民誉也，时论佥谓得人。
现代文：他提拔任用的人，都是百姓赞誉的，当时都认为选任了称职的人才。
English: The people who were promoted and appointed by him were all praised by the people. At that time, they all believed that they had appointed competent talents.

古文：迁大将军，总中外宿卫兵事。
现代文：升大将军，总理宫廷内外值宿警卫的事务。
English: He rose to the rank of general and was in charge of the guards on duty inside and outside the prime minister's palace.

古文：晋公护以帝委翼腹心，内怀猜忌。
现代文：晋公宇文护因为皇帝视于翼为亲信，内心怀有猜疑忌妒。
English: Jin Gongwu Wenguo was suspicious and envious because the emperor regarded Yu Yu as a close confidant.

古文：转为小司徒，加拜柱国。
现代文：改任小司徒，加授柱国。
English: He was reappointed to the post of Junior Councilor and given the additional post of State Councillor.

古文：虽外示崇重，实疏斥之。
现代文：虽然表面上显示推崇重用，实际上是疏远排斥他。
English: Although on the surface it appears to promote reuse, in reality it alienates and excludes it.

古文：及诛护，帝召翼，遣往河东取护子中山公训，仍代镇蒲州。
现代文：到了诛杀宇文护，皇帝召回于翼，派遣他前往河东捉拿宇文护的儿子中山公宇文训，并代理镇守蒲州。
English: When the time came to assassinate Uwenfo, the emperor recalled Yu Tseng and sent him to Hedong to capture Uwenfo's son, Zhongshan Gongwu Wenxun, and to act as the town guard of Puzhou.

古文：翼曰： 冢宰无君陵上，自取诛夷。
现代文：于翼说： 冢宰目无君主凌驾于君主之上，自取灭亡。
English: Yu Ying said: There is no monarch above the monarch, self-destruction.

古文：元恶既除，余孽宜殄。
现代文：元凶已经剪除，余孽也应灭绝。
English: The main culprits have been eliminated, and the remaining evils should also be eradicated.

古文：然皆陛下骨肉，犹谓疏不间亲。
现代文：但是都是陛下骨肉，还是要讲究关系疏远者不参与关系亲近者之间的事。
English: However, they are all His Majesty's flesh and blood, and it is still necessary to pay attention to the matter between those who are estranged and do not participate in those who are close.

古文：陛下不使诸王而使臣异姓，非直物有横议，愚臣亦所未安。 帝然之，乃遣越王盛代翼。
现代文：陛下不派遣诸王而派异姓臣子为使者，不单是众人有非议，连我也觉得不安。 皇帝认为他说得对，于是改派垄王室工瑾代替工翼。
English: His Majesty did not send kings, but sent courtiers with different surnames as envoys, which was not only criticized by many people, but also made me feel uneasy. The emperor thought he was right, so he sent the Rengo royal workmen instead of the workmen.

古文：先是，与齐陈二境，各修边防，虽通聘好，而每岁交兵。
现代文：在此之前，与齐、陈两国边境，各修边防。虽然通聘交好，但是每年都交战。
English: Prior to this, the border between the two countries of Qi and Chen was guarded by each side. Although they maintained friendly relations, they fought each other every year.

古文：然一彼一此，不能有所克获。
现代文：然而一时攻那边，一时攻这边，不能获胜。
English: However, attacking one side at a time, attacking this side at a time, cannot win.

古文：高祖既亲万机，将图东讨，诏边城镇，并益储偫，加戍卒。
现代文：高祖亲自执政，将要计划向东征讨，下诏边防城镇，都要增多储备器物，增加守边的十兵。
English: Gaozu, who was in power personally, planned to march eastward, and decreed that border towns should increase their reserves and increase the number of ten soldiers guarding the border.

古文：二国闻之，亦增修守御。
现代文：齐、陈两国听到这个消息，也增强守卫防御。
English: When Qi and Chen heard the news, they also strengthened their defense.

古文：翼谏曰： 宇文护专制之日，兴兵至洛，不战而败，所丧实多。
现代文：于翼劝谏说： 宇文护专权的时候，兴兵到洛，没有交战就失败了，损失实在很多。
English: Yu Ying Zhen said: When Yu Wen was protecting the exclusive right, the Xing soldiers came to Luo, and they failed without a battle. The loss was really a lot.

古文：数十年委积，一朝麋散。
现代文：数十年的积蓄，一朝散尽。
English: Decades of savings were wiped out overnight.

古文：虽为护无制胜之策，亦由敌人之有备故也。
现代文：虽然因为宇文护没有制胜的计策，也是由于敌人有防备的缘故。
English: Although there was no strategy to win because of Uwen Guo, it was also due to the enemy's preparedness.

古文：且疆埸相侵，互有胜败，徒损兵储，非策之上者。
现代文：况且侵犯国界，互有胜败，白白损失军中储备，不是上策。
English: Moreover, it is not the best policy to violate national borders, have mutual victories and defeats, and lose the reserves in the army in vain.

古文：不若解边严，减戎防，继好息民，敬待来者。
现代文：不如解除边防的戒严，减少戍防的人数，继续交好，使百姓休养生息，友好地接待来者。
English: It would be better to lift the martial law of the border defense, reduce the number of people defending themselves, continue to make friends, let the people rest and recuperate, and receive newcomers in a friendly manner.

古文：彼必于通和，懈而少备，然后出其不意，一举而山东可图。
现代文：对方必然对于通好讲和感到高兴，懈怠而减少防备，然后我们出其不意，举兵一次就可以谋取山东。
English: The other side is bound to be pleased with the good communication and reconciliation, slacken and reduce their defenses, and then we are taken by surprise, raising an army once can seek Shandong.

古文：若犹习前踪，恐非荡定之计。 帝纳之。
现代文：如果还蹈前迹，恐怕不是平定的计策。 皇帝采纳了他的意见。
English: If the same thing happens again, I'm afraid it won't be a peaceful strategy. The emperor adopted his opinion.

古文：建德二年，出为安随等六州五防诸军事、安州总管。
现代文：至塑二年，出任宣堕等六州五防诸军事、室业总管。
English: Two years later, he served as the general manager of the six-state five defenses, including the military and the office industry.

古文：时属大旱，涢水绝流。
现代文：当时适逢大旱，湏水断流。
English: At that time, there was a drought, and the water supply was cut off.

古文：旧俗，每逢亢阳，祷白兆山祈雨。
现代文：旧时风俗，每逢久旱不雨，就到白兆山祷告求雨。
English: According to the old custom, whenever there is no rain after a long drought, people go to Baizhao Mountain to pray for rain.

古文：高祖先禁群祀，山庙已除。
现代文：高祖原先禁止祭祀，山庙已经拆除。
English: Gaozu originally banned the ritual, and the mountain temple has since been demolished.

古文：翼遣主簿祭之，即日澍雨沾洽，岁遂有年。
现代文：于翼派遣主簿祭祀白兆山，当便下足了及时雨，一年的农事就有了收成。
English: Yu Ying sent the main book to worship Baizhao Mountain, when the timely rain fell, the year's agricultural work had a harvest.

古文：民庶感之，聚会歌舞，颂翼之德。
现代文：百姓都很感谢，聚会一起载歌载舞，颂扬于翼的恩德。
English: The people were very grateful, and the gathering sang and danced together, praising the benevolence of the wing.

古文：四年，高祖将东伐，朝臣未有知者，遣纳言卢韫等前后乘驿，三诣翼问策焉。
现代文：四年，产担将向东征伐，朝廷臣子未有知情的人，派遣纳言卢韫等先后乘坐驿马，三次到于翼那裹向他询问计策。
English: In four years, the burden of production would be sent to the East for the campaign, and the courtiers of the imperial court, who did not know about it, would send Nagan Lu and others to ride the steed successively, and three times to inquire about the strategy from him.

古文：翼赞成之。
现代文：于翼赞同并助成高祖的计划。
English: Yu Ying agreed and supported Gao Zu's plan.

古文：及军出，诏翼率荆、楚兵二万，自宛、叶趣襄城，大将军张光洛、郑恪等并隶焉。
现代文：到了大军出发，下韶于翼率领荆、楚士兵二万，从面、墓直趋窒球，大将军退：蛐、塑坦等都归他管辖。
English: When the great army set out, he led 20,000 Jing and Chu soldiers under his wing, from the surface and the tomb straight to the ball, and the general retreated: the yakitori, plastan, etc. were all under his jurisdiction.

古文：旬日下齐一十九城。
现代文：十攻下齐十九座城池。
English: Nineteen castles were captured in ten attacks.

古文：所部都督，辄入民村，即斩以徇。
现代文：所辖各部都督，擅入民村，立即斩首示众。
English: The governors of all the ministries under their jurisdiction, if they enter a civilian village without permission, will be immediately beheaded in public.

古文：由是百姓欣悦，赴者如归。
现代文：因此百姓欢欣喜悦，投奔的人如同归家一般。
English: Therefore the people rejoiced and were glad; and they that had fled fled fled as if they were returning to their homes.

古文：属高祖有疾，班师，翼亦旋镇。
现代文：适逢高祖有病，班师回朝，于翼也回到所在的方镇。
English: When Gao Zu fell ill, his class teacher returned to China, and Yu Ying also returned to Fangzhen.

古文：五年，转陕熊等七州十六防诸军事、宜阳总管。
现代文：五年，改任陆塱等七州十六防诸军事、宜腥总管。
English: Five years later, he was reappointed as the general manager of the military and civil defense of sixteen provinces in seven provinces including Lu'an.

古文：翼以宜阳地非襟带，请移镇于陕。
现代文：工翼认为宣腥不是险要之地，请求调任到迭。
English: The workers' wing thought that Xuanmei was not a critical place and requested to be transferred to Tiye.

古文：诏从之，仍除陕州刺史，总管如旧。
现代文：下诏听从他，仍任陕州刺史，总管如旧。
English: The following edict obeyed him, and he was still appointed to be the governor of Shaanxi Province, and remained in charge as before.

古文：其年，大军复东讨，翼自陕入九曲，攻拔造涧等诸城，径到洛阳。
现代文：这一年，大军又向东征讨，于翼从陕进入九曲，攻下造涧等多座城池，一直到了洛阳。
English: In the same year, the great army went on an eastward campaign. From Shaanxi, it entered Jiuqu and captured many cities, including Zhouzhuang, all the way to Luoyang.

古文：齐洛州刺史独孤永业开门出降，河南九州三十镇，一时俱下。
现代文：齐国洛州刺史独孤永业打开城门，出城投降，河南九州三十镇，一时都被攻下。
English: Luozhou of Qi opened the city gate and surrendered, and 30 towns in Henan and Kyushu were temporarily captured.

古文：襄城民庶等喜复见翼，并壶浆塞道。
现代文：襄城百姓为又见到了于翼而高兴，一起犒劳军队塞满了道路。
English: The people of Xiangcheng were happy to see Yu Ying again, and together with the army, they filled the road.

古文：寻即除洛怀等九州诸军事、河阳总管。
现代文：不久就任洛怀等九州诸军事、河阳总管。
English: Soon after, he assumed the position of general manager of military forces in Kyushu, including Lohai and Kawayo.

古文：寻徙豫州总管，给兵五千人、马千疋以之镇，并配开府及仪同等二十人。
现代文：不久调任豫州总管，供给士兵五千人、马一千匹到任所，并配给开府及仪同等二十人。
English: He was soon transferred to be the governor of Yuzhou, where he was provided with five thousand soldiers and one thousand horses, and was assigned twenty people equal to the Kaifu and Ji.

古文：仍敕河阳、襄州、安州、荆州州总管内有武干者，任翼征牒，不限多少。
现代文：仍下韶河阳、襄州、安州、荆州四州总管内有军事公务的，任凭于翼签发征用公文，不限多少。
English: If there are still military official duties within the headquarters of the four states of Hebei, Heyang, Xiangzhou, Anzhou and Jingzhou, they are allowed to issue requisition official documents without limitation.

古文：仪同以下官爵，承制先授后闻。
现代文：仪同以下官爵，秉承皇帝旨意先授后奏。
English: In accordance with the emperor's will, the ceremony and the following officials and nobles were first conferred and then performed.

古文：陈将鲁天念久围光州，闻翼到汝南，望风退散。
现代文：陈国将领鲁天念包围光州很久，听说于翼到了汝南，望风退兵逃散。
English: Chen Guo's general Lu Tiannen encircled Gwangju for a long time. It is said that Yu Ying fled to the south of Ryu, hoping to escape.

古文：霍州蛮首田元显，负险不宾，于是，送质请附。
现代文：霍州蛮族首领田元显，原仗恃天险不归顺，到这个时候，送上人质请求归附。
English: At this time, Tian Yuanxian, the leader of the Huozhou barbarians, sent a request for the return of the hostages.

古文：陈将任蛮奴悉众攻显，显立栅拒战，莫有异心。
现代文：陈国将领任蛮奴调集全部兵马进攻田元显，田元显修建营栅，抵御抗击，没有人敢有二心。
English: General Chen Guo led the barbarians to mobilize all the soldiers and horses to attack Tian Yuanxian. Tian Yuanxian built a camp gate to resist the counterattack. No one dared to have second thoughts.

古文：及翼还朝，元显便叛。
现代文：等到于翼回到朝廷，田元显便叛变了。
English: By the time Yu Tsubasa returned to the imperial court, Tanomoto Hsien had turned traitor.

古文：其得殊俗物情，皆此类也。
现代文：他懂得异域的习俗和风土人情，都像这类情况。
English: He understands the customs and customs of foreign countries, like this kind of situation.

古文：大象初，征拜大司徒。
现代文：大象初年，征入任大司徒。
English: In the first year of the elephant, he was conscripted as a disciple of the eldest disciple.

古文：诏翼巡长城，立亭鄣。
现代文：下诏于翼巡视长城，设立供防守用的堡垒。
English: The following edict was issued to inspect the Great Wall on the wing and set up a fortress for defense.

古文：西自鴈门，东至碣石，创新改旧，咸得其要害云。
现代文：西边从雁门起，向东直到碣石，创新改旧，都能抓住关键。
English: From the Wild Goose Gate in the west to Shanshi in the east, innovation to change the old can grasp the key.

古文：仍除幽定七州六镇诸军事、幽州总管。
现代文：仍任幽定七州六镇诸军事、幽州总管。
English: He was still appointed as the military and Yuzhou general manager of six towns in seven prefectures in Yuding.

古文：先是，突厥屡为寇掠，居民失业。
现代文：在此之前，突厥多次入侵抢掠，居民失去谋生的常业。
English: Prior to this, the Turks had repeatedly invaded and plundered, and the inhabitants lost their regular livelihood.

古文：翼素有威武，兼明斥候，自是不敢犯塞，百姓安之。
现代文：于翼素来威风勇武，加上通晓侦察，突厥从此不敢侵犯边塞，百姓得以安居。
English: Due to their military prowess and skillful reconnaissance, the Turks no longer dared to invade the border fortress, and the people were able to live in peace.

古文：及尉迟迥据相州举兵，以书招翼。
现代文：到尉迟迥占据相州起兵，传送书信招降于翼。
English: He was late to take up arms in Sangju and sent a letter to encourage surrender to the flanks.

古文：翼执其使，并书送之。
现代文：于翼逮捕来使，连同书信送往朝廷。
English: Yu Ying arrested the envoy and sent him to the imperial court together with a letter.

古文：于时隋文帝执政，赐翼杂缯一千五百段、粟麦一千五百石，并珍宝服玩等，进位上柱国，封任国公，增邑通前五千户，别食任城县一千户，收其租赋。
现代文：当时隋文帝执政，赐给于翼杂色丝绸一千五百段、粟麦一千五百石，以及珍宝服用玩赏的物品等，升位上柱国，封任国公，增加食邑通前五千户，另外给俸禄任城县一千户，收取他们的租税。
English: At that time, Emperor Sui Wen was in power. He gave Yu Ying 1,500 pieces of multi-colored silk, 1,500 stones of millet and other precious and valuable items, promoted him to a pillar state, appointed him as the governor of the country, increased the number of the first 5,000 households in the food township, and additionally gave him a stipend to 1,000 households in Rencheng County to collect their taxes.

古文：翼又遣子让通表劝进，并请入朝。
现代文：于翼又派遣儿子于让上表劝登皇位，并请求入朝。
English: At the same time, he sent his son, Yu Zhan, to the upper table to persuade him to ascend to the throne and to request that he be allowed to enter the imperial court.

古文：隋文帝许之。
现代文：隋文帝答应了他。
English: The Sui Emperor agreed to this.

古文：开皇初，拜太尉。
现代文：开皇初年，任太尉。
English: In the first year of the Emperor's reign, he was promoted to the rank of captain.

古文：或有告翼，云往在幽州欲同尉迟迥者，隋文召致室，遣理官按验。
现代文：有人告发于翼，说他往昔在幽州想伙同尉迟迥谋反，隋文帝召来他关押在囚禁有罪官吏的牢狱，派遣法官审查证实。
English: Someone denounced Yu Ying, saying that he had in the past plotted a rebellion in Yuzhou with his comrade-in-arms, the Sui Emperor summoned him to be held in a prison for convicted officials, and sent a judge to examine and confirm.

古文：寻以无实见原，仍复本位。
现代文：不久因为没有实据被赦罪，仍恢复本来的官位。
English: He was soon pardoned for lack of evidence, but was reinstated to his original post.

古文：三年五月，薨。
现代文：三年五月去世。
English: He died in May of the following year.

古文：赠本官、加蒲晋怀绛邵汾六州诸军事、蒲州刺史，谥曰穆。
现代文：追赠本官、加蒲晋怀绛邵汾六州诸军事、蒲州刺史，谧号为穆。
English: He was posthumously awarded the titles of "Gapu Jinhuai" (加蒲晋怀), "Shao Zi" (邵六州诸军事) and "Pu Zhou Zhi Shi" (蒲州刺史). His posthumous name was Mu.

古文：翼性恭俭，与物无竞，常以满盈自戒，故能以功名终。
现代文：于翼性格恭谨谦逊，与人无争，经常以 满则溢 告诫自己，所以能以功成名就终其生。
English: Yu Ying's character is respectful and humble, and he does not quarrel with others. He often admonishes himself with "Man Zhe Yue," so he can be famous for his lifetime.

古文：子玺，官至上大将军、军司马、黎阳郡公。
现代文：儿子于玺，官至上大将军、军司马、黎阳郡公。
English: His son, Yu Yao, was the highest-ranking general, military secretary, and the governor of Liyang County.

古文：玺弟诠，上仪同三司、吏部下大夫、常山公。
现代文：于玺的弟弟于诠，上仪同三司、吏部下大夫、常山公。
English: Yu Yan's younger brother, Yu Yan, attended the ceremony together with three officials, a doctor from the Ministry of Civil Affairs, and the Lord of Changshan.

古文：诠弟让，仪同三司。
现代文：于诠的弟弟于让，仪同三司。
English: Yu Yan's younger brother, Yu Zhan, is the third in line to the throne.

古文：尉迟迥之举兵也，河西公李贤弟穆为并州总管，亦执迥子送之。
现代文：尉迟迥举兵的时候，河西公李贤的弟弟李穆任并州总管，也逮捕尉迟迥的儿子送往朝廷。
English: When Yi Xizhong raised an army, Li Mu, the younger brother of Hexi Gong Li Xian, was appointed as the provincial governor, and also arrested the son of Yi Xizhong and sent him to the imperial court.

古文：李穆字显庆，少明敏，有度量。
现代文：李穆字显庆，年轻时很聪明敏捷，有风度器量。
English: Li Muzi Xianqing, when he was young, was very smart and agile, and had a good demeanor.

古文：太祖入关，便给事左右，深被亲遇。
现代文：太祖入关，便在身边供职，深受信任厚待。
English: When the great-grandfather entered the customs, he served around him and was treated with great trust.

古文：穆亦小心谨肃，未尝懈怠。
现代文：李穆也小心谨慎恭肃，未曾懈怠。
English: He is careful and never slacks off.

古文：太祖嘉之，遂处以腹心之任，出入卧内，当时莫与为比。
现代文：太祖嘉奖他，就安排他以心腹的重任，出入卧室，当时没有人能与他相比。
English: The great-grandfather praised him and arranged for him to enter and leave the bedroom with the heavy responsibility of his heart. At that time, no one could compare with him.

古文：及侯莫陈悦害贺拔岳，太祖自夏州赴难，而悦党史归据原州，犹为悦守。
现代文：到侯莫陈悦杀害贺拔岳时，太祖从夏州趋救国难，而侯莫陈悦的同党史归占据原州，还替侯莫陈悦防守。
English: When Hou Mo Chen Yue killed He Batyue, the great-grandfather came from Xiazhou to save the country, while Hou Mo Chen Yue's fellow party members returned to occupy Yuanzhou, and also defended Hou Mo Chen Yue.

古文：太祖令侯莫陈崇轻骑袭之。
现代文：太祖命令侯莫陈崇率领轻骑袭击史归。
English: The great-grandfather ordered Hou Mo Chen Chong to lead the light cavalry to attack Shigu.

古文：穆先在城中，与兄贤、远等据城门应崇，遂擒归。
现代文：李穆先在城中，与兄长李贤、李远等占据城门接应侯莫陈崇，就活捉了史归。
English: Li Mu Xian was in the city, and he and his elder brothers Li Xian and Li Yuan occupied the city gate to meet Hou Mo Chen Chong, and they captured Shi Gui alive.

古文：以功授都督。
现代文：以功任都督。
English: He was awarded the title of "Totoku" for his contribution.

古文：从迎魏孝武，封永平县子，邑三百户。
现代文：跟随迎立魏孝武帝，封永平县子，食邑三百户。
English: Following the enthronement of Emperor Wei Xiaowu, the county of Yongping was fenced off, and three hundred households in the county were evacuated.

古文：擒窦泰，复弘农，并有战功。
现代文：活捉宝泰，收复弘农，都有战功。
English: The capture of Baotai alive and the recovery of Hongnong are war achievements.

古文：沙苑之捷，穆又言于太祖曰： 高欢今日已丧胆矣，请速逐之，则欢可擒也。 太祖不听。
现代文：沙苑打胜仗的时候，李穆又对太祖说： 高欢今日已恐惧到极点了，请赶快追他，那么高欢可以活捉了。 太祖不听从。
English: When Sha Yuan won the battle, Li Mu also said to Taizu: Gao Huan has been terrified to the extreme today, please chase him quickly, then Gao Huan can be caught alive.

古文：论前后功，进爵为公。
现代文：评定他的前后功勋，进封爵位为公。
English: He was awarded a knighthood in recognition of his achievements.

古文：河桥之战，太祖所乘马中流矢惊逸，太祖坠于地，军中大扰。
现代文：河桥的战役中，太祖的坐骑中流箭惊慌逃走，太祖跌落在地，军中大乱。
English: During the Battle of the River Bridge, Taizu's horse ran away in panic from a flying arrow. He fell to the ground, and there was chaos in the army.

古文：敌人追及之，左右皆奔散，穆乃以策抶太祖，因大骂曰： 尔曹主何在？
现代文：敌人追了上来，太祖身边的人都奔走逃散，李穆就用马鞭笞打太祖，接着大声责骂说： 你们这班人的主人在哪裹?
English: The enemy chased after him, and everyone around him ran away. Li Mu whipped him with a horsewhip, and then scolded him in a loud voice, saying, "Where are the masters of this group of people?

古文：尔独住此！ 敌人不疑是贵人也，遂舍之而过。
现代文：你却独自停留在这裹! 敌人没有疑心这是尊贵的人，就舍弃他而走过去了。
English: But you stay here all alone! The enemy, without suspecting that this is an honorable man, abandons him and passes on.

古文：穆以马授太祖，遂得俱免。
现代文：李穆把马送给左担，就得以一起幸免于难。
English: Li Mu gave the horse to the left-hander, and they were able to survive together.

古文：是日微穆，太祖已不济矣。
现代文：当日不是李穆相救，左担已经无救了。
English: On that day, it was not Li Muxiang who saved him. The left-hander was already helpless.

古文：自是恩盼更隆。
现代文：从此恩赐礼遇更加优厚。
English: Since then, the favors have become even more generous.

古文：擢授武卫将军，加大都督、车骑大将军、仪同三司，进爵安郡公，增邑一千七百户。
现代文：升任武卫将军，加大都督、车骑大将军、仪同三司，进爵安武郡公，增加食邑一千七百户。
English: He was promoted to General of the Imperial Guards, promoted to the governor of the capital, the general of the cavalry, and the three departments of the Ministry of Ceremonies and Ceremonies, and promoted to the peerage of Anwu County, increasing the number of food villages by 1,700.

古文：前后赏赐，不可胜计。
现代文：前后赏赐之物，不可胜数。
English: There is no limit to what he can be given.

古文：久之，太祖美其志节，乃叹曰： 人之所贵，唯身命耳，李穆遂能轻身命之重，济孤于难。
现代文：过了很久，太祖赞美他的志向气节，就感叹说： 人所珍贵的东西，衹是自身的性命罢了，李穆能以自身性命为轻，救我于危难之中。
English: After a long time, the great-grandfather praised his aspiration and sighed: What is precious to people is only their own lives. Li Mu could take his own life lightly and save me from danger.

古文：虽复加之以爵位，赏之以玉帛，未足为报也。 乃特赐铁券，恕以十死。
现代文：即使再把爵位加给他，把玉帛赏给他，也不足报答。 于是特地赏赐铁券，宽恕他十次死罪。
English: Even if he were to be given the title of nobility and the Jade Scepter, it would not be enough to reward him, so he specially rewarded him with iron coupons and pardoned him ten times for the crime of death.

古文：进骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、侍中。
现代文：升骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、侍中。
English: The Imperial Court promoted him to General of the Horse Cavalry, Kaifu Yi Tong San Shi, and Samurai Junior Officer.

古文：初，穆授太祖以骢马，其后中厩有此色马者，悉以赐之。
现代文：当初，李穆送给太祖青白色的马，后来国君的养马舍中有这种颜色的马，都把它们赏赐给李穆。
English: At first, Li Mu gave the great-grandfather a blue and white horse. Later, there were horses of this color in the sovereign's stables, and they were all given to Li Mu.

古文：又赐穆世子惇安乐郡公，姊一人为郡君，余姊妹并为县君，兄弟子侄及缌麻以上亲并舅氏，皆沾厚赐。
现代文：又赏赐李穆世子李惇为安乐郡公，姊一人为郡君，其余姐妹都为县君，兄弟子侄及鳃麻丧服以上亲属和舅氏，都分得丰厚的赏赐。
English: In addition, Li Mu's descendant, Li Yan, was awarded the title of Anle County Prince, his sister was awarded the title of County Princess, and the rest of his sisters were awarded the title of County Princess. His brothers, nephews, relatives and uncles above the rank of nettle burial suit all received rich rewards.

古文：其见褒崇如此。
现代文：他受嘉奖推崇到如此地步。
English: He's been lauded and revered to this point.

古文：从解玉壁围，拜安定国中尉。
现代文：跟随太祖解除了玉壁的包围，任安定国中尉。
English: Following the Great Ancestor, he lifted the siege of the Jade Wall and served as a lieutenant of the State of Stability.

古文：寻授同州刺史，入为太仆卿。
现代文：不久任同州刺史，入朝任太仆卿。
English: He was soon appointed as the governor of Tongzhou and entered the imperial court as the servant of the emperor.

古文：征江陵功，封一子长城县侯，邑千户。
现代文：征讨江陵有功，封一个儿子为长城县侯，食邑一千户。
English: For his meritorious service in the conquest of Gangneung, one of his sons was made the county magistrate of Changcheng County, and a thousand households were provided with food.

古文：寻进位大将军，赐姓拓拔氏。
现代文：不久升位大将军，赐姓拓拔氏。
English: Soon after, he was promoted to the rank of general and given the surname Tuoba.

古文：俄除原州刺史，又以贤子为平高郡守，远子为平高县令，并加鼓吹。
现代文：不久任原州刺史，又以李贤的儿子为平高郡太守，李远的儿子为乎高县县令，一起加赏鼓吹乐队。
English: Soon he was appointed as the prefect of Wonju, and he also made Li Xian's son the governor of Pinggao County, Li Yuan's son the county magistrate of Gu Gao County, and he also rewarded the band.

古文：穆自以叔侄一家三人，皆牧宰乡里，恩遇过隆，固辞不拜。
现代文：李穆自己认为叔侄一家三人，都在家乡担任太守县令，恩泽礼遇过于优厚，坚决推辞不肯担任。
English: Li Mu himself believes that all three of his uncles and nephews have served as the governor of the county in his hometown. The reward and courtesy are too generous, and he resolutely refuses to serve.

古文：太祖不许。
现代文：太祖不准许。
English: The great-grandfather did not agree.

古文：后转雍州刺史，入为小冢宰。
现代文：后来调任雍州刺史，入朝为小冢宰。
English: Later, he was transferred to the post of Yongzhou magistrate and entered the imperial court as a minor magistrate.

古文：孝闵帝践阼，增邑通前三千七百户，又别封一子为县伯。穆请回封贤子孝轨，许之。
现代文：孝闵帝登上皇位，增加食邑通前三千七百户，又另封一个儿子为县伯李穆请求转封李贤的儿子李孝轨，皇帝答应了。
English: When Emperor Xiaojun ascended the throne, he increased the number of households in the food county to 3,700. He also appointed another son as the county magistrate. Li Mu requested that Li Xian's son, Li Xiaorong, be appointed as the county magistrate, and the emperor agreed.

古文：及远子植谋害晋公护，植诛死，穆亦坐除名。
现代文：李远的儿子李植图谋杀害晋公宇文护，李植被诛杀，李穆也受牵连坐罪被除名。
English: Li Yuan's son Li Zhetu murdered and killed Jin Gongyu Wenzhou, Li Zhe was beaten to death, and Li Mu was also implicated in the crime and was expelled.

古文：时植弟基任淅州刺史，例合从坐。
现代文：当时李植的弟弟李基任淅州刺史，照例应该因为亲人犯罪而牵连受处分。
English: At that time, Li Zhi's younger brother, Li Qiren, was the governor of Zhangzhou. As usual, he should be implicated and punished for the crimes of his relatives.

古文：穆频诣护，请以子惇、怡等代基死，辞理酸切，闻者莫不动容。
现代文：李穆频繁地到宇文护那裹去，请求用自己的儿子李惇、李怡等代替李基而死，辞情凄切，听者无不为之动容。
English: Li Mu frequently went to Yuwenbao to wrap up, and requested that his sons, Li Jun and Li Yi, be used to die in place of Li Ji. The words were heartbreaking, and the listeners were deeply moved.

古文：护矜之，遂特免基死。
现代文：宇文护怜悯他，就特地免除李基的死罪。
English: Uwen Guo took pity on him and specifically exempted Liji from the death penalty.

古文：世宗即位，拜骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、大都督、安武郡公、直州刺史。
现代文：世宗即位，任骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、大都督、安武郡公、直州刺史。
English: When Sejong ascended the throne, he was appointed as the grand general of cavalry, the third secretary of the Kaifu Rites, the grand governor, the governor of Anbu County, and the governor of Jōshū.

古文：武成二年，拜少保。
现代文：武成二年，授少保。
English: In the second year of Wucheng, he was awarded the title of Junior Public Security Officer.

古文：保定二年，进位大将军。
现代文：惺定二年，升位大将军。
English: Two years later, he was promoted to the rank of general.

古文：三年，从随公杨忠东伐。
现代文：三年，跟随随公龃向东讨伐。
English: Three years later, he followed Gongjun Zong to the East.

古文：还，拜小司徒，迁柱国大将军，别封一子郡公，邑二千户。
现代文：还朝，任小司徒，升柱国大将军，另封一个儿子为郡公，食邑二千户。
English: In addition, in the morning, he was appointed as a junior officer, promoted to the general of the country, and another son was appointed as a county magistrate, feeding two thousand households.

古文：五年，迁大司空。
现代文：五年，升大司空。
English: Five years later, he was promoted to Senior Vice President.

古文：天和二年，进封申国公，邑五千户，旧爵回授一子。
现代文：天和二年，进封申国公，食邑五千户，旧爵转授一个儿子。
English: Two years later, he was given the title of Shinshukong, with 5,000 households in the county, and the old title was passed on to his son.

古文：建德元年，迁太保。
现代文：建德元年，升太保。
English: In the first year of Jiande, he was promoted to Taibo.

古文：寻出为原州总管。
现代文：不久出任原州总管。
English: He soon assumed the post of Governor of Wonju Province.

古文：四年，高祖东征，令穆率兵三万，别攻轵关及河北诸县，并破之。
现代文：四年，高祖束征，命令李穆带兵三万，另攻软关及河北各县。都攻了下来。
English: In the fourth year, Gaozhu Zokei ordered Li Mu to lead 30,000 soldiers to attack Soft Pass and other counties in Hebei. All of them were defeated.

古文：后以帝疾班师，弃而不守。
现代文：后来因为皇帝患病班师回朝，攻取的地方舍弃而不防守。
English: Later, due to Emperor Wu's illness, the troops were withdrawn, and the conquered areas were abandoned and not defended.

古文：六年，进位上柱国，除并州总管。
现代文：六年，升位上柱国，任并州总管。
English: Jiande for six years, was promoted to Shangzhuang, and served as the provincial governor.

古文：时东夏再平，人情尚扰，穆镇之以静，百姓怀之。
现代文：当时东夏再次子定，人心世情还很?昆乱，李穆以安静无为不施刑罚来安抚他们，百姓怀念他。
English: At that time, Dongxia was once again stable, and people's hearts and minds were still very turbulent. Li Mu calmed them down by being quiet and not imposing punishment. People miss him.

古文：大象元年，迁大左辅，总管如旧。
现代文：大象元年，升大左辅，总管如旧。
English: In the first year of the elephant, he was promoted to the left assistant, and the general manager was the same as before.

古文：二年，加太傅，仍总管。
现代文：二年，加太傅，照样任总管。
English: Two years later, Ga Tai Fu still held the post of general manager.

古文：及尉迟迥举兵，穆子荣欲应之。
现代文：到尉迟迥兴兵，李穆的儿子李荣想响应他。
English: Li Mu's son, Li Rong, wanted to respond to him.

古文：穆弗听曰： 周德既衰，愚智共悉。
现代文：李穆不听从，说： 周的德行已经衰落了，愚蠢和明智的人都知道。
English: Li Mu disobeyed, saying: Zhou's virtue has declined, and both the foolish and the wise know it.

古文：天时若此，吾岂能违天。 乃遣使谒隋文帝，并上十三环金带，盖天子之服也，以微申其意。
现代文：天时像这样，我怎么能违背天意? 就派遣使者拜谒隋文帝，呈上十三环金带，这是天子的服饰，用以委婉地申明他的心意。
English: How can I go against God's will when the weather is like this? So I sent an envoy to pay homage to Emperor Wen of the Sui Dynasty, and presented him with a thirteen-ring gold band, which is the clothing of the Son of Heaven, to express his will in a tactful manner.

古文：时迥子谊为朔州刺史，亦执送京师。
现代文：当时尉迟迥的儿子尉迟谊任朔州刺史，也被逮捕送往京师。
English: At this time, Ren Shuzhou's son, Ren Shiyi, was arrested and sent to Beijing.

古文：迥令其所署行台韩长业攻陷潞州，执刺史赵威，署城民郭子胜为刺史。
现代文：尉迟迥命令他所任用的行台韩长业攻下潞州，逮捕刺史趟威，任用城中居民郭子胜为刺史。
English: Guo Zisheng ordered his appointed governor Han Changye to capture Zhangzhou, arrest Zishi Wadui, and appoint Guo Zisheng, a resident of the city, as Zishi.

古文：穆遣兵讨之，获子胜。
现代文：李穆派兵讨伐，活捉丫郭子胜。
English: Li Mu sent soldiers to fight and captured Guo Zisheng alive.

古文：隋文帝嘉之，以穆劳效同破邺城第一勋，加三转，听分授其二子荣、才及兄贤子孝轨。
现代文：隋文帝嘉奖他，以他的劳绩同破邺城第一勋，加勋级三转级，听任分授给他的两个儿子李荣、李才及兄长李贤的儿子李孝轨。
English: Sui Emperor Wenxiu commended him, and with his achievements, he was awarded the First Distinguished Service Medal of the City of Jiuyuan, and the Third Class of the Second Class of the Second Class of the Second Class of the Third Class of the Third Class of the Third Class of the Third Class of the Third Class of the Third Class of the Third Class of the Third Class of the Third Class of the Third Class of the Third Class of the Third Class of the Third Class of the Third Class of the Third Class of the Third Class of the Third Class of the Third Class of the Third Class of the Third Class of the Third Class of the Third Class of the Third Class of the Third Class of the

古文：荣及才并仪同大将军，孝轨进开府仪同大将军。
现代文：李荣及李才都任仪同大将军，李孝轨升开府仪同大将军。
English: Li Rong and Li Cai were both appointed as grand marshals, and Li Xiaorou was promoted to grand marshal.

古文：又别封子雄为密国公，邑三千户。
现代文：又另封儿子李雄为密国公，食邑三千户。
English: He also made his son, Li Xiong, the Duke of Hsinchu, which affected 3,000 households in the county.

古文：穆长子惇，字士宇。
现代文：李穆的长子李惇，字士宇。
English: Li Mu's eldest son, Li Yao, is played by Zha Shiyu.

古文：大统四年，以穆功赐爵安平县侯，寻授车骑大将军、仪同三司、大都督，进爵为公。
现代文：大统四年，因为李穆的功勋而赐爵安平县侯，不久任车骑大将军、仪同三司、大都督，进爵为公。
English: In the fourth year of the Great Reunification, because of Li Mu's meritorious service, he was given the title of Anping County Marquis, and soon became the General of the Cavalry, the Third Division of the Ministry of Ceremonies, and the Grand Governor.

古文：太祖令功臣世子并与略阳公游处，惇于时辈之中，特被引接。
现代文：太祖下令功臣世子一起与略阳公相处，李惇在当时一辈人当中，特地被引见接待。
English: The great-grandfather ordered the descendant of the hero to get along with Liao Yang Gong, and Li Wei was specially introduced to the reception among the generation at that time.

古文：每有遐方服玩，异域珍奇，无不班锡。
现代文：每次有远方服饰和玩赏之物，异地珍贵奇异的物品，没有不颁赐的。
English: Every time there are far-away costumes and trinkets, rare and exotic items from different places, there is nothing not to award.

古文：俄小武伯，进爵安乐郡公。
现代文：不久授任小武伯，进爵安乐郡公。
English: He was soon given the title of Xiaowu Bo and the title of Anle County.

古文：天和三年，迁骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、凤州刺史。
现代文：天和三年，升骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、凤州刺史。
English: In the 3rd year of Tianhe, he was promoted to cavalry general, Kaifu ceremony with three divisions, and Fengzhou stabbing history.

古文：卒于位。
现代文：在职位上去世。
English: He died in office.

古文：赠大将军、原灵豳三州刺史。
现代文：追赠大将军、原灵豳三州刺史。
English: He was posthumously awarded the title of grand general, and his original coffin was placed in the Three Prefectures Mausoleum.

古文：史臣曰：窦炽仪表魁梧，器识雄远。
现代文：史臣曰：窦炽仪表雄壮高大，器量见识宏大深远。
English: Shichen said: Dou Blazing Instrument is majestic and tall, and the scope of insight is grand and far-reaching.

古文：入参朝政，则嘉谋以陈；出总蕃条，则惠政斯洽。
现代文：入朝参与朝政，就能提出好的计谋；出外总理繁多事项，就能使仁政和洽。
English: Entering the DPRK and participating in the DPRK government can put forward good strategies; the visiting prime minister can make benevolent politics and peace through a variety of matters.

古文：窦毅忠肃奉上，温恭接下，茂实彰于本朝，义声扬于殊俗。
现代文：宝毅忠心谨肃事奉君上，温和谦恭接待部下，盛美的业绩在本朝显扬，仁义的声望在远方传播。
English: Bao Yi loyally and solemnly served the emperor, and received his subordinates with gentleness and courtesy. His magnificent achievements were prominent in this dynasty, and his reputation for benevolence and righteousness spread far and wide.

古文：并以国华民望，论道当官，荣映一时，庆流来叶。
现代文：两人一起以国家的精华和人民的榜样，议论正道担当官职，荣耀映照于一时，福泽流传于后世。
English: Together, the two of them took the essence of the country and the example of the people to discuss the right way to assume official duties. The glory was reflected in an instant, and the blessing was passed down to future generations.

古文：及炽迟疑劝进，有送故之心，虽王公恨恨，何以加此。
现代文：窦炽迟疑劝登皇位，仍怀有随旧君迁转的心意，即使王祥在晋受禅时眷恋故主，也比不上窦炽这样。
English: Dou Jia hesitated to advise him to ascend to the throne, still harboring the intention of following the old monarch. Even if Wang Xiang was attached to the old lord when he was promoted to Zen, it was nothing compared to Dou Jia.

古文：语曰： 君使臣以礼，臣事君以忠。 然则效忠之迹或殊，处臣之理斯一，榷言指要，其维致命乎。
现代文：古语说： 君主用礼节任使臣子，臣子用忠心事奉君主。 既然如此，那么效忠的业绩或许不同，而对待臣子的道理是一致的，榷言要旨，大概在于捐躯吧!
English: The ancients said: The monarch uses etiquette to appoint a vassal, and the vassal serves the monarch with loyalty. In this case, the performance of loyalty may be different, but the principle of treating a vassal is consistent, and the gist of the criticism is probably in the sacrifice!

古文：是以典午擅朝，葛公休为之投袂；新都篡盗，翟仲文所以称兵。
现代文：因此典午把持朝政，葛公休为之拂动衣袖，奋然而起；新都侯王莽篡汉，翟仲文为之兴兵讨伐。
English: As a result, Fenyong took control of the imperial government, and Ge Gongxiu ruffled his sleeves for it and rose up; the new capital lord Wang Mang usurped Han, and Zou Zhongwen raised an army to fight for it.

古文：及东郡诛夷，竟速汉朝之祸；淮南覆败，无救魏室之亡。
现代文：等到东郡诛杀平定，最后加速了汉朝的祸患；淮南覆败，无法挽救魏室的灭亡。
English: Waiting for the Dong County battle to be settled, the disaster of the Han Dynasty was finally accelerated; Huainan was defeated, and the demise of Weishu could not be saved.

古文：而烈士贞臣，赴蹈不已，岂忠义所感，视死如归者欤。
现代文：但是有志建功立业之士和忠贞之臣，赴汤蹈火不停止，也许是为忠义所感奋，而视死如归吧。
English: However, for those who are dedicated to building a successful career and loyal retainers, who do not stop going to the mountains and rivers, it may be that they are excited by loyalty and see death as a homecoming.

古文：于、李之送往事居，有曲于此。
现代文：于、李的礼葬死者，奉事生者，在这方面是有曲衷的。
English: Yu and Li's ritual of burying the dead and ministering to the living is poignant in this regard.

古文：翼既功臣之子，地即姻亲；穆乃早着勋庸，深寄肺腑。
现代文：于翼是功臣的子弟，地位亲近至姻亲；李穆很早就功勋显著，被皇帝视为心腹。
English: Yu Ying was the son of a meritorious subject, and his status was close to that of a relative by marriage; Li Mu had distinguished himself early on, and was regarded by the emperor as a confidant.

古文：并兼文武之任，荷累世之恩，理宜与存与亡，同休同戚。
现代文：一起兼有文武的重任，受世代的君恩，按理应该与皇帝共存亡，同喜忧。
English: Together with the heavy responsibilities of literature and military, by the generation of Junen, it is reasonable that they should coexist with the emperor and share the joys and sorrows.

古文：加以受扞城之托，总戎马之权，势力足以勤王，智能足以卫难。
现代文：加上接受保卫疆土的重托，总管兵马的大权，权势力量足以起兵救援王朝，才智能力足以防卫危难。
English: In addition to accepting the heavy entrustment of defending the territory, the commander-in-chief of the soldiers and horses has great power, the power is enough to raise troops to rescue the dynasty, and the intellectual ability is enough to defend the danger.

古文：乃宴安宠禄，曾无释位之心；报使献诚，但务随时之义。
现代文：却逸乐安于尊崇的俸禄，竟没有赞辅朝政的心思；回报使者献上诚意，衹致力于顺应时势。
English: However, he enjoyed the honorable salary and did not have the heart to support the government; he rewarded the envoy with sincerity and devoted himself to conforming to the current situation.

古文：弘名节以高贵，岂所望于二公。
现代文：弘扬名望气节以清高尊贵，难道可以寄希望于于、李两位。
English: Is it possible to pin hopes on the two Li brothers to carry forward the fame, prestige and dignity of the Qing Dynasty?

古文：若舍彼天时，征诸人事，显庆起晋阳之甲，文若发幽蓟之兵，协契岷峨，约从漳滏，北控沙漠，西指崤函，则成败之数，未可量也。
现代文：如果舍弃天时，征求人事，显庆起用晋阳之军，文若出动幽蓟之兵，协契于岷峨，约从于漳滏，向北控制沙漠，往西指向崤函，那么成功或失败的气数，是不能估量的。
English: If you give up heaven and earth, solicit personnel, and use the army of Jinyang in celebration, and if you send out the soldiers of Yuxiang, and sign a treaty in Saga, about from Yunnan, control the desert to the north, and point west to Yufan, then the number of success or failure is incalculable.

