古文：舆服昔三皇乘祗车出谷口，夏氏以奚仲为车正，殷有瑞车，山车垂句是也。
现代文：古代三皇乘坐祇车出谷，夏后氏任命奚仲为车正，殷商有瑞车，就是祥瑞的自然之车。
English: In ancient times, the three emperors rode out of the valley in gishas, and the Emperor Xiaogou appointed Xizhong as the chariot master, and the merchants of Yin had Sui chariots, which were the natural chariots of Xiang Rui.

古文：《周礼》匠人为舆，以象天地。
现代文：《周礼》工匠制作车舆，取象于天地。
English: In "Zhou Li," craftsmen make a chariot wheel, which is depicted in heaven and earth.

古文：汉武天汉四年，朝诸侯甘泉宫，定舆服制，班于天下。
现代文：汉武帝天汉四年，在甘泉宫会见诸侯，确定舆服制度，颁布天下。
English: In the 4th year of the Han Dynasty, Emperor Hanwu met with the princes in the Ganquan Palace, determined the public dress system, and promulgated it to the world.

古文：光武建武十三年，得公孙述葆车，舆辇始具。
现代文：光武帝建武十三年，得到公孙述的葆车，车舆乘辇开始齐备。
English: In the thirteenth year of Emperor Guangwu Jianwu's reign, Emperor Guangwu received a carriage described by his grandson, and the carriage began to be ready.

古文：蔡邕创立此志，马彪勒成汉典，晋挚虞治礼，亦议五辂制度。
现代文：蔡邕创作《舆服志》，旦昼鱼勾勒成选伐典制，置垫廛研究礼，也探讨帝王使用的五辂制度。
English: Cai Qi authored "The History of Public Clothing," which outlined the selection and selection system, the study ceremony of the cushion, and also explored the five-cushion system used by the emperor.

古文：江左之始，车服多阙，但有金戎，省充庭之仪。
现代文：东晋南逼初期，车舆制度大多空缺，衹有阅兵礼，省去了陈列皇帝乘舆的仪式。
English: In the early days of the Eastern Jin Dynasty, most of the carriage system was vacant, there was no military parade, and the ceremony of displaying the emperor's carriage was omitted.

古文：太兴中，太子临学，无高盖车，元帝诏乘安车。
现代文：太兴年间，太子驾临学校，没有高盖车，五帝下诏乘坐安车。
English: During the Taixing era, the prince arrived at school without a high-deck car, and the five emperors had to take a safe car.

古文：元、明时，属车唯九乘。
现代文：元帝、明帝时，皇帝的属车衹有九辆。
English: At the time of the Yuan and Ming dynasties, there were nine chariots belonging to the emperor.

古文：永和中，石虎死后，旧工人奔叛归国，稍造车舆。
现代文：永和年间，石虎死后，旧的工匠叛逃归国，逐渐能制造车舆。
English: During the Yonghe period, after the death of Shihu, the old craftsmen defected and returned to the country, and gradually they were able to manufacture chariots.

古文：太元中，苻坚败后，又得伪车辇，于是属车增为十二乘。
现代文：太元年间，苻坚败退后，又得到伪车舆乘辇，于是皇帝的属车增加到十二辆。
English: In the first year of the Taiyuan Emperor's reign, the imperial chariots increased to twelve.

古文：义熙中，宋武平关、洛，得姚兴伪车辇。
现代文：义熙年间，宋武帝平定关、洛，得到继垒的伪车舆乘辇。
English: During the reign of Emperor Yixi, Emperor Song Wudi conquered Dingguan and Luo, and obtained the succession of the pseudo-chariots and chariots.

古文：宋大明改修辇辂，妙尽时华，始备伪氐，复设充庭之制。
现代文：塞主塱时改修乘辇车舆，曲尽时兴的式样，才与伪氐一样完备，重设陈列皇帝车舆的制度。
English: The system of displaying the emperor's chariots was re-established when the main pavilion was dismantled and the chariots were refurbished, with the aim of perfecting the fashionable style and making it as complete as the pseudo pavilion.

古文：永明中，更增藻饰，盛于前矣。
现代文：永明年间，更增加繁缛的装饰，比前代兴盛。
English: In the next generation, more elaborate decorations will be added, which will be more prosperous than the previous generation.

古文：案《周礼》以检《汉志》，名器不同，晋、宋改革，稍与世异，今记时事而已。
现代文：根据《周礼》翻检《汉书礼乐志》，器名不同，晋、宋改革，与历代稍有不同，现在衹是记一下当时的情况罢了。
English: According to the "Zhou Li" review of the "Hanshu Li Music History," the instrument names are different, and the Jin and Song reforms are slightly different from the previous generations. Now I just want to remember the situation at that time.

古文：玉辂，汉金根也。
现代文：玉辂，莲丝的金根车。
English: Tamakazura, the golden root of the lotus.

古文：漆画轮，金涂纵容后路受福輠。
现代文：车轮漆画，车轮有涂金的纵容，后车、受神装饰。
English: The wheels are painted, the wheels have gold-plated connivance, the rear wheels are decorated with gods.

古文：两厢上望板前优游，通缘金涂镂釭，碧绞罽，凿镂金薄帖。
现代文：车的两厢上的望板前安装优游，通体涂金及雕刻的金片，缠有碧色的丝绳。雕镂的金片贴面。
English: In front of the gazebo on the two compartments of the car, there is a good tour, the whole body is coated with gold and engraved gold, and there is a blue silk rope.

古文：两厢外织成衣，两厢里上施金涂镂面钉，玳瑁帖。
现代文：车两厢外用金丝织成五彩图案的车衣，两厢裹面顶上用涂金镂面钉，玳瑁贴面。
English: The outer two compartments of the car are woven with gold wire into a multicolored pattern of the car coat, the two compartments are wrapped on top with gold-coated satin nails, satin veneer.

古文：望板厢上金薄帖，金博山，登仙纽，松精。
现代文：望板和厢上用金箔贴面，装饰金博山，登仙纽，松精。
English: The gazebo and carriages are covered with gold leaf, decorated with Mount Jinbo, Mount Xianyu, and pine cones.

古文：优游上，和鸾鸟立花趺衔铃，银带玳瑁筒瓦，金涂镂，刀格，织成手匡金花钿锦衣。
现代文：优游上的车铃装饰成鸟立在花座上口衔铃铛的样子，装饰银带和玳瑁的筒瓦，涂金雕镂成薄片，刀格，金丝手织镶嵌金花的锦衣。
English: The car bells on the Yuyu are decorated with the appearance of a bird standing on a flower seat with a mouth-shaped bell, decorated with silver ribbons and enameled tubular tiles, coated with gold and carved into thin sheets, knives, and gold silk hand-woven brocade with gold flowers.

古文：优游下，隐膝，里施金涂镂面钉，织成衣。
现代文：优游的下边，是隐膝，裹面使用涂金镂面钉，金丝织成五彩图案。
English: The lower side of Youyou is a hidden knee, the wrap uses gold-coated satin nails, and the gold thread is woven into a multicolored pattern.

古文：优游横前，施玳瑁帖，金涂花钉。
现代文：优游横木前，使用玳瑁贴面，涂金花形钉。
English: In front of the Yoyo crossbar, use the enamel veneer to paint the gold flower-shaped nails.

古文：优游前，金涂倒龙，后梢凿银玳瑁龟甲，金涂花沓。
现代文：优游前边，是涂金倒挂的龙，后梢嵌银玳瑁龟甲，涂金的花沓。
English: In front of Youyou, there is a gold-coated upside-down dragon, a silver-encrusted tortoise shell in the back, and a gold-coated garland.

古文：望板，金涂受福望龙诸校饰。
现代文：望板，有涂金的受福、望龙等各种装饰。
English: a gazebo, with various decorations such as a gold-coated blessing and a dragon.

古文：抗及诸末，皆螭龙首。
现代文：抗以及各末梢，都装饰螭龙头。
English: The faucet head is decorated with a rhombus as well as each of the ends.

古文：龙形板，在车前，银带花兽，金涂受福，缘里边，镂玳瑁织成衣。
现代文：龙汗板，在车的前面，装饰银带、花、兽，涂金的受福，沿着裹边，装饰镂金薄片、玳瑁、金丝织成五彩图案的饰物。
English: Dragon sweat board, in front of the car, decorated with silver ribbon, flowers, animals, gold-plated blessing, along the wrapping edge, decorated with sheet gold, enamel, and gold wire woven into colorful patterns.

古文：里，金涂镂面花钉。
现代文：裹面是涂金镂面的花钉。
English: Wrapped face is a flower nail coated with gold satin.

古文：外，金涂博山、辟邪虎、凤皇衔花诸校饰。
现代文：外面是涂金的博山、辟邪虎、凤凰街花等各种装饰。
English: On the outside, there are various decorations such as gold-coated mountains, evil tigers, and phoenix flowers.

古文：斗盖，金涂镂釭，二十八爪支子花，黄锦斗衣，复碧绢柒布缘油顶，绛系络，织成颜芚赭舌孔雀毛复锦，缘绞随阴，悬珠蚌佩，金涂铃，云朱结，仙人绶，杂色真孔雀眊。一辕，漆画车衡，银花带，衡上金涂博山，四和鸾鸟立花趺衔铃，所谓 鸾鸟立衡 也。
现代文：斗形车盖，涂金的镂金薄片，二十八爪支子花，黄锦斗衣，双层碧绢漆布做成油顶，绛色缨络，编织成颜屯赭舌孔雀毛的双层锦，绿色的丝绳缠绕在车盖之下，悬挂珠蚌佩饰，涂金车铃，云朱结，仙人绶，杂色的真孔雀毛旗帜一个车辕，漆画的车衡，银花带，车衡上装饰涂金博山，四个车铃都是乌立在花座上口衔铃铛的样子，所谓 鸾鸟立在车衡上 。
English: A bucket-shaped car cover, a thin sheet of gold-coated platinum, a twenty-eight-clawed flower, a yellow brocade, a double-layered tourmaline lacquered cloth made into an oil cap, an ochre braid, a double-layered brocade woven into a peacock feather, a green silk rope twisted under the car cover, a hanging bead decoration, a gold-coated car bell, a cloud of scarlet, a fairy cocoon, a multi-colored real peacock feather flag, a car bell, a painted car scale, a silver flower band, a car scale decorated with a gold mountain, four car

古文：又龙首衔轭，叉髦插翟尾，上下花沓，绛绿系的，望绳八枚。
现代文：另外笼头衔着车轭，叉开的马鬣插有雉尾，上下装饰花沓，绛绿色丝绳系住，八条望绳。
English: In addition, the cage is tied with a rickshaw, the forked horse bridle is inserted with an embroidered tail, the top and bottom are decorated with flower braids, the hoop is tied with a green silk rope, and there are eight watch ropes.

古文：旂十二旒，画升龙，竿首金涂龙衔火焰幡，真眊。
现代文：旗上装饰十二条彩带，旗上画有飞龙，旗竿头装饰涂金的龙衔火焰幡，真毛饰。
English: The flag is decorated with twelve colored ribbons, the flag is painted with a flying dragon, the flagpole head is decorated with a gold-plated dragon flame flag, and real fur decoration.

古文：棨戟，织成衣，金涂沓驻及受福，金涂雁镂釭。
现代文：荣戟，有金丝织成五彩图案的缯衣，涂金的沓驻和受福，涂金的雁形镂金薄片。
English: Honour ribbon, satin dress with gold thread woven into a multicoloured pattern, gold-coated standing and receiving blessings ribbon, gold-coated goose-shaped satin gold flake.

古文：漆案立床，在车中，锦复黄绞，为案立衣。
现代文：漆画桌案立架，在车内，双层锦黄丝绳，设案是为挂衣服。
English: The lacquer painting table project is set up in the car, with double-layered brocade yellow rope. The design is for hanging clothes.

古文：锦复黄绞鄣泥。
现代文：双层锦黄丝绳鄣泥。
English: Double layer of brocade yellow silk rope dipped in mud.

古文：八幅，长九尺，缘红锦芚带，织成花芚的。
现代文：八幅，九尺长，边是红锦庵带，编织成花屯的。
English: Eight panels, nine feet long, bordered with red brocade ribbon, woven into a wreath.

古文：五辂，江左相承驾四马，左右騑为六。
现代文：帝王的五格，束晋相沿四马驾车，左右骈马是六匹。
English: The emperor's five squares, Zou Jinxiang driving along the four horses, the left and right horses are six.

古文：施绛系游御绳，其重毂贰辖飞軨幡，用赤油金，有紫真袴。
现代文：使用绛色缰绳，两个车毂、车辖装饰飞斡幡，用赤油斡，有紫色真毛饰。
English: The use of ochre reins, two ruts, rims decorated with flying flags, with red oil, with purple real fur trim.

古文：左纛，置左騑马轭上。
现代文：左边设纛旗，设在左骈马的轭上。
English: On the left side, there is a banner, which is placed on the left horse's bridle.

古文：金筼金加冠，状如玉华 形 ，在马髦上。
现代文：金制马冠，把金装饰在冠上，形状如同鬓发，设在马冠上。
English: A golden crown, set in a wreath of gold, set in a wreath of gold, set in a wreath of gold.

古文：方釳，铁广数寸，有三孔，插翟尾其中。
现代文：方形纥，铁制，宽数寸，有三个孔，雉尾插在其中。
English: Square shovel, made of iron, a few inches wide, with three holes, shovel tail inserted in it.

古文：繁缨，金涂紫皮，紫真眊，横在马膺前。
现代文：马腹带和颈带，涂金紫皮，紫色真毛饰，横在马胸前。
English: A horse's girth and collar, with gold-painted purple leather and purple real fur trim, are stretched across the horse's chest.

古文：镂锡，刻金为马面当颅。
现代文：镂金马额装饰，镂刻金属做成马额的当颅。
English: The horse's brow is decorated with enamelled gold, and the horse's skull is made of enamelled metal.

古文：皆如古制。
现代文：都如同古制。
English: It's like the old system.

古文：世祖永明初，加玉辂为重盖，又作麒麟头，采画，以马首戴之。
现代文：世祖永明初年，玉辂加为双重车盖，又制作麒麟头，装饰彩画，戴
English: In the first year of the founder of the Yongming Dynasty, the jade gong was added as a double car cover, and the unicorn head was made.

古文：竟陵王子良启曰： 臣闻车旗有章，载自前史，器必依礼，服无舛法。
现代文：在马头上。竟陵王萧子良启奏说： 我听说舆车旗仗有一定的规矩，自前代史书就有记载，器物必须依照礼制，车骑不能违背法度。
English: At the head of the horse, Xiao Ziliang, the King of the Mausoleum, said: I heard that there are certain rules for the public chariot flag, which have been recorded since the previous history books. The utensils must be in accordance with the etiquette, and the chariot ride must not violate the law.

古文：凡盖员象天，轸方法地，上无二天之仪，下设两盖之饰，求之志录，恐为乖衷。
现代文：车盖的圆象征天，车轸的方象征大地，上天没有两个表象，地下车辆装饰两个车盖，查检史志记载，恐怕失当。
English: The circle of the car cover symbolizes the sky, the square of the rim symbolizes the earth, there are no two representations of heaven, underground vehicles are decorated with two car covers, inspection history records, I am afraid it is inappropriate.

古文：又假为麟首，加乎马头，事不师古，鲜或可施。 
现代文：另外做假麒麟头，戴在马头上，做事不学习古制，很少有实施的可能。 
English: In addition, it is rarely possible to make a fake unicorn head, wear it on a horse's head, and do things without learning the ancient system.

古文：建武中，明帝乃省重盖等。
现代文：建武年间，明帝就省去了双重车盖等。
English: During the Jianwu period, the Ming Dynasty dispensed with the double cover and so on.

古文：金辂。
现代文：金辂。
English: Kim Yeong-soo.

古文：制度校饰如玉辂，而稍减少，亦以金涂。
现代文：根据制度像玉格一样装饰，数量稍加减少，也用金涂饰。
English: According to the system, it is decorated like a jade lattice, the number is slightly reduced, and it is also decorated with gold.

古文：象辂。
现代文：象辂。
English: The elephant warbler.

古文：如金辂而制饰又减。
现代文：如同金格可装饰数量又有减少。
English: As with gold, the number of pieces that can be decorated has also decreased.

古文：木辂。
现代文：木辂。
English: Wooden rafts.

古文：制饰如象辂而尤减。
现代文：装饰制度同象辖可数量更减少。
English: The decoration system is the same as that of the elephant, but the number can be reduced.

古文：革辂，如大辂。
现代文：革辂，如同大辖。
English: It's like the Great Jurisdiction.

古文：建大麾。
现代文：立大旗。
English: A large flag was raised.

古文：赤旗也。
现代文：是红色旗。
English: It's a red flag.

古文：首施大焰幡。
现代文：头上挂火焰幡。
English: A flame banner hangs from his head.

古文：宋升明三年，锡齐王大辂、戎辂各一。
现代文：宋升明三年，赐给齐王大辂、戎貉各一辆。
English: In the third year of Song Shengming, Qi Wang was given a large cormorant and an eunuch cormorant.

古文：乘黄五辂，无大辂、戎辂。
现代文：御马驾的五辂车中，没有大辂、戎格。
English: Among the five-horse chariots of the imperial cavalry, there are no large chariots or military ranks.

古文：左丞王逡之议： 大辂，殷之祭车，故不登周辂之名，而《明堂位》云 大辂，殷辂也 。注云 大辂，木辂也 。
现代文：左丞王逡之建议： 大辂是殷商的祭祀用车，所以周代的五辖中没有它的名字，而《明堂位说 大辖是殷商的车名 ，注说 大辖就是木格 。
English: Suggestion from Zuo Wang Xizhi: Daxu is the sacrificial vehicle of Yin merchants, so there is no name for it in the Five Jurisdictions of the Zhou Dynasty, and "Mingtangyi said that Daxu is the car name of Yin merchants, noting that Daxu is Mugu."

古文：《月令》 中央土，乘大辂 。注云 殷辂也 。
现代文：《月令》 中央土位，乘大辖 ，注说 是殷商车名 。
English: "Lunar Calendar" Central earth position, by the great jurisdiction, note that it is the name of the Yin merchant car.

古文：《礼器》 大辂繁缨一就 。注云 大辂，殷之祭天车也 。《周礼》五路，玉路、金路、象路、革路、木路。
现代文：《礼器》 大辂装饰一圈马缨 ，注说 大格就是殷商祭祀天的用车，《周礼》的五辂车，是玉辂、金辖、象辂、革辂、木辂。
English: "Rituals" Dagger decorated with a circle of horse tacks, note that Dagger is the car used by Yin merchants to worship heaven, and the five-pronged car of "Weekly Rites" are jade tacks, gold tacks, elephant tacks, leather tacks, and wooden tacks.

古文：则周之木路，殷之大辂也。
现代文：那么周代的木辖，就是殷商的大格。
English: So, the Muxiu of the Zhou Dynasty is the epitome of Yin merchants.

古文：周革路建大白，以即戎，此则戎路也。
现代文：《周礼》的革辖竖白色旗，用它去行军征战，造就是戎辂。
English: "Zhou Li"'s leather jacket has a white flag, and it is used to march to war, making it a military cape.

古文：意谓国之大事，在祀与戎，故锡以殷祭天之车，与周之即戎之路。
现代文：意思是国家的大事，在于祭祀与战争，所以赐给殷商的祭天用车，就是周代的行军用车。
English: It means that the important things of the country lie in sacrifice and war, so the sacrificial vehicle given to Yin merchants is the first military vehicle in Zhou Dynasty.

古文：祀则以殷，戎必以周者，明郊天义远，建前代之礼，即戎事近，故以今世之制。
现代文：祭祀就用殷商的车，战争就必须用周代的车，表明祭天意义深远，要用前代的礼仪，战争的事情近，所以用当代的制度。
English: Yin merchants' chariots are used for sacrifices, and Zhou dynasty chariots must be used for war, indicating that the significance of sacrificing to the heavens is far-reaching, and that the previous generation's etiquette should be used, and the war is near, so the current system should be used.

古文：《明堂位》云 鲁君孟春乘大路，载十有二旒日月之章，祀帝于郊 。
现代文：《明堂位》说 鲁君孟春时节乘坐大格。车上插着装饰十二旒及日月徽号的旗子，到国都郊外祭祀上帝 。
English: Lu Junmeng rode in a large carriage during the Spring Festival, with a flag decorated with the twelve Chinese characters and the sun and moon emblem, and went to the outskirts of the capital to worship God, according to Mingtangyi.

古文：天子以大辂以锡诸侯，良有以也。
现代文：一定要用大辂赏赐诸侯，是很早就有的。
English: It is necessary to reward the lords with large ingots, which have been around for a long time.

古文：今木路，即大路也。 
现代文：现在的木辂，就是大格。 
English: The current raft is the Dagger.

古文：太尉左长史王俭议，宜用金辂九旒。
现代文：太尉左长史王俭建议，应当用金辂旗上用九条旒。
English: The captain of the Left Division, Shi Wang Jian, suggested that nine stripes should be used on the golden banner.

古文：时乘黄无副，借用五辂，大朝临轩，权列三辂。
现代文：当时御马没得用，借用其他马凑齐五辖，大型朝廷会见驾临殿前时，只好临时排列三辖。
English: At that time, the imperial horse could not be used, so other horses were borrowed to make up the five jurisdictions. When the large-scale imperial court met before arriving at the palace, they had to temporarily arrange the three jurisdictions.

古文：玉、金辂，建碧旂。
现代文：玉、金辂，车上插碧色旗。
English: Jade and gold brooches, with a blue flag on the car.

古文：象木辂，建赤旂。
现代文：象、木辂，车上插红色旗。
English: An elephant, a raft, and a red flag are mounted on the vehicle.

古文：永明初，太子步兵校尉伏曼容议，以为： 齐德尚青，五路五牛及五色幡旗，并宜以先青为次。
现代文：永明初年，太子步兵校尉伏曼容建议，认为 齐据五德终始之说尚青色，五辂、五牛以及五色幡旗，都应把青色放在首位。
English: In the first year of Sun Myung Moon, Fu Manrong, the prince's infantry lieutenant, suggested that since the five virtues were said to be blue from the beginning, the five gongs, five cows and the five-colored flag should be blue in the first place.

古文：军容戎事之所乘，牺牲茧握之所荐，并宜悉依尚色。
现代文：阅军出征乘坐的车子，祭祀中进献的小牛，都应当依照所崇尚的颜色。
English: The chariots used in military parades and the calves offered in sacrifices should all be in accordance with the revered color.

古文：三代服色，以姓音为尚，汉不识音，故还尚其行运之色。
现代文：夏、商、周三代的服制颜色，是根据姓氏的音律决定崇尚，汉代不懂音律，所以还是崇尚与朝运转换相应的颜色。
English: The color of the dress code for the Xia, Shang and San dynasties was decided according to the rhythm of the surname. The Han dynasty did not understand the rhythm, so they still advocated the color corresponding to the change of the dynasty.

古文：今既无善律，则大齐所尚，亦宜依汉道。
现代文：现在既然没人精通音律，那么大齐所崇尚的服色，也应当依照选伐的规矩。
English: Now that no one is proficient in musical notation, the color of the clothing that Dazhi advocates should also be chosen according to the rules of felling.

古文：若有善吹律者，便应还取姓尚。 
现代文：如果有人能够吹出音律，就应当根据姓氏选取崇尚的颜色 。
English: If someone is able to play the melody, they should choose the color of worship according to the surname.

古文：太子仆周颙议： 三代姓音，古无前记，裁音配尚，起自曼容。
现代文：太子仆周颠建议： 三代姓氏的音律，古代没有记载，依照音律裁定相配的崇尚颜色，自伏曼容开始。
English: The prince's servant Zhou Bibo suggested: There is no record of the musical rhythm of the surnames of the three generations in ancient times. According to the musical rhythm, the appropriate color should be decided, starting from the face.

古文：则是曼容善识姓声，不复方假吹律。
现代文：那么就是曼容精通姓氏的声律，不需要再藉助吹出的音律。
English: That is, Man Rong is proficient in the vocal rhythm of the surname, and does not need to use the blown rhythm.

古文：何故能识远代之宫商而更迷皇朝之律吕，而云当今无知吹律以定所尚，宜附汉以从阙邪？
现代文：为何能够识别远古的音律，反而辨别不清皇朝的音律，却说当今没有人懂得吹出音律，而确定所崇尚的颜色，应当依照汉代规矩任其阙失呢?
English: Why is it possible to recognize ancient musical rhythms, but it is not possible to distinguish the musical rhythms of the imperial dynasty, but it is said that no one today knows how to play musical rhythms, and to determine the color to be revered, it should be allowed to be lost according to Han Dynasty rules?

古文：皇朝本以行运为所尚，非关不定于音氏。
现代文：皇朝本来就是用时运的转换决定所崇尚的颜色，不是决定于音律姓氏。
English: The imperial dynasty originally used the conversion of time to determine the color to be revered, not the phonetic surname.

古文：如此，设有善律之知音，不宜遵声以为尚。 
现代文：因此，就是有精通音律的人，也不应当依照声律确定所崇尚的颜色。 
English: Therefore, even those who are well-versed in musical notation should not determine the color they advocate according to musical notation.

古文：散骑常侍刘朗之等十五人并议驳之，事不行。
现代文：散骑常侍刘朗之等十五人都提出反驳意见，伏曼容的建议未能施行。
English: Fifteen people, including Liu Langzhi, the errant equerry, raised objections, and Fu Manrong's suggestion could not be implemented.

古文：皇太子象辂。
现代文：皇太子乘象轮。
English: The crown prince rides an elephant wheel.

古文：校饰如御，抃九旒降龙。
现代文：装饰如同御车，插的旗上是九条旒，画有降龙。
English: It is decorated like a carriage, and the flag on which it is placed has nine ribbons and a descending dragon.

古文：皇太后皇后重翟车，金涂校具，白地人马锦帖，厢隐膝后户，白牙的帖，金涂面钉，漆画轮，铁铛，金涂纵容后路輠，师子辖、抗檐皆施金涂螭头及神龙雀等诸饰。
现代文：皇太后、皇后乘重翟车，车具涂金，白底人马图的锦贴面，车厢设隐膝开后弓，车牙白色贴面，涂金的面钉，漆昼车轮，铁铛，涂金的纵容后路辗，狮子辖、抗檐都使用涂金的螭头及神龙雀等各种装饰。
English: The empress dowager and empress rode in a heavy-duty carriage, with gold-painted wheels, white-painted mattock veneer, the carriage was equipped with a hidden knee-open rear bow, white-painted teeth, gold-painted nails, lacquered sun wheels, anvil, gold-painted connivance rear road roller, and gold-painted hoe and dragon feather.

古文：轭衡上施金博山，又有金涂长角巴首。
现代文：车轭、车衡上装饰金博山，另外有涂金的长角大蛇头。
English: The wheels, axles and scales are decorated with Mount Jinbo, and there is also a gold-coated long-horned snake head.

古文：盖，金涂，爪支子花二十八，青油侠碧绢黄绞盖，漆布里。
现代文：有车盖，涂金，爪支子花二十八枝，涂青油质地为侠碧绢黄丝绳的车盖，漆布车盖裹。
English: There is a car cover, coated with gold, claw bracket flower twenty-eight branches, coated with blue oil, the texture of the car cover is yellow silk rope, lacquer cloth car cover wrapped.

古文：紫颜芚，黄绞紫绞随阴，碧毛。
现代文：紫色屯，黄丝绳、紫丝绳挂在车盖下，碧色屯。
English: Purple tun, yellow rope, purple rope hanging under the hood, turquoise tun.

古文：外上施绛紫系络。
现代文：外面用绛紫色的绳系住。
English: The outside is fastened with a dark purple rope.

古文：碧旂九旒，棨戟。
现代文：插碧色旗挂九条旒，用架戟。
English: Insert a blue flag, hang nine ribbons, and use a stand for the ribbon.

古文：宋元嘉《东宫仪记》云中宫仆御重翟金根车，未详得称为金根也。
现代文：宋元嘉《束宫仪记》说中宫仆人驾重翟金根车，不详为什么能称为金根。
English: Song Yuanjia's "Record of the Ceremonies of the Palace" says that the servants of the Middle Court drove a heavy-duty golden-roofed carriage, but it is not known why it was called a golden-roofed carriage.

古文：皇太子妃厌翟车。
现代文：皇太子妃厌翟车。
English: The Crown Princess hates the carriage ride.

古文：如重翟，饰微减。
现代文：如同重翟车，装饰稍微减少。
English: As with the heavy carriages, the decoration has been slightly reduced.

古文：指南车。
现代文：指南车。
English: Guide car.

古文：四周厢上施屋，指南人衣裙襦天衣，在厢中。
现代文：四周车厢上建小屋，有指南人穿短服天衣，在车厢中。
English: There are cabins built on all sides of the carriage, with guides wearing short-sleeved jackets in the carriage.

古文：上四角皆施龙子竿，县杂色真孔雀眊，乌布皂复幔，漆画轮，驾牛，皆铜校饰。
现代文：上面四角都立龙子竿，悬挂杂色的真孔雀毛旗，黑布幔帐，漆画车轮，用牛驾车，都用铜装饰。
English: The four corners of the top are decorated with copper, with dragon and dragon rods, hanging multi-colored real peacock feather flags, black cloth curtains, painted wheels, and driving with cattle.

古文：记里鼓车。
现代文：记里鼓车。
English: Listen to the drum roll.

古文：制如指南，上施华盖子，纟禁衣漆画，鼓机皆在内。
现代文：形制如同指南车，上面用华盖，绀色车衣漆画图案，鼓的机关都设在裹面
English: It is shaped like a guide car, with a flower cover on top, an ochre-coloured livery painted pattern, and the drum's organs are all located in the crotch

古文：辇车，如犊车，竹蓬。
现代文：辇车，如同牛车，竹制车篷。
English: A mule cart, like an ox cart, with a bamboo canopy.

古文：厢外凿镂金薄，碧纱衣，织成芚，锦衣。
现代文：车厢外雕镂薄金片，碧色纱衣，丝织五彩图案屯，锦衣。
English: The exterior of the carriage is carved with thin gold flakes, blue gauze, silk with multicolored patterns, and brocade.

古文：厢里及仰 顶 隐膝后户，金涂镂面，玳瑁帖，金涂松精，登仙花纽，绿四缘，四望纱萌子，上下前后眉，镂鍱。
现代文：车厢裹面及顶篷隐膝、后门，涂金镂面钉，玳瑁贴面，涂金松精，登仙花纽，四边绿色，四面窗用纱萌子，上下前后眉，镂金薄片。
English: Wrapped car and canopy hidden knee, rear door, painted gold satin nails, satin veneer, painted gold pine, climbing honeysuckle, green on all sides, four windows with gauze buds, upper and lower front and back eyebrows, thin sheet of sheet gold.

古文：辕枕长角龙，白牙兰，玳瑁金涂校饰。
现代文：车辕枕着长角龙，白牙栅栏，玳冒涂金装饰。
English: Long-horned dragon, white-toothed fence, gold-painted decoration.

古文：漆鄣尘板在兰前，金银花兽玃天龙师子镂面，榆花细指子摩尼炎，金龙虎。
现代文：油漆的挡尘板在栅栏前，金银的花兽获天龙狮子图像镂刻在表面，美丽的榆花形首饰和发光的珍珠，涂金的龙虎图像。
English: Painted baffles in front of the fence, gold and silver flowers and animals with dragon and lion images engraved on the surface, beautiful flower-shaped jewelry and luminous pearls, gold-coated dragon and tiger images.

古文：扶辕，银口带，龙板头。
现代文：扶辕装饰银带，龙板头。
English: Handrail decorated with silver band, dragon head.

古文：龙辕轭上，金凤皇铃璅银口带，星后梢，玳瑁帖，金涂香沓，银星花兽幔竿杖，金涂龙牵，纵横长筜，背花香柒兆床副。
现代文：龙形辕轭上，装饰金制凤凰形车铃，银口带，后梢装饰星点，玳瑁贴面，涂金香沓，银星花兽装饰的帏幔撑竿，涂金龙牵，纵横长裥，背后是花香涂绘的床架。
English: On the dragon-shaped yoke, a decorative gold phoenix-shaped car bell, a silver mouth strap, a decorative star on the tail fin, a satin veneer, a gold-painted champagne yoke, a silver star flower beast decorated yoke support rod, a gold-painted dragon tow, a long horizontal yoke, and a bed frame painted with flowers on the back.

古文：自辇以下，二宫御车，皆绿油幢，绛系络。
现代文：自辇以下，二宫的用车，都是油成绿色车帷，绛色缰绳。
English: All of Ninomiya's cars, from the smallest to the largest, have oiled green curtains and ochre-colored reins.

古文：御所乘，双栋。
现代文：御用车辆，都是双栋。
English: All the official vehicles are double-deckers.

古文：其公主则碧油幢云。
现代文：其中公丰乘坐的车则油成碧色车帏。
English: Among them, the car that Gongfeng was riding in was covered with oil and turned into a blue rutabaga.

古文：《司马法》曰 夏后氏辇曰金车，殷曰胡奴车，周曰辎车 ，皆辇也。
现代文：《司马法》说 夏后氏的辇称金车，殷商称胡奴车，周代称辎车 ，都是辇。
English: "Sima Fa" says that Xia Hou's nickname is Jin Che, Yin Shang's nickname is Hu Nu Che, and Zhou Dynasty's nickname is Xing Che, all of which are nicknames.

古文：《汉书·叔孙通传》云 皇帝辇出房 ，成帝辇过后宫，此朝宴并用也。
现代文：《汉书叔孙通传》说 皇帝乘辇出房 ，成帝乘辇路过后宫，这是上朝宴会都乘用的。
English: "Hanshu Shushun Tongzhuan" says that the emperor used the gong to go out of the room, and the emperor Chengdi used the gong to pass through the harem, which was used for the banquet of the last dynasty.

古文：《舆服志》云 辇车具金银丹青采祇雕画蒲陶之文，乘人以行 。
现代文：《舆服志》说 辇车装饰金银丹青彩腰雕画葡萄图案，人乘坐出行 。
English: "Public Service Journal" said that the carriage was decorated with gold, silver, blue and white, and the waist was carved with grape patterns, and people traveled by it.

古文：信阳侯阴就见井丹，左右人进辇，是为臣下亦得乘之。
现代文：信阳侯阴就去见井丹，身边的人抬进辇，造就是说臣下也能乘坐。
English: Shinyang Houyin went to see Jing Dan, and the people around him were carried into the carriage, which meant that the vassals could also ride.

古文：晋武帝给安平献王孚云母辇。
现代文：晋武帝赐给安平献王司马孚云母装饰的辇。
English: Emperor Jinwu gave Anping to present Wang Simafu with a mica-decorated bowl.

古文：晋中朝又有香衣辇，江左唯御所乘。
现代文：晋中朝又有香衣辇，束晋时祇有帝王乘坐。
English: During the Jin Dynasty and the Middle Jin Dynasty, there was also the Xiangyi Coach, but during the Suc Jin Dynasty, only the emperor rode the coach.

古文：卧辇。
现代文：臣辇。
English: It's my turn now.

古文：校饰如坐辇，不甚服用。
现代文：装饰如同坐辇，不太使用。
English: Decorated like a cushion, it is rarely used.

古文：漆画轮车，金涂校饰如辇，微有减降。
现代文：油漆绘画轮车，涂金像辇一样装饰，稍有减少降低。
English: Paint painting wheel car, painted gold decorated like a skull, slightly reduced.

古文：金涂铛，纵容后輠师子副也。
现代文：涂金车铛，纵容后蜾装饰狮子画像。
English: The gold-plated chariot is adorned with a lion, while the back of the chariot is decorated with a lion.

古文：御为群公举哀临哭所乘。
现代文：皇上为诸公举哀前去哭吊所乘的车子。
English: The emperor went to mourn for the princes, and the carriage he was riding in was taken away.

古文：皇后、太子妃亦乘之。
现代文：皇后和太子妃也乘坐 乞。
English: The Queen and the Crown Princess also rode in the carriage.

古文：漆画牵车，小形如舆车，金涂纵容后路师子輠，铁铛，锦衣。
现代文：油漆绘画牵车，形状小如同舆车，涂金纵容、后路、狮子蜾，铁制车铛，锦车衣。
English: Paint drawing of a cart, small in shape like a minibus, gold-coated connivance, back road, lion's mane, iron cart ruts, brocade car coat.

古文：厢里隐膝后户，牙兰，辕枕梢，幰竿戍栋梁，皆金涂校饰。
现代文：车厢裹设隐膝，后边开门，牙形栅栏，车辕、车轸后梢，车帏撑竿作栋梁，都涂金装饰。
English: The carriage is wrapped with a hidden knee, the rear side of the door is open, the tooth-shaped fence, the wheel rim, the rear end of the wheel rim, the wheel rim support rod as a pillar, are all gold-plated.

古文：御及皇太子所乘，即古之羊车也。
现代文：皇上及皇太子所乘的车子，就是古代的羊车。
English: The carriage in which the emperor and the crown prince ride is an ancient sheep cart.

古文：晋泰始中，中护军羊琇乘羊车，为司隶校尉刘毅所奏。
现代文：晋泰始年间，中护军羊璘乘坐羊车，被司隶校尉刘毅弹劾。
English: During the first years of the Jin and Tai Dynasties, the middle-ranking military escort, the Yang Di, rode in a sheep wagon and was impeached by Liu Yi, a lieutenant of the Sili.

古文：武帝诏曰： 羊车虽无制，非素者所服，免官。 
现代文：武帝诏令说： 羊车的使用虽然没有一定的制度，但不是普通人可以乘坐的，免去羊诱官职。 
English: Emperor Wu's edict said: Although there is no definite system for the use of sheep carts, they are not for ordinary people to ride, and they are exempted from official duties.

古文：《卫玠传》云： 总角乘羊车，市人聚观。 
现代文：《卫蚧传》说： 未成年就乘坐羊车，街市上人们围观。 
English: "The Legend of Wei Xuan" says: Minors ride sheep carts, and people watch them on the street market.

古文：今不驾羊，犹呼牵此车者为羊车云。
现代文：现在不用羊驾车，仍然称这牵车为羊车。
English: Nowadays, sheep are no longer used to drive the vehicle, and it is still referred to as a sheep wagon.

古文：舆车，形如轺车，漆画，金校饰锦衣。
现代文：舆车，形状如同朝车，油漆绘画，用金装饰，锦车衣。
English: A public carriage, shaped like a morning carriage, painted, decorated with gold, and decorated with brocade.

古文：两厢后户隐膝牙兰，皆玳瑁帖，刀格，镂面花钉。
现代文：两厢后边开门，设置隐膝及牙形栅栏，都是玳瑁贴面，刀格，镂面花钉。
English: The doors open at the back of the two compartments, and a hidden knee and tooth-shaped fence are set up, all of which are enamel veneer, knife grid, and enamel flower nail.

古文：幰竿戍校栋梁。下施八，金涂沓，兆床副。
现代文：车帏撑竿作成栋梁，下面用八条桐木，涂金花沓，配以兆床。
English: The girders are supported by wooden poles, and eight paulownia trees are used underneath, painted with gold leaf, and fitted with trusses.

古文：人举之。
现代文：用人举着它。
English: It's being held up by someone.

古文：一曰小舆，小行幸乘之。
现代文：又叫小舆，皇上小型巡视乘坐它。
English: It is also known as Xiao Mei, and the emperor's small inspection team rides on it.

古文：皇太子亦得于宫内乘之。
现代文：皇太子也可以在宫内乘坐它。
English: The crown prince can also ride it around the palace.

古文：衣书十二乘，资榆毂轮，箕子壁，绿油衣，厢外绿纱萌，油幢络，通幰，竿刺代栋梁，柮檽真形龙牵，支子花。
现代文：衣书车十二辆，愤木、榆木车轮，箕子车壁，绿油外表，车厢外是绿色纱帐，涂油的幛幕缨络，通体帏帐，撑竿代替栋梁，柚糯木真形的龙牵，支子花。
English: Twelve book vans, angry wood, birch wheels, hazel walls, green oil on the outside, green curtains on the outside of the car, oiled curtains, full-length curtains, poles instead of beams, real teak draughts, braces.

古文：辕后伏神抗、承泥、沓，金涂校具。
现代文：车辕后的伏神抗、承泥板、沓，涂金装饰车具。
English: Fushinbu, mud plate, roller, and gold-coated decorative vehicle parts behind the wheel rim.

古文：古副车之象也。今亦曰五时副车。
现代文：是效法的古代副车。现在也叫五时副车。
English: It is an imitation of the ancient side car. Now it is also called the five o'clock side car.

古文：青萌车，是谓扌翕幔车。
现代文：青萌车，就是搐幔车。
English: Qingmeng car, that is, Xing car.

古文：油络画安车，公主、王妃、三公特进夫人所乘。
现代文：油络画安车，公主、王妃、三公特进夫人所乘坐。
English: Oil painting depicting the carriage in which the princess, the prince's wife, and the third prince's wife ride.

古文：汉制，皇后、贵人紫罽軿车。
现代文：汉代制度，皇后、贵人乘紫嗣耕车。
English: Han Dynasty system, empresses and nobles rode purple heirs' carts.

古文：晋皇后乘云母油画安车，驾六，以两辕安车驾五为副。
现代文：晋皇后乘云母油画安车，六马驾车，用五马驾驭的两辕安车作为副车。
English: The Empress Jin rode in a mica oil-painted horse-drawn carriage, with six horses driving, and a five-horse-driven two-horse carriage as a second car.

古文：公主画安车驾六，以两辕安车驾三为副。
现代文：公主乘六马驾驭的绘画安车，用三马驾驭的两辕安车作为副车。
English: The princess rides in a six-horse drawn carriage, with a three-horse drawn two-horse carriage as a sidecar.

古文：公主画安车驾三，三夫人青交络安车驾三，皆以紫绛罽軿车驾三为副。
现代文：公主乘三马驾驭的绘画安车，三夫人乘三马驾驭的青交络安车，都用三马驾驭的紫绛色局耕车作为副车。
English: The princess took the three-horse-driven painting cart, the three ladies took the three-horse-driven blue crossover cart, and all used the three-horse-driven purple and indigo color bureau cultivator as a side car.

古文：九嫔世妇軿车驾二，王公妃特进夫人皂交络为副。
现代文：九嫔、世妇乘两马驾驭的耕车，王公妃及特进夫人用皂交络车作为副车。
English: Jiuzhaigou and the world's women rode two-horse-driven ploughing carts, while Wang Gongfei and Mrs. Tejin used a soap-mixing cart as a secondary vehicle.

古文：汉贱轺车而贵軿车，晋贱辎軿而贵轺车，皆行礼所乘。
现代文：汉代轻视轺车而重视耕车，置伐轻视辎耕车而重视轺车，都是举行典礼时乘坐的。
English: In the Han Dynasty, people despised the plough and valued the cultivator, while people in the Age of Settlement despised the plough and valued the cultivator. Both were used during ceremonies.

古文：黄屋车，建碧旗九旒，九旒，鸾辂也。
现代文：黄屋车，树碧色旗，装饰九旒，九旒，是天子王侯所乘之车的丝织垂饰。
English: Yellow carriage, tree-blue flag, decorated with nine ribbons, nine ribbons, is the silk hanging decoration of the carriage of the prince.

古文：汉《舆服志》云： 金根车，盖黄缯为里，谓之黄屋。 
现代文：漠《舆服志》说： 金根车，车盖的裹用黄缯，称为黄屋。 
English: "Public Opinion" said: the golden-rooted car, the car cover wrapped with yellow ribbon, is called Huangya.

古文：今金、玉辂皆以黄地锦，唯此车以黄缯。
现代文：如今金辖、玉辖都用黄地锦，衹有黄屋车用黄缯。
English: Nowadays, gold and jade provinces all use yellow brocade, and there are yellow houses with yellow roofs.

古文：皆金涂校具，黄隐随阴，青毛羽，二十八爪支子花，绛系络。
现代文：都是涂金车具，黄色随阴，青毛羽，二十八爪支子花，绛色绳络。
English: They are all gold-coated vehicles, yellow with a shade, blue feathers, twenty-eight-clawed bracts, and ochre ropes.

古文：九命上公所乘。
现代文：是爵位最高的上公所乘坐的。
English: It was the highest-ranked member of the Imperial Household Agency who rode on the train.

古文：青盖安车，朱轓漆班轮，驾一，左右騑，通幰车为副，诸王礼行所乘。
现代文：青盖安车，红色车障杂色油漆车轮，一马驾辕，左右骈马，用通忆车作副车，诸王参加礼仪时所乘坐。
English: Qinggai and car, red barrier and multi-colored paint wheels, one horse driving the carriage, right and left horses, with a memory car as a side car, used by the kings to participate in the ceremony.

古文：凡车有轓者谓之轩。
现代文：凡是有障蔽的车称作轩。
English: Any car with a barrier is called Xuan.

古文：皂盖安车，朱轓漆班轮，驾一，通幰牛车为副，三公礼行所乘。
现代文：黑盖安车，红色车障杂色油漆车轮，一马驾辕，用通忆牛车作副车，三公参加礼仪时所乘坐。
English: A black covered wagon, red painted wheels, a horse-drawn carriage, and an ox-drawn cart were used as sidecars, which the three princes rode when attending the ceremony.

古文：安车，黑耳皂盖马车，朱轓，驾一，牛车为副，国公列侯礼行所乘。
现代文：安车，黑耳黑盖马车，红色车障，一马驾辕，用牛车作副车，国公列侯参加礼仪时所乘坐。
English: Security car, black-eared and black-covered carriage, red barrier, one-horse carriage, ox-drawn carriage as a secondary vehicle, used by princes and queens when attending ceremonies.

古文：马车，驾一，九卿、领、护、二卫、骁游、四军、五校从郊陵所乘。
现代文：马车，一马驾辕，九卿、领、护、二卫、骁游、四军、五校随从参加天地祭祀和陵墓祭祀时所乘坐。
English: Horse-drawn carriage, one horse driving a donkey, nine lords, leaders, guardians, two guards, a procession, four armies, and five schools accompanied by attendants to participate in the Heaven and Earth Festival and the Mausoleum Festival.

古文：晋制，三公下至九卿，又各安车黑耳一乘，公驾三，特进驾二，卿驾一，复各轺车施黑耳后户皂轮一乘。
现代文：置塑制度，三公以下到九卿，又各配安车黑耳一辆，三公是三马驾辕，特进是二马驾辕，卿是一马驾辕，又各配加黑耳后门黑轮的轺车一辆。
English: According to the system of placement of statues, there are nine nobles below the three noblemen, and each of them is equipped with a black carriage, the three noblemen are three-horse carriage, the special advance is two-horse carriage, the noblemen are one-horse carriage, and each of them is equipped with a black carriage with a black back door.

古文：油络轺车，尚书令、仆射、中书监、令、尚书、侍中、常侍、中黄门、中书、散骑侍郎，皆驾一牛，朝直所乘。
现代文：油络辊车，尚书令、仆射、中书监、令、尚书、侍中、常侍、中黄门、中书、散骑侍郎，都用一牛驾车，上朝当值时所乘坐。
English: The oil-bearing chariots, Shang Shuling, Puxia, Zhong Shujuan, Ling, Shang Shuling, Zhanzhong, Zhanzhong, Zhonghuangmen, Zhongshu, and Sanzhong, were all driven by one ox, and were used when on duty in the previous morning.

古文：晋制，尚书令施黑耳后户皂轮，仆射、中书监、令直施后户皂轮，尚书无后户，皆漆轮毂，今犹然。
现代文：晋朝制度，尚书令加黑耳后门黑轮，仆射、中书监、令直加后门黑轮，尚书没有后门，都漆画车轮车毂，现在仍然如此。
English: In the Jin Dynasty system, Shang Shuling added a black ear and a black wheel to the back door, while Puxi, Zhong Shuling, and Ling Zichang added a black wheel to the back door. Shang Shuling did not have a back door, but they all painted a cartwheel and a cartwheel, and this is still the case.

古文：安车，赤屏，驾一；又辂车，施后户，为副，太子二傅礼行所乘。
现代文：安车，红色屏障，一马驾辕，又用开后门的轺车作为副车，是太子太傅、少傅参加礼仪时所乘坐的。
English: The safety car, the red barrier, the horse-drawn carriage, and the carriage with the back door open as a secondary car, were used by the Prince Taifu and the Young Master when they attended the ceremony.

古文：四望车，通幰，油幢络，班漆轮毂。
现代文：四望车，设有障幔，油漆帏幕绳络，漆成杂色的车轮车毂。
English: Four-watch car, equipped with barriers, painted curtain ropes, painted multi-colored wheels and wheels.

古文：亦曰皂轮，以加礼贵臣。
现代文：也叫皂轮，作为加给尊贵大臣的礼遇。
English: Also called a soap wheel, as a courtesy given to the honorable minister.

古文：晋武诏给魏舒、阳燧四望小车。
现代文：晋武帝下诏赐给魏舒阳燧四望小车。
English: Emperor Jinwu issued an edict to give Wei Shuyang a four-wheeled carriage.

古文：三望车，制度如四望。
现代文：三望车，制度如同四望车。
English: The three-watch car system is similar to the four-watch car system.

古文：或谓之夹望，亦以加礼贵臣。
现代文：或称为夹望，也用来作为加给显贵大臣的礼遇。
English: It is also used as a courtesy to dignified ministers.

古文：次四望。
现代文：次于四望车。
English: It is second only to the four-eyed chariot.

古文：油幢络车，制似三望而减。
现代文：油幢络车，形制像三望车而有所简化。
English: It is a simplified version of the oil tanker, which is shaped like a three-pointed star.

古文：王公加礼者之为常乘，次三望。
现代文：是受到礼遇的王公经常乘坐的，次于三望车。
English: It is the one that the prince, who was treated with courtesy, often rides, second only to the three-eyed carriage.

古文：平乘车，竹箕子壁仰，资榆为轮，通幰，竿刺代栋梁，柮檽真形龙牵，金涂支子花纽，辕头后梢沓伏神承泥。
现代文：平乘车，竹箕的四壁顶篷，椟木、榆木车轮，设有障幔，用竿头代替栋梁，柚糯木制成的真形龙牵，涂金的支子花纽，辕头后梢用沓伏神挡泥。
English: A flat ride, a four-wall canopy with bamboo rafters, birch and birch wheels, a barrier, a pole instead of a beam, a real dragon made of teak, a gold-plated garland, and a mudguard made from the back of a skull.

古文：庶人亦然，但不通幰。
现代文：庶人也是这样，但不设障幔。
English: It is the same for commoners, but there are no obstacles.

古文：三公诸王所乘。
现代文：三公诸王所乘坐。
English: The Three Princes and Three Kings rode in it.

古文：自四望至平乘，皆铜校饰。
现代文：自四望车到平乘车，都是用铜具装饰。
English: From the watchtower to the flat car, they are all decorated with copper fittings.

古文：辒辌车，四轮，饰如金根。
现代文：辊鲸车。四个车轮，装饰如同金根车。
English: A beaked whale carriage. Four wheels, decorated like a golden chariot.

古文：四角龙首，施组衔璧，垂五采，析羽葆流苏，前后云气错画帷裳，以素为池而黼黻。
现代文：四角有龙首，用丝带街挂壁玉，垂下五彩，羽毛装饰的车盖流苏，前后是画有云气交织图案的帷裳，以白色生绢作为棺木装饰，可图案繁绣。
English: The four corners have dragon heads, hanging wall beads with ribbon streets, hanging colorful, feather-decorated car lid tassels, front and back are curtains with interwoven cloud patterns, decorated with white ginger as a coffin, and can be embroidered with patterns.

古文：驾四白骆马，太仆执辔。
现代文：用四匹黑鬃白马驾车，由太仆执缰。
English: It is driven by four black and white horses, with a servant at the wheel.

古文：贵臣薨，亦如之，羽饰驾御，微有减降。
现代文：显贵的大臣去世，也用该种车辆，羽毛装饰车驾执御。稍有减降。
English: When a prominent minister passed away, he also used this kind of vehicle, feather-decorated car to drive. There was a slight decrease.

古文：《虞书》曰： 予欲观古人之象，日、月、星辰、山、龙、华虫，作缋；宗彝、藻、火、粉米、黼、黻，絺绣，以采章施于五色。 
现代文：《虞书》说： 我想观察古人的图像，月、星辰、山、龙、华虫作为画饰，宗彝、藻、火、粉米、黼黻、编绣，用五种颜色装饰五彩图案。 
English: "The Book of Fortune" said: I want to observe the images of the ancients, the moon, stars, mountains, dragons, and insects as decorations, Zonglu, algae, fire, powdered rice, bamboo shoots, and embroidery, and use five colors to decorate multicolored patterns.

古文：天子服备日、月以下，公山、龙以下，侯伯华虫以下，子男藻、火以下，卿大夫粉米以下。
现代文：天子的衣服配用曰、月以下的图案，公爵用山、龙以下的图案，侯爵、伯爵用华虫以下的图案，子爵、男爵用藻、火以下的圃案，卿大夫用粉米以下的图案。
English: The emperor's clothes were fitted with patterns of the moon and below, the duke with patterns of the mountain and dragon and below, the marquis and the count with patterns of the caterpillar and below, the viscount and the baron with patterns of the algae and the fire and below, and the doctor with patterns of the flour and below.

古文：天子六冕，王后六服，著在《周官》。
现代文：天子有六种帽子，王后有六种服装，记载在《周官》中。
English: The emperor has six kinds of hats, and the queen has six kinds of clothing, recorded in "Zhou Guan."

古文：公侯以下，咸有名则，佩玉组绶，并具礼文，后代沿革，见《汉志》《晋服制令》，其冠十三品，见蔡邕《独断》，并不复具详。
现代文：公爵、侯爵以下，都有不同的名分规定，连佩戴玉的丝绳，礼制中都有具体的文字规定，后代的沿革，见《汉志》及《晋服制令》，其中帽子的十三种品级，见蔡邕的《独断》，都不再详细叙述。
English: Below the rank of duke and marquis, there are different rules for titles. Even the silk cords for wearing jade have specific written rules in the etiquette system. For the history of the descendants, see "Han Zhi" and "Jin clothing regulation." Among them, the thirteen grades of hats, see Cai Wei's "Arbitrariness," are no longer described in detail.

古文：宋明帝泰始四年，更制五辂，议修五冕，朝会飨猎，各有所服，事见《宋注》。
现代文：宋明帝泰始四年，改行五辖车制，讨论制作五种礼帽，朝见、宴饮、田猎时，各戴不同的礼帽，事情见《宋注》。
English: In the fourth year of the reign of Emperor Taizong of the Song Dynasty, the five-branch chariot system was introduced, and the production of five kinds of ceremonial hats was discussed. When meeting for the first time, dining, and hunting, each wore a different ceremonial hat, see "Song Notes."

古文：旧相承三公以下冕七旒，青玉珠，卿大夫以下五旒，黑玉珠。
现代文：过去相沿三公以下戴的礼帽有七旒，用青玉珠串，卿大夫以下戴的礼帽有五旒，用黑玉珠串。
English: In the past, the ceremonial hats worn by the three princes and below had seven brims and were strung with blue jade beads, while the ceremonial hats worn by the doctors and below had five brims and were strung with black jade beads.

古文：永明六年，太常丞何諲之议，案《周礼》命数，改三公八旒，卿六旒。
现代文：丞塱六年，太常丞何谨之建议，根据《周礼》的命数，三公改为八旒，卿改为六旒。
English: In the sixth year of the Joseon Dynasty, according to the number of lives in the "Weekly Ritual," the three kings were changed to eight kings, and the three queens were changed to six queens.

古文：尚书令王俭议，依汉三公服，山、龙九章，卿华虫七章。
现代文：尚书令王俭建议，依照汉代制度，三公的服装用山、龙等九种图案，卿用华虫等七种图案。
English: According to the Han Dynasty system, Wang Jian suggested that nine patterns, such as mountains and dragons, should be used for the clothing of the three princes, and seven patterns, such as insects, should be used for the nobles.

古文：从之。
现代文：被采纳。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：平冕，黑介帻，今谓平天冠。
现代文：平冕黑介帧，现在叫平天冠。
English: The flat-crowned black intermediary frame, now called the flat crown.

古文：皂表，朱缘里，广七尺，长尺二寸，垂珠十二旒，以朱组为缨，如其绶色。
现代文：外表黑色裹边朱色，宽七尺，长一尺二寸，垂挂十二旒珠串，用朱色丝绳作帽带，颜色与系印的绶带相同。
English: It was black on the outside, with a vermilion border, seven feet wide and one foot two inches long, with twelve strings of beads hanging from it, and a cap band made of vermilion silk cord, the same color as the umbilical cord.

古文：衣皂上绛下，裳前三幅，后四幅。
现代文：衣服是上衣黑色下衣绛色，前面三幅，后面四幅。
English: The clothes are black on the top and navy on the bottom, three on the front and four on the back.

古文：衣画而裳绣，为日、月、星辰、山、龙、华虫、藻、火、粉米、黼、黻十二章。
现代文：上衣绘画下衣绣饰，作成曰、月、星辰、山、龙、华虫、藻、火、粉米、黼、黻等十二种图案。
English: Top coat painting, bottom coat embroidery, creating twelve kinds of patterns such as day, moon, stars, mountains, dragons, insects, algae, fire, powdered rice, dragonflies and dragonflies.

古文：素带广四寸，朱里，以朱绿裨饰其侧，要中以朱，垂以绿，垂三尺。
现代文：白绢衣带宽四寸，朱色襄，用朱绿色裨衣装饰在侧面，主要部分用朱色，下垂部分用绿色，垂下三尺。
English: White satin dress with a width of four inches, vermilion collar, decorated on the side with vermilion green loincloth, the main part with vermilion, hanging part with green, hanging down three feet.

古文：中衣，以绛缘其领袖，赤皮韨，绛袴袜，赤鋋抃，郊庙临朝所服也。
现代文：中衣，领边袖口用绛色，红色皮绂，绛色裤袜，红色鞋，祭祀天地宗庙和上朝时穿戴。
English: Middle dress, collar and cuffs in navy blue, red leather jacket, navy blue pants and socks, red shoes, worn during the worship of the Imperial Family and the last days of the Joseon Dynasty.

古文：汉世，冕用白玉珠为旒。
现代文：汉代冠冕用白玉珠作为旒。
English: Han Dynasty crowns used white jade beads as enamel.

古文：魏明帝好妇人饰，改以珊瑚珠。
现代文：魏明帝喜好妇人装饰，改用珊瑚珠作为旒。
English: Emperor Ming of Wei favored women's adornment, and used coral beads as baubles.

古文：晋初仍旧，后乃改。
现代文：晋代初年沿袭，后来才改。
English: It was inherited in the first year of the Jin Dynasty, and only later changed.

古文：江左以美玉难得，遂用琫珠，世谓之白璇珠。
现代文：束晋因为美玉难得，于是用蚌珠，世上称为白璇珠。
English: Sokjin, because of the rarity of gems, used a white jade bead, known in the world as a white jade bead.

古文：衮衣，汉世出陈留襄邑所织。
现代文：衮衣，汉代出白陈留襄邑所织。
English: Han clothing, woven in the Han Dynasty by Bai Chen Liu Xiangwu.

古文：宋末用绣及织成。建武中，明帝以织成重，乃采画为之，加饰金银薄，世亦谓为天衣。
现代文：宋末用绣品织成，建武年问，明帝认为织成太贵重，于是作成彩画，加上金银薄片装饰，世上也称它为天衣。
English: At the end of the Song Dynasty, it was woven with embroidery. When Emperor Jianwu enquired about it, Emperor Ming thought it was too precious to be woven, so it was made into a painting, decorated with gold and silver flakes. The world also calls it heavenly clothing.

古文：史臣曰：黼黻之设，经纬为用，故五色六章十二衣还相为质也。历代龙衮，织以成文，今体不胜衣，变易旧法，岂致美黻冕之谓乎！
现代文：史臣曰：衣服图案的绘饰，是利用织物作为基础，所以五种色彩、六种图案、十二类衣服还是互为基础历代的龙衮，织成图案，如今在南方没法穿太多的衣服，改变旧的服饰制度，岂不就是使衣帽漂亮!
English: Shichen said: The decoration of clothing patterns is based on the use of fabric. Therefore, the five colors, six patterns, and twelve types of clothing are still based on each other. In the past, they were woven into patterns. Nowadays, it is impossible to wear too many clothes in the south. To change the old clothing system is to make clothes and hats beautiful!

古文：通天冠，黑介帻，金博山颜，绛纱袍，皂缘中衣，乘舆常朝所服。
现代文：通天冠，黑介帧，金博山颜，绛纱袍，皂边中衣，天子平常上朝时穿戴。
English: Through the crown of heaven, the black intermediary frame, the golden mountain, the embroidered robe, the soap-edged shirt, the heavenly son usually wears it when he gets up in the morning.

古文：旧用駮犀簪导，东昏改用玉。
现代文：过去用驳犀制成的簪导，东昏侯改用玉。
English: In the past, the guide made of barbed wire was used, but Dongdimou changed to jade.

古文：其朝服，臣下皆同。
现代文：那些上朝服饰，臣下都相同。
English: Those courtly attire, the vassals are all the same.

古文：黑介帻，单衣，无定色，乘舆拜陵所服。
现代文：黑介帧，单衣，没有固定的颜色，天子拜谒陵墓时所穿戴。
English: Black-and-white frame, single garment, no fixed color, worn when the emperor visited the tomb.

古文：其白帢单衣，谓之素服，以举哀临丧。
现代文：那白便帽和单衣，称为素服，用于举哀吊唁。
English: The white cap and gown, known as plain clothes, are used for mourning.

古文：远游冠，太子诸王所冠。
现代文：远游冠，是太子和各王所戴。
English: It is worn by princes and kings alike.

古文：太子朱缨，翠羽緌珠节。
现代文：太子戴的是朱色帽带，帽带末梢用翠色的鸟羽，装饰珠子。
English: The prince is wearing a vermilion hatband, the ends of which are trimmed with emerald bird feathers and decorated with beads.

古文：诸王玄缨，公侯皆同。
现代文：各王戴的是黑色帽带，公和侯也都相同。
English: All the kings wear black bonnets, as do the dukes and lords.

古文：平冕，各以组为缨，王公八旒，衣山、龙九章，卿七旒，衣华虫七章，并助祭所服。
现代文：平冕，各用丝绳做帽带，王公帽上是八旒，衣服上是山、龙等九种图案；卿的帽上是七旒衣服上是华虫等七种图案，都是协助祭祀时所穿戴的服饰。
English: flat crowns, each with a silk cord to make a hat band, the king's hat has eight crests, the clothes have nine patterns such as mountains and dragons; the lord's hat has seven crests and the clothes have seven patterns such as insects, all of which are costumes worn to assist in the sacrifice.

古文：皆画皂绛缯为之。
现代文：都是用皂绛色缯绘饰制作。
English: They are all made with soapstone-coloured enamel decoration.

古文：进贤冠，诸开国公、侯，乡、亭侯，卿，大夫，尚书，关内侯，二千石，博士，中书郎，丞、郎，秘书监、丞、郎，太子中舍人、洗马、舍人，诸府长史，卿，尹、丞，下至六百石令长小吏，以三梁、二梁、一梁为差，事见《晋令》。
现代文：进贤冠，各开国公、侯，乡、亭侯，卿，大夫，尚书，关内侯，二千石，博士，中书郎，丞、郎，秘书监、丞、郎，太子中舍人、洗马、舍人，诸府长史，卿，尹、丞，下至俸禄六百石的令长小吏，用三、二、一根帽梁作为区分，事情见于《晋令》。
English: Jin Xian Guan, the founding prince, lord, township, pavilion lord, lord, doctor, Shang Shu, Guan Nai Guo, 2,000 koku, doctor, chushiro, joe, roe, secretary supervisor, joe, roe, the prince's subordinate, wash horse, subordinate, prefectural governor, lord, yin, joe, down to the salary of 600 koku, with three, two, one cap beam as a distinction, the matter is found in the "Jin Ruling."

古文：武冠，侍臣加貂蝉，余军校武职、黄门、散骑、太子中庶子、二率、朝散、都尉，皆冠之。
现代文：武冠，侍卫大臣加饰貂蝉。其余的军校武职、黄门、散骑、太子中庶子、二率、朝散、都尉，都戴武冠。
English: The rest of the military schools, the Yellow Gate, the scattered cavalry, the prince's middle child, the second-in-command, the morning sun, and the captain, all wear the military crown.

古文：唯武骑虎贲服文衣，插雉尾于武冠上。
现代文：衹有武骑虎贲穿圃纹衣服，在武冠上插雉尾。
English: There is a warrior riding a tiger, wearing clothes with a grove pattern, and inserting an appendix in the warrior's crown.

古文：史臣曰：应劭《汉官》释附蝉，及司马彪志并不见侍中与常侍有异，唯言左右珥貂而已。
现代文：史臣曰：应劭《汉宫》解释附着的貂蝉，以及司马彪的《心》中都没有说侍中舆常侍的帽饰有差别，衹是说帽子左右装饰貂蝉罢了。
English: Shichen said: "The Han Palace" explains the attached boa constrictors, and Sima Biao's "Heart" does not say that there is a difference in the hat decoration of the attendants, but that the hat is decorated with boa constrictors on the left and right.

古文：案项氏说云 汉侍中蝉，刻为蝉像，常侍但为榼而不蝉 ，未详何代所改也。
现代文：据项氏说法是 汉代侍中帽子上的蝉饰，是刻成蝉的图像，常侍衹装饰瑺而不装饰蝉 ，不清楚是哪一个朝代改的。
English: According to Mr. Xiang, the cicada decoration on the hat of the Han Dynasty waiter is an image carved into a cicada, and the waiter often decorates the beak without decorating the cicada. It is not clear which dynasty changed it.

古文：法冠，廷尉等诸执法者冠之。
现代文：法冠，廷尉等各位执法官戴的帽子。
English: The crown of justice, the hat worn by the bailiffs, and so on.

古文：高山冠，谒者冠之。
现代文：高山冠，谒者戴的帽子。
English: Alpine crown, the cap worn by the deaf.

古文：樊哙冠，殿门卫士冠之。
现代文：樊啥冠，宫殿门口卫士戴的帽子。
English: The crown of thorns, the hat worn by the guard at the palace gate.

古文：黑介帻冠，文冠；平帻冠，武冠。
现代文：黑介帧冠，是文官的帽子；平帧冠，是武官的帽子。
English: The black-framed crown is the civil officer's hat; the flat-framed crown is the military officer's hat.

古文：尚书令、仆射、尚书纳言帻，后饰为异。
现代文：尚书令、仆射、尚书纳言戴帧，后来在装饰上有所区别。
English: Shang Shuling, Puxia and Shang Shunajian wore frames, and later there was a difference in decoration.

古文：童子空顶帻，施假髻，贵贱同服。
现代文：童子空顶愤，用假发髻，贵贱都可以戴。
English: The boy is empty-headed and angry, wearing a wig, which can be worn by both the rich and the poor.

古文：救日蚀，文武官皆免冠，著赤介帻对朝服。
现代文：发生日食进行救助时，文武官员都脱去帽子，戴红色介帧与官服相配红色介帧。
English: In the event of a solar eclipse, when rescuing, civil and military officials all take off their hats and wear red helmets to match their official uniforms.

古文：赤帻，示威武也。
现代文：是表示威武。
English: It means "mightiness."

古文：袴褶，车驾亲戎、中外纂严所服。
现代文：裤褶，天子御驾亲征、内外戒严时穿用。
English: The crotch of the trousers is worn when the emperor is on a personal crusade or when martial law is in effect.

古文：黑冠，帽缀紫褾，以络带代鞶带。
现代文：黑色帽子，连紫色帽边，用绳带代替大带。
English: A black hat with a purple brim and a rope belt instead of a big belt.

古文：中官紫褾，外官绛褾。
现代文：内官是紫色帽边，外官是绛色帽边。
English: The inner officer is a purple brim, and the outer officer is a navy brim.

古文：其纂严戎服不缀褾，行留悉同。
现代文：戒严和出征的服装不连边，行进和停驻时都相同。
English: The dress code for martial law and deployment is not uniform, and it is the same for both marching and stationed.

古文：校猎巡幸，从官戎服革带鞶带，文官不缨，武官脱冠。
现代文：天子阅兵、狩猎和巡行，随从官员穿军服用革带和大带，文官不用帽带，武官脱去帽子。
English: In military parades, hunting and parades, officials wear leather belts and large belts, civil servants do not wear cap belts, and military attaches do not wear caps.

古文：袿衤属大衣，谓之祎衣，皇后谒庙所服。
现代文：桂裯大衣，称作讳衣，皇后拜谒宗庙时穿用。
English: Guizhou embroidered overcoat, known as tabi, worn by the empress when visiting the Ancestral Temple.

古文：公主会见大首髻，其燕服则施严杂宝为佩瑞。
现代文：公主会见大首髻，其便服就装饰各种珠宝作为佩带的吉祥物。
English: The princess meets the big-headed dragonfly, whose casual clothes are decorated with various jewels as a mascot to wear.

古文：袿衤属用绣为衣，裳加五色，锁金银校饰。
现代文：桂裯是用刺绣制成上衣，下衣加各种颜色，装饰金银薄片。
English: Katsura is embroidered into tops, bottoms in various colors, and decorated with gold and silver flakes.

古文：绶，乘舆黄赤绶，黄赤缥绿绀五采。
现代文：绶带，天子是用黄色和红色，装饰黄、红、淡青、绿、天青五色。
English: The umbilical cord of the celestial son is yellow and red, decorated with yellow, red, light blue, green and sky blue.

古文：太子朱绶，诸王纁朱绶，皆赤黄缥绀四采。
现代文：太子是朱色绶带，各王是浅朱色绶带，都是装饰红、黄、淡青、天青四色。
English: The prince's sash is vermilion, and the kings' sashes are light vermilion. They are decorated with red, yellow, light blue, and sky blue.

古文：妃亦同。
现代文：妃也相同。
English: The same goes for the princess.

古文：相国绿綟绶，三采，绿紫绀。
现代文：相国是黑黄近绿色绶带，装饰绿、紫、天青三色。
English: The partner country is a black-yellow-near-green umbilical cord, decorated with green, purple and sky blue.

古文：郡公玄朱。侯伯青朱，子男素朱，皆三采。
现代文：郡公是黑、朱色，侯和伯是青、朱色，子和男是白、朱色，都是装饰三色。
English: Guigong is black and vermilion, Hou and Bo are blue and vermilion, and sons and men are white and vermilion, all of which are decorated with three colors.

古文：公世子紫，侯世子青，乡、亭、关内侯墨绶，皆二采。
现代文：公的嫡子是紫色，侯的嫡子是青色，乡、亭、关内侯是墨色绶带，都装饰二色。
English: The prince's heir is purple, the prince's heir is blue, and the townships, pavilions, and counties are ink ribbons, all decorated with two colors.

古文：郡国太守、内史青，尚书令、仆、中书监、令、秘书监皆黑，丞皆黄，诸府丞亦黄。
现代文：郡国太守、内史是青色，尚书令、仆射、中书监、令、秘书监，都是黑色，丞都是黄色，各府丞也是黄色。
English: The governor of the county and the history of the county are blue, the secretary, the secretary, the secretary, the secretary, the secretary, the secretary, the secretary, the secretary, the secretary, the secretary, the secretary, the secretary, the secretary, the secretary, the secretary, the secretary, the secretary, the secretary, the secretary, the secretary, the secretary, the secretary, the secretary, the secretary, the secretary, the secretary, the secretary, the secretary, the secretary, the secretary, the secretary, the secretary, the secretary, the secretary, the secretary.

古文：皇后与乘舆同赤，贵嫔、夫人、贵人紫，王太妃，长公主、封君亦紫绶，六宫青绶青白红，郡公、侯夫人青绶。
现代文：皇后和皇帝共用红色，贵嫔、夫人、贵人是紫色，王太妃、长公主、封君也是紫色绶带，六宫是青色绶带，用青白红色装饰，郡公、侯的夫人是青色绶带。
English: The empress and the emperor share red, and the noblemen, ladies, and dignitaries are purple, and the princess, the eldest princess, and the crown prince are also purple ribbons. The six palaces are blue ribbons, decorated with blue-white-red, and the county magistrate and the lord's wife are blue ribbons.

古文：乘舆传国玺，秦玺也。
现代文：皇帝沿用的国玺是秦朝的国玺。
English: The imperial scepter used by emperors was the scepter of the Qin Dynasty.

古文：晋中原乱，没胡。江左初无之，北方人呼晋家为 白板天子 。
现代文：晋时中原战乱沦落胡人之手，东晋起初没有国玺，北方人称东晋皇室为 白板天子 。
English: During the Jin Dynasty, the Central Plains fell into the hands of the Hu people. At first, the Eastern Jin Dynasty did not have a national seal. People in the north called the Eastern Jin Dynasty royal family the sons of the whiteboard.

古文：冉闵败，玺还南。
现代文：冉闵战败，国玺回到江南。
English: Ran Wei was defeated and Guo Wei returned to the south of the Yangtze River.

古文：别有行信等六玺，皆金为之，亦秦、汉之制也。
现代文：另外还有行信等六枚玺，都是用金制成的，也是秦、汉的制品。
English: In addition, there are six seals such as letters, which are made of gold and are also products of Qin and Han.

古文：皇后金玺，太子诸王金玺，皆龟钮。
现代文：皇后的金玺，太子和各王的金玺，都是龟形钮。
English: The queen's gold brooch, the prince's and the king's gold brooch, are all turtle-shaped buttons.

古文：公侯五等金章，公世子金印，侯银印，贵嫔、夫人金章，公主、王太妃、封君金印，六宫以下公侯太夫人夫人银印。
现代文：公侯等五级爵位用金章，公的嫡子用金印，侯的嫡子用银印，贵嫔、夫人用金章，公主、王太妃、封君用金印，六宫以下公侯太夫人、夫人用银印。
English: Five levels of nobility such as princes use gold seals, legitimate sons of princes use gold seals, legitimate sons of princes use silver seals, noblemen and ladies use gold seals, princesses, princesses, and princes use gold seals, and princesses and ladies below the sixth house use silver seals.

古文：其公、将军金章，光禄大夫、卿、尹、太子傅、诸领护将军、中郎将、校尉、郡国太守内史、四品五品将军，皆银章，尚书令、仆、中书监、令、秘书监丞、太子二率，诸府长史、卿、尹、丞、尉、中丞、都水使者、诸州刺史，皆铜印。
现代文：公、将军用金章，光禄大夫、卿、尹、太子傅、诸领护将军、中郎将、校尉、郡国太守内史、四品五品将军，都是用银章，尚书令、仆射、中书监、令、秘书监丞、太子二率、诸府长史、卿、尹、丞、尉、中丞、都水使者、各州刺史，都是用铜印。
English: The gold medallions for public officials and generals, the silver medallions for officials and generals, the bronze medallions for officials and generals, the gold medallions for officials and generals, the silver medallions for officials and generals, the silver medallions for officials and generals, the silver medallions for officials and generals, the silver medallions for officials and generals, the silver medallions for officials and generals, the silver medallions for officials and generals, the silver medallions for officials and generals, the silver medallions for officials and generals, the silver medallions for officials and generals, the silver medall

古文：三台五省二品文官，皆簪白笔。
现代文：三台五省的二品文官，都用白笔簪发。
English: The second-class civil servants in the three provinces and five prefectures all used white pens to write their names.

古文：王公五等及武官不簪，加内侍乃簪。
现代文：王公、五等爵以及武官不簪发，加内侍官才簪发。
English: Princes, fifth-ranked nobles, and military officers do not have to be ordained, but canonic chamberlains do.

古文：百官执手板，尚书令、仆、尚书，手板头复有白笔，以紫皮裹之，名曰 笏 。
现代文：百官持手板，尚书令、仆射、尚书，手板头上又有白笔，用紫皮裹着，名叫 笏 。
English: Hundreds of officials are holding pallets, inscribed, inscribed, inscribed, with a white pen on the top of the pallet, wrapped in purple leather, and called.

古文：汉末仲长统谓百司皆宜执之。
现代文：漠末仲垦铲认为百官都应当持着它。
English: He believes that all officials should carry it.

古文：其肩上紫袷囊，名曰 契囊 ，世呼为 紫荷 。
现代文：他们肩上的紫色夹层袋，名叫 契囊 ，世人称为 紫荷 。
English: On their shoulders is a purple laminated bag, called a "chihaku" (契囊), known to the world as a "shihaku" (紫荷).

古文：佩玉，自乘舆以下，与晋、宋制同。
现代文：佩玉，自皇帝以下，与置、塞的制度相同。
English: From the emperor on down, the system for placing and removing the jade is the same.

古文：建元四年，制王公侯卿尹珠水精，其余用牙蚌。
现代文：建五四年，确定王、公、侯、卿、尹佩戴珍珠、水晶，其余的人用象牙、蚌壳。
English: Built in 1954, it was decided that the king, prince, lord, lord, and Yin would wear pearls and crystal, while the rest of the people would wear ivory and oyster shells.

古文：太官宰人服离支衣，后定。
现代文：太官、宰人穿离支衣，是后来定的。
English: It was decided later that the vice-chancellors and vice-mayors would wear their jerkins.

古文：赞曰：文物煌煌，仪品穆穆。
现代文：赞曰：礼乐制度齐备，礼仪品级整肃。
English: Zang said: the etiquette system is complete, and the etiquette level has been rectified.

古文：分别礼数，莫过舆服。
现代文：区分礼数，没有超过舆服制度的。
English: Distinguish the number of salutes, without exceeding the public dress system.

