古文：二十二日，由北城外历凤凰山北麓，经北门，二里，过黄备桥。
现代文：二十二日由北城外顺凤凰山北麓而行，经过北门，走二里，越过黄备桥。
English: On the 22nd, I walked from outside the northern city along the northern foot of Fenghuang Mountain, passed the north gate, walked two miles, and crossed the Huang Bei Bridge.

古文：桥架曹溪之上。
现代文：往西北行十里，溯一条溪流到了元口。
English: Travel northwest for ten miles and follow a stream to the mouth of the river.

古文：西北行十里，溯溪至元口。又五里至官庄前，西南渡溪，又十里至陈坊。北渡小木桥，为曹山寺道。
现代文：又走五里到官庄前，往西南渡过溪流，又走十里到陈坊 从陈坊往北越过小木桥，是去曹山寺的路。
English: Another five miles to Guanzhuang, to the southwest across the stream, and another ten miles to Chenfang. From Chenfang to the north across the small wooden bridge, is the road to Caoshan Temple.

古文：遂令顾仆同担夫西至乐安之流坑，余与静闻携被襆，渡桥沿小溪入。
现代文：于是叫顾仆同担夫往西先到乐安县的流坑等候，我和静闻携带着被袋，越过桥沿小溪进去。
English: So I told Gu and the porter to go west and wait at the sinkhole in Le'an County. Jingwen and I carried the quilts and crossed the bridge along the creek.

古文：五里，为狮子口。
现代文：走五里，为狮子口。
English: Walk five miles and you will reach the lion's mouth.

古文：由回龙洞而入山隘，即曹山也。
现代文：由回龙洞进人山隘中，就是曹山。
English: Caoshan is in the middle of the mountain pass from Huilongdong.

古文：其内环峰凹辟，平畴一围，地圆整如砥，山环绕如城，水流其间。
现代文：山里峰峦回环，中间凹陷，形成一块平地，平地圆而齐整，如同磨刀石，山峰环绕在周围好似一道城墙，水流淌在其间。
English: The peaks of the mountains are intertwined, with a depression in the middle, forming a flat land. The flat land is round and even, like a grindstone. The peaks surround the area like a city wall, with water flowing between them.

古文：自回龙口而南下陈坊，又东下宜黄，交锁曲折，亦此中一洞天，为丹霞、麻姑之类也。
现代文：从回龙洞口往南下到陈坊，又东下宜黄县城，交错盘结，也别有洞天，如同丹霞山、麻姑山一样。
English: From the mouth of Huilong Cave to the south to Chenfang, and then to the east to Yiguang County, there is a staggered winding, and there is no cave sky, just like Danxia Mountain and Magu Mountain.

古文：初以何王二氏名何王山，后加 草 、加 点 ，名荷玉山。
现代文：最初因为何、王两姓居住在此地而叫何王山，后分别加了 草 字头和丫点，名叫荷玉山。
English: At first, it was called He Wang Mountain because the two surnames He and Wang lived in this place. Later, they added the Chinese characters "草" and "丫点" respectively, and named it Ho Yu Mountain.

古文：唐本寂禅师礼曹溪回，始易名曹山。宋赐额宝积寺，毁于嘉靖丙戌公元年，基田俱属缙绅。
现代文：唐代本寂禅师到曹溪礼拜回来后，才改名为曹山，宋朝赐给 宝积寺 的匾额，明嘉靖丙戌年被毁坏，寺基和田产都转属官宦。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, it was only after the Zen master Benjak came back from praying in Caoxi that the temple was renamed Caoshan. The Song Dynasty gave the temple the title of Baojie Temple, but it was destroyed in the Ming Jiajing Rebellion, and the temple grounds and farmland were turned over to the government.

古文：兹有名僧曰观心，将兴复焉。
现代文：现有个名僧叫观心，打算兴复寺庙。
English: There is now a famous monk called Guanshin, who plans to restore the temple.

古文：观心，宜黄人，向驻锡丰城，通儒释之渊微发生及发展，兼诗文之玄著。
现代文：观心是宜黄人，以前住留在丰城县，精通儒佛两家的高深义理，又懂得诗词文章的奥妙。
English: Guanzhong is a Yihuang person. He used to live in Fengcheng County. He is well versed in the profound teachings of both Confucianism and Buddhism, and understands the mysteries of poetry.

古文：余一至，即有针芥之合指性情契合，设供篝灯，谈至丙夜，犹不肯就寝，曰： 恨相见之晚也。 
现代文：我一到曹山，就与他性情契合，晚上他准备了夜点，挑灯与我长谈到三更，还不肯就寝，他说： 遗憾的是我俩相见太晚了。 
English: As soon as I arrived at Caoshan, I fit in with his temperament. In the evening, he prepared for the night, lit a lamp and talked with me for a long time about the three changes, but he refused to go to bed. He said: Unfortunately, we met too late.

古文：先是，余午至，留饭后即谓余曰： 知君志在烟霞，此中尚有异境，曹山旧迹，不足观也。 
现代文：这之前，我中午到达时，他留我们吃饭后就对我说： 我知道您的志向在于游历烟云霞雨、名山胜水，这地方还有风景更奇异的境地，曹山的旧时遗迹，不值得观览。 
English: Before that, when I arrived at noon, after he left us to eat, he said to me: I know that your ambition is to travel through clouds and rain, famous mountains and rivers, this place also has a more bizarre landscape, the ancient ruins of Caoshan, not worth watching.

古文：二十三日，早闻雨声。
现代文：二十三日清早听到雨声。
English: In the early morning of the 23rd, the sound of rain was heard.

古文：饭而别观心，出曹山，而雨丝丝下。
现代文：饭后辞别观心，走出曹山，丝丝细雨不停地下着。
English: After dinner, I left the observation center and walked out of Caoshan. It was drizzling.

古文：三里至陈坊木桥，仍西从大道。
现代文：走三里到陈坊木桥，仍旧往西顺大路行。
English: Walk three miles to Chenfang Muxiao, still go to Xishun Road.

古文：溯溪二里，过鹏风桥。
现代文：溯溪走二里，越过鹏风桥。
English: Follow the stream for two miles and cross the Pengfeng Bridge.

古文：溪南自山来，路西折逾小岭。
现代文：溪从南面山中流来，路折往西翻越一座小山岭。
English: The stream flows from the mountains in the south and winds its way west over a small ridge.

古文：又三里，复西渡溪之上流，曰接龙桥。
现代文：又走三里，又往西越过那条溪水的上游，溪上的桥叫接龙桥。
English: I walked another three miles and crossed the upper reaches of the stream to the west. The bridge over the stream is called the Dragon Bridge.

古文：盖溪自曹山后岭北山峡而来，南下而转至鹏风桥者，此流尚细，而宜黄、崇仁之界，因逾接龙桥而西，即为崇之东南境。
现代文：此溪大概就是从曹山后边山岭北面的山峡中流出来，南下折到鹏风桥的那条，此处水流还细小，但它是宜黄县和崇仁县的分界，于是跨过接龙桥往西，就是崇仁县的东南境了。
English: This stream probably flows out of the gorge in the north of the mountains behind Mount Cao, and turns south to the Pengfeng Bridge. The water flow here is still small, but it is the boundary between Yihuang County and Chongren County, so it crosses the Dragon Bridge to the west, which is the southeast border of Chongren County.

古文：从此入山共三里，逾大霍岭，直逼龙骨山下。
现代文：从这里进入山中共三里，越过大霍岭，直逼龙骨山下。
English: From here, it is a total of three miles to enter the mountain, crossing the Daholing and reaching the bottom of the Keel Mountain.

古文：又二里，逾骨岭，水犹东注。
现代文：又走二里，翻过龙骨岭，水仍然流往东。
English: After walking another two miles and turning over the keel ridge, the water still flowed to the east.

古文：又三里，下幞头岭，水始西流。
现代文：又走三里，下了蹼头岭，水才往西流。
English: After walking another three miles and descending Shantouling, the water flowed westward.

古文：又四里至纯乡，则一溪自南而北矣。
现代文：又走四里到纯乡，见一条溪水从南往北流来。
English: I walked another four miles to Chunxiang and saw a stream flowing from south to north.

古文：渡溪桥是为纯乡村，有居民颇众。
现代文：越过溪上的桥就是纯乡村，村中居民很多。
English: The bridge over the stream is pure countryside, and there are many residents in the village.

古文：随水西二里，北下为崇仁道。
现代文：沿溪水西行二里，往北下去是到崇仁县城的路。
English: Go west along the stream for two miles, and go north to the town of Chongren.

古文：南循小水一里，西登干冈岭，岭颇峻，逾岭而下，纯西南行矣。
现代文：向南顺一条小水走一里，往西登上干冈岭，此岭很峻峭，越岭而下，就是一直向西南方向行了。
English: Walk south along a small stream for one mile, and go west to climb Kankang Ridge. This ridge is very steep, and if you go down over the ridge, you will go all the way to the southwest.

古文：十里，至廖庄桥，有溪自南而北，其大与纯乡之溪并，东北流，当与纯溪同下崇仁者也。
现代文：走十里，到廖庄桥，有条溪水自南往北流，大处和纯乡的那条一样，它往东北流去，应当是和纯溪一同流下崇仁县去的。
English: Walking ten miles to Liaozhuang Bridge, there is a stream flowing from south to north, much like the one in Chunxiang, it flows to the northeast, and should have flowed down to Chongren County with Chunxiang.

古文：又西五里，过练树桥，桥跨巴溪之上。
现代文：又往西五里，跨过练树桥，桥横架在巴溪上。
English: Another five miles to the west, across the Jianshu Bridge, the bridge is built across the Ba Creek.

古文：又西过坳上，盖南来之脉北过相山者也。
现代文：又往西经过坳上，它大概是南来的山脉往北延伸到相山间的地方。
English: Further west, it passes through the 上, which is probably a place where the mountains from the south extend northward to the middle of the mountains.

古文：其东水下练树桥为小巴溪，西水下双溪桥为大巴溪，俱合于罕浒，北即峙为相山，高峙朱碧街之北。
现代文：山坳东面的水流下练树桥后为小巴溪，西面的水流下双溪桥后为大巴溪，它们汇合在罕浒，山坳北面就耸起为相山，它高耸在朱碧街北边。
English: Xiaobaxi Creek flows under the Lianshu Bridge on the east side of the hawthorn, and the Daba Creek flows under the Shuangxi Bridge on the west side. They converge in Hankou, and the north side of the hawthorn rises as the Lianshan, which towers on the north side of Zhubi Street.

古文：再西即为芙蓉山。
现代文：再往西就是芙蓉山。
English: Further west is Mount Hibiscus.

古文：芙蓉尖峭而相山屏列，俱崇仁西南之巨擘也。
现代文：芙容山尖峭而相山如屏障横列，它们都是崇仁县西南境的大山。
English: Furong Mountain is steep, and the adjacent mountains are lined up like a barrier. They are all large mountains in the southwest border of Chongren County.

古文：自练树桥又五里而至朱碧街。
现代文：从练树桥又走五里为朱碧街。
English: From Lianshu Bridge, it's another five miles to Zhu Bi Street.

古文：其地在崇仁南百余里，南五十里为大华山，西南三十里为乐安县。
现代文：此地在崇仁县城南边一百多里，南边五十里为大华山，西南边三十里为乐安县城。
English: It is located more than 100 miles south of Chongren County, 50 miles south of Mount Dahua, and 30 miles southwest of Le'an County.

古文：二十四日，昧爽黎明，从朱碧西南行，月正中天。
现代文：二十四日黎明时，从朱碧街往西南行，明月当空。
English: At dawn on the twenty-fourth day, from Zhu Bi Street to the southwest, the bright moon was in the sky.

古文：二里为双溪桥。
现代文：走二里为双溪桥。
English: Walk two miles to Shuangxi Bridge.

古文：二小溪，一自东北，一自西北，俱会于桥北，透桥东南去。
现代文：有两条小溪，一条从东北来，一条从西北来，汇合在桥北面，穿过桥往东南流备路从桥西南走。
English: There are two streams, one from the northeast and one from the northwest, which meet on the north side of the bridge and flow southeast across the bridge.

古文：路从西南，又一里为玄坛庙桥。
现代文：又行一里为玄坛庙桥。
English: Another mile to go for the Temple Bridge.

古文：其水自西而东，乃芙蓉西南之流，当亦东会双溪而下罕浒入巴溪者也。
现代文：桥下的水自西往东流，它是芙容山西南面的水，应当也是流往东汇合双溪而流下罕浒注入巴溪的水流。
English: The water under the bridge flows from west to east. It is the water from the southwest of Mount Furong. It should also be the water that flows to the east from the confluence of the two streams and flows down the Han River into the Ba River.

古文：过溪南一里，越雷公岭，有溪自南而西北去。
现代文：镀过溪往南一里，翻越雷公岭，有条溪水从南往西北流去。
English: Plating the stream to the south one mile, over the Lei Gongling, there is a stream flowing from south to northwest.

古文：下岭即东南溯溪，一里为雷公场，又南三里为深坑。
现代文：下了岭便溯溪往东南走，一里为雷公场，又往南三里为深坑。
English: After descending the ridge, I followed the creek to the southeast, one mile to Lei Gongyuan, and three miles to the south to Shenkeng.

古文：又东南二里为石脑，上有桥曰崑ǖ阳桥。
现代文：又往东南走二里为石脑，石脑上面有座桥叫昆阳桥。
English: Another two miles to the southeast is the crag, on which there is a bridge called Kunyang Bridge.

古文：又南三里曰双湛桥，又二里曰赵桥，又五里曰横冈，又五里越一岭，曰赵公岭。
现代文：又往南走三里叫双湛桥，又走二里叫赵桥，又走五里叫横冈，又走五里翻越一座山岭，那岭叫赵公岭。
English: Another three miles south called Shuangzhan Bridge, another two miles called Zhao Bridge, another five miles called Yokang, another five miles over a mountain ridge, that ridge called Zhao Gongling.

古文：自石脑来十五里，其岭坦而长，盖东自华盖山度脊，而西经乐安，而北转进贤，为江西省城之脉者也。
现代文：从石脑过来的十五里中，山岭平坦而且长，岭脊大概从东面的华盖山越过来，往西经过乐安县，又往北折入进贤县，成为江西省城主山脉。
English: In the fifteen miles from Shih Niu, the mountains are flat and long. The ridge probably comes from the east of Mount Huagai, passes through Le'an County to the west, and turns north into Jinsian County, becoming the main mountain range of Jiangxi Province.

古文：岭北水绕雷公而西北下崇仁，岭南水由大陂而下永丰、吉水者也。
现代文：岭北的水绕过雷公岭往西北流下崇仁县，岭南的水从大破流下永丰、吉安两县。
English: The water in the north of Ling bypassed Lei Gongling and flowed northwest down to Chongren County, while the water in the south of Ling flowed down from Dagu to Yongfeng and Ji'an counties.

古文：下岭，山隘渐辟，其内坞曰白麻插，水虽西流乐安、永丰，而地犹属崇仁；其外冈曰崇仁仙观，则乐安之界也。
现代文：走下岭，山隘逐渐开阔，山隘中的山坞叫白麻插，坞中的水虽往西流入乐安县和永丰县，但地仍隶属崇仁县；山隘外的山冈叫崇仁仙观，它是乐安县的县界。
English: Walking down the ridge, the mountain pass gradually opens up. The dock in the mountain pass is called Bai Ma Jie. Although the water in the dock flows westward into Le'an County and Yongfeng County, it is still part of Chongren County. The mountain pass outside the mountain pass is called Chongren Senkan, which is the county border of Le'an County.

古文：由白麻插循左山东南行，三里至大坪墅，转而东向入山。
现代文：从白麻插顺左边的山往东南走，三里到大坪墅，然后折往东进入山中。
English: Walk southeast from the mountain on the left side of the white aspen, walk three miles to the Daping Villa, and then turn east into the mountains.

古文：又二里，东至一天门，有涧西注石桥下，从此遂蹑级上登。
现代文：又走二里，往东到达一天门，有条山涧水向西注入一座石桥下，从此处起便踏着石级往上登。
English: He walked another two miles, eastward to the Yicheng Gate, where a mountain stream flowed westward under a stone bridge. From there, he climbed up the stone steps.

古文：一里至旧一天门，有二小溪，一自东南，一自东北，合于石屋之上。
现代文：爬一里到达旧一天门，有两条小溪，一条从东南流来，一条从东北流来，汇合在石屋子上边。
English: There are two streams, one flowing from the southeast and one from the northeast, which converge at the top of the stone house.

古文：从此俱峻坂悬级。
现代文：从此处起都是在陡峻的山坡上悬置石瞪。
English: From this point on, the stones are suspended on a steep hillside.

古文：又七里至二天门，逐两度过脊之坂，俱狭若堵墙。
现代文：又攀七里到二天门，于是两次越过山脊穿越过去的山坡，那山坡都窄得如一堵墙。
English: Another seven-mile climb to Futianmen, so twice over the ridge through the past hillside, the hillside is as narrow as a wall.

古文：于是东北绕三峰之阴北，共七里而登华盖之顶，谒三仙焉。
现代文：过山坡后往东北绕着三座山峰的北面而行，共七里登上山顶，在山顶拜渴了三仙的像。
English: After crossing the mountain slope, they walked around the north face of the three peaks in the northeast, climbing a total of seven miles to the top of the mountain, where they worshipped the image of the Three Immortals.

古文：盖华盖三峰并列，而中峰稍逊，西为着棋，东为华盖。
现代文：华盖山三座山峰并列，中间那座稍低，西面为着棋峰，东面为华盖峰。
English: The three peaks of Mount Huagai are side by side, the middle one is slightly lower, the west side is the peak of Ji, and the east side is the peak of Huagai.

古文：路由西峰而登，其阳南甚削，故取道于阴。
现代文：上山顶的路从西面那座山峰攀登，它的南面很陡，所以我们取道北面。
English: The road to the top of the mountain climbs from the peak in the west. The south face of the mountain is very steep, so we took the north face.

古文：华盖之上，诸道房如峰窝驾空，簇绕仙殿，旁无余地，无可眺舒。
现代文：华盖峰上，众多道士住的小屋如同蜂窝架在空中，簇绕着仙殿，旁边无空地，没办法舒心地远眺。
English: On Huagai Peak, the huts where many Taoists live stand like honeycombs in the air, clustered around the Hall of Immortals. There is no open space next to them, and it is not possible to look far away comfortably.

古文：饭于道士陈云所房，亟登着棋，四眺形胜。
现代文：在道士陈云所的房中吃了饭，便赶忙登上着棋峰，四下眺望周围山川胜迹。
English: After eating in the room of the Taoist Chen Yun, he hurriedly climbed the chess peak and looked around at the surrounding mountains and rivers.

古文：其北正与相山对，而西南则中华山欲与颉颃下，东与南俱有崇嶂，而道士不能名，然皆不能与华盖抗也。
现代文：它北面与相山对着，西南面则像是要和中华山抗衡，东面与南面都有高峻的屏障似的山峰，道士不能说出它们的名称，但它们都不能与华盖山比高低。
English: To the north, it faces the same mountain, and to the southwest, it seems to compete with Mount Zhonghua. To the east and south, there are steep barrier-like peaks. Taoists can't name them, but they can't compare with Mount Huagai.

古文：其山在崇仁南百二十里，东去宜黄亦百二十里，西去乐安止三十里，东南至宁都则二百余里焉。
现代文：此山在崇仁县南一百二十里，东面距宜黄县也是一百二十里，西面离乐安县只有三十里，往西南去一百里到永丰县，往东南到宁都县却有二百多里。
English: This mountain is one hundred and twenty miles south of Chongren County, one hundred and twenty miles east of Yiguang County, only thirty miles west of Le'an County, one hundred miles southwest of Yongfeng County, and more than two hundred miles southeast of Ningdu County.

古文：余自建昌，宜取道磁龟，则直西而至；自宜黄，宜取道石蛩从云封寺，亦直西而至；今由朱碧，则迂而北，环而西，转而东向入山，然取道虽迂五十里，而得北游曹山洞石，亦不为恨也。
现代文：我从建昌府来，应取道磁龟，那就可以直往西到达此处；从宜黄县城来，应取道石蛰从云封寺走，也可以直往西到达这里；现由朱碧街走，则折往北面，绕往西面，才转往东进入山中，然而所走道路虽然绕了五十里，但能够往北游览曹山的洞穴峰石，也不算遗憾。
English: When I came from Jianchangfu, I should take the magnetic turtle road, then I can go straight to the west to get here; when I came from the city of Yiwu County, I should take the stone path from Yunfeng Temple, and I can also go straight to the west to get here; now, when I walked from Zhubi Street, I turned to the north, went around to the west, and then turned to the east to enter the mountain. However, although the road I took went around fifty miles, it was not a pity to be able to go north to visit Cao Shan's cave peak stone.

古文：下山十五里，至三天门，渡石桥而南，遂西南向落日趋。
现代文：朝山下走十五里，到三天门，越过石桥往南，便向西南朝着落日的方向急奔。
English: After walking fifteen miles down the mountain, I reached Sanmenmen Gate, crossed the stone bridge to the south, and rushed southwest toward the setting sun.

古文：五里过崇仙观。
现代文：五里经过崇仙观。
English: After five miles, I reached the top of the mountain.

古文：又三里越韬岭，是为乐安界。
现代文：又走三里翻过韬岭，那里是乐安县界。
English: I walked another three miles and crossed the Fuling, which is the border of Le'an County.

古文：又西南三里，渡一溪桥。
现代文：又往西南走三里，越过溪上的一座桥。
English: Another three miles to the southwest, over a bridge over the creek.

古文：又四里，溪西转出大陂，溪中乱石平铺，千横万叠，水碎飞活转，如冰花玉屑。
现代文：又走四里，溪流向西绕出大破，溪中乱石平铺，千横万叠，溪水碎飞活转，如冰花玉屑。
English: After walking another four miles, the stream to the west broke into large pieces. There were thousands of stones piled up in the stream, and the broken water flew around like shards of ice.

古文：时日已暮，遂宿大陂。
现代文：当时已经傍晚，于是投宿在大破。
English: At that time it was already late afternoon, so we stayed in Dabara.

古文：二十五日，是日为冬至，早寒殊甚，日出始行。
现代文：二十五日这天是冬至，早晨异常寒冷，太阳出来后才出发。
English: It was the winter solstice on the 25th. The morning was unusually cold, and we didn't set out until the sun came up.

古文：西南五里为药腊。
现代文：往西南走五里为药腊。
English: It is five miles to the southwest.

古文：又五里为曾田，其处村居甚盛，而曾氏为最，家庙祀宗圣公孔子之弟子曾参。
现代文：又走五里为曾田，那里村庄中居民很多，而姓曾的最多，曾氏祖庙中祭祀宗圣公曾参。
English: They also walked five miles to Zengda, where there are many residents in the village, and the surname Zeng is the most common. Zeng's ancestral temple is dedicated to the patriarch Zeng San.

古文：从此转而南，渡溪入山，乃中华山之西北麓支山也。
现代文：从曾田转往南，渡过溪水进入山中，那山是中华山西北麓的一个分支。
English: From Zengda, turn south, cross the stream and enter the mountain, which is a branch of the northwest foot of Mount Zhonghua.

古文：中华在华盖西南三十里，从药腊来循其阴西行，至是乃越而转其西北。
现代文：中华山在华盖山西南三十里，从药腊来顺着它的北面往西行，到这里才越过山转到它的西北面。
English: Zhonghuashan is 30 miles southwest of Huagai Mountain. From Yulin, it follows the north face of the mountain to the west, and only here does it cross the mountain to its northwest face.

古文：又三里为馒头山，见溪边横石临流，因与静闻箕踞其上，不知溪流之即穿其下也。
现代文：又走三里为馒头山，见溪边横卧着的石头下临水流，于是和静闻屈膝张足坐到那石头上爹但不知道溪流就是从石头下面穿出去的。
English: After walking another three miles to Shantou Mountain, he saw a stream under a stone lying on the edge of the stream, so he and Jing Huan knelt down and sat on the stone, but he did not know that the stream was coming out from under the stone.

古文：及起而行，回顾溪流正透石而出，始知其为架壑之石也。
现代文：等起身出发，回头见溪流正好穿过石头流出来，才知石头是横架在沟谷上的。
English: When I got up and set off, I looked back and saw that the stream was flowing right through the stone, only to find out that the stone was placed horizontally over the ravine.

古文：余之从乐安道，初览其《志》，知其城西四十里有天生石梁，其侧有石转运，故欣然欲往；至是路已南，不及西向，以为与石桥无缘；而不意复得此石，虽溪小石低，已见 天生 一斑。
现代文：我之所以从乐安县走，是因开初阅览县志时，得知县城西面四十里有座天生石桥，它侧面有块石头循环旋转，所以欣然想前往观看；到这里路已走朝南面，未能向西走，以为与石桥无缘了，而未想到又见着此石，虽溪流细小石头低矮，但已见到 天生 桥的一斑。
English: The reason why I walked from Le'an County was that when I read the county record for the first time, I learned that there was a natural stone bridge in the west of the county seat, and there was a stone rotating on its side, so I gladly wanted to go and see it. At this point, the road had gone south and I couldn't go west, thinking that I couldn't get to the stone bridge, but I didn't expect to see this stone again. Although the stream was low with small stones, I had already seen a sign of the natural bridge.

古文：且其东北亦有石悬竖道旁，上如卓锥，下细若茎，恐亦石桥转运之类矣。
现代文：而且它东北面也有块石头悬立在路旁，上部如直立的锥子，下部纤细若茎杆，恐怕也和那石桥侧边循环旋转的石头是一类。
English: Moreover, there is also a stone on the northeast side of it that hangs on the side of the road. The upper part is like an upright cone, and the lower part is thin like a stem. I am afraid that it is also a kind of stone that rotates on the side of the stone bridge.

古文：又南一里为黄汉。
现代文：又往南一里为黄漠。
English: Another mile to the south is the Yellow Desert.

古文：又南逾一小岭，一里是为简上，为中华之西南谷矣。
现代文：又往南越过一座小岭，走一里为简上，这里已是中华山的西南山谷。
English: Further south, we crossed a small ridge, and after walking for a mile, we reached the top of the ridge. This was the southwest valley of Mount Zhonghua.

古文：从此婉转山坑，渐次而登，五里，上荷树岭，上有瞻云亭。
现代文：从此处起曲折地从山谷中绕行，逐渐往上攀登，五里上到荷树岭，岭上有个瞻云亭。
English: From here, we zigzagged around the valley and gradually climbed up, five miles up to the Hazel Ridge, where there is a Junyun Pavilion.

古文：盖岭之东北为中华，岭之西南为雪华，此其过脉之脊云。
现代文：大概此岭的东北为中华山，西南为雪华山，此处是两山的山脉经过的山脊。
English: Presumably, the northeast of this ridge is Mount Zhonghua, and the southwest is Mount Xuehua. Here is the ridge through which the two mountains pass.

古文：逾岭南下二里，至坑底，有小溪，一自东北，一自西北，会而南。
现代文：越过岭往南下行二里，到达谷底，有两条小溪，一条从东北来，一条从西北来，汇合后流往南。
English: Cross the ridge and go south for two miles, reaching the bottom of the valley. There are two streams, one from the northeast and one from the northwest, which flow south after merging.

古文：三里，出源里桥。又三里则大溪自东而西，渡长木桥至溪南，是为流坑。
现代文：走三里，出了源里桥 又走三里，有条大溪自东往西流，跨过溪上的长木桥到了南岸，为流坑。
English: Walk three miles, out of the source bridge, walk another three miles, there is a large stream flowing from east to west, across the long wooden bridge on the stream to the south bank, as a sinkhole.

古文：其处阛闠纵横，是为万家之市，而董氏为，巨姓，有五桂坊焉。
现代文：此处街市纵横，是个有万家居民的市镇，其中董姓是大姓，市镇中有个五桂坊。
English: The streets and markets here are vertical and horizontal, and it is a town with ten thousand residents. Among them, the surname Dong is the eldest surname, and there is a Wuguifang in the town.

古文：大溪之水东五十里自郎岭而来，又东过大树岭，为宁都界，合太华、中华东南之水至此，西八里至乌江，又合黄漠之水南下永丰焉。
现代文：大溪从东面五十里的郎岭流来，又流过东面的大树岭，成为宁都县界，然后汇合太华山、中华山东南面的水流到此，向西流八里到乌江，又汇合黄漠的水向南流下永丰县。
English: The Daxi River flows from Langling, 50 miles to the east, and flows through Dashu Ridge on the east to become the Ningdu County boundary. Then, the water flowing from the southeast of Mount Taihua and Mount Zhonghua converges here, flowing westward for eight miles to the Wujiang River, and the water from the Yellow Desert converges to flow southward to Yongfeng County.

古文：是日午至流坑，水涸无舟，又西八里，宿于乌江溪南之茶园。
现代文：这天中午到流坑时，溪中水流干涸没有船只，又往西行八里，投宿在乌江溪南面的茶园。
English: At noon on this day, when they arrived at the sinkhole, the water in the stream had dried up and there were no boats. They went eight miles west and stayed at a tea garden on the south side of Wujiang Creek.

古文：二十六日，因候舟停逆旅。
现代文：二十六日因等候船只停在旅店中。
English: On the 26th, they stopped at a hotel to wait for a boat.

古文：急索饭，即渡溪桥北上会仙峰。
现代文：急忙搞饭吃后，就越过溪上的桥往北攀上会仙峰。
English: After a quick meal, we crossed the bridge over the stream and climbed northward to the summit of Huaixianfeng.

古文：其峰在大溪之北，黄漠溪之西，盖两溪交会，而是山独峙其下流，与雪华山东西夹黄漠溪入大溪之口者也。
现代文：此峰在大溪的北面、黄漠溪的西面，两条溪流交汇，它耸立在汇流处的下游，与雪华山夹峙在黄漠溪汇入大溪处的东西两边。
English: This peak is located on the north side of the Daxi River and the west side of the Yellow Desert Creek. The two streams meet at the confluence. It stands in the lower reaches of the confluence, and is sandwiched between Mount Xuehua on the east and west sides of the confluence of the Yellow Desert Creek and the Daxi.

古文：峰高耸突兀倍于雪华，而阳多石骨嶙峋，于此中独为峻拔。
现代文：会仙峰高耸突兀，超过雪华山一倍，南面多石骨嶙峋，在这里是最峻峭挺拔的。
English: Xianfeng is towering and jagged, more than twice as high as Mount Xuehua. To the south, there are many stone skeletons, and here is the steepest and most vertical.

古文：其西南则豁然，溪流放注永丰之境也。
现代文：山峰的西南面却很开阔，溪流通畅地奔流入永丰县境。
English: However, the southwest face of the peak is very open, and the stream flows smoothly into Yongfeng County.

古文：由溪北从东小径西上，五里而至会仙峰。
现代文：由溪北岸从峰东面的小路往西上去，五里便到会仙峰。
English: From the north bank of the stream, take the path on the east side of the peak to the west, and after five miles you will reach Xianfeng.

古文：按《志》止有仙女峰，在乐安南六十里，而今土人讹为会仙云；然其为三仙之迹则无异矣。
现代文：按志书记载，只有座仙女峰，在乐安县南面六十里，如今当地人误为会仙峰；然而它是保存有三仙遗迹之地的说法却是一样的。
English: According to historical records, there is only one Fairy Peak, sixty miles south of Le'an County. Nowadays, local people mistake it for the Fairy Peak; however, the saying that it is a place to preserve the relics of the Three Immortals is the same.

古文：是峰孤悬，四眺无所不见。
现代文：此峰孤峰高悬，四处眺望无所不见。
English: This isolated peak is so high that you can see it from all directions.

古文：老僧董怀莪为余言： 北四十里为乐安，西南六十里为永丰，直西为新淦，直东为宁都。
现代文：老僧董怀获对我说： 它北面四十里为乐安县，西南面六十里为永丰县，正西边为新淦县，正东边为宁都县。
English: The old monk Dong Huaiwu said to me: It is forty miles north of Le'an County, sixty miles southwest of Yongfeng County, due west of Xinyi County, and due east of Ningdu County.

古文：其东北最远者为太华山，其次为中华，又次为雪华，三华俱在东北。
现代文：它东北面最远的是太华山，其次为中华山，最近的是雪华山、三华山，都在东北面。
English: The farthest to the northeast is Mount Taihua, followed by Mount Zhonghua, and the closest are Mount Xuehua and Mount Sanhua, all in the northeast.

古文：而乐安之北有西华，兀立云雾之间，为江省过脉，尖拔特甚，盖从太华西北渡赵公岭而特起者也。 
现代文：而乐安县北面有座西华山，兀立在云雾间，为江西省山脉经过的地方，特别尖峭挺拔，大概是从太华山西北越过赵公岭而特起的一座山。 
English: In the north of Le'an County, there is a West Huashan Mountain, standing between the clouds and fog. It is a place where the mountains of Jiangxi Province pass by. It is particularly sharp and tall. It is probably a mountain that rises from the northwest of Taihuashan across Zhao Gongling.

古文：由会仙而上，更西北一里，其石巑岏锐峻，上多鹃花红艳，不甚高，亦冬时一异也。
现代文：从会仙峰往上，再往西北走一里，山间石头高大尖峭，并生长着许多正开得红艳的杜鹃花，但不很高，这也是寒冬时节的一个奇异景观了。
English: One mile up from the Xianfeng Peak and then to the northwest, the mountain stones are tall and sharp, and there are many bright red rhododendrons growing, but not very high, which is also a strange landscape in the cold winter season.

古文：由会仙南面石磴而下，至山半甫有石泉一泓，由其山峭拔无水泉，故山下之溪亦多涸辙耳。
现代文：从会仙峰南面的石瞪往下走，到半山中石头间才有一汪泉水，因此山高峻挺拔没有流水潭泉，所以山下的溪流也多是干涸见底的。
English: If you walk down from the rocks on the south side of Huixian Peak, there is only a little spring water between the rocks in the middle of the mountain. Therefore, there is no flowing spring in the high and steep mountain, so the streams under the mountain are mostly dry.

古文：下山五里，至溪旁，其南即为牛田，水南，其北为乌江，其东为茶园，余所停屐处也。
现代文：下山五里，到溪岸边，南面就是牛田、水南，北面为乌江，东面是茶园，即我们停留住宿的地方。
English: Five miles down the mountain, to the bank of the stream, the south is the cow field, the water south, the north is the Wujiang River, and the east is the tea garden, that is, the place where we stay.

古文：午返，舟犹不行，遂止宿焉。二十七日，乌江，三十里，丰陂宿。
现代文：我从常山县来，所经县城无不通船，只有金期、乐安两县，通船的水流都在县城外四五十里的地方。二十七日船从乌江出发，行三十里，到丰破住宿。
English: When I came from Changshan County, all the counties and cities I passed through were accessible by boat. Only two counties, Jincai and Le'an, were accessible by boat, and the water flow was in a place forty or fifty miles outside the county. On the 27th, the boat departed from Wujiang, traveled thirty miles, and went to Fengbai for accommodation.

古文：二十八日，十里，将军。
现代文：二十八日行十里，到将军村。
English: On the 28th, I walked ten miles to the General's Village.

古文：二十里，永丰宿。
现代文：又行二十里，到永丰县城住宿。
English: Another twenty miles to Yongfeng County to stay.

古文：二十九日，自永丰西南五里放舟，又三十五里北郊。
现代文：二十九日从永丰县城西南五里处开船，又行三十五里到北郊。
English: On the 29th, the boat left Yongfeng County five miles southwest of the city and traveled another thirty-five miles to the northern suburbs.

古文：吉水界。二十五里，亦名乌江。
现代文：又行二十五里，也叫乌江。
English: Another twenty-five miles, also called Wujiang.

古文：又十里，下黄宿。
现代文：再行十里，到下黄住宿。
English: Travel another ten miles to Shih Huang for accommodation.

古文：三十日，早行。
现代文：三十日清早出发。
English: We set off early in the morning on the 30th.

古文：二十里，凤凰桥。
现代文：行二十里，到凤凰桥。
English: Twenty miles to Phoenix Bridge.

古文：溪右崖上有凤眼石，溪左为熊右御史概所居。
现代文：溪右边山崖上有个凤眼石，溪左边是熊概右御史住过的地方。
English: There is a phoenix stone on the cliff on the right side of the stream, and on the left side of the stream is the place where Xiong Youyu lived.

古文：又五里抵官材石，溪左一山崖石嶙峋，曰仙女排驾。
现代文：又行五里抵官材石，溪左岸一座山上崖石嶙峋，叫仙女排驾山。
English: Another five miles to the official stone, a mountain cliff on the left bank of the stream, called the fairy row.

古文：遂绕吉水东门，转南门、西门、北门，而与赣水合。
现代文：我们绕过吉水县城东门，转到南门、西门和北门，一条水流与赣水汇合。
English: We bypassed the east gate of the city of Jishui County, and went to the south gate, west gate and north gate. A stream of water converged with Surabaya.

古文：盖三面绕吉水者为恩江，由永丰来。
现代文：环绕吉水县城三面的是恩江，赣水只经过北门。
English: Surrounding the city of Jishui County on three sides is the Enjiang River. Surabaya only passes through the north gate.

