古文：丁丑正月初一日晓起，晴丽殊甚。
现代文：丁丑年正月初一日天亮起来，天空非常晴朗明丽。
English: On the first day of the first month of the Dingwuxian year, the sky was very clear and bright.

古文：问其地，西去路江二十里，北由禾山趋武功百二十里，遂令静闻同三夫先以行李往路江，余同顾仆挈被携带被子直北入山。
现代文：询后问得知那地方西距路江二十里，从北面由禾山前往武功山一百二十里，于是让静闻同那三个男子先带着行李到路江，我和顾仆提着被子直往北进入山中。
English: After further inquiry, it was learned that the place was twenty miles west of Lujiang, and one hundred and twenty miles from the north from He Mountain to Wukong Mountain. Therefore, Jingwen and the three men were allowed to take their luggage to Lujiang first, and Gu and I went straight north into the mountains with the quilt.

古文：其山不甚高，而土色甚赤。
现代文：那山不很高，但土色很红。
English: The mountain is not very high, but the soil color is very red.

古文：升陟五里，越一小溪又五里，为山上刘家。
现代文：往上攀登五里，越过一条小溪又走五里，为山上刘家。
English: Climbing up five miles, crossing a creek and walking another five miles, it was the Liu family on the mountain.

古文：北抵厚堂寺，越一小岭，始见平畴，水田漠漠。
现代文：再往北抵达厚堂寺，越过一座小山岭，才见到平展的田野，田野中水田密布。
English: Further north, we arrived at Hodo-ji Temple, and after crossing a small mountain ridge, we saw a flat field with dense paddy fields.

古文：乃随流东北行五里，西北转，溯溪入山。
现代文：于是顺水往东北行五里，折往西北，溯溪走进山中。
English: So I followed the water to the northeast for five miles, turned to the northwest, and followed the stream into the mountains.

古文：此溪乃禾山东北之水，其流甚大，余自永城西行，未见有大水南向入溪者，当由山上刘家之东入永城下流者也。
现代文：此溪是禾山东北面的溪流，水流很大，我从永城往西行，未见到有大的溪流向南注入流经永新县城的那条溪中，此溪应当是从山上刘家的东面往东流，到永城下游汇入大溪中。
English: This stream is a stream on the northeast side of He Mountain. The water flow is very large. I went west from Yongcheng and did not see a large stream flowing south into the stream flowing through Yongxin County. This stream should flow east from the east side of Liu Jia on the mountain and merge into the large stream downstream of Yongcheng.

古文：北过青堂岭西下，复得平畴一坞，是为十二都。
现代文：往北径过青堂岭，向西下去，又见到满是平坦田地的一个山坞，这是十二都。
English: Heading north across Qingdangling and heading west, you will see a dock full of flat fields. These are the twelve capitals.

古文：西溯溪入龙门坑，溪水从两山峡中破石崖下捣，连泄三、四潭。
现代文：朝西面溯溪流进入龙门坑，溪水从两山间的山峡中冲破石崖向下捣泻，连续泄落而形成三四个潭。
English: Tracing the stream to the west into the Longmen Pit, the stream water rushes down from the mountain gorge between the two mountains, breaking through the stone cliff and continuously leaking to form three or four pools.

古文：最下一潭深碧如黛，其上两崖石皆飞突相向。
现代文：最下面的一个潭深碧如黛，潭上面两边的崖石都相互向对面飞突出去。
English: A pool at the bottom is as deep as a lake, and the cliffs on both sides of the pool are jutting out in opposite directions.

古文：夹凹中有罗汉洞，闻不甚深，寺僧乐庵以积香出供，且留为罗汉、五老之游。
现代文：进入坑谷内，又见到一片平坦的田野，这是禾山寺的所在处。寺的南面对着禾山的五老峰，而寺所背靠的，是禾山北支再度耸起的一座山，有双重石高高耸立在寺后面的山上。大概禾山是寺西面的主山，而五老峰是寺南面耸起的山峰，最为高耸挺拔。
English: Entering the valley, I saw a flat field, which is the location of He Shan Temple. The south of the temple faces the Wulao Peak of He Shan, and the temple is backed by a mountain that rises again from the northern branch of He Shan. There are double stones standing tall on the mountain behind the temple. Wulao Mountain is probably the main mountain on the west side of the temple, and Wulao Peak is the highest mountain that rises on the south side of the temple.

古文：余急于武功，恐明日穷日力不能至，请留为归途探历，遂别乐庵，北登十里坳。
现代文：相夹间的凹陷处有个罗汉洞，听说不是很深，寺中僧人乐庵端出他的饭食给我们吃，并且留我游览罗汉洞和五老峰。我急着要游武功山，担心明日全力走一天不能到达，就向他说明愿将这两个地方留作归途中探寻游历之处，然后便告别乐庵，往北攀登十里坳。
English: There is a Luohan Cave in the depression between the two peaks. I heard that it is not very deep. The monk of the temple, Le An, brought out his meal for us to eat, and left me to visit Luohan Cave and Wulao Peak. I was in a hurry to visit Wugong Mountain, worried that I would not be able to reach it after a full day of walking tomorrow, so I explained to him that I would like to leave these two places as a way back to explore the place of travel, and then bid farewell to Le An and climb north for ten miles.

古文：其岭开陟共十里而遥，登岭时，西望寺后山巅，双重骈立，峰若侧耳耦语然。
现代文：那岭往上攀登起来有十里还多，登岭时，往西望见寺后面的山顶上，双重石并列耸立，两座石峰若如两人侧耳相对私语。
English: There are more than ten miles to climb up the ridge. When climbing the ridge, you can see the double stones standing side by side on the top of the mountain behind the temple. The two stone peaks are like two people whispering to each other.

古文：越岭北下，山复成坞，水由东峡破山去，坞中居室鳞比，是名铁径。
现代文：越过岭往北下去，山中又形成山坞，水由山坞东面的山峡中破山而去，山坞中住房鳞次栉比，这里名叫铁径。
English: Crossing the ridge to the north, a dock is formed in the mountains. The water breaks through the mountain in the gorge to the east of the dock, and the houses in the dock are very different. This is called the railway track.

古文：复从其北越一岭而下，五里，再得平畴，是名严堂，其水南从岭西下铁径者也。
现代文：又从铁径北面越过一座山岭往下走，五里，再次见到平坦的田野，这里名叫严堂，严堂的水往南从山岭西面流下铁径。
English: From the north side of the railway track, I crossed a mountain range and walked down for five miles. Once again, I saw a flat field. This place is called Yantang. The water from Yantang flows south from the west side of the mountain range down the railway track.

古文：由严堂北五里，上鸡公坳，又名双顶。
现代文：从严堂往北行五里，上了鸡公坳，它又叫双顶。
English: Five miles north of Yandang, we came across a chicken coop, also known as a duplex.

古文：其岭甚高，岭南之水南自铁径东去，岭北之水则自陈山从北溪出南乡，鸡公之北即为安福界。
现代文：那岭很高，岭南边的水从南面的铁径向东流去，岭北边的水却是从陈山由北面的溪中流出南乡。鸡公坳的北面就是安福县界。
English: The ridge is very high, and the water on the south side of the ridge flows eastward from the railway track on the south side, while the water on the north side of the ridge flows out of the Nanxiang from the Chen Mountain from the stream on the north side. The north side of Jiguangyao is the border of Anfu County.

古文：下岭五里至陈山，日已暮，得李翁及泉留宿焉。
现代文：下了岭走五里到陈山，太阳已将落，得到村中李及泉翁的留宿。
English: After walking five miles down the ridge to Chen Shan, the sun was about to set, and Li and Quan Weng stayed in the village.

古文：翁方七十，真深山高隐也。
现代文：李翁正好七十岁，真是深山中的一个志行高尚的隐居人士。
English: Li Weng is exactly seventy years old, and he is truly a high-minded recluse deep in the mountains.

古文：初二日，晨餐后，北向行。
现代文：初二日早餐后，往北行。
English: After breakfast on the first two days, we headed north.

古文：其南来之水，从东向破山去，又有北来之水，至此同入而东，路遂溯流北上。
现代文：陈山南面流来的水，从东面破山而去，又有条从北面流来的水，到此处与它汇合而流向东去，路便溯此水往北延伸。
English: The water flowing from the south side of Mount Chen breaks through the mountain from the east, and there is another water flowing from the north side. At this point, it merges with it and flows to the east. The road then traces this water to the north.

古文：盖陈山东西俱崇山夹峙，而南北开洋成坞，四面之山俱搏空溃壑，上则亏蔽天日，下则奔坠峭削，非复人世所有矣。
现代文：陈山的东西两面都是高山夹峙，而南北向展开一块平地形成山坞，四周的山都是上插云空而下坠深谷，向上遮蔽天日，向下倾坠峻峭，不再像是人世间有的景象。
English: On the east and west sides of Mount Chen, there are high mountains, and a flat land spreads out to the north and south to form a dock. The surrounding mountains are interspersed with clouds in the sky and fall into a deep valley, shielding the sun from the sky, and falling down steeply. It is no longer like a scene from the human world.

古文：五里，宛转至岭上。
现代文：走五里，曲折地爬到岭头上。
English: Walk five miles and climb tortuously to the ridge head.

古文：转而东，复循山北度岭脊，名庙山坳，又名常冲岭。
现代文：折往东，又顺山往北越过岭脊，那岭叫庙山坳，又称常冲岭。
English: Turning to the east, it runs along the mountain to the north and crosses the ridge. That ridge is called Miao Mountain Ridge, also known as Changchong Ridge.

古文：其西有峰名乔家山，石势嵯峨高峻，顶有若屏列、若人立者，诸山之中，此其翘楚á最好的云。
现代文：它西面有座山峰叫乔家山，山间峰石磋峨，山顶上有若横列的屏风、站立的人等形态的石头，在周围的众多山峰中，它是最美的。
English: To the west of it, there is a mountain called Qiaojia Mountain. The peaks between the mountains are jagged, and on the top of the mountain there are stones in the form of screens, standing people, etc. It is the most beautiful of the many peaks around.

古文：北下三里，有石崖兀突溪左，上有纯石横竖，作劈翅回翔之状，水从峰根坠空而下者数十丈。但路从右行，崖畔丛茅蒙茸，不能下窥，徒闻捣空振谷之响而已。
现代文：往北下去三里，有座石崖突兀溪左，崖上横叠竖插着清一色的石头，呈现出展翅盘旋的形态，水流从山峰根脚向空中倾泻卞去，落差达几十丈高 只是路从右边走，崖畔白茅丛生嫩草覆地，不能窥见下面，只能听到水流向空中捣泻时所发出的震撼山谷的响声而已。
English: Three miles to the north, there is a rocky cliff jutting out of the creek to the left. On the cliff, there are clear-colored stones stacked horizontally and vertically, showing the shape of wings hovering. The water flows from the foot of the mountain to the air, with a drop of several tens of meters. Just walk from the right side of the road, the cliffside is covered with white thatch. You can't see below, you can only hear the sound of the valley when the water flows into the air.

古文：下此始见山峡中田塍环壑，又二里始得居民三四家，是曰卢子泷ó一溪自西南山峡中来，与南来常冲之溪合而北去，泷北一冈横障溪前，若为当关。
现代文：走下此处才见到山峡中田块环绕着沟谷，又走二里才见到三四家居民，这地方叫卢子拢。一条溪水从西南的山峡中流来，与从南边常冲流来的溪水汇合而往北流去，拢北有条山冈横障在溪前，若像是在为村庄守护关口。
English: It is only when you walk down here that you see the fields surrounding the ravine in the gorge, and it is only after walking two miles that you see three or four residents. This place is called Lu Zi Kou. A stream flows from the southwest of the gorge, merging with the stream that often rushes from the south and flowing north. To the north, there is a mountain ridge in front of the stream, as if it is guarding the village.

古文：溪转而西，环冈而北，遂西北去。
现代文：溪水流到山冈前折向西，绕过山冈往北流，然后就朝西北淌去。
English: The stream flows to the hill before turning west, flows around the hill to the north, and then flows to the northwest.

古文：路始舍涧，北过一冈。
现代文：道路这才与山沟水分开，往北越过一条山冈。
English: This is when the road separates from the ravine and crosses a mountain range to the north.

古文：又五里，下至平畴，山始大开成南北两界，是曰台上塘前，而卢子泷之溪，复自西转而东，乃渡溪北行，三里至妙山，复入山峡，至泥坡岭麓，得一夫肩挑行李。
现代文：许久后，听到路下边传出涂涂的水声，到深邃的草木间去寻觅，见一个小洞中流出泉水，于是用手捧来喝。而后在山坳间见到个村落，它是十九都门家坊。
English: After a long time, he heard the sound of rushing water coming from the roadside, went to the deep grass and trees to look for it, saw spring water flowing out of a small cave, so he held it in his hand to drink it. And then he saw a village in the mountains, it was Shizhongdumenjiafang.

古文：五里，北越岭而下，又得平畴一壑，是曰十八都。又三里，有大溪亦自西而东，度平田桥北上相公岭，从此迢遥直上，俱望翠微，循云崖。五里，有路从东来十九都日犹下午，恐前路崎岖，姑留余力而止宿焉。
现代文：坊西面有座山峰很峻峭，它就是在相公岭上望见而当时想攀登的那山峰，它的正东北与香炉峰对峙，是武功山的南案 此时还是下午，但担心前面的道路崎岖难行，便姑且保留余力而停下来住宿在门家坊。
English: To the west of Fang, there is a very steep mountain. It is the mountain that I wanted to climb when I saw it from the top of Shogongling. It is just northeast of the confrontation with Incense Burner Peak, and is the southern part of Wu Gong Mountain. It was still afternoon, but I was worried that the road ahead was rugged and difficult to travel. I had to save my energy and stopped to stay at Mengjiafang.

古文：主人王姓，其母年九十矣。
现代文：投宿那家的主人姓王，他母亲年纪有九十岁了。
English: The owner of the guest house, surnamed Wang, has a 90-year-old mother.

古文：初三日，晨餐后行，云气渐合，而四山无翳。
现代文：初三日早餐后出发，天空中云气渐渐聚拢，但四周的山峦没有被遮蔽。
English: We set out after breakfast on the third day of the first lunar month. The clouds gradually gathered in the sky, but the surrounding mountains were not obscured.

古文：三里，转而西，复循山向北，始东见大溪自香炉峰麓来，是为湘吉湾。
现代文：走了三里，折往西面，又顺山向北行，才看见东面有条大溪从香炉峰麓流来，这里是湘吉湾。
English: After walking for three miles, turning to the west, and then heading north along the mountain, I saw a large stream flowing from the foot of the incense burner peak in the east. This is Xiangji Bay.

古文：又下岭一里，得三四家。
现代文：又走下岭一里，见到三四户人家。
English: I walked another mile down the ridge and saw three or four homes.

古文：又登岭一里，连过二脊，是为何家坊。
现代文：又朝岭上攀登一里，接连越过两座山脊，这里是何家坊。
English: In the morning, I climbed a mile up the ridge and crossed two ridges in succession. This is Hejiabo.

古文：有路从西坞下者，乃钱山之道，水遂西下而东，则香炉峰之大溪也；有路从北坳上者，乃九龙之道；而正道则溯大溪东从夹中行。
现代文：有条路从村西边山坞中下去，那是到钱山的路，水流顺山坞向西流下去而后折向东，它就是香炉峰流来的大溪；有条路从村北山坳朝上延伸，那是去九龙的路，而上武功山的正路是溯大溪往东从两山间走。
English: There is a road going down from the dock on the west side of the village, which is the road to Qianshan. The water flows down the dock to the west and then turns to the east, which is the stream flowing from the peak of the incense burner; there is a road extending from the village north of the mountain, which is the road to Kowloon, and the main road on Mount Wukong is to follow the stream to the east between the two mountains.

古文：二里，渡溪循南崖行，又一里，茅庵一龛在溪北，是为三仙行宫。
现代文：二里后，渡过溪流顺南边的山崖而行，又走一里，有间小茅屋立在溪北岸，这是三仙行宫。
English: After two miles, they crossed the stream and walked along the cliff on the south side. After another mile, there was a small thatched cottage on the north bank of the stream. This was the Three Immortals' Palace.

古文：从此渐陟崇冈，三里，直造香炉峰。
现代文：从此处起渐渐向高峻的山冈上攀爬，三里后，直抵香炉峰。
English: From here, it gradually climbs up the steep mountain, and after three miles, it reaches the incense stove peak.

古文：二里至集云岩，零雨沾衣，乃入集云观少憩焉。
现代文：香炉峰的崖壁上、山坳间不时有细流悬挂着，向北流下大溪。仰头看见峰头上云影逐渐疏朗，便赶忙向上攀登，忽然间零星的小雨又飘飞起来。
English: On the cliff wall of the Incense Stove Peak, between the ridges, there are thin streams hanging from time to time, and a large stream flows down to the north. Looking up, I saw the clouds gradually clearing on the peak, so I hurriedly climbed up, and suddenly sporadic light rain began to fall again.

古文：观为葛仙翁栖真之所，道流以新岁方群嬉正殿上，殿止一楹，建犹未完也。
现代文：爬二里到达集云岩，零星的雨水打湿了衣服，于是进入集云观稍作休息。此观是葛仙翁为养身进行修炼的处所，这一天因为是新年佳节道徒们正成群地在正殿上嬉闹，那殿只有一根前柱，还未营建完毕。
English: After climbing two miles to reach Jiyun Rock, the clothes got wet from the sporadic rain, so I took a short break to enter Jiyun View, which is the place where Ge Xianweng cultivates for self-cultivation. On this day, because it is the New Year's Day, the disciples are playing in groups on the main hall, which has only one front pillar and has not yet been completed.

古文：其址高倚香炉，北向武功，前则大溪由东坞来，西向经湘吉湾而去，亦一玄都也。
现代文：观址高高地背靠着香炉峰，北面朝着武功山，前方则是大溪从东面山坞中流来，向西经湘吉湾而流去，也是一个神仙居住的好地方。
English: The observation site is high up against the back of the Incense Burner Peak, facing the Wu Gong Mountain in the north, and the front is the big stream flowing from the dock in the east and flowing west through the Xiangji Bay. It is also a good place for immortals to live.

古文：时雨少止，得一道流欲送至山顶，遂西至九龙，乃冒雨行半里，渡老水桥，上牛心岭。
现代文：这时雨稍微停了些，遇到个道徒想送我们到山顶，于是往西到了九龙，便冒雨行半里，跨过老水桥，再顺武功山南麓而行，就上了牛心岭。
English: At this time, the rain stopped a little, and we met a Taoist monk who wanted to take us to the top of the mountain, so we went west to Kowloon, walked half a mile in the rain, crossed the old water bridge, then walked along the southern foot of Wukong Mountain, and went up Niu Xinling.

古文：五里，过棋盘石，有庵在岭上。雨渐大，道流还所畀送资，弃行囊去。
现代文：五里后，经过棋盘石，这时雨渐渐大了起来，那道徒归还了我们给他的送路费，丢下行李袋离去。
English: Five miles later, after passing the checkerboard stone, when the rain gradually increased, the Taoist returned the fare we gave him and left the luggage bag.

古文：盖棋盘有路直北而上，五里，经石柱风洞，又五里，径达山顶，此集云大道也；山小径循深壑而东，乃观音崖之道。
现代文：有路从棋盘石直往北上去，五里后，经过石柱风洞，又过五里，便直达武功山山项，这是从集云观登山的大路；从棋盘石由小路顺深谷向东去，是从观音崖登山的路。
English: There is a road from the checkerboard stone straight to the north. After five miles, it passes through the stone pillar wind tunnel. After another five miles, it goes straight to the Wu Gong Shan mountain range. This is the main road for mountaineering from Jiyun Guan. From the checkerboard stone, the path goes east along the deep valley. It is the road for mountaineering from Guan Yin Cliff.

古文：余欲兼收之，竟从山顶小径趋九龙，而道流欲仍下集云，从何家坊大路，故不合而去。
现代文：我想兼顾两条路上的风光，竟然从山顶的小路直奔九龙，而那道徒想仍然下到集云观，从何家坊大路走，所以他和我意见不合而离去。
English: I wanted to take advantage of the scenery on both roads, so I went straight to Kowloon from the path at the top of the mountain, but the scoundrel still wanted to go down to Jiyunwang and walk from Hejiafang Road, so he disagreed with me and left.

古文：余遂从小径冒雨东行。
现代文：于是我冒雨从小路往东行。
English: So I braved the rain and headed east on a back road.

古文：从此山支悉从山顶隤壑而下，凸者为冈，凹者为峡，路循其腰，遇冈则跻而上，遇峡则俯而下。
现代文：从此处起山的支脉尽都是从山顶向深谷中倾坠而下，凸起处形成山冈，凹伏处形成山峡，道路顺着山腰延伸，遇山冈就攀登而上，遇山峡便俯身下行。
English: From here, all of the mountain's foothills descend from the top of the mountain into a deep valley. The bumps form hills, the depressions form gorges, and the road extends along the mountainside. If it is a hill, it climbs up, and if it is a gorge, it bends down.

古文：由棋盘经第二峡，有石高十余丈竖峰侧，殊觉娉婷。
现代文：从棋盘石向东经过第二个山峡时，有块十几丈高的石头直立在山峰侧边，让人觉得形态优美。
English: When passing through the second gorge from the checkerboard stone to the east, there is a stone more than ten meters high standing upright on the side of the mountain peak, which makes people feel that the shape is beautiful.

古文：其内峡中突崖丛树，望之甚异，而曲霏草塞，无可着足。
现代文：那石头以内的山峡中石崖突兀树木丛生，看上去很奇异，但道路弯曲，大雨飞洒，草木塞路，无处可以着足。
English: The canyon within the stone, with its jagged cliffs and clumps of trees, looks very strange, but the road is curved, heavy rain is falling, the grass and trees are blocking the road, and there is nowhere to set foot.

古文：又循路东过三峡，其冈下由涧底横度而南，直接香炉之东。
现代文：又沿路往东经过第三个山峡，峡间的山冈从路下面的山涧向南横越过去，径直到香炉峰的东面。
English: Along the road to the east, it passes through a third gorge. The mountain range between the gorges crosses the mountains below the road to the south until it reaches the east side of the Incense Burner Peak.

古文：于是涧中之水遂分东西行，西即由集云而出平田，东即由观音崖而下江口，皆安福东北之溪也。
现代文：从这条山冈起，山涧中的水便向东西两边分流，流往西的就是从集云观而流出平田的那条，流往东的就是从观音崖而流下江口的那条，它们都是安福东北的溪流。
English: From this hill, the water in the mountain stream branches off to the east and west. The stream flowing to the west is the one that flows out of Hirata from Jyunkan, and the one flowing to the east is the one that flows from the Guanyin cliff down to the estuary. They are all streams in the northeast of Anfu.

古文：于是又过两峡。
现代文：从此处后又经过两峡。
English: From here, it passes through the Two Gorges again.

古文：北望峡内俱树木蒙茸，石崖突兀，时见崖上白幌如拖瀑布，怪无飞动之势，细玩欣赏之，俱僵冻成冰也。
现代文：向北望去，山峡内尽是树木丛草掩蔽，石崖突兀，不时地见到崖壁上仿佛挂着白色的布慢，如同向下垂悬着的瀑布，奇怪的是没有飞洒流动的态势，仔细观察欣赏，原来它们都已经结成冰了。
English: Looking to the north, the canyon is covered with trees and grasses, and the cliffs are jutting out. From time to time, it seems as if a white cloth is hanging on the cliff wall, like a waterfall hanging down. Strangely, there is no flowing situation. If you observe and appreciate carefully, they have all turned into ice.

古文：然后知其地高寒，已异下方，余躞è蹀小步走路雨中不觉耳。
现代文：这才知道这地方高而寒冷，已经不同于下边的地方了，只是我们小步慢行在雨中，不曾感觉到而已。
English: It was only then that we knew that this place, high and cold, was already different from the places below, but we did not feel it as we walked slowly in the rain.

古文：共五里，抵观音崖，盖第三冈过脊处正其中也。
现代文：共走五里，抵达观音崖，大概第三冈的冈脊穿越过去的地方正好是它的中部。
English: After a total of five miles, we arrived at the Guanyin Cliff. The place where the ridge of the third hill crosses the past is exactly its middle.

古文：观音崖者，一名白法庵，为白云法师所建，而其徒隐之扩而大之。
现代文：观音崖又叫白法庵，是白云法师创建的，他的徒弟隐之进行了扩建而使庵的规模更大。
English: Guanyin Cliff, also known as Baihoan, was founded by Baiyun Mage. His apprentice, Yingzhi, expanded the monastery and made it larger.

古文：盖在武功之东南隅，其地幽僻深窈，初为山牛野兽之窝，名牛善堂；白云鼎建禅庐，有白鹦之异，故名白法佛殿。
现代文：此庵位于武功山的东南隅，地处深山之中，幽隐偏僻，原先是山牛野兽栖息的处所，名叫牛善堂；白云创建佛寺时，出现了白鹦飞来此地的奇异景象，所以取名叫白法佛殿。
English: This hermitage is located in the southeast corner of Mount Wukong, deep in the mountains, secluded and remote. Originally, it was a place for wild cattle to roost, called Niu Son Do. When Bai Yun founded the Buddhist temple, a strange scene of a white parrot flying to this place appeared, so it was named Bai Fa Buddha Hall.

古文：前有广池一方，亦高山所难者。
现代文：殿前有个宽大的水池，这也是高山中难遇见的。
English: In front of the main hall, there is a large pond, which is rare in the high mountains.

古文：其前有尖峰为案，曰箕山，乃香炉之东又起一尖也。
现代文：庵前方有座尖耸的山峰成为案山，叫箕山，是香炉峰的东面又耸起来的一座尖峰。
English: In front of the hermitage, there is a towering peak that has become the mountain of the case, called Shaoshan. It is a spike that rises again on the east side of the incense peak.

古文：其地有庵而无崖，崖即前山峡中亘石，无定名也。
现代文：那里实际上有庵无崖，崖就是前面经过的山峡中绵亘的石壁，没有固定的名称。
English: In fact, there is a hermitage without a cliff there. The cliff is a continuous stone wall in the mountain gorge that passes in front of it. It has no fixed name.

古文：庵前后竹树甚盛，其前有大路直下江口，其后即登山顶之东路也。
现代文：庵的前后翠竹绿树非常茂盛，前面有条大路直下江口，后面就是登武功山山顶的东路。
English: Before and after the hermitage, the green trees of green bamboo are very lush. In front, there is a road straight down to the river mouth, and behind it is the east road to the top of Mount Wu Gong.

古文：时余衣履沾透，亟换之，已不作行计。
现代文：当时我衣服鞋子都湿透了，赶忙更换掉，已经不作再往前走的打算。
English: At that time, my clothes and shoes were soaking wet. I hurriedly changed them and had no intention of going any further.

古文：饭后雨忽止，遂别隐之，向庵东跻其后。
现代文：饭后雨忽然停了，于是辞别隐之，从庵东登上庵后的路。
English: After the meal, the rain suddenly stopped, so they left the hermitage and walked from the east side of the hermitage to the back.

古文：直上二里，忽见西南云气浓勃奔驰而来，香炉、箕山倏忽被掩益厉，顾仆竭蹶上跻。
现代文：直往上二里，忽然看见西南方云雾翻滚奔涌而来，香炉峰、箕山倏忽间就被遮掩了，于是更加激励已经精疲力竭的顾仆一颠一跃地往上登。
English: Two miles up, he suddenly saw the southwestern clouds rolling and rushing, and the Incense Burner Peak and Lushan Mountain were suddenly covered, which further encouraged the exhausted Gu servant to climb up.

古文：又一里，已达庵后绝顶，而浓雾弥漫，下瞰白云及过脊诸冈峡，纤毫无可影响，幸霾而不雨。
现代文：又登一里，已到达白法庵后面的最高顶端，然而浓雾弥漫，往下俯瞰白云所建的庙宇以及山脊从中穿越过去的众多山冈山峡，见不到丝毫影子，听不到丁点儿声响，幸好天空虽然阴霆但不下雨。
English: I climbed another mile and reached the highest peak behind Bai Fa'an. However, the fog was thick. I looked down at the temples built by Bai Yun and the numerous mountain gorges from which the ridge passed. I could not see the slightest shadow or hear the slightest sound. Fortunately, although the sky was overcast, it did not rain.

古文：又二里，抵山顶茅庵中，有道者二人，止行囊于中。
现代文：又走二里，抵达武功山山顶的茅庵中，茅庵内有两个道人，我们将行李停放在其中。
English: After another two miles, we arrived at a thatched hut at the top of Mount Wukong. There were two Taoists in the hut, and we parked our luggage in one of them.

古文：三石卷殿即在其上，咫尺不辨。道者引入叩礼，遂返宿茅庵。是夜风声屡吼，以为已转西北，可幸晴，及明而弥漫如故。
现代文：山顶上有道路通往四方：由正南面去的一条，从风洞石柱下到棋盘石、集云观，经过相公岭出平田、十八都，是一条大路，它就是我入山所走的那条；由东南面去的一条，从观音崖下到江口，通到安福县；由东北面去的一条，二里后出雷打石，又往前一里就是萍乡县界，然后下到山口通到萍乡县；由西北面去的一条，从九龙抵达枚县；由西南面去的一条，从九龙下钱山，抵达茶陵州。
English: On the top of the mountain, there are roads leading to all four directions: the one going from the south, from the wind tunnel stone pillar to the checkerboard stone, the set of clouds, passing through the Sogong Mountains out of the plain and the eighteen capitals, is a big road, it is the one I walked into the mountain; the one going from the southeast, from the Guanyin Cliff to the estuary, leads to Anfu County; the one going from the northeast, after two miles out of the lightning stone, and one mile ahead is the Pingxiang County boundary, and then down to the mountain pass to Pingxiang County; the one going from the northwest, from Kow

古文：初四日，闻夙霾未开，僵卧久之。
现代文：这就是武功山四方的境域。初四日听说天上的阴霆未散，我便静静地躺了许久。
English: This is the four-square territory of Wukong Mountain. On the fourth day of the first lunar month, I heard that the storm in the sky had not dissipated, so I lay quietly for a long time.

古文：晨餐后方起，雾影倏开倏合。
现代文：早餐后才起来，雾影忽开忽合。
English: I didn't get up until after breakfast, and the mist would come and go.

古文：因从正道下，欲觅风洞石柱。
现代文：于是从正路下山，想去探寻风洞石柱。
English: Therefore, I went down the mountain from the main road and wanted to explore the wind tunnel stone pillar.

古文：直下者三里，渐见两旁山俱茅脊，无崖岫之奇，远见香炉峰顶亦时出时没，而半犹浓雾如故。
现代文：直往下三里，逐渐见到两旁的山都在茅草丛中露出脊梁，没有崖壁峰峦的奇秀，远远看见香炉峰顶也时出时没，而它的半山仍然和先前一样浓雾弥漫。
English: Three miles down, I gradually saw that the mountains on both sides were exposed in the thatch bushes, without the beauty of cliff walls and peaks. Far away, I saw the peak of the incense burner, but its mid-mountain was still as foggy as before.

古文：意风洞石柱尚在二三里下，恐一时难觅，且疑道流装点之言，即觅得亦无奇，遂仍返山顶，再饭茅庵。
现代文：我心想风洞石柱还在二三里以下的地方，恐怕一时难以寻找到，并且怀疑道徒所讲的是些敷衍塞责的话，即便寻着了也不会有什么奇异的景象，便乘没有下雨，仍旧返回山顶，再次在那间茅庵中吃了饭，准备先去九龙。
English: I thought to myself that the wind tunnel stone pillar was still two or three miles below the crane, and I was afraid that it would be difficult to find it for a while, and I suspected that the Taoist was talking about some perfunctory words, and even if I found it, there would be no strange scene, so I took advantage of the absence of rain, still returned to the top of the mountain, ate dinner again in the thatched hut, and prepared to go to Kowloon first.

古文：乃从山脊西行，初犹弥漫，已而渐开。
现代文：这才从山脊上往西行，开初山中仍然是雾气弥漫，不久就渐渐散开。
English: It was only then that we headed west from the ridge. At first, the mountain was still foggy, but it soon cleared.

古文：三里稍下，度一脊，忽雾影中望见中峰之北矗崖崭柱，上刺层霄，下插九地，所谓千丈崖。
现代文：三里后略微向下走了一些，越过一条山脊，忽然从雾影中看见武功山中峰的北面有矗立的山崖、高峻的石柱，它们向上刺入层层云霄，往下插进深深的地府，这就是所说的千丈崖。
English: After three miles, I walked down a little, crossed a ridge, and suddenly saw from the mist the north face of the middle peak of Wugong Mountain with towering cliffs and steep stone pillars. They pierce the layers of clouds and plunge into the depths of hell. This is the so-called thousand-meter cliff.

古文：百崖丛峙回环，高下不一，凹凸掩映。
现代文：成百座山崖丛密地耸立着，交错盘绕，高低不一，凹陷的山洼和突凸的峰石相互掩映。
English: Hundreds of mountain cliffs rise densely, interlaced and coiled, varying in height, with concave depressions and protruding pinnacles shadowing each other.

古文：隤北而下，如门如阙，如幛如楼，直坠壑底，皆密树蒙茸，平铺其下。
现代文：往北直向下走，到处如门如网，如幢如楼，直下到谷地，尽都是丛密的树木、纷乱的杂草平平地铺在深谷中。
English: Going straight down to the north, everywhere is like a door like a net, like a building like a building, straight down to the valley, all are dense trees, disorderly weeds flatly spread in the deep valley.

古文：然雾犹时笼罩，及身至其侧，雾复倏开，若先之笼，故为掩袖之避，而后之开，又巧为献笑之迎者。
现代文：然而雾气还时时笼罩着山崖，等走到它们的侧边时，雾又忽然散开，好像先前的笼罩，是女人故意用衣袖遮面以回避客人，而后面的散开，又像是用心装出笑脸欢迎客人。
English: However, the fog still shrouded the cliffs from time to time, and when they came to their sides, the fog suddenly dispersed, as if the previous shrouding was the woman deliberately covering her face with her sleeves to avoid the guests, and the spreading behind was like welcoming the guests with a smile.

古文：盖武功屏列，东、西、中共起三峰，而中峰最高，纯石，南面犹突兀而已，北则极悬崖回崿之奇。
现代文：大概武功山若屏障横列着，东面、西面和中间共耸起三座山峰，而中峰最高，峰上纯是石头，南面只是山崖突兀而已，北面却是极尽了山崖悬空直立、曲折盘绕的奇美。
English: If the barriers of the Bukong Mountains were lined up horizontally, there would be a total of three peaks rising in the east, west and middle. The middle peak would be the highest. The top of the peak would be made of pure stone. The south side would be nothing but steep cliffs, while the north side would be extremely beautiful with cliffs hanging straight up and twists and turns.

古文：使不由此而由正道，即由此而雾不收，不几谓武功无奇胜哉！
现代文：假使不由此处而是从正路走，假使由此处走而雾气不散开，不是就要说武功山没有奇异优美的景观了吗？
English: If you don't walk from here but walk from the main road, if you walk from here and the fog doesn't disperse, wouldn't you have to say that Wugong Mountain doesn't have a strange and beautiful landscape?

古文：共三里，过中岭之西，连度二脊，其狭仅尺五。
现代文：共走三里，经过武功山中间一座山岭的西面，接连越过两座山脊，它们都狭窄得仅有一尺五宽。
English: A total of three miles, passing the western side of a mountain ridge in the middle of Mount Wukong, and successively crossing two ridges, they are all narrow and only one foot and five wide.

古文：至是海北俱石崖，而北尤崭削无底，环突多奇，由此通道而下，可尽北崖诸胜，而惜乎山高路绝，无能至者。
现代文：到此处南北都是石崖，而北边的石崖尤其高峻陡削，它们深播无底，盘绕突兀，有许多奇异的景观，山脊上有两座崖壁层层破裂开，如同门一样，向下倾坠到重重深谷中。从那两座崖壁处向下凿通道路，就可以览尽山脊北崖的各处胜景，但可惜的是山高路绝，没有能到达那些山崖间游览的人。
English: There are cliffs here from north to south, and the cliffs on the north side are particularly high and steep. They are bottomless, coiled and abrupt, with many strange landscapes. There are two cliff walls on the ridge that are cracked open layer by layer, like a door, and fall down into deep valleys. From the two cliff walls, a road can be cut down to see all the sights of the northern cliff of the ridge, but unfortunately there is no mountain road, and no one can reach those who visit the cliffs.

古文：又西复下而上，是为西峰。
现代文：又往西，依然是先下后上，这里是武功山的西峰。
English: Further west, still descending first and then ascending, here is the west peak of Mount Wukong.

古文：其山与东峰无异，不若中峰之石骨棱嶒矣。
现代文：西峰与东峰无差异，不像中峰那样石崖高峻突兀、条块分明。
English: There is no difference between the west peak and the east peak. Unlike the middle peak, the cliff is steep and jagged, and the blocks are distinct.

古文：又五里，过野猪洼。
现代文：又走五里，经过野猪洼。
English: Another five-mile walk, past wild boar depression.

古文：西峰尽处，得石崖突出，下容四五人，曰二仙洞。
现代文：在西峰尽头处，看到一座石崖突出来，下面可以容纳四五个人，它叫二仙洞。
English: At the end of the West Peak, you can see a rock cliff protruding, which can accommodate four or five people. It is called the Two Immortals Cave.

古文：闻其上尚有金鸡洞，未之人也。
现代文：听说它上面还有个金鸡洞，我没有进去。
English: I heard that there was also a golden chicken hole above it, but I didn't go in.

古文：又西稍下四里，至九龙寺。
现代文：从二仙洞起山分成两支，路从中间通过。又沿着略微下倾的路往西走四里，到九龙寺。
English: From Er Xian Dong, the mountain splits into two branches, and the road passes through the middle. Then, walk four miles west along the slightly downhill road to Jiulong Temple.

古文：寺当武功之西垂，崇山至此忽开坞成围，中有平壑，水带西出峡桥，坠崖而下，乃神庙时宁州禅师所开，与白云之开观音崖，东西并建寺。
现代文：此寺在武功山的西睡，高峻的山岭到了此处忽然向四周分开，围成山坞，中间有块平坦的谷地，水流绕着谷地往西面流出山峡口处的桥，向山崖间倾泻下去。寺是神宗时宁州禅师创建的，与白云创建观音崖，是分别在山的东西两边同时进行的。
English: This temple lies to the west of Mount Wukong. When the high mountain range comes to this place, it suddenly splits into four sides, enclosing a dock. In the middle is a flat valley. The water flows around the valley to the west and flows out of the bridge at the mouth of the mountain gorge, pouring down between the cliffs. The temple was founded by the Ningzhou Zen master Shensong Shi, and the creation of the Guanyin cliff by Baiyun was carried out simultaneously on the east and west sides of the mountain.

古文：然观音崖开爽下临，九龙幽奥中敞，形势固不若九龙之端密也。
现代文：然而观音崖地势开阔畅爽居高临下，九龙寺地势幽深宽阔，观音崖的地理形势固然不如九龙寺那样既正而又幽静隐秘。
English: However, the geographical situation of Guanyin Cliff is not as upright and secluded as that of Jiulong Temple.

古文：若以地势论，九龙虽稍下于顶，其高反在观音崖之上多矣。
现代文：若以地势来论，九龙寺虽然稍低于山顶，但它的高度反而在观音崖之上许多。
English: In terms of topography, although Jiulong Temple is slightly lower than the top of the mountain, its height is much higher than that of Guanyin Cliff.

古文：寺中僧分东西两寮，昔年南昌王特进山至此，今其规模尚整。
现代文：寺中的僧人分住在东西两间小屋中，前些年南昌王曾特意进山到此拜佛，如今寺庙僧房的规模依然齐整。
English: The monks in the temple live in two huts, one in the east and one in the west. A few years ago, the king of Nanchang went into the mountains to worship Buddha. Today, the size of the monks' quarters in the temple is still intact.

古文：西寮僧留宿，余见雾已渐开，强别之。出寺，西越溪口桥，溪从南下。
现代文：西面房中的僧人留我们住宿，我见雾气已经逐渐散开，便坚考地和他们告别 走出寺，往西越过溪口桥，溪从南面流下。
English: The monks in the west-facing room let us stay, and when I saw that the fog had gradually dispersed, I bade them a heartfelt farewell. I walked out of the temple, crossed the bridge to the west, and the stream flowed down from the south.

古文：复西越一岭，又过一小溪，溪坠于东，路坠于西，俱垂南直下。
现代文：再往西越过一座山岭，又渡过一条小溪，两条溪水汇合而往南倾坠到山谷中。
English: Further west, we crossed a mountain range and a small stream. The two streams merged and fell southwards into the valley.

古文：五里为紫竹林，僧寮倚危湍修竹间，幽爽兼得，亦精蓝之妙境也。
现代文：溪从东面倾泻，道路从西面下插，都是直往南面下去。走五里为紫竹林，有间僧人居住的小屋坐落在高处的急流修竹间，清幽和高爽兼得，也算得是佛教寺院的一处美妙所在。
English: The stream pours down from the east, the road drops down from the west, and they all go straight down to the south. Five miles away is the purple bamboo forest, and there is a hut inhabited by monks located at the height of the rapids. It is quiet and refreshing, and it is also considered to be a wonderful place for a Buddhist temple.

古文：从山上望此，犹在重雾；渐下渐开，而破壁飞流，有倒峡悬崖湍之势。
现代文：从山上远望此处，还是被掩蔽在重重云雾中；渐朝下走云雾渐散开，而此处破裂的崖壁上水流飞泻，有崖壁上的急流高悬在倒竖的山峡间那样一种态势。
English: Viewed from the mountains, this place is still covered in heavy clouds and fog; the clouds and fog gradually disperse as they move downwards, and here the water flows over the broken cliffs, with the rapids on the cliffs hanging high between the inverted gorges.

古文：又十里而至卢台，或从溪右，或从溪左，循度不一，靡不在轰雷倒雪中。
现代文：又走十里到卢台，一路间或从溪右走，或从溪左行，路线不一，但无不是行走在如巨雷轰响的水声中和似雪花倒溅的白浪间。
English: I walked another ten miles to Lutetia, walking either from the right side of the stream or from the left side of the stream. The routes were different, but all of them were walking in the thunderous sound of the water and between the white waves that looked like snowflakes falling.

古文：但润崖危耸，竹树翳密，悬坠不能下窥，及至渡涧，又复平流处矣。
现代文：只是水流在高高的山崖间，被翠竹绿树掩蔽，不能窥见到水流的形态和气势，等到渡过山涧水，又已经是水流平缓的地方了。
English: However, the water flow is between the high cliffs, hidden by the green bamboo trees, and you cannot see the shape and momentum of the water flow. When you cross the mountain stream, it is already a place where the water flow is gentle.

古文：出峡至卢，始有平畴一壑，乱流交涌畦间，行履沾濡。
现代文：走出山峡到达卢台，才有布满平坦田块的谷地，纷乱的水流交错从田畦间涌出，我们的行装鞋子都被打湿。
English: When we got out of the gorge and arrived in Loutai, we found a valley full of flat fields. Turbulent streams of water surged out of the fields, and our hiking shoes were wet.

古文：思先日过相公岭，求滴水不得；此处地高于彼，而石山潆绕，遂成沃泽。
现代文：回想起前天过相公岭时，要一滴水都不能找到；此处地势高于那里，但石山间溪水环绕，于是成了水流灌注的洼地。
English: Thinking back to the day before yesterday, when I passed through Sogongling, I couldn't find a single drop of water; the terrain here is higher than there, but there are streams between the mountains, so it became a water-permeated depression.

古文：盖武功之东垂，其山乃一脊排支分派；武功之西垂，其山乃众峰耸石攒崖，土石之势既殊，故燥润之分亦异也。
现代文：这大概是因为武功山东睡的山是一条主脊分出若干支脉，而武功山西睡的山是众多山峰各各分立，山峰上石头突兀崖壁并矗。泥土、石头的情形既然不同，所以干燥湿润的状况也就有差异了。
English: This is probably due to the fact that the sleeping mountain to the east of Mount Wukong is a main ridge with several branches, while the sleeping mountain to the west of Mount Wukong is a number of separate peaks, with cliff walls and rocky outcrops on the peaks. Since the soil and stone conditions are different, the dry and wet conditions are also different.

古文：夹溪四五家，俱环堵离立，欲投托宿，各以新岁宴客辞。
现代文：溪两崖住着四五户人家，房屋呈环状离立着，想投到其中的一家住宿，但各家都以新年要宴请宾客的理由推辞了。
English: There are four or five families living in the two cliffs of the creek. The houses are separated from each other in a ring shape. They wanted to stay in one of the houses, but each family declined on the grounds that they wanted to host guests for the New Year.

古文：方徘徊路旁，有人一群从东村过西家，正所宴客也。
现代文：正徘徊在路旁时，有一群人从东面村中走到村西去，他们正是被宴请的客人。
English: While he was wandering by the roadside, a group of people walked from the village in the east to the village in the west. They were the invited guests.

古文：中一少年见余无宿处，亲从各家为觅所栖，乃引至东村宴过者，唐姓家。得留止焉。
现代文：其中一个少年见我没有住宿处，亲自到各家，为我找栖身的处所，把我带到东村已经宴请过客人的一家，这才得以留宿下来。
English: One of the boys saw that I didn't have a place to stay and personally went to each house to find a place for me to stay. He took me to a family in the East Village that had already hosted a party, and that's how I was able to stay there.

古文：是日行三十里。
现代文：这天行了三十里。
English: This day we travelled thirty miles.

古文：初五日，晨餐后，雾犹翳山顶。
现代文：初五日早餐后，雾气仍然遮蔽着山顶。
English: After breakfast on the fifth day of the first lunar month, the mist still covered the top of the mountain.

古文：乃东南越一岭，五里下至平畴，是为大陂。
现代文：于是往东南翻越一座山岭，走五里下到平坦的田野中，这里是大阶。
English: So I went southeast over a mountain ridge, walked five miles down to a flat field, and here is a large crocodile.

古文：居民数家，自成一壑。
现代文：此处住着几家居民，自成一个和外界相对隔绝的幽深谷地。
English: Several families live here, forming a deep valley relatively isolated from the outside world.

古文：一小溪自东北来，乃何家坊之流也，卢台之溪自北来，又有沙盘头之溪自西北来，同会而出陈钱口。
现代文：一条小溪从东北面流来，那是何家坊流来的溪流，卢台的溪水从北面流来，又有条从沙盘头来的溪水自西北面流来，它们汇合而流出陈钱口。
English: A small stream flows from the northeast, which is the stream from Hejiafang, the stream from Lutai flows from the north, and another stream from Shapentou flows from the northwest. They converge and flow out of Chen Qiankou.

古文：出口即十八都平田，东向大洋也。
现代文：两山对耸如门，路也沿溪流而去。出了陈钱口就是十八都平田，它东面对着一块宽展的大平地。
English: The two mountains face each other like a gate, and the road also follows the stream. Out of Chenqiankou is the Eighteen Capital Plains, which faces a wide flatland to the east.

古文：大陂之水自北而陈钱，上陂之水自西而至车江，二水合而东经钱山下平田者也。
现代文：大破来的水自北而流出陈钱口，上破来的水自西而流到车江，两条溪水汇合而往东经过钱山流下平田。
English: The large-flowing water flows out of Chenqiankou from the north, the upper-flowing water flows from the west to Chejiang, and the two streams converge and flow eastward through Qianshan and down to the plains.

古文：路由车江循西溪，五里至七陂，复入山。
现代文：路从车江沿西面的溪水走，五里后到上破，又进入山中。
English: The road goes from Chejiang River along the west side of the stream, after five miles to Shangba, and then into the mountains.

古文：已渡溪南，复上门楼岭，五里越岭，复与溪会。
现代文：随后，渡过溪水到南面，又上了门楼岭，爬五里越过岭，又与溪水相遇。
English: Then, I crossed the stream to the south, and went up the Gate Tower Ridge, climbed five miles over the ridge, and met the stream again.

古文：过平坞又二里，有一峰当溪之中，其南北各有一溪，潆峰前而合，是为月溪上流。
现代文：过了一个平坦韵山坞又走二里，有座山峰立在溪流中，山峰的南北两面各有一条溪流，它们绕流到山峰前面而汇合，这是月溪的上游。
English: After a flat rhyme dock and two miles, there is a mountain peak standing in the stream. There is a stream on the north and south sides of the mountain peak. They flow around to the front of the mountain peak and converge. This is the upstream of the moon stream.

古文：路从峰之南溪而入，其南有石兰冲，颇突兀。
现代文：路沿山峰南面的那条溪流进入山中，溪的南面有个石兰冲，山崖很是突兀。
English: The stream on the south side of the road along the mountain peak enters the mountain. There is a rocky outcrop on the south side of the stream, and the cliff is very abrupt.

古文：又三里登祝高岭，岭北之水下安福，岭南之水下永新。
现代文：又走三里，登上祝高岭，岭北的水流下安福县，岭南的水流下永新县。
English: After walking another three miles, they reached Zhu Gaoling. The water in the north of the ridge flowed down to Anfu County, and the water in the south of the ridge flowed down to Yongxin County.

古文：又平行岭上二里，下岭东南行二里，过石洞北，乃西南登一小山，山石色润而形巉。
现代文：又从岭头上平平地行二里，然后走下岭往东南行二里，过了石洞的北面，便朝西南攀上一座小山，山间的石头色泽温润但形态高险峻峭。
English: From the head of the ridge, he walked two miles flatly, then walked down the ridge to the southeast for two miles, passed the north side of the stone cave, and climbed a hill to the southwest. The stone color of the mountains is warm and moist, but the shape is high and steep.

古文：由石隙下瞰，一窟四环，有门当隙中，内有精蓝，后有深洞，洞名石城。而门为僧闭无可入。
现代文：曲折地往北再进去，又有一根大石柱，下面如莲花环绕堆叠形成柱子，石柱的上部如同作为仪仗用的华贵的旗帜，顶盖连接着洞顶；这根石柱旁边也有缝隙，可绕着石柱转。
English: Winding its way north again, there is another large stone pillar, the bottom of which is like a lotus surrounded by stacks to form a pillar, the upper part of the stone pillar is like a magnificent flag for ceremonial use, the top cover is connected to the top of the cave; there is also a gap next to this stone pillar, which can be turned around the stone pillar.

古文：从石上俯而呼，久之乃得人，因命僧炊饭，而余入洞，欲出为石门寺之行也。及出，饭后，见洞甚奇，索炬不能，复与顾仆再入细搜之。
现代文：大石柱的左边另外环绕着一个小洞，那支洞更加弯隆。等走出洞，吃了饭，见洞非常奇异，未能找到火把，又与顾仆再次进入洞中细细探寻。
English: On the left side of the large stone pillar, there is also a small cave, which is more curved. After going out of the cave and eating the meal, he saw that the cave was very strange. Unable to find the torch, he and his servant went into the cave again to explore it in detail.

古文：出已暮矣，遂宿庵中。
现代文：出洞来已经傍晚了，于是住在庵中。
English: It was already late afternoon when they came out of the cave, so they stayed in the hermitage.

古文：石城洞初名石廊；南陂刘元卿开建精蓝于洞口石窟中，改名书林；今又名石城，以洞外石崖四亘若城垣也。
现代文：石城洞原先名叫石廊洞；南破人刘元卿在洞口石窟中创建佛寺后，改名书林洞；如今又叫石城洞，因为洞外石崖环亘四周若像城墙。
English: Shicheng Cave was originally called Shilong Cave; after the Nanba man Liu Yuanqing founded a Buddhist temple in the cave mouth grottoes, it was renamed Shulin Cave; today it is also called Shicheng Cave, because the stone cliff ring outside the cave is like a city wall.

