古文：黄帝即位十有五年，喜天下戴己，养正命，娱耳目，供鼻口，焦然肌色皯黣，昏然五情爽惑。
现代文：黄帝即天子位已经十五年了，因受到天下百姓拥戴而十分高兴，于是就保养身体，兴歌舞娱悦耳目，调美味温饱鼻口，然而却弄得面色枯黄黝黑，形容憔悴萎靡，头脑昏沉，情志迷惑。
English: The Yellow Emperor, the Son of Heaven, has been in power for fifteen years. He is very happy to be loved by the people of the world, so he takes care of his body, sings and dances to entertain his ears and eyes, adjusts delicacies and nourishes his nose. However, his face has turned yellow and dark, and he is described as languid, dull-witted, and emotionally confused.

古文：又十有五年，忧天下之不治，竭聪明，进智力，营百姓，焦然肌色皯黣，昏然五情爽惑。
现代文：又过了十五年，因忧虑天下混乱得不到治理，于是竭尽全部精力，增进智慧和体力，去治理百姓，然而同样是弄得面色枯黄黝黑，形容憔悴萎靡，头脑昏沉，情志迷惑。
English: After another fifteen years, he was worried that the chaos in the world could not be controlled, so he exerted all his energy to increase his wisdom and physical strength to govern the people, but he was also made to look withered, yellow and dark, described as languid, dizzy, and confused.

古文：黄帝乃喟然赞曰： 朕之过淫矣。
现代文：黄帝长叹道： 我的错误真是太深了。
English: The Yellow Emperor sighed for a long time and said, "My mistake is really too deep.

古文：养一己其患如此，治万物其患如此。 
现代文：保养自己，它的祸害是这样，一心治理天下，它的祸害也是这样。 
English: So is self-indulgence, and so is ruling the world single-mindedly.

古文：于是放万机，舍宫寝，去直侍，彻钟悬，减厨膳，退而闲居大庭之馆，斋心服形，三月不亲政事。
现代文：于是他放下了纷繁的日常事务，离开了宫殿寝室，取消了值班侍卫，撤掉了钟磐乐器，削减了美味膳食，退出来安闲地居住在宫外的大庭之馆，清除心中杂念，降服形体欲望，三个月不过问政治事务。
English: So he put down the complicated daily affairs, left the palace bedroom, canceled the guards on duty, removed the bell-rock musical instruments, cut down the delicious meals, retired to live in the courtyard outside the palace, cleared his mind of distractions, surrendered to physical desires, and did not ask about political affairs for three months.

古文：昼寝而梦，游于华胥氏之国。
现代文：有一天，他白天睡觉时做了个梦，梦见自己游历到了华胥氏之国。
English: One day, when he was sleeping during the day, he had a dream that he had traveled to the land of the Huayu.

古文：华胥氏之国在弇州之西，台州之北，不知斯齐国几千万里；盖非舟车足力之所及，神游而已。
现代文：华胥国在弇州的西方，台州的北方，不知离中国有几千万里，并不是乘船、坐车和步行所能到达的，只不过是神魂漂游罢了。
English: In the west of Luzhou and the north of Taizhou, Hualien is tens of millions of miles away from China. It cannot be reached by boat, car or on foot, but only by wandering.

古文：其国无帅长，自然而已。
现代文：那个国家没有君主和官长，一切听其自然罢了。
English: That country has no monarch or officials, everything is left to its own devices.

古文：其民无嗜欲，自然而已。
现代文：那里的百姓没有嗜好和欲望，一切顺其自然罢了。
English: The people there have no hobbies or desires, everything just goes with the flow.

古文：不知乐生，不知恶死，故无夭殇；不知亲己，不知疏物，故无爱憎；不知背逆，不知向顺，故无利害：都无所爱惜，都无所畏忌。
现代文：他们不懂得以生存为快乐，也不懂得厌恶死亡，因而没有夭折与短命的人；不懂得偏爱自身，也不懂得疏远外物，因而没有喜爱和憎恶的东西；不懂得反对与叛逆，也不懂得赞成与顺从，因而没有有利与有害的事情。一切都不去贪恋顾惜，一切都不去畏惧忌讳。
English: They do not know how to enjoy life, nor do they know how to detest death, so there are no premature deaths and short-lived people; they do not know how to favor themselves, nor do they know how to alienate external things, so there are no likes and dislikes; they do not know how to oppose and rebel, nor do they know how to approve and obey, so there are no beneficial and harmful things.

古文：入水不溺，入火不热。
现代文：他们到水中不会淹没，到火里不会烧伤。
English: When they go into the water, they don't drown, and when they go into the fire, they don't get burned.

古文：斫挞无伤痛，指擿无痟痒。
现代文：刀砍鞭打没有伤痛，指甲抓搔也不觉酸痒。
English: There is no pain in the cutting and whipping, nor is there any itching in the scratching of the nails.

古文：乘空如履实，寝虚若处床。
现代文：乘云升空就像脚踏实地，睡在虚无里就好像躺在床上。
English: Taking off on a cloud is like stepping on solid ground, and sleeping in the void is like lying in bed.

古文：云雾不硋其视，雷霆不乱其听，美恶不滑其心，山谷不踬其步，神行而已。
现代文：云雾不能遮挡他们的视线，雷霆不能捣乱他们的听觉，美丑不能迷惑他们的心志，山谷不能阻挡他们的脚步，一切都凭精神运行而已。
English: Clouds and mists cannot obstruct their sight, thunder cannot disturb their hearing, beauty and ugliness cannot confuse their minds, valleys cannot block their footsteps, everything is just running by the spirit.

古文：黄帝既寤，怡然自得，召天老、力牧、太山稽，告之，曰： 朕闲居三月，斋心服形，思有以养身治物之道，弗获其术。
现代文：黄帝从梦中醒来后，觉得十分愉快而满足，于是把大臣天老、力牧和太山稽叫来，告诉他们说： 我安闲地在家中住了三个月，清除了心中的杂念，降服了形体的欲望，专心考虑能够保养身心和治理外物的方法，但没能得到好的方法。
English: After the Yellow Emperor woke up from the dream, he felt very happy and satisfied, so he called the ministers Tian Lao, Li Mu and Taishan Qin and told them: I have lived at home for three months, cleared my mind of distractions, surrendered to the desires of the body, and concentrated on ways to maintain the body and mind and control foreign objects, but I couldn't get a good way.

古文：疲而睡，所梦若此。
现代文：后来我因疲倦而睡觉，做了一个这样的梦。
English: Later, when I was tired and went to sleep, I had such a dream.

古文：今知至道不可以情求矣。
现代文：现在我才懂得高深的道是不能用主观的欲望去追求的。
English: Now I understand that the higher path cannot be pursued with subjective desires.

古文：朕知之矣！
现代文：我明白了！
English: I get it!

古文：朕得之矣！
现代文：我得到了！
English: I got it!

古文：而不能以告若矣。 
现代文：但我却无法把它告诉你们。 
English: But I can't tell you why.

古文：又二十有八年，天下大治，几若华胥氏之国，而帝登假。百姓号之，二百馀年不辍。
现代文：又过了二十八年，天下大治，几乎和华胥国一样，而黄帝却去世了，老百姓悲痛大哭，二百多年都不曾中断过。
English: Twenty-eight years later, the country was in a state of war, almost the same as Huayu, but the Yellow Emperor died, and the people cried with grief, which had not been interrupted for more than two hundred years.

古文：列姑射山在海河洲中，山上有神人焉，吸风饮露，不食五谷；心如渊泉，形如处女。不偎不爱，仙圣为之臣；不畏不怒，愿悫为之使；不施不惠，而物自足；不聚不敛，而己无愆。
现代文：列姑射山在黄河入海口的河洲中，山上住着神人，呼吸空气，饮用露水，不吃五谷；心灵如同虚静的渊泉，形体好似柔弱的处女；不偏心不私爱，仙人和圣人都臣服于他；不威不愤，诚实与忠厚的人都甘愿供他役使；不施舍不恩惠，外界的事物都自己满足；不积聚不搜括财物，自身从无困顿贫乏。
English: In the estuary where the Yellow River enters the sea, there lives a god-man on the mountain. He breathes air, drinks dew, and does not eat grain. His mind is like an empty spring, and his body is like a weak virgin. He is not partial or selfish, and sages and saints submit to him. He is not arrogant or angry, and honest and loyal people are willing to serve him. He does not give alms or favors, and satisfies himself with external things. He does not accumulate or search for wealth, and he is never poor.

古文：阴阳常调，日月常明，四时常若，风雨常均，字育常时，年谷常丰；而土无札伤，人无夭恶，物无疵疠，鬼无灵响焉。
现代文：那里阴阳二气永远调和，太阳月亮永久明亮，四季总是和顺，风雨总是均匀，孕育生长时时合节，五谷杂粮岁岁满仓；而且大地上没有瘟疫，人民不会夭殇，万物没有灾患，鬼魅也无法兴风作浪。
English: There, the yin and yang are always in harmony, the sun and the moon are always bright, the four seasons are always harmonious, the wind and rain are always uniform, the breeding of growth is at the same time as the festival, and the grain and miscellaneous grains are full year after year; and there is no plague on the earth, the people will not die young, there is no disaster in all things, and ghosts can not make waves.

古文：列子师老商氏，友伯高子；进二子之道，乘风而归。
现代文：列子拜老商氏为师，与伯高子交友，把两人的所有本领部学到了手，然后乘风而归。
English: He followed the old merchant as his mentor, made friends with Ba Gao Zi, learned all the skills of the two, and then returned by the wind.

古文：尹生闻之，从列子居，数月不省舍。
现代文：尹生听说了，便来跟列子学习，并和列子住到一起，几个月都不回家探望。
English: When Yin Sheng heard about this, he came to study with Lei Zi and lived with him, not going home to visit for several months.

古文：因间请蕲其术者，十反而十不告。
现代文：他趁列子闲暇时，请求学习他的法术，往返十次，列子十次都没有告诉他。
English: He took advantage of the trainee's leisure time and asked him to learn his magic. He went back and forth ten times, but the trainee did not tell him ten times.

古文：尹生怼而请辞，列子又不命。
现代文：尹生有些生气，请求离开，列子也不表态。
English: Yin Sheng was a little angry and asked to leave, but Ye Zi did not make a statement.

古文：尹生退。
现代文：尹生便回家了。
English: Yin Sheng then went home.

古文：数月，意不已，又往从之。
现代文：几个月后，尹生想要学道的念头难以消除，又前去跟从列子。
English: A few months later, Yin Sheng could not get rid of the idea of learning Taoism, so he went to follow Lei Zi.

古文：列子曰： 汝何去来之频？ 
现代文：列子问： 你为什么来去这么频繁呢？ 
English: Lets ask: Why do you come and go so frequently?

古文：尹生曰： 曩章戴有请于子，子不我告，固有憾于子。
现代文：尹生说： 以前我向您请教，先生不肯传授，本来有些怨恨您。
English: Yin Sheng said: I asked you for advice before, but you refused to teach me, so I had some resentment towards you.

古文：今复脱然，是以又来。 
现代文：现在我的怨气已经全部消散，所以又来了。 
English: Now all my anger has dissipated, so here I am again.

古文：列子曰： 曩吾以汝为达，今汝之鄙至此乎。
现代文：列子说： 过去我以为你通达事理，现在才知你竟鄙陋到如此地步。
English: Reiko said, "In the past, I thought you were reasonable, but now I know that you are so mean.

古文：姬！
现代文：坐下！
English: Sit down!

古文：将告汝所学于夫子者矣。
现代文：我将告诉你我是怎样向先生学习道术的。
English: I will tell you how I learned Daoism from my teacher.

古文：自吾之事夫子、友若人也，三年之后，心不敢念是非，口不敢言利害，始得夫子一眄而已。
现代文：自从我拜老商氏为师、以伯高子为友，三年间，心中不敢计较是与非，嘴上不敢谈论利与害，然后才得到老师斜看一眼。
English: In the three years since I followed the old merchant as my teacher and Bo Gao Zi as my friend, I dared not consider the rights and wrongs in my heart, and dared not talk about the benefits and harms on my lips, and only then did I get a sideways glance from the teacher.

古文：五年之后，心庚念是非，口庚言利害，夫子始一解颜而笑。
现代文：五年后，心里更加不敢存念是非，口中更加不敢言说利害，先生这才开颜对我一笑。
English: Five years later, my heart was even more afraid to think about right and wrong, and my mouth was even more afraid to say what was at stake. It was only then that my teacher smiled at me.

古文：七年之后，从心之所念，庚无是非；从口之所言，庚无利害，夫子始一引吾并席而坐。
现代文：七年后，任凭心里怎样去想，更加没有是非；任凭口中怎样去说，更加没有利害，先生才开始让我与他并席而坐。
English: Seven years later, he began to let me sit next to him, because there was no right or wrong in letting my heart think what it wanted to think, and there was no benefit in letting my mouth say what it wanted to say.

古文：九年之后，横心之所念，横口之所言，亦不知我之是非利害欤，亦不知彼之是非利害欤；亦不知夫子之为我师，若人之为我友：内外进矣。
现代文：九年后，我放纵心灵去计较，放纵口舌去谈论，但所计较与谈论的也不知道是我的是非利害呢，也不知道是别人的是非利害呢；也不知道先生是我的老师，伯高子是我的朋友；这时身内身外都忘得一干二净了。
English: Nine years later, I indulged my mind to meditate and my tongue to talk, but I did not know whether what I was meditating and talking about was my own interests or someone else's interests; I did not know that my teacher was my teacher, and that Bao Gao Zi was my friend. At that time, I had completely forgotten everything inside and outside of myself.

古文：而后眼如耳，耳如鼻，鼻如口，无不同也。
现代文：从此以后，眼睛就像耳朵一样，耳朵就像鼻子一样，鼻子就像嘴一样，它们没有什么不同的。
English: From then on, the eyes are like the ears, the ears are like the nose, the nose is like the mouth, they are no different.

古文：心凝形释，骨肉都融；不觉形之所倚，足之所履，随风东西，犹木叶干壳。
现代文：心灵凝聚，形体消散，骨骸血肉相互融合；感觉不到形体所倚赖的，脚下所踩踏的，只是随着风向东游西荡，就像那枯木的落叶或是竹笋的干壳四散飘零。
English: The mind condenses, the body dissipates, the bones and flesh fuse with each other; you can't feel what the body relies on, what you step on under your feet, it just swings east and west with the wind, like the fallen leaves of the dead tree or the dry shell of the bamboo raft.

古文：竟不知风乘我邪？我乘风乎？
现代文：竟然不知道是风驾驭着我呢，还是我驾驭着风啊！
English: I didn't know whether the wind was driving me or I was driving the wind!

古文：今女居先生之门，曾未浃时，而怼憾者再三。
现代文：现在你在我的门下，没几天的功夫，就再三的怨愤不满。
English: Now that you're under my roof, it didn't take you more than a few days to become resentful and dissatisfied.

古文：女之片体将气所不受，汝之一节将地所不载。
现代文：你的身躯也不会被元气所接受，你的肢体将不被大地承载。
English: Your body will not be accepted by the vitality, and your limbs will not be supported by the earth.

古文：履虚乘风，其可几乎？ 
现代文：脚踏虚空，驾驭风云，又怎么可能办得到呢？ 
English: How is it possible to tread the void and navigate the storm?

古文：尹生甚怍，屏息良久，不敢复言。
现代文：尹生非常惭愧，好长时间不敢大声出气，也不敢再说什么。
English: Yin Sheng was very ashamed. For a long time, he did not dare to vent his anger out loud, nor did he dare to say anything.

古文：列子问关尹曰： 至人潜行不空，蹈火不热，行乎万物之上而不慄。
现代文：列子问关尹说： 道术最高的人在深水中游泳不会窒息，在火中踩踏不会被烧伤，在最高的地方行走不会恐惧。
English: A reporter asked Guan Yin: "The person with the highest level of morality can swim in deep water without suffocating, walk in fire without getting burned, and walk in the highest place without fear.

古文：请问何以至于此？ 
现代文：请问他们是如何达到这种境界的呢？ 
English: How did they get to this point?

古文：关尹曰： 是纯气之守也，非智巧果敢之列。
现代文：关尹说： 这是能够守住元气的缘故，而不是靠聪明、技巧和果敢所能办到的。
English: Guan Yin said: This is due to being able to maintain vitality, rather than relying on cleverness, skill and courage.

古文：姬！
现代文：坐下！
English: Sit down!

古文：鱼语女。
现代文：我告诉你。
English: I'm telling you.

古文：凡有貌像声色者，皆物也。
现代文：凡是有相貌、形状、声音和颜色的，都是物。
English: Everything that has a face, a shape, a sound and a color is a thing.

古文：物与物何以相远也？
现代文：物与物为什么会差别很大呢？
English: Why are things so different from one another?

古文：夫奚足以至乎先？
现代文：物怎么能达到未始有物的至虚境界呢？
English: How can a thing reach the ultimate state of nothingness?

古文：是色而已。
现代文：这些不过是拘于形貌与声色罢了。
English: It's all a matter of form and tone.

古文：则物之造乎不形，而止乎无所化。
现代文：而道能达到不露形迹与永不变灭的境地。
English: The Tao, however, can reach the state of not revealing its traces and never changing and disappearing.

古文：夫得是而穷之者，焉得而正焉？
现代文：能够掌握此道而穷尽此理的人，外物怎么能阻止他呢？
English: If a person is able to master this path and exhaust this principle, how can external things stop him?

古文：彼将处乎不深之度，而藏乎无端之纪，游乎万物之所终始。
现代文：他处于大道的尺度内，藏神于无首无尾的大道中，游于万物赖以生死的大道之境。
English: He is in the scale of the avenue, the god of Tibet is in the headless and tailless avenue, swimming in the realm of the avenue on which all things depend for life and death.

古文：壹其性，养其气，含其德，以通乎物之所造。
现代文：使心性纯一而不杂，使元气保养而不失，使德行与大道相合，与派生万物的大道相通。
English: Let the mind be pure and not mixed, let the vitality be maintained and not lost, and let the virtue be compatible with the avenue, and be compatible with the avenue of derived things.

古文：夫若是者，其天守全，其神无郤，物奚自入焉？
现代文：像这样的人，他的自然天性能持守完全，他的精神没有间隙，外物怎么能侵入呢？
English: For a person like this, his natural ability is completely preserved, and there is no gap in his spirit. How can a foreign object intrude?

古文：夫醉者之坠于车也，虽疾不死。
现代文：喝醉酒的人从车上坠下，虽然受伤却不会摔死。
English: A drunk falls out of a car and, although injured, does not fall to his death.

古文：骨节与人同，而犯害与人异，其神全也。
现代文：他的骨节和别人相同，而受到的伤害却与人不同，是由于他神全的缘故。
English: His joints are the same as those of others, but the damage he receives is different from that of others, because of his divinity.

古文：乘亦弗知也，坠亦弗知也。
现代文：他既不知乘坐车上，也不知坠跌在地。
English: He did not know whether he was on board or whether he had fallen to the ground.

古文：死生惊惧不入乎其胸，是故遌物而不慑。
现代文：死生惊惧都没有进入他的心中，所以遇到外物并不恐惧。
English: Fear of life and death have not entered his heart, so he is not afraid when encountering foreign objects.

古文：彼得全于酒而犹若是，而况得全于天乎？
现代文：喝醉酒的人靠酒获得神全，尚能如此，何况是靠自然之道获得神全的人呢？
English: Can a drunken man by wine be made perfect, and a man be made perfect by the law of nature?

古文：圣人藏于天，故物莫之能伤也。 
现代文：圣人藏神于自然天道，所以外物不能伤害他。 
English: The saint hid God in nature, so nothing could harm him.

古文：列御寇为伯昏无人射，引之盈贯，措杯水其肘上，发之，镝矢复沓，方矢复寓。
现代文：列御寇为伯昏无人表演射箭。他拉满了弓弦，把装满水的杯子放在拿弓的手的肘上，然后射出箭去，一箭连着一箭，前一箭刚射出，后一箭已拉满弦。
English: There was no archery demonstration for Bodom. He pulled a full bow string, put a cup full of water on the elbow of the bow hand, and then shot arrows, one arrow after another, the previous arrow had just been shot, and the latter arrow had been pulled full of strings.

古文：当是时也，犹象人也。
现代文：在这个时候，他全身贯注，像木偶一样一动也不动。
English: At this time, he was completely absorbed and did not move like a puppet.

古文：伯昏无人曰： 是射之射，非不射之射也。
现代文：伯昏无人说： 你这是运用技巧的有心之射，而不是无心的不射之射。
English: Oddly, no one said: This is a deliberate shot using skill, not an unintentional missed shot.

古文：当与汝登高山，履危石，临百仞之渊，若能射乎？ 
现代文：如果我和你登上高山，走在摇晃的岩石上，面临万丈深渊，你还能射吗？ 
English: If I climb a high mountain with you, walk on a shaky rock, and face the abyss, can you still shoot?

古文：于是无人遂登高山，履危石，临百仞之渊，背逡巡，足二分垂在外，揖御寇而进之。
现代文：于是伯昏无人便领他登上高山，走在摇晃的岩石上。当临近万丈深渊时，他背对着深渊往后退，双脚已有三分之二悬空了，才拱手作揖，请列御寇上来。
English: And when he was come nigh to the great deep, he drew back with his back to the abyss, and his feet being two-thirds out of the water, he stretched forth his hand, and called for the band of raiders.

古文：御寇伏地，汗流至踵。
现代文：列御寇早已吓得趴倒在地，汗水流到了脚后跟。
English: Rei Mikko had already fallen to the ground in fright, with sweat running down to her heels.

古文：伯昏无人曰： 夫至人者，上窥青天，下潜黄泉，挥斥八极，神气不变。今汝怵然有恂目之志，尔于中也殆矣夫！ 
现代文：伯昏无人说： 道术最高的人，朝上能够窥视青天，往下能测察黄泉，精神纵游八方，神色气度始终不变，现在你全身发抖，心中十分恐惧，你于射箭之道还是相差很远啊！ 
English: No one said: the person with the highest level of Daoism, can look up at the blue sky, can look down at the yellow spring, the spirit travels in all directions, the appearance and temperament are always the same, now your whole body is trembling, your heart is very afraid, you are still very far from the way of archery!

古文：范氏有子曰子华，善养私名，举国服之；有宠于晋君，不仕而居三卿之右。
现代文：范家有个儿子叫子华，喜欢私自蓄养侠客，全国人都屈服于他。他很得晋国国君的宠爱，虽然没有官职，但地位却在三位公卿之上。
English: The Fan family had a son named Zihua, who liked to raise knights himself, and the whole country bowed down to him. He was very much favored by the ruler of Jin, and although he had no official position, his status was above the three nobles.

古文：目所偏视，晋国爵之；口所偏肥，晋国黜之。
现代文：只要是他赏识的人，国君就会赐予谁爵位；只要是被他鄙薄过的人，晋国就将他贬黜。
English: As long as it is someone he appreciates, the sovereign will bestow a title of nobility; as long as it is someone he despised, the Jin state will disparage him.

古文：游其庭者侔于朝。
现代文：来往于他家的人同朝廷上的一样多。
English: As many people came and went from his house as from the court.

古文：子华使其侠客以智鄙相攻，强弱相凌。虽伤破于前，不用介意。
现代文：子华叫他的侠客互相斗智斗勇，强者与弱者互相凌辱，即使受伤流血的人躺在眼前，他也毫不放在心上。
English: Zihua ordered his knights to pit their wits against each other, the strong against the weak, and to humiliate each other. Even if a wounded and bleeding person was lying in front of him, he didn't care.

古文：终日夜以此为戏乐，国殆成俗。
现代文：整天整夜以此游戏取乐，几乎成为全国的风俗。
English: Having fun with this game all day and all night has almost become a national custom.

古文：禾生、子伯，范氏之上客。
现代文：禾生和子伯是范家的上等门客。
English: He Sheng and his son are the first-class customers of the Fan family.

古文：出行，经坰外，宿于田更商丘开之舍。
现代文：有一天外出，途经远郊，借宿在老农商丘开的茅舍里。
English: One day he went out, passing through the suburbs, and stayed in a cottage owned by an old farmer and merchant.

古文：中夜，禾生、子伯二人相与言子华之名势，能使存者亡，亡者存；富者贫，贫者富。
现代文：半夜时候，禾生、子伯两人一齐谈论子华的名气和势力，说他能使生者灭亡，亡者复活；富者变穷，穷者变富。
English: In the middle of the night, He Sheng and Zibo both talked about Zi Hua's fame and power, saying that he could make the living perish and the dead resurrect; the rich become poor and the poor become rich.

古文：商丘开先窘于饥寒，潜于牖北听之。
现代文：商丘开正困于饥寒，躲在朝北的窗口下听到了这番谈话。
English: Shangqiu Kaizheng, trapped by hunger and cold, hid under a north-facing window and heard the conversation.

古文：因假粮荷畚之子华之门。
现代文：于是，他就借了粮食，挑着装行李的草筐，来到子华门下。
English: As a result, he borrowed grain and came to Zihua's door with a straw basket containing his luggage.

古文：子华之门徒皆世族也，缟衣乘轩，缓步阔视。
现代文：子华的门徒都出身于世家大族，身穿白色绢衣，乘坐高车，走起路来昂首阔步，旁若无人。
English: Zihua's disciples were all from large families. They wore white robes, rode in high-speed cars, and walked with their heads held high, as if no one was watching.

古文：顾见商丘开年老力弱，面目黎黑，衣冠不检，莫不眲之。
现代文：他们瞧见商丘开年老体弱，面色黎黑，衣冠不整，没有一个不轻视他。
English: They saw that the merchant was old and frail, with a dark complexion and unkempt clothes. None of them did not despise him.

古文：既而狎侮欺诒，攩㧙挨抌，亡所不为。
现代文：接着又戏弄、侮辱、欺骗他，推摔捶打，无所不为，商丘开却没有一点不高兴的样子。
English: Then he teased him, insulted him, cheated on him, pushed and shoved him, and did everything, but the merchant did not look unhappy at all.

古文：商丘开常无愠容，而诸客之技单，惫于戏笑。遂与商丘开俱乘高台，于众中漫言曰： 有能自投下者，赏百金。 
现代文：侠客们的手段用尽了，也懒得再嬉笑嘲弄他。接着就和商丘开一起登上高台，并在众人之间夸诞地宣称： 谁要是自愿跳下去，就奖赏一百金。 
English: The knights exhausted their resources and did not bother to laugh and mock him any more. Then they climbed onto the platform together with the merchant, and made a grandiose announcement among the crowd: Anyone who jumps down voluntarily will be rewarded with a hundred gold.

古文：众皆竞应。
现代文：大家都争着响应。
English: Everyone was scrambling to respond.

古文：商丘开以为信然，遂先投下，形若飞鸟，扬于地，骪骨无毁。
现代文：商丘开信以为真，就先从高台上跳了下去，身姿好像飞鸟，飘飘摇摇地落到地面，肌肉骨骼毫无毁损。
English: Taking the letter to be true, Shangqiu first jumped down from the high platform, looking like a bird, and floated and swayed to the ground, with no damage to his musculoskeletal system.

古文：范氏之党以为偶然，未讵怪也。
现代文：范氏的门客以为这是偶然现象，并不感到特别奇怪。
English: Mr. Fan's protégés thought it was a coincidence and did not find it particularly strange.

古文：因复指河曲之淫隈曰： 彼中有宝珠，泳可得也。 
现代文：于是又指着河湾的深水处说： 那水里有宝珠，游下去可以摸到。 
English: Then he pointed to the deep water of the bay and said, "There is a pearl in that water. If you swim down to it, you can touch it."

古文：商丘开复从而泳之。
现代文：商丘开又跳到了水里。
English: Shang Qiukai jumped into the water again.

古文：既出，果得珠焉。
现代文：游出水面后，果然得到了宝珠。
English: After swimming out of the water, he got the pearl.

古文：众昉同疑。子华昉令豫肉食衣帛之次。
现代文：大家这才开始觉得奇怪，子华才让他加入食肉穿绸的行列。
English: Everyone began to think it was strange that Zi Hua had just let him join the ranks of carnivores wearing silk.

古文：俄而范氏之藏大火。
现代文：没多久范家的仓库发生大火。
English: Not long after, a fire broke out in the Fan family's warehouse.

古文：子华曰： 若能入火取锦者，从所得多少赏若。 
现代文：子华说： 你们有能钻进火中取出绸缎的，根据取出的多少赏赐你们。 
English: Zihua said, "If you can dig into the fire and take out the silk cocoon, I will reward you according to how much you have taken out."

古文：商丘开往无难色，入火往还，埃不漫，身不焦。
现代文：商丘开毫无难色地钻进了大火中，来去几次，烟尘没有沾污脸面，身体也没有被烧焦。
English: Shangqiu Kai got into the fire without any difficulty, he came and went several times, the smoke did not stain his face, and his body was not burned.

古文：范氏之党以为有道，乃共谢之曰： 吾不知子之有道而诞子，吾不知子之神人而辱子。
现代文：范家的门徒以为他有什么道术，于是一齐向他道歉说： 我们不知道您有道术而欺哄了您，我们不知道您是神人而侮辱了您。
English: The disciples of Fan Jia thought he had some kind of Daoism, so they all apologized to him, saying, "We didn't know you had Daoism and deceived you. We didn't know you were a man of God and insulted you."

古文：子其愚我也，子其聋我也，子其盲我也。
现代文：您可以把我们看作是笨蛋，您可以把我们看作是聋子，您可以把我们看作是瞎子。
English: You can look at us as stupid, you can look at us as deaf, you can look at us as blind.

古文：敢问其道。 
现代文：我们大胆地向您请教道术。 
English: We boldly ask you to teach us Taoism.

古文：商丘开曰： 吾亡道。
现代文：商丘开说： 我没有什么道术。
English: Shangqiu Kai said, "I don't have any martial arts skills.

古文：虽吾之心，亦不知所以。
现代文：即使我自己心里也不知道是什么缘故。
English: Even in my heart I don't know why.

古文：虽然，有一于此，试与子言之。
现代文：即便如此，还是有一点可以对着你们说一说。
English: Even so, there is one thing I can say to you.

古文：曩子二客之宿吾舍也，闻誉范氏之势，能使存者亡，亡者存；富者贫，贫者富。
现代文：过去你们中有两位侠客住在我的家中，我听到他们赞誉范氏的势力，能够使生者死，使死者生；使富有的人贫穷，使贫穷的人富有。
English: In the past, two of your knights lived in my home, and I heard them praise Fan's power to make the living die and the dead live; to make the rich poor and the poor rich.

古文：吾诚之无二心，故不远而来。
现代文：我对此深信不疑，所以不怕路途遥远而赶来。
English: I am convinced of this, so I am not afraid to travel far and come.

古文：及来，以子党之言皆实也，唯恐诚之之不至，行之之不及，不知形体之所措，利害之所存也。心一而已。
现代文：我来了后，又将你们的话当作实话，唯恐我的诚心不够，行动得不快，根本顾不上自己的身体处在什么境地，也不知道利害在什么地方，只是专心一意罢了。
English: When I come, I will take your words as the truth, lest my sincerity be insufficient and my actions be unpleasant, and I will not be able to take care of my physical condition at all, and I will not know where the stakes are, but only concentrate on one thing.

古文：物亡迕者，如斯而已。
现代文：外物也不能改变我的诚心，如此而已。
English: External things cannot change my sincerity, that's all.

古文：今昉知子党之诞我，我内藏猜虑，外矜观听，追幸昔日之不焦溺也，怛然内热，惕然震悸矣。
现代文：今天才知道你们在欺哄我，我的心中隐藏着猜疑和忧虑，身体要小心观察测听，回想过去侥幸没有被烧焦、淹死，现在恐惧震惊得心悸。
English: Today, I know that you are deceiving me. My heart hides suspicions and worries. My body should carefully observe the hearing test, recall that I was lucky not to be burned or drowned in the past, and now my heart is shocked by fear.

古文：水火岂复可近哉？ 
现代文：哪里还能在靠近水火呢？ 
English: Where else can you be so close to water and fire?

古文：自此之后，范氏门徒路遇乞儿马医，弗敢辱也，必下车而揖之。
现代文：从此以后，范氏的门徒在路上遇到乞丐和马医这些穷人，再不敢侮辱，一定要下车致礼。
English: From then on, when Fan's disciples encountered beggars and poor people such as horse doctors on the road, they did not dare to insult them and had to get out of the car to pay their respects.

古文：宰我闻之，以告仲尼。
现代文：宰我听说了这件事，告诉孔子。
English: If you hear about this, tell Confucius.

古文：仲尼曰： 汝弗知乎？
现代文：孔子说： 你不知道吗？
English: Confucius said, "Don't you know?

古文：夫至信之人，可以感物也。
现代文：最诚心的人，可以感化万物。
English: The most sincere person can influence all things.

古文：动天地，感鬼神，横六合，而无逆者，岂但履危险，入水火而已哉？
现代文：可以感动天地，感动鬼神，纵横在天地之间而没有悖逆阻碍，哪里只是走在危险的地方、进入水火之中而已呢？
English: It is possible to move heaven and earth, to move ghosts and gods, to walk vertically and horizontally between heaven and earth without being hindered by disobedience. Where is it possible to just walk in a dangerous place, into the midst of fire and water?

古文：商丘开信伪物犹不逆，况彼我皆诚哉？
现代文：商丘开相信假话尚且遭不到阻碍与伤害，更何况我们彼此都要坚守诚信呢！
English: Merchants are not hindered or harmed by believing lies, let alone that we must adhere to honesty!

古文：小子识之！ 
现代文：你们要牢牢记住啊！ 
English: You have to remember that!

古文：周宣王之牧正有役人梁鸯者，能养野禽兽，委食于园庭之内，虽虎狼雕鹗之类，无不柔驯者。
现代文：周宣王时负责饲养禽兽的官吏手下有个仆役梁鸯，能够饲养野禽野兽，在园庭中喂养它们，即使是猛虎饿狼、大雕鱼鹰之类，没有不被训养得柔顺的。
English: At the time of King Zhou Xuan, the official in charge of raising animals had a servant, Liang Jiao, who was able to raise wild animals and feed them in the garden. Even fierce tigers, hungry wolves, large carved fish eagles and the like were not trained to be pliable.

古文：雄雌在前，孳尾成群，异类杂居，不相搏噬也。
现代文：雌雄禽兽交配繁殖，生育的禽兽成群结队；不同类的禽兽混杂居住在一起，也不互相打架伤害。
English: Male and female animals mate and reproduce, and the animals that give birth are in groups; different types of animals live together, and they do not fight and hurt each other.

古文：王虑其术终于其身，令毛丘园传之。
现代文：周宣王担心他的技术没有传人，便命令毛丘园向他学习。
English: King Zhou Xuan was worried that his skills had not been passed on to others, so he ordered Mao Qiuyuan to learn from him.

古文：梁鸯曰： 鸯，贱役也，何术以告尔？
现代文：梁鸯对毛丘园说： 我只是一个卑贱的仆役，有什么技术可以告诉你？
English: Liang Qi said to Mao Qiuyuan: I am just a lowly servant, what skills can I tell you?

古文：惧王之谓隐于尔也，且一言我养虎之法。
现代文：但又怕大王说我对你隐瞒，姑且和你谈谈畜养老虎的方法。
English: But lest the king should say that I am concealing something from you, let me tell you about the method of raising tigers.

古文：凡顺之则喜，逆之则怒，此有血气者之性也。
现代文：凡是顺着它就高兴，逆着它就发怒，这是有血气的动物的本性。
English: It is the nature of all fleshly animals to rejoice when it is obeyed and to rage when it is disobeyed.

古文：然喜怒岂妄发哉？
现代文：但高兴与愤怒难道是无端发作的吗？
English: But aren't happiness and anger just coincidental?

古文：皆逆之所犯也。
现代文：都是违背它的习惯才导致的。
English: It's all a result of breaking its habits.

古文：夫食虎者，不敢以生物与之，为其杀之之怒也；不敢以全物与之，为其碎之之怒也。
现代文：喂养老虎，不能用活的动物喂它，怕它因杀死活物时要发怒；不能用整个动物喂它，怕它因撕碎动物时也会诱发怒气。
English: When feeding a tigress, you should not feed it with a live animal, for fear that it will become angry when it kills a live animal; you should not feed it with a whole animal, for fear that it will also cause anger when it shreds the animal.

古文：时其饥饱，达其怒心。
现代文：要知道它什么时候饿了，什么时候饱了，顺从它喜怒无常的性情。
English: Know when he's hungry and when he's full, and defer to his temperament.

古文：虎之与人异类，而媚养己者，顺也；故其杀之，逆也。
现代文：虎与人是不同的种类，虎讨好喂养它的人，是因为喂养的人顺着它的缘故；那么它伤害人，就是因为逆着它的缘故了。
English: A tiger is a different species from a human being. A tiger pleases the one who feeds it because the one who feeds it follows it; then it harms the one who opposes it.

古文：然则吾岂敢逆之使怒哉？
现代文：我哪里敢逆着它使它发怒呢？
English: How dare I defy it and make it angry?

古文：亦不顺之使喜也。
现代文：但也不完全顺从它使它高兴。
English: But neither does complete obedience to it make it happy.

古文：夫喜之复也必怒，怒之复也常喜，皆不中也。
现代文：因为高兴到一定程度必然是愤怒，愤怒到一定程度常常是高兴，都不是适中的态度。
English: Because happiness to a certain extent is bound to be anger, anger to a certain extent is often happiness, are not moderate attitudes.

古文：今吾心无逆顺者也，则鸟兽之视吾，犹其侪也。
现代文：现在我的心是既不违逆也不顺从，那么鸟兽对待我，就像对待它们的同类一样了。
English: Now that my heart is neither rebellious nor submissive, the birds and beasts treat me as they would their own kind.

古文：故游吾园者，不思高林旷泽；寝吾庭者，不愿深山幽谷，理使然也。 
现代文：所以在我的园中游玩的禽兽，不思念高大的树林和空旷的水泽；在我的庭中睡觉的禽兽，不向往深山和幽谷，就是顺其自然而使它们这样。 
English: So the animals that play in my garden don't miss the tall trees and empty water; the animals that sleep in my garden don't yearn for the deep mountains and valleys, they just do it naturally.

古文：颜回问乎仲尼曰： 吾尝济乎觞深之渊矣，津人操舟若神。
现代文：颜回问孔子： 我曾经在名叫觞深的深潭上渡水，摆渡的人划船功夫神妙得很。
English: Yan Hui asked Confucius, "I once crossed the water in a deep pool called the Abyss, and the ferryman was very skillful in rowing.

古文：吾问焉，曰： 操舟可学邪？ 
现代文：我问他： 划船技术可以学吗？ 
English: I asked him: Can you learn rowing techniques?

古文：曰： 可。
现代文：他回答说： 可以。
English: A: Yes.

古文：能游者可教也，善游者数能。
现代文：能游泳的人可以教会，善于游泳的人很快就能学会。
English: Those who can swim can teach, and those who are good at swimming can quickly learn to swim.

古文：乃若夫没人，则未尝见舟而谡操之者也。 
现代文：至于会潜水的人，即使从未见过船也立刻能学会驾驭它。 
English: As for those who can dive, even if they have never seen a boat, they can immediately learn to navigate it.

古文：吾问焉，而不告。
现代文：我问他是什么道理，他就不回答了。
English: When I asked him why, he didn't answer.

古文：敢问何谓也？ 
现代文：敢问先生这是什么道理呢？ 孔子说： 唉！
English: Dare I ask what is the reason for this? Confucius said: Alas!

古文：仲尼曰： 𧮒！吾与若玩其文也久矣，而未达其实，而固且道与。
现代文：我和你在书本上讨论这件事已经很久了，却并没有明白它的实际内容，又何况要了解道术呢？
English: You and I have been discussing this matter in books for a long time, but we haven't understood its actual content, and what's more, what do we need to understand about Daoism?

古文：能游者可教也，轻水也；善游者之数能也，忘水也。
现代文：能够游泳的人可以教会他，是因为他不怕水；善于游泳的人不需要学习自己就会，是因为他忘了那是水。
English: A swimmer can be taught to swim because he is not afraid of the water; a good swimmer does not need to be taught to swim because he has forgotten that it is water.

古文：乃若夫没人之未尝见舟也而谡操之也，彼视渊若陵，视舟之覆犹其车却也。
现代文：至于那些能在深水中潜泳的人，即使从未见过船，拿起舵也能掌船，这是因为他把深渊看成是山陵，把翻船看成是车子从山坡上后退了。
English: As for those who can swim in deep water, even if they have never seen a ship, they can take the helm and steer the ship, because they see the abyss as a mountain, and the capsized ship as a car retreating from the hillside.

古文：覆却万物方陈乎前而不得入其舍，恶往而不暇？
现代文：千万件翻船、退车一类的事摆在他面前，他也不放心上，干什么事不自由自在呢？
English: Tens of thousands of things like capsized boats and overturned cars are in front of him, and he is not at ease. What are the things he is not free to do?

古文：以瓦抠者巧，以钩抠者惮，以黄金抠者惛。
现代文：用瓦片投掷的人很有技巧，用银钩投掷便有些害怕，用黄金投掷就昏昏沉沉了。
English: He who throws with tiles is skillful, he who throws with silver hooks is a little afraid, and he who throws with gold is dazed.

古文：巧一也，而有所矜，则重外也。
现代文：技巧是一样的，而有所顾惜，是因为看重身外之物了。
English: The technique is the same, but I'm a bit more cautious because I'm more concerned with what's on the outside.

古文：凡重外者拙内。 
现代文：凡是看重身外之物的人，心里的素质一定很拙劣。 
English: Anyone who attaches importance to things outside the body must have a poor inner quality.

古文：孔子观于吕梁，悬水三十仞，流沫三十里，鼋鼍鱼鳖之所不能游也。见一丈夫游之，以为有苦而欲死者也，使弟子并流而承之。
现代文：孔子在吕梁山游览，看见瀑布从几十丈高的地方飞落下来，激起的浪花溅起三十里，鼋鼍鱼鳖也不能游动，却看见一个男人在那里游泳，以为他是因痛苦而想自杀的人，便叫弟子顺着水流去救他。
English: When Confucius was on a tour of Mount Luliang, he saw a waterfall falling from a height of several tens of meters, the excited waves splashed for thirty miles, and the eels could not swim. However, he saw a man swimming there and thought that he was a person who wanted to commit suicide because of pain, so he asked his disciple to follow the current to save him.

古文：数百步而出，被发行歌而游于棠行。
现代文：谁知这个人游了几百步又出来了，披着头发唱着歌，在塘埂下漫步。
English: Who knows, this person swam a few hundred steps and came out again, wearing his hair and singing a song, strolling under the pond.

古文：孔子从而问之，曰： 吕梁悬水三十仞，流沫三十里，鼋鼍鱼鳖所不能游。向吾见子道之，以为有苦而欲死者，使弟子并流将承子。
现代文：孔子跟过去问他说： 吕梁的瀑布有几十丈高，激起的浪花飞溅出三十里，鼋鼍鱼鳖也不能游动，刚才我看见你在水里面游，以为是有痛苦而想自杀的人，便叫弟子顺着水流去救你。
English: Confucius went over to him and asked him, "The Luliang waterfall is dozens of meters high, and the excited waves splash out for thirty miles. The eel's gills can't swim. Just now, I saw you swimming in the water and thought you were someone who was in pain and wanted to commit suicide, so I asked my disciple to go with the current to save you.

古文：子出而被发行歌，吾以子为鬼也。
现代文：你出来后披着头发，一面走一面唱歌，我以为你是鬼怪。
English: When you came out with your hair up and you were singing as you walked, I thought you were a ghost.

古文：察子，则人也。请问蹈水有道乎？ 
现代文：但仔细看你，仍然是人。请问游水有道术吗？ 
English: But if you look closely, you are still a human being. Is there a way to swim in the water?

古文：曰： 亡，吾无道。
现代文：那人说： 没有，我没有什么道术。
English: The man said, "No, I don't have any Taoist skills."

古文：吾始乎故，长乎性，成乎命。
现代文：我开始于本然，再顺着天性成长，最终成就自然天命。
English: I started from the beginning, then I grew up according to my nature, and finally I achieved my natural destiny.

古文：与齎俱入，与汩偕出，从水之道而不为私焉。
现代文：与漩涡一起进入水流的中心，与上涌的流水一起浮出水面，顺从水的流动方向而不另出已见，这就是我游水的方法。 
English: To enter the center of the current with the whirlpool, to rise to the surface with the upwelling current, to follow the direction of the flow of the water without seeing anything else, this is the way I swim.

古文：此吾所以道之也。 孔子曰： 何谓始乎故，长乎性，成乎命也？ 
现代文：孔子问： 什么叫做开始于本然，再顺着天性成长，最终成就自然天命呢？ 
English: Confucius asked, "What is it to begin with one's own nature, to grow according to one's own nature, and finally to achieve one's natural destiny?

古文：曰： 吾生于陵而安于陵，故也；长于水而安于水，性也；不知吾所以然而然，命也。 
现代文：那人说： 我出生在高地而安心于高地，这就叫安于本然；我成长在水边而练习于水边，这就叫习而成性；我不知道为何这样做而去做了，这就叫顺应自然天命。 
English: The man said: I was born in the highlands and feel at ease in the highlands, which means to be at ease with nature; I grew up by the water and practice at the water's edge, which means to be habitual; I do not know why I do this and do it, which means to comply with natural destiny.

古文：仲尼适楚，出于林中，见痀偻者承蜩，犹掇之也。仲尼曰： 子巧乎！
现代文：孔子到楚国去，经过一片树林，看见一位驼背老人在粘蝉，就像捡东西一样容易。孔子问： 您真是灵巧啊！
English: When Confucius went to Chu, he passed through a forest and saw an old man with a humped back picking up sticky cicadas. It was as easy as picking up something. Confucius asked, "You are so deft!

古文：有道邪？ 
现代文：这里面有什么技巧吗？ 
English: Is there any skill involved?

古文：曰： 我有道也。
现代文：那人答道： 是有技巧的。
English: The man replied, "It's a skill.

古文：五六月，累垸二而不坠，则失者锱铢；累三而不坠，则失者十一；累五而不坠，犹掇之也。
现代文：在竹竿头上叠放两个丸子，经过五六个月的练习就不会掉下来了，那在粘蝉时失误就很少了；练到在竹竿头上叠放三个丸子而不掉下来，那在粘蝉时失误就只有十分之一；练到在竹竿头上叠放五个丸子而不掉下来，粘蝉就好像用手拾取一样毫无遗漏了。
English: After five or six months of practice, if you stack two marbles on the head of a bamboo pole, they will not fall down, and there will be few mistakes in sticking cicadas; if you practice stacking three marbles on the head of a bamboo pole without falling down, there will be only one-tenth of a mistake in sticking cicadas; if you practice stacking five marbles on the head of a bamboo pole without falling down, the sticking cicadas will not be missed as if they were picked up by hand.

古文：吾处也若橛株驹，吾执臂若槁木之枝。
现代文：我立定身子就像竖起的树墩那样静止不动，我用臂执竿就像枯木的树枝。
English: I stood as still as a tree stump, my arms like the branches of a dead tree.

古文：虽天地之大、万物之多，而唯蜩翼之知。
现代文：虽然天地广大，万物众多，而我只知道有蝉翼。
English: Although the world is vast and there are many things, I only know that there are cicada wings.

古文：吾不反不侧，不以万物易蜩之翼，何为而不得？ 
现代文：我不会因为纷杂的万物影响专注于蝉翼的心志，怎么能得不到蝉呢？ 
English: I will not concentrate on the cicada's wings because of the influence of various things. How can I not get a cicada?

古文：孔子顾谓弟子曰： 用志不分，乃凝于神，其痀偻丈人之谓乎！ 
现代文：孔子回头对弟子说： 心志专一而不分散，就会达到神妙境界。
English: Confucius turned back to his disciple and said, "If one's mind is single-minded and undivided, one will reach a wondrous realm."

古文：丈人曰： 汝逢衣徒也，亦何知问是乎？
现代文：说的就是这位驼背老人吧！ 老人说： 你是读书人，怎么想起来问这件事呢？
English: The old man said, "You are a reader, how could you think of asking me that?

古文：修汝所以，而后载言其上。 
现代文：好好研究你的仁义之道，再来谈论这些道理吧。 
English: Study well your way of benevolence and righteousness, and then let's talk about these principles.

古文：海上之人有好沤鸟者，每旦之海上，从沤鸟游，沤鸟之至者百住而不止。
现代文：海边有个喜欢鸥鸟的人，每天早上到海上去，跟鸥鸟玩耍，飞来的鸥鸟有上百只之多。
English: There is a person on the seashore who likes ostriches. Every morning, he goes to the sea and plays with ostriches. There are hundreds of ostriches flying in.

古文：其父曰： 吾闻沤鸟皆从汝游，汝取来，吾玩之。 
现代文：他父亲说： 我听说鸥鸟都爱跟你游玩，你抓一只来，我玩玩。 
English: His father said, "I've heard that ostriches like to play with you. You catch one, and I'll play with it."

古文：明日之海上，沤鸟舞而不下也。
现代文：第二天他来到海上，鸥鸟都在空中飞翔而不下来。
English: The next day he came to the sea, and the storks were all flying in the air and not coming down.

古文：故曰：至言去言，至为无为。
现代文：所以说： 最高深的言论是摈弃言论，最卓绝的行为是无所作为。
English: Therefore, the most profound speech is to abandon speech, and the most outstanding behavior is to do nothing.

古文：齐智之所知，则浅矣。
现代文：只局限于个人的智巧所知，那就失之浅薄了。 
English: To confine oneself only to one's personal wisdom and knowledge is to miss the point.

古文：赵襄子率徒十万，狩于中山，藉芿燔林，扇赫百里。
现代文：赵襄子率领仆从十万人在中山国境内打猎，践踏杂草，烧毁树林，烈炎烧及百里之远。
English: Zhao Xiangzi led a hundred thousand people to hunt in the territory of Zhongshan, trampling weeds, burning forests, and burning flames hundreds of miles away.

古文：有一人从石壁中出，随烟烬上下，众谓鬼物。
现代文：有个人从石壁中走出来，跟随着烟火忽上忽下，大家以为是鬼。
English: A man came out of the stone wall, following the fireworks up and down. Everyone thought it was a ghost.

古文：火过，徐行而出，若无所经涉者。
现代文：火势过去以后，他慢慢地走出来，像什么也没有经历过一样。
English: After the fire passed, he walked out slowly, as if he had never experienced anything.

古文：襄子怪而留之，徐而察之：形色七窍，人也；气息音声，人也。问奚道而处石？
现代文：赵襄子感到奇怪，就把他留下来。慢慢地观察他，看他的形貌、肤色与七窍是人，气息声音也是人，于是问他： 什么道术使你能住在石壁中？
English: Zhao Xiangzi felt strange, so he left him there. He slowly observed him, and saw that his shape, skin color, and seven orifices were human, and that his breath and voice were also human. So he asked him: What kind of Taoism enables you to live in a stone wall?

古文：奚道而入火？
现代文：什么道术使你能走进火中？ 
English: What do you do that allows you to walk into fire?

古文：其人曰： 奚物而谓石？
现代文：那人说： 什么东西叫做石壁？
English: The man said, "What do you call a stone wall?

古文：奚物而谓火？ 
现代文：什么东西叫做火焰？ 
English: What is a flame?

古文：襄子曰： 而向之所出者，石也；而向之所涉者，火也。 其人曰： 不知也。 
现代文：赵襄子说： 你刚才出来的地方就是石壁，你刚才所踩过的东西就是火焰。 那人说： 我不知道。 
English: Zhao Xiangzi said: The place you just came out of is a stone wall, and what you just stepped on is a flame. The man said: I don't know.

古文：魏文侯闻之，问子夏曰： 彼何人哉？ 
现代文：魏文侯听说后，问子夏说： 那是个什么样的人？ 
English: After hearing this, Wei Wenhou asked Zixia: What kind of person is that?

古文：子夏曰： 以商所闻夫子之言，和者大同于物，物无得伤阂者。游金石，蹈水火，皆可也。 
现代文：子夏说： 以我从孔子那里听来的话说，得中和之气的人，身心同外物融合在一起，因而万物不能伤害与阻碍他，在金石中游玩，在水火中行走，都是可以的。 
English: Zixia said, "According to the words I heard from Confucius, a person who has the spirit of neutralization has his mind and body fused with external things, so that nothing can harm or hinder him. It is possible to play among precious stones and walk in water and fire.

古文：文侯曰： 吾子奚不为之？ 
现代文：魏文侯又问： 你为什么不这样做呢？ 
English: Wei Wenhou also asked: Why don't you do this?

古文：子夏曰： 刳心去智，商未之能。
现代文：子夏说： 挖掉心肺，抛弃思虑，我不能办到。
English: Zixia said, "I can't dig out my heart and lungs and abandon my thoughts.

古文：虽然，试语之有暇矣。 
现代文：即使这样，姑且说一说还是有可能的。 
English: Even so, it is still possible, to say the least.

古文：文侯曰： 夫子奚不为之？ 
现代文：文侯说： 孔子为什么不这样做呢？ 
English: Wen Hou said: Why didn't Confucius do this?

古文：子夏曰： 夫子能之而能不为者也。 
现代文：子夏说： 他老人家能办得到，但是不愿意这样做。 
English: Zixia said: The old man can do it, but he doesn't want to.

古文：文侯大说。
现代文：魏文侯听了非常高兴。
English: Wei Wenhou was very happy to hear this.

古文：有神巫自齐来处于郑，命曰季咸，知人死生存亡、祸福寿夭，期以岁月旬日，如神。
现代文：有一个神奇的巫师从齐国来到郑国居住，名字叫季咸，知道人的生死存亡、祸福夭寿，所预言的年、月、旬、日，准确如神。
English: There was a magical sorcerer who came from Qi to live in Zheng. His name was Ji Xian. He knew people's life and death, misfortune and fortune, and predicted the year, month, season, and day with godlike accuracy.

古文：郑人见之，皆避而走。
现代文：郑国人见了他，都避开他走得远远的。
English: When the people of Zheng saw him, they all avoided him and walked far away.

古文：列子见之而心醉，而归以告壶丘子，曰： 始吾以夫子之道为至矣，则又有至焉者矣。 
现代文：列子见到他，佩服得如痴如醉，并回来把这事告诉了壶丘子，说： 原来我以为您的道术是最高的了，现在才知道又有高深的了。 
English: When Letsi saw him, she admired him like crazy, and when she came back, she told Kuchuko about this, saying, "Originally, I thought your Daoism was the highest, but now I know that it is also profound.

古文：壶子曰： 吾与汝无其文，未既其实，而固得道与？
现代文：壶子说： 我教授给你的仅仅是道的外表，还没有教授给你道的实质，你难道以为得道了吗？
English: The pot said, "I have only taught you the appearance of the Tao, but I have not yet taught you the essence of the Tao. Do you think you have attained the Tao?"

古文：众雌而无雄，而又奚卵焉？
现代文：只有许多雌性动物而没有雄性动物，又怎么能生出卵来呢？
English: How can eggs be produced if there are only many females and no males?

古文：而以道与世抗，必信矣，夫故使人得而相汝。
现代文：你用表面之道与世人较量，必然要暴露心迹，所以便容易让人看透得以给你占卜吉凶祸福。
English: If you compete with the world on the surface, you will inevitably expose your heart, so it is easy for people to see through and give you fortune-telling.

古文：尝试与来，以予示之。 
现代文：你试试把他请来，让他看看我的相。 
English: Why don't you invite him over and show him what I look like.

古文：明日，列子与之见壶子。
现代文：第二天，列子带着季咸来见壶子。
English: The next day, Reiko brought Ji Xian to see the pot.

古文：出而谓列子曰： 嘻！
现代文：季咸出去后对列子说： 唉！
English: After Ji Xian went out, he said to Lei Zi: Alas!

古文：子之先生死矣，弗活矣，不可以旬数矣。
现代文：您的老师快要死了，不能活了，过不了十天了。
English: Your teacher is about to die. He can't live. He has less than ten days to live.

古文：吾见怪焉，见湿灰焉。 
现代文：我看他形色怪异，面如湿灰毫无生机。 
English: I thought he was odd-looking, with a lifeless, wet-looking face.

古文：列子入，涕泣沾衿，以告壶子。
现代文：列子进来后，哭得衣服都湿了，把此话告诉了壶子。
English: When Letson came in, his clothes were wet from crying, and he told this to the pot.

古文：壶子曰： 向吾示之以地文，罪乎不誫不止，是殆见吾杜德几也。
现代文：壶子说： 刚才我将寂静的心境显示给他看，茫然无知，不动不止，所以他看见我闭塞了生机。
English: The pot said: Just now I showed him my silent state of mind, dazed and motionless, so he saw that I had blocked my vitality.

古文：尝又与来！ 
现代文：再请他来一趟吧！ 
English: Ask him to come again!

古文：明日，又与之见壶子。
现代文：第二天，季咸又同列子来见壶子。
English: The next day, Reiko brought seasoned salt to see the pot.

古文：出而谓列子曰： 幸矣！
现代文：出去后对列子说： 您的老师遇到我真是太幸运了！
English: After he left, he said to Reiko, "Your teacher is so lucky to have met me!

古文：子之先生遇我也，有瘳矣。
现代文：可以痊愈了。全身都又了生机，我看见他闭塞的生机在萌动了。 
English: He can be healed. His whole body has come back to life, and I can see his blocked-up life springing to life.

古文：灰然有生矣，吾见杜权矣。 
现代文：列子进来把这话告诉了壶子。
English: A messenger came in and told this to the pot.

古文：列子入告壶子。壶子曰： 向吾示之以天壤，名实不入，而机发于踵，此为杜权。
现代文：壶子说： 刚才我把天地间变化生长的气象显示给他看，虚名实利都不能侵入，而生机却自上而下地发动，这就是闭塞生机的萌动。
English: The pot said, "Just now, I showed him the weather of change and growth between heaven and earth. False fame and real profit can't invade, but vitality can be launched from the top down. This is the germination of vitality.

古文：是殆见吾善者几也。尝又与来！ 
现代文：所以他看到我好转的生机。再请他来一趟吧！ 
English: That's why he saw an opportunity in my improvement. Ask him to come again!

古文：明日，又与之见壶子。
现代文：第二天，季咸又同列子来见壶子。
English: The next day, Reiko brought seasoned salt to see the pot.

古文：出而谓列子曰： 子之先生坐不齐，吾无得而相焉。
现代文：出去后对列子说： 您的老师坐在那里心神恍惚，我无从给他看相，等他心神安定下来，我再给他看相。 
English: After he left, he said to Reiko, "Your teacher is sitting there in a daze. I can't show him his face. I'll show him his face when his mind settles down."

古文：试齐，将且复相之。 
现代文：列子进来告诉了壶子。
English: The sergeant came in and told the kettle.

古文：列子入告壶子。壶子曰： 向吾示之以太冲莫眹，是殆见吾衡气几也。
现代文：壶子说： 刚才我显示给他看的是太虚无迹象可征，所以他看到了我混沌平衡的生机。
English: The pot said, "What I showed him just now was too insubstantial, so he saw the vitality of my chaotic balance.

古文：鲵旋之潘为渊，止水之潘为渊，流水之潘为渊，滥水之潘为渊，沃水之潘为渊，氿水之潘为渊，雍水之潘为渊，汧水之潘为渊，肥水之潘为渊，是为九渊焉。
现代文：鲸鱼盘旋之处成为深渊，水流停积之处成为深渊，水流运动之处成为深渊，水流涌出之处成为深渊，水流陡落之处成为深渊，水流决口之处成为深渊，水流回拢之处成为深渊，水流入泽之处成为深渊，水流会合之处成为深渊，这是九种深渊。
English: Whale circling places become abysses, stagnant water places become abysses, moving water places become abysses, gushing water places become abysses, rushing water places become abysses, breaking water places become abysses, receding water places become abysses, flowing water places become abysses, meeting water places become abysses, these are the nine kinds of abysses.

古文：尝又与来！ 
现代文：再请他来一趟吧！ 
English: Ask him to come again!

古文：明日，又与之见壶子。
现代文：第二天，列子又带季咸来见壶子。
English: The next day, Reiko brought seasoned salt to see the pot.

古文：立未定，自失而走。壶子曰： 追之！ 
现代文：还没有站定，季咸就惊慌失色地逃走了。壶子说： 追上他！ 
English: Not yet standing firm, Ji Xian panicked and fled. The pot said: Catch up with him!

古文：列子追之而不及，反以报壶子，曰： 已灭矣，已失矣，吾不及也。 
现代文：列子追赶不上，回来报告壶子，说： 已经不见了，已经消失了，我追不上他了。 
English: Unable to catch up with Letson, he returned to report the pot, saying: "It's gone, it's disappeared, I can't catch up with it."

古文：壶子曰： 向吾示之以未始出吾宗。
现代文：壶子说： 刚才我没有展露我的宗本给他看。
English: The pot said: Just now, I didn't show him my master copy.

古文：吾与之虚而猗移，不知其谁何，因以为茅靡，因以为波流，故逃也。 
现代文：我只是显示出心地虚寂而随物顺化的样子，他摸不清我所使用的是什么道术，只看见我如草随风而倒，如水逐波而流的状态，所以就逃走了。 
English: He could not figure out what kind of magic I was using. He only saw that I was like grass falling with the wind, like water flowing with the waves, so he ran away.

古文：然后列子自以为未始学而归，三年不出，为其妻爨，食狶如食人，于事无亲，雕瑑复朴，块然独以其形立，㤋然而封戎，壹以是终。
现代文：列子这时才明白自己还没有学到什么，便返回到家中，三年不出门，替他妻子烧火做饭，喂猪像伺候人一样周到，对任何事物都没有偏爱，不事雕琢而复归真朴，像土块一样独立而不受干扰，在纷繁的琐事中却心神一致，终身专守着纯一之道。
English: At this time, Letson realized that he had not learned anything, so he returned home and did not leave the house for three years. He cooked for his wife, fed the pigs as carefully as a waiter, had no preference for anything, did not carve anything and returned to simplicity, was as independent as a clod and was not disturbed, but was united in mind and spirit in a variety of trifles, and adhered to a pure path for life.

古文：子列子之齐，中道而反，遇伯昏瞀人。
现代文：列子到齐国去，半路上又返了回来，遇到了伯昏瞀人。
English: The procession went to Qi Province, and on the way back, they encountered the Bokumans.

古文：伯昏瞀人曰： 奚方而反？ 
现代文：伯昏瞀人问： 为什么又中途回来了呢？ 
English: "Why did you come back in the middle of the journey?

古文：曰： 吾惊焉。  恶乎惊？ 
现代文：列子说： 我感到震惊。  为什么震惊？ 
English: "I was shocked. Why shocked?

古文： 吾食于十浆，而五浆先馈。 
现代文： 我在有十家酒店的小镇吃饭，刚到那里就有五家酒店赠送给我酒菜。 
English: I ate in a town with ten hotels, and when I got there, five hotels gave me drinks and food.

古文：伯昏瞀人曰： 若是，则汝何为惊己？ 
现代文：伯昏瞀人问： 这样的事情，你为什么要感到震惊呢？ 
English: "Why should you be shocked by such a thing?

古文：曰： 夫内诚不解，形谍成光，以外镇人心，使人轻乎贵老，而齑其所患。
现代文：列子说： 心中的情欲没有消融，形态举动便有光彩，以这外貌镇服人心，使人们对自己的敬重超过了老人，这可能带来祸患。
English: Reiko said, "If the lust in one's heart hasn't dissipated, one's appearance and behavior will be brilliant. With this appearance, one can win people's hearts and make people respect one's self more than the elderly. This may bring disaster.

古文：夫浆人特为食羹之货，多馀之赢；其为利也薄，其为权也轻，而犹若是。
现代文：那些卖浆的人只是做点羹汤的买卖罢了，赢利并不多；他们获得的利润很少，所拥有的权势很小，尚且如此尊敬我。
English: Those who sell the syrup are just selling a little soup, and the profit is not much; they make little profit, have little power, and yet they respect me so much.

古文：而况万乘之主，身劳于国，而智尽于事；彼将任我以事，而效我以功，吾是以惊。 
现代文：何况是万乘的君主，他们为国事操劳，为事业竭尽心智；他将会把重任交给我而要我建功效力，因此我感到惊异。 
English: What's more, the Emperor of Manchukuo, who has been working hard for the state affairs and exerting his mind for the cause, will give me the important task and ask me to make contributions, so I am surprised.

古文：伯昏瞀人曰： 善哉观乎！
现代文：伯昏瞀人说： 你的看法真是太好了！
English: "What a great opinion you have!" said Bo Dumoulin.

古文：汝处己，人将保汝矣。 
现代文：你这样严格要求自己，人们一定会归附你的。 
English: You hold yourself to such a high standard, people are bound to gravitate towards you.

古文：无几何而往，则户外之屦满矣。
现代文：伯昏瞀人没过多久去列子家，看到门外拜访者的鞋子已经摆满了。
English: It didn't take long for the man from Bo to go to Reiko's house and see that the shoes of the visitors outside the door were already full.

古文：伯昏瞀人北面而立，敦杖蹙之乎颐。
现代文：伯昏瞀人面向北站着，竖着拐杖支撑着下巴。
English: Mr. Bo stood facing north, his chin propped up on crutches.

古文：立有间，不言而出。
现代文：站了一会儿，没有说话就走了。
English: He stood for a moment, then left without a word.

古文：宾者以告列子。
现代文：接待宾客的人告诉了列子。
English: The person receiving the guests told the story.

古文：列子提履徒跣而走，暨乎门，问曰： 先生既来，曾不废药乎？ 
现代文：列子提着鞋子光着脚赶了出来，追到大门口，问道： 先生既然来了，还不说几句启发训导我的话吗？ 
English: The sergeant rushed out barefooted, shoes in hand, and chased him to the front door, asking, "Since the teacher is here, won't you say a few words to inspire and instruct me?"

古文：曰： 已矣。
现代文：瞀人说： 算了吧！
English: The eunuch said, "Forget it!

古文：吾固告汝曰，人将保汝，果保汝矣。
现代文：我本来就告诉过你，人们将归附于你，果然归附你了吧。
English: I told you people would flock to you, and they have.

古文：非汝能使人保汝，而汝不能使人无汝保也，而焉用之感也？
现代文：这不是你有能力使别人归附于你，而是你没有能力使别人不归附于你。你哪里用得着以言行去感动别人呢？
English: It is not that you have the ability to make others belong to you, but that you do not have the ability to make others not belong to you. Why do you need to move others with words and deeds?

古文：感豫出异。且必有感也，摇而本身，又无谓也。
现代文：你事先就应当知道以言行感动别人的结果会使自己与众不同。而且心有所动，必然会动摇你的本性，这就更没有意义了。
English: You should know in advance that the result of touching others with your words and deeds will make you different. And if your heart is moved, it will inevitably shake your nature, which is even more meaningless.

古文：与汝游者，莫汝告也。
现代文：与你交游的人，不能把这些道理告诉你。
English: Your fellow travelers can't tell you these things.

古文：彼所小言，尽人毒也。
现代文：他们那些细巧之言，尽是毒害人心的。
English: Their subtle words are poisonous to people's hearts.

古文：莫觉莫悟，何相孰也！ 
现代文：没有人能够从中觉悟，大家又怎么能互相获得教益呢！ 
English: No one can gain enlightenment from it, so how can everyone learn from each other?

古文：杨朱南之沛，老聃西游于秦，邀于郊。至梁而遇老子。
现代文：杨朱向南到沛地，老聃西游到秦地。杨朱抄郊野的小路，至梁地遇到了老子。
English: Yang Zhu went south to Paidi, and Laojun went west to Qin. Yang Zhu followed the country road and met Lao Zi in Liangdi.

古文：老子中道仰天而叹曰： 始以汝为可教，今不可教也。 
现代文：老子在半路上仰天长叹道： 起初我以为你是可以教导的，现在看来不可教导了。 
English: Lao Zi looked up at the sky and sighed, "At first I thought you could teach, but now it seems you can't.

古文：杨朱不答。
现代文：杨朱没吭声。
English: Yang Zhu did not speak.

古文：至舍，进涫漱巾栉，脱履户外，膝行而前，曰： 向者夫子仰天而叹曰： 始以汝为可教，今不可教。 
现代文：到了旅舍，杨朱给老子送上洗脸水、漱口水、毛巾和梳子，把鞋子脱在门外，跪着走到老子面前，说： 刚才您老人家仰天长叹道： 起初我以为你是可以教导的，现在看来不可教导了。 
English: When they arrived at the hostel, Yang Zhu gave Lao Zi a face wash, mouthwash, a towel, and a comb. He took off his shoes outside the door, knelt down in front of Lao Zi, and said, "Just now, your old man was looking up at the sky and sighing: At first, I thought you could teach, but now it seems you can't teach.

古文：弟子欲请夫子辞，行不间，是以不敢。
现代文：学生想请教您原因，但先生忙着赶路，所以没敢打扰。
English: The student wanted to ask you why, but the teacher was in a hurry, so he didn't dare to interrupt.

古文：今夫子间矣，请问其过。 
现代文：现在您有空了，请问我哪里做错了。 
English: Now that you are free, please ask me what I did wrong.

古文：老子曰： 而睢睢，而盱盱，而谁与居？
现代文：老子说： 你神态傲慢，谁还愿意和你相处呢？
English: Lao Tzu said, "Your countenance is arrogant, who would want to get along with you?

古文：大白若辱，盛德若不足。 
现代文：最洁白的东西好像十分黑暗，最道德的人好像有所不足。 
English: The whitest things seem very dark, and the most virtuous seem to lack something.

古文：杨朱蹴然变容曰： 敬闻命矣！ 
现代文：杨朱立刻变得十分恭敬地说： 敬听教诲了。 
English: Yang Zhu immediately became very respectful and said, "I've listened to the teachings.

古文：其往也，舍者迎将家，公执席，妻执巾栉，舍者避席，炀者避灶。
现代文：杨朱往沛地去，走到旅舍的时候，主人十分客气地迎接他进房间，老板安排坐席，老板娘拿来毛巾和梳子，旅舍的客人让出了坐席，在灶前烤火的人让出了灶门。
English: Yang Zhu kept walking. When he reached the hostel, the owner welcomed him into the room very politely. The boss arranged the seating, the boss's daughter brought towels and combs, the guests of the hostel gave up their seats, and the person who was baking in front of the stove gave up the stove door.

古文：其反也，舍者与之争席矣。
现代文：当他从沛地回来的时候，旅舍的客人们已不再拘束，同他争抢坐席了。
English: When he came back refreshed, the hostel guests were no longer restrained and competed with him for a seat.

古文：杨朱过宋，东之于逆旅。
现代文：杨朱经过来国，向东到了旅舍。
English: Yang Zhu passed through the country and went east to the hostel.

古文：逆旅人有妾二人，其一人美，其一人恶；恶者贵而美者贱。
现代文：旅舍主人有两个小老婆，其中一人美丽，一人丑陋，丑陋的受尊宠而美丽的受冷落。
English: The innkeeper had two wives, one beautiful and one ugly. The ugly one was favored and the beautiful one was despised.

古文：杨朱问其故。
现代文：杨子问这是什么缘故。
English: Yang Zi asked the reason for this.

古文：逆旅小子对曰： 其美者自美，吾不知其美也；其恶者自恶，吾不知其恶也。 
现代文：旅舍的伙计回答说： 那美丽的自以为美丽，我并不觉得她美丽；那丑陋的自以为丑陋，我并不觉得她丑陋。 
English: The innkeeper replied, "The beautiful one thinks she is beautiful, but I don't find her beautiful; the ugly one thinks she is ugly, but I don't find her ugly.

古文：杨朱曰： 弟子记之！
现代文：杨子说： 弟子们记住！
English: Yang Zi said: Disciples, remember!

古文：行贤而去自贤之行，安往而不爱哉？ 
现代文：品行高尚而又能去掉自以为高尚之心的人，到什么地方不受人敬重呢？ 
English: Where is there no respect for a man who acts nobly and is able to rid himself of what he considers to be a noble heart?

古文：天下有常胜之道，有不常胜之道。
现代文：天下有常胜的道，有不常胜的道。
English: There is a way of permanent victory and a way of impermanent victory.

古文：常胜之道曰柔，常不胜之道曰强。
现代文：常胜之道叫做柔弱，不常胜之道叫做刚强。
English: The way of constant victory is called softness, and the way of infrequent victory is called strength.

古文：二者亦知，而人未之知。
现代文：二者显而易见，但人们多不知道。
English: Both are obvious, but many people don't know about them.

古文：故上古之言：强，先不己若者；柔，先出于己者。
现代文：所以上古有句话说：刚强，是认为外物不如自己的；柔弱，却是认为外物胜过自己的。
English: That is why there was a saying in ancient times: the strong think that what is foreign is not as good as their own; the weak think that what is foreign is better than their own.

古文：先不己若者，至于若己，则殆矣。
现代文：认为外物不如自己的，等到它们和自己相当了，就危险了。
English: It is dangerous to think that external things are not as good as one's own until they are.

古文：先出于己者，亡所殆矣。
现代文：认为外物胜于自己的，就没有危险了。
English: There is no danger in thinking that what is outside is better than what is inside.

古文：以此胜一身若徒，以此任天下若徒，谓不胜而自胜，不任而自任也。
现代文：用来战胜身心的是这个道理，用来应付天下的也是这个道理，这叫做虽然不是有意战胜却自然就已战胜，虽然不是有意胜任却自然就已胜任。
English: It is this principle that is used to overcome the mind and body, and it is also this principle that is used to deal with the world. This is called although it is not intentional to win, it is naturally defeated, although it is not intentional to be competent, it is naturally competent.

古文：粥子曰： 欲刚，必以柔守之；欲强，必以弱保之。
现代文：鬻子说： 要想刚，必定得靠柔来守护；要想强，必定得用弱来保障。
English: The cripple said, "If you want to be strong, you must protect yourself with gentleness; if you want to be strong, you must protect yourself with weakness."

古文：积于柔必刚，积于弱必强。
现代文：柔积蓄起来必定刚，弱积蓄起来必定强。
English: Soft accumulation must be strong, and weak accumulation must be strong.

古文：观其所积，以知祸福之乡。
现代文：观测它们所积蓄的，就可以知道祸福的趋向了。
English: By observing what they accumulate, it is possible to know the trend of good and evil.

古文：强胜不若己，至于若己者刚；柔胜出于己者，其力不可量。 
现代文：靠刚强胜过不如自己的，等到它与自己相当就会遭殃；靠柔弱胜过超过自己的，力量便不可估量。 
English: He who relies on strength to overcome his inferiority will suffer misfortune when he is equal to himself; he who relies on weakness to overcome his superiority will gain immeasurable strength.

古文：老聃曰： 兵强则灭，木强则折。
现代文：老子说： 兵马强大就会被消灭，树木强硬就会被折断。
English: Lao Tzu said: Strong soldiers and horses will be destroyed, and strong trees will be broken.

古文：柔弱者生之徒，坚强者死之徒。 
现代文：柔弱是生存的道路，坚强是死亡的途径。 
English: Weakness is the way to survive, strength is the way to die.

古文：状不必童，而智童；智不必童，而状童。
现代文：形貌不必相同而智慧相同，智慧不一定相同而形貌相同。
English: The appearance does not have to be the same but the wisdom is the same, the wisdom does not have to be the same but the appearance is the same.

古文：圣人取童智而遗童状，众人近童状而疏童智。
现代文：圣人选取相同的智慧，而不选取相同的形貌。一般人选取相同的形貌而不选取相同的智慧。
English: A sage chooses the same wisdom, but not the same form; a common man chooses the same form, but not the same wisdom.

古文：状与我童者，近而爱之；状与我异者，疏而畏之。
现代文：形貌与自己相同的，便亲近而喜爱它；形貌与自己不同的，便疏远而害怕它。
English: If the form is the same as one's own, one is close to it and loves it; if the form is different from one's own, one is distant from it and fears it.

古文：有七尺之骸，手足之异，戴发含齿，倚而趣者，谓之人；而人未必无兽心。
现代文：有七尺长的身躯，手与脚不一样，头上长头发，口中生牙齿，能站立并快步行走的，叫做人，而人未必没有禽兽之心。
English: A seven-foot-long body, with hands and feet different, hair on the head, teeth in the mouth, able to stand and walk quickly, is called a man, and a man may not have the heart of a beast.

古文：虽有兽心，以状而见亲矣。
现代文：即使有禽兽之心，也以人的形状而得到他人的亲近。
English: Even if you have the heart of a beast, you can get close to others in the form of a human being.

古文：傅翼戴角，分牙布爪，仰飞伏走，谓之禽兽；而禽兽未必无人心。
现代文：身上长翅，头上生角，龇着牙齿，张着脚爪，抬着头飞，低着头跑，叫做禽兽，而禽兽未必没有人心。
English: They have wings on their bodies, horns on their heads, they have teeth, they have claws, they fly with their heads up and run with their heads down. They are called beasts, but beasts do not necessarily have no heart.

古文：虽有人心，以状而见疏矣。
现代文：即使有人心，也以禽兽的形状而被人疏远。
English: Even if there is a human heart, it is alienated in the form of an animal.

古文：庖牺氏、女娲氏、神农氏、夏后氏，蛇身人面，牛首虎鼻：此有非人之状，而有大圣之德。
现代文：扈牺氏、女蜗氏、神农氏、夏后氏，或者是蛇身人面，或者是牛头虎鼻，他们有不是人的形状，而有大圣人的道德。
English: The priestesses, the maidservants, the shamans, and the queens, whether snake-faced or bull-headed and snub-nosed, are not human in shape, but have the morals of great saints.

古文：夏桀、殷纣、鲁桓、楚穆，状貌七窍，皆同于人，而有禽兽之心。而众人守一状以求至智，未可几也。
现代文：夏桀王、殷纣王、鲁桓公、楚穆王，他们的形貌都和人一样，但却有禽兽之心，而人们却坚持以他们有和人一样的形貌而希望他们有很高的智慧，这是办不到的。
English: King Xia Yao, King Yin Yao, King Lu Huan, and King Chu Mu all have the same appearance as humans, but they have the hearts of animals, while people insist that they have the same appearance as humans and hope that they have high wisdom, which is impossible.

古文：黄帝与炎帝战于阪泉之野，帅熊、羆、狼、豹、貙、虎为前驱，雕、鹖、鹰、鸢为旗帜，此以力使禽兽者也。
现代文：黄帝在阪泉的郊野与炎帝作战时，曾统帅熊、罴、狼、豹、驱、虎为前驱，鵰、鹖、鹰、鸢为旗帜，这是用力量役使禽兽的例子。
English: When the Yellow Emperor was fighting the Flaming Emperor in the countryside of Hanquan, he had the bear, roe deer, wolf, leopard, roe deer, and tiger as vanguards, and the roe deer, roe deer, eagle, and jackal as flags. This is an example of using strength to use animals.

古文：尧使夔典乐，击石拊石，百兽率舞；《箫韶》九成，凤皇来仪：此以声致禽兽者也。
现代文：尧使用夔主管音乐，敲击着磬钟，各种野兽跟着跳舞；萧韶乐曲成了套，凤凰也来朝拜，这是用乐声吸引禽兽的例子。
English: With the use of gongs to conduct music, and the gongs to strike the bell, all kinds of beasts danced with it; the music of Xiao Wei became a set, and the phoenix also came to worship. This is an example of using music to attract animals.

古文：然则禽兽之心，奚为异人？
现代文：那么禽兽之心，与人有什么不同呢？
English: So what is the difference between the heart of an animal and that of a human?

古文：形音与人异，而不知接之之道焉。
现代文：形状声音与人不同，一般人便不知道与它们交往的方法。
English: Shapes and sounds are different from people, and the average person does not know how to communicate with them.

古文：圣人无所不知，无所不通，故得引而使之焉。
现代文：圣人没有什么不知道，没有什么不通晓，所以能吸引并能役使它们。
English: There is nothing the sage does not know, nothing he does not understand, and so he is able to attract and use them.

古文：禽兽之智有自然与人童者，其齐欲摄生，亦不假智于人也。
现代文：禽兽的智慧有生来就与人相同的，它们都想保养身体，智慧也不比人低。
English: The wisdom of animals is the same as that of humans. They all want to maintain their bodies, and their wisdom is no less than that of humans.

古文：牝牡相偶，母子相亲；避平依险，违寒就温；居则有群，行则有列；小者居内，壮者居外；饮则相携，食则鸣群。
现代文：雌雄互相匹配，母子互相亲爱；避开平地，依托险峻；逃离寒冷，寻求温暖；居住时结伙成群，出行时依次成列；幼生的住在里面，强壮的住在外面；喝水时互相提携，吃食时一起叫鸣。
English: Males and females match each other, mothers and children love each other; avoid flatlands, rely on steep slopes; escape the cold, seek warmth; live in groups, travel in rows; young live inside, strong live outside; drink water together, eat together.

古文：太古之时，则与人同处，与人并行。
现代文：上古的时候，它们同人类在一起居住，和人类一同出行。
English: In ancient times, they lived with humans and traveled with them.

古文：帝王之时，始惊骇散乱矣。
现代文：到了有帝王的时候，才开始被惊吓而散乱了。
English: Only when there was an emperor did they start to get scared and scatter.

古文：逮于末世，隐伏逃窜，以避患害。
现代文：等到衰败的乱世，它们更是隐藏逃窜，以避免祸患。
English: Until the chaos of decay, they even hide and flee to avoid the scourge.

古文：今东方介氏之国，其国人数数解六畜之语者，盖偏知之所得。
现代文：现在东方有个介氏之国，这个国家的人常常懂六畜的语言，大概是有异常智慧的缘故。
English: Now there is a country in the East, the country of the Jie, whose people often understand the language of the six animals, probably because of their extraordinary wisdom.

古文：太古神圣之人，备知万物情态，悉解异类音声。
现代文：上古的神圣之人，对万物的性质形态全都明白，对异类的语言声音全都了解。
English: The holy men of antiquity understood everything about the nature and form of all things, and everything about the sounds of foreign languages.

古文：会而聚之，训而受之，同于人民。
现代文：把它们会合聚集起来，对它们进行训练教授，和对待人民一样。
English: Gather them together, train them, teach them, and treat them like people.

古文：故先会鬼神魑魅，次达八方人民，末聚禽兽虫蛾。言血气之类，心智不殊远也。
现代文：所以先会合鬼神妖怪，然后通达八方人民，最后聚集禽兽昆虫，说凡是有血有气的动物，它们的头脑智慧相差得并不太远。
English: Therefore, they first gathered ghosts, gods, and monsters, then reached out to the people in all directions, and finally gathered animals and insects, saying that all animals with blood and gas are not too far apart in their brains and wisdom.

古文：神圣知其如此，故其所教训者无所遗逸焉。
现代文：神圣之人明白这个道理，所以他们教授训练所有的动物没有什么遗漏。
English: The holy men understood this, so they taught and trained all the animals without omission.

古文：宋有狙公者，爱狙，养之成群。
现代文：宋国有个饲养猴子的人，很喜欢猴子。
English: In the Song Dynasty, there was a man who raised monkeys. He liked monkeys very much.

古文：能解狙之意，狙亦得公之心。
现代文：他养了一群猴子，了解猴子的性情，猴子也懂得他的心意。
English: He kept a group of monkeys and understood the nature of the monkeys, and the monkeys also understood his mind.

古文：损其家口，充狙之欲。
现代文：他还减少家里人的口粮，以满足猴子的需要。
English: He also reduced his family's rations to meet the monkey's needs.

古文：俄而匮焉，将限其食。恐众狙之不驯于己也，先诳之曰： 与若芧，朝三而暮四，足乎？ 
现代文：不久家里贫困起来，他打算限制猴子的食物，又怕猴子不听自己的话，便先欺骗它们说： 喂你们橡子，早上三个，晚上四个，够吗？ 
English: Soon the family became poor, and he wanted to limit the monkeys' food. Fearing that the monkeys would not listen to him, he first deceived them by saying: "Feed you acorns, three in the morning and four in the evening, is that enough?

古文：众狙皆起而怒。
现代文：众猴子都跳起来发了怒。
English: All the monkeys jumped up in anger.

古文：俄而曰： 与若芧，朝四而暮三，足乎？ 
现代文：过了一会儿，他又说： 喂你们橡子，早上四个，晚上三个，够吗？ 
English: After a while, he added: "Feed you acorns, four in the morning and three in the evening, is that enough?

古文：众狙皆伏而喜。
现代文：猴子们听了，都趴在地上十分高兴。
English: When the monkeys heard this, they all lay down on the ground and were very happy.

古文：物之以能鄙相笼，皆犹此也。
现代文：世间万物之所以用巧智或鄙俗的方法可以笼络，道理就在这里。
English: This is the reason why all things in the world can be entangled using clever or vulgar methods.

古文：圣人以智笼群愚，亦犹狙公之以智笼众狙也。
现代文：圣人用智慧来笼络欺骗那些愚笨的人，就像养猴人用智慧笼络欺骗那些猴子一样。
English: A sage uses wisdom to entrap and deceive those who are foolish, just as a monkey breeder uses wisdom to entrap and deceive those monkeys.

古文：名实不亏，使其喜怒哉！
现代文：名义与实际都没有亏损，却能够使他们欢喜或者愤怒！
English: There is no nominal or actual loss, but it can make them happy or angry!

古文：纪渻子为周宣王养斗鸡。
现代文：纪渻子为周宣王饲养斗鸡。
English: Ji Yanzi raises fighting roosters for Zhou Xuanwang.

古文：十日而问： 鸡可斗已乎？ 
现代文：周宣王过了十天就问： 鸡可以斗了吗？ 
English: After ten days, King Zhou Xuan asked: Can chickens fight?

古文：曰： 未也，方虚骄而恃气。 
现代文：回答说： 不行。还没有真本领，只知依仗骄傲之气。 
English: He replied, "No, I can't. I don't have any real ability, I just rely on my pride."

古文：十日又问。
现代文：过了十天又问。
English: Ten days later, he asked again.

古文：曰： 未也，犹应影响。 
现代文：回答说： 不行。它看到别的鸡的影子、听到别的鸡的声音就想应战。 
English: He replied, "No. It sees the shadow of another chicken and hears the sound of another chicken and wants to fight."

古文：十日又问。
现代文：过了十天又问。
English: Ten days later, he asked again.

古文：曰： 未也，犹疾视而盛气。 
现代文：回答说： 不行。还目光锐利，气势旺盛。 
English: He replied, "No, I can't. My eyes are still sharp and I still have a lot of energy.

古文：十日又问。
现代文：过了十天又问。
English: Ten days later, he asked again.

古文：曰： 几矣。
现代文：回答说： 差不多了。
English: He replied: "Almost."

古文：鸡虽有鸣者，已无变矣。
现代文：即使别的鸡大声鸣叫，它也不为所动。
English: Even if another chicken squawks loudly, it is not moved.

古文：望之似木鸡矣，其德全矣。
现代文：看上去像个木头鸡了。它的德行已经晚完备了。
English: He looks like a wooden chicken. His virtue has been perfected too late.

古文：异鸡无敢应者，反走耳。 
现代文：别的鸡没有敢应战的，纷纷掉身逃跑了。 
English: The other chickens didn't dare to fight back and ran away.

古文：惠盎见宋康王。
现代文：惠盎拜见宋康王。
English: Hui Ang pays homage to Song Kang Wang.

古文：康王蹀足謦欬，疾言曰： 寡人之所说者，勇有力也，不说为仁义者也。
现代文：康王正顿足咳嗽着，急急地说： 我所喜欢的是勇敢且有力量的人，不喜欢谈论仁义道德的人。
English: "I like people who are brave and powerful, and I don't like people who talk about righteousness and morality," he said, suddenly coughing.

古文：客将何以教寡人？ 
现代文：您打算用什么来教导我呢？ 
English: What are you going to teach me?

古文：惠盎对曰： 臣有道于此，使人虽勇，刺之不入，虽有力，击之弗中。
现代文：惠盎回答说： 我这里有一种道术，能使别人即使勇敢，也刺不进我的身体；即使有力量，也无法击中我。
English: Hui Ang replied, "I have a kind of Taoism here that can prevent others from piercing my body, even if they are brave; even if they have strength, they cannot hit me.

古文：大王独无意邪？ 
现代文：难道大王对此没有兴趣吗？ 宋康王说： 好！
English: Isn't the king interested in this?

古文：惠盎曰： 夫刺之不入，击之不中，此犹辱也。
现代文：这正是我所想要听到的。 惠盎说： 刺我不进，打我不中，这还是在受侮辱。
English: That's exactly what I wanted to hear. Hui Ang said: "If I don't get stabbed, if I don't get hit, it's still an insult.

古文：臣有道于此，使人虽有勇，弗敢刺，虽有力，弗敢击。
现代文：我这里还有一种道术，能使人虽然勇敢却不敢刺我，虽有力量却不敢打我。
English: I also have a Daoist technique that can make people brave but not dare to stab me, and strong but not dare to hit me.

古文：夫弗敢，非无其志也。
现代文：不过不敢并不等于不想。
English: But not daring is not the same as not wanting to.

古文：臣有道于此，使人本无其志也。
现代文：我这里还有一种道术，能使人根本就不想打人。
English: I also have a technique that makes people not want to hit at all.

古文：夫无其志也，未有爱利之心也。
现代文：不过不想打还没有爱护帮助你的思想。
English: But don't want to fight the thought that there is no love to help you.

古文：臣有道于此，使天下丈夫女子，莫不驩然皆欲爱利之。
现代文：我这里还有一种道术，能使天下的男人女子没有不高高兴兴要爱护帮助你的。
English: I also have a technique here that can make men and women all over the world want to love and help you without displeasure.

古文：此其贤于勇有力也，四累之上也。
现代文：这比勇敢、有力量要好得多，是比上述四种道术都好的道术。
English: This is much better than being brave and strong, and is a better Daoism than the above-mentioned four Daoisms.

古文：大王独无意邪？ 
现代文：难道大王对此没有兴趣吗？ 
English: Isn't the king interested in this?

古文：宋王曰： 此寡人之所欲得也。 
现代文：宋康王说： 这正是我所想要得到的。 
English: Song Kang Wang said, "This is exactly what I wanted.

古文：惠盎对曰： 孔、墨是已。
现代文：惠盎说： 孔子、墨子就是这样。
English: Hui Ang said: Confucius and Mozi are like that.

古文：孔丘、墨翟，无地而为君，无官而为长；天下丈夫女子莫不延颈举踵而愿安利之。
现代文：孔丘、墨翟没有土地却成为君主，没有官职却成为官长，天下的男人女子没有不伸着脖子、踮着脚盼望他们，希望得到安定和帮助的。
English: There is no man or woman in the world who does not crane their necks and stomp their feet in expectation of them, hoping to receive stability and help.

古文：今大王，万乘之主也，诚有其志，则四竟之内皆得其利矣。
现代文：现在大王是一个拥有万乘兵车的君主，如果真有这样的志向，那么国境之内的百姓，就都会得到好处。
English: Now the great king is a monarch with thousands of chariots. If there is such an aspiration, then the people within the borders will benefit.

古文：其贤于孔、墨也远矣。 
现代文：那恩惠就会比孔丘、墨翟多得多了。 
English: That favor will be much more than Confucius and Mo Yan.

古文：宋王无以应。
现代文：宋康王无话可说。
English: Song Kang Wang had nothing to say.

古文：惠盎趋而出。
现代文：惠盎快步走了出去。
English: Hui Ang walked out at a brisk pace.

古文：宋王谓左右曰： 辩矣，客之以说服寡人也！ 
现代文：宋康王对身边的人说： 真是能说会道啊，竟然以这样的辩说把我说服了。 
English: Song Kangwang said to the people around him, "You really know how to argue, and you have convinced me with such an argument.

