古文：凡守者，进不郭，退不亭障，以御战，非善者也。
现代文：凡是守城的军队，不在外城迎击敌人，不固守城郊险要据点，这样来进行防御战斗，不是好的办法。
English: It is not a good idea for any army defending a city to fight a defensive battle without engaging the enemy in the outer city and without holding fast to the key strongholds on the outskirts of the city.

古文：豪杰雄俊，坚甲利兵，劲弩矢，尽在郭中，乃收窖廪，毁拆而入保，令客气十百倍，而主之气不半焉。敌攻者，伤之甚也。
现代文：因为，把英雄豪杰，精锐部队，优良兵器，都集中在城内，并且收集城外的存粮，拆毁城外的房后，使民众统统退保城垣，这样就会使攻者气焰嚣张，而守者士气低落，一旦遭敌进攻，守军就会受到很大损伤。
English: Because the heroes and heroines, elite troops, and fine weapons are all concentrated in the city, and the stored grain outside the city is collected, the houses outside the city are demolished, and the people are all withdrawn to defend the city walls. This will make the attackers arrogant, and the defenders demoralized. Once attacked by the enemy, the defenders will be greatly damaged.

古文：然而世将弗能知。
现代文：但是一般庸将却不懂得这个道理。
English: But the average mediocre player doesn't understand this.

古文：夫守者，不失险者也。守法：城一丈，十人守之，工食不与焉。
现代文：防守的军队绝不能放弃险要的地形，守城的方法，城墙每一丈，需要十人防守，勤杂人员还不计算在内。
English: The defending army must not abandon the critical terrain, the method of defending the city, each height of the city wall requires ten people to defend, not counting the diligent personnel.

古文：出者不守，守者不出。
现代文：出击部队不担任守备，守备部队不担任出击。
English: The attack force does not serve as the defense force, and the defense force does not serve as the attack force.

古文：一而当十，十而当百，百而当千，千而当万。
现代文：守城一人可当敌十人，十人可当敌百人，百人可当敌千人，千人可当敌万人。
English: One person guarding a city can be an enemy of ten, ten can be an enemy of a hundred, a hundred can be an enemy of a thousand, and a thousand can be an enemy of ten thousand.

古文：故为城郭者，非特费于民聚土壤也，诚为守也。
现代文：所以建筑城郭，并不是耗费民力去堆土玩，实际是为了加强防御。
English: Therefore, the construction of the castle was not a waste of manpower to pile up dirt, but actually to strengthen the defense.

古文：千丈之城，则万人之守。池深而广，城坚而厚，士民备，薪食给，弩坚矢强，矛戟称之，此守法也。
现代文：通常千丈之城需要万人防守，同时要求城壕深而宽，城墙坚而厚，人力充足，柴粮丰富；弓矢坚强，矛戟也同样锋利。
English: Usually, a city of a thousand towers needs ten thousand people to defend it. At the same time, it requires deep and wide trenches, strong and thick city walls, sufficient manpower, abundant firewood and grain; strong bows and arrows, and equally sharp spear points.

古文：攻者不下十余万之众，其有必救之军者，则有必守之城；无必救之军者，则无必守之城。若彼坚而救诚，则愚夫愚妇无不蔽城尽资血城者。
现代文：这就是守城的方法。敌人使用十万以上的兵力进攻城市时，守城的军队如果有可靠的援军，城市就一定能守得住，如果没有可靠的援军，城市就不一定能守住。如果防者城垣坚固，又有可靠的援军，那么，民众就没有不竭尽全力守城的。
English: This is the way to defend the city. When the enemy uses more than 100,000 troops to attack the city, if the army defending the city has reliable reinforcements, the city will definitely be able to hold on, but if there are no reliable reinforcements, the city will not necessarily be able to hold on. If the defenders have strong walls and reliable reinforcements, then the people will not do their best to defend the city.

古文：期年之城，守余于攻者，救余于守者。
现代文：要想坚守一年的城市，必须守军足以抵抗进攻的敌人，援军足以支援防守的军队。
English: In order to hold a city for a year, the defending army must be strong enough to resist the attacking enemy, and the reinforcements must be strong enough to support the defending army.

古文：若彼城坚而救不诚，则愚夫愚妇无不守陴而泣下，此人之常情也。遂发其窖廪救抚，则亦不能止矣。必鼓其豪杰雄俊，坚甲利兵，劲弩强矢并于前，毁瘠者并于后。
现代文：如果城垣坚固但没有可靠的提军，那么，民众就没有不守着城垛而悲伤的，这是人之常情，即使散发财物和粮食来安抚他们，也不能消除这种悲观情绪，必须勉励豪杰英雄率领精锐部队，使用优良武器，奋力战斗于前，使老幼残弱者并力支援于后，
English: If the city walls are strong but there is no reliable supply of troops, then the people will not be sad without guarding the city walls. This is human nature. Even if we distribute wealth and grain to appease them, we cannot eliminate this pessimistic mood. We must encourage heroes to lead elite troops, use high-quality weapons, and fight hard in the front, so that the old and the weak can be supported in the rear.

古文：十万之军顿于城下，救必开之，守必出之。
现代文：敌人十万大军兵临城下，援军必须能打开重围，守军也必须能乘机出去，抢占要点。
English: The enemy has a hundred thousand soldiers in front of the city. The reinforcements must be able to reopen the siege, and the defenders must also be able to take the opportunity to go out and seize the key points.

古文：要塞，但救其后，无绝其粮道，中外相应。此救而示之不诚。则倒敌而待之者也。后其壮，前其老，彼敌无前，守不得而止矣。
现代文：援军也可以只在守军的后方打开一条通路，使军的粮道不被切断，并与守军互相策应，这是为了表示救援不积极用以迷惑敌人，等待有利战机，只好把精部队撤到后方控制起来，而把战斗力差的部队配置在攻城前线，这样敌人攻城，就不可能有进展，而守军也可以出去了。
English: Reinforcements can also only open a passage in the rear of the defenders, so that the army's food supply is not cut off, and coordinate with the defenders. This is to indicate that the rescue is not actively used to confuse the enemy, waiting for a favorable fighter, it is necessary to withdraw the elite troops to the rear and control them, and place the troops with poor combat effectiveness on the front line of the siege, so that the enemy can not attack the city, and the defenders can go out.

古文：此守权之谓也。
现代文：这就是守城的权变。
English: This was a coup d'état by the city's defenders.

