古文：黄帝问曰：为五谷汤液及醪醴奈何？
现代文：黄帝问道：用五谷来做成汤液及醪醴，应该怎样？
English: The Yellow Emperor asked, "What should be done with grain to make soup and stew?

古文：岐伯对曰：必以稻米，炊之稻薪，稻米者完，稻薪者坚。
现代文：岐伯回答说：必须要用稻米作原料，以稻杆作燃料，因为稻米之气完备，稻杆又很坚劲。
English: Qi Bo replied: It is necessary to use rice as raw material and rice cane as fuel, because rice is full of gas and rice cane is very strong.

古文：帝曰：何以然？
现代文：黄帝问道：何以见得？
English: The Yellow Emperor said, "Why?

古文：岐伯曰：此得天地之和，高下之宜，故能至完：伐取得时，故能至坚也。
现代文：岐伯说：稻禀天地之和气，生长于高下适宜的地方，所以得气最完；收割在秋时，故其杆坚实。
English: Qi Bo said: the rice stalk is the harmony of heaven and earth. It grows in a suitable place at a suitable height, so it gets the most gas. It is harvested in autumn, so its stem is solid.

古文：帝曰：上古圣人作汤液醪醴，为而不用何也？
现代文：黄帝道：上古时代有学问的医生，制成汤液和醪醴，但虽然制好，却备在那里不用，这是什麽道理？
English: Huang Di said: In ancient times, learned doctors made soup and stew, but although they were prepared, they were not used there. What is the reason for this?

古文：岐伯曰：自古圣人之作汤液醪醴者，以为备耳！夫上古作汤液，故为而弗服也。
现代文：岐伯说：古代有学问的医生，他做好的汤液和醪醴，是以备万一的，因为上古太和之世，人们身心康泰，很少疾病，所以虽制成了汤液，还是放在那里不用的。
English: Qibo said, "Ancient learned doctors prepared the decoction and gourd as a contingency, because in ancient times, people were physically and mentally healthy, and diseases were rare. Therefore, even though the decoction was made, it was not used.

古文：中古之世，道德稍衰，邪气时至，服之万全。
现代文：到了中古代，养生之道稍衰，人们的身心比较虚弱，因此外界邪气时常能够乘虚伤人，但只要服些汤液醪醴，病就可以好了。
English: In the Middle Ages and ancient times, people's health declined slightly, and people's physical and mental health was relatively weak. Therefore, external evil spirits could often use falsehood to hurt people, but as long as they took some decoction, the disease could be cured.

古文：帝曰：今之世不必已何也。
现代文：黄帝道：现在的人，虽然服了汤液醪醴，而病不一定好，这是什麽缘故呢？
English: Huang Di said: People nowadays, although they have taken the decoction of ginger, are not necessarily well. What is the reason for this?

古文：岐伯曰：当今之世，必齐毒药攻其中，镵石针艾治其外也。
现代文：岐伯说：现在的人和中古时代又不同了，一有疾病，必定要用药物内服，砭石、针灸外治，其病才能痊愈。
English: Qibo said, "People today are different from those in the Middle Ages. If you have a disease, you must take medicine internally, and external treatment with vermiculite and acupuncture will cure the disease.

古文：帝曰：形弊血尽而功不立者何？
现代文：黄帝道：一个病情发展到了形体弊坏、气血竭尽的地步，治疗就没有办法见效，这里有什麽道理？
English: Huang Di said: If a disease has developed to the point of physical deterioration and exhaustion of qi and blood, there is no way for treatment to be effective. What is the reason for this?

古文：岐伯曰：神不使也。
现代文：岐伯说：这是因为病人的神气，已经不能发挥他的应有作用的关系。
English: Qibo said: This is because the patient's aura is no longer able to play its due role.

古文：帝曰：何谓神不使？
现代文：黄帝道：什麽叫做神气不能发生他的应有作用？
English: Huangdi Dao: What is the meaning of "Shenqi" if it cannot play its due role?

古文：岐伯曰：针石道也。
现代文：岐伯说：针石治病，这不过是一种方法而已。
English: Qi Bo said, "This is just a method to cure diseases.

古文：精神不进，志意不治，故病不可愈。
现代文：现在病人的神气已经散越，志意已经散乱，纵然有好的方法，神气不起应有作用，而病不能好。
English: Now the patient's energy has dissipated, and his will has been scattered. Even if there is a good method, the energy will not have the effect it should, and the disease will not get better.

古文：今精坏神去，营卫不可复收。
现代文：况且病人的严重情况，是已经达到精神败坏，神气离去，营卫不可以再恢复的地步了。
English: Moreover, the serious condition of the patient is that he has already reached the point of demoralization, his dignity is gone, and the camp guard can no longer recover.

古文：何者？嗜欲无穷，而忧患不止，精气弛坏，营泣卫除，故神去之而病不愈也。
现代文：为什麽病情会发展到这样的地步的呢？由于不懂得养生之道，嗜好欲望没有穷尽，忧愁患难又没有止境，以致于一个人的精气败坏，荣血枯涩，卫气作用消失，所以神气失去应有的作用，对治疗上的方法以失去反应，当然他的病就不会好。
English: Why does the illness develop to such an extent? Because one does not know the way of health care, one's hobbies and desires are inexhaustible, and one's sorrows and hardships have no end, so that one's spirit is spoiled, one's glory is dulled, and one's virtue is lost. Therefore, one's dignity loses its due role, and one does not respond to therapeutic methods. Of course, one's illness will not get better.

古文：帝曰：夫病之始生也，极微极精，必先入结于皮肤。
现代文：黄帝道：凡病初起，固然是精微难测，但大致情况，是必先侵袭于皮肤，所谓表证。
English: Huang Di said: At the beginning of any disease, it is true that it is subtle and difficult to measure, but the general situation is that it must first invade the skin, the so-called demonstration.

古文：今良工皆称曰病成，名曰逆，则针石不能治，良药不能及也。
现代文：现在经过医生一看，都说是病已经成，而且发展和预后很不好，用针石不能治愈，吃汤药亦不能达到病所了。
English: Now, after seeing the doctor, they all said that the disease had already formed, and the development and prognosis were very bad. It could not be cured with a needle stone, and it was not possible to reach the hospital by taking soup medicine.

古文：今良工皆得其法，守其数，亲戚兄弟远近音声日闻于耳，五色日见于目，而病不愈者，亦何暇不早乎？
现代文：现在医生都能懂得法度，操守术数，与病人象亲戚兄弟一样亲近，声音的变化每日都能听到，五色的变化每日都能看到，然而病却医不好，这是不是治疗的不早呢？
English: Nowadays, doctors are able to understand the laws, observe the number of operations, and are as close to patients as relatives and brothers. The changes in voice can be heard every day, and the changes in the five colors can be seen every day. However, the disease is not easy to cure. Is this not too early for treatment?

古文：岐伯曰：病为本，工为标，标本不得，邪气不服，此之谓也。
现代文：岐伯说：这是因为病人为本，医生为标，病人与医生不能很好合作，病邪就不能制服，道理就在这里。
English: Qi Bo said: This is because the patient is the basis, the doctor is the standard, the patient and the doctor can not cooperate well, the disease can not be subdued, the reason is here.

古文：帝曰：其有不从毫毛而生，五脏阳以竭也，津液充郭，其魄独居，孤精于内，气耗于外，形不可与衣相保，此四极急而动中，是气拒于内而形施于外，治之奈何？
现代文：黄帝道：有的病不是从外表毫毛而生的，是由于五脏的阳气衰竭，以致水气充满于皮肤，而阴气独盛，阴气独居于内，则阳气更耗于外，形体浮肿，不能穿原来的衣服，四肢肿急而影响到内脏，这是阴气格拒与于内，而水气弛张于外，对这种病的治疗方法怎样呢？
English: Huang Di said: Some diseases are not caused by the appearance of hair. They are caused by the failure of the yang qi of the five internal organs, so that the water qi is full of the skin, while the yin qi is predominant. If the yin qi lives alone inside, then the yang qi is more consumed outside. The body is puffy and can not wear the original clothes. The limbs are swollen and affect the internal organs. This is the yin qi is rejected inside, while the water qi is relaxed outside. What is the treatment for this disease?

古文：岐伯曰：平治于权衡，去宛陈莝，微动四极，温衣缪剌其处，以复其形。
现代文：岐伯说：要平复水气，当根据病情，衡量轻重，驱除体内的积水，并叫病人四肢做些轻微运动，令阳气渐次宣行，穿衣服带温暖一些，助其肌表之阳，而阴凝易散。用缪刺方法，去水以恢复原来的形态。
English: Qi Bo said: To smooth the water vapor, according to the condition of the disease, measure the weight, expel the accumulated water in the body, and ask the patient to do some slight movements of the limbs, so that the yang qi is gradually promoted, wear warm clothes, help the skin surface of the sun, and the inking is easy to disperse. Use the pinprick method to remove water to restore the original shape.

古文：开鬼门，洁净府，精以时服；五阳已布，疏涤五脏，故精自生，形自盛，骨肉相保，巨气乃平。
现代文：用发汗和利小便的方法，开汗孔，泻膀胱，使阴精归于平复，五脏阳气输布，以疏通五脏的郁积。这样，精气自会生成，形体也强盛，骨骼与肌肉保持着常态，正气也就恢复正常了。
English: With the method of perspiration and beneficial urination, open the sweat pores, lax the bladder, make the yin and yang of the viscera smooth, and distribute the yang and qi of the viscera to clear the accumulation of the viscera. In this way, the essence will be generated, the body will be strong, the bones and muscles will remain normal, and the righteous qi will return to normal.

古文：帝曰：善。
现代文：黄帝道：讲得很好
English: Emperor Jinwu said, "Very good."

