古文：张根，字知常，饶州德兴人。
现代文：张根字知常，饶州德兴人。
English: Zhang Ne Zi Zhizhong, Raozhou De Xingren.

古文：少入太学，甫冠，第进士。
现代文：年幼时入太学，成年时，考上进士。
English: When he was a child, he entered Taigaku, and when he became an adult, he was admitted as a graduate.

古文：调临江司理参军、遂昌令。
现代文：调任临江司理参军、遂昌令。
English: Linjiang Sili was transferred to join the army, Suichang order.

古文：当改京秩，以四亲在堂，冀以父母之恩封大父母，而貤妻封及母，遂致仕，得通直郎，如其志。
现代文：应当改任京官，因为四亲在堂，希望把给父母的恩封转给祖父母，把妻子的恩封转给母亲，于是退休，得任通直郎，成全了他的志向。
English: He should be reassigned to the Beijing government, because his four parents were in the hall, and he hoped to transfer the title of nobility given to his parents to his grandparents, and the title of nobility given to his wife to his mother, so he retired and was appointed as Tong Nairo, fulfilling his ambition.

古文：时年三十一。
现代文：当时年仅三十一。
English: He was only 31 years old at the time.

古文：乡人之贤者彭汝砺序其事，自以为不及。
现代文：乡里有个贤者叫彭汝砺把这件事写出来，自以为不如他。
English: There was a wise man in the village who told Peng Rucheng to write about this matter, thinking that he was not as good as him.

古文：屏处十年，曾布、曾肇、邹浩及本道使者上其行义，徽宗召诣阙。
现代文：闲居十年，曾布、曾肇、邹浩及本道使者上书说明他的义行，徽宗召他到宫。
English: After he had been idle for ten years, Zeng Bu, Zeng Zhao, Zeng Hao and the emissaries of this sect wrote to him to explain his virtuous deeds, and Huizong summoned him to the palace.

古文：为帝言： 人主一日万几，所恃者是心耳。
现代文：他对皇帝说： 人主一日万机，所依靠的是心而已。
English: He said to the emperor: People master a million machines in a day, but what they rely on is their heart.

古文：一累于物，则聪明智虑且耗，贤不肖混洧，纲纪不振矣。
现代文：一旦被物所牵挂，那么聪明智虑会耗尽，贤者不肖者混淆，纲纪不振。
English: Once you are preoccupied with things, your intelligence will be exhausted, your wisdom will be confused, and your discipline will be weak.

古文：愿陛下清心省欲，以窒祸乱之原。 遂请罢钱塘制造局。
现代文：希望陛下清心寡欲，来窒灭祸乱的源头。 于是请求罢去钱塘制造局。
English: He hoped that his majesty would have a pure heart and desire to smother the source of the calamity, so he asked to be removed from the Qiantang Manufacturing Bureau.

古文：帝改容嘉美，以为亲贤宅教授。
现代文：皇帝改容赞美，任命他为亲贤宅教授。
English: The emperor commended his transformation and appointed him as a professor of Xinxian residence.

古文：未几，通判杭州，提举江西常平。
现代文：不久，出任杭州通判，提举江西常平。
English: Soon after, he was appointed as the chief judge of Hangzhou, and promoted Jiangxi Changping.

古文：内侍走马承受举劾一路以钱半给军衣非是，自转运使、郡守以下皆罢。
现代文：内侍走马承受举劾一路把一半收入供给军衣是错误的，自转运使、郡守以下都予以罢免。
English: It was wrong for the chambermaid to accept the impeachment and to provide half of the income to the military uniform.

古文：根言： 东南军法与西北殊，此事行之百五十年矣。
现代文：张根上书说 ：东西军法与西北不同，这种政制已施行一百五十年了。
English: Zhang Gen wrote: The East-West Military Law is different from the Northwest Military Law. This political system has been in place for 150 years.

古文：帅守、监司，分朝廷忧，顾使有罪，犹当审处，岂宜以小奄尺纸空十郡吏哉？ 诏皆令复还。
现代文：帅守、监司替朝廷分忧，即使有罪，还应慎重处理，怎能因为小小宦官尺纸而罢空十郡官吏呢？ 诏令都恢复原官。
English: The commander-in-chief and the superintendent of police are there to take care of the worries of the imperial court. Even if they are guilty, they should be dealt with carefully. How can the officials of ten counties be dismissed because of a small piece of paper? The imperial edict restored them to their original posts.

古文：又言： 本道去岁蠲租四十万，而户部责偿如初。
现代文：张根又上书说 ：本道去年减免租税四十万，而户部责令偿还。
English: Zhang Gen also submitted a letter saying: Last year, this province received a tax reduction of 400,000, and the Ministry of Households ordered repayment.

古文：祖宗立发运上供额，而给本钱数百万缗，使广籴以待用。
现代文：祖宗立下发运上供的钱额，而拨给本钱数百万缗，让官府多籴米以备用。
English: The amount of money provided for the shipment was set by the ancestor, and millions of baht were allocated to the capital, so that the government would have more rice to spare.

古文：比希恩者乃献为羡余，故岁计不足，至为无名之敛。 诏贷所蠲租，而以籴本钱还之六路。洪州失官锡，系治兵吏千计。
现代文：但邀恩者献给结余，所以岁计不足，以致成为无名之敛。 诏令贷免所减租税，并且把籴米本钱还给六路，洪州丢失官印，把上千兵吏关起来审治。
English: However, the invited benefactors contributed to the surplus, so the budget was insufficient, so that it became a nameless austerity. The tax reduction granted by the decree was exempted, and the principal of glutinous rice was returned to the six roads, Hongzhou lost the official seal, and thousands of soldiers were locked up for trial.

古文：根曰： 此有司失于几察之过也。
现代文：张根说 ：这是有关部门失于稽察的过错。
English: Zhang Gen said: This is the fault of the relevant departments failing to inspect.

古文：今罗取无罪之人，责以不可得之物，何以召和气？ 乃罢其狱。
现代文：现在收取无罪之人，而责回不可得之物，怎能招致和气呢？ 
English: For how can there be peace when the innocent are taken and the guilty are punished?

古文：大观中，入对言： 陛下幸涤烦苛，破朋党，而士大夫以议论不一，观望苟且，莫肯自尽。陛下毁石刻，除党籍，与天下更始，而有司以大臣仇怨，废锢自如。
现代文：于是停止这个冤狱。大观年间，张根入宫回答皇帝说： 陛下幸能涤除烦苛，破除朋党，而士大夫因为议论持见不一，互相观望推诿，不肯自尽其力，陛下毁去石刻，除掉党籍，让天下更始，而有关部门因为大臣仇怨，仍然禁锢自如。
English: In the year of the Great View, Zhang Geng entered the palace and replied to the emperor, "Your majesty has fortunately been able to purify the boredom and get rid of the party cronies, while the scholar-officials, because of their divergent opinions, watched each other's shirking and refused to do their best. Your majesty destroyed the stone carvings, got rid of the party membership, and let the world begin anew, while the relevant departments were still imprisoned because of the minister's grudge.

古文：为治之害，莫大于此，愿思所以励敕之。 即命为转运副使，改淮南转运使，加直龙图阁。
现代文：治国的害处，莫大于此，希望您思考计策整治这些情况。 即任命他为转运副使，改为淮南转运使，加任直龙图阁。
English: There is nothing more harmful to governing the country than this, and I hope you will think of a strategy to rectify these situations, that is, appoint him as deputy envoy for transit, change to Huainan transit envoy, and add the post of Zhilong Tu Ge.

古文：上书请： 常平止听纳息，以塞兼并；下户均出役钱，以绝奸伪，市易惟取净利，以役商贾。
现代文：他上书请求 ：常平官只管纳息钱，以堵塞兼并；下等人户平均推付役钱，以杜绝奸伪；市易惟取净利，以役使商贾。
English: He submitted a petition requesting that: ordinary and lower-ranking officials should only pay interest to block mergers; lower-ranking households should pay service fees to prevent fraud; market exchanges should only take net profits to serve merchants.

古文：虽名若非正，然与和贾不雠其直什一，而使之倍输额外无名无数之敛，有间矣。 又请： 分举官为三科：一县令，二学官，三县丞曹。
现代文：虽然名分好像不正，但与和买不抵其价值的十分之一，而让他门加倍付出额外无名无数的敛赋，有所不同。 又请求 ：把举荐官吏分为三科：一是县令，二是学官，三是县丞曹。
English: Although the title seems to be unfair, it is different from buying and buying one-tenth of its value, and asking his door to pay double the additional nameless countless accumulation.Also requested: to divide the recommending officials into three disciplines: one is the county magistrate, the second is the academic officer, and the third is the county junior high school teacher.

古文：州郡亦分三等。明言其人某材堪充某州、某官、某县令，吏部据以注拟，则令选稍清，视平配硬差远矣。 诏吏部、户部相度以闻。
现代文：州郡也分为三等，明确说明某人才能充任某州、某官、某县令，吏部据此注拟，则吏选稍清明，比平配硬差好多了。 诏令吏部、户部互相协商后告诉皇上。
English: States and counties are also divided into three classes, which clearly shows that a person can only serve as a certain state, a certain official, and a certain county magistrate, and the cadre department is based on this note, then the cadre selection is a little clear, much better than the leveling.

古文：根又以水灾多，乞蠲租赋，散活口米、常平青苗米，振贷流民。
现代文：张根又因为水灾多，乞求蠲免租赋，发放洛口米、常平青苗米，赈贷流民。
English: Due to the frequent floods, Zhanggen has also been begging for rent-free rice, distributing Lokou rice and Changping seedling rice, and lending money to displaced people.

古文：诏褒谕之。
现代文：诏令褒扬他。
English: The imperial edict praised him.

古文：徙两浙，辞不行，乃具疏付驿递奏。
现代文：徙官两浙，谢绝不听，于是写下条疏交驿站传奏。
English: The migration officials of the two provinces refused to listen to Xie, so he wrote down the following article.

古文：大略谓： 今州郡无兼月之储，太仓无终岁之积，军须匮乏，边备缺然。
现代文：大概说 ：现在州郡没有两个月的储积，太仓没有一年的积蓄，军需匮乏，边备不周。
English: He probably said: At present, Zhoushu County does not have two months of reserves, Taicang does not have one year of reserves, there is a shortage of military supplies, and the border is not well prepared.

古文：东南水旱、盗贼间作，西、北二国窥伺日久，安得不豫为之计？ 因条列茶盐、常平等利病之数，遂言： 为今之计，当节其大者，而莫大于土木之功。今群臣赐一第，或费百万。
现代文：东南水旱，盗贼常常发生，西、北二国窥伺日久，怎么能不预先计谋？ 于是条列茶盐、常平等利处与弊端，于是说： 为今之计，当其大者，莫大于土木之功，现在赐给大臣一栋房子，有时耗费百万。
English: Thieves often occur in the southeast due to floods and droughts, and the two countries of the west and the north have been spying on each other for a long time. How could they not plan ahead? So they lined up the pros and cons of tea and salt, which are often equal, and then said: For the present plan, when its great, nothing is greater than civil engineering, now give the minister a house, sometimes costing millions.

古文：臣所部二十州，一岁上供财三十万缗耳，曾不足给一第之用。
现代文：我所管辖的二十个州，一岁上供才三十万缗而已，甚至不足以供足造一栋住宅的费用。
English: In the 20 states under my jurisdiction, the annual subsidy is only 300,000 baht, which is not even enough to cover the cost of building a house.

古文：以宠元勋盛德，犹虑不称，况出于闾阎干泽者哉。
现代文：拿住宅来尊宠元勋盛德之臣，犹恐不称，何况赐给那些阿谀邀恩者呢。
English: It would not be right to take the house to honor the beloved of the founder, Shengde, let alone give it to those who invited him.

古文：虽赵普、韩琦佐命定策所未有，愿陛下靳之。
现代文：即使有赵普、韩琦佐命定策之大功，希望陛下也要吝惜赏赐。
English: Even if Zhao Pu and Han Xingsa have made great contributions to the predestined plan, I hope that His Majesty will also begrudge the reward.

古文：其次如田园、邸店，虽不若赐第之多，亦愿日削而月损之。
现代文：其次如田园、邸店，虽然不如赐第那么多，也希望日削月损之。
English: Secondly, such as rural areas and residences, although it is not as good as giving so much, it is also hoped that it will be reduced day by day.

古文：如金帛好赐之类，亦不可不节也。
现代文：像金帛好赐之类，也不可不节制啊。
English: You can't indulge in things like giving away gold ingots.

古文：又其次如锡带，其直虽数百缗，亦必敛于数百家而后足，今乃下被仆隶，使混淆公卿间，贤不肖无辨。
现代文：又其次如锡带，其价值虽然只有数百缗，也一定要向数百家收敛才足数，现在却下及仆隶，让他们混淆在公卿大臣之间，贤者不肖者没有分辨。
English: And secondly, such as the pewter belt, although its value is only a few hundred baht, it must also converge to a few hundred, but now it is down to the servants, so that they are confused between the nobles and ministers, and there is no distinction between the wise and the foolish.

古文：如以其左右趋走，不欲墨绶，当别为制度，以示等威可也。 书奏，权幸侧目，谋所以中伤之者，言交上，帝察根诚，不之罪也。
现代文：如果因为他们手下人便于领命，不必授给绶带，应当另订一套制度，以表示等级威望就行了。 上书奏来，权幸侧目，谋求能够中伤他的，交互上言，皇帝察辨张根的忠诚，不责罪于他。
English: If they did not have to give him the sash because it was easier for their subordinates to receive the order, they should have set up another system to indicate the level of prestige. When the letter was issued, Guan Xing looked sideways, seeking to slander him, and exchanged insults. The emperor judged Zhang Gen's loyalty and did not blame him.

古文：寻以花石纲拘占漕舟，官买一竹至费五十缗，而多入诸臣之家。
现代文：不久因为花石纲拘占漕舟，官府买一根竹子耗费至五十缗，却大多落入诸位大臣之家。
English: Soon, because the flower and stone class dominated the rowing boat, the government spent up to fifty baht to buy a bamboo rod, but most of them fell into the homes of ministers.

古文：因力陈其弊，益忤权幸，乃擿根所书奏牍注切草略，为傲慢不恭，责监信州酒。
现代文：于是力陈弊端，更加忤逆权贵，于是摘录张根所书奏牍、注切、草略，认为傲慢不恭，责令他为监信州酒。
English: As a result, he made efforts to expose the vices and become more rebellious against the powerful. He then excerpted Zhang Geng's writings and considered them to be arrogant and ordered him to supervise the state liquor.

古文：既又言根非诋常平之法，以摇绍述之政，再贬濠州团练副使，安置郴州。
现代文：不久又认为张根诋毁常平之法，摇动绍述之政，再贬为濠州团练副使，安置在郴州。
English: Soon, he thought that Zhang Jian had slandered the law of Changping and shaken the politics of Shaoshu, and then he was demoted to the deputy envoy of the Bozhou Rehearsal Team and placed in Bozhou.

古文：寻以讨淮贼功，得自便。
现代文：不久因讨伐淮贼有功，得以自便。
English: Soon, he was able to take advantage of his success in fighting against the Huai thieves.

古文：以朝散大夫终于家，年六十。
现代文：以朝散大夫身份死于家中，终年六十岁。
English: He died at home as Dr. Chosan, at the age of sixty.

古文：九岁而孤，舅欲夺母志，谅挽衣泣曰： 岂有为人子不能养其亲者乎！ 母为感动而止。
现代文：张根生性至孝，父亲有虫病要戒盐，张根因此吃淡味。母亲爱吃河豚及螃蟹，母亲去世后，张根不再吃。母亲害病时，每到鸡叫时就苏醒了，张根后来不忍听到鸡叫。任谅字子谅，眉山人，徙居汝阳。九岁丧父，其舅打算逼其母改嫁，谅挽衣哭道 ：哪里有为人之子不能养食自己的亲人呢？ 母亲为之感动而作罢。
English: Zhang Gen was born with filial piety. His father had a worm disease and had to give up salt, so Zhang Gen ate light food. His mother loved to eat puffer fish and crabs. After his mother died, Zhang Gen stopped eating. When his mother was ill, he woke up every time the rooster crowed. Later, Zhang Gen couldn't bear to hear the rooster crow. Forgive, forgive, people of Meishan, migrate to Yuyang. When his father died at the age of nine, his uncle planned to force his mother to remarry, and he wept: Where is the son of man who can't feed his relatives? His mother was moved by

古文：谅力学自奋，年十四，即冠乡书。
现代文：任谅力学自奋，年仅十四，就在乡里称冠。
English: Let me tell you, he was only 14 years old when he won the championship in the countryside.

古文：登高第，调河南户曹。
现代文：考中进士前几名，调任河南尹曹。
English: Yin Cao from Henan Province was promoted from the top few candidates in the junior high school entrance examination.

古文：以兵书谒枢密曾布，布使人邀诣阙，既见，觉不能合，径去。
现代文：用兵书谒求枢密曾布，曾布派人邀他到宫殿，相见后，觉得互相不合，径自离去。
English: Zeng Bu sent someone to invite him to the palace. After meeting, they felt that they were not compatible with each other, so they left.

古文：布为相，犹欲用之。
现代文：曾布任宰相时，还打算用他。
English: When Zengbu was appointed prime minister, he also planned to use him.

古文：谅予书，规以李德裕事，布始怒。
现代文：任谅寄给他书信，用李德裕之事来规劝他，曾布开始恼怒他。
English: Zeng Bu began to irritate him by sending him letters and using Li Deyu's case to persuade him.

古文：蒋之奇、章楶在枢府，荐为编修官，布持其奏不下，为怀州教授。
现代文：蒋之奇、章螶在枢密府任职，推荐任谅为编修官，曾布压着他们的奏章不发，任命任谅为怀州教授，徽宗看到他作的《新学碑》，说 ：真是文士啊。 
English: Jiang Zhiqi and Zhang Qian served in the Privy Council, and recommended Ren Ren as an editor. Zeng Bu pressed them not to issue the report, and appointed Ren Ren as a professor in Huizhou. Huizong saw his "New School Monument" and said, "He really is a scribe."

古文：徽宗见其所作《新学碑》，曰： 文士也。 擢提举夔路学事，历京西、河北、京东，改转运判官。
现代文：提升他为提举夔路学事，历官京西、河北、京东，改任转运判官。
English: He was promoted to promote Kushiro academic affairs, and successively held the posts of Beijing West, Hebei, and Beijing East, and was reappointed as a transfer judge.

古文：著《河北根本籍》，凡户口之升降，官吏之增损，与一岁出纳奇赢之数，披籍可见，上之朝。
现代文：著有《河北根本籍》，凡是户口的增减，官吏的增损，以及一年收入支出及结余之数，开书可见，献给朝廷。
English: He is the author of the "Hebei Basic Registration," which is dedicated to the imperial court, showing the increase and decrease of household registration, the increase and decrease of officials, as well as the annual income, expenditure and balance.

古文：张商英见其书，谓为天下部使者之最。
现代文：张商英见了此书，认为任谅是天下部使者中最优秀的。
English: Zhang Shangying saw this book and thought that Ren Yue was the best of the emissaries of the central government.

古文：提点京东刑狱。
现代文：任谅任提点京东刑狱。
English: Let's not even mention the Beijing East Detention Center.

古文：梁山泺渔者习为盗，荡无名籍，谅伍其家，刻其舟，非是不得辄入。
现代文：梁山泺渔夫惯于作盗，在水中游荡没有名籍，任谅把他们五家一编列，刻在他们的船上，不这样不得进入湖区。
English: The Liangshan cormorant fishermen are accustomed to stealing, wandering in the water without a name and nationality. Let them be arranged in five families and carved on their boats. Otherwise, they will not be allowed to enter the lake area.

古文：他县地错其间者，镵石为表。
现代文：其他县地方杂错其间的，立石为标志。
English: Other counties and localities are mixed in the middle, with standing stones as a symbol.

古文：盗发，则督吏名捕，莫敢不尽力，迹无所容。
现代文：盗情发生，则督促官吏及名捕，不敢不尽力，盗迹无所容。
English: In the case of theft, officials are urged to do their best, and theft is not tolerated.

古文：加直秘阁，徙陕西转运副使。
现代文：加任直秘阁，改任陕西转运副使。
English: He was also appointed as the First Secretary of the State Council and the Vice-Minister of Shaanxi Transportation.

古文：降人李讹哆知边廪不继，阴阙地窖粟而叛，遗西夏统军书，称定边可唾手取。
现代文：降人李讹哆知道边兵粮食不继，暗中挖地窖藏其粮食叛乱，送给西夏统军书信，声称定边唾手可取。
English: Li Lan, who had been demoted, knew that the border soldiers did not have enough food, so he secretly dug a cellar to hide his food rebellion, and sent a letter to the Western Xia United Army, claiming that it was a good idea to settle the border.

古文：谅谍知其谋，亟输粟定边及诸城堡，且募人发所窖，得数十万石。
现代文：任谅侦知他的阴谋，急忙输送粮食到定边及各个城堡，并且募人发掘李讹哆的地窖，得到粮食数十万石。
English: Permit me to detect his plot, hastily transport grain to Dingbian and various castles, and recruit people to excavate Li Xuan's cellar, and get hundreds of thousands of grains of grain.

古文：讹哆果入寇，失藏粟，七日而退。
现代文：讹哆果然入侵，失掉所藏粮食，七天后退去。
English: The baboons invaded successfully, lost the grain they had hidden, and left seven days later.

古文：他日，复围观化堡，而边储已足，讹哆遂解去。
现代文：后来，又围困观化堡，而边备已足，讹哆于是解围而去。
English: Later, they besieged the fort of Guanhua again, but the border was already full, so they broke the siege and left.

古文：加徽猷阁待制、江淮发运使。
现代文：朝廷加任他为徽猷阁待制、江淮发运使。
English: The imperial court appointed him as the ambassador to Huizhou, Jiangxi and Hubei.

古文：蔡京破东南转般漕运法为直达纲，应募者率游手亡赖，盗用干没，漫不可核，人莫敢言。
现代文：蔡京改变东南转船漕运法为直达纲，应募者大多是游手无赖，盗用干没，漫散不可核稽，人民不敢议论。
English: Cai Jing changed the southeast transshipment method of rowing transport to a direct route. Applicants are mostly rogues, plagiarism is gone, rambling is not verifiable, and people dare not discuss.

古文：谅入对，首论之，京怒。
现代文：任谅入宫见皇上，首先议论此事，蔡京大怒。
English: Permission to enter the palace to see the emperor, first discuss the matter, Cai Jing was furious.

古文：会汴、泗大水，泗州城不没者两板。
现代文：正好汴、泗发生大水，泗城没有淹没的只有两板。
English: Just as the flood occurred, there were only two boards that were not flooded in Lucheng.

古文：谅亲部卒筑堤，徙民就高，振以米粟。
现代文：任谅亲自率领士卒筑堤，把百姓迁徙到高处，给予粮食救济。
English: Let me personally lead the soldiers to build a dike, move the people to higher ground, and give them food relief.

古文：水退，人获全，京诬以为漂溺千计，坐削籍归田里。
现代文：水退，百姓得以保全，蔡京诬陷说淹死了上千人，因此任谅被削职归家。
English: The water receded, the people were saved, and Cai Jing was falsely accused of drowning thousands of people, so he was relieved of his duties and returned home.

古文：执政或言： 水灾守臣职，发运使何罪？ 帝亦知其枉，复右文殿修撰、陕西都转运使。
现代文：执政大臣中有人认为 ：救水灾是守臣的职责，发运使有什么罪？ 皇帝也知道他的冤枉，复用为右文殿修撰、陕西都转运使。
English: Some of the ruling ministers believed that flood relief was the duty of a vassal, so what was the crime of the dispatching envoy? The emperor also knew that he was wronged, and reassigned the envoy to the Palace of Literature and Literature, and to Shaanxi Province.

古文：寻复徽猷阁待制，进直学士。
现代文：不久重任徽猷阁待制，进升为直学士。
English: Soon, he was reappointed to the Huiyang Pavilion as a trainee, and was promoted to a direct bachelor.

古文：童贯更钱法，必欲铁钱与铜钱等，物价率十减其九。
现代文：童贯更改钱法，一定想使铁钱与铜钱等价，物价大都减去十分之九。
English: When Tong Quan changed the monetary system, he wanted to make iron money equal to copper money, and most of the prices were reduced by nine-tenths.

古文：诏谅与贯议，谅言为六路害，寝其策。
现代文：诏令任谅与童贯商议，任谅认为是六路的祸害，停止这个计划。
English: Zhao ordered Ren Yue to consult with Tong Run, Ren Yue considered it to be the scourge of the six roads, and stop the plan.

古文：加龙图阁直学士、知京兆府，徙渭州。
现代文：加任龙图阁直学士、知京兆府，徙任到渭州。
English: He was also appointed as the direct bachelor of Longtu Ge, Zhijing Zhaofu, and moved to Zhangzhou.

古文：以母忧去。
现代文：因母丧离职。
English: Left the company due to the death of his mother.

古文：宣和七年，提举上清宝箓宫、修国史。
现代文：宣和七年，任提举上清宝官、修国史。
English: Seven years after the declaration of peace, he was appointed and promoted to Shangqing treasure official, and was responsible for revising national history.

古文：初，朝廷将有事于燕，谅曰： 中国其有忧乎。 乃作书贻宰相曰： 今契丹之势，其亡昭然，取之当以渐，师出不可无名。
现代文：当初，朝廷打算在燕地有所行动，任谅说： 中国将有忧患吗？ 于是写信给宰相说： 现今契丹之势，其灭亡之迹昭然，攻取应慢慢来，出师不可无名。
English: At first, the imperial court planned to take action in Yanji, saying: "Will there be trouble in China?" So they wrote to the prime minister saying: "Nowadays, the Qidan is in power, and the signs of its demise are obvious. We should take our time in conquering it, and we must not become nameless.

古文：宜别立耶律氏之宗，使散为君长，则我有存亡继绝之义，彼有瓜分辐裂之弱，与邻崛起之金国，势相万也。 至是，又言郭药师必反。
现代文：应当另立耶律氏的后人，使他分散为君长，则我国有存亡继绝之义，敌国有瓜分辐裂之弱，与邻近崛起的金国，势均力敌。 到这时，又认为郭药师一定会反叛。
English: If the descendants of the Yerut clan should be set up separately and dispersed as monarchs, then our country would have the right to survive and succeed, the enemy country would be weak from division and fragmentation, and it would be on an equal footing with the neighboring rising country of Jin. At this time, it was also believed that Guo Yaoshi would certainly rebel.

古文：帝不听，大臣以为病狂，出提举嵩山崇福宫。
现代文：皇帝不听，大臣认为他是病狂，出京任提举嵩山崇福宫。
English: The emperor did not listen, the minister thought he was a madman, and went to Beijing to nominate the Songshan Chongfu Palace.

古文：是冬，金人举兵犯燕山，药师叛降，皆如谅言。
现代文：这年冬天，金人发兵侵犯燕山，郭药师叛降，都像任谅所说那样。
English: This winter, the Jin people sent troops to invade Yanshan Mountain, and Guo Yaxi rebelled, just as Ren Yue said.

古文：乃复起谅为京兆，未几，卒，年五十八。
现代文：于是重新起用为京兆知府，不久，去世，终年五十八岁。
English: As a result, he was reappointed as the governor of Kyōshō, and died soon after, at the age of fifty-eight.

古文：周常，字仲修，建州人。
现代文：周常字仲修，建州人。
English: Zhou Changzi, also known as Zhong Xiu, was the founder of the state.

古文：中进士第。
现代文：考中进士。
English: Passed the junior high school entrance examination.

古文：以所著《礼·檀弓义》见王安石、吕惠卿，二人称之，补国子直讲、太常博士。
现代文：把所著《礼檀弓义》献给王安石、吕惠卿，二人称誉他，补任国子直讲、太常博士。
English: He dedicated his book "Ritanzhi Yuyi" to Wang Anshi and Lü Huiqing, and the two praised him and appointed him as a direct lecturer of Kuniko and a doctor of Taichang.

古文：以养亲，求教授扬州。
现代文：为了养育双亲，求任扬州教授。
English: In order to raise his parents, he applied for a position as a professor in Yangzhou.

古文：年未五十即致仕。
现代文：年纪不到五十就退休。
English: Retire before the age of fifty.

古文：久之，御史中丞黄履荐其恬退，起为太常博士，辞。
现代文：很久以后，御史中丞黄履以其恬退向朝廷推荐，起用为太常博士，周常辞谢了。
English: A long time later, Imperial Historian Chujo Huang Li recommended his resignation to the Imperial Court and was appointed as Taichang Doctor, but Zhou Chang declined.

古文：元符初，复申前命，兼崇政殿说书，迁著作佐郎。
现代文：元符初年，朝廷又重申前命，兼任崇政殿说书，升为著作佐郎。
English: In the first year of the Genpu era, the Imperial Court reaffirmed the previous order, and he was also appointed as the Narrator of the Suisho-den and promoted to the Saro of the Writings.

古文：疏言： 祖宗诸陵器物止用涂金，服饰又无珠玉，盖务在质素，昭示训戒。
现代文：周常上疏说： 祖宗各陵的器物只用涂金的，服饰又没有珠玉，务于质朴，表示训戒。
English: Zhou Chang Shangsuo said: The artifacts of the ancestral tombs are only gold-plated, and the clothing has no jewels, which is simple and shows discipline.

古文：自裕陵至宣仁后寝宫，乃施金珠，愿收贮景灵殿，以遵遗训。 诏置之奉宸库。
现代文：自裕陵至宣仁后寝宫，才采用金珠，希望收藏在景灵殿，以遵遗训。 诏令放置在奉宸库。
English: From Yuling to Xuanren's Hougang Palace, only gold beads were used, and it was hoped that they would be stored in the Jingling Palace, in accordance with the imperial edict.

古文：擢起居舍人。
现代文：提升为起居舍人。
English: Promoted to live-in caregiver.

古文：邹浩得罪，常于讲席论救，贬监郴州酒。
现代文：邹浩得罪，周常以讲席身份论救，被贬为郴州监酒。
English: Zou Hao was found guilty, Zhou often used his position as a lecturer to plead for help, and was relegated to the wine prison in Zhangzhou.

古文：徽宗立，召为国子祭酒、起居郎，从容言： 自古求治之主，未尝不以尚志为先。
现代文：徽宗即位后，召用他为国子祭酒、起居郎，周常从容上言说： 自古以来追求大治的皇帝，未尝不以尊尚志向为先。
English: After the enthronement of Huizong, he called him to be the son of the country to offer wine and to live in the palace, and Zhou often said calmly: Since ancient times, the emperor who pursues great governance has never failed to put the honor of the emperor first.

古文：然溺于富贵逸乐，蔽于谄谀顺适，则志随以丧，不可不戒。
现代文：但是如果溺于富贵逸乐，蔽于谄谀顺适，则志向随之丧失，不可不戒。
English: However, if you indulge in the luxury of wealth and indulge in the pleasures of luxury, then your ambition will be lost and you will have to give it up.

古文：元祐法度互有得失，人才各有所长，不可偏弃。 
现代文：元法令制度各有得失，人才各有所长，不可偏弃。 
English: The former legal system has its own advantages and disadvantages, and talents have their own strengths, and should not be abandoned.

古文：时以天暑，令记注官卯漏正即勿奏事，仍具为令。
现代文：当时天气酷热，诏令记注官卯漏时分就不要奏事，依然定为法令。
English: At that time, the weather was extremely hot, and it was still considered to be a law not to report a matter if the official who recorded the imperial edict was absent.

古文：常言： 本朝记注类多兼谏员，故凡言动，得以所闻见论可否。
现代文：周常说： 本朝记注大多兼任谏官，故凡有言语行动，可以把听到和看到的议论可否。
English: Zhou Chang said: Most of this morning's notes also serve as eunuchs, so if there are words and actions, you can see and hear the discussion.

古文：神宗皇帝时，修注官虽不兼谏职，亦许以史事于崇政、延和殿直前陈述。
现代文：神宗皇帝时，修注官虽然不兼任谏职，也允许在崇政、延和殿向皇帝直接陈述史事。
English: During the reign of Emperor Shenzong, the commentator, although he did not concurrently serve as an official, was also allowed to directly report historical events to the emperor in the Suzheng and Yanhe halls.

古文：陛下于炎暾可畏之候，暂停进对，亦人情之常。
现代文：陛下在炎热可畏的天气，暂时停止进对，也是人之常情。
English: It is only human nature for His Majesty to temporarily halt his progress in the sweltering heat.

古文：若著为定令，则必记于日录，传之史笔，使后人观之，将以为倦于听纳，而忘先帝之美意矣。 事遂寝。
现代文：如果作为定令，则必定记在日录中，传记在史书中，让后人看见了，会认为陛下倦于听纳，而忘掉先帝的好意。 此事于是停止了。
English: If it had been an order, it would have been recorded in the diary, and the biography in the history books, so that future generations would see that His Majesty was tired of listening and had forgotten the good intentions of the former emperor.

古文：进中书舍人、礼部侍郎。
现代文：进升为中书舍人、礼部侍郎。
English: He was promoted to junior high school teacher and attendant of the etiquette club.

古文：蔡京用事，不能容，以宝文阁待制出知湖州。
现代文：蔡京执政，不能容忍他，让他以宝文阁待制身份出京任知湖州。
English: Cai Jing was in power and could not tolerate him, so he sent him out of Beijing to Zhihuzhou with the status of a Baobengge trainee.

古文：寻又夺职，居婺州。
现代文：不久又免职，住在婺州。
English: He was soon relieved of his duties and went to live in Zhangzhou.

古文：复集贤殿修撰。
现代文：复任集贤殿修撰。
English: He was reinstated as Shusan-dono Shusan.

古文：卒，年六十七。
现代文：去世，终年六十七岁。
English: He died shortly afterwards, aged 67.

