古文：高宗高宗天皇大圣大弘孝皇帝讳治，字为善，太宗第九子也。母曰文德皇后长孙氏。始封晋王，贞观七年，遥领并州都督。
现代文：高宗名治，字为善，是太宗的第九个儿子。母亲是文德皇后长孙氏。最初被封为晋王，贞观七年，兼领不亲任职的并州都督。
English: Gao Zong Nanzhi, whose Chinese name means "goodness," was the ninth son of Emperor Taizong. His mother was the eldest grandchild of Empress Wende. He was initially crowned as the King of Jin, and was chaste for seven years. He also served as the provincial governor.

古文：十七年，太子承乾废，而魏王泰次当立，亦以罪黜，乃立子治为皇太子。
现代文：贞观十七年，太子李承乾被废黜，次子魏王李泰当立为皇太子，也因获罪被废，于是太宗立李治做了皇太子。
English: In the seventeenth year of Zhenguan, Prince Li Chengqian was deposed, and the second son of Wei Wang, Li Tai Dang, was made crown prince. He was also deposed for being convicted of a crime, so Emperor Taizong made Li Zhi crown prince.

古文：太宗尝命皇太子游观习射，太子辞以非所好，愿得奉至尊，居膝下。
现代文：太宗曾命李治出宫游览、习练射术，李治以这不是自己的喜好推辞，希望能侍奉父皇，在父母身边。
English: Emperor Taizong once ordered Li Zhi to go out of the palace for a tour and practice shooting. Li Zhi said that this was not his preference and hoped to serve his father, the emperor, alongside his parents.

古文：太宗大喜，乃营寝殿侧为别院，使太子居之。
现代文：太宗十分高兴，便在寝宫侧边另建一院，让李治居住。
English: Taizong was very happy, so he built another hospital next to the sleeping palace for Li Zhi to live in.

古文：太宗每视朝，皇太子常侍，观决庶政。
现代文：太宗每临朝听政，李治总在身边侍奉，细看裁决各种政事。
English: Whenever Taizong came to the court to listen to politics, Li Zhi always served at his side, carefully watching the rulings of various political affairs.

古文：二十三年，太宗有疾，诏皇太子听政于金液门。
现代文：贞观二十三年，太宗染病，诏令李治在金液门处理政事。
English: In the 23rd year of Zhenguan, when Taizong fell ill, the emperor ordered Li Zhi to deal with political affairs at Jinshu Gate.

古文：四月，从幸翠微宫。
现代文：四月，随太宗亲临翠微宫。
English: In April, he accompanied Emperor Taizong to the Tsui Hwe Palace.

古文：太宗崩，以羽檄发六府甲士四千，卫皇太子入于京师。
现代文：太宗逝世，李治以紧急军事文书调遣六府的四千武士，护卫他以皇太子身份进入京城。
English: When Emperor Taizong died, Riji dispatched four thousand samurai from six prefectures with an emergency military document to escort him as crown prince into the capital.

古文：六月甲戌，即皇帝位于柩前。
现代文：六月初一，李治在太宗灵柩前登皇帝位。
English: On the first day of June, Li Zhi ascended to the throne in front of Emperor Taizong's coffin.

古文：大赦，赐文武官勋一转，民八十以上粟帛，给复雍州及比岁供军所一年。
现代文：诏令大赦，赐予文武官员勋爵迁升一级，赏给八十岁以上的平民粮食、布帛，免除雍州百姓的劳役以及近年对军营的供给一年。
English: The edict granted amnesty, promoted the civil and military officials to the next level, granted grain and cloth to civilians over the age of 80, exempted the people of Yongzhou from labor service, and in recent years, supplied military camps for one year.

古文：癸未，长孙无忌为太尉。
现代文：初十，长孙无忌任太尉。
English: At the age of ten, the eldest grandson was promoted to the rank of captain.

古文：癸巳，检校洛州刺史李勣为开府仪同三司，参掌机密。
现代文：二十日，检校洛州刺史李责力任开府仪同三司，参与执掌军国机密。
English: On the 20th, the inspector of the inspection of the inspection of the inspection of the inspection of the inspection of the inspection of the inspection of the inspection of the inspection of the inspection of the inspection of the inspection of the inspection of the inspection of the inspection of the inspection of the inspection

古文：八月癸酉，河东地震。乙亥，又震。
现代文：八月初一，河东发生地震；初三，又震。
English: On the first day of August, an earthquake occurred in Hedong; on the third day of the first month, another earthquake.

古文：庚辰，遣使存问河东，给复二年，赐压死者人绢三匹。
现代文：初八，派使臣慰问河东，免除该地区劳役二年，赐给被压死者每人绢三匹。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, he sent envoys to offer condolences to Hedong, exempted the region from labor service for two years, and gave three donkeys to each of the victims.

古文：庚寅，葬文皇帝于昭陵。
现代文：十八日，将太宗安葬在昭陵。
English: On the 18th, Emperor Taizong was buried in Shoryo.

古文：九月甲寅，荆王元景为司徒，吴王恪为司空。
现代文：九月十二日，荆王李元景任司徒，吴王李恪任司空。
English: On September 12th, Jing Wang Li Yuanjing was appointed as a disciple, and Wu Wang Li Ke was appointed as a disciple.

古文：乙卯，李勣为尚书左仆射、同中书门下三品。
现代文：十三日，李责力任尚书左仆射、同中书门下三品。
English: On the thirteenth day, Li Liuli appointed Shang Shuxi as the left-hand man of the shooting, and the third grade of the same middle school.

古文：十一月乙丑，晋州地震。
现代文：十一月二十四日，晋州地震。
English: On November 24th, the Jinzhou earthquake occurred.

古文：左翊卫郎将高偘伐突厥。
现代文：左翊卫郎将高侃讨伐突厥。
English: Zuo Shenweiro will lead Gao Kan to fight the Turks.

古文：是冬，无雪。
现代文：这年冬季，无雪。
English: There was no snow this winter.

古文：永徽元年正月辛丑，改元。
现代文：永徽元年正月初一，更改年号。
English: On the first day of the first month of the first month of the first year of Yonghui, the year number was changed.

古文：丙午，立妃王氏为皇后。
现代文：初六，立妃子王氏为皇后。
English: In the sixth year of her junior high school, she became the empress.

古文：张行成为侍中。
现代文：张行成任侍中。
English: Zhang Xingcheng became a chamberlain.

古文：二月辛卯，封子孝为许王，上金杞王，素节雍王。
现代文：二月二十二日，高宗封儿子李孝为许王，李上金为杞王，李素节为雍王。
English: On February 22nd, Gao Zongfu's son Li Xiao became the King of Xu, Li Shangjin became the King of Qi, and Li Su Jie became the King of Yong.

古文：四月己巳，晋州地震。
现代文：四月初一，晋州地震。
English: On the first day of April, the Jinzhou earthquake occurred.

古文：五月巳未，太白昼见。
现代文：五月二十一日，白天出现太白星。
English: On May 21, a very white star appeared in the daytime.

古文：六月，高偘及突厥战于金山，败之。
现代文：六月，高侃与突厥军在金山交战，打败突厥军。
English: In June, Gao Kan and the Turkish army fought in Jinshan, defeating the Turkish army.

古文：庚辰，晋州地震，诏五品以上言事。
现代文：十三日，晋州地震，诏令五品以上官员议论政事。
English: On the 13th, after the earthquake in Jinzhou, officials above the fifth rank were ordered to discuss political affairs.

古文：七月辛酉，以旱虑囚。
现代文：七月二十四日，因旱灾讯察记录囚犯的罪状。
English: On July 24, due to the drought, the inspection and recording of prisoners' criminal records was suspended.

古文：八月戊辰，给五品以上解官充侍者半禄，加赐帛。
现代文：八月初二，给予五品上解职后充任侍臣的官员一半俸禄，另赐布帛。
English: On the 2nd day of the 8th month, officials who were promoted to the 5th grade and were appointed as vassals after being relieved of their duties were given half of their salary and a cloth bag.

古文：庚午，降死罪以下。
现代文：初四，对死罪以下的犯人减刑。
English: On the fourth day of the new year, the sentence of prisoners with less than the death penalty will be reduced.

古文：九月癸卯，高偘俘突厥车鼻可汗以献。
现代文：九月初七，高侃俘虏突厥首领车鼻可汗进献朝廷。
English: On the 7th day of the 9th month of the year, Gao Kan's captives, led by the Turkic chieftain, Khufu Khan, were presented to the imperial court.

古文：十月戊辰，李勣罢左仆射。
现代文：十月初三，免去李责力的左仆射职务。
English: On the 3rd of October, Li Rongli was relieved of his left shooting duties.

古文：十一月己未，贬褚遂良为同州刺史。
现代文：十一月二十四日，将褚遂良贬为同州刺史。
English: On November 24th, Zou Suiliang was relegated to a footnote in the state's history.

古文：十二月庚午，琰州獠寇边，梓州都督谢万岁死之。
现代文：十二月初五，琰州僚人侵犯边界，梓州都督谢万岁殉难。
English: On the 5th day of the 12th month of the lunar calendar, the officials of Zhangzhou invaded the border, and the governor of Zizhou, Xie Wanlong, was martyred.

古文：二年正月戊戌，开义仓以赈民。
现代文：永徽二年正月初四，打开地方防荒储粮的义仓救济灾民。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the second year of Yonghui, the local famine prevention and grain storage warehouses were opened to help the victims.

古文：乙巳，黄门侍郎宇文节、中书侍郎柳奭同中书门下三品。
现代文：十一日，授予黄门侍郎宇文节、中书侍郎柳同中书门下三品职位。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the three positions of Huangmen waiter Uwen Jie and Zhongshu waiter Liu Tong under Zhongshu were awarded.

古文：乙卯，瑶池都督阿史那贺鲁叛。
现代文：二十一日，瑶池都督阿史那贺鲁反叛。
English: On the twenty-first day, the governor of Tsugaike, Ashina Horu, rebelled.

古文：四月乙丑，命有司毋进肉食，讫于五月。
现代文：四月初二，高宗命御膳官署不要进奉肉食，到五月为止。
English: On the second day of the fourth month of the lunar calendar, the Imperial Household Agency of Emperor Gaozong decreed that people should not eat meat until May.

古文：七月丁未，贺鲁寇庭州，左武卫大将军梁建方、右骁卫大将军契苾何力为弓月道行军总管以伐之。
现代文：七月十六日，阿史那贺鲁侵犯庭州，左武卫大将军梁建方、右骁卫大将军契絆何力任弓月道行军总管进行讨伐。
English: On July 16th, Ashina Horu invaded Tingzhou, and the left guard general, Liang Jianfang, and the right guard general, Qi Kizong He Li, were appointed as the head of the Yunyue Road march to carry out the crusade.

古文：八月己巳，高季辅为侍中；于志宁为尚书左仆射，张行成为右仆射，同中书门下三品。
现代文：八月初八，高季辅任侍中，于志宁任尚书左仆射，张行成任尚书右仆射，同中书门下三品。
English: On the 8th day of the 8th month of the 8th month, Gao Jifu was appointed as an attendant, Yu Shining was appointed as the left footman of Shang Shu, Zhang Xingcheng was appointed as the right footman of Shang Shu, and there were three prizes at the same time.

古文：己卯，白水蛮冠边，左领军将军赵孝祖为郎州道行军总管以伐之。
现代文：十八日，白水蛮族侵犯边界，左领军将军赵孝祖任郎州道行军总管进行讨伐。
English: On the 18th, the Baishui barbarians invaded the border, and the left-leading army general Zhao Xiaozu was appointed as the head of the march of the Lanzhou Road to carry out the crusade.

古文：九月癸卯，以同州苦泉牧地赐贫民。
现代文：九月十三日，将同州苦泉的牧地赐给贫民。
English: On September 13th, the grazing land in Bitouquan, Tongzhou, was given to the poor.

古文：十月辛卯，晋州地震。
现代文：十月初二，晋州地震。
English: On the second day of October, the earthquake in Jinzhou.

古文：十一月辛酉，有事于南郊。
现代文：十一月初二，在京城南郊举行祭天大礼。
English: On the second day of the first month of November, a grand festival was held in the southern suburbs of Beijing.

古文：癸酉，禁进犬马鹰鹘。
现代文：十四日，禁止向宫廷进贡犬马鹰鹘诸玩物。
English: On the 14th, it was forbidden to bring tribute dogs, horses, eagles and other toys to the court.

古文：戊寅，忻州地震。
现代文：十九日，忻州地震。
English: On the 19th, the Zhangzhou earthquake occurred.

古文：甲申，雨木冰。
现代文：二十五日，雨水着树成冰。
English: On the 25th, the rain turned the trees to ice.

古文：是月，窦州、义州蛮寇边，桂州都督刘伯英败之。
现代文：本月，窦州、义州蛮族侵犯边界，桂州都督刘伯英将其击败。
English: This month, Douzhou and Yizhou barbarians invaded the border, and Guizhou Governor Liu Boying defeated them.

古文：赵孝祖及白水蛮战于罗仵候山，败之。
现代文：赵孝祖与白水蛮族在罗忤候山交战，击败蛮军。
English: Zhao Xiaozu fought with the Baishui barbarians in Luoqiao Mountain and defeated the barbarians.

古文：十二月乙未，太白昼见。
现代文：十二月初七，白天出现太白星。
English: On the 7th day of the 12th month, a very white star appeared in the daytime.

古文：壬子，处月硃邪孤注杀招慰使单道惠，叛附于贺鲁。
现代文：二十四日，沙陀突厥的朱邪孤注杀了招慰使单道惠，反叛归附阿史那贺鲁。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, the Sadducees of the Sadducees killed the consoler and the one-way benefit, and the rebellion was attached to Ashina Horu.

古文：是冬，无雪。
现代文：这年冬季，无雪。
English: There was no snow this winter.

古文：三年正月癸亥，梁建方及处月战于牢山，败之。
现代文：永徽三年正月初五，梁建方与沙陀突厥军在牢山交战，击败沙陀军。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the third year of the reign of Yonghui, Liang Jianfang and the Shado Turk Army fought in the Liao Mountain, defeating the Shado Army.

古文：甲子，以旱避正殿，减膳，降囚罪，徒以下原之。
现代文：初六，高宗因旱灾避离正殿，减少膳食，对囚犯减刑，流放以下的罪犯免刑。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, Gaozong fled the main hall due to drought, reduced meals, commuted the sentences of prisoners, and pardoned criminals below the banishment.

古文：己巳，褚遂良为吏部尚书、同中书门下三品。
现代文：十一日，褚遂良任吏部尚书、同中书门下三品。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Zou Suiliang was appointed as the secretary of Shangshu, and was promoted to the third grade of the same middle school.

古文：丙子，享于太庙。
现代文：十八日，高宗到祖庙祭献。
English: On the 18th, Gaozong went to the ancestral temple to offer sacrifices.

古文：丁亥，耕藉田。
现代文：二十九日，高宗在借民力耕治的奉祀农田上行亲耕礼仪。
English: On the 29th, Gaozong went up to the worshipping farmland, which was cultivated by the people's efforts, to perform the cultivation ceremony.

古文：三月辛巳，雨土。
现代文：三月二十四日，天降土雨。
English: On March 24th, it rained.

古文：宇文节为侍中，柳奭守中书令。
现代文：宇文节任侍中，柳暂行代理中书令。
English: Yu Wenjie was appointed as a chamberlain, and Liu Yu temporarily acted as the secretary.

古文：四月庚寅，赵孝祖及白水蛮战，败之。
现代文：四月初三，赵孝祖与白水蛮族交战，将其击败。
English: On the third day of the fourth month, Zhao Xiaozu fought with the Baishui barbarians and defeated them.

古文：甲午，彭王元则薨。
现代文：初七，彭王李元则去世。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, Peng Wang Li Yuan passed away.

古文：是月，兵部侍郎韩瑗为黄门侍郎、同中书门下三品。
现代文：本月，兵部侍郎韩瑗任黄门侍郎、同中书门下三品。
English: This month, the attendant of the military department, Han Zheng, was appointed as the attendant of the Yellow Gate and the third grade of the middle school.

古文：五月庚申，求齐侍中崔季舒、给事黄门侍郎裴泽、隋仪同三司豆卢毓、御史中丞游楚客子孙官之。
现代文：五月初四，寻求北齐的侍中崔季舒、给事黄门侍郎裴泽、隋朝的仪同三司豆卢毓、御史中丞游楚客的子孙，委以官职。
English: On the fourth day of the fifth month, Cui Jishu, a chamberlain of the Northern Qi Dynasty, Baize, a chamberlain of the Yellow Gate Dynasty, Zhu Lu, a chamberlain of the Sui Dynasty, and Yu Chu, a secretary of the Southern Qi Dynasty, were appointed to official posts.

古文：七月丁巳，立陈王忠为皇太子，大赦，赐五品以上子为父后者勋一转，民酺三日。
现代文：七月初二，高宗立陈王李忠为皇太子，施行大赦，赐给五品以上官员之子勋衔，在其父以下的加勋一级，百姓聚饮三天。
English: On the second day of the first month of July, Gaozong appointed Chen Wang Lizhong as the crown prince, implemented an amnesty, and gave the sons of officials with five or more pins an honorary title, and the people gathered for three days to drink.

古文：九月丙辰，求周司沐大夫裴融、尚书左丞封孝琰子孙官之。
现代文：九月初二，寻求北周的司沐大夫裴融、尚书左丞封孝琰的子孙，委以官职。
English: On the second day of the first month of September, the descendants of the Northern Zhou's Simu doctor Pei Rong and Shangshu Zuo Feng Xiaojuan were appointed to official positions.

古文：是月，中书侍郎来济同中书门下三品。
现代文：本月，授予中书侍郎来济同中书门下的三品官职。
English: This month, he was awarded the third grade official position under the tutelage of Chusho Jiro.

古文：十二月癸巳，濮王泰薨。
现代文：十二月初十，濮王李泰去世。
English: On the 10th day of the 12th month of the lunar calendar, the king of Zhou, Li Tai, passed away.

古文：四年二月甲申，驸马都尉房遗爱薛万彻柴令武、高阳巴陵公主谋反，伏诛；杀荆王元景、吴王恪。
现代文：永徽四年二月初二，驸马都尉房遗爱、薛万彻、柴令武、高阳巴陵公主谋反，被处死；杀了荆王李元景、吴王李恪。
English: On the second day of the second month of February in the fourth year of Yonghui, Xuanma Duifang Youai, Xue Wancher, Chai Lingwu, and Gaoyang Baling Princess plotted a rebellion and were executed; they killed Jing Wang Li Yuanjing and Wu Wang Li Ke.

古文：乙酉，流宇文节于桂州。
现代文：初三，将宇文节流放到桂州。
English: On the third day of junior high school, he exiled Uwen Jie to Guizhou.

古文：戊子，废蜀王愔为庶人。
现代文：初六，将蜀王李忄音废黜为平民。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, Li Yuyin, King of Shu, was dethroned as a commoner.

古文：己亥，徐王元礼为司徒，李勣为司空。
现代文：十七日，徐王李元礼任司徒，李责力任司空。
English: On the 17th, Xu Wang and Li Yuanli were appointed as magistrates, and Li Rongli was appointed as magistrate.

古文：四月壬寅，以旱虑囚，遣使决天下狱，减殿中、太仆马粟，诏文武官言事。
现代文：四月二十一日，因旱灾讯察记录囚犯的罪状，派使臣裁决全国的罪案，减少殿中省、太仆寺的马饲料，诏令文武官员议论政事。
English: On April 21, due to the drought, he inspected and recorded the crimes of prisoners, sent envoys to adjudicate crimes across the country, reduced the horse feed in the central province and Taipu Temple, and ordered civil and military officials to discuss political affairs.

古文：甲辰，避正殿，减膳。
现代文：二十三日，高宗避离正殿，减少膳食。
English: On the 23rd, Gaozong left the main hall and cut down on meals.

古文：六月己丑，太白昼见。
现代文：六月初九，白天出现太白星。
English: On the ninth day of the sixth month, a very white star appeared in the daytime.

古文：八月己亥，陨石于冯翊十有八。
现代文：八月二十日，在冯翊落下陨石十八个。
English: On August 20th, 18 meteorites fell in Fengye.

古文：九月壬戌，张行成薨。
现代文：九月十三日，张行成逝世。
English: On September 13, Zhang Xingcheng passed away.

古文：甲戌，褚遂良为尚书右仆射。
现代文：二十五日，褚遂良任尚书右仆射。
English: On the 25th, Zou Suiliang appointed Shang Shuxu as his right-hand man.

古文：十月庚子，幸温汤。
现代文：十月二十二日，高宗去到温泉。
English: On October 22, Gao Zong went to a hot spring.

古文：甲辰，赦新丰。
现代文：二十六日，对新丰施行赦免。
English: On the 26th, Xinfeng was pardoned.

古文：乙巳，至自温汤。
现代文：二十七日，高宗自温泉回到京城。
English: On the 27th, Gao Zong returned to Beijing from the hot springs.

古文：戊申，睦州女子陈硕真反，婺州刺史崔义玄讨之。
现代文：三十日，睦州女子陈硕真反叛，婺州刺史崔义玄讨伐她。
English: On the 30th, Chen Shuozhen, a woman from Mutsu Province, rebelled, and the Zhangzhou assassin, Cui Yixuan, attacked her.

古文：十一月庚戌，陈硕真伏诛。
现代文：十一月初二，陈硕真被处死。
English: On November 2, Chen Shuozhen was executed.

古文：癸丑，兵部尚书崔敦礼为侍中。
现代文：初五，兵部尚书崔敦礼任侍中。
English: In the fifth year of junior high school, Choi Tun-ri, a military scholar, became an attendant.

古文：丁巳，柳奭为中书令。
现代文：初九，柳任中书令。
English: On the ninth day of the first month of the year, the willow is appointed as the middle letter.

古文：十二月庚子，高季辅薨。
现代文：十二月二十四日，高季辅逝世。
English: Gao Jifu passed away on December 24.

古文：五年正月丙寅，以旱诏文武官、朝集使言事。
现代文：永徽五年正月十九日，因旱灾诏令文武官员、派往各地的朝集使议论政事。
English: On the 19th day of the 1st month of the 5th year of Yonghui, due to drought, civil and military officials and envoys sent to various parts of the country gathered to discuss political affairs.

古文：三月戊午，如万年宫。
现代文：三月十二日，高宗去往万年宫。
English: On March 12, Gaozong left for the Palace of Ten Thousand Years.

古文：乙丑，次凤泉汤。
现代文：十九日，歇驻凤泉汤。
English: On the 19th, Fengquan Tang was stationed.

古文：辛未，赦岐州及所过徒罪以下。
现代文：二十五日，对岐州及所经过地方的服劳役以下罪犯施行赦免。
English: On the 25th, an amnesty was granted to criminals who had served less than forced labor in Qizhou and the areas they passed through.

古文：六月癸亥，柳奭罢。
现代文：六月十九日，柳被免职。
English: On June 19, Liu was removed from his post.

古文：丙寅，河北大水，遣使虑囚。
现代文：二十二日，河北发生洪灾，朝廷派使臣讯察记录囚犯的罪状。
English: On the 22nd, a flood occurred in Hebei, and the imperial court sent envoys to investigate and record the crimes of the prisoners.

古文：八月己未，诏免麟游、岐阳今岁课役，岐州及供顿县半岁。
现代文：八月十六日，下诏免除麟游、岐阳两地本年的赋税及徭役，岐州及供应百官、藩侯途中食宿和行旅所需之物的各县免赋税、徭役半年。
English: On August 16th, the following edict exempted Linyou and Qiyang from this year's taxes and corvée, and exempted Qizhou and the counties that supplied hundreds of officials and lords with accommodation and travel necessities for half a year.

古文：九月丁酉，至自万年宫。
现代文：九月二十五日，高宗自万年宫回到京城。
English: On September 25, Gaozong returned to the capital from the Palace of 10,000 Years.

古文：十月癸卯，筑京师罗郭，起观于九门。
现代文：十月初一，加筑京城外围的城廓，在天子居地的九门兴建望楼。
English: On the first day of October, the outer perimeter of the capital city was extended, and a watchtower was built at Jiumen, the residence of the emperor.

古文：六年正月壬申，拜昭陵，赦醴泉及行从，免县今岁租、调，陵所宿卫进爵一级，令、丞加一阶。
现代文：永徽六年正月初一，高宗祭拜昭陵，减免醴泉的赋税，并赏赐随行侍从人员，免去该县本年的租赋及应缴的布帛，赐予守护皇陵的值宿警卫人员晋爵一级，县令、县丞官加一阶。
English: On the first day of the first month of the sixth year of Yonghui, Gao Zong paid homage to Zhaoling, reduced and exempted the tax of Xuanquan, and rewarded the accompanying attendants, exempted the county's rent this year and the cloth allowance payable, and awarded the guards on duty guarding the imperial mausoleum a knighthood, and the county magistrate and the county magistrate added a rank.

古文：癸酉，以少牢祭陪葬者。
现代文：初二，以单牲祭祀昭陵的陪葬人员。
English: On the second day of the junior high school, the funeral attendants of Shoryo made a single sacrifice.

古文：甲戌，至自昭陵。
现代文：初三，自昭陵返回京城。
English: On the third day of the new year, he returned to Kyoto from Shoryo.

古文：庚寅，封子弘为代王，贤潞王。
现代文：十九日，封其子李弘为代王、李贤为潞王。
English: On the 19th, he made his son Li Hong the acting king and Li Xian the regent.

古文：二月乙巳，皇太子加元服，降死罪以下，赐酺三日，五品以上为父后者勋一转。
现代文：二月初五，皇太子李忠加冕，对死罪以下犯人减刑，赏赐臣民聚饮三日，五品以上官员勋级在其父以下者加勋一级。
English: On the fifth day of the second month of the year, Crown Prince Li Zhong was crowned, commuted the sentences of prisoners below the death penalty, rewarded the subjects with a three-day drinking party, and the officials with the rank of five or above were awarded the first level of decoration for those below their fathers.

古文：乙丑，营州都督程名振、左卫中郎将苏定方伐高丽。
现代文：二十五日，营州都督程名振、左卫中郎将苏定方征讨高丽国。
English: On the 25th, Yingzhou's governor, Cheng Na Zhen, and Zuo Zhong Lang led the Su Ding side to conquer Korea.

古文：五月壬午，及高丽战于贵端水，败之。
现代文：五月十三日，与高丽军在贵端水交战，击败敌军。
English: On May 13, he fought against the Korean People's Army in Gudang Water and defeated the enemy.

古文：癸未，左屯卫大将军程知节为葱山道行军大总管，以伐贺鲁。
现代文：十四日，左屯卫将军程知节任葱山道行军大总管，讨伐阿史那贺鲁。
English: On the 14th, General of the Left Tunwei Army Cheng Zhijie was appointed as the commander-in-chief of marching troops along the Qianshan Road to fight against Ashina Heru.

古文：壬辰，韩瑗为侍中，来济为中书令。
现代文：二十三日，韩瑗任侍中，来济任中书令。
English: On the 23rd, Han Zheng was appointed as an attendant, and Lai Ji was appointed as a secretary.

古文：七月乙酉，崔敦礼为中书令。
现代文：七月十七日，崔敦礼任中书令。
English: On July 17th, Choi Tun Lee was appointed to the post of middle secretary.

古文：是月，中书舍人李义府为中书侍郎，参知政事。
现代文：本月，中书舍人李义府任中书侍郎，参预掌管朝政。
English: This month, Li Yifu, the chancellor of the Chinese Academy of Letters, was appointed chancellor of the Chinese Academy of Letters, and is now in charge of the imperial government.

古文：九月庚午，贬褚遂良为潭州都督。
现代文：九月初三，将褚遂良贬为潭州都督。
English: On the 3rd day of the 9th month, Zou Suiliang was demoted to the governor of Tanzhou.

古文：乙酉，洛水溢。
现代文：十八日，洛水泛滥。
English: On the 18th, the Luo River was flooded.

古文：十月，齐州黄河溢。
现代文：十月，齐州黄河泛滥。
English: In October, the Yellow River in Qizhou began to flood.

古文：己酉，废皇后为庶人。
现代文：十三日，将皇后王氏废黜为平民。
English: On the 13th, Queen Wang was dethroned as a commoner.

古文：乙卯，立宸妃武氏为皇后。
现代文：十九日，立宸妃武氏为皇后。
English: On the 19th, Princess Takeshi became empress.

古文：丁巳，大赦，赐民八十以上粟帛。
现代文：二十一日，施行大赦，赐予百姓八十岁以上的老人粮食布帛。
English: On the twenty-first day, an amnesty was implemented, and people over the age of eighty were given grain cloth bags.

古文：十一月己巳，皇后见于太庙。
现代文：十一月初三，皇后武氏谒拜祖庙。
English: On the third day of the first month of November, Empress Wu paid homage to her ancestral temple.

古文：戊子，停诸州贡珠。
现代文：二十二日，停止各州进贡珍珠。
English: On the 22nd, the states stopped paying tribute in pearls.

古文：癸巳，诏禁吏酷法及为隐名书者。
现代文：二十七日，诏令禁止官吏施用酷刑和写匿名信。
English: On the 27th, a royal edict prohibited officials from using torture and writing anonymous letters.

古文：是冬，皇后杀王庶人。
现代文：这年冬季，皇后武氏杀了被废为平民的原皇后王氏。
English: In the winter of that year, Empress Wu killed the former Empress Wang, who had been abolished as a commoner.

古文：显庆元年正月辛未，废皇太子为梁王，立代王弘为皇太子。
现代文：显庆元年正月初六，将皇太子李忠废贬为梁王，立代王李弘为皇太子。
English: On the 6th day of the 1st month of the 1st year of the Hsien Ching, the crown prince Li Zhonghu was demoted to Liang Wang, and the king Li Hong was established as the crown prince.

古文：壬申，大赦，改元，赐五品以上子为父后者勋一转，民酺三日，八十以上粟帛，丙戌，禁胡人为幻戏者。
现代文：初七，施行大赦，更改年号，赐予五品以上官员勋级在其父以下者加勋一级，百姓聚饮三日，赏给八十岁以上老人粮食布帛。二十一日，禁止胡人变幻术。
English: On the seventh day of the new year, an amnesty was implemented, the year was changed, officials with five or more pins were given an order of merit, and those below their father were given an additional order of merit, the people gathered to drink for three days, and the elderly over the age of eighty were awarded grain cloth. On the 21st day, the Hu people were banned from changing magic.

古文：甲午，放宫人。
现代文：二十九日，放还宫女。
English: On the 29th, Gongnian was released.

古文：三月辛巳，皇后亲蚕。
现代文：三月十七日，皇后武氏行躬践蚕事之礼。
English: On March 17th, Empress Wu paid homage to the silkworm.

古文：丙戌，户部侍郎杜正伦为黄门侍郎、同中书门下三品。
现代文：二十二日，户部侍郎杜正伦任黄门侍郎、同中书门下三品。
English: On the 22nd, Household Attendant Du Zhenglun was appointed Yellow Gate Attendant, and Junior High School Attendant Third Class.

古文：四月壬寅，诏五品以上老疾不以罪者同致仕。
现代文：四月初八，下诏：五品以上官员因年老有病而未获罪者与辞官者同等待遇。
English: On the 8th day of the 4th month of the year, the following edict was issued: Officials of the Fifth Rank and above who have not been convicted due to old age or illness will be treated the same as those who have resigned.

古文：壬子，矩州人谢无零反，伏诛。
现代文：十八日，矩州人谢无零反叛，被处死。
English: On the 18th, the people of Guozhou rebelled against Xie Wuzhong and were executed.

古文：七月癸未，崔敦礼为太子少师、同中书门下三品。
现代文：七月二十一日，崔敦礼任太子少师、同中书门下三品。
English: On July 21st, Choi Tun Lee was appointed as the prince's young teacher and the third grade of the same middle school.

古文：八月丙申，崔敦礼薨。
现代文：八月初四，崔敦礼逝世。
English: On the 4th of August, Tridunlei passed away.

古文：辛丑，程知节及贺鲁部歌逻禄、处月战于榆慕谷，败之。
现代文：初九，程和节与阿史那贺鲁的部属歌逻禄、沙陀突厥军在榆慕谷交战，击败敌军。
English: On the 9th day of the first lunar month, Cheng He Jie and Ashina Horu's subordinates, the Qaloglu and Shado Turkic armies, engaged in battle in Yimu Valley and defeated the enemy army.

古文：九月庚辰，括州海溢。
现代文：九月十九日，括州海潮泛滥。
English: On September 19th, the sea tides in Bozhou began to flood.

古文：癸未，程知节及贺鲁战于怛笃城，败之。
现代文：二十二日，程知节与阿史那贺鲁在怛笃城交战，击败贺鲁。
English: On the 22nd, Cheng Zhi Jie and Ashina Horu fought in the city of Zidu and defeated Horu.

古文：十一月乙丑，以子显生，赐京官、朝集使勋一转。
现代文：十一月初五，高宗因其子李显出生，赐予京官、朝集使加勋官一级。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of November, Gaozong awarded the Beijing official and the Choshu envoy with a first-class decoration for the birth of his son, Li Xian.

古文：自八月霜且雨至于是月。
现代文：自八月霜雨交加至本月。
English: It's been raining and frosty since August.

古文：是岁，龟兹大将羯猎颠附于贺鲁，左屯卫大将军杨胄伐之。
现代文：这年，龟兹大将羯猎颠依附阿史那贺鲁，左屯卫大将军杨胄率军征讨。
English: In this year, General Gui Zi followed Ashina Horu and General Yang Mi led the army to fight.

古文：二年闰正月壬寅，如洛阳宫。
现代文：显庆二年闰正月十三日，高宗去洛阳宫。
English: On the 13th day of the second leap year, Gaozong went to Luoyang Palace.

古文：庚戌，右屯卫将军苏定方为伊丽道行军总管，以伐贺鲁。
现代文：二十一日，右屯卫将军苏定方任伊丽道行军总管，讨伐阿史那贺鲁。
English: On the twenty-first day, General Su Dingfang of the Right Tunwei was appointed as the head of the march of the Ili Road, and fought against Ashina Horu.

古文：二月癸亥，降洛州囚罪，徒以下原之，免民一岁租、调，赐百岁以上氈衾粟帛。
现代文：二月初五，对洛阳囚犯减刑，判服劳役以下的罪犯免刑，免除百姓一年的租赋及应缴的布帛，赐给百岁以上老人毡被、粮食、布帛。
English: On the fifth day of the second month of the year, Luoyang prisoners' sentences were commuted, convicts sentenced to less than labor service were pardoned, the people were exempted from one year's rent and cloth allowance, and the elderly over 100 years old were given quilts, grain and cloth allowance.

古文：庚午，封子显为周王。
现代文：十二日，高宗封其子李显为周王。
English: On the 12th, Gao Zongfu appointed his son Li Xian as King of Zhou.

古文：壬申，徙封素节为郇王。
现代文：十四日，改封李素节为郇王。
English: On the 14th, Li Su Jie was given the title of "King of Gong."

古文：三月戊申，禁舅姑拜公主，父母拜王妃。
现代文：三月二十日，禁止公主的舅、姑参拜公主，王妃的父母参拜王妃。
English: On March 20, the uncle and aunt of the princess were forbidden to visit the princess, and the parents of the princess were forbidden to visit the princess.

古文：癸丑，李义府兼中书令。
现代文：二十五日，李义府兼中书令。
English: On the 25th, Li Yifu also became the Clerk of the Central Government.

古文：五月丙申，幸明德宫。
现代文：五月初九，高宗亲临明德宫。
English: On the 9th day of the 5th month, Gao Zong personally visited the Mingde Palace.

古文：七月丁亥，如洛阳宫。
现代文：七月初一，高宗前往洛阳宫。
English: On the first day of July, Gaozong went to Luoyang Palace.

古文：八月丁卯，贬韩瑗为振州刺史，来济为台州刺史。
现代文：八月十一日，将韩瑗贬为振州刺史，来济任台州刺史。
English: On August 11th, Han Zheng was demoted to Zhenzhou magistrate, and Lai Jie was appointed Taizhou magistrate.

古文：辛未，卫尉卿许敬宗为侍中。
现代文：十五日，卫尉卿许敬宗任侍中。
English: On the fifteenth day, the captain of the guards, Xu Jingzong, was appointed as a chamberlain.

古文：九月庚寅，杜正伦兼中书令。
现代文：九月初五，杜正伦任中书令。
English: On the 5th day of the 9th month, Du Zhenglun was appointed to the post of vice-commander.

古文：十一月戊戌，如许州。
现代文：十一月十四日，高宗去许州。
English: On November 14th, Gaozong left for Huzhou.

古文：甲辰，遣使虑所过州县囚。
现代文：二十日，派使臣讯察所经过州县记录的囚犯罪状。
English: On the 20th, the Information Office sent an envoy to inspect the criminal records of prisoners recorded by prefectures.

古文：乙巳，猎于滍南。
现代文：二十一日，在氵蚩南打猎。
English: On the 21st, he went hunting in southern Anhui Province.

古文：壬子，讲武于新郑，赦郑州，免一岁租赋，赐八十以上粟帛，其尝事高祖任佐史者以名闻。
现代文：二十八日，在新郑讲习武事，赏赐郑州：免一年的租赋，赐给八十岁以上老人粮食布帛，将曾经侍奉高祖任佐史的人奏报皇帝。
English: On the 28th, he gave a martial arts lesson in Xinzheng, and rewarded Zhengzhou: exempted from a year's rent, gave grain cloth to the elderly over 80 years old, and made the person who once served Gao Zu as Sashi the emperor.

古文：十二月乙卯，如洛阳宫。
现代文：十二月初一，高宗去洛阳宫。
English: On the first day of December, Gaozong went to Luoyang Palace.

古文：丁巳，苏定方败贺鲁于金牙山，执之。
现代文：初三，苏定方在金牙山打败并俘虏阿史那贺鲁。
English: On the third day of the first month, Su Dingfang defeated and captured Ashina Heru in Jinya Mountain.

古文：丁卯，以洛阳宫为东都。
现代文：十三日，将洛阳宫定为东都。
English: On the 13th, Luoyang Palace was designated as the eastern capital.

古文：三年正月戊申，杨胄及龟兹羯猎颠战于泥师域，败之。
现代文：显庆三年正月二十五日，杨胄与龟兹国的羯猎颠在泥师城交战，将其击败。
English: On the 25th day of the 1st month of the 3rd year of the Hsien Ching, Yang Hui fought with the hunting dogs of the Kuez Kingdom in the mud city and defeated them.

古文：二月甲戌，至自东都。
现代文：二月二十一日，高宗自东都返回京城。
English: On February 21, Gao Zong returned to Beijing from Dongdu.

古文：戊寅，虑囚。
现代文：二十五日，讯察记录囚犯的罪状。
English: On the 25th, the investigation recorded the prisoner's charges.

古文：六月壬子，程名振及高丽战于赤烽镇，败之。
现代文：六月初一，程名振与高丽军在赤烽镇交战，击败高丽军。
English: On the first day of June, Cheng Na Zhen and the Korean People's Army fought in Chakchon Town, defeating the Korean People's Army.

古文：十一月乙酉，贬杜正伦为横州刺史，李义府普州刺史。
现代文：十一月初六，将杜正伦贬为横州刺史，李义府贬为普州刺史。
English: At the beginning of November 6, Du Zhenglun was relegated to the history of Hengzhou and Li Yifu was relegated to the history of Puzhou.

古文：戊子，许敬宗权检校中书令。
现代文：初九，许敬宗暂行代理检校中书令。
English: On the ninth day of the new year, Xu Jingzong became the interim agent for the school inspection.

古文：甲午，苏定方俘贺鲁以献。
现代文：十五日，苏定方将俘获的阿史那贺鲁进献太庙。
English: On the 15th, the Suding side presented the captured Ashina Horu to the Imperial Temple.

古文：戊戌，许敬宗为中书令，大理卿辛茂将兼侍中。
现代文：十九日，许敬宗任中书令，大理寺卿辛茂将兼侍中。
English: On the 19th, Xu Jingzong was appointed as the middle secretary, and the head of the Dali Temple, Xin Mao, was also appointed as a chamberlain.

古文：四年三月壬午，昆陵都护阿史那弥射及西突厥真珠叶护战于双河，败之。
现代文：显庆四年三月初五，昆陵都督阿史那弥射与西突厥的真珠叶护在双河交战，将其击败。
English: On the 5th day of the 3rd month of the 4th year of Xianqing, the governor of Kunling, Ashina Misha, fought and defeated the West Turkic Pearl Yegu in Shuanghe.

古文：四月丙辰，于志宁为太子太师、同中书门下三品。
现代文：四月初十，于志宁任太子太师、同中书门下三品。
English: On the 10th day of the 4th month, Yu Zhining was appointed as the prince's teacher, and was promoted to the third grade of the same middle school.

古文：乙丑，黄门侍郎许圉师同中书门下三品。
现代文：十九日，黄门侍郎许圉师受任同中书门下三品。
English: On the 19th, Huangmen waiter Xu Yanshi was appointed to the third grade of the same middle school.

古文：戊辰，流长孙无忌于黔州。
现代文：二十二日，将长孙无忌流放黔州。
English: On the 22nd, he banished his eldest grandson to Zhangzhou.

古文：于志宁罢。
现代文：于志宁被免职。
English: Yu Shining was dismissed.

古文：五月己卯，许圉师为中书侍郎、同中书门下三品。
现代文：五月初三，许圉师任中书侍郎、同中书门下三品。
English: On the third day of the fifth month, Xu Yanshi was appointed as the junior secretary of the middle school, and the junior secretary of the middle school.

古文：丙申，兵部尚书任雅相、度支尚书卢承庆参知政事。
现代文：二十日，兵部尚书任雅相、度支尚书卢承庆参预掌管朝政。
English: On the 20th, Hyobu Shosho was appointed as Minister of the Army, and Doshi Shosho, Lu Chengqing, was appointed to take charge of the imperial government.

古文：戊戌，杀凉州都督长史赵持满。
现代文：二十二日，杀了凉州都督长史赵持满。
English: On the 22nd, he killed the governor of Liangzhou, Shi Zhao Mochiman.

古文：七月己丑，以旱避正殿。
现代文：七月十四日，高宗因旱灾避离正殿。
English: On July 14th, Gaozong had to evacuate the main hall due to drought.

古文：壬辰，虑囚。
现代文：十七日，讯察记录囚犯的罪状。
English: On the 17th, the investigation recorded the prisoner's charges.

古文：八月壬子，李义府为吏部尚书、同中书门下三品。
现代文：八月初八，李义府任吏部尚书、同中书门下三品。
English: On the 8th day of the 8th month of August, Li Yifu was appointed as the secretary of Shangshu and the third grade of the middle school of Shangshu.

古文：十月丙午，皇太子加元服，大赦，赐五品以上子孙为父祖后者勋一转，民酺三日。
现代文：十月初三，皇太子李弘加冕，施行大赦，赐予子、孙为五品以上官员而勋级在其父、祖以下者加勋一级，百姓聚饮三日。
English: On the third day of October, Crown Prince Li Hong was crowned, and a general amnesty was implemented, granting sons and grandsons of officials with five or more pins, and those with an order below their fathers and ancestors, an additional order. The people gathered for three days to drink.

古文：闰月戊寅，如东都，皇太子监国。
现代文：闰十月初五，高宗去东都，皇太子李弘代理国政。
English: On the 5th day of the 10th month, Gaozong went to Dongdu, and Crown Prince Li Hong took over the state affairs.

古文：辛巳，诏所过供顿免今岁租赋之半，赐民八十以上氈衾粟帛。
现代文：初八，下诏：皇帝所经过的供应百官、藩侯食宿及旅途所需之物的各县，减免本年租赋的一半，赐给百姓八十岁以上的老人毡被、粮食和布帛。
English: On the eighth day of the first lunar month, the following edict was issued: All the counties through which the emperor had passed to supply hundreds of officials, lords and princes with food, lodging and travel necessities would be exempted from paying half of the current year's rent, and the people over the age of eighty would be given quilts, grain and cloth.

古文：十一月丙午，许圉师为左散骑常侍、检校侍中。
现代文：十一月初四，许圉师任左散骑常侍、检校侍中。
English: On the 4th day of the 11th month of the first month, Xu Junshi was appointed as the left horseback riding attendant and the middle school inspector.

古文：戊午，辛茂将薨。
现代文：十六日，辛茂将去世。
English: On the 16th, Xinmao will pass away.

古文：癸亥，贺鲁部悉结阙俟斤都曼寇边，左骁卫大将军苏定方为安抚大使以伐之。
现代文：二十一日，阿史那贺鲁的属部、悉结阙的首领都曼侵犯边境，左骁卫大将军苏定方任安抚大使率军讨伐。
English: On the twenty-first day, Ashina Horu's subordinate, the leader of Shijiazhuang, Touman, invaded the border, and the left guard general, Suding Fang, led the army to fight.

古文：卢承庆同中书门下三品。
现代文：卢承庆受任同中书门下三品。
English: Lu Chengqing was appointed to the third grade of the same middle school.

古文：五年正月癸卯，苏定方俘都曼以献。
现代文：显庆五年正月初二，苏定方俘获都曼进献朝廷。
English: On the 2nd day of the 1st month of the 5th year of Xianqing, Suding captured Duman and presented it to the imperial court.

古文：甲子，如并州。
现代文：二十三日，高宗去并州。
English: On the 23rd, Gaozong went to annex the prefecture.

古文：己巳，次长平，赐父老布帛。
现代文：二十八日，歇驻长平，赐给当地父老布帛。
English: On the 28th, he stopped in Changping and gave the local people cloth bags.

古文：二月丙戌，赦并州及所过州县，义旗初尝任五品以上葬并州者祭之，加佐命功臣食别封者子孙二阶，大将军府僚佐存者一阶，民年八十以上版授刺史、县令，赐酺三日。
现代文：二月十五日，高宗减免并州及所经过州县的租赋；祭祀反隋起义之初曾任五品以上官职葬在并州的人，给辅佐高祖开创帝业另封食邑的功臣的子孙加官阶二级，大将军府的僚臣佐吏尚存者加官阶一级，给八十岁以上的平民老人加封刺史、县令荣衔，赐予聚饮三日。
English: On February 15, Gaozong reduced and exempted the rent of the annexed prefecture and the counties that passed through it; those who had held more than five official positions and were buried in the annexed prefecture at the beginning of the anti-Sui uprising were awarded the second level of official rank for the descendants of the meritorious soldiers who assisted Gaozong in creating the empire, and the first level of official rank for the surviving officers of the General Staff, and the elderly civilians over the age of eighty were awarded the title of "priest" and the honorary title of "county magistrate," and were given three days to gather and drink.

古文：甲午，祠旧宅。
现代文：二十三日，到旧日的府宅春祭。
English: On the 23rd, the old mansion's spring festival was held.

古文：三月丙午，皇后宴亲族邻里于朝堂，会命妇于内殿。
现代文：三月初五，皇后武氏在朝堂宴请亲族邻里，在内殿会见有封号的妇女。
English: On the 5th day of the 3rd month, Empress Wu invited relatives and neighbors to a banquet in the imperial hall, and met a woman with a seal number in the inner hall.

古文：赐从官五品以上、并州长史司马勋一转。
现代文：高宗赏赐五品以上的侍从官、并州的长史、司马勋官一级。
English: Gaozong rewarded the attendants with more than five prizes, and the long history of the state and the first-class Sima officer.

古文：妇人八十以上版授郡君，赐氈衾粟帛。
现代文：八十岁以上的妇女授予郡君的荣衔，赐给她们毡被、粮食和布帛。
English: Women over the age of eighty were given the title of Gu Jun, and were given quilts, grain and cloth.

古文：己酉，讲武于城西。
现代文：初八，高宗在京城西边讲习武事。
English: On his eighth day of junior high school, Gao Zong went to a martial arts class on the west side of Beijing.

古文：辛亥，左武卫大将军苏定方为神兵道行军总管，新罗王金春秋为嵎夷道行军总管，率三将军及新罗兵以伐百济。
现代文：初十，左武卫大将军苏定方任神兵道行军大总管，新罗国王金春秋任山禺夷道行军总管，率领三个将军的军队和新罗兵讨伐百济。
English: On the tenth day of the first month of the year, Zuo Wuwei's general Su Dingfang was appointed as the general manager of the march of the Shenbei Road, and the king of Silla, Jin Chunqiu, was appointed as the general manager of the march of the Shanshui Road. He led the army of three generals and the Silla soldiers to fight against Baekje.

古文：四月癸巳，如东都。
现代文：四月二十三日，高宗去东都。
English: On April 23, Gao Zong left for Dongdu.

古文：五月辛丑，作八关宫。
现代文：五月初一，兴建八关宫。
English: On the first day of May, construction of Hachiguan Palace began.

古文：戊辰，定襄都督阿史德枢宾为沙砖道行军总管，以伐契丹。
现代文：二十八日，定襄都督阿史德枢宾任沙砖道行军总管，讨伐契丹。
English: On the 28th, the governor of Dingxiang, Ashide Zhenbin, was appointed as the general manager of the march of the sand-brick road to fight against the Khitan.

古文：六月庚午朔，日有食之。
现代文：六月初一，日月合朔，有日蚀。
English: On the first day of June, the sun and moon are new, and there is a solar eclipse.

古文：七月乙巳，废梁王忠为庶人。
现代文：七月初六，将梁王李忠废黜为平民。
English: On the 6th day of the 7th month, Liang Wang and Li Zhong were dethroned as commoners.

古文：丁卯，卢承庆罢。
现代文：二十八日，卢承庆被免职。
English: On the 28th, Lu Chengqing was removed from office.

古文：八月庚辰，苏定方及百济战，败之。
现代文：八月十二日，苏定方与百济军交战，将其击败。
English: On August 12, the Suding side entered into battle with the Baekje army and defeated it.

古文：壬午，左武卫大将军郑仁泰及悉结、拔也固、仆骨同罗战，败之。癸未，赦神兵道大总管以下军士及其家，赐民酺三日。
现代文：十四日，左武卫大将军郑仁泰与悉结、拔也固、仆骨、同罗的军队交战，将其击败，十五日，赦免神兵道大总管以下的军士及其家人，赐予百姓聚饮三日。
English: On the 14th, Zheng Rintai, General of the Left Division of the Middle Palace Guards, fought and defeated the troops of Shijiazhuang, Bajiaogu, Hubei and Tongluo. On the 15th, he pardoned the soldiers and their families below the General Manager of the General Headquarters of the Chinese People's Liberation Army and gave the people three days to gather and drink.

古文：十一月戊戌，苏定方俘百济王以献。
现代文：十一月初一，苏定方俘获百济国王进献朝廷。
English: On the first day of November, Su Dingfang captured the king of Baekje and presented him to the imperial court.

古文：甲寅，如许州。
现代文：十七日，高宗去许州。
English: On the 17th, Gaozong went to Xuzhou.

古文：十二月辛未，猎于安乐川。
现代文：十二月初五，高宗在安乐川打猎。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of December, Gaozong went hunting in Anle River.

古文：己卯，如东都。
现代文：十三日，去东都。
English: On the 13th, I went to Dongdu.

古文：壬午，左骁卫大将军契苾何力为浿江道行军大总管，苏定方为辽东道行军大总管，左骁卫将军刘伯英为平壤道行军大总管，以伐高丽。
现代文：十六日，左骁卫大将军契絆何力任氵贝江道行军大总管，苏定方任辽东道行军大总管，左骁卫将军刘伯英任平壤道行军大总管，率军征讨高丽国。
English: On the 16th, General Zuo Bingwei Qizong He Li was appointed as the general manager of the march in the Mu Beijiang Road, General Su Dingfang was appointed as the general manager of the march in the Liao Dao Road, and General Zuo Bingwei Liu Bo Ying was appointed as the general manager of the march in the Pyongyang Road, and led the army to conquer Korea.

古文：阿史德枢宾及奚、契丹战，败之。
现代文：阿史德枢宾与奚、契丹交战，击败敌军。
English: Emperor Ashide fought against the Mongols and Khitans and defeated the enemy army.

古文：龙朔元年正月戊午，鸿胪卿萧嗣业为扶余道行军总管，以伐高丽。
现代文：龙朔元年正月二十二日，鸿胪卿萧嗣业任扶余道行军总管，征讨高丽国。
English: On the 22nd day of the 1st month of the 1st year of the Long Shuo, Hongwu Sir Xiao Ziye was appointed as the general manager of the march of Fuyu Road to conquer Korea.

古文：二月乙未，改元，赦洛州。
现代文：二月三十日，更改年号，对洛州施行赦免。
English: On February 30, the name of the year was changed, and an amnesty was granted to Lozhou.

古文：四月庚辰，任雅相为浿江道行军总管，契苾何力为辽东道行军总管，苏定方为平壤道行军总管，萧嗣业为扶余道行军总管，右骁卫将军程名振为镂方道行军总管，左骁卫将军庞孝泰为沃沮道行军总管，率三十五军以伐高丽。
现代文：四月十六日，任雅相任氵贝江道行军总管，契絆何力任辽东道行军总管，苏定方任平壤道行军总管，萧嗣业任扶余道行军总管，右骁卫将军程名振任镂方道行军总管，左骁卫将军庞孝泰任沃沮道行军总管，率领三十五个军的兵力征讨高丽国。
English: On April 16th, Ren Yaxiang was appointed as the general manager of the march on the Wubai River, Qizong He Li was appointed as the general manager of the march on the Liaodong River, Su Dingfang was appointed as the general manager of the march on the Pyongyang River, Xiao Ziyi was appointed as the general manager of the march on the Fuyu River, the right guard general Cheng Nanzhen was appointed as the general manager of the march on the Yufang River, and the left guard general Pang Xiaotai was appointed as the general manager of the march on the Wo Desh Road, leading the recruitment of thirty-five armies to invade Korea.

古文：甲午晦，日有食之。
现代文：三十日，月末，有日蚀。
English: On the 30th, at the end of the month, there is a solar eclipse.

古文：六月辛巳，太白经天。
现代文：六月十七日，太白星行经天空。
English: On June 17th, a white star streaked across the sky.

古文：八月甲戌，苏定方及高丽战于浿江，败之。
现代文：八月十一日，苏定方与高丽军在氵贝江交战，击败高丽军。
English: On August 11, the Suding side fought with the Koryo army at the Zubei River and defeated the Koryo army.

古文：九月癸卯，及皇后幸李勣、许圉师第。
现代文：九月十一日，高宗与武皇后亲临李责力、许圉师府第。
English: On September 11, Gao Zong and Empress Wu visited Li Rongli and Xu Yanshi's residence.

古文：壬子，徙封贤为沛王。
现代文：二十日，改封李贤为沛王。
English: On the 20th, Li Xian's title was changed to Pei Wang.

古文：十月丁卯，猎于陆浑。
现代文：十月初五，高宗在陆浑打猎。
English: On the fifth day of October, Gaozong went hunting in the mud.

古文：戊辰，猎于非山。
现代文：初六，在非山打猎。
English: In my sixth year of junior high, I went hunting in the mountains.

古文：癸酉，如东都。
现代文：十一日，去东都。
English: On the 11th, I went to Dongdu.

古文：郑仁泰为铁勒道行军大总管，萧嗣业为仙崿道行军大总管，左骁卫大将军阿史那忠为长岑道行军大总管，以伐铁勒。
现代文：郑仁泰任铁勒道行军大总管，萧嗣业任仙萫道行军大总管，左骁卫大将军阿史那忠任长岑道行军大总管，征讨铁勒。
English: Zheng Rintai served as the general superintendent of the Tielu Road Campaign, Xiao Ziye served as the general superintendent of the Xianlong Road Campaign, and General Ashina Zhong served as the general superintendent of the Changxuan Road Campaign to conquer Tielu.

古文：二年二月甲子，大易官名。
现代文：龙朔二年二月初四，大改官称。
English: On the 4th day of the 2nd month of the 2nd year of the Long Shuo, it was announced that there would be a major reshuffle.

古文：甲戌，任雅相薨。
现代文：十四日，任雅相去世。
English: On the 14th, Ren Yaxiang passed away.

古文：戊寅，庞孝泰及高丽战于蛇水，死之。
现代文：十八日，庞孝泰与高丽军在蛇水交战，阵亡。
English: On the 18th, Pang Hsiao-tai and the Korean People's Army fought in the Snake River and died in battle.

古文：三月庚寅，郑仁泰及铁勒战于天山，败之。
现代文：三月初十，郑仁泰与铁勒军在天山交战，击败铁勒军。
English: At the beginning of March 10th, Zheng Rintai and Tiele's army fought in Tianshan, defeating Tiele's army.

古文：乙巳，如河北县。
现代文：十六日，高宗去河北县。
English: On the 16th, Gaozong went to Hebei County.

古文：辛亥，如蒲州。
现代文：二十二日，去蒲州。
English: On the 22nd, I went to Bushu.

古文：癸丑，如同州。
现代文：二十四日，去同州。
English: On the 24th, I went to Tongzhou.

古文：四月庚申，至自同州。
现代文：四月初一，自同州返抵京城。
English: On the first day of April, he returned to Beijing from the same state.

古文：辛巳，作蓬莱宫。
现代文：二十二日，建造蓬莱宫。
English: On the 22nd, the Penglai Palace was built.

古文：六月癸亥，禁宗戚献纂组雕镂。
现代文：六月初五，禁止王室亲属进献编绘的丝带、雕刻的献辞制品。
English: On the 5th day of the 6th month, the royal family's relatives were prohibited from donating embroidered ribbons and carved offerings.

古文：七月戊子，以子旭轮生满月，大赦，赐酺三日。
现代文：七月初一，高宗因儿子李旭轮满月，施行大赦，赐予臣民聚饮三日。
English: On the first day of July, Emperor Gaozong pardoned his son, Li Xulan, because of the full moon, and gave his subjects three days to gather and drink.

古文：右威卫将军孙仁师为熊津道行军总管，以伐百济。
现代文：右威卫将军孙仁师任熊津道行军总管，征讨百济国。
English: Yu Weiwei's general Sun Renshi was appointed as the general manager of the march in Kumazu Province to conquer Baekje.

古文：戊戌，李义府罢。
现代文：十一日，李义府被免职。
English: On the 11th, Li Yifu was removed from office.

古文：八月壬寅，许敬宗为太子少师、同东西台三品。
现代文：八月十六日，许敬宗任太子少师、同东西台三品。
English: On August 16th, Xu Jingzong was appointed as the young teacher of the prince and the third grade of the East and West.

古文：九月丁丑，李义府起复。
现代文：九月二十一日，李义府重被起用。
English: On September 21, Li Yifu was reinstated.

古文：十月丁酉，幸温汤，皇太子监国。
现代文：十月十一日，高宗亲临温泉，皇太子李弘代行处理国政。
English: On October 11th, Gao Zong personally visited the hot spring, and Crown Prince Li Hongzhu took over the state affairs.

古文：丁未，至自温汤。
现代文：二十一日，高宗自温泉返回京城。
English: On the 21st, Gao Zong returned to Beijing from the hot springs.

古文：庚戌，西台侍郎上官仪同东西台三品。
现代文：二十四日，西台侍郎上官仪加同东西台三品。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, the west table attendant and the east and west table three dishes were added to the official ceremony.

古文：十一月辛未，贬许圉师为虔州刺史。
现代文：十一月十六日，将许圉师贬为虔州刺史。
English: On November 16th, Xu Yanshi was relegated to the history of Qianzhou.

古文：癸酉，封子旭轮为殷王。
现代文：十八日，高宗封其子李旭轮为殷王。
English: On the 18th, Gao Zongfu appointed his son Li Xulun as Yin Wang.

古文：是岁，右卫将军苏海政为蒨海道行军总管，以伐龟兹。
现代文：本年，右卫将军苏海政任耤海道行军总管，征讨龟兹国。
English: This year, the right guard general, Su Haizheng, was appointed as the general manager of the march on the Minhai Highway to conquer the Kuez country.

古文：海政杀昆陵都护阿史那弥射。
现代文：苏海政杀了昆陵都护阿史那弥射。
English: Su Haizheng killed Kunling tutelary Ashenami Zhao.

古文：三年正月乙丑，李义府为右相。
现代文：龙朔三年正月十一日，李义府任右相。
English: On the 11th day of the first month of the third year of Longshuo, Li Yifu was appointed Minister of the Right.

古文：二月减百官一月俸，赋雍、同等十五州民钱，以作蓬莱宫。
现代文：二月，减发百官一个月的薪俸，征收雍、同等十五个州百姓的钱财，用以建造蓬莱宫。
English: In February, the salaries of 100 officials were reduced by one month, and the money and wealth of the people of Yong and the equivalent of 15 states were collected to build the Penglai Palace.

古文：乙亥，杀驸马都尉韦正矩。
现代文：乙亥，杀了驸马都尉韦正矩。
English: Eihei, killed the horse captain Wei Zhengrong.

古文：庚戌，虑囚。
现代文：二十六日，讯察记录囚犯的罪状。
English: On the 26th, the investigation recorded the prisoner's charges.

古文：四月戊子，流李义府于巂州。
现代文：四月初五，将李义府流放到州。
English: On the 5th of April, Li Yifu was exiled to Shandong Province.

古文：五月壬午，柳州蛮叛，冀州都督长史刘伯英以岭南兵伐之。
现代文：五月三十日，柳州少数民族反叛，冀州都督长史刘伯英率领岭南军队讨伐。
English: On May 30, the ethnic minorities of Liuzhou rebelled, and the governor of Jizhou, Shi Liu Boying, led the Lingnan army in a crusade.

古文：六月，吐蕃攻吐谷浑，凉州都督郑仁泰为青海道行军大总管以救之。
现代文：六月，吐蕃进攻吐谷浑，凉州都督郑仁泰任青海道行军大总管率军救援。
English: In June, Tubo attacked Tugu Hun, and Zheng Rintai, the governor of Liangzhou, led the Qingdao march to rescue the troops.

古文：八月癸卯，有彗星出于左摄提。
现代文：八月二十二日，在 左摄提 天区出现彗星。
English: On August 22nd, a comet appeared in the left-hand sky.

古文：戊申，诏百寮言事。
现代文：二十七日，高宗诏令百官议论政事。
English: On the 27th, Emperor Gaozong issued an edict ordering all officials to discuss political affairs.

古文：遣按察大使于十道。
现代文：派遣按察大使赴十个道巡视。
English: Send the ambassador to inspect ten provinces.

古文：九月戊午，孙仁师及百济战于白江，败之。
现代文：九月初八，孙仁师与百济军在白江交战，击败百济军。
English: On the 8th day of the 9th month, Sun Renshi's division fought with the Baekje army in the Baekje River and defeated the Baekje army.

古文：十月辛巳，诏皇太子五日一至光顺门，监诸司奏事，小事决之。
现代文：十月初一，诏令皇太子李弘每五日至光顺门一次，掌管各官署上陈政事，对小事进行裁处。
English: On the first day of October, the emperor ordered the crown prince, Li Hong, to come to the Guangshun Gate once every five days to take charge of the administrative affairs of all government departments and to adjudicate minor matters.

古文：十一月甲戌，雨木冰。
现代文：十一月二十五日，雨水着树成冰。
English: On November 25th, rainwater turned trees into ice.

古文：十二月庚子，改明年为麟德元年，降京师、雍州诸县死罪以下。
现代文：十二月二十一日，决定将明年改为麟德元年，对京城、雍州各县死罪以下的罪犯减刑。
English: On December 21, it was decided to change the next year to the first year of Lin De, and to reduce the sentences of criminals with less than capital crimes in Beijing and Yongzhou counties.

古文：壬寅，安西都护高贤为行军总管，以伐弓月。
现代文：二十三日，安西都护高贤任行军总管，讨伐西突厥的部落弓月。
English: On the 23rd, Anxi tutelary Gao Xian was appointed as the general manager of the march to fight the Western Turkic tribe, the Yueyue.

古文：麟德元年二月戊子，如福昌宫。
现代文：麟德元年二月初十，高宗去往福昌宫。
English: On the tenth day of the second month of the first year of Lin De, Gao Zong went to Fuchang Palace.

古文：癸卯，如万年宫。
现代文：二十五日，去万年宫。
English: On the 25th, I went to the Palace of Ten Thousand Years.

古文：四月壬午，道王元庆薨。
现代文：四月初四，道王李元庆去世。
English: On the fourth day of the fourth month of April, the Taoist King Li Yuanqing passed away.

古文：五月戊申，许王孝薨。
现代文：五月初一，许王李孝去世。
English: On the first day of May, Xu Wang Lihong passed away.

古文：丙寅，以旱避正殿。
现代文：十九日，高宗因旱灾避离正殿。
English: On the 19th, Gaozong had to evacuate the main hall due to drought.

古文：七月丁未，诏以三年正月有事于泰山。
现代文：七月初一，下诏：于麟德三年正月在泰山祭祀天地。
English: On the first day of July, the following edict was issued: In the first month of the third year of Lin De's reign, the heavens and earth would be sacrificed on Mount Tai.

古文：八月己卯，幸旧第，降万年县死罪以下。
现代文：八月初四，高宗亲临旧日府第，对万年县的死罪以下罪犯减刑。
English: On the 4th of August, Gao Zong personally went to the former Nipu County to commute the sentences of the following criminals convicted of capital crimes in Mannen County.

古文：壬午，至自万年宫。
现代文：初七，自万年宫返抵京城。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, he returned to the capital from the Palace of 10,000 Years.

古文：丁亥，司列太常伯刘祥道兼右相，大司宪窦德玄为司元太常伯、检校左相。
现代文：十二日，司列太常伯刘祥道兼右相，大司宪窦德玄任司元太常伯、检校左相。
English: On the 12th, Liu Xiang Dao, the secretary of the secretary of the permanent secretary, and the right minister, and Dou De Xuan, the chief secretary of the gendarmerie, were appointed as the deputy permanent secretary and the left minister of the inspection.

古文：十二月丙戌，杀上官仪。
现代文：十二月十三日，杀了上官仪。
English: On December 13th, he killed a high-ranking official.

古文：戊子，杀庶人忠。
现代文：十五日，杀了被废为平民的皇太子李忠。
English: On the 15th, he killed Crown Prince Li Zhong, who had been abolished as a commoner.

古文：刘祥道罢。
现代文：刘祥道被免职。
English: Liu Xiangdao was removed from his post.

古文：太子右中护乐彦玮、西台侍郎孙处约同知军国政事。
现代文：太子右中护乐彦玮、西台侍郎孙处约参与主持军国政事。
English: The prince's right-hand middle bodyguard, Raku Hikomaro, and the west side attendant, the grandson, were roughly involved in presiding over the military and state affairs.

古文：是冬，无雪。
现代文：这年冬季，无雪。
English: There was no snow this winter.

古文：二年二月壬午如东都。
现代文：麟德二年二月初十，高宗去往东都。
English: On the tenth day of the second month of the second year of Lind, Gaozong went to Dongdu.

古文：三月甲寅，司戎太常伯姜恪同东酉台三品。
现代文：三月十二日，司戎太常伯姜恪加同东西台三品。
English: On March 12th, Sijong Taizhong Bo Jiang added three dishes from the East and West.

古文：戊午，遣使虑京师诸司及雍、洛二州囚。
现代文：十六日，高宗派使臣讯察京城各官署及雍、洛二州的囚犯的罪状。
English: On the 16th, envoys from high religious sects inspected the criminal records of prisoners from various government offices in Beijing and the two prefectures of Yong and Luo.

古文：闰月癸酉，日有食之。
现代文：闰三月初二，有日蚀。
English: On the second day of intercalary March, there is a solar eclipse.

古文：是春，疏勒、弓月、吐蕃攻于阗，酉州都督崔智辩、左武卫将军曹继叔救之。
现代文：这年春季，疏勒、弓月、吐蕃进攻于阗，西州都督崔智辩、左武卫将军曹继叔率军救援。
English: In the spring of that year, Shule, Yunyue, and Tubo attacked Yunnan, and the governor of Xizhou, Cui Zhifen, and the general of Zuowei, Cao Jishu, led the army to rescue.

古文：四月丙午，赦桂、广、黔三都督府。
现代文：四月初五，减免桂、广、黔三个都督府的租赋。
English: On the fifth day of the fourth month of the year, the rent of the three prefectures of Gui, Guang and Handan will be reduced and exempted.

古文：丙寅，讲武于邙山之阳。
现代文：二十五日，高宗在邙山南讲习武事。
English: On the 25th, Gaozong held a martial arts class in the south of Lushan.

古文：戊辰，左侍极陆敦信检校右相，孙处约、乐彦玮罢。
现代文：二十七日，左侍极陆敦信加检校右相，孙处约、乐彦玮被免职。
English: On the 27th, the left-hand man, Jiulutongxin, was promoted to the right-hand man of the inspection school, and Sun Zhanyou and LeHikang were dismissed.

古文：七月己丑，邓王元裕薨。
现代文：七月十九日，邓王李元裕去世。
English: On July 19, Deng Wang Li Yuanyu passed away.

古文：十月壬戌，带方州刺史刘仁轨为大司宪兼知政事。
现代文：十月二十四日，带方州刺史刘仁轨任大司宪兼知政事。
English: On October 24th, Liu Rengui, the governor of Fangzhou, was appointed as the chief secretary of constitution and political affairs.

古文：丁卯，如泰山。
现代文：二十九日，高宗去泰山。
English: On the 29th, Gaozong went to Mount Tai.

古文：大有年。
现代文：今年五谷大丰收。
English: There was a bumper harvest in Gotani this year.

古文：乾封元年正月戊辰，封于泰山。
现代文：乾封元年正月初一，高宗在泰山举行筑坛祭天盛典。
English: On the first day of the first month of the first year of the Qianfeng era, Gaozong held a grand ceremony of the Chitan Festival in Mount Tai.

古文：庚午，禅于社首，以皇后为亚献。
现代文：初三，在社首祭天，由皇后武氏做第二次祭祀献礼主持。
English: On the third day of junior high school, on the first day of the company's festival, Empress Takeuji presided over the second offering ceremony.

古文：壬申，大赦，改元。
现代文：初五，施行大赦，更改年号。
English: On the 14th, there was a general amnesty and the year was changed.

古文：赐文武官阶、勋、爵。
现代文：赐给文武官员官阶、勋号、爵位。
English: The civil and military officials were given official ranks, honorary titles, and peerages.

古文：民年八十以上版授下州刺史、司马、县令，妇人郡、县君；七十以上至八十，赐古爵一级。
现代文：平民中八十岁以上的老翁授予次等州级的刺史、司马、县令荣衔，妇人授予郡君、县君荣衔；七十至八十岁的老人，赐予古爵位一级。
English: Among the civilians, the old men over the age of eighty were awarded the second-class state-level titles of Zhishi, Sima, and County Magistrate, while the women were awarded the titles of county magistrate and county magistrate; the old men between the ages of seventy and eighty were awarded the first-class ancient title.

古文：民酺七日，女子百户牛酒。
现代文：赐给百姓聚宴七日，女子每百户牛酒一份。
English: Give the people a feast on the seventh day, and let the women of every hundred households take a drink of wine.

古文：免所过今年租赋，给复齐州一年半、兗州二年。
现代文：免除所经过地方本年的租赋，免除齐州的劳役一年半、兖州的劳役二年。
English: He was exempted from paying rent for the current year in the places he passed through, from one and a half years of labor service in Qizhou, and from two years of labor service in Zhangzhou.

古文：辛卯，幸曲阜，祠孔子，赠太师。
现代文：二十四日，高宗亲临曲阜，祭祀孔子，追赠孔子为太师。
English: On the 24th, Gao Zong himself came to Qufu, worshipped Confucius, and posthumously awarded Confucius the title of Grand Master.

古文：二月己未，如亳州，祠老子，追号太上玄元皇帝，县人宗姓给复一年。
现代文：二月二十二日，高宗去亳州，祭祀老子，追赠老子封号为太上玄元皇帝，李姓的县民免除劳役一年。
English: On February 22nd, Gaozong went to Zhangzhou to offer sacrifice to Lao Zi and posthumously bestow upon him the title of Empress Dowager Xuan Yuan. County residents with the surname Li were exempted from labor service for one year.

古文：四月甲辰，至自亳州。
现代文：四月初八，由亳州返回京城。
English: On the eighth day of the fourth month, he returned to Beijing from Zhangzhou.

古文：庚戌，陆敦信罢。
现代文：十四日，陆敦信被免职。
English: On the 14th, Lu Tunxin was dismissed from his post.

古文：六月壬寅，高丽泉男生请内附，右骁卫大将军契苾何力为辽东安抚大使，率兵援之。
现代文：六月初七，高丽国的泉男生请求内附于中国，右骁卫大将军契絆何力任辽东安抚大使，领兵前往助援。
English: On the 7th day of the 6th month of the year, the Quan boys from Goryeo came to China at the request of the Chinese, and the right-hand guard general, He Li, was appointed as the Liaodong pacification ambassador to lead the troops to help.

古文：左金吾卫将军庞同善、营州都督高偘为辽东道行军总管，左武卫将军薛仁贵、左监门卫将军李谨行为后援。
现代文：左金吾卫将军庞同善、营州都督高侃任辽东道行军总管，左武卫将军薛仁贵、左监门卫将军李谨行担任后援。
English: General Pang Tong Son of the Left Division of the Imperial Guards and Gao Kan, the governor of Yingzhou, served as the general manager of the march of the Liao Host Army, while General Xue Rengui of the Left Division of the Imperial Guards and General Li Zhengying of the Left Division of the Imperial Guards served as backup.

古文：七月乙丑，徙封旭轮为豫王。
现代文：七月初一，改封李旭轮为豫王。
English: On the first day of July, Li Xulun was renamed Yu Wang.

古文：庚午，刘仁轨兼右相。
现代文：初六，刘仁轨兼右相。
English: Sixth-year junior high school students, Liu Rensuo is also the right-hand man.

古文：八月辛丑，窦德玄薨。
现代文：八月初八，窦德玄去世。
English: On August 8th, Dou Dexuan passed away.

古文：丁未，杀始州刺史武惟良、淄州刺史武怀运。
现代文：十四日，杀了始州刺史武惟良、淄州刺史武怀运。
English: On the 14th, he killed Seishu assassin Shibu Koreyoshi, and Gyeongju assassin Shibu Hoeun.

古文：九月，庞同善及高丽战，败之。
现代文：九月，庞同善与高丽军交战，击败高丽军。
English: In September, Pang Tong Son fought with the Korean People's Army and defeated the Korean People's Army.

古文：十二月己酉，李勣为辽东道行台大总管，率六总管兵以伐高丽。
现代文：十二月十八日，李责力任辽东道行台大总管，统率六个总管的兵力征讨高丽。
English: On December 18th, Li Rongli was appointed as the general manager of Liaodong University of Commerce and Industry, and led six general managers to recruit troops to invade Korea.

古文：二年正月丁丑，以旱避正殿，减膳，虑囚。
现代文：乾封二年正月十六日，高宗因旱灾避离正殿，减少膳食，讯察记录囚犯的罪状。
English: On the 16th day of the first month of the second year of Qianfeng, Gaozong avoided the main hall due to drought, reduced meals, and investigated and recorded the crimes of prisoners.

古文：二月丁酉，涪陵郡王愔薨。
现代文：二月初六，涪陵郡王李忄音去世。
English: On the 6th day of the 2nd month of the lunar month, King Li Yuyin of Fuling County passed away.

古文：辛丑，禁工商乘马。
现代文：初十，禁止工商业者乘马。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, it was forbidden for industrialists and merchants to ride horses.

古文：六月乙卯，西台侍郎杨武戴至德、东台侍郎李安期、司列少常伯赵仁本同东西台三品。
现代文：六月二十六日，西台侍郎杨武、戴至德，东台侍郎李安期，司列少常伯赵仁本加同东西台三品。
English: On June 26th, Yang Wu and Dai Zhide, attendants from West Taiwan, and Li An, attendant from East Taiwan, as well as Zhao Renpeng, a junior attendant from East and West Taiwan, were added to the three dishes.

古文：东台舍人张文瓘参知政事。
现代文：东台舍人张文馞参预主持朝政。
English: Zhang Wenyi, a resident of East Taiwan, presided over the imperial government.

古文：七月己卯，以旱避正殿。减膳，遣使虑囚。
现代文：七月二十日，高宗因旱灾避离正殿，减少膳食，派遣使臣讯察记录囚犯的罪状。
English: On July 20, Gaozong evacuated the main hall due to drought, reduced meals, and sent envoys to investigate and record the prisoners' crimes.

古文：八月己丑朔，日有食之。
现代文：八月初一，日月合朔，有日蚀。
English: On the first day of August, the sun and moon are new, and there is a solar eclipse.

古文：辛亥，李安期罢。
现代文：二十三日，李安期被免职。
English: On the 23rd, Li Anji was removed from office.

古文：九月庚申，以饵药，皇太子监国。
现代文：九月初三，高宗因服药，由皇太子李弘代行处理国政。
English: On the 3rd day of the 9th month, due to the fact that Gao Zong was taking medicine, Crown Prince Li Hong stepped in to handle state affairs on his behalf.

古文：辛未，李勣及高丽战于新城，败之。
现代文：十四日，李责力与高丽军在新城交战，击败高丽军。
English: On the 14th, Li Rongli and the Koryo army fought in Sincheng and defeated the Koryo army.

古文：是岁，岭南洞獠陷琼州。
现代文：本年，岭南的洞僚人攻破琼州。
English: This year, the Dongli people of Lingnan broke through Qiongzhou.

古文：总章元年正月壬子，刘仁轨为辽东道副大总管兼安抚大使、浿江道行军总管。
现代文：总章元年正月二十七日，刘仁轨任辽东道副大总管兼安抚大使、氵贝江道行军总管。
English: General Chapter On the 27th day of the first month of the first year of the year, Liu Renlu served as the deputy general manager of Liaodong and the pacification ambassador, and the general manager of the march of the Zubei River.

古文：二月丁巳，皇太子释奠于国学。
现代文：二月初三，皇太子李弘在国学祭祀先师。
English: On the third day of the second month of the year, Crown Prince Ri Hong returned to his position as a preceptor in the national school of religious rites.

古文：戊寅，如九成宫。
现代文：二十四日，高宗去九成宫。
English: On the 24th, Gaozong went to Jiu Chenggong.

古文：壬午，李勣败高丽，克扶馀、南苏、木底、苍岩城。
现代文：二十八日，李责力打败高丽军，攻克扶余、南苏、木底、苍岩城。
English: On the 28th, Li Youli defeated the Koryo army and conquered Fuyu, Nansu, Midi, and Cangyan.

古文：三月庚寅，大赦，改元。
现代文：三月初六，施行大赦，更改年号。
English: On the 6th day of the 3rd month, an amnesty was implemented and the year was changed.

古文：四月乙卯，赠颜回太子少师，曾参太子少保。
现代文：四月初一，追封颜回为太子少师，曾参为太子少保。
English: On the first day of April, Yan Hui was appointed as the Prince's Junior Teacher, having previously served as the Prince's Junior Bodyguard.

古文：丙辰，有彗星出于五车，避正殿；减膳，撤乐，诏内外官言事。
现代文：初二，在天区毕宿北的 五车 五星之间出现彗星，高宗避离正殿，减少膳食，停止奏乐，诏令宫廷内外官员议论政事。
English: On the second day of the first month of the year, a comet appeared between the five chariots and five stars in the northern part of the heavenly quarter. Gaozong avoided the main hall, reduced meals, stopped playing music, and ordered officials inside and outside the palace to discuss political affairs.

古文：庚申，以太原元从西府功臣为二等：第一功后官无五品者，授其子若孙一人，有至四品五品者加二阶，有三品以上加爵三等；第二功后官无五品者，授其子若孙从六品一人，有至五品者加一阶，六品者二阶，三品以上爵一等。
现代文：初六，将太原最初从西府的功臣分为二等：一等功臣的子孙官位不及五品者，授予其子或孙一人为五品官；为官至四品、五品者，官阶提升二级；任三品以上官员者，爵位加三等；二等功臣的后人，官位不及五品者，授其子或孙一人为从六品官；为官至五品者，官阶提升一级；任六品官者官阶提升二级；为官在三品以上者，爵位加一等。
English: In the sixth year of Junior High School, Taiyuan was initially divided into two classes of meritorious scholars from the western part of the prefecture: the descendants of meritorious scholars of the first class, whose official ranks were less than the fifth grade, were awarded one son or grandchild as the fifth grade official; for officials up to the fourth grade and five grades, the official rank was promoted to the second level; for officials with more than three grades, the title was increased to the third level; the descendants of meritorious scholars of the second class, whose official ranks were less than the fifth grade, were awarded one son or grandchild as the sixth grade official; for officials up to the fifth grade,

古文：辛巳，杨武薨。
现代文：二十七日，杨武去世。
English: On the 27th, Yang Wu passed away.

古文：八月癸酉，至自九成宫。
现代文：八月二十一日，高宗自九成宫返抵京城。
English: On August 21, Gaozong returned to the capital from Jiu Chenggong Palace.

古文：九月癸巳，李勣败高丽王高藏，执之。
现代文：九月十二日，李责力打败并俘获高丽王高藏。
English: On September 12, Li Baili defeated and captured Goryeo King Gaozang.

古文：十二月丁巳，俘高藏以献。
现代文：十二月初七，将高藏进献朝廷。
English: On the seventh day of the twelfth month, Gaozang was presented to the imperial court.

古文：丁卯，有事于南郊。
现代文：十七日，高宗在京城南郊举行祭天大典。
English: On the 17th, Gaozong held a grand festival in the southern suburbs of Beijing.

古文：甲戌，姜恪检校左相，司平太常伯阎立本守右相。
现代文：二十四日，姜恪加检校左相，司平太常伯阎立本代理右相。
English: On the 24th, Jiang Ke added the left phase of the inspection, and Siping Taizhongbo Yan became the acting right phase.

古文：二年二月辛酉，右肃机李敬玄为西台侍郎，张文瓘为东台侍郎：同东西台三品。
现代文：总章二年二月十二日，右肃机李敬玄任西台侍郎，张文馞任东台侍郎，均加同东西台三品。
English: On February 12, the second year of the General Chapter, Li Jingxuan, a right-wing cadre, was appointed as the West District Chamberlain, and Zhang Wenyu was appointed as the East District Chamberlain, both of which were added to the East and West Districts.

古文：三月丙戌，东台侍郎郝处俊同东西台三品。
现代文：三月初八，东台侍郎郝处俊加同东西台三品。
English: On the 8th day of the 3rd month of the 3rd month, the East-West three dishes were added to the East-West three dishes.

古文：癸巳，皇后亲蚕。
现代文：十五日，皇后武氏举行躬践蚕事的典礼。
English: On the 15th, Empress Wu held a ceremony to practice sericulture.

古文：四月己酉，如九成宫。
现代文：四月初一，高宗去九成宫。
English: On the first day of April, Gaozong went to Jiu Chenggong.

古文：六月戊申朔，日有食之。
现代文：六月初一，日月合朔，有日蚀。
English: On the first day of June, the sun and moon are new, and there is a solar eclipse.

古文：七月癸巳，左卫大将军契苾何力为乌海道行军大总管，以援吐谷浑。
现代文：七月十七日，左卫大将军契絆何力任乌海道行军大总管，率军援助吐谷浑。
English: On July 17th, General Zuo Wei appointed He Li as the general manager of the Ukaido Campaign, and led the army to assist Tuyugun.

古文：九月庚寅，括州海溢。
现代文：九月十四日，括州海潮泛滥。
English: On September 14th, the sea tides in Bozhou began to flood.

古文：壬寅，如岐州。
现代文：二十六日，高宗去岐州。
English: On the 26th, Gaozong went to Qizhou.

古文：乙巳，赦岐州，赐高年粟帛。
现代文：二十九日，减免岐州的赋税，赐给高龄老人粮食布帛。
English: On the 29th, Qizhou tax was reduced and exempted, and grain cloth bags were given to the elderly.

古文：十月丁巳，至自岐州。
现代文：十月十二日，自岐州返回京城。
English: On October 12th, he returned to Beijing from Qizhou.

古文：十一月丁亥，徙封旭轮为冀王，改名轮。
现代文：十一月十二日，高宗改封李旭轮为冀王，并改其名为李轮。
English: On November 12th, Gaozong changed Li Xulun's title to King of Ji, and changed his name to Li Rong.

古文：十二月戊申，李勣薨。
现代文：十二月初三，李责力逝世。
English: On the third day of December, Li Ruili passed away.

古文：是冬，无雪。
现代文：本年冬季，无雪。
English: There was no snow this winter.

古文：咸亨元年正月丁丑，刘仁轨罢。
现代文：咸亨元年正月初三，刘仁轨被免职。
English: On the third day of the first month of the year of Xianheng, Liu Renlu was dismissed.

古文：二月戊申，虑囚。
现代文：二月初五，讯察记录囚犯的罪状。
English: On February 5th, the investigation recorded the prisoner's charges.

古文：丁巳，东南有声若雷。
现代文：十四日，京城东南方有雷声般巨响。
English: On the 14th, there was a thunderous noise in the southeast of Beijing.

古文：三月甲戌，大赦，改元。
现代文：三月初一，施行大赦，更改年号。
English: On the first day of March, an amnesty was implemented and the year was changed.

古文：壬辰，许敬宗罢。
现代文：十九日，许敬宗被免职。
English: On the 19th, Xu Jingzong was removed from office.

古文：四月癸卯，吐蕃陷龟兹拨换城。
现代文：四月初一，吐蕃攻破龟兹国的拨换城。
English: On the first day of April, Tubo broke through the transfer city of Kuez.

古文：废安西四镇。
现代文：废止安西四镇。
English: Annul the Anxi Four Towns.

古文：己酉，李敬玄罢。
现代文：初七，李敬玄被免职。
English: On the seventh day of the new year, Li Jingxuan was dismissed.

古文：辛亥，右威卫大将军薛仁贵为逻娑道行军大总管，以伐吐蕃。
现代文：初九，右威卫大将军薛仁贵任逻娑道行军大总管，征讨吐蕃。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, General Xue Rengui, commander of the Right Division of Wei, was appointed as the general manager of the march of the logic road, and the collection of spade was completed.

古文：庚午，如九成宫。
现代文：二十八日，高宗去九成宫。
English: On the 28th, Gaozong went to the Jiu Cheng Palace.

古文：雍州大雨雹。
现代文：雍州降大冰雹。
English: Large hailstones fell in Yongzhou.

古文：高丽酋长钳牟岑叛，寇边，左监门卫大将军高偘为东州道行军总管，右领军卫大将军李谨行为燕山道行军总管，以伐之。
现代文：高丽国酋长钳牟岑反叛，侵犯边境，左监门卫大将军高侃任东州道行军总管，右领军卫大将军李谨行任燕山道行军总管，率军征讨。
English: Koryo chieftain Jang Moo-hyun rebelled and violated the border, the left guard gatekeeper general Gao Kan served as the Dongju-do march chief, and the right guard leader general Ri Jong-hyun served as the Yanshan-do march chief and led the army to investigate.

古文：六月壬寅朔，日有食之。
现代文：六月初一，日月合朔，有日蚀。
English: On the first day of June, the sun and moon are new, and there is a solar eclipse.

古文：七月甲戌，以雍、华、蒲、同四州旱，遣使虑囚，减中御诸厩马。
现代文：七月初三，因雍、华、蒲、同四州干旱，高宗派使臣讯察记录囚犯的罪状，减少宫中诸马舍的马匹。
English: On the third day of the seventh month, due to the drought in the four provinces of Yong, Hua, Pu and Tong, the high-sect envoys inspected and recorded the crimes of the prisoners and reduced the number of horses in the stables in the palace.

古文：戊子，李敬玄起复。
现代文：十七日，李敬玄被起用。
English: On the 17th, Li Jingxuan was appointed.

古文：薛仁贵及吐蕃战于大非川，败绩。
现代文：薛仁贵在大非川与吐蕃交战，大败。
English: Xue Rengui fought with Tubo in the Daya River and suffered a crushing defeat.

古文：八月庚戌，以谷贵禁酒。
现代文：八月初十，因谷贵禁酒。
English: On the 10th day of the 8th month, he stopped drinking alcohol.

古文：丁巳，至自九成宫。
现代文：十七日，高宗自九成宫返回京城。
English: On the 17th, Gaozong returned to the capital from Jiu Chenggong.

古文：甲子，赵王福薨。
现代文：二十四日，赵王李福去世。
English: On the 24th, Zhao Wang Lifu passed away.

古文：丙寅，以旱避正殿，减膳。
现代文：二十六日，高宗因旱灾避离正殿，减少膳食。
English: On the 26th, Gaozong had to evacuate the main hall due to drought and cut down on meals.

古文：九月丁丑，给复雍、华、同、岐、邠、陇六州一年。
现代文：九月初七，免除雍、华、同、岐？陇六州的劳役一年。
English: On the 7th day of the 9th month, the labor service of the six prefectures of Yong, Hua, Tong and Qi'an was exempted for one year.

古文：闰月癸卯，皇后以旱请避位。
现代文：闰九月初三，皇后武氏因旱灾请求避离其位。
English: On the third day of the ninth lunar month, Empress Wu requested to abdicate due to drought.

古文：甲寅，姜恪为凉州道行军大总管，以伐吐蕃。
现代文：十四日，姜恪任凉州道行军大总管，征讨吐蕃。
English: On the 14th, Jiang Guo was appointed as the general manager of the march of the Liangzhou Road, and the collection of spade was completed.

古文：十月庚辰，诏文武官言事。
现代文：十月十一日，诏令文武百官议论政事。
English: On October 11th, the edict was issued for the civil and military officials to discuss political affairs.

古文：乙未，赵仁本罢。
现代文：二十六日，赵仁本被免职。
English: On the 26th, Zhao Renben was removed from his post.

古文：十二月庚寅，复官名。
现代文：十二月二十一日，恢复原用官名。
English: On December 21, the original official name was restored.

古文：是岁，大饥。
现代文：本年，大饥荒。
English: This year, famine.

古文：二年正月乙巳，如东都，皇太子监国。
现代文：咸亨二年正月初七，高宗去东都，皇太子李弘代理国政。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the second year of Emperor Xianheng, Gaozong went to the Eastern Capital, and Crown Prince Li Hong took over the state affairs.

古文：二月辛未，遣使存问诸州。
现代文：二月初四，朝廷派使臣慰问各州。
English: On the fourth day of the second month, the imperial court sent envoys to offer condolences to the various prefectures.

古文：四月戊子，大风，雨雹。
现代文：四月二十二日，大风，降冰雹。
English: April 22nd, high winds, hail.

古文：六月癸巳，以旱虑囚。
现代文：六月二十八日，因旱灾讯察记录囚犯的罪状。
English: On the 28th of June, due to the drought, the inspection and recording of prisoners' criminal records was suspended.

古文：九月，地震。
现代文：九月，地震。
English: In September, an earthquake.

古文：丙申，徐王元礼薨。
现代文：初二，徐王李元礼去世。
English: On the second day of the new year, Xu Wang Li Yuanli passed away.

古文：十月丙子，求明礼乐之士。
现代文：十月十三日，招求通晓礼乐的贤士。
English: On October 13th, the wise men who are familiar with liturgical music were summoned.

古文：十一月甲午朔，日有食之。
现代文：十一月初一，日月合朔，有日蚀。
English: On the first day of the first month of November, the sun and the moon are new, and there is a solar eclipse.

古文：庚戌，如许州，遣使存问所过疾老鳏寡，虑囚。
现代文：十七日，高宗去许州，派使臣慰问所经各地的病、老、鳏、寡；讯察记录囚犯的罪状。
English: On the 17th, Gaozong went to Huzhou and sent envoys to offer condolences to the sick, old, infirm, and widows in all the regions he passed through; he also inspected and recorded the crimes of the prisoners.

古文：十二月癸酉，猎于昆阳。
现代文：十二月初十，高宗到昆阳打猎。
English: On the tenth day of the twelfth month, Gaozong went hunting in Kunyang.

古文：丙戌，如东都。
现代文：二十三日，去东都。
English: On the 23rd, I went to Dongdu.

古文：是岁，姜恪为侍中，阎立本为中书令。
现代文：本年，姜恪任侍中，阎立本任中书令。
English: This year, Jiang Jia served as an attendant, and Yan Liben served as a secretary.

古文：三年正月辛丑，姚州蛮寇边，太子右卫副率梁积寿为姚州道行军总管以伐之。
现代文：咸亨三年正月初八，姚州少数民族侵扰边境，太子右卫副帅梁积寿任姚州道行军总管率军讨伐。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the third year of Xianheng, the Yaozhou ethnic minorities invaded the border, and the prince's right guard deputy commander Liang Jishou was appointed as the general manager of the Yaozhou road march and led the army to fight.

古文：二月己卯，姜恪薨。
现代文：二月十七日，姜恪去世。
English: On February 17th, Jiang Ke passed away.

古文：四月壬申，校旗于洛水之阴。
现代文：四月十一日，在洛水南边校旗。
English: On April 11, the school flag was raised on the south side of Luoshui.

古文：九月癸卯，徙封贤为雍王。
现代文：九月十五日，改封李贤为雍王。
English: On September 15, Li Xian was renamed Yong Wang.

古文：十月己未，皇太子监国。
现代文：十月初二，皇太子李弘代理国政。
English: On the second day of October, Crown Prince Ri Hong took over as acting head of state.

古文：十一月戊子朔，日有食之。
现代文：十一月初一，日月合朔，有日食。
English: On the first day of the first month of November, the sun and the moon are new, and there is a solar eclipse.

古文：甲辰，至自东都。
现代文：十七日，高宗自东都返回京城。
English: On the 17th, Gaozong returned to Beijing from Dongdu.

古文：十二月，金紫光禄大夫致仕刘仁轨为太子左庶子、同中书门下三品。
现代文：十二月，金紫光禄大夫、辞官居家的刘仁轨任太子左庶子、同中书门下三品。
English: In December, Dr. Jin Zi Guanglu, Liu Renlu, who was a retired official and lived at home, was appointed as the Prince's left illegitimate child and the third grade of the same middle school.

古文：四年正月丙辰，郑王元懿薨。
现代文：咸亨四年正月二十九日，郑王李元懿去世。
English: On the 29th day of the 1st month of the 4th year of Xianheng, Zheng Wang Li Yuanxuan passed away.

古文：四月丙子，如九成宫。
现代文：四月二十一日，高宗去九成宫。
English: On April 21, Gaozong left for Jiu Chenggong.

古文：闰五月丁卯，禁作甗捕鱼、营圈取兽者。
现代文：闰五月十三日，禁止做耫捕鱼，围圈猎兽。
English: On the 13th day of leap May, it is forbidden to catch fish with bait, or to surround game animals.

古文：八月辛丑，以不豫诏皇太子听诸司启事。
现代文：八月十九日，高宗因身体不适，诏令皇太子李弘处置诸官署启奏的政事。
English: On August 19th, Gao Zong, who was unwell, ordered Crown Prince Li Hong to deal with the government affairs initiated by various government departments.

古文：己酉，大风落太庙鸱尾。
现代文：二十七日，大风吹落太庙屋脊顶端象征能避水灾的装饰建筑鸱尾一一一水精。
English: On the 27th, high winds blew down the top of the roof of the Taimiao Temple, a decorative building that symbolizes the ability to avoid floods.

古文：十月壬午，阎立本薨。
现代文：十月初一，阎立本逝世。
English: On the first day of October, Yan Liben passed away.

古文：乙未，以皇太子纳妃，赦岐州，赐酺三日。
现代文：十四日，因皇太子李弘纳妃，减免岐州的租赋，赐予臣民聚饮三日。
English: On the 14th, because the crown prince Li Hongnai reduced and exempted the rent of Qizhou, he gave the subjects three days to gather and drink.

古文：乙巳，至自九成宫。
现代文：二十四日，高宗自九成宫返回京城。
English: On the 24th, Gaozong returned to the capital from Jiu Chenggong.

古文：上元元年二月壬午，刘仁轨为鸡林道行军大总管，以伐新罗。
现代文：上元元年二月初二，刘仁轨任鸡林道行军大总管，率军征讨新罗。
English: On the second day of the second month of the first year of the second month of the first year of the second month of the first year of the first year of the first year of the second year of the second year of the first year of the second year of the first year of the second year of the first year of the second year of the second year of the first year of the second year of the first year of the second year of the second year of the first year of the second year of the first year of the second year of the second year of the second year of the first year of the second year of the first year of the second year of the second year of the second year of the first year of the second year

古文：三月辛亥朔，日有食之。
现代文：三月初一，日月合朔，有日蚀。
English: On the first day of March, the sun and the moon are new, and there is a solar eclipse.

古文：己巳，皇后亲蚕。
现代文：十九日，皇后武氏举行躬践蚕事的典礼。
English: On the 19th, Empress Wu held a ceremony to practice sericulture.

古文：八月壬辰，皇帝称天皇，皇后称天后。
现代文：八月十五日，高宗加号为 天皇 ，皇后武氏号称 天后 。
English: On August 15th, Gao Zongjia was given the title of Emperor, and Empress Wu was given the title of Empress.

古文：追尊六代祖宣简公为宣皇帝，妣张氏曰宣庄皇后；五代祖懿王为光皇帝，妣贾氏曰光懿皇后。
现代文：追尊前六代祖简宣公为宣皇帝，其妻张氏为宣庄皇后；前五代祖父懿王为光皇帝，其妻贾氏为光懿皇后。
English: His six-generation ancestor, Jian Xuan Gong, was Xuan Emperor, and his wife, Zhang, was Xuanzhuang Empress; his five-generation grandfather, Zi Wang, was Guang Guang Emperor, and his wife, Jia, was Guang Yu Empress.

古文：增高祖、太宗及后谥。
现代文：增追高祖李渊、太宗李世民及其皇后谥号。
English: Zeng Chui Gaozhu Li Yuan, Taizong Li Shimin and his Empress Dowager.

古文：大赦，改元，赐酺三日。
现代文：施行大赦，更改年号，赐予臣民聚饮三日。
English: An amnesty was implemented, the year was changed, and the subjects were given three days to gather and drink.

古文：十一月丙午，如东都。
现代文：十一月初一，高宗去东都。
English: On the first day of November, Gaozong went to Dongdu.

古文：己酉，独于华山曲武原。
现代文：初四，到华山的曲武原打猎。
English: On my fourth day of junior high school, I went to Qubuyuan in Huashan to go deer hunting.

古文：十二月癸未，蒋王恽自杀。
现代文：十二月初八，蒋王李恽自杀。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of December, Jiang Wang Lijun committed suicide.

古文：二年正月己未，给复雍、同、华、岐、陇五州一年。
现代文：上元二年正月十四日，免除雍、同、华、岐、陇五州百姓的劳役一年。
English: On the 14th day of the first month of the second year of the Shang dynasty, the people of the five states of Yong, Tong, Hua, Qi and Qi were exempted from labor service for one year.

古文：辛未，吐蕃请和。
现代文：二十六日，吐蕃来朝请和。
English: On the 26th, Tu Youyou came in the morning to ask for peace.

古文：二月，刘仁轨及新罗战于七重城，败之。
现代文：二月，刘仁轨和新罗军在七重城交战，打败新罗军。
English: In February, Liu Renlu and the Silla army fought in Qihe, defeating the Silla army.

古文：三月丁巳，天后亲蚕。
现代文：三月十三日，天后武氏举行躬践蚕事典礼。
English: On March 13th, the Queen of Heaven Wu held a ceremony for the practice of sericulture.

古文：四月辛巳，天后杀周王显妃赵氏。
现代文：四月初七，天后武氏杀了周王李显的妃子赵氏。
English: On the 7th day of the 4th month, Huan Wu killed Zhao, the concubine of King Li Xian of Zhou.

古文：丙戌，以旱避正殿，减膳，撤乐，诏百官言事。
现代文：十二日，高宗因旱灾避离正殿，减少膳食，停止奏乐，诏令文武百官议论政事。
English: On the twelfth day, Gaozong avoided the main hall due to drought, reduced meals, stopped playing music, and ordered the civil and military officials to discuss politics.

古文：己亥，天后杀皇太子。
现代文：二十五日，天后武氏杀了皇太子李弘。
English: On the 25th, Queen Tian Wu killed Crown Prince Li Hong.

古文：五月戊申，追号皇太子为孝敬皇帝。
现代文：五月初五，追赠皇太子李弘号为孝敬皇帝。
English: On the fifth day of the fifth lunar month, Crown Prince Li Hong was posthumously given the title of Emperor Xiaojing.

古文：六月戊寅，立雍王贤为皇太子，大赦。
现代文：六月初五，立雍王李贤为皇太子，施行大赦。
English: On the 5th day of the 6th month, Yong Wang Lixian was appointed crown prince, and a general amnesty was implemented.

古文：七月辛亥，杞王上金免官，削封邑。
现代文：七月初九，杞王李上金被免官，削夺封邑。
English: On the 9th day of the 7th month, King Li Shangjin was relieved of his post and deprived of his fief.

古文：八月庚寅，葬孝敬皇帝于恭陵。
现代文：八月十九日，将孝敬皇帝李弘葬于恭陵。
English: On August 19th, Emperor Li Hongzhi was buried in Gongling.

古文：丁酉，诏妇人为宫官者岁一见其亲。
现代文：二十六日，下诏：妇女任宫内官职者每年会见其双亲一次。
English: On the 26th, the following edict was issued: Women serving as palace officials must meet with their parents once a year.

古文：庚子，张文瓘为侍中，郝处俊为中书令，刘仁轨为尚书左仆射，戴至德为右仆射。
现代文：二十九日，张文馞任侍中，郝处俊任中书令，刘仁轨任尚书左仆射，戴至德任右仆射。
English: On the 29th, Zhang Wenyu was appointed as an attendant, Zong Shidejun as the middle secretary, Liu Renglu as the left secretary, and Dai Zhide as the right secretary.

古文：十月庚辰，雍州雨雹。
现代文：十月初十，雍州降冰雹。
English: At the beginning of October, hail fell in Yongzhou.

古文：壬午，有彗星出于角、亢。
现代文：十二日，在天区东方苍龙角、亢星宿之间出现彗星。
English: On the 12th, a comet appeared in the eastern celestial region between Canglong Cape and the Pleiades.

古文：仪凤元年正月壬戌，徙封轮为相王。
现代文：仪凤元年正月二十三日，改封李轮为相王。
English: On the 23rd day of the first month of the first year of the Yi and Feng dynasties, Li Rong was given the title of King.

古文：丁卯，纳州獠寇边。
现代文：二十八日，纳州僚人侵扰边境。
English: On the 28th, the Naxalites invaded the border.

古文：二月丁亥，如汝州温汤，遣使虑免汝州轻系。
现代文：二月十九日，高宗去汝州温泉，派使臣审察释放汝州拘囚的轻犯。
English: On February 19th, Gaozong went to Ruzhou Hot Spring and sent an envoy to inspect the release of the minor prisoners in Ruzhou.

古文：三月癸卯，黄门侍郎来恒、中书侍郎薛元超同中书门下三品。
现代文：三月初五，黄门侍郎来恒、中书侍郎薛元超加同中书门下三品。
English: On the fifth day of March, Huangmen waiter Lai Heng, Chinese book waiter Xue Yuanchao, and the next three books of the Chinese book were added.

古文：甲辰，如东都，免汝州今岁半租，赐民八十以上帛。
现代文：初六，高宗去东都，免除汝州本年租赋的一半，赐给平民中八十岁以上老人布帛。
English: On his sixth day of junior high school, Gao Zong went to Dongdu, waived half of Ruzhou's rent this year, and gave cloth bags to civilians over the age of 80.

古文：闰月己巳。吐蕃寇鄯、廓、河、芳四州，左监门卫中郎将令狐智通伐之。
现代文：闰三月初一，吐蕃侵犯鄯、廓、河、芳四州，左监门卫中郎将令狐智通讨伐吐蕃。
English: On the first day of the third month of the leap year, Tubo invaded Shizuoka, Gaku, Kawagoe, and Fang. The left guard, Zhongro, ordered Fox Zhitong to fight Tubo.

古文：乙酉，周王显为洮河道行军元帅，领左卫大将军刘审礼等十二总管，相王轮为凉州道行军元帅，领契苾何力等军，以伐吐蕃。
现代文：十七日，周王李显任洮河道行军元帅，统领左卫大将军刘审礼等十二个总管，相王李轮任凉州道行军元帅，率领契絆何力诸军，讨伐吐蕃。
English: On the 17th, Zhou Wang Lixian was appointed as the marching marshal of the Lianghe Road, and led twelve chief officers including the General of the Left Division Liu Xunli, and So Wang Lihong was appointed as the marching marshal of the Liangzhou Road, and led the troops of Qi Kizong He Li to fight against the Tubo.

古文：四月戊申，至自东都。
现代文：四月十一日，高宗自东都回京。
English: On April 11, Gao Zong returned to Beijing from Dongdu.

古文：甲寅，中书侍郎李义琰同中书门下三品。
现代文：十七日，中书侍郎李义琰加同中书门下三品。
English: On the 17th, Li Yixuan, the attendant of Chinese calligraphy, was promoted to the third grade of Chinese calligraphy.

古文：戊午，如九成宫。
现代文：二十一日，高宗去九成宫。
English: On the 21st, Gaozong went to the Jiu Cheng Palace.

古文：六月癸亥，黄门侍郎高智周同中书门下三品。
现代文：六月二十七日，黄门侍郎高智周加同中书门下三品。
English: On June 27th, Gao Zhi Zhou, a waiter at Huangmen, was promoted to the third grade of Zhongshumen.

古文：七月丁亥，有彗星出于东井。
现代文：七月二十一日，在天区 东井 八星之间出现彗星。
English: On July 21, a comet appeared between eight stars in the eastern sky.

古文：乙未，吐蕃寇叠州。
现代文：二十九日，吐蕃侵犯叠州。
English: On the 29th, Tubo invaded Yame Prefecture.

古文：八月庚子，避正殿，减膳，撤乐，损食粟马，虑囚，诏文武官言事。
现代文：八月初五，高宗避离正殿，减少膳食，停止奏乐，压缩吃粮的马匹，讯察记录囚犯的罪状，诏令文武官员议论政事。
English: On the 5th day of the 8th month, Gaozong withdrew from the main hall, reduced the meals, stopped the music, compressed the horses that ate grain, inspected and recorded the crimes of prisoners, and ordered civil and military officials to discuss political affairs.

古文：甲子，停南北中尚、梨园、作坊，减少府杂匠。
现代文：二十九日，停止宫中南、北司掌管营造、杂作的官署及梨园、作坊的活动，减少专供帝王享用的车马、衣物、宝货、珍膳的官署杂作匠人。
English: On the 29th, the activities of the government offices in charge of construction and handicrafts, pear orchards and workshops in the Southern and Northern Divisions of the Imperial Household were suspended, and the number of craftsmen in charge of handicrafts in the government offices, who were responsible for chariots and horses, clothing, precious goods and rare dishes exclusively for the emperor, was reduced.

古文：是月，青州海溢。
现代文：本月，青州海潮泛滥。
English: This month, the sea tides in Qingzhou caused flooding.

古文：十月乙未，至自九成宫。
现代文：十月初一，高宗自九成宫返回京城。
English: On the first day of October, Gaozong returned to the capital from Jiu Chenggong.

古文：丙午，降封郇王素节鄱阳郡王。
现代文：十二日，将郇王李素节降封为潘阳郡王。
English: On the 12th, Li Su Jie, the king of Shan, was demoted to the king of Panyang County.

古文：十一月壬申，寺赦，改元。
现代文：十一月初八，施行大赦，更改年号。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of November, an amnesty was implemented and the year was changed.

古文：庚寅，李敬玄为中书令。
现代文：二十六日，李敬玄任中书令。
English: On the 26th, Li Jingxuan resigned from the post of vice-premier.

古文：十二月戊午，来恒、薛元超为河南、河北道大使。
现代文：十二月二十五日，来恒、薛元超任河南道、河北道大使。
English: On December 25th, Xue Yuanchao was appointed as the ambassador of Henan and Hebei provinces.

古文：二年正月乙亥，耕藉田。
现代文：仪凤二年正月十二日，高宗在籍田上举行躬践农事的典礼。
English: On the 12th day of the first month of the second year of Yi Feng, Gaozong held a ceremony to practice farming on his registered farm.

古文：庚辰，京师地震。
现代文：十七日，京城长安地震。
English: On the 17th, the Beijing Chang'an earthquake occurred.

古文：四月，太子左庶子张大安同中书门下三品。
现代文：四月，太子左庶子张大安加同中书门下三品。
English: In April, Zhang Da'an, Prince Zuo's illegitimate son, was promoted to the third grade of junior high school.

古文：五月，吐蕃寇扶州。
现代文：五月，吐蕃侵犯扶州。
English: In May, Tubo invaded Fuzhou.

古文：八月辛亥，刘仁轨为洮河军镇守使。
现代文：八月二十一日，刘仁轨任洮河军镇守使。
English: On August 21st, Liu Renlu took up the post of the town guard of the Minhe Army.

古文：十月壬辰，徙封显为英王，更名哲。
现代文：十月二十七日，改封李显为英王，更其名为李哲。
English: On October 27th, Li Xian was given the title of Yingwang and his name was changed to Li Zhe.

古文：十二月乙卯，募关内、河东猛士，以伐吐蕃。
现代文：十二月二十七日，招募关内、河东的猛士，用以征讨吐蕃。
English: On December 27th, soldiers from Guanzhong and Hedong were recruited to collect the money.

古文：是岁，西突厥及吐蕃寇安西。
现代文：本年，西突厥与吐蕃侵犯安西。
English: This year, West Turkistan and Tibet invaded Anxi.

古文：冬，无雪。
现代文：冬季无雪。
English: In winter, there is no snow.

古文：三年正月丙子，李敬玄为洮河道行军大总管，以伐吐蕃。
现代文：仪凤三年正月十九日，李敬玄任洮河道行军大总管，征讨吐蕃。
English: On the 19th day of the first month of the third year of the Yi and Feng Dynasties, Li Jingxuan was appointed as the general manager of the marching troops of the Minhe Road, and he went to collect and discuss the spade.

古文：癸未，遣使募河南、河北猛士，以伐吐蕃。
现代文：二十六日，朝廷派使臣招募河南、河北的猛士，用以征讨吐蕃。
English: On the 26th, the imperial court sent envoys to recruit warriors from Henan and Hebei to collect the money.

古文：四月丁亥，以旱避正殿，虑囚。
现代文：四月初一，高宗因旱灾避离正殿，讯察记录囚犯的罪状。
English: On the first day of April, Gaozong had to leave the main hall due to drought, and inspected and recorded the crimes of the prisoners.

古文：戊申，大赦，改明年为通乾元年。
现代文：二十二日，施行大赦，决定将来年改为通乾元年。
English: On the 22nd, an amnesty was carried out, and it was decided to change the next year to the first year of Tongxian.

古文：癸丑，泾州民生子异体连心。
现代文：二十七日，泾州民户出生异体连心儿。
English: On the 27th, a family in Zhangzhou gave birth to a conjoined twin.

古文：五月壬戌，如九成宫。
现代文：五月初七，高宗去九成宫。
English: On the seventh day of the fifth month, Gaozong went to Jiu Chenggong.

古文：大雨霖。
现代文：连日大雨。
English: Heavy rain for days on end.

古文：九月辛酉，至自九成宫。
现代文：九月初七，高宗自九成宫回京。
English: On the 7th day of the 9th month, Gaozong returned to Beijing from Jiu Chenggong.

古文：癸亥，张文瓘薨。
现代文：初九，张文馞去世。
English: On the 9th day of the 9th month, Zhang Wenyi passed away.

古文：丙寅，李敬玄、刘审礼及吐蕃战于青海，败绩，审礼死之。
现代文：十二日，李敬玄、刘审礼在青海与吐蕃军交战，大败，刘审礼阵亡。
English: On the 12th, Li Jingxuan and Liu Xunli fought against the Tubo army in Qinghai and were soundly defeated. Liu Xunli was killed in the battle.

古文：十月丙申，停剑南、陇右岁贡。
现代文：十月十三日，停止剑南、陇右二道每年向朝廷的进贡。
English: On October 13th, the annual tribute to the imperial court in the two provinces of Jian'nan and Handan was suspended.

古文：丙午，密王元晓薨。
现代文：二十三日，密王李元晓去世。
English: On the 23rd, Mi Wang Li Yuanxiao passed away.

古文：闰十一月丙申，雨木冰。
现代文：闰十一月十四日，雨水着树成冰。
English: On the 14th day of the 11th month, rainwater froze trees.

古文：壬子，来恒薨。
现代文：三十日，来恒去世。
English: On the 30th, Lai Heng passed away.

古文：十二月癸丑，罢通乾号。
现代文：十二月初一，废止拟改的 通乾 年号。
English: On the first day of December, the proposed change to the name of the year will be abolished.

古文：调露元年正月戊子，如东都。
现代文：调露元年正月初七，高宗去东都。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the first year, Gaozong went to Dongdu.

古文：庚戌，戴至德薨。
现代文：二十九日，戴至德去世。
English: On the 29th, Dai Zhide passed away.

古文：四月辛酉，郝处俊为侍中。
现代文：四月十二日，郝处俊任侍中。
English: On April 12, Shishidokoro Shun was appointed as a chamberlain.

古文：五月丙戌，皇太子监国。
现代文：五月初七，皇太子李贤代理国政。
English: On the seventh day of the fifth lunar month, Crown Prince Li Xian took over as acting head of state.

古文：戊戌，作紫桂宫。
现代文：十九日建造紫桂宫。
English: On the 19th, the Shigui Palace was built.

古文：六月辛亥，大赦，改元。
现代文：六月初三，施行大赦，更改年号。
English: On the third day of the first month of June, an amnesty was implemented and the year was changed.

古文：吏部侍郎裴行俭伐西突厥。
现代文：吏部侍郎裴行俭征讨西突厥。
English: The attendant of the cadre department, Bae Gyojin, went to the West Turkic region.

古文：九月壬午，行俭败西突厥，执其可汗都支。
现代文：九月初五，裴行俭打败西突厥，俘获其首领都支可汗。
English: On the 5th day of the 9th month, Pei Xingjian defeated the Western Turks and captured their leader, Du Shi Khan.

古文：十月，突厥温傅、奉职二部寇边，单于大都护府长史萧嗣业伐之。
现代文：十月，突厥的温傅、奉职两部侵犯边境，单于大都护府长史萧嗣业前往讨伐。
English: In October, two Turkic armies, the Wenfu and the Bongfu, invaded the border, and the governor of Datu, Shi Xiao, went to fight them alone.

古文：十一月戊寅，高智周罢。
现代文：十一月初一，高智周被免职。
English: On the first day of November, Gao Zhizhou was removed from office.

古文：甲辰，礼部尚书裴行俭为定襄道行军大总管，以伐突厥。
现代文：二十七日，礼部尚书裴行俭任定襄道行军大总管，征讨突厥。
English: On the 27th, the Ministry of Rites and Ceremonies appointed Shangshu Pei Xingjian as the commander-in-chief of the Xiangdao March to conquer the Turks.

古文：永隆元年二月癸丑，如汝州温汤。
现代文：永隆元年二月初八，高宗去汝州温泉。
English: On the eighth day of the second month of the first year of Yonglong, Gaozong went to Ruzhou Hot Spring.

古文：丁巳，如少室山。
现代文：十二日，去少室山。
English: On the 12th, I went to Shomuroyama.

古文：乙丑，如东都。
现代文：二十日，去东都。
English: On the 20th, I went to Dongdu.

古文：三月，裴行俭及突厥战于黑山，败之。
现代文：三月，裴行俭与突厥军在黑山交战，打败突军。
English: In March, Pei Xingjian fought with the Turkic army in Montenegro and defeated the Turkic army.

古文：四月乙丑，如紫桂宫。
现代文：四月二十一日，高宗去紫桂宫。
English: On April 21, Gaozong went to Shigui Palace.

古文：戊辰，黄门侍郎裴炎、崔知温，中书侍郎王德真：同中书门下三品。
现代文：二十四日，黄门侍郎裴炎、崔知温，中书侍郎王德真，皆加同中书门下三品。
English: On the 24th, Huangmen attendants Pei Yan and Cui Zhian, and Chinese book attendant Wang Dezhen, were all promoted to the third grade of the Chinese school.

古文：五月丁酉，太白经天。
现代文：五月二十四日，太白星行经天空。
English: On May 24th, a very white star streaked across the sky.

古文：七月己卯，吐蕃寇河源。
现代文：七月初七，吐蕃侵犯河源。
English: On the 7th day of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month.

古文：辛巳，李敬玄及吐蕃战于湟川，败绩。
现代文：初九，李敬玄与吐蕃军在湟川交战，大败。
English: On the 9th day of the first month, Li Jingxuan and the Tubo army fought in the Beichuan River and suffered a great defeat.

古文：左武卫将军黑齿常之为河源军经略大使。
现代文：左武卫将军黑齿常之任河源军经略大使。
English: General Sobuei Kurotoji assumed the position of the ambassador for economic affairs of the Heyuan Army.

古文：丙申，江王元祥薨。
现代文：二十四日，江王李元祥去世。
English: On the 24th, Jiang Wang Li Yuanxiang passed away.

古文：突厥寇云州，都督窦怀哲败之。
现代文：突厥军侵犯云州，都督窦怀哲将其击败。
English: The Turkic army invaded Yunnan, and the governor Dou Huai Zhe defeated it.

古文：八月丁未，如东都。
现代文：八月初五，高宗去东都。
English: On August 5th, Gaozong went to Dongdu.

古文：丁巳，贬李敬玄为衡州刺史。
现代文：十五日，将李敬玄贬为衡州刺史。
English: On the 15th, Li Jingxuan was relegated to the annals of Hengzhou history.

古文：甲子，废皇太子为庶人。
现代文：二十二日，将皇太子李贤废为平民。
English: On the 22nd, Li Xian, the crown prince, was abolished as a commoner.

古文：乙丑，立英王哲为皇太子，大赦，改元，赐酺三日。
现代文：二十三日，立英王李哲为皇太子，施行大赦，更改年号，赐予臣民聚饮三日。
English: On the 23rd, King Yingzhe made Li Zhe the crown prince, implemented an amnesty, changed the year, and gave the subjects three days to gather and drink.

古文：己巳，贬张大安为普州刺史。
现代文：二十七日，将张大安贬为普州刺史。
English: On the 27th, Zhang Da'an was relegated to the history of Puzhou.

古文：九月甲申，王德真罢。
现代文：九月十三日，王德真被免职。
English: On September 13, Wang Dezhen was removed from his post.

古文：十月壬寅，降封曹王明为零陵郡王。
现代文：十月初一，将曹王李明降等为零陵郡王。
English: On the first day of October, Cao Wang Li Ming was downgraded to the King of Luling County.

古文：戊辰，至自东都。
现代文：二十七日，高宗自东都回京。
English: On the 27th, Gaozong returned to Beijing from Dongdu.

古文：十一月壬申朔，日有食之。
现代文：十一月初一，日月合朔，有日蚀。
English: On the first day of the first month of November, the sun and the moon are new, and there is a solar eclipse.

古文：开耀元年正月乙亥，突厥寇原、庆二州。
现代文：开耀元年正月初五，突厥侵犯原、庆二州。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the first year, the Turks invaded the Yuan and Qing states.

古文：辛巳，赐京官九品以上酺三日。
现代文：十一日，赐予京城九品以上官员聚宴三日。
English: On the 11th day of the month, a banquet was held for officials of nine or more ranks in Beijing for three days.

古文：癸巳，裴行俭为定襄道行军大总管，以伐突厥。
现代文：二十三日，裴行俭任定襄道行军大总管，讨伐突厥。
English: On the 23rd, Pei Xingjian was appointed as the commander-in-chief of the Xiang road march to fight the Turks.

古文：己亥，减殿中、太仆马，省诸方贡献，免雍、岐、华、同四州二岁税，河南、河北一年调。
现代文：二十九日，减少殿中省、太仆寺的马匹，减少各州、藩的进贡，免除雍、岐、华、同四州两年的赋税，河南、河北二道一年的应缴绢绫等物品。
English: On the 29th, the horses of the provinces in the palace and the servants' temples were reduced, the tribute of each province and domain was reduced, and the taxes of Yong, Qi, Hua and Tong four provinces were exempted for two years, and the taxes of Henan and Hebei two provinces were exempted for one year.

古文：二月丙午，皇太子释奠于国学。
现代文：二月初六，皇太子李哲在国学祭祀先师。
English: On the 6th day of the 2nd month of the year, the Crown Prince Ri Zhe left his position as the senior teacher of Korean studies and religious rites.

古文：三月辛卯，郝处俊罢。
现代文：三月二十二日，郝处俊被免职。
English: On March 22nd, Gong Chengjun was removed from his post.

古文：五月乙酉，常州人刘龙子谋反，伏诛。
现代文：五月十七日，常州人刘龙子谋反，被处死。
English: On May 17th, Liu Longzi, a native of Changzhou, plotted a rebellion and was executed.

古文：丙戌，定襄道副总管曹怀舜及突厥战于横水，败绩。
现代文：十八日，定襄道副总管曹怀舜在横水与突厥军交战，大败。
English: On the 18th, Cao Huaiqi, the deputy head of Dingxiang Road, fought with the Turkish army in Hengshui and was defeated.

古文：己丑，黑齿常之及吐蕃战于良非川，败之。
现代文：二十一日，黑齿常之与吐蕃在良非川交战，击败吐军。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, the Black Tooth Changzhi and the Tuyi fought in the Liangfei River and defeated the Tuyi army.

古文：六月壬子，永嘉郡王晫有罪，伏诛。
现代文：六月十五日，永嘉郡王李日卓获罪，被处死。
English: On June 15, Li Rizhuo, the king of Yongjia County, was found guilty and executed.

古文：七月己丑，以太平公主下嫁，赦京师。
现代文：七月二十二日，因太平公主出嫁，对京城施行赦免。
English: On July 22nd, because Princess Taiping got married, the capital was pardoned.

古文：甲午，刘仁轨罢左仆射。
现代文：二十七日，刘仁轨被免去左仆射职务。
English: On the 27th, Liu Renluo was removed from the post of left-handed shooter.

古文：闰月丁未，裴炎为侍中，崔知温、薛元超守中书令。
现代文：闰七月十一日，裴炎任侍中，崔知温、薛元超代理中书令。
English: On July 11th, Pei Yan was appointed as an attendant, and Cui Zhiwen and Xue Yuanchao were appointed as acting middle secretaries.

古文：庚戌，以饵药，皇太子监国。
现代文：十四日，高宗因服药，皇太子李哲代理国政。
English: On the 14th, due to Gao Zong taking medicine, Crown Prince Li Zhe stepped down as acting head of state.

古文：庚申，裴行俭及突厥战，败之。
现代文：二十四日，裴行俭与突厥交战，击败突厥军。
English: On the 24th, Pei Xingjian fought with the Turks and defeated the Turkish army.

古文：八月丁卯，以河南、河北大水，遣使赈乏绝，室庐坏者给复一年，溺死者赠物，人三段。
现代文：八月初一，因河南、河北二道大水，派使臣前往救济贫困人家，住房毁坏者免除劳役一年，被淹死者每人赠杂色绢帛三段。
English: On the first day of August, due to the floods in Henan and Hebei, envoys were sent to the homes of the poor for relief. Those whose houses were destroyed were exempted from labor service for one year, and each of the drowned victims was given three pieces of colored straw.

古文：九月丙申，有彗星出于天市。
现代文：九月初一，在天区 天市 诸星间出现彗星。
English: On the first day of September, a comet appeared in the sky between the stars.

古文：壬戌，裴行俭俘突厥温傅可汗、阿史那伏念以献。
现代文：二十七日，裴行俭俘获突厥首领温傅可汗、阿史那伏念进献朝廷。
English: On the 27th, Pei Xingran captured the Turkic chieftains Wenfu Khan and Ashina Funei and presented them to the imperial court.

古文：乙丑，改元，赦定襄军及诸道缘征官吏兵募。
现代文：三十日，更改年号，免除定襄军及各道因征讨所招募的官吏士卒的赋税。
English: On the 30th, the year number was changed, exempting the Dingxiang Army and the officials recruited by each province from paying taxes.

古文：十月丙寅朔，日有食之。
现代文：十月初一，日月合朔，有日蚀。
English: On the first day of October, the sun and moon are new, and there is a solar eclipse.

古文：十一月癸卯，徙庶人贤于巴州。
现代文：十一月初八，将废为平民的原皇太子李贤流放至巴州。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of November, the former crown prince Li Xian, who was no longer a civilian, was exiled to Bazhou.

古文：永淳元年二月癸未，以孙重照生满月，大赦，改元，赐酺三日。
现代文：永淳元年二月十九日，高宗因其孙李重照满月，施行大赦，更改年号，赐予臣民聚饮三日。
English: On February 19th, Yongjun 1st, Gaozong, because of the full moon of his grandson Li Chongzhao, issued an amnesty, changed the year, and gave his subjects three days to gather and drink.

古文：是月，突厥车薄、咽面寇边。
现代文：本月，突厥的车薄、咽面二部侵犯边境。
English: This month, two Turkish convoys violated the border.

古文：三月戊午，立重照为皇太孙。
现代文：三月二十五日，立李重照为皇太孙。
English: On March 25th, Li Chongzhao was named the emperor's grandson.

古文：四月甲子朔，日有食之。
现代文：四月初一，日月合朔，有日蚀。
English: On the first day of April, the sun and moon are new, and there is a solar eclipse.

古文：丙寅，如东都，皇太子监国。
现代文：初三，高宗去东都，皇太子李哲代理国政。
English: In the third year of junior high school, Gao Zong went to Dongdu, and Crown Prince Li Zhe took over state affairs.

古文：辛未，裴行俭为金牙道行军大总管，率三总管兵以伐突厥。
现代文：初八，裴行俭任金牙道行军大总管，率领三个总管的兵力征讨突厥。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, Pei Xingjian was appointed the general manager of the march of Jinja Road, and led the troops of three general managers to fight the Turks.

古文：安西副都护王方翼及车薄、咽面战于执海，败之。
现代文：安西副都护王方翼与车薄、咽面等在热海交战，将其击败。
English: Anxi vice-governor Wang Fangyi fought with Che Hou and Guanmen in Atami and defeated them.

古文：丁亥，黄门侍郎郭待举、兵部侍郎岑长倩、秘书员外少监郭正一、吏部侍郎魏玄同与中书门下同承受进止平章事。
现代文：二十四日，黄门侍郎郭待举、兵部侍郎岑长倩、秘书员外少监郭正一、吏部侍郎魏玄同与中书门下一同接受向皇帝呈奏国事进退意见的职权。
English: On the 24th, Guo Zhifu, the attendant of the Yellow Gate, Guo Changtao, the attendant of the Military Department, Guo Zhengyi, the secretary, Guo Zhengyi, the assistant superintendent, and Wei Xuan, the attendant of the Civil Affairs Department, together with the attendant of the Chinese Academy of Letters, accepted the authority to present to the emperor the opinions on the progress and retreat of national affairs.

古文：五月乙卯，洛水溢。
现代文：五月二十三日，洛水泛滥。
English: On May 23rd, Luo River was flooded.

古文：六月甲子，突厥骨咄禄寇边，岚州刺史王德茂死之。
现代文：六月初三，突厥的骨咄禄侵犯边境，岚州刺史王德茂死难。
English: On the 3rd day of the 6th month, the Turkish army invaded the border, and Wang Demao, the governor of Zhangzhou, was killed.

古文：是月，大蝗，人相食。
现代文：本月，发生大蝗灾，出现人吃人现象。
English: This month, a large locust plague occurred, and the phenomenon of people eating people appeared.

古文：七月，作万泉宫。
现代文：七月，建造万泉宫。
English: In July, construction of the Manquan Palace began.

古文：己亥，作奉天宫。
现代文：初八，建造奉天宫。
English: On the 8th day of the 8th month, the construction of the Feng Tian Palace began.

古文：庚申，零陵郡王明自杀。
现代文：二十九日，零陵郡王李明自杀。
English: On the 29th, King Li Ming of Luling County committed suicide.

古文：九月，吐蕃寇柘州，骁卫郎将李孝逸伐之。
现代文：九月，吐蕃侵犯柘州，骁卫郎将李孝逸率军征讨。
English: In September, when Tubo invaded Zhangzhou, Zou Weiro led Li Xiao Yi's army to attack.

古文：十月甲子，京师地震。
现代文：十月初五，京城长安地震。
English: On October 5th, the Beijing Chang'an earthquake occurred.

古文：丙寅，黄门侍郎刘齐贤同中书门下平章事。
现代文：初七，黄门侍郎刘齐贤加同中书门下平章事。
English: In the seventh year of junior high school, Liu Qixian, a waiter at the Yellow Gate, was promoted to the same rank as Xia Ping, a scholar at the Middle School.

古文：弘道元年正月甲午，幸奉天宫。
现代文：弘道元年正月初六，高宗亲临奉天宫。
English: On the 6th day of the 1st month of the 1st year of Hongdao, Gao Zong personally visited the Temple of Heaven.

古文：二月庚午，突厥寇定州，刺史霍王元轨败之。
现代文：二月十二日，突厥侵犯定州，刺史霍王李元轨将其击败。
English: On February 12, the Turks invaded Dingzhou, and Li Yuanlu, the king of Shi Huo, defeated them.

古文：三月庚寅，突厥寇单于都护府，司马张行师死之。
现代文：三月初二，突厥侵犯单于都护府，司马张行师死难。
English: On the second day of March, the Turks invaded Dugongfu, and Sima Zhang Xingshi was killed.

古文：庚子，李义琰罢。
现代文：十二日，李义琰被免职。
English: On the 12th, Li Yixuan was removed from office.

古文：丙午，有彗星出于五车。
现代文：十八日，在天区毕宿北的 五车 五星之间出现彗星。
English: On the 18th, a comet appeared between the five chariots and five stars in the northern part of the sky.

古文：癸丑，崔知温薨。
现代文：二十五日，崔知温去世。
English: On the 25th, Cui Zhiyuan passed away.

古文：四月己未，如东都。
现代文：四月初二，高宗去东都。
English: On the second day of the fourth month, Gaozong went to Dongdu.

古文：壬申，郭待举、郭正一同中书门下平章事。
现代文：十五日，郭待举、郭正一加同中书门下平章事。
English: On the 15th, Guo Zhizhi and Guo Zhengyi were promoted to the same rank.

古文：甲申，绥州部落稽白铁余寇边，右武卫将军程务挺败之。
现代文：二十七日，绥州的部落稽、白铁余侵扰边境，右武卫将军程务挺将其击败。
English: On the 27th, Zhangzhou's tribal chiefs and Bai Tie Yu invaded the border, and the right guard general Cheng Mu Ting defeated them.

古文：五月乙巳，突厥寇蔚州，刺史李思俭死之。
现代文：五月十八日，突厥侵犯蔚州，刺史李思俭死难。
English: On May 18th, the Turks invaded Ulsan and killed Shi Li Sijian.

古文：七月甲辰，徙封轮为豫王，改名旦。
现代文：七月十九日，改封李轮为豫王，将其名改为李旦。
English: On July 19th, Li Rong was renamed Yu Wang, and his name was changed to Li Dan.

古文：薛元超罢。
现代文：薛元超被免职。
English: Xue Yuanchao was removed from office.

古文：八月乙丑，皇太子朝于东都，皇太孙留守京师。
现代文：八月初十，皇太子李哲去东都朝见高宗，皇太孙李重照留守京城。
English: At the beginning of August 10th, the crown prince Li Zhe went to the Dongdu Court to see Gao Zong, while the grand-grandson of the emperor, Li Chongzhao, stayed in Beijing.

古文：丁卯，滹沱溢。
现代文：十一日，滹沱河泛滥。
English: On the 11th day, the Li River flooded.

古文：己巳，河溢，坏河阳城。
现代文：十四日，黄河泛滥，毁坏河阳城。
English: On the 14th, the Yellow River overflowed, destroying the city of Heyang.

古文：九月己丑，以太平公主子生，赦东都。
现代文：九月初五，因太平公主生子，对东都施行赦免。
English: On the 5th day of the 9th month, due to the birth of Princess Taiping's son, Dongdu was pardoned.

古文：十月癸亥，幸奉天宫。
现代文：十月初十，高宗亲临奉天宫。
English: At the beginning of October, Emperor Gaozong personally visited the Celestial Palace.

古文：十一月戊戌，右武卫将军程务挺为单于道安抚大使，以伐突厥。
现代文：十一月十五日，右武卫将军程务挺任单于道安抚大使，征讨突厥。
English: On November 15th, Cheng Mu Ting, a general of the Right Division of the Imperial Guards, was appointed as an ambassador to pacify the Korean Peninsula, to fight against the Turks.

古文：辛丑，皇太子监国。
现代文：十八日，皇太子李哲代理国政。
English: On the 18th, Crown Prince Li Zhe took over as acting head of state.

古文：丁未，如东都。
现代文：二十四日，高宗去东都。
English: On the 24th, Gaozong went to Dongdu.

古文：戊申，裴炎、刘齐贤、郭正一兼于东宫平章事。
现代文：二十五日，裴炎、刘齐贤、郭正一兼任东宫平章事。
English: On the 25th, Pei Yan, Liu Qixian, and Guo Zhengyi concurrently served as Dongguan Pingzhangji.

古文：十二月丁巳，改元，大赦。
现代文：十二月初四，更改年号，施行大赦。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of December, the year name was changed and an amnesty was implemented.

古文：是夕，皇帝崩于贞观殿，年五十六。
现代文：此夜，高宗在贞观殿逝世，时年五十六岁。
English: On this night, Gaozong passed away at the age of fifty-six in the Zhenguan Hall.

古文：谥曰天皇大帝。
现代文：谥号 天皇大帝 。
English: His posthumous name was Emperor Taisei.

古文：天宝八载，改谥天皇大圣皇帝；十三载，增谥天皇大圣大弘孝皇帝。
现代文：天宝八载，改其谥号为 天皇大圣皇帝 ；天宝十三载，增谥号为 天皇大圣大弘孝皇帝 。
English: In the eighth year of the Heavenly Treasure era, his posthumous name was changed to Emperor Daishen Emperor; in the thirteenth year of the Heavenly Treasure era, his posthumous name was changed to Emperor Daishen Emperor.

古文：赞曰：《小雅》曰： 赫赫宗周，褒姒灭之。 
现代文：评说：《诗·小雅》有句云： 盛大周王朝，褒姒毁灭掉。 
English: Comment: There is a saying in "Poetry · Xiao Ya": The grand Zhou Dynasty was destroyed.

古文：此周幽王之诗也。
现代文：这是指责周幽王宠爱褒姒的诗。
English: This is a poem accusing Zhou Yu Wang of being fond of Baodi.

古文：是时，幽王虽亡，而太子宜臼立，是为平王。
现代文：这时，幽王虽死，但太子宜臼业已继位，此即周平王。
English: At this time, although Yu Wang was dead, Prince Yisu had already succeeded to the throne, that is, Zhou Ping Wang.

古文：而诗人乃言灭之者，以为文、武之业于是荡尽，东周虽在，不能复兴矣。
现代文：而诗人仍说周朝灭亡，因为文王、武王的基业从此荡然无存，东周虽在，已不能复兴了。
English: But the poet still said that the Zhou Dynasty had perished, because the legacy of King Wen and King Wu had vanished, and although the Eastern Zhou Dynasty still existed, it could no longer be revived.

古文：其曰灭者，甚疾之之辞也。
现代文：诗人说周朝灭亡，是恨极之辞。
English: The poet said that the demise of the Zhou Dynasty was a hate speech.

古文：武氏之乱，唐之宗室戕杀殆尽，其贤士大夫不免者十八九。
现代文：武氏祸乱，李唐王室成员遭受残害殆尽，贤明的士大夫十之八、九不能幸免。
English: Wu's calamity, the members of the royal family of Li Tang were all destroyed, and eight or nine out of ten of the wise doctors could not be spared.

古文：以太宗之治，其遗德余烈在人者未远，而几于遂绝，其为恶岂一褒姒之比邪？
现代文：这时太宗的贞观之治，留存在世的德政功业相距尚不久远，却几乎完全丧尽，武氏的作恶哪里是一个褒姒所能比拟的呢？
English: At this time, the reign of Taizong's chastity, and the German political achievements that remained in the world were not far apart, but they were almost completely lost. What evil deed of the Wu clan could be compared to a reward?

古文：以太宗之明，昧于知子，废立之际，不能自决，卒用昏童。
现代文：太宗如此圣明，却昏昧于了解自己的儿子，在废、立皇太子之时，不能自主裁决，终于起用愚昧之人。
English: Emperor Taizong is so holy, but he is too ignorant to know his own son. When the crown prince was abolished and established, he could not make his own decision, and finally appointed a foolish person.

古文：高宗溺爱衤任席，不戒履霜之渐，而毒流天下，贻祸邦家。
现代文：高宗溺爱寝卧中人，不警戒防微杜渐，以至于祸害遍及天下，毁灭邦国家族。
English: Gao Zong coddled those who were sleeping, and did not guard against evils, so that the scourge spread all over the world, destroying nations and families.

古文：呜呼，父子夫妇之间，可谓难哉！
现代文：可叹哪，父子夫妇之间的关系，实在堪称极难处置呀！
English: Alas, the relationship between father and son is extremely difficult to handle!

古文：可不慎哉？
现代文：能不审慎吗？
English: Can we not be prudent?

