古文：十有三年春，王正月。
现代文：十三年春季，周历正月，无事。
English: In the spring of the thirteenth year, the first month of the lunar calendar, nothing happened.

古文：夏五月壬午，陈侯朔卒。
现代文：夏季五月壬午日，陈侯朔去世。
English: On the afternoon of May Day in summer, Chen Houshuo passed away.

古文：邾子蘧蒢卒。
现代文：邾子蘧蒢无事。
English: There's nothing to worry about.

古文：自正月不雨至于秋七月。
现代文：正月到七月一直没有下雨。
English: There was no rain from the first month of the year to July.

古文：大室屋坏。
现代文：太庙正屋屋顶损坏。
English: The roof of Taimiao Zhengya was damaged.

古文：冬，公如晋。
现代文：冬季，鲁文公到晋国。
English: In winter, Lu Wen Gong went to Jin Province.

古文：卫侯会公于沓。
现代文：卫成公在沓地会见文公。
English: Wei Chenggong met with Wengong in Handan.

古文：狄侵卫。
现代文：狄国侵犯卫国。
English: Di's country is encroaching on our country.

古文：十有二月己丑，公及晋侯盟。
现代文：十二月己丑日，鲁文公与晋侯结盟。
English: On Ugly Day in December, Lu Wen Gong allied with Jin Hou.

古文：公还自晋。
现代文：文公从晋国回国。
English: Wengong returned from Jin.

古文：郑伯会公于棐。
现代文：郑穆公和鲁文公在棐地会见。
English: Zheng Mu Gong and Lu Wen Gong meet in Handan.

古文：十三年春，晋侯使詹嘉处瑕，以守桃林之塞。
现代文：十三年春季，晋灵公派詹嘉住在瑕地，以防守桃林这个险要的地方。
English: In the spring of the thirteenth year, Jinling sent Zhan Jia to live in the blemish to defend the important place of the peach grove.

古文：晋人患秦之用士会也，夏，六卿相见于诸浮。
现代文：晋国人担心秦国任用士会，夏季，六卿在诸浮相见。
English: The people of Jin were worried about the Qin State Appointees' Association. In the summer, the Six Lords met in Zhu Fu.

古文：赵宣子曰： 随会在秦，贾季在狄，难日至矣，若之何？ 
现代文：赵宣子说： 士会在秦国，贾季在狄人那里，祸患每天都可能发生，怎么办？ 
English: Zhao Xuan Zi said, "In Qin Province, there is a scholar's association, and in Di people, there is a courtier's association, so disasters may happen every day. What should we do?

古文：中行桓子曰： 请复贾季，能外事，且由旧勋。 
现代文：中行桓子说： 请让贾季回来，他了解外界的事情，而且因为有过去的功劳。 
English: Zhongxing Huan Zi said: Please let Jia Ji come back, he understands the outside world, and because of past achievements.

古文：郤成子曰： 贾季乱，且罪大，不如随会，能贱而有耻，柔而不犯，其知足使也，且无罪。 
现代文：郤成子说： 贾季喜欢作乱，而且罪过大，不如让士会回来。士会能够做到卑贱而知道耻辱，柔弱而不受侵犯，他的智谋足以使用，而且没有罪过。 
English: Hao Chengzi said: Jia Ji likes to make trouble, and his sin is too great, it is better to let the Shikai come back. The Shikai can be humble and know shame, tender and inviolable, his wit is enough to use, and there is no sin.

古文：乃使魏寿馀伪以魏叛者以诱士会，执其帑于晋，使夜逸。
现代文：于是晋国就让魏寿馀假装率领魏地的人叛乱，以引诱士会。把魏寿馀的妻子儿女抓在晋国，让他夜里逃走。
English: As a result, Jin Province asked Wei Shouyu to pretend to lead the people of Wei Province in a rebellion in order to lure the scholars' association. Wei Shouyu's wife and children were arrested in Jin Province, and he was allowed to escape in the night.

古文：请自归于秦，秦伯许之。
现代文：魏寿馀请求把魏地归入秦国，秦康公答应了。
English: Wei Shouyu requested that Wei land be incorporated into Qin, and Qin Kangong agreed.

古文：履士会之足于朝。
现代文：魏寿馀在朝廷上踩一下士会的脚，示意士会与他一起回晋国。
English: Wei Shouyu stepped on the foot of the scholars' association at the imperial court, and the scholars' association returned to Jin with him.

古文：秦伯师于河西，魏人在东。
现代文：秦康公驻军在河西，魏地人在河东。
English: Qin Kangong's garrison was in Hexi, and the Wei people were in Hedong.

古文：寿馀曰： 请东人之能与夫二三有司言者，吾与之先。 
现代文：魏寿馀说： 请派一位东边人而能够跟魏地几位官员说话的，我跟他一起先去。 
English: Wei Shouyu said: Please send a person from the east who can talk to several Wei officials, I will go with him first.

古文：使士会。
现代文：秦康公派遣士会。
English: Qin Kangong dispatched an envoy.

古文：士会辞曰： 晋人，虎狼也，若背其言，臣死，妻子为戮，无益于君，不可悔也。 
现代文：士会辞谢说： 晋国人，是老虎豺狼。如果违背原来的话不让下臣回来，下臣死，妻子儿女也将被诛戮，这对君王没有好处，而且后悔不及。 
English: Jin people are tigers and wolves. If, contrary to the original words, the vassal is not allowed to return, the vassal will die, and his wife and children will also be killed. This is not good for the king, and it is beyond regret.

古文：秦伯曰： 若背其言，所不归尔帑者，有如河。 
现代文：秦康公说： 如果晋国违背原来的话不让你回来，我若不送还你的妻子儿女，有河神作证！ 
English: Qin Kangong said, "If the State of Jin does not let you return in violation of the original agreement, if I do not return your wife and children, the river gods will testify!

古文：乃行。
现代文：这样士会才敢去。
English: So they went on.

古文：绕朝赠之以策，曰： 子无谓秦无人，吾谋適不用也。 
现代文：绕朝把马鞭送给士会，说： 您别说秦国没有人才，我的计谋正好不被采用罢了。 
English: He went around the country to give the whip to the scholars' association and said, "Don't say that there are no talents in Qin, it's just that my plan wasn't adopted."

古文：既济，魏人噪而还。
现代文：渡过黄河以后，魏地人因得到士会而欢呼，熙熙嚷嚷地回去了。
English: After crossing the Yellow River, the Wei people cheered because they got the Shih Association, and went back in a huff.

古文：秦人归其帑。
现代文：秦国人送还了士会的妻子儿女。
English: The people of Qin returned the wives and children of the officers' association.

古文：其处者为刘氏。
现代文：士会留在秦国的家人都改姓为刘氏。
English: All the family members who stayed in Qin changed their surnames to Liu.

古文：邾文公卜迁于绎。
现代文：邾文公为了迁都到绎地而占了卦问吉凶。
English: In order to relocate the capital to Idukki, Gong Wengong made up a story about good and bad luck.

古文：史曰： 利于民而不利于君。 
现代文：史官说： 对百姓有利而对国不利。 
English: Historian says: Good for the people, bad for the country.

古文：邾子曰： 苟利于民，孤之利也。
现代文：邾文公说： 如果对百姓有利，也就是我的利益。
English: "If it's good for the people, it's good for me," he said.

古文：天生民而树之君，以利之也。
现代文：上天生育了百姓而为他们设置君主，就是用来给他们利益的。
English: Heaven gave birth to the people and set up a monarch for them to benefit them.

古文：民既利矣，孤必与焉。 
现代文：百姓得到利益，我就必然也在其中了。 
English: If the people benefit, I am sure to be among them.

古文：左右曰： 命可长也，君何弗为？ 
现代文：左右随从说： 生命是可以延长的，君王为什么不这样做？ 
English: Followers left and right said: Life can be prolonged, why doesn't the king do this?

古文：邾子曰： 命在养民。
现代文：邾文公说： 活着就是为了抚养百姓。
English: Yu Wenkong said, "To live is to raise the people."

古文：死之短长，时也。
现代文：而死的或早或晚，那是由于偶然因素的缘故。
English: And death, sooner or later, is due to chance.

古文：民苟利矣，迁也，吉莫如之！ 
现代文：百姓如果有利，迁都就是了，没有比这再吉利的了。 
English: If it is beneficial to the people, the capital will be moved. Nothing could be more auspicious.

古文：遂迁于绎。
现代文：于是就迁都到绎地。
English: As a result, the capital was moved to Kyakuden.

古文：五月，邾文公卒。
现代文：五月，邾文公死了。
English: In May, Sun Yat-sen died.

古文：君子曰： 知命。 
现代文：君子说： 邾文公真正懂得天命。 
English: Virtuous people all say that Guo Wengong is the one who understands the destiny.

古文：秋七月，大室之屋坏，书不共也。
现代文：秋季，七月，太庙正屋屋顶损坏，《春秋》所以记载，是为了表示臣下的不恭敬。
English: In the autumn, in July, the roof of the main building of the Great Temple was damaged. "Spring and Autumn" was recorded in order to show the disrespect of the subjects.

古文：冬，公如晋，朝，且寻盟。
现代文：冬季，文公到晋国朝见，同时重温过去的友好关系。
English: In the winter, Wengong went to Jin Province to meet with the imperial court, and at the same time revisit the past friendly relations.

古文：卫侯会公于沓，请平于晋。
现代文：卫成公在沓地会见文公，请求和晋国讲和。
English: Wei Cheng Gong met with Wen Gong in Handan and requested to make peace with Jin.

古文：公还，郑伯会公于棐，亦请平于晋。
现代文：文公回国时，郑穆公在棐地会见文公，也请求和晋国讲和。
English: When Wen Gong returned to China, Zheng Mu Gong met with Wen Gong in Handan, and also requested to make peace with Jin.

古文：公皆成之。
现代文：鲁文公都一一帮助他们达成和议。
English: Luwen Gongdu helped them to reach a peaceful discussion one by one.

古文：郑伯与公宴于棐。子家赋《鸿雁》。
现代文：郑穆公和鲁文公在棐地举行宴会，子家赋了《鸿雁》这首诗。
English: Zheng Mu Gong and Lu Wen Gong held a banquet in Handan, and the family gave the poem "The Wild Geese" to the couple.

古文：季文子曰： 寡君未免于此。 
现代文：季文子说： 寡君也不能免于这种处境。 
English: "A widower is not exempt from this kind of situation," Ms. Ji said.

古文：文子赋《四月》。子家赋《载驰》之四章，文子赋《采薇》之四章。
现代文：就赋了《四月》这首诗，子家又赋了《载驰》这首诗的第四章，季文子赋了《采薇》这首诗的第四章。
English: He endowed the poem "April," his son also endowed the fourth chapter of the poem "Carrying Forward," and his son endowed the fourth chapter of the poem "Picking Weeds."

古文：郑伯拜，公答拜。
现代文：郑穆公拜谢，鲁文公答谢。
English: Zheng Mu Gong thanks, Lu Wen Gong thanks.

