古文：夫玄象着明，以察时变，天文也；圣达立言，化成天下，人文也；达幽显之情，明天人之际，其在文乎。
现代文：天象显明，可以观察时运的变化，就是天文；仁圣先达著书立说，教化天下，就是人文；通晓隐晦和明显的实际情况，明白上天舆世人的关系，在于文。
English: It is astronomy that reveals the celestial phenomena and observes the changes of the times; it is humanities that enlightens the world through the writings of Ren Shengxian; it is literature that is familiar with the obscure and obvious realities, and understands the relationship between heaven and earth.

古文：逖听三古，弥纶百代，制礼作乐，腾实飞声，若或言之不文，岂能行之远也。
现代文：聆听远古的消息，贯通百世，制礼作乐，扬实传声，如果言辞没有文采，怎么能够流传久远。
English: Listen to the ancient news, permeate the world, make music, and carry the truth. If the words are not literary, how can they be passed down for a long time?

古文：子曰： 文王既没，文不在兹？ 大圣踵武，邈将千载，其间英贤卓荦，不可胜纪，咸宜韬笔寝牍，未可言文，斯固才难不其然也。
现代文：孔子说： 文王去世，文献就不在这裹了吗? 大圣遵循先王的足迹，延续千载，在此期间超绝出众的英贤，不计其数，但他们这些人都应该放下自己的纸笔，不算是有文采，这本来就是由于才能所限达不到有文采的境地。
English: Confucius said, "If King Wen passed away, wouldn't the documents be wrapped up here?" The Great Sage followed the footsteps of the former king and continued for a thousand years. During this period, there were countless outstanding sages, but these people should put down their pen and paper. They are not considered to be literate, which is due to the limitations of talent.

古文：至夫游、夏以文词擅美，颜回则庶几将圣，屈、宋所以后尘，卿、云未能辍简。
现代文：后来子游、子夏以文词擅长，颜回差不多可以算圣人了，屈原、宋玉步其后尘，司马长卿、扬子云辛勤创作。
English: Later, Ziyu and Zixia were good at writing, Yan Hui could almost be considered a saint, Qu Yuan and Song Yu followed in their footsteps, and Sima Changqing and Yang Ziyun worked hard to create.

古文：于是辞人才子，波骇云属，振鹓鹭之羽仪，纵雕龙之符采，人谓得玄珠于赤水，策奔电于昆丘，开四照于春华，成万宝于秋实。
现代文：由此才子辞人屑出不穷，施展才能，纵情笔墨，好比是在赤水中发现了黑色的明珠，在昆仑山上驾驭宝马一样发现了人才，如同春天开启了照耀四方的光华，秋天就可收获无数的果实。
English: As a result, there is an endless supply of talent, talent and indulgence, just like finding a black pearl in the red water, discovering talent like driving a BMW on the Kunlun Mountains, just as spring opens the brilliance that shines in all directions, autumn can harvest countless fruits.

古文：然文之所起，情发于中。人有六情，□五常之秀；情感六气，顺四时之序。
现代文：文学之源，在于发自内心的情感，人有六情，承受了五行的灵气；人的情感和自然界的六气相应，是由于顺应了四时的季节。
English: The source of literature lies in the emotions that come from the heart. People have six emotions and have received the five elements of the aura; human emotions and the six energies of nature correspond to the four seasons of the year.

古文：其有帝资悬解，天纵多能，摛黼黻于生知，问珪璋于先觉，譬雕云之自成五色，犹仪凤之冥会八音，斯固感英灵以特达，非劳心所能致也。
现代文：那些有帝王之资，解民倒悬的人，上天赐给他各种才能，对智者铺陈华美的文辞，向先觉请教高尚的品格，好比是彩云具有了五彩，又如同凤凰的呜叫暗合了八音，逭本是上天有感于英明灵秀而赐予他突出的才能，并非用心学习就可以得到的。
English: Those who have the emperor's capital and solve the people's problems, God has given him all kinds of talents. To the wise, he will spread the ancient and beautiful words, and to the preconscious, he will ask for advice. The noble character is like the clouds have five colors, and like the phoenix's cry, it has eight tones. This is because God is impressed by the wise and gifted and gives him outstanding talent. It is not something that can be obtained by studying hard.

古文：纵其情思底滞，关键不通，但伏膺无怠，钻仰斯切，驰骛胜流，周旋益友，强学广其闻见，专心屏于涉求，画缋饰以丹青，雕琢成其器用，是以学而知之，犹足贤乎已也。
现代文：即使思维停滞、门路不通，但他们会继续努力，毫不懈怠，更加勤奋钻研，热心向名流请教，和有助益的朋友往来，通过强学拓宽自己的见闻，专心代替待人接物，绘画用丹青来装饰，器皿因雕琢成就用途，所以学而知之，仍然可以算是圣贤。
English: Even if their thinking is stagnant and there is no way out, they will continue to work hard. They will not slack off. They will study more diligently. They will earnestly seek advice from celebrities and keep in touch with helpful friends. They will broaden their knowledge through intensive study. They will concentrate on serving others instead of receiving gifts. Paintings will be decorated with red ochre. Vessels will be used because they are carved. Therefore, they can still be regarded as sages.

古文：谓石为兽，射之洞开，精之至也。
现代文：李广把石头当作野兽，用箭射开，是精诚所至。
English: Li Guang took the stone as a beast and shot it with an arrow, which was the best.

古文：积岁解牛，砉然游刃，习之久也。
现代文：庖丁杀牛剥皮很多年，做到游刃有余，是由于修习的时间很长。
English: He has been killing and skinning cattle for many years, and he is able to do this because he has had a long time to practice.

古文：自非浑沌无可凿之姿，穷奇怀不移之情，安有至精久习而不成功者焉。
现代文：如果不是像浑沌那样没有可以开凿的资质，像穷奇那样有不可改变的凶恶本性，怎么会有精诚所至而金石不开的事情呢。
English: If it were not for the fact that, like Chaos, he has no qualities that can be developed, and that he has an unchangeable evil nature, like Quixote, how could there be things that are not possible with the best of intentions?

古文：善乎魏文之着论也： 人多不强力，贫贱则慑于饥寒，富贵则流于逸乐，遂营目前之务，而遗千载之功，日月逝于上，体貌衰于下，忽然与万物迁化，斯志士大痛也。 
现代文：魏文帝所说的话太对了： 人们都不知道去努力，贫贱者自暴自弃于饥寒，富贵者耽于享乐，于是大家衹顾着处理眼前的事，却放弃了可以流传千古的功德，日月流转、岁月流失，容颜衰老、体力下降，很快就伴随着万物一起死亡，这是有志之士最感到痛心的。 
English: The words of Emperor Weiwen are all too true: People do not know how to work hard, the poor give themselves up to hunger and cold, the rich indulge in pleasure, so everyone neglects to deal with the immediate matter, but gives up the merits that can be passed down for thousands of years. The sun and the moon pass, the years pass, the face ages, the physical strength declines, and soon everything dies along with everything else. This is the most painful thing for those who have aspirations.

古文：沈休文云： 自汉至魏，四百余年，辞人才子，文体三变。 然自兹厥后，轨辙尤多。
现代文：沈休文说： 从漠到魏，四百多年，才子辞人的文体经历了三次演变。 但从此以后，轨迹纷繁。
English: Shen Huiwen said: From the desert to the Wei Dynasty, for more than four hundred years, the style of the talented poet has undergone three evolutions, but since then, the trajectory has been varied.

古文：江左梁末，弥尚轻险，始自储宫，刑乎流俗，杂惉懘以成音，故虽悲而不雅。
现代文：江南梁末，十分崇尚轻靡奇险，这种文风发起者是皇太子，被当时的文人模仿，把不和谐的声音混杂在一起，所以虽悲而不雅。
English: At the end of the Yangtze River, there was a strong belief in taking risks. This style of writing was initiated by the crown prince and was imitated by the literati of the time. It mixed discordant voices together, so it was sad and inelegant.

古文：爰逮武平，政乖时蠹，唯藻思之美，雅道犹存，履柔顺以成文，蒙大难而能正。原夫两朝叔世，俱肆淫声，而齐氏变风，属诸弦管，梁时变雅，在夫篇什。
现代文：到了武平年间，朝政日益败坏，文章注重辞藻的华美，但大雅之道仍然得以保存，写文章笃守柔媚婉约，经历大的变故才能端正文风推究两朝末世，充斥着淫靡玩乐的习气，而齐代变风，表现在音乐上。銮时变雅，表现在文章上。
English: During the Wuping era, the imperial government became increasingly corrupt. The articles focused on the beauty of words, but the elegant way was still preserved. The articles were written in a soft and gentle manner. It took great changes to correctly deduce the style of the end of the two dynasties. It was full of the habit of lascivious play, and the changing style of the two dynasties was reflected in the music. The changing style of the times was reflected in the articles.

古文：莫非易俗所致，并为亡国之音；而应变不殊，感物或异，何哉？
现代文：造无非是改变风俗造成的，都变成了亡国之音；可是同样为了应付习俗的变化，表现形式却不相同，什么原因呢?
English: It is nothing more than the result of changing customs, and they have all become the sounds of a dying country; but in order to cope with the changes in customs, the forms of expression are different, why?

古文：盖随君上之情欲也。
现代文：恐怕是由于皇上的七情六欲导致的结果。
English: I'm afraid it's a result of the emperor's erratic behavior.

古文：有齐自霸图云启，广延髦□，开四门以纳之，举八纮以掩之，邺京之下，烟霏雾集，河间邢子才、巨鹿魏伯起、范阳卢元明、巨鹿魏季景、清河崔长儒、河间邢子明、范阳祖孝征、乐安孙彦举、中山杜辅玄、北平阳子烈并其流也。
现代文：从北齐建国以来，广泛延纳杰出人才，大开四门招揽他们，用优厚的条件使他留下来，于是来到曲的文士辐凑云集，亘国邢子才、钜尘魏伯起、茎屋卢元明、堑尘塾垦、渣回崔昼插、困涩王塱、莲碱担茎蛮、碧迭还产举、史山丝盐直、韭垩阳子烈都是当时的名流。
English: Since the founding of North Qi, it has extensively recruited outstanding talents, opened its doors wide to invite them, and used favorable conditions to make him stay. Therefore, the scribes who came to Qu gathered in large numbers. Waguo Zizicai, Shoucheng Wei Boqi, Zhujiya Lu Yuanming, Shoucheng Ju Juqi, Jia Hui Cui Rongjie, Juxi Wang Qi, Lian Cao Bao Ci Man, Bijie Jianqiu, Shishan Si Yan Zhi, and Zouyang Zili were all famous celebrities at that time.

古文：复有范阳祖鸿勋亦参文士之列。
现代文：又有范阳祖鸿勋也加入他们的行列。
English: Fan Yang Zu Hongxun also joined them.

古文：天保中，李愔、陆邛、崔瞻、陆元规并在中书，参掌纶诰。
现代文：天保年间，李值、堕邛、查盐、陆重担同在中书，负责起草皇帝的韶令文诰。
English: During the Tenpo era, Li Zhen, Zhuozhong, Zhaishan and Lu Shuzhong were together in Zhongshu, responsible for drafting the emperor's imperial edicts.

古文：其李广、樊逊、李德林、卢询祖、卢思道始以文章著名。
现代文：奎广、樊逊、李德林、卢询祖、卢墨道开始都以文章知名于当世。
English: The others, Li Guang, Zhaotong, Li Delin, Lu Xunzu and Lu Siduo, began to become famous for their articles.

古文：皇建之朝，常侍王晞独擅其美。
现代文：皇建一代，常侍王晞独领风骚。
English: Emperor Qixiao Zhaozhong established the dynasty, and his attendant emperors excelled in the beauty of literature.

古文：河清、天统之辰，杜台卿、刘逖、魏骞亦参知诏敕。
现代文：河清、天统年间，杜台卿、刘逖、魏骞也参预起草诏书。
English: During the Heqing and Tiantong dynasties, Du Taiqing, Liu Bei and Wei Bei also participated in the pre-drafting of the edict.

古文：自愔以下，在省唯撰述除官诏旨，其关涉军国文翰，多是魏收作之。
现代文：奎擅等人在中书，负责起草官吏任命的诏书，凡是涉及军国大事的文书，都出自魏收之手。
English: Qui Xuan and others were in charge of the imperial rescript, responsible for drafting the imperial rescript for the appointment of officials, and all the documents related to military and national events came from the hands of Wei Jie.

古文：及在武平，李若、荀士逊、李德林、薛道衡为中书侍郎，诸军国文书及大诏诰俱是德林之笔，道衡诸人皆不预也。
现代文：到了武平年间，李若、荀士逊、李德林、薛道衡任中书侍郎，军国文书和典诰都是李德林所作，薛道衡等人都没有参预。
English: During the Wu-Ping era, Li Ruo, Fu Shisong, Li Delin, and Xue Daoheng served as the secretary of the Central Military Commission. Li Delin wrote the military documents and documents, and Xue Daoheng and others did not participate in the preliminaries.

古文：后主虽溺于□小，然颇好讽咏，幼稚时，曾读诗赋，语人云： 终有解作此理不？ 及长亦少留意。
现代文：虽然后主受到一群小人的蒙蔽，但是很喜欢吟诗作赋，小的时候，曾读诗赋，对人说： 是不是有人知道写作的方法呢? 长大后在逭方面以留心。
English: Although his successor was hoodwinked by a group of villains, he was very fond of chanting poems. When he was a child, he used to read poems and say to people: Does anyone know how to write? When you grow up, pay attention to how you write.

古文：初因画屏风，敕通直郎兰陵萧放及晋陵王孝式录古名贤烈士及近代轻艳诸诗以充图画，帝弥重之。
现代文：起初因为画屏风，命通直郎兰陵萧放和晋陵王孝式收集古代圣贤壮士和近代作诗轻艳的人画在屏风上，皇上对此很看重。
English: At first, because of painting screens, Lanling Xiaofang and Jinling Wang Xiaoxi collected ancient sages and modern poets to paint on the screen. The emperor attached great importance to this.

古文：后复追齐州录事参军萧□、赵州功曹参军颜之推同入撰次，犹依霸朝，谓之馆客。
现代文：后来又征召齐州录事参军萧悫、趟州功曹参军颜之推一同参加撰写，如同依附朝廷，把他们叫做馆客。
English: Later, Xiao Wei, who was conscripted to join the army to record the events in Qizhou, and Yan Niu, who was conscripted to join the army to record the events in Wuzhou, were also conscripted to participate in the writing. As if they were attached to the imperial court, they were called "guests."

古文：放及之推意欲更广其事，又祖珽辅政，爱重之推，又托邓长颙渐说后主，属意斯文。
现代文：萧放和颜之推想扩大范围，而且祖埏辅佐朝政时，很看重颜之推，又委托邓长颐逐渐劝说后主，留心文学。
English: Xiao Fang expanded the scope of Yan's suggestion, and when Zu Xi assisted the imperial government, he attached great importance to Yan's suggestion, and entrusted Deng Changyu to gradually persuade his successor to pay attention to literature.

古文：三年，祖珽奏立文林馆，于是更召引文学士，谓之待诏文林馆焉。
现代文：三年，祖埏奏明后主设立文林馆，于是更广泛招纳文士，让他们作文林馆待韶。
English: In the third year of Wuping, the founder Wang Tingso asked for the establishment of the Wenlin Museum, so he also convened the introduction of literary men and women, and called these people the Taizhao Literature Museum.

古文：珽又奏撰御览，诏珽及特进魏收、太子太师徐之才、中书令崔劼、散骑常侍张雕、中书监阳休之监撰。
现代文：祖埏又启奏皇上请求编写《御览》，皇上命祖埏及特进魏收、太子太师徐之才、中书令崔劫、散骑常侍张雕、中书监阳休之负责编撰工作。
English: Zu Xi also replied to the emperor's request to compile the "Overview," and the emperor ordered Zu Xi and Wei Hui, the special envoy, Xu Zhicai, the prince's grandmaster, Cui Luo, Zhang Xiao, the rider's attendant, and Yang Hui, the inspector of Chinese books, to be responsible for compiling the work.

古文：珽等奏追通直散骑侍郎韦道逊、陆乂、太子舍人王劭、□尉丞李孝基、殿中侍御史魏澹、中散大夫刘仲威、袁奭、国子博士朱才、奉车都尉眭道闲、考功郎中崔子枢、左外兵郎薛道衡、并省主客郎中卢思道、司空东合祭酒崔德、太学博士诸葛汉、奉朝请郑公超、殿中侍御史郑子信等入馆撰书，并□放、□、之推等同入撰例。
现代文：祖埏等又请求征召通直散骑侍郎韦道逊、陆义、太子舍人王劭、卫尉丞李孝基、殿中侍御史魏澹、中散大夫刘仲威、袁奭、国子博士朱才、奉车都尉眭道闲、考功郎中崔子枢、左外兵郎薛道衡、并州省主客郎中卢思道、司空束合祭酒崔德、太学博士诸葛漠、奉朝请郑公超、殿中侍御史郑子信等人入文林馆一起参加，并命令萧放、萧慇、颜之推也一同到文林馆加入编撰的行列。
English: Zu Xi and others also requested the enlistment of Tong Zhi Sanzhong's cavalrymen Wei Daosong, Lu Yi, the prince's concubine Wang Xi, the guard sergeant Li Xiaoji, the palace attendant Shi Wei Xi, the palace doctor Liu Zhongwei, Yuan Zhi, Dr. Guo Zi, the military commander Feng Chai, the military commander Gaozhong, Cui Zizhu, the foreign soldier Zuoying, Xue Doheng, and the provincial chief guest Lang Zhong Lu Si Dao, Cai Zhou, Cai Zhaozhong, Dr. Zhu Ge Mu, the imperial scholar Feng Chao invited Z

古文：复令散骑常侍封孝琰、前乐陵太守郑元礼、□尉少卿杜台卿、通直散骑常侍王训、前南兖州长史羊肃、通直散骑常侍马元熙、并省三公郎中刘□、开府行参军李师上、温君悠入馆，亦令撰书。
现代文：又命散骑常侍封孝琰、前乐陵太守郑元礼、卫尉少卿杜台卿、通直散骑常侍王训、前南兖州长史羊肃、通直散骑常侍马元熙、并州省三公郎中刘珉、开府行参军李师上、温君悠入馆也让他们编书。
English: He also ordered the sanshaku of the regular attendants, Fong Xiaojun, the former governor of Le Mausoleum, Zheng Yuanli, the guard lieutenant, Du Taiqing, the direct sanshaku of the regular attendants, Wang Xun, the former governor of Nanxi, Shi Yangsu, the direct sanshaku of the regular attendants, Ma Yuanxi, and the three provincial governors, Liu Xuan, Li Shijian and Wen Junyu, who participated in the march to Kaifu, to enter the museum and let them compile books.

古文：复命特进崔季舒、前仁州刺史刘逖、散骑常侍李孝贞、中书侍郎李德林续入待诏。
现代文：又命特进崔季舒、前仁州刺史刘逖、散骑常侍李孝贞、中书侍郎李德林接着进入文林馆作待诏。
English: Cui Jishu, former Renzhou magistrate Liu Wei, stallion attendant Li Xiaozhen, and chancellery attendant Li Delin were then ordered to enter the Wenlin Pavilion to wait for the imperial edict.

古文：寻又诏诸人各举所知，又有前济州长史李翥、前广武太守魏骞、前西兖州司马萧溉、前幽州长史陆仁惠、郑州司马江旰、前通直散骑侍郎辛德源、陆开明、通直郎封孝謇、太尉掾张德冲、并省右民郎高行恭、司徒户曹参军古道子、前司空功曹参军刘顗、获嘉令崔德儒、给事中李元楷、晋州治中阳师孝、太尉中兵参军刘儒行、司空祭酒阳辟疆、司空士曹参军卢公顺、司徒中兵参军周子深、开府参军王友伯、崔君洽、魏师謇并入馆待诏，又敕右仆射段孝言亦入焉。
现代文：不久又命各人举荐自己了解的文士，于是又有前济州长史李翥、前广武太守魏骞、前西兖州司马萧溉、前幽州长史陆仁惠、郑州司马江旰、前通直散骑侍郎辛德源、陆开明、通直郎封孝謇、太尉掾张德冲、并省右民郎高行恭、司徒户曹参军古道子、前司空功曹参军刘颢、获嘉县令崔德儒、给事中李元楷、晋州治中阳师孝、太尉中兵参军刘儒行、司空祭酒阳辟疆、司空士曹参军卢公顺、司徒中兵参军周子深、开府参军王友伯、崔君洽、魏师謇一同为文林馆待诏，又命右仆射昼耋直也进入塞并篮。
English: Soon, he ordered everyone to nominate the scribes they knew, so there were the former governor of Ji Province, Shi Li Rong, the former governor of Guangwu Province, Wei Rong, the former governor of West Gansu Province, Sima Xiao Rui, the former governor of Yu Province, Shi Lu Ren Hui, the governor of Zhengzhou Province, Sima Jiang Rong, the former cavalry officer, Xin De Yuan, Lu Kaiming, the former cavalry officer, Tong Naorong, the former cavalry officer, Tong Naorong, the former cavalry officer, Zhang De Chong, and the provincial right-wing people, Lang Gao Xing Gong, the

古文：御览成后，所撰录人亦有不时待诏，付所司处分者。
现代文：《御览》编成后，参加编写的人员也有不适合作待诏的，交给有关部门处理。
English: After the "Overview" was compiled, the personnel who participated in the preparation were also unsuitable to be issued, and they were handed over to the relevant departments for processing.

古文：凡此诸人，亦有文学肤浅，附会亲识，妄相推荐者十三四焉。
现代文：这些人中也有文学修养肤浅的，凭着亲戚朋友关系，胡乱推荐上来的占了十分之三四。
English: Therefore, three-fourths of the people who were placed by their superiors also have a shallow literary foundation, are dependent on relatives and friends, and randomly recommend each other for promotion.

古文：虽然，当时操笔之徒，搜求略尽。
现代文：即使这样，当时能够操笔写文章的人几乎全部搜求来了。
English: In spite of this, people who were engaged in literature at that time had almost nothing to search for.

古文：其外如广平宋孝王、信都刘善经辈三数人，论其才性，入馆诸贤亦十三四不逮之也。
现代文：其他如广平宋孝王、信都刘善经等几人，若论他们的才情，文林馆中也要有十之三四比不上他们。
English: Others, such as Guangping Song Xiao Wang, Xindu Liu Shan Jing and a few others, if their talents are considered, there should be three or four out of ten in the Wenlin Museum that are not as good as them.

古文：待诏文林，亦是一时盛事，故存录其姓名。
现代文：作文林馆待诏，也可以算是当时的一件盛事，所以就记下了他们的姓名。
English: The opening of the Shobunrinkan can also be considered a great event at that time, so their names were recorded.

古文：自邢子才以还，或身终魏朝，已入前史；或名位既重，自有列传；或附其家世；或名存后书。辄略而不载。
现代文：涩王丈以下这些人，有的在秀蝈就去世了，前史有了记载；有的名大位高，已经归入列传；有的附在家族之中；有的保留在后史，所以都省去不加记载。
English: Some of these people, including Shibuo Wanzho, died in the Showa era and were recorded in prehistory; some were famous and high-ranking, and have been included in the list; some were attached to the family; some were retained in later history, so they were all omitted without being recorded.

古文：今缀序祖鸿勋等列于文苑者焉。
现代文：如今把担迈勤等人按顺序编入《文苑传》。
English: Nowadays, Dang Maiqin and others are sequentially compiled into "Wen Yuan Biography."

古文：鸿勋弱冠与同郡卢文符并为州主簿。
现代文：其他还有值得记录的，附于本传的末尾。担游动，面塑昙人。
English: There are others worth recording, which are appended to the end of this story.

古文：仆射临淮王彧表荐鸿勋有文学，宜试以一官，敕除奉朝请。
现代文：父亲岖，在魏历任历塱、戏壁太守，都治理得很好。死时官任金紫光禄大夫，追赠中书监、幽州刺史，谧号惠侯。
English: His father, Rugo, was a well-governed ruler in the Wei Dynasty, serving as the governor of Lijiang and the governor of Jingbei. At the time of his death, the official was appointed as the doctor of Jin Zi Guanglu, and was posthumously given the titles of the middle librarian, the governor of Yuzhou, and the honorary title of Hui Hou.

古文：人谓之曰： 临淮举卿，便以得调，竟不相谢，恐非其宜。 鸿勋曰： 为国举才，临淮之务，祖鸿勋何事从而谢之。 彧闻而喜曰： 吾得其人矣。 及葛荣南逼，出为防河别将，守滑台。
现代文：迈勤二十岁时和同郡卢文符同任主簿。仆射临淮王直送上表推荐他有文才，应该通过考核授予适当的官职，下令为奉朝请。别人对他说： 临淮王推举了你，得以提升，而你却不感激他，恐怕是不应该的。 他说： 为国家举荐贤才，是他职责所在，我为什么要去感谢他呢。 高或听到后高兴地说： 我算是选中人才了。 葛荣南侵时，边动出任防河别将，驻守遣台。
English: When Ma Qin was 20 years old, he and Lu Wenfu of the same county were assigned to the same master book. His servant Lin Huai Wang sent him to the table to recommend that he had literary talent and should be awarded the appropriate official position through the assessment and ordered to serve the imperial court. Others said to him: Lin Huai Wang nominated you and was promoted, but you did not thank him, I am afraid it should not be. He said: It is his duty to recommend talents for the country, why should I thank him. Gao Guo said happily after hearing: I am a selected talent. When Ge Rong invaded the south, he was assigned to be the general of river defense and stationed

古文：永安初，元罗为东道大使，署封隆之、邢卲、李浑、李象、鸿勋并为子使。
现代文：永安初，元罗任东道大使，安排封隆之、邢邵、李浑、李象、鸿勋任子使。
English: At the beginning of Yongan, Yuan Luo served as the host ambassador, and arranged for Feng Longzhi, Zou Shao, Li Hun, Li Xiang, and Hong Xun to serve as envoys.

古文：除东济北太守，以父老疾为请，竟不之官。
现代文：任鸿勋束济北太守，以父亲年老多病为由，没有去上任。
English: Ren Hongxun, the first abbot of Jibei, did not take up the post on the grounds that his father was too old and ill.

古文：后城阳王徽奏鸿勋为司徒法曹参军事，赴洛，徽谓之曰： 吾闻临淮相举，竟不到门，今来何也？ 鸿勋曰： 今来赴职，非为谢恩。 转廷尉正。
现代文：后来城阳王高徽奏请他任司徒法曹参军事，到了洛阳，高徽对他说： 我听说临淮王举荐你，你却不到他府上表示感谢，如今为什么到我这儿来? 他回答说： 我今天是来赴职上任的，并非为了谢恩。 又改任廷尉正。
English: Later, the king of Chengyang, Gao Hui, asked him to serve as a military officer. When he arrived in Luoyang, Gao Hui said to him, "I heard that King Lin Huai recommended you, but you didn't go to his palace to express your gratitude. Why did you come to me now?" He replied, "I came here today to take up my post, not to express my gratitude. I've been promoted to court lieutenant."

古文：后去官归乡里。
现代文：说：后来辞官返回家乡。
English: "Later, the resigning officer returned to his hometown," he said.

古文：与阳休之书曰：阳生大弟：吾比以家贫亲老，时还故郡。
现代文：给阳休之写了一封信阳生老弟：我近来由于家中贫困父亲年迈，返回了故乡。
English: Yang Sheng wrote a letter to Yang Xiu: I have recently returned to my hometown because my father, who is poor, is getting old.

古文：在本县之西界，有雕山焉。其处闲远，水石清丽，高岩四匝，良田数顷，家先有野舍于斯，而遭乱荒废，今复经始。
现代文：在本县西部，有一座雕山，地处幽静，水清石丽，四周高山环绕，有良田数顷，原先还有一所房子，可是遭逢兵乱已经荒废，如今重新起造。
English: In the western part of this county, there is a carved mountain, located in a quiet place, with clear water and beautiful stone, surrounded by high mountains, with several hectares of good fields. Originally, there was a house, but it was destroyed by the war, and now it has been rebuilt.

古文：即石成基，凭林起栋。
现代文：利用山石作地基，依靠树林作栋梁。
English: Use the mountains and rocks as the foundation, rely on the woods as the girders.

古文：萝生映宇，泉流绕阶。月松风草，缘庭绮合；日华云实，傍沼星罗。
现代文：藤萝掩映了屋檐，清泉绕阶流淌，明月挂松风吹细草，在庭院中辉映；照山果，在溪边到处都是。
English: The wisteria hides the eaves, the clear spring flows around the steps, the bright moon hangs on the pine, the wind blows the grass, and it shines in the courtyard; the mountain fruit shines, and it is everywhere by the stream.

古文：檐下流烟，共霄气而舒卷；园中桃李，杂椿柏而葱蒨。
现代文：房檐下升起的炊烟，同雾气混合而乍舒乍卷；园中的桃树李树，舆椿树、柏树相问而郁郁葱葱。
English: The cooking smoke rising from under the eaves mixes with the fog and curls up; the peach trees, plum trees, camellia trees and cypress trees in the garden are intertwined and lush.

古文：时一褰裳涉涧，负杖登□，心悠悠以孤上，身飘飘而将逝，杳然不复自知在天地间矣。
现代文：撩着衣服趟过山涧，拄着拐杖登上山峰，心中感到悠然自得，身体飘飘欲仙，飘然出世的感觉忘了生活在天地之间。
English: Walking through the mountains with clothes on, climbing up the peaks with crutches, I felt at ease in my heart, my body was floating, and I forgot the feeling of being born into the world and living between heaven and earth.

古文：若此者久之，乃还所住。
现代文：在山上陶醉了很久才回到家中。
English: It took me a long time to come back home after being intoxicated in the mountains.

古文：孤坐危石，抚琴对水，独咏山阿，举酒望月，听风声以兴思，闻鹤唳以动怀。
现代文：独自坐在危石上。对着流水弹琴，面向山凹吟诵，举酒杯望月，听风声而文涌，听鹤鸣而动怀。
English: Sitting alone on a perilous rock. Playing the lute against the flowing water, chanting facing the mountain groove, holding a wine glass and looking at the moon, listening to the wind and listening to the cranes.

古文：企庄生之逍遥，慕尚子之清旷。
现代文：希望能如庄周一样逍遥，羡慕尚子那样的清静旷逸。
English: I hope I can be as happy as Zhuang Zhou, and envy the quiet seclusion of Shang Zi.

古文：首戴萌蒲，身衣缊袯，出艺粱稻，归奉慈亲，缓步当车，无事为贵，斯已适矣，岂必抚尘哉。
现代文：头戴蒲草帽，身穿麻布衣，种植稻米，侍奉双亲，徒步当车，无为无欲，已经习惯，又何必少年同游。
English: Wearing a straw hat, wearing a linen suit, planting rice, serving their parents, walking as a cart, doing nothing, not wanting anything, they are already used to it, and why do they have to travel together as teenagers.

古文：而吾生既系名声之缰□，就良工之剞劂。振佩紫台之上，鼓袖丹墀之下。
现代文：但我生来就套上了功名的枷锁，曾经向名师学习雕章琢句。列位朝堂之上，袖手殿廷之下。
English: But I was born with the shackles of fame on my shoulders, and I used to learn carving and chiseling from a famous teacher.

古文：采金匮之漏简，访玉山之遗文。
现代文：收集文献中的疏漏，访求散落的文章。
English: Collect omissions in the literature, visit scattered articles.

古文：敝精神于丘坟，尽心力于河汉。
现代文：在典籍中耗尽精力，在治理州县中消磨心智。
English: Exhaust energy in classics, and dissipate mind in the governance of prefectures.

古文：摛藻期之鞶绣，发议必在芬香。兹自美耳，吾无取焉。
现代文：期盼自己的文章绚丽华美，希望自己的见解赏心悦目。
English: They expect their articles to be brilliant and gorgeous, and hope that their opinions are pleasing to the eye.

古文：尝试论之。
现代文：其实逭不过是自我夸饰。
English: In fact, it is nothing but self-aggrandizement.

古文：夫昆□积玉，光泽者前毁；瑶山丛桂，芳茂者先折。
现代文：我是不会如此的。
English: I wouldn't do that.

古文：是以东都有挂冕之臣，南国见捐情之士。
现代文：我再作论述。昆仑山上的宾玉，有光泽的首先被毁掉；瑶山上丛生的桂树，花香的首先被采折。所以束都有挂冠的大臣，南方有捐弃的文士。
English: I will discuss it again. The shiny pentagram on Mount Kunlun was the first to be destroyed; the cinnamon trees on Mount Lushan were the first to be cut down. Therefore, there are crowned ministers in the bunch, and there are abandoned scribes in the south.

古文：斯岂恶粱锦，好蔬布哉，盖欲保其七尺，终其百年耳。
现代文：不是他们厌恶锦衣玉食，喜欢布衣蔬食，而是为了保全性命、终老百年罢了。
English: It's not that they detest rich food and prefer cloth, clothes and vegetables, it's just that they want to live for a hundred years in order to preserve their lives.

古文：今弟官位既达，声华已远，象由齿毙，膏用明煎，既览老氏谷神之谈，应体留侯止足之逸。
现代文：如今你的官位已经很高了，华年远逝，牙齿脱落，走向衰亡，油脂由于照明而熬尽，你已经通览了老子养生之道，就应该仿效张良激流勇退的做法。
English: Now that your official position is already high, the golden years are long gone, the teeth are falling out, the decline is approaching, the grease is exhausted due to lighting, and you have reviewed the way of Laozi's health, you should follow the example of Zhang Liang's torrent retreat.

古文：若能翻然清尚，解佩捐簪；则吾于兹山，庄可办一。
现代文：如果能够幡然悔悟，仰慕清雅，解除世俗的羁绊，那么我可以在此为你盖起一所居室。
English: If you can suddenly repent, admire elegance, and release the shackles of the world, then I can build a room for you here.

古文：得把臂入林，挂巾垂枝，携酒登巘，舒席平山，道素志，论旧款，访丹法，语玄书，斯亦乐矣，何必富贵乎？
现代文：咱们两人携手深入森林，把头巾挂在树枝上，带着酒登上高峰，在乎旷的山上铺开席子，说平素的志向，谈旧日的朋友，探究练丹的方法，讨论玄学的典籍，也算是一种乐趣，何必一定要谋求富贵呢?
English: It's fun for the two of us to go deep into the forest together, to hang our headscarves on the branches, to climb the peak with wine, to spread a mat on the vast mountain, to talk about plain aspirations, to talk about old friends, to explore the methods of practicing Dan, and to discuss the classics of metaphysics. Why do we have to seek wealth?

古文：去矣阳子，途乖趣别，缅寻此旨，杳若天汉。
现代文：阳子你该脱离尘俗了，尽快摆脱仕途，一旦失去机会，再回头已是远隔天汉而遥不可及。
English: Yoko, it's time for you to break away from the mundane. Get rid of your career path as soon as possible. Once you lose the opportunity, it's too late to turn back.

古文：已矣哉，书不尽意。
现代文：就写这些，信中难以尽述。
English: That's all I have to say, and it's hard to say it all in a letter.

古文：梁使将至，□鸿勋对客。
现代文：銮使将要来到齐，皇上命边动接待来使。
English: The envoys are about to arrive, and the Emperor is anxious to receive them.

古文：高祖曾征至并州，作晋祠记，好事者玩其文。
现代文：直坦曾经把他征召到差业，写《晋祠记》，当时人们欣赏这篇文章。
English: Naotan once conscripted him to write "History of the Jin Dynasty," which was well received at the time.

古文：位至高阳太守，在官清素，妻子不免寒馁，时议高之。
现代文：鸿勋官至高阳太守，居官清廉，妻儿免不了忍受饥寒，当时的人们因此而推崇他。
English: The people at that time admired Hong Xun, who was the highest-ranking official of the Yang di-Pertuan Agong, a clean official, and whose wife and children could not help but endure the cold and hunger.

古文：天保初卒官。
现代文：天保初，死于任上。
English: At the beginning of the Tenpo era, he died in office.

古文：李广，字弘基，范阳人也，其先自辽东徙焉。
现代文：李广，字弘基，范阳人，他的祖先从辽东迁到莲肠。
English: Li Guang, surnamed Hongji, Fan Yang people, his ancestors moved from Liaodong to Lianxi.

古文：广博涉□书，有才思文议之美，少与赵郡李謇齐名，为邢、魏之亚。
现代文：奎广博览群书，才思文论都很好，年轻时和赵郡李謇齐名，仅次于邢邵和魏收。
English: Kui Guang is well-versed in books, and his thoughts on literature are very good. When he was young, he was as famous as Zhao County's Li Yan, second only to Zou Shao and Wei Jie.

古文：而讷于言，敏于行。
现代文：为人拙于言辞，善于做事。
English: He is not good at words, but good at deeds.

古文：魏安丰王延明镇徐州，署广长流参军。
现代文：魏安丰王延明镇守徐州时，安排李广任长流参军。
English: When Wei Anfeng Wang of Yanming Town was guarding Xuzhou, he arranged for Li Guangren to join the army.

古文：释褐荡逆将军。
现代文：初为荡逆将军。
English: At first, he was a rebellious general.

古文：尒朱仲远牒为大将军记室，加谏议大夫。
现代文：氽朱仲远征召为大将军记室，加谏议大夫。
English: Zhai Zhuzhong was called up for the expedition as the general's secretary, and Gao was appointed as the doctor of deliberation.

古文：荆州行台辛纂上为行台郎中，寻为车骑府录事参军。
现代文：荆州行台辛纂提升他任行台郎中，不久任车骑府录事参军。
English: Jingzhou Xingtai Xinzhuang promoted him to Xingtai Rongzhong, and he soon joined the army as a cavalry officer.

古文：中尉崔暹精选御史，皆是世冑，广独以才学兼御史，修国史。
现代文：中尉崔逞精心选拔御史，都是世家子弟，仅有李广是以才学兼御史，编修国史。
English: Lieutenant Cui Gang carefully selected the historians, all of whom were sons of the family. Only Li Guang was able to learn and compile the history of the country.

古文：南台文奏，多其辞也。
现代文：御史台的奏章大多出白他的手笔。
English: Most of the orchestra's music is in his handwriting.

古文：平阳公淹辟为中尉，转侍御史。
现代文：平阳公高淹征召他任中尉，改任侍御史。
English: He was conscripted as a lieutenant by Emperor Gao of Pingyang and was appointed as an attendant to the Emperor.

古文：显祖初嗣霸业，命掌书记。
现代文：题祖继位之初，命李广掌管文书。
English: At the beginning of Emperor Taizu's succession, Li Guang was appointed to be in charge of documents.

古文：天保初，欲以为中书郎，遇其病笃而止。
现代文：天保初，想任命他为中书郎，正赶上他病重作罢。
English: At the beginning of the Tenpo era, he wanted to appoint him as Chushiro, but his serious illness caught up with him.

古文：广曾欲早朝，未明假寐，忽惊觉，谓其妻云： 吾向似睡，忽见一人出吾身中，语云： 因而惚怳不乐，数日便遇疾，积年不起，资产屡空，药石无继。
现代文：奎庐要去上早朝，天色未明坐着打瞌睡，忽然惊醒，对妻子说： 我似睡非睡时，忽然看见一人从我的身体中出来，告诉我说： 你过于耗费心力，精神上已经承受不了，现在向你告辞了。  
English: Qui-Gon was about to go out early in the morning. He was sitting and dozing in the dark, when he suddenly woke up. He said to his wife, "I seemed to be asleep, but suddenly I saw a person come out of my body and tell me, 'You've been working too hard, you can't take it anymore, and now I'm saying goodbye to you.'

古文：广雅有鉴识，度量弘远，坦平无私，为士流所爱，岁时共赡遗之，赖以自给。
现代文：因此精神恍惚闷合不乐，不几天就得了病，长年卧病在床，家财耗尽，无钱买药。李广有鉴别人的能力，度量大，胸怀坦荡，士人都喜欢他，一年到头对他常有馈赠，得以维持生活。
English: As a result, his spirit was in a trance, he was depressed and unhappy, and within a few days he fell ill, he was bedridden for many years, his family's finances were depleted, and he had no money to buy medicine. Li Guang had the ability to learn from others, he was generous, and his heart was open. The nobles all liked him, and they often gave him gifts throughout the year so that he could sustain his life.

古文：竟以疾终。
现代文：最后因病身亡。
English: He eventually died of his illness.

古文：曾荐毕义云于崔暹，广卒后，义云集其文笔十卷，托魏收为之□。
现代文：他生前曾向崔暹推荐毕义云，李广死后，义云整理了他的文集共十卷，委托魏收作叙。
English: Before his death, he had recommended Bi Yiyun to Cui Siam. After Li Guang's death, Yiyun compiled a total of ten volumes of his literary works and commissioned Wei to compile them.

古文：其族人子道亦有文章。
现代文：他的族人子道也有文采。
English: His people's way of life is also rich in literature.

古文：樊逊，字孝谦，河东北猗氏人也。
现代文：樊逊，字孝谦，河东北猗氏人。
English: He Xun, also known as Xiao Qian, was a member of the Xiong clan in northeastern Hebei Province.

古文：祖琰，父衡，并无官宦。
现代文：祖父樊琰，父樊衡，都没有作过官。
English: Neither his grandfather nor his father had ever been an official.

古文：而衡性至孝，丧父，负土成坟，植柏方数十亩，朝夕号慕。
现代文：而樊衡极其孝顺，父亲去世后，自己背土堆成坟丘，方圆几十亩都种上柏树，早晚在坟边号哭。
English: But Zou Heng was extremely filial. After his father's death, he piled up the dirt on his back into a grave mound, planted cypress trees in a radius of dozens of acres, and cried at the graveside in the morning and evening.

古文：逊少学，常为兄仲优饶。
现代文：樊逊自小读书，兄长樊仲对他常常照顾。
English: Hao Sun has been studying since he was a child, and his older brother Hao Zhong often takes care of him.

古文：既而自责曰： 名为人弟，独受安逸，可不愧于心乎？ 欲同勤事业。
现代文：他曾白责说： 我名义上是弟弟，却独自享受安逸，怎能不感到惭愧呢? 想和兄长一样忙于家业。
English: He once said: "How can I not feel ashamed of being a younger brother in name, but enjoying comfort alone? I want to be as busy with the family business as my elder brother.

古文：母冯氏谓之曰： 汝欲谨小行耶？ 逊感母言，遂专心典籍，恒书壁作 见贤思齐 四字，以自劝勉。
现代文：母亲冯氏说： 你想成为拘于小节的人吗? 他有感于母亲的话，专心致志地读书，常在墙上写 见贤思齐 四字，用来自勉。
English: His mother, Ms. Feng, said, "Do you want to be a person who sticks to the melody? " He was inspired by his mother's words and devoted himself to reading. He often wrote the four characters of "See, think and be wise" on the wall and used his own efforts.

古文：属本州岛沦陷，寓居邺中，为临漳小史。
现代文：本州沦陷，寄居在邺，作临漳小史。
English: After the fall of Honshu, he lived as a sojourner in Linyi and wrote a short history of Linyi.

古文：县令裴鉴莅官清苦，致白雀等瑞，逊上清德颂十首。
现代文：县令裴鉴居官清廉，勤于政事，所以出现了白雀等祥瑞，樊逊作了十首《清德颂》。
English: The county magistrate, Pei Jian, was a clean official and diligent in political affairs, so the White Sparrow and other auspicious signs appeared, and Sun Xun composed ten "Ode to Chingde."

古文：鉴大加赏重，擢为主簿，仍荐之于右仆射崔暹，与辽东李广、渤海封孝琰等为暹宾客。
现代文：裴鉴非常欣赏，提拔他作了主簿。又推荐给右仆射崔暹，和辽东李广、渤海封孝琰等人都成为崔暹的宾客。
English: He was highly appreciated by Pei Jian, who promoted him to be his chief secretary, and recommended him to his right-hand man, Choe Siem. Choe Siem's guests included Liaodong Li Guang and Bohai Feng Xiaojun.

古文：人有讥其靖默不能趣时者，逊常服东方朔之言，陆沉世俗，避世金马，何必深山蒿庐之下，遂借陆沉公子为主人，拟客难，制客诲以自广。后崔暹大会宾客，大司马、襄城王元旭时亦在坐，论欲命府僚。暹指逊曰： 此人学富才高，佳行参军也。 旭目之曰： 岂能就耶？ 逊曰： 家无荫第，不敢当此。 武定七年，世宗崩，暹徙于边裔，宾客咸散，逊遂往陈留而居之。
现代文：武定七年，世宗去世，崔暹调任边疆，宾客散去，樊逊迁到陈留居住。
English: In the seventh year of Wuding, Shizong died, Cui Siem was transferred to the frontier, the guests dispersed, and Xuansong moved to Chenluo.

古文：梁州刺史刘杀鬼以逊兼录事参军，仍举秀才。
现代文：銮州刺史刘杀鬼任用樊逊兼录事参军，举荐他作秀才。
English: Liu Zhidi, the governor of Zhangzhou, appointed Sun Xun to join the army and recommended him as a talented person.

古文：尚书案旧令，下州三载一举秀才，为五年已贡开封人郑祖献。
现代文：尚书依照过去的法令，下州每三年可以推荐一次秀才，而梁州在武定五年已推举了开封人郑祖献。
English: According to the previous decree, Shangshu can recommend a talented person every three years, while Liangzhou has nominated Zheng Zu, the person who opened the seal, in the fifth year of Wuding.

古文：计至此年未合。
现代文：截止到今年衹有两年，不合规定。
English: As of this year, there have been two cases of non-compliance.

古文：兼别驾王聪抗议，右丞阳斐不能□。
现代文：兼别驾王聪提出了抗议，右丞阳斐也不能推托。
English: Wang Cong also lodged a protest, and Yu Rong Yangfei could not be dissuaded.

古文：尚书令高隆之曰： 虽逊才学优异，待明年仕非远。 逊竟还本州岛。
现代文：尚书令高隆之说： 虽然樊逊才学优异，等明年再作官也还不晚。 
English: Shang Shuling Gao Longzhi said: Although Sun Xun is an excellent student, it is not too late to become an official next year.

古文：八年，转兼长史，从军南讨。
现代文：最后樊逊回到了本州。武定八年，改为兼长史，跟随军队南下作战。
English: Finally, Shoson returned to Honshu. In the eighth year of Wuding, he changed his name to Kanenagaishi and followed the army to fight in the south.

古文：军还，杀鬼移任颍川，又引逊兼颍州长史。
现代文：回来后，刘杀鬼改到颖川任刺史，又引荐他兼颖州长史。
English: After returning, Liu changed the ghost-killing to Yingchuan appointment stabbing history, and also introduced him and Ying governor history.

古文：天保元年，本州岛复召举秀才。
现代文：天保元年，本州又召他推荐秀才。
English: In the first year of the Tenpo era, Honshu also invited him to recommend talents.

古文：二年春，会朝堂对策罢，中书郎张子融奏入。
现代文：二年春，在朝廷应试策问完毕，由中书郎张子融上奏中选。
English: In the spring of the second year, after the Imperial Court had finished asking for suggestions, Chushiro Zhang Zi was chosen to play the role.

古文：至四年五月，逊与定州秀才李子宣等以对策三年不调，被付外，上书请从闻罢，诏不报。
现代文：到了四年五月，樊逊和定州秀才李子宣等人因为策问后三年没有调职，被调赴外地，几人上书请求停止，但朝廷没有批准。
English: In May of the same year, Jiaxun and the Dingzhou scholar Li Zixuan and others were transferred to other places because they had not been transferred three years after the interrogation. Several people petitioned to stop this, but the court did not approve.

古文：梁州重表举逊为秀才。
现代文：梁州重新上表推荐樊逊为秀才。
English: Liangzhou re-listed and recommended Sun Xun as a talented person.

古文：五年正月制诏问升中纪号，逊对曰： 臣闻巡岳之礼，勒在虞书，省方之义，着于易象。
现代文：天保五年正月下诏问在祭告上天时的名号，他上表回答说：臣听说天子巡狩邦国封禅之礼，记载在《虞书》裹，巡枧四方之义，保存在《易象》中。
English: In the second half of the first month of the 5th year of the Tenpo era, he was asked the name of the time when the festival was announced to the heavens, and he answered the above table: The vassal heard that the son of heaven went on a tour of the country to seal the gift of Zen, recorded in the "Gyushu," the meaning of the four-way cruise, preserved in the "Ishi."

古文：往帝前王，匪唯一姓，封金刊玉，亿有余人。
现代文：过去的帝王，不衹是一家一姓，封禅时用金字刻在玉板上，像这样的人很多。
English: In the past, emperors had only one family name, which was engraved in gold letters on a jade plate at the time of enthronement. There are many people like this.

古文：仲尼之观梁甫，不能尽识；夷吾之对齐桓，所存未几。
现代文：孔子不能尽识在梁甫山上封禅的人。管仲对齐桓公说古代封禅的七十二家，现在已所剩无几。
English: Confucius could not fully understand the people who fenced Zen on Mount Liangfu. Guanzhong told Qi Kuan Gong that the seventy-two families that fenced Zen in ancient times are now few.

古文：然盛德之事，必待太平，苟非其人，更贻灵谴。
现代文：这样的盛德大事，必须等天下太平后才能进行，如果封惮者不够资格，反而会遭到神灵的谴责。
English: Such a great moral event must wait until the world is at peace before it can be carried out. If the person who sealed it is not qualified, it will be condemned by the gods.

古文：秦皇无道，致雨风之灾；汉武奢淫，有奉车之害。
现代文：秦始皇无道，招来狂风暴雨之灾；汉武帝骄奢淫逸，陪同前去的奉车子侯暴病而死。
English: Qin Shihuang Emperor had no choice but to invite the disaster of raging storms and rain; Emperor Hanwu was arrogant, extravagant and lascivious, accompanied by Feng Chezihou, who died of violent illness.

古文：及文叔受命，炎精更辉，四海安流，天下辑睦，剑赐骑士，马驾鼓车，乃用张纯之文，始从伯阳之说。
现代文：光武帝刘秀上承天命，束汉王朝应火运而生，四海安宁，天下和睦，宝剑赐给将士，马匹拉着载鼓之车，于是颁行了张钟的文章，听从了蝇垦的建议进行封禅。
English: Guangwu Emperor Liu Xiu inherited the destiny of heaven, the Han Dynasty was born in response to the fire, the four seas were peaceful, the world was peaceful, the sword was given to the soldiers, the horses pulled the car carrying the drum, so he issued the article of Zhang Zhong, and heeded the suggestion of the flies to carry out the seal of Zen.

古文：至于魏、晋，虽各有君，量德而处，莫能拟议。
现代文：到了垫、晋，虽然各有君主，各人以恩德来衡量，都不敢有封禅的想法。
English: When it came to Mat and Jin, although each had its own monarch, and each was measured in terms of benevolence, they did not dare to have the idea of fusing Zen.

古文：蒋济上言于前，徒秽纸墨；袁准发论于后，终未施行。
现代文：首先是蒋济上书，白白玷污纸墨；后来袁准又提出建议，最终也不能实现。
English: First of all, it was Jiang Jie who submitted the letter, which tarnished the paper and ink in vain. Later, Yuan Jun also made suggestions, which ultimately could not be realized.

古文：世历三朝，年将十祀，启圣之期，兹为昌会。
现代文：如今经历了三朝，将近十祭，到了开启圣明的时期，可算是一次盛会。
English: Now it has gone through three dynasties, nearly ten festivals, and by the time of the opening of the Holy Light, it can be considered a grand event.

古文：然自水德不竞，函谷封涂，天马息歌，苞茅绝贡。
现代文：但帝王的品德不好，函谷关阻塞不通，天马不能进献给王朝，进贡的青茅供应断绝。
English: However, the emperor's moral character was not good, the Hangeul Pass was blocked, the Heavenly Horse could not be dedicated to the dynasty, and the supply of Qingmao for tribute was cut off.

古文：我太祖收宝□之瑞，握凤皇之书，体一德以匡朝，屈三分而事主，荡此妖寇，易如沃雪。
现代文：我朝太祖有宝鶸的祥瑞，手捧天子的韶书，以德行来匡正朝廷，委曲自己侍奉国君，荡除贼寇，好比用热水浇化白雪。
English: My great-great-grandfather had the auspiciousness of Baodi, holding the imperial edict of the Son of Heaven in his hand, rectifying the imperial court with virtue, appointing himself to serve the sovereign, and eliminating thieves and robbers. It was like pouring hot water on snow.

古文：但昌既受命，发乃行诛，虽太白出高，中国宜战，置之度外，望其迁善。
现代文：但文王姬旦已经承受了天命，到了武王姬发才杀掉了产挝。即使象征攻伐的太白星高悬，中原地区也很适宜作战，高祖却置之度外，希望百姓改过向善。
English: However, King Wen Hidan had already received the destiny of heaven, and it took King Wu Hifa to kill the Lao. Even if the white star symbolizing the attack was high, the Central Plains region was very suitable for combat, but Gaozu left it out, hoping that the people would change for the better.

古文：伏惟陛下以神武之姿，天然之略，马多冀北，将异山西，凉风至，白露下，北上太行，东临碣石，方欲吞巴蜀而扫崤函，苑长洲而池江汉。
现代文：陛下凭藉着神武的雄姿，天生的才略，战马比冀北还多，将领也不同于山西，秋风至，白露降的时节，北上太行，东临碣石，将吞并巴蜀而扫平崤函，把长洲当作园林，把长江、汉水当作护城河。
English: His Majesty, by virtue of the heroic stature of the divine martial arts and his innate talent, has more war horses than the north of Hebei, and his generals are also different from those in Shanxi Province. When the autumn wind arrives and the white dew falls, the north is too far away and the east is too close. He will annex Bashu and sweep Pingluhan, use Changzhou as a garden, and use the Yangtze River and the Han River as a moat.

古文：复恐迎风纵火，芝艾共焚，按此六军，未申九伐。
现代文：又恐怕迎风放火，把灵芝和艾草一起烧毁，所以就按兵不动，停止征伐。
English: I am afraid that they will set fire to the wind and burn the reishi and mugwort together, so I will not move and stop the expedition.

古文：夫周发牙璋，汉驰竹使，义在济民，非闻好战。
现代文：当初周代发遣将帅，汉朝派出军队，目的在于拯救百姓，并不是喜好战争。
English: Originally, the Zhou Dynasty dispatched generals, and the Han Dynasty dispatched troops. The purpose was to save the people, not to enjoy war.

古文：至如投鼠忌器之说，盖是常谈；文德怀远之言，岂识权道。
现代文：至于投鼠忌器的说法，都是老生常谈；教化远方归附的言论，怎能知道权变之道。
English: As for the saying of casting a rat-repellent device, it is all old-fashioned talk; how can we know the way of power change if we are indoctrinated by the speech of far away countries.

古文：今三台令子，六郡良家，蓄锐须时，裹粮待诏。
现代文：如今内外都有优秀的人才，养精蓄锐在等待良机，带好粮食随时听从召唤。
English: Nowadays, there are outstanding talents both at home and abroad. They are waiting for a good opportunity to keep their spirits up, and they are ready to follow the call with good food.

古文：未若龙驾虎服，先收陇右之民，电转雷惊，因取荆南之地。
现代文：所以皇上不如亲自率领将士，先收服陇右的百姓，再以迅雷不及掩耳之势，攻取荆南之地。
English: Therefore, it would be better for the emperor to personally lead the generals, first subdue the people on the right, and then seize the land of Jingnan with lightning speed.

古文：昔秦举长平，金精食昴，楚攻巨鹿，枉矢霄流，况我威灵，能无协赞。
现代文：当年秦军攻取长平时，太白星遮住了昴星，楚国攻打钜鹿时，晚上枉矢星从天空划过，何况我军有这样显赫的声威，能不马到成功。
English: When the Qin army conquered Changping, the white star covered the yellow star, and when the Chu attacked the elk, the yellow star streaked across the sky at night. What's more, our army has such a prominent prestige that it can't fail to succeed.

古文：但使彼之百姓一□六军，似见周王，若逢司□。
现代文：百姓见到正义之师，如同见到周王，如同遇见了救命的官员。
English: The people saw the righteous teacher as if they were seeing King Zhou, as if they were seeing the official who saved their lives.

古文：然后除其苛令，与其约法，振旅而还，止戈为武，标金南海，勒石东山，纪天地之奇功，被风声于千载。
现代文：然后再废除各种严酷的法令，和他们约法三章，整顿军队班师，停息战争，在南海设铜柱，在束山刻石，记载天地之人功，流传千载的名声。
English: Then he repealed all kinds of harsh laws and decrees, including the Three Chapters of the Law of the Three Kingdoms, reorganized the army, stopped the war, set up a bronze pillar in the South China Sea, carved stones in the Sokshan Mountains, recorded the human feats of heaven and earth, and spread the reputation for thousands of years.

古文：若令马儿不死，子阳尚在，便欲案明堂之图，草射牛之礼，比德论功，多惭往列，升中告禅，臣用有疑。
现代文：如果马儿没有死，子阳还健在的话，就按照朝廷的规划，起草封禅射牛的礼仪，评判功德，会使以往的帝王都感到羞愧，祭天封禅，臣下对此还有所疑问。
English: If Ma'er is not dead and Ziyang is still alive, then, according to the plan of the imperial court, the etiquette of Fuzhen shooting oxen will be drafted, and the merits will be judged. This will make the past emperors feel ashamed, and devote themselves to Fuzhen. The subjects still have some doubts about this.

古文：又问求才审官，逊对曰：臣闻雕兽画龙，徒有风云之势；金舟玉马，终无水陆之功，三驾礼贤，将收实用，一毛不拔，复何足取。
现代文：皇上又下韶间选拔贤才考察官吏之策，他回答说：我听说雕出的野兽画出的龙，徒然有兴风布云之势，黄金做成的船白玉制成的马，最终不能使用。往返多次去礼聘贤才，一定能得到实效，一毛不拔，毫无收益。
English: When the emperor inquired again about the strategy of selecting wise men to inspect officials, he replied: "I heard that the dragon drawn by the carved beast is likely to spread in vain, and the ship made of gold and the horse made of white jade can't be used in the end. Going back and forth many times to hire wise men will definitely get real results, not a dime, no profit.

古文：是以尧作虞宾，遂全箕山之操；周移商鼎，不纳孤竹之言。
现代文：因此尧将天下让给舜，保全了许由隐居箕山的节操；周取代了商，没有采纳伯夷、叔齐的建议。
English: Therefore, Zhou conceded the whole country to Zhou, and preserved Xu Yu's seclusion in Shaoshan; Zhou replaced the merchants, and did not adopt the suggestions of Bo Yi and Shu Qi.

古文：但处士盗名，虽云久矣；朝臣窃位，盖亦实多。
现代文：隐士靠避世来博取名声，这种现象已经历史很长了；大臣没有才学而窃取高位，也非常之多。
English: There is a long history of hermits gaining fame by hiding from the world, and there are also many ministers who steal high positions without learning.

古文：汉拜丞相，便有钟鼓之妖；魏用三公，乃致孙权之笑。
现代文：所以汉代任命丞相时，就产生钟鼓之妖；魏任用三公，招来孙权的讥笑。
English: Therefore, when the Han Dynasty appointed a chancellor, it gave rise to the demon of the bell and drum; when Wei appointed the three princes, it attracted the ridicule of Sun Quan.

古文：故山林之与朝廷，得容非毁；肥遁之与宾王，翻有优劣。
现代文：所以山林和朝廷，对有道之士并没有损伤；隐居和做官，反而会显出优劣。
English: Therefore, the mountains and forests and the imperial court did not harm the Taoists; seclusion and being an official, on the other hand, would show their strengths and weaknesses.

古文：至于时非蹈海，而曰羞作秦民；事异出关，而言耻从□乱。
现代文：现在并不是跳海自杀的时代，却像鲁仲连一样说羞于作秦国的百姓；现实也舆老子出关不同，却说耻于参加卫国的战乱。
English: Now is not the time to jump into the sea and commit suicide, but like Lu Zhonglian, they say they are ashamed to be the people of Qin; the reality is also different, but they say they are ashamed to participate in the war.

古文：虽复星干帝座，不易高尚之心；月犯少微，终存耿介之志。
现代文：即使注定能做皇帝，也不改变高尚的心灵；即使作丁士大夫，也始终有忠贞的志向。
English: Even if he is destined to be an emperor, he will not change his noble mind; even if he is a doctor, he will always have a loyal aspiration.

古文：自我太岳之后，克广洪业，禹至神宗，舜格文祖。
现代文：自从我朝祖先太岳以来，都能恢弘大业，禹向尧帝学习，舜效法文祖。
English: Since the time of my ancestor Taiyue, I have been able to do great things, learn from Emperor Yu, and follow the example of the founder of French literature.

古文：陛下受天之明命，光华日月，爰自纳麓，乃格文祖，仪天地以设官，象星辰而布职。
现代文：皇上承受天命，光辉照耀，自己总揽朝政后，仿效文祖，模仿天地设立官员，取法星辰议定职位。
English: The emperor received the mandate of heaven and shone with glory. After he took over the government, he followed the example of the founder of Confucianism, established officials in imitation of heaven and earth, and took the positions agreed upon by the stars.

古文：汉家神凤，惭用纪年；魏氏青龙，羞将改号。
现代文：漠代天子羞于使用自己的纪年，魏氏皇帝也将改变自己的年号。
English: The desert emperor is ashamed to use his own era, and the Wei emperor will also change his era.

古文：上膺列宿，咸是异人；下法山川，莫非奇士。
现代文：朝中的公卿大臣，或是天上的星宿，下到凡间，集中了山川的灵气，都是奇人异士。
English: The court nobles and ministers of the dynasty, or the stars in the sky, descend to the mundane world and concentrate the aura of the mountains and rivers. They are all strange people.

古文：所以画堂甲观，修德日新，庙鼎歌钟，王勋岁委。
现代文：所以皇上的品德，每天都有进步，宗庙朝廷一派笙歌，每年都要赏赐有功勋的人。
English: Therefore, the emperor's moral character is improving day by day. The imperial family and the imperial court send out poems every year to reward those who have meritorious deeds.

古文：循名责实，选□举能，朝无铜臭之公，世绝钱神之论。
现代文：考察他们的名实是否相符，在众人中选拔贤才，朝堂上没有充满铜臭气的公卿，世界上也就没有了《钱神》之《论》。
English: They examined whether their names corresponded to reality, and selected the wisest among them. There were no copper-smelling nobles in the imperial court, and there was no "On" of "God of Money" in the world.

古文：昔百里相秦，名存雀箓；萧、张辅沛，姓在河书。
现代文：当初百里奚任秦国宰相，名字保存在《雀录》裹；萧何、张良辅佐沛公，姓名出现在《河书》中。
English: At the beginning, Bai Lijuan was the prime minister of Qin, and his name was preserved in the "Bird Record"; Xiao He, Zhang Liangfu, and Sapei Gong, whose names appeared in the "River Book."

古文：今日公卿，抑亦天授，与之为治，何欲不从。
现代文：今天的王公卿相，也是上天授命给他们，和他们一起治理国家，他们都会依从。
English: Today's ministers of Wang Gongqing are also appointed by heaven, and they will govern the country together with them. They will all obey.

古文：未必稽首天师，方闻牧马之术；膝行山上，始得治身之道。
现代文：不一定向天师请教，才能知道牧马之术；跪着在山上行走，才能得到修身之道。
English: It is not necessary to seek advice from a heavenly teacher in order to know the art of wrangling a horse; walking on the mountain on one's knees is the only way to attain self-cultivation.

古文：但使帝德休明，自强不息，甲夜观书，支日通奏。
现代文：皇上明察美善，自强不息，晚上读书，白天处理政事。
English: The emperor was a keen observer of beauty and virtue, and he worked tirelessly to improve himself. He read books at night and dealt with political affairs during the day.

古文：周昌桀、纣之论，欣然开纳；刘毅桓、灵之比，终自含弘。
现代文：类似周文王认为桀纣无道的言论，也欣然采纳，刘毅以桓帝、灵帝作比，也能宽宏大量地接受。
English: Similar to Zhou Wenzhong's remarks that the emperor was a scoundrel, which were also readily accepted, Liu Yi's comparison of Emperor Huan and Emperor Ling could also be accepted in a magnanimous manner.

古文：高悬王爵，唯能是与，管库靡遗，渔盐毕录。无令桓谭非谶，官止于郡丞；赵壹负才，位终于计掾。
现代文：高官颢职，授给才能出众的人，仓库的东西没有丝毫浪费，渔盐之类都好好收藏，不要因为桓谭反对图谶，就使他出任郡丞而死；赵壹身负奇才，最终仅为计掾。
English: The post of high-ranking official is awarded to people with outstanding talents, the things in the warehouse are not wasted in the slightest, and things such as fish salt are well collected. Don't let Huan Tan be appointed as county magistrate and die because he opposes Tu Han; Zhao Yi is a genius, and ultimately just a schemer.

古文：则天下宅心，幽明知感，岁精仕汉，风伯朝周，真人去而复归，台星坼而还敛，诗称多士，易载□龙，从此而言，可以无愧。
现代文：那样就会天下归心，神人感动，岁精任职于漠，风神朝拜于周，品行端正的人离开又返回，百官散尽又重新聚集，《诗经》上说的多士，《周易》上记载的群贤，由此而来，皇上可以间心无愧。
English: In that way, the world will be reconciled, the gods and mortals will be moved, the god of the year will serve in the desert, the wind god will worship in Zhou, the people with good morals will leave and return, the officials will be dispersed and re-gathered, the many people mentioned in the "Song of Songs" and the sages recorded in the "Zhou Yi" will come from this, and the emperor can have a clear conscience.

古文：又问释道两教，逊对曰：臣闻天道性命，圣人所不言，盖以理绝涉求，难为称谓。
现代文：又问他关于佛教、道教，他回答说：我听说天道性命之说，圣人都不加谈论，大概是由于义理深妙，难以探求，很难称说。
English: He also asked him about Buddhism and Taoism, to which he replied, "I have heard that sages do not talk about the heavenly way of life, probably because it is profound, difficult to explore, and difficult to explain.

古文：伯阳道德之论，庄周逍遥之旨，遗言取意，犹有可寻。
现代文：伯阳关于道德的论述，庄周有关逍遥的说法，遗言取意，有理可寻。
English: Bo Yang's discourse on morality, Zhuang Zhou's statement on profligacy, and his last words are all reasonable.

古文：至若玉简金书，神经秘录，三尺九转之奇，绛雪玄霜之异，淮南成道，犬吠云中，子乔得仙，剑飞天上，皆是凭虚之说，海枣之谈，求之如系风，学之如捕影。
现代文：至于所谓的玉简金书、神经秘绿、驭剑炼丹的奇法、呼风唤雨的妙术，淮南王刘安得道，他的狗也随着升天，王子乔成仙，他的剑也飞上了天，都是凭空捏造，荒诞不经之说，刻意去学，就等于捕风捉影。
English: As for the so-called jade, jade, jade, jade, jade, jade, jade, jade, jade, jade, jade, jade, jade, jade, jade, jade, jade, jade, jade, jade, jade, jade, jade, jade, jade, jade, jade, jade, jade, jade, jade, jade, jade, jade, jade, jade, jade, jade, jade, jade, jade, jade, jade, jade, jade, jade, jade, j

古文：而燕君、齐后、秦皇、汉帝，信彼方士，冀遇其真，徐福去而不归，栾大往而无获。犹谓升遐倒影，抵掌可期；祭鬼求神，庶或不死。
现代文：而燕昭王、齐桓公、秦始皇、汉武帝，相信方士，希望遇到真正的仙人。徐福一去不返，乐大一无所获，但仍以为升天指日可待；祭鬼求神或许可以长生不死。
English: However, Yan Zhao Wang, Qi Huan Gong, Qin Shi Huang, and Emperor Han Wu believed in the magicians and hoped to meet a real immortal. Xu Fu did not return, and Le Da did not gain anything, but still thought that ascension to heaven was just around the corner; worshipping ghosts and praying to the gods could perhaps lead to immortality.

古文：江璧既返，还入骊山之墓；龙媒已至，终下茂陵之坟。
现代文：秦始皇沉入长江的玉璧又被送回来，但仍埋入骊山墓穴；汉武帝从大宛获得了良马，仍然进入茂陵墓地。
English: Emperor Qin Shi Huang's jade figurine, which sank into the Yangtze River, was sent back again, but it was still buried in the Lushan Tomb; Emperor Han Wu obtained a good horse from Dayuan and still entered the Muling Cemetery.

古文：方知刘向之信洪宝，没有余责；王充之非黄帝，比为不相。
现代文：方知刘向相信洪范五行，没有更多的责任；王充非难黄帝，本来是因为不相干。
English: Fang Zhi Liu Xiang believed in Hong Fan Wuxing, there is no more responsibility; Wang Cong accused Huangdi, originally because irrelevant.

古文：又末叶已来，大存佛教，写经西土，画像南宫。
现代文：自从束汉末叶以来，大兴佛教，到处抄写经文，悬挂佛像。
English: Since the end of the Han Dynasty, Buddhism has been vigorously promoted, scriptures have been copied everywhere, and Buddha statues have been hung.

古文：昆池地黑，以为劫烧之灰；春秋夜明，谓是降神之日。
现代文：昆明池土地呈现黑色，就说是大劫中焚烧剩下的灰烬；春秋的夜晚分外明亮，就说是神仙降临之日。
English: The land of Kunming Lake appears black, which is said to be the ashes left over from the Great Cataclysm; the nights of spring and autumn are exceptionally bright, which is said to be the day of the gods.

古文：法王自在，变化无穷，置世界于微尘，纳须弥于黍米。
现代文：佛性自在，变化无穷，把世界放在微小的尘埃中，把须弥山放在一粒黍米上。
English: Buddha nature is at ease, infinite change, put the world in a tiny dust, put Mount Sumeru on a grain of glutinous rice.

古文：盖理本虚无，示诸方便。
现代文：这种理论本来虚无飘缈，却用各种方法显示出来。
English: This kind of theory is nothing but fluttering, but it is shown by various methods.

古文：而妖妄之辈，苟求出家，药王燔躯，波论洒血，假未能然，犹当克命。
现代文：而一些奸邪之人，务求出家，宣扬药王焚化自身，波论以血洒地，假如不能做到这些，还能够维护生命。
English: On the other hand, some evil-doers, in order to enter the priesthood, preach that the medicine king should burn himself and sprinkle blood on the ground. If they can't do these things, they can still preserve life.

古文：宁有改形易貌，有异生人，恣意放情，还同俗物。
现代文：其实岂有改变形体容貌，和活人大不相同的，却恣肆放荡，与世俗之人没什么两样。
English: In fact, there is no change in the shape and appearance, which is very different from that of a living person, but it is wantonly debauchery, which is no different from that of a worldly person.

古文：龙宫余论，鹿野前言，此而得容，道风前坠。
现代文：佛在龙宫说法、在鹿野苑传道，从此被允许传扬，社会的风气因此而堕落。
English: From then on, the Buddha was allowed to preach in the Dragon Palace and preach in the Deer Park, and the social atmosphere fell as a result.

古文： 伏惟陛下受天明命，屈己济民，山鬼□灵，海神率职。
现代文：我认为皇上接受上天授命，委屈自己拯救天下百姓，山鬼显灵，海神相助。
English: I think that the emperor accepted the order from heaven, wronged himself to save the people of the world, the mountain demon appeared, and the sea god helped.

古文：湘中石燕，沐时雨而□飞；台上铜乌，愬和风而杓转。
现代文：湘中石燕，沐浴雨露而群飞；灵台上的铜乌，迎着和风而旋转。
English: The stone swallows of central Hunan, bathed in rain and dew, fly in flocks; the copper cormorants on the altar, face the wind and spin.

古文：以周都洛邑，治在镐京，汉宅咸阳，魂归丰、沛，汾、晋之地，王□维始，眷言巡幸，且劳经略。
现代文：周朝定都洛邑，治理得好的却是在镐京，汉代定都在咸阳，刘邦却是在丰、沛起兵，汾州、晋州是我朝的发祥地，皇上应不断巡视，而且派兵驻防。
English: The Zhou Dynasty established its capital in Luoyang, but the well-governed one was in Beijing. The Han Dynasty established its capital in Xianyang, but Liu Bang raised an army in Feng and Pei. Bozhou and Jinzhou are the cradles of the Ming Dynasty. The emperor should constantly inspect and station troops.

古文：犹复降情文苑，斟酌百家，想执玉于瑶池，念求珠于赤水。
现代文：除此还要留心文苑，比较诸子百家，盼望着能在瑶池中任职，能在赤水上得到明珠。
English: In addition, you should also pay attention to the literary world, compare hundreds of schools, and look forward to being able to serve in the pool and get a pearl in the red water.

古文：窃以王母献环，由感周德；上天锡佩，实报禹功。
现代文：我以为西王母送给周穆王玉环，是由于周有天子之德：上天赐给夏玉佩，是回报大禹治水的功绩。
English: I thought that the Jade Ring was given to Zhou Mu Wang by the Western Queen Mother because Zhou had the virtue of being the son of Heaven: Heaven gave it to Xia Yupei as a reward for Dayu's achievements in water control.

古文：二班勒史，两马制书，未见三世之辞，无闻一乘之旨。
现代文：班彪、班固父子编撰史书，二司马著述，从来没有出现遇有关过去、未来、现在三世的言辞，也没有听说遇教人成佛的一乘之法。
English: Ban Biao and Ban Gu, father and son, compiled a history book, written by the second Sima. There was never any talk about the past, the future, the present and the third generation, nor was there any mention of the method of teaching people to become Buddhists.

古文：帝乐王礼，尚有时而沿革；左道怪民，亦何疑于沙汰。
现代文：帝王的礼乐，尚且随时代而改革；旁门左道和奇怪之民，终究像沙砾一样被淘汰是毫无疑问的。
English: The emperor's music has been reformed with the times; there is no doubt that the side door and the strange people will eventually be eliminated like gravel.

古文：又问刑罚宽猛，逊对曰：臣闻惟王建国，刑以助礼，犹寒暑之赞阴阳，山川之通天地。
现代文：皇上又向他询问刑罚宽严，他回答说：我听说帝王建立国家，刑罚是用来协助礼节的，如同寒季、暑季协助阴阳，高山大沟通天地一样。
English: The emperor also asked him about the leniency of the punishment. He replied, "I heard that the emperor established the country, and the punishment is used to assist the etiquette, just as the cold season and the summer season assist the yin and yang, and the mountain communicates with heaven and earth.

古文：爰自末叶，法令稍滋，秦篆无以穷书，楚竹不能尽载。
现代文：自王朝末期以来，法令越来越多，费尽秦篆不能完全记录，楚简不能完全记载。
English: Since the end of the dynasty, there have been more and more decrees, and the efforts of Qin Hui cannot be fully recorded, and those of Chu Jane cannot be fully recorded.

古文：有司因此，开以二门，高下在心，寒热随意。
现代文：因此有关部门都有二种方法，刑罚的宽严全凭自己随意处理。
English: Therefore, the relevant departments have two methods, and the severity of the punishment is entirely at their own discretion.

古文：周官三典，弃之若吹毛；汉律九章，违之如覆手。
现代文：丢弃《周官》三典，可以不用；汉朝九章，可以违反。
English: If you discard the three chapters of "Zhou Guan," you may not use them; if you discard the nine chapters of "Han Dynasty," you may violate them.

古文：遂使长平狱气，得酒而后消；东海孝妇，因灾而方雪。
现代文：造就使得长平几十万人的怨气，在饮酒之后消除；束海孝妇的冤屈，要通过天灾才能昭雪。
English: The resentment of hundreds of thousands of people in Changping was eliminated after drinking alcohol; the grievances of the Sokha women could only be cleared up through natural disasters.

古文：诏书挂壁，有善而莫遵；奸吏到门，无求而不可。
现代文：韶书高悬在墙上，即使有好事也不遵行；奸猾之吏来到门前，无论要求做什么都必须做到。
English: For the writing is on the wall, so that no good deed goes unpunished; and when wicked men come to the door, no matter what they ask, it must be done.

古文：皆由上失其道，民不见德。
现代文：逭都是由于皇帝不按道义行事，百姓未蒙圣德。
English: It was all due to the fact that the emperor did not act according to morality, and the people were not sanctified.

古文：而议者守迷，不寻其本。
现代文：大臣执迷不悟，不能发现根本所在。
English: The minister is obsessed and can't find the root of the problem.

古文：钟繇、王朗追怨张苍，祖讷、梅陶共尤文帝。
现代文：钟繇、王朗埋怨张苍，祖讷、梅陶指责文帝。
English: Zhong Rong and Wang Lang complained about Zhang Cang, while Zune and Meitao accused Emperor Wen.

古文：便谓化尸起偃，在复肉刑；致治兴邦，无关周礼。
现代文：主张要拯济苍生，在于恢复肉刑；振兴国家，和周礼无关。
English: Advocating to save lives is to restore corporal punishment; revitalizing the country has nothing to do with Zhou Li.

古文：伏惟陛下昧旦坐朝，留心政术，明罚以纠诸侯，申恩以孩百姓。
现代文：皇上上朝的时候，要留心政务，严明刑罚来纠察诸侯，申明恩德来抚育百姓。
English: When the emperor ascended to the throne, he should pay attention to government affairs, severely punish and picket the lords, and affirm and nurture the people.

古文：黄旗紫盖，已绝东南；白马素车，将降轵道。
现代文：黄旗紫盖式的云气，已经不再在东南出现；表示凶丧的白马素车，就要出现在软道。
English: The yellow-flagged, purple-covered clouds no longer appear in the southeast; the white horse-drawn carriage, which signifies death, is about to appear on the soft road.

古文：若复峻典深文，臣实未悟。
现代文：如果再严刑峻法，我实在不能同意，为什么呢?
English: If the punishment is more severe, I really can't agree with it. Why?

古文：何则？人肖天地，俱□阴阳，安则愿存，扰则图死。
现代文：人就像天地一样，受阴阳之气，安宁的时候希望存活，祸乱的时候就祇有一死。
English: People are like heaven and earth, subject to the influence of yin and yang. In times of peace, they hope to survive, but in times of disaster, there is only death.

古文：故王者之治，务先礼乐，如有未从，刑书乃用，宽猛兼设，水火俱陈，未有专任商、韩而能长久。
现代文：所以帝王治理天下，一定先用礼乐教化百姓，再有不顺从的，才用刑罚，宽严并施，急缓并用，从来没有用商鞅、韩非之法而国家可以长久的。
English: Therefore, for the emperor to govern the world, he must first use ritual music to educate the people, and if there are any non-compliant people, he must use punishment, both lenient and severe, and quick and slow. The country can be long-lasting without using the law of negotiation and diplomacy.

古文：昔秦归士会，晋盗来奔；舜举□陶，不仁自远。
现代文：当初秦国让士会回到晋国，结果晋国大治，大盗都来到了秦国；舜举荐了皋陶，心怀不仁的人都自动离开。
English: At the beginning, the Qin government allowed the Confucianists to return to Jin, but as a result of the Great Purge in Jin, the great thieves all came to Qin; Zou recommended Zou Tao, and those who were not kindhearted left of their own accord.

古文：但令释之、定国迭作理官，龚遂、文翁继为郡守，科闲律令，一此宪章，欣闻汲黯之言，泣断昭平之罪。
现代文：祇要使释之、定国任主管刑狱的官员，龚遂、文翁继续任太守，审核取舍法令，完全仿照他们以前的作法，高兴地采纳逛壁的进谏，哭泣着判定晅垩的罪行。
English: The only thing left to do was to appoint Ding Guo as the official in charge of the prison, and then Wen Weng continued to serve as the governor, reviewing the transfer decree, completely following their previous practice, happily accepting the wall-walking criminal, crying and judging the criminal's crime.

古文：则天下自治，大道公行，乳兽含牙，苍鹰垂翅，楚王钱府，不复须封，汉狱□囚，自然蒙理。
现代文：那样一来，天下就可以治理，大道得以施行，幼兽能长出牙齿，苍鹰垂下翅膀，楚王的钱库，不再需要封存，汉家监狱中含冤的囚犯，自然得到昭雪。
English: In that way, the world can be governed, roads can be enforced, young animals can grow teeth, goshawks can hang down their wings, King Chu's treasury no longer needs to be sealed, and prisoners with grievances in the Han prison will naturally get justice.

古文：后服之徒，既承风而慕化；有截之内，皆蹈德而咏仁。
现代文：归服的人，随之受到教化；九州之内，都歌德而颂仁。
English: Those who submit are then educated; in Kyushu, everyone is a goth and worships the benevolent.

古文：号以成、康，何难之有？
现代文：即使想达到成、康盛世，又有什么难呢?
English: Even if you want to achieve success and prosperity, what is so difficult?

古文：又问祸福报应，逊对曰：臣闻五方易辨，尚待指南；百世可知，犹须吹律。
现代文：又问他关于祸福报应，他说：我听说五方虽然容易辨别，仍然需要指南针指明方位；百代家族的历史可以知晓，仍然需要吹动律管确定姓氏。
English: I heard that although the five directions are easy to distinguish, it is still necessary to use a compass to indicate the direction; the history of hundreds of families can be known, and it is still necessary to blow the pipe to determine the surname.

古文：□复天道秘远，神□难源，不有通灵，孰能尽悟。
现代文：更何况天道神秘玄远，神仙的踪迹难以推究本源，如果没有灵异的才能，谁又能完全领悟。
English: Moreover, the heavenly way is mysterious and profound, and it is difficult to trace the origin of the gods. If there is no supernatural talent, who can fully understand.

古文：乘查至于河汉，唯□牵牛；假寐游于上玄，止逢翟犬。
现代文：有人乘坐着木筏来到天河，仅见到了牵牛星；赵筒子睡梦中到上玄宫游玩，仅碰上了翟地的一条狗。
English: Some people came to the Tianhe River on a raft and only saw the Morning Glory; Zhao Zuzi visited the Shangyuan Palace in his sleep and only met a dog in the meadow.

古文：造化之理，既寂寞而无传；报应之来，固难得而妄说。
现代文：大自然的造化，已经寂寂无闻；报应的来临，本来就难以见到而胡传。
English: Nature's creation has been silent; the coming of retribution has been difficult to see and misrepresented.

古文：但秦穆有道，勾芒锡年，虢公□德，蓐收降祸。
现代文：秦穆公政治清明，勾芒神赐给他十九年的寿命；虢公没有德行，蓐收降给他灾祸。
English: Qin Mu Gong's politics were clear, and God gave him a life span of nineteen years; Yan Gong had no virtue, and Yan Yan succumbed to his misfortune.

古文：高明在上，定自有知，不可谓神冥昧难信。
现代文：上天的神明非常清楚，对事都能掌握；不能认为神明幽远难知而不相信。
English: The gods of heaven are very clear and can grasp things; you can't think that the gods are far away and difficult to know without believing.

古文：若夫仲尼厄于陈、蔡，孟轲困于齐、梁，自是不遇其时，宁关性命之理。
现代文：像孔子被困在陈、蔡，孟轲被困在齐、梁，是因为他们生不逢时，岂能认为与性命之说有关。
English: Like Confucius was trapped in Chen and Cai, and Meng Xi was trapped in Qi and Liang, because they were born at the wrong time, how can they think that it is related to the theory of life?

古文：子胥无君，马迁附下，受诛取辱，何可尤人。
现代文：伍子胥领吴军攻打楚国，将楚王鞭尸报仇，目无国君，司马迁为叛将李陵开脱，二人一被杀一受宫刑的耻辱，怎么能怨天尤人。
English: Wu Zi led the Wu Army to attack the State of Chu, avenged the whipping of the body of the King of Chu, there was no prince, Sima was transferred as a traitor to liberate Li Ling, two people were killed and one was subjected to the disgrace of palace punishment, how can people complain about heaven.

古文：至如协律见亲，棹船得幸，从此而言，更不足怪。
现代文：至于因擅长音乐而亲近皇上，会驾船而受到宠幸，诸如此类，更不足为怪。
English: As for being close to the emperor because of being good at music, being favored with driving a boat, and the like, it is even less surprising.

古文：周王漂杵，致天之罚；白起诛降，行己之意。
现代文：周武王伐商的时候杀戮太多，鲜血可以浮起舂米的石杵，才引来上天的惩罚；白起在长平坑杀了趟军四十万降军，完全是出于自己的意愿。
English: When Zhou Wu Wang was a lumberjack, he killed so many people that his blood could lift a stone pile of glutinous rice. Only then did he attract the punishment of heaven. It was not by chance that he killed an army of 400,000 soldiers in Changping pit, it was entirely out of his own will.

古文：是以七百之祚，仍加姬氏；杜邮之戮，还属武安。
现代文：所以周可以有七百年的国运，而武安君白起却在杜邮被秦逼迫自杀。
English: Therefore, Zhou can have seven hundred years of national prosperity, while Wu Anjun was forced to commit suicide by Qin in Du Po.

古文：昔汉问上计，不过日蚀；晋策秀才，止于寒火。
现代文：当初漠向大臣询问好的计策，范围不超过关于日食的问题；晋代考核秀才，也衹限于实际不存在的寒火。
English: At the beginning, the scope of asking the minister about good strategies did not exceed the issue of solar eclipses; the examination of talents in the Jin Dynasty was also limited to cold fires that did not actually exist.

古文：前贤往士，咸用为难。
现代文：过去的贤士，对此感到为难。
English: The sages of the past would have been puzzled.

古文：推古比今，臣见其易。
现代文：推古及今，我认为皇上的问题很容易找到答案。
English: From ancient times to the present, I think it is easy to find the answer to the emperor's question.

古文：然草莱百姓，过荷恩私，三折寒胶，再游金马，王言昭贲，思若有神，占对失图，伏深悚惧。 
现代文：但我为草野百姓，过分地享受了皇上的恩宠，策问后经过三年的磨砺，两次在金星盟待韶，皇上向我咨询大事，我竟然有若神助，如果回答问题不合皇上的意囤，感到非常惶恐。
English: But for the people of Kusano, I have enjoyed the grace of the emperor excessively. After three years of refinement after asking questions, twice in the Venus League, the emperor consulted me about major events. I actually have a divine help. If the answer to the question does not meet the emperor's intention, I am very frightened.

古文：尚书擢第，以逊为当时第一。
现代文：这一年科举考试，尚书推荐樊逊为第一。
English: In this year's national college entrance examination, Shangshu recommended Jiaxiong as the first.

古文：十二月，清河王岳为大行台率□南讨，以逊从军。
现代文：天保五年十二月，清河王高岳任大行台率领军队南征，带樊逊从军。
English: In December of the 5th year of the Tenpo era, King Gao Yue of the Qing Dynasty led the army southward, and he brought Xun Xun with him.

古文：明年，显祖纳贞阳侯为梁主，岳假逊大行台郎中，使于南，与萧修、侯瑱和解。
现代文：第二年，显祖承认贞阳侯是梁天子，高岳任命樊逊代理大行台郎中，出使南朝，与萧脩、侯琐和解。
English: In the second year, Emperor Xianzu acknowledged that Prince Zhengyang was the son of Liang Tianzi, and Gao Yue appointed Gongsun as the acting vice-regent of the Southern Dynasties, and sent him to the Southern Dynasties to reconcile with Xiao Yu and Prince Zuo.

古文：逊往来五日，得修等报书，岳因与修盟于江上。
现代文：他来回用了五天的时间，收到了萧脩等人的回书，于是高岳在长江边上和萧脩订立盟约。
English: It took him five days to go back and forth, and he received a reply from Xiao Yao and others, so Gao Yue made a covenant with Xiao Yao on the edge of the Yangtze River.

古文：大军还邺，逊仍被都官尚书崔昂举荐。
现代文：大军回到邺，樊逊被都官尚书崔昂举荐。
English: The large army returned to Handan, and Handan was recommended by the capital official, Shangshu Cuiang.

古文：诏付尚书，考为清平勤干，送吏部。
现代文：皇上下令交付尚书，经过考察发现他清廉能干，送到吏部。
English: The emperor ordered the delivery of Shang Shu. After an inspection, it was found that he was clean and capable, and he was sent to the personnel department.

古文：七年，诏令校定□书，供皇太子。
现代文：七年，皇上下令让他校定群书，侍奉皇太子。
English: Seven years later, the emperor ordered him to proofread a group of books and serve the crown prince.

古文：逊与冀州秀才高干和、瀛州秀才马敬德、许散愁、韩同宝、洛州秀才傅怀德、怀州秀才古道子、广平郡孝廉李汉子、渤海郡孝廉鲍长暄、阳平郡孝廉景孙、前梁州府主簿王九元、前开府水曹参军周子深等十一人同被尚书召共刊定。
现代文：樊逊和冀州秀才高干和、瀛州秀才马敬德、许散愁、韩同实、洛州秀才傅怀德、怀州秀才古道子、广平郡孝廉李汉子、渤海郡孝廉鲍长喧、阳平郡孝廉景孙、前梁州府主簿王九元、前开府水曹参军周子深等十一人受尚书调遣一同参加校定。
English: Eleven people were dispatched by Shang Shu to participate in the grading, including Gao Ganhe from Jizhou, Ma Jingde, Xu Sanxu, Han Tongsheng from Zhangzhou, Fu Huide from Lozhou, Guo Han Zi from Huizhou, Li Han Zi from Guangping County, Bao Chang Dun from Bohai County, Jing Sun from Yangping County, Wang Jiuyuan from Liangzhou, and Zhou Zishen from Kaifu.

古文：时秘府书籍纰缪者多，逊乃议曰： 按汉中垒校尉刘向受诏校书，每一书竟，表上，辄言：臣向书、长水校尉臣参书，太史公、太常博士书、中外书合若干本以相比校，然后杀青。
现代文：当时秘府中的书籍错讹的很多，樊逊建议说： 汉中垒校尉刘向奉命校定典籍，每一本书校完，就上表章，表章上注明：臣刘向书、长水校尉臣参书，太史公、太常博士书、把内府藏书和外面的版本相互校对，然后定稿。
English: At that time, there were a lot of mistakes in the books in the secret government, and Su Xun suggested: Han Zhongye Lieutenant Liu Xiang was ordered to proofread the classic books. After each book was proofread, it was stamped with a seal, and the seal was marked with: Minister Liu Xiangshu, Changshui Lieutenant Chen Sangshu, Taishi Gong, Taichang Doctor's Book, and the books in the inner government collection were proofread against the outside versions, and then finalized.

古文：今所雠校，供拟极重，出自兰台，御诸甲馆。
现代文：现在校定的书籍，提供的版本有很多重复，有藏在兰台的，有藏在甲馆的。
English: There are a lot of duplicates in the versions of the books that are currently proofread, some of which are hidden in the reading room, and some of which are hidden in Hall A.

古文：向之故事，见存府合，即欲刊定，必藉□本。
现代文：按照刘向的惯例，府阁中的典籍，既然要刊定，就必须搜集其他版本。
English: According to Liu Xiang's practice, since the classics in the cabinet must be published, it is necessary to collect other versions.

古文：太常卿邢子才、太子少傅魏收、吏部尚书辛术、司农少卿穆子容、前黄门郎司马子瑞、故国子祭酒李业兴并是多书之家，请牒借本参校得失。 秘书监尉瑾移尚书都坐，凡得别本三千余卷，五经诸史，殆无遗阙。
现代文：太常卿邢子才、太子少傅魏收、吏部尚书辛术、司农少卿穆子容、前黄门郎司马子瑞、原国子祭酒李业兴都是收藏极多的藏书家，请下令借来各种版本以参校正误。 秘书监尉瑾调任尚书都坐，共得到其他版本书三千多卷，《五经》和各种史书，几乎都没有缺漏。
English: Taizhongqing Shanzicai, Taizi Shoshu Fu Wei Hui, Li Bu Shang Shuxin Shu, Sino Shaoqing Mu Zirong, Former Huangmen Lang Sima Zirui, Former Guo Zi Sacrificial Wine Li Ye Xing are all book collectors with a large collection, please order to borrow various versions to participate in the correction.

古文：八年，诏尚书开东西二省官选，所司策问，逊为当时第一。
现代文：八年，下令尚书为东西二省选拔官员，主管人员考对策，樊逊是当时第一。
English: Eight years ago, Shangshu was ordered to be the selection official for the two provinces in the east and west, and the supervisors examined the countermeasures. Xunxun was the first at that time.

古文：左仆射杨愔辟逊为其府佐。
现代文：左仆射杨情征召他作府佐。
English: His left-hand man, Sho Yang, conscripted him as a prefectural aide.

古文：逊辞曰： 门族寒陋，访第必不成，乞补员外司马督。 愔曰： 才高不依常例。 特奏用之。
现代文：他推辞说： 我出身贫寒，考察门第出身必然不行，请求补授员外司马督。 杨情说： 如果才能出众，选拔时就不能完全按常规处理。 
English: He declined, saying, "I come from a poor family, so it's not possible to investigate my family background, so I'd like to ask the substitute teacher, Ma Du." Yang Rong said, "If your talent is outstanding, you can't be selected according to the usual procedure."

古文：九年，有诏超除员外将军。
现代文：特意启奏皇上对他加以起用。九年，下令任员外将军。
English: He was specially appointed by the emperor. Nine years later, he was ordered to be appointed as a foreign general.

古文：后世祖镇邺，召入司徒府管书记。
现代文：后来世祖镇守邺，把他召入司徒府掌管来往文书。
English: Later, Shizuchenzhen Shoujun called him into Shitufu to take charge of the correspondence.

古文：及登祚，转授主书，迁员外散骑侍郎。
现代文：世祖登基后，改任主书，升任员外散骑侍郎。
English: After the Emperor ascended to the throne, he was appointed as the chief scribe, and was promoted to the position of a non-commissioned officer.

古文：天统初，病卒。
现代文：天统初，病逝。
English: At the beginning of the Heian period, he died of illness.

古文：刘逖，字子长，彭城丛亭里人也。
现代文：刘逖，字子长，彭城丛亭里人。
English: Liu Xuan, the eldest son, was a villager in the Pengcheng cluster.

古文：祖芳，魏太常卿。
现代文：祖父刘芳，任魏太常卿。
English: Liu Fang's grandfather was Wei Tai Changqing.

古文：父戫，金紫光禄大夫。
现代文：父亲刘馘，任金紫光禄大夫。
English: His father, Liu Wei, was the doctor of Jin Zi Guanglu.

古文：逖少而聪敏，好弋猎骑射，以行乐为事，爱交游，善戏谑。
现代文：刘逖小时候很聪明，喜欢骑马打猎，一心在于行乐，喜爱和人交往，爱和别人开玩笑。
English: When Liu Ye was a child, he was very clever. He liked to ride horses and go hunting. His heart was in having fun. He loved to socialize and joke with others.

古文：郡辟功曹，州命主簿。
现代文：郡中征召他任功曹，州裹任命为主簿。
English: The county called him to serve as a meritorious officer, and the state appointed him as the chief accountant.

古文：魏末征诣霸府，世宗以为永安公浚开府行参军。
现代文：魏末来到世宗府中，世塞任命他为永安公壶逡的开府行参军。
English: At the end of the Wei Dynasty, he came to the Sejong Palace, and the Sejong Emperor appointed him to join the army in the march to the palace led by Yongan Gong Jue.

古文：逖远离乡家，倦于羁旅，发愤自励，专精读书。
现代文：型遥远离家乡，对旅居生活很厌倦，就发愤用功，专心致志地读书。
English: Far away from home, tired of the traveling life, he worked hard and devoted himself to studying.

古文：晋阳都会之所，霸朝人士攸集，咸务于宴集。
现代文：晋阳是当时的大都会，朝中人士会集，人们往来饮宴集会。
English: Jinyang is a metropolis, people from all walks of life gather there, and they all like to eat and drink.

古文：逖在游宴之中，卷不离手，值有文籍所未见者，则终日讽诵，或通夜不归，其好学如此。
现代文：刘逖即使在游玩宴饮时，也手不释卷，如果遇到没有见过的典籍，就整天诵读，甚至整夜不回家，他就是如此好学。
English: Even when he is out at a banquet, Liu Ye never lets go of a book. If he comes across a classic book that he hasn't seen before, he will read it all day and even stay up all night. He is just so eager to learn.

古文：亦留心文藻，颇工诗咏。
现代文：他对文章词藻也很留意，擅长写诗。
English: He also pays attention to the words in his articles and is good at writing poetry.

古文：天保初，行定陶县令，坐奸事免，十余年不得调。
现代文：天保初，代理室胞县令，由于奸事被免官，十几年不能调任。
English: At the beginning of the Tenpo era, the acting county magistrate was removed from office due to treachery, and could not be transferred for more than ten years.

古文：干明年，兼员外散骑常侍，使于梁主萧庄，还，兼三公郎中。
现代文：莲塱年，兼任员外散骑常侍，在梁主萧庄在位时出使南梁，回来后，兼任三公郎中。
English: In the year of the lotus, he also served as a non-commissioned officer riding horseback, and was sent to Nanliang during the reign of Xiaozhuang, the lord of Liang. After his return, he also served as one of the three princes.

古文：皇建元年，除太子洗马。
现代文：皇建元年，任太子洗马。
English: In the first year of the Emperor's reign, he was appointed as the prince to wash horses.

古文：肃宗崩，从世祖赴晋阳，除散骑侍郎，兼仪曹郎中。
现代文：肃宗去世后，随从世祖来到晋坠，任散骑侍郎，兼仪曹郎中。
English: After the death of Su Zong, he followed his ancestor to Jinkan and served as a horseman and a member of the imperial court.

古文：久之，兼中书侍郎。
现代文：很长时间以后，兼中书侍郎。
English: After a long time, he also became a junior high school secretary.

古文：和士开宠要，逖附之，正授中书侍郎，入典机密。
现代文：和士开受宠身居要职时，刘逖依附他，任中书侍郎，参与国事。
English: When He Shikai was favored to hold an important position, Liu Ye followed him, serving as his secretary and taking part in state affairs.

古文：兼散骑常侍，聘陈使主，还，除通直散骑常侍。
现代文：兼散骑常侍。为访陆使主，回国后，任通直散骑常侍。
English: He was appointed as a regular attendant of horseback riding. After returning to Japan, he was appointed as a regular attendant of horseback riding.

古文：寻迁给事黄门侍郎，修国史，加散骑常侍。
现代文：不久升任给事黄门侍郎，撰修国史，加散骑常侍。
English: He was soon promoted to attendant of the Yellow Gate, wrote a history of the country, and became a samurai.

古文：又除假仪同三司，聘周使副。
现代文：又为假仪同三司，出使北周时任副使。
English: He was also the deputy envoy of the Northern Zhou Dynasty to the Three Departments of the Qing Dynasty.

古文：二国始通，礼仪未定，逖与周朝议论往复，斟酌古今，事多合礼，兼文辞可观，甚得名誉。
现代文：两国刚刚通好时，礼仪没有确定，他和周朝来回交涉，参考古今，都很合乎礼节，而且文辞也很好，取得了好名声。
English: When the two countries had just established diplomatic relations, the etiquette was not established. He and Zhou Dynasty negotiated back and forth, referring to ancient times and modern times. It was all in line with etiquette, and the language was also very good, gaining a good reputation.

古文：使还，拜仪同三司。
现代文：出使回来，任仪同三司。
English: Returning from the mission, Ren Yi marched with the Third Division.

古文：世祖崩，出为江州刺史。
现代文：世祖去世后，出任型刺史。
English: After the death of the founder, he served as the chief historian.

古文：祖珽执政，徙为仁州刺史。
现代文：圭噬执政时，调任生出刺史。
English: When Gui Zhao was in power, there was a history of backstabbing when he was transferred.

古文：祖珽既出，征还，待诏文林馆，重除散骑常侍，奏门下事。
现代文：圭哩被排挤出朝廷后，他被召回，作文林馆待诏，重新任散骑常侍，在门下省主管上书。
English: After Guili was ousted from the imperial court, he was recalled, the composition of the forest pavilion was pending, he was reappointed as a horseback riding attendant, and he wrote a letter to the provincial supervisor.

古文：未几，与崔季舒等同时被戮，时年四十九。
现代文：不久，和崔季舒等人同时被杀，时年四十九岁。
English: Soon, he was killed at the same time as Cui Jishu and others, at the age of forty-nine.

古文：初逖与珽以文义相得，结雷、陈之契，又为弟俊聘珽之女。
现代文：当初刘逖和祖埏以文章相交往，像雷义和陈重一样友谊深厚，又替弟弟刘俊聘祖埏的女儿为妻。
English: At the beginning, Liu Jun and Zu Xi were in contact with each other through articles. Like Lei Yi and Chen Chong, they had a deep friendship. He also hired Zu Xi's daughter as a wife for his brother Liu Jun.

古文：珽之将免赵彦深等也，先以告逖，仍付密启，令其奏闻。
现代文：担銮罢免赵彦迳等人时，先告诉了刘逖，给他秘密奏章，先奏明了皇帝。
English: When he dismissed Zhao Yanyan and others, he first told Liu Bei, gave him the secret score, and first played it for the emperor.

古文：彦深等颇知之，先自申理，珽由此疑逖告其所为。
现代文：趟彦深对逭件事有了解，就提前进行了申辩，祖埏由此怀疑是他告的密。等到!
English: Wabi-Hikobuka had knowledge of Zou's case and pleaded his case in advance, leading Zou to suspect that Zou was the informant. Wait!

古文：及珽被出，逖遂遣弟离婚，其轻交易绝如此。
现代文：噬被赶出朝廷，他又让弟弟离婚，他就是如此轻易和朋友断绝关系。
English: After being banished from court and divorcing his brother, he cut ties with his friend so easily.

古文：所制诗赋及杂文文笔三十卷。
现代文：创作的诗赋和杂文等共三十卷。
English: His poems and essays totaled thirty volumes.

古文：子逸民，开府行参军。
现代文：儿子逸民，任开府行参军。
English: His son, Yatmin, joined the army after leaving the capital.

古文：逖弟，少聪明，好文学。
现代文：弟弟塑隆，小时很聪明，喜好文学。
English: His younger brother, Shulong, was very clever as a child and loved literature.

古文：天统、武平之间，历殿中侍御史，兼散骑侍郎，迎劳陈使，尚书仪曹郎。
现代文：孟筮、亘旺年间，任殿中侍御史，兼散骑侍郎，迎劳速使，尚书仪曹郎。
English: During the reigns of Meng Xi and Wang Wang, he was appointed as the palace's chief equerry, as well as a horseback riding equerry, a labor dispatch rider, and a secretary.

古文：周大象末，卒于黎州治中。
现代文：且主塞末年，死于茔业治中任上。
English: And in the last years of his life, he died in the middle of his term.

古文：子玄道，有人品识用，定州骑兵参军。
现代文：他的儿子玄道，有人品见识，任宣塑骑兵参军。
English: His son, Xuan Dao, who had some sense of decency, was allowed to join the army as a cavalryman.

古文：逖从子顗，字君卿。
现代文：刘逖的侄子刘颢，字君卿。
English: Liu Yao's nephew Liu Yao, nicknamed Junqing.

古文：祖廞，魏尚书，为高祖所杀。
现代文：祖父刘厂，任魏尚书，被高祖所杀。
English: Liu's grandfather, Ren Wei Shangshu, was killed by Gao Zu.

古文：顗父济及济弟俱奔江南。
现代文：父亲刘济和叔父刘竣都逃到了江南。
English: His father Liu Ji and uncle Liu Shun both fled to the south of the Yangtze River.

古文：顗出后。
现代文：刘颢过继给刘竣。
English: Liu Shun was succeeded by Liu Jun.

古文：武定中从还北。
现代文：武定年间随刘竣回到北方。
English: During the Wuding era, he returned to the north with Liu Shun.

古文：赐爵临颍子，大宁中卒于司徒司马。
现代文：刘竣被赐为临头子爵，大宁年间死于司徒司马任上。
English: Liu Shun was given the title of Viscount Lintou, and during the time of Danying, Szu Sima died while in office.

古文：顗好文学，工草书，风仪甚美。
现代文：刘颉喜好文学，擅长草书，风度俊美。
English: Liu Ye likes literature, is good at cursive, and has a beautiful demeanor.

古文：历瀛州外兵参军、司空功曹，待诏文林馆，除大理司直。
现代文：历任瀛州外兵参军、司空功曹，文林馆待诏，任大理司直。
English: Successive foreign soldiers from Bozhou have joined the army, and Sifu Gong Cao, Wenlin Pavilion, and Dali Sizhi have been appointed.

古文：隋开皇中鄜州司马，卒。
现代文：隋开皇年问任鄘州司马，去世。
English: In the year of the founding of the Sui Dynasty, he was appointed as the Sima of Zhangzhou and passed away.

古文：荀士逊，广平人也。
现代文：荀士逊，广平人。
English: Fuxison, Guangping people.

古文：好学有思理，为文清典，见赏知音。
现代文：为人好学有思辨能力，写的文章清丽典雅，受到知音者的赞赏。
English: He is a quick learner and a quick thinker. The articles he writes are clear and elegant, and are appreciated by his friends.

古文：武定末，举司州秀才，迄天保十年不调。
现代文：武定末年，被举荐为司州秀才，一直到天保十年也没有任官。
English: At the end of Wuding's life, he was recommended as a scholar of Sizhou, but he was not appointed until the 10th year of the Tenpo era.

古文：皇建中，马敬德荐为主书。
现代文：皇建年间，马敬德推荐他为主书。
English: During the years of imperial construction, Ma Jingde recommended him as the main author.

古文：世祖时，转中书舍人。
现代文：世祖时，改任中书舍人。
English: At the time of the founding father, he was reassigned to the position of middle school teacher.

古文：状貌甚丑，以文辞见用。
现代文：他相貌丑陋，但因为文辞很好而得到任用。
English: He's ugly, but he got the job because he's a good writer.

古文：曾有事须奏，值世祖在后庭，因左右传通者不得士逊姓名，乃云丑舍人。
现代文：有一次要启奏某事，正好世祖在后庭，由于左右通报的人不知道他的姓名。就说是丑舍人。
English: There was a time when I wanted to play something, and the ancestor happened to be in the backyard, and because the people around me didn't know his name, they said he was ugly.

古文：世祖曰： 必士逊也。 看封题果是，内人莫不忻笑。
现代文：世祖说： 一定是士逊。 打开封题来看果然是他，内臣太监全都笑起来。
English: The patriarch said, "It must be the scholar Sun," and when he opened the cover to see that it was indeed him, all the vassals and eunuchs burst out laughing.

古文：后主即位，累迁中书侍郎，号为称职。
现代文：后主即位，多次升迁任中书侍郎，都认为称职。
English: After the enthronement of the Lord, he was promoted several times to the position of chushojiro (chamberlain), which he considered to be a worthy position.

古文：与李若等撰典言行于世。
现代文：和李若等人撰写《典言》流行于世。
English: and Li Ruo and others to write "Analects" became popular in the world.

古文：齐灭年卒。
现代文：北齐灭亡那年去世。
English: He died in the same year as the fall of Northern Qi.

古文：颜之推，字介，琅邪临沂人也。
现代文：颜之推，字介，琅邪临沂人。
English: Yan Zhi Niu, Zi Jie, Zi Ying Linyi Ren.

古文：九世祖含，从晋元东渡，官至侍中、右光禄、西平侯。
现代文：九世祖颜含，随晋元帝束渡，官至侍中、右光禄、西平侯。
English: The 9th generation ancestor Yanhan followed Emperor Jin Yuan to Sokudo, and served as a chamberlain, Ukokoroku, and Nishihiraho.

古文：父勰，梁湘东王绎镇西府咨议参军。
现代文：父亲颜勰，梁湘束王萧绎镇西府谘议参军。
English: His father, Yan Qi, and Liang Xiangzhu Wang Xiao Yuanzhen of Xiufu advised him to join the army.

古文：世善周官、左氏，之推早传家业。
现代文：家中世代精通《周官》、《左传》，之推很早就受到家庭文化的熏陶。
English: The generations in my family are well versed in "Zhou Guan" and "Zhu Chuan," which were influenced by family culture very early on.

古文：年十二，值绎自讲庄、老，便预门徒。
现代文：十二岁那年，萧绎自己讲授《庄子》、《老子》，就参加听讲。
English: At the age of twelve, Xiao Yuanzhong taught "Zhuang Zi" and "Lao Zi" himself, and participated in the lecture.

古文：虚谈非其所好，还习礼、传，博览□书，无不该洽，词情典丽，甚为西府所称。
现代文：但他并不喜欢清谈，回家学习《周礼》和《左传》，同时博览群书，无所不读，文章辞采典雅清丽，得到萧绎的赏识。
English: However, he didn't like plain talk. He went home to study "Zhou Li" and "Zhu Chuan," and at the same time read a lot of books. He read everything, and his articles were elegant and beautiful, and he was highly appreciated.

古文：绎以为其国左常侍，加镇西墨曹参军。
现代文：萧绎任他为国左常侍，加镇西墨曹参军。
English: Xiao Yuanzhong appointed him as the left wing of the country's general staff, and he joined the army together with Xizhen Ximo Cao.

古文：好饮酒，多任纵，不修边幅，时论以此少之。
现代文：喜好饮酒，为人狂诞放纵，不修边幅，受到当时人的指责。
English: He was criticized for his fondness for alcohol, his constant self-indulgence, and his disregard for cleanliness of dress and appearance.

古文：绎遣世子方诸出镇郢州，以之推掌管记。
现代文：萧绎派世子萧方诸驻守郢州，命之推为掌管记。
English: Xiao Yu sent his son, Xiao Fangzhu, to guard Zhangzhou, and he was put in charge of it.

古文：值侯景陷郢州，频欲杀之，赖其行台郎中王则以获免。被囚送建业。
现代文：正好侯景攻陷郢州，屡次想杀掉他，幸亏行台郎中王则搭救幸免于难，被囚禁押送到建业。
English: Just as Houjing invaded Zhangzhou, he repeatedly tried to kill him. Fortunately, Emperor Taizong was able to save him and he was imprisoned and sent to Jianye.

古文：景平，还江陵。
现代文：侯景被平定后，回到江陵。
English: After the suppression of the rebellion of Houjing, Yan Zhipu returned to Gangneung.

古文：时绎已自立，以之推为散骑侍郎，奏舍人事。
现代文：逭时萧绎自己作了皇帝。任命他为散骑侍郎，以舍人的身份奏事。
English: At that time, Emperor Xiaoyan made himself emperor. He appointed him as a horseback riding attendant to attend to matters as a layman.

古文：后为周军所破。
现代文：后来被周军打败。
English: Later, it was defeated by the Zhou army.

古文：大将军李显庆重之，荐往弘农，令掌其兄阳平公远书翰。
现代文：大将军李显庆很看重他，推荐到弘农任职，负责他兄长阳平公李远的文书。
English: General Li Xianqing thought highly of him and recommended him to work in Hongnong, where he was responsible for the paperwork of his brother Yang Ping Gong Li Yuan.

古文：值河水暴长，具船将妻子来奔，经砥柱之险，时人称其勇决。
现代文：黄河水势暴涨，他坐船带领妻子儿女逃到北方，经过了险要的砥柱，人们佩服他的勇敢果决。
English: When the Yellow River's water level rose sharply, he took a boat to lead his wife and children to escape to the north. They passed through a critical point, and people admired his courageous determination.

古文：显祖见而悦之，即除奉朝请，引于内馆中，侍从左右，颇被顾眄。
现代文：显祖召见后很欣赏他，授为奉朝请，进入内馆，在自己左右侍奉，很受青睐。
English: After being summoned, Emperor Xianzu admired him very much. He was invited to serve the emperor, entered the inner hall, and served around him. He was very popular.

古文：天保末，从至天池，以为中书舍人，令中书郎段孝信将□书出示之推。
现代文：天保末，陪同到天池，授中书舍人，显祖命中书郎段孝信拿着诏书给之推看。
English: At the end of the Tenpo era, accompanied to the Heavenly Pool, the high school students were awarded, and the scholar Duan Xiaoxin, who was appointed by the founder, held the imperial edict and showed it to them.

古文：之推营外饮酒，孝信还以状言，显祖乃曰： 且停。 由是遂寝。
现代文：之推正在营外饮酒，孝信回来报告了情况，显祖说： 暂且不要授官。 
English: He was drinking outside the camp, and when Takanobu came back to report the situation, Henzo said, "Don't give him the post for the time being.

古文：河清末，被举为赵州功曹参军，寻待诏文林馆，除司徒录事参军。
现代文：因此作罢。河清末，被举荐为赵州功曹参军，不久又入文林馆待诏，任司徒绿事参军。
English: At the end of the He Ching, he was recommended to join the army as the Zhaozhou Gong Cao, and soon he entered the Wenlin Pavilion to wait for the edict, and joined the army as a scholar.

古文：之推聪颖机悟，博识有才辩，工尺牍，应对闲明，大为祖珽所重，令掌知馆事，判署文书。
现代文：之推聪明机敏，博学多才有论辩能力，擅长文书，回答问题简明，大受祖埏看重，命他负责塞拯篮，处理来往文书。
English: Yan Zhipu was intelligent, quick-witted, insightful, well-informed, able to argue, good at writing letters, and good at answering questions. He was highly valued by the ancestral court, and was appointed to be in charge of the Wenlin Museum and to sign documents.

古文：寻迁通直散骑常侍，俄领中书舍人。
现代文：不久升任通直散骑常侍，不久领中书舍人。
English: He was soon promoted to the position of Tsuchizane Sanzhishi no Tsuneishi, and soon became the second-in-command of the Imperial Household Agency.

古文：帝时有取索，恒令中使传旨，之推□承宣告，馆中皆受进止。
现代文：皇上不时索取东西，经常命宦官传旨，之推领旨宣布，文林馆都听从他的安排。
English: From time to time, the emperor asked for things, often ordered eunuchs to convey the will, and the eunuchs announced that the Wenlin Museum would follow his arrangements.

古文：所进文章，皆是其封署，于进贤门奏之，待报方出。
现代文：进奏的文章，都是他来署名，在进贤门奏入，等有了回音才退出来。
English: The articles of the prelude are all signed by him, played in at the entrance, and only withdrawn when there is an echo.

古文：兼善于文字，监校缮写，处事勤敏，号为称职。
现代文：而且擅长文字之学，负责校订书写，做事勤谨迅速，人们认为他很称职。
English: And he is good at the study of letters, responsible for proofreading and writing, doing things diligently and quickly, people think he is very competent.

古文：帝甚加恩接，顾遇逾厚，为勋要者所嫉，常欲害之。
现代文：皇上很恩待他，待遇丰厚，受到权贵的嫉妒，常常想陷害他。
English: The emperor was very kind to him, treated him well, and was envied by the nobility, who often tried to frame him.

古文：崔季舒等将谏也，之推取急还宅，故不联署。
现代文：崔季舒等人想劝谏皇上，不要到晋阳去，颜之推急忙返回家中，所以没有联合署名。
English: Cui Jishu and others wanted to persuade Emperor Zou not to go to Jinyang, but Yan Zhihui hurriedly returned home, so there was no joint signature.

古文：及召集谏人，之推亦被唤入，勘无其名，方得免祸。
现代文：等到皇上召集参加劝谏的人，之推也被召来，查验没有他的名字，避过了一次大祸。
English: When the emperor summoned those who had taken part in the persuasion, Zhi Niu was also summoned to check that his name was not there, and a great disaster was averted.

古文：寻除黄门侍郎。
现代文：不久任黄门侍郎。
English: Soon after, he was given the position of Huangmen waiter.

古文：及周兵陷晋阳，帝轻骑还邺，窘急计无所从，之推因宦者侍中邓长颙进奔陈之策，仍劝募吴士千余人以为左右，取青、徐路共投陈国。帝甚纳之，以告丞相高阿那肱等。
现代文：凰军攻陷置盟，皇上率领轻装骑兵回到邺，走投无路不知该怎么办。之推通过宦官侍中邓长灵劝皇上逃奔陈，主张招募吴地勇士一千多人加以护卫，从壹州、徐州到达陈国，皇上很同意，就告诉了丞相高阿那肱等人。
English: The Emperor led the light cavalry back to Shao and was at a loss as to what to do. Therefore, through the eunuch's aide-de-camp, Deng Changling, he urged the Emperor to flee to Chen and advocated the recruitment of more than a thousand Wu warriors to escort him from Yizhou and Xuzhou to Chen. The Emperor agreed and told the prime minister, Gao Ananyuan, and others.

古文：阿那肱不愿入陈，乃云吴士难信，不须募之。
现代文：阿那肱不愿意到陈去，就说呈地人难以信赖，不应该招募。
English: Anaxagoras did not want to go to Chen, saying that the local people were unreliable and should not be recruited.

古文：劝帝送珍宝累重向青州，且守三齐之地，若不可保，徐浮海南渡。
现代文：劝皇上把珍宝辎重送到青州，并且坚守三齐之地。如果守不住，就慢慢从海上向南撤走。
English: He advised the emperor to send the treasure anchor back to Qingzhou, and to stick to the land of Sanqi. If he could not keep it, he would slowly withdraw from the sea to the south.

古文：虽不从之推计策，然犹以为平原太守，令守河津。
现代文：虽然皇上没有采纳颜之推的计策，仍任命他为平原太守，令他戍守河津。
English: Although the emperor did not adopt Yan's strategy, he still appointed him as the governor of the plains and ordered him to hold on to Kawazu.

古文：齐亡入周，大象末为御史上士。
现代文：北齐灭亡后归附北周，大象末年任御史上士。
English: After the downfall of Northern Qi, it was annexed by Northern Zhou, and the elephant was appointed as the imperial historian in his last years.

古文：隋开皇中，太子召为学士，甚见礼重。
现代文：隋开皇年间，太子召他为学士，很看重他。
English: During the reign of Emperor Sui, the crown prince called him as a bachelor and valued him highly.

古文：寻以疾终。
现代文：不久因病去世。
English: He died of illness shortly afterwards.

古文：有文三十卷、撰家训二十篇，并行于世。
现代文：有文集三十卷，撰有《家训》二十篇，都流行于世。
English: There are 30 volumes of anthologies, and 20 articles of "Family Discipline" have been written, all of which are popular in the world.

古文：曾撰观我生赋，文致清远，其词曰：
现代文：曾经写过《观我生赋》，文辞典雅意境幽远。
English: He once wrote "Looking at My Life," a literary classic with a remote artistic setting.

古文： 仰浮清之藐藐，俯沉奥之茫茫，已生民而立教，乃司牧以分疆，内诸夏而外夷狄，骤五帝而驰三王。
现代文：赋如下：仰望苍天渺渺茫茫，俯视大地漫漫无边，自从世上有了百姓就有了教化，天下被分成不同的地域地区，中央是华夏外围是夷狄，岁月如飞，五帝三王成了历史。
English: It is as follows: looking up at the sky is dim and vague, looking down at the earth is boundless, since there have been people in the world, there has been enlightenment, the world has been divided into different regions, the center is Huaxia, the periphery is Yidi, the years are flying, the five emperors and three kings have become history.

古文：大道寝而日隐，小雅摧以云亡，哀赵武之作孽，怪汉灵之不祥，旄头玩其金鼎，典午失其珠囊，瀍涧鞠成沙漠，神华泯为龙荒，吾王所以东运，我祖于是南翔。
现代文：大道终结而一天天隐退，《小雅》受到摧残而认为已经消亡，哀趟武灵王实行胡骑射，怨汉灵帝的昏庸无能，军队戏弄了皇权，司马等官职失去了俸禄，泸水、涧水完全变成了沙漠，华夏沦落为一片荒野，晋中宗因此束迁，齐高祖于是南下。
English: At the end of the road, they retreated day by day. Xiao Ya was devastated and thought to have died out. They lamented the fact that King Wuling practiced horse riding and archery, and complained of Han Lingdi's incompetence. The army made fun of the imperial power. Sima and other officials lost their salaries. Surabaya and Surabaya completely turned into a desert. Huaxia was reduced to a wilderness. As a result, the Jinzhong sect was relocated, and Qi Gaozu went south.

古文：晋中宗以琅邪王南渡，之推琅邪人，故称吾王。
现代文：离开了琅邪迁徙到南越，定都在金陵过去的旧址上，在新的都城重新立起帝王的旗帜，在浩渺水乡又埋下了杞梓的种子。
English: After leaving the Yiyang, they migrated to South Vietnam and settled in the former site of Jinling, re-erected the imperial banner in the new capital city, and planted the seeds of Yiyang in the vast water town.

古文：去琅邪之迁越，宅金陵之旧章，作羽仪于新邑，树□梓于水乡，传清白而勿替，守法度而不忘。
现代文：世代祖传的清白没有代替，念念不忘的是遵守先人法度。我的家族已经兴盛了九代，世代相传的美名却受到了败坏。问我善良的人在何处，我极其厌恶南梁。
English: There is no substitute for the innocence passed down from generation to generation, and the most important thing to remember is to abide by the laws of our ancestors. My family has prospered for nine generations, but the good name passed down from generation to generation has been corrupted. When I ask where the good people are, I absolutely detest Nanliang.

古文：逮微躬之九叶，颓世济之声芳。
现代文：给会飞的野兽添上翅膀，把贪心的野狼当作孩子。
English: Give wings to the flying beasts, and treat the greedy wolves as children.

古文：问我良之安在，钟厌恶于有梁，养傅翼之飞兽，梁武帝纳亡人侯景，授其命，遂为反叛之基。
现代文：开始时从绝域招来了祸患，终于又祸起萧墙。即使万里之内，姑且藉一支芦苇就可以远航，手执着长矛来围攻皇城，剑拔弩张对着皇上走来的道路。勤王的兵将超过十万，竟然不能解救急难，感叹刚直的将相，为问候皇上祇好向叛臣投降。梁武帝不再留恋人世而出家，使得白天也黯淡无光，已执政了五十年，却因城破战败而饿死。
English: At the beginning, a calamity was brought from the wilderness, and finally the calamity of the wall arose. Even if it is less than ten thousand miles, even with a reed, you can sail far away, besiege the imperial city with a spear in hand, and stand against the emperor's path with a sword. The king's soldiers will exceed one hundred thousand, and they can't solve the emergency, lamenting the upright general, and surrendering to the traitor in order to greet the emperor. Emperor Liangwu no longer yearned for life and went into seclusion, making the day gloomy. He has been in power for fifty years, but starved to death

古文：子贪心之野狼。
现代文：继位的君主听命于奸猾的佞臣，常常感到如同芒针刺背。
English: Succeeding monarchs, at the beck and call of treacherous vassals, often feel like a thorn in the flesh.

古文：武帝初养临川王子正德为嗣，生昭明后，正德还本，特封临贺王。
现代文：自从东晋迁到江南避难，江湘之间就成为礼乐之乡，到现在已经将近三百年，外族的统治却遍布四方，念诵着受苦于胡人的诗篇而长叹，吟唱着管仲的乐曲而增添忧伤。
English: Ever since the Eastern Jin migrated to the south of the Yangtze River to take refuge, the area between the Yangtze and the Xiang became the home of ceremonial music. Now, nearly three hundred years later, the rule of foreigners has spread to all four directions. They recite the poems of those who suffered from the Hu people and sigh, and sing the music of Guanzhong to add sadness.

古文：犹怀怨恨。经叛入北而还，积财养士，每有异志也。初召祸于绝域，重发衅于萧墙。
现代文：世担面对艰难的时世而奋起，在沮水、漳水举起义旗，被授予犀甲和鹤膝矛，建立起飞云和赊艘的舰队，北征兵于漠水，南调粮于衡阳。
English: Shitan rose up in the face of difficult times. He raised the banner of righteousness in Shizuizu and Surabaya. He was awarded a rhinoceros armor and a crane spear. He established a fleet of take-off clouds and sailing ships. The north recruited soldiers in the desert, and the south transferred grain to Hengyang.

古文：正德求征侯景，至新林，叛投景，景立为主，以攻台城。虽万里而作限，聊一苇而可航，指金阙以长铩，向王路而蹶张。
现代文：过去先帝死了由太子来继位，现在是兄长死了由弟弟当帝王，待到皇孙失宠后，让人感叹绿车也不能扶立。为什么王道这样难，是由于都想捞取好处，襄阳拒不执行调兵的命令，长沙也不供给粮食。
English: In the past, when the first emperor died, the crown prince succeeded to the throne. Now, when an elder brother dies, the younger brother becomes emperor. After the emperor's grandson falls out of favor, people lament that the green cart cannot stand upright. Why is the royal road so difficult? It is because they all want to gain benefits, Xiangyang refuses to carry out the order of troop transfer, and Changsha does not supply grain.

古文：勤王踰于十万，曾不解其搤吭，嗟将相之骨鲠，皆屈体于犬羊。
现代文：皇上亲自去讨伐，但大功岂能片刻之间成就，世子被杀而侄子又来进攻，兄长河东王被围攻，岳阳王就来偷袭，防守湘州的褚氏家族投降了岳阳王，湘州城一晚上就失陷。
English: The emperor himself went to the crusade, but great achievements can not be achieved in a moment, the heir was killed and the nephew attacked again, the elder brother, King Hedong, was besieged, King Yueyang came to sneak attack, the defense of the Xiangzhou Yi family surrendered to King Yueyang, and the city of Xiangzhou fell in one night.

古文：台城陷，援军并问讯二宫，致敬于侯景也。武皇忽以厌世，白日黯而无光，既飨国而五十，何克终之弗康。
现代文：襄阳的杜岸兄弟对岳阳王倒戈乘夜来投奔，素不相识的人虽兵戈相向却带着笑容，至亲骨肉互相诛杀衹能相对哭泣，周公旦为避免成王的怀疑假装生病，孝武帝残杀兄弟悔之晚矣。湘东王的幕府中事务繁忙，人们错误地推荐了我，不到二十岁就步入仕途，刚刚十九岁就因军功加墨曹参军。
English: The Dugan brothers from Xiangyang took the night to attack King Yueyang. People who didn't know each other were smiling, even though they were fighting against each other. They were so close that they could cry together. Zhou Gongdan pretended to be ill to avoid the suspicion of becoming king. It was too late for Emperor Xiaowu to regret killing his brothers. The Shandong king's shogunate was busy with affairs. People mistakenly recommended me. I started my career when I was less than twenty years old, and I joined the army at the age of nineteen because of my military service.

古文：嗣君听于巨猾，每凛然而负芒。
现代文：并非能拿起武器保卫社稷。仅在宫闱之中起草文书，很少能展翅搏击风云。
English: It is not able to take up arms to defend the palace. It can only draft documents in the palace, and can rarely fight against the storm.

古文：自东晋之违难，寓礼乐于江湘，迄此几于三百，左衽浃于四方，咏苦胡而永叹，吟微管而增伤。
现代文：等到荆王作了皇帝，才开始报仇雪耻，水师驻在武昌，抚军镇于夏水之滨。我在众多官员中充数，参加到军队的行列之中，很惭愧像商山四皓一样辅佐世子，并跻身六友之中互相谈说，即使形神都很相和，却不是我的意愿。
English: It was not until Jing Wang became emperor that he began to avenge the shame of the past. Sailors were stationed in Wuchang, and Fuzhuanzhen on the coast of Xiashui. I filled the ranks of many officials, joined the ranks of the army, was ashamed to support the world's children like the Shangshan Four Emperors, and became one of the six friends to talk to each other. Even if the gods are very harmonious, it is not my will.

古文：世祖赫其斯怒，奋大义于沮漳。
现代文：结识的都是皇室中的权贵，就像站在屋檐下倚在横木上觉得危险。
English: Acquaintances are all powerful people in the royal family, just like standing under the eaves and leaning on the crossbeam feels dangerous.

古文：孝元帝时为荆州刺史。授犀函与鹤膝，建飞云及艅艎，北征兵于汉曲，南发餫于衡阳。
现代文：想实现自己的理想去激励，培养年幼的抚军有声威，到处寻求知己却不受器重，画地为牢以博取名声，拿起武器防备侵犯都交给文官，行军打仗都委托给书生。
English: If you want to realize your own ideals, encourage and train young soldiers to have a reputation, seek friends everywhere but do not be weighed down by the weight of the world, build a prison to gain fame, take up weapons to guard against encroachment are all entrusted to civil officials, and marching and fighting are all entrusted to students.

古文：湘州刺史河东王誉、雍州刺史岳阳王并隶荆州都督府。
现代文：正是皇遮贼寇最猖獗的时候，朝廷却听信谗言后果严重。王凝对敌寇不加防范，向翔拱手面对入侵的贼兵。全都变猿而化鹄，都是自取灭亡。
English: It was at the time when the emperor's banditry was at its most rampant that the imperial court listened to his advice, with serious consequences. Wang Rong did not take precautions against the enemy bandits, and surrendered to Xiang Xiang in the face of the invading bandits. They all turned into apes and perished, and they all perished by their own hands.

古文：昔承华之宾帝，实兄亡而弟及，昭明太子薨，乃立晋安王为太子。
现代文：将要进攻渚宫，先从别的道路前进，永宁公牢固地守卫着巴陵，护军中军一举击溃了叛军。
English: They were going to attack Nagisa Palace, but they advanced from another road first. Yongninggong firmly guarded Baling, and the escorting troops defeated the rebels in one fell swoop.

古文：逮皇孙之失宠，叹扶车之不立。嫡皇孙驩出封豫章王而薨。
现代文：败逃的敌人发泄心中的余毒，要杀掉所有的俘虏，幸亏有先生王则像蚣一样保护我，自己在塞压大帝的录鬼簿中删掉了名字，又从上天招回了灵魂，人若得到了新生，都希望像别人一样享受天年而终。
English: The defeated enemy vented the remaining poison in his heart and wanted to kill all the captives. Fortunately, Mr. Wang protected me like a cocoon. He deleted the names in the ghost book of the great emperor, and called back the soul from heaven. If a person is reborn, he hopes to enjoy heaven and die like others.

古文：间王道之多难，各私求于京邑，襄阳阻其铜符，长沙闭其玉粒。
现代文：贼人大败以后又卷土重来，像大雕和飞鸢伸出尖嘴和利爪，杀掉天子自己做了皇帝，凭藉着雾气以升天，四个月就招来了祸患，哪裹还用得了十年。
English: After the great defeat of the thieves, they made a comeback. Like the eagle and the falcon, they stretched out their pointed beaks and sharp claws. They killed the son of heaven and made themselves emperor. They ascended to heaven by means of fog. In four months, they brought disaster. It still took ten years to wrap them up.

古文：河东、岳阳皆昭明子。
现代文：在过去的土地上被狄人俘虏，度过了一段时间又回到了中原。
English: He was captured by the Di people in the past land, spent some time and returned to the Central Plains.

古文：遽自战于其地，岂大勋之暇集，子既殒而侄攻，昆亦围而叔袭，褚乘城而宵下，杜倒戈而夜入，元以河东不供船艎，乃遣世子方等为刺史。
现代文：站在清庙的废墟上发出黍离的感慨，为空荡的粮仓长出禾穗而感到悲伤。岩鼓横卧在街上不再有人击打，景钟被毁掉不能再悬挂，旷野萧条到处布满了白骨，村庄死寂都没有了炊烟。
English: Standing on the ruins of the Qing Temple, I felt a sense of separation, and was saddened by the ears of grain growing out of the empty granary. The rock drum lay in the street and was no longer beaten by anyone, the bell was destroyed and could no longer be hung, the desolation of the wilderness was full of white bones, and the silence of the village had no smoke.

古文：大军掩至，河东不暇遣拒。
现代文：过去上百家族有的还存在，五个宗族已经被剪灭而覆亡。
English: In the past, some of the hundreds of families still existed, but five clans have been wiped out.

古文：世子信用□小，贪其子女玉帛，遂欲攻之，故河东急而逆战，世子为乱兵所害。
现代文：衹剩下昭君哀伤的弹奏，仅留住诸侯女儿悲哀的琴声。经过旧日居住的长干巷而掩面哭泣，展望埋葬祖先的自下堕而流连忘返。
English: All that is left is the mournful music of Prince Akechi, and the sad sound of the harp of the daughter of the lords. Passing through the long alleys where they used to live, they hide their faces and weep, looking forward to burying their ancestors who have fallen from grace and are now forgotten.

古文：孝元发怒，又使鲍泉围河东。
现代文：燕雀离家时还要怀念，对故乡衹留下虔心的祝愿。
English: When the chaffinch leaves home, he should also miss it, and leave pious wishes for his hometown.

古文：而岳阳宣言大猎，即拥□袭荆州，求解湘州之围。
现代文：孔子也具有这一心情，从王粲又得到了证实。
English: Confucius also had this feeling, which was confirmed by Wang Xi.

古文：时襄阳杜岸兄弟怨其见劫，不以实告，又不义此行，率兵八千夜降，岳阳于是遁走。
现代文：远离了西土的众人，帮助方叔去讨伐贼人，按着鸣响的宝剑似乎雷声叱咤，挥动雄伟的旗帜好像云彩浮动，飞奔千里去追击败逃的敌人，三年时间直捣对方的巢穴，在束郡杀死蚩尤，把郅支的尸体挂在北面的宫殿。安抚冤屈的幽魂，清扫荒芜的陵园。
English: Far away from the people of the West, he helped Uncle Fang to fight against the bandits, sounded his sword like a thunderclap, waved his majestic flag like a cloud floating, flew thousands of miles to chase down the fleeing enemy, spent three years directly attacking each other's nests, killed Qiu You in Shu County, and hung the body of Zou Zhi in the north palace. To appease the ghosts of grievances, and clean up the desolate cemetery.

古文：河东府褚显族据投岳阳。
现代文：殷道再度兴盛，夏祭得以继续，让刘邦感到遗憾，阿房宫的大火延烧了几月。
English: Yindao flourished again, and the summer festival was able to continue, which made Liu Bang regret that the fire in Afang Palace continued to burn for several months.

古文：所以湘州见陷也。行路弯弓而含笑，骨肉相诛而涕泣，周旦其犹病诸，孝武悔而焉及。
现代文：驾着船来到江南，侍奉登基的皇上，再一次看到汉族官员而萌生敬意，满足南方百姓殷切的希望。
English: He came to the south of the Yangtze River by boat to serve the enthroned emperor. Once again, the sight of Han officials aroused respect and satisfied the ardent hopes of the people in the south.

古文：方幕府之事殷，谬见择于人□，未成冠而登仕，财解履以从军。
现代文：穿上绛色的朝服陈述自己的意见，做了散骑侍郎参与朝廷的议论，偶尔校定一下石渠合的藏书，不时参加柏梁台的唱和。不成材的大臣不计其数，要用无数的清水才能濯洗。
English: He put on a dark-colored imperial robe to present his opinions, rode horseback to participate in the discussions of the imperial court, occasionally calibrated the collection of books in the stone canal, and from time to time participated in the singing of the bridge. There are countless unqualified ministers, and they need countless amounts of clean water to wash.

古文：时年十九，释褐湘东国右常侍，以军功加镇西墨曹参军。
现代文：陆纳占据潇湘而负罪不来朝见，武陵王割据岷峨而自己称王。
English: Lu Na occupied Xiao Xiang and was guilty of not coming to the imperial court, while King Wuling cut himself off from the imperial court and proclaimed himself king.

古文：非社稷之能□。
现代文：用了很长时间治理得天下太平，开始整修壮丽的东都。
English: It took a long time to bring peace to the world and to begin renovating the magnificent Dongdu.

古文：童汪锜。阙仅书记于阶闼，罕羽翼于风云。
现代文：秦兵像北风一样再次刮起，为江南人民不再能和乐生活而嗟伤。
English: The Qin soldiers, like the north wind, are blowing again, and the people in the south of the Yangtze River are no longer able to live peacefully.

古文：及荆王之定霸，始雠耻而图雪，舟师次乎武昌，抚军镇于夏汭。
现代文：防守着固若金汤的城池，皇上却在宫裹辗转反侧。正义的军队坚持道义，反而是师出无名者难以抵挡。百万百姓都成为俘虏，无数的典籍被焚烧，普天之下，斯文尽丧。
English: Defending the impregnable castle, the emperor was in the palace. The righteous army adhered to morality, but it was difficult to resist the unknown. Millions of people became prisoners, countless classics were burned, and all over the world, Sven was lost.

古文：怜婴孺之何辜，矜老疾之无状，夺诸怀而弃草，踣于涂而受掠。
现代文：可怜那些妇女婴儿是多么无辜，哀怜年老多病的人走投无路。从别人手中夺来又像草一样丢弃，倒毙在路上又受到抢掠。
English: Pity those women and babies, how innocent they are, and pity the old and sick who have no choice but to be snatched from the hands of others and thrown away like grass, or to die on the road and be robbed.

古文：□乘舆之残酷，轸人神之无状，载下车以黜丧，揜桐棺之□葬。
现代文：怨恨军队的残酷，悲痛入神都反常，出丧时用粗陋的木车装运尸体，遮护着桐木棺草草下葬。
English: Resentment of the army's cruelty, grief into the gods are all abnormal. At the time of the funeral, the bodies are transported in a crude wooden cart, and the paulownia coffin is covered and hastily buried.

古文：云无心以容与，风怀愤而憀悢。
现代文：白云无心缓缓浮动，北风满怀愤怒而呼啸。
English: The white cloud floats slowly and mindlessly, and the north wind howls with rage.

古文：井伯饮牛于秦中，子卿牧羊于海上。
现代文：井伯到秦中去饮牛，子卿到海边去牧羊。
English: Jingbo went to Qinzhong to drink cattle, Ziqing went to the seaside to herd sheep.

古文：留钏之妻，人衔其断绝；击磬之子，家□其悲怆。
现代文：仅留下金钏之妻，人们可怜她断绝了后代；击磬人的儿子死了，家中哭声悲怆。
English: Only the wife of the goldsmith was left, and people pitied her for cutting off the offspring; the son of the smith died, and there were cries of grief in the house.

古文： 小臣耻其独死，实有愧于胡颜，牵痾疻而就路，时患□气。策驽蹇以入关。
现代文：我耻于独自死去，又有何面目苟且求生，我蹒跚而登程，骑着老驴而入关。
English: I'm ashamed to die alone, and I'm desperate to survive, and I'm on my way, riding an old donkey into the pass.

古文：官疲驴瘦马。下无景而属蹈，上有寻而亟搴，嗟飞蓬之日永，恨流梗之无还。
现代文：下看不到影子而跺脚，上有所寻而带住坐骑，叹惜飘泊不定而埋怨白天太长，遣憾时间飞逝而一去不返。
English: You can't see the shadow below and stomp your feet, you can't find something above and take your mount with you, you lament the drifting and uncertain and complain that the day is too long, and regret that time flies and never returns.

古文：若乃玄牛之旌，九龙之路，土圭测影，璇玑审度，或先圣之规模，乍前王之典故，与神鼎而偕没，切仙宫之永慕。
现代文：至于画着青牛的旗帜，九龙路过的道路，用土圭测量时间，用璇玑观测天象，有的是先代圣人的规定，恰好符合前王的旧章，但和神鼎一样隐没不再出现，被保藏在仙宫让人永远怀念。
English: As for the flag with a young bull, the road passing through Kowloon, the measurement of time with the togui, the observation of the celestial bodies with the cormorant, some are the provisions of the previous saints, just in line with the old chapter of the former king, but like the deity, they have disappeared and no longer appear, and are kept in the Fairy Palace for people to remember forever.

古文：尔其十六国之风教，七十代之州壤，接耳目而不通，咏图书而可想，何黎氓之匪昔，徒山川之犹曩。
现代文：十六国的风俗，流传了七十代的天下，想要用耳目但此路不通，想要藉助书籍来歌颂仅能凭空想象，为什么黎民百姓不再安居乐业，衹有山川还和旧时一样。
English: The customs of sixteen countries have been passed down for seventy generations. If you want to use your eyes and ears, you can't. If you want to use books to praise, you can only imagine why the people of Lebanon no longer live and work in peace. The mountains and rivers are still the same as in the old days.

古文：每结思于江湖，将取弊于罗网，聆代竹之哀怨，听出塞之嘹朗，对皓月以增愁，临芳樽而无赏。
现代文：在江湖上游荡思绪万千，在世俗的罗网中感到疲惫，聆听代北竹笛哀怨的曲调，倾听出塞曲嘹亮地奏响，对着天空一轮皓月更增添了愁思，眼前的美酒也无心去品尝。
English: Wandering in the rivers and lakes with a thousand thoughts, feeling tired in the worldly snares, listening to the sad melody of the northern bamboo flute, listening to the bright sound of the corkscrew, adding more sadness to the sky with a crescent moon, and having no intention of tasting the beautiful wine in front of me.

古文：自太清之内衅，彼天齐而外侵，始蹙国于淮浒，遂压境于江浔。
现代文：自从太清年间发生内乱，上天辅助齐国不断对外扩张，国家祇能收缩到淮河边上，被敌人大军压境一直到长江北岸。
English: Since the civil strife occurred during the Taiqing Dynasty, Heaven has assisted Qi to continuously expand abroad. The country can only shrink to the edge of the Huai River, and has been suppressed by the enemy army all the way to the north bank of the Yangtze River.

古文：侯景之乱，齐氏深斥梁家土宇，江北、淮北唯余庐江、晋熙、高唐、新蔡、西阳、齐昌数郡。
现代文：新立了仁厚的国主，统率南方的优秀人才。于是各支军队都接受皇上指挥，用五百辆车去迎接远方入侵者。
English: A new, benevolent sovereign was appointed to lead the talented people of the south, and all the armies accepted the emperor's command to meet the distant invaders with five hundred chariots.

古文：至孝元之败，于是尽矣，以江为界也。
现代文：出使的季札听完音乐得以返回国内，钟仪鼓琴后也被释放还朝。
English: After listening to the music, the envoys were able to return home, and they were also released after playing the glockenspiel.

古文：获仁厚之麟角，克□秀之南金，爰□旅而纳主，车五百以敻临，齐遣上党王涣率兵数万纳梁贞阳侯明为主。
现代文：听到消息好像柔风使耳朵得以清新，倾慕见到太阳而天下归心，试着用蓍草加以卜算，得到了《泰》卦吉利象征。
English: Hearing the news is like a gentle breeze that refreshes the ears, admiring to see the sun and the world is reconciled, trying to use valerian to make divination, and getting the "Tai" gua auspicious symbol.

古文：返季子之观乐，释钟仪之鼓琴。
现代文：好比是想去秦国却到了楚国，本来是去东方却走了南路，乘船渡过龙门的河曲，又行过砥柱的两座高山。
English: It's like wanting to go to Qin but ending up in Chu, wanting to go to the East but taking the southern route, crossing the Longmen River by boat, and traveling through the two high mountains of the pillar.

古文：梁武聘使谢挺、徐陵始得还南，凡厥梁臣，皆以礼遣。
现代文：黄河上的风迎面吹来雷声轰鸣，波浪起伏负载着船高高低低地前进。
English: The wind on the Yellow River blows thunder and roar in the opposite direction, and the undulating waves carry the boat high and low.

古文：窃闻风而清耳，倾见日之归心，试拂蓍以贞筮，遇交泰之吉林。
现代文：如同携带着大龟任凭河水有多深，又好似到深水去斩杀蛟龙，黄昏时舟船离开了陕地，第二天清晨在河阴结缆。追逐着暴风而超凡脱俗，为能实现忠信的理想而一路吟咏。
English: Like carrying a large turtle no matter how deep the river is, and like going to deep water to kill a dragon, the boat left Shaanxi at dusk, and the next morning the cable was tied in the shadow of the river. Chasing the storm and otherworldly, in order to realize the ideal of loyalty and sing all the way.

古文：之推闻梁人返国，故有齐之心。
现代文：遭逢厄运难以回到南朝，故国也不堪回首，废掉了国君又杀死了丞相，改换了朝廷变更了街市。
English: Due to bad luck, it was difficult to return to the Southern Dynasty, and the motherland could not look back. The sovereign was abolished, the prime minister was killed, the imperial court was changed, and the street market was changed.

古文：以丙子岁旦筮东行吉不，遇泰之坎，乃喜曰： 天地交泰而更习，坎重险，行而不失其信，此吉卦也，但恨小往大来耳。 后遂吉也。
现代文：我滞留在漳河边，哀叹什么时候结束飘流的生活，黄鹄尚且能飞回故地而深感内疚，翠凤能高翔而自觉惭愧，竟然不能像令思那样对答皇上的提问，白白地像彦先那样做了高官。在盛化旁编撰典籍，做了崇文馆的待诏，作了常侍而列于大臣，进入朝廷而任职。丞相对我的才能也赞叹不已，说我已经超越了他。
English: I lingered by the Li River, lamenting when to end my drifting life. Huang Rong could fly back to his hometown and felt deeply guilty. Cui Feng could fly high and felt ashamed that he couldn't answer the emperor's questions like Ling Si, and became a high-ranking official in vain like Yan Xian. Compiled classics while prospering, became a dignitary of the Chongwen Museum, became a regular attendant and was ranked as a minister, and entered the imperial court to serve. Zheng also admired my talent and said that I had surpassed him.

古文：譬欲秦而更楚，假南路于东寻，乘龙门之一曲，历砥柱之双岑。
现代文：在夜间陪同皇上谈话而被别人嫉妒，蒙受皇上的宠幸又何足自恃。要防备别人的唇枪舌剑，警惕仕途中的艰险，如同穿上了厚重的皮裘而抵寒，釜底抽薪水就停止了沸腾。
English: Accompanying the emperor in conversation at night and being envied by others, and being favored by the emperor, and how self-deprecating. It is necessary to guard against the gossip of others and be alert to the hardships on the way. It is like putting on a heavy fur coat and braving the cold. The bottom of the kettle stops boiling when the salary is drawn.

古文：冰夷风薄而雷呴，阳侯山载而谷沉，侔挈龟以凭浚，类斩蛟而赴深，昏扬舲于分陕，曙结缆于河阴。
现代文：厘王是武盛童的继承者，作太子时就仿效成帝，纵情于骄奢淫逸，也是由于奸臣的唆使，可惜浪费了无数精美的丝绸，废弃了许多采玉的遣址，若任用管仲则天下大治，若亲近狄牙便引起祸乱。恨朝政的荒废，惜天下的丧失，起因于平阳之战中滥竽充数，以后敌军才势如破竹地攻到太原。
English: Li Wang was the successor of Wu Sheng Tong. When he was crown prince, he imitated the emperor and indulged in pride, luxury and debauchery. It was also due to the instigation of treacherous vassals. Unfortunately, he wasted countless exquisite silks and abandoned many jade-collecting sites. If he appointed Guanzhong, the world would be ruled by chaos, and if he was close to Di Zha, it would cause disaster. He hated the desolation of the imperial government and regretted the loss of the world. It was caused by the indiscriminate plunder in the Battle of Pingyang. After that, the enemy army attacked Taiyuan like a

古文：水路七百里一夜而至。
现代文：我一直挂念着国家的安危，遂口口口口口，及都口而升降，心怀坟墓的覆亡。
English: I have always been concerned about the safety and security of the country, the rise and fall of Suikoukoukoukoukoukou, and the rise and fall of the capital, and I have been thinking about the collapse of the grave.

古文：予一生而三化，备荼苦而蓼辛，在扬都值侯景杀简文而篡位，于江陵逢孝元覆灭，至此而三为亡国之人。
现代文：刚刚计议完毕又改变了初衷，丞相暗中背叛皇上又伪装忠心，暗中达成阴谋，奸臣又对我加以诬陷。
English: Just after the deliberation was over, he changed his original intention. The prime minister secretly betrayed the emperor and disguised his loyalty, secretly reached a conspiracy, and the treacherous minister framed me.

古文：鸟焚林而铩翮，鱼夺水而暴鳞，嗟宇宙之辽旷，愧无所而容身。 夫有过而自讼，始发蒙于天真，远绝圣而弃智，妄锁义以□仁，举世溺而欲拯，王道郁以求申。
现代文：昔的九州都听命于人，如今天下都被人控制，齐国二十八年的期限果然按时终结，百六的厄运定然降临。我一生经历了三个朝代，备尝生活的艰辛，烧毁树林飞乌也脱落了羽毛，水源干涸鱼也受到曝晒，叹惜宇宙如此辽阔，懊悔竟然没有容身之地。有了过失要自我责备，发蒙在于天真，远离圣人而绝智，妄想保住仁义而愚蠢，世界都一片混浊却想拯救，王道失去却想发扬。
English: Kyushu in the past was at the beck and call of man, just as it is under the control of man today. The twenty-eight-year period of the Kingdom of Qi has indeed ended on time, and the hundred and six years of bad luck have certainly come. I have experienced three dynasties in my life, and I have tasted the hardships of life. When the forests are burned, the flying pigeons lose their feathers, the water sources dry up, and the fish are also exposed. I lament that the universe is so vast that there is no room for remorse. If there is a fault, you should blame yourself, the haze lies in naivety, far from

古文：既衔石以填海，终荷戟以入秦，亡寿陵之故步，临大行以逡巡。
现代文：想衔石而填海，终带戟而入秦，失去寿陵的教训，到太行山又犹豫。
English: If you want to take the stone and reclaim the sea, you will eventually fall into the Qin Dynasty, lose the lesson of Shuling, and hesitate to go to Taihang Mountain.

古文：向使潜于草茅之下，甘为畎亩之人，无读书而学剑，莫抵掌以膏身，委明珠而乐贱，辞白璧以安贫，尧、舜不能荣其素朴，桀、纣无以污其清尘，此穷何由而至，兹辱安所自臻。
现代文：假如当初隐居在草屋，甘心作农夫，不去读书而学剑，不高谈阔论去修身，放弃珍宝而甘贱，推掉富贵而安贫，尧、舜不能羡慕我的朴素，桀、纣不能玷污我的清白，困顿何由而来，屈辱又怎能招来。
English: If at the beginning I had lived in seclusion in a grass hut, if I had been willing to be a farmer, if I had learned the sword instead of studying, if I had cultivated myself instead of talking about it, if I had renounced the precious and become humble, if I had pushed away the rich and become poor, then I would not have been able to envy my simplicity, I would not have been able to tarnish my innocence, I would not have been able to understand why I was in such a predicament, and how I could have been humiliated.

古文：而今而后，不敢怨天而泣麟也。之推在齐有二子，长曰思鲁，次曰敏楚，不忘本也。
现代文：从今后，再也不怨天而哀叹。之推在北齐有两个儿子，长于思鲁，次子慜楚，表明不忘根本。
English: From now on, I will no longer complain about the weather and lament. As a result, I have two sons in North Qi, who are older than Silu, and the second son, Zhaochu, to show that I will not forget the fundamentals.

古文：之推集在，思鲁自为序录。
现代文：《颜之推集》如今得以保存，思鲁作了序绿。
English: "Collection of Faces" has now been preserved, with Slu as the preface.

古文：袁奭，字符明，陈郡人，梁司空昂之孙也。
现代文：直座，字丞塱，速翅人，梁司空塞显的孙子。
English: Zhi Zi, Zhi Zheng, the swift-winged man, the grandson of Liang Si Kong Xie Xuan.

古文：父君方，梁侍中。
现代文：父亲袁君方，任凿侍中。
English: His father, Yuan Kunfang, was a member of the Imperial Household Agency.

古文：奭，萧庄时以侍中奉使贡。
现代文：芦蓝时，塞座以侍中身份奉命出使。
English: At the time of the Reign of Terror, Cosa was sent as an envoy in his capacity as an attendant.

古文：庄败，除琅邪王俨大将军咨议，入馆，迁太中大夫。
现代文：萧壁战败后，任堕夏眶直俪的大将军谘议，入塞叠笪，升太中大夫。
English: After the defeat of Xiao Bi, he was consulted by the general of the fallen Xia Xizhong, and was promoted to Tai Zhong Dafu.

古文：韦道逊，京兆杜陵人。
现代文：韦道逊，京兆杜陵人。
English: Wei Daosong, the founder of the Beijing Zhaotong Mausoleum.

古文：曾祖肃，随刘义真渡江。
现代文：曾祖韦肃，跟随刘义真渡江。
English: Zeng Zu Wei Su followed Liu Yizhen to cross the river.

古文：祖崇，自宋入魏，寓居河南洛阳，官至华山太守。
现代文：祖父韦崇，从宋入魏，寄居在河南洛阳，官至华山太守。
English: Grandfather Wei Chong, from the Song Dynasty into the Wei Dynasty, lived in Luoyang, Henan Province, and served as the governor of Huashan.

古文：道逊与兄道密、道建、道儒并早以文学知名。
现代文：道逊和兄道密、道建、道儒很早都以文学出名。
English: Dawson and his brothers, Dao Mi, Dao Jian, and Daoju, all became famous for their literature early on.

古文：道密，魏永熙中开府祭酒。
现代文：道密，北魏永熙年间任开府祭酒。
English: Daomi, a Kaifu festival liquor during the Northern Wei Dynasty.

古文：因患恍惚，沉废于家。
现代文：因为患有精神恍惚症，在家闲居。
English: Because he suffers from a psychotic disorder, he idles at home.

古文：道建，天保末卒司农少卿。
现代文：道建，天保末年死于司农少卿任上。
English: Dojian, who died in the last year of the Tenpo era, was appointed to the post of Sino-Minor Secretary of Agriculture.

古文：道儒，历中书黄门侍郎。
现代文：道儒，历任中书黄门侍郎。
English: Daoju, the successive attendants of the Yellow Gate in Chinese history.

古文：道逊，武平初尚书左中兵，加通直散骑侍郎，入馆，加通直常侍。
现代文：逊，亘迁初为尚书左中兵，加授通直散骑侍郎，入塞拯鑪，加通直常侍。
English: Later, at the beginning of the migration, he was the left middle soldier of Shangshu, the assistant cavalryman of Zhaozhongzhi, the assistant cavalryman of Zhaozhong, and the assistant cavalryman of Zhaozhongzhi.

古文：江旰，字季，济阳人也。
现代文：江旰，字季，济阳人。
English: Jiangxi, Ji, Jiyang people.

古文：祖柔之，萧齐尚书右丞。
现代文：祖父江柔之，任南齐尚书右丞。
English: His grandfather, Jiang Rongzhi, was appointed as the vice-president of the Southern Qi Dynasty.

古文：叔父革，梁都官尚书。
现代文：叔父江革，梁时任都官尚书。
English: His uncle, Jiang Ge, was the then-governor of Liang.

古文：旰，梁末给事黄门郎，因使至淮南，为边将所执，送邺。
现代文：江旰在銮末任给事黄门侍郎，因为出使淮南，被守边将领捉获，送到邺。
English: At the end of the Warring States period, Jiang Yu appointed Huang Men as his personal attendant. Because he was sent to Huainan, he was captured by the border guards and sent to the Warring States period.

古文：稍迁郑州司马，入馆，除太尉从事中郎，转太子家令。
现代文：逐渐升为郑州司马，入文林筵，任太尉从事中郎，改任太子家令。
English: He gradually rose to Zhengzhou Sima, entered Wenlin County, was appointed captain to engage in middlemen, and was reassigned to the prince's household.

古文：齐亡，逃还建业。
现代文：齐亡后，逃回建业。
English: After Qi's death, he fled back to Jianye.

古文：终于都官尚书。
现代文：死时官任都官尚书。
English: At the time of his death, he was still a high-ranking official.

古文：眭豫，字道闲，赵郡高邑人。父寂，梁北平太守。
现代文：旦遂，字蝈，趟郡直邑人。父亲睦寂，任里韭垩太守。
English: Tansui, Zeta Zeta, a native of Wai County, Nao-eup, and his father Mutsujaku, were both appointed as provincial governors.

古文：道闲弱冠，州举秀才。
现代文：姻二十岁时，本州推举他为秀才。
English: When he was in his late twenties, the state of Honshu selected him as an outstanding talent.

古文：天保中，参议礼令，历晋州道行台郎、大理正、奉车都尉。
现代文：玉堡年间，参预拟订礼令，历任晋州道行台郎、大理正、奉车都尉。
English: During his time in Tambao, he participated in the drafting of the etiquette, and successively served as the governor of Jinzhou, the governor of Gangdai, the governor of Dali, and the governor of Fengche.

古文：入馆，迁员外散骑常侍，寻兼祠部郎中。
现代文：入文林馆，升任员外散骑常侍，不久兼祠部郎中。
English: He was admitted to the Wenlin Pavilion, promoted to the rank of non-commissioned officer riding horseback, and soon became a junior member of the ancestral hall.

古文：隋开皇中，卒于洛州司马。
现代文：隋开皇年间，死于洛州司马任上。
English: During the reign of Emperor Gaozong of the Sui Dynasty, he died on the post of Luozhou Sima.

古文：豫宗人仲让，天保时尚书左丞。
现代文：族人眭仲让，型呈年间任尚书左丞。
English: The clan members were forced to give up their positions, and in the form of the years, they were appointed to the position of Shojo-zojo.

古文：朱才，字待问，吴都人。
现代文：塞立，字姻，县登人。
English: Seili, Zhaorong, County Dengren.

古文：萧庄在淮南，以才兼散骑常侍，副袁奭入朝。
现代文：芦楚在进南时，任用他兼散骑常侍，随塞堕入朝。
English: When Luchu went to the south, he appointed him as his equerry and rode horseback to accompany him into the imperial court.

古文：庄败，留邺。
现代文：芦蓝失败后，留在邺。
English: After the failure of Lulan, it remained in the cocoon.

古文：稍迁国子博士、谏议大夫。
现代文：逐渐升为国子博士、谏议大夫。
English: Gradually, he rose to the position of Kuniko hakase (professor) and Shingon doctor.

古文：齐亡，客游信都而卒。
现代文：蛮灭亡后，客游至值都去世。
English: After the demise of the barbarians, all the tourists died.

古文：荀仲举，字士高，颍川人，世江南。
现代文：荀仲举，字一，题丛人，世代居住在江南。
English: 仲举,字一,题丛人,generationally living in the south of the Yangtze River.

古文：仕梁为南沙令，从萧明于寒山被执。
现代文：銮时任直丝令，追随芦塱而在塞山被俘。
English: At that time, he was ordered to serve as the commander of Zhoushi, and he was captured on Mount Saizhan while following Lushan.

古文：长乐王尉粲甚礼之。
现代文：垦銮王幽垩很礼待他。
English: The king treated him with great courtesy.

古文：与粲剧饮，啮粲指至骨。
现代文：迪举和慰塞一起豪饮，把旦塞的手都咬得露出骨头。
English: Di He and Consolation drank together, biting Danso's hands to the bone.

古文：显祖知之，杖仲举一百。
现代文：显祖知道后，将他杖打了一百。
English: When Emperor Xianzu found out, he beat him with his cane a hundred times.

古文：或问其故，答云： 我那知许，当是正疑是麈尾耳。 入馆，除符玺郎。
现代文：有人间他这样做的缘故，他回答说： 我怎么知道，当时我还以为是鹿尾呢。 入文林馆，任符玺郎。
English: When asked why he did it, he replied, "How do I know, at the time I thought it was a deer's tail.

古文：后以年老家贫，出为义宁太守。
现代文：后来由于卜了年纪且家中贫困出任羞空太守。
English: Later, due to his old age and poverty in his family, he became the Embarrassed Empress Dowager.

古文：仲举与赵郡李概交□，概死，仲举因至其宅，为五言诗十六韵以伤之，词甚悲切，世称其美。
现代文：他和瘤逊奎塑交情深厚，李概死后，倥壁来到他家中，作了五言诗十六韵来哀悼他，词意悲切，世人都称颂诗美。
English: He had a deep friendship with Zhou Xunkui. After Li Zhizhong's death, Zoubi came to his home and made a five-sentence poem with 16 rhymes to mourn him. The words were sad, and the world praised the poem.

古文：萧悫，字仁祖，梁上黄侯晔之子。
现代文：萧整，字边，銮亡黄侯盖坠之子。
English: Xiao Zhengyi, Zhubei, the son of the deceased Huang Hou Gai Shuang.

古文：天保中入国，武平中太子洗马。
现代文：玉堡年间来到韭变，亘铿年任太子洗马。
English: During the years of the Yubao Castle, he came to the transformation, and was appointed as the prince of the year.

古文：古道子，河内人。
现代文：古道子，河内人。
English: Ancient Taoist, native of Hanoi.

古文：父起，魏太中大夫。
现代文：父亲古起，任魏太中大夫。
English: His father was a doctor in the Wei Dynasty from ancient times.

古文：道子有干局，当官以强济知名，历检校御史、司空田曹参军。
现代文：古道子做事干练，居官以能力出众闻名，历任检校御史、司空田曹参军。
English: An ancient scholar, he is good at his job. He is well-known for his outstanding abilities as a resident official. He has served as inspector of schools, and as a member of the military.

古文：自袁奭等俱涉学有文词。
现代文：袁奭等人都涉猎文词。
English: Yuan Qi and others were all dabbling in literature.

古文：荀仲举、萧悫工于诗咏。
现代文：荀仲举、萧悫擅长诗歌。
English: Zou Zhongjiu and Xiao Zou are good at poetry.

古文：□曾秋夜赋诗，其两句云 芙蓉露下落，杨柳月中□ ，为知音所赏。
现代文：萧慇曾在秋天的晚上作诗，其中有两句说 芙蓉露下落，杨柳月中疏 ，受到知音者赞赏
English: Xiao Yao once wrote a poem on an autumn evening, in which two lines said, "Hibiscus dew falls, poplar willows are sparse in the middle of the month," which was appreciated by his friends

古文：赞曰：九流百氏，立言立德，不有斯文，宁资刊勒。
现代文：赞曰：九大流派和诸子百家，都主张立言立德，如果没有文学，怎么能刊刻而保存。
English: Zang said: the nine major schools and hundreds of schools all advocate the principle of morality. If there is no literature, how can it be published and preserved?

古文：乃眷淫靡，永言丽则，雅以正邦，哀以亡国。
现代文：最终竟然发展到文辞华靡，吟咏典雅，雅以正邦，哀则亡国。
English: In the end, it even developed into the rhetoric of gorgeous, elegant, elegant, and righteous, and sorrowful.

