古文：魏子平，字仲均，弘州人。
现代文：魏子平字仲均，弘州人。
English: Wei Zi Ping, also known as Zhong Jun, is a native of Hongzhou.

古文：登进士第，调五台主簿，累除为尚书省令史，除大理丞，历左司都事，同知中都转运使事，太府监。
现代文：进士及第，调升五台主簿，屡次升迁被授予尚书省令史，任大理丞，历任左司都事、同知中都转运使事、太府监等职。
English: He was promoted to the first rank and the second rank, promoted to the five major directories, and was repeatedly promoted and awarded the title of Shangshusho Rongshi, appointed as the grand secretary, successively appointed as the left secretary, the transfer envoy, the superintendent and so on.

古文：正隆三年，为贺宋主生日副使。
现代文：正隆三年，为贺宋主生日副使。
English: In the third year of Zhenglong, he became the deputy envoy for the birthday of He Song.

古文：是时，海陵谋伐宋，子平使还，入见，海陵问江左事，且曰： 苏州与大名孰优？ 
现代文：这时，海陵王正在图谋攻打宋朝，魏子平出使宋朝回来后，入朝拜见海陵王，海陵王问他江左的事情，且说： 苏州与大名哪一个城市更好？ 
English: At this time, King Hailing was plotting to attack the Song Dynasty. After Wei Zi Ping sent an envoy to the Song Dynasty and returned, he went to the court to pay homage to King Hailing. King Hailing asked him about Jiangzuo and said: Which city is better, Suzhou or Daming?

古文：子平对曰： 江、湖地卑湿，夏服蕉葛，犹不堪暑，安得与大名比也。 
现代文：魏子平回答说： 长江、太湖地势低凹潮湿，夏天穿焦麻、葛做的衣服犹不能抵抗炎热，怎么能同大名相比。 
English: Wei Ziping replied, "The Yangtze River and Taihu Lake are low-lying and wet. In summer, wearing clothes made of coke hemp and kudzu can't resist the heat. How can they be compared to daimyo?

古文：海陵不悦。
现代文：海陵王不高兴。
English: King Hailing is not happy.

古文：世宗即位，除户部侍郎。
现代文：金世宗即皇帝位，魏子平任户部侍郎。
English: Kim Sejong became the emperor, and Wei Zi Ping was appointed as the steward of the household.

古文：大定二年，丞相仆散忠义伐宋，置元帅府于南京，子平掌馈运，给金牌一、银牌六，粮道给办。
现代文：大定二年，丞相仆散忠义攻打宋朝，在南京设置元帅府，魏子平掌管钱粮运输，被授予金牌一枚、银牌六枚，负责粮草供应。
English: In the 2nd year of Dading, San Zhongyi, the minister of war, attacked the Song Dynasty, set up a marshal's office in Nanjing, and Wei Ziping was in charge of grain transportation. He was awarded a gold medal and six silver medals, and was responsible for grain and grass supply.

古文：进户部尚书。
现代文：魏子平进升为户部尚书。
English: Wei Ziping was promoted to head of the household.

古文：六年，复为贺宋主生日使，上曰： 使宋无再往者，卿昔年供河南军储有劳，用此优卿耳。 
现代文：大定六年，又任贺宋主生日使，皇帝说： 出使宋朝的人没有第二次再去的。你以前供应河南军事物资有功劳，这次是优待你。 
English: In the sixth year of Dading, he was also appointed as the envoy of the birthday of He Song. The emperor said: The person who sent the envoy of the Song Dynasty did not go again for the second time. You used to supply Henan with military materials, and this time you were treated favorably.

古文：久之，拜参知政事。
现代文：很久以后，魏子平官拜参知政事。
English: A long time later, Wei Zi Ping was appointed to the post of prefectural governor.

古文：上问子平曰： 古者税什一而民足，今百一而民不足，何也？ 
现代文：皇帝问魏子平说 ：以前收十分之一的税而百姓富足，现在收百分之一的税百姓反而不富足，为什么？ 
English: The emperor asked Wei Ziping, "In the past, the people were rich because of the one-tenth tax. Now, the people are not rich because of the one-hundredth tax. Why?"

古文：子平对曰： 什一取其公田之入，今无公田而税其私田，为法不同。
现代文：魏子平回答说： 十分之一的税是从公田收入中提取的，现在没有公田而从私田中收税，做法不同。
English: Wei Ziping replied: One-tenth of the tax is extracted from the income of public land, and now there is no public land but tax is collected from private land. The practice is different.

古文：古有一易再易之田，中田一年荒而不种，下田二年荒而不种。
现代文：以往有第一次整田第二次整田，中等田一年荒芜不种，下等田二年荒芜不种。
English: In the past, there was a first field preparation, a second field preparation, the middle field was barren for one year, and the lower field was barren for two years.

古文：今乃一切与上田均税之，此民所以困也。 
现代文：现在一切都按上等田征税，这是百姓贫困的原因。 
English: Now everything is taxed according to kami-toda, which is the reason for the poverty of the people.

古文：上又问曰： 戍卒逋亡物故，今按物力高者补之，可乎？ 
现代文：皇帝又问 ：戍边士卒逃跑死亡，今天用物力雄厚的人补充，可以吗？ 
English: The emperor also asked, "Is it possible to supplement today's supply of able-bodied men with those who have fled and died?"

古文：对曰： 富家子弟騃懦不可用，守戍岁时求索无厌，家产随坏。
现代文：魏子平回答说 ：富家子弟愚笨懦弱不可以使用，戍边时无厌地求取，家产随即衰败。
English: Wei Ziping replied, "The children of the rich are too stupid and cowardly to be of any use. They are insatiable in their pursuit of wealth, and their family fortunes will soon decline."

古文：若按物力多寡赋之，募材勇骑射之士，不足则调兵家子弟补之，庶几官收实用，人无失职之患。 
现代文：如果按物力的多少征赋，招募勇敢善骑射的人，不够就调兵家子弟补充，那么官府就会收到实效，也不用担忧他失职。 
English: If, according to the amount of material resources conscripted, the recruitment of brave people who are good at riding and shooting is not enough to recruit soldiers to supplement their children, then the government will receive the actual results, and there is no need to worry about his dereliction of duty.

古文：上从之。
现代文：皇帝听从了他。
English: Emperor Dezong accepted his suggestion.

古文：海州捕贼八十余人，贼首海州人，其兄今为宋之军官。
现代文：海州逮捕了八十多个盗贼，盗贼头是海州人，其兄现在宋朝做军官。
English: Haizhou arrested more than eighty thieves. The head of the thieves was from Haizhou, and his brother is now an officer in the Song Dynasty.

古文：上闻之，谓宰相曰： 宋之和好，恐不能久，其宿、泗间汉军，以女直军代之。 
现代文：皇帝听说此事，对宰相说： 宋朝同我们和好可能不会长久，宿、泗两地之间的汉人军队，用女真军队代替它。 
English: When the emperor heard about this, he said to the chancellor: The Song Dynasty's reconciliation with us may not last long. The Han Chinese army stationed between the two places should be replaced by the Jurchen army.

古文：子平曰： 誓书称沿边州城，除自来合设置射粮军数并巡尉外，更不得屯军守戍。 
现代文：魏子平说： 盟约说沿边疆的州城，除双方合设置射粮军数并巡尉外，不得驻军守卫。 
English: Wei Ziping said, "According to the treaty, the state capitals along the frontier may not be guarded by garrisons, unless both sides jointly set up the number of grain-shooting troops and lieutenants.

古文：上曰： 此更代之，非增戍也。 
现代文：皇帝说： 这是代替它，不是增兵戍守。 
English: The emperor said: This is to replace it, not to increase the number of troops.

古文：上曰： 前日令内任官六品以上，外任五品以上，并举所知。
现代文：皇帝说： 前日令内任官六品以上、外任官五品以上，一同推荐所了解的人。
English: The emperor said, "The day before yesterday, I issued an order to appoint more than six officials in the inner office and more than five officials in the outer office, and to recommend the people I know.

古文：未闻有举之者，岂无其才，盖知而不举也。 
现代文：但没有听说有推荐的人，难道没有人才，大概是了解而不推荐。 
English: But if you haven't heard of anyone with a recommendation, don't you have any talent, you probably understand and don't recommend.

古文：子平曰： 请令当举之官，每任须举一人。 
现代文：魏子平说 ：请命令应当推荐的官，每任必须推荐一人。 
English: Wei Ziping said: Please order the officials who should be recommended, each must recommend one person.

古文：泽州刺史刘德裕、祁州刺史斜哥、沧州同知讹里也、易州同知讹里剌、楚丘县令刘春哥以赃污抵罪，上欲诏示中外，丞相守道以为不可，上以问子平曰： 卿意何如？ 
现代文：泽州刺史刘德裕、祁州刺史斜哥、沧州同知讹里也、易州同知讹里剌、楚丘县令刘春哥因为贪赃犯罪，皇帝想把此事公布出去，丞相守道认为不可以，皇帝因此问魏子平说： 你的意下如何？ 
English: The emperor wanted to make public the fact that Liu Chun Ge, the governor of Zhezhou, Liu Deyu, the governor of Zhangzhou, Xiang Ge, the governor of Cangzhou, Tongzhi and Liya, the governor of Yizhou, and the governor of Chuqiu County, Liu Chun Ge, were guilty of corruption. The prime minister thought it was unacceptable, so the emperor asked Wei Ziping: What do you think?

古文：子平曰： 臣闻惩一戒百，陛下固宜行之。 
现代文：魏子平说： 我听说惩一儆百，陛下应该那样做。 
English: Wei Ziping said, "I have heard that the punishment is one hundred lashes. Your Majesty should do that."

古文：上曰： 然。 
现代文：皇帝说 ：说的对。 
English: His last position was that of Taijo-jo.

古文：遂降诏焉。
现代文：于是降下了诏示。
English: As a result, the imperial edict was issued.

古文：宋人于襄阳汉江上造舟为浮梁三，南京统军司闻而奏之，上问宰臣曰： 卿等度之，以为何如？ 
现代文：宋朝人在襄阳汉江上打造船只修了三座浮桥，南京统军司听说此事，上奏了朝廷，世宗皇帝问宰臣说： 你们猜猜，宋人为什么这样做？ 
English: The Song Dynasty people built three floating bridges on the Han River in Xiangyang to build ships. The Nanjing United Military Department heard about this and reported it to the imperial court. Emperor Shizong asked the prime minister: "Guess why the Song people did this?

古文：子平曰： 臣闻襄阳薪刍，皆于江北取之，殆为此也。 
现代文：魏子平说 ：我听说襄阳用的薪柴和牧草，都是从江北取得的，他们的行为大概是为此。 
English: Wei Ziping said: I heard that the firewood and forage used in Yangyang are obtained from the north of the river, and their behavior is probably for this reason.

古文：上曰： 朕与卿等治天下，当治其未然。及其有事，然后治之，则亦晚矣。 
现代文：皇帝说 ：朕与你们坐天下，应当治理防患于未然，等到有事后再去治理，那就为时已晚。 
English: The emperor said, "I sit with you on the throne of the world. We should govern and prevent problems before they occur. If we wait until something happens to govern afterwards, it will be too late.

古文：河南统军使宗叙求入见奏边事，上使修起居注粘割斡特剌就问状。
现代文：河南统军使宗叙请求入朝上奏边关的事，皇帝派修起居注粘割斡特剌前去询问情况。
English: The Henan United Army sent an envoy to Zongxu to request entry into the imperial court to report the border issue, and the emperor sent a special envoy to inquire about the situation.

古文：宗叙言： 得边报及宋来归者言，宋国调兵募民，运粮饷，完城郭，造战船浮桥，兵马移屯江北。
现代文：宗叙说 ：得到边关的报告以及宋朝前来投降的人说，宋国调兵招募百姓，运粮饷，修复城郭，造战船修浮桥，兵马移驻长江北岸。
English: Zong Xiu said: According to the reports from the border gate and the people who came to surrender to the Song Dynasty, the Song Dynasty sent troops to recruit people, transport grain, repair the castle, build warships, repair the pontoon bridge, and move the soldiers and horses to the north bank of the Yangtze River.

古文：自和议后即罢制置司，今复置矣。
现代文：自两国和议后宋废除了制置司，今天又设置它。
English: After the two countries negotiated for peace, the Song Dynasty abolished the Department of Establishment, and today it has been set up again.

古文：商、虢、海州皆有奸人出没，此不可不备。
现代文：商、虢、海州等都有奸人出没，这不可不防。
English: Shang, Handan, and Haizhou are all haunted by traitors, which cannot be avoided.

古文：尝报枢密院，彼视以为文移，故欲入见言之。 
现代文：曾把此事上报枢密院，他们把它看作文移，所以想进朝面奏皇上。 
English: He had reported the matter to the Privy Council, and they regarded it as a misappropriation, so they wanted to go to the Emperor.

古文：斡特剌召凡言边事者诘问，皆无实状，行至境上，问知襄阳浮桥乃樵采之路，如子平策。
现代文：粘割斡特剌召见谈及边关之事的人询问，都说没有这种情况，等到边境上，问后知道襄阳浮桥是伐樵之路，像魏子平推测的。
English: When the special envoy was summoned to the people who talked about the border, they all said that there was no such situation. When they arrived at the border, they knew that the Yangyang Floating Bridge was a logging road, as Wei Ziping speculated.

古文：还奏。
现代文：粘割斡特剌回朝上奏了情况。
English: The sticky situation played out again in the morning.

古文：诏凡妄说边关兵事者徒二年，告人得实，赏钱五百贯。
现代文：皇帝下诏凡是胡乱说边关兵事的人判二年徒刑，上告的情况属实的，赏五百贯钱。
English: The emperor decreed that anyone who talked nonsense about the military affairs of the frontier should be sentenced to two years of imprisonment, and if the appeal was true, he would be rewarded with five hundred crowns.

古文：上问宰臣曰： 祭宗庙用牛。
现代文：皇帝问宰臣说： 祭祀宗庙需要用牛。
English: The emperor asked the vassal: "It is necessary to use cattle to worship the ancestral temple.

古文：牛尽力稼穑有功于人，杀之何如？ 
现代文：牛尽力稼穑对人有功，为什么要杀了它？ 
English: Cows do their best to earn money for people, so why kill them?

古文：子平对曰： 惟天地宗庙用之，所以异大祀之礼也。 
现代文：魏子平回答说 ：只有天地宗庙用它，这就是大祭祀礼节的不同之处。 
English: Wei Ziping replied, "Only the Heaven and Earth Temple uses it. This is the difference in the grand ritual etiquette."

古文：十一年，罢为南京留守，未几致仕。
现代文：大定十一年，魏子平罢免别职任南京留守，不久退休。
English: In the eleventh year of Dading, Wei Ziping was dismissed from his other post and stayed in Nanjing, and soon retired.

古文：十五年，起为平阳尹，复致仕。
现代文：大定十五年，他复出任平阳尹，又退休。
English: In the fifteenth year of Dading, he returned to the post of Pingyang Yin and retired.

古文：二十六年，薨于家。
现代文：大定二十六年，在家中逝世。
English: He was twenty-six years old and died at home.

古文：孟浩，字浩然，泺州人。
现代文：孟浩字浩然，滦州人。
English: Meng Haozhe is a brilliant man from Zhangzhou.

古文：辽末年登进士第。
现代文：辽国末年登进士第。
English: In the last years of the Liao dynasty, he was promoted to the position of scholar.

古文：天会三年，为枢密院令史，除平州观察判官。
现代文：天会三年，为金朝枢密院令史，授职为平州观察判官。
English: In the third year of the Heavenly Assembly, he was appointed as a member of the Privy Council of the Kim dynasty, and was appointed as a Pingzhou observation judge.

古文：天眷初，选入元帅府备任使，承制除归德少尹，充行台吏、礼部郎中，入为户部员外郎、郎中。
现代文：天眷初年，选拔进元帅府做备任使，按规定被授为归德少尹，充行台吏、礼部郎中，进朝为户部员外郎、郎中。
English: In the first year of Tian Guan, he was selected to enter the Marshal's Office as a preparatory envoy, and was awarded the title of Gui De Shao Yin, as well as the title of Feng Xing Tai Li and the title of Vice-Minister of Ceremonies, and the title of Vice-Minister of Household and Vice-Minister of Ceremonies.

古文：韩企先为相，拔擢一时贤能，皆置机要，浩与田珏皆在尚书省，珏为吏部侍郎，浩为左司员外郎。
现代文：韩企先做丞相时，选拔提升当时的贤能人才后，都把他们放置在机要处，孟浩与田珏都在尚书省，田珏为吏部侍郎，孟浩为左司员外郎。
English: When Han Kui first became prime minister, after selecting and promoting the best talents of the time, he placed them in important positions. Meng Hao and Tian Hao were both in the Ministry of Education and Culture, with Tian Hao as the secretary of the Personnel Department and Meng Hao as the secretary of the Left Division.

古文：既典选，善铨量人物，分别贤否，所引用皆君子。
现代文：选择人才后，衡量考核人才，区分贤与不贤，所推荐使用的人都是君子。
English: After the selection of talents, the evaluation of talents, the distinction between virtuous and non-virtuous, and the recommended use of people are all gentlemen.

古文：而蔡松年、曹望之、许霖皆小人，求与珏相结，珏薄其为人拒之。
现代文：然而蔡松年、曹望之、许霖都是小人，他们请求与田珏相互结交，田珏轻视他们的为人而拒绝了他们。
English: However, Cai Songnian, Cao Wangzhi, and Xu Lin are all villains. They asked to make friends with Tian Yao, but Tian Yao despised them as people and rejected them.

古文：松年，蔡靖子。靖将兵不能守燕山，终败宋国，珏颇以此讥斥松年，松年初事宗弼于行台省，以微巧得宗弼意，宗弼当国，引为刑部员外郎。
现代文：蔡松年是蔡靖的儿子，蔡靖带兵没能守住燕山，最后被宋朝打败，田珏常用此事讥讽蔡松年。蔡松年跟随宗弼在行台省做事，他用小花招博得了完颜宗弼的满意，完颜宗弼掌握国政，推荐他做刑部员外郎。
English: Cai Songnian was the son of Cai Jing. Cai Jing and his soldiers failed to hold Yanshan, and were eventually defeated by the Song Dynasty. Tian Yu used to ridicule Cai Songnian. Cai Songnian followed Zongyi to work in Xingtai Province. He used tricks to win the satisfaction of Guan Yan Zongyi. Guan Yan Zongyi controlled state affairs and recommended him to be the foreign minister of the criminal investigation department.

古文：望之为尚书省都事，霖为省令史。
现代文：曹望之做尚书省都事，许霖做省令史。
English: Cao Wangzhi wrote the history of the provincial capital, and Xu Lin wrote the history of the provincial government.

古文：皆怨珏等，时时毁短之于宗弼，凡与珏善者皆指以为朋党。
现代文：他们都怨恨田珏等人，常常在宗弼面前诋毁田珏他们，凡是与田珏关系好的人都说他们在拉帮结党。
English: They all resented Tian Qi and others, and often slandered Tian Qi in front of Zong Qi. Anyone who had a good relationship with Tian Qi said that they were pulling the strings.

古文：韩企先疾病，宗弼往问之，是日，珏在企先所，闻宗弼至，知其恶己，乃自屏以避。
现代文：韩企先有病，完颜宗弼前去看望问候，这天，田珏在韩企先那里，听说宗弼来了，知道他讨厌自己，于是躲避在屏风后面。
English: On this day, Tian Ye was at the Korean company when he heard that Zong Ye had come, and he knew that he hated himself, so he hid behind the screen.

古文：宗弼曰： 丞相年老且疾病，谁可继丞相者？ 
现代文：完颜宗弼说： 丞相年老且有病，谁可做丞相继承人？ 
English: Guanyan Zonglu said: If the prime minister is old and sick, who can be the prime minister's successor?

古文：企先举珏，而宗弼先入松年谮言，谓企先曰： 此辈可诛。 
现代文：韩企先推荐田珏，而完颜宗弼以前听过蔡松年说田珏的谗言，他对韩企先说 ：这个人可以杀了他。 
English: The Korean company first recommended Tian Qi, and after Yan Zongqi had previously heard Cai Songnian say that Tian Qi's criticism, he said to the Korean company: This man can kill him.

古文：珏闻流汗浃背。
现代文：田珏听到后冷汗涔涔。
English: Tian Qi broke out in a cold sweat after hearing this.

古文：企先薨，珏出为横海军节度使。
现代文：韩企先去世，田珏离朝任横海军节度使。
English: Han Kui died first, and Tian Kui left the imperial court to serve as an envoy to the Imperial Japanese Navy.

古文：选人龚夷鉴除名，值赦，赴吏部铨，得预覃恩。
现代文：推荐人龚夷鉴被除名。部吏把龚夷鉴的事告诉田珏。
English: The recommending person, Zou Yijian, was removed from the list. The ministry official told Tian Yao about Zou Yijian.

古文：珏已除横海，部吏以夷鉴白珏，珏乃倒用月日署之。许霖在省典覃恩，行台省工部员外郎张子周素与珏有怨，以事至京师，微知夷鉴覃恩事，嗾许霖发之，樉以专擅朝政。诏狱鞫之，拟珏与奚毅、邢具瞻、王植、高凤庭、王效、赵益兴、龚夷鉴死，其妻子及所往来孟浩等三十四人皆徙海上，仍不以赦原。
现代文：许霖在省掌管覃恩，行台省工部员外郎张子恩平素与田珏有怨恨，因为有事到京城，稍微了解龚夷鉴覃恩的事，就怂恿许霖告发他，诋毁他专权朝政。皇帝诏令审讯这件官司，拟定杀死田珏、奚毅、邢具瞻、王植、高凤庭、王效、赵益兴、龚夷鉴，他们的妻子儿子及同其往来的孟浩等三十四人都迁到海上，仍不给赦免。
English: Xu Lin was in charge of Jian'en in the province, and Zhang Zi En, the younger brother of Wang Zhi, a member of the Ministry of Industry and Commerce of Xingtai Province, had a grudge against Tian Qi. Because he came to Beijing and knew a little about Jian'en, Xu Lin denounced him and slandered his autocratic government. The emperor ordered the trial of this lawsuit, and planned to kill Tian Qi, Jian Yi, Jian Guzhang, Wang Zhi, Gao Fengting, Wang Xiang, Zhao Yixing, Jian Qi, and their wives and sons, and Meng Hao, who had been in contact with them

古文：天下冤之。
现代文：天下人为他们抱冤。
English: People all over the world think that his family was very wronged.

古文：世宗在熙宗时，知田珏党事皆松年等构成之。
现代文：金世宗在熙宗执政的时候，知道田珏结党的事都是蔡松年等人编造成的。
English: When Kim Sejong was in power under Kim Il Sung, he knew that the Tianyu Knot Party was caused by Cai Songnian and others.

古文：而浩等三十二人遇天德赦令还乡里，多物故，惟浩与珏兄谷、王补、冯煦、王中安在。
现代文：当孟浩等三十二人幸遇天德年间大赦，让他们返回乡里时，他们大多已死，只有孟浩与田珏的哥哥田谷及王补、冯煦、王中安还活着。
English: When Meng Hao and thirty-two others were fortunate enough to receive an amnesty during the Tiande Era, allowing them to return to the countryside, most of them were dead. Only Meng Hao and Tian Yao's older brother, Tian Gu, and Wang Ji, Feng Yao, and Wang Zhong'an were still alive.

古文：大定二年，召见，复官爵。
现代文：大定二年，孟浩等被召见，恢复官爵。
English: In the second year of Dading, Meng Hao and others were summoned to the court to restore the official title.

古文：浩为侍御史，谷为大理丞，补为工部员外郎，煦为兵部主事，中安知火山军事，而浩寻复为右司员外郎。
现代文：孟浩为侍御史，田谷为大理丞，王补为工部员外郎，冯煦为兵部主事，王中安为知火山军事，不久孟浩又为右司员外郎。
English: Meng Hao was the chamberlain, Tianya was the grand secretary, Wang Shu was the second-in-command of the engineering department, Feng Qi was the chief of the military department, Wang Zhong'an was the chief of the military department, and soon Meng Hao was the second-in-command of the right department.

古文：浩笃实，遇事辄言，无所隐。
现代文：孟浩诚实，遇事敢说，不隐瞒。
English: Meng Hao is honest, dares to speak out in times of trouble, and does not hide anything.

古文：上嘉其忠，每对大臣称之。
现代文：皇帝很赞赏他的忠实，常常在大臣们面前称赞他。
English: The emperor appreciated his loyalty and often praised him in front of his ministers.

古文：有疾，求外补，除祁州刺史，致仕，归。
现代文：孟浩有病，请求到外面做官，授予祁州刺史，后退休回家。
English: Meng Hao was ill, he asked to work as an official outside, he was awarded the title of Zhangzhou Provincial Historian, and then he retired and returned home.

古文：七年，起为御史中丞，而浩已年老，世宗以不次用之，再阅月，拜参知政事。
现代文：大定七年，起用他为御史中丞，而孟浩年纪已大，金世宗破格提拔任用他，又过一个月，授予他参知政事。
English: In the seventh year of Dading, Meng Hao was appointed as the Vice-President of History, while Meng Hao was already old. Kim Sejong promoted and appointed him in an unprecedented way, and a month later, he was awarded the post of Vice-President of Politics.

古文：故事，无自中丞拜执政者，浩辞曰： 不次之恩，非臣所敢当。 
现代文：按过去的先例，没有从中丞直接授职为执政的人，孟浩推辞说： 破格提拔之恩，不是我敢担当的。 
English: According to the precedent of the past, Meng Hao, who was not directly appointed by Zhong Rong as the person in power, said: "I do not dare to be responsible for the extraordinary promotion.

古文：上曰： 卿自刺史致仕，除中丞，国家用人，岂拘阶次？
现代文：皇帝说： 你自刺史退休，被授予中丞，国家用人，难道还拘束于等级。
English: The emperor said: Since you retired from the imperial court, you have been awarded the rank of junior middle officer, and you are employed by the state. Are you still bound by rank?

古文：卿公正忠勤，虽年高犹可宣力数年，朕思之久矣。 
现代文：你公正忠诚勤勉，虽然年纪大还可以出力几年，我考虑已经很久了。 
English: I've been thinking about you for a long time. You are fair, loyal and diligent. Although you are old, you can still contribute for a few years.

古文：浩顿首谢。
现代文：孟浩叩头谢恩。
English: Zhang Hao bowed his head in thanks.

古文：世宗敕有司东宫凉楼增建殿位，浩谏曰： 皇太子义兼臣子，若所居与至尊宫室相侔，恐制度未宜，固宜示以俭德。 
现代文：金世宗告诫有司在东宫凉楼增建殿位，孟浩劝谏说： 皇太子又是臣子，如果他住的与至尊宫室相同，恐怕不合制度，因此应该勤俭为德。 
English: King Jin Shizong admonished Yushi to build an additional palace in the East Palace's summer house, and Meng Hao advised him: The crown prince is also a courtier, and if he lives in the same palace as the Supreme Emperor, he may not conform to the system, so he should be frugal.

古文：上曰： 善。 
现代文：皇帝说 ：好。 
English: Han Wang replied, "Okay, that's it!

古文：遂罢其役，因谓太子曰： 朕思汉文纯俭，心常慕之，汝亦可以为则也。 
现代文：于是停止了基建，因此对太子说： 朕想汉文纯俭，心中常慕，你也可以以此为准则。 
English: As a result, the construction of infrastructure was stopped, so he said to the prince: I want to be pure and frugal in Chinese, and I always yearn for it in my heart. You can also take this as a guideline.

古文：未几，皇太子生日，上宴群臣于东宫，以大玉杓、黄金五百两赐丞相志宁，顾谓群臣曰： 卿等能立功，朕亦褒赏如此。 
现代文：不久，皇太子过生日，皇帝在东宫大宴群臣，用大玉杓、五百两黄金赐给丞相纥石烈志宁，并环顾群臣说： 你们能立功，朕也这样褒赏你们。 
English: Not long after, on the Crown Prince's birthday, the emperor gave a grand banquet to the courtiers in the East Palace. He gave the Grand Jade Scepter and five hundred taels of gold to the Minister of War, Shishi Retshinin, and looked around at the courtiers and said, "If you can do meritorious deeds, I will reward you in the same way."

古文：又曰： 参政孟浩公正敢言，自中丞为执政。
现代文：又说 ：参政孟浩公正敢言，从中丞一下提为执政。
English: He also said that Meng Hao, who was a member of the Political Bureau, was fair and dared to speak his mind, and was promoted to the post of the Political Bureau from the Central Military Commission.

古文：卿等能如是，朕亦不次用之。 
现代文：你们能这样，朕也破格提拔任用你们。 
English: If you can do this, I will promote and appoint you in an unprecedented way.

古文：世宗尝曰： 女直本尚纯朴，今之风俗，日薄一日，朕甚悯焉。 
现代文：金世宗曾经说 ：女真原本崇尚纯朴，今天的风俗一天不如一天厚淳，朕很忧愁。 
English: Kim Sejong once said, "Femininity originally advocated simplicity, but today's customs are becoming more and more vulgar day by day. I am very sad."

古文：浩对曰： 臣四十年前在会宁，当时风俗与今日不同，诚如圣训。 
现代文：孟浩回答说 ：我四十年前在会宁，当时风俗与今天不同，正像圣上训释。 
English: Meng Hao replied: I was in Huining forty years ago, when the customs were different from today, just like the sermon.

古文：上曰： 卿旧人，固知之。 
现代文：皇帝说： 你是旧时人，所以知道。 
English: The emperor said: You are an old-timer, so you know.

古文：上谓宰臣曰： 宋前废帝呼其叔湘东王为 猪王 ，食之以牢，纳之泥中，以为戏笑。
现代文：皇帝对宰臣说： 宋朝前废帝叫他叔叔湘东王为 猪王 ，让他在栏圈中吃饭，作为戏笑。
English: The Emperor said to the Vice-Minister: The former Emperor of the Song Dynasty called his uncle, the King of Shandong, the King of Pigs, and made him eat in the stalls as a joke.

古文：书于史策，所以劝善而惩恶也。
现代文：写在史册中，以劝善惩恶。
English: Written in the annals of history, in order to persuade the good and punish the evil.

古文：海陵以近习掌记注，记注不明，当时行事，实录不载，众人共知之者求访书之。 
现代文：海陵王用亲信掌管记注，记注写的不清楚，当时的行动大事，实录不记载，大家都知道的要询问写上它。 
English: King Hailing used his close confidants to take charge of the notes. The notes are not clear, the actions at that time are important, the records are not recorded, everyone knows to ask and write it down.

古文：浩对曰： 良史直笔，君举必书。
现代文：孟浩回答说： 良史直笔，君主的行动要写上。
English: Meng Hao replied: Good history is written directly, and the actions of the monarch should be written down.

古文：帝王不自观史，记注之臣乃得尽其直笔。 
现代文：帝王自己不看史，记注官才能都写下它。 
English: Emperors themselves do not read history, it is up to the scribes to write it down.

古文：浩复奏曰： 历古以来，不明赏罚而能治者，未之闻也。
现代文：孟浩又奏说： 自古以来，不明确奖赏惩罚而能治理好的，没有听说过。
English: Meng Hao also said: Since ancient times, it has not been heard that unclear rewards and punishments can govern good behavior.

古文：国家赏善罚恶，盖亦多矣，而天下莫能知。
现代文：国家奖赏好的惩罚恶的，大概也很多，而天下人不知道。
English: The state rewards the good and punishes the bad, and there are probably a lot of them, but people around the world don't know about them.

古文：乞自今凡赏功罚罪，皆具事状颁告之，使君子知劝以迁善，小人知惧以自警。 
现代文：请求从今开始凡是赏功罚罪，都把事情公布出去，使大臣们知道勤勉而努力工作，小人知道害怕而警惕。 
English: Request that from now on, all rewards and punishments be made public, so that ministers know to be diligent and work hard, and villains know to be afraid and alert.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇帝听从了孟浩的建议。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：进尚书右丞，兼太子少傅。
现代文：孟浩进升为尚书右丞，兼太子少傅。
English: Meng Hao was promoted to Shang Shujing, and also became the prince's junior tutor.

古文：罢为真定尹，上曰： 卿年虽老，精神不衰，善治军民，毋遽言退。 
现代文：后罢此职而任真定尹，金世宗皇帝说： 你年纪虽然大了，精神却还很好，又善于管理军民，不要急忙说退。 
English: After resigning from this post and appointing Zhending Yin, Emperor Kim Sejong said: Although you are old, your spirit is still good, and you are good at managing the military and the people. Don't be in a hurry to resign.

古文：以通犀带赐之。
现代文：皇帝用通犀带赐给他。
English: The emperor gave him a rhinoceros horn.

古文：十三年，薨。
现代文：大定十三年，孟浩死去。
English: In the thirteenth year of Dading, Meng Hao died.

古文：田谷自大理丞累官同知中京留守，终于利涉军节度使。
现代文：田珏从大理丞直升为同知中京留守，最后官为利涉军节度使。
English: Tanabe hurriedly left the capital from Darijo as a friend, and eventually became a military attaché to the Imperial Court.

古文：二十九年，章宗诏尚书省曰： 故吏部侍郎田珏等皆中正之士，小人以朋党陷之，由是得罪。
现代文：大定二十九年，金章宗下诏尚书省说 ：已故吏部侍郎田珏等人都是中正之士，小人用拉朋结党的罪名陷害他们，所以被判罪。
English: In the 29th year of Dading, Jinzhangzong issued an edict to Shangshuo saying, "The late librarian's attendant, Tian Qi, and others were all Zhongzheng's men. A villain framed them with the accusation of recruiting and forming a party, so they were convicted.

古文：世宗用孟浩为右丞，当时在者俱已用之，亡者未加追复，其议以闻。 
现代文：金世宗用孟浩做右丞，当时还健在的人都任用了，但死去的人却没有加以追复原职，这个主张让大家知道。 
English: Kim Sejong used Meng Hao as his right-hand man. Those who were still alive at the time were appointed, but those who died were not restored to their original positions. Let everyone know this idea.

古文：张汝霖奏曰： 珏专权树党，先朝已正罪名，莫不称当。
现代文：张汝霖上奏说： 田珏专权结党，先朝已经判定了他的罪名，没有人不说罪定的很恰当。
English: Zhang Rulin delivered a speech, saying, "Tian Ye has formed an authoritarian party, and the previous government has already convicted him. No one can but say that the conviction is very appropriate.

古文：今追赠官爵，恐无惩劝。 
现代文：今天追赠他们官爵，恐怕不能惩恶扬善。 
English: I'm afraid we can't punish the bad and reward the good by posthumously awarding them peerages today.

古文：汝霖先朝大臣，尝与顾命，上初即位，不肯辄逆其意，谓之曰： 卿既以为不可，姑置之。 
现代文：张汝霖是先朝的大臣，曾经参与那次案子的审判，金章宗又刚即皇帝位，不肯逆他的意思，对他说： 你既然是为了天下，姑且把此事放下。 
English: Zhang Rulin was a minister of the previous dynasty, who had participated in the trial of that case. Jin Zhangzong, who had just become emperor, refused to go against his wishes, and said to him: Since you are for the sake of the world, let this matter drop.

古文：盖张浩与蔡松年友善，故汝霖犹挤之也。汝霖死后，章宗复诏尚书省曰： 盖自田珏党事之后，有官者以为戒，惟务苟且，习以成风。
现代文：张汝霖死后，章宗又下诏尚书省说： 从田珏结党事之后，当官的引以为戒，追求苟且已习以成风。
English: After Zhang Rulin's death, Zhang Zong also issued an edict to the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology, saying: "After Tian Xuan's defection from the Communist Party, it has become a custom for government officials to be wary of, and to pursue, gloating.

古文：先帝知珏等无罪，录用生存之人，有擢至宰执者，其次有为节度、防御、刺史者。
现代文：先帝知道田珏等人无罪，录用了活着的人，有的提拔到宰执，有的做了节度、防御、刺史。
English: The former emperor knew that Tian Xuan and others were not guilty, and he hired living people, some were promoted to be in charge, and some did the control, defense, and history.

古文：其死者犹未追复，子孙犹在编户，朕甚悯焉。
现代文：那些死去的人还没有追复原职，其子孙也还在编户，朕很怜悯他们。
English: Those who died have not been restored to their original positions, and their children and grandchildren are still accountants. I feel very sorry for them.

古文：惟旌贤显善，无间存没，宜推先帝所以褒录忠直之意，并加恩恤，以励风俗。
现代文：为了表彰贤的传扬好的，应该推广先帝的褒扬忠直之意，并增加恩惠体恤，用以劝励风俗。
English: In order to commend the propagation of virtue, it is necessary to promote the former emperor's praise of loyalty, and increase the grace and sympathy to encourage customs.

古文：据田珏一起人除已叙用外，但未经任用身死，并与复旧官爵。
现代文：除田珏等一些人被任用外，没有任用的死去的，一起官爵复原职。
English: In addition to some people who were appointed, such as Tian Qi, those who died without appointment were reinstated together with the peerage.

古文：其子孙当时已有官职，以父祖坐党因而削除者，亦与追复。
现代文：他们的子孙当时已经有官职的，因为父亲祖父连坐结党案被判撤职的，也一起追复。
English: Their children and grandchildren already had official positions at that time, because their father's and grandfather's removal from office in connection with the case of sitting in the party was also recovered together.

古文：应合追复爵位人等子孙不及荫叙者，亦皆量与恩例。 
现代文：应当追复爵位的人及其子孙没有受到荫恩的，也按惯例给与他们。 
English: Those who should be restored to the peerage, and their children and grandchildren who have not received a peerage, will also be given them, as is customary.

古文：梁肃，字孟容，奉圣州人。
现代文：梁肃字孟容，奉圣州人。
English: Liang Su Zi Meng Rong, from Feng Shengzhou.

古文：自幼勤学，夏夜读书，往往达旦，母葛氏常灭烛止之。
现代文：他从小勤奋学习，夏天夜里读书常常通宵达旦，他的母亲葛氏经常熄灭蜡烛阻止他学习。
English: He studied diligently from an early age. He often stayed up all night reading in the summer, and his mother, Ge, often extinguished candles to prevent him from studying.

古文：天眷二年，擢进士第，调平遥县主簿，迁望都、绛县令。
现代文：天眷元年，梁肃选拔为进士第，调任平遥县主簿，升为望都、绛县令。
English: In the first year of Tianxin, Liang Su was selected to be promoted to the third, transferred to the main book of Pingyao County, and promoted to the capital of Wangdu and the county magistrate.

古文：以廉，入为尚书省令史。
现代文：他廉洁奉公，进朝任尚书省令史。
English: He was an incorruptible public servant and entered the imperial court as the Minister of Education and Culture.

古文：除定海军节度副使，改中都警巡使，迁山东西路转运副使。
现代文：后他被授予定海军节度副使，改任中都警巡使，升为山东西路转运副使。
English: Later, he was awarded the title of vice-envoy of the Navy Festival, and was appointed as the vice-envoy of the Central Metropolitan Police, and was promoted to vice-envoy of the East-West Mountain Road Transportation.

古文：营治汴宫，肃分护役事。
现代文：建造汴京宫殿时，梁肃分管工程建设。
English: During the construction of the Beijing Palace, Liang Su was in charge of the project construction.

古文：摄大名少尹。
现代文：代理大名少尹。
English: Acting daimyo shoin.

古文：正隆末，境内盗起，驱百姓平人陷贼中不能自辨者数千人，皆系大名狱。
现代文：正隆末年，国内发生盗贼作乱，几千名百姓平民被驱赶到盗贼中不能分辨，都被囚禁在大名的狱中。
English: At the end of Zhenglong's reign, there was a riot caused by thieves in the country, and several thousand commoners were driven away to where they could not be distinguished from the thieves, and they were all imprisoned in the Daming Prison.

古文：肃到官，考验得其情谳，出者十八九。
现代文：梁肃到任后，调查审讯了情况，十分之八九的都被放了出来。
English: After Liang Su took office, the situation was investigated and interrogated, and eight out of ten were released.

古文：大定二年，宛平赵植上书曰： 顷者，正隆任用阉寺，少府少监兼上林署令胡守忠因缘巧幸，规取民利。
现代文：大定二年，宛平赵植上书说： 不久前，正隆年间任用宦官，少府少监兼上林署令胡守忠因为巧言得宠，且巧取民利。
English: In the second year of Dading, Wanping Zhao Zhi wrote: Not long ago, during the Zhenglong era, Hu Shouzhong was appointed as eunuch, and he was also appointed as Shofu Junior Supervisor and Shanglin Department because he was well-liked for his clever speech and cleverly took advantage of the people.

古文：前蓟州刺史完颜守道、前中都警巡使梁肃，勤恪清廉，愿加进擢。 
现代文：前蓟州刺史完颜守道、前中都警巡使梁肃，勤勤恳恳清正廉洁，希望得到提升。 
English: Liang Su, a former member of the Zhangzhou Provincial History Committee, and a former central city police inspector, is diligent, sincere, honest and clean, and hopes to be promoted.

古文：于是守忠落少监，守道自滨州刺史召为谏议大夫，肃中都转运副使改大兴少尹。
现代文：于是胡守忠被降去少监职，完颜守道从滨州刺史召为谏议大夫，梁肃由中都转运副使改任大兴少尹。
English: As a result, Hu Shouzhong was demoted to the position of junior inspector, Guanyan Shoudou was called from Binzhou Zhishi to the position of deputy chief of staff, and Liang Su was transferred from the vice-minister of transportation to the vice-minister of transportation to the position of Daxing Shouyin.

古文：肃上疏言： 方今用度不足，非但边兵耗费而已。
现代文：梁肃上奏说： 今天国家开支不富足，这不仅仅是戍边军队的耗费。
English: Liang Su said: Today, the national expenditure is not sufficient. This is not just the expenditure of the border troops.

古文：吏部以常调除漕司僚佐，皆年老资高者为之，类不称职。
现代文：吏部授予的漕司官员，都是年老资高的人，他们大多不称职。
English: The rowing officials awarded by the cadre department are all old and senior, and most of them are incompetent.

古文：臣谓凡军功、进士诸科、门荫人，知钱谷利害，能使国用饶足而不伤民者，许上书自言。
现代文：我认为凡是有军功、考取进士各科、享受荫恩的人，知道金钱粮食的利害关系，能使国家开支宽裕而不损害人民的人，允许他们上书陈述建议。
English: I think that anyone who has military merit, has passed the entrance examination for scholars of various disciplines, and enjoys the shadow of grace, who knows the interests of money and grain, and who can make the country's expenditure generous without harming the people, is allowed to submit a letter to present suggestions.

古文：就择其可用，授以职事。
现代文：然后择其善者而用，授予他们职务。
English: Then he selects the best of them and appoints them.

古文：每五年委吏部通校有无水旱屯兵，视其增耗而黜陟之。
现代文：每五年委托吏部通报比较他们任职期间辖区内有无水旱兵灾，视其增值与消耗而罢免提升他们。
English: Every five years, the Commissioned Officers Department will notify and compare whether there is drought or war disaster in the jurisdiction during their tenure, and promote them according to their value-added and consumption.

古文：自汉武帝用桑弘羊始立榷酤法，民间粟麦岁为酒所耗者十常二三。
现代文：自从汉武帝用桑弘羊开始建立榷酤法，每年民间粮食有十分之三被耗费掉。
English: Since Emperor Hanwu began to use mulberry sheep to establish the ploughing method, three-tenths of folk grain has been consumed every year.

古文：宜禁天下酒曲，自京师及州郡官务，仍旧不得酤贩出城。
现代文：应该禁止天下酒的生产，从京城到州郡的官府，仍旧不能买卖酒出城。
English: The production of national liquor should be banned. From the capital to the provincial government, it is still not possible to buy and sell liquor outside the city.

古文：其县镇乡村，权行停止。 
现代文：县镇乡村，权且停止买卖酒。 
English: Counties, towns and villages have the right to stop selling and buying alcohol.

古文：不报。
现代文：皇帝金世宗对此没有答复。
English: It didn't make the papers.

古文：三年，坐捕蝗不如期，贬川州刺史，削官一阶，解职。
现代文：大定三年，梁肃因为不能按期捕杀蝗虫，贬为川州刺史，降职一级，解除职务。
English: In the third year of Dading, because Liang Su could not catch and kill locusts on schedule, he was demoted to the status of a historian of Sichuan Province, downgraded to the first grade, and relieved of his duties.

古文：上御便殿，召左谏议大夫奚吁、翰林待制刘仲诲，秘书少监移剌子敬，访问古今事。
现代文：金世宗皇帝驾御便殿，诏令左谏议大夫奚吁、翰林待制刘仲诲、秘书少监移剌子敬，询问古今大事。
English: Emperor Kim Sejong rode to the throne room, and ordered Zuo Ye to interrogate Dr. Zhou, Hanlin to detain Liu Zhongyun, and Secretary Juvenile Convict Jianzi to inquire about the events of the past and present.

古文：少间，吁从容请曰： 梁肃材可惜，解职太重。 
现代文：一会儿，奚吁从容请求说 ：梁肃是个人才应当爱惜，解职惩罚太重。 
English: After a while, Zou Xu calmly pleaded: Liang Su is an individual who should be cherished, and the punishment of dismissal is too heavy.

古文：上曰： 卿言是也。 
现代文：皇帝说： 你说的对。 
English: The emperor said: Your words are right.

古文：乃除河北东路转运副使。
现代文：于是授予梁肃为河北东路转运副使。
English: As a result, Liang Su was awarded the title of Deputy Envoy of Hebei East Road Transportation.

古文：是时，窝斡乱后，兵食不足，诏肃措置沿边兵食。
现代文：此时，移剌窝斡叛乱刚平定，军队粮食紧张，皇帝诏令梁肃筹措军队的粮食。
English: At this time, the rebellion in Zhisheng had just been quelled, the army was short of food, and the emperor ordered Liang Su to raise food for the army.

古文：移牒肇州、北京、广宁盐场，许民以米易盐，兵民皆得其利。
现代文：梁肃下文书给肇州、北京、广宁盐场，允许人民用米换盐，军队人民都得利。
English: Liang Su issued a document to Zhaozhou, Beijing and Guangning salt fields, allowing the people to exchange rice for salt, and the military people all benefited.

古文：四年，通检东平、大名两路户籍物力，称其平允。
现代文：大定四年，检查东平、大名两路住户的物力，一致称赞此两路的住户物力平均。
English: In the fourth year of the Great Reform, the material resources of households in Dongping and Daming were inspected, and the average material resources of households in these two roads were unanimously praised.

古文：他使者所至皆以苛刻增益为功，百姓诉苦之。
现代文：而其他地方则用苛刻的手段增加物力作为功劳，老百姓都诉苦。
English: In other places, however, harsh measures are used to increase material resources as a reward, and the common people complain about the hardships.

古文：朝廷敕诸路以东平、大名通检为准，于是始定。
现代文：朝廷下令各路都以东平、大名作为标准，于是此事才算安定下来。
English: The imperial court ordered that all roads should be built according to the standards of Dongping and daimyo, and the matter was finally settled.

古文：七年，父忧去官。
现代文：大定七年，梁肃父亲去世他辞官服孝。
English: In the seventh year of Dading, Liang Su's father passed away and he resigned from his post to become a filial son.

古文：起复都水监。
现代文：再次出任时为都水监。
English: When he took office again, he was the Metropolitan Water Inspector.

古文：河决李固，诏肃视之，还奏： 决河水六分，旧河水四分。
现代文：黄河在李固渡决口，皇帝金世宗诏令梁肃前去视察，回朝后他上奏： 决口的那条河道有六分水，旧河道有四分水。
English: The Yellow River was at the mouth of the Li River. Emperor Jin Shizong ordered Liang Su to go and inspect it. After returning to China, he recited: The river at the mouth of the Li River has six-percent water, and the old river has four-percent water.

古文：今障塞决河，复故道为一，再决而南则南京忧，再决而北则山东、河北皆可忧。
现代文：现在是河道阻碍导致决口，把旧河道修复，第二次决口南面的南京就很危险，第三次决口北面的山东、河北都很危险。
English: At present, it is the obstruction of the river channel that leads to the breach and the restoration of the old river channel. The second breach south of Nanjing is very dangerous, and the third breach north of Shandong and Hebei is very dangerous.

古文：不若止于李固南筑堤，使两河分流，以杀水势便。 
现代文：不如在李固渡南修一道大堤，使两条河道分流，以减缓水势。 
English: It would be better to build a large dike in the south of Li Guodu to divert the flow of the two rivers and slow down the water level.

古文：上从之。
现代文：皇帝听从了他的意见。
English: Emperor Dezong accepted his suggestion.

古文：改大理卿。
现代文：梁肃改任大理卿。
English: Liang Su was reappointed as Daliqing.

古文：尚辇局本把石抹阿里哥与钉铰匠陈外儿共盗宫中造车银钉叶，肃以阿里哥监临，当首坐。
现代文：尚辇局本把石抹阿里哥，与钉铰匠陈外儿，共同盗窃宫中造车银钉叶。梁肃认为石抹阿里哥是监工，应当是首犯。
English: According to Liang Su, the chief of the Bureau of Palace Guards, the stone-dabbing Arigo, together with the nail-maker Chen Wai'er, stole the silver nail leaves for the palace car. Liang Su believed that the stone-dabbing Arigo was the supervisor and should be the first offender.

古文：他寺官以陈外儿为首，抵死。
现代文：其他官认为陈外儿是首犯，用他抵偿死罪。
English: Other officials believed that Chen Wai'er was the first offender and used him to atone for the capital crime.

古文：上曰： 罪疑惟轻，各免死，徒五年，除名。 
现代文：金世宗皇帝说： 罪行不重，都免死，判五年徒刑，官府除名。 
English: Emperor Kim Sejong said: The crimes are not serious, they are all exempted from death, sentenced to five years in prison, and removed from the government.

古文：于时，东京久不治，上自择肃为同知东京留守事。
现代文：在那时，东京很长时间没有治理好，皇帝亲自选拔梁肃为同知东京留守事。
English: At that time, Tokyo had not been well governed for a long time, and the emperor personally selected Liang Su to stay in Tokyo.

古文：迁中都都转运使，转吏部尚书。
现代文：梁肃升为中都转运使，转为吏部尚书。
English: Liang Susheng was transferred to the Central Government as a transfer envoy, and was transferred to the Personnel Department as an official.

古文：上疏论台谏，其大旨谓： 台官自大夫至监察，谏官自大夫至拾遗，陛下宜亲择，不可委之宰相，恐树私恩，塞言路也。 
现代文：梁肃上奏讨论台谏，其大意是： 台官从大夫到监察，谏官从大夫到拾遗，陛下应该亲自选拔，不可以把此事委托给宰相，那样恐怕会树起私怨，阻塞言论自由。 
English: Liang Su made a speech to discuss the appointment of Taiwan officials, the gist of which was: Taiwan officials should be selected in person from doctors to supervisors, and eunuchs should be selected from doctors to excavators. The matter should not be entrusted to the prime minister, as this would probably create personal grudges and obstruct freedom of speech.

古文：上嘉纳之。
现代文：皇帝金世宗嘉奖了他并接纳了他的意见。
English: The Emperor approved and adopted his opinion.

古文：复请奴婢不得服罗，上曰： 近已禁奴婢服明金矣，可渐行之。 
现代文：梁肃又请求皇帝说奴婢不得穿丝织衣服，皇帝金世宗说： 近来已经禁止奴婢穿明金了，对此可逐渐实行。 
English: Liang Su also asked the emperor to say that slaves and maids should not wear silk clothes. Emperor Jin Shizong said: Recently, slaves and maids have been banned from wearing bright gold, and this can be gradually implemented.

古文：肃举同安主簿高旭，除平阳酒使，肃奏曰： 明君用人，必器使之。
现代文：梁肃推荐同安主簿高旭，高旭被授予平阳酒使，梁肃上奏说 ：明君用人，一定量才使用。
English: Liang Su recommended the master of Tongan, Gao Xu, and Gao Xu was awarded the title of Pingyang Sake Master. Liang Su said: "Ming Jun employs people, and only uses a certain amount.

古文：旭儒士，优于治民，若使坐列肆，榷酒酤，非所能也。
现代文：高旭是个儒士，擅长治理百姓，如果使他管理经营酒，不是他的能力。
English: Gao Xu is a Confucian, good at governing the people. If he is made to manage liquor, it is not his ability.

古文：臣愚以为诸道盐铁使依旧文武参注，其酒税使副以右选三差俱最者为之。 上曰： 善。 
现代文：我以为诸道盐铁使依旧文武参注，其酒税副使选各方面都好者担任。 皇帝说 ：好。 
English: I thought that the people in charge of the salt and iron in various provinces were still the same as those in charge of literature and military affairs, and that the person who was good at all aspects of the selection of the liquor tax deputy was in charge. The emperor said: Good.

古文：改刑部尚书。
现代文：改任梁肃为刑部尚书。
English: Liang Su was appointed as the head of the Criminal Law Department.

古文：宋主屡请免立受国书之仪，世宗不从。
现代文：宋朝君主多次请求免去设立接受国书的仪礼，金世宗不同意。
English: The monarch of the Song Dynasty repeatedly requested to be exempted from the establishment of the ceremony of receiving the state anthem, but Kim Sejong did not agree.

古文：及大兴尹璋为十四年正旦使，宋主使人就馆夺其书，而重赂之。
现代文：等到大兴尹完颜璋为十四年正旦使，宋朝君主派人在靠近宾馆的地方抢去了他的文书，然后又重重贿赂他。
English: When Daxing Yin Wanyan became the 14th Zhengdan envoy, the Song Dynasty monarch sent someone to snatch his documents near the hotel, and then bribed him heavily.

古文：敢劳将命之还，先布鄙悰之恳，自余专使肃控请祈。 
现代文：完颜璋回去，被打一百五十下，官府除名。任梁肃为宋国详问使。
English: After Yan Xuan returned, he was beaten 150 times and expelled from the government. Liang Su was appointed as the detailed envoy of the Song Dynasty.

古文：肃还至泗州，先遣都管赵王府长史驼满蒲马入奏。
现代文：梁肃到宋朝，宋朝君主一一如约，立接国书。梁肃准备回金朝，宋让他捎信致谢。梁肃回到泗州，先派都管赵王府长史礥满蒲马进朝入奏。
English: When Liang Su arrived in the Song Dynasty, the monarch of the Song Dynasty, as agreed, signed a document to take over the country. When Liang Su was preparing to return to the Jin Dynasty, the Song Dynasty asked him to write a letter of thanks. When Liang Su returned to Zhangzhou, he first sent the governor of Zhao Wangfu, Shi Minman Puma, to enter the country.

古文：世宗大喜，欲以肃为执政，左丞相良弼曰： 梁肃可相，但使宋还即为之，宋人自此轻我矣。 
现代文：金世宗很高兴，想任梁肃为执政，左丞相良弼说 ：梁肃才能完全可以做相，但只刚刚出使宋朝回来就任命他，宋朝人从此会小看我们。 
English: Kim Sejong was very happy and wanted to appoint Ryang Soo as the ruler. Ryang Soo, the minister of the left, said, "Only Ryang Soo can be a pharaoh, but he was only appointed when he returned from the Song Dynasty. The Song Dynasty people will look down on us from now on."

古文：上乃止。
现代文：金世宗皇帝于是停止了任命。
English: The Emperor finally stopped.

古文：久之，为济南尹，上疏曰： 刑罚世轻世重，自汉文除肉刑，罪至徒者带鐐居役，岁满释之，家无兼丁者，加杖准徒。
现代文：很久以后，梁肃为济南尹，他上奏说 ：刑罚时轻时重，自从汉文帝除掉摧残人肉体的刑罚，犯罪达到判刑的人带镣服刑，期满释放，家里没有成年男子，加倍打他。
English: After a long time, Liang Su changed his name to Jinan Yin. He said in his report, "Punishments vary from light to heavy. Since Emperor Han Wen eliminated the punishment of destroying people's bodies, those who have committed crimes and have been sentenced to serve their sentences with shackles, will be released at the end of the term. If there is no adult male in the family, he will be beaten twice as much."

古文：今取辽季之法，徒一年者杖一百，是一罪二刑也，刑罚之重，于斯为甚。
现代文：现在借鉴辽末的法律，判刑一年的人再打一百下，这是一罪两次惩罚，刑罚之重，这表现的最甚。
English: Now, with reference to the law of Liaoning Province at the end of the last century, a person sentenced to one year will receive one hundred lashes. This is a crime with two punishments, and the severity of the punishment is the most obvious.

古文：今太平日久，当用中典，有司犹用重法，臣实痛之。
现代文：现在太平日子应当用中等刑法，有司还用重刑法，我实在痛心。
English: Now, in times of peace, we should use the medium-level criminal law, but some departments still use the heavy-level criminal law. I am really saddened.

古文：自今徒罪之人，止居作，更不决杖， 不报。
现代文：从现在开始犯罪的人，只让他们服刑，不要再打他们。 
English: From now on, if someone commits a crime, just let them serve their sentence and stop beating them.

古文：未几，致仕，起复彰德军节度使，召拜参知政事。
现代文：金世宗皇帝没有批复。
English: Emperor Kim Sejong did not approve the reply.

古文：上谓侍臣曰： 梁肃以治入异等，遂至大任，廉吏亦可以劝矣。 
现代文：不久，梁肃退休。出山后又为彰德军节度使，授予参知政事，金世宗皇帝对侍臣说 ：梁肃因为管理人很优异，于是被重用，廉吏也可以勉励。 
English: Not long after, Liang Su retired. After leaving the mountain, he was awarded the title of "Senior Vice-Governor" and "Senior Vice-Minister" as a special envoy to the German army. Emperor Kim Sejong said to his vassal: "Because Liang Su was an excellent administrator, he was reused. Corrupt officials can also be encouraged."

古文：肃奏： 汉之羽林，皆通《孝经》。今之亲军，即汉之羽林也。
现代文：梁肃上奏说： 汉人的羽林军，都通晓《孝经》，我们现在的亲军，就是汉人的羽林军。
English: Liang Su Shangsoo said: The Han people's Ulin Army are all familiar with the "Filial Piety," and our current pro-army is the Han people's Ulin Army.

古文：臣乞每百户赐《孝经》一部，使之教读，庶知臣子之道，其出职也，可知政事。 
现代文：我请求每百户赐给一部《孝经》，让他们学习，这样差不多能知道做臣子的道理，出任官职，可知道行政事务。 
English: I request that one copy of the Filial Piety Sutra be given to every hundred households for them to study, so that they can almost know the principle of being a courtier, hold a government post, and know administrative affairs.

古文：上曰： 善，人之行，莫大于孝，亦由教而后能。 
现代文：金世宗皇帝说： 好，人的行为，没有比孝更大的，这也是先学习后才知道的。 
English: Emperor Kim Sejong said, "Well, there is nothing more important than filial piety in human behavior, and this is something that can only be learned through study.

古文：诏与护卫俱赐焉。
现代文：皇帝金世宗诏令赐赏梁肃和护卫。
English: Emperor Jin Shizong issued a decree to reward Liang Su and his bodyguards.

古文：复上奏曰： 方今斗米三百，人已困饿，以钱难得故也。
现代文：梁肃又上奏说 ：当今三百斗米，人们仍然困窘饥饿，因为钱难得的缘故。
English: Liang Su also said in his report: Today, people are still suffering from hunger because of the scarcity of money.

古文：计天下岁入二千万贯以上，一岁之用余千万。
现代文：计天下每年收入二千万贯以上，一年开支后还剩一千万。
English: According to statistics, the world's annual income is more than 20 million yuan, and there is still 10 million yuan left after one year's expenditure.

古文：院务坊场及百姓合纳钱者，通减数百万。
现代文：院务坊场及百姓交钱纳税，总共几百万。
English: The hospital administration and the people pay taxes, totaling several million.

古文：院务坊场可折纳谷帛，折支官兵俸给，使钱布散民间，稍稍易得。 
现代文：院务坊场可折合交纳粮食和丝织物，以此折合给官兵的俸禄，使钱布散于民间，这很容易做到。 
English: It is easy to do, because the hospital can exchange the grain and silk fabric, and thus exchange the salary for the officers and soldiers, so that the money can be distributed to the people.

古文：上曰： 悬欠院务，许折纳，可也。 
现代文：金世宗皇帝说： 允许折合交纳，可以。 
English: Emperor Kim Sejong said, "It is permissible to accept payment in the form of exchange.

古文：肃上疏论生财舒用八事。
现代文：梁肃上奏章论生财用人八件事。
English: Liang Su made a report on the eight things of making money and employing people.

古文：一曰罢随司通事；二曰罢酒税司杓栏人；三曰天水郡王本族已无在者，其余皆远族，可罢养济；四曰裁减随司契丹吏员；五曰罢榷醋，以利与民；六曰量减盐价，使私盐不行，民不犯法；七曰随路酒税许折纳诸物；八曰今岁大稔，乞广籴粟麦，使钱货流出。
现代文：一、废去随司通事。二、废去酒税税司杓栏人。三、天水郡王的本族已经没人了，其余的人都是远族，可免去他的供给。四、裁减随司的契丹官员。五、废除食醋专营，以利人民。六、适量降低盐价，让私盐卖不出去，这样人民就不会犯法。七、随路酒税允许折合物质交纳。八、今年大丰收，请求国家广泛收购粮食，让钱物流于社会。
English: I. Abolish the attendant. II. Abolish the liquor tax. III. There is no longer anyone from the original family of the king of Tianshui County, and the rest of the people are distant relatives, who can be exempted from his supply. IV. Reduce the attendant Khitan officials. V. Abolish the vinegar franchise to benefit the people. VI. Reduce the price of salt by an appropriate amount so that the private salt cannot be sold, so that the people will not break the law. VII. Allow the travel liquor tax to be paid in kind. VIII. This year's bumper harvest, request the state to widely purchase grain and let the money flow

古文：上曰： 赵氏养济一事，乃国家美政，不可罢。
现代文：皇帝金世宗说 ：天水郡王供给一事，是国家的美政，不能废除。
English: Emperor Jin Shizong said, "The matter of the supply of the King of Tianshui County is the country's beauty policy and cannot be abolished."

古文：其七事，宰相详议以闻。 
现代文：其他七件事，宰相详细议论后再报告给我。 
English: As for the other seven matters, the Prime Minister will discuss them in detail before reporting to me.

古文：上又曰： 朕在位二十余年，鉴海陵之失，屡有改作，亦不免有缪戾者，卿等悉心奏之。 
现代文：皇帝金世宗又说： 朕在位二十多年，借鉴海陵王皇帝的失败，屡有改革，这也免不了有错误罪过，你们要悉心上奏。 
English: Emperor Kim Sejong also said, "I have been on the throne for more than twenty years. Drawing on the failure of Emperor Haering, there have been many reforms. This also inevitably involves mistakes and sins. You should play your part carefully.

古文：肃论 正员官被差，权摄官有公罪，及正员还任，皆准去官勿论，往往其人苟且，不事其事。乞于县令中留十人备差，无差正员官。 
现代文：梁肃议论： 正员官被差遣，权摄官有公罪，等到正员官还任，都准他们辞官勿论，他们那些人往往苟且，不好好从事他们的事业，请求在县令中留十人备用，不要差遣正员官。 
English: Liang Su's discussion: When a regular officer is dispatched, the power of the procuratorate is a public crime. As long as the regular officer is still in office, they are allowed to resign. However, those people are often scrupulous and do not engage in their cause well. Request that ten people be kept in reserve in the county order, and do not send a regular officer.

古文：上曰： 自今权摄有公罪，正员虽还而本职未替者，勿以去官论之。 
现代文：皇帝金世宗说 ：自今权摄官有公罪，正员官回来后而他的职务未有人代替的，不要让他们辞官。 
English: Emperor Kim Sejong said, "From now on, if there is a public crime committed by a regent, and if there is no one to take his place when the regular officials return, don't let them resign.

古文：肃曰： 诚如圣旨。 
现代文：梁肃说 ：诚然像你说的。 
English: Liang Su said, "Of course, as you said.

古文：肃与宰相奏事，既罢，肃跪而言曰： 四时畋猎，虽古礼，圣人亦以为戒。
现代文：梁肃与宰相上奏完毕，梁肃跪下说： 四季打猎，虽然是古礼，但圣人也引以为戒。
English: After Liang Su and the prime minister had finished their performance, Liang Su knelt down and said, "Hunting in the four seasons, although it is an ancient ritual, is also a warning to the sages.

古文：陛下春秋高，属时严寒，驰聘于山林之间。
现代文：陛下年龄大，又是严寒季节，不宜在山林之间驰骋。
English: His Majesty is old, and it is the cold season. It is not appropriate to gallop between the mountains and forests.

古文：法宫燕处，亦足怡神，愿为宗社自重，天下之福也。 
现代文：法宫燕处，也足可以怡神，希望陛下为了祖宗的社稷而自重，这是天下的福气。 
English: At the Dharma Palace Yan, you can also enjoy the gods. I hope that Your Majesty will be self-respecting for the sake of the ancestral society. This is the blessing of the world.

古文：上曰： 朕诸子方壮，使之习武，故时一往尔。 
现代文：金世宗皇帝说： 朕的儿子都年轻力壮，让他们练武，到时一同前往山林射猎。 
English: Emperor Kim Sejong said: My sons are young and strong, let them practice martial arts, and then go to the mountains and forests to shoot.

古文：同知震武军节度使邓秉钧陈言四事，其一言外多阙官，及循资拟注不得人，上以问宰相张汝弼，曰： 循资格行已久，仍旧便。 
现代文：同知震武军节度使邓秉钧陈述四件事，其中一件事是说外面多宫阙官府，按照资格有人不该有，皇帝金世宗以此问宰相张汝弼，张说： 此事按资格推行已久，仍然按旧例。 
English: Emperor Jin Shizong asked the prime minister Zhang Rong, "This matter has been carried out according to qualifications for a long time, but it is still according to the old practice.

古文：肃曰： 不然。
现代文：梁肃说： 不行。
English: Liang Su said, "No."

古文：如亡辽固不足道，其用人之法有仕及四十年无败事，即与节度使，岂必循资哉。 
现代文：如果灭亡的辽国固不值得称道，但他们用人的法则一一一做四十年官没有失败的事，即升他为节度使一一一值得称道，难道一定要遵循资格吗？ 
English: If the Liao Guogu, who perished, was not praiseworthy, but they used the law of man to do the things that officials have not failed to do for forty years, that is, to make him worthy of praise, is it necessary to follow the qualifications?

古文：上曰： 仕四十年已衰老。
现代文：皇帝金世宗说 ：做官做四十年已经衰老了。
English: Emperor Kim Sejong said, "Being an official for forty years has aged me."

古文：察其政绩，善者升之，后政再察之，善又升之，如此可以得人，亦无旷事。 
现代文：要观察他的政绩，好的就提升他，再观察他的政绩，好的又提他，如此可以得到人才，也没有空缺的事。 
English: If you want to observe his political performance, if it is good, you should promote him. If you want to observe his political performance, if it is good, you should promote him. In this way, you can get talent, and there is no vacancy.

古文：肃曰： 诚如圣训。 
现代文：梁肃说： 正如圣上训诫的那样。 
English: Liang Su said, "It is just as the saint exhorted.

古文：肃论盗贼不息，请无禁兵器。
现代文：梁肃说盗贼不灭，请求不要禁止兵器。
English: Liang Su said that thieves will not be extinguished, and asked that weapons not be banned.

古文：上曰： 所在有兵器，其利害如何？ 
现代文：金世宗皇帝说 ：所有的地方都有兵器，利害关系怎么样？ 
English: Emperor Kim Il Sung said, "There are weapons everywhere. What are the stakes?

古文：肃曰： 他路则已，中都一路上农夫听置之，似乎无害。 
现代文：梁肃说： 其他路就不说了，中都一路上农夫随便搁置它，似乎没有害。 
English: Liang Su said, "I won't talk about other roads. In the middle of the road, the farmer casually put it aside. It doesn't seem to be harmful.

古文：上曰： 朕将思之。 
现代文：金世宗皇帝说 ：朕将考虑这件事。 
English: Emperor Kim Sejong said, "I will think about it."

古文：凡使宋者，宋人致礼物，大使金二百两，银二千两，副使半之，币帛杂物称是。
现代文：凡是出使到宋朝的人，宋人都送礼物，大使送二百两黄金、二千两白银，副使减半。
English: Anyone who was sent to the Song Dynasty, the Song people sent gifts, the ambassador sent two hundred and two gold, two thousand and two silver, and the deputy envoy reduced by half.

古文：及推排物力，肃自以身为执政，昔尝使宋，所得礼物多，当为庶民率先，乃自增物力六十余贯，论者多之。
现代文：等到展示物力，梁肃自认为身为执政，以前曾出使宋朝，所得礼物多，应当为他人的表率，于是自己再增加物力六十余贯献给国家，议论这件事的人很多。
English: When it came time to display his material resources, Liang Sui thought that he, as the ruler, who had previously sent envoys to the Song Dynasty and received many gifts, should be a role model for others. Therefore, he increased his material resources by more than sixty percent and dedicated them to the country. There are many people who talk about this.

古文：二十三年，肃请老，上谓宰臣曰： 梁肃知无不言，正人也。
现代文：大定二十三年，梁肃请求告老还乡，皇帝金世宗对宰臣说： 梁肃知无不言，是个正直的人。
English: In the 23rd year of Dading, when Liang Su requested to return to his hometown, Emperor Jin Shizong said to the vice-minister: Liang Su knows everything and is an honest person.

古文：有疾在告，遣官医诊视。
现代文：你们却知而不言，朕实在是看不起。即使这样，梁肃已经年纪大了，应该批准他的请求。 
English: But you know and don't say, I really despise you. Even so, Liang Su is already old, and his request should be approved.

古文：复为刑部尚书。
现代文：于是梁肃退休。
English: Gongpo returned to the imperial court and was appointed to the Ministry of Justice.

古文：上还自上京，以为西京留守，改临洮尹，卒。移剌子敬，字同文，本名屋骨朵鲁，辽五院人。
现代文：皇帝下诏任命梁肃的儿子梁汝翼为门祗候。大定二十八年，梁肃死去。谥号正宪。移剌子敬，字同文，本名叫屋古朵鲁，辽国五院人。
English: The emperor decreed that Liang Su's son, Liang Ruyi, should be the next emperor. Liang Su died in the 28th year of Dading. His posthumous name was Zheng Xian. His real name was Yakudoru. He was a member of the Fifth Academy of Liao Dynasty.

古文：曾祖霸哥，同平章事。
现代文：他的曾祖父是霸哥，官做到同平章事。
English: His great-grandfather was a domineering brother, and officials did everything equally.

古文：父拔鲁，准备任使官。
现代文：他的父亲拔鲁，准备任使官。
English: His father, Baloo, was preparing to become an envoy.

古文：都统杲克中京，辽主西走，留拔鲁督辎重，已而辎重被掠，拔鲁乃自髡，逃于山林。
现代文：都统杲攻克中京，辽国君主向西逃跑，留下拔鲁督运辎重，不久辎重被掠夺，拔鲁于是自己剃去了头发，逃进山林。
English: After conquering Chukyo, the Liao monarch fled westward, leaving Baloo in command. Soon after, Baloo was plundered, so Baloo shaved his head and fled into the mountains.

古文：子敬读书好学，皇统间，特进移剌固修《辽史》，辟为掾属。《辽史》成，除同知辽州事。
现代文：子敬读书好学，皇统年间，皇上特地召移剌固进官编撰修订《辽史》，移剌固辟举移剌子敬为掾属，《辽史》编修完毕，子敬被任命为同知辽州事。
English: Zi Jing was fond of reading and learning. During the period of imperial rule, the emperor specially summoned Zi Zi Gu Jin to compile and revise the "Liao History." Zi Zi Gu Bi raised Zi Zi Jing to be a member of the imperial family. After the compilation of "Liao History" was completed, Zi Jing was appointed as Tongzhi Liaozhou.

古文：旧本厅自有占地，岁入数百贯，州官岁取其课，地主以为例，未尝请辩。
现代文：按旧的规定，本厅自有所属土地，每年收入数百贯钱，州官每年收取税捐，地主们以此为例，不曾请求辩解。
English: According to the old regulations, this office has its own land, earns hundreds of thousands of dollars a year, and state officials collect taxes and fees every year. The landowners took this as an example and did not ask for justification.

古文：子敬曰： 已有公田，何为更取民田。 竟不取。
现代文：子敬说： 已经有公田，有什么理由再从民田中收取税金？ 
English: Zi Jing said: There are already public fields, what is the reason for collecting taxes from private fields?

古文：秩满，郡人请留于行台省，不许。
现代文：竟然不去收取民田税金。子敬任期满了，郡人请求将子敬留在行台省，圣上不允许。
English: He didn't even collect the people's field tax. When his term of office expired, the people of the county asked him to stay in Xingtai Province, but he was not allowed to go.

古文：天德三年，入为翰林修撰，迁礼部郎中。
现代文：天德三年，入朝任翰林修撰，迁任礼部郎中。
English: In the third year of Tende's reign, he entered the imperial court as Hanlin Shuxin and was transferred to the position of Reibu roju.

古文：正隆元年，诸将巡边，诏子敬监战，军帅以战获分将士，亦以遗子敬，子敬不受。
现代文：正隆元年，诸将巡边，皇帝诏令子敬监战，军中元帅拿战利品分给将士，也送给子敬，子敬不接受。
English: In the first year of Zhenglong, when the generals were on patrol, the emperor issued an edict ordering Zi Jing to supervise the battle. The field marshal took the spoils and distributed them to the soldiers, and also gave them to Zi Jing, but Zi Jing did not accept them.

古文：及还，入见，海陵谓之曰： 汝家贫而不苟得，不受俘获，朕甚嘉之。 
现代文：还朝入见皇上，海陵王对他说： 你家贫而不贪利，不接受俘获战利品，朕很是赞赏你。 
English: He also went to see the emperor, and King Hailing said to him: Your family is poor but not greedy, and does not accept captured booty. I really appreciate you.

古文：凡同行官僚所取者，皆没入于官。
现代文：凡是与子敬同行官僚所获取的战利品，都被没收进了官府库中。
English: All the spoils of war obtained by the bureaucrats who accompanied Zi Jing were confiscated into the government treasury.

古文：其后诏子敬宴赐诸部，谕之曰： 凡受进，例遣宰臣，以汝前能称职，故特命汝。 
现代文：之后皇上诏令子敬设宴赏赐诸部官员，向他们宣布： 凡受进封的，按常规是派宰相大臣去办，因为你以前的表现才能称职，所以特别直接对你下命令。 
English: Afterward, the Emperor gave a banquet to reward the officials of various ministries, and announced to them, "For those who have been awarded the title of nobility, the Prime Minister will be sent to deal with them according to the usual procedure, because your previous performance is what qualifies you for the position, so he will give you a special direct order.

古文：使还，迁翰林待制。
现代文：让子敬回去了，升迁他为翰林待制。
English: Zhan Zi Jing went back, and he was promoted to be the leader of Hanlin.

古文：大定二年，以待制同修国史。
现代文：大定二年，以待制身份同修国史。
English: In the second year of Dading, he began to study the history of the country as a trainee.

古文：是时，窝斡余党散居诸猛安谋克中，诏子敬往抚之，仍宣谕猛安谋克，及州县汉人，无以前时用兵相杀伤，挟怨辄害契丹人。
现代文：当时，窝斡的余党散居在诸猛安谋克当中，皇帝诏令子敬前往去安抚他们，仍然宣布他们是猛安谋克，以及州县的汉人，不像以前的时候用兵打仗互相杀伤，心怀怨恨则去残害契丹人。
English: At that time, the remnants of the party were scattered in the midst of the rebels, and the emperor gave the order to go to pacify them, and still declared that they were rebels, as well as the Han people of the prefectures and counties, unlike in the past when they used soldiers to fight and kill each other, and with resentment they went to kill the Khitan people.

古文：使还，改秘书少监，兼修起居注，修史如故。
现代文：子敬出使归来，改任秘书少监，兼撰修《起居注》，并像以前一样撰修历史。
English: After Zi Jing returned from his mission, he was reassigned to the position of secretary and junior superintendent. He also wrote "Living and Working Notes" and studied history as before.

古文：诏曰： 以汝博通古今，故以命汝。 
现代文：皇帝下诏说 ：因为你博通古今，所以任命你去修史。 
English: The emperor issued an edict saying, "Because you are knowledgeable about the past and the present, I have appointed you to study history."

古文：常召入讲论古今及时政利害，或至夜半。
现代文：皇上经常召子敬入宫讲论古今以及时政利害，有时讲到半夜。
English: The emperor often invited his son to the palace to lecture on the past, present and current political interests, sometimes until midnight.

古文：子敬有良马，平章政事完颜元宜索之，子敬以元宜为相也，不与。
现代文：子敬有良马，平章政事完颜元宜向他索要，子敬因为元宜是宰相，不给他。
English: Zi Jing has a good horse. After the political affairs of Pingzhang, Yan Yuanyi asked him for a horse. Zi Jing did not give it to him because Yuanyi was the prime minister.

古文：至是，元宜乞致仕，罢为东京，子敬乃以此马赆行，识者韪之。
现代文：到了元宜请求辞官，被罢免宰相去东京任职，子敬才拿这匹良马送给元宜并为他送行，知道这件事的人都称赞他做的对。
English: When it came to Motoyoshi's request to be appointed as chancellor, and the ousted prime minister went to Tokyo to take up his post, it was Sonken who gave this fine horse to Motoyoshi and saw him off. Everyone who knew about this praised him for doing the right thing.

古文：子敬对曰： 宋人自来浮辞相欺，来书言海陵败于采石，大军北归，按兵不袭，俾全师而还。
现代文：当时，仆散忠义攻伐宋国，宋国请求讲和，而文书、疆界都未确定。子敬和秘书少监石抹颐、修《起居注》的张汝弼正在偏殿侍候，皇上说： 宋主求和，但宋人反复而不讲信义，喜欢夸大其辞。 
English: At that time, Zhongyi's vassals attacked Song, and Song asked for peace, but the documents and borders had not been determined. Zi Jian and Zhang Rong, the secretary of the junior superintendent of the imperial court, were waiting in the hall, and the emperor said: "Song is asking for peace, but the Song people repeatedly do not speak truthfully and like to exaggerate their words.

古文：海陵未尝败于采石，其谲诈多此类也。回书宜言往者大军若令渡江，宋国境土，必为我有。 
现代文：子敬回答说 ：宋人从来都是以浮虚之辞来欺骗人，传来文书说海陵在采石战败，大军向北撤回，他们按兵不动，并不追击，从而保全海陵全军而还。
English: Zi Jing replied, "The Song people have always been deceiving people with fancy words. There was a document saying that Hailing was defeated in quarrying, and the army withdrew to the north. They did not move their troops and did not pursue, thus preserving Hailing's entire army and returning.

古文：上曰： 彼以诡诈，我以诚实，但当以理折之。 
现代文：其实海陵不曾在采石战败，宋人的诡谲诈骗大多是这一类的。我朝回书应该写明我们派出大军。如果下令渡江，那么宋国国土，一定归我大金所有。 
English: In fact, Hailing was not defeated in quarrying, and most of the deception of the Song people was of this kind. My reply should state that we sent a large army. If I ordered to cross the river, then the land of Song would definitely belong to me.

古文：迁右谏议大夫，起居注如故。
现代文：子敬迁升右谏议大夫，仍然撰修《起居注》。
English: His son, Jing Qian, was promoted to the position of doctor of right-hand consultation, and he was still writing "Living Notes."

古文：上幸西京，州县官入见，猛安谋克不得随班。
现代文：圣上驾临西京，州县官奉诏入见，猛安谋克不准跟班。
English: When the saint arrived in West Beijing, the prefectural and county officials were informed by imperial edict that they were not allowed to accompany him.

古文：子敬奏军民一体，合令猛安谋克随班入见，上嘉纳之，于是责让宣徽院。
现代文：子敬禀奏说军民是一体，应该同时命令猛安谋克跟班入见，皇上赞许并采纳了这个意见，于是责备宣徽院。
English: The Emperor approved and adopted this opinion, and then reproached the Xuanhuiyuan.

古文：及端午朝会，诏依子敬奏行之。
现代文：到了端午朝会，皇上诏令依照子敬的奏议去办。
English: When it came to the Dragon Boat Festival morning assembly, the emperor issued an imperial edict to hold it in accordance with Zi Jing's proposal.

古文：子敬言山后禁猎地太广，有妨百姓耕垦，上用其言，遂以四外猎地与民。
现代文：子敬说山后禁止出入留做打猎的地方划得太广了，对百姓耕垦有所妨碍，皇上听取了他的意见，于是把四外打猎的禁地交给了百姓。
English: Zi Jing said that the area behind the mountain where it was forbidden to go out and stay to hunt was too wide and hindered the people's cultivation. The emperor listened to his opinion and gave the people the four forbidden hunting areas.

古文：迁秘书监，谏议、起居如故。
现代文：子敬又迁任秘书监，谏议、修《起居注》等依然如故。
English: Zi Jing was also transferred to the post of secretary supervisor, and the discussion and revision of the "Residential Notes" are still the same.

古文：子敬举同知宣徽院事移剌神独斡、兵部侍郎移剌按答，太子少詹事乌古论三合自代，上不许。
现代文：子敬推举同知宣徽院事移剌神独斡、兵部侍郎移剌按答，太子少詹事乌古论三合自荐要取代他们，皇上不同意。
English: The Emperor did not agree with the idea of the Prince's younger brother, Prince Zhan Zhihu, recommending himself to replace them.

古文：子敬与同签宣徽院事移剌神独斡侍，上曰： 亡辽不忘旧俗，朕以为是。
现代文：子敬和同签宣徽院事移剌神独斡侍奉皇上，皇上说： 辽国虽已灭亡却不忘旧俗，朕认为是这样的。
English: Zi Jinghe and his co-signatory, Xuan Hui Academy, moved the matter to the Emperor, and the Emperor said: Although Liaoning has perished, it has not forgotten the old customs. I think this is the case.

古文：海陵习学汉人风俗，是忘本也。
现代文：海陵学习汉人风俗，是忘本。
English: Hailing from China, learning Chinese customs is like forgetting a book.

古文：若依国家旧风，四境可以无虞，此长久之计也。 
现代文：如果依照国家旧风，四境可以没有失误，这是长久之计。 
English: This is a long-term solution if, in accordance with the country's old style, there are no mistakes in the four frontiers.

古文：世宗将如凉陉，子敬与右补阙粘割斡特剌、左拾遗杨伯仁奏曰： 车驾至曷里浒，西北招讨司囿于行宫之内地矣。
现代文：世宗将到凉陉，子敬与右补遗粘割斡特剌、左拾遗杨伯仁上奏说： 车驾到曷里浒，西北招讨司正好圈在行宫的内地。
English: Shizong will go to Liangyao, Zi Jing will go to the right to collect relics, Yang Boren will go to the left to collect relics, and Zi Jing will go to the right to collect relics, Yang Boren will go to the left to collect relics, and Zi Jing will go to the right to collect relics, Yang Boren will go to the left to collect relics, and Zi Jing will go to the right to collect relics.

古文：乞迁之于界上，以屏蔽环卫。 上曰： 善。 
现代文：请求把它迁到界上，用来作为遮蔽环卫的屏障。 皇上说 ：好。 
English: He asked for it to be moved to the world, to be used as a barrier to protect the environment, and the emperor said, "Yes."

古文：诏尚书省曰： 招讨斜里虎可徙界上，治蕃部事。
现代文：皇帝下令在尚书省说 ：招讨斜里虎可以迁徙到界上，治理蕃部的事情。
English: The emperor issued an order in Shangshu Province, saying: Invite the tiger to migrate to the world and manage the affairs of the crotch.

古文：都监撒八仍于燕子城治猛安谋克事。 
现代文：都监撒八仍然在燕子城做猛安谋克之事。 
English: The city supervisor, Saba, is still in Swallow Town plotting and scheming.

古文：上与侍臣论古之人君贤否，子敬奏曰： 陛下凡与宰臣谋议，不可不令史官知之。 
现代文：皇上和侍臣讨论古代的人君是否贤君，子敬上奏说： 陛下凡是和宰相大臣议论策划，不可不叫史官知道讨论内容。 
English: The Emperor and his courtiers were discussing whether ancient emperors were virtuous or not. Zi Jing said: Whenever His Majesty discusses and plans with the Prime Minister, he must let the historian know the content of the discussion.

古文：上曰： 卿言是也。 
现代文：皇上说 ：卿说的对。 
English: The emperor said: Your words are right.

古文：转签书枢密院事，同修国史，出为河中尹，请老。
现代文：批转签书给枢密院事，让子敬同修国家历史，出任河中府尹，请求退休养老。
English: He approved the transfer of the signature to the Privy Council, asked his son Jing to study national history with him, to serve as the governor of Hechuan Province, and requested retirement pension.

古文：河中地热，上恐子敬不耐暑，改兴中尹。
现代文：河中地方气候炎热，皇上担心子敬不耐暑热，改任他为兴中府尹。
English: The climate in the middle of the river was hot, and the emperor was worried that Zi Jing would not be able to stand the heat, so he changed his name to Xingzhongfu Yin.

古文：子敬女自懿州来兴中省谒，遇盗途中，剽掠其行李且尽，既而还之，谢曰： 我辈初不知为府尹家也，尹有德于民，尚忍侵犯邪。 
现代文：子敬的女儿从懿州来兴中探视，在途中遇到强盗，把她的行李掠夺一空，事后又归还了她，并谢罪说 ：我辈开始不知道是府尹家的人，府尹对人民有恩德，还能忍心侵犯他吗？ 
English: Zi Jing's daughter came from Zhangzhou to visit during the festival. On the way, she encountered a robber, who plundered her luggage, returned it to her afterwards, and said, "We didn't know it was a person from Fu Yin's family at first. Fu Yin is kind to the people. Can we bear to violate him?"

古文：徙咸平、广宁尹。
现代文：子敬又奉命迁任咸平、广宁府尹。
English: Zi Jing was also ordered to move to Xianping and Guangningfu Yin.

古文：二十一年，致仕，卒于家，年七十一。
现代文：二十一年，子敬辞官，在家中逝世，享年七十一岁。
English: In 1921, Zi Jing, a diplomat, died at home at the age of 71.

古文：子敬尝使宋，及受诸部进贡，所受礼物，皆散之亲旧。
现代文：子敬曾经出使宋国，以及接受诸部落的进贡，所接受的礼物，全部分给了亲戚朋友。
English: Zi Jing once sent an envoy to the Song Dynasty, and received tributes from various tribes. The gifts he received were all given to relatives and friends.

古文：及卒，家无余财，其子质宅以营葬事。
现代文：到逝世时，家里没有富余钱财，他的儿子典当家宅用来料理丧葬之事。
English: At the time of his death, there was no spare money in the family, and his son pawned the family home to pay for the funeral.

