古文：九年春，王三月丁丑，宋公御说卒。
现代文：九年春季，周历三月丁丑，宋桓公御说去世。
English: In the spring of the ninth year, in the third month of Dingwu of the lunar calendar, Emperor Song Huan passed away.

古文：夏，公会宰周公、齐侯、宋子、卫侯、郑伯、许男、曹伯于葵丘。
现代文：夏季，僖公与周公、齐侯、宋子、卫侯、郑伯、许男、曹伯在葵丘会见。
English: In the summer, Zhai Gong met with Zhou Gong, Qi Hou, Song Zi, Wei Hou, Zheng Bo, Xu Man and Cao Bo in Kwai Chiu.

古文：秋七月乙酉，伯姬卒。
现代文：秋季七月乙酉，伯姬去世。
English: In the fall of July, Berkie died.

古文：九月戊辰，诸侯盟于葵丘。
现代文：九月戊辰，各诸侯在葵丘会盟。
English: At the end of September, all the lords gathered in Kwai Chung.

古文：甲子，晋侯佹诸卒。
现代文：甲子，晋侯佹诸去世。
English: His eldest son, Jin Hou Xizhu, passed away.

古文：冬，晋里克杀其君之子奚齐。
现代文：冬季，晋国的里克在居丧的茅屋里杀了奚齐。
English: In the winter, Rick from Jin Province killed a cormorant in the hut where he was staying.

古文：九年春，宋桓公卒，未葬而襄公会诸侯，故曰子。
现代文：九年春季，宋桓公去世。还没有下葬，宋襄公就会见诸侯，所以《春秋》称他为 子 。
English: In the spring of the ninth year, Song Huan died. Before he was buried, Song Xiang would meet with the princes, so "Spring and Autumn" called him a son.

古文：凡在丧，王曰小童，公侯曰子。
现代文：凡是在丧事期间，天子称为 小童 ，公侯称为 子 。
English: During funerals, the son of heaven is called the child, and the prince is called the son.

古文：夏，会于葵丘，寻盟，且修好，礼也。王使宰孔赐齐侯胙，曰： 天子有事于文武，使孔赐伯舅胙。 
现代文：夏季，鲁僖公和宰周公、齐桓公、宋桓公、卫文公、郑文公、许僖公、曹共公在葵丘会见，重温过去的盟约，同时发展友好关系，这是合于礼的。周襄王派宰孔把祭肉赐给齐桓公，说： 周天子祭祀文王、武王，派遣我把祭肉赐给伯舅。 
English: In the summer, Prince Lu Xun met with Zhaizhou, Qihuan, Songhuan, Weiwen, Zhengwen, Xu Rong and Cao Gong in Kwai Chiu to revisit the past alliance and develop friendly relations, which is appropriate. Zhou Xiang Wang sent Zhaikon to give the sacrificial meat to Qihuan, saying: Zhou Tianzi sacrificed King Wen and King Wu, and sent me to give the sacrificial meat to my uncle.

古文：齐侯将下拜。
现代文：齐桓公准备下阶拜谢。
English: Lord Qi Kuan is preparing to bow his head.

古文：孔曰： 且有后命。天子使孔曰： 以伯舅耋老，加劳，赐一级，无下拜。  
现代文：宰孔说： 还有以后的命令，天子派我说： 因为伯舅年纪大了，加上功劳，奖赐一级，不用下阶拜谢。  
English: Zai Kong said: There is also a later order, the Son of Heaven sent me to say: Because my uncle is old, plus merit, award one level, do not have to thank the next level.

古文：对曰： 天威不违颜咫尺，小白余敢贪天子之命无下拜！
现代文：齐桓公回答说： 天子的威严就在前面，小白我岂敢受天子的命令而不下阶拜谢？
English: Prince Qi Huan replied, "The majesty of the Son of Heaven is right in front of me. How dare I accept the order of the Son of Heaven without bowing down?

古文：恐陨越于下，以遗天子羞。
现代文：不下拜，我惟恐在诸侯位上摔下来，给天子留下羞辱。
English: If I don't bow down, I'm afraid I'll fall from my position as a vassal and bring shame on the Son of Heaven.

古文：敢不下拜！ 
现代文：岂敢不下阶拜谢？ 
English: How dare you not bow down?

古文：下拜，登受。
现代文：齐桓公下阶拜谢，登上台阶接受祭肉。
English: Prince Qi Kuan bowed his thanks and ascended the steps to receive the sacrificial meat.

古文：秋，齐侯盟诸侯于葵丘曰： 凡我同盟之人，既盟之后，言归于好。 
现代文：秋季，齐桓公和诸侯在葵丘会盟，说： 凡是我们一起结盟的人，既已盟誓之后，就回复到过去那样友好。 
English: In the autumn, Prince Qi Kuan and the princes made an alliance in Kwai Chuk, saying, "All those who have allied with us, once they have sworn, will return to the friendship of the past.

古文：宰孔先归，遇晋侯曰： 可无会也。
现代文：宰孔先行回国，遇到晋献公，说： 可以不去参加会盟了。
English: Zai Kong returned to China first, and when he met Jin Xiangguo, he said: I can't go to join the League.

古文：齐侯不务德而勤远略，故北伐山戎，南伐楚，西为此会也。东略之不知，西则否矣。
现代文：齐桓公不致力于德行，而忙于远征，所以向北边攻打山戎，向南边攻打楚国，在西边就举行了这次会盟，向东边是否要有所举动，还不知道，攻打西边是不可能的。
English: King Qi Kuan was not committed to virtue, but was busy with expeditions. Therefore, he attacked Mount Rong to the north, attacked Chu to the south, and held this alliance in the west. Whether he will move to the east is still unknown. It is impossible to attack the west.

古文：其在乱乎。
现代文：晋国恐怕会有祸乱吧！
English: I'm afraid there will be disaster in Jin!

古文：君务靖乱，无勤于行。 
现代文：君王应该从事于安定国内的祸乱，不要急于前去。 
English: The monarch should be engaged in stabilizing the country's woes, not rushing ahead.

古文：晋侯乃还。
现代文：晋献公听了这话，就回国了。
English: Upon hearing this, Shinkinkong returned to China.

古文：九月，晋献公卒，里克、郑欲纳文公，故以三公子之徒作乱。
现代文：九月，晋献公去世。里克邳郑想要接纳文公为国君，所以就发动三位公子的党羽起来作乱。
English: In September, Emperor Jinxian passed away. Rikken Zheng wanted to accept Emperor Wen as the sovereign, so he unleashed the party members of the three princes to start a riot.

古文：初，献公使荀息傅奚齐，公疾，召之，曰： 以是藐诸孤，辱在大夫，其若之何？ 
现代文：当初，晋献公曾让荀息辅助奚齐。当献公重病时，召见荀息说： 把这个弱小的孤儿付托给您，怎么样？ 
English: At the beginning, Jin Xianggong had made Xixi assist him. When Xianggong was seriously ill, he summoned Xixi and said, "How about entrusting this weak little orphan to you?"

古文：稽首而对曰： 臣竭其股肱之力，加之以忠贞。
现代文：荀息叩头说： 下臣愿意竭尽力量，再加上忠贞。
English: The eavesdropping kowtower said: The vassal is willing to do his best, coupled with loyalty.

古文：其济，君之灵也；不济，则以死继之。 
现代文：事情成功，那是君主在天的威灵；不成功，我就继之以死。 
English: If things go well, it is the will of the sovereign in heaven; if things do not go well, I will die.

古文：公曰： 何谓忠贞？ 
现代文：献公说： 什么叫忠贞？ 
English: Dedication: What is loyalty?

古文：对曰： 公家之利，知无不为，忠也。送往事居，耦俱无猜，贞也。 
现代文：荀息回答说： 国家的利益，知道了没有不做的，这是忠；送走过去的，奉事活着的，两方面都互不猜疑，这是贞。 
English: Hao Xixi replied, "In the interest of the country, if you know what you have to do and don't do it, this is loyalty; if you send away the past and serve the living, both sides do not suspect each other, this is chastity."

古文：及里克将杀奚齐，先告荀息曰： 三怨将作，秦、晋辅之，子将何如？ 
现代文：等到里克将要杀掉奚齐，先期告诉荀息说： 三方面的怨恨都要发作了，秦国和晋国帮助他们，您打算怎么办？ 
English: When Rick was about to kill Hao Qi, he told Hao Xi in advance, "All three aspects of resentment will be triggered. Qin and Jin will help them. What are you going to do?"

古文：荀息曰： 将死之。 
现代文：荀息说： 打算死。 
English: He said, "I'm going to die."

古文：里克曰： 无益也。 
现代文：里克说： 没有好处！ 
English: Rick said: No good!

古文：荀叔曰： 吾与先君言矣，不可以贰。
现代文：荀息说： 我和先君说过了，不能改变。
English: He sighed and said, "I have already spoken with my predecessor, and I can't change it."

古文：能欲复言而爱身乎？
现代文：难道既想要实践诺言而又要爱惜己身吗？
English: Do you want to keep your promise and take care of yourself?

古文：虽无益也，将焉辟之？
现代文：虽然没有好处，又能躲到哪里去呢？
English: It's no good, but where can you hide?

古文：且人之欲善，谁不如我？
现代文：而且人们要求上进，谁不像我一样？
English: And people want to get ahead. Who doesn't want to be like me?

古文：我欲无贰，而能谓人已乎。 
现代文：我不想改变诺言，难道能够对别人说不要这样做吗？ 
English: I don't want to break my promise, how can I tell others not to do it?

古文：冬十月，里克杀奚齐于次。
现代文：冬季，十月，里克在居丧的茅屋里杀了奚齐。
English: In the winter, in October, Rick killed a wren in the cottage where he was staying.

古文：书曰： 杀其君之子。 
现代文：《春秋》记载说： 杀其君之子 ，称奚齐为 君之子 ，是由于晋献公还没有下葬。
English: "Spring and Autumn" records that: "The reason why he killed his son, calling him his son, was because Jin Xian Gong had not yet been buried."

古文：未葬也。荀息将死之，人曰： 不如立卓子而辅之。 
现代文：荀息准备自杀，有人说： 不如立卓子为国君而辅助他。 
English: He was about to commit suicide, but someone said, "It would be better to make Zhuo Zi the ruler of the country and support him."

古文：荀息立公子卓以葬。
现代文：荀息立了公子卓为国君而安葬了献公。
English: The nobles mourned the death of the prince and laid him to rest in a state funeral.

古文：十一月，里克杀公子卓于朝，荀息死之。
现代文：十一月，里克又在朝廷上杀了公子卓。荀息就自杀了。
English: In November, Rick killed another noble, Zhuo, in the imperial court. He then committed suicide.

古文：君子曰： 诗所谓 白圭之玷，尚可磨也；斯言之玷，不可为也 ，荀息有焉。 
现代文：君子说： 《诗》所说的 白玉圭上的斑点，还可以磨掉；说话有了毛病，就不可以追回了。 荀息就是这样的啊！ 
English: The nobleman said, "The spots on the eggplant mentioned in the poem can still be rubbed off; if there is a problem with the speech, it cannot be recovered.

古文：齐侯以诸侯之师伐晋，及高梁而还，讨晋乱也。
现代文：齐桓公带领诸侯的军队进攻晋国，到达高梁就回国。这是为了讨伐晋国发生的祸乱。
English: Prince Qi Kuan led the troops of the princes to attack Jin, and returned to Gaoliang. This was in order to fight the calamity that occurred in Jin.

古文：令不及鲁，故不书。
现代文：命令没有到达鲁国，所以《春秋》没有记载。
English: The order did not reach Lu, so "Spring and Autumn" was not recorded.

古文：晋郤芮使夷吾重赂秦以求入，曰： 人实有国，我何爱焉。
现代文：晋国的郤芮要夷吾给秦国馈送重礼，以请求秦国帮助他回国，并对夷吾说： 真要使别人占据了国家，我们有什么可爱惜的？
English: The prince of Jin asked the Empress of Wu to give a heavy gift to the Empress of Qin to ask the Empress of Qin to help him return to the country, and said to the Empress of Wu: If we really want others to occupy the country, what do we have to be sorry about?

古文：入而能民，土于何有。 
现代文：回国而得到百姓，土地有什么了不起？ 
English: What's so great about returning to your country and getting people and land?

古文：从之。
现代文：夷吾听从了。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：齐隰朋帅师会秦师，纳晋惠公。
现代文：齐国的隰朋率领军队会合秦军而使晋惠公回国即位。
English: Zou Feng of Qi led the army to meet the Qin army and made Jin Huigong return to the country to take the throne.

古文：秦伯谓郤芮曰： 公子谁恃？ 
现代文：秦穆公对郤芮说： 公子依靠谁？ 
English: Qin Mu Gong said to Zou: Whom does the prince rely on?

古文：对曰： 臣闻亡人无党，有党必有雠。
现代文：郤芮回答说： 臣听说逃亡在外的人没有党羽，有了党羽必定就有仇敌。
English: Zou replied, "Minister, I have heard that those who have fled abroad have no followers, and if they have followers, they must have enemies.

古文：夷吾弱不好弄，能斗不过，长亦不改，不识其他。 
现代文：夷吾小时候不喜欢玩耍，能够争斗而不过分，年纪大了也不改变，其他我就不知道了。 
English: When I was a child, I didn't like to play. I can fight, but not too much. When I'm older, I don't change. I don't know anything else.

古文：公谓公孙枝曰： 夷吾其定乎？ 
现代文：秦穆公对公孙枝说： 夷吾可以安定国家吗？ 
English: Qin Mu Gong said to Gongsun Zhi: Can we stabilize the country?

古文：对曰： 臣闻之，唯则定国。
现代文：公孙枝说： 臣听说：只有行为合乎准则，才能安定国家。
English: Sun Zhi said: I have heard that a country can only be stable if its behavior conforms to the norms.

古文：《诗》曰： 不识不知，顺帝之则。 文王之谓也。
现代文：《诗》说： 无知无识，顺应了上天的法则 ，文王就是这样的。
English: "Poetry" said: Ignorance and ignorance, conforming to the law of heaven, King Wen is like this.

古文：又曰： 不僭不贼，鲜不为则。 无好无恶，不忌不克之谓也。
现代文：又说， 不弄假，不伤残，很少不能做典范 ，没有爱好，也没有厌恶，这就是说既不猜忌也不好强。
English: He also said that he does not fake, does not injure, rarely fails to be a model, has no hobbies and no aversion, that is to say, he is neither suspicious nor strong.

古文：今其言多忌克，难哉！ 
现代文：现在他的话里边既猜忌又好强，要夷吾安定晋国，难呀！ 
English: Now there is both suspicion and strength in his words. It is difficult to promote stability and advance the country!

古文：公曰： 忌则多怨，又焉能克？
现代文：秦穆公说： 猜忌就多怨恨，又哪里能够取胜？
English: Qin Mukong said: Suspicion leads to more resentment, and where can you win?

古文：是吾利也。 
现代文：这是我国的利益啊。 
English: This is the interest of our country.

古文：宋襄公即位，以公子目夷为仁，使为左师以听政。
现代文：宋襄公做了国君，认为公子目夷仁爱，让他做左师来处理政事，宋国由此安定太平。
English: When Song Xianggong became the ruler of the country, he believed that nobles should be benevolent and let him be the left-hand man to deal with political affairs. As a result, Song was stable and peaceful.

古文：于是宋治。故鱼氏世为左师。
现代文：所以目夷的后人鱼氏世世代代承袭左师的官。
English: Therefore, Mei's descendants, the Mermaid clan, inherited the post of Left Division for generations.

