古文：赵挺之张商英刘正夫何执中郑居中张康国朱谔刘逵林摅管师仁侯蒙赵挺之，字正夫，密州诸城人。
现代文：赵挺之字正夫，密州诸城人。
English: Zhao Tingzhi's father-in-law, a resident of Zhucheng, Michoacan.

古文：进士上第。
现代文：考中进士前几名。
English: He was one of the top candidates in the junior high school entrance examination.

古文：熙宁建学，选教授登、棣二州，通判德州。
现代文：熙宁年间建立学校，被选任为登、棣二州教授，德州通判。
English: During the years of Xi Ning, he established a school and was appointed as a professor of the two states of Deng and Zou, and a judge of the State of Texas.

古文：哲宗即位，赐士卒缗钱，郡守贪耄不时给，卒怒噪，持白梃突入府。
现代文：哲宗即皇位，赏赐士卒们缗钱，郡守贪污不及时付给士卒，士卒们愤怒地叫喊着，拿着白梃冲进府衙。
English: Tetsuzong, i.e. the imperial throne, rewarded the officials with money, the county governors were corrupt and did not pay the officials in time, the officials shouted angrily and rushed into the government office with the egrets.

古文：守趋避，左右尽走。
现代文：郡守躲避，官吏们都逃走。
English: The county governor hid, and all the officials fled.

古文：挺之坐堂上，呼问状，立发库钱，而治其为首者，众即定。
现代文：挺之坐在大堂上，问明情况，立即拿出府库钱财分发，而惩治带头闹事的人，士卒们安宁下来。
English: Tange sat in the lobby, clarified the situation, immediately took out the treasury money and distributed it, and punished those who led the riot, and the officers calmed down.

古文：魏境河屡决，议者欲徙宗城县。
现代文：魏州境内黄河多次决口，有人建议迁移宗城县。
English: The Yellow River has burst its banks several times in Weizhou, and some people have suggested moving it to Zongcheng County.

古文：转运使檄挺之往视，挺之云： 县距高原千岁矣，水未尝犯。
现代文：转运使让挺之前去视察，挺之说： 县城远离高原一千多年了，河水从未犯境。
English: Tingzhi said: The county seat has been far away from the plateau for more than a thousand years, and the river has never breached the boundary.

古文：今所迁不如旧，必为民害。 使者卒徙之，财二年，河果坏新城，漂居民略尽。
现代文：现在要迁到的地方不如旧址，一定会祸害百姓。 转运使还是决定迁徙，才过两年，黄河果然冲坏新城，把居民几乎都淹死。
English: The place to be moved to now is not as good as the old site, and it will certainly harm the people. The transfer agent still decided to move, but only two years later, the Yellow River really destroyed the new city and almost drowned the residents.

古文：召试馆职，为秘阁校理，迁监察御史。
现代文：朝廷召他试任馆职，任秘阁校理，升为监察御史。
English: The Imperial Court called him to try out for the post of librarian, and he was promoted to inspector of history.

古文：初，挺之在德州，希意行市易法。
现代文：当初，挺之在德州时，按朝廷意思实行市易法。
English: At first, when Tangezhi was in Texas, he implemented the market exchange law according to the will of the imperial court.

古文：黄庭坚监德安镇，谓镇小民贫，不堪诛求。
现代文：黄庭坚当时主管德安镇，认为镇小百姓贫困，无法承受诛求。
English: Huang Tingjian, who was in charge of De'an Town at the time, believed that the town's small people were poor and could not afford to beg.

古文：及召试，苏轼曰： 挺之聚敛小人，学行无取，岂堪此选。 至是，劾奏轼草麻有云 民亦劳止 ，以为诽谤先帝。
现代文：到被召试时，苏轼说： 挺之是个聚敛钱财的小人，学识品行不可取，怎么适合这个职位。 到这时，挺之上奏弹劾苏轼草书中有句 民亦劳止 的话，认为这是诽谤先帝。
English: When he was summoned for the examination, Su Shi said, "Tranzhi is a villain who accumulates money and wealth, and his knowledge and character are not desirable, so how can he be suitable for this position." At this time, Tranzhi appealed to impeach Su Shi's cursive book, which contained a sentence "People also work hard," which was considered to be a slander against the former emperor.

古文：既而坐不论蔡确，通判徐州，俄知楚州。
现代文：不久因没有弹劾蔡确获罪，降任徐州通判，不久任楚州知州。
English: Soon after, he was found guilty for not impeaching Cai Jian, and was demoted to the post of Xuzhou Tongzhan, and soon after to the post of Chuzhou Zhizhou.

古文：入为国子司业，历太常少卿，权吏部侍郎，除中书舍人、给事中。
现代文：入京任国子司业，历任太常少卿，代理吏部侍郎，授任中书舍人、给事中。
English: Entered the capital as Kokushi no Tsukasa, successively held the posts of Taijo Shokei (Minor Secretary of the Ministry of Civil Affairs), Acting Secretary of the Ministry of Civil Affairs, and was awarded the positions of Chushojoin (Senior Secretary of the Ministry of Civil Affairs) and Shoshojoin (Senior Secretary of the Ministry of Civil Affairs).

古文：使辽，辽主尝有疾，不亲宴，使近臣即馆享客。
现代文：出使辽国，辽主曾经有病，不亲自宴请他，让近臣到旅馆宴请他。
English: The Liao emissary was once ill, so he did not personally invite him to the banquet, but asked his close vassal to invite him to the hotel.

古文：比岁享乃在客省，与诸国等，挺之始争正其礼。
现代文：到年终宴请时方在客省，与其他诸国相同，是挺之争论才使辽国礼制公正。
English: By the end of the year, when the party is held in the guest province, like other countries, it is the dispute that makes the Liao national etiquette system more just.

古文：徽宗立，为礼部侍郎。
现代文：徽宗即位后，任礼部侍郎。
English: After Emperor Huizong ascended to the throne, he was appointed as the attendant of the Ceremonial Department.

古文：哲宗祔庙，议迁宣祖，挺之言： 上于哲宗兄弟，同一世；宣祖未当迁。 从之。
现代文：祭祀哲宗宗庙时，徽宗打算迁移宣祖庙庭，挺之说 ：皇上与哲宗是兄弟，同一代；宣祖庙不应迁走。 
English: At the time of the dedication of the Tetsuzo ancestral temple, the Huizong sect planned to move the garden of the Xuanzu temple, but Tingzhi said: The emperor and Tetsuzo are brothers, of the same generation; the Xuanzu temple should not be moved.

古文：拜御史中丞，为钦圣后陵仪仗使。
现代文：徽宗听从了他的意见。授任他为御史中丞，任钦圣后陵仪仗使。
English: Emperor Huizong listened to his advice and appointed him as the Vice-Commander of History and the Ceremonial Officer of the Mausoleum of Emperor Qin Sheng.

古文：曾布以使事联职，知禁中密指，谕使建议绍述，于是挺之排击元祐诸人不遗力。
现代文：曾布同时任使、事之职，知道宫中密旨，劝挺之建议绍述新法，于是挺之排挤打击元党人不遗余力。
English: Zeng Bu, who was also appointed as an envoy, knew the secret of the palace and advised Ting Ting's proposal to introduce the new law. Therefore, Ting Ting's exclusion and the attack on the former party members spared no effort.

古文：由吏部尚书拜右丞，进左丞、中书门下侍郎。
现代文：由吏部尚书授任右丞，进升左丞、中书门下侍郎。
English: He was appointed to the post of Ujo by Shosho, the secretary, promoted to the post of Sajo, and became a junior attendant of Chusho.

古文：时蔡京独相，帝谋置右辅，京力荐挺之，遂拜尚书右仆射。
现代文：当时蔡京独任宰相，徽宗打算设置右相，蔡京极力推荐挺之，于是徽宗授任挺之为尚书右仆射。
English: At that time, Cai Jing was the sole prime minister, Huizong planned to set up the right minister, Cai Jing strongly recommended Ting, so Huizong awarded the appointment of Ting to Shang Shuxu.

古文：既相，与京争雄，屡陈其奸恶，且请去位避之。
现代文：挺之任宰相后，与蔡京争权，多次陈述他的奸恶，并且请求辞去相位避开他。
English: After Tange's appointment as prime minister, he competed with Cai Jing for power, repeatedly stated his treachery, and asked to resign to avoid him.

古文：以观文殿大学士、中太一宫使留京师。
现代文：被任命为观文殿大学士、中太一宫使留在京城。
English: He was appointed as a scholar of the University of the Confucian Academy of Literature, and stayed in Kyoto.

古文：乞归青州，将入辞，会彗星见，帝默思咎徵，尽除京诸蠹法，罢京，召见挺之曰： 京所为，一如卿言。 加挺之特进，仍为右仆射。
现代文：挺之请求回青州，准备入宫告辞，正好彗星出现，徽宗默默思索征象的原因，全部废除蔡京定下的各种法律，罢免蔡京，召见挺之说： 蔡京所作所为，全部像你说的那样。 加任挺之为特进，仍旧任右仆射。
English: Tange requested to return to Qingzhou, prepared to enter the palace and bid farewell, just as the comet appeared, Huizong silently pondered the reasons for the signs, abolished all the laws set by Cai Jing, dismissed Cai Jing, summoned Tange and said: Cai Jing's actions are all as you said.

古文：京在崇宁初，首兴边事，用兵连年不息。
现代文：蔡京在崇宁初期，首先兴起边事，战争连年不息。
English: In the early days of Chongning, Caijing first saw the rise of border disputes, and the war continued year after year.

古文：帝即幸其家，以不及视其病为恨，辍视朝三日，赠太师，追封清源郡王，谥曰正献。
现代文：皇帝临朝，对大臣们说： 朝廷不可与四面敌国发生冲突，冲突一起，祸患不息，士兵百姓肝脑涂地，哪里是人主爱护百姓恤惜财物的本意啊。 挺之退朝后对同僚们说 ：皇上志向在于停止战争，我们应当顺从其意。 不久蔡京复任宰相，挺之仍以大学士兼佑神观使。
English: When the emperor was on the throne, he said to his ministers, "The imperial court must not come into conflict with the four enemy countries. Conflicts are a constant scourge, and soldiers and commoners are brainwashed. What is the original intention of the people to love and protect the people, and to spare their property?" After the emperor retired, he said to his colleagues, "The emperor's ambition is to stop the war, and we should follow his wishes." Soon after, Cai Jing was reinstated as prime minister, and Cai Jing was still a university scholar and an envoy of the Shen Guanzhong.

古文：郑居中，字达夫，开封人。
现代文：不久去世，终年六十八岁。追赠司徒，谥号为 清宪 。郑居中字达夫，开封人。
English: He died soon after, at the age of sixty-eight. He was posthumously awarded the title of "Stu," and his posthumous name was "Qing Xian." Zheng Ju, also known as "Dafu," was the person who opened the seal.

古文：登进士第。崇宁中，为都官礼部员外郎，起居舍人，至中书舍人、直学士院。
现代文：考中进士，崇宁期间，任都官礼部员外郎、起居舍人，升至中书舍人、直学士院。
English: During his time in Chongning, he was promoted from a junior high school student to a junior high school student to a junior high school student to a junior high school student to a junior high school student.

古文：初，居中自言为贵妃从兄弟，妃从蕃邸进，家世微，亦倚居中为重，由是连进擢。
现代文：当初，居中自称是贵妃的叔伯兄弟，贵妃从藩王官邸进入后宫，家世微贱，也依靠居中以自重，从此连连被提升。
English: At first, Ju Zhong claimed to be the uncle and brother of Guifei. Guifei entered the harem from the official residence of the lord of the domain. He came from a humble family and relied on Ju Zhong for his self-respect. From then on, he was promoted successively.

古文：会妃父绅客祝安中者，上书涉谤讪，言者并及居中，罢知和州，徙颍州。
现代文：正好贵妃的父亲郑绅的门客祝安中，上书涉及诽谤，进言的人牵涉到居中，居中因此被罢贬为知和州，改任知颍州。
English: It just so happened that Zhu Anzhong, a disciple of Guifei's father, Zheng Sheng, was involved in slander when he wrote the letter, and the person who made the suggestion was involved in Juzhong. As a result, Juzhong was demoted to Chihwa Prefecture and changed to Chihli Prefecture.

古文：明年，归故官，迁给事中、翰林学士。
现代文：第二年，回朝担任旧职，升任给事中、翰林学士。
English: In the second year, he returned to China to take up his old post, and was promoted to vice-minister and scholar of Hanlin.

古文：大观元年，同知枢密院。
现代文：大观元年，任同知枢密院。
English: In the first year of the Taikan era, he was appointed to the Privy Council.

古文：时妃宠冠后宫，于居中无所赖，乃用宦官黄经臣策，以外戚秉政辞。
现代文：当时贵妃在后宫最受皇上宠爱，对于居中无所依赖，于是采用宦官黄经臣的计策，以外戚秉政为借口罢贬居中。
English: At that time, Guifei was the most favored by the emperor in the harem, and there was no reliance on her being placed in the middle, so she used the strategy of eunuch Huang Jingchen to remove her from the middle on the pretext of upholding politics.

古文：改资政学士、中太一宫使兼侍读。
现代文：改任资政殿学士、中太一宫使兼侍读。
English: He was appointed as a scholar of the House of Councillors, and also served as an attendant of Emperor Taizong.

古文：蔡京以星文变免，赵挺之相，与刘逵谋尽改京所为政。
现代文：蔡京因为星象有变而被罢相，赵挺之任宰相，与刘逵谋划全部改变蔡京的政令。
English: Cai Jing was dismissed from his post because of a change in the stars. Zhao Tingri was appointed prime minister, and he and Liu Ye planned to change all of Cai Jing's decrees.

古文：未几，徽宗颇悔更张之暴，外莫有知者。
现代文：不久，徽宗非常后悔改变宰相之举，宫中无人知道徽宗此意。
English: Soon, Huizong very much regretted changing the prime minister's move. No one in the palace knew what Huizong meant by this.

古文：居中往来绅所，知之，即入见言： 陛下建学校、兴礼乐，以藻饰太平；置居养、安济院，以周拯穷困，何所逆天而致威谴乎？ 帝大悟。
现代文：居中经常与郑绅家来往，得知此事，立即入宫求见徽宗说 ：陛下建立学校，大兴礼乐，来藻饰太平；设置居养、安济院，来救济穷困百姓，哪里违逆天意而导致天谴呢？ 徽宗醒悟过来。
English: Ju Zhong often visited Zheng Sheng's family. When he learned of this, he immediately entered the palace and asked to see Huizong, saying, "Your majesty has established a school, promoted ceremonial music, and come to decorate Taiping; set up a nursing home, Anji Hospital, and come to the aid of the poor people. Where did you go against God's will and cause God's punishment? Huizong came to his senses.

古文：居中退语礼部侍郎刘正夫，正夫继请对，语同。
现代文：居中出宫后与礼部侍郎刘正夫商议，刘正夫接着入宫求见皇上，他的意见与居中相同。
English: After leaving the palace, Ju Zhong discussed the matter with Liu Zhengfu, an attendant of the Ceremonial Department. Liu Zhengfu then entered the palace and asked to see the emperor. His opinion was the same as that of Ju Zhong.

古文：帝意乃复向京。
现代文：皇帝心中又偏向蔡京。
English: In the emperor's heart, he was partial to Cai Jing.

古文：京再得政，两人之助为多。
现代文：蔡京再次得以执政，他们二人的帮助居多。
English: Cai Jing was able to govern again, with the help of the two of them.

古文：居中厚责报，京为言枢密本兵之地，与三省殊，无嫌于用亲。
现代文：居中要求得到厚报，蔡京对他说枢密是执掌兵权的重要机关，与三省机关不同，不妨用人唯亲。
English: When he was in the middle of asking for a large reward, Cai Jing told him that the Privy Council is an important organ that exercises military power. Unlike the three provincial organs, it is better to use a person who is close to him.

古文：经臣方恃权，力抗前说，京言不效。
现代文：经臣正把持朝政，竭力诋毁前说，蔡京的话没有生效。
English: He said that the words of Cai Jing did not take effect.

古文：居中疑不己援，始怨之，乃与张康国比而间京。
现代文：居中怀疑蔡京不援用自己，于是怨恨他，就与张康国一起诋毁蔡京。
English: Chu Zhong suspected that Cai Jing did not refer to himself, so he resented him and denigrated Cai Jing together with Zhang Kangguo.

古文：都水使者赵霖得龟两首于黄河，献以为瑞。
现代文：都水使者赵霖在黄河得到一只两头龟，献给皇上作为祥瑞。
English: Zhao Lin, the water envoy of the capital, obtained a two-headed turtle in the Yellow River and dedicated it to the emperor as a good luck charm.

古文：京曰： 此齐小白所谓 象罔 ，见之而霸者也。 居中曰： 首岂宜有二？
现代文：蔡京说： 这是齐国小白说的 象罔 ，见到的就可以称霸。 居中说 ：头怎么能有两个？
English: Cai Jing said: This is what Qi Guo Xiaobai said about the elephant shrew, you can dominate when you see it. Kui said: How can there be two heads?

古文：人皆骇异，而京独主之，殆不可测。 帝命弃龟金明池，谓 居中爱我 ，遂申前命，进知院事。
现代文：人们都感到骇异，而蔡京却张扬这件事，真是危不可测啊。 皇帝命令把两头龟丢进金明池，认为 居中爱护我 ，于是重申前命，提升居中为知枢密院事。
English: People were horrified, and Cai Jing publicized the matter, it was really dangerous. The emperor ordered to throw the two-headed turtle into the Jinming Pool, thinking that the center would love me, so he reiterated his previous life and promoted the center to the Privy Council.

古文：四年，京又罢。
现代文：四年，蔡京又被罢免。
English: Four years later, Cai Jing was ousted again.

古文：居中自许必得相，而帝觉之，不用。
现代文：居中自认为一定会成为宰相，而皇帝也觉察出来，不重用他。
English: Chu Zhong thought that he would definitely become the prime minister, and the emperor also sensed it and did not re-use him.

古文：妃正位中宫，复以嫌，罢为观文殿学士。
现代文：郑妃升为皇后，居中又因为后戚干政的嫌疑，被罢贬为观文殿学士。
English: Zhengfei was promoted to empress, and because of the suspicion that her daughter-in-law was involved in politics, she was demoted to a scholar of the Academy of Confucius.

古文：政和中，再知枢密院，官累特进。
现代文：政和年间，居中再次出任知枢密院事，官加特进。
English: During the years of the Meiji Restoration, Ju Zhong once again served as a member of the Privy Council.

古文：时京总治三省，益变乱法度。
现代文：当时蔡京总管三省政事，越发乱为改变法度。
English: At that time, Cai Jing was in charge of the three provinces' political affairs, and there was more and more turmoil to change the law.

古文：居中每为帝言，帝亦恶京专，寻拜居中少保、太宰，使伺察之。
现代文：居中常常为此向皇帝进言，皇帝也讨厌蔡京专断，不久授任居中为少保、太宰，让他监察蔡京。
English: Ju Zhong often advised the emperor for this reason. The emperor also hated Cai Jing's arbitrariness, and soon appointed Ju Zhong as Shao Bao and Dazai, and let him supervise Cai Jing.

古文：居中存纪纲，守格令，抑侥幸，振淹滞，士论翕然望治。
现代文：居中执政存纲纪，守格令，阻抑侥幸小人的进用，援引淹滞不升的官员，士大夫认为大治有望。
English: In the middle of the government, there are rules and regulations, restraining orders, preventing the use of lucky villains, and citing officials who are stagnant and do not rise, Shidafu believes that great governance is promising.

古文：丁母忧，旋诏起复。
现代文：遭母丧，守丧未满三年，皇帝诏令重新起用他。
English: After his mother's death and less than three years of mourning, the emperor issued a decree to reinstate him.

古文：逾年，加少傅，得请终丧。
现代文：过了一年，加官少傅，得到准许守满丧期。
English: A year later, he was given permission to observe the full mourning period.

古文：服除，以威武军节度使使佑神观。
现代文：守丧满期后，以威武军节度使身份兼任佑神观使。
English: After the expiration of the mourning period, he was also appointed as a messenger of Yushin in the capacity of a military commander.

古文：还领枢密院，加少师。连封崇、宿、燕三国公。
现代文：回京后兼管枢密院，加官少师，连封崇、宿、燕三国公。
English: After returning to Beijing, he concurrently presided over the Privy Council, was promoted to minor official, and successively held the titles of Chong, Yado, and Yan of the Three Kingdoms.

古文：朝廷遣使与金约夹攻契丹，复燕云，蔡京、童贯主之。
现代文：朝廷派遣使者与金国相约夹攻契丹，恢复燕云领土，蔡京、童贯主持这件事。
English: The imperial court dispatched an envoy to attack Khitan and restore Yanyun's territory, with Cai Jing and Tong Run presiding over the matter.

古文：居中力陈不可，谓京曰： 公为大臣。
现代文：居中竭力陈述不可，对蔡京说： 公为国家大臣，是国家的元老，不遵守宋金两国盟约，制造事端，实非妙算。 
English: Ju Zhong tried his best to explain the situation, and said to Cai Jing: Guo is a minister of state, and is the elder statesman of the country. If he does not abide by the treaty between Song and Jin, and creates an incident, it is not a good plan.

古文：国之元老，不能守两国盟约，辄造事端，诚非妙算。 京曰： 上厌岁币五十万，故尔。 居中曰： 公独不思汉世和戎用兵之费乎？
现代文：蔡京说 ：皇上讨厌每年拿出五十万岁币给金国，所以这样。 居中说： 公却不考虑汉代和戎用兵的费用吗？让百万百姓肝脑涂地，实在是你造成的啊！ 
English: Cai Jing said, "The emperor hates to give half a million rupees to China every year, that's why it's like this." Ju said, "Does the public not consider the expenses of the Han Dynasty and the army? You really caused a million people to be brainwashed!"

古文：使百万生灵肝脑涂地，公实为之。 由是议稍寝。其后金人数攻，契丹日蹙，王黼、童贯复议举兵，居中又言： 不宜幸灾而动，待其自毙可也。 不听。
现代文：从此这个意见稍稍停止下来。后来金人多次进攻，契丹日益困迫，王黼、童贯又建议用兵，居中又说： 不应幸灾而动，等待契丹自行灭亡就可以了。 
English: From then on, this opinion stopped for a while. Later, the Jin attacked the Khitans several times, and the Khitans were increasingly in trouble. Wang Yao and Tong Quan also suggested the use of soldiers, and the middle said: Do not move for luck, just wait for the Khitans to perish on their own.

古文：燕山平，进位太保，自陈无功，不拜。
现代文：朝廷不听他的意见，燕山被平定后，居中进升为太保，自述无功，不接受任命。
English: The imperial court did not listen to his opinion. After Yanshan was pacified, Chu Zhong was promoted to Tai Bao, but he did not accept the appointment because he said he was useless.

古文：入朝，暴遇疾归舍，数日卒，年六十五。
现代文：有天入朝，突然患上疾病回到住宅，几天后去世，终年六十五岁。
English: One day, he suddenly fell ill and returned home. He died a few days later, at the age of 65.

古文：赠太师、华原郡王，谥文正。
现代文：追赠太师、华原郡王，谥号为 文正 。
English: He was posthumously awarded the title of Grand Master and King of Hua Yuan County, and his posthumous name was Wenzheng.

古文：帝亲表其隧曰： 政和寅亮醇儒宰臣文正郑居中之墓。 
现代文：皇帝亲自为他的墓碑题字 政和寅亮醇儒宰臣文正郑居中之墓 。
English: The emperor personally inscribed his tombstone with the words, "The tomb of Zheng He, Yin Liang, Miao Jiu, Zheng Jiu, Zheng Zheng."

古文：居中始仕，蔡京即荐其有廊庙器。
现代文：居中刚进入仕途，蔡京就推举他有宰相之才。
English: As soon as Ju Zhong entered his career, Cai Jing nominated him as prime minister.

古文：既不合，遂因蔡渭理其父确功状，追治王珪。
现代文：后来两人不和，于是蔡京趁蔡渭申述他的父亲蔡确的功绩，追究王王圭的责任。
English: Later, the two did not get along, so Cai Jing took advantage of Cai Ye to recount the exploits of his father, Cai Jizhen, to investigate Wang Wanggui's responsibility.

古文：居中，珪婿也，故借是撼之，然卒不能害。
现代文：居中是王王圭的女婿，因此借这件事排挤他，但是终究不能够害他。
English: In the middle was Wang Wang Gui's son-in-law, so they used this incident to push him out, but in the end they couldn't harm him.

古文：子修年、亿年，皆至侍从。
现代文：居中的儿子修年、亿年，都官至侍从。
English: The middle-aged son, Shuren, is a million years old, and has risen through the ranks from city official to servant.

古文：卒，年六十五。赠正奉大夫。侯蒙，字元功，密州高密人。
现代文：亿年遭靖康之难，流落到金国，后来奉事刘豫，晚年得以南归，秦桧因与他是姻亲提升他为资政殿大学士，位与执政大臣同。秦桧死后，亿年也被贬死抚州。侯蒙字元功，密州高密人。
English: He was exiled to Jin Province, and later served Liu Yu. In his later years, he was able to return to the south. Because he was related to Qin Yu by marriage, Qin Yu promoted him to the position of Senior Councilor of State, the same position as the ruling minister. After Qin Yu's death, he was also killed in Fuzhou. Hou Meng Zi Yuan Gong, a high-ranking person in Mishu.

古文：未冠，有俊声，急义好施，或一日挥千金。
现代文：未成年时，有好名声，急义好施，有时一天挥霍千金。
English: When he was a minor, he had a good reputation, was quick to give, and sometimes squandered thousands of dollars a day.

古文：进士及第，调宝鸡尉，知柏乡县。
现代文：考中进士后，调任宝鸡尉、柏乡知县。
English: After passing the junior high school entrance examination, he was transferred to Baoji First Lieutenant and Baoxiang County.

古文：民讼皆决于庭，受罚者不怨。
现代文：百姓诉讼都在县衙判决，受罚者没有怨意。
English: All of the people's lawsuits were adjudicated by the county magistrate, and the people who were punished had no complaints.

古文：转运使黄湜闻其名，将推毂之，召诣行台白事，蒙以越境不肯往。
现代文：转运使黄听说他的名声，准备推荐他，召他到转运司陈述政事，侯蒙因为要出县境不肯前往。
English: Huang heard of his reputation from the transportation department and was ready to recommend him and call him to the transportation department to report on government affairs. Hou Meng refused to go because he wanted to leave the county.

古文：湜怒，他日行县，阅理文书，欲翻致其罪；既而无一疵可指，始以宾礼见，曰： 君真能吏也。 率诸使者合荐之。
现代文：黄大怒；后来巡视各县，检阅文书，想找岔治他的罪；后来没有一处可以指责，就以宾客之礼相见，说： 你真是个能干的官吏啊。 黄率领诸使联合推荐他。
English: Huang flew into a rage; later, he toured all the counties, reviewing documents, trying to find someone to punish him; later, when there was no place to blame, he met with the courtesy of a guest, saying: You are really an able official.

古文：徙知襄邑县，擢监察御史，进殿中侍御史。
现代文：徙任襄邑知县，升为监察御史，进升殿中侍御史。
English: He was transferred to Xiangyuchi County, promoted to inspector of history, and promoted to attendant of history.

古文：崇宁星变求言，蒙疏十事，曰去冗官，容谏臣，明嫡庶，别贤否，绝幸冀，戒滥恩，宽疲民，节妄费，戚里毋预事，阉寺毋假权。
现代文：崇宁年间星象变异皇上征求政事建议，侯蒙上书条陈十件事，分别是：去冗官，容谏臣，明嫡庶，别贤否，绝幸冀，戒滥恩，宽疲民，节妄费，外戚不要干预政事，宦官不得掌权。
English: During the reign of Emperor Chongning, the emperor solicited suggestions on political affairs from the emperors, and the ten matters were recorded in the imperial edict. They were as follows: to reduce the number of officials, to tolerate vassals, to recognize legitimate children, to discriminate between the gifted and the not-so-gifted, to be extremely fortunate, to refrain from abuse of grace, to be tolerant of the tired and the poor, to be frugal, that relatives should not interfere in political affairs, and that eunuchs should not hold power.

古文：徽宗听纳，有大用意。迁侍御史。
现代文：徽宗予以采纳，有重用他之意，升任侍御史。
English: He was adopted by the Huizong and promoted to the position of chamberlain, with the intention of reusing him.

古文：西将高永年死于羌，帝怒，亲书五路将帅刘仲武等十八人姓名，敕蒙往秦州逮治。
现代文：西边将领高永年死在羌地，徽宗大怒，亲自书写五路将帅刘仲武等十八人姓名，令侯蒙前往秦州逮捕审讯。
English: The western general Gao Yongnian died in Shunde, and Huizong was so angry that he personally wrote the names of eighteen people, including the five-way general Liu Zhongwu, and ordered Hou Meng to go to Qinzhou for arrest and interrogation.

古文：既行，拜给事中。
现代文：将出发时，任命他为给事中。
English: When the time comes to depart, appoint him to be in charge.

古文：至秦，仲武等囚服听命，蒙晓之曰： 君辈皆侯伯，无庸以狱吏辱君，第以实对。 案未上，又拜御史中丞。
现代文：侯蒙到秦州，仲武等人穿着囚服听候命令，侯蒙告诉他们说 ：你们都是侯伯，不能让狱吏污辱你们，依次讲出实情吧。 案件还未上报，朝廷任命他为御史中丞。
English: Houmeng went to Qinzhou, Zhongwu and others wore prison uniforms and awaited orders. Houmeng told them, "You are all Hoube, you can't let the prison officials insult you, let's tell the truth one by one." The case had not yet been reported, and the imperial court appointed him to the position of Vice-Minister of History.

古文：蒙奏言： 汉武帝杀王恢，不如秦缪公赦孟明；子玉缢而晋侯喜，孔明亡而蜀国轻。
现代文：侯蒙上奏说： 汉武帝杀死王恢，不如秦缪公赦免孟明；子玉被缢杀而晋侯高兴，孔明死而蜀国被轻视。
English: Hou Meng Shangsoo said: Emperor Hanwu killed Wang Hui, it is not as good as Qin Mu Gong pardoned Meng Ming; Ziyu was killed and Jin Hou was happy, Confucius died and Shu was despised.

古文：今羌杀吾一都护，而使十八将繇之而死，是自艾其支体也。
现代文：现在羌人杀死我国一个都护，而让十八位将领因此而死，这是自己毁坏自己的肢体啊。
English: It is self-destruction of one's own body to kill a tutelary of our country and let eighteen generals die as a result.

古文：欲身不病，得乎？ 帝悟，释不问。
现代文：要想身体不得病，可能吗？ 徽宗醒悟过来，赦免他们不予追问。
English: If you want to avoid getting sick, is it possible? Huizong came to his senses and pardoned them without questioning.

古文：迁刑部尚书，改户部。
现代文：侯蒙升任刑部尚书，改任户部尚书。
English: Hou Meng was promoted to the position of the secretary of the Department of Criminal Law and the secretary of the Department of Household Affairs.

古文：比岁郊祭先期告办，尚书辄执政。
现代文：这年郊祭朝廷预先办理，尚书主管政事。
English: This year, the Imperial Court handled the suburb festival in advance, and Shang Shu was in charge of political affairs.

古文：至是，帝密谕之。
现代文：这时，皇帝秘密告诉他。
English: At this time, the emperor secretly told him.

古文：对曰： 以财利要君而进，非臣所敢。 母丧，服除，归故官，遂同知枢密院。
现代文：侯蒙回答说： 用财利讨好君主而进升，我不敢这样做。 遭母丧，守孝期满，恢复旧官，于是任同知枢密院。
English: Houmeng replied, "I dare not use my wealth and power to ingratiate myself with the monarch and get promoted. After my mother's death and the expiration of my filial duty, I resumed my old position and was appointed to the Privy Council.

古文：进尚书左丞、中书侍郎。
现代文：进升尚书左丞、中书侍郎。
English: He was promoted to Shosho-zojo and Chusho-zamiro.

古文：先是，御史中丞蔡薿诋张商英私事甚力，有旨令廷辨。
现代文：在此之前，御史中丞蔡鑊大力诋毁张商英的私事，皇帝下旨命令举行廷辩。
English: Prior to this, the Imperial Historian Cai Qi had vigorously slandered Zhang Shangying's private affairs, and the emperor issued an order to hold a court debate.

古文：蒙曰： 商英虽有罪，宰相也；蔡薿虽言官，从臣也。
现代文：侯蒙说 ：商英虽然有罪，但他是宰相；蔡鑊大力诋毁，虽是言官，但他是从臣。
English: Hou Meng said: although Shang Ying is guilty, he is the prime minister; although Cai Ye is a spokesman, he is a subordinate.

古文：使之廷辨，岂不伤国体乎？ 帝以为然。
现代文：让他们廷辩，岂不有伤国体？ 皇上认为是这样。
English: Wouldn't it be a disservice to the nation to let them argue in court? The emperor thought so.

古文：一日，帝从容问： 蔡京何如人？ 对曰： 使京能正其心术，虽古贤相何以加。 帝颔首，且使密伺京所为。
现代文：一天，皇上从容问侯蒙说： 蔡京这人怎么样？ 侯蒙回答说 ：假如蔡京能心术端正，即使古代贤相也无法比拟。 皇上点头称是，而且让他秘密侦察蔡京的行为。
English: One day, the emperor calmly asked Hou Meng: "What is Cai Jing like?" Hou Meng replied: "If Cai Jing can be skillful, even the ancient sages cannot be compared." The emperor nodded and said yes, and asked him to secretly investigate Cai Jing's behavior.

古文：京闻而衔之。
现代文：蔡京听说后怨恨他。
English: After hearing this, Cai Jing resented him.

古文：大钱法敝，朝廷议改十为三，主藏吏来告曰： 诸府悉辇大钱市物于肆，皆疑法当变。 蒙曰： 吾府之积若干？ 曰： 八千缗。 蒙叱曰： 安有更革而吾不知！ 明日，制下。
现代文：大钱法有弊端，朝廷准备改十为三，主藏吏来报告说 ：诸府都把大钱拿到市场购物，都怀疑法令会改变。 侯蒙说： 我们府里积钱有多少？ 守藏吏回答说： 八千缗。 侯蒙吼道： 怎么会有变更而我不知道的呢？ 
English: The big money law has drawbacks, the imperial court is preparing to change ten into three, the main collector came to report: all the prefectures have brought big money to the market for shopping, and they all doubt that the law will change.Hou Meng said: How much money do we have in our prefectures?The guardian of Tibet replied: Eight thousand baht.Hou Meng shouted: How can there be a change and I don't know about it?

古文：又尝有几事蒙独受旨，京不知也；京侦得之，白于帝，帝曰： 侯蒙亦如是邪？ 罢知亳州。旋加资政殿学士。
现代文：第二天，诏令下达。曾经又有几件事侯蒙单独受诏，蔡京不知道；蔡京侦察得知，告诉皇上，皇上说： 侯蒙也这样吗？ 罢贬他为知亳州，不久加任资政殿学士。
English: The next day, the imperial edict was issued. There were several other things that Hou Meng alone received the imperial edict, but Cai Jing did not know; Cai Jing reconnaissance learned, told the emperor, the emperor said: Is Hou Meng also like this? He was dismissed as Zhifang Prefecture, and soon he was appointed as a scholar of the Palace of the Grand Vizier.

古文：今青溪盗起，不若赦江，使讨方腊以自赎。 帝曰： 蒙居外不忘君，忠臣也。 命知东平府，未赴而卒，年六十八。
现代文：宋江在京东作乱，侯蒙上书说： 宋江以三十六人横行齐、魏，官军数万没有敢抵抗的，他的才能一定过人，现在青溪贼人作乱，不如赦免宋江，让他讨伐方腊来自赎。 皇上说 ：侯蒙身在地方不忘君主，是个忠臣啊。 命他任东平知府，未到任就去世，终年六十八岁。
English: When Songjiang wreaked havoc in the eastern part of Beijing, Houmeng wrote: Songjiang ran amok with thirty-six people, Wei, tens of thousands of government troops did not dare to resist, his talent must be superior. Now that the Qinghai bandits are wreaking havoc, it is better to pardon Songjiang and let him fight the enemy to redeem himself. The emperor said: Houmeng, who does not forget the monarch in the localities, is a loyal subject. He was ordered to serve as the governor of Dongping, but died before taking office, aged sixty-eight.

古文：赠开府仪同三司，谥文穆。
现代文：追赠开府仪同三司，谥号为文穆。
English: He was posthumously awarded the title of Kaifu and the title of Sanji, and his posthumous name was Wenmu.

