古文：六年春，王正月。
现代文：六年春季周历正月，无事。
English: In the first month of the six-year spring calendar, nothing happened.

古文：夏，公会齐侯、宋公、陈侯、卫侯、曹伯伐郑，围新城。
现代文：夏季，僖公与齐侯、宋公、陈侯、卫侯、曹伯一起攻打郑国，围困新城。
English: In the summer, Gong Zhi and Qi Hou, Song Gong, Chen Hou, Wei Hou, and Cao Bo together attacked Zheng Guo and besieged Xincheng.

古文：秋，楚人围许。诸侯遂救许。
现代文：秋季，楚国围困许国，各诸侯国于是救援许国。
English: In the autumn, Chu besieged Xu, and the various states came to Xu's rescue.

古文：冬，公至自伐郑。
现代文：冬季，僖公从攻打郑国的战场回国。
English: In the winter, Shao Gong returned home from the battlefield where he had attacked Zheng.

古文：六年春，晋侯使贾华伐屈，夷吾不能守，盟而行。
现代文：六年春季，晋献公派遣贾华率军进攻屈地。夷吾守不住，和屈人订立盟约然后出走。
English: In the spring of the sixth year, Jia Hua and his army were dispatched by Jian Xiangguo to attack Kudu. Yigo was unable to defend himself, so he made a pact with Kudu and then fled.

古文：将奔狄。
现代文：准备逃亡到狄。
English: Preparing to flee to Dee.

古文：郤芮曰： 后出同走，罪也。
现代文：郤芮说： 在重耳之后离开而且同样逃到狄，这就表明你有同谋的罪过。
English: Zou said: "Leaving after the re-hearing and also fleeing to Di, this shows that you are guilty of complicity.

古文：不如之梁。
现代文：不如去梁国。
English: Better to go to Liang Province.

古文：梁近秦而幸焉。 
现代文：梁国接近秦国而又得到它的信任。 
English: Liang Guo approached Qin Guo and gained its trust.

古文：乃之梁。
现代文：于是夷吾就到了梁国。
English: That's how I ended up in Liang.

古文：夏，诸侯伐郑，以其逃首止之盟故也。
现代文：夏季，诸侯进攻郑国，因为郑国逃避首止那次结盟的缘故。
English: In the summer, the princes attacked Zheng, because Zheng avoided the first alliance.

古文：围新密，郑所以不时城也。
现代文：诸侯军包围了新密，这就是郑国在不宜动土筑城的时令而筑城的缘故。
English: The armies of the princes surrounded Xinmi, which is why Zheng built the city at a time when it was not appropriate to build a city.

古文：秋，楚子围许以救郑。
现代文：秋季，楚成王出兵包围许国来救援郑国。
English: In autumn, Chu Cheng Wang sent troops to surround Xu Province and rescue Zheng Province.

古文：诸侯救许，乃还。
现代文：诸侯出兵救援许国，楚军于是回国。
English: Princes and lords sent troops to rescue Xu, and the Chu army then returned home.

古文：冬，蔡穆侯将许僖公以见楚子于武城。
现代文：冬季，蔡穆侯带领许僖公到武城去见楚成王。
English: In winter, Cai Mu Hou led Xu Yigong to Wucheng to meet King Chu Cheng.

古文：许男面缚衔璧，大夫衰绖，士舆榇。
现代文：许男两手反绑，嘴里衔着璧玉，大夫穿着孝服，士抬着棺材。
English: Xu's hands were tied behind his back, and he was holding a gemstone in his mouth. The doctor was wearing a filial piety robe, and the priest was carrying the coffin.

古文：楚子问诸逢伯。
现代文：楚成王询问逢伯。
English: King Chu Cheng inquired about Feng Bo.

古文：对曰： 昔武王克殷，微子启如是。
现代文：逢伯回答说： 从前武王打胜殷朝，微子启就是这样做的。
English: Feng Bo replied: In the past, King Wu defeated the Yin Dynasty, and this is what Weizhi Kai did.

古文：武王亲释其缚，受其璧而祓之。焚其榇，礼而命之，使复其所。 
现代文：武王亲自解开他的捆绑，接受他的璧玉而举行扫除凶恶之礼，烧掉他的棺材，给以礼遇而命令他，让他回到原地原位去。 
English: King Wu personally untied his shackles, received his gems and held a ceremony of sweeping away evil, burned his coffin, gave him a courtesy and ordered him to return to his original place.

古文：楚子从之。
现代文：楚成王接受了逢伯的建议。
English: King Chu Wen agreed.

