古文：杨景行，字贤可，吉安太和州人。
现代文：杨景行字贤可，吉安太和州人。
English: Yang Jingxing is a talented writer, and Ji'an is a Taiwanese and a person from Suzhou.

古文：登延祐二年进士第，授赣州路会昌州判官。
现代文：延二年进士，授赣州路会昌州判官。
English: Two years later, he was promoted to judge, and was awarded the title of Changzhou Judge by the Changzhou Road Association.

古文：会昌民素不知井饮，汲于河流，故多疾疠；不知陶瓦，以茅覆屋，故多火灾。
现代文：会昌百姓一向不知道饮井水，在河中汲水，所以多疾病；不知道用陶瓦，而以茅草盖房，所以多火灾。
English: The people of Huichang have always not known how to drink well water and draw water from the river, so there are many diseases; they do not know how to use clay tiles, but they build houses with thatch, so there are many fires.

古文：景行教民穿井以饮，陶瓦以代茅茨，民始免于疾疠火灾。
现代文：景行教民挖井饮水，用陶瓦代替茅草，百姓才免于生病和火灾。
English: Jing Xing's followers dug wells to drink water, and used clay tiles instead of thatch to save the people from illness and fire.

古文：豪民十人，号十虎，干政害民，悉捕置之法。
现代文：有十个豪民，号称十虎，干扰政事，危害百姓，景行将他们逮捕，绳之以法。
English: There were ten wealthy people, known as the Ten Tigers, who interfered with political affairs and endangered the people. Jingxing arrested them and brought them to justice.

古文：乃创学舍，礼师儒，劝民斥腴田以膳士，弦诵之声遂盛。
现代文：创立学校，礼聘儒师，劝民开垦沃土，以供师生膳食，读书、讲礼乐的风气从此兴盛。
English: He founded a school, hired Confucian scholars, and urged the people to cultivate fertile land to provide meals for teachers and students, and the culture of reading and reciting liturgical music has flourished ever since.

古文：调永新州判官，奉郡府命，核民田租，除刬宿弊，奸欺不容，细民赖焉。
现代文：调任永新州判官，奉郡府之命，核实民间田租，去除以往的弊端，不允许奸诈欺骗，百姓都依赖他。
English: He was transferred to Yongxin County Magistrate, and by order of the county government, he verified the private land rent, removed the previous drawbacks, did not allow treachery and deception, and the people all relied on him.

古文：改江西行省照磨，转抚州路宜黄县尹，理白冤狱之不决者数十事。
现代文：改任江西行省照磨，转抚州路宜黄县尹，理清了几十起不能判决的冤狱。
English: He was transferred to Jiangxi Zhomao Province and transferred to Yin County, Yiwu Province, and cleared up dozens of unjust imprisonment cases that could not be adjudicated.

古文：升抚州路总管府推官，发擿奸伏，郡无冤狱。
现代文：升抚州路总管府推官，严惩隐藏的坏人，郡中无冤案。
English: He was promoted to the Fuzhou General Administration of Highways, severely punished the hidden bad guys, and there were no unjust cases in the county.

古文：金溪县民陶甲，厚积而凶险，尝屡诬陷其县长吏罢去之，由是官吏畏其人，不敢诘治，陶遂暴横于一郡。
现代文：金溪县民陶甲，聚敛很多财富，又很凶暴，曾多次诬陷其县的长吏，因此县里的官吏都怕他，不敢惩办，于是陶甲横暴于一郡。
English: Tao Jia, a citizen of Jinxi County, amassed a lot of wealth and was very violent. He had repeatedly framed the officials of his county, so the officials in the county were afraid of him and did not dare to punish him, so Tao Jia was violent in a county.

古文：景行至，以法痛绳之，徙五百里外。
现代文：景行到那里后，依法狠狠地惩治他，将他流放到五百里外。
English: After Jingxing arrived there, he was severely punished according to the law and exiled to a place 500 miles away.

古文：金溪豪僧云住，发人冢墓取财物，事觉，官吏受贿，缓其狱，景行急按之，僧以贿动之，不听，乃赂当道者，以危语撼之，一不顾，卒治之如法。
现代文：金溪有一豪僧名云住，挖墓取财，事情暴露之后，官吏收他的贿，未将他即时关进监狱，景行当即将他投入狱中，僧人以贿收买他，遭他拒绝，于是又贿赂当权的人对他威胁恐吓，景行义无反顾，按法治之。
English: There was a wealthy monk in Jinxi who lived in obscurity and dug graves to make money. After the affair was exposed, officials took bribes from him and did not immediately put him in prison. Jing Xing was about to put him in prison. The monk bribed him, but he refused, so he bribed those in power to threaten and intimidate him. Jing Xing did not care about justice and followed the rule of law.

古文：由是豪猾屏迹，良民获安。
现代文：从此豪猾之徒都逃跑绝迹，良民得以安宁。
English: From then on, the daredevils ran away and disappeared, and the good people were able to live in peace.

古文：转湖州路归安县尹，奉行省命，理荒田租，民无欺弊。
现代文：转湖州路归安县尹，奉行省的命令，理顺田租，民众中无欺蒙的弊端。
English: Turn Huzhou Road to Yin, An County, and follow the provincial order to straighten out the field rent. There is no disadvantage of deception among the people.

古文：景行所历州县，皆有惠政；所去，民皆立石颂之。
现代文：景行经历的州县，都有惠政；他离开后，百姓都树碑歌颂他。
English: All the prefectures and counties where Jing Xing traveled had favorable policies. After he left, the people all set up monuments to praise him.

古文：以翰林待制、朝列大夫致仕，年七十四卒。
现代文：后来以翰林待制、朝列大夫辞官，终年七十四岁。
English: Later, he was appointed to the post of Hanlin, and became a doctor of the Imperial Court, at the age of seventy-four.

古文：林兴祖，字宗起，福州罗源人。
现代文：林兴祖，字宗起，福州罗源人。
English: Lin Xingzu, surnamed Zongqi, was born in Luoyuan, Fuzhou.

古文：至治二年，登进士第，授承事郎、同知黄岩州事，三迁而知铅山州。
现代文：至治二年，考中进士，历任承事郎、同知黄岩州事、铅山州知州。
English: Two years later, he passed the junior high school entrance examination, and successively served as the secretary, the same as Huangyan Shuzhou, and the same as Lead Mountain Shuzhou.

古文：铅山素多造伪钞者，豪民吴友文为之魁，远至江淮、燕蓟，莫不行使。
现代文：铅山一向有人制伪钞，土豪吴友文是其中的头目，远至江淮、燕蓟，都有这种伪钞。
English: There have always been people making counterfeit banknotes in Lead Mountain, and the local strongman Wu Youwen is one of the leaders. This kind of counterfeit banknote can be found as far away as Jianghuai and Yan'an.

古文：友文奸黠悍鸷，因伪造致富，乃分遣恶少四五十人，为吏于有司，伺有欲告之者，辄先事戕之，前后杀人甚众，夺人妻女十一人为妾，民罹其害，衔冤不敢诉者十余年。
现代文：友文奸刁凶暴，因制伪钞致富，他分派流氓四、五十人到衙门当差，发现有控告他们的人，就事先杀死他。先后被杀的人很多，他们抢良家妻女十一人为妾，百姓含冤十多年不敢报官。
English: He was a ferocious fellow, and had become rich by counterfeiting money. He sent forty or fifty of his hooligans to be on duty at the gate of the court. When they found someone to accuse them, they killed him in advance. Many people were killed in succession. They robbed good families of their wives and eleven daughters as concubines. For more than ten years, the people did not dare to report their grievances to the officials.

古文：兴祖至官，曰： 此害不除，何以牧民！ 
现代文：兴祖至该地就任后，说： 此害不除，怎能治理百姓？ 
English: After Xingzu took office in the area, he said, "This harm cannot be eliminated. How can I govern the people?"

古文：须臾，来诉友文者百余人，择其重罪一二事鞫之，狱立具，逮捕其党二百余人，悉置之法。
现代文：当即通告禁制伪钞，并悬赏告密者，不久有人去控告，佯装以其告不实，申斥而去；接着又有人控告抓获两个制伪钞者和赃证。
English: A ban on counterfeit banknotes was immediately announced, and a reward was offered to the informant, and soon someone went to complain, pretended to be a false accusation, and went away with a reprimand; then someone complained that two counterfeiters and forgers were caught.

古文：民害既去，政声籍甚。江浙行省丞相别儿怯不花荐诸朝，升南阳知府，改建德路同知，俱未任。
现代文：审讯刚结束，友文亲自到官府去营救，兴祖命令将他们一起抓住，很快，控告友文的就有百余人。兴祖审讯了其中情节最严重的，逮捕其党羽二百多人，并按法定罪，民害既除，政治声誉也大振。江浙行省丞相别儿怯不花向朝廷推荐了兴祖，升兴祖为南阳知府。
English: Just after the trial ended, Youwen personally went to the government office to rescue, Xingzu ordered to catch them together, and soon there were more than a hundred people who accused Youwen. Xingzu interrogated the most serious of them, arrested more than two hundred of his party members, and according to the statutory crime, the harm to the people was eliminated, and the political reputation was also greatly strengthened. Jiangsu and Zhejiang Provincial Minister of Justice recommended Xingzu to the court, and Xingzu was promoted to Nanyang Prefecture.

古文：至正八年，特旨迁为道州路总管，行至城外，撞贼已迫其后，相去仅二十里。时湖南副使哈剌帖木儿屯兵城外，闻贼至，以乏军需，欲退兵，兴祖闻，即夜诣说留之。
现代文：至正八年特旨迁升为道州路总管，行至道州城外，撞族贼已至，相距仅二十里，当时湖南副使哈剌帖木儿屯兵城外，听说贼兵来了，因军需不足，想撤退，兴祖连夜劝说挽留。
English: By the eighth year of the reign of the emperor, the special envoy was promoted to the position of the chief administrator of the Daozhou Road. When he went outside the city of Daozhou, the bandits had already arrived and were only twenty miles away. At that time, the deputy envoy of Hunan Province, Harun Timur, stationed soldiers outside the city. When he heard that the bandits had arrived, he wanted to withdraw because of the shortage of military supplies, but Xingzu persuaded him to stay overnight.

古文：哈剌帖木儿曰： 明日得钞五千锭、桐盾五百，乃可破贼。 
现代文：哈剌帖木儿说 ：明天能有五千锭银钞，五百只桐盾，可破贼兵。 
English: "Tomorrow I can have five thousand silver coins and five hundred paise to break the bandits," said Harutemure.

古文：兴祖许之。明日甫入城视事，即以恩信劝谕盐商，贷钞五千锭，且取郡楼旧桐板为盾，日中皆备。
现代文：兴祖次日就任，以朝廷之恩德与信用劝盐商贷款五千锭，并取郡楼旧桐板为盾，中午备齐送哈剌帖木儿，哈即决定留守御敌。
English: The next day, Emperor Xingzu took office. With the grace and credit of the imperial court, he persuaded the salt merchant to lend him five thousand baht, and took the old paulownia board of the county hall as a shield. At noon, they were ready to send Harun Timur, and Harun immediately decided to stay and fight the enemy.

古文：永明县洞徭屡窃发为民害，兴祖以手榜谕之。皆曰： 林总管廉而爱民，不可犯也。 
现代文：贼兵听说此情连夜逃跑了。永明县洞徭族常盗窃人民，为害一方，兴祖张贴告示，贼说 ：总管廉洁爱民不可违犯。 
English: The bandits heard of this and fled in the middle of the night. The Dongye people of Yongming County often steal from the people. To their detriment, Xingzu posted a notice, the thieves said: "The general manager must be honest and love the people."

古文：三年不入境。
现代文：三年不入境为害。
English: Three years of non-entry into the country.

古文：已而罢兴作，赈贫乏，轻徭薄敛，郡中大治，宪司考课，以道州为最。
现代文：接着，停止兴土木，赈济贫困，轻赋税，全州大治。据监察御史考核，政务以道州最好。
English: Next, stop the construction of civil engineering, alleviate poverty, light taxation, and make the whole state great. According to the assessment of the inspector of history, the government affairs are the best in Daozhou.

古文：卒于官。
现代文：年老退职，卒于家。
English: He died in office.

