古文：渊，字伯源，小名阳乌。
现代文：卢渊，字伯源，小名阳乌。
English: Lu Yuan, his nickname Bo Yuan, and his nickname Yang Wu.

古文：性温雅寡欲，有祖父之风，敦尚学业，闺门和睦。
现代文：性情温雅寡欲，有祖父的风范，笃志学业，家门和睦。
English: Temperament mild and reserved, grandfatherly demeanor, dedicated to his studies, family harmony.

古文：袭侯爵，拜主客令，典属国。
现代文：袭爵为侯，拜为主客令，典属国。
English: Heirs to the title of marquess, guests of the lord, and vassals of the state.

古文：迁秘书令、始平王师。
现代文：迁任秘书令、始平王师。
English: Shihei Wang Shi was transferred to the position of secretary.

古文：以例降爵为伯。
现代文：后按例降爵为伯。
English: Afterward, he was demoted to the peerage as usual.

古文：给事黄门侍郎，迁兼散骑常侍、秘书监、本州大中正。
现代文：任给事黄门侍郎，迁任兼散骑常侍、秘书监、本州大中正。
English: He was appointed to the post of Huangmen waiter, transferred to the post of horseback riding attendant, secretary supervisor, and Honshu University junior high school principal.

古文：是时，高祖将立冯后，方集朝臣议之。
现代文：当时，高祖将立冯后，准备召集朝中大臣讨论此事。
English: At that time, Emperor Gaozong was preparing to convene the ministers of the DPRK and China to discuss the matter.

古文：高祖先谓渊曰： 卿意以为何如？ 
现代文：高祖先问卢渊： 卿觉得怎么样？ 
English: Gao Yuan's ancestor asked Lu Yuan: What do you think, sir?

古文：对曰： 此自古所慎，如臣愚意，宜更简卜。 
现代文：卢渊说： 这种事自古以来都是很慎重的，依臣愚见，应该求之卜筮。 
English: Lu Yuan said: This kind of thing has been very prudent since ancient times. According to the minister's foolish opinion, we should ask for advice.

古文：高祖曰： 以先后之侄，朕意已定。 
现代文：高祖说： 因她是先后的侄女，我的主意已定。 
English: Gaozu said, "Since she is my niece, my mind is made up.

古文：渊曰： 虽奉敕如此，然于臣心实有未尽。 
现代文：卢渊说： 虽然为臣奉命如此，然而心中实有未尽之意。 
English: Lu Yuan said: Although I have been ordered to do so, I still have unfinished business in my heart.

古文：及朝臣集议，执意如前。
现代文：等到朝臣聚集讨论，卢渊仍像以前一样坚持自己的意见。
English: When the courtiers gathered to discuss, Lu Yuan still insisted on his opinion as before.

古文：冯诞有盛宠，深以为恨，渊不以介怀。
现代文：冯诞得到皇帝的隆厚宠遇，这下深深记恨在心，卢渊也不记挂。
English: Feng Zheng got the emperor's generous favor, and he deeply regretted it. Lu Yuan did not care.

古文：及高祖议伐萧赜，渊表曰：
现代文：等到高祖召集朝臣讨论征伐萧颐的事，卢渊上表说：
English: When Gaozu called together his courtiers to discuss the matter of conquering Xiao Yu, Lu Yuan said at the table:

古文：臣诚识不周览，颇寻篇籍。
现代文： 为臣虽然见识不周广，但也颇涉篇籍。
English: For a minister, although his knowledge is not extensive, he is also quite involved in books.

古文：自魏晋以前，承平之世，未有皇舆亲御六军，决胜行陈之间者。
现代文：从魏晋前溯，太平之世时，从未有皇帝御驾亲临六军，决胜战场之上。
English: Looking back from the Wei and Jin Dynasties, in times of peace, no emperor has ever personally visited the Six Armies to lead them to victory on the battlefield.

古文：胜不足为武，弗胜有亏威德，明千钧之弩不为鼷鼠发机故也。
现代文：胜了说不上是英武，不能胜又有损圣德，这是所谓千钧之驽不为老鼠而发动机关的道理。
English: It cannot be said that victory is heroic, and failure to win is detrimental to morality. This is the so-called reason why the key to success is not the mouse, but the engine.

古文：昔魏武以弊卒一万而袁绍土崩，谢玄以步兵三千而苻坚瓦解。
现代文：过去魏武王曹操反凭老弱之兵一万而使袁绍土崩瓦解，谢玄以士兵三千而苻坚瓦解。
English: In the past, Wei King Cao Cao relied on ten thousand weak soldiers to make Yuan Shao disintegrate, and Xie Xuan relied on three thousand soldiers to disintegrate.

古文：胜负不由众寡，成败在于须臾，若用田丰之谋，则坐制孟德矣。
现代文：胜负不由人数众寡决定，成败在于须臾之间，若袁绍采用田丰之谋，则坐制曹孟德。
English: Victory or defeat is not determined by the small number of people, success or failure lies in the balance. If Yuan Shao adopts Tian Feng's strategy, Cao Mengde will take the lead.

古文：魏既并蜀，迄于晋世，吴介有江水，居其上流，大小势殊，德政理绝。
现代文：魏已吞并蜀国，到了晋代，吴仅据有江表，魏居其上游，国力大小悬殊，德政理绝。
English: Wei had already annexed Shu, and by the Jin Dynasty, Wu only controlled the Yangtze River, while Wei was upstream. There was a huge disparity in national power, and Germany had no political power.

古文：然犹君臣协谋，垂数十载。
现代文：但是仍然君臣协谋，延续数十年。
English: However, it is still a conspiracy of princes and ministers, which has lasted for decades.

古文：逮孙皓暴戾，上下携爽，不陆俱进，一举始克。
现代文：到了吴孙皓时朝政暴虐，上下离心背德，魏才水陆俱进，一举攻下吴国。
English: When it came to Wu Sun Yat, the imperial government was tyrannical, the upper and lower ranks were unscrupulous, and the Wei dynasty advanced by leaps and bounds, conquering Wu in one fell swoop.

古文：今萧氏以篡杀之烬，政虐役繁，又支属相屠，人神同弃。
现代文：现在萧氏政权以篡杀之烬，政治暴酷，赋役繁杂，又加上门内支属相互残杀，人神同弃。
English: At present, the Xiao regime is full of the ashes of usurpation, political brutality, forced labor, coupled with the fact that the branches within the clan kill each other, abandoning both humans and gods.

古文：吴会之民，延踵皇泽，正是齐轨之期，一同之会。
现代文：吴、会这些地方的百姓，纷纷来到皇魏境内，眼下正是克平之日，统一之期。
English: The people of these places came to the territory of the imperial Wei dynasty one after another, and now is the day of Keping, the period of unification.

古文：若大驾南巡，必左衽革面，闽越倒戈，其犹运山压卵，有征无战。
现代文：如若皇上您大驾南巡，敌人必定革面臣服，闽、越之民必定倒戈，这就犹如运山压卵，有征无战。
English: If you, the emperor, make a grand tour of the south, the enemy will surely surrender, and the people of Yunnan and Yue will surely turn against you. This is just like moving a mountain to crush an egg, there is no war without conquest.

古文：然愚谓万乘亲戎，转漕难继，千里馈粮，士有饥色，大军之后，必有凶年。
现代文：但是愚臣认为万乘之尊的您亲自出征，漕运难继，千里运粮，兵有饥色，大军征战之后，必有饥荒凶险之年。
English: However, the foolish minister thought that since the Venerable Manjusri had personally set out for the war, it would be difficult to succeed in paddling, transporting grain over thousands of miles, the soldiers would be hungry, and after a large army went to war, there would be a year of famine and danger.

古文：不若命将简锐，荡涤江右，然后鸣鸾巡省，告成东岳，则天下幸甚，率土戴赖。
现代文：还不如命令将帅统领精锐，荡涤江右，然后陛下您鸣鸾巡察，庆功于东岳泰山，则天下不胜幸运，四海百姓便会拥戴依赖于您。
English: It would be better to order the commander-in-chief of the elite to sweep the right side of the river, and then Your Majesty to make a grand inspection and celebrate the success of Mount Tai in Dongyue. Then the world would be very lucky, and the people of the four seas would embrace and depend on you.

古文：臣又闻流言，关右之民，自比年以来，竞设斋会，假称豪贵，以相扇惑。显然于众坐之中，以谤朝廷。
现代文： 为臣又听到流言，关右之民，近年以来，竞相设立斋会，假称豪贵，互相煽惑，公然在集会时候，诽谤朝廷。
English: The vassal also heard a rumor that in recent years, the people of Guan Yu have been competing to set up a banquet, pretending to be noble, inciting each other, and openly slandering the imperial court during the meeting.

古文：无上之心，莫此之甚。
现代文：无上之心，没有比这更严重的了。
English: There's nothing more serious than a broken heart.

古文：愚谓宜速惩绝，戮其魁帅。
现代文：愚臣认为应迅速惩办灭绝此风，诛杀其魁首。
English: The foolish minister thought that the extermination of this style should be quickly punished, and its leader should be killed.

古文：不尔惧成黄巾、赤眉之祸。
现代文：不这样的话，臣担心会铸成黄巾、赤眉那样的祸乱。
English: Otherwise, the minister feared that it would lead to the calamity of the yellow scarf and red eyebrows.

古文：育其微萌，不芟之毫末，斧斤一加，恐蹈害者众。
现代文：养育其微萌之芽，不铲其毫末之苗，万一他们造反，恐怕受其危害的就多了。
English: Nurture their tiny buds, do not shovel their tiny seedlings, in case they rebel, I'm afraid they will harm more.

古文：臣世奉皇家，义均休戚，诚知干忤之愆实深，然不忠之罪莫大。
现代文：为臣世代侍奉皇家，义在与君王同休共戚，十分清楚犯颜直谏触犯龙颜的罪过深重，然而如果不这样，不忠之罪就更可怕了。 
English: For generations of vassals to serve the royal family, righteousness and solidarity with the monarch, it is very clear that it is a serious sin to offend the dragon's face, but if not, the sin of disloyalty is even more terrible.

古文：诏曰：
现代文：皇帝下诏说：
English: The next edict said:

古文：至德虽一，树功多途。
现代文： 至上之德虽然只有一个，但树立功德的途径却很多。
English: Although there is only one supreme virtue, there are many ways to establish merit.

古文：三圣殊文，五帝异律，或张或弛，岂必相因？
现代文：三圣殊文，五帝异律，或张或弛，哪里要一定是相因不改呢。
English: The Three Holy Books, the Five Immortals' Law, or Zhang or Slack, what must be the same?

古文：远惟承平之主，所以不亲旆五戎者，盖有由矣。
现代文：朕远思太平之主，所以不亲自挂帅征讨，大概都是有缘由的。
English: I have a longing for the Lord of Peace, so I don't personally go to court. There is probably a reason for this.

古文：英明之主，或以同轨无征；守庸之君，或缘志劣寝伐。
现代文：英明之主，或以天下统一而无征；守庸之君，或因志劣停伐。
English: The wise lord, or with the unification of the world and no levy; Shouyong's prince, or because of inferiority.

古文：今若喻之英皇，时非昔类；比之庸后，意有恧焉。
现代文：而今朕若把自己与过去英明的皇帝比较，时势今非昔比；比之庸懦的君主，朕着实又不甘心。
English: But now, if I compare myself with the wise emperors of the past, the situation is not the same as before; compared with the cowardly monarchs, I am not satisfied.

古文：脱元极之尊，本不宜驾，二公之徒，革辂之戎，宁非谬欤？
现代文：假如尊贵无上的君主，不宜亲驾，那二公之徒，革辂之战，岂不是很荒谬的吗？
English: If it is not fitting for the most exalted monarch to personally lead those two servants of the people in the battle of Gezi, is it not absurd?

古文：寻夫昔人，若必须己而济世，岂不克广先业也。
现代文：朕推寻过去的人，假如都身先士卒拯济世事，哪还有不拓广祖先基业的呢？
English: If all the people in the past who I am looking for are the first to save the world, what is there to do but expand the heritage of our ancestors?

古文：定火之雄，未闻不武，世祖之行，匪皆疑慑。
现代文：定火之雄，未闻不武；世祖的行为，非皆疑慑。
English: A man of steady fire is unheard of and unarmed; the actions of the forefathers are not always suspect.

古文：且曹操胜袁，盖由德义内举；苻坚瓦解，当缘立政未至。
现代文：而且曹操胜了袁术，是由于其德行礼义内泽百姓；苻坚土崩瓦解，是因为其政治火候未到。
English: Moreover, Cao Cao's victory over Yuan Shu was due to his virtue and courtesy to the people of Neize; the collapse of the solid ground was due to his political failure.

古文：定非弊卒之力强，十万之众寡也。
现代文：显然不是老弱的士兵力量强大，十万之众势力弱小。
English: Obviously, it is not the old and weak soldiers who are powerful, but the hundred thousand people who are weak.

古文：今则驱驰先天之术，驾用仁义之师，审观成败，庶免斯咎。
现代文：现在朕采用先天之术，率领仁义之师，审观成败，或许可以免于这种过失。
English: Now that I am using my innate skills, leading a team of benevolent and righteous teachers, and judging success and failure, I may be able to avoid this mistake.

古文：长江之阻，未足可惮；逾纪之略，何必可师？
现代文：长江险阻，并不可怕；要成就伟大的计划，何必一定要找个先前的模式呢。
English: The Yangtze River perilous obstacle is not terrible; to achieve a great plan, why must we find a previous model?

古文：洞庭、彭蠡，竟非殷固，奋臂一呼，或成汉业。
现代文：洞庭、彭蠡，毕竟不是坚固如殷城，我魏师振臂一呼，或许即能成就汉之大业。
English: Dongting and Penghu, after all, are not as solid as Yincheng. If my Wei teacher shakes his arm, he may be able to achieve the great cause of Han.

古文：经略之义，当付之临机；足食之筹，望寄之萧相。
现代文：谋略之义，当付之临机应变；粮草之需，就寄托在如萧何那样的贤相身上。
English: The meaning of strategy is to be prepared for the contingency; the need for grain and grass is entrusted to the wise person such as Xiao He.

古文：将希混一，岂好轻动；利见之事，何得委人也！
现代文：朕此番前行，将求海内统一，哪里是喜好轻举妄动，利益所在，何能委派他人！
English: This time, going forward, we will seek unification within the country, where is the preference to act rashly, where are the interests, how can we delegate others!

古文：又水旱之运，未必由兵；尧汤之难，讵因兴旅？
现代文： 而且国家遭到水旱灾害，未必是由于兵祸；尧、汤时的灾难，难道也是因为兴兵动旅引起的？
English: Moreover, if a country suffers from floods and droughts, it is not necessarily due to military disasters; is the calamity of the Sino-Japanese War also caused by the mobilization of troops?

古文：颇丰之后，虽静有之，关左小纷，已敕禁勒。
现代文：国家丰年之后，虽静有之，关左的小纷乱，朕已下令平伐。
English: After a prosperous year for the country, although there is calm, there is a little turmoil on the other side of the border, and I have ordered a leveling.

古文：流言之细，曷足以纡天功？
现代文：微不足道的流言，哪能妨碍大业的完成？
English: Trivial gossip, what can hinder the completion of a great cause?

古文：深录诚心，勿恨不相遂耳，
现代文：朕深深记住了爱卿的一片诚心，卿不要记恨朕不按你说的去做。 
English: I deeply remember the sincerity of Love Sir. Sir, don't hold it against me if I don't do what you say.

古文：及车驾南伐，赵郡王干督关右诸军事，诏加渊使持节、安南将军为副，勒众七万将出子午。
现代文：等到皇帝车驾亲征，赵郡王元干督管关右诸军事，皇帝下诏加授卢渊为使持节、安南将军，为副都督，统领七万兵马准备从子午出击。
English: By the time the emperor personally led the troops, the governor of Zhao County, Wang Yuan, was in charge of the military in Guanzhong. The emperor issued an edict awarding Lu Yuan the title of envoy, General Annan the title of vice-governor, and he led 70,000 soldiers and horses to prepare for the attack from Zibo.

古文：寻以萧赜死，停师。
现代文：不久因萧颐去世，停止南征。
English: Soon after, the Southern Expedition was halted due to Xiao Yao's death.

古文：是时泾州羌叛，残破城邑，渊以步骑六千众号三万，徐行而进。
现代文：当时泾州羌人叛逆，攻城占邑，卢渊率领六千骑步兵，号称三万，慢慢向前开进。
English: At that time, the people of Zhangzhou rebelled, occupied the city, and Lu Yuan led six thousand cavalry and infantry, known as thirty thousand, and slowly moved forward.

古文：未经三旬，贼众逃散，降者数万口，唯枭首恶，余悉不问。
现代文：不到一个月，叛贼便纷纷逃散，投降的民众有数万人，卢渊只杀了首恶，其他人的罪行一律不过问。
English: In less than a month, the traitors fled in droves, and tens of thousands of people surrendered. Lu Yuan only killed the ringleader, and the crimes of the others were not questioned.

古文：诏兼侍中。
现代文：皇帝下诏让他兼任侍中。
English: The emperor decreed that he should also serve as a chamberlain.

古文：初，渊年十四，尝诣长安。将还，诸相饯送者五十余人，别于渭北。有相者扶风人王伯达曰： 诸君皆不如此卢郎，虽位不副实，然德声甚盛，望逾公辅。
现代文：当初，卢渊十四岁时，曾经到长安去过，准备回来时，有五十多人为他饯别，地点在渭水北面，有位相士扶风人王伯达说： 诸君都不如这位卢郎，他的官位与其学识才干虽不相称，但是他的德行名声十分隆盛，名望超过朝中诸公宰辅。
English: At the beginning, when Lu Yuan was fourteen years old, he had been to Chang'an, and when he was preparing to return, more than fifty people came to bid him farewell. The place was north of Surabaya, and a comrade-in-arms, Wang Boda, said: All princes are not as good as this Lu Lang. Although his official position is not commensurate with his academic ability, his reputation for virtue is very prosperous, and his fame exceeds that of the princes and assistants in the imperial court.

古文：后二十余年，当制命关右。
现代文：二十多年后，当号令关右。
English: More than 20 years later, it is time to turn right.

古文：愿不相忘。 
现代文：愿卢郎不忘老夫今日之言。 
English: May Lulang not forget what the old man said today.

古文：此行也，相者年过八十，诣军门请见，言叙平生。
现代文：此行之时，王伯达已年逾八十，到军门求见，谈论平生所见。
English: At the time of this trip, Wang Boda was more than eighty years old. He went to the military gate to meet and talk about what he had seen in his lifetime.

古文：未几，拜仪曹尚书。
现代文：没多久，朝廷便拜卢渊为仪曹尚书。
English: It didn't take long for the imperial court to make Lu Yuan an honorary Cao Shangshu.

古文：高祖考课在位，降渊以王师守常侍、尚书，夺常侍禄一周。
现代文：魏高祖考核在位官员，降卢渊以王师守常侍、尚书郎，夺除他常侍的俸禄一周。
English: Wei Gaozhu examined the reigning officials, and demoted Lu Yuan to Wang Shiguo's regular attendant, Shang Shuro, and deprived him of his regular attendant's salary for one week.

古文：寻除豫州刺史，以母老固辞。
现代文：不久任他为豫州刺史，卢渊以母亲年老为由，坚辞不赴任。
English: He was soon appointed as the governor of Yuzhou, but Lu Yuan refused to take up the post, citing his mother's old age.

古文：会萧昭业雍州刺史曹虎遣使请降，乃以渊为使持节、安南将军，督前锋诸军径赴樊邓。
现代文：恰逢萧昭业的雍州刺史曹虎派使者前来请求投降，朝廷便派卢渊为使持节、安南将军，督领前锋诸路军马奔赴樊邓。
English: At the time of Xiao Zhaojie's death, the Yongzhou general Cao Hu sent an envoy to request his surrender. The imperial court then sent Lu Yuan as envoy, General Annan as commander, and the vanguard of the various armies and horses to rush to Shandong.

古文：渊面辞曰： 臣本儒生，颇闻俎豆，军旅之事，未之学也。
现代文：卢渊到高祖驾前辞谢说： 为臣一介儒生，颇闻俎豆祭祀之类，带兵征战之事，从未学过。
English: Lu Yuan said before leaving for Gaozhu: I am a vassal of a Confucian scholar, I have heard a lot about pea sacrifices and the like, but I have never learned about leading soldiers into battle.

古文：惟陛下裁之。 
现代文：望陛下定夺。 
English: His Majesty's will be done.

古文：军期已逼，高祖不许。
现代文：行军日期已经逼近，高祖不同意换人。
English: The date of the march was approaching, and Gaozu did not agree to be replaced.

古文：渊曰： 但恐曹虎为周鲂耳，陛下宜审之。 
现代文：卢渊说： 臣担心曹虎又成为另一个周鲂啊，陛下应审慎从事。 
English: Lu Yuan said, "The minister is worried that Cao Hu will become another Zhou Ying, Your Majesty should be prudent.

古文：虎果伪降。
现代文：曹虎果然诈降。
English: Cao Hu indeed cheated his way to promotion.

古文：渊至叶，具曹虎谲诈之问，兼陈其利害。
现代文：卢渊到叶城，详细询问曹虎诈降之事，兼陈述其利害关系。
English: Lu Yuan went to Yecheng to inquire in detail about Cao Hu's fraudulent abdication and to state his interests.

古文：诏渊取南阳。
现代文：魏帝下诏让卢渊攻打南阳。
English: Emperor Wei ordered Lu Yuan to attack Nanyang.

古文：渊以兵少粮乏，表求先攻赭阳，以近叶仓故也。
现代文：卢渊以兵少粮乏，上表请求先攻赭阳。因它靠近叶城粮仓的缘故。
English: As Luyuan was short of soldiers and food, he asked the table above to attack Poyang first, because it was close to the grain silos of Yecheng.

古文：高祖许焉，乃进攻赭阳。
现代文：高祖同意了，于是卢渊便进攻赭阳。
English: Gaozu agreed, so Lu Yuan attacked Shenyang.

古文：萧鸾遣将垣历生来救，渊素无将略，为贼所败，坐免官爵为民。
现代文：萧鸾派将领垣历生前来救援，卢渊素无将略，被敌人打败了，被免去官爵，贬为平民。
English: Xiao Yao sent his generals to come to the rescue, and Lu Yuan was defeated by the enemy. He was stripped of his title and reduced to a commoner.

古文：寻遭母忧，高祖遣谒者诣宅宣慰。
现代文：不久卢渊遭母丧，魏高祖派使者前往卢宅宣慰吊问。
English: Soon after Lu Yuan's mother passed away, Emperor Wei Gaozu sent an envoy to Lu's house to offer condolences and condolences.

古文：服阕，兼太尉长史。
现代文：丧期完了之后，卢渊兼任太尉长史。
English: After the period of mourning was over, Lu Yuan also served as the first lieutenant of Changshi.

古文：高祖南讨，又兼彭城王中军府长史。
现代文：高祖南讨，卢渊又兼任彭城王中军府长史。
English: Gao Zu went to the south, and Lu Yuan also served as the military governor of Pengcheng.

古文：寻为徐州京兆王愉兼长史，赐绢百匹。
现代文：不久为徐州、京兆王元愉兼任长史，朝廷赐绢百匹。
English: Soon after, he was appointed as the governor of Xuzhou and the prince of Jing Zhao, Wang Yuan Rong, and the imperial court gave him 100 horses.

古文：愉既年少，事无巨细，多决于渊。
现代文：元愉年纪很小，府中事不论大小，大多由卢渊决定。
English: Motoyuki is very young, and most things in the prefectural government, no matter how big or small, are decided by Lu Yuan.

古文：渊以诚信御物，甚得东南民和。
现代文：卢渊以诚信御物，得到东南老百姓的信任与爱戴。
English: Lu Yuan has won the trust and love of the Southeastern people with his integrity.

古文：南徐州刺史沈陵密谋外叛，渊觉其萌渐，潜敕诸戍，微为之备。
现代文：南徐州刺史沈陵密谋外叛，卢渊看出了他们的迹象，暗暗吩咐诸戍军，以防不测。
English: Nan Xuzhou assassinated Shen Ling and plotted to rebel, Lu Yuan saw their signs and secretly ordered the troops to leave in case of emergency.

古文：屡有表闻，朝廷不纳。陵果杀将佐，勒宿豫之众逃叛。
现代文：卢渊屡屡上表，朝廷也不采纳他的意见，沈陵后来果然杀了身边将帅，率宿豫人马叛逃南方。
English: Lu Yuan repeatedly made representations, but the imperial court did not accept his opinions. Shen Ling later indeed killed the general at his side and defected to the south at the head of Su Yuan Renma.

古文：滨淮诸戍，由备得全。
现代文：沿淮诸戍地，由于有防备，得以保全。
English: The areas along Huai-Zhulun Road have been preserved due to precautions.

古文：陵在边历年，阴结既广，二州人情，咸相扇惑。
现代文：沈陵戍边多年，暗地勾结的人员很多，南徐、宿豫二州，人情都被煽惑。
English: Shenling has been on the fringe for many years, and there are many people who secretly collude. Nanxu, Sukuyuan and the two prefectures have been instigated.

古文：陵之余党，颇见执送，渊皆抚而赦之，惟归罪于陵，由是众心乃安。
现代文：沈陵南逃后，他的余党，很有一些被押送到卢渊这里来的，卢渊都安抚他们一番之后把人放了，由此人心安定下来。
English: After Shen Lingnan fled to the south, many of his remaining followers were escorted to Lu Yuan. Lu Yuan calmed them down and let them go, which calmed people down.

古文：景明初，除秘书监。
现代文：景明初年，朝廷任命他为秘书监。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Jingming, the imperial court appointed him as the superintendent of secretaries.

古文：二年卒官，年四十八。
现代文：二年，卒于任上，享年四十八岁。
English: He died in office two years later, at the age of 48.

古文：赠安北将军、幽州刺史，复本爵固安伯，谥曰懿。
现代文：朝廷赠他为安北将军、幽州刺史，恢复其固安伯爵位，谥称懿。
English: The imperial court presented him with the titles of Anbei General and Yuzhou Historian, and restored his title of Count of Gu'an.

古文：初，谌父志法钟繇书，传业累世，世有能名。
现代文：当初，卢谌父亲卢志师法钟繇书法，世代传业，代有能人。
English: At the beginning, Lu Zhi's father, Lu Zhi, was a calligrapher who taught Zhong Zhi's calligraphy, which was passed down from generation to generation.

古文：至邈以上，兼善草迹。
现代文：至卢邈以上，兼擅长草书。
English: He is also good at cursive writing.

古文：渊习家法，代京宫殿多渊所题。
现代文：卢渊演习家法，代京宫殿的字多是卢渊所题。
English: Lu Yuan practiced family law, and most of the characters of the palace in Beijing were written by Lu Yuan.

古文：白马公崔玄伯亦善书，世传卫瓘体。
现代文：白马公崔玄伯也善于书法，世代传习卫馞体。
English: Baima Gong Cui Xuanbo is also good at calligraphy, and he has been studying the Wei Xuan style for generations.

古文：魏初工书者，崔卢二门。
现代文：魏朝初年工于书法的，就是崔、卢两家。
English: In the first year of the Wei Dynasty, the two families that worked on calligraphy were the Cui and Lu families.

古文：渊与仆射李冲特相友善。
现代文：卢渊与仆射李冲关系特别和睦。
English: Lu Yuan and his servant Li Chong have a particularly harmonious relationship.

古文：冲重渊门风，而渊祗冲才官，故结为婚姻，往来亲密。
现代文：李冲看中卢渊门风，而卢渊推崇李冲才识官位，故结为婚姻亲家，往来亲密。
English: Li Chong sees the influence of Lu Yuan, while Lu Yuan praises Li Chong's talent and official position, so they are married and have close contacts.

古文：敏弟昶，字叔达，小字师颜，学涉经史，早有时誉。
现代文：至于卢渊受到高祖的礼遇赏识，李冲从中也起到了很大的作用。卢渊有八个儿子。卢敏之弟卢昶，字叔达，小字师颜，学涉经史，早年就受到世人称誉。
English: As for Lu Yuan being appreciated by Gao Zu's courtesy, Li Chong also played a great role in this. Lu Yuan had eight sons. Lu Min's brother Lu Wei, Zi Shuda, Xiao Zi Shiyan, who studied history, was praised by the world in his early years.

古文：太和初，为太子中舍人、兼员外散骑常侍，使于萧昭业。
现代文：太和初年，卢昶任太子中舍人、兼员外散骑常侍，出使萧昭业。
English: In the first year of the reign of Empress Dowager Cixi, Lu Xun was appointed as the prince's middle attendant, part-time external equestrian attendant, and dispatched Xiao Zhaoye.

古文：高祖诏昶曰： 卿便至彼，勿存彼我。
现代文：临行前高祖对卢昶说： 你到了彼方，不要分彼此。
English: Before leaving, Gao Zu said to Lu Yao: When you get to the other side, don't separate from each other.

古文：密迩江扬，不早当晚，会是朕物。
现代文：江南、扬州近在眼前，非早即晚，定成我手中之物。
English: Jiangnan and Yangzhou are close at hand, and sooner or later, they will be in my hands.

古文：卿等欲言，便无相疑难。 
现代文：你们想说什么就说，不要互相猜疑。 
English: Say what you want, don't be suspicious of each other.

古文：又敕副使王清石曰： 卿莫以本是南人，言语致虑。
现代文：又对副使王清石说： 你不要认为自己是南方人，说起话来就有所顾虑。
English: He also said to deputy envoy Wang Qingshi, "Don't think of yourself as a person from the south, and be cautious when you speak.

古文：若彼先有所知所识，欲见便见，须论即论。
现代文：如果他们先有什么主意或计策，想要见就见，需要论就论。
English: If they have any ideas or strategies first, they want to see them, they need to talk about them.

古文：卢昶正是宽柔君子，无多文才，或主客命卿作诗，可率卿所知，莫以昶不作，便复罢也。
现代文：卢昶是一个宽柔君子，没有多高的文才，或许主客要你作诗，可以尽你的才识，不要因为卢昶不作，就也罢手。
English: Lu Xun is a gentle gentleman, without much literary talent. Perhaps the host and guest want you to write poetry, you can do your best. Don't stop because Lu Xun doesn't do it.

古文：凡使人之体，以和为贵，勿递相矜夸，见于色貌，失将命之体。
现代文：大凡使者的规矩，以和为贵，不要交替着表现出傲慢自大，显露于情态容貌，失去奉朝廷之命的体统。
English: It is the rule of a great envoy to value harmony, and not to show arrogance and conceit in turn, to show it in his demeanor and appearance, and to lose the dignity of obeying the orders of the imperial court.

古文：卿等各率所知，以相规诲。 
现代文：你们各自都以自己的才智，相互加以规劝教诲。 
English: And exhort one another, every one of you, in your wisdom.

古文：及昶至彼，值萧鸾僭立，于是高祖南讨之，昶兄渊为别道将。而萧鸾以朝廷加兵，遂酷遇昶等。
现代文：卢昶等人到达南朝的时候，正碰上萧鸾即位称帝，于是高祖率军南讨，卢昶之兄卢渊任一路军队的主将，而萧鸾由于朝廷以兵刃相见，对待卢昶等使者就十分严酷苛刻。
English: When Lu Yu and others arrived in the Southern Dynasty, they were confronted with Xiao Yu's enthronement as emperor, so Gao Zu led the army to the south, Lu Yu's brother Lu Yuan served as the commander of the army all the way, and Xiao Yu treated Lu Yu and other emissaries very harshly because the imperial court saw eye to eye.

古文：昶本非骨鲠，闻南人云兄既作将，弟为使者。乃大恐怖，泪汗交横。
现代文：卢昶本来就不是刚毅之士，听到南朝人说哥哥已作为将领，弟弟却任使者，就大为恐惧，眼泪和汗水满面横流。
English: Lu Wei was not a man of fortitude. When he heard that the Southern Dynasty said that his brother had become a general, but his brother was an envoy, he was very afraid. Tears and sweat streamed down his face.

古文：鸾以腐米臭鱼豆供之。
现代文：萧鸾拿烂米臭鱼碎豆给他们吃。
English: Xiao Yan gave them rotten rice, rotten fish, and crushed beans to eat.

古文：而谒者张思宁辞气謇谔，曾不屈挠，遂以壮烈死于馆中。
现代文：但使者张思宁言辞气慨正直刚强，始终不屈不挠，终于壮烈地死于客馆之中。
English: However, the envoy, Zhang Sining, was full of vigor, honest and strong, always unyielding, and finally died in the guesthouse.

古文：昶还，高祖责之曰： 衔命之礼，有死无辱，虽流放海隅，犹宜抱节致殒。
现代文：卢昶回到朝廷，高祖斥责他说： 遵奉朝命之礼，宁死不辱，即使流放到天涯海角，仍然应当守节至死。
English: When Lu Yao returned to the imperial court, Gao Zu rebuked him, saying, "In accordance with the imperial order, I would rather die than be disgraced. Even if I were exiled to the ends of the earth, I should still observe the festival until I die."

古文：卿不能长缨羁首，已是可恨，何乃俯眉饮啄，自同犬马？
现代文：你不能以长缨缚贼首，已是可恨。何以竟至于低头饮水啄食，把自己等同于犬马。
English: You cannot bind the head of a thief with fetters; that would be detestable. Why should he bow his head to drink and eat, and compare himself to a dog?

古文：有生必死，修短几何。
现代文：有生必有死，长短又有几何。
English: If there is life, there must be death. What is the difference between long and short?

古文：卿若杀身成名，贻之竹素，何如甘彼刍菽，以辱君父乎？
现代文：你如果杀身成仁，可以名垂青史，为什么甘愿吃他们的马料，辱没君父呢？
English: If you succeed in killing yourself, you can become famous and go down in history. Why are you willing to eat their horsemeat and dishonor your father?

古文：纵不远惭苏武，宁不近愧思宁！ 
现代文：纵使不愧对古之苏武，难道不因身边的张思宁而感到羞惭！ 
English: Even if he is worthy of the ancient Suwu, isn't he ashamed of the Zhangsining around him!

古文：昶对曰： 臣器乏陆、随，忝使闽越。
现代文：卢昶回答说： 臣缺乏陆贾、萧何的才气，愧为出使闽越的使臣。
English: Lu Wei replied: My minister lacks the talent of Lu Jia and Xiao He, and I am ashamed to be the envoy who sent him.

古文：属萧鸾昏狂，诛戮无道。
现代文：时值萧鸾昏乱张狂，大肆诛戮不讲道义。
English: At the time, Xiao Yao was delirious and wild, killing indiscriminately without any sense of morality.

古文：恐不得仰奉明时，归养老母，苟存尺蠖，屈以求伸。
现代文：我惟恐不能仰奉圣明之世，在家奉养老母，苟且偷生如同尺蠖，先屈以求后伸。
English: I'm afraid that I can't worship the holy world, serve as an elderly mother at home, and secretly live like a shakuhachi, first bowing to get up and then stretching.

古文：负辱朝命，罪宜万死，乞归司寇，伏听斧钺。 
现代文：背负辱没朝廷使命，罪应万死，请求陛下将我交付司寇，我拜伏听凭诛杀。 
English: I bear the shame of not fulfilling the mission of the imperial court, and I deserve to die for my crime. I beg Your Majesty to hand me over to the scouts. I will obey and fight to the death.

古文：遂见罢黜。
现代文：于是卢昶被罢黜。
English: As a result, Lu Wei was ousted.

古文：久之，复除彭城王友，转秘书丞。
现代文：过了一段时间，卢昶又被任命为彭城王友，转任秘书丞。
English: After a period of time, Lu Wei was appointed as Pengcheng Wangyou and transferred to the post of secretary.

古文：景明初，除中书侍郎，迁给事黄门侍郎、本州大中正。
现代文：景明初年，卢昶被任命为中书侍郎，迁任给事黄门侍郎、本州大中正。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Jingming, Lu Xun was appointed as the secretary of the Chinese Academy of Letters, and was transferred to the Huangmen secretary and the vice-president of the Honshu University.

古文：昶请外禄，世宗不许。
现代文：卢昶请求外任，世宗不予准许。
English: Lu Wei requested to be reassigned, but Shizong would not allow it.

古文：迁散骑常侍，兼尚书。
现代文：后迁任散骑常侍，兼任尚书。
English: Later, he was transferred to the position of straggler, and concurrently held the post of Shoshu.

古文：时洛阳县获白鼠。
现代文：当时洛阳县捉到一只白鼠。
English: At that time, a white rat was caught in Luoyang County.

古文：昶奏曰：
现代文：卢昶上书奏道：
English: Lu Yao wrote in his diary:

古文：谨案《瑞典》，外镇刺史、二千石、令长不祗上命，刻暴百姓，人民怨嗟，则白鼠至。
现代文： 谨查瑞典，外镇刺史、二千石、令长等官不遵奉朝命，对待百姓苛刻暴戾，人民怨恨，那么白鼠就会到来。
English: If you carefully investigate Sweden, you will find that officials such as the mayor of a town with a history of two thousand koku and the commander-in-chief do not follow the orders of the court, treat the people harshly and violently, and the people resent them. Then the white rat will come.

古文：臣闻祯不虚见，德合必符；妖不妄出，咎彰则至。
现代文：臣闻祯石不会凭空出现，道德高深必然与符命相合；妖物不随便出来，罪过明显就会到来。
English: Subordinates will not appear out of thin air, and high moral standards will inevitably coincide with the fate of the soul; monsters will not come out casually, and sins will obviously come.

古文：是以古之人君，或怠瑞以失德，或祗变而立功，斯乃万古之殷鉴，千龄之炯诫。
现代文：所以古之人君，或有怠慢了祥瑞而丧失德行，或有恭奉妖变而建立功勋，这是万古的殷鉴，千年的炯诫。
English: Therefore, in ancient times, people either neglected auspiciousness and lost virtue, or worshipped evil spirits and built up merits. This is an eternal lesson and a thousand-year admonition.

古文：比者，灾气作沴，恆阳亏度，陛下流如伤之慈，降纳隍之旨，哀百姓之无辜，引在予之深责。
现代文：近来，灾害不祥之气作怪，满盈的太阳亏蚀，陛下流布有如哀伤之慈，降下救民于水火之旨，哀百姓之无辜，引咎深责。
English: In recent times, disasters have been ominous and ominous, the sun has been eclipsed, and His Majesty has spread like a sad mercy, lowering the will to save the people to the water and fire, mourning the innocent of the people, and deeply blaming.

古文：举贤黜佞之诏，道映于尧先；进思纳谏之言，事光于舜右。
现代文：举贤黜佞的诏令，道德映照于唐尧之前；进思纳谏的言辞，事实光耀于虞舜之旁。
English: Raise the edict of a virtuous person, and morality will be reflected before the Tang Dynasty; think about the words of a virtuous person, and the facts will shine next to the Yue Dynasty.

古文：伏读明旨，俯观征谴，敢布庸瞽，以陈万一。
现代文：臣拜读圣明之旨，俯观征兆之谴，大胆诉说愚陋之见，陈述细微之言。
English: A subject should read the meaning of the holy light, look down on the punishment of the omen, boldly tell the foolish view, and state the subtle words.

古文：窃惟一夫之耕，食裁充口；一妇之织，衣止蔽形。
现代文： 一夫之耕耘，粮食只能糊口；一妇之纺织，衣服只能蔽体。
English: A man's toil is food for his mouth, but a woman's weaving is clothing for her body.

古文：年租岁调，则惟常理，此外征求，于何取足？
现代文：年租岁调，那是常理，额外的征求，何处得以满足？
English: Annual rent adjustment, that is common sense, additional solicitation, where to be satisfied?

古文：然自比年以来，兵革屡动。荆扬二州，屯戍不息；钟离、义阳，师旅相继。
现代文：然而近年以来，兵革屡次出动；荆扬二州，屯戍不曾停息；钟离、义阳，师旅相继。
English: However, in recent years, the military revolution has been launched repeatedly; Jingyang two states, the settlement has not stopped; Zhongli, Yiyang, Shilabai successively.

古文：兼荆蛮凶狡，王师薄伐，暴露原野，经秋淹夏。
现代文：兼以荆蛮凶狡，王师讨伐，暴尸原野，经秋至夏。
English: It also features Jing the Brutal, Wang Shi the Crusader, and the Wasteland of the Dead, and runs from autumn to summer.

古文：汝颍之地，率户从戎；河冀之境，连丁转运。
现代文：汝颍之地，所有的民户都应征从戎；河冀之境，连年兵丁转运。
English: In the land of Ruyi, all households were conscripted to join the army; in the land of Hebei, soldiers were transferred year after year.

古文：又战不必胜，加之退负，死丧离旷，十室而九。
现代文：又每战不能必胜，加之失败退却，死丧逃离的，十室有九室。
English: In addition, every battle cannot be won, in addition to the defeat and retreat, the dead and the fleeing, there are nine rooms in the ten rooms.

古文：细役烦徭，日月滋甚；苛兵酷吏，因逞威福。
现代文：繁杂细琐的徭役，日益增重，凶兵酷吏，因此而逞其威福。
English: The complex and detailed role of the eunuch is becoming more and more important, and the murderous soldiers are cruel, so they are proud of their power.

古文：至使通原遥畛，田芜罕耘；连村接闬，蚕饥莫食。
现代文：致使广大的地域之内，田园荒芜无人耕耘，无数的村落门户，家蚕饥饿无人饲养。
English: As a result, within a vast area, the countryside is barren and uncultivated, innumerable villages have no portals, and hungry silkworms are raised by no one.

古文：而监司因公以贪求，豪强恃私而逼掠。
现代文：但监司借公而贪求，豪强恃私而逼掠。
English: However, the supervisors are greedy and covet by taking advantage of the public, and are arrogant, selfish and predatory.

古文：遂令鬻裋褐以益千金之资，制口腹而充一朝之急。
现代文：遂令百姓卖掉短袄来满足千金之资，忍饥挨饿来充实一朝之急。
English: So he ordered the people to sell their short coats to satisfy their financial needs, and to starve to satisfy their urgent needs.

古文：此皆由牧守令长多失其人，郡阙黄霸之君，县无鲁恭之宰，不思所以安民，正思所以润屋。
现代文：这都是由于牧守令长多为用人不当，郡中缺少黄霸那样的牧守，县里没有鲁恭那样的宰令，不考虑安民之计，一心想着肥私之策。
English: This is all due to the fact that most of the chief herdsmen are improperly employed, the county lacks a herdsman like Huangba, and there is no zairei like Lukong in the county. They do not consider the safety of the people, but only think about their own interests.

古文：故士女呼嗟，相望于道路；守宰暴贪，风闻于魏阙。
现代文：所以男女嗟叹呼号，相望于道路，守宰贪婪暴虐，风闻于魏阙。
English: Therefore, men and women sigh and call, look forward to the road, guard greed and tyranny, and are known in Wei Wei.

古文：往岁法官案验，多挂刑网，谓必显戮，以明劝诫。
现代文：往年官府执法验案，大多悬挂法网，说是必须明正典刑，处决示众以示劝诫。
English: In previous years, the government's law enforcement inspection cases were mostly suspended, saying that it was necessary to clarify the formal punishment, and the executions were shown to the public to show exhortation.

古文：然后遣使覆讯，公违宪典。
现代文：然而后来派人再行审讯，却公开违背法律典章。
English: However, they later sent someone to conduct a retrial, but they openly violated the legal code.

古文：或承风挟请，轻树私恩；或容情受贿，辄施己惠。
现代文：有的为买人情，轻易给予私恩；有的徇情受贿，动辄施以己惠。
English: Some easily give personal favors in order to buy people's affection; some accept bribes and readily give their own benefits.

古文：御史所劾，皆言诬枉；申雪罪人，更云清白。
现代文：御史进行弹劾，都说是诬枉；替有罪之人申雪，又说全都清白。
English: All impeachments in history have been said to be false; all guilty people have been declared innocent, and all have been declared innocent.

古文：长侮上之源，滋陵下之路。
现代文：滋长侮慢朝廷之源，开辟欺凌百姓之路。
English: It nourishes the source of contempt for the imperial court and paves the way for bullying the people.

古文：忠清之人，见之而自怠；犯暴之夫，闻之以益快。
现代文：忠贞清廉之人，见此而自然倦怠；犯法凶暴之徒，闻此而越发痛快。
English: The pure and the virtuous see it and naturally grow weary; the lawless and the violent hear it and are more exhilarated.

古文：白鼠之至，信而有征矣。
现代文：白鼠的到来，实在是一种征兆啊。
English: The arrival of the white mouse is really a sign.

古文：伏愿陛下垂睿哲之鉴，察妖灾之起。
现代文： 伏愿陛下垂睿哲之明鉴，察妖灾之兴起。
English: I pray that His Majesty will learn from the sages and see the rise of evil.

古文：延对公卿，广询庶政；引见枢纳，博求民隐。
现代文：接见朝廷公卿，广泛征询政务；引见精干之臣，广为搜求民情。
English: He met with court nobles of the Imperial Court and extensively inquired about government affairs; he met with elite courtiers and extensively searched for people's feelings.

古文：存问孤寡，去其苛碎；轻徭省赋，与民休息。
现代文：抚恤孤寡，去其苛税负担；轻减徭赋，与民以休养生息。
English: Widows and orphans will be supported, and the heavy tax burden will be removed; the endowment will be reduced, and the people will be able to rest and recuperate.

古文：贞良忠谠，置之于朝；奸回贪佞，弃之于市。
现代文：忠良坚贞之士，置之于朝；奸邪贪佞之徒，弃之于市。
English: Those who are loyal, good, and steadfast will be placed in the government; those who are treacherous, evil, and greedy will be abandoned in the city.

古文：则九官勿戒而恆敬，百县不严而自肃，士女欣欣，人有望矣。
现代文：那么九官不须警戒而长期恭谨，百县不加严治而自然整肃，男女欣然，人民有望。 
English: Then the nine officials do not need to be alert but long-term respectful, the hundred counties do not impose strict but natural rectification, men and women are delighted, and the people are hopeful.

古文：诏曰： 朕纂承鸿绪，伏膺宝历，思靖八方，惠康四海。
现代文：皇帝下诏说： 朕继承鸿业，身居皇位，想要绥靖八方，惠康四海。
English: The emperor issued an edict saying, "I am the successor to Hongye, I am on the throne, I want to achieve pacification in all directions and prosperity in all directions.

古文：当必世之期，麟凤不降；属胜残之会，白鼠告咎。
现代文：正当盛世之期，麟凤不降；遏制凶残之时，白鼠报怨。
English: When prosperity is at its peak, the unicorn and the phoenix do not decline; when the ferocity is curbed, the white mouse complains.

古文：万邦有罪，实唯朕躬。
现代文：国家四方有罪，实是朕的过错。
English: The four sides of the country are guilty, but it's really my fault.

古文：尚书敷纳机猷，献替是寄，谠言有闻，朕实嘉美。 
现代文：尚书省广纳机要谋划，忠言进谏寄托于此。得以听闻忠诚正直之言，我实应予以赞赏嘉奖。 
English: Shangshu's province-wide acceptance machine should be planned, and loyal advice should be entrusted to it. I should really appreciate the award for hearing the words of loyalty and honesty.

古文：转侍中，又兼吏部尚书，寻即正，仍侍中。
现代文：于是转授卢昶为侍中，又兼任吏部尚书，不久授任为正职，仍任侍中。
English: As a result, Lu Wei was transferred to be an attendant, and he also served as a clerk, and was soon appointed to a full-time position, still serving as an attendant.

古文：昶守职而已，无所激扬也。
现代文：卢昶克尽职守而已，并无激扬振奋之举。
English: Lu Rongke is just doing his duty, there is no excitement.

古文：与侍中元晖等更相朋附，为世宗所宠，时论鄙之。
现代文：卢昶与侍中元晖等人互相结交，为世宗所宠信，当时的舆论都鄙视他们。
English: Lu Xun and his attendant, the middle-ranking official Yuan Xuan, and others befriended each other and were favored by Shizong. At the time, the public opinion despised them.

古文：出除镇东将军、徐州刺史。
现代文：卢昶出任为镇东将军、徐州刺史。
English: Lu Wei was appointed as Zhendong General and Xuzhou Shishi.

古文：永平四年夏，昶表曰： 萧衍琅邪郡民王万寿等款诚内结，潜来诣臣，云朐山戍今将交换，有可图之机。
现代文：永平四年夏，卢昶上表说： 萧衍所属琅笽郡百姓王万寿等诚心想来归附，暗中来见我，说是朐山戍现在将要换防，有可图之机。
English: In the summer of the fourth year of Yongping, Lu Yao said on the table: Xiao Yan's subordinate, Wang Wan Shou, sincerely wanted to join, and secretly came to see me, saying that Lushan Yao was now going to change the defense, and there was a lucrative opportunity.

古文：臣即许以旌赏，遣其还入。
现代文：臣当即许诺对他予以表彰奖赏，遣送他们回去。
English: The vassal immediately promised to give him a commendation award and send them back.

古文：至三月二十四夜，万寿等奖率同盟，攻掩朐城，斩衍辅国将军，琅邪、东莞二郡太守，带朐山戍主刘晣并将士四十余人，传首至州。
现代文：到了三月二十四日夜晚，王万寿等人率领同盟者，偷袭攻打朐城，斩杀萧衍的辅国将军，琅笽、东莞二郡太守，以及朐山戍主刘晰并将士四十余人，将其首级传送到州。
English: On the evening of March 24th, Wang Wanshou and others led their allies in a sneak attack on Lucheng, killing Xiao Yan, the general of Fu Guo, and Liu Xiao, the governor of Dongguan County, as well as Liu Xiao, the lord of Lushan County, and more than forty of his soldiers, whose heads were sent to the state.

古文：臣即遣兼郯城戍副张天惠率骁勇二百，径往赴之。
现代文：臣立即派兼郯城戍副将张天惠率领骁勇二百人，径直前往朐山。
English: The minister immediately dispatched Zhang Tianhui, the vice-commander of the Lushan Fortress, to lead the 200 men of the Lushan Fortress straight to Lushan.

古文：琅邪诸戍络绎继援，而衍郁洲已遣二军以拒天惠。
现代文：琅笽郡各戍络绎相继援助，但萧衍所属郁州已派两路军抗拒张天惠。
English: All counties in Handan County have provided assistance one after another, but Iuzhou, where Xiao Yan belongs, has sent two armies to resist Zhang Tianhui.

古文：天惠与万寿等内外齐击，俘斩数百，便即据城。 
现代文：张天惠与王万寿等内外同时合击，俘获和斩杀敌军数百人，很快占领了朐城。 
English: Zhang Tianhui and Wang Wanshou and others at home and abroad at the same time, captured and killed hundreds of enemy troops, and soon occupied Lucheng.

古文：诏昶曰： 彭宋地接边疆，势连淮海，威御之术，功在不易。
现代文：皇帝诏令卢昶说： 彭宋靠近边疆，地势紧连淮海，以威力防御之术，实在不易成功。
English: The emperor ordered Lu Wei to say: Peng Song is close to the frontier, the terrain is closely connected to the Huaihai Sea, and it is not easy to succeed in the power of defense.

古文：朐山险塞，寇之要防，水陆交凑，扬、郁路冲，畜聚凶徒，虔刘边鄙，青、光、齐、衮每罹其患。
现代文：朐山是险峻的要塞，敌寇的重要防地，水陆交汇，为扬、郁各路的要冲，凶徒聚集于此，劫掠屠戮边地，青、光、齐、兖诸州屡次遭其祸害。
English: Lushan is a precipitous fortress, an important defense site for enemy corsairs, a water-land confluence, and a crossroads for Yang and Yu. The criminals gathered here, looting and slaughtering the borderlands, and Qing, Guang, Qi, and Yunnan provinces repeatedly suffered from its scourge.

古文：卿妙算既敷，克城殄众，展疆辟土，何善如之！
现代文：你施展巧计妙算，攻克朐城消灭敌众，拓展大魏疆土，有什么比这更好的。
English: What could be better than for you to use your cunning and skillful calculation to conquer Lucheng, exterminate the enemy, and expand the territory of the Great Wei Dynasty?

古文：庸勋之懋，朕用嘉止。
现代文：功勋之大，朕当给予嘉奖。
English: For his great merits, I should give him a commendation.

古文：故遣左右直长阎遵业具宣往怀。
现代文：所以派左右直长阎遵业奉诏前往安抚。
English: Therefore, the left and right leaders sent Yan Zunye to appease them.

古文：此戍郁洲之本，存亡所系。
现代文：朐山戍是郁州的根本，存亡之所系。
English: The Lushan Mountains are the root of Iuzhou, the place of survival.

古文：今既失守，有不存之心；彼见扼喉，将图救援之计。
现代文：如今已经失守，郁州就有不存之心；萧衍看到扼住了他的咽喉，将会图谋救援之计。
English: Now defenseless, Yuzhou is desperate; Xiao Yan, seeing his throat choked, will try to rescue him.

古文：今水雨盛行，宜须防守。
现代文：现在正是多雨的季节，应当严加防守。
English: Now is the rainy season, should be strictly defensive.

古文：卿可深思拟捍之规，攘敌之略，使还具闻。 
现代文：你要慎重考虑守城的计策，抗敌的谋略，让使者回来上报朝廷。 
English: You should carefully consider the strategy of defending the city, the strategy of resisting the enemy, and let the envoy return to report to the imperial court.

古文：昶又表： 萧衍将张稷、马仙琕、阴虔和等各领精兵，分屯诸堰；昌义之、张惠绍、王神念、王茂光承彼传信，续发建鄴。
现代文：卢昶又进表说： 萧衍部将张稷、马仙王卑、阴虔和等人各领精兵，分别屯驻在淮水各处堤坝；昌义之、张惠绍、王神念、王茂光接到他们传来的消息，即从建邺出发作为后续。
English: Lu Wei also went into the table and said: Xiao Yan's department stationed the elite soldiers of various domains, such as Zhang Xuan, Ma Xian, Wang Bi, Yin Qian and others, respectively, at the dikes around Huai Shui; Chang Yizhi, Zhang Huishao, Wang Shennian and Wang Maoguang received the news from them, that is, starting from Jianye as a follow-up.

古文：自存之计，并归于此。
现代文：其自存之计，都在此一举。
English: All of its self-preservation measures have come to an end.

古文：量力准寇，事恐不轻。
现代文：估计敌方的力量，事情恐怕并不轻松。
English: Estimating the strength of the enemy, things are probably not easy.

古文：何者？
现代文：为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：此兵九千，贼众四万，名将健士，远近毕集，邀凭雨热，决死来战，藉众乘凶，希固巢穴。
现代文：我方仅有将士九千人，贼众却达四万人，名将健士，远近集中于此，趁着雨热的气候，拼死前来作战，凭借人多气汹，希图巩固其巢穴。
English: We only have nine thousand soldiers, but the bandits have forty thousand. Famous soldiers and able-bodied men, far and near concentrated here, take advantage of the rainy and hot weather, fight to the death, and with the help of many people, hope to consolidate their nest.

古文：所以倾国而举，非为朐山，将恐王师固六里，据湖冲，南截淮浦，势崩难测，海利盐物，交阙常贡。
现代文：萧衍之所以倾国而动，并非为了朐山一地，而是害怕魏军固守六里，占据湖冲，南截淮浦，其势力崩溃就难以预测，海盐之利，就要交贡于魏庭。
English: The reason why Xiao Yan moved to invade the country was not for the sake of Lushan, but because he was afraid that the Wei army would hold fast to Liuli, occupy Huchon and the southern section of Huaipu, the collapse of its power would be unpredictable, and the profits from sea salt would have to be paid as tribute to Wei.

古文：所虑在大，有必争之心。
现代文：其所忧虑的在更大的地方，故此有必争之心。
English: His worries are in a bigger place, so he has a competitive spirit.

古文：若皇家经略，方有所讨，必须简将增兵，加益粮仗，与之亢拟。
现代文：如果朝廷的谋略，准备对萧衍进行征讨，就必须对这里调将增兵，充实粮草兵器，以便与敌军相对抗。
English: If the strategy of the imperial court is to prepare for the conquest of Xiao Yan, it is necessary to transfer more troops here and replenish the grain and grass weapons in order to resist the enemy.

古文：相持至秋，天麾一动，开拓为易。
现代文：相持到了秋季，皇上率部出动，开拓疆土就不成问题。
English: However, by the autumn, the emperor and his troops were on the move, and the expansion of the territory was no longer a problem.

古文：图南之计，事本在今，请增兵六千、米十万石；如其不也，伏听朝议。 
现代文：图南之计，事本在今，请求增加兵卒六千人，米十万石。如果不能这样做，我恭伏听从朝廷的议决。 
English: In accordance with Tunan's plan, I am now requesting an increase of six thousand soldiers and one hundred thousand koku of rice. If this cannot be done, I will humbly obey the decision of the Imperial Court.

古文：昶又表： 贼徒大集，众旅强盛，置栅朐山，屯守门井，并围固城，昼夜连战。
现代文：卢昶又上表说： 贼徒大量聚集，兵力极为强大，在朐山设置栅栏，屯守栅门和水井，并且围攻固城，昼夜连战。
English: Lu Wei also said on the table: The bandits gathered in large numbers and the troops were extremely powerful. They set up fences in Lushan, guarded the gates and wells, and besieged the fortress, fighting day and night.

古文：恐狡势既强，后难除揃。
现代文：恐怕敌方势力强大之后，就难以翦除了。
English: I'm afraid that once the enemy forces are strong, it will be difficult to eliminate them.

古文：辄欲令征虏将军赵遐率勒见兵，与之决胜。
现代文：我正想令征虏将军赵遐率领现有部众，与之决一胜负。
English: I'm thinking of ordering the conscript general Zhao Jun to lead the existing troops and fight it out.

古文：遐虑众少不敌，若一举失利，则众心挫怯，求待大众俱至，奋锐击之。
现代文：赵遐考虑寡不敌众，倘若一举失利，就会使部众心怀怯惧，请求等待大军到来之后，锐意奋力攻击敌军。
English: Zhao Wei considered that he was outnumbered, and if he failed at one stroke, he would frighten his subordinates, and asked them to wait for the arrival of the large army, and then attack the enemy with great determination.

古文：窃谓此谋，非为孟浪。
现代文：我私下认为这一计议，并非是轻率之举。
English: Privately, I don't think it's a decision that's been taken lightly.

古文：且臣本奉朝规，令相拒守，以待凉月。
现代文：况且臣本来就遵奉朝廷之命，坚持拒守，以待秋凉之季。
English: Moreover, the minister had originally complied with the order of the imperial court and insisted on refusing to keep watch, waiting for the autumn cool season.

古文：今岁已云秋，高风渐举，经算大图，时事既至。且鲍口以东，陆运无阂，朐、固之间，本无停潦，宜时掩击边陲。
现代文：如今已临近秋天，秋风渐起，朝廷的经略大图，实现的时机已到，而且鲍口以东，陆路并无阻隔，朐城、固城之间，本来就没有积水，应当适时地乘其不备，攻击边陲之敌。
English: Now that autumn is approaching and the autumn wind is gradually rising, the time has come for the imperial court to draw up a grand strategy and implement it. Moreover, there is no land barrier east of Baokou, and there is no standing water between Fucheng and Gucheng. It is necessary to take advantage of its lack of preparation in a timely manner and attack the enemy on the border.

古文：而贼自夏以来，贯甲不歇，从六里以北，城栅相连，役使兵人，便已疲殆。
现代文：再者敌军从入夏以来，穿着铠甲不曾停歇，从六里以北，城堡栅栏相互连接，役使部下士卒，已使他们疲惫不堪。
English: Moreover, since the beginning of the summer, the enemy troops have not stopped wearing armor, and from six miles north, the castle fences are connected to each other, and the subordinates have been exhausted.

古文：若大众临之，必可禽捷。
现代文：如果大军一到，必定可以很快取胜。
English: If a large army arrives, it must be able to win quickly.

古文：一城退溃，众垒土崩，乘胜图之，易于振朽。
现代文：一座城池溃退，众多堡垒就会瓦解，我军乘胜追击，易如摧枯拉朽。
English: If a city is defeated, many fortresses will collapse, and our army will use the victory to pursue, which is easy to destroy.

古文：脱兵不速至，长彼炽心，军士忧惶，自生异议。
现代文：倘若大军不能很快赶到，就会助长敌方气焰，将士忧惧惶恐，自然会滋生异议。
English: If a large army does not arrive quickly, it will boost the enemy's pride, make the generals anxious, and naturally breed dissent.

古文：请速简配，以及事机。 
现代文：请求朝廷迅速选择配备军队，以不延误时机。 
English: Request the Imperial Court to quickly choose the army to be equipped, so as not to delay the timing.

古文：诏曰： 一克获朐山，计本于昶，乘胜之规，终宜有寄。
现代文：皇帝下诏说： 攻克朐山，计策出于卢昶，乘胜攻击的谋划，终究应当实施。
English: The emperor issued an imperial edict saying: To conquer Lushan, the strategy comes from Lu Wei, and the planning of the attack should be carried out after all.

古文：是以起兵之始，即季处分，前机经略，一以任之。
现代文：所以开始起兵的时候，就委付他进行处置，以前的攻守策略，全都委任于他。
English: Therefore, when he began to raise an army, he was entrusted with the disposition, and the previous offensive and defensive strategies were all delegated to him.

古文：今既请兵，理宜速遂。
现代文：现在他既来请求派兵，按理应当从速发兵。
English: Now that he has come to request the dispatch of troops, it is logical that the troops should be dispatched immediately.

古文：可遣冀、定、瀛、相四州中品羽林、虎贲四千人赴之。 
现代文：可派遣冀、定、瀛、相四州的中品羽林、虎贲四千人赶赴前线。 
English: It is possible to send four thousand people to the front line from Ji, Ding, Handan, Sangshizhou, Zhongpin, Hualin, and Huchen.

古文：又诏昶曰： 朐山之克，实由于卿，开疆拓土，实为长策。
现代文：皇帝又诏令卢昶说： 朐山被攻克，实在是由于你的功劳，开疆拓土，实在是长久之计。
English: The emperor also issued a decree to Lu Wei, saying, "The conquest of Lushan is really due to your merits. It is a long-term plan to open up the territory and expand the territory.

古文：然经讨未服，非卿而谁？
现代文：策划征讨尚未降服之敌，不是你又有谁人？
English: Who are you not to plan the conquest of an unconquered enemy?

古文：而蚁徒送死，规侵王略，天亡小贼，数在无远。
现代文：而蝼蚁之徒前来送死，图谋侵犯大魏疆土，上天要灭亡小贼，运数已在不远。
English: But the followers of the Ants came to send them to death, attempting to invade the territory of the Great Wei Dynasty. Heaven wants to destroy the petty thieves, and the number of transports is not far away.

古文：故前者命卿亲临指授，寻以卿疾未瘳，且待消息。
现代文：所以先前命你亲自指挥授意，不久因为你生病未愈，暂且等待消息。
English: That's why I ordered you to give the order in person, but since you're still ill, I'll wait to hear from you.

古文：今既痊复，宜遵前旨，秉戈挥锐，殄寇为怀。
现代文：现在你已痊愈康复，应当遵奉先前的旨意，秉戈挥锐，消灭敌寇。
English: Now that you have recovered from your illness, you should follow your previous will, stick to your guns, and wipe out the enemy bandits.

古文：已发虎旅五万，应机电赴，指辰而至，遂卿本请。
现代文：现已发虎贲之军五万，顺应时机星夜驰赴，指日可到，满足你的请求。
English: Now the army of fifty thousand has been dispatched, and it will rush to the starry night according to the time, and it can arrive on the appointed day to meet your request.

古文：截彼东南，亮委高算。 
现代文：断绝敌方的东南部，确实是高明的谋算。 
English: Cutting off the enemy's southeast is indeed a clever strategy.

古文：又诏昶曰： 取朐置戍，并是卿计，始终成败，悉归于卿。
现代文：又诏令卢昶说： 攻取朐城设置戍所，都是你的计谋，成败与否，全归于你。
English: He also ordered Lu Xun to say: "The capture of Fucheng and the establishment of a military base are all your schemes. Whether they succeed or fail is entirely up to you.

古文：卿以兵少请益，今已遂卿本意。
现代文：你由于兵少请求增派，现在已满足你的要求。
English: You asked for more troops because of the shortage, and now your request has been met.

古文：如闻东唐陆道甚狭，一辄之外，皆是大水。
现代文：听说东唐一带陆路非常狭窄，一车之宽以外，都是大水。
English: It is said that the land routes in and around East Tang are very narrow, except for the width of one car, they are all flooded.

古文：彼必据之，以断军路。
现代文：敌方必定要占据它，以断我军前进之路。
English: The enemy must occupy it in order to cut off our army's advance.

古文：若已如此，更设何策？
现代文：倘若情况已经如此，另有什么计策？
English: If this is already the case, what else can be done?

古文：其军奇兵变，遽以表闻。
现代文：萧衍用兵奇诡多变，你应及时以表奏知。
English: Xiao Yan's use of soldiers is tricky and changeable. You should be aware of this in time.

古文：又闻衍军将帅，每有流言，云魏博淮阳、宿豫，乃是两宜。
现代文：又听说萧衍军中将帅，常有流言，说魏军取得淮阳、宿豫，才是两全其美。
English: I also heard that General Xiao Yan was a handsome lieutenant general, and there were often rumors that the Wei army obtained Huaiyang and Sukuyuan, which was the best of both worlds.

古文：若实有此，卿可量朐山薪水得支几时。
现代文：如果确实是这样，你可以估量朐山的柴火饮水能支持多久。
English: If this is indeed the case, you can estimate how long Lushan's firewood and drinking water can support.

古文：脱事容往返，驰驿速闻。
现代文：倘若事情容许往返，即派使速告朝廷。
English: If the matter permits a round trip, then an urgent appeal will be sent to the Imperial Court.

古文：如薪水少急，即可量计。
现代文：如果薪水缺乏而紧急，你可以量计着使用。
English: If pay is scarce and urgent, you can use it sparingly.

古文：若理不可尔，亦将军裁决。 
现代文：如果照道理不能这样做，也可按军中情况裁断。 
English: If this is not possible according to reason, it can also be decided according to the situation in the army.

古文：昶既儒生，本少将略，又羊祉子燮为昶司马，专任戎事，掩昶耳目，将士怨之。
现代文：卢昶是一个儒生，本来就缺少将才，又有羊祉的儿子燮任卢昶的司马，专管军事，遮蔽卢昶的耳目，将士都怨恨他。
English: Lu Xun was a Confucian. He was short of generals, but he had a son who served as Lu Xun's second-in-command, in charge of military affairs. Lu Xun's eyes and ears were covered, and the generals resented him.

古文：朐山戍主傅文骥粮樵俱罄，以城降衍。
现代文：朐山戍主傅文骥因粮草断绝，以朐山城投降了萧衍。
English: Because of the lack of grain and grass, the master of Lushan, Fu Wenyi, surrendered Lushan City to Xiao Yan.

古文：昶见城降，于是先走退。
现代文：卢昶看到戍城已降，于是自己首先逃退。
English: Lu Wei saw that Lucheng had fallen, so he fled first.

古文：诸军相寻奔遁，遇大寒雪，军人冻死及落手足者三分而二。
现代文：诸军相继奔走逃遁，遇到大雪严寒，军人冻死和冻掉手足的有三分之二。
English: The armies fled one after the other, encountering heavy snow and severe cold. Two-thirds of the soldiers froze to death and froze their hands and feet.

古文：自国家经略江左，唯有中山王英败于钟离，昶于朐山失利，最为甚焉。
现代文：自从国家经略江东以来，只有中山王元英在钟离打过败仗，卢昶在朐山失利，情况最为严重。
English: Since the country's intervention in the east of the Yangtze River, only Zhongshan Wangyuanying has been defeated in Zhongli, and Lu Wei has been defeated in Shaoshan, which is the most serious situation.

古文：世宗遣黄门甄琛驰驿锁昶，穷其败状。
现代文：世宗派黄门甄琛从驿道驰往扣押了卢昶，拟表追究他的罪责。
English: Huangmen Zhenyao of the World Sect arrested Lu Yao while he was driving from Xingdao and drafted a charge sheet to prosecute him.

古文：诏曰： 朐山之败，伤损实深，推始究末，罪钟元帅。
现代文：皇帝下诏说： 朐山的失败，伤亡损失实为惨重，推究其始末，罪责在于元帅。
English: The emperor issued an edict saying: "The defeat of Lushan, the casualties and losses are really heavy, and the blame lies with the marshal.

古文：虽经大宥，轻重宜别，昶一人可以免官论坐，自余将统以下悉听依赦复任。 
现代文：虽然实行大赦，处分轻重应有所区别，卢昶一人免官论罪，其余将领以下全都听凭其按照赦令恢复官任。 
English: Although an amnesty is in effect, the severity of the punishment should be different. Lu Wei is the only one to be pardoned, and the rest of the generals and below are all subject to his reinstatement in accordance with the pardon order.

古文：未几，拜太常卿，仍除安西将军、雍州刺史，又进号镇西将军，加散骑常侍。
现代文：没过多久，朝廷任卢昶为太常卿，仍旧任安西将军、雍州刺史，又进号为镇西将军，加授散骑常侍。
English: It did not take long for the imperial court to appoint Lu Xun as Tai Changqing, still as Anxi General, Yongzhou Shishi, and then as Zhenxi General, with the additional title of Sanzhi.

古文：熙平元年卒于官。
现代文：熙平元年，卢昶在官任上去世。
English: In the first year of Heiping, Lu Wei died in office.

古文：赠征北将军、冀州刺史，谥曰穆。
现代文：朝廷追赠他为征北将军、冀州刺史，定谥号为穆。
English: The imperial court posthumously awarded him the title of "Northern Expeditionary General" and "Historian of Jizhou," and his posthumous name was Mu.

古文：昶宽和矜恕，善于绥抚，其在徐州，戍兵疾，亲自检恤。至番兵年满不归，容充后役，终昶一政，然后始还。
现代文：卢昶为人宽和矜恕，善于绥靖安抚，他在任徐州刺史时，戍兵有病，曾亲自前去探视抚恤，以至戍守边地的兵卒服役期满仍不愿回家，要求继续服役，直至卢昶任期届满，然后才回家乡。
English: Lu Xun was a lenient and forgiving person, good at appeasement and pacification. When he was in charge of the history of Xuzhou, his soldiers were sick, and he personally went to visit the pensions. So much so that the soldiers who guarded the borderlands still did not want to go home at the end of their service period, and asked to continue to serve until Lu Xun's term expired, and then return to their hometown.

古文：人庶称之。
现代文：人们都称扬此事。
English: People are praising this.

