古文：问曰：脉有三部，阴阳相乘。
现代文：问：人的脉象有寸关尺三部，是阴阳相互依存、维系的反映。
English: Q: The human pulse has three parts, which is a reflection of the interdependence and maintenance of yin and yang.

古文：荣卫血气，在人体躬。
现代文：脉的搏动与营卫气血及肺气密切相关。
English: The pulsation of the pulse is closely related to the circulation of qi and blood and lung qi.

古文：呼吸出入，上下于中，因息游布，津液流通。
现代文：在人体内，营卫气血随呼吸出入、气息的活动而循环上下、敷布周身，故有脉的跳动。
English: In the human body, yingwei qi and blood circulate up and down with the movement of breathing and the activity of breath, and circulate around the body, so there is a pulse beating.

古文：随时动作，效象形容，春弦秋浮，冬沉夏洪。
现代文：人与天地相应，四时气候的变化，对人势必产生影响，故脉随四时而有变化，呈现多种多样的形态。例如春天脉象弦，秋天脉象浮，冬天脉象沉，夏天脉象洪。
English: Corresponding to man and heaven and earth, the changes in the four-hour climate are bound to have an impact on people. Therefore, the pulse changes with the four hours, showing a variety of forms. For example, the spring pulse is like a string, the autumn pulse is like a float, the winter pulse is like a sink, and the summer pulse is like a flood.

古文：察色观脉，大小不同，一时之间，变无经常，尺寸参差，或短或长。上下乖错，或存或亡。
现代文：同时，病人的脉象，有大小的区别，即使在一个时间内，也往往变化不定。此外，尺部和寸部脉象可参差不齐，或见短脉，或见长脉；上部和下部的脉象可以不一，有的有脉搏存在，有的脉搏消失。
English: At the same time, the patient's pulse varies in size, and even within a certain period of time, it often changes erratically. In addition, the pulse in the length and inch can be uneven, either short or long; the pulse in the upper and lower parts can be different, some have a pulse, and some have a pulse disappear.

古文：病辄改易，进退低昂。心迷意惑，动失纪纲。
现代文：并且，人一生病脉搏就会发生变化，或见脉搏跳的快，或见脉搏跳的慢，或见脉浮，或见脉沉。
English: Moreover, a person's pulse will change throughout his or her life. You may see a fast pulse, a slow pulse, a floating pulse, or a sinking pulse.

古文：愿为具陈，令得分明。
现代文：这些都容易使人心迷意惑，动辄就丢掉纲领，请老师详加陈述，以便清楚明白。
English: These are all easy to make people bewitched and confused, and they will easily throw away the program and ask the teacher to explain in detail so that they can understand clearly.

古文：师曰：子之所问，道之根源。
现代文：老师答：你所问的，正是医道中的根本问题。
English: Teacher: What you are asking is the fundamental question in the way of medicine.

古文：脉有三部，尺寸及关。
现代文：脉有三部，就是寸关尺。
English: There are three parts to the pulse, which is the circumference.

古文：荣卫流行，不失衡铨。
现代文：营卫气血的流行，如尺之量长短，秤之称轻重，准确无误。
English: The popularity of yingwei qi and blood, such as the length of the ruler, the weight of the scale, is accurate.

古文：肾沉、心洪、肺浮、肝弦，此自经常，不失铢分。
现代文：所以肾脉沉，心脉洪，肺脉浮，肝脉弦，这是各脏正常的本脉，不会有丝毫差错。
English: Therefore, the renal vein sinks, the cardiac vein floods, the pulmonary vein floats, and the hepatic vein strings, which are the normal veins of each organ, will not have the slightest error.

古文：出入升降，漏刻周旋，水下百刻，一周循环。
现代文：随呼吸出入，人体营卫之气流行，按漏刻时间循环周身。漏刻中水下二刻，则循环一周。
English: With the breath in and out, the human body is in the air of health, and circulates around the body according to the missing time. If the missing time is two hours underwater, then the cycle is one week.

古文：当复寸口，虚实见焉。变化相乘，阴阳相干。
现代文：因此，按寸口之脉，就可察人体虚实，观病情的变化，明阴阳的偏盛偏衰。
English: Therefore, according to the pulse of the inch, it is possible to observe the human body's truth and falsity, observe the changes in the condition, and observe the rise and fall of the yin and yang.

古文：风则浮虚，寒则牢坚；沉潜水蓄，支饮急弦；动则为痛，数则热烦。
现代文：如果感受风邪，则脉象浮虚，感受寒邪则脉象牢坚，沉伏之脉主水饮停蓄，急弦之脉是支饮为害，动脉主痛，数脉主热甚。
English: If you feel a cold, your pulse will be weak. If you feel a cold, your pulse will be strong. If you feel a sinking pulse, you should stop drinking water. If you feel a rushing pulse, you should stop drinking water. If you feel a cold, your pulse will be weak. If you feel a cold, your pulse will be strong.

古文：设有不应，知变所缘，三部不同，病各异端。
现代文：假如脉与病症不相对应，必须了解变化的根源。寸关尺三部的脉象不同，疾病也就相异。
English: If the pulse does not correspond to the disease, it is necessary to understand the root cause of the change. If the pulse pattern of the three parts of the inch ruler is different, the disease will also be different.

古文：太过可怪，不及亦然，邪不空见，中必有奸，审察表里，三焦别焉，知其所舍，消息诊看，料度府藏，独见若神。
现代文：脉搏太过是病态，不及也是病态。总之，邪气不是空无所见的，如果穷究其源，必能找到病变根本。因此，必须审查病在表在里，分辨在上焦、中焦、还是下焦，明确邪气所侵犯的部位，诊查推断脏腑的盛衰。
English: Too much pulse is pathological, and too little is also pathological. In short, the evil spirit is not invisible. If you investigate its source, you will be able to find the root of the lesion. Therefore, it is necessary to examine the disease on the inside, distinguish between the upper focus, the middle focus, and the lower focus, identify the parts invaded by the evil spirit, and diagnose and infer the rise and fall of the viscera.

古文：为子条记，传与贤人。
现代文：如果掌握这些，就会有独到、高超的见解。
English: If you master these, you will have a unique and superior opinion.

古文：师曰：呼吸者，脉之头也。
现代文：为此，分条记述如后，以传给有知识的人。老师说：脉随呼吸之气的出入而行。
English: The teacher said: The pulse follows the entry and exit of the breath.

古文：初持脉，来疾去迟，此出疾入迟，名曰内虚外实也。
现代文：初按脉搏时，其脉来得快，去得快，这是因为呼吸之气呼出的快吸进的慢，叫做内虚外实。
English: When you first press the pulse, the pulse comes fast and goes fast. This is because of the fast inhalation of the exhaled breath and the slow inhalation, which is called the inner void and the outer solid.

古文：初持脉，来迟去疾，此出迟入疾，名曰内实外虚也。
现代文：初按脉时，其脉来的慢，去的快，这是因为呼吸之气呼出的慢吸进的快，名叫内实外虚。
English: When you press the pulse for the first time, the pulse is slow to come and fast to go. This is because of the slow inhalation and fast exhalation of the breath, which is called the inner solid and outer void.

古文：问曰：上工望而知之，中工问而知之，下工脉而知之，愿闻其说。
现代文：问：高明的医生，通过察颜观色就能知道病情，一般的医生，通过问诊就能知道病情，水平低下的医生通过诊脉才能知道病情，请老师给以指教。
English: Q: A skilled doctor can know the condition of a patient by observing the color of the patient's face. An ordinary doctor can know the condition of a patient through consultation. A low-level doctor can only know the condition of a patient through diagnosis. Please ask your teacher for guidance.

古文：师曰：病家人请云，病人若发热，身体疼，病人自卧。
现代文：老师答：假如病人家属来请医生时说，病人发热厉害，身体疼痛，却能自然安睡。
English: Teacher's answer: If the patient's family members come to ask the doctor to say that the patient has a high fever and body pain, but can sleep naturally and peacefully.

古文：师到，诊其脉，沉而迟者，知其差也。
现代文：到病家后诊病人的脉为沉而迟，知道疾病将要痊愈。
English: After visiting the patient's home, the patient's pulse is heavy and slow, knowing that the disease will be cured.

古文：何以知之？
现代文：根据什么知道的呢？
English: How do you know this?

古文：表有病者，脉当浮大，今脉反沉迟，故知愈也。
现代文：这是因为，患者发热、身体疼痛，是表证之见症，表证脉应浮大，现在脉反见沉迟，为表证而得里脉，由此可知邪气已衰，疾病将要痊愈。
English: This is because the patient's fever and body pain are the symptoms of the symptoms. The symptoms of the symptoms should be large. The symptoms of the symptoms should be large. The symptoms of the symptoms should be large. The symptoms of the symptoms should be large. The symptoms of the symptoms should be large.

古文：假令病人云，腹内卒痛，病人自坐。师到，脉之，浮而大者，知其差也。
现代文：假如病人诉腹部突然疼痛，却能安然自坐，切其脉为浮大，也可知道疾病将愈。
English: If the patient complains of a sudden pain in the abdomen, but is able to sit up unharmed, and the pulse is large, it is also possible to know that the disease will get better.

古文：何以知之？
现代文：根据什么知道的呢？
English: How do you know this?

古文：若里有病者，脉当沉而细，今脉浮大，故知愈也。
现代文：这是因为，患者腹内疼痛，是病在里，里有病脉应当沉而细，现脉浮大，是阴证而见阳脉，为正复邪退之兆，所以知道疾病将愈。
English: This is because the patient's abdominal pain is the beginning of the disease. If there is a diseased vein, it should be deep and thin. If there is a current vein, it should be large and buoyant. If there is a negative vein, it should be a positive vein. If there is a positive vein, it should be a sign of recovery. Therefore, it is known that the disease will get worse.

古文：师曰：病家人来请云，病人发热，烦极。
现代文：老师说：病人家属来请医生时说，病人发热很厉害。
English: The teacher said: When the patient's family came to ask for a doctor, they said that the patient had a severe fever.

古文：明日师到，病人向壁卧，此热已去也。
现代文：第二天医生到了病家，见病人朝墙安然入睡，这是热已经退了。
English: The next day, the doctor arrived at the patient's home and saw that the patient had fallen asleep peacefully against the wall, indicating that the fever had subsided.

古文：设令脉不和，处言已愈。
现代文：此时，即使脉象还未趋调和，也可以断言疾病已经痊愈。
English: At this time, even if the pulse is not yet reconciled, it can be asserted that the disease has been cured.

古文：设令向壁卧，闻师到，不惊起而盼视，若三言三止，脉之，咽唾者，此诈病也。
现代文：假如病人朝墙而睡，医生来后，并不惊坐而起，却盯着医生，说话吞吐支吾、欲言又止，给他诊查时，却吞咽唾液，这是病人假装生病。
English: If the patient is sleeping against the wall, and when the doctor comes, he does not wake up, but stares at the doctor, stutters, hesitates, and stops talking, and swallows saliva when he is examined, this is the patient pretending to be sick.

古文：设令脉自和，处言汝病大重，当须服吐下药，针灸数十百处，乃愈。师持脉，病人欠者，无病也。
现代文：假如病人的脉象正常，医生就可故意说这个病很重，应当服涌吐药及泻下药，并须针刺、艾灸数十、数百个穴位，以吓唬病人，这样才能痊愈。
English: If the patient's pulse is normal, the doctor can deliberately say that the disease is very serious, should take emetics and laxatives, and need acupuncture, moxibustion dozens, hundreds of acupoints, in order to scare the patient, so as to recover.

古文：脉之，呻者，病也。
现代文：医生诊脉时，病人打哈欠的，这是没有病。
English: When the doctor diagnoses the pulse, the patient yawns, which is not a disease.

古文：言迟者，风也。
现代文：医生诊脉时，病人呻吟的，这是有病。
English: When the doctor diagnoses the pulse, the patient groans, which is a disease.

古文：摇头言者，里痛也。行迟者，表强也。坐而伏者，短气也。坐而下一脚者，腰痛也。里实护腹，如怀卵物者，心痛也。
现代文：如果说话迟钝不灵活的，是风病；摇头说话的，是里有疼痛的病症；行动迟缓的，是筋脉强急的病变；俯伏而坐的，是短气；不能正坐的，是腰痛；双手护腹，好象怀抱鸡蛋不肯放手，惧怕人触碰的，这是脘腹疼痛。
English: If the speech is sluggish and inflexible, it is rheumatism; if the head is shaking, it is a painful disease; if the movement is slow, it is a lesion of the myocardium; if the person sits down, it is shortness of breath; if the person cannot sit up straight, it is low back pain; if the person covers the abdomen with both hands, as if holding an egg in his arms, and refuses to let go, and is afraid of being touched, it is abdominal pain.

古文：师曰：伏气之病，以意候之，今月之内，欲有伏气。
现代文：老师说：伏气这种病，必须时时留意观察，注意及时发现病人，以便尽早治疗。
English: The teacher said, "This kind of illness must be observed at all times, and patients must be found in time so that they can be treated as early as possible.

古文：假令旧有伏气，当须脉之。
现代文：假如过去确有邪气内伏，就应该及早诊查。
English: If in the past there was indeed evil, it should be diagnosed as early as possible.

古文：若脉微弱者，当喉中痛似伤，非喉痹也。
现代文：如果脉象微弱的，就会出现咽喉疼痛剧烈，好像创伤一样，这不是喉痹证。
English: If the pulse is weak, there will be severe pain in the throat, like a trauma, this is not a sore throat.

古文：病人云：实咽中痛，虽尔，今复欲下利。
现代文：病人说：咽喉的确疼痛。虽然如此，现在又想腹泻。
English: The patient said: "My throat is really sore. Even so, I feel like I'm going to have diarrhoea.

古文：问曰：人病恐怖者，其脉何状？
现代文：问：人在恐惧惊怕的时候，脉的形态怎么样？
English: Question: What is the shape of the pulse when a person is frightened?

古文：师曰：脉形如循丝，累累然，其面白脱色也。
现代文：老师答：脉形好像用手指按丝线，纤细而连贯，同时，病人的面部失色而显苍白。
English: Teacher's answer: The vein shape is like using a finger to press a silk thread, thin and coherent. At the same time, the patient's face loses color and appears pale.

古文：问曰：人不饮，其脉何类？
现代文：问：人如果不饮水，以致津液亏虚，脉的表现怎么样？
English: Q: If a person does not drink water, resulting in a loss of fluid, how does the pulse behave?

古文：师曰：其脉自涩，唇口干燥也。
现代文：老师答；脉象涩，并见唇、口干燥。
English: The teacher replied; the pulse is like astringency, and the lips and mouth are dry.

古文：问曰：人愧者，其脉何类？
现代文：问：人羞愧时，脉的表现怎么样？
English: Q: When a person is ashamed, how does the pulse behave?

古文：师曰：脉浮，而面色乍白乍赤。
现代文：老师答：脉象浮，并见面色忽红忽白。
English: Teacher's answer: The pulse is like floating, and the color turns red and white at the same time.

古文：问曰：经说，脉有三菽、六菽重者，何谓也？
现代文：问：《难经》说：脉有三菽重、六菽重的，是怎么回事？
English: Q: The "Difficult Classic" says that the pulse has three strings and six strings. What's going on?

古文：师曰：脉者，人以指按之，如三菽之重者，肺气也；如六菽之重者，心气也；如九菽之重者，脾气也；如十二菽之重者，肝气也；按之至骨者，肾气也。
现代文：老师答：医生用手指按脉，如三粒小豆一样的重量就能切得脉搏的，是肺气之脉；如六粒小豆一样的重量而切得脉搏的，是心气之脉；如九粒小豆一样的重量而切得脉搏的，是脾气之脉；如十二粒小豆的重量而切得脉搏的，是肝气之脉；重按至骨始得脉搏的，是肾气之脉。
English: Teacher's answer: The doctor presses the pulse with his finger. If he can feel the pulse with the weight of three red beans, it is the pulse of lung qi. If he feels the pulse with the weight of six red beans, it is the pulse of heart qi. If he feels the pulse with the weight of nine red beans, it is the pulse of temper. If he feels the pulse with the weight of twelve red beans, it is the pulse of liver qi. If he presses the pulse to the bone, it is the pulse of kidney qi.

古文：假令下利，寸口、关上、尺中，悉不见脉，然尺中时一小见，脉再举头者，肾气也。若见损脉来至，为难治。
现代文：假如病人腹泻，寸关尺均摸不到脉搏，但尺部时而出现脉微微搏动，随呼吸而至的，这是肾气尚未竭绝；如果出现一息而脉二至的损脉，则是难治之证。
English: If the patient has diarrhea, the doctor cannot feel the pulse even with a ruler, but the ruler sometimes has a pulse, which comes with breathing, which is the kidney gas has not been exhausted; if there is a pulse with two pulses in one breath, it is a sign of intractable.

古文：问曰：脉有相乘、有纵、有横、有逆、有顺，何也？
现代文：问：脉象有相互乘侮、有纵横、有顺逆，讲的是什么呢？
English: Question: What does it mean to say that the signs of the pulse have mutual multiplication and subtraction, vertical and horizontal, and positive and negative?

古文：师曰：水行乘火，金行乘木，名曰纵；火行乘水，木行乘金，名曰横；水行乘金，火行乘木，名曰逆；金行乘水，木行乘火，名曰顺也。问曰：脉有残贼，何谓也？
现代文：老师答：四时各有平脉，五脏之气与之相应，所以有春弦、夏洪、秋浮、冬沉之脉。如果五脏之气相乘相克，则为病脉。其中，如果脏腑之气相乘，克其所胜的，例如夏令脉应洪，反见沉脉，是肾水乘心火；春季脉应弦，反见浮脉的，是肺金乘肝木，这些就叫纵。如果脏腑之气反侮，反乘其不胜的，例如冬季脉应沉，反见洪脉的，是心火反侮肾水；秋令脉当浮，反见弦脉的，是肝木反侮肺金，这些就叫横。如果秋令反见沉脉，是肾水乘肺金；春季反见洪脉，是心火乘肝木，这些是子气克母，名叫逆。
English: Teacher's answer: At four o'clock, each has a flat vein, and the five visceral qi corresponds to it, so there are spring chord, summer high, autumn high, and winter low. If the five visceral qi are multiplied by each other, it is a diseased vein. Among them, if the visceral qi is multiplied by each other, the one that wins, for example, the summer pulse is inflowing, but the sinking pulse is the kidney water riding the heart fire; the spring pulse is responding to the chord, but the floating pulse is the lung gold riding the liver wood, these are called vertical. If the visceral qi is

古文：师曰：脉有弦、紧、浮、滑、沉、涩，此六者名曰残贼，能为诸脉作病也。
现代文：如果冬令反见浮脉，是肺金乘肾水；夏令反见弦脉，是肝木乘心火，这些是母气乘子，名叫顺。问：脉象中有邪气伤人的病脉，是怎么回事？老师答：脉象中有弦、紧、浮、滑、沉、涩，这六种脉象就是邪气伤人所致的病脉，是邪气侵害各经脉所致病变的反映。
English: If you look at the floating vein in winter, it is the lung gold that rides on the kidney water; if you look at the string vein in summer, it is the liver wood that rides on the heart fire. These are the mother gas multipliers, named Shun. Question: What is the cause of the veins that hurt people with evil spirits in the pulse image? Teacher's answer: There are strings, tightness, floating, slippery, heavy, and astringency in the pulse image. These six pulse images are the diseased veins caused by the evil spirits, and are a reflection of the lesions caused by the evil spirits infringing on each meridian.

古文：问曰：脉有灾怪，何谓也？
现代文：问：脉象中有灾怪，是怎么回事？
English: Q: There's a monster in the pulse, what's going on?

古文：师曰：假令人病，脉得太阳，与形证相应，因为作汤。比还送汤如食顷，病人乃大吐，若下利，腹中痛。
现代文：老师答：假如有一个病人，既有太阳之脉，又有太阳之证，脉与证相应，于是制作汤药治疗，待到服药后约一顿饭左右的时间，病人突然出现剧烈呕吐，或者严重腹泻，并见腹中疼痛。
English: Teacher's answer: If there is a patient who has both the sun's pulse and the sun's certificate, and the pulse corresponds to the certificate, then a decoction is made for treatment, and about a meal or so after taking the medicine, the patient suddenly has severe vomiting, or severe diarrhea, and sees abdominal pain.

古文：师曰：我前来不见此证，今乃变异，是名灾怪。
现代文：而医生就诊时没有这些见症，是现在才发生的意外变化，这就叫灾怪。
English: However, these symptoms were not present at the time of the doctor's visit. It is an unexpected change that has just occurred, which is called a disaster.

古文：又问曰：何缘作此吐利？
现代文：又问：是什么原因引起的呕吐、腹泻？
English: Another question: What is the cause of vomiting and diarrhea?

古文：答曰：或有旧时服药，今乃发作，故名灾怪耳。
现代文：老师答：可能是以前服的其它药，现在才发生作用，所以引起了呕吐、腹泻等症，产生了意外变化。
English: Teacher's answer: It may be that other drugs taken before are only taking effect now, so they have caused vomiting, diarrhea and other symptoms, resulting in unexpected changes.

古文：问曰：东方肝脉，其形何似？
现代文：问：东方肝脉，它的表现怎么样？
English: Q: Oriental hepatic vein, how does it perform?

古文：师曰：肝者木也，名厥阴，其脉微弦濡弱而长，是肝脉也。肝病自得濡弱者，愈也。
现代文：老师答：肝，属木，又叫厥阴，其脉微弦濡弱而长，是肝的平脉，如果肝病而见濡弱之脉，示疾病将愈。
English: Teacher's answer: The liver is a tree, also known as Jueyin. Its veins are long, thin and weak. They are the flat veins of the liver. If you have liver disease and see weak, wet veins, it means that the disease is getting worse.

古文：假令得纯弦脉者，死，何以知之？
现代文：假如为单纯弦脉的，预后不良。为什么呢？
English: If it is a simple chord, the prognosis is poor. Why?

古文：以其脉如弦直，是肝藏伤，故知死也。
现代文：因为其脉如弓弦一样直，这是肝脏损伤，所以知道预后不良。
English: Because its veins are as straight as a bowstring, this is liver damage, so the prognosis is known to be poor.

古文：南方心脉，其形何似？
现代文：南方心脉，它的表现怎么样？
English: Nanfang Xinmei, how does it perform?

古文：师曰：心者火也，名少阴，其脉洪大而长，是心脉也。
现代文：老师答：心属火，又叫少阴，其脉洪大而长，是心的平脉。
English: Teacher's answer: The heart belongs to fire, also known as Shaoyin. Its vein is large and long, and is the flat vein of the heart.

古文：心病自得洪大者，愈也。
现代文：心病而见洪大脉，是疾病将愈。
English: The more the heart is diseased and the blood vessels are inflamed, the more the disease will progress.

古文：假令脉来微去大，故名反，病在里也。
现代文：假如脉象来时微弱去时大，这是反常的现象，叫做 反 ，主病在里。
English: If the pulse is weak when it comes and large when it goes, this is an abnormal phenomenon, called anti, the main disease is in.

古文：脉来头小本大者，故名复，病在表也。
现代文：如果脉来时小而去时大，这叫 覆 ，主病在表。
English: If the pulse is small at the time of arrival and large at the time of departure, this is called overlap, the main disease is on the table.

古文：上微头小者，则汗出；下微本大者，则为关格不通，不得尿。
现代文：如果脉浮取而微来时小的，就会出现汗出。如果脉沉取微而去时大的，则会出现关格不通，没有小便。
English: If the pulse is small when it comes and goes, there will be sweating. If the pulse is large when it comes and goes, there will be a blockage and no urine.

古文：头无汗者可治，有汗者死。
现代文：此时，倘若头部无汗的，其病尚可以治疗；倘若有汗的，属于死候。
English: At this time, if there is no sweat on the head, the disease can still be treated; if there is sweat, it is death.

古文：西方肺脉，其形何似？
现代文：西方肺脉，它的表现怎么样？
English: The western pulmonary artery, how is it doing?

古文：师曰：肺者金也，名太阴，其脉毛浮也，肺病自得此脉。
现代文：老师答：肺属金，又叫太阴，其脉如毛之浮，是肺的平脉。
English: Teacher's answer: Lung belongs to gold, also known as yin. Its vein is like the floating of hair. It is the flat vein of the lung.

古文：若得缓迟者，皆愈；若得数者，则剧。
现代文：如果肺病而见此脉，或见缓迟的，是疾病将愈。如果出现数脉的，那么疾病就将增剧。
English: If the pulmonary disease is caused by this vein, or if it is delayed, the disease will be more severe. If there are several veins, the disease will be more severe.

古文：何以知之？
现代文：为什么呢？
English: How do you know this?

古文：数者南方火，火克西方金，法当痈肿，为难治也。
现代文：脉数，主南方火邪盛，火克西方金，就会形成痈肿，是难治之证。
English: The number of veins, the main south fire evil, fire west gold, will form an abscess, which is difficult to cure.

古文：问曰：二月得毛浮脉，何以处言至秋当死。
现代文：问：二月见毛浮脉，根据什么断言到秋天就会死亡？
English: Q: I had mumps in February. What is the basis for the assertion that I will die by autumn?

古文：师曰：二月之时，脉当濡弱，反得毛浮者，故知至秋死。
现代文：老师答：二月期间，脉象应当濡弱，反而出现毛浮，所以知道到冬天会死。
English: Teacher's answer: During February, the pulse should be wet and weak, but there is a fluff, so I know that I will die in winter.

古文：二月肝用事，肝脉属木，应濡弱，反得毛浮者，是肺脉也。肺属金，金来克木，故知至秋死。
现代文：二月是肝气当令的时候，肝属木，脉应濡弱，却反而见毛浮脉，毛浮是肺脉，肺属金，金来克木，所以知道到秋天就会死亡。
English: February is the time for the liver gas, the liver is wood, the pulse should be wet and weak, but on the contrary, we see the capillary vein, the capillary is the pulmonary vein, the lung is gold, the gold is the wood, so we know that we will die in the autumn.

古文：他皆仿此。
现代文：其它各季的脉象都可依此类推。
English: The pulse of the other seasons can be deduced in the same way.

古文：师曰：脉，肥人责浮，瘦人责沉。肥人当沉，今反浮；瘦人当浮，今反沉，故责之。
现代文：老师说：给肥胖人诊脉，如果脉浮，应当寻求致浮的原因；为瘦弱人诊脉，如果脉沉，应当查找致沉的根源。这是因为，肥胖人脉象本应当沉，现反而见浮；瘦弱人脉象本应浮，现反而见沉，都是反常之脉，所以应当查找原因。
English: The teacher said, "When diagnosing the pulse of an obese person, if the pulse is buoyant, the cause of the buoyancy should be sought; when diagnosing the pulse of a thin person, if the pulse is sinking, the cause of the sinking should be found. This is because the pulse of an obese person is supposed to be sinking, but it is now floating; the pulse of a thin person is supposed to be floating, but it is now sinking. Both are abnormal pulses, so the cause should be found.

古文：师曰：寸脉下不至关，为阳绝；尺脉上不至关，为阴绝。此皆不治，决死也。
现代文：老师说：寸脉下不及关，是阳绝于上；尺脉上不达关，是阴绝于下，这都是不治之候，必死无疑。
English: The teacher said, "If you can't pass the test below the ulna, it is the yang that is superior to the yang; if you can't pass the test above the ulna, it is the yin that is inferior to the yin. These are incurable conditions, and you will undoubtedly die.

古文：若计其余命死生之期，期以月节克之也。
现代文：如果要预测病人的死期，可以根据月令季节与疾病相克的规律来推算。
English: If the time of death of a patient is to be predicted, it can be calculated according to the laws of the lunar season and the disease.

古文：师曰：脉病人不病，名曰行尸，以无王气，卒眩仆不识人者，短命则死。
现代文：老师说：脉象有病而外形无病的，叫做行尸，是脏腑生气已竭的表现，如果突然昏眩仆倒不省人事的，就会夭折而死亡。
English: The teacher said: the pulse is like a diseased and disease-free appearance, called the walking corpse, is a manifestation of the exhaustion of the viscera. If you are suddenly dizzy and unconscious, you will die prematurely.

古文：人病脉不病，名曰内虚，以无谷神，虽困无苦。
现代文：如果外形病而脉象正常的，叫做内虚，这是缺乏水谷之气所致，虽然身体困苦，也无危害。
English: If the external appearance of the disease and the pulse is normal, it is called internal deficiency, which is caused by the lack of water valley qi, although the body is in distress, there is no harm.

古文：问曰：翕奄沉，名曰滑，何谓也？
现代文：问：脉来大而盛，又忽然沉下，像转珠一样的，叫做滑脉，这是什么意思？
English: Question: What does it mean when the vein swells and then suddenly sinks, like a spinning top, and is called a slipped vein?

古文：沉为纯阴，翕为正阳，阴阳和合，故令脉滑。
现代文：老师答：沉脉是少阴纯阴之象，脉大而盛是阳明正阳之象。
English: Teacher's answer: The sinking vein is the image of less yin and pure yin, while the large and flourishing vein is the image of yang, bright and positive yang.

古文：关尺自平，阳明脉微沉，食饮自可。
现代文：少阴为先天之本，阳明是后天之本，阳明少阴两相结合，则气血充盈，流行疾急，所以脉滑，而其关尺脉必自然相平。
English: Yin and Yang are innate, Yang and Ming are acquired. When Yang, Yin and Yang are combined, the qi and blood will be full, and the epidemic will be acute, so the pulse will be slippery, and the pulse will naturally be flat.

古文：少阴脉微滑，滑者紧之浮名也，此为阴实，其人必股内汗出，阴下湿也。
现代文：如果关脉不平而微沉的，是阳明里实未甚，则饮食尚可；如果尺脉不平而微浮紧的，这是少阴阴盛，病人一定会出现两大腿内侧出汗、阴部潮湿的症状。
English: If the intervertebral artery is uneven and slightly depressed, it is the yang and not the truth, then the diet is acceptable; if the ulnar artery is uneven and slightly tight, it is less yin and more yin, the patient will definitely have symptoms of sweating on the inner thighs and wetness in the pubic area.

古文：问曰：曾为人所难，紧脉从何而来？
现代文：问：我曾被人问难，紧脉是怎样产生的？
English: Q: I've been asked the question, how did the tightness come about?

古文：师曰：假令亡汗、若吐，以肺里寒，故令脉紧也。假令咳者，坐饮冷水，故令脉紧也。假令下利，以胃中虚冷，故令脉紧也。
现代文：老师答：假如发汗太过，或者催吐，导致肺脏虚寒，可致紧脉；假如咳嗽的病人，因喝冷水，致寒饮内停，也能产生紧脉；如果患虚寒腹泻，因胃中虚寒，同样可致紧脉。
English: Teacher's answer: If sweating too much, or vomiting, causes the lungs to be cold, it can cause a tight pulse; if a coughing patient, due to drinking cold water, causes cold drinks to stop, it can also cause a tight pulse; if suffering from cold diarrhea, due to cold in the stomach, it can also cause a tight pulse.

古文：寸口卫气盛，名曰高；荣气盛，名曰章；高章相搏，名曰纲。
现代文：寸口卫气过盛的，叫高；营气过盛的，叫章；营卫之气均盛的，名叫纲。
English: Those whose qi is too strong at the entrance to the camp are called Gao; those whose qi is too strong at the camp are called Zhang; and those whose qi is equally strong at the camp are called Gang.

古文：卫气弱，名曰惵；荣气弱，名曰卑；惵卑相搏，名曰损。
现代文：卫气弱的叫惵；营气弱的叫卑；营卫之气均弱的，名叫损。
English: Weakness in defense is called shyness; weakness in camp spirit is called inferiority; weakness in both defense and camp spirit is called loss.

古文：卫气和，名曰缓；荣气和，名曰迟；迟缓相搏，名曰沉。
现代文：卫气调和的，名叫缓；营气调和的，名叫迟；营卫之气均调和的，名叫沉。
English: Those who harmonize the spirit of the camp are called slow; those who harmonize the spirit of the camp are called slow; and those who harmonize the spirit of the camp are called slow.

古文：寸口脉缓而迟，缓则阳气长，其色鲜，其颜光，其声商，毛发长；迟则阴气盛，骨髓生，血满，肌肉紧薄鲜硬。
现代文：寸口脉缓而迟，缓脉是卫气调和之象，卫气充盛于外，所以其人皮肤颜色鲜明，有光泽，声音清晰高亢，毛发生长旺盛；迟脉为营卫调和之象，营血盛于内，所以其人骨髓生长，血脉充盛，肌肉丰腴结实。
English: Inch pulse is slow and slow, slow pulse is the image of the harmony of the spirit, the spirit is full outside, so the skin color is bright and shiny, the voice is clear and high-pitched, and the hair growth is vigorous; the late pulse is the image of the harmony of the spirit, the blood is full inside, so the human bone marrow grows, the blood is full, and the muscles are plump and strong.

古文：阴阳相抱，荣卫俱行，刚柔相搏，名曰强也。
现代文：阴阳相互促进，营卫之气流通，刚柔相济，所以身体强壮无病。
English: Yin and yang promote each other, the qi of Ying Wei circulates, and the strong and the soft are compatible, so the body is strong and disease-free.

古文：趺阳脉滑而紧，滑者胃气实，紧者脾气强。
现代文：趺阳脉滑而紧，滑主胃有实邪，紧主脾有实邪。
English: The supine yang vein is slippery and tight, the slippery main stomach has real evil, and the tight main spleen has real evil.

古文：持实击强，痛还自伤，以手把刃，坐作疮也。
现代文：脾胃之邪相互搏击，各持其强，自相伤害，这就好象用手握住刀口，因而产生创伤。
English: The evils of the spleen and stomach fight against each other, each with its own strength, injuring each other. It is like holding the edge of a knife in one's hand, resulting in a wound.

古文：寸口脉浮而大，浮为虚，大为实。
现代文：寸口脉浮而大，浮主正气虚，大主邪气实。
English: The crotch of the pulse floats and swells, the floater is positive and weak, and the great master is evil and strong.

古文：在尺为关，在寸为格。关则不得小便，格则吐逆。
现代文：浮大脉见于尺部的，是正虚于下，邪气关闭下焦，而致小便不通，这就叫 关 ；浮大脉见于寸部的，是正虚于上，邪气格拒上焦，所以吐逆，这就叫 格 。
English: The floating great vein is seen at the base of the foot, it is positive and false at the bottom, the evil spirit closes the lower focus, and causes the urine not to pass, this is called off; the floating great vein is seen at the base of the foot, it is positive and false at the top, the evil spirit refuses to be scorched, so it is reversed, this is called off.

古文：趺阳脉伏而涩，伏则吐逆，水谷不化，涩则食不得入，名曰关格。
现代文：趺阳脉伏而涩，伏为中焦壅塞，水谷不化，所以吐逆；涩为脏气内结，脾虚不运，所以饮食不能入口，这也叫关格。
English: The pharyngeal vein is narrow and astringent, the pharyngeal vein is the middle coke plug, the trough does not dissolve, so it spits backward; the astringency is the internal knot of dirty gas, the spleen is weak and unlucky, so the diet cannot be ingested, which is also called the pass.

古文：脉浮而大，浮为风虚，大为气强，风气相搏，必成隐疹，身体为痒。痒者名泄风，久久为痂癞。
现代文：脉象浮而大，浮是感受风邪，大是邪气盛。风邪与正气相互搏结，轻的邪犯肌表而出现皮肤出疹，身体搔痒、名叫泄风；重的风邪久羁不去，皮肤溃烂结痂，而形成痂癞。
English: The pulse is like floating and large, floating is to feel the cold, and large is the evil spirit. The cold and the righteous spirit fight with each other, and the light evil spirit causes the skin rash to appear, the body itches, and it is called the wind; the heavy cold does not linger for a long time, the skin festers and crusts, and it forms warts.

古文：寸口脉弱而迟，弱者卫气微，迟者荣中寒。
现代文：寸口脉弱而迟，弱是卫气虚弱，迟是营中有寒。
English: If the pulse is weak, it is too late; if it is weak, the morale is too low; if it is too late, there is cold in the camp.

古文：荣为血，血寒则发热；卫为气，气微者心内饥，饥而虚满不能食也。
现代文：营是血，血中受寒就发热；卫是气，气不足就会出现胃脘痞满，虽感觉饥饿却不能饮食。
English: Camp is blood, and coldness in blood causes fever; health is qi, and a lack of qi causes a full stomach, and although you feel hungry, you can't eat.

古文：肤阳脉大而紧者，当即下利，为难治。
现代文：趺阳脉大而紧，脉大为虚，紧为寒盛，正虚而阴寒邪甚，应当见腹泻等症，治疗较为困难。
English: The pharyngeal yang vein is large and tight, the large vein is empty, the tight vein is cold, and the positive and empty vein is very cold. Diarrhea and other symptoms should be seen, and treatment is more difficult.

古文：寸口脉弱而缓，弱者阳气不足，缓者胃气有余。噫而吞酸，食卒不下，气填于膈上也。
现代文：寸口脉弱而缓，弱主阳气不足，运化不及；缓主胃中谷气有余，饮食停滞，所以出现嗳气、吞酸、饮食不下、胸脘满闷的症状。
English: The pulse is weak and slow, the weak main yang qi is insufficient, and the transportation is insufficient; the slow main stomach has more than enough grain qi, and the diet is stagnant, so the symptoms of bad breath, acid swallowing, not eating, and chest full of stuffy.

古文：趺阳脉紧而浮，浮为气，紧为寒。浮为腹满，紧为绞痛。
现代文：趺阳脉浮而紧，浮为气虚，紧为寒甚，气虚则腹部胀满，寒甚则腹中绞痛。
English: The qi yang vein is floating and tight, floating is qi deficiency, tight is very cold, qi deficiency is abdominal distension, and cold is abdominal cramp.

古文：浮紧相搏，肠鸣而转，转即气动，隔气乃下。
现代文：气虚寒甚相合，就会出现肠鸣，腹中气机转动，气机一转动则胸膈壅滞之气得以下行。
English: If the qi deficiency and cold are very close to each other, there will be intestinal tingling, the gas engine in the abdomen will turn, and once the gas engine turns, the stagnant qi in the chest will go down.

古文：少阴脉不出，其阴肿大而虚也。
现代文：如果少阴脉不现的，是虚寒之气结于下焦，可致外阴部肿大而疼痛。
English: If there is little or no vaginal vein, it is because of the cold air in the lower heat, which can cause the vulva to be swollen and painful.

古文：寸口脉微而涩，微者卫气不行，涩者荣气不逮。
现代文：寸口脉微而涩，微是卫气虚运行不力，涩是营阴不足。
English: Tsunkou pulse is weak and astringent, weak is weak running, astringent is lack of yin.

古文：荣卫不能相将，三焦无所仰，身体痹不仁。
现代文：卫虚而营不足，营卫不能相互协调，三焦失去依靠，就会导致身体麻痹不仁。
English: If the Wei is weak and the Ying is insufficient, if the Ying and Wei cannot coordinate with each other, and if the Sanjiao loses its reliance, it will lead to physical paralysis and insensitivity.

古文：荣气不足，则烦疼，口难言；卫气虚，则恶寒数欠。
现代文：营气不足，筋脉失养，则身体疼痛剧烈、口难说话；卫气虚弱，不能卫外，则怕冷、呵欠连连。
English: If the camp spirit is deficient and the muscle vein is out of balance, the body will be in severe pain and it will be difficult to speak; if the spirit is weak and it cannot go outside, it will be afraid of the cold and yawn continuously.

古文：三焦不归其部，上焦不归者，噫而酢吞；中焦不归者，不能消谷引食；下焦不归者，则遗溲。
现代文：营卫俱虚，三焦失养，不能各司其职，上焦失职，则嗳气吞酸；中焦失职，则不能消化饮食；下焦失职，则大小便失禁。
English: Camp guards are deficient, three-focal loss of health, unable to perform their duties, upper-focal loss of duty, then the hernia swallows acid; middle-focal loss of duty, then unable to digest food; lower-focal loss of duty, then incontinence.

古文：趺阳脉沉而数，沉为实，数消谷。
现代文：趺阳脉沉而数，沉主邪实于里，数主热，热能消化水谷，治疗较易。
English: The radial pulse of the qi yang is sinking, the main body of the qi yang is sinking, the main body of the qi yang is sinking, the main body of the qi yang is sinking, the main body of the qi yang is sinking, the main body of the qi yang is sinking, and the main body of the qi yang is sinking.

古文：紧者，病难治。
现代文：如果脉不沉数而沉紧，为里寒甚，属难治之候。
English: If the pulse is not heavy, but heavy and tight, it is very cold, and it is difficult to cure.

古文：寸口脉微而涩，微者卫气衰，涩者荣气不足。
现代文：寸口脉微而涩，微主卫气虚，涩主营气不足。
English: Tsunkou pulse is weak and astringent, weak main spirit is weak, and astringent main spirit is insufficient.

古文：卫气衰，面色黄；荣气不足，面色青。
现代文：卫气虚弱，则面色萎黄；营气不足，则面色发青。
English: If one's morale is weak, one's complexion will turn yellow; if one's morale is low, one's complexion will turn blue.

古文：荣为根，卫为叶。荣卫俱微，则根叶枯槁，而寒栗咳逆，唾腥吐涎沫也。
现代文：营好比树根，卫好比枝叶，营卫俱虚，则根本枝叶皆枯萎，所以出现畏寒战栗、咳嗽气逆、唾吐腥臭脓血及涎沫。
English: Ying is like the root of a tree, and Wei is like the branches and leaves. Ying Wei is weak, and the basic branches and leaves are withered, so there are shivering, coughing gas, spitting stinky blood and foam.

古文：趺阳脉浮而芤，浮者卫气衰，芤者荣气伤，其身体瘦，肌肉甲错，浮芤相搏，宗气衰微，四属断绝。
现代文：趺阳脉浮而芤，浮主卫气虚，芤主营气伤，营卫之气衰微，不能充养形体，所以身体消瘦、皮肤粗糙，甚至皮肤干燥成鳞甲之状。
English: The yang and yang veins are floating, the main body is weak, the main body is injured, the main body is weak, and the body cannot be nourished, so the body is thin, the skin is rough, and even the skin is dry and scaly.

古文：寸口脉微而缓，微者卫气疏，疏则其肤空；缓者胃气实，实则谷消而水化也。
现代文：寸口脉微而缓，微为卫气不足，不能固外，则肌腠空虚；缓是胃气有余，胃气充盛则能消化饮食、吸取水分。
English: If the pulse is weak and slow, it means that the qi is insufficient, if it cannot be fixed, then the blood vessels are empty; if the pulse is slow, it means that the stomach has enough qi, and if the stomach is full of qi, it can digest food and absorb water.

古文：谷入于胃，脉道乃行，而入于经，其血乃成。
现代文：饮食入胃，才能生成营卫，运行于脉道；水分经胃的吸收，输送于经脉，才有血液的生成。
English: Only when food enters the stomach can the yingwei be generated and run in the vascular tract; only when water is absorbed through the stomach and transported to the vascular tract can blood be generated.

古文：荣盛，则其肤必疏，三焦绝经，名曰血崩。
现代文：营气虽盛而卫气弱，外则不能固护肌表，内则不能固其血，就会产生血崩之证。
English: Although the camp spirit is strong and the ethos is weak, the outside can not protect the skin surface, and the inside can not fix the blood, it will produce evidence of hemorrhage.

古文：肤阳脉微而紧，紧则为寒，微则为虚，微紧相搏，则为短气。
现代文：趺阳脉微而紧，紧为里寒，微为气虚。微紧相合，为脾胃虚寒、中气不足，所以产生短气。
English: The supine yang vein is slightly tight, the tight yang vein is cold, and the slightly tight yang vein is deficient in qi. The slightly tight yang vein is deficient in spleen and stomach, and deficient in medium qi, resulting in shortness of breath.

古文：少阴脉弱而涩，弱者微烦，涩者厥逆。
现代文：少阴脉弱而涩，弱为阴虚，阴虚心火上炎，则微见心烦；涩为血少，阴血虚少，血行不畅，不能温暖四肢，则为四肢厥冷。
English: Less yin vein is weak and astringent, weak is yin and void, yin and void heart is inflamed, then it is faintly upset; astringency is less blood, yin and void blood is less, blood circulation is not smooth, can not warm the limbs, then the limbs are cold.

古文：趺阳脉不出，脾不上下，身冷肤硬。
现代文：趺阳脉隐伏不显，主脾阳衰微。脾虚不能运化，水谷精微不能营养周身上下，所以身体冷而皮肤硬。
English: The pharyngeal yang vein is not obvious, and the main spleen yang is weak. The spleen is not able to transport, and the water valley is not able to nourish the upper and lower body, so the body is cold and the skin is hard.

古文：少阴脉不至，肾气微，少精血，奔气促迫，上入胸隔，宗气反聚，血结心下，阳气退下，热归阴股，与阴相动，令身不仁，此为尸厥。
现代文：少阴脉象不现，是肾气衰竭、精血不足。
English: Less than the yin vein does not appear, which is caused by renal gas failure and insufficient blood.

古文：当刺期门、巨阙。寸口脉微，尺脉紧，其人虚损多汗，知阴常在，绝不见阳也。
现代文：肾阴虚竭，不能潜阳，阳气上奔，迫促胸膈，宗气反而被阻，聚而不行，致血结心下。
English: The kidney yin is exhausted, it cannot go into the sun, the yang qi rushes up, forcing the chest and abdomen, but the zong qi is blocked, cannot be gathered, and causes bleeding under the heart.

古文：寸口诸微亡阳，诸濡亡血，诸弱发热，诸紧为寒。诸乘寒者，则为厥，郁冒不仁，以胃无谷气，脾涩不通，口急不能言，战而栗也。
现代文：阳气若退于下，阳气下行，则阴部及两大腿内侧发热；阳与阴相争，阴阳之气两相郁遏，营卫俱不通行，所以出现身体厥冷不仁，失去感觉，状若死人，这就叫尸厥，应当针刺期门，巨阙穴。
English: If the yang qi retreats downwards and the yang qi descends, then the genitals and the inner thighs will heat up; yang and yin are in conflict, the yin and yang qi of the two phases are depressed, and the camp is impassable, so the body appears cold and unfeeling, loses sensation, looks like a dead person, this is called corpse, should be acupuncture phase door, giant anvil hole.

古文：问曰：濡弱何以反适十一头？
现代文：寸部脉微，尺部脉紧，微为阳气衰微，紧是阴寒内盛。
English: The pulse of the inch part is weak, the pulse of the yard part is tight, the yang is weak, and the cold is strong.

古文：师曰：五藏六府相乘故令十一。
现代文：阴邪常盛而阳衰，所以病人虚弱多汗。一般说来，寸口脉微主阳虚，濡主血少，弱主阴虚发热，紧主寒。
English: Yin and yang are always in full swing, so the patient is weak and sweats a lot. Generally speaking, the pulse is weak, the yang is weak, the wet is weak, the yin is weak, the heat is weak, and the tight is cold.

古文：问曰：何以知乘府，何以知乘藏？
现代文：问：根据什么知道病入于腑？根据什么知道病入于脏？
English: Q: On what basis do you know that disease enters the body? On what basis do you know that disease enters the body?

古文：师曰：诸阳浮数为乘府，诸阴迟涩为乘藏也。
现代文：老师答；凡见阳脉如浮或数的，是病入于腑；凡见阴脉如迟或涩的，是病入于脏。
English: The teacher replied: Anyone who sees the yang vein as floating or numb is sick into the navel; anyone who sees the yin vein as slow or astringent is sick into the dirt.

