古文：耶律隆运耶律勃古哲萧阳阿武白萧常哥耶律虎古
现代文：耶律隆运，本姓韩，名德让，西南面招讨使韩匡嗣之子。
English: Yelu Longyun, real name Han, given name Dejan, was the son of Han Kuangzhi, the south-west recruiting officer.

古文：耶律隆运，本姓韩，名德让，西南面招讨使匡嗣之子也。统和十九年，赐名德昌；二十二年，赐姓耶律；二十八年，复赐名隆运。
现代文：统和十九年，赐名德昌。二十二年，赐姓耶律。二十八年，又赐名隆运。
English: In the 19th year of the Heian period, he was given the name Dechang. In the 22nd year, he was given the surname Yeru. In the 28th year, he was given the name Ryuun.

古文：重厚有智略，明治体，喜建功立事。
现代文：端庄忠厚，颇有智谋才略，深明治事之体，喜好建功立业。
English: He is dignified and loyal, quite resourceful, deeply rooted in the Meiji era, and likes to make contributions.

古文：侍景宗，以谨饬闻，加东头承奉官，补枢密院通事，转上京皇城使，遥授彰德军节度使，代其父匡嗣为上京留守，权知京事，甚有声。
现代文：侍奉景宗，以谨慎周到著称，加东头承奉官，补枢密院通事，转上京皇城使。遥授彰德军节度使，代其父匡嗣为上京留守，暂时代管京城事务，颇有声誉。
English: He served Jingzong, and was known for his prudence and thoughtfulness. He was appointed as the official in charge of the eastern part of China, filled the position of the secretary of the Privy Council, and became the envoy to the Imperial City of Beijing. He was awarded the position of the envoy to the German military festival, and stayed in Beijing in place of his father, Kuanzhe, temporarily managing the affairs of the capital. He had quite a reputation.

古文：寻复代父守南京，时人荣之。
现代文：不久又代父守南京，时人觉得他很荣耀。
English: Before long, he was guarding Nanjing in his father's stead, which was considered a great honor at the time.

古文：宋兵取河东，侵燕，五院糺详稳奚底、统军萧讨古等败归，宋兵围城，招胁甚急，人怀二心。
现代文：宋兵取河东，进犯燕地，五院纠详稳奚底、统军萧讨古等败回，宋兵围南京城，劝谕威胁十分急迫，很多人有出降之意。
English: The Song soldiers took Hedong, invaded Yan's land, the Fifth Court of the Ming Dynasty was defeated, the United Army was defeated, and the Song soldiers surrounded Nanjing City. The threat of persuasion was very urgent, and many people had the intention of surrendering.

古文：隆运登城，日夜守御。
现代文：隆运登城，日夜守御。
English: Long Yun entered the city and guarded it day and night.

古文：援军至，围解。
现代文：援军到，便解了围。
English: When reinforcements arrived, the siege was lifted.

古文：及战高梁河，宋兵败走，隆运邀击，又破之。
现代文：及至接战于高梁河，宋兵败走，隆运邀击，又破之。
English: As far as the battle in Gaolianghe, the Song soldiers were defeated and fled, and the Longyun invited the attack and broke it.

古文：以功拜辽兴军节度使，征为南院枢密使。
现代文：因功拜为辽兴军节度使，召为南院枢密使。
English: Because of his meritorious service, he was appointed as the special envoy of the Liao Xing Army, and was called to be the privy envoy of the Southern Yuan Dynasty.

古文：景宗疾大渐，与耶律斜轸俱受顾命，立梁王为帝，皇后为皇太后，称制。隆运总宿卫事，太后益宠任之。
现代文：景宗生病逝世，隆运与耶律斜轸一同受临终遗命，立梁王为帝，以皇后为皇太后，行使皇帝权力，隆运总管宿卫之事，太后更加宠任信用他。
English: When King Gyeongjong died of illness, Long Yun and Yerut Sonyeong received the last rites together. King Liang was made emperor and the empress dowager was made empress dowager to exercise the emperor's power. Long Yun was in charge of the palace guards, and the empress dowager trusted him even more.

古文：统和元年，加开府仪同三司，兼政事令。
现代文：统和元年，加开府仪同三司，兼政事令。
English: In the first year of unification, the Kaifu ceremony was added to the three departments, and the government affairs order was added.

古文：四年，宋遣曹彬、米信将十万众来侵，隆运从太后出师败之，加守司空，封楚国公。
现代文：四年，宋遣曹彬、米信率十万人马前来进犯，隆运随太后出师败之，加守司空，封楚国公。
English: In the fourth year, Song sent Cao Bin and Yixin to attack with a hundred thousand horses. Long Yun followed the empress dowager and defeated them, adding the governor Siku and sealing the state of Chu.

古文：师还，与北府宰相室昉共执国政。
现代文：回师，与北府宰相室日方同掌国政。
English: He returned to his position and took charge of national politics together with the Japanese side of the Hokufu Prime Minister's Office.

古文：上言山西四州数被兵，加以岁饥，宜轻税赋以来流民，从之。
现代文：上奏称山西四州多次遭受战争，又加上年成不好，应减轻赋税以招徕流民，皇上从之。
English: The report said that the four prefectures of Shanxi had suffered from war many times, and with the bad harvest of the year, taxes should be reduced to attract displaced people, and the emperor agreed.

古文：六年，太后观击鞠，胡里室突隆运坠马，命立斩之。
现代文：六年，太后观看击鞠球，胡里室冲撞隆运使之坠于马下，下令立即斩之。
English: In the sixth year, the empress dowager was watching a game of bowls, when Hulishu rammed Rongyun, causing him to fall under the horse, and ordered him to be immediately beheaded.

古文：诏率师伐宋，围沙堆，敌乘夜来袭，隆运严军以待，败走之，封楚王。
现代文：诏令率兵伐宋，包围沙堆，敌人乘夜前来偷袭，隆运整军以待，敌人兵败逃走，封为楚王。
English: He ordered his soldiers to attack Song and encircle the sand dunes. The enemy came at night to make a surprise attack. The Long March army was waiting. The enemy was defeated and fled. He was crowned King of Chu.

古文：九年，复言燕人挟奸，苟免赋役，贵族因为囊橐，可遣北院宣徽使赵智戒谕，从之。
现代文：九年，又上言说燕人心怀奸诈，以不正当的手段求免赋役，权贵们乘机给以窝藏包庇，可派遣北院宣徽使赵智前往警告、晓谕，皇上从之。
English: In the ninth year, it was said that Yan's heart was treacherous and he used improper means to ask for exemption from military service. The dignitaries took the opportunity to give him shelter and protection. They could send the Northern Court to proclaim the emblem to make Zhao Zhi go to warn and tell, and the emperor would follow.

古文：十一年，丁母忧，诏强起之。
现代文：十一年，遭逢母丧离职，诏令强行起复。
English: In the eleventh year, he was forced to resign due to his mother's death, and the imperial edict was forcibly revived.

古文：明年，室昉致政，以隆运代为北府宰相，仍领枢密使，监修国史，赐兴化功臣。
现代文：次年，室日方归还政事，以隆运代为北府宰相，仍领枢密使、监修国史，赐为兴化功臣。
English: The following year, the Imperial Court and the Japanese side returned political affairs, with Takamune acting as the prime minister of the northern prefecture, still holding the post of privy councilor, supervising the national history, and being awarded as a meritorious vassal.

古文：十二年六月，奏三京诸鞫狱官吏，多因请托，曲加宽贷，或妄行搒掠，乞行禁止。
现代文：十二年六月，上奏称东中南三京各断案官吏，多因私下之嘱托，枉法加以宽恕，或者妄行拷打，请加以禁止。
English: In June of the 12th year, the report said that the officials of the East, Central, and South Beijing Three Municipalities who decided the case, mostly because of private persuasion, unjustified forgiveness, or wanton torture, should be prohibited.

古文：上可其奏。
现代文：皇上准其奏。
English: The emperor approved his music.

古文：又表请任贤去邪，太后喜曰： 进贤辅政，真大臣之职。 
现代文：又上表请求任用贤能斥逐奸邪之辈，太后高兴地说 ：举荐贤才辅佐朝政，这才真个是尽了大臣之职。 
English: Also, the table requested the appointment of a wise person who could expel the evil generation, and the empress dowager said happily: "Recommending a wise person to assist the imperial government, this is truly fulfilling the duties of a minister."

古文：优加赐赉。
现代文：优诏给以赏赐。
English: The emperor gave him a reward.

古文：服阕，加守太保、兼政事令。
现代文：服丧期满，加守太保，兼政事令。
English: At the end of the mourning period, the governor of Taipo will be added, and the government affairs order will be issued.

古文：会北院枢密使耶律斜轸薨，诏隆运兼之。
现代文：适逢北院枢密使耶律斜轸薨，诏令由隆运兼其职。
English: This coincided with the abdication of the Privy Councilor of the Northern Yuan Dynasty, Ye Lu, and the imperial edict was issued that Yu Longyun would also take up the post.

古文：久之，拜大丞相，进王齐，总二枢府事。
现代文：又过了好久，拜为大丞相，进位为齐王，总领南北二枢府事。
English: After a long time, Bai became the grand chancellor, advanced to the rank of king of Qi, and became the leader of the two central government departments in the north and south.

古文：以南京、平州岁不登，奏免百姓农器钱，及请平诸郡商贾价，并从之。
现代文：以南京、平州粮食歉收，上奏免去百姓的农器钱，又请求平准各郡经商之价格，均从之。
English: In view of the poor grain harvest in Nanjing and Pingzhou, the report exempted the people's agricultural equipment money, and also requested the leveling of the price of doing business in each county.

古文：二十二年，从太后南征，及河，许宋成而还。
现代文：二十二年，随从太后南征，到了黄河，许宋求和而还。
English: Twenty-two years later, following the Southern Expedition of the Empress Dowager to the Yellow River, Xu Song sued for peace and returned.

古文：与惕隐耶律善补败宋将杨继业，加开府仪同三司、政事门下平章事。
现代文：迁为晋王，赐姓，出其宫籍，隶于横帐季父房后，于是改赐今名，位在亲王之上，赐予田宅及陪葬地。
English: He was moved to Jin Wang, given a surname, removed from his palace citizenship, subordinated to his father's family, and then given his current name, placed above the prince, given a farmhouse and a burial ground.

古文：未几，以山西城邑多陷，夺兵柄。
现代文：随从皇上伐高丽回，四肢风瘫，皇上与皇后亲自探病给医药。薨，年七十一岁。
English: Accompanying the Emperor on the campaign to recapture Korea, the Emperor and Empress personally examined and treated a quadriplegic woman. She was seventy-one years old.

古文：李继迁受赂，潜怀二心，奉诏率兵往谕，继迁托以西征不出，德威至灵州俘掠而还。年五十五卒，赠兼侍中。子雱金，终彰国军节度使。二孙：谢十、涤鲁。谢十终惕隐。涤鲁，字遵宁。
现代文：赠尚书令，谥文忠，由官府拨给葬具，并在乾陵旁边建庙。涤鲁，字遵宁。
English: Shang Shuling (尚書令) was bestowed on him, and the government allocated funeral paraphernalia, and a temple was built next to the Qianling Mausoleum.

古文：幼养宫中，授小将军。
现代文：幼时养于宫中，授小将军。
English: Raised in the imperial court as a child, he was given the title of Junior General.

古文：重熙初，历北院宣徽使、右林牙、副点检，拜惕隐，改西北路招讨使，封漆水郡王，请减军籍三千二百八十人。
现代文：重熙初年，历任北院宣徽使、右林牙、副点检，拜惕隐，改任西北路招讨使，封漆水郡王，请求免除三千二百八十人的军籍。
English: In the first year of Chongxi, the successors of Beiyuan Xuan Hui Envoy, Right Lin Ya, Sub-Point Inspection, and Bai Tiyin, were reappointed as Northwest Road Recruitment Envoy, sealed the King of Suishui County, and requested that 3,280 people be exempted from military registration.

古文：后以私取回鹘使者獭毛裘，及私取阻卜贡物，事觉，决大杖，削爵免官。
现代文：后来因为私自拿走回鹘使者的獭毛裘，又私自取用阻卜的贡物，事情败露，断刑为大杖，削夺爵位免去官职。
English: Later, because I took away the bristle of the envoy to Hui, and I took the tribute of obstruction from myself, the matter was revealed, the punishment was a big stick, and I was stripped of my title and removed from office.

古文：俄起为北院宣徽使。
现代文：不久起用为北院宣徽使。
English: He was soon appointed as the North Prefectural Emblem Envoy.

古文：十九年，改乌古敌烈部都详稳，寻为东北路详稳，封混同郡王。
现代文：十九年，改任乌古敌烈部都详稳，不久任东北路详稳，封混同郡王。
English: In nineteen years, he was reappointed as Ugou's ardent enemy, and soon he was appointed as Northeast Road's ardent enemy, and he was mixed up with the county king.

古文：清宁初，徙王邓，擢拜南府宰相。
现代文：清宁初，改封邓王，提升为南府宰相。
English: At the beginning of the Qing Dynasty, he changed his title to Deng Wang and was promoted to the Prime Minister of Nanfu.

古文：以年老乞骸骨，更王汉。
现代文：因为年老请求离职返乡，被改封为汉王。
English: Because of his old age, he asked to leave his post and return to his hometown, and was renamed Han Wang.

古文：大康中薨，年八十。
现代文：大康年间逝世，年八十岁。
English: He died in the Taikang era, at the age of eighty.

古文：涤鲁神情秀彻，圣宗子视之，兴宗待以兄礼，虽贵愈谦。
现代文：涤鲁神情清隽明达，圣宗视之如同亲生子，兴宗待他以兄长之礼，尽管地位显赫，涤鲁却越来越谦逊。
English: Dairu looked bright and clear, and Shentong regarded him as his own son. Xingzong treated him as an elder brother. Despite his prominent position, Dairu became more and more humble.

古文：初为都点检，扈从猎黑岭，获熊。
现代文：初时担任都点检，随从皇上在黑岭田猎，获得一头熊。
English: At the beginning, he served as an inspector, hunting with the emperor in the Heilingtian and obtaining a bear.

古文：上因乐饮，谓涤鲁曰： 汝有求乎？ 
现代文：兴宗因为高兴而饮酒，对涤鲁说： 你有什么要求吗？ 
English: Xingzong drank because he was happy and said to Paeru, "Do you have any requests?"

古文：对曰： 臣富贵逾分，不敢他望。
现代文：涤鲁回答说： 我的富足与贵显都超越了本分，不敢再有别的什么奢望。
English: Darius answered, My riches and honour exceed my need, and I dare not hope for more.

古文：惟臣叔先朝优遇，身殁之后，不肖子坐罪籍没，四时之荐享，诸孙中得赦一人以主祭，臣愿毕矣。 
现代文：只有我的叔叔在先朝受到优厚之礼遇，身死之后，不肖之子因为犯罪被籍没了家产，一年四季祭奠无人，皇上如果能在叔叔的诸位孙子之中赦免一人以主持祭祀，我的愿望就满足了。 
English: My uncle was the only one who received generous courtesies during the previous reign. After his death, his son lost his family property due to his criminal record, and there was no one to pay tribute to him all year round. If the emperor could pardon one of my uncle's grandchildren to preside over the sacrifice, my wish would be fulfilled.

古文：诏免籍，复其产。
现代文：诏令撤销籍没，恢复其叔之产业。
English: The imperial edict revoked his citizenship and reinstated his uncle's property.

古文：子燕五，官至南京步军都指挥使。
现代文：涤鲁之子耶律燕五，官至南京步军都指挥使。
English: The son of Jia Lu, Ye Lu Yan Wu, was a high-ranking official who commanded the Nanjing Foot Army.

古文：制心，小字可汗奴。
现代文：制心，乳名可汗奴。
English: Careful, you're going to get your name called.

古文：父德崇，善医，视人形色，辄决其病，累官至武定军节度使。
现代文：父耶律德崇，擅长医术，观察人的形体面色，便能诊断其病，累官至武定军节度使。
English: His father, Yeludet Chong, was good at medicine and could diagnose a person's illness by observing their appearance. He rose through the ranks to become the military governor of Wuding.

古文：制心善调鹰隼。
现代文：制心善于驯养鹰鹘。
English: He is good at taming eagle owls.

古文：统和中，为归化州刺史。
现代文：统和年间，任归化州刺史。
English: During the unification period, Ren was naturalized as a prefectural official.

古文：开泰中，拜上京留守，进汉人行宫都部署，封漆水郡王。
现代文：开泰年间，拜为上京留守，进用为汉人行宫都部署，封漆水郡王。
English: During the reign of Emperor Taizong, Baizhong stayed in Beijing for the purpose of going to the capital, and was deployed to the Han People's Palace for the purpose of going to the Han People's Palace. He was the king of Suishui County.

古文：以皇后外弟，恩遇日隆。
现代文：因为是皇后表弟，受皇上知遇日益隆盛。
English: Because he was the cousin of the empress, he was treated with increasing prosperity by the emperor.

古文：枢密副使萧合卓用事，制心奏合卓寡识度，无行检，上默然。
现代文：枢密副使萧合卓当权，制心奏称萧合卓缺乏识见与器度，没有品行，皇上没有回复。
English: The vice-secretary of the privy council put Xiao Hezhuo in power. He said that Xiao Hezhuo lacked insight and decorum, and had no moral character. The emperor did not reply.

古文：每内宴欢洽，辄避之。
现代文：制心每逢内府宴会欢乐和洽之时，便躲避开来。
English: Whenever a banquet at the Imperial Household Agency was a time of joy and harmony, he would avoid it.

古文：皇后不悦曰： 汝不乐耶？ 
现代文：皇后不高兴地说 ：你不快乐吗？ 
English: The unhappy Queen said, "Are you not happy?"

古文：制心对曰： 宠贵鲜能长保，以是为忧耳！ 
现代文：制心回答说 ：宠幸与显贵很少能够长时间地保有，我不过是因此而忧心罢了！ 
English: "I am only worried because it is rare for favors and honors to be kept for a long time," he replied calmly.

古文：圣宗即位，太后称制，会群臣议军国事，勃古哲上疏陈便宜数事，称旨，即日兼领山西路诸州事。
现代文：太平年间，历任中京留守、惕隐、南京留守，改封燕王，迁任南院大王。有人劝制心侍奉佛法，制心回答说： 我不懂什么佛法，只是心中没有私念，就近似于佛心了。 
English: During the Taiping era, successive Chukyo retainers, Chikyaku retainers, and Nanking retainers changed their titles to Yan Wang and were transferred to Nanin Daio. When someone urged Korechika to serve Buddhism, Korechika replied, "I don't know any Buddhism, but I don't have any selfish thoughts in my heart, so I'm close to the Buddha's heart."

古文：统和四年，宋将曹彬等侵燕，勃古哲击之甚力，赐输忠保节致主功臣，总知山西五州。
现代文：一天，他沐浴之后换上衣服躺下，家里人听得音乐之声，奇怪地进屋去看他，却发现他已然离开人世。年五十三岁，赠政事令，追封陈王。
English: One day, after he took a bath, he changed his clothes and lay down. His family heard the sound of music and entered the house to see him in a strange way. However, they found that he had already passed away. He was 53 years old, he issued a government order, and he was enthroned as King Chen.

古文：会有告勃古哲曲法虐民者，按之有状，以大杖决之。
现代文：制心任上京留守时，禁酒之令正严，有人捕获得私自酿酒者，后者将酒一气全部喝尽，制心笑了起来，没有再究治其罪。
English: When Tsukishin left to stay in Tokyo, the prohibition of alcohol was very strict. Someone caught a bootlegger, who drank all the wine in one go, laughed and did not investigate his crime.

古文：八年，为南京统军使，卒。子爻里，官至详稳。萧阳阿，字稍隐。
现代文：制心去世的那天，部民们悲痛得就像死了父母一般。萧阳阿，字稍稳。
English: On the day of Xiao Yang's death, his subordinates grieved as if their parents had died.

古文：端毅简严，识辽、汉字，通天文、相法。
现代文：正直刚毅，简约严明。熟悉辽、汉两种文字，通晓天文、相法。
English: Honest and tough, simple and strict. Familiar with Liao and Chinese characters, knowledgeable about astronomy and phase method.

古文：父卒，自五蕃部亲挽丧车至奚王岭，人称其孝。
现代文：父亲去世时，他亲自挽扶灵车从五蕃部直到奚王岭，人们都称道他孝顺。
English: When his father died, he personally drove the hearse from Wusongbu to Shaowangling. People praised him for his filial piety.

古文：年十九，为本班郎君。
现代文：十九岁时，担任本班郎君。
English: At the age of nineteen, he served as the head of the class.

古文：历铁林、铁鹞、大鹰三军详稳。
现代文：历任铁林、铁鹞、大鹰三军详稳。
English: The successors of the Tielin, the Spade, and the Great Eagle three armies are well established.

古文：乾统元年，由乌古敌烈部屯田太保为易州刺史。
现代文：乾统元年，由乌古敌烈部屯田太保改任易州刺史。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Qian, he was transferred from the Wu ancient enemy stronghold of Tonden Taibo to the position of Ezhou Sashishi.

古文：幸臣刘彦良尝以事至州，怙宠恣横，为阳阿所沮。
现代文：宠臣刘彦良曾经因事到州中，恃宠恣意妄为，为阳阿所阻止。
English: Liu Yanliang, a favorite, once went to the middle of the state due to an incident, and Yang Ah prevented him from acting arbitrarily.

古文：彦良归，妄加毁訾，寻遣人代阳阿。
现代文：彦良回京之后，便对他妄加毁谤，不久皇上派人来替换阳阿。
English: After Hikora returned to Kyoto, he slandered him, and soon the emperor sent someone to replace Yang Ah.

古文：州民千余诣阙请留，即日授武安州观察使。
现代文：州中百姓千余人到宫中请求让阳阿留任，当日授任为武安州观察使。
English: More than a thousand people in the province went to the imperial court to request that Yang Ah remain in office, and on the same day he was appointed as the Wu'an Provincial Observer.

古文：二年，改辽兴军节度使，召为北府宰相，以柴册礼，加兼侍中。
现代文：历任乌古涅里、顺义、彰信等军节度使，及权知东北路统军使事。在得知耶律狼不、铎鲁斡等人反叛消息后，独自率领部下三十多人追捕之，身受两处创伤，活捉十余人，送到皇上行宫所在。
English: Successively served as the military envoy of Uguneri, Shunyi, and Zhangxin, as well as the envoy of the Northeastern Road Union Army. After learning the news of the rebellion of Yerudolfo, Zangluyu, and others, he led more than thirty subordinates to chase them, suffered two wounds, captured more than ten people alive, and sent them to the emperor's palace.

古文：天庆元年，致仕，卒，谥曰钦肃。
现代文：因未抓获首恶而获罪，被免去官职。不久，代理南京留守，去世。
English: He was found guilty of failing to apprehend the chief villain and was removed from his official post. Soon after, the acting governor stayed behind in Nanjing and passed away.

古文：耶律虎古，字海邻，六院夷离堇觌烈之孙。
现代文：耶律虎古，字海邻，六院夷离堇觌烈之孙。
English: Yelu Hugu, Zi Haikou, the grandson of the six emperors who were exiled from their homes.

古文：少颖悟，重然诺。
现代文：少时聪慧过人，特别注意言而有信。
English: At times, he was extremely intelligent, and paid particular attention to being able to express himself clearly.

古文：保宁初，补御盏郎君。
现代文：保宁初年，补为御王戋郎君。
English: In his first year in Boryeong, he was promoted to Gwanghyeongnyang.

古文：十年，使宋还，以宋取河东之意闻于上。
现代文：十年，出使宋回国，将宋想夺取河东之意图报告给皇上。
English: Ten years later, he sent Song back to China to report to the emperor Song's intention to seize Hedong.

古文：燕王韩匡嗣曰： 何以知之？ 
现代文：燕王韩匡嗣问 ：从何而知？ 
English: Yan Wang Han Kuanzhe asked: How do you know?

古文：虎古曰： 诸僣号之国，宋皆并收，惟河东未下。
现代文：虎古说： 所有僭取王号的国家，宋一概吞并之，只有河东未曾攻下。
English: Huko said, "All the countries that usurped the title of king were annexed by Song I. Only Hedong was never conquered.

古文：今宋讲武习战，意必在汉。 
现代文：现下宋国讲习武事，练习作战，其意必在于图谋汉。 
English: At present, the Song Dynasty is studying martial arts and practicing combat, which must mean that they are trying to plot Han.

古文：匡嗣力沮，乃止。
现代文：匡嗣极力加以阻止，皇上便作罢。
English: Kuanzhe tried his best to stop it, but the emperor stopped it.

古文：明年，宋果伐汉。
现代文：次年，宋果然讨伐北汉。
English: The following year, Song successfully invaded Northern Han.

古文：帝以虎古能料事，器之，乃曰： 吾与匡嗣虑不及此。 
现代文：皇上因为虎古能料事，很器重他，并说 ：我与匡嗣都没考虑到这一点。 
English: The Emperor held him in high esteem because of his ability to keep track of things, and said, "Neither I nor the Emperor took this into consideration."

古文：授涿州刺史。
现代文：授他为涿州刺史。
English: He was awarded the History of Zhangzhou.

古文：统和初，皇太后称制，召赴京师。
现代文：统和初年，皇太后临朝称制摄理国政，召他到京师。
English: In the first year of unification, the Empress Dowager Lintong appointed him as the regent of state affairs and summoned him to Beijing.

古文：与韩德让以事相忤，德让怒，取护卫所执戎仗击其脑，卒。
现代文：与韩德让因事相互忤逆，德让发怒夺过护卫所持的兵仗猛击其头，虎古当场被打死。
English: He and Han Dejan were at loggerheads with each other over the matter. In anger, Dejan snatched the sword held by the guard and slammed it on his head. Huko was killed on the spot.

