古文：同光四年春正月戊午朔，帝不受朝贺，契丹寇渤海。
现代文：同光四年一月一日，庄宗不接受朝贺。契丹侵犯渤海。
English: On January 1 of the same year, Zhuangzong did not accept morning greetings. Khitan invaded the Bohai Sea.

古文：壬戌，诏以去岁因被灾沴，物价腾踊，自今月三日后避正殿，减膳撤乐，以答天谴。
现代文：五日，下诏说因去年灾害，物价上涨，从本月三日以后避开正殿，削减饮食撤除乐舞，以承受上天的惩罚。
English: On the 5th, the next edict said that due to last year's disasters and rising prices, from the 3rd day of this month, avoid the main hall, cut down on food and remove music and dance, in order to bear the punishment of heaven.

古文：应去年遭水灾州县，秋夏税赋并与放免。
现代文：凡是去年遭受水灾的州县，秋夏赋税一起免除。
English: All prefectures and counties that suffered from floods last year are exempt from the autumn and summer taxes.

古文：自壬午年已前所欠残税，及诸色课利，已有敕命放免者，尚闻所在却有征收，宜令租庸司切准前敕处分。
现代文：自壬午年以前所欠的残留税款，以及各种课利，已有诏令予以免除的，还听说所在官府仍在征收，应令租庸司立即按以前命令处理。
English: Since the residual taxes owed before the Year of the Horse, as well as all kinds of interest, have been exempted by the edict of the Emperor, and it is also heard that the government office is still collecting, the Rent Division should be ordered to deal with it immediately according to the previous order.

古文：应京畿内人户，有停贮斛斗者，并令减价出粜；如不遵行，当令检括。
现代文：凡是京城郊区内的居民有囤积粮食的，应令减价出售，如不遵守命令，应予没收。
English: All residents in the suburbs of Beijing who have hoarded grain should be ordered to sell it at a reduced price, and if they do not comply with the order, they should be confiscated.

古文：西川王衍父子及伪署将相官吏，除已行刑宪外，一切释放。
现代文：西川王衍父子和伪职将相官吏，除已判了刑以外，全部予以释放。
English: Nishikawa Wangyan, his son, and the fake consul generals and officials were all released except for those who had already been sentenced.

古文：天下禁囚，除十恶五逆、官典犯赃、屠牛毁钱、放火劫舍、持刀杀人，准律常赦不原外，应合抵极刑者，递降一等。
现代文：天下被囚禁的犯人，除了十恶五逆、官典犯赃、杀牛毁钱、放火抢劫、持刀杀人，一般刑律不予赦免的以外，所有判了死刑的，减刑一等。
English: In addition to the ten evils and five rebellions, the violation of the official code, the killing of cattle and the destruction of money, the arson and robbery, and the killing with a knife, which are not pardoned by the general criminal law, all prisoners sentenced to death are commuted to the first class.

古文：其余罪犯悉与减降；逃背军健，并放逐便。
现代文：其余罪犯全部予以减刑降刑。逃兵散兵，也一并释放不予追究。
English: The remaining criminals will all have their sentences reduced. Deserters and deserters will also be released without being investigated.

古文：癸亥，河中节度使李继麟来朝。
现代文：六日，河中节度使李继麟来上朝。
English: On the 6th, the Mid-Heaven Festival made Li Jilin come to Shang Dynasty.

古文：诸州上言，准宣为去年十月地震，集僧道起消灾道场。
现代文：诸州报告，请允许为去年十月的地震召集和尚道士做道场消灾。
English: Zhuzhou report, please allow us to call up monks and Taoists for the earthquake last October to do the dojo disaster relief.

古文：甲子，魏王继岌杀枢密使郭崇韬于西川，夷其族。
现代文：七日，魏王李继岌在西川杀死枢密使郭崇韬和他全族。
English: On the seventh day, the Wei king Li Jigu killed the imperial envoy Guo Chongyao and his entire family in Xichuan.

古文：丙寅，百官上表，请复常膳，凡三上表，乃允之。
现代文：九日，百官上表章，请庄宗恢复正常饮食，共上了三次奏章，庄宗才答应。
English: On the 9th, a hundred officials came to see Zhuangzong and asked him to resume his normal diet. Zhuangzong agreed only after he had been to see Zhuangzong three times.

古文：西川行营都监李廷安进西川乐官二百九十八人。
现代文：西川行营都监李廷安进献西川乐官二百九十八人。
English: Li Ting'an, the procurator of the Nishikawa camp, presented 298 people to the Nishikawa music officials.

古文：契丹寇女真、渤海。
现代文：契丹侵犯女真、渤海。
English: Khitan invade Jizhen, Bohai.

古文：戊寅，契丹安巴坚遣使贡良马。
现代文：二十一日，契丹阿保机派使者进贡良马。
English: On the twenty-first day, Khitan Aboji sent an envoy to pay tribute to Ryoma.

古文：庚辰，帝异母弟鄜州节度使存乂伏诛。
现代文：二十三日，庄宗异母弟州节度使李存繧被杀。
English: On the 23rd, Zhuangzong's half-brother Zhu Jiedu had Li Cunxu killed.

古文：存乂，郭崇韬之子婿也，故亦及于祸。
现代文：李存繧是郭崇韬的女婿，所以被牵涉到灾祸。
English: Li Cunxu was Guo Chongyao's son-in-law, so he was implicated in the disaster.

古文：是日，以河中节度使、守太师、兼尚书令、西平王李继麟为滑州节度使，寻令硃守殷以兵围其第，诛之，亦夷其族。
现代文：这一天，任河中节度使、守太师、兼尚书令、西平王李继麟为滑州节度使，接着又命令朱守殷用兵包围他的府第，杀掉他和全族人。
English: On this day, he appointed Kehongongongongongongongongongongongongongongongongongongongongongongongongongongongongongongongongongongongongongongongongongongongongongongongongongongongongongongongongongongongongongongongongongongongongongongongongongongongongongongongongongongongongongongongongongongongongongongongongongongongongongongongongongongongongongongongongongongongongongongongongongongongongongongongongongongongongongongongongongongongong

古文：辛巳，吐浑、奚各遣使贡马。
现代文：二十四日，吐谷浑、奚人各派使者进贡马匹。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, envoys from both the Huns and the Jurchens of Tuy were sent to bring in the tribute horses.

古文：镇州上言，部民冻死者七千二百六十人。
现代文：镇州报告，部下百姓冻死七千二百六十人。
English: The township reported that 7,260 of its citizens froze to death.

古文：又奏，准宣进花果树栽及抽乐人梅审译赴京。
现代文：又上奏，请允许进献花果树木以及乐伶梅审铎到京师。
English: Please allow me to offer flowers, fruits, trees, and plum blossoms to the Imperial Household Agency.

古文：甲申，以郓州节度使、永王存霸为河中节度使，以滑州节度使、申王存渥为郓州节度使。乙酉，内人景姹上言： 昭宗遇难之时，皇属千余人同时遇害，为三穴瘗于宫城西古龙兴寺北，请改葬。 
现代文：二十八日，宫人景姹上奏： 昭宗遇难之时，皇属一千多人同时遇害，挖了三个洞葬在宫城西古龙兴寺北面，请予改葬。 
English: On the 28th, the palace people played the following song: When Akimune was killed, more than a thousand members of the imperial family were killed at the same time. They dug three holes and buried him in the north of the West Goryu Ryukyu Temple in Miyagi. Please be reburied.

古文：从之，仍诏河南府监护其事。
现代文：庄宗同意，于是下诏令河南府监办此事。
English: Zhuangzong agreed, and issued a decree ordering Henan Prefecture to supervise the matter.

古文：丙戌，回鹘可汗阿都欲遣使贡良马。
现代文：二十九日，回鹘可汗阿咄欲派使者进贡良马。
English: On the 29th, the Hui Khan sent an envoy to pay tribute to Liangma.

古文：镇州上言，平棘等四县部民，饿死者二千五十人。
现代文：镇州报告，平棘等四县百姓饿死二千五十人。
English: According to the report of Zhenzhou, 250 people in Pingxiao and other four counties died of starvation.

古文：丁亥，诏硃友谦同恶人史武等七人，已当国法，并籍没家产。
现代文：三十日，下诏说朱友谦同案犯史武等七人，已受国法处死，并没收家产。
English: On the 30th, the next edict said that Zhu Youqian's co-offender Shi Wu and seven others had been sentenced to death by the state law, and their family property had been confiscated.

古文：甲午，以郑州刺史李绍奇为河阳节度使，以乐人景进为银青光禄大夫、检校右散骑常侍、守御史大夫。
现代文：史武等朱友谦的旧将，当时都是刺史，全都以无罪而全族被诛。二月七日，任乐人景进为银青光禄大夫、检校右散骑常侍、守御史大夫。
English: At that time, Zhu Yuqian's old generals, such as Shi Wu, were all assassinated, all of them were found not guilty, and the whole family was executed. On February 7, the musician Jing Jin was appointed as the doctor of silver, the doctor of silver, the doctor of silver, the doctor of silver, the doctor of silver, the doctor of silver, the doctor of silver, the doctor of silver, the doctor of silver, the doctor of silver, the doctor of silver, the doctor of silver, the doctor of silver, the doctor of silver, the doctor of silver, the doctor of silver, the doctor of silver, the doctor of silver, the doctor of silver, the doctor of silver

古文：进以俳优嬖幸，善采访闾巷鄙细事以启奏，复密求妓媵以进，恩宠特厚。
现代文：景进以演戏受宠幸，善于采访街头巷尾琐细事情上报，又秘密搜求妓女进宫，受很优厚的待遇。
English: As an actor, Jingjin was favored and fortunate. He was good at interviewing people on the street and reporting on trivial matters. He also secretly searched for prostitutes to enter the palace and received very generous treatment.

古文：魏州钱谷诸务，及招兵市马，悉委进监临。
现代文：魏州钱粮事务，以及招兵买马，全委任景进监管。
English: Wei Zhou's money and grain affairs, as well as the recruitment of soldiers, were all entrusted to the supervision of Jingjin.

古文：孔谦附之以希宠，常呼为 八哥 。
现代文：孔谦想依附他以邀宠，常叫他 八哥 。
English: Kong Qian wanted to cling to him as a favorite, and often called him the eighth brother.

古文：诸军左右无不托附，至于士人，亦有因之而求仕进者。
现代文：各军左右无不托庇于他，就是读书人也有因为拜求他而走上仕途的。
English: All armies rely on him for protection, and even scholars have made their careers by praying to him.

古文：每入言事，左右纷然屏退，惟以陷害荧惑为意焉。
现代文：每次入宫对庄宗说事情，左右都得避开，专门干些陷害蛊惑的事。
English: Every time he entered the palace to say something to Zhuangzong, he had to avoid the left and right, and he had to do some special work of entrapment.

古文：是日，帝幸冷泉校猎。
现代文：这一天，庄宗到冷泉打猎。
English: On this day, Zhuang Zong went hunting in Lengquan.

古文：乙未，宰臣豆卢革上言，请支州县官实俸，以责课效。
现代文：八日，宰臣豆卢革上奏，请支付州县官员的实际薪俸，以便他们工作干出实效。
English: On the 8th, Vice-Minister Doulu made a report, requesting that the actual salaries of state and county officials be paid so that they could work effectively.

古文：丙申，武德使史彦琼自鄴驰报称： 今月六日，贝州屯驻兵士突入都城，剽劫坊市。 
现代文：九日，武德使史彦琼从邺州骑马来报告 ：本月六日，贝州屯驻士兵突然冲入城中，抢劫市场商店。 
English: On the 9th, Wu De sent Shi Yan Qiong on horseback from Zhangzhou to report: On the 6th of this month, soldiers stationed in Beizhou suddenly rushed into the city and robbed market stores.

古文：初，帝令魏博指挥使杨仁晸率兵戍瓦桥，至是代归，有诏令驻于贝州。
现代文：起初，庄宗令魏博指挥使杨仁率兵戍守瓦桥，到现在换防，诏令在贝州屯驻。
English: At first, Zhuang Zong ordered Wei Bo to command Yang Ren to lead the troops to guard the tile bridge, and now he has changed the defense, and ordered the troops to be stationed in Beizhou.

古文：上岁天下大水，十月鄴地大震，自是居人或有亡去他郡者，每日族谈巷语云： 城将乱矣！ 
现代文：去年天下涨大水，十月邺州大地震，自此居民中有逃亡去别的地方的，每天聚在街巷议论说： 城中将出乱子！ 
English: Last year, there was a big flood, and in October, there was a big earthquake in Zhangzhou. Since then, some residents who fled to other places have gathered in the streets every day to discuss: There will be chaos in the city!

古文：人人恐悚，皆不自安。
现代文：人人恐惧，都不安心。
English: Everybody's scared, everybody's on edge.

古文：十二月，以户部尚书王正言为兴唐尹、知留守事。
现代文：十二月，任户部尚书王正言为兴唐尹、知留守事。
English: In December, Shangshu Wang Zhengyan was appointed to the household department to take care of Xing Tangyin and Zhiru.

古文：正言年耄风病，事多忽忘，比无经治之才。武德使史彦琼者，以伶官得幸，帝待以腹心之任，都府之中，威福自我，正言以下，皆胁肩低首，曲事不暇。
现代文：王正言年老中风，事情常有遗忘，完全没有治理才能，武德使史彦琼，以一伶官而得宠幸，庄宗视为心腹委以重任，他在都府之中，作威作福，从王正言以下，对他都低声下气，委曲从事。
English: Wang Zhengyan suffered a stroke in his old age. He often forgot things and had no ability to govern at all. He was favored with the title of eunuch because of his martial arts skills. Zhuangzong considered him to be entrusted with important responsibilities. He acted as a bully in the capital, and everyone from Wang Zhengyan down was condescending to him and engaged in commissioned music.

古文：由是政无统摄，奸人得以窥图。
现代文：因此，政事官没有统摄之权，让奸人得到谋求权势的机会。
English: As a result, political officials do not have the power to control the situation, giving the traitors the opportunity to seek power.

古文：洎郭崇韬伏诛，人未测其祸始，皆云： 崇韬已杀继岌，自王西川，故尽诛郭氏。 
现代文：在郭崇韬被杀时，人们不知祸患的起因，都说： 郭崇韬已经杀了李继岌，在西川自己称王，所以杀掉郭氏全家。 
English: When Guo Chongzhen was killed, people did not know the cause of the calamity. They all said: Guo Chongzhen had already killed Li Jizhe, and proclaimed himself king in Xichuan, so he killed Guo's entire family.

古文：先是，有密诏令史彦琼杀硃友谦之子澶州刺史建徽。
现代文：在这以前，有密诏令史彦琼杀朱友谦之子澶州刺史朱建徽。
English: Prior to this, there was a secret edict ordering Shi Yanqiong to kill Zhu Jianhui, the son of Zhu Youqian, the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：史彦琼夜半出城，不言所往。
现代文：史彦琼半夜出城，不说去哪里。
English: Shi Yanqiong left the city in the middle of the night without saying where she was going.

古文：诘旦，阍报正言曰： 史武德夜半驰马而去，不知何往。 
现代文：天亮时，守城的报告王正言说： 史武德半夜骑马而去，不知到哪里去。 
English: At dawn, Wang Zhengyan, the report of the city guard, said: Shude rode away in the middle of the night and did not know where to go.

古文：是日人情震骇，讹言云： 刘皇后以继岌死于蜀，已行弑逆，帝已晏驾，故急征彦琼。 
现代文：这一天人心大震，谣传说： 刘皇后因李继岌在蜀死去，已发动叛逆杀了皇帝，皇帝已死，所以紧急征召史彦琼。 
English: On this day, people's hearts were shaken. Rumor had it that Empress Liu had killed the emperor in rebellion because of the death of Li Jizhu in Shu. The emperor was dead, so Shi Yanqiong was urgently summoned.

古文：其言播于鄴市，贝州军士有私宁亲于都下者，掠此言传于贝州。
现代文：这话在邺州街市流传，贝州军士有私自回乡探亲听说谣传的，又将谣言在贝州传开。
English: The rumor was spread in Luzhou Street Market. Sergeant Beizhou heard about the rumor when he went back to his hometown to visit his relatives. He then spread the rumor in Luzhou.

古文：军士皇甫晖等因夜聚蒱博不胜，遂作乱，劫都将杨仁晸曰： 我辈十有余年为国家效命，甲不离体，已至吞并天下，主上未垂恩泽，翻有猜嫌。
现代文：军士皇甫晖等因夜里赌博没赢，于是作乱，绑架都将杨仁说 ：我们十几年为国家卖命，铠甲不离身，以致吞并天下，主上不降临恩泽，反而猜疑我们。
English: The sergeant-at-arms Wang Fuxi and others did not win because of gambling in the night, so they rioted and kidnapped Yang Ren, saying: We have been working for the country for more than ten years, and we have not left our armor, so that we have annexed the world. The Lord does not come with grace, but suspects us.

古文：防戍边远，经年离阻乡国，及得代归，去家咫尺，不令与家属相见。
现代文：保卫边疆，常年离开家乡，等到换防回来，离家近在咫尺，又不让和家属相见。
English: Defend the frontier, leave their hometown all year round, wait until the changing of the guard to come back, stay close to home, and do not let them see their families.

古文：今闻皇后弑逆，京邑已乱，将士各欲归府宁亲，请公同行。 
现代文：现在听说皇后杀了皇帝，京城已乱，将士都想回家探亲，请你与我们一同走。 
English: Now I hear that the empress has killed the emperor, the capital is in chaos, and the generals all want to go home to visit their relatives. Please come with us.

古文：仁晸曰： 汝等何谋之过耶！
现代文：杨仁说： 你们的打算太不对了！
English: Yang Ren said: Your plan is too wrong!

古文：今英主在上，天下一家，从驾精兵不下百万，西平巴、蜀，威振华夷，公等各有家族，何事如此！ 
现代文：现在英明的君主在上，天下一家，皇帝的精兵不下百万，西边平定了巴、蜀，威震中外，你们各有家族，为什么要这样做？ 
English: Now the wise sovereign is on high, the whole world is one family, the emperor's elite soldiers are no less than a million, Ba and Shu have been leveled in the west, and you all have families outside the epicenter. Why do you do this?

古文：军人乃抽戈露刃环仁晸曰： 三军怨怒，咸欲谋反，苟不听从，须至无礼。 
现代文：军士们于是拿起戈矛刀剑，围住杨仁说 ：三军怨怒，都想谋反，如不听从，别怪我们对你无礼。 
English: The sergeants then took up their spears and swords and surrounded Yang Ren, saying, "The three armies are angry and want to rebel. If you don't obey, don't blame us for being rude to you."

古文：仁晸曰： 吾非不知此，但丈夫举事，当计万全。 
现代文：杨仁说 ：我并不是不知道这些，但大丈夫做事，应想万全之计。 
English: Yang Ren said, "It's not that I don't know these things, but it's okay to do things, you should try everything."

古文：军人即斩仁晸。
现代文：军士们便杀了杨仁。
English: The soldiers then killed Yang Ren.

古文：裨将赵在礼闻军乱，衣不及带，将逾垣而遁，乱兵追及，白刃环之曰： 公能为帅否？
现代文：副将赵在礼听说军队叛乱，衣服来不及系上带子，想翻墙逃跑，乱兵追上来，持刀围住他说： 你能做我们的主帅吗？
English: When Vice Admiral Zhao Zaili heard about the army's rebellion, he couldn't fasten the straps on his clothes in time and wanted to escape over the wall. The soldiers chased him and surrounded him with knives, saying, "Can you be our commander?

古文：否则头随刃落！ 
现代文：否则头随刀落！ 
English: Otherwise, heads will fall with the sword!

古文：在礼惧，即曰： 吾能为之。 
现代文：赵在礼害怕，立即说： 我能做。 
English: Zhao Zaili was scared and immediately said: I can do it.

古文：众遂呼噪，中夜燔劫贝郡。
现代文：众人于是欢呼呐喊，半夜里烧抢贝郡。
English: The crowd then cheered and shouted, and in the middle of the night they set fire to and looted Bei County.

古文：诘旦，拥在礼趋临清，剽永济、馆陶。
现代文：天亮后，拥着赵在礼奔赴临清，掠夺永济、馆陶。
English: After dawn, he rushed to Linqing with Zhao in his arms, plundering Yongji and the Museum of Ceramics.

古文：五日晚，有自贝州来者，言乱兵将犯都城，都巡检使孙铎等急趋史彦琼之第，告曰： 贼将至矣，请给铠仗，登陴拒守。 
现代文：五日晚，有从贝州来的人，说乱兵将侵犯都城，都巡检使孙铎等急忙到史彦琼家里，告诉他说： 贼兵将要来了，请发给铠甲兵器，登城拒守。 
English: On the evening of the fifth day, some people from Bechu said that the soldiers would invade the capital city. The patrol ordered Sun Yao and others to rush to Shi Yanqiong's house and tell him: The robbers are coming, please give them armor weapons and refuse to defend the city.

古文：彦琼曰： 今日贼至临清，计程六日方至，为备未晚。 
现代文：史彦琼说： 今天贼兵才到临清，算路程要六天才到这里，防备来得及。 
English: Shi Yanqiong said: Today, the robber soldiers have just arrived in Linqing, and it will take six days to get here, so it's time to prepare.

古文：孙铎曰： 贼来寇我，必倍道兼行，一朝失机，悔将何及！
现代文：孙铎说： 贼寇前来侵犯，必然会加速行军，一旦失去军机，后悔都来不及！
English: Sun Yat-sen said: Thieves and robbers who come to invade will inevitably speed up the march. Once you lose a military plane, it's too late to regret it!

古文：请仆射率众登陴，铎以劲兵千人伏于王莽河逆击之；贼既挫势，须至离溃，然后可以剪除。
现代文：请仆射率领众军登上城墙，我率领劲兵千人埋伏在王莽河迎击他们，贼兵被挫败之后，必然会溃逃，然后可以全部消灭。
English: Ask the archer to lead the army onto the city wall. I will lead a thousand strong soldiers to ambush them in Wang Manghe. After the robbers are defeated, they will inevitably flee, and then they can all be eliminated.

古文：如俟其凶徒薄于城下，必虑奸人内应，则事未可测也。 
现代文：如等到他人气势汹汹地逼到城下，担心有奸人做内应，则事情就不可预料了。 
English: If you wait until the other person is aggressively forced under the city, fearing that there is a traitor to do the inner work, then things are unpredictable.

古文：彦琼曰： 但训士守城，何须即战。 
现代文：史彦琼说 ：只须命令士兵守城，何必立即交战。 
English: Shi Yanqiong said, "We only need to order the soldiers to defend the city, why do we need to fight immediately?"

古文：时彦琼疑孙铎等有他志，故拒之。
现代文：此时史彦琼怀疑孙铎等有其他图谋，所以拒绝他的建议。
English: At this time, Shi Yanqiong suspected that Sun Yat-sen and others had other plans, so he rejected his suggestion.

古文：是夜三更，贼果攻北门，彦琼时以部众在北门楼，闻贼呼噪，即时惊溃。
现代文：这夜三更时分，贼兵果然进攻北门，史彦琼这时正率兵在北门楼，听到贼兵呼叫，立刻惊溃。
English: At three o'clock that night, the bandits attacked the north gate. Shi Yanqiong was leading the soldiers in the north gate building at that time. When he heard the bandits' call, he immediately collapsed.

古文：彦琼单骑奔京师。
现代文：史彦琼单骑奔往京师。
English: Shi Yanqiong rode alone to Beijing.

古文：迟明，乱军入城，孙铎与之巷战，不胜，携其母自水门而出，获免。
现代文：天亮以后，乱军攻入城内，孙铎与他们巷战，打不赢，带着他母亲从水门出城，才免遭劫难。
English: After dawn, the rebels entered the city. Sun Yat-sen fought with them in the streets, but could not win. He took his mother out of the city through the water gate to avoid disaster.

古文：晡晚，赵在礼引诸军据宫城，署皇甫晖、赵进等为都虞候、斩斫使，诸军大掠。
现代文：傍晚，赵在礼引诸军占据宫城，任命皇甫晖、赵进等人为都虞候、斩斫使，各军大肆抢掠。
English: In the evening, Zhao led the troops to occupy Miyagi, and appointed Emperor Fu Xi, Zhao Jin and others as the governor of Miyagi and the executioner, and the troops looted and plundered.

古文：兴唐尹王正言谒在礼，望尘再拜。
现代文：兴唐尹王正言进见赵在礼，望尘再拜。
English: Yin Wang Zhengyan, the ruler of Xingtang, came to see Zhao Zaili and bowed to him.

古文：是日，众推在礼为兵马留后，草奏以闻。
现代文：这一天，众人推举赵在礼为兵马留后，起草表章向皇帝上报。
English: On this day, after everyone voted for Zhao Zili to stay as a soldier, he drafted a report to the emperor.

古文：帝怒，命宋州节度使元行钦率骑三千赴鄴都招抚，诏征诸道之师进讨。
现代文：庄宗大怒，命宋州节度使元行钦率领三千骑兵奔赴邺都招抚，下诏征各道军队进军讨伐。
English: Zhuang Zong was furious, and ordered the Song State Festival to make Yuan Xingqin lead three thousand cavalrymen to rush to the capital of Fuzhou, and ordered the armies of all provinces to march to the crusade.

古文：丁酉，淮南杨溥遣使贺平蜀。
现代文：十日，淮南杨溥派使者庆贺平定蜀地。
English: On the 10th, Huainan Yang Di sent an envoy to celebrate the victory of Pingding Shu.

古文：己亥，魏王继岌奏，康延孝拥众反，回寇西川。
现代文：十二日，魏王李继岌报告，康延孝率众人造反，回头侵犯西川。
English: On the twelfth day, the Wei king Li Jizhe reported that Kang Yanxiao led the people to rebel and return to invade the West River.

古文：遣副招讨使任圜率兵追讨之。
现代文：派副招讨使任圜率兵追讨。
English: He sent his vice-inviting officer to ask Ren Zheng to lead the soldiers to recover.

古文：庚子，福建节度副使王延翰奏，节度使王审知委权知军府事。
现代文：十三日，福建节度副使王延翰上奏，节度使王审知委托临时掌管军府事务。
English: On the 13th, Wang Yanhan, deputy envoy of the Fujian Festival, made a report, and the Festival envoy, Wang Xizhi, was entrusted with the temporary management of the military affairs.

古文：邢州左右步直军四百人据城叛，推军校赵太为留后，诏东北面副招讨使李绍真率兵讨之。
现代文：邢州左右步直军四百人占据城市叛乱，推举军校赵太做留后，诏命东北面副招讨使李绍真率兵讨伐。
English: In Zhangzhou, four hundred soldiers of the People's Liberation Army occupied the city and rebelled. After the military school Zhao Tai was elected to stay, he ordered the vice-governor of the Northeast to invite Li Shaozhen to lead the troops to fight.

古文：辛丑，元行钦至鄴都，进攻南门，以诏书招谕城中，赵在礼献羊酒劳军，登城遥拜行钦曰： 将士经年离隔父母，不取敕旨归宁，上贻圣忧，追悔何及！
现代文：十四日，元行钦到邺都，进攻南门，用诏书向城中宣告招抚，赵在礼献羊酒犒劳军士，登城向元行钦遥拜说 ：将士多年与父母分别，没有皇上命令而回家探亲，使得皇帝忧虑，我们追悔莫及！
English: On the 14th, Yuan Xingqin went to Shidu, attacked the South Gate, and announced the invitation to the city with an imperial edict. Zhao offered mutton wine and labor to the sergeant, and went to the city to pay homage to Yuan Xingqin, saying: The soldiers have been separated from their parents for many years, and they have come home to visit their relatives without the emperor's order, which has made the emperor worried. We can't regret it!

古文：傥公善为敷奏，俾从涣汗，某等亦不敢不改过自新。 
现代文：如果您能好言向上禀报，使皇帝发号令，我们也不敢不改过自新。 
English: If you can kindly report to the emperor, so that the emperor issues an order, we dare not fail to reform.

古文：行钦曰： 上以汝辈有社稷功，必行赦宥。 
现代文：元行钦说 ：皇上因你们有保卫社稷之功，必然宽恕。 
English: Yuan Xingqin said, "The Emperor will surely forgive you because you have done so much to defend the society."

古文：因以诏书谕之。
现代文：因而把诏书给他。
English: So he gave him the imperial edict.

古文：皇甫晖聚众大诟，即坏诏。
现代文：皇甫晖聚众大骂，撕坏诏书。
English: The emperor's father-in-law gathered everyone together to curse and tear up the imperial edict.

古文：行钦以闻，帝怒曰： 收城之日，勿遗噍类！ 
现代文：元行钦把此事告诉庄宗，庄宗大怒说： 收复邺城之时，不要留下这些人。 
English: Yuan Xingqin told Zhuangzong about this, and Zhuangzong said angrily, "Don't leave these people behind when you recapture Lucheng."

古文：壬寅，行钦自鄴退军，保澶州。
现代文：十五日，元行钦自邺都退军，保卫澶州。
English: On the 15th, Yuan Xingqin withdrew his troops from Zhangdu to defend Zhangzhou.

古文：诏河中节度使、永王存霸归籓。
现代文：十七日，从马直宿卫军士王温等五人半夜谋乱，杀本军使，被卫兵抓住，在本军军门碎尸。
English: On the 17th, five people including Wang Wen, a guard sergeant from Ma Zhiju, plotted a riot in the middle of the night, killed the envoy, were caught by the guards, and dismembered the corpse at the military gate of the army.

古文：己酉，以枢密使宋唐玉为特进、左威卫上将军，充宣徽南院使。庚戌，诸军大集于鄴都，进攻其城，不克。
现代文：二十日，邺都行营招抚使元行钦率各道军队再次进攻邺都。二十一日，诏命河中节度使、永王李存霸回其藩地。二十三日，各军在邺都大会师，进攻邺城，没攻下。
English: On the 20th, Yuan Xingqin led the troops of various provinces to attack Shidu again. On the 21st, Yongwang Li Cunha, the envoy of the Central Party Committee, was ordered to return to his domain. On the 23rd, the troops in Shidu attacked Shicheng, but failed to capture it.

古文：行钦又大治攻具。
现代文：元行钦又大力准备攻城器具。
English: Yuan Xingqin also made great efforts to prepare siege equipment.

古文：城中知其无赦，昼夜为备。
现代文：城中知道不会被宽恕，昼夜防备。
English: The city knows it will not be forgiven, and is on guard day and night.

古文：朝廷闻之益恐，连发中使促继岌西征之师。
现代文：朝廷听说更加恐慌，连着派出朝中使者催促李继岌的西征军队。
English: Hearing of this, the imperial court panicked even more, and dispatched envoys from both North Korea and China to urge Li Jizhong's beleaguered Western Expedition army.

古文：继岌以康延孝据汉州，中军之士从任圜进讨，继岌端居利州，不获东归。
现代文：李继岌因康延孝占据汉州，派中军士兵随任圜进讨，他自己居守利州，不能东归。
English: Because of Kang Yanxiao's occupation of Hanzhou, Li Jizhe sent soldiers from the Chinese army to accompany him. He himself stayed in Lizhou and could not return to the east.

古文：东川董璋奏，准诏诛遂州节度使李令德于本州，夷其族。
现代文：这一天，飞龙使颜思威带领西川宫人来到。二十四日，淮南杨溥派使者进贡土产。西京报告，客省使李严押送蜀主王衍到本府。二十五日，东川董璋上奏，请下诏在本州杀死遂州节度使李令德和其全族人。
English: On the 24th, Huainan Yang Di sent an envoy to pay tribute to local products. Xijing reported that Li Yan, the guest provincial envoy, sent Wang Yan, the lord of Shu, to the capital. On the 25th, Dongchuan Dong Di made a speech, asking the emperor to kill Li Lingde, the Suizhou festival envoy, and his entire family in Hanzhou.

古文：癸丑，湖南马殷奏，福建节度使王审知疾甚，副使王延翰已权知军府事，请降旄节。
现代文：二十六日，湖南马殷报告，福建节度使王审知病重，副使王延翰已临时接管军府事务，请授予旗帜符节。
English: On the 26th, Hunan Ma Yin reported that the Fujian Festival had made Wang Xizhi seriously ill, and the deputy envoy Wang Yanhan had temporarily taken over the affairs of the military department. Please grant the flag festival.

古文：司天监上言：自二月上旬后，昼夜阴云，不见天象，自二十六日方晴，至月终，星辰无变。
现代文：司天监报告：自二月上旬后，昼夜阴云，不见天象，到二十六日才晴，到月底，星辰没变化。
English: From the beginning of February onwards, day and night were cloudy, and no celestial objects were seen. It did not become clear until the 26th, and by the end of the month, the stars had not changed.

古文：以右卫上将军硃汉宾知河南府事。甲辰，命蕃汉总管李嗣源统亲军赴鄴都，以讨赵在礼。
现代文：二十七日，命令蕃汉总管李嗣源统帅亲军奔赴邺都，以讨伐赵在礼。
English: On the 27th, he ordered the commander-in-chief of the Shihans, Li Siyuan, to rush to the capital to fight Zhao Zaili.

古文：帝素倚爱元行钦，鄴城军乱，即命为行营招讨使，久而无功。
现代文：庄宗一直倚重喜爱元行钦，邺城军乱，便任命为行营招讨使，他却久而无功。
English: Zhuangzong had always been fond of Yuan Xingqin. When the Lucheng Rebellion broke out, he was appointed as an envoy to the battlefield, but he did not succeed for a long time.

古文：时赵太据邢州，王景戡据沧州，自为留后，河朔郡邑多杀长吏。
现代文：此时赵太占据邢州，王景戡占据沧州，自任为留后，河朔郡邑多有官吏被杀。
English: At this time, Zhao Tai occupied Zhangzhou, Wang Jingyao occupied Cangzhou, and many officials in Heshuo County were killed after staying in their posts.

古文：帝欲亲征，枢密使与宰臣奏言： 京师者，天下根本，虽四方有变，陛下宜居中以制之，但命将出征，无烦躬御士伍。 
现代文：庄宗想亲自出征，枢密使和宰臣上奏说： 京师是天下根本，虽然四方有变乱，陛下应居中以制之，只须命将军出征，不必亲自带兵。 
English: When Zhuangzong wanted to go to war in person, the imperial envoy and the vice-minister sent a message to the emperor, saying, "The Beijing division is the foundation of the world. Although there are upheavals in the four directions, Your Majesty should stay in the middle to control them. You only need to order the general to go to war, and you do not need to personally lead the soldiers.

古文：帝曰： 绍荣讨乱未有成功，继岌之军尚留巴、汉，余无可将者，断在自行。 
现代文：庄宗说： 元行钦讨伐叛乱没有成功，李继岌的军队还留在巴蜀、汉中，其余没有可使用的将军，只有我自己统帅军队了。 
English: Zhuangzong said, "The counter-insurgency against the Yuan and Qin Dynasties did not succeed. Li Jizhe's army still remained in Bashu and Hanzhong. The rest had no usable generals, and I was left in command of the army.

古文：枢密使李绍宏等奏曰： 陛下以谋臣猛将取天下，今一州之乱而云无可将者，何也？
现代文：枢密使李绍宏等说 ：陛下以谋臣猛将取得天下，现在一州之乱就说没有将军了，是为什么呢？
English: The confidential envoy Li Shaohong and others said, "His Majesty will conquer the world with the help of his advisors. Now, after the Yizhou Rebellion, it is said that there are no generals. Why?

古文：总管李嗣源是陛下宗臣，创业已来，艰难百战，何城不下，何贼不平，威略之名，振于夷夏，以臣等筹之，若委以专征，鄴城之寇，不足平也！ 
现代文：总管李嗣源是陛下同宗武臣，创业以来，艰难百战，哪座城没攻下？
English: The general manager, Li Siyuan, is a samurai retainer from the same family as His Majesty. Since starting the business, he has been through a hundred difficult battles. Which city has he not conquered?

古文：帝素宽大容纳，无疑于物，自诛郭崇韬、硃友谦之后，阉宦伶官交相谗谄，邦国大事皆听其谋，繇是渐多猜惑，不欲大臣典兵，既闻奏议，乃曰： 予恃嗣源侍卫，卿当择其次者。 又奏曰： 以臣等料之，非嗣源不可。 
现代文：哪处贼兵没平定？威武之名，震于中外，按我们的设想，如委任他征讨，邺城贼兵一定能平定。 庄宗平时宽宏大度，不疑他们，自从杀郭崇韬、朱友谦之后，宦官伶官交相谗谄，国家大事都听这些人的话，于是渐渐有了猜忌之心，不想让大臣带兵，听了奏议后说 ：我靠李嗣源保卫，你们再选别人。 又上奏说 ：按我们的意思，非李嗣源不可。 
English: Zhuangzong was usually magnanimous, and did not doubt them. Ever since Guo Chongtao and Zhu Youqian were killed, eunuchs and eunuchs have been at loggerheads with each other, and national affairs have been dictated by these people. Therefore, he gradually became suspicious and did not want the minister to lead the troops. After listening to the report, he said, "I rely on Li Siyuan to defend, you should choose someone else." He also said, "According to our will, it must be Li Siyuan."

古文：河南尹张全义亦奏云： 河朔多事，久则患生，宜令总管进兵。
现代文：河南尹张全义也上奏说： 河朔多事，拖久了则生祸患，应令总管进兵。
English: Yin Zhang Quanyi of Henan Province also made a report, saying: "The river is full of troubles, and if it is delayed, it will cause disasters. The general manager should be ordered to enter the army."

古文：如倚李绍荣辈，未见其功。 
现代文：如依靠李绍荣等人，不见成功。 
English: If you rely on Li Shaorong and others, you will not succeed.

古文：帝乃命嗣源行营。
现代文：庄宗于是命李嗣源带兵行进。
English: So Zhuangzong ordered Li Siyuan to march with the troops.

古文：是日，延州知州白彦琛奏，绥、银兵士剽州城谋叛。
现代文：这一天，延州知州白彦琛上奏，绥、银二地士兵抢掠州城谋叛。
English: On this day, soldiers from Yanzhou, Chizhou, Baiyan and Yin provinces plundered the city of Chizhou and plotted to rebel.

古文：庚戌，李绍真自邢州赴鄴都城下。
现代文：魏王李继岌送装有郭崇韬父子头颅的盒子到宫门，诏令张全义收下埋掉。
English: The Wei king, Li Jie, sent a box containing the heads of Guo Chongyao and his son to the palace gate, and ordered Zhang Quanyi to take it and bury it.

古文：辛亥，以威武军节度副使、福建管内都指挥使、检校太傅、守江州刺史王延翰为福建节度使，依前检校太傅。壬子，李嗣源领军至鄴都，营于西南隅。甲寅，进营于观音门外，下令诸军，诘旦攻城。
现代文：三月一日，李绍真报告，收复邢州，擒获贼首赵太等二十一人，押到邺都城下示众，然后都在军门杀掉碎尸。四日，李绍真自邢州赴邺都城下。六日，李嗣源率领大军到邺都，在西南角扎营，八日，又进军到观营门外扎营，下令各军天亮攻城。
English: On March 1, Li Shaozhen reported that he had recovered Ganzhou and captured twenty-one people, including the head of the thieves, Zhao Tai, and pushed them to the outskirts of Ganzhou to demonstrate, and then killed the broken bodies at the military gate. On the 4th, Li Shaozhen went from Ganzhou to the outskirts of Ganzhou. On the 6th, Li Siyuan led a large army to Ganzhou and camped in the southwest corner. On the 8th, he marched into the camp outside the camp gate and ordered the army to attack the city at dawn.

古文：是夜，城下军乱，迫嗣源为帝。
现代文：这一夜，城下军队作乱，逼李嗣源做皇帝。
English: That night, the troops under the city rioted and forced Li Siyuan to become emperor.

古文：迟明，乱军拥嗣源及霍彦威入于鄴城，复为皇甫晖、赵进等所胁，嗣源以诡词得出，夜分至魏县。
现代文：天亮以后，乱军拥着李嗣源和霍彦威进入邺城，又被皇甫晖等人威胁，李嗣源说假话骗他们得以出城，夜间到魏县。
English: After dawn, the rebels entered the city of Handan with Li Siyuan and Huo Yanwei in their arms. They were also threatened by Wang Fuxi and others. Li Siyuan lied to them and tricked them into leaving the city and going to Wei County at night.

古文：时嗣源遥领镇州，诘旦，议欲归籓，上章请罪，安重诲以为不可，语在《明宗纪》中。
现代文：此时李嗣源遥领镇州，天亮时，准备回到自己藩地，向庄宗上表章请罪，安重诲以为不行。第二天，就到相州。
English: At this time, Li Siyuan Yao was in charge of Zhenzhou, and at dawn, he was ready to return to his own domain and plead guilty to Zhuangzong Shangfuzhang. He thought it was impossible. The next day, he went to Xiangzhou.

古文：翼日，遂次于相州。元行钦部下兵退保卫州，以飞语上奏，嗣源一日之中遣使上章申理者数四。
现代文：元行钦部下退兵保守卫州，派人飞骑向上报告，李嗣源一天中再三再四派使者上奏章申述。
English: Yuan Xingqin's subordinates withdrew to defend Weizhou and sent messengers to report to the emperor on horseback. Li Siyuan repeatedly sent four messengers to petition the emperor.

古文：帝遣嗣源子从审与中使白从训赍诏以谕嗣源，行至卫州，从审为元行钦所械，不得达。
现代文：庄宗派李嗣源之子李从审和中使白从训带诏书告知李嗣源，走到卫州，李从审被元行钦抓住，诏书不能送到。
English: Zhuang Zongzong sent Li Siyuan's son, Li Congzhu, and the Chinese envoy, Bai Congzhu, to convey the edict to Li Siyuan. When they reached Weizhou, Li Congzhu was caught by Yuan Xingqin, and the edict could not be delivered.

古文：是日，西面行营副招讨使任圜奏，收复汉州，擒逆贼康延孝。
现代文：这一天，西门行营副招讨使任圜报告，收复汉州，擒获逆贼康延孝。
English: On this day, the deputy recruiting officer of the Ximen Camp, Ren Zheng, reported that he had recovered Hanzhou and captured the traitor Kang Yanxiao.

古文：丙辰，荆南高季兴上言，请割峡内夔、忠、万等三州却归当道，依旧管系，又请云安监。
现代文：十日，荆南高季兴上奏，请割三峡内夔、忠、万等三州复归相应的道，依以前的管辖，又请任云安监。
English: On the 10th day of the month, Jingnan Gao Ji Xing made a speech, and requested that the three counties of Yan, Zhong, and Wanzhou in the Three Gorges should be reverted to the corresponding provinces, and that Yun should be appointed as the safety inspector according to the previous jurisdiction.

古文：初，将议伐蜀，诏高季兴令率本军上峡，自收元管属郡。
现代文：早先将要计划讨伐蜀地，诏令高季兴率本军上三峡，自己收复原管属郡。
English: Early on, plans were made to invade Shu, and Gao Jixing was ordered to lead his army to the Three Gorges and recover the county that was originally under his control.

古文：军未进，夔、忠、万三州已降，季兴数请之，因赂刘皇后及宰臣枢密使，内外叶附，乃俞其请。
现代文：大军未进发，夔、忠、万三州已投降，高季兴几次请求，还贿赂刘皇后和宰臣枢密使，朝廷内外附和，庄宗才答应他的要求。
English: Zhuangzong only agreed to Gao Jixing's request after he had made several requests and bribed Empress Liu and the Vice-Minister's confidential envoy, which were supported by both inside and outside the imperial court.

古文：戊午，诏河南府预借今年秋夏租税。
现代文：十二日，下诏给河南府预借今年秋夏租税。
English: On the 12th, the government issued an order to lend this year's autumn and summer tax to Henan Province.

古文：时年饥民困，百姓不胜其酷，京畿之民，多号泣于路，议者以为刘盆子复生矣。
现代文：此时年成歉收人民困苦，百姓有受不完的残害掠夺，京城周围的人民，大都在道路上哭泣，有议论说是刘盆子再次出现了。
English: At this time, the poor harvest of the year made the people suffer, the people suffered endless damage and plunder, and the people around the capital were mostly crying on the road. Some people said that Liu Bonsi had reappeared.

古文：庚申，诏潞州节度使孔勍赴阙，以右龙虎统军安崇阮权知潞州。
现代文：十四日，诏令潞州节度使孔京力来京城，以右龙虎统军安崇阮暂管潞州。
English: On the 14th, the Bozhou Festival was decreed to make Kong Jingli come to Beijing, and An Chong Ruan, the right dragon and tiger unified army, temporarily took charge of Bozhou.

古文：是日，忠武军节度使、齐王张全义薨。
现代文：这一天，忠武军节度使、齐王张全义去世。
English: On this day, Zhang Quanyi, the king of Qi, the loyal military commander of the Qing Dynasty, died.

古文：壬戌，宰臣豆卢革率百官上表，以魏博军变，请出内府金帛优给将士。
现代文：十六日，宰臣豆卢革率百官上表章，因魏博军变乱，请拿出内府钱物优待将士。
English: On the 16th, Zai Zon Dou Lu led the revolutionaries and made hundreds of officials receive medals. Due to the Wei Bo army's mutiny, please come up with the money and material benefits of the inner government.

古文：不报。
现代文：庄宗不回答。
English: It didn't make the papers.

古文：时知星者上言： 客星犯天库，宜散府藏。 
现代文：此时懂得星象的人报告： 客星犯天库，应散发库府收藏的东西。 
English: At this time, people who understand the stars report: the guest star has violated the sky library, and the things collected by the library should be distributed.

古文：又云： 流星犯天棓，主御前有急兵。 
现代文：又说 ：流星犯天蒬，预示皇帝跟前有紧急的战事。 
English: He also said that the meteor was an act of God, foretelling that the emperor had an urgent battle ahead of him.

古文：革等惶恐而退。癸亥，以伪置昭武军节度使林思谔为阆州刺史。是日，出钱帛给赐诸军，两枢密使及宋唐玉、景进等各贡助军钱币。
现代文：庄宗召集宰臣到便殿，皇后拿出宫中妆奁银盆各两个，与皇子满哥等三人，对宰臣说 ：外面人说内府金银宝贝无数，以前诸侯进贡的东西立即又赐与出去，现在宫中所有只是妆奁、小孩而已，可以拿去供给军队。 豆卢革等人惶恐而退。十七日，拿出钱物赐给诸军，两枢密使和宋唐玉、景进等人各自拿钱供给军队。
English: Zhuang Zong summoned the aides-de-camp to the toilet, and the empress took out two pots of gold and silver from the palace, and three other people, including the prince Mango, and said to the aides-de-camp, "Outsiders say that there are countless treasures of gold and silver in the inner palace. In the past, the things that the princes paid tribute to were immediately given out, but now all the things in the palace are just makeup cases and children, and can be taken to supply the army. Zhu Ruge and others panicked and retreated. On the 17th, they took out money and gave it to the army, and the two emiss

古文：是时，军士之家乏食，妇女掇蔬于野，及优给军人，皆负物而诟曰： 吾妻子已殍矣，用此奚为！ 
现代文：此时，军士家庭缺食，妇女在野外捡野菜，等到发钱物时，都背着东西骂道： 我们妻子儿女都饿死了，发这个有什么用！ 
English: At this time, the sergeant's family was short of food, the women were picking up vegetables in the field, and when it came to handing out money, they all scolded behind their backs: Our wives and children are starving to death, what's the use of handing this out!

古文：甲子，元行钦自卫州率部下兵士归，帝幸耀店以劳之。
现代文：十八日，元行钦自卫州率部下士兵返回，庄宗到耀店慰劳他。
English: On the 18th, Yuan Xingqin returned from defending the state with soldiers under his command, and Zhuozong went to Yaodian to console him.

古文：西川辇运金银四十万至阙，分给将士有差。
现代文：西川用车运来金银四十万两到京城，按等级分给将士。
English: Nishikawa transported 400,000 taels of gold and silver to the capital by car and distributed them to the soldiers according to their ranks.

古文：元行钦请车驾幸汴州，帝将发京师，遣中官向延嗣驰诏所在诛蜀主王衍，仍夷其族。
现代文：元行钦请庄宗驾临汴州，庄宗将从京师出发，派中使官向延嗣骑马下诏给所在官员诛杀蜀主王衍及其全族人。
English: Yuan Xing invited Zhuo Zong to visit Bozhou. Zhuo Zong would depart from Beijing and send an envoy to Yan Zi on horseback to issue an order to the local officials to kill the Shu lord Wang Yan and his entire family.

古文：乙丑，车驾发京师。
现代文：十九日，车驾从京师出发。
English: On the 19th, the driver set off from Beijing.

古文：戊辰，遣元行钦将骑军沿河东向。
现代文：二十二日，派元行钦率领骑兵沿黄河向东。
English: On the 22nd, he sent Yuan Xingqin to lead the cavalry eastward along the Yellow River.

古文：壬申，帝至荥泽，以龙骧马军八百骑为前军，遣姚彦温董之。彦温行至中牟，率所部奔于汴州。
现代文：二十六日，庄宗到荥泽，以龙骧马军八百骑兵为前军，派姚彦温监管，姚彦温走到中牟，率领部下奔向汴州。
English: On the 26th, Zhuang Zong went to Heze and sent Yao Yanwen to supervise the 800 cavalrymen of the Long March Horse Army. Yao Yanwen went to Zhongmou and led his subordinates to Zhangzhou.

古文：时潘瑰守王村寨，有积粟数万，亦奔汴州。
现代文：此时潘环守卫王村寨，有储积的粮食几万，也奔向汴州。
English: At this time, Panhuan guarded Wangcunzhai, with tens of thousands of grain reserves, and also rushed to Zhangzhou.

古文：是时，李嗣源已入于汴。帝闻诸军离散，精神沮丧，至万胜镇即命旋师。
现代文：这时候，李嗣源已进入汴州，庄宗听说诸军离散，精神沮丧，到万胜镇便下令回师。
English: At this time, Li Siyuan had already entered Zhangzhou. Zhuang Zong heard that the troops had dispersed and were depressed. When he arrived at Wansheng Town, he ordered his division to return.

古文：登路旁荒冢，置酒视诸将流涕。
现代文：登上路边的荒坟，设酒看着各位将军流泪。
English: He climbed onto a roadside grave, poured himself a drink and watched the generals shed tears.

古文：俄有野人进雉，因问冢名，对曰： 里人相传为愁台。 
现代文：突然有当地人献上野鸡，便问他这座坟的名称，答道： 当地人相传叫它为愁台。 
English: Suddenly, a local offered him a pheasant and asked him the name of the grave, to which he replied: "The locals call it the Sorrowful Table."

古文：帝弥不悦，罢酒而去。
现代文：庄宗更不高兴，罢酒而去。
English: Zhuang Zong was even more displeased and went without drinking.

古文：是夜，次汜水。
现代文：这夜到汜水。
English: I'm going to Surabaya tonight.

古文：初，帝东出关，从驾兵二万五千，及复至汜水，已失万余骑。
现代文：以前庄宗出关向东，随从士兵二万五千，等到再回汜水时，已失去一万多骑兵。
English: Previously, Zhuangzong went out to the east, accompanied by twenty-five thousand soldiers. By the time he returned to Surabaya, he had lost more than ten thousand cavalry.

古文：乃留秦州都指挥使张塘以步骑三千守关。
现代文：于是留下秦州都指挥使张塘带领三千步兵骑兵守关。
English: Therefore, he left the command of Qinzhou to Zhang Tang, who led three thousand infantry and cavalry to guard the pass.

古文：帝过罂子谷，道路险狭，每遇卫士执兵仗者，皆善言抚之曰： 适报魏王继岌又进纳西川金银五十万，到京当尽给尔等。 
现代文：庄宗经过罂子谷时，道路险狭，每次遇到手持兵器的卫士，都好言抚慰道： 刚才报告说魏王李继岌又进献西川五十万金银，回到京城一定都给你们。 
English: When Zhuangzong passed through the Jiaozi Valley, the road was dangerously narrow. Every time he encountered a guard with a hand-held weapon, he was comforted with the words: Just now, it was reported that the Wei King Li Jizhe once again donated half a million gold and silver to the West River, and he would definitely give it all to you when he returned to Beijing.

古文：军士对曰： 陛下赐与大晚，人亦不感圣恩。 
现代文：军士回答 ：陛下赐给太晚，人家也不感谢你的恩典。 
English: The sergeant replied, "Your Majesty gave it too late, and people are not grateful for your grace."

古文：帝流涕而已。
现代文：庄宗只好流泪。
English: Zhuangzong had to shed tears.

古文：又索袍带赐从官，内库使张容哥对曰： 颁给已尽。 
现代文：又索要袍带赐给随从官员，内库使张容哥说 ：已颁赐完了。 
English: He also asked for robes and sashes to be given to the officials accompanying him. Zhang Rongge, the courier, said, "This has already been done."

古文：卫士叱容哥曰： 致吾君社稷不保，是此阉竖！ 
现代文：卫士叱责张容哥说 ：弄得我们皇上保不住天下的就是这个阉宦奴才！ 
English: The guards scolded Zhang Rongge and said, "It is this ruffian lackey who has made our emperor unable to save the world!"

古文：太祖叹曰： 二十年夹河战争，不能以军法约束此辈，诚兒戏。 
现代文：拔出刀来追赶他，有人救他才免于一死。张容哥对同党说 ：皇后吝惜东西不散发，军人归罪到我们，若有不测之事，到时会碎尸万段，我不愿看见这种灾祸。 因此投黄河而死。
English: Pulling out his sword to chase him, someone had to save him from certain death. Zhang Rongge said to his comrades: "The Empress is stingy and does not distribute things, the soldiers blame us, if something unexpected happens, there will be thousands of corpses, I do not want to see this kind of disaster. Therefore, I threw myself into the Yellow River and died."

古文：甲戌，次石桥，帝置酒野次，悲啼不乐，谓元行钦等诸将曰： 鄴下乱离，寇盗蜂起，总管迫于乱军，存亡未测，今讹言纷扰，朕实无聊。
现代文：二十八日，到石桥，庄宗在野外设酒，悲哭不乐，对元行钦等各位将军说： 邺下动乱离散，寇盗蜂起四出，总管被乱军逼迫，存亡难测，现在谣言纷扰，我实在无可依靠。
English: On the 28th, at Shihqiao, Zhuo Zong set up a liquor store in the open, weeping bitterly, and said to Yuan Xingqin and the other generals: "There is turmoil and disunity under my command, robbers and bandits have risen up everywhere, the general manager is being persecuted by the rebels, his survival is uncertain, and now there are rumors, I really can't be relied on.

古文：卿等事予已来，富贵急难，无不共之，今兹危蹙，赖尔筹谋，而竟默默无言，坐观成败。
现代文：你们跟随我以来，富贵危难，无不共同承受，今天的危难处境，靠你们出主意想办法，然而却默默无语，坐观成败。
English: Since you have been following me, you have shared the wealth, the wealth and the peril. Today's perilous situation depends on you to come up with ideas and find solutions. However, you are silent, watching the success or failure.

古文：予在荥泽之日，欲单骑渡河，访求总管，面为方略，招抚乱军，卿等各吐胸襟，共陈利害，今日俾予至此，卿等如何！ 
现代文：我在荥泽的时候，想独自一人渡过黄河，访求总管，当面授予方略，招抚乱军。你们各说心中的话，一起陈述利害，今天使我走到这一地步，你们又将怎么办？ 
English: When I was in Heze, I wanted to cross the Yellow River alone, visit the chief administrator, and give him a strategy in person, to entice the rebels. You each say what is in your heart, and state the interests together. Today I have come to this point, what will you do?

古文：元行钦等百余人垂泣而奏曰： 臣本小人，蒙陛下抚养，位极将相，危难之时，不能立功报主，虽死无以塞责，乞申后效，以报国恩。 
现代文：元行钦等一百多人流泪上奏说 ：我们原本是小人物，蒙陛下抚养，官位做到将相，危难时不能立功报答陛下，虽死也难以推卸责任，请允许我们申展今后的效力，以报国恩。 
English: More than a hundred people, including Yuan Xingqin, raised their voices in tears and said, "We are originally small people. We were raised by His Majesty, and we have been promoted to high-ranking positions. In times of crisis, we cannot repay His Majesty with meritorious service. Although we are dead, it is difficult to shirk our responsibilities. Please allow us to apply for future effectiveness to repay the nation's kindness."

古文：于是，百余人皆援刀截发，置须于地，以断首自誓，上下无不悲号，识者以为不祥。
现代文：于是百余人都用刀割下头发，把发髻放在地上，以断头为誓，上下无不悲伤哭泣，见此情境的人认为是不祥之兆。
English: As a result, more than a hundred people cut off their hair with a knife, put the hairpins on the ground, swore to cut off their heads, and wept with sadness. People who saw this situation thought it was an ominous sign.

古文：是日，西京留守张筠部署西征兵士到京，见于上东门外，晡晚，帝还宫。
现代文：这一天，西京留守张筠带领西征士兵到京城，庄宗在上东门外接见他们，傍晚，庄宗还宫。
English: On this day, Zhang Qian, who stayed in West Beijing, led the Western Expedition soldiers to the capital. Zhuang Zong received them outside the Upper East Gate. In the evening, Zhuang Zong returned to the palace.

古文：初，帝在汜水，卫兵散走，京师恐骇不宁，及帝至，人情稍安。
现代文：起初，庄宗在汜水，卫兵走散，京师恐惧不安，等到庄宗回来，人心稍定。
English: At first, Zhuangzong was in Surabaya, the guards dispersed, and the Beijing division was afraid and uneasy. When Zhuangzong returned, people's hearts were a little more stable.

古文：乙亥，百官进名起居。
现代文：二十九日，百官上朝奏事。
English: On the 29th, 100 officials made a report to the emperor.

古文：安义节度使孔勍奏，点校兵士防城，准诏运粮万石，进发次。
现代文：安义节度使孔京力上奏，清点士兵防守都城，请下诏运粮万石，进发都城。
English: The An'yi Festival made Kong Jingli rise to the top, clear soldiers defended the capital, please issue an edict to transport grain to the capital.

古文：时勍已杀监军使据城，诡奏也。
现代文：此时孔京力已杀监军使占据都城，所以上奏骗庄宗。
English: At this time, Kong Jingli had already killed the imperial envoy to occupy the capital, so he played the role of Zhuangzong.

古文：丙子，枢密使李绍宏与宰相豆卢革、韦说会于中兴殿之廊下，商议军机，因奏： 魏王西征兵士将至，车驾且宜控汜水，以俟魏王。 
现代文：三十日，枢密使李绍宏和宰相豆卢革、韦说在中兴殿廊下相会，商议军机，因而上奏说： 魏王西征士兵将到，陛下车驾应该到汜水，以等候魏王。 
English: On the 30th, the confidential envoy Li Shaohong and the prime ministers Dou Luge and Wei Wei met under the corridor of the Zhongxing Palace to discuss the military aircraft, and therefore reported: Wei Wang Xizheng soldiers will arrive, His Majesty's carriage should go to Surabaya to wait for Wei Wang.

古文：从之。
现代文：庄宗同意。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：午时，帝出上东门亲阅骑军，诫以诘旦东幸，申时还宫。
现代文：中午，庄宗出上东门亲自检阅骑兵，告诉说天亮去东边，下午还宫。
English: At noon, Zhuo Zong went to the east gate to personally inspect the cavalry, telling them to go to the east at dawn and return to the palace in the afternoon.

古文：四月丁丑朔，以永王存霸为北都留守，申王存渥为河中节度使。
现代文：四月一日，任永王李存霸为北都留守，任申王李存渥为河中节度使。
English: On April 1st, the Yong Wang Li Cunba stayed behind in the north, and the Shen Wang Li Cunwu stayed behind in the middle of the river.

古文：是日，车驾将发京师，从驾马军陈于宽仁门外，步兵陈于五凤门外。
现代文：这一天，车驾将从京师出发，从驾骑军在宣仁门外列阵，步兵在五凤门外列阵。
English: On this day, the cavalry will depart from the Beijing Division, the cavalry will line up outside the Xuanren Gate, and the infantry will line up outside the Wufeng Gate.

古文：帝内殿食次，从马直指挥使郭从谦自本营率所部抽戈露刃，至兴教门大呼，与黄甲两军引弓射兴教门。
现代文：庄宗在内殿进食，从马直指挥使郭从谦自本营率领部下抽戈带刀，到兴教门大喊，和黄甲两军用箭射兴教门。
English: Zhuangzong ate in the inner hall. Ma Zhi commanded Guo Ziqian to lead his men from the base camp to draw a sword, shout to the Xingjia Gate, and shoot arrows at the Xingjia Gate with the Yellow Army.

古文：帝闻其变，自宫中率诸王近卫御之，逐乱兵出门。
现代文：庄宗听说有变乱，从宫中率诸王近卫抵抗，把乱兵赶出门。
English: When Zhuangzong heard that there was a disturbance, he led the royal guards from the palace to resist and drive the disorderly soldiers out of the gate.

古文：《东都事略·符彦卿传》云：郭从谦之乱，庄宗左右皆引去，惟彦卿力战，杀十余人。庄宗崩，彦卿恸哭而去。
现代文：不久敌军焚烧兴教门，翻过城墙而入，登上宫墙呼叫，庄宗带领亲军格斗，杀死乱兵数百。突然庄宗被流矢射中，中午，在绛霄殿廊下驾崩，享年四十三岁。
English: Soon after, the enemy army set fire to the Xingjia Gate, climbed over the city wall and entered the palace, and ascended the palace wall to shout. Zhuangzong led the pro-army to fight, killing hundreds of soldiers. Suddenly, Zhuangzong was hit by a stream of arrows, and at noon, he died under the corridor of the Xingxiao Palace, at the age of forty-three.

古文：是时，帝之左右例皆奔散，唯五坊人善友敛廓下乐器簇于帝尸之上，发火焚之。及明宗入洛，止得其烬骨而已。
现代文：这时，庄宗身旁的人都四处奔散，只有五坊人善友，收集廊下乐器堆在庄宗尸体上，点火烧掉，等明宗进入洛阳，仅得骨灰而已。
English: At this time, the people around Zhuangzong were scattered everywhere, and only five good friends gathered the musical instruments from the corridor and piled them on Zhuangzong's corpse, lit a fire and burned them. When Mingzong entered Luoyang, he only got the ashes.

古文：天成元年七月丁卯，有司上谥曰光圣神闵孝皇帝，庙号庄宗。
现代文：天成元年七月十三日，有关官员上谥号尊为光圣神闵孝皇帝，庙号为庄宗。
English: On July 13th of the first year of Tiancheng, the officials concerned changed their names to Emperor Guang Sheng and Emperor Jiao Xiao, and the temple's name to Zhuangzong.

古文：是月丙子，葬于雍陵。
现代文：这个月二十二日，葬于雍陵。
English: On the 22nd of this month, he was buried in Yongling.

