古文：是仪字子羽，北海营陵人也。
现代文：是仪，字子羽，北海营陵人。
English: It is Yi, Zi Zi Yu, Beihai Yingling Ren.

古文：本姓氏，初为县吏，后仕郡，郡相孔融嘲仪，言 氏 字 民 无上，可改为 是 ，乃遂改焉。
现代文：他本姓 氏 ，起初作过县吏，后在郡里任职，郡相孔融嘲笑他，说 氏 字是 民 无上，可改为 是 ，于是就改了姓。
English: His original family name was 氏, at first he was a county official, and later he served in the county. The county magistrate, Kong Rong, mocked him, saying that 氏 was the highest among the people and could be changed to Yes, so he changed his family name.

古文：后依刘繇，避乱江东。
现代文：是仪后来投靠刘繇，到江东躲避战乱。
English: Afterward, Ziyi defected to Liu Bei and went to the east of the Yangtze River to escape the war.

古文：繇军败，仪徙会稽。
现代文：刘繇军队战败，是仪迁居会稽。
English: The defeat of Liu Bei's army is the climax of the ceremony of moving in.

古文：孙权承摄大业，优文徵仪。到见亲任，专典机密，拜骑都尉。
现代文：孙权登基掌权，用文辞优美的诏书征召是仪，是仪到后被孙权信赖倚重，专门掌管机要事务，担任骑都尉。
English: When Sun Quan ascended to the throne and assumed power, he used a beautifully worded imperial edict to conscript Jie Yi. After Jie Yi arrived, he was trusted and relied on by Sun Quan, and was specifically in charge of important affairs, serving as a cavalry captain.

古文：吕蒙图袭关羽，权以问仪，仪善其计，劝权听之。
现代文：吕蒙密谋袭取关羽，孙权将此事征询是仪，是仪赞同吕蒙的计谋，劝孙权采纳其计。
English: Lv Meng plotted to attack Guan Yu, and Sun Quan asked Ji for advice. Ji agreed with Lv Meng's plan and advised Sun Quan to adopt it.

古文：从讨羽，拜忠义校尉。
现代文：是仪跟随孙权征讨关羽，被任命为忠义校尉。
English: Following Sun Quan's enlistment of Guan Yu, Ziyi was appointed as a loyal lieutenant.

古文：仪陈谢，权令曰： 孤虽非赵简子，卿安得不自屈为周舍邪？ 
现代文：是仪陈词拜谢，孙权命令说： 我虽然不是古代的赵简子，您怎就不委曲自己作一个周舍呢? 
English: After bowing in thanks, Sun Quan ordered, "Although I am not the ancient Zhao Jianzi, why don't you commission yourself to build a house?

古文：既定荆州，都武昌，拜裨将军，后封都亭侯，守侍中。
现代文：荆州被平定后，东吴迁都武昌，是仪被授任裨将军，后封爵都亭侯，暂时主理侍中。
English: After Jingzhou was subdued, the capital of Eastern Wu was moved to Wuchang, and Jieyi was awarded the title of General, and later he was given the title of Duke of Tientsin, temporarily acting as the head of the court.

古文：欲复授兵，仪自以非材，固辞不受。
现代文：孙权想再授予他以部队，是仪自以为不是统领军队的人才，坚决推辞不接受。
English: Sun Quan wanted to award him with more troops, but Yi thought that he was not the talent to command the army, and he firmly refused to accept.

古文：黄武中，遣仪之皖就将军刘邵，欲诱致曹休。
现代文：黄武年间，孙权派遣是仪前往皖城到将军刘邵部下任职，想招诱曹休到来。
English: During the Huangwu era, Sun Quan dispatched Ji to Shicheng to serve under General Liu Shao, hoping to entice Cao Xiu to come.

古文：休到，大破之，迁偏将军，入阙省尚书事，外总平诸官，兼领辞讼，又令教诸公子书学。
现代文：曹休来后，被吴军打得大败，是仪被提升为偏将军，入朝总管尚书事，并管理朝廷外各官员，兼理诉讼事宜。孙权又令他教导众公子读书学习。
English: After Cao Xiu's arrival, he was soundly defeated by the Wu army. He was promoted to the rank of general, and became the head of the imperial office in charge of bookkeeping, as well as managing officials outside the imperial court and handling litigation matters. Sun Quan also ordered him to teach the nobles to read and study.

古文：大驾东迁，太子登留镇武昌，使仪辅太子。
现代文：孙权东迁京都到建业，太子孙登留下镇守武昌，是仪被派留下辅助太子。
English: Sun Quan moved Kyoto to Jianye, Prince Sun Deng remained as the town guard of Wuchang, and Ji was sent to stay as an assistant prince.

古文：太子敬之，事先谘询，然后施行。
现代文：太子非常敬重他，有事都先征询他意见，然后才实施推行。
English: The prince holds him in high esteem and consults him before implementing anything.

古文：进封都乡侯。
现代文：是仪被晋封为都乡侯。
English: Yes, I was promoted to the post of capital township mayor.

古文：后从太子还建业，复拜侍中、中执法，平诸官事、领辞讼如旧。
现代文：后来他跟随太子返回建业，再被授予侍中、中执法，主管各宫事务，依旧兼管诉讼。
English: Later, he followed the crown prince back to Jianye, and was then awarded the position of chamberlain and law enforcement officer, in charge of palace affairs, and still in charge of litigation.

古文：典校郎吕壹诬白故江夏太守刁嘉谤讪国政，权怒，收嘉系狱，悉验问。
现代文：典校郎吕壹诬告谗毁原江夏太守刁嘉谗言诽谤国家政事，孙权大怒，将刁嘉收押关进监狱，详细审问查验。
English: Sun Quan was enraged by the false accusation of the former Empress Dowager of the Jiangxi Province, Sun Jia, who was falsely accused of slandering the country's political affairs. Sun Quan detained Sun Jia in prison and interrogated him in detail.

古文：时同坐人皆怖畏壹，并言闻之，仪独云无闻。
现代文：当时与此事有关系的人都畏惧吕壹，并都说听到过刁嘉说了那些话，唯独是仪说没有听说过。
English: At that time, people who had something to do with the matter were afraid of Lü Yi, and they all said that they had heard Gong Jia say those words, except for Yi, who said that he had not heard of it.

古文：於是见穷诘累日，诏旨转厉，群臣为之屏息。
现代文：于是是仪被连续审讯多日，孙权下旨要严厉审问，大臣们都为此恐惧沉默。
English: As a result, Korechika was interrogated for several days in a row. Sun Quan ordered that he be severely interrogated, and the ministers were silent out of fear.

古文：仪对曰： 今刀锯已在臣颈，臣何敢为嘉隐讳，自取夷灭，为不忠之鬼！
现代文：是仪回答说： 如今刀锯已架在我的脖子上，我哪敢替刁嘉隐瞒实情，而自取灭族之祸，成为不忠之鬼呢?
English: "Now that the knife and saw are around my neck, how can I hide the truth for Gong Jia and become an unfaithful ghost?"

古文：顾以闻知当有本末。 据实答问，辞不倾移。
现代文：只是为了让陛下了解这件事的来龙去脉。 他根据实情回答，言辞毫无改变。
English: It was just to let His Majesty know the background of the matter, and he answered truthfully, and his words did not change.

古文：权遂舍之，嘉亦得免。
现代文：孙权就放弃对他的审问，刁嘉也得以释放。
English: Sun Quan gave up interrogating him, and Gong Jia was also released.

古文：蜀相诸葛亮卒，权垂心西州，遣仪使蜀申固盟好。
现代文：蜀国丞相诸葛亮去世，孙权关心蜀国情况，派遣是仪出使蜀国与其巩固结盟友好关系。
English: When Zhuge Liang, the prime minister of Shu, died, Sun Quan was concerned about the situation in Shu. He sent an envoy to Shu to consolidate the alliance and friendly relations.

古文：奉使称意，后拜尚书仆射。
现代文：是仪作为使节的言行举止很合孙权心意，后被任命为尚书仆射。
English: As an envoy, Korei's words, deeds, and behavior were very much in line with Sun Quan's intentions, and he was later appointed as Shang Shu's lackey.

古文：南、鲁二宫初立，仪以本职领鲁王傅。
现代文：南阳王孙和、鲁王孙霸刚被册立，是仪以本职任兼任鲁王傅。
English: Nanyang King Sunwa and Lu King Sunba had just been enthroned, and it was Ji who concurrently served as Lu King Fu.

古文：仪嫌二宫相近切，乃上疏曰： 臣窃以鲁王天挺懿德，兼资文武，当今之宜，宜镇四方，为国藩辅。
现代文：是仪对二宫地址相距太近不以为然，就上疏说： 为臣私下认为鲁王天资卓群勤修美德，文武兼备，现在适宜的安排，是让他镇守四方，作为国家的藩篱屏障。
English: Disapproving of the fact that the addresses of the two palaces were too close to each other, Korei said to Joso: Privately, my vassal thinks that Lu Wang Tianzhuoqun is diligent in cultivating virtue, both literary and military, and the most appropriate arrangement now is to have him guard the four directions as a national barrier.

古文：宣扬德美，广耀威灵，乃国家之良规，海内所瞻望。
现代文：宣扬美好德行，广泛显耀威信，这是国家的优良传统，天下百姓共同仰望的。
English: It is the fine tradition of the country to propagate fine virtues and widely display prestige, which is looked up to by the people all over the world.

古文：但臣言辞鄙野，不能究尽其意。
现代文：只是为臣言辞粗疏，不能完整地表达想法。
English: It's just that his words are coarse and he can't fully express his thoughts.

古文：愚以二宫宜有降杀，正上下之序，明教化之本。 
现代文：我认为二宫应当有所抑制，纠正上下顺序，宣明教化根本。 
English: I think the second palace should be restrained, correct the order of the top and bottom, and promote enlightenment.

古文：书三四上。
现代文：他接连上书三四次。
English: He wrote three or four times in succession.

古文：为傅尽忠，动辄规谏；事上勤，与人恭。
现代文：他作为王傅忠心耿耿，时常加以规劝;对上奉事勤谨，与人相交恭敬。
English: As the king's tutor, he was devoted to loyalty, often exhorting; he was diligent in his duties to superiors, and respectful in his dealings with others.

古文：不治产业，不受施惠，为屋舍财足自容。
现代文：从不经营产业，不接受别人的施惠，房舍财物能供给日常生活就行。
English: Never run an industry, do not accept favors from others, and only provide housing and property for daily life.

古文：邻家有起大宅者，权出望见，问起大室者谁，左右对曰： 似是仪家也。 
现代文：邻居有人修建大宅，孙权出行望见，问这大宅是谁的，身边随从回答说： 似乎是是仪家。 
English: A neighbor had someone build a big house. Sun Quan asked who the owner of the big house was. The attendant replied, "It seems to be the family of Yi."

古文：权曰： 仪俭，必非也。 
现代文：孙权说： 是仪俭朴，一定不是他。 
English: Sun Quan said, "If he is frugal and simple, it must not be him."

古文：问果他家。
现代文：问之后果然是别人家。
English: After asking, it turned out to be someone else's house.

古文：其见知信如此。
现代文：他受孙权的信任与了解到如此程度。
English: That's how much he was trusted and understood by Sun Quan.

古文：服不精细，食不重膳，拯赡贫困，家无储畜。
现代文：是仪衣着不精制，饮食不注重奢华，乐于赈济赡养贫困之人，家中无什么储蓄。
English: They dress immaculately, their diet does not focus on luxury, they are happy to support the poor, and there is little savings at home.

古文：权闻之，幸仪舍，求视蔬饭，亲尝之，对之叹息，即增俸赐，益田宅。
现代文：孙权得知后，亲自到他家，要求看看他家吃的饭菜，并亲口尝过，对此深为叹息，当即增加是仪的俸禄和赏赐，增广他的田地住宅。
English: When Sun Quan learned of this, he personally went to his house and asked to see the food his family ate, and tasted it himself. He was deeply saddened by this, and immediately increased Koregi's salary and reward, and expanded his field residence.

古文：仪累辞让，以恩为戚。
现代文：是仪多次推辞谢绝，因这种恩惠而心中不安。
English: Ji Ji repeatedly declined the offer, feeling uneasy because of the favor.

古文：时时有所进达，未尝言人之短。
现代文：他时常举荐人才进献计策，从未说过别人不足。
English: He often recommends talents to contribute strategies, and has never said that others are not enough.

古文：权常责仪以不言事，无所是非，仪对曰： 圣主在上，臣下守职，惧於不称，实不敢以愚管之言，上干天听。 
现代文：孙权常责备他不谈论政事，没有是非，是仪回答说： 圣明君主在上，为臣尽忠职守，担心不能胜任职位，实在不敢以愚笨的劣见看法，来干扰陛下视听。 
English: Sun Quan often reproached him for not talking about political affairs, there is no right or wrong, and Ziyi replied: The sacred monarch is above, he is loyal to his duties as a vassal, he is worried that he is not qualified for the position, and he really does not dare to interfere with His Majesty's viewing and listening with stupid and inferior opinions.

古文：事国数十年，未尝有过。
现代文：他担任国家公职几十年，未曾有所错漏。
English: He has served as a national public official for decades and has never made a mistake.

古文：吕壹历白将相大臣，或一人以罪闻者数四，独无以白仪。
现代文：吕壹多次诬陷告发将相大臣，有的人竟被他告发有罪达四次之多，唯独没有借口告发是仪。
English: Lu I repeatedly framed and accused the minister of generals and ministers, and some people were actually accused by him as many as four times. However, there is no excuse for the accusation.

古文：权叹曰： 使人尽如是仪，当安用科法为？ 
现代文：孙权感叹说： 如果人人都像是仪那样，还到哪里去施用律令条文呢? 
English: Sun Quan sighed and said, "If everyone is like Yi, where else can the provisions of the ritsuryo code be applied?

古文：及寝疾，遗令素棺，敛以时服，务从省约，年八十一卒。
现代文：等到是仪重病卧床，他留下遗嘱要求用一般棺木安葬，穿戴平时衣服入殓，务必节省简约。八十一岁时去世。
English: When he was gravely ill in bed, he left a will requesting that he be buried in an ordinary coffin and that he be dressed in his regular clothes for burial. It was important to keep things simple. He died at the age of 81.

古文：胡综字伟则，汝南固始人也。
现代文：胡综，字伟则，汝南郡固始县人。
English: Hu Zimin, Zi Wei Ze, from Gushi County, Runan County.

古文：少孤，母将避难江东。
现代文：他小时候父亲就去世，母亲带着他到江东避乱。
English: His father died when he was a child, and his mother took him to the eastern part of the Yangtze River to escape the turmoil.

古文：孙策领会稽太守，综年十四，为门下循行，留吴与孙权共读书。
现代文：孙策兼任会稽太守，胡综十四岁，是他门下循行，留在吴地和孙权一同读书。
English: Sun Ce concurrently served as the auditor-general of the association. Hu Zi, who was 14 years old, followed his footsteps and stayed in Wudi to study with Sun Quan.

古文：策薨，权为讨虏将军，以综为金曹从事，从讨黄祖，拜鄂长。
现代文：孙策去世，孙权担任讨虏将军，任命胡综为金曹从事，跟随大军征讨黄祖，任鄂县县长。
English: After Sun Ce's death, Sun Quan appointed Hu Zong as the general in charge of conquering the enemy, appointed Hu Zong as the general in charge of conquering Jin Cao, followed the great army in conquering Huang Zu, and served as the governor of E County.

古文：权为车骑将军，都京，召综还，为书部，与是仪、徐详俱典军国密事。
现代文：孙权为车骑将军，以京口城为首府，征召胡综回京，任职书部，与是仪、徐详一同主理军国机密事宜。
English: With Sun Quan as the general of cavalry and chariots, and Jingkou City as the capital, Hu Siming was summoned back to Beijing to serve as the secretary, and was in charge of military and state secrets together with Zeyi and Xu Jie.

古文：刘备下白帝，权以见兵少，使综料诸县，得六千人，立解烦两部，详领左部、综领右部督。
现代文：刘备出兵到白帝城，孙权因为现有兵少，派胡综到各县征选士兵，得到六千人，建立解烦兵左、右两部，徐详兼任左部督，胡综兼任右部督。
English: Liu Bei dispatched troops to Baidicheng, Sun Quan, because of the small number of existing soldiers, sent Hu Zong to each county to recruit soldiers, got six thousand people, established two departments to solve the troubles of soldiers left and right, Xu Jie concurrently served as the left governor, Hu Zong concurrently served as the right governor.

古文：吴将晋宗叛归魏，魏以宗为蕲春太守，去江数百里，数为寇害。权使综与贺齐轻行掩袭，生虏得宗，加建武中郎将。
现代文：吴将晋宗叛吴归降附魏国，魏国任命晋宗为蕲春太守，距离长江几百里处，多次进犯吴国，孙权派胡综与贺齐轻装疾行突袭，生擒晋宗，胡综被加授建武中郎将。
English: Wu made Jinzong, a traitor to Wu, surrender to Wei. Wei appointed Jinzong as the governor of Hunchun, several hundred miles away from the Yangtze River. He repeatedly invaded Wu. Sun Quan sent Hu Zong and He Qi to make a surprise attack in light armor. Jinzong was still alive, and Hu Zong was given the additional title of Jian Wuzhong.

古文：魏拜权为吴王，封综、仪、详皆为亭侯。
现代文：魏国授予孙权为吴王，胡综、是仪、徐详都被封为亭侯。
English: The State of Wei granted Sun Quan the title of King of Wu, and Hu Siming, Ze Yi, and Xu Zhe were all made princes.

古文：黄武八年夏，黄龙见夏口，於是权称尊号，因瑞改元。
现代文：黄武八年夏，有黄龙在夏口出现，于是孙权称帝登基，因出现祥瑞而更改年号。
English: In the summer of the eighth year of Huangwu, a yellow dragon appeared in Xiakou, so Sun Quan claimed to be enthroned, and changed the year because of the appearance of Xiang Rui.

古文：又作黄龙大牙，常在中军，诸军进退，视其所向，命综作赋曰：
现代文：又制作黄龙大牙旗，常竖在中军，各军进退，都看大旗指向而行动，孙权为此命令胡综作赋为：
English: He also made the Yellow Dragon Big Tooth Flag, which was often erected in the Chinese army, and each army advanced and retreated according to the direction of the big flag. Sun Quan ordered Hu Zong to make it as follows:

古文：乾坤肇立，三才是生。
现代文： 乾坤初立，天地人因此出现。
English: At the dawn of time, the heavens and the earth came into being.

古文：狼弧垂象，实惟兵精。
现代文：天狼星显示星象，实是表示军队精精良。
English: The star Sirius, which shows the constellations, is actually a sign of a well-trained army.

古文：圣人观法，是效是营，始作器械，爰求厥成。
现代文：圣人观察自然规律，借此效仿经营，开始制作器械，以此求得成功。
English: The sage observed the laws of nature and used this to emulate business and began to make instruments in order to achieve success.

古文：黄、农创代，拓定皇基，上顺天心，下息民灾。
现代文：黄帝、神农开创人类朝代，开拓奠定皇家基业，对上顺应天意，对下消除百姓灾祸。
English: The Yellow Emperor and Shennong initiated human dynasties, pioneered and laid the royal foundation, complied with the will of heaven on the one hand, and eliminated the people's disasters on the other hand.

古文：高辛诛共，舜征有苗，启有甘师，汤有鸣条。
现代文：帝高辛诛杀共工，帝虞舜征讨有苗，夏启在甘地讨伐有扈氏，商汤在鸣条攻破夏桀。
English: Emperor Gao and Emperor Xin fought and killed co-workers, Emperor Yu and Emperor Xu fought and defeated the Miao, Emperor Xia and Emperor Qi fought and defeated the Qiang in the Battle of Gandia, and Emperor Shang and Emperor Tang fought and defeated the Xia and Qiang in the Battle of Mingtiao.

古文：周之牧野，汉之垓下，靡不由兵，克定厥绪。
现代文：周武王在牧野攻破商纣，汉高祖在垓下消灭项籍，如此种种无不依靠大军，因战争才建起功业。
English: King Zhou Wu defeated the merchants in Makino, and Emperor Gaozu eliminated the merchants under his command. All of these things depended on large armies, and they were only possible because of the war.

古文：明明大吴，实天生德，神武是经，惟皇之极。
现代文：光辉耀耀大吴国，有此基业实在是上天降德，神圣威武治理天下，一切都依赖上天法则。
English: The glory and grandeur of the State of Wu, with this foundation, is really the descent of virtue from heaven, the divine and mighty governance of the world, and everything depends on the law of heaven.

古文：乃自在昔，黄、虞是祖，越历五代，继世在下。
现代文：于是从远古开始，黄帝、虞舜是开创帝业的祖先，经历五个朝代，一直传到今天。
English: As a result, from ancient times, the Yellow Emperor and Emperor Yu were the ancestors who pioneered the empire, experienced five dynasties, and have been passed down to this day.

古文：应期受命，发迹南土，将恢大繇，革我区夏。
现代文：大吴应合运数承受天命，从南国土地发迹，将恢复圣贤大道，使华夏朝代重新交替延续。
English: The Great Wu should carry out the number of transports to bear the destiny of heaven, from the land of the south, will restore the sage road, and make the Huaxia Dynasty alternate and continue.

古文：乃律天时，制为神军，取象太一，五将三门；疾则如电，迟则如云，进止有度，约而不烦。
现代文：于是遵循天理，设置神圣部队，取象太一运行，设置五将镇守三门;行动快速好似闪电，行动缓慢犹如彩云，前进停止均有法度，精练简明而不繁琐。
English: So, in accordance with the principles of heaven, the sacred troops were set up, and the five generals were set up to guard the three gates. The fast movement was like lightning, the slow movement was like a colorful cloud, the advance and stop were all legal, and the refinement was concise and not cumbersome.

古文：四灵既布，黄龙处中，周制日月，实曰太常，桀然特立，六军所望。
现代文：四灵旗布列四方，黄龙牙旗矗立中央，旗上绘日月之形，旗名称作 太常 ，卓然矗立，大军仰望。
English: The four spirit flags are spread out in all directions, the yellow dragon's tooth flag stands in the center, the flag is painted with the shape of the sun and the moon, the flag name is "Too Chang," it stands tall, and the army looks up.

古文：仙人在上，鉴观四方，神实使之，为国休祥。
现代文：仙人在上，观照四方，神灵驱动，为国降下吉祥。
English: The hermit is on the top, watching the four directions, driven by the gods, and is auspicious for the country.

古文：军欲转向，黄龙先移，金鼓不鸣，寂然变施，闇谟若神，可谓秘奇。
现代文：军队行进想要改变方向，黄龙旗率先移动，金鼓不必鸣响，在静默中改变，隐蔽朦胧好似神灵在场，所有行动可谓奇妙神秘。
English: The army marching wants to change direction, the yellow dragon flag is the first to move, the golden drum does not have to sound, it changes in silence, it is hidden and hazy like the presence of gods, and all actions can be described as strange and mysterious.

古文：在昔周室，赤乌衔书，今也大吴，黄龙吐符。
现代文：昔日武王伐纣，有赤乌衔书显灵，现在在我大吴国，也有黄龙吐符的征兆。
English: In the old days, when King Wu was cutting down trees, there was a ghost of a red wuxia book, and now, in my great country of Wu, there is also a sign of a yellow dragon spitting out symbols.

古文：合契河洛，动与道俱，天赞人和，佥曰惟休。
现代文：这都契合《河图》、《洛书》的卦辞，动辄与天道相和，上天赞同百姓和谐，神签上显示这是吉庆。 
English: All of this is in line with the "river chart" and "Book of Luo" of the ancient Chinese sagas. It is in harmony with heaven, and heaven agrees with the harmony of the people. God's signature shows that this is auspicious.

古文：蜀闻权践阼，遣使重申前好。
现代文：蜀国得知孙权称帝登基，派遣使者前来重修过去结盟友好。
English: When the State of Shu learned that Sun Quan had ascended to the throne, it sent an envoy to restore the alliance and friendship of the past.

古文：综为盟文，文义甚美，语在权传。
现代文：胡综撰作盟约，文义很美，其辞记录在《孙权传》。
English: Hu Zongji composed a covenant, the meaning of which is very beautiful, and his words are recorded in "The Biography of Sun Quan."

古文：权下都建业，详、综并为侍中，进封乡侯，兼左右领军。
现代文：孙权东下建都建业，徐详、胡综共同任侍中，晋封为乡侯，兼任左、右领军。
English: Sun Quan went to the east to build the capital Jianye, and Xu Zheng and Hu Zheng jointly served as chamberlains, were promoted to the position of townspeople, and concurrently served as the left and right leaders.

古文：时魏降人或云魏都督河北振威将军吴质，颇见猜疑，综乃伪为质作降文三条：
现代文：当时魏国有投降过来的人说，魏国都督河北振武将军吴质，被魏朝廷猜疑，胡综于是假造吴质作降书三条：
English: At that time, the people who surrendered from the state of Wei said that Wu Qian, the general of Hebei Zhenwu, the governor of Wei, was suspected by the Wei court, so Hu Zhao forged Wu Qian to write three articles of surrender:

古文：其一曰： 天纲弛绝，四海分崩，群生憔悴，士人播越，兵寇所加，邑无居民，风尘烟火，往往而处，自三代以来，大乱之极，未有若今时者也。
现代文：其一说： 国家纲纪废弛断绝，天下分崩离析，百姓憔悴苦痛，士人四处流散，兵匪所到之处，城中没有居民，战火烟尘纷飞，其状随处可见。自从三代以来，天下动乱至极，也未有像今天这种情况。
English: One of them said: The national discipline is broken, the country is falling apart, the people are suffering, the scholars are scattered everywhere, the soldiers and bandits are everywhere, there are no residents in the city, and the smoke and dust of war are everywhere. Since the third generation, the world has been extremely turbulent, and there has never been a situation like today.

古文：臣质志薄，处时无方，系於土壤，不能翻飞，遂为曹氏执事戎役，远处河朔，天衢隔绝，虽望风慕义，思讬大命，愧无因缘，得展其志。
现代文：臣下吴质志向疏陋，处于当前没有良计，受困于在所生活的地域内，不能翱翔高飞，于是为曹氏参与战事，远处河朔之地，与天道隔绝。虽仰慕风范大义，想归顺天命，惭愧没有机缘，得以施展志向。
English: His vassal, Wu Chieh, had poor aspirations and was currently without a good plan. He was trapped in the region where he lived and could not soar high, so he participated in the war for the Cao clan. He was far away in the land of Heshaku and was cut off from the heavenly road. Although he admired the great morality and wanted to submit to the fate of heaven, he was ashamed that he had no opportunity to show his aspirations.

古文：每往来者，窃听风化，伏知陛下齐德乾坤，同明日月，神武之姿，受之自然，敷演皇极，流化万里，自江以南，户受覆焘。
现代文：每每见到来往吴国之人，私下得知吴国风俗教化，知道陛下德行与天地等同，与日月明耀，神武的英姿，乃自然授予，因此推演上天法则，传扬万里，自大江以南，家家户户蒙受恩泽。
English: Every visitor to the Kingdom of Wu learns in private that the customs and culture of the Kingdom of Wu are the best. They know that His Majesty's virtue is the same as that of heaven and earth, that it shines like the sun and moon, and that it is bestowed by nature. Therefore, they deduce the heavenly law and propagate it for thousands of miles. From the south of the Yangtze River, every family has received grace.

古文：英雄俊杰，上达之士，莫不心歌腹咏，乐在归附者也。
现代文：英雄豪杰，得道之士，无不发出衷心的歌咏，以自己归顺得所而愉悦。
English: Heroes and heroines, men of virtue, all sing their heartfelt songs, rejoicing in their submission.

古文：今年六月末，奉闻吉日，龙兴践阼，恢弘大繇，整理天纲，将使遗民，睹见定主。
现代文：今年六月底，敬闻在黄道吉日中，龙跃登基，光大大道，整顿朝纲，将使天下遗民，见到真龙天子。
English: At the end of June this year, it is said that on the auspicious day of the zodiac, the Dragon Leap will be enthroned, and the Great Light Road and the rectification of the morning program will make the world's remaining people see the true Dragon God.

古文：昔武王伐殷，殷民倒戈；高祖诛项，四面楚歌。
现代文：昔日武王伐商，殷商军民倒戈依附;汉高祖诛杀项羽，四面楚歌。
English: In the past, King Wu cut down merchants, and the soldiers and people of Yin merchants followed him; the ancestors of the Han Dynasty killed Xiang Yu, and fought in all directions.

古文：方之今日，未足以喻。
现代文：和今日形势比较，都不足以相提。
English: Comparisons with today's situation are inadequate.

古文：臣质不胜昊天至愿，谨遣所亲同郡黄定恭行奉表，乃讬降叛，间关求达，其欲所陈，载列于左。 
现代文：臣下吴质无法抑制自己昊天般的崇高志愿，谨派我的亲信同郡人黄定恭敬地奉上章表，并托付他表明叛降，远路行来求得上报陛下，其中想表达的内容，载列在下面。 
English: My vassal Wu Qian could not restrain his lofty will, so I respectfully sent my close confidant and fellow county resident Huang Ding to submit the above chapter list, and entrusted him to declare his surrender and travel far and wide to obtain the report to His Majesty. The content I wanted to express is listed below.

古文：其二曰： 昔伊尹去夏入商，陈平委楚归汉，书功竹帛，遗名后世，世主不谓之背诞者，以为知天命也。
现代文：其二说： 昔日伊尹离开夏朝依附殷商，陈平背弃西楚投靠汉朝，其功绩记载在竹帛上，留名后世，君主不认为他们是背叛者，而认为他们是知晓天命之人。
English: The second said: In the past, Yi Yin left the Xia Dynasty to follow the Yin merchants, and Chen Ping abandoned the Western Chu to rely on the Han Dynasty. Their exploits were recorded on the bamboo pole, leaving their names to future generations. The monarch did not think they were traitors, but thought they were people who knew the fate of heaven.

古文：臣昔为曹氏所见交接，外讬君臣，内如骨肉，恩义绸缪，有合无离，遂受偏方之任，总河北之军。
现代文：臣下昔日被曹氏看中而交结，表面是君臣关系相依托，实际上如骨肉至亲，情深义重，只有相合而无背离，于是承担掌管一方的重任，总领黄河以北的军队。
English: In the past, Cao's vassals were favored by the Cao clan and became intertwined. On the surface, the monarch-vassal relationship was supported by each other, but in reality, they were like flesh and blood, with a deep sense of meaning. Only when they were together, there was no deviation. Therefore, he took on the important task of controlling one side, leading the army north of the Yellow River.

古文：当此之时，志望高大，永与曹氏同死俱生，惟恐功之不建，事之不成耳。
现代文：在这种时候，我志向远大，发誓永远与曹氏同生共死，只担忧功绩无法建立、事业无法成就。
English: At this time, I aspire to be ambitious, swear to live and die with Cao forever, and only worry that my achievements cannot be established and my career cannot be achieved.

古文：及曹氏之亡，后嗣继立，幼冲统政，谗言弥兴。
现代文：等到曹氏亡故，后嗣继位，幼王主管朝政，谗言逐渐兴起。
English: After the death of the Cao family, when the heir succeeded to the throne and the young king was in charge of the imperial court, the criticism gradually arose.

古文：同侪者以势相害，异趣者得间其言，而臣受性简略，素不下人，视彼数子，意实迫之，此亦臣之过也。
现代文：同僚们倚仗权势互相戕害，志趣不同者借机诋毁挑拨。而臣下我天性简略，向来不屈服他人，看那几个小子，内心确实要压迫我，这也有为臣的过失。
English: Colleagues rely on their power to harm each other, and those with different interests take the opportunity to slander and provoke. My subordinates are simple by nature, and have never yielded to others. Looking at those boys, my heart really wants to oppress me, which is also the fault of my subordinates.

古文：遂为邪议所见构会，招致猜疑，诬臣欲叛。
现代文：于是我被邪恶的谗言所陷害，招致幼主猜疑，污蔑我打算叛变。
English: So I was framed by evil slander, which aroused the suspicion of the young master and slandered me for planning to rebel.

古文：虽识真者保明其心，世乱谗胜，馀嫌犹在，常惧一旦横受无辜，忧心孔疚，如履冰炭。
现代文：虽说了解实情之人担保说明我的心意，然而世道混乱、谗言生效，对我的猜疑仍旧存在，我常常忧虑有朝一日会横遭无辜之祸，因此十分忧虑痛苦，如踏在薄冰炭火之上。
English: Although people who know the truth vouch for my intentions, the world is chaotic, gossip is effective, and suspicions about me still exist. I am often worried that one day I will encounter an innocent disaster, so I am very worried and painful, like stepping on thin ice.

古文：昔乐毅为燕昭王立功於齐，惠王即位，疑夺其任，遂去燕之赵，休烈不亏。
现代文：昔日乐毅在齐国为燕昭王立下大功，燕惠王登基后，因猜疑而罢免乐毅的职位，于是他离开燕国到赵国，功业并未因此而损减。
English: In the past, Le Yi did a great service for Yan Zhao Wang in Qi Province. After Yan Hui Wang ascended to the throne, Le Yi's position was dismissed due to suspicion, so he left Yan Province to Zhao Province. His service was not reduced as a result.

古文：彼岂欲二三其德，盖畏功名不建，而惧祸之将及也。
现代文：他岂是想对燕国三心二意，只不过是担心功业无法建立，而担心灾祸将要来临。
English: Did he want to be half-hearted about Yan Guo, but he was worried that he would not be able to establish his merits, and he was worried that disaster would come.

古文：昔遣魏郡周光以贾贩为名，讬叛南诣，宣达密计。时以仓卒，未敢便有章表，使光口传而已。
现代文：过去我曾派遣魏郡人周光以做生意为名，托付叛降南方的想法，明确表达我的秘密计策，当时因时间仓卒，不敢立即呈上奏章，只是让周光口头转述而已。
English: In the past, in the name of doing business, I had sent Zhou Guang, a person from Wei County, to entrust the idea of defecting to the south, and to clearly express my secret strategy. At that time, due to time pressure, I did not dare to immediately submit the transcript, but only let Zhou Guang verbally paraphrase it.

古文：以为天下大归可见，天意所在，非吴复谁？
现代文：我认为天下最终一统已经显出征兆，上天旨意所在，除了吴国还能是谁呢?
English: I think that the world has finally shown signs of unity, and God's will is in place. Who else could it be but the State of Wu?

古文：此方之民，思为臣妾，延颈举踵，惟恐兵来之迟耳。
现代文：这里的百姓，都希望成为陛下的臣仆，伸长脖子踮起脚跟，只恐吴国军队来得太迟。
English: The people here all hope to become his majesty's servants, craning their necks and stomping their feet, only fearing that the Wu army will come too late.

古文：若使圣恩少加信纳，当以河北承望王师，款心赤实，天日是鉴。
现代文：倘若皇恩多加信任接纳，一定以黄河以北的土地恭迎王师，拳拳忠心，天日可鉴。
English: If Emperor Nduga trusted and accepted, he would certainly welcome Wang Shi with the land north of the Yellow River, and his loyalty would be a good example.

古文：而光去经年，不闻咳唾，未审此意竟得达不？
现代文：但周光南往已有一年，却没有消息传回，不知我的心意他是否已经转述?
English: But Zhou Guangnan has been gone for a year, but no news has come back. I wonder if he has already relayed my thoughts?

古文：瞻望长叹，日月以几，鲁望高子，何足以喻！
现代文：我瞻望南天接连叹息，日月不已，即使鲁国人盼望齐国卿高奚敬仲，也不足以与此相比!
English: I look up at the southern sky and sigh continuously, the sun and the moon do not cease, even if the Lu people hope for the rise of Secretary of State Gao Rongjian, it is not enough to compare with this!

古文：又臣今日见待稍薄，苍蝇之声，绵绵不绝，必受此祸，迟速事耳。
现代文：又臣下如今所受待遇愈加淡薄，恶人诋毁的言论，不绝于耳，我必定因此遭受灾祸，只是迟或早而已。
English: Moreover, the treatment of my subjects has become more and more lenient, and the slanderous words of the wicked are heard more and more. I am sure to suffer calamity because of this, but it will happen sooner or later.

古文：臣私度陛下未垂明慰者，必以臣质贯穿仁义之道，不行若此之事，谓光所传，多虚少实，或谓此中有他消息，不知臣质构谗见疑，恐受大害也。
现代文：臣下私下揣测陛下没有垂示圣明的慰勉，其原因一定是认为我吴质通彻晓仁义之道，不会做这样的事情，认为周光所转达的言辞，假多真少，或认为其中有什么其他想法，却不知我吴质因构陷诋毁而被猜疑，担忧遭受大祸!
English: Privately, his subjects speculated that the reason for His Majesty's lack of consolation must be that he thought I, Wu Ch'ien, knew the path of benevolence and righteousness and would not do such a thing, that the words conveyed by Zhou Guang were more or less false, or that there were other thoughts in them, but he did not know that I, Wu Ch'ien, was suspected of framing and slandering, and was worried about suffering a great disaster!

古文：且臣质若有罪之日，自当奔赴鼎镬，束身待罪，此盖人臣之宜也。
现代文：况且我吴质如果真有罪过之日，定会自己奔向鼎镬就死，捆绑自己等待惩处，这恐怕是为人臣子所应做到的。
English: Moreover, if I, Wu Ch'ien, am really guilty, I will run to the top of the mountain and die, and I will tie myself up and wait for punishment. I am afraid that this is what a courtier should do.

古文：今日无罪，横见谮毁，将有商鞅、白起之祸。
现代文：现在我并无罪过，却横受构陷诋毁，将有商鞅、白起那样的灾祸。
English: Now I am not guilty, but I have been framed and slandered, and there will be a discussion, and such a calamity will arise.

古文：寻惟事势，去亦宜也。死而弗义，不去何为！
现代文：思量目前形势，离开魏国也是有原因的，现在死去并不能体现出道义，不离开又做什么呢!
English: Considering the current situation, there is a reason for leaving Wei. Dying now does not reflect morality. What will you do if you do not leave?

古文：乐毅之出，吴起之走，君子伤其不遇，未有非之者也。
现代文：乐毅的出奔，吴起的逃亡，君子都同情他们未受到礼遇，没有人非议他们的举动。
English: Le Yi's departure, Wu Zhi's escape, the gentlemen all sympathized with them for not being treated with courtesy, and no one criticized their actions.

古文：愿陛下推古况今，不疑怪於臣质也。又念人臣获罪，当如伍员奉己自效，不当徼幸因事为利。
现代文：希望陛下类推古事以相比今人，不要猜疑责备我吴质，另外陛下或者想到，为人臣子者被判处罪名，应当像伍子胥那样自己献身致力表现忠诚，不应当侥幸地借机寻求便利。
English: I hope that Your Majesty will draw an analogy between ancient times and the present, and not suspect and blame me, Wu Quan. In addition, Your Majesty may think that if you are a courtier and are convicted of a crime, you should devote yourself to showing loyalty like Wu Zixuan, and should not take the opportunity to seek convenience.

古文：然今与古，厥势不同，南北悠远，江湖隔绝，自不举事，何得济免！
现代文：但今天与古时相比，时势不同，南北距离遥远，江湖隔绝，自己不主动行事，又怎能脱离灾祸呢?
English: But today, compared with ancient times, the situation is different, the distance between the north and the south is far away, the rivers and lakes are isolated, and they do not take the initiative. How can they get rid of the disaster?

古文：是以忘志士之节，而思立功之义也。
现代文：所以我只好忘却志士的节操，而考虑建立功业的道义。
English: So I had to forget about the integrity of the aspirant and think about establishing the morality of the cause.

古文：且臣质又以曹氏之嗣，非天命所在，政弱刑乱，柄夺於臣，诸将专威於外，各自为政，莫或同心，士卒衰耗，帑藏空虚，纲纪毁废，上下并昬，想前后数得降叛，具闻此问。
现代文：我吴质又考虑到曹氏的继承人，并非天命所在，政治衰微，刑法错乱，朝政大权被贼臣把持，各位将领在外专权，各自为政，无人同心，军队衰败耗损，国库财货空虚，朝廷纲纪败坏，君臣同样昏聩。我想到陛下前后多次招得魏国的叛逃者，都得知了这些情况。
English: I, Wu Ch'ien, also considered that Cao's successor was not predestined, that politics was in decline, that the criminal law was in disarray, that the supreme power of the imperial government was held by kleptocrats, that the generals had exclusive power abroad, that they each governed themselves, that no one had the same heart, that the army was worn out by decay, that the treasury was empty, that the discipline of the imperial court had deteriorated, and that the princes and ministers were equally confused. I thought of the defectors who had been invited to Wei many times before and after His Majesty, and all of them had learned about these circumstances.

古文：兼弱攻昧，宜应天时，此实陛下进取之秋，是以区区敢献其计。
现代文：兼并弱小攻打昏庸，应当顺应天时，这实在是陛下进取的有利之机，因而区区吴质我才敢献上自己的计划。
English: The annexation of the weak and the attack on the mediocre should be in accordance with the weather, which is really a favorable opportunity for His Majesty to forge ahead. Therefore, I dared to present my own plan.

古文：今若内兵淮、泗，据有下邳，荆、扬二州，闻声响应，臣从河北席卷而南，形势一连，根牙永固。
现代文：现在如果聚集军队于淮河、泗水一带，占据下邳，荆、扬二州，就会闻风响应，我从黄河之北席卷南下，南北势力相连，根基必会永远坚固。
English: Now, if you gather troops in the Huaihe and Surabaya areas and occupy the two states of Jiaozuo, Jing and Yang, you will feel the wind response. I will sweep from the north of the Yellow River to the south. The forces of the north and south are connected, and the foundation will always be solid.

古文：关西之兵系於所卫，青、徐二州不敢彻守，许、洛馀兵众不满万，谁能来东与陛下争者？
现代文：关西的魏军被拘束在他们守卫的地盘，青、徐二州的魏军不敢撤离守卫，许、洛所剩魏军之数不到一万兵力，有谁还能到东方来与陛下争锋呢?
English: The Wei army in Kansai was confined to the territory they were guarding. The Wei army in Qing and Xu two states did not dare to withdraw from the guard. The remaining Wei army in Xu and Luo was less than ten thousand troops. Who else could come to the East to compete with His Majesty?

古文：此诚千载一会之期，可不深思而熟计乎！
现代文：这实在是千载难逢的良机，怎能不深思熟虑去谋算呢?
English: This really is a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity, how can we not think about it?

古文：及臣所在，既自多马，加以羌胡常以三四月中美草时，驱马来出，隐度今者，可得三千馀匹。
现代文：至于臣下所守之地，自来盛产良马，又加上羌人胡人经常在三四月间水草肥盛时，驱马出来放牧，粗略估计目前的情况，可以获得马匹三千多。
English: As for the land guarded by his vassals, it has been producing good horses since time immemorial. In addition, the Xiong people and the Hu people often drive horses out to graze in March and April when the water and grass are abundant. A rough estimate of the current situation is that more than three thousand horses can be obtained.

古文：陛下出军，当投此时，多将骑士来就马耳。
现代文：陛下出兵，应当利用这一时机，多带些骑兵来就这里的良马。
English: Your Majesty should take advantage of this opportunity to bring more cavalry to take advantage of the good horses here.

古文：此皆先定所一二知。
现代文：这些都是根据已掌握的情况预先制定的大致计划，现如上上报。
English: All of these are general plans that have been prepared in advance based on the information available, and are being reported as above.

古文：凡两军不能相究虚实，今此间实羸，易可克定，陛下举动，应者必多。
现代文：凡是两军对垒，不能不相互探究对方虚实，现在这里兵马确实羸弱，很容易就能取胜平定，陛下出兵前进，响应者一定很多。
English: Whenever there is a confrontation between two armies, they cannot help but investigate each other's truth and falsehood. Now, the soldiers and horses here are really weak and can be easily defeated and pacified. Your Majesty has sent troops to advance, and there must be many responders.

古文：上定洪业，使普天一统，下令臣质建非常之功，此乃天也。
现代文：这样陛下就可上奠定宏大事业，使四海之内归为一统，下令我吴质能建非常之功，这是天意啊!
English: In this way, His Majesty will be able to lay the foundation for a great cause, unify the four seas, and order me to do great things. This is God's will!

古文：若不见纳，此亦天也。
现代文：如果我的建计不被采纳，这也是天意。
English: If my plan is not adopted, it is also the will of heaven.

古文：愿陛下思之，不复多陈。 
现代文：希望陛下对此深加考虑，我不再多言。 
English: I hope that His Majesty will give this matter serious consideration, and I will not say any more.

古文：其三曰： 昔许子远舍袁就曹，规画计较，应见纳受，遂破袁军，以定曹业。
现代文：其三说： 昔日许子远离袁氏依附曹氏，他的计策谋略，都被曹氏所采纳，于是大败袁军，奠定曹氏基业。
English: The third said: In the past, Xu Zi was far away from the Yuan clan and depended on the Cao clan. His strategies and plans were all adopted by the Cao clan, so he defeated the Yuan army and laid the foundation of the Cao clan.

古文：向使曹氏不信子远，怀疑犹豫，不决於心，则今天下袁氏有也。
现代文：如若曹氏不信任许子远，而怀疑犹豫，不下定决心，则如今天下被袁氏占有。
English: If the Cao clan does not trust Xu Ziyuan, but doubts, hesitates, and does not make up its mind, then it will be occupied by the Yuan clan.

古文：愿陛下思之。
现代文：希望陛下考虑这件事。
English: I hope His Majesty will consider this matter.

古文：间闻界上将阎浮、赵楫欲归大化，唱和不速，以取破亡。
现代文：我私下得知边境上的将领阎浮、赵楫想要归顺宏大教化，因彼此倡应商议不及时，导致失败覆灭。
English: I learned in private that the generals on the border, Yan Fu and Zhao Qi, wanted to submit to the Great Indoctrination, but because they did not consult each other in time, they failed.

古文：今臣款款，远授其命，若复怀疑，不时举动，令臣孤绝，受此厚祸，即恐天下雄夫烈士欲立功者，不敢复讬命陛下矣。
现代文：现在臣下忠心耿耿，遥献生命于陛下，如果再被怀疑，不及时发兵出动，令我处于孤绝无援之地，遭受阎、赵他们那样的大祸，那恐怕天下那些想为吴国立功的豪杰壮士，不敢再将性命托付陛下了。
English: Right now, my vassals are deeply loyal and have dedicated their lives to Your Majesty. If they are suspected of not dispatching troops in time, leaving me in a helpless situation and suffering the same disaster as Yan and Zhao, then I'm afraid that the world's heroes who want to serve the State of Wu will no longer dare to entrust their lives to Your Majesty.

古文：愿陛下思之。
现代文：希望陛下考虑这件事。
English: I hope His Majesty will consider this matter.

古文：皇天后土，实闻其言。 
现代文：苍天大地，也必定听到我的想法。 
English: Heaven and earth will surely hear my thoughts.

古文：此文既流行，而质已入为侍中矣。
现代文：这篇文章流传后，而吴质已入朝任侍中了。
English: After this article was circulated, Wu Ching had already entered the imperial court as an attendant.

古文：二年，青州人隐蕃归吴，上书曰： 臣闻纣为无道，微子先出；高祖宽明，陈平先入。
现代文：黄龙二年，青州人隐蕃归附吴国，他上书说： 为臣听说商纣王行事无道，微子预先出逃;汉高祖宽厚贤明，陈平率先投奔。
English: In the second year of the Yellow Dragon, Qingzhou's Xinyi was annexed to the State of Wu. He sent a letter saying: "As a vassal, I heard that the King of Shangguan acted immorally, and I fled in advance; Han Gao Zu was generous and wise, and Chen Ping was the first to flee.

古文：臣年二十二，委弃封域，归命有道，赖蒙天灵，得自全致。
现代文：为臣二十二岁，抛弃我的封邑，归顺有道之君，仰赖上天神灵，得以平安到来。
English: As a twenty-two-year-old vassal, I abandoned my fiefdom, submitted to the prince of the way, and relied on the spirit of the gods and angels to arrive safely.

古文：臣至止有日，而主者同之降人，未见精别，使臣微言妙旨，不得上达。
现代文：为臣来后已有多时，而主事者将我视作一般投降之人，未加以精细地区别，使为臣微言妙旨，无法上达陛下。
English: It's been a long time since I've been a vassal, and those in charge see me as a person who generally surrenders, without making a fine distinction, so that the vassal's fine words can't reach His Majesty.

古文：於邑三叹，曷惟其已。
现代文：我郁抑长叹，此种处境何时才能结束?
English: I can't help but wonder, when will this situation end?

古文：谨诣阙拜章，乞蒙引见。 
现代文：谨此来到宫阙，跪拜上奏，请求能蒙受陛下召见。 
English: I hereby come to the Imperial Palace, kneel before the Emperor, and beg to be summoned by His Majesty.

古文：权即召入。
现代文：孙权当即召隐蕃入宫。
English: Sun Quan was immediately summoned to the palace.

古文：蕃谢答问，及陈时务，甚有辞观。
现代文：隐蕃答对问话，以及陈述对时事的见解，都很有见地。
English: He is insightful in his responses to questions and in his presentation of his views on current events.

古文：综时侍坐，权问何如，综对曰： 蕃上书，大语有似东方朔，巧捷诡辩有似祢衡，而才皆不及。 
现代文：胡综当时侍坐，孙权问他隐蕃怎样。胡综回答说： 隐蕃上书，夸张言辞有似东方朔之处，巧言诡辩很像祢衡，而实际才能都不如他们。 
English: At that time, Sun Quan asked Hu Zomei how he was doing. Hu Zomei replied, "Having written a book, Hu Zomei's exaggerated words are similar to the Oriental Shuo, his clever words and sophistry are very similar to You Hei, but his actual ability is not as good as them.

古文：权又问可堪何官，综对曰： 未可以治民，且试以都辇小职。 
现代文：孙权又问他隐蕃能担任什么官职，胡综回答说： 此人不能让他去治理百姓，暂且让他试试当名小京官。 
English: Sun Quan also asked him what kind of official position Hunchun could hold, and Hu Zong replied, "This man cannot be allowed to govern the people. For the time being, let him try being a minor official in Beijing."

古文：权以蕃盛论刑狱，用为廷尉监。
现代文：孙权考虑到隐蕃有很多刑法诉讼的言论，就任隐蕃为廷尉监。
English: Sun Quan took into account that Yingluo had a lot of criminal law litigation remarks, and appointed Yingluo as a court lieutenant.

古文：左将军朱据、廷尉郝普称蕃有王佐之才，普尤与之亲善，常怨叹其屈。
现代文：左将军朱据、廷尉郝普都称赞隐蕃有辅弼君主的才干，郝普尤其与他亲近友善，常常埋怨叹息他的屈才。
English: Left-wing general Zhu Zhen and courtier Yan Pu both praised Ying Zheng's ability to assist the monarch. Yan Pu was especially close and friendly with him, and often complained about his inferiority.

古文：后蕃谋叛，事觉伏诛，普见责自杀。
现代文：后来隐蕃密谋叛变，事情败露后被诛杀，郝普因受到责备而自杀。
English: Later, Hideyoshi plotted a mutiny, was beaten to death after the affair was exposed, and Zengpu committed suicide because he was blamed.

古文：据禁止，历时乃解。
现代文：朱据被停职软禁，很久之后才获释。
English: Zhu Zhen was suspended from duty and placed under house arrest. He was released a long time later.

古文：拜综偏将军，兼左执法，领辞讼。
现代文：孙权任命胡综为偏将军，兼任左执法，负责处理诉讼事务。
English: Sun Quan appointed Hu Zong as a part-time general, concurrently serving as a left-wing law enforcement officer, responsible for handling litigation matters.

古文：辽东之事，辅吴将军张昭以谏权言辞切至，权亦大怒，其和协彼此，使之无隙，综有力焉。
现代文：在进攻辽东事情上，辅吴将军张昭因劝谏孙权言辞过于直率急切，孙权也大怒，使他们调和彼此关系，不再心有嫌隙，其间胡综起了很大的作用。
English: In the matter of the attack on Liaodong, Zhang Zhao, the assistant general of Wu, was too blunt and eager to advise Sun Quan, and Sun Quan was also very angry, so that they could reconcile their relationship and no longer have a bad feeling. Hu Zong played a great role in this.

古文：性嗜酒，酒后欢呼极意，或推引杯觞，搏击左右。
现代文：胡综天性嗜酒，酒后呼叫欢快，有时还推拉酒杯，拳打手下人。
English: Hu Zong has a natural affinity for alcohol. After drinking, he calls out cheerfully, and sometimes pushes and pulls wine glasses, and punches subordinates.

古文：权爱其才，弗之责也。
现代文：孙权爱惜他的才干故不责怪。
English: Sun Quan cherished his talent and did not blame him.

古文：凡自权统事，诸文诰策命，邻国书符，略皆综之所造也。
现代文：自孙权掌管国事以后，凡是各种文、诰、策、命以及送往邻国的书信，大体上都是胡综所撰写。
English: Since Sun Quan took charge of state affairs, all kinds of documents, edicts, policies, orders, and letters sent to neighboring countries were generally written by Hu Zangshi.

古文：初以内外多事，特立科，长吏遭丧，皆不得去，而数有犯者。
现代文：起初因为国内外事务繁多，专门制定律令，长吏遭逢丧事，都不能离职奔丧，但仍多次有人违犯。
English: At the beginning, because of the many domestic and foreign affairs, special rules and regulations were formulated, and officials were unable to leave their posts due to death, but there were still many violations.

古文：权患之，使朝臣下议。
现代文：孙权十分忧虑，让朝臣商议解决的措施。
English: Sun Quan was very worried and asked the courtiers to discuss a solution.

古文：综议以为宜定科文，示以大辟，行之一人，其后必绝。
现代文：胡综的建议认为应制定具体法律条文，告知犯者处以死刑，只在一人身上施行，以后此种现象一定断绝。
English: Hu Zongmei's suggestion was that specific legal provisions should be formulated to inform the offender that the death penalty would be imposed only on one person, and that this phenomenon would definitely be eliminated in the future.

古文：遂用综言，由是奔丧乃断。
现代文：后来采用胡综的意见，从此离职奔丧的现象绝迹。
English: Later, Hu Zongli's opinion was adopted, and the phenomenon of leaving the post and rushing to death was eliminated.

古文：赤乌六年卒，子冲嗣。
现代文：赤乌六年，胡综去世，他的儿子胡冲承嗣爵位。
English: In the sixth year of the reign of Emperor Wu, Emperor Hu Zong died, and his son Emperor Hu Chong succeeded to the throne.

古文：冲平和有文幹，天纪中为中书令。
现代文：胡冲性情平和很有文才，天纪年间担任中书令。
English: Hu Chong had a peaceful disposition and was very talented in literature. During the Tianji era, he served as a middle school teacher.

古文：徐详者字子明，吴郡乌程人也，先综死。
现代文：徐详，字子明，吴郡乌程人，先于胡综去世。
English: Xu Zhi, Zi Ming, Wu County Wucheng people, died before Hu Zhai.

古文：评曰：是仪、徐详、胡综，皆孙权之时幹兴事业者也。
现代文：评曰：是仪、徐详、胡综，都是孙权时期辅佐兴盛大业的人。
English: The commentary said: Zi Yi, Xu Zhe, Hu Zi, were all people who assisted the prosperity of the Sun Quan period.

古文：仪清恪贞素，详数通使命，综文采才用，各见信任，辟之广夏，其榱椽之佐乎！
现代文：是仪廉洁恭敬，徐详多次出使，胡综文才兼备，各自受到信任，类比修建大厦，他们就像是架屋之木那样的重要人物啊！
English: They are honorable, honest and respectful, Xu Zhe has been dispatched many times, Hu Zhe is a talented writer, each of them is trusted, and they are like building a building, they are like important figures like the wood of the frame house!

