古文：周贤者王常叶虚中郑君程逸人李处士骆玄素赵操崔玄亮
现代文：周贤者王常叶虚中郑君程逸人李处士骆玄素赵操崔玄亮
English: Zhou Xian Zhen Zhen Zhen Zhen Zhen Zhen Zhen Zhen Zhen Zhen Zhen

古文：周贤者
现代文：周贤者
English: Zhou Xianzhe

古文：唐则天朝，相国裴炎第四弟为虢州司户。
现代文：唐朝武则天当政时，相国裴炎的第四个弟弟任虢州司户。
English: When Wu Zetian of the Tang Dynasty was in power, the fourth brother of his countryman Pei Yan served as the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：虢州有周贤者，居深山，不详其所自。
现代文：虢州有个周贤者，住在深山中，不知道他是从哪里来的，与裴司户关系很好。
English: In Zhangzhou, there is a man named Zhou Xian who lives deep in the mountains. I don't know where he comes from, but he has a good relationship with the Pei family.

古文：与司户善，谓曰： 公兄为相甚善，然不出三年，当身戮家破，宗族皆诛，可不惧乎！ 
现代文：他对司户说： 您的兄长做宰相很好，但是不出三年，一定家破人亡，宗族之人全都被杀，你不畏惧吗？ 
English: He said to Sido, "It's great that your brother is prime minister, but in less than three years, your family will be destroyed, and everyone in your clan will be killed. Aren't you afraid?

古文：司户具悉其行事，知非常人也，乃涕泣而请救。
现代文：司户完全了解他的行事，知道他不是平常的人，就流着眼泪向他请求救助。
English: The steward, fully aware of his actions and knowing that he was not an ordinary person, asked him for help with tears.

古文：周生曰： 事犹未萌，有得脱理。
现代文：周生说： 事情还没有萌发，有能够解脱的道理。
English: Zhou Sheng said: Things have not yet sprouted, there is a reason to be relieved.

古文：急至都，以吾言告兄，求取黄金五十镒将来，吾于弘农山中，为作章醮，可以移祸殃矣。 
现代文：您赶快到都城去，把我的话告诉您的哥哥，要他拿出黄金五十镒。你把它带回来，我在弘农山中，为他作奏报天帝的表章替他祭祀，可以把灾祸避开了。 
English: You should hurry to the capital and tell your brother what I have said, and ask him to take out fifty shekels of gold. If you bring it back, I will play for him in the Hongnong Mountain, announce the Heavenly Emperor's seal, and sacrifice for him, so that the disaster can be avoided.

古文：司户于是取急还都，谒兄河东侯炎。
现代文：司户于是找件急事回到都城，拜见兄长河东侯裴炎。
English: The steward then returned to the capital in search of an urgent matter to visit his brother, the Marquis of Hedong, Pei Yan.

古文：炎为人睦亲，于友悌甚至，每兄弟自远来，则同卧谈笑，虽弥历旬日，不归内寝焉。
现代文：裴炎为人很好，对亲人和睦，对朋友对兄弟友爱很周到，每当兄弟从远方来，他就与兄弟同床谈笑，即使满旬历日，他也不回内室去睡。
English: Pei Yan was a very good person. He was very considerate to his relatives, friends and brothers. Whenever a brother came from far away, he would talk and laugh with his brother in bed. Even if he had a long day, he would not go back to his room to sleep.

古文：司户夜中，以周贤语告之，且求其金。
现代文：司户在半夜时，把周贤者的话告诉了裴炎，又向他要金子。
English: In the middle of the night, the steward told Pei Yan about Zhou Xian's words and asked him for gold.

古文：炎不信神鬼，至于邪俗镇厌，常呵怒之。
现代文：裴炎不相信鬼神，至于世俗驱邪镇魔一类事，他听到就呵叱生气。
English: Pei Yan doesn't believe in ghosts and gods, but when he hears about things like the secular exorcism of evil spirits, he gets angry.

古文：闻弟言，大怒曰： 汝何不知大方，而随俗幻惑！
现代文：听到弟弟的话，裴炎大怒，说： 你为什么不懂得大学问，却随着世俗被虚幻之事所迷惑？
English: Hearing his brother's words, Pei Yan flew into a rage and said, "Why don't you know how to ask questions in college, but are confused by unreal things in the world?

古文：此愚辈何解，而欲以金与之？
现代文：这些愚昧之辈明白什么，却想要拿金子给他？
English: What do these fools understand that they want to give him gold?

古文：且世间巫觋，好托鬼神，取人财物，吾见之常切齿。今汝何故忽有此言？
现代文：况且世上的行巫术的人，喜好假托鬼神，骗取人家钱财，我见到这种事总是切齿痛恨，你今天为什么忽然说出这种话？
English: What's more, the wizards of the world are fond of pretending to be ghosts and gods and swindling people out of their money. I always hate to see such things. Why did you suddenly say such a thing today?

古文：静而思之，深令人恨。 
现代文：冷静地想一想，很令人憎恨。 
English: Think about it. It's disgusting.

古文：司户泣曰： 周贤者，识非俗幻，每见发言，未尝不中。
现代文：司户哭泣着说： 周贤者的见识不是世俗虚幻的那种人可比，我每次看到他说出的话不没有不应验的。
English: The steward said with tears: Zhou Xian's insight is not comparable to that of worldly and illusory people. Every time I see what he said, I can't help but agree with him.

古文：兄为宰相，家计温足，何惜少金？不会转灾为祥也。 
现代文：兄长当宰相，家计丰足，为什么吝惜少量金子不让他把灾祸转为吉祥呢？ 
English: When the elder brother was the prime minister and the family was well-off, why did he begrudge a small amount of gold and not allow him to turn the disaster into good luck?

古文：炎滋怒不应。
现代文：裴炎更加发怒不答应。
English: Pei Yan was even more angry and did not agree.

古文：司户知兄志不可夺，惆怅辞归弘农。
现代文：司户知道哥哥的意志不可改变，就忧愁地回到弘农。
English: Knowing that his brother's will could not be changed, the steward sadly returned to Hongnong.

古文：时河东侯初立则天为皇后，专朝擅权，自谓有泰山之安，故不信周言，而却怒恨。
现代文：当时河东侯裴炎刚奏请立武则天为皇后，专权把持朝政，自己认为地位有如泰山一般安稳，所以不相信周贤者的话，却反而发怒痛恨。
English: At that time, the prince of Hedong, Pei Yan, had just asked the emperor to make Wu Zetian the empress, and he had absolute power over the government. He thought that his position was as stable as Mount Tai, so he did not believe Zhou Xian's words, but he was angry and hated.

古文：及岁余，天皇崩，天后渐亲朝政，忌害大臣，嫌隙屡构。
现代文：一年多以后，唐高宗死了，武则天皇后渐渐亲自处理朝政，忌恨杀害大臣，与裴炎已屡次构成嫌隙。
English: More than a year later, Tang Gaozong died, and Empress Wu Zi gradually took over the administration of the imperial court herself. She abhorred the killing of ministers, and she and Pei Yan had often been at odds.

古文：乃思周贤者语，即令人至弘农，召司户至都。
现代文：这时，裴炎才想起周贤者的话，就派人到弘农去，把司户召到京城。
English: At this time, Pei Yan remembered Zhou Xian's words and sent someone to Hongnong to summon the steward to Beijing.

古文：炎馈具黄金，令求贤者于弘农诸山中，尽不得。寻至南阳、襄阳、江陵山中，乃得之，告以兄言。
现代文：裴炎准备黄金赠给他，让他求周贤者。司户到弘农诸山中去寻找周贤者，全找遍了也没找到，又寻到南阳、襄阳、江陵山中，才把周贤者找到，把哥哥的话告诉他。
English: Pei Yan prepared gold to give to him, so that he could ask Zhou Xian for it. The steward went to the mountains of Hongnong to look for Zhou Xian, but after searching everywhere, he couldn't find him. He had to go to the mountains of Nanyang, Xiangyang and Jiangling to find Zhou Xian and tell him what his brother had said.

古文：贤者因与还弘农，谓司户曰： 往年祸害未成，故可坛场致请。
现代文：周贤者就与司户一起回到弘农，对司户说： 往年祸害还没有酿成，所以可以设坛场送达请求。
English: Zhou Xian'er went back to Hongnong with the steward and said to the steward: The disaster of previous years has not yet been brewed, so you can set up an altar to serve the request.

古文：今灾祥已构，不久灭门，何求之有？
现代文：现在灾难的征兆已经构成，不久将要族灭满门，还有什么请求的必要呢？
English: Now that the omens of disaster have been established, and the gates of annihilation are about to be flung wide, what need is there for supplication?

古文：且吾前月中至洛，见裴令被戮，系其首于右足下。
现代文：而且我上个月里到洛阳，看到裴相国被杀戮，把他的脑袋拴在右足下。
English: Moreover, I went to Luoyang last month, saw Pei Xianguo being killed, and put his head under my right foot.

古文：事已如此，且无免势，君勿更言。
现代文：事已经如此，没有免除的情势。您不必再说了。
English: That's the way it is, there are no exemptions. You don't need to say any more.

古文：且吾与司户相知日久，不可令君与兄同祸，可求百两金，与君一房章醮请帝，可以得免。
现代文：我和司户互相了解日子已经很久了，我不能让您和您的哥哥一同遭到祸患，您可以拿出一百两黄金，我给您这一房人上表章祭祀向上天请求，可以靠这个办法得到赦免。
English: My steward and I have known each other for a long time. I can't let you and your brother suffer the same fate. You can take out one hundred and two gold coins. I'll give you this watch and ask God for a sacrifice. You can rely on this method to be pardoned.

古文：若言裴令，终无益也。 
现代文：若说裴相国，到底没有办法了。 
English: If you say Baisangguo, there is no way out.

古文：司户即市金与贤者，入弘农山中设坛场，奏章请命。
现代文：司户就拿来黄金给了周贤者，周贤者进入弘农山中设了坛场，上表章为司户请命。
English: The steward took the gold and gave it to Zhou Xian. Zhou Xian entered Hongnong Mountain and set up an altar, and the above inscription was the steward's last request.

古文：法事毕，仍藏金于山中，谓司户曰： 君一房免祸矣。
现代文：法事完毕，又把金子藏在山中，对司户说： 您这一房人免祸了。
English: When the ceremony was over, he hid the gold in the mountains and said to the steward, "You and your household are safe from harm.

古文：然急去官，移家襄阳。 
现代文：然而必须赶快放弃官职，把家搬到襄阳。 
English: However, he must quickly give up his official position and move his family to Xiangyang.

古文：司户即迁家襄阳。
现代文：司户就把家迁移到襄阳。
English: The steward moved his family to Yangyang.

古文：月余而染风疾，十月而裴令下狱极刑，兄弟子侄皆从。
现代文：一个多月以后，司户染上了风疾，十个月后，裴相国就被投进监狱处了极刑，兄弟子侄都与他一起受戮。
English: More than a month later, Sido contracted typhoid fever. Ten months later, Bae Sanguk was thrown into prison and sentenced to death. His brothers, nephews and nieces were all killed with him.

古文：而司户风疾，在襄州，有司奏请诛之。
现代文：而司户因为患了风疾，住在襄阳，主管官员奏本请求杀掉他。
English: However, because the steward was suffering from wind disease and lived in Xiangyang, the responsible official wrote a request to kill him.

古文：天后曰： 既染风疾，死在旦夕，不须问，此一房特宜免死。 
现代文：武则天说： 既然他染了风疾，死在旦夕，就不必追究了，这一房人特准免死。 
English: Wu Zetian said, "Since he contracted typhoid and died on the eve of the New Year, there is no need to investigate. This roommate is specially exempted from death."

古文：由是得免。
现代文：这样，司户一房得到免祸。
English: In this way, one steward's house was spared from disaster.

古文：初河东侯遇害之夕，而犬咬其首曳焉。
现代文：当初，河东侯裴炎遇害那天的晚上，一只狗把他的脑袋拽走了。
English: At first, on the evening of the day of the murder of Hou Peiyan in Hedong, a dog dragged his head away.

古文：及明，守者求得之，因以发系其首于左足下，竟如初言。
现代文：到天亮后，守护的人把他的脑袋找到了，就用他的头发把他的头拴在他的右足下，完全像周贤者当初说的那样。
English: After dawn, the guards found his head and used his hair to tie his head under his right foot, just as Zhou Xian'er had said.

古文：王常
现代文：王常
English: Wang Chang

古文：王常者，洛阳人，负气尚义，见人不平，必手刃之；见人饥寒，至于解衣推食，略无难色。
现代文：王常是洛阳人，凭借意气崇尚正义，看到别人有不平之事，一定要亲手杀掉坏人；看到别人饥饿寒冷，甚至于把自己的衣服脱下，把自己的粮食拿去送给他们，一点也没有为难的神色。
English: Wang Chang was from Luoyang. By virtue of his spirit, he advocated justice. When he saw that others had grievances, he had to kill the bad people with his own hands. When he saw that others were hungry and cold, he even took off his clothes and took his grain to give it to them. He did not look embarrassed at all.

古文：至德二年，常于终南山游，遇风雨，宿于中山。
现代文：至德二年，他曾经到终南山去旅游，遇到风雨，就住在山中。
English: In the past two years, he went to Nanshan to travel, encountered wind and rain, and lived in the mountains.

古文：夜将半，雨晴云飞，月朗风恬。
现代文：快到半夜的时候，雨过天晴，云彩飘移，月色明亮，风已平静。
English: It was nearly midnight, the rain had passed, the clouds had drifted away, the moon was bright, and the wind had calmed down.

古文：常慨然四望而叹曰： 我欲平天下乱，无一人之柄以佐我，无尺土之封以资我。我欲救天下之饥寒，而又衣食亦不自充。
现代文：王常感慨地四处望望，叹息着说： 我想要平定天下的祸乱，却没有一个人一件武器来辅佐我，没有一尺一寸的土地来资助我；我想要拯救天下挨饿受冻的人，而自己的衣食又不充足。
English: Wang Chang looked around with emotion and said with a sigh: I want to pacify the calamity of the world, but there is no one and no weapon to support me, and there is no inch of land to support me; I want to save the starving and freezing people in the world, but my own food and clothing are not sufficient.

古文：天地神祗福善，故不足信。 
现代文：天地神灵保佑行善事的人，还是不能相信啊。 
English: I still can't believe that the gods of heaven and earth bless those who do good deeds.

古文：言讫，有一神人自空而下，谓常曰： 尔何此言？ 
现代文：说完，有一个神人从空中下来，对王常说： 您怎么说出这样的话来？ 
English: Having said this, a divine being descended from the sky and said to Wang Chang: How can you say such a thing?

古文：常按剑沉吟良久，乃对曰： 我言者，平生之志也。
现代文：王常按着剑柄沉思了很久，才回答说： 我说的话，是我平生的志向啊！
English: Wang Chang pressed the hilt of his sword and pondered for a long time before he answered: What I said is my lifelong ambition!

古文：是何神圣，降临此间？ 
现代文：你是什么神圣，降临到这里？ 
English: What are you, a saint, come down here for?

古文：神人曰： 我有术，黄金可成，水银可死。虽不足平祸乱，亦可少济人之饥饥。
现代文：神人说： 我有方术，可以变成黄金，虽然不能平定祸乱，也可以稍微救济人们的饥寒。
English: The man of God said, "I have a technique that can turn into gold. Although I can't put an end to the calamity, I can alleviate people's hunger and cold a little.

古文：尔能授术于我，以救世人寒乎？ 
现代文：你能向我学习仙术，去救济世人的饥寒吗？ 
English: Can you learn magic from me to relieve the world's hunger and cold?

古文：常曰： 我闻此术是神仙之术，空有其名，未之见也。
现代文：王常说： 我听说这个方术是神仙之术，空闻其名，没有见到这样的方术啊。
English: Wang Chang said: I have heard that this square is the magic of the immortals. I have never seen such a square.

古文：况载籍之内，备叙秦皇汉武好此道，终无成，但为千载之讥诮。 
现代文：何况书籍记载的内容之中，详细叙述了秦始皇、汉武帝喜好这个方术，始终也没有成功，只为人们留下千载讥笑的话柄。 
English: Moreover, among the contents recorded in books, the preferences of Qin Shihuang and Han Emperor Wu were described in detail, but they were never successful, leaving only a thousand years of ridicule for people.

古文：神人曰： 秦皇、汉武，帝王也。帝王处救人之位，自有救人之术而不行，反求神仙之术则非。
现代文：神人说： 秦始皇、汉武帝是帝王啊，帝王处在救人的地位上，自己有救人的办法而不施行，反而去寻找神仙的方术，这就不对了。
English: The man of God said, "Qin Shihuang and Han Wudi are emperors. Emperors are in the position of saving people. It is not right for them to have the means to save people but not put them into practice. Instead, they should look for the methods of the gods.

古文：尔无救人之位，欲救天下之人，固可行此术。 
现代文：你没有救人的地位，却想要救助天下的人，当然可以施行这个方术了。 
English: You are not in a position to save people, but you want to help people around the world. Of course, you can use this method.

古文：常曰： 黄金成，水银死，真有之乎？ 
现代文：王常说： 黄金成，水银死，真有这样的事吗？ 
English: Wang Chang said: Gold is made, mercury dies, is there really such a thing?

古文：神人曰： 勿疑，有之哉。
现代文：神人说： 你不要怀疑，有这回事。
English: The man of God said, "Don't doubt it.

古文：夫黄金生于山石，其始也是山石之精，而千年为水银；水银受太阴之气，固流荡而不凝定。微遇纯阳之气合，则化黄金于倏忽也。
现代文：黄金从山石中生成，它当初也是山石的精华，经过一千年变成水银；水银接受了太阴之气，本来流动而不凝固，如果遇到纯阳之气与它汇合，那么在转眼之间它就变成黄金了。
English: Gold is formed from rock. It was originally the quintessence of rock. After a thousand years, it turned into mercury. Mercury received the air of yin. Originally, it flowed without solidifying. If it encountered the air of pure yang and merged with it, it would turn into gold in the blink of an eye.

古文：今若以水银欲化成黄金，必须在山即化，不在山即不化。
现代文：现在如果想把水银变成黄金，必须在山上炼化，在山就能炼化，不在山就不能炼化。
English: Now, if you want to turn mercury into gold, you must refine it in the mountains. You can refine it in the mountains, but you can't refine it without the mountains.

古文：但遇纯阴之石，气合即化也。
现代文：只要遇到纯阳的石头，阴阳二气汇合，就炼化了。
English: As long as it encounters the stone of the pure sun, the yin and yang of the two qi converge, it is refined.

古文：我有书，君受之勿疑。 
现代文：我有书，你把它拿去，不要怀疑。 
English: I have a book, you take it, don't doubt it.

古文：常乃再拜神人。
现代文：王常就向神人拜了两拜。
English: Wang Chang bowed twice to the godman.

古文：神人于袖中取一卷书授常，常跪受讫。神人戒之曰： 读此书，尽了黄白之道，异日当却付一人。
现代文：神人从袖子中拿出一卷书交给了王常，王常跪着接过来后，神人又告诫他说： 读了这卷书，就完全明白了点石成金之术。
English: The man of God took out a book from his sleeve and handed it to Wang Chang. Wang Chang knelt down and took it. The man of God then admonished him, "If you read this book, you will fully understand the art of turning a bit of stone into gold."

古文：勿轻授，勿终秘，勿授之以贵人；勿授之以道流僧徒，彼皆少有救人之术；勿授之以不义之辈，彼必不以饥寒为念。
现代文：将来应当再交给另一个人，但不要轻易传授，不要一直保密，不要把它传授给地位高的人，也不要把它传授给道流僧徒，因为他们都略有救人的办法。更不要把它传授给不义之徒，他们必然不把别人的饥寒放在心上。
English: In the future, it should be passed on to another person, but don't pass it on easily, don't keep it a secret, don't pass it on to people of high status, don't pass it on to dissident monks, because they all have a way to save people, and don't pass it on to evildoers, who certainly don't care about other people's hunger and cold.

古文：黄金成，济人之外，勿奢逸。
现代文：黄金炼成以后，除去救济穷人之外，不要贪图奢侈淫逸。
English: After the gold is refined, do not covet luxury and debauchery, except for the relief of the poor.

古文：珍重我术，珍重我言；如不然，天夺尔算。 
现代文：珍重我的方术，珍重我的话，如果不这样做，天将夺你的寿命。 
English: Cherish my methods, cherish my words, if you don't, heaven will take your life.

古文：常又再拜曰： 神人今授我圣术，固终身无忘也。
现代文：王常又拜了两拜说： 神人今天传给我神圣的方术，我当然终身不能忘记。
English: Wang Chang bowed twice more and said, "The sacred sorcery passed down to me today by the gods and mortals, of course I cannot forget it for the rest of my life.

古文：但乞示我是何神圣，使我知大惠之处。 
现代文：只请您告诉我您是什么神圣，使我知道这个大恩的来处。 
English: Only tell me what is sacred to you, so that I may know where this great grace comes from.

古文：神仙曰： 我山神也。
现代文：神仙说： 我是山神啊。
English: The deity said, "I am a mountain god.

古文：昔有道人藏此书于我山，今遇尔义烈之人，是以付尔。 
现代文：从前有个道人把这卷书藏在我的山中，今天遇到你这个义烈的人，所以给了你。 
English: Once upon a time, there was a Taoist who hid this book in my mountains. Today, I met you, a righteous man, so I gave it to you.

古文：言讫而灭。
现代文：说完，神人就不见了。
English: After saying this, the godman disappeared.

古文：常得此书读之，遂成其术。尔后多游历天下，以黄金赈济之绝。
现代文：王常得到这卷书，把它读通了，终于学成了那个方术，从此以后他经常游历天下，拿黄金去赈济贫困的人。
English: Wang Chang obtained this book, read it through, and finally learned the method. Since then, he has often traveled around the world to take gold to help the poor.

古文：叶虚中
现代文：叶虚中
English: Ye Jiu Middle School

古文：唐贞元初，丹阳令王琼，三年调集，皆黜落，甚惋愤。
现代文：唐朝贞元初年，丹阳县令王琼，三年谋取调升，年年都被驳回，因此很遗憾也很气愤。
English: In the first year of Zhenyuan of the Tang Dynasty, Wang Qiong, the governor of Danyang County, had been seeking promotion for three years, but was rejected every year, so he was very sorry and angry.

古文：乃斋宿于茅山道士叶虚中，求奏章以问吉凶。
现代文：于是他就到茅山道士叶虚中那里斋戒住宿，求叶虚中写表章奏报天帝来询问吉凶。
English: So he went to the Moushan Taoist Ye Huizhong to fast and stay there, and asked Ye Huizhong to write a seal and report to the Heavenly Emperor to inquire about the fortunes.

古文：虚中年九十余，强为奏之。
现代文：叶虚中已九十多岁了，勉强替他奏报。
English: Ye Huizhong, who is over 90 years old, reluctantly reported for him.

古文：其章随香烟飞上，缥缈不见。
现代文：那表章随着香烟飞上天，若有若无地就不见了。
English: The watch badge flew up into the sky with the cigarette, and disappeared without a trace.

古文：食顷复堕地，有朱书批其末云： 受金百两，折禄三年；枉杀二人，死后处分。 
现代文：大约过了一顿饭的时间，那表章又掉到地上，有红笔在表章末尾写上： 接受百两黄金，折损俸禄三年；冤枉杀死两人，死后再加处分。 
English: About an hour after the meal was over, the seal fell to the ground again, and a red pen wrote at the end of the seal: "Accepted one hundred and two gold pieces, lost salary for three years; killed two people unjustly, punished after death."

古文：后一年，琼果得暴疾终。
现代文：一年后，王琼果然得了暴病而死。
English: A year later, Wang Qiong died of a violent illness.

古文：郑君
现代文：郑君
English: Zheng Jun

古文：唐贞元末，郑君知盐铁信州院，常有顽夫，不察所从来，每于人吏处恐胁茶酒。
现代文：唐朝贞元末年，郑君主持盐铁信州院时，经常有一个蛮横的人，不知道从哪里来的，经常到众人和官吏住处威胁他们要茶要酒。
English: In the last years of the Zhengyuan period of the Tang Dynasty, when Zheng Jun presided over the Salt Railway Shinshu Academy, there was often a rude person, I don't know where he came from, who often went to the residences of many people and officials to threaten them to ask for tea and wine.

古文：郑君擒至笞脊，方庭炼矿次，计银数万两。
现代文：郑君下令把他擒来用板子打他脊背。当时院子里正在炼矿，估计有几万两银子。
English: Zheng ordered that he be handcuffed and hit on the back of the neck with a board. At the time, the yard was refining ore, estimated to be worth tens of thousands of taels.

古文：杖讫曳去，色返扬扬，呼曰： 且看此物得成否！ 
现代文：打完把那个人拖走，可是那个人脸色反而扬扬得意，喊着说： 且看这东西能炼成吗？ 
English: After the beating, they dragged the man away, but the man looked rather elated, shouting: "And look, can this thing be refined?

古文：果竟不变。
现代文：那些矿石炼完果然全无变化。
English: Those ores were completely unchanged after refining.

古文：郑君怒，枷送盐铁使江西李公，公即棒杀之。
现代文：郑君大怒，又把那个人套上枷索送到盐铁使江西李公那里去，李公就下令用棒子把他打死。
English: Zheng Jun flew into a rage, and put the man in shackles and sent him to Jiangxi Li Gong's place. Li Gong then gave the order to beat him to death with a club.

古文：旬日又至，复于炉处言曰： 看更得成就否！ 
现代文：可是过了十来天，那个人又来了，又到炉旁去说： 看看还能炼成不能？ 
English: But after about ten days, the man came again and went to the furnace and said, "Let's see if we can still make it."

古文：亦如前。
现代文：结果又像前一次那样没炼成。
English: The result was the same as the last time, the rum was not refined.

古文：郑公令捉倒，先折脚笞死，沃以豕血，埋狱中。
现代文：郑公又下令把他捉住按倒，先把脚折断，再用板子把他打死，并且又用猪血浇他，把他埋在狱中。
English: Zheng Gong also gave orders to capture and hold him down, first break his feet, then beat him to death with a board, and then douse him with pig's blood and bury him in prison.

古文：明旦，摆拨复自门来至。
现代文：第二天早晨，那个人又大摇大摆地从大门走来。
English: The next morning, the man swaggered through the gate again.

古文：使等惊异，皆迎接。
现代文：官吏人等都很惊奇，都去迎接他。
English: The officials were surprised and went to meet him.

古文：曰： 我本与汝作戏，矿但重炼，无虑也。 
现代文：那个人说： 我本来是与你们开玩笑，矿只管重炼，不用担心了。 
English: The man said, "I was just joking with you, the mine can only refine, don't worry about it."

古文：乃去。
现代文：说完就走了。
English: So Gaozu set off.

古文：郑君视于瘗所，悉已无矣，银并成就，从不复见矣。
现代文：郑君到埋他的地方去看，什么也没有了，同时银子也炼成了，那个人从此没有再出现。
English: Zheng Jun went to the place where he was buried to have a look. There was nothing left, and at the same time the silver had been refined. The man never reappeared.

古文：程逸人
现代文：程逸人
English: Cheng Yat-ren

古文：上党有程逸人者，有符术。
现代文：上党有个叫程逸人的人，有符术。
English: There was a man named Cheng Yiren in the Upper Party, who had the ability to write Chinese characters.

古文：刘悟为泽潞节度，临沼县民萧季平，家甚富，忽一日无疾暴卒。
现代文：刘悟任泽潞节度时，临治县有个平民叫萧季平，家里很富有，忽然有一天无病暴死。
English: At the time of Liu Wuren Zeyu Festival, there was a commoner in Linji County named Xiao Jiping. His family was very rich, but one day he suddenly died without any illness.

古文：逸人尝受平厚惠，闻其死，即驰往视之，语其子云： 尔父未当死，盖为山神所召，治之尚可活。 
现代文：逸人尝受过萧季平厚恩，听说他死了，就跑去看他，对他的儿子说： 你的父亲不应当死，大概是被山神召去了，给他治一治还可以活过来。 
English: Hearing that Xiao Jiping had died, Yi Ren, who had been blessed by Xiao Jiping, ran to see him and said to his son, "Your father should not have died. He was probably summoned by the mountain god. If you cure him, he can still live."

古文：于是朱书一符，向空掷之。
现代文：于是他就用朱笔画了一道符，向空中把它扔出去。
English: So he drew a symbol with a red pen and threw it into the air.

古文：仅食顷，季平果苏。
现代文：仅仅过了一顿饭时间，萧季平果然苏醒了。
English: After just one meal, Xiao Jiping woke up.

古文：其子问父向安适乎，季平曰： 我今日方起，忽见一绿衣人云，霍山神召我，由是与使者俱行。
现代文：他的儿子问父亲刚才到哪去了，萧季平说： 我今天刚起来，忽然看见一个穿绿衣的人，他说霍山神召我，我就跟使者一起走了。
English: When his son asked where his father had just gone, Xiao Qiping said: "I just got up today and suddenly saw a man in a green robe. He said that the god Huoshan had summoned me, so I went with the messenger.

古文：约五十余里，适遇丈夫朱衣，仗剑怒目，从空而至。
现代文：大约走了五十多里，刚好遇到一位穿朱红衣服的男子，仗剑怒目从空中来到。
English: After walking for more than fifty miles, he just happened to meet a man dressed in vermilion, who came flying from the sky with a sword in his hand.

古文：谓我曰： 程斩邪召汝，汝可即去。 
现代文：他对我说： 程斩邪召你，你可以立即去。 
English: He said to me, "Cheng Zhengyi summoned you, you can go immediately."

古文：于是绿衣者驰走，若有惧。
现代文：于是穿绿衣的人急忙走了，好像有所畏惧似的。
English: Then the man in green hurried away, as if he were afraid.

古文：朱衣人牵我复偕来，有顷，忽觉醒然。 
现代文：那个穿朱红衣服的人拉着我又一起回来，隔了一会儿，忽然惊觉，就苏醒了。 
English: The man in the scarlet robe pulled me back with him, and after a while, I suddenly woke up.

古文：其家惊异，因质问逸人曰： 所谓程斩邪者谁邪？ 
现代文：他家里的人觉得惊异，就询问程逸人说： 所说的程斩邪这个人是谁呀？ 
English: The people in his family were surprised and asked Cheng Yat-sen: "Who is this person called Cheng Zhengyi?"

古文：逸人曰： 吾学于师氏归氏龙虎斩邪符箓。 
现代文：程逸人说： 我从师氏归氏那里学到了龙虎斩邪符箓。 
English: Cheng Yat-sen said, "I learned from my teacher, Mr. Gui, how to use the dragon and tiger to defeat evil.

古文：因解所佩箓囊以示之，人方信其不诬。
现代文：说着就解下所佩带的符囊给他们看，人们才相信他的话不假。
English: When he said this, he unzipped the talisman bag he was wearing and showed it to them, and only then did they believe that his words were true.

古文：逸人后游闽越，竟不知所在。
现代文：程逸人后来游历闽越一带，不知哪里去了。
English: Cheng Yixuan later traveled around the Fengtai area, and I don't know where he went.

古文：李处士
现代文：李处士
English: Officer Li got up.

古文：李文公翱，自文昌宫出刺合肥郡。
现代文：文公李翱，从文昌宫出任合肥刺史。
English: Literary scholar Li Yan, from the Wenchang Palace, served as Hefei's chief historian.

古文：公性褊直方正，未尝信巫觋之事。
现代文：他性情狭隘，耿直方正，从来不相信女巫男巫所做的事。
English: He was narrow-minded and square-jawed, and never believed in what witches and wizards did.

古文：郡客李处士者，自云能通神人之言，言事颇中，合郡肃敬，如事神明。
现代文：合肥郡有个外乡人叫李处士，自己说能通神人的言语，他说的事很准，全郡的人对他肃然起敬，像信奉神明一样信奉他。
English: In Hefei County, there is a foreigner named Li Zhentong, who claims to be able to communicate with the gods. He is very accurate in what he says, and people throughout the county hold him in high esteem and worship him as if he were a god.

古文：公下车旬月，乃投刺候谒，礼容甚倨。
现代文：李翱上任快到一个月了，这个李处士才投进名刺等候进见，李翱礼节表情很傲慢。
English: It's been almost a month since Li Wei took office, and this official Li Wei has just put in his business card and is waiting to be seen. Li Wei's polite expression is very arrogant.

古文：公谓曰： 仲尼大圣也，而云未知生焉知死。
现代文：对他说： 孔仲尼是大圣人，却说不知生死，你能比孔子强吗？ 
English: He said to him, "Kongzhongni was a great sage, but he said that he did not know whether he would live or die. Can you be better than Confucius?

古文：子能贤于宣文邪？ 生曰： 不然，独不见阮生著《无鬼论》，精辨宏赡，人不能屈，果至见鬼乎？
现代文：李处士说： 不是这样，你难道没见到阮生写作《无鬼论》，言辞精辟，气势宏大，内容丰富，人们驳不倒他，最终结果见到鬼这件事吗？
English: Officer Li said, "Isn't it so? Didn't you see that Nguyen Son wrote "The Absence of Ghosts," his words were incisive, powerful, rich in content, people couldn't refute him, and the end result was to see a ghost?

古文：且公骨肉间，旦夕当有遘疾沉困者，苟晏安鸩毒则已，或五常粗备，渍以七情，孰忍视溺而不援哉？ 
现代文：而且你的亲人中间，最近当有得病沉重的人，如果你安于亲人被毒害就罢了，如果稍微具备五常之念，沾着七情，谁能忍心看着淹死而不伸手援救呢？ 
English: Moreover, among your relatives, there should be someone who has been seriously ill recently. If you are satisfied with your relatives being poisoned, if you have a little bit of the five elements and seven emotions, who can bear to watch them drown without reaching out for help?

古文：公愈怒，立命械系之。
现代文：李翱更加愤怒，立即下令用刑具把李处士锁住关押起来。
English: Li Yao became even angrier and immediately ordered to lock up the official with a torture device.

古文：夫人背疽，明日内溃，果不食昏暝，百刻不糁。
现代文：这时李翱的夫人背上生个毒疮，第二天里面就溃烂了，竟然不吃东西，昏昏沉沉地闭着眼睛，一连几天连米汤都没喝。
English: At this time, Li Yao's wife had a poisonous sore on her back, which festered the next day. She didn't eat, closed her eyes drowsily, and didn't even drink rice soup for several days.

古文：遍召医药，曾无少瘳。
现代文：到处问医买药，一点也没见好转。
English: I asked doctors everywhere to buy medicine, but I didn't see any improvement at all.

古文：爱女十人，既笄未嫁，环床呱呱而泣，自归咎于文公之桎梏李生也。
现代文：爱女十个人，已经到结婚的年龄却还没有出嫁，绕着床大声哭泣，开始埋怨李翱关押李生。
English: Ten beloved daughters, who have reached the age of marriage but have not yet married, cry loudly around the bed and begin to complain about Li Sheng's detention of Li Sheng.

古文：公以鸳鸯义重，息裔情牵，不得已，解缧绁而祈叩之。
现代文：李翱因为夫妻情义深重，子女感情牵动，不得已，就给李处士解开绳索向他磕头祈请。
English: Because of the deep feelings between husband and wife, and the emotional involvement of their children, Li Yan had no choice but to untie the rope for Officer Li and bow to him in prayer.

古文：则曰： 若手翰一文，俟夜当祈之，宜留墨篆同焚，当可脱免。 
现代文：李处士说： 如果你亲手写一篇文章，等到夜间当为你祈祷，应当把我留下的符一同烧掉，一定能够解脱免灾。 
English: Officer Li said, "If you write an article with your own hands, and wait until the night to pray for you, you should burn the token I left with you, and you will definitely be able to get rid of the calamity."

古文：仍诫曰：慎勿笺易铅椠，他无所须矣。 
现代文：又告诫他说： 千万不要在书札上添字改字，其它就不必准备什么了。 
English: He also admonished him: Never add or change words on the bookplate, and you don't need to prepare anything else.

古文：公竟受教。即自草祝语，洁手书之。
现代文：李翱完全按他指点的去作，就自己起草祷告的话，洗净了手去写。
English: Li Yan did exactly as he instructed, he drafted the prayer himself and washed his hands to write it.

古文：公性褊且疑，数纸皆误，不能爽约，则又再书。炬灺更深，疲于毫砚。
现代文：李翱性情狭隘又多疑，写了几张纸都有错误，不能失约，就又重新写，点着蜡烛写到更深，被累得疲倦不堪。
English: Li Yan was narrow-minded and suspicious. He wrote several pieces of paper with mistakes. He couldn't break the contract, so he rewrote it again. He lit a candle to write more deeply. He was exhausted.

古文：克意一幅，缮札稍严，而官位之中，竟笺一字。
现代文：精心写成一幅，书札缮写得比较严整，但写自己官位几个字中竟漏掉一字，在旁边补上。
English: It was carefully written as a picture, and the calligraphy was well done. However, in the few words he wrote about his official rank, one word was left out, and it was filled in on the side.

古文：既逾时刻，遂并符以焚。
现代文：约定的时刻已经超过了，就连信札和符箓一起烧了。
English: The appointed time has passed, and even the letter and the seal have been burned.

古文：焚毕，呻吟顿减，合室相庆。
现代文：烧完以后，夫人呻吟的声音顿时减少了，全家人互相庆贺。
English: After the cooking was over, the sound of her moaning suddenly diminished, and the whole family congratulated each other.

古文：黎明，李生候谒。
现代文：黎明时，李生等候拜见，李翱非常感激他。
English: At dawn, Li Sheng waited to see him. Li Yao was very grateful to him.

古文：公深德之。生曰： 祸则见免，犹谓迟迟。
现代文：李生说： 祸患算是被免除了，不过还是迟缓了。
English: Li Sheng said: The scourge has been eliminated, but it is still slow.

古文：诫公无得漏略，何为复注一字？ 
现代文：我告诫您不能漏字，为什么又补注一个字？ 
English: I warned you not to omit a word, so why did you add another?

古文：公曰： 无之。 
现代文：李翱说： 没有这回事。 
English: Li Wei said: There is no such thing.

古文：生曰： 祝词在斯。 
现代文：李生说： 祈祷的词句在这里。 
English: Li Sheng said, "The words of the prayer are written here.

古文：因探怀以出示，则昨夕所烬之文也。
现代文：就从怀争掏出给他看，正是昨天烧成灰的文字。
English: I pulled it out of my pocket to show him, it was the text that burned to ashes yesterday.

古文：公惊愕惭赧，避席而拜，酬之厚币。
现代文：李翱又惊愕又羞惭，就离开座席向李生下拜，用厚礼报答他。
English: Surprised and ashamed, Li Yao left his seat to bow to Li Sheng and thanked him profusely.

古文：竟无所取，旬日告别，不知所往。
现代文：李生什么也不要，过了十来天，李生告别，不知到哪里去了。
English: Li Sheng didn't want anything. After about ten days, Li Sheng said goodbye and I don't know where he went.

古文：疾亦渐间。
现代文：夫人的病也渐渐痊愈了。
English: My wife's illness is also getting better.

古文：骆玄素
现代文：骆玄素
English: Camellia sinensis

古文：赵州昭庆民骆玄素者，为小吏，得罪于县令，遂遁迹而去。
现代文：赵州昭庆县民有个叫骆玄素的人，担当小吏时得罪了县令，就逃遁而去。
English: There was a man named Luo Xuan Su from Zhaoqing County in Zhaozhou. When he was in charge of a minor official, he offended the county magistrate and ran away.

古文：令怒，分捕甚急，遂匿身山谷中。
现代文：县令发怒，派人分头捕获很紧急，骆玄素就藏身于山谷之中。
English: The county magistrate was so angry that he dispatched a detachment to capture Luo Xuan Su, who was hiding in the valley.

古文：忽遇老翁，衣褐衣，质状凡陋，策杖立于长松之下。
现代文：有一天，他忽然遇到一个老翁，穿着粗麻衣服，资质一般，样子丑陋，拄着拐杖站在高高的松树下。
English: One day, he suddenly encountered an old man, dressed in coarse linen, with average qualifications and an ugly appearance, standing under a tall pine tree on crutches.

古文：召玄素讯之曰： 尔安得至此耶？ 
现代文：他把玄素叫过来问他说： 你怎么能到这里来呢？ 
English: He called Hyun-Soo and asked him, "How did you get here?"

古文：玄素对： 得罪于县令，遁逃至此，幸翁见容。 
现代文：玄素回答说： 我得罪了县令，逃遁到这里，希望老人家容留我。 
English: Xuan Su replied, "I have offended the county magistrate and fled here. I hope the old man will tolerate me."

古文：翁引玄素入深山，仅行十余里，至一岩穴，见二茅斋东西相向，前临积水，珍木奇花，罗列左右。
现代文：老头就把玄素领进深山，大约走了十多里，到了一个岩洞，看到两座茅屋东西相对，前面池水，珍奇的花木排列在左右。
English: The old man led him deep into the mountains, about ten miles away, to a cave, where he saw two thatched huts facing each other, a pond in front, and rare flowers and trees lined up on either side.

古文：有侍童一人，年甚少，总角衣短褐，白衣纬带革舄，居于西斋。
现代文：有一个侍童，年龄很小，把头发束成髻，穿着麻布短衣，白色的衣服束着腰带，穿着兽皮制做的鞋，住在西边的房屋。
English: There was a page boy, very young, with his hair in a bun, wearing a short linen dress, a white dress tied with a sash, and shoes made of animal skins, who lived in a house to the west.

古文：其东斋有药灶，命玄素候火。
现代文：那东边的房屋有炼药的炉灶，老头就让玄素在那里守火。
English: The house to the east had a furnace for refining medicines, and the old man asked Xuan Su to keep the fire there.

古文：老翁自称东真君，命玄素以东真呼之。
现代文：老头自称东真君，让玄素称呼他东真。
English: The old man called himself Dong Zhenjun and asked Xuan Su to call him Dong Zhen.

古文：东真以药十余粒，令玄素饵之，且曰： 可以治饥矣。 
现代文：东真把十几粒药拿出来给玄素，让玄素把它服下，又说： 这药可以治疗饥饿。 
English: Dong Zhen took out a dozen pills and gave them to Xuan Su. Xuan Su took them and said, "This medicine can cure hunger."

古文：自是玄素绝粒。
现代文：从此玄素不吃一粒粮食。
English: From then on, Xuan Su did not eat a single grain of grain.

古文：仅岁余，授符术及吸气之法，尽得其妙。
现代文：将近一年多，老头又传授给玄素符术和呼气之法，玄素完全掌握了其中奥妙。
English: For more than a year, the old man taught Hsuan Suo the art of writing and exhaling, and Hsuan Suo completely mastered the secrets.

古文：一日，又谓玄素曰： 子可归矣。 
现代文：有一天，老头又对玄素说： 你可以回去了。 
English: One day, the old man said to Xuan Su: You can go back.

古文：既而送玄素至县南数十里，执手而别。
现代文：然后就把玄素送到县南几十里的地方，握手告别。
English: Then, he sent it to a place several dozen miles south of the prefecture, and shook hands with everyone to say goodbye.

古文：自此以符术行里中。
现代文：从此玄素就在乡里之中行符术。
English: Since then, Xuan Su has been practicing the art in the countryside.

古文：常有孕妇，过期不产。玄素以符一道，令饵之，其夕即产，于儿手中得所吞之符。
现代文：曾经有一个孕妇，过了产期而没有生下孩子，玄素把一道符给她，让她吞服下去，当天夜里就生了，在孩子手中找到了产妇吞下的那道符。
English: Once upon a time, there was a pregnant woman who was past her due date and had not given birth to a child. Xuan Su gave her a talisman and asked her to swallow it. She gave birth that night, and in the child's hands she found the talisman that the mother had swallowed.

古文：其他神效，不可具述。
现代文：其他神效的事情，不能详细记述。
English: Other supernatural events cannot be described in detail.

古文：其后玄素犯法，刺史杖杀之。凡月余，其尸如生，曾无委坏之色，盖饵灵药所致。
现代文：后来玄素犯了法，刺史用杖把他打死，共计一个多月，他的尸体还像活着时一样，一点也没有朽败的样子，原因是服食灵药造成的。
English: Later, Xuan Su broke the law, and Shi Shi beat him to death with a cane, for a total of more than a month. His corpse was still as it was when he was alive, and did not look rotten at all. The cause was caused by taking the elixir.

古文：于是里人收瘗之。
现代文：于是乡里的人替他收尸，把他埋葬了。
English: So the villagers collected his body and buried him.

古文：时宝历元年夏月也。
现代文：当时是宝历元年夏天。
English: It was the summer of the first year of the Horyu era.

古文：赵操
现代文：赵操
English: Zhao Cao

古文：赵操者，唐相国憬之孽子也，性疏狂不慎。相国屡加教戒，终莫改悔。
现代文：赵操是唐朝相国赵憬的孽子，性情粗野，放荡不羁，相国屡次加以教训，他也始终没有悔改的表现。
English: Zhao Cao was the son-in-law of the Tang Dynasty's brother-in-law, Zhao Jing. He had a coarse temperament and was unruly. The brother-in-law repeatedly gave him lessons, but he never showed any signs of repentance.

古文：有过惧罪，因盗小吏之驴，携私钱二緍，窜于旗亭下。
现代文：有一次，他犯了过失，害怕治罪，就偷了小吏的一头驴，携带二千文私房钱，逃到旗亭之下。
English: Once, when he made a mistake and was afraid of being punished, he stole a donkey belonging to a petty official and fled under the pavilion with two thousand rupees of his own money.

古文：不日钱尽，遂南出启夏门，恣意纵驴，从其所往。
现代文：不几天钱花光了，就向南走出了启夏门，任意驱赶毛驴，听从毛驴往前走。
English: After a few days of running out of money, he walked out of the Qixia Gate to the south, drove the donkey at will, and followed the donkey to go forward.

古文：俄届南山，渐入深远，猿鸟一径，非畜乘所历。
现代文：时间不久到了南山，越走越深，越走越远，只剩下一条只有猴子和飞鸟才能过去的小路，不能乘驴过去。
English: Time soon came to Nanshan. The deeper I walked, the farther I went. There was only one path left that only monkeys and birds could pass, and I couldn't pass on a donkey.

古文：操即系驴山木，跻攀独往。
现代文：赵操就把驴拴在山下树上，独自往上攀登。
English: Zhao Cao tied the donkey to a tree at the foot of the mountain and climbed up alone.

古文：行可二十里，忽遇人居，因即款门。
现代文：大约走了二十里，忽然遇到有人居住的房舍，赵操就去敲门。
English: After walking for about twenty miles, Zhao Cao suddenly came across an inhabited house and went to knock on the door.

古文：既入，有二白发叟谓操曰： 汝既至，可以少留。 
现代文：进屋以后，有两位白发老头对他说： 你既然来了，可以稍作停留。 
English: After entering the house, two white-haired old men said to him: Since you are here, you can stay for a while.

古文：操顾其室内，妻妾孤幼，不异俗世。
现代文：赵操向那屋里一看，妻妾儿女都有，跟俗世没有什么不同。
English: When Zhao Cao looked into the room, he saw that his wife, concubine and children were all there, no different from the world.

古文：操端无所执，但恣游山水，而甚安焉。
现代文：赵操由于没事可做，就只管游山玩水，而觉得在这里很安闲。
English: With nothing to do, Zhao Cao only went hiking and playing in the water, but found it very relaxing here.

古文：月余，二叟谓操曰： 劳汝入都，为吾市山中所要。 
现代文：一个多月后，两个老头对他说： 劳驾你进一趟都城，为我们买些山里需要的东西。 
English: After more than a month, the two old men said to him, "Please come to the capital to buy some things we need in the mountains."

古文：操则应命。
现代文：赵操就答应了。
English: Zhao Fu agreed.

古文：二叟曰： 汝所乘驴，货之可得五千，汝用此，依吾所约买之而还。 
现代文：两个老头又说： 你所骑来的那头驴，把它卖掉可以得到五千钱，你用这些钱，依照我们约定的把东西买回来。 
English: And the two old men said, Sell the ass that thou camest upon, and thou shalt have five thousand pieces of money; and buy it again with these, according to our agreement.

古文：操因曰： 操大人方为国相，今者入京，惧其收维。
现代文：赵操就向他们说： 我父亲正担当相国，现在我进京去，担心他把我抓回去。
English: Zhao Cao said to them: My father is in charge of a neighboring country, now I am going to Beijing, I am worried that he will take me back.

古文：且驴非己畜，何容便货？况絷之山门，今已一月，其存亡不可知也。 
现代文：而且那头毛驴也不是我自己的牲畜，怎能容我随便卖掉，何况把它系在山下，如今已一个月了，那头驴是死是活还不知道呢。 
English: Moreover, that donkey is not my own animal, how can I sell it, let alone tie it at the foot of the mountain. It's been a month now, and I still don't know if the donkey is dead or alive.

古文：二叟曰： 第依吾教，勿过忧苦。 
现代文：两个老头说： 你尽管按我们说的话去做，不必过于忧愁苦恼。 
English: The two old men said, "Just do what we tell you, and don't worry too much.

古文：操即出山，宛见其驴尚在。还乘之而驰，足力甚壮。
现代文：赵操就出了山，看见那头驴还在，就又骑上它跑起来，那头驴的脚力很强壮。
English: Zhao Fu went out of the mountain and saw that the donkey was still there. He mounted it again and started to run. The donkey's legs were very strong.

古文：货之，果得五千。因探怀中二叟所示之书，惟买水银耳。
现代文：赵操把它卖掉，果然得到了五千钱，就从怀中掏出老头交给他的购货单，原来只买水银而已。
English: Zhao Fu sold it and got 5,000 yuan. He pulled out the purchase order that the old man had given him from his pocket. Originally, he only wanted to buy mercury.

古文：操即为交易，薄晚而归，终暝遂及二叟之舍。
现代文：赵操替他们买了水银，傍晚时往回走，天完全黑下来时就回到了两个老头的住处。
English: Zhao Fu bought the mercury for them, walked back in the evening, and returned to the two old men's residence when it was completely dark.

古文：二叟即以杂药烧炼，俄而化为黄金。
现代文：两个老头就用杂药烧炼水银，不一会儿，水银就变成了黄金。
English: The two old men used herbs to burn the mercury, and in a short time, the mercury turned into gold.

古文：因以此术示之于操。
现代文：于是两个老头就把这个方术传授给了赵操。
English: So the two old men taught this method to Zhao Fu.

古文：自尔半年，二叟徐谓操曰： 汝可归宁，三年之后，当与汝会于茅庐。 
现代文：从这以后半年过去了，两个老头慢慢地对赵操说： 你可以回家了。三年之后，该与你在茅庐相会。 
English: Half a year has passed since then, and the two old men slowly said to Zhao Cao: You can go home. After three years, it's time to meet you at the thatched cottage.

古文：操愿留不获，于是辞诀。
现代文：赵操等小祭过后，就又进了山。
English: After the small festival, Zhao Cao and the others went back into the mountains.

古文：及家，相国薨再宿矣。
现代文：可是遇到歧路木石，峰峦树木，都不是以前经过的那样了。
English: However, when encountering stones and stones, peaks and trees, it is not the same as before.

古文：操过小祥，则又入山，歧路木石，峰峦树木，皆非向之所经也，操亟返，服阕，因告别昆仲，游于江湖，至今无羁于世。
现代文：赵操急忙返回家。守丧完毕，就告别兄弟，游历江湖。
English: Zhao Cao hurriedly returned home. After the funeral, he said goodbye to his brothers and traveled across the country.

古文：从学道者甚众，操终无传焉。
现代文：到现在也没有在世上停留。跟他学道的人很多，赵操始终没传授他们。
English: Even now, he has not stopped in the world. There are many people who have studied with him, but Zhao Cao has never taught them.

古文：崔玄亮
现代文：崔玄亮
English: Cui Xuanliang

古文：唐太和中，崔玄亮为湖州牧。尝有僧道闲，善药术。
现代文：唐代太和年间，崔玄亮担住湖州刺史时，曾经有个叫道闲的和尚，善长炼药方术。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, when Cui Xuanliang was in charge of the history of Huzhou, there was a monk who was good at making recipes.

古文：崔曾求之。
现代文：崔玄亮曾经向他请求学习。
English: Cui Xuanliang once asked him to learn to dance.

古文：僧曰： 此术不难求，但利于此者，必及阴谴。可令君侯一见耳。 
现代文：和尚说： 这个方术不难探求，只不过靠这个方术获取好处的人，一定会遭到责罚的。
English: The monk said, "This method is not difficult to learn, but those who take advantage of it will be punished.

古文：乃遣崔市汞一斤，入瓦锅，纳一紫丸，盖以方瓦，叠灰埋锅，备而焰起。
现代文：不过可以让您看一看。 就让崔玄亮买来一斤水银，把它倒入瓦锅内，放进一颗紫色药丸，用方瓦把锅盖上，又堆聚木炭把锅埋起来。
English: Let Cui Xuanliang buy a kilogram of mercury, pour it into a pot, put a purple pill in it, cover the pot with a square tile, and pile up charcoal to bury the pot.

古文：谓崔曰： 只成银，无以取信。
现代文：准备好了火就燃起来了。和尚对崔玄亮说： 如果只炼成银子，还不能取信。
English: When the fire was ready, it was lit. The monk said to Cui Xuanliang, "If you only make silver, you can't receive letters."

古文：公宜虔心想一物，则自成矣。 
现代文：你可以诚心诚意地想一件东西，就自然形成了。 
English: You can sincerely think about something, and it will naturally come into being.

古文：食顷，僧夹锅于水盆中，笑曰： 公想何物？ 
现代文：吃顿饭的时间，和尚把锅夹起来放在水盆中，笑着说： 您想的是什么东西？ 
English: When it was time to eat, the monk picked up the pot and placed it in the basin. He smiled and said, "What are you thinking about?

古文：崔曰： 想我之形。 
现代文：崔玄亮说： 想我自己的形像。 
English: Cui Xuanliang said: I want to create my own image.

古文：僧取以示之，若范金焉，眉目中笏，悉具之矣。
现代文：和尚就从锅中取出一件东西给他看，好象用金子做的模型似的，眉毛、眼睛、头巾、笏板，崔玄亮的特征都具备了。
English: The monk took something out of the pot and showed it to him. It looked like a model made of gold. The eyebrows, eyes, headscarf, and cutting board all had the features of Cui Xuanliang.

古文：此则神仙之术，不可厚诬，但罕遇其流，有自言者，皆妄焉耳。
现代文：这就是神仙的方术，无可厚非，只是很少遇到神仙一类的人，有自我标榜是神仙的人，大都是虚妄的。
English: This is the way of the immortals, there is no doubt about it, but it is rare to encounter a person of the immortals, and those who have self-billed themselves as immortals are mostly false.

