古文：王建，陈州项城人。
现代文：王建，陈州项城人。
English: Wang Jian, a resident of Xiangcheng, Chenzhou.

古文：唐末，隶名于忠武军。
现代文：唐朝末年，加入忠武军。
English: At the end of the Tang Dynasty, he joined the Loyalist Army.

古文：秦宗权据蔡州，悬重赏以募之，建始自行间得补军候。
现代文：秦宗权盘踞蔡州，悬重赏来招募他，王建才从行伍之间得以补任军候。
English: Qin Zongquan besieged Caizhou and offered a heavy reward to recruit him, and Wang Jiancai was able to fill in as a military steward from the ranks.

古文：广明中，黄巢陷长安，僖宗幸蜀。
现代文：广明年间，黄巢攻陷长安，僖宗移驾蜀地。
English: In the middle of the Guangxi year, Huang Chao captured Chang'an, and Shizong moved to Shu.

古文：时梁祖为巢将，领众攻襄、邓，宗权遣小校鹿晏宏从监军杨复光率师攻之，建亦预行。
现代文：当时后梁太祖还是黄巢部将，带领众军进攻襄州、邓州，秦宗权派小校鹿晏弘跟着监军杨复光领兵进攻梁太祖，王建也在军中。
English: At that time, Liang Taizu was still the commander of the Yellow Nest Division, leading the troops to attack Xiangzhou and Dengzhou. Qin Zongquan sent the schoolboy Lu Xunhong to attack Liang Taizu with Yang Fuguang leading the troops, and Wang Jian was also in the army.

古文：是岁，复光入援京师，明年破贼收京城。初，复光以忠武军八千人立为八都，晏宏与建各一都校也。
现代文：这一年，杨复光增援京城，第二年攻破黄巢乱寇收复京城，当初，杨复光将忠武军八千人分为八都，鹿晏弘与王建各为一都校尉。
English: In this year, Yang Fuguang reinforced Beijing, and in the following year, he defeated Huang Chao and recovered Beijing. At first, Yang Fuguang divided the loyal army of eight thousand people into eight capitals, and Lu Yinghong and Wang Jian were each a capital captain.

古文：复光死，晏弘率八都迎扈行在，至山南，乃攻剽金、商诸郡县，得兵数万，进逼兴元，节度使牛丛弃城而去，晏宏因自为留后，建等为属郡刺史，不令之任。
现代文：杨复光死后，鹿晏弘率领八都士兵前往保卫皇帝出行居住的地方，到山南，就攻击抢劫金州、商州各郡县，收得士兵数万人，进逼兴元府，兴元节度使牛丛弃城而逃，鹿晏弘因而自封为留后，以王建等人为府属州郡的刺史，却不让他们去上任。
English: After the death of Yang Fuguang, Lu Jianhong led soldiers from the eight capitals to defend the emperor's place of residence. In Shannan, he attacked and robbed the counties and counties of Jinzhou and Shangzhou, collecting tens of thousands of soldiers. He forced his way into Xingyuan. The Xingyuan festival made the cattle abandon the city and flee. Lu Jianhong therefore stayed behind after he was self-appointed. He used Wang Jian and others as the history of the prefectural counties, but did not allow them to take office.

古文：俄而晏宏正授节旄，恐部下谋己，多行忍虐，由是部众离心。
现代文：不久鹿晏弘被正式授与符节大旗，怕部下谋害自己，就做了很多残忍暴虐的事，因此部下将士与他离心。
English: Soon after, Rokujuhiro was officially awarded the Grand Banner of the Rune Festival. Fearing that his subordinates were plotting to kill him, he did many cruel and tyrannical things. As a result, his subordinates distanced themselves from him.

古文：建与别将韩建友善，晏宏益猜二建，伪待之厚，引入卧内。
现代文：王建与另一将领韩建很友好，鹿晏弘更加猜疑这两人，假装对待他们优厚，引进自己寝室内。
English: Wang Jian and another general Han Jian are very friendly. Lu Yuhong is even more suspicious of the two, pretending to treat them well and bringing them into his bedroom.

古文：二建惧，夜登城慰守陴者，因月下共谋所向，谓韩建曰： 仆射甘言厚德，是疑我也，祸难无日矣，早宜择利而行。 韩曰： 善。 
现代文：两人害怕，夜晚爬上城墙告慰守卫城墙的士兵，在月下一起商量出路，王建对韩建说： 鹿晏弘仆射甜言蜜语，是猜疑我们，祸难不远了，应早点选择一个好的去处。 韩建说 ：说得对。 
English: The two were afraid, climbed the city wall at night to comfort the soldiers guarding the city wall, and discussed the way out together under the moon. Wang Jian said to Han Jian: Deerslayer Hongpu is sweet-talking, he is suspicious of us, disaster is not far away, we should choose a good place to go early. Han Jian said: That's right.

古文：因率三千人趋行在，僖宗嘉之，赐与巨万。
现代文：于是率领三千人投奔皇帝出行所在的地方，僖宗嘉许他们，赐给巨额财富。
English: So he led three thousand people to the place where the emperor was traveling, and Emperor Taizong praised them and gave them a huge amount of wealth.

古文：分其兵为五都，仍以旧校主之，即晋晖、李师泰、张造与二建也，因号曰随驾五都，田令孜皆录为假子。
现代文：将他们的士兵分作五都，归隶以前的校尉晋晖、李师泰、张造和王建、韩建领导，因而号称为随驾五都，田令孜把五人都收为自己的养子。
English: He divided his soldiers into five groups, with the former lieutenants Jin Zhuo, Li Shitai, Zhang Zuo, Wang Jian, and Han Jian leading the group. As a result, they became known as the Five Followers, and Tian Lingzi adopted all five of them as his adopted sons.

古文：及僖宗还宫，建等分典神策军，皆遥领刺史。
现代文：到僖宗驾返长安宫殿后，王建等人分别掌管神策军，都兼任地方刺史。
English: After the Yongzong returned to the Chang'an Palace, Wang Jian and others were in charge of the Shensha Army, and they also served as local historians.

古文：光启初，从僖宗再幸兴元，令孜惧逼，求为西川监军，杨复恭代为观军容使。
现代文：光启初年，跟随僖宗再次到兴元府，田令孜害怕受逼，请求作西川监军，杨复恭代任观军容使。
English: In the first year of Guangqi, he once again followed Emperor Taizong to Xingyuanfu. Tian Lingze, afraid of being forced, requested to be the inspector of the West River, and Yang Fuzhong took the place of the observer.

古文：建等素为令孜所厚，复恭惧不附己，乃出五将为郡守，以建为壁州刺史。
现代文：王建等人一向被田令孜厚爱，李复恭怕他们不归附自己，就派出这五位将领到下面任郡守，任王建为壁州刺史。
English: Wang Jian and others had always been deeply loved by Tian Lingzi. Li Fuqiong was afraid that they would not return to him, so he sent these five generals to be county governors, and appointed Wang Jian as the governor of Bishu.

古文：天子还京，复恭以杨守亮镇兴元，尤畏建侵己，屡召之。
现代文：天子回京以后，杨复恭以杨守光镇守兴元府，更害怕王建害自己，屡次招召他。
English: After Tianzi returned to Beijing, Yang Fuqiong used Yang Shuguang to guard Xingyuan. He was even more afraid of Wang Jian harming himself, and repeatedly summoned him.

古文：建不安其郡，因招合溪洞豪猾，有众八千，寇阆州，陷之，复攻利州，刺史王珙弃城而去。
现代文：王建在郡任上也不安，因而聚合溪流山洞的豪强滑寇，得到八千部下，寇犯阆州，攻陷了它，又进攻利州，刺史王珙弃城而逃。
English: Wang Jian was not satisfied with his position as county magistrate, so he gathered eight thousand of his subordinates from the powerful gliding robbers of the stream cave, robbed Zhangzhou, captured it, and attacked Lizhou. Zishi Wang abandoned the city and fled.

古文：建播剽二郡，所至杀掠，守亮不能制。
现代文：王建剽劫两郡，杨守亮不能禁止。
English: Wang Jianliao robbed two counties, Yang Shouliang cannot be banned.

古文：东川节度使顾彦朗，初于关辅破贼时与建相闻，每使人劳问，分货币军食以给之，故建不侵梓、遂。
现代文：东川节度使顾彦朗，当初在京城附近攻黄巢时与王建相识，常派人慰问，将货币军粮分给他，所以王建不侵犯梓州和遂州。
English: Dongchuan Jiedu made Gu Yanlang meet Wang Jian when he attacked Huang Chao near Beijing. He often sent condolences and gave him money and military grain, so Wang Jian did not invade Zizhou and Suizhou.

古文：西川节度使陈敬瑄忧其胶固，谋于监军田令孜，曰： 王八，吾子也，彼无他肠，作贼山南，实进退无归故也。
现代文：西川节度使陈敬蠧怕王建势力巩固，与监军田令孜商量，田令孜说 ：王八，是我的养子，他没有别的主意，在山南当贼寇，实在是进退维谷的原因。
English: The Nishikawa festival made Chen Jingyao fear the consolidation of Wang Jian's power, and discussed with the supervisor of the army, Tian Lingzi. Tian Lingzi said: Wang Baxi is my adopted son, he has no other idea, being a bandit in Shannan is really the reason for the difficulties.

古文：吾驰咫尺之书，可以坐置麾下。 
现代文：我急送给他几行书信，可以让他归于我们旗下。 
English: I hurriedly sent him a few lines of correspondence so that he could come under our banner.

古文：即飞书招建。
现代文：于是飞快地传信招王建。
English: So they quickly sent a letter to recruit Wang Jian.

古文：建大喜，遣使谓彦朗曰： 监军阿父遣信见招，仆欲诸成都省阿父，因依陈太师得一大郡，是所愿也。 
现代文：王建非常高兴，派使者对顾彦朗说： 监军养父写信招收我，我想去成都探望义父，因便依附陈太师，得统率一处大郡，是我所愿望的。 
English: Wang Jian was very happy and sent an envoy to Gu Yanlang, saying, "My foster father, the supervisor of the army, wrote a letter to recruit me. I want to go to Chengdu to visit my father-in-law. Since I am attached to Chen Taishi, it is my wish to lead a large county.

古文：即之梓州见彦朗，留家寄东川，选精甲三千之成都。
现代文：即到梓州见顾彦朗，将家人寄留在东川，挑选精锐甲士三千人到成都。
English: That is, he went to Zizhou to meet Gu Yanlang, left his family in Dongchuan, and selected 3,000 elite warriors to go to Chengdu.

古文：行次鹿头，或谓敬瑄曰： 建，今之剧贼，鸱视狼顾，专谋人国邑，傥其即至，公以何等处之？
现代文：走到鹿头，有人对陈敬蠧说： 王建是现今最厉害的贼寇，像鸱枭一样地瞪着眼睛，像恶狼一样地环视四周，专门图谋别人的国土城邑，如果他一来，您用什么职位安置他？
English: Walking to Deer's Head, someone said to Chen Jingyao, "Wang Jianru is today's most powerful bandit. He stares like a baboon and looks around like a wolf, intent on plotting other people's lands and cities. If he comes, what position will you place him in?"

古文：彼建雄心，终不居人之下，公如以将校遇之，是养虎自贻其患也。 
现代文：那王建野心勃勃，终将不居于人下，您如果以将校对待他，是养虎贻患。 
English: That Wang Jian is ambitious, and he will not live below the people in the end. If you treat him as an officer, it will be a breeding ground for trouble.

古文：敬瑄惧，乃遣人止建，遽修城守。
现代文：陈敬蠧害怕了，就派人拦阻王建，急忙修筑城防。
English: Chen Jingyao was afraid, so he sent someone to stop Wang Jian and hastily built a city wall.

古文：建怒，遂据汉州，领轻兵至成都。敬瑄让之曰： 若何为者，而犯吾疆理？ 
现代文：王建大怒，就占据汉州，率领轻装士兵到成都，陈敬蠧责问他说 ：你们是干什么的，竟敢犯我疆土？ 
English: Wang Jian flew into a rage, occupied Hanzhou and led light-armed soldiers to Chengdu. Chen Jingyao scolded him and asked: "What are you doing, how dare you violate my territory?"

古文：建军吏报曰： 阆州司徒比寄东川，而军容太师使者继召，今复拒绝，何也？
现代文：王建的军官回答说 ：我们阆州司徒前不久寄身在东川，而贵处观军容太师派使者招召，现又加以拒绝，是为什么？
English: Wang Jian's officer replied, "We, Zhangzhou Sittu, stayed in Dongchuan not long ago, but you sent an envoy to invite the Grandmaster Yong, and now you have rejected it. Why is that?"

古文：司徒不惜改辕而东，而北省太师，反为拒绝，虑顾梓州复相嫌间，谓我何心故也。
现代文：我们司徒不惜改变方向到东边来，来这里探望太师，反而被拒绝。担心顾彦朗又会嫌弃我们，不理解我们此行是什么用心。
English: We, the Sito, did not hesitate to change our direction and come to the east. We came here to visit Taishi, but were turned away. We were worried that Gu Yanlang would reject us again, and did not understand the intention of our trip.

古文：使我来报，且欲寄食汉州，公勿复疑。 
现代文：所以司徒派我们来报告，准备暂时在汉州讨口饭吃，您不要再猜疑。 
English: That's why Szeto sent us here to report that we're preparing to find a place to eat in Hanzhou for the time being. Don't doubt us any longer.

古文：时光启三年。
现代文：这时是光启三年。
English: At this time, it was the third year of Guangqi.

古文：居浃旬，建尽取东川之众，设梯冲攻成都，三日不克而退，复保汉州。
现代文：住下才一、二十天，王建全部调来东川的兵力，架长梯冲击进攻成都，三天没攻下而退回，再据守汉州。
English: After only one to twenty days of residence, Wang Jian transferred all of Dongchuan's forces, mounted a long ladder to attack Chengdu, did not attack for three days and returned, and then defended Hanzhou.

古文：月余，大剽蜀土，进逼彭州，百道攻之，敬瑄出兵来援，建解围，纵兵大掠，十一州皆罹其毒，民不聊生。
现代文：一个多月，大肆抢劫蜀地，进逼彭州，从各个方向进攻，陈敬蠧派兵来救援，王建撤除对彭州的围困，放纵士兵大肆抢劫，十一州都遭受他的荼毒，民不聊生。
English: For more than a month, he plundered Shu, forced his way into Pengzhou, and attacked from all directions. Chen Jingyao sent troops to rescue, Wang Jian lifted the siege on Pengzhou, and allowed soldiers to plunder. Eleven states were poisoned by him, and the people did not want to live.

古文：建军势日盛，复攻成都，敬瑄患之，顾彦朗亦惧侵己。
现代文：王建兵力一天天壮大，又进攻成都，陈敬蠧害怕他，顾彦朗也怕他侵害自己。
English: Wang Jian's military strength grew day by day, and he attacked Chengdu. Chen Jingyao was afraid of him, and Gu Yanlang was also afraid of him encroaching on himself.

古文：昭宗即位，彦朗表请雪建，择大臣为蜀帅，移敬瑄他镇，乃诏宰臣韦昭度镇蜀，以代敬瑄。
现代文：唐昭宗即位，顾彦朗上表请求洗刷王建罪名，挑选一位大臣作为蜀地统帅，调动陈敬蠧镇守他方，于是诏令宰臣韦昭度统率蜀地，以代替陈敬蠧。
English: When Tang Zhaozong ascended the throne, Gu Yanlang made a request to clear Wang Jian of the charges, select a minister as the commander of Shu, and mobilize Chen Jingyao to guard the other side. Therefore, he ordered the vice-minister Wei Zhaodou to lead Shu to replace Chen Jingyao.

古文：敬瑄不受代，天子怒，命顾彦朗、杨守亮讨之，时昭度以建为牙内都校，董其部兵。
现代文：陈敬蠧不接受替代，天子大怒，命令顾彦朗、杨守亮征讨他，这时韦昭度以王建为牙内都校，掌管他部下兵马。
English: Chen Jingyao did not accept the replacement, the heavenly son was furious and ordered Gu Yanlang and Yang Shouliang to recruit him. At this time, Wei Zhaodu took Wang Jian as the Inner Capital School, in charge of his subordinates.

古文：《鉴戒录》云：昭度以部兵置行府。及王师无功，建谓昭度曰： 相公兴数万之众，讨贼未效，饷运交不相属。近闻迁洛以来，籓镇相噬，朝廷姑息不暇，与其劳师以事蛮方，不如从而赦之，且以兵威靖中原，是国之本也。
现代文：到皇室军队不得取胜时，王建对韦昭度说： 相公您调动数万部队，讨伐逆贼不能奏效，军粮运输供应不上，最近听说朝廷迁都洛阳以来，藩镇互相兼并，朝廷听任他们，没有余暇处置，与其劳累军队来征伐蛮族地区，不如顺从而赦免他们，再率领军队平定中原，这才是国家的根本大事。
English: When the imperial army was unable to win, Wang Jian said to Wei Zhaodu: "Comrade, you have mobilized tens of thousands of troops, the crusade against the traitors cannot be effective, and the supply of military food cannot be transported. Recently, I heard that since the imperial court moved its capital to Luoyang, the towns of the provinces have merged with each other. The imperial court has listened to them and has no time to dispose of them. Instead of laboring the army to conquer the barbarian areas, it is better to pardon them and then lead the army to pacify the Central Plains. This is the fundamental event of the country.

古文：相公盍归朝觐，与主上画之。 
现代文：相公何不回去朝见皇上，与皇上合谋计划？ 
English: Why doesn't your father-in-law go back to see the emperor and make a plan with him?

古文：昭度持疑未决。
现代文：韦昭度迟疑未决。
English: Wei Zhaodu hesitates and is undecided.

古文：一日，建阴令军士于行府门外擒昭度亲吏，脔而食之，建徐启昭度曰： 盖军士乏食，以至于是耶！ 
现代文：一天，王建暗地里叫军士在行府门外抓住韦昭度的身边官吏，把他斫成肉块吃掉，王建慢慢启发韦昭度说： 是因为军士没有粮食，才至于这样了！ 
English: One day, Wang Jian secretly told the sergeant to seize Wei Zhaodu's officials outside the gate of the residence and eat him into pieces of meat. Wang Jian slowly inspired Wei Zhaodu to say: It's because the sergeant has no food that it's come to this!

古文：昭度大惧，遂留符节与建，即日东还。
现代文：韦昭度大为惊骇，于是留下符节交给王建，当天就向东返回。
English: Wei Zhaodu was very shocked, so he left the festival to Wang Jian and returned to the east the same day.

古文：才出剑门，建即严兵守门，不纳东师。
现代文：才出剑门，王建就派重兵把守关门，不让东方军队进来。
English: As soon as the Sword Gate was opened, Wang Jian sent heavy troops to close the gate and prevent the Eastern Army from entering.

古文：月余，建攻西川管内八州，所至响应，遂急攻成都，田令孜登城谓建曰： 老夫与八哥相厚，太师久以知闻，有何嫌恨，如是困我之甚耶！ 
现代文：一个多月，王建进攻西川管区八州，所到各州都响应他，于是猛烈进攻成都，田令孜登上城墙对王建说 ：老夫与八哥交情深厚，陈太师久已听说，有什么嫌隙怨恨，来这样重重围困我们呢？ 
English: For more than a month, Wang Jian attacked eight prefectures in the Xichuan region. All the prefectures he visited responded to him, so he launched a fierce attack on Chengdu. Tian Lingzi climbed onto the city wall and said to Wang Jian: My husband and my brother have a deep friendship. Chen Taishi has heard about this for a long time. What is the grudge and resentment, to besiege us like this?

古文：建曰： 军容父子之恩，心何敢忘，但天子付以兵柄，太师孤绝朝廷故也。
现代文：王建说： 监军与我有父子之恩，内心怎敢忘记，只是天子交给我兵权，而陈太师又离绝朝廷的缘故。
English: Wang Jian said, "The supervisor of the army and I have the grace of father and son. How dare my heart forget that it is only because the Son of Heaven gave me the military power and Chen Taishi left the imperial court.

古文：苟太师悉心改图，何福如之！ 
现代文：如果陈太师真心改变主意，还有什么福能比得上！ 
English: If Grandmaster Chen sincerely changes his mind, what blessing can compare to that!

古文：又曰： 吾欲与八哥军中相款，如何？ 
现代文：田令孜又说： 我想到八哥军中洽谈，怎么样？ 
English: Tian Lingzi also said: I want to negotiate with the Octopus Army, how about it?

古文：曰： 父子之义，何嫌也。 
现代文：王建说 ：父子之义，怎能嫌弃呢？ 
English: Wang Jian said, "How can we reject the righteousness of the Father and the Son?

古文：是夜，令孜携蜀帅符印入建军授建。
现代文：当夜，田令孜携带蜀地统帅的符印到王建军营中交给王建。
English: That night, Tian Lingzi carried the seal of the Shu commander to Wang Jian's military camp and handed it over to Wang Jian.

古文：建泣谢曰： 太师初心太过，致有今日相戾，既此推心，一切如旧。 
现代文：王建笑着推辞说 ：陈太师当初太不应该，以致有今天的对立，既然如此推心置腹，一切都像从前那样。 
English: Wang Jian said with a smile: Chen Taishi was so inappropriate at the beginning that there is today's opposition. Since he is so sincere, everything is the same as before.

古文：翌日，敬瑄启关迎建，以蜀帅让之，建乃自称留后，表陈其事。
现代文：第二天，陈敬蠧打开城门迎接王建，将蜀帅职位让给他，王建于是自称为留后，上表陈述这件事。
English: The next day, Chen Jingyao opened the city gate to welcome Wang Jian, and gave him the position of Shu Shu. Wang Jian then declared himself to be staying behind, and went on to explain the matter.

古文：明年春，制授检校太傅、成都尹、西川节度副大使知节度事、管内观察处置、云南八国招抚等使，时龙纪元年也。
现代文：第二年春天，诏令授王建检校太傅、成都尹、西川节度副大使知节度事、管内观察处置云南八国招抚等使，这是龙纪元年的事。
English: In the spring of the second year, Wang Jianqian, the Taifu of the school, Chengdu Yin, the deputy ambassador of the Xichuan Festival, and other envoys of the eight countries of Yunnan Province were given orders to supervise and handle the festival. This was in the first year of the Dragon Dynasty.

古文：《蜀梼杌》云： 敬瑄废处雅州，以其子为刺史。
现代文：调陈敬蠧到雅州安置，又以他儿子为刺史。当陈敬蠧上路后，王建令人将他杀死在路上。
English: Chen Jingyao was transferred to Yazhou for resettlement, and his son was used as a scapegoat. When Chen Jingyao went on the road, Wang Jian had him killed on the road.

古文：既行，建遣杀于三江，令孜仍监其军，复以令孜阴附凤翔，下狱饿死。
现代文：田令孜仍旧任监军。几个月后，有人告发田令孜与凤翔李茂贞有书信往来问候，王建就将田令孜关进牢中活活饿死。
English: A few months later, someone reported that Tian Lingzi and Fengxiang Li Maozhen had written greetings to each other, and Wang Jian put Tian Lingzi in prison to starve to death.

古文：建雄猜多机略，意常难测，既有蜀土，复欲窥伺东川，又以彦朗婚姻之旧，未果行。
现代文：王建疑心特重而又足智多谋，难以测知他的心意。已经拥有了蜀地，还想图谋东川，又因跟东川顾彦朗有姻亲，没有立即行动。
English: Wang Jian was especially suspicious and resourceful, and it was difficult to gauge his intentions. He already owned Shu, but he still wanted to plot against Dongchuan, and because he was related by marriage to Dongchuan Gu Yanlang, he did not act immediately.

古文：会彦朗卒，弟彦晖代为梓帅，交情稍怠。
现代文：恰逢顾彦朗去世，他弟弟顾彦晖代为梓州统帅，交情逐渐淡薄。
English: Coinciding with Gu Yanlang's death, his brother Gu Yanjun became the commander-in-chief of Azusa, and their friendship gradually faded.

古文：李茂贞乘其有间，密构彦晖，因与茂贞连盟，关征疆吏之间，与蜀人得失。
现代文：李茂贞乘他们之间有裂痕，密切联络顾彦晖，顾彦晖因而与李茂贞结盟，在关税征赋使者往来之间，与蜀人相龃龉。
English: Li Maozhen took advantage of the rift between them and kept in close contact with Gu Yanyuan. Gu Yanyuan thus allied with Li Maozhen, and was in contact with the Shu people between the exchanges of the envoys.

古文：大顺末，建出师攻梓州，彦晖求援于凤翔，李茂贞出师援之，建即围解，自是秦、川交恶者累年。
现代文：大顺末年，王建出兵进攻梓州，顾彦晖向凤翔李茂贞求援，李茂贞发兵援助他，王建即撤除对梓州的包围。从此秦、川交恶多年。
English: At the end of the year of Dashun, Wang Jian sent troops to attack Zizhou, Gu Yanjun asked Fengxiang Li Maozhen for help, Li Maozhen sent troops to help him, and Wang Jian immediately lifted the siege on Zizhou. Since then, Qin and Sichuan have been at odds for many years.

古文：后建大起蜀军，败岐、梓之兵于利州，彦晖惧，乞和，请与岐人绝，许之。
现代文：后来王建大批出动蜀军，在利州打败岐下和梓州的军队，顾彦晖害怕，请求讲和，请求与岐人断绝关系，王建答应了他。
English: Later, Wang Jian sent out a large number of Shu troops to defeat the troops of Qishan and Zizhou in Lizhou. Gu Yanqi was afraid and asked to make peace and break off relations with the Qin people. Wang Jian agreed.

古文：景福中，山南之师寇东川，彦晖求援于建，建出兵赴之，大败兴元之众。
现代文：景福年间，山南军队寇犯东川，顾彦晖向王建求援，王建出兵奔援他，大败兴元府军队。
English: During the Jingfu era, the Shannan army invaded the Dongchuan River, Gu Yanqi went to Wang Jian for help, Wang Jian sent troops to help him, and defeated the Xingyuan army.

古文：洎军旋，建承虚奄袭梓州，据彦晖，置于成都，遂兼有两川，自此军锋益炽。
现代文：当凯旋回师时，王建乘虚扑袭梓州，俘获顾彦晖，安置在成都，于是兼有了东、西两川，从此军势更加强盛。
English: When the division returned home in triumph, Wang Jian took advantage of a false move to invade Zizhou, captured Gu Yanqi, and placed him in Chengdu. As a result, he had both the east and west rivers, and his army became even more powerful.

古文：天复初，李茂贞、韩全诲劫迁车驾在凤翔，梁祖攻围历年。
现代文：天复初年，李茂贞、韩全诲将唐昭宗劫持到凤翔，梁太祖围攻凤翔一年多。
English: In the first year of Tianfu, Li Maozhen and Han Quanzhi kidnapped Tang Zhaozong to Fengxiang, and Liang Taizu besieged Fengxiang for more than a year.

古文：建外修好于汴，指茂贞罪状，又阴与茂贞间使往来，且言坚壁勿和，许以出师赴援，因分命诸军攻取兴元。
现代文：王建表面上与梁太祖修好，指责李茂贞的罪状，暗地里又与李茂贞秘密派使者交往，并要李茂贞坚守城墙不要妥协，答应出兵奔赴支援，于是分别命令各路军队攻占兴元。
English: On the surface, Wang Jian made peace with Liang Taizu and accused Li Maozhen of committing crimes. Secretly, he secretly sent an envoy to meet with Li Maozhen, and asked Li Maozhen to hold fast to the city wall and not to compromise. He promised to send troops to help, and then ordered the armies of all directions to occupy Xingyuan separately.

古文：比及梁祖解围，茂贞山南诸州皆为建所有，自置守将。
现代文：到梁太祖解除对凤翔的包围时，李茂贞的山南各州都被王建占有，自己安置守将。
English: By the time Liang Taizu lifted the siege on Fengxiang, all of Li Maozhen's Shannan states had been occupied by Wang Jian, and he had installed his own guards.

古文：及茂贞垂翅，天子迁雒阳，建复攻茂贞之秦、陇等州，茂贞削弱不能守。
现代文：当李茂贞势力衰微时，天子迁往洛阳，王建又进攻李茂贞的秦、陇等州，李茂贞势弱不能坚守。
English: When Li Maozhen's power waned, Tianzi moved to Luoyang, and Wang Jian attacked Li Maozhen's Qin, Qi and other provinces. Li Maozhen was too weak to hold out.

古文：或劝建因取凤翔，建曰： 此言失策，吾所得已多，不俟复增岐下。
现代文：有人劝王建趁机攻取凤翔，王建说： 这话没有策略，我得到的已经很多，不须再增加岐下。
English: Some people advised Wang Jian to seize the opportunity to capture Fengxiang. Wang Jian said: There is no strategy to this, I have already gained a lot, there is no need to increase the distance.

古文：茂贞虽常才，然名望宿素，与硃公力争不足，守境有余。
现代文：李茂贞虽然才能平常，但他是名高望重的老辈，与朱公争势力量不行，但守卫本境力量有余。
English: Although Li Maozhen's talent is ordinary, he is a highly respected elder. He cannot compete with Zhu Gong, but he has more than enough strength to defend his own territory.

古文：韩生所谓入为扞蔽，出为席藉是也。
现代文：这就是韩生所说的入能固守捍卫，出则被人欺凌。
English: This is what Hanson meant by being able to stick to and defend, and being bullied by others.

古文：适宜援而固之，为吾盾卤耳。 
现代文：适当给予支持让他存在，可作为我们的屏障。 
English: Properly supported, it exists to act as a barrier between us.

古文：及梁祖将谋强禅，建与诸籓同谋兴复，乃令其将康晏率兵三万会于凤翔，数与汴将王重师战，不利而还。
现代文：当梁太祖想要谋取帝位时，王建与各藩镇合谋复兴，于是命令他的大将康晏率领三万大军集中在凤翔，多次与梁军王重师部队战斗，不能取胜，就撤回来了。
English: When Liang Taizu wanted to seek the imperial throne, Wang Jianjun conspired with all the provinces and towns to revive it, so he ordered his general Kang Xi to lead a 30,000-strong army to concentrate in Fengxiang. He repeatedly fought with Liang's army and Wang Chongshi's troops, but when he could not win, he withdrew.

古文：赵匡凝之失荆、襄也，弟匡明以其幹奔蜀，建因得夔、峡、忠、万等州。
现代文：赵匡凝丢失荆州、襄州时，他弟弟赵匡明带着妻子儿女逃奔蜀地，王建因而获取夔、峡、忠、万等州。
English: When Zhao Kuangning lost Jingzhou and Xiangzhou, his brother Zhao Kuangming fled to Shu with his wife and children, and Wang Jian thus gained Shantou, Xia, Zhong and Wanzhou.

古文：及梁祖开国，蜀人请建行刘备故事。建自帝于成都，改元永平。
现代文：当梁太祖建国时，蜀人请王建仿照刘备的先例，王建便在成都自称为蜀国皇帝，改年号叫永平。
English: When Liang Taizu founded the country, the Shu people asked Wang Jian to follow the example of Liu Bei. Wang Jian called himself the Emperor of Shu in Chengdu and changed his name to Yongping.

古文：五年，改元通正。
现代文：五年后，改年号叫通正。
English: Five years later, it was renamed Tongzheng.

古文：是年冬，改元天汉，又改元光天。
现代文：这年冬天，又改年号叫天汉，接着又改年号叫光天。
English: This winter, it was renamed Tianhan, and then it was renamed Guangtian.

古文：在位十二年，年七十二。
现代文：在位十二年，年七十二岁去世。
English: He reigned for twelve years and died at the age of seventy-two.

古文：子衍嗣。
现代文：王衍，是王建的小儿子。
English: Wang Yan is the youngest son of Wang Jian.

古文：衍，建之幼子也。建卒，衍袭伪位，改元乾德。
现代文：王建死后，王衍承袭伪前蜀国君位，改用乾德年号纪年。
English: After the death of Wang Jian, Wang Yan succeeded to the throne of the pseudo-former Shu State, and changed to the Qiande era.

古文：六年十二月，改明年为咸康。
现代文：乾德六年十二月，改第二年年号为咸康。
English: In December of the sixth year of Qiande, the name of the year was changed to Xiankang the following year.

古文：秋九月，衍奉其母、徐妃同游于青城山，驻于上清宫。
现代文：秋天九月，王衍陪母亲徐妃同游青城山，在上清宫休息。
English: In the autumn of September, Wang Yan accompanied his mother Xu Fei on a tour of Qingcheng Mountain and rested at the Shangqing Palace.

古文：时宫人皆衣道服，顶金莲花冠，衣画云霞，望之若神仙，及侍宴，酒酣，皆免冠而退，则其髻髽然。
现代文：这时宫人都穿着道士衣服，戴着金莲花冠，衣服上画着云霞，远望她们就像神仙，让她们陪酒时，喝到酣醉，都取掉冠帽退下，头上的发髻才一个个都现出来。
English: At this time, the palace people were all dressed in Taoist clothes, wearing golden lotus flower crowns, with clouds and haze painted on their clothes, looking at them from afar like immortals. When they were drinking with them, they were so drunk that they all took off their crown caps and retreated, and only then did the hairpins on their heads appear one by one.

古文：又构怡神亭，以佞臣韩昭等为狎客，杂以妇人，以恣荒宴，或自旦至暮，继之以烛。
现代文：又修建起怡神亭，以佞臣韩昭为狎客，再加上女人，以恣意荒淫喜乐，有时从早到晚，接着点上烛火继续宴乐。
English: They also built the Yishenting, with the eunuch Han Zhao as the host, plus a woman, with arbitrary wild joy, sometimes from morning to night, and then lit a candle to continue the party.

古文：伪嘉王宗寿侍宴，因以社稷国政为言，言发涕流，至于再三。
现代文：伪嘉王宗寿陪酒时，要王衍以社稷国政为重，一言既出，涕泗横流，反复哭请。
English: When pseudo-Jia Wang Zongshu accompanied by wine, Wang Yan should take social and national politics as the most important, one word out, cross-flowing, crying repeatedly.

古文：同宴佞臣潘在迎等姑奏衍云： 嘉王好酒悲。 
现代文：而一同陪宴的佞臣潘在迎等却对王衍说 ：嘉王喜欢在喝酒时悲伤。 
English: However, the eunuch Pan, who was also at the banquet, said to Wang Yan while waiting for the welcome: "Jia Wang likes to be sad when drinking."

古文：因翻恣谐谑，取笑而罢。
现代文：因此反而更加恣意笑闹，一直取笑到最后。
English: As a result, there is more spontaneous laughter and teasing until the very end.

古文：自是忠正之臣结舌矣。
现代文：从此忠诚正直的臣子都闭口不谏了。
English: From then on, the loyal and honest vassals kept their mouths shut.

古文：时中国多故，衍得以自安。
现代文：这时中原颇多变故，王衍得以自安一时一地。
English: At this time, the Central Plains were changing a lot, so Wang Yan was able to move from one place to another.

古文：及严使还，奏庄宗曰： 王衍呆童耳，宗弼等总其兵柄，但益家财，不恤民事，君臣上下，惟务穷奢。其旧勋故老，弃而不任，蛮蜓蜑之人，痛深疮痏。
现代文：当李严出使回来后，上奏庄宗说： 王衍不过是一傻小子罢了，王宗弼等掌握兵权，只管积聚家财，不安抚人民，君臣上下，都只追求穷奢极欲，那些功勋重臣，都被弃置不用，川蜀的人民，深受苦痛。
English: When Li Yan returned from his mission, Shangso Zhuangzong said: Wang Yan is just a silly boy. Wang Zongtao and others hold military power, but they only accumulate family wealth and do not care about the people. Monarchs and ministers are only pursuing extravagant desires. Those meritorious ministers have all been abandoned. The people of Sichuan Shu are in great pain.

古文：以臣料之，大兵一临，望风瓦解。 
现代文：以我估计，大军一到，伪蜀便将望风瓦解。 
English: In my estimation, as soon as the large army arrives, the pseudo-Shu will collapse.

古文：庄宗深然之，遂蒐兵括马，有平蜀之心。
现代文：庄宗深以为是，便招兵买马，有平定蜀地之志。
English: Zhuang Zong deeply believed that it was, so he recruited soldiers and horses, with the aim of pacifying Shu.

古文：唐师未起时，伪东川节度使宋承葆献计于衍云： 唐国兵强，不早为谋，后将焉救？
现代文：唐军尚未发兵时，伪东川节度使宋承葆向王衍献策说 ：唐国兵力强大，不趁早做打算，以后将怎么挽救？
English: When the Tang army had not yet sent troops, the pseudo Dongchuan Festival made Song Chengyao give Wang Yan a plan and said: Tang's military strength is strong, if you don't plan ahead of time, how will you be saved in the future?

古文：请于嘉州沿江造战舰五百艘，募水军五千，自江下峡，臣以东师出襄、邓，水陆俱进，东北沿边，严兵据险。
现代文：请在嘉州沿江建造五百艘战舰，招募五千名水军，从长江下峡州；我再从东面出兵襄州、邓州，水陆一齐推进，靠东北一带边境，布设重兵把守。
English: Please build five hundred warships along the river in Jiazhou and recruit five thousand sailors from the Lower Yangtze River Gorge State; I will then send troops from the east to Xiangzhou and Dengzhou, advance together by land and water, and deploy heavy troops along the border in the northeast.

古文：南师出江陵，利则进取，否则退保硖口。
现代文：从南边出兵江陵，顺利就向前进攻，不利就退守硖口。
English: From the south, troops were dispatched to Gangneung, successfully advancing to attack, and unfavorably retreating to defend Hukou.

古文：又选三蜀骁壮三万，急攻岐、雍，东据河、潼，北招契丹，啖以美利，见可则进，否则据散关以固吾圉，事纵不捷，亦攻敌人之心矣。 
现代文：再挑选三蜀之地的骁勇士卒三万人，急攻岐下、雍州，东面据黄河、潼关之险，北面招诱契丹，用厚利引诱他们，如可能就前进，不行就据散关以固守疆土，即使不能获胜，也能动摇敌人军心。 
English: He then selected 30,000 warriors from the land of Sanshu to attack Qizhi and Yongzhou in a hurry. To the east, there was the danger of the Yellow River and Shaoguan. To the north, he invited the Khitans and lured them with rich profits. If possible, he would advance, but if not, he would defend the territory according to Sankuan. Even if he could not win, he could shake the enemy's military spirit.

古文：衍不从。
现代文：王衍不听从。
English: Wang Yan did not obey.

古文：唐同光三年九月十日，庄宗下制伐蜀，命兴圣宫使魏王继岌为都统，枢密使郭崇韬为行营都招讨。
现代文：后唐同光三年九月十日，庄宗下令伐蜀，命兴圣宫使魏王李继岌为都统，枢密使郭崇韬为行营都招讨。
English: On September 10th, the third year of the Later Tang Dynasty, Zhuang Zong ordered the destruction of Shu, and ordered the construction of the Holy Palace, so that the Wei King Li Jizhe became the capital, and the Privy Councilor Guo Chongyi became the commander.

古文：其月十八日，魏王统阙下诸军发洛阳。
现代文：十八日，魏王统帅京城各军离开洛阳。
English: On the 18th, Wei Wang, commander-in-chief of the Beijing army, left Luoyang.

古文：光庭尝以《道》、《德》二经注者虽多，皆未能演暢其旨，因著《广成义》八十卷，他术称是，识者多之。孟知祥，字保裔，邢州龙冈人也。
现代文：魏王下马接受他的传国璧，郭崇韬解开缚着他的绳子，当烧掉他的棺材时，王衍领着伪百官面朝东北跳舞谢恩。二十八日，唐军进入成都。从发兵到进入成都，总共七十五天。孟知祥，字保裔，邢州龙冈人。
English: The Wei king dismounted to receive his ancestor, Guo Chongzhen untied the ropes that bound him, and when his coffin was burned, Wang Yan led the pseudo-hundred officials to the northeast to dance a dance of thanks. On the 28th, the Tang army entered Chengdu. From the dispatch of troops to entering Chengdu, a total of seventy-five days. Meng Zhixiang, Zibo ethnic group, Longgang people from Zhangzhou.

古文：祖察，父道，世为郡校。
现代文：祖父孟察，父亲孟道，一生为郡中校尉。
English: His grandfather, Mengcha, and his father, Meng Dao, were county lieutenant-colonels all their lives.

古文：伯父方立，终于邢洺节度使，从父迁，位至泽潞节度使。
现代文：伯父孟方立，官至邢氵名节度使，叔父孟迁，位至泽潞节度使。
English: His uncle, Meng Fangli, was an official of the State Council, and his uncle, Meng Qian, was an official of the State Council of Zhejiang Province.

古文：知祥在后唐庄宗同光三年，授西川节度副大使，知节度事。
现代文：孟知祥在后唐庄宗同光三年，任西川节度副大使，履行节度使职权。
English: Meng Zhixiang served as Vice-Ambassador of the Nishikawa Festival for three years after the Tang Dynasty.

古文：天成中，安重诲专权用事，以知祥庄宗旧识，方据大籓，虑久而难制，潜欲图之。
现代文：天成年间，安重诲独占权柄任意而为，因为孟知祥是庄宗旧友，现在镇守一大藩镇，担心事久之后难以控制他，暗中想搞掉他。
English: Between the ages of ten and eighteen, An Chongyun monopolized power and acted arbitrarily, because Meng Zhixiang was an old friend of Zhuang Zong, now the town guard of a large town, worried that it would be difficult to control him after a long time, and secretly wanted to get rid of him.

古文：是时，客省使李严以尝使于蜀，洞知其利柄，因献谋于重诲，请以己为西川监军，庶效方略，以制知祥，朝廷可之。
现代文：这时，客省使李岩因为曾经出使过蜀地，洞察蜀地的长处和弊病，因而向安重诲出谋划策，请求任命自己为西川监军，大展方略，以控制孟知祥，朝廷应允了他。
English: At this time, the guest province asked Li Yan, because he had been sent to Shu and had insight into the strengths and weaknesses of Shu, to give advice to An Chong, and asked him to appoint himself as the supervisor of the West River, and to make great efforts to control Meng Zhixiang. The court agreed with him.

古文：及严至蜀，知祥延接甚至，徐谓严曰： 都监前因奉使，请兵伐蜀，遂使东、西两川俱至破灭，川中之人，其怨已深。
现代文：当李岩到蜀地时，孟知祥迎候接待非常周到，然后再慢慢地对他说 ：你上次出使蜀地，回去后请求出兵攻伐蜀地，以致使东、西两川都遭受破败凋敝，川中的人民，对你怨恨很深。
English: When Li Yan arrived in Shoudi, Meng Zhixiang received him with a very thoughtful welcome, and then slowly said to him: "You last time you went to Shoudi, and when you returned, you requested to send troops to attack Shoudi. As a result, both the east and west rivers were devastated, and the people in the middle of the river had a deep grudge against you.

古文：《鉴戒录》云：李严于天成初复来临护，孟祖加之礼分，从容数其五罪，命剑斩之。其后朝廷每除剑南牧守，皆令提兵而往，或千或百，分守郡城。
现代文：现在你又一次来这里，人心十分惶恐不安，因此我没有时间来奉陪你。 于是派人将他拖下台阶，杀死在台阶前面。从那以后朝廷每次任命剑南官吏，都让带着军队去，有时上千有时成百，分守郡城。
English: Now that you have come here again, your heart is full of fear and anxiety, so I don't have time to accompany you. So I sent someone to drag him down the steps and kill him in front of the steps. Since then, every time the court appointed officials from Jianan, they sent them with troops, sometimes thousands, sometimes hundreds, to guard the county seat.

古文：时董璋作镇东川已数年矣，亦有雄据之意。
现代文：这时董璋镇守东川已有几年了，也有据土称雄的意思。
English: At this time, Donglu Town has been guarding Dongchuan for several years, and also has the meaning of being a local hero.

古文：会朝廷以夏鲁奇镇遂州，李仁矩镇阆州，皆领兵数千人赴镇，复授以密旨，令制御两川。
现代文：遇上朝廷以夏鲁奇镇守遂州，李仁矩镇守阆州，都带领几千人赴任，又授与他们密旨，令他们控制抵御西川和东川。
English: When faced with the imperial court, he took the town of Xialuqi to defend Suizhou, and the town of Li Renchi to defend Zhangzhou, both of which led several thousand people to take office, and gave them secret orders to control and resist the West River and the East River.

古文：董璋觉之，乃与知祥通好，结为婚家，以固辅车之势。
现代文：董璋觉察到了，于是与孟知祥互通友好，结为亲家，以巩固他们之间辅车相依的关系。
English: Dong Xuan noticed this, so he and Meng Zhixiang exchanged friendship and became relatives to consolidate the interdependent relationship between them.

古文：知祥虑唐军骤至，与遂、阆兵合，则势不可支吾，遂与璋协谋，令璋以本部军先取阆州，知祥遣大将军李仁罕、赵廷隐率军围遂州。
现代文：孟知祥怕唐朝大军猛扑过来，与遂州、阆州兵力汇合，就势不可挡，于是就与董璋合谋，让董璋率领本部兵马先攻取阆州，孟知祥则派大将军李仁罕、赵廷隐率军队包围遂州。
English: Meng Zhixiang was afraid that the Tang Dynasty army would swoop down and join forces with Suizhou and Ganzhou, which would be overwhelming, so he conspired with Dong Jun to let Dong Jun lead the headquarters troops to capture Ganzhou first, while Meng Zhixiang sent General Li Renhan and Zhao Tingyin to encircle Suizhou.

古文：长兴元年冬，唐军伐蜀，至剑门。
现代文：长兴元年冬天，唐军攻伐蜀地，到剑门。
English: In the winter of the first year of Changxing, the Tang army invaded Shudi and reached Jianmen.

古文：二年，以遂、阆既陷，又粮运不接，乃班师。
现代文：二年，因为遂州、阆州已经陷落，加上粮草供应不上，就撤回军队。
English: In the second year, because Suizhou and Zhangzhou had fallen and grain and grass could not be supplied, the army was withdrawn.

古文：三年，知祥又破董璋，乃自领东、西两川节度使。
现代文：三年，孟知祥又打败董璋，于是自任东、西两川节度使。
English: Three years later, Meng Zhixiang defeated Dong Xuan again, so he appointed himself as the East and West Sichuan Festival Envoy.

古文：唐天祐十六年，岁在己卯，十一月十四日，生昶于太原。
现代文：广顺元年，以剑南东西川节度使、蜀王身份在蜀地称后蜀国皇帝，改年号为明德。七月去世，年六十一岁。孟昶，是孟知祥的三儿子。
English: In the first year of the Guangshun era, he was called the Emperor of the Later Shu Kingdom in the identity of the King of Shu as the envoy of the Jiannan East-West River Festival, and changed his name to Mingde. He died in July at the age of 61. Meng Yao was the third son of Meng Zhixiang.

古文：及知祥镇蜀，昶与其母从知祥妻琼华长公主同入于蜀。
现代文：母亲李氏，本是后唐庄宗的嫔妃，庄宗把她赐给了孟知祥。唐天十六年十一月十四日，在太原生下孟昶。当孟知祥镇守蜀地时，孟昶与母亲随孟知祥的正妻琼华长公主一同入蜀。
English: Meng Zhixiang was born on the 14th day of the 11th month of the 16th year of the Tang Dynasty in Taiyuan. When Meng Zhixiang was in charge of Shu, Meng Zhixiang and his mother accompanied Meng Zhixiang's wife, Qiong Hua, the eldest princess, to Shu.

古文：知祥僭号，伪册为皇太子。
现代文：孟知祥僭称帝号后，册封孟昶为皇太子。
English: After Meng Zhi Xiangyi was given the title of emperor, he was given the title of crown prince.

古文：知祥卒，遂袭其伪位，时年十六，尚称明德元年。
现代文：孟知祥去世后，孟昶就继承伪帝位，当时年仅十六岁，这是明德元年。
English: After the death of Meng Zhixiang, Meng Yao inherited the pseudo-imperial throne, when he was only sixteen years old, which was the first year of Ming and De.

古文：及伪明德四年冬，伪诏改明年为广政元年，是岁即晋天福三年也。
现代文：到伪后蜀国明德四年冬诏令改下年为广政元年，这年就是后晋天福三年。
English: According to the four-year Winter Imperial Edict issued by Mingde of Shu, the following year was changed to the first year of Guang Zheng, which was the third year of the reign of Emperor Tianfu.

古文：伪广政十三年，伪上尊号为睿文英武仁圣明孝皇帝。
现代文：伪广政十三年，上尊号称睿文英武仁圣明孝皇帝。
English: In the thirteenth year of the pseudo-Guang Zheng, Shang Zun was known as Emperor Rui Wen Ying Wu Ren Sheng Ming Xiao.

古文：皇朝乾德三年春，王师平蜀，诏昶举族赴阙，赐甲第于京师，迨其臣下赐赍甚厚，寻册封楚王。
现代文：大宋乾德三年春，王师平定蜀地，诏令孟昶全族到京城，赐给上等住宅，他的臣子也赏赐甚多，不久册封孟昶为楚王。
English: In the spring of the third year of the Great Song Dynasty, Emperor Qiande ordered Meng Xi's whole family to go to Beijing and gave them a first-class residence. His vassals also received a lot of rewards, and Meng Xi was soon crowned King of Chu.

古文：是岁秋，卒于东京，时年四十七，事具皇家日历。自知祥同光二年丙戌岁入蜀，父子相继，凡四十年而亡。
现代文：这年秋，孟昶在东京去世，时年四十七岁。从孟知祥于同光二年到川蜀，父子相继，共四十年而后蜀灭亡。
English: In the autumn of that year, Mencius died in Tokyo, at the age of forty-seven. From Meng Zhixiang in the second year of Tongguang to Sichuan Shu, father and son successively, a total of forty years, and then Shu died.

