古文：朱祐字仲先，南阳宛人也。
现代文：◆朱祐传朱祐字仲先，是南阳郡宛县人。
English: ◆Zhu Yu Chu Chu Chu Chu Chu Chu Chu Chu Chu Chu Chu Chu Chu Chu Chu Chu

古文：少孤，归外家复阳刘氏，往来舂陵，世祖与伯升皆亲爱之。
现代文：少年丧父，回到复阳县外祖父母刘氏家中，往来舂陵，世祖与伯升都与他亲爱。
English: After the boy lost his father, he returned to the home of his maternal grandparents, the Liu family, in Foyang County. He went back and forth to Fuling. Both his grandfather and Baosheng were dear to him.

古文：伯升拜大司徒，以祐为护军。
现代文：伯升拜大司徒后，以朱祐为护军。
English: After Bo was promoted to Daishi, Zhu Yu became his escort.

古文：及世祖为大司马，讨河北，复以祐为护军，常见亲幸，舍止于中。
现代文：世祖为大司马，讨伐河北时，又以朱祐为护军，时常面晤亲幸，并住宿在里面。
English: The founder of the sect was Daisima, and when he was fighting in Hebei Province, he used Zhu Yu as a bodyguard. He often met his relatives and stayed with them.

古文：祐侍宴，从容曰： 长安政乱，公有日角之相，此天命也。 世祖曰： 召刺奸收护军！ 祐乃不敢复言。
现代文：朱祐陪宴，从容说： 长安政治混乱，公有帝王之相，这是天降之命啊。 世祖说： 召唤刺奸来收捕你这个护军！ 朱祐于是不敢再说了。
English: Zhu Yu accompanied the banquet and calmly said, "Chang'an is in political turmoil, the government has the appearance of an emperor, this is the mandate from heaven." The ancestor said, "Summon the assassins to arrest you, the escort!" Zhu Yu did not dare to say any more.

古文：从征河北，常力战陷阵，以为偏将军，封安阳侯。
现代文：跟从征讨河北，时常力战破阵，以朱祐为偏将军，封安阳侯。
English: Following the conquest of Hebei, he constantly fought to break the line of battle, with Zhu Yu as a partial general, and Anyang Hou as a feudal lord.

古文：世祖即位，拜为建义大将军。
现代文：世祖即位，拜为建义大将军。
English: The founder ascends the throne, and the great general Jianyi is worshipped.

古文：建武二年，更封堵阳侯。
现代文：建武二年，更封堵阳侯。
English: In the second year of the Jianwu era, he was given the title of Yanghou.

古文：冬，与诸将击邓奉于淯阳，祐军败，为奉所获。
现代文：冬，与诸将击邓奉于氵育阳，朱祐兵败，被邓奉所俘获。
English: In the winter, he and other generals fought against Deng Bong Yu and Zhu Yu Yuyang, and Zhu Yu was defeated and captured by Deng Bong.

古文：明年，奉破，乃肉袒因祐降。
现代文：第二年，邓奉被攻破，就肉袒跟朱祐投降。
English: In the second year, Deng Bong was defeated and surrendered to Zhu Yu.

古文：帝复祐位而厚加慰赐。
现代文：帝恢复朱祐职位而且厚加慰劳赏赐。
English: The emperor restored Zhu Yu's position and rewarded him for his hard work.

古文：遣击新野、随，皆平之。
现代文：派遣他击新野、随县，都平定了。
English: He was dispatched to attack Shinno and Suigun, and they were both pacified.

古文：延岑自败于穰，遂与秦丰将张成合，祐率征虏将军祭遵与战于东阳，大破之，临阵斩成，延岑败走归丰。
现代文：延岑自从败于穰，就与秦丰部将张成会合，朱祐率领征虏将军祭遵与延岑战于东阳，大破延岑，临阵斩了张成，延岑败走归秦丰。
English: After the defeat at Yancheng, Yancheng met with Qin and Feng's general Zhang Cheng for the first time. Zhu Yu led the conscription of the captives, the general's festival, and the war with Yancheng in Dongyang. Yancheng was defeated, Zhang Cheng was killed in the front line, and Yancheng was defeated and went back to Qin and Feng.

古文：祐收得印绶九十七。
现代文：朱祐收得印绶九十七件。
English: Zhu Yu received ninety-seven stamps.

古文：进击黄邮，降之，赐祐黄金三十斤。
现代文：进击黄邮，黄邮降，赏赐朱祐黄金三十斤。
English: Attack the yellow post, yellow post down, award Zhu Yu gold thirty catties.

古文：四年，率破奸将军侯进、辅威将军耿植代征南大将军岑彭围秦丰于黎丘，破其将张康于蔡阳，斩之。
现代文：建武四年，率领破奸将军侯进、辅威将军耿植代征南大将军岑彭围攻秦丰于黎丘，破其将张康于蔡阳，斩张康。
English: In the fourth year of Jianwu, he led the ruffian general Hou Jin and the auxiliary general Geng Zhi to besiege Qin Feng in Liciu and defeat Zhang Kang in Caiyang. Zhang Kang was beheaded.

古文：帝自至黎丘，使御史中丞李由持玺书招丰，丰出恶言，不肯降。
现代文：帝亲到黎丘，派御史中丞李由持玺书招降秦丰，秦丰口出恶言，不肯降。
English: When Emperor Taizhong came to Lichu, he sent the imperial historian, the middle-ranked general Li Yu, to invite Qin Feng to abdicate, but Qin Feng spoke ill of him and refused to abdicate.

古文：车驾引还，敕祐方略，祐尽力攻之。
现代文：帝引还，授朱祐以方略，朱祐尽力围攻。
English: The emperor brought him back and gave Zhu Yu a strategy, and Zhu Yu tried his best to besiege him.

古文：明年夏，城中穷困，丰乃将其母、妻、子九人肉袒降。
现代文：第二年夏，城中穷困，秦丰就领他的母亲妻子九人肉袒投降。
English: In the summer of the second year, in the midst of the city's poverty, Qin Feng led his mother, his wife, and nine others to surrender.

古文：祐轞车传丰送洛阳，斩之。
现代文：朱祐以囚车载秦丰送到洛阳，把他斩了。
English: Zhu Yu took Qin Feng to Luoyang in a prison van and beheaded him.

古文：大司马吴汉劾奏祐废诏受降，违将帅之任，帝不加罪。
现代文：大司马吴汉弹劾朱祐废诏接受投降，违反了将帅的使命，帝不加罪。
English: Major-General Ma Wuhan impeached Zhu Yu for abrogating the edict to accept the surrender, which violated the general's mission. The emperor was not punished.

古文：祐还，与骑都尉臧宫会击延岑余党阴、酂、筑阳三县贼，悉平之。
现代文：朱祐返回后，与骑都尉臧宫会击延岑余党阴县、赞阝县及筑阳县的贼众，全都平定了。
English: After Zhu Yu returned, he and the cavalry captain Gong Gong would defeat the remaining thieves in Yin County, Zhangye County and Chikuyang County, and all of them were leveled.

古文：祐为人质直，尚儒学。
现代文：朱祐为人质朴耿直，喜尚儒学。
English: Zhu Yu is simple and straightforward, and likes Confucianism.

古文：将兵率众，多受降，以克定城邑为本，不存首级之功。
现代文：率领兵众，多接受投降，以能安定城邑为根本，不追求滥斩首级的功劳。
English: To lead the troops, to accept more surrenders, to be able to stabilize the city as the fundamental, not to pursue indiscriminate beheading level of merit.

古文：又禁制士卒不得虏掠百姓，军人乐放纵，多以此怨之。
现代文：又严禁士卒不准虏掠百姓，军人乐于放纵，多因此埋怨朱祐。
English: It was also strictly forbidden for soldiers and officers to plunder the people, and soldiers were happy to indulge, so they often complained about Zhu Yu.

古文：九年，屯南行唐拒匈奴。
现代文：建武九年，屯兵南行唐抵拒匈奴。
English: In the ninth year of Jianwu, the troops marched south to Tang to resist the Xiongnu.

古文：十三年，增邑，定封鬲侯，食邑七千三百户。
现代文：建武十三年，增加封邑，定封鬲侯，食邑七千三百户。
English: In the 13th year of Jianwu, the number of fiefs and townships was increased, and the number of fiefs and townships was fixed, resulting in 7,300 households in food townships.

古文：十五年，朝京师，上大将军印绶，因留奉朝请。
现代文：建武十五年，朝京师，呈上大将军印绶，因留京奉朝请。
English: In the 15th year of Jianwu's reign, when he was sent to the capital, he presented the general's seal, and was invited to serve the emperor because he was staying in Beijing.

古文：祐奏古者人臣受封，不加王爵，可改诸王为公。
现代文：朱祐奏说古代人臣受封赏，不加王爵，建议改诸王为公。
English: Zhu Yusuo said that the ancient vassals were rewarded with titles, not with peerages, and suggested that they should be changed to kings.

古文：帝即施行。
现代文：帝即采纳施行。
English: The emperor immediately adopted and implemented it.

古文：又奏宜令三公并去 大 名，以法经典。
现代文：又奏说应令三公都去掉 大 的冠号，以效法过去经典。
English: He also said that the three princes should be ordered to remove the big crowns to emulate the classics of the past.

古文：后遂从其议。
现代文：后来帝也接受他的建议。
English: Later, the emperor also accepted his suggestion.

古文：祐初学长安，帝往候之，祐不时相劳苦，而先升讲舍。
现代文：朱祐起初就学长安，帝前往问候，朱祐不时相劳苦，而先升讲舍。
English: At first, Zhu Yu went to school in Chang'an, and the emperor went to greet him. Zhu Yu worked hard from time to time, and was the first to go to school.

古文：后车驾幸其第，帝因笑曰： 主人得无舍我讲乎？ 以有旧恩，数蒙赏赉。
现代文：后来帝到朱祐府第，因而笑道： 主人得不舍我而讲吗？ 因有旧恩，多次承蒙赏赐。
English: Later, the emperor came to Zhu Yu's residence, so he laughed and said, "Can my master say this without me? Because of my old favor, I have been rewarded many times.

古文：二十四年，卒。
现代文：建武二十四年，去世。
English: Jianwu 24 years old, passed away.

古文：子商嗣。
现代文：子朱商嗣位。
English: His son Zhu Shang succeeded to the throne.

古文：商卒，子演嗣，永元十四年，坐以兄伯为外孙阴皇后巫蛊事，免为庶人。
现代文：朱商卒，子朱演嗣位，永元十四年，因从兄伯为外孙阴皇后巫蛊事所牵连，被免为庶人。
English: Zhu Shangtuo, the son of Zhu Enzhi, was exempted from being a commoner in the 14th year of the Yongyuan era because he was implicated in the matter of his brother and uncle being the grandchildren of Queen Wushan.

古文：永初七年，邓太后绍封演子冲为鬲侯。
现代文：永初七年，邓太后续封朱演儿子朱冲为鬲侯。
English: In the seventh year of the Yongzheng era, Emperor Deng subsequently appointed Zhu Rong's son Zhu Chong as the prince.

古文：景丹字孙卿，冯翊栎阳人也。
现代文：◆景丹传景丹字孙卿，冯翊栎阳人。
English: ◆Jingdan passed on Jingdan's name to Sun Ching, and Feng Shiyang was born.

古文：少学长安。
现代文：年少时就学长安。
English: When he was young, he went to school with Nagayasu.

古文：王莽时举四科，丹以言语为固德侯相，有干事称，迁朔调连率副贰。
现代文：王莽时举四科，景丹以言语科被举为固德侯相，被称誉为有干事才能，迁为朔调连率副贰。
English: Wang Mang was promoted to four subjects, Jing Dan was promoted to Gu De Hou Xiang with speech department, was praised as having the ability of an officer, and was transferred to the deputy magistrate.

古文：更始立，遣使者徇上谷，丹与连率耿况降，复为上谷长史。
现代文：更始即位，派遣使者到上谷宣示，景丹与连率、耿况投降了更始，再为上谷长史。
English: Emperor Gaozong ascended to the throne, and sent an envoy to Shanggu to announce it. Jingdan surrendered to Emperor Gaozong together with his second-in-command, Geng Zhou, and then Emperor Gaozong.

古文：王郎起，丹与况共谋拒之。
现代文：王郎起来后，景丹与耿况共同谋议抗拒王郎。
English: After Wang Lang got up, Jing Dan and Geng Zheng jointly plotted to resist Wang Lang.

古文：况使丹与子弇及寇恂等将兵南归世祖，世祖引见丹等，笑曰： 邯郸将帅数言我发渔阳、上谷兵，吾卿应言然，何意二郡良为吾来！
现代文：耿况派景丹与儿子耿及寇恂等率兵南归世祖，世祖引见景丹等，笑着说 ：邯郸将帅几次扬言要发渔阳、上谷兵，我只是聊且应付而已，没想到二郡却为我而来！
English: Geng sent Jingdan and his sons, Geng and Kouyi, and other soldiers south to return to their ancestor. The ancestor brought Jingdan and others to meet him, and said with a smile: "General Xiao threatened several times to send Yuyang and Shanggui soldiers. I was just chatting and coping. I didn't expect the two counties to come for me!

古文：方与士大夫共此功名耳。 拜丹为偏将军，号奉义侯。
现代文：当与二郡的士大夫共享此功名哩。 拜景丹为偏将军，号奉义侯。
English: He should share this title with the shidafu of the two counties. Bai Jingdan is a partial general, with the title of Bongyi Hou.

古文：从击王郎将皃宏等于南，郎兵迎战，汉军退却，丹等纵突骑击，大破之，追奔十余里，死伤者从横。
现代文：跟从攻击王郎部将儿宏等于南，郎兵迎战，汉军退却，景丹纵突击骑兵攻击，大破王郎军，追奔十余里，死伤纵横在道。
English: Following the attack of Wang Langbu, Erhong is equal to the south, Lang soldiers meet the battle, the Chinese army retreats, Jing Dan longitudinal assault cavalry attack, smash Wang Lang's army, chase more than ten miles, death and injury lie in the road.

古文：丹还，世祖谓曰： 吾闻突骑天下精兵，今乃见其战，乐可言邪？ 遂从征河北。
现代文：景丹回，世祖对他说： 我听说突击骑兵是天下的精兵，现在看到突骑参战，其喜悦岂可用言语表达呢？ 于是跟从征伐河北。
English: Back in Jingdan, the ancestor said to him: I have heard that the assault cavalry are the best soldiers in the world, and now that I see the cavalry participate in the war, can I express my joy in words? So I followed the conquest of Hebei.

古文：世祖即位，以谶文用平狄将军孙咸行大司马，众威不悦。
现代文：世祖即位，以谶文用平狄将军孙咸代理大司马，部众都不高兴。
English: When the founder of the dynasty ascended to the throne, he used General Sun Xian as the acting grand steward. The members were not happy.

古文：诏举可为大司马者，群臣所推惟吴汉及丹。
现代文：帝下诏书求群臣推举谁可为大司马，群臣推举的只有吴汉和景丹。
English: The imperial edict asked the courtiers to nominate who should be the grand steward, but only Wu Han and Jing Dan were nominated.

古文：帝曰： 景将军北州大将，是其人也。
现代文：帝说 ：景将军是北州大将，大司马可以是他。
English: The emperor said, "General Jing is the general of Hokushu, and Daisima can be him."

古文：然吴将军有建大策之勋，又诛苗幽州、谢尚书，其功大。
现代文：然而吴将军有建立大策的功勋，又诛了苗会、谢躬，他的功劳大。
English: However, General Wu has the merit of establishing a grand strategy, and he also won the seedling meeting and bowed down, and his merit is great.

古文：旧制骠骑将军官与大司马相兼也。 乃以吴汉为大司马，而拜丹为骠骑大将军。
现代文：按旧制骠骑将军官衔与大司马可以兼任。 于是以吴汉为大司马，而拜景丹为骠骑大将军。
English: According to the old system, the official title of the cavalry general and the chief steed could be concurrently held. Therefore, Wu Han was the chief steed, and Bai Jingdan was the cavalry general.

古文：建武二年，定封丹栎阳侯。
现代文：建武二年，定封景丹为栎阳侯。
English: In the second year of Jianwu, Jingdan was appointed as the lord of Shenyang.

古文：帝谓丹曰： 今关东故王国，虽数县，不过栎阳万户邑。
现代文：帝对景丹说： 现在关东原有的王国，虽有好几个县，只有栎阳是万户邑。
English: The emperor said to Jingdan: Although there are several counties in the former kingdom of Kanto, only Shenyang is a million-household county.

古文：夫 富贵不归故乡，如衣绣夜行 ，故以封卿耳。 丹顿首谢。
现代文：俗话说 富贵不归故乡，像穿了锦绣的衣服在黑夜中走路 ，所以封你为栎阳侯哩。 
English: As the saying goes, if the rich do not return to their hometowns, it is like walking in the dark wearing an embroidered dress. Therefore, you are the prince of Shenyang.

古文：秋，与吴汉、建威大将军耿弇、建义大将军朱祐、执金吾贾复、偏将军冯异、强弩将军陈俊、左曹王常、骑都尉臧宫等从击破五校于羛阳，降其众五万人。
现代文：景丹以头叩地表示感谢。秋，与吴汉、建威大将军耿、建义大将军朱祐、执金吾贾复、偏将军冯异、强弩将军陈俊、左曹王常、骑都尉臧宫等跟从击破五校于阳，投降的达五万人。
English: In the autumn, with Wu Han, Jian Wei General Geng, Jian Yi General Zhu Yu, Xie Jinwujiafu, Bi General Feng Yi, Qiang Yu General Chen Jun, Zuo Cao Wang Chang, Cavalry Lieutenant Gong Gong, and others, he defeated the five schools in Yang and surrendered to fifty thousand people.

古文：会陕贼苏况攻破弘农，生获郡守。
现代文：恰逢陕贼苏况攻破弘农，活捉了郡守。
English: Coincidentally, the Shaanxi bandit Su Jiao defeated Hongnong and captured the county governor alive.

古文：丹时病，帝以其旧将，欲令强起领郡事，乃夜召入，谓曰： 贼迫近京师，但得将军威重，卧以镇之足矣。 丹不敢辞，乃力疾拜命，将营到郡，十余日薨。
现代文：景丹当时患了病，帝因他是归将，想让他勉强起来担任弘农郡守，于是在夜间召他入见，对他说 ：贼迫近京师，只要依仗将军威信，睡在床上镇守就够了。 景丹不敢推辞，于是勉强支撑病体接受任命，率营兵西到弘农郡，十多天后病逝。
English: At that time, Jingdan was ill, and the emperor wanted him to reluctantly serve as the governor of Hongnong County because he was the returning general, so he summoned him at night and said to him, "The thief is approaching the capital division, as long as he relies on the authority of the general and sleeps on the bed, it is enough to guard the town." Jingdan did not dare to refuse, so he reluctantly supported the sick body to accept the appointment, led the battalion west to Hongnong County, and died of illness more than ten days later.

古文：子尚嗣，徙封余吾侯。
现代文：子景尚嗣位，徙封余吾侯。
English: His son, Kageyo, succeeded to the throne, and the fief was transferred to Yugo.

古文：尚卒，子苞嗣。
现代文：景尚去世，子景苞嗣位。
English: Kengyo died, and his son Kengyo succeeded to the throne.

古文：苞卒，子临嗣，无子，国绝。
现代文：景苞去世，子景临嗣位，景临无子，封国废除。
English: After the death of King Yeongjo, his son King Jin succeeded to the throne. King Jin had no son, and the feudal state was abolished.

古文：永初七年，邓太后绍封苞弟遽为监亭侯。
现代文：永初七年，邓太后续封景苞弟景遽为监亭侯。
English: In the seventh year of the Yongchun era, Deng Tai's younger brother Jingsheng, who had been a follower of Deng Tai, became a Jingting marquess.

古文：王梁字君严，渔阳要阳人也。
现代文：◆王梁传王梁字君严，渔阳郡要阳县人。
English: ◆ Wang Liang Chuan Wang Liang Zi Jun Yan, Yuyang County, Yangyang County.

古文：为郡吏，太守彭宠以梁守狐奴令，与盖延、吴汉俱将兵南及世祖于广阿，拜偏将军。
现代文：为郡吏，太守彭宠以王梁掌管狐奴县令，与盖延、吴汉都率兵南下追及世祖于广阿，拜为偏将军。
English: As the county official, the eunuch Peng Cun with Wang Liang presided over the county of Qunu, and together with Gai Yan and Wu Han, they led the soldiers to the south to pursue the ancestor Yu Guang'a, and worshiped him as a partial general.

古文：既拔邯郸，赐爵关内侯。
现代文：攻拔邯郸后，赐爵关内侯。
English: He was given the title of Lord of Guanai after the attack.

古文：从平河北，拜野王令，与河内太守寇恂南拒洛阳，北守天井关，朱鲔等不敢出兵，世祖以来梁功。
现代文：跟从平定河北，拜野王令，与河内太守寇恂南拒洛阳，北守天井关，朱鲔等不敢出兵，世祖以为是王梁的功劳。
English: Following the pacification of Hebei, Baino Wang Rong, and the governor of Hanoi, Guo Xuan, refused to send troops to Luoyang, while the northern governor, Tiantian Guan, and Zhu Xi did not dare to send troops. The ancestors believed that this was the merit of Wang Liang.

古文：及即位，议选大司空，而《赤伏符》曰 王梁主卫作玄武 ，帝以野王卫之所徙，玄武水神之名，司空水土之官也，于是擢拜梁为大司空，封武强侯。
现代文：等到即位，议选大司空，而《赤伏符》说 王梁主卫作玄武 ，帝以野王是卫元君所徙，玄武是水神之名，司空是水土之官，于是擢拜王梁为大司空，封武强侯。
English: When he ascended to the throne, he proposed the election of Daishi Ku, and "Akafufu" said that Wang Liang, the main guard, was Genbu, the emperor was moved by the wild king, Genbu was the name of the water god, and Siku was the official of the land and water, so he promoted Wang Liang to Daishi Ku, the stronghold of the military.

古文：建武二年，与大司马吴汉等俱击檀乡，有诏军事一属大司马，而梁辄发野王兵，帝以其不奉诏敕，令止在所县，而梁复以便宜进军。
现代文：建武二年，与大司马吴汉等共击檀乡，诏令军事一律归属大司马，而王梁擅自发动野王兵，帝以其不遵诏令，令他在所在县中停止行动，而王梁又擅自进军。
English: In the second year of the Jianwu era, together with the grand secretary Ma Wu Han and others, he attacked Dangxiang. The imperial edict ordered that all the military belonged to the grand secretary Ma, and Wang Liang launched the wild king soldiers without authorization. The emperor ordered him to stop the action in his county for not following the imperial edict, and Wang Liang marched into the army without authorization.

古文：帝以梁前后违命，大怒，遣尚书宗广持节军中斩梁。
现代文：帝以王梁前前后后都违抗命令，大怒，派遣尚书宗广持符节往军中斩王梁。
English: The emperor disobeyed Wang Liang's orders both before and after, and in a rage, he sent Shang Shuzong Guang to the army to behead Wang Liang.

古文：广不忍，乃槛车送京师。
现代文：宗广不忍，就用囚车将王梁载回京师。
English: Unable to bear it, Zongguang took Wang Liang back to the capital in a prison van.

古文：既至，赦之。
现代文：到京后，帝赦免了他。
English: After arriving in Beijing, the emperor pardoned him.

古文：月余，以为中郎将，行执金吾事。
现代文：月余，又以他为中郎将，兼执金吾事。
English: At the end of the month, he was appointed as the second-in-command, and was also in charge of financial affairs.

古文：北守箕关，击赤眉别校，降之。
现代文：北守箕关，击赤眉别校，别校降。
English: North of Shouguan, don't raise your eyebrows, don't go down.

古文：三年春，转击五校，追至信都、赵国，破之，悉平诸屯聚。
现代文：三年春，转击五校，追到信都、赵国，大破之，所有屯聚都平定了。
English: In the spring of the third year, the five schools were attacked and chased to Xindu and Zhao, which was a great success, and all the settlements were leveled.

古文：冬，遣使者持节拜梁前将军。
现代文：冬，派遣使者持符节拜王梁为前将军。
English: In winter, an envoy was sent to pay tribute to Wang Liang as a former general.

古文：四年春，击肥城、文阳，拔之。
现代文：建武四年春，进击肥城、文阳，都攻下了。
English: In the spring of the 4th year of Jianwu, they attacked Fucheng and Benyang and captured them.

古文：进与骠骑大将军杜茂击佼缰、苏茂于楚、沛间，拔大梁、啮桑，而捕虏将军马武、偏将军王霸亦分道并进，岁余悉平之。
现代文：进与骠骑大将军杜茂击佼瞗、苏茂于楚、沛之间，攻拔大梁、砫桑，而捕虏将军马武、偏将军王霸也分道并进，一年多全都平定了。
English: Between Jin and his cavalry generals, Du Mao, Du Jiao, Su Mao, Yu Chu, and Pei, they attacked the girders and the reeds, while the captive general, Ma Wu, and the partial general, Wang Ba, also went their separate ways, and for more than a year they were all pacified.

古文：五年，从救桃城，破庞萌等，梁战尤力，拜山阳太守，镇抚新附，将兵如故。
现代文：建武五年，跟从救桃城，破庞萌等，王梁战斗尤其有力，拜为山阳太守，镇守抚慰新归附者，将兵一如过去。
English: Jianwu five years, following the rescue of Taocheng, breaking Pangmeng, etc., Wang Liang's battle is particularly powerful. He is worshiped as the Shanyang Taishu, the town guard comforts the newly annexed, and the soldiers are as in the past.

古文：数月征人，代欧阳歙为河南尹。
现代文：几个月后征召入京，代欧阳歙为河南尹。
English: A few months later, he was called to Beijing and replaced Ouyang Xuan as Henan Yin.

古文：梁穿渠引穀水注洛阳城下，东写巩川，及渠成而水不流。
现代文：王梁开渠引谷水注入洛阳城下，向东泻入巩川，等到渠成而水不流。
English: Wang Liang opened a canal to bring water from the valley into the city of Luoyang, and it flowed eastward into the Gongchuan River. When the canal was completed, the water did not flow.

古文：七年，有司劾奏之，梁惭惧，上书乞骸骨。
现代文：建武七年，有司弹劾奏明，王梁惭惧，上书请求退职。
English: In the seventh year of Jianwu, there was an impeachment report, and Wang Liang was ashamed and sent a letter requesting to resign.

古文：乃下诏曰： 梁前将兵征伐，众人称贤，故擢典京师。
现代文：帝下诏书说 ：王梁以前率兵征伐，众人称他为贤，所以擢升到京师。
English: The imperial edict said: Wang Liang used to lead the army to conquer, and everyone called him a wise man, so he was promoted to the Beijing division.

古文：建议开渠，为人兴利，旅力既愆，迄无成功，百姓怨讟，谈者讙哗。
现代文：建议开渠，为人兴利，众力已过，而功不成。百姓埋怨诽谤，言谈者喧哗吵嚷。
English: It is suggested to open a canal, it is beneficial to people, all efforts have passed, but the work has not been accomplished. The people complain about slander, and the talkers are noisy.

古文：虽蒙宽宥，犹执谦退， 君子成人之美 ，其以梁为济南太守。 十三年，增邑，定封阜成侯。
现代文：虽蒙宽宥，他本人还是执意谦退， 君子成人之美 ，特以王梁为济南太守。 建武十三年，增加封邑，定封为阜成侯。
English: Although he was pardoned, he himself still insisted on humbly retreating, the beauty of a gentleman's adulthood, especially with Wang Liang as the governor of Jinan. In the thirteenth year of Jianwu, he increased the fief and set the fief as Fucheng.

古文：十四年，卒官。
现代文：建武十四年，卒于官。
English: He died in office in the 14th year of the Kenmu era.

古文：子禹嗣。
现代文：子王禹嗣位。
English: His son, King Utsugi, succeeded to the throne.

古文：禹卒，子坚石嗣。
现代文：禹去世，子王坚石嗣位。
English: When Yu died, his son King Jianshi succeeded to the throne.

古文：坚石追坐父禹及弟平与楚王英谋反，弃市，国除。
现代文：王坚石因父亲王禹及弟王平参与了楚王刘英谋反的罪案而被追究，斩于市，封国废除。
English: Wang Jianshi was investigated for his father Wang Yu and his brother Wang Ping's participation in the crime of Chu King Liu Ying's rebellion, and he was executed in the city, and the state seal was abolished.

古文：杜茂字诸公，南阳冠军人也。
现代文：◆杜茂传杜茂字诸公，南阳郡冠军人。
English: ◆Dumo Chuan Dumo Zi Zhu Gong, champion of Nanyang County.

古文：初归光武于河北，为中坚将军，常从征伐。
现代文：起初归光武于河北，为中坚将军，常跟从征伐。
English: At first, Guiguang was a general in Hebei Province, and he was a stalwart general, often following the expedition.

古文：世祖即位，拜大将军，封乐乡侯。
现代文：世祖即位，拜为大将军，封为乐乡侯。
English: The ancestor ascended the throne, was worshipped as a great general, and was given the title of Le Xiangwu.

古文：北击五校于真定，进降广平。
现代文：北击五校于真定，进降广平。
English: The five schools in the north were in Zhending, and those in the east and west were in Guangping.

古文：建武二年，更封苦陉侯。
现代文：建武二年，更封苦陉侯。
English: In the second year of Jianwu, he was even more bitter.

古文：与中郎将王梁击五校贼于魏郡、清河、东郡，悉平诸营保，降其持节大将三十余人，三郡清静，道路流通。
现代文：与中郎将王梁击五校贼于魏郡、清河、东郡，平定了所有营堡，其持节大将三十多人都投降了，三郡得以清静，道路流通。
English: Wang Liang, together with Zhonglang, defeated five school bandits in Wei County, Qinghe County, and Dong County, and leveled all the camps. More than thirty of his commanders surrendered, and the three counties were able to be quiet, and the roads were open.

古文：明年，遣使持节拜茂为骠骑大将军，击沛郡，拔芒。
现代文：明年，派遣使者持符节拜杜茂为骠骑大将军，进击沛郡，攻拔芒县。
English: Next year, an envoy will be sent to invade Pei County and attack Mang County with the festival of symbols to pray for Du Mao to be the general of the cavalry.

古文：时，西防复反，迎佼彊。
现代文：当时西防再次造，迎佼瞗。
English: At that time, the West Defense was rebuilt, and it was a great success.

古文：五年春，茂率捕虏将军马武进攻西防，数月拔之，彊奔董宪。
现代文：建武五年春，杜茂率捕虏将军马武进攻西防，几月后攻拔了，佼瞗逃奔董宪。
English: In the spring of the fifth year of Jianwu's reign, Du Mao led the captive general Ma Wu to attack the West Defense. A few months later, the attack was successful, and Du Mao fled to Dong Xian.

古文：东方既平，七年，诏茂引兵北屯田晋阳、广武，以备胡寇。
现代文：东方既已平定，建武七年，诏令杜茂引兵北上屯田晋阳、广武，以防备胡寇。
English: The East had already been pacified, and in the seventh year of Jianwu's reign, Du Mao was ordered to bring troops north to Jinyang and Guangwu, to guard against the Huko.

古文：九年，与雁门太守郭凉击卢芳将尹由于繁畤，芳将贾览率胡骑万余救之，茂战，军败，引入楼烦城。
现代文：建武九年，与雁门太守郭凉攻击卢芳将尹由于繁县，卢芳将领贾览率领胡骑万余人援救，杜茂与战，军败，引入楼烦县城。
English: In the ninth year of the Jianwu era, with Guo Liang, the guardian of the Wild Goose Gate, attacking Lu Fang, the general Yin Zengshang County, Lu Fang's general Jia Chan led more than 10,000 Hu riders to rescue, Du Mao fought, defeated, and introduced the county town of Lou Yu.

古文：时，卢芳据高柳，与匈奴连兵，数寇边民，帝患之。
现代文：这时卢芳占据高柳，与匈奴兵相连结，多次侵犯边民，帝很忧虑。
English: At this time, Lu Fang occupied Gaoliu, linked with the Xiongnu soldiers, and repeatedly invaded the border people. The emperor was very worried.

古文：十二年，遣谒者段忠将众郡弛刑配茂，镇守北边，因发边卒筑亭候，修烽火，又发委输金帛缯絮供给军士，并赐边民，冠盖相望。
现代文：建武十二年，派遣谒者段忠将各郡解除刑枷的犯人配给杜茂，镇守北边，因而发动边卒筑亭候，修烽火，又发动运输金帛缯絮以供给军士，并赐给边民，官吏相望前后不绝。
English: In the twelfth year of the Jianwu era, the warlord Duan Zhong was dispatched to distribute the prisoners released from the shackles of the counties to Dumo, guarding the northern side of the town, and thus launched the border guards to build pavilions, repair bonfires, and also launched the transportation of gold ingots to supply the sergeants and give them to the border residents. Officials look at each other constantly.

古文：茂亦建屯田，驴东转运。
现代文：杜茂也建屯田，用马卢车转运。
English: Doumao also built a tun field and transported goods by horse-drawn carriage.

古文：先是，雁门人贾丹、霍匡、解胜等为尹由所略，由以为将帅，与共守平城。
现代文：先是，雁门人贾丹、霍匡、解胜等被尹由所掠，尹由以他们为将帅，与尹由共守平城。
English: First of all, Jia Dan, Huo Kuang, Xie Sheng and others from the Wild Goose Gate were plundered by Yin Yu. Yin Yu took them as his generals, and together with Yin Yu they guarded Pingcheng.

古文：丹等闻芳败，遂共杀由诣郭凉；凉上状，皆封为列侯，诏送委输金帛赐茂、凉军吏及平城降民。
现代文：贾丹等听说卢芳失败了，就与霍匡、解胜等共杀尹由来见郭凉；郭凉上奏情状，都封为列侯，帝诏令将运输金帛赐给杜茂、郭凉军吏及平城投降的民众。
English: When Jia Dan and others heard that Lu Fang had failed, they conspired with Huo Kuang, Xie Sheng and others to kill Guo Liang; Guo Liang was made a vassal, and the imperial edict gave the transportation gold ingot to Du Mao, Guo Liang's military officers and the people of Pingcheng who had surrendered.

古文：自是卢芳城邑稍稍来降，凉诛其豪右郇氏之属，镇抚赢弱，旬月间雁门且平，芳遂亡入匈奴。
现代文：自此以后卢芳的城邑逐渐来投降，郭凉诛其豪强大族郇氏之属，安抚老弱，一月之间雁门暂趋平定，卢芳于是逃亡到匈奴。
English: From then on, Lu Fang's towns gradually surrendered. Guo Liang led his powerful clan, the Min clan, to pacify the old and weak. Between January and March, the Wild Goose Gate was temporarily pacified, and Lu Fang fled to the Xiongnu.

古文：帝擢凉子为中郎，宿卫左右。
现代文：帝擢升郭凉儿子为中郎，宿卫左右。
English: Emperor Gaozong promoted Guo Liang's son to be the middle brother, and he became the second-in-command.

古文：凉字公文，右北平人也。
现代文：郭凉字公文，右北平人。
English: Guo Liangzhe is the name of the official, and he is from the North of China.

古文：身长八尺，气力壮猛，虽武将，然通经书，多智略，尤晓边事，有名北方。
现代文：身长八尺，气力强壮勇猛，虽是武将，然精通经书，多智略，尤通晓边事，有名于北方。
English: He is eight feet tall, powerful, strong and brave. Although he is a warrior, he is well versed in scriptures, has a lot of wisdom, and is well versed in foreign affairs. He is famous in the north.

古文：初，幽州牧朱浮辟为兵曹掾，击彭宠有功，封广武侯。
现代文：起初，幽州牧朱浮征为兵曹掾，击彭宠有功，封广武侯。
English: At first, Yuzhou herdsman Zhu Fuxing was enlisted as a petty officer, fought against Peng Zhao, and was awarded the title of Guangwu Marquis.

古文：十三年，增茂邑，更封脩侯。
现代文：建武十三年，增加杜茂食邑，更封侯。
English: In the thirteenth year of the Jianwu era, the number of Du Mao food villages was increased, and the number of feudal lords was increased.

古文：十五年，坐断兵马禀缣，使军吏杀人，免官，削户邑，定封参蘧乡侯。
现代文：建武十五年，因牵涉到割断兵马缣，使军吏杀人案件，被免官，削户邑，定封参蘧乡侯。
English: In the fifteenth year of Jianwu, he was removed from office, his residence was cut off, and he was ordered to be confined to the township of Sanxing due to his involvement in the cutting of the Terracotta Warriors and Horses and the murder of a military official.

古文：十九年，卒。
现代文：建武十九年去世。
English: He died in the 19th year of the Kenmu era.

古文：子元嗣，永平十四年，坐与东平王等谋反，减死一等，国除。
现代文：子杜元嗣位。永平十四年，因牵连与东平王等谋反，减死一等，封国废除。
English: In the 14th year of Yeongpyeong, because he was implicated in plotting a rebellion with King Dongpyeong, he was demoted one rank and his fief abolished.

古文：永初七年，邓太后绍封茂孙奉为安乐亭侯。
现代文：永初七年，邓太后续封杜茂孙杜奉为安乐亭侯。
English: In the seventh year of the Yongzheng era, Deng Tai subsequently appointed Du Maosun Du Bong as Anle Tinghou.

古文：马成字君迁，南阳棘阳人也。
现代文：◆马成传马成字君迁，南阳郡棘阳人。
English: ◆Ma Cheng Chuan, Ma Cheng Zi, Jun Qian, Nanyang County, Shengyang.

古文：少为县吏。
现代文：年少时为县吏。
English: Young is a county official.

古文：世祖徇颍川，以成为安集掾，调守郏令。
现代文：世祖伐颍川，以马成为安集掾，调守郏县县令。
English: The ancestor of the Fahu River, Yima became the governor of Anji County, and was appointed as the top official of Anji County.

古文：及世祖讨河北，成即弃官步负，追及于蒲阳，以成为期门，从征伐。
现代文：世祖讨伐河北，马成就弃官步行，追及于蒲阳，以马成为期门，跟从征伐。
English: The ancestors fought in Hebei, the horse abandoned the official position and walked, and caught up with Puyang. The horse became the gateway, and followed the conquest.

古文：世祖即位，再迁护军都尉。
现代文：世祖即位，再迁护军都尉。
English: The founder ascends to the throne, and then the captain of the guard moves in.

古文：建武四年，拜扬武将军，督诛虏将军刘隆、振威将军宋登、射声校尉王赏，发会稽、丹阳、九江、六安四郡兵击李宪，时帝幸寿春，设坛场，祖礼遣之。
现代文：建武四年，拜为扬武将军，督诛虏将军刘隆、振威将军宋登、射声校尉王赏，发会稽、丹阳、九江、六安四郡兵攻击李宪。当时帝到寿春，设立坛场，按祖礼祭祀。
English: In the fourth year of Jianwu, soldiers from four counties attacked Li Xian, including General Yangwu, General Liu Long, General Zhenwei, General Song Deng, and Lieutenant Wang Yun, and soldiers from four counties, including Fahui, Danyang, Jiujiang, and Lu'an. At that time, the emperor came to Shuchun to set up an altar and offer sacrifices according to the ancestral rites.

古文：进围宪于舒，令诸军各深沟高垒。
现代文：进围李宪于舒，令诸军各深沟壁垒。
English: He encircled Lixian in Shu and made all the troops form deep trenches.

古文：宪数挑战，成坚壁不出，守之岁余。
现代文：李宪多次挑战，马成坚壁不与交战，围守一年多，
English: Li Xian challenged several times, Ma Cheng Jianbi did not fight, surrounded for more than a year,

古文：至六年春，城中食尽，乃攻之，遂屠舒，斩李宪，追及其党与，尽平江淮地。
现代文：到建武六年春，城中食尽，于是攻城，屠杀舒城居民，斩李宪，追击其党羽，尽平定江淮地区。
English: In the spring of the sixth year of Jianwu, the city was exhausted, so they attacked the city, massacred the residents of Shucheng, beheaded Li Xian, pursued his party members, and completely pacified the Jianghuai region.

古文：七年夏，封平舒侯。
现代文：建武七年夏，封为平舒侯。
English: In the summer of the seventh year of Kenmu, he was given the title of Pingshuo.

古文：八年，从征破隗嚣，以成为天水太守，将军如故。
现代文：八年，跟从征伐破隗嚣，以马成为天水太守，统帅军队如故。
English: In eight years, he followed the conquest and broke through the hustle and bustle, and became the governor of Tianshui with a horse, commanding the army as before.

古文：冬，征还京师。
现代文：冬，征召回京师。
English: In the winter, the Kyoto division was called back.

古文：九年，代来歙守中郎将，率武威将军刘尚等破河池，遂平武都。
现代文：建武九年，代来歙掌管中郎将，率武威将军刘尚等破河池县，于是平定武都郡。
English: In the 9th year of the Jianwu era, Zhong Rong Zheng, who had been in charge of Jianwu for generations, led Wu Wei General Liu Shang and others to break through Hechi County, and then subdued Wudu County.

古文：明年，大司空李通罢，以成行大司空事，居府如真，数月复拜扬武将军。
现代文：第二年，大司空李通罢官，以马成代理大司空事，居大司空府如实职办事，数月复拜扬武将军。
English: In the second year, the Air Chief Marshal Li Tong was dismissed, with Ma Cheng acting as the Air Chief Marshal, and the Air Ministry acting as the Air Chief Marshal. For several months, he paid homage to General Yangwu.

古文：十四年，屯常山、中山以备北边，并领建义大将军朱祐营。
现代文：建武十四年，屯兵常山、中山以警备北部边疆，并领建义大将军朱祐所部。
English: In the 14th year of Jianwu, he stationed soldiers in Changshan and Zhongshan to guard the northern border, and led the headquarters of General Zhu Yu of Jianyi.

古文：又代骠骑大将军杜茂缮治障塞，自西河至渭桥，河上至安邑，太原至井陉，中山至邺，皆筑保壁，起烽燧，十里一候。
现代文：又代骠骑大将军杜茂建筑工事，自西河至渭桥，自河上至安邑，自太原至井陉，自中山至邺，都建筑堡垒，起烽火，十里建一个了望哨所。
English: On the other hand, General Du Mao, the commander-in-chief of the cavalry, was in charge of the construction work. From the West River to the bridge, from the river to An'yun, from Taiyuan to the well, and from Zhongshan to the well, they all built fortresses, made bonfires, and built a lookout post ten miles away.

古文：在事五六年，帝以成勤劳，征还京师。
现代文：在职事五六年，帝以马成勤劳，征召回京。
English: After five or six years on the job, he was called back to Beijing for hard work.

古文：边人多上书求请者，复遣成还屯。
现代文：边疆人士多有上书求其回边的，帝因此再派遣马成还屯。
English: Many people from the border regions wrote to the emperor to ask for his return, so the emperor sent Ma Cheng to return to the capital.

古文：及南单于保塞，北方无事，拜为中山太守，上将军印绶，领屯兵如故。
现代文：等到南单于保塞自安，北方安宁无事，拜马成为中山太守，呈上将军印绶，仍领屯兵如故。
English: By the time Nan Shan had secured peace in Baosai and there was no peace in the north, Baima became the governor of Zhongshan, presented the general's seal, and still led the garrison as before.

古文：二十四年，南击武谿蛮贼，无功，上太守印绶。
现代文：建武二十四年，南击武奚谷蛮贼，未建军功，就呈上太守印绶。
English: In the twenty-fourth year of Jianwu, he attacked the barbarian bandits in the south of Wuxi and Shibuya, and without any military achievements, he was presented with the Emperor's Seal.

古文：二十七年，定封全椒侯。就国。
现代文：建武二十七年，定封全椒侯，就国。
English: In the 27th year of the Jianwu era, Zhengfei Jianfei marched into the country.

古文：三十二年卒。
现代文：建武三十二年去世。
English: He died in 32nd year of Jianwu.

古文：子卫嗣。
现代文：子马卫嗣位。
English: His son Uma became the heir to the throne.

古文：卫卒，子香嗣，徙封棘陵侯。
现代文：马卫卒，子马香嗣位，徙封为棘陵侯。
English: Ma Wei's pupil, his son Ma Xiang's heir, was exiled to Spinalonga.

古文：香卒，子丰嗣。
现代文：马香卒，子马丰嗣位。
English: Ma Xiang's son, Ma Feng's heir.

古文：丰卒，子玄嗣。
现代文：马丰卒，子马玄嗣位。
English: Ma Feng died, and his son Ma Xuan succeeded him.

古文：玄卒，子邑嗣。
现代文：马玄卒，子马邑嗣位。
English: Ma Xuan dies, son Ma Yip succeeds.

古文：邑卒，子丑嗣，桓帝时以罪失国。
现代文：马邑卒，子马丑嗣位，桓帝时以罪废其封国。
English: Ma Yip's pupil, Zima Qushi's heir to the throne, was stripped of his title to the country by Emperor Kuan.

古文：延熹二年，帝复封成玄孙昌为益阳亭侯。
现代文：延熹二年，复封马成玄孙马昌为益阳亭侯。
English: Two years later, Ma Chengxuan's grandson Ma Chang was reinstated as the Marquis of Yiyang.

古文：刘隆字元伯，南阳安众侯宗室也。
现代文：◆刘隆传刘隆字伯元，南阳安众侯的宗室。
English: ◆Liu Longquan Liu Longzhi Bo Yuan, the ancestral family of Nanyang Anzhuo.

古文：王莽居摄中，隆父礼与安众侯崇起兵诛莽，事泄，隆以年未七岁，故得免。
现代文：王莽居摄年间，刘隆父刘礼与安众侯刘崇起兵谋杀王莽，事泄露，刘隆以年不满七岁，得免于祸。
English: During Wang Mang's residence, Liu Long's father Liu Li and the Prince of Anzhu, Liu Chong, raised an army to murder Wang Mang. The incident was leaked, and Liu Long, who was under seven years old, was spared from the disaster.

古文：及壮，学于长安，更始拜为骑都尉。
现代文：等到年壮，就学于长安，更始拜他为骑都尉。
English: When he was a young man, he studied in Chang'an and became a cavalry captain.

古文：谒归，迎妻、子置洛阳。
现代文：请假归，迎妻子儿女安置在洛阳。
English: He asked for leave to return, and his wife and children were resettled in Luoyang.

古文：闻世祖在河内，即追及于射犬，以为骑都尉，与冯异共拒朱鲔、李轶等，轶遂杀隆妻、子。
现代文：听说世祖在河内，就追及世祖于射犬，被任为骑都尉，与冯异共拒朱鲔、李轶等，李轶就把刘隆的妻子儿女杀了。
English: Hearing that his ancestor was in Hanoi, he chased after his ancestor Yu Shaoxing and was appointed as a cavalry captain. Together with Feng Yixing, he rejected Zhu Xi and Li Xuan. Li Xuan then killed Liu Long's wife and children.

古文：建武二年，封亢父侯。
现代文：建武二年，封亢父侯。
English: In the second year of the Jianwu era, his father was enthroned.

古文：四年，拜诛虏将军，讨李宪。
现代文：建武四年，拜为诛虏将军，讨伐李宪。
English: In the fourth year of Jianwu, he became a general and fought against Li Xian.

古文：宪平，遣隆屯田武当。
现代文：李宪被讨平后，派遣刘隆屯田武当。
English: After Li Xian was subdued, Liu Long was sent to be a military commander in Tonden.

古文：十一年，守南郡太守，岁余，上将军印绶。
现代文：建武十一年，代理南阳太守，一年多，呈上大将军印绶。
English: In the eleventh year of Jianwu, the acting Nanyang governor, more than a year, presented the general seal.

古文：十三年，增邑，更封竟陵侯。
现代文：建武十三年，增加食邑，更封为竟陵侯。
English: In the thirteenth year of Jianwu, he increased the number of counties, and was even given the title of Jingling.

古文：是时，天下垦田多不以实，又户口年纪互有增减。
现代文：这时，天下垦田多不符合实际，户口年纪又互有增减。
English: At this time, most of the world's rice fields do not correspond to reality, and the age of household registration has increased and decreased.

古文：十五年，诏下州郡检核其事，而刺史、太守多不平均，或优饶豪右，侵刻羸弱，百姓嗟怨，遮道号呼。
现代文：建武十五年，诏令各州郡检核垦田事，而刺史太守多不平均，或者以优良富饶田地给予豪强大族，而对羸弱百姓侵占剥削，百姓嗟叹埋怨，号啕呼叫的挤满了道途。
English: In the 15th year of the Jianwu era, the imperial edict ordered all prefectures and counties to inspect the matter of ploughing the fields, but most of them were not equal, or they gave the rich and powerful families with good and rich fields, while they occupied and exploited the weak and weak people. The people lamented and complained, and the roads were crowded with horns.

古文：时，诸郡各遣使奏事，帝见陈留吏牍上有书，视之，云： 颍川、弘农可问，河南、南阳不可问。 帝诘吏由趣，吏不肯服，抵言于长寿街上得之。
现代文：当时各个郡各遣使者奏事，帝见陈留吏牍上有书，一看，见写着 颍川、弘农可以问，河南、南阳不可以问 。帝诘问此书来历，吏不肯说真话，诈说是在长寿街上捡到的。
English: At that time, envoys from various counties reported to the emperor that there was a book on Chen Rui Li's letterhead, which read, "You can ask questions about Luochuan and Hongnong, but not Henan and Nanyang." When the emperor inquired about the origin of the book, the official refused to tell the truth, saying that he had found it on Changshou Street.

古文：帝怒。
现代文：帝发怒。
English: The emperor was furious.

古文：时，显宗为东海公，年十二，在幄后言曰： 吏受郡敕，当欲以垦田相方耳。 帝曰： 即如此，何故言河南、南阳不可问？ 对曰： 河南帝城，多近臣，南阳帝乡，多近亲，田宅逾制，不可为准。 帝令虎贲将诘问吏，吏乃实首服，如显宗对。
现代文：当时显宗为东海公，年令只有十二岁，在幄幕后说 ：吏受郡守命令，当然想以垦田作为方法哩。 帝说： 既然这样，为什么说河南、南阳不可以问呢？ 显宗回答说： 河南是帝城，多亲近之臣，南阳是帝乡，多近亲，田宅超过规定，不可为标准。 帝令虎贲将诘问该吏，吏就如实说明，恰如显宗说的一样。
English: At that time, Emperor Xuanzong was the ruler of the East China Sea and was only twelve years old. He said behind the curtain of the imperial palace, "Since the officials were ordered by the county governor, of course they wanted to use the ploughing field as a method." The emperor said, "Since that is the case, why is it said that Henan and Nanyang cannot be asked?" Emperor Xuanzong replied, "Henan is the imperial city, the closest subject, Nanyang is the imperial hometown, the closest relative, the field house exceeds the regulation, it cannot be the standard. The emperor will interrogate the officials, and the officials will truthfully explain, just as Emperor Xu

古文：于是遣谒者考实，具知奸状。
现代文：于是派遣近侍考察核实，奏明奸状。
English: So they sent a courtier to investigate and verify, and reported the treachery.

古文：明年，隆坐征下狱，其畴辈十余人皆死。
现代文：第二年，刘隆被征下狱，其同辈十多人都死。
English: The following year, Liu Long was conscripted out of prison, and more than ten of his peers died.

古文：帝以隆功臣，物免为庶人。
现代文：帝以刘隆是功臣，特将他贬为平民。
English: The emperor considered Liu Long to be a meritorious subject, and specifically relegated him to the status of a commoner.

古文：明年，复封为扶乐乡侯，以中郎将副伏波将军马援击交阯蛮夷徵侧等，隆别于禁谿口破之，获其帅徵贰，斩首千余级，降者二万余人。
现代文：建武十七年，再封刘隆为扶乐乡侯，以中郎将副伏波将军马援击交趾蛮夷征侧等，刘隆另于禁奚谷口破其军，俘获其帅征贰，斩首千余级，降者两万余人。
English: In the 17th year of the Jianwu era, Liu Long was re-appointed as the governor of Fule Township. With the middle brother, he assisted the vice-Fubo General Ma to defeat the barbarian invaders. Liu Long also broke his army at the mouth of the Forbidden Valley, captured his handsome conscript, beheaded more than a thousand people, and demoted more than twenty thousand people.

古文：还，更封大国，为长平侯。
现代文：回京，更封大国，为长平侯。
English: He returned to Kyoto and was given the title of Daigoku, the highest rank of which was Nagahira.

古文：及大司马吴汉薨，隆为骠骑将军，行大司马事。
现代文：到大司马吴汉去世后，刘隆为骠骑将军，代理大司马事。
English: After the death of the chief steward Ma Wuhan, Liu Long became the general of the cavalry, acting as the chief steward of the horse.

古文：隆奉法自守，视事八岁，上将军印绶，罢，赐养牛，上樽酒十斛，以列侯奉朝请。
现代文：刘隆奉法自守，视事八年，呈上大将军印绶，官罢，赐养牛，上樽酒十斛，以列侯奉朝请。
English: Liu Long obeyed the law and protected himself, and after eight years of consideration, he was presented with the general's seal, given an official post, given cattle to raise, given ten ounces of wine in a barrel, and invited to serve the emperor as a vassal.

古文：三十年，定封慎侯。
现代文：建武三十年，定封慎侯。
English: Jianwu thirty years, Dingfeng prudence.

古文：中元二年，卒，谥曰靖侯。
现代文：中元二年卒，谥为靖侯。
English: He died in the second year of the 12th century, and his posthumous name was Jinghou.

古文：子安嗣。
现代文：子刘安嗣位。
English: His son Liu An succeeded to the throne.

古文：傅俊字子卫，颍川襄城人也。
现代文：◆傅俊传傅俊字子卫，颍川郡襄城人。
English: ◆Fu Jun ChuanFu Jun Zi Wei, a resident of Xiangcheng, Beichuan County.

古文：世祖徇襄城，俊以县亭长迎军，拜为校尉，襄城收其母弟宗族，皆灭之。
现代文：世祖攻取襄城，傅俊以县亭长迎接汉军，拜为校尉，襄城逮捕他的母弟及宗族，都诛灭了。
English: The ancestor conquered Xiangcheng, Fu Jun greeted the Chinese army with the title of county pavilion chief, bowed as a lieutenant, Xiangcheng arrested his mother and brother and his clan, and they were all annihilated.

古文：从破王寻等，以为偏将军。
现代文：跟从攻破王寻等，以傅俊为偏将军。
English: Followed by breaking Wang Xun and so on, with Fu Jun as a partial general.

古文：别击京、密，破之，遣归颍川，收葬家属。
现代文：另击京、密，攻破了，遣他回颍川，收葬家属。
English: He also attacked Beijing and Tainan, broke through, and sent him back to Luochuan to bury his family members.

古文：及世祖讨河北，俊与宾客十余人北追，及于邯郸，上谒，世祖使将颍川兵，常从征伐。
现代文：到世祖讨伐河北时，傅俊与宾客十余人北追，在邯郸追到了，上谒世祖，世祖使他率领颍川兵，常常跟从征伐。
English: When the ancestor went to fight in Hebei, Fu Jun and more than ten guests chased him north and chased him to Yunnan. When the ancestor arrived in Yunnan, the ancestor made him lead the Yunnan soldiers and often followed the conquest.

古文：世祖即位，以俊为侍中。
现代文：世祖即位，以傅俊为侍中。
English: The founder ascends the throne, with Fu Jun as an attendant.

古文：建武二年，封昆阳侯。
现代文：建武二年，封昆阳侯。
English: In the second year of Jianwu, he was given the title of Kunyang Marquis.

古文：三年，拜俊积弩将军，与征南大将军岑彭击破秦丰，因将兵徇江东，扬州悉定。
现代文：建武三年，拜傅俊为积弩将军，与征南大将军岑彭击破秦丰，因而率兵攻取江东，扬州全部平定。
English: In the third year of Jianwu, Baifu Jun became the general of Jizhong, and defeated Qin Feng with the general of the Southern Expedition, Zibo Peng, thus leading the troops to conquer the east of the Yangtze River, and all of Yangzhou was pacified.

古文：七年，卒，谥曰威侯。
现代文：建武七年去世，谥为威侯。
English: Jianwu died in the seventh year of his reign, and Zou became a powerful lord.

古文：子昌嗣，徙封芜湖侯。
现代文：子傅昌嗣位，徙封芜湖侯。
English: His son Fu Chang succeeded to the throne, and was given the title of Wuhu marquis.

古文：建初中，遭母忧，因上书，以国贫不愿之封，乞钱五十万，为关内侯。
现代文：建初年间，遭母丧，因而上书，以芜湖贫穷不愿去封国，要求赐钱五十万，为关内侯。
English: During the first year of construction, his mother passed away, so he wrote a letter, saying that he did not want to seal the country with the poverty of Lugu Lake, and asked for half a million in money to be the governor of Guanai.

古文：肃宗怒，贬为关内侯，竟不赐钱。
现代文：肃宗发怒，贬傅昌为关内侯，竟不赏赐钱财。
English: Su Zong was furious and denigrated Fu Chang as Guan Nei Hou, but he did not give him any money.

古文：永初七年，邓太后复封昌子铁为高置亭侯。
现代文：永初七年，邓太后复封傅昌子傅铁为高置亭侯。
English: In the seventh year of the Yongchu era, Empress Dowager Deng reinstated Fu Changzi and Fu Tie as high-ranking princes.

古文：坚镡字子伋，颍川襄城人也。
现代文：◆坚镡传坚镡字子亻及，颍川襄城人。
English: ◆Kenroku passed down the Kenroku characters to his children and grandchildren, and became a member of the Hachikawa townspeople.

古文：为郡县吏。
现代文：为郡县吏。
English: He is a county official.

古文：世祖讨河北，或荐镡者，因得召见。
现代文：世祖讨伐河北，有人举荐坚镡，世祖因而召见。
English: The ancestor fought in Hebei, some people recommended Jianye, and the ancestor was summoned.

古文：以其吏能，署主簿。
现代文：以其有任郡县吏的才能，署为主簿。
English: With his talent as a county official, he is the main character of the series.

古文：又拜偏将军，从平河北，别击破大枪于卢奴。
现代文：又拜为偏将军，跟从平定河北，另击破大枪于卢奴。
English: He also served as a partial general, followed the pacification of Hebei Province, and smashed the big guns in Lunu.

古文：世祖即位，拜镡扬化将军，封〈氵隱〉强侯。
现代文：世祖即位，拜坚镡为扬化将军，封氵隐强侯。
English: The ancestor ascended the throne, and Bai Jianjun became the general of Yanghua Province.

古文：与诸将攻洛阳，而朱鲔别将守东城者为反间，私约镡晨开上东门。
现代文：与诸将攻洛阳，而朱鲔部将守东城者作为反间，私约坚镡于清晨开上东门。
English: With the generals attacking Luoyang, and Zhu Xi Bu guarding the eastern city as the opponent, I will open the eastern gate in the early morning.

古文：镡与建义大将军朱祐乘朝而入，与鲔大战武库下，杀伤甚众，至旦食乃罢，朱鲔由是遂降。
现代文：坚镡与建义大将军朱祐乘机而入，与朱鲔大战于库下，杀伤很多，直到早餐时才停战，朱鲔因此而投降。
English: Jianzhong and Jianyi General Zhu Yu took the opportunity to enter, and fought with Zhu Xi under the warehouse, with many casualties. The war did not end until breakfast, and Zhu Xi therefore surrendered.

古文：又别击内黄，平之。
现代文：又另击内黄，平定了。
English: Another blow to Naihuang, and it's all over.

古文：建武二年，与右将军万脩徇南阳诸县，而堵乡人董反宛城，获南阳太守刘驎。
现代文：建武二年，与右将军万攻取南阳各县，而堵乡人董讠斤在宛城造，俘获南阳太守刘马。
English: In the second year of Jianwu, he and the right general Wan captured all the counties of Nanyang, while the villagers Dong Shujin built in Wancheng and captured the Nanyang governor Liu Ma.

古文：镡乃引军赴宛，选敢死士夜自登城，斩关而入，遂弃城走还堵乡。
现代文：坚镡就引军赴宛，自选敢死队乘夜登城楼，斩关而入，董讠斤于是弃城走回堵乡。
English: Jian Chen led the army to Wan, and the self-selected death squad took the night to climb the city tower and entered the city, so Dong Yujin abandoned the city and went back to Tongxiang.

古文：邓奉复反新野，攻破吴汉。
现代文：邓奉又在新野造，攻破了吴汉。
English: Deng Bong also built in Xinye, and defeated Wu Han.

古文：时，万脩病卒，镡独孤绝，南拒邓奉，北当董，一年间道路隔塞，粮馈不至，镡食蔬菜，与士卒共劳苦。
现代文：这时万因病去世，坚镡孤独无援，南面要拒邓奉，北面要挡住董讠斤，一年之间道路阻塞，粮食给养断绝，坚镡吃的是蔬菜，与士卒共劳苦。
English: At this time, he died of all kinds of diseases. Jianzhong was lonely and helpless. In the south, he had to resist Dengfeng. In the north, he had to block Dong Rongjin. The road was blocked for a year. The grain supply was cut off. Jianzhong ate vegetables and worked hard with the soldiers.

古文：每急，辄先当矢石，身被三创，以此能全其众。
现代文：每遇战，常先当矢石，身上三处受了伤，以此能保全其部众。
English: Whenever there was a battle, he was often the first to be hit, and he received three wounds on his body in order to protect his subordinates.

古文：及帝征南阳，击破、奉，以镡为左曹，常从征伐。
现代文：等到帝征讨南阳，击破董讠斤、邓奉，以坚镡为左曹，经常跟从征伐。
English: Wait until the emperor conquers Nanyang, defeats Dong Shujin and Deng Bong, and takes Jianyao as his left-hand man, and often follows the conquest.

古文：六年，定封合肥候。
现代文：建武六年，定封为合肥侯。
English: It's been six years since Jianwu, and he is now a Hefei marquis.

古文：二十六年，卒。
现代文：建武二十六年去世。
English: Kenmu passed away at the age of twenty-six.

古文：子鸿嗣。
现代文：子坚鸿嗣位。
English: His son Jianhong succeeded him.

古文：鸿卒，子浮嗣。
现代文：坚鸿去世，子坚浮嗣位。
English: Jianhong died, and his son Jianfu succeeded him.

古文：浮卒，子雅嗣。
现代文：坚浮去世，子坚雅嗣位。
English: Jianfu died and his son Jianya succeeded him.

古文：马武字子张，南阳湖阳人也。
现代文：◆马武传马武字子张，南阳郡湖阳人。
English: ◆Ma Wu Chuan Ma Wu Zi Zhang, a native of Hoyang, Nanyang County.

古文：少时避仇，客居江夏。
现代文：年轻时因避仇，在江夏客居。
English: When he was young, he lived as a guest in Jiangxia to avoid revenge.

古文：王莽末，竟陵、西阳三老起兵于郡界，武往从之，后入绿林中，遂与汉军合。
现代文：王莽末年，竟陵、西阳三老起兵于郡界，马武也参加了，后来进入绿林中，于是与汉军会合。
English: At the end of Wang Mang's life, Jingling and Xiyang three old men raised an army at the county border. Ma Wu also participated, and later entered the green forest, thus joining the Chinese army.

古文：更始立，以武为侍郎，与世祖破王寻等。拜为振威将军，与尚书令谢躬共攻王郎。
现代文：更始立，以马武为侍郎，与世祖破王寻等，拜为振威将军，与尚书令谢躬共攻王郎。
English: From the very beginning, he took Ma Wu as his attendant, defeated Wang Xun with his ancestor, worshiped as General Zhenwei, and attacked Wang Rong together with Shang Shuling Xie Mi.

古文：及世祖拔邯郸，请躬及武等置酒高会，因欲以图躬，不克。
现代文：世祖攻克邯郸，请谢躬及马武等举行盛大酒会，想借此诛杀谢躬，没有成功。
English: The ancestor conquered Khotan, invited Xie Mu and Ma Wu to hold a grand banquet, and tried to use this opportunity to kill Xie Mu, but failed.

古文：既罢，独与武登丛台，从容谓武曰： 吾得渔阳、上谷突骑，欲令将军将之，何如？ 武曰： 驽怯无方略。 世祖曰： 将军久将，习兵，岂与我掾史同哉！ 武由是归心。
现代文：酒会既罢，世祖独与马武登上丛台，从容对马武说： 我得到渔阳、上谷突击骑兵，想让你统帅，怎么样？ 
English: Even though it was a drinking party, Shedu and Mabu climbed onto the dais and calmly said to Mabu: I got Yuyang and Shanggu Assault Cavalry, and I want you to be the commander, how about that?

古文：及谢躬诛死，武驰至射犬降，世祖见之甚悦，引置左右，每劳飨诸将，武辄起斟酌于前，世祖以为欢。
现代文：马武说 ：我驽钝怯懦没有方略哩。 世祖说 ：将军久为将帅，深习兵事，难道与我掾史相同吗？ 马武由此心里归向世祖。谢躬被诛后，马武奔往射犬投降，世祖见了很高兴，把他引到左右，每次慰劳宴会诸将，马武常常起身斟酌于前，世祖甚为欢畅。
English: Mabu said, "I'm a dull coward and there's no way I can escape." The patriarch said, "The general has been a general for a long time and has studied military affairs deeply, is that the same as my history?" Mabu's heart returned to the patriarch from this. After bowing to the emperor, Mabu ran to the dog to surrender. The patriarch was happy to see him and led him to the right and left. Every time there was a consolation banquet for the generals, Mabu would often get up and look forward to it. The patriarch was very happy.

古文：复使将其部曲至邺，武叩头辞以不愿，世祖愈美其意，因从击群贼。
现代文：再使马武率领其部队到邺，马武叩头推辞说不愿意，世祖更加赞美其意，因使马武跟从进击诸群贼。
English: He then made Mabu lead his troops to Shao. Mabu bowed his head and said that he did not want to, and the patriarch praised his intention even more, because he made Mabu follow and attack the bandits.

古文：世祖击尤来、五幡等，败于慎水，武独殿，还陷阵，故贼不得迫及。
现代文：世祖击尤来、五幡等，在慎水失败，马武独殿后军，返回去攻破敌军阵地，所以贼兵不敢追及。
English: Shizu hit Yulai, Wuhan, and so on, but failed in Shinsui, while Mabu defeated the rearguard and returned to break through the enemy's position, so the bandits did not dare to catch up.

古文：进至安次、小广阳，武常为军锋，力战无前，诸将皆引而随之，故遂破贼，穷追至平谷，浚靡而还。
现代文：进到安次、小广阳，马武常为前锋，力战向前，诸将都引军相随，所以攻破贼兵，穷追到平谷县、浚靡县而回师。
English: When marching into Anji and Xiaogangyang, Ma Wu was often at the forefront, fighting vigorously forward. The generals all led their armies in the same direction, so they broke through the bandits and chased them all the way to Pinggu County and Dzungmai County before returning to the division.

古文：世祖即位，以武为侍中、骑都尉，封山都侯。
现代文：世祖即位，以马武为侍中、骑都尉，封山都侯。
English: The ancestor ascended to the throne, with Ma Wu as a chamberlain, cavalry captain, and vassal lord.

古文：建武四年，与虎牙将军盖延等讨刘永，武别击济阴，下成武、楚丘，拜捕虏将军。
现代文：建武四年，与虎牙将军盖延等讨伐刘永，马武另击济阴，攻下了成武、楚丘，拜捕虏将军。
English: In the fourth year of Jianwu, he fought against Liu Yong with Huya General Gai Yan and others, and Ma Wu also attacked Jiyin, captured Chengwu and Chuqiu, and captured General Bai.

古文：明年，庞萌反，攻桃城，武先与战，破之；会车驾至，萌遂败走。
现代文：第二年，庞萌造，攻桃城，马武先与交战，攻破庞军；恰好帝车驾到，庞萌于是败走。
English: In the second year, Pang Mengzhu attacked Taocheng, and Ma Wuxi was the first to fight against and defeat Pang's army. Just as the imperial car arrived, Pang Meng was defeated and left.

古文：六年夏，与建威大将军耿弇西击隗嚣，汉军不利，引下陇，嚣追急，武选精骑还为后拒，身披甲持戟奔击，杀数千人，嚣兵乃退，诸军得还长安。
现代文：建武六年夏，与建威大将军耿西击隗嚣，汉军不利，引军下陇。隗嚣追得很紧急，马武选精骑回军抵御隗嚣，身披盔甲手持画戟奔击，杀数千人，隗嚣兵才退，诸军得还长安。
English: In the summer of the sixth year of Jianwu, Geng Xi, the general of Jianwei, fought against the Han army, and the Han army was unfavorable, leading the army to retreat. The pursuit of the enemy was very urgent, and the horse of the horse was selected to ride back to the army to resist the enemy, wearing armor and holding a paintbrush, killing thousands of people. The enemy soldiers only retreated, and the army was still safe.

古文：十三年，增邑，更封脩侯。
现代文：建武十三年，增加食邑，更封俞阝侯。
English: In the thirteenth year of Jianwu, the number of counties was increased, and the number of counties was increased.

古文：将兵北屯下曲阳，备匈奴。
现代文：率领军队北屯下曲阳，防备匈奴。
English: He led the army from Beitun to Quyang to guard against the Huns.

古文：坐杀军吏，受诏将妻子就国。
现代文：其余的一个个回答，到马武，马武说 ：臣以武勇，可作军尉以督讨盗贼。 
English: The rest answered one by one, starting with Mabu. Mabu said, "If a vassal is brave, he can act as a lieutenant to catch a thief."

古文：武径诣洛阳，上将军印绶，削户五百，定封为杨虚侯，因留奉朝请。
现代文：帝笑着说 ；且莫为盗贼，自己送到亭长手里，这样就可以了。 
English: The emperor smiled and said, "And don't be a thief, deliver it to the chief steward yourself, that's fine."

古文：帝后与功臣诸侯宴语，从容言曰： 诸卿不遭际会，自度爵禄何所至乎？ 高密侯邓禹先对曰： 臣少尝学问，可郡文学博士。 帝曰： 何言之谦乎 卿邓氏子，志行修整，何为不掾功曹？ 余各以次对，至武，曰： 臣以武勇，可守尉督盗贼。 帝笑曰： 且勿为盗贼，自致亭长，斯可矣。 武为人嗜酒，阔达敢言，时醉在御前面折同列，言其短长，无所避忌，帝故纵之，以为笑乐。
现代文：马武为人嗜喝酒，胸怀阔达敢说真话，这时喝醉了在皇上面前面折各功臣诸侯，评说他们的长短，无所回避忌讳。帝故意让他讲，以为笑乐。
English: Mawu was fond of drinking, broad-minded and dared to speak the truth. At that time, he got drunk and in front of the emperor, he broke down all the meritorious princes and commented on their merits and demerits. There was no way to avoid the taboo. The emperor deliberately let him speak, thinking it would be fun.

古文：帝虽制御功臣，而每能回容，宥其小失。
现代文：帝虽然制约驾御功臣，而每每能曲法宽容，原谅功臣们的小过。
English: Although the emperor restricts his meritorious vassals, he is always tolerant of their tricks and forgives their minor faults.

古文：远方贡珍甘，必先遍赐列侯，而太官无余。
现代文：远方贡献来的珍宝甘味，必先遍赐列侯，而皇帝的厨中却很少。
English: The precious sweetness contributed from far away must first be given to the princes, but the emperor's kitchen has very little of it.

古文：有功，辄增邑赏，不任以吏职，故皆保其福禄，终无诛谴者。
现代文：有功，常增赏封邑，而不任以官职，所以都能保其福禄，没有诛杀谪降的。
English: Those with meritorious deeds were often rewarded with additional fiefdoms, but were not allowed to hold official posts, so they were able to keep their fortunes, and did not have to fight and die.

古文：二十五年，武以中郎将将兵击武陵蛮夷，还，上印绶，显宗初，西羌寇陇右，覆军杀将，朝廷患之，复拜武捕虏将军，以中郎将王丰副，与监军使者窦固、右辅都尉陈讠斤，将乌桓、黎阳营、三辅募士、凉州诸郡羌胡兵及弛刑，合四万人击之。
现代文：建武二十五年，马武以中郎将率军击武陵蛮夷，回京，呈上印绶。显宗初，西羌侵犯陇右，覆灭守军攻杀将领，朝廷深以为患，于是再拜马武为捕虏将军，以中郎将王丰为副，与监军使者窦固、右辅都尉陈讠斤，率领乌桓、黎阳营、三辅招募士兵、凉州诸郡羌胡兵及解除刑枷的犯人，共四万人攻击之。
English: In the 25th year of the Jianwu era, Ma Wu led an army under the command of Zhong Lang to attack the barbarians in Wuling and returned to Beijing with a seal. At the beginning of the reign of Emperor Xian Zong, the court was deeply concerned that the West Mongols would encroach on the right side of Wuling and kill the generals of the defending army. Therefore, Ma Wu was appointed as the general of captives, Wang Feng as the deputy of Zhong Lang, and Dou Gu, the envoy of supervising the army, and Chen Yujin, the right auxiliary captain, led the recruited soldiers of Wuhuan, Liyang Camp, and San

古文：到金城浩亹，与羌战，斩首六百级。
现代文：到了金城郡浩县，与羌战，斩首六百级。
English: When he arrived at Hao County, Jincheng County, he fought with the Xiongnu and beheaded 600 of them.

古文：又战于洛都谷，为羌所败，死者千余人。
现代文：又战于洛都谷，被羌兵打败，死了千余人。
English: They also fought in Lod Valley, where they were defeated and more than a thousand people died.

古文：羌乃率众引出塞，武复追击到东、西邯，大破之，斩首四千六百级，获生口千六百人，余皆降散。
现代文：羌于是率众引出塞外，马武再追击到东、西邯，大破羌兵，斩首四千六百级，活捉一千六百人，其余或降或散。
English: He then led the crowd out of Tibet, and Ma Wu chased them to the east and west of Tibet, defeating 4,600 of their soldiers, beheading another 1,600, and capturing the rest.

古文：武振旅还京师，增邑七百户，并前千八百户。
现代文：马武整顿军旅回京师，增加食邑七百户，与以前的食邑相加共一千八百户。
English: Ma Wu returned to Beijing after the rectification campaign and increased the number of food villages by 700, bringing the total number of food villages to 1,800.

古文：永平四年，卒。
现代文：永平四年去世。
English: Yongping died four years later.

古文：子檀嗣，坐兄伯济与楚王英党颜忠谋反，国除。
现代文：子马檀嗣位，因牵涉到兄伯济与楚王刘英党与颜忠谋反获罪，封国废除。
English: His son Ma Dang, the heir to the throne, was found guilty of conspiring against his brother Bo Zi and the Chu King Liu Ying Party and Yan Zhong, and the state was abolished.

古文：永初七年，邓太后绍封武孙震为漻亭侯。
现代文：永初七年，邓太后续封马武孙马震为亭侯。
English: In the seventh year of the Yongzheng era, Deng Tai subsequently appointed Ma Wusun Ma Zhen as the prince.

古文：震卒，子侧嗣。
现代文：马震去世，子马侧嗣位。
English: Ma Zhen passed away, and his son Ma Xiang became the heir.

古文：论曰：中兴二十八将，前世以为上应二十八宿，未之详也。
现代文：史官评论道：中兴二十八将，前世以为是应着天上的二十八宿，没有详考。
English: The historian commented, "In the previous life, the ZTE 28 generals were thought to correspond to the 28 heavenly mansions, but there was no detailed examination.

古文：然咸能感会风云，奋其智勇，称为佐命，亦各志能之士也。
现代文：但他们都能感会风云时事的变化，奋其智慧勇力，称为辅佐之臣，他们也真是志能之士哩。
English: But they can all feel the changes in the wind and current affairs, exert their wisdom and courage, and are called assistant retainers. They are also true volunteers.

古文：议者多非光武不以功臣任职，至使英姿茂绩，委而勿用。
现代文：评议的人多对光武不以功臣任职，以至使那些英俊之士，已取得丰功伟绩的，弃而不用，持否定态度。
English: Most of the reviewers held a negative attitude towards the fact that Guangwu did not appoint meritorious men, so that those handsome men, who had achieved great achievements, were discarded.

古文：然原夫深图远算，固将有以焉尔。
现代文：然而推究起来实在是出于深谋远虑，才有这样的举措哩。
English: However, it turns out that such a move was made out of forethought.

古文：若乃王道既衰，降及霸德，犹能授受惟庸，勋贤皆序，如管、隰之迭升桓世，先、赵之同列文朝，可谓兼通矣。
现代文：至于王道既衰，降到霸德，还能够以功劳贤良来授官授职，譬如管仲、阝显朋之迭升于齐桓之世，先轸、赵衰之同列于晋文之朝，可以说是兼通了。
English: As for the king's way, although it was weak and reduced to tyranny, it was still possible to award officials with merit and virtue, for example, Guanzhong and Zou Xianbo were promoted in succession in the Qiguan era, and Xianqi and Zhao Zhen were ranked together in the Jinwen era, which can be said to be a double pass.

古文：降自秦、汉，世资战力，至于翼扶王运，皆武人屈起。
现代文：到了秦、汉，世人看重武力，至于助成王运，都是由于武人的崛起。
English: In the Qin and Han dynasties, the world placed great importance on military power, and the rise of the warrior class was the main reason for the rise of the royal family.

古文：亦有鬻缯屠狗轻猾之徒，或崇以连城之赏，或任以阿衡之地，故执疑则隙生，力侔则乱起。
现代文：也有卖缯屠狗轻猾之徒，或推重以连城之赏，或委任以天下依倚取平之地，所以势相疑则间隙生，力相当则祸乱起。
English: There are also light-hearted people who sell yakitori and butcher dogs, or push for the reward of winning the city, or appoint the world to rely on the flat land, so if the situation is doubtful, gaps will arise, and if the force is equal, evil will arise.

古文：萧、樊且犹缧绁，信、越终见菹戮，不其然乎！
现代文：萧何、樊口会犹身陷缧绁，韩信、彭越终被菹戮，难道不是这样吗！
English: Isn't it the case that Xiao He and Hukou He are still in prison, while Han Xin and Peng Yue are finally being killed?

古文：自兹以降，迄于孝武，宰辅五世，莫非公侯。
现代文：自此以后，至于孝武，五世的宰辅无不一由公侯勋贵充任。
English: Since then, as far as the filial piety is concerned, the fifth generation of Zaifu were all appointed by Princes and Nobles.

古文：遂使缙绅道塞，贤能蔽壅，朝有世及之私，下多抱关之怨。
现代文：致使士大夫道路阻塞，贤能之士蒙蔽隔断，朝廷有父子相继之私恩，下面多俊杰守门之嗟怨。
English: As a result, the road of envoys and doctors is blocked, the virtuous people are blinded and cut off, the imperial court has the personal favor of father and son in succession, and the resentment of the gatekeepers below.

古文：其怀道无闻，委身草莽者，亦何可胜言。
现代文：其怀才不遇，委身草莽的，说也说不完。
English: His talent is not met, and his commitment is reckless. There is no end to what he can say.

古文：故光武鉴前事之违，存矫枉之志，虽寇、邓之高勋，耿、贾之鸿烈，分土不过大县数四，所加特进、朝请而已。
现代文：所以光武鉴于前事之背离，存矫枉之大志，虽然寇恂、邓禹之高功，耿、贾复之伟业，封土不过几个大县，所加也只是特进、奉朝请而已。
English: Therefore, in view of the departure from the past, Guangwu had the great ambition of rectifying the injustice. Although the high achievements of Guo Qi and Deng Yu, and the great achievements of Geng and Jia Fu, the fiefs were only a few large counties, and what was added was only a special advance and a request to serve the emperor.

古文：观其治平临政，课职责咎，将所谓 导之以政，齐之以刑 者乎！
现代文：考察他在治平时期的施政方针，考核职务责问过失，正是所谓 导之以政，齐之以刑 的人啊。
English: Examining his policy guidelines during the period of pacifism, assessing duties, blaming and questioning faults, it is precisely the so-called people who are led to politics and punished together.

古文：若格之功臣，其伤已甚。
现代文：如按法律办事，必定会伤害他们。
English: If you go by the law, you're going to hurt them.

古文：何者？
现代文：为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：直绳则亏丧恩旧，桡情则违废禁典，选德则功不必厚，举劳则人或未贤，参任则群心难塞，并列则其敝未远。
现代文：按法令办事则亏伤了私恩故旧，原情宽宥又违废了禁令典刑，选择德才则不必有大功，举荐功劳则人未见得贤德，参与任职则群心难于满足，如功贤并列任用则高祖时的弊病未远。
English: To act in accordance with the law is to damage the old-fashioned private grace, to pardon the original situation is to violate the prohibition and punishment, to choose the moral talent is not to have great merit, to recommend the merit is to have no virtue, to participate in the post is to be unable to satisfy the group spirit, and if the merits and virtues are appointed together, the maladies of Gao Zu are not far away.

古文：不得不校其胜否，即以事相权。
现代文：不得不考核其胜任与否，即以事实来权衡。
English: They have to be judged on their competence, that is, on the basis of facts.

古文：故高秩厚礼，允答元功，峻文深宪，责成吏职。
现代文：所以高官厚禄，答谢元勋，苛酷的法条和严厉的法令，责成官吏们各尽其职。
English: Therefore, the high official's generous salary, the gratitude to the founder, the harsh laws and the strict decrees, ordered the officials to perform their duties.

古文：建武之世，侯者百余，若夫数公者，则与参国议，分均休咎，其余并优以宽科，完其封禄，莫不终以功名延庆于后。
现代文：建武之世，封侯的一百多人，但参与国政的却只有邓禹、贾复、李通等数人，均分休咎，其余的都以宽宏的律法相优待，完备他们的封地俸禄，莫不都以功名延续流惠于其后代。
English: In Jianwu's time, there were more than a hundred feudal lords, but only Deng Yu, Jia Fu, Li Tong and a few others took part in national politics. All of them were pardoned, and the rest were treated favorably according to the magnanimous law, and their fief salaries were complete. All of them continued to benefit their descendants with their merits.

古文：昔留侯以为高祖悉用萧、曹故人，而郭伋亦讥南阳多显，郑兴又戒功臣专任。
现代文：以前张良以为刘邦所用的都是萧何、曹参的故旧，而郭亻及也讥刺南阳显贵过多，郑兴又劝谏不要专用功臣。
English: In the past, Zhang Liang thought that Liu Bang only used the old ones of Xiao He and Cao San, while Guo Yu and also ridiculed the Nanyang dignitaries too much. Zheng Xing also advised Liu Bang not to use special heroes.

古文：夫崇恩偏授，易启私溺之失，至公均被，必广招贤之路，意者不其然乎！
现代文：崇恩偏授，容易造成私溺的弊病，以至公让大家蒙受恩泽，必能广招天下的贤才，想起来难道不是这样的吗？
English: It is easy to cause the malady of selfishness by favoritism and favoritism, so that the public allows everyone to receive grace, which will surely attract the world's sages. Isn't it like this when you think about it?

古文：永平中，显宗追感前世功臣，乃图画二十八将于南宫云台，其外又有王常、李通、窦融、卓茂，合三十二人。
现代文：永平中，显宗追感前世功臣，就画了二十八名宿将的图悬于南宫云台，其外又有王常、李通、窦融、卓茂，合计三十二人。
English: In Yongping, Hentong drew a picture of 28 innkeepers hanging in Nangu Yuntai, including Wang Chang, Li Tong, Dou Rong and Zhuo Mao, a total of 32 people.

古文：故依其本弟系之篇末，以志功臣之次云尔。
现代文：这里按其本来秩序附于篇末，以志功臣之位次。
English: Here, according to its original order, it is appended to the end of the article, in order of merit.

古文：征西大将军阳夏侯冯异上谷太守淮陵侯王霸建义大将军鬲侯朱祐信都太守阿陵侯任光征虏将军颍阳侯祭遵豫章太守中水侯李忠骠骑大将军栎阳侯景丹右将军槐里侯万脩虎牙大将军安平侯盖延太常灵寿侯邳彤卫尉安成侯铫期骁骑将军昌成侯刘植东郡太守东光侯耿纯横野大将军山桑侯王常城门校尉朗陵侯臧宫大司空固始侯李通捕虏将军杨虚侯马武大司空安丰侯窦融骠骑将军慎侯刘隆太傅宣德侯卓茂
现代文：太傅高密侯邓禹，大司马广平侯吴汉，左将军胶东侯贾复，建威大将军好畤侯耿弇，骠骑大将军参蘧侯杜茂，执金吾雍奴侯寇恂，征南大将军舞阳侯岑彭，征西大将军阳夏侯冯异，建义大将军鬲侯朱祐，征虏将军颍阳侯祭遵，骠骑大将军栎阳侯景丹，虎牙大将军安平侯盖延，卫尉安成侯铫期，东郡太守东光侯耿纯，城门校尉朗陵侯臧宫，捕虏将军杨虚侯马武，骠骑将军慎侯刘隆，中山太守全椒侯马成，河南尹阜成侯王梁，琅笽太守祝阿侯陈俊，骠骑大将军参蘧侯杜茂，积弩将军昆阳侯傅俊，左曹合肥侯坚镡，上谷太守淮陵侯王霸，信都太守阿陵侯任光，豫章太守中水侯李忠，右将军槐里侯万修，太常灵寿侯邳彤，骁骑将军昌成侯刘植，横野大将军山桑侯王常，大司空固始侯李通，大司空安丰侯窦融，太傅宣德侯卓茂。
English: Taifu Gaomi marquis Deng Yu, Daishi Ma Guangping marquis Wu Han, Zuo general Jia Dong marquis Jia Fu, Jian Wei general Gao Ying marquis Geng Yao, Zou cavalry general Zhang Ying marquis Du Mao, Zheng Jinwu Yongnu marquis Guo Yao, Zheng Nan general Maiyang marquis Zheng Peng, Zheng Xi general Yang Xia marquis Feng Yi, Jian Yi general Zheng marquis Zhu Yu, Zheng marquis Matsu Zun, Zheng cavalry general Zheng Yang marquis Jing Dan, Houga general Anping marquis Guiyan, Guard lieutenant Ancheng

