古文：事闻于朝，为改所居乡曰纯孝。履祥幼而敏睿，父兄稍授之书，即能记诵。
现代文：金履祥字吉父，婺之兰溪人。先祖原姓刘，因避讳吴越钱武肃王之同音名，故改姓金。履祥幼时就很聪慧，父兄稍加教授，就能背诵。
English: Jin Ruxiang's father, a native of Lanxi in Shandong Province, was originally surnamed Liu, but he changed his surname to Jin to avoid the homonymous name of Wu Yue Qian Wu Su Wang. When he was young, Ruxiang was very clever, and his father and brother could recite it with a little teaching.

古文：比长，益自策励，凡天文、地形、礼乐、田乘、兵谋、阴阳、律历之书，靡不毕究。
现代文：年龄稍大，更加自勉奋发学习。对天文、地理、礼乐、兵谋、阴阳、律历之类的书，无不认真研究。
English: Slightly older, more self-motivated to study. Astronomy, geography, music, military strategy, yin and yang, calendar and other books, all carefully studied.

古文：及壮，知向濂、洛之学，事同郡王柏，从登何基之门。
现代文：及至青年时期，懂得了要向宋代理学家周敦颐、程颐、程颢学习，他与同郡王柏拜何基为师。
English: By the time he was a young man, he knew that he should learn from the Song proxy scholars Zhou Dunyao, Cheng Yao and Cheng Yao. He and his compatriot Wang Bai Heji were his teachers.

古文：基则学于黄榦，而榦亲承朱熹之传者也。自是讲贯益密，造诣益邃。
现代文：而何基的老师是黄，又是朱熹的亲授弟子，因此其学问更其严密，融会贯通，其造诣更为深邃。
English: However, He Ji's teacher was Huang, who was also a personal disciple of Zhu Xi, so his learning was more rigorous, integrated, and his accomplishment was more profound.

古文：时宋之国事已不可为，履祥遂绝意进取。
现代文：由于当时宋朝危亡之势已无可挽救，履祥决心不再进取。
English: As the Song Dynasty was on the brink of collapse at the time, and there was no way to save it, Ruxiang was determined not to make any more advances.

古文：然负其经济之略，亦未忍遽忘斯世也。
现代文：然而其具有安邦济世之才略，使他不能对当时政治形势不问不闻。
English: However, he had a knack for making the world a better place, which made it impossible for him to ignore the political situation at the time.

古文：会襄樊之师日急，宋人坐视而不敢救，履祥因进牵制捣虚之策，请以重兵由海道直趋燕、蓟，则襄樊之师，将不攻而自解。
现代文：适逢襄樊战事紧迫，宋朝持观望态度不敢去救援，履祥因此向宋朝献策直捣元军空虚的后方。请求用重兵由水路直趋燕、蓟以解救襄樊之师。
English: When the battle of Xiangfan was urgent, the Song Dynasty held a wait-and-see attitude and did not dare to go to the rescue. Therefore, Lushang proposed to the Song Dynasty to directly attack the empty rear of the Yuan Army. He requested that the heavy soldiers should go straight from the waterway to Yan and Jiao to rescue the division of Xiangfan.

古文：且备叙海舶所经，凡州郡县邑，下至巨洋别坞，难易远近，历历可据以行。
现代文：他详细叙述海船所经的州郡县邑以及大海中远近岛屿，处处都是可行的。
English: He described in detail the states, counties and townships that the ship passed through, as well as the islands far and near in the sea. Everything is feasible.

古文：宋终莫能用。
现代文：可是宋政府始终未采用他的计策。
English: However, the Song government never adopted his strategy.

古文：及后朱瑄、张清献海运之利，而所由海道，视履祥先所上书，咫尺无异者，然后人服其精确。
现代文：后来朱王宣、张清献海运之利，而所经海道，与履祥以前的上书相比，几乎没有什么差异，因此后人很佩服他计算的精确。
English: Later, Zhu Wangxuan and Zhang Qing donated the profits of shipping, and the sea route they traveled was almost no different from the previous donation, so later generations admired the accuracy of his calculation.

古文：德祐初，以迪功郎、史馆编校起之，辞弗就。
现代文：宋恭帝德，以迪功郎、史馆编校起用他，履祥未接受。
English: Song Kyongdeok was appointed as the editor-in-chief of the history museum, but he did not accept the appointment.

古文：训迪后学，谆切无倦，而尤笃于分义。有故人子坐事，母子分配为隶，不相知者十年，履祥倾赀营购，卒赎以完；其子后贵，履祥终不自言，相见劳问辛苦而已。
现代文：宋将灭亡，各地盗匪烽起，履祥隐居金华山中，战火稍停，就在山谷山岩间追云逐月，吟咏歌唱，将世上的事情看得非常淡泊，常常独自一人整天态度严肃，然待人接物则有朝气，和蔼可亲。对后生谆谆教导，从不厌倦。他更忠于 义 ，友人之子因犯罪，母子沦为奴隶，十年未见面，他倾其所蓄，为母子赎罪，直到释放为止。后来友人之子富贵了，他从不谈及此事，见面只相互问候罢了。
English: Song will perish, bandits from all over the country will rise up, Lu Xiang will live in seclusion in the Jinhua Mountains, the war will stop for a while, he will chase the clouds among the valleys and rocks, sing and chant, see the world's affairs very light, often alone all day with a serious attitude, but treat people and things with a youthful spirit and friendliness. He will never get tired of teaching the future generations. He is more loyal to righteousness, a friend's son was a slave due to crime, and his mother and son were slaves, and they did not meet for ten years. He devoted all his resources to atone for his mother and son until he was

古文：何基、王柏之丧，履祥率其同门之士，以义制服，观者始知师弟子之系于常伦也。履祥尝谓司马文正公光作《资治通鉴》，秘书丞刘恕为《外纪》，以记前事，不本于经，而信百家之说，是非谬于圣人，不足以传信。
现代文：何基、王柏去世后，他率领同窗，遵照师友之义，着丧服去吊丧。履祥曾说文正公司马光作《资治通鉴》，秘书丞刘恕写《外纪》，记载以前的事，不以经书为依据而选百家之说，无论是非，都不符合圣人思想，不足以传告别人。
English: After the death of He Ji and Wang Bai, he led his classmates to go to the funeral in mourning clothes, in accordance with the teachings of his teachers and friends. Lu Xiang once said that Ma Guang of the Wenzheng Company wrote the "Capitalism General Study," and the secretary, Liu Shou, wrote the "Foreign Studies," recording the previous things, and selecting the hundred sayings without relying on the scriptures. Whether it is right or wrong, it is not in line with the thoughts of a saint, and it is not enough to tell others.

古文：自帝尧以前，不经夫子所定，固野而难质。
现代文：尧舜以前之事，并非孔夫子所定，正误难辨。
English: What happened before was not decided by Confucius, and it is difficult to tell the difference.

古文：夫子因鲁史以作《春秋》，王朝列国之事，非有玉帛之使，则鲁史不得而书，非圣人笔削之所加也。
现代文：夫子将鲁国的历史著为《春秋》，王朝列国的事，不是玉帛上写的，也不写进鲁史，并非圣人有意删掉。
English: Fufu Zi wrote the history of Lu as "Spring and Autumn." The affairs of the dynasties and countries are not written on the jade tablet, nor are they written into the history of Lu. It is not that the sage intentionally deleted them.

古文：况左氏所记，或阙或诬，凡此类皆不得以辟经为辞。
现代文：《左传》所记，或者有缺漏，或者有错误，不能说是在阐明经书。
English: There are either omissions or errors in what is recorded in the Zuo Zhuan, and it cannot be said that it is an explanation of the scriptures.

古文：乃用邵氏《皇极经世历》、胡氏《皇王大纪》之例，损益折衷，一以《尚书》为主，下及《诗》、《礼》、《春秋》，旁采旧史诸子，表年系事，断自唐尧以下，接于《通鉴》之前，勒为一书，二十卷，名曰《通鉴前编》。
现代文：于是履祥以宋代邵雍的《皇极经世历》、胡宏的《皇王大纪》为例，损益适中，以《尚书》为主，不及《诗》、《书》、《春秋》，旁采旧史及诸子百家，加以解释，按年叙事，上自唐尧，下止于《通鉴》所记时代之前，编为一书，共二十卷，名为《通鉴前编》。
English: As a result, Lu Xiang took the Song Dynasty Shaoyong's "Imperial Calendar" and Hu Hong's "Imperial Chronicle" as examples, with moderate profit and loss, with "Shang Shu" as the main body, less than "Poetry," "Book" and "Spring and Autumn," along with old history and hundreds of scholars, to explain, narrating by year, starting from Tang Dynasty and ending before the era recorded in "Tong Jian," compiled into one book, a total of twenty volumes, called "Tong Jian, First Edition."

古文：凡所引书，辄加训释，以裁正其义，多儒先所未发。
现代文：所引之书，均加注释，以明其义，这都是先儒所未做到的。
English: All the cited books are annotated to clarify their meaning, which was never done before by Confucius.

古文：当时议者以为基之清介纯实似尹和静，柏之高明刚正似谢上蔡，履祥则亲得之二氏，而并充于己者也。
现代文：书成之后授与门生许谦，对他说： 二帝三王的微言和美好德行当为后世所效法，战国之申不害、商鞅之法术乱政，当为后世君王所引以为戒。这些本书不可不著。 履祥的著作还有《大学章句疏义》二卷，《论语孟子集注考证》十七卷，《书表注》四卷。
English: After completing the book, he awarded it to his protégé, Xu Qian, and said to him: "The weak words and good deeds of the two emperors and three kings should be emulated by future generations, and the suggestion of warring states should not be harmful, and the magic and chaos of negotiations should be regarded as a warning by future monarchs. These books must be written. There are also two volumes of "University Chapter Sentences," seventeen volumes of "Essay on the Mencius Collection" and four volumes of "Book List."

古文：履祥居仁山之下，学者因称为仁山先生。
现代文：许谦对这些书都作了校定，均传于学者。天历中，廉访使郑允中，都把这些书呈进皇帝。履祥住于仁山之下，学者们称他为 仁山先生 。
English: Xu Qian calibrated these books, and they were all passed on to scholars. In the heavenly calendar, Zheng Yunzhong, the unlicensed envoy, presented these books to the emperor. Lu Xiang lived under the Nanshan Mountains, and scholars called him Mr. Nanshan.

古文：大德中卒。
现代文：大德年间卒。
English: He was a pupil of Dade.

古文：元统初，里人吴师道为国子博士，移书学官，祠履祥于乡学。
现代文：元统初，同乡吴师道为国子博士，将履祥著作移于学官，在乡学中供奉他的神位。
English: At the beginning of the Yuan Dynasty, Wu Shidao, a fellow villager, was a doctor of the country, and he transferred the works of Lu Xiang to the scholar, and worshiped his divinity in the village school.

古文：至正中，赐谥文安。
现代文：至正年间，赐谥文安。
English: In the year of the Year of the Horse, grant us peace and prosperity.

古文：许谦，字益之，其先京兆人。
现代文：许谦字益之，祖籍京兆。
English: Xu Qian Zhi Yizhi, whose ancestral home is in Beijing.

古文：九世祖延寿，宋刑部尚书。
现代文：他的九世祖许延寿是宋朝刑部尚书。
English: His ninth-generation ancestor Xu Yanshou was the Song Dynasty's Minister of Justice.

古文：八世祖仲容，太子洗马。
现代文：以后各代都任官。后由平江迁至婺州路之金华，到谦时已是五代为金华人了。
English: Later, they moved from Pingjiang to Jinhua on Luzhou Road, and by the time of Qian, there had already been five generations of Jinhua people.

古文：谦生数岁而孤，甫能言，世母陶氏口授《孝经》、《论语》，入耳辄不忘。
现代文：谦几岁时，父亲早逝，刚能说话，伯母陶氏口授《孝经》《论语》，他的记忆力很强。
English: When Qian Qian was a few years old, his father died early and he was just able to speak. His aunt Tao dictated "The Filial Piety Sutra" and "The Analects" to him. He had a strong memory.

古文：稍长，肆力于学，立程以自课，取四部书分昼夜读之，虽疾恙不废。
现代文：稍大一点，对学习极为努力，自己规定内容进行学习，取四部书，分昼夜阅读，即使有病也不停止。
English: Slightly older, he is very diligent in his studies. He studies according to his own schedule, takes four books, reads day and night, and does not stop even if he is ill.

古文：既乃受业金履祥之门，履祥语之曰： 士之为学，若五味之在和，醯酱既加，则酸咸顿异。
现代文：在金履祥的门下求学，履祥教育他说： 你们求学就像五味调合，加了醋酱后，味道立即不同。
English: Studying under the tutelage of Jinlu Xiang, and being educated by him, he said: "Studying with you is like a five-flavor concoction. After adding vinegar sauce, the taste immediately changes.

古文：子来见我已三日，而犹夫人也，岂吾之学无以感发子耶！ 
现代文：你来见我已三天，像个女子，羞于言辞，难道我的教学没能激发你吗？ 
English: You have been coming to see me for three days, like a woman, shy of words. Hasn't my teaching inspired you?

古文：谦闻之惕然。
现代文：谦听后非常敬畏他。
English: After listening to him, I was very much in awe of him.

古文：居数年，尽得其所传之奥。
现代文：几年后终于领会了老师授课中的奥妙。
English: After a few years, I finally understood the mystery of the teacher's teaching.

古文：于书无不读，穷探圣微，虽残文羡语，皆不敢忽。
现代文：他无书不读，即使微小的问题也不放过，哪怕不完整的文章或只字片语，从不忽视。
English: He reads everything, even if it's a small problem, even if it's an incomplete article or a piece of text, he never ignores it.

古文：有不可通，则不敢强；于先儒之说，有所未安，亦不苟同也。
现代文：遇到不通之处，从不妄作解释；对先儒的话，自己不甘听从的，决不随便同意。
English: When encountering incomprehensibility, never make an explanation; if you are not willing to listen to the words of the first Confucius, you will never agree to them.

古文：读《四书章句集注》，有《丛说》二十卷，谓学者曰： 学以圣人为准的，然必得圣人之心，而后可学圣人之事。
现代文：他读完《四书章句集注》，写《丛说》二十卷，其中说： 学习要以圣人作为标准，先学他们的思想，再学他们做的事。
English: After reading the Annotated Collection of Four Chapters and Sentences, he wrote 20 volumes of Conghua, in which he said: Study should be based on saints as a standard, first learn their thoughts, and then learn what they did.

古文：圣贤之心，具在《四书》，而《四书》之义，备于朱子，顾其辞约意广，读者安可以易心求之乎！ 
现代文：圣贤的思想都在《四书》里，其要义全在朱子注释中。但他的辞简而意义深广，读的人怎么可能不学其思想就理解其真义呢？ 
English: The thoughts of saints and sages are all in the "Four Books," and their essential meaning is all in Zhu Zi's commentary. But his words are concise and profound, how can readers understand their true meaning without learning their thoughts?

古文：读《诗集传》，有《名物钞》八卷，正其音释，考其名物度数，以补先儒之未备，仍存其逸义，旁采远援，而以己意终之。
现代文：他读《诗集传》便写《名物钞》八卷，为它正音解释，进行考证，以补先儒书中不完备之处，但仍保存其原意，通过旁征博引，以自己的见解作结论。
English: He read the "Collection of Poems" and then wrote eight volumes of "Famous Banknotes," explaining it in positive terms, conducting research, to make up for the incompleteness of the previous Confucian book, but still preserving its original meaning, and drawing conclusions from his own opinions through collateral citations.

古文：读《书集传》，有《丛说》六卷。
现代文：读《书集传》，著《丛说》六卷。
English: He read "Book Collection Biography" and wrote six volumes of "Conglomerate."

古文：又有《自省编》，昼之所为，夜必书之，其不可书者，则不为也。
现代文：读历史著《治忽几微》。他采用编年体，著史书，上起太氏，下止宋元元年九月司马光卒，说明历代兴亡的原因。他还著有《自省篇》，白天做的事，夜晚一定写下来，不能写的一定不做。
English: He read a history book, "A Few Moments to Fix." He used a chronological format, a history book, starting with the Tai clan and ending with Sima Guangzu in September of Song and Yuan Dynasties, to explain the reasons for the rise and fall of past generations. He also wrote "Self-reflection," what to do during the day must be written down at night, and what cannot be written must not be done.

古文：其他若天文、地理、典章、制度、食货、刑法、字学、音韵、医经、术数之说，亦靡不该贯，旁而释、老之言，亦洞究其蕴。
现代文：对天文、地理、典章、食货、刑法、字学、音韵、医经、术数等学说，无不通晓。对有关释家、老子学说，也要探其奥秘。
English: They know everything about astronomy, geography, legal codes, foodstuffs, criminal law, calligraphy, music, medicine, surgery, and so on. They also want to explore the mysteries of the related teachings of the Buddha and Lao Zi.

古文：尝谓： 学者孰不曰辟异端，苟不深探其隐，而识其所以然，能辨其同异，别其是非也几希。 又尝句读《九经》、《仪礼》及《春秋三传》，于其宏纲要领，错简衍文，悉别以铅黄朱墨，意有所明，则表而见之。
现代文：他曾说 ：读书人谁不说要排除异端，但能探其奥妙，辨别异同是非的人又有几个呢？ 又给《九经》、《仪礼》、《春秋三传》断句，对竹简顺序颠倒或抄写的错误，分别用铅黄和朱红划上，以示区分。
English: He once said: "Every reader says that he wants to eliminate heresy, but how many people can explore its mysteries and distinguish between similarities and differences? Also, for the "Nine Classics," "Rites" and "Three Classics of Spring and Autumn," the sentence is broken, and for the error of reversing the order of the jotters or copying, it is marked with lead yellow and vermilion respectively to show the distinction.

古文：其后吴师道购得吕祖谦点校《仪礼》，视谦所定，不同者十有三条而已。
现代文：以后吴师道买到吕祖谦点校的《仪礼》，与许谦校订的比较，不同之处仅有十三条。
English: Later, Wu Shidao bought the "Rite" edited by Lu Zuqian, and compared it with the one edited by Xu Qian, there were only thirteen differences.

古文：谦不喜矜露，所为诗文，非扶翼经义，张维世教，则未尝轻笔之书也。
现代文：谦不喜欢显露才华，除非有益经义，张扬道德和事理的，都不轻易动笔。
English: Humility does not like to show talent, unless it is beneficial to the cause, promoting morality and reason, it is not easy to start writing.

古文：延祐初，谦居东阳八华山，学者翕然从之。
现代文：延祐初，住东阳八华山，众多学生向他求教，不久便开门讲学，学生不远千里而来。
English: At the beginning of his career, Yan Yu lived in Bahuashan, Dongyang. Many students asked him for advice, and he soon opened his doors to give lectures. Students came from thousands of miles away.

古文：寻开门讲学，远而幽、冀、齐、鲁，近而荆、扬、吴、越，皆不惮百舍来受业焉。其教人也，至诚谆悉，内外殚尽，尝曰： 己有知，使人亦知之，岂不快哉！ 
现代文：他教学生是诚心诚意，细致耐心，倾其所知，并以此为乐，孜孜不倦。在门下受教的学生千余人，他按各人的情况分别教授，使每人都有所得，但他从不用应科举的文章为教材。谦孝顺父母，尊敬兄长，为人处事不拘泥于古人，不流于世俗。
English: He teaches his students with sincerity, meticulous patience, pouring out what he knows and taking pleasure in it, tirelessly. There are more than a thousand students under his tutelage. He teaches according to each person's situation, so that everyone has income, but he never uses the textbook for the exam. He is humble and filial, obeys his parents, respects his elder brother, and does not adhere to the ancients and does not flow into the world.

古文：或有所问难，而词不能自达，则为之言其所欲言，而解其所惑。
现代文：在家乡四十年，各处人士都以不访他为耻。路过其乡的士绅都要去他家问安。有人向他求教，听过讲解的人，深为佩服。
English: For forty years in his hometown, people from all over the country were ashamed of not visiting him. Gentlemen who passed by his hometown would go to his house to say hello. Some people asked him for advice, and those who heard the explanation were deeply impressed.

古文：讨论讲贯，终日不倦，摄其粗疏，入于密微。
现代文：大德中遭重灾。他说 ：现在国家公私缺粮，饿死的人到处可见，我怎能只顾自己吃饱？ 
English: He said: "Nowadays, the country is suffering from a shortage of grain, both public and private, and people are dying of starvation everywhere. How can I just eat enough for myself?

古文：闻者方倾耳听受，而其出愈真切。惰者作之，锐者抑之，拘者开之，放者约之。
现代文：中州有名望的人廉访使刘庭直、副使赵宏伟对谦都深为佩服，要向朝廷推荐。
English: Liu Tingzhi and Zhao Hongwei, vice-envoys of the famous people of Zhongzhou, were deeply impressed by Qian and recommended him to the imperial court.

古文：尝以白云山人自号，世称为白云先生。
现代文：到晚年身负教学重任，远近的学生以他的身安否作为道的盛衰。至元三年卒，享年六十八岁。
English: In his later years, he shouldered the heavy responsibility of teaching, and students near and far took his health and safety as the rise and fall of the Tao. He graduated in the third year of the Yuan Dynasty, and died at the age of 68.

古文：朝廷赐谥文懿。
现代文：朝廷谥号文懿。
English: The Imperial edict was issued.

古文：门人惟新安赵汸为高第，得其《春秋》之学为多。
现代文：先是何基、王柏及金履祥卒，他们的学问还没有发扬光大，至谦时他的思想更加突出，学生追本穷源，认为是朱熹的嫡传。
English: First of all, He Ji, Wang Bai and Jin Lixiang were his disciples. Their learning had not yet been carried forward. When he was humble, his thoughts were more prominent. The students searched for the origin and thought that he was the heir of Zhu Xi.

古文：萧渼，字惟斗，其先北海人。父仕秦中，遂为奉元人。
现代文：江浙行中书省替他向朝廷奏请求建 四贤书院 ，来奉祭祀，并排在学官之列。萧渼斗字惟斗，祖先是北海人。父亲在秦中任官职，成为奉元人了。
English: On his behalf, the Central Jiangsu and Zhejiang Provinces requested the imperial court to build the Four Sages Academy for him, to offer sacrifices, and to be ranked among the scholars. Xiao Xuan was a scholar by birth, and his ancestors were from the North Sea. His father held a government post in the Qin Dynasty, and became a scholar.

古文：渼性至孝，自为儿时，翘楚不凡。
现代文：渼斗极为孝顺，自儿时起，就表现不一般。
English: He is extremely filial and has been behaving unusually since he was a child.

古文：稍出为府史，上官语不合，即引退，读书面山者三十年。
现代文：稍长之后任府史，上级官员的话不合意，他就辞职，在南山读书达三十年。
English: After a little longer, he was appointed as the prefectural historian, and when the words of higher-ranking officials did not agree, he resigned. He studied in Nanshan for thirty years.

古文：制一革衣，由身半以下，及卧，辄倚其榻，玩诵不少置，于是博极群书，天文、地理、律历、算数，靡不研究。
现代文：做了一件皮革衣服，长达下半身，就寝时，就倚卧在榻上，思考诵读不停。他博览群书，天文、地理、律历、算数，无不研究。
English: He made a leather garment that extended to the lower half of his body, and when he went to bed, he lay on the bed, thinking and reading non-stop. He was well-versed in books, studying everything from astronomy, geography, the Gregorian calendar, and arithmetic.

古文：侯均谓元有天下百年，惟萧惟斗为识字人。
现代文：侯均说元有天下百年，只有萧惟斗是识字的人。
English: Hou Jun said that in the past hundred years, only Xiao Weidong was literate.

古文：学者及其门受业者甚众。
现代文：向他求教和在他门下受业的人很多。
English: Many have sought his advice and studied under him.

古文：尝出，遇一妇人，失金钗道旁，疑渼拾之，谓曰： 殊无他人，独翁居后耳。 
现代文：有次出门时，遇见一个妇人，在路旁遗失金钗，妇人怀疑是渼斗拾到。对他说： 绝无他人，只有老翁在后。 
English: Once, when he was out, he met a woman who had lost a gold ingot on the roadside. The woman suspected that the ingot had been found. She said to him: "There is no one else, only the old man is behind."

古文：渼令随至门，取家钗以偿。其妇后得所遗钗，愧谢还之。
现代文：渼斗让她跟随到他家中，取家中钗给她，这个妇人后来找到遗失的金钗，惭愧地送还渼斗的金钗。
English: The woman later found the lost gold ingot and, ashamed, returned it to Xingdou.

古文：乡人有自城中暮归者，遇寇，欲加害，诡言 我萧先生也 ，寇惊愕释去。
现代文：有乡人傍晚从城中回家，途中遇寇，并要害他。乡人诈称： 我是萧先生。 寇大惊，将他放走。
English: A villager was returning home from the city in the evening. On his way, he met a robber who wanted to harm him. The villager pretended to be Mr. Xiao. The robber was shocked and let him go.

古文：世祖分藩在秦，辟渼与杨恭懿、韩择侍秦邸，渼以疾辞，授陕西儒学提举，不赴。
现代文：世祖分封于秦，征召渼斗与杨恭懿、韩择任王府侍读，渼斗以病推辞，授以陕西儒学提举，不去赴任。
English: The ancestor was assigned to Qin, and he and Yang Jiong and Han Zhe were called up to serve as attendants to the royal court. However, he resigned due to illness and was promoted to Shaanxi Confucianism, but he did not go to the post.

古文：省宪大臣即其家具宴为贺，使一从史先诣渼舍，渼方汲水灌园，从史至，不知其为渼也，使饮其马，即应之不拒，及冠带迎宾，从史见渼，有惧色，渼殊不为意。
现代文：行省大臣在家中备宴为他庆贺，派随从官员先到渼斗的家，渼斗正汲水灌园，从吏到后，不知道他就是渼斗，而要他给马饮水，渼斗立即照办，待他穿戴整齐出去迎接宾客时，从吏见到渼斗后，显出害怕的神情，渼斗毫不介意。
English: The provincial minister was preparing a banquet at his home to celebrate him. He sent the officials who followed him to the home of Xun Dou first. Xun Dou was drawing water to irrigate the garden. When the officials arrived, they did not know that he was Xun Dou, but asked him to give water to the horse. Xun Dou immediately complied. When he was dressed neatly and went out to greet the guests, when the officials saw Xun Dou, he showed a frightened look. Xun Dou did not mind.

古文：后累授集贤直学士、国子司业，改集贤侍读学士，皆不赴。
现代文：后来屡次被授为集贤学士、国子司业，改集贤侍读学士，都未赴任。
English: Later, he was repeatedly awarded the title of Zhenxian Baccalaureate and the title of Guozhizi, and changed to Zhenxian Attendant Baccalaureate, but he did not take up the post.

古文：大德十一年，拜太子右谕德，扶病至京师，入觐东宫，书《酒诰》为献，以朝廷时尚酒故也。
现代文：大德十一年，拜为太子右谕德，带病至京师，进入东宫，晋见太子，因为当时朝廷时尚饮酒，所以在晋见时，写《酒诰》奉献。
English: In the eleventh year of Dade's reign, he prayed for the right to be crowned as the crown prince, brought his illness to Beijing, entered the East Palace, and met with the crown prince. Since it was the fashion for the imperial court to drink alcohol at that time, he dedicated his "Sake Lees" when he met with the prince.

古文：寻以病力请去职，人问其故，则曰： 在礼，东宫东面，师傅西面，此礼今可行乎？ 
现代文：不久以病为由，极力辞去职务，人们问他为何要辞职，他说： 按礼节，东宫坐于东边，师傅坐在西边，这样的礼节现在行得通么？ 
English: People asked him why he wanted to resign, and he said: According to etiquette, the East Palace sits on the east side, and the master sits on the west side. Does this etiquette work now?

古文：俄除集贤学士、国子祭酒，依前右谕德，疾作，固辞而归。
现代文：不久授集贤学士、国子祭酒，仍任前职右谕德，病发，力辞而归故里。
English: Soon after, he was awarded the title of "Worthy Scholar" and "Wine for the National Children's Day." He was still in his previous position, but he fell ill and had to return to his hometown.

古文：卒年七十八，赐谥贞敏。
现代文：终年七十八岁，赐谥号贞敏。
English: At the age of 78, she was given the posthumous name Zhenmin.

古文：渼制行甚高，真履实践，其教人，必自《小学》始。
现代文：渼斗修养很高，凡事要亲自实践，他教导别人，一定要从《小学》开始。
English: Hao Dou is very cultivated. He has to practice everything himself. When he teaches others, he must start with "Elementary School."

古文：均貌魁梧，而气刚正，人多严惮之，及其应接之际，则和易款洽。
现代文：他所写的文章，立意精深，其言浅显，而其含义深刻，一贯以洙、泗为范本，以濂、洛、考亭为依据，关辅之士一致奉他为宗师，被称为一代学识纯正的儒者。
English: The articles he wrote were profound in their intention, simple in their words, but profound in their meaning. They were always modeled on Zou and Zou, and based on Zou, Luo, and Caoting. The people of Guanshu unanimously regarded him as their guru, and were known as a generation of Confucians with pure knowledge.

古文：虽方言古语，世所未晓者，莫不随问而答，世咸服其博闻。
现代文：他的著作有《三礼说》、《小学标题驳论》、《九州志》，及《勤斋文集》流行于世。
English: His works such as "Three Rites of Spring," "A Refutation of Primary School Titles," "A History of Kyushu," and "A Collection of Essays on Diligence" are popular around the world.

古文：同恕，字宽甫，其先太原人。
现代文：同恕字宽甫，祖先太原人。
English: He is also a descendant of the Taiyuan people.

古文：五世祖迁秦中，遂为奉元人。
现代文：五世祖时迁居秦中，因而为奉元人。
English: The fifth generation moved to Qin and became a follower of the founder.

古文：祖升。
现代文：祖父叫同升。
English: My grandfather was called Tong Sheng.

古文：父继先，博学能文，廉希宪宣抚陕右，辟掌库钥。
现代文：父亲同继先，学问渊博，善写文章，廉希宪为陕右宣抚使时，征召继先掌管仓库的钥匙。
English: Both his father and his father before him were well-educated and good at writing articles. When Liang Xixian was appointed as the envoy of the State Council of the People's Republic of China, he was summoned to take charge of the keys to the warehouse.

古文：家世业儒，同居二百口，无间言。
现代文：家中世代从事儒学，同住的有二百口人，他们之间从不背后说长道短。
English: My family has been engaged in Confucianism for generations. There are two hundred people living together, and they never talk behind each other's backs.

古文：恕安静端凝，羁丱如成人，从乡先生学，日记数千言。
现代文：恕安静稳重，束发就像成年人，向同乡先生求学，一日能记数千言。
English: Although he is quiet and steady, he combs his hair like an adult, learns from his hometown teacher, and can memorize thousands of words a day.

古文：年十三，以《书经》魁乡校。
现代文：十三岁时，以《书经》在乡校夺魁。
English: At the age of thirteen, he won the first place in the village school with "Shu Jing."

古文：至元间，朝廷始分六部，选名士为吏属，关陕以恕贡礼曹，辞不行。
现代文：至元年间，朝廷开始分为六个部，选举有名的读书人任吏员，关陕因同恕为礼部贡士，未录用。
English: In the first year of the 21st century, the imperial court began to be divided into six departments, and famous readers were elected as clerks. Guan Shanshan was not hired because he was a member of the ceremonial department.

古文：仁宗践阼，即其家拜国子司业，阶儒林郎，使三召，不起。
现代文：仁宗即位，立刻遣使去同恕家授国子司业，官阶为儒林郎，三次遣使征召，都不肯受任。
English: When Emperor Nanzong ascended to the throne, he immediately sent an envoy to confer the position of Secretary of the Imperial Household with the Ji family. The official rank was Julin Lang. Three times the envoy was summoned, but he refused to accept the appointment.

古文：陕西行台侍御史赵世延，请即奉元置鲁斋书院，中书奏恕领教事，制可之。
现代文：陕西行台侍御史赵世延，请在奉元设置 鲁斋书院 ，中书奏请皇上由恕领导书院的教学，朝廷同意。
English: Zhao Shiyan, the governor of Shaanxi and Taiwan, asked Feng Yuan to set up Lujai Academy, and the Chinese calligrapher asked the emperor to lead the teaching of the academy, and the court agreed.

古文：先后来学者殆千数。
现代文：先后来学习的有数千人。
English: There are thousands of people who have studied successively.

古文：延祐设科，再主乡试，人服其公。
现代文：延祐设科举，恕再次主考乡试，人们佩服他公正。
English: Yan Yu set up the science examination, and again presided over the township examination. People admired his fairness.

古文：六年，以奉议大夫、太子左赞善召，入见东宫，赐酒慰问。
现代文：六年，以奉议大夫、太子左赞善召，入东宫晋见，帝赐酒慰问。
English: In the sixth year, he was invited to the East Palace to meet Prince Zuo Zanzan, a doctor and prince, and the emperor gave him wine to express his condolences.

古文：继而献书，厉陈古谊，尽开悟涵养之道。
现代文：接着敬献文章，文中陈述古代情谊、启发智慧、修养品德的道理。
English: Next, a tribute article, in which the principles of ancient friendship, inspired wisdom, and cultivation of moral character are stated.

古文：明年春，英宗继统，以疾归。
现代文：第二年，英宗即位，恕因病辞职。
English: The following year, Emperor Yeongjong ascended the throne, but resigned due to illness.

古文：致和元年，拜集贤侍读学士，以老疾辞。
现代文：致和元年，拜集贤侍读学士，因年老有病辞职。
English: In the first year of the Heian period, Bai Jixian attended a bachelor's course and resigned due to old age and illness.

古文：恕之学，由程、朱上溯孔、孟，务贯浃事理，以利于行。
现代文：恕为学，由程、朱上溯孔、孟，都力求贯通事理，以利于实行。
English: With respect to learning, Yucheng, Zhu Shangyuan and Meng all strived to understand the principles in order to facilitate the implementation.

古文：教人曲为开导，使得趣向之正。
现代文：教育人时委婉曲折进行开导，使之走向正确的方向。
English: When educating people, euphemistic twists and turns are used to enlighten them and guide them in the right direction.

古文：性整洁，平居虽大暑，不去冠带。
现代文：爱整洁，日常生活中即使在大暑天气，也不去冠带。
English: Love tidiness, in daily life, even in hot weather, do not go to the crown.

古文：母张夫人卒，事异母如事所生。
现代文：母亲去世后，侍奉继母如同生母一样。
English: After her mother's death, she served her stepmother as if she were her own mother.

古文：父丧，哀毁致目疾，时祀斋肃详至。
现代文：父丧，因悲痛致使眼得病，祭祀斋戒严肃详尽。
English: My father passed away, my eyes got sick due to grief, and the sacrifice and fasting were serious and detailed.

古文：尝曰： 养生有不备，事犹可复，追远有不诚，是诬神也，可逭罪乎！ 
现代文：曾说 ：供养有不到之处，还可以补救，追祭祖宗，如有不诚之处，是对神的亵渎，可以逃脱罪责么？ 
English: He once said, "If there is a deficiency in the offering, it can be remedied. If there is dishonesty, it is blasphemy against God. Can you escape the guilt?"

古文：与人交，虽外无适莫，而中有绳尺。
现代文：与人交往，即使不能相互适应、心意相通的表现，而心中却有准则。
English: Interacting with people, even if they can't adapt to each other and show that they are of one mind, they still have principles in their hearts.

古文：里人借骡而死，偿其直，不受，曰： 物之数也，何以偿为！ 
现代文：邻人借骡使用死了，按值偿还，恕不收，并说： 小事情何必要还！ 
English: The neighbor borrowed money, used it, paid it back according to its value, and said, "There is no need to pay for small things!"

古文：家无儋石之储，而聚书数万卷，扁所居曰榘庵。
现代文：家中无一担粮食的储存，而有存书几万卷，他的居室取名榘庵。
English: At home, there was not a single load of grain stored, but there were tens of thousands of volumes of books stored. His room was named Shuan.

古文：时萧渼居南山下，亦以道高当世，入城府，必主恕家，士论称之曰 萧同 。
现代文：当时萧住于南山脚下，也以道德高尚闻名于世，进城时，一定要到恕家拜访，士人都称他们为 萧同 。
English: At that time, Xiao lived at the foot of Nanshan Mountain. He was also famous for his high moral standards. When entering the city, you must visit his family. Scholars called them Xiao Tong.

