古文：朝鲜王满者，故燕人也。
现代文：朝鲜王卫满，原是燕国人。
English: Korea's King Hye Man was originally from the country of Yan.

古文：自始全燕时尝略属真番、朝鲜，为置吏，筑鄣塞。
现代文：最初，在燕国全盛的时候，曾经攻取真番、朝鲜，让它们归属燕国，并为它们设置官吏，在边塞修筑防御城堡。
English: In the beginning, when Yan was at its peak, it conquered Zhenbang and Korea, made them belong to Yan, appointed officials for them, and built defensive fortresses on the border.

古文：秦灭燕，属辽东外徼。
现代文：后来秦国灭掉燕国，朝鲜就成了辽东郡以外的边境国家。
English: Later, Qin State eliminated Yan State, and Korea became a border country outside Liaodong County.

古文：汉兴，为其远难守，复修辽东故塞，至浿水为界，属燕。
现代文：汉朝建国后，因为朝鲜离得远，难以守卫，所以重新修复辽东郡以前的那些关塞，一直到浿水为界，属燕国管辖。
English: After the founding of the Han Dynasty, because North Korea was far away and difficult to guard, the former checkpoints in Liaodong County were restored, all the way to Surabaya, which was under the jurisdiction of Yan.

古文：燕王卢绾反，入匈奴，满亡命，聚党千馀人，魋结蛮夷服而东走出塞，渡浿水，居秦故空地上下鄣，稍役属真番、朝鲜蛮夷及故燕、齐亡命者王之，都王险。
现代文：后来燕王卢绾造反，跑到了匈奴。卫满也流亡于外，聚集同党一千多人，梳着椎形发髻，穿上蛮夷服装，在东方走出塞外，渡过浿水，居住到秦国原来的空旷之地名叫上下鄣的地方，并逐渐地役使真番、朝鲜蛮夷以及原来的燕国和齐国的逃亡者，使他们归属自己，在他们当中称王，建都在王险城。
English: Later, Yan King Lu Xun rebelled and fled to the Xiongnu. Wei Man also went into exile, gathering more than a thousand people with the same party, combing his hair in a spiral bun, putting on barbarian clothes, going out of the country in the east, crossing the Yangtze River, living in the original open land of Qin called the upper and lower Yangtze River, and gradually serving Zhenfan, the Korean barbarians, and the fugitives of the original Yan and Qi countries, so that they belonged to themselves, called the king among them, and built in Wangyan City.

古文：会孝惠、高后时天下初定，辽东太守即约满为外臣，保塞外蛮夷，无使盗边；诸蛮夷君长欲入见天子，勿得禁止。
现代文：正当汉惠帝和高后时代，天下刚刚安定，辽东郡的太守就约定卫满做汉朝的外臣，保护边塞以外的蛮夷，不要让他们到边境来骚扰抢夺；各位蛮夷的首领想到汉朝进见天子，不要禁止。
English: At the time of Emperor Han Hui and Emperor Gao, when the world had just stabilized, the governor of Liaodong County agreed to make Wei Man a foreign minister of the Han Dynasty, to protect barbarians outside the border fortress, and not to let them come to the border to harass and rob.

古文：以闻，上许之，以故满得兵威财物侵降其旁小邑，真番、临屯皆来服属，方数千里。
现代文：辽东太守把这情况报告天子知道，天子同意这个条件。因此，卫满得以凭借他的兵威和财物侵略、招降他周围的小国，真番、临屯都来投降归属卫满，他统辖的地区方圆数千里。
English: The governor of Liaodong reported this to the emperor, and the emperor agreed to this condition. Therefore, Wei Man was able to use his military power and wealth to invade and invite the small countries around him, including Zhenban and Lintong, to surrender and belong to Wei Man. The area under his control covered thousands of miles.

古文：传子至孙右渠，所诱汉亡人滋多，又未尝入见；真番旁众国欲上书见天子，又拥阏不通。
现代文：卫满把统治权传给他的儿子，再传到孙子右渠手中，这期间被朝鲜所引诱来的汉朝逃亡者越来越多，而右渠又不曾去觐见汉朝天子。真番周围许多小国想上书要求拜见汉朝天子，却又被阻塞，无法让天子知道这一请求。
English: During this period, more and more Han dynasty fugitives were lured by North Korea, but the right channel did not go to see the Han dynasty emperor. Many small countries around Zhenban wanted to write a letter requesting to see the Han dynasty emperor, but they were blocked, unable to let the emperor know this request.

古文：元封二年，汉使涉何谯谕右渠，终不肯奉诏。
现代文：元封二年，汉朝派涉何责备和告知右渠，但右渠终究不肯接受汉朝的诏命。
English: In the second year of the Yuan Dynasty, the Han Dynasty sent a delegation to reprimand and inform the Right Canal, but the Right Canal ultimately refused to accept the Han Dynasty's edict.

古文：何去至界上，临浿水，使御刺杀送何者朝鲜裨王长，即渡，驰入塞，遂归报天子曰 杀朝鲜将 。
现代文：涉何离开朝鲜，来到边界，面对浿水，就派驾车的车夫刺杀了护送涉何的朝鲜裨小王，然后立即渡河，疾驰而回，进入汉朝边塞。于是回到京城向天子报告： 我杀了朝鲜的一个将军。 
English: When Han He left Korea, came to the border and faced Surabaya, he sent the driver of the carriage to assassinate the escort of the North Korean Han He, Tu Xiaowang, and then immediately crossed the river, galloped back and entered the Han Dynasty border fortress. Then he returned to Beijing to report to the Son of Heaven: I killed a North Korean general.

古文：上为其名美，即不诘，拜何为辽东东部都尉。
现代文：天子认为他有杀死朝鲜将军的美名，就不再追究他的过失，却授予他辽东东部都尉的官职。
English: Tianzi thought that he had the reputation of killing the North Korean general, so he no longer pursued his fault, but awarded him the post of captain of the eastern part of Liaodong.

古文：朝鲜怨何，发兵袭攻杀何。
现代文：朝鲜怨恨涉何，调兵偷袭，杀了涉何。
English: What is the reason for North Korea's grudge, what is the reason for the sudden attack and killing?

古文：天子募罪人击朝鲜。
现代文：汉朝天子下令招募被赦免罪过的犯人去攻打朝鲜。
English: The emperor of the Han Dynasty ordered the recruitment of pardoned prisoners to attack North Korea.

古文：其秋，遣楼船将军杨仆从齐浮渤海；兵五万人，左将军荀彘出辽东：讨右渠。
现代文：元封二年秋天，汉朝派楼船将军杨仆从齐地乘船渡过渤海，军队有五万人；左将军荀彘率兵走出辽东郡，去讨伐右渠。
English: In the autumn of the second year of the Yuan Dynasty, the Han Dynasty sent the general Yang Min to cross the Bohai Sea by ship from Qi, with an army of fifty thousand; the left general Zou led the soldiers out of Liaodong County to fight the right canal.

古文：右渠发兵距险。
现代文：右渠调兵据守在险要的地方，抵抗汉朝军队。
English: The right-channel troops were stationed in critical places to resist the Han Dynasty army.

古文：左将军卒正多率辽东兵先纵，败散，多还走，坐法斩。
现代文：左将军名字叫多的卒正首先率辽东兵进击敌人，结果队伍失败而走散了，多数人跑回来，因触犯军法而被处死。
English: General Zuo Doduo's subordinate Zheng first led the Liaodong soldiers to attack the enemy. As a result, the team failed and dispersed. Most of them ran back and were executed for violating military law.

古文：楼船将军将齐兵七千人先至王险。
现代文：楼船将军率领齐地兵士七千人，首先到达王险城。
English: General Loufeng led a total of seven thousand soldiers and reached Wang Riancheng first.

古文：右渠城守，窥知楼船军少，即出城击楼船，楼船军败散走。
现代文：右渠守城，探听到楼船将军军队少的消息，就出城攻打楼船将军，楼船将军的军队失败而四散奔逃。
English: He defended the city on the right side of the canal, and when he heard the news that the general's army was small, he went out of the city to attack the general. The general's army was defeated and scattered.

古文：将军杨仆失其众，遁山中十馀日，稍求收散卒，复聚。
现代文：杨仆将军失去了军队，逃到山中藏了十多天，逐渐找回四散的兵卒，重新聚集到一起。
English: General Yang Min lost his army, fled to the mountains and hid for more than ten days. Gradually, he found his scattered soldiers and gathered them together again.

古文：左将军击朝鲜浿水西军，未能破自前。
现代文：左将军荀彘攻击驻守浿水西边的朝鲜军队，未能从前面攻破敌军。
English: General Zuo Yu attacked the North Korean troops stationed to the west of Surabaya, but failed to break through the enemy forces from the front.

古文：天子为两将未有利，乃使卫山因兵威往谕右渠。
现代文：天子因为两将军没能取得军事胜利，就派卫山凭借兵威前去明告右渠。
English: Since the two generals failed to achieve a military victory, the Son of Heaven sent Wei Shan to take advantage of their military prowess and go to the right channel.

古文：右渠见使者顿首谢： 原降，恐两将诈杀臣；今见信节，请服降。 
现代文：右渠会见了汉朝使者，叩头谢罪： 愿意投降，只怕杨、荀二将军用欺诈的手段杀死我。如今我看到了表示诚信的符节，请允许我们投降归顺。 
English: Zuo Qu met with the envoy of the Han Dynasty, bowed down and said, "I am willing to surrender, but I am afraid that General Yang and General Xing will kill me by fraudulent means. Now I have seen the symbols of sincerity, please allow us to surrender and submit."

古文：遣太子入谢，献马五千匹，及馈军粮。
现代文：右渠就派遣太子去汉朝谢罪，献上五千匹马，又向在朝鲜的汉军赠送军粮。
English: Right away, he sent the crown prince to the Han Dynasty to express his gratitude, presented five thousand horses, and gave military rations to the Han troops in Korea.

古文：人众万馀，持兵，方渡浿水，使者及左将军疑其为变，谓太子已服降，宜命人毋持兵。
现代文：有一万多朝鲜民众，手里拿着兵器，正要渡过浿水，使者和左将军怀疑朝鲜人叛变，说太子已投降归顺，应当命令人们不要携带兵器。
English: There were more than ten thousand North Koreans, with weapons in their hands, about to cross Surabaya. The envoy and General Zuo suspected the North Koreans of mutiny, saying that the prince had surrendered and should order people not to carry weapons.

古文：太子亦疑使者左将军诈杀之，遂不渡浿水，复引归。
现代文：太子也怀疑汉朝使者和左将军要欺骗和杀害自己，于是就不再渡河，又领朝鲜民众归去。
English: The prince also suspected that the Han Dynasty emissary and General Zuo were trying to deceive and kill him, so he stopped crossing the river and led the Korean people back.

古文：山还报天子，天子诛山。
现代文：卫山回到京城向天子报告，天子杀了卫山。
English: Wei Shan returned to the capital to report to Tianzi, and Tianzi killed Wei Shan.

古文：左将军破浿水上军，乃前，至城下，围其西北。
现代文：左将军攻破浿水上的朝鲜军队，才向前推进，直到王险城下，包围了城的西北方。
English: General Zuo broke through the North Korean army on the Surabaya River, and then pushed forward until Wang Jing was under the city and surrounded the northwest of the city.

古文：楼船亦往会，居城南。
现代文：楼船将军也前去会师，驻军城南。
English: General Lohuan also went to join the division and stationed troops in the south of the city.

古文：右渠遂坚守城，数月未能下。
现代文：右渠于是坚守王险城，几个月过去了，汉军也未能攻下王险城。
English: The right canal then held on to Wangancheng. Months passed, and the Chinese army was unable to capture Wangancheng.

古文：左将军素侍中，幸，将燕代卒，悍，乘胜，军多骄。
现代文：左将军一向在宫中侍奉皇上，得宠。他所率领的是燕国和代国的士兵，很凶悍，又趁着打了胜仗的机会，军中的多数战士都很骄傲。
English: General Zuo had always served the emperor in the palace and was favored by him. The soldiers he led were from Yan's country and on behalf of Yan's country. They were fierce and took advantage of the opportunity to win the war. Most of the soldiers in the army were very proud.

古文：楼船将齐卒，入海，固已多败亡；其先与右渠战，因辱亡卒，卒皆恐，将心惭，其围右渠，常持和节。
现代文：楼船将军率领齐兵，渡海打仗，本来就有许多失败伤亡；他们先前和右渠交战时，遭受了困难和耻辱，伤亡很多士卒，士卒都恐惧，将官的心中也觉惭愧，在他们包围右渠时，楼船将军经常手持议和的符节。
English: There were many defeats and casualties in the past when the general led a group of soldiers across the sea to fight. When they fought against the right canal, they suffered difficulties and humiliation. Many soldiers were killed and injured. The soldiers were afraid, and the generals felt ashamed. When they surrounded the right canal, the general often held the sign of peace in his hand.

古文：左将军急击之，朝鲜大臣乃阴间使人私约降楼船，往来言，尚未肯决。
现代文：左将军竭力进攻敌城，朝鲜的大臣就暗中寻机和楼船将军联系，商量朝鲜投降的事，双方往来会谈，还没有作出决定。
English: General Zuo tried his best to attack the enemy city. North Korea's minister secretly contacted General Lou Ship about the search plane and discussed North Korea's surrender. The two sides have been in talks, but no decision has been made.

古文：左将军数与楼船期战，楼船欲急就其约，不会；左将军亦使人求间郤降下朝鲜，朝鲜不肯，心附楼船：以故两将不相能。
现代文：左将军屡次同楼船将军商定同时进击的日期，楼船将军想尽快与朝鲜达成降约，所以不派兵与左将军会合。左将军也派人去寻机让朝鲜投降，朝鲜不肯降左将军，而心中想归附楼船将军。因此，两位将军不能相互协调，共同对敌。
English: General Zuo repeatedly agreed with General Loufeng on the date of simultaneous attack. General Loufeng wanted to reach a surrender agreement with North Korea as soon as possible, so he did not send troops to meet with General Zuo. General Zuo also sent people to find an opportunity for North Korea to surrender. North Korea refused to surrender General Zuo, but wanted to attach General Loufeng. Therefore, the two generals could not coordinate with each other and fight against the enemy together.

古文：左将军心意楼船前有失军罪，今与朝鲜私善而又不降，疑其有反计，未敢发。
现代文：左将军心想楼船将军从前打败仗的罪过。如今又同朝鲜大臣私下友好，而朝鲜又不肯投降，就怀疑楼船将军有造反阴谋，只是未敢采取行动。
English: General Zuo was thinking about the sin of General Lofung's defeat in the war in the past. Now he was privately friendly with the North Korean minister, and North Korea refused to surrender. He suspected General Lofung of plotting a rebellion, but he did not dare to take action.

古文：天子曰将率不能，前使卫山谕降右渠，右渠遣太子，山使不能剸决，与左将军计相误，卒沮约。
现代文：天子说将帅无能，不久前我才派卫山去晓谕右渠投降，右渠派遣太子来谢罪，而卫山这个使者却不能专一果断地处理事情，同左将军的计谋皆出现了失误，终于毁坏了朝鲜投降的约定。
English: Heaven's Son said that the general was incompetent. Not long ago, I sent Weishan to tell the right channel to surrender, and the right channel sent the prince to apologize. However, Weishan, the messenger, could not deal with the matter decisively. The strategies with General Zuo all went wrong, and finally destroyed the agreement of North Korea's surrender.

古文：今两将围城，又乖异，以故久不决。
现代文：现在两将军围攻王险城，又相互违背而不能一致行动，因此长时间不能解决问题。
English: Now the two generals are besieging Wang Yuancheng, and they are not able to act in unison because they contradict each other, so they cannot solve the problem for a long time.

古文：使济南太守公孙遂往之，有便宜得以从事。
现代文：派遣济南太守公孙遂前去纠正他们的错误，如有方便有利的机会，可以随时自行处理事务。
English: So he sent Gongsun Sui, the eunuch of Jinan, to correct their mistakes. If there is a convenient and favorable opportunity, he can deal with the matter at any time.

古文：遂至，左将军曰： 朝鲜当下久矣，不下者有状。 
现代文：公孙遂到达朝鲜后，左将军说： 朝鲜早就可以攻下了，现在还未攻下是有原因的。 
English: After Gongsun Sui arrived in North Korea, General Zuo said: North Korea could have been conquered long ago, and there is a reason why it has not been conquered yet.

古文：言楼船数期不会，具以素所意告遂，曰： 今如此不取，恐为大害，非独楼船，又且与朝鲜共灭吾军。 
现代文：他又说了同楼船将军约定进军日期；而楼船将军不来会师的事，并把他一向怀疑楼船将军谋反的想法都告诉了公孙遂，说： 现在到了这种地步还不逮捕他，恐怕会成为大害，不仅是楼船将军要谋反，而且他又要联合朝鲜一起来消灭我军。 
English: He also said that he had agreed on the date of the march with General Loupen, but General Loupen did not come to join the division, and he told Gongsun Sui all the thoughts he had always suspected General Loupen of plotting a rebellion, saying: If we do not arrest him at this stage, I am afraid it will be a great harm. Not only does General Loupen want to rebel, but he also wants to unite with North Korea to destroy our army.

古文：遂亦以为然，而以节召楼船将军入左将军营计事，即命左将军麾下执捕楼船将军，并其军，以报天子。
现代文：公孙遂也认为是这样，就用符节召楼船将军来左将军军营中商量事情，当场命令左将军的部下捉拿楼船将军，并把他的军队合并到左将军手下，然后把这件事报告了汉天子。
English: Gongsun also thought so, so he summoned General Loufeng to General Zuo's camp to discuss the matter, ordered General Zuo's subordinates to capture General Loufeng on the spot, and merged his army under General Zuo, and then reported the matter to Han Tianzi.

古文：天子诛遂。
现代文：天子杀了公孙遂。
English: The son of God killed his grandson.

古文：左将军已并两军，即急击朝鲜。
现代文：左将军合并了两方面的军队，就竭力攻打朝鲜。
English: General Zuo combined the armies of the two sides and tried his best to attack Korea.

古文：朝鲜相路人、相韩阴、尼谿相参、将军王夹相与谋曰： 始欲降楼船，楼船今执，独左将军并将，战益急，恐不能与，王又不肯降。 
现代文：朝鲜宰相路人、宰相韩阴、尼溪宰相参、将军王等相互商议说： 开始要投降楼船将军，如今楼船将军被捕，只有左将军率领合并的军队，战事越发紧急，我们恐怕不能坚持下去，国王又不肯投降。 
English: North Korean Prime Minister Passerby, Prime Minister Han Yin, Nixi Prime Minister Sang, General Wang Yao, and others consulted with each other and said: At first, we wanted to surrender to General Loufeng. Now, General Loufeng has been arrested. Only General Zuo is leading the combined army. The war is becoming more and more urgent. I'm afraid we can't hold out, and the king won't surrender.

古文：阴、唊、路人皆亡降汉。
现代文：韩阴、王、路人都逃亡到汉军那里，向汉朝投降。
English: Han Yin, Wang Qi, and passers-by all fled to the Han army and surrendered to the Han Dynasty.

古文：路人道死。
现代文：路人在道上死去了。
English: A passer-by died on the road.

古文：元封三年夏，尼谿相参乃使人杀朝鲜王右渠来降。
现代文：元封三年夏天，尼溪相参就派人杀死了朝鲜王右渠，向汉朝投降。
English: In the summer of the third year of the Yuan dynasty, Nixi Shangsan sent someone to kill the Korean king Yuquan and surrender to the Han dynasty.

古文：王险城未下，故右渠之大臣成巳又反，复攻吏。
现代文：王险城还没攻下来，原右渠的大臣成巳又造反，并攻打不同他一起造反的朝鲜官吏。
English: Before Wang Riancheng was conquered, the former minister of the right canal, Cheng Mi, rebelled again and attacked the North Korean officials who rebelled with him.

古文：左将军使右渠子长降、相路人之子最告谕其民，诛成巳，以故遂定朝鲜，为四郡。
现代文：左将军派右渠的儿子长降、相路人的儿子路最去明白地告诉朝鲜的百姓，杀了成已，因此汉朝终于平定了朝鲜，设立了四个郡。
English: General Zuo sent the son of the right canal, Changjun, and the son of the fellow traveler, Lu most, to tell the Korean people clearly that they had been killed, so the Han Dynasty finally pacified Korea and established four counties.

古文：封参为澅清侯，阴为荻苴侯，唊为平州侯，长为几侯。
现代文：汉天子封参为澅清侯，韩阴为狄苴侯，王为平州侯，长降为几侯。
English: Han Tianzi Fuzan was the prince of the Qing dynasty, Han Yin was the prince of the Di dynasty, Wang Qian was the prince of the Binzhou dynasty, and Changjun was the prince of the Qian dynasty.

古文：最以父死颇有功，为温阳侯。
现代文：路最因为父亲死了，很有功劳，被封为温阳侯。
English: Lu was given the title of Prince of Wenyang due to his father's death, which was a great achievement.

古文：左将军徵至，坐争功相嫉，乖计，弃市。
现代文：左将军被召回京城，犯了争功而相互嫉妒，违背作战计划的罪过，被公开处死。
English: General Zuo was recalled to Beijing, where he was publicly executed for the crime of competing for merit, causing mutual jealousy, and violating the battle plan.

古文：楼船将军亦坐兵至洌口，当待左将军，擅先纵，失亡多，当诛，赎为庶人。
现代文：楼船将军也因为犯了军队到达洌口，应当等候左将军，却擅自抢先攻击敌人，致使伤亡很多的罪过，被判处死刑，他用钱赎了罪，免除死刑，成为平民。
English: General Loufeng was also sentenced to death for the crime of attacking the enemy ahead of the enemy without authorization, resulting in many casualties, because he committed the crime of the army arriving at the gate and should have waited for General Zuo. He atoned for his crime with money, was exempted from the death penalty, and became a civilian.

古文：太史公曰：右渠负固，国以绝祀。
现代文：太史公说：朝鲜王右渠依仗地势的险固，国家因此被灭绝。
English: Taishikong said: The Korean king relied on the precariousness of the terrain, and the country was thus exterminated.

古文：涉何诬功，为兵发首。
现代文：涉何骗取功劳，成为发兵攻打朝鲜的开端。
English: It was the beginning of sending troops to attack North Korea.

古文：楼船将狭，及难离咎。
现代文：楼船将军行事心胸狭小，遇到危难就遭受祸殃。
English: The general of the houseboat acted narrow-minded, and suffered calamity in the face of danger.

古文：悔失番禺，乃反见疑。
现代文：后悔曾经在攻陷番禺时失了利，却反而被人怀疑要造反。
English: He regretted that he had lost out in the attack on Panyu, but he was suspected of wanting to rebel.

古文：荀彘争劳，与遂皆诛。
现代文：荀彘争功，同公孙遂都被斩杀。
English: They fought for their merits, but they and their grandsons were all killed.

古文：两军俱辱，将率莫侯矣。
现代文：征讨朝鲜的杨仆和荀彘的两支军队都遭受困辱，将帅没有被封侯。
English: The two armies led by Yang Pei and Zou suffered humiliation in the conquest of Korea, and the general was not given the title of prince.

