古文：犀首立五王，而中山后持。
现代文：魏文侯想灭掉中山。
English: Wei Wenhou wanted to exterminate Zhongshan.

古文：齐谓赵、魏曰： 寡人羞与中山并为主，愿与大国伐之，以废其王。 中山闻之，大恐。
现代文：常庄谈对赵襄子说： 魏国如果吞并中山，公孙衍拥立齐、赵、魏、燕、中山五国国君为王，中山君最后被推立。
English: Changzhuang Dan said to Zhao Xiangzi: "If Wei annexes Zhongshan, Gongsun Yan will make Qi, Zhao, Wei, Yan and Zhongshan the kings of the five countries, and Zhongshan will finally be promoted."

古文：召张登而告之曰： 寡人且王，齐谓赵、魏曰，羞与寡人并为王，而欲伐寡人。
现代文：齐王对赵、魏两国说： 寡人与中山君一起称王感到耻辱，希望与你们讨伐他，废掉他的王号。 中山君听说后，非常害怕，召见张登告诉他说： 寡人就要称王了，齐王对赵、魏两国说，与寡人一起称王感到耻辱，想要讨伐寡人。
English: King Qi said to Zhao and Wei, "Some people are ashamed to call themselves kings with Zhongshan Jun, and hope to fight him with you and abolish his title of king." After hearing this, Zhongshan Jun was very afraid and summoned Zhang Deng to tell him, "Some people are about to call themselves kings. King Qi said to Zhao and Wei, "Some people are ashamed to call themselves kings with you, and want to fight some people."

古文：恐亡其国，不在索王。非子莫能吾救。 
现代文：寡人只是害怕国家被灭亡，不在乎要那个王号，除了您没有谁能救我。 
English: Some people are just afraid of the country being destroyed, and don't care about the king's name. No one can save me but you.

古文：登对曰： 君为臣多车重币，臣请见田婴。 
现代文：张登回答说： 您为臣下多备车辆和丰厚的礼物，臣下请求去拜见田婴。 
English: Zhang Deng replied: You have prepared many vehicles and rich gifts for your vassals. Your vassals have requested to visit Tian Rong.

古文：中山之君遣之齐。见婴子曰： 臣闻君欲废中山之王，将与赵、魏伐之，过矣。
现代文：中山君就派张登去了齐国，张登见到田婴说： 臣下听说您要废掉中山君的王号，准备同赵、魏两国攻打中山，您错了。
English: Zhongshan sent Zhang Deng to Qi. Zhang Deng saw Tian Yu and said, "Your vassals have heard that you want to abolish Zhongshan's title of king and prepare to attack Zhongshan with Zhao and Wei. You are mistaken."

古文：以中山之小，而三国伐之，中山虽益废王，犹且听也。
现代文：以中山那样的小国，三个大国去攻打它，中山国即使遭到比废除王号还大的祸患，也会听命的。
English: If a small country like Zhongshan is attacked by three big countries, Zhongshan will obey even if it suffers a greater disaster than the abolition of the king's title.

古文：且中山恐，必为赵、魏废其王而务附焉。是君为赵、魏驱羊也，非齐之利也。岂若中山废其王而事齐哉? 
现代文：再说中山君很害怕，一定会为赵、魏两国废掉王号，竭力依附它们，这样做，您是为赵、魏两国赶羊，并非对齐国有利，哪比得上让中山君废掉王号来侍奉齐国呢？ 
English: What's more, Zhongshan was very afraid. He was sure to abolish the title of king for Zhao and Wei, and tried his best to cling to them. By doing so, you were driving sheep for Zhao and Wei, which was not beneficial to Qi. What could be better than having Zhongshan abolish the title of king to serve Qi?

古文：田婴曰： 奈何? 
现代文：田婴说： 怎么办呢？ 
English: Tianying said, "What should we do?

古文：张登曰： 今君召中山，与之遇而许之王，中山必喜而绝赵、魏。赵、魏怒而攻中山，中山急而为君难其王，则中山必恐，为君废王事齐。
现代文：张登说： 现在您应该召见中山君，同他会面并允许他称王，中出君一定高兴，就会断绝与赵、魏两国的邦交，赵、魏两国发怒，攻打中山，中山形势危急，就会知道各国国君不愿同他一道称王，中山君一定很害怕，自己就会为您废掉王号侍奉齐国。
English: Zhang Deng said: Now you should summon Zhongshan Jun, meet with him and allow him to proclaim the king. Zhongzijun will be happy, he will break off diplomatic relations with Zhao and Wei. Zhao and Wei will be angry and attack Zhongshan. Zhongshan is in a critical situation. You will know that the kings of all countries are unwilling to proclaim the king with him. Zhongshan Jun must be very afraid. He will abolish the title of king for you and serve Qi.

古文：彼患亡其国，是君废其王而亡其国，贤于为赵、魏驱羊也。 田婴曰： 诺。 
现代文：他担心自己的国家被灭掉，这样您废掉了他的王号并保存了中山，比为赵、魏两国赶羊要好得多。 田婴说： 遵命。 
English: He feared that his country would be wiped out, so it was much better for you to abolish his title of king and preserve Zhongshan than to drive sheep for Zhao and Wei.

古文：张丑曰： 不可。
现代文：张丑说： 不可以这样做。
English: Zhang Jiu said, "You can't do that.

古文：臣闻之，同欲者相憎，同忧者相亲。
现代文：我听说，有同样欲望者互样憎恨，有同样忧虑者互样亲近。
English: I have heard that those who have the same desires hate each other, and those who have the same worries are close to each other.

古文：今五国相与王也，负海不与焉。此是欲皆在为王，而忧在负海。
现代文：现在五国相互称王，而齐国不愿同中山同时称王，这样看来，五国的欲望都在称王上，只是担心齐国干预。
English: Now the five countries are calling each other kings, while Qi is unwilling to do so at the same time as Zhongshan. It seems that the desires of the five countries are all on the throne, but they are worried about the intervention of Qi.

古文：今召中山，与之遇而许之王，是夺五国而益负海也。
现代文：现在您如果召见中山君：和他会面，允许他称王，这就侵夺了四国的权利而使齐国获得好处。
English: Now, if you were to summon Nakayama-kun, meet with him, and allow him to proclaim himself king, this would usurp the rights of Shikoku and benefit Qi.

古文：致中山而塞四国，四国寒心，必先与之王而故亲之。是君临中山而失四国也。
现代文：得到了中山的邦交却隔绝了四国的联系，四国会感到心寒。您一定要先让齐国和中山称王，故意同中山亲近，这样您接近了中山却矢去了四国。
English: You must first let Qi Province and Zhongshan reign supreme, and deliberately get close to Zhongshan, so that when you get close to Zhongshan, you end up in Shikoku.

古文：且张登之为人也，善以微计荐中山之君久矣，难信以为利。 
现代文：再说张登的为人，长期以来善于把一些小计谋进献给中山君，难以相信张登会给我们带来好处。 
English: In addition, Zhang Deng is a person who has long been good at dedicating some small plans to Zhongshan. It is hard to believe that Zhang Deng will bring us benefits.

古文：田婴不听。果召中山君而许之王。
现代文：田婴不听，真的召见了中山君并允许中山君称王。
English: Tian Ying did not listen and actually summoned Zhong Shan and allowed him to proclaim himself king.

古文：张登因谓赵、魏曰： 齐欲伐河东。
现代文：张登对赵、魏两国说： 齐国要进攻你们的河东。
English: Zhang Deng said to Zhao and Wei, "Qi is going to attack your east of the river.

古文：何以知之?
现代文：我怎么知道的呢？
English: How do I know?

古文：齐羞与中山之为王甚矣，今召中山，与之遇而许之王，是欲用其兵也。岂若令大国先与之王，以止其遇哉? 
现代文：齐国对同中山同时称王感到非常耻辱，现在却召见中山君，同他会面并允许他称王：是想利用中山的军队，这哪比得上你们同中山君先称王，来阻止他们的会面呢 ？ 
English: The State of Qi is very ashamed of having proclaimed the king at the same time as Zhongshan, but now it has summoned Zhongshan Jun, met with him and allowed him to proclaim the king: it wants to use Zhongshan's army, which is comparable to you and Zhongshan Jun first proclaiming the king to prevent their meeting?

古文：赵、魏许诺，果与中山王而亲之。
现代文：赵、魏两国答应了，果真同中山一起称王，并且非常亲近中出。
English: Zhao and Wei agreed, and the two countries celebrated the king together with Zhongshan, and became very close.

古文：中山果绝齐而从赵、魏。
现代文：中山也真的断绝了同齐国的邦交，服从赵国、魏国。
English: Zhongshan also severed diplomatic relations with Qi and submitted to Zhao and Wei.

