古文：王重师，颍州长社人也。
现代文：王重师，颍州长社人。
English: Wang Chung-shih, a member of the Shandong Governor's Club.

古文：材力兼人，沈嘿大度，临事有权变，剑槊之妙，冠绝于一时。
现代文：材力过人，沉默而有大度，遇事能应变，刀剑长矛技法之妙，冠绝一时。
English: Superior strength, silent and magnanimous, able to adapt in times of need, excellent sword and spear techniques, the crowning moment.

古文：唐中和末，蔡寇陷许昌，重师脱身而来，太祖异其状貌，乃隶于拔山都。每于军前效用，颇出侪类。
现代文：唐中和末年，蔡州贼寇攻陷许昌，王重师脱身逃奔太祖，太祖惊异他的相貌，于是把他归隶于拔山都军旅中，王重师常在军前效力立功，超群出众。
English: In the middle and late years of the Tang Dynasty, the Caizhou bandits attacked and captured Xu Chang. Wang Chung Shih escaped and fled to the great-grandfather. The great-grandfather was surprised by his appearance, so he subordinated him to the Bashan Capital Army. Wang Chung Shih often distinguished himself in the front of the army.

古文：文德中，令董左右长剑军。
现代文：文德年间，令他统帅左右长剑军。
English: During the Wende era, he was made the commander of the left and right long sword army.

古文：太祖伐上蔡，重师力战有功。
现代文：太祖攻伐上蔡时，王重师力战有功。
English: When the great-grandfather attacked Cai, Wang Chung-shih fought bravely and successfully.

古文：及讨兗、郓，擢为指挥使，奏授检校右仆射。
现代文：到讨伐兖州、郓州时，被擢升为指挥使，奏明朝廷授与检校右仆射。
English: At the time of the campaigns against Bozhou and Zhangzhou, he was promoted to the post of commander, and was awarded the title of Right-Handed Shooter by the Ming court.

古文：重师枕戈擐甲五六年，于齐、鲁间凡经百余战，由是威震敌人。
现代文：王重师枕戈披甲，五六年转战于齐、鲁一带，共经历百余战，因而威震敌军。
English: Wang Chongshih wore armor on his pillow, and in 1956 he fought in the Qi and Lu areas, experiencing more than 100 battles, thus terrifying the enemy army.

古文：寻授检校司空，为颍州刺史。
现代文：接着任检校司空，为颍州刺史。
English: Next, he was appointed as the inspector of schools, and wrote the history of Zhangzhou.

古文：乾宁中，太祖攻濮州，纵兵坏其墉，濮人因屯火塞其坏垒，烟焰亘空，人莫敢越。
现代文：乾宁年间，太祖进攻濮州，纵使士兵破坏濮州城墙，濮州人于是屯积火堆堵塞在被毁坏的城墙处，烟火连天，没有人敢越过。
English: During the Qianling Dynasty, Emperor Taizu attacked Zhangzhou. Even though the soldiers destroyed the city wall of Zhangzhou, the people of Zhangzhou built bonfires at the destroyed city wall. The fireworks were so bright that no one dared to go beyond.

古文：重师方苦金疮，卧于军次，诸将或勉之，乃跃起，命壮士悉取军中氈罽投水中，掷于火上，重师然后率精锐，持短兵突入，诸军踵之，濮州乃陷。
现代文：王重师正受创伤之苦，卧病军中，将领们有的劝勉他上阵应急，王重师于是一跃而起，命壮士全部取来军中毡投入水中浸湿，丢到火堆上，王重师然后率领精锐士兵，持短刀突入敌城，各军紧接其后，濮州才得以攻陷。
English: Wang Chung-shih was suffering from trauma. Some of the generals in the army who were ill urged him to go to battle. Wang Chung-shih then jumped to his feet. He took all the strong men and threw them into the water, soaking wet, and threw them onto the fire. Wang Chung-shih then led the elite soldiers and rushed into the enemy city with a short knife. The armies followed closely, and Zhangzhou was able to fall.

古文：重师为剑槊所伤，身被八九创，丁壮荷之还营，且将毙矣。
现代文：王重师被刀剑长槊刺击，身受九处创伤，有勇壮的士卒背着他回到军营，已经奄奄一息了。
English: Wang Chongshi was stabbed with a sword and suffered nine wounds. Brave soldiers carried him back to the military camp. He was on his deathbed.

古文：太祖惊惜尤甚，曰： 虽得濮垒，而失重师，奈何！ 
现代文：太祖特别惊恐爱惜，说： 虽然攻下濮州，却将失去重师，怎么办？ 
English: The great-grandfather was particularly alarmed and regretted it, saying: Although we have conquered Zhangzhou, we will lose a key teacher. What should we do?

古文：亟命以奇药疗之，弥月始愈。
现代文：立即命令用奇药给他医治，一个多月才痊愈。
English: He was immediately ordered to be treated with a miracle drug, and it took more than a month for him to recover.

古文：寻知平庐军留后，加检校司徒。
现代文：接着任平卢军留后，加封为检校司徒。
English: Then, after he stayed in the Pinglu Army, he was appointed as a school inspector.

古文：其后北伐幽、沧、镇、定，屡与晋军接战，颇得士心，故多胜捷。
现代文：后来北伐幽、沧、镇、定各州，多次与晋军交战，深得军心，所以大多能克敌致胜。
English: Later, during the Northern Expedition in the provinces of Yu, Cang, Zhen and Ding, he fought against the Jin army many times and won the hearts and minds of the soldiers, so he was able to defeat the enemy and win most of the battles.

古文：天祐中，授雍州节度使，加同平章事。
现代文：天年间，任雍州节度使，加封同平章事。
English: During the Tian Dynasty, he was appointed as the Yongzhou Festival Envoy, and was awarded the title of Tongping.

古文：《通鉴》云刘捍至长安，王重师不为礼，捍谮之帝，曰： 重师潜与邠、岐通。 
现代文：多年从戎抚民，很有威望恩惠。开平年间，被刘捍诬陷，太祖很怀疑他，但没有把柄揭发他的罪行。不久王重师擅自派裨将张君练领兵深入州、凤翔，张君练战败。
English: For many years, he served the people of Rongfu with great prestige and favor. During the Kaiping era, he was framed by Liu Han, and the great-grandfather was very suspicious of him, but he did not have the power to expose his crime. Soon, Wang Chongshi sent Zhang Junren to lead the troops into Zhoushou and Fengxiang without authorization, and Zhang Junren was defeated.

古文：甲申，贬溪州刺史，寻赐自尽，夷其族。
现代文：太祖闻讯，气恼他专断擅权，因而追究其罪而杀了他。
English: When the great-grandfather heard the news, he was angry that he had arbitrarily usurped power, so he investigated his crime and killed him.

古文：硃珍，徐州丰县雍凤里人也。
现代文：朱珍，徐州丰县雍凤里人。
English: Zhu Zhen, a resident of Yongfengli, Feng County, Xuzhou.

古文：太祖初起兵，珍与庞师古、许唐、李晖、丁会、氏叔琮、邓季筠、王武等八十余人，以中涓从，摧坚陷阵，所向荡决。
现代文：太祖初起兵时，朱珍与庞师古、许唐、李晖、丁会、氏叔琮、邓季筠、王武等八十多人，以中涓官的身份相追随，摧坚城陷战阵，所向无敌。
English: When the great-grandfather first raised an army, Zhu Zhen and more than eighty people, including Pang Shigu, Xu Tang, Li Yu, Ding Hui, Uji Shuxuan, Deng Jizhen, and Wang Wu, followed in the capacity of middle eunuchs, destroying the fortified city and falling into the battle, and they were invincible.

古文：及太祖镇汴，兼领招讨使，署珍为宣武右职，以总腹心。
现代文：到太祖镇守汴州时，兼任招讨使，暂任朱珍为宣武军右职，以掌管心腹将士。
English: When he went to Taizu Town to guard Bozhou, he also served as a recruiting envoy, and temporarily appointed Zhu Zhen as the right-hand man of the Xuanwu Army to take charge of loyal soldiers.

古文：于是简练军伍，裁制纲纪，平巢破蔡，多珍之力也。
现代文：于是朱珍挑选士兵训练部队，制订纲纪。平定黄巢，攻破蔡州贼寇，多赖朱珍之力。
English: Therefore, Zhu Zhen selected the soldiers to train the troops and formulated the rules and regulations. To pacify the Yellow Nest and defeat the Caizhou bandits, he relied on Zhu Zhen's strength.

古文：始尚让以骁骑五千人至繁台，珍与庞师古、齐奉国等击退之。
现代文：开始时尚让带领骁勇骑兵五千人来到繁台，朱珍与庞师古、齐奉国等击退他们。
English: At the beginning of the fashion, Zhu Zhen led five thousand brave cavalrymen to the plateau, and Zhu Zhen, Pang Shigu, Qi Fengguo and others repelled them.

古文：及黄巢败，珍与并帅李克用追至冤句而还。
现代文：到黄巢失败，朱珍与并州统帅李克用追到冤句而回。
English: After failing to reach the Yellow Nest, Zhu Zhen and the unified state commander Li Ke chased the wrongdoers and returned.

古文：寻从太祖以汴、宋、亳之师入西华，破王夏寨，勇冠军锋，以功加秩。
现代文：接着跟随太祖率汴、宋、亳州军队进入西华，攻破王夏寨，勇冠三军，因功增加爵禄。
English: Then, he followed his great-great-grandfather to lead the Qian, Song and Zhangzhou armies into West China, broke through Wang Xiazhai, won the three armies, and increased his honor.

古文：光启元年，署诸军都指挥使，始为上将。
现代文：光启元年，暂任各军总指挥使，开始做上将。
English: In the first year of Guangqi, he temporarily served as the commander-in-chief of each army and began to work as a general.

古文：于是军焦夷，败蔡师铁林三千人，尽俘其将。
现代文：于是驻军焦夷，打败蔡州铁林军三千人，俘虏全部将领。
English: As a result, the garrison of Jiao Yi defeated 3,000 soldiers of the Caizhou Iron Forest Army, and all the captives were generals.

古文：复西至汝、郑，南过陈、颍，缭宋、亳、滑、濮间，与蔡贼交战，鏖伏袭杀，不知其数。
现代文：又向西到汝州、郑州，向南经陈州、颍州，辗转于宋、亳、滑、濮各州之间，与蔡贼交战，鏖兵攻杀，不计其数。
English: He also went west to Ruzhou and Zhengzhou, and south to Chenzhou and Zhangzhou, and traveled between Song, Yan, Nian, and Zhou provinces. He fought against Cai Qi, and killed countless soldiers.

古文：会滑州节度使安师儒戎政不治，太祖命珍与李唐宾率步骑以经略之。
现代文：这时滑州节度使安师儒治理军政不善，太祖命朱珍与李唐宾率领步卒骑兵以攻打他。
English: At this time, the Slanting Festival made Anshiru govern the military and political affairs poorly, and Zhu Zhen and Li Tangbin led the foot soldiers and cavalry to attack him.

古文：始入境，遇大雪，令军士无得休息，一夕驰至壁下，百梯并升，遂乘其墉，滑州平。
现代文：才入滑州，遇大雪，令军士不准休息，一直奔到滑州城下，百辆云梯一起架起，于是登上城墙，滑州被平定。
English: He had just entered the city of Slant, when it snowed heavily, the sergeant was not allowed to rest, and he ran all the way to the foot of the city of Slant, erecting a hundred ladders together, and then climbed the city wall, and Slant was subdued.

古文：时太祖方谋齐师，乃遣珍往淄州募兵，行次任县，东面都统齐克让伏兵于孙师陂以邀珍，珍大破之。
现代文：这时太祖正图谋补充兵源，于是派朱珍前往淄州招募士兵，走到任县，东面都统齐克让伏兵于孙师陂以拦击朱珍，朱珍打败他。
English: At this time, the great ancestor was trying to replenish the army, so he sent Zhu Zhen to Bozhou to recruit soldiers, went to Ren County, and in the east, he sent an ambush to Sun Shiyan to stop Zhu Zhen, and Zhu Zhen defeated him.

古文：进军至牙山，都虞候张仁遇白珍曰： 军有不齐者，当先斩本都将，后以状闻，愿许之。 
现代文：进军到牙山，都虞候张仁遇对朱珍说 ：军士有不统一行动的，当先问斩本部都将，然后宣布罪状，愿答应这件事。 
English: When marching into Asan, the prefectural governor Zhang Renjun said to Zhu Zhen: If the sergeant does not have a unified action, he should first ask the headquarters, and then announce the charges. He is willing to agree to this matter.

古文：珍怒其专，乃斩仁遇以徇军，由是诸将咸惧。
现代文：朱珍怒他专擅，于是斩杀张仁遇遍告军中，因此诸将震惊。
English: Zhu Zhen was angry at his expertise, so he killed Zhang Ren when he was in the army, so the generals were shocked.

古文：兵至乾封，与淄人战于白草口，败之。
现代文：兵到乾封，与淄州人在白草口交战，打败他们。
English: The soldiers went to Qianfeng, fought with the Zhangzhou people in Bai Cao Kou, and defeated them.

古文：青人以步骑二万，列三寨于金岭驿，珍与战，连破之，歼其师，尽获军器戎马。
现代文：青州人率领步卒骑兵二万，在金岭驿立起三座营寨，朱珍与之交战，接连攻破它们，歼灭了青州军队，俘获全部军器、战马。
English: The Qingzhou people led 20,000 foot soldiers and cavalrymen and erected three camps in Jinling. Zhu Zhen fought with them, broke through them one after another, annihilated the Qingzhou army, and captured all military equipment and horses.

古文：是夕，攻博昌，大获兵众。
现代文：这晚，进攻博昌，大获兵众。
English: That night, they attacked Bochang and won a large number of soldiers.

古文：其后破卢瑭、张晊及硃瑄、硃瑾之众，平定曹、濮，未尝不在战中。
现代文：后来打败卢瑭、张日至以及朱王宣、朱瑾部队，平定曹州、濮州，朱珍未曾不在战役之中。
English: Later, he defeated Lu Xun, Zhang Zhi and the troops of Zhu Wangxuan and Zhu Xi, and pacified Caozhou and Zhangzhou. Zhu Zhen was never absent from the battle.

古文：梁山之役，始与李唐宾不协。
现代文：梁山战役中，朱珍开始与李唐宾不和协。
English: During the Battle of Liangshan, Zhu Zhen began to quarrel with Li Tangbin.

古文：珍在军尝私迎其室于汴，而不先请，太祖疑之，密令唐宾察之，二将不相下，因而交诤。
现代文：朱珍在军中曾私自从汴京接出自己的家室，而不先请示，太祖怀疑他，密令李唐宾监察他，二将互不相让，因而交相争辩。
English: When Zhu Zhen was in the army, he once took his own family out of Beijing without asking permission first. His great-grandfather suspected him and secretly ordered Li Tangbin to supervise him. The two would not give in to each other, so they quarreled.

古文：唐宾夜斩关还汴以诉，珍亦弃军单骑而至，太祖两惜之，故不罪，俾还于师。
现代文：李唐宾连夜斩关回汴京诉告，朱珍也放下部队单骑而到，太祖对双方都爱惜，所以不降罪，使回到部队。
English: Li Tangbin went back to Beijing overnight to lodge a complaint, and Zhu Zhen also left the army and rode alone. The great-grandfather was sympathetic to both sides, so he did not give in and returned to the army.

古文：复以踏白骑士入陈、亳间，以邀蔡人，遂南至斤沟，破淮西石璠之师二万，掳璠以献。
现代文：朱珍又带领踏白军骑兵进入陈州、亳州之间，以拦击蔡州贼人，于是南至斤沟，打败淮西石的部队两万人，抓获石献上。
English: Zhu Zhen also led the cavalry of the Taobao Army into the middle of Chenzhou and Zhangzhou to intercept the thieves of Caizhou, and then went south to Jingu, defeated the troops of Huaixi Shi with 20,000 people, and captured the stone offering.

古文：珍旋师自亳北趣静戎，济舟于滑，破黎阳、临河、李固三镇。
现代文：朱珍回师从亳州北面奔赴静戎，坐船到滑州，攻破黎阳、临河、李固三镇，驻军内黄，打败乐从训一万多人。
English: Zhu Zhenhui's division rushed from the north of Luzhou to Jing Rong, took a boat to Luzhou, broke through the three towns of Liyang, Linhe and Li Gu, garrisoned Naihuang, and defeated more than 10,000 people from Le Xun.

古文：军于内黄，败乐从训万余人，分命聂金、范居实略澶州，与魏师遇于临黄；魏军有豹子军二千人，戮之无噍类，威振河朔。
现代文：分别命令聂金、范居实攻打澶州，与魏州军队在临黄相遇，魏军有豹子军二千人，全被杀死不剩一个，朱珍威震河朔。
English: He ordered Bao Jin and Fan Jushi to attack Ganzhou separately, and met with the Wei army in Linhuang. The Wei army had two thousand leopards, all of which were killed, leaving only one, Zhu Zhenwei.

古文：复攻淮西，至蔡，夹河而寨，败贼将萧皓之众，皆拥于河溺死之。
现代文：又进攻淮西，到蔡州，夹河道安营，打败贼将萧皓的部众，都赶到河中淹死他们。
English: He also attacked Huaixi, went to Caizhou, camped along the river, defeated the thieves, and drove Xiao Yao's subordinates into the river to drown them.

古文：进军蔡州，营其西南，既破羊马垣，遇雨班师。
现代文：进军蔡州，在西南结营，在攻破羊马垣后，遇雨回师。
English: They marched into Caizhou, camped in the southwest, and returned to the division in the rain after breaking through the sheep fence.

古文：珍以兵援刘赞，赴楚州，至襄山南，遇徐戎扼其路，珍乃攻丰，下之。
现代文：朱珍领兵援助刘瓒，奔赴楚州，到襄山以南，遇上徐州军队扼守通路，朱珍于是进攻丰州，攻占了它。
English: Zhu Zhen led an army to aid Liu Bei and rushed to Chuzhou. When he reached the south of Xiangshan and encountered the Xuzhou army guarding the passage, Zhu Zhen attacked and occupied Fuzhou.

古文：时溥乃以全师会战于丰南吴康里，珍乃收丰，破其三万余众。
现代文：时溥于是领全军会战于丰州以南的吴康里，朱珍于是收回丰城兵力，打败时溥三万多部队。
English: Therefore, Shi Jiong led the whole army to fight in Wu Kangli, south of Fongzhou. Zhu Zhen then recovered the Fengcheng troops and defeated more than 30,000 troops of Shi Jiong.

古文：及蔡贼平，珍比诸将功居多。
现代文：到蔡州贼寇平定，朱珍比其他诸将功劳居多。
English: Zhu Zhen has done more than other generals to quell the banditry in Caizhou.

古文：龙纪初，与诸将屯于萧县，以御时溥，珍虑太祖自至，令诸军葺马厩以候巡抚，李唐宾之裨将严郊独慢焉，军候范权恃珍以督之。
现代文：龙纪初年，与各将屯驻于萧县，以抵御时溥，朱珍估计太祖将亲自前来，即令各军葺修马厩以等候太祖的巡视抚慰，李唐宾的偏将严郊偏独轻慢不从，军候范权依仗朱珍以督责他。
English: In the first year of the Longji era, with the generals stationed in Xiao County to withstand the storm, Zhu Zhen estimated that the great-grandfather would come in person, and ordered the troops to repair the stables to wait for the great-grandfather's inspection and comfort. Li Tangbin's general was too arrogant to obey, and the military standard authority relied on Zhu Zhen to supervise him.

古文：唐宾素与珍不协，果怒，乃见以诉其事。珍亦怒曰： 唐宾无礼！ 
现代文：李唐宾平素与朱珍不和，果然发怒，于是面见朱珍以申诉此事，朱珍也发怒说： 李唐宾无礼！ 
English: Li Tangbin was always at odds with Zhu Zhen, and he was really angry, so he met with Zhu Zhen to complain about the matter. Zhu Zhen was also angry and said: Li Tangbin is rude!

古文：郴王友裕领兵攻泽州，时太祖驻大军于盟津，乃令谠将兵越太行，授以筹谋。
现代文：于是拔剑杀了他，朱珍令人骑马向太祖陈述此事。太祖刚听到李唐宾的死讯，惊骇，与敬翔商谋，假装令有关官员收捕李唐宾的妻儿下狱，以安定朱珍的心。
English: So he drew his sword and killed him, and Zhu Zhen had someone ride on horseback to report the matter to his great-grandfather. The great-grandfather had just heard the news of Li Tangbin's death, was shocked, and made a bargain with Qixiang, pretending to order the relevant officials to arrest Li Tangbin's wife and children and send them to prison, in order to stabilize Zhu Zhen's heart.

古文：谠颇违节度，久而无功。太祖遣追还，廷责其罪，戮之于河桥。李重允，宋州下邑人。
现代文：太祖于是径直前往萧县，距萧县三十里，朱珍率将校迎接拜见，太祖令武士把朱珍抓起来，指责他专权擅杀，命丁会执行对他的死刑，都将霍存等几十人叩头以求，太祖大怒，用坐床掷击他们，才退。李重允，宋州下邑人。
English: The great-grandfather then went straight to Xiao County, 30 miles away from Xiao County, Zhu Zhen led the officers to meet him. The great-grandfather ordered the samurai to arrest Zhu Zhen, accusing him of killing arbitrarily, ordering the death penalty to be carried out on him. Dozens of people, including Huo Cun, bowed down to him. The great-grandfather was furious and hit them with a sitting bed before retreating. Li Chongyun, a native of the lower town of Songzhou.

古文：状貌雄武，初在黄巢党中，推为刚鸷。
现代文：形状相貌雄壮勇武，早年在黄巢军中，就公认他刚强凶猛。
English: His appearance is majestic and courageous. In his early years in the Yellow Nest Army, he was recognized as strong and fierce.

古文：唐中和四年五月，同尚让、李谠等率众至繁台，与太祖之军相拒。
现代文：唐代中和四年五月，同尚让、李谠等人率领部队到繁台，与太祖的军队相抗拒。
English: In May of the middle of the Tang Dynasty and the fourth year of the Tang Dynasty, Tong Shangzhan, Li Yu and others led the troops to the plateau to resist the army of the great ancestor.

古文：及巢寇渐衰，乃率众来降。
现代文：到黄巢乱寇渐渐衰微时，李重胤就带领部队投降。
English: When the Yellow Nest Rebellion was waning, Li Shigetin led the troops to surrender.

古文：太祖素识之，拔用不次，署为先锋步军都头。
现代文：太祖一向赏识他，越级提拔使用他，让他暂任先锋步军都头。
English: The great-grandfather always appreciated him, promoted him to a higher rank and used him, making him temporarily the head of the vanguard marching army.

古文：与胡真援河阳，逼怀州。
现代文：与胡真一起援救河阳，进逼怀州。
English: Together with Hu Zhen, he rescued Heyang and forced Huai Zhou to surrender.

古文：重允以部下兵突之，射中蕃将安休休。
现代文：李重胤率领部下士兵突击敌军，射中蕃族将领安休休。
English: Li Shigetian led his soldiers in a surprise attack on the enemy, and the Yi general was shot dead.

古文：又令与李谠率骑军至陕，应接郭言，回次渑池，破贼帅黄花子之众，改滑州夹马指挥使。
现代文：太祖又命令他率领骑兵到陕州，接应郭言，回师驻扎在渑池时，打败敌军统帅黄花子的部队，李重胤改任滑州夹马指挥使。
English: The great-grandfather also ordered him to lead the cavalry to Shaanxi Province to meet Guo Yan, and when his division was stationed in Dianchi, he defeated the troops of the enemy commander Huang Hanazi, and Li Shigetian was reassigned as the commanding officer of the Slanting Horse.

古文：蔡贼围汴，重允以步兵攻下三寨，掳获甚多。
现代文：蔡州贼寇围困汴州时，李重胤带领步兵攻下三座营寨，获得战利品极多。
English: When the Caizhou bandits besieged Ganzhou, Li Shigetin led the infantry to capture three camps and obtained a lot of trophies.

古文：太祖大举伐宗权，俾重允以滑兵为先锋。
现代文：太祖大举攻伐秦宗权时，派李重胤带领滑州兵马做先锋。
English: When the great-grandfather vigorously attacked the Qin Dynasty, he sent Li Shigetian to lead the soldiers and horses of the State of Nanzhou to be the vanguard.

古文：及东讨徐州，下丰、萧二邑，转右厢马步军指挥使。
现代文：到向东攻讨徐州时，攻克丰、萧两座城邑，转任右厢马步军指挥使。
English: When he attacked Xuzhou to the east, he conquered the two cities of Feng and Xiao, and was transferred to the commander of the Right Wing Horse Infantry Army.

古文：大顺元年秋，从郴王友裕收泽州，与晋军战于马牢川，王师败绩，回守河阳。
现代文：大顺元年秋天，跟随郴王朱友裕收复泽州，与晋军在马牢川交战，郴王军队战败，退回据守河阳。
English: In the autumn of the first year of Dashun, he followed the Shao King Zhu Youyu to recapture Fuzhezhou, and fought with the Jin army in Ma Ao River. The Shao King's army was defeated and returned to the defense of Heyang.

古文：太祖谓诸将曰： 李谠、重允违我节度，不能立功，颇辜任使。 
现代文：太祖对诸位将领说： 李谠、李重胤违背我的指挥调度，不能立下战功，很辜负了我对他们的信任使用。 
English: The great-grandfather said to the generals: Li Xi and Li Chongyin disobeyed my command and scheduling, failed to make war exploits, and betrayed my trust in them.

古文：于是与李谠并戮于河桥。
现代文：于是与李谠一起被诛杀在河桥。
English: As a result, he was beaten to death in Heqiao together with Li Yao.

