古文：初二日自白岳下山，十里，循麓而西，抵南溪桥。
现代文：初二这天从白岳山下山，走十里路，顺着山麓向西，抵达南溪桥。
English: On the second day of junior high school, I went down the mountain from Mount Paektu, walked ten miles, followed the foot of the mountain to the west, and arrived at Nanxi Bridge.

古文：渡大溪，循别溪，依山北行。
现代文：渡过大溪，顺着别溪水，沿着山麓往北走。
English: Cross the big stream, follow the water of the Beixi River, and walk north along the foot of the mountain.

古文：十里，两山峭逼如门，溪为之束。
现代文：继续走十里路，就见两座山十分陡峭，像两扇逼近的石门，溪水流到这里就被它所约束。
English: Continue walking for ten miles and you will see two very steep mountains, like two approaching stone gates, which restrict the flow of the stream.

古文：越而下，平畴颇广。
现代文：越过两山向下走，眼前的田畴平坦宽广。
English: Walking down over the two mountains, the fields in front of me are flat and wide.

古文：二十里，为猪坑。
现代文：走二十里路，就是猪坑。
English: If you walk twenty miles, you will come to a pig pit.

古文：由小路登虎岭，路甚峻。
现代文：从小路攀登虎岭，道路非常险峻。
English: From the path to climb Tiger Ridge, the road is very steep.

古文：十里，至岭。
现代文：又走十里路，到达虎岭。
English: He walked another ten miles to get to Huling.

古文：五里，越其麓。
现代文：再接着走五里路，越过虎岭山麓。
English: Then continue walking for five miles, crossing the foothills of the Huling Mountains.

古文：北望黄山诸峰，片片可掇拾取。
现代文：向北看，黄山的各座山峰，小如片片山石，仿佛可以拾取。
English: Looking to the north, the peaks of Mount Huangshan are as small as pieces of rock, as if they can be picked up.

古文：又三里，为古楼坳。
现代文：又走三里路，就是古楼坳。
English: Walk another three miles and you will reach the ancient tower.

古文：溪甚阔，水涨无梁，木片弥满布一溪，涉之甚难。
现代文：溪水很宽阔，溪水暴涨而又没有桥梁，木片遍布一条溪水，赤足涉过溪水很艰难。
English: The stream is very wide, the stream is soaring and there is no bridge, wood chips are all over a stream, and it is difficult to wade through the stream barefoot.

古文：二里，宿高桥。
现代文：过二里后，在高桥歇宿。
English: After two miles, we stopped at Takahashi.

古文：初三日随樵者行，久之，越岭二重。
现代文：初三这天随着樵夫一同走，走了很久，翻越过两座山岭。
English: On the third day of junior high school, I walked with the woodcutter for a long time, crossing two mountains.

古文：下而复上，又越一重。
现代文：下山后再重新爬上另一山，又翻越过一座山岭。
English: After descending the mountain, he climbed up another mountain and climbed over another ridge.

古文：两岭俱峻，曰双岭。
现代文：两座山岭都很险峻，叫双岭。
English: Both mountains are very steep, called Shuangling.

古文：共十五里，过江村。
现代文：总共走了十五里，经过江村。
English: We walked a total of fifteen miles, passing through the village of Jiangzhou.

古文：二十里，抵汤口，香溪、温泉诸水所由出者。
现代文：走二十里路后，到达汤口，是香溪、温泉各条溪水所流出的地方。
English: After a twenty-mile walk, you will reach the Yangtze estuary, where the water of the Xiangxi and hot spring streams flows out.

古文：折而入山，沿溪渐上，雪且没趾。
现代文：踅转方向而进入山里，沿着溪水逐渐上山；雪埋没了脚趾。
English: We turned into the mountains and followed the stream uphill; the snow buried our toes.

古文：五里，抵祥符寺。
现代文：走五里路，抵达祥符寺。
English: Take the five-mile road and arrive at Xiangfu Temple.

古文：汤泉即黄山温泉，又名朱砂泉在隔溪，遂俱解衣赴汤池。
现代文：温泉就在隔溪，于是大家都解衣脱鞋到温水池里洗澡。
English: The hot spring is just across the stream, so everyone undressed and took off their shoes to bathe in the warm pool.

古文：池前临溪，后倚壁，三面石甃，上环石如桥。
现代文：温泉池前临溪水，后倚岩壁，三面都用石头镶砌，上面环架着石条就像桥一样。
English: The hot spring pool is surrounded by a stream in front and a rock wall behind. All three sides are lined with stones, and the upper ring is made of stone strips, just like a bridge.

古文：汤深三尺，时凝寒未解，面汤气郁然，水泡池底汩汩起，气本香冽。
现代文：温泉有三尺左右深，当时冬寒还没有解除，温暖的水汽向上蒸腾，水泡从池底汩汩冒出，气味很清香。
English: The hot spring is about three feet deep. At that time, the winter cold had not yet lifted, warm water vapor was transpiring upward, bubbles were emerging from the bottom of the pool, and the smell was very fragrant.

古文：黄贞父谓其不及盘山，以汤口、焦村孔道，浴者太杂遝。
现代文：黄贞父说黄山的温泉不及盘山好，是因为汤口、焦村是交通孔道，来洗浴的人太多太杂。
English: Huang Zhen's father said that Huangshan's hot springs are not as good as Panshan's, because Yangtze estuary and Jiao village are transportation channels, and too many people come to bathe.

古文：浴毕，返寺。
现代文：洗浴完毕，返回祥符寺。
English: After bathing, return to Shōfu-ji Temple.

古文：僧挥印引登莲花庵，蹑雪循涧以上。
现代文：挥印和尚引导我们登山去莲花庵，顺着山涧、踏着积雪上山。
English: The monk waved a sign to guide us up the mountain to the lotus hermitage, and we climbed up the mountain along the ridge and over the snow.

古文：涧水三转，下注而深泓者，曰白龙潭；再上而停涵石间者，曰丹井。井旁有石突起，曰 药臼 ，曰 药铫 即小铁锅。
现代文：涧水三次转弯，下流注入深潭中，叫 白龙潭 ；再往上，山涧水在石间的涵洞停歇，那涵洞叫 丹井 ；丹井旁有石头突起，叫 药臼 、 药铫 。
English: Surabaya water turns three times, and the downstream flows into a deep pool, called Bai Longtan; further up, the mountain water stops in a culvert between the stones, that culvert is called Tansui; there are stone protrusions next to the Tansui, called yakitori, yakitori.

古文：宛转随溪，群峰环耸，木石掩映。
现代文：随着溪水宛转前行，四周有耸立的群峰环绕，树林与山石相互掩映。
English: As the stream turns and moves forward, there are towering peaks all around, and the trees and rocks reflect each other.

古文：如此一里，得一庵，僧印我他出，不能登其堂。
现代文：在这样的景致里走了一里路，找到一座寺庵，印我和尚因他事外出，我们不能进入庵堂歇憩。
English: In such a landscape, I walked a mile and found a temple hermitage, but I and Shang were out because of other things, and we could not enter the hermitage to rest.

古文：堂中香炉及钟鼓架，俱天然古木根所为。
现代文：只见庵堂中的香炉及钟、鼓架，都是用天然的古树根雕凿而成。
English: The incense burner, bell and drum stand in the hermitage are all carved from the natural roots of ancient trees.

古文：遂返寺宿。
现代文：于是返回祥符寺住宿。
English: So they returned to Shōfu-ji Temple to stay.

古文：初四日兀坐枯坐听雪溜竟日。
现代文：初四这天整天枯坐着听雪滑落的声音。
English: On the fourth day of my junior year, I sat all day listening to the sound of snow falling.

古文：初五日云气甚恶，余强卧至午起。
现代文：初五这天阴云、寒气很险恶，我强迫自己睡在床上，到中午才起床。
English: On the day of the fifth day of the lunar month, it was cloudy and the cold was very dangerous. I forced myself to sleep in bed and did not get up until noon.

古文：挥印言慈光寺颇近，令其徒引。
现代文：挥印和尚说慈光寺离得很近，让他的徒弟带领我们去游览。
English: The waving monk said that Ciguang Temple was very close, and asked his apprentice to take us on a tour.

古文：过汤地，仰见一崖，中悬鸟道，两旁泉泻如练。
现代文：经过温泉池，仰身见一山崖，其中间悬着艰险的小道，小道两旁倾泻而下的泉水就像雪白的绢匹。
English: After passing the hot spring pool, I looked up and saw a mountain cliff, with a perilous path hanging in the middle. The spring water pouring down on both sides of the path was like snow-white horseshoe crabs.

古文：余即从此攀跻上，泉光云气，撩绕衣裾。
现代文：我就从这里攀登上去，泉水的闪光与云气，在衣服前后撩绕。
English: I climb up from here, the sparkle of the spring water and the cloud haunt my clothes.

古文：已转而右，则茅庵上下，磬韵香烟，穿石而出，即慈光寺也。
现代文：后转向右走，就见茅草寺庵上下，磐钱的声音与泉袅而起的香烟，穿越石头散发出来，这就是慈光寺。
English: After turning to the right, you will see the thatched temple hermitage up and down, the sound of rock money and the cigarette smoke rising from the spring are emitted through the stone, which is Jiguang Temple.

古文：寺旧名珠砂庵。
现代文：慈光寺旧名殊砂庵。
English: Jiko-ji Temple's former famous sand hermitage.

古文：比丘为余言： 山顶诸静室，径为雪封者两月。
现代文：和尚对我说： 山顶上的各处静室，其道路被积雪封闭已两个月时间。
English: The monk said to me, "There are still rooms all over the mountaintop, and the roads have been blocked by snow for the past two months.

古文：今早遣人送粮，山半雪没腰而返。 
现代文：今早派遣人送去粮食，因山半腰积雪厚达人腰，无法通过而返回。 
English: This morning, people were sent to deliver food, but they were unable to return because the snow was up to waist-deep on the mountain.

古文：余兴大阻，由大路二里下山，遂引被卧。
现代文：我的兴致受到极大阻碍，就从大道走了二里路下山，回到住所，拉过棉被睡觉。
English: My interest was greatly hindered, so I walked two miles down the mountain from the main road, returned to the residence, pulled over the quilt and went to sleep.

古文：初六日天色甚朗。
现代文：初六这天天色很晴朗。
English: On the 6th day of the first month, the sky was very clear.

古文：觅导者各携筇手杖上山，过慈光寺。
现代文：寻觅到一位向导，各自拿着炸竹杖上山，经过慈光寺。
English: They found a guide, and each of them went up the mountain with a pair of bamboo sticks, passing by Jiguang Temple.

古文：从左上，石峰环夹，其中石级为积雪所平，一望如玉。
现代文：从左面往上攀登，石峰环绕相夹，其中的石级被积雪覆盖得平平坦坦，一眼望去就像白玉一般。
English: Climbing up from the left, surrounded by stone peaks, one of the stone steps is covered with snow and is so flat that it looks like a white marble.

古文：蔬木茸茸中，仰见群峰盘结，天都独巍然上挺。
现代文：稀疏的树木披满茸茸的雪花，在其中仰视黄山群峰盘根错节，唯独天都峰巍然挺立于群峰之上。
English: The sparse trees are covered with fluffy snowflakes, where you can look up at the peaks of the Yellow Mountains, which are intertwined, except for the Tiandu Peak, which stands tall above the peaks.

古文：数里，级愈峻，雪愈深，其阴处冻雪成冰，坚滑不容着趾。
现代文：往上走数里路，石级越来越险峻，积雪越来越深，那些背阴的地方雪已冻结成冰，坚硬而溜滑，不容脚踩稳。
English: A few miles up, the stone steps get steeper and steeper, the snow gets deeper and deeper, and the snow in the gloomy places has frozen into ice, hard and slippery, and it is not safe to step on.

古文：余独前，持杖凿冰，得一孔置前趾，再凿一孔，以移后趾。
现代文：我独自一人前进，拿着竹杖凿冰，挖出一个孔放置前脚，再凿一个孔，以移动后脚。
English: I walked alone, using a bamboo cane to cut through the ice, digging a hole to place my front foot and another to move my back foot.

古文：从行者俱循此法得度。
现代文：跟从我的人都沿用这一方法得以通过。
English: My followers have all used this method to get through.

古文：上至平冈，则莲花、云门诸峰，争奇竞秀，若为天都拥卫者。
现代文：往上走到平冈，看见莲花峰、云门峰等各座山峰争奇竞秀，就像是替天都峰作护卫。
English: When you walk up to Hiraoka, you will see mountains such as Lotus Peak and Yunmen Peak competing with each other, as if they were guarding the Heavenly Capital Peak.

古文：由此而入，绝岘大小成两截的山危崖，尽皆怪松悬结。高者不盈丈，低仅数寸，平顶短髲，盘根虬干，愈短愈老，愈小愈奇，不意奇山中又有此奇品也！
现代文：从这里进去，无论是极陡峭的山，或是高峻的石崖上，全都是怪异的松树悬空盘结，高的不超过二丈，矮的仅有几寸，平顶上的松树松针很短，盘根错节而枝干弯曲如虫，越是短粗的越是老松，越是矮小的越是怪异，不意这奇山中又有此种奇异的品种呵！
English: Entering from here, whether it is a very steep mountain or a steep cliff, there are all strange pine trees hanging in the air, no more than two feet high, short only a few inches, the pine needles on the flat top are very short, the roots are intertwined and the branches are bent like insects, the shorter and thicker the older the pine, the shorter and smaller the more strange, and suddenly there is such a strange variety in this strange mountain!

古文：松石交映间，冉冉慢慢地僧一群从天而下，俱合掌言： 阻雪山中已三月，今以觅粮勉到此。
现代文：在奇松怪石交相辉映之间，一群和尚仿佛是从天而降，向我们慢慢走来，都合起掌说： 被雪阻隔在山中已三个月，现在因为寻觅粮食勉强走到这里。
English: A group of monks seemed to have fallen from the sky and were walking slowly towards us. They raised their hands and said: "We have been in the mountains for three months, cut off by snow, and now we have come here reluctantly in search of food."

古文：公等何由得上也？ 
现代文：诸公为什么得以上山来？  
English: Why did the princes have to come up the mountain?

古文：且言： 我等前海诸庵，俱已下山，后海山路尚未通，惟莲花洞可行耳。 
现代文：又说： 我们前海各庵的僧人，都已下山；后海的山路尚未通行，只有莲花洞的路可以走了。 
English: He also said, "We, the monks of the monasteries in Qianhai, have all gone down the mountain; the mountain path in Houhai has not yet been passed, and only the path of the Lotus Cave can be walked.

古文：已而从天都峰侧攀而上，透峰罅而下，东转即莲花洞路也。
现代文：后来，就从天都峰侧面攀援而上，穿过山峰缝隙下山，向东转就是去莲花洞的路了。
English: Later, I climbed up from the side of Tiandu Peak, went down through the mountain crevice, and turned east to the Lotus Cave.

古文：余急于光明顶、石笋矼之胜，遂循莲花峰而北。上下数次，至天门。
现代文：我急切地想游览光明顶、石笋狂的胜景，于是顺着莲花峰向北走，上上下下好几次，到达天门。
English: I was eager to visit the splendid scenery of Guangmingding Peak and Shijiazhuang Mountain, so I walked north along the Lotus Peak, up and down several times, and arrived at the Gate of Heaven.

古文：两壁夹立，中阔摩肩，高数十丈，仰面而度，阴森悚骨。
现代文：天门两边有刀削般陡直的石壁相夹，中间宽仅能摩肩而行，高则数十丈，仰面向上度量，阴森得令人毛骨惊然。
English: On both sides of the Heaven's Gate, there are stone walls that are as steep and straight as if they were cut with a knife. The width in the middle is only shoulder-width wide, while the height is several tens of meters, measured from the back up. It is so gloomy that it makes your hair stand on end.

古文：其内积雪更深，凿冰上跻，过此得平顶，即所谓前海也。
现代文：天门里积雪更深，凿出冰洞而向上攀登，走过这里就到平顶，就是人们所说的前海了。
English: In Tianmen, the snow was deeper, so they cut an ice cave and climbed up. When they passed through here, they reached the flat top, which is what people call Qianhai.

古文：由此更上一峰，至平天矼。
现代文：从这里再登上一峰，到达平天斑。
English: From here, climb another peak to reach Ping Tian Bao.

古文：矼之兀突独耸者，为光明顶。
现代文：平天狂上独耸而突兀的地方，是光明顶。
English: The place that stands out and stands out above the ordinary is the bright top.

古文：由矼而下，即所谓后海也。
现代文：从平天狂向下走，就是所谓的后海了。
English: Going down from the flat sky to the crazy sky is the so-called back sea.

古文：盖平天矼阳为前海，阴为后海，乃极高处，四面皆峻坞，此独若平地。
现代文：大约平天斑的南面是前海，北面是后海，就是最高的地方，四面都是险峻的凹地，唯独这里有如平地。
English: The south side of the roughly flat sky patch is the Qianhai, and the north side is the Houhai, which is the highest place. All four sides are steep depressions, except here, which is flat.

古文：前海之前，天都莲花二峰最峻，其阳属徽之歙地名，其阴属宁之太平。
现代文：前海的前面，天都、莲花两座山峰最高峻，它南面属于徽州府的款县，它的北面属于宁国府的太平县。
English: In front of Qianhai, Tiandu and Lotus are the two highest peaks. Its south side belongs to Xing County of Huizhou Prefecture, and its north side belongs to Taiping County of Ningguo Prefecture.

古文：余至平天矼，欲望光明顶而上。
现代文：我到平天班时，很想朝光明顶攀登而上。
English: When I got to the weekday shift, I really wanted to climb up to the top of the bright.

古文：路已三十里，腹甚枵变虚，即肚子很饿，遂入矼后一庵。
现代文：山路已走了三十里，肚子感到很饥饿，于是走进平天班后面的一座庵里。
English: After walking thirty miles through the mountains, feeling very hungry, he went into a hermitage behind the work shift.

古文：庵僧俱踞石向阳。
现代文：庵里的和尚都坐在石头上面朝南方。
English: The monks in the hermitage all sit on the stone and face south.

古文：主僧曰智空，见客色饥，先以粥饷。
现代文：主持和尚名叫智空，看见客人饥饿的神色，先用稀饭款待。
English: The presiding monk, whose name was Zhikong, saw that the guests were hungry, so he first treated them to porridge.

古文：且曰： 新日太皎，恐非老睛。 
现代文：并且说： 刚出来的太阳太明亮，恐怕以后不是长久的晴天气候。 
English: And he said: "The sun that has just come out is too bright, I'm afraid it won't be a long-lasting sunny weather.

古文：因指一僧谓余曰： 公有余力，可先登光明顶而后中食，则今日犹可抵石笋矼，宿是师处矣。 
现代文：于是指着一位和尚对我说： 徐公如果有余力，可以先登览光明顶而后再吃中饭，那今天还可以抵达石笋狂，晚上在这位禅师处歇宿。 
English: So he pointed to a monk and said to me: "Xu Gong, if you have enough energy, you can first visit the top of Guangming and then have lunch, then today you can also reach Shijiazhuang and stay at this Zen master's place in the evening."

古文：余如言登顶，则天都、莲花并肩其前，翠微、三海门环绕于后，下瞰绝壁峭岫，罗列坞中，即丞相原也。
现代文：我照他所说的登上光明顶，只见天都、莲花两峰在前方并肩而立，翠微、三海门在后面环绕，向下鸟瞰，极陡峭的山崖和峻峭的山岭，罗列于大山坞中，那就是皿相原了。
English: As he said, I climbed to the top of Guangming Peak, only to see Tiandu, the two peaks of the Lotus Flower, standing side by side in front, and Tsuiwei and Sanhaimen surrounded in the back. From a bird's-eye view, the extremely steep cliffs and steep mountains were lined up in a large dock. That was the dish.

古文：顶前一石，伏而复起，势若中断，独悬坞中，上有怪松盘盖。
现代文：光明顶前的一巨石，低伏一段后又重新峙立，其势就如中断一样，孤独地悬空于山坞中，石上有怪异的松树盘根错节地覆盖着。
English: A huge rock in front of the bright top, after lying low for a while and then standing up again, its momentum is like a break, hanging alone in the dock, with strange pine trees on the rock covered with tangled roots.

古文：余侧身攀踞其上，而浔阳踞大顶相对，各夸胜绝。
现代文：我侧身攀登到巨石上坐着，得阳叔翁则坐在光明大顶上与我相对，各自夸耀景致的极为优美。
English: I climbed sideways to sit on the boulder, and Duryang Shu Weng sat opposite me on the bright summit, each boasting of the extremely beautiful scenery.

古文：下入庵，黄粱已熟。
现代文：走下光明顶进入庵里，黄粱米饭已做熟了。
English: After stepping down from the bright top and entering the hermitage, the yellow glutinous rice was already cooked.

古文：饭后，北向过一岭，踯躅菁莽中，入一庵，曰狮子林，即智空所指宿处。
现代文：饭后，向北走，经过一座山岭，在草木茂盛的林莽中徘徊，走进一座庵中，庵名叫狮子林，就是智空所指点的歇宿之处。
English: After the meal, he walked northward, passing a mountain range, wandering through a lush forest, and entering a hermitage. The hermitage was called Lion Forest, which was the resting place pointed out by Zhikong.

古文：主僧霞光，已待我庵前矣。
现代文：狮子林的主持和尚霞光，已在庵前等待我了。
English: The leader of the lion forest, monk Xia Guang, was already waiting for me in front of the hermitage.

古文：遂指庵北二峰曰： 公可先了此胜。 
现代文：他指着庵北面的两座山峰说： 徐公可以先行了结这处胜景的游览。 
English: Pointing to the two peaks to the north of the hermitage, he said, "Xu Gong can take a tour of this scenic spot first."

古文：从之。
现代文：我听从他的话。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：俯窥其阴，则乱峰列岫，争奇并起。
现代文：俯身窥视两山峰的北面，只见峰峦众多、山岭并列，一起耸立着争相显示奇异。
English: Peering down at the north face of the two peaks, one can only see a multitude of peaks and ridges, mountains side by side, towering together and competing to show the strangeness.

古文：循之西，崖忽中断，架木连之，上有松一株，可攀引而度，所谓接引崖也。
现代文：顺着两峰往西走，山崖忽然中断，架设木桥将两边连通，上面有一棵松树，可以攀引着越过木桥，即是所谓的接引崖了。
English: Walking along the two peaks to the west, the cliff suddenly breaks, erecting a wooden bridge to connect the two sides. There is a pine tree on top, which can be climbed over the wooden bridge, that is, the so-called connection cliff.

古文：度崖，空石罅而上，乱石危缀间，构木为石，其中亦可置足，然不如踞石下窥更雄胜耳。
现代文：乱石间连缀的地方很危险，以木料作石梁相架，也可以在其中行走，然而不如坐在岩石上往下窥探，景致更壮丽。
English: It is dangerous to walk in the area where the stones are interlaced. The wooden beams are used as a photo frame. However, it is better to sit on the rocks and look down. The view is even more magnificent.

古文：下崖，循而东，里许，为石笋矼。
现代文：走下接引崖，顺小路往东行一里多路，就是石笋砚。
English: Stepping off the overhanging cliff and following the path eastwards for more than a mile, you come to Shizhao.

古文：矼脊斜亘，两夹悬坞中，乱峰森罗，其西一面即接引崖所窥者。
现代文：石笋杠山脊倾斜连绵，两夹崖壁悬于山坞中，乱峰森罗万象，它西边的一面就是在接引崖上所窥视的地方。
English: The rocky ridge slopes continuously, two cliff walls hang in the dockyard, the turbulent peak is all-encompassing, and its western side is the place you can see on the jutting cliff.

古文：矼侧一峰突起，多奇石怪松。
现代文：石笋征侧面一山峰突起，上面很多奇石怪松。
English: A mountain peak protrudes from the side of Shishijie, with many strange pines on it.

古文：登之，俯瞰壑中，正与接引崖对瞰，峰回岫转，顿改前观。
现代文：登上山峰顶，俯瞰山谷中，正好与接引崖对视，峰回山转，顿改前观。
English: Climbing to the top of the mountain, overlooking the valley, just facing the jutting cliff, turning the peak back to the mountain, and suddenly changing the front view.

古文：下峰，则落照拥树，谓明晴可卜，踊跃归庵。
现代文：走下山峰，只见夕阳拥围着松树，以为明天的晴朗是可以预卜了，不由得跳跃欢呼着赶回狮子林庵。
English: Walking down the mountain, I saw the sunset surrounded by pine trees. I thought that tomorrow's sunny weather could be predicted, and I couldn't help jumping and cheering to get back to Lion Forest Lodge.

古文：霞光设茶，引登前楼。
现代文：霞光主持准备好茶水，引导我登上前楼。
English: Xia Guang, the host, prepared tea and led me up to the front building.

古文：西望碧痕一缕，余疑山影。
现代文：向西眺望，夭边有一缕碧绿色的痕迹。我怀疑是山峰的阴影。
English: Looking to the west, there is a trace of turquoise on the far side. I suspect it is the shadow of a mountain peak.

古文：僧谓： 山影夜望甚近，此当是云气。 
现代文：霞光和尚说： 山影夜晚看起来很近，这应当是云气。 
English: Xia Guang Monk said, "Mountain shadow looks close in the evening, it must be clouds.

古文：余默然，知为雨兆也。
现代文：我一下子沉默无语，知道这是要下雨的预兆了。
English: I fell silent and knew it was a sign of rain.

古文：初七日四山雾合。
现代文：初七日四周的山都被雾掩合成一体了。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, the mountains all around were covered with fog and became one.

古文：少顷，庵之东北已开，西南腻甚指雾气非常凝滞厚重，若以庵为界者，即狮子峰亦在时出时没间。
现代文：一会儿，庵东北面的雾已经散开，而西南方的雾还很浓腻，如果以庵为分界处，就是很近的狮子峰也在雾中时现时没。
English: In a moment, the fog on the northeast side of the hermitage had dispersed, but the fog on the southwest side was still very thick. If the hermitage was the dividing point, the nearby Lion Peak was also in the fog.

古文：晨餐后，由接引崖践雪下。
现代文：早餐后，由接引崖踏着积雪下山。
English: After breakfast, we walked down the snow-covered mountain from the overhanging cliff.

古文：坞半一峰突起，上有一松裂石而出，巨干高不及二尺，而斜拖曲结，蟠翠三丈余，其根穿石上下，几与峰等，所谓 扰龙松 是也。
现代文：山坞半腰上一座山峰突起，峰上有棵松树挣裂开石头而出，粗大的树干却高不到二尺，向斜面沿伸，弯曲盘结，翠绿的枝叶曲折环绕有三丈多长，树根上上下下穿过石岩，其长度几乎与山峰之高相等，这就是所谓的 扰龙松 了。
English: Halfway up the dock, a mountain peak rises. On the peak, a pine tree breaks through the stone. The thick trunk is less than two feet high, stretching along the slope, bending and twisting. The emerald green twists and turns of the branches and leaves are more than three feet long, and the roots of the tree go up and down through the stone rock. Its length is almost equal to the height of the mountain peak. This is the so-called disturbing dragon pine.

古文：攀玩移时，望狮子峰已出，遂杖而西。
现代文：攀登游玩了一段时间，看看已走出狮子峰，于是拄着手杖往西走。
English: He climbed for a while to see if he had made it out of Lion's Peak, so he walked west with a cane.

古文：是峰在庵西南，为案山。
现代文：这座山峰在狮子林庵的西南方，叫案山。
English: This peak in the south-west of Lion's Grove is called Shanshan.

古文：二里，蹑其巅，则三面拔立坞中，其下森峰列岫，自石笋、接引两坞迤逦至此，环结又成一胜。
现代文：走二里路后，登上案山之巅，三面拔地而起峙立山坞中，山下面是森罗万象的峰峦和众多的山岭，从石笋狂、接引崖两处山坞曲折连绵到这里，环绕盘结又形成一处胜景。
English: After a two-mile walk, climb to the top of the mountain, stand on three sides of the dock, and the bottom of the mountain is full of peaks and numerous mountains. From the stone pier and the connecting cliff, the two docks continue to meander here, and the surrounding coils form a scenic spot.

古文：登眺间，沉雾渐爽舒朗，急由石笋矼北转而下，正昨日峰头所望森阴径也。
现代文：登高远眺之间，浓雾渐渐轻爽开朗，急忙从石笋斑北面楚转而下，正是昨天在峰顶所看见的阴森道路了。
English: As we climbed higher and higher, the dense fog gradually became lighter and brighter, and we hurriedly turned down from the rocky north face, which was the gloomy road we saw at the peak yesterday.

古文：群峰或上或下，或巨或纤，或直或欹，与身穿绕而过。
现代文：群峰有的很高有的很低，有的巨大有的纤小，有的峭直有的倾斜，行进其中往往察身穿绕而过。
English: Some of the peaks are very high and some are very low, some are huge and some are small, some are steep and some are sloping. When traveling through them, you often look around and pass by.

古文：俯窥辗顾，步步生奇，但壑深雪厚，一步一悚。
现代文：俯仰窥视，辗转回顾，每走一步都产生新奇的感觉；但是山谷深而积雪厚，每走一步都有一种恐惧。
English: Peering up, looking back, there is a sense of novelty in every step; but the valley is deep and the snow is thick, and there is a fear in every step.

古文：行五里，左峰腋一窦透明，曰 天窗 。
现代文：走了五里路，见左边山峰腋部有一孔穴透出光明，称作 天窗 。
English: After walking for five miles, you will see a hole on the left side of the peak, called the skylight, that lets light through.

古文：又前，峰旁一石突起，作面壁状，则 僧坐石 也。
现代文：又前行，山峰旁一石突起，作面壁的形状，则是 僧坐石 了。
English: Further ahead, a rock protrudes from the side of the mountain, creating the shape of a face wall. It is a monk sitting on a rock.

古文：下五里，径稍夷，循涧而行。
现代文：往下走五里路，道路稍稍平坦，顺着山涧水前行。
English: Go down the five-mile road, the road is slightly flat, and go along the mountain stream.

古文：忽前涧乱石纵横，路为之塞。
现代文：忽然前面山涧中乱石纵横，路为之阻塞。
English: All of a sudden, there was a pile-up of rocks in the mountains ahead, blocking the road.

古文：越石久之，一阙新崩，片片欲堕，始得路。
现代文：越过乱石走了很久，见到新崩开的一个缺口，片片石壁似乎就要堕落，才重新找到行路。
English: After walking for a long time over the jumbled stones, I saw a newly opened gap, and it seemed that every piece of the stone wall was about to fall, before I found my way again.

古文：仰视峰顶，黄痕一方，中间绿字宛然可辨，是谓 天牌 ，亦谓 仙人榜 。
现代文：仰视峰顶，有黄色的一方痕迹，中间绿色的字宛然可辨认，这就叫 天牌 ，也叫作 仙人榜 。
English: Looking up at the peak, there are traces of the yellow side, and the green word in the middle is clearly recognizable. This is called the sky card, also known as the fairy list.

古文：又前，鲤鱼石；又前，白龙池。
现代文：又前行，到鲤鱼石；再往前行，是白龙池。
English: Further on, you will come to Eel Rock. Further on, you will come to Bai Long Pond.

古文：共十五里，一茅出涧边，为松谷庵旧基。
现代文：总计走了十五里路，一座茅庐出现在涧水边，这是松谷庵的旧址。
English: After a total of fifteen miles, a thatched cottage appeared on the edge of Surabaya, which is the former site of Matsutani-an.

古文：再五里，循溪东西行，又过五水，则松谷庵矣。
现代文：再走五里路，顺着溪水边向东西方向走，又渡过五条溪水，就到达松谷庵了。
English: After another five-mile walk, following the stream edge in an east-west direction, and crossing five streams, you will reach Matsutani-an.

古文：再循溪下，溪边香气袭人，则一梅亭亭正发，山寒稽雪，至是始芳。
现代文：再顺着溪水往下走，溪边阵阵香气袭人，是一棵亭亭玉立的梅树正在开花，山谷严寒到处积雪，到这里才开始有花香芬芳。
English: Then we walked down the stream, and the aroma of the stream was overwhelming. A majestic plum tree was in bloom, and the valley was covered with snow. It was only here that the flowers began to smell fragrant.

古文：抵青龙潭，一泓深碧，更会两溪，比白龙潭势既雄壮，而大石磊落，奔流乱注，远近群峰环拱，亦佳境也。
现代文：抵达青龙潭，这是一乱深得碧绿的水，又汇合了两条溪水，比之白龙潭，气势既雄壮，又有突兀的大石，奔流的溪水向潭中乱注，远处近处的群峰环卫着，也是一处优美的景观。
English: Arriving at Qinglongtan, this is a deep turmoil of turquoise-green water, and the confluence of two streams, compared to Bailongtan, the momentum is both majestic and jagged boulders, rushing streams pour into the pool, the distant peaks are surrounded, and it is also a beautiful landscape.

古文：还餐松谷，往宿旧庵。
现代文：回到松谷庵吃晚饭，在松谷庵旧址的茅庐里往宿。
English: Return to Matsutani-an for dinner, and stay overnight in the thatched hut on the former site of Matsutani-an.

古文：余初至松谷，疑已平地，及是询之，须下岭二重，二十里方得平地，至太平县共三十五里云。
现代文：我初到松谷庵时，猜测已经是平地，等到这里询问人，说是还必须走下二重山岭，二十里山路后方能够找到平地，到太平县共有三十五里路云云。
English: When I first arrived at Matsutani-an, my guess was that it was flat land. When I asked people here, they said that I still had to walk down the double mountain range. Twenty miles behind the mountain road can find flat land, and there are a total of thirty-five miles to Taiping County.

古文：初八日拟寻石笋奥境，竟为天夺，浓雾迷漫。
现代文：初八日准备去寻觅石笋狂的奥秘之境，不料竟然被上天所剥夺。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, he was preparing to go in search of the mysterious land of Ishizuchi-madness, but was unexpectedly deprived by the heavens.

古文：抵狮子林，风愈大，雾亦愈厚。
现代文：浓雾迷漫山野，抵达狮子林时，风更大，雾也愈加浓厚。
English: A thick fog shrouded the mountains. When we arrived at the lion forest, the wind was stronger and the fog thicker.

古文：余急欲趋炼丹台，遂转西南。
现代文：我急切想要疾趋炼丹台，于是转向西南方向。
English: I was eager to rush to the dance hall, so I turned to the southwest.

古文：三里，为雾所迷，偶得一庵，入焉。
现代文：走三里路，被浓雾迷失了道路，偶然得见一庵，就进入庵里。
English: After walking for three miles, the road was lost in the thick fog. By chance, he saw a hermitage and entered it.

古文：雨大至，遂宿此。
现代文：大雨下起来，于是只好在此住宿。
English: It started to rain heavily, so we had to stay here.

古文：初九日逾午少霁晴。
现代文：初九日过了中午，天气稍稍晴朗。
English: After noon on the 9th day of the first month, the weather was slightly sunny.

古文：庵僧慈明，甚夸西南一带峰岫不减石笋矼，有 秃颅朝天 、 达摩面壁 诸名。
现代文：庵里的和尚慈明，很夸奖庵西南一带的山峰岩洞，认为不减石笋狂的险奇，有 秃颅朝天 、 达摩面壁 诸名胜可供游览。
English: The monk in the hermitage, Ciming, highly praised the mountain peaks and caves around the southwest of the hermitage, and believed that there were no less dangerous wonders, including the Bald Head of the Morning Sky, the Damo Face Wall, and other places of interest to visit.

古文：余拉浔阳蹈乱流至壑中，北向即翠微诸峦，南向即丹台诸坞，大抵可与狮峰竞驾，未得比肩石笋也。
现代文：我拉着得阳叔翁踏过乱流来到山谷之中，向北走就是翠微峰等各峰峦，向南走就是炼丹台等各山坞，景致大体上可与狮子峰并驾齐驱，而不能与石笋班比肩一致了。
English: I pulled Dedyang Shu Weng across the turbulent current and came to the middle of the valley. To the north are the peaks such as Tsui Wei Feng, and to the south are the docks such as Lingtai. The scenery can generally keep pace with Lion Peak, but can not match the Shijiazhuang class.

古文：雨踵至，急返庵。
现代文：雨接踵而至，我们急忙返回庵中。
English: As the rain continued, we hurried back to the hermitage.

古文：初十日晨雨如注，午少停。
现代文：初十日早晨，大雨如注，中午时稍为停了一会。
English: On the morning of the 10th day of the first month, it rained heavily. At noon, it stopped for a while.

古文：策杖二里，过飞来峰，此平天矼之西北岭也。
现代文：拄手杖走二里路，经过飞来峰，这是平天斑西北面的山岭。
English: Walking two miles with a cane, he passed by Feilai Peak, which is a mountain range in the northwest of Ping Tianba.

古文：其阳坞中，峰壁森峭，正与丹台环绕。
现代文：飞来峰南面的山坞中，山峰壁立陡峭，正好与炼丹台相互环绕。
English: In the dockyard on the south side of Fei Lai Feng, the mountain wall stands steeply, just surrounding the Refinery.

古文：二里，抵台。
现代文：二里路后，抵达炼丹台。
English: After two miles, they arrived at the dance hall.

古文：一峰西垂，顶颇平伏。三面壁翠合沓重叠，前一小峰起坞中，其外则翠微峰、三海门蹄股拱峙。
现代文：向西垂的一座山峰，峰顶很平坦，三面有青翠绿树覆盖的岩壁重重叠叠，前面一座小峰峦突起于山坞中，山坞外则是翠微峰、三海门像脚与腿一般地环卫峙立着。
English: A mountain that slopes to the west, the peak is very flat, the rock walls covered with green trees on three sides are overlapping, a small peak in front protrudes in the dockyard, the dockyard is surrounded by green peaks, and the three sea gates stand like feet and legs.

古文：登眺久之。
现代文：登上峰顶四处眺望了很久。
English: After climbing to the top, I looked around for a long time.

古文：东南一里，绕出平天矼下。
现代文：向东南方走一里路，从天平斑下绕出来。
English: Walk southeast for one mile to get out from under the balance patch.

古文：雨复大至，急下天门。
现代文：大雨重又下起来，急忙走下天门。
English: Heavy rain fell again, and I hurried down the Heavenly Gate.

古文：两崖隘肩，崖额飞泉，俱从人顶泼下。
现代文：两旁狭隘得仅有肩宽，崖顶上的飞泉，都是从人头上泼下来。
English: The sides are so narrow that they are only shoulder-width apart, and the flying fountains on the cliff top are all thrown down from people's heads.

古文：出天门，危崖悬叠，路缘崖半，比后海一带森峰峭壁，又转一境。 海螺石 即在崖旁，宛转酷肖，来时忽不及察，今行雨中，颇稔其异，询之始知。
现代文：走出天门，高耸的山崖悬空重叠，道路沿着山崖半腰延伸，比之后海一带森严的山峰、陡峭的岩壁，又转变为另一种境地。 海螺石 就在岩崖旁边，宛转的形态非常像只海螺。来的时候忽略了，来不及仔细观察，现在在雨中行走，倒很熟悉它奇异之处，这是询间别人后才知道的。
English: Out of the Heaven's Gate, the towering cliffs overlap in the sky, the road extends halfway along the cliff, and the wooded peaks and steep rock walls of the sea area are transformed into another situation.Conchite It is next to the cliff, and the shape of the turning point is very similar to a conch.I ignored it when I came, and it was too late to observe it carefully.Now, walking in the rain, I am very familiar with its strangeness, which I only knew after asking others.

古文：已趋大悲庵，由其旁复趋一庵，宿悟空上人处。
现代文：后来去大悲庵，从大悲庵旁又再去另一庵，在悟空上人处宿歇。
English: Later, he went to Daiheian, and from Daiheian he went to another hermitage, where he stayed with Goku Shonin.

古文：十一日上百步云梯。
现代文：十一日登上百步云梯。
English: On the 11th, I climbed the hundred-step ladder.

古文：梯磴插天，足趾及腮，而磴石倾侧崡岈，兀兀挺立高耸欲动，前下时以雪掩其险，至此骨意俱悚。
现代文：百步云梯的石瞪很陡，似乎一直插入了蓝天，爬石瞪时脚趾几乎触到脸腮，而且石瞪的石条倾斜、中间空隙很大，高凸突兀，似乎在动。先前下山时因积雪掩盖了它的险要，到现在看清了不觉毛骨和心里都一齐恐惧起来。
English: The stone ledge of the hundred-step cloud ladder is very steep, it seems to have been inserted into the blue sky. When climbing the stone ledge, the toes almost touch the cheek, and the stone ledge of the stone ledge is inclined, the middle gap is very large, and the high convex ridge seems to be moving. Previously, when descending the mountain, the snow covered its perimeter, and now I see it clearly, I feel fear in my bones and in my heart.

古文：上云梯，即登莲花峰道。
现代文：上完百步云梯，随即登上去莲花峰的路。
English: After climbing the hundred-step ladder, the road to the lotus peak is immediately climbed.

古文：又下转，由峰侧而入，即文殊院、莲花洞道也。
现代文：又向下转，由莲花峰侧面前进，就是通向文殊院、莲花洞的路了。
English: Turn down again and walk forward from the side of Lotus Peak, which is the road leading to Wenshu Academy and Lotus Cave.

古文：以雨不止，乃下山，入汤院，复浴。
现代文：因为雨一直不停，于是下山，进温泉院里，再次沐浴。
English: Since it had been raining incessantly, I went down the mountain, entered the hot spring resort, and bathed again.

古文：由汤口出，二十里抵芳村，十五里抵东潭，溪涨不能渡而止。
现代文：由汤口出来，行二十里路抵达芳村，走十五里抵达东潭，溪水暴涨不能过渡而停下来。
English: From Tangkou, travel 20 miles to reach Fangcun, and travel 15 miles to reach Dongtan. The rapid rise of the stream cannot be transitioned and stopped.

古文：黄山之流，如松谷、焦村，俱北出太平；即南流如汤口，亦北转太平入江；惟汤口西有流，至芳村而巨，南趋岩镇，至府西北与绩溪会。
现代文：黄山的溪流，如松谷溪、焦村溪，都是向北流出太平县；即便向南流的汤口溪，也向北转，流到太平县后再流向长江；唯独汤口西边有条溪流，到芳村而成巨流，向南流去岩镇，到徽州府西北面与绩溪会合。
English: The streams of Huangshan, such as Songgu Creek and Jiaocun Creek, all flow north out of Taiping County; even the south-flowing Tangkou Creek turns north and flows to Taiping County before flowing to the Yangtze River; except that there is a stream on the west side of Tangkou, which becomes a huge stream at Fangcun, flows south to Yanzhen, and meets Jiexi in the northwest of Huizhou.

