古文：昔武王伐纣，迁九鼎于雒邑，伯夷、叔齐薄之，饿死于首阳，不食其禄，周犹称盛德焉。
现代文：当年，周武王讨伐商纣王，灭掉商后，把象征国家政权的九鼎从商都迁到雒邑，伯夷、叔齐认为武王不忠不孝而耻食周粟，饿死在首阳山，连周人尚且称赞他们有高尚的品德。
English: In that year, King Zhou Wu fought against the merchants of the Qin Dynasty. After eliminating the merchants, he moved the Jiu Ding, a symbol of state power, from the capital of the merchants to the city of Jiuyue. Bo Yi and Uncle Qi thought that King Wu was disloyal and unfilial, but he was ashamed to eat corn poppies and starved to death on Shouyang Mountain. Even the people of Zhou praised them for their noble character.

古文：然孔子贤此二人，以为 不降其志，不辱其身 也。
现代文：孔子认为他们二人很贤德，称赞他们 不改变自己的志向，不使自身遭到羞辱。 
English: Confucius thought that the two of them were very virtuous and praised them for not changing their aspirations and not allowing themselves to be humiliated.

古文：而《孟子》亦云： 闻伯夷之风者，贪夫廉，懦夫有立志 ； 奋乎百世之上，百世之下莫不兴起，非贤人而能若是乎！ 
现代文：孟子也说： 听到伯夷的风范，足以使贪婪的人变得廉洁，使懦弱的人树立志向；  在百代之前振奋行为，令百代之后无不深受鼓舞，如若不是圣贤之人谁能如此呢？ 
English: Mencius also said, "Hearing the example of the warrior is enough to purify the greedy, and inspire the cowardly; to inspire the behavior of a hundred generations ago, and to inspire the behavior of a hundred generations later. If it is not a sage, who can do so?

古文：汉兴有园公、绮里季、夏黄公，甪里先生，此四人者，当秦之世，避而入商雒深山，以待天下之定也。
现代文：汉王朝兴起后，有园公、绮里季、夏黄公、角里先生，这四个人在秦王朝统治天下时，逃避到商雒山深处，等待天下平定。
English: After the rise of the Han Dynasty, when the Qin Dynasty ruled the world, these four people, Yu Yuan Gong, Bao Liji, Xia Huang Gong, and Mr. Qunli, fled to the depths of the Shangluo Mountains to wait for the world to be pacified.

古文：自高祖闻而召之，不至。
现代文：汉高祖听说后召见他们，他们没有来。
English: When Henkel heard of this, he summoned them, but they did not come.

古文：其后吕后用留侯计，使皇太子卑辞束帛致礼，安车迎而致之。
现代文：后来吕后采用留侯张良的计策，让皇太子带着丝织物，谦辞卑礼，用坐乘的小车将其迎接到自己身边，辅佐自己。
English: Later, Empress Dowager Lyu used Zhang Liang's strategy of staying at court to have the crown prince come with silk fabric, bow humbly, and use a carriage to welcome him to her side and assist her.

古文：四人既至，从太子见，高祖客而敬焉，太子得以为重，遂用自安。
现代文：四人到来后，随从太子见高祖，高祖敬重他们而待为上宾，太子也由此受到重视，地位于是得以稳固。
English: After the arrival of the four, they followed the prince to see Gaozu. Gaozu respected them and stayed as the chief guest. The prince also received attention from this, and his position was thus stabilized.

古文：语在《留侯传》。
现代文：这件事情详细记载在《留侯传》中。
English: This event is recorded in detail in the "Rumo Chronicle."

古文：其后谷口有郑子真，蜀有严君平，皆修身自保，非其服弗服，非其食弗食。
现代文：其后，谷口有郑子真，蜀有严君子，都能修身自重，不该穿的不穿，不该吃的不吃。
English: After that, Taniguchi had Zheng Zizhen and Shu had Yan Junzi, both of whom were able to cultivate self-respect, not wearing what they shouldn't wear and not eating what they shouldn't eat.

古文：成帝时，元舅大将军王凤以礼聘子真，子真遂不亻出而终。
现代文：汉成帝在位时，大舅大将军王凤以礼招聘子真，子真不应召，以不屈服而终。
English: When Emperor Hancheng was on the throne, his great-uncle, General Wang Feng, invited Zizhen with courtesy, but Zizhen did not invite him, and ended up not giving in.

古文：君平卜筮于成都市，以为： 卜筮者贱业，而可以惠众人。
现代文：君子在成都街市上占卜算卦，他认为： 占卜虽然是低贱的职业，但是可以使众人得到好处。
English: A gentleman was doing divination and fortune-telling at a street market in Chengdu. He thought: Although divination is a lowly profession, it can benefit everyone.

古文：有邪恶非正之问，则依蓍龟为言利害。
现代文：有卜问邪恶不正之事的，就依照蓍草和龟甲向他言明利害。
English: If you have any questions about evil or injustice, you should tell him your interests in accordance with the principles of weeds and tortoiseshell.

古文：与人子言依于孝，与人弟言依于顺，与人臣言依于忠，各因势导之以善，从吾言者，已过半矣。 
现代文：给做儿子的占卜，就依孝道解说；给做弟弟的占卜，晓以顺服之理；给做臣子的占卜，以忠君的思想为依据。这样因势利导，引导不同的人们都走向善的方面。遵从我的话的人，已有一大半了。 
English: The divination for a son is based on the way of filial piety; the divination for a younger brother is based on the principle of obedience; and the divination for a vassal is based on the thought of loyalty. In this way, because of the guidance of snobbery, different people are guided towards the good. The majority of people have already obeyed my words.

古文：裁日阅数人，得百钱足自养，财闭肆下帘而授《老子》。
现代文：他每天衹接待几个人，收入百钱能够维持生活了就收摊，在家教授《老子》。
English: He receives several people every day, closes his stall when his income reaches 100 yuan, and teaches "Lao Zi" at home.

古文：博览亡不通，依老子、严周之指著书十余万言。
现代文：并大量阅读各种书籍，无不通晓，依照老子、庄周的理论，著书十余万字。
English: He also read a large number of books, and according to the theory of Lao Zi and Zhuang Zhou, he wrote more than 100,000 words.

古文：杨雄少时从游学，以而仕京师显名，数为朝廷在位贤者称君平德。
现代文：杨雄年轻时曾从其游学，后来在京师做官而名声显著，多次对朝廷贤德的官吏称赞严君平的品行。
English: When he was young, Yang Xiong had learned from him on a tour. Later, he became famous as an official in Beijing. He repeatedly praised Yan Junping's conduct to the virtuous officials of the imperial court.

古文：杜陵李强素善雄，久之为益州牧，喜谓雄曰： 吾真得严君平矣。 雄曰： 君备礼以待之，彼人可见而不可得诎也。 
现代文：杜陵人李彊一向和杨雄很好，后来做官为益州牧，高兴地对杨雄说： 这下我真要得到严昼王了 握雄说： 你要以礼待之，他这个人可见而不可屈为人所用。 
English: Li Yan, a man from Tuling, had always been on good terms with Yang Xiong. Later, when he became an official of Yizhou Pastoral, he said happily to Yang Xiong, "Now I really want to get Yan Rong Wang." Gu Xiong said, "You should treat him with courtesy. He is a person who can be seen but cannot be used.

古文：强心以为不然。
现代文：李彊内心不以为然。
English: Li Yao didn't think so.

古文：及至蜀，致礼与相见，卒不敢言以为从事，乃叹曰： 杨子云诚知人！ 
现代文：待其到蜀地上任后，和君平以礼相见，却始终不敢提出召其为属吏的事，于是叹道： 杨子云确实了解人啊！ 
English: After waiting for him to take office in Shu, he met Junping with courtesy, but he always dared not raise the issue of calling him as a subordinate official, so he sighed: Yang Ziyun really understands people!

古文：君平年九十余，遂以其业终，蜀人爱敬，至今称焉。
现代文：严君平活到九十余岁，到死都以占卜算卦为业，蜀地的人都热爱和尊敬他，至今仍赞不绝口。
English: Yan Jun lived to be more than ninety years old, and until his death he was engaged in divination and arithmetic. The people of Shu loved and respected him, and still praise him.

古文：及雄著书言当世士，称此二人。
现代文：后来杨雄著书言及当世之士，特别称赞这两个人。
English: Later, Yang Xiong wrote a book about contemporary people, praising these two people in particular.

古文：其论曰： 或问：君子疾没世而名不称，盍势诸名卿可几？
现代文：他评论说： 有人间：君子怕终身于世而无名可称，何不以名卿之势成就其名？
English: He commented: Some people say: A gentleman is afraid to live in the world forever without a name to speak of. Why not make a name for himself by becoming famous?

古文：曰：君子德名为几。
现代文：我以为：君子自蓄其德，则名声可立。
English: I thought: if a gentleman keeps his virtue to himself, he can make a name for himself.

古文：梁、齐、楚、赵之君非不富且贵也，恶虖成其名！
现代文：梁、齐、楚、赵等诸侯王并非不富贵，可是用什么来成就他们的名声呢？
English: Princes such as Liang, Qi, Chu and Zhao were not without wealth, but what did they use to achieve their fame?

古文：谷口郑子真不诎其志，耕于岩石之下，名震于京师，岂其卿？
现代文：谷郑子真不屈其志，耕作于岩石之下，名声却响于整个京城，难道是因为其身为公卿吗？
English: Gu Zhengzi is truly unyielding. He cultivates under a rock, but his reputation resonates throughout the capital. Is it because he is a nobleman?

古文：岂其卿？
现代文：难道是因为其身为公卿吗？
English: Was it because he was a nobleman?

古文：楚两龚之洁，其清矣乎！
现代文：楚地两龚白洁其身，有清明之名！
English: Chu Di's cheeks are white and clean, with a reputation for cleanness!

古文：蜀严湛冥，不作苟见，不治苟得，久幽而不改其操，虽随、和何以加诸？
现代文：蜀郡严君子深沉无欲，不为苟合取容之事，不操苟且求利之业，长久幽居而不改变自己的节操，即使是随侯之珠、和氏之璧，又怎能与之相比呢？
English: Shu County's strict gentleman is profound and non-greedy, not for the sake of conciliation, not for the sake of profit, long-term seclusion without changing his self-discipline, even if it is the pearl of Suihou and the gem of Heji, how can it be compared with it?

古文：举兹以旃，不亦宝乎！ 
现代文：举此人而用之，不也是国家的宝贝吗？ 
English: Isn't it a treasure of the country to name this person and use him?

古文：自园公、绮里季、夏黄公、甪里先生、郑子真、严君平皆未尝仕，然其风声足以激贪厉俗，近古之逸民也。
现代文：园公、绮里季、夏黄公、角里先生、郑子真、严君平等均未曾做官，然而他们的风范、名声足以阻止贪婪、激励世俗，为近古避世隐居之人。
English: Park Gong, Bao Lijie, Xia Huang Gong, Mr. Kakuri, Zheng Zizhen, and Yan Jun have never served as officials. However, their demeanor and reputation are enough to prevent greed and encourage the secular, and they are people who have avoided the world and lived in seclusion for a long time.

古文：若王吉、贡禹，两龚之属，皆以礼让进退云。
现代文：而如王吉、贡禹、两龚之类，出仕与隐退都知依礼谦让。
English: On the other hand, people like Wang Ji, Gong Yu, and Liang Yao were known to be polite and courteous when entering the service or retiring.

古文：王吉字子阳，琅邪皋虞人也。
现代文：王吉，字子阳，琅邪皋虞人。
English: Wang Ji, the character Ziyang, is a member of the conspiratorial group of conspirators.

古文：少好学明经，以郡吏举孝廉为郎，补若卢右丞，迁云阳令。
现代文：少时好学，精通经义，初为郡吏，举孝廉被选为郎，补若卢右丞之位，后又改任云阳县令。
English: At a young age, he was eager to learn and well-versed in the classics. At first, he was a county official. He was chosen to be a son-in-law, filling the position of Lu Yu Rong, and later he was appointed as the Yunyang County magistrate.

古文：举贤良为昌邑中尉，而王好游猎，驱驰国中，动作亡节，吉上疏谏，曰：
现代文：举贤良被任为昌邑中尉，昌邑王喜好游猎，常常在国中驱马奔驰，行为没有节制，王吉因此尚书劝谏说：
English: He was appointed as the lieutenant of Changyi. The king of Changyi was fond of hunting. He often drove horses around the country. His behavior was unrestrained. Therefore, Wang Ji wrote a letter to persuade him, saying:

古文：臣闻古者师日行三十里，吉行五十里，《诗》云： 匪风发兮，匪车揭兮，顾瞻周道，中心怛兮。 
现代文：臣下听说古时候军队平常每日行进三十里，为吉事而行进也衹五十里。《诗经》有云： 彼风疾发，彼车疾驰，环顾周道，心中哀伤。 
English: His subjects heard that in ancient times, the army usually marched thirty miles a day, and for auspicious occasions they marched as much as thirty-five miles. "The Book of Songs" has a cloud: His wind blows violently, his chariot speeds, he looks around, and his heart is saddened.

古文：说曰：是非古之风也，发发者；是非古之车也，揭揭者。
现代文：意思是：疾发飘忽，这非古之有道之风；驱马疾驰，这非古之有道之车。因此伤感。
English: It means: the swiftness of the hair, this is not the ancient style; the gallop of the horse, this is not the ancient car. Therefore, it is sad.

古文：盖伤之也。今者大王幸方与，曾不半日而驰二百里，百姓颇废耕桑，治道牵马，臣愚以为民不可数变。
现代文：现今大王巡幸方与县，不到半天就奔驰二百里，很多百姓都荒废了农事来修路牵马，臣下以为，百姓不可多变。
English: Nowadays, when the great king is on a tour of the fortunate provinces and counties, he travels 200 miles in less than half a day. Many people have abandoned farming to build roads and lead horses. His subjects thought that the people could not change.

古文：昔召公述职，当民事时，舍于棠下而听断焉。
现代文：过去召公奭到任，正值农事繁忙，就在甘棠树下办公决事。
English: In the past, when a public official was called to office, it was a busy time for farming, and the decision was made under the neem tree.

古文：是时，人皆得其所，后世思其仁恩，至乎不伐甘棠，《甘棠》之诗是也。
现代文：当其时，人人各得其所，后世主人也追思他的仁义和恩德，以至于不砍伐造棵甘棠树，以资纪念。《诗经》中《甘棠》之诗就是描写这件事的。
English: At that time, everyone had their own place, and the masters of later generations also thought about his benevolence and grace, so much so that they did not cut down and build a sweet orange tree as a memorial. The poem "Sweet orange" in the "Book of Songs" describes this matter.

古文：大王不好书术而乐逸游，冯式撙衔，驰骋不止，口倦乎叱咤，手苦于箠辔，身劳乎车舆；朝则冒雾露，昼则被尘埃，夏则为大暑之所暴炙，冬则为风寒之所偃薄。
现代文：大王您不好读书学习而喜欢游逸，整日倚着车栏驾车驭马，奔驰不停，口舌因怒斥吆喝而倦怠，手臂因驾车驭马而酸痛，身体因车马颠簸而劳顿；清晨冒着雾露，白天披着尘埃；夏天为酷热的暑气所蒸烤，冬天被刺骨的寒冷侵迫。
English: Great King, you are not good at reading and studying, but you like to travel. You lean on the railing all day, drive and ride horses, and drive non-stop. Your tongue is tired from yelling and screaming, your arm is sore from driving and riding horses, and your body is exhausted from driving and riding horses. In the morning, you are exposed to mist and dew, and during the day, you are covered with dust. In summer, you are steamed by the scorching heat, and in winter, you are attacked by the biting cold.

古文：数以耎脆之玉体犯勤劳之烦毒，非所以全寿命之宗也，又非所以进仁义之隆也。
现代文：屡屡以弱弱的玉体去承受辛苦劳累的侵害，这种行为无益于延年益寿，也不利于仁义的增长。
English: Repeatedly using a weak body to bear the abuse of hard work, this behavior is not conducive to longevity, nor is it conducive to the growth of benevolence.

古文：夫广夏之下，细旃之上，明师居前，劝诵在后，上论唐、虞之际，下及殷、周之盛，考仁圣之风，习治国之道，焉发愤忘食，日新厥德，其乐岂徒衔橛之间哉！
现代文：在宽敞明亮的房间里，在精美华丽的毡毯上，德才兼备的老师在前面谆谆教诲，勤学好问的学生在后面孜孜苦读，上论唐、虞之旧事，下及殷、周之盛况，考察仁德圣明之人的风范，学习治国安民的方法，悠然自得，发愤忘食，不断增进和完善自己的道德修养，遣其中的乐趣愉悦又岂是驾车驭马四处闲游所能相比的呢！
English: In the spacious and bright room, on the exquisite and gorgeous carpets, the teachers who are both virtuous and talented are teaching in front, and the students who are diligent and inquisitive are diligently studying in the back, discussing the old affairs of Tang and Yu, and the pomp of Yin and Zhou, examining the manners of benevolent and saintly people, learning the methods of governing the country and the people, leisurely self-indulgence, forgetting to eat when angry, and constantly improving and perfecting their moral cultivation. The fun and pleasure of this is comparable to driving a car and riding a horse.

古文：休则俯仰诎信以利形，进退步趋以实下，吸新吐故以练臧，专意积精以适神，于以养生，岂不长哉！
现代文：休息的时候就俯仰屈伸以活动身体筋络，进出以步代车而行以结实双腿，吐故纳新以练五脏之气，专心致志集中意念以养精安神，用上述方法养生，难道还不能长寿吗！
English: When resting, you should bend over and stretch with active body muscles, enter and exit with walking instead of driving with strong legs, spit out the old and accept the new to practice the five viscera, concentrate and concentrate your thoughts to raise energy and peace of mind, and use the above methods to improve health. Can't you still live longer?

古文：大王诚留意如此，则心有尧、舜之志，体有乔、松之寿，美声广誉登而上闻，则福禄其辏而社稷安矣。
现代文：大王您若真正用心如上行事，那么就会心有尧、舜之志，身有乔、松之寿；对您的赞誉之声鹊起并上闻于天子，则将福禄齐至而国家安定。
English: Great King, if you truly act with your heart as above, then you will have a good heart, a good will, and a good life; if the praise for you rises and is heard in heaven, then the fortune will be the same and the country will be stable.

古文：皇帝仁圣，至今思慕未怠，于官馆囿池弋猎之乐未有所幸，大王宜夙夜念此，以承圣意。
现代文：当今圣上仁德圣明，先帝晏驾以来，他至今思慕不已，对行幸宫馆园池以及出游狩猎等玩乐之事都未尝涉足，大王您应当时刻铭记这些，体察圣意。
English: Today's saint is the saint of benevolence, and since the former emperor passed away, he has been thinking about it ever since. He has never set foot in the pleasure grounds of the Imperial Palace or on a hunting trip. Your majesty, you should always keep these things in mind and experience the holy will.

古文：诸侯骨肉，莫亲大王，大王于属则子也，于位则臣也，一身而二任之责加焉，恩爱行义孅介有不具者，于以上闻，非飨国之福也。
现代文：各诸侯骨肉中，没有人比大王您与皇上的关系更亲近的了，从亲缘关系上看，大王是子辈，按君臣地位来论，大王是人臣，您是一身兼负着双重的责任啊，处在这种地位，大王在施恩行义方面稍有不周全的地方，被皇上知道了，对于继承社稷江山并不是一件好事呵。
English: Among all the princes, there is no one who is closer to the emperor than the great king. From the point of view of kinship, the great king is a descendant. According to the status of the monarch and the vassal, the great king is a vassal. You are both responsible and responsible. In this position, the great king is a little incomplete in terms of benevolence and righteousness. The emperor knows that it is not a good thing to inherit the mountains.

古文：臣吉愚戆，愿大王察之。
现代文：臣王吉我愚昧戆直，希望大王明察。
English: Minister Wang Ji, I am stupid and straightforward, I hope the great king will see clearly.

古文：王贺虽不遵道，然犹知敬礼吉，乃下令曰： 寡人造行不能无惰，中尉甚忠，数辅吾过。
现代文：昌邑王刘贺虽然不守正道，但是还知道敬重礼遇王吉，因此他下令说： 我的修养品行不可能没有懈怠之处，中尉王吉忠心耿耿，多次指正我的过失。
English: Although Wang Liu He of Changyi did not adhere to the right path, he still knew how to treat Wang Ji with respect and courtesy, so he ordered: My cultivation is impossible without slackness. Lieutenant Wang Ji is loyal and has repeatedly corrected my mistakes.

古文：使谒者千秋赐中尉牛肉五百斤，酒五石，脯五束。 
现代文：因此，令谒者千秋赐给中尉牛肉五百斤，酒五石，干肉五束。 
English: Therefore, the commander gave the lieutenant five hundred catties of beef, five kilos of wine, and five bundles of dried meat.

古文：其后复放从自若。
现代文：这以后刘贺又放纵如常。
English: After that, Liu He indulged as usual.

古文：吉辄谏争，甚得辅弼之义，虽不治民，国中莫不敬重焉。
现代文：王吉每每据理谏争，很是尽了为人辅臣的义务，虽然没有直接参与治理百姓，但封国之中没有不敬重他的。
English: Wang Jizhong always fought for justice and fulfilled his duties as a vassal. Although he did not directly participate in governing the people, there was no disrespect for him among the vassals.

古文：久之，昭帝崩，亡嗣，大将军霍光秉政，遣大鸿胪、宗正迎昌邑王。
现代文：过了很久，昭帝驾崩，他没有太子，大将军霍光执政，派遣大鸿胪宗正迎立昌邑王进京。
English: After a long time, Emperor Zhao passed away, he did not have a prince, the great general Huo Guang ruled, and dispatched the great hero Jianzong Zheng to welcome the king of Changyi into Beijing.

古文：吉即奏书戒王曰： 臣闻高宗谅暗，三年不言。
现代文：王吉立刻上书告诫昌邑王说： 我听说高宗居丧，三年不说话。
English: Wang Ji immediately wrote a letter to warn Changyi Wang, saying: I heard that Gao Zong was in mourning and would not speak for three years.

古文：今大王以丧事征，宜日夜哭泣悲哀而已，慎毋有所发。
现代文：现在大王您因丧事被征召，应日夜悲哀哭泣，千万不要有其他举动。
English: Now, great king, you have been conscripted because of the funeral, you should weep day and night in sorrow, and you must not do anything else.

古文：且何独丧事，凡南面之君何言哉？
现代文：况且，何衹是丧事应该如此，大凡南面而王者又何曾有过多的言论呢？
English: Besides, how many funerals should be like this, and how many kings have had too much to say?

古文：天不言，四时行焉，百物生焉，愿大王察之。
现代文：苍天不言，四季仍依时更迭，世间百物照样生息繁衍，希望大王明察。
English: Heaven forbid, the four seasons still change according to time, and all the things in the world still live and reproduce, I hope the great king can see it.

古文：大将军仁爱勇智，忠信之德天下莫不闻，事孝武皇帝二十余年未尝有过。
现代文：大将军霍光仁爱而智勇，其忠直诚信的品德天下无人不晓，事奉孝武皇帝二十余年未曾有过过失。
English: General Huo Guang was benevolent and wise, and no one in the world was unaware of his loyal and honest character. He served Emperor Xiaowu for more than 20 years without any fault.

古文：先帝弃群臣，属以天下，寄幼孤焉，大将军抱持幼君襁褓之中，布政施教，海内晏然，虽周公、伊尹亡以加也。
现代文：先帝去世，将天下和幼孤托付于他，大将军扶持尚在襁褓之中的幼主，颁布政令施行教化，维护了国家的安定，即使是周公、伊尹也不过如此。
English: When the former emperor died, he entrusted the world and his children to him. The general supported his young master, who was still in his infancy, issued decrees to carry out enlightenment, and maintained the stability of the country. Even Zhou Gong and Yi Yin were no different.

古文：今帝崩，亡嗣，大将军惟思可以奉宗庙者，攀援而立大王，其仁厚岂有量哉！
现代文：现今皇帝驾崩没有继承人，大将军从可以继承汉室宗庙的立场考虑，援引提拔迎立大王为君，其仁爱宽厚真是无可比拟啊！
English: Now that the emperor has passed away without an heir, the general considered from the standpoint of being able to inherit the Han family temple, invoking the promotion of welcoming the great king as king. His benevolence and generosity are truly incomparable!

古文：臣愿大王事之敬之，政事一听之，大王垂拱南面而已。
现代文：臣下希望大王事奉他、敬重他，国家政事皆听从他的安排，您衹需无为而治南面称君就可以了。
English: His subjects hope that the great king will serve him and respect him, and that the national politics will follow his arrangements. You don't have to do anything but rule the south and call yourself a prince.

古文：愿留意，常以为念。 
现代文：希望大王您考虑我的建议，并常放于心上。 
English: I hope Your Majesty will consider my suggestion and keep it in mind.

古文：王既到，即位二十余日以行淫乱废。
现代文：昌邑王到京师后，即位二十余天，就因行为淫乱而被废黜。
English: Twenty days after King Changyi arrived in Beijing, he was dethroned for his immoral behavior.

古文：昌邑群臣坐在国时不举奏王罪过，令汉朝不闻知，又不能辅道，陷王大恶，皆下狱诛。
现代文：昌邑封国的大臣们因昌邑王在封国时不举报其罪过，致使朝廷不知昌邑王的品行；又因作为臣下未能尽辅弼引导之职，致使昌邑王犯下大罪，都被下狱诛杀。
English: The ministers of the fiefdom of Chang'e were all sent to prison and killed because they did not report the crimes committed by the king of Chang'e during his fiefdom, which made the court unaware of the king's behavior; and because they failed to fulfill their duties as vassals to assist and guide the king of Chang'e, which caused him to commit a serious crime.

古文：唯吉与郎中令龚遂以忠直数谏正得减死，髡为城旦。
现代文：衹有王吉和郎中令龚遂因忠诚刚直、屡次进谏而得以免死，被判剃发修筑城池。
English: As a result, Wang Ji and his second-in-command, Ling Zang, were spared death due to their loyalty and steadfastness, and were sentenced to build a castle.

古文：起家复为益州刺史，病去官，复征为博士、谏大夫。
现代文：后来又起家复出任益州刺史，不久因病辞官。又被征为博士谏大夫。
English: Later, he returned to his family to serve as the governor of Yishu, but soon resigned due to illness. He was also recruited as a doctor.

古文：是时，宣帝颇修武帝故事，宫室车服盛于昭帝。
现代文：当时宣帝极力效法武帝，恢复了武帝时的典章制度，宫室、车乘、服饰等都超过昭帝时的规模。
English: At that time, Emperor Xuan tried his best to follow the example of Emperor Wu and restored the ceremonial system of Emperor Wu. The palace, chariots, and costumes all exceeded the scale of Emperor Zhao.

古文：时外戚许、史、王氏贵宠，而上躬亲政事，任用能吏。
现代文：这时，许、史、王等几家外戚也因得宠而尊贵，宣帝亲自处理政事，并任用能干的官吏。
English: At this time, several maternal relatives such as Xu, Shi, and Wang were also honored for being favored, and Emperor Xuan personally handled political affairs and appointed capable officials.

古文：吉上疏言得失，曰：
现代文：王吉上疏评论其得失说：
English: Commenting on its gains and losses, Wang Jishangso said:

古文：陛下躬圣质，总万方，帝王图籍日陈于前，惟思世务，将兴太平。
现代文：陛下以尊贵之体亲自总理各方事务，国家地图与户籍每天展列于眼前，一心一意想着国家政务，力求天下太平。
English: His Majesty, with dignity, personally presides over the affairs of all parties, the national map and household registration are displayed in front of him every day, and he is single-mindedly thinking about national affairs and striving for world peace.

古文：诏书每下，民欣然若更生。
现代文：每次韶书传下，百姓都欣喜若狂，如获新生。
English: Every time the imperial edict was passed down, the people were ecstatic, as if they had been reborn.

古文：臣伏而思之，可谓至恩，未可谓本务也。
现代文：臣下认为，这些举措虽然对于百姓来说可谓是最大的恩惠了，但还不能说是尽到了政务的根本。
English: In the opinion of his subjects, although these measures were the greatest boon to the people, they could not be said to have fulfilled the fundamentals of government affairs.

古文：欲治之主不世出，公卿幸得遭遇其时，言听谏从，然未有建万世之长策，举明主于三代之隆者也。
现代文：想有所作为的君主不是世世都有的，公卿大臣有幸遇到这样的时代，君主能听从公卿大臣的建议和劝谏，但是却没有建立万世基业的长远计策，没有造就出像夏、商、周三代盛世时那样的明君圣主。
English: Monarchs who want to make a difference are not found everywhere in the world. Noble Lords and Ministers are fortunate to encounter such an era. Monarchs can listen to the advice and persuasion of noble Lords and Ministers, but they do not have a long-term strategy to establish a world-class heritage, and they do not create a bright monarch like Xia, Shang, and the third generation of the Ming Dynasty.

古文：其务在于期会簿书，断狱听讼而已，此非太平之基也。
现代文：只注重于朝廷或官府的财物出入及诉讼断案之类的事情，这不是建立太平社会的根本。
English: It is not essential to build a peaceful society if we only focus on matters such as the flow of property from the imperial court or government offices and the adjudication of lawsuits.

古文：臣闻圣王宣德流化，必自近始。
现代文：我听说圣明的君主宣扬德政流布教化，一定要从眼前开始做起。
English: I have heard that the holy monarchs preach the moral and political stream of education, and must start from the present.

古文：朝廷不备，难以言治；左右不正，难以化远。
现代文：朝廷内部不整肃，就很难言及治理国家；君主身边的人不正直，就很难教化远方之人。
English: If there is no orderliness within the imperial court, it is difficult to govern the country; if the people around the monarch are not honest, it is difficult to educate people far away.

古文：民者，弱而不可胜，愚而不可欺也。
现代文：百姓虽然弱小但却不可欺凌，虽然愚昧，但却不可蒙骗。
English: Although the people are weak, they should not be bullied; although they are ignorant, they should not be deceived.

古文：圣主独行于深宫，得则天下称诵之，失则天下咸言之。
现代文：圣主独自高居深宫，行为举措得人心则天下交口称颂，失人心则天下议论纷纷。
English: The Holy Lord alone is enthroned in the deepest palace. Actions and measures that win the hearts of the people are praised by the world, while actions and measures that lose the hearts of the people are discussed by the world.

古文：行发于近，必见于远，故谨选左右，审择所使。左右所以正身也，所使所以宣德也。《诗》云： 济济多士，文王以宁。 
现代文：皇上的行为虽做在眼前，但影响却很广远，因此应当谨慎地选择身边的左右辅臣和使官；左右辅臣是为匡正皇帝的言行而设置的，使官是为宣扬皇帝的恩德而设置的。《诗经》云： 人才济济，文王得以安定天下。 
English: Although the emperor's actions are done in front of his eyes, their influence is far-reaching. Therefore, he should carefully choose the right and left aides and envoys around him; the right and left aides are set up to rectify the emperor's words and deeds, and the envoys are set up to promote the emperor's benevolence.

古文：此其本也。
现代文：造就是国家政务的根本。
English: Construction is the foundation of national government affairs.

古文：《春秋》所以大一统者，六合同风，九州共贯也。
现代文：《春秋》所推崇的以天子为中心的大一统政治，是全国各地风俗教化相同，九州方圆政令贯通划一。
English: "Spring and Autumn" advocates a unified politics centered on the Son of Heaven, which means that customs and education are the same throughout the country, and Kyushu's political order is uniform.

古文：今俗吏所以牧民者，非有礼义科指可世世通行者也，独设刑法以守之。
现代文：如今那些平庸无能的官吏统治百姓，不是依靠世世都可以通行的礼义规范来进行教化，而仅仅依靠刑律法令来达到目的。
English: Today, those mediocre and incompetent officials rule the people, not by relying on the etiquette norms that can be passed down from generation to generation, but only by relying on criminal laws to achieve their goals.

古文：其欲治者，不知所由，以意穿凿，各取一切，权谲自在，故一变之后不可复修也。
现代文：那些想有所作为的官吏，又不能认真考察典章制度、礼义规范，而是按照自己的意志穿凿附会，各取所需，投机诡诈，任意妄为，因此，一旦形势发生变化，便难以继续推行其政令。
English: Those officials who want to make a difference cannot seriously examine the system of regulations and the norms of etiquette, but instead, according to their own will, cut through the subordinate committees, take what they need, speculate, and act arbitrarily. Therefore, once the situation changes, it will be difficult to continue to implement their decrees.

古文：是以百里不同风，千里不同俗，户异政，人殊服，诈伪萌生，刑罚亡极，质朴日销，恩爱浸薄。
现代文：于是便造成了百里之内风俗不同，千里之内教化各异，家家从事不同的事情，人人穿着各异的服色，奸诈欺骗争相而生。滥用刑罚没有穷尽，纯朴的民风日益消失，恩爱的情感逐渐淡薄。
English: As a result, customs are different within a hundred miles, education is different within a thousand miles, families are engaged in different things, everyone wears different clothes, and treachery and deception compete with each other. There is no end to the abuse of punishment, the simple folk customs are disappearing day by day, and the feelings of love are gradually fading.

古文：孔子曰 安上治民，莫善于礼 ，非空言也。
现代文：孔子说 稳定政权、统治百姓最好的办法莫过于礼治 ，这不是一句空话。
English: Confucius said that there is nothing better than etiquette for a stable country and for governing the people, and this is not empty talk.

古文：王者未制礼之时，引先王礼宜于今者而用之。
现代文：作为一国之君，在尚未制订出新的礼义制度的时候，应当选择先代君王所订礼义制度中适宜于当今情况的部分加以运用。
English: As the ruler of a country, when a new etiquette system has not yet been established, he should choose the part of the etiquette system established by the previous monarch that is suitable for the current situation and apply it.

古文：臣愿陛下承天心，发大业，与公卿大臣延及儒生，述旧礼，明王制，驱一世之民济之仁寿之域，则俗何以不若成、康，寿何以不若高宗？
现代文：臣下我希望陛下顺承天道，奋创大业，与公卿大臣以及儒学之士一起共同考述旧礼，宣明王制，以仁义礼制治理天下，使百姓沐浴陛下之恩泽，安逸而长寿。这样一来，何愁天下风俗教化比不上成、康之世，长治久安的国运比不上殷王武丁呢？
English: Subjects, I hope that Your Majesty will follow the heavenly way, work hard to create a great cause, and together with the nobles, ministers, and Confucian scholars, examine the old rituals, proclaim the royal system, and govern the world with the benevolence and righteousness ritual system, so that the people can bathe in Your Majesty's grace, and live a long and comfortable life. In this way, why worry that the world's customs and education are not as good as a prosperous and healthy world, and the long-term national prosperity is not as good as King Wu Ding?

古文：窃见当世趋务不合于道者，谨条奏，唯陛下财择焉。
现代文：臣下我个人认为当今社会中有些不符合礼义之道的地方，谨条列呈上，请陛下圣裁明择。
English: My subject, I personally believe that there are some areas in today's society that do not conform to the path of propriety and righteousness. I respectfully present the list and ask His Majesty to make a clear choice.

古文：吉意以为： 夫妇，人伦大纲，夭寿之萌也。
现代文：王吉认为 夫妇，是人类关系中最重要的一种关系，它关系到人的生老病死。
English: Wang Ji believed that the couple is the most important relationship in human relations. It is related to people's life, old age, illness and death.

古文：世俗嫁娶太早，未知为人父母之道而有子，是以教化不明而民多夭。
现代文：现在世俗的人们结婚过早，尚未懂得为人父母的道理就有了孩子，因此不仅道德教化不易实施，而且人丁容易夭折。
English: Nowadays, secular people get married too early and have children without understanding the principles of parenthood. Therefore, it is not only difficult to implement moral education, but it is also easy for people to die prematurely.

古文：聘妻送女亡节，则贫人不及，故不举子。
现代文：娶妻嫁女花费无度，贫苦人家无力承受，因此不敢多生育儿女。
English: Marrying a wife and marrying a daughter costs a lot of money, and poor families cannot afford it, so they do not dare to have more children.

古文：又汉家列侯尚公主，诸侯则国人承翁主，使男事女，夫诎于妇，逆阴阳之位，故多女乱。
现代文：另外，汉朝各诸侯王娶公主，诸侯王国中的国人娶诸侯之女，这种制度使男人事奉女人，丈夫屈服于妻子，颠倒了阴阳之序，所以容易发生由女人引起的祸端。
English: In addition, the princes of the Han Dynasty married princesses, and the people in the princes' kingdoms married the princes' daughters. This system made men serve women, and husbands submit to their wives, reversing the order of yin and yang, so it was easy for disasters caused by women to occur.

古文：古者衣服车马贵贱有章，以褒有德而别尊卑，今上下僣差，人人自制，是以贪财诛利，不畏死亡。
现代文：古时候，衣服车马依据其拥有者地位的高低贵贱都有一定的规定，用以表彰贤德之人，区别上下尊卑，现今却上下僭越混乱，人人自行其是，没有一定的节度，于是人们贪图财货、追逐私利而不惜冒生命危险。
English: In ancient times, clothes, chariots and horses all had certain regulations according to the status of their owners, which were used to commend virtuous people and distinguish between the upper and lower classes. Nowadays, however, the upper and lower classes have become more and more chaotic, and everyone is free to do as they please, without a certain degree of restraint. As a result, people are greedy for goods and pursue selfish interests at the risk of their lives.

古文：周之所以能致治，刑措而不用者，以其禁邪于冥冥，绝恶于未萌也。 
现代文：周王朝之所以能够做到不用刑罚而达到天下大治，是因为它将各种奸邪罪恶遏止在尚未产生之时啊。 
English: The reason why the Zhou Dynasty was able to achieve the rule of the world without punishment is because it stopped all kinds of treachery and evil at a time when they had not yet arisen.

古文：又言： 舜、汤不用三公九卿之世而举皋陶、伊尹，不仁者远。
现代文：王吉还说： 虞舜、商汤不任用三公九卿的世袭子弟，而选拔皋陶、伊尹为臣，这样那些谗佞不仁之人就被疏远了。
English: Wang Ji also said, "Yu Yao and Shang Tang did not appoint the hereditary sons of the three princes and nine nobles, but chose Sheduo and Yi Yin as their vassals. Thus, those who were not kind were alienated."

古文：今使俗吏得任子弟，率多骄骜，不通古今，至于积功治人，亡益于民，此《伐檀》所为作也。
现代文：如今允许官吏的子弟蒙荫为官，他们大多骄傲蛮横，不了解古今之事，至于积累功绩，治理民众，无益于百姓，造就是《诗经。伐檀》篇中所讽刺的现象。
English: Nowadays, the sons of officials are allowed to become officials. Most of them are proud and arrogant, and do not understand the things of the past and the present. As for the accumulation of merits and the governance of the people, it is not beneficial to the people, which is the ironic phenomenon in the "Song of Songs. Felling Trees."

古文：宜明选求贤，除任子之令。
现代文：应当实行公开选拔，以征求贤能之人，废除子弟以父兄而蒙荫为官的制度。
English: Open selection should be implemented to solicit capable people, and the system of children being appointed in the shadow of their fathers and brothers should be abolished.

古文：外家及故人可厚以财，不宜居位。去角抵，减乐府，省尚方，明视天下以俭。
现代文：外戚及亲朋故旧可以多给其资财，但不应当让他们高居官位，应摒弃角抵之戏，减免乐府，裁减主管营造巧作的工匠，向天下明示崇尚节俭的决心。
English: Relatives, relatives and friends can give them more wealth, but they should not let them occupy high-ranking positions. They should abandon the game of antagonist, reduce the number of music schools, reduce the number of supervisors to create craftsmen, and show the world their determination to advocate frugality.

古文：古者工不造雕王缘，商不通侈靡，非工商之独贤，政教使之然也。
现代文：过去工匠不制造雕刻精美的器物，商人不流通奢侈浪费的货物，并非这些工匠和商人独具贤德，而是统治者政治教化的结果。
English: In the past, craftsmen did not make beautifully carved utensils, and merchants did not distribute extravagant and wasteful goods. These craftsmen and merchants did not have unique virtues, but were the result of the political indoctrination of the rulers.

古文：民见俭则归本，本立而末成。 其指如此，上以其言迂阔，不甚宠异也。
现代文：天下百姓看到政府弃奢从俭的决心，就会回归到农业这一根本上来，根本确立后，与之相关的工商末流也就能按正确的轨迹发展了。 王吉上疏的核心思想大体如此，皇上认为他的言论不切合实际，因此不太看重他。
English: When the people of the world see the government's determination to abandon extravagance and adopt frugality, they will return to agriculture as the fundamental, and after the fundamental is established, the related industry and commerce will also be able to develop according to the correct trajectory. This is the core idea of Wang Jishangso in general. The emperor believes that his remarks are unrealistic, so he does not attach much importance to him.

古文：吉遂谢病归琅邪。
现代文：王吉于是藉口身体不适，返回家乡琅邪。
English: Wang Jie then used the excuse that he was unwell and returned to his hometown to purge the evil.

古文：始吉少时学问，居长安。
现代文：当初王吉年轻时求学，曾居住于长安城内。
English: When Wang Jie was young and studying, he used to live in Chang'an City.

古文：东家有大枣树垂吉庭中，吉妇取枣以啖吉。
现代文：东家有一棵很大的枣树，其枝叶垂入王吉借住的庭院中，王吉的妻子摘了一些树上的枣给王吉吃。
English: The host family had a large jujube tree, the branches and leaves of which hung over into the courtyard where Wang Jizhe was staying. Wang Jizhe's wife picked some jujube from the tree for Wang Jizhe to eat.

古文：吉后知之，乃去妇。
现代文：王吉后来才知道枣子是从束家的树上摘的，就休弃了自己的妻子。
English: Only later did Wang Jie learn that the jujube was picked from a tree belonging to the Sok family, and he abandoned his wife.

古文：东家闻而欲伐其树，邻里共止之，因固请吉令还妇。里中为之语曰： 东家有树，王阳妇去；东家枣完，去妇复还。 
现代文：冬家知道这件事后就想砍掉那棵枣树，邻居们劝阻了他，并坚决地恳请王吉让其妻子返家。里中人就这件事说道： 东家有树，王阳妇去；东家枣完，去妇复还。 
English: After knowing this, Dong Jia wanted to cut down the jujube tree. The neighbors dissuaded him and firmly implored Wang Ji to let his wife return home. The people in the village said about this matter: The east house has a tree, Wang Yang's wife should go; when the east house is finished with the jujube, the woman should return it.

古文：其厉志如此。
现代文：王吉对自身意志的激励由此可见。
English: Wang Jie's encouragement of his own will can be seen from this.

古文：吉与贡禹为友，世称 王阳在位，贡公弹冠 ，言其取舍同也。
现代文：王吉与贡禹是好朋友，世人称 王阳在朝为官，贡禹也将入仕 ，就是说他们两人进止志趣相同。
English: Wang Ji and Gong Yu are good friends. The world says that Wang Yang is an official in the DPRK, and Gong Yu will also enter the service, which means that they both have the same interests.

古文：元帝初即位，遣使者征贡禹与吉。
现代文：汉元帝即位不久，派使者征召贡禹和王吉入朝。
English: Soon after Emperor Han Yuan ascended the throne, he sent an envoy to recruit Gong Yu and Wang Ji to join the imperial court.

古文：吉年老，道病卒，上悼之，复遣使者吊祠云。
现代文：王吉因为年纪大了，在途中染病去世，汉元帝哀悼他，又派出使者吊祭。
English: Because Wang Ji was old, he died of an illness on the way. Emperor Hanyuan mourned for him and sent an envoy to offer a hanging sacrifice.

古文：初，吉兼通《五经》，能为驺氏《春秋》，以《诗》、《论语》教授，好梁丘贺说《易》，令子骏受焉。
现代文：当初，王吉兼通《五经》，熟悉骗氏《春秋》，以《诗经》、《论语》等教授学生，尤其爱好梁丘贺解说的《易经》，让儿子王骏跟他学习。
English: At the beginning, Wang Jie was familiar with the "Five Classics," familiar with the "Spring and Autumn" of Liang Shi, and taught students with the "Song of Songs," "Analects," etc. He was especially fond of the "I Ching" explained by Liang Qiuhe, and let his son Wang Qi study with him.

古文：骏以孝廉为郎。
现代文：王骏举孝廉任为郎。
English: Wang Xi raised Xiaoren as his son.

古文：左曹陈咸荐骏贤父子，经明行修，宜显以厉俗。
现代文：左曹陈咸举荐王骏说其父子二人都有贤德，通晓经义，德行修明，应当让他们处于显贵的地位，用以勉励世俗之人。
English: Zuo Cao Chen Xian recommended to Wang Qi that both his father and son should be in a prominent position to encourage the people of the world, because both of them had virtue, were familiar with the scriptures, and practiced virtuous deeds.

古文：光禄勋匡衡亦举骏有专对材。
现代文：光禄勋匡衡也举荐王骏，说他有见问即对，无所疑惑之材。
English: Guangluhun Kuangheng also recommended Wang Yao, saying that he was right on cue and was an unquestionable talent.

古文：迁谏大夫，使责淮阳宪王。
现代文：于是，王骏被升任为谏大夫，并代表朝廷前去指斥批评淮阳宪王的不轨行为。
English: As a result, Wang Qi was promoted to the post of Qi doctor, and on behalf of the imperial court, he went to rebuke the misconduct of criticizing Huaiyang Xianwang.

古文：迁赵内史。
现代文：后又改任赵国的内史。
English: Later, he was assigned to Zhao's internal history.

古文：吉坐昌邑王被刑后，戒子孙毋为王国吏，故骏道病，免官归。
现代文：王吉因昌邑王之事受牵连被判刑以后，告诫子孙不要做诸侯王国的官吏，因此，王骏称病，免官归家。
English: After Wang Ji was sentenced for being implicated in the matter of the king of Changyi, he warned his descendants not to be officials of the kingdom of princes. Therefore, Wang Xi called in sick, was dismissed and returned home.

古文：起家复为幽州刺史，迁司隶校尉，奏免丞相匡衡，迁少府，八岁，成帝欲大用之，出骏为京兆尹，试以政事。
现代文：后从家中又起用为幽州刺史，升任司隶校尉，上奏罢免了丞相匡衡，后又改任少府。这样过了八年，成帝准备委他以重任，让他出任京兆尹，以此考察他处理政事的能力。
English: Later, he was promoted from his family to be the governor of Yuzhou, promoted to the rank of lieutenant of Sili, dismissed the prime minister Kuangheng, and was later appointed to the position of the minor governor. After eight years, the Emperor Chengdu Preparation Committee assigned him to the important position of Jing Zhaoyun, in order to examine his ability to deal with political affairs.

古文：先是，京兆有赵广汉、张敞、王尊、王章，至骏皆有能名，故京师称曰： 前有赵、张，后有三王。 
现代文：在此之前，出任京兆尹的有趟广汉、张敞、王尊、王章等人，直至王骏都有能干的名声，因此，京师人士称赞说： 前有赵、张，后有三王。 
English: Prior to this, Guanghan, Zhang Zhan, Wang Zun, Wang Zhang and others had served as the Beijing Zhaoyun, and they all had a reputation for ability until Wang Yao. Therefore, Beijing scholars praised that: There were Zhao and Zhang before, and there were three kings after.

古文：而薛宣从左冯翊代骏为少府，会御史大夫缺，谷永奏言： 圣王不以名誉加于实效。
现代文：当时，薛宣以左冯翊之职，接替王骏任少府，正好赶上御史大夫之位空缺，谷永上奏说： 圣明的君王用人不听虚名而重实效。
English: At that time, Xue Xuan took the position of Zuo Fengyu to succeed Wang Yu as the minor prefect, just in time for the vacancy of the position of the imperial historian, and Gu Yong said: The king of the sacred does not listen to the false name and repeats the actual effect.

古文：考绩用人之法，薛宣政事已试。 
现代文：用人之法皆须考察其功绩，薛宣通过考察，很有政绩。 
English: All employers are required to examine the merits of their employees, and Xue Xuan passed the examination and had a lot of political achievements.

古文：上然其议。宣为少府月余，遂超御史大夫，至丞相，骏乃代宣为御史大夫，并居位。
现代文：成帝同意了谷永的意见，因此，薛宣任少府之职才一个多月，就被破格提升为御史大夫，最后官至丞相。王骏则代替薛宣接任御史大夫之职，二人同朝为官，并居高位。
English: Emperor Cheng agreed with Gu Yong's opinion. As a result, Xue Xuan, who had only been in office for a little more than a month, was promoted to the position of Imperial Historian, the last official to be promoted to Imperial Minister. Wang Xi took over the position of Imperial Historian in place of Xue Xuan, and they both held high positions in the same court.

古文：六岁病卒，翟方进代骏为大夫。
现代文：又过了六年，王骏病故，翟方进接替王骏为御史大夫。
English: Six years later, when Wang Qi died of illness, Yan Fangjin succeeded Wang Qi as the imperial historian.

古文：数月，薛宣免，遂代为丞相。
现代文：又过了数月，薛宣被免职，翟方进代为丞相。
English: A few months later, Xue Xuan was removed from his post, and Shifang Jin took over as chancellor.

古文：众人为骏恨不得封侯。
现代文：众人都为王骏未得封侯而感到遣憾。
English: Everyone felt sorry for Wang Yao not being able to become a vassal.

古文：骏为少府时，妻死，因不复娶，或问之，骏曰： 德非曾参，子非华、元，亦何敢娶？ 
现代文：王骏为少府时，他的妻子死了，此后没再续娶，有人问他何故，他说： 我无曾参之德，子无华、元之贤，怎敢再取？ 
English: When Wang Yao was a young prefect, his wife died. After that, he did not remarry. When someone asked him why, he said, "I have no virtue, no son, and no virtue. How dare I remarry?"

古文：骏子崇以父任为郎，历刺史、郡守，治有能名。
现代文：王骏之子王崇蒙父荫而任为郎，历任刺史、郡守之职，治政有能干的名声。
English: Wang Yong's son, Wang Chongming, was appointed by his father to be his heir, and successively held the posts of secretary of state and county governor, and had a reputation for being able to govern.

古文：建平三年，以河南太守征入为御史大夫数月。
现代文：建平三年，在河南太守任上时被征召入朝为御史大夫数月。
English: In the third year of Jianping, when he assumed the post of Henan Taishou, he was conscripted into the imperial court to serve as an imperial historian for several months.

古文：是时，成帝舅安成恭侯夫人放寡居，共养长信宫，坐祝诅下狱，崇奏封事，为放言。
现代文：当时，汉成帝之舅安成恭侯的夫人放丧夫寡居，被供养于长信宫中，因犯巫蛊祝诅之罪而下狱，王崇上奏密封章疏，为放求情。
English: At that time, the wife of Han Chengdi's uncle, An Cheng Gonghou, was widowed and was raised in the Changxin Palace. She was sent to prison for committing the crime of witchcraft and cursing. Wang Chong played the seal song and begged for release.

古文：放外家解氏与崇为婚，哀帝以崇为不忠诚，策诏崇曰： 朕以君有累世之美，故逾列次。
现代文：放的娘家解氏和王崇是姻亲之家，因此，汉哀帝认为王崇对皇帝不忠诚，于是制策韶诫王崇说： 我因你家有累世之美名，故而破格选用你。
English: The family of Emperor Han's daughters, the Jie clan and Wang Chong, were relatives by marriage. Therefore, Emperor Han deemed Wang Chong to be disloyal to the emperor, so he devised a plan to admonish Wang Chong, saying, "I chose you because of your family's long-standing reputation.

古文：在位以来，忠诚匡国未闻所由，反怀诈谖之辞，欲以攀救旧姻之家，大逆之辜，举错专恣，不遵法度，亡以示百僚。 
现代文：可是你就任以来，没有做出什么忠诚扶国之举，反而出此奸诈的言辞，想以此拯救开脱你的姻亲之家，这是大逆之罪，你行为专断放肆，不遵循法度，不足以作百官的表率。 
English: However, since you took office, you have not made any act of loyalty and support for the country, but on the contrary, you have come up with this treacherous rhetoric, trying to save and absolve your in-laws' family. This is a crime of high treason. Your arbitrary and impudent behavior, not following the law, is not enough to set an example for all officials.

古文：左迁为大司农，后徙卫尉、左将军。
现代文：于是将王崇降职为大司农，后来又改任卫尉左将军。
English: As a result, Wang Chong was demoted to the position of the Chief Secretary of Agriculture, and later he was reappointed to the position of Lieutenant General of the Left Division.

古文：平帝即位，王莽秉政，大司空彭宣乞骸骨罢，崇代为大司空，封扶平侯。
现代文：汉平帝即位后，王莽把持朝政，大司空彭宣上书请求告老归乡，得以获准，王崇便取代他继任大司空之职，被封为扶平侯。
English: After Emperor Hanping ascended the throne, Wang Mang took control of the imperial government, and Grand Secretary Ku Peng Xuan submitted a request to return to his hometown, which was approved. Wang Chong replaced him as Grand Secretary Ku and was named Fu Ping Hou.

古文：岁余，崇复谢病乞骸骨，皆避王莽，莽遣就国。
现代文：过了一年多时间，王崇也称病请求辞官归乡，其实他们都是为了躲避王莽，王莽便让王崇前往扶平侯的封地养老。
English: After more than a year, Wang Chong also said that he was ill and asked the officials to return home. In fact, they were all to avoid Wang Mang, who then let Wang Chong go to the fiefdom of Fu Ping Hou to retire.

古文：岁余，为傅婢所毒，薨，国除。
现代文：过了一年多时间，王崇被侍婢毒害而死，其封国也随之被废。
English: After more than a year, Wang Chong was poisoned to death by a servant girl, and his title to the country was consequently annulled.

古文：自吉至崇，世名清廉，然材器名称稍不能及父，而禄位弥隆。
现代文：王氏家族自王吉至王崇，几世皆有清廉之名，然而若以才学名声论子孙都稍逊于其父祖，但官位却是越来越高。
English: The Wang family, from Wang Ji to Wang Chong, has had a reputation for incorruptibility for several generations. However, if they are famous for learning, their descendants are slightly inferior to their ancestors, but the official rank is getting higher and higher.

古文：皆好车马衣服，其自奉养极为鲜明，而亡金银锦绣之物。
现代文：王氏几代都喜好车马衣服，他们的衣食住行都极为讲究，十分出众，但却没有金银锦绣等物品。
English: Several generations of the Wang family have been fond of horse-drawn carriages and clothes. Their food, clothing, housing and travel are all extremely exquisite, very outstanding, but they do not have gold, silver, brocade and other items.

古文：及迁徙去处，所载不过囊衣，不畜积余财。
现代文：每次搬家迁徙时，车上所载的不过是一口袋替换衣物而已。他们不存储多余的财物。
English: Each time they move house, they carry just a bag of replacement clothes in the car. They don't store any extra belongings.

古文：去位家居，亦布衣疏食。
现代文：离官家居时，也是布衣蔬食。
English: When away from home, it is also cloth, clothes and vegetables.

古文：天下服其廉而怪其奢，故俗传 王阳能作黄金 。
现代文：天下之人都佩服他们的清廉，却又对其衣食车马如此讲究感到十分奇怪，因此民间都传说 王阳会变金术 。
English: People all over the world admire their chastity, but find it very strange that they are so particular about their clothes, food, carriages and horses, so the folk have a legend that Wang Yang can turn into gold.

古文：贡禹字少翁，琅邪人也。
现代文：贡禹，字少翁，琅邪人。
English: Gong Yu, also known as Shao Weng, was an evil man.

古文：以明经洁行著闻，征为博士、凉州刺史，病去官。
现代文：以精通经义，品行端正而著称，被征召为博士，任凉州刺史，因病辞官。
English: He was famous for his mastery of the classics and philosophy, and his upright conduct. He was called up as a doctor, appointed as the chief historian of Liangzhou, and resigned from his post due to illness.

古文：复举贤良为河南令。
现代文：后来被推举为贤良任河南令。
English: Later, he was promoted to the post of Henan Provincial Commander.

古文：岁余，以职事为府官所责，免冠谢。
现代文：遇了一年多，因公事被府官指责，被迫脱帽谢罪。
English: After more than a year, he was accused by a prefectural official for doing his job, and was forced to take off his hat to apologize.

古文：禹曰： 冠一免，安复可冠也！ 
现代文：贡禹说： 帽子一旦摘下，岂能再戴！ 
English: Gong Yu said, "Once you take off your hat, you can't wear it again!

古文：遂去官。
现代文：于是辞官而去。
English: So he resigned his post and left.

古文：元帝初即位，征禹为谏大夫，数虚己问以政事。
现代文：汉元帝即位不久，征召贡禹为谏大夫，多次屈尊向他询问政事。
English: Soon after Emperor Han Yuan ascended the throne, he conscripted Gong Yu to be his doctor, and repeatedly deigned to ask him about political affairs.

古文：是时，年岁不登，郡国多困，禹奏言：
现代文：当时，年成不好，农业歉收，天下郡县王国处境困窘，贡禹上奏说：
English: At that time, the year was not good, the agricultural harvest was poor, and the country was in a difficult situation, Gong Yu said:

古文：古者宫室有制，宫女不过九人，秣马不过八匹；墙涂而不雕，木摩而不刻，车舆器物皆不文画，苑囿不过数十里，与民共之；任贤使能，什一而税，无它赋敛徭戍之役，使民岁不过三日，千里之内自给，千里之外各置贡职而已。
现代文：古时候宫室有一定的规格制度，宫女不超过九人，饲养的马匹不超过八匹；宫墙衹粉刷而不绘画，木料衹打磨光滑而不雕刻；车舆器物等也都不用颜色图画来纹饰，皇家的园林方圆不超过几十里，并与老百姓共同享用；任用贤能之人，衹收取相当于百姓收入十分之一的赋税，除此之外不再有其他的赋敛以及劳作戍边之役，役使百姓，每年不超过三天，以京畿为中心，千里之内的赋税天子取以自供，千里之外则依据其出产确定一定的种类和数量，让他们按时入贡而已。
English: In ancient times, the imperial palace had a certain standard system. There were no more than nine court ladies and no more than eight horses; the palace walls were whitewashed without painting, the wood was polished smooth without carving; the vehicles and utensils were not decorated with color pictures. The royal gardens were no more than a few dozen miles in circumference and were shared with the common people; the appointment of a virtuous person collected a tax equivalent to one-tenth of the people's income. In addition, there were no other taxes and labor frills. The people were forced to work no more than three days a year, with Gyeonggi as the center. The tax gods within a thousand

古文：故天下家给人足，颂声并作。
现代文：因此，天下百姓丰衣足食，对君王的感戴与颂扬之声处处可闻。
English: Therefore, the people of the world are well-fed and clothed, and the voice of admiration and praise for the monarch can be heard everywhere.

古文：至高祖、孝文、孝景皇帝，循古节俭，宫女不过十余，厩马百余匹。
现代文：到高祖、孝文、孝景皇帝之时，仍能遵循古制，勤俭节约，宫女不过十余人，厩中马匹不过百余匹。
English: At the time of Emperor Gaozu, Emperor Xiaowen, and Emperor Xiaojing, it was still possible to follow the ancient system, to be thrifty and frugal, to have only a dozen or so concubines, and only a hundred or so horses in the stables.

古文：孝文皇帝衣绨履革，器亡雕文金银之饰。
现代文：孝文皇帝穿厚缯做的衣服，兽皮做的鞋，所用器物没有雕刻绘画金镶银嵌等装饰。
English: Emperor Xiaowen wore clothes made of thick felt, shoes made of animal skin, and the utensils he used were not decorated with carvings, paintings, gold and silver inlays, etc.

古文：后世争为奢侈，转转益甚，臣下亦相放效，衣服履裤刀剑乱于主上，主上时临潮入庙，众人不能别异，甚非其宜。
现代文：后世的人却争相竞赛奢侈，辗转发展，曰益严重，臣下也争相仿效，衣裤鞋帽以及所佩刀剑等没有一定的规制，混乱而僭越主上，主上经常上朝入庙，众人竟很难从车乘服饰上辨别上下尊卑，这种情形很不应当。
English: Later generations, however, competed for luxury and development, saying that it was getting more and more serious, and their subjects also competed for imitation. There was no certain regulation for clothing, trousers, shoes, hats, and the swords they wore. Confusion and arrogance prevailed. The master often went to the temple, and it was difficult for everyone to distinguish the superior from the inferior in terms of clothing. This situation is very inappropriate.

古文：然非自知奢僣也，犹鲁昭公曰： 吾何僣矣？ 
现代文：然而，那些人却没有意识到自己的奢侈僭越，正如鲁昭公所言： 我哪裹有僭越之处啊？ 
English: However, those people did not realize their extravagant arrogance, as Lu Zhaogong said: Where is my arrogance?

古文：今大夫僣诸侯，诸侯僣天子，天子过天道，其日久矣。
现代文：现今大夫僭越诸侯，诸侯僭越天子，天子超越天道的情况由来已久了。
English: Nowadays, it has been a long time since doctors surpassed princes, princes surpassed heavenly sons, and heavenly sons surpassed heavenly sons.

古文：承衰救乱，矫复古化，在于陛下。
现代文：承接衰微的局面，挽救混乱的礼制，恢复古代的教化，这一切都指望陛下您了。
English: Taking over the declining situation, saving the chaotic etiquette, and restoring the ancient enlightenment, all of this is counting on you, Your Majesty.

古文：臣愚以为尽如太古难，宜少放古以自节焉。《论语》曰： 君子乐节礼乐。 
现代文：臣下我认为，要完全恢复到太古时代的情形已很难做到了，最好是适当仿效上占以自我约束。《论语》说： 君子乐节礼乐。 
English: In my opinion, it is very difficult to completely restore the situation of the primeval times, and it is best to use self-restraint in appropriate imitation. "Analects" said: Junzi music festival music.

古文：方今宫室已定，亡可奈何矣，其余尽可减损。
现代文：现在宫室已建成，无可奈何，没法更改了，其他方面可尽量节俭。
English: Now that the palace room has been completed, there is no choice but to change it, and other aspects can be as frugal as possible.

古文：故时齐三服官输物不过十笥，方今齐三服官作工各数千人，一岁费数巨万。
现代文：过去在查地为天子制作服装的三服官，每年送来的服装不过十竹箱，现在齐地的三服官用工各数千人，一年花费好几万。
English: In the past, the three service officers in Chaudi used to make clothing for the heavenly son, but the clothing sent every year was only ten bamboo boxes. Now, the three service officers in Qi Di employ thousands of workers each, spending tens of thousands a year.

古文：蜀广汉主金银器，岁各用五百万。
现代文：蜀郡的广汉主造金银器皿，每年费用各五百万。
English: Guanghan in Shu County is the main manufacturer of gold and silverware, with an annual cost of five million each.

古文：三工官官费五千万，东西织室亦然。
现代文：少府所属三工官官费年耗五千万，东西织室也是如此。
English: The official expenses of the three craftsmen belonging to Shofu amount to 50 million yen a year, and the same applies to the East-West Weaving Room.

古文：厩马食粟将万匹。
现代文：厩棚内食粟之马将近万匹。
English: The stables are home to nearly 10,000 horses.

古文：臣禹尝从之东宫，见赐怀案，尽文画金银饰，非当所以赐食臣下也。
现代文：我曾经跟随您到太后宫，太后赏赐我酒席，所用酒杯、几案都绘有花纹和金银装饰，这些都不适合用来赐宴臣下。
English: I once followed you to the Empress Dowager's palace. The Empress Dowager presented me with a wine goblet. The wine goblet and several cases are decorated with patterns and gold and silver. These are not suitable for giving to guests.

古文：东宫之费亦不可胜计。
现代文：太后宫的花费也是不可胜计的。
English: The cost of the harem is also incalculable.

古文：天下之民所为大饥饿死者，是也。
现代文：天下的老百姓之所以出现因饥饿而丧命，其原因就在于此。
English: This is the reason why people all over the world are dying of hunger.

古文：今民大饥而死，死又不葬，为犬猪食。
现代文：现在百姓因饥荒而死，死后又无力安葬，尸骨被猪狗所食，甚至出现了人吃人的情况。
English: Now the people are dying of starvation, unable to be buried after death, and their bones are being eaten by pigs and dogs. There have even been cases of cannibalism.

古文：人至相食，而厩马食粟，苦其大肥，气甚怒至，乃日步作之。
现代文：与之相反，宫中马厩中的马匹却因终日饱食粟米，致使人们为其过于肥壮而发愁，并且担心它精力旺盛而容易发怒，便天天让它遛达活动，用以消耗它过剩的精力。
English: On the other hand, the horses in the stables of the palace were fed with millet all day long, which made people worry that they were too fat, and they were worried that they were energetic and prone to anger, so they made them exercise every day to consume their excess energy.

古文：王者受命于天，为民父母，固当若此乎！
现代文：王者受命于天，为民父母，难道就该如此吗！
English: The king was ordered by heaven to rule as the people's parent. Is that how it should be?

古文：天不见耶？
现代文：苍天难道没长眼吗？
English: Doesn't the sky have eyes?

古文：武帝时又多取好女至数千人，以填后宫。
现代文：漠武帝当政时，又多搜罗美色的女子数千人，用以充实后宫。
English: When Emperor Mengwu was in power, he also collected thousands of beautiful women to enrich his harem.

古文：及弃天下，昭帝幼弱，霍光专事，不知礼正，妄多臧金钱财物，鸟、兽、鱼、鳖、牛、马、虎、豹生禽，凡百九十物，尽瘗臧之，又皆以后宫女置于园陵，大失礼，逆天心，又未必称武帝意也。
现代文：待其驾崩后，昭帝年纪尚小，霍光把持朝政，不懂得礼教的正道，妄自大量收藏金钱财物，以及乌兽鱼鳖牛马虎豹等生禽，共一百九十种，都作了武帝的随葬品，全部埋入地下，又把后宫女子安置在园陵守节，极大地歪曲了礼制，违背了天道人心，同时也未必符合武帝的心愿。
English: After his death, Zhao Di was still young, Huo Guang was in charge of the government, he did not understand the right path of etiquette, he made a large collection of money and property, as well as a total of one hundred and ninety species of wild fowl such as cuttlefish, snail and tiger leopard, all of which became Emperor Wu's funerary goods. They were all buried underground, and the harem girl was placed in the garden mausoleum to keep the festival. This greatly distorted the etiquette and violated the heart of the heavenly way, and at the same time did not necessarily meet Emperor Wu's wishes.

古文：昭帝晏驾，光复行之。
现代文：昭帝驾崩时，霍光又是如此行事。
English: At the time of Emperor Zhao's death, Huo Guang acted in the same way.

古文：至孝宣皇帝时，陛下恶有所言，群臣亦随故事，甚可痛也！
现代文：到孝宣皇帝去世时，陛下您也没有表示更改前制的意思，臣下们也就依旧例行事，实在是令人痛心啊！
English: When Emperor Xiaoxuan died, Your Majesty did not express your intention to change the previous system, and your subjects continued to act as usual. It is truly heartbreaking!

古文：故使天下承化，取女皆大过度，诸侯妻妾或至数百人，豪富吏民畜歌者至数十人，是以内多怨女，外多旷夫。
现代文：所以使得天下之人都承此风，娶女都大大超过了限度，诸侯的妻妾有的多至数百人，一些豪富和官宦之家，白养歌妓至数十人，于是便出现了宫内府内多怨女，宫外府外多旷夫的情况。
English: As a result, people all over the world followed this trend, and the number of married women greatly exceeded the limit. Some lords had up to hundreds of wives and concubines, while some wealthy families and families of government officials had up to dozens of courtesans. As a result, there were many mistresses in the palace and many absentee husbands outside the palace.

古文：及众庶葬埋，皆虚地上以实地下。
现代文：至于人们的丧葬，都是不惜空虚地上，而将物品大量随葬地下。
English: As for people's funerals, they are all carried out on empty ground, with a large number of items buried underground.

古文：其过自上生，皆在大臣循故事之罪也。
现代文：这种种令人痛心的现状，其根源起于主上，其罪过却在于臣下因循旧例的行为。
English: This sorry state of affairs has its roots in the Lord, but the fault lies with his subjects for following the old ways.

古文：唯陛下深察古道，从其俭者，大减损乘舆服御器物，三分去二。
现代文：希望陛下您深入考察上古之道，遵循其节俭的风尚，大量削减车乘服饰御用器物，削减去三分之二。
English: I hope, Your Majesty, that you will take a closer look at the old ways and follow their frugal ways, and drastically reduce the number of articles of clothing and household utensils, cutting them by two-thirds.

古文：子产多少有命，审察后宫，择其贤者留二十人，余悉归之。
现代文：子嗣多少本由命定，陛下应审察后宫女子，选择其中贤德者留下二十人，其余的都让她们回归自己的家中。
English: The number of his descendants is predetermined. His Majesty should examine all the women of the harem, select the virtuous ones and keep twenty of them, and let the rest of them return to their homes.

古文：及诸陵园女亡子者，宜悉遣。
现代文：各陵园内守节女子中没有子嗣的，也应都遣返其家。
English: In all the cemeteries, if the women who observe the festival have no children, they should also be repatriated to their families.

古文：独杜陵宫人数百，诚可哀怜也。
现代文：仅杜陵内就有宫女数百人，实在让人哀怜。
English: There are hundreds of maids of honour in the Tu Ling alone, which is truly pathetic.

古文：厩马可亡过数十匹。
现代文：宫中马匹不要超过数十匹。
English: There should not be more than a few dozen horses in the palace.

古文：独舍长安城南苑地以为田猎之囿，自城西南至山西至鄠皆复其田，以与贫民。
现代文：衹保留长安城南苑地作为田猎的场所，自城西南至山西乃至鄂等地的苑囿都恢复为农田，分配给贫苦百姓。
English: Preserve the South Garden of Chang'an City as a place for field hunting, from the southwest of the city to Shanxi and even H, the gardens are restored to farmland and distributed to poor people.

古文：方今天下饥馑，可亡大自损减以救之，称天意乎？
现代文：现今天下百姓遭受饥馑之苦，难道可以不大量削减自己衣食住行的费用，以救济百姓，顺应天意吗？
English: Now that the people are suffering from famine, can we not greatly reduce the cost of our own food, clothing, housing and transportation in order to relieve the people and conform to the will of heaven?

古文：天生圣人，盖为万民，非独使自娱乐而已也。
现代文：天生圣人，就是为了天下民众，并非祇让圣人自行欢乐而已。
English: Natural saints are for the people of the world, not just for the saints to enjoy themselves.

古文：故《诗》曰： 天难谌斯，不易为王 ； 上帝临女，毋贰尔心。 
现代文：因此，《诗经》有言道： 天意难承，为君不易；  上天时时监察着你，不可心怀二意 。
English: Therefore, there is a saying in the "Song of Songs": The will of heaven is difficult to accept, and it is not easy for you; Heaven is always monitoring you, and you should not have second thoughts.

古文： 当仁不让 ，独可以圣心参诸天地，揆之往古，不可与臣下议也。
现代文：《论语》云 当仁不让 ，做皇帝的衹可以圣人之心参诸天地法则，譬照往古贤哲，而不应和臣下讨论。
English: In the Analects, it is said that the emperor's edict should not be discussed with his subjects, but that a saint's heart should be guided by the laws of heaven and earth, following the example of ancient sages.

古文：若其阿意顺指，随君上下，臣禹不胜拳拳，不敢不尽愚心。
现代文：如果臣下曲意奉迎，衹会按照君王的意志行事，我贡禹一腔拳拳之忱，不敢不尽我的一片心啊。
English: If my vassal obeys my wishes, I will act in accordance with the will of the king. I pay tribute to you with all my heart. I dare not fail to do my best.

古文：天子纳善其忠，乃下诏令太仆减食谷马，水衡减食肉兽，省宜春下苑以与贫民，又罢角抵诸戏及齐三服官。
现代文：汉元帝很欣赏贡禹的忠诚，采纳了他的建议，于是下韶令太仆减少了食谷的马匹，令水衡减少了供观赏的食肉的禽兽，并把宜春下苑的土地划出来分配给贫民耕种，又废罢了角抵等游戏和齐地的三服官。
English: Emperor Han Yuan appreciated Gong Yu's loyalty and accepted his suggestion, so he ordered the eunuchs to reduce the number of horses in the food valley, the water balance to reduce the number of carnivorous animals for viewing, and the land of Yichun Xia Yuan was allocated to the poor for cultivation, and the games such as the game and the three servants of Qi Di were abolished.

古文：迁禹为光禄大夫。
现代文：升任贡禹为光禄大夫。
English: Gong Yu was promoted to Guanglu Doctor.

古文：顷之，禹上书曰： 臣禹年老贫穷，家訾不满万钱，妻子糠豆不赡，裋褐不完。
现代文：不久，贡禹上书说： 当初我年老贫穷，家财总计不到万钱，妻子儿女粗食不能裹腹，粗布衣服尚不蔽体。
English: Soon after, Gong Yu wrote: At that time, I was old and poor. My family's total wealth was less than ten thousand yuan. My wife and children could not afford to buy coarse food for their stomachs, and coarse cloth clothes did not yet cover their bodies.

古文：有田百三十亩，陛下过意征臣，臣卖田百亩以供车马。
现代文：有田地一百三十亩，蒙陛下错爱征召我，我卖掉百亩田地购置车马以奉诏。
English: I have a hundred and thirty mu of farmland. His Majesty mistakenly conscripted me. I sold my hundred mu of farmland to buy a horse and cart to carry out his command.

古文：至，拜为谏大夫，秩八百石，俸钱月九千二百。
现代文：到达京城后，被拜为谏大夫，官秩八百石，薪俸钱每月九千二百。
English: After arriving in Beijing, he was worshipped as Dr. Zou, with an official rank of 800 koku and a salary of 9,200 per month.

古文：廪食太官，又蒙赏赐四时杂缯、绵絮、衣服、酒肉、诸果物，德厚甚深。
现代文：太官供给饮食，又承蒙赏赐四时所用之布匹衣服、酒肉以及各种果物，恩德深厚。
English: The eunuch provided food and drink, and was rewarded with cloth, clothing, wine, meat, and various fruits, which were used four times. His kindness was profound.

古文：疾病侍医临治，赖陛下神灵，不死而活。
现代文：我曾患疾病，陛下派御医屈尊诊治，仰仗陛下神灵得以不死而活。
English: I once suffered from an illness, His Majesty sent a doctor to treat me, and I relied on His Majesty's spirit to live forever.

古文：又拜为光禄大夫，秩二千石，俸钱月万二千。
现代文：又被升为光禄大夫，位居二千石，薪俸钱每月一万二千。
English: He was also promoted to the post of Guanglu Doctor, with a salary of 12,000 yuan per month.

古文：禄赐愈多，家日以益富，身日以益尊，诚非草茅愚臣所当蒙也。
现代文：俸禄赏赐更多了，家境日渐富裕，身位曰益尊贵，这实在不是像我这样的草泽愚臣所应当蒙受的荣光。
English: I have been rewarded with more salary, my family is getting richer and richer, and my position is becoming more and more distinguished. This is really not the glory that a grass-roots idiot like me should receive.

古文：伏自念终亡以报厚德，日夜惭愧而已。
现代文：我私下常想，终究没有办法报答陛下的大恩大德，惟有日夜惭愧而已。
English: Privately, I often think that in the end, there is no way to repay His Majesty's great kindness, except to be ashamed day and night.

古文：臣禹犬马之齿八十一，血气衰竭，耳目不聪明，非复能有补益，所谓素餐尸禄洿朝之臣也。
现代文：如今我贱龄已八十有一，气血衰竭，耳已不聪，目已不明，不可能对国家对朝廷有所贡献了，衹是所谓空食俸禄，有损朝廷形象的废人罢了。
English: Now, at the ripe old age of eighty-one, I am exhausted, my ears are deaf, my eyes are blind, and it is impossible for me to make any contribution to the country and the imperial court. I am nothing more than a so-called empty-suit who damages the image of the imperial court.

古文：自痛去家三千里，凡有一子，年十二，非有在家为臣具棺椁者也。
现代文：我又暗自伤心离家三千里，衹有一个刚年满十二岁的儿子，没有人能在家为我置办棺椁，养老送终。
English: I also secretly grieved that I was three thousand miles away from home, but I had a son who had just turned twelve. No one could arrange a coffin for me at home, or provide for my old age.

古文：诚恐一旦蹎仆气竭，不复自还，洿席荐于宫室，骸骨弃捐，孤魂不归。
现代文：真怕一旦跌倒气绝，不能再活过来，玷污了宫室的席子，尸骨弃于异乡，孤魂归不了故里。
English: I'm really afraid that once I lose my breath, I won't be able to come back to life, I'll defile the seat of the palace, my body will be abandoned in a foreign land, and I won't be able to return to my hometown.

古文：不胜私愿，愿乞骸骨，及身生归乡里，死亡所恨。 
现代文：怀此私愿，十分希望能辞去官职，返回故里，若能如愿，便死而无憾了。 
English: With this selfish wish, I very much hope to resign from my official position and return to my hometown. If I can do so, I will die with no regrets.

古文：天子报曰： 朕以生有伯夷之廉，史鱼之直，守经据占，不阿当世，孳孳于民，俗之所寡，故亲近生，几参国政。
现代文：元帝批示说： 朕因为先生有伯夷之廉洁，史鱼之刚直，遵循经义据守古道，不盲目趋从世风，孜孜不倦为民请命，为当今俗世少见之高尚贤良之人，因此而亲近先生，希望先生参与国政。
English: Emperor Yuan issued the following instruction: "I am close to you because you are the most honest of emperors, the most upright of historians, you follow the classics, you do not blindly follow the fashion of the times, you tirelessly plead for the lives of the people, and you are a noble and virtuous person rarely seen in the world today. I hope you will participate in national politics."

古文：今未得久闻生之奇论也，而云欲退，意岂有所恨与？
现代文：如今还未来得及多听听先生的惊世之论，先生却说要隐退，难道是先生有什么遗憾不顺心的事吗？
English: Now, we haven't had time to listen to more of his earth-shattering theories, but he says he wants to retire. Does he have any regrets?

古文：将在位者与生殊乎？
现代文：还是因为和当朝其他官吏志趣不投呢？
English: Or is it because they do not share the same interests as other government officials?

古文：往者尝令金敞语生，欲及生时禄生之子，既已谕矣，今复云子少。
现代文：以前朕曾指示金敞转告您，想在您在世之时就让您的儿子蒙荫食禄，您已经明白朕的心意了，现在却又说儿子年少，无人为您养老送终。
English: In the past, I had instructed Jin Chang to tell you that I wanted to let your son live in the shade while you were alive. You have already understood my intention, but now you say that your son is young and there is no one to look after you in your old age.

古文：夫以王命辨护生家，虽百子何以加？
现代文：以天子之命护佑先生的家庭，即使有一百个儿子又怎能相比呢？
English: Even if there are a hundred sons, how can they compare?

古文：传曰亡怀土，何必思故乡！
现代文：俗话说 勿怀土，先生又何必日夜思念故乡呢！
English: As the saying goes, "Don't miss your hometown," so why do you miss it day and night?

古文：生其强饭慎疾以自辅。 
现代文：请先生多进饮食小心生病，保重身体。 
English: Please eat more, be careful of getting sick, and take care of your body.

古文：后月余，以禹为长信少府。
现代文：此后一个多月，任贡禹为长信少府。
English: More than a month later, Gong Yu was appointed to the position of Changxin Shophu.

古文：会御史大夫陈万年卒，禹代为御史大夫，列于三公。
现代文：适逢御史大夫陈万年逝世，贡禹便接替他为御史大夫，列于三公之位。
English: When the Grand Historian Chen Mannian passed away, Gong Yu succeeded him as Grand Historian and was ranked as one of the Three Princes.

古文：自禹在位，数言得失，书数十上。
现代文：自贡禹在朝为官后，多次评论政事得失，上书数十次。
English: After Zigong Yu became an official in the DPRK, he repeatedly commented on the merits and demerits of politics, and submitted dozens of letters.

古文：禹以为古民亡赋算口钱，起武帝征伐四夷，重赋于民，民产子三岁则出口钱，故民重困，至于生子辄杀，甚可悲痛。
现代文：贡禹认为，古时人民没有赋算口钱的负担，从汉武帝征伐周边少数民族起，开始向老百姓征收重赋，百姓生养儿子长到三岁，便要开始交纳口钱，因此百姓十分困苦，以至于出现生下儿子便杀死的现象，实在是很悲惨可怜。
English: Gong Yu believes that in ancient times, the people did not have the burden of calculating mouth money. From the time Emperor Hanwu conquered the surrounding ethnic minorities, he began to levy heavy taxes on the common people. When the common people had a son who was three years old, they had to begin to pay mouth money. Therefore, the common people were very poor, so that the phenomenon of a son being killed after birth was really very tragic and pitiful.

古文：宜令儿七岁去齿乃出口钱，年二十乃算。
现代文：应当规定小孩七岁换牙以后再交口钱，年满二十岁再开始交纳赋税。
English: It should be stipulated that children should pay oral money after changing their teeth at the age of seven, and start paying taxes at the age of twenty.

古文：又言古者不以金钱为币，专意于农，故一夫不耕，必有受其饥者。
现代文：贡禹又说古时候不以金钱为货币，专心于农事，因此，一人不耕作，定有因此而挨饿的人。
English: Gong Yu also said that in ancient times, people did not use money as currency and concentrated on farming. Therefore, if one person does not farm, there must be people who are starving.

古文：今汉家铸钱，及诸铁官皆置吏卒徒，攻山取铜铁，一岁功十万人已上，中农食七人，是七十万人常受其饥也。
现代文：现在汉家实行铸钱，并且诸铁官都纷纷设置官吏和差役刑徒，遣派他们开凿矿山，挖掘钢，一年费工十万人以上，平均一个中等劳力的农夫可养活七个人，这样一来，每年就有七十万人经常遭受饥饿之苦。
English: At present, the Han family practices the minting of money, and all the iron officials have successively set up officials and forced laborers, and dispatched them to excavate mines and dig steel. It takes more than 100,000 people to work for a year. On average, a medium-labor farmer can feed seven people. As a result, 700,000 people often suffer from hunger every year.

古文：凿地数百丈，销阴气之精，地臧空虚，不能含气出云，斩伐林木亡有时禁，水旱之灾未必不由此也。
现代文：凿地数百丈，破坏了阴气之精，地藏空虚，不能含气出云，砍伐树木森林没有季节时令的限制，水旱之灾未必不是由此而产生的。
English: Hundreds of meters of earth have been chiseled away, destroying the spirit of yin and yang. The earth has become empty, unable to produce clouds. The felling of trees and forests is not limited by season. Floods and droughts are not necessarily caused by this.

古文：自五铢钱起已来七十余年，民坐盗铸钱被刑者众，富人积钱满室，犹亡厌足。
现代文：自从开始铸五铢钱至今已有七十余年，百姓犯私自铸钱之罪而被判刑者甚多，富贵之家积钱满室，尚不满足。
English: It has been more than 70 years since the minting of 50 baht coins began. There are many people who have been sentenced for the crime of illegally minting money. Wealthy families have accumulated a lot of money and are still not satisfied.

古文：民心动摇，商贾求利，东西南北各用智巧，好衣美食，岁有十二之利，而不出租税。农夫父子暴露中野，不避寒暑，捽土，手足胼胝，已奉谷租，又出稿税，乡部私求，不可胜供。
现代文：民心动摇，商买追逐财利，在东西南北四面八方使用各种手段，享受着精美的衣服食品，每年获取十分之二的利润，却不用交纳租税，而农夫父子却暴露于田野之中，不避寒暑，拔草碎土，手脚都长满了老茧，已交了谷租，又要交禾秆税，乡部之吏还有各种名目的搜刮勒索，不可胜供。
English: The people's hearts are wavering. Merchants are chasing money and profit, using all kinds of means in all directions from east to west and north to south, enjoying fine clothes and food, obtaining two-tenths of profits every year, but not paying taxes, while the farmer and his son are exposed to the fields, do not avoid cold and heat, pull up weeds and broken soil, hands and feet are covered with calluses, have paid grain rent, and have to pay grain tax, and the village officials also have various names to scrape and extort, can not be defeated.

古文：故民弃本逐末，耕者不能半。
现代文：因此人们都抛弃务农本业而追逐商贾末业，从事农业生产者不到总人口的半数。
English: As a result, people are abandoning farming as a profession in favour of commerce, with less than half of the total population engaged in agricultural production.

古文：贫民虽赐之田，犹贱卖以贾，穷则起为盗贼。
现代文：天子虽赐给贫苦农民以田地，但他们还是将它贱价卖掉以从事商买之业，穷困之极就起而为盗贼。
English: Although the Son of God gave the land to the poor farmers, they still sold it at a low price to engage in the business of buying and selling. When they were extremely poor, they became thieves.

古文：何者？
现代文：这是什么原因呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：末利深而惑于钱也。
现代文：末业利大而人们易受金钱诱惑！
English: People are susceptible to the lure of money!

古文：是以奸邪不可禁，其原皆起于钱也。
现代文：因此，奸宄邪恶之事屡禁不止，其根源都在于金钱。
English: As a result, there is a lot of corruption and evil, and the root of it all is money.

古文：疾其末者绝其本，宜罢采珠玉金银铸钱之官，无复以为币。
现代文：要消除种种奸邪的现象，就必须禁绝产生奸邪的根源，应当罢除掌管采掘珠玉金银及铸钱的官吏，不再铸造货币。
English: In order to eliminate all kinds of treacherous phenomena, it is necessary to ban the root causes of treachery, remove the officials in charge of mining precious metals and minting money, and no longer mint money.

古文：市井勿得贩卖，除其租铢之律，租税禄赐皆以布帛及谷，使百姓一归于农，复古道便。
现代文：禁止贱买贵卖的市场交易，废除原有的计百物之铢两抵租税的法律，租税、俸禄及赏赐都用布帛和谷物，使百姓都归于农桑，追遵古法，于国于政都为便利。
English: The market transactions of buying cheap and selling dear were prohibited, and the original law of deducting tax twice for every hundred things was abolished. The tax, salary and reward were all made of cloth and grain, so that the people were all farmers, and it was convenient for the country and the government to follow the ancient law.

古文：又言诸离宫及长乐宫卫可减其太半，以宽徭役。
现代文：贡禹又建议说各处行宫别馆以及长乐宫的戍卫人员可以削减一大半，以减轻百姓的徭役负担。
English: Gong Yu also suggested that the guards of the palace annexes and the Changle Palace could be reduced by more than half in order to reduce the burden on the people.

古文：又诸官奴婢十万余人戏游亡事，税良民以给之，岁费五六巨万，宜免为庶人，廪食，令代关东戍卒，乘北边亭塞候望。
现代文：再有各官府的奴婢计有十余万人，他们终日游戏玩耍，无所事事，还要靠征收百姓的赋税来供给他们衣食，每年费用达五、六万之巨，应当将他们免去奴婢身份成为庶人，给予其食，让他们代替关东戍卒，驻扎北边亭塞担任侦察戍卫之职。
English: Furthermore, there are more than one hundred thousand slaves and maidservants of various government offices. They play games all day and do nothing. They also rely on the collection of taxes from the people to provide them with food and clothing. The annual cost is as high as fifty or sixty thousand. They should be freed from the status of slaves and maidservants to become commoners, give them food, let them replace the Kanto guards, and station them in the north side of the pavilion to serve as reconnaissance guards.

古文：又欲令近臣自诸曹、侍中以上，家亡得私贩卖，与民争利，犯者辄免官削爵，不得仕宦。
现代文：贡禹又想奏请皇上下令让各部门自侍中以上的近臣之家，不得私自贩卖货物，与民争利，有违犯规定者，就免官削爵，不得再入仕途。
English: Gong Yu also wanted to appeal to the emperor to order all departments to allow the house of the vassal of the middle and above to serve themselves, not to sell goods without permission, to compete with the people for profits, and those who violated the regulations would be exempted from official demotion and would not be allowed to re-enter the career.

古文：禹又言：孝文皇帝时，贵廉洁，贱贪污，贾人、赘婿及吏坐赃者皆禁锢不得为吏，赏善罚恶，不阿亲戚，罪白者伏其诛，疑者以与民，亡赎罪之法，故令行禁止，海内大化，天下断狱四百，与刑错亡异。
现代文：贡禹还说：孝文皇帝时，崇尚廉洁，鄙视贪污，商买之人，入赘之婿，以及官吏中有贪污、受贿行为者，都禁锢终身，不得为官，奖赏善行，惩罚恶人，不偏袒亲戚，罪证确凿者按律诛杀，罪证不能肯定者，从轻发落，没有赎罪的规定，因此，令行禁止，天下大治，全国共审理和判决案件四百起，和无人犯法，刑法闲置不用没什么区别。
English: Gong Yu also said: When Emperor Xiaowen was in power, he advocated integrity and despised corruption. Merchants, bribe-takers, the son-in-law of the emperor, as well as officials who committed acts of corruption and bribery, were all imprisoned for life, were not allowed to become officials, rewarded good deeds, punished evildoers, did not favor relatives, those with solid criminal evidence were killed according to the law, those with uncertain criminal evidence were let off lightly, and there was no provision for atonement. Therefore, the execution of orders was prohibited, the whole country was governed, and a total of 400 cases were tried and sentenced across the country. It was no different from

古文：武帝始临天下，尊贤用士，辟地广境数千里，自见功大威行，遂从耆欲，用度不足，乃行一切之变，使犯法者赎罪，入谷者补吏，是以天下奢侈，官乱民贫，盗贼并起，亡命者众。
现代文：汉武帝即位之初，尊重贤才，任用士人，开拓疆域数千里，他认为自己功绩盛大，威望很高，于是开始奢侈纵欲，费用不足，就变更各种旧有规制，使犯法者可以用钱物来赎罪，交纳一定的谷物就可以补为官吏，于是，天下奢侈之风盛行，吏治混乱，百姓贫困，盗贼蜂起，亡命之徒众。
English: At the beginning of the reign of Emperor Hanwu, he respected the talents, appointed scholars, and explored thousands of miles of territory. He thought that his achievements were grand and his prestige was high. So he began to indulge in luxury. When the expenses were insufficient, he changed all kinds of old regulations so that lawbreakers could use money to atone for their sins, and paying a certain amount of grain could be supplemented as officials. As a result, luxury prevailed in the world, officials ruled in chaos, the people were poor, thieves rose up, and the people were desperate.

古文：郡国恐伏其诛，则择便巧吏书习于计簿能欺上府者，以为右职；奸轨不胜，则取勇猛能操切百姓者，以苛暴威服下者，使居大位。
现代文：各郡国害怕祸殃及身，就选择精通掌故、长于为文、熟悉赋税簿籍、善于巧言蒙骗上级官府的人为高官；奸邪之事屑出不穷，便举用凶狠而能控制百姓者、能以苛刻暴虐手段胁迫人屈服者，让他们身居要职。
English: The counties and states, fearing that calamity would befall them, chose as their high officials those who were good at manipulation, good at writing, familiar with tax books, and good at cunningly deceiving higher-level government offices; those who were able to control the people with ferocity, and those who could coerce people into submission with harsh and tyrannical means, were appointed to important positions.

古文：故亡义而有财者显于世，欺谩而善书者尊于朝，悖逆而勇猛者贵于官。
现代文：因此无义而有财者显赫于世间，欺诈而善书者尊贵于朝廷，逆乱狂妄而凶狠无畏者位居高职。
English: For this reason, those who are unjust but rich are prominent in the world, those who are deceitful but good at reading are honored in the imperial court, and those who are rebellious, arrogant, and fearless are in high positions.

古文：故俗皆曰： 何以孝弟为？
现代文：所以，民间流传着这样的话： 要孝悌何用？
English: Therefore, there is a popular saying: What is the use of being filial?

古文：财多而光荣。
现代文：钱财多就光荣。
English: The more money, the more glory.

古文：何以礼义为？
现代文：要礼义何用？
English: What's the use of politeness?

古文：史书而仕宦。
现代文：善于为文就能显贵。
English: If you are good at writing, you can be distinguished.

古文：何以谨慎为？
现代文：要谨慎何用？
English: What's the use of being cautious?

古文：勇猛而临官。 
现代文：凶狠暴虐就能做官。 
English: A vicious tyrant can become an official.

古文：故黥劓而髡钳者犹复攘臂为政于世，行虽犬彘，家富势足，目指气使，是为贤耳。
现代文：于是，受过黥、劓、髡、钳等各种刑罚的人也在世间奋起参政，行为虽如同猪狗，却家境富有，势力强大，颐指气使，造就是所谓贤能之人。
English: As a result, people who have received various punishments such as shackles, shackles, shackles and shackles have also risen up in the world to participate in politics. Although they behave like pigs and dogs, they are rich and powerful, and they are made by the so-called virtuous people.

古文：故谓居官而置富者为雄桀，处奸而得利者为壮士，兄劝其弟，父勉其子，俗之坏败，乃至于是！
现代文：于是，做官而致富者被视为英雄豪杰，奸诈而得利者被称为壮勇之士。哥哥劝勉弟弟，父亲鼓励儿子，争蹈其途，社会风气的败坏，已到了如此地步！
English: As a result, those who become officials and become rich are regarded as heroes, and those who are treacherous and make a profit are called heroes. The elder brother exhorts the younger brother, the father encourages the son, and they fight for their way. The corruption of the social ethos has reached such a level!

古文：察其所以然者，皆以犯法得赎罪，求士不得真贤，相，守崇财利，诛不行之所致也。
现代文：考察其原因，都是由于犯法允许赎罪，求士得不到真正的贤能，郡国长官贪图钱财和私利，诛罚措施实行不力的缘故。
English: The reasons for this are all due to the fact that breaking the law allows atonement, solicitors do not get real merit, county governors are greedy for money and self-interest, and the implementation of punishment measures is weak.

古文：今欲兴至治，致太平，宜除赎罪之法。
现代文：现今要想振兴社会，达到大治，使天下太平，就应当废除赎罪的法律。
English: Today, if we want to revitalize society, achieve great governance, and make the world peaceful, we should abolish the law of atonement.

古文：相、守选举不以实，及有臧者，辄行其诛，亡但免官，则争尽力为善，贵孝弟，贱贾人，进真贤，举实廉，而天下治矣。
现代文：诸侯国相和郡守选拔举荐人才情况不属实，以及有贪赃行为的，要坚决诛杀，不能仅仅免官而已，这样一来，则人人争相尽力为善，推崇孝敬父母，友爱兄弟，唾弃商贾货利之人，进荐举用真正贤能而廉洁的人，天下就会得到大治。
English: In this way, everyone will strive to do their best, promote filial piety, respect for parents, love for brothers and sisters, revile merchants and profiteers, and promote the use of truly virtuous and incorruptible people, and the world will be greatly improved.

古文：孔子，匹夫之人耳，以乐道正身不解之故，四海之内，天下之君，微孔子之言亡所折中。
现代文：孔子祇是一个普通的百姓，因为他一心向道，修身不懈，以致四海之内，天下之君，莫不以孔子之言为判断是非的标准。
English: Confucius was just an ordinary citizen, because he was single-minded in his pursuit of the Way and tireless in his self-cultivation, to the extent that, within the four seas, the ruler of the world would have to use the words of Confucius as the standard for judging right and wrong.

古文：况乎以汉地之广，陛下之德，处南面之尊，秉万乘之权，因天地之助，其于变世易俗，调和阴阳，陶冶万物，化正天下，易于决流抑队。
现代文：何况以汉朝如此辽阔之地域，又有陛下如此深厚的德行，身居国君的尊贵地位，执掌天下大权，藉天地之佑助，要改变世事革易民俗，调和阴阳，化育万物，匡正天下，实比开通河道泄流，制止将坠之物还容易。
English: What's more, with the vast territory of the Han Dynasty, and His Majesty's profound virtue, living in the noble position of the sovereign, holding the supreme power of the world, with the help of heaven and earth, it is easier to change the world, revolutionize folk customs, reconcile yin and yang, transform and nurture all things, and rectify the world, than to open the river to drain the flow and stop the falling things.

古文：自成、康以来，几且千岁，欲为治者甚众，然而太平不复兴者，何也？
现代文：自盛、尘以来，至今已将近一千年了，其间想要治理天下的人很多，然而，太平盛世再也没有出现过，这是为什么呢？
English: It has been nearly a thousand years since Sheng, Dust, and during that time there have been many people who wanted to rule the world. However, there has never been another Taiping Sheng, why is that?

古文：以其舍法度而任私意，奢侈行而仁义废也。
现代文：就是因为舍弃了法度而放纵私欲，奢侈风行而仁义消亡。
English: It is because of the abandonment of the law and the indulgence of selfishness, luxury and the demise of benevolence.

古文：陛下诚深念高祖之苦，醇法太宗之治，正已以先下，选贤以自辅，开进忠正，致诛奸臣、远放谄佞，赦出园陵之女，罢倡乐，绝郑声，去甲乙之帐，退伪薄之物，修节俭之化，驱天下之民皆归于农，如此不解，则三王可侔，五帝可及。
现代文：陛下若诚心追念高祖创业的艰辛，完全效法太宗治国之法，端正自己的言行以表率臣下，选择贤德之士来辅佐自己，纳进忠正之士，惩处奸臣，远离阿谀谄佞之人，放出各园陵中的女子，罢除歌舞杂伎，杜绝靡靡之音，撤去多余的装饰幔帐，摒弃华而不实之物，进行勤俭节约的教化，引导天下百姓都回归于农业生产，如此坚持不懈，那么三皇、五帝之盛世伟绩皆可比及。
English: If His Majesty sincerely remembers the hardships of Gao Zu's entrepreneurship, fully emulates the Taizong's way of governing the country, rectifies his words and deeds, leads his subjects by example, selects virtuous people to assist him, recruits loyal and upright people, punishes treacherous people, keeps away from those who worship idols, releases women from gardens, abolishes kabuki, puts an end to malaise, removes superfluous decorative decorations, abandons gaudy things, teaches thrift and economy, and guides the people of the world to return to agricultural production, then the great achievements of the Three Emperors and the Five Emperors are comparable.

古文：唯陛下留意省察，天下幸甚。
现代文：陛下若能留意并审察于此，乃天下之大幸。
English: It would be a great blessing for the world if Your Majesty could pay attention to and examine this.

古文：天子下其议，令民产子七岁乃出口钱，自此始。
现代文：天子奏书批转发下，诏令百姓生孩子七岁后再开始交纳口钱，这个规定自此开始。
English: After the imperial edict was issued, it was decreed that people should wait seven years after the birth of a child before paying taxes. This regulation has been in effect ever since.

古文：又罢上林宫馆希幸御者，及省建章、甘泉宫卫卒，减诸侯王庙卫卒，省其半。
现代文：又废除了上林宫馆中那些很少有机会临幸的处所，裁减了建章、甘泉宫的卫兵，将各诸侯王庙的卫兵减少一半。
English: He also abolished those places in the Shanglin Palace where people rarely had the chance to be lucky, reduced the number of guards at the Jianzhang and Ganquan Palaces, and halved the number of guards at the temples of the princes and kings.

古文：余虽未尽从，然嘉其质直之意。
现代文：其他方面虽没有完全听从贡禹的建议，但元帝很嘉奖他的忠质耿直之心。
English: Although other parties did not fully follow Gong Yu's advice, Emperor Yuan highly commended his loyalty and sincerity.

古文：禹又奏欲罢郡国庙，定汉宗庙迭毁之礼，皆未施行。
现代文：贡禹又上疏，要求罢除郡国之庙，制定汉家宗庙亲尽则毁的礼制，都未能实行。
English: Gong Yu and Shang Shu, who demanded the removal of the county's temple and the establishment of a ritual system for the destruction of the Han family's ancestral temple, all failed to be implemented.

古文：为御史大夫数月卒，天子赐钱百万，以其子为郎，官至东郡都尉。
现代文：贡禹任御史大夫几个月后去世，元帝赐钱百万，任其子为郎，官至束郡都尉。
English: A few months after the appointment of Gong Yu as the Imperial Historian, he passed away. The Yuan Emperor gave him a million in money and appointed his son as his son, the highest-ranking official in Saku County.

古文：禹卒后，上追思其议，竟下诏罢郡国庙，定迭毁之礼。
现代文：贡禹逝世后，元帝追思他的建议，最终下韶罢除了郡国之庙，确定了亲尽庙毁的制度。
English: After the death of Gong Yu, the Yuan Emperor reflected on his suggestion, and finally abolished the county temple and determined the system of personally destroying the temple.

古文：然通儒或非之，语在《韦玄成传》。
现代文：但是这些举措遭到了当时一些学识渊博的儒生的非议，事情详见《韦玄成传》。
English: However, these measures were criticized by some learned Confucians at the time, as detailed in "Wei Xuancheng Biography."

古文：两龚皆楚人也，胜字君宾，舍字君倩。
现代文：两龚都是楚国人，龚胜字君宾，龚舍字君倩。
English: Both of them are natives of Chu, 胜字君宾, 舍字君まる.

古文：二人相友，并著名节，故世谓之楚两龚。
现代文：两人是好朋友，同以有节操而著名当世，因此，世人称之为楚两龚。
English: The two are good friends, both famous for their self-restraint. Therefore, the world calls them the "two brothers of Chu."

古文：少皆好学明经，胜为郡吏，舍不仕。
现代文：两龚少时都好学而通晓经义，龚胜为郡吏，龚舍没有做官。
English: When they were young, both of them were eager to learn and well-versed in the sutras. Gong Sheng was a county official, while Gong She did not hold any official position.

古文：久之，楚王入朝，闻舍高名，聘舍为常侍，不得已随王，归国固辞，愿卒学，复至长安。
现代文：过了很长时间，楚王准备进京朝见天子，他听说龚舍名望很高，就聘请他为常侍，龚舍不得已只好跟随楚王入朝，回到王国后他坚决请求辞职，希望集中精力完成其学业，于是又来到长安。
English: After a long time, King Chu was preparing to go to Beijing to meet the emperor. He heard that Yao Xie's reputation was very high, so he hired him as a regular attendant. Yao Xie had no choice but to follow King Chu into the court. After returning to the kingdom, he firmly asked to resign, hoping to concentrate on completing his studies, so he came to Chang'an again.

古文：而胜为郡吏，三举孝廉，以王国人不得宿卫补吏，再为尉，一为丞，胜辄至官乃去。
现代文：龚胜为郡吏，三次被举为孝廉，但因为是王国的人，不能担任宫中宿卫。后补为吏，两次任为尉，一次任为丞，每次龚胜都是到任不久就辞官而去。
English: Gong Sheng was a county official, and was raised to filial piety three times, but because he was a person of the kingdom, he could not serve as a palace night watchman. Later, he was appointed as an official, twice as a lieutenant, and once as a junior officer. Each time, Gong Sheng resigned from his post shortly after taking office.

古文：州举茂才，为重泉令，病去官。
现代文：后来被州举荐茂才，任重泉县令，因病辞官。
English: Later, Maocai was recommended by the state, appointed as the county magistrate of Jiuquan County, but resigned due to illness.

古文：大司空何武、执金吾阎崇荐胜，哀帝自为定陶王固已闻其名，征为谏大夫。
现代文：大司空何武、执金吾阎崇举荐龚胜，汉哀帝在做定陶王时就已闻其名声，于是征召龚胜为谏大夫。
English: Daishi Ku He Wu and Ekin W Yan Chong recommended Ying Sheng. Emperor Han Ai had already heard of Ying Sheng's reputation when he was the King of Ding Tao, so he conscripted Ying Sheng as Ying Sheng's doctor.

古文：引见，胜荐龚舍及亢父甯寿、济阴侯嘉，有诏皆征。
现代文：龚胜入京由人导引谒见哀帝时，向哀帝推荐了龚舍以及亢父的宁寿、济阴的侯嘉，哀帝下诏令全部征召入朝。
English: When Yao Sheng entered Beijing and was led by someone to see Emperor Ai, he recommended to Emperor Ai the Imperial Palace, as well as his father's Ning Shou and Jiyin's Hou Jia, and Emperor Ai ordered them all to be conscripted into the imperial court.

古文：胜曰： 窃见国家征医巫，常为驾，征贤者宜驾。 
现代文：龚胜说： 我看见国家征召医生和巫师时，常常为他们准备车乘，征召贤德之人也应当为他们准备车马。 
English: Huan Sheng said: I have seen that when a country recruits doctors and wizards, they often prepare carriages for them. Those who recruit virtuous people should also prepare carriages and horses for them.

古文：上曰： 大夫乘私车来耶？ 
现代文：哀帝问： 你是乘自己的车来的吗？ 
English: Aidi asked: Did you come by your own car?

古文：胜曰： 唯唯。 
现代文：龚胜说： 是的。 
English: Hao Sheng said: Yes.

古文：有诏为驾。龚舍、侯嘉至，皆为谏大夫。
现代文：于是，哀帝下令为被征召者准备车马，前往迎接。龚舍、侯嘉奉韶而来，都任为谏大夫。
English: As a result, Emperor Ai ordered that chariots and horses be prepared for the conscripts and went to meet them. Oushe and Hou Jia Bongye came and were both appointed as doctors.

古文：甯寿称疾不至。
现代文：宁寿称病未至。
English: Ning Shou said that the illness had not yet come.

古文：胜居谏官，数上书求见，言百姓贫，盗贼多，吏不良，风俗薄，灾异数见，不可不忧。
现代文：龚胜身居谏官之职后，多次上书求见，陈述百姓贫困，盗贼繁多，官吏不良，世风淡薄，灾异屡现，不能不担忧警醒。
English: After holding the post of eunuch, Zou Sheng repeatedly wrote to seek advice, stating that the people were poor, there were many thieves, the officials were bad, the world style was weak, and disasters occurred frequently. It was impossible not to be worried and alert.

古文：制度泰奢，刑罚泰深，赋敛泰重，宜以俭约先下。
现代文：国家规制用度过于宽奢，刑罚过于严峻，赋敛过于苛重，应当以节俭宽松表率天下。
English: The degree of state regulation is too lenient, the punishment is too severe, and the restraint is too severe. We should set an example of frugality and looseness to the world.

古文：其言祖述王吉、贡禹之意。
现代文：其言论宗旨是阐述王吉、贡禹之意。
English: The purpose of his speech was to explain the meaning of Wang Ji and Gong Yu.

古文：为大夫二岁余，迁丞相司直，徒光禄大夫，守右扶风。
现代文：任谏大夫两年多，升为丞相司直，又迁为光禄大夫，代理右扶风职务。
English: After more than two years in the position of Dr. Zou, he was promoted to the position of Vice-Minister of Justice, and then moved to the position of Dr. Guanglu, acting as his right-hand man.

古文：数月，上知胜非拨烦吏，乃复还胜光禄大夫、诸吏给事中。
现代文：过了几个月，哀帝了解到他不是善于处理繁冗政务的人才，又复其旧职，任光禄大夫诸吏给事中。
English: After a few months, Emperor Ai realized that he was not good at dealing with the complexities of government affairs. He resumed his old position, and appointed Dr. Guanglu to be in charge of all officials.

古文：胜言董贤乱制度，由是逆上指。
现代文：龚胜指责董贤惑乱朝纲制度，因此而违逆了哀帝的旨意。
English: Xuan Sheng accused Dong Xian of confusing the system of the imperial program, thus violating the will of the Emperor.

古文：后岁余，丞相王嘉上书荐故廷尉梁相等，尚书劾奏嘉 言事恣意，迷国罔上，不道。 
现代文：过了一年多，丞相王嘉上书推荐原廷尉梁相等人，尚书向皇帝检举弹劾王嘉，说他 说话随便，不负责任，迷惑国人，欺蒙皇上，是大逆不道。 
English: After more than a year, Wang Jia, the prime minister, recommended Liang Xiang, the former imperial lieutenant, and others in a letter to the emperor. The letter accused Wang Jia of impeachment, saying that he spoke casually, was irresponsible, confused the people of the country, and deceived the emperor, which was a great treason.

古文：下将军中朝者议，左将军公孙禄，司隶鲍宣、光禄大夫孔光等十四人皆以为嘉应迷国不道法。
现代文：皇帝将此劾奏发下让朝中将军大臣们讨论，左将军公孙禄、司隶鲍宣、光禄大夫孔光等十四人都认为王嘉确实触犯了迷国不道之法。
English: The emperor sent this impeachment report to the generals and ministers of the DPRK and China for discussion. Fourteen people, including the left general Gongsun Lu, the military attaché Baoxuan, and the doctor of Guanglu, Kong Guang, all believed that Wang Jia had indeed violated the law of misleading the country.

古文：胜独书议曰： 嘉资性邪僻，所举多贪残吏。
现代文：惟独龚胜上书说： 王嘉本性邪恶，他所举荐的人多为贪婪残暴的官吏。
English: However, the letter only said: Wang Jia is evil by nature, and the people he recommended are mostly greedy and cruel officials.

古文：位列三公，阴阳不和，诸事并废，咎皆繇嘉，迷国不疑，今举相等，过微薄。 
现代文：其位列三公，阴阳不和，诸事并废，罪过都在王嘉，他犯了迷国之罪毫无疑问，不过，这次举荐梁相等人，不算什么大过错。 
English: He is ranked as one of the Three Princes, yin and yang are not in harmony, all things are null and void, and all sins are in Wang Jia. There is no doubt that he has committed the sin of losing the country, but this time, recommending Liang Xiang and others is not a big mistake.

古文：日暮议者罢。
现代文：傍晚时分，讨论结束。
English: In the late afternoon, the discussion ended.

古文：明旦复会，左将军禄问胜： 君议亡所据，今奏当上，宜何从？ 
现代文：第二天又继续讨论，左将军公孙禄问龚胜说： 你昨天的议论没有根据，今天要将讨论结果上报皇上，你最后决定服从哪种意见？ 
English: The discussion continued the next day, and the left general, Gongsun Lu, asked Gongsheng and said: Your discussion yesterday was unfounded, and today you want to report the results of the discussion to the emperor. Which opinion did you finally decide to obey?

古文：胜曰： 将军以胜议不可者，通劾之。 
现代文：龚胜说： 将军如果认为我的意见不合适，就连我一起弹劾好了。 
English: Hao Sheng said, "If the general thinks my opinion is inappropriate, he can even impeach me.

古文：博士夏侯常见胜应禄不和，起至胜前谓曰： 宜如奏所言。 
现代文：博士夏侯常见龚胜与公孙禄之间谈话不愉快，就起身到龚胜跟前对他说： 应当同意尚书劾奏所言。 
English: When the conversation between Dr. Xia Houcheng and Gongsun Lu was not pleasant, Dr. Xia Houcheng stood up and said to Gongsun Lu: "You should agree with what Shang Shuxin said.

古文：胜以手推常曰： 去！ 
现代文：龚胜用手推搡夏侯常说： 你走开！ 
English: Hao Sheng pushed Xia Hou with his hand and often said: You go away!

古文：后数日，复会议可复孝惠、孝景庙不，议者皆曰宜复。胜曰： 当如礼。 
现代文：几天后，众大臣又聚会讨论是否可以恢复孝惠、孝景庙的问题，与会者都说应当恢复，龚胜却说： 应当遵循礼制行事。 
English: A few days later, the ministers met again to discuss whether it was possible to restore the Xiao Hui and Xiao Jing temples. The participants all said that it should be restored, but He Sheng said: It should follow the etiquette.

古文：常复谓胜： 礼有变。 
现代文：夏侯常又对龚胜说： 礼制也是有所变化的。 
English: Xia Houchang also said to Xuan Sheng: The etiquette has also changed.

古文：胜疾言曰： 去！
现代文：龚胜立刻反驳道： 你走开！
English: Hao Sheng immediately retorted: You go away!

古文：是时之变。 
现代文：是时势变了。 
English: Times have changed.

古文：常恚，谓胜曰： 我视君何若，君欲小与众异，外以采名，君乃申徒狄属耳！ 
现代文：夏侯常恼羞成怒，对龚膛说： 你知道我怎样看你吗？你想标新立异，故意和众人有所不同，以此哗众取宠，博取名声，你不过是像殷末申徒狄一类的人罢了！ 
English: Xia Hou was often irritated and angry, and said to Zang Rong: "Do you know how I see you? You want to be innovative, deliberately different from everyone else, in order to make a splash and gain fame. You're just a person like Yin Shentu Di!

古文：先是，常又为胜道高陵有子杀母者，胜白之，尚书问： 谁受？ 
现代文：在此之前，夏侯常曾对龚胜说高陵地方有一个人把他的母亲杀了。龚胜将此事禀告于上，尚书问： 你是听谁说的？ 
English: Prior to this, Xia Hou had often said to Yao Sheng that a man in the Gaoling region had killed his mother. Yao Sheng reported this to the authorities, and Shang Shuxu asked: Who did you listen to?

古文：对曰： 受夏侯常。 
现代文：龚胜答道： 听夏侯常说的。 
English: Hao Sheng replied: Listen to what Xia Hou often said.

古文：尚书使胜问常，常连恨胜，即应曰： 闻之白衣，戒君勿言也。奏事不详，妄作触罪。 
现代文：尚书又让他再去向夏侯常询问详情，夏堡赏因接连被娄眯在议政时斥责，心中十分恼恨龚胜，于是回答说： 我是听官府中的杂役随便说的，让你不要往外说，你怎么就报告上面了呢？不了解事件的详情，随便奏闻于上是要获罪的。 
English: Shangshu also asked him to go to Xia Houzang again to inquire about the details. Xia Burgong was very angry and frustrated because he was repeatedly reprimanded for being arrested during political deliberation, so he replied: I was listening to the clerk in the government office. If you don't want to talk about it, why did you report it? If you don't know the details of the incident, you will be punished for casually reporting it.

古文：胜穷，无以对尚书，即自劾奏与常争言，洿辱朝廷。
现代文：龚胜没有办法向尚书交待，便上书自己弹劾自己说和夏侯常争吵，有辱朝廷尊严。
English: Xuan Sheng had no way to communicate with Shang Shu, so he wrote a letter to impeach himself, saying that he often quarreled with Xia Hou, which was a disgrace to the dignity of the imperial court.

古文：事下御史中丞，召诘问，劾奏 胜吏二千石，常位大夫，皆幸得给事中，与论议，不崇礼义，而居公门下相非恨，疾言辩讼，惰谩亡状，皆不敬。 
现代文：此事报到御史中丞那里，御史中丞召龚胜和夏侯常前去责问，并上奏弹劾说： 龚胜为二千石的官吏，夏侯常居大夫之位，都有幸得为给事中，参与朝廷议政，却不尊崇朝廷礼义，身居公职，却相互非议怨恨，声色俱厉地争吵辩论，言行恣意而无状，都属不敬之行为。 
English: The matter was reported to the goshi chujo, and the goshi chujo summoned Shansheng and Xia Hou to come forward for questioning, and filed an impeachment, saying: Shansheng is an official of two thousand koku, Xia Hou often holds the position of doctor, both are fortunate to be in the middle of things, participate in the deliberation of the imperial court, but do not respect the courtesy of the imperial court, live in public office, but blame each other for resentment, quarrel vigorously, debate, speak and act arbitrarily, and have no status, are all acts of disrespect.

古文：制曰： 贬秩各一等。 
现代文：皇帝下令说： 两人各降级一等。 
English: The emperor gave the following order: Both of you will be demoted one rank.

古文：胜谢罪，乞骸骨。
现代文：龚胜谢罪并请求辞职还乡。
English: He pleaded guilty and asked to resign and return to his hometown.

古文：上乃复加赏赐，以子博为侍郎，出胜为渤海太守。
现代文：皇上又给予赏赐，任命他的儿子龚博为侍郎，又让龚胜出任渤海太守。
English: The emperor also gave a reward, appointing his son Zibo as a chamberlain, and letting Yongsheng serve as the governor of Bohai.

古文：胜谢病不任之官，积六月免归。
现代文：龚胜称病推辞不去就任，六个月后免官还乡。
English: Hao Sheng said that he would not resign due to illness, and returned to his hometown six months later.

古文：上复征为光禄大夫，胜常称疾卧，数使子上书乞骸骨，会哀帝崩。
现代文：哀帝又征召龚胜为光禄大夫。龚胜常常声称有病而卧床不起，多次让其子上书请求免职还乡，恰逢哀帝驾崩。
English: Aidi also conscripted Gong Sheng as a doctor of Guanglu. Gong Sheng often claimed to be ill and bedridden, and repeatedly asked him to write a letter requesting to be relieved of duty and return to his hometown, which coincided with the death of Aidi.

古文：初，琅邪邴汉亦以清行征用，至京兆尹，后为太中大夫。
现代文：当初琅邪人邴汉也因品行高洁而被征召，官至京兆尹，后又为太中大夫。
English: At the beginning, the evil-doer Shih Han was also conscripted because of his virtuous conduct, and he served as an official up to Jing Zhaoyun, and later as a Tai Zhong Daifu.

古文：王莽秉政，胜与汉俱乞骸骨。
现代文：王莽专擅朝政后，龚胜和邴汉都请求告老还乡。
English: After Wang Mangxuan's ascension to the throne, both Su Sheng and Su Han requested to return to their hometowns.

古文：自昭帝时，涿郡韩福以德行征至京师，赐策书束帛遣归。
现代文：自昭帝在位时，涿郡人韩福因德行出众而被征召至京师长安，昭帝赐给他策书和束帛让他回归故里。
English: When Emperor Zhao was on the throne, Han Fu, a native of Jixian County, was conscripted to Beijing Shichang'an because of his outstanding virtue. Emperor Zhao gave him a guidebook and a satchel so that he could return to his hometown.

古文：诏曰： 朕闵劳以官职之事，其务修孝弟以教乡里。
现代文：下诏说： 我不忍心让您这么大年纪还操劳国家政事，回乡后，请努力以孝悌之义教化乡里。
English: The next edict said: I can't bear to let you still be involved in national politics at such an old age. When you return to your hometown, please do your best to educate the villagers with filial piety.

古文：行道舍传舍，县次具酒肉，食从者及马。
现代文：归乡途中可在官府的驿站传舍中食宿休息，沿途各县要准备酒肉，供给随从及车马饮食。
English: On the way back to their hometowns, they can stay and rest at the government's post station dormitory. Along the way, each county should prepare wine and meat, and provide entourage and horse-drawn carriage meals.

古文：长吏以时存问，常以岁八月赐羊一头，酒二斛。
现代文：涿郡的地方官吏要按时慰问，每年八月赐羊一头，酒二斛。
English: The local officials of Handan County should offer condolences on time, and give a sheep and two jars of wine every August.

古文：不幸死者，赐複衾一，祠以中牢。 
现代文：如果不幸去世，官府要赐给一床殡葬用的夹被，并按中牢之礼进行祭祀。 
English: In the event of an unfortunate death, the government will provide a bed of funeral quilts, and a memorial service will be held in accordance with the rites of the middle prison.

古文：于是王莽依故事，白遣胜、汉。
现代文：遣时王莽便依据旧例，上奏允许送龚胜、邴汉返乡。
English: According to the old custom, Wang Mang was allowed to send Xuan Sheng and Xuan Han back to their hometowns.

古文：策曰： 惟元始二年六月庚寅，光禄大夫、太中大夫耆艾二人以老病罢。
现代文：并下策书说： 元始二年六月庚寅，光禄大夫、太中大夫两位老人因年老病重而辞官。
English: And the following policy document said: In June of the second year of Geng Yin, two old men, Dr. Guanglu and Dr. Taizhong, resigned due to old age and serious illness.

古文：太皇太后使谒者仆射策诏之曰：盖闻古者有司年至则致仕，所以恭让而不尽其力也。
现代文：太皇太后派谒者仆射向他们传达韶令说：听说古代的官吏到了一定的年纪就辞官归隐，以此恭让后者并保存一定的余力。
English: The empress dowager sent a courier to convey the imperial order to them, saying, "I have heard that in ancient times, when officials reached a certain age, they resigned and went into seclusion, in order to respect the latter and save a certain amount of energy.

古文：今大夫年至矣，朕愍以官职之事烦大夫，其上子若孙若同产、同产子一人。
现代文：现在二位大夫都上了年纪，朕不忍再以官职之事烦劳大夫，你们可以从自己的儿子或孙子或兄弟、兄弟的儿子中选出一人，让他到朝中来任职。
English: Now that the two doctors are getting old, I can't bear to bother the doctors with official duties any longer. You can choose one of your sons or grandsons or brothers or brothers' sons to serve in the government.

古文：大夫其修身守道，以终高年。
现代文：大夫归乡后请修身守道，安享天年吧。
English: After the doctor returns to his hometown, please cultivate yourself and keep the path, and enjoy the rest of your life.

古文：赐帛及行道舍宿，岁时羊酒衣衾，皆如韩福故事。
现代文：赐予布帛及准许在沿途各驿站传舍休息过夜，每年官府按时供给的羊酒衣被的规格，都照当年韩福的旧例。
English: He was given a piece of cloth and allowed to spend the night at the missionary houses along the way. The specifications of the sheep's wine quilt provided by the government on time every year were the same as Hanfu's old example.

古文：所上子男皆除为郎。 
现代文：所推荐的一位儿孙或同宗兄弟、兄弟之子都任为郎。 
English: The recommended child, grandchild, half-brother or half-brother's son will be appointed as the heir.

古文：于是胜、汉遂归老于乡里。
现代文：于是龚胜、邴汉就归老于乡里。
English: As a result, Shansheng and Shuhan returned to the countryside.

古文：汉兄子曼容亦养志自修，为官不肯过六百石，辄自免去，其名过出于汉。
现代文：邴汉兄长的儿子名曼容，也能修身立志，做官不肯超过六百石品级，一超过六百石，就自行免官离职，他的名声超过了邴汉。
English: Zou Han's elder brother's son, named Man Rong, was also able to set his mind on self-cultivation. He refused to exceed 600 koku grade when he became an official. Once he exceeded 600 koku, he was dismissed from his post on his own. His reputation surpassed that of Zou Han.

古文：初，龚舍以龚胜荐，征为谏大夫，病免。
现代文：当初，龚舍因龚胜推荐，被征召为谏大夫，因病免官。
English: At first, because of the recommendation of Gong Sheng, Gong She was called up to be a doctor of Gong, but was dismissed due to illness.

古文：复征为博士，又病去。
现代文：后又征为博士，又因病离任。
English: Later, he was appointed as a doctor and left the post due to illness.

古文：顷之，哀帝遣使者即楚拜舍为太山太守。
现代文：不久，漠哀帝派使者到楚国拜龚舍为太山太守。
English: Soon after, Emperor Miao sent an envoy to Chu to pay homage to Yanshe as the governor of Taishan.

古文：舍家居在武原，使者至县请舍，欲令至廷拜授印绶。
现代文：龚舍家住武原，使者到县裹请龚舍，准备让龚舍到县衙大厅上拜受印绶。
English: Oushe lives in Takehara. The envoy went to the county to invite Oushe and prepare for Oushe to go to the county hall to receive the seal.

古文：舍曰： 王者以天下为家，何必县官？ 
现代文：龚舍说： 王者以天下为家，又何必一定要到县衙大堂才能授受韶令呢？ 
English: Ourshe said: The king takes the whole world as his home, and why does he have to go to the county magistrate's hall to receive the imperial decree?

古文：遂于家受诏，便道之官。
现代文：于是就在自己的家中接受了韶书，上路就任。
English: So he accepted the imperial edict at his home and went on his way to take office.

古文：既至数月，上书乞骸骨。
现代文：上任数月，上书请求告老还乡。
English: A few months after taking office, he wrote a letter requesting to return to his hometown.

古文：上征舍，至京兆东湖界，固称病笃。
现代文：皇上又征召龚舍到京兆束部的湖县任职，龚舍以病重坚决推辞。
English: The emperor also conscripted 舍 to serve in Huxian County, Beijing Zhaozhou, but 舍 declined due to his serious illness.

古文：于子使使者收印绶，拜舍为光禄大夫。
现代文：天子衹得派使者收回印绶，拜龚舍为光禄大夫。
English: The Son of Heaven sent an emissary to recover the seal, and Bai Yanshe became the doctor of Guanglu.

古文：数赐告，舍终不肯起，乃遣归。
现代文：天子又多次赐告，龚舍始终不肯接受就任，于是天子只好让他返乡。
English: Tenzin also repeatedly announced that Ourshe would never accept the post, so Tenzin had to let him return home.

古文：舍亦通《五经》，以《鲁诗》教授。
现代文：龚舍也通晓《五经》，曾以《鲁诗》教授弟子。
English: He was also familiar with the "Five Classics" and had taught his disciples with "Lu Shi."

古文：舍、胜既归乡里，郡二千石长吏初到官皆至其家，如师弟子之礼。
现代文：龚舍、龚胜告老归乡后，其所在郡县的长官二千石、长吏等初到任时都要到他们家，行师生之礼。
English: After returning to their hometowns, the governors of the counties and counties of 2,000 koku and the chief officials of the counties and counties in which they are located should go to their homes when they first take office to perform the teacher and student salute.

古文：舍年六十八，王莽居摄中卒。
现代文：龚舍于王莽摄政时去世，时年六十八岁。
English: She died at the age of sixty-eight during Wang Mang's regency.

古文：莽既篡国，遣五威将帅行天下风俗，将帅亲奉羊、酒存问胜。
现代文：王莽篡夺国家政权后，派五威将帅巡视天下风俗，将帅亲自捧着肥羊美酒慰问龚胜。
English: After Wang Mang usurped the state power, he sent Wu Wei General Shuai to inspect the customs of the world. General Shuai personally held the fat sheep and wine to console the victory.

古文：明年，莽遣使者即拜胜为讲学祭酒，胜称疾不应征。
现代文：第二年，王莽派遣使者前去拜龚胜为讲学祭酒，龚胜声称有病而不应征。
English: The following year, Wang Mang sent an envoy to pay homage to Yao Sheng as a lecture sacrificial wine. Yao Sheng claimed to be ill and did not enlist.

古文：后二年，莽复遣使者奉玺书，太子师友祭酒印绶，安车驷马迎胜，即拜，秩上卿，先赐六月禄直以办装，使者与郡太守、县长吏、三老官属、行义诸生千人以上入胜里致诏。
现代文：过了二年，王莽又派使者拿着玺印诏书和太子师友祭酒的印绶，并派出四匹马拉的安车，很隆重地前去迎接龚胜，打算前往龚胜的乡里拜他为秩列上卿的高官，并先赐龚胜六个月的俸禄之资，以便他置办行装，王莽的使者和郡太守、县长吏、三老属官、乡邑中有声望之人以及诸生弟子等一千余人，一起来到龚胜所住乡里传达诏令。
English: Two years later, Wang Mang also sent an emissary with the seal of the imperial edict and the seal of the prince's teacher and friend's sacrificial wine, and sent four horse-drawn carriages to solemnly go to meet Xuan Sheng, intending to go to Xuan Sheng's township to worship him as a high-ranking official with the rank of Lord, and first gave Xuan Sheng six months' salary to help him prepare for the trip. Wang Mang's emissary and the county governor, county officials, three old subordinate officials, prestigious people in the township, and more than a thousand disciples came to Xuan Sheng's township

古文：使者欲令胜起迎，久立门外，胜称病笃，为床室中户西南牖下，东首加朝服拕绅。
现代文：使者想让龚胜起身迎接，因此在门外站立等待了很长时间。龚胜声称自己病重，无法起来迎接，便在家中西屋南窗下设一床，自己身穿朝服长带头朝东卧于床上。
English: The messenger wanted Hao Sheng to get up to greet him, so he stood outside the door and waited for a long time. Hao Sheng claimed that he was seriously ill and could not get up to greet him, so he set up a bed under the south window of the west wing of his home. Wearing a long morning suit, he lay on the bed with his head facing east.

古文：使者入户，西行南面立，致诏付玺书，迁延再拜奉印绶，内安车驷马，进谓胜曰： 圣朝未尝忘君，制作未定，待君为政，思闻所欲施行，以安海内 。
现代文：使者进屋，往西走然后面南而立，传达诏令，并交付玺书，然后退后一步再次行礼，奉上印绶，将迎接的安车驷马也赶进院内，再进前对龚胜说： 圣朝没有忘记您老人家，现在天下制度未定，期待您参与政事，希望听到您对国家大政方针的建议和指导，用以安定天下。 
English: The messenger entered the house, walked to the west and then stood facing south, conveyed the imperial edict, and delivered the imperial edict, then stepped back to salute again, presented the seal, and the horse and carriage that would greet him also rushed into the courtyard. He then said to Xuan Sheng: The Holy Dynasty has not forgotten you old man, now the world system is undecided, we look forward to your participation in politics, and hope to hear your suggestions and guidance on the national policy, in order to stabilize the world.

古文：胜对曰： 素愚，加以年老被病，命在朝夕，随使君上道，必死道路，无益万分。 
现代文：龚胜回答说： 我向来愚昧，加上年老多病，已是命在旦夕，若跟随您上路，必死于途中无疑，这样一来对国家对个人都毫无益处。 
English: Xuan Sheng replied: I have always been stupid, and with my old age and illness, I am already on the verge of death. If I follow you on the road, I will undoubtedly die on the way, which will be of no benefit to the country or the individual.

古文：使者要说，至以印绶就加胜身，胜辄推不受。
现代文：使者极力劝说，甚至上前去将印绶带在龚胜身上，龚胜就是推辞不受。
English: The messenger tried his best to persuade him, even going so far as to place the seal on his body.

古文：使者即上言： 方盛夏暑热，胜病少气，可须秋凉乃发。 
现代文：使者只好上禀王莽说： 现在正值盛夏酷暑，龚胜体病气衰，不宜出门，可待秋凉后再上路。 
English: The messenger had no choice but to call Wang Mang and say: "It's the height of summer and it's very hot right now. I'm very sick and weak. I shouldn't go out. I can wait until it's cooler in the fall before I go on the road."

古文：有诏许。
现代文：王莽下诏同意。
English: Wang Mang issued an edict to agree.

古文：使者五日一与太守俱问起居，为胜两子及门人高晖等言： 朝廷虚心待君以茅土之封，虽疾病，宜动移至传舍，示有行意，必为子孙遗大业。 
现代文：使者每隔五天就和太守一起前来问候饮食起居及身体情况，并对龚胜的两个儿子及门人高晖等人说： 朝廷虚心期待龚胜先生，要封他为侯，即使他病情严重，也应当起身住到驿站，以示有赴行之意，这样定会为子孙后代留下大基业的。 
English: Every five days, the emissary would come with the daimyō to greet Rong about his diet, living conditions, and physical condition, and to say to Rong Sheng's two sons and his protégé Gao Yao and others: The imperial court humbly expects Mr. Rong Sheng to be given the title of marquess. Even if he is seriously ill, he should get up and live at the station to show that he has the will to go. In this way, he will surely leave a great legacy for future generations.

古文：晖等白使者语，胜自知不见听，即谓晖等： 吾受汉家厚恩，无以报，今年老矣，旦暮入地，谊岂以一身事二姓，下见故主哉？ 
现代文：高晖等人把使者的这番话告诉了龚胜，龚胜知道自己的话不被听从，因此对高晖等人说： 我蒙受汉王室深厚的恩德，无以为报，如今年纪大了，随时都有可能撒手人寰，难道可以一身事奉二姓，死后又到阴间去见故主吗？ 
English: Gao Xuan and others told Xuan Sheng about the words of the messenger. Xuan Sheng knew that his words would not be listened to, so he said to Gao Xuan and others: I have received the deep grace of the Han royal family, and there is no way to repay it. If I am older this year, I may give up at any time. Is it possible to serve two families, and after death go to the underworld to see the old master?

古文：胜因敕以棺敛丧事： 衣周于身，棺周于衣。
现代文：于是龚胜便吩咐子孙们为他准备棺木等丧葬事宜，说： 我死后衹要衣不露身，棺不露衣即可。
English: So Hao Sheng ordered his sons and grandsons to prepare a coffin and other funeral matters for him, saying: "When I die, I want my clothes not to be exposed, and my coffin not to be exposed.

古文：勿随俗动吾冢，种柏，作祠堂。 
现代文：不要追随时下的社会风气陪葬许多物品，以免招人挖掘，也不要在墓旁植松柏、立祠堂。 
English: Don't follow the current social trend of burying many items, so as not to invite people to dig, and don't plant conifers or build an ancestral hall next to the grave.

古文：语毕，遂不复开口饮食，积十四日死，死时七十九矣。
现代文：吩咐完后就不再开口饮食，十四天后逝去，时年七十九岁。
English: After giving the order, he no longer opened his mouth to eat, and died fourteen days later, at the age of seventy-nine.

古文：使者、太守临敛，赐複衾祭祠如法。
现代文：使者、太守都来参加葬礼，依据旧例赐夹被并以中牢之规格祭祠。
English: The emissary and the governor-general both came to attend the funeral, and according to the old custom, they were given a blanket and taken to the shrine, which had the dimensions of a medium-security prison.

古文：门人衰绖治丧者百数。
现代文：其门人弟子身着丧服吊丧者达数百人。
English: Hundreds of his disciples, dressed in mourning clothes, followed the funeral procession.

古文：有老父来吊，哭甚哀，既而曰： 嗟乎！
现代文：有一位老人前来吊唁，哭得很悲切，哭完后又说： 唉！
English: An old man came to offer his condolences, weeping bitterly. After he had finished crying, he said: Alas!

古文：薰以香自烧，膏以明自销。
现代文：薰草由于芳香而自烧毁，油脂因能照明而自销熔。
English: Lavender self-combusts because of its fragrance, and grease self-melts because of its ability to illuminate.

古文：龚生竟夭天年，非吾徒也。 
现代文：龚生竟然未满天年而亡，不是我的一类人啊！ 
English: It's not my type of person to die at such a young age!

古文：遂趋而出，莫知其谁。
现代文：说完后便急步走出门去，没有人知道他是谁。
English: After saying this, he hurriedly walked out of the door. No one knew who he was.

古文：胜居彭城廉里，后世刻石表其里门。
现代文：龚胜居住在彭城廉里，后世刻石表彰其乡里之门。
English: Gong Sheng lived in Pengcheng Lianli, and later generations carved a stone to commend the gate of his village.

古文：鲍宣字子都，渤海高城人也。
现代文：鲍宣，字子都，渤海高城人。
English: Baoxuan, Zhizi Du, a resident of Bohai Gaocheng.

古文：好学，明经，为县乡啬夫，守束州丞。
现代文：勤奋好学，精通经义，先为县乡啬夫官，暂代束州县丞。
English: Diligent and eager to learn, well versed in the classics, he first served as a county and township magistrate, and then temporarily as the county magistrate of Sokcho County.

古文：后为都尉、太守功曹，举孝廉为郎，病去官，复为州从事。
现代文：后为都尉太守功曹，举孝廉被选任为郎，因病辞官，又为州从事。
English: Afterward, he was appointed as the captain of the guard of honor, and was selected as the son of Zhu Xiaolian. Due to illness, he resigned from the post and engaged in work for the state.

古文：大司马、卫将军王商辟宣，荐为议郎，后以病去。
现代文：大司马卫将军王商曾征辟鲍宣，举荐他为议郎，后又因病离任。
English: Major General Ma Wei Wang Shang once recruited Bao Xuan and recommended him as a mediator, but he later left his post due to illness.

古文：哀帝初，大司空何武除宣为西曹掾，甚敬重焉，荐宣为谏大夫，迁豫州牧。
现代文：哀帝即位之初，大司空何武拜鲍宣为西曹掾，对他非常敬重，推荐他为谏大夫，又转任豫州牧。
English: At the beginning of Emperor Ai's ascension to the throne, the Grand Master Ku He Bui Bao Xuan was Xi Cao Yao, he was highly respected, he recommended him as the doctor of Yao, and he was transferred to the Yuzhou Patriarchate.

古文：岁余，丞相司直郭钦奏 宣举错烦苛，代二千石署吏听讼，所察过诏条。
现代文：一年多后，丞相司直郭钦上奏说： 鲍宣施政繁琐苛，他代替郡守任用官吏办理诉讼，所监察的问题超出了皇上所制定的条例。
English: More than a year later, the Minister of Justice, Minister of Justice, Minister of Justice, Minister of Justice, Minister of Justice, Minister of Justice, Minister of Justice, Minister of Justice, Minister of Justice, Minister of Justice, Minister of Justice, Minister of Justice, Minister of Justice, Minister of Justice, Minister of Justice, Minister of Justice, Minister of Justice,

古文：行部乘传去法驾，驾一马，舍宿乡亭，为众所非。 
现代文：出去巡视考察时车乘规制也不遵典制，驾一匹马，夜宿乡亭，被众人所非议。 
English: When he went out on inspection tours, he did not follow the regulations for driving a car. He drove a horse and stayed at a village pavilion at night, which was criticized by many people.

古文：宣坐免。
现代文：鲍宣因此而被免职。
English: As a result, Bao Xuan was removed from his post.

古文：归家数月，复征为谏大夫。
现代文：回家数月后，又被征召为谏大夫。
English: A few months after returning home, he was called up again to become a doctor.

古文：宣每居位，常上书谏争，其言少文多实。
现代文：鲍宣在位为官时，常常上书进谏据理力争，他的话少有虚文，却朴实而切中时弊。
English: When Bao Xuan was in office, he often wrote and argued for reasons. His words were rarely false, but they were simple and pertinent to the times.

古文：是时，帝祖母傅太后欲与成帝母俱称尊号，封爵亲属，丞相孔光、大司空师丹、何武、大司马傅喜始执正议，失傅太后指，皆免官。
现代文：当时哀帝的祖母傅太后想和成帝的母亲同称尊号，并为其亲属封官授爵，丞相孔光、大司空师丹、何武、大司马傅喜等人一开始就坚持正义，因此而违逆了傅太后的旨意，于是都被免官。
English: At that time, Emperor Qianlong's grandmother Empress Dowager Fu wanted to have the same honorific as Emperor Chengdu's mother, and had her relatives knighted. Premier Kong Guang, Grand Secretary Ku Shidan, He Wu, Grand Secretary Ma Fuxi, and others insisted on justice from the beginning, and therefore violated Empress Dowager Fu's will, and were all dismissed.

古文：丁、傅子弟并进，董贤贵幸，宣以谏大夫从其后，上书谏曰：
现代文：丁、傅二氏外戚子弟都得以进升，董贤受宠幸而显贵，鲍宣以谏大夫的身份继孔光、师丹、何武、傅喜等人之后，上书进谏说：
English: Ding and Fu Er's maternal relatives and children were able to advance. Dong Xian was favored and distinguished. Bao Xuan followed Kong Guang, Shi Dan, He Wu, Fu Xi and others in the capacity of Dr. Zou, and wrote to Zou saying:

古文：窃见孝成皇帝时，外亲持权，人人牵引所私以充塞朝廷，妨贤人路，浊乱天下，奢泰亡度，穷困百姓，是以日蚀且十，彗星四起。
现代文：我私下里看到孝成皇帝时，外戚掌权，人人都牵引自己所亲近的人充满了朝廷，堵塞了贤德之人的进升之路，使得天下一片混乱，奢侈无度，百姓穷困，因此，天上发生日食将近十次，彗星四次出现。
English: Privately, I saw that when Emperor Xiaocheng was in power, his relatives were in power, and everyone dragged their relatives to fill the imperial court, blocking the path of the virtuous, causing chaos in the world, extravagance, and poverty among the people. As a result, there were nearly ten solar eclipses in the sky, and comets appeared four times.

古文：危亡之征，陛下所亲见也，今奈何反复剧于前乎？
现代文：那些危亡的征兆是陛下亲眼所见的，现在怎么反而又比以前更甚了呢？
English: How is it that the signs of impending doom, which Your Majesty saw with your own eyes, are now worse than ever?

古文：朝臣亡有大儒骨鲠、白首耆艾、魁垒之士，论议通古今、喟然动众心、忧国如饥渴者，臣未见也。
现代文：朝廷大臣中没有正直的儒学之士，没有老资格而富有经验的老人，没有健壮的武士；通晓古今历史，能够一呼百应，忧国忧民犹如饥渴而思饮食之迫切者，臣下也没有见到。
English: There are no honest Confucian scholars among the ministers of the imperial court, no old men with long qualifications and rich experience, no robust samurai. They are familiar with ancient and modern history and are able to call out a hundred responses. They are worried about the country and the people as if they were hungry and thirsty and thinking about eating and drinking, and their subjects have not seen them.

古文：敦外亲小童及幸臣董贤等在公门省户下，陛下欲与此共承天地，安海内，甚难。
现代文：倚重任用外亲小童及佞幸之臣董贤等在朝廷身居要职，陛下想和这些人一起奉天承运，安定天下，是很难办到的。
English: Relying heavily on the appointment of children of relatives and favored vassals, such as Dong Xian, to hold important positions in the imperial court, it is difficult for His Majesty to work with these people to carry out the will of heaven and stabilize the world.

古文：今世俗谓不智者为能，谓智者为不能。
现代文：现今世俗把缺少智慧的人称为能人，把有才智的人看作无能。
English: Nowadays, the world sees people who lack wisdom as capable people, and people with intelligence as incompetent.

古文：昔尧放四罪而天下服，今除一吏而众皆惑；古刑人尚服，今赏人反惑。
现代文：过去唐尧将共工、罐兜、三苗、鲧四个罪人流放而天下臣服，今天拜授一个官吏而众人疑惑；古时施以刑罚而人还顺服，现在行以奖赏人们反生疑虑。
English: In the past, Tang Xuan exiled four sinners, namely, Tong Tong, Jian Gao, San Miao and Gao Gang, and the whole world submitted to him. Today, he bestows an official and everyone is suspicious. In ancient times, he imposed punishments and people still obeyed. Now, he rewards people for their doubts.

古文：请寄为奸，群小日进。
现代文：相互请托施行奸计，奸佞小人利益受到重用。
English: They asked each other to entrust the implementation of treachery, and the interests of the villains were reused.

古文：国家空虚，用度不足。
现代文：国家府库空虚，费用不足。
English: State treasuries are empty, expenses are insufficient.

古文：民流亡，去城郭，盗贼并起，吏为残贼，岁增于前。
现代文：人民流亡，离开城郭，盗贼蜂拥而起，官吏残害百姓，一年比一年严重。
English: People are fleeing, leaving the city walls, thieves are swarming, officials are brutalizing the people, and it's getting worse every year.

古文：凡民有七亡：阴阳不和，水旱为灾，一亡也；县官重责更赋租税，二亡也；贪吏并公，受取不已，三亡也；豪强大姓蚕食亡厌，四亡也；苛吏徭役，失农桑时，五亡也；部落鼓鸣，男女遮列，六亡也；盗贼劫略，取民财物，七亡也。
现代文：造成老百姓失业流离的原因有七：一，阴阳不和，水旱成灾；二，县官催以沉重的租税和更赋；三，贪官污吏侵吞公产，不断地进行搜刮；四，豪强大族蚕食无厌；五，苛暴之吏征发徭役，贻误了农时；六，乡间村落时时响起警戒盗贼的桴鼓之声，百姓不分男女都不得不出动围击追捕；七，盗贼抢劫掠夺百姓财物。
English: There are seven reasons for the people's unemployment and displacement: First, the yin and yang are at odds with each other, and the drought has become a disaster; Second, the county officials have urged heavy taxes and higher taxes; Third, corrupt officials have misappropriated public property and have been constantly scraping; Fourth, the powerful and powerful ethnic groups have been eating and nibbling; Fifth, the harsh officials have collected and distributed the corvee, delaying the farming time; Sixth, the sound of warning thieves has been heard in rural villages, and the people, both men and women, have had to go out to surround and chase them; Seventh, the thieves have robbed and plundered the

古文：七亡尚可，又有七死：酷吏殴杀，一死也；治狱深刻，二死也；冤陷亡辜，三死也；盗贼横发，四死也；怨雠相残，五死也；岁恶饥饿，六死也；时气疾疫，七死也。
现代文：这七种导致百姓流离失业的祸端尚且不说，又有七种导致百姓死亡的因素：一，被酷吏击杀；二，判案量刑过于严厉苛刻；三，冤枉陷害无辜；四，盗贼突然出现；五，结怨结仇者相互残杀；六，年景歉收，人遭饥馑；七，气候恶劣，疾病流行。
English: In addition to these seven kinds of disasters that lead to the displacement and unemployment of the people, there are also seven factors that lead to the death of the people: First, they were killed by cruel officials; Second, the judgment and sentencing were too harsh; Third, the innocent were framed; Fourth, the thieves suddenly appeared; Fifth, the grudge-bearing enemies killed each other; Sixth, the poor harvest, people suffered from starvation; Seventh, the bad weather, the epidemic of diseases.

古文：民有七亡而无一得，欲望国安，诚难；民有七死而无一生，欲望刑措，诚难。
现代文：百姓有七失而无一得，想要国家安定，实在是很难；人民有七死而无一生，想要搁置刑罚，也是很难的。
English: The people have seven losses and no gains, and it is really difficult to want the country to be stable; the people have seven deaths and no life, and it is also difficult to want to suspend the punishment.

古文：此非公卿、守、相贪残成化之所致邪？
现代文：这种状况难道不是公卿及郡守国相等地方官吏贪婪残酷成风所造成的吗？
English: Wasn't this situation caused by the greed and cruelty of local officials such as court nobles and county governors?

古文：群臣幸得居尊官，食重禄，岂有肯加恻隐于细民，助陛下流教化者邪？
现代文：大臣们有幸身居高位，领取丰厚的俸禄，他们中又有谁能体恤百姓疾苦，辅佐陛下流布恩泽教化呢？
English: The ministers are fortunate to be in high positions and receive rich salaries, but who among them can sympathize with the people's sufferings and assist His Majesty's education?

古文：志但在营私家，称宾客，为奸利而已。
现代文：他们的心思都衹用在经营私家利益，招纳收买宾客，贪图不正当的利益而已。
English: Their minds are all occupied with the management of private interests, recruiting and bribing guests, and coveting illegitimate interests.

古文：以苟容曲从为贤。以拱默尸禄为智，谓如臣宣等为愚。
现代文：大家都以阿谀顺从为贤德，以明哲保身拱手默立衹管领食俸禄为聪明，而把像我这样敢于直言的人看作是愚蠢。
English: Everyone regards obedience as a virtue, self-preservation as wisdom, and the ability to earn a salary as wisdom, while people like me who dare to speak out are regarded as stupid.

古文：陛下擢臣岩穴，诚冀有益毫毛，岂徒欲使臣美食大官，重高门之地哉！
现代文：陛下您选拔大臣于山岩洞穴之中，实希望能对朝廷对国家有所帮助，难道陛下衹是想让臣子们享受着高官厚禄锦衣玉食，以增添宫阙殿堂的威严吗？
English: Your majesty, you selected ministers from the caves in the mountain rock, truly hoping that they would be of help to the imperial court and the country. Is it your majesty's intention to let the courtiers enjoy the lavish food and clothing of high-ranking officials in order to increase the majesty of the Imperial Palace?

古文：天下乃皇天之天下也，陛下上为皇太子，下为黎庶父母，为天牧养元元，视之当如一，合《尸鸠》之诗。
现代文：天下是皇天的天下，陛下上为皇天之子，下为黎民父母，代替皇天统治养育众生，对他们当一视同仁，正如《诗经》中《尸鸠》一诗所说的那样。
English: The kingdom of heaven is the kingdom of the emperor. His Majesty is the son of the emperor on high, and the parents of the people on low. In place of the emperor, he rules and nurtures all living beings, and they should be treated equally, as the poem "The Corpse" in the "Book of Songs" says.

古文：今贫民菜食不厌，衣又穿空，父子夫妇不能相保，诚可为酸鼻。
现代文：现在贫苦百姓食不裹腹，衣不蔽体，父子夫妇都无力相互保护，实在令人心酸。
English: Now the poor people can't feed themselves, can't clothe themselves, and parents and children can't protect each other. It's really sad.

古文：陛下不救，将安所归命乎？
现代文：陛下不救助他们，他们将归附何处呢？
English: If Your Majesty does not help them, where will they go?

古文：奈何独私养外亲与幸臣董贤，多赏赐以大万数，使奴从宾客浆酒霍肉，苍头庐儿皆用致富！
现代文：为什么祇厚待外戚和幸臣董贤，给他们的赏赐多以万数，以至于他们的奴婢侍从和门客都视酒肉为最普通低级的饮食，连奴婢侍从都跟着富裕起来了！
English: Why did they only treat their relatives and the fortunate retainer, Dong Xian, well, and give them tens of thousands of gifts, so that their servants and concubines and their guests regarded wine and meat as the most ordinary and low-grade food, and even their servants and concubines became rich!

古文：非天意也。
现代文：这是违背天意的。
English: This is against God's will.

古文：及汝昌侯傅商亡功而封。
现代文：至于汝昌侯傅商则无功而受封爵。
English: As for Ruchang Houfu Shang, he was knighted without merit.

古文：夫官爵非陛下之官爵，乃天下之官爵也。
现代文：官爵不是陛下的官爵，而是天下的官爵。
English: A peerage is not your peerage, it is the peerage of the world.

古文：陛下取非其官，官非其人，而望天说民服，岂不难哉！
现代文：陛下拿不属于自己的官爵授予不当受此官爵的人，却还指望天悦人服，又怎么可能呢？
English: How is it possible for His Majesty to bestow a title that does not belong to him on a person who has unjustly received it, and still expect the heavens to be pleased?

古文：方阳侯孙宠、宜陵侯息夫躬辩足以移众，强可用独立，奸人之雄，或世尤剧者也，宜以时罢退。
现代文：方阳侯孙宠、宜陵侯息夫躬二人诡辩的口才足以打动众人，其势力强大足以独挡一面，他们是奸人中的枭雄，是最危险的人物，应当找机会及时将他们免退。
English: Fangyang marquess Sun Jie and Yiling marquess Shifu are two people whose eloquence of sophistry is enough to impress everyone, and whose power is strong enough to stand alone. They are the most dangerous figures among the traitors, and should find an opportunity to prevent them from retreating in time.

古文：及外亲幼童未通经术者，皆宜令休就师傅。
现代文：至于那些不懂经术的外戚幼童，则应让他们都离任从师就学。
English: As for the young children of relatives who do not understand the sutra, they should be allowed to leave the teacher to study.

古文：急征故大司马傅喜使领外亲。
现代文：应立即征召原大司马傅喜让他统领外戚。
English: The former Daishi Ma Fu Xi should be immediately conscripted and allowed to lead his maternal relatives.

古文：故大司空何武、师丹、故丞相孔光、故左将军彭宣，经皆更博士，位皆历三公，智谋威信，可与建教化，图安危。
现代文：原大司空何武、师丹，原丞相孔光，原左将军彭宣，他们精通经义，都任过博士，且皆位历三公，他们的智谋威信，足以兴立教化、图谋国家存亡之大事。
English: The former grand secretary Ku He Wu, Shidan, the former prime minister Kong Guang, and the former left-wing general Peng Xuan, who were well versed in literature and philosophy, had all served as doctors, and were all ranked as three kings. Their wisdom and prestige were enough to establish enlightenment and plan for the survival of the country.

古文：龚胜为司直，郡国皆慎选举，三辅委输官不敢为奸，可大委任也。
现代文：龚胜为司直，郡国都认真对待选举，京畿三辅委输官不敢投机取巧，可以委以大任。
English: Gong Sheng is a straightforward official, the county and the country are serious about the election, and the Gyeonggi three sub-committees do not dare to be opportunistic, and can be entrusted with important duties.

古文：陛下前以小不忍退武等，海内失望。
现代文：陛下先前因小有不快于心，不能忍受而罢免了何武等人，国人都很失望。
English: His Majesty had previously dismissed He Wu and others because he was displeased with Xiao Zhuang and could not bear it. The people of the country were very disappointed.

古文：陛下尚能容亡功德者甚众，曾不能忍武等邪！
现代文：您既然连那一大批毫无功德的人都能容忍，为何就不能容忍何武等人呢？
English: Since you can even tolerate that large number of people who have no merit, why can't you tolerate the likes of Jiwu?

古文：治天下者当用天下之心为心，不得自专快意而已也。
现代文：治理天下者应当想天下人之所想，不能衹凭一己之好恶行事。
English: Those who govern the world should think what the world thinks, and not act according to their own likes and dislikes.

古文：上之皇天见谴，下之黎庶怨恨，次有谏争之臣，陛下苟欲自薄而厚恶臣，天下犹不听也。
现代文：上有皇天谴责，下有黎民怨恨，还有敢于直谏的臣下奋起抗争，陛下就是想要减损自己的威德而增添恶人的势力，天下之人也不会听从的。
English: On the one hand, there is the emperor's condemnation, on the other hand, there is the Li people's resentment, and there are the courtiers who dare to stand up and fight. His Majesty just wants to weaken his own virtue and increase the power of the wicked, and the people of the world will not listen.

古文：臣虽愚戆，独不知多受禄赐，美食太官，广田宅，厚妻子，不与恶人结仇怨以安身邪？
现代文：我虽愚钝，难道不懂得多受俸禄和赏赐，做大宫、吃美食，扩展田宅，厚养妻子儿女，不与恶人结怨以遇安稳日子吗？
English: Although I am stupid, don't I understand how important it is to receive salary and reward, build a large palace, eat delicious food, expand the farmhouse, raise my wife and children well, and not quarrel with the wicked in order to have a stable life?

古文：诚迫大义，官以谏争为职，不敢不竭愚。
现代文：实在是迫于大义而为，官以谏静为天职，不敢不竭尽愚忠。
English: In fact, they are compelled to act for the sake of the greater good, and officials take silence as their sacred duty, and dare not fail to be loyal.

古文：惟陛下少留神明，览《五经》之文，原圣人之至意，深思天地之戒。
现代文：希望陛下稍加留意，阅览《五经》的内容，探寻圣人至诚至深之意，深思天地的告诫。
English: I hope that Your Majesty will pay a little attention, read the contents of the Five Classics, explore the sincerity and profound meaning of the saints, and ponder the admonitions of heaven and earth.

古文：臣宣呐钝于辞，不胜忄卷々，尽死节而已。
现代文：臣鲍宣言语迟钝，感情恳切，尽忠守节而已。
English: The minister Bao declared that his speech was dull, his feelings were earnest, and he was just being loyal to the festival.

古文：上以宣名儒，优容之。
现代文：皇上因鲍宣是名儒，因此对他很宽容，没有怪罪于他。
English: Because Bao Xuan was a famous Confucian, the emperor was very tolerant of him and did not blame him.

古文：是时，郡国地震，民讹言行筹，明年正月朔日蚀，上乃征孔光，免孙宠、息夫躬，罢侍中诸曹黄门郎数十人。
现代文：正在这时郡国发生了地震，民间谣言四起纷纷占卜求签，第二年正月初一出现日食，皇上于是征召孔光，罢免了孙宠、息夫躬，又罢退侍中诸曹黄门郎数十人。
English: Just at this time, an earthquake occurred in the county, and there were four cases of folk rumors asking for divination. On the first day of the first month of the second year, a solar eclipse occurred, and the emperor then summoned Kong Guang, dismissed Sun Ji, Sifu Mu, and dismissed dozens of attendants including Cao Huangmenlang.

古文：宣复上书言：
现代文：鲍宣又上书说：
English: Bao Xuan also wrote:

古文：陛下父事天，母事也，子养黎民，即位已来，父亏明，母震动，子讹言相惊恐。
现代文：陛下应当像侍奉父亲一要侍奉苍天，应像侍奉母亲一样侍奉大地，像养育自己的孩子一样养育黎民，陛下即位以来，苍天缺少光明，大地发生震动，百姓间谣言流传相互惊吓。
English: His Majesty should serve heaven as he served his father, should serve the earth as he served his mother, and should nurture the Li people as he nurtured his own children. Since His Majesty ascended the throne, heaven has lacked light, the earth has been shaken, and rumors have circulated among the people to scare each other.

古文：今日蚀于三始，诚可畏惧。
现代文：如今日食出现于岁、月、曰三始之时，确实令人畏惧。
English: If today's eclipse occurs at the beginning of the year, month, and day, it is truly frightening.

古文：小民正月朔日尚恐毁败器物，何况于日亏乎！
现代文：普通百姓在正月初一尚且怕毁坏器物，更何况太阳出现亏缺呢？
English: Ordinary people are still afraid of destroying things on the first day of the first month of the year, not to mention the shortage of the sun.

古文：陛下深内自责，避正殿，举直言，求过失，罢退外亲及旁仄素餐之人，征拜孔光为光禄大夫，发觉孙宠、息夫躬过恶，免官遣就国，众庶歙然，莫不说喜。
现代文：陛下能深深自责，避开正殿，举用敢于直谏之士以检讨自己的过失，罢免外戚及您身边那些白食俸禄的无用之人，征拜孔光为光禄大夫，审察孙宠、息夫躬的过失和罪恶，让他们免官回到自己的侯国中去，众人和洽，无不欢欣鼓舞。
English: Your majesty can deeply reproach yourself, avoid the main hall, use those who dare to stand up straight to review their own mistakes, dismiss your relatives and those useless people around you who are wasting their salaries, recruit Kong Guang as a doctor of Guanglu, examine the mistakes and sins of your grandchildren and grandchildren, and let them return to their own principality. Everyone is happy and encouraged.

古文：天人同心，人心说则天意解矣。
现代文：天人同心，人心顺悦则天意和解。
English: Heaven and man are of the same mind. When the hearts of people are in harmony, it is the will of heaven to reconcile.

古文：乃二月丙戌，白虹虷日，连阴不雨，此天有忧结未解，民有怨望未塞者也。
现代文：到二月丙戌，白虹犯，连阴不雨，这是天有忧结未释，人民心中尚有不满的征兆。
English: By February, there will be no rain, no rain, no rain, no rain. This is a sign that the people are still dissatisfied.

古文：侍中、驸马都尉董贤本无葭莩之亲，但以令色谀言自进，赏赐亡度，竭尽府藏，并合三第尚以为小，复坏暴室。
现代文：侍中驸马都尉董贤与皇室本没有任何亲戚关系，他却靠着巧言令色阿谀献媚而得以晋升，皇上对他的赏赐没有节制，用尽国库资财，合并三处宅第赐给他，尚嫌狭小，又将暴室之地赐予他。
English: The equerry, Lieutenant Dong Xian, was not related to the imperial family at all, but he was promoted by persuading his mistress to flatter him. The emperor did not restrain his reward, exhausted the national treasury, merged three mansions and gave him a small one, and gave him the land of the violent house.

古文：贤父子坐使天子使者将作治第，行夜吏卒皆得赏赐。
现代文：董贤父子坐在那裹指使着天子的使者工匠修建宅第，为其府第巡夜打更的吏卒都能得到赏赐。
English: Dong Xian and his son sat there and instructed the craftsmen to build a mansion, and the officials who patrolled the mansion at night were rewarded.

古文：上冢有会，辄太官为供。
现代文：他家上坟或有宴请聚会，都要少府太官供给物资，进行操办。
English: If his family visits a grave or has a banquet gathering, it is necessary to supply materials to the minor prefectural governor and carry out the operation.

古文：海内贡献当养一君，今反尽之贤家，岂天意与民意耶！
现代文：全国各地进贡的物品，本是供养皇上的，现在反而都集中到董贤家裹，这难道符合天意民心吗！
English: The articles of tribute from all over the country, which were originally intended to support the emperor, are now concentrated in the Dongxian family. Is this in line with the will of heaven and the people?

古文：天不可久负，厚之如此，反所以害之也。
现代文：天意民心不可长久辜负，如此厚待董贤，其实是在害他。
English: The will of heaven and the hearts of the people cannot be disappointed for long. Treating Dong Xian so generously is actually harming him.

古文：诚欲哀贤，宜为谢过天地，解仇海内，免遣就国，收乘舆器物，还之县官。
现代文：陛下如果真的怜爱董贤，就应为他向天地谢罪，消除天下人士对他的怨恨，罢免他的官职，让他回归其封国，没收其所乘车舆和各种器物，还给县官。
English: If His Majesty really pities Dong Xian, he should apologize to heaven and earth for him, eliminate the world's resentment against him, dismiss him from his official position, let him return to his fiefdom, confiscate his car and various utensils, and return them to the county officials.

古文：如此，可以父子终其性命；不者，海内之所仇，未有得久安者也。
现代文：这样，尚可以使他们父子安度余生；否则，为天下人所仇恨者，是不可能长久过安稳日子的。
English: In this way, it is still possible for their father and son to live the rest of their lives in peace; otherwise, it is impossible for those who are hated by the world to live in peace for a long time.

古文：孙宠、息夫躬不宜居国，可皆免以视天下。
现代文：孙宠、息夫躬二人不宜身居要职，可罢免他们以示天下。
English: Sun Zhao and his son-in-law are not fit to hold important positions. They should be removed from their posts to show the world.

古文：复征何武、师丹、彭宣、傅喜，旷然使民易视，以应天心，建立大政，以兴太平之端。
现代文：再征用何武、师丹、彭宣、傅喜等人，使人民看到一个清明开朗的新气象，顺应皇天之心，建立完善的政治，以中兴天下太平之业。
English: He then requisitioned He Wu, Shidan, Peng Xuan, Fu Xi and others, so that the people could see a clear and cheerful new weather, conform to the heart of the emperor, establish a perfect politics, and promote the cause of world peace with ZTE.

古文：高门去省户数十步，求见出入，二年未省，欲使海濒仄陋自通，远矣！
现代文：高门距省户仅仅数十步，想要省视不过是一出一入的功夫而已，却尚且二年未省视了，在这种情况下，想要使天涯海角偏僻之地自行通达，太不可能了！
English: The high gate is only a few dozen steps away from the provincial house. If you want to visit the provinces, it is just a one-in-one-out effort, but you have not visited the provinces for two years. In this case, it is impossible to make the remote places in the far corners of the world accessible by yourself!

古文：愿赐数刻之间，极竭毣々之思，退入三泉，死亡所恨。
现代文：希望陛下恩赐片刻时间，让我陈述我的浅见，然后，那怕是身葬黄泉，我也死而无憾了。
English: I hope that Your Majesty will grant me a moment to present my humble opinion, and then, even if I die, I will die with no regrets.

古文：上感大异，纳宣言，征何武、彭宣，旬月皆复为三公。
现代文：皇上对鲍宣所言大感惊异，于是采纳了他的意见，起用何武、彭宣，十天半月问都将他们复任为三公。
English: The emperor was greatly surprised by what Bao Xuan said, so he adopted his opinion, appointed He Wu and Peng Xuan, and reinstated them as the three princes in ten and a half days.

古文：拜宣为司隶。
现代文：拜鲍宣为司隶。
English: Bao Xuan was made a member of the imperial court.

古文：时，哀帝改司隶校尉但为司隶，官比司直。
现代文：这时哀帝改司隶校尉为司隶，官位级别相当于司直。
English: At this time, Emperor Aideri changed the rank of Sisli to Sisli, and the rank of the officer was equivalent to that of Si Zhi.

古文：丞相孔光四时行园陵，官属以令行驰道中，宣出逢之，使吏钩止丞相掾史，没入其车马，摧辱宰相。
现代文：丞相孔光负责四时巡视园陵，其属官仗恃有皇帝的敕令而违反规制，乘车在驰道中行走，鲍宣外出正好遇见，鲍宣就让属吏扣留了丞相掾史，并没收其车马，羞辱丞相。
English: The chancellor, Kong Guang, was in charge of inspecting the gardens at four o'clock. His subordinates disobeyed the emperor's edict and violated regulations by riding in the carriageway. They happened to meet Bao Xuan when he was out. Bao Xuan had his subordinates detain the chancellor, confiscate his car and horse, and humiliate the chancellor.

古文：事下御史，中丞、侍御史至司隶官，欲捕从事，闭门不肯内。
现代文：此事被交到御史中丞那裹处理，侍御史到司隶官衙处，想要逮捕鲍宣的随从官吏，鲍宣闭门不让其入内。
English: The matter was handed over to the court historian, Zhongzheng Nan, for handling. The court historian went to the magistrate's office, and wanted to arrest Bao Xuan's attendant officials. Bao Xuan closed the door and did not allow them to enter.

古文：宣坐距闭使者，亡人臣礼，大不敬，不道，下廷尉狱。
现代文：鲍宣因此而犯了拒绝接纳使者、没有人臣之礼、大不敬、不守道义等罪遇，被捕下廷尉狱。
English: As a result, Bao Xuan committed the crimes of refusing to receive an envoy, not having a courtier's salute, great disrespect, and not upholding morality, and was arrested and imprisoned.

古文：博士弟子济南王咸举幡太学下，曰： 欲救鲍司隶者会此下。 
现代文：博士弟子济南人王咸举着一杆旗帜到太学门前，说： 想救鲍司隶的人请集中在此旗帜下。 
English: Wang Xian, a doctoral disciple from Jinan, held up a banner in front of the school gate and said, "If you want to save Bao Sili, please gather under this banner."

古文：诸生会者千余人。
现代文：太学生聚集了一千余人。
English: More than a thousand people were gathered by the students.

古文：朝日，遮丞相孔光自言，丞相车不得行，又守阙上书。
现代文：到了上朝之日，他们拦住丞相自己说明情况，丞相的车马不能前行，又守候在宫阙门前，上书皇帝。
English: On the day of the Emperor's enthronement, they stopped the prime minister himself to explain the situation. The prime minister's car and horse could not go forward, and they waited in front of the palace gate to write to the emperor.

古文：上遂抵宣罪减死一等，髡钳。
现代文：皇帝于是将鲍宣的死罪递减一等，剃去头发，用铁圈束颈。
English: The emperor then reduced Bao Xuan's death sentence by one degree, shaved off his hair, and tied his neck with an iron collar.

古文：宣既被刑，乃徙之上党，以为其地宜田牧，又少豪俊，易长雄，遂家于长子。
现代文：鲍宣被判刑后，便举家迁徙到上党，他认为上党地区适于农耕和放牧，又少豪俊之士，容易为首称雄，于是就把家安在上党的长子县。
English: After Baoxuan was sentenced, he moved his whole family to Shangdang. He believed that the Shangdang area was suitable for farming and grazing, and there were few heroes.

古文：平帝即位，王莽秉政，阴有篡国之心，乃风州郡以罪法案诛诸豪桀，及汉忠直臣不附己者，宣及何武等皆死。
现代文：汉平帝即位后，王莽擅权，暗裹有阴谋篡夺帝位之心，于是他暗示各州郡罗织罪名陷害诛杀豪杰之士，至于对汉朝忠诚正直不愿攀附自己的大臣，鲍宣及何武等人都被处死。
English: After Emperor Hanping ascended to the throne, Wang Mang abused his power and was secretly involved in a plot to usurp the imperial throne. Therefore, he hinted that the various states were guilty of framing and assassinating heroic figures. As for the ministers who were loyal to the Han Dynasty and honestly did not want to cling to their own, Bao Xuan and He Wu and others were all executed.

古文：时，名捕陇西辛兴，兴与宣女婿许绀俱过宣，一饭去，宣不知情，坐系狱，自杀。
现代文：当时通缉陇西人辛兴，辛兴舆鲍宣的女婿许绀一起到鲍宣家，吃了一顿饭就离开了，鲍宣不知实情，受牵连被捕下狱，自杀而死。
English: At that time, Xin Xing, who was wanted in Shaanxi, and Xin Xing's son-in-law Xu Rong, who was also wanted in Shaanxi, went to Bao Xuan's home together, ate a meal and left. Bao Xun did not know the truth, was implicated, arrested and imprisoned, and committed suicide.

古文：自成帝至王莽时，清名之士，琅邪又有纪逡王思，齐则薛方子容，太原则郇越臣仲、郇相稚宾，沛郡则唐林子高、唐尊伯高，皆以明经饬行显名于世。
现代文：自成帝至王莽时期，清廉高节之士还有琅邪人起逡王墨，齐人整立王容，左愿人鱼幽旦健、鲣捣歪睡，翅人卢盐工直、卢茎值庙，他们都以精通经义，谨修品行而闻名于世。
English: From the time of Emperor Cheng Rong to the time of Wang Mang, the members of the Qing Dynasty's High Festival also had the following roles: the evil person who made the king's ink, the virtuous person who made the king's countenance, the virtuous person who made the mermaid's countenance beautiful, the virtuous person who made the mermaid's countenance beautiful, the virtuous person who made the mermaid's countenance beautiful, the virtuous person who made the mermaid's countenance beautiful, the virtuous person who made the mermaid's countenance beautiful, the virtuous person who made the

古文：纪逡、两唐皆仕王莽，封侯贵重，历公卿位。
现代文：纪逡、两唐都在王莽统治时做官，被封授侯爵，荣耀显贵，位列公卿。
English: During Wang Mang's reign, Guizhou and the two Tang Dynasties all had officials who were awarded the title of marquis, which was a prestigious honor and ranked as a noble.

古文：唐林数上疏谏正，有忠直节。
现代文：卢拯曾多次上书谏静，有忠诚刚直的气节。
English: Lu Zheng had written many times about being a quiet, loyal and upright person.

古文：唐尊衣敝履空，以瓦器饮食，又以历遗公卿，被虚伪名。
现代文：卢奠身穿破旧的衣服，脚踏穿孔的鞋子，用粗糙的瓦器饮食，又将这些粗糙的瓦器遍赠公卿大臣，得到了虚伪的名声。
English: Lu Jian wore worn-out clothes, shoes with holes in the soles, ate with rough earthenware, and gave these rough earthenware to noblemen and ministers, gaining a reputation for hypocrisy.

古文：郇越、相，同族昆弟也，并举州郡孝廉、茂材，数病，去官。
现代文：郇越、郇相是同族兄弟，一同被州郡举为孝廉茂材，几次因病辞官。
English: Hao Yue and Hao Xiang are brothers of the same ethnicity. They were both honored by the state and county as filial sons and daughters, and were removed from their posts several times due to illness.

古文：越散其先人訾千余万，以分施九族州里，志节尤高。
现代文：郇越将祖辈积蓄的千余万资财分施于州里九族乡亲，志节尤为高尚。
English: Gong Yue has distributed more than one thousand million yuan of capital and wealth accumulated by his ancestors to the nine ethnic groups in the county, which is a particularly noble aspiration.

古文：相王莽时征为太子四友，病死，莽太子遣使裞以衣衾，其子攀棺不听，曰： 死父遗言，师友之送勿有所受，今于皇太子得托友官，故不受也。 京师称之。
现代文：郇相在王莽执政时被征为太子四友，因病去世后，王莽太子派使者赠予丧服和衾被，郇相的儿子扶着棺材，不接受赠物，他说： 我去世的父亲留下遣言，不接受师友所赠之物，现在，我父亲对于皇太子来说可以算是友官，所以不能接受太子所赠之物。 
English: When Wang Mang was in power, Yan Xiang was enlisted as one of the four friends of the crown prince. After Wang Mang died of illness, the crown prince sent an envoy to donate mourning clothes and quilts. Yan Xiang's son supported the coffin and did not accept gifts. He said: My deceased father left a message, not accepting gifts from teachers and friends. Now, my father can be considered a friend to the crown prince, so he cannot accept gifts from the prince.

古文：薛方尝为郡掾祭酒，尝征不至，及莽以安车迎方，方因使者辞谢曰： 尧、舜在上，下有巢由，今明主方隆唐、虞之德，小臣欲守箕山之节也。 
现代文：京城中的人们都称赞他的行为。薛方曾任郡掾祭酒，朝廷曾征召他，他不应召，王莽执政时用安车迎接他，薛方通过使者婉言推辞说： 唐尧、虞舜在上为君时，下有巢父、许由等人隐于民间，现在明主正振兴唐、虞之德，小臣想效法许由等人，以守箕山之节。 
English: The people in the capital all praised his actions. Xue Fang had been in charge of the county sacrificial wine, the imperial court had conscripted him, he should not be called, Wang Mang met him with an armored car when he was in power. Xue Fang said through the emissary's gentle words: When Tang Xuan and Gu Yao were kings, there were Nest Father, Xu Yue and others hidden from the people. Now the Lord is revitalizing Tang, Yu Zi De, and the vassal wants to follow the example of Xu Yue and others to observe the Lushan Festival.

古文：使者以闻，莽说其言，不强致。
现代文：使者把他的话告诉了王莽，王莽很高兴，就不再勉强他了。
English: The messenger told Wang Mang what he had said, and Wang Mang was pleased and no longer forced him.

古文：方居家以经教授，喜属文，著诗赋数十篇。
现代文：薛方在家教授经学，喜欢写文章，着有诗赋数十篇。
English: Xue Fang teaches classics at home, likes to write articles, and has written dozens of poems.

古文：始隃麋郭钦，哀帝时为丞相司直，奏免豫州牧鲍宣、京兆尹薛修等，又奏董贤，左迁卢奴令，平帝时迁南郡太守。
现代文：开始喻麋人郭钦，在汉哀帝时任丞相司直，曾上书要求罢免豫州牧鲍宣、京兆尹薛修等人，又上书弹劾董贤，被降为卢奴县令，平帝时升为南郡太守。
English: Guo Qin, the person who started the story, was the prime minister when Emperor Han Yei, and had written a letter to demand the dismissal of Yuzhou Patriarch Bao Xuan, Emperor Jing Zhao, Emperor Yin Xuexiu, and others. He also wrote a letter to impeach Dong Xian, who was reduced to the position of Lu Nu County Governor, and was promoted to the position of Nan County Governor during the reign of Emperor Ping.

古文：而杜陵蒋诩元卿为兖州刺史，亦以廉直为名。
现代文：而杜陵人蒋翻元卿任兖州刺史，也以廉洁刚直而闻名。
English: However, the man from Duling, Jiang Qiuyuan, who was appointed as the governor of Zhangzhou, was also famous for his honesty.

古文：王莽居摄，钦、诩皆以病免官，归乡里，卧不出户，卒于家。
现代文：王莽摄政，郭钦、蒋翊都称病免官，回归乡里，病卧在床，足不出户，死于家中。
English: Wang Mang, the regent, Guo Qin, and Chiang Kai-shek all claimed to be ill and dismissed from their posts, returned to the countryside, lay ill in bed, did not leave the house, and died at home.

古文：齐栗融客卿、北海禽庆子夏、苏章游卿、山阳曹竟子期皆儒生，去官不仕于莽。
现代文：齐国的栗融客卿、北海的禽庆子夏、苏章游卿、山阳的曹竟子期，都是儒生，王莽篡位后，均弃官不仕。
English: Li Rongkeqing of Qi, Yi Qing Zixia of the North Sea, Su Zhang Youqing, and Cao Jingzi of Sanyang were all Confucians. After Wang Mang usurped the throne, they all resigned from their posts.

古文：莽死，汉更始征竟以为丞相，封侯，欲视致贤人，销寇贼。
现代文：王莽死后，汉更始帝刘玄征召曹竟为丞相，封授侯爵，想以此向天下人表示他招揽贤人，消除寇贼的诚意。
English: After Wang Mang's death, Liu Xuan, the first emperor of the Han Dynasty, conscripted Cao Qian as the prime minister and made him a marquis, hoping to show the world that he was recruiting wise men and eliminating the sincerity of the bandits.

古文：竟不受侯爵。
现代文：曹竟不接受爵位。
English: Cao did not accept the title.

古文：会赤眉人长安，欲降竟，竟手剑格死。
现代文：恰逢赤眉军攻入长安，想让曹竟投降，曹竟持剑搏斗而死。
English: Just as the Red Eyebrows invaded Chang'an, they wanted Cao to surrender, but Cao fought with his sword and died.

古文：世祖即位，征薛方，道病卒。
现代文：世祖即位后，征召薛方，薛方病死于应召进京途中。
English: After the Emperor ascended to the throne, he conscripted Xue Fang. Xue Fang died of illness on his way to Beijing.

古文：两龚、鲍宣子孙皆见褒表，至大官。
现代文：龚胜、龚舍和鲍宣的子孙都被表彰，位至大官。
English: The descendants of Ye Sheng, Ye Xie and Bao Xuan were all commended and promoted to high-ranking officials.

古文：赞曰：《易》称 君子之道也，或出或处，或默或语 ，言其各得道之一节，譬诸草木，区以别矣。
现代文：赞曰：《易经》说 君子之道，或出仕或隐居，或沉默或建言 ，是说他们各自得到道的一个方面，犹如兰、桂诸草木，类别虽不同，而都各显其芬芳。
English: Zang said: "The I Ching says that the way of a gentleman is either to serve or to live in seclusion, or to be silent or to offer advice. This means that they have each obtained one aspect of the way, just like the orchid, cinnamon and other plants. Although the categories are different, they all show their fragrance.

古文：故曰山林之士往而不能反，朝廷之士入而不能出，二者各有所短。
现代文：所以说在野之士隐而不能再入仕，在朝之人入仕后不能再隐处，二者各有所短。
English: Therefore, it is said that those who are in the field are hidden and can no longer enter the service, and those who are in the morning can no longer hide after entering the service. Both are short.

古文：春秋列国卿大夫及至汉兴将相名臣，怀禄耽宠以失其世者多矣！
现代文：从春秋列国卿大夫及至汉兴以后的将相名臣，留恋官禄耽溺宠幸而致失去世道人心者有多少啊！
English: From the Spring and Autumn period, the line of secretaries of state and doctors to the Han Xing dynasty, there are many famous courtiers who are attached to official positions and indulge in favors, resulting in the loss of the world's moral heart!

古文：是故清节之士于是为贵。
现代文：因此，其中品行高洁之士显得犹为难能可贵。
English: Therefore, among them, those with high moral standards appear to be even more valuable.

古文：然大率多能自治而不能治人。
现代文：然而大多数人衹能自治而不能治人。
English: Most people, however, are capable of self-governance but not of governing.

古文：王、贡之材，优于龚、鲍。
现代文：像王吉、贡禹这样的人才，远优于龚胜、龚舍和鲍宣。
English: Talents like Wang Ji and Gong Yu are far superior to Gong Sheng, Yao She and Bao Xuan.

古文：守死善道，胜实蹈焉。
现代文：至死而守善道，龚胜确实实践了圣人之道。
English: By following the virtuous path until death, He Sheng truly practiced the way of a saint.

古文：贞而不谅，薛方近之。
现代文：坚贞而聪慧，言不必信，薛方的言行接近圣人之意。
English: Steadfast and intelligent, there is no need to believe what he says. Xue Fang's words and deeds are close to the meaning of a saint.

古文：郭钦、蒋诩好遁不污，绝纪、唐矣！
现代文：郭钦、蒋翊逃避浊乱，不污其节，完全不同于纪逡和唐林、唐尊等人。
English: Guo Qin and Chiang Kai-shek evaded the turmoil and did not tarnish their reputation, which is completely different from Ji Kun and Tang Lin, Tang Zun and others.

