古文：中书、尚书令在西汉时为少府官属，与太官、汤官、上林诸令品秩略等，侍中但为加官，在东汉亦属少府，而秩稍增。
现代文：中书令、尚书令在西汉时是少府的属官，跟太官令、汤官令、上林苑令等官的品级地位大致相等，侍中只是为增加新职而加上的官号，在东汉时也属于少府，只是品级稍微增高。
English: In the Western Han Dynasty, Zhongshurong and Shangshurong were subordinate officials of Shofu, roughly equal in rank to officials such as Taikan, Tang, and Shanglinyuan. Samurai was just an official title added to add a new position. In the Eastern Han Dynasty, it also belonged to Shofu, but the rank was slightly higher.

古文：尚书令为千石，然铜印墨绶，虽居几要，而去公卿甚远，至或出为县令。
现代文：尚书令的俸禄为千石，但是虽然授予铜印墨缓，身处机要部门，却比公卿差得很远，甚至有的出京为官只作县令。
English: Shang Shuling's salary was a thousand koku, but although the award of copper printing and ink was slow, and he was in an important department, he was far from a noble, and some even went to Beijing as an official only as a county magistrate.

古文：魏、晋以来，浸以华重。
现代文：魏、晋以来，地位渐渐显赫重要。
English: Since the Wei and Jin dynasties, the status has gradually become more prominent and important.

古文：唐初遂为三省长官，居真宰相之任，犹列三品，大历中乃升正二品。入国朝，其位益尊，叙班至在太师之上，然只以为亲王及使相兼官，无单拜者。
现代文：唐朝初年就成为三省的长官，担任真宰相的职位，但仍只是三品官，大历年间才成正二品；到了宋朝，尚书令的地位更加尊贵，等级排列甚至在太师之上，然而只作为亲王以及使相的兼官，没有单独授予的。
English: In the first year of the Tang Dynasty, he became the governor of three provinces and held the post of the real prime minister, but he was still only the third-ranked official, and only became the second-ranked official during the Great Calendar; in the Song Dynasty, Shang Shuling's status was more honorable, ranking even above the Grand Master, but only as a prince and envoy, not awarded separately.

古文：见任宰相带侍中者才五人：范鲁公质、赵韩王普、丁晋公谓、冯魏公拯、韩魏王琦。
现代文：现在任宰相而带侍中官号的人才有五人：鲁公范质、韩王赵普、晋公丁谓、魏公冯拯、魏王韩琦。
English: At present, there are only five people who hold the title of vice-chancellor with the title of vice-chancellor: Lu Gongwang, Han Wang Zhao Pu, Jin Gong Ding Zuo, Wei Gong Feng Zheng, and Wei Wang Han Qi.

古文：尚书令又最贵，除宗王外，不以假人。
现代文：尚书令又最显贵，除了宗姓王以外，不授予其他。
English: Shang Shuling is the most prestigious, and is not awarded to anyone other than the family name of Wang.

古文：赵韩王、韩魏王始赠真令，韩公官止司徒，及赠尚书令，乃诏自今更不加增，盖不欲三师之官赘其称也。
现代文：韩王赵普、魏王韩琦才开始被赐予真尚书令，韩琦的官号只是司徒，等到赐予尚书令时，就下令从今往后不加官号，这是不想用三师的官号赘加在它的称号上。
English: Han Wang Zhao Pu and Wei King Han Xuan only began to be given official titles. Han Xuan's official title was only "Stu." When he was given the official title, he ordered that the official title would not be added from now on. This was because he did not want to use the official title of "Three Divisions" to add to his title.

古文：政和初，蔡京改侍中、中书令为左辅、石弼，而不置尚书令，以为太宗皇帝曾任此官。殊不知乃唐之太宗为之，故郭子仪不敢拜，非本朝也。
现代文：宋政和初，蔡京把侍甲、中书令改为左辅、右弼，而不设尚书令，以为宋大宗皇帝曾经任过这个官，却不知道唐朝的太宗曾做过此官，因此郭子仪不敢拜受，这事不是出于本朝。
English: At the beginning of the Song Dynasty, Cai Jing changed the ranks of the officers and the middle-ranking officials to the left assistant and the right eunuch, but did not set the high-ranking officials. He thought that Emperor Song Daizong had once held this position, but he did not know that Emperor Taizong of the Tang Dynasty had once held this position. Therefore, Guo Ziyi did not dare to worship him. This was not due to this dynasty.

