古文：完颜撒改庞迪温迪罕移室懑神土懑移剌成石抹卞杨仲武蒲察世杰萧怀忠移剌按答孛术鲁阿鲁罕赵兴祥石抹荣敬嗣晖完颜撒改，上京纳鲁浑河人也，其先居于兀冷窟河。
现代文：完颜撒改，上京纳鲁浑河人，其祖先居在兀冷窟河。
English: After changing their appearance, the Naruhunhe people, whose ancestors lived in the Qilian Cave River, came to Beijing.

古文：身长多力，善用枪。
现代文：他身高力大，善于使枪。
English: He's tall, strong and good with a gun.

古文：王师南征，睿宗为右副元帅，置之麾下，佩以金牌，使督军事。
现代文：金军南征，睿宗为右副元帅，把完颜撒改招为部下，给他佩带金牌，让他监督军事。
English: When the Golden Army marched south, Ruizong was the right vice-marshal. He changed his title to subordinate, gave him a gold medal to wear, and let him supervise the military.

古文：天眷元年，授本班祗候郎君详稳。
现代文：天眷元年，完颜撒改被授予本班祗候郎君详稳。
English: In the first year of the Heian period, this class was awarded the title of Shuko-ro-kun-zetsudo.

古文：其后从军泰州路，军帅以撒改为万户，领银术可等猛安，戍北边，数有战功。
现代文：其后他在泰州路从军，军帅任完颜撒改为万户，领银术可等猛安，驻守北疆，多有战功。
English: After that, he joined the army in Taizhou Road. After he was appointed as the military commander, he changed his surname to Wanhu. He was stationed in Northern Xinjiang and had many military achievements.

古文：天德二年正月，海陵庶人遣使夏国，谕以即位事，因令伺彼之意。
现代文：天德二年正月，海陵庶人派完颜撒改出使夏国，告知夏国他即皇帝位之事，并命令完颜撒改侦探夏国的情况。
English: In the first month of the second year of the Tiande era, the commoners of Hailing sent an envoy to Xia Guo to inform him that he was the emperor, and ordered the envoy to investigate the situation of Xia Guo.

古文：既还，称旨，为尚书兵部郎中。
现代文：回来后，任务完成得很好，被授予尚书兵部郎中。
English: After returning, the task was completed well, and he was awarded the title of Shangshu Heybun Langzhong.

古文：改同知会宁尹，迁迭剌部族节度使，改瓯里本群牧使，为曷懒路都总管。
现代文：改任同知会宁尹，升迭剌部族节度使，改任瓯里本群牧使，为曷懒路都总管。
English: He was reappointed as Ning Yin of the Tongzhi Association, promoted to be the chief of the Qilian tribe, the chief of the Qilian tribe, and the chief of the Qilian lazy road.

古文：海陵伐宋，授卫州防御使，为武震军都总管。
现代文：海陵皇帝攻打宋朝，授予完颜撒改卫州防御使，为武震军都总管。
English: Emperor Hailing attacked the Song Dynasty, and awarded him the post of defense envoy for the defense of Weizhou, and he was the general manager of the Wuzhen Army.

古文：世宗即位，遣使召撒改，既至，除昌武军节度使。
现代文：金世宗即皇帝位，派使者诏令完颜撒改，他到达后，仓促被授予昌武军节度使。
English: Kim Sejong, that is, the emperor, sent an envoy to complete the face-sweeping reform. After his arrival, he was hastily awarded the festival envoy of the Changwu Army.

古文：已而为山东路元帅副都统，改安化军节度使，兼副都统如故。
现代文：不久他为山东路元帅副都统，改任安化军节度使，依旧兼副都统。
English: Soon after, he was promoted to Shandong Road Marshal and Deputy Commander-in-Chief of the Anhua Army, and remained Deputy Commander-in-Chief of the Anhua Army.

古文：四年，徙镇安武，仍兼副统。
现代文：大定四年，他迁居镇守安武，仍兼副统。
English: In the fourth year of the Taisho era, he moved to the town of Anbu, where he was still the deputy governor.

古文：领山东、大名、东平三路军八万余渡淮，会大军伐宋。
现代文：他率领山东、大名，东平三路军八万多人渡淮河，同大军会师攻打宋朝。
English: He led the Shandong, Daimyo, and Dongping Third Route Army of more than 80,000 men across the Huai River and joined the same army to attack the Song Dynasty.

古文：进至楚州，宋遣使奉岁币。
现代文：进军到楚州，宋朝派使者奉上进贡钱币。
English: When they marched into Chuzhou, the Song Dynasty sent an envoy with tribute coins.

古文：还邳州，卒。
现代文：他回到邳州，后死去。
English: He returned to Zhangzhou and later died.

古文：庞迪，字仲由，延安人。
现代文：庞迪，字仲由，延安人。
English: Pandi, alias Nakayu, Yan'an native.

古文：少倜傥，喜读兵书，习骑射，学推步孤虚之术，无所效用。
现代文：他少年时风流倜傥，喜读兵书，熟悉骑马射箭，学习推步孤虚之术，但没有地方效力。
English: When he was a young man, he was good-looking, enjoyed reading military books, was familiar with horse riding and archery, and learned the art of walking alone, but had no local effect.

古文：应募，隶泾原路第三副将，破贼有功，授保义郎。
现代文：他应召从军，属于泾原路第三副将，由于破敌有功，被授予保义郎。
English: He was called up to serve in the army, and belonged to the third vice-general of the Xingyuan Road. He was awarded the title of "Guarantor" for his distinguished service in defeating the enemy.

古文：尝从百余骑经行山谷，遇夏人数千，众皆骇惧请避，迪遂跃马犯阵，敌皆披靡，身被重创，神色自若，完军以还。
现代文：他曾经同一百多骑兵在山谷中行走，遇到几千夏国人，同行都害怕请求避开夏国人，庞迪于是骑马冲犯夏国人的队伍，敌人披靡而逃，他身受重伤，而神色自若，军队也毫无损失而归。
English: He once walked with more than a hundred cavalry in the valley and encountered thousands of Xia people. His colleagues were afraid to ask him to avoid the Xia people. Pandi then rode on horseback to attack the Xia people's team. The enemy was defeated and fled. He was seriously injured, but he looked confident. The army also returned without loss.

古文：自是知名，擢为正将，权发遣泾原路兵马都监。
现代文：庞迪从此出名，升为正将，暂代理发遣泾原路兵马都监。
English: From then on, Pangdi became famous and was promoted to the rank of general. He temporarily acted as the chief inspector of troops and horses dispatched to Yuyuan Road.

古文：齐国建，泾原路经略使张中孚举迪权知怀德军，兼沿边安抚使。
现代文：齐国建立，泾原路经略使张中孚推荐庞迪暂代知怀德军，兼沿边安抚使。
English: After the establishment of the State of Qi, Zhang Zhongfu, a general of the Qin Dynasty, recommended that Pang Di temporarily replace the German army and serve as a pacifying envoy along the border.

古文：夏人合军五万薄怀德城，迪开门待之，夏人不敢入。
现代文：夏国人集中五万军队逼迫怀德城，庞迪开城门等待，夏国军队不敢进城。
English: The Xia people concentrated fifty thousand troops to persecute the city of Huai De. Pandi opened the city gate and waited. The Xia army did not dare to enter the city.

古文：因以数千骑分门突出，遂破之，斩首五百级，获军资羊马甚众。
现代文：因此庞迪用几千骑兵分门突然出击，于是打败了夏军，斩首五百，俘获很多军用物资及羊马。
English: Therefore, Poundy made a surprise attack with several thousand cavalrymen, defeated the Xia army, beheaded five hundred, and captured a lot of military supplies and horses.

古文：复破关师古兵，擢知泾州。
现代文：庞迪又打败关师古的军队，他被升为知泾州。
English: He defeated Guan Shigu's army again and was promoted to Zhisheng Prefecture.

古文：未到官，改知镇戎军、沿边安抚使。
现代文：庞迪还没到任，又改为知镇戎军，沿边安抚使。
English: Before Poundy took office, he changed the name to Zhizhen Armies, and became a pacifying envoy along the border.

古文：已而权淮南东路马步军副总管，总制沂、密、淮阳，兼权知沂州。
现代文：不久他暂代淮南东路马步军副总管，共控制沂、密、淮阳，并暂兼知沂州。
English: Soon after, he temporarily became the deputy commander-in-chief of the Ma Bu Army on the East Huainan Road, jointly controlling Handan, Miyang and Huaiyang, and temporarily also Zhisheng.

古文：丁父忧，去官。寻起复为环庆路兵马都钤辖，权知邠州。
现代文：庞迪父亲去世，他辞官服孝，不久孝满后又为环庆路兵马都钤辖，暂代知州。
English: When Poundy's father passed away, he resigned from his post and became a filial son. Soon after he became a filial son, he was placed under the jurisdiction of the Huanqing Road Terracotta Warriors and Horses, temporarily representing Chizhou.

古文：齐国废，改华州防御使。
现代文：齐国被废除，庞迪改任华州防御使。
English: The State of Qi was abolished, and Pangdi was appointed as the Defense Minister of Huazhou.

古文：顷之，军变，被执入山。
现代文：不久，军队发生叛乱，他被拘捕山中。
English: Soon after, the army mutinied and he was arrested in the mountains.

古文：已而贼众悔曰： 公为政素善，岂宜劫辱。 
现代文：尔后叛军后悔说 ：你为政一向和善，岂能劫持污辱。 
English: Afterwards, the rebels regretted and said, "You have always been kind in your politics, how could you take advantage of the insult?"

古文：遂纵之还，复领州事。
现代文：于是把庞迪放了回去，他又领华州事。
English: So he let Bundy go, and he went back to China.

古文：天眷元年，除永兴军路兵马都总管兼知京兆府，徙临洮尹，兼熙秦路兵马都总管。
现代文：天眷元年，庞迪被任命为永兴军路兵马都总管兼知京兆府，调任临洮尹，兼熙秦路兵马都总管。
English: In the first year of Tianxin, Pangdi was appointed as the general manager of Yongxing Military Road and Zhizhao Prefecture, transferred to Linyi Yin, and also the general manager of Qin Road.

古文：陕右大饥，流亡四集，迪开渠溉田，流民利其食，居民藉其力，各得其所，郡人立碑纪其政绩。
现代文：陕右大饥荒，人民四处逃荒，庞迪开渠灌溉田地，逃荒百姓得到了食物，居民凭借自己的力量，各得其所，郡人立碑纪念他的政绩。
English: During the great famine in Shaanxi and Hebei, people fled the famine in all directions. Pangdi opened a canal to irrigate the fields, and the people who fled the famine received food. The residents got what they wanted with their own strength. The people of the county erected a monument to commemorate his achievements.

古文：官制行，吏部以武功大夫、博州团练使特授定远大将军。
现代文：官职制度实行后，吏部以武功大夫、博州团练使特授予他定远大将军。
English: After the implementation of the official post system, the cadre department awarded him the title of "martial arts doctor" and "Bozhou regimental drill envoy" to Dingyuan.

古文：七年，除庆阳尹。
现代文：皇统七年，庞迪被任命为庆阳尹。
English: In the seventh year of imperial reunification, Pangdi was named Qingyang Yin.

古文：历三考不易，以治最闻，诏书褒美，西人荣之。
现代文：庞迪经历三次考核都没变动职位，因为治政闻名，金熙宗皇帝下诏褒奖他，西人以此为荣。
English: After undergoing three appraisals, Pangdi did not change his position. Because he is famous for his governance, Emperor Kim Xizong issued a decree to commend him. Westerners are proud of this.

古文：正隆元年，迁凤翔尹，屡上章求退，不许。
现代文：正隆元年，庞迪升为凤翔尹，他屡次上奏章请求退隐，没有被允许。
English: In the first year of Zhenglong, Pangdi was promoted to Fengxiangyin. He repeatedly requested to retire from public life, but was not allowed.

古文：海陵南伐，征敛烦急，官吏因缘为奸，富者用贿以免，贫者破产益困。
现代文：海陵皇帝南伐，征收繁多且紧急，官吏因此邪恶收取，富人贿赂以免，穷人越发破产贫困。
English: Emperor Hailing's Southern Expedition, the collection was numerous and urgent, so the officials collected evilly, the rich bribed to avoid it, and the poor became increasingly bankrupt and impoverished.

古文：迪悉召民使共议增减，不加威督而役力均，人情大悦。
现代文：庞迪尽召百姓让他们共议征收增减，不加责罚而平均分配劳役，百姓拍手称快。
English: Poundy tried his best to call on the people to let them discuss the increase and decrease of the tax, and distribute the labor service equally without punishment. The people clapped their hands and said they were happy.

古文：五年，徙汾阳军节度使。
现代文：正隆五年，庞迪调任汾阳军节度使。
English: In the fifth year of Zhenglong, Pangdi was transferred to the post of Shenyang Military Festival Envoy.

古文：大定初，复为临洮尹，迁南京路都转运使，以省事惜费，安静为政，河南称之。
现代文：大定初年，庞迪又任临洮尹，升南京路都转运使，他因为减少劳役节约开支，廉洁为政，河南境内都称赞他。
English: In the first year of Datong, Pangdi was also appointed as the Linyi-Yin-Zhengzhou-Nanjing Road Transportation Envoy. He was praised in Henan Province for reducing labor costs, saving expenses, and being a clean politician.

古文：及伐宋，以仲武为威定军都总管，驻兵归德。
现代文：庞迪调任降阳军节度使。庞迪死在官职上，终年七十岁。
English: Poundy was transferred to the position of the festival envoy of the sun-setting army. Poundy died in office at the age of seventy.

古文：大定三年，除武胜军节度使，改陕西西路转运使，卒。
现代文：庞迪性格忠孝，他父亲生病，医药无效，庞迪仰天哭泣祈祷，割自己大腿肉做羹给他父亲吃，其父病因此康复。庞迪与弟兄分家财，他的家财全部给弟兄，一点不要。
English: Poundy's character is loyal and filial, his father is ill, medicine is ineffective, Poundy cries and prays to the heavens, cuts his thigh meat to make soup for his father to eat, and his father's illness recovers as a result. Poundy shares the family wealth with his brothers, his family wealth is all given to his brothers, do not want it at all.

古文：蒲察世杰，本名阿撒，曷速馆斡笃河人，徙辽阳。
现代文：官爵的荫恩，他首先给各个侄子。他病情严重后，沐浴穿上官服而死。蒲察世杰本名蒲察阿撒，曷速馆斡笃河人，后迁居辽阳。
English: After he fell seriously ill, he took a bath, put on his official uniform, and died. His real name was Putsa Asa, and he was a river dweller, and later he moved to Liaoyang.

古文：初在梁王宗弼军中。
现代文：起初他在梁王完颜宗弼军中。
English: At first, he was in the army of King Liang Wanyan.

古文：为人多力，每与武士角力赌羊，辄胜之。
现代文：蒲察世杰力大无穷，每当与武士角力赌羊，必胜。
English: Putsa Shijie's strength is boundless. Whenever he wrestles with a samurai in a game of sheep, he always wins.

古文：能以拳击四岁牛，折胁死之。
现代文：他能用拳击四岁的牛，牛的肋骨被折断而死。
English: He can box a four-year-old cow, whose ribs are broken and she dies.

古文：有粮车陷淖中，七牛挽不能出，世杰手挽出之。
现代文：一次有一辆粮车陷在泥坑中，七条牛拉不出来，蒲察世杰用手把粮车拽了出来。
English: Once there was a grain wagon stuck in a mud puddle, and seven cows could not be pulled out. Puca Shijie pulled the grain wagon out by hand.

古文：宗敏为东京留守，召置左右。
现代文：宗敏任东京留守，把他召在左右。
English: Munetoshi was away in Tokyo, so he was called in.

古文：海陵篡立，即以为护卫。
现代文：海陵篡皇帝位后，就任他做护卫。
English: After Emperor Hailing usurped the throne, he was appointed as an escort.

古文：海陵谓世杰曰： 汝勇力绝伦，今我兄弟有异志者，期以十日除之，则有非常之赏，仍尽以各人家产赐汝。 
现代文：海陵对蒲察世杰说： 你勇力无比，现在我的兄弟有不同我一心的，限你十天除掉他们，到时就有非常之赏，把他们的家产赐给你。 
English: Hailing said to Putsa Shijie, "Your courage is beyond compare. Now my brothers have a different heart from mine. If you can get rid of them in ten days, then you will receive a great reward, and their family property will be given to you.

古文：世杰受诏而不肯为。
现代文：蒲察世杰受命后却不肯行动。
English: But he refused to act after receiving the order.

古文：已过十日，海陵怒，面责之。
现代文：已过十天，海陵发怒，当面斥责他。
English: Ten days later, Hailing got angry and scolded him face to face.

古文：世杰曰： 臣自誓不以非道害物，虽死不敢奉诏。 
现代文：蒲察世杰说 ：臣自己发誓不用无道害物，即使死了也不敢奉诏行事。 
English: Bucha Shijie said: The minister himself swore not to use anything harmful, and even if he died, he would not dare to act according to the edict.

古文：海陵爱其勇，不之罪也。
现代文：海陵爱他的勇猛，没有治罪他。
English: Hailing loved his bravery and did not punish him.

古文：正隆四年，调诸路兵伐宋，年二十以上、五十以下皆籍之。
现代文：正隆四年，海陵皇帝调遣诸路军队攻打宋朝，年二十岁以上、五十岁以下的都登记从军。
English: In the fourth year of Zhenglong, Emperor Hailing dispatched troops from all directions to attack the Song Dynasty. All those over the age of twenty and under the age of fifty were registered to join the army.

古文：他使者唯恐不如诏书，得数多，世杰往喝懒路，得数少。
现代文：其他的人唯恐招不够人数，多招了很多人，蒲察世杰前往曷懒路征召的人却不多。
English: Others, fearing that they would not be able to recruit enough people, recruited a lot of people, but there were not many people recruited by Putsa Shijie to Lazy Road.

古文：海陵怪问之，对曰： 曷懒地接高丽，今若多籍其丁，即有缓急，何以为备？ 
现代文：海陵皇帝很奇怪问他这件事，他回答说： 曷懒同高丽国接壤，今天如果多征召了那里的男子，万一有情况，怎么去防备？ 
English: The Emperor of Hailing asked him about this in surprise, and he replied, "Lazy is on the border with Goryeo. If we conscript more men from there today, how can we be prepared in the event of an emergency?

古文：海陵喜曰： 他人用心不能及也。 
现代文：海陵皇帝高兴地说 ：别人没有你有心。 
English: Emperor Hailing said happily, "Other people don't have your heart."

古文：除同知安国军节度使事，赐银二百五十两、绢彩六百匹、马二疋。
现代文：授予他同知安国军节度使事，赐银二百五十两、六百匹绢彩、二匹马。
English: He was awarded the post of festival envoy with the Chian National Army, and was given 2502 silver, 600 horses, and two horses.

古文：是时征发不已，民不堪命，犯法者众，邢久无长吏，狱囚积四百余人。
现代文：当时征召调兵不停，民不堪命，犯法的人多，邢地很长时间没有长吏，监狱的囚犯积到四百多人。
English: At that time, conscription was incessant, the people were desperate, there were many people who broke the law, there were no officials for a long time, and more than four hundred prisoners accumulated in the prison.

古文：世杰到官月余，决遣略尽。
现代文：蒲察世杰到任一月后，几乎全部释放了囚犯。
English: A month after he took office, he released almost all of the prisoners.

古文：入为宿直将军，以事往胡里改路，还奏： 契丹部族大抵皆叛，百姓惊扰不安。
现代文：他进朝为宿直将军，因为公事前往胡里改路，回朝后他上奏说： 契丹部族大都背叛我们，老百姓不得安宁。
English: He went to the DPRK as a general, but changed his route to Huli due to business. After returning to the DPRK, he reported, "Most of the Khitan tribes have betrayed us, and the common people have no peace."

古文：今举国南伐，贼若乘虚入据东土根本之地，虽得江、淮，无益也。
现代文：现在举国南伐，叛军如果乘虚而入占据我们的东土根本之地，即使我们得到了长江、淮河流域，也没有多少利益。
English: Now the whole country is heading south. If the rebels take advantage of the situation and occupy our eastern land, even if we get the Yangtze River and Huaihe River basins, there will be little benefit.

古文：宜先讨平契丹，南伐未晚。 
现代文：我们应该首先讨平契丹，再南伐也不晚。 
English: We should first level the Khitan, and then it is not too late to go south.

古文：海陵不悦曰： 诏令已出矣。
现代文：海陵皇帝不高兴地说 ：命令已下了。
English: Unhappy, Emperor Hailing said: The order has been given.

古文：今以三万兵选将屯中都以北，足以镇压。 
现代文：现在用三万军队选择将领驻守中都以北，足可以镇压。 
English: Now, with 30,000 troops stationed north of Zhongdu, it is possible to suppress them.

古文：世杰又曰： 若东土大族附于贼，恐三万众未易当也。 
现代文：蒲察世杰又说 ：如果东土的大宗族归附叛军，恐怕三万军队不容易抵挡。 
English: Putsa Shijie also said, "If the great clans of the eastern lands join the rebel army, I'm afraid it won't be easy to fend off thirty thousand troops."

古文：海陵不听。
现代文：海陵皇帝不听他的话。
English: Emperor Hailing did not listen to him.

古文：及发汴京，授郑州防御使，领武捷军副总管。
现代文：等到大军出发到了汴京，蒲察世杰被授予郑州防御使，领武捷军副总管。
English: When the large army set out for Beijing, Putsa Shijie was awarded the Zhengzhou Defense Envoy, the deputy commander-in-chief of the People's Liberation Army.

古文：大军渡淮，世杰以军三千护粮餫东下，败宋兵数千人，夺其战船甚众。
现代文：大军渡过淮河，蒲察世杰率三千士兵护粮东下，打败宋兵几千人，夺了宋兵很多战船。
English: The large army crossed the Huai River, and Putsa Shijie led three thousand soldiers to the east to protect grain, defeated several thousand Song soldiers, and captured many warships of Song soldiers.

古文：至和州境，击宋兵五万人走之。
现代文：到达和州境，攻击宋兵五万人并打跑了他们。
English: When they reached the state border, they attacked 50,000 Song soldiers and chased them away.

古文：明日，使其子兀迭领二百八十骑为应兵，自领八百骑前战。连射六十余人，皆应弦而毙，宋兵遂奔溃。
现代文：第二天，蒲察世杰让儿子蒲察兀迭率领二百八十名骑兵作为内应，他自己率领八百名骑兵正面作战，他连射六十多人且都是应声毙命，宋兵于是溃败而逃。
English: The next day, Puca Shijie asked his son Puca Xingdei to lead two hundred and eighty cavalrymen as internal support. He himself led eight hundred cavalrymen to fight head-on. He shot more than sixty people at a time and all of them were killed. The Song soldiers were defeated and fled.

古文：海陵欲观水战，使世杰领水军百人试之。
现代文：海陵皇帝想观察水战情况，让蒲察世杰率领一百水兵试探。
English: Emperor Hailing wanted to observe the situation of the naval battle, so he asked Putsa Shijie to lead a hundred sailors to explore.

古文：宋人舟大而多，世杰舟小，乃急进，至中流取胜而还。
现代文：宋人船大且多，蒲察世杰船小，于是快速进攻，到中流取胜而归。
English: Song people's ships are large and many, but Putsa Shijie's ships are small, so they quickly attack and return to the middle stream to win.

古文：大定初，世杰复取陕州，败宋兵石壕镇，复败宋援兵三千人，遂围陕州。
现代文：大定初年，蒲察世杰又进攻陕州，在石壕镇打败宋兵，又打败三千宋朝援兵，于是围攻陕州。
English: In the first year of Dading, Putsa Shijie attacked Shaanxi again, defeated Song soldiers in Shijie Town, defeated three thousand Song Dynasty reinforcements, and then besieged Shaanxi.

古文：宋兵二千自潼关来，世杰以兵二百四十迎击之，射杀十余人，宋兵败走。
现代文：二千宋兵从潼关来，蒲察世杰用二百四十兵迎头攻击射死十几人，宋兵败走。
English: Two thousand Song soldiers came from Shaoguan, and Putsa Shijie used two hundred and forty soldiers to attack head-on and shot dead more than a dozen people. The Song soldiers were defeated and fled.

古文：复败之于土壕山，生擒一将。
现代文：又在土壕山打败宋兵，活捉一将。
English: He also defeated the Song soldiers at Tonkoushan and captured a general alive.

古文：复以兵三百至斗门城，遇宋兵万余，宋将三人挺枪来刺世杰，世杰以刀断其鎗，宋兵乃退。
现代文：又领三百兵到斗门城，遇到一万多宋兵，宋朝军队中三员大将挺枪来刺蒲察世杰，蒲察世杰用刀砍断了他们的枪，宋兵于是退走。
English: He also led three hundred soldiers to Doumen City and encountered more than ten thousand Song soldiers. Three generals from the Song Dynasty army raised their guns to stab Putsa Shijie. Putsa Shijie cut off their guns with a knife, and the Song soldiers then retreated.

古文：复以四谋克军败宋兵于土华，复围陕州。
现代文：他又用四谋克军在土华打败宋兵，再次围攻陕州。
English: He also used the four-pronged strategy to defeat the Song soldiers in Tuhua and besieged Shaanxi again.

古文：世杰尝擐甲佩刀，腰箭百只，持鎗跃马，往来军中。
现代文：蒲察世杰曾经穿甲佩刀，腰箭百支，持枪跃马，往来军中。
English: Putsa Shijie used to wear armor, carry a sword, shoot a hundred arrows from his waist, jump on a horse with a gun, and was in and out of the army.

古文：敌人见而异之，曰： 真神将也。 
现代文：敌人见了都惊异，说 ：真是神将啊！ 
English: When the enemy saw this, they were astonished and said, "What a great general!

古文：亲率选卒二百余人穴地以入，城遂拔。
现代文：蒲察世杰亲自率领选拔的二百多士兵挖地洞进入陕州城中，于是陕州被攻下。
English: Putsa Shijie personally led more than two hundred selected soldiers to dig a hole into the middle of the city of Shaanxi, and then Shaanxi was captured.

古文：再破宋军三万人，复虢州。
现代文：他再次打败三万宋军，收复了虢州。
English: He once again defeated the 30,000-strong Song Army and recovered Zhangzhou.

古文：未几，为卫州防御使，改河南路统军都监。
现代文：不久，蒲察世杰为卫州防御使，改任河南路统军都监。
English: Soon, Putsa Shijie was appointed as the defense envoy of Weizhou Province and the inspector of the Henan Road United Army.

古文：召赴阙，上慰劳良久，除西北路副统，赐厩马、弓矢、佩刀。
现代文：金世宗皇帝召蒲察世杰前往阙宫，皇帝慰劳他很久，授予他西北路副统，赐厩马、弓矢、佩刀。
English: Emperor Jin Shizong summoned Pu Cha Shijie to the Summer Palace. The emperor consoled him for a long time, awarded him the title of vice-commander of the Northwest Road, and gave him a stable horse, a bow and arrow, and a sword.

古文：从仆散忠义讨契丹。
现代文：蒲察世杰跟从仆散忠义讨伐契丹。
English: Pucha Shijie and his loyal servant San fought against the Khitan.

古文：贼平，改华州防御使，与徒单合喜经略陇右。
现代文：叛军平定，他改任华州防御使，同徒单合喜巡视陇右。
English: When the rebels were subdued, he was reassigned as the defense envoy of Huazhou, and he and his comrades went on a patrol to the right.

古文：合喜复德顺，至东山堡，宋兵捍绝樵路，世杰击走之，追至城下。
现代文：徒单合喜收复德顺，到东山堡，宋兵保卫切断樵路，蒲察世杰打跑了他们，并追到城下。
English: After conquering and recovering De Shun, the Song soldiers defended Dongshan Fort and cut off the main road. Putsa Shijie beat them and chased them to the outskirts of the city.

古文：城中出兵约二万余，败之，杀伤甚众。
现代文：城中派出约二万多兵，他打败了他们，并杀伤很多。
English: He sent more than twenty thousand soldiers into the city and defeated them, killing and wounding many.

古文：宋经略使荆皋弃德顺走，世杰与左都监璋追破其军。
现代文：宋朝经略使荆皋弃德顺逃跑，蒲察世杰与左都监完颜璋追击并打败了宋军。
English: Song Dynasty Emperor Jing Rong abandoned Deshun and fled, while Pu Cha Shijie and Zuo Duan chased and defeated the Song Army.

古文：改亳州防御使，四迁通远军节度使。
现代文：蒲察世杰改任亳州防御使，四次升任通远军节度使。
English: Putsa Shijie was appointed as the defense envoy of Zhangzhou, and was promoted four times as the military envoy of Tongyuan Army.

古文：宋人辄入巩州境粜米面，有司执之，世杰署案作归附人，纵遣之。
现代文：宋朝人动不动就到巩州卖米面，有司拘捕了他，蒲察世杰签署放回宋人，于是宋人被放。
English: During the Song Dynasty, a man went to Gongzhou to sell rice noodles. An official arrested him, and Putcha Shijie signed a document to release him back to the Song Dynasty. As a result, the Song Dynasty man was released.

古文：译吏蔡松寿诬府主谋叛，坐斩。十八年，起为弘州刺史。母忧去职。累迁亳州防御使，卒。
现代文：大定十八年，起用他为弘州刺史，蒲察世杰因母亲去世而辞职。多次升任亳州防御使，后死去。
English: In the 18th year of Dading, he was appointed as the military governor of Hongzhou, but resigned due to the death of his mother. He was promoted to the defense minister of Zhangzhou several times, and then died.

古文：世杰少贫，然疏财尚气，每临阵，敌众既败，必戒士卒毋纵杀掠。
现代文：蒲察世杰少年贫穷，然而他疏财仗义，每次亲临战场，敌军败后，他一定告诫士兵不要放纵杀人掠夺。
English: The young Putsa Shijie was poor, but he saved his money to fight for justice. Every time he was on the battlefield, after the enemy army was defeated, he would certainly admonish the soldiers not to indulge in killing and looting.

古文：平居非忠孝不言，亲贤乐善，甚获当世之誉云。
现代文：平时他非忠孝不言，亲贤乐善，当时的人都称赞他。
English: In ordinary times, he was not loyal and filial, he was kind and good-natured, and people at that time praised him.

