古文：陈骞子舆裴秀子頠秀从弟楷楷子宪
现代文：陈骞子舆裴秀子頠秀从弟楷楷子宪
English: Chen Zizhi, Pei Xiu Zi, Xiu Xiu from his brother, Kai Kai Zi Xian

古文：陈骞，临淮东阳人也。
现代文：陈骞，是临淮束阳人。
English: Chen Yao is a native of Linhuai and Sokyang.

古文：父矫，魏司徒。
现代文：父亲陈矫，是魏的司徒。
English: His father, Chen Jiao, was Wei's tutor.

古文：矫本广陵刘氏，为外祖陈氏所养，因而改焉。
现代文：陈矫本来是广陵刘氏，由外祖父陈氏养育，因而改了姓。
English: Originally from Guangling Liu, Chen Jiao was raised by his maternal grandfather Chen, and thus changed his surname.

古文：骞沈厚有智谋。
现代文：陈骞深沉有智谋。
English: Chen Yao is deep-rooted and resourceful.

古文：初，矫为尚书令，侍中刘晔见幸于魏明帝，谮矫专权。
现代文：当初，陈矫任尚书令，侍中刘晔被魏明帝宠幸，诬陷陈矫专权。
English: At the beginning, Chen Jiao was assigned to the position of Shang Shuling, and Liu Ye, an aide, was favored by Emperor Wei Ming. Chen Jiao was accused of having absolute power.

古文：矫忧惧，以问骞。
现代文：陈矫忧虑惧怕，向陈骞询问。
English: Chen Jiao was worried and afraid, so he asked Chen Yao.

古文：骞曰： 主上明圣，大人大臣，今若不合意，不过不作公耳。 
现代文：陈骞说： 皇帝圣明，父亲是大臣，假如不如意，不过不作公罢了。 
English: Chen Yao said, "Emperor Shengming, your father is a minister. If things don't go well, just don't do anything public.

古文：后帝意果释，骞尚少，为夏侯玄所侮，意色自若，玄以此异之。
现代文：后来皇帝的疑虑果然消除。陈骞少年时，被夏侯玄侮辱，神态自如，夏侯玄因此觉得他不寻常。
English: Later, the emperor's doubts were eliminated. When Chen Xi was a boy, he was insulted by Xia Houxuan, and his demeanor was at ease. Xia Houxuan therefore thought he was unusual.

古文：起家尚书郎，迁中山、安平太守，并著称绩。
现代文：最初作官任尚书郎，改任中山、安平太守，都有显著业绩。
English: He was first appointed to the post of Shoshuro, and was later appointed to the posts of Nakayama and Anping, both of which had significant achievements.

古文：征为相国司马、长史、御吏中丞，迁尚书，封安国亭侯。
现代文：征为相国司马、长史、御史中丞，升任尚书，封为安国亭侯。
English: He was enlisted as Shokoku Sima, Choshi, and Goshi Chujo, promoted to Shoshu, and given the title of Ankokutei Maro.

古文：蜀贼寇陇右，以尚书持节行征蜀将军，破贼而还。
现代文：蜀国入侵陇右，陈骞以尚书持节兼代征蜀将军，打败敌军回朝。
English: Shu invaded the right side of the Han Dynasty, and Chen Zhi defeated the enemy army and returned to the Han Dynasty.

古文：会诸葛诞之乱，复以尚书行安东将军。
现代文：适逢诸葛诞之乱，又以尚书身份兼代安束将军。
English: It coincided with the birth of the Zhuge Rebellion, and he also assumed the role of General Anzuka in his capacity as Shangshu.

古文：寿春平，拜使持节、都督淮北诸军事、安东将军，进爵广陵侯。
现代文：寿春平定，官拜使持节、都督淮北诸军事、安东将军，爵位升为广陵侯。
English: Shuchun was pacified, and the officials paid homage to the envoy Ji Jie, the governor of Huaibei Province, the military, and General Anton, and his title was raised to Guangling marquis.

古文：转都督豫州诸军事、豫州刺史，持节、将军如故。
现代文：转任都督豫州诸军事、豫州刺史，持节、将军之位依旧。
English: He was transferred to the post of the military governor of Yuzhou, and the title of general remained unchanged.

古文：又转都督江南诸军事，徙都督荆州诸军事、征南大将军，封郯侯。
现代文：又转任都督江南诸军事，调任都督荆州诸军事、征南大将军，封为郯侯。
English: He was also transferred to the military governor of Jiangnan Province, transferred to the military governor of Jingzhou Province, the general of the Southern Expedition, and was given the title of prince.

古文：武帝受禅，以佐命之勋，进车骑将军，封高平郡公，迁侍中、大将军，出为都督扬州诸军事，余如故，假黄钺。
现代文：武帝接受禅让，陈骞以辅佐天命的功勋，升车骑将军，封为高平郡公，升为侍中、大将军，出任都督扬州诸军事，其余官职依旧，假黄钺。
English: Emperor Wu accepted Zen's resignation, Chen Rong was promoted to general of cavalry and cavalry with the merit of assisting the heavenly destiny, he was named the governor of Gaoping County, he was promoted to the rank of general and served as the military governor of Yangzhou. The rest of the official positions remained the same.

古文：攻拔吴枳里城，破涂中屯戍。赐骞兄子惺爵关中侯。
现代文：攻取吴国的枳里城，打败涂中屯兵，赐陈骞兄长的儿子陈悝关中侯的爵位。
English: He captured the city of Baoli in the State of Wu, defeated the troops of Tu Zhong, and gave the son of Chen Yu's elder brother the title of Chen Yu Guan Zhong Marquis.

古文：咸宁初，迁太尉，转大司马。
现代文：咸宁初年，升太尉，转大司马。
English: In Xianning's first year, he was promoted to the rank of captain, and then to the rank of major.

古文：骞因入朝，言于帝曰： 胡烈、牵弘皆勇而无谋，强于自用，非绥边之材，将为国耻。
现代文：陈骞趁着入朝，对皇帝说： 胡烈、牵弘都有勇无谋，过于自信，不是安定边防之才，将给国家带来羞耻。
English: Taking advantage of his entrance into the imperial court, Chen Qi said to the emperor: Hu Lie and Zhihong are both reckless and overconfident. They are not capable of stable border defense and will bring shame to the country.

古文：愿陛下详之。 
现代文：希望陛下详察。 
English: I hope His Majesty will take a closer look.

古文：时弘为扬州刺史，不承顺骞命。
现代文：当时牵弘任扬州刺史，不服从陈骞的命令。
English: At that time, Zhu Hong was appointed Yangzhou chief historian and disobeyed Chen Xi's order.

古文：帝以为不协相构，于是征弘，既至，寻复以为凉州刺史。
现代文：皇帝认为两人不和互相结怨，于是征召牵弘，来了以后，不久又出任凉州刺史。
English: The emperor thought that the two did not get along and had a grudge against each other, so he conscripted Tsuchihiro, and after he came, he soon became the governor of Liangzhou.

古文：骞窃叹息，以为必败。
现代文：陈骞私下叹息，认为此举必定招致失败。
English: Chen Yao privately sighed, thinking that this move would surely lead to failure.

古文：二人后果失羌戎之和，皆被寇丧没，征讨连岁，仅而得定，帝乃悔之。
现代文：两个人后来果然失去了与羌戎和好，都死于敌寇，连年征讨，仅得以安定，皇帝很后悔。
English: Later, the two men lost their peace with Qiong Rong, and both died as enemy invaders. After years of war, they were only able to achieve stability, which the emperor regretted.

古文：骞少有度量，含垢匿瑕，所在有绩。
现代文：陈骞年少时就有度量，宽容大度，无论任何职都有业绩。
English: When Chen Wei was young, he had a sense of moderation, tolerance and generosity. Regardless of any position, he had achievements.

古文：与贾充、石苞、裴秀等俱为心膂，而骞智度过之，充等亦自以为不及也。
现代文：与买充、石苞、裴秀等人都是辅佐大臣，而陈骞的智谋度量在他们之上，买充等人也自认为比不上他。
English: He and others such as Maichong, Shijie, and Pei Xiu were assistant ministers, but Chen Xi's wisdom and tact were superior to theirs, and Maichong and others also considered themselves to be inferior to him.

古文：累处方任，为士庶所怀。
现代文：多次担任一方重任，被士人与庶民怀念。
English: He held a number of important positions, and is remembered fondly by both nobles and commoners.

古文：既位极人臣，年逾致仕，思欲退身。
现代文：官至极品以后，超过退休年龄，打算退休。
English: After being promoted to the highest rank, he exceeded the retirement age and planned to retire.

古文：咸宁三年，求入朝，因乞骸骨。
现代文：咸宁三年，请求入朝，于是乞求告老免职。
English: After three years, Xianning requested to join the imperial court, and then begged to be relieved of his duties.

古文：赐衮冕之服，诏曰： 骞元勋旧德，统乂东夏，方弘远绩，以一吴会，而所苦未除，每表恳切，重劳以方事。
现代文：赐他衮冕之服，下诏书说： 陈骞有大功旧德，治理东部，弘扬远大的业绩，来统一吴会，而所劳苦的事情没有消除，每次上表言辞恳切。
English: Presenting him with the crowning robe, the next imperial edict said: Chen Xi has made great contributions to the old morality, governed the east, and promoted great achievements to unify the Wu Association, but the things he has worked hard for have not been eliminated, and his words are sincere every time.

古文：今听留京城，以前太尉府为大司马府，增置祭酒二人，帐下司马、官骑、大车、鼓吹皆如前，亲兵百人，厨田十顷，厨园五十亩，厨士十人，器物经用皆留给焉。
现代文：一方的事务辛苦劳累，现今听任他留在京城，以以前的太尉府为大司马府，增置两名祭酒，帐下的司马、官骑、大车、鼓吹都依旧，亲兵一百人，厨田十顷，厨园五十亩，厨士十人，器物用品都留给大司马府。
English: On the other hand, the affairs were laborious and tiring, and now he was allowed to stay in the capital, with the former captain's palace as the grand steward's palace, two additional sacrificial wine, the steward's horse, the official horse, the cart, and the propaganda were still under the account, one hundred soldiers, ten hectares of kitchen fields, fifty mu of kitchen garden, ten chefs, and all the utensils and supplies were left to the grand steward's palace.

古文：又给乘舆辇，出入殿中加鼓吹，如汉萧何故事。 
现代文：又给乘舆车，出入宫殿加鼓吹，如同汉代芦坦的事例。 
English: In addition, the use of public cars and the entrance and exit of the palace were given more publicity, just like the case of the Han Dynasty.

古文：骞累称疾辞位，诏曰： 骞履德论道，朕所谘询。
现代文：速画屡次称病辞官，诏书说： 速塞行德论道，是我参佐。
English: He was repeatedly referred to as the "dictator of diseases" by the shoga, and the imperial edict said: "I am the senator of the shoga.

古文：方赖谋猷，以弘庶绩，宜时视事。
现代文：正在依赖他的谋略，来弘扬业绩，应该管理政务。
English: He is relying on his strategy to promote performance and should manage the affairs of the government.

古文：可遣散骑常侍谕意。 
现代文：可以派遣散骑常侍来说明旨意。 
English: You can send a samurai on horseback to explain your will.

古文：骞辄归第，诏又遣侍中敦谕还府。
现代文：陈骞则回到家中，诏书又派遣侍中敦促陈骞回官府。
English: Chen Xi returned home, and the imperial edict sent an attendant to urge Chen Xi to return to the government office.

古文：遂固请，许之，位同保傅，在三司之上，赐以几杖，不朝，安车驷马，以高平公还第。
现代文：于是坚决请求，皇帝答应了他，官位如同保傅，在三司之上，赐他几案手杖，不必上朝，安车驷马，以高平公的身份回家。
English: So he made a resolute request, and the emperor agreed to it. He was given the official rank of Baofu, above the three departments, and was given several canes. He did not have to go to court, hitch a ride, and return home as Gao Pingguo.

古文：帝以其勋旧耆老，礼之甚重。
现代文：皇帝因为他功勋大年龄高，对他很礼敬。
English: The emperor was very respectful to him because of his great achievements and his old age.

古文：又以骞有疾，听乘舆上殿。
现代文：又因为陈骞有病，听任他乘轿上殿。
English: Also, because Chen Yao was ill, he was allowed to go up to the palace in a limousine.

古文：骞素无謇谔之风，然与帝语傲；及见皇太子加敬，时人以为谄。
现代文：陈骞从来没有正直敢言之风，然而对皇帝说话态度高傲；等到见皇太子时十分恭敬，当时的人认为他谄媚。
English: Chen Xuan had never had the courage to speak honestly, but he spoke to the emperor in a haughty manner; when he saw the crown prince, he was very respectful, and people at the time thought he was charming.

古文：弟稚与其子舆忿争，遂说骞子女秽行，骞表徙弟，以此获讥于世。
现代文：弟陈稚与陈骞的儿子陈舆愤怒争执，于是说陈骞子女的污秽行为，陈骞上表把弟弟迁走，为此受到世人的耻笑。
English: Chen Zhi's younger brother Chen Zhi had an angry dispute with Chen Yu's son Chen Yu, so he said that Chen Yu's children's filthy behavior, Chen Yu took the lead in moving his brother away, for which he was ridiculed by the world.

古文：元康二年薨，年八十一，加以衮敛，赠太傅，谥曰武。
现代文：元康二年去世，时年八十一岁。加衮服入殓，赠太傅，谧号武。
English: Yuan Kang died two years later, at the age of eighty-one. He was given the additional honor of entering the imperial court, given the title of taifu, and given the posthumous title of bu.

古文：及葬，帝于大司马门临丧，望柩流涕，礼依大司马石苞故事。
现代文：下葬时，皇帝在大司马门亲临丧礼，看着灵柩落泪，丧礼依照大司马石苞的先例。
English: At the time of the burial, the emperor attended the funeral ceremony at Dasima Gate and watched the coffin shed tears. The funeral ceremony followed the precedent of Dasima Shi Huang.

古文：子舆嗣爵。
现代文：儿子陈舆继嗣。
English: His son Chen Myouji succeeds him.

古文：舆字显初，拜散骑侍郎、洛阳令，迁黄门侍郎，厉将校左军、大司农、侍中。
现代文：陈舆字显初，官拜散骑侍郎、洛阳令，升任黄门侍郎，历任将校左军、大司农、侍中。
English: At the beginning of Chen Yuzhi's career, he was promoted to the official rank of Sanki Attendant, Luo Yangling, Huangmen Attendant, and successively the officer of the Left Army, the Chief of the Peasants, and the Attendant.

古文：坐与叔父不睦，出为河内太守。
现代文：因为与叔父不和睦，出任河内太守。
English: Because he did not get along with his uncle, he became the governor of Hanoi.

古文：舆虽无检正，而有力致。
现代文：陈舆虽然没有操行，而办事勤勉。
English: Although Chen Yiwu did not practice, he was diligent in his work.

古文：寻卒，子植字弘先嗣，官至散骑常侍。
现代文：不久死去，儿子陈植字弘先继嗣，官至散骑常侍。
English: He died soon after, and his son, Chen Zhi Zi Hong Xian, became his successor, and was appointed to the rank of Sanzhi Zheng.

古文：卒，子粹嗣，永嘉中遇害，孝武帝以骞玄孙袭爵。
现代文：死，儿子陈粹继嗣，永嘉年间遇害，孝武帝让陈骞的玄孙继承爵位。
English: After the death of his son, Chen Qi's successor, who was killed during the Yongjia era, Emperor Xiaowu allowed Chen Qi's great-great-grandson to inherit the title.

古文：卒，弟子浩之嗣。
现代文：死，弟弟的儿子浩之继嗣。
English: He died, and his brother's son, Hiroshi, became his successor.

古文：宋受禅，国除。
现代文：宋接受禅让时，封地被取消。
English: Song accepted Zen's concession, and the fiefdom was abolished.

古文：裴秀，字季彦，河东闻喜人也。
现代文：裴秀字季彦，河东闻喜人。
English: Baishu is called Ji Yan, and Hedong is called Weng Xi Ren.

古文：祖茂，汉尚书令。
现代文：祖父裴茂，是汉朝的尚书令。
English: His grandfather, Pei Mao, was a Shang Shuling (尚書令) of the Han Dynasty.

古文：父潜，魏尚书令。
现代文：父亲裴潜，是魏的尚书令。
English: His father, Pei Qian, was a Wei Shang Shuling.

古文：秀少好学，有风操，八岁能属文。
现代文：裴秀少年时好学，有风度节操，八岁能写文章。
English: As a young boy, Pei Xiu was eager to learn, had the demeanor of a disciplinarian, and was able to write articles at the age of eight.

古文：叔父徽有盛名，宾客甚众。
现代文：叔父裴徽有名望，宾客很多。
English: Uncle Pei Hui is famous and has many guests.

古文：秀年十余岁，有诣徽者，出则过秀。
现代文：裴秀十多岁时，有拜访裴徽的人，出来时顺便见裴秀。
English: When Pei Xiu was more than ten years old, someone who was visiting Pei Hui happened to see Pei Xiu when he came out.

古文：然秀母贱，嫡母宣氏不之礼，尝使进馔于客，见者皆为之起。
现代文：然而裴秀的生母卑微，嫡母宣氏对她无礼，曾让她给客人端饭菜，见到她的人都为她起立。
English: However, Pei Xiu's birth mother was humble, and her mother-in-law, Xuan Ru, was rude to her. She once asked her to serve meals to guests, and everyone who saw her stood up for her.

古文：秀母曰： 微贱如此，当应为小兒故也。 
现代文：裴秀生母说： 我这么低贱，这是为了我小儿子的缘故。 
English: Pei Xiu's birth mother said: I am so lowly, this is for the sake of my little son.

古文：宣氏知之，后遂止。
现代文：宣氏知道了此事，以后就不再那么做。
English: When he found out about it, he stopped doing it.

古文：时人为之语曰： 后进领袖有裴秀。 
现代文：当时的人说： 后辈的领袖是裴秀。 
English: People at that time said: The leader of the younger generation is Pei Xiu.

古文：渡辽将军毌丘俭尝荐秀于大将军曹爽，曰： 生而岐嶷，长蹈自然，玄静守真，性入道奥；博学强记，无文不该；孝友著于乡党，高声闻于远近。
现代文：渡辽将军坍丘俭曾向大将军曹爽推荐裴秀，说： 生下来就聪慧，长循自然；幽思清静，坚守正道；博学强记，精通文章；孝顺与友善在乡里闻名，好名声远近周知。
English: General Duanqiu Jian of the Liao Dynasty once recommended Peixiu to the great general Cao Shuang, saying: Born to be wise, follow nature; quiet and calm, stick to the right path; erudite, proficient in writing; filial piety and friendliness are famous in the countryside, and good reputation is known far and wide.

古文：诚宜弼佐谟明，助和鼎味，毗赞大府，光昭盛化。
现代文：实在应该辅佐谋略，协助政务，赞助贵府，光大教化。
English: It is really necessary to assist in strategy, assist in government affairs, sponsor your government, and promote enlightenment.

古文：非徒子奇、甘罗之俦，兼包颜、冉、游、夏之美。 
现代文：裴秀不仅仅是子奇、甘罗一类人物，他兼有颜、冉、游、夏的美德。 
English: Pei Xiu is not only a kind of Ziqi and Ganluo, he also has the virtues of Yan, Ran, Yu and Xia.

古文：爽乃辟为掾，袭父爵清阳亭侯，迁黄门侍郎。
现代文：曹爽于是征召他为属官，继承父亲清阳亭侯的爵位，迁升黄门侍郎。
English: Cao Shuang then conscripted him as a subordinate official to inherit the title of his father, the Marquis of Qingyangting, and promoted him to Huangmen chamberlain.

古文：爽诛，以故吏免。
现代文：曹爽被杀，因旧官吏的身份被罢免。
English: Cao Shuang was killed and removed from his post as a former official.

古文：顷之，为廷尉正，历文帝安东及卫将军司马，军国之政，多见信纳。
现代文：不久，任廷尉正，历任文帝安束及卫将军司马，提出的国政军政，多被采纳。
English: Soon, the national politics and military politics proposed by Ren Tingzheng, the successive Wen Di'an clique and the guard general Sima were mostly adopted.

古文：迁散骑常侍。
现代文：升任散骑常侍。
English: Promoted to Sangetsu-no-Zenshi.

古文：帝之讨诸葛诞也，秀与尚书仆射陈泰、黄门侍郎锺会以行台从，豫参谋略。
现代文：皇帝讨伐诸葛诞时，裴秀与尚书仆射陈泰、黄门侍郎钟会随从行台，参与谋略。
English: At the time of the emperor's crusade against Zhuge, Pei Xiu, along with Shang's servant Sha Chen Tai and Huangmen's servant Zhong Hui, followed the procession and participated in the strategy.

古文：及诞平，转尚书，进封鲁阳乡侯，增邑千户。
现代文：诸葛诞被平定，转任尚书，进封鲁阳乡侯，增加食邑一千户。
English: Zhugexing was subdued, transferred to Shangshu, moved to Luyang Township, and increased the number of food villages by one thousand.

古文：常道乡公立，以豫议定策，进爵县侯，增邑七百户，迁尚书仆射。
现代文：常道乡公继位，裴秀因为参与立位，进爵位为县侯，增加食邑七百户，升任尚书仆射。
English: Zongdao Xiangong succeeded to the throne, and Pei Xiu, because of his participation in the enthronement, was promoted to the peerage of county magistrate, increased the number of counties by 700, and was promoted to Shang Shupo.

古文：魏咸熙初，厘革宪司。
现代文：魏咸熙初年，改革宪司。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Hanxi of the Wei Dynasty, he reformed the Constitutional Court.

古文：时荀顗定礼仪，贾充正法律，而秀改官制焉。
现代文：当时荀颛修定礼仪，买充修订法律，而裴秀改官制。
English: At that time, Zou revised the etiquette, Maichong revised the law, and Pei Xiu changed the official system.

古文：秀议五等之爵，自骑督已上六百余人皆封。
现代文：裴秀奏议五等爵位，自骑督以上六百多人都受封。
English: Pei Xiu proposed a fifth-class knighthood, and more than six hundred people from the captain onward were knighted.

古文：于是秀封济川侯，地方六十里，邑千四百户，以高苑县济川墟为侯国。
现代文：于是裴秀被封为济川侯，封地方圆六十里，食邑一千四百户，以高苑县济川墟为侯国。
English: As a result, Baishu was given the title of Jichuan marquis, with a territory of sixty miles, fourteen hundred households, and the Jichuan market in Gaoyuan County as the marquisate.

古文：初，文帝未定嗣，而属意舞阳侯攸。
现代文：当初，文帝还没确定继承人，而有意立舞阳侯司马攸。
English: At first, Emperor Wen had not yet decided on a successor, but he intended to appoint Wanyang Hou Simayou.

古文：武帝惧不得立，问秀曰： 人有相否？ 
现代文：武帝怕不立自己，问裴秀说： 人有没有相貌之说? 
English: Emperor Wu was afraid to stand up for himself, so he asked Pei Xiu: "Do people talk about looks?

古文：因以奇表示之。
现代文：于是表示自己相貌奇突。
English: As a result, he said that his appearance was bizarre.

古文：秀后言于文帝曰： 中抚军人望既茂，天表如此，固非人臣之相也。 
现代文：裴秀后来对文帝说： 中抚军声望高，又有帝王的仪容，肯定不是作臣之相。 
English: Later, Pei Xiu said to Emperor Wen: The reputation of the Central Military Commission is high, and it has the appearance of the emperor. It is definitely not the appearance of a vassal.

古文：由是世子乃定。
现代文：由此定了世子。
English: From this, the future was decided.

古文：武帝既即王位，拜尚书令、右光禄大夫，与御史大夫王沈、卫将军贾充俱开府，加给事中。
现代文：武帝登上王位以后，裴秀官拜尚书令、右光禄大夫，与御史大夫王沈、卫将军贾充都为开府，加给事中。
English: After Emperor Wu ascended the throne, Baisiu official Bai Shang Shuling, Uguanglu doctor, and goshi doctor Wang Shen, Wei general Jia Chong all became the capital, and were added to the matter.

古文：及帝受禅，加左光禄大夫，封钜鹿郡公，邑三千户。
现代文：武帝接受禅让，加封左光禄大夫，封钜鹿郡公，食邑三千户。
English: Emperor Wu accepted Zen's offer, added the fief of Dr. Sakoroku, the fief of Menglu County, and 3,000 households in the food village.

古文：时安远护军郝诩与故人书云： 与尚书令裴秀相知，望其为益。 
现代文：当时安远护军郝翔给朋友写信说： 我与尚书令裴秀相互了解，看到他谋私利。 
English: At that time, Anyuan Protector Gao Xiang wrote to a friend, saying: I have a mutual understanding with Shang Shuling Pei Xiu, and I see him seeking personal gain.

古文：有司奏免秀官，诏曰： 不能使人之不加诸我，此古人所难。
现代文：有关官吏奏请罢免裴秀的官职，皇帝下韶书说： 不能防止不加罪人，这是古人所难。
English: The relevant officials requested the removal of Pei Xiu from his official position, and the emperor said in the imperial edict: It is impossible to prevent sin, which is difficult for the ancients.

古文：交关人事，诩之罪耳，岂尚书令能防乎！
现代文：串通勾结，是郝翔的罪责，难道是尚书令能防范的吗!
English: Collusion is a high-flying crime, can it be prevented by a written order?

古文：其勿有所问。 
现代文：不要过问这件事。 
English: Don't ask about it.

古文：司隶校尉李憙复上言，骑都尉刘尚为尚书令裴秀占官稻田，求禁止秀。
现代文：司隶校尉李意又上言，说骑都尉刘尚为尚书令裴秀侵占公稻田，请求限制裴秀行动自由。
English: Sifu Lieutenant Li Yi also made a speech, saying that Cavalry Captain Liu Shang ordered Pei Xiu to occupy public rice fields, and requested that Pei Xiu's freedom of movement be restricted.

古文：诏又以秀干翼朝政，有勋绩于王室，不可以小疵掩大德，使推正尚罪而解秀禁止焉。
现代文：诏书又说裴秀辅佐朝政，对王室有勋绩，不能因为小的缺点掩盖了大的美德，派人推究刘尚的罪责而解除对裴秀的限制。
English: The edict also said that Pei Xiu Fu, an aide to the imperial court, had meritorious service to the royal family, and it was not possible to send someone to investigate Liu Shang's guilt and lift the restrictions on Pei Xiu because of small shortcomings covering up great virtues.

古文：久之，诏曰： 夫三司之任，以翼宣皇极，弼成王事者也。
现代文：很久之后，皇帝下诏书说： 三司的责任，是辅佐皇室，佐助王事。
English: After a long time, the emperor issued an edict saying, "The responsibility of the three departments is to assist the imperial family and assist the royal affairs.

古文：故经国论道，赖之明喆，苟非其人，官不虚备。
现代文：因而治国论道，依赖的是他们的明哲，如果用人不当，官职就虚设了。
English: Therefore, when it comes to governing the country, it is their sages that are relied upon. If people are employed improperly, official posts will be set up in vain.

古文：尚书令、左光禄大夫裴秀，雅量弘博，思心通远，先帝登庸，赞事前朝。
现代文：尚书令、左光禄大夫裴秀，器量博大，用心深远，先帝登皇位，他辅助前朝。
English: Shang Shuling, Zuo Guanglu's doctor Pei Xiu, a man of great ability and far-reaching intentions, was the first emperor to ascend to the throne, and he assisted the previous dynasty.

古文：朕受明命，光佐大业，勋德茂著，配踪元凯。
现代文：我接受天命，他佐助大业，功勋道德盛大，实是朝廷重臣。
English: I accept the destiny of heaven, he is the leader of a great cause, he has great merits and morals, and he is actually a senior court official.

古文：宜正位居体，以康庶绩。
现代文：应当名实相符，以褒彰他功绩。
English: It should match the name with the reality to commend his achievements.

古文：其以秀为司空。 
现代文：以裴秀为司空。 
English: With Pei Xiu as Tsukasa.

古文：秀儒学洽闻，且留心政事，当禅代之际，总纳言之要，其所裁当，礼无违者。
现代文：裴秀学问广博，而且留心政事，在禅代之时，总管禅让礼仪，他所裁定的事，没有违背礼的。
English: At the time of the Zen era, the chief abbot of the Zen sect allowed the etiquette, and the things he decided did not violate the etiquette.

古文：又以职在地官，以《禹贡》山川地名，从来久远，多有变易。
现代文：又因为他职务是地官，认为《禹贡》山川地名，由来久远，变化很多。
English: Also, because of his position as a local official, he believes that "Yugong" mountain and river place names have a long history and have changed a lot.

古文：后世说者或强牵引，渐以暗昧。
现代文：后代解说的人有的牵强附会，因而逐渐令人不明白。
English: Subsequent generations of commentators have been more far-fetched and thus increasingly incomprehensible.

古文：于是甄摘旧文，疑者则阙，古有名而今无者，皆随事注列，作《禹贡地域图》十八篇，奏之，藏于秘府。
现代文：于是甄别选取旧有文献，有疑点的就缺而不论，古代有的地名而今天没有的，都随事作注，作《禹贡地域圆》十八篇，奏报，收藏在秘府。
English: As a result, the old documents were screened and selected, and if there was any doubt, it was considered to be missing, and any place names that existed in ancient times but do not exist today were annotated on a case-by-case basis, and 18 articles of "Ugong Regional Circle" were made, reported, and stored in a secret place.

古文：其序曰：
现代文：序文说：
English: The preamble says:

古文：图书之设，由来尚矣。
现代文：图书的撰写，由来久远。
English: The writing of books goes back a long way.

古文：自古立象垂制，而赖其用。
现代文：自古仿效万物形象绘制定制，都依赖图书。
English: Since ancient times, the system of imitating the image of all things has relied on books.

古文：三代置其官，国史掌厥职。
现代文：三代设有关官员，国史掌管这一职务。
English: Three generations of relevant officials have been set up, and the State Historian is in charge of this post.

古文：暨汉屠咸阳，丞相萧何尽收秦之图籍。
现代文：到了漠攻屠咸阳，丞相萧何把秦的图籍全部收集起来。
English: When it came to the attack on Tu Xianyang, Emperor Xiao He collected all of Qin's books.

古文：今秘书既无古之地图，又无萧何所得，惟有汉氏《舆地》及《括地》诸杂图。
现代文：如今宫中藏书既没有古代的地图，又没有萧何所收集的图书，祇有汉代《舆地》及《括地》等杂图。
English: Today, there are neither ancient maps nor books collected by Xiao He in the palace collection, but only miscellaneous maps such as Han Dynasty "Public Land" and "Bound Lands."

古文：各不设分率，又不考正准望，亦不备载名山大川。
现代文：这些图既不设统一比例，又不考证方位，名山大川的记载也不完备。
English: These maps do not set a uniform proportion, nor do they verify the location, and the records of famous mountains and rivers are incomplete.

古文：虽有粗形，皆不精审，不可依据。
现代文：虽然有粗略的形制，但都不精当，不能作依据。
English: Although there is a rough shape, it is not precise and cannot be used as a basis.

古文：或荒外迂诞之言，不合事实，于义无取。
现代文：有的关于荒远地区的荒唐记载，不合事实，没有可取之处。
English: Some of the absurd reports about the desolate regions are not true and have no merit.

古文：大晋龙兴，混一六合，以清宇宙，始于庸蜀，冞入其岨。
现代文：大晋王朝兴起，统一天下，以荡清宇宙，从庸蜀开始，更加险阻。
English: The rise of the Great Jin Dynasty, unifying the country and clearing the universe, starting from Yongshu, is even more dangerous.

古文：文皇帝乃命有司，撰访吴蜀地图。
现代文：文皇帝于是命令有关官吏，编撰访求吴蜀地图。
English: Emperor Wen then ordered the relevant officials to compile a map of Wu Shu.

古文：蜀土既定，六军所经，地域远近，山川险易，征路迂直，校验图记，罔或有差。
现代文：蜀国被平定以后，六军所经之地，地域的远近，山川的险易，征途的曲直，校验地图记载，没有差错。
English: After Shu was subdued, the six armies recorded the places they passed through, the distance and proximity of the regions, the dangers of the mountains and rivers, the bends and straights of the journey, and the verification maps, without error.

古文：今上考《禹贡》山海川流，原隰陂泽，古之九州，及今之十六州，郡国县邑，疆界乡陬，及古国盟会旧名，水陆径路，为地图十八篇。
现代文：如今上推考证《禹贡》中记载的山海!流，平原洼地池塘沼泽，古代的九州，及现代的十六州，郡国县邑，疆界乡村，及古国盟会的旧地名，水路陆路，绘编成地图十八篇。
English: Nowadays, the mountains, seas, rivers, plains, depressions, ponds, marshes, ancient Kyushu, and modern 16 prefectures, counties, counties, border villages, and old place names of the League of Ancient Nations, waterways, and land routes recorded in "Yugong" are up for review, and eighteen maps have been drawn and compiled.

古文：制图之体有六焉。
现代文：编制地图的体例有六条。
English: There are six ways to compile a map.

古文：一曰分率，所以辨广轮之度也。
现代文：第一是分率，即按统一比例缩小画方。
English: The first is the fraction, that is, the reduction of the painting method according to a uniform ratio.

古文：二曰准望，所以正彼此之体也。
现代文：第二是准望，即辨正彼此间的地理方位。
English: The second is the anticipation, that is, to identify the geographical position between each other.

古文：三曰道里，所以定所由之数也。
现代文：第三是道里，即道路相距的里敷。
English: The third is the way, that is, the distance between the roads.

古文：四曰高下，五曰方邪，六曰迂直，此三者各因地而制宜，所以校夷险之异也。
现代文：第四是高下，第五是方邪，第六是迂直，这三条各因地制宜，分别表示平 坦险阻曲折的区别。
English: The fourth is high and low, the fifth is square and crooked, and the sixth is roundabout. These three, each according to local conditions, respectively indicate the difference between flat and dangerous obstacles and twists.

古文：有图象而无分率，则无以审远近之差；有分率而无准望，虽得之于一隅，必失之于他方；有准望而无道里，则施于山海绝隔之地，不能以相通；有道里而无高下、方邪、迂直之校，则径路之数必与远近之实相违，失准望之正矣，故以此六者参而考之。
现代文：有图像而没有分率，就没办法辨别远近的差异；有分率而没有准望，虽然在某一地方准确，必定在其他地方有误；有准望而没有道里，则用在山海隔绝的地方，不能相通；有道里而没有高下、方邪、迂直的校对，道路里敷一定与远近的实际相违背，失去地理方位的准确性，因而要用这六条相互考证。
English: If there is an image without a fraction, there is no way to distinguish the difference between far and near; if there is a fraction but no expectation, although it is accurate in one place, it must be wrong in other places; if there is an expectation but no way, it is used in places isolated by mountains and seas, and cannot be connected; if there is a way but there is no proofreading of high and low, square and round, the road must be contrary to the reality of far and near, losing the accuracy of geographical position, so we must use these six cross-examination.

古文：然远近之实定于分率，彼此之实定于道里，度数之实定于高下、方邪、迂直之算。
现代文：然后远近的实数由分率决定，彼此之间的实际由准望决定，道路的实际距离由道里决定，路途难易程度的实际由高下、方邪、迂直的推算决定。
English: Then the real number of far and near is determined by the fraction, the actual between each other is determined by the expectation, the actual distance of the road is determined by the road, and the actual degree of difficulty of the road is determined by the high and low, the square and the roundabout.

古文：故虽有峻山钜海之隔，绝域殊方之迥，登降诡曲之因，皆可得举而定者。
现代文：因而虽然有高山大海的阻隔，有舆世隔绝的异域他乡的遥远，有登高下山迂回的原因，都可以依地图而定。
English: Therefore, although there is the barrier of the mountain and the sea, the isolation of the world, the remoteness of the foreign country, and the reasons for climbing up and down the mountain, they can all be determined according to the map.

古文：准望之法既正，则曲直远近无所隐其形也。
现代文：准望之法确定后，那么曲直远近就很清楚了。
English: After the method of expectation is determined, then it is very clear how far and near the song is.

古文：秀创制朝仪，广陈刑政，朝廷多遵用之，以为故事。
现代文：裴秀创立制定朝廷礼仪，广泛陈述刑法政令，朝廷多遵从采用，作为先例。
English: Pei Xiu created and formulated the imperial court etiquette, extensively stated the criminal law decree, and the imperial court mostly followed and adopted it as a precedent.

古文：在位四载，为当世名公。
现代文：在位四年，是当时有名的大臣。
English: He reigned for four years and was a well-known minister at the time.

古文：服寒食散，当饮热酒而饮冷酒，泰始七年薨，时年四十八。
现代文：裴秀穿衣单薄吃饭不按时，该喝热酒时喝冷酒，泰始七年去世，时年四十八岁。
English: Pei Xiu, dressed in thin clothes, did not eat meals on time, and drank cold wine when he should have drunk hot wine. He died seven years later, at the age of forty-eight.

古文：诏曰： 司空经德履哲，体蹈儒雅，佐命翼世，勋业弘茂。
现代文：诏书说： 司空为人明哲有美德，行为儒雅，佐助皇上辅翼王朝，功勋业绩弘大。
English: The imperial edict said: Siku was a man of great wisdom and virtue, his behavior was refined, he assisted Emperor Sasuke and the Sui Dynasty, and his meritorious achievements were extensive.

古文：方将宣献敷制，为世宗范，不幸薨殂，朕甚痛之。
现代文：正要有所作为修定国家法制，作为世上的宗师模范，不幸去世，我很是悲痛。
English: I am deeply saddened that he passed away just as he was about to do something to amend the country's legal system and serve as a role model for the world.

古文：其赐秘器、朝服一具、衣一袭、钱三十万、布百匹。
现代文：赐他高贵棺材、朝服一套、衣一件、钱三十万、布百匹。
English: Give him a noble coffin, a set of morning dress, a piece of clothing, three hundred thousand money, and a hundred pieces of cloth.

古文：谥曰元。 
现代文：谧号元。 
English: 号元.

古文：初，秀以尚书三十六曹统事准例不明，宜使诸卿任职，未及奏而薨。
现代文：当初，裴秀认为尚书三十六个部门管事的不明确，应该让众卿任职，未来得及上奏就去世。
English: At first, Pei Xiu thought that the management of the thirty-six departments of Shangshu was not clear, and that the nobles should be allowed to serve. In the future, he would die before the performance.

古文：其友人料其书记，得表草言平吴之事，其词曰： 孙皓酷虐，不及圣明御世兼弱攻昧，使遗子孙，将遂不能臣；时有否泰，非万安之势也。
现代文：他的朋友整理他的文稿，发现了上表的草稿论说平定吴国的事，写的是： 孙皓残酷暴虐，不趁着圣明的国君统治国家时兼并弱小攻伐昏昧，而留给子孙，将不能让敌人臣服；时世有好坏，并不永远是顺利之势。
English: His friend sorted out his manuscript and found the draft of the above table, which discussed the matter of pacifying the state of Wu. It was written: Sun Yat-sen was cruel and tyrannical, and he did not take advantage of the sacred kings to rule the country to annex the weak and attack the obscure, but left it to his descendants, and he would not be able to make the enemy submit. Times are good and bad, and it is not always a smooth situation.

古文：臣昔虽已屡言，未有成旨。
现代文：我虽然已经说了多次，但没有写成奏章。
English: Although I've said it many times, I haven't written a movement.

古文：今既疾笃不起，谨重尸启。
现代文：如今我病重，恭敬地再次陈述。
English: Now that I am gravely ill, I respectfully retract that statement.

古文：愿陛下时共施用。 
现代文：愿陛下适时施行。 
English: May His Majesty implement it in a timely manner.

古文：乃封以上闻。
现代文：便把上表封起来上奏。
English: Then he sealed the top sheet and started to play.

古文：诏报曰： 司空薨，痛悼不能去心。
现代文：诏书答覆说： 司空去世，沉痛的哀思不能从心中抹去。
English: The imperial rescript replied: Siku passed away, and the deep sorrow cannot be erased from my heart.

古文：又得表草，虽在危困，不忘王室，尽忠忧国。
现代文：又得到上奏的草稿，虽在病重，不忘王室，尽忠为国。
English: Although seriously ill, he did not forget the royal family and was loyal to the country.

古文：省益伤切，辄当与诸贤共论也。 
现代文：越看越伤心，造就与众贤臣一起讨论。 
English: The more you look at it, the sadder it is. It makes you want to discuss it with all the sages.

古文：咸宁初，与石苞等并为王公，配享庙庭。
现代文：咸宁初年，和石苞等人都是王公，配享皇庙。
English: In the first year of Xianning, and Shijie and others were princes, sharing the imperial temple.

古文：有二子：浚、頠。
现代文：有两个儿子：裴浚、裴颇。
English: They have two sons: Peijun and Peipo.

古文：浚嗣位，至散骑常侍，早卒。
现代文：裴浚继嗣，官至散骑常侍，死得早。
English: Baizhun's successor, who was an officer of the cavalry, died early.

古文：浚庶子憬不惠，别封高阳亭侯，以浚少弟頠嗣。
现代文：裴浚的庶子裴憬不聪慧，另封高阳亭侯，让裴浚的弟弟裴颠继嗣。
English: The illegitimate son of Peizhun, Pei Jing, was not clever, and he was also given the title of Gaoyangting, so that Pei Jun's younger brother, Pei Bing, could become his successor.

古文：頠字逸民。
现代文：裴愿字逸民。
English: Pei Xiang, the character of Yimin.

古文：弘雅有远识，博学稽古，自少知名。
现代文：非常儒雅有远见，学问广博研习古事，从小有名。
English: He is very refined and far-sighted, has a broad knowledge and studies ancient things, and has been famous since childhood.

古文：御史中丞周弼见而叹曰： 頠若武库，五兵纵横，一时之杰也。 
现代文：御史中丞周弼见了他感慨说： 裴颇像个兵器库，各种武器纵横，是一时的豪杰。 
English: Zhou Yu, the Imperial Historian, saw him and said with emotion: Pei was like an arsenal, with all kinds of weapons, and was a hero of the time.

古文：贾充即頠从母夫也，表 秀有佐命之勋，不幸嫡长丧亡，遗孤稚弱。
现代文：贾充是裴颠姨母的丈夫，上表说 裴秀有佐助皇上的功勋，不幸嫡长子死亡，遣孤幼弱。
English: Jia Chong was the husband of Pei Xiu's aunt, and the above table says that Pei Xiu had the merit of assisting the emperor. Unfortunately, his eldest son died, leaving him orphaned and weak.

古文：頠才德英茂，足以兴隆国嗣。 
现代文：裴颇才德兼备，足以兴隆封爵 。
English: Pei is talented and moral, enough to flourish knighthood.

古文：诏頠袭爵，頠固让，不许。
现代文：下韶让裴颇继承爵位，裴颠坚决推辞，皇上不准许。
English: The lower court allowed Peipo to inherit the title, Peibing firmly refused, and the emperor did not allow it.

古文：太康二年，徵为太子中庶子，迁散骑常侍。
现代文：太康二年，征召裴颠为太子中庶子，升为散骑常侍。
English: In the second year of Taikang, Baibing was conscripted as the prince's middle child and promoted to the rank of horseback riding attendant.

古文：惠帝既位，转国子祭酒，兼右军将军。
现代文：惠帝即位，转任国子祭酒，兼右军将军。
English: When Emperor Hui ascended the throne, he was transferred to the post of Kuniko Matsuri no Sake, as well as the post of General of the Right Army.

古文：初，頠兄子憬为白衣，頠论述世勋，赐爵高阳亭侯。
现代文：当初，裴愿兄长的儿子裴憬没作官，裴愿论述世代的勋绩，裴憬被赐予高阳亭侯的爵位。
English: At first, Pei Jian, the son of Pei Jian's elder brother, Pei Jing, did not hold any official position. Pei Jian discussed the generation's outstanding achievements. Pei Jian was awarded the title of Marquis of Gaoyangting.

古文：杨骏将诛也，骏党左军将军刘豫陈兵在门，遇頠，问太傅所在。
现代文：杨骏将要被杀时，杨骏的同党左军将军刘豫在大门陈列兵士，遇见裴龥，问太傅何在。
English: When Yang Hui was about to be killed, Yang Hui's fellow leftist general Liu Yu, who was displaying soldiers at the gate, met Pei Hui and asked him where Taifu was.

古文：頠绐之曰： 向于西掖门遇公乘素车，从二人西出矣。 
现代文：裴憔骗他说： 在西掖门附近遇见太傅乘坐素车，跟从两人向西出去了。 
English: Pei Yan lied to him and said, "I met Taifu near the West Gate of the Forbidden City. I took a taxi and followed the two of them to the west.

古文：豫曰： 吾何之？ 
现代文：刘豫说： 我去哪裹? 
English: Liu Yu said: Where should I go?

古文：頠曰： 宜至廷尉。 
现代文：裴愿说： 应该到廷尉那裹去。 
English: Pei Xian said, "You should go and wrap yourself around the courtier."

古文：豫从頠言，遂委而去。
现代文：刘豫听从了裴憔的话，于是放弃抵御而离开。
English: Liu Yu listened to Pei Yao's words, so he gave up resisting and left.

古文：寻而诏頠代豫领左军将军，屯万春门。
现代文：不久诏书命令裴憔代替刘豫兼左军将军，屯兵于万春门。
English: Soon after, the imperial edict ordered Pei Xuan to replace Liu Yuqian as the general of the Left Army and to garrison the Wanchun Gate.

古文：及骏诛，以功当封武昌侯，頠请以封憬，帝竟封頠次子该。
现代文：等到杨骏被杀，裴颅因为有功应当封武昌侯，裴顾请求把爵位封给裴憬，皇帝最终封了裴颅的次子裴该。
English: After Yang Xuan was killed, Pei Gu requested that Pei Jia be given a title of nobility, and the emperor finally granted the title to Pei Jia, Pei Gu's second son.

古文：頠苦陈憬本承嫡，宜袭钜鹿，先帝恩旨，辞不获命。
现代文：裴憔反复陈述裴憬本是嫡传，应该承袭钜鹿郡公，先帝施恩下旨，我推辞不掉。
English: Pei Yao repeatedly stated that Pei Jiao was a direct descendant and should inherit the position of the county magistrate of Elk County. I could not refuse the grace of the previous emperor.

古文：武昌之封，己之所蒙，特请以封憬。
现代文：武昌的封赐，是我应该蒙受的，特此请求封给裴憬。
English: The award from Wuchang is what I should have received, and I hereby request that it be given to Pei Jia.

古文：该时尚主，故帝不听。
现代文：裴该当时与皇帝有姻亲，因而皇帝不听裴龥的请求。
English: Baigai was related by marriage to the emperor at the time, so the emperor did not listen to Baigai's request.

古文：累迁侍中。
现代文：多次升迁为侍中。
English: He was promoted several times to the position of Samurai Junior High School.

古文：时天下暂宁，頠奏修国学，刻石写经。
现代文：当时天下暂时安宁，裴颠奏请建国学，刻石写经。
English: At that time, the world was temporarily at peace. Pei Biao invited scholars to study the founding of the People's Republic of China, and carved stones to write scriptures.

古文：皇太子既讲，释奠祀孔子，饮飨射侯，甚有仪序。
现代文：皇太子开始读书，祭祀孔子，宴饮射侯，很有礼仪秩序。
English: The crown prince began to read, worship Confucius, and dine with the princes. There was a lot of decorum and order.

古文：又令荀籓终父勖之志，铸钟凿磬，以备郊庙朝享礼乐。
现代文：又命令苟藩完成他父亲荀勖的志向，铸钟凿磬，用作郊庙祭祀朝会宴享的礼乐。
English: He also ordered the Gou clan to fulfill his father's dream of making bell chisels, which were used as ceremonial music for suburban temple rituals and imperial banquets.

古文：頠通博多闻，兼明医术。
现代文：裴颠学识广博，兼明医术。
English: Pei Bu has a wide range of knowledge and also knows medicine.

古文：荀勖之修律度也，检得古尺，短世所用四分有余。
现代文：荀勖在修订律历度量时，检验出古代的尺，比当世的尺短四分多。
English: In revising the rhythms of measurement, he found that the ancient ruler was more than a quarter of an inch shorter than the contemporary ruler.

古文：頠上言： 宜改诸度量。
现代文：裴颠上疏说： 应当改正各种度量衡。
English: Pei Buxiaoxiao said: All kinds of weights and measures should be corrected.

古文：若未能悉革，可先改太医权衡。
现代文：如果不能全改，可以先改太医的量器。
English: If it is not possible to completely change, you can first change the Taiji's measuring instrument.

古文：此若差违，遂失神农、岐伯之正。
现代文：这些量器如果有误差，那就失去了神农、岐伯的规定了。
English: If there are errors in these measuring instruments, then the provisions of Shennong and Qibao will be lost.

古文：药物轻重，分两乖互，所可伤夭，为害尤深。
现代文：药物的轻重，分量的差异使药性不一，可以使人受伤致死，造成的祸害更大。
English: The difference in the weight and volume of drugs makes the drug properties different, which can cause people to be injured and killed, resulting in greater harm.

古文：古寿考而今短折者，未必不由此也。 
现代文：古人长寿而今人短命夭折的情况，未必不是因为这个原因。 
English: It is not necessarily for this reason that ancient people lived long lives and modern people die young.

古文：卒不能用。
现代文：最终未被采纳。
English: It was ultimately not adopted.

古文：乐广尝与頠清言，欲以理服之，而頠辞论丰博，广笑而不言。
现代文：乐广曾与裴龥清谈，想用理说服他，而裴颇言理广博，乐广笑着不说话。
English: Le Guang had a clear talk with Pei Yao, and wanted to use reason to convince him, but Pei was quite rational, and Le Guang laughed and did not speak.

古文：时人谓頠为言谈之林薮。
现代文：当时的人说裴愿言谈丰富，无所不晓。
English: At that time, people said that Bae was full of words and knew everything.

古文：頠以贾后不悦太子，抗表请增崇太子所生谢淑妃位号，仍启增置后卫率吏，给三千兵，于是东宫宿卫万人。
现代文：裴憔因为买后不喜欢太子，上表直言请求提高太子的生母谢淑妃的地位封号，反复陈述增设后卫官吏，给三千兵士，于是束宫宿卫达到一万人。
English: Because Pei Xuan did not like the prince after the purchase, he bluntly requested to raise the status and title of the prince's birth mother, Xie Shu Fei, and repeatedly stated that he would increase the number of guards officers to three thousand soldiers, so the palace guards reached ten thousand.

古文：迁尚书，侍中如故，加光禄大夫。
现代文：裴龥升任尚书，侍中的职位依旧，加授光禄大夫。
English: Pei Jun was promoted to Shang Shu, the position of chamberlain remained the same, and he was also awarded the title of Guanglu Doctor.

古文：每授一职，未尝不殷勤固让，表疏十余上，博引古今成败以为言，览之者莫不寒心。
现代文：每授他一个职位，没有一次不诚心坚决推让，十余次上表，广泛地引用古今成败作为论据，读到的人没有不戒惧的。
English: Each time he was awarded a post, he never once dishonestly and resolutely pushed back, and more than ten times he made a list, extensively citing past and present successes and failures as arguments. People who read it are not afraid.

古文：頠深虑贾后乱政，与司空张华、侍中贾模议废之而立谢淑妃。
现代文：裴颠很担心贾后扰乱国政，与司空张华、侍中贾模商议废置贾后而立谢淑妃。
English: Pei Bing was very worried that Jia Hou would disrupt national politics, and discussed with the Secretary of the Air Force Zhang Hua and the Vice-Admiral Jia Miao to abolish Jia Hou and establish Xie Shufei.

古文：华、模皆曰： 帝自无废黜之意，若吾等专行之，上心不以为是。
现代文：张华、贾模都说： 皇帝没有废黜她的意思，如果我们这些人自作主张那么干，皇帝的心中不认为那是对的。
English: Zhang Hua and Jia Miao both said, "The emperor has no intention of deposing her. If we people do it of our own accord, the emperor does not think it is right in his heart."

古文：且诸王方刚，朋党异议，恐祸如发机，身死国危，无益社稷。 
现代文：况且诸王势力正强，朋党意见不一，恐怕祸患就像待发的机弩，自己丧命国家危亡，对国家没有益处。 
English: Moreover, the powers of kings are strong, and the opinions of friends and parties are not the same. I am afraid that the disaster is like a tactic waiting to happen. If you lose your own life and the country is in danger, it is not good for the country.

古文：頠曰： 诚如公虑。
现代文：裴颇说： 的确像你们担心的那样。
English: "It's exactly as you feared," Pei Po said.

古文：但昏虐之人，无所忌惮，乱可立待，将如之何？ 
现代文：可昏庸暴虐的人，无所顾忌，变乱马上可以到来，将怎么应付呢? 
English: But how will the dim-witted tyrants, who have no scruples, cope with the turmoil that may soon come?

古文：华曰： 卿二人犹且见信，然勤为左右陈祸福之戒，冀无大悖。
现代文：张华说： 你们二人还被信任，经常在皇上左右陈述有关祸福的警告，希望没有大悖逆。
English: Zhang Hua said, "You two are still trusted, and you often warn the emperor about calamities and blessings, hoping that there will be no major rebellion.

古文：幸天下尚安，庶可优游卒岁。 
现代文：幸亏天下还安定，差不多可以平平安安到死。 
English: Fortunately, the world is still stable, and it is almost possible to live peacefully until death.

古文：此谋遂寝。
现代文：废贾后的谋略就搁置。
English: The Queen's strategy was put on hold.

古文：頠旦夕劝说从母广城君，令戒喻贾后亲待太子而已。
现代文：裴颇每天劝说姨母广城君，让她劝告买后善待太子而已。
English: Pei Po persuaded her aunt Guangcheng every day to advise her to be kind to the prince.

古文：或说頠曰： 幸与中宫内外可得尽言。言若不行，则可辞病屏退。
现代文：有人对裴愿说： 希望与后宫内外把话说透，所说的如果行不通，就以有病为由辞官隐退。
English: Someone said to Baegyeong, "I hope you can talk things through with both inside and outside the harem. If what you say doesn't work, you can resign from your post and go into seclusion on the grounds of illness."

古文：若二者不立，虽有十表，难乎免矣。 
现代文：要是遣两条都做不到，虽然有十次上表，还是难以免难。 
English: If you can't do both, although there are ten times the above table, it is still unavoidable.

古文：頠慨然久之，而竟不能行。
现代文：裴烦感叹了半天，而最终没能做到。
English: Pei Duan sighed for half a day, but ultimately failed to do so.

古文：迁尚书左仆射，侍中如故。
现代文：升为尚书左仆射，侍中的职务依旧。
English: He was promoted to Shangshu Zuopuzha, but his position as a chamberlain remained unchanged.

古文：頠虽后之亲属，然雅望素隆，四海不谓之以亲戚进也，惟恐其不居位。
现代文：裴颢虽然是皇后的亲属，然而他的名声一直很好，全国各地的人不认为他是因亲戚关系得以升迁，而且惟恐他不居高位。
English: Although Pei Jun is a relative of the empress, his reputation has always been good. People all over the country do not think that he was promoted due to kinship, and they are afraid that he will not hold a high position.

古文：俄复使頠专任门下事，固让，不听。
现代文：不久又让裴颇专任门下事，坚决推辞，皇上不允许。
English: Soon after, he asked Pei Po to become his full-time subordinate, but Pei Po firmly refused and the emperor would not allow it.

古文：頠上言： 贾模适亡，复以臣代，崇外戚之望，彰偏私之举。
现代文：裴颇上疏说： 贾模刚去世，又让我代替他，扩大了外戚的名望，更成了偏私之举。
English: Pei Po Jinsao said: Jia Miao just passed away, and I was asked to replace him, which expanded the reputation of the relative, and became a selfish act.

古文：后族何常有能自保，皆知重亲无脱者也。
现代文：皇后的族人怎能常有自我保全的，都知道被重用亲属没有能逃脱灾难的。
English: How can the people of the queen's clan often have self-preservation, they all know that there are no reused relatives who can escape the disaster.

古文：然汉二十四帝惟孝文、光武、明帝不重外戚，皆保其宗，岂将独贤，实以安理故也。
现代文：然而漠代二十四朝皇帝惟有孝文、光武、明帝不重外戚，那些外戚都保全了他们的宗族，我岂止是想要求得自身的美名，实在是因为要安于道的缘故。
English: However, the emperors of the twenty-four dynasties of the Miao Dynasty, only Xiaowen, Guangwu, and the Ming Emperor did not care about their relatives. Those relatives all preserved their families. I did not just want to get my own good name, it was really because I wanted to be loyal to the Tao.

古文：昔穆叔不拜越礼之飨，臣亦不敢闻殊常之诏。 
现代文：过去穆拯不接受超越礼法的宴飨，我也不敢听到不寻常的诏书。 
English: In the past, Mu Zheng did not accept banquets that went beyond etiquette, and I did not dare to hear unusual edicts.

古文：又表云： 咎繇谟虞，伊尹相商，吕望翊周，萧张佐汉，咸播功化，光格四极。
现代文：又上表说： 咎繇为舜谋划，伊尹辅佐商，吕望辅佐周，萧张辅佐汉，都播散了功德教化，光亮遍及四方。
English: It is also said in the above table that: Guan Yu was the mastermind of the plan, and Yi Yin assisted Shang, Lü Wang assisted Zhou, and Xiao Zhang assisted Han, all of whom spread the enlightenment of merit, and the light spread to the four directions.

古文：暨于继体，咎单、傅说，祖己、樊仲，亦隆中兴。
现代文：到了各朝的继位国君时，咎单、傅说，祖己、樊仲，也都使国家中兴。
English: When it came to the succession of the sovereigns of each dynasty, Gui Shan and Fu said that their ancestors and Yuzhong also made the country prosperous.

古文：或明扬侧陋，或起自庶族，岂非尚德之举，以臻斯美哉！
现代文：他们有的出名前地位卑微，有的出身于庶族，这难道不是崇尚德行的举动，从而达到善美的境界吗!
English: Some of them are famous for their lowly status, and some are from the common people. Isn't this an act of advocating virtue, thus reaching the realm of goodness and beauty?

古文：历观近世，不能慕远，溺于近情，多任后亲，以致不静。
现代文：观察近代，不能仰慕古人，沉溺于亲近者，多任用皇后的亲属，以致国不安宁。
English: Observing modern times, we cannot admire the ancients, indulge in intimacy, and appoint more relatives of the empress, so that the country is restless.

古文：昔疏广戒太子以舅氏为官属，前世以为知礼。
现代文：过去速尘告诫太子不要任命舅舅作官，前世认为这是知礼。
English: In the past, Suigetsu cautioned the prince not to appoint his uncle as an official. In his previous life, he thought this was a courtesy.

古文：况朝廷何取于外戚，正复才均，尚当先其疏者，以明至公。
现代文：况且朝廷何必任用外戚，品德与才能相等，还应该先任用关系疏远的人，以示公正。
English: Moreover, the imperial court does not have to appoint a relative, whose character and talent are equal, but should first appoint someone who is distantly related in order to show fairness.

古文：汉世不用冯野王，即其事也。 
现代文：汉代不任用冯野王，就是这个道理。 
English: This is the reason why Feng Ye Wang was not appointed during the Han Dynasty.

古文：表上，皆优诏敦譬。
现代文：表呈上，每次都被皇上下韶好言敦促开导。
English: On the form, each time the emperor was encouraged to enlighten.

古文：时以陈准子匡、韩蔚子嵩并侍东宫，頠谏曰： 东宫之建，以储皇极。
现代文：当时任用陈准的儿子陈匡、韩蔚的儿子韩嵩一同侍奉太子，裴颇劝谏说： 束宫的设立，是为了准备皇位继承人。
English: At that time, Chen Jun's son, Chen Kuang, and Han Wei's son, Han Song, were appointed to serve the crown prince together. Pei Po advised that: The establishment of the Sok Palace was to prepare the heir to the throne.

古文：其所与游接，必简英俊，宜用成德。
现代文：和太子交往的人，一定要挑选英俊的人才，应当选用德行完备的人。
English: Those who come into contact with the prince should choose handsome people, and those who are full of virtue.

古文：匡、嵩幼弱，未识人理立身之节。
现代文：陈匡、韩嵩不成熟，不知道作人的道理与立身的节操。
English: Chen Kuang and Han Song are immature and do not know the principles of being a man and the discipline of standing up.

古文：东宫实体夙成之表，而今有童子侍从之声，未是光阐遐风之弘理也。 
现代文：东宫太子有早熟的外表，而现在有童子侍从的语调，这不符合光大未来事业的大理。 
English: The crown prince of the Eastern Palace has a precocious appearance, and now has the tone of a boy's attendant, which is not in line with the principle of Guangda's future career.

古文：愍怀太子之废也，頠与张华苦争不从，语在《华传》。
现代文：愍怀太子被废时，裴颠与张华苦苦争辩不被听从，事情记载在《张华传》。
English: When Prince Gong Huai was deposed, Pei Bing and Zhang Hua argued bitterly and were not listened to. The matter is recorded in the "Zhang Hua Biography."

古文：頠深患时俗放荡，不尊儒术，何晏、阮籍素有高名于世，口谈浮虚，不遵礼法，尸禄耽宠，仕不事事；至王衍之徒，声誉太盛，位高势重，不以物务自婴，遂相放效，风教陵迟，乃著崇有之论以释其蔽曰：
现代文：裴憔很担心当时风俗的放荡，不尊崇儒家，何晏、阮籍素来有显赫的名声，而言谈浮夸虚幻，不遵循礼法，空受俸禄沉溺于恩宠，当官不干事；至于王衍一类人，声誉太盛，地位高权势重，不以从事政务约束自己，于是互相仿效，风俗教化衰败，因而著述崇有之论反对贵无之论说：
English: Pei Rong was very worried about the debauchery of the customs at that time, and did not respect the Confucianists. He Rong and Nguyen Quan had always had a prominent reputation. In other words, they talked about pompous illusions, did not follow the etiquette, received empty salaries and indulged in grace, and were not officials. As for Wang Yan and other people, their reputation was too strong, their status was high and powerful, and they did not restrict themselves by engaging in government affairs. Therefore, they imitated each other, and the customs and education decayed. Therefore, the author's theory of reverence opposed the theory of preciousness:

古文：夫总混群本，宗极之道也。
现代文：聚合万物的根本，是至高无上之道。
English: The essence of the unification of all things is the supreme way.

古文：方以族异，庶类之品也。
现代文：用事物种类的差异加以限定，是对万物的品评。
English: To confine things to the differences of species is to judge all things.

古文：形象著分，有生之体也。
现代文：形象明显分别，是有生命的物体。
English: The image is clearly distinguished, it is a living object.

古文：化感错综，理迹之原也。
现代文：变化影响错综，是探究事理的根本。
English: The complex effects of change are fundamental to the investigation of causes and effects.

古文：夫品而为族，则所禀者偏，偏无自足，故凭乎外资。
现代文：通过品评而区分族类，所依靠的时有偏颇，偏颇得无法让自己满足，因而要凭外力相助。
English: Through the evaluation to distinguish between races, rely on sometimes biased, biased unable to satisfy themselves, and therefore rely on external assistance.

古文：是以生而可寻，所谓理也。
现代文：因此事物一发生就有迹可寻，造就是所谓的理。
English: Therefore, as soon as things happen, there are traces to be found. Creation is the so-called reason.

古文：理之所体，所谓有也。
现代文：理所体察的，就是所谓有。
English: What is perceived by reason is what is said to exist.

古文：有之所须，所谓资也。
现代文：有所必须的，就是所谓资。
English: What is necessary is the so-called capital.

古文：资有攸合，所谓宜也。
现代文：资与有配合，就是所谓宜。
English: When there is cooperation between capital and labor, it is called appropriateness.

古文：择乎厥宜，所谓情也。
现代文：选择这种宜，就是所谓情。
English: The choice of this kind of suit is the so-called emotion.

古文：识智既授，虽出处异业，默语殊涂，所以宝生存宜，其情一也。
现代文：人有了知识以后，虽然进仕退隐不一，沉默言语方式不同，但都是为了珍爱生命保存合宜，这裹的情是一样的。
English: After people have knowledge, although there are differences in the way of entering and leaving seclusion, and the way of silent speech is different, they are all for the sake of cherishing life and preserving it, and this feeling is the same.

古文：众理并而无害，故贵贱形焉。
现代文：各种事理同时存在而无害，因而就表现出了贵与贱。
English: All kinds of things exist at the same time and are harmless, thus showing the highs and lows.

古文：失得由乎所接，故吉凶兆焉。
现代文：得与失就在于贵贱的区别，因而吉与凶都有征兆。
English: The difference between gain and loss lies in the difference between high and low, so there are signs of good luck and bad luck.

古文：是以贤人君子，知欲不可绝，而交物有会。
现代文：因此贤人君子，知道欲望不可断绝，于是与人结交有时。
English: Therefore, wise men and gentlemen know that desire cannot be cut off, so they sometimes make friends with people.

古文：观乎往复，稽中定务。
现代文：在来往中观察，决定如何行事。
English: Observe the interaction and decide how to act.

古文：惟夫用天之道，分地之利，躬其力任，劳而后飨。
现代文：惟有顺应天时地利，尽力而为，付出辛劳然后享受。
English: You just have to go with the flow, do your best, work hard and enjoy it.

古文：居以仁顺，守以恭俭，率以忠信，行以敬让，志无盈求，事无过用，乃可济乎！
现代文：处事坚持仁顺，坚持恭敬俭朴，行为依据忠诚信义，依据谦恭退让，立志不求过高，行事不求过分，这样便可以成事。
English: Adhere to the principle of benevolence, respect and frugality, act according to the principle of loyalty and trustworthiness, act according to the principle of modesty and concession, do not aspire to be too high, and do not act excessively, so that things can be accomplished.

古文：故大建厥极，绥理群生，训物垂范，于是乎在，斯则圣人为政之由也。
现代文：因此努力达到极致，安抚治理百姓，顺从事物之理为后世留下典范，就在于此，这是圣人为政之道。
English: Therefore, efforts should be made to achieve the ultimate goal, to pacify and govern the people, and to leave a model for future generations in accordance with the laws of nature. This is the way of politics for saints.

古文：若乃淫抗陵肆，则危害萌矣。
现代文：如果锋芒毕露欺凌放肆，那么危害就萌生了。
English: If the sharpness is revealed as bullying and impudence, then harm will arise.

古文：故欲衍则速患，情佚则怨博，擅恣则兴攻，专利则延寇，可谓以厚生而失生者也。
现代文：因此欲漫延就会加速祸患，情没有节制结怨就会增多，专权放纵就会招致进攻，独霸利益就会引来敌寇，可以说是想使生活充裕而适得其反。
English: Therefore, the desire to spread will accelerate the disaster, the situation is unrestrained, the grudge will increase, the authoritarian indulgence will lead to attack, and the monopoly of interests will attract enemies. It can be said that it is counterproductive to make life abundant.

古文：悠悠之徒，骇乎若兹之衅，而寻艰争所缘。
现代文：庸俗的人们，害怕这类争端，于是寻找争执的缘由。
English: Vulgar people, afraid of such disputes, look for a reason to quarrel.

古文：察夫偏质有弊，而睹简损之善，遂阐贵无之议，而建贱有之论。
现代文：看到偏而责难崇有，又看到简损的好处，于是就阐述贵无之议，又提出贱有之论。
English: Seeing the benefits of blaming and advocating, and seeing the benefits of simplifying, he then expounded on the argument of preciousness, and proposed the theory of cheapness.

古文：贱有则必外形，外形则必遗制，遗制则必忽防，忽防则必忘礼。
现代文：贬低崇有就必定有外在表现，外在表现就必定是抛弃规制，抛弃规制就必定忽略防范，忽略防范就必定忘掉礼制。
English: If you belittle reverence, there must be an outward manifestation, and the outward manifestation must be abandoning regulation, abandoning regulation must be neglecting prevention, and neglecting prevention must be forgetting etiquette.

古文：礼制弗存，则无以为政矣。
现代文：礼制不存在，就无法为政了。
English: If there is no etiquette, there can be no politics.

古文：众之从上，犹水之居器也。
现代文：百姓顺从地位高的人，如同水在器皿。
English: The people obey high-ranking people like water in a vessel.

古文：故兆庶之情，信于所习；习则心服其业，业服则谓之理然。
现代文：因此百姓的性情，相信他们所习惯的；习惯就安心于其业，安于其业就说这是理所当然。
English: Therefore, the people's temperament believes in what they are used to; the habit is at ease with its business, and it is said that it is natural to be at ease with its business.

古文：是以君人必慎所教，班其政刑一切之务，分宅百姓，各授四职，能令禀命之者不肃而安，忽然忘异，莫有迁志。
现代文：因此统治人要慎重教化，颁布政令刑法等一切事情，让不同的人从事士农工商业，能让接受命令的人不严峻而安定，在短时间内忘掉异端，没有变迁的想法。
English: Therefore, the rulers should carefully educate the people, issue decrees, criminal laws and all other things, let different people engage in agriculture, industry and commerce, can make the people who receive orders not severe but stable, forget heresy in a short time, and have no idea of change.

古文：况于据在三之尊，怀所隆之情，敦以为训者哉！
现代文：何况依据君、师、父的尊贵地位，心怀所尊崇之情，当作训令呢!
English: What's more, according to the noble status of you, your teacher, and your father, with the feeling of being respected in your heart, take it as a command!

古文：斯乃昏明所阶，不可不审。
现代文：这是昏庸与圣明的区别，不能不审慎。
English: This is the difference between mediocrity and sanctity, and we must be prudent.

古文：夫盈欲可损而未可绝有也，过用可节而未可谓无贵也。
现代文：夫盈的欲望可以减损但不能因此而断绝，过头的物质享用可以节省但不能就此说没有富贵。
English: The desire of husband and wife can be reduced, but it cannot be cut off. Excessive material enjoyment can be saved, but it cannot be said that there is no wealth.

古文：盖有讲言之具者，深列有形之故，盛称空无之美。
现代文：那些高谈阔论的人，罗列崇有的弊端，盛赞虚无的美好。
English: Those who talk too much, enumerate venerable evils, and extol the beauty of nothing.

古文：形器之故有征，空无之义难检，辩巧之文可悦，似象之言足惑，众听眩焉，溺其成说。
现代文：器物是有外形特征的，可是空无的义理难于检验，雄辩乖巧的言辞可以使人高兴，貌似真实的言论足以让入迷惑，众人的视听被迷惑，沉溺于已形成的说法。
English: Objects have external characteristics, but empty theories are difficult to test, eloquent and well-spoken words can make people happy, seemingly true statements are enough to be confused, and many people's audio-visuals are confused and indulge in already formed sayings.

古文：虽颇有异此心者，辞不获济，屈于所狎，因谓虚无之理，诚不可盖。
现代文：即便是有不同的意见，言论不被接受，委屈于自己所喜爱，于是说虚无的理论，不能被掩盖。
English: Even if there are different opinions, speech is not accepted, wronged by their own favorite, so to speak, the theory of nothingness, can not be covered up.

古文：唱而有和，多往弗反，遂薄综世之务，贱功烈之用，高浮游之业，埤经实之贤。
现代文：有唱有和，在虚无的路上一去不回，于是菲薄治理，贬低功利，推崇轻浮游荡的行径，贬低务实的贤能之人。
English: There is singing, there is harmony, and on the road of nothingness, there is no return. Therefore, the government is weak and feeble, the utilitarianism is belittled, the frivolous and wandering behavior is praised, and the pragmatic and capable person is belittled.

古文：人情所殉，笃夫名利。
现代文：人情所追逐的，实在就是名利。
English: What people are chasing is really fame and fortune.

古文：于是文者衍其辞，讷者赞其旨，染其众也。
现代文：于是善写文章的人夸大其辞，不善言辞的人称赞他们的观点，因而感染了民众。
English: As a result, good writers exaggerate, and bad writers praise their opinions, thus infecting the public.

古文：是以立言藉于虚无，谓之玄妙；处官不亲所司，谓之雅远；奉身散其廉操，谓之旷达。
现代文：因此根据虚无而立论，就被称为玄妙；作官不关心职守，被称作高雅脱俗；作人不廉洁自律，被称作旷达。
English: Therefore, a theory based on nothingness is called mysterious; an official who does not care about his duties is called elegant and refined; an author who is not honest and self-disciplined is called extravagant.

古文：故砥砺之风，弥以陵迟。
现代文：于是努力的风气，就更衰落了。
English: As a result, the culture of hard work has further declined.

古文：放者因斯，或悖吉凶之礼，而忽容止之表，渎弃长幼之序，混漫贵贱之级。
现代文：狂放的人因为虚无的世风，有的违背吉凶事的礼仪，忽视举止仪容，轻慢长幼之间的礼教，扰乱贵贱等级。
English: Because of the nothingness of the world style, some wild people violate the etiquette of auspicious and inauspicious events, neglect manners and appearance, despise the etiquette between elders and children, and disrupt the noble and low class.

古文：其甚者至于裸裎，言笑忘宜，以不惜为弘，士行又亏矣。
现代文：其中最过分的人甚至裸身，说笑不顾时宜，把不顾一切当作豁达，士大夫的德行又受到了损害。
English: The most extravagant among them even went naked, talked and joked without regard for the occasion, and regarded recklessness as open-mindedness. The moral conduct of the scholar-bureaucrats was also damaged.

古文：老子既著五千之文，表摭秽杂之弊，甄举静一之义，有以令人释然自夷，合于《易》之《损》、《谦》、《艮》、《节》之旨。
现代文：老子著述了五千字的文章，明示了污秽繁杂的弊病，甄别列举了清静专一的道理，有令人释然醒悟的作用，符合《易》中《损》、《谦》、《艮》、《节》的要旨。
English: Laozi wrote a five-thousand-character essay, pointing out the filthy and complex ills, and listing the principles of clarity, calmness and singleness. It has a refreshing and sobering effect, and is in line with the essence of "loss," "humility," "modesty" and "sacrifice" in "E."

古文：而静一守本，无虚无之谓也；《损》《艮》之属，盖君子之一道，非《易》之所以为体守本无也。
现代文：而清静专一守本分，没有虚无的意思；《损》、《艮》这一类，大概衹是君子的一种道德，不是《易》的本意。
English: However, keeping one's duty in a calm and quiet manner does not mean nothing; in the category of "loss" and "failure," "failure" is probably a kind of morality of a gentleman, not the original intention of "success."

古文：观老子之书虽博有所经，而云 有生于无 ，以虚为主，偏立一家之辞，岂有以而然哉！
现代文：观看老子的著作虽然广博有道，而说 有生于无 ，以虚为主，有别于众人自立一家学说，恐怕是有原因的吧!
English: Looking at Lao Zi's works, although they are broad and profound, there is probably a reason for saying that being born from nothing, with nothing as the main, is different from everyone's self-reliance.

古文：人之既生，以保生为全，全之所阶，以顺感为务。
现代文：人出生以后，以保全生命为第一，保全生命所凭藉的，最重要的是顺从自己的感觉。
English: After a person is born, the first priority is to preserve life, and the most important thing to preserve life is to follow one's own feelings.

古文：若味近以亏业，则沈溺之衅兴；怀末以忘本，则天理之真灭。
现代文：如果旨趣接近于损害事业，那么沉溺的迹象就开始了；如果怀末而忘本，那么天理也就灭绝了。
English: If the intention is close to harming the cause, then the signs of addiction will begin; if the book is forgotten, then the principle will be extinct.

古文：故动之所交，存亡之会也。
现代文：因此行动前后交替，关系到存亡之机。
English: Therefore, the action alternates back and forth, which is related to the chance of survival.

古文：夫有非有，于无非无；于无非无，于有非有。
现代文：在崇有之时否定有，在贵无之时否定无；在贵无之时否定无，便是在崇有之时否定有。
English: To deny existence at the time of reverence is to deny existence at the time of nothingness. To deny existence at the time of nothingness is to deny existence at the time of reverence.

古文：是以申纵播之累，而著贵无之文。
现代文：因此申述放纵之弊端，而著述贵无论。
English: So complain about the evils of self-indulgence, and your writing will be fine.

古文：将以绝所非之盈谬，存大善之中节，收流遁于既过，反澄正于胸怀。
现代文：将以灭绝他所否定的谬误，保存大善而合乎法度，结束过度的放荡，在心中返回到清静端正。
English: He will put an end to the excesses of dissoluteness by eradicating the falsehood that he has denied, by preserving the great good in accordance with the law, and by returning to serenity and rectitude in his heart.

古文：宜其以无为辞，而旨在全有，故其辞曰 以为文不足 。
现代文：适合贵无之论，而主旨在于崇有，因而有 说得逞不够充分 这样的文辞。
English: It is suitable for the theory of preciousness and nothingness, but the main purpose is to be revered, so there are such words that are not enough to say.

古文：若斯，则是所寄之涂，一方之言也。
现代文：如果是这样，就是所表达的道理，是一种学说而已。
English: If this is the case, then the principle expressed is nothing more than a theory.

古文：若谓至理信以无为宗，则偏而害当矣。
现代文：如果认为至理就是以贵无为根本，就偏颇而不恰当了。
English: It would be biased and inappropriate to think that the most important thing is to take preciousness as the fundamental.

古文：先贤达识，以非所滞，示之深论。
现代文：古代贤人见识通达，没有被禁锢，发表了高深的言论。
English: Ancient sages were well-informed, were not imprisoned, and made profound statements.

古文：惟班固著难，未足折其情。
现代文：衹有班固著作艰深，难以判断他的看法。
English: It is difficult to judge the views of Zou Youbangu, whose writings are profound.

古文：孙卿、杨雄大体抑之，犹偏有所许。
现代文：孙卿、杨雄大体压抑虚无论，但还是有所赞许。
English: Sun Ching and Yang Xiong are generally repressed, but they are still praised.

古文：而虚无之言，日以广衍，众家扇起，各列其说。
现代文：而虚无之论，逐日播散，众家煽动兴起，各自推出自己的学说。
English: On the other hand, theories of nothingness are spreading day by day, and various schools of thought are springing up, each putting forward their own theories.

古文：上及造化，下被万事，莫不贵无，所存佥同。
现代文：上至大自然，下至万事，没有不贵无的，所保留的都相同。
English: Up to nature, down to all things, there is nothing that is not precious, and what is kept is the same.

古文：情以众固，乃号凡有之理皆义之埤者，薄而鄙焉。
现代文：人情因为人多而顽固，于是凡崇有的道理，在义理上都是被贬低的人，遭到菲薄鄙视。
English: Human feelings are stubborn because there are so many people, so all revered principles are, in the sense of justice, disparaged and despised.

古文：辩论人伦及经明之业，遂易门肆。
现代文：辩论人伦及经义的学说，于是都改换门庭。
English: Debating the doctrines of human ethics and economic justice, they all changed their minds.

古文：頠用矍然，申其所怀，而攻者盈集。
现代文：裴颇为此惊恐，申述心中想法，而攻击我的人众多。
English: Pei was very frightened by this and expressed his thoughts, but there were many people who attacked me.

古文：或以为一时口言。
现代文：有人认为这是一时的言论。
English: Some people think it was a spur-of-the-moment remark.

古文：有客幸过，咸见命著文，擿列虚无不允之征。
现代文：有人见到我，责我写文章，选列虚无偏颇的例子。
English: Someone saw me and asked me to write an article, listing examples of bias.

古文：若未能每事释正，则无家之义弗可夺也。
现代文：如果不能每件事解释纠正，那么贵无之论就不能推翻。
English: If you can't explain and correct everything, you can't refute the null hypothesis.

古文：頠退而思之，虽君子宅情，无求于显，及其立言，在乎达旨而已。
现代文：我退下以后思考，虽然君子顺应人情，不求显赫，但到了立论的时候，就要表达自己的观念。
English: After I stepped back, I reflected that although a gentleman conforms to people's feelings and does not seek prominence, when it is time to make an argument, he must express his own ideas.

古文：然去圣久远，异同纷纠，苟少有仿佛，可以崇济先典，扶明大业，有益于时，则惟患言之不能，焉得静默，及未举一隅，略示所存而已哉！
现代文：然而现在距圣人时代久远，不同的看法纷争纠缠，假如稍有相似，可以光大先代经典，扶助大业，对时代有益，就惟恐自己的言论达不到要求了，怎能沉默，至于未能列举事例，是因为衹是略微表示一下心中所想的而已!
English: However, it is now a long time since the era of sages, and different opinions are entangled in disputes. If there is a slight similarity, it can magnify the previous generation's classics, support the great cause, and be beneficial to the times. For fear of not meeting the requirements of one's own speech, how can one be silent? As for the failure to list examples, it is because it is only a slight expression of what is in one's heart!

古文：夫至无者无以能生，故始生者自生也。
现代文：极端的贵无论不能存在，因而开始出现时是自生的。
English: Extreme nihilism cannot exist, so it begins to appear spontaneously.

古文：自生而必体有，则有遗而生亏矣。
现代文：自生就必定包容崇有，那么抛弃有就会受到损害。
English: Self-nurturing is bound to be tolerant and reverent, so abandoning it will be damaged.

古文：生以有为已分，则虚无是有之所谓遗者也。
现代文：一旦崇有与贵无有了区分，那么虚无是崇有所谓的遣留而已。
English: Once there is a distinction between reverence and precious nothing, then nothingness is reverence's so-called exile.

古文：故养既化之有，非无用之所能全也；理既有之众，非无为之所能循也。
现代文：因此养说到底即化为有，不是无用论所能包容的；理是有的聚合，不是无为所能包容的。
English: Therefore, in the final analysis, nourishment is transformed into existence, which is not something that can be contained by useless theory; reason is the aggregation of existence, which is not something that can be contained by inaction.

古文：心非事也，而制事必由于心，然不可以制事以非事，谓心为无也。
现代文：心不是事，而办事必定出于思考，然而不能说办事不是事，认为心是无。
English: The mind is not a thing, and doing things must come from thinking. However, it cannot be said that doing things is not a thing, and that the mind is nothing.

古文：匠非器也，而制器必须于匠，然不可以制器以非器，谓匠非有也。
现代文：工匠不是器皿，而制做器皿必须靠工匠，然而不能说制作的器皿不是器皿，认为工匠是没有的。
English: A craftsman is not a vessel, and it is up to the craftsman to make the vessel. However, it cannot be said that the vessel made is not a vessel, and it is considered that there is no craftsman.

古文：是以欲收重泉之鳞，非偃息之所能获也；陨高墉之禽，非静拱之所能捷也；审投弦饵之用，非无知之所能览也。
现代文：因此想捕获深渊中的鱼龙，不是安卧就能得到的；想打下高墙上的禽鸟，不是静心拱手就能完成的；精心地拉弓弦下诱饵，不是无知所能做的。
English: Therefore, if you want to catch the fish and dragon in the abyss, you can't get it by lying down; if you want to shoot down the birds on the high wall, you can't do it by meditating; if you want to carefully pull the bait under the bowstring, you can't do it by ignorance.

古文：由此而观，济有者皆有也，虚无奚益于已有之群生哉！
现代文：由此看来，崇有者都有，虚无对已经存在的民众有什么好处呢!
English: From this point of view, there are admirers, what good is nothingness to the people who already exist!

古文：王衍之徒攻难交至，并莫能屈。
现代文：王衍一类人的攻击责难先后到来，都不能使他屈服。
English: The attacks and criticisms of people like Wang Yan came one after another, but they could not make him give in.

古文：又著《辩才论》，古今精义皆辨释焉，未成而遇祸。
现代文：又着《辩才论》，古今的精华大义都有所辨别解释，没有完成就遇到了灾难。
English: In addition, with the "Argumentation Theory," the essence of ancient and modern great-righteousness has been distinguished and explained. If it is not completed, it will encounter a disaster.

古文：初，赵王伦谄事贾后，頠甚恶之，伦数求官，頠与张华复固执不许，由是深为伦所怨。
现代文：当初，赵王司马伦奉承贾后，裴頠很厌恶他。司马伦数次要求官位，裴頠和张华多次坚决反对，因此深为司马伦所怨恨。
English: At first, Zhao Wang Sima Lun flattered Jia Hou, but Pei Xuan detested him very much. Sima Lun asked for an official position several times, and Pei Xuan and Zhang Hua resolutely opposed it many times, so he was deeply resented by Sima Lun.

古文：伦又潜怀篡逆，欲先除朝望，因废贾后之际遂诛之，时年三十四。
现代文：赵王司区俭又暗怀篡权谋反之心，想先除掉朝中有威望的人，趁着废黜买后的机会杀了裴倾，那年他三十四岁。
English: Zhao Wang Si Guo Jian also harbored the intention of usurping power and plotting a counterattack. He wanted to get rid of someone with prestige in the imperial court first, and took advantage of the opportunity after the dethronement to kill Pei Ting. He was thirty-four years old that year.

古文：二子嵩、该，伦亦欲害之。
现代文：两个儿子嵩、该，赵王司马伦也想杀害他们。
English: His two sons, Song and Gui, and Zhao Wang Simaren also wanted to kill them.

古文：梁王肜、东海王越称頠父秀有勋王室，配食太庙，不宜灭其后嗣，故得不死，徙带方；惠帝反正，追复頠本官，改葬以卿礼，谥曰成。
现代文：梁王肜、东海王司马越说裴頠的父亲裴秀对王室有功勋，配享于太庙，不宜灭绝他的后代，因而免于一死，流放到萤室。塞帝复立，追认裴憔原官，按卿的礼节改葬，谧号成。
English: Liang Wangchun and East Sea King Sima Yue said that Pei Xiu, the father of Pei Xiu, had made great contributions to the royal family and deserved to be enshrined in the Imperial Temple. It was not appropriate to exterminate his descendants. Therefore, he was spared from death and exiled to Huanchong. Emperor Seti restored the throne, identified Pei Xiu as the original official, and reburied him according to the etiquette of the lord.

古文：以嵩嗣爵，为中书黄门侍郎。
现代文：让裴嵩继承爵位，任中书黄门侍郎。
English: Let Pei Song inherit the title of nobility and serve as the attendant of the Yellow Gate.

古文：该出后从伯凯，为散骑常侍，并为乞活贼陈午所害。
现代文：盏箠出京后跟了伯父裴饥，任散骑常侍。都被流窜的强盗陈午杀害。
English: After leaving Beijing, Zhen Rong followed his uncle Pei Rong and served as his equerry. Both were killed by the fugitive bandit Chen Rong.

古文：楷字叔则。
现代文：裴楷字叔则。
English: Baikai characters uncle rules.

古文：父徽，魏冀州刺史。
现代文：父亲裴徽，任魏冀州刺史。
English: His father, Pei Hui, held the post of Wei and Hebei prefectural governor.

古文：楷明悟有识量，弱冠知名，尤精《老》、《易》，少与王戎齐名。
现代文：聪明有见识，二十岁就出了名，尤其精通《老刊、《易经》，年少时与王戎有同样的名声。
English: Intelligent and insightful, he became famous at the age of twenty, especially proficient in the "Old Book" and the "I Ching." When he was young, he had the same reputation as Wang Rong.

古文：锺会荐之于文帝，辟相国掾，迁尚书郎。
现代文：钟会把他推荐给文帝，任相国掾，升任尚书郎。
English: The bell association recommended him to Emperor Wen, and he was appointed to the post of imperial secretary and promoted to the post of imperial secretary.

古文：贾充改定律令，以楷为定科郎。
现代文：置充修改律令，任用裴楷为定科郎。
English: Okichō revised the Ritsuryo and appointed Baikai as Teikoro.

古文：事毕，诏楷于御前执读，平议当否。
现代文：事情完毕，诏令裴楷任御前执读，评论奏章是否妥当。
English: After the matter was over, the emperor ordered Baikai to be appointed to read in front of the emperor, commenting on whether the score was appropriate.

古文：楷善宣吐，左右属目，听者忘倦。
现代文：盏揸善于发表言论，左右顾盼，听的人忘记疲倦。
English: Zhengyu is good at making speeches, looking around, and the listener forgets to be tired.

古文：武帝为抚军，妙选僚采，以楷为参军事。
现代文：亘瞳任抚军时，精选手下同僚，任命轰撞为参军事。
English: When Watami was appointed to the army, his colleagues, who were elite players, were appointed to join the military.

古文：吏部郎缺，文帝问其人于锺会。
现代文：吏部郎缺员，工垃询问钟盒什么人合适。
English: There was a vacancy for a clerk, so the factory asked the bell maker who would be suitable.

古文：会曰： 裴楷清通，王戎简要，皆其选也。 
现代文：钟盒说： 裴楷精明通达，王戎做事简要，都是合适人选。 
English: The clock box said: Pei Kai is shrewd and knowledgeable, Wang Rong is concise, and both are suitable candidates.

古文：于是以楷为吏部郎。
现代文：于是任命裴楷为吏部郎。
English: As a result, Baikai was appointed to the position of secretary.

古文：楷风神高迈，容仪俊爽，博涉群书，特精理义，时人谓之 玉人 ，又称 见裴叔则如近玉山，映照人也 。
现代文：裴楷风采高速，容貌英俊，博猎群书，特别精通理义，当时的人称他为 玉人 ，又说 见到裴叔则就好像走近玉山，光彩照人 。
English: Pei Kai's style is fast, his appearance is handsome, he is well-read, and he is particularly proficient in logic. At that time, people called him Jade Man, and said that seeing Uncle Pei was like approaching Jade Mountain, shining brightly.

古文：转中书郎，出入宫省，见者肃然改容。
现代文：转任中书郎，出入宫廷，见到他的人都肃然起敬。
English: Transferred to the post of Chushiro, he entered and left the court, and everyone who saw him was awestruck.

古文：武帝初登阼，探策以卜世数多少，而得一，帝不悦，群臣失色，莫有言者。
现代文：亘游初登帝位，用摸取简策的方法来占卜在位有多少年，而摸到的是一，皇帝不高兴。大臣们紧张，没有人说话。
English: After touring the newly enthroned emperor, he used the method of finding a simple solution to predict how many years he would reign, and what he found was that the emperor was not happy. The ministers were nervous, and no one spoke.

古文：楷正容仪，和其声气，从容进曰： 臣闻天得一以清，地得一以宁，王侯得一以为天下贞。 
现代文：裴楷整理仪容，使声气和悦，从容上前说： 我听说天得到一就清，地得到一就宁，王侯得到一表示天下忠贞。 
English: Pei Kai straightened his appearance, made his voice pleasant, and calmly said: I heard that once the heaven is obtained, it is clear, once the earth is obtained, it is better, and once the prince is obtained, it means the world is loyal.

古文：武帝大悦，群臣皆称万岁。
现代文：武帝十分高兴，群臣都呼万岁。
English: Emperor Wu was very happy, and all the courtiers shouted "long live."

古文：俄拜散骑侍郎，累迁散骑常侍、河内太守，入为屯骑校尉、右军将军，转侍中。
现代文：不久官拜散骑侍郎，逐渐升至散骑常侍、河内太守，入京任屯骑校尉、右军将军，转任侍中。
English: Soon, he was promoted to the rank of sanzhijishi, and gradually rose to the rank of sanzhijishi, the governor of Hanoi, and was appointed to Beijing as a cadet captain, general of the right army, and transferred to the position of a chamberlain.

古文：石崇以功臣子有才气，与楷志趣各异，不与之交。
现代文：石崇由于是功臣后代又有才气，与裴揩志趣不同，不跟差指交往。
English: Due to the fact that Shi Chong is a talented descendant of a hero, he does not interact with the bad fingers, unlike Pei Xizhi.

古文：长水校尉孙季舒尝与崇酣燕，慢傲过度，崇欲表免之。
现代文：长水校尉重量曾经与互塞畅饮，傲慢过度，石塞想上表罢免他。
English: The weight of the captain of the Changshui was once drunk with the mutual block, the arrogance was excessive, and the stone block wanted to remove him from the table.

古文：楷闻之，谓崇曰： 足下饮人狂药，责人正礼，不亦乖乎！ 
现代文：韭揩听说了，对石崇说： 足下请人喝下狂药，又要求别人遵守正礼，这不有些矛盾吗? 
English: After hearing this, Zou said to Shi Chong: Isn't there a contradiction in asking someone to drink poison and asking someone else to be polite?

古文：崇乃止。
现代文：石崇于是作罢。
English: So Ishitaka gave up.

古文：楷性宽厚，与物无忤。
现代文：裴楷生性宽厚，与人无仇。
English: Pei Kai Sheng is generous and has no grudge against anyone.

古文：不持俭素，每游荣贵，辄取其珍玩。
现代文：不主张朴素，每逢去荣华富贵的地方游玩，就拿走别人的珍宝古玩。
English: They do not advocate simplicity. Whenever they visit places of glory and wealth, they take away other people's precious antiques.

古文：虽车马器服，宿昔之间，便以施诸穷乏。
现代文：即便是车马器具服饰，短时间内就送给穷困的人。
English: Even car and horse equipment and clothing are given to the poor in a short time.

古文：尝营别宅，其从兄衍见而悦之，即以宅与衍。
现代文：曾经经营了一处别墅，他的堂兄裴衍见到后喜欢，裴楷就把房子送给了裴衍。
English: He once managed a villa. His cousin Pei Yan liked it when he saw it, and Pei Kai gave the house to Pei Yan.

古文：梁、赵二王，国之近属，贵重当时，楷岁请二国租钱百万，以散亲族。
现代文：梁、趟两位王，是国君的近亲，在当时地位显赫，裴楷每年请两封国租钱百万，散给亲族。
English: The two kings, Liang and Wei, were close relatives of the sovereign and held a prominent position at the time. Pei Kai requested two million yuan in state rent each year to distribute to his relatives.

古文：人或讥之，楷曰： 损有余以补不足，天之道也。 
现代文：有人讥讽裴楷，裴揩说： 损有余补不足，这是天道。 
English: Some people ridiculed Pei Kai, and Pei Yao said: "If there is a loss, there is a surplus to make up for it. This is the way of heaven.

古文：安于毁誉，其行己任率，皆此类也。
现代文：不在乎别人的诋毁，做自己想做的事，都是这类情况。
English: Don't care about the slander of others, do what you want to do, are all such situations.

古文：与山涛、和峤并以盛德居位，帝尝问曰： 朕应天顺时，海内更始，天下风声，何得何失？ 
现代文：裴楷与山涛、和蠕当官都有品德好的名声，皇帝曾问： 我顺应天时，海内重更，天下的舆论，谈论有什么得失? 
English: Pei Kai, Shan Tao, and Wurm officials all have a reputation for good moral character. The emperor once asked: I conform to the time of day, the weight of the sea, and the world's public opinion. What are the gains and losses of talking about it?

古文：楷对曰： 陛下受命，四海承风，所以未比德于尧舜者，但以贾充之徒尚在朝耳。
现代文：裴楷回答说： 陛下接受天命，四海响应，之所以不能在德政方面与尧舜相比，是因为贾充一类人还在朝廷。
English: Pei Kai replied: His Majesty accepts the Mandate of Heaven and responds to the four seas. The reason why he cannot be compared to Jia Jia in terms of German politics is because people like Jia Chong are still in the imperial court.

古文：方宜引天下贤人，与弘正道，不宜示人以私。 
现代文：正应该吸引天下贤人，弘大正道，不宜向人们展示私情。 
English: It is just right to attract the world's sages and propagate the great righteous way. It is not appropriate to show people one's private feelings.

古文：时任恺、庾纯亦以充为言，帝乃出充为关中都督。
现代文：当时王恺、座钟也这样评说贾立，皇帝于是任直室为迩中都督。
English: At that time, Wang Qian and Zachong also commented on Jiali in this way, and the emperor then appointed Zhishu as the governor of Yunnan.

古文：充纳女于太子，乃止。
现代文：置童向太子献出女儿，才留下。
English: It was only after Okido offered his daughter to the prince that he stayed.

古文：平吴之后，帝方修太平之化，每延公卿，与论政道。
现代文：平定县之后，皇帝开始力求天下太平，时常延请公卿，与他们讨论政道。
English: After the pacification of Jing County, the emperor began to strive for world peace, and often invited nobles to discuss the political course with them.

古文：楷陈三五之风，次叙汉魏盛衰之迹。
现代文：裴楷陈述三王五帝的风范，接着叙述汉魏盛衰的原因。
English: Baikai stated the manners of the three kings and five emperors, and then described the reasons for the rise and fall of Han and Wei dynasties.

古文：帝称善，坐者叹服焉。
现代文：皇帝叫好，在座的人叹服。
English: The emperor said hello, and everyone present sighed with admiration.

古文：楷子瓚娶杨骏女，然楷素轻骏，与之不平。
现代文：裴楷的儿子裴瓒娶了杨骏的女儿，然而裴楷一向看不起杨骏，与他关系不好。
English: Pei Kai's son Pei Xuan married Yang Xuan's daughter. However, Pei Kai always looked down on Yang Xuan and had a bad relationship with him.

古文：骏既执政，乃转为卫尉，迁太子少师，优游无事，默如也。
现代文：杨骏执政后，墓壁转任卫尉，改任太子少师，清闲无事，沉默少言。
English: After Yang Hui came to power, Tomb Wall was transferred to the position of guard lieutenant, and then to the position of the prince's apprentice. He was idle and silent.

古文：及骏诛，楷以婚亲收付廷尉，将加法。
现代文：圭瞪被杀后，呈过因为姻亲被捕交付廷尉，将要被加以刑罚。
English: After Gui Gao was killed, he was handed over to a court official because his in-laws were arrested, and he will be punished.

古文：是日事仓卒，诛戮纵横，众人为之震恐。
现代文：那天事发仓猝，杀人遍地，大家为此惊恐。
English: That day, things went wrong in a hurry, people were killed all over the place, and everyone was terrified.

古文：楷容色不变，举动自若，索纸笔与亲故书。
现代文：裴楷神色不变，举动自如，索要纸笔给亲友写信。
English: Pei Kai's expression remained unchanged and his actions were relaxed. He asked for a pen and paper to write a letter to his relatives and friends.

古文：赖侍中傅祗救护得免，犹坐去官。
现代文：幸而侍中傅祗救护得以免于一死，还是坐罪被罢官。
English: Fortunately, the chambermaid, Fu Xianbei, was spared from death, but he was still removed from his post for the crime.

古文：太保卫瓘、太宰亮称楷贞正不阿附，宜蒙爵土，乃封临海侯，食邑二千户。
现代文：太保卫璀、太宰司马奎称赞墓揩忠贞正直不阿谀奉承，应受到封地，于是被封为临海侯，食邑两千户。
English: Taibowei and Dazai Sima Kui praised Tomakom for his loyalty, honesty, and lack of flattery. He deserved to be given a fief, so he was made the governor of Linhai, with a fief of two thousand households.

古文：代楚王玮为北军中候，加散骑常侍。
现代文：代替楚王司屋理任北军中候，加散骑常侍。
English: In place of Chu Wang Siya, he was appointed as a middle-ranking officer of the Northern Army, and he was also assigned as a cavalryman.

古文：玮怨瓘、亮斥己任楷，楷闻之，不敢拜，转为尚书。
现代文：司马璋怨恨卫茎、司马亮排斥自己而任用茎攒，茎撵听说后，不敢接受任命，转任尚书。
English: Sima Yi resented Wei Zi, Sima Liang excluded himself and appointed Zi Zi. After hearing this, Zi Zi did not dare to accept the appointment and transferred to Shang Shu.

古文：楷长子舆先娶亮女，女适卫瓘子，楷虑内难未已，求出外镇，除安南将军、假节、都督荆州诸军事，垂当发而玮果矫诏诛亮、瓘。玮以楷前夺己中候，又与亮、瓘婚亲，密遣讨楷。
现代文：裴楷的长子裴舆先娶了亮的女儿，寻过的女儿嫁了卫璀的儿子，裴楷考虑到内乱没有平息，请求出京任职，改任安南将军、假节、都督荆州诸军事，正要出发而司马璋果然假藉诏书名义诛杀旦屋奎、区违因为冬指先前夺取自己中候职位，又跟司马亮、卫瑾是姻亲，秘密派人去讨伐裴楷。
English: Pei Kai's eldest son Pei Muxin married Liang's daughter first, and the daughter he found married Wei Yao's son. Taking into account that the civil unrest had not subsided, Pei Kai requested to go to Beijing to serve, and was appointed as General Annan, False Festival, and Governor of Jingzhou Military. He was about to leave, but Sima Yi actually killed Danyu Kui in the name of the imperial edict, and the district illegally seized his middle-ranking position because of the winter, and he was related by marriage to Sima Liang and Wei Yao, and secretly sent someone to fight against Pei Kai.

古文：楷素知玮有望于己，闻有变，单车入城，匿于妻父王浑家，与亮小子一夜八徙，故得免难。
现代文：裴楷平素就知道司马璋对自己有怨恨，听说有了变故，一人乘车入城，藏匿在岳父王运家，与司马毫的小儿子一晚上八次换住处，因而得以免于灾难。
English: Pei Kai always knew that Sima Yao had a grudge against him, and when he heard that there had been a change of fortune, he drove into the city alone, hid at his father-in-law Wang Yun's house, and changed places with Sima Yao's youngest son eight times in one night, so he was able to avoid disaster.

古文：玮既伏诛，以楷为中书令，加侍中，与张华、王戎并管机要。
现代文：司马璋被诛杀以后，任命裴楷为中书令，加侍中，与张华、王戎共同管理中书事。
English: After Sima Yao was killed, he appointed Pei Kai as the secretary of the Chinese Academy of Letters, as well as the attendant, and jointly managed the Chinese Academy of Letters with Zhang Hua and Wang Rong.

古文：楷有渴利疾，不乐处势。
现代文：裴楷有渴望权利的毛病，不满意所处的官位。
English: Pei Kai has the problem of longing for power and is not satisfied with his official position.

古文：王浑为楷请曰： 楷受先帝拔擢之恩，复蒙陛下宠遇，诚竭节之秋也。
现代文：王浑为裴楷请求说： 裴楷受到先代皇帝提拔的恩典，又受到陛下的宠幸知遇，正是竭尽忠诚之秋。
English: Wang Hun pleaded for Pei Kai, saying: Pei Kai was promoted by the grace of the previous emperor, and was favored by His Majesty. It was the autumn of loyalty.

古文：然楷性不竞于物，昔为常侍，求出为河内太守；后为侍中，复求出为河南尹；与杨骏不平，求为卫尉；及转东宫，班在时类之下，安于淡退，有识有以见其心也。
现代文：但是裴楷生性不善竞争，过去任常侍，请求出任河内太守；后任侍中，又请求出任河南尹；与杨骏不和，求任卫尉；等到转入束宫，位次在当时同类人之下，但他安心于淡泊退隐，有见识的人可以看到他的心迹。
English: However, Pei Kaisheng was not good at competition. In the past, when he was a regular attendant, he asked to be the governor of Hanoi; later, when he was an attendant, he also asked to be the governor of Henan; when he was at odds with Yang Pi, he asked to be a guard lieutenant; when he was transferred to the Palace of the Grand Dukes, his rank was lower than that of similar people at that time, but he was at ease in retirement, and people with insight could see his heart.

古文：楷今委顿，臣深忧之。
现代文：裴楷如今不振作，我深为担忧。
English: I am deeply worried that Pei Kai is not doing well now.

古文：光禄勋缺，以为可用。
现代文：光禄勋缺员，我认为可以任用。
English: Since there is a vacancy for an officer of the Order of the Glory, I think I can make the appointment.

古文：今张华在中书，王戎在尚书，足举其契，无为复令楷入，名臣不多，当见将养，不违其志，要其远济之益。 
现代文：如今张华在中书，王戎在尚书，足以掌管文书，没必要再让裴楷介入。名臣不多，应当得到奉养，不违背他的意愿，以求长远之利。 
English: Nowadays, Zhang Hua is in charge of the Chinese script and Wang Rong is in charge of the Shang script, so there is no need for Baikai to intervene. There are not many famous ministers, and they should be supported, not against his will, in order to seek long-term benefits.

古文：不听，就加光禄大夫、开府仪同三司。
现代文：不被采纳，就加任光禄大夫、开府仪同三司。
English: If he is not accepted, he will be appointed as the doctor of Guanglu, the head of the ceremony and the three departments.

古文：及疾笃，诏遣黄门郎王衍省疾，楷回眸瞩之曰： 竟未相识。
现代文：等到病重，下诏派遣黄门郎王衍探视，裴楷回头看着他说： 未曾见过。 
English: When he became seriously ill, he sent Huangmen Lang Wangyan to visit him. Baikai looked back at him and said, "I have never seen him before."

古文：衍深叹其神俊。
现代文：王衍对其才智超群深为赞叹。
English: Wang Yan was impressed by his superior intellect.

古文：楷有知人之鉴，初在河南，乐广侨居郡界，未知名，楷见而奇之，致之于宰府。
现代文：裴楷善于识别人才，起初在河南，乐广侨居在郡内，没有名声，裴楷见到他认为是奇人，把他引入宰府。
English: Pei Kai is good at identifying talent. At first, he was in Henan. Le Guang lived in the county and had no reputation. When Pei Kai saw him, he thought he was a genius and brought him to Zaifu.

古文：尝目夏侯玄云 肃肃如入宗庙中，但见礼乐器 ，锺会 如观武库森森，但见矛戟在前 ，傅嘏 汪翔靡所不见 ，山涛 若登山临下，幽然深远 。
现代文：曾看夏侯玄说 就像敬穆地走进宗庙，衹看到礼乐器 ，看到钟会说 好像看到兵器库，衹看到面前的矛戟 ，看到傅嘏说 汪洋无所不见 ，看到山涛说 好像登山下望，幽然深远 。
English: Looking at Xia Houxuan once said that it was like respectfully walking into the ancestral temple, looking at the ceremonial instruments, looking at the bell said that it was like seeing an arsenal, looking at the spear in front of him, looking at Fu Xi said that the ocean was everywhere, and looking at the mountains said that it was like looking down the mountain, far and wide.

古文：初，楷家炊黍在甑，或变如拳，或作血，或作芜菁子。
现代文：起初，裴楷家做饭，黄米在锅中，有的变得像拳头，有的像血，有的像芜菁子。
English: At first, when Baikai's family was cooking and the yellow rice was in the pot, some became like fists, some like blood, and some like cochineal.

古文：其年而卒，时年五十五，谥曰元。
现代文：造年裴楷去世，时年五十五岁，谧号元。
English: Baikai died at the age of fifty-five, and his posthumous name was Yuan.

古文：有五子：舆、瓚、宪、礼、逊。
现代文：有五个儿子：裴舆、裴瓒、裴宪、裴礼、裴逊。
English: They had five sons: Pei Yu, Pei Xuan, Pei Xian, Pei Li, and Pei Xun.

古文：舆字祖明。
现代文：裴舆字祖明。
English: Pei Yu's character Zu Ming.

古文：少袭父爵，官至散骑侍郎，卒谥曰简。
现代文：年少时承袭父亲爵位，官至散骑侍郎，死后谧号简。
English: Inherited his father's title at a young age, rose through the ranks to become a horseback riding equerry, and after his death was given the name Jane.

古文：瓚字国宝，中书郎，风神高迈，见者皆敬之。
现代文：裴瓒字国宝，任中书郎，有神采，见到他的人都尊敬他。
English: Pei Xuan, a national treasure, was appointed as a middle school teacher. He was full of wit, and everyone who saw him respected him.

古文：特为王绥所重，每从其游。
现代文：特别受到王绥的器重，常跟从他出游。
English: He was particularly influenced by Wang Yao and often traveled with him.

古文：绥父戎谓之曰： 国宝初不来，汝数往，何也？ 
现代文：王绥的父亲王戎对他说： 国宝起初不来，你多次去他那儿，为什么? 
English: Wang Rong, Wang Yao's father, said to him, "The national treasure didn't come at first. You went to him many times. Why?

古文：对曰： 国宝虽不知绥，绥自知国宝。 
现代文：回答说： 国宝虽然不了解王绥，王绥自己了解国宝。 
English: He replied: Although the national treasure does not understand Wang Xi, Wang Xi himself understands the national treasure.

古文：杨骏之诛，为乱兵所害。
现代文：杨骏之乱时，被乱兵杀害。
English: He was killed by rioters during the Yang Hui Rebellion.

古文：宪字景思。
现代文：裴宪字景思。
English: "Pei Xian" and "Jing Si" are familiar.

古文：少而颖悟，好交轻侠。
现代文：年少而聪明，喜好结交。
English: Young and smart, he likes to make friends.

古文：及弱冠，更折节严重，修尚儒学，足不逾阈者数年。
现代文：等到二十岁，完全改变平曰志向，崇尚儒学，几年足不出产。
English: By the time he was twenty years old, he had completely changed his worldly aspirations, advocating Confucianism, and did not produce for several years.

古文：陈郡谢鲲、颍川庾敳皆俊郎士也，见而奇之，相谓曰： 裴宪鲠亮宏达，通机识命，不知其何如父；至于深弘保素，不以世物婴心者，其殆过之。 
现代文：陈郡谢鲲、颖川庾故都是才华出众的人，见到裴宪感到惊奇，相互说： 裴宪正直豁达，通机知命，不知比他父亲怎么样；至于他的深沉纯真，不以世事困扰自己，恐怕超过他父亲。 
English: Chen County Xie Yao and Yingchuan Yao were both talented people. They were surprised to see Pei Xian and said to each other: Pei Xian is honest and open-minded, resourceful and resourceful, I don't know how he is better than his father; as for his profound innocence, not troubling himself with worldly affairs, I am afraid he is better than his father.

古文：初，侍讲东宫，历黄门吏部郎、侍中。
现代文：起初，在东宫任侍讲，历任黄门吏部郎、侍中。
English: At first, he served as an attendant speaker in the East Palace, and successively served as a Yellow Gate official and a chamberlain.

古文：东海王越以为豫州刺史、北中郎将、假节。
现代文：东海王司马越任命他为豫州刺史、北中郎将、假节。
English: The king of the East Sea, Sima Yue, appointed him as the governor of Yuzhou, the general of the North, and the false festival.

古文：王浚承制，以宪为尚书。
现代文：王浚掌权，任命裴宪为尚书。
English: Wang Jun assumed power, and appointed Pei Xian as Shangshu.

古文：永嘉末，王浚为石勒所破，枣嵩等莫不谢罪军门，贡赂交错，惟宪及荀绰恬然私室。
现代文：永嘉末年，王浚被石勒打败，枣嵩等人没有不去军门谢罪的，上贡贿赂的人你来我往，惟有：睦及苞纬安然地待在家中。
English: At the end of the Yongjia era, Wang Jun was defeated by Shi Le, Zaosong and others did not go to the military gate to apologize, those who paid tribute and bribed you came to me, only: stay at home peacefully.

古文：勒素闻其名，召而谓之曰： 王浚虐暴幽州，人鬼同疾。
现代文：石勒平素知道他们的名声，召他们来对他俩说： 王浚在幽州暴虐，人鬼都怨恨他。
English: Shi Lepin always knew their reputation and called them to say to the two of them: "Wang Jun is a tyrant in Yuzhou, and all men and ghosts hate him.

古文：孤恭行乾宪，拯兹黎元，羁旧咸欢，庆谢交路。
现代文：我亲行天道，拯救百姓，困苦者都欢喜，庆贺感谢者布满道路。
English: I personally walk the heavenly road, save the people, the poor are happy, and the roads are full of people celebrating and thanking.

古文：二君齐恶傲威，诚信岨绝，防风之戮，将谁归乎？ 
现代文：你二人都厌恶淫威，诚信阻断，防风那样的杀戮，将归罪于谁呢? 
English: Both of you detest arrogance, block honesty, and prevent wind-like killing. Who will be blamed?

古文：宪神色侃然，泣而对曰： 臣等世荷晋荣，恩遇隆重。
现代文：裴宪神色从容，哭着回答说： 我们世代享受晋的荣耀，恩典礼遇隆重。
English: Pei Xian looked calm and replied with tears: Our generation has enjoyed the glory of Jin, and has been treated with great grace and courtesy.

古文：王浚凶粗丑正，尚晋之遗籓。
现代文：王浚凶蛮粗野，但还是晋遣留下来的藩国。
English: Wang Jun was a savage and rude man, but he was still sent back to the domain.

古文：虽欣圣化，义岨诚心。
现代文：我虽然为圣明教化欢欣，但义阻碍我的诚心。
English: Although I rejoice in the enlightenment, righteousness hinders my sincerity.

古文：且武王伐纣，表商容之闾，未闻商容在倒戈之例也。
现代文：再说武王伐纣，修饰商容的大门，没听说商容参与倒戈反商的事。
English: In addition, Wu Wang Fahu, the gate that embellished Shang Rong, did not hear of Shang Rong's participation in the rebellion against Shang Rong.

古文：明公既不欲以道化厉物，必于刑忍为治者，防风之戮，臣之分也。请就辟有司。 
现代文：大王既然不愿用道来感化万物，必定以残酷作为治理手段，防风那样的杀戮，是我的责任，请把我交官吏依法处置。 
English: Since the great king does not want to use the Tao to inspire all things, he must use cruelty as a means of governance. Killing like a windbreak is my responsibility. Please hand me over to the officials for disposition according to law.

古文：不拜而出。
现代文：不行拜礼就退出。
English: If you can't do the service, quit.

古文：勒深嘉之，待以宾礼。
现代文：石勒很赞许他，用宾客的礼节来对待他。
English: Shearer was full of praise for him, treating him with the courtesy of a guest.

古文：勒乃簿王浚官寮亲属，皆赀至巨万，惟宪与荀绰家有书百余帙，盐米各十数斛而已。
现代文：石勒于是登记王浚的官员亲属的财产，都有数万财富，衹有裴宪和荀绰家中有百余函书，盐米各十几斛而已。
English: Shi Le then registered the property of Wang Jun's official relatives, all of whom had tens of thousands of wealth, including Pei Xian and Zizhe, who had more than a hundred letters and more than a dozen bags of salt rice each.

古文：勒闻之，谓其长史张宾曰： 名不虚也。
现代文：石勒听说此事，对他的长史张宾说： 名不虚传。
English: When Shiller heard about this, he said to his long-time friend Zhang Bin: "The name is not fake.

古文：吾不喜得幽州，喜获二子。 
现代文：我得到幽州没有欢喜，欢喜的是得到遣两个人。 
English: I wasn't happy to get Yuzhou, I was happy to get two people.

古文：署从事中郎，出为长乐太守。
现代文：代理从事中郎，出任长乐太守。
English: He acted as churo (middle steward) and served as chōreki taishō (governor).

古文：及勒僭号，未遑制度，与王波为之撰朝仪，于是宪章文物，拟于王者。
现代文：等到石勒僭越名号，来不及顾及制度，裴宪舆王波为他撰写朝廷礼仪，于是宪章文物，比拟帝王。
English: Wait until Shi Le Yue name, too late to take into account the system, Pei Xian Wang Bo wrote the imperial etiquette for him, so the charter cultural relics, likened to the emperor.

古文：勒大悦，署太中大夫，迁司徒。
现代文：石勒十分高兴，任命他代理太中大夫，升任司徒。
English: Shi Le was very pleased and appointed him as the Acting Vice-Marshal, and he was promoted to the position of tutor.

古文：及季龙之世，弥加礼重。
现代文：季龙时代，更加受礼遇器重。
English: In the Qilong era, it was even more important to be treated with courtesy.

古文：宪有二子：挹、，并以文才知名。
现代文：裴宪有两个儿子：裴挹、裴彀，都因文才知名。
English: Pei Xian had two sons: Pei Xuan and Pei Xuan, both famous for their literary talent.

古文：仕季龙为太子中庶子、散骑常侍。
现代文：裴彀任季龙太子中庶子、散骑常侍。
English: Baekhyun was an illegitimate son of the middle son of the crown prince Qilong, and a samurai.

古文：挹、俱豪侠耽酒，好臧否人物。
现代文：裴挹、裴彀都豪爽侠义沉溺于饮酒，喜好褒贬人物。
English: Pei Xuan and Pei Xuan are both heroic and chivalrous, indulge in drinking, and like to praise and criticize figures.

古文：与河间邢鱼有隙，鱼窃乘马奔段辽，为人所获，鱼诬使己以季龙当袭鲜卑，告之为备。
现代文：与河间邢鱼有矛盾，邢鱼偷骑裴彀的马投奔段辽，被人抓获，邢鱼谎称裴彀派自己来，因季龙要偷袭鲜卑，告诉他们做好准备。
English: There was a conflict with Hema Eelpout. Eelpout secretly rode Pei Lan's horse to Duanliao and was caught. Eelpout falsely claimed that Pei Lan had sent him because Qilong was planning to attack Xianbei. He told them to be prepared.

古文：时季龙适谋伐辽，而与鱼辞正合。
现代文：当时季龙正谋划讨伐段辽，与邢鱼的话正好吻合。
English: At that time, Qilong was planning to attack Liao Duan, which coincided with the words of carp.

古文：季龙悉诛挹、，宪亦坐免。
现代文：季龙杀掉裴挹、裴彀，裴宪也定罪免官。
English: Ji Long killed Pei Yao, Pei Yao, and Pei Xian was also convicted and removed from office.

古文：未几，复以为右光禄大夫、司徒、太傅，封安定郡公。
现代文：不久，又任命他为右光禄大夫、司徒、太傅，封为安定郡公。
English: Not long after, he was also appointed Ukokoroku-dokufu, Sito, and Taifu, and was given the title of stable county governor.

古文：宪历官无干绩之称，然在朝玄默，未尝以物务经怀。
现代文：裴宪历居官位没有业绩名声，然而在朝廷沉默，不曾把官事放在心上。
English: Pei Xian had no reputation for performance throughout his time in office. However, he was silent in the imperial court and never paid attention to his official duties.

古文：但以德重名高，动见尊礼。
现代文：但因为德高望重，一举一动都被尊重礼遇。
English: However, because of the high moral standards, every move is treated with respect and courtesy.

古文：竟卒于石氏，以族人峙子迈为嗣。
现代文：最终死在石氏手中，用族人裴峙的儿子裴迈作为后人。
English: He eventually died at the hands of the Shishi clan, leaving his son Pei Mai, a member of the Pei family, as his heir.

古文：楷长兄黎，次兄康，并知名。
现代文：裴楷长兄裴黎，次兄裴康，都知名。
English: Pei Kai's eldest brother, Pei Li, and his second brother, Pei Kang, are both famous.

古文：康子盾，少历显位。
现代文：裴康的儿子裴盾，年轻历任显赫官位。
English: Pei Kang's son, Pei Dun, rose through the ranks of prominent officials at a young age.

古文：永嘉中，为徐州刺史，委任长史司马奥。
现代文：永嘉年间，任徐州刺史，委任长史司马奥。
English: During the Yongjia era, he was appointed as the chief historian of Xuzhou and appointed the chief historian Simao.

古文：奥劝盾刑杀立威，大发良人为兵，有不奉法者罪便至死。
现代文：司马奥劝裴盾用刑罚诛杀确立威望，大规模征集平民当兵，有不遵守法律的人就判死罪。
English: Simao advised Pei Dun to establish prestige by punitive killings, recruit civilians as soldiers on a large scale, and sentence those who did not abide by the law to death.

古文：在任三年，百姓嗟怨。
现代文：在任三年，百姓怨恨。
English: After three years in office, the people are resentful.

古文：东海王越，盾妹夫也。
现代文：东海王司马越，是裴盾的妹夫。
English: East Sea King Sima Yue is Pei Dun's brother-in-law.

古文：越既薨，骑督满衡便引所发良人东还。
现代文：司马越死后，骑督满衡就带领所征集的平民束还。
English: After Sima Yue's death, the cavalry commander Man Heng led the civilians back.

古文：寻而刘元海遣将王桑、赵固向彭城，前锋数骑至下邳，文武不堪苛政，悉皆散走，盾、奥奔淮阴，妻子为贼人所得。
现代文：不久刘元海派遣将领王桑、趟固出兵彭城，前锋几人到达下邳，文武官员受不了苛政，全都逃散。裴盾、司马奥逃奔到淮阴，妻子儿女被强盗抓获。
English: Soon after, Liu Yuanhai dispatched the general Wang Sang and sent soldiers to Pengcheng from Wugu, and several forwards arrived in Jiaozuo. The civil and military officials could not bear the harsh government and all fled. Pei Dun and Simao fled to Huaiyin, and their wives and children were captured by robbers.

古文：奥又诱盾降赵固。
现代文：司马奥又劝裴盾向赵固投降。
English: Simao also advised Pei Dun to surrender to Zhao Gu.

古文：固妻盾女，有宠，盾向女涕泣，固遂杀之。
现代文：趟固的妻子是裴盾的女儿，受宠，裴盾向女儿哭泣，赵固于是杀了裴盾。
English: Zhaogu's wife was Pei Dun's daughter, and she was favored. Pei Dun cried to her daughter, so Zhao Gu killed Pei Dun.

古文：盾弟邵，字道期。
现代文：裴盾的弟弟裴邵，字道期。
English: Pei Shao, the younger brother of Pei Dun, is a word poet.

古文：元帝为安东将军，以邵为长史，王导为司马，二人相与为深交。
现代文：元帝为安东将军时，任命裴邵为长史，王导是司马，两人交情深厚。
English: When Emperor Yuan was General Anton, he appointed Pei Shao as Changshi and Wang Du as Sima. The two had a deep friendship.

古文：征为太子中庶子，复转散骑常侍，使持节、都督扬州江西淮北诸军事、东中郎将，随越出项，而卒于军中。
现代文：裴邵被征为太子中庶子，又转任散骑常侍，使持节、都督扬州江西淮北诸军事、束中郎将，跟随司马越赴项，死在军中。
English: Pei Shao was enlisted as an illegitimate son of the crown prince, and transferred to the position of horseback riding attendant, so that Ji Jie, the military governor of Yangzhou-Jiangxi-Huaibei, and Sok Zhong Rong, followed Sima Yue to Qian, and died in the army.

古文：及王导为司空，既拜，叹曰： 裴道期、刘王乔在，吾不得独登此位。 
现代文：等到王导为司空，上任后，叹息说： 如果裴道期、刘王乔在，我不能独登这个官位。 
English: After Wang Du became the secretary-general, he sighed and said, "If Pei Dao and Liu Wang Qiao are here, I can't ascend to this post alone.

古文：导子仲豫与康同字，导思旧好，乃改为敬豫焉。
现代文：王导的儿子仲豫与裴康的字相同，王导思念旧日朋友，于是改为敬豫。
English: Wang Du's son Zhong Yu has the same name as Pei Kang. Wang Du misses his old friend, so he changed his name to Jing Yu.

古文：楷弟绰，字季舒，器宇宏旷，官至黄门侍郎、长水校尉。
现代文：裴楷的弟弟裴绰，字季舒，胸怀宽大，官做到黄门侍郎、长水校尉。
English: Pei Kai's younger brother, Pei Kao, nicknamed Ji Shu, was broad-minded and rose to the rank of Huangmen waiter and Changshui school captain.

古文：绰子遐，善言玄理，音辞清暢，泠然若琴瑟。
现代文：裴绰的儿子裴遐，善谈玄理，辞令流畅，清越如琴瑟。
English: Baizhao's son, Baizhao, is good at talking about metaphysics, his words are fluent, and he is as clear as a lyre.

古文：尝与河南郭象谈论，一坐嗟服。
现代文：曾与河南郭象谈论，满座人都佩服。
English: He once talked with the Guozhong of Henan Province and was admired by the entire audience.

古文：又尝在平东将军周馥坐，与人围棋。
现代文：又曾在平束将军周馥那儿跟别人下围棋。
English: He also used to play Go with others at the home of General Zhou Yu of Hiratsu.

古文：馥司马行酒，遐未即饮，司马醉怒，因曳遐堕地。
现代文：周馥的司马劝酒，裴遐没有立即喝，司马醉酒发怒，就把裴遐拉倒在地上。
English: Zhou Qi's steward tried to persuade him to drink, but Pei Qi did not drink immediately. The steward, drunk and angry, pulled Pei Qi to the ground.

古文：遐徐起还坐，颜色不变，复棋如故。
现代文：裴遐慢慢起来回到座位，神色不改，像刚才一样下棋。
English: Baekhyun slowly got up and returned to his seat, his expression unchanged, playing chess as he had just done.

古文：其性虚和如此。
现代文：他的性格就是这样虚心平和。
English: His personality is so open-minded and peaceful.

古文：东海王越引为主簿，后为越子毗所害。
现代文：东海王司马越请他任主簿，后来被司马越的儿子司马毗杀害。
English: The East Sea king Sima Yue asked him to be the chief accountant, and later he was killed by Sima Yue's son Sima Pi.

古文：初，裴、王二族盛于魏晋之世，时人以为八裴方八王：徽比王祥，楷比王衍，康比王绥，绰比王澄，瓚比王敦，遐比王导，頠比王戎，邈比王玄云。
现代文：当初，裴、王两个家族在魏晋时代很兴旺，那时的人认为八个姓裴的正好比拟八个姓王的：裴徽比王祥，裴楷比王衍，裴康比王绥，裴绰比王澄，裴瓒比王敦，裴遐比王导，裴愿比王戎，裴邈比王玄。
English: At first, the two families of Pei and Wang were very prosperous in the Wei and Jin dynasties. At that time, people thought that the eight surnames of Pei were exactly comparable to the eight surnames of Wang: Pei Hui than Wang Xiang, Pei Kai than Wang Yan, Pei Kang than Wang Qi, Pei Cao than Wang Cheng, Pei Jian than Wang Dun, Pei Jian than Wang Du, Pei Jian than Wang Rong, Pei Jian than Wang Xuan.

古文：史臣曰：周称多士，汉曰得人，取类星象，颉颃符契。
现代文：史臣曰：周朝被认为士子众多，汉朝称为得到贤人，用星象类比，与符命相应。
English: Shichen said: the Zhou Dynasty was considered to have a large number of scholars, and the Han Dynasty was called to have sages, using the star analogy, corresponding to the fate.

古文：时乏名流，多以干翮相许，自家光国，岂陈骞之谓欤！
现代文：当时缺乏名流，多用骨干一辞相赞许，自家光耀国家，难道说的是陈骞吗?
English: At that time, there was a lack of celebrities, and many people praised each other with a backbone, and their own family shined at the top of the country. Was it Chen Xi who said that?

古文：秀则声盖朋僚，称为领袖。
现代文：裴秀的名声超过同僚，称为领袖。
English: Pei Xiu's reputation surpasses that of his colleagues and he is known as a leader.

古文：楷则机神幼发，目以清通。
现代文：裴楷年少时就机智神奇，清远通达。
English: When he was young, Baikai had a magical wit and was able to see far and wide.

古文：俱为晋氏名臣，良有以也。
现代文：都是晋代名臣，确实如此啊!
English: They are all famous ministers of the Jin Dynasty, that's for sure!

古文：赞曰：世既顺才，才膺世至。
现代文：赞曰：乱世出英才，英才集而世安。
English: Zang said: "Out of the chaos of the world comes excellence, and when excellence is gathered, the world is safe."

古文：高平沈敏，蕴兹名器。
现代文：高平公沉着聪明，终成大器。
English: Gao Ping Gong is calm and clever, and will eventually become a great man.

古文：钜鹿自然，亦云经笥。
现代文：钜鹿郡公裴秀自然，博通经学。
English: Gongpei Xiu of Elk County is a natural, well-rounded student of economics.

古文：娲皇炼石，晋图开秘。
现代文：娲皇炼石补天，晋代图籍揭开奥秘。
English: Emperor Qian's refining of stone to replenish the heavens, and the discovery of the secrets of the Jin Dynasty.

古文：頠有清规，承家来媚。
现代文：裴颠有清规，继承家业受到爱戴。
English: Pei Bibo has clear rules and is loved for inheriting the family business.

