古文：古者国有危难，君简贤能而任之，齐三日，入太庙，南面而立，将北面，太师进钺于君。君持钺柄以授将，曰： 从此至军，将军其裁之。 
现代文：从古至今，大凡国家遇有危难，国君会选拔贤德之人作将帅以解救国难。出征前，斋戒三日，进至太庙告祭列祖列宗，国君面南而站，将帅面北而立，太师双手奉上大斧，国君接过大斧，手持斧柄授给将帅说： 从现在开始，部队由您指挥。 
English: From ancient times to the present, when a great country is in danger, the sovereign will select a virtuous person to be the commander-in-chief to save the country. Before setting out, fast for three days, go to the Imperial Temple to offer sacrifices to the ancestors, the sovereign stands facing south, the commander-in-chief faces north, the grandmaster hands over a large axe, the sovereign takes over the large axe and hands the axe handle to the commander-in-chief and says: From now on, the troops will be commanded by you.

古文：复命曰： 见其虚则进，见其实则退。
现代文：然后，国君接着说： 作战时，见敌人势弱则进击，见敌人实力强固则以退为主。
English: Then, the sovereign went on to say, "During battle, when you see the enemy is weak, you attack, and when you see the enemy is strong, you retreat."

古文：勿以身贵而贱人，勿以独见而违众，勿恃功能而失忠信。
现代文：不能因为自己身居高位而看轻别人，也不要因为自己意见独特而听不进部下的意见，不可以凭借自己功绩显赫就失去人忠信本分的品质。
English: You should not look down on others because you are in a high position, nor should you not listen to the opinions of your subordinates because of your unique opinions, and you should not lose the quality of loyalty and duty by virtue of your outstanding achievements.

古文：士未坐勿坐，士未食勿食，同寒署，等劳逸，齐甘苦，均危患，如此则士必尽死，敌必可亡。 
现代文：部下还没有坐下来休息时，身为将帅不能自己先坐下来休息，部下还没有吃饭时，身为将帅也不要首先进餐，应该与部下同寒暑，等劳逸，齐甘苦，均危患，做到了这一切，手下的将士必会竭尽全力，敌人也一定会被打败 。
English: When his subordinates have not yet sat down to rest, as a general, he cannot sit down and rest by himself. When his subordinates have not yet eaten, as a general, he should not eat first. He should be with his subordinates in cold and heat, work and rest, suffer and suffer, and be in danger. Having done all this, his subordinates will do their best, and the enemy will be defeated.

古文：将受词，凿凶门，引军而出，君送之，跪而推毂，曰： 进退惟时，军中事不由君命，皆由将出。 
现代文：将帅听完国君的训命后，宣誓效忠，然后亲自打开凶门，率军出征。国君把出征的军队送到北门，向将帅乘用的车马跪拜同时又说： 将在外，不受君命。从今天起，军队中的一切行动都由您来决策 。
English: After listening to the command of the sovereign, the commander-in-chief swore allegiance, and then personally opened the gate and led the army to go to war. The sovereign sent the army to the north gate, bowed to the chariot and horse used by the commander-in-chief, and said: "I will be outside, I will not be ordered by the sovereign. From today, all actions in the army will be decided by you."

古文：若此，则无天于上，无地于下，无敌于前，无主于后。是以智者为之虑，勇者为之斗，故能战胜于外，功成于内，扬名于后世，福流于子孙矣。
现代文：这样，将帅就具有了绝对的权威，也可以使智谋之人为之献策，使勇犯之人为之效命沙场。由此，可以百战百胜，立下汗马功劳，也能扬名于后世，福泽恩及子孙。
English: In this way, the commander-in-chief has absolute authority, and can also make the wise man offer advice, and make the brave criminal serve the battlefield. As a result, it is possible to win a hundred victories, make hard work, and also be famous in future generations, for the benefit of their children and grandchildren.

