古文：孔靖孔琳之殷景仁季恭始察孝廉，累迁司徒左西掾，未拜，遭母忧。
现代文：孔季恭最初被举为孝廉，逐步升迁为司徒左西掾，尚未授官，遭到了母亲的丧事。
English: Kong Qigong was initially raised as a filial son, and gradually promoted to the position of a scholar. However, he has not yet been given an official post, and his mother has passed away.

古文：隆安五年，被起爲山阴令，不就。
现代文：隆安五年被起用为山阴令，没去上任。
English: In the fifth year of Long'an's reign, he was appointed to the position of Shanyin Rong, but did not take up the post.

古文：宋武帝东征孙恩，屡至会稽，过季恭宅，季恭正昼卧，有神人衣服非常，谓曰： 起！天子在门。 
现代文：宋武帝东征孙恩，屡次到会稽，前往孔季恭的宅院，孔季恭白天正在睡觉，有一个神人衣服不同平常，对他说： 起来，天子在你家门前！ 
English: Emperor Songwu's expedition to conquer the East, led by Sun En, made repeated visits to the court, and went to Kong Qigong's mansion. Kong Qigong was sleeping during the day, and there was a god-man dressed in unusual clothes. He said to him: "Arise, son of heaven, before your door!

古文：既而失之，遽出，适见帝，延入结交，执手曰： 卿后当大贵，愿以身爲托。 
现代文：随后就消失了，他马上出去，正好见到了武帝，请进家中结交为友，拉着他的手说： 您以后一定会大贵，我愿意以身相托。 
English: Then he disappeared. He went out immediately, just in time to see Emperor Wu. Please come into the house to make friends, take his hand and say: You will certainly be very valuable in the future. I am willing to entrust myself to you.

古文：于是曲意礼接，赡给甚厚。
现代文：于是曲意以礼相待，供给十分丰厚。
English: As a result, they treated each other with courtesy, and the supply was very plentiful.

古文：帝后讨孙恩，时桓玄篡形已着，帝欲于山阴建义。
现代文：武帝后来讨伐孙恩，当时桓玄篡权的形迹已经很明显，武帝打算在山阴建立义军。
English: Emperor Wu later fought against Sun En. At that time, signs of Kuan Xuan's usurpation of power were already evident, and Emperor Wu planned to establish a rebel army in the mountains.

古文：季恭以山阴路远，且玄未居极位，不如待其篡后，于京口图之，帝亦以爲然。
现代文：孔季恭认为山阴路远，而且桓玄尚未占据极位，不如等他篡权以后，在京口对付他，武帝也认为应该这样。
English: Kong Qigong thought that the mountain was far away, and that Huan Xuan had not yet occupied the highest position. It would be better to wait for him to usurp power and deal with him in Beijing. Emperor Wu also thought that this should be the case.

古文：时虞啸父爲会稽内史，季恭求爲府司马不得，乃出诣都。
现代文：当时虞啸父做会稽内史，孔季恭请求担任府中的司马，没有得到，于是便出去前往京城。
English: At that time, Gu Xiao's father was doing the internal history of the audit committee, Kong Jiqong asked to serve as the secretary of the government, but did not get it, so he went to the capital.

古文：及帝定桓玄，以季恭爲会稽内史，使齎封板拜授，正与季恭遇。
现代文：等武帝平定了桓玄，任命孔季恭为会稽内史，派人带着封板前往授职，正与孔季恭遇上。
English: Emperor Wu had subdued Kuan Xuan, appointed Kong Jikang as the internal history auditor of the association, and sent someone with a seal to confer the position. He was meeting Kong Jikang.

古文：季恭便回舟夜还，至即叩扉入郡。
现代文：孔季恭便回舟夜还，到了以后就敲门进入郡府衙门。
English: Kong Qigong went back to the boat at night, and when he arrived, he knocked on the door to enter the county government gate.

古文：啸父本爲桓玄所授，闻玄败，开门请罪。
现代文：虞啸父本来是由桓玄所任命的，听说桓玄失败，开门请罪。
English: Yu Xiao's father was originally appointed by Huan Xuan. When he heard that Huan Xuan had failed, he opened the door and pleaded guilty.

古文：季恭慰勉，使且安所住，明日乃移。
现代文：孔季恭对他进行安慰和勉励，让他暂且呆在所住的地方，明日再转任。
English: Kong Jikong consoled and encouraged him to stay where he lived for the time being, and to change his post tomorrow.

古文：季恭到任，厘整浮华，翦罚游惰，由是境内肃清。
现代文：孔季恭到任后，整顿浮华，铲除、惩罚游逛和懒惰的人，由此境内秩序肃静清平。
English: After Kong Jikong took office, he rectified the pompousness, eradicated and punished the loiterers and lazy people, and thus the domestic order was quiet and calm.

古文：累迁吴兴太守，加冠军。
现代文：逐渐升迁为吴郡太守，担任冠军将军。
English: He was gradually promoted to the governor of Wu County and served as the champion general.

古文：先是吴兴频丧太守，言项羽神爲卞山王，居郡听事，二千石常避之。
现代文：在这以前吴郡频频地出现太守丧亡，说是项羽神做了卞山王，住在郡中处理政事，二千石官员常常避开他。
English: Prior to this, the death of the eunuch had frequently occurred in Wu County. It was said that Xiang Yu Shen had become the king of Lushan and lived in the county to deal with political affairs. Officials of 2,000 koku often avoided him.

古文：季恭居听事，竟无害也。
现代文：孔季恭坐在里面处理政务，竟然平安无事。
English: Kong Qigong was sitting inside, handling government affairs, and it turned out to be safe.

古文：迁尚书左仆射，固让。
现代文：调任尚书左仆射，他坚持推让。
English: When he was transferred to the position of Shang Shuxu's second-in-command, he insisted on making concessions.

古文：义熙八年，复爲会稽内史，修饰学校，督课诵习。
现代文：义熙八年，重新担任会稽内史，修整学校，督促检查教学。
English: In the eighth year of the reign of Emperor Yixi, he resumed his duties as the internal history auditor of the association, reorganized the school, and urged the inspection of teaching.

古文：十年，复爲右仆射，又让不拜。
现代文：十年，重新担任右仆射，又推让没有接受。
English: Ten years later, he was reinstated as a right-handed shooter, but he did not accept the offer.

古文：除领军，加散骑常侍。
现代文：任命为领军，兼散骑常侍。
English: He was appointed as the leader of the army, as well as a samurai.

古文：十二年致仕，拜金紫光禄大夫。
现代文：义熙十二年离休，封为金紫光禄大夫。
English: He retired in the 12th year of the reign of Emperor Yixi and was given the title of Jin Zi Guanglu Doctor.

古文：是岁，武帝北伐，季恭求从，以爲太尉军谘祭酒。
现代文：这一年，武帝北伐，孔季恭请求跟随前往，让他担任太尉军咨祭酒。
English: In that year, Emperor Wu was on the Northern Expedition, and Kong Jigong asked him to accompany him, and let him serve as the captain of the military ceremony.

古文：从平关、洛。
现代文：随从平定关中、洛阳。
English: Followed by Pingding Guanzhong, Luoyang.

古文：至德元年卒，年七十馀。
现代文：宋台初建，任命他为尚书令，又推让，于是任命为侍中、特进、左光禄大夫。
English: Song Dynasty was first built, appointed him as Shang Shuling, and then pushed him aside, so he was appointed as a chamberlain, a special envoy, and a doctor of the Left Guanglu.

古文：有集十五卷，弹文四卷。
现代文：后来辞职东归，武帝亲自到戏马台为他设宴送行，各位官员都赋诗描述他的德才之美。
English: There are fifteen volumes of collected works and four volumes of music.

古文：子绍安、绍薪、绍忠。绍忠字孝扬，亦有才学，位太子洗马、鄱阳王东曹掾。
现代文：等武帝接受天命登上帝位，加封他为开府仪同三司，推让多年都不接受，去世以后，便以此作为对他的追赠。
English: Emperor Wu accepted the heavenly mandate to ascend to the throne of God, and he was awarded the title of Kaifu Yi and Sanji, but he did not accept it for many years. After his death, he used it as a posthumous gift to him.

古文：孔琳之字彦琳，会稽山阴人也。
现代文：○孔琳之孔琳之，字叫彦琳，会稽山阴县人。
English: ○ Konglin of Konglin, the character is called Hikorin, and is from Sangin County.

古文：曾祖群，晋御史中丞。
现代文：曾祖孔群，是晋朝的御史中丞。
English: Zengzu Kongqun was the imperial historian of the Jin Dynasty.

古文：祖沈，丞相掾。
现代文：祖父孔沈，是丞相掾。
English: His grandfather, Kong Shen, was chancellor of the Joseon Dynasty.

古文：父廞，光禄大夫。
现代文：父亲孔貵，是光禄大夫。
English: His father, Kong Xuan, was a doctor in Guanglu.

古文：琳之强正有志力，少好文义，解音律，能弹棋，妙善草隶。
现代文：孔琳之坚强正直有志向，少年时代喜爱文章，懂音律，能下棋，善于写一笔极妙的草隶。
English: Kong Lin is strong, honest, and ambitious. As a boy, he loved to write, knew music, could play chess, and was good at writing a wonderful essay.

古文：桓玄辅政爲太尉，以爲西合祭酒。
现代文：桓玄辅佐朝政担任太尉，任用他为西阁祭酒。
English: Kangensuke, an aide-de-camp to the Emperor, was appointed to the position of Taijo (second lieutenant), and he was appointed as the brewer of the Saigakusai sake.

古文：玄时议欲废钱用谷帛，琳之议曰：
现代文：桓玄当时议论打算废除钱币而用谷帛代替，孔琳之发表议论说：
English: At the time, Kuan Xuan was discussing plans to abolish coins and replace them with the guzheng. Kong Linzhi made the following comment:

古文：洪范八政，以货次食，岂不以交易之所资，爲用之至要者乎。
现代文： 《洪范》中讲八政，把财货仅次于食物，难道不是因为交易所用的手段，是一种极重要的实用物品么？
English: "Hong Fan" talks about the eight principles of politics, and the goods are second only to food. Isn't it because the means used in the exchange is a very important practical item?

古文：故圣王制无用之货，以通有用之财，既无毁败之费，又省难运之苦，此钱所以嗣功龟贝，历代不废者也。
现代文：所以圣王制造出无用的货币，用来流通有用的财物，既没有毁坏的耗费，又省去了难以运输的苦处，这正是钱之所以能继承龟甲贝壳的地位，历代都不废弃的原因。
English: Therefore, the holy king made useless money to circulate useful property, which not only avoided the cost of material destruction and damage, but also saved the trouble of difficult transportation. This is the reason why money plays a role after the tortoise shell and cannot be abolished in all ages.

古文：谷帛爲宝，本充衣食，今分以爲货，则致损甚多，又劳烦于商贩之手，耗弃于割截之用，此之爲弊，着于自曩。
现代文：谷帛成为宝贝，本来是因为它可以做为衣食，现在再分出一个功能作货币，则带来很多损害，又烦琐地经由商贩的手，在割截使用之中耗费抛舍，这些弊端，自古时候就是很明显的。
English: The reason why the guqin became a treasure was originally because it could be used for food and clothing, but now it has been separated into a function of money, which brings a lot of damage, and it is cumbersome to pass through the hands of merchants, and it is wasteful to discard it during use. These drawbacks have been obvious since ancient times.

古文：故锺繇曰： 巧僞之人，竞湿谷以要利，制薄绢以充资。 
现代文：所以钟繇说： 取巧伪诈的人，竞相弄湿谷物以捞取好处，织造稀薄的帛以充当货币。 
English: So Zhong Qi said: "Craftsmen compete in wetting grain to gain benefits and weaving thin cocoons to serve as currency.

古文：魏世制以严刑，弗能禁也。
现代文：魏朝的时候曾用严厉的刑罚加以管制，也不能够禁止。
English: The Wei Dynasty used severe punishment to restrict it, but it could not be banned.

古文：是以司马芝以爲 用钱非徒丰国，亦所以省刑 。
现代文：所以司马芝认为 用钱贸易不仅可以富国，也是减少刑罚的方法 。
English: Therefore, Sima Zhi believed that using money to trade can not only enrich the country, but also reduce the penalty method.

古文：今既用而废之，则百姓顿亡其利，是有钱无粮之人，皆坐而饥困，此断之之弊也。
现代文：现有已经用了而又废除它，则老百姓马上就要失去用它的利益，这样有钱无粮的人，都会因此而饥饿窘困，这是截断它的弊端。
English: If the existing one has been used and then abolished, the common people will immediately lose the benefits of using it. People who have money and no food will all be hungry and distressed as a result. This is the drawback of cutting it off.

古文：魏明帝时，钱废谷用四十年矣，以不便于人，乃举朝大议，精才达政之士，莫不以爲宜复用钱。
现代文：魏明帝的时候，废除钱币而使用谷物实行了四十年，因为对人们不方便，于是整个朝廷议论大起，精通经济明达政治的士人，莫不认为应该重新使用钱币进行贸易。
English: At the time of Emperor Wei Ming, the abolition of coins and the use of grain was implemented for forty years, because it was inconvenient for people, so the whole court started a big discussion. Scholars who were well versed in economics and politics did not think that coins should be used again for trade.

古文：彼尚舍谷帛而用钱，足以明谷帛之弊着于已试也。
现代文：他们尚且舍弃谷帛而使用钱币，足以证明使用谷帛的弊端在过去的试验中已经很显著了。 
English: The fact that they also used money instead of grain money is enough to prove that the drawbacks of using grain money have been very significant in past experiments.

古文：玄又议复肉刑，琳之以爲：
现代文：桓玄又谈论恢复肉刑，孔琳之认为：
English: Kuan Xuan also talked about the resumption of corporal punishment, and Kong Linzhi said:

古文：唐虞象刑，夏禹立辟，盖淳薄既异，致化不同。
现代文： 唐尧虞舜时代以特异的服饰象征五刑，夏禹时代建立刑法是因为世风淳厚浇薄的不同，导致教化手段的不同。
English: In the era of Tang Dynasty and Yu Dynasty, the five punishments were symbolized by special clothing. The establishment of criminal law in the era of Xia Yu was due to the difference in social customs, which led to the difference in the means of enlightenment.

古文：书曰 世轻世重 ，言随时也。
现代文：《尚书》中说 要根据世道来定刑罚轻重 ，是说要随着时代而变化。
English: "Shangshu" says that the severity of punishment should be determined according to the world, which means that it should change with the times.

古文：夫三代风纯而事简，故罕蹈刑辟，季末俗巧而务殷，故动陷宪网。
现代文：夏商周三代风俗淳厚、事情简单，所以很少触犯刑法。末代风俗机巧而事务繁多，所以常常陷入法网。
English: In the third generation of Xia merchants, the customs were simple and the affairs were simple, so they rarely violated the criminal law. In the last generation, the customs were clever and the affairs were many, so they often fell into the net of the law.

古文：若三千行于叔世，必有踊贵之尤，此五帝不相循法，肉刑不可悉复者也。
现代文：如果孔门的三千弟子处在乱世，必然会有用刑太多的指责，这正是五帝不互相因循效法，肉刑不可全部恢复的原因。
English: If the three thousand disciples of Confucius are in a chaotic world, there will inevitably be accusations of using too much punishment. This is precisely the reason why the five emperors do not follow each other's example and why physical punishment cannot be fully restored.

古文：汉文发仁恻之意，伤自新之路莫由，革古创制，号称刑厝；然名轻而实重，反更伤人。
现代文：汉文帝发了仁慈恻隐之心，感伤犯人没有自新的道路，改革古代的办法，创立新制度，号称刑措；然而名义上轻而实际上重，反而更加伤害人。
English: Emperor Hanwen sent out benevolence and compassion, sentimental prisoners did not have a path of self-renewal, reformed ancient methods, created a new system, known as punitive measures; however, it was nominally light but actually heavy, but it hurt people more.

古文：故孝景嗣位，轻之以缓，缓而人慢，又不禁邪。
现代文：所以孝景帝继承皇位，用宽缓的措施来减轻它，宽缓则人们怠慢，又不能禁止邪恶。
English: Therefore, Emperor Xiaojing inherited the imperial throne and used lenient measures to alleviate it. However, leniency means that people are negligent, and evil cannot be prohibited.

古文：期于刑罚之中，所以见美于昔，历代详论而未获厥中者也。
现代文：当时希望能找到适中的刑法，因而受到过去人们的称赞，历代详加讨论而没有获得适当的措施。
English: At that time, it was hoped to find a moderate criminal law, so it was praised by people in the past, and it was discussed in detail for generations without obtaining appropriate measures.

古文：兵荒已后，罹法更多，弃市之刑，本斩右趾，汉文一谬，承而弗革，所以前贤怅恨，议之而未辩。
现代文：兵乱发生以后，遇到的刑法更多，弃市的刑法，本来是截断右脚的脚趾，汉文帝发生谬误，后世继承而不加以改革，以前的贤者因此十分遗憾，进行了议论而没有深入辨析。
English: After the outbreak of the civil war, more criminal laws were encountered. The criminal law of abandoning the city was originally to cut off the toe of the right foot. Emperor Hanwen made a mistake and inherited it from future generations without reforming it. Therefore, the former sages were very sorry and discussed it without in-depth analysis.

古文：锺繇、陈群之意虽小有不同，欲以右趾代弃市。
现代文：钟繇、陈群的意思虽然小有不同，都是企图以截断右趾代替弃市。
English: Although the meanings of Zhongqi and Chenqun are slightly different, they are all attempts to cut off the right toe instead of abandoning the city.

古文：若从其言，则所活者衆矣。
现代文：如果依照他们的话去办，那么所救活的人就多了。
English: If we do what they say, then more people will be saved.

古文：降死之生，诚爲轻法，可以全其性命，蕃其産育，仁既济物，功亦益衆。
现代文：降低死罪让犯人能够生存，的确是较轻的刑法，可以保全他的生命，增加他的产育，仁慈既可以对人生有利，功劳也可以有益于大众。
English: Reducing the death penalty so that the prisoner can survive is indeed a lighter criminal law, which can save his life and increase his breeding. Kindness can be beneficial to life, and merit can also benefit the public.

古文：又今之所患，逋逃爲先，屡叛不革，宜令逃身靡所，亦以肃戒未犯，永绝恶原。
现代文：又现在所忧虑的，罪犯逃亡是第一项，屡次逃跑而不悔改的，应该让他们无处可逃，也以此警诫没有犯罪的人，永远根绝罪恶的根源。
English: And what is of concern now is that the escape of criminals is the first item, and those who repeatedly escape and do not repent should let them have nowhere to escape, and this is also a warning to those who have not committed crimes, and forever eradicate the root cause of evil.

古文：至于馀条，宜且依旧。
现代文：至于其余各条，应该仍然依据过去的法律。 
English: As for the remaining articles, they should still be based on the previous law.

古文：玄好人附悦，而琳之不能顺旨，是以不见知。
现代文：桓玄喜欢别人附和逢迎，而孔琳之不能顺从他的意旨，所以不被赏识。
English: Kuan Xuan likes others to agree with him, but Kong Linzhi cannot follow his wishes, so he is not appreciated.

古文：累迁尚书左丞，扬州中从事史，所居着绩。
现代文：逐步调任尚书左丞、扬州中从事史，所在之处都有显著的政绩。
English: He was gradually transferred to Shangshuzhanzhong and Yangzhou Middle School for History, and achieved remarkable political achievements wherever he was.

古文：时责衆官献便宜，议者以爲宜修庠序，恤典刑，审官方，明黜陟，举逸拔才，务农简调。
现代文：当时责成各级官吏献计提出应该办理的事情。有人提议应该修缮地方学校，减缓国家刑法，审察官员表现，明确升降标准，举荐隐逸，提拔人才，加强农业，减轻税收。
English: At that time, officials at all levels were instructed to make suggestions on what should be done. It was suggested that local schools should be repaired, the national criminal law should be relaxed, the performance of officials should be reviewed, promotion standards should be clarified, people should be recommended, talents should be promoted, agriculture should be strengthened, and taxes should be reduced.

古文：琳之于衆议之外，别建言曰：
现代文：孔琳之在众人的议论之外，另有提议说：
English: In addition to the discussion of Kong Linzhi among many people, another proposal said:

古文：夫玺印者，所以辨章官爵，立契符信。
现代文： 印玺，是用来辨别官爵，提供凭信依据的。
English: The seal is used to distinguish official ranks and provide a basis for credence.

古文：官莫大于皇帝，爵莫尊于公侯，而传国之玺，历代递用，袭封之印，弈世相传。
现代文：官职没有大于皇帝的，爵位没有高于公侯的，而传国的印玺，历代顺次使用，世袭封号的印章，代代相传。
English: No official post is higher than that of the emperor, no title of nobility is higher than that of the prince, and the seal of the country is used successively from generation to generation, and the seal of the hereditary seal is passed down from generation to generation.

古文：贵在仍旧，无取改作。
现代文：可贵处在于保持旧貌，不另外改作。
English: The valuable thing is to keep the old look, not to change it.

古文：今世唯尉一职独用一印，至于内外群官，每迁悉改，讨寻其义，私所未达。
现代文：现在世上只有尉这一官职各自单独使用一种印章，以至朝内外的众官吏们，每次调任都要改换，追寻其中的含义，自己还没有弄懂。
English: Nowadays, there is only one official post in the world, that of lieutenant, which uses a single seal, so that all officials inside and outside the country have to change every time they are transferred, and they have yet to understand the meaning behind it.

古文：若谓官各异姓，与传袭不同，则未若异代之爲殊也；若论其名器，虽有公卿之贵，未若帝王之重；若以或有诛夷之臣，忌其凶秽，则汉用秦玺，廷祚四百，未闻以子婴身戮国亡而弃不佩。
现代文：如果说是因为官吏各自姓氏不一，与传玺不同，则这还不如不同的时代差别更大；如果论物品有名，它虽然有公卿的尊贵，却没有帝王的重大；如果是因为有的居此职位的大臣受过诛杀，忌讳它的不吉利和晦气，那么汉朝用了秦国的印玺，传位四百年，没有听说因为子婴自身被杀国家灭亡而抛弃不佩。
English: If it is because the officials have different surnames, and it is different from the imperial seal, then this is not as different as the different times; if it is famous, although it has the nobility of the nobles, it does not have the importance of the emperor; if it is because some ministers in this position have been killed, and it is unlucky and unlucky, then the Han Dynasty used the seal of the Qin State, passed down for four hundred years, and it is not heard that it was abandoned because the baby was killed and the country was destroyed.

古文：帝王公侯之尊，不疑于传玺，人臣衆僚之卑，何嫌于即印？
现代文：以帝王公侯的尊贵，并不怀疑传玺，而以大臣众官的卑下，为什么却要嫌弃印章呢？
English: With the dignity of emperors and princes, they do not doubt the transmission of the seal, but with the lowliness of ministers and officials, why do they want to abandon the seal?

古文：载籍未闻其说，推例自乖其准，而终年刻铸，丧功消实，金银铜炭之费，不可称言，非所以因循旧贯，易简之道。
现代文：书籍记载中没有听到过这种说法，引用例证自己违背了准则，而终年不断地在刻铸，费工费料，金银铜炭的消耗，不去说它，关键在于这并不是遵循旧轨、力求简易的做法。
English: This kind of statement has not been heard in the records of books. He cited examples to violate the guidelines, but he continued to engrave all year round. The cost of labor, materials, and the consumption of gold, silver, and copper, not to mention it, the key is that this is not to follow the old track and strive for simplicity.

古文：愚请衆官即用一印，无烦改作，若新置官，又官多印少，文或零失，然后乃铸，则仰裨天府，非唯小益。
现代文：在下请求众位官员都用同一枚印章，不要再费事去改制。如果是新设置的官员，而又官多印少，或者有的文字损毁，然后再铸，那么这对于皇家府库，将补益不小。 
English: I hereby request all officials to use the same seal, and not to bother to change the system. If it is a newly established official, and there are more officials and fewer seals, or some words are damaged and then recast, then this will be a great benefit to the royal treasury.

古文：又曰：
现代文：他又说：
English: He added:

古文：凶门柏装，不出礼典，起自末代，积习生常，遂成旧俗，爰自天子达于庶人。
现代文： 丧事牌楼，并不出自关于礼的典籍，而是起自衰亡的末代，习惯积累，产生常规，于是成为旧的风俗，起自天子直到百姓。
English: Funeral pylons do not come from books on etiquette, but from the decline and fall of the last generation, habits accumulate, produce a routine, and thus become an old custom, from heaven to the people.

古文：诚行之有由，卒革必骇；然苟无关于情，而有愆礼度，存之未有所明，去之未有所失，固当式遵先典，厘革后谬，况复兼以游费，实爲人患者乎。
现代文：如果的确这样实行很有道理，突然改掉必然引起震惊；然而如果是与人情无关，而又违背礼度，保存它也没有什么好处，去掉它也没有什么损失，当然就应该遵守从前的典籍，革除后世的谬误，况且又有许多虚浮的花费，实在是成为人们的一种忧患啊！
English: If this practice is indeed very reasonable, the sudden change is bound to cause shock; however, if it has nothing to do with human feelings, but violates courtesy, there is no benefit in preserving it, and there is no loss in removing it. Of course, we should abide by the previous classics and eliminate the fallacies of future generations. Moreover, there are many wasteful expenses, which is really a kind of sorrow for people!

古文：凡人士丧仪，多出闾里，每有此须，动十数万，损人财力，而义无所取。
现代文：凡是人们的丧葬仪式，大多出在民间，经常都有这种需要，常常要花十几万，损耗人们的财力，而在意义上并无什么可取。
English: All people's funeral ceremonies, mostly in the folk, often have this need, often cost hundreds of thousands, deplete people's financial resources, and in the sense there is nothing to be desired.

古文：至于寒庶，则人思自竭，虽复室如悬罄，莫不倾産单财，所谓 葬之以礼 ，其若此乎？
现代文：至于贫寒的平民人家，则人人都想竭尽自己的能力，即使是房室好像倒悬的钟磬一样空空，也无不倾尽自己的家产和微薄的钱财，所谓 按礼埋葬 ，难道就是像这样的吗？
English: As for the poor common people's homes, everyone wants to do their best, even if the room is as empty as an upside-down bell, they all want to spend their family property and meager money, the so-called ritual burial, is it like this?

古文：谓宜一罢凶门之式。
现代文：我认为应该完全罢免丧事牌楼的仪式。 
English: In my opinion, the ceremony of the funeral arch should be completely abolished.

古文：迁尚书吏部郎。
现代文：后来调他担任尚书吏部郎。
English: Later, he was transferred to the post of secretary.

古文：义熙十一年，除宋武帝平北、征西长史，迁侍中。
现代文：义熙十一年，任命他为宋武帝平北、征西长史，调任侍中。
English: In the eleventh year of the reign of Emperor Yixi, he was appointed to the Song Emperor Pingbei and the Western Conquest Long History, and transferred to the position of chamberlain.

古文：宋台初建，除宋国侍中。
现代文：宋台刚刚建立的时候，任命他为宋国侍中。
English: When the Song Dynasty was just established, he was appointed as a Song State Attendant.

古文：永初二年，爲御史中丞，明宪直法，无所屈桡，奏劾尚书令徐羡之亏违宪典。
现代文：永初二年，担任御史中丞，光明正直维护法令，绝不屈从任何压力，曾奏表弹劾尚书令徐羡之违背法典。
English: In the second year of the Yongchu era, he served as the vice-president of the imperial history, upholding the laws of light and honesty, never yielding to any pressure, and once filed a petition to impeach the violation of the code of laws by Xu Qian.

古文：时羡之领扬州刺史，琳之弟璩之爲中从事，羡之使璩之解释琳之，使停寝其事。
现代文：当时徐羡之兼任扬州刺史，孔琳之的弟弟孔璩之为中从事，徐羡之让孔璩之劝解孔琳之，让他放弃弹劾此事。
English: At that time, Xu Enzhi was also in charge of Yangzhou history, while Kong Linzhi's younger brother, Kong Yingzhi, was engaged in it. Xu Enzhi asked Kong Yingzhi to persuade Kong Linzhi to abandon the impeachment.

古文：琳之不许，曰： 我触忤宰相，政当罪止一身。
现代文：孔琳之不答应，说： 我触犯了宰相，应当是仅只我一人获罪。
English: Kong Lin refused, saying: I have offended the prime minister, I should be the only one to be punished.

古文：汝必不应从坐，何须勤勤邪。 
现代文：你必定不应该跟着连坐，哪里需要这样辛勤游说呢？ 
English: Surely you shouldn't go along with the company, where is the need for such hard lobbying?

古文：自是百僚震肃，莫敢犯禁。
现代文：从这件事百官受到了震惊，没人再敢违犯禁令。
English: Officials were shocked by the incident, and no one dared to violate the ban again.

古文：武帝甚嘉之，行经兰台，亲加临幸。
现代文：武帝非常称赞他，路过兰台时，亲自去看望他。
English: Emperor Wu highly praised him, and went to visit him in person when he was passing by the Orchid Garden.

古文：迁祠部尚书，不事産业，家尤贫素。
现代文：后来调任祠部尚书，不营办财产，家中特别贫寒。
English: Later, he was transferred to the ancestral hall of Shangshu, did not manage property, and his family was particularly poor.

古文：景平元年卒，追赠太常。
现代文：景平元年逝世，追赠为太常。
English: Jingping died in the first year of the year and was posthumously awarded the title of Taizang.

古文：子邈有父风，官至扬州中从事。
现代文：他的儿子孔邈具有他父亲的风格，官职升至扬州中从事。
English: His son Kong Quan followed in his father's footsteps and rose through the ranks of the Yangzhou Middle School.

古文：邈子觊。
现代文：○孔觊
English: ○Hole in the wall

古文：觊字思远，少骨鲠有风力，以是非爲己任。
现代文：孔觊字思远，少年时代正直有气节，把明辨是非作为自己的责任。
English: Confucius was far-sighted and honest in his youth. He regarded it as his responsibility to distinguish right from wrong.

古文：口吃，好读书，早知名。
现代文：他口吃，好读书，很早就知名。
English: He stutters, he's a good reader, he's been famous for a long time.

古文：历位中书黄门侍郎。
现代文：曾任中书黄门侍郎。
English: He was once a waiter at the Huangmen of Zhongshu.

古文：初，晋安帝时，散骑常侍选望甚重，与侍中不异，其后职任闲散，用人渐轻。
现代文：起初，晋安帝的时候，散骑常侍官位很重要，与侍中没有区别，后来职位闲散，用人渐渐变轻。
English: At first, during the reign of Emperor Jinan, the position of straggling equerry was very important, and there was no difference between it and the position of equerry. Later, the position was idle, and the number of employees gradually decreased.

古文：孝建三年，孝武欲重其选，于是吏部尚书顔竣奏以觊及司徒左长史王景文应举。
现代文：孝建三年，孝武帝打算加重它的分量，于是吏部尚书颜竣奏表，建议让孔觊和司徒左长史王景文作为这个职位的人选。
English: In the third year of Xiaojian, Emperor Xiaowu planned to increase its weight, so the personnel department Shang Shouyan finalized the list and suggested that Kong Yao and the chief of the Sidu Left, Shi Wang Jingwen, be the candidates for this position.

古文：帝不欲威权在下，其后分吏部尚书置二人以轻其任。
现代文：孝武帝不想让威权留在下面，此后把吏部尚书分置为两人以减轻它的重要性。
English: Emperor Xiaowu did not want to leave the authority below, so he divided the leadership into two people to reduce its importance.

古文：侍中蔡兴宗谓人曰： 选曹要重，常侍闲淡，改之以名而不以实，虽主意欲爲轻重，人心岂可变邪？ 
现代文：侍中蔡兴宗对别人说： 选才职位重要，常侍职务闲淡，改变的只能是名字而不是事实，虽然君主想安排它们的轻重，人心难道可以改变么？ 
English: The equerry, Cai Xingzong, said to others, "The position of selector is important, but the position of regular attendant is unimportant. The only thing that can be changed is the name, not the fact. Although the monarch wants to arrange their importance, can people's hearts be changed?

古文：既而常侍之选复卑，选部之贵不异。
现代文：随后常侍的职务重又降低，吏部的贵重仍无改变。
English: Subsequently, the duties of the attendants were reduced again, but the importance of the officials remained unchanged.

古文：大明元年，徙太子中庶子，领翊军校尉，历秘书监，廷尉卿，爲御史中丞。
现代文：大明元年，调任太子中庶子，兼任翊军校尉，历经秘书监、廷尉卿，后为御史中丞。
English: In the first year of the Great Ming Dynasty, he was transferred to the position of the prince's illegitimate son, concurrently serving as a lieutenant in the imperial army, and after serving as secretary and courtier, he was later appointed to the position of vice-president of the imperial court.

古文：鞭令史，爲有司所纠，原不问。
现代文：他曾经鞭打令史，被有关部门所检举，宽大没有治罪。
English: He had a history of whipping and was reported by the relevant departments, but there was no punishment.

古文：六年，除安陆王子绥后军长史、江夏内史。
现代文：大明六年，任命为安陆王刘子绥后军长史、江夏内史。
English: In the sixth year of the Ming Dynasty, he was appointed as the military governor of Anlu Wang Liu Zixuan and the governor of Jiangxia.

古文：性使酒仗气，每醉辄弥日不醒，僚类间多所陵忽，尤不能曲意权幸，莫不畏而疾之。
现代文：他性格爱好酗酒任性，每次喝醉了就整天不醒，同僚间多有欺凌轻慢，尤其不能曲意侍奉权要得宠的人物，那些人无不对他又怕又恨。
English: His character is alcoholic and capricious. Every time he gets drunk, he stays awake all day. There is a lot of bullying and belittlement among his colleagues, especially those who can't serve the right to be favored. Those people all fear and hate him.

古文：居常贫罄，无有丰约，未尝关怀。
现代文：他家里经常很贫困，无论盛衰，都不在意。
English: His family was often very poor, and he didn't care whether they prospered or not.

古文：爲府长史，典签谘事，不呼前不敢前，不令去不敢去。
现代文：他做府中的长史，典签咨询事情，他不叫前去不敢前去，他不让离开不敢离开。
English: He does the long history of the government, the signing of the advisory matter, he does not dare to go forward, he does not dare to leave.

古文：虽醉日居多，而明晓政事，醒时判决，未尝有壅。
现代文：虽然喝醉的日子居多，却清楚地了解政治事务，酒醒的时候判决，不曾有过阻滞。
English: Although he was drunk most of the time, he had a clear understanding of political affairs and made decisions when he was sober.

古文：衆咸曰： 孔公一月二十九日醉，胜世人二十九日醒也。 
现代文：众人都说： 孔公一月二十九天醉，胜过世人二十九天醒。 
English: Many people said: Kong Gong got drunk on the 29th day of January, which is better than the world waking up on the 29th day.

古文：孝武每欲引见，先遣人觇其醉醒。性真素，不尚矫饰，遇得宝玩，服用不疑，而他物粗败，终不改易。
现代文：他性格真诚朴素，不喜欢伪装，遇到宝贵的玩物，取用不疑，而其他东西即使粗破，也终不改变。
English: His character is sincere and simple, he does not like disguise, when he encounters valuable toys, he will use them, and other things, even if they are broken, will not change.

古文：时吴郡顾觊之亦尚俭素，衣裘器服皆择其陋者。
现代文：当时吴郡的顾觊之也崇尚节俭朴素，衣裘器服都拣粗陋的。
English: At that time, Gu Xizhi of Wuxi County also advocated frugality and simplicity, and his clothing and utensils were of poor quality.

古文：宋世清俭，称此二人。
现代文：宋代的清素俭朴，要数这两个人。
English: The Song Dynasty's purity, simplicity and frugality can be traced back to these two people.

古文：觊弟道存、从弟徽，颇营産业，二弟请假东还，觊出渚迎之，辎重十馀船，皆是绵绢纸席之属。
现代文：孔觊的弟弟孔道存、堂弟孔徽，经营了很多家产，两个弟弟东归，孔觊前往江中的小沙洲上去迎接他们，货物十余船，都是绵绢纸席之类。
English: Kong Tao's younger brother, Kong Daocun, and his cousin, Kong Hui, managed many family properties. The two younger brothers returned east, and Kong Tao went to a small sandbar in the middle of the river to meet them. There were more than ten cargo ships, all of which were paper seats and the like.

古文：觊见之僞喜，谓曰： 我比乏，得此甚要。 
现代文：孔觊见了以后假装喜欢，对他们说： 我近来很疲乏，很需要这些东西。 
English: After seeing them, Kong Ye pretended to like them and said to them, "I've been very tired lately, and I really need these things."

古文：因命置岸侧，既而正色谓曰： 汝辈忝预士流，何至还东作贾客邪？ 
现代文：于是就吩咐把它们放在岸边，随后脸色严正地对他们说： 你们都属于士人的范围，怎么弄到返回东部来作商人了呢？ 
English: So he ordered them to be placed on the shore, and then, with a stern countenance, he said to them: "You all belong to the realm of the nobles. How did you manage to return to the East to become merchants?

古文：命烧尽乃去。
现代文：命令全部烧尽，然后离去。
English: The order was to burn everything and then leave.

古文：先是，庾徽之爲御史中丞，性豪丽，服玩甚华，觊代之，衣冠器用莫不粗率。
现代文：在这以前，庾徽之做御史中丞，性格豪放俏丽，衣服玩物十分华美，孔觊代替了他的职位，衣帽用具无不粗率。
English: Prior to this, Zou Hui was a middle-ranking official in the Ministry of History. His personality was bold and playful, his clothes and toys were very gorgeous, and he was replaced by Kong Yu. His clothing and hat paraphernalia were all crude.

古文：兰台令史并三吴富人，咸有轻之之意。
现代文：兰台令史和三吴富人，都有轻视的意向。
English: Lantai Lingshi and Sam Wu Rich Man both have the intention to despise.

古文：觊蓬首缓带，风貌清严，皆重迹屏气，莫敢欺犯。
现代文：孔觊蓬乱着头发，松系着带子，风貌清峻严肃，那些人都谨慎惶恐，不敢欺负和冒犯。
English: With their tousled hair and loose braids, and their stern and serious demeanor, those people were wary and afraid, afraid to bully and offend.

古文：庾徽之字景猷，潁川鄢陵人也，后卒于南东海太守。
现代文：庾徽之字景猷，颍川鄢陵人，后来死在南东海太守任上。
English: The character of the national emblem, Jingyao, was born in Jechuan, and later died in the post of governor of the South East China Sea.

古文：觊后爲司徒左长史，道存代觊爲后军长史、江夏内史。
现代文：孔觊后来做了司徒左长史，孔道存代替孔觊为后军长史、江夏内史。
English: Confucius later became the Long History of Stuzha, and Confucius was replaced by Confucius as the Long History of the Later Han and the Long History of Jiangxia.

古文：时东土大旱，都邑米贵，一斗将百钱。
现代文：当时东部大旱，京城米贵，一斗一百钱。
English: At that time, there was a severe drought in the eastern part of the country, and the price of rice in the capital was as high as 100 sen per bucket.

古文：道存虑觊甚乏，遣吏载五百斛米饷之。
现代文：孔道存担心孔觊非常困难，就派下属官员运了五百斛米送给他。
English: Kong Dao Cun was worried that it would be very difficult for Kong Xuan, so he sent subordinate officials to deliver five hundred mu of rice to him.

古文：觊呼吏谓之曰： 我在彼三载，去官之日，不办有路粮。
现代文：孔觊叫来那个官员对他说： 我在那里三年，离职的时候，连路上的粮食也没有备好。
English: "I was there for three years, and when I left, I didn't even have enough food for the journey," the official said.

古文：郎至彼未几，那能得此米邪？
现代文：你到那里不久，怎么能得到这么多米呢？
English: How can you get so much rice so soon after you get there?

古文：可载米还彼。 
现代文：你可以载上米再回到那里去。 
English: You can load up with rice and go back there.

古文：吏曰： 自古以来无有载米上水者，都下米贵，乞于此货之。 
现代文：那官员说： 自古以来没有载米上水的，京城米贵，请求在这里卖掉。 
English: The official said, "Since ancient times, there has been no water to carry rice to the market. Beijing rice is expensive, please sell it here."

古文：不听，吏乃载米而去。
现代文：他不答应，官员只好把米再运回去。
English: He did not agree, and the officials had to ship the rice back again.

古文：永光元年，迁侍中，后爲寻阳王右军长史、行会稽郡事。
现代文：永光元年，调为侍中，后来担任寻阳王右军长史、主管会稽郡事务。
English: In the first year of the Yongguang era, he was transferred to a chamberlain, and later served as the chief historian of the right army of King Guoyang and the head of the county affairs of the audit committee.

古文：明帝即位，召爲太子詹事，遣故佐平西司马庾业爲右军司马，代觊行会稽郡事。
现代文：明帝即位，召他为太子詹事，他派过去的副手平西司马庾业担任右军司马，代替孔觊主管会稽郡事务。
English: When Emperor Ming ascended to the throne, he called him to serve as Prince Zhan's secretary. He sent his former deputy, Pingxi Sima Qianye, to serve as the right-hand army secretary, replacing Kong Qian as the head of the county affairs of the Audit Office.

古文：时上流反叛，上遣都水使者孔璪入东慰劳。
现代文：当时上游反叛，皇上派遣都水使者孔到东部去慰劳。
English: At that time, there was a rebellion in the upper reaches, and the emperor sent the messenger of the capital water, Kong, to the east to offer consolation.

古文：璪至，说觊以废帝侈费，仓储耗尽，都下罄匮，资用已竭；今南北并起，远近离叛，若拥五郡之锐，招动三吴，事无不克。
现代文：孔到了以后，劝告孔觊，说废帝奢侈浪费，仓库的储蓄已经耗尽，京城财物空虚，用品已经用完，现在南北并起，远近叛离，如果率领五郡的精锐，在三吴招兵买马，事情没有不成功的。
English: After Kong arrived, he advised Kong Hao, saying that the wasteful emperor was extravagant and wasteful, the warehouse's savings had been exhausted, the capital's property was empty, supplies had run out, and now the north and south were rising up together, with defections near and far. If he led the elite of the five counties to recruit soldiers in Sanwu, things would not be unsuccessful.

古文：觊然其言，遂发兵驰檄。
现代文：孔觊认为他说得很对。于是就发兵起事，传送讨伐的檄文。
English: Confucius thought that he was quite right. So he sent troops to rise up and conveyed the message of the crusade.

古文：觊子长公，璪二子淹、玄并在都，驰信密报，泰始二年正月，并逃叛东归。
现代文：孔觊的儿子孔长公，孔的两个儿子孔淹、孔玄都在京城，于是派人飞马去给他们秘密报信，泰始二年正月，一起叛逃东归。
English: Kong Changgong, the son of Kong Quan, and Kong's two sons, Kong Duan and Kong Xuan, were both in the capital, so he sent someone on a flying horse to give them a secret message. In the first month of the second year of Taizhi, they defected together and returned to the east.

古文：遣书要吴郡太守顾琛，琛以母年笃老，又密迩建邺，与长子宝素谋议未判。
现代文：孔觊派人送信邀请吴郡太守顾琛，顾琛因为母亲年纪很老，又接近建邺，和长子顾宝素谋议一直未能决定。
English: Confucius sent a messenger to invite Gu Yao, the governor of Wu County, but Gu Yao and his eldest son Gu Baosu could not reach a decision because his mother was very old and close to Jian Yao.

古文：少子宝先时爲山阴令，驰书报琛，以南师已近，朝廷孤弱，不时顺从，必有覆灭之祸。
现代文：少子顾宝先当时做山阴令，驰马送信报告顾琛，认为南面的部队已经接近，朝廷孤弱，不及时顺从，必然会有覆灭的大祸。
English: Younger son Gu Bao was the first to give the order, galloping on horseback to send a report to Gu Yao, believing that the troops in the south were already approaching, that the imperial court was weak, and that if they did not obey in time, there would inevitably be a catastrophe.

古文：觊前锋军已度浙江，琛遂据郡同反。
现代文：孔觊的前锋军队已经渡过浙江，顾琛于是占据本郡一同造反。
English: The vanguard army of Kong Yao had already crossed Zhejiang, and Gu Yao therefore occupied the county and revolted together.

古文：吴兴太守王昙生、义兴太守刘延熙、晋陵太守袁标一时回应。
现代文：吴兴太守王昙生、义兴太守刘延熙、晋陵太守袁标一起响应。
English: Wu Xing Daju Wang Xinsheng, Yixing Daju Liu Yanxi and Jinling Daju Yuan Bian responded together.

古文：庾业既东，明帝即以代延熙爲义兴，以延熙爲巴陵王休若镇东长史。
现代文：庾业东去以后，明帝就让他代替刘延熙为义兴太守，让刘延熙做巴陵王刘休若的镇东长史。
English: After Gongye went to the East, Emperor Ming let him replace Liu Yanxi as Yixing Daju, and let Liu Yanxi be the mayor of the East of the town of Liu Xiu Rong, King of Baling.

古文：业至长塘湖，即与延熙合。
现代文：庾业走到了长塘湖，就与刘延熙互相结合。
English: When Gongye came to the Changtang Lake, he and Liu Yanxi became a couple.

古文：明帝遣建威将军沈怀明东讨，尚书张永系进。
现代文：明帝派遣建威将军沈怀明东下讨伐，尚书张永随后前进。
English: Emperor Ming dispatched Jianwei General Shen Huiming to the eastward crusade, followed by Shangshu Zhang Yong.

古文：巴陵王休若董统东讨诸军。
现代文：巴陵王刘休若督统东讨各路军队。
English: Liu Xiu, the king of Balin, led the army in an east-to-west campaign.

古文：时觊所遣孙昙瓘等军顿晋陵九里，部阵甚盛。
现代文：当时孔觊所派遣的孙昙馞等军队停驻在晋陵的九里，部队的阵容非常盛大。
English: At that time, Sun Yat-sen and other troops dispatched by Confucius were stationed in Jinling's Jiu Li, and the lineup of troops was very grand.

古文：怀明至奔牛，所领寡弱，张永至曲阿，未知怀明安否，退还延陵就休若。
现代文：沈怀明到了奔牛，所率领的军队兵少而且弱，张永到达曲阿，不知道沈怀明是否平安，退还到延陵去跟随刘休若。
English: When Shen Huaiming arrived at Bengniu, the army he led was small and weak. Zhang Yong arrived at Qu'a, did not know whether Shen Huaiming was safe, and returned to Yanling to follow Liu Xiu.

古文：诸将帅咸劝退破冈，休若宣令敢有言退者斩，衆小定。
现代文：诸将帅都劝他退到破冈，刘休若宣布命令敢有说退军的斩首，众人稍微安定了一些。
English: The generals and admirals all advised him to retreat to the broken hill, and if Liu Xiu announced an order to behead those who dared to say that they would withdraw, everyone was a little more stable.

古文：军主刘亮又继至，兵力转集，人情乃安。
现代文：军中主将刘亮又接着来到，兵力转为集中，人心才安定下来。
English: Liu Liang, the commander-in-chief of the army, came next, the troops were concentrated, and the hearts of the people settled down.

古文：时齐高帝率军东讨，与张永等于晋陵九里曲结营，与东军相持。
现代文：当时齐高帝率领军队东讨，与张永等在晋城的九里曲结营，和东军相持。
English: At that time, Emperor Qigong led the army to the East, and camped with Zhang Yong and others in Jincheng's Nine Mile Curve, holding out against the Eastern Army.

古文：上遣积射将军江方兴、南台御史王道隆至晋陵视贼形势，贼帅孙昙瓘、程扞宗、陈景远凡有五城，互相连带。
现代文：皇上派遣积射将军江方兴、南台御史王道隆到晋陵视察贼军的形势，贼帅孙昙馞、程磗宗、陈景远共有五城，互相连带。
English: The emperor dispatched General Jiang Fangxing and Nantai Governor Wang Daolong to Jinling to inspect the situation of the rebel army. The rebel commanders Sun Yat-sen, Cheng Yu-zong and Chen Jingyuan had a total of five cities, which were connected to each other.

古文：扞宗城犹未固，道隆率所领急攻之，俄顷城陷，斩扞宗首。
现代文：程磗宗的城防还不巩固，王道隆率领他所带的兵卒猛烈地攻击，很快就把城攻破了，斩了程磗宗的头。
English: Cheng Xizong's city defense was not yet consolidated. Wang Daolong led his soldiers in a fierce attack and soon broke through the city, beheading Cheng Xizong.

古文：刘亮果劲，便刀楯，乃负楯而进，直入重栅，衆军因之，即皆摧破。
现代文：刘亮果断刚劲，熟悉刀盾，于是便拿着盾前进，直入重重栅栏，众军随在后面，于是全部摧破。
English: Liu Liang was resolute and strong, familiar with the sword and shield, so he took the shield and advanced, straight into the fence, followed by the army, and then destroyed everything.

古文：齐高帝与永等乘胜驰击之，又大破之。
现代文：齐高帝与张永等乘胜追击，又大破敌军。
English: Qigong Emperor and Zhang Yong took advantage of the victory to pursue and defeated the enemy army.

古文：昙瓘因此败走，孔璪与昙生焚仓库，奔钱唐。
现代文：孙昙馞因此败逃，孔与王昙生烧毁了仓库，逃奔钱塘。
English: As a result, Sun Yat-sen was defeated and fled. Kong and Wang Yat-sen burned down the warehouse and fled to Qiantang.

古文：会稽闻西军稍近，将士多奔亡，觊不能复制。
现代文：会稽听说西军越来越近，将士有很多逃亡，孔觊不能再加以控制。
English: The auditor heard that the Western Army was getting closer and closer, that many soldiers had fled, and that Kong Xi could no longer control them.

古文：上虞令王晏起兵攻郡，觊忧遽不知所爲。
现代文：上虞令王晏起兵攻郡城，孔觊很忧虑，不知道该怎么办。
English: Shang Yu ordered Wang Xuan to attack the county seat. Kong Xuan was very worried and did not know what to do.

古文：其夕率千人声云东讨，实趋石赐。遇潮涸不得去，衆叛都尽，门生载以小船，窜于山脊村。
现代文：当天夜里他率领一千人声称要东讨，实际上是开往石，遇到潮水干涸无法离去，军众叛变逃尽，一个随从用一条小船载着他，逃窜到山嵴村。
English: On the same night, he led a thousand people who claimed to be going to the east, but in fact they were going to Shishi. When the tide dried up, they could not leave. The army mutinied and fled. A follower carried him in a small boat and fled to the village of Yamahoko.

古文：村人缚以送晏，晏调曰： 此事孔璪所爲，无豫卿事，可作首辞，当相爲申上。 
现代文：村里的人把他捆起来送给王晏，王晏戏弄他说： 这事是孔干的，和你没有关系，可以写一份自首书，我会替你向上申报的。 
English: The people in the village tied him up and gave him to Wang Yao. Wang Yao teased him and said, "This was done by Kong, it has nothing to do with you. You can write a self-surrender letter, and I will report it to the authorities for you."

古文：觊曰： 江东处分，莫不由身，委罪求活，便是君辈行意耳。 
现代文：孔觊说： 江东事情的策划，无不是由我本身，委罪别人以求活命，就是您这类人的做法了。 
English: Confucius said, "The planning of the events in Jiangdong was all done by myself, and blaming others in order to survive is the practice of people like you.

古文：晏乃斩之东合外。
现代文：王晏于是在东门外将他斩首。
English: Wang Yao then beheaded him outside the east gate.

古文：临死求酒，曰： 此是平生所好。 
现代文：临死的时候他要酒喝，说： 这是我平生的喜好。 
English: As he lay dying, he asked for a drink, saying: "This has been my life's passion.

古文：顾琛、王昙生、袁标等并诣吴喜归罪，喜皆宥之。
现代文：顾琛、王昙生、袁标等都到吴喜那里去认罪，吴喜都宽恕了他们。
English: Gu Gan, Wang Xinsheng, Yuan Biao and others all went to Wu Xi to confess their sins, and Wu Xi forgave them all.

古文：东军主凡七十六人，于阵斩十七人，余皆原宥。觊之起兵也，梦行宣阳门道上，顾望皆丘陵。觊寤，私告人曰： 丘陵者弗平，建康其殆难克。 
现代文：孔觊起兵后，有一次梦见走在宣阳门的道上，回头望去，全是丘陵。孔觊醒来，私下告诉别人说： 丘陵就是不平，建康大概难以攻克。 
English: After he raised an army, Kong Hui once dreamed that he was walking on the road of Xuanyang Gate. Looking back, it was all hills. Kong Hui woke up and privately told others: "Hills are uneven, Jiankang is probably difficult to conquer."

古文：觊弟道存，位黄门吏部郎、南郡太守。
现代文：孔觊的弟弟孔道存，职位是黄门吏部郎、南郡太守。
English: Kong Daozun, the younger brother of Kong Hui, held the positions of Huangmen Librarian and Nan County Governor.

古文：晋安王子勋建僞号，以爲侍中，行雍州事，事败见杀。
现代文：晋安王刘子勋建立伪号，任命他为侍中，主管雍州事务，事情失败后被杀。
English: Liu Zixun, the king of Jin'an, created a false name and appointed him as an attendant, in charge of Yongzhou affairs. He was killed after the affair failed.

古文：殷景仁，陈郡长平人也。
现代文：○殷景仁殷景仁，陈郡长平人。
English: ○Yin JingrenYin Jingren, Chen County Governor Pingren.

古文：曾祖融，晋太常。
现代文：曾祖殷融，是晋朝的太常。
English: Zeng Zu Yin Rong was the first emperor of the Jin Dynasty.

古文：祖茂之，特进、左光禄大夫。
现代文：祖父殷茂之，是特进、光禄大夫。
English: His grandfather, Yin Maozhi, was a special envoy and doctor of Guanglu.

古文：父道裕，早亡。
现代文：父亲殷道裕，早年去世。
English: His father, Yin Daoyu, died at an early age.

古文：景仁少有大成之量，司徒王谧见而以女妻之。
现代文：殷景仁少年时就有宏大的器量，司徒王谧见了，便把女儿嫁给他为妻。
English: When Yin Jingren was a young boy, he had a great potential. When King Stutts saw this, he married his daughter to him.

古文：爲宋武帝太尉行参军，历位中书侍郎。
现代文：他为宋武帝的太尉行参军，曾任中书侍郎。
English: He joined the army as a lieutenant of Emperor Songwu and served as a junior secretary.

古文：景仁不爲文而敏有思致，不谈义而深达理，至于国典朝仪，旧章记注，莫不撰录，识者知其有当世之志也。
现代文：殷景仁不写文章而敏捷多思，不谈礼义而深达情理，至于国家典仪、旧章记载，无不撰录，有眼光的人知道他是有用世志向的。
English: Yin Jingren does not write articles, but is quick and thoughtful. He does not talk about etiquette, but is deeply reasonable. As for national ceremonies and old chapter records, they are all written down. People with vision know that he is useful.

古文：尝建议请百官举才，以所荐能否黜陟，武帝甚知之。
现代文：他曾经建议请百官荐举人才，以所推荐的人是否能干而决定淘汰和录用，武帝对他十分赏识。
English: He once suggested that a hundred officials should be asked to recommend talents, and that the selection and recruitment of the recommended person should be based on their ability. Emperor Wu was very appreciative of him.

古文：少帝即位，补侍中，累表辞让。
现代文：少帝即位，他被补为侍中，多次上表辞让。
English: When the young emperor ascended the throne, he was made an aide-de-camp and had to abdicate several times.

古文：优诏申其请，以爲黄门侍郎，历左卫将军。
现代文：宽厚的诏令满足了他的请求，任命他担任黄门侍郎，历任左卫将军。
English: A generous imperial edict satisfied his request, appointing him as the Yellow Gate chamberlain, the first of the successive left guard generals.

古文：文帝即位，委遇弥厚。
现代文：文帝即位，委任和待遇更加厚重。
English: Emperor Wen ascended the throne, and the appointment and treatment became more substantial.

古文：俄迁侍中，左卫如故。
现代文：很快又升为侍中，左卫职务依旧不变。
English: He was soon promoted to Samurai Junior Officer again, and his position as left guard remained unchanged.

古文：时与王华、王昙首、刘湛四人并爲侍中，以风力局干，冠冕一时，同升之美，近代莫及。
现代文：当时与王华、王昙首、刘湛四人共同为侍中，以风神和才干，为一时的冠冕，共同升迁的美事，近代没有能比得上的。
English: At that time, together with Wang Hua, Wang Xizhou and Liu Zhan, he was an attendant, with the wind god and talent as a temporary crown, and the beauty of the joint promotion could not be matched in modern times.

古文：元嘉三年，车驾征谢晦，司徒王弘入居中书下省，景仁长直，共掌留任。
现代文：元嘉三年，皇帝亲自征讨谢晦，司徒王弘进入中书下省，殷景仁身材长直，共同掌管留守任务。
English: In the third year of the Yuan Jia Dynasty, the emperor personally conscripted Xie Hui, Szu Wanghong entered the Middle and Lower Provinces, and Yin Jingren, who was tall and straight, jointly took charge of the task of staying behind.

古文：晦平，代到彦之爲中领军，侍中如故。
现代文：谢晦被平定，他代到彦之担任中领军，侍中职务依然如故。
English: Xie Yu was subdued, and he took the place of Yan Zhi as the leader of the middle army, and his position as an aide-de-camp remained unchanged.

古文：文帝所生章太后早亡，上奉太后所生苏氏甚谨。
现代文：文帝的生母章太后早年死亡，皇上侍奉太后的生母苏氏非常恭谨。
English: Emperor Wen's birth mother, Empress Dowager Zhang, died at an early age. Emperor Wen's mother, Empress Dowager Su, who served the empress dowager, was very respectful.

古文：六年，苏氏卒，车驾亲往临哭，诏欲遵二汉推恩之典。
现代文：元嘉六年，苏氏去世，皇上亲自前往哭悼，诏令想遵照两汉推恩的旧典。
English: In the sixth year of Yuan Jia, Su died, and the emperor himself went to mourn, and the imperial edict wanted to follow the old code of the two Han Dynasty.

古文：景仁议以爲 汉氏推恩加爵，于时承秦之弊，儒术蔑如，惧非盛明所宜轨蹈。
现代文：殷景仁认为： 汉代推恩加爵，当时是承袭秦朝的弊端，蔑视儒术，怕不是盛明时代所应循蹈的。
English: Yin Jingren thought: The Han Dynasty's promotion of Xiong Jiaxuan, at that time, inherited the drawbacks of the Qin Dynasty and disdained Confucianism, which was not what should be followed in the Shengming era.

古文：晋监二代，朝政之所因，君举必书，哲王之所慎。
现代文：晋朝依照二代，只要是与朝政有关，君主的举措必定要加以记载，所以贤明的君王一定要谨慎。
English: According to the second generation of the Jin Dynasty, as long as it is related to court politics, the monarch's measures must be recorded, so the wise monarch must be cautious.

古文：体至公者悬爵赏于无私，奉天统者每屈情以申制，所以作孚万国，贻则后昆 。
现代文：主持公道的人应该颁发奖赏而不以私情，奉行天统的人常要约束感情而申明制度，以此立诚信于万国，留典则于后世。 
English: Those who preside over justice should award rewards without taking advantage of personal feelings, and those who pursue heavenly principles should often restrain their feelings and affirm the system, so as to establish good faith in all countries, and leave a record for future generations.

古文：上从之。
现代文：皇上听从了。
English: Emperor Dezong accepted his suggestion.

古文：丁母忧，葬竟，起爲领军将军，固辞。
现代文：遭到了母亲的丧事，葬罢以后，被起用为领军将军，他坚持推辞。
English: After his mother's death and funeral, he was appointed as a leading general, but he refused.

古文：上使纲纪代拜，遣中书舍人周赳舆载诣府。
现代文：皇上指示州郡主簿代授，派中书舍人周赳用车把他载上拉到府中。
English: The emperor instructed the deputy chief librarian of the State Library, and sent the librarian Zhou Yu to take him to the capital in a car.

古文：服阕，迁尚书仆射。
现代文：服丧期满后，升为尚书仆射。
English: After the expiration of the mourning period, he was promoted to Shang Shufu.

古文：太子詹事刘湛代爲领军，湛与景仁素善，皆被遇于武帝，俱以宰相许之。
现代文：太子詹事刘湛代替他做领军，刘湛和殷景仁一向友好，都受到武帝的厚遇，都以宰相相许。
English: Prince Zhan Zhi Liu Zhan replaced him as the leader of the army. Liu Zhan and Yin Jingren have always been friendly. Both were well received by Emperor Wu, and both were promised the post of prime minister.

古文：湛常居外任。
现代文：刘湛常常担当外任。
English: Liu Zhan was often in charge of foreign affairs.

古文：会王弘、王华、王昙首相系亡，景仁引湛还朝，共参朝政。
现代文：正赶上王弘、王华、王昙首相继死去，殷景仁便引刘湛回朝，共同参与朝政。
English: Just as the prime ministers Wang Hong, Wang Hua, and Wang Ye passed away, Yin Jingren brought Liu Zhan back to the imperial court to jointly participate in imperial politics.

古文：湛既入，以景仁位遇本不踰己，一旦居前，意甚愤愤。
现代文：刘湛入京后，因为殷景仁的地位本来不超过自己，一旦处在前面，心里非常气愤。
English: After Liu Zhan entered Beijing, because Yin Jingren's status did not exceed his own, once he was in front, he was very angry.

古文：知文帝信仗景仁，不可移夺，乃深结司徒彭城王义康，欲倚宰相之重以倾之。
现代文：他知道文帝信任殷景仁，不可转变，于是便深深结交司徒彭城王刘义康，想倚凭宰相的重位来压过他。
English: He knew that Emperor Wen trusted Yin Jingren and could not be changed, so he made a deep friendship with Liu Yikang, the king of Stubai Pengcheng, and wanted to use his position as prime minister to overpower him.

古文：十二年，景仁迁中书令、护军将军，仆射如故，寻复加领吏部。
现代文：元嘉十二年，殷景仁升为中书令、护军将军，仆射职务依旧，不久又兼管吏部。
English: In the 12th year of the Yuan Jia Dynasty, Yin Jingren was promoted to the position of the middle secretary and the general of the escorting troops. He still held the position of the footman, and soon he also took charge of the cadre department.

古文：湛愈怒，义康纳湛言，毁景仁于文帝，帝遇之益隆。
现代文：刘湛更加愤怒，刘义康听了刘湛的话，在文帝面前毁谤殷景仁，文帝对他却更加器重。
English: Liu Zhan was even more angry. Liu Yikang listened to Liu Zhan's words and slandered Yin Jingren in front of Emperor Wen, but Emperor Wen treated him more seriously.

古文：景仁密陈相王权重，非社稷计，上以爲然。
现代文：殷景仁秘密地陈说了相王的权力太重，对国家不利，皇上认为很对。
English: Yin Jingren secretly said that the king's power was too heavy and detrimental to the country, and the emperor thought it was right.

古文：景仁对亲旧叹曰： 引之令入，便噬人。 
现代文：殷景仁对亲戚和旧友慨叹说： 引荐他入京做官，他反要咬人！ 
English: Yin Jingren lamented to his relatives and old friends, "If you recommend him to go to Beijing to become an official, he will bite you!

古文：乃称疾请解，不见许，使停家养病。
现代文：于是称病请求解职，没有被允许，只让他在家养病。
English: He then claimed to be ill and asked to be relieved of his duties. This was not allowed, and he was only allowed to recover at home.

古文：湛议欲遣人若劫盗者于外杀之，以爲文帝虽知，当不能伤至亲之爱。
现代文：刘湛提议可以派人扮作盗贼在外面把他杀死，认为文帝即使知道，也一定不能伤害最亲的亲人。
English: Liu Zhan suggested that someone could be sent to pretend to be a thief and kill him outside, believing that even if Emperor Wen knew, he would not be able to harm his closest relatives.

古文：上微闻之，徙景仁于西掖门外晋鄱阳主第，以爲护军府。
现代文：皇上暗中听到消息，便把殷景仁迁移到西掖门外的晋朝鄱阳公主府第中，作为护军府。
English: The emperor secretly heard the news and moved Yin Jingren to the middle of the Jin Dynasty Poyang Princess House outside the West Gate to serve as a military garrison.

古文：密迩宫禁，故其计不行。
现代文：紧连着皇宫，所以他们的计谋没有得逞。
English: The palace was right next to it, so their plan didn't work.

古文：景仁卧疾者五年，虽不见上，而密函去来，日中以十数，朝政大小必以问焉。
现代文：殷景仁卧病五年，虽然不见皇上，而秘密信件往来不断，一天中数以十计，朝政大小都要拿来问他。
English: Yin Jingren was bedridden for five years, and although he did not see the emperor, the secret letters continued to come and go, dozens of them a day, and both the imperial court and the government had to ask him about them.

古文：影迹周密，莫有窥其际者。
现代文：行迹周密，没有能发现他们踪迹的。
English: Their movements were so well-planned that no one could find any trace of them.

古文：及将收湛之日，景仁便拂拭衣冠。
现代文：即将抓捕刘湛的那天，殷景仁便拂拭衣冠。
English: On the day Liu Zhan was about to be arrested, Yin Jingren brushed off his crown.

古文：寝疾既久，左右皆不悟其意。
现代文：卧病时间久了，身边的人都不明白他的意思。
English: He had been bedridden for a long time, and the people around him didn't understand what he meant.

古文：其夜，上出华林园延贤堂召之，景仁犹称脚疾，小床舆以就坐，诛讨处分，一皆委之。
现代文：当天夜里，皇上走出华林园延贤堂召见了他，殷景仁仍然称言有脚病，在小坐车里坐下，捕杀事务的布置，全都交他办理。
English: In the evening of the same day, the emperor walked out of the Yanxian Hall of the Hualin Garden to summon him. Yin Jingren still said that he had a foot disease, sat down in a small car, and the arrangement of hunting and killing affairs were all handed over to him.

古文：代义康爲扬州刺史，仆射、吏部如故。
现代文：他代替刘义康做了扬州刺史，仆射、吏部依旧不变。
English: He replaced Liu Yikang to make Yangzhou stabbing history, and the puppeteers and officials remained unchanged.

古文：遣使者授印绶，主簿代拜毕，便觉疾甚，情理乖错。
现代文：派使者授了官印，主簿代为授职以后，便觉得病情加重，情理反常。
English: After the official seal was conferred on the envoy and the official seal was conferred on behalf of the main book, he felt that his illness was aggravated and the situation was abnormal.

古文：性本宽厚，而忽更苛暴，问左右曰： 今年男婚多，女嫁多？ 
现代文：他的性格本来很宽厚，却忽然变得苛暴起来，问左右的人说： 今年是男婚多，是女嫁多？ 
English: His character was originally very generous, but he suddenly became harsh, asking people around him: "Are there more men getting married this year, or more women getting married?"

古文：是冬大雪，景仁乘舆出厅事观望，忽惊曰： 当阁何得有大树？ 
现代文：这年冬天下了大雪，殷景仁乘车从厅堂里出来观望，忽然惊奇地说： 阁房的前面怎么会有大树？ 
English: This winter, there was heavy snowfall. Yin Jingren took a car and came out of the hall to watch. Suddenly, he said in surprise: How can there be a big tree in front of the attic?

古文：既而曰： 我误耳。 
现代文：随后便说： 我搞错了。 
English: Then he said: I made a mistake.

古文：疾笃，文帝谓不利在州，使还住仆射下省。
现代文：病危的时候，文帝说不适合住在州府，让他回来仍然住在仆射下省。
English: When he was critically ill, Emperor Wen said that it was not suitable for him to live in the state capital, and asked him to return to live in Fuxia County.

古文：爲州凡月馀日卒，或云见刘湛爲祟。
现代文：做州刺史共一个多月去世，有人说看到刘湛在作祟。
English: It's been more than a month since Liu Zhan passed away. Some people say they saw Liu Zhan in the act.

古文：追赠侍中、司空，諡曰文成公。
现代文：追赠为侍中、司空，谥号文成公。
English: He was posthumously awarded the titles of Samurai, Jikku, and received the posthumous name of Munenari.

古文：大明五年，孝武行经景仁墓，诏遣致祭。
现代文：大明五年，孝武帝路过殷景仁墓，诏令派人祭祀。
English: In the 5th year of the Daming Dynasty, Emperor Xiaowu passed by the tomb of Yin Jingren and issued an imperial edict to send someone to perform the ritual.

