古文：起屠维赤奋若七月，尽玄黓执徐九月，凡三年有奇。
现代文：起屠维赤奋若七月，尽玄黓执徐九月，一共三年。
English: It has been a total of three years since the beginning of the Tuwei red-hot July and the end of the Xu Xu in September.

古文：元和四年己丑，公元八零九年
现代文：唐宪宗元和四年
English: Tang Xian Zong Yuan and the Four Years

古文：秋，七月，壬戌，御史中丞李夷简弹京兆尹杨凭，前为江西观察使，贪污僭侈。
现代文：秋季，七月，壬戌，御史中丞李夷简揭发京兆尹杨凭原先担任江西观察使时贪赃枉法，过度奢侈。
English: In the autumn of July, Li Yijian, the Vice-Minister of History, exposed the excesses of corruption and extravagance of Jing Zhao, Yin Yang, who had previously served as the Jiangxi Observer.

古文：丁卯，贬凭临贺尉。
现代文：丁卯，宪宗将杨凭贬为临贺县尉。
English: However, Emperor Xianzong demoted Yang Biao to the rank of lieutenant of Linhe County.

古文：夷简，元懿之玄孙也。
现代文：李夷简是李元懿的玄孙。
English: Li Yijian is the great-great-grandson of Li Yuanjun.

古文：上命尽籍凭资产，李绛谏曰： 旧制，非反逆不籍其家。 
现代文：宪宗命令将杨凭的资财田产全部没收，李绛进谏说： 根据惯例，如果不属于谋反叛逆的罪行，便不没收罪犯的家产。 
English: The Constitutional Court ordered the confiscation of all of Yang Biao's assets, property and farmland. Li Shizhen said: According to the usual practice, if it does not belong to the crime of plotting rebellion, the criminal's family property will not be confiscated.

古文：上乃止。凭之亲友无敢送者，栎阳尉徐晦独至蓝田与别。
现代文：于是，宪宗才没有没收杨凭的资财田产。杨凭的亲戚朋友没有敢来送行的，唯独栎阳县尉徐晦来到蓝田，与杨凭辞别。
English: As a result, Emperor Xianzong did not confiscate Yang Biao's wealth and farmland. Yang Biao's relatives and friends did not dare to come to see him off, but only Xuyue, the lieutenant of Shuyang County, came to Lantian to bid farewell to Yang Biao.

古文：太常卿权德舆素与晦善，谓之曰： 君送杨临贺，诚为厚矣，无乃为累乎！ 
现代文：太常卿权德舆平素与徐晦交好，便告诉他说： 你为杨临贺送行，诚然是情谊深厚，但这岂不要使你遭受牵累吗！ 
English: Tai Changqing Quan Deming, who was good friends with Xu Yu, told him: You are seeing off Yang Linhe, and it is true that you have a deep friendship, but shouldn't this be a drag on you?

古文：对曰： 晦自布衣蒙杨公知奖，今日远谪，岂得不与之别！
现代文：徐晦回答说： 我从身为平民时便蒙受杨公的知遇与奖拔，现在他被贬逐远方，我怎么能够不与他告别呢！
English: Xu Yu replied, "Since I was a commoner, I have been favored and praised by Yang Gong. Now that he has been banished far away, how can I not say goodbye to him!"

古文：借如明公它日为谗人所逐，晦敢自同路人乎！ 
现代文：假使您以后被进谗的人斥逐，我敢自视为与您彼此无关的人吗！ 
English: If in the future you are driven out by the invaders, do I dare to consider myself as someone who has nothing to do with you!

古文：德舆嗟叹，称之于朝。
现代文：权德舆赞叹不已，便在朝廷中称扬他。
English: The people of power and virtue were overwhelmed with admiration, and they praised him in the imperial court.

古文：后数日，李夷简奏为监察御史。
现代文：过了几天后，李夷简奏请宪宗任命徐晦为监察御史。
English: A few days later, Li Yi Jianxiao asked Emperor Xianzong to appoint Xu Yu as the inspector of imperial history.

古文：晦谢曰： 晦平生未尝得望公颜色，公何从而取之！ 
现代文：徐晦道谢时说： 我平时不曾以与您谋面，您根据什么选取了我呢！ 
English: When thanking him, Xu Yuya said, "I have never met you before, on what basis did you choose me?"

古文：夷简曰： 君不负杨临贺，肯负国乎！ 
现代文：李夷简说： 你不肯辜负杨临贺，怎么肯辜负朝廷呢！ 
English: Li Yijian said: If you are not willing to live up to Yang Linhe, how can you live up to the imperial court!

古文：上密问诸学士曰： 今欲用王承宗为成德留后，割其德、棣二州更为一镇以离其势，并使承宗输二税，请官吏，一如师道，何如？ 
现代文：宪宗暗中征询诸位翰林学士的意见说： 现在打算任用王承宗为成德留后，从成德分割出德州与棣州两地，再设置一个军镇，以便削弱王承宗的势力，并且让王承宗向国家缴纳两税，向朝廷请求任命官吏，完全像对李师道的措施一样，你们认为怎么样呢？ 
English: Gensong surreptitiously solicited the opinions of all the scholars of Hanlin and said: Now, after appointing Wang Chengzong to Chengde, it is planned to divide Texas and Zhangzhou from Chengde, and then set up a military town in order to weaken Wang Chengzong's power, and let Wang Chengzong pay two taxes to the state and request the appointment of officials from the court, just like the measures against Li Shiduo. What do you think?

古文：李绛等对曰： 德、棣之隶成德，为日已久，今一旦割之，恐承宗及其将士忧疑怨望，得以为辞。
现代文：李绛等人回答说： 德州与棣州隶属成德，为时已久，现在忽然将二州分割出来，恐怕王承宗及其将士的忧虑怀疑、怨恨不满，便能够找到借口了。
English: Li Yao and others replied: "Texas and Zhangzhou have belonged to Chengde for a long time, and now the two states are suddenly separated. I am afraid that Wang Chengzong and his soldiers' worries, doubts, resentment and dissatisfaction will be able to find an excuse.

古文：况其邻道情状一同，各虑它日分割，或潜相构扇。
现代文：况且，相邻各道的情形和他是一样的，相邻各道各自顾虑以后也会遭到分割，或许就要暗中相互连结，彼此煽动了。
English: Moreover, the situation of the neighboring roads is the same as his, and the neighboring roads will be divided after their own concerns, and may be secretly linked to each other and instigated by each other.

古文：万一旅拒，倍难处置，愿更三思。
现代文：假如他们聚兵抗拒朝廷，处理起来会有加倍困难，希望陛下再反复考虑一下。
English: If they join forces to resist the imperial court, it will be doubly difficult to deal with. I hope His Majesty will reconsider.

古文：所是二税、官吏，愿因吊祭使至彼，自以其意谕承宗，令上表陈乞如师道例，勿令知出陛下意。
现代文：有关上缴两税、任命官吏两点是正确的，希望趁着吊祭使前往王承宗处的机会，让吊祭使以个人意见开导王承宗，使他上表陈请按照李师道的成例处理，不让他知道这是出自陛下的意见。
English: The two points about paying two taxes and appointing officials are correct. I hope that you will take advantage of the opportunity to go to Wang Chengzong's office with the envoy, let the envoy enlighten Wang Chengzong with his personal opinion, and ask him to follow the example of Li Shidao, and not let him know that this is from His Majesty's opinion.

古文：如此，则幸而听命，于理固顺，若其不听，体亦无损。 
现代文：这样，假如王承宗幸好听从命令，固然是顺乎情理的；倘若王承宗不肯听从命令，也不会损害朝廷的体面。 
English: Thus, if Wang Chengzong fortunately obeyed the order, it would certainly be reasonable; if Wang Chengzong refused to obey the order, it would not damage the dignity of the imperial court.

古文：上又问： 今刘济、田季安皆有疾，若其物故，岂可尽如成德付授其子，天下何时当平！
现代文：宪宗又询问道： 如今刘济、田季安都身患重病，如果他们一旦去世，难道能够完全像对待成德那样，将节度使的职务交给他们的儿子吗！这样下去，什么时候天下才能够平定呢！
English: Gensong also asked, "Nowadays, Liu Ji and Tian Ji'an are both seriously ill. If they were to die, would it be possible to completely hand over the post of ceremonial envoy to their son, as was done with Chengde? If this continues, when will the world be able to be pacified?"

古文：议者皆言 宜乘此际代之，不受则发兵讨之，时不要失。 
现代文：议论此事的人们都说： 应当趁着这一时机取代他们，如果他们不肯接受命令，就派兵讨伐他们，时机不可错过。 
English: People who discuss this matter say: We should take advantage of this opportunity to replace them, if they refuse to accept orders, send troops to fight them, the opportunity should not be missed.

古文：如何？ 
现代文：这种看法怎么样呢？ 
English: What do you think should be done?

古文：对曰： 群臣见陛下西取蜀，东取吴，易于反掌，故谄谀躁竞之人争献策画，劝开河北，不为国家深谋远虑，陛下亦以前日成功之易而信其言。
现代文：李绛等人回答说： 群臣看到陛下西面攻取蜀地，东面攻取吴地，易于反掌，所以阿谀逢迎、争权夺势的人们争着进献筹谋，劝说陛下开通河北地区。他们不曾为国家做过深远的谋划，周密的计虑，陛下也由于前些时候成功比较容易，因而相信他们的话。
English: Li Yao and others replied, "When the group of courtiers saw that His Majesty was conquering Shu to the west and Wu to the east, it was easy for them to turn their backs, so the people who were competing for power and influence were competing to advance their plans and persuade His Majesty to open the Hebei region. They had never made far-reaching plans and careful considerations for the country. His Majesty also believed their words because it was easier to succeed in the past.

古文：臣等夙夜思之，河北之势与二方异。
现代文：我等日夜相继地考虑此事，认为河北地区的形势与西蜀、东吴两地不同。
English: We have been considering this matter day and night, and we believe that the situation in Hebei is different from that in West Shu and East Wu.

古文：何则？
现代文：为什么这样说呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：西川、浙西皆非反侧之地，其四邻皆国家臂指之臣。
现代文：西川和浙西都不是反复无常的地区，他们周边相邻的州道都是国家可以指挥自如的臣属。
English: West Sichuan and West Zhejiang are not capricious regions, and the adjacent state highways around them are subjects that the state can command freely.

古文：刘辟、李锜独生狂谋，其下皆莫之与，辟、锜徒以货财啖之，大军一临，则涣然离耳。
现代文：唯独刘辟、李生出狂妄的阴谋，但他们的部下都不赞成。刘辟、李仅仅用物资钱财利诱部下，官军一到，他们的势力便分崩瓦解了。
English: However, Liu Bi and Li Sheng came up with a wild conspiracy, but their subordinates did not approve. Liu Bi and Li only used materials and money to entice their subordinates. As soon as the government army arrived, their power collapsed.

古文：故臣等当时亦劝陛下诛之，以其万全故也。成德则不然，内则胶固岁深，外则蔓连势广，其将士百姓怀其累代煦妪之恩，不知君臣逆顺之理，谕之不从，威之不服，将为朝廷羞。又，邻道平居或相猜恨，及闻代易，必合为一心，盖各为子孙之谋，亦虑他日及此故也。
现代文：他们的将士与百姓感念他们累世赡养的恩惠，不晓得君主与臣下、正顺与逆反的道理，劝告他们，他们不肯听从，威慑他们，他们不肯服气，这是会给朝廷带来羞辱的。再者，相邻各道平时或许会相互猜疑与怨恨，及至得知朝廷派人代换成德节度使时，就肯定会合成一条心，这大约是各自替子孙后代打算，也顾虑到以后自己会遭到这种处置的原故啊。
English: Their soldiers and people, mindful of the bounty they had received over the years, did not know the difference between a sovereign and a subject, between right and wrong, advised them, they refused to listen, deterred them, they refused to submit, which would bring humiliation to the court. Moreover, neighbors may be suspicious and resentful of each other in peacetime, and when they learn that the court has sent someone to replace them, they will surely unite as one heart. This is probably what they each intended for future generations, and also why they will be treated this way in the future.

古文：万一馀道或相表里，兵连祸结，财尽力竭，西戎、北狄乘间窥窬，其为忧患可胜道哉！
现代文：如果其余数道中有人与成德相互应援，战祸就会连绵不断，国家的资财用尽，力量耗竭，西部与北部的戎狄再乘机伺隙而动，他们造成的祸患难道是讲得完的吗！
English: If someone from the remaining provinces were to come to Chengde's aid, the war would continue to be disastrous. The country's resources and strength would be exhausted, and the western and northern armies would take advantage of the opportunity to exploit the situation. Is there no end to the disasters they have caused?

古文：济、季安与承宗事体不殊，若物故之际，有间可乘，当临事图之。于今用兵，则恐未可。
现代文：刘济、田季安与王承宗在事情的体统上没有区别，倘若在他们去世时，有机可乘，应当临至事情发生时再谋取，现在诉诸武力，恐怕就不够妥当了。
English: There is no difference between Liu Ji, Tian Ji'an and Wang Chengzong in terms of the order of events. If there is anything to be gained when they die, it should be sought after when the event occurs. Resorting to force now would probably not be appropriate.

古文：太平之业，非朝夕可致，愿陛下审处之。 
现代文：天下太平的大业，不是一朝一夕可以实现的，希望陛下审慎地处理此事。 
English: The great cause of world peace cannot be achieved overnight. I hope His Majesty will handle this matter prudently.

古文：时吴少诚病甚，降等复上言： 少诚病必不起。
现代文：当时，吴少诚病情非常严重，李绛等人再次进言说： 吴少诚的病肯定不会再好起来了。
English: At that time, Wu Shaocheng's illness was very serious, and Li Wei and others once again said: Wu Shaocheng's illness will definitely not get better.

古文：淮西事体与河北不同，四旁皆国家州县，不与贼邻，无党援相助。朝廷命帅，今正其时，万一不从，可议征讨。
现代文：淮西的局势与河北并不相同，周围都是国家的州县，不与贼寇的疆境相毗邻，没有同党应援帮助，朝廷任命淮西主帅，现在正是时候，如果淮西不肯听从，可以计议出兵征讨他们。
English: The situation of Huaixi is not the same as that of Hebei. It is surrounded by the states and counties of the country. It is not adjacent to the border of the bandits, and there is no help from the same party. The court appointed Huaixi coach. Now is the time. If Huaixi does not want to listen, it can be considered to send troops to recruit them.

古文：臣愿舍恒冀难致之策，就申蔡易成之谋。
现代文：我希望陛下丢开恒冀这一难达目的的筹策，归向申蔡这一容易成功的谋划。
English: I hope that His Majesty will discard the hard-to-achieve Hengji plan and turn to the easy-to-succeed Shen Cai plan.

古文：脱或恒冀连兵，事未如意，蔡州有衅，势可兴师，南北之役俱兴，财力之用不足。
现代文：假如对恒冀需要连续用兵，战事并不令人满意，而蔡州出现缝隙，具备可以发兵的形势，南北两方同时用兵，国家的财物人力的用度就难以充足了。
English: If the continuous use of troops is required for Hengji, the war is not satisfactory, and there is a gap in Caizhou, which has a situation where troops can be sent, and the north and south use troops at the same time, the use of national property and manpower will be insufficient.

古文：傥事不得已，须赦承宗，则恩德虚施，威令顿废。
现代文：倘若事情出于迫不得已，而必须赦免王承宗，那就会使陛下的恩典与仁德空自施行，朝廷的威严与号令立刻废弃了。
English: If, out of necessity, Wang Chengzong had to be pardoned, then His Majesty's grace and benevolence would become self-executing, and the majesty and command of the imperial court would immediately be abandoned.

古文：不如早赐处分，以收镇冀之心，坐待机宜，必获申蔡之利。 
现代文：这就不如及早颁赐对王承宗的处理办法，以便收揽恒冀的归向之心，坐等时机，肯定能够在申蔡得到好处。 
English: This is not as good as issuing a treatment plan for Wang Chengzong as early as possible, in order to win the hearts of Hengji, and waiting for the opportunity will definitely benefit Shen Cai.

古文：既而承宗久未得朝命，颇惧，累表自诉。
现代文：不久，王承宗因很久没有得到朝廷任命，感到很是恐惧，屡次上表自行陈诉。
English: Soon, Wang Chengzong, who had not been appointed by the imperial court for a long time, felt very scared and repeatedly went to the table to make his own complaints.

古文：八月，壬午，上乃遣京兆少尹裴武诣真定宣慰，承宗受诏甚恭，曰： 三军见迫，不暇俟朝旨，请献德、棣二州以明恳款。
现代文：八月，壬午，宪宗便派遣京兆少尹裴武前往真定安抚王承宗，王承宗接受诏旨时很是恭敬地说： 由于我受到部下各军的逼迫，来不及等候朝廷颁旨任命。请让我献出德州与棣州，用以表明我的诚意。 
English: In the afternoon of August, Emperor Xianzong sent Jingzhao Shao Yin Peiwu to Zhending to appease Wang Chengzong. When Wang Chengzong accepted the imperial edict, he said very respectfully: "Since I am being persecuted by the troops under my command, I can't wait for the imperial decree to be issued. Please let me offer Texas and Zhangzhou to show my sincerity."

古文：丙申，安南都护张舟奏破环王三万众。
现代文：丙申，安南都护张舟奏称打败了环王的三万人众。
English: On the other hand, Annan's tutelary Zhang Zhou made a speech saying that he had defeated the 30,000 people of the ring king.

古文：九月，甲辰朔，裴武复命。
现代文：九月，甲辰朔，裴武回报完成使命。
English: In September, Jiachenshuo, Pei Wu returned to complete the mission.

古文：庚戌，以承宗为成德军节度、恒、冀、深、赵州观察使，德州刺史薛昌朝为保信军节度、德、棣二州观察使。
现代文：庚戌，宪宗任命王承宗为成德节度使和恒、冀、深、赵四州观察使，德州刺史薛昌朝为保信军节度使和德、棣二州观察使。
English: Geng Zong and Jianzong appointed Wang Chengzong as the Chengde Festival Envoy and He Heng, Hebei, Sheng and Zhao as the Four-State Observation Envoy, and the Texian Emissary Xue Chang as the Hoxin Army Festival Envoy and He De and Jizhou Two-State Observation Envoy.

古文：昌朝，嵩之子，王氏之婿也，故就用之。
现代文：薛昌朝是薛嵩的儿子，王承宗的女婿，所以朝廷就势起用了他。
English: Xue Changchao was the son of Xue Song and the son-in-law of Wang Chengzong, so the imperial court took advantage of him.

古文：田季安得飞报，先知之，使谓承宗曰： 昌朝阴与朝廷通，故受节钺。 
现代文：田季安得到快马传递的报告，事先已经知道了朝廷的任命，便派人告诉承宗说： 薛昌朝暗中与朝廷交往，所以他才得到节度使的职位。 
English: When Tian Ji'an received the report transmitted by the fast horse, he already knew the appointment of the imperial court in advance, and sent a person to tell Chengzong that: Xue Chang secretly communicated with the imperial court, so he only got the post of festival envoy.

古文：承宗遽遣数百骑驰入德州，执昌朝，至真定，囚之。
现代文：王承宗连忙派遣数百名骑兵奔入德州，将薛昌朝捉拿到真定囚禁起来。
English: Wang Chengzong hurriedly dispatched hundreds of cavalrymen to rush into Texas to capture Xue Changchun and take him into custody.

古文：中使送昌朝节过魏州，季安阳为宴劳，留使者累日，比至德州，已不及矣。
现代文：中使颁送任命薛昌朝为节度使的旌节经过魏州，田季安佯装设宴犒劳中使，将中使留了好几天，及至中使来到德州时，薛昌朝已经被捉拿走了。
English: When the Chinese envoy passed through Weizhou on the Dragon Boat Festival, Tian Ji'an set up a banquet to reward the efforts of the Chinese envoy, and kept the Chinese envoy for several days. By the time the Chinese envoy came to Dezhou, Xue Changchao had already been captured and taken away.

古文：上以裴武为欺罔，又有谮之者曰： 武使还，先宿裴垍家，明旦乃入见。 
现代文：宪宗认为裴武是在欺蒙朝廷，还有人诬陷他说： 裴武出使归来后，先到裴家中过夜，第二天早晨，才入朝晋见。 
English: Gensong believed that Pei Wu was deceiving the imperial court, and others slandered him by saying: After Pei Wu returned from his mission, he first spent the night at Pei's home, and the next morning, he went to see Emperor Jin.

古文：上怒甚，以语李绛，欲贬武于岭南。
现代文：宪宗非常恼怒，将此事说给李绛听，打算将裴武贬逐到岭南。
English: Kenzong was very angry and told Li Qian about the matter, intending to banish Pei Wu to Lingnan.

古文：绛曰： 武昔陷李怀光军中，守节不屈，岂容今日遽为奸回！
现代文：李绛说： 过去，裴武落在李怀光的军队中，恪守节操，不肯屈服，现在怎么会突然去做邪恶的事情！
English: Li Zhe said: In the past, Pei Wu was in Li Huaiqing's army, adhering to discipline and refusing to give in. How can he suddenly do evil things now!

古文：盖贼多变诈，人未易尽其情。
现代文：大约贼人狡诈多变，使人不容易识破其中的真情。
English: Thieves, for example, are cunning and changeable, and it is not easy for people to see through their true feelings.

古文：承宗始惧朝廷诛讨，故请献二州。
现代文：王承宗起初害怕朝廷讨伐他，所以请求献出两个州来。
English: At first, Wang Chengzong was afraid that the imperial court would attack him, so he asked for two provinces.

古文：既蒙恩贷，而邻道皆不欲成德开分割之端，计必有阴行间说诱而胁之，使不得守其初心者，非武之罪也。
现代文：在蒙受陛下的宽宥后，与王承宗相邻各道不愿意让成德成为分割地盘、献给朝廷的开端，估计肯定发生了暗中劝说、引诱、胁迫王承宗，使他不能够信守当初的心愿的事情，这并不是裴武的罪责啊。
English: After receiving His Majesty's pardon, all the provinces neighboring Wang Chengzong were unwilling to let Chengde become the starting point for dividing the territory and dedicating it to the imperial court. It is estimated that Wang Chengzong must have been secretly persuaded, seduced, and coerced, so that he could not keep his original wish. This is not Peiwu's fault.

古文：今陛下选武使入逆乱之地，使还，一语不相应，遽窜之暇荒，臣恐自今奉使贼廷者以武为戒，苟求便身，率为依阿两可之言，莫肯尽诚具陈利害，如此，非国家之利也。
现代文：如今陛下挑选裴武前往反叛动乱的地区，出使回来后，一句话说得不够适合，便急忙将他斥逐到荒远地区，我恐怕从今以后受命出使敌庭的人们会以裴武当作儆戒，苟且寻求自身的便利，一概说些随声附和、模棱两可的言语，不肯披露真心而陈述利弊得失了。像这个样子，对国家可不是有利的啊。
English: Now that His Majesty has chosen Pei Wu to go to the rebellious and turbulent areas, and after returning from the mission, one word was not suitable enough, and he was quickly banished to a desolate area. I am afraid that from now on, people who are ordered to send the enemy court will use Pei Wu as a warning, seek their own convenience, and generally say some words that are echoed and ambiguous, and refuse to disclose their true intentions and state the pros and cons. Like this, it is not beneficial to the country.

古文：且垍、武久处朝廷，谙练事体，岂有使还未见天子而先宿宰相家乎！
现代文：而且，裴与裴武长期在朝廷任职，熟悉朝事的体统，难道会在出使归来、未见天子以前便首先在宰相家中过夜吗！
English: Moreover, Pei and Pei Wu had been working in the imperial court for a long time and were familiar with the etiquette of court affairs. Would they spend the night at the prime minister's house before returning from their mission and seeing the emperor?

古文：臣敢为陛下必保其不然，此殆有谗人欲伤武及垍者，愿陛下察之。 
现代文：我敢向陛下确保裴武不会这样去做，这大概是有好进谗言的人打算危害裴武以至裴，希望陛下察验此事。 
English: I dare to assure His Majesty that Pei Wu will not do this. This is probably a well-informed person who intends to endanger Pei Wu and even Pei Yu. I hope His Majesty will investigate this matter.

古文：上良久曰： 理或有此。 
现代文：宪宗停了许久才说： 在道理上或许有此一说吧。 
English: Kenzong paused for a long time before he said, "There may be something to that theory."

古文：遂不问。
现代文：于是不再追究。
English: As a result, the investigation was no longer pursued.

古文：丙辰，振武奏吐蕃五万馀骑至拂梯泉。
现代文：丙辰，振武奏称，吐蕃五万余骑来到佛梯泉。
English: According to Zhenwuxiao, more than 50,000 people rode from Tubo to the Buddha's Fountain.

古文：辛未，丰州奏吐蕃万馀骑至大石谷，掠回鹘入贡还国者。
现代文：辛未，丰州奏称，吐蕃一万余骑来到大石谷，掳掠入京进贡后归返本国的回鹘人。
English: According to Fengzhou's report, more than ten thousand horsemen from Tubo rode to the Great Rock Valley to capture Uighurs who had returned to their home country after bringing tribute to Beijing.

古文：左神策军吏李昱贷长安富人钱八千缗，满三岁不偿，京兆尹许孟容收捕械系，立期使偿，曰： 期满不足，当死。 
现代文：左神策军吏李昱向长安富人借贷钱八千缗，满了三年，还不偿还。京兆尹许孟容将李昱收捕，并给他带上枷锁，立下期限，让他清偿。
English: Zuoshenze military official Li Qian borrowed eight thousand baht from a rich man in Chang'an, and after three years, he still hadn't repaid it. Jing Zhaoyun Xu Meng Rong arrested Li Qian, put him in chains, and set a deadline for him to repay the money.

古文：一军大惊。中尉诉于上，上遣中使宣旨，送本军，孟容不之遣。
现代文：许孟容说： 如果期限满了，你还没有完全还清，就会处以死罪。 
English: Xu Meng Rong said: If the time limit is over and you have not fully paid off, you will be sentenced to death.

古文：中使再至，孟容曰： 臣不奉诏，当死。
现代文：左神策军全军大为震惊。左神策军中尉向宪宗申诉，宪宗派遣中使宣布诏旨，让许孟容将李昱交付本军，许孟容不肯将他遣回。
English: The whole army of Zuoshensha was shocked. Lieutenant Zuoshensha appealed to Emperor Gensong. The envoy sent by Emperor Gensong announced the imperial decree, asking Xu Meng Rong to hand Li Qian over to the army. Xu Meng Rong refused to send him back.

古文：然臣为陛下尹京畿，非抑制豪强，何以肃清辇下！
现代文：中使第二次前来，许孟容说： 我不肯接受诏命，该当死罪。然而，我为陛下担任京城周围地区的长官，如果不去约束地方上的豪强势力，怎么能够使京城清平整肃呢！
English: When the envoy came for the second time, Xu Meng Rong said, "I refuse to accept the imperial edict, I should be punished by death. However, I serve as the governor of the area around the capital for His Majesty, if I do not restrain the local powerful forces, how can I make the capital clean and tidy!

古文：钱未毕偿，昱不可得。 
现代文：只要没有将钱完全清偿，李昱就不能够从我这放走。 
English: As long as the money is not completely paid off, Li Yan cannot be released from me.

古文：上嘉其刚直而许之，京城震栗。
现代文：宪宗嘉许许孟容刚强正直，便答应了他，京城的人们震恐惊惧了。
English: The people of Kyoto were shocked and frightened when the founder of the Confucianism, Kenzong Jiaxu, praised Meng Rong's strength and honesty and agreed to help him.

古文：上遣中使谕王承宗，使遣薛昌朝还镇。承宗不奉诏。
现代文：宪宗派遣中使开导王承宗，让他发送薛昌朝返回德州，王承宗不接受诏命。
English: Wang Chengzong, one of the envoys sent by Kenzong to enlighten Wang Chengzong, asked him to send Xue Chang to return to Texas. Wang Chengzong did not accept the imperial order.

古文：冬，十月，癸未，制削夺承宗官爵，以左神策中尉吐突承璀为左、右神策、河中、河阳、浙西、宣歙等道行营兵马使、招讨处置等使。
现代文：冬季，十月，癸未，宪宗颁制削除王承宗的官职爵位，任命左神策中尉吐突承璀为左右神策、河中、河阳、浙西、宣歙等道行营兵马使、招讨处置等使。
English: In the winter, in October, Wang Chengzong's official title and knighthood were removed from the Constituent Assembly's award system, and Lieutenant Tutu Chengyu of the Left Divine Defense Force was appointed as the military envoy of the Left and Right Divine Defense Forces, the middle of the river, the river Yang, the west of Zhejiang, and Xuanwu.

古文：翰林学士白居易上奏，以为： 国家征伐，当责成将帅，近岁始以中使为监军。
现代文：翰林学士白居易上奏认为； 国家发兵征讨攻伐时，应当督责将帅去完成任务。近些年来，开始任命中使为监军。
English: Hanlin Baccalaureate Bai Juyi believes that when the state sends troops to attack, it should supervise the general to complete the task. In recent years, it has begun to appoint middle envoys as supervisors.

古文：自古及今，未有征天下之兵，专令中使统领者也。
现代文：自古至今，还没有征调全国的兵力，专门让中使统领的先例。
English: From ancient times to the present, there has been no precedent for conscripting troops from all over the country and having them led by a special envoy.

古文：今神策军既不置行营节度使，即承璀乃制将也。又充诸军招讨处置使，即承璀乃都统也。
现代文：现在，神策军既然不设置本军的行营节度使，吐突承璀便是总领本军的主将了，吐突承璀又充任诸军招讨处置使，他便是统领各军的都统了。
English: Now, since the Divine Providence Army does not set up an envoy for the encampment of the army, Tu Tu Cheng Ho is the commander-in-chief of the army, and Tu Tu Cheng Ho is also the envoy for inviting and dealing with the armies, and he is the commander of all the armies.

古文：臣恐四方闻之，必轻朝廷；四夷闻之，必笑中国。
现代文：我担心各地得知这一消息后，肯定要窥伺朝廷的间隙，周边各族得知这一消息后，必须会笑话中国无人。
English: I am worried that after all regions have learned this news, they will definitely want to spy on the interstices of the imperial court. After the surrounding ethnic groups have learned this news, they must laugh at China.

古文：陛下忍令后代相传云以中官为制将、都统自陛下始乎！
现代文：陛下能够忍受让后世相互传说，任命宦官为一军主将、各军都统是由陛下肇始的吗！
English: Can Your Majesty bear to let posterity tell each other that a eunuch was appointed as the commander of an army, and that all armies were started by Your Majesty?

古文：臣又恐刘济、茂昭及希朝、从史乃至诸道将校皆耻受承璀指麾，心既不齐，功何由立！
现代文：我还担心刘济、张茂昭、以及范希朝、卢从史以至于各道将校都以接受吐突承璀的指挥为耻辱，既然军心不齐，又怎么能够建立功劳呢！
English: I am also worried that Liu Ji, Zhang Maozhao, as well as Fan Xichang and Lu Congshi, so that the officers of all provinces are ashamed to accept the command of Tutu Chengyu. Since the military spirit is not consistent, how can they build up merit?

古文：此是资承宗之计而挫诸将之势也。
现代文：这是资助王承宗计谋，挫伤各将领的声势啊。
English: This is a scheme to fund Wang Chengzong and frustrate the voices of the generals.

古文：陛下念承璀勤劳，贵之可也；怜其忠赤，富之可也。
现代文：陛下顾念吐突承璀辛勤劳苦，使他尊贵起来就可以了；怜惜他忠心赤诚，使他富厚起来就可以了。
English: It is enough for his majesty to think of him as a diligent and hard-working person to make him noble; it is enough to pity his loyalty and sincerity to make him rich.

古文：至于军国权柄，动关理乱，朝廷制度，出自祖宗，陛下宁忍徇下之情而自隳法制，从人之欲而自损圣明，何不思于一时之间而取笑于万代之后乎！ 
现代文：至于军队和国家的权力，经常关系到政治修明或祸乱丛生，朝廷的制度，是由祖宗传承下来的，难道陛下能够忍受顺从下属的情好，从而毁坏自家的法令制度，放纵别人的欲求，从而损害自己无上的英明吗！陛下为什么不暂时思考一番，却要招来万世以后的讥笑呢！ 
English: As for the power of the army and the state, it is often related to political reform or disaster, and the system of the imperial court is inherited from the ancestors. Can His Majesty tolerate the subordination of subordinates, thereby destroying his own legal system, indulging the needs of others, and thus damaging his supreme wisdom? Why does His Majesty not think for a while, but it will bring ridicule after all ages!

古文：时谏官、御史论承璀职名太重者相属，上皆不听。
现代文：当时，论说吐突承璀被委任的职务名分太重的谏官、御史一个接着一个，宪宗全然不肯听从。
English: At that time, Kenzong refused to listen to the eunuchs and imperial historians who said that the post assigned to Tutu Chengjun was too important.

古文：戊子，上御延英殿，度支使李元素、盐铁使李鄘、京兆尹许孟容、御史中丞李夷简、谏议大夫孟简、给事中吕元膺、穆质、右补阙独孤郁等极言其不可。上不得已，明日，削承璀四道兵马使，改处置为宣慰而已。
现代文：戊子，宪宗驾临延英殿，度支使李元素、盐铁使李、京兆尹许孟容、御史中丞李夷简、给事中吕元膺、穆质、右补阙独孤郁等人极力进言对吐突承璀的任命是不妥当的，宪宗没有办法，第二天，免除了吐突承璀的四道兵马使职务，将处置使改为宣慰使罢了。
English: On arriving at Yan Ying's palace, Guo Zi, Gensong, Li Zhengyuan, Shi Tie Zhi Li, Jing Zha Yin Xu Meng Rong, Goshi Zhongzheng Li Yijian, Lu Yuan Rong, Mu Qiao, Yu Shui Rong and others tried their best to argue that the appointment of Tutu Chung-I was inappropriate. Gensong had no choice. The next day, he relieved Tutu Chung-I of his four-way military envoy duties and changed the disposition envoy to a consolation envoy.

古文：李绛尝极言宦官骄横，侵害政事，谗毁忠贞。
现代文：李绛曾经极力进言宦官傲慢专横，侵扰损害朝中政务，谗言诋毁忠诚坚贞之士，宪宗说： 这一类人怎么有胆量说别人的坏话呢！
English: Ri Yong had tried his best to say that eunuchs were arrogant and domineering, interfering with and damaging the political affairs of the DPRK and China, and slandering and defaming loyal and steadfast people. Gensong said, "How can this kind of person have the guts to speak ill of others!

古文：上曰： 此属安敢为谗！
现代文：即使他们进了谗言，我也不会听信的。 
English: Even if they did, I wouldn't listen.

古文：就使为之，朕亦不听。 绛曰： 此属大抵不知仁义，不分枉直，唯利是嗜，得赂则誉跖、足乔为廉良，怫意则毁龚、黄为贪暴，能用倾巧之智，构成疑似之端，朝夕左右浸润以入之，陛下必有时而信之矣。
现代文：李绛说： 这一类人大都不懂得仁义，分不清是非，唯利是图，只要是得到贿赂，就能将盗跖、庄赞誉成廉洁善良之人；如果违背了他们的意志，便可将龚遂、黄霸毁谤为贪婪暴虐的，能够使用狡诈的智虑，捏造成是非难辨的事端，时时刻刻围绕在四周，将谗言逐渐渗透进去，陛下肯定有时候也会相信他们的。
English: Li Wei said: Most of this kind of people do not understand benevolence and righteousness, cannot distinguish right from wrong, and seek only profit. As long as they receive bribes, they can praise thieves and swindlers as honest and good people; if they violate their will, they can slander the greedy and the tyrannical, and can use cunning and cleverness to fabricate difficult matters. They are always around, and the slander gradually penetrates into them. Your Majesty will certainly believe them sometimes.

古文：自古宦官败国者，备载方册，陛下岂得不防其渐乎！ 
现代文：自古以来，宦官败坏国家的事件，完全记录在典籍上面，陛下怎么能够不防备他们的浸染呢！ 
English: Since ancient times, the events of eunuchs corrupting the country have been fully recorded in the classics. How could His Majesty not be on guard against their infiltration?

古文：己亥，吐突承璀将神策兵发长安，命恒州四面籓镇各进兵招讨。
现代文：己亥，吐突承璀带领神策军从长安出发，命令恒州四周的藩镇各自进军招抚讨伐。
English: Ji Hai, Tu Tu Chengyu led the Shensha army from Chang'an, and ordered the towns around Hengzhou to march into the campaign.

古文：初，吴少诚宠其大将吴少阳，名以从弟，署为军职，出入少诚家如至亲，累迁申州刺史。
现代文：当初，吴少诚宠爱他的大将吴少阳，便以堂弟的名义，委任他担当军中职务，吴少阳在吴少诚家中往来，就像最近的亲属一样。历经多次升迁，他已担任了申州刺史。
English: At first, Wu Shao-cheng favored his general Wu Shao-yang, and appointed him to serve in the army in the name of his cousin. Wu Shao-yang was in and out of Wu Shao-cheng's family, just like his closest relatives. After several promotions, he has served as Shenzhou chief historian.

古文：少诚病，不知人，家僮鲜于熊儿诈以少诚命召少阳摄副使、知军州事。
现代文：吴少诚得病后，连人都不能分辨出来了。家中的仆人鲜于熊儿诈称吴少诚的命令，传召吴少阳代理彰义节度副使，掌管军中和地方事务。
English: After Wu Shaocheng fell ill, even people couldn't tell them apart. The servants in the family called Wu Shaoyang the acting deputy envoy of Changyi Jiedu, in charge of military and local affairs, and falsely claimed to be Wu Shaocheng's order.

古文：少诚有子元庆，少阳杀之。
现代文：吴少诚有个儿子叫吴元庆，吴少阳将他杀掉。
English: Wu Shaocheng had a son named Wu Yuanqing, and Wu Shaoyang killed him.

古文：十一月，己巳，少诚薨，少阳自为留后。
现代文：十一月，己巳，吴少诚去世，吴少阳自命为彰义留后。
English: In November, Wu Shao Cheng passed away, and Wu Shao Yang volunteered to stay behind.

古文：是岁，云南王寻阁劝卒，子劝龙晟立。
现代文：这一年，云南王寻劝去世，他的儿子劝龙晟即位。
English: In the same year, Yunnan's King Xuanxuan died, and his son Longxuan ascended to the throne.

古文：田季安闻吐突承璀将兵讨王承宗，聚其徒曰： 师不跨河二十五年矣，今一旦越魏伐赵，赵虏，魏亦虏矣，计为之奈何？ 
现代文：田季安得知吐突承璀带领兵马征讨王承宗，便将他的徒众聚合起来说： 朝廷的军队不能够跨过黄河，已经长达二十五年时间了，现在忽然越过魏博，攻打成德。倘若成德被俘虏，魏博也就被俘虏了，我们应当做何打算呢？ 
English: When Tian Ji'an learned that Tutong Chengyu led troops and horses to conquer Wang Chengzong, he gathered his followers together and said: The imperial army has not been able to cross the Yellow River for twenty-five years, and now it has suddenly crossed Weibo and attacked Chengde. If Chengde is captured, Weibo will also be captured. What should we do?

古文：其将有超伍而言者，曰： 愿借骑五千，以除君忧！ 
现代文：他的将领中有人从队伍中站出来说： 希望能够借给我骑兵五千人，用以消除您的忧虑。 
English: One of his generals stepped forward from the ranks and said: "I hope to be able to lend you five thousand cavalry to ease your worries."

古文：季安大呼曰： 壮哉！
现代文：田季安大声喊着说： 真是豪壮！
English: Tian Ji'an shouted loudly, "What a hero!

古文：兵决出，格沮者斩！ 
现代文：我决意出兵，阻止者斩首！ 
English: I am determined to send in the troops, and anyone who stands in the way will be beheaded!

古文：幽州牙将绛人谭忠为刘济使魏，知其谋，入谓季安曰： 如某之谋，是引天下之兵也。
现代文：幽州牙将绛州人谭忠为刘济出使魏博，得知了魏博的企图，便前去告诉田季安说： 根据我的谋算，魏博出兵，这是招引天下的军队来对付魏博啊。
English: Yuzhou Fang sent Tan Zhong, a person from Zhangzhou, as an envoy to Wei Bo on behalf of Liu Ji. When he learned of Wei Bo's intention, he went to tell Tian Ji'an and said: According to my calculation, Wei Bo sent troops. This is to attract the world's army to deal with Wei Bo.

古文：何者？
现代文：为什么这样说呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：今王师越魏伐赵，不使耆臣宿将而专付中臣，不输天下之甲而多出秦甲，君知谁为之谋？
现代文：现在，朝廷的军队越过魏博，攻打成德，不使用老臣宿将，反而把兵权专付给宦官，不征调全国的军队，反而派出大批的关中兵马，您知道这是谁想出来的主意吗？
English: Now, the imperial army has crossed the Wei Bo and attacked Chengde. Instead of using old vassals and warlords, the military power has been exclusively assigned to eunuchs. Instead of conscripting the national army, a large number of Guanzhong soldiers and horses have been dispatched. Do you know who came up with this idea?

古文：此乃天子自为之谋，欲将夸服于臣下也。
现代文：这便是天子自己想出来的主意，准备以此向臣下夸耀，并使他们敬服啊。
English: This is the idea that the Son of Heaven came up with himself, and he is preparing to boast about it to his subjects and make them respect him.

古文：若师未叩赵而先碎于魏，是上之谋反不如下，且能不耻于天下乎！
现代文：如果官军在没有攻打成德以前，首先便被魏博打败了，这就表示天子的谋算反而赶不上臣下的谋算，皇上在天下的人们面前怎么能够不感到羞愧呢！
English: If the imperial army was first defeated by Wei Bo before attacking Chengde, this meant that the emperor's plan could not catch up with that of his subjects. How could the emperor not feel ashamed before the people of the world!

古文：既耻且怒，必任智士画长策，仗猛将练精兵，毕力再举涉河，鉴前之败，必不越魏而伐赵，校罪轻重，必不先赵而后魏，是上不上，下不下，当魏而来也。 
现代文：皇上既羞愧，又恼怒，就一定要任用能谋善算的人士来筹划长远的计策，依仗勇猛善战的将领来训练精锐的兵马，然后再全力起兵，渡过黄河。官军吸取以往失败的教训，就一定不会再越过魏博前去攻打成德；比较魏博与成德罪责的大小，也一定不会先去攻打成德，然后再攻打魏博。这可谓不上不下，就是对着魏博来的了。 
English: The emperor was both ashamed and angry, so he had to appoint people who were good at calculating to plan long-term strategies, rely on brave and skillful generals to train elite soldiers and horses, and then make every effort to cross the Yellow River. The government army learned from the lessons of past failures and would never cross Weibo again to attack Chengde. Comparing the size of the guilt of Weibo and Chengde, they would never attack Chengde first and then attack Weibo. This can be described as up and down, that is, against Weibo.

古文：季安曰： 然则若之何？ 
现代文：田季安说： 果真如此，怎么办才好呢？ 
English: Tian Ji'an said: If this is really the case, what should we do?

古文：忠曰： 王师入魏，君厚犒之。
现代文：谭忠说： 当官军进入魏博境内时，你要好好犒劳官军。
English: Tan Zhong said: When the government army enters the territory of Weibo, you should work hard for the government army.

古文：于是悉甲压境，号曰伐赵，而可阴遗赵人书曰： 魏若伐赵，则河北义士谓魏卖友；魏若与赵，则河南忠臣谓魏反君。
现代文：当此之际，你要将全部兵马压向过境，号称攻打成德，但可以暗中给成德人送上一封书信说： 倘若魏博攻打成德，河北地区的仗义之士使会说魏博出卖朋友了；倘若魏博援助成德，河南地区的忠义之臣便会说魏博反叛君主了。
English: On this occasion, you want to push all the soldiers and horses to the border, claiming to attack Chengde, but you can secretly send a letter to the Chengde people saying: If Weibo attacks Chengde, the soldiers of righteousness in Hebei will say that Weibo has betrayed his friends; if Weibo assists Chengde, the loyal subjects in Henan will say that Weibo has rebelled against the monarch.

古文：卖友反君之名，魏不忍受。
现代文：出卖朋友和反叛君主的名声，魏博是不能容忍与接受的。
English: Weibo's reputation of betraying friends and rebelling against the monarchy is intolerable and unacceptable.

古文：执事若能阴解陴障，遗魏一城，魏得持之奏捷天子以为符信，此乃使魏北得以奉赵，西得以为臣，于赵有角尖之耗，于魏获不世之利，执事岂能无意于魏乎！ 
现代文：如果您能够暗中解除城防，送给魏博一座城池，魏博得以拿此城作为向天子报捷的凭据，这才能使魏博在北面得以侍奉成德，在西面得以做成人臣，对于成德说来，仅有不多的损耗，对魏博说来，获得罕有的利益，难道您能够对魏博的主张没有一点意思吗！ 
English: If you can secretly lift the city defenses and give Weibo a city pool, Weibo can use this city as a proof of victory to the Son of Heaven. This will enable Weibo to serve Chengde in the north, and to be an adult minister in the west. For Chengde, there is only a little loss, and for Weibo, gain rare benefits. Can you not have a little interest in Weibo's claim?

古文：赵人脱不拒君，是魏霸基安矣。 季安曰： 善！
现代文：假如成德人不拒绝你的主张，这便使魏博的霸主基业奠定了。 田季安说： 太好了！
English: If Chengde people do not reject your proposal, this will lay the foundation for the hegemony of Weibo. Tian Ji'an said: Great!

古文：先生之来，是天眷魏也。 
现代文：先生的到来，是上天对魏博的眷顾啊。 
English: The arrival of the teacher is God's care for Wei Bo.

古文：遂用忠之谋，与赵阴计，得其堂阳。
现代文：于是，田季安采用了谭忠的计谋，与成德暗中商议，得到了成德的堂阳县。
English: As a result, Tian Ji'an adopted Tan Zhong's stratagem and secretly negotiated with Chengde to obtain Chengde's Doyang County.

古文：忠归幽州，谋欲激刘济讨王承宗。会济合诸将言曰： 天子知我怨赵，今命我伐之，赵亦必大备我。
现代文：谭忠回到幽州后，打算用计鼓动刘济攻讨王承宗，适逢刘济聚合各将领说： 天子知道我怨恨成德，现在命令我讨伐成德，成德也必然极力防备我。
English: After Tan Zhong returned to Yuzhou, he planned to use the trick to encourage Liu Jie to attack Wang Chengzong. At the right time, Liu Jie gathered all the generals and said: God knows that I resent Chengde, and now I am ordered to fight Chengde. Chengde must also be very careful to prevent me.

古文：伐与不伐孰利？ 
现代文：出兵讨伐与不出兵讨伐，采用哪种做法有利呢？ 
English: Whether to dispatch troops for a crusade or not to dispatch troops for a crusade, which approach is advantageous?

古文：忠疾对曰： 天子终不使我伐赵，赵亦不备燕。 
现代文：谭忠赶忙回答说： 天子最终是不会让我们去攻打成德的，成德也不会防备卢龙。 
English: Tan Zhong hurriedly replied: In the end, God would not let us attack Chengde, and Chengde would not be able to defend itself against Lulong.

古文：济怒曰： 尔何不直言济与承宗反乎！ 
现代文：刘济生气地说： 你为什么不直接说我与王承宗谋反呢！ 
English: Liu Jie said angrily: Why didn't you just say that I was plotting against Wang Chengzong!

古文：命系忠狱。
现代文：他命令将谭忠囚禁到牢狱中。
English: He ordered that Tan Zhong be sent to prison.

古文：使人视成德之境，果不为备。
现代文：刘济让人察看成德的边境，果然不曾设置防备。
English: Liu Ji had Chengde's border inspected, and it turned out that there were no defenses in place.

古文：后一日，诏果来，令济 专护北疆，勿使朕复挂胡忧，而得专心于承宗。 
现代文：过了一天，果然有诏书送来，命令刘济 专力防护北部疆境，不要让朕再为胡人担忧，因而得以一心一意地对付王承宗。 
English: One day later, an imperial edict was sent to Liu Ji, ordering him to protect the northern border, and not to let me worry about the Hu people, so I was able to single-mindedly deal with Wang Chengzong.

古文：济乃解狱召忠曰： 信如子断矣，何以知之？ 
现代文：于是，刘济打开牢狱，召见谭忠说： 事态诚然像你判断的那样，你是怎么知道的呢？ 
English: As a result, Liu Jie opened the prison and summoned Tan Zhong to say: The situation is indeed as you judge it to be. How did you know?

古文：忠曰： 卢从史外亲燕，内实忌之；外绝赵，内实与之。
现代文：谭忠说： 卢从史表面上与卢龙亲近，骨子里实际是在忌恨卢龙，表面上不与成德往来，骨子里实际是在援助成德。
English: Tan Zhong said: Lu was close to Lu Rong on the surface of history, but in essence, he actually hated Lu Rong. On the surface, he did not deal with Chengde, but in essence, he actually assisted Chengde.

古文：此为赵画曰： 燕以赵为障，虽怨赵，必不残赵，不必为备， 一且示赵不敢抗燕，二且使燕获疑天子。
现代文：他为成德这样筹划说： 卢龙是把成德作为自己的屏障的，虽然卢龙怨恨成德，但肯定不会伤害成德，所以没有必要对卢龙设置防备。 这种做法，一是显示成德不敢抗拒卢龙，二是打算让卢龙遭到天子的怀疑。
English: He planned for Chengde in this way: Lulong took Chengde as his own barrier, and although Lulong resented Chengde, he would certainly not hurt Chengde, so there was no need to set up a defense against Lulong. This approach, on the one hand, showed that Chengde did not dare to resist Lulong, and on the other hand, it was intended to make Lulong suspect the Son of Heaven.

古文：赵人既不备燕，潞人则走告于天子曰： 燕厚怨赵，赵见伐而不备燕，是燕反与赵也。 
现代文：既然成德人不防备卢龙，潞州人便会跑去报告天子说： 卢龙对成德的怨恨很深，成德在遭受攻打时，并不防备卢龙，这说明卢龙反而是与成德亲善的。 
English: Since the Chengde people did not guard against Lulong, the Zhangzhou people would run to report to Tianzi and say: Lulong's hatred for Chengde is very deep. When Chengde was attacked, it did not guard against Lulong, which shows that Lulong is friendly with Chengde.

古文：此所以知天子终不使君伐赵，赵亦不备燕也。 
现代文：这就是我知道天子最终不会让您攻打成德，而成德也不会防备卢龙的道理所在啊！ 
English: This is the reason why I know that God will not let you attack Chengde in the end, and Chengde will not prevent Lulong!

古文：济曰： 今则奈何？ 
现代文：刘济说： 现在应当怎么办呢？ 
English: Liu Jie said: What should we do now?

古文：忠曰： 燕、赵为怨，天下无不知。
现代文：谭忠说： 卢龙与成德结下仇怨，天下无人不知。
English: Tan Zhong said: No one in the world knows that Lulong and Chengde have a grudge.

古文：今天子伐赵，君坐全燕之甲，一人未济易水，此正使潞人以燕卖恩于赵，败忠于上，两皆售也。
现代文：现在，天子出兵攻打成德，你却使整个卢龙的兵马披甲不卧，坐以待敌，连一个人也没有渡过易水，这就恰好让潞州人认为卢龙以小恩小惠收买成德，因而向皇上败坏卢龙忠于朝廷的名声，在这两方面他们都能达到目的。
English: Now, the Son of Heaven has sent troops to attack Chengde, but you have made the entire Lulong soldiers and horses wear armor and wait for the enemy, and not a single person has crossed the Yishui River. This just happens to make the people of Zhangzhou think that Lulong bought Chengde with small favors, thus ruining the reputation of Lulong's loyalty to the imperial court to the emperor. In both respects, they can achieve their goals.

古文：济曰： 吾知之矣。 乃下令军中曰： 五日毕出，后者醢以徇！ 
现代文：这就使卢龙虽然内含信守忠义的心愿，终于还是招惹来偏袒成德的口实，既不能使成德人感激卢龙，还徒然使辱骂卢龙的呼声在天下喧闹不止罢了。请您周密地考虑这个问题吧！ 刘济说： 我明白其中的道理啦。 
English: This meant that although Lulong contained the desire to be faithful and loyal, he finally provoked an excuse to favor Chengde. It was not possible to make Chengde people grateful to Lulong, and it was in vain that the call to abuse Lulong was noisy all over the world. Please consider this issue carefully! Liu Ji said: I understand the reason.

古文：元和五年庚寅，公元八一零年
现代文：于是，他命令军中将士说： 五天以内，全部出动，要是有谁落后了，就将他剁成肉酱示众！ 五年
English: Therefore, he ordered the lieutenant generals: "Within five days, all units must move out, and if there is anyone left behind, he must be made into mincemeat and shown to the public! Five years

古文：春，正月，刘济自将兵七万人击王承宗，时诸军皆未进，济独前奋击，拔饶阳、束鹿。
现代文：春季，正月，刘济亲自带领兵马七万人进击王承宗。当时，各军都没有前进，只有刘济向前奋力进击，攻克了饶阳与束鹿。
English: In the spring, in the first month, Liu Zi personally led 70,000 soldiers and horses to attack Wang Chengzong. At that time, all the armies did not advance, only Liu Zi pushed forward and defeated Raoyang and Sokha.

古文：河东、河中、振武、义武四军为恒州北道招讨，会于定州。
现代文：河东、河中、振武、义武四军担当恒州北面的招抚与讨伐，在定州会师。
English: The four armies of Hedong, Hedong, Zhenwu and Yiwu were in charge of attracting and fighting in the north of Hengzhou, and they joined forces in Dingzhou.

古文：会望夜，军吏以有外军，请罢张灯。张茂昭曰： 三镇，官军也，何谓外军！ 
现代文：正赶上十五日夜晚，义武的军吏认为定州驻有外来的军队，请求禁止张灯，张茂昭说： 河东、河中、振武三镇兵马，都是官军，怎么能够把他们称作外来的军队呢！ 
English: Just in time for the evening of the 15th, the military officials of Yiwu believed that there were foreign troops stationed in Dingzhou, and requested that Zhang Lan be banned. Zhang Maozhao said: The soldiers and horses of the three towns of Hedong, Hechu, and Zhenwu are all government troops, how can they be called foreign troops!

古文：命张灯，不禁行人，不闭里门，三夜如平日，亦无敢喧哗者。
现代文：他命令点起灯来，不禁止人们夜行，不关闭坊里的大门，一连三个夜晚，都像平时一样，也没有人胆敢大声乱喊乱叫。
English: He ordered the lights to be lit, did not forbid people to walk at night, did not close the doors of the village, and for three nights in a row, as usual, no one dared to shout loudly.

古文：丁卯，河东将王荣拔王承宗洄湟镇。
现代文：丁卯，河东将领王荣攻克了王承宗的洄湟镇。
English: Dingwu, Wang Rong, the general of Hedong, conquered Wang Chengzong's Shanzhen.

古文：吐突承璀至行营，威令不振，与承宗战，屡败。左神策大将军郦定进战死。
现代文：吐突承璀来到行营后，军威政令不振，与王承宗交战，屡次失败，左神策大将军郦定进战死。
English: After Tutu Chengzong arrived at the encampment, the military authority and political order were not strong, and he fought with Wang Chengzong and failed repeatedly. General Zuo Shenze entered the battle and died.

古文：定进，骁将也，军中夺气。
现代文：郦定进是一员骁勇的将领，军中将士因他的战死而士气低落。
English: Lu Dingjin was a brave general, and the morale of the lieutenant generals was low because of his death in battle.

古文：洒南尹房式有不法事，东台监察御史元稹奏摄之，擅令停务。
现代文：河南尹房式做了不守法纪的事情，东台监察御史元稹奏请将他拘捕，同时擅自命令停止房式办理本职事务。
English: Henan Yin Fang style has done something that does not comply with laws and regulations. Dongtai Supervisor of History Yuan Shengxiao requested that he be arrested, and at the same time ordered to stop Fang style from handling his duties.

古文：朝廷以为不可，罚一季俸，召还西京。
现代文：朝廷认为不能够这样处理，罚元稹一个季度的薪俸，将他召回西京长安。
English: The imperial court thought it was not possible to deal with him in this way, fined him a quarter of his salary, and recalled him to West Beijing Chang'an.

古文：至敷水驿，有内侍后至，破驿门呼骂而入，以马鞭击稹伤面。
现代文：元稹来到敷水驿时，有一个内侍宦官从后面赶到，撞开驿站的大门，叫喊喝骂着走了进去，用马鞭抽打元稹，打伤了他的脸。
English: When Yuan Shikun arrived at Shiquan, an eunuch of the inner court arrived from behind, broke open the gate of the station, shouted and scolded, entered, and whipped Yuan Shikun with a horse whip, injuring his face.

古文：上复引稹前过，贬江陵士曹。
现代文：宪宗又联系元稹以前的过失，将他贬为江陵士曹。
English: Gensong also linked it to Yuan Zang's previous misdeeds and demoted him to Gangneung Shizao.

古文：翰林学士李绛、崔群言稹无罪。
现代文：翰林学士李绛与崔群都说元稹是无罪的。
English: Hanlin scholars Li Yu and Cui Qun both said that Yuan Yu was not guilty.

古文：白居易上言： 中使陵辱朝士，中使不问而稹先贬，恐自今中使出外益暴横，人无敢言者。
现代文：白居易也进言说： 中使欺凌羞辱朝中官员，不去追究中使的罪过，反而首先将元稹贬官，恐怕从今以后中使外出会愈加暴虐骄横，人们没有再敢说话的了。
English: Bai Juyi also said: The Chinese envoy bullied and humiliated the officials of the DPRK and China, and instead of investigating the sins of the Chinese envoy, he first demoted the Yuan Zang. I am afraid that from now on, the Chinese envoy will become more and more tyrannical and arrogant, and people will no longer dare to speak.

古文：又，稹为御史，多所举奏，不避权势，切齿者众，恐自今无人肯为陛下当官执法，疾恶绳愆，有大奸猾，陛下无从得知。 
现代文：再者，元稹担任御史，提出不少检举奏报，对权贵势要人士无所避忌，痛恨他的人很多，现在将元稹贬逐了，恐怕从今以后没有人愿意为陛下担当官职而执行法令，憎恨邪恶而纠正过失了。即使出现了特大的奸险狡猾的人物，陛下也无法得知了。 
English: Furthermore, as the imperial historian, Yuan Shik served as the imperial historian, made a lot of reports, did not avoid the powerful and influential people, and there were many people who hated him. Now that Yuan Shik has been ousted, I am afraid that from now on, no one will be willing to carry out the decrees for His Majesty's official duties, and hate evil and correct mistakes. Even if there are extremely treacherous and cunning people, His Majesty will not be able to know.

古文：上不听。
现代文：宪宗不肯听信他的谏言。
English: The Emperor did not listen to him.

古文：上以河朔方用兵，不能讨吴少阳。三月，己未，以少阳为淮西留后。
现代文：宪宗因河朔地区正在使用武力，不再能够讨伐吴少阳，三月，己未，任命吴少阳为淮西留后。
English: Because of the use of force in the Hexuo region, Xianzong was no longer able to fight Wu Shaoyang. In March, he appointed Wu Shaoyang as the successor of Huaixi.

古文：诸军讨王承宗者久无功，白居易上言，以为： 河北本不当用兵，今既出师，承璀未尝苦战，已失大将，与从史两军入贼境，迁延进退，不惟意在逗留，亦是力难支敌。
现代文：由于讨伐王承宗的各支军队长期不能成功，白居易进言认为： 河北地区本来就不应该使用武力，既然现在出兵了，吐突承璀不曾艰苦作战，却已经失去了一员大将。他与卢从史两支军队已经进入成德的疆境，一味拖延行动，不只是有意停顿不前，也是他们的兵力难以抵敌。
English: Due to the long-term lack of success in fighting Wang Chengzong's various armies, Bai Juyi suggested that: Hebei region should not have used force in the first place. Now that troops have been dispatched, Tutu Chengzong did not fight hard, but he has lost a general. He and Lu Congshi's two armies have entered the borders of Chengde, and they have been delaying action. It is not only a deliberate pause, but also their strength is difficult to resist.

古文：希朝、茂昭至新市镇，竟不能过。
现代文：范希朝与张茂昭来到新市镇，竟然不能够通过。
English: Fan Xichang and Zhang Maozhao came to the new town, but they couldn't get through.

古文：刘济引全军攻围乐寿，久不能下。
现代文：刘济率领全军攻打并围困乐寿，长期不能攻克。
English: Liu Jie led the whole army to attack and besiege Leshou, which could not be conquered for a long time.

古文：师道、季安元不可保，察其情状，似相计会，各收一县，遂不进军。
现代文：李师道与田季安原来就是不能担保的，观察他们的情形，好像相互经过了盘算，每人各自占领一个县，便不再进军。
English: Li Shidao and Tian Ji'an couldn't guarantee their departure originally. Observing their situation, it was as if they had calculated with each other. Each of them occupied one county, and then stopped marching.

古文：陛下观此事势，成功有何所望！
现代文：陛下看这样的事态趋势，还有什么成功的希望！
English: Your Majesty, looking at this trend of events, what hope is there for success?

古文：以臣愚见，须速罢兵，若又迟疑，其害有四：可为痛惜者二，可为深忧者二。
现代文：以我愚昧的见解看来，必须迅速停止用兵，如果还要犹豫，便会有四点害处，其中应当为陛下痛切惋惜的害处有两点，应当为陛下深切忧虑的害处也有两点。
English: In my humble opinion, it is necessary to put a speedy end to the use of arms, and if there is any hesitation, there will be four evils, two of which are to be deplored by Your Majesty, and two of which are to be feared by Your Majesty.

古文：何则？若保有成，即不论用度多少；既的知不可，即不合虚费赀粮。
现代文：为什么这样说呢？ 倘若保证能够获得成功，便可以不计较费用需要多少；既然明确知道无法获得成功，便不应该白白耗费资财与粮食。
English: Why is this? If success is assured, there is no need to count the cost; if it is clear that success is not possible, there is no need to waste money and food.

古文：悟而后行，事亦非晚。
现代文：懂得了这个道理以后再去行动，为时还不算晚。
English: It is not too late to act after understanding this truth.

古文：今迟校一日有一日之费，更延旬月，所费滋多，终须罢兵，何如早罢！
现代文：现在，晚纠正一天就要多一天的费用，再拖延一个月，需要的费用就更多了。既然终究要停止用兵，为什么不及早停止下来呢！
English: Now, if it is corrected a day late, it will cost an extra day, and if it is delayed for another month, it will cost more. Since it is necessary to stop the use of troops after all, why not stop it early!

古文：以府库钱帛、百姓脂膏资助河北诸侯，转令强大。
现代文：用国家库存的钱财布帛和民脂民膏供给河北地区的节帅，反而使他们强大起来。
English: The money, cloth, silk and butter from the state's stockpile were used to supply the soldiers of the festival in Hebei Province, which made them stronger.

古文：此臣为陛下痛惜者一也。臣又恐河北诸将见吴少阳已受制命，必引事例轻重，同词请雪承宗。
现代文：这便是为陛下痛切惋惜的第一点。 我还担心河北地区各将领见到吴少阳已经受到制书的任命，必定会援引处理这一件事的宽严标准，众口一词地请求为王承宗昭雪。
English: This is the first point of deep regret for His Majesty. I am also worried that when the generals in Hebei see that Wu Shaoyang has been appointed as a book maker, they will certainly invoke the lenient and strict standards for dealing with this matter and make a collective request for Wang Chengzong Zhaoxue.

古文：若章表继来，即义无不许。
现代文：如果奏章奏表相继而来，按道理说就不能不答应了。
English: If the scores come one after the other, it is logically impossible not to agree.

古文：请而后舍，体势可知，转令承宗胶固同类。
现代文：经过他们请求后再放弃对王承宗的讨伐，这种格局与情势是可想而知的，只能反而使王承宗与同类人牢固地勾结在一起。
English: After their request, they gave up the crusade against Wang Chengzong. This pattern and situation is conceivable, but it can only make Wang Chengzong firmly collude with the same kind of people.

古文：如此，则与夺皆由邻道，恩信不出朝廷，实恐威权尽归河北。
现代文：像这个样子，给予与剥夺完全是按照与王承宗相邻各道的意见来决定的，恩德与信义都不是出自朝廷，这实在让人担心朝廷的声威与权力会完全归向河北藩镇了。
English: In this way, the giving and depriving is entirely decided in accordance with the opinions of the provinces adjacent to Wang Chengzong. Neither benevolence nor loyalty come from the imperial court. This really makes people worry that the prestige and power of the imperial court will fully return to the Hebei province and town.

古文：此为陛下痛惜者二也。今天时已热，兵气相蒸，至于饥渴疲劳，疾疫暴露，驱以就战，人何以堪！
现代文：这便是我为陛下痛切惋惜的第二点 现在天气已经炎热，士兵身上的热气互相蒸熏，至于饥饿干渴，疲乏劳累，瘟疫流行，露天而处，驱赶着他们去参加战斗，人们怎么能够经受得住呢！
English: This is the second regret I have for Your Majesty. The weather is already hot, the soldiers are steaming with the heat, and how can they endure the hunger, thirst, fatigue, plague, and the open air that drive them to battle?

古文：纵不惜身，亦难忍苦。
现代文：即使人们并不爱惜自己的身体，也是难以忍受这种苦楚的。
English: Even if people do not care about their bodies, it is unbearable to go through this kind of suffering.

古文：况神策乌杂城市之人，例皆不惯如此，忽思生路，或有奔逃，一人若逃，百人相扇，一军若散，诸军必摇，事忽至此，悔将何及！
现代文：况且，神策军中杂乱无章的城市居民，一概都不习惯像这样的军旅生活，忽然想到应该寻找一条求生之路，若有一个逃跑，便有一百个人相互煽动逃跑，若有一支军队溃散，其他各军必定也要动摇。如果事情忽然达到这般地步，后悔还来得及吗！
English: Moreover, the chaotic city dwellers in the Shinsengumi army are not used to such a military life, and suddenly think of finding a way to survive. If one escapes, there will be a hundred people inciting each other to escape. If one army collapses, the other armies will also be shaken. If things suddenly reach such a level, is it too late to regret it?

古文：此为陛下深忧者一也。臣闻回鹘、吐蕃皆有细作，中国之事，小大尽知。
现代文：这便是我为陛下深切忧虑的第一点。 我听说回鹘与吐蕃都派出了密探，对于中国的事情，无论大小，全都知道。
English: This is the first of my deep concerns for His Majesty. I have heard that both the Uighurs and the Tibetans have sent spies who know everything about China, no matter how big or small.

古文：今聚天下之兵，唯讨承宗一贼，自冬及夏，都未立功，则兵力之强弱，资费之多少，岂宜使西戌、北虏一一知之！
现代文：现在，朝廷聚集天下兵马，只是在讨伐王承宗这一个叛贼，由冬天到夏天，都不能够建树功勋。而军队力量的强弱，物资费用的多少，难道应该让西方与北方的戎虏逐个了解清楚吗！
English: Now, the imperial court has gathered all the soldiers and horses in the world, but they are only fighting against Wang Chengzong, a traitor, from winter to summer, and they are not able to build a merit. And should the strength of the army and the amount of material costs be made clear to the soldiers in the west and the north one by one?

古文：忽见利生心，乘虚入寇，以今日之势力，可能救其首尾哉！
现代文：假如他们忽然看到有利可图，生出异心，乘着国内空虚的时机前来侵犯，就凭着朝廷现在的形势与力量，难道对两方面都能够予以救援吗？
English: If all of a sudden they see that there are profits to be made, if they become hostile, and take advantage of the domestic vacuum to invade, can the current situation and strength of the imperial court provide assistance to both sides?

古文：兵连祸生，何事不有！
现代文：战争连续不断，灾祸从中产生，什么样的事情不会现出！
English: Wars go on and on, disasters come out of them, what kind of things do not come out!

古文：万一及此，实关安危。
现代文：万一到了这般田地，实在是关系着国家的安定与危亡。
English: In the unlikely event that such a situation arises, it is really a matter of national stability and peril.

古文：此其为陛下深忧者二也。 
现代文：这便是我为陛下深切忧虑的第二点。 
English: This is the second point about which I am deeply concerned for Your Majesty.

古文：卢从史首建伐王承宗之谋，及朝廷兴师，从史逗留不进，阴与承宗通谋，令军士潜怀承宗号；又高刍粟之价以败度支，讽朝廷求平章事，诬奏诸道与贼通，不可进兵，上甚患之。
现代文：卢从史第一个提出讨伐王承宗的策谋，及至朝廷发兵后，卢从史却停留下来，不肯进兵，暗中与王承宗互通计谋，让将士们暗地里在怀中揣着王承宗的行军标记，还抬高草料与粮食的价格，以便破坏度支的军需供应，暗示朝廷任命他为平章事，上奏诬告各道与王承宗勾结，不赞成进兵。宪宗为此甚为忧虑。
English: Lu Zengzong was the first in history to come up with a plan to fight Wang Chengzong. However, after the imperial court sent troops, Lu Zengzong stayed behind and refused to go into the army. He secretly plotted with Wang Chengzong and had his generals secretly carry Wang Chengzong's marching signs in their arms. He also raised the price of hay and grain in order to destroy the supply of war supplies, suggesting that the imperial court had appointed him as a matter of public record. He also falsely accused all the sects of colluding with Wang Chengzong and disapproved of going into the army. Gensong was very worried about this.

古文：会从史遣牙将王翊元入奏事，裴垍引与语，为言为臣之义，微动其心，翊元遂输诚，言从史阴谋及可取之状。
现代文：适逢卢从史派遣牙将王翊元入朝奏事，裴将他引至一旁，与他谈话，对他讲述作为人臣应有的义理，暗暗地打动他的内心，于是王翊元也表达了自己的诚意，将卢从史暗中的策划与潞州可以攻取的状况讲了出来。
English: At the right time, Lu Zengshi sent his general Wang Xuanyuan to report to the imperial court. Pei took him aside, talked with him, told him about the principles of loyalty as a vassal, and secretly moved his heart. Wang Xuanyuan also expressed his sincerity, revealing Lu Zengshi's secret plan and the situation in Zhangzhou.

古文：垍令翊元还本军经营，复来京师，遂得其都知兵马使乌重胤等款要。
现代文：裴命令王翊元返回本军，经过筹措规划后，再来京城，于是赢得了潞州都知兵马使乌重胤等人的诚心。
English: Bae ordered Wang Xuanyuan to return to his own army, and after the financing and planning, he came to Beijing. Thus, he won the sincerity of Wu Shigetian, the military commander of Bozhou, and others.

古文：垍言于上曰： 从史狡猾骄很，必将为乱。
现代文：裴对宪宗说： 卢从史诡诈多端，骄横凶暴，肯定要发动变乱。
English: Bae said to Kenzong: Lu Congshi is deceitful, arrogant and ferocious, and is sure to start a riot.

古文：今闻其与承璀对营，视承璀如婴儿，往来殊不设备。
现代文：现在听说他在吐突承璀的对面扎营，将吐突承璀当作婴儿一般，在两营之间往来，全然不设置防备。
English: Now I hear that he has set up camp on the opposite side of the Tuyungcheng Pass, treating the Tuyungcheng Pass as if it were a baby, and moving between the two camps without setting up any defenses.

古文：失今不取，后虽兴大兵，未可以岁月平也。 
现代文：如果失去现在的时机，不将他拘捕起来，以后即使征集大批兵马前去讨伐，也是不能在短时间内将他平定的。 
English: If the current opportunity is lost and he is not arrested, it will not be possible to pacify him in a short time, even if a large number of soldiers and horses are recruited to go and fight.

古文：上初愕然，熟思良久，乃许之。
现代文：宪宗起初感到惊讶，经过长时间的周密考虑后，便答应了下来。
English: At first, Kenzong was surprised, but after long and careful consideration, he agreed.

古文：从史性贪，承璀盛陈奇玩，视其所欲，稍以遗之。
现代文：由于卢从史生性贪婪，吐突承璀将许多珍奇的玩赏器物陈列出来，看出他希望得到什么，便逐渐地拿来送给他。
English: Due to Lu Congshi's natural greed, Tucu Chengyu displayed many rare playthings, and gradually gave them to him when he saw what he wanted.

古文：从史喜，益相昵狎。
现代文：卢从史高兴，对吐突承璀愈发亲昵。
English: Lu Congshi was delighted and became more and more intimate with Tu Ducheng.

古文：甲申，承璀与行营兵马使李听谋，召从史入营博，伏壮士于幕下，突出，擒诣帐后缚之，内车中，驰诣京师。
现代文：甲申，吐突承璀与行营兵马使李听经过商议后，叫卢从史前来营中博戏，在帐幕下面设了伏兵。卢从史来到后，伏兵突然冲了出来，擒获了卢从史，到帐幕后面，将他捆绑起来，装进车中，急奔京城。
English: After consultation, he ordered Lu Congshi to come to the camp to play, and set up an ambush under the tent. After Lu Congshi arrived, the ambush suddenly rushed out, captured Lu Congshi, went behind the tent, tied him up, loaded him into a car, and rushed to Beijing.

古文：左右惊乱，承璀斩十馀人，谕以诏旨。
现代文：卢从史身边的人们又震惊，又慌乱，吐突承璀斩杀了十多个人，当众宣布了诏书的旨意。
English: People around Lu Congshi were shocked and panicked. Tu Tu Chengyu killed more than ten people and publicly announced the intention of the edict.

古文：从史营中士卒闻之，皆甲以出，操兵趋哗。
现代文：卢从史营中的将士们得知消息后，都穿好铠甲，走了出来，手中握着兵器，疾步而行，大声喧哗。
English: After Lu learned the news from the soldiers in the history camp, they all put on armor and came out, holding weapons in their hands, walking at a fast pace and making a lot of noise.

古文：乌重胤当军门叱之曰： 天子有诏，从者赏，敢违者斩！ 
现代文：乌重胤站在军营门前喝斥他们说： 天子发有诏令，服从的奖赏，胆敢违抗的问斩！ 
English: Wu Chongyan stood in front of the gate of the military camp and shouted at them: "The Son of Heaven has issued a decree, the reward of obedience, and the punishment of those who dare to disobey!

古文：士卒皆敛兵还部伍。
现代文：于是，将士们都收起兵器，回到队伍中去。
English: As a result, the soldiers put away their weapons and returned to the ranks.

古文：会夜，车疾驱，未明，已出境。
现代文：适值夜晚降临，载着卢从史的车辆急速奔驰，在天亮以前，已经走出了泽潞的疆境。
English: As night fell, the vehicle carrying Lu Zengshi sped away. Before dawn, it had already left the borders of Zhejiang.

古文：重胤，承洽之子；听，晟之子也。
现代文：乌重胤是乌承洽的儿子。李听是李晟的儿子。
English: Wu Chongyan is the son of Wu Chengchao. Li He is the son of Li Yao.

古文：丁亥，范希朝、张茂昭大破承宗之众于木刀沟。
现代文：丁亥，范希朝、张茂昭在木刀沟大破王承宗的兵马。
English: Ding Hai, Fan Xichang, and Zhang Maozhao defeated Wang Chengzong's army in the Battle of Woodcutters' Gully.

古文：上嘉乌重胤之功，欲即授以昭义节度使。
现代文：宪宗嘉许乌重胤的功劳，打算立即授给他昭义节度使的职务。
English: Kenzong appreciated Wu Chung-yin's service and planned to immediately assign him the post of Shouyi's regent.

古文：李绛以为不可，请授重胤河阳，以河阳节度使孟元阳镇昭义。
现代文：李绛认为不适当，请求授给乌重胤河阳节度使的职务，而任命河阳节度使孟元阳镇守昭义。
English: Li Gan thought it was inappropriate and requested that Wu Chungyan be given the post of Heyang's festival envoy, while Heyang's festival envoy Meng Yuanyang was appointed to guard the town of Shoyi.

古文：会吐突承璀奏，已牒重胤句当昭义留后，绛上言： 昭义五州据山东要害，魏博、恒、幽诸镇蟠结，朝廷恃此以制之。
现代文：适逢吐突承璀奏称，他已经发出文书，指令乌重胤为句当昭义留后，李绛进言说： 昭义所属的泽、潞、邢、胤、磁五州，在崤山以东占据着关系全局的重要地位，魏博、恒州、幽州各军镇盘状纠结，朝廷只有依仗这五州之地来控制他们。
English: At the right time, Tu Tu Zongcheng said that he had issued a document, instructing Wu Chongyin to be a sentence. When Zhao Yi stayed, Li Junjin said: Zhao Yi belongs to the five states of Zhe, Zou, Zou, Tan and Zheng, which occupy an important position in the overall situation in the east of Shaoshan. Wei Bo, Hengzhou and Yuzhou are entangled in the form of a disk, and the imperial court can only control them by relying on these five states.

古文：邢、滋、洺入其腹内，诚国之宝地，安危所系也。
现代文：邢州、磁州、州伸展到魏博等军镇的中心地区，诚然是国家的宝地，关系着国家的安全与危亡。
English: The central regions of the military towns such as Bozhou, Magnetized Zhou, and Zhou extending to Weibo, are indeed national treasures, and are related to the security and peril of the country.

古文：向为从史所据，使朝廷旰食，今幸而得之，承璀复以与重胤，臣闻之惊叹，实所痛心！
现代文：从前昭义被卢从史占据，已使朝廷为此忙得顾不上按时吃饭，现在幸亏得到了昭义，但吐突承璀又将昭义交给了乌重胤，我得知消息后惊叹不已，实在感到痛心！
English: In the past, Shouyi was occupied by Lu Congshi, which made the imperial court so busy that it could not attend to meals on time. Now, fortunately, Shouyi has been obtained, but Tutu Chengjun has also handed over Shouyi to Wu Chongyin. I was stunned when I learned the news, I was really saddened!

古文：昨国家诱执从史，虽为长策，已失大体。
现代文：不久前朝廷将卢从史诱捕，即使这算是长远的筹策，却也已经失去了原则。
English: Not long ago, the imperial court entrapped Lu Congshi. Even if this is a long-term strategy, it has lost its principle.

古文：今承璀又以文牒差人为重镇留后，为之求旌节，无君之心，孰甚于此！
现代文：现在，吐突承璀又送发文书，指派乌重胤担当这一重要军镇的留后，并请求任命他为节度使，目无君主的居心，还有比这更为严重的吗！
English: Now, there is nothing more serious than the fact that Tu Tu Chengjun sent another letter, assigning Wu Chungyin to be in charge of the rear of this important military town, and requesting that he be appointed as the festival envoy, without the intention of the monarch!

古文：陛下昨日得昭义，人神同庆，威令再立；今日忽以授本军牙将，物情顿沮，纪纲大紊。
现代文：陛下日前取得昭义，人神共同庆祝，军政号令再次树立起来。现在忽然将昭义授给本军中的牙将，众望顿时沮丧，法度大为紊乱。
English: His Majesty recently received the title of Shōyō, people and gods celebrated together, and the military and political order was re-established. Now, suddenly, the title of Shōyō will be awarded to the commander of the army, people are suddenly frustrated, and the law is in great disorder.

古文：校计利害，更不若从史为之。
现代文：算计此中的好处与坏处，反而不如由卢从史担任节度使。
English: Considering the benefits and drawbacks of this, it would be better for Lu Zengshi to serve as the moderator.

古文：何则？
现代文：为什么这样说呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：从史虽蓄奸谋，已是朝廷牧伯。
现代文：虽然卢从史蓄积着邪恶的阴谋，但已经是朝廷任命的州道长官。
English: Although Lu Congshi has accumulated evil plots, he is already a state highway commissioner appointed by the court.

古文：重胤出于列校，以承璀一牒代之，窃恐河南、北诸侯闻之，无不愤怒，耻与为伍。
现代文：而乌重胤只是众多将官中的一员，因吐突承璀的一纸文书便代替了卢从史，我私下里担心河南、河北的节帅得知消息后，没有不感到愤怒，以与他同列为耻辱的。
English: But Wu Chung-yin is just one of many generals. He replaced Lu Congshi because of a paper written by Tu Tu Chengyu. Privately, I am worried that the marshals of Henan and Hebei provinces will not be able to help but feel angry after learning the news, and will be classified as a disgrace along with him.

古文：且谓承璀诱重胤使逐从史而代其位，彼人人麾下各有将校，能无自危乎！
现代文：而且他们将会说是吐突承璀诱使乌重胤驱逐卢从史，从而代替了他的职位的，他们每个人的部下都有将官，怎么能够不感到自危呢！
English: Moreover, they will say that it was Tucu Chengyu who induced Wu Chongyan to expel Lu Congshi and thus replace him in his post. Each of them has generals under his command. How can they not feel threatened!

古文：傥刘济、茂昭、季安、执恭、韩弘、师道继有章表陈其情状，并指承璀专命之罪，不知陛下何以处之？
现代文：倘若刘济、张茂昭、田季安、程执恭、韩弘，李师道一个接着一个地进献章表，陈述这种情形，并且指责吐突承璀专擅君命的罪行，不知道陛下怎样处理？
English: If Liu Ji, Zhang Maozhao, Tian Ji'an, Cheng Xigong, Han Hong, and Li Shidao, one after another, were to go into the medal table, state this situation, and accuse the Tutsi of the crime of taking the emperor's life, I don't know how His Majesty would deal with it.

古文：若皆不报，则众怒益甚；若为之改除，则朝廷之威重去矣。 
现代文：如果陛下一概不予答复，大家的怒气就会更为加重；如果陛下因此改为任命他人，朝廷的威严便失去了。 
English: If His Majesty does not reply at all, everyone's anger will increase; if His Majesty appoints someone else as a result, the dignity of the court will be lost.

古文：上复使枢密使梁守谦密谋于绛曰： 今重胤已总军务，事不得已，须应与节。 
现代文：宪宗又让枢密使梁宗谦暗中与李绛商量说： 现在乌重胤已经总揽军中事务，事情出于迫不得已，应该授给他节度使的旌节。 
English: Gensong also had the imperial envoy, Liang Zongqian, secretly discuss with Li Xi, saying, "Now that Wu Chungyin has completely taken over the affairs of the army, the matter is out of necessity, and he should be given the title of imperial envoy."

古文：对曰： 从史为帅不由朝廷，故启其邪心，终成逆节。
现代文：李绛回答说： 卢从史担任主帅便不是由朝廷任命的，所以才启动了他邪恶的意图，终于做出违反节操的事情。
English: Li Wei replied: Lu Zengshi was not appointed by the imperial court to be the head coach, so he started his evil intention and finally did something that violated discipline.

古文：今以重胤典兵，即授之节，威福之柄不在朝廷，何以异于从史乎！
现代文：现在，由于乌重胤掌管军事，朝廷便授给他节度使的旌节，刑赏的权柄不掌握在朝廷手中，与卢从史担任节度使又有什么区别呢！
English: Now, since Wu Chung-yin is in charge of the military, the imperial court has given him the title of the commander of the festival. The power of punishment and reward is not in the hands of the imperial court. What is the difference between him and Lu Congshi as the commander of the festival?

古文：重胤之得河阳，已为望外之福，岂敢更为旅拒！
现代文：乌重胤能够得到河阳，已经是超出他向往的福气了，难道他还有胆量聚众抗拒吗！
English: The fact that Wu Chung-yin was able to get to Heyang is already a blessing beyond his wildest dreams. Does he still have the guts to gather a crowd to resist?

古文：况重胤所以能执从史，本以杖顺成功，一旦自逆诏命，安知同列不袭其迹而动乎！
现代文：何况乌重胤能够捉获卢从史的原因，本来是由于他坚持顺承朝廷才取得成功的。忽然连他自己也违背诏书的命令，怎么能够知道同事们会不沿袭他的行径，从而有所行动呢！
English: Moreover, the reason why Wu Chung-yin was able to capture Lu Zengshi was originally due to his insistence on obeying the imperial court. Suddenly, even he himself violated the order of the edict, how could he know that his colleagues would not follow his actions and thus take action!

古文：重胤军中等夷甚多，必不愿重胤独为主帅。
现代文：乌重胤在军队中的同辈为数众多，他们肯定不希望乌重胤独自出任主帅。
English: Wu Chung-yin's peers in the military are numerous, and they certainly do not want Wu Chung-yin to be the head coach alone.

古文：移之他镇，乃惬众心，何忧其致乱乎！ 
现代文：将他改任到别的军镇去，才能使大家感到满意，哪里需要为招致变乱而担忧呢！ 
English: If his transfer to another garrison town is satisfactory, there is no need to worry about causing disturbances!

古文：上悦，皆如其请。
现代文：宪宗高兴起来，完全按照他的请求去做。
English: Kenzong was delighted and did exactly as he had asked.

古文：壬辰，以重胤为河阳节度使，元阳为昭义节度使。
现代文：壬辰，任命乌重胤为河阳节度使，任命孟元阳为昭义节度使。
English: In Imjin, Wu Shigetian was appointed as the envoy to the Heyang Festival, and Meng Yuanyang was appointed as the envoy to the Shouyi Festival.

古文：戊戌，贬卢从史欢州司马。
现代文：戊戌，宪宗将卢从史贬为州司马。
English: At the same time, Kenzong relegated Lu from history to the post of prefectural secretary.

古文：五月，乙巳，昭义军三千馀人夜溃，奔魏州。
现代文：五月，乙巳，昭义军三千多人在夜间溃散，逃奔魏州。
English: In May, at the eleventh hour, more than three thousand soldiers of the Shōyō army broke up at night and fled to Weizhou.

古文：刘济奏拔安平。
现代文：刘济奏称攻克了安平。
English: Liu Jisong claimed to have conquered Anping.

古文：庚申，吐蕃遣其臣论思邪热入见，且归路泌、郑叔矩之柩。
现代文：庚申，吐蕃派遣臣下论思邪热入京朝见，而且归还了路泌和郑叔矩的灵柩。
English: Goshun, Tubo sent his vassals to the imperial court in Beijing to discuss the evil thoughts, and returned the coffins of Lu Xuan and Zheng Shukun.

古文：甲子，奚寇灵州。
现代文：甲子，奚人侵犯灵州。
English: Jiazi, Xiangren invade Lingzhou.

古文：六月，甲申，白居易复上奏，以为： 臣比请罢兵，今之事势，又不如前，不知陛下复何所待！ 
现代文：六月，甲申，白居易再次进献奏疏认为： 近来我曾请求停止用兵，现在事情的趋势，又不如以前了，不知道陛下还要等待什么！ 
English: In June, Jiashen, Bai Juyi once again made a presentation, saying: Recently, I have asked to stop the use of soldiers, and now the trend of things is not as good as before, I don't know what your majesty has to wait for!

古文：是时，上每有军国大事，必与诸学士谋之。
现代文：当时，每当遇到军队和国家重大的事情，宪宗必定要与各位翰林学士商量。
English: At that time, whenever the military and the country were confronted with important matters, the Constitutionalists would certainly have to consult with the scholars of Hanlin.

古文：尝逾月不见学士，李绛等上言： 臣等饱食不言，其自为计则得矣，如陛下何！
现代文：宪宗曾经有一个多月没有召见翰林学士，李绛等人便进言说： 我等饱食终日，不用进言，若是为自己着想，这是够好的了，但是这对陛下怎么样呢！
English: It had been more than a month since Kenzong had summoned Hanlin, and Li Lan and the others began to speak: "We wait for a full meal all day, we don't need to speak, if it's for our own sake, that's good enough, but what about His Majesty!

古文：陛下询访理道，开纳直言，实天下之幸，岂臣等之幸！ 
现代文：陛下征询访求治国的方策，开辟言路，采纳谏言，这实在是国家的幸运，岂是我等的幸运！ 
English: His Majesty's request for a visit to seek advice on how to run the country, to open up a dialogue, and to accept advice, this is truly fortunate for the country, and fortunate for us!

古文：上遽令 明日三殿对来。 
现代文：宪宗连忙下令： 明天你们前来麟德殿奏对吧。 
English: Kenzong hastily ordered: "Tomorrow, you will come to the Lin De Hall to perform, right?"

古文：白居易尝因论事，言 陛下错 ，上色庄而罢，密召承旨李绛，谓： 白居易小臣不逊，须令出院。 
现代文：白居易有一次由于在议论事情时说 陛下错了 ，宪宗面色庄重严肃地停止了谈话，暗中将翰林学士承旨李绛召来，告诉他说： 白居易这个小臣出言不逊，必须让他退出翰林院。 
English: On one occasion, because Bai Juyi said, "Your Majesty is wrong" when discussing a matter, the Emperor solemnly stopped the conversation and secretly summoned Li Xi, the Hanlin Scholar, and told him: Bai Juyi, this junior minister, has made insolent remarks and must be removed from the Hanlin Academy.

古文：绛曰： 陛下容纳直言，故群臣敢竭诚无隐。
现代文：李绛说： 陛下能够容纳直率的进言，所以群臣才敢竭尽诚心，不作隐瞒。
English: Li Wei said: His Majesty is able to accept straightforward advice, so the ministers dare to be sincere and not conceal anything.

古文：居易言虽少思，志在纳忠。
现代文：白居易的话虽然有欠思考，但本意是要进献忠心。
English: Although Bai Juyi's words were ill-considered, his intention was to promote loyalty.

古文：陛下今日罪之，臣恐天下各思箝口，非所以广聪明，昭圣德也。 
现代文：现在倘若陛下将他处以罪罚，我担心天下的人们都各自想要缄默不语了，这可不是开拓视听，彰明至上德行的办法啊。 
English: Now, if His Majesty were to punish him, I am afraid that people all over the world would want to remain silent. This is not the way to open up the audio-visual world and highlight the highest virtues.

古文：上悦，待居易如初。
现代文：宪宗高兴起来，对待白居易也还像往常一样。
English: Kenzong became happy and treated Bai Juyi as usual.

古文：上尝欲近猎苑中，至蓬莱池西，谓左右曰： 李绛必谏，不如且止。 
现代文：宪宗曾经准备就近在禁苑中打猎，来到蓬莱池的西面，对周围的人们说： 李绛肯定是要进谏的，不如姑且停止吧。 
English: Kenzong had planned to go hunting in the nearby Forbidden Garden, came to the west side of the Penglai Pond, and said to the people around him: Li Qian is definitely going to enter the pond, why not just stop it.

古文：秋，七月，庚子，王承宗遣使自陈为卢从史所离间，乞输贡赋，请官吏，许其自新。
现代文：秋季，七月，庚子，王承宗派遣使者陈述自己是被卢从史从中的挑拨的，请求缴纳赋税，要求朝廷任命官吏，允许他改过自新。
English: In the autumn, in July, Wang Chengzong sent an envoy to Geng Zi, stating that he was instigated by Lu Congshi, requesting to pay taxes, asking the court to appoint officials, and allowing him to reform.

古文：李师道等数上表请雪承宗，朝廷亦以师久无功，丁未，制洗雪承宗，以为成德军节度使，复以德、棣二州与之。悉罢诸道行营将士，共赐布帛二十八万端匹，加刘济中书令。
现代文：李师道等人屡次上表请求为王承宗平反，朝廷也由于长期用兵，无所建树，丁未，宪宗便颁布制书为王承宗平反，任命他为成德军节度使，将德州与棣州两地重新归属给他，将各道行营的将士们全部遣还，一共向他们颁赐布帛二十八万端匹，还加封刘济为中书令。
English: Li Shidao and others repeatedly petitioned for the rehabilitation of Wang Chengzong, but the imperial court did not do anything due to the long-term use of troops. However, the Emperor issued a document to rehabilitate Wang Chengzong, appointed him as the festival envoy of the Chengde Army, reattached Texas and Zhangzhou to him, repatriated all the soldiers from each province, and awarded them a total of 280,000 pieces of cloth, and also added Liu Ji as a Chinese letter.

古文：刘济之讨王承宗也，以长子绲为副大使，掌幽州留务。
现代文：刘济讨伐王承宗时，任命长子刘绲为节度副大使，掌管幽州留后事务。
English: When Liu Jie was fighting against Wang Chengzong, he appointed his eldest son Liu Jie as the deputy ambassador of the festival, in charge of the affairs of Yuzhou.

古文：济军瀛州，次子总为瀛州刺史，济署行营都知兵马使，使屯饶阳。
现代文：刘济在瀛州驻扎，而次子刘总担任瀛州刺史，于是刘济便让刘总暂任行营都知兵马使，让他屯兵饶阳。
English: Liu Ji was stationed in Bozhou, while his second son Liu Zong served as the governor of Bozhou. Therefore, Liu Zong asked Liu Zong to temporarily serve as the envoy of the Duchy of Sichuan and let him stay in Raoyang.

古文：济有疾，总与判官张、孔目官成国宝谋，诈使人从长安来，曰： 朝廷以相公逗留无功，已除副大使为节度使矣。 
现代文：适逢刘济身患疾病，刘总与判官张、孔目官成国宝计议，派人诈称从长安前来，对刘济说： 由于您停留不前，无所建树，朝廷已经任命副大使刘绲为节度使了。 
English: When Liu Jie fell ill, Liu Zong discussed with the judge Zhang and the Confucius official to become a national treasure. He sent someone to fraudulently come from Chang'an and said to Liu Jie: Since you are not moving forward and have nothing to do, the imperial court has appointed Vice-Ambassador Liu Jie as a ceremonial envoy.

古文：明日，又使人来告曰： 副大使旌节已至太原。 
现代文：第二天，刘总又让人前来向刘济报告说： 前来颁送旌节，任命副大使为节度使的使者已经来到太原。 
English: The next day, Liu Zong sent someone to report to Liu Ji: The envoy who came to present the Dragon Boat Festival and appoint the deputy ambassador as the festival envoy has arrived in Taiyuan.

古文：又使人走而呼曰： 旌节已过代州。 
现代文：接着又使人边跑边喊地说： 颁送节度使旌节的使者已经过了代州。 
English: Then he called out to the people as they ran: "The messenger of the festival has passed through Daizhou.

古文：举军惊骇。
现代文：全军将士都很惊异。
English: All the soldiers were surprised.

古文：济愤怒不知所为，杀大将素与绲厚者数十人，追绲诣行营，以张兄皋代知留务。
现代文：刘济心怀愤怒，不知所措，便斩杀了平常与刘绲亲善的大将几十个人，召刘绲立即到行营来，而任命张的哥哥张皋代替他掌管留后事务。
English: Liu Ji was furious and at a loss, so he killed dozens of generals who were usually friendly with Liu Bei, called Liu Bei to the camp immediately, and appointed Zhang's brother Zhang Bei to take charge of the affairs after he left.

古文：济自朝至日昃不食，渴索饮，总因置毒而进之。乙卯，济薨。
现代文：从早晨起床直到太阳偏西，刘济都未进餐，觉得口渴，便要水渴，刘总乘机在水中下了毒药，送给刘济喝了。乙卯，刘济去世。
English: From getting up in the morning until the westward movement of the sun, Liu Zi did not have a meal. Feeling thirsty, he asked for water. Liu Zong took the opportunity to put poison in the water and gave it to Liu Zi to drink. Then, Liu Zi died.

古文：绲行至涿州，总矫以父命杖杀之，遂领军务。
现代文：刘绲走到涿州时，刘总诈称父亲的命令，将他用棍捧打死，于是刘总便统领了军中事务。
English: When Liu Ye went to Ganzhou, General Liu Cheated his father's order and beat him to death with a club, so General Liu took charge of the affairs of the army.

古文：岭南监军许遂振以飞语毁节度使杨于陵于上，上命召于陵还，除冗官。
现代文：岭南监军许遂振用不实之辞向宪宗诽谤节度使杨於陵。宪宗命令将杨於陵召回朝廷，任命他当闲散的官员。
English: The Lingnan supervisor, Xu Sui Zhen, used false words to slander Yang Yuling. The emperor ordered Yang Yuling to be recalled to the imperial court and appointed him as an idle official.

古文：裴垍曰： 于陵性廉直，陛下以遂振故黜籓臣，不可。 
现代文：裴说： 杨於陵生性廉洁耿直，陛下因许遂振的原故贬黜节帅，这是不合适的。 
English: Bae said: Yang Yuling is honest and upright, and it is inappropriate for His Majesty to disparage him for the reason of Xu Sui Zhen.

古文：丁巳，以于陵为吏部侍郎。
现代文：丁巳，宪宗任命杨於陵为吏部侍郎。
English: Soon after, Emperor Gensong appointed Yang Yuling as the attendant of the cadre.

古文：遂振寻自抵罪。
现代文：不久，许振遂自行承受了应负的罪责。
English: Soon, Xu Zhensu took the blame on his own.

古文：八月，乙亥，上与宰相语及神仙，问： 果有之乎？ 
现代文：八月，乙亥，宪宗与宰相谈到神仙，宪宗问道： 果真有神仙吗？ 
English: In August, the Year of the Boar, Kenzong and the Prime Minister talked about the immortals, and Kenzong asked: Are there really immortals?

古文：李籓对曰： 秦始皇、汉武帝学仙之效，具载前史，太宗服天竺僧长年药致疾，此古今之明戒也。
现代文：李藩回答说： 秦始皇、汉武帝学习仙术的结果，全都记载在以往的史书中，太宗服用天竺僧人的长生不老之药招致疾病，这便是由古代到现在的明戒啊。
English: Li Han replied: The results of Emperor Qin Shi Huang and Emperor Han Wudi's study of magic are all recorded in the previous history books. Taizong took the elixir of immortality from the celestial monks and caused illness. This is a clear commandment from ancient times to the present.

古文：陛下春秋鼎盛，方励志太平，宜拒绝方士之说。
现代文：陛下年富力强，正在勉励心志，再造太平盛世，应当拒绝方术之士的说教。
English: His Majesty, who is young and vigorous, and who is working hard to re-create a peaceful and prosperous world, should reject the teachings of the sorcerers.

古文：苟道盛德充，人安国理，何忧无尧、舜之寿乎！ 
现代文：如果能够使道德盛大而充盈，人民安居乐业，国家政治修明，还用担心没有唐尧、虞舜的年寿吗！ 
English: If we can make morality grand and abundant, the people live and work in peace and contentment, and the national politics clear, do we still have to worry about the longevity of Tang Xuan and Yu Xuan?

古文：九月，己亥，吐突承璀自行营还。
现代文：九月，己亥，吐突承璀从行营回到朝廷。
English: In September, Ji Hai, Tutu Chengyu returned to the imperial court from the camp.

古文：辛亥，复为左卫上将军，充左军中尉。
现代文：辛亥，吐突承璀重新担任左卫上将军，充任左神策军中尉。
English: Xinhai, Tutu Chengjun re-assumed the post of General of the Left Division and served as Lieutenant of the Left Division.

古文：裴垍曰： 承璀首唱用兵，疲弊天下，卒无成功，陛下纵以旧恩不加显戮，岂得全不贬黜以谢天下乎！ 
现代文：裴说： 吐突承璀首先提倡使用武力，使天下百姓穷乏困苦，到头来还是不能获得成功。即使陛下因旧日的恩情而不肯将他处决示众，为了向天下百姓道歉，难道能够对他全然不加贬斥吗？ 
English: Bae said, "Tutu Chengjun first advocated the use of force to impoverish the people of the world, but in the end he could not succeed. Even if His Majesty did not want to publicly execute him because of his old-fashioned kindness, in order to apologize to the people of the world, can he not be disparaged at all?

古文：给事中段平仲、吕元膺言承璀可斩。
现代文：给事中段平仲与吕元膺说吐突承璀应当斩杀。
English: In the middle of the matter, Heizhong and Lu Yuanjun said that Tuyong Chengjun should be killed.

古文：李绛奏称： 陛下不责承璀，他日复有败军之将，何以处之？
现代文：李绛上奏声称： 如果陛下不肯处罚吐突承璀，以后再出现战败的将领，能够怎样处治他们呢？
English: Li Qiye said at the beginning of his speech: If Your Majesty is not willing to punish the generals of Tu Duc Cheng Ho, how will you deal with the defeated generals in the future?

古文：若或诛之，则同罪异罚，彼必不服；若或释之，则谁不保身而玩寇乎！
现代文：如果诛杀他们，那便是同样的罪责，不同的处罚，他们定然不会服气；如果对他们免予治罪，那还有谁不保全自身，姑息敌军呢！
English: If they are killed, it is the same guilt, different punishment, they will certainly not submit; if they are exempted from punishment, then who will not protect themselves and appease the enemy army!

古文：愿陛下割不忍之恩，行不易之典，使将帅有所惩劝。 
现代文：希望陛下割舍对他不能狠下心来的私恩，行使不可更改的刑典，使将帅们得到一些警戒与勉励。 
English: I hope that His Majesty will give up his unmerited favor and exercise the unchangeable penal code, so that the generals can get some warning and encouragement.

古文：间二日，上罢承璀中尉，降为军器使。中外相贺。
现代文：隔了两天，宪宗免除了吐突承璀左神策军中尉的职务，将他降职为军器使，朝廷内外的人们都相互祝贺。
English: Two days later, Emperor Gensong relieved Tu Tsung-cheng of his post as lieutenant of the Shenso army and demoted him to a military attaché. People inside and outside the imperial court congratulated each other.

古文：裴垍得风疾，上甚惜之，中使候问旁午于道。
现代文：裴得了风疾，宪宗很是为他惋惜，派去问候病情的中使在道路上往来纷繁。
English: When Bae fell ill with typhoid, Kenzong was very sorry for him. Envoys were sent to greet him, and there was a lot of traffic on the road.

古文：丙寅，以太常卿权德舆为礼部尚书、同平章事。
现代文：丙寅，宪宗任命太常卿权德舆为礼部尚书、同平章事。
English: Cui Yin, the founder of Confucianism, appointed Tai Changqing Quan Deyi as the head of the ceremonial department and the secretary of the same level.

古文：义武节度使张茂昭请除代人，欲举族入朝。
现代文：义武节度使张茂昭请求任命代替自己的人员，准备整个家族入京朝见。
English: The Yiwu Festival made Zhang Maozhao request the appointment of a person to replace him and prepare the whole family to enter Beijing for the imperial court.

古文：河北诸镇互遣人说止之，茂昭不从，凡四上表。
现代文：河北各藩镇交互派人前来劝阻，张茂昭不肯听从。
English: The provinces and towns of Hebei sent people to dissuade him, but Zhang Maozhao refused to listen.

古文：上乃许之。以左庶子任迪简为义武行军司马。
现代文：张茂昭共计四次上表，宪宗才答应了他的请求，任命左庶子任迪简为义武行军司马。
English: Zhang Maozhao submitted a total of four times, and it was only then that Xianzong agreed to his request and appointed his left illegitimate son, Ren Dijan, as the military commander of the military expedition.

古文：茂昭悉以易、定二州簿书管钥授迪简，遣其妻子先行，曰： 吾不欲子孙染于污俗。 
现代文：张茂昭将易州、定州的帐簿文书和锁头钥匙悉数交给了任迪简，打发他的妻子儿女率先上路，还说： 我不想让自己的子孙后代沾染上污浊的习俗。 
English: Zhang Maozhao handed over all the account book documents and lock keys of Yizhou and Dingzhou to Ren Diyan, and sent his wife and children on the road first, saying: I don't want my children and grandchildren to be contaminated with dirty customs.

古文：茂昭既去，冬，十月，戊寅，虞侯杨伯玉作乱，囚迪简，辛已，义武将士共杀伯玉。
现代文：张茂昭离去后，冬季，十月，戊寅，虞候杨伯玉发起变乱，将任迪简囚禁起来。辛巳，义武的将士们一起杀掉了杨伯玉。
English: After Zhang Maozhao left, in the winter, in October, Wu Yin and Gu Gu waited for Yang Bo-yu to initiate a mutiny and imprison Ren Di-jian. Soon, the soldiers of Yi Wu killed Yang Bo-yu together.

古文：兵马使张佐元又作乱，囚迪简，迪简乞归朝。
现代文：兵马使张佐元又一次发起变乱，将任迪简囚禁起，任迪简请求返回朝廷。
English: Zhang Sogen once again instigated a mutiny and had Ren Dijan imprisoned. Ren Dijan requested to return to the imperial court.

古文：既而将士复杀佐元，奉迪简主军务。
现代文：不久，将士们又将张佐元杀掉，拥戴任迪简主持军中事务。
English: Not long after, the soldiers killed Zhang Sa Yuan and appointed Ren Di Jian to preside over the affairs of the military.

古文：时易定府库罄竭，闾阎亦空，迪简无以犒士，乃设粝饭与士卒共食之，身居戟门下经月。
现代文：当时，易州、定州的库存消耗已尽，居民也散失一空，任迪简拿不出什么东西来犒劳将士，便备办了粗米饭，与士兵们共同进餐。
English: At that time, the stocks of Yizhou and Dingzhou were exhausted, and the residents were also scattered. Ren Diyan could not bring anything to reward the soldiers, so he prepared coarse rice and had a meal with the soldiers.

古文：将士感之，共请迪简还寝，然后得安其位。
现代文：他亲身在军府的大门下面住了一个月，将士们被他打动了，一齐请任迪简回去就寝，此后任迪简的位子才得以安稳下来。
English: He personally lived under the gate of the military headquarters for a month. The soldiers were moved by him and all invited Ren Dizhen to go back to bed. After that, Ren Dizhen's position was stabilized.

古文：上命以绫绢十万匹赐易定将士。
现代文：宪宗命令拿出绫绢十万匹，颁赐给易州、定州的将士们。
English: Kenzong ordered to take out 100,000 yakitori and give them to the soldiers of Yizhou and Dingzhou.

古文：壬辰，以迪简为义武节度使。
现代文：壬辰，皇帝任命任迪简为义武节度使。
English: In Imjin, the emperor appointed Ren Dijian as the envoy of the Yiwu Festival.

古文：甲午，以张茂昭为河中、慈、隰、晋、绛节度使，从行将校皆拜官。
现代文：甲午，皇帝任命张茂昭为河中、慈、隰、晋、绛节度使，跟随他同行的将官一概授给官职。
English: In the afternoon of the same day, the emperor appointed Zhang Maozhao as the special envoy to the Chinese provinces of Hechong, Cixi, Yan, Jin and Yunnan, and all the generals who accompanied him were assigned to official positions.

古文：右金吾大将军伊慎以钱三万缗赂右军中尉第五从直，求河中节度使。
现代文：右金吾大将军伊慎以三万缗钱贿赂右军中尉第五从直，要求得到河中节度使的职务。
English: Kingu's right-hand general, Ishin, bribed the right-hand army's fifth lieutenant, Zongzhi, with 30,000 baht and demanded to be given the post of Kechu's regent.

古文：从直恐事泄，奏之。
现代文：第五从直惟恐事情泄露出去，便将此事奏报了。
English: The fifth, fearing that the matter would be leaked, reported the matter to the police.

古文：十一月，庚子，贬慎为右卫将军，坐死者三人。
现代文：十一月，庚子，宪宗将伊慎贬为右卫将军，有三个人因此获罪致死。
English: In November, Geng Zi and Kenzong demoted Isin to the rank of U-guard general, and three people were sentenced to death for this.

古文：初，慎自安州入朝，留其子宥主留事，朝廷因以为安州刺史，未能去也。
现代文：当初，伊慎由安州入京朝见，将他的儿子伊宥留下来主持留后事务，朝廷因而任命伊宥为安州刺史，所以他便没有能够离开安州。
English: At first, Ishin left Anzhou to visit the imperial court in Beijing, leaving his son Iyu to preside over the affairs of the imperial court. As a result, the imperial court appointed Iyu as the crown prince of Anzhou, so he was not able to leave Anzhou.

古文：会宥母卒于长安，宥利于兵权，不时发丧。
现代文：适逢伊宥的母亲在长安去世，伊宥贪图兵权，不肯按时将死讯公布于众。
English: When Iyu's mother died in Chang'an, Iyu coveted military power and refused to announce her death to the public on time.

古文：鄂岳观察使郗士美遣僚属以事过其境，宥出迎，因告以凶问，先备篮舆，即日遣之。
现代文：鄂岳观察使郗士美派遣所属官吏办事经过安州疆境，伊宥出来迎接，于是告诉他母亲的死讯，先准备好竹轿，当天便让他离去了。
English: The observation of Mt. Egakun made Gong Shimei send its officials to pass through the border of Anzhou, and Iyu came out to meet them. He then told him about his mother's death. First, he prepared a bamboo sedan, and let him leave the same day.

古文：甲辰，会王纁薨。
现代文：甲辰，会王李去世。
English: On the seventh day of the first lunar month, the king of the association, Li Yuxuan, passed away.

古文：庚戌，以前河中节度使王锷为河东节度使。
现代文：庚戌，宪宗任命前任河中节度使王锷为河东节度使。
English: Geng Zong, Kenzong appointed the predecessor of the Mid-Hebei Festival Envoy Wang Xi as the Mid-Hebei Festival Envoy.

古文：上左右受锷厚赂，多称誉之，上命锷兼平章事，李籓固执以为不可。
现代文：宪宗身边的人们收受了王锷丰厚的贿赂，多数称赞他。宪宗让王锷兼任平章事，李藩坚持认为这是不适当的。
English: The Li clan insisted that it was inappropriate for Wang Xi, who had been bribed handsomely by people close to Emperor Xuanzong, to also hold the title of Pingzhang, and many praised him.

古文：权德舆曰： 宰相非序进之官。
现代文：权德舆说 宰相不是按照等次进升的官职。
English: The pro-government media said that the prime minister is not a post that is promoted according to the order of precedence.

古文：唐兴以来，方镇非大忠大勋，则跋扈者，朝廷或不得已而加之。
现代文：唐朝兴起以来，若不是对特别忠心或立有大功的藩镇，就是对骄横强暴的节帅，朝廷有时出于迫不得已，才将宰相的官职授给他们。
English: Since the rise of the Tang Dynasty, the imperial court has sometimes, out of necessity, bestowed the post of prime minister on either a particularly loyal or highly meritorious hanzhen or an arrogant and violent section commander.

古文：今锷既无忠勋，朝廷又非不得已，何为遽以此名假之！ 
现代文：现在，王锷既没有显示忠心，建立勋劳，朝廷也不是迫不得已，为什么要忙着将这个名义给予他呢！ 
English: Now, since Wang Xi did not show loyalty and establish the decoration, and the imperial court is not forced to do so, why should they be so busy to give him this name!

古文：上乃止。
现代文：于是，宪宗不再任命王锷为宰相。
English: The Emperor finally stopped.

古文：锷有吏才，工于完聚。
现代文：王锷具有治理地方的才干，擅长修城储粮一类事务。
English: Wang Hui has the ability to govern the local government, and is good at matters such as the construction of the city and grain storage.

古文：范希朝以河东全军出屯河北，耗散甚众。
现代文：范希朝率领河东全军前往河北地区驻扎，人力物力的损耗很大。
English: Fan Xichang led the entire army of Hedong to the Hebei region to be stationed, and the loss of manpower and material resources was great.

古文：锷到镇之初，兵不满三万人，马不过六百匹，岁馀，兵至五万人，马有五千匹，器械精利，仓库充实，又进家财三十万缗，上复欲加锷平章事。
现代文：王锷来到军镇的初期，兵员不满三万人，马匹不超过六百匹。经过一年多的时间，兵员达到五万人，马匹拥有五千匹，军事器具精良而锋利，仓库中的物资装得满满的。
English: In the early days when Wang Hui came to the military town, the number of soldiers was less than 30,000 and the number of horses was no more than 600. After more than a year, the number of soldiers reached 50,000 and the number of horses was 5,000. The military equipment was sophisticated and sharp, and the materials in the warehouse were full.

古文：李绛谏曰： 锷在太原，虽颇著绩效，今因献家财而命之，若后世何！ 
现代文：王锷还进献自家财物三十万缗，宪宗又打算加封王锷为平章事，李绛规劝说： 王锷任职太原，虽然取得的功效很是显著，但现在由于贡献自家财物便任命他为宰相，后世将怎样看待此事呢！ 
English: Wang Hui also donated 300,000 baht of his own property, and Emperor Xianzong also planned to add Wang Hui's title to Taiyuan. Li Yijie persuaded: Wang Hui served in Taiyuan, although the effect he achieved was very significant, but now, because of the contribution of his own property, he appointed him as prime minister. How will future generations look at this matter?

古文：上乃止。
现代文：于是，宪宗再次打消了任命王锷为相的念头。
English: The Emperor finally stopped.

古文：中书侍郎、同平章事裴土自数以疾辞位。庚申，罢为兵部尚书。
现代文：中书侍郎裴屡次因疾病要求辞去相位，庚申，宪宗将裴罢免为兵部尚书。
English: Bae, the attendant of the middle secretary, repeatedly asked to resign from the position due to illness. Goshun and Gensong removed Bae from the post of secretary of the military department.

古文：十二月，戊寅，张茂昭入朝，请迁祖考之骨于京兆。
现代文：十二月，戊寅，张茂昭入京朝见，请求将祖父和父亲的骸骨迁移到京兆府安葬。
English: In December, Wu Yin and Zhang Maozhao visited the imperial court in Beijing and requested that the skeletons of their grandfather and father be moved to Jingzhao Prefecture for burial.

古文：壬午，以御史中丞吕元膺为鄂岳观察使。
现代文：壬午，宪宗任命御史中丞吕元膺为鄂岳观察使。
English: In the morning of the 3rd day of the 3rd month, Jianzong appointed the Imperial Historian Lv Yuanqi as the observation envoy to Mt. E.

古文：元膺尝欲夜登城，门已锁，守者不为开。
现代文：有一次，吕元膺在夜间要登城，城门已经上锁，守护城门的人不肯为他打开城门。
English: Once, when Lü Yuanxuan wanted to enter the city at night, the gate was already locked, and the person guarding the gate refused to open it for him.

古文：左右曰： 中丞也。 
现代文：周围的人说： 他是吕中丞啊。 
English: People around him said, "He's Lü Zhongzheng."

古文：对曰： 夜中难辩真伪，虽中丞亦不可。 
现代文：守护城门的人回答说： 夜间难以辨别真假，即使是吕中丞，也不能够打开城门。 
English: The person guarding the gate replied, "At night, it is difficult to distinguish between the true and the false. Even Lü Zhongzheng can't open the gate."

古文：元膺乃还。
现代文：于是，吕元膺便回去了。
English: As a result, Lü Yuanzhang returned home.

古文：明日，擢为重职。
现代文：第二天，守门人被提拔到重要职位上去。
English: The next day, the goalkeeper was promoted to a more important position.

古文：翰林学士、司勋郎中李张面陈吐突承璀专横，语极恳切。
现代文：翰林学士、司勋郎中李绛当着宪宗的面陈诉吐突承璀骄横专断，言辞极为恳切。
English: Hanlin Scholar and Sisunro Junior High School student Li Jie, in front of Emperor Xianzong, made a complaint against Emperor Xuanzong's arrogance and arbitrariness, and his words were extremely sincere.

古文：上作色曰： 卿言太过！ 
现代文：宪宗气得变了脸色说： 你说得太过分了吧！ 
English: Xianzong's face turned pale with anger and said, "You've gone too far!

古文：绛泣曰： 陛下置臣于腹心耳目之地，若臣畏避左右，爱身不言，是臣负陛下；言之而陛下恶闻，乃陛下负臣也。 
现代文：李绛哭泣着说： 陛下将我安置在亲近信任的地位上，如果我在陛下面前畏怯退缩，爱惜自身，不肯进言，这便是我辜负了陛下。我把话讲出来了，但陛下讨厌去听，这就是陛下辜负我了。 
English: Li Yan cried and said, "Your Majesty has placed me in a close and trusted position. If I cower in front of Your Majesty, feel sorry for myself, and refuse to speak, then I have failed Your Majesty. I have spoken out, but Your Majesty hates to listen, then Your Majesty has failed me."

古文：上怒解，曰： 卿所言皆人所不能言，使联闻所不闻，真忠臣也！
现代文：宪宗的怒气消除了，便说： 你讲的全是人们不能讲的，使朕听到了无法得知的事情，是一位真正的忠臣啊！
English: When the anger of the Emperor had subsided, he said, "You have told me everything that people cannot tell, and have made me hear things that I cannot know. You are a true loyal subject!"

古文：他日尽言，皆应如是。 
现代文：你以后尽情而言，完全应该像现在这个样子。 
English: As far as you are concerned, you should be exactly the same as you are now.

古文：己丑，以绛为中书舍人，学士如故。
现代文：己丑，宪宗任命李绛为中书舍人，翰林学士的职务仍如往常。
English: To his dismay, Emperor Xianzong appointed Li Jie as the person in charge of Chinese literature. The position of Hanlin Scholar remained as usual.

古文：绛尝从容谏上聚财，上曰： 今两河数十州，皆国家政令所不及，河、湟数千里，沦于左衽，朕日夜思雪祖宗之耻，而财力不赡，故不得不蓄聚耳。
现代文：李绛曾经从容不迫地规劝皇帝不要聚敛钱财，宪宗说： 现在河南、河北的好几十个州，都没有实行国家的政教法令，河、湟地区的好几千里地，还沦陷在异族手中，朕日夜想着洗雪祖宗的耻辱，但是财力不够丰足，所以不得不积蓄聚敛啊。
English: Li Qiye once calmly advised the emperor not to accumulate money. Xianzong said: Now, dozens of states in Henan and Hebei have not implemented the state's political and religious decrees, and thousands of miles of land in the Hebei and Fujian regions have fallen into the hands of foreigners. I think about the shame of the ancestors day and night, but my financial resources are not sufficient, so I have to accumulate.

古文：不然，朕宫中用度极俭薄，多藏何用邪！ 
现代文：不然，朕在宫廷中的花费极为俭约，多储藏财物又有什么用呢！ 
English: Otherwise, my spending in the court is extremely frugal, and what is the use of storing more wealth!

古文：元和六年辛卯，公元八一一年春，正月，甲辰，以彰义留后吴少阳为节度使。
现代文：六年春季，正月，甲辰，宪宗任命彰义留后吴少阳为节度使。
English: In the spring of the sixth year, in the first month of the year, Jia Chen, Jianzong appointed Wu Shaoyang as the festival envoy after he had stayed in Changyi.

古文：庚申，以前淮南节度使李志甫为中书侍郎，同平章事。
现代文：庚申，宪宗任命前任淮南节度使李吉甫为中书侍郎、同平章事。
English: Goshun, Jianzong appointed his predecessor Huainan Jiedu to make Li Jifu the secretary of the Central Committee and the same rank.

古文：二月壬申，李籓罢为太子詹事。
现代文：二月，壬申，李藩被罢为太子詹事。
English: In February, Jinshin, the Li clan was ousted as Prince Zhanji.

古文：己丑，忻王造薨。
现代文：己丑，忻王李造去世。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, King Li Zou passed away.

古文：宦官恶李绛在翰林，以为户部侍郎，判本司。
现代文：宦官不愿意让李绛在翰林院任职，使他出任户部侍郎，兼管户部。
English: The eunuch was not willing to allow Li Qian to serve in the Hanlin Academy, so he appointed him as the steward of the household and the manager of the household.

古文：上问绛： 故事，户部侍郎皆进羡馀，卿独无进，何也？ 
现代文：宪宗询问李绛说： 依照惯例，户部侍郎都要进献额外税收，唯独你不肯进献，这是为什么呢？ 
English: Kenzong asked Li Yao, "According to the usual practice, all household attendants have to contribute extra taxes, but you refuse to contribute. Why is that?

古文：对曰： 守士之官，厚敛于人以市私恩，天下犹共非之。况户部所掌，皆陛下府库之物，给纳有籍，安得羡馀！
现代文：李绛回答说： 守卫疆土的地方官员，向百姓征收沉重的赋税来换取私人的恩惠，天下的人们尚且共同非难他们，何况户部掌管着的，都是陛下府库中的物品，支出与交纳都有帐簿记载，怎么会有额外的盈余！
English: Li Lan replied: Local officials who guard the territory and collect heavy taxes from the people in exchange for private favors, the people of the world still jointly condemn them. What's more, the items under the control of the Household Department are all items in His Majesty's Treasury, and the expenditure and payment are recorded in the account books. How can there be an extra surplus!

古文：若自左藏输之内藏以为进奉，是犹东库移之西库，臣不敢踵此弊也。 
现代文：如果将财物从左藏转运到内库中去，以此作为进献的供物，这就如同将财物从东边的库房搬动到西边的库房，我可不敢因袭这一弊病啊。 
English: If the property is transferred from Zuohe to the inner storehouse as an offering, it is like moving the property from the eastern storehouse to the western storehouse. I don't dare to attack this evil.

古文：上嘉其直，益重之。
现代文：宪宗嘉许李绛的耿直，更加器重他了。
English: Kenzong appreciated Li Yao's sincerity and respected him even more.

古文：乙巳，上问宰相： 为政宽猛何先？ 
现代文：乙巳，宪宗询问宰相说： 执掌大政的宽和与严厉应当哪个居于首位？ 
English: Instantly, Kenzong asked the prime minister, "Which should be the first place to be in charge of the government, the lenient or the harsh?"

古文：权德舆对曰： 秦以惨刻而亡，汉以宽大而兴。
现代文：权德舆回答说： 秦朝因残酷苛刻而灭亡，汉朝因宽和大度而兴盛。
English: Guan Deyu replied: The Qin Dynasty perished because of its cruelty and harshness, while the Han Dynasty flourished because of its broadness and magnanimity.

古文：太宗观《明堂图》，禁杖人背，是故安、史以来，屡有悖逆之臣，皆旋踵自亡，由祖宗仁政结于人心，人不能忘故也。
现代文：太宗观看《明堂图》，禁止鞭打人们的脊背。所以安禄山、史思明以来，屡次出现悖乱忤逆的臣下，但在转足之间都自取灭亡了。这是由于祖宗的仁政维系着人心，人们不能够忘怀的缘故啊。
English: Taizong watched the "Mingtang Map" and forbade whipping people's backs. Therefore, since Anlu Mountain and Shi Siming, there have been many rebellious and rebellious subjects, but they all self-destructed between turning their feet. This is because the benevolent government of the ancestors maintains the hearts of the people, and people cannot forget it.

古文：然则宽猛之先后可见矣。 
现代文：这样说来，宽和与严厉应该孰先孰后是很清楚的了。 
English: It is clear, then, that leniency and severity should go hand in hand.

古文：上善其言。
现代文：宪宗很赏识权德舆的进言。
English: The emperor thought that what Tanaga said was reasonable.

古文：夏，四月，戊辰，以兵部尚书裴土自为太子宾客，李吉甫恶之也。
现代文：夏季，四月，戊辰，宪宗任命兵部尚书裴为太子宾客，这是因为李吉甫憎恶他的原故。
English: In the summer, in April, at Boshen, Gensong appointed the military commander, Shang Shupei, as the prince's guest, because Li Jifu detested him.

古文：庚午，以刑部侍郎、盐铁转运使卢坦为户部侍郎、判度支。
现代文：庚午，宪宗任命刑部侍郎、盐铁转运使卢坦为户部侍郎、判度支。
English: In the afternoon of the 7th day of the 7th month, Gensong appointed Lutang as the attendant of the criminal department and the transfer agent of salt and iron to be the attendant of the household department and the branch of judgment.

古文：或告泗州刺史薛謇为代北水运使，有异马不以献。
现代文：有人告发泗州刺史薛謇在担任代北水运使时，曾有一匹不同寻常的好马，却没有进献上来。
English: It was reported that when serving as a representative of the North Water Transport, Zhangzhou Zishi Xue Qi had an unusually good horse, but he did not offer it up.

古文：事下度支，使巡官往验，未返，上迟之，使品官刘泰昕按其事。
现代文：事情下交度支查问，命令巡官前去验察，尚未返回，宪宗嫌事情办得太慢，便让品官刘泰昕按察此事。
English: When the matter was handed over for investigation, he ordered the inspector to go and inspect it, but he had not yet returned. Xianzong suspected that the matter was being handled too slowly, so he asked the inspector, Liu Taiyuan, to investigate the matter.

古文：户坦曰： 陛下既使有司验之，又使品官继往，岂大臣不足信于品官乎！
现代文：卢坦说： 既然陛下让主关部门验察此事，却接着又让品官前往，难道是大臣比品官还不值得相信吗！
English: Rutan said: "Since His Majesty had the relevant authorities investigate the matter, and then had the probity officer visit, isn't the minister more worthy of trust than the probity officer?"

古文：臣请先就黜免。 
现代文：请让我先来接受罢免吧。 
English: Please let me accept the dismissal first.

古文：上召泰昕还。
现代文：于是，宪宗将刘泰昕传召回来了。
English: As a result, Gensong summoned Liu Taiyuan back.

古文：五月，前行营粮料使于皋谟、董溪坐赃数千缗，敕贷其死，皋谟流春州，溪流封州。
现代文：五月，前任行营粮料使于皋谟和董溪因贪污数千缗钱财而获罪，宪宗颁敕免除了他们的死罪，于皋谟被流放春州，董溪被流放封州。
English: In May, Yu Zhenmue and Dong Xioru, the former leaders of the grain camp, were found guilty of embezzling thousands of baht in money and property. They were exonerated from the death penalty by the Constitutional Court. Yu Zhenmue was exiled to Chunzhou, and Dong Xioru was exiled to Fuzhou.

古文：行至潭州，并追遣中使赐死。
现代文：当他们走到潭州时，宪宗又追派中使赐他们自裁而死。
English: When they came to Tanzhou, Emperor Xianzong ordered them to commit suicide.

古文：权德舆上言，以为： 皋谟等罪当死，陛下肆诸市朝，谁不惧法！
现代文：权德舆进言认为： 于皋谟等二人的罪行应当处死，陛下将他们陈尸闹市，还有谁敢不畏惧法纪！
English: The opinion of authoritative and moral public opinion is that: the crimes of the two people such as Yu Zhenmo should be put to death, His Majesty will display their corpses in the city, and who else dares not fear the law!

古文：不当已赦而杀之。 
现代文：但陛下不应该在赦免他们以后，却又将他们杀掉。 
English: But Your Majesty should not have pardoned them and then killed them.

古文：溪，晋之子也。
现代文：董溪是董晋的儿子。
English: Dong Xi is the son of Dong Jin.

古文：庚子，以金吾大将军李惟简为凤翔节度使。
现代文：庚子，宪宗任命金吾大将军李惟简为凤翔节度使。
English: Geng Zi, Kenzong appointed Kingu General Li Wei Jian as Feng Xiang's envoy.

古文：陇州地与吐蕃接，旧常朝夕相伺，更入攻抄，人不得息。
现代文：陇州与吐蕃接壤，以往经常天天相互侦察，交替着进入敌方攻打抄掠，人们不得宁息。
English: Zhangzhou borders with Tubo. In the past, they often scouted each other every day, alternately entering the enemy to attack and plunder, and people could not rest peacefully.

古文：惟简以为边将当谨守备，蓄财谷以待寇，不当睹小利，起事盗恩，禁不得妄入其地。
现代文：李惟简认为边疆将领应当周密设防，积蓄资财和谷物，等待敌军的到来，不应当着眼细小的利益，惹起事端，窃取官家的赏赐。
English: Li WeiJian believed that the frontier generals should set up fortifications carefully, accumulate resources and grain, and wait for the arrival of the enemy army. They should not focus on petty interests, stir up trouble, and steal rewards from officials.

古文：益市耕牛，铸农器，以给农之不能自具者，增垦田数十万亩。
现代文：他禁止人们随便进入吐蕃的疆境，同时逐渐购买耕牛，铸造农用器具，以便供给不能自己备办耕牛与农具的农民，结果增垦田地数十万亩。
English: He forbade people to enter the borders of Tubo at will, and at the same time gradually purchased farm cattle and cast farm implements in order to supply farmers who could not prepare their own farm cattle and farm implements. As a result, the farmland increased by hundreds of thousands of mu.

古文：属岁屡稔，公私有馀，贩者流及它方。
现代文：适值一连几年丰收，公家与私人有了余粮，于是商人将粮食贩运到外地出售。
English: After several years of good harvests, the public and private sectors had surplus grain, so merchants transported grain to other places to sell it.

古文：赐振武节度使阿跌光进姓李氏。
现代文：宪宗赐给振武节度使阿跌光进姓氏为李氏。
English: The surname given to Zhenwu Jiedu by the Jianzong was Li.

古文：六月，丁卯，李吉甫奏： 自汉至隋十有三代，设官之多，无如国家者。
现代文：六月，丁卯，李吉甫上奏说： 由秦朝到隋朝的十三个朝代，设置官员的数量，没有比我朝更多的了。
English: In June, Dingwu, Li Jifu said in his report: In the thirteen dynasties from the Qin Dynasty to the Sui Dynasty, the number of appointed officials is no more than that of my dynasty.

古文：天宝以后，中原宿兵，见在可计者八十馀万，其馀为商贾、僧、道不服田亩者什有五六，是常以三分劳筋苦骨之人奉七分待衣坐食之辈也。
现代文：天宝年间以后，中原地区驻屯军队，现在能够计算出来的就有八十多万人，其余作为商人、僧人、道士等不从事农业的人口有十分之五六，这是经常以十分之三的劳苦筋骨的人们去奉养十分之七的不织而衣、不劳而食的人们。
English: After the Tenpo era, the number of soldiers stationed in the Central Plains region can now be calculated to be more than eight hundred thousand. The rest of the population who are not engaged in agriculture, such as merchants, monks, and Taoists, account for fifty-six tenths of the population. This is because people with three tenths of hard work and bones often have to support seven tenths of people who do not weave clothes and do not work.

古文：今内外官以税钱给俸者不下万员，天下千三百馀县，或以一县之地而为州，一乡之民而为县者甚众，请敕有司详定废置，吏员可省者省之，州县可并者并之，入仕之涂可减者减之。
现代文：现在，朝廷内外需要以税收的钱财供给薪俸的官员不少于一万人，全国有一个千三百多个县，以一个县的地方设置成一个州，以一个乡的人口编制成一个县的情况为数很多。请陛下敕令有关部门详细地规定州县的废弃与设立，对可以省除的吏员要省除，对可以合并的州县要合并，对可以减少的入仕途径要减少。
English: At present, there are no less than ten thousand officials inside and outside the Imperial Court who need tax money to provide salaries. There are more than thirteen hundred counties in the country, and there are many cases where a county is set up as a prefecture and a township is set up as a prefecture. I would like to ask Your Majesty to order the relevant departments to stipulate in detail the abandonment and establishment of prefectures and counties, to eliminate officials who can be eliminated, to merge prefectures and counties that can be merged, and to reduce the number of ways to enter the service that can be reduced.

古文：又，国家旧章，依品制俸，官一品月俸钱三十缗；职田禄米不过千斛。
现代文：再者，根据朝廷以往的典章制度，依照官员的品级制定薪俸，一品官员每月薪俸钱三十缗，职田上所产的禄米不超过一千斛。
English: Furthermore, according to the imperial court's previous award system, salaries were set according to the official's rank. An official's monthly salary was 30 mon, and the amount of rice produced in the field did not exceed 1,000 mon.

古文：艰难以来，增置使额，厚给俸钱，大历中，权臣月俸至九千缗，州无大小，刺史皆千缗。
现代文：国家遭受艰难困苦以来，增设诸使的名额，发给优厚的薪俸钱，到大历年间，有权势的大臣每月薪俸达到钱九千缗，各州不分大小，刺史一概每月薪俸钱一千缗。
English: Since the country has suffered hardships, the number of ambassadors has been increased and generous salaries have been paid. By the end of the calendar year, the monthly salary of powerful ministers reached nine thousand baht, and the monthly salary of each state, regardless of size, was one thousand baht.

古文：常兗为相。始立限约，李泌又量其闲剧，随事增加，时谓通济，理难减削。
现代文：常衮担任宰相时，开始设立限制约束，李泌又酌量职务清闲与繁重的不同情况，顺从事情的机宜增加薪俸，当时号称通达融贯，从道理上说来是难以削减的。
English: When Chang Kui served as prime minister, he began to set up restrictions and constraints, and Li Xiu also took into account the different situations of leisure and heavy duties, and increased salaries according to the circumstances. At that time, it was known to be transparent and coherent, and it was difficult to reduce it.

古文：然犹有名存职废，或额去俸存，闲剧之间，厚薄顿异。
现代文：然而，仍然还有名义存在而职事废弃，或者名额免除而薪俸存在的情形，在任职的清闲与繁重之间，薪俸的优厚与菲薄顿时显出差别来了。
English: However, there are still nominal cases where the post is abandoned, or the salary is exempt from quotas. There is a difference between the leisure and the onerousness of the post, and the salary is generous and generous.

古文：请敕有司详考俸料、杂给，量定以闻。 
现代文：请陛下敕令有关部门详细考核薪俸食料、杂项供给，酌情参定，上报闻知。 
English: I would like to ask Your Majesty to order the relevant departments to carry out a detailed assessment of salaries, food and miscellaneous supplies, participate in the decision-making process as appropriate, and report their findings.

古文：于是命给事中段平仲、中书舍人韦贯之、兵部侍郎许孟容、户部侍郎李绛同详定。
现代文：因此，宪宗命令给事中段平仲、中书舍人韦贯之、兵部侍郎许孟容、户部侍郎李绛共同详细参定。
English: Therefore, Kenzong ordered that the middle section of the matter, Heizhong, the middle secretary, Wei Gangzhi, the secretary of the military department, Xu Mengrong, and the secretary of the household department, Li Xi, should jointly participate in the detailed decision.

古文：秋，九月，富平人梁悦报父仇，杀秦杲，自诣县请罪。
现代文：秋季，九月，富平人梁悦为父亲报仇，杀死了秦杲，主动前往县衙请求治罪。
English: In the autumn, in September, Fuping man Liang Yue took revenge for his father, killed Qin Yao, and took the initiative to go to the county magistrate to request punishment.

古文：敕： 复仇，据《礼经》则义不同天，征法令则杀人者死。
现代文：敕书称： 有关复仇的规定，若根据《礼记》的说法，在道理上说与仇人应是不共戴天的，但若引证法令条文，杀人的人就应当处以死刑。
English: The imperial edict said: "Regarding the provisions on revenge, if according to the "Li Ji," it is reasonable to say that the enemy should not be tolerated, but if the provisions of the law are cited, the murderer should be sentenced to death.

古文：礼、法二事，皆王教之大端，有此异同，固资论辩，宜令都省集议闻奏。 
现代文：礼教与法令两项，都是帝王实行教化的重大根据，既然其间存在着这样的区别，固然应当通过论说辨析商量明白，应该让尚书都省召集有关人员计议，奏报闻知。 
English: Since there is such a difference between the two, it should be understood through discussion and discussion, and the relevant personnel should be convened by Shangshudu Province for discussion, and the report should be heard.

古文：职方员外郎韩愈议，以为： 律无其条，非阙文也。盖以不许复仇，则伤孝子之心而乖先王之训；许复仇，则人将倚法专杀，无以禁止其端矣。
现代文：职方员外郎韩愈的议论认为： 刑律中没有关于与杀父的仇人不共戴天的条文，并不是出现了阙疑不书的文字，而是由于若不允许为父报仇，便伤害了孝子的心愿，而且违背了先代帝王的教训；若允许为父报仇，人们便将会凭借着法令擅自杀人，从而无法禁止此类事情的发生。
English: Han Yu, a member of the staff, argued that: There is no provision in the Criminal Law about not sharing the sky with the enemy who killed the father. It is not that there is a suspicious text, but because if it is not allowed to avenge the father, it will hurt the wishes of the filial son, and it violates the teachings of the previous emperor; if it is allowed to avenge the father, people will commit suicide by virtue of the law, so it is impossible to prohibit such things from happening.

古文：故圣人丁宁其义于经，而深没其文于律，其意将使法吏一断于法，而经术之士得引经而议也。
现代文：所以圣人在经书里将此中的含义反复强调，而在刑律中又将此类条文深深隐没了。圣人的用意是让执法的官吏一概本着法令裁决，而让尊奉经学的人士得以援引经典而加以议论。
English: Therefore, the sage repeatedly emphasized the meaning of this in the scriptures, and deeply concealed such provisions in the criminal law. The intention of the sage was to allow law enforcement officials to make decisions in accordance with the law, and to allow people who respect the scriptures to discuss them by citing the classics.

古文：宜定其制曰： 凡复父仇者，事发，具申尚书省集议奏闻，酌其宜而处之。 
现代文：应该将所规定的此项制度表达为： 凡是为父亲报仇的人，事情被举发后，应当一概申报尚书省，由尚书省召集有关人员计议奏报，斟酌合理的情由，作出应有的处治。 
English: The stipulated system should be expressed as follows: Anyone who takes revenge for his father, after the matter is reported, should report to the Ministry of Education and Culture, and the Ministry of Education and Culture will convene the relevant personnel to make a report, consider the reasonable reasons, and make the proper treatment.

古文：则经律无失其指矣。 
现代文：这样，经书与刑律便都不会失去各自的意指了。 
English: In this way, the scriptures and the criminal law will not lose their respective meanings.

古文：戊戌，敕： 梁悦杖一百，流循州。
现代文：宪宗敕令： 对梁悦处以杖刑一百，流放循州。 
English: Gensong's edict: Liang Yue was sentenced to 100 strokes of the cane and banished to Xuzhou.

古文：甲寅，吏部奏准敕并省内外官计八百八员，诸司流外一千七百六十九人。
现代文：甲寅，吏部上奏说，依据敕令合并与省除朝廷内外官员计有八百零八人、各部门九品以下的吏员一千七百六十九人。
English: A: According to the report of the Ministry of Civil Service, according to the imperial order of merging with the provinces, there are 8008 officials in and out of the imperial court, and 1769 officials below the ninth grade in various departments.

古文：黔州大水坏城郭，观察使窦群发溪洞蛮以治之。督役太急，于是辰、溆二州蛮反，群讨之，不能定。
现代文：黔州发生严重的水灾，内城与外城都被毁坏。黔中观察使窦群征发溪洞蛮人来修治内城与外城，由于督责事功过于急切，于是辰州和溆州两地的蛮人反叛了。窦群讨伐蛮人，没有能够将他们平定。
English: A serious flood occurred in Zhangzhou, and both the inner city and the outer city were destroyed. It was observed in Zhangzhou that Dou Qun enlisted the barbarians of Fashi Cave to repair the inner city and the outer city. Because the supervision was too urgent, the barbarians in both Chenzhou and Zhangzhou rebelled. Dou Qun fought the barbarians and was unable to subdue them.

古文：戊午，贬群开州刺史。
现代文：戊午，宪宗将窦群贬为开州刺史。
English: In the afternoon, Jianzong reduced Douqun to Kaizhou Zhishi.

古文：冬，十一月，弓箭库使刘希光受羽林大将军孙瑞钱二万缗，为求方镇，事觉，赐死。
现代文：冬季，十一月，弓箭库使刘希光接受了羽林大将军孙二万缗钱，便为他谋求节度使的职务，结果被发觉了，宪宗赐他自裁而死。
English: In the winter, in November, the bow and arrow depot made Liu Xiguang accept the money of the great general Sun Shiguang, and then sought the post of the secretary of the festival for him. As a result, he was discovered, and the emperor gave him his own death.

古文：事连左卫上将军、知内待省事吐突承璀，丙申，以承璀为淮南监军。
现代文：事情牵连到左卫上将军、知内侍省事吐突承璀，丙申，宪宗任命吐突承璀为淮南监军。
English: The affair implicated General Zuo Wei and the provincial governor of Zhizhong Province, Tu Tu Chengyu, and, according to the report, Emperor Xianzong appointed Tu Tu Chengyu as the supervisor of the South Huai Army.

古文：上问李绛： 联出承璀何如？ 
现代文：宪宗询问李绛： 朕将吐突承璀任为外官怎么样呢？ 
English: Gensong asked Li Qiye: What about appointing Tutu Chengjun as foreign minister?

古文：对曰： 外人不意陛下遽能如是。 
现代文：李绛回答说： 外界人士想不到陛下忽然能够这么做。 
English: Li Wei replied: Outsiders couldn't imagine that His Majesty would suddenly be able to do this.

古文：上曰： 此家奴耳，向以其驱使之久，故假以恩私；若有违犯，朕去之轻如一毛耳！ 
现代文：宪宗说： 此人只是一个家奴而已。以往，朕觉得使唤他的时间很长了，所以因私情恩宠而宽宥了他。倘若他有违纪犯法的行为，朕抛弃他就如丢掉一根毫毛一样轻易呢！ 
English: Gensong said, "This man is just a domestic slave. In the past, I felt that I had been using him for a long time, so I pardoned him out of selfishness. If he has committed disciplinary offenses, I will abandon him as easily as if I lost a hair!

古文：十六宅诸王既不出阁，其女嫁不以时，选尚者皆由宦官，率以厚赂自达。
现代文：十六宅诸王既然都没有去做封地上的藩王，他们的女儿便不能按时出嫁，已经择偶下嫁的女儿都是通过宦官办成的，大都要以丰厚的贿赂为自己通融。
English: Since the kings of the Sixteen Houses did not become feudal lords, their daughters could not get married on time. The daughters who had already chosen their husbands were married by eunuchs, and most of them had to bribe their way into the marriage.

古文：李吉甫上言： 自古尚主必择其人，独近世不然。 
现代文：李吉甫进言说： 自古以来，公主下嫁，必定要选择合适的人士，唯独近世以来不是这个样子了。 
English: Li Jifu went on to say, "Since ancient times, when a princess marries, she must choose the right person. However, this has not been the case since modern times.

古文：十二月，壬申，诏封恩王等六女为县主，委中书、门下、宗正、吏部选门地人才称可者嫁之。
现代文：十二月，壬申，宪宗颁诏将恩王等人的六个女儿封为县主，委托中书省、门下省、宗正寺和吏部选择门第人才相当的人士，将县主许配给他们。
English: In December, Jinshin, Jianzong issued an edict to appoint the six daughters of Enwang and others as county chiefs, and entrusted the Central Literature Department, the subordinate departments, the Zongsheng Temple and the cadre department to select people with talents equivalent to those of the disciples, and assign the county chiefs to them.

古文：己丑，以户部侍郎李绛为中书侍郎、同平章事。
现代文：己丑，宪宗任命户部侍郎李绛为中书侍郎、同平章事。
English: At the same time, Kenzong appointed the Household Attendant, Li Jun, as the Chusho Attendant and Tongbei Officer.

古文：李吉甫为相，多修旧怨，上颇知之，故擢绛为相。
现代文：李吉甫出任宰相以来，往往报复旧日与自己结怨的人们，宪宗也略微了解一些情况，因此才提升李绛出任宰相。
English: Since Li Jifu took office as prime minister, he often retaliated against people who had grievances with him in the past. Xianzong also slightly understood some of the circumstances, so he promoted Li Jie to the post of prime minister.

古文：吉甫善逢迎上意，而绛鲠直，数争论于上前；上多直绛而从其言，由是二人有隙。
现代文：李吉甫善于逢迎皇上的意旨，而李绛刚正不阿，二人屡次在宪宗面前争论，宪宗时常认为李绛正确，听从他的主张。因此，二人有了嫌隙。
English: Li Jifu was good at fulfilling the emperor's wishes, while Li Gan Gangzheng was not. The two of them repeatedly argued in front of Xianzong, who often believed that Li Gan was right and followed his advice. As a result, the two had a rift.

古文：闰月，辛卯朔，黔州奏：辰、溆贼帅张伯靖寇播州、费州。
现代文：闰十二月，辛卯朔，黔州上奏说：辰州与溆州两地溪洞蛮人头领张伯靖侵犯播州与费州。
English: On leap December, Xinwu Shuo, Zhangzhou Shangxuo said: Zhang Bojing, the leader of the Xidong barbarians in Chenzhou and Zhangzhou, invaded Banzhou and Feizhou.

古文：试太子通事舍人李涉知上于吐突承璀恩顾未衰，乃投匦上疏，称 承璀有功，希光无罪。
现代文：试太子通事舍人李涉得知宪宗对吐突承璀的恩宠眷顾并未减弱，便在收受臣民意见的铜匦中投递章疏，内称： 吐突承璀立有功劳，刘希光没有罪过。
English: The crown prince's secretary, Li Wanzhong, learned that Emperor Xianzong's favor and patronage of Tu Congcheng had not diminished, and he sent a chapter in the gong that received the opinions of his subjects, saying: Tu Congcheng stood up with merit, Liu Xiguang was not guilty.

古文：承璀久委心腹，不宜遽弃。 
现代文：吐突承璀被陛下长期托付亲信之任，不应当聚然将他抛弃。 
English: His Majesty has long entrusted His Imperial Highness with the position of confidant, and they should not abandon him.

古文：知匦使、谏议大夫孔癸戈见其副章，诘责不受。
现代文：知匦使、谏议大夫孔看到了章疏的副本，对上奏的内容加以责问，不肯受理他的章疏。
English: Dr. Kong, the intellectual envoy and mediator, saw the copy of the chapter, questioned the content of the overture, and refused to accept his chapter.

古文：涉乃行赂，诣光顺门通之。
现代文：于是，李涉行贿，前往光顺门进状。
English: As a result, Li Guanzhong paid a bribe and went to the Guangshun Gate to deliver the letter.

古文：癸戈闻之，上疏极言 涉奸险欺天，请加显戮。 
现代文：孔得知消息后，上疏极力进言说： 李涉奸邪阴险，欺骗上天，请将他处决示众。 
English: After Kong learned the news, Shang Zuo tried his best to persuade him, saying: Li Guanzhong is evil and insidious, and has deceived Heaven. Please execute him in public.

古文：戊申，贬涉峡州司仓。
现代文：戊申宪宗将李涉贬为峡州司仓。
English: Wu Shen Xianzong demoted Li Wanzhong to the position of the governor of the Gorges.

古文：涉，渤之兄；癸戈，巢父之子也。
现代文：李涉是李渤的哥哥。孔是孔巢父的儿子。
English: Li Wan is the elder brother of Li Yao. Kong is the son of Kong Xue's father.

古文：辛亥，惠昭太子宁薨。
现代文：辛亥，惠昭太子李宁去世。
English: Xinhai, Prince Huizhao Li Ning passed away.

古文：是岁，天下大稔，米斗有直二钱者。
现代文：这一年，全国获得大丰收，有些地方一斗米才值两个钱。七年
English: That year, the whole country had a bumper harvest, and in some places a barrel of rice was worth only two yuan.

古文：元和七年壬辰，公元八一二年春，正月，辛未，以京兆尹元义方为鄜坊观察使。
现代文：春季，正月，辛未，宪宗任命京兆尹元义方为坊观察使。
English: In the spring, the first month, and the middle of the year, Emperor Xianzong appointed Jing Zhao, Yin Yuan and Yifang as the observation envoys.

古文：初，义方媚事吐突承璀，李吉甫欲自托于承璀，擢义方为京兆尹。
现代文：当初，元义方巴结吐突承璀，李吉甫也打算依靠吐突承璀，因而提拔元义方出任京兆尹。
English: At first, Li Jifu also planned to rely on Tutu Chengjun, so he promoted Yuan Yifang to the post of Jing Zhaoyun.

古文：李绛恶义方为人，故出之。
现代文：李绛憎恶元义方的为人，所以将他斥逐出朝。
English: Li Xi detested Yuan Yifang as a person, so he expelled him from the court.

古文：义方入谢，因言 李绛私其同年许季同，除京兆少尹，出臣鄜坊，专作威福，欺罔聪明。 
现代文：元义方入朝向宪宗谢恩，乘机说： 李绛为他的同年许季同徇私，将许季同任命为京兆少尹，将我斥逐到坊，专门作威作福，欺侮蒙骗陛下的视听。 
English: The Yuanyi side entered the court to thank the Xianzong, and took the opportunity to say: Li Yu is his same-year Xu Ji Tong, appointed Xu Ji Tong as Jing Zhaozhong, expelled me to the workshop, and specially used me to bully and deceive His Majesty's audio-visual.

古文：上曰： 朕谙李绛不知是。
现代文：宪宗说： 朕熟知李绛，他可不是像你说的这个样子。
English: Gensong said, "I know Li Qiye very well. He is not like you said.

古文：明日，将问之。 
现代文：等到明天吧，朕打算问一问他。 
English: Wait until tomorrow, I'm going to ask him.

古文：义方惶愧而出。
现代文：元义方既惶恐，又惭愧，只好走了出来。
English: Both frightened and ashamed, Yuan Yi had no choice but to come out.

古文：明日，上以诘绛曰： 人于同年固有情乎？ 
现代文：第二天，宪宗以此事责问李绛说： 人们对于自己的同年固然会有私情吗？ 
English: The next day, Kenzong asked Li Yao about this matter and said: Will people have personal feelings for their same year?

古文：对曰： 同年，乃四海九州之人偶同科第，或登科然后相识，情于何有！
现代文：李绛回答说： 所谓同年，就是来自全国各地人们偶然同时科考登第，有些人是在考中复试以后才互相认识的，这里有什么私情！
English: Li Wei replied: The so-called "same year" means that people from all over the country accidentally won the science exam at the same time. Some people only got to know each other after retaking the exam. What's the secret here?

古文：且陛下不以臣愚，备位宰相，宰相职在量才授任，若其人果才，虽在兄弟子侄之中犹将用之，况同年乎！
现代文：而且，陛下不嫌我愚昧，让我充数担任宰相，宰相的职责在于酌量人们的才能，授给他们职任，倘若有人果真具有才能，即使他在自己的兄弟侄一辈人中，尚且要任用他，何况与自己是同年呢！
English: Moreover, your majesty does not blame me for my folly in appointing so many to the office of chancellor, whose duty it is to weigh men's talents, and give them offices, if there be any who are really gifted, even if he were to appoint him from among his own brothers and nephews, much less in his own year!

古文：避嫌而弃才，是乃便身，非徇公也。 
现代文：因躲避嫌疑而放弃人才，这是便利自身的做法，而不是舍身为公的态度啊。 
English: Abandoning talent to avoid suspicion is a way to make things easier for oneself, not a selfless attitude.

古文：上曰： 善，朕知卿必不尔。 
现代文：宪宗说： 讲得好。朕知道你肯定不会私情用事的。 
English: Kenzong said, "That was well said. I know for sure that you won't use it for personal reasons.

古文：遂趣义方之官。
现代文：于是，宪宗催促元义方前去就任。
English: As a result, Kenzong urged Yuan Yikang to step forward and take office.

古文：振武河溢，毁东受降城。
现代文：振武处的黄河泛滥，冲毁了东受降城。
English: The Yellow River overflowed at Zhenwu and washed away Dongshuangcheng.

古文：三月，丙戌，上御延英殿，李吉甫言： 天下已太平，陛下宜为乐。 
现代文：三月，丙戌，宪宗驾临延英殿，李吉甫进言说： 天下已经太平，陛下应该作乐。 
English: In March, when Emperor Xianzong arrived at Yan Ying's palace, Li Jifu said: The world has become peaceful. Your Majesty should make music.

古文：李绛曰： 汉文帝时兵木无刃，家给人足，贾谊犹以为厝火积薪之下，不可谓安。
现代文：李绛说： 汉文帝时，兵器钝弊，没有锋刃，家家富裕，人人丰足，贾谊且尚认为这是将火种放到堆积着的木柴下面，不能够说这是安定的。
English: Li Wei said: In the time of Emperor Hanwen, weapons were blunt, without sharp edges, families were rich, everyone was affluent, and people still thought that this was putting kindling under the piled up firewood. It cannot be said that this was stable.

古文：今法令所不能制者，河南、北五十馀州。犬戎腥膻，近接泾、陇，烽火屡惊。加之水旱时作，仓禀空虚，此正陛下宵衣旰食之时，岂得谓之太平，遽为乐哉！ 
现代文：现在，朝廷的法纪号令不能够控制的地区，有河南、河北五十多个州；异族秽恶的气息，近处已经与泾州与陇州连接，边防上的烽火屡次报警；再加上水旱灾害经常发生，库存的粮食空匮乏用，这正是陛下应当天亮以前就起床，傍晚时分才进食时，怎么能够将现在称为太平，忙着作乐呢！ 
English: At present, the areas that cannot be controlled by the imperial edict of legal discipline include more than 50 states in Henan and Hebei; the atmosphere of alien filth, the vicinity has been connected with Zhangzhou and Zhangzhou, and the bonfires on the border have been repeatedly reported to the police; coupled with the frequent occurrence of floods and droughts, and the shortage of grain stocks, this is exactly when His Majesty should get up before dawn and only eat in the evening, how can he call the present peaceful and busy making music!

古文：上欣然曰： 卿言正合朕意。 
现代文：宪宗高兴地说： 你的话恰好符合朕的心意。 
English: Kenzong said happily, "Your words are exactly in line with my heart.

古文：退，谓左右曰： 吉甫专为悦媚，如李绛，真宰相也！ 
现代文：退朝以后，宪宗对身边的人说： 李吉甫专门阿谀献媚，像李绛那样，才是真正的宰相哩！ 
English: After retiring from the throne, Kenzong said to the people around him: "Li Jifu is a special flatterer, just like Li Xi, he is the real prime minister!"

古文：上尝问宰相： 贞元中政事下理，何乃至此？ 
现代文：宪宗曾经询问宰相： 贞元年间办理政务不甚修明，为什么竟会达到那般地步？ 
English: Kenzong once asked the prime minister: During the reign of Zhengyuan, government affairs were not very clear, why did it reach such a level?

古文：李吉甫对曰： 德宗自任圣智，不信宰相而信他人，是使奸臣得乘间弄威福。
现代文：李吉甫回答说： 德宗听凭自己超人的智力行事，不肯信任宰相，却要信任其他的人，这就使邪恶的臣下能够趁机恃势玩弄权柄。
English: Li Jifu replied: Dezong acted according to his superhuman intelligence. He did not want to trust the prime minister, but wanted to trust other people. This enabled his evil vassals to take advantage of the situation and play with power.

古文：政事不理，职此故也。 
现代文：办理政事不甚修明，主要由于这个原故啊。 
English: The administration of political affairs is not very clear, mainly due to this reason.

古文：上曰： 然此亦未必皆德宗之过。
现代文：宪宗说： 然而，这也不一定都是德宗的过错。
English: Kenzong said: However, this is not necessarily all the fault of Dezong.

古文：朕幼在德宗左右，见事有得失，当时宰相亦未有再三执奏者，皆怀禄偷安，今日岂得专归咎于德宗邪！
现代文：朕幼年在德宗身边，看到每逢事情有成败优劣之分时，当时的宰相也没有再三坚持奏陈的，都贪恋俸禄，但求眼前平安度日，现在，怎么能够专门将过错归给德宗呢！
English: I was close to Dezong when I was young, and I saw that whenever there was a success or failure, the prime minister at the time did not insist on playing Chen again and again. They were greedy for salary, but they wanted to live a safe life. Now, how can the fault be attributed to Dezong?

古文：卿辈宜用此为戒，事有非是，当力陈不已，勿畏朕谴怒而遽止也。 
现代文：你们这些人最好以此为戒。如果事情有对错之分，应当尽力陈述不止，不要害怕朕会发怒而赶忙闭口不言啊！ 
English: You people had better take this as a warning. If something is right or wrong, you should try your best to explain it, and don't be afraid that I will get angry and quickly shut up!

古文：李吉甫尝言： 人臣不当强谏，使君悦臣安，不亦美乎！ 
现代文：有一次，李吉甫说： 人臣不应该固执地一味进谏。让君主喜欢，臣下安宁，不是也很好吗！ 
English: On one occasion, Li Jifu said: "Civil servants should not stubbornly persist in entering the palace. Isn't it also good for the monarch to like it and for the servants to be at peace?"

古文：李绛曰： 人臣当犯颜苦口，指陈得失，若陷君于恶，岂得为忠！ 上曰： 绛言是也。 
现代文：李绛说： 人臣应该敢于冒犯圣上的威严，讲出逆耳但又恳切的谏言，指明并陈述事情的成功与失败。假如使君主陷在邪恶之中，怎么能够算得上是忠于君主呢！ 宪宗说： 李绛说得对啊。 
English: Li Hongzong said, "A minister should dare to offend the sacred majesty, speak insincere but earnest criticisms, point out and state the success and failure of the matter. If the monarch is trapped in evil, how can he be considered loyal to the monarch?"

古文：吉甫至中书，卧不视事，长吁而已。
现代文：李吉甫来到中书省，躺在那里，不肯办事，只是长吁叹气罢了。
English: When Li Jifu came to the People's Republic of China, he lay there, unwilling to do anything but sigh.

古文：李绛或久不谏，上辄诘之曰： 岂朕不能容受邪，将无事可谏也？ 
现代文：有时候，李绛很长时间没有进谏，宪宗便追问他说： 难道是朕不能够容纳你的意见吗，还是没有事情应该进谏呢？ 
English: Sometimes, Li Gan did not enter the palace for a long time, and Xianzong asked him: "Is it because I cannot accommodate your opinion, or is there nothing that should enter the palace?"

古文：李吉甫又尝言于上曰： 赏罚，人主之二柄，不可偏废。
现代文：又有一次，李吉甫告诉宪宗说： 奖赏与惩罚，是人君的两大权柄，不能够偏废。
English: On another occasion, Li Jifu told Xianzong, "Reward and punishment are the two major powers of the ruler, and they should not be neglected.

古文：陛下践祚以来，惠泽深矣，而威刑未振，中外懈惰，愿加严以振之。 
现代文：自从陛下登基以来，施行的恩泽够深厚的了。只是刑罚未能振举，朝廷内外官员松懈懒惰，希望更为严厉地执行刑法，以便使内外官员振作起来。 
English: Since His Majesty's accession to the throne, the grace of enforcement has been profound enough, but the punishment has not been invigorated, and the officials at home and abroad have been lax and lazy, hoping to enforce the criminal law more strictly in order to invigorate the officials at home and abroad.

古文：上顾李绛曰： 何如？ 
现代文：宪宗看着李绛说： 这种说法怎么样？ 
English: Xianzong looked at Li Yao and said, "What about this argument?

古文：对曰： 王者之政，尚德不尚刑，岂可舍成、康、文、景而效秦始皇父子乎！ 
现代文：李绛回答说： 帝王的政务，推尚仁德，而不是推尚刑罚，怎么能够丢开周成王与周康王、汉文帝与汉景帝的榜样，反而去效法秦始皇父子呢！ 宪宗说： 对。 
English: Li Qiye replied, "The emperor's government affairs promote benevolence, not punishment. How can we discard the examples of King Zhoucheng and King Zhoukang, Emperor Hanwen and Emperor Hanjing, and instead follow the example of Emperor Qin Shi Huangdi and Emperor Qin Shi Huangdi?"

古文：上曰： 然。 后旬馀，于由页入对，亦劝上峻刑。
现代文：十多天后，于入朝奏对，也劝说宪宗实行严刻的刑罚。
English: More than ten days later, he appealed to the emperor and persuaded the emperor to impose a severe punishment.

古文：又数日，上谓宰相曰： 于由页大是奸臣，劝朕峻刑，卿知其意乎？ 
现代文：又过了几天，宪宗告诉宰相们说： 于是一个大大的奸臣，他劝说朕实行严刑峻法，你们知道其中的用意吗？ 
English: A few days later, Kenzong told the chancellors, "A great traitor has persuaded me to implement the Severe Penal Code. Do you know his intention?

古文：皆对曰： 不知也。 
现代文：宰相们都回答说： 不知道啊。 
English: The prime ministers all replied: I don't know.

古文：上曰： 此欲使朕失人心耳。 
现代文：宪宗说： 他这是打算让朕失去人心罢了。 
English: Kenzong said, "He's just trying to make me unpopular."

古文：吉甫失色，退而抑首不言笑竟日。
现代文：李吉甫惊慌得变了脸色，退朝以后，一整天都在低着头，不说话，也不发笑。
English: Li Jifu's face turned pale with panic. After the abdication, he kept his head down all day, neither speaking nor laughing.

古文：夏，四月，丙辰，以库部郎中、翰林学士崔群为中书舍人，学士如故。
现代文：夏季，四月，丙辰，宪宗任命库部郎中、翰林学士崔群为中书舍人，担任翰林学士的职务一如既往。
English: In the summer, in April, Hsin-Chen and Kenzong appointed Cui Qun, the vice-chairman of the treasury department and the scholar of Hanlin, as the dean of Chinese literature, and he served as the scholar of Hanlin as before.

古文：上嘉群谠直，命学士 自今奏事，必取崔群连署，然后进之。 
现代文：宪宗嘉许崔群的正直，命令翰林学士： 从今以后，凡是奏请事由，一定要在取得崔群的签名连署以后，才能将奏疏进上。 
English: Gensong praised Cui Qun's honesty and ordered Hanlin Baizhang: From now on, if you want to file a petition, you must obtain Cui Qun's signature and co-signature before filing the petition.

古文：群曰： 翰林举动皆为故事。
现代文：崔群说： 翰林学士的任何行为都是要成为惯例的。
English: Cui Qun said: Any behavior of Hanlin Bachelors is to become a common practice.

古文：必如是，后来万一有阿媚之人为之长，则下位直言无从而进矣。 
现代文：如果一定这么办，万一后来有阿谀谄媚的人物担当翰林学士的长官，便会使官位处于下级的人们的直切进言无法进献上来了。 
English: If this were to be done, in the unlikely event that a sycophant were to become the head of the Hanlin Academy, it would make it impossible for people in lower ranks to offer forthright advice.

古文：固不奉诏。章三上，上乃从之。
现代文：崔群坚决不肯接受诏命，经过三次上奏，宪宗才听从了他的主张。
English: Cui Qun resolutely refused to accept the imperial edict, and it took three times for the emperor to listen to his proposal.

古文：五月，庚申，上谓宰相曰： 卿辈屡言淮、浙去岁水旱，近有御史自彼还，言不至为灾，事竟如何？ 
现代文：五月，庚申，宪宗对宰相们说： 你们这些人屡次提到淮南、浙江地区去年发生了水旱灾害，近来有一个御史从那里回来，谈到那里的情况还不至于造成灾害，事情究竟是怎样的呢？ 
English: In May, Goshun and Gensong said to the prime ministers: You people have repeatedly mentioned that there were floods and droughts in Huainan and Zhejiang last year. Recently, an imperial historian came back from there and said that the situation there was not enough to cause disasters. What is the situation like?

古文：李绛对曰： 臣按淮南、浙西、浙东奏状，皆云水旱，人多流亡，求设法招抚，其意似恐朝廷罪之者，岂肯无灾而妄言有灾邪！
现代文：李绛回答说： 我考察了淮南、浙西、浙东进奏的文状，都说发生了水旱灾害，人民多数流离失散，请求朝廷想办法安抚，他们的意思似乎是担心朝廷加罪于他们，难道他们肯在没有灾情的情形下，胡乱去说本地遭受了灾害吗！
English: Li Wei replied: I have examined the documents from Huainan, West Zhejiang, and East Zhejiang, and they all say that droughts and floods have occurred, most people have been displaced and dispersed, and they ask the imperial court to find a way to appease them. Their meaning seems to be that they are worried that the imperial court will add guilt to them. Would they be willing to say that the local area has suffered a disaster without a disaster situation?

古文：此盖御史欲为奸谀以悦上意耳，愿得其主名，按致其法。 
现代文：这种不至造成灾害的说法，大约是御史打算做奸邪逢迎的事情，以期讨得陛下的欢心罢了，我希望得知发言人的姓名，加以按察，依法制裁。 宪宗说： 你讲得对啊！
English: I hope to learn the name of the spokesman, have it investigated, and have it sanctioned according to law.Kenjong said, "You're right!

古文：上曰： 卿言是也。国以人为本，闻有灾当亟救之，岂可尚复疑之邪！朕适者不思，失言耳。 
现代文：国家以人民为根本，国家听说发生了灾情，应该赶忙去救济人民，怎么能够还要怀疑灾情发生与否呢！朕适才所说，有欠深思，是朕说错了。 
English: The state takes the people as its foundation. When the state hears that a disaster has occurred, it should rush to help the people. How can it still doubt whether the disaster has occurred or not? What I said just now was not well thought out. I was wrong.

古文：命速蠲其租赋。
现代文：于是，宪宗命令赶快免除淮南和两浙的赋税。
English: As a result, Emperor Xianzong ordered to quickly exempt Huainan and Zhejiang from paying taxes.

古文：上尝与宰相论治道于延英殿，日旰，暑甚，汗透御服，宰相恐上体倦，求退。上留之曰： 朕入禁中，所与处者独宫人、宦官耳，故乐与卿等且共谈为理之要，殊不知倦也。 
现代文：有一次，宪宗与宰相们在延英殿谈论治国之道，当时天色向晚，暑气甚重，汗水湿透了宪宗的衣服，宰相们担心宪宗身体困倦，便请求退下，宪宗挽留他们说： 朕进入宫廷后，接触到的只有宫女和宦官罢了，所以朕喜欢与你们谈论治国的要领，绝不感到困倦。 
English: On one occasion, Kenso and the chancellors were discussing the way of governing the country at Yan Ying-den. It was late in the day, the heat was very heavy, and sweat soaked Kenso's clothes. The chancellors were worried that Kenso was tired and asked to leave. Kenso held them back and said, "Since I entered the court, I have only come into contact with court ladies and eunuchs. Therefore, I like to talk to you about the essentials of governing the country, and I never feel tired.

古文：六月，癸已，司徒、同平章事杜佑以太保致仕。
现代文：六月，癸巳，司徒、同平章事杜佑以太保的官职退休。
English: In June, Yu Si, Szeto, and Tongping Zhangji Du You retired from their posts.

古文：秋，七月，乙亥，立遂王宥为太子，更名恒。
现代文：秋季，七月，乙亥，宪宗将遂王李宥立为太子，给他更改名字叫做李恒。
English: In the autumn, in July, in the Year of the Boar, Emperor Xianzong made Sui Wang Liyu the crown prince, and changed his name to Li Heng.

古文：恒，郭贵妃之子也。
现代文：李恒是郭贵妃的儿子。
English: Li Heng is the son of Guo Guifei.

古文：诸姬子澧王宽，长于恒。上将立恒，命崔群为宽草让表。
现代文：皇子澧王李宽是姬妾所生，比李恒年长，宪宗打算将李恒立为太子，命令崔群替李宽起草推让太子的表章。
English: Emperor Xianzong planned to make Li Heng the crown prince, and ordered Cui Qun to draft the seal of the crown prince for Li Guang.

古文：群曰： 凡推己之有以与人谓之让。
现代文：崔群说： 凡将自己拥有的东西推辞给别人才叫做推让。
English: Cui Qun said: Anyone who refuses to give what he owns to others is called a concession.

古文：遂王，嫡子也，宽何让焉！ 
现代文：遂王李恒是陛下正妻所生的儿子，澧王李宽有什么可以推让的呢！ 
English: After all, King Li Heng is the son of His Majesty's lawful wife, so what is there for King Li Guang to concede?

古文：上乃止。八月，戊戌，魏博节度使田季安薨。
现代文：于是，宪宗不再让崔群草拟李宽推让太子的表章了。八月，戊戌，魏博节度使田季安去世。
English: As a result, Emperor Xianzong no longer allowed Cui Qun to draft the seal of Prince Li Guangzhang. In August, Wei Bo Festival, Tian Ji'an passed away.

古文：初，季安娶洺州刺史元谊女，生子怀谏，为节度副使。
现代文：当初，田委安娶州刺史元谊的女儿为妻，所生儿子田怀谏担任了魏博节度副使。
English: At the beginning, Tian Wei'an married the daughter of State Councilor Shi Yuan, and his son, Tian Huai'an, served as the deputy envoy of the Wei Bo Festival.

古文：牙内兵马使田兴，庭玠之子也，有勇力，颇读书，性恭逊。
现代文：牙内兵马使田兴，是田庭的儿子，勇武有力，颇读过一些书，性情恭谨谦逊。
English: Tian Xing, the son of Tian Tian, is a brave and powerful man. He has read a lot of books, and his disposition is respectful and humble.

古文：季安淫虐，兴数规谏，军中赖之。
现代文：田季安放荡而暴虐，田兴屡次规劝，军中将士都仰赖着他。
English: Tian Ji'an was debauched and tyrannical, Tian Xing repeatedly persuaded him, and the lieutenant generals all relied on him.

古文：季安以为收众心，出为临清镇将，欲杀之。
现代文：田季安认为田兴收揽人心，将他斥逐到临清担任镇守将领，还准备将他杀掉。
English: Tian Ji'an thought that Tian Xing was winning hearts and minds, banished him to Linqing to serve as a town guard general, and also prepared to kill him.

古文：兴阳为风痹，灸灼满身，乃得免。
现代文：田兴佯装得了冷湿病，用艾草炙灼全身，才得以幸免。
English: Tian Xingyao pretended to have a cold and wet disease and scorched his whole body with wormwood to be spared.

古文：季安病风，杀戮无度，军政废乱。夫人元氏召诸将立怀谏为副大使，知军务，时年十一。
现代文：田季安得了疯病，杀人没有限度，军政废驰而混乱，夫人元氏召集各位将领将田怀谏立为节度副大使，掌管军中事务，当时田怀谏只有十一岁。
English: Tian Ji'an fell ill with madness, there was no limit to the number of murders, military and political affairs were in chaos, and his wife, Mrs. Yuan, called together the generals to appoint Tian Huai'an as deputy ambassador of the festival, in charge of military affairs. At that time, Tian Huai'an was only eleven years old.

古文：迁季安于别寝，月馀而薨。
现代文：田季安被迁移到另外的寝室，过了一个多月便去世了。
English: Tian Ji'an was moved to another bedroom and died more than a month later.

古文：召田兴为步射都知兵马使。
现代文：田怀谏将田兴召回，任命他为步射都知兵马使。
English: Tian Huaiqi recalled Tian Xing and appointed him as the commander of the foot-shooters.

古文：辛亥，以左龙武大将军薛平为郑滑节度使，欲为控制魏博。
现代文：辛亥，宪宗任命左龙武大将军薛平为郑滑节度使，准备让他来控制魏博。
English: In Xinhai, Emperor Xianzong appointed General Xue Ping of the Zalongwu to be Zhengnui's regent, preparing for him to take control of Weibo.

古文：上与宰相议魏博事，李吉甫请兴兵讨之，李绛以为魏博不必用兵，当自归朝廷。
现代文：宪宗与宰相们计议有关魏博的事宜，李吉甫请求起兵讨伐田怀谏，李绛认为对魏博不一定需要采取军事行动，田怀谏就会自行归顺朝廷。
English: Kenzong and the prime ministers discussed the matter of Weibo, and Li Jifu requested to raise an army to fight against the logging of Tianhuaiyi. Li Jifu believed that military action against Weibo was not necessarily necessary, and Tianhuaiyi would voluntarily submit to the imperial court.

古文：吉甫盛陈不可不用兵之状，上曰： 朕意亦以为然。 
现代文：李吉甫极力陈述不能不采取军事行动的理由，宪宗说： 朕的意思也认为是这样的。 
English: When Li Jifu tried to explain why military action had to be taken, Xianzong said, "I think that's what I meant.

古文：绛曰： 臣窃观两河蕃镇之跋扈者，皆分兵以隶诸将，不使专在一人，恐其权任太重，乘间而谋己故也。
现代文：李绛说：我私下里观察河南、河北骄横强暴的藩镇，都分出一部分兵力，隶属给各个将领，不让兵力专门由一人掌握，这是担心掌握兵权的将领权力与职任过重，便会趁机图谋自己的原故。
English: Li Wei said: I have secretly observed that the arrogant and violent provinces and towns in Henan and Hebei have all allocated a part of their military force to be subordinated to various generals, and do not allow the military force to be controlled by one person. This is because they are worried that the generals who control the military power have too much power and duties, and will take the opportunity to plot their own reasons.

古文：诸将势均力敌，莫能相制，欲广相连结，则众心不同，其谋必泄；欲独起为变，则兵少力微，势必不成。
现代文：各将领势均力敌，不能相互节制。倘若他们打算广泛地相互联合起来，则大家的心思并不相同，谋划肯定要泄露出去。如果他们打算单独起兵，发起变乱，则兵马太少，力量微薄，肯定不能成功。
English: The generals are evenly matched and cannot restrain each other. If they intend to form a broad alliance, then everyone is not of the same mind and the plan must be divulged. If they intend to raise an army alone and start a revolution, then the soldiers are too few and the strength is meager, and it will definitely not succeed.

古文：加以购赏既重，刑诛又峻，是以诸将互相顾忌，莫敢先发，跋扈者恃此以为长策。
现代文：加之，各镇既悬赏优厚，又刑罚严厉，所以各将领互相顾虑，彼此畏忌，都没有胆量率先发难，骄横的藩镇就是仗恃着这些，作为自己长远的计策。
English: In addition, the towns offered both generous rewards and severe punishments, so the generals were wary of each other and afraid of each other, and they did not have the courage to take the lead. The arrogant towns relied on these as their long-term strategy.

古文：然臣窃思之，若常得严明主帅能制诸将之死命者以临之，则粗能自固矣。
现代文：然而，我私下里考虑此事，假如经常得以起用能够节制各将领竭尽死力效命的严明的主帅来驾驭他们，大体上就能自行安定下来了。
English: However, I think about it in private, if I can often use a strict coach who can restrain the generals from exhausting their lives to control them, they will generally be able to stabilize themselves.

古文：今怀谏乳臭子，不能自听断，军府大权必有所归，诸将厚薄不均，怨怒必起，不相服从，则向日分兵之策，适足为今日祸乱之阶也。
现代文：现在，田怀谏只是一个乳臭小儿，还不能够亲自听政断事，军府的大权必然要有一个归向，对待各将领有厚有薄，不能均衡，必定要产生怨恨，不肯服从主帅的命令，这就使以往分散兵力的策略，恰好足以成为如今滋生祸乱的缘由啊。
English: Now, Tian Huaiqi is just a spoiled child, not yet able to listen to the government and make decisions in person. The power of the military government must have a direction. It is impossible to treat all generals equally. It must produce resentment and refuse to obey the orders of the commander. This makes the strategy of dispersing troops in the past just enough to become the cause of the current disaster.

古文：田氏不为屠肆，则悉为俘囚矣，何烦天兵哉！
现代文：即使田氏不被举家屠杀，陈尸示众，也会全家人成为俘虏与囚徒，还用烦劳朝廷的兵马吗！
English: Even if Mr. Tian's entire family is not slaughtered and his corpse displayed to the public, will his entire family become captives and prisoners, and will the soldiers and horses of the imperial court be used to do the work?

古文：彼自列将起代主帅，邻道所恶，莫甚于此。
现代文：田怀谏由众多的将领中起来代替主帅，相邻各道所憎恶的，没有比这一点更为严重的了。
English: There is nothing more serious than Tian Huaisheng replacing the commander with one of his many generals, which is detested by all the neighboring clans.

古文：彼不倚朝廷之援以自存，则立为邻道所齑粉矣。
现代文：田怀谏如不倚赖朝廷的援助而自存，就会立刻被相邻各道捣碎成细粉。
English: If Tianhuaiyao were to survive independently without the aid of the imperial court, it would immediately be pounded into a fine powder by the neighboring provinces.

古文：故臣以为不必用兵，可坐待魏博之自归也。
现代文：所以，我认为不一定要用兵，是可以坐着等候魏博自行归附的。
English: Therefore, I think that it is not necessary to use soldiers, and it is possible to sit and wait for Weibo to attach itself.

古文：但愿陛下按兵养威，严敕诸道选练士马以须后敕。
现代文：我只希望陛下屯兵不动，蓄养声威，严令各道挑选并操练人马，以待日后的敕令。
English: I only hope that His Majesty will keep his troops on the alert, cultivate his prestige, and strictly order all departments to select and train personnel to await future imperial orders.

古文：使贼中知之，不过数月，必有自效于军中者矣。
现代文：假使魏博将领知道了朝廷的动向，不会超过几个月时间，肯定就会有在军中主动请求效命的人了。
English: If the Wei Bo generals had known about the movement of the imperial court, it would not have taken more than a few months, and there would certainly have been people in the army who took the initiative to ask for their lives.

古文：至时，惟在朝廷应之敏速，中其机会，不爱爵禄以赏其人，使两河籓镇闻之，恐其麾下效之以取朝廷之赏，必皆恐惧，争为恭顺矣。
现代文：到时候，只在于朝廷敏捷迅速地接应他们，看准时机，不爱惜官爵俸禄，以此奖赏效命之人。使河南、河北的藩镇得知这一消息，担心自己的部下效法魏博，以期得到朝廷的奖赏，因而肯定都会害怕起来，要争着向朝廷表示恭敬顺从了。
English: At that time, it was only because the imperial court quickly and swiftly responded to them, seized the opportunity, and did not spare the salary of officials and nobles to reward those who served their lives. When the towns of Henan and Hebei learned this news, they were worried that their subordinates would follow Wei Bo's example in hopes of receiving a reward from the imperial court. Therefore, they would certainly be afraid and scramble to show respect and obedience to the imperial court.

古文：此所谓不战而屈人兵者也。 
现代文：这就是人们所说的不用使用武力便使敌兵屈服的道理啊。 宪宗说： 讲得好！ 
English: This is what people mean when they say that you don't need to use force to make the enemy soldiers surrender. Xianzong said: Well said!

古文：上曰： 善！他日，吉甫复于延英盛陈用兵之利，且言刍粮金帛皆已有备。
现代文：后来，李吉甫又在延英殿极力陈诉采取军事行动的好处，而且说粮草钱帛都已经有了准备。
English: Later, at the Yan Ying Palace, Li Jifu again tried to present the advantages of taking military action, and said that the grain, grass and money had all been prepared.

古文：上顾问绛，绛对曰： 兵不可轻动。
现代文：宪宗征询李绛的意见，李绛回答说： 武力是不能够轻易动用的。
English: Kenzong asked Li Yao for his opinion. Li Yao replied, "Force cannot be used easily.

古文：前年讨恒州，四面发兵二十万，又发两神策兵自京师赴之，天下骚动，所费七百馀万缗，讫无成功，为天下笑。
现代文：前年讨伐恒州，各地派出兵马二十万人，又派出左、右神策军的兵马由京城开往恒州，致使全国骚扰不安，消耗的费用有七百多万缗，最终不能获得成功，被天下的人们所耻笑。
English: In the previous year's crusade against Hengzhou, 200,000 soldiers and horses were sent from all over the country, and soldiers and horses of the Left and Right Divisions were sent from Beijing to Hengzhou, causing harassment and anxiety throughout the country. The cost was more than seven million baht. In the end, they could not succeed and were ridiculed by people all over the world.

古文：今疮痍未复，人皆惮战，若又以敕命驱之，臣恐非直无功，或生他变。
现代文：现在，战争的创伤尚未恢复，人民都害怕打仗。如果又用敕令驱使他们，我担心不但不能取得成功，或许还要发生其他变故。
English: Now that the wounds of the war have not yet healed, and the people are afraid to fight, if they are forced to do so by imperial edict, I am afraid that not only will they not succeed, but other things may happen.

古文：况魏博不必用兵，事势明白，愿陛下勿疑。 
现代文：况且，不一定要对魏博采取军事行动。事情的发展趋势很清楚，希望陛下不用迟疑了。 
English: Moreover, it is not necessary to take military action against Weibo. The development trend of the situation is very clear, and I hope that His Majesty will not hesitate.

古文：上奋身抚案曰： 朕不用兵决矣。 绛曰： 陛下虽有是言，恐退朝之后，复有荧惑圣听者。 
现代文：宪宗猛然起身用力拍着案子说： 朕决定不采取军事行动， 李绛说： 虽然陛下说了此话，恐怕在退朝以后，还会有人来迷惑陛下的听闻。 
English: Xianzong abruptly stood up and forcefully patted the case and said, "I have decided not to take military action." Li Yan said, "Although Your Majesty said this, I am afraid that after retiring from the throne, there will still be people to confuse Your Majesty's hearing."

古文：上正色厉声曰： 朕志已决，谁能惑也！ 
现代文：宪宗面色庄重，声音严厉地说： 朕的意图已经决定下来了，谁能够来迷惑朕！ 
English: With a solemn face and a stern voice, Xianzong said, "My intention has already been decided, who can come and confuse me!

古文：绛乃拜贺曰： 此社稷之福也。 
现代文：不久，由于田怀谏幼稚弱小，军中政事完全由家中的仆从蒋士则决断。
English: Soon, due to Tian Huaisheng's childishness and weakness, the political affairs in the army were completely decided by the family's servant, Chiang Shih.

古文：既而田怀谏幼弱，军政皆决于家僮蒋士则，数以爱憎移易诸将，众皆愤怒。朝命久未至，军中不安。
现代文：蒋士则屡次凭着个人的爱憎调动诸将，大家都愤怒起来上。朝廷的任命长时间没有送到，军中将士更是不能安下心来了。
English: Chiang Shih, on the other hand, repeatedly mobilized generals based on his personal likes and dislikes, and everyone became angry. The appointment of the imperial court was not sent for a long time, and the lieutenant generals could not calm down.

古文：田兴晨入府，士卒数千人大噪，环兴而拜，请为留后。
现代文：有一次，田兴在早上前往军府，数千名士兵大声喊叫，围着田兴行礼，请田兴担任留后。
English: Once, when Tian Xing went to the military headquarters in the morning, thousands of soldiers shouted loudly, surrounded Tian Xing, and asked Tian Xing to stay behind.

古文：兴惊仆于地，众不散。
现代文：田兴惊惶得扑倒在地，众人仍然不肯散去。
English: Tian Xing panicked and fell to the ground. The crowd still refused to disperse.

古文：久之，兴度不免，乃谓众曰： 汝肯听吾言乎！ 皆曰： 惟命。 
现代文：过了许久，田兴估计难以走脱，便对大家说： 你们愿意听从我的话吗？ 大家都说： 请下命令吧。 
English: After a long time, Tian Xing estimated that it would be difficult to escape, so he said to everyone: Are you willing to follow my words? Everyone said: Please give an order.

古文：兴曰： 勿犯副大使，守朝廷法令，申版籍，请官吏，然后可。 
现代文：田兴说： 不许冒犯副大使，遵守朝廷的法纪命令，向朝廷申报版图户籍，请朝廷任命官吏，做到这些以后，我才答应你们。 
English: Tian Xing said: Don't offend the deputy ambassador, comply with the court's order of legal discipline, declare the territory and household registration to the court, and ask the court to appoint officials. Only after doing these things will I agree to you.

古文：皆曰： 诺。 
现代文：大家都说： 好吧。 
English: Everyone said: Yes.

古文：兴乃杀蒋士则等十馀人，迁怀谏于外。
现代文：于是，田兴杀了蒋士则等十多个人，将田怀谏迁移到外地去了。
English: As a result, Tian Xing killed more than ten people, including Jiang Shizhe, and moved Tian Huaiyu to another place.

