古文：维武王胜殷，抚国绥民，乃观于殷政，告周公旦曰： 呜呼，殷政总总，若风草有所积，有所虚，和此如何？ 
现代文：武王灭殷以后，为了稳定国家安定民众，就考察了殷朝的政令，并对周公旦说： 啊呀！殷朝的政令乱纷纷，如风中之草，有时积聚一起，有时空空。对它进行调和，怎么样? 
English: After King Wu eliminated Yin, in order to stabilize the country and stabilize the people, he examined the decrees of the Yin Dynasty and said to Zhou Gongdan: Ah! The decrees of the Yin Dynasty are chaotic, like grass in the wind, sometimes accumulating together, sometimes empty. How about reconciling it?

古文：周公曰： 闻之文考，来远宾，廉近者，道别其阴阳之利，相土地之宜，水土之便。
现代文：周公回答说： 听先父文王说，招来远方的人，集聚近处的人，辨别南北地势的优势，审视土地是否宜种，水利是否方便，营建居邑，称之为大聚。
English: Zhou Gong replied, "Listening to my father, King Wen, he said, invite people from far away, gather people from nearby, distinguish the advantages of the north-south topography, examine whether the land is suitable for planting, whether the water conservancy is convenient, and build a residential town, which is called a large gathering.

古文：营邑制命之曰：大聚先诱之以四郊，王亲在之。
现代文：先从四郊招引百姓。君王要亲自考察，卿大夫要从众人中选任。
English: At first, people were invited from the four suburbs. The king himself was to inspect the situation, and the royal doctor was to be chosen from the crowd.

古文：大夫免列以选，赦刑以宽，复亡解辱削赦□重，皆有数，此谓行风。
现代文：赦免及刑罚要宽松，使逃亡者回来，使受辱者除去羞辱，削职赦罪的轻重都有规定，这叫做实行风化。
English: Amnesties and punishments should be lenient, fugitives should be allowed to return, the humiliated should have their humiliation removed, and the severity of crimes should be pardoned. This is called the implementation of etiquette.

古文：乃令县鄙商旅曰：能来三室者，与之一室之禄。
现代文：然后才传令边远地方的商旅说： 能够带来三户人家的，赏给一户的食用为报酬。 
English: Only then did they send word to business travelers in outlying areas: If you can bring three families, you will be rewarded with food from one family.

古文：辟开修道，五里有郊，十里有井，二十里有舍，远旅来至关，人易资，舍有委。
现代文：开辟关口，修筑道路。五里之内为邑之郊，每十里有水井，每二十里有庐舍。远方商旅来此，与人交易货物。
English: Open the gates, build the roads. Within five miles is the suburb of the town, every ten there are wells, every twenty there are outhouses. Faraway merchants come here to trade goods with people.

古文：市有五均，早暮如一，送行逆来，振乏救穷。老弱疾病，孤子寡独，惟政所先。
现代文：庐舍有存放货物的地方，市场有平均物价的官员。早晚物价一致，不断送往迎来。赈济贫乏，救助穷困以及老弱、残疾、孤儿、寡妇、独身者，是为政的先务。
English: There is a place to store goods in the house, and there are officials with average prices in the market. Sooner or later, the prices are the same, and they are constantly sent to usher in. Alleviating poverty and helping the poor, as well as the elderly, disabled, orphans, widows, and single people, is a priority for the government.

古文：民有欲畜，发令。
现代文：这样，百姓也就愿意蓄养他们。
English: In this way, the people are willing to keep them.

古文： 以国为邑，以邑为乡，以乡为闾，祸灾相恤，资丧比服，五户为伍，以首为长，十夫为什，以年为长。
现代文：发令：把国分为邑，把邑分为乡，把乡分为间。
English: Issue an order: divide the country into townships, townships into townships, and townships into villages.

古文：合闾立教，以威为长，合族同亲，以敬为长。饮食相约，兴弹相庸，耦耕□耘，男女有婚，坟墓相连，民乃有亲。
现代文：发生灾祸，互相救助，通力合作办丧事。五家为一伍，以第一家为伍长；十个成年男子为一什，以年长者为什长；各间设立教化，以威信高的为闾长；全宗族相互亲近，以可尊敬者为族长。饮食相互约制。鼓励勤劳纠正游惰相互为用，耕作互相协作。男女各有婚配，死后夫妇坟墓相连，百姓就有亲人。
English: In the event of a disaster, help each other and work together to carry out the funeral. Five families are a team, with the first family as the team leader; ten adult men are one-tenth, with the older one as the leader; education and enlightenment are set up between each other, with high prestige as the leader; the whole clan is close to each other, with a respectable person as the head of the clan. The diet is mutually agreed upon. Encourage hard work to correct idleness and use each other, and cooperate with each other in farming. Men and women are married. After death, the graves of couples are connected, and the people have relatives.

古文：六畜有群，室屋既完，民乃归之。
现代文：六畜成群，房屋落成以后，百姓就会聚到那里去。
English: After the house is completed, the people will gather there.

古文：立君子以修礼略，立小人以教用兵。
现代文：各乡设置巫医，备办各样药物以防疾病与灾难；积蓄各种草药以备齐酸、苦、甘、辛、咸五味。
English: Each township set up a witch doctor to prepare all kinds of medicines to prevent diseases and disasters; accumulate all kinds of herbs to prepare acid, bitter, sweet, spicy and salty five flavors.

古文：立乡射以习容，春和猎耕耘，以习迁行。教芋与树艺，比长立职，与田畴皆通。
现代文：设立乡正以勤劳民事，设立职孤以训教幼儿；设立职丧以料理死者，设立大葬以处理安埋；立文德君子以修明礼乐，立技勇之士教人使用兵器；立乡射之礼以练习容仪，春季合猎以练习迁行，春季耕耘以教人种植。设立官长，使田土得到开垦。
English: The establishment of the township is to diligently civil, the establishment of the post orphan is to train and teach young children; the establishment of the post funeral is to cook the dead, the establishment of a large funeral is to deal with the burial; the establishment of the literati gentleman is to perform the Ming ritual, the establishment of the skillful man is to teach people to use weapons; the establishment of the township shooting ceremony is to practice the appearance, the spring hunting is to practice the migration, and the spring ploughing is to teach people to plant. The establishment of the official, so that the land can be reclaimed.

古文：立祭祀，与岁谷登下厚薄，此之谓德教。
现代文：立祭祀，随年成丰歉而用祭物。这叫做教德。
English: It is called religious virtue to establish a sacrificial rite, and to use the sacrificial offerings as the year progresses.

古文： 若其凶土陋民，贱食贵货，是不知政。
现代文：如果土地荒芜，民众不教化，轻粮食重财货，就是不懂为政。
English: If the land is barren, if the people are not educated, and if grain is valued more than goods, then politics is based on ignorance.

古文：山林薮泽，以因其□工匠，役工以攻其材；商贾趣市，以合其用。
现代文：山林与湖泊，要加以利用。使工匠做工，以加工那些材料；使商贾往市场，以流通用物。
English: Mountains, forests, and lakes are to be exploited; artisans are to be employed in working those materials; merchants are to go to market in the produce of the earth.

古文：外商资贵而来，贵物益贱，五出贵物，以通其器。
现代文：外商携带本地价高货物而来，高价货就会便宜。要使外商带来高价货，带走便宜物，借以流通器用。
English: If foreign traders bring goods with high local prices, the high-priced goods will be cheaper. Foreign traders should be allowed to bring high-priced goods, take away cheap goods, and use them as circulation tools.

古文：夫然则关夷市平，财无郁废，商不乏资，百工不失其时，无愚不教，则无穷乏，此谓和德。
现代文：这样，关市平稳，财物就不积压、不闲置。商贾不缺乏资本，各种工匠不荒废时日，愚昧得到教育，就会没有贫穷。这叫做和德。
English: In this way, the customs market will be stable, wealth will not be accumulated and idle, merchants will not lack capital, all kinds of craftsmen will not waste time, ignorance will be educated, and there will be no poverty. This is called harmony.

古文： 若有不言，乃政其凶，陂沟道路，藂苴，丘坟不可树谷者，树以材木。春发枯槁，夏发叶荣，秋发实蔬，冬发薪蒸。以匡穷困。
现代文：如果不加教导，其国政就会凶险。池塘边，道路旁，杂草丛生地以及土丘土堆一凡不能种粮食的地方都栽上树木；春季利用枯槁的树干，夏季利用树叶与花朵，秋季利用可食的果实，冬季利用柴薪，以救助穷困的人家。
English: By the side of ponds, by the side of roads, in thickets of weeds, and on mounds and heaps of earth, wherever it is not possible to grow food, trees are planted; in the spring, dead trunks are used; in the summer, leaves and flowers; in the autumn, edible fruits; and in the winter, firewood is used to help the poor.

古文：揖其民力，相更为师。
现代文：聚合民力，使他们相互为师。
English: Unite the people's power and let them learn from each other.

古文：因其土宜，以为民资，则生无乏用，死无传尸。
现代文：顺应土地性质耕种，作为百姓的资财，百姓就不会缺少财用，死了也不会弃尸荒野。
English: Cultivating according to the nature of the land, as the people's wealth, the people will not lack financial resources, and will not abandon the dead in the wilderness.

古文：此谓仁德。
现代文：这叫做仁德。
English: This is called benevolence.

古文： 旦闻禹之禁，春三月，山林不登斧，以成草木之长；三月遄不入网罟，以成鱼鳖之长。
现代文：我听说禹的禁令；春季三个月，山林中不准用斧子砍伐，以成就草木的生长；夏季三个月，江湖中不准下网罟，以成就鱼类的生长。
English: I have heard of Yu's ban; for three months in the spring, it is not allowed to use axes to cut down trees in the mountains and forests to achieve the growth of plants and trees; for three months in the summer, it is not allowed to cast nets in rivers and lakes to achieve the growth of fish.

古文：且以并农力执，成男女之功。
现代文：并且聚合农民努力操作，以成就男耕女织之事。
English: In addition, farmers will be brought together to work hard to achieve the goal of having both men and women farmers.

古文：夫然则有生而不失其宜，万物不失其性，人不失七事，天不失其时，以成万财。
现代文：这样，土地不会失去它的地力，万物不会失去它的功用，人们不会失去他的职事，加之上天不误了季节，就能成就各样财富。
English: In this way, the land will not lose its strength, all things will not lose their function, people will not lose their duties, and in addition, the sky will not miss the season, and all kinds of wealth can be achieved.

古文：既成，放此为人。
现代文：种种财富成就以后，发放以供人享用。
English: After all kinds of wealth achievements, it is distributed for people to enjoy.

古文：此谓正德。
现代文：这叫做正德。
English: This is called Zhengde.

古文： 泉深而鱼鳖归之，草木茂而鸟兽归之；称贤使能，官有材而士归之；关市平，商贾归之；分地薄敛，农民归之。
现代文：潭水深，鱼鳖就聚到里面；草木茂，鸟兽就聚到里面；举用贤德任用有才之人为官，士人就聚到那里；关市平稳，商贾就聚到那里；分土地、轻赋税，农民就聚到那里。
English: If the pool is deep, the fish will gather there; if the vegetation is thick, the birds and beasts will gather there; if a person of virtue and talent is appointed as an official, the scholars will gather there; if the city of Guan is stable, the merchants will gather there; if the land is divided and taxes are light, the farmers will gather there.

古文：水性归下，农民归利。
现代文：水的本性是向低处流，人的本性是往有利方向去。
English: It is the nature of water to flow downhill, and it is the nature of man to go in a favorable direction.

古文：王若欲求天下民，社设其利，而民自至，譬之若冬日之阳，夏日之阴，不召而民自来。
现代文：君王若想招来天下百姓，就先备好给他们的利益，百姓就会自己到来。如同冬天的向阳地、夏天的阴凉处，不召而人自来。
English: If a ruler wants to invite the people of the world, he must first prepare the benefits for them, and the people will come by themselves. It is like a sunny place in winter and a shady place in summer. People come without being invited.

古文：此谓归德。
现代文：这叫做归德。
English: This is called returning to virtue.

古文： 五德既明，民乃知常。 
现代文：五德既已修明，百姓就知道过正常生活。 
English: Now that the Five Virtues have been clarified, the people know how to live a normal life.

古文：武王再拜曰： 呜呼，允哉！天民侧侧，余知其极有宜。 
现代文：武王两拜行礼，说道： 啊呀，好啊，百姓真多，我知道治民的办法了。 
English: King Wu bowed twice and said: Ah, good, there are so many people, I know how to govern them.

古文：乃召昆吾冶而铭之，藏府而朔之。
现代文：就召来冶官，把周公之言冶铸在铜版上，放入府中供每月朔日省视。
English: He summoned a smith to cast Zhou Gong's words on a copper plate and put it in the government office for the monthly New Year's Day inspection.

