古文：吴王夫差还自黄池，息民不戒。
现代文：吴王夫差从黄池回国后，让士兵休息而不加戒备。
English: After Wu Wangfuchai returned from Huangchi, he let the soldiers rest without warning.

古文：越大夫种乃唱谋曰： 吾谓吴王将遂涉吾地，今罢师而不戒以忘我，我不可以怠。
现代文：越国大夫文种于是倡议说： 我以为吴王下一步将会进攻我们，现在他休兵不动，毫不戒备，想使我们忘了他，我们不可因此而懈怠。
English: Dr. Wenzhuang Yue then proposed: "I thought that King Wu would attack us next, but now he is resting, motionless, unguarded, and wants us to forget him. We must not slacken our efforts.

古文：日臣尝卜于天，今吴民既罢，而大荒荐饥，市无赤米，而囷鹿空虚，其民必移就蒲蠃于东海之滨。
现代文：往日我曾卜问上天，现在吴国的民众已经疲乏，而且连年饥荒，市场上连糙米也没有，粮仓都空了。他们的民众一定得迁移到东海边靠拣蛤蚌求生。
English: In the past, I used to pray to the heavens, but now the people of Wu are exhausted, and have been starving for years. There is not even brown rice on the market, and the granaries are empty. Their people will have to migrate to the East Sea to survive by picking straw.

古文：天占既兆，人事又见，我蔑卜筮矣。
现代文：上天已有预兆，民众的不满也出现，我无须再加卜问了。
English: There are already signs in the heavens, and the people's dissatisfaction has also appeared. I don't need to ask any more questions.

古文：王若今起师以会，夺之利，无使夫悛。
现代文：国王如果现在发兵和吴国交战，可以夺得有利时机，不让吴国有改变被动处境的机会。
English: If the king now sends troops to fight against Wu, he can seize a favorable opportunity and prevent Wu from changing its passive situation.

古文：夫吴之边鄙远者，罢而未至，吴王将耻不战，必不须至之会也，而以中国之师与我战。
现代文：吴国边远地区的士兵，因为回家休整一时不能赶回，吴王将会以不应战为耻，他肯定不等远兵到达，而只用国都现有的军队与我们作战。
English: Since the soldiers in the outlying areas of the State of Wu cannot rush back home for a short rest, the King of the State of Wu will be ashamed that he should not fight. He will certainly not wait for the distant soldiers to arrive, but only use the existing troops in the capital to fight against us.

古文：若事幸而从我，我遂践其地，其至者亦将不能之会也已，吾用御儿临之。
现代文：倘若事情真能这样顺从我们的意愿，我们就可以攻入吴国，吴国边远地区的援兵即使赶来，也不能再与吴军会合了，我们可以用在御儿的驻军牵制他们。
English: If things can really follow our wishes in this way, we will be able to invade Wu. Even if reinforcements from the remote areas of Wu arrive, they will no longer be able to join the Wu army. We can use the garrison in Gyeongnam to hold them back.

古文：吴王若愠而又战，奔遂可出。
现代文：吴王如果发怒再战，只有兵败逃亡。
English: If Wu Wang fights again in anger, he will only be defeated and flee.

古文：若不战而结成，王安厚取名而去之。 越王曰： 善哉！ 
现代文：如果不战求和，国王就可以安稳地获取厚利和名誉然后放了他。 越王说： 太好了！ 
English: If he didn't sue for peace, the king would be able to safely gain wealth and fame and then release him. King Yue said, "Great!

古文：乃大戒师，将伐楚申包胥使于越，越王勾践问焉，曰： 吴国为不道，求残我社稷宗庙，以为平原，弗使血食。
现代文：于是大规模动员军队，准备征伐吴国。楚国大夫申包胥出使到越国，越王勾践问他说： 吴国不行正道，图谋灭亡我国，摧毁我们的宗庙，把它夷为平地，不让我们祖宗神灵得到应有的祭祀。
English: As a result, a large-scale army was mobilized to prepare for the conquest of the State of Wu. The doctor of the State of Chu, Shen Baojun, sent an envoy to the State of Yue. The King of Yue asked him: "The State of Wu is not following the right path, it is plotting to destroy our country, to destroy our ancestral temple, to raze it to the ground, and to prevent our ancestral deities from receiving the worship they deserve.

古文：吾欲与之徼天之衷，唯是车马、兵甲、卒伍既具，无以行之。
现代文：我想和吴国一起求上天评判，看它赐福给哪个国家。现在我已准备好了车马、武器装备和士兵，只差没有动用，请问还要具备什么条件才能动用军队去进攻？ 申包胥推却说： 不知道。 
English: I wanted to join Wu Guo in asking for Heaven's judgment, to see which country it would bless. Now I have prepared horses, chariots, weapons, equipment, and soldiers, but I have yet to use them.

古文：请问战奚以而可？ 
现代文：越王再三问他，才回答说： 吴国很强大，能凭实力取得诸侯国的贡赋。
English: King Yue asked him repeatedly before he answered: "Wu is a very powerful country, and it can obtain tribute from the principalities by its own strength.

古文：包胥辞曰： 不知。 
现代文：冒昧地问一下，君王您凭什么跟它开战？ 
English: May I venture to ask on what authority you, Your Majesty, are waging war against it?

古文：王固问焉，乃对曰： 夫吴，良国也，能博取于诸侯。敢问君王之所以与之战者？ 
现代文：越王说： 在我周围的人，凡是杯中的酒，碗中的肉，竹篮里的饭，从来不敢不与他们分享。
English: King Yue said, "The people around me would never dare not to share the wine in their cups, the meat in their bowls, and the rice in their bamboo baskets.

古文：王曰： 在孤之侧者，觞酒、豆肉、箪食，未尝敢不分也。
现代文：我对饮食不讲究，也不迷恋美妙的音乐，一心想以此报复吴国，希望凭这些能取胜。 申包胥说： 好倒是好，可单靠这些还不行。 
English: I'm not particular about food, and I'm not obsessed with beautiful music. I just want to take revenge on Wu Guo with this, and I hope I can win with these. Shen Baojun said: It's good, but it's not enough.

古文：饮食不致味，听乐不尽声，求以报吴。愿以此战。 
现代文：越王说： 越国之中，有病的我慰问，死去的我替他埋葬，我敬重老人，爱护儿童，抚养孤儿长大，访问民间的疾苦，一心想以此报复吴国，希望凭这些能取胜。 
English: King Yue said, "Among the people of Yue, I comfort the sick and bury the dead. I respect the elderly, love children, bring up orphans, and visit the sufferings of the people. I want to take revenge on the State of Wu, and hope to win with these."

古文：包胥曰： 善则善矣，未可以战也。 
现代文：申包胥说： 好倒是好，可单靠这些还不行。 
English: Shen Baozhen said: "It's good, but it's not enough to rely on these alone.

古文：王曰： 越国之中，疾者吾问之，死者吾葬之，老其老，慈其幼，长其孤，问其病，求以报吴。
现代文：越王说： 在国中，我宽厚待民，像对自己的子女一样，忠心慈惠地善待他们。我修订法令，放宽刑法，实施民众所想要的，去除民众所厌恶的，称赞民众的优点，制止民众的恶行，一心想以此报复吴国，希望凭这些能取胜。 申包胥说： 好倒是好，可单靠这些还不行。 
English: King Yue said, "In the country, I treated the people generously, like my own children, and treated them with loyalty and benevolence. I amended the laws and regulations, relaxed the criminal law, implemented what the people wanted, removed what the people disliked, praised the people's virtues, and stopped the people's evil deeds. I wanted to take revenge on the State of Wu with this, and hoped to win with these." Shen Baojun said, "It's good, but it's not enough."

古文：愿以此战。 包胥曰： 善则善矣，未可以战也。 王曰： 越国南则楚，西则晋，北则齐，春秋皮币、玉帛、子女以宾服焉，未尝敢绝，求以报吴，愿以此战。 
现代文：越王说： 在国中，对富人我让他们安心营生，对穷人我则接济他们。补救不足，调剂剩余，使贫富都得到利益，一心想以此报复吴国，希望凭这些能取胜。 申包胥说： 好倒是好，可单靠这些还不行。 越王说： 越国南邻楚，西接晋，北连齐，每年四季，我都向它们贡献财货、玉帛和童男童女以表示服从，从未间断过。一心想以此报复吴国，希望凭这些能取胜。 
English: Yue Wang said: In the country, for the rich, I let them live with peace of mind, and for the poor, I help them. The remedy is insufficient, the adjustment is surplus, so that both the rich and the poor are benefited, and I am determined to take revenge on the State of Wu, hoping to win with these. Shen Baojun said: It is good, but it is not enough to rely on these alone. Yue Wang said: The southern neighbor of the State of Yue, the western neighbor of the State of Jin, and the northern neighbor of the State of Lianqi, every four seasons, I have contributed wealth, jade and boys and girls to them to show obedience

古文：包胥曰： 善哉，蔑以加焉，然犹未可以战也。
现代文：申包胥说： 好了，不必再增加了。可单靠这些还是不行。
English: Shen Baozhen said: Well, there is no need to increase it. But it is still not possible to rely on these alone.

古文：夫战，智为始，仁次之，勇次之。
现代文：从事战争，智谋是最重要的，仁义次之，勇敢又次之。
English: In waging war, wisdom and strategy are the most important, followed by benevolence and righteousness, and then bravery.

古文：不智，则不知民之极，无以铨度天下之众寡；不仁，则不能与三军共饥劳之殃；不勇，则不能断疑以发大计。 越王曰： 诺。 
现代文：没有智谋，就不会知道民心的向背，也就不会衡量双方的力量对比；不仁义，就不会和三军将士共同分担饥饿劳累的痛苦；不勇敢，就不会果断排除疑难以决定大计。 越王说： 我同意。 
English: Without wisdom and strategy, there would be no way to know the people's sentiment, and there would be no way to measure the balance of power between the two sides; without benevolence and righteousness, there would be no way to share the pain of hunger and fatigue with the soldiers of the three armies; without courage, there would be no way to decisively eliminate doubts, and it would be difficult to decide the overall plan.

古文：越王勾践乃召五大夫，曰： 吴为不道，求残吾社稷宗庙，以为平原，不使血食。
现代文：于是越王勾践召见五位辅政的大夫说： 吴国不行正道，图谋灭亡我国，摧毁我们的宗庙，把它夷为平地，不让我们祖宗神灵得到应有的祭祀。
English: Then King Gojang summoned the five doctors who assisted the government and said, "The State of Wu is not following the right path. It is plotting to destroy our country, destroy our ancestral temple, raze it to the ground, and not allow our ancestral deities to be properly worshipped.

古文：吾欲与之徼天之衷，唯是车马、兵甲、卒伍既具，无以行之。
现代文：我想和吴国一起求上天评判，看它赐福给哪个国家。现在我已准备好了车马、武器装备和士兵，只差没有动用。
English: I wanted to join Wu Guo in asking for Heaven's judgment, to see which country it would bless. Now I have prepared horses, chariots, weapons, equipment, and soldiers, but I have yet to use them.

古文：吾问于王孙包胥，既命孤矣；敢访诸大夫，问战奚以而可？
现代文：我向申包胥请教伐吴大计，他已给了我告诫。现在我再冒昧咨询诸位大夫，请问还要具备什么条件才可以取胜？
English: I asked Shen Baozhen for advice on how to defeat Wu, and he gave me a warning. Now I would like to consult with you doctors. What conditions do you need to have in order to win?

古文：勾践愿诸大夫言之，皆以情告，无阿孤，孤将以举大事。 
现代文：希望诸位大夫发表意见，都讲真心话，不要虚伪迎合我。
English: I hope that all of you doctors will express your opinions, speak the truth, and not pander to me with hypocrisy.

古文：大夫舌庸乃进对曰： 审赏则可以战乎？ 
现代文：我将依靠你们的帮助打一场大仗。 大夫舌庸上前回答说： 切实地做到奖赏就可以取胜了吧？ 
English: I will rely on your help to fight a big battle. "Do you think you can win if you earn the reward?

古文：王曰： 圣。 
现代文：越王说： 真是通达的办法。 
English: Yue Wang said, "It's a really effective method."

古文：大夫苦成进对曰： 审罚则可以战乎？ 
现代文：大夫苦成上前回答说： 切实地做到惩罚就可以取胜了吧？ 
English: Dr. Ku Cheng stepped forward and replied, "Can you win if you really punish?

古文：王曰： 猛。 
现代文：越王说： 这样可以使士兵勇猛。 
English: King Yue said, "This can make soldiers brave."

古文：大夫种进对曰： 审物则可以战乎？ 
现代文：大夫文种上前回答说： 切实地制定军旗的颜色就可以取胜了吧？ 
English: Dr. Wenzong stepped forward and replied, "Can we win if we really decide on the colors of the flag?"

古文：王曰： 辩。 大夫蠡进对曰： 审备则可以战乎？ 
现代文：越王说： 这样可以使士兵辨别自己部队的旗帜而统一行动。 大夫范蠡上前回答说： 切实地安排好守备就可以取胜了吧？ 
English: King Yue said, "In this way, soldiers can distinguish the flags of their own units and act in unison." Doctor Fan Ye stepped forward and replied, "If you can effectively arrange your defense, you can win, right?"

古文：王曰： 巧。 
现代文：越王说： 这样考虑是很巧妙周全的。 
English: Yue Wang said, "This kind of consideration is very clever and comprehensive.

古文：大夫皋如进对曰： 审声则可以战乎？ 王曰： 可矣。 
现代文：大夫皋如上前回答说： 切实明确指挥进退的金鼓声就可以取胜了吧？ 越王说： 可以了。 
English: Dr. Xunru stepped forward and replied, "Is it possible to win by effectively and clearly directing the sound of the advancing and retreating golden drums?" Yue Wang said, "It's possible."

古文：王乃命有司大令于国曰： 苟任戎者，皆造于国门之外。 
现代文：于是越王命令管事的臣子向国人传达命令说： 如愿加入军队的，都去国都门外集合。 
English: Therefore, King Yue ordered the vassal in charge to convey an order to the people of the country, saying, "If you wish to join the army, all of you should gather outside the gate of the capital."

古文：王乃命于国曰： 国人欲告者来告，告孤不审，将为戮不利，及五日必审之，过五日，道将不行。 
现代文：越王在那儿命令说： 你们中有好的主意想来报告的，都请报告我。报告不实将受罚，请在五天内一定慎重考虑，超过五天你的主意就不被采用了。 
English: There, King Yue ordered: "If any of you have a good idea that you want to report, please report it to me. False reports will be punished. Please carefully consider it within five days. If it takes more than five days, your idea will not be adopted."

古文：王乃入命夫人。
现代文：越王又进后宫命令夫人。
English: King Yue went into the harem again and ordered his wife to dance.

古文：王背屏而立，夫人向屏。
现代文：越王背向屏风而立，夫人面向屏风。
English: Yue Wang stands with his back to the screen, while his wife faces the screen.

古文：王曰： 自今日以后，内政无出，外政无入。
现代文：越王说： 从今以后，后宫的内务不许出宫，外界的政事不许进宫。
English: Yue Wang said: From now on, the internal affairs of the harem are not allowed to leave the palace, and the political affairs of the outside world are not allowed to enter the palace.

古文：内有辱，是子也；外有辱，是我也。
现代文：后宫的内务有差错，是你的责任；外界的政事有差错，是我的责任。
English: If there is a mistake in the internal affairs of the harem, it is your responsibility; if there is a mistake in the external political affairs, it is my responsibility.

古文：吾见子于此止矣。 
现代文：我见你就在这里为止了。 
English: I'm done with you.

古文：王遂出，夫人送王，不出屏，乃阖左阖，填之以土。去笄侧席而坐，不扫。
现代文：越王于是离开后宫出来，夫人送他，不走出屏风，便关上左侧的门户，用土填死，摘去头上的首饰，侧身而坐，不再洒扫庭除。
English: Therefore, King Yue left the harem and came out. His wife saw him off. Without leaving the screen, he closed the left portal, filled it with soil, removed the jewelry on his head, sat sideways, and no longer swept the yard.

古文：王背檐而立，大夫向檐。
现代文：越王出宫后来到朝堂，背着屋檐而立，大夫面向屋檐。
English: After leaving the palace, Yue Wang went to the morning hall and stood with his back to the eaves, while the doctor faced the eaves.

古文：王命大夫曰： 食土不均，地之不修，内有辱于国，是子也；军士不死，外有辱，是我也。
现代文：越王命令大夫说： 田地分配不平均，土地垦殖得不好，国家的内政有差错，是你们的责任；士兵们不拼死作战，国家对外征伐的战事有差错，是我的责任。
English: Yue Wang ordered the doctor to say: The uneven distribution of fields, the poor land reclamation, and the mistakes in the country's internal affairs are your responsibility; the soldiers do not fight to the death, and the mistakes in the country's foreign wars are my responsibility.

古文：自今日以后，内政无出，外政无入，吾见子于此止矣。 
现代文：从今以后，对内的国政不干预外面，对外的军政也不干预国内，我见你们就在这里为止了。 
English: From now on, we will not interfere in each other's internal affairs, and we will not interfere in each other's military affairs. That's all for now.

古文：王遂出，大夫送王不出檐，乃阖左阖，填之以土，侧席而坐，不扫。
现代文：越王于是离开朝堂，大夫们送他，不走出屋檐，便关上左侧的门户，用土填死，侧身而坐，不再洒扫庭除。
English: King Yue then left the court, and the doctors escorted him away. Without going out of the eaves, he closed the left portal, filled it with soil, sat sideways, and no longer swept the courtyard.

古文：王乃之坛列，鼓而行之，至于军，斩有罪者以徇，曰： 莫如此以环瑱通相问也。 
现代文：越王于是去郊外的土坛，从那儿击鼓出发，来到军营，杀了犯罪的人，当众宣告说： 不准有人像他这样用金玉饰物贿赂，破坏军纪。 
English: King Yue then went to a dirt mound in the suburbs, from where he started to play the drums, came to the military camp, killed the criminal, and publicly announced: "No one is allowed to bribe with gold ornaments like him and destroy military discipline."

古文：明日徙舍，斩有罪者以徇，曰： 莫如此不从其伍之令。 
现代文：第二天军队移驻新的营地，杀了犯罪的人，当众宣告说： 不准有人像他这样不服从军令。 
English: The next day, the army moved to a new camp, killed the criminal, and publicly announced: "No one should disobey military orders like him."

古文：明日徙舍，斩有罪者以徇，曰： 莫如此不用王命。 
现代文：第三天军队又移驻新的营地，杀了犯罪的人，当众宣告说： 不准有人像他这样不听君王的命令。 
English: On the third day, the army moved to a new camp, killed the criminal, and publicly declared: "No one is allowed to disobey the king's orders like him."

古文：明日徙舍，至于御儿，斩有罪者以徇，曰： 莫如此淫逸不可禁也。 
现代文：第四天军队移驻到靠近边境的御儿这个地方，杀了有罪的人，当众宣告说： 不准有人像他这样放纵自流。 
English: On the fourth day, the army moved to this place near the border, killed the guilty person, and publicly declared: "No one should be allowed to indulge himself like him."

古文：王乃命有司大徇于军，曰： 有父母耆老而无昆弟者，以告。 
现代文：越王又命令管事的臣下向全军宣告说： 有父母老人而没有兄弟的，报告上来。 
English: King Yue also ordered the vassal in charge to announce to the whole army, "If you have elderly parents but no brothers, report to me."

古文：王亲命之曰： 我有大事，子有父母耆老，而子为我死，子之父母将转于沟壑，子为我礼已重矣。
现代文：越王亲自对他们说： 我要打一场大仗，你们有父母老人，为我效力而死，你们的父母将无人照顾，你们为我所尽的礼已经很重了。
English: King Yue himself said to them: "I am about to fight a great battle. You have elderly parents who have served and died for me. Your parents will have no one to take care of them. The sacrifices you have made for me are already very heavy.

古文：子归，殁而父母之世。
现代文：请你们回去，以便为父母送终。
English: Please go back so that you can see your parents die.

古文：后若有事，吾与子图之。 
现代文：今后如果国家有事，我再跟你们商量。 
English: In the future, if there is a national emergency, we will consult with you again.

古文：明日徇于军，曰： 有兄弟四五人皆在此者，以告。 
现代文：第二天又向全军宣告说： 有兄弟四五人都在这里当兵的，报告上来。 
English: And the next day he commanded all the people, saying, "If any of you have four or five brothers who have served as soldiers in the army, bring them to me.

古文：王亲命之曰： 我有大事，子有昆弟四五人皆在此，事若不捷，则是尽也。
现代文：越王亲自对他们说： 我要打一场大仗，你们兄弟四五人都在军队里，如果打不赢，就可能全部牺牲，选一个你们当中想回去的，让他回家。 
English: King Yue himself said to them: "I am going to fight a big battle. Four or five of your brothers are in the army. If we do not win, we may all be sacrificed. Choose one of you who wants to go back and let him go home."

古文：择子之所欲归者一人。 明日徇于军，曰： 有眩瞀之疾者，以告。 
现代文：第三天又向全军宣告说： 有眼睛昏花，目力不佳的，报告上来。 
English: On the third day he announced to the whole army: "If anyone has a lazy eye or is short-sighted, report to me.

古文：王亲命之曰： 我有大事，子有眩瞀之疾，其归若已。
现代文：越王亲自命令他们说： 我要打一场大仗，你们眼睛有病，就请回去吧。
English: King Yue himself ordered them: "I am going to fight a big battle. If your eyes are bad, please go back."

古文：后若有事，吾与子图之。 
现代文：今后如果国家有事，再跟你们商量。 
English: In the future, if there is a national emergency, we will consult with you again.

古文：明日徇于军，曰： 筋力不足以胜甲兵，志行不足以听命者归，莫告。 
现代文：第四天又向全军宣告说： 有体力虚弱，不能胜任打仗，智力低下不能听懂命令的，回家去吧，不必报告。 
English: On the fourth day, he announced to the entire army: Those who are physically weak, not competent to fight, and those with low intelligence who cannot understand orders, should go home and do not need to report.

古文：明日，迁军接和，斩有罪者以徇，曰： 莫如此志行不果。 
现代文：第五天全军转移，杀了有罪的人，当众宣告说： 不准像他这样畏首畏尾胆子小。 
English: On the fifth day the whole army marched out, killed the guilty man, and proclaimed in public: "Don't be like him.

古文：于是人有致死之心。
现代文：于是军中人人有决死的准备。
English: As a result, everyone in the army was ready to die.

古文：王乃命有司大徇于军，曰： 谓二三子归而不归，处而不处，进而不进，退而不退，左而不左，右而不右，身斩，妻子鬻。 
现代文：越王又命令管事的臣下向全军宣告说： 你们中有让回去而不回去，让留下而不安心，让前进而不前进，让撤退而不撤退，让向左而不向左，让向右而不向右的，一律处死，妻子卖掉。 
English: King Yue also ordered the vassals in charge to announce to the whole army: "If any of you are reluctant to go back, but do not go back; if you are reluctant to stay, but do not go forward; if you are reluctant to withdraw, but do not withdraw; if you are reluctant to go left, but do not go left; if you are reluctant to go right, but do not go right, you shall all be put to death and your wives sold."

古文：于是吴王起师，军于江北，越王军于江南。
现代文：当时，吴王起兵，驻扎在吴淞江北岸。越王军队驻扎在吴淞江南岸。
English: At that time, King Wu raised an army and stationed it on the north bank of the Wuxi River. King Yue's army was stationed on the south bank of the Wuxi River.

古文：越王乃中分其师以为左右军，以其私卒君子六千人为中军。
现代文：越王把军队分成左右两军，把亲近他又有志气的六千士兵组编成中军。
English: King Yue divided his army into two, the right and the left, and organized the six thousand soldiers who were close to him and had ambition into the Chinese army.

古文：明日将舟战于江，及昏，乃令左军衔枚溯江五里以须，亦令右军衔枚逾江五里以须。
现代文：第二天将在江上进行船战，到黄昏时，越王便命令左军衔枚，逆江上行五里待命；又命令右军衔枚，沿江下行五里待命。
English: The next day, a naval battle would take place on the river. At dusk, the king of Yue ordered the left army to stand by and wait five miles upstream, and the right army to stand by and wait five miles downstream.

古文：夜中，乃命左军、右军涉江鸣鼓中水以须。
现代文：夜半时，命令左右两军同时击鼓渡江，在中流待命。
English: At midnight, he ordered the left and right armies to beat drums to cross the river at the same time and stand by in the middle of the river.

古文：吴师闻之，大骇，曰： 越人分为二师。将以夹攻我师。 
现代文：吴军听到鼓声大惊道： 越国人分为两部分准备夹击我们了。 
English: Hearing the sound of the drums, the Wu troops were shocked and said, "The Vietcong have divided into two groups and are preparing to attack us."

古文：乃不待旦，亦中分其师，将以御越。
现代文：于是不等到天明，也把军队分成两部分，准备抵抗越军。
English: So, without waiting for daylight, he also divided the army into two parts, preparing to resist the Vietnamese army.

古文：越王乃令其中军衔枚潜涉，不鼓不噪以袭攻之。吴师大北。
现代文：越王就命令中军街枚偷偷渡江，不击鼓，不喧哗，奇袭敌人，吴军大败。
English: King Yue ordered the Chinese army to cross the river secretly, without beating drums or making noise, and surprise the enemy. The Wu army was defeated.

古文：越之左军、右军乃遂涉而从之，又大败之于没，又郊败之，三战三北，乃至于吴。越师遂入吴国，围王台。
现代文：这时越国的左军、右军乘机渡江掩袭，又在没这个地方把吴军打得大败。最后，在吴的国都郊外又大败吴军。吴军三战三负，越军便进入吴国都，包围了吴王藏身的姑苏台。
English: At this time, the left and right armies of Vietnam took advantage of the opportunity to cross the river to cover the attack, and in the absence of this place, the Wu army was defeated. Finally, the Wu army was defeated in the suburbs of the capital of Wu. The Wu army lost three battles, and the Vietnamese army entered the capital of Wu and surrounded the Gu Sudai, where the king of Wu was hiding.

古文：吴王惧，使人行成，曰： 昔不谷先委制于越君，君告孤请成，男女服从。
现代文：吴王害怕，派人求和说： 过去我臣服于越君，越君向我求和，愿将宫中男女送来供我驱使。
English: King Wu was afraid and sent someone to sue for peace, saying, "In the past, I submitted to Prince Yue. Prince Yue sued me for peace and offered to send men and women from the palace to drive me.

古文：孤无奈越之先君何，畏天之不祥，不敢绝祀，许君成，以至于今。
现代文：我碍于我们两国先君的友好关系，害怕上天降下不祥，所以不敢灭绝越国宗庙的祭祀，答应了越君的求和，一直到现在。
English: Because of the friendly relations between our two countries' forefathers, and fearing that the heavens would bring bad omens, I did not dare to destroy the sacrificial rites of Yue Guo's ancestral temple, and I agreed to Yue Guo's request for peace, until now.

古文：今孤不道，得罪于君王，君王以亲辱于弊邑。
现代文：如今我不遵天道，得罪了君王，君王亲自来到敝国。
English: Now I have offended the king by not following the heavenly way, and the king himself has come to my country.

古文：孤敢请成，男女服为臣御。 
现代文：我冒昧地请求讲和，宫中男女都交给君王驱使。 
English: I ventured to sue for peace, and the men and women of the court were driven to the king.

古文：越王曰： 昔天以越赐吴，而吴不受；今天以吴赐越，孤敢不听天之命，而听君之令乎？ 
现代文：越王说： 过去上天把越国赐给吴国，而吴国没有接受。现在上天又把吴国赐给越国，我岂敢不听上天的命令而去听你的命令呢？ 
English: King Yue said, "In the past, Heaven gave the kingdom of Yue to the kingdom of Wu, but the kingdom of Wu did not accept it. Now, Heaven has given the kingdom of Wu to the kingdom of Yue. Do I dare to disobey Heaven's order and listen to your order?"

古文：乃不许成。
现代文：就没有答应求和。
English: They did not agree to sue for peace.

古文：因使人告于吴王曰： 天以吴赐越，孤不敢不受。
现代文：为此派人告诉吴王说： 上天把吴国赐给越国，我不敢不接受。
English: Therefore, he sent someone to tell King Wu, "God has given the State of Wu to the State of Yue, and I dare not refuse.

古文：以民生之不长，王其无死！
现代文：人的生命并不长，希望吴王不要轻易去死。
English: Human life is not long, I hope Wu Wang does not die easily.

古文：民生于地上，寓也，其与几何？
现代文：人活在世界上，不过是一个过客，能有多少时日？
English: How long can a person live in the world, just a passer-by?

古文：寡人其达王于甬句东，夫妇三百，唯王所安，以没王年。 
现代文：我将把吴王安排到甬句东这个地方养老，让吴王挑选三百对夫妇，随同前去侍候终生。 
English: I will arrange for King Wu to retire to this place east of Xinggu, and let King Wu choose three hundred couples to accompany him and wait for him for life.

古文：夫差辞曰： 天既降祸于吴国，不在前后，当孤之身，实失宗庙社稷。
现代文：夫差推辞说： 上天给吴国降下的大祸，不在前不在后，正在我执政的时候，国家的宗庙社稷实际上是我失掉的。
English: "The great calamity that Heaven has brought down on the State of Wu is neither before nor after, but during my time in office, I actually lost the state's head temple and shrine," he said.

古文：凡吴土地人民，越既有之矣，孤何以视于天下！ 
现代文：凡是吴国的土地和人民，越国已经全都占有了，我还有什么资格活在这个世界上！ 
English: All the land and people of the State of Wu have already been taken over by the State of Yue. How am I still qualified to live in this world?

古文：夫差将死，使人说于子胥曰： 使死者无知，则已矣；若其有知，吾何面目以见员也！ 
现代文：夫差临死前，让人去告祭伍子胥说： 假使死去的人什么也不知道，也就罢了；假使人死后还有知，我还有什么脸去见你啊！ 
English: Before her husband's death, she sent someone to tell Wu Zixuan about the sacrifice, saying, "If the dead don't know anything, that's all there is to it; if they still know after their death, what right do I have to see you!

古文：遂自杀。
现代文：于是便自杀了。
English: Zhang Tang then committed suicide.

古文：越灭吴，上征上国，宋、郑、鲁、卫、陈、蔡执玉之君皆入朝。
现代文：越王灭了吴国，又北上征服了中原几个诸侯国。宋、郑、鲁、卫、陈、蔡等国的国君都拿着玉器来朝拜。
English: King Yue destroyed the State of Wu, and Emperor Wu conquered several states in the Central Plains. The sovereigns of Song, Zheng, Lu, Wei, Chen, and Cai all came to pay homage with jade objects.

古文：夫唯能下其群臣，以集其谋故也。
现代文：这是因为勾践能谦虚地对待群臣，集中他们智谋的缘故。
English: This was because he was able to treat his courtiers with modesty and concentrate their wisdom.

