古文：一曰：凡国之亡也，有道者必先去，古今一也。
现代文：先识凡是国家濒于灭亡的时候，有道之人一定会事先离开，古今都是一样的。
English: Insight: Whenever a country is on the brink of extinction, people with morals will certainly leave in advance. It is the same now as it was in the past.

古文：地从於城，城从於民，民从於贤。
现代文：土地的归属取决于城邑的归属，城邑的归属取决于人民的归属，人民的归属取决于贤人的归属。
English: The ownership of the land depends on the ownership of the city, the ownership of the city depends on the ownership of the people, and the ownership of the people depends on the ownership of the wise men.

古文：故贤主得贤者而民得，民得而城得，城得而地得。
现代文：所以，贤明的君主得到贤人辅倥，人民自然就得到了，得到人民，城邑自然就得到了，得到城邑，土地自然就得到了。
English: Therefore, if a wise ruler is assisted by wise men, the people will naturally get what they want. If they get the people, they will naturally get the towns. If they get the towns, they will naturally get the land.

古文：夫地得岂必足行其地、人说其民哉？
现代文：土地的获得难道一定要亲自巡视那里，一定要亲自劝说那里的人民吗？
English: Is it necessary to personally inspect a place and personally persuade the people there in order to acquire land?

古文：得其要而已矣。
现代文：只要得到根本就够了。
English: Just getting the basics is enough.

古文：夏太史令终古出其图法，执而泣之。
现代文：夏朝的太史令终古拿出法典，抱着哭泣。
English: Tai Shi Ling of the Xia Dynasty took out the legal code and wept.

古文：夏桀迷惑，暴乱愈甚。
现代文：夏桀执迷不悟，暴虐荒淫更加厉害。
English: Xia Yao's obsession did not dissipate, and the violence and debauchery became even more severe.

古文：太史令终古乃出奔如商。
现代文：终古于是出逃投奔商。
English: He eventually ran away to become a merchant.

古文：汤喜而告诸侯曰： 夏王无道，暴虐百姓，穷其父兄，耻其功臣，轻其贤良，弃义听谗，众庶咸怨，守法之臣，自归于商。 
现代文：商汤高兴地告诉诸侯说： 夏王无道，残害百姓逼迫父兄，侮辱功臣，轻慢贤人，抛弃礼义，听信谗言。众人都怨恨他，他的掌管法典的臣子已自行归顺了商。 
English: Shang Tang happily told the lords: Xia Wang has no morals, he murders the people, persecutes his father and brother, insults the heroes, despises the sages, abandons propriety, and listens to flattery. Everyone resents him, and his vassals in charge of the legal code have voluntarily surrendered to Shang.

古文：殷内史向挚见纣之愈乱迷惑也，於是载其图法，出亡之周。
现代文：殷商的内史向挚，看到纣王越来越淫乱昏惑，于是用车载着殷商法典出逃投奔周。
English: Yin Shang's inner historian Zongxin saw that King Zou was becoming more and more lewd and bewildered, so he used a car to carry Yin Shang's code of conduct to escape and rush to Zhou.

古文：武王大说，以告诸侯曰： 商王大乱，沈于酒德，辟远箕子，爰近姑与息。妲己为政，赏罚无方，不用法式，杀三不辜，民大不服。
现代文：武王非常高兴，把这事告诉诸侯说： 商王昏乱至极，溺干饮酒作乐，躲避疏远箕子，亲近妇女和小人，妲己参与政事，赏罚没有准则，不依法度行事，残杀了三个无辜的人，人民大为不服。
English: King Wu was very pleased and told the lords about this: The merchant king was extremely confused. He drank himself into a stupor to amuse himself, avoided alienating his son-in-law, got close to women and villains, refused to participate in political affairs, had no standards for rewards and punishments, did not act in accordance with the law, and brutally killed three innocent people. The people were greatly dissatisfied.

古文：守法之臣，出奔周国。 
现代文：他的掌管法典的臣子已出逃刊周的国都。 
English: His courtiers in charge of the legal code have fled the capital.

古文：晋太史屠黍见晋之乱也，见晋公之骄而无德义也，以其图法归周。
现代文：晋国的太史屠黍，看到晋国混乱，晋国君主骄横而没有德义，于是带着晋国的法典归顺周国。
English: The great historian of Jin, Tu Youyi, saw the chaos in Jin and the arrogance and lack of virtue of the monarchs of Jin, so he took the code of Jin and submitted to Zhou.

古文：周威公见而问焉，曰： 天下之国孰先亡？ 
现代文：周威公接见他时问道： 天下的诸侯国哪个先灭亡？ 
English: When Zhou Weigong received him, he asked: Which of the principalities in the world will perish first?

古文：对曰： 晋先亡。 
现代文：屠黍回答说： 晋国先灭亡。 
English: Tu Youyou replied: Jin Province will perish first.

古文：威公问其故，对曰： 臣比在晋也，不敢直言，示晋公以天妖，日月星辰之行多以不当。曰： 是何能为？ 
现代文：威公问其原因，屠黍回答说： 我前一段在晋国的时候，不敢直言劝谏，我拿天像的异常，日月星辰的运行多不合度度的反常现像启示晋君，他说： 这些又能怎么样？ 
English: Weigong asked the reason for this, and Tu Youyou replied, "When I was in Jin Province in the previous paragraph, I did not dare to advise you bluntly. I took the abnormality of the heavenly image, the abnormal phenomenon of the movement of the sun, moon and stars as a revelation to Jinjun. He said, "What can these do?

古文：又示以人事多不义，百姓皆郁怨。曰： 是何能伤？ 
现代文：我又拿人事的处理大多不符合道义，百姓都烦闷怨恨的情况启示他，他说： 这些又能有什么妨害？
English: I also revealed to him that the handling of personnel affairs is mostly unethical, and that the people are bored and resentful. He said: What kind of hindrance can these be?

古文：又示以邻国不服，贤良不举曰： 是何能害？ 
现代文：我又拿邻国不归服，贤人得不到举用的情况启示他，他说： 这些又能有什么危害？ 
English: I also revealed to him about the situation where a neighbor does not submit and a wise man cannot be appointed, and he said: What harm can these do?

古文：如是，是不知所以亡也。
现代文：像这样，就是不了解所以灭亡的原因啊。
English: Like this, you just don't understand the reason for their demise.

古文：故臣曰晋先亡也。 
现代文：所以我说晋国先灭亡。 
English: That's why I say Jin will perish first.

古文：居三年，晋果亡。
现代文：过了三年，晋国果然灭亡了。
English: After three years, the Jin Dynasty finally collapsed.

古文：威公又见屠黍而问焉，曰： 孰次之？ 
现代文：威公又接见屠黍，问他说： 哪一国接着要灭亡？ 
English: Weigong also met with Tu Youyou and asked him: Which country will be the next to perish?

古文：对曰： 中山次之。 
现代文：屠黍回答说； 中山国接着要灭亡。 
English: Tu Youyou replied: Zhongshan will be the next to perish.

古文：威公问其故，对曰： 天生民而令有别，有别，人之义也，所异於禽兽麋鹿也，君臣上下之所以立也。
现代文：威公问其原因，屠黍回答说： 上天生下人来就让男女有别。男女有别，这是人伦大义，是人与禽兽麇鹿不周的地方，是君臣上下所以确立的基础。
English: Wei Gong asked the reason for this, and Tu Youyou replied, "God made men and women different by nature. Men and women are different, which is the great virtue of human ethics, a place where people and animals do not get along well, and the foundation established by kings and ministers.

古文：中山之俗，以昼为夜，以夜继日，男女切倚，固无休息，康乐，歌谣好悲，其主弗知恶，此亡国之风也。臣故曰中山次之。 
现代文：中山国的习俗，以日为夜，夜以继日，男女耳鬓厮磨，互相偎依，没有停止的时候，纵情安逸享乐，歌唱喜好悲声，对这种习俗，中山国的君主不知厌恶，这是亡国的风俗啊，所以我说中山国接着要灭亡。 
English: The custom of the Central Mountain Kingdom is that day is night, and night follows day, and men and women listen to each other and obey each other, and when they do not stop, they indulge in pleasure, singing and lamenting. The monarch of the Central Mountain Kingdom does not know how to dislike this custom. This is the custom of a dying country, so I say that the Central Mountain Kingdom will continue to perish.

古文：居二年，中山果亡。
现代文：过了两年，中山国果然灭亡了。
English: After two years, Zhongshan really perished.

古文：威公又见屠黍而问焉，曰： 孰次之？ 屠黍不对。
现代文：威公又接见屠黍，问说。 哪一国接着要灭亡？ 屠黍不回答。
English: Weigong met with Tu Youyou again and asked, "Which country will perish next?" Tu Youyou did not answer.

古文：威公固问焉，对曰： 君次之。 
现代文：威公坚持问他，他回答说： 接着要灭亡的是您。 
English: The emperor persisted in asking him, and he replied, "The next to perish is you."

古文：威公乃惧，求国之长者，得义莳、田邑而礼之，得史驎、赵骈以为谏臣，去苛令三十九物，以告屠黍。
现代文：威公这才害怕了，访求国中德高望重的人，得到义莳、田邑，对他们以礼相待，得到史驎磷，赵骈，让他们作谏官，废除了苛刻的法令三十九条。
English: It was only then that the emperor became afraid. He visited people who were highly respected in the country, and treated them with courtesy. He got Shi Yifang and Zhao Wei, and made them eunuchs. He abolished the harsh Thirty-nine Articles.

古文：对曰： 其尚终君之身乎！ 
现代文：成公把这些情况告诉了屠黍，屠黍回答说： 这大概可以保您一生平安吧！ 
English: Chenggong told this to Tu Youyou, and Tu Youyou replied, "This will probably keep you safe for life!"

古文：曰：臣闻之，国之兴也，天遗之贤人与极言之士；国之亡也，天遗之乱人与善谀之士。 
现代文：又说： 我听说过，国家将若盛的时候，上天给它降下贤人和敢于直言相谏的人，国家将灭亡的时候，上天给它降下乱臣贼子和善于阿谀诌媚的人。 
English: He also said, "I have heard that when a country is flourishing, heaven sends it wise men and those who dare to be outspoken. When a country is dying, heaven sends it traitors and sycophants.

古文：威公薨，歹聿九月不得葬，周乃分为二。
现代文：威公死了，暂殡九个月不得安葬，周国于是分裂为两个小国。
English: Weigong died and was not allowed to be buried for nine months. Zhou's state was then split into two small states.

古文：故有道者之言也，不可不重也。
现代文：所以有道之人的话，不可以不重视啊。
English: Therefore, it is important to pay attention to the words of a virtuous person.

古文：周鼎著饕餮，有首无身，食人未咽，害及其身，以言报更也。
现代文：周鼎上铸上饕餮纹，有头没有身子，吃人来及下咽，祸害已连累自身，这是表明恶有恶报啊。
English: Zhou Ding on the casting of wrinkles, there is a head without a body, cannibalism and swallowing, the scourge has entangled itself, this is to show that evil has evil consequences.

古文：为不善亦然。
现代文：做不善的事也是这样。
English: So is doing wrong.

古文：白圭之中山，中山之王欲留之，白圭固辞，乘舆而去。
现代文：白圭到中山国，中山国的君主想要留下他，白圭坚决谢绝，乘车离开了。
English: Bai Gui went to Zhongshan Province, the monarch of Zhongshan Province wanted to keep him, Bai Gui resolutely refused and left by car.

古文：又之齐，齐王欲留之仕，又辞而去。
现代文：又到了齐国，齐国君主想耍留他做官，他又谢绝，离开了齐国。
English: He came to Qi again. The monarch of Qi wanted to keep him as an official, but he refused and left Qi.

古文：人问其故，曰： 之二国者皆将亡。
现代文：有人问他为什么，他说： 这两个国家都将要灭亡。
English: When asked why, he said: "Both countries are going to die."

古文：所学有五尽。何谓五尽？
现代文：我听说有 五尽 ，什么叫 五尽 ？
English: I've heard that there are five ends, what are the five ends?

古文：曰：莫之必，则信尽矣；莫之誉，则名尽矣；莫之爱，则亲尽矣；行者无粮、居者无食，则财尽矣；不能用人、又不能自用，则功尽矣。国有此五者，无幸必亡。
现代文：就是：没有人信任他，那么信义就丧尽了，没有人赞誉他，那幺名声就丧尽丁没有人喜爱他，那么亲人就丧尽了，行路的人没有干粮、居家的人没有吃的，那么财物就丧尽了；不能任用人，女不能发挥自已的作用，那么功业就丧尽了，国家有这五种情况，必定灭亡，无可幸免。
English: That is: if no one trusts him, then his trustworthiness is lost; if no one praises him, then his fame is lost; if no one loves him, then his relatives are lost; if people on the road have no dry food, and people at home have no food, then their wealth is lost; if people cannot be appointed, and women cannot play their role, then their achievements are lost; if a country has these five conditions, it will surely perish and cannot be spared.

古文：中山、齐皆当此。 
现代文：中山、齐国都正符合这五种情况。 
English: Zhongshan and Qi Province are all in line with these five situations.

古文：若使中山之王与齐王闻五尽而更之，则必不亡矣。
现代文：假如让中山的君主和齐国的君主闻知 五尽 ，并改正自己的恶行，那就一定不会灭亡了。
English: If the monarchs of Zhongshan and the monarchs of Qi were made aware of the Five Perfections and corrected their evil deeds, then they would certainly not perish.

古文：其患不闻，虽闻之又不信。
现代文：他们的祸患在于没有听到这些话，即使听到了又不相信。
English: Their evil is that they have not heard, and if they hear, they will not believe.

古文：然则人主之务，在乎善听而已矣。
现代文：这样看来，君主需要努力做的，在善于听取意见罢了。
English: It would seem that all the monarch has to do is be a good listener.

古文：夫五割而与赵，悉起而距军乎济上，未有益也。
现代文：中山五次割让土地给赵国，齐滑王率领全部军队在济水一带抵御以燕国为首的五国军队，都没有什么益处，都没有逃脱国亡身死的下场。
English: Zhongshan ceded land to Zhao five times, and Qisai Wang led the entire army to resist the five-nation army led by Yan in the area of Jishui. There was no benefit, and no one escaped the fate of death.

古文：是弃其所以存，而造其所以亡也。
现代文：这是由于他们抛弃了那些能使国家生存的东西，而为自己准备下了灭亡的条件。
English: This is because they have abandoned those things that can make the country survive, and have prepared the conditions for their own demise.

古文：二曰：天下虽有有道之士，国犹少。
现代文：观世天下虽然有有道之士，但本来就很少。
English: Looking at the world, although there are Taoists in the world, they are very few.

古文：千里而有一士，比肩也；累世而有一圣人，继踵也。
现代文：如果方圆千里有一个士，那就很多了，可以称得上是肩靠着肩了，如果几代出一个圣人，那就不少了，可以称得上是脚挨着脚了。
English: If there is one saint in a thousand miles, that is a lot, it can be said to be shoulder to shoulder. If there is a saint in several generations, that is a lot, it can be said to be foot to foot.

古文：士与圣人之所自来，若此其难也，而治必待之，治奚由至？
现代文：士和圣人的出现，竟这样的困难，可是国家的安定却一定得依靠他们，像这样，国家安定的局面怎么能到来？
English: The emergence of saints and sages is so difficult, but the stability of the country must rely on them. How can a stable situation for the country come about like this?

古文：虽幸而有，未必知也，不知则与无贤同。
现代文：即使幸或有贤人。
English: Even if you are lucky or wise.

古文：此治世之所以短，而乱世之所以长也。
现代文：也未必被人知道。有贤人而不被人知晓，那就跟没有贤人一样。这就是安定的世道之所以很短、而混乱的世道之所以很长的原因啊。
English: Nor is it necessarily known. If there is a wise man and he is not known, it is the same as if there is no wise man. This is why the path of a stable world is very short and the path of a chaotic world is very long.

古文：故王者不四，霸者不六，亡国相望，囚主相及。
现代文：所以成就王业的人没有出现四位，称霸诸侯的人没有出现六位，被灭亡的国家一个连着一个，被囚禁的君主一个接着一个。
English: That is why there were not four men who achieved kingship, nor six men who dominated princes, nor a country destroyed one after the other, nor a monarch imprisoned one after the other.

古文：得士则无此之患。
现代文：得到士就没有这样的祸患了。
English: Getting a taxi is no longer such a scourge.

古文：此周之所封四百馀，服国八百馀，今无存者矣。
现代文：这就是周朝所封的四百多个诸侯、归服的八百多个国家如今没有再存在的原因。
English: This is the reason why the more than four hundred vassals and more than eight hundred countries subject to the Zhou Dynasty no longer exist today.

古文：虽存，皆尝亡矣。
现代文：即便有存在的，也都曾经灭亡过。
English: Even if they existed, they all perished.

古文：贤主知其若此也，故日慎一日，以终其世。
现代文：贤明的君主知道情况是这样，所以一天比一天谨慎，以保自己终身平安。
English: A wise prince, knowing this to be the case, becomes more prudent day by day, in order to secure his life.

古文：譬之若登山，登山者，处已高矣，左右视，尚巍巍焉山在其上。
现代文：比如说登山，登山的人，登到的地方已经很高了，向左右看，高峻的山还在上边呢。
English: For example, mountain climbers, mountain climbers, the place they have reached is already very high. Looking to the left and right, the steep mountain is still on the top.

古文：贤者之所与处，有似於此。身已贤矣，行已高矣，左右视，尚尽贤於己。
现代文：贤人和人相处与此相似。自己已经很贤明了，品行已经很高尚了，向左右看，还尽是超过自己的人。
English: It is similar to the way a wise man gets along with others. He is already very wise, and his conduct is already very noble. Looking to the right and left, he is still a man who surpasses himself.

古文：故周公旦曰： 不如吾者，吾不与处，累我者也；与我齐者，吾不与处，无益我者也。 
现代文：所以周公旦说： 不如我的人，我不跟他在一起，这是牵累我的人，跟我一样的人，我不跟他在一起，这是对我没有益处的人。 
English: Therefore, Zhou Gongdan said: If a person is not as good as me, I will not be with him. This is a person who drags me down. If a person is like me, I will not be with him. This is a person who is of no use to me.

古文：惟贤者必与贤於己者处。
现代文：只有贤人一定跟超过自己的人在一起。
English: Only a wise man sticks with those who are better than him.

古文：贤者之可得与处也，礼之也。
现代文：跟贤人在一起是能够办到的，那就是以礼对待他们。
English: It is possible to get along with sages, that is, to treat them with courtesy.

古文：主贤世治，则贤者在上；主不肖世乱，则贤者在下。
现代文：君主贤明，世道安定，贤人就在上位，君主不肖，世道混乱，贤人就在下位，而奸佞小人受到提拔重用。
English: The monarch is wise, the world is stable, the wise man is at the top, the monarch is ugly, the world is chaotic, the wise man is at the bottom, and the villain is promoted and reused.

古文：今周室既灭，天子既废，乱莫大於无天子。
现代文：现在周王室已经灭亡，天子已经废黜，世道混乱没有比无天子更严重的了。
English: Now the Zhou royal family has perished, the heavenly son has been deposed, and the chaos of the world is no more serious than no heavenly son.

古文：无天子则强者胜弱，众者暴寡，以兵相刬，不得休息。
现代文：没有天子，强大的就胜过弱小的，人多势众的就欺凌势孤力单的，用军队互相残杀，无法止息。
English: Without a divine son, the strong would prevail over the weak, the numerous would bully the powerless, and armies would be used to kill each other, and there would be no stopping it.

古文：而佞进。
现代文：如今的世道就正是这样。
English: That is the way of the world today.

古文：今之世当之矣。故欲求有道之士，则於江海之上，山谷之中，僻远幽闲之所，若此则幸於得之矣。
现代文：所以想要访求有道之士，就应该到江海之滨，山谷之中，僻远幽静之处去访求，这样做就有幸或许能得到他们。
English: Therefore, if you want to visit a Taoist, you should go to the coast of the river, the middle of the valley, and the remote and quiet place to visit, and by doing so, you may be lucky enough to get them.

古文：太公钓於滋泉，遭纣之世也，故文王得之。
现代文：太公望在滋泉边钓鱼，是因为正遭逢纣当政的时代，所以周文王得到了他。
English: The reason why King Taigong wanted to go fishing at the spring was that he was in the era when King Fengyu was in power, so King Zhouwen got him.

古文：文王，千乘也；纣，天子也。
现代文：文王只是拥有千辆兵车的诸侯，纣是天子。
English: King Wen is only a prince with a thousand chariots, but he is the son of heaven.

古文：天子失之，而千乘得之，知之与不知也。诸众齐民，不待知而使，不待礼而令。
现代文：然而天子失去了太公，而诸侯却得到了太公，这是因为文王了解太公，而纣不了解太公啊。
English: However, the heavenly son lost the grand duke, but the lords gained the grand duke. This is because King Wen understood the grand duke, while Zou did not understand the grand duke.

古文：若夫有道之士，必礼必知，然後其智能可尽也。
现代文：平民百姓，无须了解就可以役健他们，无须礼遇就可以命令他们。至于有道之士，一定要礼遇他们，一定要了解他们，然后才可以让他们把智慧才能全都献出来。
English: As for the common people, you can help them without understanding them, and you can order them without courtesy. As for the Taoists, you must treat them with courtesy, you must understand them, and only then can you let them give all their wisdom and talent.

古文：晏子之晋，见反裘负刍息於涂者。
现代文：晏子到晋国去，看见一个反穿皮衣背着草的人正在路边休息。
English: Mule went to Jin Province and saw a man wearing a fur coat and carrying grass on his back, who was resting on the roadside.

古文：以为君子也，使人问焉，曰： 曷为而至此？ 
现代文：晏子认为这个人是个君子，就派人问他说： 你为什么到了这里？ 
English: The lame man thought that this man was a gentleman, so he sent someone to ask him, "Why did you come here?"

古文：对曰： 齐人累之，名为越石父。 
现代文：那个人回答说： 我给齐人为奴，名叫越石父。 
English: The man replied, "I have a slave named Yue Shifu.

古文：晏子曰： 嘻！ 
现代文：晏子听了以后说： 噢! 
English: After listening, the cripple said, "Oh!

古文：遽解左骖以赎之，载而与归。
现代文：立刻解下车左边的马把这个人赎了出来，跟他一起乘车回去。
English: Immediately dismount the horse on the left of the car to redeem this person and take the car back with him.

古文：至舍，弗辞而入。
现代文：到了馆舍，晏子不向他告辞就进去了。
English: When he arrived at the guesthouse, the cripple went in without saying goodbye.

古文：越石父怒，请绝。
现代文：越石父很生气，请求与晏子绝交。
English: Yue Shi's father was very angry and asked him to break off relations with Zou Zi.

古文：晏子使人应之曰： 婴未尝得交也，今免子於患，吾於子犹未邪？ 
现代文：晏子派人回答他说： 我不曾跟你交朋友啊。现在我从患难中把你解救出来，我对你还不可以吗？ 
English: The cripple sent someone to answer him: "I never befriended you. Now that I have rescued you from your troubles, am I still not allowed to help you?

古文：越石父曰： 吾闻君子屈乎不己知者，而伸乎己知者。
现代文：越石父说： 我听说君子在不了解自己的人而前可以忍受屈辱，在已经了解自己的人面前就要挺胸做人。
English: Yue Shi's father said, "I heard that a gentleman can endure humiliation in front of people who don't know him, and that he should stand up straight in front of people who already know him.

古文：吾是以请绝也。 
现代文：因此，我要跟您绝交。 
English: Therefore, I am breaking off diplomatic relations with you.

古文：晏子乃出见之，曰： 向也见客之容而已，今也见客之志。
现代文：晏子于是出来见他说； 刚才只是看到客人的容貌罢了，现在才看到客人的心志。
English: The cripple then came out to meet him and said, "Just now I only saw the guest's face, but now I see the guest's heart.

古文：婴闻察实者不留声，观行者不讥辞，婴可以辞而无弃乎？ 
现代文：我听说考察人的实际的人不留意人的名声，观察人的行为的人不考虑人的言辞。我可阻向您谢罪而不被拒绝吗？ 
English: I have heard that the practical man who examines people does not pay attention to people's reputation, and the man who observes people's behavior does not consider people's words. Can I stop you from apologizing and not be rejected?

古文：越石父曰： 夫子礼之，敢不敬从。 
现代文：越石父说： 先生您上礼对待我，我怎敢恭敬从命。 
English: Yue Shi's father said, "Teacher, how dare you treat me with respect? How dare I respectfully obey your order?"

古文：晏子遂以为客。
现代文：晏子于是把他待为上宾。
English: So the mule took him as his chief guest.

古文：俗人有功则德，德则骄。
现代文：世俗之人有功劳就自以为对别人有恩德，自以为对别人有恩德就骄做。
English: When worldly people have merit, they think they are being kind to others, and when they think they are being kind to others, they are proud.

古文：今晏子功免人於厄矣，而反屈下之，其去俗亦远矣。
现代文：现在晏子有从困境中解教人的功劳，却反而对被救的人很谦卑，他超出世俗已经相当远了。
English: Now the mule has the merit of rescuing people from difficulties, but on the contrary, he is very humble to the rescued people. He is already quite far beyond the world.

古文：此令功之道也。
现代文：述就是保全功劳的方法啊。
English: It's a way to preserve one's reputation.

古文：子列子穷，容貌有饥色。
现代文：列子很贫困，脸上现出饥饿的气色。
English: The soldiers are poor and hungry.

古文：客有言之於郑子阳者，曰： 列御寇，盖有道之士也，居君之国而穷，君无乃为不好士乎？ 
现代文：有个宾客把这种情况告诉给郑相子阳，说： 列御寇是个有道之士，居住在您的国家却很贫困，您恐怕是不喜欢士吧？ 
English: A guest told this situation to Zheng Xiangziyang, saying: "Lie Miko is a virtuous man, but he lives in poverty in your country. I'm afraid you don't like men, do you?"

古文：郑子阳令官遗之粟数十秉。
现代文：子阳让官吏送给列子几百石粮食。
English: Zheng Ziyang then ordered the officials under his command to send a lot of grain to the envoys.

古文：子列子出见使者，再拜而辞。
现代文：列子出来会见使者，拜而又拜，谢绝了。
English: After seeing the messenger, Letson very politely bowed to him for a few moments, but declined the grain.

古文：使者去，子列子入，其妻望而拊心曰： 闻为有道者妻子，皆得逸乐。
现代文：使者离开了，列子进了门，他的妻早怨恨地捶着胸脯说； 听说有道之人的妻子儿女都能得到安乐。
English: The messenger left, the page came to the door, and his wife beat her breast resentfully and said, "I've heard that the wives and children of virtuous people can find peace and happiness.

古文：今妻子有饥色矣，君过而遗先生食，先生又弗受也。
现代文：如今妻子儿女已经面有饥色，相国派人探望并给先生您送来吃的，先生您又不接受。
English: Now that your wife and children are starving, your home country has sent someone to visit you and bring you food, but you won't accept it.

古文：岂非命也哉？ 
现代文：我们岂不是命中注定要受贫困吗？ 
English: Isn't that what life is all about?

古文：子列子笑而谓之曰： 君非自知我也，以人之言而遗我粟也，至已而罪我也，有罪且以人言。
现代文：列子笑着对她说： 相国自己并不了解我，是因为别人的话才送给我粮食，过不了多久，同样又将会因为别人的话治我的罪。
English: Letsi smiled and said to her: My partner country does not understand me, they only give me food because of the words of others, and before long, they will also punish me because of the words of others.

古文：此吾所以不受也。 
现代文：这就是我不接受的原因。 
English: That's why I don't accept it.

古文：其卒民果作难，杀子阳。
现代文：结果人民果然发难，杀死了子阳。
English: As a result, the people really got into trouble and killed Ziyang.

古文：受人之养而不死其难，则不义；死其难，则死无道也。
现代文：接受了人家的供养，却不为他遭难而去死，就是不义，为他遭难而去死，就是为无道之人而死。
English: To accept the offerings of others, but not to die for their suffering, is injustice; to die for their suffering, is to die for the wicked.

古文：死无道，逆也。
现代文：为无道之人而死，就是悖逆。
English: To die for the ungodly is rebellion.

古文：子列子除不义、去逆也，岂不远哉？
现代文：列子免除不义、避开悖逆，岂不是很远吗？
English: Is it not far for a prince to redeem iniquity, and to pass over transgression?

古文：且方有饥寒之患矣，而犹不苟取，先见其化也。
现代文：正当他有饥寒之苦的时候，尚且不肯随随便便地接受别人的馈赠，这是因为事先预见到了事情的发展变化。
English: It was precisely when he was suffering from hunger and cold that he did not want to casually accept gifts from others, because he foresaw the development of things in advance.

古文：先见其化而已动，远乎性命之情也。
现代文：事先预见到事物的发展变化，从而采取相应的行动，这就通晓性命的真情了。
English: To foresee the development and change of things in advance, and thus to take corresponding actions, is to understand the true meaning of life.

古文：三曰：人之目，以照见之也，以瞑则与不见，同。其所以为照、所以为瞑异。
现代文：知接人的眼睛，因为明亮才能看见东西，失明就看不见，看见或看不见，眼睛是相同的，但接触外物时，或明亮、或失明却是不同的。
English: The eyes of the perceiving person, because of the brightness, can see things, blindness can not see, see or not see, the eyes are the same, but when exposed to foreign objects, either bright or blind is different.

古文：瞑士未尝照，故未尝见。
现代文：失明的人眼睛未曾明亮过，所以从未看见过。
English: The blind man's eyes have never been bright, so he has never seen.

古文：瞑者目无由接也，无由接而言见，谎。
现代文：失明的人眼睛无法与外物接触，无法与外物接触却说看见了，这是欺骗。
English: A blind person's eyes can't make contact with external objects, and if they can't make contact with external objects but say they can see, this is deception.

古文：智亦然。
现代文：智力也是达样。
English: Intelligence is also good.

古文：其所以接智、所以接不智同，其所能接、所不能接异。智者，其所能接远也；愚者，其所能接近也。
现代文：人们的智力达到或达不到，凭借的条件是相同的，但接触外物时，或聪明、或愚笨却是不同的。聪明的人，他们的智力能达到很远，愚笨的人，他们的智力所及范圈很近。
English: People's intelligence is achieved or not achieved, the conditions are the same, but when exposed to foreign objects, either smart or stupid is different. Smart people, their intelligence can reach very far, stupid people, their intelligence can reach very close.

古文：所能接近而告之以远，奚由相得？
现代文：智力所及很近的人，却告诉他长远的变化趋势，怎么能理解？
English: How can someone who is very close to the intellect, but tells him the long-term trend of change, how can he understand?

古文：无由相得，说者虽工，不能喻矣。
现代文：对于无法理解的人，游说的人即使善辩，也无法让他明白了。
English: To those who do not understand, no amount of persuasion can make them understand.

古文：戎人见暴布者而问之曰： 何以为之莽莽也？ 
现代文：有个戎人看到一个晒布的，就问他说； 用什么东西织得这样长大呢？ 
English: A soldier, seeing a dried-up piece of cloth, asked him, "What did you use to make it grow like that?"

古文：指麻而示之。
现代文：那个人指着麻让戎人看。
English: The man pointed at the mahjong player.

古文：怒曰： 孰之壤壤也，可以为之莽莽也！ 
现代文：戎人生气地说， 哪里有这样乱纷纷的东西可以织得这样长大呢! 
English: The soldier said angrily, "Where can such a jumble of things be woven to grow up like this?"

古文：故亡国非无智士也，非无贤者也，其主无由接故也。
现代文：所以灭亡的国家不是没有聪明之士，也不是没有贤德之人，而是因为亡国的君主智力不及，无法接触他们的缘故啊。
English: Therefore, the country that perished was not without clever people, nor without virtuous people, but because the monarch of the country that perished was not intelligent enough to get in touch with them.

古文：无由接之患，自以为智，智必不接。
现代文：无法接触他们所带来的祸患是自以为聪明，这样智力势必达不到。
English: The misfortune of not being able to reach them is that they think they are clever, but they are not.

古文：今不接而自以为智，悖。
现代文：如果智力达不到却又自以为聪明，这是胡涂。
English: If you think you're smart when you're not, it's bullshit.

古文：若此则国无以存矣，主无以安矣。
现代文：像这样，国家就无法生存了，君主就无法安定了。
English: As such, the country cannot survive, and the monarch cannot be stable.

古文：智无以接，而自知弗智，则不闻亡国，不闻危君。
现代文：如果君主智力达不到，而自知智力不及，那样就不会有灭亡的国家，不会有处于险境的君主了。
English: If the sovereign were not intelligent, and did not know that he was not, there would be no ruined state, no imperiled sovereign.

古文：管仲有疾，桓公往问之，曰： 仲父之疾病矣，将何以教寡人？ 
现代文：管仲生了重病，桓公去探望他，说： 仲父您的病很严重了，您有什么话教诲我呢？ 
English: When Guan Zhong fell seriously ill, Emperor Kan went to visit him and said, "Father Guan, your illness is very serious. Do you have any words of advice for me?"

古文：管仲曰： 齐鄙人有谚曰： 居者无载，行者无埋。 
现代文：管仲说； 齐国的鄙野之人有句谚语说； 家居的人不用准备外出时车上装载的东西，行路的人不用准备家居时需要埋藏的东西。 
English: Guanzhong said; People in the outback of Qi Province have a saying; People at home do not need to prepare things to be loaded on the car when going out, and people traveling do not need to prepare things to be buried when staying at home.

古文：今臣将有远行，胡可以问？
现代文：我将要永远地走了，哪还值得询问？ 
English: I'm going to be gone forever, what's left to ask?

古文：桓公曰： 愿仲父之无让也。 
现代文：桓公说： 希望仲父您不要推辞。 
English: Prince Kan said, "I hope you won't refuse to be my stepfather."

古文：管仲对曰： 愿君之远易牙、竖刀、常之巫、卫公子启方。
现代文：管仲回答说： 希望您疏远易牙、竖刀、常之巫，卫公子启方。 
English: Guanzhong replied, "I hope you will stay away from Yi Zha, Hanzhong, Chang Zhi Wu, and Wei Gongzi Kai Fang.

古文：公曰： 易牙烹其子犹尚可疑邪？ 
现代文：桓公说： 易牙不惜煮了自己的儿子以满足我的口味，这样的人还可以怀疑吗？ 
English: Huan Gong said, "Iga cooked his own son to suit my taste, can such a person still be doubted?"

古文：管仲对曰： 人之情，非不爱其子也，其子之忍，又将何？ 
现代文：管仲回答说； 人的本性不是不爱自己的儿子啊，他连自己的儿子都狠心煮死了，对您又怎么能热爱呢？ 
English: Guanzhong replied, "Isn't it human nature not to love one's own son? He even boiled his own son to death, so how can he love you?"

古文：有於君公又曰： 竖刀自宫以近寡人，犹尚可疑邪？ 
现代文：桓公又说； 竖刀自己阉割了自己以便接近侍奉我，这样的人还可以怀疑吗？ 
English: Lord Huan also said, "Hengtao castrated himself in order to get close to serving me. Can such a person still be doubted?"

古文：管仲对曰： 人之情，非不爱其其身之忍，又将何有於君？ 
现代文：管仲回答说： 人的本性不是不爱自己的身体啊，他连自身都狠心阉割了，对您又怎么能热爱呢？ 
English: Guanzhong replied, "It is not in man's nature not to love his own body. He has even castrated himself. How can he love you?

古文：公又曰： 常之巫审於死生，能去苛病，犹尚可疑邪？ 
现代文：桓公又说： 常之巫能明察死生，能驱除鬼降给人的疾病，这样的人还可以怀疑吗？ 
English: Prince Huan also said, "Ancient witches can see life and death, and can drive away the diseases that ghosts bring to people. Can such a person still be doubted?

古文：管仲对曰： 死生，命也。苛病，失也。
现代文：管仲回答说： 死生是命中注定的，鬼降给人的疾病是由于精神失守引起的。
English: Guanzhong replied, "Life and death are predetermined by fate. Illnesses brought by ghosts are caused by mental derangement.

古文：君不任其命、守其本。而敢归巫，彼将以此无不为也。 
现代文：您不听凭天命，守住根本，却倚仗常之巫，他将借此无所不为了。 
English: You do not listen to the fate of heaven, keep the fundamental, but rely on the magic of the constant, he will use this to do everything.

古文：公又曰： 卫公子启方事寡人十五年矣，其父死而不哭，犹尚可疑邪？ 
现代文：桓公又说： 卫公子启方侍奉我十五年了，他的父亲死了，他都不敢回去哭丧，这样的人还可以怀疑吗？ 
English: Prince Huan also said, "Wei Gongzi Qifang has served me for fifteen years. His father died, and he did not dare to go back to mourn. Can such a person still be suspected?

古文：管仲对曰： 人之情，非不爱其父也，其父之忍，又将何有於君？ 公曰： 诺。
现代文：管仲回答说： 人的本性不是不爱自己的父亲啊，他连自己的父亲都那样狠心对待，对您又怎么能热爱呢？ 桓公说： 好吧。 
English: Guanzhong replied, "It is not human nature not to love one's father. He even treated his own father so cruelly. How can he love you?" Huan Gong said, "Okay."

古文：管仲死，尽逐之。
现代文：管仲死了，桓公把易牙等人全部驱遂了。
English: After Guanzhong's death, King Qi Kuan expelled all these people.

古文：食不甘，宫不治，苛病起，朝不肃。
现代文：桓公吃饭不香甜，后宫不安定，鬼病四起，朝政混乱。
English: Emperor Kan's food was not sweet, his harem was unstable, there were four cases of ghostly illness, and the imperial government was in chaos.

古文：居三年公曰： 仲父不亦过乎！
现代文：过了三年，桓公说； 仲父也太过分了吧!
English: After three years, Kanko said, the stepfather has gone too far!

古文：孰谓仲父尽之乎！ 
现代文：谁说仲父的话都得听从呢! 
English: Who says you have to listen to your stepfather?

古文：於是皆复召而反。
现代文：于是又把易牙等人都召了回来。
English: So he called Iga and the others back.

古文：明年，公有病，常之巫从中出曰： 公将以某日薨。 
现代文：第二年，桓公病了，常之巫从官内出来说： 君主将在某日去世。 
English: In the second year, Prince Qi Kuan fell ill, and it was the evil spirit of Chang Zhi Wu who came out of the palace and said to the people, "Prince Qi Kuan will die on a certain day in a certain month."

古文：易牙、竖刀、常之巫相与作乱，塞宫门，筑高墙，不通人，矫以公令。
现代文：易牙。竖刀、常之巫一起作乱，堵塞了宫门，筑起了高墙，不让人进去，假称这是桓公的命令。
English: Iga. Hatchet and Tsune no Miko get together to create a disturbance, block the palace gate, build a high wall, and prevent anyone from entering, pretending that this is an order from Lord Kan.

古文：有一妇人逾垣入，至公所。
现代文：有一个妇人翻墙进入宫内，到了桓公那里。
English: A woman climbed over the wall into the palace and got to Prince Kan.

古文：公曰： 我欲食。 
现代文：桓公说： 我想吃饭。 
English: Kan said, "I want to eat."

古文：妇人曰： 吾无所得。 
现代文：妇人说； 我没有地方能弄到饭。 
English: The woman said, "I have no place to get water.

古文：公又曰： 我欲饮。 
现代文：桓公又说： 我想喝水。 
English: Prince Kan also said, "I want to drink water."

古文：妇人曰： 吾无所得。 
现代文：妇人说： 我没有地方能弄到水。 
English: The woman said, "I have no place to get water.

古文：公曰： 何故？ 
现代文：桓公说： 这是为什么？ 
English: Kan said, "Why is that?

古文：对曰： 常之巫从中出曰： 公将以某日薨。 
现代文：妇人回答说。 常之巫从官内出来说： 君主将在某日去世。 
English: The woman replied, "The sorcerer Tsune no Miko came out of his office and said, 'The sovereign will die one day.

古文：易牙、竖刀、常之巫相与作乱，塞高墙，不通人，故无所得。
现代文：易牙，竖刀，常之巫一起作乱，堵塞了宫门，筑起了高墙，不让人进来，所以没有地方能弄饭和水。
English: Iga, Katana, and Tsune no Miko together caused a disturbance, blocked the palace gate, built a high wall, and did not let anyone in, so there was no place to get food and water.

古文：卫公子启方以书社四十下卫。 
现代文：卫公子启方带着四十社的土地和人口投降了卫国。 
English: The Emperor's son, Emperor Akikata, surrendered the country with the land and population of forty shrines.

古文：公慨焉叹，涕出曰： 嗟乎！
现代文：桓公慨然叹息，流着泪说： 唉!
English: Prince Kan sighed with emotion and said with tears streaming down his face: Alas!

古文：圣人之所见，岂不远哉！
现代文：圣人所预见到的，难道不是很远吗？
English: Is not what the sage foresaw very far away?

古文：若死者有知，我将何面目以见仲父衣乎？ 
现代文：如果死者有知，我将有什么脸去见仲父呢？ 
English: If the deceased knew, would I have the face to meet the stepfather?

古文：蒙袂而绝乎寿宫。
现代文：于是用衣袖蒙住脸，死在寿官。
English: So he covered his face with his sleeve and died at the coroner's office.

古文：虫流出於户，上盖以杨门之扇，三月不葬。
现代文：尸虫爬出门外，尸体上盖着杨门的门扇，过了三个月不能停柩，过了九个月不能下葬。
English: Cadaver worms crawl out of the door, the corpse is covered with the door leaf of the poplar door, after three months it cannot be stopped, and after nine months it cannot be buried.

古文：此不卒听管仲之言桓公非轻难而恶管子也，无由接见也。
现代文：这是因为桓公不能始终听从管忡的话啊。桓公不是轻视灾难、厌恶管仲，而是智力不及，无法知道管仲的话是对的。
English: This is because King Kan cannot always listen to the words of Guanzhong. It is not that King Kan despises disasters and loathes Guanzhong, but that he is not intelligent enough to know that Guanzhong's words are right.

古文：无由接，固却其忠言，而爱其所尊贵也。
现代文：正因为无法知道，所以不采纳管仲的忠言，反而亲近自己所宠信的那几个小人。
English: Precisely because it is impossible to know, they do not accept Guanzhong's loyal advice, but instead get close to their favorite villains.

古文：四曰：穴深寻，则人之臂必不能极矣。
现代文：悔过洞深八尺，那么人的手臂就不能探到底了。
English: If you regret that the hole is eight feet deep, then your arm will not be able to reach the bottom.

古文：是何也？
现代文：这是为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：不至故也。
现代文：是因为手达不到的缘故。
English: It's because it's out of reach.

古文：智亦有所不至。公兴师以袭郑，蹇叔谏曰： 不可。
现代文：从前，秦穆公发兵偷袭郑国，蹇叔劝阻说： 不可以。
English: Once upon a time, Qin Mu Gong sent soldiers to attack Zheng Guo. Uncle Zhai dissuaded him, saying, "No.

古文：臣闻之，袭国邑，以车不过百里，以人不过三十里，皆以其气之趫与力之盛至，是以犯敌能灭，去之能速。
现代文：我听说过，偷袭他国城邑，用战车不能超过百里，用步兵不能超过三十里，都是凭着士兵士气旺盛和力量强盛时到达，因此进攻敌人能够消灭他们，撤离战场能够迅速离去。
English: I have heard that sneak attacks on cities and towns of other countries should not exceed one hundred miles by chariot and thirty miles by infantry. This is based on the principle that soldiers should arrive when their morale is high and their strength is strong. Therefore, attacking the enemy can eliminate them, and withdrawing from the battlefield can quickly leave.

古文：今行数千里，又绝诸侯之地以袭国，臣不知其可也。
现代文：现在行军几千里，又要穿越其他诸侯国的领土去时袭他国，我不知道那怎么可以呢!
English: Now we are marching thousands of miles and have to cross the territories of other principalities to attack another country. I don't know how that can be!

古文：君其重图之。 
现代文：您还是仔细慎重地考虑考虑吧。 
English: You'd better think it over carefully.

古文：缪公不听也。
现代文：穆公不听从他的意见。
English: Mu Gong did not listen to his advice.

古文：蹇叔送师於门外而哭曰： 师乎！见其出而不见其入也。 
现代文：蹇叔送军队出征送到城门外，哭着说； 将士们啊，我看到你们出去却看不到你们回来啦! 
English: Uncle Yao sent the troops to be conscripted and sent them outside the city gate, crying, "O generals, I see you go out, but I don't see you come back!"

古文：蹇叔有子曰申与视，与师偕行。
现代文：蹇叔的两个儿子申和视跟军队一起出征。
English: His uncle's two sons, Shin and Son, went to the front with the army.

古文：蹇叔谓其子曰： 晋若遏师必於淆。
现代文：蹇叔对他的儿子们说： 晋国如果阻击我军，一定在崤山。
English: Uncle Zou said to his sons: "If Jin blocks our army, it must be in Shaoshan.

古文：女死，不於南方之岸，必於北方之岸，为吾尸女之易。 
现代文：你们战死的话，不死在南山边，就一定要死在北山边，以便我给你们收尸时容易识别。 
English: If you die in battle, if you do not die on the south side of the mountain, you must die on the north side of the mountain, so that I can easily identify you when I collect your bodies.

古文：缪公闻之，使人让蹇叔曰： 寡人兴师，未知何如。
现代文：穆公听说了这件事，派人责备蹇叔说： 我发兵出征，还不知道胜负如何。
English: When Mu Gong heard about this, he sent someone to reproach Uncle Zou, saying, "I sent troops to fight, but I still don't know whether we will win or lose.

古文：今哭而送之，是哭吾师也。 
现代文：现在你却哭着送行，这是给我的军队哭丧啊。 
English: Now you're leaving in tears, crying for my troops.

古文：蹇叔对曰： 臣不敢哭师也。
现代文：蹇叔回答说： 我不敢给军队哭丧啊。
English: Uncle Zou replied, "I don't dare to mourn for the army.

古文：臣老矣，有子二人，皆与师行。
现代文：我老了，有两个儿子都和军队一起出征。
English: I'm an old man with two sons in the military.

古文：比其反也，非彼死，则臣必死矣，是故哭。 
现代文：等到军队回来的时候，不是他们战死，就一定是我死了，因此我才哭。 
English: By the time the army came back, if they didn't die, I would have died, so I just cried.

古文：师行过周，王孙满要门而窥之，曰： 呜呼！是师必有疵。
现代文：秦军出征经过周的都城，王孙满美好城门上了闩，从门缝里观看秦军，说： 哎呀，这支军队必遭挫折。
English: When the Qin army went on a campaign and passed through the capital city of Zhou, Wang Sunman put a shackle on the gate of the beautiful city, watched the Qin army from the cracks of the door, and said: Alas, this army will surely suffer setbacks.

古文：若无疵，吾不复言道矣。
现代文：如果它不遭挫折，以后我就不再议论 道 了。
English: If it doesn't fail, I won't talk about it anymore.

古文：夫秦非他，周室之建国也。
现代文：秦国非他国可比，它是周王室分封的诸侯国。
English: Qin is not comparable to other countries. It is the most powerful of the Zhou dynasty's vassal states.

古文：过天子之城，宜橐甲束兵，左右皆下，以为天子礼。
现代文：它的军队经过天子的都城，应该收藏起铠甲兵器，战车上驭者左右的甲士都应下车，以此表示向天子行礼。
English: When its army passes through the capital city of the heavenly son, it should collect armor weapons, and the armorers on both sides of the chariot driver should get off the chariot, in order to salute the heavenly son.

古文：今袀服回建，左不轼，而右之超乘者五百乘，力则多矣，然而寡礼，安得无疵？ 
现代文：现在这支军队服装上下一色，兵车上建置混乱，左边的将士不凭轼致敬，右边的骖乘跃上车的有五百辆。这些人力气固然是很大了，然而缺少礼仪，这样的军队怎么能不遭挫折？ 
English: Now this army's clothing is faded, there is confusion on the troop cars, the soldiers on the left do not salute with the salute, and there are five hundred vehicles on the right that jump on the car. These manpower is certainly great, but there is a lack of etiquette, how can such an army not be frustrated?

古文：师过周而东。
现代文：秦军过了周的都城向东行进。
English: The Qin army passed the capital of Zhou and marched eastward.

古文：郑贾人弦高、奚施将西市於周，道遇秦师，曰： 嘻！
现代文：郑国商人弦高、奚施西行到周的都城去做买卖，在路上遇到秦国军队，弦高说； 啊!
English: Zheng merchants Zheng Gao and Jinshi traveled west to the capital city of Zhou to do business. On the way, they encountered the Qin army. Zheng Gao said; Ah!

古文：师所从来者远矣。此必袭郑。 
现代文：这支军队是从很远的地方来的，这一定是去偷袭郑国。 
English: This army came from far away, and it must have been on a sneak attack on Zheng.

古文：遽使奚施归告，乃矫郑伯之命以劳之，曰： 寡君固闻大国之将至久矣。
现代文：于是立即让奚施回郑国报告，自己就假托郑国国君的命令云慰劳秦军。弦高说： 我们国君本来很早就听说贵国军队要来了。
English: Therefore, he immediately asked Yao Shi to report back to Zheng Guo, and he consoled the Qin army on the pretext of Zheng Guo Guo Jun's order. Zheng Gao said: Our Guo Jun had heard very early that your army was coming.

古文：大国不至，寡君与士卒窃为大国忧，日无所与焉，惟恐士卒罢弊与糗粮匮乏。
现代文：贵军没有来，我们国君和士兵私下替贵军担忧，每天都为此而心情不愉快，惟恐责军士兵赢弱疲困，干粮缺乏。
English: Your army has not come. Our sovereign and soldiers are privately worried about your army. They are unhappy every day because of this, but they are afraid to blame the soldiers for being weak and tired, and for the lack of dry food.

古文：何其久也！
现代文：怎么这么久才到啊！
English: What took you so long to get here?

古文：使人臣犒劳以璧，膳以十二牛。 
现代文：我们国君派我用壁犒劳贵军，并献给贵军十二头牛作为膳食。 
English: Our sovereign has sent me to work your army with straw and to give your army twelve oxen for food.

古文：秦三帅对曰： 寡君之无使也，使其三臣丙也、术也、视也於东边候晋之道，过，是以迷惑，陷入大国之地。 
现代文：秦军三个主帅回答说； 我们的国君没有合适的人可派遣，派了他的三个臣子丙、术、视到东方察看晋国的道路。没想走过了头，因此迷了路，误人贵国境内。 
English: The three commanders of the Qin Army replied, "Our sovereign has no suitable person to send, so he sent three of his vassals, C, X, and J, to the east to inspect the roads of Jin. He did not want to go too far, so he lost his way and misled people in your country."

古文：不敢固辞，再拜稽首受之。
现代文：不敢执意不收，拜而又拜，叩头于地，接受了犒劳的东西。
English: Not daring to persist in not accepting, he bowed again and again, prostrated himself on the ground, and accepted the reward.

古文：三帅乃惧而谋曰： 我行数千里，数绝诸侯之地以袭人，未至而人已先知之矣，此其备必已盛矣。 
现代文：秦军的三个主帅很担心，商议说； 我们行军几千里，多次穿越其他诸侯国的土地去偷袭人家，还没到，人家就已经先知道了，这样看来，他们的准备一定已经很充分了。 
English: The three commanders of the Qin army were very worried, and discussed: "We have marched thousands of miles, crossing the lands of other principalities many times to sneak attack others. Before we arrived, others already knew about it, so it seems that their preparations must have been very sufficient.

古文：还师去之。
现代文：于是回师离开了郑国。
English: So he left Zheng.

古文：当是时也，晋文公适薨，未葬。
现代文：在这时，正赶上晋文公去世还没有安葬。
English: At this time, it was just in time for the death of Jin Wengong, who had not yet been buried.

古文：先轸言於襄公曰： 秦师不可不击也，臣请击之。 
现代文：先轸对襄公说： 秦军不可不袭击，我情您允许我去袭击它。 
English: Xian Qi said to Xiang Gong: The Qin Army must attack, I hope you will allow me to attack it.

古文：襄公曰： 先君薨，尸在堂，见秦师利而因击之，无乃非为人子之道欤！ 
现代文：襄公说： 先君去世，尸体还在堂上，看到秦军有利可图就去袭击它，这恐怕不是当儿子的应该遵循的原则吧！ 
English: Xiang Gong said: The Ancestor died, the body is still in the hall, and when the Qin Army saw that it was profitable, they attacked it. I'm afraid this is not the principle that a son should follow!

古文：先轸曰： 不吊吾丧，不忧吾哀，是死吾君而弱其孤也。
现代文：先轸说： 秦国对我们的丧事不表示慰问，对我们的哀痛不表示忧伤，这是忘掉了我们的先君，欺侮您年幼。
English: Xian Qi said: "Qin has not expressed any condolences for our death, or sorrow for our grief. This is because they have forgotten our forefathers and bullied your young children.

古文：若是而击，可大强。
现代文：他们这样无情无义，我们去袭击它，可以使晋国大大强盛。
English: They are so merciless and ruthless. If we attack them, we can make Jin a much stronger country.

古文：臣请击之。 
现代文：我请您允许我去袭击它。 
English: I ask you to allow me to attack it.

古文：襄公不得已而许之。
现代文：襄公不得已才答应了他。
English: Prince Xiang had no choice but to agree.

古文：先轸遏秦师於淆而击之，大败之，获其三帅以归。
现代文：先轸在崤山截住并攻击秦军，把它打得大败，俘获了秦军的三个主帅而回。
English: Qianlong first intercepted and attacked the Qin army in Shaoshan, defeated it, captured the three commanders of the Qin army and returned.

古文：缪公闻之，素服庙临，以说於众曰： 天不为秦国，使寡人不用蹇叔之谏，以至於此患。 
现代文：秦穆公听到这个消息，身穿丧服，到宗庙里哭告祖先，向众人说道； 上天不帮助秦国，才让我没有听从蹇叔的劝谏，以至遭到这样的祸患。 
English: Upon hearing this news, Qin Mu Gong, dressed in mourning clothes, went to the ancestral temple to cry out to his ancestors and said to everyone, "If heaven does not help Qin, it is because I did not listen to Uncle Zou's advice that I suffered such a calamity."

古文：此缪公非欲败於殽也，智不至也。
现代文：这并不是穆公想在崤山被打败，而是因为智力达不到啊。
English: This is not because Mu Gong wants to be defeated in Shaoshan, but because his intelligence is not up to it.

古文：智不至则不信。
现代文：智力达不到就不相信蹇叔的话。
English: If you don't have enough intelligence, you won't believe Uncle Gong's words.

古文：言之不信，师之不反也从此生。故不至之为害大矣。
现代文：不相信蹇叔的话，结果导致了秦军全军覆没。所以，智力达不到带来的危害真是太大。乐成
English: Not believing Uncle Zhai's words, the result led to the annihilation of the entire Qin army. Therefore, the harm caused by not reaching intelligence is really too great.

古文：五曰：大智不形，大器晚成，大音希声。
现代文：最大的智慧不显现，担当大事的人成就较晚，最优美的乐音听来无声。
English: The greatest wisdom does not appear, those who are responsible for great things are late in achieving them, and the most beautiful music sounds silent.

古文：禹之决江水也，民聚瓦砾。
现代文：当禹疏导江水的时候，人们却堆积瓦砾加以阻挡。
English: When the Yuzo River was diverted, people piled up rubble to block it.

古文：事已成，功已立，为万世利。
现代文：等到治水的事业完成，功业建立以后，给子孙万代带来了好处。
English: When the cause of water control is completed and the cause is established, it will bring benefits to generations to come.

古文：禹之所见者远也，而民莫之知。
现代文：禹目光远大，可是人们却没有谁知道这一点。
English: Yu is very far-sighted, but people don't know that.

古文：故民不可与虑化举始，而可以乐成功。
现代文：所以，不可以跟普通的百姓商讨改变现状、进行创业开拓的大事，却可以跟他们享受成功的快乐。
English: Therefore, it is not possible to discuss with ordinary people the important things of changing the status quo and doing business development, but you can enjoy the happiness of success with them.

古文：孔子始用於鲁，鲁人鹥诵之曰： 麛裘而韠，投之无戾。
现代文：孔子在鲁国开始被任用时，鲁国人怨恨地唱道： 穿着鹿皮衣又穿蔽膝，抛弃他没关系。
English: When Confucius began to be appointed in Lu, the Lu people sang resentfully: Wearing a deerskin and wearing knee-caps, it's okay to abandon him.

古文：韠而麛裘。
现代文：穿着蔽膝又穿鹿皮裘，抛弃他没罪尤。 
English: Wearing a knee-length dress and a deerskin coat, it's not a crime to abandon him.

古文：投之无邮。 用三年，男子行乎涂右，女子行乎涂左，财物之遗者，民莫之举。
现代文：被任用三年之后，鲁国男子在道路右边行走，女子在遭路左边行走，遗失了的财物，没有人拾取。
English: Three years after being appointed, the men of Lu are walking on the right side of the road, the women are walking on the left side of the road, and the lost property has not been picked up.

古文：大智之用，固难逾也。
现代文：大智的运用，本来就难以让人知晓啊。
English: The use of great wisdom is inherently difficult to understand.

古文：子产始治郑，使田有封洫，都鄙有服。
现代文：子产开始治理郑国时，让田地有沟渠疆界，让城邑、鄙野有规定的服色。
English: When Zi Fang began to govern Zheng Guo, he made the fields have ditch boundaries, and the towns and fields have prescribed clothing colors.

古文：民相与诵曰： 我有田畴，而子产赋之。
现代文：人民一起怨恨地唱道； 我们有田亩，子产征军赋。
English: The people sang together resentfully; We have acres of farmland, and our children's produce is requisitioned for the army.

古文：我有衣冠，而子产贮之。
现代文：我们有衣冠，子产收赋税。
English: We have the crown of clothing, and taxes are collected from our children.

古文：孰杀子产，吾其与之。 
现代文：谁要杀子产，我们去帮助。 
English: If someone wants to kill a child, we will help.

古文：後三年，民又诵之曰： 我有田畴，而子产殖之。
现代文：三年之后，人民又歌颂他说： 我们有田亩，子产让它增五谷。
English: Three years later, the people sang his praises again: "We have acreage, let it increase grain production."

古文：我有子弟，而子产诲之。
现代文：我们有子弟，子产对他们施教育。
English: We have children and we are educating them.

古文：子产若死，其使谁嗣之？ 
现代文：子产如果死了，还有谁能继承他？ 
English: If the child dies, who else can inherit him?

古文：使郑简、鲁哀当民之诽訾也，而因弗遂用，则国必无功矣，子产、孔子必无能矣。
现代文：假使郑简公、鲁哀公面对人民的诽谤非议，就不再任用子产，孔子了，那么国家一定无所成就，子产，孔子也一定无法施展才能了。
English: If Zheng Jian Gong and Lu Ye Gong were to face the slanderous criticism of the people, they would no longer appoint Zibo and Confucius, then the country would certainly not achieve anything, and Zibo and Confucius would certainly not be able to display their talents.

古文：非徒不能也，虽罪施，於民可也。
现代文：不只是不能施展才能，即使被治罪，人民也会赞同的。
English: Not only will they not be able to use their talents, but even if they are punished, the people will approve of it.

古文：今世皆称简公、哀公为贤，称子产、孔子为能。
现代文：如今世上都称赞简公，哀公贤明，称赞子产、孔子有才能。
English: Nowadays, the world praises Jian Gong, Lai Gong for his wisdom, Zibo for his progeny, and Confucius for his talent.

古文：此二君者，达乎任人也。
现代文：这两位君主，很懂得任用人啊。
English: These two monarchs know how to appoint people.

古文：舟车之始见也，三世然後安之。
现代文：舟、车开始出现的时候，人们都不习惯，过了三代人们才感到习惯。
English: When boats and cars first appeared, people were not used to them. It took three generations for people to get used to them.

古文：夫开善岂易哉！
现代文：开始做好事难道容易吗？
English: Isn't it easy to start doing good?

古文：故听无事治。
现代文：所以听信愚民之言，任何事都办不好。
English: Therefore, listening to the words of fools, nothing can be done well.

古文：事治之立也，人主贤也。
现代文：事业之所以成功，全在于君主贤明啊。
English: The reason for the success of the business is entirely due to the wisdom of the monarch.

古文：魏攻中山，乐羊将。
现代文：魏国攻打中山国，乐羊为将。
English: Wei attacked Zhongshan, led by Le Yang.

古文：已得中山，还反报文侯，有贵功之色。
现代文：乐羊攻下中山国以后，回国向魏文侯报告，显出夸功骄傲的神色。
English: After Le Yang conquered Zhongshan, he returned to Wei Wenhou to report, showing a proud look.

古文：文侯知之，命主书曰： 群臣宾客所献书者，操以进之。 
现代文：文侯察觉了这一点，就命令主管文书的官吏说。 群臣和宾客献上的书信，都拿来进上。 
English: Aware of this, the prince of letters ordered the official in charge of correspondence to "bring in all the letters presented by the ministers and guests."

古文：主书举两箧以进。
现代文：主管文书的官吏搬着两箱书信进上来。
English: The official in charge of paperwork came in with two boxes of letters.

古文：令将军视之，书尽难攻中山之事也。
现代文：文侯让乐将军看这些书信。书信都是责难攻打中山国这件事的。
English: Wenhou asked General Le to read the letters, all of which condemned the attack on Zhongshan.

古文：将军还走，北面再拜曰： 中山之举，非臣之力，君之功也。 
现代文：乐将军转身退下几步，向北再拜说： 攻下中山国，不是我的力量，是君主您的功劳啊。 
English: General Le turned around, retreated a few steps, and bowed again to the north, saying, "Capturing Zhongshan is not my strength, but the merit of your majesty."

古文：当此时也，论士殆之日几矣，中山之不取也，奚宜二箧哉？
现代文：乐羊攻打中山国的时候，议论的人对这件事的危害一天比一无严重了，假使文侯相信了群臣宾客之言，认为中山国不可取，那么，哪里用得着两箱书信呢？
English: When Le Yang attacked Zhongshan, the harm of those who discussed the matter was more serious than nothing. If Wen Hou believed the words of his guests and thought that Zhongshan was not desirable, then what was the use of two boxes of letters?

古文：一寸而亡矣。
现代文：只需一寸长的书信就足以让乐羊失去功劳了。
English: Just an inch-long letter is enough to discredit Le Yang Zhou.

古文：文侯，贤主也，而犹若此，又况於中主邪？
现代文：文侯是贤明的君主，臣下尚且如此，更何况一般的君主呢？
English: A prince is a wise monarch, and so are his vassals, let alone an ordinary monarch.

古文：中主之患，不能勿为，而不可与莫为。
现代文：一般君主的祸患是，不能不让他去做，又不能让他中途不改。
English: The trouble with the average monarch is that you can't get him not to do something, and you can't get him not to change halfway through.

古文：凡举无易之事，气志视听动作无非是者，人臣且孰敢以非是邪疑为哉？
现代文：君主凡是去做中途不改变的事情，思想意志、视听行动无不认为正确，臣下谁还敢认为不对而横加怀疑呢？
English: Monarchs always do things that do not change in the middle, thinking, will, audio-visual actions are all considered to be correct, and who would dare to think that it is wrong and cast doubt on it?

古文：皆壹於为，则无败事矣。
现代文：君臣都专心去敞，就没有做不成的事了。
English: There is nothing that cannot be done if all the princes and ministers devote themselves to it.

古文：此汤、武之所以大立功於夏、商，而句践之所以能报其雠也。
现代文：这就是汤，武王之所以在灭亡夏、商中大立功业，勾践之所以能够报仇的原因。
English: This is the reason why Tang and King Wu were able to take revenge after the death of Xia and Shang.

古文：以小弱皆壹於为而犹若此，又况於以强大乎！
现代文：只要君臣全都专心去做，凭仗弱小的国家尚且能如此，更何况凭仗强大的国家呢？
English: As long as all the princes and courtiers concentrate on doing it, can a small and weak country do it, let alone a powerful country?

古文：魏襄王与群臣饮，酒酣，王为群臣祝，令群臣皆得志。
现代文：魏襄王跟臣子们一起喝酒，喝到正畅快的时候，魏王为臣子们祝酒，让臣子们都能得志。
English: Wei Xiang Wang and his courtiers drank together. When the drinking was over, Wei Wang made a toast to the courtiers, so that the courtiers could be inspired.

古文：史起兴而对曰： 群臣或贤或不肖，贤者得志则可，不肖者得志则不可。 
现代文：史起站起来回答说： 臣子有的贤明有的不肖，贤明的人得志可以，不肖的人得志就不可以。 
English: Shiqi stood up and replied: Some courtiers are wise and some are not. Wise people can achieve their goals, while unwise people cannot.

古文：王曰： 皆如西门豹之为人臣也。 
现代文：魏王说： 让群臣都像西门豹当臣子那样。 
English: The king of Wei said: Let the courtiers all be like Ximen leopards as courtiers.

古文：史起对曰： 魏氏之行田也以百亩，邺独二百亩，是田恶也。
现代文：史起回答说； 魏国分配给人民土地，每户一百亩，邺地偏偏给二百亩，这说明那里的土地不好。
English: Shiqi replied that the land allocated to the people in Wei was 100 mu per household, while the farmland was only 200 mu, which indicated that the land there was not good.

古文：漳水在其旁，而西门豹勿知用，是其愚也。
现代文：漳水在它的旁边，可是西门豹却不知利用，这说明他很愚蠢。
English: The water is right next to him, but the leopard doesn't know how to use it, which means he's stupid.

古文：知而弗言，是不忠也。愚与不忠，不可效也。 
现代文：知道这种情况却不报告，这说明他不忠。愚蠢和不忠，不可效法。 
English: If he knew about it and didn't report it, he was unfaithful. Stupid and unfaithful, not to be emulated.

古文：魏王无以应之。
现代文：魏王无话回答他。
English: The Wei king had no answer for him.

古文：明日，召史起而问焉，曰： 漳水犹可以灌邺田乎？ 
现代文：第二天，召来史起问他说， 漳水还可以灌溉邺的田地吗？ 
English: The next day, he was summoned by the historian and asked him, "Can muddy water still irrigate muddy fields?"

古文：史起对曰： 可。 
现代文：史起回答说： 可以。 
English: Shiqi replied, "Yes."

古文：王曰： 子何不为寡人为之？ 
现代文：魏王说， 你何不替我去做这件事？
English: Wei Wang said, "Why don't you do this for me?"

古文：史起曰： 臣恐王之不能为也。 
现代文：史起说； 我担心您不能做啊。 
English: Shiqi said; I'm afraid you can't do it.

古文：王曰： 子诚能为寡人为之，寡人尽听子矣。 
现代文：魏王说： 你如果真的能替我去做这件事，我全都听你的。 
English: Wei Wang said, "If you can really do this for me, I will listen to you completely."

古文：史起敬诺，言之於王曰： 臣为之，民必大怨臣，大者死，其次乃藉臣。
现代文：史超恭恭敬敬地答应了，并对魏王说： 我去做这件事，那里的人民一定非常怨恨我，严重了会弄死我，次之也会凌辱我。
English: Shi Chaoqian respectfully agreed, and said to Wei Wang, "If I do this, the people there will certainly hate me very much. If it is serious, they will kill me, and if it is not serious, they will abuse me."

古文：臣虽死藉，愿王之使他人遂之也。王曰： 诺。 
现代文：即使我被弄死或被凌辱，希望您派其他人继续完成这件事。 魏王说； 好吧。 
English: Even if I am killed or abused, I hope you will send someone else to finish the job. Wei Wang said; Okay.

古文：使之为邺令。
现代文：派他去当邺令。
English: Send him to the Imperial Palace.

古文：史起因往为之。邺民大怨，欲藉史起。史起不敢出而避之。
现代文：史起于是去邺开始了引漳工程，邺地的人民非常怨恨史起，想要凌辱他，史起不敢出门，躲了起来。
English: Shiqi then went to Handan and began the project to lure him. The people of Handan resented Shiqi very much and wanted to abuse him. Shiqi did not dare to go out and hid.

古文：王乃使他人遂为之。
现代文：魏壬就派别人最终完成这一工程。
English: Wei Ren sent someone else to finally complete the project.

古文：水已行，民大得其利，相与歌之曰： 邺有圣令，时为史公。
现代文：水流到了田里，人民大大受益，一起歌颂他说； 邺地有贤令，此人是史公。
English: The water flowed to the fields, the people benefited greatly, and together they sang praises to him, saying, "There is a virtuous order in the ploughed land, and this man is Shiguang."

古文：决漳水，灌邺旁。
现代文：引漳水，灌邺田。
English: Divert the water and irrigate the fields.

古文：终古斥卤，生之稻粱。 
现代文：古来盐碱地，能长稻和谷。 
English: Since ancient times, saline soil has been able to grow rice and grain.

古文：使民知可与不可，则无所用矣。贤主忠臣，不能导愚教陋，则名不冠後、实不及世矣。
现代文：假使人民知道什么可做，什么不可做，那就没有任用贤人的必要了，贤主忠臣，如果不能教导愚蠢鄙陋的人，那么名声就不能流传到后世，政绩也不能对当代有利了。
English: If the people knew what to do and what not to do, then there would be no need to appoint wise men, wise leaders and loyal subjects. If one cannot teach stupid and despicable people, then one's reputation would not be passed on to future generations, and one's political achievements would not benefit the present generation.

古文：史起非不知化也，以忠于主也。
现代文：史起不是不知道事物的发展趋势，他明知要遭到民众的怨恨，却还要治理漳水，是因为他忠于君主。
English: He knew that he would be hated by the people, but he continued to govern Surabaya because he was loyal to the monarch.

古文：魏襄王可谓能决善矣。
现代文：魏襄王可说是能对善于做出决断了。
English: Wei Xiang Wang can be said to be good at making decisions.

古文：诚能决善，众虽喧哗，而弗为变。
现代文：如果真能对善行做出决断，那么众人即使喧哗，也不会因此而改变。
English: If you can really make a decision to do good deeds, then people will not change even if they make a fuss.

古文：功之难立也，其必由讻々邪！
现代文：功业之所以难于建立，大概一定是由于众人的吵吵闹闹吧!
English: The reason why it is difficult to establish a career is probably due to the noise of the crowd!

古文：国之残亡，亦犹此也。
现代文：国家的残破灭亡，也是由于这个原因啊。
English: The ruin of the country is also due to this reason.

古文：故讻々之中，不可不味也。
现代文：所以在众人的吵吵闹闹之中，不可不加以研究体会。
English: Therefore, in the midst of the clamor of many people, it is necessary to study and experience.

古文：中主以之止善，贤主以之讻々也立功。
现代文：一般的君主以为众人的吵吵闹闹就停止了行善，贤明的君主却在众人的吵吵闹捅之中建立起功业。
English: An ordinary ruler thinks that the noise of the crowd will stop him from doing good, but a wise ruler builds his career amidst the noise of the crowd.

古文：六曰：使治乱存亡若高山之与深溪，若白垩之与黑漆，则无所用智，虽愚犹可矣。
现代文：察微假设治和乱、存和亡的区别像高山和漂谷，像白土和黑漆那样分明，那就社有必要运用智慧，即使蠢人也可以知道了。
English: If the difference between governing and chaos, between living and dying, is as clear as a mountain and a valley, as white soil and black paint, then it is necessary to use wisdom, even if a stupid person can know.

古文：且治乱存亡则不然。
现代文：然而治和乱、存和亡的区别并不是这样。
English: However, the difference between governance and chaos, between survival and death, is not like that.

古文：如可知，如可不知；如可见，如可不见。
现代文：好像可知，又好像不可知，好像可见，又好像不可见。
English: It seems to be knowable, and it seems to be unknowable, it seems to be visible, and it seems to be invisible.

古文：故智士贤者相与积心愁虑以求之，犹尚有管叔、蔡叔之事与东夷八国不听之谋。
现代文：所以有才智的人、贤明的人都在千思百虑、用尽心思去探求治乱存亡的征兆，尽管如此，尚且有管叔、蔡衩的叛乱事件和东夷八国不听王命的阴谋。
English: Therefore, intelligent and wise people are thinking about everything, exhausting their minds to explore the signs of chaos and survival. Despite this, there are still the rebellions of Guanzhong and Cai Qi and the conspiracy of the eight eastern provinces to disobey the king's order.

古文：故治乱存亡，其始若秋毫。察其秋毫，则大物不过矣。
现代文：所以治乱存亡，它们刚刚出现的时候就像秋毫那样，能够明察秋毫，大事就不会出现过失了。
English: That's why chaos management is here to stay. When they first appear, it's like the autumn chill. If you can clearly see the autumn chill, there will be no mistakes in major events.

古文：鲁国之法，鲁人为人臣妾於诸侯，有能赎之者，取其金於府。
现代文：鲁国的法令规定，鲁国人在其它诸侯国给人当奴仆，有能赎出他们的，可以从国库中支取金钱。
English: According to the laws of the State of Lu, Lu people were treated as slaves in other principalities, and anyone who could ransom them could withdraw money from the state treasury.

古文：子贡赎鲁人於诸侯，来而让，不取其金。
现代文：子贡从其它诸侯国赎出了做奴仆的鲁国人，回来却推辞，不支取金钱。
English: Zigong ransomed the Lu people who were slaves from other vassal states, but they refused to return and did not take any money.

古文：孔子曰： 赐失之矣。
现代文：孔子说： 端木赐做错了。
English: Confucius said, "Tang Mu Zi made a mistake.

古文：自今以往，鲁人不赎人矣。 
现代文：从今以后，鲁国人不会再赎人了。 
English: From now on, the people of Lu will no longer ransom people.

古文：取其金，则无损於行；不取其金，则不复赎人矣。
现代文：支取金钱，对品行并没有损害，不支取金钱，就不会有人再赎人了。
English: Withdrawing money does not harm one's moral conduct. Without withdrawing money, there would be no one to redeem people.

古文：子路拯溺者，其人拜之以牛，子路受之。
现代文：子路救了一个溺水的人，那个人用牛来酬谢他，子路收下了牛。
English: Zilu rescued a drowning man. The man rewarded him with a cow. Zilu accepted the cow.

古文：孔子曰： 鲁人必拯溺者矣。 
现代文：孔子说； 鲁国人一定会救溺水的人了。 
English: Confucius said; Lu people will surely rescue the drowning people.

古文：孔子见之以细，观化远也。
现代文：孔子能从细小处看到结果，这是由于他对事物的发展变化观察得远啊。
English: Confucius was able to see the results from the smallest details, because he observed the development and changes of things from afar.

古文：楚之边邑曰卑梁，其处女与吴之边邑处女桑於境上，戏而伤卑梁之处女。
现代文：楚国有个边境城邑叫卑梁，那里的姑娘与吴国边境城邑的姑娘一起在边境上采桑叶，嬉戏时，吴国的姑娘伤了卑粱的蛄娘。
English: There is a border town called Beiliang in the State of Chu. The girl from there and the girl from the border town of the State of Wu were picking mulberry leaves on the border together. While playing, the girl from the State of Wu injured the humble maiden.

古文：卑梁人操其伤子以让吴人，吴人应之不恭，怒，杀而去之。
现代文：卑梁人带着受伤的姑娘去责备吴国人，吴国人应答很不恭敬，卑梁人很恼怒，杀死了那个吴国人就走了。
English: The people of Beiliang took the injured girl to reproach the people of Wu, the people of Wu responded very disrespectfully, the people of Beiliang were very angry, killed the person of Wu and left.

古文：吴人往报之，尽屠其家。
现代文：吴国人去报复，把那个楚国人全家都杀死了。
English: The Wu people retaliated and killed the entire family of the Chu people.

古文：卑梁公怒，曰： 吴人焉敢攻吾邑？ 
现代文：卑粱的守邑大夫大怒，说； 吴国人怎么竟敢攻打我的城邑？ 
English: "How dare the people of Wu attack my city?" said the humble town watchman angrily.

古文：举兵反攻之，老弱尽杀之矣。
现代文：发兵去攻打吴国人，连老弱全都杀死了。
English: He sent troops to attack the people of Wu and killed all of them, including the old and the weak.

古文：吴王夷昧闻之，怒，使人举兵侵楚之边邑，克夷而後去之。
现代文：吴王夷昧听到这事以后大怒，派人率兵侵犯楚国的边境城邑，攻克楚国边邑，把它夷为平地，然后才离开。
English: After hearing this, Wu Wangyimai flew into a rage and sent men and soldiers to invade the border towns of Chu, conquer the border towns of Chu, raze them to the ground, and then leave.

古文：吴、楚以此大隆。
现代文：吴国，楚国因此展开大战。
English: As a result, the states of Wu and Chu went to war.

古文：吴公子光又率师与楚人战於鸡父，大败楚人，获其帅潘子臣、小帷子、陈夏啮。
现代文：吴公子光又率领军队在鸡父跟楚国军队交战，把楚军打得大殴，俘虏了楚军的主帅潘子臣、小帷子、以及陈国的夏啮。
English: Wu Gongziguang also led the army to fight with the Chu army in the chicken father, beat the Chu army, and captured the commander of the Chu army, Pan Zichen, Xia Jiazi, and Xia Yao of Chen.

古文：又反伐郢，得荆平王之夫人以归，实为鸡父之战。
现代文：又接着攻打郢，得到了楚乎王的夫人，把她带回吴国。这实际上还是鸡父之战的继续。
English: He then went on to attack and capture Yao, got King Chuhu's wife, and brought her back to the State of Wu. This was actually a continuation of the War of Chicken Fathers.

古文：凡持国，太上知始，其次知终，其次知中。
现代文：凡是要守住国家，最上等的是洞察事情的开端，其次是预见到事情的结局，再次是随着事情的发展了解它。
English: The best way to preserve a nation is to see it in the beginning, the second best is to see it in the end, and the third best is to see it as it is going.

古文：三者不能，国必危，身必穷。
现代文：这三样都做不到，国家一定危险，自身一定困窘。
English: If it can't do all three, the country must be in danger, and it must be embarrassed.

古文：《孝经》曰： 高而不危，所以长守贵也；满而不溢，所以长守富也。
现代文：《孝经》上说： 高却不倾危，因此能够长期保住尊贵，满却不外溢，因此能够长期保住富足。
English: "The Filial Piety Sutra" says: High but not perilous, so you can keep your dignity for a long time, full but not overflowing, so you can keep your wealth for a long time.

古文：富贵不离其身，然後能保其社稷，而和其民人。 
现代文：富贵不离身，然后才能保住国家，使人民和谐。 
English: Wealth and nobility are inseparable, and only then can the country be preserved and the people brought into harmony.

古文：楚不能之也。
现代文：楚国恰恰不能做到这些。
English: This is exactly what Chu cannot do.

古文：郑公子归生率师伐宋。
现代文：郑公子归生率领军队攻打宋国。
English: Zheng Gongzi returned to life and led the army to attack Song.

古文：宋华元率师应之大棘，羊斟御。
现代文：宋国的华元率领军队在大军迎敌，羊斟给他怍驭手。
English: Hua Yuan of the Song Dynasty led the army to meet the enemy in a large army, and the sheep gave him a helmsman.

古文：明日将战，华元杀羊飨士，羊斟不与焉。
现代文：第二天将要作战，华元杀了羊宴享甲士，羊斟却不在宴享的人中。
English: The next day there was going to be a battle, Hua Yuan killed a soldier who was enjoying a sheep feast, but Yang Pu was not among those enjoying the feast.

古文：明日战，怒谓华元曰： 昨日之事，子为制；今日之事，我为制。 
现代文：第二天作战的时候，羊斟愤怒地对华元说： 昨天宴享的事由你掌握，今天驾车的事该由我掌握了。 
English: On the second day of the battle, Yang Cui angrily said to Hua Yuan: Yesterday's banquet is in your hands, today's driving is in my hands.

古文：遂驱入於郑师。
现代文：于是把车一直赶进郑国军队里。
English: So he drove the car all the way into the Zheng army.

古文：宋师败绩，华元虏。
现代文：宋国军队大败，华元被俘。
English: The Song army suffered a crushing defeat and Hua Yuan was captured.

古文：夫弩机差以米则不发。
现代文：弩牙相差一个米粒就不能发射。
English: A single grain of rice can't make a dent.

古文：战，大机也。
现代文：战争正像一个大的弩牙。
English: The war is just like a big toothache.

古文：飨士而忘其御也，将以此败而为虏，岂不宜哉！
现代文：宴享甲士却忘了自己的驭手，将帅因此战败被俘，难道不是麻该的吗？
English: Isn't it ironic that a warrior who enjoys a feast forgets his charioteer, and the general is defeated and taken prisoner?

古文：故凡战必悉熟偏备，知彼知己，然後可也。
现代文：所以，凡作战一定要熟悉全部情况，做好全面准备，知己知彼，然后才可以作战。
English: Therefore, in any battle, you must be familiar with the entire situation, make comprehensive preparations, and know each other before you can fight.

古文：鲁季氏与郈氏斗鸡，郈氏介其鸡，季氏为之金距。
现代文：鲁国的季氏与郈氏斗鸡，郈氏给他的鸡披上甲，季氏给鸡套上金属爪。
English: The Ji clan of Lu fights a rooster with the Zou clan. The Zou clan puts armor on its rooster, and the Ji clan puts metal claws on its rooster.

古文：季氏之鸡不胜，季平子怒，因归郈氏之宫，而益其宅。
现代文：季氏的鸡没有斗胜，季平子很生气，于是侵占郈氏的房屋，扩大自己的住宅。
English: Ji's chicken did not win the fight, and Ji Ping Zi was very angry, so he occupied the house of Zhai and expanded his house.

古文：郈昭伯怒，伤之於昭公，曰： 禘於襄公之庙也，舞者二人而已，其馀尽舞於季氏。
现代文：郈昭伯非常恼怒，就在昭公面前诋毁季氏说： 在襄公之庙举行大祭的时候，舞蹈的人仅有十六人而已，其余的人都到季氏家去跳舞了。
English: Zhai Zhao Bo was very angry and slandered Ji in front of Zhao Gong, saying: When the grand festival was held in the temple of Xiang Gong, there were only sixteen dancers, and the rest of the people went to Ji's house to dance.

古文：季氏之舞道，无上久矣。
现代文：季氏家舞蹈人数超过规格，他日无君主已经很长时间了。
English: The number of dancers in Ji's family exceeds the specifications, and it has been a long time since he had a monarch.

古文：弗诛，必危社稷。 
现代文：不杀掉他，一定会危害国家。 
English: If we don't kill him, we'll be endangering the country.

古文：公怒，不审，乃使郈昭伯将师徒以攻季氏，遂入其宫。
现代文：昭公大怒，不加详察，就派郈昭伯率辆军队去攻打季氏，攻入了他的庭院。
English: Shoko was furious, and without further investigation, he sent Zou Shobo to lead an army to attack Ji, breaking into his courtyard.

古文：仲孙氏、叔孙氏相与谋曰： 无季氏，则吾族也死亡无日矣。 
现代文：仲孙氏、叔孙氏彼此商量说： 如果没有了季氏。那我们家接离灭亡就没有几天了。 
English: Mr. Nakasone and his great-uncle discussed with each other and said, "If there is no Mr. Ji, then our family is only a few days away from extinction."

古文：遂起甲以往，陷西北隅以入之，三家为一，郈昭伯不胜而死。
现代文：于是发兵前往救助，攻破院墙的西北角进人庭院，三家合兵一处，郈昭伯不能取胜而被杀死。
English: As a result, soldiers were sent to the rescue. The northwest corner of the courtyard wall was breached and entered the courtyard. The three families joined forces, and Zou Zhao Bo could not win and was killed.

古文：昭公惧，遂出奔齐，卒於干侯。
现代文：昭公害怕了，于是逃亡型齐国，后来死在干侯。
English: Akihiro was afraid, so he fled to Qi Province, and later died in Ganghwa.

古文：鲁昭听伤而不辩其义，惧以鲁国不胜季氏，而不知仲、叔氏之恐，而与季氏同患也。
现代文：鲁昭公听信诋毁季氏的话，却不分辨是否合乎道理，他只害怕凭着鲁国不能胜过季氏，却不知道仲孙氏，叔孙氏也很恐惧，他们与季孙氏是患难与共的。
English: Lu Zhaogong listens to the words of discrediting Ji, but he does not distinguish whether it is reasonable. He is only afraid that he cannot beat Ji with the help of Lu, but he does not know Zhong Sun. Uncle Sun is also afraid. They are in trouble with Ji Sun.

古文：是不达乎人心也。
现代文：这是由于不了解人心啊。
English: This is due to not understanding the human heart.

古文：不达乎人心，位虽尊。
现代文：不了解人心，地位即便尊贵，对安全又有什么益处呢？
English: Without understanding the hearts of the people, even if the position is noble, what is the benefit to security?

古文：何益於安也？以鲁国恐不胜一季氏，况於三季？
现代文：凭借鲁国尚且害怕不能胜过一个季氏，更何况三个季氏呢？
English: With the help of Lu, are you still afraid of not being able to win more than one quarter, let alone three quarters?

古文：同恶固相助。
现代文：他们都厌恶昭公，本来就舍互相救助。
English: They all loathe Akechi and would rather help each other.

古文：权物若此其过也，非独仲、叔氏也，鲁国皆恐。
现代文：昭公权衡事情错误到如此地步，不只是仲孙氏、叔孙氏，整个鲁国都会感到恐惧。
English: Zhao Gong considered the situation so wrong that not only the Nakasuns and the Unshuns, but the whole country of Lu would feel fear.

古文：鲁国皆恐，则是与一国为敌也，其得至干侯而卒犹远。
现代文：整个鲁国都感到恐惧，这就是与整个国家为敌了。昭公与整个国家为敌，在国内就该被杀，今得以死在干侯，还算有幸死得远了呢！
English: The whole of Russia felt fear, and that meant that he had become an enemy of the whole country. Akihito was an enemy of the whole country, and should have been killed at home. Now that he can die in prison, he is lucky enough to die far away!

古文：七曰：东方之墨者谢子，将西见秦惠王。
现代文：去宥东方墨家学派的谢子，将要到西方去见秦惠王。
English: Xie Zi, who went to the East to appease the Mo school, will go to the West to meet Qin Hui Wang.

古文：惠王问秦之墨者唐姑果。
现代文：惠王向秦国墨家学派的唐姑果打听谢子的情况。
English: Hui Wang inquired about Xie Zi's situation from Tang Guo Guo of the Qin state ink painting school.

古文：唐姑果恐王之亲谢子贤於己也，对曰： 谢子，东方之辩士也。其为人甚险，将奋於说，以取少主也。 
现代文：唐姑果担心秦王亲近谢子超过自己，就回答说： 谢子是东方能言善辩的人，他的为人很狡诈，他这次来，将竭力游说，以取得太子的欢心。 
English: Tang Gu Gu was worried that Qin Wang was closer to Xie Zi than himself, so she replied: Xie Zi is a person who can speak well in the East. He is a very cunning person. When he comes this time, he will do his best to lobby in order to win the favor of the prince.

古文：王因藏怒以待之。
现代文：秦王于是心怀愤怒等待谢子的到来。
English: King Qin then awaited Xiezi's arrival with anger in his heart.

古文：谢子至，说王，王弗听。
现代文：谢子来了，劝说秦王，秦王不听从他的意见。
English: Xie Zi came and persuaded the Qin King, but the Qin King did not listen to his advice.

古文：谢子不说，遂辞而行。
现代文：谢子很不高兴，于是就告辞走了。
English: Xie Zi was very unhappy, so she said goodbye and left.

古文：凡听言以求善也，所言苟善，虽奋於取少主，何损？
现代文：凡听人议论是为了听取好的意见，所说的意见如果好，即便是竭力想取得太子的欢心，又有什么损害？
English: Anyone who listens to others is listening to good opinions. If the opinions are good, even if they are trying to win the prince's favor, what's the harm?

古文：所言不善，虽不奋於取少主，何益？
现代文：所说的意见如果不好，即便不是要竭力取得太子的欢心，又有什么益处？
English: If the said opinion is not good, even if it is not to try hard to win the prince's favor, what is the benefit?

古文：不以善为之悫，而徒以取少主为之悖，惠王失所以为听矣。
现代文：不因为他的意见好认为他诚实，而只是困为他想取得太子的欢心就认为他悖逆，惠王丧失了所以耍听取意见的目的了。
English: It was not because his opinions were good that he was considered honest, but simply because he wanted to win the prince's favor that he was considered rebellious. Hui Wang lost the purpose of listening to opinions.

古文：用志若是，见客虽劳，耳目虽弊，犹不得所谓也。
现代文：像这样动用心思，会见宾客目即使很劳苦，耳朵眼睛即使非常疲惫，还是得不到宾客言谈的要旨。
English: If you think about it like this, even if you have to work hard to meet the guests, even if your ears and eyes are very tired, you still can't get the gist of what the guests are saying.

古文：此史定所以得行其邪也，此史定所以得饰鬼以人、罪杀不辜，群臣扰乱，国几大危也。
现代文：这就是史定之所以能够干邪僻之事的原因，这就是史定之所以能用人装扮成鬼、加罪杀戮无辜之人，以致群臣骚乱、国家几乎危亡的原因。
English: This is the reason why Shi Ding was able to do such evil things, this is the reason why Shi Ding was able to use people to dress up as ghosts, add crimes and kill innocent people, so that the ministers rioted and the country was almost in danger.

古文：人之老也，形益衰而智益盛。
现代文：人到了年老的时候，身体越来越衰弱，可是智慧越来越旺盛。
English: When people reach old age, their bodies become weaker and weaker, but their wisdom becomes more and more vigorous.

古文：今惠王之老也，形与智皆衰邪？
现代文：现在惠王已到了老年，难道身体和智慧都衰竭了吗？
English: Now that Hui Wang has reached old age, are his body and wisdom exhausted?

古文：荆威王学书於沈尹华，昭厘恶之。
现代文：楚威王向沈尹华学习文献典藉，昭厘对此很忌恨。
English: King Chu Wei learned literature from Shen Yinhua, which was abhorrent to Zhao Li.

古文：威王好制，有中谢佐制者，为昭厘谓威王曰： 国人皆曰：王乃沈尹华之弟子也。 
现代文：威王喜好法制，有个帮助制定法令的中谢官替昭厘对威王说： 国人都说： 王是沈尹华的弟子。  
English: King Wei likes the legal system. A middle-ranking official who helped formulate the decree said to King Wei on behalf of Zhaoli: The Chinese people all say: Wang is a disciple of Shen Yinhua.

古文：王不说，因疏沈尹华。
现代文：威王很不高兴，于是就疏远了沈尹华。
English: Wei Wang was very unhappy, so he distanced himself from Shen Yinhua.

古文：中谢，细人也，一言而令威王不闻先王之术，文学之士不得进，令昭厘得行其私。
现代文：中谢官是地位卑贱的人，他说了一句话就让威王不能听到先王治国之道，使那些研习、精通古代文猷典籍的人不得重用，让昭整得以实现自己的阴谋。
English: Zhong Xieguan was a low-ranking person. He said one sentence to let Wei Wang not hear the former king's way of governing the country, so that those who studied and were proficient in ancient literatures and classics would not be reused, so that Zhao Zhengyi could realize his plot.

古文：故细人之言，不可不察也。
现代文：所以，对地位卑贱的人所说的话不可不明察啊。
English: So, what you say to a lowly person should not go unnoticed.

古文：且数怒人主，以为奸人除路，奸路以除，而恶壅却，岂不难哉？
现代文：他们多次激怒人主，借此替奸人扫清仕进之路。奸人的仕进之路扫清了，却又厌恶贤人的仕进之路被阻塞，这难道不是很难吗？
English: They have angered their masters many times, thereby clearing the way for the traitors. Isn't it difficult that the way of the traitors is cleared, but the way of the sages is blocked?

古文：夫激矢则远，激水则旱，激主则悖，悖则无君子矣。
现代文：奋力向后引箭，箭就射得远，阻遏水流，水势就猛，激怒君主，君主就会悖谬，君主悖谬就没有君子辅佐了。
English: Strive to draw the arrow backwards, and the arrow will be shot far away; block the flow of water, and the water will be violent; anger the monarch, and the monarch will be perverted; and there will be no gentleman to assist the monarch in his perversion.

古文：夫不可激者，其唯先有度。
现代文：不可激怒的，大概只有心中早有准则的君主吧。
English: Probably, only a monarch who has a code in his heart should not be provoked.

古文：邻父有与人邻者，有枯梧树，其邻之父言梧树之不善也，邻人遽伐之。
现代文：有个人与别人为邻，家中有棵干枯的梧桐树，与他为邻的一位老者说之棵捂桐不好，他立刻就把它伐了。
English: There was a man who lived next door to someone else. He had a withered sycamore tree at home. An old man who lived next door to him said that the sycamore tree was not good, and he immediately cut it down.

古文：邻父因请而以为薪。
现代文：那位老者于是要那棵梧桐树，想拿去当柴烧。
English: The old man then asked for the sycamore tree and wanted to use it as firewood.

古文：其人不说曰： 邻者若此其险也，岂可为之邻哉？ 
现代文：他不高兴地说： 这个邻居竞这样地险诈啊，怎么可以跟他作邻居呢？ 
English: He said angrily, "This neighbor is so treacherous, how can I be his neighbor?"

古文：此有所宥也。
现代文：这是有所蔽塞啊。
English: It's a blockage.

古文：夫请以为薪与弗请，此不可以疑枯梧树之善与不善也。
现代文：要那棵梧桐把它作柴烧，或是不要，这些都不能作为怀疑梧桐树好还是不好的依据。
English: Whether the sycamore should be used as firewood or not is not a basis for doubting whether the sycamore is good or bad.

古文：齐人有欲得金者，清旦，被衣冠，往鬻金者之所，见人操金，攫而夺之。
现代文：齐国有个一心想得到金子的人，清晨，穿上衣服，戴好帽子，到了卖金子的人那里，看见人拿着金子，抓住金子就夺了过来。
English: In Qi Province, there was a man who had his heart set on getting gold. In the morning, he put on his clothes and hat, went to the person selling gold, saw the person holding gold, grabbed the gold and took it over.

古文：吏搏而束缚之，问曰： 人皆在焉，子攫人之金，何故？ 
现代文：吏役把他抓住捆了起来，问他说； 人都在这里，你就抓取人家的金子，这是为什么？ 
English: The bailiff grabbed him, tied him up, and asked him, "If everyone is here, why are you taking people's gold?

古文：对吏曰： 殊不见人，徒见金耳。 
现代文：他回答说： 我根本没有看见人，只见到金子罢了。 
English: He replied, "I didn't see any people at all, only gold."

古文：此真大有所宥也。
现代文：这真是蔽塞到极点了。
English: This is a complete and utter cover-up.

古文：夫人有所宥者，固以昼为昏，以白为黑，以尧为桀。
现代文：有所蔽塞的人，本来就把白天当成黑夜，把白当成黑，把尧当成桀。
English: People who have something to hide, originally regard the day as night, the white as black, and the cocoon as cocoon.

古文：宥之为败亦大矣。
现代文：蔽塞的害处真也太大了。
English: The harm of blockage is really too great.

古文：亡国之主，其皆甚有所宥邪？
现代文：亡国的君主大概都是蔽塞到极点了吧。
English: The monarchs of defeated countries are probably stuffed to the gills.

古文：故凡人必别宥然後知，别宥则能全其天矣。
现代文：所以，凡是人一定要能够区分什么是蔽塞，然后才能知道事物的全貌，能够区分什么是蔽塞就能保全自身了。
English: Therefore, all people must be able to distinguish what is a blockage, and then they can know the whole picture of things. If they can distinguish what is a blockage, they can protect themselves.

古文：八曰：名正则治，名丧则乱。
现代文：正名名分合宜国家就治理得好，名分不正国家就混乱。
English: A country with a legitimate name and proper name is well governed, while a country with an illegitimate name and improper name is chaotic.

古文：使名丧者，淫说也。
现代文：使名分不正的是浮夸失实的言辞。
English: What gives it a bad name is the overblown rhetoric.

古文：说淫则可不可而然不然，是不是而非不非。
现代文：言辞浮夸失实就会把不可以说成可以，而把不是这样说成这样，就会把不对说成对，而把不错说成错。
English: Flamboyant rhetoric and misrepresentation will turn what cannot be said into what can be said, and what cannot be said into what can be said, and what cannot be said into what cannot be said, and what cannot be said into what cannot be said, and what cannot be said into what cannot be said, and what cannot be said into what cannot be said, and what cannot be said into what cannot be said, and what cannot be said into what cannot be said.

古文：故君子之说也，足以言贤者之实、不肖者之充而已矣，足以喻治之所悖、乱之所由起而已矣，足以知物之情、人之所获以生而已矣。
现代文：所以君子的言辞，足以说出贤人的贤明，不肖之人的不肖就行了，足以讲明治世之所以兴盛、乱世由何引起的就行了，足以令人知晓事物的真情、人之所以能生存的原因就行了。
English: Therefore, the words of a gentleman are enough to tell the wisdom of a wise man, the wretchedness of a wretched man, what caused the prosperity and chaos of the Meiji era, the truth of things, and the reason why people can survive.

古文：凡乱者，刑名不当也。
现代文：凡是混乱，都是由于名实不符造成的。
English: Any confusion is caused by the discrepancy between name and reality.

古文：人主虽不肖，犹若贤用，犹若听善，犹若为可者。
现代文：君主即便不贤，也还是知道任用贤人，还是知道听从善言，还是知道做可行之事。
English: Even if the monarch is not virtuous, he still knows how to appoint wise men, still knows how to listen to good words, and still knows how to do what is feasible.

古文：其患在乎所谓贤从不肖也，所为善而从邪辟，所谓可从悖逆也。
现代文：他们的弊病就在于他们所认为的贤人只不过是不肖之人，他们所认为的善言只不过是邪僻之吉，他们所认为的可行之事只不过是悖逆之事。
English: Their malady lies in the fact that they consider wise men to be nothing but fools, good words to be nothing but perverse blessings, and feasible things to be nothing but rebellious things.

古文：是刑名异充，而声实异谓也。
现代文：这就是形名异实、名实不符。
English: This is a contradiction in terms, a discrepancy between name and reality.

古文：夫贤不肖，善邪辟，可悖逆，国不乱，身不危，奚待也？
现代文：把不肖当成贤明，把邪僻当成善良，把悖逆当成可行，像这样，国家不混乱，自身不危险，还等什么呢？
English: Treating the unsightly as wise, the perverse as good, and the disobedient as feasible, like this, the country is not chaotic, it is not dangerous, what are you waiting for?

古文：齐湣王是以。
现代文：齐湣王就是这样。
English: This is how the king of Qi Gong dances.

古文：知说士，而不知所谓士也。
现代文：知道喜欢士，却不知道什么人才叫士。
English: I know what I like, but I don't know what to call it.

古文：故尹文问其故，而王无以应。
现代文：所以尹文问他什么叫士。湣王无话回答。
English: Therefore, Yin Wen asked him what "Shi" meant. Shao Wang was speechless.

古文：此公玉丹之所以见信、而卓齿之所以见任也。
现代文：这就是公玉丹之所以被信任，卓齿之所以被任用的原因。
English: This is the reason why Gong Yutang was trusted, and why Zhuojin was appointed.

古文：任卓齿而信公玉丹，岂非以自雠邪？
现代文：任用卓齿，信任公玉丹，难道不是给自己安排仇人吗？
English: By appointing Zhuo Zhai and trusting Gong Yudan, isn't he setting up an enemy for himself?

古文：尹文见齐王，齐王谓尹文曰： 寡人甚好士。 
现代文：尹文谒见齐王，齐王对尹文说； 我非常喜欢士。 
English: When Yin Wenyi met King Qi, King Qi said to Yin Wenyi, "I like you very much.

古文：尹文曰： 愿闻何谓士？ 
现代文：尹文说： 我希望听您说说什么样的人叫做士。 
English: Yin Wen said: I would like to hear you say what kind of person is called a scholar.

古文：王未有以应。
现代文：齐王没有话来回答。
English: King Qi did not have the words to reply.

古文：尹文曰： 今有人於此，事亲则孝，事君则忠，交友则信，居乡则悌。
现代文：尹文说： 假如有这样一个人，侍奉父母根孝顺，侍奉君主很忠诚，结交朋友棍守信用，住在乡里敬爱兄长。
English: Yin Wen said: If there were such a person, he would serve his parents with filial piety, serve the monarch with loyalty, make friends and keep his word, and live in the countryside and respect his elder brother.

古文：有此四行者，可谓士乎？ 
现代文：有这四种品行的人，可以叫做士吗？ 
English: Can a person with these four qualities be called a scholar?

古文：齐王曰： 此真所谓士已。 
现代文：齐说： 这真是所说的士了。 
English: Qi said, "This is really what was said."

古文：尹文曰： 王得若人，肯以为臣乎？ 
现代文：尹文说： 您得到这个人，肯用他作臣子吗？ 
English: Yin Wen said: If you get this man, will you use him as a vassal?

古文：王曰： 所愿而不能得也。 
现代文：齐王说； 这是我所希望的，但却不能得到。 
English: "This is what I hoped for, but I can't have it," Qi Wang said.

古文：尹文曰： 使若人於庙朝中深见侮而不斗，王将以为臣乎？ 王曰： 否。
现代文：尹文说： 假如这个人在大庭广众之中受到莫大侮辱却不争斗，您还将让他作臣子吗？ 齐王说： 不。
English: Yin Wen said, "If this person is greatly insulted in public but does not fight, will you still make him a vassal?" King Qi said, "No."

古文：大夫见侮而不斗，则是辱也，辱则寡人弗以为臣矣。 
现代文：士受到侮辱却不争斗，这就是耻辱。甘心受辱，我就不让他作臣子了。 
English: If a vassal is insulted but does not fight, that is a disgrace. If he is willing to be insulted, I will not allow him to be a vassal.

古文：尹文曰： 虽见侮而不斗，未失其四行也。
现代文：尹文说： 这个人虽然受到侮辱而不争斗，但他并没有丧失上述四种品行。
English: Yin Wen said: Although this person was insulted and did not fight, he did not lose the above four moralities.

古文：未失其四行者，是未失其所以为士一矣。
现代文：没有丧失上述四种品行，这就是说没有丧失一点成为士的条件。
English: There is no loss of the above-mentioned four virtues, that is to say, there is no loss of any of the conditions for becoming a disciple.

古文：未失其所以为士一，而王以为臣，失其所以为士一，而王不以为臣，则向之所谓士者，乃士乎 ？
现代文：没有丧失一点成为士的条件，可是大王您却不让他作臣子，那么您先前所认为的士还是士吗？ 
English: You haven't lost any of the conditions for becoming a samurai, but you, the great king, have not allowed him to become a courtier, so is the samurai you thought of before still a samurai?

古文：王无以应。
现代文：齐王无话回答。
English: Shao Wang did not have the words to answer.

古文：尹文曰： 今有人於此，将治其国，民有非则非之，民无非则非之民有罪则罚之，民无罪则罚之，而恶民之难治，可乎？ 王曰： 不可。 
现代文：尹文说： 假如有这样一个人，将治理他的国家，人民有错误责备他们，人民没有错误也责备他们，人民有罪惩罚他们，人民没有罪也惩罚他们。这样做，反倒埋怨人民难以治理，可以吗？ 齐王说： 不可以。 
English: Yin Wen said: If there is such a person who will govern his country, the people will blame them if there is a mistake, the people will also blame them if there is no mistake, the people will punish them if they are guilty, and the people will also punish them if they are not guilty.

古文：尹文曰： 窃观下吏之治齐也，方若此也。 
现代文：尹文说， 我私下观察您的臣属治理齐国正像这样。 
English: Yin Wen said, I have privately observed that your vassals are governing Qi Guo just like this.

古文：王曰： 使寡人治信若是，则民虽不治，寡人弗怨也。
现代文：齐王说： 假如我治理国家真地像这样，那么人民即使治理不好，我也不怨恨。
English: King Qi said, "If I truly govern the country like this, then even if the people are not well governed, I will not resent them.

古文：意者未至然乎！ 
现代文：或许我还没有到达这个地步吧！ 
English: Maybe I'm not quite there yet!

古文：尹文曰： 言之不敢无说，请言其说。
现代文：尹文说： 我既然这样说就不能没有理由，请允许我说一说理由。
English: Yin Wen said: Since I cannot say this without a reason, please allow me to say a reason.

古文：王之令曰： 杀人者死，伤人者刑。 
现代文：您的法令说： 杀人的处死，伤人的受刑。 
English: Your law says: Kill and be killed, wound and be wounded.

古文：民有畏王之令、深见侮而不敢斗者，是全王之令也，而王曰： 见侮而不敢斗，是辱也。 
现代文：人民中有的敬畏您的法令，受到奠大侮辱而不敢争斗，这是顾全您的法令啊，可是您却说， 受侮辱而不敢争斗，这是耻辱。 
English: Some of the people fear your decrees, and are too much insulted to dare to fight. This is obeying your decrees, but you say, "It is a disgrace to be insulted and not dare to fight."

古文：夫谓之辱者，非此之谓也。
现代文：真正叫做耻辱的，不是说的这个。
English: It's not what's said that's the real shame.

古文：以为臣不以为臣者，罪之也。
现代文：本该作臣子的，您却不让他作臣子，等于是惩罚他。
English: He should have been a vassal, but you did not let him be a vassal, which is tantamount to punishing him.

古文：此无罪而王罚之也。 
现代文：这就是没有罪过而您却惩罚他啊。 
English: That's punishing him for something he didn't do.

古文：齐王无以应。
现代文：齐王无话回答。
English: King Qi was speechless.

古文：论皆若此，故国残身危，走而之谷，如卫。
现代文：君王的议论都像这样，所以国家残破，自身危急，逃到谷邑，又到了卫国。
English: The king's speeches are all like this, so the country is broken, its own crisis, fled to the grain town, and then to the defense of the country.

古文：齐湣王，周室之孟侯也，太公之所以老也。
现代文：齐圄是周朝分封的诸侯之长，太公在这里得以寿终。
English: Qichen was the head of the princes assigned to the Zhou Dynasty, and the grand duke was able to end his life here.

古文：桓公尝以此霸矣，管仲之辩名实审也。
现代文：桓公曾凭借齐国称霸诸侯，这是由于管仲辨察名实非常详明啊。
English: King Kan once used Qi to dominate the princes. This was due to the fact that Guanzhong made a very detailed analysis of the names and facts.

